Probing the chirality of 1D Majorana edge states around
a 2D nanoflake in a superconductor

Andrzej Ptok,1, вҲ— David J. Alspaugh,2, вҖ  Szczepan GпҝҪlodzik,3 Aksel
KobiaпҝҪlka,3 Andrzej M. OleВҙs,4, 5 Pascal Simon,6, вҖЎ and PrzemysпҝҪlaw Piekarz 1, В§

1Institute of Nuclear Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. W. E. Radzikowskiego 152, PL-31342 KrakВҙow, Poland
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana 70803-4001, USA
3Institute of Physics, Maria Curie-SkпҝҪlodowska University, Plac Marii SkпҝҪlodowskiej-Curie 1, PL-20031 Lublin, Poland
4Institute of Theoretical Physics, Jagiellonian University, Profesora StanisпҝҪlawa пҝҪLojasiewicza 11, PL-30348 KrakВҙow, Poland
5Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstrasse 1, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany
6UniversitВҙe Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, F-91405, Orsay, France
(Dated: August 28, 2020)

The interplay between superconductivity, magnetic field and spinвҖ“orbit coupling can lead to the
realization of nonвҖ“trivial topological phases.
Recent experiments have found signatures of such
phases in magnetic nanoflakes formed by nanostructures coupled to a superconducting substrate.
These heterostructures comprise a topologically non-trivial region surrounded by a trivial one due to
the finite magnetic exchange field induced by the magnetic nanoflake. The analysis of the topological
phase diagram of such a system shows that a similar phase separation occurs by tuning the chemical
potential of the nanoflake.
In this paper, we study such a possibility in detail, analyzing the
spatial extent of the edge modes circulating around the nanoflake and discussing some practical
implementations. We also show how the chirality of Majorana edge states can be probed using
scanning tunneling spectroscopy with a double tip setup.

I.
INTRODUCTION

The quest for the realization of Majorana zero modes
(MZMs), driven by the pursuit of both fundamental
physics and their potential application to fault-tolerant
topological quantum computation [1вҖ“5], is steering an
active research in engineering p-wave superconductivity.
Non-Abelian braiding is an essential step towards topo-
logical quantum computing, though it has not yet been
experimentally achieved with MZMs. Due to the local-
ized nature of MZMs, their braiding will necessarily in-
volve both coupling and manipulation processes.
However, it has been suggested that non-Abelian
braiding is not only restricted to MZMs, but can also
be implemented with one-dimensional (1D) chiral Ma-
jorana fermions [6].
Chiral Majorana fermions can
manifest themselves as quasiparticle edge states of a
two-dimensional (2D) topological p-wave superconduc-
tor [4, 7]. Signatures of 1D chiral Majorana quasipar-
ticles have been recently observed in 2D heterostructures
consisting of a quantum anomalous Hall insulator bar in
contact with a superconductor [8]. Additionally, recent
progress in atomic scale engineering [9вҖ“13] is opening up
new perspectives for the practical implementation of chi-
ral Majorana fermions by spatially building nonвҖ“trivial
topological phases separated from trivial ones. Recent
progress includes Co islands grown on a Si substrate and
covered by a monolayer of Pb [9] and nano-scale Fe is-
lands of monoatomic height on a Re surface [14]. Due

вҲ— e-mail: aptok@mmj.pl
вҖ  e-mail: dalspa1@lsu.edu
вҖЎ e-mail: pascal.simon@u-psud.fr
В§ e-mail: piekarz@wolf.ifj.edu.pl

to the nonвҖ“trivial topological phase transition resulting
from a gap closure, in-gap edge states surrounding the
topological superconducting (SC) domain are observed.
In both experiments, these in-gap states are strongly de-
localized around the islands and have been interpreted
as signatures of chiral Majorana fermions.
In 2D superconductors with Rashba spinвҖ“orbit cou-
pling (SOC), the transition to a nonвҖ“trivial phase can be
induced by an external Zeeman magnetic field [15вҖ“17].
The boundary between the trivial and nonвҖ“trivial topo-
logical phases is given by h2
c = Вө2 + вҲҶ2, see Fig. 1(a),
where hc stands for the critical Zeeman field for given val-
ues of the doping Вө and the SC gap вҲҶ. In the aforemen-
tioned experimental results, the Zeeman magnetic energy
arises from the presence of magnetic dopants interacting
with the substrate, while the SOC and the SC gap are
intrinsic to the subsystem. Looking at the phase diagram
presented in Fig. 1(a), one observes that a line which con-
nects the points A and B in the (Вө, h) plane could corre-
spond to an inhomogeneous system in real space, where
a non-magnetic trivial domain (point A) surrounds or
borders with a topological magnetic domain (point B).
In this paper, we instead choose to explore an alterna-
tive route. We consider an inhomogeneous system but in
a constant magnetic Zeeman energy, which would reside
on the CвҖ“D line in Fig. 1(a). The transition to the topo-
logical domain occurs due to a change in the chemical
potential Вө. Such a system could be constructed exper-
imentally in many different ways: one option would be
to substitute the magnetic atoms in the Co island [9]
by non-magnetic ones and add a magnetic field parallel
to the SC Pb monolayer [Fig. 1(b)]. Another promising
approach is to use the versatility offered by 2D van-der-
Waals heterostructures [18]. A possible way to generate
an homogeneous Zeeman exchange energy in the proxim-

arXiv:2008.11807v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  26 Aug 2020


2

FIG. 1.
(a) Schematic representation of the topological phase diagram as a function of the chemical potential Вө and a
magnetic Zeeman energy h. (b) Schematic view of the studied system. A superconducting (SC) layer (yellow transparent
atoms) is deposited on a magnetic substrate (gray atoms). The nanoflake is formed by non-magnetic atoms located at random
sites either between the substrate and the SC layer as shown in the figure or above the SC layer. For a constant SC gap
вҲҶ, the boundary between the topologically trivial (blue region) and nonвҖ“trivial phase (yellow region) is given by a parabola
h2
c = вҲҶ2 + Вө2 [orange line in (a)].

ity of a superconductor could be engineered by stacking
recently synthesized 2D magnetic materials [19, 20] with
a transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) superconductor
such as NbSe2. A non-magnetic island can be obtained
by evaporating some alkaline adatoms to enforce charge
transfer.
The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we first
start with a circular geometry for the nanoflake and de-
rive the dispersive chiral Majorana edge states analyti-
cally in the continuum limit. We also discuss the spatial
extent of the chiral Majorana modes in the tranverse di-
rection. In Sec. III we compare our results obtained in
the continuum limit to exact diagonalization of a tight
binding model on a lattice. In Sec. IV, we propose and
study a setup in order to measure the chirality of the Ma-
jorana edge states using two ferromagnetic tips. Finally,
we present a summary of our results and give conclusions
in Sec. V.

II.
NANOFLAKE WITH CIRCULAR
GEOMETRY

We begin by considering a nanoflake with a circular
symmetry as depicted in Fig. 2. For simplification and
without a loss of generality, we can also assume a smooth
boundary of the nanoflake. Keeping in mind the circu-
lar symmetry, the Hamiltonian will commute with the
zth component of the total angular momentum operator
Jz вүЎ Lz+Sz. We may then find the energies of the bound
state wave functions localized at the edge of the nanoflake
in terms of the mJ quantum numbers. This method al-
lows us to determine the existence of chiral subgap states
within our system, and has successfully been used in the
studies of other 2D systems with circular symmetry such
as graphene [21].
Thus, the real-space normal state Hamiltonian has the

form,

H(r, вҲҮ) =
пҝҪ
вҲ’ вҲҮ2

2m вҲ’ Вө(r)
пҝҪ
Пғ0 + Оұ(Пғ Г— вҲ’iвҲҮ)z + hПғz,

(1)

where Пғi (for i = {0, x, y, z}) are the Pauli matrices act-
ing in spin space. Here, the system is 2D with r вүЎ (x, y),
and the chemical potential is given by,

Вө(r) =

пҝҪ
Вө1
r < R0,
Вө2
r вүҘ R0.
(2)

We may also define the discontinuity ОҙВө = Вө2 вҲ’ Вө1 at
the boundary, see Fig. 2. In other words, ОҙВө corresponds
to the spatial variation of the chemical potential induced
by the nanoflake. The BdG Hamiltonian may then be
expressed as,

H = 1

2

пҝҪ
dr ОЁвҖ (r)
пҝҪH(r, вҲҮ)
iПғyвҲҶ
вҲ’iПғyвҲҶ
вҲ’HT (r, вҲ’вҲҮ)

пҝҪ
ОЁ(r),

(3)

where
ОЁ(r)
вүЎ
(ПҲвҶ‘(r), ПҲвҶ“(r), ПҲвҖ 
вҶ‘(r), ПҲвҖ 
вҶ“(r))T
is
the
Nambu spinor, with ПҲПғ(r) being electron field operators
which destroy an electron with spin Пғ at location r.
Due to the circular symmetry of the nanoflake (or more
precisely, the scalar chemical potential Вө(r) = Вө(r)), the

FIG. 2.
Schematic representation of the discussed system in
the thermodynamic limit with a circular nanoflake deposited
on a substrate.


3

BdG Hamiltonian commutes with the zth component of
the total angular momentum operator Jz = Lz + Sz.
It follows that the Hamiltonian and Jz share the same
eigenstates. The eigenstates of Jz, with the half-integer
eigenvalues mJ, are given by

П•mJ =

пЈ«

пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈӯ

umJвҶ‘(r) ei(mJвҲ’1/2)Оё

umJвҶ“(r) ei(mJ+1/2)Оё

vmJвҶ‘(r) ei(mJ+1/2)Оё

vmJвҶ“(r) ei(mJвҲ’1/2)Оё

пЈ¶

пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈё .
(4)

To focus on states with small total angular momenta,

we take a low-energy approximation and neglect the ki-
netic energy term in the Hamiltonian [22]. By writing the
umJПғ(r) and vmJПғ(r) functions in terms of the Modified
Bessel Functions of the First and Second Kind, we may
then solve for the bound state wave functions localized
at r = R0. The details of this approach can be found in
the Supplemental Material (SM) [23], and the resulting
wave functions have the form:

П•mJ =

пҝҪ
П•mJ1
r < R0,
П•mJ2
r вүҘ R0,
(5)

where

П•mJ1 =
пҝҪ

О·=Вұ
NmJ1О·

пЈ«

пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈӯ

amJ1О·ImJвҲ’ 1

2
(kmJ1О·r)ei(mJвҲ’ 1

2 )Оё

bmJ1О·ImJ+ 1

2
(kmJ1О·r)ei(mJ+ 1

2 )Оё

cmJ1О·ImJ+ 1

2
(kmJ1О·r)ei(mJ+ 1

2 )Оё

ImJвҲ’ 1

2
(kmJ1О·r)ei(mJвҲ’ 1

2 )Оё

пЈ¶

пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈё

,
(6)

and

П•mJ2 =
пҝҪ

О·=Вұ
NmJ2О·

пЈ«

пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈӯ

amJ2О·ei(mJвҲ’ 1

2 )ПҖKmJвҲ’ 1

2
(kmJ2О·r)ei(mJвҲ’ 1

2 )Оё

bmJ2О·ei(mJ+ 1

2 )ПҖKmJ+ 1

2
(kmJ2О·r)ei(mJ+ 1

2 )Оё

cmJ2О·ei(mJ+ 1

2 )ПҖKmJ+ 1

2
(kmJ2О·r)ei(mJ+ 1

2 )Оё

ei(mJвҲ’ 1

2 )ПҖKmJвҲ’ 1

2
(kmJ2О·r)ei(mJвҲ’ 1

2 )Оё

пЈ¶

пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈё

.
(7)

Here I(z) and K(z) are the Modified Bessel Functions of the first and second kind, respectively. The a, b, and c
parameters along with the normalizations are derived within the SM [23], while the radial momenta which control the
spatial extent of the bound states wave functions are given by

kmJjО· = 1

Оұ

пҝҪ

h2 вҲ’ E2mJ + вҲҶ2 вҲ’ Вө2
j + 2О·
пҝҪ

E2mJВө2
j + вҲҶ2(h вҲ’ Вөj)(h + Вөj),
(8)

where j = 1, 2 and О· = Вұ. For each of the П•mJ bound
states localized at r = R0, the total radial spatial extent
ОҫmJ of the wave functions are thus determined by

ОҫmJ = max{kвҲ’1
mJ1+, kвҲ’1
mJ1вҲ’, kвҲ’1
mJ2+, kвҲ’1
mJ2вҲ’}.
(9)

The energy spectrum of these bound states vs the mJ
quantum numbers is presented in Fig. 3, while the spatial
profile of the wave functions is given in Fig. 4 for two
different characteristic sets of parameters. The number
of in-gap states is quantized due to the finite perimeter
of the nanoflake and their energy spacing depends on
intrinsic parameters. In the first set of parameters, we
find 8 in-gap states while we have 4 in-gap states in the
second set. We choose the strength of the Zeeman field
such that the topological gap,

вҲҶtop =
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪh вҲ’
пҝҪ

вҲҶ2 + Вө2
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ ,
(10)

is equal both inside and outside the nanoflake.
From
our first set of data we obtain вҲҶtop = 0.070 meV, while
for our second set we obtain вҲҶtop = 0.0296 meV. The
existence of only one branch of states in the topological
gap signals that they are chiral (here left handed). This
in turn supports the hypothesis of a phase separation
in space with a chiral Majorana edge state circulating
around the nanoflake.

We also note that these dispersive states are not per-
fectly linear, but instead exhibit a slight cubic behavior.
Comparing both set of parameters, we see that the larger
the discontinuity |ОҙВө| = |Вө1 вҲ’ Вө2|, the more localized the
edge states are. This behavior is expected; indeed, the
in-gap Majorana states are pinned at the domain wall
which is controlled by the spatial variation of the chemi-
cal potential.


4

FIG. 3.
Spectrum of the in-gap dispersive states as a function
of the total angular momentum quantum number mJ.
Results are presented for two different sets of parameters:
(a) Вө1 = 0.2 meV, Вө2 = 0.4 meV, вҲҶ = 0.3 meV, and
(b) Вө1 = 0.1 meV, Вө2 = 0.2 meV, вҲҶ = 0.2 meV.
We take R0 = 10 nm and Оұ = 0.25 meVВ·nm.

III.
TIGHT BINDING FORMULATION

In order to confirm our calculations performed in the
continuum limit and to go beyond the circular symmetry
assumption for a nanoflake, we have also performed nu-
merical calculations on a lattice based on a tight binding
description. Our system can be described by the follow-
ing tight binding Hamiltonian,

H = Hkin + HSO + Hprox + Hflake.
(11)

The first term corresponds to a free particle on a 2D
square lattice,

Hkin =
пҝҪ

ijПғ
[вҲ’t + (4t вҲ’ Вө вҲ’ Пғh)Оҙij] cвҖ 
iПғcjПғ.
(12)

Here t is the hopping integral between nearest neighbor
sites [24], Вө is the chemical potential (calculated from
the bottom of the band), while h can be regarded either
as a genuine Zeeman energy or as a magnetic exchange
energy depending on the situation under consideration.
In all cases, we treat it as an effective magnetic field in
what follows.
The second term describes the in-plane
SOC,

HSO = вҲ’iОұ
пҝҪ

ijПғПғвҖІ
cвҖ 
i+djПғ [(dj Г— ЛҶПғ) В· ЛҶz]ПғПғвҖІ ciПғвҖІ,
(13)

where vectors di вҲҲ {ВұЛҶx, ВұЛҶy} stand for the locations of
the neighbors of the i-th site, while ЛҶПғ = (Пғx, Пғy, Пғz) is the
vector with the Pauli matrices being its components. A
SC gap can be induced in the layer through the proximity
effectвҖ”this process is described through the third term
by the BCS-like form,

Hprox = вҲҶ
пҝҪ

i

пҝҪ
cвҖ 
iвҶ‘cвҖ 
iвҶ“ + H.c.
пҝҪ
.
(14)

The last term in Eq. (11) denotes the influence of the
nanoflake at the particle distribution,

Hflake = вҲ’
пҝҪ

i
VicвҖ 
iПғciПғ.
(15)

FIG. 4.
Localization of the in-gap bound states around the
edge of the nanoflake for different values of the total angular
momentum mJ. Figures (a) and (b) correspond to the same
sets of parameter values as detailed in Fig. 3.

We assume that every atom comprising the nanoflake
changes the energy levels of the rest of the sites, i.e.,
we assume a long-range impurity potential given by
Vi = V0
пҝҪ

m exp (вҲ’Rmi/О»), where the summation is car-
ried out over all adatoms in a given configuration V [25].
Here, О» denotes the characteristic length of decay of the
impurity potential.
The Hamiltonian H can be diagonalized by the unitary
transformation,

ciПғ =
пҝҪ

n

пҝҪ
uinПғОіn вҲ’ ПғvвҲ—
inПғОівҖ 
n
пҝҪ
,
(16)

which leads to the BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes (BdG) equa-
tions [26] of the form

EnОҰin =
пҝҪ

j
HijОҰjn,
(17)

with eigenvectors ОҰin = (uinвҶ‘, vinвҶ“, uinвҶ“, vinвҶ‘)T . Here

Hij =

пЈ«

пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈ¬
пЈӯ

HijвҶ‘
Dij
SвҶ‘вҶ“
ij
0
DвҲ—
ij
вҲ’HвҲ—
ijвҶ“
0
SвҶ“вҶ‘
ij
SвҶ“вҶ‘
ij
0
HijвҶ“
Dij
0
SвҶ‘вҶ“
ij
DвҲ—
ij
вҲ’HвҲ—
ijвҶ‘

пЈ¶

пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈ·
пЈё
(18)

is the Hamiltonian in the matrix form, with matrix el-
ements HijПғ = вҲ’t пҝҪ
j ОҙвҹЁi,jвҹ© + (4t вҲ’ Вө вҲ’ Пғh вҲ’ Vi)Оҙij as
the kinetic term, Dij = вҲҶОҙij describing the SC correla-
tions, and SПғПғвҖІ
ij
= вҲ’iОұ пҝҪ
j [(dj Г— ЛҶПғ) В· ЛҶz]ПғПғвҖІ ОҙвҹЁi,jвҹ© standing
for the matrix representation of the spinвҖ“orbit coupling.
More details of this method can be found e.g. in Ref. [27].

A.
Numerical results

We report the calculations on a Nx Г— Ny = 59 Г— 59
square lattice with periodic boundary conditions (PBC).
Omitting generality, in the calculations presented in this
subsection we use a nanoflake with a circular shape and
a radius R0 = 15.1, which covers about 20% of the total
area.
We present results for a nanoflake characterized


5

by О» = 1 and V0/t = вҲ’0.06. In subsequent calculations,
we take Оұ/t = 0.15, вҲҶ/t = 0.3, and Вө/t = 0.4. If not
mentioned explicitly in the text, the value of the magnetic
Zeeman field h was chosen so that the boundary between
the trivial and nonвҖ“trivial phases remains in the center
of the artificial domain wall (typically h/t вүғ 0.4).

1.
Density of states

From the solutions of the BdG equations, we first cal-
culate the local density of states (LDOS) [28],

ПҒi(Пү)=
пҝҪ

Пғn

пҝҪ
|uinПғ|2Оҙ (Пү вҲ’ En) + |vinПғ|2Оҙ (Пү + En)
пҝҪ
,(19)

where we replace the Dirac function Оҙ(Пү) by a Lorentzian,
Оҙ(Пү)= О¶/[ПҖ(Пү2+О¶2)], with a small broadening О¶ = 0.003t.
Figure 5 shows an example of the LDOS for a chosen path
(along the nanoflake with y = 30). The nonвҖ“trivial do-
main is separated from the trivial phase by in-gap states
strongly localized along the edge of the nanoflake (cf.
Fig. 6). The domain wall is visible in the form of two
sets of LDOS peaks with oscillating intensity near the
Пү/t вүғ 0, which are a result of the discrete nature of the
in-gap stateвҖҷs spectrum. The LDOS in our system does
not exhibit an вҖңXвҖқвҖ“shape crossing through the energy
gap around the nanoflake edge, in contrast to the re-
sults presented in Refs. [9, 29]. Nevertheless, our results
are in agreement with experimental results presented in
Ref. [14]. In consequence, we do not observe the two-ring
localization like in Refs. [9, 29] but a one-ring structure
along the nanoflake boundary like in Ref. [14].
The localization of the in-gap states is shown Fig. 6.
As we can see, the edge states are localized around the
nanoflake at the border between the trivial and topo-
logical phases. All states create localized states with a
circular shape of the same radius (equal approximately to
17), while the radius of the nanoflake is equal R0 вүғ 15.1
(shown by doted-dashed line). The difference of these re-
sults with respect to the ones discussed in the continuum

FIG. 5.
Local density of states along the line presented in
the inset.

limit is a consequence of the smearing of the domain wall
given by Vi.
The total density of states (DOS) of the system per site
is given by a summation of the LDOS over the whole 2D
space, i.e., ПҒ(Пү) = 1/N пҝҪ

i ПҒi(Пү). Here, we can separate
the sum into three different terms
пҝҪ

i
вҶ’
пҝҪ

iвҲҲNanoflake
+
пҝҪ

iвҲҲDW
+
пҝҪ

iвҲҲBulk
,
(20)

a contribution from the sites belonging to nanoflake, a
contribution from the domain wall (DW), and a con-
tribution from the bulk states [cf.
inset in Fig. 7(b)].
As in Ref. [30], we can define the functions Ci in or-
der to classify the states in real space.
These func-
tions are equal to 1 when a site i belongs to a given
region, and 0 otherwise. We assume that the NF (bulk)
region is located in sites where the nanoflake changes
(does not change) the chemical potential significantly,
i.e., |Vi| < 0.95 max{|Vi|} (|Vi| > 0.05 max{|Vi|}). Oth-
erwise, we treat the site as a part of the DW region,
i.e., when 0.95 max{|Vi|} вүӨ |Vi| вүӨ 0.05 max{|Vi|}. These
conditions can be smoothed arbitrarily without changing
the results qualitatively (see Fig. S6 and Fig. S7 in the
SM [23]).
We use this recipe to present the partial density of
states (PDOS), which is defined as follows

ЛңПҒ(Пү) =
пҝҪ

i
Ci ПҒi(Пү).
(21)

The contribution of the bulk (NF) presented in Fig. 7(a)
[Fig. 7(b)], looks like the familiar DOS of a pure 2D
Rashba spin-orbit coupled superconductor, in which the
gap closing is followed by a reopening of the topological
gap. Dashed blue lines serve as a guide to the eye, show-
ing the linear continuation of the last negative and first

FIG. 6.
LDOS of several in-gap eigenstates along center
of the nanoflake (y = 30). The radius R0 = 15.1 is shown
by a gray line (cf. Fig. 4). The inset shows a spectrum of
the system and a description of the eigenstates (cf. Fig. 3).
Numbers from вҲ’5 to 5 enumerate the ten states near the
Fermi level.


6

positive eigenvalue. The value of the magnetic field h for
which these dashed lines cross zero energy indicate the
phase transition from trivial to nonвҖ“trivial phase.

For effective fields larger than this crossing point, in
both cases we observe a topological gap opening around
Пү/t вүғ Вұ0.1. Contrary to this, the DW PDOS [Fig. 7(c)]
ressembles a nonвҖ“trivial 2D system with egdes [31]. Be-
tween critical fields for bulk and NF regions (dashed
blue lines crossing the Fermi level), we observe the in-
gap states associated only with DW, which confirms the
existence of bound states localized along the DW. Addi-
tionally, with the increase of h, the contribution of these
states to the total DOS is shifted from the DW to bulk
region (cf. Fig. S8 in the SM [23]).

FIG. 7.
Partial density of states for different regions: (a)
bulk, (b) nanoflake, and (c) domain wall. Blue dashed lines
serve as a guide to the eye and present the linear continuation
of the gap closing.

2.
NonвҖ“trivial topological domains and topological phase
diagram

A magnetic field, h, leads to a closing of the trivial SC
gap and reopening of a new nonвҖ“trivial topological gap.
This occurs at the critical energy h2
c = Вө2 + вҲҶ2 [15вҖ“17]
(hc/t вүғ 0.5 for our choice of parameters). In our system,
the value of the chemical potential varies from site to
site i.e., Вөi = Вө+Vi. This non-homogeneity can lead to a
situation in which the above condition is met only locally
[32вҖ“34]. We can therefore construct a space dependent
indicator [35] that describes the spatial distribution of
the nonвҖ“trivial topological phase,

ПҮi =
пҝҪ

(Вө + Vi)2 + вҲҶ2 вҲ’ h.
(22)

Thus, positive (negative) sign of ПҮi indicates the topolog-
ically trivial (nonвҖ“trivial) phase. Indeed, from the anal-
ysis of ПҮi under an increase of the magnetic field h (see

FIG. 8.
Topological phase diagramвҖ” in the (Вө, h) plane: (a)
as obtained from the indicator ПҮi defined in Eq. (22) and (b)
the value of the energy gap ОҙE. Note that the values in the
bottom left corner are very high and exceed the scale of the
plot.


7

Fig. S9 in the SM [23]), we find that the non-trivial phase
exists in the system when ПҮi < 0.
From the above analysis, it follows that the spatial de-
pendence of the ПҮi indicator gives a correct information
about the emergence of the nonвҖ“trivial topological do-
main inside the nanoflake. Using this condition, we con-
struct a topological phase diagram in the two-parameter
space defined by the chemical potential Вө and the effec-
tive magnetic field h shown in Fig. 8(a).
First, we recall that the trivial and nonвҖ“trivial topo-
logical phases are separated by a parabolic boundary
h2
c = Вө2 + вҲҶ2 in the homogeneous system. In our sys-
tem, the nanoflake introduces a non-homogeneity in Вө
to the system, thus the boundary splits due to the ex-
istence of two regions in space where topological phases
can emerge. As a consequence, the boundary in the phase
diagram evolves into a stripe, whose width is given by
max |Vi|. Thus, in the limit V0 вҶ’ 0 (homogeneous sys-
tem without any nanoflake), the вҖңstripeвҖқ would narrow
down into a line hc(Вө), as seen in Fig. 1.
Second, the region of the stripe separating the phases
coincides with the value of the gap ОҙE, calculated as the
energy difference between the eigenvalues closest to Fermi
level [Fig. 8(b)]. The existence of a nonвҖ“trivial domain in
the system is a result of the occurrence of in-gap states
with exponentially small eigenenergies (described by ОҙE).

3.
Bond current

When the system has boundaries [31, 36], or if artificial
barriers are introduced [34, 37], in-gap states localize on
the edges of the system. The in-gap states are localized in
a collection of preferable locations, independently of the
broadening of domain wall. These wellвҖ“localized in-gap

FIG. 9.
Vector map of the bond current in the described
system. Color corresponds to the absolute value of the cur-
rent |Ii| (right scale).

states provide a contribution to the bond current which
can be expressed as the local charge flow and is obtained
from the Heisenberg equation [38вҖ“40],

Дұв„ҸвҲӮвҹЁniвҹ©

вҲӮt
= вҹЁ[H, ni]вҹ© .
(23)

The current vector field can be represented as a sum
of the spin-dependent currents, Ii = пҝҪ

iПғ IiПғ, where
IiПғ = вҲӮtвҹЁniПғвҹ© can be expressed by the BdG eigenvec-
tors [40, 41].
In Fig. 9, we present the real space map of the bond
current.
Color of the arrows denotes their magnitude
вҲқ |Ii|. Once again, the width of the domain wall (con-
trolled by О») is reflected by an observable, however, this
time it is through the area in which there is a signifi-
cant flow of charge (cf. Fig. S3 in the SM [23]). These
low energy modes bear a close resemblance to the sur-
face states of three-dimensional (3D) topological insula-
tors (TIs) [42, 43]. Due to the SOC induced band inver-
sion and bulk-boundary correspondence, the 2D surface
of a TI hosts metallic states which disperse through the
band gap. Generally, band inversion is a result of the
nonвҖ“trivial phase transition, but hereвҖңsurface statesвҖқ are
limited to the boundary of the nanoflake, which serves as
an edge of the system. The current vector field presented
in Fig. 9 is the sum of the contributions of the spin-вҶ‘ and
spin-вҶ“ current.
Due to the breaking of time reversal symmetry, the
spin-вҶ‘ component dominates and thus resembles the
вҖңquasi-helicalвҖқ situation described in Ref. [9]. It is worth
noting that a magnetic impurity or a ferromagnetic is-
land proximityвҖ“coupled to a SOC superconductor will
exhibit a finite spin polarization, thus giving rise to per-
sistent currents [38вҖ“40] as a result of the magnetoelectric
effect.
This type of bond current along the nanoflake
can be observed experimentally, e.g. in the differential
conductance measurements [14, 44].

B.
Numerical results for irregular nanoflake

In order to go beyond the circular limit discussed in
previous paragraphs, we locate the substituted atoms
at random sites of the lattice as nearest neighbors of
an initial atom, located at the center of the surface.
This method results in a nanoflake with rugged bound-
ary (cf. Fig. 1) between the substituted (blue) and sub-
strate (gray) atoms, which is similar to experimental se-
tups [9, 14]. However, artificial construction of nanoflakes
could be characterized by a more regular shape too. In
practice, in the SM [23], we show that the main properties
of the system do not depend qualitatively on the shape of
the nanoflake. Therefore, all properties described before
remain when the flake becomes irregular.


8

IV.
PROPOSAL TO EXPERIMENTALLY
MEASURE THE CHIRALITY USING SCANNING
TUNNELING MICROSCOPY

Our experimental proposal is based on the double-tip
measurement technique [45вҖ“47]. The in-gap edge states
localized around the nanoflake can give a nonlocal re-
sponse between two spatially separated tips, which is
schematically shown in Fig. 10.
Similar transconduc-
tance technique was successfully used to measure an in-
gap surface band [48].
We performed the calculation of the local and non-local
differential conductance using the Kwant [49] code to
numerically obtain the scattering matrix [50вҖ“52]:

S =
пҝҪ
S11 S12
S21 S22

пҝҪ
,
Sij =
пҝҪ See
ij
Seh
ij
She
ij
Shh
ij

пҝҪ
.
(24)

Here, SОұОІ
ij
is the block of the scattering amplitudes of
incident particles of type ОІ in tip j to particles of type
Оұ in tip i. Then, the differential conductance matrix is
given as [53]:

Gij(E) вүЎ вҲӮIi

вҲӮVj
= e2

h
пҝҪ
T ee
ij вҲ’ T he
ij вҲ’ ОҙijN e
i
пҝҪ
,
(25)

where Ii is the current entering terminal i from the scat-
tering region and Vj is the voltage applied to the terminal
j, and N e
i is the number of electron modes at energy E
in terminal i. Finally, the energy transmission is:

T ОұОІ
ij
= Tr
пҝҪпҝҪ
SОұОІ
ij
пҝҪвҖ 
SОұОІ
ij

пҝҪ
.
(26)

The nonlocal response is constituted by two processes:
(i) a direct electron transfer between the leads and (ii)
the crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) of an electron from
one tip into a hole in the second tip [54, 55]. In typi-
cal cases, the CAR contribution dominates the electron

FIG. 10.
Setup of a double-tip experiment in order to probe
the chirality of the edge states. In the presence of the external
magnetic field h in вҶ‘ вҠҷ (red) or вҶ“ вҠ— (blue) direction, the chiral
bond current flows clockwise (blue arrows) or counterclock-
wise (red arrows) along the boundary of the system. Thus,
the double-tip measurement of non-local differential conduc-
tance G12 depends on the chirality of the edge state, i.e. on
the direction of the magnetic field and the bond current.

transfer [56, 57] and such processes is responsible for the
Cooper pair splitter [58]. Here, we show that this tech-
nique has a potential application in measuring the chi-
rality of the edge state. In order to achieve this goal, we
suggest the use of two ferromagnetic tips described by
the Hamiltonian:

Hi
tip =
пҝҪ

kПғ
(ОөkПғ вҲ’ ПғMi) cвҖ 
kПғckПғ,
(27)

where ОөkПғ is the dispersion relation of the free electrons
in the tips, while Mi is the magnetization of the ith tip.
We assume that the tips have opposite magnetization,
i.e. M1 = вҲ’M2. The tips are separated from the plane
of the system by the barrier potential. We assume a sys-
tem like that shown schematically in Fig. 10, i.e. tips
are located exactly above the nanoflake edge, in a non-
symmetric position. As a result, a distance between 1st
and 2nd tip differs when measured clockwise or counter-
clockwise (along the edge state channel at the border of
the nanoflake).
In our system, we can find the local (G11 and G22) as
well as non-local (G12 and G21) differential conductance
(Fig. 11 and Fig. 12, respectively). The local conduc-
tance Gii can be treated as a probe of the existence of
states in the system [59, 60]. In this sense, each state
gives a positive signal in Gii, independently of the direc-
tion of the magnetic field h (see top and bottom panels
in Fig. 11). As we can see, in our case we observe several
in-gap states. Due to the use of ferromagnetic tips we
observe non-equality of G11 and G22 (blue and red lines,
respectively).
The non-local conductances G12 and G21 (Fig. 12) de-
scribe different situations. In order for CAR processes
to occur, electrons from both tips need to have opposite
spins to create a Cooper pair and simultaneously eject
a hole from the other tip.
Due to the applied exter-
nal magnetic field the incident electrons from the edge
bond current would have the same spin as the electrons
from the first tip they encounter. The electron with op-
posite spin should come the other tip (which has oppo-
site magnetization) and emit a hole with the same spin
to constitute a CAR process. Thanks to this nonlocal
phenomena, we can easily determine the direction of the
edge state propagation as the nonlocal conductance co-
incides with the direction of chiral bond current. Thus,
if the sign of magnetic field changes, the direction of the
edge state propagation reverts too, G12 becomes G21 due
to the spatial symmetry of the system.
However, tips
are not perfectly magnetized, therefore nonlocal conduc-
tance measurement in the direction opposite to the chiral
bond current remains nonzero (e.g. G21 for вҠҷ direction of
magnetic field). As the edge state bond current is con-
stituted of both spins, particles with spins not aligned
with the tip magnetization scatter off the tip (cf. wave-
function localizations in Fig. 13). If the magnetic field is
not present in the system, in-gap nonlocal conductance
vanishes (not shown), and peaks at the edge of supercon-
ducting gap appear [53]. Differences between the abso-
lute value of non-local conductances are the consequence


9

FIG. 11.
The local conductance G11 and G22 are shown in
blue and red lines for positive (a) and negative (b) magnetic
field h/t = Вұ0.4. Here, we take two ferromagnetic (FM) tips
with M1 = вҲ’M2 = 3.0t. The direction of the magnetic field
applied to the system is shown on top.

of the non-symmetric position of the tips. The change
from negative to positive slope near the gap can be inter-
preted as a crossover from subgap transport dominated
by crossed Andreev reflection to charge imbalance above
the gap [61].
Additionally, the non-local conductance
strongly depends on a distance between the tips [53].
To explain the above results, we analyzed the prop-
agating modes in the system (Fig. 13).
The nonlocal
transport corresponds to situation where incident elec-
tron from one tip is transmitted through the edge modes
as the chiral mode and is scattered into the second tip.
Such propagating modes can be represented in form of
wavefunction ПҲ(r) = (ЛңuвҶ“, ЛңuвҶ‘, ЛңvвҶ“, ЛңvвҶ‘)T , where Лңu and Лңv cor-
respond to its electron- and hole-like component, respec-
tively.
Here, ПҲ is composed mostly of вҶ“-electron and
вҶ‘-hole component [62]. Regions with the nonвҖ“zero prob-
ability of localization correspond to the particle remnants
of scattering processes, which distribution coincides with
the direction of edge state propagation. As we mentioned
above, with relatively small voltage bias, the non-local
transport is dominated by CAR processes (which was
envisioned by the antiparallel magnetization of G12 and
G21). In the case of the вҖңpositiveвҖқ вҠҷ magnetic field, we
observe propagation from 1st to 2nd tip in clockwise di-

FIG. 12.
The same as Fig. 11, but in the case of the non-
local conductance G12 and G21, shown by red and blue lines,
respectively. The direction of the magnetic field applied to
the system is shown on top.

rection [Fig. 13, panels (a) and (b)], for both electron
and hole component of the wavefunction. Then, if we
check the mode propagation from 2nd to 1st tip [Fig. 13,
panels (c) and (d)], we can see that the chirality of the
propagating modes is preserved and clockwise.
In the
case of the magnetic field with opposite direction, we
observe modes propagating in opposite direction as pre-
viously mentioned (bottom panels in Fig. 13). Without
any surprise, mode propagation direction in this case is
also preserved.
Summarizing, the non-local conductance is not just a
fingerprint of the existence of the chiral mode [62], but
also a tool to measure its chirality.

V.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Recent experimental results have presented the possi-
bility of the emergence of nonвҖ“trivial topological phases
in magnetic nanostructures coupled to superconducting
substrates [9, 14].
In this paper, we have explored the artificial imple-
mentation of topological phase transitions induced by
the local modification of the chemical potential. In this
respect, we performed analytic calculations valid in the
continuum limit in the case of a nanoflake with a circu-


10

FIG. 13.
Spatial profile of the wavefunctions (particle- and hole-like component, given by u and v respectively) having the
largest contribution to propagating modes at energy 0.02t. Top (bottom) panels show results in the case of positive (negative)
value of magnetic field and are depicted by вҠҷ (вҠ—). First two columns from left, correspond to propagating modes from 1st to
2nd tip (1 вҶ’ 2), while two column from right вҖ“ from 2nd to 1st tip (2 вҶ’ 1). STM tips are labeled at panel (a). Yellow dashed
line represents the region of the system bordered by the potential barrier.

lar geometry and found the spectrum of the system as a
function of the total angular momentum. We have also
studied how the transverse spatial extent of the wave
function of the chiral Majorana state localized around
the nanoflake depends upon the system parameters. We
then performed similar calculations for a finite size ge-
ometry using a tight binding formulation. In-gap states
correspond to prominent peaks in the LDOS only in a
distinct region of space, identified as the domain wall,
which should be observed relatively simply through STM
experiments. We have introduced a real space indicator,
which locally characterizes the topological phase. Indeed,
for a few sets of parameters, results obtained from this
indicator were in agreement with those obtained in the
continuum limit. In the case analyzed here, the effective
magnetic field leads to the realization of a nonвҖ“trivial
phase only in distinct regions of the system, creating a
nonвҖ“trivial superconducting dome surrounded by a triv-
ial superconducting phase. This phase separation could
be observed through the measurement of a bond chiral
current, which is connected to the existence of strongly
localized in-gap states.
We have shown that this cur-
rent circulates around the nanoflake. Additionally, with
the help of the indicator, we have found the topological
phase diagram of the system. We have shown that an ar-
tificial phase separation can be induced for a finite range
of effective magnetic field. The boundary of this phase
separation is strongly related to the effective magnetic

field, which determines the transition between trivial to
nonвҖ“trivial phases
In the last part of our work, we have proposed an ex-
perimental method to measure the chiraliy of the edge
states, based on a double-tip measurement of the non-
local differential conductivity. We have found that the
non-local transport properties between the two tips allow
one to determine the chirality of the edge state. Although
challenging, this type of experiment should be accessible
with the present technology.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Tristan Cren for inter-
esting
discussions.
This
work
was
supported
by
the
National
Science
Centre
(NCN,
Poland)
un-
der
grants
Nos.:
2017/24/C/ST3/00276
(A.P.),
2017/27/N/ST3/01762 (S.G.),
2018/31/N/ST3/01746
(A.K.),
2016/23/B/ST3/00839
(A.M.O.),
and
2017/25/B/ST3/02586 (P.P.).
A. M. OleВҙs is grateful
for the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation Fellow-
ship (Humboldt-Forschungspreis).
AP appreciate also
founding in the frame of scholarships of the Minister of
Science and Higher Education (Poland) for outstanding
young scientists (2019 edition, no. 818/STYP/14/2019).


11

[1] A.Yu. Kitaev, вҖңFault-tolerant quantum computation by
anyons,вҖқ Ann. Physics 303, 2 (2003).

[2] Ch. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman,
and S. Das Sarma, вҖңNon-Abelian anyons and topologi-
cal quantum computation,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 1083
(2008).

[3] J. Alicea, Y. Oreg, G. Refael, F. von Oppen, and M. P. A.
Fisher, вҖңNon-Abelian statistics and topological quantum
information processing in 1d wire networks,вҖқ Nat. Phys.
7, 412 (2011).

[4] J. Alicea, вҖңNew directions in the pursuit of Majorana
fermions in solid state systems,вҖқ Rep. Prog. Phys. 75,
076501 (2012).

[5] D. Aasen, M. Hell, R. V. Mishmash, A. Higginbotham,
J. Danon, M. Leijnse, T. S. Jespersen, J. A. Folk, Ch. M.
Marcus, K.n Flensberg,
and J. Alicea, вҖңMilestones to-
ward Majorana-based quantum computing,вҖқ Phys. Rev.
X 6, 031016 (2016).

[6] B. Lian, X.-Q. Sun, A. Vaezi, X.-L. Qi,
and S.-Ch.
Zhang, вҖңTopological quantum computation based on chi-
ral Majorana fermions,вҖқ Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
115, 10938 (2018).

[7] X.-L. Qi and S.-Ch. Zhang, вҖңTopological insulators and
superconductors,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1057 (2011).

[8] Q. L. He, L. Pan, A. L. Stern, E. C. Burks, X. Che,
G. Yin, J. Wang, B. Lian, Q. Zhou, E. S. Choi, K. Mu-
rata, X. Kou, Z. Chen, T. Nie, Q. Shao, Y. Fan, S.-
Ch. Zhang, K. Liu, J. Xia,
and K. L. Wang, вҖңChi-
ral Majorana fermion modes in a quantum anomalous
Hall insulatorвҖ“superconductor structure,вҖқ Science 357,
294 (2017).

[9] G. C. MВҙenard, S. Guissart, Ch. Brun, R. T. Leriche,
M. Trif, F. Debontridder, D. Demaille, D. Roditchev,
P. Simon,
and T. Cren, вҖңTwo-dimensional topological
superconductivity in Pb/Co/Si(111),вҖқ Nat. Commun. 8,
2040 (2017).

[10] R. Drost, T. Ojanen, A. Harju, and P. Liljeroth, вҖңTopo-
logical states in engineered atomic lattices,вҖқ Nat. Phys.
13, 668 (2017).

[11] H. Kim,
A. Palacio-Morales,
T. Posske,
L. RВҙozsa,
K. PalotВҙas, L. Szunyogh, M. Thorwart, and R. Wiesen-
danger, вҖңToward tailoring Majorana bound states in ar-
tificially constructed magnetic atom chains on elemental
superconductors,вҖқ Sci. Adv. 4, eaar5251 (2018).

[12] A. Kamlapure, L. Cornils, J. Wiebe, and R. Wiesendan-
ger, вҖңEngineering the spin couplings in atomically crafted
spin chains on an elemental superconductor,вҖқ Nat. Com-
mun. 9, 3253 (2018).

[13] G. C. MВҙenard, A. Mesaros, Ch. Brun, F. Debontridder,
D. Roditchev, P. Simon,
and T. Cren, вҖңIsolated pairs
of Majorana zero modes in a disordered superconducting
lead monolayer,вҖқ Nat. Commun. 10, 2587 (2019).

[14] A. Palacio-Morales, E. Mascot, S. Cocklin, H. Kim,
S. Rachel, D. K. Morr, and R. Wiesendanger, вҖңAtomic-
scale interface engineering of Majorana edge modes in a
2D magnet-superconductor hybrid system,вҖқ Sci. Adv. 5,
eaav6600 (2019).

[15] M. Sato and S. Fujimoto, вҖңTopological phases of noncen-
trosymmetric superconductors: Edge states, Majorana
fermions, and non-Abelian statistics,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 79,
094504 (2009).

[16] M. Sato, Y. Takahashi, and S. Fujimoto, вҖңNon-Abelian
topological order in s-wave superfluids of ultracold
fermionic atoms,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 020401 (2009).

[17] M. Sato, Y. Takahashi, and S. Fujimoto, вҖңNon-Abelian
topological orders and Majorana fermions in spin-singlet
superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 82, 134521 (2010).

[18] K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho,
and
A. H. Castro Neto, вҖң2D materials and van der Waals
heterostructures,вҖқ Science 353, aac9439 (2016).

[19] K. S. Burch, D. Mandrus, and J.-G. Park, вҖңMagnetism in
two-dimensional van der Waals materials,вҖқ Nature 563,
47 (2018).

[20] Ch. Gong and X. Zhang, вҖңTwo-dimensional magnetic
crystals and emergent heterostructure devices,вҖқ Science
363, eaav4450 (2019).

[21] M. M. Asmar and S. E. Ulloa, вҖңSpin-orbit interaction and
isotropic electronic transport in graphene,вҖқ Phys. Rev.
Lett. 112, 136602 (2014).

[22] Y. Oreg, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, вҖңHelical liquids
and Majorana bound states in quantum wires,вҖқ Phys.
Rev. Lett. 105, 177002 (2010).

[23] See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by
the publisher] for details of the analytical calculations
and additional numerical results for the nanoflake with
irregular shape. In the second case, the numerical results
for different sets of values О» and V0 are presented.

[24] In the case of an homogeneous 2D system, this gives a
dispersion relation Ek = вҲ’2t(cos(kx) + cos(ky)). Then,
the minimal available energy is equal to вҲ’4t.

[25] M. M. MaВҙska, ЛҷZ. ВҙSledВҙz, K. Czajka, and M. Mierzejewski,
вҖңInhomogeneity-induced enhancement of the pairing in-
teraction in cuprate superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett.
99, 147006 (2007).

[26] P. G. De Gennes, Superconductivity Of Metals And Al-
loys, Advanced Books Classics Series (Westview Press,
1999).

[27] A. V. Balatsky, I. Vekhter,
and J.-X. Zhu, вҖңImpurity-
induced states in conventional and unconventional super-
conductors,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 373 (2006).

[28] H. Matsui, T. Sato, T. Takahashi, S.-C. Wang, H.-B.
Yang, H. Ding, T. Fujii, T. Watanabe,
and A. Mat-
suda, вҖңBCS-like bogoliubov quasiparticles in high-Tc su-
perconductors observed by angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 217002 (2003).

[29] K. BjВЁornson and A. M. Black-Schaffer, вҖңProbing chiral
edge states in topological superconductors through spin-
polarized local density of state measurements,вҖқ Phys.
Rev. B 97, 140504(R) (2018).

[30] K. BjВЁornson and A. M. Black-Schaffer, вҖңProbing vor-
tex Majorana fermions and topology in semiconduc-
tor/superconductor heterostructures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 91,
214514 (2015).

[31] A. KobiaпҝҪlka, T. DomaВҙnski, and A. Ptok, вҖңDelocalisation
of Majorana quasiparticles in plaquetteвҖ“nanowire hybrid
system,вҖқ Sci. Rep. 9, 12933 (2019).

[32] X.-J. Liu and H. Hu, вҖңTopological superfluid in one-
dimensional spin-orbit-coupled atomic Fermi gases,вҖқ
Phys. Rev. A 85, 033622 (2012).

[33] X.-J. Liu and P. D. Drummond, вҖңManipulating Majorana
fermions in one-dimensional spin-orbit-coupled atomic
Fermi gases,вҖқ Phys. Rev. A 86, 035602 (2012).


12

[34] A. Ptok, A. Cichy,
and T. DomaВҙnski, вҖңQuantum en-
gineering of Majorana quasiparticles in one-dimensional
optical lattices,вҖқ J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 30, 355602
(2018).

[35] T. Zhou, N. Mohanta, J. E. Han, A. Matos-Abiague, and
I. ЛҮZutiВҙc, вҖңTunable magnetic textures in spin valves: From
spintronics to Majorana bound states,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 99,
134505 (2019).

[36] J. RВЁontynen and T. Ojanen, вҖңTopological superconduc-
tivity and high Chern numbers in 2D ferromagnetic Shiba
lattices,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 236803 (2015).

[37] A. KobiaпҝҪlka and A. Ptok, вҖңElectrostatic formation of
the majorana quasiparticles in the quantum dot-nanoring
structure,вҖқ J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 31, 185302 (2019).

[38] S. S. Pershoguba, K. BjВЁornson, A. M. Black-Schaffer,
and A. V. Balatsky, вҖңCurrents induced by magnetic im-
purities in superconductors with spin-orbit coupling,вҖқ
Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 116602 (2015).

[39] J. Li, T. Neupert, Z. Wang, A. H. MacDonald, A. Yaz-
dani, and B. A. Bernevig, вҖңTwo-dimensional chiral topo-
logical superconductivity in Shiba lattices,вҖқ Nat. Com-
mun. 7, 12297 (2016).

[40] K. BjВЁornson, S. S. Pershoguba, A. V. Balatsky,
and
A. M. Black-Schaffer, вҖңSpin-polarized edge currents and
Majorana fermions in one- and two-dimensional topolog-
ical superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 92, 214501 (2015).

[41] Sz. GпҝҪlodzik and T. DomaВҙnski, вҖңIn-gap states of magnetic
impurity in quantum spin Hall insulator proximitized to a
superconductor,вҖқ J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 32, 235501
(2020).

[42] M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, вҖңColloquium: Topological
insulators,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045 (2010).

[43] C.-Z. Chang and M. Li, вҖңQuantum anomalous Hall ef-
fect in time-reversal-symmetry breaking topological in-
sulators,вҖқ J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 28, 123002 (2016).

[44] I. K. Drozdov, A. Alexandradinata, S. Jeon, S. Nadj-
Perge, H. Ji, R. J. Cava, B. A. Bernevig, and A. Yazdani,
вҖңOne-dimensional topological edge states of bismuth bi-
layers,вҖқ Nat. Phys. 10, 664 (2014).

[45] I. Shiraki, F. Tanabe, R. Hobara, T. Nagao,
and
S. Hasegawa, вҖңIndependently driven four-tip probes for
conductivity measurements in ultrahigh vacuum,вҖқ Surf.
Sci. 493, 633 (2001).

[46] M. Kolmer, P. Olszowski, R. Zuzak, Sz. Godlewski, Ch.n
Joachim,
and M. Szymonski, вҖңTwo-probe STM exper-
iments at the atomic level,вҖқ J. Phys.: Condens. Matter
29, 444004 (2017).

[47] B. VoigtlВЁander,
V. Cherepanov,
S. Korte,
A. Leis,
D. Cuma, S. Just,
and F. LВЁupke, вҖңInvited review ar-
ticle: Multi-tip scanning tunneling microscopy: Experi-
mental techniques and data analysis,вҖқ Rev. Sci. Instrum.
89, 101101 (2018).

[48] M. Kolmer, P. Brandimarte, J. Lis, R. Zuzak, Sz.
Godlewski, H. Kawai, A. Garcia-Lekue, N. Lorente,
T. Frederiksen, Ch. Joachim, D. Sanchez-Portal,
and
M. Szymonski, вҖңElectronic transport in planar atomic-
scale structures measured by two-probe scanning tunnel-
ing spectroscopy,вҖқ Nat. Commun. 10, 1573 (2019).

[49] Ch. W. Groth, M. Wimmer, A. R. Akhmerov,
and
X. Waintal, вҖңKwant: a software package for quantum
transport,вҖқ New J. Phys. 16, 063065 (2014).

[50] G. B. Lesovik and I. A. Sadovskyy, вҖңScattering matrix
approach to the description of quantum electron trans-
port,вҖқ Phys.-Usp. 54, 1007 (2011).

[51] A. R. Akhmerov, J. P. Dahlhaus, F. Hassler, M. Wim-
mer, and C. W. J. Beenakker, вҖңQuantized conductance
at the Majorana phase transition in a disordered super-
conducting wire,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 057001 (2011).

[52] I. C. Fulga, F. Hassler, A. R. Akhmerov, and C. W. J.
Beenakker, вҖңScattering formula for the topological quan-
tum number of a disordered multimode wire,вҖқ Phys. Rev.
B 83, 155429 (2011).

[53] T. ВЁO. Rosdahl, A. Vuik, M. Kjaergaard,
and A. R.
Akhmerov, вҖңAndreev rectifier: A nonlocal conductance
signature of topological phase transitions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B
97, 045421 (2018).

[54] J. M. Byers and M. E. FlattВҙe, вҖңProbing spatial correla-
tions with nanoscale two-contact tunneling,вҖқ Phys. Rev.
Lett. 74, 306 (1995).

[55] G.
Deutscher
and
D.
Feinberg,
вҖңCoupling
superconducting-ferromagnetic
point
contacts
by
Andreev reflections,вҖқ Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 487 (2000).

[56] G Falci, D Feinberg, and F. W. J Hekking, вҖңCorrelated
tunneling into a superconductor in a multiprobe hybrid
structure,вҖқ Europhysics Letters (EPL) 54, 255 (2001).

[57] D. Beckmann, H. B. Weber, and H. v. LВЁohneysen, вҖңEv-
idence for crossed Andreev reflection in superconductor-
ferromagnet hybrid structures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
197003 (2004).

[58] L. G. Herrmann, F. Portier, P. Roche, A. Levy Yey-
ati, T. Kontos,
and C. Strunk, вҖңCarbon nanotubes
as Cooper-pair beam splitters,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 104,
026801 (2010).

[59] J. Chen, P. Yu, J. Stenger, M. Hocevar, D. Car, S. R.
Plissard, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, T. D. Stanescu,
and
S. M. Frolov, вҖңExperimental phase diagram of zero-bias
conductance
peaks
in
superconductor/semiconductor
nanowire devices,вҖқ Sci. Adv. 3, e1701476 (2017).

[60] H. Zhang, Ch.-X. Liu, S. Gazibegovic, D. Xu, J. A. Lo-
gan, G. Wang, N. van Loo, J. D. S. Bommer, M. W. A.
de Moor, D. Car, R. L. M. Op het Veld, P. J. van Veld-
hoven, S. Koelling, M. A. Verheijen, M. Pendharkar,
D. J. Pennachio, B. Shojaei, J. S. Lee, Ch. J. PalmstrГёm,
E. P. A. M. Bakkers, S. Das Sarma, and L. P. Kouwen-
hoven, вҖңQuantized Majorana conductance,вҖқ Nature 556,
74 (2018).

[61] M. S. Kalenkov and A. D. Zaikin, вҖңCrossed Andreev
reflection and spin-resolved non-local electron trans-
port,вҖқ in Fundamentals of Superconducting Nanoelectron-
ics, edited by A. Sidorenko (Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011) pp. 67вҖ“100.

[62] S. Ikegaya, Y. Asano, and D. Manske, вҖңAnomalous non-
local conductance as a fingerprint of chiral Majorana edge
states,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 207002 (2019).


