 

 

Electrical Tuning of Phase Change Antennas and Metasurfaces 

Yifei Wang1, Patrick Landreman1, David Schoen1,2, Kye Okabe3, Ann Marshall1, Umberto 

Celano1,4, H.-S. Philip Wong3, Junghyun Park5, Mark L. Brongersma1* 

 

1 Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA 

2 Exponent Inc., Menlo Park, California, USA 

3 Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA 

4 IMEC, Leuven, Belgium 

5 Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Samsung Future Technology Campus Samsungro 

130, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon, South Korea, 16678 

* Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Mark L. Brongersma (email: 

brongersma@stanford.edu). 

 

 

Abstract 

The success of semiconductor electronics is built on the creation of compact, low-power switching 

elements that offer routing, logic, and memory functions. The availability of nanoscale optical switches 

could have a similarly transformative impact on the development of dynamic and programmable 

metasurfaces, optical neural networks, and quantum information processing. Phase change materials 

are uniquely suited to enable their creation as they offer high-speed electrical switching between 

amorphous and crystalline states with notably different optical properties. Their high refractive index 

has also been harnessed to fashion them into compact optical antennas. Here, we take the next 

important step by realizing electrically-switchable phase change antennas and metasurfaces that offer 

strong, reversible, non-volatile, multi-phase switching and spectral tuning of light scattering in the 

visible and near-infrared spectral ranges. Their successful implementation relies on a careful joint 

thermal and optical optimization of the antenna elements that comprise an Ag strip that 

simultaneously serves as a plasmonic resonator and a miniature heating stage. 

 
 


Introduction 

The development of metasurfaces for passive manipulation of optical wavefronts has witnessed tremendous 

progress over the last decade.1–3 The research focus is now shifting to dynamic metasurfaces, which offer 

new applications and directions for explorative science as they are not bound by the same fundamental limits 

as static elements4. The creation of metasurface pixels that can dynamically alter their light scattering 

behavior not only requires the use of resonant structures to boost light-matter interaction, but also broad 

tunability of their resonant behavior. Effective ways to manipulate resonances apply mechanical motion5–10, 

electrical gating to modify carrier concentrations11–16 or to induce the Stark effect17, electrochemistry18–21, 

liquid crystals22–24, and phase change materials25–29. Materials exhibiting structural phase transitions between 

crystalline and amorphous states show particular promise as they offer non-volatile switching. Metasurfaces 

with non-volatile pixels could afford convenient programming of desired functions and a reduced power 

consumption as pixels remain in a desired state after an external stimulus is removed. Reducing power 

consumption in dynamic metasurfaces with nanoscale pixel-arrays is shaping up as one of the key challenges 

moving forward as it will rival those of densely-integrated electronic circuitry. 

In this work we will use germanium antimony telluride (GST), which is one of the most well-established 

phase change materials based on its use in optical storage media (e.g. compact disk) and non-volatile 

electronic memories30. It brings many desirable properties, including unity-order changes in the permittivity 

across a broad spectrum, retention times exceeding 10 years, robust switching over 109 cycles, and short 

programming times of ~100 ns.26,30–32 In order to appreciate the challenges in creating electrically-

programmable GST antennas and metasurfaces, it is of value to study previous works on electronic and 

optical switching of this material. Crystallization of GST from the amorphous state can be achieved by simply 

heating it up to GST’s crystallization temperature35,36. The reverse transformation back into the amorphous 

state is more challenging. It requires a rapid melt-quenching process with cooling rates exceeding 109 

K/s.26,31,33 This was first accomplished with focused, short laser pulses as a heating source29,37, widely used 

on optical discs, which recently facilitated demonstrations of a variety of optically-reconfigurable photonic 

elements26,27, including plasmonic38–41 and Mie-resonant antennas42, waveguide-based modulators43, and 

metasurfaces for beamsteering44, lensing29,45, perfect absorption36, displays46, and holographic elements47. 

The reversible electrical switching of photonic structures has proven to be more challenging. Electrically-

controlled thermal cycling is well established to switch ultra-compact, 10-nm-scale GST memory cells.33 

Researchers found  that this approach can produce highly-conductive, crystalline filaments in amorphous 

GST30,34,35 and it has recently been successfully implemented for GST in ultrasmall plasmonic gaps to 


modulate waveguide transmission52. However, optical antennas are notably larger than memory cells (~ 100 

nm) and their tuning is challenging as it requires a controlled phase change throughout their entire volume. 

This is hard to achieve as the comparatively low surface-to-volume ratio of these larger photonic structures 

tends to result in a slow cooling process that prevents an effective quench.26 Nonetheless switching of thin 

layers of GST has recently been achieved through the use of micro-heater stages.48–51 This enabled a new 

class of mixed-mode electronic-photonic devices capable of seamlessly interconverting electrical and optical 

signals in switchable thin films51 and waveguide devices50. In this work, we completely reenvision the 

metallic heater stages used to switch GST so that they can also function as strongly scattering plasmonic 

antennas. To achieve robust and reversible electrical tuning of the resulting phase-change antennas requires 

a thoughtful co-optimization of their electrical, thermal and optical properties. In a second stage, we use the 

insights acquired in realizing dynamic phase-change antennas to also produce tunable metasurfaces. 

 

Main 

We first demonstrate the possibility to electrically tune the scattering properties of phase change antennas. 

Figure 1a schematically illustrates one of our antenna designs with a 60-nm-wide and 25-nm-thick GST 

nanobeam stacked on top of a 140-nm-wide and 36-nm-thick Ag nanostrip. The basic idea is that the Ag strip 

will deliver a plasmonic antenna function and the GST beam will bring dynamic switching functions. These 

two elements are electrically separated from each other by a 6-nm-thick layer of Al2O3 and connected to two 

sets of electrodes at both ends. The entire device sits on a 120-nm-thick SiO2 layer on a Si substrate, whose 

approximately quarter-wavelength thickness was chosen to enhance the optical excitation of and collection 

from the antenna in the near-infrared. It was finally covered by a 20-nm-thick Al2O3 capping layer to protect 

it from oxidation. This design offers several desirable optical, electrical, and thermal properties that facilitate 

effective tuning of the light scattering. To perform accurate optical simulations, the optical properties of our 

GST material are first measured using ellipsometry (Supplementary Note 1). Our simulations show that under 

dark-field illumination with TM-polarized light (H field directed along the length of the nanobeam) at 800 

nm, surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) are excited at the interface between the GST and Ag (Fig. 1b). The 

fields are largely confined to the volume of the GST beam. This is consistent with a physical picture where 

excited SPPs resonate by oscillating back and forth inside the GST beam, reflecting from its side walls.53,54 

For this reason, the width of the GST beam critically controls the resonance wavelength and narrower (wider) 

beams can be chosen to shift the resonance to the blue (red). The good modal overlap of the SPP mode with 

the switching medium ensures effective tuning of the resonant scattering properties upon a phase change.  


 

Figure 1: Operation and optical response of an electrically-tunable phase change antenna. a. A schematic 

showing an optical antenna comprised of a GST nanobeam stacked on top of an Ag nanostrip, separated by a thin Al2O3 

layer. Set (blue) and Reset (red) current pulses are sent through the Ag nanostrip heater/antenna to transform a-GST to 

c-GST and back. The resistance of the GST beam and the scattered light from the device in dark-field, white-light 

illumination can be monitored to study the impact of the phase changes on the electrical and optical properties. b. 

Finite-difference time-domain simulation of the antenna with a-GST illuminated at grazing-incidence and with TM-

polarized light at a wavelength of 800 nm. c. The simulated total scattering cross section of the optical antenna with a-

GST and c-GST. d. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a fabricated device e. Dark-field, white-light 

scattering images of the antenna taken after a set pulse and a reset pulse, showing a notable change in scattering 

intensity. The scattered light intensity measured along the antenna length is plotted in the inset. f. Cross section TEM 

images. The left image shows a scanning TEM image of the stacked GST and Ag beams and the thin Al2O3 spacer. On 

the right are high-resolution TEM images of this type of device after applying reset and set pulses, respectively. Insets 

show the corresponding fast Fourier transforms (FFT) with a logarithmic intensity scale. The top cross section shows 

no crystallinity, while the bottom image shows the lattice fringes of c-GST. 

 

Figure 1c shows the resonant scattering behavior for the cases where the GST is in the amorphous (a-GST) 

and crystalline phase (c-GST). The long wavelength resonance corresponds to the fundamental dipole 

resonance with one antinode in the magnetic field above the Ag strip and the short wavelength resonance 


corresponds to a resonance with three antinodes (Fig. S3). Both resonances exhibit clear redshifts as the phase 

is transformed from amorphous to crystalline due to an increase of the imaginary part of GST permittivity. 

In this work we will mainly focus on the stronger, fundamental resonance. The scattering cross section 

reduces upon switching from a-GST to c-GST due to the higher materials loss in the crystalline phase at the 

longer wavelength. 

The changes in the scattering cross section can be directly observed in dark-field microscopy under 

white-light illumination. Figure 1d shows a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the antenna and 

pads that electrically connect the GST beam and Ag strip. The optical images taken from the antenna before 

and after amorphization show clear differences in the scattered light intensity (Fig.1e).  Both antennas show 

a more-or-less constant scattering intensity along the length of the beams, as expected for well-fabricated 

antennas. 

A structural analysis of the antennas before and after switching further confirms our ability to 

reversibly switch the GST material between crystalline and amorphous phases. Using a focused ion beam 

(FIB) lift-out technique, we prepared antennas for electron microscopy analysis. Transmission electron 

microscopy (TEM) cross-sectional imaging (see Fig. 1f) shows the structure was successfully fabricated with 

the intended geometry and dimensions. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) 

imaging of the GST nanobeams after a reset pulse exhibits no lattice fringes, consistent with an amorphous 

phase, while GST after a set pulse exhibits lattice fringes with a spacing that is consistent with c-GST. More 

details on the sample preparation and measurement analysis are discussed in Supplementary Note 4. 

The Ag strip also performs important electrical and thermal functions. By running current through the 

beam, it can serve as a miniature hot-plate capable of heating the GST beam that sits on top. Two kinds of 

current pulses with different temporal profiles are sent through the Ag strips. Set pulses of a 1 μs duration 

and with a 20 μs trailing time are used to heat the GST above the crystallization temperature (Tx) and then 

maintain the high temperature long enough to facilitate complete crystallization.33,55 Reset pulses feature a 

higher current for a shorter duration of 500 ns to rapidly raise the local temperature above the melting 

temperature of GST (Tmelt ~600 °C). The pulse is then switched off quickly with a 20 ns trailing time to 

achieve an effective melt-quench that freezes in the amorphous phase. The key challenge towards realizing 

reversible switching is achieving a sufficiently fast cooling rate to prevent recrystallization as the GST cools. 

From the literature it is established that for our thermal cycle typical crystallization times are around 80 ns.56 

We find that it is beneficial to have an Ag strip that is wider than the GST beam to ensure excellent heat 

dissipation to the substrate.  A thermal simulation (Methods) of the device shows that a reset pulse with a 


100 ns rise time, can effectively heat the GST beam to above Tmelt in about 200 ns (Fig. 2a). At the end of the 

pulse, the current drops with a 20 ns trailing time and this allows the GST to cool down to a temperature 

below 120 °C (below Tx ≈ 160 °C) in less than 50 ns (Fig. 2b). Our 2D simulations assume that the antenna 

is infinitely long, which is justified for our 10 μm-long and 140-nm-wide antennas (Fig. 1d). 

We further analyze the GST switching behavior by monitoring the resistance of the GST nanobeam 

after sending every reset and set pulse (see Fig. 2c). The resistance after each reset pulse is seen to consistently 

increase by at least an order of magnitude and the opposite occurs after each set pulse. This confirms that we 

can achieve robust, reversible switching between the a-GST and c-GST phases. The slight variations in the 

resistance may indicate not fully completed transformations. Additionally, we performed conductive atomic 

force microscopy (C-AFM) to demonstrate that the phase transition happens along the entire length of the 

GST nanobeam (Supplemental Note 5). 

 

 

Figure 2: Electrothermal switching of optical antennas. a. A thermal simulation of the phase change antenna when 

applying a reset pulse. The temporal evolution of the average temperature of the GST nanobeam (top) is plotted along 

with the electrical pulse current (bottom). The melting temperature (Tmelt) and crystallization temperature (Tx) of GST 

are plotted with dashed lines respectively. b. Cross sectional plot of the antenna temperature profile during the cooling 

process, the time stamps correspond to the three dots on the temperature curve in panel a. c. Electrical testing of an 

antenna. The resistance of the GST nanobeam is measured after each pulse, where the red regions show the resistance 

after reset pulses and blue regions indicate the resistance after set pulses. The peak pulse current is plotted at the bottom. 

Robust and reversible switching between crystalline and amorphous phases is confirmed by the resistance changes in 

excess of one order of magnitude.  

 

Scattering spectra from the antenna are taken after each current pulse (Fig. 3a). The measured spectra show 

broad resonances that are peaked just above 700 nm. They qualitatively match the simulated spectra of the 

total scattering cross section in Fig. 1c. A notable 30% modulation in intensity is observed on resonance. The 


spectra for the amorphous and crystalline phase show good consistency over many cycles. The simulated 

spectra in Fig. 3b show good agreement when we take into account that in our experiments we only collect 

back-scattered light through a 50× objective with a numerical aperture of 0.6. The spectra that are simulated 

assuming complete amorphization and crystallization indicate a possible signal modulation exceeding 50%. 

An antenna with different volume fractions of amorphous material are also simulated, assuming the top part 

of the antenna is in the crystalline phase. We find that the spectra continuously morph from the crystalline 

spectrum to the amorphous spectrum as the volume fraction is increased. The measured spectra after the reset 

pulses in Fig. 3a agree best with simulations assuming a high (~ 80%) volume fraction of a-GST. It could be 

that the GST antenna does not return to the completely amorphized state after reset pulses and part of the 

GST material may have recrystallized during the quenching process. We confirmed that GST can indeed be 

switched completely to the crystalline state by sending set pulses with higher current. In that case, no further 

decrease of the back scattered signal is observed after multiple set pulses.  

We also use a CCD camera to image the antenna in real time as we are sending switching pulses (See 

Fig. 1e). We integrate the intensity over the antenna area, to plot the scattered intensity against time as 

different set and reset pulses are delivered to the antenna (Fig. 3c). The collected signal shows signal changes 

of 30% over more than 100 cycles, as shown in Fig. S10. 

 

 

Figure 3: In situ optical measurement of an antenna. a. Measured spectra of the scattered light from an antenna 

after reset and set pulses, under dark-field illumination. The dashed lines represent spectra collected after 10 cycles of 

operation. The inset shows two images of the antenna under dark-field illumination after a reset pulse (top) and a set 

pulse (bottom). b. Simulated spectra of the scattered light from the antenna, collected with an objective (NA: 0.6), 

when the GST nanobeam is in the amorphous, crystalline and partially amorphous phase (80% is amorphous with a top 

20% layer in crystalline state). c. Demonstration of binary operation of the antenna, with a change of 30% in scattered 

light intensity after reset (red) and set pulses (blue). 


While the reset pulses quench the GST quickly in the above experiments, we can increase the trailing 

time to induce slower cooling and allow the GST to fully crystallize. By varying the temporal shape of the 

pulses, we can control the degree of crystallization and achieve multi-level operation. (Fig. S11) 

After we demonstrated the repeatable switching of a single antenna, we move on to explore whether 

more complex metasurfaces can be created comprised of multiple antennas. Figure 4a shows a schematic of 

a metasurface designed to operate as a perfect absorber13,36 in the crystalline phase. Here, 85-nm-wide and 

35-nm-thick GST nanobeams are placed in an array with a period of 200 nm on top of a 60-nm-thick Ag strip. 

The Ag strip is chosen to be thick enough to prevent any light transmission. 

Again a thin (6 nm) layer of Al3O2 is used as a spacer and a 50-nm-thick Al3O2 capping layer was 

deposited to protect the device. In Fig. 4b, we show a FDTD simulation of the metasurface with c-GST beams, 

under TM-polarized illumination at normal incidence. We first show the field distribution at the wavelength 

of 730 nm, where SPPs are excited on the Ag surface and inside the GST beams. The high fields result in 

significant dissipation inside the beams causing almost perfect absorption. This is confirmed by the overlaid 

flowlines of the Poynting vector that show efficient funneling of an incident plane wave into the lossy GST 

beams. The ability to achieve perfect absorption can be understood by comparing the scattered fields from a 

sample with just the Ag strip and one with the GST beams on top of the strip. They are seen to be perfectly 

out of phase and of equal amplitude. This indicates that the non-resonant path (reflection from the Ag strip) 

and the resonant path (storing energy in the resonant antenna modes) can destructively interfere and prevent 

an outgoing/reflected wave. After switching to a-GST, the metasurface reflects 30% of the light at 730 nm 

and the absolute modulation of the reflectance increases at longer wavelengths (Fig. 4c). 

To verify the simulations, we measure reflection spectra from the metasurface at normal incidence. 

When the beams are in the crystalline phase the lowest reflectance of 4.3% is achieved at the wavelength of 

700 nm, consistent with the simulations. After a reset pulse, the reflected light intensity at this wavelength 

increases to 14.5%, a more than 3-fold change. The non-zero reflectance for c-GST is attributed to the small 

variations in the nanobeam dimensions that disturb the delicate, destructive interference condition. The 

highest modulation in the reflectance of a factor 4.5 is achieved at a wavelength of 755 nm. We also collect 

the reflected light with a CCD camera after passing through a band-pass filter centered at 690 nm, with a full 

width half maximum (FWHM) of 10 nm. In Fig. 4e, the reflected signal is modulated up and down with reset 

and set pulses respectively, showing a good consistency with repeated cycling. 


 

Figure 4: An electrically-tunable phase change metasurface. a. A schematic of the proposed metasurface is shown 

on the right, with a dense GST nanobeam-array placed on an optically-thick Ag strip. Reset and set pulses are sent 

through the Ag strip to heat the metasurface and reversibly transform it between a-GST and c-GST phases. The left top 

inset is an SEM image of a device. The left bottom inset is a false-colored SEM image of the GST array, where the red 

regions highlight the GST nanobeams. b. FDTD simulation of the metasurface with c-GST at normal-incidence and 

with TM-polarized light at a wavelength of 730 nm. The first figure plots the total field. The second and third figure 

shows the scattered field for the Ag strip by itself and for the case the GST nanobeams are added, displaying a π phase 

difference. c. Simulated spectra of the reflectance and transmittance of the metasurface with a-GST and c-GST beams. 

The ratio of the reflectance for the a-GST and c-GST states is shown by the dotted black curve. d. Measured spectra of 

the reflectance of the metasurface taken after a reset and set pulse. The on/off ratio of the reflectance (reset/set) is also 

shown as the black curve, with a maximum ratio of 4.5 at the wavelength of 755 nm. The FWHM of the band-pass 

filter used to obtain Fig. 4e is shown in gray.  e. Demonstration of binary operation of a “perfect absorber” metasurface, 

showing a modulation of reflectance by more than 2.5-fold after reset and set pulses. 

 

 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a method for realizing electrical, non-volatile, and reversible switching 

of phase change antennas and metasurfaces devices based on a chalcogenide phase change material. A design 


was created in which Ag nanostrips can conveniently function as a nano-heater and enable plasmonic antenna 

functions. We show an optical antenna that offers strong scattering in the visible and near-infrared spectral 

ranges and significant (30%) electrical modulation of the scattered light intensity. Utilizing destructive 

interference between two pathways, a metasurface is also demonstrated, with an electrical modulation of the 

reflectance by more than 4-fold. This work opens the opportunity to create a wide range of dynamic random 

access metasurfaces capable of programmable and active wavefront manipulation. 

 

References:  

1. 
Yu, N. & Capasso, F. Flat optics: Controlling wavefronts with optical antenna metasurfaces. IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. 
AP-S Int. Symp. 19, 2341–2342 (2013). 

2. 
Chen, H.-T., Taylor, A. J. & Yu, N. A review of metasurfaces: physics and applications. Reports Prog. Phys. 76401 (2016). 
doi:10.1088/0034-4885/79/7/076401 

3. 
Lalanne, P. & Chavel, P. Metalenses at visible wavelengths: past, present, perspectives. Laser Photonics Rev. 11, (2017). 

4. 
Shaltout, A. M., Shalaev, V. M. & Brongersma, M. L. Spatiotemporal light control with active metasurfaces. Science 364, 
374–377 (2019). 

5. 
Holsteen, A. L., Raza, S., Fan, P., Kik, P. G. & Brongersma, M. L. Purcell effect for active tuning of light scattering from 
semiconductor optical antennas. Science 358, 1407–1410 (2017). 

6. 
Gao, L. et al. Optics and Nonlinear Buckling Mechanics in Large-Area, Highly Stretchable Arrays of Plasmonic 
Nanostructures. ACS Nano 9, 5968–5975 (2015). 

7. 
Zheludev, N. I. & Plum, E. Reconfigurable nanomechanical photonic metamaterials. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 16–22 (2016). 

8. 
Cencillo-Abad, P., Ou, J. Y., Plum, E. & Zheludev, N. I. Electro-mechanical light modulator based on controlling the 
interaction of light with a metasurface. Sci. Rep. 7, (2017). 

9. 
Afridi, A. et al. Electrically Driven Varifocal Silicon Metalens. ACS Photonics 5, 4497–4503 (2018). 

10. Arbabi, E. et al. MEMS-tunable dielectric metasurface lens. Nat. Commun. 9, (2018). 
11. Yao, Y. et al. Broad electrical tuning of graphene-loaded plasmonic antennas. Nano Lett. 13, 1257–1264 (2013). 
12. Emani, N. K. et al. Electrically Tunable Plasmonic Resonances with Graphene. Nano Lett. 12, 5202–5206 (2012). 
13. Park, J., Kang, J.-H., Kim, S. J., Liu, X. & Brongersma, M. L. Dynamic Reflection Phase and Polarization Control in 
Metasurfaces. Nano Lett. 17, 407–413 (2017). 

14. Huang, Y. W. et al. Gate-Tunable Conducting Oxide Metasurfaces. Nano Lett. 16, 5319–5325 (2016). 
15. Iyer, P. P., Pendharkar, M., Palmstrøm, C. J. & Schuller, J. A. III-V Heterojunction Platform for Electrically Reconfigurable 
Dielectric Metasurfaces. ACS Photonics 6, 1345–1350 (2019). 

16. Jun, Y. C. et al. Epsilon-near-zero strong coupling in metamaterial-semiconductor hybrid structures. Nano Lett. 13, 5391–
5396 (2013). 

17. Wu, P. C. et al. Dynamic beam steering with all-dielectric electro-optic III–V multiple-quantum-well metasurfaces. Nat. 
Commun. 10, 1–9 (2019). 

18. Emboras, A. et al. Atomic Scale Plasmonic Switch. Nano Lett. 16, 709–714 (2016). 
19. Di Martino, G., Tappertzhofen, S., Hofmann, S. & Baumberg, J. Nanoscale Plasmon-Enhanced Spectroscopy in Memristive 
Switches. Small 12, 1334–1341 (2016). 

20. Schoen, D. T., Holsteen, A. L. & Brongersma, M. L. Probing the electrical switching of a memristive optical antenna by 
STEM EELS. Nat. Commun. 7, (2016). 

21. Li, Y., Van De Groep, J., Talin, A. A. & Brongersma, M. L. Dynamic Tuning of Gap Plasmon Resonances Using a Solid-
State Electrochromic Device. Nano Lett. 19, 7988–7995 (2019). 

22. Minovich, A. et al. Liquid crystal based nonlinear fishnet metamaterials. Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 121113 (2012). 
23. Buchnev, O., Ou, J. Y., Kaczmarek, M., Zheludev, N. I. & Fedotov, V. A. Electro-optical control in a plasmonic 
metamaterial hybridised with a liquid-crystal cell. Opt. Express 21, 1633 (2013). 

24. Li, S. Q. et al. Phase-only transmissive spatial light modulator based on tunable dielectric metasurface. Science 364, 1087–
1090 (2019). 

25. Soares, B. F., Jonsson, F. & Zheludev, N. I. All-Optical Phase-Change Memory in a Single Gallium Nanoparticle. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 98, 153905 (2007). 


26. Wuttig, M., Bhaskaran, H. & Taubner, T. Phase-change materials for non-volatile photonic applications. Nat. Photonics 11, 
465–476 (2017). 

27. Ding, F., Yang, Y. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Dynamic Metasurfaces Using Phase-Change Chalcogenides. Adv. Opt. Mater. 7, 
1801709 (2019). 

28. Driscoll, T. et al. Memory metamaterials. Science 325, 1518–1521 (2009). 
29. Wang, Q. et al. Optically reconfigurable metasurfaces and photonic devices based on phase change materials. Nat. Photonics 
10, 60–65 (2015). 

30. Wong, H.-S. P. et al. Phase Change Memory. Proc. IEEE 98, 2201–2227 (2010). 
31. Wuttig, M. & Yamada, N. Phase-change materials for rewriteable data storage. Nat. Mater. 6, 824–832 (2007). 
32. Anbarasu, M. & Wuttig, M. Understanding the Structure and Properties of Phase Change Materials for Data Storage 
Applications. Journal of the Indian Institute of Science 91, (2012). 

33. Raoux, S., Xiong, F., Wuttig, M. & Pop, E. Phase change materials and phase change memory. MRS Bull. 39, 703–710 
(2014). 

34. Liang, G. et al. Comparison of optical and electrical transient response during nanosecond laser pulse-induced phase 
transition of Ge2Sb2Te5 thin films. Chem. Phys. Lett. 507, 203–207 (2011). 

35. Hosseini, P., Wright, C. D. & Bhaskaran, H. An optoelectronic framework enabled by low-dimensional phase-change films. 
Nature 511, 206–211 (2014). 

36. Tittl, A. et al. A Switchable Mid-Infrared Plasmonic Perfect Absorber with Multispectral Thermal Imaging Capability. Adv. 
Mater. 27, 4597–4603 (2015). 

37. Li, P. et al. Reversible optical switching of highly confined phonon–polaritons with an ultrathin phase-change material. Nat. 
Mater. 15, 870–875 (2016). 

38. Kats, M. A. et al. Thermal tuning of mid-infrared plasmonic antenna arrays using a phase change material. Opt. Lett. 38, 368 
(2013). 

39. Ann-Katrin U. Michel  Tobias W. W. Maß, Kathrin Schönauer, Martin Salinga, Matthias Wuttig, and Thomas Taubner*, D. 
N. C. Using low-loss phase-change materials for mid- infrared antenna resonance switching. Nano Lett. 13, (2013). 

40. Michel, A. K. U. et al. Reversible Optical Switching of Infrared Antenna Resonances with Ultrathin Phase-Change Layers 
Using Femtosecond Laser Pulses. ACS Photonics 1, 833–839 (2014). 

41. Laee, R. A., Lbooyeh, M. A. & Retyakov, S. T. Phase-change material-based nanoantennas with tunable radiation patterns. 
Opt. Lett. 41, (2016). 

42. Tian, J. et al. Active control of anapole states by structuring the phase-change alloy Ge2Sb2Te5. Nat. Commun. 5, (2019). 
43. Rudé, M., Simpson, R. E., Quidant, R., Pruneri, V. & Renger, J. Active Control of Surface Plasmon Waveguides with a 
Phase Change Material. ACS Photonics 2, 669–674 (2015). 

44. de Galarreta, C. R. et al. Nonvolatile Reconfigurable Phase-Change Metadevices for Beam Steering in the Near Infrared. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1704993 (2018). 

45. Yin, X. et al. Beam switching and bifocal zoom lensing using active plasmonic metasurfaces. Light Sci. Appl. 6, e17016 
(2017). 

46. Carrillo, S. G. et al. A Nonvolatile Phase‐Change Metamaterial Color Display. Adv. Opt. Mater. 1801782, 1801782 (2019). 
47. Leitis, A. et al. All-Dielectric Programmable Huygens’ Metasurfaces. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 1910259 (2020). 
48. Hamann, H. F., O’Boyle, M., Martin, Y. C., Rooks, M. & Wickramasinghe, H. K. Ultra-high-density phase-change storage 
and memory. Nat. Mater. 5, 383–387 (2006). 

49. Ahn, C. et al. Crystallization properties and their drift dependence in phase-change memory studied with a micro-thermal 
stage. J. Appl. Phys. 110, (2011). 

50. Kato, K., Kuwahara, M., Kawashima, H., Tsuruoka, T. & Tsuda, H. Current-driven phase-change optical gate switch using 
indium-tin-oxide heater. Appl. Phys. Express 10, 3–6 (2017). 

51. Au, Y. Y., Bhaskaran, H. & Wright, C. D. Phase-change devices for simultaneous optical-electrical applications. Sci. Rep. 7, 
1–7 (2017). 

52. Farmakidis, N. et al. Plasmonic nanogap enhanced phase-change devices with dual electrical-optical functionality. Sci. Adv. 
5, eaaw2687 (2019). 

53. Søndergaard, T. & Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Strip and gap plasmon polariton optical resonators. Phys. Status Solidi Basic Res. 245, 
9–19 (2008). 

54. Landreman, P. E., Chalabi, H., Park, J. & Brongersma, M. L. Fabry-Perot description for Mie resonances of rectangular 
dielectric nanowire optical resonators. Opt. Express 24, 29760 (2016). 

55. Chen, Y. et al. Resolving glass transition in Te-based phase-change materials by modulated differential scanning 
calorimetry. Appl. Phys. Express 10, (2017). 

56. Suh, D. S. et al. Critical quenching speed determining phase of Ge 2 Sb 2 Te 5 in phase-change memory. Tech. Dig. - Int. 
Electron Devices Meet. IEDM 1–4 (2006). doi:10.1109/IEDM.2006.346909 


Methods: 

Devices fabrication 

The optical antennas and metasurface devices are fabricated following many of the same, initial fabrication 

steps. First, a 120-nm-thick layer of SiO2 is grown by thermally oxidizing a Si substrate. Alignment markers 

and contact pads are subsequently defined on the substrates by photolithography. We then use electron-beam 

evaporation to first deposit a 5-nm-thick Ti adhesion layer, followed by a 45-nm-thick Au later and a lift-off 

in acetone. 

The next steps to fabricate the optical antennas involve an electron-beam (e-beam) lithography to 

define the Ag strips, followed by e-beam evaporation of a 4-nm-thick Ti adhesion layer and a 36-nm-thick 

Ag layer and ultimately a lift-off. We then deposit an Al2O3 layer with a thickness of 6 nm by atomic layer 

deposition (ALD). Another set of contact pad are defined by photolithography, designed to connect the GST 

beams. A 5-nm-thick Ti adhesion layer and a 45-nm-thick Au layer are then deposited by e-beam evaporation. 

For the next layer, we use e-beam lithography to define the pattern, then use DC magnetron sputtering to 

deposit the GST from a Ge3Sb2Te6 (GST-326) target, to achieve 24-nm-thick GST nanobeams. As the last 

step, a protective Al2O3 capping layer with a thickness around 20 nm is deposited by ALD (thinner on top of 

GST at 13 nm).  

The next steps to fabricate active metasurfaces involve e-beam lithography to define the Ag strips and 

a deposition of a 6-nm-thick Ti adhesion layer and 54-nm-thick Ag layer. We then deposit a 6-nm-thick 

Al2O3 layer by ALD. E-beam lithography is used to define the GST patterns, followed by DC magnetron 

sputtering of GST-326, producing 34-nm-thick GST nanobeam-arrays. An Al2O3 capping layer with a 

thickness around 50 nm is deposited by ALD. 

Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations 

Optical simulations are carried out with FDTD method (FDTD Simulations, Lumerical). Two-dimensional 

(2D) simulations of the single optical antennas are performed with perfectly matched layer (PML) boundary 

condition. While a single-wavelength TFSF source is used to study the impact of an inclined illumination at 

46°, we sweep the wavelength with a fixed angle of incidence to obtain the spectrum across a broad 

wavelength range. Monitors are placed around the device, outside of the TFSF source region to calculate the 

far-field profile of electromagnetic field at each wavelength. We then integrate the field intensity within a 

solid angle, corresponding to a numerical aperture of 0.6. To further simulate the experimental condition, we 

measure the collection efficiency of the objective used in experiments (Nikon TU Plan 50×/0.60) at each 


wavelength. This allows us to correct for the instrument response. 2D simulation of the metasurface are 

performed using periodic boundary conditions. 

Finite element method (FEM) simulation 

We also performed 2D thermal simulations a finite-element method (COMSOL Multiphysics). They are 

implemented for a 10 μm×10 μm region, with the boundary set at room temperature. The thermal model is 

discussed in more details in Supplementary Note 2. 

Electrical characterization 

A semiconductor device parameter analyzer is used for electrical characterization, including a pulse generator 

which sends electrical pulses through Ag strips to induce phase transition and measurement units to monitor 

the resistance of both Ag and GST strips. Please refer to Supplementary Note 3. 

In-situ optical measurements 

We measure the dark-field scattering spectra of the antennas and the bright-field reflection of the 

metasurfaces with a Nikon C2 confocal microscope. A halogen lamp is used as the illumination source. After 

being collected by a 50× objective (Nikon TU Plan 50×/0.60), the scattered light from devices is polarized in 

the TM direction with respect to the devices and is subsequently sent into either of two paths. In the first path, 

a Nikon DS-Fi1 camera is used to capture images and videos. Alternatively in a second path, a confocal 

scanner spatially selects the scattered light from the devices and sends it to a Princeton Instruments 

SpectraPro 2300i spectrometer (150 lines/mm, blazed for λ = 500 nm) and a Pixis Si CCD camera (−70 °C 

detector temperature) to analyze the spectrum. The antennas are measured under dark-field illumination at a 

46° incident angle. The scattered light is collected through a 30-μm-diameter pinhole in the confocal scanner, 

before analysis by the spectrometer. The measured spectra are normalized to the scattered spectrum of a 

Lambertian reflector (Labsphere Spectralon 99%) measured under the same condition. The metasurface 

devices are measured under normal-incidence illumination, with an aperture stop closed to ensure a minimal 

beam divergence. The measured spectra are normalized to the reflection spectrum of an Ag mirror (Thorlabs 

PF10-03-P01). While under the microscope for in situ optical measurement, the devices are connected to a 

semiconductor analyzer by probe tips to perform electrical switching. 

Transmission electron microscopy and sample preparation 

Transmission electron microscopy was used to analyze the structural phase and physical dimensions of the 

devices. Details can be found in Supplementary Note 4. 

Conductive atomic force microscopy 

Please see the discussion in Supplementary Note 5. 


Acknowledgment 

The work was supported by was supported by an individual investigator project funded by Samsung Advanced Institute of 

Technology. We would like to also acknowledge funding from AFOSR MURI grant (FA9550-17-1-0002). Part of this work was 

performed at the Stanford Nano Shared Facilities (SNSF), supported by the National Science Foundation under award ECCS-

1542152. U.C. was supported in part by Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek—Vlaanderen (FWO). 

Author contributions 

Y.W., P.L. and M.L.B. conceived the ideas for this research project. Y.W. fabricated the devices, performed optical simulations, 

and implemented optical microscopy measurements. D.S. and A.M. prepared the sample and carried out TEM measurements. Y.W. 

conducted thermal simulations and electrical measurements with the help of K.O. and H.-S.P.W. C-AFM measurements were 

performed by Y.W. and U.C. All authors contributed to the writing of the manuscript. 

Competing financial interests 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

 

  


