1

Thickness-dependent electron momentum relaxation times in iron films

K. L. Krewer,1,2,a) W. Zhang,1,4 J. Arabski,3 G. Schmerber,3 E. Beaurepaire,3 M.

Bonn,1 and D. Turchinovich1,4 

1Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, 55128 Mainz, Germany

2Graduate School of Excellence Material Science in Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany

3Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Institut de Physique et Chimie des Matériaux de Strasbourg, UMR 7504, 23 rue du

Loess, F-67000 Strasbourg, France 

4Fakultät für Physik, Universität Bielefeld, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany 

a)
Corresponding author krewer@mpip-mainz.mpg.de

Terahertz time-domain conductivity measurements in 2 to 100 nm thick iron films resolve the femtosecond time 
delay between applied electric fields and resulting currents. This current response time decreases from 29 fs for
thickest films to 7 fs for the thinnest films. The macroscopic response time is not strictly proportional to the 
conductivity. This excludes the existence of a single relaxation time universal for all conduction electrons. We 
must assume a distribution of microscopic momentum relaxation times. The macroscopic response time depends 
on average and variation of this distribution; the observed deviation between response time and conductivity 
scaling corresponds to the scaling of the variation. The variation of microscopic relaxation times depends on film 
thickness because electrons with different relaxation times are affected differently by the confinement since they 
have different mean free paths. 

Conductivity in metals is typically described using a highly simplified 
model: a gas of identical electrons characterized by a single, 
universal relaxation time1–4. This contrasts with the complexity of 
the underlying process where all electronic states on the Fermi 
surface contribute to conduction3,5, and relaxation times often vary 
strongly across the Fermi surface6–10. The few femtosecond time 
delay between an applied field and the resulting current - the 
current response time 𝜏𝐶 - reflects the macroscopic momentum 
relaxation of an ensemble of charges. Resolving this delay can 
therefore provide insights into the relaxation processes and connect 
microscopic scattering to macroscopic conduction. 
This is particularly relevant for thin metal films1,2,4,11–13 for which 
different electrons can be affected differently by confinement. 
Here, we determine 𝜏𝐶 as a function of thickness for thin metal 
films, and demonstrate that different types of electrons with 
different relaxation times are present in the films. 
We performed substrate referenced transmission terahertz time-
domain transmission spectroscopy14,15 at room temperature (293 K) 
on iron films ranging from 2.2 to 100 nm thickness. The films were 
deposited on double-polished MgO (100) substrates and capped 
with ca. 12 nm of MgO. The films were grown by molecular beam 
epitaxy at room temperature, with subsequent annealing. The 
thicknesses 𝑎 were controlled in situ by quartz balance sensing and 
confirmed ex situ by small-angle x-ray diffraction (XRD) for selected 
samples (see supplementary material fig. S1). Roughnesses 
extracted from XRD average 0.9 ± 0.1 nm, without significant 
dependence on thickness. Reflection high-energy electron 
diffraction images indicate that this preparation method achieves 
single-crystalline films with bcc lattice structure (see fig. S2 and S3 
in the supplementary material). 
The terahertz radiation was generated and detected in 1 mm ZnTe 
crystals using 800 nm 40 fs pulses from an amplified Ti:Sapphire 

laser emitting 1000 pulses per second14. We alternated recording 
the terahertz transmission through the samples with the 
transmission through a bare reference substrate. We performed 
three rounds of measurements, each with a different combination 
of samples, alternatingly acquiring traces for sample and reference 
10 to 30 times. We correct the terahertz transmission relative to the 
reference substrate for substrate thickness differences16. We then 
numerically solve the transfer matrices17 for the corrected 
transmission data, using the thin conductive film approximation18,19
to generate starting values. This approach allows reliably 
determining the phase 𝜑 of the conductivity 𝜎̃, even for films for 
which the phase acquired by the terahertz pulse during a direct 
transit is non-negligible (see Supplementary Material). 
The current response time 𝜏𝐶 can be obtained from the measured 
phase 𝜑 of the conductivity 𝜎̃ at a specific frequency 𝑓, through: 

𝜏𝐶(𝑓) = tan (𝜑(𝜎̃(𝑓))) /(2𝜋𝑓)
(1)

If a universal relaxation time 𝜏𝑢 existed, the current response time 
𝜏𝐶 would be constant and equal to the universal relaxation time 𝜏𝑢
of the Drude model. Previous measurements of the current 
response time in metals were limited to ca. 10 fs accuracy, due to 
uncertainties in the thickness of the reference substrate20,21. Our 
thickness correction technique allows determining the current 
response time with an error of ca. 1 fs16 for most cases, allowing to 
compare response times between different samples. Fig.1 shows 3 
exemplary phase-resolved conductivity spectra for a very thin (2.2 
nm), an intermediate (10.3 nm), and a thick film (100 nm). The 
phase-resolved conductivity is plotted in terms of amplitude 𝜎 and 
current response time 𝜏𝐶. The spectra are essentially flat, with the 
exception of the conductivity amplitude 𝜎 of the 100 nm film, which 
slightly decreases with increasing frequency. Deviations from flat 
spectra are larger than the statistical errors and correlate between 


2

different samples; for example an increase in response time 𝜏𝐶 for 
high frequencies occurs for both the 2.2 and 10 nm films shown in 
fig. 1. These residuals only correlate between different samples 
measured in the same round; the residuals do not correlate with the 
same samples measured in a different round several months later 
with a different reference substrate (see supplementary fig. S4). 
Therefore we consider these residuals artefacts. 

FIG. 1: The complex conductivities 𝝈̃ extracted from time-

domain spectroscopy, represented as amplitude 𝝈 (full squares, left 
axis) and current response time 𝝉𝑪 (empty circles, right axis), which
is the tangent of the phase over angular frequency. Conductivity 
spectra are displayed for a thick (100 nm, black), intermediate (10.3 
nm, blue), and very thin (2 nm, red) sample. Error bars indicate the 
standard error of the mean, inferred  from repeated measurements. 
Where invisible, the error bars are smaller than the markers. Lines 
denote effective Drude responses derived from spectral averages 
𝝉̅𝑪(dashed lines, right axis) and 𝝈̅𝑫𝑪 (full lines, left axis) of 𝝉𝑪(𝒇) and 
𝝈(𝒇) ∙ √(𝟏 + (𝟐𝝅𝒇𝝉̅𝑪)𝟐).

The amplitude spectra 𝜎(𝑓) are flat due to the very low relaxation 
times 𝜏. The flat response time spectra 𝜏𝐶(𝑓) appear to be
consistent with the hypothesis of a universal relaxation time 𝜏𝑢, as 
the hypothesis predicts the response time to be constant and equal 
to 𝜏𝑢, as a universal relaxation time results in a Drude type 
dispersion 

𝜎̃= 𝜎𝐷𝐶/(1 − 𝑖2𝜋𝑓𝜏𝑢). 
(2)

The universal relaxation time assumption also predicts that the DC
conductivity 𝜎𝐷𝐶 is proportional to 𝜏𝑢. We find that the conductivity 
amplitudes 𝜎 are lower for the thinner films, with the difference 
between 10 to 2.2 nm being much larger than that between 100 and 
10 nm. The current response time 𝜏𝐶 behaves quite differently. It is 
also lower for thinner films, but the relative difference in response 
times between 100 and 10 nm is almost two times that of the 
conductivity amplitudes, contrary to the assumption of direct 
proportionality. The 2.2 nm thin film shows higher current response 
times than direct proportionality would predict from the 
conductivity amplitudes.
To compare the scaling of conductivity amplitude and response 
time, we extract the spectral average 𝜏̅𝐶 of the current response 
times for each film. We then compute the DC-limit of the 
conductivity of a Drude type dispersion from each frequency step

by multiplying the conductivity amplitudes 𝜎 at each frequency
𝑓 with √(1 + (2𝜋𝑓 𝜏̅𝐶)2). The resulting spectra for the DC 
parameter are then also averaged. The residual artefacts are the 
main source of error on both the response time 𝜏̅𝐶 and DC-
conductivity 𝜎̅𝐷𝐶 parameters extracted from each spectrum. The 
residuals are taken into account by multiplying the variance of the 
weighted averages by the reduced sum of weighted residuals. 
Further, we use the instances where we have measurements of the 
same sample in different rounds to estimate the precision. These 
measurements deviate between 0.1 and 2.7 fs from another, i.e.
slightly more than what we estimate from the residuals. We use the 
larger estimate where we have measurements from different 
rounds, and we add the average unexplained variance of (0.8 fs)2 to 
the variance from the residuals
where we do not have 

measurements from different rounds. Further, we add the variances 
caused by a possible 1% error in the substrate refractive index, by 
the uncertainty of the substrate thickness correction and the 
uncertainty on the film thickness a.
The thickness scaling of the extracted response time and DC-
conductivity is shown in fig. 2. From thick towards thin films, the DC 
conductivity first hardly decreases, then jumps down from 10 to 8 
nm and then keeps decreasing strongly. The current response time 
first decreases quickly, also jumps down from 10 to 8 nm and then 
levels out towards thinner films. So while both parameters decrease 
with decreasing thickness a, the detailed scaling is different. 

FIG. 2: DC-conductivities 𝝈̅𝐃𝐂 (left axis, black) and current 

response times 𝝉̅𝑪 (right axis, red) extracted from complex 
conductivity spectra of 12 iron films from 2.2 to 100 nm thickness. 
The conductivity decreases and the current response becomes 
faster for thinner metal films, as expected from increased surface 
scattering, but they are not directly proportional. All measurements 
were performed at 293 K.

None of the existing models for the thickness scaling of conductivity 
predict the response time1,2,4,11–13. Further, the jump between 8 and 
10 nm does not fit with any model.  We hence do not focus on trying 
to find a detailed microscopic model for the exact thickness scaling 
of these iron films. We rather focus on the peculiarity of seeing 
constant current response time spectra but no proportionality 
between conductivity and current response time. The spectrally 
constant response time is predicted by the universal relaxation time 
hypothesis; the deviations from proportionality contradict this 
hypothesis. To investigate the deviation from proportionality, we 
plot the quotient 𝑄 = 𝜏̅𝐶/𝜎̅𝐷𝐶of the response time and the DC-
conductivity in fig. 3. We see that those values are not constant, but 

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0

2

4

6

8

10

 
 

s=|s̃| [106 S/m]

Frequency f [1012 Hz]

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

 
 

tC=tan(f(s̃))/(2pf) [10-15 s]

10
100
0

2

4

6

8

10

s̅ DC [106 S/m]

Film thickness a [nm]

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

t̅ C [10-15 s]


3

rather start out high, decrease down to 10 nm and increase again. 
We analyze how significant these deviations from proportionality 
are. We assume our data obey a normal distribution. Our error bars 
are our best estimates for the 68% confidence interval. The best fit 
for a constant quotient lies several interval widths above the 68 % 
confidence intervals for the intermediate films around 10 nm, and 
several times below those for 100 nm. The probability of obtaining 
data fitting worse to the hypothesis of a universal relaxation time is 
10-9, equivalent to 6 standard deviations for a normal distribution. 
The deviations are significant. 

FIG. 3: Quotient Q of the current response time 𝝉𝑪 by the DC-

conductivity 𝝈𝑫𝑪 as a function of the film thickness. The blue dashed
line is a constant fitted to the data, as predicted by the hypothesis 
of a universal relaxation time. The data lie outside the 99.999999% 
(6 Gaussian standard deviations) confidence interval for the 
universal relaxation time hypothesis. The red curve is a second-
order polynomial fit in 𝟏/𝒂, consistent with two competing 
processes altering the variation C of the relaxation times. Data are 
within the 68 % (1 std) confidence interval of the red curve. 

How can we explain now that the spectra of the response time are 
flat but it is not the universal relaxation time? Similar behavior has 
been observed by Kamal et al.22 in a metal oxide film. The entire 
spectrum of the metal oxide can only be described by a distribution 
of scattering rates 𝜏−1; but for the low frequency limit, a single 
effective current response time suffices22. Similarly, we can also 
understand our observation by considering a distribution of 
microscopic relaxation times 𝜏. We start by using the full description 
of the phase-resolved conductivity spectrum within the relaxation 
time approximation in the semi-classical Bloch-Boltzmann 
formalism. For a cubic crystal, this yields3,6,23:

𝜎̃(𝑓) =

1

3

𝑒2

8𝜋3 ∑
∫
∬
−

𝜕𝑔

𝜕ℰ 𝑣𝑔(𝑆⃗, ℰ, 𝑏, 𝑠)

𝜏(𝑆⃗,ℰ,𝑏,𝑠)

1−𝑖2𝜋𝑓𝜏(𝑆⃗,ℰ,𝑏,𝑠) 𝑑𝑆𝑑ℰ
𝑆(ℰ)

∞
𝑏,𝑠 0
.

(3)

Here we sum over all bands 𝑏 and both spins projections 𝑠 and 
integrate over all iso-energy surfaces 𝑆(ℰ) in reciprocal space. The 
conductivity contribution for each point  𝑆⃗ on such an iso-energy 
surface is given by the group velocity 𝑣𝑔 and the relaxation time 𝜏, 
which both may vary between each point 𝑆⃗, energy ℰ, band 𝑏, and 
spin 𝑠.6 The contribution is weighted by the energy derivative of the 
electron distribution function g; when the electron population 
conducts in a steady-state, this is the Fermi-distribution. The 

derivative of the Fermi distribution means that only electronic 
states close to the Fermi surface contribute. 𝑔 will deviate from the 
Fermi distribution when the energy of the photons ℎ𝑓 is larger than 
the typical thermal excitation 𝑘𝐵𝑇. For room temperature (293 K) 
this implies frequencies 𝑓 larger than 6 THz. Since we stay below 6 
THz, the observables we measure only depend on the same 
microscopic properties which govern steady-state transport at 
room temperature. 
The key point is that already in the semiclassical theory, the 
relaxation time is not necessarily universal, but varies between the 
electronic states contributing to conduction. Since we want to 
assess the phase and frequency dependence of the conductivity, we 
convert the integral of eq. (3) into an integration over the relaxation 
times. 

𝜎̃(𝑓) = 𝑊−1 ∫

𝑤(𝜏)𝜏

1−𝑖2𝜋𝑓𝜏 𝑑𝜏

∞
0
(4)

Basically all parameters 𝑆⃗, ℰ, 𝑏, and 𝑠 have been expressed as 
functions of 𝜏, allowing to express the integrand as a single function 
𝑤(𝜏). The prefactor 𝑊−1 is chosen such that 𝑤(𝜏) is normalised. 
This allows interpreting 𝑤(𝜏) as a probability distribution density. 
The distribution of microscopic relaxation times 𝑤(𝜏) gives the 
probability that a microscopic excitation of unit conductivity per 
relaxation time will relax in a time 𝜏. W only depends on the 
electronic structure of the material and not on the relaxation times 
𝜏. In the case of a universal relaxation time 𝜏𝑢, the distribution 𝑤(𝜏)
reduces to a delta distribution 𝛿(𝜏 − 𝜏𝑢). Inserting this in eq. (4) and 
looking at the DC-limit, we identify W as the quantity 𝜌0𝜏𝑢
calculated by Gall3 by integrating computed group velocities over 
the Fermi surface. Within Drude’s assumption of a universal 

relaxation time and photon energy independence of 

𝜕𝑔

𝜕ℰ, W is 

connected to Drude’s plasma frequency 𝜔𝑃 via 𝑊−1 = 𝜀0𝜔𝑃2.
We measure the low-frequency limit of 𝜎̃(𝑓). Therefore we Taylor-
expand eq. (4) for frequencies 𝑓 lower than 1/(2𝜋𝜏):

𝜎̃(𝑓) =

1

𝑊 ∑
∞ (𝑖2𝜋𝑓)𝑙
𝑙=0
〈𝜏𝑙+1〉
(5)

=

𝜎𝐷𝐶

1−𝑖2𝜋𝑓𝜏𝐶 + 𝑂((2𝜋𝑓𝜏)2)
(6)

Here  〈
〉 denotes the average over the distribution of relaxation 

times 𝑤(𝜏). Equation (5) tells us that the conductivity is directly 
connected to the moments 〈𝜏𝑙〉 of the relaxation time distribution
𝑤(𝜏). Theoretically, all moments could be inferred from the 
spectrum, and thereby the entire distribution. In practice, we can 
infer information about the first two moments: Equation (6) holds 
for

𝜎𝐷𝐶 = 〈𝜏〉/𝑊
and         𝜏𝐶 =

〈𝜏2〉

〈𝜏〉 = 〈𝜏〉(1 + 𝐶2).  
(7)

The first moment, the mean relaxation time 〈𝜏〉, gives us the average 
magnitude. The second centralised moment is the variance 𝑉. The 
standard deviation √𝑉 measures the absolute width of the 
distribution. To decide how much impact the shape of the 
distribution has, we need to compare the standard deviation to the 
mean. This ratio √𝑉/〈𝜏〉 is the coefficient of variation C. We hence 
can interpret the deviations of 𝑄 = 𝜏̅𝐶/𝜎̅𝐷𝐶 = 𝑊(1 + 𝐶2) from a 
constant value in fig. 3 in terms of a change in variation 𝐶 of the 
microscopic relaxation times.
Now we will show that the deviations of Q from a constant value 
are not random, but depend systematically on film thickness 𝑎. To 
this end, we show that a simple polynomial function of the thickness 

2
10
100
20

30

40

50

R=t̅ C/s̅ DC=W(1+C2) [10-22 Wms]

Film thickness a [nm]


4

𝑎 describes the data reasonably well. This polynomial is 𝑄(𝑎) =
𝑄∞ − 𝑏1 𝑎
⁄ + 𝑏2/𝑎2, displayed as the red curve in fig. 3. The 

probability p of obtaining data fitting worse to this polynomial is 
0.21. The expectation value of this probability is 0.5. The p value is 
within 0.34 (one Gaussian standard deviation) of its expectation 
value. This indicates a good fit. The fit parameters are 𝑄∞= 34.8 ∙
10−22 Ωms , 𝑏1= 9.2 ∙ 10−15 Ωs and 𝑏2= 2.9 ∙ 10−6 Ωs/m. This 
description with a simple polynomial function shows that the 
thickness scaling of Q is systematic. 
Next, we describe two effects by which surface scattering may alter 
the variation C of microscopic relaxation times and thereby 
qualitatively explain the thickness scaling of Q. Firstly, the 
anticorrelation of bulk and surface scattering may decrease C. 
Surface scattering predominantly affects electrons with a long 
expected free path, since those electrons are most likely to reach 
the surface instead of scattering in bulk. This anticorrelation starts 
cutting off the long relaxation time “tail” of the distribution of 
microscopic relaxation times, which decreases the variation. The 
thinner the film, the larger the role of surface scattering and the 
larger the reduction of the variation from bulk scattering by the 
anticorrelated surface scattering. We can interpret the 𝑏1-term in 
the empirical polynomial as representing this narrowing of the
relaxation 
time 
distribution 
by 
anticorrelated 
scattering 

mechanisms. 
Secondly, the surface scattering will add positional (𝑧) and 
directional (𝑣𝑧) variation between microscopic relaxation times 
𝜏(𝑆⃗, ℰ, 𝑏, 𝑠, 𝑧, 𝑣𝑧).  An electron may scatter very soon from the 
surface when it is close to the surface and travels towards the 
surface. An electron that is far away from the surface or travelling 
parallel to the surface will hardly scatter from it. So the relaxation 
times due to surface scattering will vary strongly, and the directional 
variation will increase for increasingly thinner films. This variation 
will add to the intrinsic variation, increasing the total variation C. We 
can motivate the 𝑏2 term by this effect. We should mention that 
contrary to the decrease of Q from 100 to 8 nm, the strong rise of Q
for the thinnest films is much less significant due to large 
uncertainties. Further, competing explanations for this increase 
exist. Firstly, at thicknesses of a few nm, the roughness of almost 1 
nm will cause systematic errors, as described by Namba24. Secondly, 
recent x-ray absorption measurements on a 1.5 nm film25 suggest 
some changes to the electronic structure for such a thin film 
compared to bulk. This means for the thinnest films, the value of W
may change.
We now check whether our explanation of two mechanisms 
changing the variation of relaxation times is consistent with the 
observed conductivity scaling: When surface scattering dominates, 
the increase in directional variation will increase Q with decreasing 
thickness. When bulk scattering dominates, the anticorrelation 
effect will decrease the variation with decreasing thickness. 
Therefore a minimum in variation C and quotient Q should occur 
when bulk and surface scattering contributions are about equal, 
which implies a conductivity of ca. half the bulk value. In our 
measurement, the conductivity drops to half the value of the 
thickest film between 5 and the 8 nm film thickness 𝑎, which 
coincides with the minimum the empirical Q(a) scaling. So we have 
found a qualitative explanation for how surface scattering can cause 
the scaling of the variation C and therefore the observed scaling of 
Q, and this explanation is consistent with the scaling of the 
conductivity. 
Last but not least, we check the consistency of the variation scaling 
explanation by comparing 𝑄∞ to values of W calculated from 

electronic band structure.  The anticorrelation between bulk and 
surface scattering can only take effect when a large variation 𝐶∞
exist in bulk, which implies that 𝑄∞ must be larger than W. 
Cazzaniga et al.26 use density functional theory with local spin 
density approximation to calculate a dc-conductivity 𝜎𝐷𝐶 of 155 ∙
106 S/m for an assumed universal relaxation time 𝜏𝑢 of 143 fs, from 
which we can calculate a value for 𝑊 = 𝜏𝑢/𝜎𝐷𝐶
of 9.2 ∙

10−22 Ωms. For nickel, a cubic ferromagnet like iron, Gall3 reports 
a similar calculated value of 10.0 ∙ 10−22 Ωms. Cazzaniga’s value 
for W is 3.8 times smaller than the 34.8 ∙ 10−22 Ωms we observe 
for 𝑄∞ = 𝑊(1 + 𝐶∞

2). This translates to variation 𝐶∞ in bulk of 

1.7; that means the stardard deviation of the relaxation time 
distribution is 1.7 times larger than the mean. This variation would 
certainly be large enough for narrowing of the relaxation time 
distribution by anticorrelated surface scattering to occur. 
We illustrate the impact of the variation of microscopic relaxation 
times on the current response time by using Cazzaniga’s value for 
W to estimate the mean relaxation time 〈𝜏〉 from the conductivity 
of the 100 nm film. We estimate 8 fs, while the observed current 
response time 𝜏̅𝐶 is 29 fs. 
In summary, we have resolved the phase of the THz conductivity of 
iron films with enough precision to demonstrate decreasing current 
response times 𝜏̅𝐶 with decreasing thickness. We further could 
resolve significant deviations between the scaling of the DC-
conductivity and the response time. This can happen when no 
universal relaxation time 𝜏𝑢 exists. At this point, we need to 
distinguish between the observable macroscopic response time 𝜏𝐶, 
the various microscopic relaxation times 𝜏, and the mean relaxation 
time 〈τ〉 parameterizing DC-conduction. The conductivity spectrum 
can be fully described by the distribution 𝑤(𝜏) of microscopic 
relaxation times. For the low-frequency limit, the observable DC-
conductivity depends on the mean 〈τ〉, the response time on mean 
〈τ〉 and variation 𝐶 of the distribution of relaxation times. We 
explain the thickness scaling of the quotient 𝑄 = 𝜏𝐶/𝜎𝐷𝐶 by surface 
scattering changing the shape of the distribution of relaxation times. 
The relaxation time distribution picture allows predicting the 
response time 𝜏𝐶 for other metallic systems: Mott7 explained the 
temperature-independent conduction in Constantan and Manganin 
alloys by a process that changes the distribution, but not the 
average relaxation time. Therefore, the response time 𝜏𝐶 should 
increase with temperature in these alloys. 

Supplementary material:

See supplementary material for iron film characterization, terahertz 
data treatment and spectral averaging/residual spectra.

Acknowledgements:
We
are grateful to Eduard Unger for automatizing the 

measurements and to Zoltan Mics and Ivan Ivanov for building the 
high precision set-up used. K.K. acknowledges the support from 
MAINZ - Graduate School of Excellence Material Science in Mainz. 
D.T. acknowledges the project “Nonequilibrium dynamics in solids 
probed 
by 
terahertz 
fields” 
funded 
by 
the 
Deutsche 

Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) -
Projektnummer 278162697 - SFB 1242.

Credit Line:


5

This article may be downloaded for personal use 
only. Any other use requires prior permission of 
the author and AIP Publishing. This article 
appeared in Appl. Phys. Lett. 116, 102406 (2020) and 
may 
be 
found 
at 

http://aip.scitation.org/doi/10.1063/1.5142479.
Copyright 
(2020)
Authors. 
This 
article 
is 

distributied 
under 
a 
Creative 
Commons 

Attribution (CC BY) License.

1 K. Fuchs, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 34, 100 
(1938).

2 E.H. Sondheimer, Adv. Phys. 1, 1 (1952).

3 D. Gall, J. Appl. Phys. 119, 085101 (2016).

4 A.F. Mayadas and M. Shatzkes, Phys. Rev. B 1, 1382 
(1970).

5 A.A. Abrikosov, Fundamentals of the Theory of Metals, 
1988 editi (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1988).

6 A.B. Pippard, Rep. Prog. Phys. 23, 176 (1960).

7 N.F. Mott, Proc. R. Soc. London. Ser. A - Math. Phys. Sci. 
153, 699 (1936).

8 A. Fert and I.A. Campbell, Phys. Rev. Lett. 21, 1190 
(1968).

9 D.H. Lowndes, K. Miller, and M. Springford, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 25, 1111 (1970).

10 M. Springford, Phys. Condens. Matter 19, 1 (1975).

11 J.J. Thomson, Proc. Camb. Philol. Soc. 11, 120 (1901).

12 N. Trivedi and N.W. Ashcroft, Phys. Rev. B 38, 12298 
(1988).

13 R.C. Munoz and C. Arenas, Appl. Phys. Rev. 4, 011102 
(2017).

14 R. Ulbricht, E. Hendry, J. Shan, T.F. Heinz, and M. Bonn, 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 543 (2011).

15 R.D. Averitt and A.J. Taylor, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 
14, R1357 (2002).

16 K.L. Krewer, Z. Mics, J. Arabski, G. Schmerber, E. 
Beaurepaire, M. Bonn, and D. Turchinovich, Opt. Lett. 43, 
447 (2018).

17 C.C. Katsidis and D.I. Siapkas, Appl. Opt. 41, 3978 
(2002).

18 R.E. Glover and M. Tinkham, Phys. Rev. 104, 844 
(1956).

19 R.D. Averitt and A.J. Taylor, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 
14, R1357 (2002).

20 M. Walther, D.G. Cooke, C. Sherstan, M. Hajar, M.R. 
Freeman, and F.A. Hegmann, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. 
Matter Mater. Phys. 76, 125408 (2007).

21 B.G. Alberding, G.P. Kushto, P.A. Lane, and E.J. Heilweil, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 223104 (2016).

22 S. Kamal, D.M. Kim, C.B. Eom, and J.S. Dodge, Phys. Rev. 
B 74, 165115 (2006).

23 N.W. Ashcroft and N.D. Mermin, Solid State Physics
(Saunders College Pub., Philadelphia, 1976).

24 Y. Namba, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 9, 1326 (1970).

25 S. Ueda, M. Mizuguchi, M. Tsujikawa, and M. Shirai, Sci. 
Technol. Adv. Mater. 20, 796 (2019).

26 M. Cazzaniga, L. Caramella, N. Manini, and G. Onida, 
Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 82, 1 (2010).


6

Supplementary material for thickness-dependent electron momentum relaxation 

times in iron films

Keno L. Krewer,1,2,* Wentao Zhang, 1,4, Jacek Arabski,3 Guy Schmerber,3 Eric Beaurepaire,3 Mischa Bonn,1 and 

Dmitry Turchinovich1,4,

1Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, 55128 Mainz, Germany

2Graduate School of Excellence Material Science in Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany

3Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Institut de Physique et Chimie des Matériaux de Strasbourg, UMR 7504, 23 rue du

Loess, F-67000 Strasbourg, France

4Fakultät für Physik, Universität Bielefeld, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany

(2019-01-23)

Sample preparation:

The iron films were deposited on double polished 

MgO (100) substrates and capped with ca. 12 nm of MgO. 
The molecular beam epitaxy was performed at room 
temperature with subsequent annealing at 600 K. The 
deposition rate was 0.05 nm/min at standard 10-10 Torr 
(10-8 Pa) pressure. The thicknesses were controlled “in 
situ” by quartz balance sensing and confirmed “ex situ” by 
small-angle x-ray diffraction (XRD) for selected samples 
by means of a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer 
equipped with a monochromatic source (Ge(220)×2) 
delivering a Cu Kα1 incident beam (45 kV, 200 mA, λ = 
0.154056 nm), see Figure S1). Roughnesses extracted 
from XRD average 0.9±0.1 nm, without significant 
dependence on thickness. X-ray diffraction patterns (fig. 
S.2) and reflection high energy electron diffraction 
images (fig. S.3) indicate that this preparation method 
achieves single-crystalline films with bcc lattice structure. 

Extraction of THz conductivity spectra from field 

transmission spectra:

We note that this is the first time, that the complex 

conductivity has been recovered for “non-thin” metal 
films, that is films which the complex phase acquired by 
the terahertz field during a direct transit is non-negligible. 
We have expanded the substrate thickness correction 
determination we presented in a previous work1
accordingly, but this yields deviations smaller than the 
statistical error. However, the full transfer matrix 
approach for recovering the complex conductivity is 
crucial for all films thicker than 20 nm, because the 
thicker the film, the smaller the current response time 

would appear in the conventionally used thin film 
approximation.

Extraction of
current
response
time and DC-

conductivity from THz conductivity spectra

We extract the current response times and DC 

conductivities of the effective Drude model (eq. S1). 

𝜎̃(𝑓) =

𝜎𝐷𝐶

1−𝑖2𝜋𝑓𝜏𝐶. (S1)

The frequency range between 0.6 and 2.0 THz has the 

best phase resolution. We solve the complex conductivity 
at each frequency for response time and DC-conductivity 
in this region. The resulting values are similar for all 
frequencies, but the values vary more than their standard 
errors from repeated measurements predict. We note 
that the discrepancies correlate between samples 
measured in the same measurement round, but not 
between the same sample measured in two separate 
rounds (see fig. S4.). Since we changed reference 
substrates 
between 
rounds, 
we 
suspect 

contamination/roughness of the reference substrates as 
main cause for these small discrepancies. We extract the 
current response times and DC-conductivities by 
averaging over the 0.6 to 2.0 THz frequency range. 
Experimental noise, discrepancies between frequencies 
and discrepancies between measurements a year apart at 
slightly different positions have been factored into the 
parameter and error estimates.

Accuracy estimation for response time and DC-

conductivity

We focus the discussion on the response time, the 

conductivity was handled in a similar manner. We 


7

estimate the impact of the artefacts in two ways: First by 
taking into account the reduced sum of residuals to 
estimate the statistical error on the average. Second we 
use the differences between the spectral averages of the 
same samples measured in different series. The statistical 
error on the measurements lead to errors between 0.2 
and 1.2 fs. The differences between measurements of the 
same sample are between 0 and 2.6 fs, their standard 
deviation is ca. 1.7 fs. This is somewhat larger than what 
to expect from the statistical error, even when factoring in 
the additional error from the substrate thickness 
correction. Therefore, for the samples with more than one 
measurement, the measurements are averaged and the 
differences taken into account to determine the error. The 
average additional error deduced from comparing 
measurements of the same sample is 0.8 fs, and this 
average value is added into the error estimate for the 
samples with only one measurement. Additionally 
systematic errors from inaccuracy of the substrate index 
are factored in, for thick films also any uncertainties on 
the film thickness. The biggest error contributions are the 
errors inferred from the residuals and the differences 
between different rounds of measurements. Only in case 
of the 3 nm sample, the error from the substrate thickness 
difference surpasses them.

1.
Krewer, K. L. et al. Accurate terahertz spectroscopy of 
supported thin films by precise substrate thickness 
correction. Opt. Lett. 43, 447–450 (2018).


8

ering process can be assigned a scattering rate 

Figure S1. X-Ray reflectivity measurement of selected Fe thin films. The recovered thicknesses are 
given in parenthesis behind the layer materials. Below them, the respective roughnesses 𝜎 are 
displayed. Experimental data points are shown in black, while the fit in red with a maximum figure 
of merit χ2 = 0.05.

Figure S2. X-Ray diffraction pattern of selected Fe thin layers, Fe crystallizes well in the bcc structure.


9

Figure S3: RHEED images of Fe on MgO/MgO epitaxial uptake.

Figure S4: Spectra of the residuals of the spectral averages. Upper panels show the deviations between the DC conductivities 
𝜎𝐷𝐶(𝑓) = 𝜎(𝑓) ∙ √(1 + (2𝜋𝑓𝜏̅𝐶)2) and their spectral averages 𝜎̅𝐷𝐶. Lower panels show deviations of the current response 
times from their spectral averages. The first column shows the residuals of all spectra combined, columns 2 to 4 show each the 
spectra from a single measurement round. We can see clear trends among individual rounds, but no correlation between the 
rounds and none between the same samples or samples of similar thickness (similar thicknesses are indicated by similar color). 
The residuals are hence artifacts specific to the round of measurements. 

-4

-2

0

2

4

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0

-4

-2

0

2

4

0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0

 2 nm A
 5 nm A
 8 nm A
 10.3 nm A
 20 nm A
 100 nm A
 3 nm B
 4 nm B
 10.3 nm B
 40 nm B
 60 nm B
 80 nm B
 3 nm C
 4 nm C
 10.0 nm C
 20 nm C
 40 nm C
 60 nm C
 80 nm C
 100 nm C

 sDC- ̅sDC [105 S/m]

round C
round B

tc- ̅tC [10-15 s]

 f [1012 Hz]

all measurements
round A

 f [1012 Hz]
 f [1012 Hz]
 f [1012 Hz]


