Comparison of phase change process in Si-GST
hybrid integrated waveguide and MMI devices

HANYU ZHANG,1 XING YANG,2 LIANGJUN LU, 2,* JIANPING CHEN,2 B. M. A.
RAHMAN,3 AND LINJIE ZHOU2

1 College of Telecommunications and Information Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts and 
Telecommunications, Nanjing 210023, China
2 State Key Laboratory of Advanced Optical Communication Systems and Networks, Shanghai Institute 
for Advanced Communication and Data Science, Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
3 Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, City, University of London, London EC 1V0HB, 
U. K.
* luliangjun@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract: In the past decades, silicon photonic integrated circuits (PICs) have been considered 
as a promising approach to solve the bandwidth bottleneck in optical communications and 
interconnections. Despite significant advances, large-scale PICs still face a series of technical 
challenges, such as footprint, power consumption, and routing state storage, resulting from the 
active tuning methods used to control the optical waves. These challenges can be partially 
addressed by combining chalcogenide phase change materials (PCMs) such as Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) 
with silicon photonics, especially applicable in switching applications due to the nonvolatile 
nature of the GST. Although GST phase transitions between amorphous and crystalline states 
actuated by optical and electrical pulses heating have been experimentally demonstrated, there 
is no direct comparison between them. We carried out simulations and experiments to 
systematically investigate the difference in the phase change process induced by optical and 
electrical pulses for two types of Si-GST hybrid waveguides. For the phase transition induced 
by optical pulses, the device has a clear advantage in terms of power consumption and operation 
speed. For the phase transition induced by electrical pulses, the device is suitable for large-scale 
integration because it does not require complex light routing. It helps us better understand the 
phase change process and push forward the further development of Si-GST hybrid integration 
platform, bringing in new potential applications.

© 2020 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement

1.
Introduction

Silicon photonics has been widely considered as one of the most promising candidates for low-
cost photonic integration by leveraging the complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) 
infrastructure [1]. In recent years, a wide range of silicon photonic devices have been 
demonstrated on the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform [2-4]. However, the active tuning 
methods are usually based on two mechanisms: the thermo-optic effect [5, 6] or the free-carrier 
dispersion effect [7-9]. It is still challenging to make tunable optical devices with a small 
footprint and low power consumption. The hybrid integration of new materials onto silicon for 
emerging applications has attracted considerable attention [10-16]. Among the various existing 
materials, chalcogenide-based phase change materials (PCMs) hybrid-integrated with silicon 
(Si) or silicon nitride (Si3N4) offers a promising solution for specific applications, such as 
neuromorphic computing [17-20], optical switching [21-24], all-optical memory [25, 26], and 
highly reconfigurable general-purpose photonic circuits resembling the field-programmable 
gate array (FPGA) in electronics [27-29]. Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) is the most commonly used PCM 
and has been commercially used in both optical and electronic data storage [30, 31]. It possesses 
at least two phase states, amorphous state (aGST) and crystalline state (cGST). The introduction 


of GST to silicon photonics can bring various advantages. First, GST is a nonvolatile material, 
which means the phase state can be maintained without any static power consumption. 
Therefore, the optical routing state can be stored after tuning. Second, the refractive index 
contrast between the amorphous and crystalline states is very large, especially in the near-
infrared telecom wavelength range. It indicates that the active devices can be made very 
compact. Third, reversible switching between two phase states can be realized for multiple 
cycles at high speed. It ensures long-term operation of the devices without failure. Finally, GST 
can be easily deposited using radio frequency (RF) sputtering from a stoichiometric GST alloy 
target. It hence allows for low-cost fabrication of Si-GST hybrid devices.

The phase change process is dependent on the duration time of the excitation pulse. The 

underlying mechanism is related to both thermal [32] and athermal effects [33]. The thermal 
phase transition mechanism of GST is due to the localized heating in the presence of an optical 
or electrical pulse. A low-power long-duration pulse heats up the material above the glass 
transition temperature, inducing the phase change from the amorphous to the crystalline state. 
On the other hand, to reversely transform this material, a shorter but higher power pulse is 
necessary to generate enough heat to melt the crystalline material. After melting, the material is 
then cooled down by a fast thermal quenching process so that it eventually becomes amorphous. 
The athermal effects can only be observed when the excitation pulse is below the picosecond 
range. During the crystalline to the amorphous transition, the partial covalent bonds of Ge atoms 
are broken by the excitation pulse to induce an atomic structure migration from an octahedral 
to a tetrahedral configuration. The change could be realized just by electronic excitation without 
the need for melting [34]. Therefore, the amorphization process can occur in only several 
picoseconds.

In last five years, a lot of work has also been done on developing phase-change photonics 

using Si-GST hybrid waveguides, where optical or electrical pulses are often used to induce the 
phase change. The basic waveguide structures are strip waveguide [35-38] and multimode 
interfere (MMI) waveguide [39-42]. However, the differences in the phase transition process 
under optical and electrical pulses excitation for these two types of structures have not been 
fully investigated. In this article, we compare their basic optical properties and dynamic 
responses under optical and electrical pulses. Our experimental results and analyses serve to 
provide a reference for new device design based on the hybrid integration of silicon and GST.

2.
Results and discussions

2.1 Basic optical properties

The influence of GST cell dimensions, namely, length and width, has been computationally 
studied for the amorphization and crystallization processes
in Si3N4-GST hybrid 

waveguides[43]. The GST cell thickness is usually fixed at 10-20 nm. A thicker GST cell in 
principle gives a higher extinction coefficient and larger effective refractive index difference 
between amorphous and crystalline states. In this section, we investigate the influence of GST 
layer thickness on the insertion loss and extinction ratio for silicon strip and MMI waveguides. 
It should be noted that we choose silicon instead of Si3N4 waveguides because it is beneficial to 
control the phase state of GST by using electrical pulses, which will be discussed in Section 2.3.

Figure 1(a) shows the structures of silicon strip and MMI waveguides covered with a 1-m-

long GST cell. An indium-tin-oxide (ITO) layer with the same thickness as GST is put on top 
of the GST in order to prevent its oxidation in air. The MMI waveguide is based on the self-
imaging principle. The input light spot is reproduced in periodic intervals in the MMI region. 
When the GST cell is positioned at the light focusing spot, it has substantial overlap with the 
optical wave, resulting in a high tuning efficiency. We first studied the basic optical properties
of both devices through numerical simulations. The operation wavelength was chosen at  = 
1.55 m. The refractive indices of the materials used in the simulations were adopted from [44]. 
Figure 1(b) shows the magnitude of the electrical field intensity (|E|2) distributions in the x-z


plane for the silicon strip waveguide with 30-nm-thick GST when the GST is amorphous (fig. 
1(b) left) and crystalline (fig. 1(b) right). The fundamental transverse electric (TE) mode of the 
silicon waveguide is launched into the input waveguide. As a comparison, Figure 1(c) shows
the results for the MMI waveguide with the same thickness of GST. A significant reduction in 
optical transmission is observed for the MMI waveguide when GST returns to crystalline state
(fig. 2(b) left). 

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic structures of a strip waveguide (left) and a MMI waveguide (right) with a small GST cell on top. 

Insets show the cross-section of the hybrid section. (b, c) Simulated electrical field intensity distributions in (b) the

strip waveguide and (c) the MMI waveguide when the GST is amorphous (left) and crystalline (right).

Figure 2(a) shows the simulated transmission spectra of the strip and the MMI waveguides.

We can observe that the MMI waveguide has a lower loss in the amorphous state and a higher
transmission contrast between the crystalline and amorphous states. We also performed 3D 
finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations to obtain reflection, transmission, and 
absorption power with different thicknesses of GST for amorphous and crystalline states, as 
shown in Figs. 2(b) and 2(c), respectively. The absorption loss was calculated by subtracting 
the transmission and reflection power from the input power. With a thicker GST, the absorption 
losses of the two waveguides increase in both states and the optical transmission contrast 
between the two states also increases. However, a thicker GST layer also gives a higher optical 
attenuation in the amorphous state. Figure 1(d) shows the extinction ratio of the two waveguides. 
The  MMI waveguide exhibits a higher extinction ratio when the GST cell is thicker than 27.5
nm. 

2.2 Dynamic responses to optical pulses

The optical transmission simulations only give the steady-state optical field distribution and 
leave us no information about the dynamic process during the phase change process. In the 
above simulations, we assumed that the GST reaches a fully crystalline or amorphous state. In 
this section, we study the dynamic phase change process for the two types of waveguides in the 
presence of an optical pump pulse. The pump pulse comes from the same waveguide and 
evanescently interacts with GST. We developed a comprehensive 3D finite element method 
(FEM) model to study the optical-thermal interactions in both waveguides. The power 
consumption and operation speed were compared in particular. In the simulation, an 
Electromagnetic Waves Beam Envelopes model from COMSOL was used to calculate the 
power absorbed in the GST and ITO, while a Heat Transfer in Solids model was employed to 
calculate the temperature distribution. Table 1 summarizes the related material properties. The 
refractive index of GST in both states linearly changes with temperature (T). The resistivity and 
thermal conductivity of GST have a nonlinear relationship with temperature [45].


Fig. 2. (a) Simulated transmission spectra of the strip and MMI waveguides with amorphous and crystalline GST. (b, 
c) Normalized optical transmission, reflection, and absorption power in the Si-GST hybrid waveguide when GST is 
(b) amorphous and (c) crystalline. (d) Extinction Ratio between amorphous and crystalline states as a function of GST 

thickness. 

Table 1: Basic material properties

Material
Si
SiO2
ITO
aGST
cGST

Heat capacity (J/(kg·K))
720
740
340
210
210

Thermal conductivity (W/(m·K))
149
1.38
11
Variable a
Variable a

Density (kg/m3)
2330
2200
7100
6150
6150

Complex refractive index
3.48
1.45
1.50+0.20i
n=6.11-2.20×10-4T
k=0.83+1.56×10-3T

n=3.94+1.11×10-3T
k=0.045+4.1×10-4T

a The resistivity and thermal conductivity of GST change with temperature [45].

We first compare the power consumption during the amorphization process. The GST layer 

thickness is 30 nm. Since the amorphization temperature (~600℃) is much higher than the 
crystalline temperature (~160℃), GST material is more easily to degrade during the 
amorphization process. Amorphization can be induced by a single pulse, but crystallization 
needs several pulses to reach a fully crystalline state. Therefore, we only simulate the 
amorphization process. Figures 3(a) and 3(d) show the temperature change in response to an 
excitation optical pulse with different power with duration of 20 ns. The inset presents the 2D 
temperature distribution in the lateral cross section of the GST layer at the falling edge of the 
optical pulse. For higher optical power, a larger amorphized GST zone can be obtained. Figures
3(b) and 3(e) show the temperature variation along the ridge-lines (light propagation direction) 
denoted in Figs. 3(a) and 3(d), respectively. It can be seen that temperature distribution is not 
uniform. The maximum-to-minimum temperature ratio is close to two for both waveguides. It
suggests that the central part of GST will be first amorphized and it will easily destroy the 
central part if one attempts to amorphize the entire GST cell. Figure 3(c) shows the maximum 
temperature change as a function of pump pulse power. The stripe waveguide has lower power 
consumption. With an identical optical pump pulse, the GST temperature for the strip 
waveguide is around 2.5 times that for the MMI waveguide. Because silicon has higher 
thermal conductivity than silicon dioxide and air, the MMI section offers good thermal 
leakage, leading to a lower temperature. The temperature rises linearly with increased pump 
pulse power. By controlling the pump pulse power, we can get multiple intermediate states with 


a mixture of crystalline and amorphous GST. This characteristic increases the waveguide tuning 
freedom that can be employed to perform multiplication and logic computation [46]. Figure 3(f) 
compares the transient temperature responses for the two waveguides with different powers 
when the two devices are raised to the same temperature. The structure has an apparent effect 
on the response time. The temperature of the GST in the MMI waveguide rises faster probably 
because the light is focused in the MMI waveguide. Meanwhile, it also cools down faster
because the wide MMI section provides a faster thermal dissipation rate. The operation speed 
is determined by the dead time, which is defined as the 1/e cooling time.

Fig. 3. (a, d) GST temperature change in response to an excitation optical pulse of different power for (a) strip 

waveguide (d) and MMI waveguide, respectively. Insets: temperature profiles in the planar cross-section of the GST 
layer. (b, e) Temperature distribution along the ridge-lines for (b) strip waveguide (e) and MMI waveguide. (c) The 
maximum temperature in GST change as a function of pump pulse energy. (f) The temporal temperature responses

when the two waveguides are raised to the same temperature.

GST layer thickness also significantly affects power consumption and operation speed.

Figure 4(a) shows the comparison of temperature change with different thicknesses of GST. The 
amorphization process uses a single pulse with a 20 ns duration and 10 mW peak power. Figure 
4(b) shows the temperature profiles along the ridge-lines denoted in Fig. 4(a). We see that a 
thicker GST layer can absorb more energy, resulting in a higher temperature. However, as there 
is a large gradient in temperature, switching the entire GST cell is more difficult for thick GST, 
especially in strip waveguide. The complete amorphization is hard to obtain for a longer than 1 
m GST cell. Figure 4(c) shows the maximum temperature change as a function of the GST 
thickness. With the same thickness of GST, its temperature in the strip waveguide is 2.5-3 times 
higher than that in the MMI waveguide. In order to get the same degree of amorphization, the 
optical pump power required by the MMI waveguide is at least 2.5 times higher than that of the 
strip waveguide.


Fig. 4 (a) GST temperature transient response for different thicknesses of GST. Insets: temperature profile in the 

planar cross-section of the GST layer. (b) Temperature distribution along the ridge-lines. (c) The maximum 

temperature change as a function of GST thickness.

To verify our simulation predictions, we fabricated an MMI waveguide covered with 

30-nm-thick GST on top (Device I) and two strip waveguides covered with 30-nm-thick 
(Device II) and 15-nm-thick (Device III) GST on top and. The dimensions of the strip
waveguide are in agreement with the above simulation. It should be noted that we use MMI 
crossing waveguide to replace the MMI waveguide in the following test. As shown in Fig. 
5(a), GST phase change can be induced by electrical pulses applied by the orthogonal MMI 
waveguide (see Section 2.3 for details). These three devices were heated for 5 min at 200 ℃
on a hot plate for implementing a fully crystalline state. Figure 5(b) shows the SEM images 
of Device II with fully crystalline state GST. We first investigated the amorphization 
process of the Device I when a rectangular optical pulse was applied. The optical pulse has 
a fixed duration of 20 ns. Figures 5(c) and 5(d) present the SEM images of the Device I 
when the peak power of the optical pulse power is 75 mW and 150 mW, respectively. The 
amorphous area is approximately elliptical for the two cases, which is in agreement with 
the simulation results. It indicates that a high power pulse can induce more amorphous 
region. However, as the pulse power is further increased, a larger amorphized zone is hard 
to be obtained. The temperature at the center of the GST-cell is much higher than its 
peripheral region, which results in  a severe degradation of central part in the GST when 
its peripheral  region reaches the melting point. The Device II (30-nm-thick GST), as 
explained in the previous part, has a higher attenuation of the optical transmission in both 
states. If one attempts to reach a higher transmission level in the amorphization process, 
multiple higher power optical pulses are needed to switch more regions of GST to the 
amorphous state. However, the GST cell will be irreversibly degraded, as shown in Fig. 
5(e). We also experimentally compare the power consumption of the three devices in the 
amorphization process. Figure 5(f) shows the transmission change as a function of pump 
pulse power for Device I (green line), Device II (red line), and Device III (black line). The 
obtained switching contrast of three devices all have a relatively linear response with 
increased pump pulse power. The amorphization threshold power is higher for a thinner GST 
cell. We notice that with the same thickness of GST, the MMI waveguide needs more 
optical power than the strip waveguide to get the same transmission contrast. The power 
consumption for Device I is 4.4 times higher than Device II, which is higher than expected
because the MMI crossing waveguides experience larger thermal dissipation than MMI 
waveguide. For strip waveguide with different thicknesses of GST, the power consumption 
in Device III is 2.5 times than that in Device II. This is in good agreement with our 
simulation results.


Figure 5 (a, b) SEM images of the Device I (a) and Device II (b) when the GST is in the original fully crystalline 

state. (c-d) SEM images of Device III when the GST is amorphized by (c) a 75-mW optical pulse, and (d) a 150-mW 
optical pulse. (e) SEM image of the Device II after multiple high-power optical pulses are applied. (f) Transmission 

change as a function of optical pump optical pulse power.

2.3 Dynamic response to electrical pulses

Although the phase change under optical pulses exhibits a faster response speed, it is difficult 
to be employed in large-scale optical switch fabrics due to inconvenient routing of the optical 
pump pulses. Instead, phase change under electrical pulses is more suitable since the electrical 
pulses can be delivered by electrical wires on another layer. In order to electrically heat up the 
GST cell, we resort to the crossing structures, as shown in Fig. 6. The center of the crossing is 
covered by 30-nm-thick GST and 30-nm-thick ITO. The crossed silicon strip is heavily P++-
doped with a concentration of 1020 cm-3 so that it works as a resistive heater. A Ti/Au 
(5nm/150nm) layer is deposited on top to provide electrical connection. The gap size between 
the two Au electrodes is 5 m. The crossed strips are 1 m and 1.7 m wide for the waveguide
and MMI crossings, respectively. Figure 6(b) illustrates the optical power propagation in the x-
y plane for the waveguide and MMI crossings. The crossing induced loss for the regular 
waveguide and the MMI is 2.34 dB and 0.51 dB, respectively. The lower loss for the MMI 
crossing is due to its self-imaging principle.

Fig. 6. (a) Strip waveguide crossing (left) and MMI crossing (right) integrated with electrically actuated GST. Inset: 
cross-section of the GST cell. (b) Simulated electrical field intensity distributions in the strip waveguide crossing (up) 

and the MMI crossing (bottom).

Next, we compare the power consumption in electrical phase change for the two crossings. 

Figure 7(a) shows the transient temperature response when an electrical pulse is applied. The 
pulse duration is 20 ns and the peak voltage is 9 V and 11 V. The insets show the temperature 
profiles in the lateral cross section of the GST layer. Due to the lower thermal dissipation, the 
strip waveguide crossing reaches a higher temperature compared with the MMI crossing.
Figure 7(b) shows the temperature distributions along the ridge-lines denoted in Fig. 7(a).
The temperature variation is less than 100 °C across the GST cell, which indicates that the 
electrical pulse can induce phase change for the entire GST cell. 

Figure 7(c) shows the temperature transient response for different thicknesses of GST in the 

amorphization process. It reveals that the thickness of GST does not have a significant effect on 
the temperature response, because the heating process is governed by the Joule heat transfer 
from the silicon resistive heater. In contrast, for optically induced phase change, the optical 
pump pulse evanescently interacts with the GST cell, and as a result, a thicker GST cell absorbs 
more light and reaches a higher temperature.


Fig. 7. (a) GST temperature variation in response to an excitation electrical pulse for the strip waveguide crossing and 

the MMI crossing. Insets: temperature profiles in the planar cross-section of the GST layer. (b) Temperature 

distribution along the ridge-lines in (a). (c) GST temperature variation for two thicknesses of GST cell.

Table 2 summarizes power consumption, operation speed, insertion loss, and extinction ratio 

of the two types of devices under optically and electrically induced phase change. The GST 
thickness is 30 nm. It can be seen that the insertion loss and the extinction ratio of the MMI 
devices are better than the strip waveguide devices. The power consumption of the MMI is 
higher than the strip waveguide because of the large silicon area underneath the GST cell. The 
dead time under electrical pulses is longer than that under optical pulses. Because the doping 
region beneath the GST is a rectangular strip, heat is uniformly generated along the doping 
region. Given that the GST is only deposited at the center of the waveguide. The generated heat 
is only partially utilized to raize the GST temperature. A considerable amount of heat is wasted, 
leading to larger power consumption. In contrast, for the optically induced phase change, the 
GST temperature rises through direct light absorbtion, and hence power consuption is lower and 
dead time shorter.

Table 2: Performance comparison of the strip waveguide and MMI devices

Methods
Devices
IL (dB)
ER (dB)
Power consumption (mW)
Dead time (ns)

Optial 

excitation

Strip WG
0.85
11.01
53*
8

MMI WG
0.50
12.85
233*
6

Electrical 
excitation

Strip crossing 
2.34
7.91
324**
65

MMI crossing 
0.51
12.66
484**
47

*optical pulse power; ** electrical pulse power

In the MMI crossing, the microheater can be further optimized to ensure heat is concentrated 

more in the center. In this way, the power consumption can be reduced and the operation speed 
can be improved. In the following section, we optimize the gap size between the Au electrodes 
and the shape of the doped region.

2.4 Microheater optimization in the MMI crossing

2.4.1 Gap size of the Au electrodes

The separation distance between the two metal electrodes (gap) significantly affects the 

power consumption in the electrical phase transition process. A smaller gap gives a lower
resistance of the microheater, which as a result, facilitating the reduction of electrical pulse 
voltage. Moreover, reducing the gap also makes heat more concentrated in the central part of 
the MMI crossing. Figure 8(a) shows the normalized transmission change of the MMI crossings
at 1550 nm in the amorphization process for three gap sizes of 3.5 m, 4 m, and 5 m. The 
excitation electrical pulse has a fixed duration of 20 ns and a varying voltage. It can be seen that 
the pulse voltage for the 5-m gap saturates at about 11.6 V, while for the 3.5-m gap, it 
saturates at 9 V. Therefore, it is feasible to reduce the pulse voltage by using a smaller gap. 
Figure 8(b) compares the normalized transmission changes of the devices with three gap 
sizes during the amorphization process. We can observe that the gap size has no influence 
on the operation speed of the device, but it will affect the power consumption of the device. 


Smaller gap size can help reduce power consumption. The simulation results show that the 
3-m gap does not suffer additional optical loss and the driving voltage can be less than 9 V.

2.4.2 Shape of the doping region

The doping shape also affects microheater resistance and heat distribution. We investigate 

three devices with different doping shapes. Device I (T1) is hourglass-shaped and the waist size 
is smaller 0.25 m than the diameter of GST cell. Device II (T2) also has an hourglass-shaped
doping region, but the waist is larger 0.25 m than the diameter of the GST disk. The width of 
both ends is 1.7 m for Device I and Device II. Device III (T3) has a regular rectangular doping 
strip. The doping width is equal to the diameter of GST cell. Figures 8(c) and 8(d) show the 
normalized transmission change as a function of pulse width (Fig. 8(c)) and pulse amplitude
(Fig. 8(d)) for the crystallization process. Changing the doping region from a rectangular strip
to an hourglass shape can reduce the pulse voltage because heat is mostly generated and 
localized in the narrow waist part. For the electrical pulse with the same amplitude and width, 
a higher temperature is obtained in the GST area for Device I, leading to low power 
consumption in electrical phase change.

Fig. 8. (a) Normalized transmission change varies with the electrical pulse amplitude for three gap sizes. (b) 

Normalized temporal response for the device with three gap sizes in the amorphous process. (c, d) Normalized 

transmission change with (c) electrical pulse width and (d) electrical pulse amplitude for three doping shapes in the 

crystallizaiton process.

3.
Conclusion

In conclusion, we used two types of Si-GST hybrid waveguides to investigated the differences 
in the reversible phase transitions induced by optical and electrical pulses. For the phase 
transition induced by optical pulses, the strip waveguide has a clear advantage in terms of power 
consumption due to lower thermal dissipation. The MMI waveguide is feasible to achieve a 
larger extinction ratio and a higher operation speed due to the larger volume and thermal 


conductivity of silicon material. However, all-optical switching has difficulty in switching 
large-area GST and need sophisticated light routing systems. The disadvantage can be overcome 
by adding crossing structures to apply electrical pulses. Although the crossing does not induce 
additional loss for the MMI, it increases the power consumption and dead time. By optimizing
the gap size between the two Au electrodes and the shape of the doped region, we 
experimentally demonstrate that a smaller gap size and hourglass-shaped doping region can
decrease the power consumption. These devices offer a promising solution for specific 
applications like large-scale rewritable optical circuits with a small footprint and high energy 
efficiency. The method built in our work also assists the design and optimization of the Si-GST 
hybrid integration devices such as nonvolatile optical switches, optical memories, and 
reconfigurable photonic circuits.

4.
Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China  (NSFC)  (61705129,  61535006),  the National Key R&D Program of China 
(2018YFB2201702),  and the Shanghai  Municipal  Science and Technology  Major  Project 
(2017SHZDZX03).  

References

1.
J. Wang and Y. Long, "On-chip silicon photonic signaling and processing: a review," Sci. Bull. 63, 1267-1310 
(2018).

2.
S. Zhalehpour, M. Guo, J. Lin, Z. Zhang, H. Sepehrian, Y. Qiao, W. Shi, and L. A. Rusch, "All silicon IQ 
modulator with 1Tb/s line rate," in 2020 Optical Fiber Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC), 2020, 
1-3.

3.
X. Wang, L. Zhou, R. Li, J. Xie, L. Lu, K. Wu, and J. Chen, "Continuously tunable ultra-thin silicon waveguide 
optical delay line," Optica 4, 507-515 (2017).

4.
W. Xu, L. Zhou, L. Lu, and J. Chen, "Aliasing-free optical phased array beam-steering with a plateau envelope," 
Opt. Express 27, 3354-3368 (2019).

5.
P. Dumais, D. J. Goodwill, D. Celo, J. Jiang, C. S. Zhang, F. Zhao, X. Tu, C. H. Zhang, S. Y. Yan, J. F. He, M. 
Li, W. Y. Liu, Y. M. Wei, D. Y. Geng, H. Mehrvar, and E. Bernier, "Silicon photonic switch subsystem with 900 
monolithically integrated calibration photodiodes and 64-fiber package," J. Lightwave Technol. 36, 233-238 
(2018).

6.
K. Suzuki, R. Konoike, J. Hasegawa, S. Suda, H. Matsuura, K. Ikeda, S. Namiki, and H. Kawashima, "Low-
insertion-loss and power-efficient 32 × 32 silicon photonics switch with extremely high-Δ silica PLC connector," 
J. Lightwave Technol. 37, 116-122 (2019).

7.
Z. Guo, L. Lu, L. Zhou, L. Shen, and J. Chen, "16 × 16 Silicon optical switch based on dual-ring-assisted Mach–
Zehnder interferometers," J. Lightwave Technol. 36, 225-232 (2018).

8.
L. Lu, S. Zhao, L. Zhou, D. Li, Z. Li, M. Wang, X. Li, and J. Chen, "16 x 16 non-blocking silicon optical switch 
based on electro-optic Mach-Zehnder interferometers," Opt. Express 24, 9295-9307 (2016).

9.
L. Qiao, W. Tang, and T. Chu, "32 × 32 silicon electro-optic switch with built-in monitors and balanced-status 
units," Sci. Rep. 7, 42306 (2017).

10.
V. Sorianello, M. Midrio, G. Contestabile, I. Asselberghs, J. Van Campenhout, C. Huyghebaert, I. Goykhman, A. 
K. Ott, A. C. Ferrari, and M. Romagnoli, "Graphene–silicon phase modulators with gigahertz bandwidth," Nat.
Photonics 12, 40-44 (2018).

11.
C. Haffner, W. Heni, Y. Fedoryshyn, J. Niegemann, A. Melikyan, D. L. Elder, B. Baeuerle, Y. Salamin, A. Josten, 
U. Koch, C. Hoessbacher, F. Ducry, L. Juchli, A. Emboras, D. Hillerkuss, M. Kohl, L. R. Dalton, C. Hafner, and 
J. Leuthold, "All-plasmonic Mach–Zehnder modulator enabling optical high-speed communication at the 
microscale," Nat. Photonics 9, 525-528 (2015).

12.
J. Jeong, Y. Jung, Z. Qu, B. Cui, A. Khanda, A. Sharma, S. S. P. Parkin, and J. K. S. Poon, "VO2 electro-optic 
memory and oscillator for neuromorphic computing," in Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics, OSA 
Technical Digest (Optical Society of America, 2020), STh3R.2.

13.
S. Abel, F. Eltes, J. E. Ortmann, A. Messner, P. Castera, T. Wagner, D. Urbonas, A. Rosa, A. M. Gutierrez, D. 
Tulli, P. Ma, B. Baeuerle, A. Josten, W. Heni, D. Caimi, L. Czornomaz, A. A. Demkov, J. Leuthold, P. Sanchis, 
and J. Fompeyrine, "Large Pockels effect in micro- and nanostructured barium titanate integrated on silicon," Nat.
Materials 18, 42-47 (2019).

14.
H. Y. Zhang, L. J. Zhou, B. M. A. Rahman, X. Wu, L. J. Lu, Y. H. Xu, J. Xu, J. C. Song, Z. G. Hu, L. P. Xu, and 
J. P. Chen, "Ultracompact Si-GST hybrid waveguides for nonvolatile light wave manipulation," IEEE Photonics 
J. 10, 1-10 (2018).

15.
V. J. Sorger, N. D. Lanzillotti-Kimura, R.-M. Ma, and X. Zhang, "Ultra-compact silicon nanophotonic modulator 
with broadband response," Nanophotonics 1(2012).


16.
Y. Zhang, J. B. Chou, J. Li, H. Li, Q. Du, A. Yadav, S. Zhou, M. Y. Shalaginov, Z. Fang, H. Zhong, C. Roberts, 
P. Robinson, B. Bohlin, C. Ríos, H. Lin, M. Kang, T. Gu, J. Warner, V. Liberman, K. Richardson, and J. Hu, 
"Broadband transparent optical phase change materials for high-performance nonvolatile photonics," Nat.
Commun. 10, 4279 (2019).

17.
J. Feldmann, N. Youngblood, C. D. Wright, H. Bhaskaran, and W. H. P. Pernice, "All-optical spiking 
neurosynaptic networks with self-learning capabilities," Nature 569, 208-214 (2019).

18.
H. Y. Changming Wu, Seokhyeong Lee, Ruoming Peng, Ichiro Takeuchi, Mo Li, "Programmable phase-change 
metasurfaces on waveguides for multimode photonic convolutional neural network," arXiv:2004.10651 (2020).

19.
N. Y. Johannes Feldmann, Maxim Karpov, Helge Gehring, Xuan Li, Manuel Le Gallo, Xin Fu, Anton Lukashchuk, 
Arslan Raja, Junqiu Liu, David Wright, Abu Sebastian, Tobias Kippenberg, Wolfram Pernice, Harish Bhaskaran, 
"Parallel convolution processing using an integrated photonic tensor core," arXiv:2002.00281 (2020).

20.
I. Chakraborty, G. Saha, A. Sengupta, and K. Roy, "Toward fast neural computing using all-Photonic phase 
change spiking neurons," Sci. Rep. 8, 12980 (2018).

21.
P. Xu, J. Zheng, J. K. Doylend, and A. Majumdar, "Low-loss and broadband nonvolatile phase-change directional 
coupler switches," ACS Photonics (2019).

22.
C. M. Wu, H. S. Yu, H. Li, X. H. Zhang, I. Takeuchi, and M. Li, "Low-loss integrated photonic switch using 
subwavelength patterned phase change material," Acs Photonics 6, 87-92 (2019).

23.
Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Li, R. Soref, T. Gu, and J. Hu, "Broadband nonvolatile photonic switching based on optical 
phase change materials: beyond the classical figure-of-merit," Opt. Lett. 43, 94-97 (2018).

24.
Y. Ikuma, Y. Shoji, M. Kuwahara, X. Wang, K. Kintaka, H. Kawashima, D. Tanaka, and H. Tsuda, "Small-sized 
optical gate switch using Ge2Sb2Te5 phase-change material integrated with silicon waveguide," Electron. Lett. 46, 
368-U5480 (2010).

25.
X. Li, N. Youngblood, C. Ríos, Z. Cheng, C. D. Wright, W. H. P. Pernice, and H. Bhaskaran, "Fast and reliable 
storage using a 5  bit, nonvolatile photonic memory cell," Optica 6, 1-6 (2019).

26.
C. Rios, M. Stegmaier, P. Hosseini, D. Wang, T. Scherer, C. D. Wright, H. Bhaskaran, and W. H. P. Pernice, 
"Integrated all-photonic non-volatile multi-level memory," Nat. Photonics 9, 725-+ (2015).

27.
H. Zhang, L. Zhou, J. Xu, N. Wang, H. Hu, L. Lu, B. M. A. Rahman, and J. Chen, "Nonvolatile waveguide 
transmission tuning with electrically-driven ultra-small GST phase-change material," Sci. Bull. (2019).

28.
C. R. de Galarreta, A. M. Alexeev, Y.-Y. Au, M. Lopez-Garcia, M. Klemm, M. Cryan, J. Bertolotti, and C. D. 
Wright, "Nonvolatile reconfigurable phase-change metadevices for beam steering in the near infrared," Adv.
Funct. Mater. 28, 1704993 (2018).

29.
J. Zheng, Z. Fang, C. Wu, S. Zhu, P. Xu, J. K. Doylend, S. Deshmukh, E. Pop, S. Dunham, M. Li, and A. 
Majumdar, "Nonvolatile electrically reconfigurable integrated photonic switch enabled by a silicon PIN diode 
heater," Adv. Mater. 32, 2001218 (2020).

30.
M. H. Lankhorst, B. W. Ketelaars, and R. A. Wolters, "Low-cost and nanoscale non-volatile memory concept for 
future silicon chips," Nat. Mater. 4, 347-352 (2005).

31.
H. S. P. Wong, S. Raoux, S. Kim, J. Liang, J. P. Reifenberg, B. Rajendran, M. Asheghi, and K. E. Goodson, 
"Phase Change Memory," Proc. IEEE 98, 2201-2227 (2010).

32.
M. Wuttig and N. Yamada, "Phase-change materials for rewriteable data storage," Nat. Mater. 6, 824-832 (2007).

33.
K. Makino, J. Tominaga, and M. Hase, "Ultrafast optical manipulation of atomic arrangements in chalcogenide 
alloy memory materials," Opt. Express 19, 1260-1270 (2011).

34.
A. V. Kolobov, P. Fons, A. I. Frenkel, A. L. Ankudinov, J. Tominaga, and T. Uruga, "Understanding the phase-
change mechanism of rewritable optical media," Nat. Mater. 3, 703-708 (2004).

35.
X. Li, N. Youngblood, Z. Cheng, S. G.-C. Carrillo, E. Gemo, W. H. P. Pernice, C. D. Wright, and H. Bhaskaran, 
"Experimental investigation of silicon and silicon nitride platforms for phase-change photonic in-memory 
computing," Optica 7, 218-225 (2020).

36.
M. Stegmaier, C. Ríos, H. Bhaskaran, C. D. Wright, and W. H. P. Pernice, "Nonvolatile all-optical 1 × 2 switch 
for chipscale photonic networks," Adv. Opt. Mater. 5, 1600346 (2017).

37.
M. Rudé, J. Pello, R. E. Simpson, J. Osmond, G. Roelkens, J. J. G. M. van der Tol, and V. Pruneri, "Optical 
switching at 1.55 μm in silicon racetrack resonators using phase change materials," Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 141119 
(2013).

38.
M. Stegmaier, C. Rios, H. Bhaskaran, and W. H. P. Pernice, "Thermo-optical effect in phase-change 
nanophotonics," Acs Photonics 3, 828-835 (2016).

39.
J. Feldmann, M. Stegmaier, N. Gruhler, C. Rios, H. Bhaskaran, C. D. Wright, and W. H. P. Pernice, "Calculating 
with light using a chip-scale all-optical abacus," Nat. Commun. 8, 1256 (2017).

40.
H. Zhang, L. Zhou, L. Lu, J. Xu, N. Wang, H. Hu, B. M. A. Rahman, Z. Zhou, and J. Chen, "Miniature multilevel 
optical memristive switch using phase change material," ACS Photonics 6, 2205-2212 (2019).

41.
K. Kato, M. Kuwahara, H. Kawashima, T. Tsuruoka, and H. Tsuda, "Current-driven phase-change optical gate 
switch using indium–tin-oxide heater," Appl. Phys. Express 10, 072201 (2017).

42.
D. Tanaka, Y. Shoji, M. Kuwahara, X. Wang, K. Kintaka, H. Kawashima, T. Toyosaki, Y. Ikuma, and H. Tsuda, 
"Ultra-small, self-holding, optical gate switch using Ge2Sb2Te5 with a multi-mode Si waveguide," Opt. Express 
20, 10283-10294 (2012).

43.
C. Rios, M. Stegmaier, Z. Cheng, N. Youngblood, C. D. Wright, W. H. P. Pernice, and H. Bhaskaran, "Controlled 
switching of phase-change materials by evanescent-field coupling in integrated photonics [Invited]," Opt. Mater.
Express 8, 2455-2470 (2018).


44.
H. Zhang, L. Zhou, B. M. A. Rahman, X. Wu, L. Lu, Y. Xu, J. Xu, J. Song, Z. Hu, L. Xu, and J. Chen, 
"Ultracompact Si-GST hybrid waveguides for nonvolatile light wave manipulation," IEEE Photonics J. 10, 1-10 
(2018).

45.
F. Xiong, A. D. Liao, D. Estrada, and E. Pop, "Low-power switching of phase-change materials with carbon 
nanotube electrodes," Science 332, 568-570 (2011).

46.
H. Zhang, L. Zhou, L. Lu, J. Chen, and B. M. A. Rahman, "Optical computing and logic operation with GST-
enabled silicon photonics," in 2019 Asia Communications and Photonics Conference (ACP), 2019, 1-3.


