1 
 

High Performance Printed AgO-Zn Rechargeable Battery for Flexible Electronics 

Lu Yin1,4, Jonathan Scharf1,4, Jessica Ma1, Jean-Marie Doux1, Christopher Redquest1, Viet Le1, 

Yin Yijie1, Jeff Ortega3, Xia Wei3, Joseph Wang1,2*, Ying Shirley Meng1,2,5* 

1 Department of Nanoengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 
2 Sustainable Power and Energy Center (SPEC), University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093, USA 
3 ZPower LLC, Camarillo, CA 93012, USA 
4 These authors contributed equally to this work 
5 Lead Contact 
*Correspondence: josephwang@ucsd.edu (J. W.), shmeng@ucsd.edu (Y. S. M.)  
 

Summary 

The rise of flexible electronics calls for cost-effective and scalable batteries with good 

mechanical and electrochemical performance. In this work, we developed printable, polymer-

based AgO-Zn batteries that feature flexibility, rechargeability, high areal capacity, and low 

impedance. Using elastomeric substrate and binders, the current collectors, electrodes, and 

separators can be easily screen-printed layer-by-layer and vacuum-sealed in a stacked 

configuration. The batteries are customizable in sizes and capacities, with the highest obtained 

areal capacity of 54 mAh/cm2 for primary applications. Advanced micro-CT and EIS were used to 

characterize the battery, whose mechanical stability was tested with repeated twisting and bending. 

The batteries were used to power a flexible E-ink display system that requires a high-current drain 

and exhibited superior performance than commercial coin-cell batteries. The developed battery 

presents a practical solution for powering a wide range of electronics and holds major implications 

for the future development of practical and high-performance flexible batteries. 

Keywords: flexible battery, printed battery, AgO, Zn, conversion electrodes 

 
 


2 
 

Introduction  

Recent interest in multifunctional flexible electronics for applications in sensing, displays, 

and wireless communication advocates for the development of complementary flexible energy 

storage solutions.1,2 Accordingly, numerous efforts have been made to tackle the challenges of 

fabricating batteries with robust mechanical resiliency and high electrochemical performance. [ref] 

To do so, several studies focused on adapting novel battery fabrication techniques, such as 

substrate pre-stretching, textile-embedding, and “island-bridge”, wire/cable, kirigami, and origami 

structuring to endow structural flexibility and stretchability to batteries.3–9 Others studies focused 

on tackling the challenge by the means of material innovation, developing polymer-based current 

collectors, electrodes, separators, and electrolytes for various intrinsically flexible and stretchable 

batteries.10–17 However, due to the exponential growth in the wearable flexible electronics market, 

manufacturers started to realize the urgent need for scalable, low-cost, and high-performance 

flexible battery technologies to provide practical energy storage solutions for the tens of millions 

of devices produced every year. Many flexible batteries rely on fabrication processes that are 

complex, low throughput, and high cost, and thus have limited practicality which hinders their lab-

to-market transformation. Addressing the need for flexibility and scalability while maintaining low 

cost, printed high-performance batteries are crucial for realizing most of the commercially viable 

battery technology. Using low-cost thick-film fabrication technologies, flexible battery 

components can be printed sheet-to-sheet or roll-to-roll using traditional, low-maintenance screen 

printing or doctor blade casting equipment, thus realizing low-cost mass production of flexible 

batteries.18 

Among many commercialized printed flexible batteries, aqueous zinc (Zn)-based 

conversion cells were successful in developing products with high throughput and low production 

cost.19 The Zn anode chemistry has been of special interest for the flexible battery market due to 

its low material cost, high theoretical capacity (820 mAh/g, 5854 mAh/L), good rechargeability, 

and safe chemistry.20,21 In addition, as Zn and the aqueous electrolyte can be readily handled in an 

ambient environment, the equipment and production costs of Zn-based batteries are often 

considerably lower compared to lithium-ion batteries. However, commercial Zn-based printed 

flexible batteries are usually non-rechargeable and feature low capacity and high impedance, thus 

limiting their application in low-power, disposable electronics only. Addressing these limitations, 


3 
 

several studies have reported the development of printable, rechargeable, and high-performance 

Zn-based batteries.16,22,23 Among them, the silver oxide-zinc (Ag2O-Zn) battery has attracted 

particular attention due to its rechargeable chemistry and its tolerance to high-current 

discharge.24,25 The redox reaction relies on the dissolution of zinc ions (Zn2+) and silver ions (Ag+) 

in the alkaline electrolyte and their supersaturation-induced precipitation, which takes place 

rapidly while maintaining a stable voltage at 1.56 V (Equation 1-6). 26,27 

Anode: 

(Dissolution)  𝑍𝑍𝑍𝑍 (𝑠𝑠) + 4𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂− (𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎) ↔ 𝑍𝑍𝑍𝑍(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)4
2− (𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎) + 2𝑒𝑒− 
 
 
 
(1) 

(Relaxation) 𝑍𝑍𝑍𝑍(𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂)4
2−(𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎) ↔ 𝑍𝑍𝑍𝑍𝑂𝑂 (𝑠𝑠) + 𝑂𝑂2𝑂𝑂 +  2𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂− (𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎)  
 
 
(2) 

(Overall) 
𝑍𝑍𝑍𝑍 (𝑠𝑠) + 2𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂− (𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎) ↔ 𝑍𝑍𝑍𝑍𝑂𝑂 + 𝑂𝑂2𝑂𝑂 + 2𝑒𝑒−  
Eo = −1.22 V vs.  SHE (3) 

Cathode: 

(Dissolution) 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴 + 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂− ↔ 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂(𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎) + 𝑒𝑒− 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 

(Relaxation) 2𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂(𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎) + 2𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂− ↔ 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴2𝑂𝑂(𝑠𝑠) + 𝑂𝑂2𝑂𝑂   
 
 
 
(5) 

(Overall) 
𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴2𝑂𝑂(𝑠𝑠) + 𝑂𝑂2𝑂𝑂 ↔ 2𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴(𝑠𝑠) + 2𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂−(𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎)  
Eo = +0.34 V vs. SHE (6) 

Most of these batteries rely solely on the use of the lower oxidation state of silver to obtain 

reversible redox reaction, while the higher oxidation state (AgO), with its redox reaction described 

in Equation 7, has been rarely utilized.  

2𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴𝑂𝑂 (𝑠𝑠) + 𝑂𝑂2𝑂𝑂 + 2𝑒𝑒− ↔ 𝐴𝐴𝐴𝐴2𝑂𝑂 (𝑠𝑠) + 𝑂𝑂2𝑂𝑂 (𝑙𝑙)  
Eo = +0.60 V vs. SHE (7) 

The underutilization of AgO can be attributed to its instability, namely, its lattice phase change 

when transitioning into Ag2O, which may result in irreversible shape changes that impede 

rechargeability, and its high charging potential responsible of possible electrode gassing due to 

oxygen evolution reaction.8,28–31 However, once addressing these issues, it is possible to access a 

much higher theoretical cathode capacity (from 231 mAh/g for Ag2O to 432 mAh/g for AgO). So 

far, printed silver-zinc batteries reported in the literature still have low rechargeability (< 50 cycles), 

limited capacity (< 12 mAh/cm2 for primary cell, < 3 mAh/cm2 for secondary cell), along with 

high internal resistance (~102 Ω) that results in large voltage drop during operation.10,29,32–34 Such 

limitations are hindering the adaptation of silver-zinc printed batteries in flexible electronics. 


4 
 

Herein, we present a novel fabrication process of all-printed, flexible, and rechargeable 

AgO-Zn batteries with ultra-high areal capacity, low impedance, and good rechargeability as a 

practical energy storage solution for flexible electronics. The fabrication of the cell relies on low-

cost, high-throughput, layer-by-layer printing of formulated powder-elastomer composite inks to 

form the current collectors, Zn anode, AgO cathode, and their corresponding separators. The 

battery adopts a low-footprint stacked configuration, with potassium hydroxide (KOH) - 

poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) hydrogel as a low impedance electrolyte sandwiched between the two 

fully printed electrodes. Using the thermoplastic styrene-ethyl-butylene-styrene block copolymer 

(SEBS) elastomer-based substrate, the assembled battery can be directly heat- and vacuum-sealed 

to preserve the electrolyte and ensure appropriate cell pressure during operation. This fabrication 

and assembly process can be applied to different cell sizes with adjustable areal capacity, allowing 

customizable battery form factors that are tailored for specific applications. Fully utilizing the 

higher oxidation state of the AgO, the as-printed cells were able to reach a high areal capacity of > 

54 mAh/cm2 while maintaining a low internal resistance (~10 Ω) for primary applications. 

Furthermore, utilizing an optimized cycling profile, the printed cells were recharged for over 80 

cycles, sustaining 0.2 C – 1 C discharges without exhibiting significant capacity loss, while 

maintaining low impedance throughout each cycle. Moreover, the fabricated cells displayed 

outstanding robustness against repeated bending and twisting deformations. To demonstrate their 

performance in powering typical flexible electronics, the fabricated thin-film batteries were 

successfully implemented in a flexible E-ink display system with an integrated microcontroller 

unit (MCU) and Bluetooth modules that require pulsed high-current discharge. Leveraging a low-

cost scalable production process, polymer-based flexible architecture, and customized ink 

formulations, the all-printed AgO-Zn battery, with its desirable mechanical and electrochemical 

performance, presents a practical solution for powering the next-generation flexible electronics, 

and sets a new benchmark for the further development of printable flexible batteries. 

 
 


5 
 

Results 

All-printed Polymer-based Fabrication 

 

Figure 1. All-printed fabrication of the flexible, rechargeable, and high-capacity AgO-Zn battery. (A) Illustration of the layer-
by-layer printing and vacuum sealing assembly processes. (B) Illustration of the AgO-Zn battery cell structure. The cell is composed 
of a hydrogel electrolyte sandwiched between the 2 electrodes, with each side composed of a heat-sealable SEBS substrate, current 
collectors, active material electrodes, and corresponding separators. (C) Photo images of the assembled cells in different 
customized sizes. (D) Photo images demonstrating the flexibility of the printed batteries. (E) Photo images of a flexible E-ink 
display system powered by the flexible AgO-Zn batteries. Scale bar, 1 cm. 

 

The all-printed fabrication of the flexible AgO-Zn battery was designed based on the 

careful selection of elastomers for the substrate, sealing, and ink binders based on their mechanical 

properties, chemical stabilities, and processabilities. SEBS was selected as the substrate material 

for its good solvent processability, chemical stability under high pH, outstanding elasticity, as well 

as its appropriate melting point (~200 °C), allowing it to be easily cast into films that are 

chemically stable, flexible, and heat-sealable to support and seal the battery.35 Screen-printing, a 

low-cost high-throughput thick-film technique was used for ink deposition, as it allows the 

efficient fabrication of the current collectors, electrodes, and separators into their preferred shapes 


6 
 

and thicknesses.18 The screen-printing of the batteries relies on the customized formulation of 6 

inks corresponding to the current collectors, electrodes, and the separators for both the anode and 

cathode. Conductive and flexible silver ink and carbon ink were printed as the anode and cathode 

current collectors respectively. Both inks use SEBS as the elastomer binder and toluene as the 

solvent to allow the ink to firmly bond to the toluene-soluble SEBS substrate. The anode ink was 

composed of Zn particles with bismuth oxide (Bi2O3) as an additive to reduce dendrite formation 

and suppress H2 gassing, while the cathode ink was mainly composed of AgO powder with a small 

amount of lead oxide coating to enhance the electrochemical stability and carbon black added to 

enhance the electronic conductivity of the electrode.29 A high-pH stable, elastomeric 

fluorocopolymer was used as the binder for both electrodes for its solubility in lower ketones which 

is less prone to oxidation by the highly oxidative AgO. Cellulose powder was used to form the 

porous cathode separator that mimics the use of cellophane to capture and reduce dissolved silver 

ions and prevent material crossover.8,19 A titanium dioxide (TiO2)-based ink was formulated for 

the anode separator, acting as a physical barrier to Zn dendrite growth. Lastly, a solid-phase 

polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) hydrogel crosslinked with potassium hydroxide (KOH) was prepared as 

the electrolyte, which complements the cell flexibility without the risk of leaking. Lithium 

hydroxide (LiOH) and calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) were used as additives in the electrolyte to 

maintain electrolyte chemical stability and minimize zinc dissolution.36,37 

The fabrication of the batteries begins with the preparation of the substrates, where a resin 

of SEBS dissolved in toluene was cast onto wax papers using film casters and dried in the oven to 

form a transparent elastic film. The layer-by-layer printing process is illustrated in Figure 1A. 

Firstly, the Ag and the carbon inks were printed onto the SEBS substrate as current collectors, with 

a 400 nm layer of gold sputtered onto the carbon current collectors to enhance their conductivity 

and chemical stability. Then, the Zn and the TiO2 inks, and the AgO and the cellulose inks were 

printed onto their corresponding current collectors. To complete the cells, the KOH-PVA hydrogel 

electrolyte was cut to size and sandwiched between the two electrodes. Lastly, the sheet of batteries 

was heat and vacuum sealed and separated into individual cells, finalizing the scalable sheet-by-

sheet fabrication of multiple cells in one sitting. The flexible, vacuum-sealed AgO-Zn batteries 

comprised of 9 layers of composite materials, can thus be easily fabricated using layer-by-layer 

screen-printing (Figure 1B). The major advantage of the stencil printing technique is the 

customizable dimension of the cells that can be tailored for different applications with specific 


7 
 

form factor and capacity requirements. As examples, cells in different sizes were fabricated using 

the same fabrication process (Figure 1C), and could be integrated with different sizes of flexible 

electronic devices. Regardless of the shapes and sizes, the assembled cells are highly flexible and 

durable under repeated mechanical deformations (Figure 1D), making them highly suitable for 

powering wearable and flexible electronics that require high resiliency to various deformations. 

Furthermore, the superior electrochemical performance of the fabricated AgO-Zn battery greatly 

expands the application of thin-film batteries in electronics with high power demands. This 

capability was demonstrated by powering a flexible display system with microcontroller and 

Bluetooth modules (Figure 1E), as discussed in the later section.  

Microstructural and Electrochemical Characterization 

 

Figure 2. Morphological and electrochemical characterization of the printed battery. (A) Photo images of the printed 3 × 3 cm2 
cell with the (i) AgO electrode, (ii) Zn electrode, (iii) Cellulose separator, and (iv) TiO2 separator layers. (B) Microscopic images 
of corresponding layers of the cell taken via SEM and Micro-CT. (C) The conductivity of the gel electrolyte as a function of 
temperature. (D) 40 cycles of CV between 2 V and 1.35 V of the (i) full cell and (ii) corresponding potential shifts in the anode 
(left) and the cathode (right) using a 3-electrode cell with a Zn metal pseudo-reference electrode. The CVs of the current collectors 
within the corresponding voltage windows (anode -0.3 V – 0.3 V, cathode 1.2 V – 2.2 V) under the electrolyte environment are 
overlaid onto the electrode CVs.  Scan rate: 10 mV/s.  

 


8 
 

The printed electrodes and separators (Figure 2A) were characterized by scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM), as well as non-intrusive, in-situ micrometer-scale X-ray computed 

tomography (micro-CT). The introduction of micro-CT enables the capability of non-destructive 

inspection of the battery, which can be highly beneficial to characterize the devices under 

deformation without the need to disassemble the cells. As shown in Figure 2B, the micro-CT 

images show a morphology which in agreement with the SEM images of the pristine anode, 

cathode, cellulose separator, and TiO2 separator. Accordingly, the 3-dimensional (3D) imaging of 

these films shown in Figure S21 offers gives a more comprehensive understanding of the material 

structures. The loosely packed Zn anode used in this work is made of large particles, with sizes in 

the range of 50 - 100 µm, which hence reduces the surface passivation induced by the spontaneous 

reaction with the electrolyte. Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis (EDX) further shows the 

homogeneous coverage of the Bi2O3 and the fluoropolymer binders on the surfaces of the Zn 

particles (Figure S5). The TiO2 separator contains much smaller particles to form a dense and 

homogenous film, thus can effectively reduce the dendrite growth (Figure S7). In comparison, the 

AgO electrode uses 1 - 20 µm particles to produce a porous electrode, which was paired with a 

separator with similar particle sizes to capture the dissolved Ag species (Figure S6 and S8). 

Overall, the porous electrodes grant easy permeation of the electrolyte, thus allowing the 

fabrication of cells with thicker electrodes to increase areal capacity. The conductivity of the PVA-

based electrolyte (Figure 2C) is in the 102 mS/cm order in a wide range of temperatures (-10 °C 

to 60 °C), similar to that of other gel electrolytes reported in the literature.15,38 The solid-phase 

hydrogel holds the ability to properly wet the electrodes which allows higher current cycling, while 

serving as a leak-free electrolyte barrier blocking dendrite growth. The hydroxide concentration 

was shown to have little effect on the electrolyte conductivity (Figure S9), but had a significant 

impact to the cycle life of the battery (Figure S13), and was thus optimized to be 36.5 % by weight.  

Figure S10 displays 3-electrode cells, using a Zn foil as a pseudo-reference electrode, that 

was used for cyclic voltammetry (CV) analysis. The AgO-Zn battery is designed to charge and 

discharge within the window of 1.35 V to 2 V which is used as the CV scanning range. As shown 

in the full cell CV in Figure 2D-i, within the scanning rate of 10 mV/s, the cell can undergo a high 

current density of up to 20 mA/cm2, proving the cell’s ability to discharge at high current. Using 

the external Zn reference, the full cell CV can be used to gauge the potential shifts of each electrode 

separately. As shown in Figure 2D-ii, the relative anode potential (left) does not shift significantly 


9 
 

during the sweep, whereas the cathode potential (right) contributes to the majority of the potential 

change in the cell, suggesting that the AgO cathode is being the rate-limiting electrode in the 

charge-discharge process. The CV of the current collectors in the corresponding voltage window 

(Figure S11) is overlaid in Figure 2D-ii, demonstrating the electrochemical stability of the current 

collectors within the expected potential range. It is worth noting that the current density of the Ag 

current collector increases towards the negative potential direction, which corresponds to the 

possible hydrogen evolution reaction taken place on the anode during the charging process. Such 

undesirable reaction is generally avoided as lower current density is used in the normal charging 

processes, corresponding to lower anode polarization (Figure S18). 

AgO-Zn Battery as A High Areal Capacity Primary Cell 

 

Figure 3. Electrochemical performance of the AgO-Zn cells as primary batteries. (A) The obtainable capacity of various sizes of 
cells that were printed with 1 layer of active materials, discharged at a current of 1 mA. (B) Bode plot reflecting the corresponding 
impedance of cells of different sizes. (C) The obtainable capacity of the 2 × 2 cm2 cells with active material loading from 1 layer 
to 8 layers. (D) Bode plot reflecting the corresponding impedance of the 2 × 2 cm2 cells with different areal loading. 

 

The ability of the cell design to adapt to different cell sizes and areal loadings was evaluated. 

Cells with the same electrode thickness but different form factors, by varying the electrode designs, 

as well as the cells with the same form factors and different thicknesses by varying the number of 


10 
 

layers of active material printed, were fabricated and discharged at a constant 1 mA current. As 

shown in Figure 3A, cells with 1-layer (anode ~ 120 µm, ~ 45 mg/cm2, cathode ~ 75 µm, ~ 26 

mg/cm2) of electrode thickness with the sizes of 1 × 1 cm2, 2 × 2 cm2, 1 × 5 cm2, 2 × 5 cm2 and 3 

× 3 cm2 were prepared, and the capacity increases proportionally to the cell area, with an average 

areal capacity of 8 mAh/cm2. The impedance of these cells was measured via 2 electrodes EIS, 

presented in Figure 3B. The overall increase in impedance throughout the high frequency and 

low-frequency domain suggests an increase in cell contact resistance, caused by the increase in 

resistance of the current collector as the cell size increases. Cells with a size of 2 × 2 cm2 were also 

characterized with increasing areal loadings by printing 1, 2, 3, 6, and 8 layers of electrodes. As 

demonstrated in Figure 3C, as the areal loading of active material increases, the areal capacity of 

the cell increases proportionally, reaching as high as 54 mAh/cm2 with 8 layers of electrodes 

(anode ~ 800 µm, ~ 310 mg/cm2, cathode ~500 µm, ~ 180 mg/cm2). The EIS on the cells with 

different thicknesses also showed no significant impedance increase as the thickness increases: 

only a minor increase in impedance in the low-frequency domain suggests a slight increase in the 

diffusion resistance due to thicker electrodes (Figure 3D). Such behavior can be attributed to the 

large pore sizes in both the anode and the cathode, which cause little resistance for the ion diffusion. 

Overall, the printed AgO-Zn cell was able to uphold superior performance in a wide range of sizes 

and areal loading, thus proven its customizability as a primary thin-film battery to power various 

electronics with appropriate sizes and capacity. A comparison between this and other flexible 

batteries is shown in Table S1 and Figure S1, showing the obtained areal capacity of 54 mAh/cm2 

being the highest among all printed batteries. 


11 
 

AgO-Zn Battery as High-performance Secondary Cell 

 

Figure 4. Electrochemical performance of the AgO-Zn cells operating as rechargeable batteries. (A) The cycling performance 
of the printed battery with a charging C-rate of 0.2C and varying discharge rate of 0.2C, 0.5C, and 1C. (B) The voltage-capacity 
plot of the battery under different discharging C-rates. (C) The voltage-capacity plot of the AgO-Zn battery at different number of 
cycles showing the stabilization of the charge-discharge profile. (D) The DCIR of the AgO-Zn within 50 cycles cycled at the C-rate 
of 0.2C. The EIS profile of the (E) Zn anode and (F) AgO cathode within 1 complete discharge-charge cycle on a 3-electrode cell 
with a Zn metal pseudo-reference electrode.  

 

Beyond the application as a primary battery, the electrochemical performance of the 

flexible AgO-Zn battery as a secondary cell was also characterized. As a cell operating with 

conversion-type chemistry, it is crucial to avoid over-oxidation of the anode materials or over-

reduction of the cathode material that would lead to irreversible particle shape change. Previous 

studies report that the loss of capacity in this system is due to the increased thickness of the ZnO 

layer that passivates the anode surface, as well as the coarsening of the AgO/Ag2O particles leading 

to a decrease in cathode surface area.8,36 Such behavior can be effectively mitigated by accurately 

controlling the degree of charge and discharge to limit the occurrence of irreversible electrode 

shape changes. The optimized charge-discharge algorithm was determined to cycle the cell 

between 40% and 90% of its maximum capacity, with larger ranges resulting in lower cycle life 

as shown in Figure S12. Figure 4A demonstrates the cycling of a cell with 2-layer electrodes with 

a maximum capacity of ~ 16 mAh/cm2. A formation cycle is firstly performed, discharging 10 

mAh/cm2 (60% of max. areal capacity) at the rate of 0.1C, allowing the electrode to slowly relax 


12 
 

into its preferred morphology with increased surface area and reduced impedance. Then, the 

batteries were charged at 0.2 C rate until reaching 2 V and charged at constant voltage until the C-

rate dropped to below 0.04 C or the capacity reached 8 mAh/cm2 (50% of max. areal capacity). 

The battery was then discharged at 0.2 C until reaching a columbic efficiency of 100% or a voltage 

of 1.35V. The entire charge-discharge process is accurately controlled by capacity in the initial 

cycles, ensuring the cell is cycled between 40% to 90% of its maximum capacity. As shown in 

Figure 4C, after a few cycles at the rate of 0.2 C, the cell slowly relaxed from capacity-controlled 

discharge to voltage-controlled discharge, with the higher plateau to lower plateau ratio resembling 

the behavior of the primary cells. Using such charge-discharge algorithm, the cycle life of the 

unstable AgO oxidation state could be controlled, and a significantly increased cycle life can be 

obtained compared to previous studies.10,29,39 Due to the supersaturation-precipitation reaction 

mechanism of both the anode and the cathode during discharge, the cell can be discharged at a 

high C-rate of up to 1 C without any loss in capacity and columbic efficiency, as shown in Figure 

4A-B. Recharging at a higher C-rate is also possible, as shown in Figure S14, although this would 

require a higher capping voltage, reducing the rechargeability and increasing and the risk of 

oxygen evolution on the cathode, thus was not preferred. 

Impedance measurements of the flexible batteries showed relatively low impedances 

throughout cycling. The impedances of the batteries were either determined during cycling of the 

full-cell using direct current internal resistance (DCIR) method, or during cycling of the separated 

anode and cathode half-cells using a 3-electrode configuration with a Zn foil serving as the 

reference. The DCIR analysis offers a straightforward and simple way to gauge the change in the 

internal resistance of the battery. As shown in Figure 4D, 2-electrode DCIR analysis with both 

charging and discharging current was performed before each charge and discharge for a battery 

cycling at 0.2 C, and the battery was able to maintain low internal resistance throughout the cycles, 

suggesting no formation of high-impedance passivating layers on the surface of the electrode 

throughout cycling. To obtain detailed information on the change in the impedance of each 

electrode during each cycle, multiple 3-electrode EIS analyses were performed on the battery while 

cycling at 0.2 C, and is plotted against the degree of discharge (DOD) of the battery. As presented 

in Figure 4E, the anode half-cell started at a low impedance of 1 – 4 Ω, with 2 depressed 

semicircles attributed to the high-speed charge transfer at the Zn particle interface and the lower 

speed hydroxide ions (OH-) diffusion in the porous network.38 With discharging the low-frequency 


13 
 

semicircle slowly expands due to the formation and growth of the ZnO species that impedes the 

OH- transport and increases the double-layer capacitance. During charging, the oxygen species are 

liberated from the reactions in Equations 1-3 to form OH- ions that diffuse readily out of the anode. 

This results in the fast mass transport of OH- ions out of the anode and a rapid drop in the 

impedance at the onset of charging that eventually recovers to the initial level, thus showing the 

reversibility of stripping and depositing of Zn on the anode. For the cathode half-cell EIS showed 

in Figure 4F, at the start of the discharge (0 % DOD), a single semi-circle corresponding to the 

mass transfer resistance and capacitance of the Ag2O formation is observed with a low-frequency 

impedance tail at an angle of approximately 45º suggesting standard Warburg diffusion of OH-. 

As the cell is discharged, the overall impedance decreases with a second semicircle emerging near 

the low-frequency domain that can be attributed to the charge transfer resistance and capacitance 

of Ag formation from Ag2O. During charging, this second low-frequency semicircle disappears as 

all the Ag oxidizes to form Ag2O and eventually AgO.  

Overall, the 3-electrode impedance results provide a deeper insight into the reaction and 

possible routes in improving the battery’s cycle-life and performance. These data indicate that the 

impedance of the AgO cathode is responsible for the majority of the cell impedance. Therefore, a 

beneficial next step will be to incorporate additives that can increase the cathode electrical 

conductivity to improve the performance in high-current applications. For the anode, the 

monitoring of ZnO formation via EIS can be paired with topological characterization methods to 

better control the conversion of Zn electrodes towards extended cycle life and is expected to be 

extremely useful for future analysis. More data and discussion of 3-electrode EIS can be found in 

the supplementary section and Figures S15-17. 


14 
 

Mechanical Stability of The Flexible, Thin-film Battery 

 

Figure 5. Performance of the AgO-Zn cell under various mechanical deformations. (A) Illustrations and corresponding photo 
images of a 2-layer loading, 1 × 5 cm2battery undergoing (A) 180° and 360° bending deformations and (B) 360° twisting 
deformation. (C) The corresponding voltage profile of the battery during 1 mA discharge while undergoing 100 cycles of (i) 180° 
outward bending, (ii) 180° inward bending, (iii) 360° inward bending, (iv) 360° outward bending with a bending diameter of 1 cm, 
and (v) 360° head-to-end twisting. (D) The micro-CT image of the entire 1 × 5 cm2 cell after repeated bending and twisting cycles 
rolled in a diameter of 1 cm, and (E) the cross-section of it bent in a diameter of 1cm (left) and a zoomed-in view (right) of the 
electrodes, demonstrating no structural damage or delamination of the cell after repeated mechanical deformations. (F) Photo 
illustration of a battery under repeated 180° bending cycles controlled by a linear stage at the speed of 15 s/cycle, and (G) the 
corresponding voltage-time plot of the charging (red) and discharging (blue) of the battery during ~2500 repetitions of bending. 

 

Compared to coin-cell, cylindrical or prismatic cells, the printed flexible batteries have the 

unique advantage of allowing bending, flexing, and twisting without causing structural failure. To 

endow such mechanical resiliency, the printed AgO-Zn batteries are composed of flexible and 


15 
 

stretchable polymer-particle composite layers endowed the highly elastic binders. This flexibility 

and stretchability allow the layers to deform to release the inter-layer strain, thus allowing the 

battery to endure large deformation without delamination between layers or build-up of fatigue, 

even when very thick electrodes are used. [ref] To test the performance of the batteries under 

severe strain, a 2-layer 1 × 5 cm2 cell was fabricated and discharged at a current of 1 mA while 

undergoing repeated bending and twisting deformations. As illustrated in Figure 5A-B, the cell 

was tested with 180° and 360° bending in both directions with a bending radius of 0.5 cm, as well 

as 180° twisted in both directions from head to end. The corresponding voltage change during 100 

cycles (1 s per cycle) of deformation was recorded, as shown in Figure 5C. In general, the cell 

exhibited stable performance during bending and twisting in both directions, with negligible 

fluctuation in voltage during the 180° bending cycles, and roughly 10 mV fluctuation during the 

180° bending and twisting cycles. The inward bending in general shows slightly more variations, 

which is suspected to be caused by the softer Ag current collector on the anode size undergoing 

more stretching on the outside during bending. More data of the cell under 10 % stretching 

deformation can be found in Figure S20. To ensure the mechanical stability of the cell, micro-CT 

was used to characterize the cell after the repeated deformation. As shown in Figure 5D-E, the 

entire cell can be scanned at a high resolution to obtain a 3-dimensional (3D) image reflecting the 

microscopic structure of the cell under deformation. The zoom-in view of the cross-section of the 

battery further shows no cracks or delamination after the repeated deformation cycles, reflecting 

the robust mechanical resiliency of the battery. More 3D visualizations of the battery under 

bending deformation can be found in Figure S21. The rechargeability of the cell is also not 

interrupted by the repeated deformation, as shown in Figure 5F-G and Video S1, where the battery 

can be normally charged and discharged while undergoing ~2500 cycles of 180° bending cycles. 

Overall, pairing the superior electrochemical and mechanical performance, the printed thin-film 

AgO-Zn thin-film battery is proven to be well-suited to reliably and sustainably power various 

wearable and flexible electronics. 


16 
 

Powering Flexible Electronics 

 

Figure 6. The powering of a flexible E-ink display system by the flexible AgO-Zn batteries. (A) Photo images of the flexible E-
ink display and the placement of two 2-layer loading, 2 × 2 cm2 batteries connected in series on the back of the display. (B) The 
power consumption of the E-ink display system with integrated BT and MCU modules during BT connection (black), after 
establishing the connection (red), and during active data transmission (blue). (C) Simulated discharge current profile with varying 
pulses and baselines (red) and the corresponding voltage response of the battery (black). (D) The complete discharge profile of 
the two cells connected in series implementing the simulation discharge profile. 

 

To demonstrate the performance of the battery powering typical flexible electronics, we 

designed a flexible E-ink display system controlled by an Arduino-type microcontroller unit with 

added Bluetooth (BT) communication module, which resembles many prototypes of IoT, wearable 

and flexible devices (Figure 6A and S22). The system is powered by two 2 × 2 cm2 batteries with 

2-layer electrodes connected in series, which can supply enough voltage (>3 V) to boot the system. 

A mobile device can connect and transmit data and commands to the BT module, which is 

processed by the microcontroller that refreshes the E-ink display. First, the energy consumption of 

the system under different operation modes operating at 3.6 V was measured. Figure 6B displays 

the current draw when (1) the system is broadcasting to seek for connection, which contains short 

bursts of current peaks around 20 mA (in black); (2) the system is connected to a mobile device, 

with an average current of 9 mA (in red); and (3) the system is actively transmitting data between 

the cellphone and the display, with the current alternating between a higher baseline of 8.5 mA 


17 
 

with peaks of 13 mA, and a lower baseline of 4 mA with peaks of 10 mA (in blue). The batteries 

are thus discharged using a script simulating the power consumption of the flexible E-ink display 

system working in repeated discrete sessions, with 10 s of BT broadcasting, 10 s of idle after 

establishing the connection, 10 s of active data transmission, followed by 30 s of resting (powered 

off) (Figure 6C and S24). As illustrated in Figure 6D, The two batteries in series were able to 

sustain the pulsed, high-current discharge in the 3.6 V – 2.4 V window to deliver power to the 

system constantly for over 12 hours, and is able to maintain its capacity of ~60 mAh, similar to 

the capacity obtained from the constant low-current 1 mA discharge. By pairing with the high-

areal capacity flexible AgO-Zn battery, the flexible E-ink display was able to operate while 

undergoing bending deformations, which is demonstrated in Video S2. In comparison, commercial 

lithium coin cells with similar rated capacity were not able to sustain the high current pulsed 

discharge, resulting in a significant loss in capacity when discharged using the same script (Figure 

S24). The low-impedance and high-energy-density battery is therefore proven to have both 

outstanding electrochemical and mechanical performance for powering of a typical prototype of a 

flexible electronic system. With their performance even surpassing its non-flexible commercial 

coin cell counterpart, such all-printed battery can be considered extremely attractive due to its 

customizability, and flexibility towards real-life applications. A typical application of using the 

battery to illuminate an LED bulb while applying various mechanical deformations were also 

tested, where the light intensity does not change as the battery is bent, folded, twisted, and stretched 

(Videos S3). 

 
 


18 
 

Discussion 

In this work, we have demonstrated a flexible and high-performance thin-film AgO-Zn 

battery based on the rechargeable conversion chemistry. Using specially formulated ink with 

stretchable elastomeric binders and thermoplastic elastomeric substrates, the batteries can be 

printed layer-by-layer using low-cost, high-throughput screen-printing techniques and assembled 

with a heat and vacuum sealing processes. To obtain a low device footprint while maintaining easy 

processability, printable and flexible separators and solid-phase KOH-PVA hydrogel were 

developed to allow a stacked sandwich configuration. The printable battery is compatible with 

various cell sizes and areal loading, leading to a high areal capacity of 54 mAh/cm2 in connection 

to repeated multilayer printing for primary applications. The battery is also rechargeable upon 

implementing the capacity-controlled cycling algorithm, with high cycle life beyond 70 cycles 

with varying discharge C-rates without loss in capacity and coulombic efficiency. The battery 

exhibited low impedance within each discharge-charge cycle, while maintaining low internal 

resistance throughout multiple cycles, suggesting stable and reversible electrode morphological 

change during electrode redox reactions. As a flexible energy storage unit for powering various 

flexible, wearable electronics, the performance of the battery was evaluated under rigorous 

mechanical testing, demonstrating that the battery offers remarkable resiliency against repeated 

large deformation bending and twisting cycles. The fabricated batteries were used in the powering 

of a customized flexible E-ink display system with BT connectivity and delivered an outstanding 

performance that surpassed commercial coin cells under the high-current pulsed discharge regime 

required by the electronics. Future work leveraging advanced electrochemical and topological 

characterization on this promising battery chemistry will be conducted to further improve its 

performance and cycle life. This will involve further optimization of the fabrication process, the 

ink composition, and the layer thicknesses and porosities should lead to a practical, commercially 

viable product with higher cycle life, lower impedance, smaller device footprint, and lower 

production cost. Overall, this work demonstrates the scalable fabrication of flexible thin-film AgO-

Zn batteries with highly desirable electrochemical and mechanical performance and tremendous 

implications towards the development of novel energy storage devices for the powering of next-

generation electronics. 

 
 


19 
 

Experimental Procedures 

Resource Availability 

Lead Contact 

Further information and requests for resources and materials should be directed to and will be 

fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Shirley S. Meng (shmeng@ucsd.edu). 

Material Availability 

This study did not generate new unique materials. 

Data and Code Availability 

The data of this study are available from the authors upon reasonable request.  

Chemicals 

Bi2O3, Ca(OH)2, KOH (pellets, ≥85%), LiOH, methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK), toluene, 

cellulose (microcrystalline powder, 20 µm), Triton-X 114, Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) (MW 

600,000), and PVA (MW = 89000 – 98000, 99+% Hydrolyzed) were purchased from Sigma 

Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Zn, AgO, and TiO2 were obtained from Zpower LLC (Camarillo, 

CA, USA). The fluorocopolymer (GBR-6005, poly(vinylfluoride-co-2,3,3,3-tetrafluoropropylene)) 

was obtained from Daikin US Corporation (New York, NY, USA). SEBS (G1645) was obtained 

from Kraton (Houston, TX, USA). Graphite powder was purchased from Acros Organics (USA). 

Super-P carbon black was purchased from MTI Corporation (Richmond, CA, USA). All reagents 

were used without further purification. 

Cell Fabrication 

Formulation of The Flexible Inks 

The electrode resin was prepared by adding 5 g of the fluorine rubber in 10 g of MIBK 

solvent and left on a shake table until the mixture was homogeneous. The SEBS resin was prepared 

by adding 40 g of the SEBS into 100 mL of toluene and left on a shake table until the mixture was 

homogeneous.  


20 
 

The silver current collector ink was formulated by combining Ag flakes, SEBS resin, and 

toluene in 4: 2: 1 weight ratio and mixing in a planetary mixer (Flaktak SpeedmixerTM DAC 150.1 

FV) at 1800 rotations per minute (RPM) for 5 min.40 The carbon current collector ink was 

formulated by firstly mixing graphite, Super-P, and PTFE powder in 84: 14: 2 weight ratio with a 

set of pestle and mortar. The mixed powder was mixed with the SEBS resin and toluene in a 10: 

12: 3 weight ratio using the mixer at 2250 RPM for 10 min to obtain a printable ink.10 

The Zn anode ink was formulated by firstly mixing the Zn and Bi2O3 powders in a 9:1 ratio 

with a set of pestle and mortar until the Zn particles are evenly coated with the Bi2O3 powder. The 

evenly mixed powder was then mixed with the electrode resin and MIBK in a 20: 4: 1 weight ratio 

using the mixer at 1800 RPM for 5 min to obtain a printable ink. The AgO cathode ink was 

formulated by firstly mixing the AgO and Super-P powders in a 95: 5 weight ratio using a set of 

pestle and mortar until homogeneous. The powder was then mixed with the electrode resin and 

MIBK in 5: 5: 2 weight ratio using the mixer at 2250 RPM for 5 min to obtain a printable ink.  

The TiO2 separator ink was prepared by firstly mixing TiO2 and cellulose powder in a 2: 1 

ratio using a set of pestle and mortar. The mixed powder was then added with the SEBS resin, 

toluene and Triton-X in 50: 55: 75: 3 weight ratio and mixed with the mixer at 2250 RPM for 10 

min to obtain a printable ink. The cellulose separator ink was prepared by firstly mixing TiO2 and 

cellulose powder in a 26: 9 ratio using a set of pestle and mortar. The mixed powder was then 

added with the electrode resin, MIBK in an 8: 7: 4 weight ratio and mixed with the mixer at 2250 

RPM for 10 min to obtain a printable ink. 

Preparation of The SEBS Substrate 

A resin with 40.8 wt% of SEBS dissolved in toluene is prepared and was left on a linear 

shaker (Scilogex, SK-L180-E) overnight or until the mixture became transparent and 

homogeneous. Wax paper was used as the temporary casting substrate, and a film caster with the 

clearance of 1000 um was used to cast the SEBS resin onto the wax paper. The cast resin was 

firstly dried in the ambient environment for 1 h, followed by curing in a conventional oven at 80 °C 

for 1 h to remove the excess solvent. The transparent, uniform SEBS film, which can be readily peeled 

off from the wax paper after curing, was used as the substrate for subsequent battery printing. 


21 
 

Printing of The Electrodes 

Stencils for printing the current collectors, electrodes, and separators were designed using 

AutoCAD software (Autodesk, San Rafael, CA, USA) and produced by Metal Etch Services (San 

Marcos, CA), with dimensions of 12 in × 12 in. The thickness of the stencils was designed to be 100 

µm for the carbon and silver current collectors, 300 µm for the TiO2 separator and the Zn anode, and 

500 µm for the cellulose separator and the AgO cathode. To print the anode, the silver ink was first 

printed onto the SEBS substrate and cured in a conventional oven at 80 °C for 10 min. The Zn ink was 

then printed onto the silver current collectors and cured at 80 °C for 30 min. The TiO2 ink was lastly 

printed onto the anode and cured at 80 °C for 10 min. To print the cathode, the carbon ink was firstly 

printed onto the SEBS substrate and cured at 80 °C for 10 min. PET sheets were cut using a computer-

controlled cutting machine (Cricut Maker®, Cricut, Inc., South Jordan, UT, USA) into a mask exposing 

the printed carbon electrodes, and the masked carbon current collector was sputtered with ~ 400 nm of 

Au and adhesion interlayer of Cr at a DC power of 100W and 200W respectively and an Ar gas flow 

rate of 16 SCCM using a Denton Discovery 635 Sputter System (Denton Discovery 635 Sputter System, 

Denton Vacuum, LLC, Moorestown, NJ, USA). The AgO ink was then printed onto the sputtered 

current collectors and cured at 50 °C for 60 min. Lastly, the cellulose ink was printed onto the cathode 

and cured at 50 °C for 60 min. To print multiple layers of electrodes or the separators, the stencil was 

offset by an additional 65 µm for each layer of AgO and 100 µm for each layer of Zn to compensate for 

the electrode thickness. See Figure S2 for the step-by-step printing and assembly process of the batteries 

and Figure S3 for the thickness calibration for the printing of anode and cathode. 

Synthesis of The Electrolyte Hydrogel  

The hydrogel is synthesized by mixing the PVA solution and the hydroxide solution into a 

gel precursor and dried in a desiccator until the desired weight is reached. For synthesizing the 

36.5 % hydroxide gel used in this study, the following formulations were used. A hydroxide 

solution was prepared by dissolving 9.426 g KOH and 0.342 g LiOH into 50 mL deionized (DI) 

water. 0.5g Ca(OH)2 was then added into the solution and stirred in a closed container under room 

temperature for 1 h to saturate the solution with Ca(OH)2, and the excess Ca(OH)2 was then 

removed from the solution. A PVA solution was prepared by dissolving 4.033 g PVA and 0.056 g 

PEO into 50 mL DI water heated to 90 °C. The precursor solution was prepared by mixing the 

hydroxide solution and the PVA solution in the weight ratio of 13.677: 10 and poured into a flat petri 

dish with the weight of 0.2 g/cm2. The precursor was left to dry in a vacuum desiccator until the weight 


22 
 

decreased to 26.12 % of precursor weight to obtain a soft, translucent hydrogel with its caustic material 

taking 36.5 % of the sum of caustic material and the water content. Additional weight and conductivity 

information for different hydroxide concentrations can be found in Table S2. The hydrogel can ben 

then cut into desired sizes and directly used or stored in a hydroxide solution with the same weight ratio 

of hydroxide without PVA. The storage solution for the 36.5 % KOH-PVA gel was prepared similar to 

the hydroxide solution, where 10.777 g KOH, 0.391 g LiOH, and 0.5g Ca(OH)2 were dissolved into 

15 mL DI water and the excess Ca(OH)2 was removed. More images of the fabrication of the 

hydrogel are shown in Figure S4. 

Microstructural Characterization 

Morphological analyses of the current collectors, separators, and active material electrodes 

were performed with SEM and micro-CT. SEM images were taken using an FEI Quanta FEG 250 

instrument with an electron beam energy of 15 keV, a spot size of 3, and a dwell time of 10 µs. 

Micro-CT experiments were conducted using a ZEISS Xradia 510 Versa. For individual film 

analysis, micro-CT samples were prepared by punching 2 mm radii disks and stacking them in a 

PTFE cylindrical tube with alternating PTFE films to provide separation between neighboring film 

disks. For the Micro-CT of full and sealed cell bending, a 1 × 5 cm2 Zn-AgO battery was bent or 

rolled around a polyethylene (PE) cylindrical tube with a diameter of 1cm. 

For the micro-CT active material electrodes, the heavier metals, such as Zn and Ag, 

warranted higher X-Ray energies than the printed polymer separator films. Accordingly, scans at 

140 keV and a current of 71.26 µA were performed with high energy filters and a magnification 

of 4X on the Zn and AgO films with voxel sizes of 2.5 µm and 0.75 µm and exposure times of 2 s 

and 18 s respectively. For the polymer separators, 80 keV scans with an 87.63 µA current were 

used with low energy filters at a magnification of 4X with voxel resolutions of 0.75 µm and 1.1 µm 

and exposure times of 8 s and 1 s for the printed anode and cathode separators respectively. For 

scans of the full cell bending, a voltage of 140 keV and a current of 71.26 µA with a 4X 

magnification was performed with the following voxel resolutions and exposure times for the 

respective cases: 18.35 µm and 2 s for low resolution bending scan, 3.54 µm and 5 s for higher 

resolution bending scan, and 7.55 µm and 2 s for rolled cell scan. For all micro-CT scans conducted, 

1801 projections were taken for a full 360˚ rotation with beam hardening and center shift constants 

implemented during the data reconstruction. Post measurement imaging and analysis were 


23 
 

performed by Amira-Avizo using the Despeckle, Deblur, Median Filter, Non-local Means Filter, 

Unsharp Mask, and Delineate modules for data sharpening and filtration provided by the software. 

The animated micro-CT scan of the battery can be found in Video S4-S5. 

Electrochemical Characterization 

Cyclic Voltammetry  

The 3-electrode half-cell CV characterization was performed on a cell assembled with the 

printed electrodes as the working electrode, a platinum foil as the counter electrode, Zn metal foil 

as the reference electrode, and 2 pieces of KOH-PVA hydrogel as the electrolyte. The 3-electrode 

full-cell CV characterization was performed between 1.35 V to 2 V on a cell assembled similar to 

the typical battery architecture but with an extra Zn metal foil as the reference electrode. The 

structures of both cells are illustrated in Figure S10. The CV was performed using an Autolab 

PGSTAT128N potentiostat/galvanostat with an additional pX-1000 module. In the 3-electrode 

full-cell CV, the AgO cathode was connected to the working electrode probe, the Zn anode was 

connected to the counter and reference electrode probes, and the pX-1000 module was used to 

monitor the potential between the cathode and the reference Zn foil. The potential of the anode vs. 

Zn was obtained by subtracting the cathode vs. Zn potential from the full cell potential. A scan 

rate of 10 mV/s was used for all CV tests. 

Discharging and Cycling Protocol 

The constant current complete discharge of the battery for primary applications was 

performed with the following procedure. Firstly, the assembled and vacuum-sealed battery was 

left idle for 1 hr to allow the electrolyte to fully permeate through the electrodes. Then, the battery 

was discharged using a battery test system (Landt Instruments CT2001A) at the desired current, 

until reaching the lower cut-off voltage of 1.35 V. 

To enable the secondary application of the battery, cycling protocols were established that 

rely on the accurate control of the potential and DOD of the battery. To perform charge-discharge 

cycling on a fabricated battery, 50% of its maximum capacity, which was estimated by the low-

current complete discharges, was first determined as the cyclable capacity and the basis to 

determine C-rates of the protocol. The battery was firstly discharged at the C-rate of 0.1C from 

100% to 40% DOD. Then, the battery was recharged at the C-rate of 0.2C until reaching 2V, and 


24 
 

then at 2V until reaching 90% DOD or C-rate of 0.05C. The battery could be then discharged and 

recharged at the desired C-rates between 1.35 V and 2 V, with the DOD maintained between 40% 

and 90% of its maximum value. Unless specified otherwise, all cycling data were performed using 

cells with 1 × 1 cm2 form factor with 2 layers of active electrode materials. More cycling data for 

two cells with 8-layer electrode thickness connected in series is shown in Figure S15. 

The pulsed discharge protocol was designed to simulate the battery’s performance in 

powering a typical MCU-controlled wearable device with integrated BT functionality. The battery 

was discharged using an Autolab PGSTAT128N potentiostat/galvanostat implementing fast 

chrono methods. See Figure S25 for the detailed discharging script. 

Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy 

Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed with a 

Biologic SP-150 in a 3-electrode configuration. The Zn-AgO three electrodes cell was fabricated 

with a Zn reference wire placed between an extra layer of hydrogel electrolyte and the original 

electrolyte layer shown in Figure 2B. The Zn reference wire was then connected to an Au sputtered 

heat-sealable SEBS-based printed carbon tab that was vacuum sealed to ensure complete cell 

sealing to hinder electrolyte dehydration. The working electrode (WE) and counter electrode (CE) 

were connected to the AgO cathode and Zn anode, respectively.  

The impedances of the two half cells and the full cell were monitored in-situ during 

charging and discharging to analyze impedance changes most closely related to practical cycling 

conditions with a galvanostatic-EIS (GEIS) measurement. Accordingly, the DC base current was 

set to the current of the charging/discharging step, while the AC amplitude was set to 300 µA, 

approximately one-fifth of the cycling current. The frequency sweep was between 1 MHz and 1 

Hz with 10 points per decade and an average of 8 measures per frequency. The cycling script 

implemented with GEIS is similar to that of the capacity-limited electrochemical cycling protocol, 

with the exception that the voltage limits applied were 1.95 V and 1.4 V vs. the reference instead 

of the anode for the charging and discharging respectfully. For each charge and discharge step, 10 

GEIS was measured for 15 complete cycles, resulting in a total of 870 separate Nyquist plots (29 

steps ×  10 measures ×  3 cell configurations). For analysis simplicity, only the 5th cycle’s 

discharge and charge were analyzed. 


25 
 

Both half-cell Nyquist plots for the 5th cycle’s discharge and charge steps were fitted to 

equivalent circuits using a slightly modified version of the Zfit function available as open-source 

code from Mathworks.41 Zfit utilizes another Mathworks open source code, fminsearchbnd, to 

minimize the error of simulated impedances with the experimental values by altering the 

impedance parameters (i.e. resistance values, constant phase element values, etc.) under realistic 

parameter boundary conditions.42 The use of this code allowed for streamline fitting of many 

successive Nyquist to provide insights in observable trends in the fitted parameters. Additional 

data of the EIS measurement can be found in Figure S16-18. 

Electrolyte Conductivity Measurement 

The ionic conductivity of the gel electrolyte was measured by a customized two-electrode 

(Stainless Steel 316L) conductivity cell with an inner impedance at 0.54 Ω. The cell constant is 

frequently calibrated by using OAKTON standard conductivity solutions at 0.447, 1.5, 15, and 80 

mS·cm-1 respectively. A constant thickness spacer was positioned between the two electrodes 

which ensure no distance changes during multiple-time measurements. The electrolytic 

conductivity value was obtained with a floating AC signal at a frequency determined by the phase 

angle minima given by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) using the following 

equation: σ = K𝑅𝑅−𝑄𝑄, where R is the tested impedance (Ω), K is the cell constant (cm-1) and Q is 

the fitting parameter.43 All of data acquisition and output were done by LabView Software, which 

was also used to control an ESPEC BTX-475 programming temperature chamber to maintain the 

cell at a set temperature in 30 minutes intervals. 

Mechanical Deformation Tests  

The bending deformation of the battery was conducted by bending a 1 × 5 cm2 battery 

around a cylinder with the diameter of 1 cm manually. The deformation was cycled between the 

bent and relaxed state at the rate of 1 s/cycle for 100 cycles. See Figure S19 for the bending control 

of the battery mechanical tests. Similarly, the twisting deformation of the battery was performed 

manually at 1 s/cycle by fixing one end of the battery and twisting the other end 180° clockwise 

and counterclockwise for 100 cycles.  


26 
 

Assembly of Flexible Display Electronics 

To demonstrate the battery’s ability to power flexible electronics, a Waveshare 2.9-inch e-

Paper flexible display was powered by two Zn-AgO batteries in series. The display module was 

connected to an Adafruit Feather nRF52 Bluefruit Low Energy (LE) chip and programmed using 

Arduino and C. The picture of the assembled system is shown in Figure S23. MATLAB code was 

used to convert images to hexadecimal format to be uploaded to the board and the display. The 

BluefruitConnect IOS app was used to connect the Adafruit chip via Bluetooth to change the 

display. The system diagram of the E-ink display system is shown in Figure S22. The pulsed 

current profile needed to power the Bluetooth chip and display was determined using an 

oscilloscope by measuring the voltage across a 10 Ω resistor connected in series with the circuitry. 

A model pulsed profile was then extracted to be applied to flexible batteries for further testing. 

 
 


27 
 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by funding from ZPower LLC and Qualcomm. This work was performed 

in part at the San Diego Nanotechnology Infrastructure (SDNI) of UCSD, NANO3, a member of 

the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure, which is supported by the National 

Science Foundation (Grant ECCS-1542148). The authors would also like to acknowledge the 

National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research (NCMIR) technologies and 

instrumentation are supported by grant R24GM137200 from the National Institute of General 

Medical Sciences. AgO, Zn, and TiO2 used in this work were provided by ZPower LLC. SEBS 

used in this work was provided by Kraton. 

 

Conflict of Interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
 


28 
 

References 

1. Gong, S., and Cheng, W. (2017). Toward Soft Skin-Like Wearable and Implantable Energy 
Devices. Advanced Energy Materials 7, 1700648. 

2. Ray, T.R., Choi, J., Bandodkar, A.J., Krishnan, S., Gutruf, P., Tian, L., Ghaffari, R., and 
Rogers, J.A. (2019). Bio-Integrated Wearable Systems: A Comprehensive Review. Chem. Rev. 
119, 5461–5533. 

3. Yin, L., Seo, J.K., Kurniawan, J., Kumar, R., Lv, J., Xie, L., Liu, X., Xu, S., Meng, Y.S., and 
Wang, J. (2018). Highly Stable Battery Pack via Insulated, Reinforced, Buckling-Enabled 
Interconnect Array. Small 14, 1800938. 

4. Xu, S., Zhang, Y., Cho, J., Lee, J., Huang, X., Jia, L., Fan, J.A., Su, Y., Su, J., Zhang, H., et 
al. (2013). Stretchable batteries with self-similar serpentine interconnects and integrated 
wireless recharging systems. Nature Communications 4, 1543. 

5. Weng, W., Sun, Q., Zhang, Y., He, S., Wu, Q., Deng, J., Fang, X., Guan, G., Ren, J., and Peng, 
H. (2015). A Gum-Like Lithium-Ion Battery Based on a Novel Arched Structure. Advanced 
Materials 27, 1363–1369. 

6. Huang, Y., Ip, W.S., Lau, Y.Y., Sun, J., Zeng, J., Yeung, N.S.S., Ng, W.S., Li, H., Pei, Z., Xue, 
Q., et al. (2017). Weavable, Conductive Yarn-Based NiCo//Zn Textile Battery with High 
Energy Density and Rate Capability. ACS Nano 11, 8953–8961. 

7. Gaikwad, A.M., Zamarayeva, A.M., Rousseau, J., Chu, H., Derin, I., and Steingart, D.A. 
(2012). Highly Stretchable Alkaline Batteries Based on an Embedded Conductive Fabric. 
Advanced Materials 24, 5071–5076. 

8. Zamarayeva, A.M., Gaikwad, A.M., Deckman, I., Wang, M., Khau, B., Steingart, D.A., and 
Arias, A.C. (2016). Fabrication of a High-Performance Flexible Silver–Zinc Wire Battery. 
Advanced Electronic Materials 2, 1500296. 

9. Li, H., Liu, Z., Liang, G., Huang, Y., Huang, Y., Zhu, M., Pei, Z., Xue, Q., Tang, Z., Wang, 
Y., et al. (2018). Waterproof and Tailorable Elastic Rechargeable Yarn Zinc Ion Batteries by 
a Cross-Linked Polyacrylamide Electrolyte. ACS Nano 12, 3140–3148. 

10. Kumar, R., Shin, J., Yin, L., You, J.M., Meng, Y.S., and Wang, J. (2017). All-Printed, 
Stretchable Zn-Ag2O Rechargeable Battery via Hyperelastic Binder for Self-Powering 
Wearable Electronics. Advanced Energy Materials 7, 1602096. 

11. Liu, W., Chen, Z., Zhou, G., Sun, Y., Lee, H.R., Liu, C., Yao, H., Bao, Z., and Cui, Y. (2016). 
3D Porous Sponge-Inspired Electrode for Stretchable Lithium-Ion Batteries. Advanced 
Materials 28, 3578–3583. 

12. Mackanic, D.G., Yan, X., Zhang, Q., Matsuhisa, N., Yu, Z., Jiang, Y., Manika, T., Lopez, J., 
Yan, H., Liu, K., et al. (2019). Decoupling of mechanical properties and ionic conductivity in 
supramolecular lithium ion conductors. Nature Communications 10, 5384. 


29 
 

13. G. Mackanic, D., Chang, T.-H., Huang, Z., Cui, Y., and Bao, Z. (2020). Stretchable 
electrochemical energy storage devices. Chemical Society Reviews. 

14. Kaltenbrunner, M., Kettlgruber, G., Siket, C., Schwödiauer, R., and Bauer, S. (2010). Arrays 
of Ultracompliant Electrochemical Dry Gel Cells for Stretchable Electronics. Advanced 
Materials 22, 2065–2067. 

15. Li, H., Han, C., Huang, Y., Huang, Y., Zhu, M., Pei, Z., Xue, Q., Wang, Z., Liu, Z., Tang, Z., 
et al. (2018). An extremely safe and wearable solid-state zinc ion battery based on a 
hierarchical structured polymer electrolyte. Energy & Environmental Science 11, 941–951. 

16. Song, W.-J., Lee, S., Song, G., and Park, S. (2019). Stretchable Aqueous Batteries: Progress 
and Prospects. ACS Energy Letters 4, 177–186. 

17. Ma, L., Chen, S., Wang, D., Yang, Q., Mo, F., Liang, G., Li, N., Zhang, H., Zapien, J.A., and 
Zhi, C. (2019). Super‐Stretchable Zinc–Air Batteries Based on an Alkaline‐Tolerant Dual‐
Network Hydrogel Electrolyte. Advanced Energy Materials 9, 1803046. 

18. Kim, J., Kumar, R., Bandodkar, A.J., and Wang, J. (2017). Advanced Materials for Printed 
Wearable Electrochemical Devices: A Review. Advanced Electronic Materials 3, 1600260. 

19. Lanceros-Méndez, S., and Costa, C.M. (2018). Printed Batteries: Materials, Technologies and 
Applications (John Wiley & Sons). 

20. Pan, H., Shao, Y., Yan, P., Cheng, Y., Han, K.S., Nie, Z., Wang, C., Yang, J., Li, X., 
Bhattacharya, P., et al. (2016). Reversible aqueous zinc/manganese oxide energy storage from 
conversion reactions. Nature Energy 1, 16039. 

21. Lee, J.-S., Tai Kim, S., Cao, R., Choi, N.-S., Liu, M., Lee, K.T., and Cho, J. (2011). Metal-Air 
Batteries with High Energy Density: Li-Air versus Zn-Air. Advanced Energy Materials 1, 34–
50. 

22. Zeng, Y., Zhang, X., Meng, Y., Yu, M., Yi, J., Wu, Y., Lu, X., and Tong, Y. (2017). Achieving 
Ultrahigh Energy Density and Long Durability in a Flexible Rechargeable Quasi-Solid-State 
Zn–MnO2 Battery. Advanced Materials 29. 

23. Li, Y., Fu, J., Zhong, C., Wu, T., Chen, Z., Hu, W., Amine, K., and Lu, J. (2019). Recent 
Advances in Flexible Zinc-Based Rechargeable Batteries. Advanced Energy Materials 9, 
1802605. 

24. Yan, C., Wang, X., Cui, M., Wang, J., Kang, W., Foo, C.Y., and Lee, P.S. (2014). Stretchable 
Silver-Zinc Batteries Based on Embedded Nanowire Elastic Conductors. Advanced Energy 
Materials 4, 1301396. 

25. Venkatraman, M., and Van Zee, J.W. (2007). A model for the silver–zinc battery during high 
rates of discharge. Journal of Power Sources 166, 537–548. 


30 
 

26. Bonk, J.F., and Garrett, A.B. (1959). A Study of the Silver (I) Oxide‐Silver (II) Oxide 
Electrode. J. Electrochem. Soc. 106, 612. 

27. Takeda, K., and Hattori, T. (1999). Optimal Process for Fabricating AgO Cathode for AgO/Zn 
Cells Improved in High Drain Pulse Performance at Low Temperatures. J. Electrochem. Soc. 
146, 3190. 

28. Parkhurst, W.A. (1984). Thermogravimetry-Evolved Gas Analysis of Silver Oxide Cathode 
Material. Journal of The Electrochemical Society 131, 1739. 

29. Wang, S.J., Meng, Y.S., Shin, J., You, J.-M., Lee, J.Z., Kumar, R., Yin, L., Wang, J., and 
Meng, S. (2016). Deposition of ZnO on bismuth species towards a rechargeable Zn-based 
aqueous battery. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys 18, 26376–26382. 

30. Xu, W., Wang, S.Q., Zhang, Q.Y., Ma, C.Y., Wang, Q., Wen, D.H., and Li, X.N. (2019). 
Hierarchically structured AgO films with nano-porosity for photocatalyst and all solid-state 
thin film battery. Journal of Alloys and Compounds 802, 210–216. 

31. McMillan, J.A. (1962). Higher Oxidation States of Silver. Chem. Rev. 62, 65–80. 

32. Kumar, R., Johnson, K.M., Williams, N.X., and Subramanian, V. (2019). Scaling Printable 
Zn–Ag2O Batteries for Integrated Electronics. Advanced Energy Materials 9, 1803645. 

33. Braam, K., and Subramanian, V. (2015). A Stencil Printed, High Energy Density Silver Oxide 
Battery Using a Novel Photopolymerizable Poly(acrylic acid) Separator. Advanced Materials 
27, 689–694. 

34. Choi, K.H., Ahn, D.B., and Lee, S.Y. (2018). Current Status and Challenges in Printed 
Batteries: Toward Form Factor-Free, Monolithic Integrated Power Sources. ACS Energy 
Letters 3. 

35. Entezam, M., Poormadadkar, H., Khonakdar, H.A., and Jafari, S.H. (2020). Melt rheology and 
interfacial properties of binary and ternary blends of PS, EOC, and SEBS. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science 137, 48791. 

36. Turney, D.E., Gallaway, J.W., Yadav, G.G., Ramirez, R., Nyce, M., Banerjee, S., Chen-
Wiegart, Y.C.K., Wang, J., D’Ambrose, M.J., Kolhekar, S., et al. (2017). Rechargeable Zinc 
Alkaline Anodes for Long-Cycle Energy Storage. Chemistry of Materials 29. 

37. Mainar, A.R., Leonet, O., Bengoechea, M., Boyano, I., Meatza, I. de, Kvasha, A., Guerfi, A., 
and Blázquez, J.A. (2016). Alkaline aqueous electrolytes for secondary zinc–air batteries: an 
overview. International Journal of Energy Research 40, 1032–1049. 

38. Braam, K.T., Volkman, S.K., and Subramanian, V. (2012). Characterization and optimization 
of a printed, primary silver–zinc battery. Journal of Power Sources 199, 367–372. 


31 
 

39. Bandodkar, A.J., Hung, V.W.S., Jia, W., Valdés-Ramírez, G., Windmiller, J.R., Martinez, 
A.G., Ramírez, J., Chan, G., Kerman, K., and Wang, J. (2013). Tattoo-based potentiometric 
ion-selective sensors for epidermal pH monitoring. Analyst 138, 123–128. 

40. Yin, L., Kumar, R., Karajic, A., Xie, L., You, J., Joshuia, D., Lopez, C.S., Miller, J., and Wang, 
J. (2018). From All-Printed 2D Patterns to Free-Standing 3D Structures: Controlled Buckling 
and Selective Bonding. Advanced Materials Technologies 3, 1800013. 

41. Dellis, J.-L. Zfit. https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/19460-zfit. 

42. D’Errico, 
J. 
fminsearchbnd, 
fminsearchcon. 
https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/8277-fminsearchbnd-
fminsearchcon. 

43. Rustomji, C.S., Mac, J., Choi, C., Kim, T.K., Choi, D., Meng, Y.S., and Jin, S. (2016). Thin-
film electrochemical sensor electrode for rapid evaluation of electrolytic conductivity, cyclic 
voltammetry, and temperature measurements. J Appl Electrochem 46, 59–67. 


32 
 

TOC entry 

 

Highlights 

Novel polymer-based printing fabrication of battery with a high areal density of 54 mAh/cm2. 

The battery is flexible, rechargeable, low impedance, customizable, and low-device footprint. 

Superior battery performance in pulsed high current discharge mode. 

 

 


1

Supplementary Information

High Performance Printed AgO-Zn Rechargeable Battery for Flexible Electronics

Lu Yin, Jonathan Scharf, Jessica Ma, Jean-Marie Doux, Christopher Redquest, Viet Le, Yin Yijie, 

Jeff Ortega, Xia Wei, Joseph Wang, and Ying S. Meng

Content

Supplementary Tables..................................................................................................................... 2

Supplementary Figures ................................................................................................................... 4

Supplementary Videos.................................................................................................................. 28

Supplementary References............................................................................................................ 29


2

Supplementary Tables

Supplementary Table 1. Comparison of areal capacities of various published and commercialized thin-
film batteries. The summary is also visualized in Figure S1.

Battery 

Type
Fabrication

Max. Areal 
Capacity 
(mAh/cm2)

Configuration
Cycle 

Number
Ref

Zn-Ag2O
Screen Printing
1.6
In-plane
11
1

Zn-Ag2O
Screen Printing
~3
In-plane
30
2

Zn-Ag2O
Extrusion Printing
~2.8
In-plane
Primary
3

Zn-Ag2O
Screen Printing
1.5
In-plane
13
4

Zn-MnO2
Plotting
~2.2
In-plane
30
5

Zn-MnO2
Doctor Blade
<0.077
Stacked
140
6

Zn-Ag2O
Drop-cast/ 

Electroplating
0.11
In-Plane
33
7

Zn-MnO2
Screen Printing
5.6
Stacked
Primary
8

Zn-Ag2O
Screen Printing
5.4
Stacked
Primary
9

Zn-Ag2O
3D Printing
2.4
Interdigitated

Pillars 
7
10

Zn-MnO2
Soaking
3.775
In-plane
Primary
11

LTO-LFP
3D Printing
1.5
In plane

Interdigitated 
30
12

Zn-Air
Screen Printing
1.4
Stacked
Primary
13

Zn-Ag2O
Screen Printing
11
Stacked
Primary
14

Si/CNT-

NMC
Doctor Blade
30
Stacked
50
15

Zn-MnO2
NA
~1
In-plane
Primary
16

Zn-MnO2
NA
~3
NA
Primary
17

Zn-MnO2
NA
~1.5
NA
Primary
18

Li-MnO2
NA
~2.5
Stacked
Primary
19

Zn-AgO
Screen Printing
54
Stacked
80
This 
work


3

Supplementary Table 2. KOH-PVA electrolyte information

Caustic Concentration
Removed Precursor Water wt%
σ0 (mS/cm)
Ea (eV)

26.3% 
65.77%
2.037×104
0.109

31.8% 
70.72%
3.155×104
0.115

36.5% 
73.88%
6.029×104
0.138


4

Supplementary Figures

Supplementary Figure 1. Visualization of Table S1 comparing the maximum current densities and areal 
capacities of various printed batteries.


5

Supplementary Figure 2. The images of the step-by-step batched fabrication of the printed AgO-Zn 
batteries. (A) Prepared SEBS substrate. (B) The layer-by-layer printing of the AgO cathode (left) and the 
Zn anode (right). (C) Placing the cathode side onto the anode side with the hydrogel electrolyte in between.
(D) Heat and vacuum sealing of the batteries. Each cell was separated by further heat sealing after the entire 
batch was vacuum sealed.


6

Supplementary Figure 3. Thickness calibration of the (A) anode and (B) cathode printed using their 
corresponding stencils. 5 samples were taken to generate the average thicknesses and standard deviations
of each data point.


7

Supplementary Figure 4. Images of the fabrication of the KOH-PVA electrolyte gel. (A) Drying of the 
precursor solution to desired concentration in a vacuum desiccator. (B) The crosslinked 36.5 % hydrogel 
after drying. (C) Storage of the hydrogel pieces after cutting into desired sizes. (D) A bent 2 × 2 cm2

hydrogel.


8

Supplementary Figure 5. (A) The SEM and corresponding EDX mapping of (B) fluorine (from the binder), 
(C) Zn, and (D) bismuth of the anode.


9

Supplementary Figure 6 (A) The SEM and corresponding EDX mapping of (B) fluorine (from the binder) 
and (C) Ag of the cathode.


10

Supplementary Figure 7. Additional SEM images of the printed TiO2 separator with different 
magnifications.


11

Supplementary Figure 8. Additional SEM images of the printed cellulose separator with different 
magnifications.


12

Supplementary Figure 9. The conductivity of the hydrogel with different caustic material concentrations. 
The linear trendline was fitted using the given equation and listed in Table S2.


13

Supplementary Figure 10. The cell structure used for the CV analysis. (A) The cell structure used for 
single electrode scanning for testing the current collectors. (B) The cell structure used for full cell scanning 
with an external Zn metal strip as the reference electrode.


14

Supplementary Figure 11. The CV of the printed (A) Ag anode current collector (CC) and the Au-
sputtered carbon cathode CC in their corresponding voltage range used in Figure 2D-ii. Scan rate: 10
mV/s.


15

Supplementary Figure 12. The cycling of the battery at the different capacity range. (A) Cycling the 
battery between 40 % and 9 0% state of charge (50 %). (B) Cycling the battery between 2 5% and 90 % 
state of charge (65 %). (C) Cycling the battery between 10 % and 90 % state of charge (80 %). Electrolyte 
with the concentration of 36.5 % was used, and the cells were cycled at the rate of 0.2 C.


16

Supplementary Figure 13. The cycling of the battery with electrolyte concentration of (A) 26.3 %, (B) 
31.8 %, and (C) 36.5 %. The 50 % capacity range was used and the cells were cycled at the rate of 0.2 C.


17

Supplementary Figure 14. The cycling of the battery at the rate of 0.5 C. The electrolyte with the 
concentration of 36.5% and the capacity range of 50% was used.

Supplementary Figure 15. The cycling of two 8-layer 2 × 2 cm2 battery connected in series at the rate of 
0.05 C.


18

Supplementary Figure 16. The equivalent circuit used for the (A) cathode and (B) anode EIS fitting.


19

Supplementary Figure 17. The Nyquist plot and the EIS fitting of the cathode during the 5th cycle (A) 
discharging and (B) charging, and the corresponding anode (C) charging and (D) discharging.


20

Supplementary Figure 18. The potential profile of the anode (A,D) and cathode (B,E) vs. Zn reference 
and the full cell (C, F) within the first 5 cycles of (A-D) discharging and (D-F) corresponding 4 cycles of 
charging. The vertical lines correspond to the places where an EIS measurements were taken.


21

Supplementary Figure 19. Additional images illustrating the manual bending and twisting of the battery. 
(A) A tube with diameter of 1 cm was used to bend the battery for half and one entire round. (B) The battery 
was twisted counterclockwise and clockwise 180° which add up to a total of 360°.


22

Supplementary Figure 20. The voltage profile of the 1 × 5 cm2 battery during 1 mA discharge while 
undergoing 100 cycles of 10 % lengthwise stretching. Although the battery was not optimized for 
stretchability, a certain amount of stretchability is required for the battery to endure low-radius bending and 
accommodate for the outer-layer strain.


23

Supplementary Figure 21. Additional microscopic 3D images of the (A) cathode, (B) cellulose separator, 
(C) anode, and (D) TiO2 separator generated using the micro-CT. (E) the 3D image of the bent 1 × 5 cm2
battery in a different angle and (F) the zoomed-in view of the top of the cell showing no cracking nor 
delamination between the layers.


24

Supplementary Figure 22.The system diagram of the assembled flexible E-ink display system.


25

Supplementary Figure 23. The photo of the assembled flexible E-ink display system with 2 batteries 
attached to the backside of the display panel.


26

Supplementary Figure 24. (A) The discharge curve of a CR1620 Lithium coin cell battery rated at 68 
mAh nominal capacity under continuous 1 mA discharge and pulsed discharge.20 Significant capacity fade 
is observed for the battery with pulsed discharge. (B) Zoomed in view of the current and voltage change of 
the CR1620 battery.


27

Supplementary Figure 25. The detailed breakdown of the pulsed discharge profile.


28

Supplementary Videos

Video S1: Repeated bending of a 1 × 5 cm2 printed battery using a linear motor. (5x speed)

Video S2: The powering of the flexible E-ink display system using two printed battery connected 

in series. 

Video S3: The powering of an LED bulb using a 1 × 5 cm2 battery during various deformations.

Video S4: Low resolution micro-CT scan of the bent 1 × 5 cm2 battery.

Video S5: High resolution micro-CT scan of a zoomed-in segment of the bent 1 × 5 cm2 battery.


29

Supplementary References

1.
Wang, S.J., Meng, Y.S., Shin, J., You, J.-M., Lee, J.Z., Kumar, R., Yin, L., Wang, J., and 
Meng, S. (2016). Deposition of ZnO on bismuth species towards a rechargeable Zn-based 
aqueous battery. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys 18, 26376–26382.

2.
Kumar, R., Shin, J., Yin, L., You, J.-M., Meng, Y.S., and Wang, J. (2017). All-Printed, 
Stretchable Zn-Ag2O Rechargeable Battery via Hyperelastic Binder for Self-Powering 
Wearable Electronics. Advanced Energy Materials 7, 1602096.

3.
Braam, K.T., Volkman, S.K., and Subramanian, V. (2012). Characterization and optimization 
of a printed, primary silver–zinc battery. Journal of Power Sources 199, 367–372.

4.
Berchmans, S., Bandodkar, A.J., Jia, W., Ramírez, J., Meng, Y.S., and Wang, J. (2014). An 
epidermal alkaline rechargeable Ag–Zn printable tattoo battery for wearable electronics. J. 
Mater. Chem. A 2, 15788–15795.

5.
Kettlgruber, G., Kaltenbrunner, M., Siket, C.M., Moser, R., Graz, I.M., Schwödiauer, R., and 
Bauer, S. (2013). Intrinsically stretchable and rechargeable batteries for self-powered 
stretchable electronics. J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 5505–5508.

6.
Winslow, R., Wu, C.H., Wang, Z., Kim, B., Keif, M., Evans, J., and Wright, P. (2013). 
Development and manufacture of printable next-generation gel polymer ionic liquid 
electrolyte for Zn/MnO2batteries. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 476, 012085.

7.
Yan, C., Wang, X., Cui, M., Wang, J., Kang, W., Foo, C.Y., and Lee, P.S. (2014). Stretchable 
Silver-Zinc Batteries Based on Embedded Nanowire Elastic Conductors. Advanced Energy 
Materials 4, 1301396.

8.
Gaikwad, A.M., Whiting, G.L., Steingart, D.A., and Arias, A.C. (2011). Highly Flexible, 
Printed Alkaline Batteries Based on Mesh-Embedded Electrodes. Advanced Materials 23, 
3251–3255.

9.
Braam, K., and Subramanian, V. (2015). A Stencil Printed, High Energy Density Silver Oxide 
Battery Using a Novel Photopolymerizable Poly(acrylic acid) Separator. Advanced Materials 
27, 689–694.

10. Ho, C.C., Murata, K., Steingart, D.A., Evans, J.W., and Wright, P.K. (2009). A super ink jet 

printed zinc–silver 3D microbattery. J. Micromech. Microeng. 19, 094013.

11. Gaikwad, A.M., Zamarayeva, A.M., Rousseau, J., Chu, H., Derin, I., and Steingart, D.A. 

(2012). Highly Stretchable Alkaline Batteries Based on an Embedded Conductive Fabric. 
Advanced Materials 24, 5071–5076.

12. Sun, K., Wei, T.-S., Ahn, B.Y., Seo, J.Y., Dillon, S.J., and Lewis, J.A. (2013). 3D Printing of 

Interdigitated Li-Ion Microbattery Architectures. Advanced Materials 25, 4539–4543.


30

13. Hilder, M., Winther-Jensen, B., and Clark, N.B. (2009). Paper-based, printed zinc–air battery. 

Journal of Power Sources 194, 1135–1141.

14. Kumar, R., Johnson, K.M., Williams, N.X., and Subramanian, V. (2019). Scaling Printable 

Zn–Ag2O Batteries for Integrated Electronics. Advanced Energy Materials 9, 1803645.

15. Park, S.-H., King, P.J., Tian, R., Boland, C.S., Coelho, J., Zhang, C. (John), McBean, P., 

McEvoy, N., Kremer, M.P., Daly, D., et al. (2019). High areal capacity battery electrodes 
enabled by segregated nanotube networks. Nature Energy 4, 560–567.

16. Blue Spark Battery Products https://www.bluesparktechnologies.com/index.php/products-

and-services/battery-products/ultra-thin-series.

17. Enfucell 
Soft 
Battery 
Data 
Sheet 

https://asiakas.kotisivukone.com/files/enfucell.kotisivukone.com/Dokumentit/Enfucell_Soft
Battery_specifications_2019-05-15.pdf.

18. Imprint 
Energy 
ZincPoly 
8349 
Battery 
Specification 

https://www.imprintenergy.com/s/Imprint-Energy-ZincPoly-8349-Battery-Datasheet-
Rev22.pdf.

19. BrightVolt 
452229-14XT 
Data 
SHeet 
https://www.brightvolt.com/wp-

content/uploads/2018/06/452229-14XT.pdf.

20. Renata 
CR1620 
Li 
Battery 
Data 
Sheet 

https://www.renata.com/fileadmin/downloads/productsheets/lithium/3V_lithium/CR1620.pdf.


