 
1

X-ray linear dichroic ptychography 

 

Yuan Hung Lo1,2, Jihan Zhou1, Arjun Rana1, Drew Morrill3, Christian Gentry3, Bjoern Enders4, 
Young-Sang Yu4, Chang-Yu Sun5, David Shapiro4, Roger Falcone4, Henry Kapteyn3, Margaret 

Murnane3, Pupa U. P. A. Gilbert5, and Jianwei Miao1† 

 

1Department of Physics and Astronomy and California NanoSystems Institute, University of 

California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 

2Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. 

3JILA and Department of Physics , University of Colorado and National Institute of Standards and Technology 

(NIST), Boulder, CO 80309, USA. 

4Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 

5Department of Physics, Materials Science and Engineering, Chemistry, and Geoscience, University of Wisconsin, 

Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA. 

†Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.M. (email: miao@physics.ucla.edu) 

 

ABSTRACT 

Biominerals such as seashells, corals skeletons, bone, and enamel are optically anisotropic 

crystalline materials with unique nano- and micro-scale organization that translates into 

exceptional macroscopic mechanical properties, providing inspiration for engineering new and 

superior biomimetic structures. Here we use particles of Seriatopora aculeata coral skeleton as a 

model and demonstrate, for the first time, x-ray linear dichroic ptychography. We map the 

aragonite (CaCO3) crystal c-axis orientations in coral skeleton with 35 nm spatial resolution. 

Linear dichroic phase imaging at the O K-edge energy shows strong polarization-dependent 

contrast and reveals the presence of both narrow (< 35°) and wide (> 35°) c-axis angular spread in 

sub-micrometer coral particles. These x-ray ptychography results were corroborated using 4D 

scanning transmission electron nano-diffraction on the same particles. Evidence of co-oriented but 

disconnected corallite sub-domains indicates jagged crystal boundaries consistent with formation 

by amorphous nanoparticle attachment. Looking forward, we anticipate that x-ray linear dichroic 

ptychography can be applied to study nano-crystallites, interfaces, nucleation and mineral growth 

of optically anisotropic materials with sub-ten nanometers spatial resolution in three dimensions.  


 
2

INTRODUCTION 

Humans have been using biogenic materials as tools since the dawn of humanity. Biominerals such 

as bone, teeth, seashells, and coral skeletons exhibit remarkable mechanical properties and 

complex hierarchical organization (1). Due to these unique characteristics, biominerals often 

outperform their geologic or synthetic inorganic counterparts, thus attracting significant interest in 

understanding the mechanisms of the biologically-controlled mineralization processes for modern 

nanotechnology (2). Careful understanding of the three-dimensional arrangement of biominerals 

has important engineering implications, and has led to bioinspired materials that outperform non-

biomimetic, inorganic synthetic analogs (3). 

One of the most common natural biominerals exists in the form of calcium carbonate 

(CaCO3), which occurs in bacteria, algae, marine organisms and humans (4). CaCO3 absorb light 

anisotropically, such that the π-bonded p orbitals of O and C atoms parallel to the crystal c-axis 

exhibit maximum absorption when aligned parallel to linearly polarized light. The absorption 

intensity changes with a cos2 law with respect to the azimuthal orientation, and reflects the 

orientation of the carbonate groups in the crystal. This information can reveal structural and 

mechanical properties in CaCO3 biominerals (5). Coral biomineralization is subject of intense 

studies, and the mechanisms of crystal nucleation and growth in coral skeletons are only beginning 

to be revealed (6, 7). 

The optical anisotropy in CaCO3 has been leveraged in polarized visible light microscopy 

to study macroscopic biomineral structure and formation mechanisms (8, 9), and with imaging 

polarimetry to study crystal orientation uniformity (10, 11). In the shorter wavelength regime, x-

ray absorption near-edge structure spectroscopy (XANES) has been used to study the orientations 

of various polymorphs of calcium carbonates (12, 13), and polarization-dependent imaging 


 
3

contrast (PIC) mapping using x-ray photoemission electron microscopy (X-PEEM) has been 

demonstrated to quantitatively map crystal orientations in CaCO3 (13, 14). Currently PIC mapping 

mostly uses X-PEEM in reflection geometry to achieve tens of nanometer resolution. However, 

PEEM’s limited achievable spatial resolution (~20 nm), and the confinement to polished two-

dimensional (2D) surfaces are insurmountable limits. Scanning transmission x-ray microscopy 

(STXM) has taken advantage of dichroic contrast to study polymer fibers (15) to resolve 30 nm 

features, but it is also limited in achievable spatial resolution (~20 nm) by the focusing optics, 

which have impractical efficiency and working distance.  

Although macroscopic morphologies in biominerals have been studied extensively, their 

nanoscopic structures are still not studied routinely in a quantitative fashion, mostly due to the lack 

of a proper transmission microscope that offers bulk-sensitive information beyond 5 nm of depth, 

with spatial resolution better than a few tens of nm. But with the development of high brilliance 

synchrotron radiation facilities worldwide, advancements in high-resolution imaging techniques, 

and the increasing availability of insertion device x-ray sources providing polarization control, 

such as elliptically polarizing undulators (EPU), new synchrotron-based tools are now becoming 

available for probing nanoscale crystal orientation in CaCO3 minerals and biominerals. 

Coherent diffractive imaging (CDI) is such a promising tool for high resolution studies of 

biominerals (16, 17), which measures the diffraction pattern of a sample and inverts it to a high 

resolution image using iterative algorithms (18). CDI was first applied to image the hierarchical 

structure of bone at the nanometer scale resolution, revealing the spatial relationship of mineral 

crystals to collagen matrix at different stages of mineralization (19). In particular, ptychography, 

a powerful scanning CDI technique (17, 20, 21), has demonstrated 5 nm resolution (22) and has 

attracted significant attention for its general applicability. Ptychography acquires a series of 


 
4

diffraction patterns from spatially overlapping illumination probes on a sample, with phase 

retrieval algorithms to iteratively recover the incident wave and complex exit wave of the sample. 

This non-invasive transmission technique offers high resolution imaging of sponge glass fiber (23), 

dentine (24), bone (25) and frozen-hydrated cells (26) in two and three dimensions. Vectorial 

version of ptychography for studying anisotropic materials has been demonstrated with visible 

light to study biominerals (27), and with x-rays to perform structural and chemical mapping of a 

meteorite sample (28). Synchrotron-based x-ray dichroic ptychography should not only be able to 

probe materials with the same orientational sensitivity as conventional techniques such as X-

PEEM, but can do so with higher spatial resolution, bulk sensitivity, with both absorption and 

phase information, and in three dimensions. 

In this work, we present the first x-ray linear dichroic ptychography of biominerals using 

the aragonite (CaCO3) coral skeleton of Seriatopora aculeata as a test sample. We imaged several 

coral skeleton particles on and off the O K-edge π* peak and observed significant contrast 

differences between absorption and phase images. We then performed PIC mapping using three 

linear dichroic ptychography absorption images to quantitatively determine crystal c-axis 

orientations in the coral with 35 nm spatial resolution. We also qualitatively validated our 

ptychography results by correlating the ptychography PIC maps with 4D scanning transmission 

electron microscopy (STEM) (29), a scanning nano-electron diffraction technique for probing 

crystal orientations in crystalline materials. Our results reveal that at the nanoscale, crystallite 

orientations can be narrowly distributed, as is characteristic of spherulitic crystals, but also 

randomly distributed in submicron particles. Moreover, we verified, for the first time in any 

biomineral, linear dichroic phase contrast at a pre-edge energy below the absorption resonance. 

The use of such phase contrast may lead to new dose-efficient dichroic imaging techniques for 


 
5

studying anisotropic biominerals, and has important implications for understanding the nanoscale 

organization of crystallites in biominerals.  

 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

Seriatopora aculeata skeleton preparation  

The S. aculeata coral skeleton used in this study was a pencil-thick, short and tapered branch, 

termed a nubbin (fig. S1). An entire S. aculeata coral skeleton, ~10×10×10 cm3 in size, was 

purchased from Tropical Fish World, El Cerrito, CA. To remove the tissue and obtain a clean 

aragonite skeleton the living coral was immersed in 5% sodium hypochloride in water (Chlorox®). 

After 7 days of bleaching, the skeleton was washed twice in DD-H2O for 5 minutes and twice in 

ethanol for 5 minutes.  A ~1 cm long nubbin, was broken off from the rest of the coral skeleton, 

placed in an agate mortar and immersed in 100% ethanol, then gently fractured by an agate pestle 

into micrometer-sized grains. The resulting ethanol suspension was sonicated for 2 minutes for 

further dispersion, and the supernatant solution was transferred by pipette onto a 200 mesh copper 

transmission electron microscopy (TEM) grid coated with carbon film and air-dried for 24 hours 

before data acquisition. 

 

X-ray linear dichroic ptychography 

Soft X-ray ptychographic microscopy measurements were performed at the imaging branch of the 

undulator beamline (7.0.1) – COherent Scattering and MICroscopy (COSMIC) – at the Advanced 

Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) (30, 31). COSMIC provides 

monochromatic soft x-rays with energies variable from 250 to 2,500 eV, spanning the carbon and 

sulfur K-edges. Coherent and monochromatic x-rays were focused onto the sample using a Fresnel 


 
6

zone plate, with 45 nm outer zone width, and a total coherent flux of approximately 109 

photons/s at the sample position. The TEM grid containing the sample was secured using a 

Hummingbird 3 mm half-grid tip, then mounted onto a standard FEI CompuStage sample 

manipulator derived from an FEI CM200 series TEM. Diffraction data were recorded with a 

1kFSCCD (32), a fast charge-coupled device (CCD) camera developed by LBNL that is capable 

of 50 frames/sec, 15-bits dynamic range with a 12-bit analog-to-digital converter and with a 1 

megapixel detector. Diffraction patterns were acquired without a beamstop and were 

automatically pre-processed onsite.  

Ptychographic measurements consisted of single diffraction patterns recorded at each 

scan point with 200 or 300 ms dwell time and scanned in a square grid with 40 nm steps to 

cover an approximately 1.5×1.5 µm field of view, with a reconstruction pixel size of 10.1 

nm/pixel. Linear dichroic ptychography data were collected at 0º, 45º, 90º and 135º linear 

polarizations. The 0º and 90º data were collected with the EPU tuned to horizontal and vertical 

polarizations, respectively. Since, at the time of these measurements, only linear horizontal and 

vertical polarizations were under remote computer control, the TEM grid was physically rotated 

clockwise in-plane by ~135º with respect to the upstream beam, and then the 45º and 135º data 

were collected using the horizontal and vertical polarizations again.  

The same linear dichroic data with 4 polarization angles were collected at two x-ray 

energies around the O K-edge π* peak: one at pre-edge (534.5 eV, or 1.5 eV before the π* peak) 

and another at on-peak (536.5 eV, or 0.5 eV after the π* peak maximum). The pre-edge energy 

used was estimated to be near the negative phase peak and thus had the most negative phase 

shift relative to vacuum, to achieve optimal phase contrast. The on-peak energy was chosen to 

be slightly off the maximum absorption peak at 536 eV to reduce beam absorption and 


 
7

attenuation caused by specimen thickness. The resonant energy at the O edge rather than the C 

edge was chosen in this study because the 3:1 ratio of O to C in CaCO3 means imaging at O 

resonance gives 3x greater signal-to-noise ratio and contrast. After all data were acquired, 

ptychography reconstructions were performed using regularized ptychographic iterative engine 

(rPIE) (33) with 300 iterations, with 𝛽!"# = 0.7 and 𝛽$%!"& = 0.7, and updating the initial probe 

only after the 100th iteration.  

 

X-ray absorption spectroscopy  

Scanning transmission x-ray microscopy with x-ray absorption spectroscopy (STXM-XAS) was 

measured at ALS beamline 7.0.1.2. The spectromicroscopy data were recorded with 5 ms dwell 

time and proceeded with 60 nm steps in a square grid scan, with energies spanning the entire O 

K-edge from 525 to 555 eV. Energy scan steps proceeded with 0.5 eV steps from 525 to 530 

eV, then 0.2 eV from 530 to 542 eV, and finally with 0.5 eV steps from 542 to 555 eV. The 

same energy scan parameters were repeated for x-ray linear polarizations at 0º, 45º, 90º, and 

135º. All spectra are normalized via subtraction of the average image from non-resonant 

energies from 525 to 530 eV.   

 
X-ray absorption spectra were generated using the MANTiS software (34). STXM-XAS 

images at each linear polarization were first converted to optical densities (OD) using fully 

transmitting regions in the specimen, then aligned using cross correlation. Principal component 

analysis (PCA) was used to reduce the dimensionality of spectral information in the images to 

obtain absorption signatures of the coral (fig. S2). The first principal component spectrum at 

each polarization, which represents the average absorption present in the coral, was shown in 

this work.  


 
8

 

Ptychographic Polarization-dependent Imaging Contrast (PIC) mapping 

Crystallographic c-axis orientations in coral particles were calculated using PIC mapping (14), a 

method that uses linear dichroism effects to quantitatively determine the angular orientation of 

micro- and nanocrystals. We used the closed-form expression to compute the in-plane angle, 𝜒, 

and out-of-plane angle, 𝛾, of the crystal c-axis with respect to the linear polarization vector. Here, 

in-plane is defined as the TEM grid plane that is perpendicular to the x-ray beam. Given three EPU 

polarization angles 0º, 90º and 45º, the electric field vectors at each polarization is 𝐸)⃗' = 𝐸(𝑥,, 𝐸)⃗) =

𝐸(𝑦,, and 𝐸)⃗* = .𝐸)⃗' + 𝐸)⃗)0/√2 , where 𝑥, and 𝑦, are unit vectors. The unit vector describing the c-

axis orientation is 𝑐̂ = 𝑥, sin 𝜒 cos 𝛾 + 𝑦, sin 𝜒 sin 𝛾 + 𝑧̂ cos 𝜒.  For the ith polarization, the signal 

intensity is 𝐼+ = 𝐼, + 𝐼-.𝐸)⃗+ ∙ 𝑐⃗0, where 𝐼, and 𝐼- are positive fitting parameters. Algebraic 

manipulations of the three components yield 

cos) 𝛾 = 1

2 +
𝐼' − 𝐼)

2[(𝐼' − 𝐼))) + (𝐼' + 𝐼) − 2𝐼*))]'/) 
(1)

sin) 𝜒 = 1

𝐼-

[(𝐼' − 𝐼))) + (𝐼' + 𝐼) − 2𝐼*))]'/)
(2)

 
Solving for 𝛾 and 𝜒 in the above equations gives the in-plane and out-of-plane c-axis 

angles, respectively. The range of 𝜒 contracts and expands as 𝐼- varies, but the relative difference 

in 𝜒 between particles remains consistent. In this work, 𝐼- was arbitrarily set to 2. Since 

ptychography data at four EPU linear polarizations were collected, two sets of polarizations were 

used to calculate two PIC maps for each coral particle: the first set used 0º, 45º, and 90º, the second 

set used 0º, 135º, and 90º.  

 


 
9

PEEM-PIC mapping 

The PIC maps were acquired using the PEEM-3 instrument on beamline 11.0.1.1 at ALS. Nine 

partly overlapping 60 µm x 60 µm PIC map data were acquired and then tiled and blended in 

Photoshop®. For each PIC map, a stack of 19 PEEM images were acquired on-peak at the O K-

edge π* energy as the linear polarization from the undulator was rotated from 0° to 90° in 5° 

increments. The 19 images were mounted as a stack and analyzed for fully quantitative crystal 

orientation information in each 60-nm pixel using the GG Macros in Igor Pro Carbon®. As coral 

skeletons are made of <99.9% aragonite (CaCO3) and <0.1% organic matrix (35), the 

contribution of organics to oxygen spectroscopy is <<0.1%, which is not expected to exhibit 

any polarization dependence. Thus, PIC mapping in ptychography or PEEM only displays 

aragonite crystal orientations. 

 

4D-STEM and electron tomography 

Scanning nano-diffraction (4D-STEM) data and electron tomography data were collected at the 

National Center for Electron Microscopy, Molecular Foundry, LBNL. Both methods were used on 

precisely the same three particles already analyzed with ptychography. A Titan 60-300 equipped 

with an Orius 830 detector (Gatan, Pleasanton, CA) and four windowless silicon drift EDS 

detectors (FEI super-X) were used with a solid angle of 0.7 srad. The microscope operated in 

STEM mode at 200 kV with an electron beam current of ~16 pA for 4D-STEM datasets and ~40 

pA for STEM imaging. The 4D-STEM diffraction data were taken on Orius CCD with a camera 

length of 300 mm using a convergence angle ~0.51mrad, with 64 × 64 square grid scan positions. 

Before clustering of 4D-STEM data, individual diffraction patterns were preprocessed by aligning 


 
10

the center of mass of the main beam to the image center to correct for horizontal and vertical shifts 

introduced by beam tilt.  

 
A diffraction similarity map was generated using agglomerative hierarchical clustering 

(36) of 4D-STEM data. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering initializes all data points, or 

individual diffraction patterns, as independent clusters. The algorithm then computed the 

proximity between every pair of data points using a specified distance metric (e.g. Euclidean 

distance, cosine similarity, correlation). Next, pairs of data points were linked to one another using 

a specified linkage metric (e.g. average distance, centroid distance, nearest neighbor distance) to 

form new grouped clusters, and repeat until all data points were linked together into a hierarchical 

tree. Finally, the consistency of the resulting clusters was verified by evaluating the distances 

between each pair of neighboring clusters in the tree. A distance that is greater than a predefined 

inconsistency score constituted a natural partition between clusters, such that separate clusters 

were considered to be truly independent. This clustering was performed in MATLAB 

(MathWorks) environment with the “linkage” function, using correlation as the distance metric, 

nearest neighbor as the linkage metric, and an inconsistency score of 1.2. 

Electron tomography was performed using the GENeralized Fourier Iterative 

REconstruction (GENFIRE) (37), an algorithm that has been used to determine the 3D and 4D 

atomic structure in materials with unprecedented detail (38–40). Before reconstruction, STEM 

projections were aligned to a common tilt axis using the center of mass and common line methods 

(41). Next, a constant background – the average value in an empty region of the image – was 

subtracted from each projection, and the process was optimized by minimizing the differences 

between all common lines and a reference common line. the projections were then normalized to 

have the same total sum, since the integrated 3D density of the isolated coral particle should be 


 
11

consistent across all tilt angles. The preprocessed projections were used in GENFIRE 

reconstruction, which ran for 100 iterations with oversampling ratio of 2 (42), 0.7-pixel 

interpolation distance, and the enforcement of positivity and support constraints.  

 

RESULTS 

Figure 1 shows the experimental schematic of linear dichroic x-ray ptychography experiment. 

Fig. 1C shows the O K-edge spectra obtained from STXM-XAS at each linear polarization, 

showing the expected dependence of x-ray absorption on the relative angle between crystal c-

axis and x-ray polarization (13). The π* peak absorption occurs around 536 eV and is maximum 

when x-ray polarization is parallel to the π orbitals of C and O in the trigonal planar carbonate 

group. The broad σ* peak occurs around 547 eV and is anticorrelated with the π* peak.  

To study the effects of linear dichroism on the absorptive component of the coral’s 

complex exit wave, we imaged 3 coral particles at two energies, pre- and on-peak. Figure 2A 

shows on-peak ptychography absorption contrast images of 3 coral particles at 0º, 45º, 90º, and 

135º polarizations from top to bottom, and from left to right the three particles are denoted as 

P1, P2 and P3, respectively. Relative contrast within the particles changes dramatically with 

polarization, signifying the presence of differently oriented nanoscale domains in each particle. 

P1 displayed overall smooth features with little internal structures, whereas P2 and P3 contained 

multiple nano-domains and striations. While resonant imaging revealed rich polarization-

dependent absorption contrast due to the linear dichroism, imaging off resonance produced no 

absorption contrast when varying polarizations (fig. S3A). 

To examine the effects of linear dichroism on the phase component of the coral skeleton 

particles’ complex exit wave, we also collected ptychography images at 534.5 eV (Fig. 2B), an 


 
12

energy slightly before the π* peak. In general, the negative phase peak is at lower energy than 

both the positive phase peak and the absorption peak and provides the greatest contrast with 

respect to non-resonant material (43). Phase contrast images reveal sharp boundaries and 

complex surface morphologies in the particles. On the other hand, on-edge phase images of the 

coral particles reveal polarization-dependent contrast that agree very well with on-edge 

absorption images (fig. S3B). According to the Kramers-Kronig relation, the effects of linear 

dichroism in crystal orientation manifests in both components of the complex refractive index. 

But as we observe in ptychography maps, while the effect on absorption is significant on 

resonance (Fig. 2A), the effect on phase is maximum off resonance (Fig. 2B). Resolution of the 

ptychography images is estimated to be 35 nm using the knife-edge method with 10-90% 

intensity cutoff (fig. S4). Given a mass attenuation coefficient (𝜇/𝜌) of 2 × 104 cm2/g for CaCO3 

on O K-edge and a ~50% overlap, each recorded projection absorbed an estimated dose of 1.44 

× 108 Gy. At this dose and estimated resolution no noticeable deterioration was observed in the 

sample (44).  

 
Ptychographic PIC mapping revealed that the orientations of crystals are much more 

diverse at the nanoscale than previously appreciated. As is clear from Fig. 3, and in particular from 

the broad range of colors in all 3 particles in Fig. 3A, and the large width of the histograms in Fig. 

3B, many crystallites are present in what was previously assumed to be single crystals, e.g. P2, or 

two crystals, e.g. P1. These crystallites vary in orientation gradually, as displayed by color 

gradients across all larger domains, as in the mustard color domain of P1, or the green-blue domain 

of P2, or the red-blue domain of P3. There are also unexpected, smaller (~100 nm) domains with 

orientation different from the larger domain, but not randomly oriented as expected from sample 

preparation artifacts, e.g. randomly aggregated particles. These small domains are co-oriented with 


 
13

one another but spatially separate from one another. See for example in P1 the string of smaller 

green crystallites at the bottom of the mustard crystal, or the four green crystallites on the right 

side, or the smaller blue domains within the red domain. Other smaller domains in P2 are the red-

dot crystallites near the edges. P3 shows several blue-green crystals of similar smaller sizes and 

orientations that are interspersed with the rest of the particle, which is shown as red-yellow. These 

nano-crystallites are highly surprising, as they were not revealed by previous methods, such as PIC 

mapping using X-PEEM in Fig. 4. PEEM-PIC mapping shows that the smaller crystalline domains 

in the centers of calcification (CoCs) are randomly oriented (Fig. 4). Ptychography PIC mapping, 

instead, shows that several smaller (~100 nm) crystallites are mis-oriented with respect to the 

larger crystals domains in which they are embedded, but they are co-oriented with one another 

(Fig. 3A). 

To better understand the co-oriented smaller domains, we performed PIC mapping on the 

on-edge linear dichroic ptychography absorption images to quantitatively map c-axis angles in the 

coral particles and analyzed the in-plane (𝛾) and out-of-plane (𝜒) c-axis orientation angles. Since 

Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 only require 3 polarizations to compute the 𝛾 and 𝜒, PIC maps in Fig. 3A were 

calculated using the 0º, 45º and 90º polarization images, and a second set of PIC maps were 

computed using 0º, 135º and 90º polarization images with consistent results (fig. S5). In each PIC 

map, in-plane angles are color-coded according to the coral’s crystal axes relative to the x-ray 

polarization, which is horizontal at 0º. Orientation ranges from 0º to 90º, since angles beyond that 

range are degenerate and cannot be distinguished from contrast alone. The out-of-plane angles 

between the c-axes and x-ray polarization are represented by brightness, such that c-axes aligned 

with the imaging plane are displayed with high brightness, and c-axes that are perpendicular to the 


 
14

imaging plane are shown in low brightness, and is lowest when the axes align directly with the x-

ray beam. 

Histograms of 𝛾 (top) and 𝜒 (bottom) in Fig. 3B present the c-axis angular distribution 

derived from the PIC maps. P1 exhibits two distinct subdomains, within which the angular spread 

is <35°, but these are oriented more than 35° apart from one another. In contrast, P2 and P3 show 

greater sub-micrometer orientational fluctuations that span more than 35°, suggesting that particles 

P2 and P3 comprise many differently oriented nanocrystals from CoCs. To further examine the 

abrupt orientational change between subdomains in P1, we performed STEM tomography on the 

very same P1 particle, which reveal two separate particles on top of each other and thus confirmed 

the ptychography results (fig. S6).  

To further validate the localization and orientation of crystallites observed in ptychography 

PIC maps, we collected scanning electron nano-diffraction 4D-STEM data on particle P3 and 

assessed its nanoscale lattice changes over the entire particle. The converging beam electron 

diffraction (CBED) patterns were analyzed using unsupervised agglomerative hierarchical 

clustering (36) to sort the particle into different regions with similar crystal orientations. Fig. 5A 

shows a STEM image of P3, and Fig. 5B shows the resulting similarity ranking map generated by 

hierarchical clustering. The closer the regions are in color, the more similar their corresponding 

CBED patterns are. Representative CBED patterns from the coral are shown in Fig. 5C, with 

numbers corresponding to the labelled regions in Fig. 5B.  

The CBED patterns reveal variations and similarity in diffraction – hence crystal 

orientations – across the particle. For instance, pattern #1 is similar to pattern #9, and both are in 

close proximity to one another. In contrast, patterns #4 and #6, although within the same region, 

have dissimilar diffraction patterns. Moreover, the similarity ranking map divides the particle P3 


 
15

into sub-regions closely resembling those shown in the ptychography PIC map in Fig. 3A. In 

particular, distinct subdomains in regions #2, #3, #4 and #7 of the similarity ranking map match 

well with the corresponding areas in the ptychographic PIC map. This result serves as further 

confirmation of the orientation heterogeneity within P3. 

 

DISCUSSION 

X-ray linear dichroic ptychography of coral particles shown in Fig. 2A and B unveil strong 

polarization-dependent absorption and phase contrast that is evidence of differently oriented 

subdomains in each particle. Moreover, each particle exhibits diverse structural features and 

contains crystal orientation domains that range in size from tens to hundreds of nanometers. While 

both on-edge absorption and pre-edge phase images reveal fine internal features in the coral 

skeleton particles, phase images seem to be more sensitive to edges and thus show surface 

morphologies and boundaries more clearly. The use of phase information to visualize weakly 

scattering fine features has previously been demonstrated with visible light phase ptychography to 

enhance cellular contrast in live cells (43, 45). In the case of biominerals, the simultaneous phase 

and absorption contrast imaging provided by x-ray ptychography can be used to probe nanoscale 

boundary features beyond the surface, enabling structural study of inter-crystal topology that is 

critical in understanding biomineral nucleation and growth. To the best of our knowledge, this is 

the first demonstration of combined linear dichroic absorption and phase imaging of optically 

anisotropic materials.  

The orientations observed in the main domains of each particle are <35°, as previously 

observed by Benzerara et al., Sun et al., and Coronado et al. (6, 46, 47), and is fully consistent with 

spherulitic crystals (6). PIC maps generated from the x-ray linear dichroic ptychography images 


 
16

(Fig. 2 and fig. S3) provide quantitative crystal orientation information with high resolution, and 

at a depth on the order of 100-500 nm, which is not available with the 5-nm-surface-sensitive X-

PEEM PIC mapping (Fig. 4). At a fine-grain level, the ptychography PIC map of P1 shows the 

presence of two overlaid homogeneous particles, each having a c-axis angular spread <35° (Fig. 

3B). Such narrow angular spread is typical of spherulitic crystal such as those that form the all 

coral skeletons, fills space isotropically with anisotropic crystals, and thus provides the coral 

skeleton with the needed structural support (6).  

Similarly, the main crystalline domains in all three particles P1, P2, and P3 are co-oriented 

within 35°, as expected from spherulitic crystals. Unexpectedly, all three particles exhibit several 

smaller (~100 nm) domains differently oriented with respect to the main domain (Fig. 3A and 3B). 

Since the orientations of these smaller domains are not random, but co-oriented with one another, 

these crystallites cannot be the randomly oriented nanocrystals observed in the CoCs in Fig. 4. 

Note that these smaller domains in corals have not been observed with such detail before, 

presumably because previous studies did not have the capability to detect bulk subdomain 

morphology. Are these co-oriented but disconnected corallites consistent with either of the current 

models proposed for coral skeleton formation? In one model corals form their skeletons by either 

ion-by-ion precipitation from solution (48, 49) in the other by attachment of amorphous precursor 

particles (7). Neither model explicitly predicts the nucleation and growth of co-oriented, 

disconnected crystals.  

The latter are unlikely to result from extraneous contaminants during coral skeleton growth, 

or depositions after the death of the animal, or aggregation of particles after fracturing, as all three 

scenarios would not generate either the co-oriented or the equally sized crystallites consistently 

observed in all three particles. Although additional evidence is needed to fully understand the 


 
17

source and formation mechanism of the observed co-oriented, disconnected crystallites, any model 

for coral skeleton formation must be consistent with their formation.  

One parsimonious explanation is that the three particles analyzed were fractured from 

interfacial regions, at the boundary of two main crystal orientation domains, for instance two 

adjacent fibers. Assuming a non-straight, jagged boundary between two crystal fibers, what 

appears as smaller separate crystallites may be portions of the same larger crystal. This 

parsimonious interpretation does not require a new understanding of coral formation; it is 

consistent with coral formation by attachment of amorphous nanoparticles (7), and crystallinity 

propagating through the amorphous phase one particle at a time (50). In this crystallinity 

originating from two distinct nucleation events would propagate in space until the two crystal 

orientations abut one another. Since they crystallized one particle at a time, their boundary between 

the two adjacent crystal fibers is not a straight plane but a nanoparticulate surface. A cross-section 

of such surface would appear as a jagged edge in a 2D map. The PIC map of the pristine coral 

skeleton geometry in Fig. 4 does indeed show jagged edges between fibers, and therefore supports 

this interpretation. The dashed line in Fig. 4C is a hypothetical fracture line at the jagged interface 

of two fibers, which would result in disconnected but co-oriented crystallites. Thus, the 

observation of the co-oriented smaller crystallites demonstrates the potential of ptychographic PIC 

map in testing hypotheses for coral skeleton nucleation and growth.  

To put ptychographic PIC map’s fine-grain, nanoscale results into the larger perspective, 

we also used X-PEEM to acquire a wide-field of view, lower spatial resolution (60 nm) PIC map 

from another region of the same S. aculeata skeleton (Fig. 4). The X-PEEM PIC map reveals two 

main types of crystallites on a macroscopic level. One type consists of large, micrometer size 

spherulitic crystals with less than 35° angular spread, which resembles P1 and its two narrowly 


 
18

distributed orientations. Another type consists of submicron crystals with randomly oriented c-

axes, localized in the CoCs (Fig. 4), which agrees with P2 and P3 and their more broadly 

distributed angular spreads (Fig. 3B). By correlating nanoscopic ptychography PIC map with its 

microscopic X-PEEM analog, we get a multi-length scale picture of the coral skeleton architecture. 

The co-oriented, disconnected crystallites, however, are not detected by PEEM-PIC mapping, 

because its maximum probing depth is 5 nm at the O K-edge (51). 

Ptychographic PIC mapping is qualitatively validated with 4D-STEM (Fig. 5B), in which 

hierarchical clustering sort the similarity of CBED patterns into a hierarchical tree. Regions with 

similar CBED patterns can be assumed to share the same crystal orientations. Comparison between 

ptychography PIC map of P3 in Fig. 3A and similarity rank map in Fig. 5B show mostly consistent 

subdomains. While it is possible to simulate CBED patterns using a known aragonite model at 

various orientations and match them with experimental patterns to estimate c-axis orientation (52), 

the coral particle’s arbitrary thickness near the center attenuated much of the beam, thereby making 

exact comparison difficult. In the future, more careful sample preparation using focused ion beam 

can produce coral specimens with desired thickness for optimal x-ray and electron transmission. 

Nonetheless, this work demonstrates a new attempt to correlate x-ray ptychography with 4D-

STEM to understand nanoscale crystal orientations in biomaterials.  

There are a few limitations in this work. First, since the aragonite particles studied here are 

randomly oriented polycrystals, x-ray linearly dichroic ptychography images actually measured 

the integrated sum of all c-axes along the beam direction, with contributions to the contrast from 

different nano-crystals. Therefore, PIC maps presented here represent only the average orientations 

in the coral particles. One strategy to overcome this limitation may be to use a ptychographic 

vector nanotomography approach similar to the ones used to study 3D magnetic vector field (53). 


 
19

By doing such vector tomography reconstruction, one should be able to obtain true c-axis 

orientations of voxels in three dimensions. Second, since the coral specimens imaged here were 

ground by a pestle and thus produced uneven surface, the uncontrolled sample morphology makes 

quantitative interpretation of ptychographic phase images more complicated, as linear dichroic 

phase contrast then becomes a function of both specimen thickness and crystal orientation.  

Also, the process of physically grinding the coral skeleton fractured the skeleton into 

particles and may have introduced structural artifacts. This can be alleviated by first embedding 

the specimen in epoxy resin then using focused ion beam (FIB) to make it suitably thin for 

ptychography. Another limitation of the current work is that for simplicity we considered the 

refractive index of aragonite to be a scalar, not a tensor. For fully quantitative x-ray ptychography 

all calculations will have to be re-done considering the tensor refractive index of aragonite (54). 

Although the observation of linear ptychographic phase dichroism is interesting, more careful 

sample preparation and measurements are needed in future studies to extract quantitative c-axis 

orientation information from phase.  

The x-ray linear dichroic ptychography results presented in this work imply an important 

possibility. Conventionally, enhanced polarization-dependent contrast is derived from absorption 

contrast when imaged on elemental absorption edges, with the trade-off that more energy is 

deposited into the sample per unit area and unit time, which inevitably exacerbates sample 

radiation damage. However, as this work has demonstrated, one major benefit of x-ray linear 

dichroic ptychography is that strong polarization-dependent phase contrast is also available when 

imaged off of resonant energy. This suggests that linear dichroic phase contrast imaging offers an 

alternative path to obtaining quantitative crystal orientation insights without having to subject the 

sample to the same radiation dose as absorption edge imaging. This potentially important finding 


 
20

can enable more sophisticated and data-intensive studies. Such dose-efficient technique will be 

especially advantageous when acquiring vector tomography datasets, since many tilt projections 

are needed to achieve high quality 3D reconstruction. So far most linear dichroism studies focused 

on absorption as linear phase dichroism is difficult to obtain experimentally. Therefore, the x-ray 

linear dichroic phase ptychography technique presented here has the potential to become an 

important tool for studying dose-sensitive materials.  

In the future, x-ray linear dichroic ptychography can be applied to image other materials 

such as tooth enamel, bone, seashells, sea urchin spines, polymers, and other classes of optically 

anisotropic materials with sophisticated nanoscale morphologies and crystallinity. It can also be 

used to study intricate mechanisms such as crystal nucleation, self-assembly, phase transitions and 

space-filling growth. In addition, given the ease with which x-ray linear polarization can be tuned 

at synchrotrons, such technique can be readily implemented in existing coherent diffractive 

imaging beamlines, and can be combined with x-ray absorption spectroscopy and x-ray 

fluorescence imaging to produce multidimensional images of heterogeneous samples. As coherent 

flux, data acquisition, and big data technologies continue to advance at synchrotron radiation 

facilities, we envision this linear dichroic ptychography imaging technique becoming part of a 

powerful suite of tools that offer both compositional and orientational information in real time. 

 

CONCLUSION 

In this work we present the first demonstration of x-ray linear dichroic ptychography. By imaging 

three S. aculeata coral skeleton particles at pre- and on-peak at the O K-edge, we observed strong 

polarization-dependent phase and absorption contrasts. Then we performed PIC mapping on the 

dichroic ptychography absorption images to quantitatively estimated c-axis orientations in the 


 
21

corals and observed the presence of two types of previously known crystallites: the main domain 

in each particle with the narrow angular spread < 35° consistent with spherulitic crystals, and with 

the randomly oriented sub-micrometer nanocrystal domains observed in the centers of calcification 

in Acropora skeletons. Finally, we observed ~100 nm crystallites mis-oriented with respect to the 

main domains in each particle but co-oriented with one another, disconnected, interspersed with 

and within larger crystals which are consistent with coral skeleton formation by attachment of 

amorphous particles, which crystallize with jagged edges in both coral fibers and CoCs.  

We also validated the x-ray results with 4D-STEM and confirmed that regions of 

orientational diversity are largely consistent. The observation of strong linear phase dichroism off 

of absorption edge offers the potentially interesting possibility of using phase imaging rather than 

absorption imaging in future linear dichroism studies as a way to alleviate sample radiation 

damage. With further development, we expect x-ray linear dichroic ptychography to become a 

powerful non-destructive tool for probing general classes of optically anisotropic materials such 

as biominerals with sub-ten nanometer resolution in two and three dimensions. 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

We thank Marcus Gallagher-Jones for his guidance on 4D-STEM analysis, and Jared J. Lodico 

and Billy A. Hubbard for their help handling the samples during the ptychography experiments at 

COSMIC. We also gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation for the donation 

of the Quadro K5200 GPU used for this research. Funding: This work was primarily supported 

by STROBE: A National Science Foundation Science & Technology Center under Grant No. 

DMR 1548924. J.M. acknowledges partial support of the Department of Energy (DE-SC0010378) 

for the development of GENFIRE. P.G. gratefully acknowledges 80% support from DOE-BES-


 
22

CSGB-Geosciences grant DE-FG02-07ER15899, and 20% support from NSF-BMAT grant DMR-

1603192. All x-ray experiments were done at the Advanced Light Source, which is supported by 

the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, US Department of Energy under 

Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The 4D-STEM and electron tomography experiments were 

performed at the Molecular Foundry, which is supported by the Office of Science, Office of Basic 

Energy Sciences of the U.S. DOE under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The electron 

tomography data was based on high-angle annular dark-field STEM images. D.M. acknowledges 

support by the Department of Energy National Nuclear Security Administration Stewardship 

Science Graduate Fellowship program, which is provided under grant number DENA0003864. 

Author contributions: J.M. directed the project; Y.H.L., J.M., P.G., C.Y.S., D.S., M.M., and H.K. 

planned the experiments; P.G. provided the samples; J.Z. collected the 4D-STEM and electron 

tomography data; Y.H.L., A.R., C.G., D.M. and D.S. collected the ptychography and STXM data; 

Y.H.L. performed the tomography reconstructions with input from J.M.; Y.H.L. performed PIC 

map analysis; P.G. and C.-Y.S. acquired and processed the PEEM-PIC maps; All authors 

contributed to the discussion and writing of the manuscript. Author Affiliations: H.K. is partially 

employed by KMLabs Inc. Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing 

interests. Data and materials availability: X-ray linear dichroic ptychography data presented in 

this work are available for download at CXIDB, and electron tomography data presented in this 

work are available for download at Mendeley Data. All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in 

the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to 

this paper may be requested from the authors. 

 
REFERENCES 
1.  H. A. Lowenstam, S. Weiner, On Biomineralization (Oxford University Press, 1989). 


 
23

2.  U. G. K. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia, R. O. Ritchie, Bioinspired structural materials. 

Nat. Mater. 14, 23–36 (2015). 

3.  Z. Yin, F. Hannard, F. Barthelat, Impact-resistant nacre-like transparent materials. Science. 

364, 1260–1263 (2019). 

4.  N. K. Dhami, M. S. Reddy, A. Mukherjee, Biomineralization of calcium carbonates and their 

engineered applications: a review. Front. Microbiol. 4 (2013), 
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2013.00314. 

5.  J. Stöhr, K. Baberschke, R. Jaeger, R. Treichler, S. Brennan, Orientation of Chemisorbed 

Molecules from Surface-Absorption Fine-Structure Measurements: CO and NO on Ni(100). 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 47, 381–384 (1981). 

6.  C.-Y. Sun, M. A. Marcus, M. J. Frazier, A. J. Giuffre, T. Mass, P. U. P. A. Gilbert, Spherulitic 

Growth of Coral Skeletons and Synthetic Aragonite: Nature’s Three-Dimensional Printing. 
ACS Nano. 11, 6612–6622 (2017). 

7.  T. Mass, A. J. Giuffre, C.-Y. Sun, C. A. Stifler, M. J. Frazier, M. Neder, N. Tamura, C. V. Stan, 

M. A. Marcus, P. U. P. A. Gilbert, Amorphous calcium carbonate particles form coral 
skeletons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, E7670–E7678 (2017). 

8.  M. J. Olszta, D. J. Odom, E. P. Douglas, L. B. Gower, A New Paradigm for Biomineral 

Formation: Mineralization via an Amorphous Liquid-Phase Precursor. Connect. Tissue Res. 
44, 326–334 (2003). 

9.  I. M. Weiss, N. Tuross, L. Addadi, S. Weiner, Mollusc larval shell formation: amorphous 

calcium carbonate is a precursor phase for aragonite. J. Exp. Zool. 293, 478–491 (2002). 

10.  R. A. Metzler, J. A. Jones, A. J. D’Addario, E. J. Galvez, Polarimetry of Pinctada fucata nacre 

indicates myostracal layer interrupts nacre structure. R. Soc. Open Sci. 4 (2017), 
doi:10.1098/rsos.160893. 

11.  R. A. Metzler, C. Burgess, B. Regan, S. Spano, E. J. Galvez, in The Nature of Light: Light in 

Nature V (International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2014), vol. 9187, p. 918704. 

12.  R. A. Metzler, M. Abrecht, R. M. Olabisi, D. Ariosa, C. J. Johnson, B. H. Frazer, S. N. 

Coppersmith, P. U. P. A. Gilbert, Architecture of Columnar Nacre, and Implications for Its 
Formation Mechanism. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 268102 (2007). 

13.  R. T. DeVol, R. A. Metzler, L. Kabalah-Amitai, B. Pokroy, Y. Politi, A. Gal, L. Addadi, S. Weiner, 

A. Fernandez-Martinez, R. Demichelis, J. D. Gale, J. Ihli, F. C. Meldrum, A. Z. Blonsky, C. E. 
Killian, C. B. Salling, A. T. Young, M. A. Marcus, A. Scholl, A. Doran, C. Jenkins, H. A. Bechtel, 
P. U. P. A. Gilbert, Oxygen Spectroscopy and Polarization-Dependent Imaging Contrast 
(PIC)-Mapping of Calcium Carbonate Minerals and Biominerals. J. Phys. Chem. B. 118, 
8449–8457 (2014). 


 
24

14.  P. U. P. A. Gilbert, A. Young, S. N. Coppersmith, Measurement of c-axis angular orientation 

in calcite (CaCO3) nanocrystals using X-ray absorption spectroscopy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
108, 11350–11355 (2011). 

15.  H. Ade, B. Hsiao, X-ray Linear Dichroism Microscopy. Science. 262, 1427–1429 (1993). 

16.  J. Miao, P. Charalambous, J. Kirz, D. Sayre, Extending the methodology of X-ray 

crystallography to allow imaging of micrometre-sized non-crystalline specimens. Nature. 
400, 342–344 (1999). 

17.  J. Miao, T. Ishikawa, I. K. Robinson, M. M. Murnane, Beyond crystallography: Diffractive 

imaging using coherent x-ray light sources. Science. 348, 530–535 (2015). 

18.  Y. Shechtman, Y. C. Eldar, O. Cohen, H. N. Chapman, J. Miao, M. Segev, Phase Retrieval with 

Application to Optical Imaging: A contemporary overview. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 32, 
87–109 (2015). 

19.  H. Jiang, D. Ramunno-Johnson, C. Song, B. Amirbekian, Y. Kohmura, Y. Nishino, Y. Takahashi, 

T. Ishikawa, J. Miao, Nanoscale Imaging of Mineral Crystals inside Biological Composite 
Materials Using X-Ray Diffraction Microscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 038103 (2008). 

20.  J. M. Rodenburg, H. M. Faulkner, A Phase Retrieval Algorithm for Shifting Illumination. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 85, 4795–4797 (2004). 

21.  P. Thibault, M. Dierolf, A. Menzel, O. Bunk, C. David, F. Pfeiffer, High-resolution scanning x-

ray diffraction microscopy. Science. 321, 379–382 (2008). 

22.  D. A. Shapiro, Y.-S. Yu, T. Tyliszczak, J. Cabana, R. Celestre, W. Chao, K. Kaznatcheev, A. L. D. 

Kilcoyne, F. Maia, S. Marchesini, Y. S. Meng, T. Warwick, L. L. Yang, H. A. Padmore, 
Chemical composition mapping with nanometre resolution by soft X-ray microscopy. Nat. 
Photonics. 8, 765–769 (2014). 

23.  M. E. Birkbak, M. Guizar-Sicairos, M. Holler, H. Birkedal, Internal structure of sponge glass 

fiber revealed by ptychographic nanotomography. J. Struct. Biol. 194, 124–128 (2016). 

24.  I. Zanette, B. Enders, M. Dierolf, P. Thibault, R. Gradl, A. Diaz, M. Guizar-Sicairos, A. Menzel, 

F. Pfeiffer, P. Zaslansky, Ptychographic X-ray nanotomography quantifies mineral 
distributions in human dentine. Sci. Rep. 5, 9210 (2015). 

25.  M. Dierolf, A. Menzel, P. Thibault, P. Schneider, C. M. Kewish, R. Wepf, O. Bunk, F. Pfeiffer, 

Ptychographic X-ray computed tomography at the nanoscale. Nature. 467, 436–439 
(2010). 

26.  J. Deng, Y. H. Lo, M. Gallagher-Jones, S. Chen, A. Pryor, Q. Jin, Y. P. Hong, Y. S. G. Nashed, S. 

Vogt, J. Miao, C. Jacobsen, Correlative 3D x-ray fluorescence and ptychographic 
tomography of frozen-hydrated green algae. Sci. Adv. 4, eaau4548 (2018). 


 
25

27.  P. Ferrand, A. Baroni, M. Allain, V. Chamard, Quantitative imaging of anisotropic material 

properties with vectorial ptychography. Opt. Lett. 43, 763–766 (2018). 

28.  Y. H. Lo, C.-T. Liao, J. Zhou, A. Rana, C. S. Bevis, G. Gui, B. Enders, K. M. Cannon, Y.-S. Yu, R. 

Celestre, K. Nowrouzi, D. Shapiro, H. Kapteyn, R. Falcone, C. Bennett, M. Murnane, J. Miao, 
Multimodal x-ray and electron microscopy of the Allende meteorite. Sci. Adv. 5, eaax3009 
(2019). 

29.  C. Ophus, Four-Dimensional Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (4D-STEM): From 

Scanning Nanodiffraction to Ptychography and Beyond. Microsc. Microanal. 25, 563–582 
(2019). 

30.  R. Celestre, K. Nowrouzi, D. A. Shapiro, P. Denes, J. M. Joseph, A. Schmid, H. A. Padmore, 

Nanosurveyor 2: A Compact Instrument for Nano-Tomography at the Advanced Light 
Source. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 849, 012047 (2017). 

31.  D. A. Shapiro, R. Celestre, P. Denes, M. Farmand, J. Joseph, A. L. D. Kilcoyne, Stefano 

Marchesini, H. Padmore, S. V. Venkatakrishnan, T. Warwick, Y.-S. Yu, Ptychographic 
Imaging of Nano-Materials at the Advanced Light Source with the Nanosurveyor 
Instrument. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 849, 012028 (2017). 

32.  D. Doering, N. C. Andresen, D. Contarato, P. Denes, J. M. Joseph, P. McVittie, J. Walder, J. T. 

Weizeorick, B. Zheng, High speed, direct detection 1k Frame-Store CCD sensor for 
synchrotron radiation. 2011 IEEE Nucl. Sci. Symp. Conf. Rec., 1840–1845 (2011). 

33.  A. Maiden, D. Johnson, P. Li, Further improvements to the ptychographical iterative engine. 

Optica. 4, 736–745 (2017). 

34.  M. Lerotic, R. Mak, S. Wirick, F. Meirer, C. Jacobsen, MANTiS: a program for the analysis of 

X-ray spectromicroscopy data. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 21, 1206–1212 (2014). 

35.  L. Muscatine, C. Goiran, L. Land, J. Jaubert, J.-P. Cuif, D. Allemand, Stable isotopes (δ13C and 

δ15N) of organic matrix from coral skeleton. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 102, 1525–1530 (2005). 

36.  L. Rokach, O. Maimon, in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Handbook, O. Maimon, L. 

Rokach, Eds. (Springer US, Boston, MA, 2005; https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-25465-X_15), 
pp. 321–352. 

37.  A. Pryor, Y. Yang, A. Rana, M. Gallagher-Jones, J. Zhou, Y. H. Lo, G. Melinte, W. Chiu, J. A. 

Rodriguez, J. Miao, GENFIRE: A generalized Fourier iterative reconstruction algorithm for 
high-resolution 3D imaging. Sci. Rep. 7, 10409 (2017). 

38.  Y. Yang, C.-C. Chen, M. C. Scott, C. Ophus, R. Xu, A. Pryor, L. Wu, F. Sun, W. Theis, J. Zhou, 

M. Eisenbach, P. R. C. Kent, R. F. Sabirianov, H. Zeng, P. Ercius, J. Miao, Deciphering 
chemical order/disorder and material properties at the single-atom level. Nature. 542, 75 
(2017). 


 
26

39.  J. Zhou, Y. Yang, Y. Yang, D. S. Kim, A. Yuan, X. Tian, C. Ophus, F. Sun, A. K. Schmid, M. 

Nathanson, H. Heinz, Q. An, H. Zeng, P. Ercius, J. Miao, Observing crystal nucleation in four 
dimensions using atomic electron tomography. Nature. 570, 500–503 (2019). 

40.  X. Tian, D. S. Kim, S. Yang, C. J. Ciccarino, Y. Gong, Y. Yang, Y. Yang, B. Duschatko, Y. Yuan, P. 

M. Ajayan, J. C. Idrobo, P. Narang, J. Miao, Correlating the three-dimensional atomic 
defects and electronic properties of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. 
Nat. Mater., 1–7 (2020). 

41.  M. C. Scott, C.-C. Chen, M. Mecklenburg, C. Zhu, R. Xu, P. Ercius, U. Dahmen, B. C. Regan, J. 

Miao, Electron tomography at 2.4-ångström resolution. Nature. 483, 444 (2012). 

42.  J. Miao, D. Sayre, H. N. Chapman, Phase retrieval from the magnitude of the Fourier 

transforms of nonperiodic objects. JOSA A. 15, 1662–1669 (1998). 

43.  M. Farmand, R. Celestre, P. Denes, A. L. D. Kilcoyne, S. Marchesini, H. Padmore, T. 

Tyliszczak, T. Warwick, X. Shi, J. Lee, Y.-S. Yu, J. Cabana, J. Joseph, H. Krishnan, T. Perciano, 
F. R. N. C. Maia, D. A. Shapiro, Near-edge X-ray refraction fine structure microscopy. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 110, 063101 (2017). 

44.  M. R. Howells, T. Beetz, H. N. Chapman, C. Cui, J. M. Holton, C. J. Jacobsen, J. Kirz, E. Lima, S. 

Marchesini, H. Miao, D. Sayre, D. A. Shapiro, J. C. H. Spence, D. Starodub, An assessment of 
the resolution limitation due to radiation-damage in X-ray diffraction microscopy. J. 
Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 170, 4–12 (2009). 

45.  J. Marrison, L. Räty, P. Marriott, P. O’Toole, Ptychography – a label free, high-contrast 

imaging technique for live cells using quantitative phase information. Sci. Rep. 3 (2013), 
doi:10.1038/srep02369. 

46.  K. Benzerara, N. Menguy, M. Obst, J. Stolarski, M. Mazur, T. Tylisczak, G. E. Brown, A. 

Meibom, Study of the crystallographic architecture of corals at the nanoscale by scanning 
transmission X-ray microscopy and transmission electron microscopy. Ultramicroscopy. 
111, 1268–1275 (2011). 

47.  I. Coronado, M. Fine, F. R. Bosellini, J. Stolarski, Impact of ocean acidification on 

crystallographic vital effect of the coral skeleton. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–9 (2019). 

48.  L. C. Nielsen, D. J. DePaolo, J. J. De Yoreo, Self-consistent ion-by-ion growth model for 

kinetic isotopic fractionation during calcite precipitation. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta. 86, 
166–181 (2012). 

49.  B. R. Constantz, Coral Skeleton Construction: A Physiochemically Dominated Process. 

PALAIOS. 1, 152–157 (1986). 

50.  L. Addadi, S. Weiner, Biomineralization: mineral formation by organisms. Phys. Scr. 89, 

098003 (2014). 


 
27

51.  B. H. Frazer, B. Gilbert, B. R. Sonderegger, G. De Stasio, The probing depth of total electron 

yield in the sub-keV range: TEY-XAS and X-PEEM. Surf. Sci. 537, 161–167 (2003). 

52.  M. Gallagher-Jones, C. Ophus, K. C. Bustillo, D. R. Boyer, O. Panova, C. Glynn, C.-T. Zee, J. 

Ciston, K. C. Mancia, A. M. Minor, J. A. Rodriguez, Nanoscale mosaicity revealed in peptide 
microcrystals by scanning electron nanodiffraction. Commun. Biol. 2, 26 (2019). 

53.  C. Donnelly, M. Guizar-Sicairos, V. Scagnoli, S. Gliga, M. Holler, J. Raabe, L. J. Heyderman, 

Three-dimensional magnetization structures revealed with X-ray vector nanotomography. 
Nature. 547, 328–331 (2017). 

54.  P. Ferrand, M. Allain, V. Chamard, Ptychography in anisotropic media. Opt. Lett. 40, 5144–

5147 (2015). 

 
 
 


 
28

FIGURES 
 

 

Fig. 1. X-ray linear dichroic ptychography imaging setup. (A) Experimental schematic of the 
x-ray linear dichroic diffraction microscope. Horizontally and vertically polarized x-rays incident 
on the specimen as spatially overlapping diffraction patterns are acquired at below (534.5 eV) and 
on (536.5 eV) the O K-edge absorption edge to obtain 0º and 90º polarization data, then sample is 
rotated 135º and measured again to obtain the 45º and 135º data. The diffraction patterns are then 
directly phased to obtain high-resolution polarization-dependent ptychography images, from 
which the absorption images are used to compute the PIC maps. (B) Ptychography absorption 
image of a coral particle used to collect linear dichroic absorption spectrums. (C) Experimental 
XAS spectra of the coral particle at 4 polarizations, showing a dependence of the CaCO3’s π* peak 
intensity on incident x-ray polarization angles.  
 


 
29

 

Fig. 2. X-ray linear dichroic ptychography of coral skeleton particles. (A) Ptychography 
absorption images of 3 aragonite particles recorded on the O K-edge absorption resonance at 536.5 
eV, across 4 linear polarizations (top to bottom: 0º, 45º, 90º and 135º), showing strong polarization-
dependent absorption contrast and revealing nanoscale morphologies ranging from smooth 
homogeneous particles several hundred nm in size to sub-100-nm fine features. (B) Ptychography 
phase images of the same particles and polarizations recorded at an energy slightly before O K-
edge absorption edge of 534.5 eV, showing strong polarization-dependent phase contrast and more 
edge-sensitive features in internal coral structures.  
 


 
30

 

Fig. 3. Ptychography PIC map of aragonite coral skeleton particles. (A) Quantitative PIC maps 
of the 3 aragonite particles, calculated using 0º, 45º and 90º linear dichroic ptychography images. 
Hue (top row) denotes in-plane azimuthal crystal c-axis angle (𝛾) of the crystallite, while 
brightness (bottom row) denotes out-of-plane c-axis angle (𝜒), all ranging from 0º to 90º. P1 
consists of mostly homogeneous orientations, whereas P2 and P3 show much more orientational 
diversity. (B) Histograms of in-plane (𝛾, top) and out-of-plane (𝜒, bottom) angles for the 3 
particles, showing a narrow 𝛾 angular spread for P1 of <35°, and much broader spread for P2 and 
P3 of >35°, suggesting the presence of both spherulitic and randomly oriented submicron 
crystallites at the nanoscopic scale.  

 


 
31

 

Fig. 4. PEEM-PIC map of another sample from the same S. aculeata coral skeleton. The white 
boxes indicate the areas magnified in panel (B) and (C). (A) PIC map, where color (hue and 
brightness) represent the in-plane and off-plane angles of the c-axis with respect to the polarization 
plane. The centers of calcification (CoCs) extend along the vertical line between the two CoCs 
labels, and in another area on the right (B). Spherulitic fiber (F) crystals (e.g. in C) radiate out of 
the CoCs, and their angular spreads are narrowly distributed, always within 35°.  (B) The CoCs 
exhibit randomly oriented and thus randomly colored submicron (200-2000 nm) crystals, which 
have a broadly distributed angular spread. (C) Magnified spherulitic fiber crystals, exhibiting 
jagged edges. The dashed line indicates a hypothetical cut surface, resulting in spatially separate, 
but consistently oriented domains with two interspersed orientations.  
 

 

Fig. 5. Diffraction similarity map from 4D-STEM with hierarchical clustering. (A) STEM 
image of particle P3, which was used to acquire scanning electron nano-diffraction patterns. (B) 
Crystal axis similarity map generated using hierarchical clustering of diffraction patterns. Areas 
with comparable color resemble subdomains with similar crystal orientations. The resulting map 


 
32

qualitatively agrees with the PIC map generated from ptychography PIC mapping (Fig. 3 P3). (C) 
Representative converging beam electron diffraction patterns from various regions of the coral 
particle, co-labeled in B and C, showing nanoscale orientational diversity. Scale bar: 200 nm. 
  
 
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS 
 
Fig. S1. Seriatopora aculeata coral skeleton. 
Fig. S2. STXM-XAS spectral decomposition. 
Fig. S3. X-ray linear dichroic ptychography of coral particles at other energies. 
Fig. S4. Estimated ptychography resolution. 
Fig. S5. Ptychography polarization-dependent contrast (PIC) map of aragonite particles with 
second set of polarizations. 
Fig. S6. Electron tomography of P1. 
Fig. S7. Monochromatic version of Fig. 3 in the main manuscript. 
Fig. S8. Monochromatic version of Fig. S5 in supplementary materials. 
 
 
TEASER 
 
X-ray linear dichroic ptychography of coral skeleton particles reveals crystal orientations with 35 
nm spatial resolution. 
 


