 
1

Surface Josephson plasma waves in a high-temperature superconduc-
tor 
 
Qianbo Lu1,2,3, Anthony. T. Bollinger4, Xi He4,5, Robert Sundling4,6, Ivan Bozovic2,4,5 and 
Adrian Gozar1,2,7,* 
 
1 Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA 
2 Energy Sciences Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT 06516, USA 
3 Shaanxi Institute of Flexible Electronics, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,    
   710072, China 
4 Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA 
5 Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA  
6 Zensoft, Inc., Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA 
7 Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA  
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Electron density oscillations with acoustic dispersions and sustained at bounda-
ries between different media provide information about surface and interface prop-
erties of hetero-structures. In ultra-thin metallic films these plasmonic excitations 
are heavily damped. Superconductivity is predicted to reduce dissipation allowing 
detection of these resonances. Emerging low-loss interface Cooper-pair waves 
have been studied  before, however, the observation of surface-confined Joseph-
son plasmons has remained elusive. Here, we report on generation and coupling 
to these excitations in an ultrathin single-crystal film of high-temperature super-
conductor La1.85Sr0.15CuO4. The film becomes brighter than Au below the critical 
temperature when probed with sub-gap THz photons. We show that the enhanced 
signal in the superconducting state, which can be visualized with a spatial resolu-
tion better than λ/3,000, originates from near-field coupling of light to surface Jo-
sephson plasmons. Our results open a path towards non-invasive investigation of 
enhanced superconductivity in artificial multilayers, buried interface states in top-
ological hetero-structures, and non-linear phenomena in Josephson devices. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Propagating sound-like collective modes in superfluids are converted to higher-energy plasma 
modes in superconductors1. Several decades ago, low-lying excitations with linear dispersions 
were detected in the microwave region, in aluminum films2. These are known as Carlson-Goldman 
modes. They consist of balanced oscillations of supercurrents and normal carriers3 and are 
overdamped except in a narrow region close to Tc. In thin films and superlattices, a second type of 
superfluid acoustic mode should exist, where the electromagnetic field is confined to the interfaces 
between superconducting and dielectric regions4. Two main obstacles make the observation of 
these excitations difficult for traditional, far-field, optical techniques5-7. One is sensitivity, i.e. the 
capability to distinguish surface modes from bulk contributions. The other is generic to acoustic 
branches and entails overcoming the momentum mismatch between free-space photons and 


 
2

gapless plasmons. This can be realized in principle by coupling the evanescent waves through a 
prism, by periodic nano-fabricated arrays, or by bringing a nano-sized light source close to the 
sample6,8,9. Artificial periodic corrugation was indeed used to observe the emergence of microwave 
surface waves in superconductors10-12. These studies highlighted the role of reduced dissipation in 
the superfluid state and established these materials as candidates for temperature-tunable plas-
monic structures10,13. In this work we use the second, scattering-based, approach, see Fig. 1, which 
has the benefit of increased spatial resolution due to the nanometer probe size. 
 
There is also a practical interest in materials hosting stacks of conductive metallic sheets ordered 
with atomic scale precision as they can be used as building blocks for plasmonic devices. Along 
with doped semiconductor superlattices or modern two-dimensional (2D) materials, superconduct-
ing cuprates are examples of such layered systems14-16. Coupling mechanisms and the requirement 
of large momentum transfers for mapping dispersion branches gave electron energy loss spectros-
copy the leading role in the study of plasmons, including pioneering work which enabled the ex-
tension of this concept to surfaces and interfaces17. Potential applications are met with substantial 
challenges because of electrical losses in conventional metallic structures18. The same problem is 
present and amplified in the normal state of superconductors with a high critical temperature (Tc). 
Topological protection was found to strongly suppress damping of acoustic plasmon excitations 
propagating on the surface of topological insulators19,20. Dissipation is also expected to be signif-
icantly reduced below Tc in superconductors4. Optical probing of these materials in the sub-gap 
regime are of interest because below Tc they are predicted to support low-loss plasmon waves and 
confinement of the photon field at deep sub-wavelength scales13. Near-field optics brings in the 
additional advantage of higher spatial resolution along with sub-surface sensitivity21. For high-Tc 
cuprates, the inherent non-linearity of the Josephson coupling between the superconducting CuO2 
planes may enable photonic applications exploiting light-matter interactions in the THz range22, 
with superfluid surface plasmon excitations predicted to play a special role7,23,24. The main result 
of this work is the observation of these modes in strongly anisotropic single crystal superconduc-
tors, where their energy and dispersions depend crucially on the Josephson coupling between ad-
jacent layers. 
 
Systems of coupled metallic layers harbor a variety of plasmonic branches and here we describe 
their salient features (see also Supplementary Note 4 and Supplementary Figure 3). There is a very 
large energy cost associated with excitations of plasmons in bulk metals. If the same materials are 
confined to 2D, this energy becomes vanishingly small in the long-wavelength limit; the oscillation 
frequency scales as ω(q → 0) ∝ q1/2, where q is the in-plane momentum25. Quasi-2D surface ex-
citations confined to planar interfaces between media with dielectric permittivities of opposite sign 
are also gapless but they display a sound-like dispersion ω(q → 0) ∝ q, see for example ref. 9. 
Interestingly, a change from the expected square root to linear dispersion for 2D electronic states 
is also generated by bulk-crystal screening effects: examples are the acoustic surface plasmons in 
metals such as those in Be(0001), ref.26. A cross-over between these two regimes can be achieved 
as well in a configuration where the 2D electron gas is screened by the proximity of a conductive 
planar electrode/gate12, or by stacking 2D conductive and insulating layers in alternation on top of 
one another, ref. 27. The latter geometry exhibits the (quasi-)2D to 3D panoply of gapped or gapless 
plasmon dispersions ω(q, kz) as dictated by kz, the momentum perpendicular to the planes28. In 
addition to these propagating guided modes, superlattices also display their characteristic surface-


 
3

confined acoustic modes, where the electric and magnetic fields decay exponentially with the dis-
tance both inside and outside the layered material6,29. 
 

In high-Tc copper oxides the normal state transport is extremely anisotropic: it is metallic in the 
ab-plane (parallel to the CuO2 layers) and insulating/incoherent in the perpendicular, c-axis, direc-
tion. Below Tc, copper oxides behave like a series array of intrinsic Josephson junctions14. Tun-
neling between CuO2 planes allows propagation of bulk plasmons only above ωJ, the screened 
Josephson plasma energy 6,8,23. Josephson plasma edge can be probed with far-field techniques and 
its measured value ranges from ωJ ~50 GHz in Ba2Sr2CaCu2O8 (ref. 30) to ~1.5 THz in La2-xSrx-
CuO4 (ref. 31) and even higher in YBa2Cu4O8 (ref. 32). Surface Josephson plasma waves (SJPWs) 
remain the only excitations with acoustic dispersion in these materials. An anisotropic two-fluid 
model was shown to capture the dielectric properties of the copper oxides33: 
 

𝜀𝜀𝛼𝛼(𝜔𝜔) = 𝜀𝜀∞,𝛼𝛼 − 
𝜔𝜔pS,𝛼𝛼
2

𝜔𝜔2 − 
𝜔𝜔pN,𝛼𝛼
2

𝜔𝜔2  +  𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝜔𝜔 ,        𝛼𝛼 = 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎, 𝑐𝑐                                (1) 

 
Here ‘S’ and ‘N’ stand for the superfluid and normal components, ωp is the plasma frequency (for 
the c-axis direction ωJ = ωpS,c/√ε∞,c) and Γ is the scattering rate. The first term in Eq. (1) follows 
from the London model and the second is a Drude-model description of the uncondensed carriers.  
In optimally doped La1.85Sr0.15CuO4 (LSCO) the ratio of the in-plane to the c-axis superfluid 
plasma frequencies is ωpS,c/ωpS,ab ≈ 25 at low temperatures31,34. 
 
RESULTS 
 
Film synthesis and near-field data  
 
We achieved coupling to SJPWs in a 13 nm thick LSCO film by using a customized cryogenic 
system based on Atomic Force Microscopy combined with Scanning Near-Field Optical Micros-
copy35,36 (AFM-SNOM), see Fig. 1, Methods and Supplementary Note 1. For film synthesis, we 
have used an advanced Atomic-Layer-by-Layer Molecular Beam Epitaxy (ALL-MBE) system, a 
technique proven to provide the highest-quality, single-crystal LSCO films with atomically smooth 
surfaces and interfaces37. The surface morphology and crystalline structure of the film were mon-
itored by reflection high-energy electron diffraction, in real time. A source of pure ozone was used 
to ensure sufficient oxidation under high-vacuum conditions. Single-crystal LaSrAlO4 substrates 
were polished perpendicular to the crystallographic [001] direction. The films are epitaxially 
locked to the substrate and pseudomorphic; the CuO2 layers are parallel to the LSCO film surface. 
During the growth, we kept the ozone partial pressure at p = 2 × 10-5 Torr and substrate temperature 
at Ts = 650 ºC. To protect the film surface, we cover the films in situ with 10 nm thick layer of 
gold, deposited at room temperature. The device shown in the inset of Fig. 1b was patterned using 
photolithography and Argon-ion milling the LSCO film into a 10 mm long, 20 μm wide strip with 
64 lateral leads to large contact pads. The protective gold layer was removed from the active LSCO 
strip by an appropriate gold etch. 
 
The AFM-SNOM system was optimized for laser light access and large collection throughput, as 
well as for AFM tip positioning and device visualization38, see Fig. 1. All data shown here were 
acquired with photon energies ω = 26.7 cm-1 (0.8 THz or 3.52 meV), corresponding to a 


 
4

wavelength λ = 375 μm. Gold pads contacting Hall bar devices were used as the optical reference 
material. AFM-SNOM scans with typical size of 1.3 μm ⨉ 8 μm (more than 2 orders of magnitude 
smaller than the photon wavelength) were taken in the temperature range 20 K < T < 300 K. These 
images are shown in Fig. 2a,b. The near-field signal was demodulated up to the 4th harmonic of 
the AFM tapping frequency, see Supplementary Note 1. We focus here on the data corresponding 
to the 3rd harmonic, S3. 
 
In Fig. 2b we compare the temperature dependence of the near-field signal with that of the device 
resistance, R(T). The corresponding temperatures are indicated to the right of each scan. LSCO 
regions are to the left and Au contact areas to the right in the panels. The dashed line between T = 
35 K and T = 30 K scans separates the data collected at temperatures collected above and below 
Tc. The error bars are primarily determined by surface roughness and the imperfections at the edge 
of the sample due to lithography. Good reproducibility in the data is demonstrated by scans ac-
quired at the same temperatures on cooling and warming during different runs for the same contact 
and also at different LSCO-Au contacts. The main experimental observation is that, when probed 
with energies of ω = 26.7 cm-1 (0.8 THz), the near-field intensity ratio between LSCO and Au 
changes substantially when the HTS sample enters the superconducting state, see Fig. 2c. Above 
Tc this ratio is fairly temperature independent, staying below unity around a value ~0.95. There is 
an abrupt rise below Tc where the relative intensity reaches a peak value close to 1.3 at T ≈ 25 K. 
The signal decreases slightly but remains above unity upon further cooling to T = 20 K. No such 
changes are observed if the sample is probed with mid-infrared photon energies ω ≈ 1,000 cm-1 
(30 THz or 125 meV), which are above the superconducting gap in LSCO. 
 
Theoretical modelling and interpretation 
 
The energy scale and the non-monotonic temperature dependence of the near-field signal across 
the superconducting transition provide strong constraints to possible interpretations of our data. 
Phonons do not display any abrupt changes at Tc. Moreover, the energies of optical and acoustic 
branches are either too high or too low to match the energy and range of momenta probed in our 
experiment39. Long wavelength and low energy magnetic excitations are already overdamped at 
much smaller Sr concentrations40. Local antiferromagnetic fluctuations persist at optimal doping41 
but they are at much higher energies, around 0.2 – 0.5 eV, and they also do not display any abrupt 
changes with temperature upon crossing Tc. Increased scattering due to larger far-field reflection 
coefficients in the superconducting state cannot account for the observations because of their tem-
perature dependence, refs. 31,42, see also the discussion in Supplementary Note 5. We can also rule 
out electronic scenarios associated with both the critical behavior of the dielectric function around 
the percolation threshold43,44. A consideration of the energy scales, near-field coupling mecha-
nisms, temperature dependence across the superconducting transition as well as of the parity and 
momentum selection rules can explain why scenarios invoking more exotic superconductivity-
induced collective modes are very unlikely to account for our results2,45-47 (a more detailed discus-
sion in connection to these aspects can be found at the end of Supplementary Note 5). 
 
In contrast, we show here that SJPWs explain observations quite naturally. This scenario accounts 
for all key features of our experiment: the coupling mechanism, the abrupt and non-monotonic 
behavior of the relative LSCO/Au signal with reversal of intensity upon crossing Tc as well as the 
energy scale which is consistent with the Josephson plasma energy ωJ inferred from far-field 


 
5

measurements.  Coupling to plasmonic excitations is enabled by evanescent modes waves with 
high in-plane momenta in the proximity of the AFM tip and it is well documented in the litera-
ture48. The peaks in the near-field signal are correlated to energies of surface modes. The dispersion 
ω(q) for the propagating electromagnetic mode confined to the planar interface between an iso-
tropic and an optically uniaxial material is implicitly given by, see Supplementary Note 3:  
 

𝑞𝑞 = 
𝜔𝜔

𝑐𝑐  �
𝜀𝜀1𝜀𝜀c(𝜔𝜔)(𝜀𝜀1− 𝜀𝜀ab(𝜔𝜔))

𝜀𝜀12− 𝜀𝜀ab(𝜔𝜔)𝜀𝜀c(𝜔𝜔)                                                              (2) 

 
where ε1 is the permittivity of the isotropic medium while εab(ω) and εc(ω) are the ab-plane and c-
axis dielectric constants of the anisotropic material. Note that if εab = εc, we recover the textbook 
dispersion formula of surface polariton in isotropic media, see ref. 9 and Supplementary Equation 
(7). AFM-SNOM has thus access to both in- and inter-plane charge dynamics, even if just one 
surface is accessible. Note also that far-field techniques require either large single crystals with 
surfaces parallel to the c-axis or, possibly, a grazing-incidence configuration for the case of thin 
films where the c-axis is perpendicular to the surface. Because of deep-subwavelength resolution, 
crystals or flakes with μm-length dimensions are sufficient for AFM-SNOM. 
 
The energies and spectral weights associated with Josephson plasma modes in our film can be seen 
in Fig. 3, which shows the energy-momentum plot of the Fresnel reflection coefficient rP(q,ω). 
The AFM-SNOM momentum form factor is also shown in panel (a) of this figure by a white 
dashed line. Within the dipole model its functional form is given by q2·exp[-2qz0] where z0 is the 
distance of minimum approach, chosen here to be equal to the tip radius rtip ~ 20 nm, see also 
Supplementary Note 6. The closely spaced branches above unity represent propagating modes in-
side the film, while the feature at ω/ωJ ~ 1, nearly dispersionless in this momentum range, corre-
spond to SJPWs. The vertical axis in Fig. 3a represents energy in units of ωJ = 56.7 cm-1, which 
is the calculated Josephson plasma frequency for LSCO at T = 0 K. The values of rP(q,ω) were 
calculated using measurements of c-axis reflectance in bulk crystals31 and in-plane THz complex 
conductivity data in single-crystal LSCO films grown by ALL-MBE 34, see Supplementary Note 
2. Our derivation of rP(q,ω) generalizes the characteristic matrix formalism for treating anisotropic 
materials in stratified media, see Supplementary Note 4. This approach also helps generalize Eq. 
(2) for multilayers because even thin-film devices contain at least two interfaces: vacuum-LSCO 
and LSCO-substrate, in our case. In this configuration there are two SJPW branches whose ener-
gies at high momenta can be read off directly from the zeros of the denominator in Eq. (2), inserting 
for ε1 the values corresponding to vacuum and the substrate, respectively, see also Supplementary 
Figure 3. A related approach has been used in ref. 49 for obtaining surface mode dispersions in 
topological semiconductors. An important point for our interpretation is the realization that, in 
spite of the very different physical origin, the near-field signal tracks with a good approximation 
the screened Josephson plasma frequency. The reason is that the asymptotic values of the SJPWs 
at high wave-vectors are pushed very close to ωJ due the strong anisotropy of the ab-plane and c-
axis plasma frequencies in LSCO. 
 
Thin films allow for the hybridization of surface modes that are either symmetric or anti-symmetric 
with respect to the reflection in horizontal symmetry plane. In the presence of a substrate these 
modes cease to have strict odd/even parity but crosstalk between them is in principle still allowed. 
In our experiment, i.e. for the range of momenta defined by our form-factor (see white dashed line 


 
6

in Fig. 3a) and energies right below the screened c-axis plasma, we are mostly sensitive to the 
surface mode confined to the top interface. This is because of the large and negative imaginary 
part of k2z in Supplementary Equation (10), the vertical component of the wave momentum inside 
the slab, which makes rP(q ≈ 1/dfilm, ω ⪝ ωP,c) practically equal to the vacuum-film reflection 
coefficient r12. In other words, the pole in Im[rP(q,ω)] associated with the mode propagating on 
the bottom interface has a vanishing strength. Further mathematical and visual explanations are 
given in Supplementary Notes 4 and 5 and Supplementary Figures 3 and 4. 
 
Furthermore, the energy scale and the momentum distribution of our experiment (the white dashed 
line in Fig. 3a) also allow us to distinguish between bulk-cavity and surface modes. Propagating 
Josephson plasmons inside the film correspond to the higher energy branches in Fig. 3a while 
surface modes appear for our momentum range as a horizontal bright line. Fig. 3b shows that 
momentum integration across the full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of the distribution does 
not affect the surface mode: the green and black dashed lines practically coincide at energies ω/ωJ 
~ 1. However, it flattens out the peak structure of the bulk-cavity modes at higher energies. In 
conclusion, Fig. 3 reveals not only that modes propagating inside the film are at higher energy than 
the Josephson plasma edge, but also that momentum averaging completely smears out their spec-
tral structure while leaving the surface modes intact because of their dispersionless nature at high 
momenta. We therefore find that our experiment is sensitive to SJPWs.  
 
Last but not least, the scenario invoking surface Josephson plasmons is also able to explain the 
temperature dependence observed in Fig. 2b. The calculated temperature and frequency depend-
ence of the near-field signal within the spherical dipole approximation is shown in Fig. 4, see also 
Supplementary Note 6. In this approximation the entire tip is replaced by a polarizable sphere 
whose radius is roughly given by the AFM tip apex curvature. The spherical-dipole approach un-
derestimates the experimental contrast and has clear limitations because of its simplifying assump-
tions. While a quantitative agreement between the model and experiment is not anticipated, we 
nevertheless expect that the qualitative features of Fig. 2 are captured. Fig. 4 shows that this is 
indeed the case, attesting to the robustness of our interpretation in terms of SJPWs. The increase 
of the relative LSCO/Au signal above unity in the superconducting state as well as the non-mon-
otonic temperature dependence are naturally understood in this scenario. As shown in Supplemen-
tary Figure 4, in our measurements we change the temperature and use the constant energy of our 
THz source. At a given temperature below Tc, the reflectance edge sweeps across our energy win-
dow and that is also the point where the near-field signal is enhanced. With further cooling, the 
superfluid density increases, the reflectance edge moves to higher energy, leading to a decrease in 
the near-field response, which is what we observe experimentally. 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
As expected, the spherical dipole model is not able to account quantitatively our data. For reason-
able fitting parameters it renders values for the LSCO/Au intensity ratio that are too small. The 
shortcomings can be understood and are essentially related to the simplifying assumptions about 
effective tip polarizability, near-field distribution, field enhancement factors and the neglect of 
retardation effects. Indeed, increasing the tip polarizability or taking into account a more realistic 
shape of the AFM tip would lead to a larger LSCO/Au contrast than that shown in Fig. 4, see also 
Supplementary Figure 5 and the discussion in Supplementary Note 6. Substantial quantitative 


 
7

discrepancies related to the spherical dipole model were already remarked for experiments per-
formed in the infrared range and more realistic models were proposed for the AFM tip geometry50 
as well as for the electrodynamic response of the sample-probe system51,52. Because in our exper-
iment the wavelengths reach millimeter range, the shortcomings of this model are further exacer-
bated. Therefore, we believe that a meaningful quantitative agreement requires a full electrody-
namical treatment taking accurately into account the shapes of AFM tips and the details of the 
scanning regime, which is outside the scope of this study.      
 
Using the value of the Josephson plasma frequency ωJ = 0.8 THz  at T = 0.8 Tc, at optimal doping 
we obtain a critical current density of the c-axis junction Jc ~ 2·105 A/cm2 and a Josephson pene-
tration depth λJ = c/ωJ ~ 375 μm, indicating that our 20 μm wide wire is in a quasi-1D long Jo-
sephson junction regime. For insulating barriers, ωJ tracks, in turn, the superconducting gap Δ. 
Using the normal-state conductivity evaluated from far-infrared reflectance data31 the gap can be 
estimated53 to Δ(T = 0.8Tc) ~ 24 cm-1 (0.75 THz), see also Supplementary Note 2. This is a value 
which is close to the frequency of AFM-SNOM data and it is in very good agreement with recent 
measurements of the superconducting gap in LSCO-based tunnel junctions54. Note that the mo-
mentum distribution probed in AFM-SNOM experiments depend on the probe geometry, see Fig. 
3a. A systematic exploration of the strong coupling (polaritonic), regime of the SJPW modes is 
important for probing superconducting nodes or analysis of dissipation channels. This task can be 
accomplished in several ways. One is by taking advantage of the fact that parameters such as the 
conical shapes or apex radii can be engineered for etched wire tips55,56. Other routes can be pro-
vided by ‘tilting’ the light line dispersion by using thin cover layers of high dielectric permittivity 
such as SrTiO3, or by using hyperspectral near-field imaging extended to the THz range57. It is 
important to note that Eq.(2), which deals with dispersion of excitations confined to planar inter-
faces, has to be amended when the wavelength of these modes is comparable to the sample width, 
which defines the Sommerfeld or Goubau regime11,58,59. A comparison with the momentum selec-
tive form-factor of the AFM tip, white dashed line in Fig.3, shows that in our configuration when 
the light couples to the sample only through the tip, the contribution of the surface modes in the 
long wavelength limit is vanishingly small. Consequently, Eq.(2) is applicable here for a broad 
momentum range which includes the relevant contributions for analysis. Note also that the ex-
tracted values for the Josephson penetration depth and superconducting gap are not obtained from 
direct measurements, but rather indirectly from the value of ωJ and theoretical considerations in 
ref. 53. Measurements of samples with different widths combined with the use of engineered AFM 
tips with larger apex radii provide a clear path for checking experimentally the role of boundary 
conditions when exploring the strong light-matter regime. 
 
The energy scales and the temperature dependence of the LSCO/Au near-field ratio constrain the 
interpretation sufficiently so that we can assign our observations to SJPWs. Other signatures com-
patible with this interpretation may exist in theory, for example real-space interference patterns of 
propagating plasmonic excitations8. We did not find observe such fringes experimentally. The rea-
sons for their absence can be understood as the result of the d-wave gap and strong quasi-particle 
damping at temperatures T ≈ 0.8·Tc, which are close to the base temperature of our system. Cus-
tomized AFM tip radii may be also needed to maximize the coupling efficiency. Plasma waves 
such as the ones reported here for LSCO have not been observed yet in Fe-based superconduc-
tors60, although they are layered materials as well. It would therefore be interesting to explore the 


 
8

coupling to these excitations as a function of the sample anisotropy and damping in engineered 
heterostructures as well as in other cuprate families. 
 
In addition to deep sub-diffractional resolution, light demodulation at different harmonics of the 
AFM tapping frequency provides dielectric depth information21. Thus, cryogenic AFM-SNOM 
allows probing both the lateral and vertical spatial (in)homogeneity in superconductors, offering a 
path for mapping superfluid profiles confined to buried interfaces15. A variable-temperature near-
field environment can also enable characterization of confined modes in topological hetero-struc-
tures and quantification of length-scales associated to superconducting proximity effects in ex-
posed surfaces or in buried interfaces61. Non-linear effects involving Josephson plasma in layered 
superconductors have been observed in LSCO by far-field methods7,22 and they are predicted to 
be even stronger below ωJ. It is conceivable that electromagnetic field enhancement around the tip 
will allow further avenues for exploration and control of such photonic effects in the THz range. 
 
 
Methods 
 
A. La1.85Sr0.15CuO4 (LSCO) film synthesis and device fabrication. 
Optimally-doped, LSCO films with a thickness of 13 nm were grown on LSAO substrates using 
ALL-MBE. The stoichiometry was controlled before and during deposition by a scanning quartz 
crystal monitor and by a calibrated custom-built 16-channel atomic absorption spectroscopy sys-
tem, respectively. Film thickness was monitored in-situ by counting the reflection high-energy 
electron diffraction oscillations and post growth by AFM, profilometry and the finite-thickness 
oscillations in X-ray reflectance and diffraction. The latter also attest to the film being atomically 
smooth. The substrate temperature during the growth was 650 ºC and the ozone partial pressure 
was kept at p = 2 × 10-5 Torr. The device, part of which is shown in Fig. 1b was patterned using 
photolithography into a narrow strip with 32 pairs of lateral contact pads, as described in the main 
text. The data shown in Fig. 2 were acquired from an area in the vicinity of one such lateral contact 
(marked by a red rectangle in Fig. 1b) and the same results were reproduced for other contacts. 
 
B. AFM – SNOM measurements. 
Near-field and AFM data were acquired simultaneously in a custom-built AFM-SNOM setup. The 
sample chamber was optimized for laser light access to the AFM tip, sample visualization and a 
large numerical aperture in the collection path. AFM tips are reproducibly obtained by etching 100 
μm diameter W wires in a 2M-NaOH solution and using a two-ring geometry. Voltages (peak-to-
peak) in the 2 – 10 V range and frequencies between 5 Hz and 800 Hz can be used for shaping the 
AFM tip shaft and apex radius. The tip radius used here is ~20 nm as imaged by Scanning Electron 
Microscopy. The tips were glued to a piezo-actuated quartz tuning fork (TF) resonator operated at 
its resonance frequency of  28.38 kHz (the resonance frequency without the mounted tip was 215 
Hz = 32.768 kHz). AFM data were taken in amplitude-modulation mode with the feedback based 
on the TF piezocurrent. The resonance FWHM was ~ 5Hz and ~ 1Hz at room and low tempera-
tures, respectively. Q-control was used to broaden the TF resonance when the system was cold. 
The AFM oscillation amplitude was A ~ 80 nm as determined from both AFM approach curves as 
well as from precise interferometric measurements. Light from a Backward Wave Oscillator (Mi-
crotech Instruments) with a wavelength λ = 375 μm (800 GHz = 26.7 cm-1) was focused on the tip 
with the help of an off-axis Au-coated copper paraboloid. The SNOM signal was focused on a 
LN2 - LHe cooled hot electron bolometer and demodulated in real-time up to the 4th harmonic of 


 
9

the AFM tapping frequency with the help of a home-made data acquisition system. We analyzed 
the SNOM data within the dipole model, which roughly approximates the metallic AFM tip with 
a sphere whose polarizability is modulated by the interaction with the LSCO sample. Details about 
the model can be found in the Supplementary Note 6. 
 
C. AFM – SNOM Data Acquisition (DAQ). 
A custom made DAQ system was built in order to analyze the SNOM signal in-real time, simul-
taneously with AFM topography data. The hardware consists of a PC computer, a National Instru-
ments high-speed digitizer and a microcontroller. Custom software provides the graphical user 
interface and synchronizes the operation of the system. The reference clock of the digitizer, re-
duced to its sampling frequency of a few MHz, is sent to the microcontroller which serves as a 
digital counter. The microcontroller also triggers the digitizer to start recording time-series data 
upon receiving pixel pulses from the ASC500 unit, which is the Attocube scanning probe micro-
scope (SPM) controller. At each pulse, the microcontroller sends the current value of its counter 
to the PC to precisely identify each pixel within the digitizer’s data streams. Two data streams are 
digitized and sent to the PC simultaneously: a reference sine wave output at the tuning fork’s 
resonance frequency (ΩTF) from an output of the ASC500 controller and the actual detector signal. 
The reference has a dual purpose: (i) it allows for clock-independent measurements of ΩTF for 
subsequent Fourier analysis of the detector signal at each pixel and (ii) it allows the SNOM-DAQ 
to operate the SPM in both amplitude and frequency modulation modes. A lock-in method allows 
demodulation of the SNOM signal at desired multiples of ΩTF. The calculated values for each pixel 
are then used to construct 2D dielectric SNOM images of the material surface. 
 
Data availability 
The authors declare that all data supporting the findings of this study are available within the man-
uscript and the supplementary information. They are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request. 
 
Code availability 
All numerical codes in this paper are available upon request to the authors.   
 
Acknowledgements 
A.G. and X.H. were supported by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation’s EPiQS Initiative 
through Grant GBMF4410. A.T.B and I.B. were supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, 
Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. A. G. also acknowledges 
support from the DOE Early Career Research program (Grant 2005410). Q.L and A.G. 
acknowledge support from the Yale West Campus Materials Characterization Core for SEM im-
aging of AFM tips. 
 
Author contributions 
Q.L. and A.G. took and analyzed the SNOM-AFM data. The synthesis of LSCO films by ALL-
MBE and characterization were done at Brookhaven by X.H., A.T.B. and I.B.. Lithography and 
Hall bar characterization by transport was done by A.T.B. R.S. and A.G. designed and built the 
AFM-SNOM data acquisition system. A.G. led the experiment and wrote the manuscript with 
contribution from all authors. 
 
(*) Correspondence: adrian.gozar@yale.edu 


 
10

References 
 
1. Anderson P. W. Plasmons, gauge invariance, and mass. Phys. Rev. 130, 439-442 (1963). 
2. Carlson R. V. & Goldman A. M. Propagating order-parameter collective modes in superconducting films. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 34, 11-15 (1975). 

3. Pekker D. & Varma C. M. Amplitude/Higgs modes in condensed matter physics: Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter 
Phys. 6, 269-297 (2015). 

4. Economou E. N. Surface Plasmons in Thin Films. Phys. Rev. 182, 539-554 (1969). 
5. Basov D. N., Fogler M.M. & Garcia de Abajo F. J. Polaritons in van der Waals materials. Science 354, aag1992 
(2016). 

6. Slipchenko T. M., Kadygrob D. V., Bogdanis D., Yampol'skii V. A. & Krokhin A. A. Surface and waveguide 
Josephson plasma waves in slabs of layered superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 84,  224512  (2011). 

7. Laplace Y. & Cavalleri A. Josephson plasmonics in layered superconductors. Adv. Physics: X: 1, 387-411 (2016). 
8. Stinson H. T. et al. Infrared nanospectroscopy and imaging of collective superfluid excitations in anisotropic 
superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 90, 014502 (2014). 

9. Novotny L. & Hecht B. Principles of Nano-Optics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2006). 
10. Tsiatmas A. et al. Superconducting plasmonics and extraordinary transmission. Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 111106 
(2010). 

11. Schumacher D., Rea C., Heitmann D. & Scharnberg K. Surface plasmons and Sommerfeld-Zenneck waves on 
corrugated surfaces: application to high-Tc superconductors. Surf. Sci. 408, 203-211 (1998). 

12. Dunmore F. J. et al. Observation of below-gap plasmon excitations in superconducting YBa2Cu3O7 films. Phys. 
Rev. B 52, R731-R734 (1995). 

13. Tsiatmas A., Fedotov V. A., Garcia de Abajo F. J. & Zheludev N. I. Low-loss terahertz superconducting plas-
monics. New J. Phys. 14, 115006 (2012). 

14. Lawrence W. E. & Doniach S., Proceedings 12th Int. Conf. Low Temp. Phys., Kyoto, Japan p.361 (1971). 
15. Gozar A. et al. High-temperature interface superconductivity between metallic and insulating copper oxides. Na-
ture 455, 782-785 (2008). 

16. Gozar A. & Bozovic I., High temperature interface superconductivity, Physica C 521, 38-49 (2016). 
17. Ritchie R. H. Plasma losses by fast electrons in thin films. Phys. Rev. 106, 874-881 (1957). 
18. Boriskina S. V. et al. Losses in plasmonics: from mitigating energy dissipation to embracing loss-enabled func-
tionalities. Adv. Opt. Photonics 9, 775-827 (2017). 

19. Jia X. et al. Anomalous acoustic plasmon dispersion from topologically protected states. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 
136805 (2017). 

20. Shvonski A., Kong J. & Kempa K. Plasmon-polaron of the topological metallic surface states. Phys. Rev. B 99, 
125148 (2019). 

21. Krutokhvostov A. A. et al. Enhanced resolution in subsurface near-field optical microscopy. Opt. Express 20, 
593-600 (2012). 

22. Dienst A. et al. Optical excitation of Josephson plasma solitons in a cuprate superconductor. Nat. Mater. 12, 535-
541 (2013). 

23. Savel'ev S., Yampol'skii V. A., Rakhmanov A. L. & Nori F. Terahertz Josephson plasma waves in layered super-
conductors: spectrum, generation, nonlinear and quantum phenomena. Rep. Progr. Phys. 73, 026501 (2010). 

24. Savel’ev S., Rakhmanov A. L., Yampol’skii V. A. & Nori F. Analogues of nonlinear optics using terahertz Jo-
sephson plasma waves in layered superconductors. Nat. Phys. 2, 521-525 (2006). 

25. Stern F. Polarizability of a two-dimensional electron gas. Phys. Rev. Lett. 18, 546-548 (1967). 
26. Diaconescu B. et al. Low-energy acoustic plasmons at metal surfaces. Nature 448, 57-59 (2007). 
27. Das Sarma S. & Quinn J. J. Collective excitations in semiconductor superlattices. Phys. Rev. B 25, 7603-7618 
(1982). 

28. Morawitz H., Bozovic I., Kresin V. Z., Rietveld G. & van der Marel D. The plasmon density of states of a layered 
electron gas. Z. Phys. B 90, 277-281 (1993). 

29. Jain J. K. & Allen P. B. Plasmons in layered films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 2437-2440 (1985). 
30. Singley E. J. et al. Measuring the Josephson plasma resonance in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8 using intense coherent THz 
synchrotron radiation. Phys. Rev. B 69, 092512 (2004). 

31. Tamasaku K., Nakamura Y.& Uchida S. Charge Dynamics across the CuO2 Planes in La2-xSrxCuO4. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 69, 1455-1458 (1992). 

32. Basov D. N., Timusk T., Dabrowski B. & Jorgensen J. D.: c-axis response of YBa2Cu4O8: a pseudogap and 
possibility of Josephson coupling of CuO2 planes. Phys. Rev. B 50, 3511-3514 (1994). 


 
11

33. van der Marel D., Habermaier H.-U., Heitmann D., Konig W. & Wittlin A. Infrared study of the superconducting 
transition in YBa2Cu3O7-x. Physica C (Amsterdam) 176, 1-18 (1991). 

34. Bilbro L. S. et al. Temporal correlations of superconductivity above the transition temperature in La2-xSrxCuO4 
probed by terahertz spectroscopy. Nat. Phys. 7, 298-302 (2011). 

35. Keilmann F., Hillenbrand R. Near-field microscopy by elastic light scattering from a tip. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., 
A 362, 787-805 (2004). 

36. Atkin J. M., Berweger S., Jones M. B & Raschke M. B. Nano-optical imaging and spectroscopy of order, phases, 
and domains in complex solids. Adv. Phys. 61, 745-842 (2012). 

37. Bozovic I. Atomic layer engineering of superconducting oxides: yesterday, today, tomorrow. IEEE Trans. Appl. 
Supercond. 11, 2686-2695 2001. 

38. Gozar A., Litombe N. E., Hoffman J. E. & Bozovic I. Optical nanoscopy of high-Tc cuprate nanoconstriction 
devices patterned by Helium ion beams. Nano Lett. 17, 1582-1586 (2017). 

39. Chaplot S. L., Reichardt W., Pintschovius L. & Pyka N. Common interatomic potential model for the lattice 
dynamics of several cuprates. Phys. Rev. B 52, 7230-7242 (1995). 

40. Gozar A., Dennis B. S., Blumberg G., Komyia S. & Ando Y. Magnetic order in lightly doped La2-xSrxCuO4. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 93, 027001 (2004). 

41. Dean M. P. M. et al. Persistence of magnetic excitations in La2-xSrxCuO4 from the undoped insulator to the 
heavility overdoped non-superconducting metal. Nat. Mater. 12, 1019-1023 (2013). 

42. Tajima S. et al. In-plane optical conductivity of La2-xSrxCuO4. Reduced superconducting condensate and residual 
Drude-like response. Phys. Rev. B 71, 094508 (2005). 

43. Bergman D. J. & Imry Y. Critical behavior of the complex dielectric constant near the percolation threshold of a 
heterogeneous material. Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 1222-1225 (1977). 

44. Bonn D. A., Dosanjh P., Liang R. & Hardy W. N., Evidence for rapid suppression of quasi-particle scattering 
below Tc in YBa2Cu3O7-δ. Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 2390-2393 (1992). 

45. Bardasis A. & Schrieffer J. R. Excitons and plasmons in superconductors. Phys. Rev. 121, 1050-1062 (1961). 
46. Sun Z., Fogler M. M., Basov D. N. & Millis A. J. Collective modes and THz near-field response of 
superconductors. Phys. Rev. Research 2, 023413 (2020). 

47. Artemenko S. N. & Kobelkov A. G. Linear response and collective oscillations in superconductors with d-wave 
pairing. Physica C 282-287, 1845-1846 (1997). 

48. Chen X. et al. Modern scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy for advanced material research. Adv. 
Mat. 31, 1804774 (2019). 

49. Charnukha A. et al. Ultrafast nonlocal collective dynamics of Kane plasmon-polaritons in a narrow-gap 
semiconductor. Sci. Adv. 5, eaau9956 (2019). 

50. Cvitkovic A., Ocelic N. & Hillenbrand R. Analytical model for quantitative prediction of material contrasts in 
scattering-type near-field optical microscopy. Opt. Express 15, 8550-8565 (2007). 

51. McLeod A. S. et al. Model for quantitative tip-enhanced spectroscopy and the extraction of nanoscale-resolved 
optical constants. Phys. Rev. B 90, 085136 (2014). 

52. Jiang B. Y., Zhang L. M., Castro-Neto A. H., Basov D. N. & Fogler M. M. Generalized spectral method for near-
field optical microscopy. J. Appl. Phys. 119, 054305 (2016). 

53. Ambegaokar V. & Baratoff A. Tunneling between superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 486-489 (1963). 
54. Zhou P. et al. Electron pairing in the pseudogap state revealed by shot noise in copper oxide junctions. Nature 
572, 493-496 (2019). 

55. Ibe J. P. et al. On the electrochemical etching of tips for scanning tunneling microscopy. J. Vac. Sci. & Technol. 
A 8, 3570-3575 (1990). 

56. Borzenets I. V. et al. Ultra-sharp metal and nanotube-based probes for applications in scanning microscopy and 
neural recording. J. Appl. Phys. 111 074703 (2012). 

57. Sterczewski L. A. et al. Terahertz hyperspectral imaging with dual chip-scale combs. Optica 6, 766-771 (2019). 
58. Goubau G. Surface waves and their application to transmission lines. J. Appl. Phys. 21, 1119-1128 (1950). 
59. Sergeichev K. F., Karfidov D. M., Andreeev S. E., Sizov Y. E. & Zhukov V. I. Excitation and propagation of 
Sommerfeld-Zenneck surface waves on a conducting strip in the centimeter-wave band. J. Comm. Technol. Elec. 
63, 326-334 (2018). 

60. Zhang S. et al. Lattice dynamics of ultrathin FeSe films on SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 035408 (2018). 
61. Woods B. D., Das Sarma S. & Stanescu T. D., Electronic structure of full-shell InAs/Al hybrid semiconductor-
superconductor nanowires: spin-orbit coupling and topological phase space. Phys. Rev. B 99, 161118(R) (2019). 

   


 
12

 
Figure Legends 
 

 

 
 
Fig. 1 The experimental system and the measured device. a A close-up of the cryogenic AFM-
SNOM sample space showing the tuning fork mount, the sample holder and the path of the light 
beam reflecting off the parabolic mirror. The two arrows indicate light propagation directions in 
our back-scattering geometry. b Schematic showing the collimated beam being focused by the 
parabolic mirror onto the apex of the AFM tip. The AFM tip is an etched metallic wire glued to a 
prong of the quartz tuning fork sensor (see Methods). c The schematic of the measured device 
shows the light beam, the AFM tip, the Au pads, the 20 μm wide strip of 13 nm thick LSCO film 
and the LaSrAlO4 substrate. During the measurements the tip was positioned next to lateral 
LSCO-Au contacts such as the one marked with a red rectangle. Similar data were obtained from 
all measured contact regions, attesting to the robustness of the results. The inset of this panel 
shows an actual CCD image of the investigated sample area. Visible on the left side of the inset 
is the etched AFM tip and its reflection in the substrate. The outline of the tip is emphasized by 
while dashed lines. 
 
 


 
13

 

 
Fig. 2 Temperature dependence of the near-field signal acquired with ω = 26.7 cm-1 (0.8 
THz) photon energy. a 3D view of the AFM topography acquired at T = 22.5 K around the LSCO-
Au contact area. Dark/bright areas on the left/right correspond to LSCO and Au, respectively. b 
Temperature dependent near-field amplitude at several temperatures. LSCO and Au regions are 
indicated by arrows and labels at the bottom. The SNOM signal from the Au contact in each 
SNOM scan is normalized to unity. Dark areas between LSCO and Au are induced by the broad 
lithographic edge and were not used in the quantitative analysis. The scale bar in the bottom 
panel is 1 μm. c The black circles: near-field S3 signal from LSCO normalized to Au, obtained 
from the data in panel (b) as a function of temperature, in log-scale. The grey-dashed line is a 
guide for the eye. The blue solid line: temperature-dependent resistance, R(T), the right vertical 
scale. 
 
 


 
14

 

 
Fig. 3 Dispersions of surface and guided Josephson plasmon modes. a Contour plot of the 
calculated imaginary part of the Fresnel reflection coefficient rP(q,ω) at zero temperature. The 
vertical axis is in units of ωJ, the screened Josephson plasma frequency. The horizontal axis is in 
units of q·dfilm, where q is the momentum and dfilm = 13 nm is the film thickness. The white dashed 
line is the AFM-SNOM momentum form-factor, see text and Supplementary Note 6. The green 
solid line is a constant-momentum cut at the maximum of the distribution (solid line) and the green 
dashed line marks the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of this distribution. b Constant momen-
tum cuts of Im[rP(q,ω)] at T = 0 K from the data in panel (a). The bottom axis is in dimensionless 
units ω/ωJ and the top axis is in units of cm-1. The green solid line corresponds to the momentum 
cut at the maximum of the form factor. The black dashed line is Im[rP(ω)] with integrated momen-
tum across the FWHM of the form factor, as indicated by the green dashed line in (a).  
 
 


 
15

 

 
Fig. 4 Temperature and frequency dependence of surface Josephson plasma waves. a A 
contour plot of the calculated amplitude of the 3rd harmonic near-field signal from LSCO, S3(T,ω), 
normalized to Au. The horizontal temperature scale extends from T = 0 K to the critical supercon-
ducting temperature Tc = 31 K. The yellow solid line marks the constant energy cut at ω = 26.7 
cm-1 (0.8 THz). b Temperature dependence of S3(T) for ω = 26.7 cm-1, the yellow line in panel (a). 
This is the frequency at which the data in Fig. 2 were acquired. The grey dashed line marks equal 
near-field intensity from LSCO and Au, as in Fig. 2b. Our calculations reproduce well the experi-
mental observations: a non-monotonic temperature dependence of the normalized S3(T,ω) signal 
and the reversal of contrast in SNOM signal between LSCO and Au upon entering the supercon-
ducting state. This is due to the resonant excitation of SJPWs in the LSCO film. 
 
 


 
16

 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Information for 
 
Surface Josephson plasma waves in a high-tempera-
ture superconductor 
 
Q. Lu1,2,3, A.T. Bollinger4, X. He4,5, R. Sundling4,6, I. Bozovic2,4,5 and A. Gozar1,2,7,*  
 
1 Department of Applied Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA 
2 Energy Sciences Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT 06516, USA 
3 Shaanxi Institute of Flexible Electronics, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,    
   710072, China 
4 Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA 
5 Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA  
6 Zensoft, Inc., Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA 
7 Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA  
 
* adrian.gozar@yale.edu 
 
 
 


 
17

Supplementary Note 1. 
Additional information about AFM-SNOM data: near-field interaction and spatial 
resolution of our measurements 
 
Supplementary Figure 1 demonstrates that our optical signal originates in the true near-field inter-
action between the AFM tip and the sample. The near-field interaction is non-linear as a function 
of the tip-sample distance1,2,3-5. As a result, the reflected signal obtained when the AFM is operated 
in tapping mode contains harmonics of the AFM resonance. Supplementary Figure 1a shows a 
typical AFM-SNOM sample approach signal demodulated up to the 4th harmonic of this frequency. 
All harmonics display very good suppression of the background component, attesting thus for the 
true near-field character of our optical measurements. Panel (b) in Supplementary Figure 1 shows 
the ratio of the near-field signal corresponding to the 3rd and 2nd harmonics while the AFM tip is 
in intermittent contact to the sample. This ratio is around 0.25 for both Au and LSCO and it is only 
very weakly temperature dependent. This value can be used in principle for refining models for 
the tip-sample interaction, e.g. to help fix adjustable parameters in various theoretical ap-
proaches4,6. 
 

 

 
Supplementary Figure 1. Near-field signal at several harmonics of the AFM resonance fre-
quency. a Low-temperature (T = 20 K) approach curves for Au contacts with the light energy ω 
= 26.7 cm-1 (0.8 THz). S2, S3 and S4 are signals demodulated at the 2nd, 3rd and 4th harmonics of 
the AFM tapping frequency of 28.02 kHz. b Relative intensities of the maxima of the 2nd and 3rd 
harmonics for LSCO (solid black circles) and Au (open red squares) as a function of temperature 
(shown in logarithmic scale) when the AFM tip is in intermittent contact to the sample. 
 
Supplementary Figure 2 provides information about the spatial resolution of our measurements. 
The left panel shows AFM topography and near-field data in a single layer graphene sitting on top 
of a SiO2 substrate. The line profile shown in panel (b) of this figure shows a transition region of 
about 100 – 150 nm. Given that our probing wavelength is λ = 375 μm we obtain a resolution 
round λ/2500 – λ/3750 consistent with our statement in the main text. The data shown in 


 
18

Supplementary Figure 2 were taken with our typical tips having apex radii R ≈ 20 nm. No partic-
ular care was taken to obtain either extra sharp (R ≤ 5 nm) tips.   
 

 

Supplementary Figure 2. Spatial resolution a AFM topography (top) and near-field data (bot-
tom) at the edge of a single layer graphene flake on a SiO2 substrate. Graphene appears brighter 
than the oxide. b Near-field line profile along the line shown in the scan on the bottom of panel 
(b). The vertical red dashed lines indicate 10% and 90% of the transition region and were used to 
determine the spatial resolution. 
 
 
Supplementary Note 2. 
Anisotropic optical data analysis in La1.85Sr0.15CuO4 
 
The calculated dispersions of the Josephson Surface Plasma Waves (JSPWs) and of the AFM-
SNOM response in our LSCO film, see Figures 3 and 4 in the main text, require knowledge of the 
dielectric constants in directions parallel and perpendicular to the CuO2 planes. For c-axis data, we 
used the results in refs. 7 and refs. 8-10. For the ab-plane, we used the results obtained by time-
domain THz spectroscopy11 correlated to reflectivity measurements in LSCO films with the same 
doping12,13. The real part of the conductivity σ1(ω) was fitted with a Lorentzian (Drude model) at 
selected temperatures. The superfluid weight was obtained by fitting the imaginary part of the 
conductivity σ2(ω) to the function F(ω) = A/ω + σdcΓω/(ω2 + Γ2), where the dc conductivity σdc 
and the scattering rate Γ were determined from the fits of the real part. The superfluid plasma 
frequency is ωpS,ab ∝ √A. The data were then interpolated at all temperatures with suitable poly-
nomials. The values ε∞,ab = 4 and ε∞,c = 25 were chosen based on refs. 7,8,12,13. 
 
For the Au reference, we used the data from refs. 14 and 15. The value εAu = -738752 + i·2077715 
was chosen based on the plasma frequency ωp,Au = 8.5 eV and the scattering rate ΓAu ≈ 75 cm-1, 
for T ≈ 77 K. At room temperature, ΓAu is a factor of ≈ 5 larger, as indicated by transport measure-
ments. Reasonably large variations in the real and imaginary parts of εAu were found to have no 
impact on the overall results. The dielectric function for the etched Tungsten tip16 and LSAO sub-
strate17 used for the dielectric function at ω ~ 26.7 cm-1 are: εW = -12377 + i·12319 and εLSAO = 
19. 
 
These optical parameters also allowed us to estimate the c-axis normal state resistivity. Together 
with the value of the screened Josephson plasma edge ωJ, which allows determination of the crit-
ical current along this axis, one could try to estimate the value of the superconducting gap Δ using 


 
19

the Ambegaokar-Baratoff formula, see the discussion section in the main text and ref. 18. The set 
of equations we used are: 
 

 

 
The critical current density jc was estimated from Supplementary Equation (1a) using Ic = jc·S and 
C = εrε0S/d, where C is the capacitance between two CuO2 planes and d = 6.62 Å is the distance 
between two CuO2 planes. The relative permittivity εr was determined from the far-IR reflectance 
data in ref. 7. The normal carrier conductivity σ was obtained from Supplementary Equation (1b) 
which is the DC limit of the Drude response, see Eq. (1) in the main text. Supplementary Equation 
(1b) above gives σ in units of Ω-1·cm-1 when ωP and Γ are expressed in units of cm-1 (here ωP ≈ 
300 cm-1 and Γ ≈ 250 cm-1 from ref. 7). Using Supplementary Equation (1a) and (1b) we determined 
the Ic·Rn product from Supplementary Equation (1c) and then the superconducting gap from (1d). 
 
 
Supplementary Note 3. 
Dispersion of surface waves at the interface between an isotropic and uniaxial ma-
terial 
 
Here we derive Eq. (2) in the main text, which is a generalization of the textbook relation for 
surface plasmons, see for example ref. 19. The geometry of the problem is similar to that of Sup-
plementary Figure 3a, but with only the top interface present. Maxwell’s equations for time har-
monic fields read: 
 

 
 

 
where the free carrier contribution is included in the complex dielectric constant shown in Equation 
(1) of the main text. The currents and surface charges can be obtained from j = σ·E and σsurf (x) = 
ε0·[E1z(x) – E2z(x)] where the conductivity σ is a tensor with components given by εα = ε∞,α + 
iσα/ε0ω where α is the ab-plane or c-axis index. It also has two components corresponding to the 
normal and superfluid parts, respectively. The equations and boundary conditions allow for sepa-
ration of the transverse electric and magnetic modes. We confine ourselves to the latter as surface 
modes can be excited only with p-polarized light, i.e. Ey 𑁔𑁔 Bx 𑁔𑁔 Bz = 0. We look for propagating 
solutions of Maxwell equations, with the electric and magnetic fields decaying exponentially away 
from the interface: 

 

 

 
where ‘j’ is an index for the two media. Gauss’ laws and the boundary conditions give: 
 

 
 
 


 
20

Supplementary Equation (4) is a set of four homogeneous equations with four unknowns: E1x, E1z, 
E2x and E2z. The condition for non-trivial solutions and the bulk dispersion relations for the iso-
tropic and uniaxial medium read: 
 

 
 

 
Supplementary Equation (5) is used for deriving the dispersion relations for the surface modes. 
The first equality in this equation is equivalent to: 
 

 
 

 
which is Equation (2) of the main text. If both materials are isotropic, i.e. εab = εc = ε2 one obtains 
the standard textbook formula for the dispersion of the surface plasmons: 
 

 

 
The asymptotic value of the dispersion ω(q→∞) in Supplementary Equation (6), i.e. the electro-
static limit, is given by the condition of vanishing denominator ε12 – εab(ω)·εc(ω) = 0. The same 
equation can be used for the bottom interface in Supplementary Figure 3a with ε1 replaced by ε3. 
They determine the positions of the green dashed lines in Supplementary Figure 2b-d. Neglecting 
the dissipative contribution part, for a metal one can write εab ≈ ε∞,ab – ωP2ab/ω2 and εc ≈ ε∞,c – 
ωP2c/ω2. If the anisotropy is large (ωP,ab / ωP,c >> 1, a condition well satisfied for cuprates) a zero 
of the denominator in Supplementary Equation (6), i.e. the asymptotic energy of the surface mode 
for high momenta, is given with a very good approximation by ωP,c/√ε∞,c. This is marks the energy 
of the reflectivity edge, which in the superconducting state is the Josephson plasma energy ωJ. 
This is why the green dashed lines in the anisotropic case of Supplementary Figure 3c are pushed 
closer to ωJ compared to the plots in panels (a) and (b) of the same figure. This is also the reason 
why the near-field signal has a peak which is very close to the reflectivity edge, see Supplementary 
Figure 4. 
 
 
Supplementary Note 4. 
Dispersions of bulk and surface plasma waves in films 
 
The JPWs are non-radiative modes, i.e. for these excitations the electromagnetic fields are expo-
nentially damped outside of the film. They are also true normal modes of the system. Here we 
provide derivations for the basic formulas in connection to guided and surface JPWs in films, see 
Fig. 3 in the main text. They appear in various forms in previous publications20-31. Typically they 
are obtained by writing down the field solutions along with the corresponding boundary conditions 
and by looking for non-trivial solutions of the system of homogeneous equations, i.e. a similar 
approach as the one in Supplementary Equations (3) and (4). 


 
21

 
In this work we generalize the characteristic matrix formalism32 for extraction of the reflection 
coefficient rP(q,ω) to the case of anisotropic media. This approach is useful because it can be 
applied easily to larger number of layers, which corresponds to the typical experimental situation. 
In this section we also illustrate qualitatively the evolution of the dispersions of the two surfaces 
modes as a function the dielectric properties of the surrounding media. The characteristic matrix 
for an anisotropic medium such as the film in Supplementary Figure 3a is given by: 
 

 
 

 
The transmitted / reflected fields are at z = 0 and z = d, respectively. Using the boundary conditions 
along with Fresnel equations, Supplementary Equation (8) becomes: 
 

 
 

 
where r = rP(q,ω) is the reflection coefficient plotted in Fig. 3 of the manuscript. It is given by:  
 

 

 
and 

 
 

 
The ‘−‘ signs here only account for the downward propagation of light, opposite to the positive 
direction of the z-axis as defined in Supplementary Figure 3a. The poles of rP(q, ω) give the im-
plicit equation for the dispersion of  SJPWs: 
 

 
 

 
An illustration of the meaning of Supplementary Equations (8 –12) is given in Supplementary 
Figure 3. The basic trends of these modes as a function of the dielectric environment are shown 
qualitatively in panels (b), (c) and (d) of this figure. For symmetric configurations (ε1 = ε3) the 
modes can be classified by the parity of the fields with respect to a reflection in a plane parallel to 
the surface at z = d/2. Supplementary Equation (12) separates into two equations, one for symmet-
ric modes with respect to the ‘x’ component of the electric field, i.e. Ex(x, z + d/2) =  Ex(x, -z + 
d/2), and the other for antisymmetric modes. The symmetric / antisymmetric modes correspond to 
the lower / upper branches, respectively, in Supplementary Figure 3b. The asymptotic value ω(q 
→ ∞) for the symmetric case, green dashed line in Supplementary Figure 3b, is given by the van-
ishing denominator condition in Supplementary Equation (6): ε12 – εab(ω)·εc(ω) = 0. If εab ≠ εc, the 


 
22

symmetry is lost, and the asymptotic values are given by εk2 – εab(ω)·εc(ω) = 0 with k = 1,3. The 
top / bottom branches in Supplementary Figure 3c correspond in the q·dfilm → ∞ limit to non-
interacting surface modes residing at the top / bottom interfaces respectively. 
 

 

 
Supplementary Figure 3. The effect of substrate and of the electronic anisotropy on the 
dispersion of Josephson plasma waves. a Schematic of the experimental three-layer structure. 
Panels b – d show the results of calculations of Im[rP(q,ω)] at T = 0 K, illustrating qualitatively the 
evolution of the dispersions of surface JPWs from the isotropic (εab = εc) and symmetric (ε1 = ε3) 
configuration to an anisotropic (εab ≠ εc) and non-symmetric (ε1 ≠ ε3) arrangement. The following 
parameters were chosen for better visualization: ε1 = ε3 = 50 and εab = εc = εc,LSCO (T = 0 K) for 
panel (b); ε1 = 50, ε3 = 100 and εab = εc = εc, LSCO (T = 0 K) for panel (c); ε1 = 50, ε3 = 100 and the 
ab-plane superfluid plasma frequency increased to three times the value along the c-axis, ωpS,ab 
= 3·ωpS,c for panel (d). The energy is in units of the screened Josephson plasma frequency ωJ. 
The film thickness d = 500 nm was chosen for all panels. Green dashed lines in each panel 
correspond to the asymptotic values of the SJP energies in the large q*dfilm limit. The tilted grey 
dashed line is the light dispersion, ω(q) = q·c/√ε1. 
 
As discussed at the end of Supplementary Note 3, anisotropy in the plasma frequencies pushes the 
asymptotic energies of both these branches close to ωJ. In Supplementary Figure 3d, a relatively 
small ratio ωp,ab / ωp,c =  3 was chosen, but the effect is nevertheless substantial. For LSCO this 
ratio is ~ 25, almost one order of magnitude higher, and this is why the energies probed in our 
experiment are so close to ωJ, see Fig. 3 in the main text and Supplementary Figure 4. Inter-layer 
electron tunneling gaps the dispersions of the propagating modes in a superlattice33, which 


 
23

otherwise obey ω(q→0, kz ≠ 0) → 0. Furthermore, these guided modes appear only when anisot-
ropy is present, see Supplementary Figure 3d, because propagation inside the film along the z-axis 
is only possible for frequencies where the ab-plane and c-axis dielectric constants have opposite 
signs, which is the so-called hyperbolic regime. This can be seen by inspection of the second 
equality in Supplementary Equation (11). 
 
Supplementary Note 5. 
Additional information about the interpretation in terms of Surface Josephson 
Plasma Waves (SJPWs) 
 
The interpretation of our data in terms of SJPWs rests on three pillars: (1) the intimate connection 
to superconductivity: the changes in the near-field signal are activated by the material entering the 
superconducting state; (2) the energy scales and (3) the non-monotonic temperature dependence of 
the relative near-field signal of LSCO compared to Au. The LSCO/Au ratio goes above unity upon 
crossing Tc and then it decreases again displaying a non-monotonic behavior. We found that these 
observations provide sufficient constraints for the interpretation. In the main text we mentioned 
other scenarios that could be, in principle, invoked to explain our results. In this section we look 
at these aspects in more detail. We start by showing why surface Josephson plasma waves can 
explain the experimental findings in a straightforward way. We then discuss and rule out the pos-
sible role played by far-field reflection coefficients, inhomogeneous behavior close to Tc as well 
as scenarios involving more exotic superconductivity-induced collective modes 
 

 

 
Supplementary Figure 4. The connection between the plasma edge seen in the far-field 
reflectance data and the resonant enhancement of the near-field signal. a Reflectance data 
with electric field polarized along the c-axis at various temperatures in optimally doped LSCO. 
The grey lines are obtained from the fitting parameters provided in ref. 7. The vertical dashed line 
corresponds to our measurement frequency ω = 0.8 THz = 26.7 cm-1. b Reflectivity at T = 10 K 
from panel (a) along with the calculated near-field signal at the same temperature (black dashed 
line). 
 
In the interpretation section of the main text we also argued that SJPWs provide a natural expla-
nation for the data in Fig. 2 of the main text. Here we explain why this is so. The basis for our 
discussion is Supplementary Figure 4. Panel 4b of this figure shows that the near field signal at a 


 
24

given temperature is peaked very close to the reflectivity edge. In that sense one can say that 
SNOM signal tracks approximately the frequency of the plasma edge. However, in spite of similar 
energies it is crucial to realize that the origin of these two signals is very different. The SNOM 
signal is peaked at energies corresponding to the poles of the Fresnel reflection coefficient rP(q,ω), 
i.e. at energies of surface modes. The reflectance edge is given by energy of the screened plasma 
frequency, ωJ = ωP/√ε∞, which is a very different quantity.  The reason these two values are so 
close to each other is the very anisotropic nature of the sample (ωP,ab/ωP,c ≈ 25 at low temperatures 
for LSCO) and it is explained mathematically at the end of Supplementary Note 3 and graphically 
in Supplementary Figure 3d. The idea is that the anisotropy makes the asymptotic value of surface 
modes energy at high momenta, a pole of rP(q,ω), to be very close to the screened c-axis plasma 
frequency. 
 
With this discussion we can see how Supplementary Figure 4a explains the temperature depend-
ence of the near-field signal in Fig. 2 of the main text. In our measurements we change the tem-
perature and use the constant frequency of our THz source, the black dashed line in panel (a). At 
some temperature below Tc the reflectance edge sweeps across our energy window and that is the 
point where the SNOM signal is enhanced. As the superfluid plasma frequency increases further 
with cooling, the reflectance edge moves to higher energies and the SNOM signal decreases again, 
showing thus non-monotonic behavior. 
 
Increased scattering due to larger far-field reflection coefficients in the superconducting state can-
not account for the observations. Similarly to a normal metal, the temperature-induced changes of 
the far-infrared in-plane reflectivity in optimally doped LSCO are very small: by less than 2% on 
cooling from room temperature to T = 5 K and by less than 1% below Tc, ref. 12. Such changes are 
very gradual and also barely detectable by conventional techniques, so they cannot be responsible 
for the observed effect. More dramatic changes occur along the c-axis due to Josephson tunneling7. 
However, an explanation in terms of increased far-field c-axis reflectance is incompatible with the 
non-monotonic temperature dependence of the near-field signal below Tc. Lowering the tempera-
ture will only increase the brightness of the sample which becomes monotonically more reflective 
with cooling. Furthermore, because our wavelength (λ = 375 μm) is much larger than our scanning 
areas it is difficult to understand how far-field reflections from a relatively large diffraction limited 
spot can produce effects that will not divide out in the LSCO/Au ratio as we move the AFM tip 
only slightly from one material to another. In fact, the approach curves shown in Supplementary 
Figure 1 clearly demonstrate that the sample is probed in the near-field, which also means a distri-
bution of finite momenta for the excitations as shown in Fig.3a of the main text. In conclusion, 
far-field effects can be ruled out. 
 
We conclude this Supplementary Note by discussing other electronic scenarios compatible, in 
principle, with near-field coupling. Associating our results with the critical behavior of the dielec-
tric function around the percolation threshold34 is not a viable option. The fluctuation peaks seen 
in the 10’s of GHz range35 do not survive in the THz region11. Consistent with these expectations, 
in spite of our deep sub-diffraction capabilities, see Supplementary Figure 2, we did not detect 
experimentally inhomogeneous behavior in our optimally doped sample. The only other conceiv-
able candidates in the electronic channel that are activated by the superconducting transition are 
those associated either with the c-axis Josephson tunneling, discussed in the next paragraph, or 
with the opening of the d-wave gap and the appearance of superconductivity-induced collective 


 
25

modes. Examples are Carlson-Goldman excitations36, amplitude oscillations of the order parame-
ter (Higgs modes) or Bardasis-Schrieffer excitonic modes37 corresponding to sub-dominant pair-
ing. A theoretical review of THz near-field coupling to these excitations can be found in ref. 38. 
Here we briefly comment why these more exotic candidates are unlikely to explain our data. The 
coupling to Carlson-Goldman modes is expected to be weak because of almost complete charge 
neutrality of this excitation. Furthermore, disorder is also expected to heavily damp this response39. 
There is no direct optical coupling to pair-breaking excitations or to the Higgs mode of the order 
parameter38. In addition, their energy scale, set by twice the superconducting gap, is larger than 
our photon energy. The requirements for near-field coupling to excitonic modes also preclude their 
observation in our experiment. Parity selection rules would forbid an expected s- to d- transition 
of the pair wave function. More importantly, Cooper pairs in cuprates are three orders of magnitude 
smaller than the AFM tip radius used here, so there is a large mismatch in the momentum transfer 
required to excite these modes. In conclusion, an assessment of near-field coupling mechanisms 
and energy scales shows that superconductivity-induced collective modes are unlikely to explain 
our data. 
 
 
Supplementary Note 6 
The spherical dipole model used for AFM-SNOM data analysis 
 
This section provides details about the model used to calculate the AFM-SNOM signal and the 
momentum dependence of the probe-sample coupling in Fig. 3 of the main text. We analyzed the 
tip-sample interaction within the point dipole mode, i.e. by approximating the AFM tip with a 
sphere whose polarizability is modulated by the presence of the sample1-4,40, see also Supplemen-
tary Figure 5. The effective tip polarizability μ is given by: 
 

 
 

where α = a34πε0(εT - 1)/(εT + 2) is the bare spherical tip polarizability, εT the dielectric constant 
of the tip (Tungsten in our case; εT = -2144 +i·1015) and ‘a’ its radius. The tip-sample distance zt 
= z0 + A[1 + cos(Ωt)] in the tapping mode oscillates with the amplitude ‘A’ and has the distance of 
minimum approach z0 ≈ a. The Fresnel reflection coefficient rP(q,ω) was discussed in the previous 
section. Within the dipole model the near-field signal demodulated at the m-th harmonic of the 
tapping frequency is given by: 
 

 
 

 
Integration over time of the first term in the Taylor expansion of the denominator in Supplementary 
Equation (14) for the m-th harmonic generates a momentum dependent function Fm (q, z0, A) given 
by: 
 


 
26

 
 

 
The AFM-SNOM momentum form-factor shown with the white dashed line in Fig. 3a of the main 
text is given by Supplementary Equation (15) for m = 3 and for a distance of minimum approach, 
z0, taken to be equal to the tip radius a ≈ 20 nm. 
 
The main approximation of the spherical dipole model is the replacement of the actual tip with a 
spherical particle. The two adjustable parameters of the model are the effective tip polarizability 
∝ a3, where a is roughly given by the AFM apex radius, and z0, which is the distance of closest 
approach of the sphere center. The latter parameter should be also of the order of the tip radius. 
Considering the typical shapes of AFM tips obtained from etched metallic wires, see for example 
refs. 41,42, as well as the large value of the radiation wavelengths in the THz range, it is clear that 
the spherical dipole model has its limitations. These shortcomings have quantitative impact on the 
effective tip polarizability, near-field distribution, field enhancement factors and on effects of re-
tardation. We believe they are at the origin of the quantitative discrepancy between the experi-
mental near-field contrast in Fig. 2 and the model calculation in Fig. 4 of the main text.  
 
These quantitative limitations were also observed in the infrared range. It is expected that the THz 
regime amplifies them because wavelengths are in the millimeter range. A more realistic tip-shape 
is going to improve of the agreement with the experiment. Indeed, increasing the effective tip 
polarizability in the spherical model or the elongation of a prolate spheroid in the quasi-static ap-
proximation43 was found to lead to an increased near-field contrast. These considerations help us 
understand that the our model can be improved by a more adequate probe geometry. However, 
because the reasons described above, we believe that a meaningful quantitative agreement can only 
be achieved by a full electrodynamical treatment taking accurately into account AFM tip shapes 
and details of the scanning regime. 
 

 

 
Supplementary Figure 5. Information about the approximations involved in the spherical 
dipole model. (a) Low resolution Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) image of our typical 
etched Tungsten AFM tips. The wire diameter is 100 μm. Note the value of the wavelength relative 
to the tip dimensions. (b) High resolution SEM image showing the tip apex. (c) Parameters of the 
dipole model. 
 
 
 
 


 
27

Supplementary References 
 

1. Keilmann F., Hillenbrand R. Near-field microscopy by elastic light scattering from a tip. Philos. Trans. R. 
Soc., A 362, 787-805 (2004). 

2. Atkin J. M., Berweger S., Jones M. B & Raschke M. B. Nano-optical imaging and spectroscopy of order, 
phases, and domains in complex solids. Adv. Phys. 61, 745-842 (2012). 

3. Raschke M. B. & Lienau C. Apertureless near-field optical microscopy. Tip-sample coupling in elastic light 
scattering. Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 5089-5091 (2003). 

4. Zhang L. M. et al. Near-field spectroscopy of silicon dioxide thin films. Phys. Rev. B 85, 075419 (2012). 
5. Govyadinov A. A. et al. Recovery of permittivity and depth from nearfield data as a step toward infrared 
nanotomography. ACS Nano 8, 6911-6921 (2014). 

6. Jiang B. Y., Zhang L. M., Castro-Neto A. H., Basov D. N. & Fogler M. M. Generalized spectral method for 
near-field optical microscopy. J. Appl. Phys. 119, 054305 (2016). 

7. Tamasaku K., Nakamura Y.& Uchida S. Charge Dynamics across the CuO2 Planes in La2-xSrxCuO4. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 69, 1455-1458 (1992). 

8. Uchida S., Tamasaku K. & Tajima S. c-axis optical spectra and charge dynamics in La2-xSrxCuO4. Phys. Rev. 
B 53, 14558-14574 (1996). 

9. Dordevic S. V., Komiya S., Ando Y. & Basov D. N. Josephson plasmon and inhomogeneous superconducting 
state in La2-xSrxCuO4. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 167401 (2003). 

10. Homes C. C., Timusk T., Liang R., Bonn D. A. & Hardy W. N.. Optical conductivity of c axis oriented 
YBa2Cu3O6.70: Evidence for a pseudogap. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1645-1648 (1993). 

11. Bilbro L. S. et al. Temporal correlations of superconductivity above the transition temperature in                     
La2-xSrxCuO4 probed by terahertz spectroscopy. Nat. Phys. 7, 298-302 (2011). 

12. Tajima S. et al. In-plane optical conductivity of La2-xSrxCuO4. Reduced superconducting condensate and 
residual Drude-like response. Phys. Rev. B 71, 094508 (2005). 

13. Uchida S., Ido T., Takagi H., Arima T. & Tajima S. Optical spectra of La2-xSrxCuO4. Effect of carrier doping 
on the electronic structure of the CuO2 plane. Phys. Rev. B 43, 7942-7954 (1991). 

14. Palik E. D. Handbook of optical constants of solids. Vol. 1; Academic Press: San Diego, 1998. 
15. Olmon R. L. et al. Optical dielectric function of gold. Phys. Rev. B 86, 235147 (2012). 
16. Ordal M. A., Bell R. J., Alexander R. W., Newquist L. A. & Querry M. R. Optical properties of Al, Fe, Ti, Ta, 
W, and Mo at submillimeter wavelengths. Appl. Opt. 27, 1203-1209 (1988). 

17. Chen G. X., Ge Y. J., Bi C. Z., Qiu X. G. & Zhao B. R., Far-infrared optical properties of SrLaAlO4 single 
crystal. J. Appl. Phys. 95, 3417-3421 (2004). 

18. Ambegaokar V. & Baratoff A. Tunneling between superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 10, 486-489 (1963). 
19. Novotny L. & Hecht B. Principles of Nano-Optics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2006). 
20. Economou E. N. Surface Plasmons in Thin Films. Phys. Rev. 182, 539-554 (1969). 
21. Slipchenko T. M., Kadygrob D. V., Bogdanis D., Yampol'skii V. A. & Krokhin A. A. Surface and waveguide 
Josephson plasma waves in slabs of layered superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 84,  224512  (2011). 

22. Stinson H. T. et al. Infrared nanospectroscopy and imaging of collective superfluid excitations in anisotropic 
superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 90, 014502 (2014). 

23. Savel'ev S., Yampol'skii V. A., Rakhmanov A. L. & Nori F. Terahertz Josephson plasma waves in layered 
superconductors: spectrum, generation, nonlinear and quantum phenomena. Rep. Progr. Phys. 73, 026501 
(2010). 

24. Swihart J. C. Field Solution for a Thin-Film Superconducting Strip Transmission Line. J. Appl. Phys. 32, 
461-469 (1961). 

25. Kliewer K. L. & Fuchs R. Collective electronic motion in a metallic slab. Phys. Rev. 153, 498-512 (1967). 
26. Mooij J. E. & Schon G. Propagating plasma mode in thin superconducting filaments. Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 
114-117 (1985). 

27. Giuliani G. F. & Quinn J. J. Charge-Density Excitations at the Surface of a Semiconductor Superlattice: A 
New Type of Surface Polariton. Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 919-922 (1983). 

28. Prade B., Vinet J. Y. & Mysyrowicz A. Guided Optical Waves in Planar Heterostructures with Negative 
Dielectric-Constant. Phys. Rev. B 44, 13556-13572 (1991). 

29. Buisson O., Xavier P. & Richard J. Observation of propagating plasma modes in a thin superconducting film. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 3153-3156 (1994). 

30. Doria M. M., Parage F. & Buisson O. Anti-symmetric plasma mode in superconducting films. Europhys. Lett. 
35, 445-450 (1996). 


 
28

31. Doria M. M., Hollauer G., Parage F. & Buisson O. Plasma waves in anisotropic superconducting films below 
and above the plasma frequency. Phys. Rev. B 56, 2722-2731 (1997). 

32. Born M. & Wolf E. Principles of Optics, Ch. 1, 7th Edition (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1999). 
33. Grecu D. Plasma Frequency of the Electron Gas in Layered Structures. Phys. Rev. B 8, 1958-1961 (1973). 
34. Bergman D. J. & Imry Y. Critical Behavior of the Complex Dielectric Constant near the Percolation 
Threshold of a Heterogeneous Material. Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 1222-1225 (1977). 

35. Bonn D. A., Dosanjh P., Liang R. & Hardy W. N., Evidence for rapid suppression of quasi-particle scattering 
below Tc in YBa2Cu3O7-δ. Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 2390-2393 (1992). 

36. Carlson R. V. & Goldman A. M. Propagating order-parameter collective modes in superconducting films. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 34, 11-15 (1975). 

37. Bardasis A. & Schrieffer J. R. Excitons and plasmons in superconductors. Phys. Rev. 121, 1050-1062 (1961). 
38. Sun Z., Fogler M. M., Basov D. N. & Millis A. J. Collective modes and THz near-field response of 
superconductors. Phys. Rev. Research 2, 023413 (2020). 

39. Artemenko S. N. & Kobelkov A. G. Linear response and collective oscillations in superconductors with d-
wave pairing. Physica C 282-287, 1845-1846 (1997). 

40. McLeod A. S. et al. Model for quantitative tip-enhanced spectroscopy and the extraction of nanoscale-
resolved optical constants. Phys. Rev. B 90, 085136 (2014). 

41. Ibe J. P. et al. On the electrochemical etching of tips for scanning tunneling microscopy. J. Vac. Sci. & 
Technol. A 8, 3570-3575 (1990). 

42. Borzenets I. V. et al. Ultra-sharp metal and nanotube-based probes for applications in scanning microscopy 
and neural recording. J. Appl. Phys. 111 074703 (2012). 

43. Cvitkovic A., Ocelic N. & Hillenbrand R. Analytical model for quantitative prediction of material contrasts 
in scattering-type near-field optical microscopy. Opt. Express 15, 8550-8565 (2007). 

 
 


