An experimental study of the detailed flame 

transport in a SI engine using simultaneous dual-

plane OH-LIF and stereoscopic PIV

B. Peterson1, E. Baum2, A. Dreizler2, B. Böhm2

1School of Engineering, Institute for Multiscale Thermofluids, University of Edinburgh, The King’s Buildings,

Mayfield Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK

2Fachgebiet Reaktive Strömungen und Messtechnik (RSM), Technische Universität Darmstadt, Otto-Berndt-

Straße 3, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany

Corresponding author: Brian Peterson, The King’s Buildings, Mayfield Road, Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, Scotland, 

UK, Fax: +44 (0)131 650 6554, E-mail: brian.peterson@ed.ac.uk

Abstract

Understanding the detailed flame transport in IC engines is important to accurately predict ignition 
and combustion phasing, rate of heat release and assess engine performance. This is particularly 
important for RANS and LES engine simulations, which often struggle to accurately predict flame 
propagation and heat release without first adjusting model parameters. Detailed measurements of 
flame transport in technical systems are required to guide model development and validation. 

This work introduces an experimental dataset designed to study the detailed flame transport and 
flame/flow dynamics for spark-ignition engines. Simultaneous dual-plane OH-LIF and stereoscopic 
PIV is used to acquire 3D measurements of unburnt gas velocity (𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠), flame displacement speed 

(𝑆𝐷) and overall flame front velocity (𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒) during the early flame development. Experiments are 
performed in an optical engine operating at 800 and 1500 RPM with premixed, stoichiometric 
isooctane-air mixtures. Analysis reveals several distinctive flame/flow configurations that yield a 
positive or negative flame displacement for which the flame progresses towards the reactants or 
products, respectively. For the operating conditions utilized, 𝑆𝐷 exhibits and inverse relationship with 
flame curvature and a strong correlation between negative 𝑆𝐷 and convex flame contours is observed. 
Trends are consistent with thermo-diffusive flames, but have not been quantified in context of IC 
engines. Flame wrinkling is more severe at the higher RPM, which results in a broader 𝑆𝐷 distribution 
towards higher positive and negative velocities. Spatially-resolved distributions of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑆𝐷 are 
presented to describe in-cylinder locations where either convection or thermal diffusion is the 
dominating mechanism contributing to flame transport. Findings are discussed in relation to common 
engine flow features, including flame transport near solid surfaces. Findings provide a first insight 
into the detailed flame transport within a technically relevant environment and are designed to support 
the development and validation of engine simulations. 

Keywords: detailed flame transport, stereoscopic PIV, OH-LIF, IC engines

1. Introduction

In many combustion systems, such as spark-ignition (SI) engines, combustion efficiency is largely 
determined by the speed at which a flame transverses through a fuel-air mixture. Accordingly, one of 
the overarching goals in combustion science is to understand the detailed mechanisms of flame 
transport. In this context, we are concerned with the speed at which a wrinkled flame front traverses a 


certain distance. In turbulent combustion, the velocity of the flame front is denoted as the vector sum 
between local convection (𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠) and thermal diffusion (𝑆𝐷) in the flame normal direction (𝑛⃑ ) [1]:

𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 = 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 + 𝑛⃑ ∙ 𝑆𝐷 (1)

𝑆𝐷 is commonly referred to as the flame displacement speed and is a central quantity in the 
understanding and modelling of turbulent premixed combustion [2]. Numerous numerical and 
experimental studies have been performed to understand the intrinsic behavior of 𝑆𝐷 with respect to 
flame structure [e.g. 3-7], flame stretch (including strain and curvature) [e.g. 6-9], turbulence intensity
[e.g. 10, 11], and pressure [e.g. 12]. These fundamental investigations are often performed for a well-
defined flame geometry (e.g. Bunsen, spherical or flat flame) within a well-characterized flow 
environment. Findings from such laboratory-scale flames have revealed the intrinsic behavior of 𝑆𝐷
with respect to various physicochemical and turbulent flow properties, which has greatly expanded 
our knowledge of flamelet theory [13-14].

While detailed investigations in laboratory-scale flames have provided a comprehensive 
understanding of flame dynamics in well-defined flame/flow geometries, flame behavior in technical 
systems (e.g. SI engines) is far less understood. In SI engines, we are not only interested in the 
intrinsic behavior of 𝑆𝐷 at high pressures, but also the capacity of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 to provide a fast, efficient 

flame transport. Additionally, it is important to resolve the stochastic nature of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 because previous 
studies have demonstrated that local flow variations can lead to favorable or unfavorable flame 
development, including misfires [15-18]. 

A comprehensive understanding of flame transport in SI engines requires detailed experimental 
measurements resolving the coupling between chemical reaction and the turbulent flow. Laser 
diagnostics such as flame imaging coupled with velocimetry measurements are well-suited to achieve 
this goal. Several investigations have utilized simultaneous flame-flow imaging methodologies in 
internal combustion (IC) engines [15-20], but only a few investigations have studied flame transport
in detail [21, 22]. Mounaïm-Rousselle et al. utilized high-speed laser tomography and particle image 
velocimetry (PIV) to resolve local 2D values of 𝑆𝐷 in a boosted optical SI engine [21]. Using a short 
laser pulse separation, Mie scattering images resolved a planar view of flame displacement, while 2D 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities were directly measured from PIV. Measurements evaluated spatially-averaged 𝑆𝐷
values as the flame progressed in time for different dilution levels.

Recognizing limitations in 2D measurements, Peterson et al. utilized a multi-planar approach to 
resolve local 3D flame displacement speeds in an optical engine [22]. The approach, originally 
proposed by Trunk et al. [23], utilized dual-plane laser induced fluorescence (LIF) imaging of the 
hydroxyl radical (OH) to resolve flame displacement on parallel planes. A 3D flame surface was 
constructed between each plane, providing the flame normal direction in 3D space. Stereoscopic PIV 
(SPIV) was simultaneously applied with OH-LIF to measure the convection of the reconstructed 
flame surface. Measurements successfully resolved distributions of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑆𝐷 during early flame 
propagation. Findings revealed a broad distribution of 𝑆𝐷 and the importance of measuring flame/flow 
quantities in 3D, which testified to the complex nature of flame development during the early stages 
of combustion.

The multi-dimensional, multi-parameter measurements presented in [22] provide a unique opportunity 
to investigate detailed flame transport and flame/flow dynamics in IC engines. This is particularly 
important for the development of predictive combustion models utilized in CFD engine simulations. 
While many sophisticated flame propagation models exist, many models struggle to accurately 
describe heat release without first adjusting model parameters. Overall, there is a lack of detailed 
measurements describing flame transport, which limits the development of more predictive flame 
models. In turn, this limits the use of CFD to be an effective design tool. 


The work presented in this study expands on the measurements in [22] to introduce an experimental
dataset designed to study detailed flame transport and flame/flow dynamics in IC engines. 
Measurements of 𝑆𝐷, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 are presented for premixed, stoichiometric isooctane-air 
mixtures at two different engine speeds of 800 and 1500 RPM. Measurements are acquired at a single 
crank-angle degree (oCA) during the early flame development phase when less than 5% of the mixture 
is consumed. Findings reveal distinctive flame/flow configurations that yield a positive or negative 
flame displacement for which the flame progresses towards the reactants or products, respectively. 
Locally resolved 𝑆𝐷 is evaluated with respect to 2D flame curvature along flame surfaces to describe 
the flame behaviour that is potentially responsible for yielding negative 𝑆𝐷 values. Finally, spatially 
resolved distributions of 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 are presented for each engine speed to describe in-cylinder
locations where either thermal diffusion or convection is the more dominating mechanism 
contributing to flame transport.

2. Experimental

2.1 Engine

Experiments were performed in a single-cylinder optically accessible SI engine (AVL). The engine is 
equipped with a 4-valve pentroof cylinder head, centrally-mounted spark plug, and quartz-glass 
cylinder and flat piston. Details of the engine are described in [24, 25]. Measurements were performed 
at two engine speeds (800 and 1500 RPM) with homogeneous, stoichiometric isooctane-air mixtures 
from port-fuel injection. Port-fuel injection took place 1.4 m upstream of the engine and the isooctane 
fuel was pre-vaporized upon spark timing. Operating parameters, shown in Table 1, were chosen to 
mimic low-load engine operation. This operation is technically relevant as it can be prone to 
combustion instabilities [15-17]. Engine speed and air intake conditions were chosen to agree with the 
comprehensive velocimetry database for the non-reacting flow that is associated with this engine [24-
30]. The intake temperature, however, is slightly higher in this study than in the aforementioned 
database because the port-fuelled section of the intake pipe was heated to promote sufficient fuel 
evaporation.

Table 1: Engine operating conditions. oCA are 
referenced to top-dead-center compression.

Engine speed
800, 1500 RPM

Intake Press., Temp.
0.95 bar, 323 K

Fuel, lambda
C8H18, 1.0

Ignition timing
800 RPM: −19° bTDC
1500 RPM: −27o bTDC

IMEP, COV
800 RPM: 5.2 bar, 1.7%
1500 RPM: 5.8 bar, 1.8%

OH-LIF, SPIV 
Image Timing

800 RPM: −14o CA
1500 RPM: −18o CA

Engine operating conditions provided repeatable thermodynamic conditions at ignition and image 
timings. Figure 1 shows the in-cylinder pressure trace for each engine speed. Before ignition, the in-
cylinder pressure is lower for 800 RPM because there is more time for heat loss, which subsequently 
reduces the thermodynamic state. As a result, peak pressures are higher for 1500 RPM than 800 RPM. 

Ignition timing was chosen such that the OH-LIF and SPIV measurement quality was optimized. As 
the piston approached top-dead-center (TDC), the field-of-view (FOV) became much smaller, 
particularly for SPIV because the cameras operated at an angle relative to the imaging plane. 


Additionally, laser reflections at surfaces reduced SPIV quality near TDC, while higher gas 
temperatures near TDC reduced OH-LIF signal-to-noise ratios. At 800 RPM, measurements were 
optimized at −14 oCA (crank-angle degrees; referenced to TDC compression). Ignition at −19oCA 
provided sufficient time (5oCA or 1040μs) to initiate a flame kernel such that images captured the 
early flame kernel development when less than 5% of the mixture was consumed and the in-cylinder 
pressure was insensitive to the flame development. At 1500 RPM, an imaging timing of −18oCA 
provided a similar in-cylinder pressure to −14oCA at 800 RPM (11.1 bar). Ignition at −27oCA 
provided 9oCA (888μs) for flame development, which provided similar flame imaging conditions to 
those at 800 RPM (i.e. flame consumed less than 5% of the mixture and in-cylinder pressure was 
insensitive to flame development at image timing). These ignition timings provided optimal 
combustion stability (COV of IMEP < 2%) with indicated mean effective pressure (IMEP) greater 
than 5 bar.

2.2 Diagnostics

The experimental setup, shown in Fig. 2, is the same as that used in [22]. A frequency-doubled 
Nd:YAG dual-cavity laser (Edgewave, INNOSLAB, 532 nm) operating at 4.8 kHz was used for SPIV 
measurements. Laser light passed through a set of focusing optics to form a laser sheet of 0.5 mm 
thickness. The sheet reflected off a 45o mirror in the crankcase and passed through the quartz glass 
piston to provide a sheet centered vertically with the cylinder axis and bisected the spark plug center 
electrode. Two CMOS cameras (Phantom V.711, double-frame exposure), placed on each side of the 
engine in Scheimpflug arrangement, imaged Mie scattering off chemically inert boron nitride (BN) 
particles (3 μm diameter), which were seeded into the intake flow. The cameras were mounted with an 
off-normal angle (γ = 14o) to the LIF cameras and imaged onto a region of 25 x H mm2, where H was 
determined by the piston height. 

Figure 1: In-cylinder pressure traces at 800 
and 1500 RPM. Individual pressure traces 
encompass 100 cycles at each RPM.


The hydroxyl radical (OH) was imaged simultaneously in two parallel, vertical planes. Two dye laser 
systems (Sirah, Precision Scan) operating with Rhodamine 6G were pumped by two separate double-
pulsed Nd:YAG laser systems (Spectra Physics, PIV400, 532 nm). Dye lasers were tuned to 282.9 nm 
to excite the Q1(6) line of the A-X(1-0) transition of OH. Each laser system provided two UV laser 
pulses (24 mJ/pulse) that were temporally separated by ∆𝑡𝐿𝐼𝐹.

A half-wave plate and polarizing beam splitter were used to combine UV beams into two parallel 
paths. The beams travelled through focusing optics, providing two parallel UV light sheets (0.2 mm 
thickness) offset by 1 mm. A dichroic beam splitter combined the UV sheets with the path of the 
SPIV laser and directed the UV light into the engine. UV light sheets were offset by ∆𝑧 = ±0.5 mm on 
each side of the PIV light sheet (see Fig. 2). Sheet separation and thickness were monitored by a UV-
sensitive beam monitor (DataRay). Fluorescence emission from each laser sheet passed through high-
transmission band-pass filters (UV-B) and was imaged onto two separate image intensifiers 
(LaVision, High-speed IRO) coupled to 14-bit CCD cameras (LaVision, ImagerProX, double-framed 
exposure) arranged on each side of the engine. Images were focused onto the same 25 x H mm2 FOV 
as the SPIV measurements. Spontaneous OH* chemiluminescence and flame luminosity were 
suppressed by gating each intensifier to 300 ns. The projected pixel resolution of both LIF detection 
systems was 20 μm, while the spatial resolution, determined by a Siemens-stern (contrast transfer 
function) was 80 μm.

An optical crank-angle encoder (AVL) was used to synchronize all lasers and cameras to the engine. 
The LIF systems were synchronized by a programmable timing unit (LaVision, PTU) to provide 
images at a fixed oCA. Each double-pulsed LIF system operated at 10 Hz providing two temporally 
resolved LIF images (𝑡0, 𝑡0 + ∆𝑡𝐿𝐼𝐹) in each plane. The UV pulse separation (∆𝑡𝐿𝐼𝐹) was set to 50 μs 
and 25 μs for 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively. For each RPM, ∆𝑡𝐿𝐼𝐹 was optimized to detect clear 
movement of the flame front. LIF images were recorded at a fixed oCA after ignition; at 800 RPM, 
LIF images were recorded at −14oCA, while at 1500 RPM LIF images were recorded at −18oCA. The 
UV pulses for each laser system were offset by 400 ns to avoid cross talk between LIF images in each 
plane. 

SPIV lasers and cameras operated at 4.8 kHz to measure the three-component (3C) velocity field. At 
800 RPM, SPIV measurements were recorded every oCA from −20o to −2oCA, while at 1500 RPM 
measurements were recorded every two oCAs from −28o to −4oCA. The pulse separation for SPIV 
(∆𝑡𝑃𝐼𝑉) was 25 μs and 10 μs for 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively. The selection of ∆𝑡𝑃𝐼𝑉 was chosen 
to achieve a maximum particle shift of ¼ the final interrogation window size. The values of ∆𝑡𝑃𝐼𝑉 and 
∆𝑡𝐿𝐼𝐹 differ because each technique detects the movement of separate substances (BN particle vs. OH 
layer) and because of the fundamental differences between SPIV and LIF processing approaches. 
When combined with LIF imaging, the first SPIV laser pulse was triggered ∆𝑡𝑃𝐼𝑉 2
⁄ after the first UV 

Figure 2: Experimental setup of the multi-plane detection system in the optical engine.


laser pulse. LIF images were recorded every other cycle for a 200-cycle sequence, while SPIV images 
were recorded for 200 consecutive cycles. 

2.3 Data processing and flame speed calculation

The absolute velocity of the flame front (𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒) is defined as the sum of the local unburnt 
convection velocity and the flame displacement speed relative to the flow in the flame-normal 
direction. This is shown schematically in Eq. (1) and in Fig. 3.

The image process procedure utilized to reconstruct a 3D flame surface and determine 𝑆𝐷 is described 
in [22] and is summarized below. A non-linear diffusion filter [31] based on an anisotropic operator
splitting in combination with a Canny edge detection algorithm was used to detect the maximum LIF 
gradient between the burnt and unburnt gas. This maximum gradient was identified as the flame front. 
It is recognized that OH is a post-flame gas. Thus, the maximum OH gradient is located behind the 
physical flame front reaction-zone. Calculations using a 1D flamelet simulation [32] suggested that 
the laminar flame thickness is 𝛿𝐿= 45 μm at the engine operating conditions (11.1 bar, ~550K). This 
thickness is in between the pixel resolution (20 μm) and the spatial resolution (80 μm) of the LIF 
detection systems. Within the short time duration of ∆𝑡𝐿𝐼𝐹, we do not expect large deviations between
the progression of the reaction-zone and the progression of the maximum OH gradient. It is therefore 
anticipated that the maximum OH gradient is suitable to determine 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 and 𝑆𝐷 in this work.

A NURBS spline interpolation [33] was used to construct a 3D flame surface between the flame 
contours identified in each OH plane. A patch diffusion algorithm [34] removed numerical noise from 
the constructed surface. The 3D flame surface is projected through the SPIV plane providing the local 
flame-normal angle at z = 0 mm. The convection velocity was extracted 0.4 mm in front of the flame 
surface (flame normal direction) on the SPIV plane at 𝑡0. This location is represented by the dotted 
line indicated as ‘position of convection’ in Fig. 3. Calculations using a 1D laminar flamelet 
simulation [32] demonstrated that the 0.4 mm distance was sufficient to avoid thermophoresis effects.

The 3D flame displacement speed was determined by transporting the position of the flame front at 𝑡0, 
z = 0 mm by the local 3C velocity. The remaining distance between the transported contour and the 
nearest point on the reconstructed flame surface at time 𝑡0 + ∆𝑡𝐿𝐼𝐹 in the flame normal (𝑛⃑ ) is 
representative of the local displacement speed, 𝑆𝐷. Local values were determined for individual points 
spaced 20 μm along the flame contour (i.e. pixel resolution) on the SPIV plane. The limited spatial
resolution (80 μm LIF) is greater than the laminar flame thickness (𝛿𝐿 = 45 μm). The detected flame 
front in the measurements is therefore recognized as a spatially filtered quantity.

SPIV images were processed with a commercial software (LaVision, DaVis 8.1). Spatial calibration 
and dewarping of the SPIV images were accomplished with a 3D target (LaVision, Type7). Self-
calibration was accomplished from 200 Mie scattering images before ignition and provided a 
remaining average pixel disparity less than 0.01 pixels. Image cross-correlation and vector 
calculations were performed with a decreasing window size multi-pass algorithm. The final 
interrogation window size was 24 x 24 with 75% overlap, providing a 0.15 mm vector spacing.

Figure 3: Vectorial schematic of local flame 
transport.


Due to the limited spatial and temporal resolutions of each diagnostic, the quantities of 𝑆𝐷, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒, 
and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 reported in this work are considered to be filtered quantities. The effect of the limited 
measurement resolutions are discussed within Sect. 2.4. 

2.4 Measurement uncertainty

A detailed uncertainty and sensitivity analysis has been presented in [22] and a brief summary is 
provided here. The most influential parameters affecting measurement uncertainty are the LIF 
resolution and the accuracy of the unburnt gas velocity. The LIF detection systems, having a spatial
uncertainty of 80 μm, could result in a maximum possible offset (i.e. uncertainty) of 𝛿𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 160 μm 
between the flame surfaces identified at 𝑡0 and 𝑡0 + ∆𝑡𝐿𝐼𝐹. Assuming this offset detection is Gaussian 
distributed, an offset of 1σ between flame surfaces is 𝛿1𝜎 = 53 μm. The resulting uncertainty of 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 and 𝑆𝐷 associated with the LIF detection limits is 𝜓1𝜎,𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 𝛿1𝜎,𝑚𝑎𝑥 Δ𝑡𝐿𝐼𝐹
⁄
. At 800 RPM, 

𝜓1𝜎 = 1.1 m/s and 𝜓𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 3.2 m/s, while at 1500 RPM 𝜓1𝜎 = 2.1 m/s and 𝜓𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 6.4 m/s. 

Uncertainty of SPIV measurements are dependent on several parameters. Analysis of the SPIV 
particle response time (see Appendix A) demonstrates that BN particles with diameter of 3 μm will 
accurately follow the engine flow in this study. With an optimized experimental setup (i.e. optimized 
camera angles, depth of field, seeding density) and sophisticated processing algorithms (e.g. cross-
correlation, adaptive PIV with variable interrogation window size and shape [35], high accuracy mode 
for final passes), SPIV measurements have an estimated uncertainty of ≤ 10%. This would correspond 
to a maximum 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 uncertainty of 1.2 m/s (800 RPM) and 2.1 m/s (1500 RPM). 

Given the aforementioned uncertainties, a root mean square estimation for 𝑆𝐷 provides a 1σ 
uncertainty of ±1.5 m/s and ±3.0 m/s at 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively. Maximum uncertainties 
yield ±3.4 m/s and ±6.7 m/s at the respective RPMs. 

Peterson et al. also performed a rigorous sensitivity analysis on the calculation of 𝑆𝐷 [22]. This 
sensitivity analysis included variations of SPIV spatial resolution, location of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 relative to the 

flame surface, and laser sheet spacing (Δz). Variation in SPIV resolution and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 location yielded an
average deviation of Δ𝑆𝐷 = 0.8 m/s, which did not alter the 𝑆𝐷 distribution. Experiments performed 
with Δz = 0 mm (i.e. single-plane measurements) revealed that differences in each LIF detection 
system can yield a maximum artificial normal flame angle of 𝛽 ± 12o. This would yield a maximum 
bias of Δ𝑆𝐷 of 0.4 m/s. Additional experiments with Δz = 0.25 and 0.75 mm revealed similar 𝑆𝐷
distributions as those from Δz = 0.5 mm. Assuming that out-of-plane curvature is similar to in-plane 
curvature, it was argued that the linear reconstruction method with Δz = 0.5 mm is suitable to capture 
the local 3D flame structure. In addition to a rigorous conditional sampling analysis, it was concluded 
that 𝑆𝐷 distributions using this method are credible within the reported uncertainty.

3. Statistical distributions 

3.1 Flow field and burnt gas

Statistical distributions of the flow field and burnt gas locations are presented to provide an overview 
of the turbulent flow and flame environment in the SI engine. Figure 4 shows the ensemble-averaged 
flow field and the probability distribution of the burned gas at each RPM. Flow fields are shown 
before ignition timing and at the oCA for which OH-LIF measurements were acquired. Velocity 
statistics are based on 200 consecutive engine cycles. Streamlines are used to show the flow direction, 
while the color-scale depicts the 3C velocity magnitude. Burnt gas probability maps are shown at OH-
LIF timing and were constructed from binarized LIF images identifying the burnt gas. These 
distributions are based on 100 engine cycles. Ensemble-averaged velocity vectors are overlaid onto 
the burnt gas distributions.


Directly before spark timing, a clockwise tumble motion exists for both RPMs. At 1500 RPM, 
however, velocity magnitude is greater and the tumble center is shifted approximately 6 mm further to 
the right within the FOV. Differences of the tumble center location with RPM have been reported by 
the authors in previous work [28]. The cause of this shift is not investigated in this study. 

At the OH-LIF image timing, the flow patterns for each RPM are qualitatively similar, while higher 
velocity magnitudes are shown for 1500 RPM. The flow patterns exhibit a “sweeping” like flow 
motion from right-to-left in the lower-half of the FOV. This sweeping flow motion is primarily due to 
the piston movement towards TDC. For both RPMs, the highest velocities in the FOV exist southwest 
of the spark plug and are symmetrically centered near the cylinder axis (i.e. x = 0 mm). The upper-
half of the FOV exhibits lower velocity magnitude, particularly to the right of the spark plug where 
the tumble center is located. At 1500 RPM, the tumble center location is captured within the FOV, 
while at 800 RPM, SPIV images preceding −14oCA suggest that the tumble center is located directly 
next to the spark plug and is not as clearly identified in the FOV.

The burnt gas distributions exhibit several similarities between 800 and 1500 RPM. In brief, a flame 
develops radially outward from the spark plug with a greater tendency to propagate towards the 
exhaust side owing to the predominant left-to-right flow direction near the spark plug prior to ignition. 
At 1500 RPM, however, the enflamed gas region is larger and extends further towards the exhaust
side of the cylinder. Before ignition, the tumble center location being further from the spark plug and 
the overall higher velocity magnitudes are such that the flow at the spark plug is more strongly 
directed towards the exhaust side of the cylinder for 1500 RPM than for 800 RPM. Higher velocity 
magnitudes at 1500 RPM transport the flame further from the spark plug, which is also responsible for 
the larger enflamed area in the negative y-region. 

For completion, RMS velocity fields are shown in Fig. 5 to characterize the turbulence associated 
with the in-cylinder flow. RMS fields are constructed from Reynolds decomposition (200 cycle 
statistic) and considers all three velocity components. Selected iso-contours of the enflamed gas 
probability distribution are overlaid onto the RMS field. RMS velocities in the burnt gas region ranges 
from 2.5 – 4.0 m/s for 800 RPM and 5.0 – 8.0 m/s for 1500 RPM. Putting this into perspective with 
the laminar burning velocity (𝑆𝐿= 0.36 m/s) gives (𝑢′ 𝑆𝐿
⁄
)800 𝑅𝑃𝑀 = 6.9 – 11.1 and (𝑢′ 𝑆𝐿
⁄
)1500 𝑅𝑃𝑀 = 

13.8 – 22.2. The Reynolds decomposition method accounts for flow turbulence and flow variations 

Figure 4: Ensemble-average flow-fields and burnt gas PDFs at 800 RPM (top) and 1500 RPM (bottom). Left: flow 
field before spark timing. Middle: flow field at OH-LIF image timing. Right: burnt gas PDFs and ensemble-
average flow field (every 6th vector shown). Velocity statistics are based on 200 PIV images. PDF statistics are 
based on 100 LIF images.


from cycle-to-cycle. Although the reported 𝑢′ 𝑆𝐿
⁄
values are likely overestimated, they provide a 

relative comparison of the turbulent flow at each RPM. The reader is referred to our earlier work for 
further discussion on turbulence characterized by Reynolds decomposition and its relation to 
instantaneous turbulence using tomographic PIV [28].

Overall, the velocity and enflamed gas distributions presented in Figs. 4 and 5 demonstrate a similar 
initial flame development between 800 and 1500 RPM at the selected image timings. Thus, with 
similar thermodynamic conditions and only minor differences in flow patterns between 800 and 1500 
RPM, the selected operating parameters provide a practical environment to study flame propagation 
for different convective velocity magnitudes and turbulence levels. 

3.2 PDF distributions: 𝑆𝐷, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒

In this work, values of 𝑆𝐷, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 are spatially measured along flame surfaces. PDFs of 
these velocities are presented in Fig. 6 to describe the range of velocities resolved for each engine 
operation. Ensemble-average and standard deviation are reported within each subplot. The data is 
composed from 100 engine cycles, which encompasses 78,030(79,223) data points at 800(1500) 
RPM. 

For each velocity, the magnitude and the direction relative to the flame normal are of interest. 𝑆𝐷 is 
always normal to the flame surface. Thus, the sign of 𝑆𝐷 will automatically determine its magnitude
and direction relative to the flame surface; a positive 𝑆𝐷 indicates transport toward the reactants, 
while a negative 𝑆𝐷 indicates transport towards the products. The latter is identified as a negative 

Figure 5: RMS velocity distribution at 800 and 
1500 RPM. RMS field shown at OH-LIF image 
timing and based on 200 PIV images. Selected 
PDF burnt gas contours are overlaid onto the 
RMS field. 

Figure 6: (a) schematic of vector angles with respect to flame normal. (b-d): PDF of 𝑆𝐷, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒. 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛼)
and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛽) distributions are also reported to reveal velocity distributions relative to the flame normal. Statistics 
are based on 100 engine cycles, yielding 78,030 and 79,223 data points at 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively. 


flame speed. This phenomenon is discussed further in Sects. 4.1 and 4.2. 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 do not have

a fixed angle to 𝑛⃑ . Within this manuscript, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 values are referred to as velocity 

magnitude and unless otherwise stated, they will always exhibit a positive value. 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(𝛼) and 

𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(𝛽) velocities are used to indicate the direction relative to the flame normal. These 
velocities can be either positive or negative depending on the vector angle; positive velocities indicate 
transport towards the reactants, while negative velocities indicate transport towards the products. The 
vector angles 𝛼 and 𝛽 are calculated from the 3D projection of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 onto 𝑛⃑ . Distributions 

of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(𝛼) and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(𝛽) are also included in Fig. 6.

Referring to Fig. 6, as engine speed increases from 800 to 1500 RPM, the velocity distributions 
broaden. 𝑆𝐷, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(α), and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) distributions all exhibits longer tails towards both higher 

positive and negative velocities, while 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 distribution show a pronounced shift towards 
higher velocity magnitudes as engine speed increases. At 800 RPM, 11.2% of the data reports 
negative 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) values, while 19.9% and 13.7% of the data report negative 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(α)
values, respectively. At 1500 RPM, these negative distributions increase to 19.5%, 25.5% and 21.9%
for 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β), 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(α), respectively. Thus, while overall flame progression is faster at 
1500 RPM (i.e. higher positive velocities), there also appears to be a tendency for stronger local flame
recession (i.e. negative velocities) at the higher engine speed.  

Although the PDFs presented in Fig. 6 provide a general overview of the flame transport velocities, 
they do not reveal the physical mechanisms attributing to fast/slow flame progression. With such 
broad distributions of flame transport, it is important to understand the local combination of 𝑆𝐷 and 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities that appropriately yield favourable or unfavourable flame progression. The remainder 
of the paper presents analysis that investigates the local flame transport mechanisms that describe the 
PDF distributions presented in Fig. 6. 

4 Results

This section presents local distributions of 𝑆𝐷, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 resolved along flame contours to 
describe local flame transport. Section 4.1 discusses unique flame/flow interactions that yield positive 
or negative flame displacement for which the flame progresses towards the reactants or products, 
respectively. Section 4.2 presents locally resolved 𝑆𝐷 velocities with respect to 2D flame curvature to 
discuss flame dynamic behaviour that increases or decreases 𝑆𝐷 velocities. Finally, findings presented 
in Sect. 4.3 describe the in-cylinder locations where 𝑆𝐷 or 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 is the dominating mechanism 
responsible for flame transport.

Within the following discussion we use the words ‘convection’ and ‘thermal diffusion’ to refer to 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑆𝐷, respectively. It is acknowledged that physical mechanisms such as mass diffusion, flow 
dilatation, and surface density can also contribute to 𝑆𝐷. The Lewis number (Le) for the C8H18-air 
mixtures in this work is 1.99 (see Sect. 4.2). It is anticipated that thermal diffusion will have a more 
dominant role than mass diffusion. Several investigations (e.g. [36-38]) have shown flow dilatation 
can influence flame transport behavior, particularly for statistically flat flames. Chakraborty et al. [37] 
demonstrated that dilatation effects are less significant for spherical flame kernels than flat flames. 
Flame kernel development in the engine is more consistent to the spherical flame growth than a flat 
flame. However, there are many aspects in engine environments that previous studies have not 
addressed; e.g. dilatation (and surface density) effects at high pressure, high temperature, and various 
deviations from perfectly spherical flame propagation. While several arguments suggest that 𝑆𝐷
measured in our experiments is primarily depicted by thermal diffusion, further evidence is required 
to understand the role of mass diffusion, flow dilatation, and surface density on 𝑆𝐷 in engine 


environments. In this work, however, we believe that ‘thermal diffusion’ is a reasonable (and simple) 
terminology to describe 𝑆𝐷 and will be used hereafter.

4.1 Flame/flow interactions

This section evaluates flame/flow interactions that describe the local flame displacement. This 
analysis is first presented for an individual engine cycle at 1500 RPM. Figure 7 shows the OH-LIF 
images on each imaging plane for this individual engine cycle. The flame front, identified by the non-
linear diffusion filter and Canny edge detection, is superimposed onto the LIF images. The flame front 
is well resolved along the OH-LIF image with the exception of the left-hand side for the z = –0.5mm 
plane. At time to a weak OH-LIF signal exists outside the detected enflamed boundary, while at time 
to + ΔtLIF the OH-LIF signal is stronger and is considered by the filter and detection algorithms. 
Images suggest that a flame from the –z direction enters the z = –0.5mm plane, causing the 
differences in the detected flame front. Such effects would lead to systematic errors in 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 and 𝑆𝐷
(e.g. 𝑆𝐷 > 50 m/s). This is a limitation of the planar techniques utilized. Such regions of large 
discrepancy were easily identified via visual inspection during the filtering and detection steps. 
Beyond visual inspection, the calculation of 𝑆𝐷was suspended upon calculation of 𝑆𝐷 > 40 m/s (i.e. 
values greatly exceeding maximum values shown in Fig. 6). This further identified regions with large 
contour discrepancy between each frame. Such regions (for all cycles) were removed and not 
considered in the flame transport analysis. For the cycle in Fig. 7, approx. 28% of the flame contour 
was removed. At 1500 RPM, 22 out of 100 cycles required a portion of the flame contour to be 
removed. The percentage of flame contour removed ranged from 6% to 31% and the average length 
removed was 16%. At 800 RPM, only 18 out of 100 cycles required a portion of the flame contour to 
be removed; the percentage of flame contour removed ranged from 6% to 26% and the average length 
removed was 12%. 


Figure 8a shows the reconstructed flame front (z = 0mm, to) overlaid onto the 2D3C flow field for the 
individual cycle. The flow field (every 6th vector shown) exhibits many similarities to the ensemble-
average flow field in Fig. 4. The flow resembles the sweeping flow motion from right-to-left. The 
highest velocity magnitudes (≥ 10 m/s) are located in the left half of the FOV, while the region to the 
right of the spark plug exhibits lower velocities (≤ 6 m/s). The spark plug and pentroof cylinder head 
obstructed the view of the SPIV cameras, which were mounted at an angle (γ = 14o) with the imaging 
plane. This restricted velocity measurements near the spark plug and cylinder head, while OH-LIF 
images were able to reveal the flame in these areas. This explains why the flame contour extends 
beyond the velocity field in the upper right corner of Fig. 8. Such regions (for all cycles) are not 
considered in the flame transport analysis. 

For clarity and brevity, the detailed flame transport is described within a small flame segment
highlighted by the rectangle shown in Fig. 8a. The flame transport resolved within this flame segment 
admirably describes different regimes of the PDF distributions shown in Fig. 6. The 3D flame 
surfaces temporally resolved at to and to+ΔtLIF are shown in Fig. 8b. Spatially resolved 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒, 𝑆𝐷 and 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities (every 10th vector shown) along the flame surface (to) are displayed in Figs. 8 c,d,e
respectively. 

Figure 7: OH-LIF images in respective planes and image 
timings for an individual engine cycle at 1500 RPM. LIF 
images shown have been corrected for laser profile and 
absorption. The identified reaction zones are indicated by 
colored lines. 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 and 𝑆𝐷 quantities are not calculated 
in highlighted region on the left. 


The flame surfaces shown in Fig. 8b reveal that the flame is not transported uniformly and, in some 
locations, the flame surface is transported in the direction of the products, rather than the reactants.
This can be determined by evaluating 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) along the flame contour in Fig. 9. Figure 9 
reports the velocity values and vector angles calculated along the flame segment. Flame contour 
points in Fig. 9 begin at the left-most position of the flame segment and walk along the flame segment 
in equally spaced points. When the vector angle angle (β) between 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 and 𝑛⃑ is greater than 90o, 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) is negative and the flame is displaced towards the products. Locations where the flame 
is transported towards the products are highlighted by red vectors in Fig. 8c and grey shaded regions 
in Fig. 9. Figure 9 reveals that β can be as high as 150o such that the local flame propagation can be 
strongly directed towards the products. 

𝑆𝐷 velocities (Fig. 8d) are normal to the flame surface and span the range –2.5 ≤ 𝑆𝐷 ≤ 25 m/s. A 
negative 𝑆𝐷 occurs when the convection velocity transports the flame contour further than the flame 
surface at time to+ΔtLIF. As a result, 𝑆𝐷 ∙ 𝑛⃑ is in the direction of the products rather than reactants [22, 
23]. Negative 𝑆𝐷 velocities are discussed further in Sect. 4.2. Within this flame segment however, 𝑆𝐷
is primarily positive, indicating that the flame propagates towards the reactants.

𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities shown in Fig. 8e, on the other hand, demonstrate that convection transports a portion 
of the flame towards the reactants and other portions of the flame towards the products. Unlike 𝑆𝐷, the 
vector angle between 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑛⃑ is not fixed and has a definitive role in the convective flame 

transport. Although the 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 distribution for the flame segment in Fig. 8 exhibits a consistent flow 
direction, the flame surface exhibits severe wrinkling such that α significantly varies along the flame 
surface. 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(α) and α are evaluated along the flame segment and plotted in Fig. 9. Vector angles 
greater than 90o depict that the flame is transported towards the products, yielding a negative 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(α) value. In Fig. 8e, green vectors indicate locations where 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 transports the flame contour 

towards the products, while black vectors reveal locations where 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 transports the flame towards 
the reactants. 

Figure 8: (a) 2D flame contour (z = 0mm) overlaid onto the SPIV field for the individual cycle shown in Fig. 7. Blue 
rectangle highlights the flame segment shown in (b-e). (b) 3D flame surfaces at to and to+ΔtLIF, (c) local 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
distribution; locations where the flame is transported to the products are highlighted by red vectors. (d) local 
𝑆𝐷 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑏𝑢𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛, (e) local 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities; locations where α > 90o are highlighted by green vectors. 


The flame/flow configurations, determined by 𝑆𝐷, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, and α, are responsible for the local 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
distribution. Locations where α < 90o, both 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 participate to transport the flame towards the 

reactants as long as 𝑆𝐷 > 0. As 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 work in unison, this will yield higher (positive) 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
values than just 𝑆𝐷 alone. This can be seen in regions between x = 5.2 − 7.1mm (corresponding flame 
contour points 260−310 and 375-430, respectively, in Fig. 9) where α values are lowest (30o − 60o) 
and corresponding 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) values are highest (14.7 – 32.6 m/s). However, when α > 90o, the 
convective flow competes against the thermal diffusion such that 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 will be determined by larger 
magnitude between 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(𝛼) and 𝑆𝐷. When α > 90o and |𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(𝛼)| > 𝑆𝐷, adverse convection 
will dominate thermal diffusion such that the flame will be transported towards the products, yielding 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) < 0. However, if α > 90o, but |𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(𝛼)| < 𝑆𝐷, thermal diffusion will dominate the 
convective flow and the flame will progress towards the reactants as long as 𝑆𝐷 is positive. Such 
regions are highlighted in yellow in Fig. 9.

Flame/flow interactions for all cycles are described in Fig. 10 where the ratio of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
is analyzed 

with respect to the flame/flow angle, α. 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
(y-axis) effectively evaluates the ratio of velocity 

magnitudes to determine which transport mechanism is greater. Recall that 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 is considered to 
always be a positive value (i.e. purely velocity magnitude).  𝑆𝐷 is unique in that it is always normal to 
𝑛⃑ and the sign of 𝑆𝐷 depicts the direction relative to 𝑛⃑ ; positive/negative 𝑆𝐷 indicates its transport is 
towards the reactants/products. Thus, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
< 0 will only occur when 𝑆𝐷 < 0. The x-axis (𝛼) 

evaluates the direction of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 relative to 𝑛⃑ ; 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 transports the flame towards reactants when 𝛼 < 90o

and transports the flame towards the products when 𝛼 > 90o (see Fig. 6a). 

Data points in Fig. 10 are colored with respect to 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) values to identify flame/flow 
interactions that lead to a positive or negative overall flame displacement. In addition, data points 
corresponding to the highest (positive) 15% 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) values are highlighted to identify

Figure 9: Velocity and vector angle quantities 
along the flame contour in Fig. 8 b-e. Grey regions 
correspond to locations where 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛽) < 0. 
Yellow regions correspond to locations where 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛼) < 0, but 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛽) > 0 such that 
the flame propagates towards the reactants.


flame/flow interactions that lead to faster overall flame propagation. These data points correspond to 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) values exceeding 9.0 and 14.5 m/s at 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively.

The data points in Fig. 10 are distributed into quadrants I – IV, which are separated by x-y axes α = 
90o and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
= 0, respectively. Dashed lines located at 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
= ± 1 separate regions where 

either convection or thermal diffusion are more dominant towards the overall flame displacement. 
Overall, several flame/flow relationships exist that lead to a positive or negative flame displacement. 
These relationships are shown by data points located in specific regions within each quadrant. 
Findings are qualitatively similar for 800 and 1500 RPM and are discussed below in terms of thermal 
diffusive (𝑆𝐷) and convective (𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠) flame transport.


Flame displacement is positive (i.e. 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) > 0) when α < 90o and 𝑆𝐷 is a positive value. 
Such data is located in quadrant II. In this scenario, both convection and thermal diffusion work in 
unison to support flame displacement towards the reactants. 


Flame displacement is also positive beyond α > 90o when 0 < 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
< 1. Such data is located in 

quadrant I. Although the convection velocity transports the flame towards the products in this 
scenario, the thermal diffusive velocity, directed towards that reactants, is always greater such that 
the overall flame displacement progresses towards the reactants.


Flame displacement has the highest (positive) value when α < 90o and/or when thermal diffusion 
is more dominant than convection (i.e. 0 < 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷 <
⁄
1). This data is highlighted in dark blue in 

Fig. 10 and is primarily located in quadrant II. A small population of this data exists in quadrant I 
where α > 90o. This, however, occurs when 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
≤ 0.8, indicating that although convection is 

directed towards the products, thermal diffusion directed towards the reactants is more dominant 
and exceeds the specified 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) threshold. As α decreases from 90o (quadrant II), data 
points exhibiting high 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β) velocities also exist for 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
values greater than unity. 

This occurs as the flame-normal convection velocity (𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(𝛼)) increases and contributes 
towards the positive flame displacement towards the reactants. 


Flame displacement is negative when 𝑆𝐷 < 0 and α > 90o. This data is located in quadrant IV. In 
this scenario, both convection and thermal diffusion transport the flame towards the products.


Flame displacement is also negative when 𝑆𝐷 < 0 and α < 90o. Such data points are located in 
quadrant III where 0 > 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
> −1. In this scenario, although convection transports the flame 

towards the reactants, thermal diffusion, which is directed towards the products, is the dominant 
velocity that leads to the negative flame transport. 

In quadrants I and III, positive or negative flame displacement can exist in regions of |𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
| > 1 

and is dependent on the values of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
and α. In particular:


In quadrant I, α > 90o such that flame displacement will be positive as long as 𝑆𝐷 > 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(α). 
In this scenario, thermal diffusion transports the flame towards the reactants, while convection 
opposes 𝑆𝐷 and transports the flame towards the products. The flame will propagate towards the 
reactants as long as the flame-normal convection velocity is less than the thermal diffusion 
transport.


As α increases in quadrant I, the convective transport, directed towards the products, will exceed
the thermal diffusion transport directed towards the reactants. Flame displacement will become 
negative when 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 cos(α) > 𝑆𝐷. 


In quadrant III, 𝑆𝐷 transports the flame towards the products, while 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 transports the flame 
towards the reactants. Flame displacement will be positive as long as the flame-normal convection 
velocity is greater than thermal diffusion, i.e. 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 cos(α) > |𝑆𝐷|.



As α increases in quadrant III, the convection velocity towards the reactants decreases. Flame 
displacement will become negative when thermal diffusion towards the products exceeds the 
flame-normal convection velocity, i.e. |𝑆𝐷| > 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 cos(α).

This analysis reveals the complex nature of flame transport and discusses the numerous flame/flow 
configurations that exist in the engine. The percentage of data for positive and negative 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(β)
is reported in Fig. 10. As engine speed increases, the percentage of data in Q2 decreases, while the 
data percentage increases significantly for Q1 and Q4, revealing that a larger percentage of the 
flame/flow interactions occur with a larger flow/flame vector angle, α. This demonstrates the greater 
complexity of flame transport at higher RPMs and reveals one of the mechanisms leading to the 
higher occurrence of negative flame displacement at 1500 RPM. 

4.2 Flame dynamics describing 𝑆𝐷 behavior

While the flame/flow interactions leading to positive or negative 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(𝛽) values has been 
analyzed extensively, the large variation of 𝑆𝐷 values is less understood. In this section, 𝑆𝐷 is 
evaluated with respect to flame curvature (κ) to understand variations of flame speed along a flame 

Figure 10: Various flame/flow interactions for 
all cycles are evaluated within the quadrants of 
the 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑆𝐷
⁄
vs. α diagram. Data points are 

colored with respect to positive and negative 
flame displacement. Flame/flow interactions 
leading to fast flame propagation are 
highlighted in dark blue. The percentage of 
data for positive and negative flame 
displacement within each quadrant is reported.


contour in order to describe the 𝑆𝐷 distributions discussed in Sects. 3.2 and 4.1. Due to the limited z-
resolution, local flame curvature is evaluated in 2D using the relation [4, 39]:

𝜅 =

𝑑𝑥
𝑑𝑠∙𝑑2𝑦

𝑑𝑠2−𝑑𝑦

𝑑𝑠∙𝑑2𝑥

𝑑𝑠2

[(𝑑𝑥

𝑑𝑠)

2

+(𝑑𝑦

𝑑𝑠)

2

]
3 2
⁄
(2)

where s is the curvilinear coordinate. For this definition, curvature is considered positive (negative) 
when the flame is convex (concave) towards the reactants. 

Figure 11 evaluates 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 along sample sections of flame contours for two individual cycles that 
show different degrees of wrinkling. Both cycles are taken from the 1500 RPM dataset and the cycle 
shown in the bottom image is the same cycle discussed in Figs. 7-9. Figures 11 a,d show the OH-LIF 
images on the z = −0.5 mm plane and highlight the flame segments for which 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 are analyzed 
in detail. Flame curvature is evaluated along the z = 0 mm flame contour (white contour, Figs. 11 b,e).
Figures 11 c,f reveal 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 values along flame contour points for the highlighted flame segments.
Flame contour points in Figs. 11 c,f begin at the left-most position of the flame segment and walk 
along the flame segment in equally spaced points. Flame wrinkles are identified in Fig. 11 c,f when
curvature crosses the 𝜅 = 0 axis and indicated by the dotted vertical lines.

When analyzing each individual flame wrinkle, an inverse relationship between 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 becomes 
apparent. In particular, as 𝜅 decreases along concave flame wrinkles, there is a notable increase in 𝑆𝐷, 
while for convex flame wrinkles there is a notable decrease in 𝑆𝐷 as 𝜅 increases. This inverse 
relationship is valid for both small and large changes in curvature (|Δ𝜅| = 0.5 – 3.0). 

In some locations, however, deviations from the inverse relationship between 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 can exist. For 
example, cycle 28 shown in Figs. 11 a-c, initially shows that 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 inflection points are nearly 

Figure 11: 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 are evaluated along selected flame segments with different degrees of flame wrinkling. (a, 
d) OH-LIF images (z = -0.5 mm). (b,e) 𝑆𝐷 shown along the flame contour (z = 0 mm) for the selected flame 
segments highlighted in a,d. Every 10th vector shown. (c,f) 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 evaluated along z = 0 mm flame contours in 
b,e. Dotted vertical lines indicate the 𝜅 = 0 crossing. Inflection points with local maximum/minimum 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅
values are indicated by x and + symbols, respectively. 


perfectly aligned. However, beyond flame contour point 125, the inverse relationship between 𝑆𝐷 as 𝜅
becomes less synchronized. Along contour points 145-155, there is a brief change in 𝜅 (convex →
concave → convex). While Δ𝑆𝐷 becomes less negative in this region, Δ𝑆𝐷 does not mirror the same 
directional change (i.e. become positive) for this small curvature change around 𝜅 = 0. As a result, 
the inflection points are no longer perfectly aligned, but the inverse relationship between Δ𝑆𝐷 and Δ𝜅
still exists. It is remarkable that the distance between the small convex → concave flame segment is 
the same distance that offsets the 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 inflection points downstream as shown in Fig. 11c (40 
flame contour points; 1 contour point = 20 μm). In this example, the small directional change in 𝜅
across 𝜅 = 0 appears to create a delay in the response of 𝑆𝐷 with respect to changes in 𝜅. 

For cycle 35, shown in Figs. 11 d-f, the flame wrinkling is more pronounced leading to larger 𝜅
values. While the inflection points for 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 are not perfectly aligned, the inverse relationship 
between 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 exists for flame wrinkles with |𝜅| > 0.5. 

The relationship between 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 is further evaluated for all engine cycles. In this analysis, the 
average derivative between the inflection point and the crossing at the 𝜅 = 0 axis is considered for 
each flame wrinkle as described in Eq 3. 

𝑑(𝑌)

𝑑𝑥𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 = [

𝑌𝑖−𝑌1
𝑥𝑖−𝑥1 +

𝑌𝑖−𝑌2
𝑥𝑖−𝑥2] 2
⁄
(3)

where 𝑌 indicates the parameter 𝑆𝐷 or 𝜅, the subscript 𝑖 indicates values at the inflection point, and 
subscripts 1,2 indicates values at the 𝜅 = 0 crossing. In this analysis, 𝑆𝐷 has units of m/s, 𝜅 has units 
of 1/mm and 𝑑𝑥𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 has units of mm. The derivative for each data point along the flame contour is 
not considered because, as shown in Fig. 11, inflection points for 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 may not be perfectly 
aligned and will cause considerable scatter when comparing 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 derivatives along each contour 
point of the flame. 

Figure 12 a,b plots the relationship between 𝑑𝜅 𝑑𝑥𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
and 𝑑𝑆𝐷 𝑑𝑥𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
for all flame wrinkles 

identified for 100 engine cycles at each RPM. The data is divided into four quadrants (Q1-Q4). At 
800(1500) RPM, 94.1%(92.4%) of the data points lie in Q2 and Q4. Data in Q2 represents flame 
segments for which 𝑆𝐷 increases as the flame surface becomes more concave, while data in Q4 
represents flame segments for which 𝑆𝐷 decreases as the flame surface becomes more convex. The 
negative correlation between 𝑆𝐷 and 𝜅 gradients is consistent with flame theory for thermo-diffusively 
stable flames where the Lewis number (Le) is greater than unity [40-43]. In premixed combustion, Le
is traditionally defined for the deficient species, either fuel or oxidant. In the current work, the engine 
was operated with stoichiometric C8H18-air mixtures, such that there is no clear deficient species. 
Bechold and Matalon [44] have suggested that both fuel and oxidant will have an effect on the 
effective mixture Lewis number (Leeff), which is defined as:

𝐿𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓 = 1 +

(𝐿𝑒𝐸−1)+𝐴(𝐿𝑒𝐷−1)

1+𝐴
(4)

where subscripts E,D represent the excess and deficient species, respectively and A is defined as:

𝐴 = 1 + 𝛽(φ − 1) (5) 

where 𝛽 is the Zeldovich number and φ is related to the equivalence ratio and is either equal to or 
greater than unity. The effective Le proposed in [44] can theoretically be used to calculate Leeff for 
cases of stoichiometric mixtures. In such cases, φ = 1 such that A = 1 and Leeff is effectively the 
weighted averaged Le of both substances (i.e. 𝐿𝑒𝑒𝑓𝑓 = (𝐿𝑒𝑜𝑥𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑡 + 𝐿𝑒𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙) 2
⁄ ). CHEMKIN is used 

in this work to calculate the thermal and mass diffusivities at the relevant engine conditions (P = 11.1 
bar, T ≈ 500 K). The effective Lewis number for the C8H18-air mixtures in this work is Leeff = 1.99. 
This suggests a thermo-diffusively stable flame for which the results shown in Fig. 12 are consistent 
with flame theory; namely 𝑆𝐷 will increase for concave flamelets and 𝑆𝐷 will decrease for convex 


flamelets. Until now, this inverse relationship has primarily been shown for 3D simplified chemistry-
and 2D detailed chemistry-based DNS studies for much simpler flame environments [6-9, 45-48].

At 800 RPM, 16.7% of the data is located outside the region |𝑑𝜅 𝑑𝑥𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
| ≤ 5, |𝑑(𝑆𝐷) 𝑑𝑥𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
| ≤

10 (dashed rectangle). At 1500 RPM, the data is distributed within a larger domain and 35.6% of the 
data fall outside of this region. The PDF of 𝜅 along each contour point (100 cycles) is shown in Fig. 
12c for each RPM. While 𝜅 shows a slightly broader distribution towards larger |𝜅| values at 1500 
RPM, the analysis in Figs. 12a,b demonstrates that the 𝜅 gradients can be significantly larger at 1500 
RPM, which often yield a larger 𝑆𝐷 gradient along the flame contour. This suggest that the more 
severe wrinkling at the higher RPM, may directly result in higher (positive) and negative flame speeds 
as depicted in the PDF distributions of Fig. 6. 

4.2.1 Negative 𝑆𝐷

It is important to emphasize that the notion of a negative 𝑆𝐷 does not pertain to rates of fuel 
consumption or heat release, but instead pertains to the flame displacement relative to the flow. 
Several experimental and computational studies have reported negative 𝑆𝐷 [6-9, 22, 23, 46-51]. DNS 
studies have identified three primary mechanisms attributed to negative 𝑆𝐷: (1) strong diffusive 
effects tangential to flame contours exhibiting high positive curvature [7-9], (2) high compressive or 
tangential strain [8, 9, 47], and (3) sensitivities of the prescribed isolevel used to identify the flame 
front [51].

The data points shown in Fig. 12 distinguish between flame segments that have either a positive or 
negative 𝑆𝐷 value at its inflection point (i.e. 𝑆𝐷,𝑖 in Eq. 3). Flame segments associated with 𝑆𝐷,𝑖 > 0 
are shown as blue circles, while flame segments associated with 𝑆𝐷,𝑖 < 0 are shown as red crosses. 
The majority of flame segments involving negative 𝑆𝐷,𝑖 values are associated with convex flame 
curvature; at 800(1500) RPM, 89.6%(87.9%) of data with 𝑆𝐷,𝑖< 0 are located in Q4. Such findings are 
in agreement with DNS studies [7-9, 47], which report negative 𝑆𝐷 associated with high positive 
flame curvature for thermo-diffusively stable flames. Gran et al [6] and Chakraborty [9] demonstrate
that this phenomenon is due to strong molecular diffusive effects tangential to flame contours 
exhibiting high positive curvature. Chakraborty [9] demonstrates that tangential diffusive effects 
causing a negative 𝑆𝐷 is much stronger in the thin reaction zone regime than in the corrugated 
flamelet regime of premixed combustion.

Figure 12: a,b) 𝑑𝜅 𝑑𝑥
⁄
vs. 𝑑𝑆𝐷 𝑑𝑥
⁄
for individual flame segments exhibiting convex and concave flame wrinkles. 

Symbol o represents flame segments having positive 𝑆𝐷,𝑖 values. Symbol x represents flame segments having negative 
𝑆𝐷,𝑖 values. c) 𝜅 PDF for all points along flame contours. Data in Fig. 12 consists of 100 cycles at each RPM, which 
includes 912 and 854 flame segments at 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively.


Analysis of the turbulent flow field in Sect. 3.1 and preliminary analysis of length scales using the 
two-point auto-correlation provide the following at the image timing employed: 𝑙 𝛿𝐹
⁄
~ 9 – 20 and 

𝑢′ 𝑆𝐿
⁄
= 6.9 – 22.2. While these findings are limited on the Reynold decomposition methodology, 

these values are suggestive that the reaction takes place within the thin reaction zone regime for the 
imaging timing and engine conditions employed in this work. This may explain why the 
overwhelming majority of the data exhibiting negative 𝑆𝐷 occur for positively curved flame segments. 
However, we should also recognize that positive flame curvature does not directly yield a negative 
𝑆𝐷; 34% and 40% of the 𝑆𝐷,𝑖 > 0 data are also located in Q4 for 800 and 1500 RPM, respectively.

Despite the majority of negative 𝑆𝐷 data exhibiting positive flame curvature, other factors could also 
contribute to negative 𝑆𝐷 values but are not evaluated in detail. For example, high tangential and 
compressive strain can yield a negative 𝑆𝐷, however, strain rates along the flame surface are not 
evaluated in this work due to the lack of gradient information in the z-direction. Since the flow field 
and flame propagation within the engine is highly 3D, we anticipate that z-gradients will be 
significant and should not be ignored. Negative 𝑆𝐷 values can also arise from measurement 
uncertainty, including limitations in linear approximation of the flame surface between the parallel 
planes. This was discussed in detail in [22] and it was shown that negative 𝑆𝐷 values still occur 
beyond maximum uncertainty, signifying that they are statistically significant.

4.3 Spatially distributed 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒

4.3.1 Individual cycle analysis

Thus far, the analysis has revealed the mechanisms that can lead to positive or negative, slow or fast 
𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 velocities. In this section we evaluate how 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 are spatially 

distributed throughout the FOV. In this section, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 is reported as a positive(negative) velocity if 
the flame is transported to the reactants(products). This is different than previous sections where
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 was strictly positive and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒cos(𝛽) (i.e. the flame-normal component) was evaluated as 
positive/negative to determine the velocity transport towards reactants/products. In this section, it is 
more meaningful to report the velocity magnitude rather than individual components, while still 
indicating the direction of the overall flame progression. 

Figure 13 shows 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 spatially distributed along flame contours for two individual 
cycles at each RPM. Velocity values shown along the flame contour are spatially averaged onto a 0.25 
x 0.25 mm2 grid. The left-most images show the flame contours superimposed onto the SPIV images. 
In these images three general regions (R1−R3) are highlighted to discuss local flame propagation 
characteristics that are common amongst recorded cycles. Region 1 is a general region downstream of 
the spark plug and often encompasses the tumble center. R1 often exhibits the lowest 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities 

in the FOV. Within R1, 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities are equal in magnitude with the exception that 𝑆𝐷 is 
greater in some locations. This implies that both thermal diffusion and convection can equally 
contribute to the overall flame displacement velocity in R1. 

Region 2 is a general region directly above the piston and beneath the spark plug. R2 exhibits the 
sweeping flow motion as described in Sect. 3.1, for which velocity magnitude increases from right-to-
left. Consequently as one progresses from right-to-left along the flame contour in R2, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 exceeds
𝑆𝐷, revealing that convection becomes the more dominating mechanism for flame displacement. Both 
individual cycles also show local regions of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 < 0 where convection opposes the flame normal 
(i.e. α > 90o) and exceeds thermal diffusion transport directed towards the reactants.  


Regions 3 is a general region containing the flame furthest to the left of the spark plug and towards 
the intake. The flame contour in R3 experiences the highest 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities in the FOV. In some 

locations 𝑆𝐷 is comparable to 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒, but otherwise 𝑆𝐷 is primarily less than 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 in R3. In most 

locations 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑆𝐷 both transport the flame towards the reactants such that 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 exhibits the 
highest (positive) values in R3. Thus, the flame typically experiences the fastest flame development in 
R3.

Figure 13 introduces another topic that has not been discussed until now: flame transport near solid 
surfaces. The individual cycle at 1500 RPM shows a portion of the flame near the piston surface. At 
the image timing employed approx. 10% of the images captured a flame near the piston surface. 
When the flame is closer than 0.4 mm from the piston surface, the convection velocity is extracted 0.1 
mm away from the flame location. The flame impinges on the piston surface at x = 0.5 mm. Velocities 
are not evaluated at this location. To the right of the flame impingement 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 are amongst 
the lowest values along the entire flame contour: −4 ≤ 𝑆𝐷 ≤ 2 m/s, −6 ≤ 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 ≤ 3 m/s. The 
negative 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 values are a result of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 opposing the flame normal and negative 𝑆𝐷 velocities. 
These negative 𝑆𝐷 velocities may indicate some aspects of flame quenching near the piston. This 
trend is discussed further within Fig. 14, but since these measurements were not specifically designed 
to study flame/wall interaction, the negative 𝑆𝐷 velocities near the piston surface are merely discussed 
as an observation at this stage. Improved spatial resolution of LIF and PIV such as presented in [52] 
or spatio-thermochemical probing of flame/wall interactions using short-pulse CARS measurements 
[53] are better suited to further investigate the flame behavior near solid surfaces.

4.3.2 Ensemble-average

Figure 14 shows the ensemble-average 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 values spatially distributed within the 
FOV. Values are reported for flame contours from 100 cycles at each RPM. For an individual flame 
contour, velocity values are spatially averaged onto a 0.25 x 0.25 mm2 grid as described for Fig. 13. 
Similar to Sect. 4.3.1, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 is reported as a magnitude (i.e. always positive), while 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 are 
reported as positive/negative to emphasize if the flame is transported towards the reactants/products.
To describe the vector orientation with respect to the flame surface, 𝛼 and 𝛽 values are extracted 
along the flame contours and the ensemble-average field is shown in Fig. 15. Regions R1-R3 are 
highlighted in Figs. 14 and 15 to coordinate the discussion with findings already presented. 

Figure 13: 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 values along flame contours (z = 0 mm) for two individual cycles at 800 and 1500 RPM. 
Values shown along the flame contour are spatially averaged onto a 0.25 x 0.25 mm2 grid. Every 6th vector shown in SPIV 
images.


The velocity maps (Fig. 14) and vector angle maps (Fig. 15) support the findings discussed in Sect.
4.1 and 4.3.1. At both RPMs, convection velocities are lowest to the east/southeast of the spark plug 
and covers a significant region of R1. Regions of high positive 𝑆𝐷 exist southeast of the spark plug 
and extend into R1. Within this general region, 𝑆𝐷 is equal to or slightly greater than 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, indicating
that both thermal diffusion and convection play an influential role in the overall flame transport. 𝛼
values within R1 (and the entire FOV) are larger for 1500 RPM than at 800 RPM and signifies a more 
complex flame/flow interaction at higher engine speeds. Regions with 𝛼 > 90o indicate regions where 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 can transport the flame towards the products. Within R1 and other regions around the spark 

plug, pockets of 𝛼 > 90o exist, but 𝑆𝐷 often exceeds 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 in these regions and results in a positive 

flame displacement (i.e. 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 > 0). 

Below the spark plug in R2, Fig. 14 shows a clear increase in 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠from right-to-left with higher 
velocities present at 1500 RPM. In region R2, Fig. 14 reveals that convection becomes the more 
dominant mechanism for flame transport as 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 greatly exceeds 𝑆𝐷. Additionally, Fig. 15 reveals 
that a majority of R2 exhibits 𝛼 value between 70o–110o, which reiterates the strong sweeping flow 
motion in this region. Several locations directly above the piston exhibit 𝛼 > 90o, indicating that the 
strong convection velocity often opposes 𝑛⃑ , leading to negative flame transport. This is more 
pronounced at 1500 RPM. The combination of adverse convection and negative 𝑆𝐷 velocities near the 
piston result in the negative 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 velocities observed near the piston surface.

Figure 14: Ensemble-average 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 fields at 800 and 1500 RPM. Statistics are based on 100 cycles. 
Velocity values are taken along flame contours and spatially averaged onto a 0.25x0.25 mm2 grid. 

Figure 15: Ensemble-average 
𝛼 and 𝛽 fields at 800 and 
1500 RPM. Statistics are 
based on 100 cycles. Values 
are taken along flame 
contours and spatially 
averaged onto a 0.25x0.25 
mm2 grid.


Flame surfaces within R3 exhibit the highest 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities within the FOV. While regions of high 
𝑆𝐷 also exist in R3, convection is typically the more dominant transport mechanism. This is consistent
for both RPMs. Moreover, Fig. 15 reveals that 𝛼 values in R3 are amongst the lowest within the FOV. 
Thus, the high 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities are more-aligned with 𝑛⃑ such that 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and positive 𝑆𝐷 velocities both 
contribute towards positive flame displacement. As a result, flame displacement is shown to be the 
fastest within R3, particularly on the leading edge of the 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 map for both RPMs. The rapid flame 
development in R3 would suggest the transition from the early flame development (0-10% mass 
fraction burned (MFB)) to the main combustion phase (10-75% MFB) when the majority of the fuel’s 
heat is released.

The ratio 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
and 𝑆𝐷 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
are also extracted along individual flame contours. In this 

analysis, all velocities are considered to have positive values (i.e. purely velocity magnitude). Figure 
16 shows the ensemble-average fields of these ratios. These fields help quantify the contribution of 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑆𝐷 towards the overall flame transport and appropriately highlights the differences between 
800 and 1500 RPM. With an exception of a few locations, it is shown that convection often has the 
greatest contribution towards the overall flame transport and this contribution increases as engine 
speed increases. For both RPMs, convection transport is greatest in R2 and R3 where 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities 
are the highest. At 1500 RPM, convection also dominates the flame transport in the far southeast 
region of the FOV. Referring to Fig. 14, this region exhibits moderate-to-high 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities (6 ≤ 

𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 ≤ 12), but equally exhibits low 𝑆𝐷 velocities (0 ≤ |𝑆𝐷| ≤ 3), which results in high 

𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
values.

For each RPM, 𝑆𝐷 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
values are consistently highest directly southeast of the spark plug and 

within R1. In these regions, 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 is the lowest and 𝑆𝐷 is the highest within the FOV. At 800 RPM, 
50-60% of flame transport is governed by thermal diffusion in this region but decreases to 40-50% at 
1500 RPM. 

4.3.3 Statistical significance

The velocity maps shown in Figs. 14-16 are based on 100 engine cycles. As depicted in Fig. 13, the 
flame contour for each cycle will only occupy a limited terrain within the FOV. Thus, not each grid 
point will contain velocity data from all 100 cycles. Figure 17 shows the number of data points
occupied within each 0.25 x 0.25 mm2 grid point to portray the statistical significance of the findings 
presented in Figs. 14-16. 

Figure 16: Spatially 
distributed 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
and 

𝑆𝐷 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
values 

are used to quantify 
the contribution of 
convection and 
thermal diffusion 
towards the overall 
flame transport at 
800 and 1500 RPM.


The number of data points is greatest within the center of the spatial domain. The maximum local 
sample size is larger for 800 RPM than for 1500 RPM, because the overall spatial domain is smaller at 
800 RPM, while the total number of samples is similar for both RPMs (78,030 and 79,223 at 800 and 
1500 RPM, respectively). Along an individual flame contour, as seen in Fig. 13, approx. 8-12 data 
points exist (on average) within each 0.25 x 0.25 mm2 cell containing a flame contour. Dividing the 
local sample size by 8-12 provides a rough estimation of the number of cycles considered at a 
particular cell. Regions R1-R3, as discussed in Fig. 13, are highlighted within Fig. 17 to discuss the 
number of data samples and cycles that occur within these regions.

Grid cells with less than 10 data points only include velocity information from single cycles, however 
several cycles may make up the entirety of these regions. Regions with less than 10 data points are 
small and located along the perimeter of the spatial domain. Cells containing 10-20 data points 
typically include velocity information from 1−2 cycles. However, regions containing 10-20 data 
points per cell are large and 10’s of cycles are located within such regions. For example, the region of 
10-20 data within R3 contains 17 cycles for 800 RPM and 35 cycles for 1500 RPM. Similarly, the 10-
20 region within R2 for 1500 RPM contains velocity data from 28 cycles. Other regions within R2 
and R3 contain higher sample sizes per grid cell and comprise of even more cycles. On average, R1 
contains the largest sample size per cell with up to 70-80 and 40-50 data points per cell for 800 and 
1500, respectively. Overall, approx. 90% of the cycles contain a flame contour within R1 for both 
RPMs.

The limited number of samples within the 100 cycles is a limitation within this work and will 
contribute to some of the spatial variance of the distributions shown in Figs. 14-16. Although the 
sample size is limited, it is important to emphasize the consistent findings amongst all cycles 
containing flame contours in each region. Namely:


Cycles within R1 exhibit amongst the lowest 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 velocities. While thermal diffusion 
typically has a larger contribution towards the overall flame transport in R1, convection also 
plays an important role, particularly at the higher RPM. 


Flame convective transport is the most dominant within R2, which exhibits the sweeping flow
motion above the piston surface. Within R2, 𝛼 values often exceed 90o demonstrating that 
adverse convection will transport the flame towards the products. Moreover, for some cycles 
the flame is shown to impinge on the piston surface for which a decrease in 𝑆𝐷 is be observed.
Both the convection and thermal diffusion velocities attribute to negative 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 velocities 
above the piston surface.

Figure 17: Number of data points evaluated 
within the 0.25 x 0.25 mm2 grid spacing for the 
velocities presented in Figs. 14-15.



Flame contours in R3 exhibit the largest 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 velocities. Such areas exhibit rapid 
flame development, which may indicate the onset of the main combustion phase

While the specific location of the transport velocity behavior may be unique for this engine, its 
operation and image timing, the findings are presented in relation to common flow characteristics 
featured in most IC engines. Therefore, such findings are anticipated not to be limited to a particular 
engine and are appropriate to understand combustion performance and develop predictive engine 
models for several IC engine platforms.

5. Conclusions

This work presents a novel experimental dataset to study the detailed flame transport within a 
homogeneous charged SI engine. Dual-plane OH-LIF and SPIV were performed to resolve the 
thermal diffusive and convective flame transport components in a thin 3D domain. Experiments were 
performed at 800 and 1500 RPM during early flame kernel development when less than 5% of the 
fuel was consumed. Ignition and image timings were carefully selected to provide similar 
thermodynamic conditions at each RPM, while the difference in engine speed provided a practical
environment to study flame propagation for different convection velocity and turbulence levels. 

As engine speed increases, PDFs revealed that flame transport velocities show a broader distribution 
to both higher positive and negative velocities. Negative velocities indicate that the flame is 
transported towards the products rather than reactants. Analysis of flame/flow interactions was 
performed to describe the flame/flow configurations that lead to positive and negative flame transport. 
The overall flame transport is a result of the relationships between 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, 𝑆𝐷 and their vector angle 
with the flame normal 𝑛⃑ . While 𝑆𝐷 remains normal to the flame surface, the vector angle (α) between 
𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑛⃑ exhibits large variations, especially in regions of flame wrinkling. Positive or negative 

flame transport is depicted by the sign of 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠cos(𝛼) and 𝑆𝐷. When these velocities are positive, both 

𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑆𝐷 participate to transport the flame towards the reactants and often yield the highest 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
velocity. The measurements revealed several flame/flow relationships that describe the complex 
nature of flame development for turbulent flows within SI engines. 

𝑆𝐷 was evaluated with respect to flame curvature (𝜅) to understand the variation of 𝑆𝐷 along flame 
contours. The flame speed behavior is consistent with that for thermo-diffusively stable flames. 
Analysis also shows a strong correlation between negative 𝑆𝐷 and convex flame contours. Until now, 
such flame dynamics have not been studied in detail within engine environments. Moreover, at the 
higher engine speed, more severe wrinkling was correlated to larger changes in 𝑆𝐷, which describes 
the broader 𝑆𝐷 distribution towards higher positive and negative velocities. 

𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠, 𝑆𝐷 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 velocities were analyzed in detail to understand their spatial distribution within 
the cylinder. This analysis provided the opportunity to quantify the relative contribution of convective 
and thermal diffusive flame transport within the FOV. The ratio 𝑆𝐷 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
⁄
is greatest downstream 

the spark plug where unburnt gas velocities are lowest behind the spark plug and near the tumble 
center. Beneath the spark plug, a strong sweeping flow motion exists for which convection is the 
most-dominating mechanism of flame transport. Near the piston surface, cycles exhibit lower (and 
sometimes negative) 𝑆𝐷, which may indicate local flame quenching. In combination with adverse 
convection transport, several locations with negative 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 exist above the piston. As the flame 
enters into the intake domain of the cylinder, the flame/flow angle (α) is more aligned with 𝑛⃑ and the 
flame is rapidly transported towards the reactants by 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝑔𝑎𝑠 and 𝑆𝐷. The flame in this region exhibits 
rapid flame development which likely demonstrates the transition from early flame development to 
the main combustion phase. Overall, the convection transport becomes greater in all regions at higher 
RPM.


These measurements provide a first insight into the detailed 3D flame transport based on statistical 
analysis of instantaneous 3D time-resolved quantities within a technically relevant environment. 
While some local phenomena may be specific to this engine’s operating conditions, most phenomena 
are described to common flow features (e.g. tumble, squish) in SI engines. Therefore, findings are 
anticipated to be a great use to the combustion and modelling community to predict more accurately 
the flame transport and subsequent heat release. The measurements also reveal the need to develop
models that predict negative 𝑆𝑑 and 𝑈⃑⃑ 𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒 velocities due to flame wrinkling, adverse convection and 
potential flame quenching near surfaces. 

Acknowledgements

The authors kindly acknowledge financial support from the ERC (grant 759546), DFG 
(SFB/Transregio 150) and EPSRC (EP/P020593/1, EP/P001661/1). A. Dreizler acknowledges 
financial support from the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz program. The authors are also especially 
thankful to LaVision for borrowing equipment, M.-S. Benzinger (ITT, Karlsruhe) for the 1D flamelet 
simulations, P. Brequigny (PRISME, Univ. Orléans) for CHEMKIN simulations, and C. Karakannas 
and A. Khan for their help in image processing.

Appendix A: SPIV particle response time

The response time of the SPIV seeding medium is evaluated to ensure that SPIV particles will 
appropriately follow the engine flow. The seeding particle response time is calculated as [54]:

𝜏𝑝 = 𝜌𝑝𝑑𝑝

2 18𝜇𝑎𝑖𝑟
⁄
(6)

where 𝜌𝑝 is the particle density (𝜌𝐵𝑁 = 2100 kg/m3), 𝑑𝑝 is the particle diameter (3 μm) and 𝜇𝑎𝑖𝑟 is the 
gas viscosity (𝜇𝑎𝑖𝑟 = 2.89e-5 Ns/m2 evaluated at 550K [55]). The calculated particle response time for 
the BN particles is 𝜏𝑝 = 36 μs. The seeding particles’ response time should be lower than relevant 
timescales of the engine flow. A typical engine timescale is described by [56]:

𝜏𝑒 = 𝑆 𝑉𝑝
⁄
(7)

where S is the engine stroke (86 mm) and 𝑉𝑝 is the mean piston speed (2.3 m/s (800 RPM) or 4.3 m/s 
(1500 RPM)). 𝜏𝑒 describes the flow variation rate imposed by the time varying engine boundary 
conditions. Another timescale for consideration is the turbulent turn-over timescale [56]:

𝜏𝑡 = 𝐿 𝑢′
⁄
(8)

where L is the length scale of the size of the energy containing eddies and 𝑢′ is a representative RMS
velocity associated with these eddies. Following the analogy of Lumley [57], L can be estimated to be 
1/6 the largest possible eddy (taken as the height between the piston and cylinder head; L = 17.3 mm / 
6). In previous studies, 𝑢′ is often equal to the piston velocity [56, 57]. In this study, we take 𝑢′ as the 
maximum velocity fluctuation from a Reynolds decomposition approach (see section 3). In 
comparison to the piston velocity, the representative 𝑢′ values used in this work are larger, which 
yields shorter 𝜏𝑡 timescales. 

Considering these timescales, the Stokes number is calculated: 

𝑆𝑡 = 𝜏𝑝 𝜏𝑒,𝑡
⁄
(9)

As can be seen in Table 2, Stokes numbers range from 0.04 – 0.1, with the highest values associated 
with 1500 RPM due to larger 𝑢′ values. The maximum Stokes number being smaller than unity 
demonstrates that the SPIV particles will accurately follow the engine flow in this study.  


Table 2: Particle time scales, flow time scales and representative Stokes numbers.

𝜏𝑝 (μs)
𝜏𝑒 (μs)
𝜏𝑡 (μs)
𝑆𝑡𝑒
𝑆𝑡𝑡

800 RPM
36
37,400
580
9.6e-04
6.2e-02

1500 RPM
36
20,000
320
1.8e-03
1.1e-01

References

1.
J.F. Driscoll, Turbulent premixed combustion: Flamelet structure and its effect on turbulent 
burning velocity, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 34 (1) (2008) 91-134.

2.
T. Poinsot, D. Venante, Theoretical and Numerical Combustion, 3rd Ed., Aquaprint, Bordeaux, 
France, 2012.

3.
H. Wang, E.R. Hawkes, B. Zhou, J.H. Chen, Z. Li, M. Aldén, A comparison between direct 
numerical simulation and experiment of the turbulent burning velocity-related statistics in a 
turbulent methane-air premixed jet flame at high Karlovitz number, Proc. Combust. Inst. 36 
(2017) 2045-2053.

4.
P. Brequiny, F. Halter, C. Mounaїm-Rosselle, Lewis number and Markstein length effects on 
turbulent expanding flames in a spherical vessel, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 73 (2016) 33-41.

5.
J.R. Osborne, S.A. Ramji, C.D. Carter, A.M. Steinberg, Relationship between local reaction 
rate and flame structure in turbulent premixed flames from simultaneous 10 kHz TPIV, OH 
PLIF and CH2O PLIF, Proc. Combust. Inst. 36 (2017) 1835-1841.

6.
J.H. Chen, H.G. Im, Stretch effects on the burning velocity of turbulent premixed hydrogen/air 
flames, Proc. Combust. Inst. 28 (2000) 211-218.

7.
I.R. Gran, T. Echekki, J.H. Chen, Negative flame speed in an unsteady 2-D premixed flame: a 
computational study, Symp. (Int.) Combust. 26 (1996) 323-329.

8.
E.R. Hawkes, J.H. Chen, Comparison of direct numerical simulation of lean premixed methane-
air flames with strained laminar flame calculations, Combust. Flame (2006) 112-125.

9.
N. Chakraborty, Comparison of displacement speed statistics of turbulent premixed flames in 
the regimes representing combustion in corrugated flamelets and thin reaction zones, Phys. 
Fluids 19 (2007) 105109.

10. R.G. Abdel-Gayed, D. Bradley, M.N. Hamid, M. Lawes, Lewis number effects on turbulent 

burning velocity, Symp. (Int.) Combust. 20 (1985) 505-512.

11. D. Bradley, M.Z. Haq, R.A. Hicks, T. Kitagawa, M. Lawes, C.G.W. Sheppard, R. Woolley, 

Turbulent burning velocity, burned gas distribution, and associated flame surface definition, 
Combust. Flame 133 (2003) 415-430.

12. H. Kobayashi. Y. Kawabata, K. Maruta, Experimental study on general correlation of turbulent 

burning velocity at high pressure, Symp. (Int.) Combust. 27 (1998) 941-948.

13. N. Chakraborty, R.S. Cant, Direct numerical simulation analysis of the flame surface density 

transport equation in the context of large eddy simulation, Proc. Combust. Inst. 32 (2009) 1445-
1453.

14. H. Pitsch, L. Duchamp de Lagenest, Large-eddy simulation of premixed turbulent combustion 

using a level-set approach, Proc. Combust. Inst. 29 (2002) 2001-2008.

15. B. Peterson, V. Sick, High-speed flow and fuel imaging study of available spark energy in a 

spray-guided direct-injection engine and implications on misfires, Int. J. Engine Res. 11, (2010) 
313-329.

16. B. Peterson, D. L. Reuss, V. Sick, High-speed imaging analysis of misfires in a spray-guided 

direct injection engine, Proc. Combust. Inst. 33 (2011) 3089-3096.

17. B. Peterson, D.L. Reuss, V. Sick, On the ignition and flame development in a spray-guided 

direct-injection spark-ignition engine, Combust. Flame 161 (2014) 240-255.


18. W. Zeng, M. Sjöberg, D.L. Reuss, Z. Hu, The role of spray-enhanced swirl flow for combustion 

stabilization in a stratified-charge DISI engine, Combust. Flame 168 (2016) 166-185.

19. P. M. Lillo, H. Zhuang, V. Sick, Topological development of homogeneous-charge and spray-

guided stratified-charge flames in an internal combustion engine. Int. J. Engine Res. 19 (2018) 
96-108.

20. M.M. Koupaie, A. Cairns, H. Vafamehr, T. Lanzanova, Cyclically resolved flame and flow 

imaging in an SI engine operating with future ethanol fuels, SAE Technical Paper 2017-01-
0655, 2017.

21. C. Mounaїm-Rosselle, L. Landry, F. Halter, F. Foucher, Experimental characteristics of 

turbulent premixed flame in a boosted spark-ignition engine, Proc. Combust. Inst. 34 (2013) 
2941-2949.

22. B. Peterson, E. Baum, B. Böhm, A. Dreizler, Early flame propagation in a spark-ignition engine 

measured with quasi 4D-diagnostics, Proc. Combust. Inst. 35 (2015) 3829-3837.

23. P.J. Trunk, I. Boxx, C. Heeger, W. Meier, B. B. Böhm, A. Dreizler, Premixed flame propagation 

in turbulent flow by means of stereoscopic PIV and dual-plane OH-PLIF at sustained kHz 
repetition rates, Proc. Combust. Inst. 34 (2013) 3565-3572.

24. E. Baum, B. Peterson, B. Böhm, A. Dreizler, On the validation of LES applied to internal 

combustion engine flows: Part 1: Comprehensive experimental database, Flow Turb. Combust.
92 (2014) 269-297.

25. D. Freudenhammer, B. Peterson, C.-P. Ding, B. Böhm, S. Grundmann, The influence of 

cylinder head geometry variations on the volumetric intake flow captured by magnetic 
resonance velocimetry, SAE Int. J. Engines 8(4) (2015), 1826-1836.

26. D. Freudenhammer, E. Baum, B. Peterson, B. Böhm, B. Jung, S. Grundmann, Volumetric 

intake flow measurements in an IC engine using magnetic resonance velocimetry, Exp. Fluids 
55 (2014) 1724.

27. B. Peterson, E. Baum, B. Böhm, V. Sick, A. Dreizler, Spray-induced temperature stratification 

dynamics in a gasoline direct-injection engine, Proc. Combust. Inst. 35 (2015) 2923-2931.

28. F. Zentgraf, E. Baum, B. Böhm, A. Dreizler, B. Peterson, On the turbulent flow in piston 

engines: coupling of statistical theory quantities and instantaneous turbulence, Phys. Fluids 28
(2016) 045108.

29. B. Peterson, E. Baum, C.-P. Ding, A. Dreizler, B. Böhm, Assessment and application of 

tomographic PIV for the spray-induced flow in an IC engine, Proc. Combust. Inst. 36 (2017) 
3467-3475.

30. E. Baum, B. Peterson, C. Surmann, D. Michaelis, B. Böhm, A. Dreizler, Investigation of the 

3D flow field in an IC engine using tomographic PIV, Proc. Combust. Inst. 34 (2013) 2903-
2910.

31. M. Desbrun, M. Mayer, P. Schröder, A.H. Barr, Implicit fairing of irregular meshes using 

diffusion and curvature flow, in: Proc. Conf. Com. Graphics Interactive Tech., ACM 
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing, New York, 1999, pp. 317-324.

32. U. Maas, J. Warnatz, Ignition processes in hydrogen-oxygen mixtures, Combust. Flame 74

(1988) 53-69.

33. L. Piegle, On NURBS: a survey, IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 11 (1) (1991) 55-

71.

34. J. Weickert, Anisotropic Diffusion in Image Processing, Teubner Verlag, Stuttgart, 1998.
35. B. Wieneke, K. Pfeiffer, Adaptive PIV with variable interrogation window size and shape, 15th

Int. Symp. On Applications of Laser Techniques to Fluid Mechanics, Lisbon, 2010. 

36. N. Swaminathan, K.N.C. Bray, Effect of dilatation on scalar dissipation in turbulent premixed 

flames, Combust. Flame 143 (2005) 549-565.

37. N. Chakraborty, J.W. Rogerson, N. Swaminathan, The scalar gradient alignment statistics of 

flame kernels and its modelling implications for turbulent premixed combustion, Flow 
Turbulence Combust. 85 (2010) 25-55.


38. L. Tian, R. P. Lindstedt, The impact of dilatation, scrambling, and pressure transport in 

turbulent premixed flames, Combustion Theory and Modelling 21 (2017) 1114-1147.

39. D. Bradley, M. Lawes, K. Liu, M.S. Mansour, Measurements and correlations of turbulent 

burning velocities over wide ranges of fuels and elevated pressures, Proc. Combust. Inst. 34 
(2013) 1519-1526.

40. C.K. Law, Dynamics of stretched flames, Symp. (Int.) Combust. 22 (1988) 1381-1402.
41. M. Matalon, Flame dynamics, Proc. Combust. Inst. 32 (2009) 57-82.
42. A.N. Lipatnikov, J. Chomiak, Molecular transport effects on turbulent flame propagation and 

structure, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 31 (2004) 1-73.

43. D.C. Haworth, T.J. Poinsot, Numerical simulations of Lewis number effects in turbulent 

premixed flames, J. Fluid. Mech. 244 (1992) 405-436.

44. J.K Bechtold, M. Matalon, The dependence of the Markstein length on stoichiometry, Combust. 

Flame 127 (2001) 1906-1913.

45. N. Chakraborty, R.S. Cant, Influence of Lewis number on curvature effects in turbulent 

premixed flame propagation in the thin reaction zone regime, Phys. Fluids 17 (2005) 105105.

46. N. Chakraborty, M. Klein, R.S. Cant, Stretch rate effects on displacement speed in turbulent 

premixed flame kernels in the thin reaction zone regimes, Proc. Combust. Inst. 31 (2007) 1385-
1392.

47. J.H. Chen, H.G. Im, Correlation of flame speed with stretch in turbulent premixed methane/air 

flames, Symp. (Int.) Combust. 27 (1998) 819-826.

48. H.N. Najm, P.S. Wyckoff, Premixed flame response to unsteady strain rate and curvature, 

Combust. Flame 110 (1997) 92-112.

49. P.A. Libby, F.A. Williams, Structure of laminar flamelets in premixed turbulent flames, 

Combust. Flame 44 (1982) 287-303.

50. J. Kerl, C. Lawn, F. Beyrau, Three-dimensional flame displacement speed and flame front 

curvature measurements using quad-plane PIV, Combust. Flame 160 (2013) 2757-2769.

51. Y.-C. Chen, R.W. Bilger, Experimental investigation of three-dimensional flame-front 

structure in premixed turbulent combustion – I: Hydrocarbon/air Bunsen flames, Combust. 
Flame 131 (2002) 400-435.

52. C.-P. Ding, B. Peterson, M. Schmidt, A. Dreizler, B. Böhm, Flame/flow dynamics the piston 

surface of an IC engine measured by high-speed PLIF and TPIV, Proc. Combust. Inst. 37 (2019)
4973-4981.

53. A. Bohlin, M. Mann, B.D. Patterson, A. Dreizler, C.J. Kliewer, Development of two-beam 

femtosecond/picosecond 
one-dimensional 
rotational 
coherent 
anti-Stokes 
Raman 

spectroscopy: time-resolved probing of flame wall interactions, Proc. Combust. Inst. 35 (2015) 
3723-3730.

54. C. Tropea, A.L. Yarin, J.F. Foss, Springer handbook of experimental fluid mechanics, Springer, 

Berlin, 2007.

55. D.W. Green, R.H. Perry, Perry’s Chemical Engineers’ Handbook, eighth ed., McGraw-Hill 

Inc., New York, 2008.

56. J. Cosadia, J. Borée, G. Charnay, P. Dumont, Cyclic variations of the swirling flow in a diesel 

transparent engine, Exp. Fluids 41 (2006) 115-134.

57. J.L. Lumley, Engines: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999.


