Theory, observation, and ultrafast response of novel hybrid anapole 
states

Adrià Canós Valero1, Egor A. Gurvitz1, Fedor A. Benimetskiy1, Dmitry A. Pidgayko1, 
Anton Samusev1, Andrey B. Evlyukhin1,2, Dmitrii Redka3, Michael.I.Tribelsky4,5,6, Mohsen 
Rahmani7, Khosro Zangeneh Kamali8, Alexander A. Pavlov9,Andrey E. Miroshnichenko10

and Alexander S. Shalin1,11

1ITMO University, Kronverksky prospect 49, 197101, St. Petersburg, Russia

2Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 9 Institutsky Lane, Dolgoprudny 141700, Russia

3Electrotechnical University “LETI” (ETU), 5 Prof. Popova Street, Saint Petersburg 197376, 
Russia

4Faculty of Physics, M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow 119991, Russia

5National Research Nuclear University, Moscow Engineering Physics Institute, Moscow 
115409, Russia

6RITS Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi 753-8511, Japan

7Advanced Optics and Photonics Laboratory, Department of Engineering, School of Science 
and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, NG11 8NS, UK

81ARC Centre of Excellence for Transformative Meta-Optical Systems, Research School of 
Physics, The Australian National University, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia

9Institute of Nanotechnology of Microelectronics of the Russian Academy of Sciences (INME 
RAS), Moscow, Nagatinskaya street, house 16A, building 11

10School of Engineering and Information Technology, UNSW Canberra, ACT, 2600, Australia

11Ulyanovsk State University, Lev Tolstoy Street 42, 432017, Ulyanovsk, Russia

Abstract. Modern nanophotonics has witnessed the rise of “electric anapoles”, destructive interferences of 
electric dipoles and toroidal electric dipoles, actively exploited to cancel electric dipole radiation from 
nanoresonators. However, the inherent duality of Maxwell’s equations suggests the intriguing possibility 
of “magnetic anapoles”, involving a nonradiating composition of a magnetic dipole and a magnetic toroidal 
dipole. Here, we predict, fabricate and observe experimentally via a series of dark field spectroscopy
measurements a hybrid anapole of mixed electric and magnetic character, with all the dominant multipoles 
being suppressed by the toroidal terms in a nanocylinder. We delve into the physics of such exotic current 
configurations in the stationary and transient regimes and predict a number of ultrafast phenomena taking 
place within sub-ps times after the breakdown of the hybrid anapole. Based on the preceding theory, we 
design a non-Huygens metasurface featuring a dual functionality: perfect transparency in the stationary 
regime and controllable ultrashort pulse beatings in the transient.

Introduction

Over the past few years, all-dielectric nanophotonics has become one of the cornerstones of 
modern research in nano-optics1. Unlike plasmonic structures, dielectric ones allow overcoming 


the fundamental limitation of Ohmic losses. Utilizing electric and magnetic Mie-like resonances 
of nanoparticles consisting of low-loss high-index semiconductor or dielectric materials, such as 
Si, TiO2, Ge, GaAs2,3, enables manipulating both the electric and magnetic components of light 
at the nanoscale. This emerging field has already led to a wide range of exciting applications, such 
as low-loss discrete dielectric waveguides4,5, passive and reconfigurable directional sources6,7,  
efficient high harmonic generation mechanisms8, light-harvesting and antireflective coatings9–11, 
all-dielectric metasurfaces with artificially tailored optical response12–15, dielectric beam 
deflectors16, subwavelength all-optical liquid mixing17, to mention just a few. 

The ability to properly describe and predict electromagnetic scattering is of prime importance to 
manipulate the behavior of light at the nanoscale. For this purpose, 
different types of 

electromagnetic multipole expansions were introduced18–22. Among them, the charge-current 
Cartesian decomposition is widely used for describing optical signatures of nano-objects of 
arbitrary shape18–20. One of the most intriguing possibilities delivered by this formalism is the 
ability to define the so-called toroidal moment family23–26. While the well-known electric toroidal 
dipole moment is associated with the poloidal currents flowing along the meridians of a torus 24, 
higher-order toroidal moments, also known as mean square radii, feature more complex current 
distributions recently investigated theoretically in Refs.27,28.

The electric toroidal dipole is now widely exploited in nanophotonics and metamaterials, active 
photonics29, ultrasensitive biosensing23
and applications requiring strong near field 

localization30,31.  The fields radiated by toroidal moments share the same angular momentum and 
far-field properties as their electric or magnetic multipolar counterparts, allowing for the 
realization of two exciting effects: (i) enhanced multipolar response32 enabled by the constructive 
interference of the fields, and (ii) mutual cancellation of the far-field contributions via the 
destructive one, so-called “anapole” states33. 

In the aforementioned scenario, an anapole state corresponds to a scattering minima from a given 
multipole channel34,33, leading to a reduction of the overall far-field scattering and confined near 
fields33. This promising feature has motivated a widespread of investigations in diverse 
applications of nanoscale light-matter interactions ranging from photocatalysis35, Raman 
scattering36, strong exciton coupling37 and second and third harmonic generation38–41. While there 
exists a large amount of literature regarding the stationary (frequency domain) response of such 
states, emergent studies point out that a completely different picture may take place in the 
transient (non-harmonic time dependent) regime42. In this regard, the understanding and control 
of the transient response of anapoles is yet to be developed, and remains an unexplored realm 
with potential applications in the novel field of ultrafast dynamic resonant phenomena43,44.  

Furthermore, the vast majority of the investigations on anapole states are limited to the electric 
dipole term only45–48. No experimental works have proven the existence of magnetic anapole 
states. Were the anapoles of electric and magnetic nature to spectrally overlap, it would lead to 
unprecedently confined near fields and provide new exciting degrees of freedom for the design 
of light-matter interactions. Until now, this has remained a challenging task, since the formation 
of the so-called ‘hybrid anapole states’ requires a careful overlap of electric and magnetic 
multipoles with their toroidal counterparts. Indeed, magnetic toroidal moments themselves have 
only been observed in a very recent work, where a complex cluster of nanodisks was necessary 
to induce the desired multipole response49.

Spherically symmetric structures are unable to support hybrid anapole states50 , since the latter 
always remain hidden by the contributions of other multipole moments with non-negligible 
scattering. Nevertheless, recent developments in the theory of multipole expansions19,28 have now 
opened the possibility to qualitatively and quantitatively investigate higher order electric and 


magnetic anapole states in scatterers with arbitrary shape, beyond the limitations of the quasistatic 
regime. 

Here we design and demonstrate experimentally for the first time the existence of such exotic 
states, schematically illustrated in Figure 1a. In the stationary regime, we theoretically predict a 
novel type of non-trivial, non-scattering state, accompanied by an effective internal field 
concentration, governed by the exceptional spectral overlap of four electric and magnetic anapole 
states of different orders. This pure Hybrid Anapole state originates from the far-field destructive 
interference of all the leading electric and magnetic Cartesian multipoles of a finite cylindrical 
scatterer with their associated toroidal moments. By doing so, we also prove for the first time that 
higher order (quadrupolar) toroidal moments can be excited in an isolated dielectric nanoparticle 
and contribute to essential features of its scattering response. Complementing the multipolar 
approach, the near-field maps are interpreted in terms of the eigenstates of an open cavity51,52

(quasi-normal modes, QNMs), thus providing a complete physical picture of the effect and 
establishing a general theoretical framework valid for anapoles of arbitrary order, in scatterers of 
arbitrary shape.

We fabricate a series of individual silicon nanocylinders supporting the effect and validate 
experimentally our theoretical predictions via dark field spectroscopy measurements. Contrarily 
to a conventional anapole state, the hybrid anapole preserves its nonradiating nature in the 
presence of any dielectric substrate. We unveil the physical mechanism behind such a 
counterintuitive effect, and demonstrate its breakdown in the transient regime, where the 
spatiotemporal maps reveal relevant changes in the beating pattern of the decaying modes that 
explicitly depend on the substrate refractive index. Finally, based on the preceeding theory, we 
design and demonstrate a dual-functional metasurface consisting of hybrid anapole particles
displaying full transparency in the stationary regime, and highly tunable spatiotemporal response 
in the transient one.

The Cartesian multipole expansion and high-order anapole conditions

The analysis of the optical response of a nanoparticle is usually carried out via the decomposition 
of the scattering cross section as a sum of multipoles, which represent independent scattering 
channels of the object. Here we utilize the irreducible Cartesian multipole expansion derived in 
Ref.28 (for completeness, also given in the Supporting Information), that explicitly takes into 
account higher order toroidal moments. The latter interpretation is our starting point towards the 
physical understanding of higher-order anapole states.

Within this approach, an electric or magnetic anapole of order n in a subwavelength scatterer is 
given by the condition:

1
1

( ,
)
( ,
)

...
0

n
n

e m
e m
d

i
i
i
i

d

k
P
i
T
v

+
=
(1)

Here we have denoted 
nth
order electric or magnetic moments with 
( )
P e
and 
(
P m)
and 

corresponding electric and magnetic toroidal moments with 
( )
T e
and 
(
T m)
, respectively. The 

number of subscripts indicates the order of each Cartesian tensor, i.e., one subscript corresponds 
to dipole, two correspond to quadrupole, etc. 
,
d
kd

are the wavenumber and the dielectric 

permittivity of the host medium, and 
dv
is the speed of light in the medium. A hybrid anapole 

state occurs when more than one multipole moment fulfils Eq.(1) at a given wavelength, resulting 
in a simultaneous suppression of scattering of two or more channels. However, as mentioned 
above, light, in general, can be radiated out through other non-zero multipole moments, destroying 
the overall effect. Thus, only the cancellation of all the leading multipoles can enable a true hybrid 
anapole. 


For the sake of clarity, in the rest of the manuscript, we will rely on the widespread notation for 
low-order multipoles, i.e. p , m for electric and magnetic dipoles, and 
Q( )e
, 
(
Q m)
for electric and 

magnetic quadrupoles. 

Results

Observation and multipole analysis of hybrid anapole states

Under conventional plane wave illumination, hybrid anapole states of homogeneous spherical 
particles are hidden by the contributions of high order multipoles 50,53. We will show that this 
restriction naturally vanishes for nano-objects with additional geometrical degrees of freedom, 
like finite cylinders or parallelepipeds. Throughout this work, and particularly in the next section, 
we will unveil the fundamental reason behind this unusual behavior.

Let us consider a cylindrical silicon nanoparticle in air. Starting now, we will use amorphous 
silicon (a-Si)  in both theoretical and experimental studies (for details refer to the Supporting 
Information). The illumination scheme is presented in the left inset of Figure 1b (normally 
incident x -polarized plane wave propagating along z
−
direction).

Figure 1. (a) Artistic representation of the novel effect. A normally incident plane wave excites nontrivial 
modal contributions in a Si nanocylinder whose interference with the background field leads to a four-fold 
hybrid anapole state yielding the nanoantenna virtually invisible in the far-field, with localized near field. 
Inset depicts the current distributions of the two resonant eigenmodes arising due to standing waves 
between the top and bottom walls (red) and lateral walls (blue) in the vertical plane. (b) Multipole
reconstruction of the numerically obtained scattering cross section for the cylindrical amorphous silicon 
nanoparticle. In the legend caption, “total” implies that both basic and toroidal contributions of a given 
multipole are plotted. The inset corresponds to the x-component of the electric field. The geometrical 
parameters of the cylinder are height H=367 nm, diameter D=252 nm. Point HA (
 = 782 nm
) 

corresponds to the hybrid anapole state. (c) Left plot: measured (solid lines) and simulated (dashed lines) 
scattering spectra of single isolated nanocylinders with different diameters D. The spectral positions of the 
hybrid anapoles are indicated by the colored regions. Right plot: SEM micrographs of the corresponding 
nanocylinder samples. The colored edges in each micrograph are associated to the legend entries in the 


measurements. (d) Amplitudes and phase differences between the multipoles and their toroidal counterparts. 
Panels from left to right, respectively: the basic electric and electric toroidal dipoles, the basic magnetic 
and magnetic toroidal dipoles, and the basic electric and electric toroidal quadrupoles. Amplitudes 
correspond to the left ordinate-axis, and phase differences are read from the right ordinate-axis.

The design methodology is based on the following: We note that the spectral positions of the full 
(basic and toroidal parts) electric dipole and magnetic quadrupole anapoles are mainly dependent 
on the cylinder’s radius, while the wavelengths of the full magnetic dipole and electric quadrupole 
anapoles change both as functions of the cylinder height and radius. Figure S3 in the Supporting
Information illustrates the spectral behavior of the multipolar anapoles with variations of the
geometrical parameters in detail. Thus, carefully tuning these two geometrical degrees of freedom 
makes it possible to place the anapoles of all the leading terms ultimately close to each other 
(Figure 1b), providing a strong scattering minimum (Figure 1b-c, point HA).

The total scattering cross section and its multipole decomposition after the numerical optimization 
are shown in Figure 1b. Perfect agreement between the sum of the multipole contributions given 
by Eq.(1) in the Supporting Information and the result of the full-wave simulations in Comsol
Multiphysics is demonstrated, proving that only the first four multipoles are sufficient to fully 
describe the optical response of the nanocylinder in the visible range. Therefore, the low-
scattering regime delivered by this state renders it perfectly dark to the incident radiation (see the
inset on Figure 1b). 

The different panels in Figure 1d show the amplitudes and phase differences of the three most 
relevant multipoles with their toroidal moments. The results further confirm that the generalized 
anapole condition in Eq.(1) is well fulfilled for each pair (the amplitudes are equal, and they are 

 rad
out of phase) at the hybrid anapole wavelength 
 =782
nm. Particularly, this implies that 

we have succeeded in exciting, for the first time, toroidal quadrupole moments in the visible range.

To confirm our theoretical predictions on the novel hybrid anapole state, we have carried out 
direct scattering spectroscopy measurements for a set of standalone nanocylinders with tailored 
dimensions in the optical spectral range (Figure 1c). The measured scattering spectra (solid lines, 
Figure 1c) exhibit a pronounced dip, shifting with the increase of the nanocylinder diameter D, 
in excellent agreement with the calculations (dashed lines, Figure 1c). Technical details on the 
fabrication and the optical measurement setup can be found in the Supporting Information. While 
an increase of the lateral size of the nanocylinder leads to an overall redshift of the multipole 
anapoles, they almost perfectly overlap at 
D = 251 nm
, where the most pronounced hybrid 

anapole state results in a large drop in scattering efficiency, of almost two orders of magnitude, 
rendering the nanocylinder virtually invisible. We note that the other dips indicated in the 
measured spectra also correspond to hybrid anapoles, although their overlap is not as much 
pronounced, but still results in a significant scattering reduction.

Noteworthy, the near-zero values of the full scattering coefficients do not imply the induced 
polarization currents in the particle to be also close to zero. This is in agreement with the usual 
anapole behavior54, but in the new state, due to the suppression of several multipoles 
simultaneously, the hybrid anapole also displays much better confined internal fields. Figure 2b 
demonstrates the average electromagnetic energy density inside the cylinder at the hybrid anapole 
wavelength to exceed nine times the value of free space almost without leakage of the field outside 
the particle volume. On its turn, the latter further reduces the interaction with the surrounding (see 
the following sections).

Intrinsic modal content of the hybrid anapole

While Cartesian multipoles are suitable for the description of far-fields, in this section we employ 
the natural QNM expansion52 of near-fields and internal currents , which in the following will 


allow us to further unveil the physics behind the hybrid anapole state. QNMs provide a suitable
basis for the induced polarization currents, which takes the following form:

(
)
(
)
( , )
,
,
s ( )
inc

s

s
i

=
 

− 


J
r
E
J
r
r .
(2)

Here 
( )
( )
s
s
i
r = − 
r
J
E
,
s ( )
 and  are, respectively, the induced modal scattering current 

distribution as a function of the internal mode field, the excitation coefficient of the sth mode 
describing its contribution to the total current at a given frequency, and the permittivity contrast 
with the host environment. 

We use a modified version of the freeware MAN developed by the authors of Ref.51. More details 
on the approach can be found in the Supporting Information. For simplicity, we consider a 
dispersionless, lossless nanocylinder with a constant refractive index 
n 3.87
(corresponding to 

aSi at 780 nm), so that the excitation coefficients depend solely on the fields of an individual 
QNM51. Losses and refractive index dispersion of the original design are negligible in the 
considered spectral range (see Supporting Information), and therefore this approximation does 
not change significantly the scattering cross section and average electromagnetic energy density.

The results of the QNM expansion are displayed in the different panels of Figure 2. The 
correctness of our calculations in the studied spectral range, particularly near the scattering dip,
is well validated in Figures 2a-b by comparing the sum of the individual QNM contributions with 
the numerically obtained total scattering cross section (a) and average electromagnetic energy 
density inside the cylinder (b). From hereon, we shall label the QNMs with the standardized 
notation for the modes of isolated cylindrical cavities55, i.e. (
,
TE TM)uv
, where the sub-indices 

denote the number of standing wave maxima in the azimuthal ( )
u , radial ( )v
and axial ( )

directions. TE and TM indicate the predominant nature of the internal field distribution. 
Specifically, TM (transverse magnetic) modes have 
0
z
H 
, while TE (transverse electric) 

have 
0
z
E 
. 


Figure 2. (a) Alternative scattering cross section decomposition by means of the QNM expansion method. 
The full-wave simulation is nearly the same (without losses), as in Figure 2, but in a linear scale. Colored 
lines are the individual contributions of the physical QNMs. The contributions of modes having their 
resonances outside the considered spectral range are added up in the green dashed line. Resonant modes in 
the considered spectral range are associated with the
TE111
, 
TE120
and 
TM113
modes of the isolated 

cylinder. The blue line corresponds to the reconstructed scattering cross section, confirming that all the 
resonant spectral features can be successfully recovered via this method, and demonstrating good agreement 
near the hybrid anapole, point HA. (b) Spectra of the volume-averaged electromagnetic field energy inside 
the cylinder, and individual contributions of the excited modes. Colors and legends are the same as in (a). 
The electromagnetic energy density has been normalized with respect to the incident electromagnetic 

energy density in the vacuum 
2

0
0
wEM
=  E
. Excellent agreement is obtained with the full-wave 

simulations. (c) Normalized internal electric field distributions of the two most relevant modal contributions 
near point A, from left to right, associated with Fabry-Perot (
TM113
) and Mie-like (
TE120
) standing wave 

patterns (
TE111
is very weak near the hybrid anapole), respectively. Their addition via Eq. (2), together 

with the background modes (Bckg.), leads to the reconstruction of the internal fields of the hybrid anapole, 
also displayed on the right-hand side of (c). All the electric fields have been normalized with their respective 
maxima, to enhance their visualization.

The spectral behavior of each resonant QNM is described by a Fano lineshape56, (see Supporting
Information, section 5). The other nearby QNMs constitute the background scattering 
contribution of the particle. 

In Figure 2a we note that a total of three QNMs resonate in the visible range. The correct 
reconstruction of the scattering cross section requires taking into account background modes, 
despite their resonances being outside the considered spectral range (green dashed line).
Nevertheless, at point HA, only the 
TM113
and 
TE120
modes present a ‘Fano-like’ response. 

Now the pronounced low scattering regime can be easily grasped as a consequence of modal 
interference: a clear sign that this is indeed the case are the resonant negative contributions to 
scattering presented by both the
TE120
and 
TM113
modes. It implies that, when the incident field 

impinges in the resonator, energy exchange takes place between the two and the background
QNM fields57. This owes to the fact that the QNMs do not obey the usual conjugate inner product 
relation of orthogonal modes in Hermitian systems58. Here it is important to emphasize the 
unusual feature of the hybrid anapole: the two resonant QNMs dominating the spectra are 
simultaneously negatively suppressed by interference with the background. For comparison, the 
QNM decomposition of a conventional dipole anapole disk is given in the Supporting Information.

A completely different picture arises within the resonator. Figure 2b presents the modal 
decomposition of the internal energy stored in the cylinder in the vicinity of point HA. This is one 
of the main results of the section, since, contrarily to the multipole expansion, the QNM 
decomposition allows us to clearly distinguish the contributions of the eigenmodes to the internal 
fields. Firstly, we note that electromagnetic energy is significantly enhanced (around nine times)
with respect to the incident plane wave. Secondly, it is clearly seen that the stored energy at the 
hybrid anapole is mainly driven by the 
TM113
mode due to its higher quality factor and the 

proximity of its resonant wavelength to the hybrid anapole wavelength, in a minor measure by 
the 
TE120
and the sum of the background contributions. Energy exchange between the internal 

fields of the QNMs is strongly minimized, as reflected in the fact that no negative contributions 
to the internal energy can be appreciated. Overall, the QNM analysis given in Figure 2
demonstrates that both the invisibility effect (outside the cylinder) and the internal energy 
enhancement at the hybrid anapole state are mediated by the simultaneous resonant response of 
the 
TM113
and the 
TE120
modes. The background modes, on the other hand, while they do not 

apparently define the spectral features of the figures of merit significantly, also play an important 


role since their interference with the resonant ones gives rise to the invisibility effect. This 
interpretation is consistent with early investigations regarding the formation of Fano lineshapes 
in the scattering cross section of spherical resonators53.

The electric field distributions of the 
TE120
and 
TM113
modes are shown in Figure 2c. Following 

Refs.59,60 we can classify the first as a ‘Mie’ type mode, similar to the ones supported by an infinite 
cylinder, while the second is of the ‘Fabry-Perot’ (FP) type 59, arising due to the formation of a 
standing wave pattern between the top and bottom walls of the resonator, i.e. having non-zero 
axial wavenumber (
1
 ). Their distinct origin unveils the reason why it is possible to obtain a 

hybrid anapole state in this particular geometry, contrarily to spherical scatterers. As shown in the 
Supporting Information, the real parts of the eigenwavelengths of the modes in the cylinder can 
be estimated as61

2

2

2

uv

uv
p

D
n
H

D

z












+

,
(3)

where 
zuv
is the th
v
root of the th
u
Bessel function of the first kind for TE modes, or its first 

derivative for TM modes. For FP modes, 
 0
and the denominator in Eq. (3) displays a strong 

dependence on the aspect ratio 
/
D H of the cylinder. In contrast, since 
= 0
for Mie modes, 

their eigenwavelengths only change with D . Thus, the eigenwavelengths and the multipolar 
content of these two mode types are independently tunable from each other, resulting in a flexible 
control over the optical response of the resonator and enabling the simultaneous scattering 
suppression observed in Figure 1a-b, and Figure 2a - the hybrid anapole state. 

A straightforward comparison between the QNM and multipolar methods allows determining the 
multipoles radiated by a given QNM (see section 10, Figure S4, in the Supporting Information). 
Specifically, Figure S3 leads us to the conclusion that the 
TE120
mode radiates primarily as p , 

with a minor 
(
Q m)
, while the 
TM113
mode scatters as a combination of m and 
Q( )e
(in both 

cases, referring to both their basic and toroidal counterparts). When scattering from a mode is 
resonantly suppressed, radiation from the multipoles associated to it is also strongly minimized, 
and results in the different multipole anapole states observed in the decomposed spectra of Figure
2a. Thus, the close proximity of the destructive interference points of the 
TE120
and 
TM113
modes

at point HA leads to an overlap of the anapole states of the four dominant multipoles. In this 
fashion, using the QNM expansion approach, we have shown an alternative and general physical 
explanation of dark scattering states and qualitatively illustrated its link to the multipolar response 
of the particle. This self-consistent approach will further be effectively applied to understand the 
physics behind the particle-substrate interaction.

As a final remark, we point out that the quality factors of the 
TE120
and 
TM113
modes in the 

structure are, respectively, 12 and 33. A direct comparison with the 
TE120
supporting a 

conventional anapole disk (see Supporting Information) shows that the quality factor of the
113
TM

mode at the hybrid anapole is more than four times larger. Therefore, we anticipate much better 
performance of the hybrid anapole for second and third harmonic generation processes with 
respect to conventional anapole disks, since nonlinear scattering cross sections scale linearly with 
the quality factors of the modes involved62.

Substrate-mediated transient signal modulation


We will now proceed to illustrate in detail a novel effect, unique to the hybrid anapole, by which 
its nonradiating nature can be preserved in the stationary regime when deposited on any dielectric 
substrate. We then exploit the underlying mechanism behind the phenomena to modulate the 
transient response of the isolated nanocylinder.

In comparison with any other scattering phenomena including conventional anapoles, the hybrid 
anapole state is remarkably robust in the presence of a substrate. This particular behavior is 
illustrated in Figure 3a, where we have plotted the calculated scattering cross sections of the 
cylinder in free space and deposited over glass (
sn =1.5
), hypothetical substrates with 
2, 3
sn =

and over amorphous silicon (
sn = 3.87
). The amplitude and spectral position of the scattering dip 

are almost  undisplaced from the free-space values while the refractive index contrast at the 
bottom of the particle remains non-zero. However, we observe drastic changes in the shape of the 
Fano profile, once the contrast is absent (silicon particle over silicon substrate). There exists a 
nontrivial underlying mechanism by which the hybrid anapole is “protected” against 
modifications of the substrate refractive index. The physics becomes transparent when examining 
the distinct nature of the two resonant modes involved in the formation of the hybrid anapole 
(Figure 3c). On the one hand, increasing the refractive index of the substrate leads to a decrease 
in the lower wall reflectivity, which is crucial for the standing Fabry-Perot mode 
TM113
inside 

the resonator. Approaching 
sn to the particle’s refractive index results in a higher energy leak 

towards the substrate and a substantial decrease in the quality factor Q . Consequently, the 
resonance flattens and disappears when the lower boundary becomes transparent, as shown in 
Figure 3b. 

The standing wave pattern of the 
TM113
resembles a one-dimensional Fabry-Perot cavity on a 

dielectric substrate. The QNMs of this simplified model has the advantage of being analytically 
solvable52, thus providing valuable physical insight easy to extrapolate to the problem at hand. As 
we derive in the Supporting Information, the QNMs are formed by two interfering plane waves 
traveling in opposite directions inside the cavity, when the driving wavelength satisfies the 
condition

2

21 23
1
r r w = ,
(4)

where 
exp(
)
r
w
ik n H
=
and 21
r , 23
r
are the Fresnel reflection coefficients from the cavity-air and 

the cavity-substrate interfaces, respectively. The quality factor of a QNM with axial index 
is 

calculated as

(
23 21 )
ln
Q
r r


= −
.
(5)

Equation (5) serves very well to illustrate the influence of the substrate on the 
TM113
mode. When 

the two reflection coefficients are unity, the energy is completely stored inside the resonator and 
Q is infinite. Similarly, a decrease in the reflection coefficient from the substrate leads to 
radiative losses and a decrease in the quality factor, effectively becoming zero when the contrast 
is absent. Indeed, a lower quality factor leads to less appreciable spectral features, as observed in 
the simulations (Figure 3b). Another important conclusion that one can draw from the numerator 
in Eq. (5) is that the real part of the resonant wavelength of the QNM is independent of the 
refractive index at the walls. Thus, modifying the substrate refractive index does not shift the 
spectral position of the resonance (i.e. does not shift the hybrid anapole wavelength), but simply 
changes the amplitude and width of the Fano profile.


With proper normalization, and employing the notation of the inset in Figure 3b, the amplitudes 

of the incoming and outgoing plane waves inside the resonator are 
1
2
2w
A
r
+ =

and 

2
2
3w
A
r
− =

, with 
(
 =1/ 4H )

(see Supporting Information for details). Plane waves 

reflected from the substrate are thus decreased with decreasing index contrast. Consequently, the 
same occurs to the lower field maxima of the 
TM113
. While this prediction is observed in the 

simulations for relatively low contrasts, the behavior at very small contrasts is very different (see 
the case with 
3
sn = in Figure 3c). In the latter situation, the standing waves along z become 

negligible in comparison with the initially weaker standing waves in the x-y plane, and the QNM 
can only be well described numerically. 

Contrarily, it is noteworthy that even comparably small contrast (3 – 3.87) leads to enough 
contribution of the 
TE120
mode to still preserve the scattering dip (see Figure 3b). The standing 

wave pattern of this second mode develops in the lateral walls of the cylinder, and therefore 
depends much less on variations of the reflectivity of the lower wall, keeping an almost constant 
quality factor (see Supporting information). Most of the QNM energy is then stored in the 
resonator even in the case of zero effective contrast with the substrate, as demonstrated in Figure 
3c. It results in a larger contribution of the 
TE120
mode to extinction at small contrasts, and a 

decrease of radiation from the electric quadrupole and magnetic dipole. The hybrid anapole is
now mainly driven by electric dipole radiation stemming from the 
TE120
mode (see Supporting 

Information). Thus, for large 
sn
the hybrid anapole degenerates into a conventional electric 

dipole anapole state, but still retains its non-radiative nature, since the other multipoles become 
negligible due to the small reflections at the lower wall of the nanocylinder.

While the effect might not seem remarkable at first glance, it opens the possibility to realize
ultrafast time modulation of the scattered signal in the transient regime. To illustrate this novel 
concept, we outline here a temporal coupled mode (TCM) scheme to model the transient behavior 
of the resonator with a set of linear equations:

(
)
i
i
i
i
i
i

d a
i
a
s
dt

+
= − 

+

−
(6)

,
i

i
i
i
i
s
s e
a
−
+

=
+

(7)

here 
( )

is+ − are the input (output) amplitudes of a given scattering channel coupled to a specific 

mode, and the 
ia coefficients correspond to the amplitudes of the excited modes 
TM113
and 

TE120
, normalized to their stored energies inside the resonator, with resonant frequencies 
i
 and 

radiative losses
i . The phase factor 
ie  emulates the contribution of the background modes. Eqs. 

(6)-(7) take into account that no coupling can occur between the resonant modes involved, (the 
derivation can be found in the Supporting Information).

In the absence of incident radiation (all
is+ = 0
), the solution of Eq. (6) for each of the two modes 

shows that their field amplitudes 
i
i
E
 a
follow a time dependence of the form 
i
i
i
t
t
e
 e
−
−
. Due 

to the mismatch between their resonant frequencies, and the fact that their radiative losses have 
the same order of magnitude, the total scattered field experiences beatings with a low frequency 
envelope given by 
(
)
1
2
cos (
 − ) / 2
, modulating a high frequency signal 
(
)
1
2
cos (
) / 2

+ 
, 

where 
1
 and 
2
 are the resonant frequencies of the 
TM113
and 
TE120
QNMs, respectively.


Tuning the substrate refractive index allows modifying the stored energy of the 
TM113
mode, 

effectively controlling the beating amplitudes in the transient.

In the simulations shown in Figure 3d-g, the hybrid anapole nanoparticle is excited by a plane 
wave square pulse with duration 
 = 200fs
, (see inset in Figure 3d) sufficiently long to allow the 

observation of both stationary and transient regimes. The scattered power is then plotted in Figure 
3d, and a more detailed view of the transient after the pulse is shown in Figure 3e for the different 
refractive index contrasts. Clear differences between the beating patterns can be appreciated, 
enabled by the leakage of the Fabry-Perot modes discussed above. In all cases, however, the decay 
of the Mie mode
TE120
is perfectly visible since it is barely affected by the substrate. The retarded 

peak that gradually disappears with decreasing contrast is associated with the slow decay of the 
Fabry-Perot mode 
TM113
.

This behavior is reflected on the recorded spatiotemporal maps of the 
x
E field in Figures 3f-g,

Figure 3. Stationary and transient response of the hybrid anapole with different index contrasts with the 
substrate. (a) Scheme depicting the setup and the excited eigenmodes. (b) Comparison between the 
numerically obtained scattering cross sections for the nanocylinder with the size from Figure 1, deposited 
on substrates with increasing refractive index. The calculations are performed with the full experimental 
aSi refractive index given in the Supporting Information. Inset of (b): One-dimensional Fabry Perot model 
of the 
TM113
mode. (c) xz field distributions of the QNMs 
TE120
and
TM113
when the cylinder is deposited 

over substrates with different refractive index. As predicted by our theory, losses from the 
TM113
mode

increase when decreasing the refractive index contrast. Contrarily, the 
TE120
mode remains confined in the 

scatterer. (d-f): Temporal response of the hybrid anapole under a plane wave square pulse; (d) Scattered 
power as a function of time; (e) Different beating patterns of the decaying eigenmodes after the plane wave 
excitation as a function of 
sn ; (f-g) Spatiotemporal maps of the x-component of the scattered electric field 


measured along the x axis for 
sn =1
(f) and 
sn = 2
(g), measured from the beginning of the modal decay. 

The colorbars are saturated for better visualization.

where the characteristics of the mode beating of the system can be fully grasped. At high contrasts, 
the 
TM113
mode leaks from the resonator, and a well-defined beating pattern is observed. The 

beating is even along the x-axis, reflecting the symmetry of the fields of the dominant modes. At 
lower contrast, the decreased contribution of the 
TM113
mode leads to damping at longer times. 

This is explained by the smaller Q-factor of the
TE120
mode, which results in a shorter transient. 

Non-Huygens transparent metasurface with controllable transients

The potential that transient modulation offers can be fully exploited in practice by fabricating
metasurfaces inheriting (and enhancing), the single particle mechanism described in the previous 
section. 

In particular, the effect can be harnessed to design fully transmissive, all-dielectric metasurfaces 
without relying on the well-known Huygens condition6,63, and simultaneously realize controllable 
ultrafast switching by harnessing transients (see Figure 4a-d). Contrarily to the latter, the light 
traverses the structure without significant phase variation, thus rendering the metasurface 
invisible (see shadowed selection in Figure 6b). This is a direct consequence of Eq.(1). It can be 
easily seen by writing the transmission coefficient as a sum of the relevant multipole contributions 
of the meta-atoms64:

(
)
( )
1
m
e
p
m
Q
Q
t
t
t
t
t
= +
+
+
+
(8)

Each term in the previous sum is proportional to the corresponding total multipole moment (basic 
and toroidal contributions).


Figure 4. Design of a subwavelength hybrid anapole-based metasurface, featuring double functionality in 
the stationary and ultrafast regimes. The period is set to 530 nm. (a) artistic representation of the proposed 
metasurface operating at the hybrid anapole state in the stationary regime. The structure is illuminated by 
an x-polarized plane wave, passing through the array completely undistorted. (b) Transmission, absorption
and phase of the transmitted wave with respect to the incident one. As predicted by Eqs. (1) and (8), the 
out-of-phase basic and toroidal moments induce a transparency band with very small phase perturbation
(shaded region). The calculations have been performed in the presence of a substrate with 
sn =1.5
. (c) 

Artistic representation illustrating the metasurface response in the sub-ps regime, when excited by a plane 
wave pulse. (d) 
x
E component of the scattered field from the metasurface as a function of time at the end 

of the plane wave pulse, for 
sn =1.5
and after increasing the substrate index  by 0.2. The results 

demonstrate that transient oscillations of the metasurface are highly sensitive to changes in the substrate 
index, opening a pathway towards tunable ultrafast beating.

When Eq. (1) is fulfilled, the multipolar contributions in Eq. (8) are zero. Consequently, we are 
left with 
t 1
in Eq. (8), and the incident wave leaves the system unperturbed (see Figure 4a).

This condition is closely fulfilled in a transmission band around the hybrid anapole wavelength
(
 = 782nm
as previously), as indicated in Figure 4b. Polarization losses induce absorption,

which slightly decreases transmission. The considered period (530 nm) is not unique, i.e. once 
the geometry supporting the hybrid anapole for an isolated particle is known, a subwavelength 
metasurface of such particles will mimic the single particle behavior far away from the first 
diffraction order65.

In analogy with the single particle behavior, the metasurface induces ultrafast beating of the 
scattered field in the transients at the beginning and the end of a plane wave pulse (see Figures 
4c-d). Remarkably, however, the sensitivity to the contrast with the underlying substrate is 
significantly accentuated, inducing large changes in the modulated scattered signal with an 


increase of 
sn
of only 0.2 , as can also be observed in the supplementary video, where the 

complete picture on the evolution of the near field topology as a function of time is presented.

The sub-ps relaxation times of the metasurface, together with the high substrate sensitivity of the 
transients, opens an exciting pathway towards the spatiotemporal control of ultrafast dynamic 
effects. Among the interesting perspectives, ultrashort laser pulses can be effectively modulated
in time by tailoring the transient phenomena. The high substrate sensitivity can be exploited in 
order to dynamically tune the transient response of the metasurface in different temporal regimes
by selecting the appropriate modulation technology66. The bulk refractive index of the substrate 
can be tuned, for example, by means of phase-change materials such a GeTe67 using temperature 
as a control parameter. More sophisticated, yet much faster refractive index changes could be 
achieved by tuning optical nonlinearities arising in the substrate as a function of the incident beam 
intensity (e.g. if ITO constitutes the underlying substrate68). Finally, modifying the free electron 
density in the substrate with electrical gating69 might constitute a promising approach to achieve 
the desired tunability in practical applications.

Discussion

In the stationary regime, we have theoretically predicted and experimentally confirmed the 
existence of hybrid anapoles, exotic non-scattering states requiring the simultaneous destructive 
interference of electric and magnetic cartesian multipoles with their toroidal counterparts. For the 
first time, dynamic toroidal quadrupoles, as well as magnetic anapoles have been confirmed 
experimentally in isolated subwavelength nanoparticles. In order to broaden our knowledge of 
anapole electrodynamics beyond the electric dipole approximation, we have developed a solid 
physical picture16 in terms of the fundamental eigenmodes driving the resonator response. 
Magnetic anapoles and quadrupole anapoles display field confinements several times larger than 
electric anapoles, promising higher enhancements of nonlinearities in the absence of linear 
scattering.

In the transient regime, the prior analysis has allowed us to design at will the breakdown of the 
hybrid anapole conditions to obtain ultrafast modulation of the scattered power. The present 
theory shows that efficient spatiotemporal control of the transients mediated by the underlying 
substrate can be achieved, while maintaining scattering in the stationary regime at vanishing level. 
Following the established theoretical guidelines, we propose and verify numerically a non-
Huygens, subwavelength metasurface obeying the same principles and therefore featuring a 
double functionality: (i) substrate-independent full transparency in both amplitude and phase 
mediated by the hybrid anapole in the stationary regime, and (ii) ultrafast, substrate-dependent 
signal modulation in the transient regime, mediated by its breakdown. The necessary changes in 
the substrate refractive index to observe appreciable modifications of the transient response of the 
metasurface are found to be well in the range of available technologies for dynamic tuning67, 
drastically expanding the available degrees of freedom.

Therefore, combining our findings with up-to-date modulation techniques holds great promise for 
future applications in the emerging field of ultrafast dynamic nanophotonics. Particularly, the 
ultrashort scattering peaks arising at the transient can be used to enhance ultrafast nonlinearities70

(e.g. single particle lasing), or coded in terms of their intensity as a function of the substrate index 
to realize light-based computing71. We note from the presented theory that transients oscillate at 
frequencies shifted from the original driving pulse, and therefore offer the possibility to realize 
linear frequency conversion72. Finally, the proposed metasurface can enable the temporal/spectral
shaping of fs laser pulses by interfering the latter with the out-going scattered signal.


References

1.
Kivshar, Y. All-dielectric meta-optics and non-linear nanophotonics. Natl. Sci. Rev. 5, 
144–158 (2018).

2.
Baranov, D. G. et al. All-dielectric nanophotonics: the quest for better materials and 
fabrication techniques. Optica 4, 814 (2017).

3.
Liu, S. et al. Resonantly Enhanced Second-Harmonic Generation Using III–V 
Semiconductor All-Dielectric Metasurfaces. Nano Lett. 16, 5426–5432 (2016).

4.
Savelev, R. S. et al. Bending of electromagnetic waves in all-dielectric particle array 
waveguides. Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, (2014).

5.
Bakker, R. M., Yu, Y. F., Paniagua-Domínguez, R., Luk’yanchuk, B. & Kuznetsov, A. I. 
Resonant Light Guiding Along a Chain of Silicon Nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 17, 3458–
3464 (2017).

6.
Fu, Y. H., Kuznetsov, A. I., Miroshnichenko, A. E., Yu, Y. F. & Luk’yanchuk, B. 
Directional visible light scattering by silicon nanoparticles. Nat. Commun. 4, 1527 
(2013).

7.
Chen, K. et al. A Reconfigurable Active Huygens’ Metalens. Adv. Mater. 29, 1–7 
(2017).

8.
Koshelev, K. et al. Subwavelength dielectric resonators for nonlinear nanophotonics. 
Science (80-. ). 367, 288–292 (2020).

9.
Shalin, A. S. Microscopic theory of optical properties of composite media with 
chaotically distributed nanoparticles. Quantum Electron. 40, 1004–1011 (2010).

10.
Voroshilov, P. M., Simovski, C. R., Belov, P. A. & Shalin, A. S. Light-trapping and 
antireflective coatings for amorphous Si-based thin film solar cells. J. Appl. Phys. 117, 
(2015).

11.
Cui, Y. et al. Boosting Solar Cell Photovoltage via Nanophotonic Engineering. Nano 
Lett. 16, 6467–6471 (2016).

12.
Terekhov, P. D. et al. Enhanced absorption in all-dielectric metasurfaces due to magnetic 
dipole excitation. Sci. Rep. 9, 3438 (2019).

13.
Algorri, J. et al. Anapole Modes in Hollow Nanocuboid Dielectric Metasurfaces for 
Refractometric Sensing. Nanomaterials 9, 30 (2018).

14.
Jahani, S. & Jacob, Z. All-dielectric metamaterials. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 23–36 (2016).

15.
Shamkhi, H. K. et al. Transverse Scattering and Generalized Kerker Effects in All-
Dielectric Mie-Resonant Metaoptics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 193905 (2019).

16.
Wang, D. et al. All-dielectric metasurface beam deflector at the visible frequencies. 
Guangdian Gongcheng/Opto-Electronic Eng. 44, 103–107 (2017).

17.
Canós Valero, A. et al. Nanovortex‐Driven All‐Dielectric Optical Diffusion Boosting 
and Sorting Concept for Lab‐on‐a‐Chip Platforms. Adv. Sci. 7, 1903049 (2020).

18.
Grahn, P., Shevchenko, A. & Kaivola, M. Electromagnetic multipole theory for optical 
nanomaterials. New J. Phys. 14, (2012).

19.
Alaee, R., Rockstuhl, C. & Fernandez-Corbaton, I. An electromagnetic multipole 
expansion beyond the long-wavelength approximation. Opt. Commun. 407, 17–21 
(2018).


20.
Evlyukhin, A. B., Fischer, T., Reinhardt, C. & Chichkov, B. N. Optical theorem and 
multipole scattering of light by arbitrarily shaped nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. B 94, 1–7 
(2016).

21.
Raab, R. E. & Lange, O. L. Multipole Theory in Electromagnetism. (Oxford Science 
Publications).

22.
Jackson, J. D. Classical electrodynamics. (1999).

23.
Papasimakis, N., Fedotov, V. A., Savinov, V., Raybould, T. A. & Zheludev, N. I. 
Electromagnetic toroidal excitations in matter and free space. Nat. Mater. 15, 263–271 
(2016).

24.
Dubovik, V. M. & Tugushev, V. V. Toroid moments in electrodynamics and solid-state 
physics. Phys. Rep. 187, 145–202 (1990).

25.
Góngora, A. T. & Ley-Koo, E. Complete electromagnetic multipole expansion including 
toroidal moments. Rev. Mex. Fis. E 52, 188–197 (2006).

26.
Fedotov, V. A., Rogacheva, A. V., Savinov, V., Tsai, D. P. & Zheludev, N. I. Resonant 
transparency and non-trivial non-radiating excitations in toroidal metamaterials. Sci. 
Rep. 3, 1–5 (2013).

27.
Nemkov, N. A., Basharin, A. A. & Fedotov, V. A. Electromagnetic sources beyond 
common multipoles. Phys. Rev. A 98, 1–9 (2018).

28.
Gurvitz, E. A. et al. The High‐Order Toroidal Moments and Anapole States in All‐
Dielectric Photonics. Laser Photon. Rev. 13, 1800266 (2019).

29.
Totero Gongora, J. S., Miroshnichenko, A. E., Kivshar, Y. S. & Fratalocchi, A. Anapole 
nanolasers for mode-locking and ultrafast pulse generation. Nat. Commun. 8, 15535 
(2017).

30.
Basharin, A. A., Chuguevsky, V., Volsky, N., Kafesaki, M. & Economou, E. N. 
Extremely high Q -factor metamaterials due to anapole excitation. Phys. Rev. B 95, 1–10 
(2017).

31.
Xiang, T., Lei, T., Huang, X., Shen, Z. & Yang, H. Anapole metamaterial absorber in 
microwave frequency range. Appl. Phys. Express 11, 2–5 (2018).

32.
Terekhov, P. D., Baryshnikova, K. V., Shalin, A. S., Karabchevsky, A. & Evlyukhin, A. 
B. Resonant forward scattering of light by high-refractive-index dielectric nanoparticles 
with toroidal dipole contribution. Opt. Lett. 42, 835 (2017).

33.
Miroshnichenko, A. E. et al. Nonradiating anapole modes in dielectric nanoparticles. 
Nat. Commun. 6, 1–8 (2015).

34.
Baryshnikova, K. et al. Giant magnetoelectric field separation via anapole-type states in 
high-index dielectric structures. Phys. Rev. B 98, 1–9 (2018).

35.
Hüttenhofer, L. et al. Anapole Excitations in Oxygen-Vacancy-Rich TiO 2– x 
Nanoresonators: Tuning the Absorption for Photocatalysis in the Visible Spectrum. ACS 
Nano 14, 2456–2464 (2020).

36.
Baranov, D. G., Verre, R., Karpinski, P. & Käll, M. Anapole-Enhanced Intrinsic Raman 
Scattering from Silicon Nanodisks. ACS Photonics 5, 2730–2736 (2018).

37.
Verre, R. et al. Transition metal dichalcogenide nanodisks as high-index dielectric Mie 
nanoresonators. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 679–684 (2019).

38.
Xu, L. et al. Boosting third-harmonic generation by a mirror-enhanced anapole 


resonator. Light Sci. Appl. 7, 44 (2018).

39.
Grinblat, G., Li, Y., Nielsen, M. P., Oulton, R. F. & Maier, S. A. Enhanced third 
harmonic generation in single germanium nanodisks excited at the anapole mode. Nano 
Lett. 16, 4635–4640 (2016).

40.
Shibanuma, T., Grinblat, G., Albella, P. & Maier, S. A. Efficient Third Harmonic 
Generation from Metal–Dielectric Hybrid Nanoantennas. Nano Lett. 17, 2647–2651 
(2017).

41.
Makarov, S. V. et al. Efficient Second-Harmonic Generation in Nanocrystalline Silicon 
Nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 17, 3047–3053 (2017).

42.
Monticone, F., Sounas, D., Krasnok, A. & Alù, A. Can a Nonradiating Mode Be 
Externally Excited? Nonscattering States versus Embedded Eigenstates. ACS Photonics
6, 3108–3114 (2019).

43.
Kaldun, A. et al. Observing the ultrafast buildup of a Fano resonance in the time domain. 
Science (80-. ). 354, 738–741 (2016).

44.
Lepeshov, S. & Krasnok, A. Virtual Optical Pulling Force. 1–14 (2019).

45.
Liu, W., Lei, B., Shi, J., Hu, H. & Miroshnichenko, A. E. Elusive Pure Anapole 
Excitation in Homogenous Spherical Nanoparticles with Radial Anisotropy. J. 
Nanomater. 2015, 382 (2015).

46.
Liu, W., Zhang, J., Lei, B., Hu, H. & Miroshnichenko, A. E. Invisible nanowires with 
interfering electric and toroidal dipoles. Opt. Lett. 40, 2293 (2015).

47.
Tian, J. et al. Active control of anapole states by structuring the phase-change alloy Ge 2 
Sb 2 Te 5. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–9 (2019).

48.
Ospanova, A. K., Stenishchev, I. V. & Basharin, A. A. Anapole Mode Sustaining Silicon 
Metamaterials in Visible Spectral Range. Laser Photon. Rev. 12, 1800005 (2018).

49.
Yang, Z.-J., Deng, Y.-H., Yu, Y. & He, J. Magnetic toroidal dipole response in 
individual all-dielectric nanodisk clusters. Nanoscale 12, 10639–10646 (2020).

50.
Luk’yanchuk, B., Paniagua-Domínguez, R., Kuznetsov, A. I., Miroshnichenko, A. E. & 
Kivshar, Y. S. Hybrid anapole modes of high-index dielectric nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. 
A 95, 1–8 (2017).

51.
Yan, W., Faggiani, R. & Lalanne, P. Rigorous modal analysis of plasmonic 
nanoresonators. Phys. Rev. B 97, 205422 (2018).

52.
Lalanne, P., Yan, W., Vynck, K., Sauvan, C. & Hugonin, J. P. Light Interaction with 
Photonic and Plasmonic Resonances. Laser Photonics Rev. 12, 1–38 (2018).

53.
Tribelsky, M. I. & Miroshnichenko, A. E. Giant in-particle field concentration and Fano 
resonances at light scattering by high-refractive-index particles. Phys. Rev. A 93, 053837 
(2016).

54.
Wei, L., Xi, Z., Bhattacharya, N. & Urbach, H. P. Excitation of the radiationless anapole 
mode. Optica 3, 799 (2016).

55.
Zhang, K. & Li, D. Electromagnetic Theory for Microwaves and Optoelectronics. 
(Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008).

56.
Tribelsky, M. I. & Miroshnichenko, A. E. Dynamics of destructive Fano resonances. 
Phys. Rev. A 100, 053824 (2019).

57.
Limonov, M. F., Rybin, M. V., Poddubny, A. N. & Kivshar, Y. S. Fano resonances in 


photonics. Nat. Photonics 11, 543–554 (2017).

58.
Hopkins, B., Poddubny, A. N., Miroshnichenko, A. E. & Kivshar, Y. S. Revisiting the 
physics of Fano resonances for nanoparticle oligomers. Phys. Rev. A 88, 053819 (2013).

59.
Yang, Y. et al. Multimode directionality in all-dielectric metasurfaces. Phys. Rev. B 95, 
165426 (2017).

60.
Bogdanov, A. A. et al. Bound states in the continuum and Fano resonances in the strong 
mode coupling regime. Adv. Photonics 1, 1 (2019).

61.
Harrington, R. F. Time-Harmonic Electromagnetic Fields. (Wiley, 2001).

62.
Gigli, C. et al. Quasinormal-Mode Non-Hermitian Modeling and Design in Nonlinear 
Nano-Optics. ACS Photonics acsphotonics.0c00014 (2020) 
doi:10.1021/acsphotonics.0c00014.

63.
Chen, H. T., Taylor, A. J. & Yu, N. A review of metasurfaces: Physics and applications. 
Reports Prog. Phys. 79, (2016).

64.
Terekhov, P. D. et al. Multipole analysis of dielectric metasurfaces composed of 
nonspherical nanoparticles and lattice invisibility effect. Phys. Rev. B 99, 45424 (2019).

65.
García de Abajo, F. J. Colloquium : Light scattering by particle and hole arrays. Rev. 
Mod. Phys. 79, 1267–1290 (2007).

66.
Shaltout, A. M., Shalaev, V. M. & Brongersma, M. L. Spatiotemporal light control with 
active metasurfaces. Science (80-. ). 364, eaat3100 (2019).

67.
Lepeshov, S., Krasnok, A. & Alù, A. Nonscattering-to-Superscattering Switch with 
Phase-Change Materials. ACS Photonics 6, 2126–2132 (2019).

68.
Alam, M. Z., De Leon, I. & Boyd, R. W. Large optical nonlinearity of indium tin oxide 
in its epsilon-near-zero region. Science (80-. ). 352, 795–797 (2016).

69.
Huang, Y. W. et al. Gate-Tunable Conducting Oxide Metasurfaces. Nano Lett. 16, 5319–
5325 (2016).

70.
Svyakhovskiy, S. E., Ternovski, V. V. & Tribelsky, M. I. Anapole: Its birth, life, and 
death. Opt. Express 27, 23894 (2019).

71.
Xu, X.-Y. et al. A scalable photonic computer solving the subset sum problem. Sci. Adv.
6, eaay5853 (2020).

72.
Lee, K. et al. Linear frequency conversion via sudden merging of meta-atoms in time-
variant metasurfaces. Nat. Photonics 12, 765–773 (2018).


