1 / 9

Boron‒Doping Effects on Local Structures of Semiconducting Ultrananocrystalline Diamond/Hydro-

genated Amorphous Carbon Composite Thin Films Fabricated via Coaxial Arc Plasma: an X-ray 

Absorption Spectroscopic Study

Naofumi Nishikawa1,2,*,†

1 Department of Applied Science for Electronics & Materials, Kyushu University, 6-1 Kasuga, Fukuoka 816-8580, Japan

2 School of Materials Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST), 1-1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1292, 

Japan

* Corresponding author email: naofumi_nishikawa@kyudai.jp

† Present: Independent Researcher

(Accepted version, Dated: August 23, 2021)

Ultrananocrystalline diamond/hydrogenated amorphous carbon composite thin films synthesized via coaxial arc 

plasma possess a marked structural feature of diamond grains embedded in an amorphous carbon and a hydrogenated 
amorphous carbon matrix which are the largest constituents of the films. Since the amorphous nature yields much 
larger light absorption coefficients as well as a generation source of photo-induced carriers with UV rays, these films 
can be potential candidates for deep-UV photodetector applications. From some previous studies p-type conduction 
of the films has been realized by doping boron in experimental conditions. In addition, their optical and electrical 
characteristics were investigated previously. However, the bonding structures which largely affect the physical prop-
erties of the devices haven’t been investigated. In this work, near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy 
characterizations are carried out. The result reveals that a bonding state σ* C‒B of diamond surfaces is formed pref-
erentially and structural distortion is caused at an early stage of boron-doping. Further doping into the films lessens 
the amount of unsaturated bonds such as π* C≡C, which may be a cause of the device performance degradations. Our 
work suggests a fundamental case model of boron-doping effects on a local structure of the film.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Diamond thin films, which can be synthesized artifi-

cially by various vapor deposition such as hot-filament 
chemical vapor deposition (HFCVD) [1,2], microwave 
plasma CVD (MWCVD) [3] and radio-frequency plasma 
CVD (RFCVD) [4,5], have been studied the past few dec-
ades as candidate materials applicable to mechanical and 
biomedical coating agents, electrodes of fuel cells, semi-
conductor devices, etc. Since diamond possesses a unique 
lattice structure with strong covalent bonds among carbon 
atoms, some intriguing physical properties are original to 
it. Those are for instance extreme hardness, chemical inert-
ness, excellent thermal conductivity [6,7], dielectric prop-
erties of wide-bandgap (5.47 eV) [8]. A lot of applications 
utilizing these characteristics could be realized by some 
proper engineering and the methods and processes are de-
veloped vigorously even now. Among them, the applica-
tion of the thin films to semiconductor devices has been 
longstanding until today. In order to produce semiconduct-
ing properties of wide-bandgap materials such as dia-
monds, impurity atoms that belong to Ⅲ or Ⅴ groups are 
necessary to be doped into the diamond thin films to create 
acceptor or donor levels between the bandgap. While ni-
trogen [9], phosphorous [10,11], sulfur [12], and boron 
[13,14] atoms are cited as the dopant candidates, boron is 
the most promising dopant that can create p-type conduc-
tion in the films since the activation energy is relatively 
low (0.37 eV) [15,16] so that it can be comparatively easily 

incorporated into diamond lattice and replaced with carbon 
atoms.

These potential diamond thin films can be classified by 

the crystallinity into single crystal and polycrystalline dia-
monds. While polycrystalline diamonds can be synthesized 
artificially using hydrogen, methane and/or argon gases via 
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique [17], amor-
phous fractions and grain boundaries (GBs) between them 
are inevitably contained in the materials to a greater or 
lesser extent. This metastable portion is so-called amor-
phous carbon (a-C) [18] and it often exists as hydrogenated 
amorphous carbon (a-C:H) in the matter due to the fabri-
cation process. Hence, such polycrystalline diamonds are 
composites of diamonds and a-Cs or a-C:Hs.

Polycrystalline diamonds are commonly composed of 

the micro- or nano-structures called microcrystalline dia-
monds (MCDs) and nanocrystalline diamonds (NCDs), re-
spectively, and the later constituting of several-nanometer 
diamond grains are sometimes called ultrananocrystalline 
diamonds (UNCDs) [19], of which composites with an a-
C and a a-C:H are written as “UNCD/a-C” and “UNCD/a-
C:H”, respectively [20].

As stated above, UNCD/a-C and UNCD/a-C:H thin 

films are deposited on various sorts of substrates via CVDs 
in general. Meanwhile, these films can also be synthesized 
via physical vapor deposition (PVD) methods such as 
pulsed laser deposition (PLD) [21,22] and coaxial arc 
plasma deposition (CAPD). CAPD process, by which the 
films are deposited with atomized, ionized, and dimerized 


2 / 9

carbon particles ejected from a graphite target equipped 
with a coaxial gun induced with a pulsed voltage [23], is 
able to form the films without hydrogen gas [24] and dia-
mond seeding pretreatment [25] at comparatively low tem-
perature (550 ℃). Therefore, CAPD method can be an en-
vironmentally-friendly, low-cost technique. This process 
also brings about a unique morphology; UNCD grains em-
bedded in an a-C and/or a a-C:H matrices with numerous 
GBs between them [23]. This distinctive morphology of 
the films would yield a quite large light absorption coeffi-
cient of over 105 cm‒1 ranging from a photon energy of 3 
to 6 eV, two orders of magnitude larger than that of the 
films by CVDs [23]. This feature is advantageous in pho-
toelectric conversions of UV rays and the UNCD/a-C:H 
films fabricated by CAPD are great potential candidates 
for UV-sensing applications (see, for example, Refs. [26] 
and [27] as for the first experimental demonstrations of 
functionalities as photo-diodes consisting of boron- and ni-
trogen-doped UNCD/a-C:H thin films prepared via CAPD, 
respectively).

A lot of experimental research on the films prepared by 

CAPD toward the applications to photovoltaics such as UV 
sensors have been accumulated until today, motivated by 
some theoretical and experimental studies. Common in-
trinsic UNCD/a-C:H films synthesized via CAPD possess 
optical properties such as an indirect optical bandgap of 1.7 
eV stemming from the amorphous regions [23], and a di-
rect gap of 2.9 eV owing to GBs specific to UNCD/a-C:H 
films [23]. The GBs play a crucial part in carrier transport 
pathway [28], which presumably enables the above appli-
cations. Boron-doping into the UNCD/a-C:H films by 
CAPD has been practically realized by performing deposi-
tion using boron-blended graphite targets [26], and the 
electrical characteristics of boron-doped UNCD/a-C:H 
films have also been surveyed through p-n heterojunction
diodes comprising the boron-doped UNCD/a-C:H films 
and n-Si substrates [26,28,29]. However, it has not been 
studied how boron-doping has an influence on the chemi-
cal bonding states of the films which possess their compli-
cated structures. 

In this work, we report on the boron-doping effects by 

use of near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure 
(NEXAFS) spectroscopy, which is functional in quantita-
tive analysis of local structures, studying the boron- and 
carbon-related bonds since C K-edge obtained by this tech-
nique is able to decern any bonding states of carbon. Re-
cently, we have investigated the hydrogenation effect sim-
ilarly by use of NEXAFS spectroscopy as well as X-ray 
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier Transform 
Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR), and demonstrated an effec-
tiveness of hydrogenation induced with a technological de-
velopment of the film fabrication process (see Ref. [30] for 
the detail) with its detail mechanism by studying compre-
hensively the chemical bonding state changes accompa-
nied by the amounts of hydrogen content in the films [31]. 
Results obtained in this work reveal that the films would 
own double-step transitions of doping toward the bonding 
states dependent on their amounts and a certain bonding 

state related to boron surely serves to create electrical lev-
els between the optical gaps closer to the top of valence 
bands, which leads to a substantial improvement of the 
electrical conductivities, by correlating with the electrical 
characteristics investigated previously. Furthermore, the 
results demonstrate a distinctive hybridization with doped-
boron atoms markedly different from those in cases of con-
ventional CVD single and polycrystalline diamonds that 
the boron dopants predominantly replace substitutionally 
with carbon atoms that consist of the diamond lattices. The 
in-depth discussion that would be informative for future 
works is given and the brief perspectives are also provided 
finally in Section 4.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE

We prepared five discrete samples with different boron 

contents to investigate boron-doping effects on UNCD/a-
C:H films in this work. All the samples were fabricated via 
CAPD based on a conventional manner reported up to date 
[23,32]. The films were deposited on insulating Si sub-
strates with resistivity of more than 10 kΩ‧cm under hy-
drogen pressure of 53.3 Pa at a substrate temperature of 
550 ℃ after an inside of a chamber was evacuated down 
up to a base pressure of 10‒5 Pa order by using a turbo mo-
lecular pump. Arc plasma discharge was performed with a 
coaxial arc plasma gun equipped with graphite targets con-
taining 0, 0.1, 1.0, 5.0, 10 at. % boron to form undoped and 
boron-doped UNCD/a-C:H films. The other important pa-
rameters are found in an experimental section of a recent 
paper [29]. NEXAFS experiments were conducted to ob-
tain B K- and C K-edges of the spectra in the films at beam-
line 12 of Kyushu Synchrotron Research Center. All exper-
iments were performed at room temperature in vacuum. 
The measurement durations were approximately forty 
minutes in each experiment and the data were recorded at 
the energy resolutions of 0.05 eV in a photon energy.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

First, boron K (B K)-edge spectra presented in Figure 

1(a) will be studied. These spectra can be divided at a pho-
ton energy of ~195 eV into transitions from specific chem-
ical bonds (B‒X) to π* and σ* states. The latter, extremely 
broad plural bands, grow with an increase of boron content 
in the films. According to some previous research on boron 
compounds such as boron nitrides (BNs) and boron car-
bides (BCs), they would be attributed to superpositions of 
wavefunctions excited from various B 1s orbitals. They are 
extremely conjugated and it is difficult to carry out a pre-
cise investigation on them quantitatively, hence we’ll 
roughly give a discussion on this part. Especially a swell 
of the spectrum in the region of more than ~200 eV, which 
can be confirmed in the films with a higher boron content, 
would be attributable mainly to a feature of an oxidized-
boron system as previously reported in the cases of B2O3
[33,34], BN [34], BN nanotubes (BNNTs) [34] and BxC1-x
[33]. This contribution might be due to the oxide impurities 
and the similar tendency was also observed in survey-scan 


3 / 9

and oxygen 1s (O 1s) XPS spectra (see Ref. [29] and Fig-
ure S1 in Supporting Information). The other part, i.e. in a 
photon energy ranging from ~195 to ~200 eV also origi-
nates from excitations of the B 1s core-level electron to σ* 
states. This contribution changes the position of the photon 
energy by a maximum of up to 4.9 eV based on the mate-
rial’s morphologies as it has been reported in c-BNs and h-
BNs [35], which implies that wavefunctions originating 
from several σ* transitions from different chemical bonds 
are superpositioned with each other since the UNCD/a-
C:H films are composed of a variety of bonding forms es-
pecially in an amorphous fraction and GBs, assuming that 
this description might be applied to our materials.

Secondary, the area in a photon energy of less than ~195 

eV is considered. An absorption spectrum of the film pre-
pared using a target with a boron content of 1.0 at. % ex-
hibits a weak jump at 188.5 eV (labeled α). This would 
stem from metallic boron (B‒B) as demonstrated in a cou-
ple of research on h-BNs [36,37], and the left shoulder of 
the peaks labeled β in the spectra of the films prepared by 
use of the targets incorporated with 5.0 and 10 at. % boron 
would also result from this contribution. As a boron con-
tent of the film increases, sharp spikes at 192 eV (labeled 
β) and 194 eV (labeled γ) are becoming noticeable. The 
former is a typical peak indicating B 1s core-level electron 
to π* states, which is often observed in various sorts of bo-
ronide, BN, and BC materials and is specific to them. Es-
pecially a literature reporting on B4C films [38] is suitable 
for an explanation of this peak corresponding to B‒C 
bonds since this material owns the most similar structure 
to our films as far as to be known at present. The latter (la-
beled γ) is weaker as compared to that of the former (la-
beled β), and there are two considerable possibilities ac-
cording to some previous studies on BNs and BCs. One is 
quantum confinement effects that will appear in a scale of 
less than 20 nm of particle size. As mentioned above, 
UNCD/a-C:Hs are complex nano-scale materials and are 

small enough to exhibit such effects, which would be ap-
plicable to our films. This hypothesis is supported by a pa-
per reporting on the same observation in BNs [39]. How-
ever, it is reported that the effects occur in diamonds whose 
grain diameters are less than 2 nm [40]. Therefore, it is less 
possible that quantum confinement effect contributes to a 
peak labeled γ. Another is an attribution to oxygen impuri-
ties as confirmed in some BNs [34,41] and boron powder 
[42] that might result from surface oxidation. Given that 
UNCD/a-C:H films synthesized by CAPD generally pos-
sess less crystallinity compared with those by CVDs and 
most of them is composed of disordered amorphous struc-
tures and GBs, quantum size effects induced with UNCD 
grains would be limited. Hence, most of these peaks la-
beled γ are presumed to be ascribed to the oxide impurities 
of the films and the quantum confinement effects will be 
the slightest contributions. To summarize the studies of B 
K-edge, boron-doping will bring about the following quan-
titative variations; (ⅰ) at an early stage of doping, metallic 
boron is formed in the films and (ⅱ) as the amount of do-
pant increases, boron atoms are certainly incorporated to 
form B‒C bonds in association with an involvement of ox-
ygen impurities, resulting in a formation of boron-oxides.

To investigate how the carbon hybridization in the films 

varies quantitatively by doping boron, NEXAFS C K-edge 
spectra were examined at the same beamline and analyzed 
in detail. Each extracted data was processed based on some 
previous studies on UNCD/a-C:H films accumulated up to 
the present (see, for example, Refs. [43] and [44] regarding 
the first investigation of the spectra and well-fitted data 
processing, respectively). The backgrounds were sub-
tracted and pre-edge in the region of less than 283 eV and 
post-edge more than 314 eV of the spectra were normal-
ized to reveal original absorption. Afterwards, arctangent 
function steps are applied as an approximation of the larg-
est absorption located at ~291 eV that denotes the ioniza-
tion potential peculiar to diamonds. As it has been already 

280
284
288
292
180
190
200
210
220

Photon energy (eV)
Photon energy (eV)

Intensity (a. u.)

(a)
(b)
B K-edge

α

β

γ

σ*
π*
δ

Y
Z

C K-edge

Figure 1. (a) NEXAFS spectra in B K-edge of UNCD/a-C:H films prepared by use of graphite targets containing 0.1, 1.0, 5.0, 10 at. % 
boron, and (b) spectra in C K-edge of the identical films as well as undoped films synthesized with a pure graphite target. The pre- and 
post-edges of C K-edge are normalized in a proper fashion (see and read the text in Section 3). 


4 / 9

studied on our recent paper, the NEXAFS C K-edge can be 
sorted out on the basis of the derivations; specifically, the 
areas larger than ~291 eV come from UNCD grains, an a-
C and a a-C:H matrices [31]. It should be noted here that 
the threshold of this absorption differs depending on the 
morphologies of any carbon-related materials (see, for in-
stance, Ref. [45] regarding the comparative work). Since 
this fraction (over ~291 eV) seems not to give rise to any 
new findings, we will discuss the topic excluding this area.

These spectra processed in the above stated fashion are 

presented in Figure 1(b). A distinct peak positioned at the 
lowest photon energy, which comes from π* C=C reso-
nance and is labeled δ, denotes energy shift toward higher 
energy by doping boron at a transition point between the 
case using a B 1.0 at. % target and a B 5.0 at. % one. This 
observation might be an implication of a formation of car-
bon oxides deriving from oxidation process accompanied 
by boron-doping. Since a formation of B‒C bonds from C‒
C bonding system hardly affects the NEXAFS spectra as it 
has been reported any number of times previously in some 

sorts of BCs, it’s the most reasonable interpretation.

One of the most noticeable appearance changes are il-

lustrated by the areas of Y and Z in Figure 1(b). To study 
the details of these areas, the processed spectra were de-
composed to gaussian functions that represent X-ray ab-
sorption in each carbon hybridization by use of analytical 
fitting program Athena [46] based on our recent work [31] 
and they are shown in Figure 2. Specifically, backgrounds 
of the obtained raw data were subtracted at the first setout, 
and the pre- and post-edges of processed data were normal-
ized. Deconvolution was carried out, on the basis of some 
previous paper reporting the successful processing, with a 
careful attention to fitting parameters such as peak position 
and full width at half maximum (FWHM). According to a 
previous research on boron-doped UNCD/a-C:H films 
synthesized via PLD technique investigated by NEXAFS 
spectroscopy, σ* C‒B resonance in the spectra comes out 
at a photon energy of 286.9 eV [47], while the similar 
spikes were observed in CAPD UNCD/a-C:H films by bo-
ron-doping [48]. Though the feature is not to be confirmed 

280
284
288
292

280
284
288
292
280
284
288
292
280
284
288
292

280
284
288
292

Photon energy (eV)

Intensity (a. u.)

Photon energy (eV)

Photon energy (eV)
Photon energy (eV)
Photon energy (eV)

Intensity (a. u.)

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)
(e)

σ* C ‒ H
π* C = C

σ* C ‒ B
π* C ≡ C
σ* C ‒ C

Figure 2. Magnified NEXAFS C K-edge spectra of (a) undoped and (b)‒(e) boron-doped UNCD/a-C:H films fabricated using graphite 
targets incorporated with (a) 0, (b) 0.1, (c) 1.0, (d) 5.0, (e) 10 at. % boron (indicated with black squared dots). Each spectrum is 
deconvoluted with gaussian and arctangent functions representing each carbon hybridization and large X-ray absorption owing to 
UNCD crystallites, respectively, and the sum totals are exhibited with red curves. As for the former, important contributions in this 
work are colored with purple (π* C=C), light green (σ* C‒H), blue (σ* C‒B), magenta (π* C≡C) and orange (σ* C‒H), and the 
others are expressed with dashed curves. All the details of a photon energy except for the case of π* C=O and π* COOH are referred 
to our latest paper [31]. These spectra were obtained by Total Electron Yield (TEY) technique, different from the referred work, and 
processed in a proper manner; therefore, note that both figures cannot be compared simply with each other. 


5 / 9

in Figure 2(a) and 2(b), namely in the undoped and 0.1 
at. % boron-doped films, it stands out gradually from Fig-
ure 2(c) to 2(e), i.e., with an increase of boron content in 
the films (see also the part set with a blue net of Figure 3), 
which means a successful incorporation of boron to hy-
bridize with carbon atoms into formation of C‒B bonds in 
the films. Flattening transition of the spectra by doping bo-
ron in the area of Y in Figure 1(b) would be caused mainly 
by this chemical bonding formation. Secondly, we shall 
place attention to the deconvoluted spectra colored with 
light green in Figure 2. This contribution coming from σ* 
C‒H and centered at 286.2 eV suddenly decreases when 
the slightest amount of boron is doped as illustrated by a 
light green net of Figure 3.
Once the boron is incorpo-

rated into the films, this hybridization gradually increases 
accompanied by an increase of the dopant, and the similar 
tendency can be observed in σ* C‒C though it exhibits less 
conspicuous compared with that of σ* C‒H. Since both of 
them are saturated bonds, it is estimated that incorporated 
boron atoms dismantled these stable structures with its ex-
tremely small amount, and such distorting effects are being 
mitigated while the boron-doping is assisted. Concerning 
the excitation to π* C≡C states, a totally opposite inclina-
tion can be confirmed in Figure 3 (see the columns with a 
magenta net). It can be interpreted that π* C≡C, the most 
unstable state, is generated additionally by boron-doping at 
the initial stage owing to the above-mentioned structural 
distortion, and in the second doping phase with a boron 
concentration of the target more than 1.0 at. % this triple-
bonded system is stabilized by addition reaction to form 
more stable states such as σ* C‒H, σ* C‒C, and π* C=C as 
well as σ* C‒B as it can be confirmed in Figure 3. The 
correlation with oxygen impurities is unclear at present and 
should be investigated by conducting measurements on 
NEXAFS O K-edge. The amount of π* C=C in the films 
increases approximately accompanied by additional boron 
doping, whereas it represents an irregular picture in the 
case of the films deposited with a boron content of 0.1 at. % 
in a target. This is presumed that the light-doping of boron 
causes the structural-distortion effect conspicuously, re-
sulting in more π* C=C states detected, and the effect is 

promoted roughly proportional to the amount of dopant 
thereafter.

The decomposed spectrum deriving from carbon-oxy-

gen bonds is split into two gaussian functions positioned at 
289.3 and 290.3 eV which denote π* C=O and π* COOH, 
respectively, from that in reference to our latest work [31]. 
The area around here is highly convoluted with several ab-
sorptions such as an ionization potential of UNCD crystal-
lites and a core electron excitation to σ* C=C states as well 
as that denotes a transition of π* C=O and π* COOH. 
Hence, quantification of these σ* states is susceptible to the 
fitting parameters and lacks its accuracy, and it’s not to be 
discussed anymore in this work since it never affects the 
discussion on the other parts considering comprehensively 
the FWHMs of each deconvolutes equivalent to 1.53 eV 
and the positions enough apart from each other. This por-
tion in the deconvolution process of NEXAFS C K-edge is 
under development at present and requires extra studies to 
comprehend the details more precisely. For instance, Shpil-
man et al. reported the existence of π* C=O at ~286.5 eV 
in CVD diamonds [49], though it is not considered here as 
there have been a lot of works on PVD UNCD/a-C:H thin 
films including CAPD ones, published in actual and yield-
ing many intriguing results by quite well fitting process al-
most the same with that I used in this work.

These chemical bonding state transitions unveiled by 

NEXAFS B K- and C K-edges summarize comprehensive 
mechanisms of boron-doping effects on the local structures 
of UNCD/a-C:H films deposited by CAPD technique. At 
an early stage of doping with its amount of less than 1.0 
at. %, incorporated boron atoms form metallic boron with-
out any hybridization with carbon atoms. This state of bo-
ron would be localized at GBs predominantly as reference 
to a report on boron-doped UNCD/a-C:H films [50] that 
were fabricated the most similarly to ours as far as compa-
rable with our results. The doped-boron doesn’t replace 
substitutionally with carbon atoms comprising diamond 
lattice, much less exist as metallic in the diamond grains, 
and it also be less possible that it is present inside an a-C 
and/or a a-C:H matrices without bonding with carbon at-
oms, considering their kinetics. This localization gives rise 

B 0 at.%
B 0.1 at.%
B 1.0 at.%

B 5.0 at.%
B 10 at.%

π* C=C
σ* C‒H
σ* C‒B
π* C≡C
σ* C‒C

Quantitative chemical 

bond content (a. u.)

Figure 3. Relative amount of each carbon hybridization in boron-doped and undoped UNCD/a-C:H films synthesized by use of graph-
ite targets with a boron content of 0, 0.1, 1.0, 5.0, and 10 at. % obtained from the deconvolutes of NEXAFS C K-edge presented in 
Figure 2.


6 / 9

to structural strains and unstable states such as π* C=C and 
π* C≡C that would be transformed from more stably satu-
rated states especially from σ* C‒H of which hydrogen 
plays a part in termination of dangling bonds at GBs. Fur-
ther doping makes the dopants combined with carbon at-
oms to form σ* C‒B. It is considered that the doped-boron 
would replace mainly hydrogen atoms substitutionally and 
append partially to dangling bonds, both of which are situ-
ated at the UNCD surfaces exposed to GBs, similarly to 
the previous investigations on the structures of PLD boron-
doped UNCD/a-C:H films [47]. Simultaneously oxygen 
impurities are involved with boron to generate boron ox-
ides presumably localized at the film surface, based on a 
result of an ion bombardment etching treatment in an XPS 
survey [51]. Incorporated-boron will permeate the whole 
films uniformly [26] to form the above-mentioned bonding 
state, resulting in the enlargement of UNCD grains [48,52] 
of which size is presumed to be tens of nanometers, so-
called NCDs. Concretely, the doped-boron doesn’t incor-
porate into the lattice of UNCD crystallites and replace 
with the constituent carbon atoms, but substitute preferen-
tially with hydrogen atoms terminating the UNCD surfaces 
at GBs. This doping mechanism is totally different from 
phenomena confirmed in a lot of conventional CVD dia-
monds introduced in Section 1, and is rather similar to 
those in PLD UNCD/a-C:H thin films. The grown diamond 

nanoparticle increases its concentration in the films, which 
generally decreases the number of, but might thicken the 
GBs as reported in the case of nitrogen-doped CVD UNCD 
thin films [53]. These denser diamonds would serve to gen-
erate more photo-induced carrier under UV irradiations, 
therefore the diodes comprising the films will be more ad-
vantageous in applications to UV photodetectors.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

By use of NEXAFS spectroscopic technique, boron-

doping effects on UNCD/a-C:H films deposited by CAPD 
have been studied to clarify the chemical bonding transi-
tions of their local structures. The results indicate metallic 
boron is formed sparsely at GBs to exist at interfaces be-
tween UNCD crystallites and an a-C and/or a a-C:H matri-
ces at an early stage of doping, and σ* C‒B starts to be 
generated on the UNCD grain surfaces substitutionally 
with hydrogen atoms at the surfaces on a priority basis and 
dangling bonds subsidiarily from a certain point by the ad-
ditional doping. This chemical bonding states should be an 
origin of a drastic enhancement of electrical conductivities 
of the films and play a part in accepter-like levels localized 
above the valence band, which would be helpful in induc-
ing hopping conductions [28]. Our results and in-depth in-
vestigations that suggest an empirical model of boron-dop-
ing on the films would be a fundamental platform of future 

0
200
400
600
800 1000
528
532
536
540

184
188
192
196
200

Binding Energy (eV)
Binding Energy (eV)

Intensity (a. u.)

Intensity (a. u.)
Intensity (a. u.)

Survey Scan
B 1s 

Spectra

O 1s 

Spectra

(a)
(b)

(c)

Undoped
B 0.1 at. % tgt.
B 1.0 at. % tgt.

B 5.0 at. % tgt.
B 10 at. % tgt.

Figure S1. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of (a) survey-scanned, (b) boron 1s (B 1s), and (c) oxygen 1s (O 1s) spectra. All meas-
urements were conducted at beamline 12 of Kyushu Synchrotron Light Research Center by use of soft X-rays. In parallel, Mg Kα line 
with a photon energy of 1253.6 eV was utilized for the survey scan measurements. Survey scan spectra are typical figures of UNCD/a-
C:H films and a couple of jumps centered at around 285 eV, 532 eV, and 980 eV that come from carbon 1s (C 1s), B 1s orbitals and 
carbon KVV auger transition in order are observed. The details of each constituent are studied in a recent work [31]. B 1s spectra show 
an advent of a peak, which means certainly boron is incorporated into the films. Growing O 1s spectra accompanied by boron-doping 
indicate the oxygen is involved at the film surface with an increase of incorporated-boron.


7 / 9

works of the films and open the way for relevant research 
toward various applications requiring impurity doping, 
which are represented by semiconducting devices such as 
photovoltaics.

Note and Acknowledgments

This work is succeeded from Yoshitake Research Group 

(Kyushu University) mainly directed by Dr. Satoshi 
Takeichi affiliated with OSG Corporation at present, and is 
completed by the author’s volunteering. The author ex-
presses deep appreciations to Dr. Satoshi Takeichi for his 
cooperation of sample fabrications, XPS and NEXAFS ex-
periments, Dr. Eiichi Kobayashi (Kyushu Synchrotron Re-
search Center) and Mr. Seiya Uchida (Kyushu University) 
for the help of XPS and NEXAFS measurements.

Conflict of Interest

The author declares no conflict of interest.

Data Availability Statements

The data that support the findings of this study are avail-

able upon reasonable request from the authors.

Appendix. Additional Discussion

We provide here additional discussion on electrical char-

acteristics that the UNCD/a-C:H films possess revealed in 
some previous research and correlate them with the results 
obtained this time to draw brief perspectives on a possible 
application toward UV photodiodes. Electrical properties 
and transport mechanisms of the films in each doped level 
can also be explained simultaneously by comparing the 
above discussion with some previous research. Hereupon, 
we review the outcomes regarding the films accumulated 
up to now before initiating correlation. As introduced in 
Section 1, heterojunction diodes comprising boron-doped 
UNCD/a-C:H films and n-type Si substrates were success-
fully fabricated with CAPD technique and the electrical 
characteristics as well as the transport mechanism have 
also been investigated. It should be noted that CAPD 
UNCD/a-C:H thin films occupy their constituents mostly 
of a-C and a-C:H matrices accompanied by a great number 
of GBs differently from those fabricated with various con-
ventional CVD techniques which own denser polycrystal-
line diamonds with less other components such as amor-
phous and GBs. This compositional difference may have 
generated their distinguished optical and electrical proper-
ties represented by the three different optical gaps deriving 
from a-C and/or a-C:H matrices, GBs, and diamond partic-
ulates. As for the electrical transport mechanism, it has 
been explained that firstly electron-hole pairs are generated 
at UNCD grains with UV irradiation. After that the created 
electron and hole transfer through mainly GBs in addition 
to their amorphous fractions supported by incorporated ni-
trogen and boron impurities in n- and p-type CAPD 
UNCD/a-C:H films, respectively. Recently, Katamune et 
al. reported the electrical characteristics of boron-doped 

UNCD/a-C:H films by use of hard X-ray photoelectron 
emission microscopy (HAXPES). From an accompanied 
investigation, it is known that the activation energy of the 
films rises with a drop of boron content and that more 
doped films with the amount of dopant more than 2.0 at. % 
exhibited clear tendencies in a hopping model [54], which 
was revealed from the temperature-dependence of electri-
cal conductivity measurements. Besides, it reports boron-
doping into the films makes the Fermi level move toward 
to the valence band and forms acceptor-like localized lev-
els, which induces the three-dimensional variable range 
hopping (VRH) conduction, with lowering the total elec-
tron density of state. These details can be referred to Ref. 
[29].

In lightly-doped films with its amount of presumed 0.5 

at. %, photo-induced carriers generated at UNCD crystal-
lites with UV illuminations would pass mainly through 
GBs with an assistance of metallic boron via three-dimen-
sional VRH and secondary through an a-C and a a-C:H ma-
trices as discussed in our recent work [31]. Though un-
doped CAPD UNCD/a-C:H films possess less conductivi-
ties equivalent to 2 × 10−7 Ω‒1cm‒1 at room temperature 
[29], p-n heterojunction diodes consisting of the lightly-
doped films and n-type Si substrates surely exhibited the 
rectifying actions [30] and work sufficiently to be p-type 
semiconductors. The films doped with an amount of boron 
enough to form σ* C‒B should increase their electrical 
conductivities up to 2 × 10−1 Ω‒1cm‒1 at room tempera-
ture owing to the created localized states in the optical gap 
mentioned above, which leads to an improvement of car-
rier concentration. Diodes with the films and the n-Si sub-
strates also follow the VRH and photo-induced carriers 
may transport similarly to those with a small amount of 
boron incorporated. In any cases the carrier paths and the 
transport mechanisms are the same much or lesser, and the 
detail descriptions are provided in Ref. [31]. We should 
note here that oxygen impurities involved accompanied by 
this process hardly have an influence on the electrical con-
ductivities referred to Ref. [29].

Thus, we have conducted close correlation between 

chemical bonding states and electrical properties of boron-
doped UNCD/a-C:H thin films prepared via CAPD in each 
doping level in this section. The result to be emphasized 
the most is a bonding state σ* C‒B would be an origin of 
enhancing electrical conductivities of the films. However 
slight the quantitative variation is, it surely serves to im-
prove device performances in the p-n heterojunction di-
odes.

[1]
S. Matsumoto, Y. Sato, M. Kamo, and N. Setaka, “Vapor 
Deposition of Diamond Particles from Methane,” Jpn. J. 
Appl. Phys. 21, L183 (1982).

[2]
S. Matsumoto, Y. Sato, M. Tsutsumi, and N. Setaka, 
“Growth of diamond particles from methane-hydrogen gas,” 
J. Mater. Sci. 17, 3106 (1982).

[3]
M. Kamo, Y. Sato, S. Matsumoto, and N. Setaka, 
“Diamond synthesis from gas phase in microwave plasma,” 
J. Cryst. Growth 62, 642 (1983).


8 / 9

[4]
S. Matsumoto, “Chemical vapour deposition of diamond in 
RF glow discharge,” J. Mater. Sci. Lett. 4, 600 (1985).

[5]
S. Matsumoto, M. Hino, and T. Kobayashi, “Synthesis of 
diamond films in a rf induction thermal plasma,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 51, 737 (1987).

[6]
T. R. Anthony, W. F. Banholzer, J. F. Fleischer, L. Wei, P. 
K. Kuo, R. L. Thomas, and R. W. Pryor, “Thermal 
diffusivity of isotopically enriched 12C diamond,” Phys. 
Rev. B 42, 1104 (1990).

[7]
L. Wei, P. K. Kuo, R. L. Thomas, T. R. Anthony, and W. 
F. Banholzer, “Thermal conductivity of isotopically 
modified single crystal diamond,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 
3764 (1993).

[8]
C. D. Clark, P. J. Dean, and P. V. Harris, “Intrinsic edge 
absorption in diamond,” Proc. R. Soc. London. Ser. A. 
Math. Phys. Sci. 277, 312 (1964).

[9]
S. Bhattacharyya, O. Auciello, J. Birrell, J. A. Carlisle, L. 
A. Curtiss, A. N. Goyette, D. M. Gruen, A. R. Krauss, J. 
Schlueter, A. Sumant, and P. Zapol, “Synthesis and 
characterization of highly-conducting nitrogen-doped 
ultrananocrystalline diamond films,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 
1441 (2001).

[10]
S. Koizumi, M. Kamo, Y. Sato, H. Ozaki, and T. Inuzuka, 
“Growth and characterization of phosphorous doped {111} 
homoepitaxial diamond thin films,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 
1065 (1997).

[11]
R. Ohtani, T. Yamamoto, S. D. Janssens, S. Yamasaki, and 
S. 
Koizumi, 
“Large 
improvement 
of 
phosphorus 

incorporation efficiency in n-type chemical vapor 
deposition of diamond,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 232106 
(2014).

[12]
I. Sakaguchi, M. N.-Gamo, Y. Kikuchi, E. Yasu, H. 
Haneda, T. Suzuki, and T. Ando, “Sulfur: A donor dopant 
for n-type diamond semiconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 60, 
R2139 (1999).

[13]
N. Fujimori, T. Imai, and A. Doi, “Characterization of 
conducting diamond films,” Vacuum 36, 99 (1986).

[14] J. Mort, D. Kuhman, M. Machonkin, M. Morgan, F. Jansen, 

K. Okumura, Y. M. LeGrice, and R. J. Nemanich, “Boron 
doping of diamond thin films,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 55, 1121 
(1989).

[15]
J. W. Glesener, “Hole capture in boron‐doped diamond,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 217 (1994).

[16]
J.-P. Lagrange, A. Deneuville, and E. Gheeraert, 
“Activation energy in low compensated homoepitaxial 
boron-doped diamond films,” Diam. Relat. Mater. 7, 1390 
(1998).

[17]
R. S. Balmer, J. R. Brandon, S. L. Clewes, H. K. Dhillon, 
J. M. Dodson, I. Friel, P. N. Inglis, T. D. Madgwick, M. L. 
Markham, T. P. Mollart, N. Perkins, G. A. Scarsbrook, D. 
J. Twitchen, A. J. Whitehead, J. J. Wilman, and S. M. 
Woollard, 
“Chemical 
vapour 
deposition 
synthetic 

diamond: materials, technology and applications,” J. Phys.:
Condens. Matter 21, 364221 (2009).

[18]
J. Robertson, “Diamond-like amorphous carbon,” Mater. 
Sci. Eng. R 37, 129 (2002).

[19]
O. Auciello and A. V. Sumant, “Status review of the 
science and technology of ultrananocrystalline diamond 
(UNCDTM) films and application to multifunctional 
devices,” Diam. Relat. Mater. 19, 699 (2010).

[20]
C. Popov, W. Kulisch, P. N. Gibson, G. Ceccone, and M. 
Jelinek, “Growth and characterization of nanocrystalline 
diamond/amorphous carbon composite films prepared by 

MWCVD,” Diam. Relat. Mater. 13, 1371 (2004).

[21]
T. Yoshitake, A. Nagano, M. Itakura, N. Kuwano, T. Hara, 
and K. Nagayama, “Spectral Absorption Properties of 
Ultrananocrystalline 
Diamond/Amorphous 
Carbon 

Composite Thin Films Prepared by Pulsed Laser 
Deposition,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 46, L936 (2007).

[22]
T. Yoshitake, A. Nagano, S. Ohmagari, M. Itakura, N. 
Kuwano, R. Ohtani, H. Setoyama, E. Kobayashi, and K. 
Nagayama, “Near-Edge X-ray Absorption Fine-Structure, 
X-ray Photoemission, and Fourier Transform Infrared 
Spectroscopies 
of 
Ultrananocrystalline 

Diamond/Hydrogenated Amorphous Carbon Composite 
Films,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 48, 020222 (2009).

[23]
T. Yoshitake, Y. Nakagawa, A. Nagano, R. Ohtani, H. 
Setoyama, E. Kobayashi, K. Sumitani, Y. Agawa, and K. 
Nagayama, “Structural and Physical Characteristics of 
Ultrananocrystalline Diamond/Hydrogenated Amorphous 
Carbon Composite Films Deposited Using a Coaxial Arc 
Plasma Gun,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 49, 015503 (2010).

[24]
K. Hanada, T. Yoshitake, T. Nishiyama, and K. Nagayama, 
“Time-Resolved Spectroscopic Observation of Deposition 
Processes of Ultrananocrystalline Diamond/Amorphous 
Carbon Composite Films by Using a Coaxial Arc Plasma 
Gun,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 49, 08JF09 (2010).

[25]
K. Hanada, T. Yoshida, Y. Nakagawa, and T. Yoshitake, 
“Formation of Ultrananocrystalline Diamond/Amorphous 
Carbon Composite Films in Vacuum Using Coaxial Arc 
Plasma Gun,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 49, 125503 (2010).

[26]
Y. Katamune, S. Ohmagari, S. Al-Riyami, S. Takagi, M. 
Shaban, and T. Yoshitake, “Heterojunction Diodes 
Comprising p-Type Ultrananocrystalline Diamond Films 
Prepared by Coaxial Arc Plasma Deposition and n-Type 
Silicon Substrates,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 52, 065801 (2013).

[27]
A. Zkria, H. Gima, M. Shaban, and T. Yoshitake, 
“Electrical 
characteristics 
of 
nitrogen-doped 

ultrananocrystalline diamond/hydrogenated amorphous 
carbon composite films prepared by coaxial arc plasma 
deposition,” Appl. Phys. Express 8, 095101 (2015).

[28]
Y. Katamune, S. Takeichi, S. Ohmagari, and T. Yoshitake, 
“Hydrogenation effects on carrier transport in boron-doped 
ultrananocrystalline diamond/amorphous carbon films 
prepared by coaxial arc plasma deposition,” J. Vac. Sci. 
Technol. A 33, 061514 (2015).

[29]
Y. Katamune, S. Takeichi, R. Ohtani, S. Koizumi, E. 
Ikenaga, K. Kamitani, T. Sugiyama, and T. Yoshitake, 
“Electrical 
properties 
of 
boron-incorporated 

ultrananocrystalline diamond/hydrogenated amorphous 
carbon composite films,” Appl. Phys. A 125, 295 (2019).

[30]
N. Nishikawa, S. Takeichi, T. Hanada, S. Tategami, A. 
Fukuyama, and T. Yoshitake, “Minority carrier lifetime in 
ultrananocrystalline diamond/hydrogenated amorphous 
carbon composite films,” Trans. Mater. Res. Soc. Japan 43, 
361 (2018).

[31]
N. Nishikawa, “Evidence of hydrogen termination at grain 
boundaries in ultrananocrystalline diamond/hydrogenated 
amorphous carbon composite thin films synthesized via 
coaxial arc plasma,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 38, 062803 
(2020).

[32]
K. Hanada, T. Nishiyama, T. Yoshitake, and K. Nagayama, 
“Optical emission spectroscopy of deposition process of 
ultrananocrystalline diamond/hydrogenated amorphous 
carbon composite films by using a coaxial arc plasma gun,” 
Diam. Relat. Mater. 19, 899 (2010).


9 / 9

[33]
I. Caretti, R. Gago, J. M. Albella, and I. Jiménez, “Boron 
carbides formed by coevaporation of B and C atoms: Vapor 
reactivity, BxC1-x composition, and bonding structure,” 
Phys. Rev. B 77, 174109 (2008).

[34]
L. Liu, T.-K. Sham, W. Han, C. Zhi, and Y. Bando, “X-ray 
Excited Optical Luminescence from Hexagonal Boron 
Nitride Nanotubes: Electronic Structures and the Role of 
Oxygen Impurities,” ACS Nano 5, 631 (2011).

[35]
X. Zhou, T.-K. Sham, W. Zhang, C.-Y. Chan, I. Bello, S.-
T. Lee, and H. Hofsäss, “Cubic Phase Content and 
Structure of BN Films from an X-ray Absorption Study,” 
Anal. Chem. 78, 6314 (2006).

[36]
D. Li, G. M. Bancroft, and M. E. Fleet, “B K-edge XANES 
of crystalline and amorphous inorganic materials,” J. 
Electron Spectros. Relat. Phenomena 79, 71 (1996).

[37]
N. L. McDougall, J. G. Partridge, R. J. Nicholls, S. P. 
Russo, and D. G. McCulloch, “Influence of point defects 
on the near edge structure of hexagonal boron nitride,” 
Phys. Rev. B 96, 144106 (2017).

[38]
O. R. Monteiro, M. Delplancke-Ogletree, and C. C. 
Klepper, “Boron carbide coatings prepared by cathodic arc 
deposition,” J. Mater. Sci. 38, 3117 (2003).

[39]
J. B. MacNaughton, A. Moewes, R. G. Wilks, X. T. Zhou, 
T. K. Sham, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, C. Y. Chan, W. J. 
Zhang, I. Bello, S. T. Lee, and H. Hofsäss, “Electronic 
structure of boron nitride single crystals and films,” Phys. 
Rev. B 72, 195113 (2005).

[40]
J.-Y. Raty, G. Galli, C. Bostedt, T. van Buuren, and L. 
Terminello, “Quantum Confinement and Fullerenelike 
Surface Reconstructions in Nanodiamonds,” Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 90, 037401 (2003).

[41]
N. L. McDougall, J. G. Partridge, D. W. M. Lau, P. 
Reineck, B. C. Gibson, T. Ohshima, and D. G. McCulloch, 
“Theoretical and experimental investigation of point 
defects in cubic boron nitride,” MRS Adv. 2, 1545 (2017).

[42]
I. Jiménez, D. G. J. Sutherland, T. van Buuren, J. A. 
Carlisle, 
L. 
J. Terminello, 
and 
F. 
J. 
Himpsel, 

“Photoemission and x-ray-absorption study of boron 
carbide and its surface thermal stability,” Phys. Rev. B 57, 
13167 (1998).

[43]
S. Ohmagari, T. Yoshitake, A. Nagano, S. AL-Riyami, R. 
Ohtani, H. Setoyama, E. Kobayashi, and K. Nagayama, 
“Near-Edge X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure of 
Ultrananocrystalline Diamond/Hydrogenated Amorphous 
Carbon Films Prepared by Pulsed Laser Deposition,” J. 
Nanomater. 2009, 876561 (2009).

[44]
S. Al-Riyami, S. Ohmagari, and T. Yoshitake, “Near-Edge 
X-ray Absorption Fine-Structure Spectroscopic Study on 
Nitrogen-Doped 
Ultrananocrystalline 

Diamond/Hydrogenated Amorphous Carbon Composite 
Films Prepared by Pulsed Laser Deposition,” Jpn. J. Appl. 
Phys. 50, 08JD05 (2011).

[45]
L. Fayette, B. Marcus, M. Mermoux, G. Tourillon, K. 

Laffon, P. Parent, and F. Le Normand, “Local order in 
CVD diamond films : Comparative Raman, x-ray-
diffraction, and x-ray-absorption near-edge studies,” Phys. 
Rev. B 57, 14123 (1998).

[46]
B. Ravel and M. Newville, “ATHENA, ARTEMIS, 
HEPHAESTUS : data analysis for X-ray absorption 
spectroscopy using IFEFFIT,” J. Synchrotron Radiat. 12, 
537 (2005).

[47]
S. Ohmagari, Y. Katamune, H. Ichinose, and T. Yoshitake, 
“Enhanced 
Growth 
of 
Diamond 
Grains
in 

Ultrananocrystalline Diamond/Hydrogenated Amorphous 
Carbon Composite Films by Pulsed Laser Deposition with 
Boron-Blended Graphite Targets,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 51, 
025503 (2012).

[48]
Y. Katamune, S. Ohmagari, H. Setoyama, K. Sumitani, Y. 
Hirai, and T.
Yoshitake, “Formation of p-Type 

Ultrananocrystalline 
Diamond/Nonhydrogenated 

Amorphous Carbon Composite Films Prepared by Coaxial 
Arc Plasma Deposition with Boron-Incorporated Graphite 
Targets,” ECS Trans. 50, 23 (2013).

[49] Z. Shpilman, I. Gouzman, T. K. Minton, L. Shen, A. Stacey, 

J. Orwa, S. Prawer, B. C. C. Cowie, and A. Hoffman, “A 
near edge X-ray absorption fine structure study of oxidized 
single crystal and polycrystalline diamond surfaces,” Diam. 
Relat. Mater. 45, 20 (2014).

[50]
S. Ohmagari, T. Yoshitake, A. Nagano, R. Ohtani, H. 
Setoyama, E. Kobayashi, T. Hara, and K. Nagayama, 
“Formation 
of 
p-Type 
Semiconducting 

Ultrananocrystalline Diamond/Hydrogenated Amorphous 
Carbon Composite Films by Boron Doping,” Jpn. J. Appl. 
Phys. 49, 031302 (2010).

[51]
S. Ohmagari, T. Yoshitake, A. Nagano, R. Ohtani, H. 
Setoyama, E. Kobayashi, and K. Nagayama, “X-ray 
photoemission spectroscopic study of ultrananocrystalline 
diamond/hydrogenated amorphous carbon composite films 
prepared by pulsed laser deposition,” Diam. Relat. Mater. 
19, 911 (2010).

[52]
Y. Katamune, S. Ohmagari, and T. Yoshitake, “Boron-
Induced Dramatically Enhanced Growth of Diamond 
Grains 
in 
Nanocrystalline 
Diamond/Hydrogenated 

Amorphous Carbon Composite Films Deposited by 
Coaxial Arc Plasma Deposition,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 51, 
078003 (2012).

[53]
J. Birrell, J. A. Carlisle, O. Auciello, D. M. Gruen, and J. 
M. Gibson, “Morphology and electronic structure in 
nitrogen-doped ultrananocrystalline diamond,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 81, 2235 (2002).

[54]
P. Achatz, O. A. Williams, P. Bruno, D. M. Gruen, J. A. 
Garrido, and M. Stutzmann, “Effect of nitrogen on the 
electronic properties of ultrananocrystalline diamond thin 
films grown on quartz and diamond substrates,” Phys. Rev. 
B 74, 155429 (2006).


