1

H i g h - p r e s s u r e  t o r s i o n
d e f o r m a t i o n
i n d u c e d  

p h a s e  t r a n s f o r m a t i o n s  a n d  f o r m a t i o n s :  n e w  

m a t e r i a l  
c o m b i n a t i o n s
a n d  
a d v a n c e d  

p r o p e r t i e s

A n d r e a  B a c h m a i e r *
a n d
R e i n h a r d  P i p p a n

E r i c h  S c h m i d  I n s t i t u t e  o f  M a t e r i a l s  S c i e n c e ,
A u s t r i a n  A c a d e m y  o f  

S c i e n c e s ,  J a h n s t r a s s e  1 2 ,  8 7 0 0  L e o b e n ,  A u s t r i a

* C o r r e s p o n d i n g  a u t h o r,  E - m a i l :  a n d r e a . b a c h m a i e r @ o e a w. a c . a t

Abstract

Heavy plastic shear deformation at relatively low homologous temperatures 

is called high-pressure torsion (HPT) deformation, which is one method of

severe plastic deformation (SPD). The aim of the paper is to give an overview 

of a new processing approach which permits the generation of innovative 

metastable materials and novel nanocomposites by HPT deformation. Starting 

materials can be either coarse-grained multi-phase alloys, a mixture of different 

elemental powders or any other combination of multiphase solid starting 

materials. After HPT processing, the achievable microstructures are similar to 

the ones generated by mecha nical alloying. Nevertheless, one advantage of the 

HPT process is that bulk samples of the different types of metastable materials 

and nanocomposites are obtained directly during HPT deformation. It will be 

shown that different material combinations can be selected and materials with 

tailored properties, or in other words, materials designed for specific 

applications and the thus required properties, can be synthesized. Areas of 


2

application for these new materials range from hydrogen storage to materials 

resistant to harsh radiation environments.

K e y w o r d s :
s e v e r e  p l a s t i c  d e f o r m a t i o n ,  h i g h - p r e s s u r e  

t o r s i o n ,  
p h a s e  
t r a n s f o r m a t i o n ,
m e c h a n i c a l  
a l l o y i n g ,  

a m o r p h i z a t i o n ,  
c r y s t a l l i z a t i o n ,
m e t a s t a b l e  
p h a s e s ,  

n a n o c o m p o s i t e ,  n a n o s t r u c t u r e

P u b l i s h e d  i n

M a t e r i a l s  T r a n s a c t i o n s

V o l u m e  6 0 ,  I s s u e  7 ,  2 0 1 9 ,  1 2 5 6 - 1 2 6 9 ,  

h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . m s e a . 2 0 2 0 . 1 3 9 2 5 4


3

1 .
Introduction

In 1935, P. Bridgman introduced a processing method, in which disc-shaped 

samples are heavily shear deformed between two anvils at relatively low 

homologous temperatures under a high hydrostatic pressure [1]. Bridgman 

already applied this innovative method to many different kinds of materials and 

compounds – an extensive review over this early period can be found in ref. [2].

In the late 1980s, the method was named ‘high-pressure torsion’ (HPT) [3] and 

rapidly gained ground as a scientific tool to obtain a broad range of ultrafine 

grained (UFG) or nanocrystalline (NC) metals and alloys with outstanding 

mechanical properties [4–6]. One major advantage of HPT processed materials 

is, for example, their ultra-high strength. Even single-phase materials achieve 

small grain sizes of few 100 nm, which is accompanied by an improvement in 

mechanical properties keeping all their other beneficial properties .

HPT is, however, not only a well-established technique to achieve grain 

refinement,
but also
to
induce
various phase transformations [7,8]. HPT 

deformation can cause dissolution of phases [7,8], disordering of ordered phases

[9] as well as amorphization of crystalline phases [10] or crystallization of 

nanocrystals in the amorphous matrices [11]. It further enables the synthesis of

metastable phases (e.g. low-temperature, high-temperature or high-pressure 

allotropic 
modifications
[12–18]).
Additionally, 
phase 
formations

(supersaturated solid solutions ) or phase separations during shear deformation

are reported [19–23]. Depending on the amount and type of the different 

mutually 
immiscible 
components, 
either 
NC
supersaturated 
alloys 
or

nanocomposites with partial supersaturation,
not producible by classical 

metallurgical ways, can be synthesized.


4

In general, the HPT-processed microstructures are similar to the ones 

generated by mechanical alloying. The product of HPT is, however, a bulk 

material with a well-defined composition. The starting materials can be very 

diverse, like coarse-grained multi-phase alloys, a mixture of powders or any 

other combination of solid starting materials. By using powders, a wider range 

of compositions becomes possible since
conventional casting
is often 

problematic due to large miscibility gaps in the used systems. Although the HPT 

processing method has already been successfully applied to different systems, 

the detailed processes to explain strain-induced mechanical mixing, metastable 

phase formations, amorphization or crystallization
have not been entirely 

clarified until now. Nevertheless, there is now intense activities in the HPT 

community in this research field.

In this article, an overview on studies carried out during the past 20 years

using the above-mentioned HPT induced phase transformations and formations

to synthesize bulk novel NC materials is given. The article further aims to

highlight very recent achievements and new trends in this active and developing 

research field. The overview is divided in the following chapters: First, a short 

review on deformation-induced phase transformation and formation processes is 

given. The focus of this overview is, however, on the properties of these novel 

materials and nanocomposites. Excellent structural properties, for example 

their high strength and microstructural stability during elevated temperatures , 

make these materials ideal candidates for fabrication of miniaturized devices, 

i.e. microelectromechanical systems. Additionally, HPT processing is used as an 

innovative solid-state route for the synthetization of NC materials with tailored 

physical properties, i.e. for solid-state hydrogen storage or radiation tolerant 


5

behavior. Finally, recent trends of creating new material combinations - bulk 

metallic glass composites or high-entropy alloys obtained from powders - as 

well as the use of innovative starting materials - coated or gas atomized powders 

- for homogeneous HPT induced mechanical alloying and an acceleration of the 

deformation-induced mixing process, are discussed. 

2. Phase transformations and formations during HPT processing

During HPT deformation, a disc shaped sample is put between two anvils,

which both have a cylindrical cavity with a depth somewhat smaller than the 

thickness of the specimen. If powder mixtures are used as starting material, t he 

powders can be either filled directly into the anvils and consolidated in the HPT 

tool or they can be hydrostatically pre-compacted in air or in inert atmosphere 

to avoid contamination. During deformation, o ne of the HPT anvils is fixed, 

whereas the other one rotates. Typically, a pressure of several GPa is applied 

during the deformation process. The sample is ideally deformed by simple shear. 

If this is the case, the various initial phases in a binary or multiple-phase system 

are elongated in shear direction and their thicknesses are continuously red uced.

To obtain a saturation or steady state in a multiphase system, this means that 

there is no further change in the microstructural features of the sample during 

on-going HPT deformation, the applied shear strain has to be sufficient to 

decrease the thicknesses of the sheared phases to the nanometer level. Starting 

with a multiphase system with initial phase sizes of 50 µm, the applied shear 

strain should be at least 50,000 to achieve a steady state in the case of ideal 

co-deformation. If the components are immiscible, nanostructured composites 

can be synthesized by this way. In reality, ideal shear and co-deformation of 


6

phases does hardly ever occur. Very often fragmentation of one phase and 

localization of the shear deformation occur. If an inhomogeneous deformation 

takes place, the applied shear strain can be even higher, but under certain 

conditions it can be smaller too [24].

Furthermore, amorphization processes and the formation of metastable solid 

solution phases (mechanical alloying) are competing processes if the respective 

phase sizes reaches the nanometer level. For the observed mechanical alloying 

processes, different mechanisms involving dislocations or enhanced atomic 

mobility due to point defects have been proposed [25–29]. In these studies, 

mechanical alloying is treated as a phenomenon observed in non-equilibrium 

processing in general and the proposed mechanism are not restricted to occur 

solely during HPT deformation, but during all other SPD processes, wire 

drawing and ball milling. In [30], it is proposed that during SPD deformation a 

thermodynamic driving force for dissolution can be obtained, if the phase size

can be decreased to the nanometer level. Mechanical mixing is then achieved by 

dispersing the dissolved atoms in the alloy matrix . Veltl et al. [31] discussed 

that the energy stored in the grain boundaries of NC materials might be another 

possible solid solution formation driving force. In [32], a capillary pressure is

suggested as driving force for phase dissolution and mechanic al alloying. Next 

are plasticity-driven mechanism: in the kinetic roughening model of Bellon and 

Averback [33], atoms are suggested to be shifted across phase boundaries. By 

the shear of atomic glide planes during deformation, the phase boundaries are

increasingly roughened leading to complete chemical mixing of multiphase

system. A similar mechanism is discussed for cementite dissolution during 

deformation of pearlitic steels [34] and in the dislocation shuffle mechanism as


7

proposed in [35].
In [36] it was further shown that the homogeneity of the 

deformation process strongly influences the degree of supersaturation and the 

mixing mechanism might further depend on the dominant deformation behavior.

The synthesis of metastable phases during SPD deformation is f urther 

explained by the effective tempera ture model in literature [37], which was 

originally developed for materials under irradiation . During SPD, the material 

is driven into a state equivalent to a state at a specific increased (effective) 

temperature
by
the applied heavy deformation. Thus,
metastable phase 

formations can occur in materials during SPD deformation.

Atomistic mixing between different metals to form supersaturated solid 

solutions, which are thermodynamically unstable and finally transform to an 

amorphous phase has already been reported in ref. [38,39]. The solid state 

amorphization process depend only on the degree of intense plastic deformation 

and can be accomplished within a much wider composition range compared to

the
frequently used
solidification route
[39].
Amorphization during HPT 

deformation has been observed in binary systems with a negative heat of mixing 

[40–43], but is not expected to occur in systems with a positive heat of mixing 

[38]. If alloys with glass forming tendency are H PT deformed, uniformly sized 

nanocrystals might also form in the amorphous matrix [38]. 

3. Structural and functional properties of HPT processed materials

The creation of novel HPT processed materials represents a promising pathway 

for obtaining materials with extraordinary mechanical and physical properties.

For structural applications, mechanical properties like high strength combined 

with ductility are often expected. Furthermore, microstructural stability during 


8

enhanced temperatures is useful. These properties are also important for 

materials with interesting physical properties – i.e. magnetic, electric, radiation 

resistant - for functional applications. Nearly all materials discussed in the 

following section show excellent mechanical properties, whi ch will not be 

separately discussed in this article. Special attention is instead given on first 

investigation
results of selected
physical properties. Additionally, the 

thermostability of the different HPT processed materials is addressed briefly. 

3.1 Thermal stability

The thermal stability of NC supersaturated solid solutions, irrespective of 

whether single phase or multi-phase after HPT deformation, has been found to 

be significantly higher than expected for NC materials [38]. At low annealing 

temperatures, decomposition or phase separation is thermodynamically favored

[38]. Thus, NC composite materials can be synthesized by phase separation 

during annealing before grain growth set in. In such a microstructure with 

isolated grains of each phase, which are further immiscible in each other, grain 

growth by boundary migration can be impeded. This grain growth retarding

effect is already long known and also used in coarse-grained materials, i.e. in 

commercial dual phase steels, which consist of martensite is lands in a ferrite 

matrix with phase ratio of 4:1.

HPT 
processed 
Cu-based 
metastable 
alloys 
from
immiscible 
phase 

constituents have been extensively studied for their enhanced microstructural 

stability and strength. Investigated systems include Cu-Cr [19,44–46], Cu-W

[47,48], Cu-Fe [46,49], Cu-Co [50,51] and Cu-Ta [52]. The thermostability of 

HPT deformed Cu-Cr alloys was examined in several studies [19,44–46]. In [19],


9

a bulk, coarse grained Cu–Cr composite (43wt.% Cr, 57 wt% Cu) was processed 

by HPT. In the as-deformed material, a grain size of only 20 nm and the 

formation of a deformation-induced Cu supersaturated solid solutions were 

observed. Annealing at 450°C for 30 min resulted in decomposition and the 

formation of a stable Cu-Cr nanocomposite material with an even enhanced 

hardness compared to the as-deformed state. The same HPT deformed Cu -Cr 

material 
was 
later 
investigated 
in 
[44,45].
The 
examination 
of 
the 

microstructural evolution during HPT deformation and subsequent annealing by 

energy-dispersive synchrotron diffraction was the focus in ref. [44]. It could be 

shown that structural relaxation induced by phase separation during annealing

and limitations in activating dislocation sources in the annealed material are 

mainly responsible for the obse rved enhanced hardness even though the domain 

(grain) size increases slightly during annealing. In [45], the thermal stability on 

the 
atomic 
scale 
was 
further 
investigated 
in-situ 
by
spherical 

aberration-corrected transmission electron microscopy (TEM). It was shown 

that decomposition is accompanied by a decrease of the average interface width 

although grain growth is not yet observed. 

In [47,48], a bulk, coarse-grained W-25% Cu alloy was deformed by HPT at 

room temperature (RT) resulting in the formation of a dual phase NC structure 

with partial solid solution formation. After deformation, the material was

annealed at different temperatures. Up to 500°C, no grain growth was observed. 

After annealing at 720°C, limited grain growth up to 50 nm and complete p hase 

separation took place. The obtained grain size in the nanocomposite after 

annealing was significantly lower compared to the undeformed W-Cu material. 

Stacks of Cu and Ta foils were HPT deformed in [52] to obtain a high amount 


10

of mechanical mixing in the immiscible Cu 5 0Ta 5 0 system. After HPT deformation,

the microstructure consisted
of a Cu-16at%Ta solid solution, Ta -rich NC 

particles and pure Ta grains. This microstructure was thermally stable even after 

annealing at 1000°C. A fine structure was retained, which was attributed to the 

Cu-Ta solid solution and the NC Ta particles hindering grain boundary motion.

Instead of bulk dual-phase materials, Cu-Fe and Cu-Co powder mixtures with 

different initial composition were HPT deformed in [20,46,50,51]. In the HPT 

deformed Cu-Fe material, either complete solid solutions of Cu in Fe and Fe in 

Cu (for low Cu or Fe contents) or dual phase NC composite with partial 

supersaturation were obtained. A high thermal stability was observed in all 

deformed Cu-Fe materials. In [46], the structural evolution during annealing of 

a HPT deformed Cu-rich single phase solid solution was investigated in detail 

by in-situ annealing in the TEM and atom probe tomography (APT) 

investigations. Before deformation, the Fe -Cu powder mixtures used in [46]

were compacted in air. Thus, oxygen contamination inevitably occurred. It was 

shown that oxide formation during subsequent annealing took place even before

decomposition set in. These NC oxides were ran domly distributed and 

contributed to the high thermal stability in the material .

A different phase separation process was observed in supersaturated Cu–Co 

solid solution with a slightly larger average grain size ( ∼100 nm) in the 

as-deformed condition [51]. In the first stages of annealing, a NC scaled 

spinodal-type decomposition was observed in the grain interior. At the same 

time, pure alternating Co and Cu regions were formed near grain boundary 

regions. At higher annealing temperatures , an UFG microstructure consisting of 

Cu and Co was formed. Once phase separation was finished and the final 


11

microstructures were formed, they were stable even for very long annealing 

times of several days.

In summary, the amount of mechanical mixing and the achieved saturation 

grain 
size 
during 
HPT 
processing
dictate 
the
subsequent 
structural 

configuration of the immiscible phases after annealing. A high microstructural 

stability is achieved in all studies. If powder mixtures without protecting 

atmosphere are used as starting materials, oxygen contamination and oxide 

formation cannot be excluded. Oxide formation, however, further contributes to 

an enhanced thermal stability of the HPT processed materials.

3.2 Magnetic properties

The primary motivation for the investigation of NC magnetic materials results 

from the dramatic change in their hysteresis properties induced by the small

grain size. First studies of magnetic characteristics of HPT processed materials 

were therefore conducted on single phase NC Cu and Co [53,54]. Nowadays, the 

magnetic properties of metastable materials synthesized by HPT deformation 

are studied as well. Tailored magnetic properties can be achieved by exploiting 

the effects of magnetic dilution in supersaturated solid solutions consisting of 

components
with different magnetic propert ies (e.g. ferromagnetic
and 

diamagnetic). The magnetic properties of the HPT processed metastable 

materials 
can 
be 
further 
modified 
by 
decomposition 
of 
these 

deformation-induced solid solutions
to achieve unique distributions of 

ferromagnetic and diamagnetic phases.

In ref. [55,56], the size and distribution of Co and Fe particles in Cu based

alloys were tuned by HPT deformation. After applying up to 10 rotations 


12

(Cu‐22wt% Fe) and 25 rotations (Cu‐10wt% Co), the ferromagnetic Co and Fe 

phases were fragmented into a size of ∼100 nm and dissolution of some Co and 

Fe in the Cu matrix also took place, but no complete single phase solid solution

was achieved up to the applied shear strain at room temperature . The coercive 

force in both alloys increased and the saturation magnetization decrease d with 

increasing HPT strain,
before both
values reached
saturation. Enhanced 

magnetoresistance was further observed (~2.5% at 77K and ~0.25% at RT for the 

Cu-Co alloy). Heat treatment at 723K for 1-10h led to a further increase of the 

measured magnetoresistance (~0.38% at RT). In ref. [57], Cu-Co alloys with 

only a small amount of Co (2.2 wt% and 4.9 wt% Co) have been studied. The 

coercivity after HPT-deformation was rather small for the Cu -2.2wt%Co alloy, 

which further showed superparamagnetic behavior because of Co particles with 

a size below the ferromagnetic limit (<10nm). The Cu-4.9wt% Co alloy showed

a different behavior with a high coercivity due to larger Co particles. 

Co-based alloys with low Cu content have also been investigated. In ref. [58], 

vacuum induction melted Cu-Co alloys (Co-5.6 wt% Cu and Co-13.6 wt% Cu) 

were processed by HPT deformation. Strong microstructural re finement in the 

Co phase (100 nm grain size) and Cu phase (precipitate size of 10 nm) was

observed. 
As a result, the coercivity was drastically enhanced, while the 

saturation magnetization stayed almost unchanged. The supersaturated Cu-Co 

solid solution, which was reported to be present in the initial state after 

induction melting, completely decomposed during HPT deformation and a 

microstructure of almost pure Co grains and Cu precipitates was obtained.

Binary solid solutions in three different immiscible systems, consisting of 

ferromagnetic (either Co or Fe) and diamagnetic (either Cu or Ag) components, 


13

were synthesized by HPT in ref. [59,60]. In the Co-Cu alloys with medium 

compositions, deformation induced mixing of the immiscible elements and 

single phase ferromagnetic FCC solid solutions were obtained. With increasing

Co content, microstructures with smaller grain sizes evolved as revealed by

Transmission Kikuchi Diffraction (TKD) analysis (Fig. 1a). Additionally, the

coercivity decreased with decreasing grain size (Fig. 1b), because exchange 

coupling of the NC grains resulted in randomization of the anisotropy. By 

annealing or HPT deformation at lower temperatures (liquid nitrogen 

temperature), the magnetic properties of the Co -Cu alloy with low Co con tent 

were
further tailored
[59].
In the Fe-Cu alloys, only
samples with low 

Fe-content (<25wt.%) could successfully be deformed by HPT. Magnetic 

measurements revealed that Fe is clustered, but also partially diluted in Cu .

Thus, a dual phase structure with a Cu-rich solid solution and a BCC Fe phase 

formed after HPT processing. Quite differently behaved the Fe-Ag system. No 

deformation-induced mixing was observed. The dual phase structure was further 

confirmed by magnetic measurements, which display ed no distortion of the Fe 

magnetic moment.

Alloys of the R-Fe-B system (R = Nd, Pr) are known as the most outstanding 

hard magnetic materials since their discovery in 1980s. Phase transformations 

and metastable phase formation generated during HPT deformation have also 

been successfully used in this material class with the objective to enhance the 

resulting magnetic properties. Already in the 1990s, Stolyarov et al. [61]

investigated the effect of HPT deformation on the structure and phase formation 

in a Pr 2 0Fe 7 3 . 5B 5Cu 1 . 5 alloy. Besides grain refinement, which already led to an 

increase of the coercivity, non-equilibrium magnetically soft phases as well as


14

an amorphous phase
(from the main Pr 2Fe 1 4B phase) were formed during 

deformation. Annealing after deformation restored the initial phases and the 

Pr 2Fe 1 4B phase crystallized with a grain size of about 300 nm. A high coercivity 

of more than 1600 kA/m was achieved, which is higher compared to sintered and 

hot-rolled permanent magnets from the same type of alloy. 

The influence of HPT deformation on microstructure, phase composition and 

coercivity of as-cast sub-, super- and stoichiometric R 2Fe 1 4B (R = Nd, Pr)-based 

alloys was investigated in ref. [62]. Grain refinement to UFG structures and 

partial or complete decomposition of the R 2Fe 1 4B phase took place after HPT 

processing in all investigated alloys . At the same time, a metastable phase – a 

BCC Fe-based solid solution rich in R -atoms - formed. The volume fraction of 

this
metastable phase increased with increasing
Fe
content
and was thus 

dependent on the initial alloy compositions. Annealing after HPT deformation 

resulted in complete or partial restoration of the initial phase s, whereby the 

super-stoichiometric Pr-based alloy showed the highest coercivity.

Microstructure and magnetic properties of different as-cast and as-cast plus 

subsequently homogenized R–Fe–B alloys were studied after HPT deformation

in ref.[61,63]. HPT deformation led to formation of UFG structures and even to 

the formation of an amorphous struc ture at extremely large strains. In the 

deformed as-cast alloys without homogenization treatment before HPT 

deformation, the crystalline α-Fe phase was additionally present. Annealing 

resulted in crystallization of the amorphous phase and the formation of stable 

magnetic phases. The microstructure consisted mainly of Pr-rich and Pr 2Fe 1 4B 

phases in both alloys, which implies that α-Fe reacts with the excess Pr and 

transforms to the Pr 2Fe 1 4B phase. A coercivity of 2232 kA/m was obtained for 


15

the Pr–Fe–B alloy, which was homogenized before deformation, and 1674 kA/m 

for the alloy, which was deformed in the as -cast condition. The lower coercivity

in the latter case was related to a small fraction of remaining α-Fe phase in the 

microstructure after annealing.

In ref.[64], a Nd–Fe–B-based liquid-phase sintered alloy (composition of 66.5 

wt% Fe, 22.1 wt% Nd, 9.4 wt% Dy, 1.0 wt% Co, 0.8 wt% B, 0.2 wt% Cu ) was HPT 

deformed at RT. The starting alloy mainly consists of a Nd 2Fe 1 4B phase. After 

deformation, grain refinement was observed and two different amorphous phases 

(Nd-rich and Fe-rich) with an embedded ferromagnetic Nd 2Fe 1 4B phase were

formed. A similar alloy (Fe–12.3 at% Nd–7.6 at% B) was investigated in ref.

[65]. In contrast to ref. [64], an amorphous matrix with uniform composition, in 

which ferromagnetic Nd 2Fe 1 4B nanocrystals were embedded, formed after HPT 

deformation of the as-cast alloy. To explain the formation of non -equilibrium 

phases, the authors argue, that HPT deformation at RT might be equivalent to an 

annealing treatment at an enhanced temperature. 
Therefore, an “effective” 

temperature can be determined a ccording to the observed phases and their

composition [37]. Thus, the “effective” temperature during HPT deformation in 

both investigated NdFeB-based alloys was estimated to be ~1140 °C
and 

~1170°C, respectively. Magnetic properties of the HPT deformed NdFeB -alloys 

have not been measured yet.

HPT deformation can also effect the phase evolution process of amorphous 

R-Fe-B-based alloys, which was used for the synthesis
of hard magnetic

nanocomposites by HPT deformation. In ref. [66], an over quenched, amorphous

Nd 9Fe 8 5B 6 alloy was investigated. After deformation, decomposition of the 

amorphous structure and precipitation of nearly 40 wt% α-Fe with a size of about 


16

10 nm was observed. The
α-Fe precipitates served as nucleation sites for 

Nd 2Fe 1 4B during a heat treatment at 600°C . Finally, a uniform and fine NC 

structure consisting of α-Fe and Nd 2Fe 1 4B grains was obtained. Compared to the 

over-quenched and only annealed reference alloy, the coercivity and remanence 

increased by 23% and 16%, respectively. The effect of HPT on phase formation 

and magnetic properties of an amorphous Nd 9Fe 8 5B 6 alloy was also studied in ref.

[67–69]. Precipitation of α-Fe nanocrystals, with an amount over 40%, occurred 

during deformation. It further lowered the amount of metastable phases formed 

after a subsequent annealing treatment compared to the rapidly quenched 

reference material. Furthermore, metastable phases with a high magnetization 

predominately formed in the HPT deformed material leading to a simultaneous 

enhancement of remanence and coercivity. A similar approach, but a different 

starting material, amorphous and partially amorphous (Nd,Pr) 1 0Fe 7 9Co 3Nb 1B 7

ribbons, were used in ref. [70,71] to obtain bulk α-Fe/Nd 2Fe 1 4B nanocomposite 

magnets. Similar to ref. [67–69], the formation of metastable intermediate 

phases during subsequent annealing did not form in the deformed microstructure

and only crystalline α-Fe and Nd 2Fe 1 4B phases could be found by XRD 

investigations after annealing. Furthermore, a high fraction of α-Fe (>30%) was 

still present which resulted in an enhanced magnetization. At the same time, an 

increase in coercivity from 4.6 kOe (as-prepared amorphous ribbons only 

annealed) to 7.2 kOe (HPT processed and annealed material) was observed, 

which was attributed to an enhancement in domain wall pinning strength. 

Already in 2009, the reasons for the high amount of α-Fe in the HPT-processed 

amorphous R-Fe-B-based alloys was studied in ref. [72]. It was shown that 

vacancy-type defects formed in the deformed amorphous matrix , which were


17

mainly 
surrounded 
with 
Fe 
atoms . 
Thus, 
the 
activation 
barrier 
for 

crystallization of the Fe phase was lowered, which leads to deformation-induced 

crystallization of the Fe phase in   amorphous Nd 9Fe 8 5B 6 alloys. 

HPT processing is a powerful tool for improvement of the magnetic properties 

of different magnetic materials using phase transformations or phase formations 

during deformation. The above studies show that an in crease in coercivity or 

energy product is possible and also soft – or semi-hard magnetic materials can 

be successfully produced.

3.3 Electrical properties and superconductivity

Materials for electrical applications have to fulfill certain requirements, the 

most important are a high electrical conductivity, a high tensile strength and a 

good thermal stability. Ag, Cu, Au, and Al pure metals possess the highest 

electrical conductivities. Unfortunately, a combination of high strength and 

electrical conductivity is very hard to reach in these pure metallic materials.

One possibility to increase the strength is alloying. However, introducing other 

elements into pure metals lowers its electrical conductivity due to electron 

scattering by solute atoms and by a minor contribution by precipitates. A NC

grain structure is another option to achieve high strength, but the electrical 

conductivity is also reduced by electron scattering due to dislocations and grain 

boundaries in deformed materials. 

A new approach combines grain refinement by HPT deformation with the 

formation of metastable phases or accelerated formation of nanosized second 

phases during processing. In ref. [73,74], the influence of HPT on strength and 

electrical conductivity in Cu -Cr alloy with very low (0.5%) [73] and high (up to 


18

27%) [74] Cr contents has been investigated. The solubility of Cr in Cu at RT is 

nearly zero with a maximum solubility of about 0.9 at% at 1350K. Although not 

explicitly investigated,
the dissolution of Cr and the formation of a

supersaturated Cu solid solution was also expected for higher Cr-contents 

(9.85% and 27%) in ref. [74]. An increasing microhardness because of a 

decreasing grain size with increasing Cr content was further observed after HPT 

deformation. Additionally, the electrical conductivity decrease d due to the 

higher amount of grain boundaries and Cr alloying atoms.
The electrical 

conductivity of the Cu-alloy should, however, be less affected by Cr precipitates 

compared to Cr in solid solution. By annealing, supersaturated solid solution 

decomposition was achieved, which lead to an increased electrical conductivity. 

Simultaneously, a high hardness was preserved due to the restriction of 

considerable grain growth. Instead of HPT deformation at RT, the Cu-Cr alloy in 

ref. [73] was deformed at 300°C. A similar microstr ucture – 200 nm grain size

of Cu with 10 nm Cr precipitates – was achieved by dynamic aging during HPT 

processing, which resulted in an enhanced electrical conductivity of 81% –85% 

IACS. Furthermore, the structure was stable up to 500°C. 

A different Cu-based material was investigated i n ref.
[75].
Cu–NbC 

composites were synthesized starting from elemental Cu, Nb an C powders with 

different vol% using HPT deformation (5 GPa, 0.5 rpm, 20 turns) . For the first 

time, the in situ formation of NbC by mechanical alloying was observed during 

HPT processing. Deformation induced phase formation took place in a

significant shorter time than by ball milling, although the mechanism of NbC 

formation are proposed to be similar in both processes. As reason accelerated 

diffusion achieved by a reduced diffusion distance s through the formation of 


19

very fine Nb particles and a reduced diffusion activation energy due to the high 

density of defects generated during HPT processing were proposed. The best 

property combination (high electrical conductivity and high tensile strength) 

was achieved in an HPT processed Cu–2 vol% NbC composites after annealing

at 700 °C for 1 h.

Pure Al is often used as a material for conductors in the elect rical industry due 

to its lower cost and lower density compared to Cu. HPT deformation and 

subsequent annealing was combined in ref. [76] to achieve high strength and 

high electrical conductivity in Al-Fe alloys (Al–2wt%Fe and Al–4wt%Fe). After 

HPT deformation, an UFG microstructure and partial dissolution of Fe in Al was 

achieved in both alloys [77]. From XRD peak shifts, 0.67wt% Fe and 0.99wt% 

Fe dissolved in the Al matrix after 75 rotations in the Al–2wt%Fe and 

Al–4wt%Fe, respectively. The electrical conductivity decreases with increasing 

HPT strain to final values of about 40% International Annealed Copper Standard 

(IACS). Annealing at 200°C resulted in precipitation of the dissolved Fe and the 

formation of well distributed, nanosized Fe particles. In the annealed state, an

even higher strength compared to the as-deformed state as well as an enhanced 

conductivity (above 50% IACS) was achieved. A similar approach (HPT at RT

with subsequent annealing or HPT deformation at 200°C) was u sed in 

Al-2wt%Fe alloys in ref. [78].  Both processing routes provided high strength, 

but a higher electrical
conductivity
(≥52%IACS) was achieved by HPT 

processing at elevated temperatures due to reduction of Fe solute atom 

concentration in the Al phase. 

In ref. [79], the effect of HPT deformation on electrical conductivity of an 

as-cast Al–5.4wt% Ce-3.1wt% La alloy was investigated. Besides the 


20

development of an UFG microstructure (average grain size about 140 nm) with

spherical intermetallic nanosized particles
(Fig.2a), deformation induced 

supersaturated solid solution of the Ce and La in the Al matrix was further 

observed by HAADF-STEM imaging (Fig. 2b). Mixing was further confirmed by 

the change of the Al lattice parameter determined from XRD investigations. The 

concentration of the rare earth elements in Al was estimated to be about 0.1 to 

0.2 at.%. These results show that mechanical alloying of Ce and La atoms in the 

Al matrix is possible even though they exhibit a very large atomic radius

difference (about 30%). In the as-deformed state, the electrical conductivity 

decreased from 49.5% IACS (as-cast state) to 39.7% IACS. After annealing at 

280°C for 1h, slight grain growth (average grain size about 200 nm), stable 

intermetallic particles and the formation of rare earth nanoclusters (~2 nm size) 

were observed. The electrical conductivity improved to 52.4% IACS with a high 

strength, both higher compared to the as-cast, undeformed state. In a subsequent 

study [80], the same rare earth elements (La + Ce) were used, but concentrations 

in the Al alloy were varied to define a composition, which provides an optimal 

combination of enhanced mechanical and electrical properties. Therefore, three 

different starting alloys with 0.9 wt% La and 1.6 wt% Ce, 2.9 wt% La and 

1.6wt % Ce and 3.1 wt% La and 5.4 wt Ce wt% were produced by casting.

Increasing rare earth element concentrations led to an enhanced strength, but

reduced the electrical conductivity. For an optimal combination of electrical 

conductivity and mechanical strength , the total concentration of rare earth 

elements should not be above 4.5 wt%. Additionally, a subsequent annealing

treatment between 250°C–280 °C for 1 h was shown to be beneficial for the 

electrical conductivity.


21

Nb–Ti alloys are widely used in another field of application, which are

superconducting magnets. The influence of metastable phase and supersaturated 

solid solution formation on superconductive properties was investigated in a 

first study in ref. [81]. Nb-Ti powder blends with 47 wt% Ti were HPT deformed

at RT and dissolution of Ti in Nb during deformation was observed. At large 

strains, a supersaturated
NC β phase with BCC structure formed. During 

annealing, decomposition
of the supersaturated phase, the formation of a 

lamellar structure and segregation of Nb at the grain and interphase boundaries 

was 
observed. 
The 
HPT 
processed 
alloy 
become 
superconductive 
at

temperatures below 9 K. It was further shown that the transition temperature for 

superconductivity was lowered with increasing shear strain, but increased with 

subsequent annealing because of the decomposition process (Fig. 2c). 

These first studies show that HPT processing (or more generally SPD) is a 

promising pathway to achieve materials with a good combination of electrical 

and mechanical properties.

3.4 Synthesis of porous materials and irradiation resistant materials

Applications of porous materials are lightweight structures, sensors or 

actuators, heat exchangers, dampeners or radiation tolerant materials, which 

require properties like low specific weight, high surface -to-volume ratio, 

excellent thermal and electrical conductivity, high energy absorption or large 

interface densities. Porous materials with ligament sizes in the UFG to NC

regime especially have a high application potential.  By varying the length-scale 

of the ligaments, the properties, e.g. the yield strength, can be adjusted.

Conventional manufacturing methods are, for example, template-based 


22

fabrication
or chemical dealloying of rapidly solidified alloys
[82,83].

Recently, another procedure to obtain UFG and NC porous metallic materials 

based on HPT
powder consolidation
and deformation process has been

developed [84–86]. Different combinations of immiscible powder mixtures 

(binary Cu/Fe [85] and Au/Fe [86] or ternary Cu-Fe-Ag [84] systems) were used 

as starting material resulting either in mechanically alloyed single phase or 

dual-phase NC microstructures. The bulk mechanically alloyed materials were 

then heat treated to reach phase sepa ration or reduce the amount of forced 

mixing and/or to adjust the grain size of the respective phases. From these bulk 

materials, porous Cu, Au or Cu-Ag materials were then created by dealloying 

using selective etching with HCl [85,86] or potentiostatic dealloying [84].

In case of the porous Au material, a porosity of ~50% and ligaments with an 

average diameter of about 100 nm with on average ~ 70 nm diameter small grain s 

was achieved [86]. For the porous Cu material, similar porosity levels and a 

slightly larger ligament size of about 200 nm was obtained [85]. Similar 

ligament sizes were observed for the Cu-Ag porous material [84]. As an example, 

the different microstructural states during the fabrication process of a 

Cu 5 0Fe 2 5Ag 2 5 material - initial state, as-deformed state, annealed, de -alloyed -

leading to a dual-phase nanoporous material is illustrated in Fig. 3. In the SEM 

image of the initial state, the different phases are easily distinguished by their 

phase contrast (Fig.3a). After HPT deformation, a metastable single-phase was 

obtained (Fig.3b). After two different heat treatments, partial or complete 

phase-separated states with NC or UFG microstr uctures were
obtained 

(Fig.3c-d). After selective potentiostatic dealloying of the Fe phase, a NC 

porous Cu-Ag material was achieved (Fig.3e). 


23

To probe the mechanical properties and deformation behaviour of the 

nanoporous materials, nanoindentation was performed in ref. [84–86]. The Cu-

and Au porous materials were further tested at different temperatures up to 

300°C to evaluate the thermo-mechanical properties and structural stability. The

hardness of the Au porous materials significantly increased after annealing , 

which was attributed to a significant reduction of mobile dislocations that left

the material at free surfaces.
Increasing hardness with increasing testing 

temperature was also observed for the Cu porous material. In this case, however, 

oxidization during high-temperature nanoindentation was observed and related 

to the measured mechanical properties. To study radiation effects and resistance, 

the Cu-Ag porous material was additionally tested before and after an 

irradiation treatment with 1 MeV protons to 1 dpa of damage at near RT. No 

notable difference in hardness before and after irradiation show ed
the 

proof-of-principle of a radiant-tolerant multi-phase UFG or NC porous material.

Another promising system
for radiation tolerant properties are Cu-Nb 

nanocomposites. In Cu-Nb multilayer nanocomposite s synthesized by different 

methods, radiation damage resistance in combination with high hardness has 

already been proven (i.e.[87–89] ). In [90], UFG Cu-Nb composites were 

synthesized by HPT processing and subsequent annealing. As starting material,

Cu and Nb powders were mixed together with a composition of 50 wt% Cu and 

50 wt% Nb. In the as-deformed state, a bulk NC material was obtained. After 

annealing at 500°C, an UFG Cu-Nb composites with grain sizes between 100 -200

nm were obtained. Such UFG Cu-Nb composites might be used as material for 

applications in harsh radiation environments in future, but radiation tolerant 

properties have not been tested yet.


24

3.5 Synthesis of hydrogen storage materials 

Hydrogen is regularly proposed as innovative energy carrier, but it remains a 

challenging task to design suitable and safe high-density hydrogen storage 

systems. Different types of hydrogen storage, like pressurized gas tanks, storage 

as liquid hydrogen or chemical storage as hydrocarbons, already exist. Another 

promising way of hydrogen storage is in reversible, solid state, light metal 

hydrides (such as Mg, MgNi 2, LaNi 5 or TiFe), but they exhibit slow kinetics in 

the charging/discharging processes and high hydrogen desorption temperatures.

The kinetics can, however, be radically enhanced by reducing the particle size 

and/or by introducing lattice defects , which enhance diffusion and can act as 

pathways for hydrogen transport. In 2010, the microstructure and hydrogen

sorption properties of Mg, MgH 2, and MgH 2–Fe powder mixtures after HPT

deformation were investigated [91]. Besides grain refinement with average 

grains sizes of 20 nm, also the formation of a metastable γ -MgH 2  phase and 

enhanced hydrogen sorption properties were observed in the bulk samples. A 

Japanese research group further determined the potential of the HPT powder 

consolidation process to synthesize novel materials for possible hydrogen 

storage application at RT using deformation-induced mixing [92]. In particular, 

different Mg-based alloys have been examined so far and the phase formations

have been further verified by first-principle calculations. Over 20 different

elemental powders such as Ti, Zr, Al and Zn were mixed with Mg powders and 

deformed by HPT at RT [93]. Various nanostructured intermetallics , but also

new metastable intermetallics, alloys or amorphous phases were synthesized. 

The Mg–Ti binary system, for example, is immiscible even in liquid form, but 


25

both elements react with hydrogen forming MgH 2 and TiH 2 hydrides. With HPT 

processing, metastable phases (BCC, FCC and two HCP structures) were formed 

in the NC material as shown by XRD and TEM investigations in ref. [94]. The 

formation of the metastable phases was explained either by deformation induced

atomic-scale mixing (for both HCP phases) or the effect of grain size on phase 

stability (for the BCC and FCC phases). After hydrogenation, MgH 2 and TiH 2, 

but no Mg-Ti hydrides were formed although first-principles calculations 

showed that this hydrogenation reaction should occur thermodynamically. Thus, 

decomposition of the metastable Mg–Ti binary phases to pure Mg and Ti is 

kinetically faster than hydrogen adsorption in the form of ternary Mg –Ti 

hydrides with the cubic structure.

Mg and Zr are also immiscible elements, which means they do not form any 

binary phases in equilibrium. Similar to Mg, Zr can store hydrogen in the form 

of ZrH 2. Powder mixtures of Mg - 50 at% Zr were HPT deformed and several new 

metastable phases (nanostructured HCP, nano-twinned FCC, BCC or ordered 

BCC-based phases) were obtained [95]. At large shear strains, the deformed

Mg-Zr material consisted mainly of a HCP Mg-Zr solid solution and small 

amounts of BCC and FCC phases. The BCC phase almost vanished at the highest 

amount of strain, indicating that it is only an intermediate phase during phase 

transformation to the HCP Mg-Zr phase. TEM high-resolution lattice images and 

high-resolution EDS maps further showed many Mg-based nanoclusters in the 

microstructure
(Fig.4a).
Contrary to the investigated Mg-Ti
[94], the

non-equilibrium Mg-Zr phase did not decompose until temperatures of 773K. 

The HPT processed Mg-Zr material further exhibited reversible hydrogen 

storage capability with an absorption of ~1 wt.% of hydrogen mainly in the 


26

Mg-based nanoclusters (Fig.4b). The absorbed hydrogen further fully desorbed 

under air or argon atmospheres at RT.

No new phase formation, but a morphization was observed, for example, in the 

Mg–Al system [93]. Furthermore, the desorption temperature for hydrogen 

decreased and an increase in hydrogen storage capacity was observed. The 

hydrogen storage capacity was, however, lower than for HPT deformed pu re Mg.

Not only binary Mg-alloys have been investigated
so far, also ternary 

Mg-based systems have been processed by HPT [96,97]. Compositions in the 

Mg−V−Sn, Mg−V−Pd, Mg−V−Ni, Mg−Ni−Sn, and Mg−Ni–Pd were first selected

based on first-principles calculations. Initial materials were either powder 

mixtures (Mg−V with Sn, Pd or Ni) or as-casted ingots (Mg−Ni−Sn or–Pd), 

which 
were 
subsequently 
HPT 
deformed
to 
ultra-high 
strains. 
XRD 

investigations proved the formation of new metastable phases (B2 -type 

structure in Mg-V-Sn, B2-type and BCC structure in Mg-V-Pd, single phase BCC

structure in Mg-V-Ni) besides thermodynamically stable Mg 2Sn and Mg 2Ni 

intermetallics.
In
the Mg-V-Ni system, complete mixing
of elements and 

structural saturation was
observed.
In Mg-V-Sn and Mg-V-Ni, structural 

inhomogeneities are visible even after extremely large shear strains . In the 

Mg-Ni-Sn and Mg-Ni-Pd systems, new phases are fo rmed as well. Uniform 

atomic mixing of initial three intermetallics to a new single phase with a 

BCC-based partly ordered CsCl-type structure was confirmed by APT 

investigations in Mg-Ni-Pd [97]. The novel HPT-synthesized alloy exhibited

high phase stability
and reversible hydrogenation and dehydrogenation 

properties at RT. In contrast, the Mg-Ni-Sn transformed from a microstructure 

containing three intermetallics in the as -cast state to a mainly amorphous 


27

structure with some nanograins. Unfortunately, no results of hydrogen related 

properties are published so far for this system. 

New Mg-V-Cr alloys were further synthesized by a combination of prior ball 

milling and subsequent HPT of mixtures of MgH 2, V and Cr powders with MgV, 

Mg 2VCr, MgV 2Cr and MgVCr compositions [98]. Novel single phase BCC

phases are formed for the compositions Mg 2VCr and MgVCr, whereas in MgV 

and MgV 2Cr a new BCC phase was formed in addition to the initial phases. Best 

properties regarding structural stability and hydrogen storage at RT
was 

achieved in the MgVCr alloy. 

In ref. [99], a Ti-50 at.% V alloy with a supersaturated BCC structure was 

synthesized at RT from Ti and V powders using HPT deformation. Although 

hydrogen diffusion and metal-to-hydride phase transformation could be

improved, the rate of hydrogen dissociation was still slow.

It can be summarized that the production of innovative hydrogen storage 

materials with unique compositions and microstructures is possible using HPT 

deformation.

4. New material combinations

4.1 Amorphous materials and bulk metallic glass composites

Amorphous materials or b ulk metallic glasses have several advantages as 

compared with crystalline metals, but have also some major drawbacks such as 

their brittleness and poor ductility in tensile testing. One way to influence the 

properties is to produce bulk metallic glass composites, which contain an 

additional amorphous or crystalline phase
as inhomogeneity
[100]. Usual 

processing routes are, for example, partial crystallization of amorphous samples, 


28

casting metallic glasses with crystalline parts such as fibers, or spark plasma 

sintering [101–107]. 

A new processing approach is to generate bulk metallic glass composites by 

HPT deformation starting from powders, in which atomic mixing or mechanical 

alloying between the constituent phases is also observed. As starting materials, 

mixtures of amorphous/crystalline or amorphous/amorphous powders are used. 

Up to now, Zr-metallic glass powders in combination with crystalline Al or Cu 

powders and mixture of Zr- and Ni-based metallic glass powders have been 

investigated. In ref. [108], 60 vol.% Zr-based metallic glass and 40 vol% Al 

crystalline powders were spark plasma sintered to obtain a pre -compacted initial 

material.
Investigations 
of 
the 
microstructural 
evolution 
during 
HPT 

deformation have shown that most of the deformation was localized in the Al 

matrix. The metallic glass phase was, however, also deformed and became

fragmented, 
which 
led
to 
microstructural 
refinement. 
Inhomogeneous 

deformation and shear band formation was further observed. Further HPT 

deformation led to full amorphization and intensive mechanical mixing. For the 

highest strains (larger than 400), a featureless, homogeneous structure was

observed, which also correlates to the hardness maxi mum of 700HV. Shear bands

occurring with a high density during HPT deformation were assumed to be the 

main mechanism for the observed mixing. It was shown by a simple geometrical 

model that few atomic jumps within shear bands could be enough to fully mix 

and amorphize the composite , if the level of deformation is large enough. 

However, chemical gradients with a typical length scale in a range of 10 –20 nm 

were still present in the microstructure even at high strains. The very high 

hardness of the as-processed composite, which is 40 % higher than the hardness 


29

of the original Zr-based metallic glass, was further attributed to these chemical 

gradients.

Zr-based metallic glass powders with f our different compositions (20, 40, 60, 

80 wt% Cu) were mixed with crystalline Cu powders, then directly consolidated

and deformed by HPT in ref. [109]. Although the Cu phase carried the most part 

of the deformation and no ideal co -deformation occurs, phase refinement of both 

phases into a lamellar structure was observed (Fig.5a-f). The structure refined

further with on-going deformation and in saturation at very high strains , single 

phase bulk metallic glasses were obtained for all composition except the one 

containing 80 wt% Cu. In this case, a part of the Zr-metallic glass phase was

dissolved in the Cu phase forming a supersaturated solid solution, which

remains crystalline. Furthermore, it was observed that t he strain necessary to 

reach saturation increases significantly
with increasing content of the 

crystalline Cu phase. The soft Cu phase carried most of the deformation; thus the

amorphous particles are not forced to deform as strongly as compositions with 

lower Cu content. Therefore, fully mixing might be prevented as well. 

Mechanical properties of the HPT deformed bulk Zr -metallic glass-based 

materials were investigated with hardness measurements. The compositions 

with 20, 40 and 60 wt% Cu exhibited a hardness that is lower than a reference

Zr-metallic glass at low strain. In the fully mixed amorphous state, the hardness 

was, however, higher than the pure Zr-metallic glass reference. By contrast, the 

composite containing 80 wt% Cu show ed on the one hand lower hardening with 

increasing strain and on the other hand the hardness of the reference Zr -metallic 

glass cannot be obtained even at the highest investigated strain. 

A similar combination of starting materials ( Zr 5 5Cu 3 0Ni 5Al 1 0 - metallic glass 


30

phase in combination with crystalline Cu) was used in [110], but instead of 

powders plates with semi-circular shape and a volume ratio of 1:1 were put 

together and subjected to HPT. SEM and TEM investigations showed that 

lamellar nano-composites were produced at the highest strain (50 rotations). In 

contrast 
to 
[109], 
no
mixing 
or 
chemical 
reaction 
between
the 

crystalline/amorphous phases or crystallization of the amorphous phase was 

observed by XRD. The reason might be the significant smaller amount of applied 

strain (50 rotations) compared to ref. [109] (500 rotations).  Additionally, a 

large scatter in hardness was determined after
deformation. The average 

hardness was also slightly smaller compared to the as-cast Zr 5 5Cu 3 0Ni 5Al 1 0

reference material.

In ref. [111], two different metallic glass powders, Zr 5 7Cu 2 0Al 1 0Ni 8Ti 5 and 

Ni 5 3Nb 2 0Ti 1 0Zn 8Co 6Cu 3 , were consolidated and deformed by HP T to synthesize 

amorphous dual phase composites. During HPT deformation, deformation of 

both amorphous phases took place and a lamellar structure similar as in the 

amorphous/crystalline composites evolved. The structure refines down to a few 

nm during deformation. Shear band formation was observed as well and at very 

high shear strains even mixing of the two amorphous materials towards a single 

phase bulk metallic glass occurred. The newly formed amorphous phase has a 

hardness between the initial metallic glasses, but higher than the rule of mixture 

predicts.

In a slightly different approach, single amorphous powders are deformed and 

deformation-induced crystallization resulted in bulk metallic glass composites 

as well. In this way, NC bulk Al 9 0Fe 5Nd 5 partially amorphous composites with 

Al nanocrystallites with a size between 5 and 25 nm were prepared “in-situ” by 


31

HPT deformation of fully amorphous gas atomized powders [112]. Instead of 

amorphous powders, ball milled Fe 7 7Al 2 . 1 414Ga 0 . 8 6P 8 . 4C 5B 4Si 2 . 6
amorphous 

ribbons were used in ref. [113]. HPT deformation led to the formation of 

dispersed Fe 2B or α -Fe nanocrystals inside the amorphous matrix. The bulk 

metallic glass composites exhibit ed enhanced Curie temperature and hardness 

with respect to the not deformed ribbon material.

The HPT process permits the production of bulk metallic glass composites.

Even novel metallic glass phases with different chemical composition can be 

synthesized.
By varying the applied strain, phase dimensions can
be 

systematically varied and deformation-induced mixing is observed. However, 

enormous amounts of strain are necessary to achieve full -mixing. With this 

process, bulk metallic glass composites containing metallic materials with new 

types of second phase - for example, Cu, which would be impossible to be 

obtained by classical solidifica tion methods due to the easy melting of Cu - can 

be synthesized. Additionally, a much wider composition range not accessible by 

the classical routes, is possible. As an example, the wide range of che mical 

compositions achieved in ref. [109] are shown in Fig.5g.

4.2 High-entropy alloys

High-entropy alloys, which are complex alloys consisting of five or more 

principal elements, have received considerable attention in the material science

community in the last few years [114,115]. High-entropy alloys with micrometer 

sized grains are usually processed by melting and casting of the pure elements 

followed by rolling and recrystallization [116]. HPT deformation of as-cast or 

arc-melted coarse grained high -entropy alloys has been reported to lead to grain 


32

sizes in the NC regime [117–120] leading to extraordinary high strength and 

structural stability. Despite their excellent properties, it is a rather long process

– casting and subsequent deformation - to achieve the desired nanostructure. As 

alternative, processing of bulk NC
high-entropy alloys
directly from the 

constituent powders using deformation-induced alloying by HPT as effective 

and time-saving method was recently proposed in ref. [121,122].  Powder

mixtures of
equiatomic
Co, Cr, Fe, Mn and Ni
were pre-compacted
and 

subsequently HPT deformed up to 100 rotations with a pressure of 5 GPa. As 

revealed by XRD, the microstructure first evolved into a (FCC+ BCC) based 

solid solution after 10 rotations. After 100 rotations, a FCC single phase solid 

solution with an increased lattice spacing for the FCC lattice was obtained. TEM 

investigations showed a NC microstructure with small amount of chromium 

oxide precipitates (size of 7–10 nm). APT analysis further proved alloying and 

a homogeneous distribution of the major constituting elements on the nanometer 

scale (Fig.6). The hardness of the as-deformed alloy showed high values of 

about 6700 MPa. The higher values compared to HPT deformed as-cast or 

arc-melted CoCrFeMnNi alloys (4900–5380 MPa [117–120]) with similar grain 

size are explained by additional pre cipitation hardening of the nanometer sized 

chromium oxide particles. The observed mechanical alloying was explained by 

accelerated atomic diffusivity and defect introduction under HPT conditions in 

combination with intensive mass transfer across interfaces by “superdiffusive” 

shear-induced mixing [28].

In summary, the potential of HPT processing as innovative and effective route 

for synthetization of high-entropy alloys is demonstrated, with many more 

options in choosing the range of composition s in future. However, we assume 


33

that processing of single phase high -entropy alloys, which are desirable to 

achieve most outstanding properties, by deformation -induced mixing might be 

only possible in a limited temperature range and for compositions close to those 

which have been found to crystallize as single-phase solid solutions with 

conventional processing routes as well.

4.3 Innovative starting materials

An important issue for deformation-induced mixing is the homogeneity of the 

deformation process, which is also influenced by the structural homogeneity of 

the starting material. Often powder mixtures are used as starting materials and 

inhomogeneity is a well-known problem. It is especially likely to occur when the 

various components of the powder mixture diff er strongly in size and density.

One solution might be laborious techniques of mixing , another the use of coated

powder particles as initial starting material, whic h means that any desired

combinations of thin metal coatings and substrate metal might be attained.

In a first feasibility study [123], Fe powders coated by a Cu layer of about 1 

-2 µm thickness were prepared by immersion deposition and subsequently 

inductively hot-pressed
to obtain a pre-compacted starting material. For 

comparison, a mixture of elemental Fe and Cu powders with similar powder 

particle sizes and overall composition was pre -compacted in the same way as the 

coated powders. Huge differences were already observed after this initial 

inductive hot-pressing step. The initial microstructure of the pre-compacted 

coated powders consists of
Fe cores separated by a Cu layer network . 

Furthermore, the compacted material was very homogeneous on a macroscopic 

scale (Fig.7a). On the contrary, the microstructure of the pre-compacted 


34

elemental powder mixture
was
chemically
inhomogeneous
(Fig. 7b) with

concentrations scattering on a length scale that is even comparable to the size 

of small HPT samples (diameter of 8-10 mm). A quite coarse initial Cu and Fe

microstructure with each a size up to several hundred microns was also observed

due to particle clustering. After HPT deformation, this initial structure leads to

inhomogeneous deformation, strain concentrations and non-symmetric hardness 

profiles. On the very contrary, the initial higher homogeneity of the coated 

powder sample results in a more uniform deformation during HPT processing, a 

higher hardness even at lower strain and a reduced amount of strain necessary to 

reach the saturation state. Furthermore, the starting material influences the 

mechanical mixing process as well. A larger amount of Fe was dissolved in the 

Cu phase, and vice versa, for the severely deformed coated powder in this 

saturation state as revealed by XRD measurements . Possible reasons are the 

smaller grain size and higher densities of stored dislocations, which are both 

stabilized by a higher amount of impurities.  As shown by XRD, the coated 

powder contained a significant amount of oxides which is higher than for the 

powder mixtures. 

Another approach to prevent powder inhomogeneity would be the synthesis of 

pre-alloyed powders. With inert gas condensation, for example, the production 

of pure metals, alloys and oxides with average NC grain sizes, high purity and 

uniform nanostructures is possible. Drawbacks are, however, the low production 

rates and that only a limited number of metals and alloys that can be vaporized.

Another option would be the use of gas atomized powders as starting mate rial. 

Up to now there exists, however, only one study using gas atomized powders in 

combination with HPT deformation [112]. A vision of the future would be the 


35

production of materials by design using the powder synthesis route, where 

multiple phases in the
form of powder particles might
be combined and 

consolidated by HPT deformation.

5. Summary and Outlook

HPT is a SPD technique, which, in addition to grain refinement, can be used 

to synthesize bulk metastable materials and novel nanocomposites having UFG

or NC structures. The UFG or NC grain size of these materials does not only 

result in advanced mechanical properties. More importantly, metastable phases 

and alloys with compositions beyond the equilibrium phase diagrams and with 

fewer thermodynamic restrictions can be designed. Most of the studies aim to 

develop innovative bulk materials with superior functional properties for future 

applications. The important points of this overview can be summarized as 

follows:

•
For nearly all HPT synthesized bulk materials, ultrahigh strengths are 

reported. Furthermore, an enhanced thermostability compared to pure 

metals is observed.

•
The magnetic properties of HPT processed materials can be tailored 

using phase transformations or phase formations. That applies both to 

hard magnetic and to soft magnetic materials.

•
High strength materials with good electrical conductivity for electrical 

applications can be processed as well.

•
First promising feasibility studies on the synthesis of porous materials, 

with efficient resistance to radiation, and irradiation resistant 

nanocomposites using HPT deformation have been conducted. 


36

•
Innovative materials for solid hydrogen storage application with 

enhanced kinetics have been produced using deformation -induced 

mixing and phase formations by HPT.

•
The first papers on amorphous materials, bulk metallic glass composites 

and high-entropy alloys synthesized by HPT deformation, which show 

promising results for the future, as well as the use of innovative starting 

materials are presented.

Acknowledgments 

Funding of this work has been provided from the European Research Council 

(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 

programme under ERC Grant Agreement No. 340185 USMS and No. 757333 

SpdTuM. 


37

REFERENCES

[ 1 ]
P . W .  B r i d g m a n ,  P h y s .  R e v .  4 8  ( 1 9 3 5 )  8 2 5 – 8 4 7 .

[ 2 ]
K .  E d a l a t i ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  A  6 5 2  ( 2 0 1 6 )  

3 2 5 – 3 5 2 .

[ 3 ]
V . .  S t o l y a r o v ,  Y . .  Z h u ,  T . .  L o w e ,  R . .  I s l a m g a l i e v ,  R . .  

V a l i e v ,  N a n o s t r u c t u r e d  M a t e r .  1 1  ( 1 9 9 9 )  9 4 7 – 9 5 4 .

[ 4 ]
R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  Y .  E s t r i n ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  T . G .  L a n g d o n ,  M . J .  

Z e h e t b a u e r ,  Y .  Z h u ,  J O M  6 8  ( 2 0 1 6 )  1 2 1 6 – 1 2 2 6 .

[ 5 ]
Y .  H u a n g ,  T . G .  L a n g d o n ,  M a t e r .  T o d a y  1 6  ( 2 0 1 3 )  

8 5 – 9 3 .

[ 6 ]
Y .  E s t r i n ,  A .  V i n o g r a d o v ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  6 1  ( 2 0 1 3 )  

7 8 2 – 8 1 7 .

[ 7 ]
X .  S a u v a g e ,  A .  C h b i h i ,  X .  Q u e l e n n e c ,  J .  P h y s .  C o n f .  

S e r .  2 4 0  ( 2 0 1 0 )  0 1 2 0 0 3 .

[ 8 ]
B .  S t r a u m a l ,  A .  K o r n e v a ,  P .  Z i ę b a ,  A r c h .  C i v .  M e c h .  

E n g .  1 4  ( 2 0 1 4 )  2 4 2 – 2 4 9 .

[ 9 ]
A . V .  
K o r z n i k o v ,  
G .  
T r a m ,  
O .  
D i m i t r o v ,  
G . F .  

K o r z n i k o v a ,  S . R .  I d r i s o v a ,  Z .  P a k i e l a ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  4 9  

( 2 0 0 1 )  6 6 3 – 6 7 1 .

[ 1 0 ] S . D .  P r o k o s h k i n ,  I . Y .  K h m e l e v s k a y a ,  S . V .  D o b a t k i n ,  

I . B .  T r u b i t s y n a ,  E . V .  T a t y a n i n ,  V . V .  S t o l y a r o v ,  E . A .  

P r o k o f i e v ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  5 3  ( 2 0 0 5 )  2 7 0 3 – 2 7 1 4 .

[ 1 1 ] Z .  K o v á c s ,  P .  H e n i t s ,  A . P .  Z h i l y a e v ,  Á .  R é v é s z ,  S c r .  

M a t e r .  5 4  ( 2 0 0 6 )  1 7 3 3 – 1 7 3 7 .


38

[ 1 2 ] A . A .  M a z i l k i n ,  B . B .  S t r a u m a l ,  S . G .  P r o t a s o v a ,  S .  V  

D o b a t k i n ,  
B .  
B a r e t z k y ,  
J .  
M a t e r .  
S c i .  
4 3  
( 2 0 0 8 )  

3 8 0 0 – 3 8 0 5 .

[ 1 3 ] M . T .  P é r e z - P r a d o ,  A . P .  Z h i l y a e v ,  P h y s .  R e v .  L e t t .  1 0 2  

( 2 0 0 9 )  1 7 5 5 0 4 .

[ 1 4 ] K .  E d a l a t i ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  H .  F u j i w a r a ,  K .  A m e y a m a ,  

M e t a l l .  M a t e r .  T r a n s .  A  4 1  ( 2 0 1 0 )  3 3 0 8 – 3 3 1 7 .

[ 1 5 ] J .  S o r t ,  A .  Z h i l y a e v ,  M .  Z i e l i n s k a ,  J .  N o g u é s ,  S .  

S u r i ñ a c h ,  J .  T h i b a u l t ,  M . .  B a r ó ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  5 1  ( 2 0 0 3 )  

6 3 8 5 – 6 3 9 3 .

[ 1 6 ] K .  E d a l a t i ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  S .  Y a g i ,  E .  M a t s u b a r a ,  M a t e r .  

S c i .  E n g .  A  5 2 3  ( 2 0 0 9 )  2 7 7 – 2 8 1 .

[ 1 7 ] M . T .  P é r e z - P r a d o ,  A . A .  G i m a z o v ,  O . A .  R u a n o ,  M . E .  

K a s s n e r ,  
A . P .  
Z h i l y a e v ,  
S c r .  
M a t e r .  
5 8  
( 2 0 0 8 )  

2 1 9 – 2 2 2 .

[ 1 8 ] Y .  T o d a k a ,  J .  S a s a k i ,  T .  M o t o ,  M .  U m e m o t o ,  S c r .  M a t e r .  

5 9  ( 2 0 0 8 )  6 1 5 – 6 1 8 .

[ 1 9 ] X .  S a u v a g e ,  P .  J e s s n e r ,  F .  V u r p i l l o t ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  S c r .  

M a t e r .  5 8  ( 2 0 0 8 )  1 1 2 5 – 1 1 2 8 .

[ 2 0 ] A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  M .  K e r b e r ,  D .  S e t m a n ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  A c t a  

M a t e r .  6 0  ( 2 0 1 2 )  8 6 0 – 8 7 1 .

[ 2 1 ] X .  S a u v a g e ,  F .  W e t s c h e r ,  P .  P a r e i g e ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  5 3  

( 2 0 0 5 )  2 1 2 7 – 2 1 3 5 .

[ 2 2 ] Y . Z .  T i a n ,  J . J .  L i ,  P .  Z h a n g ,  S . D .  W u ,  Z . F .  Z h a n g ,  M .  

K a w a s a k i ,  
T . G .  
L a n g d o n ,  
A c t a  
M a t e r .  
6 0  
( 2 0 1 2 )  


39

2 6 9 – 2 8 1 .

[ 2 3 ] B . .  S t r a u m a l ,  B .  B a r e t z k y ,  A . .  M a z i l k i n ,  F .  P h i l l i p p ,  

O . .  K o g t e n k o v a ,  M . .  V o l k o v ,  R . .  V a l i e v ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  

5 2  ( 2 0 0 4 )  4 4 6 9 – 4 4 7 8 .

[ 2 4 ] K . S .  
K o r m o u t ,  
P .  
G h o s h ,  
A .  
B a c h m a i e r ,  
A .  

H o h e n w a r t e r ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  1 5 4  ( 2 0 1 8 ) .

[ 2 5 ] Y .  A s h k e n a z y ,  N . Q .  V o ,  D .  S c h w e n ,  R . S .  A v e r b a c k ,  P .  

B e l l o n ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  6 0  ( 2 0 1 2 )  9 8 4 – 9 9 3 .

[ 2 6 ] N . Q .  V o ,  J .  Z h o u ,  Y .  A s h k e n a z y ,  D .  S c h w e n ,  R . S .  

A v e r b a c k ,  P .  B e l l o n ,  J O M  6 5  ( 2 0 1 3 )  3 8 2 – 3 8 9 .

[ 2 7 ] Y .  A s h k e n a z y ,  N .  P a n t ,  J .  Z h o u ,  P .  B e l l o n ,  R . S .  

A v e r b a c k ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  1 3 9  ( 2 0 1 7 )  2 0 5 – 2 1 4 .

[ 2 8 ] S . N .  A r s h a d ,  T . G .  L a c h ,  M .  P o u r y a z d a n ,  H .  H a h n ,  P .  

B e l l o n ,  S . J .  D i l l o n ,  R . S .  A v e r b a c k ,  S c r .  M a t e r .  6 8  

( 2 0 1 3 )  2 1 5 – 2 1 8 .

[ 2 9 ] D .  R a a b e ,  S .  O h s a k i ,  K .  H o n o ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  5 7  ( 2 0 0 9 )  

5 2 5 4 – 5 2 6 3 .

[ 3 0 ] C .  G e n t e ,  M .  O e h r i n g ,  R .  B o r m a n n ,  P h y s .  R e v .  B  4 8  

( 1 9 9 3 )  1 3 2 4 4 – 1 3 2 5 2 .

[ 3 1 ] G .  V e l t l ,  B .  S c h o l z ,  H . - D .  K u n z e ,  M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  A  

1 3 4  ( 1 9 9 1 )  1 4 1 0 – 1 4 1 3 .

[ 3 2 ] X .  S a u v a g e ,  F .  W e t s c h e r ,  P .  P a r e i g e ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  5 3  

( 2 0 0 5 )  2 1 2 7 – 2 1 3 5 .

[ 3 3 ] P .  B e l l o n ,  R . S .  A v e r b a c k ,  P h y s .  R e v .  L e t t .  7 4  ( 1 9 9 5 )  

1 8 1 9 – 1 8 2 2 .


40

[ 3 4 ] Y .  I v a n i s e n k o ,  W .  L o j k o w s k i ,  R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  H . - J .  F e c h t ,  

A c t a  M a t e r .  5 1  ( 2 0 0 3 )  5 5 5 5 – 5 5 7 0 .

[ 3 5 ] D .  R a a b e ,  S .  O h s a k i ,  K .  H o n o ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  5 7  ( 2 0 0 9 )  

5 2 5 4 – 5 2 6 3 .

[ 3 6 ] K . S .  K o r m o u t ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  A d v .  E n g .  

M a t e r .  1 9  ( 2 0 1 7 ) .

[ 3 7 ] B . B .  
S t r a u m a l ,  
A . A .  
M a z i l k i n ,  
B .  
B a r e t z k y ,  
G .  

S c h & u u m l ; t z ,  E .  R a b k i n ,  R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  M a t e r .  T r a n s .  5 3  

( 2 0 1 2 )  6 3 – 7 1 .

[ 3 8 ] G .  
W i l d e ,  
H .  
R ö s n e r ,  
J .  
M a t e r .  
S c i .  
4 2  
( 2 0 0 7 )  

1 7 7 2 – 1 7 8 1 .

[ 3 9 ] Y . F .  S u n ,  T .  N a k a m u r a ,  Y .  T o d a k a ,  M .  U m e m o t o ,  N .  

T s u j i ,  I n t e r m e t a l l i c s  1 7  ( 2 0 0 9 )  2 5 6 – 2 6 1 .

[ 4 0 ] C .  R e n t e n b e r g e r ,  T .  W a i t z ,  H . P .  K a r n t h a l e r ,  M a t e r .  S c i .  

E n g .  A  4 6 2  ( 2 0 0 7 )
2 8 3 – 2 8 8 .

[ 4 1 ] M .  P e t e r l e c h n e r ,  T .  W a i t z ,  H . P .  K a r n t h a l e r ,  S c r .  M a t e r .  

6 0  ( 2 0 0 9 )  1 1 3 7 – 1 1 4 0 .

[ 4 2 ] M .  P e t e r l e c h n e r ,  T .  W a i t z ,  H . P .  K a r n t h a l e r ,  S c r .  M a t e r .  

5 9  ( 2 0 0 8 )  5 6 6 – 5 6 9 .

[ 4 3 ] S . D .  P r o k o s h k i n ,  I . Y .  K h m e l e v s k a y a ,  S . V .  D o b a t k i n ,  

I . B .  T r u b i t s y n a ,  E . V .  T a t y a n i n ,  V . V .  S t o l y a r o v ,  E . A .  

P r o k o f i e v ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  5 3  ( 2 0 0 5 )  2 7 0 3 – 2 7 1 4 .

[ 4 4 ] A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  G . B .  R a t h m a y r ,  M .  B a r t o s i k ,  D .  A p e l ,  

Z .  Z h a n g ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  6 9  ( 2 0 1 4 ) .

[ 4 5 ] Z .  Z h a n g ,  J .  G u o ,  G .  D e h m ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  1 3 8  


41

( 2 0 1 7 )  4 2 – 5 1 .

[ 4 6 ] J .  G u o ,  G .  H a b e r f e h l n e r ,  J .  R o s a l i e ,  L .  L i ,  M . J .  D u a r t e ,  

G .  K o t h l e i t n e r ,  G .  D e h m ,  Y .  H e ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  Z .  Z h a n g ,  

N a t .  C o m m u n .  9  ( 2 0 1 8 )  1 – 9 .

[ 4 7 ] D .  E d w a r d s ,  I .  S a b i r o v ,  W .  S i g l e ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  P h i l o s .  

M a g .  9 2  ( 2 0 1 2 )  4 1 5 1 – 4 1 6 6 .

[ 4 8 ] I .  
S a b i r o v ,  
R .  
P i p p a n ,  
S c r .  
M a t e r .  
5 2  
( 2 0 0 5 )  

1 2 9 3 – 1 2 9 8 .

[ 4 9 ] A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  M .  K e r b e r ,  D .  S e t m a n ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  A c t a  

M a t e r .  6 0  ( 2 0 1 2 )  8 6 0 – 8 7 1 .

[ 5 0 ] A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  C .  M o t z ,  M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  A  6 2 4  ( 2 0 1 5 ) .

[ 5 1 ] A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  M .  P f a f f ,  M .  S t o l p e ,  H .  A b o u l f a d l ,  C .  

M o t z ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  9 6  ( 2 0 1 5 ) .

[ 5 2 ] N .  I b r a h i m ,  M .  P e t e r l e c h n e r ,  F .  E m e i s ,  M .  W e g n e r ,  S .  

V .  D i v i n s k i ,  G .  W i l d e ,  M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  A  6 8 5  ( 2 0 1 7 )  

1 9 – 3 0 .

[ 5 3 ] R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  G . F .  K o r z n i k o v a ,  K . Y .  M u l y u k o v ,  R . S .  

M i s h r a ,  A . K .  M u k h e r j e e ,  P h i l o s .  M a g .  B  7 5  ( 1 9 9 7 )  

8 0 3 – 8 1 1 .

[ 5 4 ] K . Y .  M u l y u k o v ,  G . F .  K o r z n i k o v a ,
R . F .  V a l i e v ,  P h y s .  

S t a t u s  S o l i d i  1 2 5  ( 1 9 9 1 )  6 0 9 – 6 1 4 .

[ 5 5 ] S .  N i s h i h a t a ,  K .  S u e h i r o ,  M .  A r i t a ,  M .  M a s u d a ,  Z .  

H o r i t a ,  A d v .  E n g .  M a t e r .  1 2  ( 2 0 1 0 )  7 9 3 – 7 9 7 .

[ 5 6 ] K .  S u e h i r o ,  S .  N i s h i m u r a ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  S .  M i t a n i ,  K .  

T a k a n a s h i ,  H .  F u j i m o r i ,  J .  M a t e r .  S c i .  4 3  ( 2 0 0 8 )  7 3 4 9 .


42

[ 5 7 ] B . B .  S t r a u m a l ,  S . G .  P r o t a s o v a ,  A . A .  M a z i l k i n ,  O . A .  

K o g t e n k o v a ,  L .  K u r m a n a e v a ,  B .  B a r e t z k y ,  G .  S c h ü t z ,  

A .  K o r n e v a ,  P .  Z i ę b a ,  M a t e r .  L e t t .  9 8  ( 2 0 1 3 )  2 1 7 – 2 2 1 .

[ 5 8 ] B . B .  S t r a u m a l ,  S . G .  P r o t a s o v a ,  A . A .  M a z i l k i n ,  B .  

B a r e t z k y ,  D .  G o l l ,  D .  V  G u n d e r o v ,  R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  P h i l o s .  

M a g .  L e t t .  8 9  ( 2 0 0 9 )  6 4 9 – 6 5 4 .

[ 5 9 ] A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  H .  K r e n n ,  P .  K n o l l ,  H .  A b o u l f a d l ,  R .  

P i p p a n ,  J .  A l l o y s  C o m p d .  7 2 5  ( 2 0 1 7 )  7 4 4 – 7 4 9 .

[ 6 0 ] M .  S t ü c k l e r ,  H .  K r e n n ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  L .  W e i s s i t s c h ,  S .  

W u r s t e r ,  A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  M .  S t ü c k l e r ,  H .  K r e n n ,  R .  

P i p p a n ,  L .  W e i s s i t s c h ,  S .  W u r s t e r ,  A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  

N a n o m a t e r i a l s  9  ( 2 0 1 8 )  6 .

[ 6 1 ] A . G .  P o p o v ,  D . V .  G y n d e r o v ,  V . V .  S t o l y a r o v ,  J .  M a g n .  

M a g n .  M a t e r .  1 5 7 – 1 5 8  ( 1 9 9 6 )  3 3 – 3 4 .

[ 6 2 ] V . V .  S t o l y a r o v ,  D . V .  G u n d e r o v ,  R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  A . G .  

P o p o v ,  V . S .  G a v i k o ,  A . S .  E r m o l e n k o ,  J .  M a g n .  M a g n .  

M a t e r .  1 9 6 – 1 9 7  ( 1 9 9 9 )  1 6 6 – 1 6 8 .

[ 6 3 ] V . V .  
S t o l y a r o v ,  
D . V .  
G u n d e r o v ,  A . G .  
P o p o v ,  V . S .  

G a v i k o ,  A . S .  E r m o l e n k o ,  J .  A l l o y s  C o m p d .  2 8 1  ( 1 9 9 8 )  

6 9 – 7 1 .

[ 6 4 ] B . B .  S t r a u m a l ,  A . R .  K i l m a m e t o v ,  A . A .  M a z i l k i n ,  S . G .  

P r o t a s o v a ,  
K . I .  
K o l e s n i k o v a ,  
P . B .  
S t r a u m a l ,  
B .  

B a r e t z k y ,  M a t e r .  L e t t .  1 4 5  ( 2 0 1 5 )  6 3 – 6 6 .

[ 6 5 ] B . B .  S t r a u m a l ,  A . A .  M a z i l k i n ,  S . G .  P r o t a s o v a ,  D . V .  

G u n d e r o v ,  G . A .  L ó p e z ,  B .  B a r e t z k y ,  M a t e r .  L e t t .  1 6 1  


43

( 2 0 1 5 )  7 3 5 – 7 3 9 .

[ 6 6 ] A . G .  P o p o v ,  V . S .  G a v i k o ,  N . N .  S h c h e g o l e v a ,  L . A .  

S h r e d e r ,  D . V .  G u n d e r o v ,  V . V .  S t o l y a r o v ,  W .  L i ,  L . L .  

L i ,  X . Y .  Z h a n g ,  J .  I r o n  S t e e l  R e s .  I n t .  1 3  ( 2 0 0 6 )  

1 6 0 – 1 6 5 .

[ 6 7 ] W .  L i ,  L .  L i ,  Y .  N a n ,  X .  L i ,  X .  Z h a n g ,  D .  V .  G u n d e r o v ,  

V .  V .  S t o l y a r o v ,  A . G .  P o p o v ,  A p p l .  P h y s .  L e t t .  9 1  

( 2 0 0 7 )  0 6 2 5 0 9 .

[ 6 8 ] A . G .  P o p o v ,  V .  V  S e r i k o v ,  N . M .  K l e i n e r m a n ,  P h y s .  M e t .  

M e t a l l o g r .  1 0 9  ( 2 0 1 0 )  5 0 5 – 5 1 3 .

[ 6 9 ] D .  V .  G u n d e r o v ,  V .  V .  S t o l y a r o v ,  J .  A p p l .  P h y s .  1 0 8  

( 2 0 1 0 )  0 5 3 9 0 1 .

[ 7 0 ] H .  L i ,  W .  L i ,  Y .  Z h a n g ,  D .  V .  G u n d e r o v ,  X .  Z h a n g ,  J .  

A l l o y s  C o m p d .  6 5 1  ( 2 0 1 5 )  4 3 4 – 4 3 9 .

[ 7 1 ] H .  L i ,  L .  L o u ,  F .  H o u ,  D .  G u o ,  W .  L i ,  X .  L i ,  D .  V .  

G u n d e r o v ,  K .  S a t o ,  X .  Z h a n g ,  A p p l .  P h y s .  L e t t .  1 0 3  

( 2 0 1 3 )  1 4 2 4 0 6 .

[ 7 2 ] W .  L i ,  X .  L i ,  D .  G u o ,  K .  S a t o ,  D .  V .  G u n d e r o v ,  V .  V .  

S t o l y a r o v ,  X .  Z h a n g ,  A p p l .  P h y s .  L e t t .  9 4  ( 2 0 0 9 )  

2 3 1 9 0 4 .

[ 7 3 ] R . K .  
I s l a m g a l i e v ,  
K . M .  
N e s t e r o v ,  
J .  
B o u r g o n ,  Y .  

C h a m p i o n ,  R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  J .  A p p l .  P h y s .  1 1 5  ( 2 0 1 4 )  1 – 5 .

[ 7 4 ] S .  V .  D o b a t k i n ,  J .  G u b i c z a ,  D .  V .  S h a n g i n a ,  N . R .  

B o c h v a r ,  N . Y .  T a b a c h k o v a ,  M a t e r .  L e t t .  1 5 3  ( 2 0 1 5 )  

5 – 9 .


44

[ 7 5 ] B . D .  L o n g ,  M .  U m e m o t o ,  Y .  T o d a k a ,  R .  O t h m a n ,  H .  

Z u h a i l a w a t i ,  
M a t e r .  
S c i .  
E n g .  
A  
5 2 8  
( 2 0 1 1 )  

1 7 5 0 – 1 7 5 6 .

[ 7 6 ] J . M .  C u b e r o - S e s i n ,  M .  A r i t a ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  A d v .  E n g .  

M a t e r .  1 7  ( 2 0 1 5 )  1 7 9 2 – 1 8 0 3 .

[ 7 7 ] J . M .  C u b e r o - S e s i n ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  J .  M a t e r .  S c i .  4 8  ( 2 0 1 3 )  

4 7 1 3 – 4 7 2 2 .

[ 7 8 ] A . E .  M e d v e d e v ,  M . Y .  M u r a s h k i n ,  N . A .  E n i k e e v ,  R . Z .  

V a l i e v ,  P . D .  H o d g s o n ,  R .  L a p o v o k ,  A d v .  E n g .  M a t e r .  

2 0  ( 2 0 1 8 )  1 7 0 0 8 6 7 .

[ 7 9 ] M . Y .  M u r a s h k i n ,  I .  S a b i r o v ,  A . E .  M e d v e d e v ,  N . A .  

E n i k e e v ,  W .  L e f e b v r e ,  R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  X .  S a u v a g e ,  M a t e r .  

D e s .  9 0  ( 2 0 1 6 )  4 3 3 – 4 4 2 .

[ 8 0 ] A . E .  M e d v e d e v ,  M . Y .  M u r a s h k i n ,  N . A .  E n i k e e v ,  R . Z .  

V a l i e v ,  P . D .  H o d g s o n ,  R .  L a p o v o k ,  J .  A l l o y s  C o m p d .  

7 4 5  ( 2 0 1 8 )  6 9 6 – 7 0 4 .

[ 8 1 ] K .  E d a l a t i ,  T .  D a i o ,  S .  L e e ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  T .  N i s h i z a k i ,  

T .  A k u n e ,  T .  N o j i m a ,  T .  S a s a k i ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  8 0  ( 2 0 1 4 )  

1 4 9 – 1 5 8 .

[ 8 2 ] Z .  Z h a n g ,  Y .  W a n g ,  Z .  Q i ,  W .  Z h a n g ,  J .  Q i n ,  J .  F r e n z e l ,  

J .  P h y s .  C h e m .  C  1 1 3  ( 2 0 0 9 )  1 2 6 2 9 – 1 2 6 3 6 .

[ 8 3 ] T . A .  R e b b e c c h i ,  Y .  C h e n ,  J .  M a t e r .  R e s .  3 3  ( 2 0 1 8 )  

2 – 1 5 .

[ 8 4 ] M .  W u r m s h u b e r ,  D .  F r a z e r ,  A .  B a c h m a i e r ,  Y .  W a n g ,  P .  

H o s e m a n n ,  
D .  
K i e n e r ,  
M a t e r .  
D e s .  
1 6 0  
( 2 0 1 8 )  


45

1 1 4 8 – 1 1 5 7 .

[ 8 5 ] M .  
K r e u z e d e r ,  
M . - D .  
A b a d ,  
M . - M .  
P r i m o r a c ,  
P .  

H o s e m a n n ,  V .  M a i e r ,  D .  K i e n e r ,  J .  M a t e r .  S c i .  5 0  

( 2 0 1 5 )  6 3 4 – 6 4 3 .

[ 8 6 ] A .  L e i t n e r ,  V .  M a i e r - K i e n e r ,  J .  J e o n g ,  M . D .  A b a d ,  P .  

H o s e m a n n ,  S . H .  O h ,  D .  K i e n e r ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  1 2 1  ( 2 0 1 6 )  

1 0 4 – 1 1 6 .

[ 8 7 ] N . A .  M a r a ,  A .  M i s r a ,  R . G .  H o a g l a n d ,  A . V .  S e r g u e e v a ,  

T .  T a m a y o ,  P .  D i c k e r s o n ,  A . K .  M u k h e r j e e ,  M a t e r .  S c i .  

E n g .  A  4 9 3  ( 2 0 0 8 )  2 7 4 – 2 8 2 .

[ 8 8 ] K .  H a t t a r ,  M . J .  D e m k o w i c z ,  A .  M i s r a ,  I . M .  R o b e r t s o n ,  

R . G .  H o a g l a n d ,  S c r .  M a t e r .  5 8  ( 2 0 0 8 )  5 4 1 – 5 4 4 .

[ 8 9 ] A .  M i s r a ,  M . J .  D e m k o w i c z ,  X .  Z h a n g ,  R . G .  H o a g l a n d ,  

J O M  5 9  ( 2 0 0 7 )  6 2 – 6 5 .

[ 9 0 ] M . - M .  
P r i m o r a c ,  
M . D .  
A b a d ,  
P .  
H o s e m a n n ,  
M .  

K r e u z e d e r ,  V .  M a i e r ,  D .  K i e n e r ,  M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  A  6 2 5  

( 2 0 1 5 )  2 9 6 – 3 0 2 .

[ 9 1 ] D . R .  L e i v a ,  A . M .  J o r g e ,  T . T .  I s h i k a w a ,  J .  H u o t ,  D .  

F r u c h a r t ,  S .  M i r a g l i a ,  C . S .  K i m i n a m i ,  W . J .  B o t t a ,  A d v .  

E n g .  M a t e r .  1 2  ( 2 0 1 0 )  7 8 6 – 7 9 2 .

[ 9 2 ] K .  E d a l a t i ,  E .  A k i b a ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  S c i .  T e c h n o l .  A d v .  

M a t e r .  1 9  ( 2 0 1 8 )  1 8 5 – 1 9 3 .

[ 9 3 ] H .  E m a m i ,  K .  E d a l a t i ,  A .  S t a y k o v ,  T .  H o n g o ,  H .  I w a o k a ,  

Z .  H o r i t a ,  E .  A k i b a ,  R S C  A d v .  6  ( 2 0 1 6 )  1 1 6 6 5 – 1 1 6 7 4 .

[ 9 4 ] K .  E d a l a t i ,  H .  E m a m i ,  A .  S t a y k o v ,  D . J .  S m i t h ,  E .  A k i b a ,  


46

Z .  H o r i t a ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  9 9  ( 2 0 1 5 )  1 5 0 – 1 5 6 .

[ 9 5 ] K .  E d a l a t i ,  H .  E m a m i ,  Y .  I k e d a ,  H .  I w a o k a ,  I .  T a n a k a ,  

E .  A k i b a ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  1 0 8  ( 2 0 1 6 )  2 9 3 – 3 0 3 .

[ 9 6 ] K .  E d a l a t i ,  R .  U e h i r o ,  K .  F u j i w a r a ,  Y .  I k e d a ,  H . - W .  L i ,  

X .  S a u v a g e ,  R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  E .  A k i b a ,  I .  T a n a k a ,  Z .  

H o r i t a ,  M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  A  7 0 1  ( 2 0 1 7 )  1 5 8 – 1 6 6 .

[ 9 7 ] K .  E d a l a t i ,  R .  U e h i r o ,  Y .  I k e d a ,  H . - W .  L i ,  H .  E m a m i ,  

Y .  F i l i n c h u k ,  M .  A r i t a ,  X .  S a u v a g e ,  I .  T a n a k a ,  E .  

A k i b a ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  1 4 9  ( 2 0 1 8 )  8 8 – 9 6 .

[ 9 8 ] K .  F u j i w a r a ,  R .  U e h i r o ,  K .  E d a l a t i ,  H . - W .  L i ,  R .  

F l o r i a n o ,  E .  A k i b a ,  Z .  H o r i t a ,  M a t e r .  T r a n s .  5 9  ( 2 0 1 8 )  

7 4 1 – 7 4 6 .

[ 9 9 ] K .  E d a l a t i ,  H .  S h a o ,  H .  E m a m i ,  H .  I w a o k a ,  E .  A k i b a ,  

Z .  
H o r i t a ,  
I n t .  
J .  
H y d r o g e n  
E n e r g y  
4 1  
( 2 0 1 6 )  

8 9 1 7 – 8 9 2 4 .

[ 1 0 0 ] J .  E c k e r t ,  J .  D a s ,  S .  P a u l y ,  C .  D u h a m e l ,  J .  M a t e r .  R e s .  

2 2  ( 2 0 0 7 )  2 8 5 – 3 0 1 .

[ 1 0 1 ] C . C .  H a y s ,  C . P .  K i m ,  W . L .  J o h n s o n ,  P h y s .  R e v .  L e t t .  

8 4  ( 2 0 0 0 )  2 9 0 1 – 2 9 0 4 .

[ 1 0 2 ] L .  P e r r i è r e ,  Y .  C h a m p i o n ,  M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  A  5 4 8  

( 2 0 1 2 )  1 1 2 – 1 1 7 .

[ 1 0 3 ] J . P .  K e l l y ,  S . M .  F u l l e r ,  K .  S e o ,  E .  N o v i t s k a y a ,  V .  

E l i a s s o n ,  A . M .  H o d g e ,  O . A .  G r a e v e ,  M a t e r .  D e s .  9 3  

( 2 0 1 6 )  2 6 – 3 8 .

[ 1 0 4 ] R . D .  C o n n e r ,  R . B .  D a n d l i k e r ,  W . L .  J o h n s o n ,  A c t a  


47

M a t e r .  4 6  ( 1 9 9 8 )  6 0 8 9 – 6 1 0 2 .

[ 1 0 5 ] S . T .  D e n g ,  H .  D i a o ,  Y . L .  C h e n ,  C .  Y a n ,  H . F .  Z h a n g ,  

A . M .  W a n g ,  Z . Q .  H u ,  S c r .  M a t e r .  6 4  ( 2 0 1 1 )  8 5 – 8 8 .

[ 1 0 6 ] R . T .  O t t ,  C .  F a n ,  J .  L i ,  T . C .  H u f n a g e l ,  J .  N o n .  C r y s t .  

S o l i d s  3 1 7  ( 2 0 0 3 )  1 5 8 – 1 6 3 .

[ 1 0 7 ] Y .  W u ,  H .  W a n g ,  H . H .  W u ,  Z . Y .  Z h a n g ,  X . D .  H u i ,  G . L .  

C h e n ,  D .  M a ,  X . L .  W a n g ,  Z . P .  L u ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  5 9  

( 2 0 1 1 )  2 9 2 8 – 2 9 3 6 .

[ 1 0 8 ] X .  S a u v a g e ,  Y .  C h a m p i o n ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  F .  C u v i l l y ,  L .  

P e r r i è r e ,  A .  A k h a t o v a ,  O .  R e n k ,  J .  M a t e r .  S c i .  4 9  

( 2 0 1 4 )  5 6 4 0 – 5 6 4 5 .

[ 1 0 9 ] L .  K r ä m e r ,
Y .  C h a m p i o n ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  S c i .  R e p .  7  

( 2 0 1 7 )  6 6 5 1 .

[ 1 1 0 ] Y . F .  S u n ,  H .  F u j i i ,  N .  T s u j i ,  Y .  T o d a k a ,  M .  U m e m o t o ,  

J .  A l l o y s  C o m p d .  4 9 2  ( 2 0 1 0 )  1 4 9 – 1 5 2 .

[ 1 1 1 ] L .  
K r ä m e r ,  
Y .  
C h a m p i o n ,  
K . S .  
K o r m o u t ,  
V .  

M a i e r - K i e n e r ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  I n t e r m e t a l l i c s  9 4  ( 2 0 1 8 )  

1 7 2 – 1 7 8 .

[ 1 1 2 ] A . R .  Y a v a r i ,  W . J . B .  F i l h o ,  C . A . D .  R o d r i g u e s ,  C .  

C a r d o s o ,  R . Z .  V a l i e v ,  S c r .  M a t e r .  4 6  ( 2 0 0 2 )  7 1 1 – 7 1 6 .

[ 1 1 3 ] J .  S o r t ,  D . C .  I l e ,  A . P .  Z h i l y a e v ,  A .  C o n c u s t e l l ,  T .  

C z e p p e ,  M .  S t o i c a ,  S .  S u r i ñ a c h ,  J .  E c k e r t ,  M . D .  B a r ó ,  

S c r .  M a t e r .  5 0  ( 2 0 0 4 )  1 2 2 1 – 1 2 2 5 .

[ 1 1 4 ] M . - H .  T s a i ,  J . - W .  Y e h ,  M a t e r .  R e s .  L e t t .  2  ( 2 0 1 4 )  

1 0 7 – 1 2 3 .


48

[ 1 1 5 ] D . B .  M i r a c l e ,  J . D .  M i l l e r ,  O . N .  S e n k o v ,  C .  W o o d w a r d ,  

M . D .  U c h i c ,  J .  T i l e y ,  E n t r o p y  1 6  ( 2 0 1 4 )  4 9 4 – 5 2 5 .

[ 1 1 6 ] B .  C a n t o r ,  I . T . H .  C h a n g ,  P .  K n i g h t ,  A . J . B .  V i n c e n t ,  

M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  A  3 7 5 – 3 7 7  ( 2 0 0 4 )
2 1 3 – 2 1 8 .

[ 1 1 7 ] D . - H .  L e e ,  I . - C .  C h o i ,  M . - Y .  S e o k ,  J .  H e ,  Z .  L u ,  J . - Y .  

S u h ,  M .  K a w a s a k i ,  T . G .  L a n g d o n ,  J .  J a n g ,  J .  M a t e r .  R e s .  

3 0  ( 2 0 1 5 )  2 8 0 4 – 2 8 1 5 .

[ 1 1 8 ] H .  S h a h m i r ,  J .  H e ,  Z .  L u ,  M .  K a w a s a k i ,  T . G .  L a n g d o n ,  

M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  A  6 8 5  ( 2 0 1 7 )  3 4 2 – 3 4 8 .

[ 1 1 9 ] B .  S c h u h ,  F .  M e n d e z - M a r t i n ,  B .  V ö l k e r ,  E . P .  G e o r g e ,  

H .  C l e m e n s ,  R .  P i p p a n ,  A .  H o h e n w a r t e r ,  A c t a  M a t e r .  

9 6  ( 2 0 1 5 )  2 5 8 – 2 6 8 .

[ 1 2 0 ] A .  H e c z e l ,  M .  K a w a s a k i ,  J . L .  L á b á r ,  J .  J a n g ,  T . G .  

L a n g d o n ,  J .  G u b i c z a ,  J .  A l l o y s  C o m p d .  7 1 1  ( 2 0 1 7 )  

1 4 3 – 1 5 4 .

[ 1 2 1 ] A .  K i l m a m e t o v ,  R .  K u l a g i n ,  A .  M a z i l k i n ,  S .  S e i l s ,  T .  

B o l l ,  M .  H e i l m a i e r ,  H .  H a h n ,  S c r .  M a t e r .  1 5 8  ( 2 0 1 9 )  

2 9 – 3 3 .

[ 1 2 2 ] R .  
K u l a g i n ,  
Y .  
B e y g e l z i m e r ,  
Y .  
I v a n i s e n k o ,  
A .  

M a z i l k i n ,  H .  H a h n ,  I O P  C o n f .  S e r .  M a t e r .  S c i .  E n g .  1 9 4  

( 2 0 1 7 )  0 1 2 0 4 5 .

[ 1 2 3 ] T .  M ü l l e r ,  A .  B a c h m a i e r , E .  N e u b a u e r ,  M .  K i t z m a n t e l ,  

R .  P i p p a n ,  M e t a l s  ( B a s e l ) .  6  ( 2 0 1 6 )  2 2 8 .


49

C apt i o ns Li st

F i g . 1 :  T K D i m a g e s  o f  C o 2 8 w t . % - C u  ( a ) ,  C o 4 9 w t . % - C u  ( b ) ,  

a n d  C o 6 7 w t . % - C u  ( c )  i n  t h e  a s - d e f o r m e d  s t a t e .
I n  ( d ) ,

c o e r c i v i t y  a n d  s a t u r a t i o n  m a g n e t i z a t i o n  a r e  p l o t t e d  f o r  

t h e  d i f f e r e n t  C o  c o m p o s i t i o n s .  T h e  g r e y  d o t t e d  l i n e  

i n d i c a t e  t h e  m a g n e t i c  m o m e n t  o f  F C C - C o
[ 6 0 ] .

F i g . 2 :
( a )
S T E M - H A A D F  
i m a g e  
s h o w i n g  
t h e  

m i c r o s t r u c t u r e  
o f  
t h e  
H P T  
d e f o r m e d  
A l – 5 . 4 w t %  

C e - 3 . 1 w t %  L a  a l l o y  w i t h  a  s m a l l  p a r t i c l e  o n  a  g r a i n  

b o u n d a r y .  T h e  E D S  l i n e  p r o f i l e  a n a l y s i s  a l o n g  t h e  g r a i n  

b o u n d a r y  ( i n d i c a t e d  b y  t h e  r e d  a r r o w )  i n d i c a t e s  C e  a n d  

L a  s e g r e g a t i o n .  ( b )  H i g h  r e s o l u t i o n  H A A D F  S T E M  i m a g e  

i n  [ 0 0 1 ]  z o n e  a x i s
o f  t h e  A l  m a t r i x .  T h e  a t o m i c
c o l u m n ,  

w h i c h  a r e
s i g n i f i c a n t l y  b r i g h t e r  t h a t  t h e  a v e r a g e  a r e  

s u g g e s t e d  t o
c o n t a i n  a t  l e a s t  o n e  r a r e  e a r t h  a t o m
[ 7 9 ] .

( c )  T r a n s i t i o n  t e m p e r a t u r e  f o r  s u p e r c o n d u c t i v i t y  T c  a s  

f u n c t i o n  o f  s h e a r  s t r a i n  a n d  a n n e a l i n g  t i m e  [ 8 1 ] .

F i g . 3 :  
D i f f e r e n t  
m i c r o s t r u c t u r a l  
s t a t e s  
d u r i n g  

f a b r i c a t i o n  o f  C u - A g  p o r o u s  m a t e r i a l  b y  H P T
[ 8 4 ] .  ( a )  

S E M  m i c r o g r a p h  o f  t h e  i n i t i a l  C u - F e - A g  m a t e r i a l .  ( b )  

B r i g h t  f i e l d  T E M  m i c r o g r a p h  o f  t h e  m a t e r i a l  a f t e r  H P T  

d e f o r m a t i o n .  ( c )  B r i g h t  f i e l d  T E M  m i c r o g r a p h  a f t e r  h e a t  

t r e a t m e n t  
a t  
4 0 0 ° C  
f o r  
1 h .  
( d )  
B r i g h t  
f i e l d  
T E M  

m i c r o g r a p h  a f t e r  h e a t  t r e a t m e n t  a t  6 0 0 ° C  f o r  1 h .  ( e )  S E M  


50

m i c r o g r a p h  o f  t h e  C u - A g  p o r o u s  m a t e r i a l .  

F i g . 4 :
( a )  H i g h - r e s o l u t i o n  H A A D F  l a t t i c e  i m a g e  a n d  

c o r r e s p o n d i n g  E D S  m a p p i n g s  o f  M g - b a s e d  n a n o c l u s t e r s

a t  t h e  h i g h e s t  a m o u n t  o f  s t r a i n .  ( b )  
H y d r o g e n a t i o n  

k i n e t i c s  a f t e r  H P T  d e f o r m a t i o n
[ 9 5 ] .   

F i g . 5  
S E M
i m a g e s  
o f  
a  
H P T  
p r o c e s s e d  
Z r - 4 0 w t % C u  

m e t a l l i c  g l a s s  c o m p o s i t e  a t  d i f f e r e n t  s h e a r  s t r a i n s :  ( a )  

s h e a r  s t r a i n  3 0 ,  ( b )  6 0 ,  ( c )  1 2 0 ,  ( d )  2 5 0 ,  ( e )  5 7 0  a n d  ( f )  

8 5 0 .  T h e  m a g n i f i c a t i o n  i s  t h e  s a m e  i n  a l l  i m a g e s .  ( g )  B u l k  

Z r  m e t a l l i c  g l a s s  c o m p o s i t e s  o b t a i n e d  b y  H P T  p r o c e s s i n g  

[ 1 0 9 ] ,  i n  w h i c h
t h e  c h e m i c a l  c o m p o s i t i o n  i s  a d j u s t e d  b y  

d i s s o l v i n g  
C u  
i n t o  
t h e  
Z r - m e t a l l i c  
g l a s s  

( Z r 5 7 C u 2 0 A l 1 0 N i 8 T i 5 ) .  T h e  e x t e n s i v e  r a n g e  o f  p o s s i b l e  

c o m p o s i t i o n s  i s  m a r k e d  b y  t h e  r e d  b a c k g r o u n d e d  f i e l d .  

I n  X ,  a l l  e l e m e n t s  o f  t h e  m e t a l l i c  g l a s s  e x c e p t  C u  a n d  Z r  

a r e  s u m m e d  u p .  T h e  c o l o r e d  d a t a  p o i n t s  c o r r e s p o n d  t o  

c h e m i c a l  c o m p o s i t i o n  o f  b u l k  m e t a l l i c  g l a s s e s  f r o m  

l i t e r a t u r e  ( p l e a s e  r e f e r  t o  [ 1 0 9 ]  f o r  d e t a i l s ) .

F i g . 6 :  
A P T
r e c o n s t r u c t i o n
s h o w i n g  
t h e
e l e m e n t a l

d i s t r i b u t i o n  o f  o n l y  1 %  o f  a l l  C o ,  C r ,  F e ,  M n  a n d  N i  i o n s ,  

b u t a l l  d e t e c t e d  C r O  a n d  O  i o n s  i n  t h e  a s - d e f o r m e d  s t a t e

[ 1 2 1 ] .  

F i g . 7  L i g h t  m i c r o g r a p h  i m a g e s  o f  c r o s s - s e c t i o n s  o f  t h e  

h o t - p r e s s e d  
c o a t e d  
p o w d e r  
( a )  
a n d  
t h e  
h o t - p r e s s e d  

p o w d e r  
m i x t u r e  
( b ) .  
T h e
o v e r l a y  
i l l u s t r a t e s  
E D X  


51

m e a s u r e m e n t  
a r e a s  
w i t h  
t h e  
c o l o r  
i n d i c a t i n g  
t h e  

m e a s u r e d  C u  c o n t e n t s  i n  w t . %  i n  e a c h  a r e a  [ 1 2 3 ] .


52

.


53

F i g . 1 T K D  i m a g e s  o f  C o 2 8 w t . % - C u  ( a ) ,  C o 4 9 w t . % - C u  

( b ) ,  a n d  C o 6 7 w t . % - C u  ( c )  i n  t h e  a s - d e f o r m e d  s t a t e .  

I n  ( d ) ,  c o e r c i v i t y  a n d  s a t u r a t i o n  m a g n e t i z a t i o n  a r e  

p l o t t e d  f o r  t h e  d i f f e r e n t  C o  c o m p o s i t i o n s .  T h e  g r e y  

d o t t e d  l i n e  i n d i c a t e  t h e  m a g n e t i c  m o m e n t  o f  F C C - C o  

[ 6 0 ] .


54

F i g . 2
( a )  
S T E M - H A A D F  
i m a g e  
s h o w i n g  
t h e  

m i c r o s t r u c t u r e  
o f  
t h e  
H P T  
d e f o r m e d  
A l – 5 . 4 w t %  

C e - 3 . 1 w t %  L a  a l l o y  w i t h  a  s m a l l  p a r t i c l e  o n  a  g r a i n  

b o u n d a r y .  T h e
E D S  l i n e  p r o f i l e  a n a l y s i s  a l o n g  t h e  

g r a i n  
b o u n d a r y  
( i n d i c a t e d  
b y  
t h e  
r e d  
a r r o w )  

i n d i c a t e s  C e  a n d  L a  s e g r e g a t i o n .  ( b )  H i g h  r e s o l u t i o n  

H A A D F  S T E M  i m a g e  i n  [ 0 0 1 ]  z o n e  a x i s  o f  t h e  A l  

m a t r i x .  T h e  a t o m i c  c o l u m n ,  w h i c h  a r e  s i g n i f i c a n t l y  

b r i g h t e r  t h a t  t h e  a v e r a g e a r e  s u g g e s t e d  t o  c o n t a i n  a t  

l e a s t  
o n e  
r a r e  
e a r t h  
a t o m  
[ 7 9 ] .  
( c )  
T r a n s i t i o n  

t e m p e r a t u r e  f o r  s u p e r c o n d u c t i v i t y  T c  a s  f u n c t i o n  o f  

s h e a r  s t r a i n  a n d  a n n e a l i n g  t i m e  [ 8 1 ] .


55

F i g . 3
D i f f e r e n t  
m i c r o s t r u c t u r a l  
s t a t e s  
d u r i n g  

f a b r i c a t i o n  o f  C u - A g  p o r o u s  m a t e r i a l  b y  H P T  [ 8 4 ] .  

( a )  S E M  m i c r o g r a p h  o f  t h e  i n i t i a l  C u - F e - A g  m a t e r i a l .  

( b )  B r i g h t  f i e l d  T E M  m i c r o g r a p h  o f  t h e  m a t e r i a l  a f t e r  

H P T  d e f o r m a t i o n .  ( c )  B r i g h t  f i e l d  T E M  m i c r o g r a p h  

a f t e r  h e a t  t r e a t m e n t  a t  4 0 0 ° C  f o r  1 h .  ( d )  B r i g h t  f i e l d  

T E M  m i c r o g r a p h  a f t e r  h e a t  t r e a t m e n t a t  6 0 0 ° C  f o r  1 h .  

( e )  S E M  m i c r o g r a p h  o f  t h e  C u - A g  p o r o u s  m a t e r i a l .  


56

F i g . 4
( a )  H i g h - r e s o l u t i o n  H A A D F  l a t t i c e  i m a g e  a n d  

c o r r e s p o n d i n g  
E D S  
m a p p i n g s  
o f  
M g - b a s e d  

n a n o c l u s t e r s  a t  t h e  h i g h e s t  a m o u n t  o f  s t r a i n .  ( b )  

H y d r o g e n a t i o n  k i n e t i c s  a f t e r  H P T  d e f o r m a t i o n  [ 9 5 ] .   


57

F i g . 5
S E M  i m a g e s  o f  a  H P T  p r o c e s s e d
Z r - 4 0 w t % C u  

m e t a l l i c  g l a s s  c o m p o s i t e  a t  d i f f e r e n t  s h e a r  s t r a i n s :  

( a )  s h e a r  s t r a i n  3 0 ,  ( b )  6 0 ,  ( c )  1 2 0 ,  ( d )  2 5 0 ,  ( e )  5 7 0  

a n d  ( f )  8 5 0 .
T h e  m a g n i f i c a t i o n  i s  t h e  s a m e  i n  a l l  

i m a g e s .
( g )  
B u l k
Z r
m e t a l l i c  
g l a s s  
c o m p o s i t e s

o b t a i n e d  b y  H P T  p r o c e s s i n g
[ 1 0 9 ] ,  i n  w h i c h
t h e  

c h e m i c a l  c o m p o s i t i o n  i s  a d j u s t e d  b y  d i s s o l v i n g  C u  

i n t o  t h e  Z r - m e t a l l i c  g l a s s  ( Z r 5 7 C u 2 0 A l 1 0 N i 8 T i 5 ) . T h e  

e x t e n s i v e  r a n g e  o f  p o s s i b l e  c o m p o s i t i o n s  i s  m a r k e d  

b y  t h e  r e d  b a c k g r o u n d e d  f i e l d .  I n  X ,  a l l  e l e m e n t s  o f  

t h e  m e t a l l i c  g l a s s  e x c e p t  C u  a n d  Z r  a r e  s u m m e d  u p .  

T h e  c o l o r e d  d a t a  p o i n t s  c o r r e s p o n d  t o  c h e m i c a l  

c o m p o s i t i o n  o f  b u l k  m e t a l l i c  g l a s s e s  f r o m  l i t e r a t u r e  

( p l e a s e  r e f e r  t o  [ 1 0 9 ]  f o r  d e t a i l s ) .


58

F i g . 6
A P T  r e c o n s t r u c t i o n  s h o w i n g  t h e  e l e m e n t a l

d i s t r i b u t i o n  o f  o n l y  1 %  o f  a l l  C o ,  C r ,  F e ,  M n  a n d  N i  

i o n s ,  
b u t  
a l l  
d e t e c t e d  
C r O  
a n d  
O  
i o n s  
i n  
t h e  

a s - d e f o r m e d  s t a t e  [ 1 2 1 ] .  


59

F i g . 7
L i g h t  m i c r o g r a p h  i m a g e s  o f  c r o s s - s e c t i o n s  o f  

t h e  
h o t - p r e s s e d  
c o a t e d  
p o w d e r  
( a )  
a n d  
t h e  

h o t - p r e s s e d  
p o w d e r  
m i x t u r e
( b ) .  
T h e  
o v e r l a y

i l l u s t r a t e s
E D X  m e a s u r e m e n t  a r e a s  w i t h
t h e  c o l o r  

i n d i c a t i n g  t h e  m e a s u r e d  C u  c o n t e n t s  i n  w t . %  i n  e a c h  

a r e a
[ 1 2 3 ] .


60

G r a p h i c a l  a b s t r a c t


