Measuring interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in ultra-thin magnetic
films

M. Kuepferling, A. Casiraghi, G. Soares, and G. Durin

Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica,
Strada delle Cacce 91, 10135, Torino,
Italy

F. Garcia-Sanchez

Dep.
of Applied Physics,
University of Salamanca,
Plaza de los Caidos s/n 37008, Salamanca,
Spain

L. Chen and C. H. Back

Technical University Munich,
James-Frank-Str. 1,
85748 Garching,
Germany

C. H. Marrows

School of Physics and Astronomy,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT,
United Kingdom

S. Tacchi

CNR, Istituto Officina dei Materiali - Perugia,
c/o Dipartimento di Fisica e Geologia
Universit`a Perugia,
Via A. Pascoli, 06123 Perugia,
Italy

G. Carlotti

Dipartimento di Fisica e Geologia,
Universit`a di Perugia,
Via Pascoli, 06123 Perugia,
Italy

(Dated: March 23, 2022)

The Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI), being one of the origins of chiral magnetism, is cur-
rently attracting considerable attention in the research community focusing on applied magnetism and
spintronics. For future applications, an accurate measurement of its strength is indispensable. Here
we present a review of the state-of-the-art of measuring the coefficient of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction, the DMI constant D, focusing on systems where the interaction arises from the interface
between two materials (i.e. interfacial DMI). We give an overview of the experimental techniques as
well as their theoretical background and models for the quantification of the DMI constant. The mea-
surement techniques are divided into three categories: a) domain wall-based measurements, b) spin
wave-based measurements and c) spin-orbit torque-based measurements. We analyze the advantages
and disadvantages of each method and compare D values at different interfaces. The review aims to
obtain a better understanding of the applicability of the different techniques to various stacks and of
the origin of apparent disagreements among literature values.

Contents

I. Introduction
2

II. Domain wall methods
4

A. Method overview
4

B. Theory and models
5

1. Current-driven domain wall motion
5

2. Field-driven domain wall motion
7

3. Equilibrium stripe domain pattern
10

4. Magnetic stripe annihilation
11

5. Nucleation field
11

6. Domain wall stray fields
12

7. Domain wall internal structure imaging
13

C. Experimental results
14

arXiv:2009.11830v3  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  22 Mar 2022


2

1. Current-driven domain wall motion
14

2. Field-driven domain wall motion
14

3. Equilibrium stripe domain pattern
17

4. Magnetic stripe annihilation
17

5. Nucleation field
18

6. Domain wall stray fields
19

7. Domain wall internal structure imaging
19

D. Advantages and limitations
24

III. Spin wave methods
26

A. Method overview
26

B. Theory and models
26

1. Quantum spin wave theory
26

2. Classical spin wave theory
28

C. Experimental results
30

1. Brillouin light scattering
30

2. Time resolved magneto optical imaging
32

3. Propagating spin wave spectroscopy
34

4. Spin-polarized electron energy loss spectroscopy
38

D. Advantages and Limitations
38

IV. Spin Orbit Torque method
40

A. Method overview
40

B. Theory and models
40

C. Experimental Results
41

D. Advantages and Limitations
42

V. Comparison of the methods and discussion of problems in the
determination of the DMI constant
43

A. Comparing the DMI constants obtained by the different
methods
43

B. Comparing the DMI constants in different materials
45

C. Influence of growth conditions on the DMI constant
48

D. Outlook and conclusion
48

I. Introduction

Topological spin structures such as chiral domain walls
(DWs) and skyrmions are emerging as promising informa-
tion carriers for future spintronics technologies (Dieny et al.,
2020). Electric currents can drive such spin structures with an
unprecedented level of efficiency, which makes them partic-
ularly attractive for innovative storage devices, including the
racetrack memory (Parkin and Yang, 2015). The crucial in-
gredient needed for stabilizing these chiral spin textures is the
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction (DMI).
The DMI is an anisotropic exchange interaction favoring
a canted spin arrangement and has a net contribution only in
systems without a center of inversion. It originates from the
spin-orbit coupling (SOC) which acts as a perturbation on lo-
calized spin states. Given two neighboring spins ⃗S i and ⃗S j,
the DMI contributes to the Hamiltonian locally with a first bi-
linear energy term described by the following expression:

HDMI = ⃗Dij · (⃗S i × ⃗S j)
(1.1)

where ⃗Dij = Di j(ˆrij × ˆn) is the local DMI vector which can
be described by its magnitude Dij, with ˆrij being the unit vec-
tor linking the two neighboring spins and ˆn being along the
direction of symmetry breaking. This expression is part of
a generalized exchange interaction, which relates ⃗Di j to the
isotropic exchange −Jij⃗S i · ⃗S j with exchange constant Ji j, i.e.

Heisenberg exchange in the case of localized electrons with
a direct orbital overlap, or any other direct or indirect ex-
change described by the above Hamiltonian. Contrary to the
Heisenberg type exchange, which favors collinear alignment,
the DMI promotes an orthogonal arrangement between ⃗S i and
⃗S j, with a chirality imposed by the direction of ⃗Di j.
The DMI was first proposed in the 1950s for antiferromag-
nets such as α-Fe2O3 to account for the existence of a weak
ferromagnetism (Dzyaloshinskii, 1957; Moriya, 1960). In the
following decades, several magnetic materials, such as spin
glasses, orthoferrites, manganites or superconducting cuprates
(Bogdanov et al., 2002; Coffey et al., 1991; Fert and Levy,
1980; Fert, 1991; Levy and Fert, 1981; Luo et al., 1999), were
investigated for their non-collinear or helical magnetism and
for the influence of DMI on the magnetic state. An important
step towards multilayers, on which this review focuses, was
done by Fert (1991), where anisotropic pair interactions on
surfaces or interfaces were considered.
From an experimental point of view, the development of so-
phisticated imaging techniques to visualize the magnetic state,
such as spin-polarized scanning tunnel microscopy (SPSTM)
or spin-polarized low energy electron microscopy (SPLEEM),
was crucial for triggering a renewed interest in the topic at the
beginning of the century, highlighted in the important works
Bode et al. (2007); Heinze (2000); and Heinze et al. (2011).
In non-centrosymmetric single crystals with FeSi structure1,
such as the materials MnSi, FeGe, etc., it was shown that
DMI gives rise to skyrmion lattices and other exotic spin tex-
tures at low temperature, which could be directly visualized
(M¨uhlbauer et al., 2009; R¨oßler et al., 2006; Yu et al., 2010).
More recently, the presence of DMI was also demonstrated
in thin magnetic multilayers with perpendicular magnetic
anisotropy and shown to be localised at the interface between
the layers (Je et al., 2013; Moon et al., 2013; Ryu et al., 2012;
Zakeri et al., 2010). This interfacial DMI has since received a
broad attention from the magnetic community (see e.g. Gal-
lardo et al. (2019b) and Hellman et al. (2017)). It is of partic-
ular importance in the context of systems consisting of an ul-
trathin ferromagnetic (FM) film with perpendicular magnetic
anisotropy (PMA), in contact with a heavy metal (HM) under-
or over-layer. In such a system the DMI arises due to the bro-
ken inversion symmetry at the interface between the two ma-
terials and the large SOC of the heavy metal atoms, which
mediate the interaction between neighboring spins ⃗S i and ⃗S j
of the ferromagnet. It follows that the DMI has an interfacial
nature with a strength decreasing with the magnetic film thick-
ness. If the symmetry breaking is only due to the interface and
symmetry planes or axes are always normal to the film plane,
according to Moriya’s rules, the DMI vector ⃗D, defined at the
interface, has to be necessarily perpendicular to the film nor-
mal, favoring canting of the out-of-plane magnetisation (see
Fig.1).

1 Often called B20 according to classification of the journal “Struk-
turbericht”


3

Figure 1 Diagram of a system possessing interfacial DMI. The ex-
change coupling between the spins ⃗S i and ⃗S j in a ferromagnetic (FM)
layer is mediated by a heavy metal (HM) atom with large spin-orbit
coupling. In this case, the local DMI vector with magnitude Dij is
perpendicular to the plane formed by the two atoms of the ferromag-
netic layer and the one of the heavy metal layer.

Bilayers composed of a thin magnetic film with PMA and
a heavy metal are particularly interesting from the applica-
tion point of view, due to the fast domain wall motion driven
by an electric current in presence of DMI. Early experiments
on current-induced domain wall motion in such systems were
not able to fully unravel the driving mechanisms behind such
motion.
The conventional spin-transfer torque (STT) the-
ory (Berger, 1996; Slonczewski, 1996) predicts motion in
the direction of electron flow, opposite to many observations
(Moore et al., 2008, 2009). On the other hand, the newly
proposed spin-orbit torques (SOTs) – caused by the inverse
spin galvanic (or Rashba) effect (iSGE) (Miron et al., 2010,
2011) and the spin Hall effect (SHE) (Haazen et al., 2013;
Liu et al., 2012) – did not have the correct symmetry to drive
Bloch walls (Khvalkovskiy et al., 2013), which were believed
to be present in these ultrathin PMA films from purely mag-
netostatic considerations.
This issue was resolved when it
was suggested2 that in presence of DMI, N´eel walls, which
have a fixed chirality (Heide et al., 2008; Thiaville et al.,
2012), occur instead of the expected Bloch walls (Fig. 2). A
series of experimental works later confirmed these findings
(Emori et al., 2013; Ryu et al., 2013), substantiating the view
that DMI-stabilized N´eel walls are mostly moved by the SHE
torque. Ever since, DMI-based phenomena have created an
extremely active research field, often referred to as chiral mag-
netism.
Considering the ferromagnetic film itself isotropic (i.e.
without special crystal symmetries, leading to an additional
symmetry breaking), the DMI vector simplifies to ⃗D = D(ˆri j×
ˆn) (Cr´epieux and Lacroix, 1998; Moriya, 1960; Thiaville

2 Here direct imaging of the domain wall chirality (Bode et al., 2007) played
a crucial role.

Néel wall

Bloch wall

Y
X

Z

Figure 2 Bloch and N´eel configurations for a domain wall in a per-
pendicularly magnetized material. The N´eel wall has left-handed
chirality (↑←↓) considering the positive Z direction parallel and fixed
to the normal, which is depicted by the arrow ˆn and defined pointing
from the substrate to the magnetic film.

et al., 2012), with a constant D describing the strength of the
DMI in the film plane (ˆri j the vector between the two neigh-
boring spins and ˆn is the normal to the film interface). The
interfacial DMI can then be thought of as equivalent to an ef-
fective in-plane magnetic field HDMI which, acting across the
domain wall, causes a reorientation of spins from the Bloch
configuration into the N´eel configuration with a fixed chirality
(Chen et al., 2013b; Thiaville et al., 2012). The strength of the
interfacial DMI is then measured as the DMI field (Thiaville
et al., 2012), to which it is proportional. The sign of D dic-
tates the chirality of the N´eel domain wall, and, consequently,
together with the sign of the spin Hall angle, the direction of
the domain wall motion under SHE torque 3.
Because of the crucial role that the interfacial DMI plays
in stabilizing chiral spin structures as well as in attaining
extremely efficient domain wall motion, it is of utmost im-
portance for the magnetic community to be able to accu-
rately measure and predict the magnitude and sign of D in
heavy metal (HM)/ferromagnet (FM) combinations in order
to be able to optimize these relevant effects. However, de-
spite a rapidly increasing number of works quantifying the
DMI through different experimental techniques, a remarkable
spread of data is currently present in the literature and sys-
tematic studies or reviews are still rare (Choe and You, 2018).
Not only are different measurement techniques found to pro-
vide contradictory values of D for nominally the same sys-
tem, but controversies are also present when utilizing the same
method on nominally identical stacks, or different methods on
the same sample (Shahbazi et al., 2019; Soucaille et al., 2016).
The most commonly used experimental techniques that in

3 The sign of D depends on the convention chosen in relation with the Hamil-
tonian 1.1 which can be either positive or negative. Throughout this review
we use the plus sign in the Hamiltonian, so that positive D corresponds
to N´eel domain walls with the right-handed (clockwise) chirality (↑→↓ or
↓←↑), while negative D corresponds to N´eel domain walls with the left-
handed (anticlockwise) chirality (↑←↓ or ↓→↑), where up direction is de-
fined by the normal in Fig.2


4

recent years have been employed to measure D in HM/FM
structures can be broadly divided into three categories:

1. Domain wall methods, where D is extracted by either
measuring the domain wall velocity or energy as a func-
tion of an in-plane magnetic field, or by measuring do-
main wall spacing in stripe domain phases, or by di-
rectly measuring the domain wall internal structure;

2. Spin wave methods, where D is extracted by measuring
the non-reciprocity of propagating spin waves, owing to
the presence of DMI, in in-plane magnetised films;

3. Spin-orbit torque methods, where D is extracted by
measuring the field shift of the out-of-plane hysteresis
loop under an in-plane magnetic field.

With this literature review we aim at providing an accu-
rate analysis of the current state-of-the-art regarding measure-
ments of the interfacial DMI constant D based on the different
techniques summarized above. Therefore, Sections II, III, and
IV are devoted to analyze each of the three main classes of
techniques mentioned above. In particular, in each section we
start with a theoretical background, followed by an overview
of the relevant experimental methodologies and then a num-
ber of detailed tables with a collection of the relevant results
published in the literature. Finally, for each of the three above
sections, we will provide a critical discussion of advantages
and limitations of each experimental technique. The last sec-
tion of this review article, Section V, is devoted to a compari-
son and discussion of the methods and results obtained by the
three classes of methods analyzed in the previous sections, as
well as to final considerations about open problems and chal-
lenges. In particular, we address crucial aspects of the current
research, such as the reliability of the different techniques, the
choice of material combinations to achieve large/small, nega-
tive/positive DMI, and the reasons for the spread of the results
(e.g. sample/interface quality, growth conditions and reliabil-
ity of the measuring techniques).

We anticipate that, with regard to the available literature,
it is out of the scope of the present work to give definitive
recipes to prepare specific interfaces with a controlled value
of DMI, evaluate the level of uncertainty of the different mea-
surement methods, or classify the methods clearly according
to their applicability. Therefore, one should consider our syn-
optic Figs. 28-29 as general guides to explore measurement
methods and ranges of values of common heterostructures.
We emphasize instead the need for more systematic studies
and hope that this review will stimulate the community to
tackle metrological aspects of the measurement of the DMI
at interfaces.

II. Domain wall methods

A. Method overview

In ultra-thin films with PMA, Bloch domain walls are mag-
netostatically favored over N´eel DWs4. However, the inter-
facial DMI manifests itself as a local effective in-plane mag-
netic field HDMI that acts on the domain wall which, when
large enough to overcome the magnetostatic energy coming
from the shape of the wall, converts Bloch DWs into N´eel
DWs with a chirality determined by the sign of D (Chen et al.,
2013b; Thiaville et al., 2012). By tuning the spin texture of
the DWs towards a chiral N´eel configuration, the interfacial
DMI changes the static and dynamic properties of the DWs
(Thiaville et al., 2012).
The direct observation of chiral magnetization states in
presence of a DMI (Bode et al., 2007; Heinze, 2000) was the
key for understanding the modified DW dynamics. Indeed,
first estimates of the DMI strength were obtained by fitting
DW energies and numerical simulations of DW imaging in
FM mono-/double-layers on tungsten heavy metal substrates
(Bode et al., 2007; Ferriani et al., 2008; Heide et al., 2008;
Zakeri et al., 2010). A further experimental technique used to
extract a quantitative value of D was the measurement of DW
velocities driven by an electric current as a function of in-
plane magnetic fields (Torrejon et al., 2014). This is not sur-
prising, given the importance of DMI in these systems in the
context of current-induced domain wall motion experiments
(Emori et al., 2013; Ryu et al., 2013). At the same time, it
was proven that D could also be inferred by measuring mag-
netic field driven DW velocities (Hrabec et al., 2014; Je et al.,
2013). HDMI, and thus D, is extracted by analyzing the de-
pendence of the DW velocity on the in-plane magnetic fields,
which - added or subtracted to the HDMI - can enhance or re-
duce the DW speed.
Following these early investigations (Hrabec et al., 2014;

Je et al., 2013; Ryu et al., 2013; Torrejon et al., 2014), sev-
eral further works have used DW motion, induced by either
current or field, to estimate the strength and sign of the in-
terfacial DMI in different material systems.
Nucleation of
reverse domains, which is a necessary step to study the mo-
tion of DWs, was shown to be dependent on D (Pizzini et al.,
2014), which established another path to access the magnitude
and sign of D. Finally, also the static properties of domains
were shown to be altered by the presence of DMI. This was
observed from two points of view: firstly, the domain width
is altered due the modification of the DW energy originated
from DMI (Moreau-Luchaire et al., 2016). Secondly, the DMI
affects the stability of reversed domains and their field of anni-
hilation (Hiramatsu et al., 2014). Both effects have been used
to estimate the magnitude of D.

4 However, N´eel DWs become energetically more favorable when the film is
patterned into very narrow wires (Koyama et al., 2011).


5

χ
q

Δ

z

y

x

M
Φ

Figure 3 Sketch of the collective coordinates used to describe DW
dynamics in different types of 1D models: q is the domain wall posi-
tion, Φ the angle of the projection of the magnetization M in the x–y
plane, ∆ the width, and χ the tilting angle of the DW.

DW dynamics in the presence of DMI can be understood
making use of analytical 1D models. One-dimensional DW
models have been established as useful tools to support com-
putationally costly micromagnetic simulations as well as to
interpret experimental results. As the name suggests, the 1D
models for DW dynamics are based on the approximation that
the magnetization M varies along one direction only, namely
the axis of a narrow wire, usually identified with x, as depicted
in Fig. 3.
The origins of the 1D models can be traced back to the orig-
inal description of Bloch walls by F. Bloch (Bloch, 1932). The
simplest form of the 1D model was introduced by Walker and
Slonczewski (Malozemoff and Slonczewski, 1979; Schryer
and Walker, 1974) in the 1970s5, to study DW dynamics in
PMA materials under the influence of an applied perpendic-
ular field.
Here DW dynamics was described in terms of
two time-dependent variables (see Fig. 3): the DW position
q(t) along the wire axis, and the DW angle Φ(t), defined as
the in-plane (x–y) angle of the internal DW magnetization M
with respect to the positive x axis6. The q − Φ model was
later extended by Sobolev et al. (1995, 1994) to describe DW
dynamics in PMA materials under in-plane fields. Thiaville
et al. (2002) next adapted the 1D model to systems with in-
plane magnetic anisotropy, using the domain wall width ∆(t)
as an additional time-dependent variable in a revised q−Φ−∆
model.
More recently, several other contributions have been in-
cluded in the 1D model to take into account newly discovered
effects, such as the STTs (Thiaville et al., 2005; Zhang and
Li, 2004), the SOTs (Boulle et al., 2012; Hayashi et al., 2012;
Martinez et al., 2013a,b; Seo et al., 2012) (see Eq. 2.2), and
the DMI (Emori et al., 2013; Martinez et al., 2013a; Thiaville
et al., 2012). In this context, D is then derived according to

5 The 1D model was reported earlier by L. R. Walker, Bell Telephone Labo-
ratories Memorandum, 1956 (unpublished). A description of this work can
be found in J.F. Dillon Jr., Domains and Domain Walls, in: Magnetism,
Vol. III, edited by G. T. Rado and H. Suhl (Academic, New York, 1963).
6 According to these conventions, Φ = 0 (π) corresponds to a right (left)
handed chiral N´eel DW, while Φ = ±π/2 corresponds to a Bloch DW.

Emori et al., 2013:

D = µ0HDMIMS∆,
(2.1)

where MS is the saturation magnetization, and ∆ = √A/Keff
is the DW width parameter, with A being the exchange stiff-
ness and Keff = KU − 1

2µ0M2
S the effective perpendicular
anisotropy constant, corresponding to the intrinsic perpendic-
ular anisotropy constant KU decreased by the demagnetizing
energy 1

2µ0M2
S.
Additions of thermal fluctuations (Martinez et al., 2007)
and of spatially dependent pinning (Consolo and Martinez,
2012) helped to make the 1D model more realistic. Further-
more, considering experiments of fast current-driven DW mo-
tion (Ryu et al., 2012), Boulle et al. (2013) proposed to in-
clude DW tilting as an additional time-dependent variable χ(t)
(defined as the angle of the DW normal plane with respect
to the positive x-axis), which led to the development of the
q − Φ − χ model. Very recently the 1D model was extended to
implement all four collective coordinates, namely q−Φ−∆−χ,
with the aim of improving the agreement with experimental
observations and micromagnetic simulations when large in-
plane fields are applied (Nasseri et al., 2017). The same au-
thors later showed that the simple two coordinate q−Φ model
can grant higher accuracy when combined with an ansatz
(which links collective coordinates to magnetization compo-
nents) that takes into account magnetization canting within the
domains under an in-plane field (Nasseri et al., 2018).
Here, we provide a summary for the different DW-based
techniques, explaining the underlying models (Sec. II.B), re-
viewing the main results achieved regarding the determination
of D (Sec. II.C), and highlighting the respective advantages
and limitations (Sec. II.D).

B. Theory and models

1. Current-driven domain wall motion

The driving mechanism behind the current-induced motion
of DWs in heavy metal/ferromagnet bilayers with PMA is now
widely believed to be due to a combination of SHE and DMI,
while the iSGE torque is considered to be negligible (Emori
et al., 2013; Martinez et al., 2014; Ryu et al., 2013), as the
latter acts to stabilize Bloch walls (Miron et al., 2011), and
does not have the correct symmetry to drive DWs directly
(Emori et al., 2013; Khvalkovskiy et al., 2013). The SHE
in the heavy metal converts an in-plane charge current into a
transverse spin current that gives rise to spin accumulation at
the interface between the two layers, with consequent spin-
current diffusion into the ferromagnet. This spin-current can
interact with the local magnetization by exerting a torque on it,
known as the SHE spin-orbit torque (SHE-SOT)7. According

7 To be precise, field-like and damping-like torques can occur as a result of
iSGE or SHE effects.


6

to the 1D model, the amplitude of the effective field associated
with the SHE-SOT is expressed as (Khvalkovskiy et al., 2013;
Thiaville et al., 2012):

HSHE =
ℏθSH|Je|
2µ0|e|MSd cos(Φ),
(2.2)

where θSH is the spin Hall angle, Je is the electron current
density, d is the thickness of the ferromagnetic film, and Φ
is the internal in-plane DW angle as defined in Fig. 3. As
mentioned earlier, the SHE-SOT can move DWs only if they
possess a N´eel component (i.e. Φ � ±π/2) in their spin struc-
ture, due to the interfacial DMI. The direction in which DWs
move with current depends both on the sign of the spin Hall
angle θSH, determined by the spin-orbit coupling constant of
the heavy metal, and on the sign of D (i.e. on the chirality of
the DW). Micromagnetic simulations and 1D model predict
that the maximum velocity of DWs driven by the SHE-SOT
increases with the magnitude of D, and saturates for larger
currents showing a clear plateau (Lemesh and Beach, 2019;
P. del Real et al., 2017; Thiaville et al., 2012).
The current-driven DW dynamics is dramatically affected
by the application of an in-plane magnetic field Hx along the
current direction. It is indeed due to this that DW velocity
measurements as a function of Hx provide a means to quan-
tify D. Given a fixed J, it is observed that N´eel DWs with the
same chirality ↑→↓ and ↓←↑ have the same velocity when
Hx = 0, while they move with different velocities under a
non-vanishing Hx. In particular, for a given sign of Hx, the
DW type for which Hx is parallel to HDMI moves faster while
the other kind, where Hx partially compensates HDMI, slows
down with respect to its velocity at Hx = 0. The situation
is reversed by changing the sign of the applied Hx. This re-
markable behaviour has an important consequence: both DWs
stop moving for a certain |Hx|, equal in strength but opposite
in sign for ↑→↓ and ↓←↑ DWs respectively, as schematically
shown in Fig. 4.
The applied Hx under which these N´eel DWs stop moving
– typically referred to as the “compensating” or “stopping”
field – is the field that, opposing the DMI, restores a Bloch
DW configuration, for which indeed no motion is expected
via SHE-SOT. As such, this “compensating” field H∗
x can be
considered equivalent in strength (but opposite in sign) to the
HDMI acting locally across the DWs. In other words, because
of the change in the DW internal magnetization angle (Ryu
et al., 2012), N´eel DWs move faster or slower depending on
whether the effective in-plane field experienced by the DW is
enhanced (Hx +HDMI) or decreased (Hx −HDMI), respectively.
In the latter case, DWs stop moving for Hx = H∗
x = −HDMI,
when they become Bloch walls, and they reverse direction of
motion for Hx > −HDMI, when the N´eel configuration is re-
established but with an opposite chirality. However, identify-
ing H∗
x with HDMI is valid only if conventional STT, due to
the spin-polarized current in the ferromagnet, (Berger, 1996;
Slonczewski, 1996) can be neglected. When a significant STT
is present, the relationship between the H∗
x and HDMI in the 1D

HX=0
HX=+HDMI 
vDW1=vDW2
vDW1=0
vDW2≠0

+HDMI
HX

VDW
c)

a)
b)

-HDMI

J
HM

DW1
DW2

vDW1
vDW2

vDW2
vDW1

J

DW1
DW2

vDW2
HM

HX

Figure 4 Sketch of the dynamics of DWs driven by current in the
absence (a) or presence (b) of an applied in-plane field Hx. The
white arrows indicate DW velocity. The strength of Hx applied in
(b) matches that of the DMI field HDMI, thus stopping the motion
of DW1. A sketch of the velocity for the two DWs as a function of
applied Hx is illustrated in (c).

model becomes (Emori et al., 2013; Ryu et al., 2013):

H∗
x = HDMI + sgn(θSH)2

π
µBP

γeMS∆|Je|,
(2.3)

where µB is the Bohr magneton, P is the spin current polariza-
tion, and γ is the gyromagnetic ratio. Eq. 2.3 implies that H∗
x
can depend on the amplitude of the current used to drive DWs.
When only a modest dependence of H∗
x on Je is observed, as
for instance in Karnad et al. (2018) and Ryu et al. (2014), it is
possible to conclude that the contribution from STT is small.
In any case, once HDMI is determined, the magnitude of D is
derived through Eq. 2.1, while its sign is inferred from the di-
rection of the DW motion and the sign of the spin Hall angle
θSH.
The dependence of the DW velocity on an in-plane field
for a fixed current density can be analytically described in the
context of the 1D model, taking into account STT, SHE-SOT
and DMI (Emori et al., 2013; Ryu et al., 2013; Thiaville et al.,
2012). As seen in Fig. 4, the DW velocity is expected to be
approximately linear with Hx around the “compensating” field
H∗
x, and some experimental works derive HDMI by linearly fit-
ting the data (Ryu et al., 2013; Torrejon et al., 2014). In some
cases, it has been observed that the DW velocity remains small
or null in a quite large range of Hx around H∗
x (Lo Conte et al.,

2017, 2015; Ryu et al., 2014), consistent with thermally acti-
vated creep regime, and strong pinning effects. To account for
it, the 1D model has been extended to include an effective pin-
ning potential both without (Lo Conte et al., 2017; Ryu et al.,
2014), and with thermal fields (Lo Conte et al., 2015) to de-
scribe the influence of thermal fluctuations. In both cases, the
modified 1D model has provided good agreement with the ex-
perimental data and has been used to extract HDMI. The range
of Hx values for which the DW velocity is negligible has been
observed to decrease upon increasing the current density, due
to a reduced influence of pinning (Ryu et al., 2014).
A few papers have shown that D can also be quantified


7

through current-driven DW dynamics by measuring the de-
pendence of the DW depinning efficiency, rather than the DW
velocity, on the in-plane field Hx (Franken et al., 2014; Kim
et al., 2018a). The efficiency of DW depinning is defined as:

ϵ = µ0
dHSHE

dJe
,
(2.4)

and is measured as the slope of the out-of-plane depinning
field as a function of Je.
The DW depinning efficiency
changes as a function of Hx, due to the corresponding vari-
ation of the DW internal structure. In particular, ϵ is found to
vanish at a certain H∗
x, equal in strength but opposite in sign
for ↑→↓ and ↓←↑ DWs. Similarly to what was already dis-
cussed for the DW velocity dependence on Hx, this in-plane
field H∗
x for which ϵ = 0 represents the field at which a Bloch
DW configuration is restored, and can thus be identified with
HDMI.

2. Field-driven domain wall motion

The simplest and most common way to move DWs in PMA
materials is by applying a perpendicular field Hz. To minimize
the Zeeman energy associated with Hz, domains with magne-
tization along the field direction expand at the expense of the
others, leading to DW motion. Field-driven DW dynamics are
typically classified into three distinctive regimes – creep, de-
pinning, and flow – which occur in succession upon increasing
Hz, as shown in Fig. 5a.
For sufficiently low driving fields DWs move in the ther-
mally activated creep regime where they interact strongly
with disorder, and their velocity grows exponentially as v ∼
exp(−Hz)−1/4 (Chauve et al., 2000; Lemerle et al., 1998).
Upon increasing Hz above a critical value, known as the de-
pinning field Hdep, disorder starts to become irrelevant and the
DW velocity grows as v ∼ (Hz − Hdep)β (Chauve et al., 2000),
with β being the depinning exponent at T = 0 as in Fig. 5a. Fi-
nally, for Hz ≫ Hdep the DW enters the flow regime where the
velocity increases linearly with Hz up to the so-called Walker
field HW, which marks a significant decrease in DW velocity,
due to a change in its internal dynamics (Metaxas et al., 2007).
For Hz ≫ HW the DW recovers a linear flow with Hz, albeit
with a reduced mobility dv/dH.
With the exceptions of a few works (Ajejas et al., 2017;

Ju´e et al., 2016a; Krizakova et al., 2019; Pham et al., 2016;
de Souza Chaves et al., 2019; Vaˇnatka et al., 2015), the
DMI has been mostly quantified through experiments of field-
driven DW motion in the creep regime, which is addressed
below. Methods to extract the DMI from DW dynamics in the
flow regime will be discussed later.

a. Creep regime
In the creep regime, DWs are driven by mod-
est fields (typically down to a few percent of Hdep) and move
slowly by thermal activation, interacting strongly with disor-
der of various origin (pinning defects, film thickness varia-
tions, MS inhomogeneities, etc). The DW creep dynamics is

creep
  depin.
flow

T>0
T=0

Hdep
Hz

vDW
steady

HW

vDW
a)
b)

creep
  depin.
flow

T>0
T=0

Hdep
Hz

vDW
steady
precess

HW
Hz

vDW
a)
b)

Figure 5 Dependence of the DW velocity vDW as a function of in-
creasing applied field. In (a) the three regimes - creep, depinning and
flow - are visible. The depinning transition, which is abrupt at zero
temperature, shows some rounding due to thermal effects. At higher
applied fields (b), two distinct regimes can be distinguished within
the flow regime, namely steady and precessional flow. The drop in
the velocity is called Walker breakdown.

understood in terms of the motion of a one-dimensional elas-
tic line in a two-dimensional disordered potential. The depen-
dence of the DW velocity v on the applied field Hz is described
by the so-called creep law (Chauve et al., 2000; Lemerle et al.,
1998):

v = v0 exp [−ζ(µ0Hz)−µ],
(2.5)

where v0 is the characteristic speed proportional to the attempt
frequency for DW propagation, ζ is a scaling constant, and
µ = 1/4 is the scaling exponent for the 1D elastic line.
Creep motion of DWs driven by a perpendicular field Hz is
significantly altered by the simultaneous presence of an in-
plane field Hx, similarly to what already discussed for the
current-driven case (see Sec. II.B.1). Indeed, it is observed
experimentally that when a circular magnetic bubble expands
under the application of Hz only, the radial symmetry is main-
tained and the bubble grows isotropically – thus retaining its
original shape. However, the symmetry is broken when the
bubble is expanded under the application of both Hz and Hx,
as N´eel ↑→↓ and ↓←↑ DWs acquire different velocities along
the direction of the applied Hx. This circumstance was first
observed in Kabanov et al. (2010) for continuous films of
Pt/Co/Pt (see Fig. 6), mentioning the interfacial DMI as a pos-
sible origin. Only later it was fully understood and modelled
in the context of DW creep.
The first model proposed to explain the asymmetric motion
of N´eel DWs with the in-plane field (Je et al., 2013), suggested


8

Figure 6 First observation by magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE)
of the asymmetric expansion of a bubble under in-plane magnetic
field in a continuous film of Pt/Co/Pt. Arrows show the in-plane field
directions. From Kabanov et al., 2010.

to modify the creep law (Eq. 2.5) by changing the scaling pa-
rameter ζ to take into account the dependence of DW energy
on the in-plane field (Je et al., 2013):

ζ(Hx) = ζ0[σ(Hx)/σ(0)]1/4,
(2.6)

where ζ0 is a scaling constant and σ is the DW energy density.
The dependence of DW energy density on the in-plane field
has been calculated as (Je et al., 2013; Thiaville et al., 2012):

σ(Hx) = σ0 − π2∆µ2
0M2
S

8KD
(Hx + HDMI)2,
(2.7)

when the condition |Hx + HDMI| < 4KD/πµ0MS is satisfied. In
this case the effective field acting on the DW is not strong
enough to fully convert it into a N´eel DW. Otherwise, for
higher fields and fully N´eel DWs the expression becomes:

σ(Hx) = σ0 + 2KD∆ − π∆µ0MS|Hx + HDMI|.
(2.8)

In these equations, σ0 = 4 √AKeff is the Bloch DW en-
ergy density, ∆ = √A/Keff is the domain wall width param-
eter, and KD = Nxµ0M2
S/2 is the DW shape anisotropy en-
ergy density8, with the demagnetising factor of the DW given
by Nx = ln(2)d/(π∆), with d the magnetic film thickness
(Tarasenko et al., 1998). In other words, this model predicts
that the effective in-plane field acting locally on the N´eel DWs
on either side of the bubble can be increased (decreased) if Hx
and HDMI have the same (opposite) sign, resulting in smaller
(larger) DW energy σ and thus a faster (slower) DW, just as
for the current-driven case (see Fig. 7).
The field H∗
x = −HDMI at which N´eel DWs are converted
into Bloch DWs is then equal in magnitude but opposite in

8 KD represents the fact that Bloch DWs are magnetostatically more stable
in the absence of DMI due to the high PMA of the films.

Figure 7 (a-b) Dynamics of bubble DWs driven by perpendicular
field µ0Hz=3 mT in the absence (a) or presence (b) of an in-plane
field µ0Hx=50 mT in a Ta(5 nm)/Pt(2.5 nm)/Co(0.3 nm) thin film
with PMA. Each image is obtained by adding four sequential images
with a fixed time step (0.4 s), which are captured using a magneto-
optical Kerr effect microscope. The blue box in (b) designates the
field of measurement. From Je et al., 2013. (c) A typical symmetric
profile of the DW moving left and right as a function of the in-plane
field Hx in Ta(5 nm )/Co20Fe60B20(0.8 nm)/MgO(2 nm) thin film.
Here, the velocity minima occur at |Hx| = HDMI. From Khan et al.,
2016.

sign for ↑↓ and ↓↑ DWs, respectively. It is important to no-
tice that, differently from the current-driven case, field-driven
Bloch DWs do not stop moving under the in-plane field H∗
x,
since the perpendicular field Hz keeps expanding the magnetic
bubble to minimize Zeeman energy. Rather, in field-driven ex-
periments, |H∗
x| = HDMI corresponds to a minimum in DW ve-
locity. In this simple model, the velocity for each type of DW
should be symmetric around its own minimum, as in Fig. 7c,
although in many experimental cases it is not. It follows that
in the absence of DMI, i.e. when the bubble DW is in the
Bloch configuration, both sides of the bubble have the same
velocity dependence with Hx, show a minimum at Hx = 0
and are symmetric around Hx = 0 (Kim et al., 2015a). This
model can be used to fit the dependence of bubble DW ve-
locities on in-plane field using three fitting parameters: v0, ζ0,
and HDMI itself. Alternatively, the scaling parameters v0 and
ζ0 can be extracted separately as the intercept and gradient of
a linear fit to the curve ln(v) vs. H−1/4
z
for Hx = 0, thus leav-
ing HDMI as the only fitting parameter of the v dependence
on Hx. Once HDMI has been determined, the magnitude of D
is derived through Eq. 2.1, while its sign is inferred from the
orientation of the bubble asymmetry with respect to the Hx
direction.
This modified creep model, in which the in-plane field af-
fects DW dynamics only through a variation of domain wall
energy, has been successfully applied to fit several experimen-


9

Figure 8
Example of asymmetry of the domain wall ve-
locity
profile
as
a
function
of
the
in-plane
field
(red
dots)
for
a
set
of
multilayers
with
nominal
structure
Si/SiO2/X(t)/Co20Fe60B20(1
nm)/MgO(2
nm)/Ta(1
nm)
with
four underlayers X(t): W (2 nm, (a)), W (3 nm, (b)), TaN (1 nm, (c)),
and Hf (1 nm, (d)). All cases are highly asymmetric in the velocity
profile, even showing a local maximum as for the latter case (d).
Note that the velocity in the direction orthogonal to the in-plane field
(black squares) remains symmetric. From Soucaille et al., 2016.

tal data and estimate the interfacial DMI constant D (Hrabec
et al., 2014; Je et al., 2013; Khan et al., 2016; Kim et al.,
2017a; Ku´swik et al., 2018; Petit et al., 2015; Shahbazi et al.,
2018; Wells et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2016b). However, for a
growing number of experiments, as for instance in Fig. 8, the
model fails to provide an adequate description of the data,
which often show an asymmetric behavior around the mini-
mum velocity (Cao et al., 2018a; Ju´e et al., 2016b; Kim et al.,
2018a; Lau et al., 2016; Lavrijsen et al., 2015; Pellegren et al.,
2017; Shahbazi et al., 2019; Shepley et al., 2018; Soucaille
et al., 2016), a local peak in velocity (Balk et al., 2017; Lavri-
jsen et al., 2015; Soucaille et al., 2016), or even a maximum
in velocity in the flow regime (Vaˇnatka et al., 2015).
To explain these non-symmetric results, several different
mechanisms have been suggested.
Ju´e et al. (2016b) pro-
posed to neglect any DW energy contribution, and consider
a DW chirality-dependent damping, which acts as a dissipa-
tive SOT on the DW: this damping would modulate the at-
tempt frequency for DW motion, and would thus modify the
characteristic speed v0 of the creep law (see Eq. 2.5). On the

contrary, Lavrijsen et al. (2015) suggested that chiral damp-
ing could not be an explanation of the asymmetry of their own
results, as v0 was found to be symmetric with respect to Hx.
The importance to consider possible Hx dependences on both
creep parameters v0 and ζ (not necessarily related to chiral
damping) has been highlighted in Balk et al. (2017) and She-
pley et al. (2018). While Shepley et al. showed that the de-
pendence on Hx is asymmetric for both v0 and ζ, Balk et al.
modelled their results through a modified creep law that takes
for both parameters a dependence on Hx into account. By
combining Eqs. 2.5, and 2.6, with their expression for v0, they
were able to fit velocity vs Hx curves that showed a local peak
around Hx = 0, introducing a local anisotropy due to pinning
Kpin, and having ζ0 and HDMI as fitting parameters.
Several analytical and numerical studies were devoted to
understanding these features. Kim et al. (2016a) attributed
the asymmetry in the DW energy density σ, to the asymmetric
variation of the DW width with Hx, later confirmed by micro-
magnetic simulations (Sarma et al., 2018). Lau et al. (2016)
described the velocity asymmetry in terms of the Wulff con-
struction, which yields a methodology to determine the shape
of a magnetic bubble, although it does not explicitly provide
a model for the velocity as a function of in-plane field. They
also speculated that nucleation and annihilation of Bloch lines
may be responsible for a peculiar flattening of magnetic bub-
bles, which could in turn cause the observed velocity asym-
metry. This again was confirmed through micromagnetic sim-
ulations by Sarma et al. (2018). Pellegren et al. (2017) argued
that under an applied magnetic field Hx, where the DW energy
density σ becomes anisotropic with respect to the DW orien-
tation in the film plane, the correct elastic energy that should
be considered to describe the creep regime does not simply
identify with σ, as typically assumed in the phenomenologi-
cal model of creep (Lemerle et al., 1998). Rather, to repro-
duce the asymmetry in their velocity curves, they propose that
σ should be replaced by the DW stiffness �σ = σ + σ′′, with
σ′′ =
∂2σ
∂Θ2 , where Θ is the azimuthal angle of the DW nor-
mal. Interestingly, the HDMI value extracted using this stiff-
ness model was found to be higher than the field at which the
minimum in velocity is observed. In a later work (Lau et al.,
2018), the same authors proposed to upgrade the stiffness
model, by taking into account a possible variation of the char-
acteristic speed v0 with Hx, which they also speculate could be
due to a chiral damping mechanism. Through this improved
model, they could fit velocity curves as a function of Hx that
are not only asymmetric about the minimum, but also show a
crossover between DW velocities at opposite sides of the bub-
ble. More recently, another model was advanced by Shahbazi
et al. (2019) to explain the presence of both asymmetry and
DW crossover in the velocity curves. Here, the DW depinning
field Hdep is allowed to vary with Hx in a way determined from
micromagnetic simulations. Notably, this work shows that the
velocity minimum underestimates HDMI, as was also found for
the stiffness model (Pellegren et al., 2017). This is also con-
firmed by Hartmann et al. (2019) and G´ehanne et al. (2020):
the former reconsidered the change of the DW stiffness due


10

to deformation as an angular shape, and minimizing the en-
ergy of the system with a semi-analytical approach they could
calculate the velocity profile and show that the minimum of
the velocity does not occur at HDMI. The latter showed that
Hx can also modify the characteristic length scale of pinning,
in strong correlation with the DW width, again implying that
the minimum of the velocity could not correspond to the HDMI
field.

b. Flow regime
According to the 1D model (Thiaville et al.,

2012), the presence of DMI significantly increases the Walker
field HW. Indeed, in samples with a strong enough DMI to
convert the wall to a fully N´eel form, HW is proportional to
HDMI :

HW ∝ αHDMI,
(2.9)

where α is the Gilbert damping constant (Thiaville et al.,
2012). The DW velocity at Walker breakdown can thus be
expressed as:

vW = γ0
∆
α HW ∼ π

2γ D

MS
,
(2.10)

where γ0 is the gyromagnetic ratio. In contrast to the pre-
diction of the 1D model, it is found experimentally and con-
firmed by 2D micromagnetic simulations that in samples with
large DMI, the DW velocity does not decrease at fields larger
than HW, but instead reaches a plateau (Ajejas et al., 2017;
Pham et al., 2016; Yoshimura et al., 2016). This fact origi-
nates from the complex meander-like structure that the DW
adopts at velocities above HW, with continuously nucleation
and annihilation of pairs of vertical Bloch lines (Pham et al.,
2016; Yoshimura et al., 2016). Measurements of this roughly
constant velocity, which corresponds to vW, provide a simple
way to determine D for samples with large DMI. A combina-
tion of experiments and modelling has been used to show that
D is also associated with the value of Hz at which the end of
the plateau is reached (Krizakova et al., 2019).
In other works (Ajejas et al., 2017; Pham et al., 2016;

de Souza Chaves et al., 2019; Vaˇnatka et al., 2015) measure-
ments of the minimum DW velocity as a function of Hx in the
flow regime have also been used to quantify D: in the flow
regime the DW velocity depends only on DW width (not DW
energy) and this assumes the minimum value when the DW is
Bloch. Indeed, it has been shown that under certain conditions
the 1D model provides an expression for the DW velocity that
exhibits a parabolic dependence on (Hx + HDMI) (Kim et al.,
2019b).

3. Equilibrium stripe domain pattern

The demagnetized state of PMA materials consists of a
complex domain pattern, usually in the form of labyrinth
structures of domains pointing either up or down. If the thick-
ness of the sample is very small, the equilibrium domain width

can exceed the sample dimensions and such structures are not
expected. Examples of the typical patterns are shown in Fig. 9
for a multilayer of Pt/Co/Al2O3, taken from Legrand et al.
(2018). The exact demagnetized pattern depends on the direc-
tion and the history of the applied field: when an out of plane
field is applied, a maze domain structure is created (Fig. 9a),
while for an in plane field, domain walls remain almost paral-
lel and typically form a stripe structure (Fig. 9b). In the latter,
the width and the density of domains can be used to estimate
the domain wall energy. As suggested by the theory devel-
oped for infinite parallel stripe domains (Kooy and Enz, 1960;
M´alek and Kambersk´y, 1958), the domain width is a func-
tion of the domain wall energy, which includes magnetostatic,
anisotropy, Zeeman, and exchange terms. N´eel walls, favored
by DMI, have a reduced energy and, consequently the DMI
markedly affects the equilibrium domain width.
For domain widths much larger than the domain wall width,
as is generally the case for PMA materials, the magnetostatic
contribution comes only from the surfaces charges at the top
and bottom surfaces, so that DW energy is calculated as:

σDW = 2A

∆ + 2Keff∆ − π cos(Φ)|D|
(2.11)

where Φ is the same angle of the internal DW magnetization
defined in Fig. 3. The minimization of the energy with respect
to the domain width ∆ and core angle Φ gives the value of
the equilibrium domain width: a critical value Dc is obtained.
For D > Dc the preferred configuration is a N´eel wall and
for D ≤ Dc it gradually transforms into a Bloch wall as D
approaches zero.
Initially, this method was limited to N´eel walls only, with
D > Dc, and hence cos(Φ) = 1, so that the DW energy density
simplifies to σDW = σ0 − π|D|. Later, the inclusion of the an-
gle of the wall Φ in Eq.2.11 removed this limitation (Lemesh
et al., 2017; Meier et al., 2017). A further improvement took
into account the dipolar terms coming from the internal struc-
ture of the DW or/and from the DW interaction (Lemesh et al.,
2017). This is important in thicker samples, as the dipolar en-
ergy causes the internal magnetization to vary along the thick-
ness, even in the presence of DMI. To account for all these
situations, the model was extended allowing a different angle
Φ for each layer of the sample (Lemesh and Beach, 2018).
The analytical expression for the DW energy σDW as a func-
tion of the periodicity w of the domains, which is twice the
domain width, is

σDW
µ0M2
Sd = w2

d2π3

∞
�

odd n=1

1 −
�
1 + 2πnd

w
�
e− 2πnd

w

n3
(2.12)

where d is the thickness. From the experimentally obtained
domain width one can then calculate the domain wall energy,
and estimate the DMI constant using one of the previously
derived approximations.
This general method has been applied in three different
ways: comparisons to micromagnetic simulations (Legrand


11

(a)
(b)

Figure
9
MFM
domain
patterns
for
an
(a)
out-of-plane
and
(b)
in-plane
demagnetized
multilayer
composed
of
[Pt(1 nm)/Co(0.8 nm)/Al2O3(1 nm)]20.
From Supplementary
Materials of Legrand et al., 2018.

et al., 2018; Moreau-Luchaire et al., 2016), analytical estima-
tions (Wong et al., 2018; Woo et al., 2016, 2017; Yu et al.,
2017), and scaling of the energy of an experimental image
(Ba´cani et al., 2019).

4. Magnetic stripe annihilation

Two parallel domain walls in a thin film with strong enough
DMI are homochiral N´eel walls. Since the chirality of the do-
main walls is the same, either left-handed or right-handed, the
core magnetization of those parallel domain walls point in op-
posite directions. Such a pair of domains constitutes a topo-
logical structure. This situation is different from the case of
absence of DMI, where the core magnetization of the Bloch
walls point in the same direction but not in a fixed orienta-
tion. The annihilation of these two parallel N´eel walls depends
on the strength of the DMI due to the topological configura-
tion. This fact was confirmed by simulations (Hiramatsu et al.,
2014; Mart´ınez and Alejos, 2014). To annihilate the walls an
out of plane field is applied that reduces the size of the do-
main disfavored by the field. This domain achieves a mini-
mum size until the walls meet as a so-called “winding pair” to
form a 360◦ wall, which annihilates when a given value of the
out-of-plane field is exceeded. From the determination of the
field of annihilation and the minimum domain width the DMI
can be extracted when compared with the corresponding sim-
ulations (Hiramatsu et al., 2014). An example from (Benitez
et al., 2015) of the annihilation field dependence on DMI cal-
culated by means of micromagnetic simulations can be seen
in Fig. 10. More recently, a formula for the minimum width
of stripe domains was derived (Lemesh et al., 2017), using the
analytical formulation discussed in the previous section. This
allowed the extraction of the DMI value without the perfor-
mance of systematic micromagnetic simulations.
The analytical formula for the domain wall energy σDW ob-
tained from the minimum domain width wmin is given by:

σDW
µ0M2
Sd = 1

2π(ln[1+(wmin/d)2]+(wmin/d)2 ln[1+(wmin/d)−2]).

(2.13)
As in the previous method this allows extracting the value of

Figure 10 Annihilation field of two homochiral walls as a function
of the DMI value calculated from micromagnetic simulations for two
different anisotropy values. Inset: Magnetic configuration of the two
N´eel walls squeezed together by the perpendicular field. From Ben-
itez et al., 2015.

the domain wall energy density which is also a function of
the DMI constant. Using the same expressions for the energy
density as given in the previous section, one can estimate its
value.

5. Nucleation field

As stated above, the energy of a domain wall is reduced by
the presence of DMI. This modification also affects the energy
barrier relevant for nucleation of reversed domains. Pizzini
et al. (2014) showed that the nucleation process is affected
by the presence of DMI. They distinguished between nucle-
ation at the edge of the patterned sample and in the center
of the magnetic film. They showed that the nucleation of re-
versed domains at the edge depends on the value of the in-
plane applied field and it is asymmetric with respect to the
combination of the DMI sign and the in-plane field direction.
The nucleation is favored at the edge of the sample having
a nucleated wall with the core magnetization in the direction
of the in-plane field. The half-droplet model (Vogel et al.,
2006), applied in the paper, describes the nucleation of a mag-
netic domain at the side edge under the application of an in-
plane magnetic field. The out-of-plane nucleation field for a
reversed domain is:

Hn =
πσ2d

2µ0MspkBT
(2.14)

where σ is the domain wall energy associated with the bubble,
T is the temperature and p is the factor related to the waiting
time according to τ = τ0 exp(p) where τ0 is the attempt fre-
quency. The DW energy is a function of the in-plane field
and the DMI constant. From the best adjustment of their nu-
merical model to the experimental results, they were able to
estimate the DMI constant in Pt/Co/AlOx.


12

(a)
(c)

(d)
(b)

Figure 11 (a) Theoretical nucleation field as a function of the magnetic field applied perpendicular to the edge of the sample for edge and
bubble (film) nucleation as a function of the field. (b) Experimental nucleation field as a function of the magnetic field applied perpendicular
to the edge for edge and bubble (film) nucleation. (c) Schematics of the nucleation of bubble domain (red color) showing the orientation of the
wall core parallel and anti-parallel to the applied field for in-plane fields below the DMI field. (d) Calculated domain wall energy as a function
of the in-plane field for different DMI fields. (a) and (b) are from Pizzini et al., 2014, (c) and (d) from Kim et al., 2017c.

In the case of a bubble domain away from the edges, Pizzini
et al. (2014) concluded that the Zeeman energy gained within
the half droplet having a DW magnetization component par-
allel to the in-plane field is compensated by the loss of en-
ergy within the half droplet with opposite magnetization (see
the orientation of the magnetization in Fig. 11(b)), while this
is not true for an incomplete bubble nucleated at the edge.
Therefore, the nucleation field for a complete bubble is in-
dependent of the in-plane field value. This fact agrees well
with their model shown in Fig. 11(a) and their measurements
shown in Fig. 11(b).

More recently, Kim et al. (2017c) realized that such an ar-
gument does not hold for bubbles in films above a critical in-
plane field value, corresponding to the DMI field, where the
energy of the bubble is altered due to the fact that the magne-
tization at its boundary aligns with the in-plane field. Hence,
the picture in Fig. 11(c) is no longer valid. This fact leads to
a reduced value of the bubble magnetic energy and an associ-
ated reduction of the nucleation field when the in-plane field
value is increased beyond the DMI field. This was in agree-
ment with their numerical calculations as shown in Fig. 11(d).
This fact was not observed in Pizzini et al. (2014) due to the
large DMI field in the samples studied in their work.

Therefore, the critical field above which a change from a
constant nucleation field to a field dependent nucleation is ob-
served is a measure of the DMI constant, since it coincides
with the DMI field HDMI. Experimentally, this can be de-

termined from the dependence of the out-of-plane nucleation
field on the in-plane field.

6. Domain wall stray fields

Another method taking into account the static DW struc-
ture is the direct measurement of the stray field in the DW.
The stray field has a typical profile along the axis perpendic-
ular to the DW including information on the angle Φ and the
strength and sign of D (see Fig. 12). This method is limited to
low values of D ≤ Dc, i.e. when a significant angle is present.
Dc = 2µ0M2
Sd ln 2/π2 is the critical D value above which for-
mation of fully oriented N´eel walls occurs (d is the film thick-
ness). Therefore only samples with relatively small D can be
measured since Dc is typically on the scale of 0.2 mJ/m2 (see
Tab. XII). For samples with larger DMI, where fully oriented
N´eel walls are present, only a lower limit of D can be given to-
gether with its sign (Tetienne et al., 2015). Since DW widths
are of the order of 5-10 nm, the stray field profile determi-
nation requires an excellent spatial resolution, which was ex-
perimentally tackled by nitrogen vacancy (NV) magnetometry
(Gross et al., 2016).


13

Figure 12 Schematic of the stray field measurement using a NV
magnetometer. The internal DW magnetization angle ψ (Φ, in our
notation) depends on the DMI constant, resulting in different profiles
of the stray field component Bψ
x(x). From Gross et al., 2016.

7. Domain wall internal structure imaging

With the progress in the development of advanced mi-
croscopy techniques with nanometric resolution and magnetic
contrast, it has become possible to access not only the size
and distribution of magnetic domains, but also to study the de-
tailed structure of domain walls. As discussed in the previous
sections, the domain wall structure is influenced by the pres-
ence of DMI, so that from a detailed identification of the wall
structure one can in principle quantify the DMI strength. Basi-
cally four methods for spin sensitive imaging were used in lit-
erature: pioneering works were performed by spin-polarized
scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (SP-STM/STS),
the most quantitative works were done by spin-polarized low-
energy electron microscopy (SPLEEM) and in a few more
recent works Scanning electron microscopy with polariza-
tion analysis (SEMPA) and Lorentz-transmission electron mi-
croscopy (L-TEM) were employed.
Some of the earliest evidences that the DMI influences do-
main wall energies and alters DW configurations was obtained
from SP-STM of ultrathin magnetic films deposited on heavy
metal substrates such as single atomic layers of Mn or Fe
on W(110) substrates (Bode et al., 2007; Heide et al., 2008;
Heinze et al., 2011). These methods provide information on
the magnetic order at the atomic scale. In order to extract
the parameters entering the total energy of the observed non-
collinear spin structures, such as the DMI constant, simula-
tions of the images (see Fig.13) based on models describ-
ing the tunneling process in the tip (Tersoff and Hamann,
1983) and density functional theory were performed (Wort-

Figure 13 a) Simulations of SP-STM images based on Monte Carlo
calculations (Heinze, 2006) of a monolayer of Mn on W(001) at 13 K
(the inset shows the Fourier transform). b) Detailed spin structure for
the white square indicated in a) where the helical spinstructure can
be directly seen in the illustration. From Ferriani et al., 2008.

mann et al., 2001). Since the computational cost of ab ini-
tio models is large, simplified approaches were devised, com-
bining them with Monte Carlo or micromagnetic calculations
(Heide et al., 2008; Heinze, 2006). Successively, using SP-
STM, Meckler et al. (2009a,b); and Pietzsch and Wiesendan-
ger (2011) concentrated on spin spiral domains in these bilay-
ers and showed that the magnetic structure of the Fe double
layer grown on W(110) is an inhomogeneous right-rotating
cycloidal spin spiral. Meckler et al. (2009b) extracted the
magnitude of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya vector from the ex-
perimental data using analytical micromagnetic calculations.
The result was then confirmed by comparison of the measured
saturation field along the easy axis to the respective value as
obtained from Monte Carlo simulations.
More recently, spin-polarized low-energy electron mi-
croscopy (SPLEEM) has been successfully exploited to
achieve a quantification of the DMI strength in different sys-
tems (Chen et al., 2013a, 2017, 2013b, 2020; Yang et al.,
2018b). While first works give only an estimate of the DMI
constant, a remarkable development towards quantitative val-
ues is observed in literature. Here, the HM thickness depen-
dent transition from chiral N´eel walls to achiral Bloch walls is
investigated in wedge samples. From the critical thickness a
quantitative estimate of the DMI strength is obtained. In addi-
tion to SP-STM and SPLEEM, also L-TEM (Garlow et al.,
2019) and SEMPA (Corredor et al., 2017; Kloodt-Twesten
et al., 2019; Meijer et al., 2020b) have been used to quantify
the DMI strength by comparing the measured and the calcu-
lated profiles of the domain walls. In most cases micromag-
netic analytical calculations or simulations of the DW energy
or strayfield are employed.


14

C. Experimental results

1. Current-driven domain wall motion

Measurements of current-driven DW motion are performed
in wires with typical widths ranging between 1 µm and 5 µm
and lengths of a few tens of µm. Usually, the magnetization in
the wire is initially saturated by applying an out-of-plane field
Hz. Hz is then removed and a current pulse (with duration of
a few tens of ns) is applied either directly to the wire or to
an Oersted line patterned on top of the wire. In either case
the current pulse nucleates a reversed magnetic domain and a
DW is thus injected into the wire. Alternatively, one can use
a magnetic field pulse to generate domains in injection pads,
and inject them in the wires.
For measurements of DW velocities, current pulses are ap-
plied to the wire to move a DW, while the DW position along
the wire is imaged by magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE)
microscopy in polar configuration. The number and duration
of the applied current pulses is chosen to obtain a significant
displacement of the DW, at least over a few µm. Typical val-
ues of current densities fall in the range between 1010 A/m2

and 1012 A/m2. The velocity of the DW is calculated as the
ratio between the current-induced DW displacement and the
total duration of the pulses. Finally, velocities are measured
for both ↑↓ and ↓↑ DWs under different strength of Hx, keep-
ing the current density fixed, in order to determine the “com-
pensating” field H∗
x of Fig. 4.
For measurements of DW depinning efficiencies, a con-
stant current density Je is applied continuously to the wire
for a given in-plane field Hx, while the out-of-plane field Hz
is ramped up until DW motion is detected by MOKE. The
DW depinning efficiency ϵ for a given Hx is then determined
from the slope of the depinning field Hz,dep as a function of
Je. Modest current values are used, up to about 1010 A/m2, in
order to exclude Joule heating effects. Finally, ϵ is measured
for both ↑↓ and ↓↑ DWs under different strength of Hx, and
HDMI is determined as the “compensating” field H∗
x for which
ϵ = 0.
Measurements of current-driven DW motion as a function
of the in-plane field Hx have been used to extract HDMI in
several material stacks, with Co/Ni/Co, Co20Fe60B20 or Co
as ferromagnetic films, different heavy metals as underlayers
and either a heavy metal or an oxide as overlayers. Tables I,
II, and III present a summary of the DMI values measured for
Co/Ni/Co, CoFeB, and Co, respectively.
For Co/Ni/Co films (see Table I), the DMI seems to increase
upon increasing the thickness of the Pt underlayer (Ryu et al.,
2013), while it is very low when using Pd or Ir as underlayers
(Ryu et al., 2014).
For CoFeB films with Ta and MgO as underlayer and over-
layer (see Table II), the DMI values, generally small, are
spread not only in magnitude, but also in sign (Karnad et al.,
2018; Lo Conte et al., 2015; Torrejon et al., 2014).
This
can be explained by the fact that the two interfaces contribute
with small and opposite DMI values, and that the DMI at the

CoFeB/oxide interface strongly depends on its oxidation state.
Furthermore, Karnad et al. (2018) find different signs of DMI
for Ta/CoFeB/MgO depending on whether they measure DW
motion driven by current or field (see table V for the field-
driven case). Among the underlayers used with CoFeB, W
provides the highest (positive) DMI (Torrejon et al., 2014).
Finally, for Co films, Pt is the only underlayer investigated,
while overlayers are either oxides or metals (see Table III). In
the symmetric structure Pt/Co/Pt, where no DMI is expected
if the two interfaces are identical as experienced with epitax-
ial layers, either negative (Franken et al., 2014) or vanishing
(Kim et al., 2018a) DMI values are measured. This lack of
perfect compensation depends on growth conditions, oxida-
tion of the interfaces, and many other experimental conditions.
For all the other stacks the DMI is always negative and largest
in magnitude when using Ti as overlayer (Kim et al., 2018a).

2. Field-driven domain wall motion

Experiments of field-driven DW dynamics are mostly per-
formed in continuous films where magnetization reversal pro-
ceeds by nucleation and growth of magnetic bubble domains.
Only few works report studies of planar DW dynamics (i.e.
straight walls) in continuous films (Kim et al., 2017a; Pelle-
gren et al., 2017) or in µm-wide wires (Ju´e et al., 2016a; Kim
et al., 2018a). The magnetization in the continuous film/wire
is initially saturated by applying a perpendicular field Hz. A
bubble domain (or a domain separated by a planar DW) is
then nucleated by applying a short Hz pulse in the opposite
direction, through either a coil or an electromagnet. The bub-
ble domain (or the planar domain) is expanded under simulta-
neous application of continuous Hx (from an electromagnet)
and pulsed or continuous Hz (from a coil or an electromag-
net). The initial and final positions of the DW are imaged
through MOKE microscopy in polar configuration. Typical
bubble growths are in the range of at least a few tens of µm,
to avoid coalescence with other bubbles. The velocity of the
DW is measured along the direction of the applied Hx and
is calculated as the ratio between the DW displacement and
the total time during which Hz is applied – whether in pulses
or continuously. Finally, velocities are measured for both ↑↓
and ↓↑ DWs (i.e. DWs on opposite sides of the bubble) un-
der different strength of Hx, upon keeping Hz constant. In this
way velocity vs Hx curves are constructed for both DWs and
HDMI is determined either through fitting with one of the mod-
ified creep formula previously discussed (II.B.2), or simply by
finding the field for which the velocity is minimum.
Regarding the strength of the applied fields, values differ
greatly depending on the material and DW motion regime in-
vestigated. For measurements in the creep regime only modest
µ0Hz are needed – usually of a few mT depending on the de-
pinning field – while µ0Hz of hundreds of mT are used to drive
DWs in the flow regime. The maximum values of applied
µ0Hx depend instead on the strength of the DMI. In samples
with large DMI in-plane fields up to 350 mT have been used


15

Table I Overview of DMI measurements for Co/Ni/Co thin films via current-induced domain wall motion experiments. FM and NM stand
for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. HDMI is the DMI field, D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being
the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted
from figures or calculated using the parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM Top NM |µ0HDMI|
D
Ds
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mT)
(mJ/m2) (pJ/m)

Co(0.3)/Ni(0.7)/Co(0.15)

Pt(1)

TaN(5)

60
n.a.
n.a.

Ryu et al., 2013
Pt(1.5)
190
n.a.
n.a.

Pt(3)
240
n.a.
n.a.

Pt(5)
220
n.a.
n.a.

Co(0.3)/Ni(0.7)/Co(0.15)

Pd(5)

TaN(5)

12
n.a.
n.a.

Ir(3)
18
n.a.
n.a.
Ryu et al., 2014

Pt(5)
140
n.a.
n.a.

Table II Overview of DMI measurements for CoFeB thin films via current-induced domain wall motion experiments. FM and NM stand
for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. HDMI is the DMI field, D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being
the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted
from figures or calculated using the parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM Top NM |µ0HDMI|
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mT)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co20Fe60B20(1)

Hf(2.6–6)

MgO(2)

n.a.
0.38 – 0.05a 0.38 – 0.05a
-

Torrejon et al., 2014
Ta(0.5–1.3)
n.a.
0.08 – 0.07a 0.08 – 0.07a
-

TaN(0.4–6.6)
n.a.
0.04 – 0.20a 0.04 – 0.20a
+

W(2.1–3.6)
n.a.
0.24 – 0.37a 0.24 – 0.37a
+

Co20Fe60B20(1)
Ta(5)
MgO(2)
7.8
0.06
0.06
+
Lo Conte et al., 2015

Co20Fe60B20(0.8)
Ta(5)
MgO(2)
n.a.
0.03
0.02
-
Karnad et al., 2018

a The highest and lowest DMI values reported do not necessarily correspond to the extremes of the bottom layer thickness range (for instance the highest DMI
value could occur at mid thickness range).

(Cao et al., 2018a; Hrabec et al., 2014; Lavrijsen et al., 2015).
However, since the use of in-plane fields can be accompanied
by artefacts (e.g. the nucleation of bubbles can be influenced,
misalignments of the fields and crosstalk between perpendicu-
lar and in-plane electromagnets might be present), measuring
large DMI values can be problematic. A simple scheme has
been proposed to overcome the need for high Hx values (Kim
et al., 2017a), whereby the DW velocity is measured at an an-
gle θ > 0 with respect to the in-plane field direction. In this
way, the minimum of the DW velocity scales by a factor cosθ,
and becomes measurable also for samples with large DMI by
applying moderate in-plane fields.
Field-driven DW dynamics in the creep regimes have been
investigated to extract HDMI in material systems with Co/Ni
multilayers, CoFeB or Co as ferromagnetic layers, and differ-
ent combinations of heavy metals and oxides as underlayers
and overlayers. Regarding the flow regime, instead, HDMI has
been measured only for Co films as shown in Table VII. Tables
IV, V and VI present a summary of DMI measurements in the
creep regime for Co/Ni, CoFeB and Co, respectively. In the
following we highlight some of the most interesting findings
and observations of these experimental studies.
For Co/Ni multilayers (see Tab. IV), Yu et al. (2016b) stud-
ied the effect of different capping layers with a Pt under-
layer and found values for D ranging from D = 0.05 mJ/m2

(Ds= 0.05 pJ/m) for MgO to D = 0.39 mJ/m2 (Ds= 0.35 pJ/m)

to Ta. Separately, three works by the same group (Lau et al.,
2018, 2016; Pellegren et al., 2017) have reported on the asym-
metry of DW velocity curves about their minima and on the
crossover between DW velocities for ↑↓ and ↓↑ sides of mag-
netic bubbles, corresponding to a morphological change from
flattened to teardrop bubble shapes (Fig. 14). As previously
mentioned, these velocity curves have been fitted through a
model that takes into account both DW stiffness and a field-
dependent prefactor v0, showing that measurements of the
minimum in velocity can be misleading to quantify the DMI
(Lau et al., 2018). The maximum value corresponds to an un-
derlayer of Pt and a top layer of Ta/TaN with D = 0.52 mJ/m2

(Ds= 0.94 pJ/m). The range of values are larger than in Yu
et al. (2016b) but further analysis is needed to identify its ori-
gin.

Regarding CoFeB films (see Tab. V), both the respective
Co and Fe compositions (Jaiswal et al., 2017) and the post-
growth annealing temperature (Khan et al., 2016) have been
shown to play a crucial role in the magnitude of DMI. Further-
more, for low DMI values (namely, D ≲ 0.2 mJ/m2), the DW
motion technique disagrees with the values obtained by Bril-
louin Light Scattering (BLS) (Soucaille et al., 2016). Also
worth mentioning is a recent study by Diez et al. (2019b)
which showed that the DMI can be tuned in a Ta/CoFeB/MgO
system through light He+ irradiation, due to an increasing in-
terface intermixing mostly between Ta and CoFeB layers.


16

Table III Overview of DMI measurements for Co thin films via current-induced domain wall motion experiments. FM and NM stand for
ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. HDMI is the DMI field, D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being
the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted
from figures or calculated using the parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM Top NM |µ0HDMI|
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mT)
(mJ/m2) (pJ/m)

Co(0.36)
Pt(4)
Pt(1)
37
0.24
0.09
-

Franken et al., 2014

Co(0.36)
Pt(4)
Pt(2)
12.5
0.10
0.04
-

Co(0.5)
Pt(4)
Pt(2)
11
0.09
0.04
-

Co(0.5)
Pt(2)
Pt(4)
3
0.03
0.02
-

Co(0.8)
Pt(4)
AlOx(1.9)
≫40
n.a.
n.a.

Co(1)
Pt(5)
Gd(2)
280
1.00
1.00
-
Vaˇnatka et al., 2015

Co(0.93)

Pt(4)
AlOx(2)

99
0.54
0.50
-

Co(1.31)
54
0.48
0.63
-
Lo Conte et al., 2017

Co(1.37)
48
0.47
0.64
-

Co(0.9)

Pt(2.5)

Al(2.5)
107
0.87
0.78
-

Kim et al., 2018a
Co(0.9)
Ti(2.5)
197
1.42
1.28
-

Co(0.9)
W(2.5)
183
1.35
1.22
-

Co(0.5)
Pt(1.5)
0
0
0

Figure 14 Evolution of bubble domain shapes in an applied in-plane magnetic field in Co/Ni multilayers measured by perpendicular Kerr
effect. From Lau et al., 2016.

Co is the most widely studied material, specifically in com-
bination with Pt as underlayer, which can provide high DMI
magnitudes depending on the overlayer choice. DMI mea-
surements performed in the creep regime (see Tab. VI) indi-
cate that the nominally symmetric stack Pt/Co/Pt can have
positive values of Ds as high as 0.58 pJ/m (Hrabec et al.,
2014), although the same work shows that upon ensuring epi-
taxial growth, Ds reduces to almost 0. An even larger value of
0.71 pJ/m was calculated from the experimental data by Hart-
mann et al. (2019) 9. Two more studies report a vanishing
DMI (Ajejas et al., 2017; Pham et al., 2016) for Pt/Co/Pt lay-
ers measured in the flow regime (see Tab. VII), while a small
negative Ds is found in Shahbazi et al. (2018).
Another system widely investigated in the literature is the

9 In this paper the minimum velocity is found at µ0Hx ∼ 50 mT, a value
compatible with other publications which report much smaller D/Ds val-
ues as e.g. in Kim et al. (2015a). The difference is the model used to
evaluate D from the velocity minimum. Hartmann et al. (2019) calculate
µ0HDMI ≈ 170 mT, resulting in the high value of Ds = 0.71 pJ/m.

Pt/Co/Ir stack, which also gives rise to some controversial re-
sults. First principle calculations predict opposite DMI signs
for the Pt/Co and Ir/Co interfaces, which would result in an
additive effect for the Pt/Co/Ir stack (Yamamoto et al., 2016;
Yang et al., 2015). However, Hrabec et al. (2014) show that
D decreases when introducing a thin Ir top layer in a Pt/Co/Pt
stack, and even changes sign upon increasing the Ir thickness.
Similarly, Shahbazi et al. (2019) find that the magnitude of
D is smaller in Pt/Co/Ir/Ta than in Pt/Co/Ta, suggesting that
Pt/Co and Co/Ir interfaces contribute to the net DMI with
opposite signs. On the other hand, a huge increase of DMI
has been observed in Pt/Co/MgO layers, upon insertion of a
very thin Mg film between Co and MgO (Cao et al., 2018a),
providing among the highest values of Ds =
2.32 pJ/m
(D = 2.32 mJ/m2) reported in the literature.

All these results show how important the quality of the in-
terfaces is for the determination the DMI. Perfect compensa-
tion is rarely obtained for nominally symmetric interfaces, and
large variations are possible. The “controlled damage” of the
interfaces by Ar+ ion irradiation can even be an effective way


17

to tune the sign of DMI in Pt/Co/Pt films (Balk et al., 2017).
The key aspect is the influence of the growth conditions on
DMI, as extensively investigated in Lavrijsen et al. (2015) and
Wells et al. (2017). Both studies report a dramatic variation
of the DW velocity dependence with in-plane field, observed
upon changing sputter-deposition conditions, namely Ar gas
pressure, substrate temperature or chamber base pressure. In-
deed, it is speculated that such different growth conditions
may lead to different degrees of interfacial intermixing and/or
quality, resulting in a huge range of measured DMI values,
which can even change sign (Wells et al., 2017).

3. Equilibrium stripe domain pattern

In the case of the equilibrium stripe domain pattern method,
the DMI constant is estimated by measuring magnetic do-
main widths from nanometric magnetic microscopy images.
The values and systems analyzed using this method are pre-
sented in Table VIII for CoFeB and Ni/Fe and in Table IX
for Co and FeCo thin films. As the uncertainty of the mea-
surement depends heavily on the precision of the imaging
techniques, submicrometer range resolution is indispensable.
The most commonly used experimental techniques are: Scan-
ning Transmission X-ray Microscopy (STXM) (Lemesh et al.,
2018; Moreau-Luchaire et al., 2016), Magnetic Transmission
X-ray Microscopy (MTXM) (Woo et al., 2016, 2017), Mag-
netic Force Microscopy (MFM) (Agrawal et al., 2019; Ba´cani
et al., 2019; B¨uttner et al., 2017; Casiraghi et al., 2019; Davy-
denko et al., 2019; Dugato et al., 2019; Kozlov et al., 2020;
Legrand et al., 2018; Schlotter et al., 2018; Soumyanarayanan
et al., 2017), and in a few cases MOKE (Schott et al., 2021;
Wong et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2017). Most of the materials
analyzed with this method have large DMI values (Moreau-
Luchaire et al., 2016; Soumyanarayanan et al., 2017; Woo
et al., 2016). For example, Soumyanarayanan et al. (2017)
reported that the replacement of the Co layer by a layer of
FeCo increases substantially the value of D, up to a maximum
of Ds = 2.18 pJ/m for Fe(0.6)/Co(0.6). The maximum of D
corresponds to D = 2.1 mJ/m2 for a thinner magnetic layer
Fe(0.4)/Co(0.4).
Many of the analysed films are multilayers because
the additional dipolar contribution between layers stabi-
lizes skyrmions and increases the sizes of stable skyrmions
(Moreau-Luchaire et al., 2016). Legrand et al. (2018) studied
the variation of the DW internal structure along the multilayer
thickness, due to the competition of dipolar field and DMI
in Co multilayers. The domain walls in such structures have
hybrid character between Bloch and N´eel types with differ-
ent N´eel chiralities at bottom and top surfaces. Albeit being
hybrid domain walls, the DMI can be extracted comparing
the measured domain width with the one obtained using mi-
cromagnetic simulations. With the same technique symmet-
ric Pd/Co/Pd samples were also analyzed (Davydenko et al.,
2019; Dugato et al., 2019; Kozlov et al., 2020). The origin
of the DMI in such symmetric trilayers is a different residual

stress in the top and bottom of the Co/Pd interfaces due to dif-
ferent lattice matching (Davydenko et al., 2019). Dugato et al.
(2019) were able to optimize the stack with the insertion of W
between Co and Pd, resulting in an increase of D, with an op-
timal size for a W thickness of 0.2 nm and Ds = 0.65 pJ/m
(D = 1.3 mJ/m2). Kozlov et al. (2020) found a strong vari-
ation of the estimated D value, when values of the exchange
constant in the range A = 23-30 pJ/m were used in the numeri-
cal model. The range of DMI for different exchange constants
increases with the increase of the Co thickness.
Wedges of Ni on top a Fe layer with a Cu(001) substrate
were analyzed with Threshold Photoemission Magnetic Cir-
cular Dichroism with PhotoEmission Electron Microscopy
(TP-MCD-PEEM) by Meier et al. (2017). In these samples,
the DMI originates at the Ni/Fe interface due to the lack of
inversion symmetry, but the obtained D values are small be-
cause of the lack of a source of strong SOC. D increases
when those bilayers are capped with a Pt layer. Using this
method, the dependence of DMI on temperature was also
measured for Pt/Co/Cu multilayers up to a temperature of
500 K (Schlotter et al., 2018). It was found that DMI has
a stronger dependence on temperature than other magnetic
properties, like magnetocrystalline anisotropy. Polar MOKE
was used to measure the variation of D induced by electric
fields in Pt(3 nm)/Co(0.49 nm)/AlOx(6 nm) thin films (Schott
et al., 2021). The electric field also produces variations of
the magnetization and anisotropy constant, which need to be
quantified to obtain the DMI energy. D was measured only
under electric field and the variation of D measured for an
electric field of 133 MV/m was 0.14 mJ/m2 and 0.26 mJ/m2

assuming an exchange constant of 7.5 pJ/m and 16 pJ/m, re-
spectively.

4. Magnetic stripe annihilation

With this method, the first step is to nucleate two domain
walls in a perpendicularly magnetized sample. The two walls
are then manipulated with an out-of-plane field to minimize
their distance until the two domain walls collapse. This anni-
hilation field and the minimum width of the domain separat-
ing the walls before its collapse depend on D. The values of
D extracted using this method are shown in Table X. As for
the equilibrium stripe domain pattern technique (Sec. II.C.3),
this method is based on magnetic imaging. For this purpose,
MTXM (Jaiswal et al., 2017; Litzius et al., 2017), STXM
(Woo et al., 2016, 2017) and MOKE (Yu et al., 2016a) have
been used. All the samples are magnetic thin films or wide
patterned tracks, to allow high number of domains and the
manipulation of the walls.
In the original study (Benitez
et al., 2015), the nucleated domain walls were parallel and
analysed using a combination of Lorentz transmission elec-
tron microscopy (L-TEM) and polar Kerr.
In later studies
(Jaiswal et al., 2017; Litzius et al., 2017; Woo et al., 2016,
2017; Yu et al., 2016a), the annihilation field was studied
independently of the shape and boundary of domains. Ben-


18

Table IV Overview of DMI measurements for Co/Ni multilayers via field-induced domain wall motion experiments in the creep regime.
FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. HDMI is the DMI field, D is the interfacial DMI constant and
Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in
italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
|µ0HDMI|
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mT)
(mJ/m2) (pJ/m)

Co(0.1)/[Ni(0.1)/Co(0.1)]4
Pt(4)

MgO(2)
15.59
0.05
0.05
-

Yu et al., 2016b
Cu(2)
19.23
0.12
0.11
-

Pt(2)
34.88
0.20
0.18
+

Ta(2)
103.86
0.39
0.35
-

[Co(0.2)/Ni(0.6)]2/Co(0.2)
Pt(2.5)
Ta(0.5)/TaN(3)
60
0.21
0.38
-
Lau et al., 2016

[Co(0.2)/Ni(0.6)]2/Co(0.2)
Pt(2.5)
Ta(0.5)/TaN(6)
106
0.37
0.67
-
Pellegren et al., 2017

[Co(0.2)/Ni(0.6)]2/Co(0.2)

Pt(1.2)
Ta(0.8)/TaN(6)
n.a.
0.52
0.94
-

Lau et al., 2018
Ir(1.2)
Ta(0.8)/TaN(6)
n.a.
0.07
0.13
-

Pt(2.5)
Ir(2.5)
n.a.
0.31
0.56
-

Ir(2.5)
Pt(2.5)
n.a.
0.21
0.38
+

Table V Overview of DMI measurements for CoFeB thin films via field-induced domain wall motion experiments in the creep regime. FM
and NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. HDMI is the DMI field, D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D·d,
with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were
either extracted from figures or calculated using the parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
|µ0HDMI|
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mT)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co20Fe60B20(0.8)
Ta(5)
MgO(2)
6.2 – 16.3a 0.02 – 0.06a 0.02 – 0.05a
+
Khan et al., 2016

CoFeB(1)

W(2)

MgO(2)

35
0.23
0.23
+

Soucaille et al., 2016
W(3)
15
0.12
0.12
+

TaN(1)
5
0.05
0.05
+

Hf(1)
2
0.01
0.01
+

Co20Fe60B20(0.6)
W(5)
MgO(2)
93
0.68
0.41
+
Jaiswal et al., 2017
Co40Fe40B20(0.6)
MgO(2)/Ta(5)
4
0.03
0.02
+

Co20Fe60B20(0.8)
Ta(5)
MgO(2)
8.8
0.03
0.02
+
Karnad et al., 2018

Co20Fe60B20(1)
Ta(5)
MgO(2)
2.6 – 16b
0.02 – 0.08b 0.02 – 0.08b,
+
Diez et al., 2019b

a Different DMI values correspond to different annealing temperatures.
b Different DMI values correspond to different doses of He+ ion irradiation.

itez et al. (2015) measured a value for D of 0.33 mJ/m2

(Ds= 0.27 pJ/m) in a film Pt/Co/AlOx, but they considered it a
lower limit because of a possible underestimation of the anni-
hilation field due to thermally activated processes. A DMI
value of Ds= 0.44 pJ/m (D=0.73 mJ/m2) was measured in
W/Co20Fe60B20/MgO (Jaiswal et al., 2017), while a smaller
value of Ds= 0.25 pJ/m (D=0.25 mJ/m2) was obtained when
the same composition was sandwiched between Ta layers (Yu
et al., 2016a).

5. Nucleation field

A reversed domain is nucleated in a perpendicular magne-
tized material and the out-of-plane nucleation field as a func-
tion of the in-plane applied field is analyzed. The latter can
be particularly large, up to 1 T as in Kim et al. (2017c). This
type of measurement can be divided in two groups: edge nu-
cleation in patterned wires (Pizzini et al., 2014) or asymmetric
microstructures (e.g. triangles) (Han et al., 2016) and bubble
nucleation in extended films (Kim et al., 2017c, 2018d). In

all the experiments, the magnetic images were obtained using
MOKE. In Han et al. (2016), the hysteresis loop of asymmet-
ric microstructures measured by wide-field polar Kerr shows
an asymmetry due to DMI similar to exchange biasing. This
asymmetry is attributed to the asymmetric nucleation when
an in-plane field is present and is independent of the struc-
ture size.
The values obtained for D are presented in Ta-
ble XI, mostly single layers of Co (Han et al., 2016; Kim
et al., 2018d; Pizzini et al., 2014) or trilayers of Co/Ni/Co
(Kim et al., 2017c). Pizzini et al. (2014) obtained a value of
Ds=-1.32 pJ/m (D=-2.2 mJ/m2) for Pt/Co/AlOx. Han et al.
(2016) measured the opposite sign for the reversed structure
AlOx/Co/Pt with a value of Ds=1.62 pJ/m (D =1.43 mJ/m2).
When the structure was reversed and the AlOx was replaced
by Ir a value of Ds=-2.03 pJ/m (D =-1.69 mJ/m2) was mea-
sured, indicating opposite contributions for Pt and Ir. This
method was used to obtain the value of D as a function of
temperature in a Co layer (Kim et al., 2018d), obtaining a de-
crease from 1.18 mJ/m2 at 100 K to 0.48 mJ/m2 at 300 K.


19

Table VI Overview of DMI measurements for Co thin films via field-induced domain wall motion experiments in the creep regime. FM and
NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. HDMI is the DMI field, D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d,
with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were
either extracted from figures or calculated using the parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
|µ0HDMI|
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mT)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co(0.3)
Pt(2.5)
Pt(1.5)
26.5
0.11
0.03
+
Je et al., 2013

Co(0.7)
Pt(5)

Pt(3)
104
0.83
0.58
+

Hrabec et al., 2014
Ir(0.23)/Pt(3)
10
0.08
0.06
+

Ir(0.69)/Pt(3)
155
1.23
0.86
-

Co(0.8)
Pt(10)
Pt(3)
50
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Petit et al., 2015

Co(0.4)
Pt(2)
Pt(2)
83
0.33
0.13
+
Kim et al., 2015a
Pt(2)
Pd(2)
>200
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Co(0.6)
Pt(3)
AlOx(1.6)
138
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Kim et al., 2017a
MgO(2)
483
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

Co(0.54)
Au(4)
NiO(10)
n.a.
2.04
1.11
+
Ku´swik et al., 2018

Co(0.56)
Pt(4)
Ir(5)
53
0.31
0.17
-
Shepley et al., 2018
Co(1.05)
8.5
0.12
0.13
-

Co(1)
Pt(3)
MgO(0.65)/Pt(5)
65.8
0.77
0.77
n.a.
Cao et al., 2018a
Mg(0.2)/MgO(1.5-2)/Pt(5)
311
2.32
2.32
n.a.

Co(1.8)
Pt(5)
W(1)/Pt(1)
25
0.19
0.34
n.a.
Lin et al., 2018

Co(0.6)
Pt(3)

Pt(3)
7.8
0.07
0.04
-

Shahbazi et al., 2018
Pt50Au50(3)
48
0.35
0.21
-

Au(3)
175
1
0.6
-

Co(0.8)
Pt(2.2)
Ta(4)
140a
1.12a
0.9a
-
Shahbazi et al., 2019
Ir(0.2 – 2)/Ta(4)
64.2 – 104.2b 0.49 – 0.93b 0.39 – 0.74b
-

Co(0.6)

Ta(4)/Pt(4)

Pt(4)
170
1.20
0.71
-c

Hartmann et al., 2019
Co(0.8–1.2)
Gd(3)/Pt(2)
217–77
0.43–0.23
0.34
-c

Co(0.8–1)
Ir(4)
156–92
0.39–0.23
0.23
-c

Co(1)

Ta(4)/Pt(4)

Gd(3)/Pt(4)
280
0.37
0.37
n.a.

Cao et al., 2020b
Co(1)
Gd(3)/Ta(4)
255
0.24
0.24
n.a.

Co(1)/Gd(3)/Co(1)
Ta(4)
138
0.90
0.45
n.a.

Co(0.9)

Pt(5)
Pt(5)
0
0
0
n.a

G´ehanne et al., 2020
Pt(5)
Au(5)
105
0.87
0.78
-

Au(5)
Pt(5)
78
0.59
0.53
+

a For the Pt/Co/Ta system, the value provided in the table is obtained considering HDMI to be the minimum in the velocity curves. However the work estimates
the DMI also using a model that assumes Hdep = Hdep(Hx). In this case D = -2 mJ/m2 and Ds = -1.6 pJ/m.
b The highest and lowest DMI values reported do not necessarily correspond to the extremes of the Ir thickness range.
a Sign convention used here is opposite to the used in the article.

6. Domain wall stray fields

In NV magnetometry, the value of D is obtained by mea-
suring the magnetic stray field generated by a 180◦ Bloch wall
in PMA materials (Gross et al., 2016; Tetienne et al., 2015).
The NV magnetometer measures the Zeeman shift in the elec-
tronic spin sublevels of a NV defect in a diamond crystal in
presence of a small magnetic field. The diamond nanocrystal
is placed on the tip of an AFM (atomic force microscope) and
scanned across the DW at a distance of about 100 nm from the
surface (see Fig. 12). The Zeeman shift is proportional to the
projection of the external magnetic stray field (arising from
the domains adjacent to the wall, in the case of a Bloch wall,
and of the domains adjacent to the wall and the wall itself, in
the case of a Ne´el wall) on the quantization axis of the NV
center (BNV). Therefore, Bloch and Ne´el walls can be easily
distinguished by the Zeeman shift profile perpendicular to the
wall. Since the stray field depends on several parameters such

as the distance from the surface, MS and the DW width, any
error in these values reflects in an uncertainty of D. The main
source for uncertainty is usually considered to arise from A,
the exchange stiffness, but also from inhomogeneities in MS
or thickness variations.

7. Domain wall internal structure imaging

In Bode et al. (2007) the spin-polarized scanning tunneling
microscopy (SP-STM) technique was used to investigate the
role of the DMI in systems with chiral spin structure. The spe-
cific chirality of the moments in single atomic layers of Mn on
a W(110) substrate was observed directly and the different en-
ergy contributions of the cycloid structure were calculated by
employing density functional theory with a generalized gra-
dient approximation and full-potential linearized augmented
plane waves. The long-range homogeneous spiral structure


20

Table VII Overview of DMI measurements for Co thin films via field-induced domain wall motion experiments in the flow regime. FM and
NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. HDMI is the DMI field, D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D·d, with
d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. The subscripts 1 and 2 indicate values of D and Ds extracted from HDMI and vsat, respectively.
Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the
parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
|µ0HDMI|
D1
D2
Ds1
Ds2
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mT)
(mJ/m2)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)
(pJ/m)

Co(1)
Pt(5)
Gd(5)
180
1.48
n.a.
1.48
n.a.
-
Vaˇnatka et al., 2015

Co(0.8)

Pt(4)

AlOx(3)
220
1.63 / 1.91a
n.a.
1.3 / 1.53a
n.a.
-

Pham et al., 2016
Co(1)
GdOx(4)
200
1.48 / 1.73a
n.a.
1.48 / 1.73a
n.a.
-

Co(1)
Gd(3)
300
1.52 / 1.78a
n.a.
1.52 / 1.78a
n.a.
-

Co(1)
Pt(4)
0
0
n.a.
0
n.a.

Co(0.6)

Pt(2)
Al(2)
200 / 212
1.52 / 2.02b
1.38 / 2.2b
0.91 / 1.21b 0.83 / 1.32b
-

Ajejas et al., 2017

Pt(2)
Ir(2)
96 / 125
0.5 / 0.92 b
0.37 / 0.67b
0.3 / 0.55b
0.22 / 0.4b
-

Pt(2)
Cu(2)
200
0.93
1.03
0.56
0.62
-

Pt(2)
Pt(2)
0
0
0
0
0

Ir(2)
Pt(2)
106
1.08
1.08
0.65
0.65
+

Co(0.8)
Pt(30)
AlOx(1-3)
n.a.
n.a.
1 – 1.79c
n.a.
0.8 – 1.43c
-
de Souza Chaves et al., 2019
Co(1)
Pt(4)
GdOx(1-3) 150 – >260c 0.6 – 1.42c 0.62 – 1.34c 0.6 – 1.42c 0.62 – 1.34 c
-

Co(1)

Pt(4)

Gd(4)
n.a.
n.a.
1.45
n.a.
1.45
-

Krizakova et al., 2019
Co(1)
GdOx(4)
n.a.
n.a.
1.5
n.a.
1.5
-

GdCo(4)
Ta
n.a.
n.a.
0.2
n.a.
0.8
-

GdCo(4.8)
Ta
n.a.
n.a.
0.2
n.a.
0.96
-

a The two values of DMI reported derive from two different values for the exchange constant A.
b The two values of DMI reported are due to different growth temperatures for the Co layer, either room temperature or 100◦C.
c The highest and lowest DMI values reported do not necessarily correspond to the extremes of the top NM thickness range.

Table VIII Overview of DMI measurements for CoFeB and Ni/Fe thin films via equilibrium stripe domain pattern. FM and NM stand
for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the
ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or
calculated using the parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
|D|
|Ds|
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

[Pt(3)/Co40Fe40B20(0.8)/MgO(1.5)]×20
Ta(3)
Ta(2)
1.66
1.33
Woo et al., 2017

[Pt(2.7)/Co60Fe20B20(0.8)/MgO(1.5)]×15
Ta(2.3)/Pt(3.7)
1.5
1.2
B¨uttner et al., 2017

Co40Fe40B20(1.2)
Ta(5)
TaOx(5)
0.17
0.2
Yu et al., 2017

Ni(6–12 ML)/Fe(1–3 ML)

(001)Cu

n.a.
0.28 ± 0.14

Meier et al., 2017
Ni(9 ML)/Fe(1-–3 ML)/Ni(4-–14 ML)
n.a.
0

Fe(1 ML)/Ni(6-–12 ML)
n.a.
0.38 ± 0.14

Fe(1 ML)/Ni(6-–12 ML)
Pt(0.4)
n.a.
0.6 ± 0.2

Co20Fe60B20(1.2)
MgO(1)
Ta(5)
0.65 ± 0.08
0.78
Wong et al., 2018

[Pt(2.7)/CoFeB(0.86)MgO(1.5)]x15
Ta(3.6)/Pt(1)
Pt(2.7)
1.76
1.51
Lemesh et al., 2018

[MgO(2)/Co20Fe60B20(1)/Ta(5)]×15
Ta(5)
0.08 ± 0.03 0.08±0.03

Casiraghi et al., 2019
[MgO(2)/Co20Fe60B20(0.6)/W(5)]×15
Ta(5)
0.61±0.03
0.37±0.02

[MgO(1.4)/Co60Fe20B20(0.8)/Pt(3.4)]×15
Ta(5.7)
Ta(5)
1.0±0.1
0.80±0.08

[Pt(2.5-–7.5)/Co60Fe20B20(0.8)/MgO(1.5)]×13
Ta(3)
Ta(2)
1.6 ± 0.2
1.28
Agrawal et al., 2019

was accounted for by the generalized Bloch theorem adding
spin-orbit coupling as a perturbation. The SP-STM exper-
iments (see scheme in Fig.15) were performed in ultrahigh
vacuum at T = 13 ± 1 K in constant current mode. For spin
resolved measurements Cr- and Fe-covered W tips were used.
The tunneling current I is sensitive to the relative orientation
of the magnetization of the tip (MT) and the sample (MS), ac-
cording to I = I0 + IspMT · MS, where Isp is the spin polarized
part of I. This allows for an atomic scale imaging of mag-
netic nanostructures (Heinze, 2000). This work was contin-

ued in Ferriani et al. (2008), yielding a nearest-neighbor DMI
of 4.6 meV, and Ds = 2.33 pJ/m with an approximate lattice
constant of that of W (3.165 Å). In Heinze et al. (2011) Fe
monolayers on Ir(111) were studied, showing similar values.
Double layers of Mn were studied in Yoshida et al. (2012) and
Fe islands on Cu(111) in Fischer et al. (2017). Similar stud-
ies exploiting SP-STM were also presented by Meckler et al.
(2009b) where they found that the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction is too weak to destabilize the single domain state,
but it can define the sense of rotation and the type of the cy-


21

Table IX Overview of DMI measurements for Co and FeCo thin films via equilibrium stripe domain pattern. FM and NM stand for
ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the
ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or
calculated using the parameters provided. The method does not provide the sign. All the D values are absolute values unless noted.

FM
Bottom NM Top NM
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co(0.6)/Pt(1)/[Ir(1)/Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]×10
Pt(10)
Pt(3)
1.6±0.2
0.96
n.a.
Moreau-Luchaire et al., 2016
Co(0.6)/Pt(1)/[Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]×10
Pt(10)
Pt(3)
0.2±0.2
0.12
n.a.

[Pt(3)/Co(0.9)/Ta(4)]×15
Ta(3)
1.5±0.2
1.35
n.a.
Woo et al., 2016

[Ir(1)/Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]×20

Ta(3)/Pt(10)
Pt(2)

1.67
1
n.a.

Soumyanarayanan et al., 2017

[Ir(1)/Fe(0.2)/Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]×20
1.8
1.44
n.a.

[Ir(1)/Fe(0.3)/Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]×20
1.88
1.69
n.a.

[Ir(1)/Fe(0.2)/Co(0.5)/Pt(1)]×20
1.98
1.39
n.a.

[Ir(1)/Fe(0.4)/Co(0.4)/Pt(1)]×20
2.1
1.68
n.a.

[Ir(1)/Fe(0.4)/Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]×20
1.99
1.99
n.a.

[Ir(1)/Fe(0.5)/Co(0.5)/Pt(1)]×20
1.96
1.96
n.a.

[Ir(1)/Fe(0.6)/Co(0.6))/Pt(1)]×20
1.82
2.18
n.a.

[Ir(1)/Co(0.6)Pt(1)]×5
Pt(10)
Pt(3)
2.30
1.38
+a

Legrand et al., 2018

[Ir(1)/Co(0.8)/Pt(1)]×5
Pt(10)
Pt(3)
2.00
1.6
+a

[Co(0.8)/Ir(1)/Pt(1)]×5
Pt(11)
Pt(3)
1.37
1.1
-a

[Co(0.8)/Ir(1)/Pt(1)]×5
Ta(5)/Pt(10)
Pt(3)
1.63
1.3
-a

[Co(0.8)/Ir(1)/Pt(1)]×10
Pt(11)
Pt(3)
1.52
1.22
-a

[Co(0.8)/Ir(1)/Pt(1)]×10
Ta(5)/Pt(10)
Pt(3)
2.06
1.65
-a

Co(0.8)/[Pt(1)/Ir(1)/Co(0.8)]×10
Ta(15)
Pt(3)
1.14
0.91
+a

[Pt(1)/Co(0.6)/Al2O3(1)]×20
Ta(10)/Pt(7)
Pt(3)
1.29
0.77
-a

[Pt(1)/Co(0.8)/Al2O3(1)]×20
Ta(10)/Pt(7)
Pt(3)
1.01
0.81
-a

[Al2O3(1)/Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]×20
Ta(10)
Pt(7)
1.94
1.16
+a

[Al2O3(1)/Co(0.8)/Pt(1)]×20
Ta(10)
Pt(7)
1.69
1.35
+a

[Pt(2)/Co(1.1)/Cu(1)]x15
Ta(3)
Pt(2)
1.55 (298 K)
1.7
n.a.
Schlotter et al., 2018
0.47 (423 K)
0.52
n.a.

Co(0.6)/Pt(1)/[Ir(1)/Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]×5
Pt(10)
Pt(3)
1.97±0.02
1.18
n.a.
Ba´cani et al., 2019

[Pt(2.5-–7.5)/Co(0.8)/Pt(1.5)]×13
Ta(3)
Ta(2)
0 ± 0.1
0
n.a.
Agrawal et al., 2019

[Co(0.8)/Pd(2)]×5

Cu(2)/Pd(3)
Pd(3)

1.6 ± 0.35b
1.28b
-c

Davydenko et al., 2019
[Co(0.8)/Pd(2)]×10
1.85 ± 0.45b
1.48b
-c

[Co(0.8)/Pd(2)]×20
2.3 ± 0.5b
1.84b
-c

[Pd(1)/Co(0.5)/Pd(1)]×15
0.3 ± 0.1
0.15
n.a.

Dugato et al., 2019

[Pd(1)/Co(0.5)/W(0.1)/Pd(1)]×15
1.1 ± 0.2
0.55
n.a.

[Pd(1)/Co(0.5)/W(0.2)/Pd(1)]×15
1.3 ± 0.2
0.65
n.a.

[Pd(1)/Co(0.5)/W(0.3)/Pd(1)]×15
0.4 ± 0.1
0.2
n.a.

[Pd(1)/Co(0.5)/W(1)/Pd(1)]×15
0.4 ± 0.1
0.2
n.a.

a The sign was measured using CD-XRMS (circular dichroism in x-ray resonant magnetic scattering). Sign convention used here is opposite to the used in the
article.
b Values assuming A = 20 pJ/m. Other values are also assumed in the article.
c The negative sign of DMI is inferred in combination with other experiments.

Table X Overview of DMI measurements of Co and CoFeB thin films via magnetic stripe annihilation. FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic
and non-magnetic layer, respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film.
Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the
parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
|D|
|Ds|
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co(0.8)
Pt(3)
AlOx(3)
0.33 ± 0.05 a 0.27 a Benitez et al., 2015

[Pt(3)/Co(0.9)/Ta(4)]×15
Ta(3)
1.1 ± 0.2
1
Woo et al., 2016

Co20Fe60B20(1)
Ta(5)
Ta(0.74-0.9)
0.25
0.25
Yu et al., 2016a

Co20Fe60B20(0.6)
W(5)
MgO(2)
0.73 ± 0.5
0.44
Jaiswal et al., 2017

[Pt(3)/Co40Fe40B20(0.8)/MgO(1.5)]×20
Ta(3)
Ta(2)
1.35
1.08
Woo et al., 2017

[Pt(3.2)/CoFeB(0.7)/MgO(1.4)]x15
Ta(3)
1.35 ± 0.05
0.95
Litzius et al., 2017

a Lower limit


22

Table XI Overview of DMI measurements of Co and Co/Ni thin films via nucleation field dependence. FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic
and non-magnetic layer, respectively. HDMI is the DMI field, D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of
the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or
calculated using the parameters provided. Edge nucleation provides D sign, while bubble nucleation provides only the magnitude. Values with
∗ are according to the convention used in this paper and opposite to that in the original manuscript.

FM
Bottom NM Top NM |µ0HDMI|
D
Ds
Sign Nucleation type
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mT)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co(0.6)
Pt(3)
AlOx(2)
2.2∗
1.32∗
-
Edge
Pizzini et al., 2014

Co(1.15)
AlOx(2.5)
Pt(4)
1.43∗ ± 0.06 1.62∗±0.07
+
Edge
Han et al., 2016
Co(1.2)
Pt(4)
Ir(4)
1.69∗ ± 0.03 2.03∗ ± 0.04
-

Co(0.3)/Ni(0.6)/Co(0.3)
Pt(2)
MgO(1)
228±60
0.45 ± 0.15
0.54
n.a.
Bubble
Kim et al., 2017c

Co(0.5)
Pt(2)
MgO(2)

372±30
1.18
0.59
n.a.
Bubble (100K)

Kim et al., 2018d
324±15
1.03
0.52
n.a.
Bubble (150K)

245±45
0.75
0.37
n.a.
Bubble (200K)

166±50
0.48
0.24
n.a.
Bubble (300K)

Table XII Overview of DMI measurements of CoFeB thin films by stray field using NV magnetometry. FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic
and non-magnetic layer, respectively, D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film.
Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the
parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM Top NM
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co40Fe40B20(1)
Ta(5)

MgO(2)

0±0.01
0±0.01

Gross et al., 2016
Co20Fe60B20(1)
TaN0.7%(4)
0.03±0.01 0.03±0.01
+

TaN0.7%(1)
0.06±0.02 0.06±0.02
+


23

Figure 15 Schematics of spin-polarized scanning tunneling micro-
scope (SP-STM) using a magnetically coated scanning tunneling mi-
croscope tip: (a) geometry of the experimental set-up including the
magnetization axes of tip MT and sample MS. (b) electronic struc-
ture of tip and sample. In the case of a perfect parallel alignment
of MT and MS, only majority electrons can tunnel into unoccupied
majority states and only minority electrons into unoccupied minority
states. From Heinze, 2006.

cloidal spiral once the single domain state is destabilized by
dipolar interaction. More recent SP-STM studies are found
in Hsu et al. (2018) where the effect of loading double layers
of Fe is investigated, in Perini et al. (2018) epitaxial films of
Co/Ir(111) and Pt/Co/Ir(111) are studied making use of den-
sity functional theory (DFT) and shows that in the latter DMI
comes almost only from the interface with Pt, in Romming
et al. (2018) Rh/Fe atomic bilayers on Ir(111) were studied
showing that higher-order exchange interactions may compete
with interfacial DMI.
In addition to the above results obtained by SP-STM, also
the SPLEEM technique has yielded a number of quantita-
tive studies of DMI in layered systems. In this experimental
approach, spin-polarized, low-energy electrons are projected
towards the sample surface through an illumination column
and reach the sample at normal incidence (Rougemaille and
Schmid, 2010). A magnetic beam splitter is exploited to sep-
arate the incoming electrons from the backscattered ones and
a magnified image of the (magnetic) surface is obtained by
passing the backscattered beam through an imaging column,
similar to that found in electron microscopes (a schematic
is shown in Fig.16).
This technique is extremely surface-
sensitive, since it employs electrons of a few eV energy that
do not penetrate more than a few atomic layers, while the lat-
eral resolution is of the order of several nanometers. There-
fore, SPLEEM requires in-situ analysis of samples prepared
in ultra-high vacuum and it is usually not suitable for samples
prepared elsewhere. By a careful comparison of SPLEEM
images on films of different thicknesses, the film thickness
dependent transition from chiral N´eel walls (dominated by
the DMI) and non-chiral Bloch walls (dominated by the stray
field) can be directly analyzed, so that one can quantify the
DMI relying on the fact that the DMI energy and the stray
field energy are comparable near the transition thickness. This
is because the stray field energy will increase with increasing
film thickness whereas the DMI energy is usually independent
of the film thickness. Thus, the DMI strength can be quanti-

Figure 16 Schematics of a SPLEEM microscope. Spin-polarized
electrons, photoemitted from a GaAs photocathode, are injected into
a spin manipulator where azimuthal and polar orientation of the po-
larization is adjusted. Then, the electron beam passes through an
illumination column, before being decelerated in the objective lens.
Electrons finally hit the surface with normal incidence. Electrons that
are backscattered elastically are collected in an imaging column and
focused on a phosphorous screen, where a magnified image of the
surface is obtained. The incoming and reflected electron beams are
separated in a magnetic beam splitter using the Lorentz force. From
Rougemaille and Schmid (2010).

fied by calculating the stray field energy for a wall structure
with a given film thickness. This approach has been followed
in a number of quantitative studies that are collected in Ta-
bleXIII.
As for Lorentz-TEM microscopy, it was exploited to de-
rive the value of the DMI (Garlow et al., 2019) looking at
the mixed Bloch-N´eel chiral spin textures in Co/Pd multi-
layers. An analysis of the observed intensities under varied
imaging conditions coupled to corroborative micromagnetic
simulations permitted to quantify different magnetic parame-
ters, including the domain wall width, the exchange stiffness
and the DMI. Finally, also SEMPA was used to quantify the
DMI in thin film systems. For instance, in Corredor et al.
(2017), using the experimentally determined wall angle and
width parameter, a span for the DMI strength of 0.8 meV/Co<
d <4.3 meV/Co has been derived, which was in agreement
with previous ab initio calculations for this system. Also, in a
recent SEMPA study of Fe3GeTe2 films (Meijer et al., 2020b)
a lower bound of D >0.09-0.2 mJ/m2 for the DMI term, films
was achieved.
A more refined and quantitative result was
achieved by (Kloodt-Twesten et al., 2019), studying the do-
main wall profiles of Co/Ir(111) films as a function of Co
thickness via SEMPA. They found that below a cobalt thick-
ness of 8.8 MLs, the magnetic domain walls are purely N´eel
oriented and show a clockwise sense of rotation. For larger
thicknesses the plane of rotation changes and the domain walls
show a significant Bloch-like contribution, allowing one to
calculate the strength of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion (DMI) from energy minimization. In particular, from the
angle between the plane of rotation and the domain-wall nor-
mal an interfacial DMI parameter Ds = −1.07 ± 0.05 pJ/m
was determined.


24

The pioneering approach of these methods was among the
first allowing an experimental determination of the DMI and
observing directly its influence on the magnetic structure,
and therefore the area remained very active and substantial
progress towards a quantitative determination of the DMI was
achieved (see TableXIII).

D. Advantages and limitations

In general, methods based on domain walls require an ac-
curate estimation of several magnetic parameters in order to
evaluate the interfacial DMI (see. Eq. 2.1). Among these, the
exchange stiffness A, which enters both in the expression of
the DMI field and in the DW energy, is notoriously difficult
to measure for ultrathin films leading to an uncertainty in the
quantification of D. Han et al. (2016) pointed out that in the
nucleation method a variation of A from 5 to 15 pJ/m for Co
results in a 25% difference for D obtained using the interme-
diate value 10 pJ/m. This is not the case for methods based
on spin waves (see Sec. III), where A is not needed to extract
the interfacial DMI. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that
methods that rely on domain walls can be applied to measure
D only in perpendicularly magnetized materials, while meth-
ods based on spin waves (see Sec. III) are able to quantify
D also for systems with in-plane magnetization. Below we
review the main strengths and weaknesses of all methods dis-
cussed in this Section.
Both, measurements of current-driven and field-driven DW
dynamics in presence of an in-plane magnetic field allow
quantifying not only the magnitude of D but also its sign,
which gives information on the DW chirality. On the other
hand, in the creep regime, the dependence of the DW velocity
on the in-plane field does not always follow the simple lin-
ear dependence when driven by current (see Fig. 4), or the
symmetric shape with a well defined minimum in the field-
driven case (see Fig. 7). Deviations from these simple the-
oretical predictions are in fact quite common (see Fig. 8 as
an example) and there is no consensus on a general model
able to predict and fit all the observed cases. Several mod-
els predict that the minimum velocity does not correspond to
the DMI field but agreement on its calculation is still miss-
ing, and can lead to quite different determination of the D
value.
The main reason is that a full and general micro-
scopic description of the domain wall dynamics is still un-
der investigation. While some systems seem to follow the
quenched Edward-Wilkinson equation (Albornoz et al., 2021;
Grassi et al., 2018)), there are also experimental evidences
that other system are better described by a quenched-KPZ
equation (Durin et al., 2021), having different exponents and
critical dynamics. The consequences on the DMI estimation
of these two universality classes is still unknown.
Current-driven DW motion is overall a more complex tech-
nique to determine the interfacial DMI, both for experimental
realization and for the interpretation of the results. A stan-
dard lithography process is required to pattern films into wires

of appropriate geometry and high in-plane fields, especially
for samples with large DMI, need to be applied and properly
aligned. Furthermore, the torque generated by large applied
currents can also result in a tilt of the DW (Emori et al., 2014).
Concerning the interpretation of the results, a clear definition
of HDMI might be hard due to the interplay present in complex
systems between different current-induced spin torques (STT,
SHE-SOT, iSGE torque), whose collective effect on DW dy-
namics is still not fully understood.
Field-driven DW motion has the advantage of being a rel-
atively simple method to implement experimentally, as it al-
lows the measurement of interfacial DMI in continuous films,
without the need for any lithographic patterning. However,
the application of high in-plane fields, particularly for sam-
ples with significant DMI, requires a perfect alignment of the
in-plane field, with no out-of-plane components. Indeed, in
the creep regime any unwanted component of the field per-
pendicular to the sample plane would influence the DW ve-
locity in an exponential manner (see Eq. 2.5). Several precau-
tions should be taken into account to achieve an optimal align-
ment of the in-plane field (Cao et al., 2018a; Je et al., 2013;
Lavrijsen et al., 2015; Soucaille et al., 2016). A perpendicular
stray field component may still arise in MOKE set-ups, due to
a cross-talk between in-plane and perpendicular electromag-
nets or due to not completely non-magnetic objectives, which
would alter the field distribution in a way difficult to take into
account.
Regarding measurements of DW velocities in the flow
regime, here the main difficulty lies in the generation of large
and short magnetic field pulses and the measurement of very
large velocities. The determination of the DMI constant from
the Walker DW velocity (or the saturation velocity after the
Walker field) does not need the knowledge of the exchange
constant (see Eq. 2.10), but on the other hand, may not be
accessible when hidden in the creep regime.
Among the methods that are based on the DW energy to
evaluate the interfacial DMI, imaging the equilibrium stripe
domain pattern is particularly straightforward due to its exper-
imental simplicity. Indeed, this method is compatible with any
magnetic imaging technique like Kerr microscopy or MFM
– which has to be chosen according to the expected domain
width – and does not require the application of perpendicular
nor in-plane fields. On the other hand, imaging the equilib-
rium domain configuration does not provide information on
the sign of D. For multilayer samples with large DMI, small A
or any situation that yields small values of the left hand side of
Eq. 2.12, high resolution imaging is needed in order to resolve
precisely the small domain widths. Experimentally, several
problems can emerge that may render it unusable (see Sup-
plementary material of Lucassen et al., 2017): for instance,
the demagnetization procedure is unavoidable, since the as-
deposited samples may not be in the ground state. In pat-
terned systems, the domain wall width, the domain size and
configuration may depend on the geometry, due to confine-
ment and dipolar effects, adding discrepancies with respect to
analytical formulations. Other disadvantages include the fact


25

Table XIII Overview of DMI measurements by Domain wall internal structure imaging. The measurements in Chen et al. (2013a, 2017,
2013b, 2020); and Yang et al. (2018b) were performed by SPLEEM, Meckler et al. (2009b) by SP-STM, Garlow et al. (2019) by L-TEM
and Kloodt-Twesten et al. (2019) by SEMPA. FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively, D∗ is the DMI value
given in meV/atom, D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Thicknesses are
given either in nm or atomic monolayers (ML). Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either
extracted from figures or calculated using the parameters provided. Signs with ∗ are according to the convention used in this paper and opposite
to that in the original manuscript. n.a. means that the value was not indicated in the original paper nor were parameters available to calculate
it.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
D∗
D
Ds
Sign
Ref

(meV/atom) (mJ/m2) (pJ/m)

Fe(1.7ML)
(110)W
1.2
+∗
Meckler et al., 2009b

Ni(2ML)/Fe(2.5ML)
(001)Cu
0.12-0.17
0.08-0.12
-
Chen et al., 2013aa

Ni(2ML)/[Co(1ML)/Ni(2ML)]2

(111)Pt
1.05
0.44
-

Chen et al., 2013ba
(111)Ir
0.12
0.14
+

(111)Pt/Ir(0.6-3ML)
0.47-0.12
0.28-0.14
from - to +

Ni(15ML)/Fe(3.3ML)
(110)W
0.53
0.32
+
Chen et al., 2017a

Co(2.4ML)
(0001)Ru
-
0.05
0.18
+
Yang et al., 2018ba

Co(3.9ML-8.4ML)
Graphene
0.11
0.25
-

Co(0.7nm)[Pd(0.5nm)/Co(0.7nm)]10
MgO(2nm)/Pt(4nm)
Pt(4nm)
1.05
n.a.
Garlow et al., 2019

Co(3.5ML-9.7ML)
(111)Ir
1.07
+∗
Kloodt-Twesten et al., 2019

Co(3ML)/Ni(2ML)/[Co(1ML)/Ni(2ML)]8
(111)Pd
-
1.44
0.54
-
Chen et al., 2020a

Co(3ML)/Ni(1ML)
(110)W/Pd(2.6ML) O(0.2ML)
0.63
0.4
+

Co(3ML)/Ni(1ML)
(110)W/Pd(2.1ML) H(0.6ML)
0.01
0.01
+
Chen et al., 2021a

a The values for D given in mJ/m2 were kindly provided by the authors of the original paper. In some cases the sign or thickness values were corrected with
respect to the original work.

that the simple analytical model to extract D may not work
for too thick samples which yield neither N´eel nor Bloch wall
types (hybrid wall with N´eel caps and Bloch core), although
the DMI is expected to be low in these systems.

From the experimental point of view, the domain widths
measured may be different for samples demagnetized with in-
plane or out-of-plane fields, up to 20% (Davydenko et al.,
2019; Kozlov et al., 2020; Legrand et al., 2018). For this rea-
son, the in-plane demagnetized configuration is preferred, as
it is closer to the parallel stripes described by the analytical
theory. In principle, these problems may be solved by us-
ing the proper analytical model. The analytical estimations
are derived for perfect parallel stripe domains, while the real
domain configuration consists of rounded meandering struc-
tures. Moreover, refined expressions for the DW energy may
yield slightly different values of DMI (Lemesh et al., 2017).
This disagreement in the modeling complicates the extraction
of DMI and the interpretation of the experimental results.

Similar considerations hold for the method based on mag-
netic stripe annihilation. Here too, it is only possible to extract
information on the absolute value of D, and not its sign. From
an experimental point of view, the original application of this
technique requires the presence of parallel DWs, which may
not apply to the case of materials with irregular wall profiles.
Those irregular walls can appear for materials that can host
skyrmion phases, due to the intrinsic faceting of the DWs in
such films. This fact can lead to a deviation from the ana-
lytical theory, which was derived for parallel stripe domains.
Another drawback is that as the domain walls are closer to-
gether the corresponding energy barrier for thermally induced

domain wall annihilation is reduced and is also affected by the
presence of defects, which can yield an error in the determi-
nation of the DMI value.

Since it relies on the nucleation of a reversed domain, the
process of bubble nucleation to extract the interfacial DMI
is intrinsically a statistical process and several repetitions of
the same experiment need to be carried out to achieve a re-
liable measurement of the nucleation field. In contrast, for
instance, imaging the equilibrium domain configuration in a
film can automatically provide averaged information of the
domain width, from which the DMI is quantified, if a large
enough area is imaged. Bubble nucleation experiments can
be performed both at the edge of patterned structures, such as
nucleation pads or wires, as well as in continuous films. In
the former case, the method can be used to determine both the
absolute value of D as well as its sign. Specifically, the sign
of D is related to the nucleated bubble position with respect to
the direction of the applied in-plane field. On the other hand,
bubble nucleation measurements in continuous films provide
only the absolute value of D.

Concerning the methods based on domain and domain wall
imaging, it has been shown on different magnetic systems (see
TableXIII) that SP-STM and SPLEEM (and, to a lesser extent,
SEMPA and L-TEM) can be used to achieve a quantitative es-
timation of the DMI strength, looking at the domain structure
or at the transition from N´eel to Bloch wall as a function of
thickness. One should consider that SP-STM and SPLEEM
require a complex apparatus with ultra-high vacuum and in-
situ operation, since they are sensitive to the first atomic lay-
ers, so that they cannot be employed for samples grown else-


26

where and the sample has to be perfectly clean. Use of DFT
or Monte Carlo simulations may help in refining the extrac-
tion of DMI, but requires a remarkable computational effort.
However, the main advantage of these methods is the direct
determination of the structure and chirality of the DW.

III. Spin wave methods

A. Method overview

Since their formation and propagation depend on the mag-
netic energies present in a material or a thin film, spin waves
(SWs) are used as a sensitive tool to extract magnetic prop-
erties such as susceptibility, anisotropy, Gilbert damping, ex-
change stiffness, etc. These properties, together with the ge-
ometry of the sample and the excitation, determine the spin
wave frequency, linewidth, relative amplitude and attenua-
tion length. The DMI does not only modify the equilibrium
magnetic ground state (Bak and Jensen, 1980) but also the
spin wave dynamics (Kataoka, 1987; Melcher, 1973; Zhe-
ludev et al., 1999). SWs propagating in opposite directions
have opposite chirality, so that the DMI contribution to the
SW energy may either decrease or increase the SW frequency
and results in an intrinsic non-reciprocity of the SW propa-
gation.10 This is illustrated in Fig. 17. Note that, different
from the case of the domain walls analysed in the previous
section, where the static magnetization is usually normal to
the film plane, here the static component of the magnetization
is forced to be in-plane by the external magnetic field. There-
fore, in the BLS community it is popular to assume a different
reference frame, as we do in this section, where both the ap-
plied field H and the static magnetization lie along the z direc-
tion as shown in Fig. 17 while the dynamic component of the
magnetization (small blue arrows in Fig. 17) exhibit a chirality
that can be either the same or opposite to the DMI-favoured
chirality, depending on the propagation direction of SWs. For
magnetic films this DMI-induced non reciprocity was investi-
gated the first time by Udvardi and Szunyogh (2009) and later
a series of theoretical investigations followed (Cort´es-Ortu˜no
and Landeros, 2013; Costa et al., 2010; Kostylev, 2014; Moon
et al., 2013). Experimentally, the relatively strong asymmetry
in spin wave dispersion is of interest, since the frequency of
spin wave spectra can be measured with high accuracy. A pio-
neering investigation of DMI-induced non-reciprocity in spin
wave propagation was performed analyzing SWs with large
wavenumber (Zakeri et al., 2010) by spin polarized electron
loss spectroscopy (SPEELS). Although a high wavenumber
k is advantageous11, leading to large DMI-induced frequency

10 This does not occur for arbitrary directions of DMI vector and spin wave
propagation as we will explain further below, and special experimental ge-
ometries have to be realized.
11 As we will show further below, the DMI -induced frequency shift is linear
with wave vector k of the involved spin waves.

changes, the most versatile and exploited technique to deter-
mine DMI-related effects on SW propagation is Brillouin light
scattering (BLS), which relies on the inelastic scattering of
photons by spin waves with micrometric or sub-micrometric
wavelength. BLS is becoming more and more popular, thanks
to the good compromise between sensitivity to SWs in a wide
range of k-vectors and relatively simple experimental appara-
tus. Two techniques that have also been applied to the study
of SW propagation are the Time Resolved Magneto-Optical
Kerr Effect (TR-MOKE) and Propagating Spin Wave Spec-
troscopy (PSWS). In the following we first recall some theo-
retical background about the influence of DMI on SW char-
acteristics and we will review the main results achieved by
the four above mentioned experimental techniques, compar-
ing their advantages and limitations.

B. Theory and models

In the literature we find basically two theoretical ap-
proaches to describe spin wave spectra in thin film samples
with DMI. One is based on the classical theory of magne-
tostatic spin waves (see e.g. Gallardo et al. (2019b)), and
this is the approach mainly utilized for analyzing experimen-
tal results obtained by BLS, PSWS or TR-MOKE. The other
is based on the quantum spin wave theory, which is more
suitable for high k measurements in ultrathin films as done
in SPEELS, where exchange interaction dominates the spin
wave dispersion (dos Santos et al., 2018, 2020; Udvardi and
Szunyogh, 2009). In most experimental cases, the two for-
malisms are equivalent and slight differences derive only from
the choice of energy terms. Some authors use even a mixed
approach calculating the spin wave spectra by a quantization
of the linearized Landau-Lifshitz equation (Udvardi et al.,
2003). The models used to analyze the experimental results
(Moon et al., 2013) derive typically the dispersion relation
and do not consider the specific sensing technique, so that they
are applicable to all four techniques presented in the following
section.

1. Quantum spin wave theory

The usual quantum formalism for spin waves uses the Hol-
stein Primakoff method (Holstein and Primakoff, 1940) and
starts directly from the Schr¨odinger equation with a Hamilto-
nian in a crystal lattice of spins ⃗S j that considers the Heisen-
berg exchange energy at a spin site j with the nearest neigh-
bors at position j + δ and the Zeeman energy in a magnetic
field B0ˆz

H = −2 J

ℏ2
�

j,δ
⃗S j · ⃗S j+δ − gµBB0

ℏ

�

j
S jz.
(3.1)

where J is the exchange constant, g the Land´e factor, µB the
Bohr magneton. As described in textbooks (Stamps and Hille-
brands, 1991), using the spin raising and lowering operators


27

Figure 17
(a) Sketch of a spin wave, in the Damon-Eshbach configuration, propagating towards the positive x direction, with a wave vector
+k, in the FM film. All the individual magnetic moments (blue arrows) are precessing anticlockwise around the z-axis, i.e. around the direction
of the static magnetization and of the external field H. Due to the phase delay from one spin to the next, moving from left to right, the chirality
associated with the SW is clockwise, that is favoured by a positive DMI (magenta D vector). In thin bilayer films of FM/HM, the latter
couples two neighbouring spins via a three-site exchange mechanism with the underlying atom of the HM (white atoms). As a consequence,
the absolute frequency of spin waves with +k is down-shifted in frequency. (b) SW propagating along the negative x-direction. i.e. with
wave vector -k, are characterized by an anti-clockwise chirality, that is disfavoured by a positive D, resulting in an up-shift of their absolute
frequency.

one can obtain the eigenstates and energies analytically in
certain simplified cases (e.g. low temperature approximation)
by employing the Holstein-Primakoff transformation and us-
ing the Fourier transform of the harmonic oscillator raising
and lowering operators as creation and annihilation operators
for the quantized spin waves (magnons). For ka ≪ 1 in a
cubic lattice of spins s with lattice constant a, and consider-
ing only nearest neighbour interaction, one obtains the known
quadratic dispersion relation

ℏωk = gµBB0 + 4Jsa2k2.
(3.2)

As mentioned already in the introduction, in a microscopic
approach the DMI is considered a generalized exchange inter-
action leading to a non-collinear spin configuration described

by ⃗D·( ⃗S 1× ⃗S 2), where the direction of ⃗D depends on the crystal
symmetry. This leads to an additional term in the Hamiltonian
(Moon et al., 2013; Zheludev et al., 1999)

HDMI = 2 D

ℏ2
�

j
ˆz · (⃗S j × ⃗S j+1)
(3.3)

where ˆz is perpendicular to the axis of symmetry breaking.
The related term which has to be added in the spin wave dis-
persion (Eq. 3.2) is linear in k:

ℏωDMI = 4Dsak.
(3.4)

A first study of DMI in bulk Ba2CuGe2O7, an antiferro-
magnet with a weak helimagnetic distortion (Zheludev et al.,


28

1999), was performed already in 1999 using the quantum ap-
proach, showing low energy spin wave spectra. This approach
does not consider the sample geometry but only crystal sym-
metry, so it is suitable for bulk materials. In the case of ul-
trathin films, it was shown theoretically about ten years later
that the chiral degeneracy of the magnons can be lifted due to
the presence of the DMI (Udvardi and Szunyogh, 2009). The
employed method is based on relativistic first principle cal-
culations of the magnetic ground state similar to Bode et al.
(2007) and Ferriani et al. (2008), able to identify domain wall
chirality. Therefore it was proposed to exploit this spin wave
asymmetry for measuring DMI in ultrathin films. Although it
was known already for a decade that the DMI stabilizes chiral
spin structures in bulk materials with a certain crystal sym-
metry (Bogdanov and R¨oßler, 2001; Cr´epieux and Lacroix,
1998), the work of Udvardi and Szunyogh (2009) was stim-
ulated by the discovery of homochirality of domain walls in
two monolayers of Fe on W(110) (Heide et al., 2008; Kubet-
zka et al., 2003).
A quantum approach was also used in Costa et al. (2010)
where, going back to the microscopic origin of the DMI, the
effects of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) on spin wave spectra are
studied. It is shown that the DMI leads to a linear term in k
in the dispersion relation and that the linewidth of spin wave
modes is increased by the spin-orbit coupling. The method
used here goes beyond the adiabatic approximation and di-
rectly operates in the wave vector space, avoiding calculations
in real space, taking into account large numbers of neighbor
shells. The starting point is the multiband Hubbard model
with Hamiltonian (Costa et al., 2003) where a spin-orbit in-
teraction is added. The spin wave dispersion is then obtained
from the dynamic susceptibility. In essence, the quantum ap-
proach shows clearly the microscopic origin based on SOC
and derives an additional k-linear term in the spin wave dis-
persion relation for certain relative orientations of spin wave
propagation and direction of the DMI vector.

2. Classical spin wave theory

Since in most experimental investigations (as in BLS) the
wavelength of the detected SWs are in the range between a
few microns and a few hundreds of nanometers, one can ig-
nore the discrete nature of the spins. Therefore, a classical
formulation, assuming a continuum medium, is more suit-
able.
Traditionally, spin waves in magnetic thin films are
treated as magnetostatic spin waves, neglecting exchange in-
teraction (Prabhakar and Stancil, 2009). Considering different
geometries and their related boundary conditions one obtains
either Forward Volume for perpendicular-to-plane magneti-
zation or Backward Volume and Surface or Damon-Eshbach
(DE) Waves for in-plane magnetization. The latter, where the
wave vector ⃗k is perpendicular to the applied static field ⃗H,
is the preferred configuration when exciting spin waves via
antennas due to their more efficient transduction. However,
as pointed out in several works, for the typical samples with

DMI the simple magnetostatic solution is not sufficient and
often anisotropy energy or exchange energy have to be consid-
ered, as in Gurevich (1996); Kalinikos (1981); and Kalinikos
and Slavin (1986). Here the complete problem is solved in
the thin film limit for the magnetization ⃗M including the mag-
netostatic and dynamic regime using mixed boundary condi-
tions, and going beyond the plane-wave approximation. The
exchange term is often neglected when comparing theory to
experiments, arguing that the wavenumber k obtained in the
experimental conditions is low. However, in order to be pre-
cise, the spin wave modes obtained in nanostructured films re-
quire the complete solution, being in the transition range from
magnetostatic to exchange spin waves (dipole-exchange spin
waves). One of the critical energy terms is the dipolar field
term, which can be obtained from this approach by adding the
exchange boundary conditions to the electrodynamics bound-
ary conditions. As mentioned in Moon et al. (2013), the dipo-
lar field term contains local and non-local contributions, and
can be divided into a stray field term, related to the dipolar in-
teractions between the spins in the SW, and a dipole or mag-
netostatic field term, related to the demagnetizing field. In
most cases, as in Moon et al. (2013), the dipolar term for un-
pinned exchange at the film surface (i.e.
∂
∂y ⃗m = 0 at the FM
film surface) is applied (Kalinikos, 1994). However, Kostylev
(2014) points out that the DMI pins the circular components
of the magnetization at the surface (interface) of the magnetic
film and mixed boundary conditions have to be used, which
require a numerical solution.

Figure 18 Schematic diagram of the used geometry and notation.
k is the wave vector and indicates the propagation direction of the
spin wave, H is the applied in-plane field and M the equilibrium
magnetization, pointing slightly out-of-plane. The DMI frequency
depends on the angles φk and φM as given in Eq. 3.12.

Considering a sample geometry as shown in Fig. 17, (static
component of the magnetization aligned along the z direc-
tion, i.e. parallel to the applied field H) the dispersion relation
for small amplitude spin waves is derived from the linearized
Landau-Lifshitz (LL) equation

∂ ⃗M
∂t = −γ( ⃗M × ⃗He f f )
(3.5)

The vector ⃗M has to be decomposed in one large static compo-
nent, of modulus Ms directed along the z-axis and two small


29

dynamic components that describe the precession around the
equilibrium direction: ⃗M = Ms ˆm(⃗x, t) = Ms(mx ˆx, myˆy, ˆz) with
|mx|, |my| ≪ 1 and ˆx,ˆy,ˆz are the unitary vectors of the refer-
ence frame, chosen such that the y-axis is perpendicular to the
sample plane, according to Fig. 17. The effective field to be
considered in the LL equation consists of different contribu-
tions, reflecting the different energy terms:

⃗Hef f = − 1

µ0

δEtot
δ ⃗M
= ±Hˆz+ J⃗∇2⃗m+ ⃗Hdip + ⃗Hani + ⃗HDMI (3.6)

where J = 2A/µ0Ms is the exchange constant. In case of
unpinned exchange boundary conditions the dipolar field for
a thin film can be written as (Arias and Mills, 1999; Kalinikos,
1994):

⃗Hdip = −MsmxP(kd)ˆx − Msmy(1 − P(kd))ˆy,
(3.7)

with
P(kd) = 1 − 1 − e−|kd|

|kd|
(3.8)

that, in the case of ultrathin films with thickness d, where
kd ≪ 1, reduces to P(kd) = |kd|/2 when performing a series
expansion of the exponential function. The anisotropy field,
written for the case of a uniaxial perpendicular anisotropy
constant Ku out-of-plane, is ⃗Hani =
2Ku
µ0Ms myˆy
The correct expression for the DMI field HDMI in the con-
tinuum theory is not that straightforward to obtain as it de-
pends on the crystal symmetry considered. For bulk, the first
approach from a spin to a continuum model was performed
by Dzyaloshinskii himself (Dzyaloshinskii, 1957), calculat-
ing a thermodynamic potential for certain crystal symmetry

classes.
This approach was used later by Bak and Jensen

(1980) for MnSi and FeGe, and by Bogdanov and Hubert
(1994) and Bogdanov and R¨oßler (2001) using the Lifshitz
invariants ⃗L( ⃗M, ⃗∇ × ⃗M), where the k-th component of ⃗L is
L(k)
i j = Mi
∂M j
∂xk − M j
∂Mi
∂xk . The DMI energy can be described as
a combination of Lifshitz invariants, depending on the crys-
tal symmetry (Cort´es-Ortu˜no and Landeros, 2013; Cr´epieux
and Lacroix, 1998). For certain symmetry classes, as the ro-
tational tetrahedral T12 (e.g. MnSi), the energy density due to
DMI is a combination of Lifshitz invariants with a single coef-
ficient D. Only in these cases the DMI strength is sufficiently
described by a scalar. Another example is the cyclic class
Cnv12. Its Lifshitz invariants are a suitable choice for planar
systems (bilayers) with perpendicular anisotropy, where sym-
metry breaking occurs only along the perpendicular axis and
only gradients in plane contribute to the DMI induced chiral-
ity (Bogdanov and R¨oßler, 2001; Bogdanov and Yablonskii,
1989). For a planar geometry in the xz plane with perpendicu-
lar anisotropy along y, the DMI energy can than be described
by

EDMI = D(Lx
xy + Lz
zy)
(3.9)
With ⃗M = Ms ˆm(⃗x, t) = Ms(mx ˆx, myˆy, ˆz) the DMI field can
then be obtained as

⃗HDMI = − 1

µ0

δEDMI

δ ⃗M
=
2D
µ0Ms

�∂my

∂x , −∂mx

∂x , 0
�
(3.10)

The dispersion relation is then given by

ω(k) = γµ0
�

(H0 + Jk2 + MsP(kd)sin2φk)(H0 + Jk2 − Hani + Ms(1 − P(kd))) + ωDMI = ω0 + ωDMI
(3.11)

that is valid also for values of φk different from π/2, as shown
in Fig. 18. Moreover, it can be shown that the general ex-
pression of ωDMI for an interfacial DMI is given by (Gallardo
et al., 2019b).:

ωDMI = 2γ D

Ms
k sinφk cosφM
(3.12)

where the angles are defined in Fig. 18. This means that, sim-
ilar to the results of the quantum approach reported in the
previous paragraph, the DMI leads to a shift of the disper-
sion relation, linear in k, and depending on the sign of the
wave vector, i.e. a frequency non-reciprocity due to DMI (see
Fig. 19). This non reciprocity depends on the directions of
both the sample magnetization and the spin wave propaga-
tion direction and is absent for k = 0, i.e. the condition for

12 Schoenflies notation

ferromagnetic resonance (FMR). In this respect, already in
Cort´es-Ortu˜no and Landeros (2013) it was suggested to use
BLS measurements for determining the DMI constant, point-
ing out that the largest effect can be observed applying a suf-
ficiently large external field H, so that the magnetization lies
in-plane (φM = 0), using the Damon-Eshbach (DE) geometry
(φk = π/2).

It is worth noting that the above dispersion relation is valid
up to a certain threshold of the DMI strenght, above which the
dispersion relation becomes zero and the ground state is not
uniform but rather chiral and the theory may not be applicable.
By numerical calculations it is shown that the asymmetry does
not only regard frequency but also amplitude and attenuation
length (K¨orner et al., 2015; Kostylev, 2014).

Let us also notice that the above description is valid only
for a film consisting of a single monolayer. An attempt to
take the finite film thickness correctly into account by us-
ing mixed exchange boundary conditions at the surface is


30

Figure 19 DMI-induced asymmetric spin-wave propagation in the
small-k limit. (a) Dispersion relation. (b) Attenuation length as a
function of the frequency f. From Moon et al. (2013).

shown in Kostylev (2014)13. The resulting boundary condi-
tions then are similar, but not equal, to the ones derived for
a uniaxial surface anisotropy (Soohoo, 1963). Different sur-
face anisotropies at both interfaces of the magnetic film result
in an intrinsic non reciprocity of DE spin waves (Hillebrands
et al., 1987). In this case the two contributions are difficult
to be distinguished. In fact, already in Cr´epieux and Lacroix
(1998), the presence of DMI can be interpreted as a contribu-
tion to the surface anisotropy. In order to analyze the different
contributions in a more rigorous way, film thickness depen-
dencies have to be studied, as discussed in Gladii et al. (2016)
and Lucassen et al. (2020).
In summary we want to point out that the complete solution
in the continuum theory for the bilayer system is not trivial,
requiring assumptions concerning the boundary conditions.
Especially, care has to be taken if one wants to take all con-
tributions to the spin wave dispersion non-reciprocity (such as
surface anisotropies) into account correctly. However, in most
cases the theory required for modeling experimental results is
simplified by the fact that by subtraction (as explained in the
following sections) the DMI related term in the spin wave dis-
persion relation is directly determined.

C. Experimental results

1. Brillouin light scattering

The most popular and widely employed technique for the
measurement of the DMI constant from the non-reciprocal
spin wave propagation is Brillouin light scattering (BLS)
(Carlotti and Gubbiotti, 1999). As shown in Tables XIV, XV,
XVI and XVII, more than forty papers have been published
during the last five years, reporting the value of the DMI con-
stant in samples where a FM material (usually Co or CoFeB)

13 Note: The DMI constant in Kostylev (2014) is defined as the DMI constant
in the first atomic layer and therefore is defined as �D = Dd
√

2/a, where a
is the lattice constant.

is in contact with a HM material (such as Pt, W, Ta, etc.). One
of the first BLS experimental works reporting values of the
DMI constant determined by BLS was done on Co/Ni multi-
layers (Di et al., 2015a,b; Zhang et al., 2015). In the same year
a series of publications of DMI measurements by BLS on Py,
Co and CoFeB followed (Belmeguenai et al., 2015; Cho et al.,
2015; Kim et al., 2015a; Nembach et al., 2015; Stashkevich
et al., 2015; Vaˇnatka et al., 2015) and the research continues
to be very active.
BLS is a classical tool to study spin wave dispersion in gen-
eral and non-reciprocity in particular. As sketched in Fig. 20
in a BLS experiment a monochromatic light beam is focused
on the surface of the specimen under investigation by an ob-
jective lens and the light that is back-scattered within a solid
angle is collected by the same lens and analysed in frequency
by a high-resolution spectrometer, usually a Sandercock-type,
multipass tandem Fabry-Perot interferometer (Mock et al.,
1987). The physical mechanism of BLS relies on the inelastic
scattering of photons by spin waves that are naturally present
within the medium under investigation, thanks to either the
creation (Stokes process) or the annihilation (anti-Stokes pro-
cess) of a magnon. This implies that a red-shift or a blue-shift
is observed in the scattered light with respect to the incident
beam. In wave vector space, magnons experiencing Stokes or
anti-Stokes scattering processes correspond to either a posi-
tive or a negative wave vector. As a consequence, the non-
reciprocity caused by the presence of a DMI interaction leads
to an asymmetry in frequency shift of the peaks correspond-
ing to the Stokes or the anti-Stokes process, as anticipated in
the previous paragraph (see Fig. 20). A rather wide range of k
vectors is available, up to about 2.2·105 rad/cm. The specific
value of k can be varied easily by changing the angle of the
incident beam of light, while reversing the applied magnetic
field permits to cross-check for the sign of the DMI constant.
The frequency resolution is limited by the instrumental char-
acteristics to about 0.1 GHz, because the finesse of the Fabry-
Perot interferometer (ratio between the free spectral range and
the pass-band window) has an upper limit of about 100 (Car-
lotti and Gubbiotti, 1999). This implies a lower limit for the
minimum values of the DMI constant that can be measured by
this technique. One should also consider that usually several
tens of mW of light are focused on the measurement spot, so
that the real temperature14 of the probed sample region may be
lifted above room temperature and this can have an influence
on the values of the measured magnetic parameters, including
D. Here we adopt the reference frame presented in Figs. 17
and 20, where the z-axis is aligned with the static magneti-
zation, the x-axis coincides with the propagation direction of
SWs and the film normal (y- axis) is oriented upward with re-
spect to the free surface of the FM film. With such a choice,

14 Note: The real temperature depends on the thermal properties of the ma-
terial under investigation (including the substrate material), as well as on
the numerical aperture of the exploited lens (that determines the size of the
focused light spot).


31

the frequency shift of the BLS peaks is

fDMI = ωDMI/2π = (γDk)/(πMs)
(3.13)

For the case of a FM/HM bilayer, as sketched in Fig. 20, a
negative (positive) value of fDMI, i.e.
of D, indicates that
a left (right)-handed chirality is favoured by the DMI. This
means that in presence of a positive (negative) value of D,
in the measured BLS spectra the absolute frequency of the
anti-Stokes (Stokes) peak is larger (lower) than that of the
Stokes (anti-Stokes) one, and as a consequence fDMI assumes
positive (negative) values, as illustrated in the lower panel of
Fig. 20. Please note that if the direction of the applied mag-
netic field is reversed, fDMI changes sign due to the reversal
of the SW chirality.
A comparison of the value and the sign of the DMI con-
stant measured using BLS for Co, CoFeB, and a collection of
different magnetic materials are reported in Tables XIV, XV,
XVI and XVII, respectively. When the values were not ex-
plicitly given in the original manuscript, we have calculated
or extracted them from the figures and reported them in italic.
Note that the signs in the Tables are consistent with the con-
vention of axes, field, D, k vector and frequency difference as
previously described in Figs. 17 and 20. If the authors in the
original manuscript have used a different coordinate system
and/or method of calculating the frequency asymmetry we re-
calculated the sign according to our convention.
Many papers discuss the dependence of the DMI constant
as a function of the ferromagnetic layer thickness (Belmegue-
nai et al., 2015; Chaurasiya et al., 2016; Kim et al., 2016a;
Stashkevich et al., 2015) and possible correlation with sur-
face anisotropy (Stashkevich et al., 2015) or Heisenberg ex-
change (Nembach et al., 2015). Theoretically, a 1/d depen-
dence of the DMI constant is predicted (Kostylev, 2014), as is
the case for all interface phenomena, and this makes it difficult
to distinguish between the different phenomena. Sometimes a
change in slope of the DMI constant versus 1/d is observed
(Belmeguenai et al., 2018, 2016; Cho et al., 2015; Kim et al.,
2018c). Belmeguenai et al. (2018) discuss different origins of
this change. The first is a coherent-incoherent growth mecha-
nism transition at a certain thickness accompanied by magne-
toelastic anisotropy changes. Others are changes in surface
roughness which are causing in-plane demagnetizing mag-
netic fields. Another is interdiffusion and mixing at the in-
terfaces, which reduces the interface anisotropy. According
to the experimental results the authors conclude that the first
hypothesis is the most probable.
Similarly, the dependence of the DMI on the heavy metal
thickness has been studied for both Co (Kim et al., 2017b) and
CoFeB (Chen et al., 2018b; Tacchi et al., 2017) films in con-
tact with a Pt layer. For both systems the DMI intensity was
found to increase with the Pt thickness, dPt, reaching a satu-
ration value when dPt approaches the Pt spin diffusion length
(about 2 nm). This behaviour has been explained by analytical
calculations assuming that several Pt atoms, belonging to dif-
ferent layers in the heavy metal, can contribute to the strength
of the interfacial DMI (Tacchi et al., 2017). On the contrary, in

Ma et al. (2017), the DMI strength in the IrMn/CoFeB system
was observed to increase even for IrMn layers thicker than the
IrMn spin diffusion length (about 0.7 nm). The authors claim
that this DMI enhancement can be ascribed to the reduction of
the thermal fluctuations of the antiferromagnetic (AFM) spin
arrangement when the IrMn thickness increases, suggesting a
different microscopic origin with respect to HM/FM systems.
The sign of the DMI constant was investigated for several
material combinations by changing both the stacking order
and the multilayer composition (Cho et al., 2017). In sys-
tems with a Pt (W) underlayer, negative (positive) values of
the DMI constant have been found with a quite overall agree-
ment, indicating that a left-handed (right-handed) chirality is
favored. In agreement with the theoretical calculations, it has
also been observed that the sign of DMI is reversed when the
stacking order is inverted, while its value becomes negligi-
ble in symmetric structures where a FM film is sandwiched
between two identical HM layers. On the contrary, the DMI
sign induced by other materials, such as Ir or IrMn, is still
the subject of controversial debate in the literature (see for
instance (Belmeguenai et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2017, 2018)).
However, most experimental works contradict the theoretical
prediction of Ir leading to opposite DMI sign with respect to
Pt (Yang et al., 2015). Recently, the influence of electric fields
on the DMI strength has been investigated in Ta/FeCoB/TaOx
trilayer (Srivastava et al., 2018). A strong variation of the D
value has been observed and attributed to the dependence of
the DMI at the CoFeB/Oxide interface on its oxydation state,
that can be electrically tuned. Among the Co articles, Khan
et al., 2018 investigate the effect of exchange bias with an
antiferromagnetic (AFM) overlayer on Co and confirm that
DMI is not influenced by exchange bias or the AFM spin or-
der. Finally, the sinusoidal dependence of the frequency non-
reciprocity as a function of the angle between the sample mag-
netization and the SW wave vector, theoretically predicted by
Cort´es-Ortu˜no and Landeros (2013), has been experimentally
verified for different multilayer structures (Belmeguenai et al.,
2018; Cho et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2016a; Tacchi et al., 2017;
Zhang et al., 2015).
Let us notice that several studies were able to correlate
the presence of a sizeable DMI not only to the frequency
position of the BLS peaks but also to their linewidth, i.e.
to the damping that affects spin waves.
Already Di et al.

(2015b) studied the interfacial DMI in an in-plane anisotropic
Pt(4)/Co(1.6 nm)/Ni(1.6 nm) film by Brillouin spectroscopy,
showing that the measured linewidths of counterpropagating
magnons are different, with the difference being more pro-
nounced for larger wave vectors. This could be ascribed to
a DMI-induced term that is antisymmetric in the wave vec-
tor. Moreover analytical calculations showed that, due to the
existence of the DMI, the magnon linewidth is no longer a
monotonic function of frequency. In Chaurasiya et al. (2016),
asymmetry in the peak frequency, peak intensity and magnon
lifetime were observed in W/CoFeB/SiO2. Also in this case
the linewidth for spin-wave propagating in +k direction is
smaller than the same for spin-wave propagating in −k direc-


32

Figure 20 Schematic diagram of the BLS interaction geometry. klight
i
and klight
s
represent the wave vectors of the incoming and of the backscat-
tered light. Due to the conservation of the wave vector component parallel to the surface of the specimen, the length of the wave vector of the
SW involved in the scattering process is 2klight
i
sin(θ), as shown in the right panel. SWs propagating along the +k (−k) direction correspond to
those involved in the Stokes (anti-Stokes) process, i.e in the generation (annihilation) of a magnon. The bottom panel shows a typical BLS
spectrum in the absence of DMI (dashed line) and with DMI (continuous line) for positive or negative values of D i.e. of fDMI, respectively.

tion, indicating different lifetimes of magnon propagating in
opposite directions, induced by DMI. More recently, a clear
correlation between the DMI strength and the SW damping
were demonstrated by combined FMR and BLS investigation
in different kind of systems, such as [Pt(1.5)/Co(d)/W(1.5)]xN
multilayers (Benguettat-El Mokhtari et al., 2019), Py(5)/
Cu1−xPtx bilayers (Bouloussa et al., 2019) and He+ irradiated
Ta/CoFeB/MgO films (Diez et al., 2019b).

Very recently, several works reported that a sizeable in-
terfacial DMI can also arise at the interface between an
oxide layer and a ferromagnetic one (Arora et al., 2020;
Kim et al., 2019c; Lin et al., 2020; Nembach et al.,
2020). Nembach et al. (2020) studied the interfacial DMI in
Cu(3)/Co90Fe10(1.5)/Ta(dTa)/Oxide/Ta(3) systems, where the
oxide layer was prepared by in-situ sample oxidation. Chang-
ing the Ta thickness, dTa, an oxide layer of CoFeOx and/or
TaOx was obtained following the sample exposure to oxygen.
The authors found that both the magnitude and sign of the in-
terfacial DMI can be tuned by varying the thickness and the
composition of the oxide layer, due to the changes of the elec-
tronic structure at the interface, induced by the oxidation pro-
cess. Moreover, Lin et al. (2020) showed that in the BaTiO3
(BTO)/CoFeB system the DMI strength is strongly affected
by the termination of the oxide layer (TiO2 vs BaO). In par-
ticular, a higher value of the DMI constant was found for a

TiO2-BTO substrate, and this finding was attributed by first
principle calculations to the different electronic states around
the Fermi level at the oxide/FM interfaces.
In summary, BLS has rapidly become the most used tech-
nique for measuring DMI using spin waves. A reasonable
complexity of the experimental setup and a high accuracy in
the determination of the spin wave dispersion, together with
the fact that no external excitation is needed for this technique,
which relies on thermal excitation, contribute to the success
and spreading of this technique.

2. Time resolved magneto optical imaging

Time resolved magneto-optical Kerr microscopy (TR-
MOKE) allows detecting propagating spin waves in real space
and as a function of time enabling the determination of the
spin wave k-vector and decay.
TR-MOKE was employed
by K¨orner et al. (2015) in order to determine DMI in a
Pt/Co/Py/MgO multilayer. For imaging spatially and time de-
pendent spin wave signals a focused laser pulse (spot size
≤300 nm) of λ =400 nm and pulse length ≈200 fs (repeti-
tion rate 80 MHz) is used. The laser pulses are phase locked
to a microwave generator connected to a coplanar wave guide
(CPW or microwave antenna) deposited on top of the thin film


33

Table XIV Overview of DMI measurements for Co thin films via BLS (publication years 2015 to 2018). FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic
and non-magnetic layer, respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film.
Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the
parameters provided. Signs with ∗ are according to the convention used in this paper and opposite to that in the original manuscript.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mJ/m2) (pJ/m)

Co(0.6-1.2)
Ta(3)/Pt(3)
AlOx/(2)Pt(3)
2.7-1.6 1.6-1.9
-
Belmeguenai et al., 2015

Co(1-2)
Pt(4)
AlOx(2)
1.2-0.9 1.2-1.8 n.a.
Cho et al., 2015

Co(1)
Pt(5)
GdOx(2-5)/Al(2)
1.6
1.6
-
Vaˇnatka et al., 2015

Co(1-1.7)
Pt(4)
AlOx(2)
1.2-0.8 1.2-1.4
-∗

Kim et al., 2015b
Co(1.3-1.8)
Ta(4)/Pt(4)
1.6-1.3 2.1-2.3
-∗

Co(1.06)
Ta(3)/Pt(3)
MgO(2)/Ta(2)
2.05
2.17
-
Boulle et al., 2016

Co(1.3-2.9)
Ta(4)/Ir(4)
AlOx(2)
0.7-0.35
0.9-1
n.a.
Kim et al., 2016b

Co(2)
Ta(4)
Pt(4)
0.7
1.4
+
Cho et al., 2017
Pt(4)
Ta(4)
0.92
1.84
-

Co(1.6)
Ta(4)/Pt(0.8)
AlOx(2)/Pt(1)
0.43
0.7
-
Kim et al., 2017b
Ta(4)/Pt(4.8)
1.57
2.51
-

Co(2.5)
Pt(5.4)
Au (2.5)/Pt(2.6)
0.60
1.51
-
Rowan-Robinson et al., 2017
Ir(2.5)/Pt(2.6)
0.60
1.51
-

Co(1)

Ta(5)

MgO(2)/Ta(2)

0.08
0.08
+

Ma et al., 2018

W(5)
0.11
0.11
+

Ir(5)
0.34
0.34
-

Pt(5)
1.59
1.59
-

Au(5)
0.22
0.22
-

Co(3)
MgO(2)/Pt(6)
Ru(3)
0.43a
1.3a
-
Bouloussa et al., 2018
0.33b
1b
-

Co(1)
Ta(5)/Pt(2)

Ir20Mn80(1.1)
1.14
1.14
-

Khan et al., 2018
Ir20Mn80(1.7)
1.14
1.14
-

Ir20Mn80(2.4)
1.22
1.22
-

Ir20Mn80(5)
1.11
1.11
-

Co(0.6)
Ta(5)/Pt(2)
Fe50Mn50(1)
1.5
1.35c
-
Khan et al., 2018
Fe50Mn50(2.6)
1.44
1.3c
-

[Co(0.2)/Ni(0.6)]2/Co(0.2)

Pt(1.2)

Ta(0.8)/TaN(6)

0.49
0.88
-

Lau et al., 2018
Ir(1.2)
0.05
0.09
-

Pt0.4Ir0.6(1.2)
0.19
0.34
-

Pt0.6Ir0.4(1.2)
0.24
0.43
-

a The sample is a stripe sample with stripe width 300 nm and spacing 100 nm
b Stripe width: 100 nm, spacing 100 nm
c For Ds calculation, the authors have added a monolayer of Fe from Co/FeMn interface to the effective thickness of the FM layer.

sample as shown in Fig. 21. The excited k-vectors are in the
range of 2-10 µm−1. The dynamic out-of-plane magnetization
is detected via MOKE along the direction normal to the CPW
up to a distance of 5 µm from the center of the CPW. The spin
wave dispersion is determined by using the expression given
in Moon et al. (2015). The Co film is 0.4 nm thick and has
a perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). During the mea-
surement it is magnetized in plane parallel to the CPW. Due
to its low damping, the 5 nm Py film on top of Co facilitates
the SW propagation. Damon-Eshbach modes are detected at
various distances from the CPW. Therefore it is possible to de-
tect with this technique not only frequency and amplitude non
reciprocity, but also a non reciprocity in attenuation length of
the spin waves, as predicted by theory.

Apart from the necessity of a pulsed laser system, the com-
plexity of a TR-MOKE experiment is comparable to BLS, as
far as the optical signal acquisition is concerned. However,
SWs need to be excited by a CPW which has to be prepared

by lithography directly on top of the sample. The k-vectors
that can be excited are limited by the CPW geometry. Broad-
band excitation can be obtained by a single line (as e.g. in
Ciubotaru et al. (2016)) with the drawback that the ampli-
tude is reduced with respect to a monochromatic excitation.
Since high k values are preferable, the CPW lines have to be
rather narrow (<1 µm) which requires electron beam lithogra-
phy (EBL). Boundary conditions for the generation of plane
waves have to be taken into account and it is preferable to
have stripes of magnetic material (see supplemental mate-
rial of Chauleau et al. (2014)). The Gilbert damping limits
strongly the technique (Bauer et al., 2014), since the attenua-
tion length with large damping parameter becomes too small
for the SW to be detectable, which is a significant drawback
with respect to BLS.


34

Table XV Overview of DMI measurements for Co thin films via BLS (publication years 2019 to 2021). FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic
and non-magnetic layer, respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film.
Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the
parameters provided. Signs with ∗ are according to the convention used in this paper and opposite to that in the original manuscript.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co(1-2)
Ta(3)/Pt(3)

Ir(3)
0.8 – 0.3
0.8
-

Belmeguenai et al., 2019
Cu(3)
0.9 – 0.4
1.05
-

MgO(1)
0.9 – 0.4
0.95
-

Pt(3)
0
0

[Pt(1.5)/Co(1-2)/W(1.5)]x1
0.2 - 0.3
0.55
-

Benguettat-El Mokhtari et al., 2019
[Pt(1.5)/Co(1-2)/W(1.5)]x3
1.1 - 0.6
0.85
-

[Pt(1.5)/Co(1-2)/W(1.5)]x7
1.2 - 0.6
0.90
-

Co(0.6)
Pt(3)
HfO2(3)
0.9
0.54
-
Diez et al., 2019a

Co(0.9)
Ta(5)/Pt(1.5)

Ti(2.5)/Pt(2.5)
1.42
1.28
n.a.

Kim et al., 2019a

Cu(2.5)/Pt(2.5)
0.87
0.78
n.a.

W(2.5)/Pt(2.5)
1.25
1.13
n.a.

Ta(2.5)/Pt(2.5)
0.99
0.89
n.a.

Al(2.5)/Pt(2.5)
0.92
0.83
n.a.

Pt(2.5)/Pt(2.5)
0.02
0.02
n.a.

Co(1.4)
Ta(5)/Pt(5)
MgO(2)/Ta(3)
1.20
1.68
n.a.
Kim et al., 2019c
Cu(2)/Ta(3)
1.05
1.47
n.a.

Co(0.8)
Ta(2)/Pt(2.2)
Ir(0-2)/Ta(4)
1.8 - 0.88 1.64 - 0.7
-*
Shahbazi et al., 2019

[Pt(3)/Co(1.1)/Ta(4)]x12
0.78
0.86
-
Saha et al., 2019

Co(1.2)
Ta(2.5)/Pt(0.4-2.2)d
Pt(2)
0.27 - 0.42 0.32 - 0.5
+
Gusev et al., 2020

Co(0.8-2.5)
Ta(3)/Pt(3)
Ir(3)
0.95 - 0.3
0.76
-

Benguettat-El Mokhtari et al., 2020b

Co(0.9-2.5)
Ta(3)/Pt(3)e
Ir(3)
0.6 - 0.2
0.53
-

Co(1.1-3.1)
Ta(3)/Ir(3)e
Pt(3)
0.88 - 0.32
1.05
+

Co(1-2.6)
Ta(3)/Ir(3)f
Pt(3)
0.8 - 0.3
0.77
+

Co(0.8-2.5)
Ta(3)/Pt(3)e
Cu(3)
1.31 - 0.42
1.05
-

Co(1-2.2)
Ta(3)/Pt(3)e
MgO(1)
1 - 0.5
0.95
-

Co(1.5-2.1)
Ta(3)/Pt(3)f
MgO(1)
0.8 - 0.6
1.17
-

Co(1.2-10)
Pt(3)
TaOx(0.8)/Al(0.5)
1 - 0.15
1.25g
-

Benguettat-El Mokhtari et al., 2020c
Co(1.2)
Pt(3)
TaOx(0.7-0.9)/Al(0.5)
1.2 - 1.5
1.44 - 1.8
-

Co(1.2)
Pt(3)/Cu(0-2.4)
TaOx(0.8)/Al(0.5)
1.3 - 0
1.56 - 0
-

Co(0.7)
Pt(5)
NixOy(15)
1.75g
1.3
-
Kolesnikov et al., 2021

[W(1)/Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]x10
2.65
1.83
+
Jena et al., 2021
[W(1)/Co(0.6)/Pt(1)]x20
2.49
1.72
+

d On a glass substrate
e Annealed at 300oC
f As grown
g This value was extracted by the authors from a fit of the experimental data of all samples with various Co thicknesses.
g Sample deposited with Ar pressure of 0.13 Pa

3. Propagating spin wave spectroscopy

Propagating spin wave spectroscopy (PSWS) (see Fig. 22)
is a tool to characterize spin waves excited in magnetic thin
films by measuring the dispersion relation and group veloc-
ity all-electrically using a standard high frequency (HF) in-
strument, a Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) (Bailleul et al.,
2001; Schilz, 1973; Stamps and Hillebrands, 1991). In the
field of magnonics it was widely applied (e.g. Neusser et al.
(2010)). As depicted in Fig.22, the VNA emits HF signals in
antenna 1 and receives the transmitted and reflected signals in
antenna 2 and 1, respectively (and vice versa). The mutual
inductance spectra are obtained from the transmission and re-
flection coefficients. The inductance spectra show a shift in
frequency in presence of DMI (see Fig.23) from which D is

directly obtained through Eq.3.12. Currently there are only a
few experimental works published applying PSWS to measure
the DMI constant.
In Lee et al. (2016), one of the first that applied PSWS,
spin waves are excited by a meander shaped CPW (similar
to Vlaminck and Bailleul (2010)), and detected in a second
CPW at a certain distance, thus measuring the spin wave
dispersion and group velocity by a VNA (Bailleul et al.,
2003). The measured magnetic multilayers are Pt/Co/MgO,
MgO/Co/Pt and MgO/Co/MgO in order to compare samples
with positive and negative DMI constant with one with vanish-
ing DMI. The films were patterned into 8 µm wide stripes and
a 40 nm thick AlOx layer for electric insulation was deposited
on top. The CPW consists of Ti(5)/Au(150) and was realized
with a primary spatial period of 800 nm (k=7.85 µm−1) and


35

Table XVI Overview of DMI measurements for CoFeB thin films via BLS. FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer,
respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman
were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the parameters provided.
Numbers with ∗ indicate that a magnetic dead layer was taken into account. Signs with ∗ are according to the convention used in this paper and
opposite to that in the original manuscript.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co48Fe32B20(1.6-3)
Pt(4)
AlOx(2)
0.8-0.4
1.2-1.3
n.a.
Cho et al., 2015

Co40Fe40B20(0.8)
MgO(2)/Pt(2)
MgO(2)/SiO2(3)
1
0.8
-
Di et al., 2015a

Co20Fe60B20(0.85, 1, 1.5, 2, 3)
W(2)
SiO2(2)
0.25-0.08
0.21-0.24
n.a.
Chaurasiya et al., 2016

Co20Fe60B20(1)

W(2)

MgO(1)/Ta(1)

0.25
0.25
+*

Soucaille et al., 2016
W(3)
0.27
0.27
+*

Ta48N52(1)
0.31
0.31
+*

Hf(1)
0.15
0.15
+*

Co20Fe60B20(1)
Ta(5)
Pt(0.12-0.27)/MgO(2) 0.07-0.015 0.07-0.015
+
Ma et al., 2016

Co20Fe60B20(2)
Ir22Mn78(1-7.5)

MgO(2)/Ta(2)

0.02-0.13
0.04-0.26
-

Ma et al., 2017
Co20Fe60B20(0.8-2)
Ir22Mn78(5)
0.15-0.07
0.12-0.14
-

Co20Fe60B20(1.2)
Ir(5)
0.17
0.2
+

Co40Fe40B20(2)
Si/SiO2
Pt(2)/Cu(3)
0.45a
0.9
+
Tacchi et al., 2017

Co40Fe40B20(2)

Pt(4)
Ta(4)
0.51
1.02
-

Cho et al., 2017
Ta(4)
Pt(4)
0.43
0.86
+

Ta(4)
Ta(4)
0.15
0.3
-

Pt(4)
Pt(4)
0.01
0.02
-

Co20Fe60B20(1.12)
Ta(3)/Pt(3)
Ru(0.8)/Ta(3)
0.84
0.94
-
Belmeguenai et al., 2017
Pt(3)/Ru(0.8)
MgO(1)/Ta(3)
0.3
0.37
-

Co20Fe60B20(1)

Ta(5)

MgO(2)/Ta(2)

0.04
0.04
+

Ma et al., 2018

W(5)
0.07
0.07
+

Ir(5)
0.21
0.21
+

Pt(5)
0.97
0.97
-

Au(5)
0.17
0.17
-

[Pt(5)/Co20Fe60B20(1)/Ti(1)]x1

Ti(5)
Pt(5)

0.81
0.81
n.a.

Karakas et al., 2018
[Pt(5)/Co20Fe60B20(1)/Ti(1)]x10
0.79
0.79
n.a.

[Pt(5)/Co20Fe60B20(1)/Ti(1)]x15
0.67
0.67
n.a.

[Pt(5)/Co20Fe60B20(1)/Ti(1)]x60
0.71
0.71
n.a.

CoFeB(1)
Ta(5)/Pt(0.7-4)
MgO(1)/Ta(1)
0- 0.87
0- 0.87
-
Chen et al., 2018b

Co40Fe40B20(0.9)
W(1-13)
MgO(1)/Ta(2)
0.25-0.7
0.23-0.63
n.a.
Kim et al., 2018c

Co20Fe60B20(0.9)
Ta(3)
TaOx(1)
0.08
0.05∗
+
Srivastava et al., 2018

Co20Fe60B20(1.5)
Ta(1)

Cu(0-2.4)/Pt(4)
0.52 - 0.14 0.78 - 0.21
+

Benguettat-El Mokhtari et al., 2020a
Ta(0-2.4)/Pt(4)
0.52 - 0
0.78 - 0
+

MgO(0-1.8)/Pt(4)
0.55 - 0
0.78 - 0
+

Co20Fe60B20(1.5-6)
Pt(4)
0.7 - 0.2
1.25b
+

Co20Fe60B20(2)
TiO2-BTO
Pt(4)
0.45
0.9
+
Lin et al., 2020
BaO-BTO
Pt(4)
0.56
1.12
+

a for dPt >2nm
b Ds is obtained from the linear fit of D versus 1/d for d >1.5 nm (d is the FM thickness)

subsidiary spatial period of 2250 nm (k = 2.8 µm−1). The Co
thickness d was changed from 14 nm to 20 nm. The DMI
constant is considered here to be a pure interface effect with a
characteristic length λ = 0.25 nm, so that the interfacial DMI
Di is calculated to be D = Diλ/d. Assuming that Diλ remains
constant the authors obtain a value D = 1.8 pJ/m2 for a Co
thickness of 2 nm.

In
Kasukawa
et
al.
(2018),
a
similar
film
Ta(2)/Pt(3)/Co(20)/MgO(2) was investigated for electric
field effects.
Modulations of spin wave frequency were
obtained by the gate electric field and the electric field
dependence of the DMI was calculated to be 2±0.93 fJ/Vm.

The interfacial DMI was obtained at zero electric field and
calculated to be 0.45±0.15 mJ/m2. The value calculated for
Ds, as defined in this paper, is very high compared with other
techniques. The authors reason that the measured frequency
shifts are not caused by the effects of different interfacial
anisotropies at the Pt/Co and MgO/Co interface, since no
magnetic field dependence was observed.
Therefore, they
attribute the whole ∆ f to the interfacial DMI. However, it
appears that the measured value is overestimated in this way.

Lucassen
et
al.
(2020)
investigate
Ta(4)/X(4)/Co(d)/Y(3)/Pt(2) stacks with d
= 4-26 nm
and (X,Y)=(Pt, Ir),(Ir, Pt) by meander type CPWs with


36

Table XVII Overview of DMI measurements various FM materials via BLS. FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer,
respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d, with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were
quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from figures or calculated using the parameters provided. The
value indicated with ∗ was given for the thickest FM film.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co(1.6)/Ni(1.6)
Pt(4)
MgO(2)/SiO2(3)
0.44
1.4
-
Di et al., 2015b

Ni80Fe20(4)
Si substrate
Pt(6)
0.056a
0.34
+
Stashkevich et al., 2015

Co(1.6)/Ni(1.6)
MgO(2)/Pt(4) MgO(2)/SiO2(3)
0.44
1.4
-
Zhang et al., 2015

Ni80Fe20(1-13)
Ta(3)/Pt(6)
SiN
0.15-0.025 0.15 - 0.33
-
Nembach et al., 2015

Co2FeAl(0.9-1.8)
Ta(2)/Ir(4)
Ti(2)
0.5 - 0.3
0.37∗
-
Belmeguenai et al., 2018

Fe(3)
SiO2
Pt(4)
0.22
0.67
+
Zhang et al., 2018
MgO(5)
0.35
1.05
+

Py(5)
Cu1−xPtx(6)b
0 - 0.05
0 - 0.27
+
Belmeguenai et al., 2019

Co90Fe10(1)/oxidec
Ta(3)/Pt(6)
Cu(3)/Ta(2)
1.29-1.65
2.52
-
Nembach et al., 2020
Ta(3)/Cu(6)
-0.02-0.26
0.4d
-

YIG(10)
GGG substrate
0.01
0.1
n.a.
Wang et al., 2020

[Py(1)/Pt(1)]10
Ta(5)/Pt(6)
Au(3)
0.032
0.032
-
Ahmadi et al., 2020

Fe(3)

SiO2(4)
Pt(4)
0.25
0.75
+

Zhang et al., 2021

SiO2(4)/Pt(4)
SiO2(4)
0.33
1
-

SiO2(4)/Au(4)
SiO2(4)
0.07
0.21
+

SiO2(4)
Au(4)
0.07
0.21
+

SiO2(4)/Au(4)
Pt(4)
0.4
1.2
+

SiO2(4)/Pt(4)
Au(4)
0.17
0.51
-

a This value was calculated according to the definition of D used in this paper from the original value ¯D by D = ¯Da/(
√

2d), where a=0.248nm is the lattice
constant of Py
b x=0,6.6,28,45,75,100 %
c Oxidation: 0-1000 s at 99 % Ar and 1 % O2
d The value refers to the longest oxidation of 1000 s

Figure 21 Scheme of a time resolved magneto-optic Kerr effect ex-
periment.
The pulse train of a femtosecond laser system is syn-
chronized to the sinusoidal excitation field which is generated by
sending a microwave current through a coplanar wave guide. The
change of polarisation of the reflected light is analysed in an optical
bridge and sent to a lock-in analyser synchronized to a microwave
mixer/chopper.

wave vectors k = 4, 5.5, 7, 8.5, 10 µm−1. Changing the Co
thickness in such a wide range leads to a gradual transition
between different Co phases and therefore a change in volume
anisotropy in the different samples has to be considered. A
detailed analysis of the frequency non-reciprocity due to
DMI considering surface anisotropy and changes in volume
anisotropy is performed.
Also Gladii et al. (2020, 2016)
(see Fig.
24) performed an analysis of the influence of a
difference in surface (interface) anisotropy on both sides
of a Permalloy film on the SW dispersion. In Gladii et al.
(2016) the frequency non reciprocity due to different sur-
face anisotropies was calculated revisiting the approach of
Kalinikos and Slavin (1986).
The important result of the
paper is that the frequency non reciprocity due to a difference
in surface anisotropies scales as d2, where d is the thickness
of the FM film, while the contribution due to DMI scales
with d−1. In this approach, the exchange spin waves play an
important role and a purely magnetostatic approach would
lead to unrealistic modal profiles.
In Gladii et al. (2020)
additionally the spin wave relaxation rate was measured using
two CPWs as emitter and detector at different distance. An
injected DC current in the Pt layer induced STT via the spin
Hall effect and linearly altered the spin wave relaxation time.
From this it was possible to obtain additional information
such as the spin Hall conductivity.

On the brink of this review is the recent paper (Wang et al.,

2020) which investigates interfacial DMI at an oxide-oxide


37

Figure 22 Scheme of the PSWS measurement. The two antennas
are emitting and receiving HF signals from a VNA, which generates
spin waves with an antenna specific k-vector distribution. Applying
an in-plane magnetic field parallel to the antenna, and focusing on
spin waves with k perpendicular to it, an absorption in the signal is
observed due to the Damon Eshbach (surface) modes which travel
preferentially on one of the film surfaces contributing with different
anisotropies (Kbot
s
and Ktop
s ). From Gladii et al., 2016.

D<0

D>0

D=0

• D<0
• D>0

Figure 23 Shift of the mutual inductance spectra with D.
The
plot was obtained from numerical calculations based on the LLG
approach with use of the surface permeability (Emtage, 1978) on
a magnetic film (saturation magnetization µ0Ms = 1.70 T, damp-
ing α = 0.012, film thickness d = 10 nm, D = ±0.5 mJ/m2)
for an antenna with an excitation maximum for a wave vector of
kmax = 10.4 µm−1. Left panel: the frequency shift with respect to
the applied magnetic field is shown. The black dashed line is the
calculated Damon Eshbach frequency with D = 0.

interface, here YIG/GGG. This so called Rashba (or iSGE)
induced DMI was recently observed in Avci et al. (2019) and
Ding et al. (2019). Here YIG films with thicknesses 7,10,
20, 40, 80 nm on a GGG substrate were measured by PSWS
and from the asymmetric group velocities the DMI constant
was calculated. The values were comparable with the ones
obtained from BLS.
A very recent work (K¨uß et al., 2020) employs a technique
which, as in PSWS, exploits the SW non-reciprocity in pres-
ence of DMI. The magneto acoustic spin wave (MASW) mea-
surement is experimentally similar to PSWS using a VNA for
the detection of the MASW absorption, although it is based
on a slightly different physical principle. Via antennas con-
nected to the VNA, surface acoustic waves (SAW) are excited
in LiNbO3/CoFeB(1.4-2 nm)/Pt(3 nm) heterostructures which
couple to the SWs and generate MASWs with frequencies de-
pending on DMI (see Fig.25). As in a PSWS experiment the
D value is obtained from the frequency shift between SWs
travelling in opposite directions. The non-reciprocity in the

Figure 24 (a-b) Mutual inductance spectra of Py/Pt bilayers mea-
sured at µ0H = 37 mT for spin waves with k < 0 and k > 0. The
frequency of the left-moving spin wave is shifted with respect to the
frequency of the right-moving one with a difference δfNR (c) Fre-
quency non reciprocity as a function of the Py thickness. Dashed
line and dashed-dotted line are the frequency non reciprocity con-
tributions induced by DMI and magnetic anisotropy asymmetry, re-
spectively. From Gladii et al. (2020).

resonant field is caused by the DMI as well as the reduced
coupling efficiency due to the SAW-SW helicity mismatch for
opposite propagation directions.

In summary, the electric SW measurement is rather
straightforward and only commercially available equipment
is required. Among the SW techniques it has a very good fre-
quency resolution of a few MHz. As in the TR-MOKE exper-
iments, the excitation of SWs is performed by CPWs, which
have to be prepared by EBL in order to obtain high wave num-
bers, and therefore larger DMI signals. Usually only few wave
vectors are available, since each wave vector requires its own


38

Figure 25 (a) Scheme of the experimental setup, sample and the
coordinate system of the magneto acoustic spin wave (MASW) mea-
surement. The transmission coefficients S 21 and S 12 for the oppo-
sitely propagating surface accustic waves (SAWs) with wave vec-
tors kS 21 and kS 12 are measured by a VNA. The SAW transmission
signals of (b) CoFeB(2 nm) and (c) CoFeB(2 nm)/Pt are shown.
CoFeB(2 nm)/Pt shows a nonreciprocity in both transmission am-
plitude at resonance and resonant magnetic field. From K¨uß et al.
(2020).

CPW geometry and values are limited to about 10 µm−1 us-
ing conventional techniques. Only sophisticated techniques
allow to reach higher values (Liu et al., 2018).
A second
CPW is used for detecting the spin wave signal and the sig-
nal to noise ratio is in generally low, so that only thick FM
films (>20 nm) give a clear, well measurable signal. How-
ever, the resonance frequency can be extracted well also from
a noisy signal. More problematic is the analysis of an ampli-
tude non-reciprocity. Since the FM films are rather thick, us-
ing Ds = D·d gives much larger values than other techniques.
This may be due to the fact that Ds is not well estimated since
large differences of surface properties might occur. In order to
avoid the Ds concept, some groups (Lee et al. (2016)), similar
to Kostylev (2014), attribute the measured DMI value Di only
to a thin layer (monolayer or layer of a characteristic length)
close to the interface. This delivers values for an effective D
value comparable to other techniques, but depends on the ar-
bitrary choice of the characteristic length. However, while it
is shown in several works that the 1/d dependence does not
hold for thicker samples (see e.g. Nembach et al. (2015)),
the PSWS method particularly confirms this, first because ul-
trathin films are difficult to be measured, second because the
surface character of the Damon Eshbach waves might play a
role.

4. Spin-polarized electron energy loss spectroscopy

Following the theoretical work of Udvardi and Szunyogh

(2009), the spin wave dispersion asymmetry due to DMI was
firstly measured by spin-polarized electron energy loss spec-
troscopy (SPEELS) on a double layer of Fe(110) grown on
W(110) single crystal (Zakeri et al., 2010). A monochroma-
tized spin-polarized electron beam is scattered from the sam-

ple and energy loss or gain as a function of in-plane momen-
tum transfer is measured. The minority electrons create sur-
face SWs by a virtual spin flip scattering process and loose
energy, while majority electrons may annihilate thermally ex-
cited SWs and gain energy. One measures a peak in the mi-
nority spin channel in the energy loss region and a peak in the
majority spin channel in the energy gain region (analog to the
Stokes and Anti-Stokes peak in BLS) (Zakeri, 2016). At an
electron energy of 4.163 eV (resolution 19 meV) a wave vec-
tor of ±0.5-1 Å−1 is employed by changing the angle of the
incident beam. A small SW dispersion asymmetry is expected
due to Damon-Eshbach surface modes of about 0.1 meV. The
energy difference for ±k is evaluated by inverting the mag-
netization direction. The modulus of the DMI vector for first
neighbors is 0.9 meV and 0.5 meV for second neighbors. With
an interatomic distance of a =3.16 Å and a monolayer thick-
ness 1.72 Å a value of D =3.95±0.6 mJ/m2 is obtained. In
a recent work (Tsurkan and Zakeri, 2020) the technique was
taken up again to investigate Co/Fe bilayers with C2v symme-
try on W(110) and compared with the previous results. The
fundamental role of the crystal symmetry is demonstrated re-
sulting in an extraordinary high DMI. With a thickness of
2×1.72 Å a value of D =6.55±0.7 mJ/m2 is obtained.
The main advantage of SPEELS is that the wave vector
k = 500-1200 µm−1 is hundreds of times larger than for the
above techniques, allowing to explore exchange-based spin
waves. Since the energy difference of spin waves with op-
posite k vector grows linearly with k the asymmetry detected
is about 100 times larger, so that even very small D constants
can be measured. On the other hand, one can recall the ne-
cessity of ultra-high-vacuum conditions and the impossibility
of applying magnetic fields. Furthermore, spin wave energies
calculated usually from a Heisenberg model have to take into
account the itinerant character of the spins in ferromagnetic
metals by effective exchange constants. A quantitative esti-
mation of the effective exchange constants (isotropic J as well
as anisotropic D) requires complex ab initio approaches com-
bined with spin dynamic simulations (Bergqvist et al., 2013).
This is especially valid for mono- or bilayers of ferromagnets
on a heavy metal, as were investigated by SPEELS, where
changes in the inter- and intra-layer distances have a non-
trivial influence on the exchange parameters (Zakeri, 2016).

D. Advantages and Limitations

The main advantage of spin waves methods for determina-
tion of the DMI constant is the rather simple expression for the
measurable frequency difference that occurs when the sign of
k is changed, as seen in Eq. 3.11. This also means that not
only the size, but also the sign of the constant can be easily
determined, provided that the geometry of the experiment and
the polarity of the applied field are specified. However, atten-
tion has to be paid to several aspects.
First of all, as it is the case for DW methods, the saturation
magnetization should be determined by external means, such


39

Table XVIII Overview of DMI measurements of various FM materials via spin wave methods different from BLS. K¨orner et al. (2015)
use TR-MOKE, Tsurkan and Zakeri (2020) and Zakeri et al. (2010) use SPEELS, K¨uß et al. (2020) use MASW spectroscopy and all the
others PSWS. FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and Ds = D · d,
with d being the thickness of the ferromagnetic film. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were
either extracted from figures or calculated using the parameters provided. Signs with ∗ are according to the convention used in this paper and
opposite to that in the original manuscript.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
D
Ds
Sign
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Fe(2ML)a
W(110) single crystal
3.95±0.6b
1.36±0.2c
+
Zakeri et al., 2010

Co(0.4)/Py(5)
Ta(2)/Pt(2)
MgO(5)
0.16
0.89
-
K¨orner et al., 2015

Co(14-20)

Ta(3)/Pt(3)
MgO(1.8)/Ta(3)
0.19-0.26
3.62-4.08
-∗

Lee et al., 2016
Ta(3)/MgO(1.8)
MgO(1.8)/Ta(3)
0.03
0.54
-∗

Ta(3)/MgO(1.8)
Pt(3)/Ta(3)
0.11-0.17
2.1-2.55
+∗

Py(6)
Al2O3(21)
Al2O3(5)
0.007
0.04
-
Gladii et al., 2016

Co(20)
Ta(2)/Pt(3)
MgO(2)
0.45
9
-∗
Kasukawa et al., 2018

Co(4-26)

Ta(4)/Pt(4)
Ir(3)/Pt(2)
n.a.
1.0±0.2
-

Lucassen et al., 2020
Ta(4)/Pt(4)
Pt(3)/Pt(2)
n.a.
0.1±0.04
-

Ta(4)/Ir(4)
Pt(3)/Pt(2)
n.a.
1.0±0.2
+

Py(4-20)
Ti(5)
Pt(5,10)
n.a.
0.25
+
Gladii et al., 2020

YIG(10)
GGG substrate
0.0099±0.0019
0.1
n.a.
Wang et al., 2020

Fe/Co (ML)a
W(110) single crystal
6.55±0.7
2.25±0.25c
+
Tsurkan and Zakeri, 2020

Co40Fe40B20(2)
LiNbO3
Pt(3)
0.424±0.001
0.85±0.002
+∗
K¨uß et al., 2020

a ML: atomic monolayer
b the value in SI units was taken from the supplemental material of Tsurkan and Zakeri (2020), while the original work reports D in meV
c the value was obtained assuming a ML thickness of 1.72Å

as vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) or SQUID magne-
tometry. Then, the gyromagnetic factor and the anisotropy
constants can be obtained by either FMR or BLS measure-
ments as a function of the intensity and the direction of the
external field.
Furthermore, the thickness of the magnetic
active layer has to be evaluated correctly in the derivation
of Ds from measurement of ωDMI. Not always it coincides
with the nominal layer thickness due to interlayer mixing
(dead layer) (Belmeguenai et al., 2018) or proximity effects
(Rowan-Robinson et al., 2017). Finally, it is considered that
ω0 in Eq. 3.11 is independent of the sign of k. This is in gen-
eral the case, but when comparing different samples (e.g. with
different thicknesses), this might be not perfectly true, for ex-
ample due to different surface/interface anisotropies at both
sides of the magnetic film which influence differently the ±k
spin waves and ∆ω0 = ω0(k) − ω0(−k) � 0. Therefore, such
a difference is necessarily reflected in the measured frequency
asymmetry. This problem comes from the fact that DE waves
travel on opposite surfaces at opposite k directions (Camley,
1987) and therefore any difference in magnetic properties at
the two surfaces, as e.g. surface anisotropy, will reflect in a
non-reciprocity of the spin wave spectra. By comparison with
theoretical models and the correct measurement procedure
their contribution has to estimated as far as possible. For ex-
ample, the asymmetry due to differences in surface anisotropy
or asymmetry in saturation magnetisation Ms is evaluated in
Di et al. (2015b) by measuring additionally to a Pt/Co/Ni sam-
ple a Co/Ni and a Co/MgO/Ni sample. While in the latter ∆ω0
is negligible, meaning that the contribution due to asymmetry
in Ms is negligible, the former shows an opposite sign of ∆ω0

with respect to the Pt/Co/Ni sample. This means that the two
interfaces have different contributions either from anisotropy
or DMI, but that a major role is played by the Pt/Co interface
with opposite sign with respect to the Co/Ni interface.

Surface effects usually scale as 1/d (Hillebrands, 1990;

Stamps and Hillebrands, 1991) which might open a question
on how to distinguish DMI related non-reciprocity from other
surface or interface effects. However, the frequency shift due
to DMI and surface anisotropy are intrinsically different. As
shown in (Gladii et al., 2020) they have different dependencies
on d as the first is proportional to 1/d while the latter to d2.
Furthermore, the first depends linearly on k, while the latter
has a more complex dependence, but usually decreases with
k. The wave vector dependence of the frequency shift due to
the surface anisotropy is stronger for thicker films, while the
one induced by DMI is larger for thinner films (see e.g. sup-
plementary material of (Lucassen et al., 2020)). This opens
the possibility to distinguish the different contributions, de-
pending on the value of k, having available films of different
thickness.

It was shown by numeric calculations and experimentally
by Stashkevich et al. (2015) that for thin films (dPy < 8 nm)
the SW reciprocity due to the surface anisotropy is negligible
with respect to that induced by DMI, while for thicker films
both contributions have to be considered. On the basis of the
above arguments, in the literature it is usually considered that
at kd << 1 any dependence of ω0 on the sign of k can be
neglected (Nembach et al., 2015) and that, in absence of DMI,
the ±k spin waves are subjected to an average magnetic energy
equal at both sides of the magnetic film (Soohoo, 1963).


40

Care has to be taken not only with respect to frequency non-
reciprocity, but also to amplitude non-reciprocity. Also here
there might be effects due to different boundary conditions at
the interfaces of the ferromagnetic film. For example a metal-
lic boundary condition at one side would attenuate strongly
the spin wave travelling close to it. Furthermore, methods as
PSWS show an amplitude non-reciprocity due to the fact that
the CPW couples more to one wave vector than to the other
due to the symmetry of the CPW (Serga et al., 2010).
Probably the strongest experimental limitation of the meth-
ods based on spin waves is that the sample has to be magne-
tized in-plane in order to be able to detect DE modes. There-
fore for samples with strong out-of-plane anisotropy (perpen-
dicular magnetic anisotropy, PMA) it is necessary to apply a
sufficiently high in-plane field, which can be experimentally
difficult. Furthermore, ultrathin PMA films, give rise to a low
signal to noise ratio, not only due to their thickness but often
also due to the high damping, so that fitting procedures may
have quite large uncertainties. This sets a lower limit to the
values of D that may be measured by spin wave methods and
therefore these may be considered as reliable for either mag-
netic film thicknesses above a certain threshold, or with low
damping, or high DMI constant.

IV. Spin Orbit Torque method

A. Method overview

When a charge current is applied to a HM/FM bilayer, spin
torque effects occur due to the strong spin-orbit interaction at
the interface. A charge current Je flowing in the HM along
the x axis will generate a transverse spin accumulation ⃗σ
along the y direction through the spin Hall effect and/or in-
verse spin Galvanic effect (Manchon et al., 2019). The spin
accumulation acts on the magnetic moment ⃗M and results in
an effective damping-like magnetic field ⃗Hef f ≈
⃗σ × ⃗M.
Of particular interest is the out-of-plane effective magnetic
field He f f,z induced at the N´eel-type DW (Pai et al., 2016).
As shown in Fig. 26, Hef f,z depends on the angle φ be-
tween the DW moment and the x axis, and can be quantita-
tively written as Hef f,z = χDLJecosφ (which represents ef-
fectivly Eq. 2.2), where the charge-to-spin conversion effi-
ciency (effective damping-like field per unit current density)
χDL = (ℏξDL/2eµ0MS d). Here, ξDL, MS , d are the effective
damping-like torque efficiency, the saturation magnetization
of the FM and thickness of the FM layer.

B. Theory and models

Pai et al. (2016) first proposed a method to simultaneously
determine the spin-torque efficiency and DMI field HDMI in
HM/FM with PMA, based on current assisted DW propaga-
tion model. As shown in Fig. 26(a), in the case of a homochi-
ral N´eel-type DW, the net Hef f,z which acts on the DW mag-
netization is expected to be zero due to the opposite signs of

He f f,z for up-to-down (cosφ = 1) and down-to-up (cosφ = −1)
DWs. In this case, the opposite He f f,z at the DWs moves the
domain in the same direction and there is no domain expan-
sion. However, when an in-plane external magnetic field Hx
is applied that is large enough to overcome HDMI, the mag-
netization in the walls will align parallel to Hx as shown in
Fig. 26(b) and the resulting He f f,z will point along the same
direction for both up-to-down and down-to-up DWs.
This
leads to the expansion or contraction of domains. The mag-
nitude and the polarity of He f f,z depends on Hx and Je., i.e.,
He f f,z(Hx, Je). Since He f f,z acts as an effective magnetic field
for the device, it is thus expected that the out-of-plane hystere-
sis loop of the bi-layer can be shifted by He f f,z. Therefore, by
measuring the shift of the hysteresis loop as a function of Hx
and Je, one can determine the magnitude of HDMI as well as χ.
Specifically, HDMI is determined when the DW is fully aligned
by Hsat, i.e. HDMI = Hsat, and χDL = He f f,z(Hsat, Je)/Je.

As shown in Fig. 27(a), an anomalous Hall effect (AHE)
loop, i.e., an anomalous Hall voltage versus out-of-plane mag-
netic field, is measured by changing both the magnitude and
polarity of Ie and Hx. Under an in-plane bias-field of 0.25 T
the AHE-loop shifts to opposite directions at ±6 mA, which
indicates the opposite sign of the induced He f f,z due to the
SOT. The Ie dependence of the up-to-down switching field
HS W,up−to−down and down-to-up switching field HS W,down−to−up
is summarized in Fig. 27(c).
Two current-related effects
should be considered to explain the switching fields, i.e., the
effect of Joule heating and He f f,z. Joule heating reduces the
coercivity HC which is proportional to I2
e, i.e., HC(I2
e); while
He f f,z is expected to show a linear behaviour with respect to
Ie, i.e., He f f,z(Ie). Thus, for a fixed Ie, the switching field
can be written as HS W,up−to−down = He f f,z + HC for up-to-
down switching, and HS W,down−to−up = He f f,z − HC for down-
to-up switching. By eliminating the effect of Joule heating,
the magnitude of He f f,z can be easily obtained as He f f,z =
(HS W,up−to−down + HS W,down−to−up)/2. As shown in Fig. 27(c),
He f f,z scales linearly with Ie, indicating that He f f,z is indeed
induced by current-induced spin accumulation due to inter-
facial spin-orbit interaction. One can quantify the conversion
efficiency by the slope χ(Hx, Je) = dHe f f,z/dJe, and Fig. 27(d)
shows the magnitude and polarization of χ as a function of in-
plane bias magnetic-field along x and y directions. One can
see that χ remains zero with the application of Hy, but χ in-
creases linearly with Hx and saturates at µ0Hsat = 0.5 T. This
observation is in agreement with the domain expansion pic-
ture, where the DW magnetization changes from an average
value of < cosφ >= 0 at Hx = 0 to < cosφ >= 1 when Hx
fully aligns the DW moment, which provides a measure of
HDMI with HDMI = Hsat. Moreover, the magnitude of χDL is
obtained when χ saturates, from which one can determine the
charge-to-spin conversion efficiency ξDL.


41

Figure 26 (a) Schematics of the current induced effective magnetic field Hef f,z at the N´eel-type chiral domain wall in a HM/FM bilayer
with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. In the absence of an external magnetic field, Hef f,z at the DW points along the opposite direction
(Hef f,z = 0) thus the motion of a domain wall vDW is along the –x direction and there is no domain expansion. (b) In the presence of an external
magnetic field Hx large enough to align the N´eel-type DW along Hx, the induced Hef f,z points along the same direction, which leads to domain
expansion due to the domain wall motion towards to the opposite directions. (a) and (b) are taken from Pai et al., 2016. (c) In the absence of
Hx, there is no shift of the anomalous Hall loop. (d) However, a shift of the anomalous Hall loop is expected with the application of Hx, which
provides a measure of DMI and the spin-torque efficiency.

C. Experimental Results

Data of DMI constants determined using the SOT method
are reported in Tab. XIX. Initially, Pai et al. (2016) quantified
the magnitude of HDMI in Pt/Co/MgO, Pt/CoFeB/MgO and
Ta/CoFeB/MgO multilayers, and demonstrated opposite signs
of the spin Hall angle for Pt and Ta. They also show that
a sizeable DMI exists in wedged Pt/Co(wedge)/MgO sam-
ples, where an additional spin-orbit torque appears due to the
lateral structure asymmetry and which can be used for in-
plane bias magnetic field free switching. By inserting a Pt
spacer between a Ta and CoFeB interface, Chen et al. (2018b)
found that both the spin-torque efficiency and the DMI con-
stant D gradually decrease as the Pt thickness increases to
1 nm. Note that we did not include ultra thin layers in our
summary since the layer formation may not be complete in
this case.
To generate larger interfacial DMI to support a
skyrmion phase, a non centrosymmetric superlattice structure
[HM1/FM/HM2]N with PMA is sometimes adopted because
of the enhanced interlayer coupling Moreau-Luchaire et al.
(2016). Ishikuro et al. (2019) demonstrated that the DMI at

Ir/Co and Pt/Co interfaces shows comparable magnitude with
the same sign, leading to a reduced DMI in Pt/Co/Ir trilay-
ers in agreement with several measurements using BLS and
DW methods. Khadka et al. (2018) showed that the DMI
in Pt/Co/Ru trilayers is comparable to Pt/Co/Ir. Yang et al.
(2021) measured the spin-orbit torque and DMI in [Ni-Co]/Ir
heterostructures. By alloying Cr into Pt, Quan et al. (2020) re-
cently found that both the spin-torque efficiency and the DMI
can be modulated, reaching a maximum at a Cr concentration
of about 25%.

Pai
et
al.
(2016)
found
that
HDMI
in
a
Pt(4
nm)/Co(1
nm)/MgO(2
nm)
stack
and
a
Pt(4 nm)/CoFeB(1 nm)/MgO(2 nm) stack differ by a
factor of two. Since DMI is an interfacial effect, the magni-
tude of HDMI is expected to be inversely proportional to the
thickness of FM. However, no clear experimental results with
the SOT method show this trend indicating that DMI can have
a complicated relation to the FM thickness. Interestingly, it
has been shown in W/FM/MgO structures (FM = CoFeB,
FeB) that HDMI changes sign upon increasing the thickness
of FM (Dohi et al., 2019), indicating that there could be


42

a)a)
b)

c)
d)

Figure 27
(a) Schematics of the measurement of the DMI field utilizing the anomalous Hall effect (AHE). (b) AHE-loops for
Pt(4 nm)/Co(1 nm)/MgO(2 nm) with Ie = ±6 mA (note that for consistency in the main text, we use Ie (Je) instead of Idc as used in the
figure) and an in-plane bias magnetic field Hx = 0.25 T. For clarity, slight offsets are introduced for both AHE loops. (c) Switching fields HS W
for down-to-up (red triangles) and up-to-down (blue circles) magnetization reversal as a function of Ie. H0 = Hef f,z represents the average
value of the switching fields. (d) Charge to spin conversion efficiency as a function of in-plane bias field for Pt(4 nm)/Co(1 nm)/MgO(2 nm).
Blue squares and red circles represent the data obtained with in-plane magnetic field along x and y directions, respectively. Note that we use
χDL in the text instead of χS HE. All the figures are taken from Pai et al., 2016.

competing mechanisms contributing to DMI as well as to
the interfacial spin-orbit interaction (Cao et al., 2018b; Chen
et al., 2018a; Yun et al., 2018).

Recently, measurements have demonstrated the presence
of DMI in heavy metal/magnetic insulator heterostrucures,
where the DMI is strong enough to stabilize skyrmions (Ding
et al., 2019; Shao et al., 2019) and for fast domain motion
(Avci et al., 2019). Ferrimagnetic insulators are attractive due
to their lower Gilbert damping in comparison with ultrathin
ferromagnetic metals. Using SOT, Ding et al. (2019) quanti-
fied the DMI in thulium iron garnet (TmIG)/Pt bi-layers, and
have shown that the magnitude of the DMI constant is about 1-
2 orders smaller than in metallic heterostructures. They also
showed that the magnitude of the DMI constant is inversely
proportional to the TmIG thickness, indicating that the DMI
in TmIG/Pt bilayer is indeed an interfacial effect. In Ding
et al. (2020a) the origin of the DMI in TmIG/HM bilayers
on Gd Garnet (GGG) substrates could be attributed to the
GGG/TmIG interface by investigating the FM and HM thick-

ness dependent DMI and SOT.

D. Advantages and Limitations

Being different from the methods based on DW motion
and asymmetric spin-wave propagation, the method based
on current-induced shifts of the anomalous Hall loops is a
straightforward way for determining the DMI field without
involving complicated mathematical models. However, this
method requires perpendicular magnetic anisotropy of the fer-
romagnetic material, which typically limits this method to
ultrathin ferromagnetic materials. Non-square shapes of the
AHE-loops also lead to inaccuracies in the determination of
HDMI. To determine the DMI constant, one requires a numer-
ical value for the exchange stiffness; usually an assumed value
is used. Moreover, this method is not capable to determine the
sign of DMI.


43

Table XIX Overview of DMI measurements of various FM materials by spin-orbit torque induced effective field under an in-plane bias
magnetic field. FM and NM stand for ferromagnetic and non-magnetic layer, respectively. D is the interfacial DMI constant and DS = D · d,
where d is the thickness of the FM. Numbers in roman were quoted in the reviewed papers, while numbers in italics were either extracted from
figures or calculated using the parameters provided.

FM
Bottom NM
Top NM
|µ0HDMI|
|D|
|Ds|
Ref
(nm)
(nm)
(nm)
(mT)
(mJ/m2)
(pJ/m)

Co(1)
Pt(4)

MgO(2)

500
3.0
3.0

Pai et al., 2016

CoFeB(1)
Pt(4)
250
1.8
1.8

CoFeB(1)
Ta(6)
25
0.6
0.6

Co(0.65)
Pt(4)
110
1.45
0.94

Co(0.80)
Pt(4)
200
1.99
1.59

Co(0.92)
Pt(4)
290
2.12
1.95

Co(1.00)
Pt(4)
400
2.64
2.64

Co(1.10)
Pt(4)
450
2.91
3.20

Co(1.23)
Pt(4)
310
2.49
3.06

Co(1.43)
Pt(4)
160
1.62
2.32

Co(1.52)
Pt(4)
100
1.37
2.08

Co(0.5)
Pt(4)

Ta(2)
110±10
1.01±0.12
0.51±0.06

Yun et al., 2018
Ta(4)
110±10
0.75±0.09
0.38±0.05

Ta(6)
80±10
0.70±0.09
0.35±0.05

Ta(8)
190±10
1.4±0.12
0.7±0.06

Co(1.2)
Pt(4)
Ir(1)
65±6
1.09±0.14
1.31±0.17

Khadka et al., 2018

Co(1.2)
Pt(4)
Ir(2)
81±8
1.42±0.18
1.7±0.22

Co(1)
Pt(4)
Ir(1)
130±13
2.06±0.26
2.06±0.26

Co(1)
Pt(4)
Ru(2)
140.4±14
2.66±0.33
2.66±0.33

Co(0.8)
Pt(4)
Ru(2)
212±21
2.40±0.3
1.92±0.24

Co(0.8)
Pt(4)
Ru(3)
218±22
2.30±0.29
1.84±0.23

Co(0.8)
Pt(4)
Ru(4)
238.6±24
2.56±0.32
2.05±0.26

[Pt(1)/Co(0.8)/Ru(1.3)]x2
Pt(3)
220±22
2.07±0.26
1.66±0.21

CoFeB(1.3)
Ta(3)
MgO(1)
30
0.22
0.29
Chen et al., 2018a

CoFeB(1.4)
Mo(4)
MgO(2)
20
0.35
0.49
Chen et al., 2018b

FeB(0.96)

α-W(4)
MgO(1.6)

25
n.a.
n.a.

Dohi et al., 2019
FeB(0.86)
30
n.a.
n.a.

FeB(0.76)
18
n.a.
n.a.

FeB(0.56)
50
n.a.
n.a.

[Pt(0.6)/Co(0.9)/Ir(0.6)]x3
Pt(2)
MgO(2)
80
0.4
0.36

Ishikuro et al., 2019

[Pt(0.6)/Co(0.9)/Cu(0.6)]x3
Pt(2)
MgO(2)
180
1.8
1.62

[Pt(0.6)/Co(0.9)/Ir(0.6)]x1
Pt(2)
MgO(2)
110
0.7
0.63

Co(0.9)
Ir(7)
MgO(2)
220
1.6
1.44

Co(0.9)
Pt(2)/Ir(1)
Ru(1)
150
1.1
0.99

TmIGa(2.9)
Pt(7)
n.a.
20±1
0.036±0.02
0.1±0.06
Ding et al., 2019

TmIGa(2.9-16)

GGGb substrate

Pt(7)
22 - 1.5
0.035 - 0.003
0.13c

Ding et al., 2020b
TmIGa(5.4)

Pt(0.5-7)
n.a.
0.024 - 0.029
0.13d

W(5)/Cu(3)
n.a.
0.025
0.135

Cu(3)/Pt(1.5)
n.a.
0.025
0.135

Co(0.8)
Cr0.25Pt0.75(8)/Pt(0.4)
AlOx(2)
100
0.87
0.70
Quan et al., 2020

[Ni(0.34)/Co(0.16)]2
Cu(2.5)
Ir(4)
17.4
0.82
0.82
Yang et al., 2021

a Thulium Iron garnet
b Gd3Ga5O12
c the value was obtained from a linear fit over all TmIG thicknesses
d the value was obtained from averaging over all Pt thicknesses

V. Comparison of the methods and discussion of problems
in the determination of the DMI constant

A. Comparing the DMI constants obtained by the different
methods

When comparing the DMI constant D measured by differ-
ent methods, it becomes clear that the values sometimes do not

coincide within the uncertainties of different measurements,
or are even vastly different (as shown in Figs. 28-29), even if
the measured stacks are nominally the same or at least very
similar. As examples shown in Fig. 28, disagreement on the
values are found for Pt/Co/Ir stacks (measured by nucleation,
DW creep and BLS), Pt/Co/Ta stacks (measured by BLS, do-
main pattern and SOT) or Pt/Co/AlOx and Pt/Co/MgO (mea-
sured by stripe annihilation, BLS and DW flow). Therefore,


44

it is important not only to consider the advantages and limita-
tions of each individual method, which influences their appli-
cability, but also their intrinsic differences, which might influ-
ence the measurement result. The aim of this section is to dis-
cuss the intrinsic differences and make some hypotheses about
their influence on the measurement result, although currently
systematic studies comparing the various methods are unfor-
tunately rare. Furthermore, in most of the available studies,
samples are investigated where the different techniques agree
well, while the disagreement is rarely discussed. We suppose
that the presence of defects or disorder evidences some of
the intrinsic differences between the techniques. In general,
methods based on domain wall motion are affected by the fact
that pinning influences DW dynamics. Pinning is a local phe-
nomenon that - in the case of domain wall motion - may nev-
ertheless have a global influence on the average domain wall
movement and thus may complicate the quantitative determi-
nation of D. Furthermore, quasistatic methods based on imag-
ing usually rely on observing the DW or a number of domains
in a certain position, and therefore close to pinning sites. They
depend on the local energy landscape at a pinning site which
may be different from the one far from the pinning site and
the result of the measurement may vary even from spot to spot
in a single sample due to the distribution of inhomogeneities
and defects. Analytical models and simulations usually do not
take these imperfections into account and use average param-
eters, which may lead to intrinsic errors. Considering a larger
sample area may reduce such an effect. Also nucleation of do-
mains, as it is needed also for measurements in creep regime,
occurs at pinning sites and single measurements may not be
representative. In addition, strain in the thin films might play
a role and, in fact, several recent works investigate defect- or
strain-induced DMI (Deger, 2020; Fern´andez-Pacheco et al.,
2019; Michels et al., 2019). Therefore, a statistic assessment
across a wafer, measuring at many different locations, could
help to understand more about defect related differences in the
measurements, but is currently lacking in the literature.
Dynamic methods often average out these effects.
Note
however, that an average D value obtained across a large film
area in presence of inhomogeneities might not represent the
intrinsic value. DW creep motion can be considered an inter-
mediate regime, where DWs move due to thermal activation
from one pinning site to the next. These measurements show
generally good agreement with static methods, such as the
stray field measurements by NV center magnetometry (Gross
et al., 2016; Soucaille et al., 2016). However, measurements
in the creep regime require simplified models of the domain
wall dynamics, as detailed in section II.B. In fact, concerning
measurements of DW motion in the creep regime by asym-
metric bubble expansion, there are currently various models
proposed which evaluate the DMI from the domain velocity
profile and fit the data to extract the DMI field. In addition,
the evaluation of the DMI constant depends on the DW width
or the DW energy, parameters known only up to a certain ac-
curacy. They are often calculated from the exchange stiffness
and the anisotropy constant. Both parameters should be there-

fore determined experimentally, which requires a substantial
effort especially for the exchange stiffness in thin films. At
that point direct measurements of the DW width by imaging
techniques may become a valuable alternative, even if pretty
much more complicated.
SW methods have the advantage of a more straightforward
evaluation of the DMI constant by measuring a frequency
shift, which is possible with high accuracy. Concerning the
model, only the gyromagnetic ratio γ and the saturation mag-
netization Ms have to be known (the exchange constant is not
needed for long wavelength SWs), parameters more easily
to be accessed experimentally. Pinning sites usually do not
influence the dispersion relation of spin waves directly, but
only affect the measured spin wave decay length which is re-
flected in the line width in frequency domain methods. The
most widely employed, direct and effective method is BLS,
as it does not require any external spin wave transduction or
any kind of patterning, contrary to TR-MOKE and PSWS. In-
fluence of defects, grain boundaries, inclusions and surface
roughness play a marginal role, as is generally the case for the
spin wave methods. To this respect, it has also to be consid-
ered that the revealed SW have wavelength ranging from half
a µm to a few microns and that measurements average over a
rather large sample area. In the case of BLS and TR-MOKE
the typical spot size is of the order of 10 µm and in the case
of PSWS a typical CPW is also about 10 µm long, while DWs
have a width of the order of 10 nm. Moreover, the propaga-
tion distance of SW, even for thermal SW detected by BLS,
is of the order of several microns and the influence of nano-
metric inhomogeneities is averaged out (for instance they may
result in a broadening of the BLS peaks, with a minor influ-
ence on the mean frequency) so that SW methods are rather
insensitive to them due to the different length scales involved.
Another simplification of spin wave methods might be that
the measurement does in general not require measuring (and
evaluating by a model) the spin wave dispersion ω(k) itself
but only the difference ω(k) − ω(−k), and is therefore a kind
of differential method.
The differences in applicability of the various methods ex-
plain why a direct comparison on the same sample is rarely
reported in the literature. Only in few papers (Kim et al.,
2019a; Lau et al., 2018; Pham et al., 2016; Shahbazi et al.,
2019; Soucaille et al., 2016; Vaˇnatka et al., 2015), a quantita-
tive comparison of the values of D is reported, measured by
both BLS and DW-based methods. In general, a reasonable
agreement is attained for the different systems if BLS results
are compared to those extracted from analysis of DW motion
in the flow-regime15. Instead, when DW motion is analysed in
the creep regime, the values obtained by DW-based methods
are generally significantly higher or lower than those obtained

15 Note, however, that the DW methods use additional parameters with re-
spect to the spin wave methods, as e.g. the exchange stiffness, which may
be adapted in order to fit the BLS results.


45

by BLS. As mentioned, this may depend critically on the ac-
curate analysis of the measured creep data. However, while in
the creep regime disorder plays a crucial role, spin wave prop-
agation might be rather insensitive to it. This could be owing
to the different magnetic state necessary for the measurement:
in the creep regime (nucleating and expanding a bubble do-
main) the measurement is performed at small applied fields,
so at a state where the energy landscape starts to vary locally.
Instead the spin wave methods are applied close to saturation,
where disorder in the magnetization state becomes negligible.
The level of discrepancy may be also strongly influenced by
the material properties and layer combinations, as well as by
the specific thickness and chosen substrate (Shahbazi et al.,
2019; Soucaille et al., 2016). In fact, since in the thin film sys-
tems DMI is an interface effect, details concerning the struc-
tural and chemical quality of the materials, in particular of the
interfaces, play a crucial role and should be stated in the pa-
pers. Furthermore, in order to judge the relative accuracy and
reliability of different methods it is indispensable to compare
measurements performed on identical samples and a more in-
tense research effort should respond to this need.
Concerning methods that determine the DMI field under the
influence of a current (such as current induced DW motion and
SOT field measurements), the main difficulty is the interpre-
tation of the results, taking into account the different contri-
butions of spin orbit torques. Damping and field like torques
may have different origins as the SHE and the iSGE, and both
contribute to the observed dynamics. Furthermore, in metal-
lic stacks, the current flow in the plane is not well defined as
it is partly in the FM and partly in the HM material, depend-
ing on the relative resistances and the interface scattering and
transparency (Stejskal et al., 2020).
An attempt to classify the applicability of three methods
(BLS, SOT efficiency, and DW velocity) according to DMI
strength and FM layer thickness was performed by Kim et al.
(2019a). According to their scheme, BLS applies better to
larger D values and FM film thicknesses, while DW methods
are suitable for smaller values, instead SOT applies to small
values of D, but higher FM layer thicknesses. In an inter-
mediate range all three methods are applicable and a direct
comparison of the methods on the same sample is possible. In
fact for the samples Pt(2.5)/Co(0.9)/X(2.5) (X = Ti, Ta, Al,
Pt) they find an excellent agreement within a 5% difference.
While in the case of Pt/Co/W, a 10% difference between DW-
based and SW-based methods occurs, and Pt/Co/Cu presents a
much larger 40% difference. They argue that the limitation of
BLS for measuring low DMI values is the interferometer res-
olution, while in film thickness, supposing films with PMA, it
is due to to the high fields necessary to overcome the out-of-
plane anistropy. DW velocity and SOT methods are limited
in measuring high DMI values by the maximum in-plane field
that can be applied. The DW velocity is limited to smaller
film thicknesses by chiral damping (Kim et al., 2018b) with
respect to the SOT method where spin transfer torque con-
tributes, instead at higher thicknesses both are limited due
to dendrite domain formation. The above considerations are

corroborated by a synoptic view of the Tables of results and
Figs. 28, and 29 discussed later: one may find that in several
examples of nominally similar systems, different groups ob-
tained relatively different results. In this context, even if BLS
seems at the moment the most popular and efficient method
to determine DMI in layered systems, more systematic multi-
technique investigation of the DMI on the same samples, for
different materials combination and layer thicknesses (includ-
ing a cross-check concerning the mutual consistency of re-
sults relative to different regions on the same sample) would
be highly desirable.

B. Comparing the DMI constants in different materials

The two most common material combinations investigated
in the literature are heterostructures of a) HM/CoFeB/MgO
and b) Co with Pt as a top or bottom layer. We begin by focus-
ing on Pt/Co/X heterostructures, with the top layer X = W, Pt,
Ir, Au, Ta, Al, Gd, AlOx, GdO, and MgO, as shown in Fig. 28.
When the sign of Ds is not available a gray scale is used, oth-
erwise a positive sign is indicated by orange/red palette and
negative by a blue/green one. The sign is mostly negative
because it is dominated by the Pt/Co interface which gives
a negative sign (according to the conventions used in this pa-
per). The oxides, AlOx, GdO and MgO, as top layers show the
largest (negative) DMI values (Boulle et al., 2016), with the
record (excluding PSWS measurements) of |Ds| = 3 pJ/m in
Pt(4)/Co(1)/MgO(2) thin films measured using the spin-orbit
torque method (Pai et al., 2016). One could therefore assume
that all the top layers contribute with a negative Ds, adding
up to the total negative Ds measured. In Chaves et al. (2019)
it was shown by investigating oxide wedge samples that the
Co/MOx interface (with M = Al or Gd) gives a contribution
to the DMI caused by the Pt underlayer which depends on the
oxidation state and that by tuning the Co oxidation an opti-
mization of DMI can be reached. However, a positive sign for
Ds (not shown in the figure) was reported measured by PSWS
in Pt/Co/MgO films with a thick Co layer (up to 20 nm) (Ka-
sukawa et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2016). The other elements as
top layers show more or less contradicting results, as for Ta,
Pt, and Ir. The stacks Pt/Co/Ir/X stacks show a large variety
in magnitude and sign, for instance. Note that the introduc-
tion of an Ir thin layer in Pt/Co/Ir/Pt reduces the magnitude of
Ds and changes the sign for thicker Ir (Hrabec et al., 2014).
In Ir/Co/MgO a negative value for Ds was found by BLS,
concluding that Ir contributes as a bottom layer with a neg-
ative DMI and positive as a top layer, so in the same way as
Pt. This fact is in contrast with the theoretical prediction that
the contribution of the interface Ir/Co was opposite to that of
Pt/Co (Yamamoto et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2015). Opposite
contributions would make it possible to increase the DMI by
fabricating Pt/Co/Ir trilayers. As discussed in Sections II.C.2
and IV, the combination Pt/Co/Ir seems to give smaller values
than the addition of the Ds values. Furthermore, Ir as a bottom
layer gives a positive Ds measured by BLS in Ir/CoFeB/MgO


46

Figure 28 Literature data of the DMI constant Ds for the Pt/Co/X thin films, where the top layers X = (MgO, GdO, AlOx, Al, Ta, Au, Ir, Pt,
W) can be metals (light-green) or oxides (light-yellow). The blue/green and orange/red palettes are for experimental methods where the sign is
known (negative and positive, respectively), while the grey palette is for data where only the magnitude of Ds is available. The thickness of the
bottom layer of Pt varies between 0.8 nm and 30 nm, with more than 75% of the data for a thickness larger that 3 nm. The top layer thickness
(in nm) is shown by the internal ticks (up to 6 nm). The large circles are the scale of Ds (up to 3 pJ/m). See here for an electronic version of
the figure, where it is possible to get the full description of each data (stack composition, DMI value, reference) by hovering the mouse over
the bars.

and a negative value for Ir/Co/MgO, so the sign does also de-
pend on the ferromagnetic material. A simple addition of Ds
values of top and bottom interfaces seems not to be feasible,
as is also shown for Pt/Co/W. Even though W contributes with
opposite sign to the DMI with respect to Pt and its contribution
to the DMI strength in general is higher than for FM/oxide in-
terfaces, the total DMI value of the stack is smaller than the
one obtained by Pt/Co/oxide stacks. The addition of Ds val-
ues of the top and bottom interface can be discussed at the
Pt/Co/Pt stack. For instance, films with the same thickness
of the two Pt layers should, in principle, have a zero DMI,
as for epitaxial films. However, a perfect or nearly-perfect
compensation of the top/bottom contributions is found in a

few cases (Agrawal et al., 2019; Belmeguenai et al., 2019;
G´ehanne et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2019a, 2018a; Pham et al.,
2016) (not shown in figure), and more generally small val-
ues of DMI are found, both positive and negative, as shown
in figure. Additionally, current-induced motion experiments
in Pt/Co/Pt samples show negative values independent of the
thickness of top or bottom layer (Franken et al., 2014), while
creep regime experiments give mostly positive values. In sum-
mary, Fig.28 points out the strong influence of film prepara-
tion, differences in interface properties of top and bottom lay-
ers, etc. on the DMI, which explain the high variability in
magnitude and sign of the Ds.

The interpretation of the data for the X/CoFeB/MgO het-


47

Figure 29 Literature data of the DMI constant Ds for the X/CoFeB/MgO thin films, where the bottom layers X = (IrMn, Hf, Pt, Ta, TaN, W)
are the most popular metals in the literature. The blue/green and orange/red palettes are for experimental methods where the sign is known
(negative and positive, respectively), while the grey palette is for data where only the magnitude of Ds is available. Most of the data (> 70%)
are for a MgO thickness of 2 nm, with nearly 20% for 1 nm. The bottom layer thickness (in nm) is shown by the internal ticks (up to 6 nm).
The large circles are the scale of Ds (up to 1.75 pJ/m). See here for an electronic version of the figure, where it is possible to get the full
description of each data (stack composition, DMI value, reference) by hovering the mouse over the bars.

erostructures (with X = IrMn, Hf, Pt, Ta, TaN, W as shown
in Fig. 29), is a bit more clear16. Similarly to the previous
figure, methods not able to determine the sign are shown with
gray palette, while positive signs are indicated by a orange/red
palette and negative signs by the blue/green one. In general,
the different methods give values compatible in magnitude,
with the exception of Pt/CoFeB/MgO, where BLS and do-
main pattern/spin torque methods diverge. The CoFeB/MgO
bilayer sputtered directly on the substrate (so without bottom
layer X) has a small positive Ds = 0.13 pJ/m (Chen et al.,

16 Note:
The plot contains both compositions of CoFeB, the Fe rich
Co20Fe60B20 and the Co rich Co40Fe40B20.

2018b). This value is compensated in the case of Pt and IrMn
bottom layers showing a negative Ds for the largest thickness
(up the maximum value of about -1.75 pJ/m for the Pt layer,
measured by spin torque methods). On the contrary, W and
TaN increase the positive value of Ds, up to about 0.7 pJ/m for
the W layer. Less clear is the contribution of Hf and Ta. Hf
leads to a negative D obtained by current-induced domain wall
motion measurements for a film thickness larger than 2 nm,
while a positive Ds is obtained in the creep regime and by BLS
for a 1 nm thick layer. It is interesting to note that the negative
value is decreasing as the Hf becomes thicker, while for Pt or
IrMn Ds increases for thicker films. Ta gives a variation of Ds
from negative to positive when increasing the thickness, mea-
sured by current-induced domain wall motion (Torrejon et al.,


48

2014), which is in contradiction with the positive value for the
stack without bottom layer. Furthermore, Karnad et al. (2018)
reported different signs when measuring by creep regime and
by current-induced domain wall motion. This contradiction
may originate from the small value of Ds in those Ta samples.
Despite all these difficulties, a few conclusions can be
reached concerning the sign and strength of the DMI. If the or-
der of the stack is reversed, then one finds a reversal of the sign
by symmetry. The strength of the DMI may be different due
to the different growth conditions of a reversed stack, but the
sign reversal is effectively verified as in Pt/Co/Ta and Ta/Co/Pt
trilayers measured by BLS (Cho et al., 2017). All the BLS ex-
periments are consistent with a negative (positive) value of Ds
for a Pt bottom (top) layer regardless the FM composition,
as verified for CoFeB, Co, Co/Ni, Ni80Fe20, and independent
of whether the top layer is an oxide or another heavy metal.
This result is also consistent with the sign detected for current-
induced domain wall motion and field driven motion in the
flow regime. Concerning the absolute value of Ds, the highest
values are obtained for Pt/FM interfaces in combination with
oxide top layers. In general, Co seems to be more sensitive to
the interface quality and more contradictions are found in the
literature. Clear trends are observed for CoFeB compounds
concerning a) the sign, as Pt as a bottom layer gives negative
sign, while Ta and W give positive ones; and b) the trend in
HM thickness dependence, increasing with a saturation value
for Pt, decreasing for Hf and non monotonic for W with a
maximum value for an intermediate thickness.

C. Influence of growth conditions on the DMI constant

Due to the large spread of materials used, the investigation
of the influence of growth condition on DMI is not conclu-
sive so far. Wells et al. (2017) studied the effect of sputter-
deposition conditions on DMI in Pt/Co/Pt structures. They
found that the growth temperature modifies the interfacial
roughness. The different quality of the top Pt/Co interface and
the lower Co/Pt one introduces a structural inversion asymme-
try, which results in a net DMI field in this nominally symmet-
ric structure. This explains the discrepancies of the sign of D
for Pt/Co/Pt stacks as mentioned in II.C.2. Regarding the ef-
fect of post annealing, Khan et al. (2016) studied the influence
of annealing on DMI in Ta/CoFeB/MgO. Here the DMI field
HDMI is determined by magnetic field driven domain motion
in the creep regime. They found that both HDMI and the DMI
constant D vary with annealing temperature, reaching a peak
at 230 ◦C and then decreasing as the temperature is further
increased. They also found that the dependence of interfa-
cial perpendicular magnetic anisotropy field HK on annealing
temperature follows a similar trend as DMI, suggesting a con-
nection between these parameters. They suggested that the
increase of HDMI and HK is due to an improved ordering of
atoms at the Ta/CoFeB interface. Higher annealing temper-
ature leads to diffusion of B atoms out of CoFeB as well as
intermixing at the interface, which significantly reduces HDMI

and HK. Cao et al. (2020a) also reported a similar trend in
annealing temperature dependence of HDMI in Pt/Co/x/MgO
structures (x = Mg or Ta) investigated by magnetic field driven
domain motion. A maximum HDMI is obtained at an anneal-
ing temperature of 300 ◦C, which is independent of the MgO
thickness. Similar to Khan et al. (2016), they also propose that
the enhanced HDMI is due to the improved crystalline quality
upon annealing. However, Furuta et al. (2017) used current-
driven domain wall motion to study the effect of annealing
on HDMI in Pt/[Co/Ni] structures. They show that annealing
causes a significant reduction of HDMI, domain wall veloc-
ity, perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, as well as spin-orbit
torques, which is attributed to the diffusion of Co atoms across
the Pt/Co interface.

D. Outlook and conclusion

In this review nearly than one hundred and fifty articles
measuring interfacial DMI have been analyzed. The interest
in this topic is still growing, as illustrated by the rapidly in-
creasing number of publications and citations. It may be sur-
prising that only in recent years the topic of chiral magnetism
gained such a relevance in the research community, as parity
breaking and chirality is intrinsic to magnetic systems.
New opportunities have been foreseen recently moving the
interest away from the traditional HM/FM bilayers towards
synthetic antiferromagnets (SAF) and oxides. SAFs exploit
the RKKY exchange interaction between two ultrathin FM
layers separated by a non magnetic spacer layer, which can
be tuned by the spacer layer thickness (Duine et al., 2018). In
these systems, with a HM as spacer layer, it was shown that
the DMI is enhanced by the dipolar field between the FM lay-
ers (Fern´andez-Pacheco et al., 2019; Meijer et al., 2020a). Be-
sides having the advantages of antiferromagnets, such as neg-
ligible stray fields and stability against magnetic fields (Baltz
et al., 2018), these SAFs exhibit asymmetric DWs and spin
wave dynamics. The possibility of tailoring DMI in SAFs
makes them extremely interesting for applications of chiral
magnetism and topological spin structures (Legrand et al.,
2020; Vedmedenko et al., 2020). Since this topic goes slightly
beyond the review, it is not included in the tables, however it
is worth mentioning the upcoming interest in SAFs (Bollero
et al., 2020; Fern´andez-Pacheco et al., 2019; Han et al., 2019;
Meijer et al., 2020a; Tanaka et al., 2020; Tsurkan and Zakeri,
2020).
A second topic that has come up recently, and which brings
us to the microscopic origin of DMI, is DMI in FM oxides
(Wang et al., 2020) and oxidized metallic FM (Nembach et al.,
2020) which is not fully understood, yet, but might be related
to local charge transfer at the interfaces. In (Nembach et al.,
2020) the enhanced DMI is suggested to be caused by an elec-
tric dipole moment induced by hybridization and charge trans-
fer at the oxygen/FM metal interface (Belabbes et al., 2016).
This iSGE-induced DMI (Kim et al., 2013) was also observed
for a Co/graphene interface (Yang et al., 2018b). In both cases


49

density functional theory (DFT) calculations were fundamen-
tal to interpret the results and the calculations showed that the
DMI originates from the FM layer, instead of the HM layer
(Yang et al., 2018a,b). However, the fact that hybridization at
the interface plays an essential role makes the analysis com-
plex and categorizing materials or stacks according to their
DMI strength becomes almost impossible. Interface intermix-
ing, interface roughness, dead layers and proximity effects all
were known to affect the DMI. In fact, a detailed interface
characterization should be performed in order to obtain a com-
plete picture. Although clearly certain materials give higher
DMI than others, the interfacial DMI may depend on the inter-
face properties more than on material properties themselves.
For example, annealing may change the DMI value by about
20-30% (Benguettat-El Mokhtari et al., 2020b) or exchanging
top and bottom layer in Cho et al. (2017) leads to changes of
about 30%. The iSGE-induced DMI is closely related to mate-
rials for spin-to-charge conversion which recently attracted at-
tention (Chen et al., 2016; Ding et al., 2020b; Rojas-S´anchez
and Fert, 2019). A key feature is again the mechanism of
SOC, but not necessarily a material with strong SOC, such as
HM, is required, but SOC can also be induced at the interface
by the iSGE. Similar to other SOC related phenomena (such as
spin-orbit torques), the origin of DMI, either from bulk SOC
or SOC at the interface, is impossible to disentangle, and have
to be treated in a common theoretical approach. The DMI was
firstly described by a phenomenological thermodynamic the-
ory, but it appears now fundamental, for developing materials
designed for future applications, that the microscopic origin
of DMI has to be understood in more detail.
A third new emerging topic investigates the possibility to
stabilize chiral spin textures in centrosymmetric magnetic in-
sulators, where high DW speeds (up to 400 ms−1 are reached
with minimal currents of 106 A/cm−2 (V´elez et al., 2019).
In systems like Tm3Fe5O12 (TmIG) a small DMI of the or-
der of a few µJ/m2 has been detected in DW racetracks, and
confirmed by scanning nitrogen-vacancy magnetometry. In
particular, TmIG thin films grown on Gd3Sc2Ga3O12 exhibit
left-handed N´eel chirality, changing to an intermediate N´eel-
Bloch configuration upon Pt deposition. Similarly, Lee et al.,
2020 show that Pt, W, and Au induce strong interfacial DMI
and topological Hall effect, while Ta and Ti cannot, provid-
ing insights into the mechanism of electrical detection of spin
textures in these magnetic insulator heterostructures.
A fourth and very important research field is that related to
the search for systems with large and tailored DMI, paving the
way towards the stabilization and exploitation of topological
spin structures, such as spirals, helices, merons, skyrmions
and anti-skyrmions at temperatures well above room tem-
perature and supporting high-frequency dynamics (Finocchio
et al., 2016).
This would represent a clear advantage to
move towards applications, where non-equilibrium operation
is needed to achieve fast switching and information process-
ing. In this respect, the stabilization of topological magnetic
objects and the control of their dynamical properties can be
made more efficient and reliable by patterning periodic arrays

of two-dimensional dots or anti-dots. These systems are also
the battleground of the rising and exciting field of magnonics,
where information is carried and manipulated by spin waves
propagating in periodically modulated media, i.e. artificial
magnonic crystals. Integration of DMI in magnonic crystals is
expected to open unexplored possibilities, due to the appear-
ance of a sizeable asymmetry in the magnonic band structure,
enabling the possibility of unidirectionally energy transfer and
magnetic damping tuning (Gallardo et al., 2019a). In this con-
text, the concept of topologically protected chiral edge spin
waves existing in the bandgap of a topological magnetic ma-
terial and propagating in a certain direction with respect to
the bulk magnetization direction appears to be very promising
(Wang et al., 2018). Based on this idea, reconfigurable topo-
logical spin-wave diodes, beam splitters, and interferometers
can be in principle designed and realized for new devices for
information and communication technology.

Finally, even if this review was focused on experimental
methods and results, it is clear that new challenges and ad-
vances for this research field, also in terms of functionaliza-
tion/engineering of materials, are connected with achieving a
better understanding of the microscopic origin of DMI, rely-
ing on quantum mechanical and atomistic calculations (Yang
et al., 2015) and integrating them into a multiscale modelling
chain, whose uppermost level are the micromagnetic simula-
tions able to mimic the behavior of real devices. One neces-
sary step for this goal will be to shortcut the gap existing be-
tween research communities that use either classical or quan-
tum physics, so as to setup efficient computer codes, operat-
ing in a multiscale framework, capable of providing quantita-
tive predictions and recipes for the next generation of mate-
rials and devices. In terms of experiments, characterising the
atomic scale details of real interfaces is a huge but important
challenge that must be met in order to tease out the ultimate
causes of the variation in DMI observed among the disparate
reports to date.

Acknowledgment

The project 17FUN08-TOPS has received funding from the
EMPIR programme co-financed by the Participating States
and from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and in-
novation programme. F.G.S. acknowledges the support from
Project No. SA299P18 from the Consejer´ıa de Educaci´on of
Junta de Castilla y Le´on. L.C. and C.B. acknowledge the sup-
port from DFG through SFB 1277. C.H.M. acknowledges
support from the EPSRC, grant number EP/T006803/1. G.D.
acknowledges the support from the European Union H2020
Program (MSCA ITN 860060). We kindly thank G. Chen, A.
Schmid and T.P. Ma for the unit conversion of the D values in
Table XIII. M.K. thanks H. T. Nembach, J. M. Shaw and A.
Magni for fruitful discussions. A special thank to P. Landeros
for critical reading of the manuscript and useful suggestions.


50

References

Agrawal, Parnika, Felix B¨uttner, Ivan Lemesh, Sarah Schlotter,
and Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2019), “Measurement of interfacial
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction from static domain imaging,”
Phys. Rev. B 100 (10), 104430.

Ahmadi,
Khadijeh,
Loghman Jamilpanah,
Seyed Ali Seyed
Ebrahimi, Abbas Olyaee, Mohammad Mehdi Tehranchi, and
Seyed Majid Mohseni (2020), “Observation of the Dzyaloshin-
skii–Moriya interaction via asymmetry in magnetization reversal,”
J. Phys. D 53 (46), 465001.

Ajejas, Fernando, Viola Kˇriˇz´akov´a, Dayane de Souza Chaves, Jan
Vogel, Paolo Perna, Ruben Guerrero, Adrian Gudin, Julio Ca-
marero, and Stefania Pizzini (2017), “Tuning domain wall ve-
locity with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” Appl. Phys. Lett.
111 (20), 202402.

Albornoz, Lucas J, Ezequiel E. Ferrero, Alejandro B. Kolton, Vin-
cent Jeudy, Sebastian Bustingorry, and Javier Curiale (2021),
“Universal Critical Exponents of the Magnetic Domain Wall De-
pinning Transition,” arXiv:2101.06555v2.

Arias, Rodrigo, and D. L. Mills (1999), “Extrinsic contributions to
the ferromagnetic resonance response of ultrathin films,” Phys.
Rev. B 60 (10), 7395–7409.

Arora, Monika, Justin M. Shaw, and Hans T. Nembach (2020), “Vari-
ation of sign and magnitude of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya inter-
action of a ferromagnet with an oxide interface,” Phys. Rev. B
101 (5), 54421.

Avci, Can Onur, Ethan Rosenberg, Lucas Caretta, Felix B¨uttner,
Maxwell Mann, Colin Marcus, David Bono, Caroline A. Ross,
and Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2019), “Interface-driven chiral mag-
netism and current-driven domain walls in insulating magnetic
garnets,” Nat. Nanotechnol. 14 (6), 561–566.

Ba´cani, Mirko, Miguel A. Marioni, Johannes Schwenk, and Hans J.
Hug (2019), “How to measure the local Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction in skyrmion thin-film multilayers,” Sci. Rep. 9 (1), 3114.

Bailleul, M, D. Olligs, and C. Fermon (2003), “Propagating spin
wave spectroscopy in a permalloy film: A quantitative analysis,”
Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 972.

Bailleul, M, D Olligs, C Fermon, and S. O Demokritov (2001), “Spin
waves propagation and confinement in conducting films at the mi-
crometer scale,” Europhys. Lett. 56 (5), 741–747.

Bak, P, and M H Jensen (1980), “Theory of helical magnetic struc-
tures and phase transitions in MnSi and FeGe,” J. Phys. C: Solid
State Phys. 13 (31), L881.

Balk, A L, K-W. Kim, D. T. Pierce, M. D. Stiles, J. Unguris, and
S. M. Stavis (2017), “Simultaneous control of the Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction and magnetic anisotropy in nanomagnetic tri-
layers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (7), 077205.

Baltz, V, A Manchon, M Tsoi, T Moriyama, T Ono, and
Y Tserkovnyak (2018), “Antiferromagnetic spintronics,” Rev.
Mod. Phys. 90, 015005.

Bauer, H G, J.-Y. Chauleau, G. Woltersdorf, and C. H. Back (2014),
“k-vector distribution of magneto-static spin waves excited by
micro-fabricated antenna structures,” in Springer Proceedings in
Physics (Springer International Publishing) pp. 83–85.

Belabbes, A, G Bihlmayer, F Bechstedt, S Bl¨ugel, and A Manchon
(2016), “Hund’s rule-driven Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction at
3d-5d interfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 247202.

Belmeguenai, M, H. Bouloussa, Y. Roussign´e, M. S. Gabor,
T. Petrisor, C. Tiusan, H. Yang, A. Stashkevich, and S. M. Ch´erif
(2017), “Interface Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in the inter-
layer antiferromagnetic-exchange coupled Pt/CoFeB/Ru/CoFeB
systems,” Phys. Rev. B 96 (14), 144402.

Belmeguenai, M, M. S. Gabor, Y. Roussign´e, T. Petrisor, R. B. Mos,
A. Stashkevich, S. M. Ch´erif, and C. Tiusan (2018), “Interfacial
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction sign in Ir/Co2FeAl systems in-
vestigated by Brillouin light scattering,” Phys. Rev. B 97 (5),
054425.

Belmeguenai, M, M. S. Gabor, Y. Roussign´e, A. Stashkevich, S. M.
Ch´erif, F. Zighem, and C. Tiusan (2016), “Brillouin light scatter-
ing investigation of the thickness dependence of Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction in Co0.5Fe0.5 ultrathin films,” Phys. Rev. B
93 (17), 174407.

Belmeguenai, M, Y. Roussign´e, S. M. Ch´erif, A. Stashkevich,
T Petrisor, M Nasui, and M S Gabor (2019), “Influence of the
capping layer material on the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya
interaction in Pt/Co/capping layer structures probed by Brillouin
light scattering,” J. Phys. D 52 (12), 125002.

Belmeguenai, Mohamed, Jean-Paul Adam, Yves Roussign´e, Syl-
vain Eimer, Thibaut Devolder, Joo-Von Kim, Salim Mourad
Cherif, Andrey Stashkevich, and Andr´e Thiaville (2015), “Interfa-
cial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in perpendicularly magne-
tized Pt/Co/AlOx ultrathin films measured by Brillouin light spec-
troscopy,” Phys. Rev. B 91 (18), 180405(R).

Benguettat-El Mokhtari, I, A. Mourkas, P. Ntetsika, I. Panagiotopou-
los, Y. Roussign´e, S. M. Cherif, A. Stashkevich, F. Kail, L. Cha-
hed, and M. Belmeguenai (2019), “Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction, interface-induced damping and perpendicular
magnetic anisotropy in Pt/Co/W based multilayers,” J. Appl. Phys.
126 (13), 133902.

Benguettat-El Mokhtari, I, D. Ourdani, Y. Roussign´e, R.B. Mos,
M. Nasui, S.M. Ch´erif, A. Stashkevich, M.S. Gabor, and
M. Belmeguenai (2020a), “Investigation of the correlation be-
tween perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, spin mixing con-
ductance and interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction in
CoFeB-based systems,” J. Phys. D 53 (50), 505003.

Benguettat-El Mokhtari, I, D. Ourdani, Y. Roussign´e, R.B. Mos,
M. Nasui, F. Kail, L. Chahed, S.M. Ch´erif, A. Stashkevich,
M. Gabor, and M. Belmeguenai (2020b), “Perpendicular magnetic
anisotropy and interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction in as
grown and annealed X/Co/Y ultrathin systems,” J. Phys.: Cond.
Mat. 32 (49), 495802.

Benguettat-El Mokhtari, I, Y. Roussign´e, S. M. Ch´erif, A. Stashke-
vich, S. Auffret, C. Baraduc, M. Gabor, H. B´ea, and M. Belmegue-
nai (2020c), “Interface phenomena in ferromagnet/TaOx-based
systems:
Damping, perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, and
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” Phys. Rev. Mat. 4, 124408.

Benitez, M J, A. Hrabec, A. P. Mihai, T. A. Moore, G. Burnell,
D. McGrouther, C. H. Marrows, and S. McVitie (2015), “Mag-
netic microscopy and topological stability of homochiral N´eel do-
main walls in a Pt/Co/AlOx trilayer,” Nat. Commun. 6 (1), 034008.

Berger, L (1996), “Emission of spin waves by a magnetic multilayer
traversed by a current,” Phys. Rev. B 54, 9353–9358.

Bergqvist, Lars, Andrea Taroni, Anders Bergman, Corina Etz,
and Olle Eriksson (2013), “Atomistic spin dynamics of low-
dimensional magnets,” Phys. Rev. B 87 (14), 1–12.

Bloch, F (1932), “Zur theorie des austauschproblems und der rema-
nenzerscheinung der ferromagnetika,” Z. Physik 74, 295–335.

Bode, M, M. Heide, K. von Bergmann, P. Ferriani, S. Heinze,
G. Bihlmayer,
A. Kubetzka,
O. Pietzsch,
S. Bl¨ugel,
and
R. Wiesendanger (2007), “Chiral magnetic order at surfaces
driven by inversion asymmetry,” Nature 447 (7141), 190–193.

Bogdanov, A, and A. Hubert (1994), “Thermodynamically stable
magnetic vortex states in magnetic crystals,” J. Magn. Magn. Mat.
138 (3), 255–269.

Bogdanov, A N, and U. K. R¨oßler (2001), “Chiral symmetry break-
ing in magnetic thin films and multilayers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (3),


51

037203.

Bogdanov, A N, U. K. R¨oßler, M. Wolf, and K.-H. M¨uller (2002),
“Magnetic structures and reorientation transitions in noncen-
trosymmetric uniaxial antiferromagnets,” Phys. Rev. B 66 (21),
214410.

Bogdanov, A N, and D. A. Yablonskii (1989), “Thermodynamically
stable ”vortices” in magnetically ordered crystals. The mixed state
of magnets,” Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 95 (1), 178–182.

Bollero, Alberto, Volker Neu, Vincent Baltz, David Serantes, Jos´e
Luis F. Cu˜nado, Javier Pedrosa, Ester M. Palmero, Marietta
Seifert, Bernard Dieny, Rafael P. Del Real, Manuel V´azquez, Ok-
sana Chubykalo-Fesenko, and Julio Camarero (2020), “An ex-
traordinary chiral exchange-bias phenomenon: Engineering the
sign of the bias field in orthogonal bilayers by a magnetically
switchable response mechanism,” Nanoscale 12 (2), 1155–1163.

Boulle, O, L. D. Buda-Prejbeanu, M. Miron, and G. Gaudin (2012),
“Current induced domain wall dynamics in the presence of a
transverse magnetic field in out-of-plane magnetized materials,”
J. Appl. Phys. 112 (5), 053901.

Boulle, O, S. Rohart, L. D. Buda-Prejbeanu, E. Ju´e, I. M. Miron,
S. Pizzini, J. Vogel, G. Gaudin, and A. Thiaville (2013), “Domain
wall tilting in the presence of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion in out-of-plane magnetized magnetic nanotracks,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 111, 217203.

Boulle, Olivier, Jan Vogel, Hongxin Yang, Stefania Pizzini, Dayane
de Souza Chaves,
Andrea Locatelli,
Tevfik Onur Mentes¸,
Alessandro Sala, Liliana D. Buda-Prejbeanu, Olivier Klein,
Mohamed Belmeguenai, Yves Roussign´e, Andrey Stashkevich,
Salim Mourad Ch´erif, Lucia Aballe, Michael Foerster, Mairbek
Chshiev, St´ephane Auffret, Ioan Mihai Miron, and Gilles Gaudin
(2016), “Room-temperature chiral magnetic skyrmions in ultra-
thin magnetic nanostructures,” Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 449.

Bouloussa, H, R. Ramaswamy, Y. Roussign´e, A. Stashkevich,
H. Yang, M. Belmeguenai, and S. M. Ch´erif (2019), “Pt concentra-
tion dependence of the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion, the Gilbert damping parameter and the magnetic anisotropy
in Py/Cu1−xPtx systems,” J. Phys. D 52 (5), 055001.

Bouloussa, H, J Yu, Y Roussign´e, M Belmeguenai, A Stashkevitch,
H Yang, and S M Ch´erif (2018), “Brillouin light scattering inves-
tigation of interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction in ultra-
thin Co/Pt nanostripe arrays,” J. Phys. D 51 (22), 225005.

B¨uttner, Felix, Ivan Lemesh, Michael Schneider, Bastian Pfau, Chris-
tian M. G¨unther, Piet Hessing, Jan Geilhufe, Lucas Caretta, Di-
eter Engel, Benjamin Kr¨uger, Jens Viefhaus, Stefan Eisebitt, and
Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2017), “Field-free deterministic ultrafast
creation of magnetic skyrmions by spin–orbit torques,” Nat. Nan-
otechnol. 12 (11), 1040–1044.

Camley, RE (1987), “Nonreciprocal surface waves,” Surf. Sci. Rep.
7 (3-4), 103–187.

Cao, Anni, Runze Chen, Xinran Wang, Xueying Zhang, Shiyang Lu,
Shishen Yan, Bert Koopmans, and Weisheng Zhao (2020a), “En-
hanced interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions in annealed
Pt/Co/MgO structures,” Nanotechnology 31 (15), 155705.

Cao, Anni, Youri L. W. van Hees, Reinoud Lavrijsen, Weisheng
Zhao, and Bert Koopmans (2020b), “Dynamics of all-optically
switched magnetic domains in Co/Gd heterostructures with
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” Phys. Rev. B 102, 104412.

Cao, Anni, Xueying Zhang, Bert Koopmans, Shouzhong Peng,
Yu Zhang, Zilu Wang, Shaohua Yan, Hongxin Yang, and
Weisheng Zhao (2018a), “Tuning the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction in Pt/Co/MgO heterostructures through the MgO thick-
ness,” Nanoscale 10 (25), 12062–12067.

Cao, Jiangwei, Yifei Chen, Tianli Jin, Weiliang Gan, Ying Wang,
Yuqiang Zheng, Hua Lv, Susana Cardoso, Dan Wei, and

Wen Siang Lew (2018b), “Spin orbit torques induced magneti-
zation reversal through asymmetric domain wall propagation in
Ta/CoFeB/MgO structures,” Sci. Rep. 8 (1), 1355.

Carlotti, G, and G. Gubbiotti (1999), “Brillouin scattering and mag-
netic excitations in layered structures,” Nuovo Cim. 22 (12), 1–60.

Casiraghi, Arianna, H´ector Corte-Le´on, Mehran Vafaee, Felipe
Garcia-Sanchez, Gianfranco Durin, Massimo Pasquale, Gerhard
Jakob, Mathias Kl¨aui, and Olga Kazakova (2019), “Individual
skyrmion manipulation by local magnetic field gradients,” Com-
mun. Phys. 2 (1), 1–9.

Chauleau, J-Y, H. G. Bauer, H. S. K¨orner, J. Stigloher, M. H¨artinger,
G. Woltersdorf, and C. H. Back (2014), “Self-consistent determi-
nation of the key spin-transfer torque parameters from spin-wave
Doppler experiments,” Phys. Rev. B 89, 020403.

Chaurasiya, Avinash Kumar, Chandrima Banerjee, Santanu Pan,
Sourav Sahoo, Samiran Choudhury, Jaivardhan Sinha, and Anjan
Barman (2016), “Direct observation of interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction from asymmetric spin-wave propagation in
W/CoFeB/SiO2 heterostructures down to sub-nanometer CoFeB
thickness,” Sci. Rep. 6 (1), 32592.

Chauve, Pascal, Thierry Giamarchi, and Pierre Le Doussal (2000),
“Creep and depinning in disordered media,” Phys. Rev. B 62,
6241–6267.

Chaves, Dayane De Souza, Fernando Ajejas, Viola KˇriˇZ´akov´a, Jan
Vogel, and Stefania Pizzini (2019), “Oxidation dependence of the
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in Pt/Co/MOx trilayers (M=Al
or Gd),” Phys. Rev. B 99 (14), 1–6.

Chen, G, J. Zhu, A. Quesada, J. Li, A. T. N’Diaye, Y. Huo, T. P.
Ma, Y. Chen, H. Y. Kwon, C. Won, Z. Q. Qiu, A. K. Schmid, and
Y. Z. Wu (2013a), “Novel chiral magnetic domain wall structure
in Fe/Ni/Cu(001) films,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 177204.

Chen, Gong, Sang Pyo Kang, Colin Ophus, Alpha T N’diaye,
Hee Young Kwon, Ryan T Qiu, Changyeon Won, Kai Liu,
Yizheng Wu, and Andreas K Schmid (2017), “Out-of-plane chiral
domain wall spin-structures in ultrathin in-plane magnets,” Nature
Commun. 8, 15302.

Chen, Gong, Tianping Ma, Alpha T. N’Diaye, Heeyoung Kwon,
Changyeon Won, Yizheng Wu, and Andreas K. Schmid (2013b),
“Tailoring the chirality of magnetic domain walls by interface en-
gineering,” Nat. Commun. 4 (1), 2671.

Chen, Gong, Arantzazu Mascaraque, Hongying Jia, Bernd Zimmer-
mann, MacCallum Robertson, Roberto Lo Conte, Markus Hoff-
mann, Miguel Angel Gonz´alez Barrio, Haifeng Ding, Roland
Wiesendanger, Enrique G. Michel, Stefan Bl¨ugel, Andreas K.
Schmid, and Kai Liu (2020), “Large Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya inter-
action induced by chemisorbed oxygen on a ferromagnet surface,”
Sci. Adv. 6, eaba4924.

Chen, Gong, MacCallum Robertson, Markus Hoffmann, Colin
Ophus,
Andr´e L. Fernandes Cauduro,
Roberto Lo Conte,
Haifeng Ding, Roland Wiesendanger, Stefan Bl¨ugel, Andreas K.
Schmid, and Kai Liu (2021), “Observation of hydrogen-induced
dzyaloshinskii-moriya interaction and reversible switching of
magnetic chirality,” Phys. Rev. X 11, 021015.

Chen, L, M. Decker, M. Kronseder, R. Islinger, M. Gmitra, D. Schuh,
D. Bougeard, J. Fabian, D. Weiss, and C. H. Back (2016), “Robust
spin-orbit torque and spin-galvanic effect at the Fe/GaAs (001)
interface at room temperature,” Nat. Commun. 7 (1), 13802.

Chen, Tian-Yue, Hsin-I Chan, Wei-Bang Liao, and Chi-Feng Pai
(2018a), “Current-induced spin-orbit torque and field-free switch-
ing in Mo-based magnetic heterostructures,” Phys. Rev. Appl.
10 (4), 044038.

Chen, Yifei, Qihan Zhang, Junxue Jia, Yuqiang Zheng, Ying Wang,
Xiaolong Fan, and Jiangwei Cao (2018b), “Tuning Slonczewski-
like torque and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction by inserting a


52

Pt spacer layer in Ta/CoFeB/MgO structures,” Appl. Phys. Lett.
112 (23), 232402.

Cho, Jaehun, Nam-Hui Kim, Seung Ku Kang, Hee-Kyeong Hwang,
Jinyoung Jung, Henk J M Swagten, June-Seo Kim, and Chun-Yeol
You (2017), “The sign of the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya
interaction in ultrathin amorphous and polycrystalline magnetic
films,” J. Phys. D 50 (42), 425004.

Cho, Jaehun, Nam-Hui Kim, Sukmock Lee, June-Seo Kim, Reinoud
Lavrijsen, Aurelie Solignac, Yuxiang Yin, Dong-Soo Han, Niels
J. J. van Hoof, Henk J. M. Swagten, Bert Koopmans, and
Chun-Yeol You (2015), “Thickness dependence of the interfacial
Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction in inversion symmetry broken
systems,” Nat. Commun. 6 (1), 7635.

Choe, Sug-Bong, and Chun-Yeol You (2018), “Experimental deter-
mination schemes of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” J. Ko-
rean Phys. Soc. 73 (2), 238–241.

Ciubotaru, F, T. Devolder, M. Manfrini, C. Adelmann, and I. P.
Radu (2016), “All electrical propagating spin wave spectroscopy
with broadband wavevector capability,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 109 (1),
012403.

Coffey, D, T. M. Rice, and F. C. Zhang (1991), “Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction in the cuprates,” Phys. Rev. B 44 (18), 10112–
10116.

Consolo, G, and E. Martinez (2012), “The effect of dry friction on
domain wall dynamics: A micromagnetic study,” J. Appl. Phys.
111 (7), 07D312.

Corredor, Edna C, Susanne Kuhrau, Fabian Kloodt-Twesten, Robert
Fr¨omter, and Hans Peter Oepen (2017), “SEMPA investigation of
the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in the single, ideally grown
Co/Pt(111) interface,” Phys. Rev. B 96, 60410(R).

Cort´es-Ortu˜no, D, and P. Landeros (2013), “Influence of the
Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction on the spin-wave spectra of
thin films,” J. Phys. Condens. Matter 25 (15), 156001.

Costa, A T, R. B. Muniz, S. Lounis, A. B. Klautau, and D. L. Mills
(2010), “Spin-orbit coupling and spin waves in ultrathin ferromag-
nets: The spin-wave Rashba effect,” Phys. Rev. B 82, 014428.

Costa, A T, R. B. Muniz, and D. L. Mills (2003), “Theory of spin
excitations in Fe(110) multilayers,” Phys. Rev. B 68 (22), 224435.

Cr´epieux, A, and C. Lacroix (1998), “Dzyaloshinsky–Moriya inter-
actions induced by symmetry breaking at a surface,” J. Magn.
Magn. Mat. 182 (3), 341–349.

Davydenko, A V, A. G. Kozlov, A. G. Kolesnikov, M. E. Stebliy,
G. S. Suslin, Yu. E. Vekovshinin, A. V. Sadovnikov, and S. A.
Nikitov (2019), “Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in symmetric
epitaxial [Co/Pd(111)]N superlattices with different numbers of
Co/Pd bilayers,” Phys. Rev. B 99, 014433.

Deger, Caner (2020), “Strain-enhanced Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya in-
teraction at Co/Pt interfaces,” Sci. Rep. 10 (1), 1–7.

Di, Kai, Vanessa Li Zhang, Hock Siah Lim, Ser Choon Ng,
Meng Hau Kuok, Xuepeng Qiu, and Hyunsoo Yang (2015a),
“Asymmetric spin-wave dispersion due to Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction in an ultrathin Pt/CoFeB film,” Appl. Phys. Lett.
106 (5), 052403.

Di,
Kai,
Vanessa Li Zhang,
Hock Siah Lim,
Ser Choon
Ng, Meng Hau Kuok, Jiawei Yu, Jungbum Yoon, Xuepeng
Qiu, and Hyunsoo Yang (2015b), “Direct observation of the
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in a Pt/Co/Ni film,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 114, 047201.

Dieny, B, I. L. Prejbeanu, K. Garello, P. Gambardella, P. Freitas,
R. Lehndorff, W. Raberg, U. Ebels, S. O. Demokritov, J. Ak-
erman, A. Deac, P. Pirro, C. Adelmann, A. Anane, A. V. Chu-
mak, A. Hirohata, S. Mangin, Sergio O. Valenzuela, M. Cengiz
Onbas¸lı, M. d’Aquino, G. Prenat, G. Finocchio, L. Lopez-Diaz,
R. Chantrell, O. Chubykalo-Fesenko, and P. Bortolotti (2020),

“Opportunities and challenges for spintronics in the microelec-
tronics industry,” Nature Electr. 3 (8), 446–459.

Diez, L Herrera, Y.T. Liu, D.A. Gilbert, M. Belmeguenai, J. Vogel,
S. Pizzini, E. Martinez, A. Lamperti, J.B. Mohammedi, A. La-
borieux, Y. Roussign´e, A.J. Grutter, E. Arenholtz, P. Quarterman,
B. Maranville, S. Ono, M. Salah El Hadri, R. Tolley, E.E. Fuller-
ton, L. Sanchez-Tejerina, A. Stashkevich, S.M. Ch´erif, A.D. Kent,
D. Querlioz, J. Langer, B. Ocker, and D. Ravelosona (2019a),
“Nonvolatile ionic modification of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 12 (3), 034005.

Diez, L Herrera, M. Voto, A. Casiraghi, M. Belmeguenai, Y. Rous-
sign´e, G. Durin, A. Lamperti, R. Mantovan, V. Sluka, V. Jeudy,
Y. T. Liu, A. Stashkevich, S. M. Ch´erif, J. Langer, B. Ocker,
L. Lopez-Diaz, and D. Ravelosona (2019b), “Enhancement of
the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction and domain wall velocity
through interface intermixing in Ta/CoFeB/MgO,” Phys. Rev. B
99, 054431.

Ding, Shilei, Lorenzo Baldrati, Andrew Ross, Zengyao Ren, Rui
Wu, Sven Becker, Jinbo Yang, Gerhard Jakob, Arne Brataas,
and Mathias Kl¨aui (2020a), “Identifying the origin of the non-
monotonic thickness dependence of spin-orbit torque and interfa-
cial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in a ferrimagnetic insula-
tor heterostructure,” Phys. Rev. B 102, 54425.

Ding, Shilei, Andrew Ross, Dongwook Go, Lorenzo Baldrati,
Zengyao Ren, Frank Freimuth, Sven Becker, Fabian Kammer-
bauer, Jinbo Yang, Gerhard Jakob, Yuriy Mokrousov, and Mathias
Kl¨aui (2020b), “Harnessing orbital-to-spin conversion of interfa-
cial orbital currents for efficient spin-orbit torques,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 125, 177201.

Ding, Shilei, Andrew Ross, Romain Lebrun, Sven Becker, Kyujoon
Lee, Isabella Boventer, Souvik Das, Yuichiro Kurokawa, Shruti
Gupta, Jinbo Yang, Gerhard Jakob, and Mathias Kl¨aui (2019), “In-
terfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction and chiral magnetic
textures in a ferrimagnetic insulator,” Phys. Rev. B 100, 100406.

Dohi, Takaaki, Samik DuttaGupta, Shunsuke Fukami, and Hideo
Ohno (2019), “Reversal of domain wall chirality with ferromagnet
thickness in W/(Co)FeB/MgO systems,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 114 (4),
042405.

Dugato, D A, J. Brand˜ao, R. L. Seeger, F. B´eron, J. C. Cezar, L. S.
Dorneles, and T. J. A. Mori (2019), “Magnetic domain size tuning
in asymmetric Pd/Co/W/Pd multilayers with perpendicular mag-
netic anisotropy,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 115 (18), 182408.

Duine, R A, Kyung-Jin Lee, Stuart S P Parkin, and M D Stiles (2018),
“Synthetic antiferromagnetic spintronics,” Nat. Phys. 14, 217.

Durin, G, A. Casiraghi, A. Magni, L. Herrera-Diez, D. Ravelosona,
L. Foini, and A. Rosso (2021), “Earthquake-like dynamics of
weakly-driven domain walls in ultrathin magnetic films,”
In
preparation.

Dzyaloshinskii, IE (1957), “Thermodynamic theory of ”weak” fer-
romagnetism in antiferromagnetic substances,” Sov. Phys. JETP
5 (6), 1259.

Emori, Satoru, Uwe Bauer, Sung-Min Ahn, Eduardo Martinez, and
Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2013), “Current-driven dynamics of chiral
ferromagnetic domain walls,” Nat. Mater. 12, 611.

Emori, Satoru, Eduardo Martinez, Kyung-Jin Lee, Hyun-Woo Lee,
Uwe Bauer, Sung-Min Ahn, Parnika Agrawal, David C. Bono, and
Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2014), “Spin Hall torque magnetometry of
Dzyaloshinskii domain walls,,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 184427.

Emtage, P R (1978), “Interaction of magnetostatic waves with a cur-
rent,” J. Appl. Phys. 49 (8), 4475–4484.

Fern´andez-Pacheco, Amalio, Elena Vedmedenko, Fanny Ummelen,
Rhodri Mansell, Doroth´ee Petit, and Russell P Cowburn (2019),
“Symmetry-breaking interlayer Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interac-
tions in synthetic antiferromagnets,” Nat. Mater. 18 (7), 679–684.


53

Ferriani, P, K. von Bergmann, E. Y. Vedmedenko, S. Heinze,
M. Bode, M. Heide, G. Bihlmayer, S. Bl¨ugel, and R. Wiesen-
danger (2008), “Atomic-scale spin spiral with a unique rotational
sense: Mn monolayer on W(001),” Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (2), 1517–
1530.

Fert, A, and Peter M. Levy (1980), “Role of anisotropic exchange
interactions in determining the properties of spin-glasses,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 44 (23), 1538–1541.

Fert, AR (1991), “Magnetic and transport properties of metallic
multilayers,” in Metallic Multilayers, Materials Science Forum,
Vol. 59 (Trans Tech Publications Ltd) pp. 439–480.

Finocchio, Giovanni, Felix B¨uttner, Riccardo Tomasello, Mario Car-
pentieri, and Mathias Kl¨aui (2016), “Magnetic skyrmions: from
fundamental to applications,” J. Phys. D 49 (42), 423001.

Fischer, Jeison A, Leonid M. Sandratskii, Soo-hyon Phark, Dirk
Sander, and Stuart Parkin (2017), “Atomic structure governed di-
versity of exchange-driven spin helices in Fe nanoislands: Exper-
iment and theory,” Phys. Rev. B 96, 140407.

Franken, J H, M. Herps, H. J. M. Swagten, and B. Koopmans (2014),
“Tunable chiral spin texture in magnetic domain-walls,” Sci. Rep.
4, 5248.

Furuta, M, Y. Liu, H. Sepehri-Amin, K. Hono, and J. Zhu (2017),
“Annealing effect on current-driven domain wall motion in
Pt/[Co/Ni] wire,” J. Appl. Phys. 122, 113901.

Gallardo, R A, D. Cort´es-Ortu˜no, T. Schneider, A. Rold´an-Molina,
Fusheng Ma, R. E. Troncoso, K. Lenz, H. Fangohr, J. Lindner, and
P. Landeros (2019a), “Flat bands, indirect gaps, and unconven-
tional spin-wave behavior induced by a periodic Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 067204.

Gallardo, R A, D. Cort´es-Ortu˜no, R. E. Troncoso, and P. Lan-
deros (2019b), “Spin-waves in thin films and magnonic crystals
with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions,” in Three-dimensional
Magnonics:
Layered, Micro- and Nanostructures, edited by
G. Gubbiotti (Jenny Stanford Publishing) p. 121.

Garlow, Joseph A, Shawn D. Pollard, Marco Beleggia, Tanmay
Dutta, Hyunsoo Yang, and Yimei Zhu (2019), “Quantification of
Mixed Bloch-N´eel Topological Spin Textures Stabilized by the
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction in Co/Pd Multilayers,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 122 (23), 237201.

G´ehanne, P, S. Rohart, A. Thiaville, and V. Jeudy (2020), “Strength
and length scale of the interaction between domain walls and pin-
ning disorder in thin ferromagnetic films,” Phys. Rev. Research 2,
043134.

Gladii, O, M. Collet, Y. Henry, J.-V. Kim, A. Anane, and M. Bailleul
(2020), “Determining key spin-orbitronic parameters via propa-
gating spin waves,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 13 (1), 014016.

Gladii, O, M. Haidar, Y. Henry, M. Kostylev, and M. Bailleul (2016),
“Frequency nonreciprocity of surface spin wave in permalloy thin
films,” Phys. Rev. B 93 (5), 054430.

Grassi, Mat´ıas Pablo, Alejandro B. Kolton, Vincent Jeudy, Alexandra
Mougin, Sebastian Bustingorry, and Javier Curiale (2018), “Inter-
mittent collective dynamics of domain walls in the creep regime,”
Phys. Rev. B 98, 224201.

Gross, I, L. J. Mart´ınez, J.-P. Tetienne, T. Hingant, J.-F. Roch, K. Gar-
cia, R. Soucaille, J. P. Adam, J.-V. Kim, S. Rohart, A. Thiaville,
J. Torrejon, M. Hayashi, and V. Jacques (2016), “Direct mea-
surement of interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in X |
CoFeB | MgO heterostructures with a scanning NV magnetome-
ter (X = Ta, TaN, and W),” Phys. Rev. B 94 (6), 064413.

Gurevich, A G (1996), Magnetization Oscillations and Waves (CRC
Press, Boca Raton).

Gusev, N S, A. V. Sadovnikov, S. A. Nikitov, M. V. Sapozhnikov,
and O. G. Udalov (2020), “Manipulation of the Dzyaloshinskii–
Moriya interaction in Co/Pt multilayers with strain,” Phys. Rev.

Lett. 124, 157202.

Haazen, P P J, E. Mur`e, J. H. Franken, R. Lavrijsen, H. J. M.
Swagten, and B. Koopmans (2013), “Domain wall depinning gov-
erned by the spin Hall effect,” Nat. Mater. 12, 299.

Han, Dong-Soo, Nam-Hui Kim, June-Seo Kim, Yuxiang Yin, Jung-
Woo Koo, Jaehun Cho, Sukmock Lee, Mathias Kl¨aui, Henk J. M.
Swagten, Bert Koopmans, and Chun-Yeol You (2016), “Asym-
metric hysteresis for probing Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction,”
Nano Lett. 16 (7), 4438–4446.

Han, Dong-Soo, Kyujoon Lee, Jan-Philipp Hanke, Yuriy Mokrousov,
Kyoung-Whan Kim, Woosuk Yoo, Youri L W Van Hees, Tae-Wan
Kim, Reinoud Lavrijsen, Chun-Yeol You, Henk J M Swagten,
Myung-Hwa Jung, and Mathias Kl¨aui (2019), “Long-range chiral
exchange interaction in synthetic antiferromagnets,” Nat. Mater.
18, 703–708.

Hartmann, Dion M F, Rembert A. Duine, Mari¨elle J. Meijer, Henk
J. M. Swagten, and Reinoud Lavrijsen (2019), “Creep of chiral
domain walls,” Phys. Rev. B 100, 094417.

Hayashi,
Masamitsu,
Yoshinobu Nakatani,
Shunsuke Fukami,
Michihiko Yamanouchi, Seiji Mitani, and Hideo Ohno (2012),
“Domain wall dynamics driven by spin transfer torque and the
spin-orbit field,” J. Phys. Condens. Matter. 24 (2), 024221.

Heide, M, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel (2008), “Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction accounting for the orientation of magnetic
domains in ultrathin films: Fe/W(110),” Phys. Rev. B 78 (14),
140403.

Heinze, S (2000), “Real-space imaging of two-dimensional antiferro-
magnetism on the atomic scale,” Science 288 (5472), 1805–1808.

Heinze, S (2006), “Simulation of spin-polarized scanning tunnel-
ing microscopy images of nanoscale non-collinear magnetic struc-
tures,” Applied Physics A 85 (4), 407–414.

Heinze,
Stefan,
Kirsten
von
Bergmann,
Matthias
Menzel,
Jens Brede, Andr´e Kubetzka, Roland Wiesendanger, Gustav
Bihlmayer, and Stefan Bl¨ugel (2011), “Spontaneous atomic-scale
magnetic skyrmion lattice in two dimensions,” Nat. Phys. 7 (9),
713–718.

Hellman, Frances, Axel Hoffmann, Yaroslav Tserkovnyak, Geoffrey
S. D. Beach, Eric E. Fullerton, Chris Leighton, Allan H. Mac-
Donald, Daniel C. Ralph, Dario A. Arena, Hermann A. D¨urr,
Peter Fischer, Julie Grollier, Joseph P. Heremans, Tomas Jung-
wirth, Alexey V. Kimel, Bert Koopmans, Ilya N. Krivorotov,
Steven J. May, Amanda K. Petford-Long, James M. Rondinelli,
Nitin Samarth, Ivan K. Schuller, Andrei N. Slavin, Mark D. Stiles,
Oleg Tchernyshyov, Andr´e Thiaville, and Barry L. Zink (2017),
“Interface-induced phenomena in magnetism,” Rev. Mod. Phys.
89, 025006.

Hillebrands, B, P. Baumgart, and G. G¨untherodt (1987), “In situ
Brillouin scattering from surface-anisotropy-dominated Damon-
Eshbach modes in ultrathin epitaxial Fe(110) layers,” Phys. Rev.
B 36 (4), 2450–2453.

Hillebrands, Burkard (1990), “Spin-wave calculations for multilay-
ered structures,” Phys. Rev. B 41 (1), 530–540.

Hiramatsu, Ryo, Kab-Jin Kim, Yoshinobu Nakatani, Takahiro
Moriyama, and Teruo Ono (2014), “Proposal for quantifying the
Dzyaloshinsky–Moriya interaction by domain walls annihilation
measurement,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 53 (10), 108001.

Holstein, T, and H. Primakoff (1940), “Field dependence of the
intrinsic domain magnetization of a ferromagnet,” Phys. Rev.
58 (12), 1098–1113.

Hrabec, A, N. A. Porter, A. Wells, M. J. Benitez, G. Burnell,
S. McVitie, D. McGrouther, T. A. Moore, and C. H. Marrows
(2014), “Measuring and tailoring the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction in perpendicularly magnetized thin films,” Phys. Rev. B
90 (2), 020402(R).


54

Hsu, Pin-Jui, Levente R´ozsa, Aurore Finco, Lorenz Schmidt,
Kriszti´an Palot´as, Elena Vedmedenko, L´aszl´o Udvardi, L´aszl´o
Szunyogh, Andr´e Kubetzka, Kirsten von Bergmann, and Roland
Wiesendanger (2018), “Inducing skyrmions in ultrathin Fe films
by hydrogen exposure,” Nat. Commun. 9 (1), 1571.

Ishikuro, Yuto, Masashi Kawaguchi, Naoaki Kato, Yong-Chang Lau,
and Masamitsu Hayashi (2019), “Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion and spin-orbit torque at the Ir/Co interface,” Phys. Rev. B
99 (13), 134421.

Jaiswal,
S, K. Litzius,
I. Lemesh,
F. B¨uttner,
S. Finizio,
J. Raabe, M. Weigand, K. Lee, J. Langer, B. Ocker, G. Jakob,
G. S. D. Beach,
and M. Kl¨aui (2017), “Investigation of
the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction and room temperature
skyrmions in W/CoFeB/MgO thin films and microwires,” Appl.
Phys. Lett. 111 (2), 022409.

Je, Soong-Geun, Duck-Ho Kim, Sang-Cheol Yoo, Byoung-Chul
Min, Kyung-Jin Lee, and Sug-Bong Choe (2013), “Asymmetric
magnetic domain-wall motion by the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction,” Phys. Rev. B 88 (21), 214401.

Jena, Sukanta Kumar, Rajibul Islam, Ewelina Mili´nska, Marcin M.
Jakubowski, Roman Minikayev, Sabina Lewi´nska, Artem Lynnyk,
Aleksiej Pietruczik, Paweł Aleszkiewicz, Carmine Autieri, and
Andrzej Wawro (2021), “Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya inter-
action in the epitaxial W/Co/Pt multilayers,” Nanoscale 13 (16),
7685–7693.

Ju´e, E, A. Thiaville, S. Pizzini, J. Miltat, J. Sampaio, L. D. Buda-
Prejbeanu, S. Rohart, J. Vogel, M. Bonfim, O. Boulle, S. Auffret,
I. M. Miron, and G. Gaudin (2016a), “Domain wall dynamics in
ultrathin Pt/Co/AlOx microstrips under large combined magnetic
fields,” Phys. Rev. B 93 (1), 014403.

Ju´e, Emilie, C. K. Safeer, Marc Drouard, Alexandre Lopez, Paul
Balint, Liliana Buda-Prejbeanu, Olivier Boulle, Stephane Auffret,
Alain Schuhl, Aurelien Manchon, Ioan Mihai Miron, and Gilles
Gaudin (2016b), “Chiral damping of magnetic domain walls,”
Nat. Mater. 15 (3), 272–277.

Kabanov, Y P, Y. L. Iunin, V. I. Nikitenko, A. J. Shapiro, R. D. Shull,
L. Y. Zhu, and C. L. Chien (2010), “In-plane field effects on the
dynamics of domain walls in ultrathin Co films with perpendicular
anisotropy,” IEEE Trans. Magn. 46 (6), 2220–2223.

Kalinikos, B A (1981), “Spectrum and linear excitation of spin waves
in ferromagnetic films,” Sov. Phys. J. 24 (8), 718–731.

Kalinikos, B A (1994), “Dipole-exchange spin-wave spectrum of
magnetic films,” in Linear and Nonlinear Spin Waves in Magnetic
Films and Superlattices, edited by Cottam M, G (World Scientific)
pp. 89–156.

Kalinikos, B A, and A N Slavin (1986), “Theory of dipole-exchange
spin wave spectrum for ferromagnetic films with mixed exchange
boundary conditions,” J. Phys. C 19 (35), 7013–7033.

Karakas, Vedat, Aisha Gokce, Ali Taha Habiboglu, Sevdenur
Arpaci, Kaan Ozbozduman, Ibrahim Cinar, Cenk Yanik, Riccardo
Tomasello, Silvia Tacchi, Giulio Siracusano, Mario Carpentieri,
Giovanni Finocchio, Thomas Hauet, and Ozhan Ozatay (2018),
“Observation of magnetic radial vortex nucleation in a multilayer
stack with tunable anisotropy,” Sci. Rep. 8 (1), 7180.

Karnad, G V, F. Freimuth, E. Martinez, R. Lo Conte, G. Gub-
biotti, T. Schulz, S. Senz, B. Ocker, Y. Mokrousov, and
M. Kl¨aui (2018), “Modification of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya-
interaction-stabilized domain wall chirality by driving currents,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 147203.

Kasukawa, Shuhei, Yoichi Shiota, Takahiro Moriyama, and Teruo
Ono (2018), “Evaluation of electric field effect on interface mag-
netic properties by propagating spin wave in Pt/Co/MgO struc-
tures,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 57 (8), 080309.

Kataoka, Mitsuo (1987), “Spin waves in systems with long period
helical spin density waves due to the antisymmetric and symmetric
exchange interactions,” J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 56, 3635.

Khadka,
Durga,
Sabit
Karayev,
and
S.
X.
Huang
(2018),
“Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction in Pt/Co/Ir and Pt/Co/Ru
multilayer films,” J. Appl. Phys. 123 (12), 123905.

Khan, R A, P. M. Shepley, A. Hrabec, A. W. J. Wells, B. Ocker, C. H.
Marrows, and T. A. Moore (2016), “Effect of annealing on the
interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in Ta/CoFeB/MgO
trilayers,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 109 (13), 132404.

Khan, Risalat A, Hans T. Nembach, Mannan Ali, Justin M. Shaw,
Christopher H. Marrows, and Thomas A. Moore (2018), “Mag-
netic domain texture and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction
in Pt/Co/IrMn and Pt/Co/FeMn thin films with perpendicular ex-
change bias,” Phys. Rev. B 98 (6), 064413.

Khvalkovskiy, A V, V. Cros, D. Apalkov, V. Nikitin, M. Krounbi,
K. A. Zvezdin, A. Anane, J. Grollier, and A. Fert (2013), “Match-
ing domain-wall configuration and spin-orbit torques for efficient
domain-wall motion,” Phys. Rev. B 87, 020402.

Kim, Dae-Yun, Duck-Ho Kim, and Sug-Bong Choe (2016a), “Intrin-
sic asymmetry in chiral domain walls due to the Dzyaloshinskii–
Moriya interaction,” Appl. Phys. Exp. 9 (5), 053001.

Kim, Dae-Yun, Duck-Ho Kim, Joon Moon, and Sug-Bong Choe
(2015a), “Determination of magnetic domain-wall types us-
ing Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction induced domain patterns,”
Appl. Phys. Lett. 106 (26), 262403.

Kim, Dae-Yun, Nam-Hui Kim, Yong-Keun Park, Min-Ho Park,
Joo-Sung Kim, Yune-Seok Nam, Jinyong Jung, Jaehun Cho,
Duck-Ho Kim, June-Seo Kim, Byoung-Chul Min, Sug-Bong
Choe, and Chun-Yeol You (2019a), “Quantitative accordance
of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction between domain-wall and
spin-wave dynamics,” Phys. Rev. B 100, 224419.

Kim, Dae-Yun, Min-Ho Park, Yong-Keun Park, Joo-Sung Kim,
Yune-Seok Nam, Duck-Ho Kim, Soong-Geun Je, Hyeok-Cheol
Choi, Byoung-Chul Min, and Sug-Bong Choe (2018a), “Chirality-
induced antisymmetry in magnetic domain wall speed,” Npg Asia
Mater. 10, e464.

Kim, Dae-Yun, Min-Ho Park, Yong-Keun Park, Joo-Sung Kim,
Yune-Seok Nam,
Duck-Ho Kim,
Soong-Geun Je,
Hyeok-
Cheol Choi, Byoung-Chul Min, and Sug-Bong Choe (2018b),
“Chirality-induced antisymmetry in magnetic domain wall speed,”
NPG Asia Materials 10 (1), e464–e464.

Kim, Duck-Ho, Dae-Yun Kim, Sang-Cheol Yoo, Byoung-Chul Min,
and Sug-Bong Choe (2019b), “Universality of Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction effect over domain-wall creep and flow
regimes,” Phys. Rev. B 99, 134401.

Kim, Duck-Ho, Sang-Cheol Yoo, Dae-Yun Kim, Byoung-Chul
Min, and Sug-Bong Choe (2017a), “Wide-range probing of
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” Sci. Rep. 7, 45498.

Kim, Gyu Won, Alexander S. Samardak, Yong Jin Kim, In Ho
Cha, Alexey V. Ognev, Alexandr V. Sadovnikov, Sergey A. Niki-
tov, and Young Keun Kim (2018c), “Role of the heavy metal’s
crystal phase in oscillations of perpendicular magnetic anisotropy
and the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in W/Co-
Fe-B/MgO films,” Phys. Rev. Appl 9 (6), 064005.

Kim, Kyoung-Whan, Hyun-Woo Lee, Kyung-Jin Lee, and M. D.
Stiles (2013), “Chirality from interfacial spin-orbit coupling ef-
fects in magnetic bilayers,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 216601.

Kim, Nam-Hui, Dong-Soo Han, Jinyong Jung, Jaehun Cho, June-
Seo Kim, Henk J. M. Swagten, and Chun-Yeol You (2015b), “Im-
provement of the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction by
introducing a Ta buffer layer,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 107 (14), 142408.

Kim, Nam-Hui, Dong-Soo Han, Jinyong Jung, Kwonjin Park, Henk
J. M. Swagten, June-Seo Kim, and Chun-Yeol You (2017b), “De-


55

pendence of interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction and
perpendicular magnetic anisotropy on the thickness of the heavy-
metal layer,” Appl. Phys. Express 10 (10), 103003.

Kim, Nam-Hui, Jinyong Jung, Jaehun Cho, Dong-Soo Han, Yuxi-
ang Yin, June-Seo Kim, Henk J. M. Swagten, and Chun-Yeol You
(2016b), “Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, surface
anisotropy energy, and spin pumping at spin orbit coupled Ir/Co
interface,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 108 (14), 142406.

Kim, Sanghoon, Peong-Hwa Jang, Duck-Ho Kim, Mio Ishibashi,
Takuya Taniguchi, Takahiro Moriyama, Kab-Jin Kim, Kyung-Jin
Lee, and Teruo Ono (2017c), “Magnetic droplet nucleation with a
homochiral N´eel domain wall,” Phys. Rev. B 95 (22), 220402(R).

Kim, Sanghoon, Kohei Ueda, Gyungchoon Go, Peong-Hwa Jang,
Kyung-Jin Lee, Abderrezak Belabbes, Aurelien Manchon, Moto-
hiro Suzuki, Yoshinori Kotani, Tetsuya Nakamura, Kohji Naka-
mura, Tomohiro Koyama, Daichi Chiba, Kihiro. T. Yamada,
Duck-Ho Kim, Takahiro Moriyama, Kab-Jin Kim, and Teruo Ono
(2018d), “Correlation of the Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction
with Heisenberg exchange and orbital asphericity,” Nat. Commun.
9 (1), 1648.

Kim, Woo-Yeong, Hyung Keun Gweon, Kyung-Jin Lee, and
Chun-Yeol
You
(2019c),
“Correlation
between
interfacial
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction
and
interfacial
magnetic
anisotropy of Pt/Co/MgO structures,” Appl. Phys Express 12 (5),
053007.

Kloodt-Twesten, Fabian, Susanne Kuhrau, Hans Peter Oepen, and
Robert Fr¨omter (2019), “Measuring the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction of the epitaxial Co/Ir(111) interface,” Phys. Rev. B
100, 100402.

Kolesnikov, AG, M.E. Stebliy, A.V. Davydenko, A.G. Kozlov, I.S.
Osmushko, V.V. Korochentsev, A.V. Ognev, A.V. Gerasimenko,
A.V. Sadovnikov, V.A. Gubanov, S.A. Nikitov, X. Wang, C.H.
Wan, C. Fang, M. Zhao, X.F. Han, and Alexander Samardak
(2021), “Magnetic properties and the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction in exchange biased Pt/Co/NixOy films,” Appl.
Surf. Sci. 543, 148720.

Kooy, C, and U. Enz (1960), “Experimental and theoretical study
of the domain configuration in thin layers of BaFe12O19,” Philips
Res. Rep. 15, 7–29.

K¨orner, H S, J. Stigloher, H. G. Bauer, H. Hata, T. Taniguchi,
T. Moriyama, T. Ono, and C. H. Back (2015), “Interfacial
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction studied by time-resolved scan-
ning Kerr microscopy,” Phys. Rev. B 92 (22), 220413(R).

Kostylev, M (2014), “Interface boundary conditions for dynamic
magnetization and spin wave dynamics in a ferromagnetic layer
with the interface Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” J. Appl.
Phys. 115 (23), 233902.

Koyama, T, D. Chiba, K. Ueda, K. Kondou, H. Tanigawa, S. Fukami,
T. Suzuki, N. Ohshima, N. Ishiwata, Y. Nakatani, K. Kobayashi,
and T. Ono (2011), “Observation of the intrinsic pinning of a mag-
netic domain wall in a ferromagnetic nanowire,” Nat. Mater. 10,
194.

Kozlov, A G, A. G. Kolesnikov, M. E. Stebliy, A. P. Golikov, and
A. V. Davydenko (2020), “Domain-period method for determi-
nation of the energy of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in
[Co/Pd(111)]5 superlattices,” Phys. Rev. B 102, 144411.

Krizakova, V, J. Pe˜na Garcia, J. Vogel, N. Rougemaille, D. de Souza
Chaves, S. Pizzini, and A. Thiaville (2019), “Study of the veloc-
ity plateau of Dzyaloshinskii domain walls,” Phys. Rev. B 100,
214404.

Kubetzka, A, O. Pietzsch, M. Bode, and R. Wiesendanger (2003),
“Spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy study of 360◦

walls in an external magnetic field,” Phys. Rev. B 67 (2), 020401.

K¨uß, M, M. Heigl, L. Flacke, A. H¨orner, M. Weiler, M. Albrecht,
and A. Wixforth (2020), “Nonreciprocal Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya
magnetoacoustic waves,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 217203.

Ku´swik,
P,
M.
Matczak,
M.
Kowacz,
K.
Szuba-Jabło´nski,
N. Michalak, B. Szyma´nski, A. Ehresmann, and F. Stobiecki
(2018), “Asymmetric domain wall propagation caused by in-
terfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in exchange biased
Au/Co/NiO layered system,” Phys. Rev. B 97 (2), 024404.

Lau, D, J. P. Pellegren, H. T. Nembach, J. M. Shaw, and V. Sokalski
(2018), “Disentangling factors governing Dzyaloshinskii domain-
wall creep in Co/Ni thin films using PtxIr1−x seed layers,” Phys.
Rev. B 98 (18), 184410.

Lau, Derek, Vignesh Sundar, Jian-Gang Zhu, and Vincent Sokalski
(2016), “Energetic molding of chiral magnetic bubbles,” Phys.
Rev. B 94 (6), 060401(R).

Lavrijsen, R, D. M. F. Hartmann, A. van den Brink, Y. Yin, B. Bar-
cones, R. A. Duine, M. A. Verheijen, H. J. M. Swagten, and
B. Koopmans (2015), “Asymmetric magnetic bubble expansion
under in-plane field in Pt/Co/Pt: Effect of interface engineering,”
Phys. Rev. B 91 (10), 104414.

Lee, Aidan J, Adam S. Ahmed, Jose Flores, Side Guo, Binbin
Wang, Nuria Bagu´es, David W. McComb, and Fengyuan Yang
(2020), “Probing the source of the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction responsible for the topological Hall effect in
Metal/Tm3Fe5O12 systems,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 107201.

Lee, Jong Min, Chaun Jang, Byoung-Chul Min, Seo-Won Lee,
Kyung-Jin Lee, and Joonyeon Chang (2016), “All-electrical mea-
surement of interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction using
collective spin-wave dynamics,” Nano Lett. 16 (1), 62–67.

Legrand, William, Jean-Yves Chauleau, Davide Maccariello, Nico-
las Reyren, Sophie Collin, Karim Bouzehouane, Nicolas Jaouen,
Vincent Cros, and Albert Fert (2018), “Hybrid chiral domain walls
and skyrmions in magnetic multilayers,” Sci. Adv. 4 (7), eaat0415.

Legrand, William, Davide Maccariello, Fernando Ajejas, Sophie
Collin, Aymeric Vecchiola, Karim Bouzehouane, Nicolas Reyren,
Vincent Cros, and Albert Fert (2020), “Room-temperature stabi-
lization of antiferromagnetic skyrmions in synthetic antiferromag-
nets,” Nat. Mater. 19 (1), 34–42.

Lemerle, S, J. Ferr´e, C. Chappert, V. Mathet, T. Giamarchi, and
P. Le Doussal (1998), “Domain wall creep in an Ising ultrathin
magnetic film,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 849–852.

Lemesh, Ivan, and Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2018), “Twisted domain
walls and skyrmions in perpendicularly magnetized multilayers,”
Phys. Rev. B 98, 104402.

Lemesh, Ivan, and Geoffrey S.D. Beach (2019), “Walker breakdown
with a twist: Dynamics of multilayer domain walls and skyrmions
driven by spin-orbit torque,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 12, 044031.

Lemesh, Ivan, Felix B¨uttner, and Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2017), “Ac-
curate model of the stripe domain phase of perpendicularly mag-
netized multilayers,” Phys. Rev. B 95 (17), 174423.

Lemesh, Ivan, Kai Litzius, Marie B¨ottcher, Pedram Bassirian, Nico
Kerber, Daniel Heinze, Jakub Z´azvorka, Felix B¨uttner, Lucas
Caretta, Maxwell Mann, Markus Weigand, Simone Finizio, J¨org
Raabe, Mi-Young Im, Hermann Stoll, Gisela Sch¨utz, Bertrand
Dup´e, Mathias Kl¨aui, and Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2018), “Current-
induced skyrmion generation through morphological thermal tran-
sitions in chiral ferromagnetic heterostructures,” Adv. Mater.
30 (49), 1805461.

Levy, Peter M, and A. Fert (1981), “Anisotropy induced by non-
magnetic impurities in Cu Mn spin-glass alloys,” Phys. Rev. B
23, 4667–4690.

Lin, T, H. Liu, S. Poellath, Y. Zhang, B. Ji, N. Lei, J. J. Yun, L. Xi,
D. Z. Yang, T. Xing, Z. L. Wang, L. Sun, Y. Z. Wu, L. F. Yin, W. B.
Wang, J. Shen, J. Zweck, C. H. Back, Y. G. Zhang, and W. S. Zhao


56

(2018), “Observation of room-temperature magnetic skyrmions in
Pt/Co/W structures with a large spin-orbit coupling,” Phys. Rev. B
98, 174425.

Lin, Weinan, Baishun Yang, Andy Paul Chen, Xiaohan Wu, Rui
Guo, Shaohai Chen, Liang Liu, Qidong Xie, Xinyu Shu, Yajuan
Hui, Gan Moog Chow, Yuanping Feng, Giovanni Carlotti, Silvia
Tacchi, Hongxin Yang, and Jingsheng Chen (2020), “Perpendic-
ular magnetic anisotropy and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction
at an oxide/ferromagnetic metal interface,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124,
217202.

Litzius, Kai, Ivan Lemesh, Benjamin Kr¨uger, Pedram Bassirian, Lu-
cas Caretta, Kornel Richter, Felix B¨uttner, Koji Sato, Oleg A.
Tretiakov, Johannes F¨orster, Robert M. Reeve, Markus Weigand,
Iuliia Bykova, Hermann Stoll, Gisela Sch¨utz, Geoffrey S. D.
Beach, and Mathias Kl¨aui (2017), “Skyrmion Hall effect revealed
by direct time-resolved X-ray microscopy,” Nat. Phys. 13 (2),
170–175.

Liu, Chuanpu, Jilei Chen, Tao Liu, Florian Heimbach, Haiming
Yu, Yang Xiao, Junfeng Hu, Mengchao Liu, Houchen Chang,
Tobias Stueckler, Sa Tu, Youguang Zhang, Yan Zhang, Peng
Gao, Zhimin Liao, Dapeng Yu, Ke Xia, Na Lei, Weisheng Zhao,
and Mingzhong Wu (2018), “Long-distance propagation of short-
wavelength spin waves,” Nat. Commun. 9, 738.

Liu, Luqiao, Chi-Feng Pai, Y. Li, H. W. Tseng, D. C. Ralph, and
R. A. Buhrman (2012), “Spin-torque switching with the giant spin
Hall effect of tantalum,” Science 336 (6081), 555–558.

Lo Conte, R, G. V. Karnad, E. Martinez, K. Lee, N.-H. Kim, D.-
S. Han, J.-S. Kim, S. Prenzel, T. Schulz, C.-Y. You, H. J. M.
Swagten, and M. Kl¨aui (2017), “Ferromagnetic layer thickness de-
pendence of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction and spin-orbit
torques in PtCoAlx,” AIP Adv. 7 (6), 065317.

Lo Conte, R, E. Martinez, A. Hrabec, A. Lamperti, T. Schulz,
L. Nasi, L. Lazzarini, R. Mantovan, F. Maccherozzi, S. S. Dhesi,
B. Ocker, C. H. Marrows, T. A. Moore, and M. Kl¨aui (2015),
“Role of B diffusion in the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction in Ta/Co20Fe60B20/MgO nanowires,” Phys. Rev. B 91 (1),
014433.

Lucassen,
Juriaan,
Fabian
Kloodt-Twesten,
Robert
Fr¨omter,
Hans Peter Oepen, Rembert A. Duine, Henk J. M. Swagten, Bert
Koopmans, and Reinoud Lavrijsen (2017), “Scanning electron mi-
croscopy with polarization analysis for multilayered chiral spin
textures,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 111 (13), 132403.

Lucassen, Juriaan, Casper F. Schippers, Marcel A. Verheijen, Patrizia
Fritsch, Erik Jan Geluk, Beatriz Barcones, Rembert A. Duine,
Sabine Wurmehl, Henk J. M. Swagten, Bert Koopmans, and
Reinoud Lavrijsen (2020), “Extraction of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction from propagating spin waves,” Phys. Rev. B 101 (6),
064432.

Luo, H M, Y. Y. Hsu, B. N. Lin, Y. P. Chi, T. J. Lee, and H. C.
Ku (1999), “Correlation between weak ferromagnetism and crys-
tal symmetry in Gd2CuO4-type cuprates,” Phys. Rev. B 60 (18),
13119–13124.

Ma, Xin, Guoqiang Yu, Xiang Li, Tao Wang, Di Wu, Kevin S. Ols-
son, Zhaodong Chu, Kyongmo An, John Q. Xiao, Kang L. Wang,
and Xiaoqin Li (2016), “Interfacial control of Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction in heavy metal/ferromagnetic metal thin film
heterostructures,” Phys. Rev. B 94 (18), 180408(R).

Ma, Xin, Guoqiang Yu, Seyed A. Razavi, Stephen S. Sasaki, Xi-
ang Li, Kai Hao, Sarah H. Tolbert, Kang L. Wang, and Xi-
aoqin Li (2017), “Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction across an
antiferromagnet-ferromagnet interface,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (2),
027202.

Ma, Xin, Guoqiang Yu, Chi Tang, Xiang Li, Congli He, Jing
Shi,
Kang L. Wang,
and Xiaoqin Li (2018), “Interfacial

Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction:
Effect of 5d band filling
and correlation with spin mixing conductance,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
120 (15), 157204.

M´alek, Z, and V. Kambersk´y (1958), “On the theory of the domain
structure of thin films of magnetically uni-axial materials,” Czech.
J. Phys. 8, 416–421.

Malozemoff, A P, and J. C. Slonczewski (1979), Magnetic Domain
Walls in Bubble Materials, edited by Raymond Wolfe (Academic
Press, New York).

Manchon, A, J. ˇZelezn´y, I. M. Miron, T. Jungwirth, J. Sinova, A. Thi-
aville, K. Garello, and P. Gambardella (2019), “Current-induced
spin-orbit torques in ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic sys-
tems,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 91 (3), 035004.

Martinez, E, L. Lopez-Diaz, L. Torres, C. Tristan, and O. Alejos
(2007), “Thermal effects in domain wall motion: Micromagnetic
simulations and analytical model,” Phys. Rev. B 75, 174409.

Mart´ınez, Eduardo, and ´Oscar. Alejos (2014), “Coupled Dzyaloshin-
skii walls and their current-induced dynamics by the spin Hall ef-
fect,” J. Appl. Phys. 116 (2), 023909.

Martinez, Eduardo, Satoru Emori, and Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2013a),
“Current-driven domain wall motion along high perpendicular
anisotropy multilayers: The role of the Rashba field, the spin Hall
effect, and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” Appl. Phys.
Lett. 103 (7), 072406.

Martinez, Eduardo, Satoru Emori, Noel Perez, Luis Torres, and
Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2014), “Current-driven dynamics of
Dzyaloshinskii domain walls in the presence of in-plane fields:
Full micromagnetic and one-dimensional analysis,” J. Appl. Phys.
115 (21), 213909.

Martinez, Eduardo, Giovanni Finocchio, Luis Torres, and Luis
Lopez-Diaz (2013b), “The influence of the spin-orbit torques on
the current-driven domain wall motion,” AIP Adv. 3 (7), 072109.

Meckler, S, M. Gyamfi, O. Pietzsch, and R. Wiesendanger (2009a),
“A low-temperature spin-polarized scanning tunneling micro-
scope operating in a fully rotatable magnetic field,” Rev. Sci. In-
strum. 80 (2), 023708.

Meckler, S, N. Mikuszeit, A. Preßler, E. Y. Vedmedenko, O. Pietzsch,
and R. Wiesendanger (2009b), “Real-space observation of a right-
rotating inhomogeneous cycloidal spin spiral by spin-polarized
scanning tunneling microscopy in a triple axes vector magnet,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 157201.

Meier, T N G, M. Kronseder, and C. H. Back (2017), “Domain-
width model for perpendicularly magnetized systems with
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” Phys. Rev. B 96 (14),
144408.

Meijer, Mari¨elle J, Juriaan Lucassen, Fabian Kloodt-Twesten, Robert
Fr¨omter, Oleg Kurnosikov, Rembert A Duine, Henk J M Swagten,
Bert Koopmans, and Reinoud Lavrijsen (2020a), “Magnetic chi-
rality controlled by the interlayer exchange interaction,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 124, 207203.

Meijer, Mari¨elle J, Juriaan Lucassen, Rembert A. Duine, Henk J.M.
Swagten, Bert Koopmans, Reinoud Lavrijsen, and Marcos H. D.
Guimar˜aes (2020b), “Chiral spin spirals at the surface of the van
der waals ferromagnet fe3gete2,” Nano Letters 20 (12), 8563–
8568.

Melcher, R L (1973), “Linear contribution to spatial dispersion in the
spin-wave spectrum of ferromagnets,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 30, 125.

Metaxas, P J, J. P. Jamet, A. Mougin, M. Cormier, J. Ferr´e, V. Baltz,
B. Rodmacq, B. Dieny, and R. L. Stamps (2007), “Creep and flow
regimes of magnetic domain-wall motion in ultrathin Pt/Co/Pt
films with perpendicular anisotropy,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 217208.

Michels, Andreas, Denis Mettus, Ivan Titov, Artem Malyeyev, Math-
ias Bersweiler, Philipp Bender, Inma Peral, Rainer Birringer,
Yifan Quan, Patrick Hautle, Joachim Kohlbrecher, Dirk Ho-


57

necker, Jes´us Rodr´ıguez Fern´andez, Luis Fern´andez Barqu´ın, and
Konstantin L. Metlov (2019), “Microstructural-defect-induced
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” Phys. Rev. B 99, 014416.

Miron, Ioan Mihai, Gilles Gaudin, St´ephane Auffret, Bernard Rod-
macq, Alain Schuhl, Stefania Pizzini, Jan Vogel, and Pietro
Gambardella (2010), “Current-driven spin torque induced by the
Rashba effect in a ferromagnetic metal layer,” Nat. Mater. 9, 230.

Miron,
Ioan Mihai,
Thomas Moore,
Helga Szambolics,
Lil-
iana Daniela Buda-Prejbeanu, St´ephane Auffret, Bernard Rod-
macq, Stefania Pizzini, Jan Vogel, Marlio Bonfim, Alain Schuhl,
and Gilles Gaudin (2011), “Fast current-induced domain-wall mo-
tion controlled by the Rashba effect,” Nat. Mater. 10, 419.

Mock, R, B. Hillebrands, and R. Sandercock (1987), “Construction
and performance of a Brillouin scattering set-up using a triple-
pass tandem Fabry-Perot interferometer,” J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum.
20, 656.

Moon, Jung-Hwan, Soo-Man Seo, Kyung-Jin Lee, Kyoung-Whan
Kim, Jisu Ryu, Hyun-Woo Lee, R. D. McMichael, and M. D.
Stiles (2013), “Spin-wave propagation in the presence of interfa-
cial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” Phys. Rev. B 88, 184404.

Moon, Kyoung-Woong, Duck-Ho Kim, Sang-Cheol Yoo, Soong-
Geun Je, Byong Sun Chun, Wondong Kim, Byoung-Chul Min,
Chanyong Hwang, and Sug-Bong Choe (2015), “Magnetic bub-
blecade memory based on chiral domain walls,” Sci. Rep. 5 (1),
9166.

Moore, T A, I. M. Miron, G. Gaudin, G. Serret, S. Auffret, B. Rod-
macq, A. Schuhl, S. Pizzini, J. Vogel, and M. Bonfim (2008),
“High domain wall velocities induced by current in ultrathin
Pt/Co/AlOx wires with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy,” Appl.
Phys. Lett. 93 (26), 262504.

Moore, T A, I. M. Miron, G. Gaudin, G. Serret, S. Auffret, B. Rod-
macq, A. Schuhl, S. Pizzini, J. Vogel, and M. Bonfim (2009), “Er-
ratum: “High domain wall velocities induced by current in ultra-
thin Pt/Co/AlOx wires with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy”
[Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 262504 (2008)],” Appl. Phys. Lett. 95 (17),
179902.

Moreau-Luchaire, C, C. Moutafis, N. Reyren, J. Sampaio, C. A. F.
Vaz, N. Van Horne, K. Bouzehouane, K. Garcia, C. Deranlot,
P. Warnicke, P. Wohlh¨uter, J.-M. George, M. Weigand, J. Raabe,
V. Cros, and A. Fert (2016), “Additive interfacial chiral interac-
tion in multilayers for stabilization of small individual skyrmions
at room temperature,” Nature Nanotech. 11 (5), 444–448.

Moriya, Tˆoru (1960), “Anisotropic superexchange interaction and
weak ferromagnetism,” Phys. Rev. 120 (6), 91.

M¨uhlbauer, S, B. Binz, F. Jonietz, C. Pfleiderer, A. Rosch,
A. Neubauer, R. Georgii, and P. B¨oni (2009), “Skyrmion lattice
in a chiral magnet,” Science 323 (5916), 915–919.

Nasseri, S Ali, Eduardo Martinez, and Gianfranco Durin (2018),
“Collective coordinate descriptions of magnetic domain wall mo-
tion in perpendicularly magnetized nanostructures under the ap-
plication of in-plane fields,” J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 468, 25–43.

Nasseri, S Ali, Simone Moretti, Eduardo Martinez, Claudio Serpico,
and Gianfranco Durin (2017), “Collective coordinate models of
domain wall motion in perpendicularly magnetized systems under
the spin Hall effect and longitudinal fields,” J. Magn. Magn. Mat.
426, 195–201.

Nembach, Hans T, Emilie Ju´e, Eric R. Evarts, and Justin M. Shaw
(2020), “Correlation between Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction
and orbital angular momentum at an oxide-ferromagnet interface,”
Phys. Rev. B 101, 020409.

Nembach, Hans T, Justin M. Shaw, Mathias Weiler, Emilie Ju´e, and
Thomas J. Silva (2015), “Linear relation between Heisenberg ex-
change and interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in metal
films,” Nat. Phys. 11 (10), 825–829.

Neusser, S, G. Duerr, H. G. Bauer, S. Tacchi, M. Madami,
G. Woltersdorf, G. Gubbiotti, C. H. Back, and D. Grundler
(2010), “Anisotropic propagation and damping of spin waves in
a nanopatterned antidot lattice,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (6), 067208.

Pai, Chi-Feng, Maxwell Mann, Aik Jun Tan, and Geoffrey S. D.
Beach (2016), “Determination of spin torque efficiencies in het-
erostructures with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy,” Phys. Rev.
B 93 (14), 144409.

Parkin, Stuart, and See-Hun Yang (2015), “Memory on the race-
track,” Nature Nanotech. 10, 195.

Pellegren, J P, D. Lau, and V. Sokalski (2017), “Dispersive stiff-
ness of Dzyaloshinskii domain walls,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 119 (2),
027203.

Perini, Marco, Sebastian Meyer, Bertrand Dup´e, Stephan von
Malottki, Andr´e Kubetzka, Kirsten von Bergmann, Roland
Wiesendanger, and Stefan Heinze (2018), “Domain walls and
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in epitaxial Co/Ir(111) and
Pt/Co/Ir(111),” Phys. Rev. B 97 (18), 184425.

Petit, Doroth´ee, Peter R. Seem, Marine Tillette, Rhodri Mansell, and
Russell P. Cowburn (2015), “Two-dimensional control of field-
driven magnetic bubble movement using Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interactions,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 106 (2), 022402.

Pham, Thai Ha, J. Vogel, J. Sampaio, M. Vaˇnatka, J.-C. Rojas-
S´anchez, M. Bonfim, D. S. Chaves, F. Choueikani, P. Ohresser,
E. Otero, A. Thiaville, and S. Pizzini (2016), “Very large do-
main wall velocities in Pt/Co/GdOx and Pt/Co/Gd trilayers with
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” EPL 113 (6), 67001.

Pietzsch, Oswald, and Roland Wiesendanger (2011), “Non-collinear
magnetic order in nanostructures investigated by spin-polarized
scanning tunneling microscopy,” Pure Appl. Chem. 83 (11), 1981–
1988.

Pizzini, S, J. Vogel, S. Rohart, L. D. Buda-Prejbeanu, E. Ju´e,
O. Boulle, I. M. Miron, C. K. Safeer, S. Auffret, G. Gaudin, and
A. Thiaville (2014), “Chirality-induced asymmetric magnetic nu-
cleation in Pt/Co/AlOx ultrathin microstructures,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
113 (4), 047203.

Prabhakar, A, and D. Stancil (2009), Spin Waves (Springer–Verlag
US, Boston).

Quan, J, X. Zhao, W. Liu, L. Liu, Y. Song, Y. Li, J. Ma, S. Li,
X. Zhao, and Z. Zhang (2020), “Enhancement of spin-orbit
torque and modulation of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in
Pt100−xCrx/Co/AlOx trilayer,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 117 (6), 222405.

P. del Real,
Rafael,
Victor Raposo,
Eduardo Martinez,
and
Masamitsu Hayashi (2017), “Current-induced generation and syn-
chronous motion of highly packed coupled chiral domain walls,”
Nano Lett. 17 (3), 1814–1818.

Rojas-S´anchez, J C, and A. Fert (2019), “Compared efficiencies of
conversions between charge and spin current by spin-orbit inter-
actions in two- and three-dimensional systems,” Phys. Rev. Appl.
11 (5), 1.

Romming, Niklas, Henning Pralow, Andr´e Kubetzka, Markus Hoff-
mann, Stephan von Malottki, Sebastian Meyer, Bertrand Dup´e,
Roland Wiesendanger, Kirsten von Bergmann, and Stefan Heinze
(2018), “Competition of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya and higher-order
exchange interactions in Rh/Fe atomic bilayers on Ir(111),” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 120, 207201.

R¨oßler, U K, A. N. Bogdanov, and C. Pfleiderer (2006), “Sponta-
neous skyrmion ground states in magnetic metals,” Nature 442,
797.

Rougemaille, N, and A. K. Schmid (2010), “Magnetic imaging
with spin-polarized low-energy electron microscopy,” Eur. Phys.
J. Appl. Phys. 50 (2), 201011–2010118.

Rowan-Robinson,
R
M,
A.
A.
Stashkevich,
Y.
Roussign´e,
M. Belmeguenai, S.-M. Ch´erif, A. Thiaville, T. P. A. Hase, A. T.


58

Hindmarch, and D. Atkinson (2017), “The interfacial nature of
proximity-induced magnetism and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction at the Pt/Co interface,” Sci. Rep. 7 (1), 16835.

Ryu, Kwang-Su, Luc Thomas, See-Hun Yang, and Stuart Parkin
(2013), “Chiral spin torque at magnetic domain walls,” Nature
Nanotech. 8, 527.

Ryu, Kwang-Su, Luc Thomas, See-Hun Yang, and Stuart S. P. Parkin
(2012), “Current induced tilting of domain walls in high velocity
motion along perpendicularly magnetized micron-sized Co/Ni/Co
racetracks,” Appl. Phys. Expr. 5 (9), 093006.

Ryu, Kwang-Su, See-Hun Yang, Luc Thomas, and Stuart S. P. Parkin
(2014), “Chiral spin torque arising from proximity-induced mag-
netization,” Nat. Commun. 5, 3910.

Saha, S, M. Zelent, S. Finizio, M. Mruczkiewicz, S. Tacchi, A. K.
Suszka, S. Wintz, N. S. Bingham, J. Raabe, M. Krawczyk, and
L. J. Heyderman (2019), “Formation of N´eel-type skyrmions in
an antidot lattice with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy,” Phys.
Rev. B 100, 144435.

dos Santos,
Flaviano Jos´e,
Manuel dos Santos Dias,
Filipe
Souza Mendes Guimar˜aes, Juba Bouaziz, and Samir Lounis
(2018), “Spin-resolved inelastic electron scattering by spin waves
in noncollinear magnets,” Phys. Rev. B 97, 024431.

dos Santos, Flaviano Jos´e, Manuel dos Santos Dias, and Samir Lou-
nis (2020), “Nonreciprocity of spin waves in noncollinear magnets
due to the dzyaloshinskii-moriya interaction,” Phys. Rev. B 102,
104401.

Sarma, Bhaskarjyoti, Felipe Garcia-Sanchez, S. Ali Nasseri, Arianna
Casiraghi, and Gianfranco Durin (2018), “Dynamics and mor-
phology of chiral magnetic bubbles in perpendicularly magnetized
ultra-thin films,” J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 456, 433 – 438.

Schilz, W (1973), “Spin-wave propagation in epitaxial YIG films,”
Philips Res. Rep. 28, 50–65.

Schlotter, Sarah, Parnika Agrawal, and Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2018),
“Temperature dependence of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion in Pt/Co/Cu thin film heterostructures,” Appl. Phys. Lett.
113 (9), 092402.

Schott, M, L. Ranno, H. B´ea, C. Baraduc, S. Auffret, and
A. Bernand-Mantel (2021), “Electric field control of interfacial
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in Pt/Co/AlOx thin films,” J.
Magn. Magn. Mat. 520, 167122.

Schryer, N L, and L. R. Walker (1974), “The motion of 180◦ domain
walls in uniform dc magnetic fields,” J. Appl. Phys. 45 (12), 5406–
5421.

Seo, Soo-Man, Kyoung-Whan Kim, Jisu Ryu, Hyun-Woo Lee, and
Kyung-Jin Lee (2012), “Current-induced motion of a transverse
magnetic domain wall in the presence of spin Hall effect,” Appl.
Phys. Lett. 101 (2), 022405.

Serga, A A, A V Chumak, and B Hillebrands (2010), “YIG magnon-
ics,” J. Phys. D 43 (26), 264002.

Shahbazi, Kowsar, Aleˇs Hrabec, Simone Moretti, Michael B.
Ward, Thomas A. Moore, Vincent Jeudy, Eduardo Martinez,
and Christopher H. Marrows (2018), “Magnetic properties
and field-driven dynamics of chiral domain walls in epitaxial
Pt/Co/Aux/Pt1−x trilayers,” Phys. Rev. B 98, 214413.

Shahbazi, Kowsar, Joo-Von Kim, Hans T. Nembach, Justin M. Shaw,
Andreas Bischof, Marta D. Rossell, Vincent Jeudy, Thomas A.
Moore, and Christopher H. Marrows (2019), “Domain-wall
motion and interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions in
Pt/Co/Ir(tIr)/Ta multilayers,” Phys. Rev. B 99 (9), 094409.

Shao, Q, Y. Li, G. Yu, S.K. Kim, X. Che, C. Tang, Q.L. He, Y. Tsr-
erkovnyak, J. Shi, and K.L. Wang (2019), “Topological hall ef-
fect at above room temperature in heterostructures composed of a
magnetic insulator and a heavy metal,” Nat. Electron. 2, 182–186.

Shepley, Philippa M, Harry Tunnicliffe, Kowsar Shahbazi, Gavin
Burnell, and Thomas A. Moore (2018), “Magnetic properties,
domain-wall creep motion, and the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya inter-
action in Pt/Co/Ir thin films,” Phys. Rev. B 97 (13), 134417.

Slonczewski, JC (1996), “Current-driven excitation of magnetic mul-
tilayers,” J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 159 (1), L1 – L7.

Sobolev, V L, S. C. Chen, and H. L. Huang (1995), “Domain wall
dynamics in the presence of an external magnetic field normal to
the anisotropy axis,” J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 147, 284.

Sobolev, Vladimir L, Huei Li Huang, and Shoan Chung Chen (1994),
“Generalized equations for domain wall dynamics,” J. Appl. Phys.
75, 5797.

Soohoo, R F (1963), “General exchange boundary condition and sur-
face anisotropy energy of a ferromagnet,” Phys. Rev. 131 (2), 594–
601.

Soucaille, R, M. Belmeguenai, J. Torrejon, J.-V. Kim, T. Devolder,
Y. Roussign´e, S.-M. Ch´erif, A. A. Stashkevich, M. Hayashi, and
J.-P. Adam (2016), “Probing the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion in CoFeB ultrathin films using domain wall creep and Bril-
louin light spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev. B 94 (10), 104431.

Soumyanarayanan, Anjan, M. Raju, A. L. Gonzalez Oyarce, An-
thony K. C. Tan, Mi-Young Im, A. P. Petrovi´c, Pin Ho, K. H.
Khoo, M. Tran, C. K. Gan, F. Ernult, and C. Panagopoulos (2017),
“Tunable room-temperature magnetic skyrmions in Ir/Fe/Co/Pt
multilayers,” Nat. Mater. 16, 898–904.

de Souza Chaves, Dayane, Fernando Ajejas, Viola Kˇriˇz´akov´a, Jan
Vogel, and Stefania Pizzini (2019), “Oxidation dependence of the
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in Pt/Co/MOx trilayers ( M=Al
or Gd),” Phys. Rev. B 99 (14), 144404.

Srivastava, Titiksha, Marine Schott, Rom´eo Juge, Viola Kˇriˇz´akov´a,
Mohamed Belmeguenai, Yves Roussign´e, Anne Bernand-Mantel,
Laurent Ranno, Stefania Pizzini, Salim-Mourad Ch´erif, Andrey
Stashkevich, St´ephane Auffret, Olivier Boulle, Gilles Gaudin,
Mairbek Chshiev, Claire Baraduc, and H´el`ene B´ea (2018),
“Large-voltage tuning of Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interactions: A
route toward dynamic control of skyrmion chirality,” Nano Lett.
18 (8), 4871–4877.

Stamps, R L, and Burkard Hillebrands (1991), “Dipolar interactions
and the magnetic behavior of two-dimensional ferromagnetic sys-
tems,” Phys. Rev. B 44 (22), 12417–12423.

Stashkevich, A A, M. Belmeguenai, Y. Roussign´e, S. M. Cherif,
M. Kostylev, M. Gabor, D. Lacour, C. Tiusan, and M. Hehn
(2015), “Experimental study of spin-wave dispersion in Py/Pt film
structures in the presence of an interface Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction,” Phys. Rev. B 91 (21), 214409.

Stejskal, Ond ˇrej, Andr´e Thiaville, Jaroslav Hamrle, Shunsuke
Fukami, and Hideo Ohno (2020), “Current distribution in metal-
lic multilayers from resistance measurements,” Phys. Rev. B 101,
235437.

Tacchi, S, R. E. Troncoso, M. Ahlberg, G. Gubbiotti, M. Madami,
J. Åkerman, and P. Landeros (2017), “Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction in Pt/CoFeB films: Effect of the heavy-metal
thickness,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (14), 147201.

Tanaka, Masaaki, Musashi Shimazaki, Tatsuro Ohmasa, Takafumi
Suzuki, Shunsuke Honda, Syuta Honda, Hiroyuki Awano, and
Ko Mibu (2020), “Stabilization of N´eel-type domain walls in mul-
tilayered magnetic wires using antiferromagnetic interlayer ex-
change coupling,” J. Appl. Phys 128, 63902.

Tarasenko, SV, A. Stankiewicz, V.V. Tarasenko, and J. Ferr´e (1998),
“Bloch wall dynamics in ultrathin ferromagnetic films,” J. Magn.
Magn. Mat. 189 (1), 19 – 24.

Tersoff, J, and D. R. Hamann (1983), “Theory and application for the
scanning tunneling microscope,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1998–2001.


59

Tetienne, J-P, T. Hingant, L.J. Mart´ınez, S. Rohart, A. Thiaville,
L. Herrera Diez, K Garcia, J.-P. Adam, J.-V. Kim, J.-F. Roch,
I.M. Miron, G. Gaudin, L. Vila, B. Ocker, D. Ravelosona, and
V. Jacques (2015), “The nature of domain walls in ultrathin fer-
romagnets revealed by scanning nanomagnetometry,” Nat. Com-
mun. 6 (1), 6733.

Thiaville, A, J. M. Garc´ıa, and J. Miltat (2002), “Domain wall dy-
namics in nanowires,” J. Magn. Magn. Mat. 242-245, 1061.

Thiaville, A, Y. Nakatani, J. Miltat, and Y. Suzuki (2005), “Micro-
magnetic understanding of current-driven domain wall motion in
patterned nanowires,” EPL 69 (6), 990.

Thiaville, Andr´e, Stanislas Rohart, ´Emilie Ju´e, Vincent Cros, and
Albert Fert (2012), “Dynamics of Dzyaloshinskii domain walls in
ultrathin magnetic films,” EPL 100 (5), 57002.

Torrejon,
Jacob,
Junyeon Kim,
Jaivardhan Sinha,
Seiji Mi-
tani, Masamitsu Hayashi, Michihiko Yamanouchi, and Hideo
Ohno (2014), “Interface control of the magnetic chirality in
CoFeB/MgO heterostructures with heavy-metal underlayers,”
Nat. Commun. 5 (1), 4655.

Tsurkan, S, and Kh Zakeri (2020), “Giant Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction in epitaxial Co/Fe bilayers with C2v symmetry,” Phys.
Rev. B 102, 060406(R).

Udvardi, L, and L. Szunyogh (2009), “Chiral asymmetry of the spin-
wave spectra in ultrathin magnetic films,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 102,
207204.

Udvardi, L, L. Szunyogh, K. Palot´as, and P. Weinberger (2003),
“First-principles relativistic study of spin waves in thin magnetic
films,” Phys. Rev. B 68 (10), 104436.

Vaˇnatka, M, J-C Rojas-S´anchez, J Vogel, M Bonfim, M Belmegue-
nai, Y Roussign´e, A Stashkevich, A Thiaville, and S Pizzini
(2015), “Velocity asymmetry of Dzyaloshinskii domain walls in
the creep and flow regimes,” J. Phys. Condens. Matter 27 (32),
326002.

Vedmedenko, E Y, R. K. Kawakami, D. D. Sheka, P. Gam-
bardella, A. Kirilyuk, A. Hirohata, C. Binek, O. Chubykalo-
Fesenko, S. Sanvito, V. J. Kirby, J. Grollier, K. Everschor-Sitte,
T. Kampfrath, You C.-Y., and Berger A. (2020), “The 2020 mag-
netism roadmap,” J. Phys. D 53, 453001.

V´elez, Sa¨ul, Jakob Schaab, Martin S. W¨ornle, Marvin M¨uller, Elzbi-
eta Gradauskaite, Pol Welter, Cameron Gutgsell, Corneliu Nis-
tor, Christian L. Degen, Morgan Trassin, Manfred Fiebig, and
Pietro Gambardella (2019), “High-speed domain wall racetracks
in a magnetic insulator,” Nat. Commun. 10 (1), 4750.

Vlaminck, V, and M. Bailleul (2010), “Spin-wave transduction at the
submicrometer scale: Experiment and modeling,” Phys. Rev. B
81, 014425.

Vogel, Jan, J´erˆome Moritz, and Olivier Fruchart (2006), “Nucleation
of magnetisation reversal, from nanoparticles to bulk materials,”
C. R. Physique 7 (9-10), 977–987.

Wang, Hanchen, Jilei Chen, Tao Liu, Jianyu Zhang, Korbinian
Baumgaertl, Chenyang Guo, Yuehui Li, Chuanpu Liu, Ping Che,
Sa Tu, Song Liu, Peng Gao, Xiufeng Han, Dapeng Yu, Mingzhong
Wu, Dirk Grundler, and Haiming Yu (2020), “Chiral spin-wave
velocities induced by all-garnet interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya
interaction in ultrathin yttrium iron garnet films,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
124 (2), 027203.

Wang, X S, H. W. Zhang, and X. R. Wang (2018), “Topological
magnonics: A paradigm for spin-wave manipulation and device
design,” Phys. Rev. Applied 9, 024029.

Wells, Adam W J, Philippa M. Shepley, Christopher H. Marrows,
and Thomas A. Moore (2017), “Effect of interfacial intermixing
on the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in Pt/Co/Pt,” Phys. Rev.
B 95 (5), 054428.

Wong, Q Y, W L Gan, F L Luo, G J Lim, C C I Ang, F N Tan,
W C Law, and W S Lew (2018), “In situ Kerr and harmonic
measurement in determining current-induced effective fields in
MgO/CoFeB/Ta,” J. Phys. D 51 (11), 115004.

Woo, Seonghoon, Kai Litzius, Benjamin Kr¨uger, Mi-Young Im,
Lucas Caretta, Kornel Richter, Maxwell Mann, Andrea Krone,
Robert M. Reeve, Markus Weigand, Parnika Agrawal, Ivan
Lemesh, Mohamad-Assaad Mawass, Peter Fischer, Mathias
Kl¨aui, and Geoffrey S. D. Beach (2016), “Observation of room-
temperature magnetic skyrmions and their current-driven dynam-
ics in ultrathin metallic ferromagnets,” Nat. Mater. 15 (5), 501–
506.

Woo, Seonghoon, Kyung Mee Song, Hee-Sung Han, Min-Seung
Jung, Mi-Young Im, Ki-Suk Lee, Kun Soo Song, Peter Fischer,
Jung-Il Hong, Jun Woo Choi, Byoung-Chul Min, Hyun Cheol
Koo, and Joonyeon Chang (2017), “Spin-orbit torque-driven
skyrmion dynamics revealed by time-resolved X-ray microscopy,”
Nat. Commun. 8, 15573.

Wortmann, D, S. Heinze, Ph. Kurz, G. Bihlmayer, and S. Bl¨ugel
(2001), “Resolving complex atomic-scale spin structures by spin-
polarized scanning tunneling microscopy,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,
4132–4135.

Yamamoto, Kento, Abdul-Muizz Pradipto, Kenji Nawa, Toru
Akiyama, Tomonori Ito, Teruo Ono, and Kohji Nakamura (2016),
“Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction and orbital mag-
netic moments of metallic multilayer films,” AIP Adv. 7 (5),
056302.

Yang, H, S. Hu, M. Tang, S. Che, H. Chen, D. Wu, and X. Qiu
(2021), “Spin-orbit torque and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion in perpendicularly magnetized heterostructures with iridium,”
Appl. Phys. Lett. 118 (6), 062409.

Yang, Hongxin, Olivier Boulle, Vincent Cros, Albert Fert, and Mair-
bek Chshiev (2018a), “Controlling Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya inter-
action via chirality dependent atomic-layer stacking, insulator
capping and electric field,” Sci. Rep. 8, 12356.

Yang, Hongxin, Gong Chen, Alexandre A C Cotta, Alpha T
N’diaye, Sergey A Nikolaev, Edmar A Soares, Waldemar A A
Macedo, Kai Liu, Andreas K Schmid, Albert Fert, and Mairbek
Chshiev (2018b), “Significant Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction
at graphene-ferromagnet interfaces due to the Rashba effect,” Nat.
Mater. 17, 605–609.

Yang, Hongxin, Andr´e Thiaville, Stanislas Rohart, Albert Fert, and
Mairbek Chshiev (2015), “Anatomy of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya in-
teraction at Co/Pt interfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (26), 267210.

Yoshida, Y, S. Schr¨oder, P. Ferriani, D. Serrate, A. Kubetzka, K. von
Bergmann, S. Heinze, and R. Wiesendanger (2012), “Conical
spin-spiral state in an ultrathin film driven by higher-order spin
interactions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 087205.

Yoshimura, Yoko, Kab-Jin Kim, Takuya Taniguchi, Takayuki Tono,
Kohei Ueda, Ryo Hiramatsu, Takahiro Moriyama, Keisuke Ya-
mada, Yoshinobu Nakatani, and Teruo Ono (2016), “Soliton-
like magnetic domain wall motion induced by the interfacial
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” Nat. Phys. 12, 157.

Yu, Guoqiang, Pramey Upadhyaya, Xiang Li, Wenyuan Li, Se Kwon
Kim, Yabin Fan, Kin L. Wong, Yaroslav Tserkovnyak, Pe-
dram Khalili Amiri, and Kang L. Wang (2016a), “Room-
temperature creation and spin–orbit torque manipulation of
skyrmions in thin films with engineered asymmetry,” Nano Lett.
16 (3), 1981–1988.

Yu, Guoqiang, Pramey Upadhyaya, Qiming Shao, Hao Wu, Gen Yin,
Xiang Li, Congli He, Wanjun Jiang, Xiufeng Han, Pedram Khalili
Amiri, and Kang L. Wang (2017), “Room-temperature skyrmion
shift device for memory application,” Nano Lett. 17, 261–268.


60

Yu, Jiawei, Xuepeng Qiu, Yang Wu, Jungbum Yoon, Praveen Deo-
rani, Jean Mourad Besbas, Aurelien Manchon, and Hyunsoo Yang
(2016b), “Spin orbit torques and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion in dual-interfaced Co-Ni multilayers,” Sci. Rep. 6 (1), 32629.

Yu, X Z, Y. Onose, N. Kanazawa, J. H. Park, J. H. Han, Y. Matsui,
N. Nagaosa, and Y. Tokura (2010), “Real-space observation of a
two-dimensional skyrmion crystal,” Nature 465, 901.

Yun, Jijun, Dong Li, Baoshan Cui, Xiaobin Guo, Kai Wu, Xu Zhang,
Yupei Wang, Jian Mao, Yalu Zuo, and Li Xi (2018), “Current
induced domain wall motion and tilting in Pt/Co/Ta structures
with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in the presence of the
Dyzaloshinskii-Moriya interaction,” J. Phys. D 51 (15), 155001.

Zakeri, Kh, Y. Zhang, J. Prokop, T.-H. Chuang, N. Sakr, W. X. Tang,
and J. Kirschner (2010), “Asymmetric spin-wave dispersion on
Fe(110): Direct evidence of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interac-
tion,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (13), 137203.

Zakeri, Khalil (2016), “Probing of the interfacial Heisenberg and
Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya exchange interaction by magnon spec-
troscopy,” J. Phys. Condens. Matter 29 (1), 013001.

Zhang, S, and Z. Li (2004), “Roles of nonequilibrium conduction
electrons on the magnetization dynamics of ferromagnets,” Phys.

Rev. Lett. 93, 127204.

Zhang, Vanessa Li, Kai Di, Hock Siah Lim, Ser Choon Ng,
Meng Hau Kuok, Jiawei Yu, Jungbum Yoon, Xuepeng Qiu, and
Hyunsoo Yang (2015), “In-plane angular dependence of the spin-
wave nonreciprocity of an ultrathin film with Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 107 (2), 022402.

Zhang, W, R. Chen, B. Jiang, X. Zhao, W. Zhao, S. S. Yan,
G. Han, S. Yu, G. Liu, and S. Kang (2021), “Tunable interfacial
dzyaloshinskii–moriya interaction in symmetrical Au/[Fe/Au]n
multilayers,” Nanoscale 13, 2665–2672.

Zhang, W, H Zhong, R Zang, Y Zhang, S Yu, G Han, G L Liu,
S S Yan, S Kang, and L M Mei (2018), “Electrical field enhanced
interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in MgO/Fe/Pt sys-
tem,” Appl. Phys. Lett 113, 122406.

Zheludev, A, S. Maslov, G. Shirane, I. Tsukada, T. Masuda, K. Uchi-
nokura, I. Zaliznyak, R. Erwin, and L. P. Regnault (1999), “Mag-
netic anisotropy and low-energy spin waves in the Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya spiral magnet Ba2CuGe2O7,” Phys. Rev. B 59, 11432–
11444.


