1

Feasibility Analysis and Preliminary Design of ChipSat Entry for In-situ Investigation of the Atmosphere 

of Venus

Salvatore Vivenzioa*, Dan Friesb, Chris Welchc

a International Space University, 1 Rue Jean-Dominique Cassini, 67400 Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France, 
salvatore.vivenzio@community.isunet.edu
b Initiative for Interstellar Studies, Bone Mill, New Street, Charfield, GL12 *ES, United Kingdom
dfries@gatech.edu

c International Space University, 1 Rue Jean-Dominique Cassini, 67400 Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France, 
chris.welch@isunet.edu
* Corresponding Author

Abstract

Recent miniaturization of electronics in very small, low-cost and low-power configurations suitable for use in 

spacecraft have inspired innovative small-scale satellite concepts, such as ChipSats, centimeter-scale satellites with a 
mass of a few grams. These extremely small spacecraft have the potential to usher in a new age of space science 
accessibility. Due to their low ballistic coefficient, ChipSats can potentially be used in a swarm constellation for 
extended surveys of planetary atmospheres, providing large amounts of data with high reliability and redundancy. We 
present a preliminary feasibility analysis of a ChipSat planetary atmospheric entry mission with the purpose of 
searching for traces of microscopic lifeforms in the atmosphere of Venus. Indeed, the lower cloud layer of the 
Venusian atmosphere could be a good target for searching for microbial lifeforms, due to the favourable atmospheric 
conditions and the presence of micron-sized sulfuric acid aerosols. A numerical model simulating the planetary entry 
of a spacecraft of specified geometry, applicable to any atmosphere for which sufficient atmospheric data are available, 
is implemented and verified. The results are used to create a high-level design of a ChipSat mission cruising in the 
Venusian atmosphere at altitudes favorable for the existence of life. The paper discusses the ChipSat mission concept 
and considerations about the spacecraft preliminary design at system level, including the selection of a potential 
payload.

Keywords: ChipSat, Venus, Atmospheric Entry, Microbial Life, Astrobiology

Nomenclature

𝐴𝑐
Cross Sectional Area

𝑎𝑠
Speed of Sound

𝐵𝐶
Ballistic Coefficient

𝐶𝐷
Drag Coefficient

𝐶𝐿
Lift Coefficient

𝐷
Drag Force

𝑔
Gravity Acceleration

ℎ
Altitude

𝐾𝑛
Knudsen Number

𝐿
Lift Force / Characteristic Length

𝑀
Mass

𝑀𝑎
Mach Number

𝑅
Position Vector / Radius

𝑇
Atmospheric Temperature

𝑡
Time

𝑣
Velocity

𝑣𝑤
Normal Component of Thermal Velocity

𝑊
Weight

𝛼
Angle of Attack

Γ
Local Specific Gas Constant

𝛾
Flight Path Angle

𝜀
Emissivity

𝜂𝑛
Molecular Accommodation Coefficient
along the Normal Direction

𝜂𝑡
Molecular Accommodation Coefficient 
along the Tangential Direction

𝜆
Mean Free Molecular Path

𝜌
Atmospheric Density


2

Acronyms/Abbreviations

AEM
Atmospheric Entry Model

ARD
Atmospheric Reentry Demonstrator

COTS
Commercial-Off-The-Shelf 

ISM
Industrial, Scientific and Medical (radio bands)

IR
Infrared

L-M
Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry

LOC
Lab-on-a-Chip

MEMS Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
PCB
Printed Circuit Board

SMD
Surface Mounted Device

USSA
U.S. Standard Atmosphere

UV
Ultraviolet

1. Introduction

This paper proposes the use of the ChipSat 

technology for
extended surveys of planetary 

atmospheres. ChipSats are centimeter-scale satellites 
with a mass of a few grams that, thanks to their low 
cost and low time for development (from years to 
months), reduce the entry barriers for spacecraft 
development, making space exploration affordable for 
education institutions and for a large range of space 
amateurs. The current state of the art for ChipSats is 
well represented by the “Sprites” spacecraft, the 
smallest space probes built on a single circuit board. 
More than a hundred Sprite 3.5-by-3.5 centimeter 
ChipSats, developed by Zack Manchester (Stanford 
University) in collaboration with the NASA Ames 
Research Center [1], have been deployed on March 19, 
2019 from the Kicksat-2 CubeSat carrier. Radio 
signals from this formation have been received to 
confirm this release [2]. A similar spacecraft is the 
Monarch ChipSat developed by Cornell University
that, according to Adams and Peck [3], has advanced 
beyond the Sprites effort, but it has not been launched 
yet into space.

Figure 1. Sprites ChipSat sample [4]

The use of these small-sized satellites opens the 

doors to new space mission concepts. Some have 
already been proposed in the past, such as swarms of 
ChipSats equipped with a wide range of MEMS and 
sensors, 
performing 
planetary 
atmospheres 

characterization studies [5], or asteroid composition 

analyses [6], producing simultaneously a large amount 
of data over a large volume of space, assuring high
spatial resolution and redundancy. A mission based on 
a large number of ChipSats provides a high degree of 
robustness and high probability of success, without 
using any redundant subsystems and high-reliability 
components, unlike traditional spacecraft [7], [8].

Therefore, ChipSats are proposed for a mission to 

perform in-situ investigation of Venus’ atmosphere. 
The interest in such a challenging missions derives 
from the results of several astrobiology studies 
suggesting the potential presence of microbial life in 
the Venusian atmosphere.

It is well known that the atmospheric conditions on 

Venus surface are very harsh. The temperature values 
are around 460 °C and the atmospheric pressure is 92 
times the Earth’s surface pressure. Nevertheless, 
according to a recent study published in the journal 
Astrobiology in 2018 by Limaye et al. [9], the lower 
cloud layer of the Venusian atmosphere could be a 
good target for searching for microbial lifeforms (e.g. 
bacteria), due 
to 
the 
favourable 
atmospheric 

conditions and the presence of micron-sized sulfuric 
acid aerosols. In the past, it is likely that Venus hosted 
water for a relatively short period, between 650 
million to 2 billion years, before it boiled off into the 
clouds. Nonetheless, this could still be a period 
sufficiently long to develop microbial life, considering 
that Earth needed less than a billion years, according 
to Kluger [10]. As terrestrial bacteria have routinely 
been sampled in the upper atmosphere, surviving at 
those atmospheric conditions, the potential Venusian 
bacteria could have done the same [10]. It is evident 
that atmospheric conditions, radiation levels and the 
presence of available water are the major limitations 
for habitability. However, this is not the case for the 
bottom cloud layer of Venus, which presents rather 
favourable conditions, with a temperature of ~60 °C 
and a pressure of ~1 atm, and a UV radiation flux 
comparable with that of the Archean Earth’s surface, 
when photosynthetic life was considered to be present 
on our planet. The major limitation is given by the 
availability of liquid water in the clouds, which still 
has to be assessed [9]. Moreover, in 1993, Grinspoon 
et al. [11] proposed that the ultraviolet spatial contrasts 
discovered in the early part of the 20th century in 
Venus’ cloud layer (whose causes are still unknown), 
could be justified by the presence of “unknown 
ultraviolet absorbers”, which may represent one of the 
signs for presence of life (biomarkers). Current models 
include sulfur dioxide and iron chloride as the UV 
absorbers, which could suggest the possibility of a 
potential iron- and sulfur-centered metabolism in the 
clouds [9]. Furthermore, Limaye et al. [9] mention that 
Venus’ lower clouds present mass loading estimates 
comparable to the upper biomass value for the primary 


3

biological aerosols in Earth’s atmosphere, which are 
dominated by bacteria. In the same work the authors 
suggest that the estimated sizes of Venus’ clouds 
particles are comparable to those of the Earth’s 
biological aerosols particles (from nanometer to 
submillimeter), opening the possibility that the clouds 
may similarly harbor microbial life.

This paper assesses the feasibility of a mission to 

investigate the Venusian atmosphere using ChipSats, 
by developing an Atmospheric Entry Model (AEM) 
able to compute and simulate the planetary entry 
conditions of a spacecraft of specified geometry in the 
atmosphere of any planet for which sufficient 
atmospheric data are available. 

After validating the model, the results of the 

simulation of a ChipSat re-entry in Venus’ atmosphere 
are used to estimate the useful time such a small 
spacecraft could have to perform its scientific analysis 
at a selected range of altitudes, where recent 
astrobiology studies assess it is more likely to find 
microbial life.

Section 2 presents an overview of the developed 

AEM, describing the models used for the computation 
of the planetary atmospheric parameters and the 
aerodynamic coefficients, as well as the mathematical 
models implemented for the spacecraft translational 
dynamics.

Section 3 deals with the verification of the results 

obtained from the AEM for an Earth atmospheric 
entry, considering both a traditional-sized spacecraft 
and a ChipSat spacecraft configuration.

Section 4 presents and discusses the results 

concerning a Venus atmospheric entry of a ChipSat in 
face-on configuration, obtained using the AEM. 
Furthermore, a parametric analysis is presented to 
maximize the useful time of a ChipSat entry in Venus’ 
atmosphere.

In Section 5, the mission concept proposed to 

perform in-situ investigation of the lower cloud layer 
of Venus’ atmosphere is described at high level, 
together with a discussion of the potential design of 
the spacecraft.

2.
The Atmospheric Entry Model (AEM)

The Atmospheric Entry Model is a numerical 

model used to simulate the planetary entry conditions 
of a spacecraft of specified geometry in the 
atmosphere of any planet for which sufficient 
atmospheric data are available.

The AEM computes all the main characteristic 

parameters (including the altitude-dependent profiles
of velocity, flight path angle, and acceleration load) of 
an atmospheric entry mission, according to the manual 
input selected by the user. In order to perform the 
planetary atmospheric entry simulation, the AEM uses 

Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) for the 
spacecraft 
translational 
dynamics, 
which 
are 

integrated using the MATLAB ODE solver ode15s. 
The mathematical model is described in Section 2.3.

The manual inputs required for running a 

simulation are listed below: 
- Planet: according to the planet selected, the AEM

reads 
a 
specific 
datasheet 
containing 
the 

atmospheric data for the planet’s atmosphere. 
More details about the atmospheric models 
implemented in the AEM are presented in Section 
2.1. 

- Spacecraft Configuration: the AEM has a set of 

predefined spacecraft configurations, including 
regular Apollo-style and micro-scale spacecraft 
(ChipSats). The versatility of the model enables the 
user to add a new configuration if needed.

- Angle of Attack (𝜶): the AEM takes into account 

a constant attitude angle which has to be specified 
by the user.

- Altitude Range: the range of altitudes at which the 

AEM solves the ODEs to perform the simulation. 

It is important to mention that the AEM has the 
following intrinsic limitations:
- It does not include an aerothermodynamics model. 

Nevertheless, results available in literature are
used to complement the translational dynamics 
simulations presented in this paper.

- The rotational motion is neglected.

- A model for the lift coefficient is implemented for 

the free molecular flow regime only. Nevertheless, 
the simulations
presented regard spacecraft 

configurations for which the lift is negligible.

2.1 Atmospheric Models for Earth and Venus

The Atmospheric Entry Model is able to use 

different atmospheric models, according to the planet 
selected by the user. Currently, it includes the U.S. 
Standard Atmosphere 1976 model for Earth, presented 
in [12], and the Venus International Reference 
Atmosphere (VIRA) model for Venus, described by 
Kliore, Moroz and Keating [13].

The U.S. Standard Atmosphere 1976 is an 

idealized, steady-state representation from the Earth’s 
surface up to 1000 km, assuming a moderate solar 
activity. The AEM uses this model to calculate the 
density and temperature profiles varying with the 
altitude.

The Venus International Reference Atmosphere 

(VIRA) model was developed from data observed by 
Magellan and other Venus orbiters and entry probes. 
The model includes the density and temperature 


4

profile up to 150 km. In particular, the deep and 
medium atmosphere data (up to 33 km and 100 km 
respectively) are extracted from [14], whilst the upper 
atmosphere data (from 100 to 150 km) from [15].

Furthermore, in order to define the flow regime 

experienced by the spacecraft during entry, the main 
free molecular path reported respectively in U.S. 
Standard Atmosphere 1976 and VIRA models are used 
to compute the Knudsen number profile for Earth and 
Venus. The Knudsen number is defined as 𝐾𝑛 = 𝜆/𝐿, 
where 𝜆 is the mean free molecular path, and 𝐿 is the 
characteristic length of the spacecraft. Table 1 shows 
the limit values of 𝐾𝑛, discriminating the different 
flow regimes.

Table 1: Different flow regimes depending on the Knudsen 

number

𝑲𝒏 < 𝟎. 𝟏
Continuum Flow

𝟎. 𝟏 ≤ 𝑲𝒏 ≤ 𝟏𝟎
Transitional Flow

𝑲𝒏 > 𝟏𝟎
Free Molecular Flow

Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the variation of the 

Knudsen number with the altitude respectively for 
Earth’s and Venus’ atmospheres (reproduced with the
AEM), considering the case of a ChipSat with a side 
length of 1 cm, which is used as the characteristic 
length.

Figure 2. Knudsen number vs Altitude for a ChipSat with a 

1 cm side length in Earth’s Atmosphere

Figure 3. Knudsen number vs Altitude for a ChipSat with a 

1 cm side length in Venus’s Atmosphere

2.2 Aerodynamic Coefficients

The mathematical models for the drag and the lift 

coefficients are chosen with the main purpose of this 
work in mind, which is to simulate a planetary 
atmospheric entry for a ChipSat. In a simplified 
manner, this very small spacecraft can be thought of 
as a flat plate with side-lengths and a thickness, 
respectively, on the order of centimeters and milli- to 
micrometers.

The aerodynamic coefficients strongly depend on 

the flow regime the spacecraft experiences during the 
entry, determined by the Knudsen number, as 
mentioned in Section 2.1. This is a fundamental aspect 
to be considered when simulating the flight of such a 
small spacecraft. 

The models for both CD and CL in free molecular 

flow are given by Storch [16], whose expressions 
ignore spinning and tumbling body effects. They are 
shown in equations (2.2.a) and (2.2.b).

𝐶𝐷 = 2 [𝜂𝑡 + 𝜂𝑛

𝑣𝑤
𝑣 sin(𝛼)

+ (2 − 𝜂𝑛
− 𝜂𝑡)sin2(𝛼)] sin(𝛼)

(2.2.a)

𝐶𝐿 = [𝜂𝑛

𝑣𝑤
𝑣 + (2 − 𝜂𝑛

− 𝜂𝑡) sin(𝛼)] sin(2𝛼)

(2.2.b)

𝑣𝑤 = √

𝜋Γ𝑇

2 is the normal component of the thermal 

velocity (𝑇 is the local atmospheric temperature, Γ is 
the local specific gas constant), whilst 𝜂𝑛 and 𝜂𝑡 are 
dimensionless coefficients modelling the molecular 
accommodation in the plate’s normal and tangential 
directions.


5

In the continuum flow regime the AEM considers 

a constant 𝐶𝐷 = 1.28, which is an empirical result 
obtained for flat plates in subsonic regime, reported by 
[17]. The results discussed in Section 4.1 confirm the 
validity of the assumption of subsonic flow when the 
spacecraft enters the continuum regime in Venus’ 
atmosphere.

In the transitional flow regime, the 𝐶𝐷 is computed 

by interpolating between the value used for continuum 
flow and the value calculated at an altitude 
corresponding 
to 
𝐾𝑛 = 10. 
The 
latter 
being 

considered the boundary value between free molecular 
flow and transitional flow regimes.

Figure 4 and 
Figure 5 show the simulated drag 

coefficient variation during an Earth atmospheric 
entry for a ChipSat in a face-on configuration (α =
90°). In this case the free molecular flow and 
transitional flow boundary occurs at an altitude of 
about 97 km (for Earth) and 115 km (for Venus), 
whilst the transitional flow and continuum flow 
boundary occurs at about 69 km (for Earth) and 97 km 
(for Venus).

Figure 4. 𝐶𝐷 profile for a ChipSat Earth atmospheric 

entry

Figure 5. 𝐶𝐷 profile for a ChipSat Venus atmospheric 

entry

Regarding the lift coefficient, no mathematical 

models for the continuum and transitional flow 
regimes have been implemented yet, since the main 
purpose of the analyses presented in this work is the 
study of a ChipSat in face-on configuration (α = 90°), 
for which the lift force effects are negligible.

2.3 Translational Dynamics Model

The mathematical model for the translational 

dynamics consists of two Ordinary Differential 
Equations (ODEs), which describe the spacecraft 
motion along the two directions tangential and normal 
to the curving trajectory in the point P, as represented 
in Figure 6, where the spacecraft is as assumed to be a 
mass-point.

Figure 6. Scheme of the forces acting on the spacecraft

The two equations, which are reported by Monti 

and Zuppardi [18], are functions of two time-varying 
parameters:
- The spacecraft velocity 𝑽(𝒕). 

- The flight path angle 𝜸(𝒕) (angle between the 

direction tangential to the trajectory and the local 
horizontal direction).


6

The two ODEs are reported below, respectively for 

the tangential (2.3.a) and the normal (2.3.b) directions:

𝑀 𝑑𝑣

𝑑𝑡 + 𝐷 − 𝑊𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝛾) = 0
(2.3.a)

𝑀𝑉 𝑑𝛾

𝑑𝑡 + 𝐿 + 𝑀 𝑣2

𝑅 − 𝑊𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛾) = 0
(2.3.b)

Once defined 𝐴𝑐, 𝑀, 𝑊, and 𝑅 as the spacecraft 

cross sectional area, mass, weight and position vector, 
the forces acting on the body are described in Table 2.

Table 2. Forces acting on the spacecraft

𝐷 = 1

2 𝜌𝑣2𝐶𝐷𝐴𝑐
Drag force acting on the spacecraft

𝐿 = 1

2 𝜌𝑣2𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑐
Lift force acting on the spacecraft

𝑀 𝑣2

𝑅

Centrifugal force due to the 
curvature of the trajectory

𝑀𝑣 𝑑𝛾

𝑑𝑡

Inertial force due to the variation of 
the path angle 𝛾

Expressing the altitude h as a function of time 

(𝑑ℎ = −𝑣𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝛾)𝑑𝑡), it is possible to reformulate 
equations (2.3.c) and (2.3.d) using h as independent 
variable:

𝑑𝑣
𝑑ℎ = 1

2

𝜌𝑣

sin(𝛾)

𝐴𝑐𝐶𝐷

𝑀
− 𝑔

𝑣

(2.3.c)

𝑑𝛾
𝑑ℎ = 1

2

𝜌

sin(𝛾)

𝐴𝑐𝐶𝐿

𝑀
+
1

𝑅𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝛾) −
𝑔

𝑣2tan (𝛾)

(2.3.d)

Defining 𝑅0 and 𝑔0 respectively as the planet’s 

radius and the surface gravitational acceleration, the 
magnitudes of the position vector 𝑅 and the gravity 
vector 𝑔 can be also expressed as a function of the 
altitude:

𝑅(ℎ) = 𝑅0 + ℎ
(2.3.e)

𝑔(ℎ) = 𝑔0

𝑅0

2

(𝑅0 + ℎ)2

(2.3.f)

Moreover, as described in Section 2.2, it is possible 

to express the drag coefficient 𝐶𝐷 and the lift 
coefficient 𝐶𝐿 as a function of 𝑉 and 𝛼, using different 
models according to the flow regime the spacecraft 
experiences during the entry. 

According to the planet selected by the user, the 

AEM reads the atmospheric datasheet coming from 
one of the models described in Section 2.1, to obtain 
the density and the temperature profiles 𝜌 = 𝜌(ℎ) and 
𝑇 = 𝑇(ℎ), and the Knudsen number profile 𝐾𝑛 =
𝐾𝑛(ℎ) (to determine the actual flow regime). Then, 

assuming a constant angle of attack 𝛼 defined by the 
user, the AEM is able to solve the ODEs and obtain 
the spacecraft’s entry trajectory parameters.

3.
Numerical Model Verification

The 
translational 
dynamics 
model 
of 
the 

Atmospheric Entry Model presented in Section 2.3 is
verified considering the case of an Earth atmospheric 
entry performed with two different spacecraft 
configurations:
- A traditional-sized spacecraft, the Atmospheric 

Reentry Demonstrator (ARD) vehicle. The data 
used as a benchmark for the verification are 
reported by Monti and Zuppardi [18].

- A generic ChipSat spacecraft. In this case, the data 

used as a benchmark come from Atchison, 
Manchester and Peck [5].

In both cases, the model used for the Earth’s 
atmosphere is the U.S. Standard Atmosphere 1976, 
presented in Section 2.1.

3.1 Verification for a Traditional-sized 

Spacecraft Earth Atmospheric Entry

The Atmospheric Reentry Demonstrator (ARD) 

vehicle is characterized by a 2,800 kg mass and a main 
section with a 2.8 m diameter. The initial values used 
for the simulation are the same as those reported by 
[18]. They are shown in Table 3:

Table 3. Initial values for the simulation [18]

Initial Altitude
𝟏𝟐𝟎 𝒌𝒎

Initial Velocity
7.5 𝑘𝑚/𝑠

Initial Path Angle
1.4°

The verification presented in this section considers 

constant values for the drag coefficient and the lift 
coefficient, to match the assumptions made by [18]. 
They are shown in Table 4:

Table 4. Aerodynamic Coefficients for the simulation [18]

Lift Coefficient
𝐂𝐋 = 𝟎

Drag Coefficient
CD = 1

Figure 7 shows the verification results for the ARD 

vehicle, in terms of altitude time history, velocity time 
history:
- The black-solid curve represents the benchmark 

for the verification. The data are reported in [18].

- The yellow-dashed curve represents the results 

obtained using the AEM for the face-on 
configuration (𝛼 = 90°), using the assumptions in 
Table 4.


7

It is evident from the plots reported below that for each 
parameter evaluated, the AEM results match perfectly 
those of [18], confirming the verification of the 
presented model within the given constraints.

Figure 7. Altitude time history verification for the ARD 

vehicle

3.2 Verification for a ChipSat Spacecraft Earth 

Atmospheric Entry

The test case for this verification is an Earth 

atmospheric entry mission performed by a generic 
ChipSat spacecraft, thought as a silicon flat plate, 
whose structural specifications are listed in Table 5.

Table 5. ChipSat Specifications

Side Length
𝟏 𝒄𝒎

Thickness
25 𝜇𝑚

Material Density
2330 𝑘𝑔/𝑚3

The initial values used for the simulation are the ones 
reported by [5] and are listed in Table 6.

Table 6. Initial values for the simulation

Initial Altitude
𝟑𝟓𝟎 𝒌𝒎

Initial Velocity
7.697 𝑘𝑚/𝑠

Initial Path Angle
0°

The case selected concerns a ChipSat in a face-on

configuration (𝛼 = 90°), thus the lift is negligible, 
whilst 𝐶𝐷 assumes the profile represented in Figure 4
in Section 2.2, varying according to the flow regime 
experienced by the ChipSat during entry.

Figure 8. Altitude time history for a face-on entry of a 

ChipSat

Figure 8 shows the comparison between the 

altitude time history computed by the AEM model and 
the benchmark results coming from [5].

The AEM’s trajectory implies that the ChipSat 

would dive into the atmosphere slightly faster than the 
benchmark case. These small differences in the results 
were expected since the drag coefficient model used in 
the AEM are slightly different from those reported by 
[5], which uses the expression of 𝐶𝐷 for the free 
molecular flow regime at every altitude. Nevertheless, 
it is evident that the trends of the two curves are almost 
the same, and they match almost perfectly at higher 
altitudes (in free molecular flow regime). This implies 
a positive outcome of a simple qualitative verification.

4.
Results and Feasibility Analysis of a ChipSat 
Entry in the Venusian Atmosphere

4.1 Results of a Venus Atmospheric Entry 

Performed with a ChipSat

The objective is to demonstrate the ability of the 

developed 
tool 
to 
compute 
the 
fundamental 

parameters of the spacecraft trajectory for a Venus 
atmospheric entry and to provide results supporting 
the parametric analysis performed in Section 4.2. 

The specifications of the ChipSat selected for the 

Venus atmospheric entry mission are listed in Section 
3.2, Table 5. The initial values used for the simulation 
are reported in Table 7.

Table 7. Initial values for the simulation

Initial Altitude
150 𝑘𝑚

Initial Velocity
7.237 𝑘𝑚/𝑠

Initial Path Angle
0°


8

Figure 9. Altitude time history

Figure 10. Velocity vs Altitude

Figure 11. Ballistic Coefficient vs Altitude

Figure 12. Mach Number vs Altitude

Figure 13. Flight Path Angle vs Altitude

Figure 14. Acceleration load vs Altitude (𝑔0 = 8.87 𝑚/𝑠2)


9

The atmospheric model used for this simulation is 

the Venus International Reference Atmosphere 
(VIRA), described in Section 2.1. A
face-on 

configuration (𝛼 = 90°)is considered, therefore the 
lift force effects are negligible. Concerning the drag 
coefficient, a 𝐶𝐷 profile varying with the flow regime
(described in Section 2.2), is used.

The altitude time history in Figure 9 shows that the 

descent of the ChipSat through Venus’ atmosphere is 
rather long compared to an Earth entry performed with 
the same spacecraft (see Figure 9). Indeed, the ChipSat 
reaches Venus’ surface after about 69 hours starting 
the descent from an altitude of 150 km, whilst it 
reaches Earth’s surface in about 6 hours from an 
altitude of 350 km.

This result is reflected in the velocity trend in 

Figure 10, showing a dramatic drop of the spacecraft 
velocity at high altitudes. At an altitude of 100 km, the 
ChipSat reaches already a quite low velocity value of 
94 m/s after only 9.8 minutes. Thereafter, the descent 
is much slower, and the velocity reduces more 
gradually, reaching 1 m/s at an altitude of 56 km.

The velocity trend is due to much higher values of 

the drag coefficient at higher altitudes, implying lower 
values of the ballistic coefficient in the upper layers of 
Venus’ atmosphere, as shown in Figure 11, which 
cause a higher velocity gradient 𝑑𝑣 𝑑ℎ
⁄
(see equation 

2.3.c).

Figure 12 represents the Mach number profile with 

respect to the altitude. Defined as 𝑀𝑎 = 𝑣 𝑎𝑠
⁄
, where 

𝑣 is the spacecraft velocity and 𝑎𝑠 is the speed of 
sound, the Mach number is an important non-
dimensional quantity (together with the Knudsen 
number), which enables defining the flow regime the 
spacecraft experiences during the descent. Figure 12
shows that the sonic limit of  𝑀𝑎 = 1 is reached 
already at an altitude of 106 km. From Figure 3 in 
Section 2.1, we deduce that the ChipSat is in a 
continuum flow regime (𝐾𝑛 < 0.1) starting from an 
altitude of 98 km, at which the flow velocity is already 
subsonic. These two results are in line with the 
assumption of considering the constant value 𝐶𝐷 =
1.28 [17] for the drag coefficient model in continuum, 
which is valid only for subsonic regimes.

Moreover, Figure 13 represents the flight path 

angle profile varying during the descent. The final 
value 𝛾 = 90° is reached already at an altitude of 
about 98 km.

Finally, Figure 14 shows the acceleration load 

profile varying with the altitude, which reaches a peak 
of 11.3 g at an altitude of about 119 km.

The innovative nature of this study implies that 

little benchmark results exist in literature. Therefore, 
the reliability of the results discussed in this section 
can be justified only from a qualitative perspective, by 

comparing the trends of the parameters profiles for a 
Venus atmospheric entry, with the corresponding 
profiles for an Earth atmospheric entry performed with 
the same ChipSat, which have been presented in 
Section 3.2. The main difference is that the entry 
duration is much longer for a mission on Venus, and 
this is probably due to the different atmospheric 
conditions at low altitudes. Indeed, the surface density 
and pressure values on Venus are respectively about 
53 times and 92 times the Earth’s surface density and 
pressure values.

4.2 ChipSat Thickness Parametric Analysis and 

Useful Time Evaluation

A
recent study published in the journal 

Astrobiology by Limaye et al. [9] states that the lower 
cloud layer of the Venusian atmosphere could be an 
good target for searching for microbial lifeforms, due 
to the favorable atmospheric conditions (~60 °C 
temperature, ~1 atm pressure, a not prohibitive UV 
radiation flux) and the presence of micron-sized 
sulfuric acid aerosols. 

In order to assess the feasibility of a Venus 

atmospheric entry mission performed with a ChipSat, 
aiming at providing in-situ scientific studies to search 
for life in the Venusian atmosphere, a parametric 
analysis has been performed using the AEM. 

Based on this recent astrobiology study and on the 

potential presence of “unknown ultraviolet absorbers” 
at the same altitudes already proposed by Grinspoon et 
al. [11], the range of altitude selected for the in-situ 
investigation of Venus’ atmosphere for microbial 
lifeforms is 47 - 51 km. which corresponds to the 
lower cloud layer.

The parametric analysis investigates the optimal 

thickness of the ChipSat for the proposed mission 
objectives. This dimension affects the mission profile
strongly, especially the useful time the ChipSat would 
spend at the selected altitude range (47 – 51 km), to 
provide data for the scientific studies.

The ChipSat configuration chosen for the 

simulations is the same used for the analyses presented 
in Sections 3.2 and 4.1 (see Table 5), except for the 
ChipSat’s thickness, which is the parameter varied 
during the simulations. A face-on configuration (𝛼 =
90°) is considered, and the same assumptions made in 
Section 4.1 for initial values and drag coefficient are
taken into account.


10

Figure 15. Altitude time history at different thickness 

values

Figure 16. Useful Time vs spacecraft’s thickness

Figure 15
shows the altitude time history 

considering different values of the spacecraft’s 
thickness, whilst Figure 16 represents the variation of 
the 
useful 
time
varying 
the 
spacecraft’s 

thickness.Error! Reference source not found.
reports the useful time the ChipSat spends at the 
selected altitude range (47 – 51 km) for different 
values of the spacecraft’s thickness, varying from 
2.5 𝑚𝑚 to 25 𝜇𝑚.

Table 8. Useful Time at 47-51 km for different values of the 

ChipSat’s Thickness

CHIPSAT’S 
THICKNESS

[× 𝟏𝟎−𝟑 METERS]

USEFUL TIME 

[HOURS]

2.500
0.16

1.000
0.27

0.500
0.37

0.250
0.51

0.100
0.85

0.050
1.14

0.025
1.61

The results of the parametric analysis highlights 

that a thinner ChipSat would spend a significantly 
longer time at the selected altitude range. Thus, 
assuming a 25 μm thickness and a 1 cm side-length as 
the dimensional limits for the development of such a 
small spacecraft, the minimum thickness of 25 μm
would assure an optimized useful time of about 97 
minutes.

Another important aspect to be evaluated to assess 

the feasibility of such a mission is the total heat load 
the ChipSat experiences during entry. The AEM does 
not include yet a validated aerothermodynamics
model, nevertheless Atchison, Manchester and Peck 
[5] demonstrate that a ChipSat with the same 
dimensions as the one used in this paper can survive 
an Earth atmospheric entry. Moreover, Dalle and 
Spangelo [19] report that a ChipSat with a 32 μm
thickness and a 1 cm side-length would survive a 
descent into the atmosphere of Venus with some minor 
heat shielding, such as aerogel. Therefore, the baseline 
configuration that was presented in this paper is 
expected to follow similar trends, since thinner 
ChipSats are subjected to lower thermal loads.

Furthermore, 
the
simulation 
is
performed 

considering a face-on configuration(𝛼 = 90°). A 
randomly tumbling shaped object would probably 
experiences a faster descent, due to lower values of the 
drag coefficient and higher values of the ballistic 
coefficient in continuum regime. This might motivate 
the development of an attitude control system or 
aerodynamic shapes for such a small spacecraft to 
improve their performance.

Finally, it is important to mention that the AEM

does not include a model for the hyper-velocity winds
that speed up in Venus’ atmosphere faster than the 
rotation of the planet itself. There is no evidence of 
how the winds could affect a ChipSat entry, but from 
a purely theoretical perspective, they could have a 
beneficial effect for an edge-on configuration (if we do 
not consider tumbling), making the ChipSat float in 


11

Venus’ clouds longer than expected, further increasing 
the useful time for scientific studies. On the other 
hand, the winds could reduce the entry duration for a 
face-on configuration.

5.
Mission Concept and Preliminary Design
Considerations
The mission concept proposed to perform in-situ 

investigation of the lower cloud layer of Venus’ 
atmosphere is described at high level in this section, 
together with a discussion on the potential design of 
the spacecraft.

5.1 Mission Concept

The proposed idea for the mission concept 

consists in launching a swarm of ChipSats on-board a 
mother-spacecraft that would transport them towards 
Venus, and then deploy them in the planet’s
atmosphere, similarly to the deployment of the Sprites 
ChipSats by the Kicksat-2 CubeSat carrier.

Figure 17. Artistic impression of the Sprites deployment [4]

The mother-spacecraft would be injected into an 

elliptical orbit around Venus with a periapsis between 
250 and 150 km, similar to the orbit that two past 
missions followed for their coasts to Venus, such as 
the NASA Pioneer Venus Orbiter and the ESA Venus 
Express. Thus, in proximity of the periapsis the 
mother-spacecraft would deploy the ChipSats. The 
small satellites would then descend towards Venus’ 
surface, spending around 97 minutes of useful time at 
the selected altitudes (47-51 km) to perform their 
scientific measurements and send back data to the 
mother-spacecraft, before diving into the lower layers 
of Venus’ atmosphere.

Based on the results discussed in Section 4, the 

target ChipSat for the mission has the following 
specifications, listed in Table 9.

Table 9. ChipSat specifications

Side Length
𝟏 𝒄𝒎

Thickness
25 𝜇𝑚

Material Density
2330 𝑘𝑔/𝑚3

5.2 Structures

The ChipSat structure would be based on a

Printed Circuit Board (PCB), which provide structural 
integrity 
and 
include 
circuits 
transmitting 

signals/current, and Surface Mounted Devices (SMD), 
components soldered on it. Both these technologies 
can be downscaled to a 1 cm size ChipSat [20].

5.3 Communications

One of the biggest challenge of designing a 

ChipSat mission is performing communications with 
these small satellites. Indeed, without the ability to 
accommodate a high-gain antenna, the data rate from 
is substantially lower than larger spacecraft with more 
power availability and directed, high-gain antennas
[3].

In the context of the mission concept proposed, the 

communications subsystem shall allow the ChipSat to 
send back data to the mother-spacecraft while the 
scientific measurements at the selected altitude range
are performed. 

The initial baseline
for the communications 

subsystem would be the 25 mW ISM-band radio and 
embedded PCB antenna, used on-board the Monarch 
ChipSats. According to [3], the Shannon Limit for a 
Monarch in Earth orbit is about 84 kilobits per second. 
Assuming a similar value for our mission, the potential 
transmission rate for the ChipSats is quite low. 
However, it is important to mention that a swarm of 
hundreds or thousands of ChipSats would be deployed 
simultaneously. Therefore, “the total data rate is 
competitive with large, high-power spacecraft” [3]. 
Moreover, the ChipSats would send data from 
different locations in Venus’ atmosphere, which 
enables a higher spatial resolution compared to 
receiving large amounts of data from the same region.

5.1 Power

Although Landis and Haag [21] demonstrate that 

the use of photovoltaics for missions on Venus’ lower 
atmosphere and surface is feasible despite high 
temperatures, low light levels, and a spectrum that is 
deficient in the short-wavelength part of the spectrum, 
the dimensional constraints of a ChipSat require the 
usage 
of 
different 
power 
systems, 
such 
as 

supercapacitors.

Compared to Li-ion batteries, supercapacitors are 

characterized 
by 
a 
higher 
specific 
power 


12

(~ 105 W kg
⁄
versus ~ 103 W kg
⁄
), and a lower 

specific 
energy 
(~ 10−2 Wh kg
⁄
versus 

~ 10 Wh kg
⁄
) [22]. Thus, they are suitable for our 

mission, which requires high power for a short period 
(~97 minutes).

The miniature graphene-based supercapacitors 

described by Djuric et al. [23] are chosen in this study 
to supply power to the ChipSat. They are characterized 
by a length of 6.8 mm, and a 210 μm width of the 
electrodes, separated from each other by 60 μm. 
Furthermore, they deliver an area capacitance of 80.5 
μF cm2
⁄
. These supercapacitors would be fully 

charged before the deployment, storing the energy to 
be provided to the ChipSat during its nominal 
operations.

5.2 Thermal Protection

No active thermal protection system is needed to 

withstand the thermal loads the ChipSat experiences 
during entry. As per [19], the use of silica aerogel, a 
low density, light weight material, with high insulating 
capability [24], is sufficient to protect the spacecraft 
during the entry.

5.3 Payload

To gain insights into the potential existence of 

lifeforms in
Venus’ clouds,
several different 

instruments could be used. For in-situ atmospheric 
measurements, [9] proposes the following devices: 
- Compact 
Raman 
Lidar 
to 
measure 

organic/inorganic composition, described in [25].

- Fluorescence 
Lidar 
to 
measure 

organic/biomolecular fluorescence. 

- Life detection microscope, described in [26], to 

detect the presence of microbial cells.
A miniaturized version of these instruments, so 

that they could be integrated together in a micro-scale 
spacecraft such as the ChipSat proposed, is not 
currently available.

An alternative approach is provided by the 

Miniaturized Multi-Spectral Instrument, proposed by 
the NASA Langley Research Center team in 
collaboration with the University of Hawaii for the 
characterization of planetary surfaces and atmospheres 
[27]. It is a small-size device (8 – 10 kg, 30 x 30 x 25 
cm) that integrates a Raman fluorescence spectrograph 
and a compact Lidar multi-sensor system, capable of 
investigation and identification of minerals, organic, 
and biogenic materials, as well as to perform general 
atmospheric studies. Although this is a miniaturized 
payload, the mass and the size of this device still 
exceed 
the 
limits 
imposed 
by 
the 
ChipSat 

configuration 
proposed. 
Therefore, 
further 

technological developments are needed to make it 
available for such a small spacecraft.

Another alternative is the concept of Lab-on-a-

Chip (LOC), a device that integrates several laboratory 
functions on a single integrated circuit with the 
maximum size of few square centimeters, able to 
handle minute sample volumes. The concept proposed 
by [28] includes the potential development of a Lab-
on-a-Chip for Liquid Chromatography -
Mass 

Spectrometry (LOC LC-MS). LC-MS is a technique 
used to detect metabolites, organic substances 
naturally occurring from the metabolism of a living 
organism and that do not directly come from gene 
expression. It could be very useful to the ChipSat to 
detect potential biomarkers in Venus’ clouds [29].

Finally, the integration of miniaturized versions of 

cameras (Visible, IR, UV) and magnetometers could 
lead to unexpected discoveries by providing additional
data, such as images of the interior of Venus’ 
atmosphere, as well as measurements that could help 
to understand better the induced magnetosphere of the 
planet.

6.
Conclusions and Recommendations

An Atmospheric Entry Model (AEM) has been 

developed. It is able to compute the planetary entry 
conditions of a spacecraft of specified geometry in the 
atmosphere of any planet for which sufficient 
atmospheric data are available. An overview of the 
mathematical models implemented in the AEM are 
described in detail in this paper. The model’s results 
have
been verified for spacecraft translational 

dynamics in the case of an atmospheric entry at Earth, 
considering both a traditional-sized spacecraft and a 
ChipSat spacecraft configuration. 

Relying on the positive outcome of the results 

verification, a simulation for a ChipSat entry in Venus’ 
atmosphere has been performed. The reliability of the 
results is stressed by the similarity between the trends 
of the parameters profiles for a Venus atmospheric 
entry, with the corresponding profiles for an Earth 
atmospheric entry performed with the same ChipSat.

Furthermore, following the selection of the 47 - 51 

km altitude range for Venus’ atmosphere parametric 
analysis has been performed using the AEM. The 
results highlight that a thinner ChipSat would have a 
significantly longer useful time. Indeed, considering a 
ChipSat with a 25 μm thickness and a 1 cm side-
length, the useful time for the scientific investigation 
would be 97 minutes. No thermal analysis has been 
performed, but results in literature suggest that a 
ChipSat with similar characteristics would survive a 
descent into the atmosphere of Venus with only minor
heat shielding.


13

Moreover, a mission concept to perform in-situ 

investigation of the lower cloud layer of Venus’ 
atmosphere has been proposed, and preliminary design 
considerations 
regarding 
the 
structures, 

communications, and power have been discussed. 
Different kinds of payload have been explored for 
integration on the ChipSat:
- The 
Miniaturized 
Multi-Spectral 
Instrument 

proposed by 
[27], which requires further 

technological developments to meet the size and 
mass constraints, imposed by the microscopic 
configuration of the spacecraft. 

- The Lab-on-a-Chip for Liquid Chromatography -

Mass Spectrometry (LOC LC-MS) proposed by
[28].

- Miniaturized cameras and magnetometers for 

general atmospheric studies.

Finally, 
some 
recommendations 
for 
future 

potential developments are discussed below: 
a. Consideration of the rotational motion of the 

ChipSat during entry through an additional ODE.

b. Implementation in the Atmospheric Entry Model of 

a proper aerothermodynamics model to compute 
the thermal loads the ChipSat experiences during 
entry.

c. Implementation of a proper model for the high-

speed winds of Venus’ atmosphere.

Acknowledgments

Special thanks to Initiatives for Interstellar Studies

to award the main author of this paper the Alpha 
Centauri Price for the best Individual Project carried 
out at the International Space University. It provided 
the right motivation energy to carry on with the project 
and write this paper for the International Astronautical
Congress 2019. 

References

[1]
NASA, 
“KickSat-2,” 
2019, 

https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/station/re
search/experiments/2374.html, [Accessed: 02-
Apr-2019].

[2]
D. 
Todd, 
“Sprite 
Chipsat 
femtosat 

&quot;shoal&quot; is released from Kicksat 2,” 
2019,
https://www.seradata.com/sprite-

femtosat-shoal-is-released-from-kicksat-2/,
[Accessed: 02-Apr-2019].

[3]
V. H. Adams and M. Peck, “R-Selected 
Spacecraft,” 2019.

[4]
P. Klupar, “Life in the Universe,” in 
Breakthrough Initiatives, 2018.

[5]
J. a. Atchison, Z. R. Manchester, and M. a. Peck, 
Microscale Atmospheric Re-Entry Sensors, no. 
1. 2010.

[6]
Z. Manchester and M. Peck, “Stochastic Space 
Exploration with Microscale Spacecraft,” AIAA 
Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference, 
no. August. pp. 1–6, 2011.

[7]
Z. Manchester, “Centimeter-Scale Spacecraft: 
Design, Fabrication, And Deployment,” Aug. 
2015.

[8]
A. Hein, “The AttoSat Manifesto,” 2018, 
https://i4is.org/the-attosat-manifesto,
[Accessed: 23-Nov-2018].

[9]
S. S. Limaye, R. Mogul, P. Vaishampayan, G. 
P. Słowik, A. H. Ansari, and D. J. Smith, 
“Venus’ Spectral Signatures and the Potential 
for Life in the Clouds,” Astrobiology, vol. 18, 
no. 9, pp. 1181–1198, 2018.

[10]
J. 
Kluger, 
“Researchers 
Say 
Venus’ 

Atmosphere Could Support Extraterrestrial 
Life,” 2018, http://time.com/5224561/venus-
life-atmosphere-bacteria/, [Accessed: 01-Apr-
2019].

[11]
D. H. Grinspoon et al., “Probing Venus’s cloud 
structure with Galileo NIMS,” Planet Sp. Sci, 
1993.

[12]
NOAA, NASA, and U.S. Airforce, “U.S. 
Standard Atmosphere 1976,” Washington, 
D.C., 1976.

[13]
A. J. Kliore, V. I. Moroz, and G. M. Keating, 
“The 
Venus 
International 
Reference 

Atmosphere,” 1985.

[14]
A. Seiff et al., “Models of the structure of the 
atmosphere of Venus from the surface to 100 
kilometers altitude,” Adv. Sp. Res., vol. 5, no. 
11, pp. 3–58, 1985.

[15]
G. M. Keating et al., “Models of Venus neutral 
upper atmosphere: Structure and composition,” 
Adv. Sp. Res., vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 117–171, 1985.

[16]
J. A. Storch, “Aerodynamic Disturbances on 
Spacecraft in Free-Molecular Flow,” 2002.

[17]
NASA, “Shape Effects on Drag,” 2015, 
https://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/k-
12/airplane/shaped.html, [Accessed: 26-Mar-
2019].

[18]
R. Monti and G. Zuppardi, Elementi di 
Aerodinamica Ipersonica, 2nd ed. Napoli, 2012.

[19]
D. Dalle and S. Spangelo, “Characterization of 
Entry to Solar System Atmospheres for Chip-


14

Sized Spacecraft,” in First Interplanetary Small 
Satellite Conference, 2013, pp. 1–24.

[20]
A. M. Hein, “ChipSats - Subsystems.” 2019.

[21]
G. A. Landis and E. Haag, “Analysis of solar 
cell efficiency for Venus atmosphere and 
surface missions,” 11th Int. Energy Convers. 
Eng. Conf., vol. 44135, no. V, 2013.

[22]
M. Horn, J. Macleod, M. Liu, J. Webb, and N. 
Motta, “Supercapacitors : A new source of 
power for electric cars ?,” Econ. Anal. Policy, 
vol. 61, pp. 93–103, 2019.

[23]
S. M. Djuric et al., “Miniature graphene-based 
supercapacitors fabricated by laser ablation,” 
Microelectron. Eng., vol. 182, pp. 1–7, Oct. 
2017.

[24]
NASA, “Aerogels Insulate Against Extreme 
Temperatures,” 2019. .

[25]
M. N. Abedin et al., “Standoff Ultra-Compact 
Micro-Raman Sensir,” in Lunar and Planetary 
Science XLVIII, 2017.

[26]
A. 
Yamagishi 
et 
al., 
“Life 
Detection 

Microscope for In-Situ Imaging of Living Cells 

on Mars,” in Lunar and Planetary Science 
Conference, 2014.

[27]
M. N. Abedin, A. T. Bradley, S. Ismail, S. K. 
Sharma, A. K. Misra, and S. P. Sandford, 
“Miniature and Cost-Effective Remote Raman, 
Fluorescence, 
and 
Lidar 
Multi-Spectral 

Instrument for Characterization of Planetary 
Surfaces and Atmosphere from Robotic 
Platoform,” in Concepts and Approaches for 
Mars Exploration, 2012.

[28]
A. Oedit, P. Vulto, R. Ramautar, P. W. 
Lindenburg, and T. Hankemeier, “Lab-on-a-
Chip hyphenation with mass spectrometry: 
Strategies for bioanalytical applications,” Curr. 
Opin. Biotechnol., vol. 31, pp. 79–85, 2015.

[29]
A. Roux, D. Lison, C. Junot, and J.-F. Heillier, 
“Applications 
of 
liquid 
chromatography 

coupled 
to 
mass 
spectrometry-based 

metabolomics 
in 
clinical 
chemistry 
and 

toxicology: A review,” 2011.


