An Analytic and Experimental Treatment of Fiber Optic Chemical 

Sensing: Results on Evanescent Wave Spectrometry

Joseph Plumitallo1, Jin Ho Kim1, Silverio Johnson1, Do-Joong Lee1, Stephen Giardini2, Sean 

Dinneen2, Richard Osgood III2, Jimmy Xu1

1 Brown University (United States) 

2 US Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Soldier Center (United States). 

Abstract

Standoff chemical sensing of chemicals and toxic compounds is very desirable for 

actively monitoring residential, commercial, and industrial spaces. Analytes such as toxic 
industrial compounds (TIC), chemical warfare agents (CWAs), and environmental pollutants (EPs) 
can pose serious threats to civilians, warfighters, and the environment. We report on highly 
sensitive, robust, and inexpensive distributed standoff fiber optic chemical sensors (FOCSs). 
FOCSs are activated by analytes reaching a sensing region and inducing a change in its optical 
properties. The information of a spectral response is transmitted by a shift in transmission 
spectra probed by evanescent waves, corresponding to the detection of an analyte. However, 
there are many factors that play a role in the implementation and optimization of such fiber 
sensors. We find it beneficial to construct the theory of general optochemical waveguide sensors
to guide the analysis. We apply it to a specific fiber platfom that is robust, broadband, multi-
target, scalable, and compatible to texitle fibers and fabrics – a focus of this work. The good
agreement between the predicted and measured spectra of FOCSs exposed to Ammonia (𝑁𝐻3)
lends support to the analysis. The experiment yields a 1ppm sensitivity, representing the current
best in class. The use of NH3 in the test serves as a representative for a larger set of amine-
based TICs, CWAs, EPs, and other chemical species, targeted for wide-area distributed coverage 
and textile-compatible sensors.

Introduction

Point and standoff sensors are an established and growing part of our daily lives. Their 

advancement into distributed sensors is important to cover more sensing area to reach locations 
that may be difficult for human observers, and for which point detectors, even a network of point 
detectors, is insufficient. For example, in a home fire alarm network – an example of a network 


of point sensors – if one alarm fails to detect smoke or CO emissions, then the entire network 
fails to detect the onset of a fire. In contrast, a distributed sensor takes advantage of its length 
to increase sensitivity to small signals, i.e., low-concentration analyte. As long as the noise 
doesn’t scale in the same way as the optical absorption along the fiber’s length due to chemical 
absorption in the cladding, it is reasonable to expect that longer fibers will be sensitive to the 
lower concentrations for the same minimum detectable dose, assuming absorption all along the 
fiber’s length. In addition to wider coverage and detecting smaller concentrations than that of a 
point detecter, a distributed detector like a FOCS is capable, in principle, of making spatially 
resolved measurements. 

Sensors also need to be more rugged, selective, flexible, inexpensive, and reversible. 

Sensors collect information to better understand any given system, e.g., for advanced medical 
diagnostics, atmospheric monitoring, automotive diagnostics, gas leaks, and so on [7][32][36]
[39] [40]. Sensors can be classified into three major categories: physical sensors, chemical 
sensors, and biological sensors [5]. While fiber optical chemical sensing involves important
chemistry, the sensing performance also depends on physics. 

Chemical sensors are a large subcategory of sensors that play a critical role in everyday 

state of affairs, from protecting homeowners from carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning to 
monitoring greenhouse gases such as methane (CH4) [27]. Gaseous state chemical sensing 
methods can be many and implemented in various platforms [19]. We focus on fiber optic 
chemical sensors, which fall under the category of chemical optical waveguide sensors, or 
optochemical waveguide sensors.

Optical fibers themselves are typically placed in the context of telecommunication 

technologies, but it is interesting to note that initial efforts were strongly focused on sensing 
devices rather than communications [10]. The foundations of fiber optics can be traced as early 
as the mid-1800s, although there was no significant progress in practical applications until 
pioneering work done by nobel laureate Charles K. Kao [12][33]. Since Kao’s work, there has been 
aggressive and fruitful advancements in fiber optic technologies, ranging far and wide from 
biosensors to photovoltaic power transmission [10] [30] [34] [36]. 

We report on polymer FOCSs coated with a cylindrical section of sensing dye whose 

colorimetric properties are measured by evanescent field spectrometry. The sensing fibers are 
constructed with a commercially available multi-mode polymer core wrapped in step-indexed 
cladding. They are robust, flexible, broadband, low-loss, scalable (to hundreds of meters), and 
compatible to textile fibers and fabrics which is of particular interest to us at present. To enable
effective sensing, a small cylindrical section of the fiber’s cladding is chemically etched and the 
exposed core is coated with a sensing dye. This dye region is the functional sensing region which 
allows the detection of target analytes, whether in the form of TICs, CWAs, EPs, or other toxic 
(even innocuous) compounds. 

A good FOCS should have good selectivity, robustness, reversibility and the ability to 

detect low concentrations of target analytes. A reversible sensor is one that is restorable to its 
initial state after a sensing event [14] – desirable, for example, in continuous standoff sensing
and reporting. Other desirable characteristics include low cost, portability, safety, and scalability.
Each gas sensor type usually bears some tradeoff between advantages and disadvantages under 
different circumstances, ultimately falling into its own niche. For example, metal-oxide gas 
sensors are a good option under high temperature environments, but they suffer from poor 


selectivity. On the other hand, conducting polymer gas sensors generally have good selectivity, 
but they suffer from poor stability [18]. In this spirit, we will explore the set of advantages and 
disadvantages of FOCSs that are robust, sensitive, selective, reversible, portable, scalable, 
inexpensive, safe, and in particular, compatible to textile-fibers and fabrics. Preferrably FOCS 
should also exhibit tolerance to humidity and interferents [25].

We first introduce a general waveguide theory to set up a theoretical framework within 

which optical fibers fall into. Thereafter, we constrain the more general waveguide theory to 
dielectric cylindrical waveguides (optical fibers), and later our specific construction. Smaller
diameter, so-called single-mode fibers, are analytically tractable, as they only admit one mode of 
light propagation. On the other hand, larger diameter, so-called multi-mode fibers, are much 
more analytically cumbersome, usually requiring numerical simulations or a challenging full-wave 
analysis. However, we prefer multi-mode fibers for FOCSs because they afford the low-loss 
broadband transmission that is more suited for chemical sensing of multiple targets. In order to 
help the analysis guide our design, we analyse the modes that exist in a multi-mode fiber and 
employ the weakly guiding approximation to ultimately simplify the effort necessary to 
examinethe spectral response of our broadband sensing fibers. Finally, we compare signiture 
features of our experimental results with those predicted by the corresponding model for 
validation and design guidance of further improvement.

Theory of Waveguides

Before modelling the propagation of light through an optical fiber, we will first lay out a 

more general theory of light propagation through a general waveguide structure. A waveguide 
structure, in general, is one that guides waves (of any nature) along a preferred direction such 
that energy loss is minimized, such as optical fibers. So, it is therefore desirable to first generate 
a general theory of waveguides and then impose a set of constraints that correspond to 
cylindrical dielectric waveguide structures. This will allow us to finally produce a model for the 
propagation of light through an optical fiber [9] [13] [23] [29]. We first assume the waveguide is 
free of local currents and fields. Then, Maxwell’s equations take a familiar form: 

∇ ⋅ 𝐸⃗ = 0
∇ ⋅ 𝐵⃗ = 0

∇ × 𝐸⃗ +

𝜕𝐵⃗ 

𝜕𝑡 = 0
∇ × 𝐻⃗⃗ −

𝜕𝐷⃗⃗ 

𝜕𝑡 = 0
(1)

Assuming time dependence of the form 𝑒𝑖𝜔𝑡, and linear, isotropic, media (𝐷⃗⃗ = 𝜖𝐸⃗ and 𝐵⃗ =
𝜇𝐻⃗⃗ ), taking the curl of the Ampere-Maxwell and Farady equations gives rise to the familiar 
Helmoltz wave equations: 

(∇2 + 𝜇𝜖𝜔2)𝐸⃗ = 0
(3)

(∇2 + 𝜇𝜖𝜔2)𝐵⃗ = 0
(4)

Let’s take our preferred direction along the z-axis for the 𝐸⃗ (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) and 𝐵⃗ (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) fields as 
follows: 


(𝐵⃗ )𝐸⃗ (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) = (𝐵⃗ )𝐸⃗ (𝑥, 𝑦)𝑒±𝑖𝑘𝑧−𝑖𝜔𝑡
(5)

It is convenient to separate operators and fields into components that are tranverse and parallel 
to the z-axis: 

∇𝑡

2≡ ∇2 −

𝜕2

𝜕𝑧2
(6)

𝐸⃗ = 𝐸⃗ 𝑧 + 𝐸⃗ 𝑡
(similarly for 𝐵⃗ )

where 𝐸⃗ 𝑧 ≡ 𝐸𝑧𝑧̂ and 𝐸
⃗⃗⃗ 𝑡 = (𝑧̂ × 𝐸⃗ ) × 𝑧̂
(7)

The Helmholtz equations paired with Dirichlet and Neumman boundary conditions give us the 
standard transverse electromagnetic (TEM), transverse electric (TE), and transverse magnetic 
(TM) modes. TEM waves are conveniently derivable from a potential such that they are plane 
waves with wavenumber 𝑘 = ±√𝜇𝜖𝜔2 = ±𝑣𝜔, and one can recall that TEM waves are 
unphysical inside of conducting waveguides. Treating the Helmholtz equation as an eigenvalue 
problem with a wave function, call it 𝜓, the number of modes then become finite:

(∇𝑡

2 + (𝜇𝜖𝜔2 − 𝑘2))𝜓 = 0
(8)

which is solved for chosen neumman or dirichlet boundary conditions (TE or TM). A general 
solution to the Helmholtz eigenvalue problem will give rise to a respective orthogonal 
eigenspectrum. For notational convenience, take the eigenvalues (𝜇𝜖𝜔2 − 𝑘2) ≡ 𝛾𝜆

2, and the 

corresponding solutions 𝜓𝜆, for 𝜆 ∈ ℕ. Each wave solution 𝜓𝜆 is called a mode. Now, from 
the Helmholtz equation, we also see the the eigenvalues must be positive, otherwise 𝜓𝜆
would exhibit exponentially decaying features – clearly not wave modes. Thus, 𝜇𝜖𝜔2 ≥ 𝑘2. 
Thus, we define the cutoff frequency, at which modes cease to exist: 

𝜔𝜆 =

𝛾𝜆
√𝜇𝜖
(9)

As optical fibers are waveguides, we now discuss the results of reducing general 

waveguide theory to that of optical fibers [13]. A typical optical fiber consists of a cylindrical 
dielectric core material with refractive index 𝑛1, wrapped in some cladding material with a 
refractive index of 𝑛2 (fig. 1). This is called a step-index fiber, in contrast to a graded-index fiber, 
which has a radial gradient of indices of refraction. We will not concern ourselves with graded-
index fibers (mostly used in telecom). The most important metric for choosing a cladding material 
is its refractive index. Snell’s law of refraction shows us that the relative indices of refraction and 
the angle of light incidence (with respect to the surface norm), together, largely determine 
whether or not light will continue to propagate through the waveguide: 

[sin(𝑖)

sin(𝑟) =

𝑛2
𝑛1]

𝑟=𝜋

2,𝑖=𝑖0

𝑖0 = sin−1 (

𝑛2
𝑛1)
(10)


Here, following the convention and derivation of Jackson [13], 𝑖 is the angle of incidence
(defined from the normal to the interface which lies along the radial axis for an optical fiber), 𝑟

is the angle of refraction, 𝑛1 is the refractive index of the fiber core, and 𝑛2 is the refractive 
index of the fiber cladding.

Figure 1: A typical optical fiber configuration with a core material of radius 𝑅1 (for polymer multi-mode 
fibers, usually ~500 − 1000𝜇𝑚) and real refractive index 𝑛1, and a cladding material of radius 𝑅2
(usually ~550 − 1050𝜇𝑚) and real refractive index 𝑛2 < 𝑛1

The result of (10) is that of total internal reflection, and occurs at the angle of incidence 𝑖0. For 
𝑖 > 𝑖0, total internal reflection implies the angle of refraction is complex (since sin(𝑟) > 1) with 
a purely imaginary cosine: 

cos(𝑟) = 𝑖√(

sin(𝑖)

sin(𝑖0))

2

− 1
(11)

Thus, the propagation factor for the traveling wave goes as follows (note a different reference 
frame than in Ref. [13]): 

𝑒𝑖𝑘⃗ ′⋅𝑟 = 𝑒𝑖𝑘′(𝑧sin(𝑟)+𝑥cos(𝑟)) = 𝑒

−𝑘′𝑥√( sin(𝑖)

sin(𝑖0))

2

−1

𝑒

𝑖𝑘′𝑧( sin(𝑖)

sin(𝑖0))
(12)

Here, we see that when 𝑖 > 𝑖0, the refracted wave travels along the interface, and is attenuated 

in the x-direction by the decaying term 𝑒𝑥𝑝 {−𝑘′ [(

sin(𝑖)

sin(𝑖0))

2

− 1]

1
2}.
Power is only transmitted 

along the z-direction; e.g., along the core of the optical fiber [13], since there is no power flow 
into the cladding [13].

Other parameters of optical fibers are the number and behavior of modes within a given 

fiber. Since we are more interested in relatively thick fibers for easy in- and out-coupling of broad-
band lights in field and portable sensings, single-mode telecom fibers are excluded. To 
characterize such optical fibers, it is useful to understand approximately how many modes can 

𝑧

(longitudinal)

𝑥

(transverse)


propagate within a fiber. This can be done using phase space arguments. The number density in 
this phase space goes as follows:

𝑁 = 𝑟2𝑘2 ∫

𝜃𝑚𝑎𝑥
0
𝜃𝑑𝜃 ≈

1

2 (𝑘𝑟√2𝛿)2
(13)

where 𝜃𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the cutoff angle and δ ≡

1

2 (1 − (

𝑛2
𝑛1)

2
), and when δ ≪ 1, we can invoke the so-

called weakly guiding approximation (𝑘𝑟√2𝛿 is sometimes referred to as the “V parameter”). 
For example, if we take a radius of 500𝜇𝑚, 𝑛1 ≈ 1.5, 𝑛2 ≈ 1.49, and 𝜆 = .6𝜇𝑚, we get a 
number of modes on the order of 105. This may appear to be rather large, but it is beneficial to 
the development of broad-band chemical sensing platforms and allows for multi-target 
identification by permitting analyses of complex spectral bands of chemical reactions over full 
ranges of functional wavelengths. There are two classes of optical fiber modes: meridonial rays 
and skew rays. Meridonial rays are those wich pass through the cylinders axis; i.e., nonvanishing 
intensity along the longitudinal axis. Skew rays, on the other hand, are those that do not pass 
through the cylinders axis, traveling along a helical trajectory; i.e., vanishing intensity along the 
longitudinal axis (fig. 2). 

Figure 2: A visualization of meridonial rays versus skew rays. The cladding material is omitted here, and 
pictured is just the core structure. Here, we see the two dimensional projection of the helical path of a 
skew ray (right). On the other hand, the schematic of the meridonial ray shows the ray passing through 
the longitudinal axis (left).

These rays assume plane wave propagation. As we will see, the modes are not quite plane waves, 
but for our purposes, this is a satisfactory approximation in the weakly guiding regime. Under the 
boundary conditions of a cylindrical dielectric waveguide, the Helmholtz equations give us 𝐸⃗ and 
𝐵⃗ field coupled transverse components: 

∇𝑡

2𝐻𝑧 + 𝛾2𝐻𝑧 − (

𝜔

𝛾𝑐)

2

(∇𝑡𝑛2) ⋅ ∇𝑡𝐻𝑧 = −

𝜔𝑘𝑧𝜖0

𝛾2
𝑧̂ ⋅ [∇𝑡𝑛2 × ∇𝑡𝐸𝑧]
(14)


∇𝑡

2𝐸𝑧 + 𝛾2𝐸𝑧 − (

𝑘𝑧
𝛾𝑛)

2

(∇𝑡𝑛2) ⋅ ∇𝑡𝐸𝑧 =

𝜔𝑘𝑧𝜇0
𝛾2𝑛2 𝑧̂ ⋅ [∇𝑡𝑛2 × ∇𝑡𝐻𝑧]
(15)

As the fields are coupled, we find the hybrid electric (HE) and hybrid magnetic (HM) modes with 
solutions as bessel functions respectively inside of the fiber:

𝐸𝑧 = 𝐴𝑒 ∗ 𝐽𝑚(𝛾𝜌)𝑒𝑖𝑚𝜙,
𝜌 < 𝑟
(16)

𝐻𝑧 = 𝐴ℎ ∗ 𝐽𝑚(𝛾𝜌)𝑒𝑖𝑚𝜙,
𝜌 < 𝑟
(17)

for 𝛾 ≡ 𝑛1

2 𝜔2

𝑐2 − 𝑘𝑧2, ϕ as the azimuthal angle, and 𝜌 as some interior radial distance. If we 

satisfy the weakly guiding approximation, then one can show that the bessel modes 𝐸𝑡 and 𝐻𝑡
are much larger in magnitude than the longitudinal bessel (and modified bessel) modes, 𝐸𝑙 and 
𝐻𝑙. Thus, we have nearly recovered TEM (plane-like) waves that are virtually linearly polarized,
and vary transversely as 𝐽m(𝛾𝜌) – these are our LP modes [13] [29]. Thanks to this simplification, 
this is how we shall proceed when characterizing these FOCSs. 

Fiber Optic Chemical Sensing (FOCS)

We can next extend the framework of the analysis to model desirable properties in 

designing the FOCSs [10] [30]. Among the many configurations of FOCSs, there is a general 
structure that underpins most FOCS devices; that is, there is some light source transmitted 
through the fiber to some sensing region, which is then transmitted to a detecting region. For 
broad-band multi-target chemical sensing, we couple a halogen bulb light source (Thor Labs OSL2 
broadband Halogen fiber optic illuminator) to a multi-mode step-index optical fiber with a 
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) polymer core. This fiber is mechanically sturdy, optically low-
loss, and compatible to fabrics and portable applictions. The light that exits the fiber is coupled 
to a (Hamamatsu C12880MA) microspectrometer. Our sensing region consists of a small section 
(≈ 20𝑐𝑚) of the fiber where a solution of Bromothymol Blue (BTB) and Ethyl Cellulose (EC) is 
bound to the core of the fiber, filling the space where cladding was chemically etched. The 
chemical etching and binding process begins with a cylindrical section of the fiber (≈ 20𝑐𝑚) 
submerged in pure acetone for 10 seconds, and thereafter immediately submerged in ethanol 
for 10 seconds. Three iterations of this back-and-forth between solutions are done for a total of 
60 seconds. The process ends by pipetting the BTB-EC solution onto the exposed fiber core and 
allowing it to cure overnight (fig. 3).


Figure 3: This is a schematic of the fabrication process for the fiber component of the FOCS. It is a four 
step process that begins with a commercially available PMMA core multi-mode fiber (a). From this fiber, 
an approximately 20cm cylindrical section is chemically etched by alternatingly submerging that section 
in acetone and ethanaol for 10 seconds each, over three iterations, for a total of 60 seconds (b-c). A 
BTB-EC solution is then pipetted onto the exposed core of the fiber (d), and it is left to cure overnight.

Once the fiber is prepared, one end can be coupled to a light source and the other end 

can be coupled to a spectrometer for sensing applications. The process of detection is as follows 
(fig. 4):  

1. Light from a source enters the fiber, traveling with small attenuation until it 

reaches the sensing region. 

2. Once the light reaches the sensing region, it interacts with the sensing dye and 

shifts its transmission spectra accordingly. Either a target analyte has reached the sensing 
region, or it has not.  

(a) If there are no analytes in the sensing dye region, then the chemical 

composition of the BTB-EC solution (and therefore real and complex refractive indices) remain 
constant, and our transmission spectra has some footprint corresponding to what we will call 
an initial state. 

(b) If instead analytes have interacted with the sensing dye region, then the 

sensing dye will undergo a chemical compositional (pH) change, leading to a physical coloration 
response, and therefore the transmission spectra of the light will shift from its initial state into 
a new state. 

3. Lastly, we observe the spectrometer to monitor any shifts in transmission 

spectra. A clear shift from the initial state into our expected reaction state is a good indication 
of the presence of a target analyte. 


Figure 4: A schematic of the FOCS’s detection process (a) before analytes reach the sensing dye, and (b) 
after analytes reach the sensing dye. The shift in transmission spectra detected by the spectrometer is 
physically realized by a physical coloration response via the BTB-EC coating. 

Through this process, and the description of this setup, we can begin to see the desirable 

characteristics of this sort of FOCS: safety, as there are no harmful or toxic components in the 
fiber or its sensitizing process; low cost, as PMMA fibers, dye solutions, and microspectrometers 
are relatively inexpensive; robust, as polymer fibers are flexible and strong, and the collective 
components of this setup are seen to be tolerant of many chemicals, fluids, electromagnetic 
radiation, temperature fluctuations, pressure fluctuations, etcetera; portability, as the whole 
setup is lightweight; responsive, as the information travels at the speed of light, and chemical 
diffusion is usually on the order of seconds; and scalable, as the fibers can range in length from 
millimeters to hundreds of meters [25]. In particular, they are compatible to texitle-fibers and 
fabrics which can be viewed as a new space of opportunities for chemical sensing. Selectivity and 
reversibility will also be seen to be relatively strong, and will be discussed in more detail.

Experimental Results

The analysis on optical fiber theory showed that the weakly guided approximation to a 

dielectric multi-mode cylindrical fiber gives rise to near plane waves that vary transversely as 
𝐽m(𝛾𝜌) – a good approximation for the setup that we are studying. We have collected data (from 
ellipsometry experiments) for the real and complex components of the refractive index of a BTB-
based sensing dye solution applied to an optical fiber before and after it was exposed to trace
ammonia NH3 gas. With the plane wave approximation, one can then perform an analysis on 
attenuation over a representative sample of wavelengths to predict the shift in transmission 
spectra as follows: 


𝐸⃗ ≅ 𝐸⃗ 0𝑒𝑖𝑘⃗ ⋅𝑟 = 𝐸⃗ 0𝑒𝑖𝑘𝑧 = 𝐸⃗ 0𝑒𝑖𝜔

𝑐𝑛𝑧 = 𝐸⃗ 0𝑒𝑖𝜔

𝑐𝑛𝑟𝑧𝑒−𝜔

𝑐𝑛𝑖𝑧
(18)

With this information, we can calculate the attenuation of intensity as a function of the active set 
of wavelengths we should expect based on the emission spectra of the light source and the 
sensing dye refractive indices.

Figure 5: Graph showing the calculated strength of intensity attenuation as a function of wavelength. 
Before exposure to trace NH3 (dotted curve), we expect strong attenuation in the blue region, giving 
rise to an orange/reddish color. After exposure to trace NH 3 (solid curve), we expect strong attenuation 
in the green and yellow regions, giving rise to a bluish/purplish color, as indicated by the dye’s name, 
bromothymol blue.

We see (fig. 5) that before exposure to trace NH 3 gas, there is strong absorption in the ∼350-
500nm region, and little absorption in the ∼300-350nm and ∼550-700nm regions; thus, we 
should initially observe an orange/reddish color, and expect spectral intensity peaks (mindful of
the emission spectra of the light source) in the ∼ 300-350nm and ∼ 550-700nm regions. 
Additionally, after exposure to trace NH3 gas, there is strong absorption in the ∼450-600nm 
region, and little absorption in the ∼350-450nm and ∼700-800nm region; thus, we should 
observe a bluish/purplish color (hence bromothymol blue) after a detection event, and expect a 
spectral intensity peak in the ∼550-700nm region. This analysis supported by experiment (fig. 
6).


Figure 6: Transmission spectra through the FOCS, changing as the sensor is exposed to trace NH3 (darker 
spectral lines correspond to later times). As expected, the final state has an intensity peak throughout the 
700-800nm region.

Upon exposing a 750𝜇𝑚 core diameter PMMA fiber coated in BTB-EC to trace NH 3, we 

typically observe a visible coloration response of the dye on the order of seconds, and a complete 
shift in evanescent field transmission spectra on the order of tens of seconds (fig. 6). Given the 
halogen light source and its respective intensity peaks, as expected, the transmission spectra 
shifts from an initial peak throughout ∼500-800nm to ∼700-800nm. This completely agrees 
with the previous analytic analysis — a confirmation of its reducing an otherwise complex full-
wave analysis to a very good approximation, as permitted by the weakly guiding regime in the 
bessel and modified bessel modes.

At the time of writing, we have confirmed a minimum detectable concentration of 1ppm 

[25]. Of the fiber-optic chemical sensors that are readily scalable, portable, compatible to textile 
fibers in fabrics, and potentially wearable, this stands out as the best achieved so far. We expect 
this sensitivity to increase with further iterative cycles of testing and dye and core layer structural 
optimization guided by the analytics of the weak-guiding approximation.

The remaining characteristics that characterize this FOCS are selectivity and reversibility.

FOCS are highly reversible as a function of analyte concentration exposure. When a detection 
event corresponds to small concentrations (∼1-500ppm), regeneration is usually on the order of 
a few seconds to minutes (fig. 7). We found that a different sensing dye solution, composed of 
bromophenol blue (BPB) and EC (BPB-EC) regenerates significantly quicker (sometimes 1/10𝑡ℎ

of the total regeneration time of BTB-EC). Exposure to much larger concentrations over 
prolonged periods could extend the regeneration time indefinitely, and, in extreme cases, even 
render the FOCS out of service. As for selectivity, we oserved a set of amines chemically similar 


to NH 3 that behave as interferents; otherwise, the FOCS remains highly selective. Of the 
interferents identified, we tested the effects of DEET and Spray 9, and observed much stronger 
selectivity to NH 3 vapor (fig. 8). One can imagine claiming a detection event only when the 
response is as strong as the target analyte, e.g., NH 3 in this case. Comparatively, however, this 
type of FOCS is highly selective and reversible.

Figure 7: Transmission spectra through the FOCS, changing as the sensor regenerates from previous 
exposure to trace NH 3 (darker spectral lines correspond to later times). The FOCS was exposed to NH 3
vapor for 30s before it was purged with ambient air. The recovery process took a total of ∼10 minutes 
for near complete regeneration.

Figure 8: The effect of DEET and Spray 9 as interferents to the FOCS. We observe some response, but it is 
not nearly as strong as the NH 3 indicating relatively good selectivity even among interferents.


Discussion and conclusion

The analytic formulation of the behavior of light in cylindrical dielectric multi-mode 

waveguides led to both a clearer understanding of FOCSs and a guide for further development 
and investigation [2][4][11][16][17][37][38]. Single-mode fibers are analytically tractable, but the 
need for a robust and multi-target FOCS requires multi-mode fibers. A full-wave analysis of multi-
mode (~105 modes) fibers is significantly more demanding and often obscures key features. Our 
analysis is much simpler, and captures the principal spectral responses.

The match between analytical results and experimental results were satisfactory. We 

showed the efficacy, robustness, and reversibility of FOCSs (among other desirable 
characteristics), placing them into a firm position for applications in many settings such as that 
of defense, commercial, industrial, and residential – corresponding to exemplary target analytes 
such as CWAs, TICs, EPs, etc., where we used NH3 as a representative analyte. At the current 
reported sensitivity of 1ppm (and expectations of its increase with further optimization), and the 
affordability, ruggedness, selectivity, reversibility, portability, safety, and scalability of FOCS, this
platform renders itself as a leading contender for (distributed) standoff sensing and monitoring 
of target chemicals. Of the ones scalable to hundreds meters and compatible to textile fibers and
fabrics for portable, even wearable, applications, the 1ppm result makes it stand out already as 
the current best-in-class. Though selectivity is comparatively high, there is more work to be done 
on identifying and mitigating interferents. In passing, we mention that there are also some slight 
intolerances toward changes in humidity, which calls for more development and investigation. 
Otherwise, FOCSs seem to be a good option as a standoff and constant monitor for target 
analytes with strong applications to textiles and wide-area distributed sensor networks.

In sum, the analytic formulation of waveguide theory provided good supporting models 

and terminological foundation leading to the analytic formulation of multi-mode optical fibers, 
and here specifically, FOCSs. In a good correspondance between theory and experiment, the 
theoretical predictions of the propagation of light through an optical fiber were consistent with 
our experimental results. 

We acknowledge sponsorship and funding from the National Science Foundation (CMMI-
1530547), Defense Threat Reduction Agency, Air Force Office of Scientific Research (FA9550-19-
1-0355), US Army Combat Capabilities Development Command - Soldier Center (CA W911QY-17-
2-0001), and the Army Research Office (W911NF-17-S-0002).


References

[1]  Bohren, C., Huffman, D. (1940). Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small 

Particles (3rd ed.). Wiley, New York

[2]  Chau, L., et. al. (2006) "Fiber-optic chemical and biochemical probes based on 

localized surface plasmon resonance" Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, Vol. 113, Issue 1, 
Pages 100-105

[3]  Drummond, M.H., Barton, J. (2003). "Electrochemical DNA sensors" Nature 

Biotechnology, Vol. 21, Pages 1192-1199

[4]  Duong, H.D., Rhee, J.I. (2008) "Enhancement of the sensitivity of a quantum dot-

based fiber optic temperature sensor using the solâ€“gel technique" Sensors and Actuators B: 
Chemical, Vol. 134, Issue 2, Pages 423-426

[5]  Eggins, B. (2002) Chemical Sensors and Biosensors. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, West 

Sussex

[6]  Fick, A. (1855). "Ueber Diffusion." Annalen der Physik, Vol. 94 (1), Pages 59-86

[7]  Fleming, W.J. (2001). "Overview of automotive sensors" Institute of Electrical and 

Electronics Engineers, Vol. 1, No. 4, Pages 296-308

[8]  Frezza, F., et. al. (2017). "Introduction to electromagnetic scattering: tutorial." 

Journal of the Optical Society of America, Vol. 35, No. 1, Pages 163-173

[9]  Griffiths, D.J. (2013). Introduction to Electrodynamics (4th ed.). Pearson Education, 

Inc., Illinois.

[10]  Grattan, K., Sun Dr. T. (2000). "Fiber optic sensor technology: an overview." 

American Geophysical Union, Vol. 82, Issues 1-3, pages 40-6P


[11]  Gupta, B.D., Kant, R. (2017) "Recent advances in surface plasmon resonance 

based fiber optic chemical and biosensors utilizing bulk and nanostructures" Optics & Laser 
Technology, Vol. 101, Issue 2, Pages 144-161

[12]  Hecht, J. (1999). City of Light, The Story of Fiber Optics Oxford University Press, 

New York.

[13]  Jackson, J.D. (1999). Classical Electrodynamics (3rd ed.). Wiley, New York

[14]  Jiri Janata (2008). Principles of Chemical Sensors. Springer, New York.

[15]  Jiri Janata (2008). "Introduction: Modern Topics in Chemical Sensing" American 

Chemical Society, Vol. 108, No. 2, Pages 327-328

[16]  Jorge, P., et. al. (2007). "Optical Fiber Sensing Using Quantum Dots." MDPI 

sensors, Vol.7, Issue 12, Pages 3489-3534

[17]  Jorgenson, R.C., Yee, S.S. (1993) "A fiber-optic chemical sensor based on surface 

plasmon resonance" Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, Vol. 12, Issue 3, Pages 213-220

[18]  Korotcenkov, G. (2007). "Metal oxides for solid-state gas sensors: What 

determines our choice?" Materials Science and Engineering: B, Vol. 139, Issue 1, Pages 1-23

[19]  Kwak, D., et. al. (2019). "Ammonia gas sensors: A comprehensive review" Talanta, 

Vol. 204, Pages 713-730

[20]  Lee B., (2003). "Review of the present status of optical fiber sensors." Optical 

Fiber Technology, Vol. 9, Issue 2, Pages 57-79

[21]  Mie, G. (1908). "Beitrage zur optik truber medien, speziell kolloidaler 

Metallosungen." Annals of Physics, Vol. 330, Pages 337-445

[22]  Lin, J. (2000). "Recent development and applications of optical and fiber-optic pH 


sensors." TrAC Trends in Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 19, Issue 9, Pages 541-552

[23]  Love, J.D., Snyder A.W. (1983). Optical Waveguide Theory. Chapman and Hall, 

New York.

[24]  Mishra, S., et. al. (2012). "Surface plasmon resonance based fiber optic ammonia 

gas sensor using ITO and polyaniline" Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, Vols. 171-172, Pages 
976-983

[25]  Osgood, R., et. al. (2020). "Lightweight longitudinal colorimetric fiber sensing 

platform with optimized dye/polymer thickness for remote sensing and reconnaissance." 
Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers, Vol. 11416

[26]  Ho-Pui Ho, A., et. al. (2017). Handbook of Photonics for Biomedical Engineering. 

Springer, Dordrecht

[27]  Qazi, H.H., et. al. (2012). "Recent Progress in Optical Chemical Sensors" MDPI 

Sensors, Vol. 12, pages 16522-16556

[28]  Srivastava, S. (2013). "Fiber Optic Plasmonic Sensors: Past, Present, Future" The 

Open Optics Journal, Vol. 7, Pages 58-83

[29]  Senior, J.M. (2009). Optical Fiber Communications (3rd ed.). Pearson Education 

Limited, London.

[30]  Shanafield, M., et. al. (2018). "Fiber-Optic Sensing for Environmental Applications: 

Where We Have Come From and What Is Possible." American Geophysical Union, Vol. 54, Issue 
11, Pages 8552-8557

[31]  Simoes, F.R., Xavier, M.g. (2017). Nanoscience and its Applications Elsevier, 

Massachusetts

[32]  Stetter, J.R., et. al. (2003) "Sensors, Chemical Sensors, Electrochemical Sensors, 

and ECS" Journal of the Electrochemical Society, Vol. 150, Issue 2


[33]  Szinicz, L. (2005). "History of chemical and biological warfare agents" Toxicology, 

Vol.214, Issue 3, Pages 167-181

[34]  Wolfbels, O. (2002). "Fiber-Optic Chemical Sensors and Biosensors" Anal. Chem., 

Vol. 74, Pages 2663-2678

[35]  Wolfgang, H.R., Krebber, K. (2011). "Fiber-Optic Sensor Applications in Civil and 

Geotechnical Engineering" Photonic Sensors, Vol. 1, No. 3, Pages 268-280

[36]  Zaatar, Y. (2000). "Beitrage zur optik truber medien, speziell kolloidaler 

Metallosungen." Materials Science and Engineering: B, Vol. 74, Issues 1-3, Pages 296-298

[37]  Wang, X., Wolfbeis, O. (2013) "Fiber-Optic Chemical Sensors and Biosensors 

(2008-2012)" Anal. Chem., Vol. 85, Issue 2, Pages 487-508

[38]  Wang, X., Wolfbeis, O. (2015) "Fiber-Optic Chemical Sensors and Biosensors 

(20013-2015)" Anal. Chem., Vol. 88, Issue 1, Pages 203-227

[39]  Xin, L., et. al. (2019) " A Review of Methods for Fibre-Optic Distributed

Chemical Sensing" MDPI Sensors, Vol. 19, Issue 13, Article 2876

[40]  Xin, L., et. al. (2012) " Rapid, on-site identification of explosives in nanoliter droplets 

using a UV reflected fiber optic sensor" Analitica Chimica Acta., Vol. 751 Pages 112-118


