Interstitial Carbon in bcc HfNbTiVZr high entropy alloy from first principles 

 

Luis Casillas-Trujillo1, Ulf Jansson2, Martin Sahlberg2, Gustav Ek2, Magnus M. Nygård3, 

Magnus H. Sørby3, Bjørn C. Hauback3, Igor Abrikosov1,4, Björn Alling1 

 

1Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology (IFM), Linköping University, 58183 Linköping, 

Sweden. 

 

2Department of Chemistry-Ångström, Uppsala University, 75121 Uppsala, Sweden  

 

3 Department for Neutron Materials Characterization, Institute for Energy Technology, NO-

2027 Kjeller, Norway 

 

4 Materials Modeling and Development Laboratory, National University of Science and 

Technology ‘MISIS’, Moscow, 119049 Russia  

 
 

 

Abstract 

 
The remarkable mechanical properties of high entropy alloys can be further improved by 
interstitial alloying. In this work we employ density functional theory calculations to study the 
solution energies of dilute carbon interstitial atoms in tetrahedral and octahedral sites in bcc 
HfNbTiVZr. Our results indicate that carbon interstitials in tetrahedral sites are unstable, and 
the preferred octahedral sites present a large spread in the energy of solution. The inclusion 
of carbon interstitials induces large structural relaxations with long-range effects. The effect 
of local chemical environment on the energy of solution is investigated by performing a local 
cluster expansion including studies of its correlation with the carbon atomic Voronoi volume. 
However, the spread in solution energetics can not be explained with a local environment 
analysis only pointing towards a complex, long-range influence of interstitial carbon in this 
alloy.  
 

1. Introduction 

 

In recent years high entropy alloys (HEA) have gathered a vast interest due to their mechanical 
properties. In particular, HEA consisting of refractory elements have possible applications as 
high performance materials at elevated temperatures. Near equimolar WTaMoNb and 
WTaMoNbV have displayed better mechanical properties at elevated temperatures than 
conventional Ni based superalloys [1]. Besides mechanical properties, HEA have been 
investigated as highly tailorable hydrogen storage materials [2,3].  HfNbTiVZr has attracted 
special attention for its excellent hydrogen storage capacity [4], with experimental data 
suggesting that hydrogen can occupy both tetrahedral and octahedral positions in the face 
centered structured (fcc) phase [5,6]. Furthermore, Hf21Nb25Ti15V15Zr24 has also been reported 
to display superconductivity [7]. HfNbTiVZr is believed to be a single-phase HEA with a body 
centered cubic (bcc) structure thermodynamically stable above 800 °C. At lower temperatures 
the thermodynamically stable phase is a mixture of bcc and hexagonal closed packed (hcp) 


alloys and a Laves phase [8]. However, metastable solid solution samples have been obtained 
at room temperature [9,10].  

The properties of refractory HEAs can be further improved by interstitial solution of other 
elements in the structure. For example, the incorporation of carbon atoms into HEA has been 
studied experimentally [11-23] displaying an increase in yield and ultimate strengths. To 
understand the change in mechanical properties from the incorporation of carbon, an atomic 
scale understanding is needed. As such, ab initio based studies are a powerful tool and a key 
piece to develop strategies to fine-tune mechanical properties. Recently, Ikeda et al. [24] have 
studied the impact of interstitial carbon in fcc structured CrMnFeCoNi using first principles 
calculations. Carbon atoms prefer to occupy octahedral interstitial sites in bcc metals such as 
iron [25,26], Nb and V. The small size of the octahedral interstice produces a low maximum 
solid solubility of carbon in pure metals in group 4–6 of the Periodic Table, and therefore a 
low carbon solubility in solid bcc HEA would also be expected. However, carbon dissolution 
could be assisted by the different interstitial site sizes, produced by lattice distortions 
originating from the atomic size mismatch, in addition to the effect of local chemical 
environments. We address these research questions in the present work, and study the 
further distortions produced by the incorporation of carbon. Using density functional theory 
(DFT) calculations, we have investigated the effect of local lattice distortions and the effect of 
local chemical environments on the energy of solution of C interstitial atoms in tetrahedral 
and octahedral position in bcc HfNbTiVZr. 

  

2. Methods 

2.1 Interstitial volumes 
 
There are 6 octahedral sites and 12 tetrahedral sites per unit cell in the bcc structure. 
Octahedral sites are located at the center of the faces and mid-points of the edges of the unit 
cell. Octahedral sites are six-fold coordinated, and the octahedron is distorted with two atoms 
closer to the center than the other four atoms. Tetrahedral sites are located between the 
center of the faces and mid points of each edge. Figure 1 shows the tetrahedral and octahedral 
sites in the bcc structure and the nearest neighbor polyhedra. 

 

Figure 1. Tetrahedral and octahedral interstitial sites in the bcc structure. 
 


Using a purely geometric approach, one could speculate that the best position to place an 
interstitial atom is the one with the most available free space. In a perfect bcc structure, the 
hard atom sphere model gives an atomic solute radius of 0.154rA for the octahedral site and 
0.291rA for the tetrahedral site, where rA is the atomic radius of the constituent atoms. In the 
HEA case, the multiple atomic sizes of the alloy’s components and the different local 
environments make the assessment of the void’s spaces available for the dissolution of an 
interstitial atom into a non-trivial task. In this work, we estimate the available volume using 
the so-called radical Voronoi tessellation [25,26]. In this method atomic volumes take the form 
of irregular polyhedra with faces built from the planes which are perpendicular bisectors 
between a particle and its neighbors. The radical Voronoi tessellation is a generalization of the 
conventional Voronoi polyhedra procedure to examine multicomponent compounds. The 
resulting radical plane polyhedra depend on the relative sizes of the atoms, forming an 
assembly of polyhedra which completely fill space. The radical tessellation includes all points 
whose tangential distance to the surface of the sphere is smaller than the tangential distance 
to the other spherical surfaces. 
 
In a HEA the nearest neighbor polyhedra around the interstices are distorted due to the 
relaxation effects caused by the presence of the multiple components [6,27,28]. We have 
tested different positions inside the nearest neighbor polyhedral to determine the most 
suitable candidate position to place an interstitial atom. The radical Voronoi volume for the 
centroid and for the midpoint of the vector connecting the centroid to the nearest neighbors 
is calculated, and the position with the largest volume is selected. The probe positions are 
shown in Figure 2. We have used the voro++ library for the Voronoi volume calculations [29].  

 

Figure 2. Schematic comparison of the perfect and distorted nearest neighbor polyhedra, and 
the positions probed to find the most suitable position to place an interstitial atom. 
 
2.2 DFT calculations  
 
The DFT calculations are performed using the projector augmented wave method [30] as 
implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) [31,32] with the Perdew–
Burke–Ernzenhof generalized gradient approximation [33] to model the exchange correlation 
effects. All calculations are performed using a 420 eV kinetic-energy cutoff, with a 
convergence criterion on forces of 0.01 eV/Å for structural relaxations. We use a 3x4x5 HEA 
supercell with 120 atoms, which allows for an equiatomic composition. The supercell is 
created using the special quasirandom structure method (SQS) [34] and contains 720 
tetrahedral positions, and 360 octahedral positions. We have inserted one carbon interstitial 


into the relaxed HEA supercell for each of the obtained largest available volume positions of 
the tetrahedral and octahedral interstitial sites and further relaxed the volume, shape and 
atom positions of the system. 
 
2.3 Solution energies of interstitial atoms 

 

The solution energies Δ𝐸#$% of C atoms are calculated as: 
 

Δ𝐸#$% = 𝐸(𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑦 + 𝐶) − [𝐸(𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑦) + 𝐸(𝐶)] (1) 

 
where 𝐸(𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑦 + 𝐶)) and 𝐸(𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑦) are the energies of the alloys with and without one C 
atom. 𝐸(𝐶) is the energy of graphite per atom. Due to the inadequate description of Van der 
Waals interactions of the GGA approximation, there is a large overestimation of the energy 
difference between graphite and diamond [25,35,36]. Experimentally it has been found that  
the enthalpy of graphite is 0.019 eV lower than the diamond enthalpy [37]. To obtain 𝐸(𝐶), 
we calculate the energy of diamond and shift it by applying the experimental difference value. 
 

3. Results 
 

3.1 HfNbTiVZr without carbon 

 

The size mismatch and different element interactions give rise to considerable distortions in 
the relaxed system. The relaxation of the carbon free HEA HfNbTiVZr yields a lattice constant 
of 3.36 Å. Fazakas et al. reported a 3.40 Å lattice constant determined from theoretical 
calculations [9]. The experimental values of the lattice constant are 3.3659(2) Å [5], 3.36(5) 
[10], 3.385 [9] and 3.36466(9) Å [6]. In the relaxed structure, we find an average displacement 
from ideal bcc positions of 0.27 Å with a standard deviation of 0.13 Å. Table 1 presents the 
average of the displacements per atomic species. All atomic species display large 
displacements from their ideal bcc positions, but no particular atomic specie’s behavior can 
be discerned due to the large standard deviations. In the relaxed structure, the different local 
chemical environments generate a distribution of interstitial volumes. In Figure 3 we have 
plotted the volumes for an interstitial carbon atom in tetrahedral and octahedral sites using 
our largest available volume approach with the radical Voronoi tessellation. We have obtained 
the pair distribution function of the relaxed HfNbTiVZr without carbon and find a very good 
agreement with the experimental neutron total scattering results [6] as shown in Figure 4. 
This validates our usage of a SQS structure modeling the HEA as a fully random alloy. There is 
a small shift of 0.09 Å in the nearest neighbor peak between calculations and the experimental 
data that might originate from lattice vibrations not included in the calculations or a small 
amount of short-range order in the experiments.  
 


 

Figure 3. Radical Voronoi volume distribution of tetrahedral and octahedral sites in the relaxed 
HEA. 

 

Figure 4. Pair distribution function of the DFT relaxed HfNbTiVZr and compared with the 
experimental neutron total scattering results in reference [6]. The function from DFT is 
scaled so that the baseline and the first peak are at the same level as in the experimental 
function. 
 
 
 
 


Table 1. Average displacement per atomic species between ideal and relaxed HfNbTiVZr. 
 

Average (Å) 

Hf 
0.25(15) 

Nb 
0.23(9) 

Ti 
0.30(12) 

V 
0.31(10) 

Zr 
0.27(15) 

 

 

3.2 Energy of solution 

 

The initial energies of supercells with interstitial carbon placed in the carbon-free relaxed HEA, 
and the final energies after relaxing the supercells with the carbon atom for both tetrahedral 
and octahedral positions are shown in Figure 5. The x axis has been sorted with respect to 
interstitial void volume in ascending order in the plots. For the initial case, it is possible to 
discern between the behavior of the tetrahedral and octahedral cases. In particular, the 
octahedral sites display a large range of initial energies, with some octahedral sites having 
considerably higher and lower energies than the tetrahedral sites. For the initial case, there is 
a correlation between energy and volume, with larger volumes having lower energies for both 
the tetrahedral and octahedral positions. Figure 5b shows the final energy after relaxation. In 
this case, there is no clear correlation between the energy and the interstitial volume, and the 
energies of tetrahedral and octahedral positions are not clearly distinguishable. This is 
because during relaxation, the carbon atoms initially put on tetrahedral sites diffuse to 
octahedral sites or interstitial positions in between octahedral and tetrahedral sites. The 
diffusion of C could be corroborated by visualizing the atomic positions, but to assess the large 
number of cases we have employed the Steinhardt bond-orientational parameters [38] and 
used Pyscal [39] to calculate them (details in the supplementary materials). For the octahedral 
sites, the range in energy values has reduced, from ~20 eV in the initial case to ~2eV in the 
final case. This indicates that some initial positions were highly unfavorable, while the most 
favorable positions were not strongly affected by relaxations. All the carbon interstitials put 
at octahedral sites stay there. Due to this result, for the remainder of the paper we only show 
results for carbon in octahedral positions. 


 

Figure 5. Total energies of supercells modeling HfNbTiVZr HEA with C interstitials in octahedral 
and tetrahedral sites. The initial energy corresponds to the total energy of supercells with 
interstitial carbon placed in the SQS modeling of a carbon-free relaxed HEA, while the final 
energy is calculated for the fully relaxed supercell with the carbon atom in the system. The x 
axis shows each of the interstitial positions, which have been sorted in ascending radical 
Voronoi volume. 
 
Figure 6 shows the distribution of Δ𝐸#$% of carbon atoms at octahedral positions calculated 
according to Eq. 1, with an average value of -1.01 eV and standard deviation 0.31 eV. In 
comparison, we find that a carbon interstitial in an octahedral site in pure bcc Nb and pure 
bcc V has a solution energy of -0.67 eV and -0.74 eV, respectively, which may indicate that the 
multicomponent alloying favors C dissolution in the HEA. Moreover, the lowest solution 
energy in the HEA with a value of -1.56 eV (corresponding to a local environment comprising 
of V-Ti-Ti-Nb-Zr-Zr nearest neighbors) is significantly lower than the mean value. The highest 
energy corresponds to a Nb rich local environment with a solution energy of 0.29 eV. This is 
the only octahedral site with a positive energy of solution. Table 2 presents the energy of 
formation of the monocarbides (HfC, NbC, TiC, VC and ZrC) and the energy of solution of a 
carbon interstitial in an octahedral site for the pure bcc metals Nb and V, and hcp Hf, Ti and 
Zr. In the table we have also included the average energies for metal-type-i-rich (Mi-rich) local, 
environments around carbon interstitial atoms in the HEA. An environment is defined as Mi-
rich when the Mi element occupies half or more of the nearest neighbor sites. For the 
monocarbides, group 4 (Hf,Ti, Zr) compounds have a more negative formation energy 
suggesting stronger bonds than for those of group 5 (Nb, V). This trend is maintained in the 
energy of solution of the pure metals case, with the hierarchy of Nb and V reversed, whereas 
this is no longer the case for the HEA averages. Figure 7 shows Δ𝐸#$%  for Mi-rich local, 
environments around carbon interstitial atoms. Among the different Mi-rich environments, Ti-
rich is the most favorable, with an average of -1.23 eV followed by V, Hf, Zr, with Nb being the 
least favorable. Therefore, it would be more likely to encounter carbon atoms close to Ti-rich 
local environments of the material. In Figure 7, we also have included the distribution for 
“HEA-like” local environments, meaning environments including all five metals with one 
repeated element type. For the HEA-like case, the lowest energy is -1.54 eV and highest energy 
-0.06 eV. A comparison with solution energies of the carbon interstitial in an octahedral site 
in pure bcc Nb and pure bcc V given above, shows that the values for the pure metals are 0.18 
eV and 0.29 eV above the mean value of Nb-rich local and V-rich environments, respectively, 
found in our HEA. The amount of carbon that can be dissolved in the HEA will depend on the 


number of energetically favorable environments and carbon-carbon interactions. One can 
imagine that carbon atoms would first occupy the lowest energy sites, in a similar way as 
proposed for the creation of vacancies in metastable random alloys [40].  
 

 

Fig 6. Energy of solution for octahedral sites. 
 
Table 2. Formation energies per carbon atom of the monocarbides, and energy of solution of 
interstitial carbon in the dilute limit for the pure metals (bcc structured Nb and V, and hcp 
structured Hf, Ti and Zr) and Mi-rich average in the HEA. 

Monocarbides (XC) 

(eV/C atom) 

Elemental reference 

(eV/C atom) 

HEA Mi-rich average 

(eV/C atom) 

Hf 
-2.01 
-1.84 
-1.01 

Nb 
-1.05 
-0.67 
-0.85 

Ti 
-1.71 
-1.67 
-1.23 

V 
-0.93 
-0.74 
-1.03 

Zr 
-1.83 
-1.73 
-0.94 

 


 

Fig 7. Distribution of the solution energies of carbon atoms in octahedral sites for different Mi-
rich, as well as the HEA-like local environments. 
 
 
3.3 Effect of interstitial carbon on local displacements in HfNbTiVZr HEA  
 
Figure 8 shows the displacements of the metal atoms in the supercell from their positions in 
the relaxed carbon free HEA supercell when the carbon interstitial is introduced. In this figure 
we plot the displacement as a function of their distance to the carbon atom for all octahedral 
sites. It is possible to observe the different neighbor shells, and in particular the first neighbor 
shell is clearly distinguishable. In general, the largest displacements are found in the first 
coordination sphere, with decreasing magnitude as the positions are farther away from the 
interstitial. None the less, there are still some large displacements for atoms located at 4 Å 
from the carbon interstitial, and even the atoms located farthest away from the carbon 
interstitial present considerable displacements. 

 


 

Figure 8. Atomic displacements of metal atoms upon carbon inclusion as a function of the 
distance to the carbon interstitial. 

 

For comparison, we have obtained the atom displacements in the case of a carbon atom in 
bcc Nb and V, since they are the two constituent elements that have a stable bcc structure at 
low temperature. In Figure 9a, the displacements as a function of distance from the carbon 
atom are compared, and in Figure 9b we show a schematic representation of the 
displacements of pure Nb, where the displacement vectors have been scaled up for clarity. 
Figure 9b shows that the largest displacements in the pure elements correspond to the atoms 
in the short axis of the nearest neighbor octahedron, which are pushed away from the carbon 
interstitial, while the other 4 nearest neighbors are pulled towards it. In the case of the HEA, 
it is not possible to discern between these two types of nearest neighbor atoms due to the 
wide range of nearest neighbor distances. Thus, the average displacement of the first shell in 
HfNbTiVZr is lower in magnitude and has a large error bar. For the pure element, the 
displacement tends to become 0 with increasing distance, while for the HEA, even the 
positions at the greatest distance from C that is possible to investigate with our supercell, have 
a finite displacement.  

 


Figure 9. a) Comparison of displacements of metal atoms in pure Nb, V and HfNbTiVZr as a 
function of distance to the carbon interstitial. b) Schematic illustration of atomic 
displacements in bcc Nb. 
 
 
3.4 Local environment and 𝛥𝐸#$% 
 
To investigate the effect of local chemical environment on the solution energies, we have 
studied its correlation with volume and local valence electron concentration (VEC). Figure 10 
presents the plotted Δ𝐸#$%  versus the nearest neighbor polyhedral volume, the Voronoi 
volume, the radical Voronoi volume and VEC. The VEC has showed a good correlation with the 
energy of solution in previous studies [24,41]. The VEC is computed as the average of valence 
electron numbers over the atoms in the first nearest neighbor shell of an interstitial carbon 
atom, with 4 valence electrons for Hf, Ti, Zr and 5 for Nb and V. For HfNbTiVZr the similar 
valence electrons for the constituent elements make the VEC a bad descriptor since it is unable 
to distinguish the different chemical environments. However, among these properties the 
Voronoi volume shows the best correlation with the solution energies. 
 


 

Figure 10. Δ𝐸#$% versus Voronoi volume, radical Voronoi volume, nearest neighbor polyhedral 
volume and valence electron concentration. 
 
Finally, the local chemical environment of carbon atoms in octahedral sites has been 
evaluated with a local cluster expansion method [42,43]. We have tried two approaches for 
the cluster expansion. In the first one, only the on-site interactions of the number of first 
nearest neighbors of each element type have been used. In the second approach an effective 
interaction for the Voronoi volume has been added to the first approach. The expressions for 
these two approaches are given in Equations 2 and 3, respectively. Both approaches fail to 
describe the individual values of the solution energies. In Figure 11 we have plotted the 
comparison of the calculated energies using DFT and the predicted energies. The failure of 
these simplistic approaches is an indication that the energy of solution has a complex 
dependence on chemical environment. It is needed to account for interactions well beyond 
the first neighbor shell and possibly the particular configurations of metals around carbon, as 
was found for Ti and Al around N in reference [44]. This finding is in line with the finding of 
long-range induced structural relaxations in figures 8 and 9. 
 
𝐸5$% ≅ 𝜀89𝑛89 + 𝜀;<𝑛;< + 𝜀=>𝑛=>+ 𝜀?𝑛?+ 𝜀@A𝑛@A (2) 
 


𝐸5$% ≅ 𝜀89𝑛89 + 𝜀;<𝑛;< + 𝜀=>𝑛=>+ 𝜀?𝑛?+ 𝜀@A𝑛@A + 𝜀?$%𝑉> (3) 
 

 

Figure 11. Calculated versus predicted energies using on-site interactions obtained by a local 
cluster expansion.  
 

4. Conclusions 

 
In this work we have calculated from first principles the energy and structural effects of 
solution of dilute carbon interstitials in HfNbTiVZr HEA and assessed the impact of local 
chemical environment on these energies by probing 720 tetrahedral sites and 360 octahedral 
sites. An excellent agreement between the pair distribution function from the SQS supercell 
and that from experimental neutron total scattering results has been obtained. We found that 
carbon atoms initially placed in tetrahedral positions are unstable and move to octahedral or 
other interstitial positions after relaxation.  The solution energies of C in HfNbTiVZr with 
respect of HEA and graphite display a broad distribution, with an average value of -1.01 eV 
and a standard deviation 0.31 eV. Both, the average value and minimum value of -1.56 eV are 
significantly lower than the calculated solution energies of C in pure bcc Nb and V. The 
energies of solution were negative for all octahedral sites except one with Nb rich local 
environment. Among all environments that are rich in a single metal type, Ti-rich presents the 
most favorable sites for carbon interstitials. The introduction of carbon interstitials produces 
large distortions in the system that extend beyond the first and second nearest neighbors 
shells. The wide range of displacements found in the nearest neighbor shell, and the failure of 
the simple local cluster expansion approaches indicate that interaction with atoms beyond 
the first nearest neighbor shell are needed to understand the complex distribution of local 
solution energetics for this material system.  
 
 


Acknowledgements 
 
This work was supported by the Swedish Research Council (VR) project No. 2018-04834. 
Support from the Swedish Government Strategic Research Area in Materials Science on 
Functional Materials at Linköping University, Faculty Grant SFOMatLiU No. 2009 00971 and 
from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (Wallenberg Scholar Grant No. KAW-
2018.0194) is gratefully acknowledged. B.A. acknowledges financial support from the Swedish 
Foundation for Strategic Research through the Future Research Leaders 6 program, FFL 15-
0290 and from the Swedish Research Council (VR) through the grant 2019-05403, Theoretical 
analysis of the results of electronic structure calculations was funded by RFBR, project number 
20-02-00178. Calculations were performed using supercomputer resources provided by the 
Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at the National Supercomputer Center 
(NSC). M.M.N., M.H.S. and B.C.H. acknowledge funding by the NordForsk Nordic Neutron 
Science Programme through the functional hydrides (FunHy) project (grant number 81942).  
 
 


References 
 
[1] 
O. N. Senkov, G. B. Wilks, J. M. Scott, and D. B. Miracle, Mechanical properties of 

Nb25Mo25Ta25W25 and V20Nb20Mo20Ta20W20 refractory high entropy alloys, Intermetallics, 19, 
698 (2011). 
[2] 
M. M. Nygård, G. Ek, D. Karlsson, M. Sahlberg, M. H. Sørby, and B. C. Hauback, 

Hydrogen storage in high-entropy alloys with varying degree of local lattice strain, Int. J. 
Hydrog., 44, 29140 (2019). 
[3] 
M. M. Nygård, G. Ek, D. Karlsson, M. H. Sørby, M. Sahlberg, and B. C. Hauback, Counting 

electrons-A new approach to tailor the hydrogen sorption properties of high-entropy alloys, 
Acta Mater., 175, 121 (2019). 
[4] 
M. Sahlberg, D. Karlsson, C. Zlotea, and U. Jansson, Superior hydrogen storage in high 

entropy alloys, Sci. Rep., 6, 36770 (2016). 
[5] 
D. Karlsson, G. Ek, J. Cedervall, C. Zlotea, K. T. Møller, T. C. Hansen, J. Bednarcik, M. 

Paskevicius, M. H. Sørby, and T. R. Jensen, Structure and hydrogenation properties of a 
HfNbTiVZr high-entropy alloy, Inorganic chemistry, 57, 2103 (2018). 
[6] 
M. M. Nygård, W. A. Slawinski, G. Ek, M. H. Sørby, M. Sahlberg, D. A. Keen, and B. C. 

Hauback Local order in high-entropy alloys and associated deuterides – a total scattering and 
Reverse Monte Carlo study., Acta Mater., 199, 504 (2020). 
[7] 
N. Ishizu and J. Kitagawa, New high-entropy alloy superconductor Hf21Nb25Ti15V15Zr24, 

Results Phys., 13, 102275 (2019). 
[8] 
V. Pacheco, G. Lindwall, D. Karlsson, J. Cedervall, S. Fritze, G. Ek, P. Berastegui, M. 

Sahlberg, and U. Jansson, Thermal stability of the HfNbTiVZr high-entropy alloy, lnorg. Chem., 
58, 811 (2018). 
[9] 
E. Fazakas, V. Zadorozhnyy, L. Varga, A. Inoue, D. Louzguine-Luzgin, F. Tian, and L. Vitos, 

Experimental and theoretical study of Ti20Zr20Hf20Nb20X20 (X= V or Cr) refractory high-entropy 
alloys, International Journal of Refractory Metals and Hard Materials, 47, 131 (2014). 
[10] 
M. Feuerbacher, T. Lienig, and C. Thomas, A single-phase bcc high-entropy alloy in the 

refractory Zr-Nb-Ti-V-Hf system, Scr. Mater., 152, 40 (2018). 
[11] 
M. Beyramali Kivy, C. S. Kriewall, and M. Asle Zaeem, Formation of chromium-iron 

carbide by carbon diffusion in AlXCoCrFeNiCu high-entropy alloys, Mater. Res. Lett., 6, 321 
(2018). 
[12] 
J. Chen, Z. Yao, X. Wang, Y. Lu, X. Wang, Y. Liu, and X. Fan, Effect of C content on 

microstructure and tensile properties of as-cast CoCrFeMnNi high entropy alloy, Mater. Chem. 
Phys., 210, 136 (2018). 
[13] 
L. B. Chen, R. Wei, K. Tang, J. Zhang, F. Jiang, L. He, and J. Sun, Heavy carbon alloyed 

FCC-structured high entropy alloy with excellent combination of strength and ductility, Mater. 
Sci. Eng. A, 716, 150 (2018). 
[14] 
J. T. Fan, L. J. Zhang, P. F. Yu, M. D. Zhang, D. J. Liu, Z. Zhou, P. Cui, M. Z. Ma, Q. Jing, G. 

Li, and R. P. Liu, Improved the microstructure and mechanical properties of AlFeCoNi high-
entropy alloy by carbon addition, Mater. Sci. Eng. A, 728, 30 (2018). 
[15] 
Z. Li, Interstitial equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi high-entropy alloys: carbon content, 

microstructure, and compositional homogeneity effects on deformation behavior, Acta Mater., 
164, 400 (2019). 
[16] 
Z. Li, C. C. Tasan, H. Springer, B. Gault, and D. Raabe, Interstitial atoms enable joint 

twinning and transformation induced plasticity in strong and ductile high-entropy alloys, Sci. 
Rep., 7, 40704 (2017). 


[17] 
H. Luo, Z. Li, W. Lu, D. Ponge, and D. Raabe, Hydrogen embrittlement of an interstitial 

equimolar high-entropy alloy, Corros. Sci., 136, 403 (2018). 
[18] 
Y. Y. Shang, Y. Wu, J. Y. He, X. Y. Zhu, S. F. Liu, H. L. Huang, K. An, Y. Chen, S. H. Jiang, 

H. Wang, X. J. Liu, and Z. P. Lu, Solving the strength-ductility tradeoff in the medium-entropy 
NiCoCr alloy via interstitial strengthening of carbon, Intermetallics, 106, 77 (2019). 
[19] 
Z. Wang and I. Baker, Interstitial strengthening of a f.c.c. FeNiMnAlCr high entropy 

alloy, Mater. Lett., 180, 153 (2016). 
[20] 
Z. Wang, I. Baker, Z. Cai, S. Chen, J. D. Poplawsky, and W. Guo, The effect of interstitial 

carbon on the mechanical properties and dislocation substructure evolution in 
Fe40.4Ni11.3Mn34.8Al7.5Cr6 high entropy alloys, Acta Mater., 120, 228 (2016). 
[21] 
Z. Wang, I. Baker, W. Guo, and J. D. Poplawsky, The effect of carbon on the 

microstructures, mechanical properties, and deformation mechanisms of thermo-
mechanically treated Fe40.4Ni11.3Mn34.8Al7.5Cr6 high entropy alloys, Acta Mater., 126, 346 
(2017). 
[22] 
M. Wu, Z. Li, B. Gault, P. Munroe, and I. Baker, The effects of carbon on the phase 

stability and mechanical properties of heat-treated FeNiMnCrAl high entropy alloys, Mater. 
Sci. Eng. A, 748, 59 (2019). 
[23] 
Z. Wu, C. M. Parish, and H. Bei, Nano-twin mediated plasticity in carbon-containing 

FeNiCoCrMn high entropy alloys, J. Alloys Compd., 647, 815 (2015). 
[24] 
Y. Ikeda, F. Körmann, I. Tanaka, and J. Neugebauer, Impact of chemical fluctuations on 

stacking fault energies of CrCoNi and CrMnFeCoNi high entropy alloys from first principles, 
Entropy, 20, 655 (2018). 
[25] 
C. Domain, C. Becquart, and J. Foct, Ab initio study of foreign interstitial atom (C, N) 

interactions with intrinsic point defects in α-Fe, Phys. Rev. B, 69, 144112 (2004). 
[26] 
V. Rosato, Comparative behavior of carbon in b.c.c. and f.c.c. iron, Acta Metallurgica, 

37, 2759 (1989). 
[27] 
L. Owen, E. Pickering, H. Playford, H. Stone, M. Tucker, and N. Jones, An assessment of 

the lattice strain in the CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy, Acta Mater., 122, 11 (2017). 
[28] 
Y. Tong, S. Zhao, H. Bei, T. Egami, Y. Zhang, and F. Zhang, Severe local lattice distortion 

in Zr-and/or Hf-containing refractory multi-principal element alloys, Acta Mater., 183, 172 
(2020). 
[29] 
C. Rycroft, Voro++: A three-dimensional Voronoi cell library in C++, 2009. No. LBNL-

1432E. Lawrence Berkeley National Lab.(LBNL), Berkeley, CA (United States), 2009. 
[30] 
P. E. Blöchl, Projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B, 50, 17953 (1994). 

[31] 
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals 

and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set, Comput. Mater. Sci., 6, 15 (1996). 
[32] 
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy 

calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B, 54, 11169 (1996). 
[33] 
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made 

Simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 77, 3865 (1996). 
[34] 
A. Zunger, S.-H. Wei, L. Ferreira, and J. E. Bernard, Special quasirandom structures, 

Phys. Rev. Lett., 65, 353 (1990). 
[35] 
A. Dick, F. Körmann, T. Hickel, and J. Neugebauer, Ab initio based determination of 

thermodynamic properties of cementite including vibronic, magnetic, and electronic 
excitations, Phys. Rev. B, 84, 125101 (2011). 
[36] 
B. Hallstedt, D. Djurovic, J. von Appen, R. Dronskowski, A. Dick, F. Körmann, T. Hickel, 

and J. Neugebauer, Thermodynamic properties of cementite (Fe3C), Calphad, 34, 129 (2010). 


[37] 
H. W. Day, A revised diamond-graphite transition curve, Am. Mineral., 97, 52 (2012). 

[38] 
P. J. Steinhardt, D. R. Nelson, and M. Ronchetti, Bond-orientational order in liquids and 

glasses, Phys. Rev. B, 28, 784 (1983). 
[39] 
S. Menon, G. Leines, and J. Rogal, pyscal: A python module for structural analysis of 

atomic environments, J. Open Source Softw., 4, 1824 (2019). 
[40] 
F. Tasnádi, A. V. Lugovskoy, M. Odén, and I. A. Abrikosov, Non-equilibrium vacancy 

formation energies in metastable alloys — A case study of Ti0.5Al0.5N, Mater. Des., 114, 484 
(2017). 
[41] 
J. von Appen and R. Dronskowski, Carbon-Induced Ordering in Manganese-Rich 

Austenite—A Density-Functional Total-Energy and Chemical-Bonding Study, Steel Res. Int., 82, 
101 (2011). 
[42] 
J. M. Sanchez, F. Ducastelle, and D. Gratias, Generalized cluster description of 

multicomponent systems, Physica A, 128, 334 (1984). 
[43] 
A. Van der Ven and G. Ceder, Vacancies in ordered and disordered binary alloys treated 

with the cluster expansion, Phys. Rev. B, 71, 054102 (2005). 
[44] 
B. Alling, A. V. Ruban, A. Karimi, O. E. Peil, S. I. Simak, L. Hultman, and I. A. Abrikosov, 

Mixing and decomposition thermodynamics of C-Ti1-xAlxN from first-principles calculations, 
Phys. Rev. B, 75, 045123 (2007). 
 


