Single-mode lasing from a single 7 nm thick 

monolayer of colloidal quantum wells in a 

monolithic microcavity

Sina Foroutan-Barenji1, Onur Erdem1, Savas Delikanli1, Huseyin Bilge Yagci1, Negar 

Gheshlaghi1, Yemliha Altintas1,2, and Hilmi Volkan Demir1,3*

1Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Department of Physics, UNAM – Institute 

of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Bilkent University, Ankara 06800, Turkey

2Department of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Abdullah Gul University, Kayseri 38080, 

Turkey

3LUMINOUS! Centre of Excellence for Semiconductor Lighting and Displays, The Photonics 

Institute, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, School of Physical and Mathematical 

Sciences, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 

Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore

KEYWORDS. vertical cavity surface-emitting laser, colloidal quantum wells, liquid interface 

self-assembly, monolithic microcavity, single-mode lasing

ABSTRACT. In this work, we report the first account of monolithically-fabricated vertical cavity 

surface emitting lasers (VCSELs) of densely-packed, orientation-controlled, atomically flat 


colloidal quantum wells (CQWs) using a self-assembly method and demonstrate single-mode 

lasing from a record thin colloidal gain medium with a film thickness of 7 nm under femtosecond 

optical excitation. We used specially engineered CQWs to demonstrate these hybrid CQW-

VCSELs consisting of only a few layers to a single monolayer of CQWs and achieved the lasing 

from these thin gain media by thoroughly modeling and implementing a vertical cavity consisting 

of distributed Bragg reflectors with an additional dielectric layer for mode tuning. Accurate 

spectral and spatial alignment of the cavity mode with the CQW films was secured with the help 

of full electromagnetic computations. While overcoming the long-pending problem of limited 

electrical conductivity in thicker colloidal films, such ultra-thin colloidal gain media can help 

enabling fully electrically-driven colloidal lasers.

Lasers based on solution-processed materials have attracted intensive scientific and technological 

interest owing to their exceptional advantages including ease of fabrication, low-cost synthesis and

processability and precise control of emission wavelength enabling lasing readily in different 

colors. As a result, a wide range of solution-processed materials of different classes have been 

studied for lasing,
including organic semiconductors,1
perovskites2
and semiconductor 

nanocrystals.3-5 Successful incorporation of such emitters into lasers thus far have helped

expanding the use of lasers into new areas, such as medical and biological imaging,6 chemical 

sensing,7 lab-on-a-chip diagnostics,8 and on-chip integrated photonic circuits.9,10 Among solution-

processable light-emitting materials studied for lasing applications, CQWs have gained 

considerable attention recently owing to their attractive properties including large absorption 

cross-section,11 giant oscillator strength,12 large material gain coefficient,13 giant gain cross-

section,14 and ultra-narrow emission spectra stemming from pure carrier confinement in one 

dimension.15 Several studies have been conducted to overcome fast Auger recombination in order 


to develop practical CQW lasers,16-18 and type-II CQWs,19 giant-shell CQWs,17 and gradually 

interfaced core/shell CQWs,18 have been introduced for this purpose. Auger recombination can 

also be in principle controlled by optimizing cavity designs and their interactions with the gain 

media. For example, coupling CQW layers to cavities with small mode volumes and high quality 

factors (Q-factors), such as micropillars, microdisks and photonic crystal cavities, can enhance the 

spontaneous emission due to the Purcell effect,20 as a result providing means of overcoming fast 

Auger recombination. This issue requires careful design of cavities offering optimized optical 

mode overlap coefficients (Г) and Q-factors. 

Monolithic fabrication of ultra-thin cavity VCSEL provides opportunities for enhancing Q-factor 

and enabling single-mode lasing. Single-mode lasers purified from noise of other lasing modes are 

advantageous in practical applications and typically enable lower lasing thresholds compared to 

multimode lasers. In addition, monolithic CQW laser fabrication is crucial for enhancing the 

VCSEL performance because parasitic scattering in the cavity originating from multi-component 

setup is prevented along with the surface disruptions. Previously, CQW-VCSELs were fabricated 

by sandwiching drop-casted several-micrometer-thick CQW films between two mirrors resulting 

in bulky devices suffering from heat generation, exhibiting small Q factors,5 and multi-mode 

lasing.21 This further leads to increased surface roughness and formation of stacks, which in turn 

significantly increase the scattering losses within the cavity. For monolithic fabrication of CQW-

VCSELs, deposition of uniform CQW films is required to tune the cavity thickness and the

resonance wavelength as well as to obtain cavities with high Q-factors. Recently, our group has 

reported CQW film deposition with a self-assembly technique, which allows for thickness and

orientation-controlled deposition of monolayers of CQWs on solid substrates with near unity 

surface coverage and sub-nm surface roughness across cm2-large areas.22,23 Our method is 


compatible with well-developed micro- and nano-fabrication technologies and can integrate 

CQWs with developed photonic components and in a dense footprint on a chip scale, which is 

critical for commercial mas-production. The uniform layering of top dielectric layers after CQW 

deposition and the monolithic chip-scale device fabrication needs the thermal stability of the 

underlying CQW film. CQW films with oleic acid ligands are appropriate for monolithic VCSEL 

fabrication because they are stable at temperatures up to 200 °C.24

Unfortunately, the poor confinement of the resonant mode in thin films of few monolayers could 

possibly lead to high losses, consequently making the lasing impossible. As a result, there are very 

few reports on lasing from thin films of colloidal nanocrystals. Roh et al.25 achieved lasing with a 

threshold of 18.8 µJ cm-2 from a quantum dot (QD) gain medium as thin as 50 nm using a 

distributed feedback (DFB) resonator. Kim et al.26 reported single-mode lasing from a colloidal 

QD gain medium only 35 nm thick with a threshold of 20 mJ cm-2. Achieving lasing from films of 

CQWs thinner than hundreds of nanometers,18,27 which has the advantage of giant modal gain 

compared to all other types of nanocrystals (QDs, nanorods and nanowires),28 has not been 

previously accomplished.

In this study, we demonstrate the single mode lasing by using femtosecond optical pumping pulses 

from precisely engineered monolithic VCSELs having dense ultrathin films of CQW monolayers 

obtained by self-assembly technique. Here, mode tuning films present in the monolithic VCSELs

were designed to achieve high Q-factors as well as accurate spectral matching with the gain 

spectrum with the help of full electromagnetic simulations. Owing to the uniformity and thermal 

stability of our ultra-thin CQW films used in these devices, the top DBRs could be deposited at 

temperatures above 150 °C, which ensures the fabrication of high Q-factor VCSELs. We observed 

a lasing threshold of 112 µJ cm-2 owing to the resulting high Q-factor of ~760 for a device having 


only 7-nm-thick CQW layer, which is the thinnest lasing demonstration among all colloidal 

nanocrystals reported to date to the best of our knowledge. We were also able to deposit multiple 

CQW monolayers uniformly in a cavity using self-assembly method and demonstrated lasing with 

a lower threshold of 78 µJ cm-2 from a VCSEL with four CQW monolayers having total thickness 

of ∼28 nm. It is worth noting that the CQW films in our devices were as thin as those used for 

electrical operation of colloidal light-emitting diodes.29,30 Further cavity optimization in addition 

to additional improvement in CQW performance may enable the realization of electrically-driven 

CQW lasers, which is a long-term goal.

Results and Discussion. CdSe/Cd0.34Zn0.66S core/giant alloyed hot-injection (HI) shell CQWs 

have been synthesized according to our recent recipe based on well-adjusted precursor and ligand 

concentrations.17,24 To produce highly emissive, spectrally narrow and environmentally stable 

near-unity efficiency core/shell CQWs, we have grown giant graded-shell on seed CdSe CQWs by 

the HI technique.31-34 These novel HI-grown graded-shell CQWs were shown to exhibit near-unity 

photoluminescence quantum yield (PL-QY) and high photo- and thermal-stability,24 and the device 

performance of these materials that have been recently reported with record high external quantum 

efficiency in light-emitting diodes32 and high optical gain and ultralow lasing thresholds.17,35

Figure 1a presents PL and absorption spectra of our CQWs. The inset of Figure 1a shows a 

representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of these CQWs. The PL-QY of our 

CQWs used in this work was measured to be 97%. The two excitonic features in the absorbance 

spectra located at 632 and 574 nm correspond to the electron-heavy hole and electron-light hole 

transitions, respectively. The PL emission having a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of 25 

nm peaks at 640 nm. The TEM image reveals that these CQWs have the average dimensions of (l 


× w × h) of 17.6 ± 1.6 × 16.9 ± 1.2 × 4.6 ± 0.5 nm3, and their total thickness is 7 nm if the thickness 

of the capping ligands are taken into account.

Time-resolved PL (TRPL) data of the synthesized CdSe/Cd0.34Zn0.66S core/giant alloyed HI-shell 

CQWs are given in Figure 1b. The TRPL data were fitted with bi-exponential decay function and 

the resulting amplitude average lifetime is 24 ns. The lifetime of the core-only sample is only 1.8

ns. The dangling bonds and defects on the core surface are fully passivated by our shell growth 

strategy. Along with the increase in the lifetime, the PL-QY of the core-only samples increases 

from 20% to 97% while growing the shell on it. This increase in lifetime accompanied with 

enhancement in the PLQY suggests passivation of the trap states present in the core by the high 

quality shell deposition. These findings are also supported by the prolonged biexciton lifetime 

exceeding 1.2 ns and greatly suppressed Auger recombination that is one of the significant 

bottleneck to overcome for the population inversion in practical laser applications.17,36 Figure 1c 

shows X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of the CQWs to clarify chemical structure of our 

core/shell sample by providing elemental percentage of each of its individual elements with their 

carefully fitted and identified spin-orbit components. The atomic percentages of the Cd and Zn in 

the shell are found to be 34 and 66, respectively, from the calculation procedure (see the Supporting 

Information).

The optical gain properties of these CQWs were studied in our previous work, in which we showed

the capability of amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) from bi-CQW layers with a thickness of

only 14 nm.23 This observation shows the possibility of lasing action from ultra-thin CQW gain 

media provided that coupled into an effective cavity. In this work, we fabricated CQW-VCSELs 

with ultra-thin CQW gain media and investigated their lasing characteristics. Here each device 

consists of a bottom distributed Breagg reflector (DBR) constructed with alternating layers of SiO2


and TiO2, a cavity formed by single or multiple layers of CQWs, a mode-tuning dielectric layer,

and a top DBR containing SiO2 and TiO2 layers. According to the Bragg–Snell law at normal 

incidence, the thickness of SiO2 (tl) and TiO2 (th) layers were chosen as quarter-wavelength of the

emission peak of CQWs (λmax = 640 nm), which are equal to 106 and 64 nm, respectively. The 

effective length accounting for an almost complete decay (e-2= 0.14) of the field intensity in a 

planar VCSEL structure can be calculated using 

L 𝑒𝑓𝑓 = L 𝑀𝐶 + 4(𝑡𝑙 + 𝑡ℎ)
𝑛𝑒𝑓𝑓

(𝑛ℎ − 𝑛𝑙)

(1)

where LMC is the geometrical thickness of the microcavity, nl is the refractive index of low-index 

material, nh is the refractive index of high-index material (see the Supporting Information for 

measured refractive indices), and neff is the effective refractive index of the DBRs.37 The effective 

index neff can be obtained by

n 𝑒𝑓𝑓 = √
𝑡𝑙

𝑡𝑙 + 𝑡ℎ

𝑛𝑙

2 +
𝑡ℎ

𝑡𝑙 + 𝑡ℎ

𝑛ℎ

2

(2)

taking LMC = 7 nm for a cavity with a monolayer of CQWs sandwiched between DBRs with 

TiO2/SiO2 bi-layers results in Leff = 1.3 µm. The transmittance of 11 bilayers DBRs with a length 

of 1.87 µm were measured to reach ~0.1% at λmax (Figure S1), verifying the high reflectance of 

the fabricated mirrors, which is required for achieving high cavity Q-factor, defined as 

Q=λ/FWHM. Figure S1 also shows that the transmittance of DBR is ~90% at the excitation 

wavelength (400 nm), which is needed for efficient pumping of the gain medium, too.

To achieve lasing in the cavity, the cavity resonant mode λres should be spectrally aligned with the 

peak of CQW gain λmax. Also, the optical field overlap Г with the gain medium should be 

maximized in order to achieve sufficient net modal gain given by 𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑎𝑙 = Г𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙 − 𝛼, where 


𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑙 is the material gain and α is the total modal loss. The Г-factor, and Q-factor as well as 

spectral behavior of the cavity were studied via numerical simulations based on finite-difference 

time-domain (FDTD) method (see the Methods section). All device parameters were carefully 

analyzed and optimized prior to the device fabrication for achieving the best possible performance

in our numerical calculations. As shown in Figure 2a, λres can be modulated continuously from 

~600 to ~680 nm by increasing the thicknesses of the CQW films from a single monolayer up to 

10 monolayers. This is the result of phase shift imparted by increasing of the cavity thickness. 

Adding a monolayer of CQWs with a thickness of Δt = 7 nm to the cavity redshifts the resonance 

wavelength by a relatively large amount of Δλres = +13 nm (Δνres = -11 THz) at νres = 493 THz.

The shift Δνres = - νres Δt / teff is proportional to effective cavity length teff, which is found to be ~ 

315 nm (Figure 2e). The Г factor increases by the thickness of CQW film, however the shift of the 

cavity mode to the edge of DBR stop-band reduces the reflection of the DBR and subsequently the 

Q-factor of the cavity. For our DBR design, the Г×Q product reaches to a peak value at about 640

nm and reduces when the λres is further increased by increasing the CQW film thickness.

Considering the ultrathin cavity thickness and resulting large free spectral range, λres needs to be 

tunedto reside in the FWHM of CQW emission. To work around this problem, additional dielectric 

layers were incorporated between the mirrors, which provides us with the ability to tune λres while 

maintaining a high Г×Q product at the desired wavelength. We studied the effect of adding an 

extra layer of SiO2, Al2O3 and TiO2 inside the cavity containing different numbers of CQW layers. 

As shown in Figure 2b (top panel), Г factor decreases as the thickness and refractive index of the 

mode-tuning layer increases. Increasing the thickness broadens the mode spatially and increasing 

the refractive index localizes the mode peak away from CQW film, and hence, reduces the 

effective mode overlap. The peak of Q-factor is related to the refractive index of the material, 


which happens at thinner films for the higher index. Figure 2c shows the calculated Г×Q product 

for a cavity with a monolayer of CQWs using different mode-tuning materials. These calculations 

reveal that Al2O3 provides the best performance and the highest Г×Q.

Based on our computational results, we chose to deposit 30 nm of Al2O3 on top of a monolayer of 

CQWs to match λres with the peak emission of our CQWs. The simulated Q-factor of ~9,000 in 

this case shows a great potential for coupling the emission from CQW layer to the nanocavity, 

which can enhance the spontaneous emission due to the Purcell effect. Figure 2d shows the electric 

field intensity of the resonant mode at 639 nm for the designed monolayer CQW cavity. Figure 2e

shows one period of this mode with a length of 340 nm, which indicates an effective mode index 

of 1.88.

We fabricated four sets of VCSELs having one to four CQW monolayers in the cavity. To tune 

the resonant mode of each VCSEL within the FWHM of the CQW emission, an extra layer of 

Al2O3, pf which the thickness is optimized according to the number of CQW layers, was deposited.

The CQW monolayers were deposited through our liquid−air interface CQW self-assembly 

method, which offers us the capability of depositing one CQW layer at a time with near-unity 

surface coverage and sub-nm surface roughness.22 The mode-tuning Al2O3 layer was laid down

through atomic layer deposition at 150 °C. As the CQWs used in this study have oleic acid ligand 

and are thermally stable up to 200 °C, maintaining their PL,24 it is possible to use the high-

temperature deposition techniques on top of the CQWs to obtain uniform film quality in top layers.

Figure 3a shows the cross-sectional TEM image of one such VCSEL (top panel) and a magnified 

image of the cavity consisting of one monolayer of CQWs and Al2O3 mode-tuning layer (bottom 

panel). As shown in this image, the film in the fabricated device is highly uniform resulting in high 

cavity Q-factors. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a monolayer of self-


assembled CQWs is shown in Figure 3b, which exhibits near-unity surface coverage. Figure 3c

depicts the simulated transmission spectrum for the four fabricated CQW-VCSELs. According to 

our simulations, a cavity mode exists within a wide range of photonic band gap in our designed 

structure. Hence, the cavity modes of all devices were successfully tuned to reside within the gain

band of the CQWs. For a cavity with a monolayer of CQWs, adding 30 nm thick Al2O3 film causes 

a red shift in the mode from 595 to 639 nm. Similarly, for a cavity with 2 monolayers of CQWs, 

adding 30 nm of Al2O3 red-shifts the mode from 608 to 649 nm. With the addition of 10 nm of 

Al2O3, the mode in the cavity having three monolayers of CQWs red-shifts from 620 to 638 nm 

and, similarly, the  mode red-shifts from 632 to 647 nm in the case of 4 monolayers of CQWs.

Figure 3d shows the measured PL spectra of the fabricated CQW-VCSELs at a pump fluence of 

~119 µJ cm-2 together with the simulated results. The experimentally observed lasing peak display 

an excellent match with our expectation from the numerical simulations. To find out the lasing 

threshold in each VCSEL, the cavities were excited with a pulsed laser at 400 nm with a pulse 

width of ~110 fs and a repetition rate of 1 kHz, by varying the pump fluence (see the methods 

section). The measured spectra from CQW-VCSELs having one to four monolayers of CQWs are 

presented in Figures 4a-d. Because of the ultra-thin cavity and high Q-factor in all cases, a single 

longitudinal mode exists in all devices. The linewidths extracted from Gaussian fits for the

measured lasing spectra are plotted as a function of the pump fluence in Figures 4e-h (bottom 

panel). The onset of lasing is marked by a sharp increase in the PL intensity at the lasing threshold. 

By fitting the data with a linear function, we obtained a threshold pump energy density of ∼112

µJ cm-2 for the VCSEL having a monolayer of CQW layer (VCSEL1). The lasing threshold 

gradually decreases with the increasing number of CQW monolayers and reduces to 78 μJ cm-2

for the VCSEL4 having four monolayers of CQWs. The cavity linewidth of VCSEL1 narrows 


down to 0.8 nm at the lasing threshold and reaches a minimum value of 0.5 nm at the fluence of 

114 µJ cm-2. Then, the linewidth gradually increases as we further keep increasing the pump 

fluence. For example, the linewidth widens to ~0.6 nm at the pump fluence of 119 µJ cm-2. This 

broadening at high pump fluences can be attributed to the temperature fluctuation and/or refractive 

index modulation due to nonlinear effects under hard pumping, which may result in the cavity 

mode drift near the cavity resonance wavelength. Similar behavior has been observed for 

VCSEL2-4. The peak wavelengths extracted from Gaussian fits for the measured lasing spectra is 

shown in Figures 4e-h (bottom panel). For all VCSELs the peak wavelength deviation with 

increasing pump intensity is less than 1 nm, which shows excellent stability in emission 

wavelength. The small amount of deviation can be resulting from the refractive index modulation 

due to nonlinear effects, heating effects and noise. The lasing characterizations of the VCSELs are 

listed in Table 1 for all CQW film thicknesses studied.

The observed reduction in the lasing threshold with the increasing thickness of gain medium stems 

from the increased resonant mode overlap with the gain medium. Furthermore, in each of our 

VCSELs, most of the pump beam (more than 90%) was not absorbed by the ultra-thin CQW film, 

but rather was transmitted through or reflected off the device, which would also require higher 

pumping energy. By simply increasing the CQW film thickness, in addition to Г-factor 

enhancement, the pump beam absorption in the gain medium could be increased, thereby 

increasing the modal gain at the same pump power. All CQW-VCSELs exhibited relatively low 

lasing thresholds on the order of tens of µJ cm-2 which can be attributed to the spectral matching 

of the cavity mode and the maximized Г- and Q-factors. Furthermore, a key factor for this high 

performance is the exploitation of hot-injection shell (HIS) growth of CQWs, which 


simultaneously enables a near-unity photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), reduces 

nonradiative channels, ensures smooth films, and enhances the stability.

Conclusion

In this study, we fabricated monolithic CQW-VCSELs and demonstrated single-mode lasing using 

densely-packed self-assembled films of CdSe/Cd0.34Zn0.66S core/giant alloyed HI-shelled CQWs 

as thin as 4.6 nm (if 2.4 nm organic ligands are not taken into account). Microcavities with the 

highest possible Q-factors as well as accurate spectral matching with the gain spectra were 

designed by employing numerical modeling. The high packing density of smooth films of the self-

assembled CQWs, the high Q-factor of the cavity and the superior optical properties of core/shell 

CQWs synthesized with our hot injection technique having near-unity PL quantum yield enable 

low threshold single-mode lasing from ultra-thin films of these CQWs. The demonstrated CQW 

films used in this work are sufficiently thin to possibly enable electrical carrier injection, given 

that they are combined with proper carrier-transporting layers. The findings of this work may pave 

the way for realization of ultra-thin electrically-driven colloidal laser devices, providing critical 

advantages including single-mode lasing and high electrical conduction.

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting Information. Synthesis of CdSe/CdZnS CQWs, ellipometry measurement results, 

full electromagnetic simulation of CQW-VCSELs, details of monolithic fabrication of CQW-

VCSEL, lasing measurement method, polarization characteristics of VCSEL.

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author


*E-mail: volkan@bilkent.edu.tr, hvdemir@ntu.edu.sg, volkan@alumni.stanford.org

Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Singapore National Research Foundation 

under the program NRF-NRFI2016-08 and in part from TUBITAK 115E679. The authors thank 

Mr. Mustafa Guler for his assistance in TEM imaging of the as-synthesized NPLs and preparation 

of the TEM cross-sectional sample and Dr. Gokce Celik for her help on the ellipsometric 

measurements. O.E. acknowledges TUBITAK for the financial support through BIDEB 2211 

program. H.V.D. gratefully acknowledges support from TÜBA.

References

(1) 
Zhao, J.; Yan, Y.; Gao, Z.; Du, Y.; Dong, H.; Yao, J.; Zhao, Y. S. Full-Color Laser Displays 

Based on Organic Printed Microlaser Arrays. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10 (1), 1–7.

(2) 
Jia, Y.; Kerner, R. A.; Grede, A. J.; Rand, B. P.; Giebink, N. C. Continuous-Wave Lasing 

in an Organic-Inorganic Lead Halide Perovskite Semiconductor. Nat. Photonics 2017, 11

(12), 784–788.

(3) 
Klimov, V. I.; Mikhailovsky, A. A.; Xu, S.; Malko, A.; Hollingsworth, J. A.; Leatherdale, 

C. A.; Eisler, H. J.; Bawendi, M. G. Optical Gain and Stimulated Emission in Nanocrystal 

Quantum Dots. Science (80-. ). 2000, 290 (5490), 314–317.

(4) 
Diroll, B. T.; Talapin, D. V.; Schaller, R. D. Violet-to-Blue Gain and Lasing from Colloidal 

CdS Nanoplatelets: Low-Threshold Stimulated Emission Despite Low Photoluminescence 

Quantum Yield. ACS Photonics 2017, 4 (3), 576–583.

(5) 
Guzelturk, B.; Kelestemur, Y.; Olutas, M.; Delikanli, S.; Demir, H. V. Amplified 

Spontaneous Emission and Lasing in Colloidal Nanoplatelets. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (7), 6599–

6605.


(6) 
Vollmer, F.; Arnold, S. Whispering-Gallery-Mode Biosensing: Label-Free Detection down 

to Single Molecules. Nat. Methods 2008, 5 (7), 591–596.

(7) 
Rose, A.; Zhu, Z.; Madigan, C. F.; Swager, T. M.; Bulović, V. Sensitivity Gains in 

Chemosensing by Lasing Action in Organic Polymers. Nature 2005, 434 (7035), 876–879.

(8) 
Vannahme, C.; Klinkhammer, S.; Lemmer, U.; Mappes, T. Plastic Lab-on-a-Chip for 

Fluorescence Excitation with Integrated Organic Semiconductor Lasers. Opt. Express 2011, 

19 (9), 8179.

(9) 
Jung, H.; Lee, M.; Han, C.; Park, Y.; Cho, K.-S.; Jeon, H. Efficient On-Chip Integration of 

a Colloidal Quantum Dot Photonic Crystal Band-Edge Laser with a Coplanar Waveguide. 

Opt. Express 2017, 25 (26), 32919.

(10) Xie, W.; Stöferle, T.; Rainò, G.; Aubert, T.; Bisschop, S.; Zhu, Y.; Mahrt, R. F.; Geiregat, 

P.; Brainis, E.; Hens, Z.; et al. On-Chip Integrated Quantum-Dot–Silicon-Nitride Microdisk 

Lasers. Adv. Mater. 2017, 29 (16), 2–7.

(11) Delikanli, S.; Yu, G.; Yeltik, A.; Bose, S.; Erdem, T.; Yu, J.; Erdem, O.; Sharma, M.; 

Sharma, V. K.; Quliyeva, U.; et al. Ultrathin Highly Luminescent Two-Monolayer Colloidal 

CdSe Nanoplatelets. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29 (35), 1–9.

(12) Naeem, A.; Masia, F.; Christodoulou, S.; Moreels, I.; Borri, P.; Langbein, W. Giant Exciton 

Oscillator Strength and Radiatively Limited Dephasing in Two-Dimensional Platelets. 

Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2015, 91 (12), 8–12.

(13) Guzelturk, B.; Pelton, M.; Olutas, M.; Demir, H. V. Giant Modal Gain Coefficients in 

Colloidal II-VI Nanoplatelets. Nano Lett. 2019, 19 (1), 277–282.

(14) Li, M.; Zhi, M.; Zhu, H.; Wu, W. Y.; Xu, Q. H.; Jhon, M. H.; Chan, Y. Ultralow-Threshold 

Multiphoton-Pumped Lasing from Colloidal Nanoplatelets in Solution. Nat. Commun.

2015, 6, 1–8.

(15) Lhuillier, E.; Pedetti, S.; Ithurria, S.; Nadal, B.; Heuclin, H.; Dubertret, B. Two-

Dimensional Colloidal Metal Chalcogenides Semiconductors: Synthesis, Spectroscopy, and 

Applications. Acc. Chem. Res. 2015, 48 (1), 22–30.


(16) Baghani, E.; Oleary, S. K.; Fedin, I.; Talapin, D. V.; Pelton, M. Auger-Limited Carrier 

Recombination and Relaxation in CdSe Colloidal Quantum Wells. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.

2015, 6 (6), 1032–1036.

(17) Altintas, Y.; Gungor, K.; Gao, Y.; Sak, M.; Quliyeva, U.; Bappi, G.; Mutlugun, E.; Sargent, 

E. H.; Demir, H. V. Giant Alloyed Hot Injection Shells Enable Ultralow Optical Gain 

Threshold in Colloidal Quantum Wells. ACS Nano 2019, 13 (9), 10662–10670.

(18) Taghipour, N.; Delikanli, S.; Shendre, S.; Sak, M.; Li, M.; Isik, F.; Tanriover, I.; Guzelturk, 

B.; Sum, T. C.; Demir, H. V. Sub-Single Exciton Optical Gain Threshold in Colloidal 

Semiconductor Quantum Wells with Gradient Alloy Shelling. Nat. Commun. 2019, No. 

2020, 1–8.

(19) Guzelturk, B.; Kelestemur, Y.; Olutas, M.; Li, Q.; Lian, T.; Demir, H. V. High-Efficiency 

Optical Gain in Type-II Semiconductor Nanocrystals of Alloyed Colloidal Quantum Wells. 

J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2017, 8 (21), 5317–5324.

(20) Gupta, S.; Waks, E. Overcoming Auger Recombination in Nanocrystal Quantum Dot Laser 

Using Spontaneous Emission Enhancement. Opt. Express 2014, 22 (3), 3013.

(21) Dang, C.; Lee, J.; Breen, C.; Steckel, J. S.; Coe-Sullivan, S.; Nurmikko, A. Red, Green and 

Blue Lasing Enabled by Single-Exciton Gain in Colloidal Quantum Dot Films. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 2012, 7 (5), 335–339.

(22) Erdem, O.; Foroutan, S.; Gheshlaghi, N.; Guzelturk, B.; Altintas, Y.; Demir, H. V. 

Thickness-Tunable Self-Assembled Colloidal Nanoplatelet Films Enable Ultrathin Optical 

Gain Media. Nano Lett. 2020, 20 (9), 6459-6465.

(23) Foroutan-Barenji, S.; Erdem, O.; Gheshlaghi, N.; Altintas, Y.; Demir, H. V. Optical Gain 

in Ultrathin Self-Assembled Bi-Layers of Colloidal Quantum Wells Enabled by the Mode

Confinement in their High-Index Dielectric Waveguides. Small
2020,
DOI: 

10.1002/smll.202004304.

(24) Altintas, Y.; Quliyeva, U.; Gungor, K.; Erdem, O.; Kelestemur, Y.; Mutlugun, E.; 

Kovalenko, M. V.; Demir, H. V. Highly Stable, Near-Unity Efficiency Atomically Flat 

Semiconductor Nanocrystals of CdSe/ZnS Hetero-Nanoplatelets Enabled by ZnS-Shell 


Hot-Injection Growth. Small 2019, 15 (8), 1–11.

(25) Roh, J.; Park, Y. S.; Lim, J.; Klimov, V. I. Optically Pumped Colloidal-Quantum-Dot 

Lasing in LED-like Devices with an Integrated Optical Cavity. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 (1), 

271.

(26) Kim, H.; Cho, K. S.; Jeong, H.; Kim, J.; Lee, C. W.; Koh, W. K.; Roh, Y. G.; Hwang, S. 

W.; Park, Y. Single-Mode Lasing from a Monolithic Microcavity with Few-Monolayer-

Thick Quantum Dot Films. ACS Photonics 2016, 3 (9), 1536–1541.

(27) Guzelturk, B.; Kelestemur, Y.; Olutas, M.; Delikanli, S.; Demir, H. V. Amplified 

Spontaneous Emission and Lasing in Colloidal Nanoplatelets. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (7), 6599–

6605.

(28) Guzelturk, B.; Pelton, M.; Olutas, M.; Demir, H. V. Giant Modal Gain Coefficients in 

Colloidal II-VI Nanoplatelets. Nano Lett. 2019, 19 (1), 277–282.

(29) Cho, K. S.; Lee, E. K.; Joo, W. J.; Jang, E.; Kim, T. H.; Lee, S. J.; Kwon, S. J.; Han, J. Y.; 

Kim, B. K.; Choi, B. L.; et al. High-Performance Crosslinked Colloidal Quantum-Dot 

Light-Emitting Diodes. Nat. Photonics 2009, 3 (6), 341–345.

(30) Kim, T. H.; Cho, K. S.; Lee, E. K.; Lee, S. J.; Chae, J.; Kim, J. W.; Kim, D. H.; Kwon, J. 

Y.; Amaratunga, G.; Lee, S. Y.; et al. Full-Colour Quantum Dot Displays Fabricated by 

Transfer Printing. Nat. Photonics 2011, 5 (3), 176–182.

(31) Rossinelli, A. A.; Riedinger, A.; Marqués-Gallego, P.; Knüsel, P. N.; Antolinez, F. V.; 

Norris, D. J. High-Temperature Growth of Thick-Shell CdSe/CdS Core/Shell 

Nanoplatelets. Chem. Commun. 2017, 53 (71), 9938–9941.

(32) Liu, B.; Altintas, Y.; Wang, L.; Shendre, S.; Sharma, M.; Sun, H.; Mutlugun, E.; Demir, H. 

V. Record High External Quantum Efficiency of 19.2% Achieved in Light-Emitting Diodes 

of Colloidal Quantum Wells Enabled by Hot-Injection Shell Growth. Adv. Mater. 2020, 32

(8), 1–10.

(33) Rossinelli, A. A.; Rojo, H.; Mule, A. S.; Aellen, M.; Cocina, A.; De Leo, E.; Schäublin, R.; 

Norris, D. J. Compositional Grading for Efficient and Narrowband Emission in CdSe-Based 

Core/Shell Nanoplatelets. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31 (22), 9567–9578.


(34) Kelestemur, Y.; Shynkarenko, Y.; Anni, M.; Yakunin, S.; De Giorgi, M. L.; Kovalenko, M. 

V. Colloidal CdSe Quantum Wells with Graded Shell Composition for Low-Threshold 

Amplified Spontaneous Emission and Highly Efficient Electroluminescence. ACS Nano

2019, 13 (12), 13899–13909.

(35) Zhang, L.; Yang, H.; Yu, B.; Tang, Y.; Zhang, C.; Wang, X.; Xiao, M.; Cui, Y.; Zhang, J. 

Low-Threshold Amplified Spontaneous Emission and Lasing from Thick-Shell CdSe/CdS 

Core/Shell Nanoplatelets Enabled by High-Temperature Growth. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2020, 8

(4), 1–9.

(36) Klimov, V. I.; Mikhailovsky, A. A.; McBranch, D. W.; Leatherdale, C. A.; Bawendi, M. G. 

Quantization of Multiparticle Auger Rates in Semiconductor Quantum Dots. Science (80-. 

). 2000, 287 (5455), 1011–1014.

(37) Lova, P.; Megahd, H.; Stagnaro, P.; Alloisio, M.; Patrini, M.; Comoretto, D. Strategies for 

Dielectric Contrast Enhancement in 1D Planar Polymeric Photonic Crystals. Appl. Sci.

2020, 10 (12).

Table 1. Lasing parameters of our CQW-VCSELs.

VCSEL
Number of 
CQW layers

CQW film 
thickness 

(nm)

Al2O3 film 
thickness

(nm)

Lasing 

threshold, ɸth

(μJ cm−2)

Lasing 

wavelength, λres

(nm)

1
1
7
30
112
640

2
2
14
30
107
649

3
3
21
10
102
638

4
4
28
10
78
648


Figure 1. (a) Photoluminescence (PL) and absorption spectra of the CdSe/Cd0.34Zn0.66S core/giant 

alloyed HI shell-grown CQWs. Inset: High-resolution transmission electron micrograph of these 

CQWs (scale bar: 30 nm) (b) time-resolved PL spectra (in solution), (c) X-ray photoelectron 

spectra (XPS) of CdSe/Cd0.34Zn0.66S core/giant alloyed HI shell CQWs.


Figure 2. Product of Q-factor and Г-factor and the corresponding resonant wavelength of our cavity

(a) as a function of the CQW film thickness, (b) Q-factor and Г-factor of the cavity separately for 

a monolayer of CQWs as a function of the mode tuning film (silica, alumina, and titania) thickness. 

(c) The product of Q-factor and Г-factor and the corresponding resonant wavelength of the cavity 

for a monolayer of CQWs as a function of the mode-tuning film (silica, alumina, and titania) 

thickness. (d) Electric field intensity profile of the resonant mode inside a cavity with a monolayer 

of CQWs and 30 nm of alumina. (e) Magnified plot of main lobe of the electric field intensity 

inside the cavity covering CQW and Al2O3 layers at the center shown in Figure 2d.


Figure 3. (a) Cross-section TEM image of CQW-VCSEL (top panel) and magnified image of a 

cavity (bottom panel) with a 7 nm thick (a monolayer-thick) CQW layer. (b) Top-view SEM image 

of a self-assembled CQW monolayer. (c) Simulated cavity transmission for CQW-VCSEL1, 2, 3, 

and 4, which possesses 7, 14, 21, and 28 nm thick CQW layers and exhibit cavity modes at 639, 

649, 637, and 647 nm, respectively. The inset shows the magnified range containing the resonant 

modes. (d) Spectra measured at a pumping energy density of 119 µJ cm-2 for CQW VCSELs (left 

panel) and design expectations from FDTD simulations (right panel).


Figure 4. Measured spectra of CQW-VCSELs at various pumping energy densities. (a) VCSEL1, 

(b) VCSEL2, (c) VCSEL3, and (d) VCSEL4. Peak emission intensity (top panels), linewidth and 

peak emission wavelength (bottom panels) extracted from Gaussian fits for the lasing spectra, as 

a function of the pump fluence for (e) VCSEL1, (f) VCSEL2, (g) VCSEL3, and (h) VCSEL4.


