 
1

Impact of Size and Thermal Gradient on Supercooling of Phase Change Materials for 
Thermal Energy Storage  

Drew Lilley1,2, Jonathan Lau1, Chris Dames1,2*, Sumanjeet Kaur1*, Ravi Prasher1,2,* 

1Energy Technologies Area, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 
* e-mail: cdames@berkeley.edu,  skaur1@lbl.gov,  rsprasher@lbl.gov 
 
 

Abstract 

Phase change material based thermal energy storage has many current and potential applications 
in the heating and cooling of buildings, battery and electronics thermal management, thermal 
textiles, and dry cooling of power plants. However, connecting lab scale thermal data obtained on 
DSC to the performance of large-scale practical systems has been a major challenge primarily due 
to the dependence of supercooling on the size and temperature gradient of the system. In this work 
we show how a phase change material’s supercooling behavior can be characterized 
experimentally using common lab scale thermal analysis techniques. We then develop a statistics 
based theoretical model that uses the lab-scale data on small samples to quantitatively predict the 
supercooling performance for a general thermal energy storage application of any size with 
temperature gradients. Finally, we validate the modeling methodology by comparing to 
experimental results for solid-solid phase change in neopentyl glycol, which shows how the model 
successfully predicts the changes in supercooling temperature across a large range of cooling rates 
(2 orders of magnitude) and volumes (3 orders of magnitude). By accounting for thermal gradients, 
the model avoids ~2x error incurred by lumped approximations.  

 

 
Introduction 
 
Roughly 90% of the world’s primary energy generation results in thermal energy [1,2]. The global 
thermal energy storage (TES) market is projected to deploy 13 GW in 2024, corresponding to a 
total value of $55 billion  [3]. In many applications, TES has an inherent advantage over 
electrochemical and mechanical energy storage because its  raw materials are cheap, making TES 
much more cost competitive in applications ranging from buildings and residential heating, to 
power electronics and agriculture  [4]. Phase change materials (PCMs)  are also being woven into 
thermal textiles to provide localized and personalized cooling/heating to reduce thermal load in 
buildings  [5]. Recently PCM has also found applications in dry cooling of power plants to 
conserve water by utilizing the diurnal swing of ambient temperature  [6]. PCM is also being 
actively researched for thermal management of batteries  [7]. Although cost-competitive, PCM 
implementation is lagging relative to the abundance of thermal energy, application and 
opportunity.   
 
The lag is in part due to economics, but in larger part is caused by technological barriers. For phase 
change materials – which this paper focuses on – those technological barriers are widely 
identified  [4,8,9] as (1) low PCM thermal conductivity and (2) excessive supercooling, i.e. the 
undesirable difference between a material’s thermodynamic equilibrium phase change temperature 
and the actual value seen in a cooling process with non-zero cooling rate. Low thermal conductivity 


 
2

has been addressed recently by many novel and promising techniques such as the addition of 
nanoparticles and the impregnation of PCM into graphite matrices [10]. However, 
the approaches to reduce supercooling by using either nucleating or thickening agents have met 
with limited success. 
 
In a broader context, fundamental understanding of supercooling – or metastability – remains a 
grand challenge in the sciences. Phenomenological models, such as classical nucleation 
theory  [10] and its various extensions, provide excellent physical insight into the nucleation 
process. Although physically successful, the inputs to such models (e.g surface energies, surface 
shape, free energy barriers) are difficult to know a-priori. For this reason, classical nucleation 
theory has traditionally been limited to applications requiring experimental fitting, as opposed to 
experimental prediction  [11]. 
 
Supercooling changes with just about every material and system parameter: geometry, volume, 
material, microstructure, purity, discharge rate, etc. Due to the fickle nature of nucleation, 
predicting the performance of any large-scale practical system based on lab scale data on small 
scale samples is a very difficult task.  Phase change is stochastic in nature, and there often exist 
numerous nucleation pathways that yield the same outcome  [12]. As a result, when researchers 
report a supercooling temperature from lab-scale experiments, that temperature means little 
beyond that specific experimental system, size, material, and environment. This hamstrings 
system-level modeling of PCMs in applications. Given such uncertainty, most numerical models 
neglect the effect of supercooling entirely  [13–15], which results in overly-optimistic predictions 
of system performance [16]. Thus, from a practical point of view for successful implementation of 
large- scale PCM systems, it is crucial to accurately predict their supercooling temperatures.   
 
For applications with narrow temperature ranges (i.e buildings, refrigeration, medicine), 
supercooling can be even more limiting. As an example, consider a PCM with a transition 
temperature of 20 °C used in building applications. If the lowest temperature the building can reach 
is 15 °C, then the PCM cannot supercool more than 5 degrees. If it does, the PCM will never 
crystallize and the material will be rendered inert, so that the only thermal energy storage comes 
from sensible – as opposed to latent – heat. Lacking predictive power, industry often cannot rely 
on lab-scale supercooling data reported in the literature, and instead find it necessary to perform 
their own time-consuming and expensive large-scale testing before installations. Using lab-scale 
data to predict supercooling behavior for larger systems is the key bottleneck in translating 
research into application.  
 
To overcome the bottleneck, this paper explores how nucleation theory is inherently coupled to 
thermal transport phenomena. We first establish a method to characterize the nucleation rate in 
PCMs using common lab-scale thermal analysis instrumentation (DSC, DTA, T-History). Using 
the nucleation rate from lab-scale, we show how to predict the supercooling temperature as a 
function of volume and cooling rate for isothermal (slow) cooling. We then generalize that analysis 
to calculate the supercooling temperature and transience for an arbitrary geometry, volume, and 
thermal boundary conditions which results in temperature gradient in the system– enabling 
accurate supercooling predictions for any system given lab-scale data. The analysis can be used in 
conjunction with existing numerical methods to accurately incorporate supercooling into phase 
change models, thus combining material modeling with system modeling. Finally, we validate the 


 
3

methodology outlined by comparing to experimental results in Neopentyl Glycol, which shows 
how the model successfully predicts the changes in subcooling temperature across a large range of 
cooling rates (2 orders of magnitude) and volumes (3 orders of magnitude).  
 
 

1. Determining the Nucleation Rate of a PCM 

 
Nucleation is a stochastic process and as such can be described with an appropriate statistical 
distribution. As mentioned, phenomenological models exist (e.g. Classical Nucleation 
theory  [10]) to describe that distribution but are not useful for experimental characterization given 
that multiple input parameters are unknown for the systems of current interest. It is instead more 
convenient to describe nucleation as a non-homogeneous Poisson process  [11,17–21]. A Poisson 
process is a purely statistical model for a series of discrete events where the average time between 
events is known, but the exact timing of events is random and memoryless. These assumptions are 
consonant with nucleation theory, where the average time between nucleation events is given by 
the reciprocal of the average nucleation rate, but the process is stochastic so that the exact timing 
of nucleation events is random. The Poisson process further assumes that the nucleation events are 
independent and cannot occur at the same time. Nucleation is said to be a “non-homogeneous” 
Poisson process because the rate parameter, which in this case is the nucleation rate, may not be 
constant over time (e.g. when the temperature changes with time).  Note that this use of “non-
homogenous” is completely different from the nucleation itself being homogeneous or 
heterogeneous.   
 
The non-homogeneous Poisson distribution has been used in fundamental nucleation studies of 
metals  [11,21], and in solution-crystallization processes  [22,23], but not previously for 
characterizing PCMs. Here we tailor the application of the non-homogeneous Poisson distribution 
for the workflow of PCM characterization. 
 
We begin by introducing the properties of the distribution of subcooling temperatures. The 

cumulative distribution function is described by 𝐶𝐷𝐹(𝑡) = 1 − 𝑒! ∫ #$%!& (%!
"
#
, and the survivor 

function is 𝜒(𝑡) = 1 − 𝐶𝐷𝐹(𝑡) where 𝜆(𝑡) is the Poisson rate parameter, which corresponds to 
the system-wide nucleation events per second at time t.  In general,  𝜆(𝑡) depends on the number 
of nucleation sites at the surface and within the volume. Thus,  𝜆(𝑡) is the sum of two contributions 
so that 𝜆(𝑡) = 𝑉𝐽)(𝑡) + 𝐴𝐽*(𝑡) where V is the system volume, A is the system surface area, and 
𝐽)(𝑡) and 𝐽*(𝑡) are the volume-specific and area-specific nucleation rates, respectively.  In a given 
system, normally either 𝐽)(𝑡) or 𝐽*(𝑡) will dominate so the nucleation rate can be normalized by 
only  the surface area or the volume, such that 𝐽(𝑡) =

#(%)

)
𝑜𝑟

#(%)

*  .  We note that 𝐽)(𝑡) has 

contributions from both heterogeneous and homogeneous nucleation sites within the volume of 
the system, whereas 𝐽*(𝑡) has contributions only from heterogeneous nucleation sites at the surface 
of the system. For the rest of this text we will assume that 𝑉𝐽)(𝑡) ≫ 𝐴𝐽*(𝑡)  so that the system’s 
nucleation physics scales only with the system volume.  We also note that in principle, most 
modeling results obtained below could be easily translated to a system with surface area-dominated 
nucleation physics (𝐴𝐽*(𝑡) ≫ 𝑉𝐽)(𝑡)) by suitable exchanges 𝐽)(𝑡) ↔ 𝐽*(𝑡) and  𝑉 ↔ 𝐴.  
 


 
4

In PCM characterization, the temperature is the independent variable of interest – not the time.  
Moreover, our goal is to couple nucleation with thermal transport, so we make a change of 
variables from t to T as the independent variable, such that 𝑇(𝑡) = 𝑇, 

(-

(% = 𝑇̇ , and as the initial 

condition 𝑇(𝑡 = 0) = 𝑇., where 𝑇. is the equilibrium phase transition temperature. In DSC, the 
most popular PCM characterization technique, the cooling rate is typically constant. We can then 
simplify by assuming 𝑇̇ = −𝛽, where 𝛽 is the constant cooling rate in degrees per second, defined 
to be a positive quantity. If b is not constant, 𝑇̇ = 𝑇̇(𝑡) in the integration. Applying this change of 
variables to the survivor function yields: 
 

𝜒(𝑇) = 𝑒

!)

/ ∫
0(-1) (-1
$
$%
 

 

(1) 

The goal is to compute the volume-specific nucleation rate, 𝐽)(𝑇), from experimental data, so we 
invert the survivor function, 𝜒(𝑇)  [18] : 
 

𝐽)(𝑇) = − 1

𝑉

𝛽

𝜒(𝑇)

𝑑χ(𝑇)

𝑑𝑇  
(2) 

 
The distribution of supercooling temperatures, 𝜒(𝑇), can be determined for a given PCM sample 
from cooling experiments, and thus from Eq. (2) the nucleation rate can be calculated for the 
material given the sample volume and the experimental cooling rate.  It is crucial that the sample 
volume be cooled uniformly during supercooling experiments, such that the Biot Number (𝐵𝑖 =
23

4  )  is less than 0.1, where L is the length scale of the sample which can be estimated as 𝐿 =

)

* , h 

is the convection coefficient, and k is the thermal conductivity. An example of this 𝐽)(𝑇) extraction 
procedure is discussed in Section 6. We emphasize that this procedure is also valid for surface-
dominated nucleation, in which case Eq. 2 would be normalized by the surface area instead of the 
volume and the result is 𝐽*(𝑇) rather than 𝐽)(𝑇).  To determine whether volume-based or surface-
based nucleation dominates, the nucleation rate can be measured for multiple, different sized 
samples in a DSC pan and should be normalized by both the volume and the surface area. The 
volume-normalized and surface-normalized nucleation rates can then be plotted against 
supercooling temperature, and whichever normalization collapses on a single line with zero 
intercept is the dominant nucleation mechanism.  
 
Equation 2 can be evaluated numerically, but in Sections 2-5 it will prove useful to have an 
analytical form of the nucleation rate. To that end, it is convenient to define a fitting function to 
the normalized nucleation rate [24]: 
 

𝐽)(𝑇) = 𝛾Δ𝑇5
(3) 

 
where Δ𝑇 is the difference between the thermodynamic equilibrium phase change temperature and 
the actual temperature, i.e., the supercooling. Equation 3 captures the nucleation behavior of a 
material with just two empirical parameters, 𝛾 and 𝑛.  We argue that it is very important that 
researchers report 𝛾 and 𝑛, or some other description of 𝐽)(𝑇), when characterizing new PCMs. 
As will be shown, once 𝛾 and 𝑛 are known, the supercooling behavior of the material in an arbitrary 
thermal and geometric system can be predicted.  


 
5

 

 

2. Predicting supercooling for arbitrary thermal and geometric systems – General 

theory  

 
Using the nucleation rate determined in Section 1, the goal is to determine the average time it will 
take for a PCM to nucleate given the system geometry, volume, material properties, and thermal 
boundary conditions.  
 
In Section 1 we established that the volumetric nucleation rate can be described by just two 
parameters and the subcooling temperature,  𝐽)(𝑇) = 𝛾Δ𝑇5, characterized at the lab scale (e.g. 
DSC). At this scale (𝑉 ≈ 10 𝜇𝐿), we can ensure that the temperature distribution within the PCM 
is approximately uniform by controlling the sample thickness (𝐿 < 1 𝑚𝑚) and the cooling rate 
(𝛽 ≈ 10

°7

89:). By doing this, the nucleation probability, 𝐽)(𝑇), also becomes approximately 

uniform in space, ensuring accurate volumetric nucleation rates. In a general system at larger scale, 
however, the temperature of the material varies considerably with both position and time, and 
consequently, so does the nucleation probability. The system’s nucleation probability is therefore 
inherently coupled to thermal transport phenomena.  
 
Qualitatively, this indicates that the subcooling probability in each material element within the 
PCM is governed by its own statistical distribution, i, dependent only on the local subcooling 
history at that point, T(xi,t). Each distribution is characterized by its Poisson rate parameter, 𝜆; and 
resides over volume element 𝑑𝑉;. To determine the global nucleation probability of the material, 
the distributions must be combined into one, and the combined probability distribution of the sum 
of independent random variables is equal to the convolution of their individual distributions. 
Fortunately, for a non-homogeneous Poisson process, the convolution is simply the sum of the 
individual rate parameters  [25]: 
 

G 𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑛(𝜆;) = 𝑃𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑛 JG 𝜆;

<

;

K

<

;

(4) 

 
where N is the total number of independent distributions; here, N is the number of discrete material 
elements considered.  We can then define a global, or an effective, rate parameter, 𝜆=>>(𝑡) =
∑
𝜆;(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡)
<
;?@
, or 𝜆=>>(𝑡) = ∑
𝐽;(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡)𝑉;(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧)
<
;?@
.  Passing into the limit of 

infinitesimally small volume elements, the effective rate parameter of the system at a given time 
can be rewritten as: 
 

𝜆=>>(𝑡, 𝛾, 𝑛) = ∫ ∫ ∫ 𝐽(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡)𝑑𝑥𝑑𝑦𝑑𝑧 = ∫ ∫ ∫ 𝛾(𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) − 𝑇.)5𝑑𝑥𝑑𝑦𝑑𝑧
(5) 

 
and the CDF becomes 

𝐶𝐷𝐹(𝑡, 𝛾, 𝑛) = 1 − 𝑒! ∫ #&''

"
#
$%!&(%!.
(6) 

 


 
6

The probability density function (PDF) is obtained directly from equation 6 as 𝑃𝐷𝐹(𝑡) =

(7AB(%)

(%
. 

The average time that it takes for the first nucleation event to occur can be calculated as the first 
moment of the PDF, and the standard deviation as the second: 
 

𝑡CDE(𝛾, 𝑛) = S 𝑡 𝑃𝐷𝐹(𝑡)𝑑𝑡

F

G

(7) 

 
 

𝜎%(𝛾, 𝑛) = S 𝑡H 𝑃𝐷𝐹(𝑡)𝑑𝑡

F

G

(8) 

 
Thus, if  𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) is known, by applying Eqs. 5-8 the average time until the first nucleation 
event of the system, and the standard deviation of the distribution of nucleation-onset times, can 
be calculated from only the two nucleation parameters determined in Section 1.  We note that the 
parameterization of 𝐽D is not unique, and the same procedure (equations 5-8) can be followed with 
an arbitrary parametrization of 𝐽D.  
 
Analytical solutions for 𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) are not available for all but the simplest geometries and 
boundary conditions, so in general this procedure must be carried out numerically. Equations 4-8 
are naturally discretized in space (index i) and time, and can be easily incorporated into existing 
numerical schemes for PCMs such as finite element methods, the enthalpy method  [14], effective 
heat capacity method  [26], and the heat source method  [27]. Using any of these methods, T(x,y,z) 
can be determined at each time step, and the integral of the nucleation rate as a function of T(x,y,z) 
over the volume in Eq. 5 can be calculated to determine the effective global nucleation rate at time 
t. Stepping through time, 𝜆=>>(𝑡) can be calculated, and from 𝜆=>>(𝑡) , the CDF, PDF, and then 
average time to nucleation can be determined.  
 
This output can then be used to identify when to trigger nucleation in subsequent simulations with 
single-phase initial conditions, thus providing high resolution and high-fidelity initial conditions 
for crystallization studies, or nucleation triggers for cyclic performance simulations of PCMs. 
Conversely, the probability of nucleation at each discrete element and time step can be calculated 
from equations 4-7, which makes this analysis suitable for Monte Carlo based nucleation 
simulations.  Incorporating either workflow into numerical models will take into account the 
hysteresis inherent in PCM cycling caused by supercooling, and enabling more realistic 
calculations of PCM charge/discharge times -- both of which are critical in predicting PCM 
performance in real-world applications.  
 
 
 

3. Approximate Solution – Uniform Temperature Distribution 

 
Analytical solutions to equations 6-8 are intractable for most boundary conditions. However, for a 
spatially uniform i.e. lumped, temperature distribution such that 𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡) = 𝑇(𝑡), and a 
constant cooling rate 𝛽, equation 5 is greatly simplified and  the CDF can be evaluated analytically 
:  


 
7

𝐶𝐷𝐹(𝑇) = 1 − 𝑒

!)

/ ∫
0(-) (-
$
$%
= 1 − 𝑒

!)

/

I(-!-%)()*

@J5
 
(9) 

Using this CDF, equations 6-8 can be calculated (with dependent variable T instead of t), and it 
has been shown  [24,28,29] that the temperature at which nucleation will occur on average, i.e. the 
average supercooling temperature, as a function of volume and cooling rate can be expressed as: 

Δ𝑇CDE(𝑉, 𝛽) = 𝛽

@

5J@ U𝑛 + 1

𝛾𝑉 V

@

5J@

Γ U𝑛 + 2

𝑛 + 1V
(10a) 

 
where Γ is the gamma function.  
 
The average time until nucleation is triggered is then 𝑡CDE(𝑉, 𝛽) =

@

/ Y𝑇. −

𝑇CDE(𝑉, 𝛽)Z: 

𝑡CDE[𝑠] =

@

/ ]𝛽

(

*)( Y

5J@

I) Z

(

*)( Γ Y

5JH

5J@Z ^. 
(10b) 

When b has its traditional units of [°C/min], this expression for 𝑡CDE will be in units of [min].  It 
also is important that the same units are used for V in both Eq. (10b) and the definition of 𝐽) used 
in evaluating g from Eq. (3), whether [L] and [L], [m3] and [m3], etc.    
 
We emphasize that for PCMs in large-scale applications, a lumped temperature distribution is 
generally a bad approximation. It is valid when  

23

4 < 0.1. For natural convection a typical value 

of ℎ ≈ 10

K

.+L and for PCMs 𝑘 ≈ 0.1 − 0.5

K

.∗L, so the thickness of the PCM must be less than 

~1 - 5 mm to justify the lumped approximation, which is not generally useful for large-scale 
applications. For small-scale applications such as micro-encapsulation, 𝐿 ≈ 1 𝜇𝑚 so equation 10 
is generally valid if volumetric nucleation dominates. We can use equation 10 then to interpret the 
well-known phenomenon that micro-encapsulated PCMs typically exhibit much larger 
supercooling than a macroscopic-volume sample. We see from equation 10a that Δ𝑇CDE scales 

inversely with volume, specifically Δ𝑇CDE ∝ 𝑉!N (

()*O , so for a smaller volume the supercooling 

increases, which has crippled many micro-encapsulation efforts  [4,30].  This scaling occurs 
because a reduction in volume implies a reduction in the number of nucleation sites, and the 
probability of nucleation decreases with the decrease in the number of nucleation sites. Equation 
10 can be used as a guide, therefore, in determining promising candidates for micro-encapsulation 
applications.  It is important to note, however, that the volume dominated nucleation may be 
eclipsed by surface nucleation sites as the length scale decreases. In fact, this has been used to 
combat supercooling problems in microencapsulated PCMs. To do this, researchers choose micro-
encapsulation materials that have lower surface energies with the PCM, promoting surface 
nucleation  [31,32].  Equation 10a can then be seen as a worst-case scenario supercooling 
temperature for micro-encapsulation. If the nucleation does not become surface dominated by 
whatever means, then the supercooling temperature predicted by equation 10a is the lowest 
average supercooling temperature expected. Any surface effects would serve to decrease the extent 
of supercooling.  
  


 
8

 
 
 
 
 

4. A Standardized Definition for the Supercooling Temperature 

 
The supercooling temperature is fundamentally different than the phase transition temperature. 
The  phase transition temperature is described by information embedded in the atomic details of 
the system and are well-described by deterministic equilibrium thermodynamics.  The 
supercooling temperature, on the other hand, is not a fundamental property of the material because 
it depends on the kinetics. Phenomenologically, the kinetics are dictated by the distribution of 
nucleation sites and the energy barriers associated with those sites relative to the thermal energy 
scale. The number of nucleation sites scales with the volume and/or surface area of the material, 
and the rate at which those nucleation sites gain access to the available thermal energy from the 
environment is strongly material and problem dependent. The volume/surface-area scaling, 
coupled to a strong material-transport dependence, makes defining a meaningful supercooling 
temperature for a given material challenging. To date, many researchers report supercooling values 
observed in DSC/DTA, but this value provides only a single point in a complex space defined by 
equations 6-8. For this reason, researchers testing the same material under different experimental 
conditions often observe and report different supercooling temperatures.  
 
 
To make more meaningful comparisons, it would be helpful for the thermal energy storage 
community to agree upon a standardized reference system for which a supercooling temperature 
can be defined. For our work, we choose a reference system that has a volume of 1L with cooling 
rate β = 1

°7

.;5 as a demonstration.   Treating the system as lumped, we use the solution for a 

uniform temperature distribution (equation 10a), to obtain an expression for the supercooling 
temperature of this reference system: 
 

Δ𝑇PQR=STUUV;5E,X%( = U 1

60 e°𝐶

𝑠 fV

@

5J@

U
𝑛 + 1

𝛾 ⋅ 10!Y[𝑚Y]V

@

5J@

Γ U𝑛 + 2

𝑛 + 1V
(11) 

 
To be clear, this definition says that a 1L volume of PCM cooled uniformly at 1

°7

.;5 will nucleate 

at 𝛥𝑇PQR=STUUV;5E,X%(.  With this standardization of b and V, this definition of 𝛥𝑇PQR=STUUV;5E,X%( 
depends only on g and 𝑛.  Researchers testing the same material under different experimental 
conditions will still observe different supercooling temperatures, but by determining the nucleation 
parameters 𝑛 and 𝛾 they can now agree on the supercooling temperature of this reference system. 
The supercooling performance of a PCM can then be compared by comparing the supercooling 
behavior of each PCM in this reference system.  
 
 
 
 
 


 
9

5. Experimental Validation 

 

To validate the methodology outlined in Sections 1-5, we characterize the nucleation rate of 

neopentyl glycol’s (NPG) solid-solid phase change using DSC and then perform larger-scale 
cooling experiments to test the predictions of Sections 3 and 4. We choose NPG because its 
transition is sharp, near room temperature (𝑇. = 40.8 °𝐶), and it doesn’t interact with the 
aluminum DSC pans so volumetric nucleation dominates. NPG was acquired from Sigma Aldrich 
at 99% purity, and TA Instrument’s DSC 2500 with indium temperature calibration was used.  

10 mg of NPG was cycled 150 times from 25°𝐶 to 50°𝐶 in a DSC at a heating and cooling 

rate of 10

°7

.;5 . The cooling curves from all 150 runs are shown in figure 1a. The supercooling 

temperatures were determined as the first deviation from the linear baseline heat flow signal (

K

E) 

that exceeded the minimum accuracy of heat flow on the DSC (first detectable deviation). For the 
DSC 2500, the minimum deviation is 20 𝜇𝑊. There was no sign of aging (see SI Section 1). This 
set of 150 supercooling temperatures was then used to calculate the survivor function by taking 
the ratio of non-nucleated (surviving) samples at a given temperature and dividing by the total 
number of samples. For temperatures greater than 29.3°𝐶, zero samples out of the 150 had 
nucleated, so the survivor function is equal to 1 (all samples survived) for T>29.3°𝐶.  Similarly, 
for temperatures below 27.1°𝐶, all samples have nucleated, so the survivor function is equal to 
zero (no samples survived) for T<27.1°𝐶, as shown in figure 1b. From the survivor function, the 
nucleation rate as a function of temperature was calculated using equation 2 and fitted to the power 
law, 𝐽D(𝑇) = 𝛾Δ𝑇5 , resulting in 𝛾 = 4.2 ∗ 10!YY
@

L*X., and 𝑛 = 35.87 as shown in figure 1d. To 

show the goodness of fit, the survivor function (equation 1) is plotted using 𝐽D(𝑇) = 4.2 ∗
10!YYΔ𝑇YZ.\] in figure 1b. The smooth line shows the survivor function given by the fitted 
analytical nucleation rate. There is good agreement between the fit and the data. Using equation 
11, the standardized supercooling temperature for the reference system defined in Section 5 for 
NPG is then Δ𝑇PQR=STUUV;5E,X%(=8.85°𝐶  below the equilibrium transition temperature of 40.8°𝐶.  
 
 


 
10

 
 
 

Fig. 1: (a) 2 Raw DSC data for 150 cooling cycles of 10 mg of NPG at b=10

°7

.;5 . Each 

cooling curve exhibits a phenomenon known as recalescence, in which immediately after the 
onset of a phase transition the rate of heat released is temporarily greater than the rate of 
cooling, so the material heats itself up for a short time. From these curves, the distribution of 
supercooling temperatures is recorded. (b) shows the survivor function (magenta) discussed 
in Section 1, which was calculated from the distribution of supercooling temperatures given 
by the DSC data in (a). A 95% confidence interval using the DKW inequality is shown in 
blue surrounding the empirical survivor function. The solid black line shows the fitted CDF 
from the nucleation parameters, 𝛾 and n using equation 9.  (c) The PDF computed from the 
survivor function, 𝑃𝐷𝐹(𝑡) =

(7AB(%)

(%
.  (d) shows the pointwise nucleation rate (magenta) 

calculated using a two-point finite difference form of equation 2, and its fit (black solid line) 
using equation 3.   Panels (b)-(d) are referred to 𝑇. = 40.8 °𝐶.


 
11

 
 
 
Uniform Temperature Distribution Approximation 
 
 
  
Using the nucleation parameters 
characterized via DSC, we can 
predict 
how 
the 
supercooling 

temperature 
will 
change 
with 

volume and cooling rate from 
equation 
10a. 
To 
test 
this 

prediction, 
we 
run 
cooling 

experiments for NPG at different 
volumes spanning 3 orders of 
magnitude 
(𝑉 = 6.0 ∗ 10!^, 2.6 ∗

10!_, 1.3 ∗ 10!Z 𝑚Y). For these 
experiments, 
the 
appropriate 

volume of NPG was melted in an 
oven and poured into aluminum 
weigh-boats such that the thickness L 
was uniform and less than 0.5 𝑚𝑚, 
ensuring a uniform temperature 
distribution during cooling (see SI 
Section 2). Three thermocouples 
with uncertainty ± 0.1°𝐶 were taped 
to the opposite sides of each 
aluminum pan, and the samples were 
cycled 20 times in an oven at a 
cooling rate of b=0.1

°7

.;5. Nucleation 

temperatures were recorded as the 
average supercooling value from 
each thermocouple for a given 
sample. We note that the crystal growth rate in NPG appears to be very fast, so that all 
thermocouples record the nucleation event within 5 seconds of each other and thus there is close 
agreement among the measurements. The experimental results are plotted against the predictions 
made from the nucleation parameters in Figure 2 Variations of the prediction with 𝛽 are shown, 
and it can be seen that changing 𝛽 simply offsets the curve, but not the slope, in this log-log plot. 
Experimental vs predicted values for constant volume but varying 𝛽 are shown in figure 2 for 𝛽 =
10!@ °7

X  and 𝛽 = 10@ °7

X , and the predicted values agree closely with experimental results. 

 
 
 
 

Fig. 2: Experimental vs predicted supercooling temperatures for NPG 
at different volumes and cooling rates for the uniform temperature 
distribution approximation. The black dots represent the experimental 
averages and the vertical lines their standard deviations, all for an 
experimental cooling rate of b=0.1 

°.

/01 . The shaded blue region and 

the dashed blue lines represent the average predicted supercooling 
temperatures  from equation 10a for a cooling rate of 0.1 

°.

/01,  bounded 

by one predicted standard deviation, using 𝛾 = 4.2 ∗ 10233 and 𝑛 =
35.87 determined from Fig. 2, The red point is another experiment 
using a faster cooling rate of 104 °.

/01.  

10-10
10-8
10-6
10-4

9

10

11

12

13

Volume [m3]

Relative Supercooling [°C]

𝛽 = 10! °𝐶

𝑚𝑖𝑛

𝛽 = 10"

𝛽 = 10#$

𝛽 = 10#%


 
12

 
 
 
General Theory 
 
 
To test the predictions in Section 4 we keep the volume constant at 𝑉 = 2.6 ∗ 10!_ 𝑚Y but vary 
the aspect ratio, so that the transient cooling is no longer lumped. By varying the geometry, we 
change the local thermal conditions at each nucleation site. To do this, we iteratively melted 2.6 ∗
10!_ 𝑚Yof NPG in an oven and cast them into PTFE tubes of varying diameter, ranging from 
0.635 to 1.588 cm. We note 
that the PTFE was chosen 
because the tubes do not 
interact with NPG, and they 
are 
non-stick 
for 
easy 

removal. Once removed from 
the PTFE forms, the NPG 
cylinder (shown in blue in Fig 
3.) was bridged between two 
columns of foam (diagonal 
black hatched lines) such that 
its end faces were insulated, 
while 
its 
circumferential 

surface was open to the 
environment (i.e convective boundary conditions). Thermocouples were placed behind aluminum 
foil contacting one face of the cylinder, so that the thermocouple tip had no direct contact with the 
NPG. The NPG cylinders were then equilibrated at 𝑇U = 50°𝐶 in an oven for several hours.  Then 
each cylinder was transferred to an environment held at T¥=25°𝐶 to cool by free convection, and 
the time until nucleation was recorded for each aspect ratio and compared against the predictions 
given by equations 6-8. For these predictions, edge effects were important so we used COMSOL 
Multiphysics to calculate 𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡). To make these predictions, we calibrated for the free 
convection coefficient by placing a thermocouple on the outer surface of an NPG cylinder and 
measuring the temperature vs time curve and fitting numerical solutions for temperature vs time 
curves to that data to determine ℎ (see SI 2). This calibration yielded ℎ = 18

K

.+L, taken as 

constant, which is a reasonable value for free convection and was used for the predictions in figure 
4. 
 
The predictions of equations 6-8 are plotted (solid blue line) against experimentally determined 
nucleation times (black dots) in Figure 4. The shaded blue region denotes predictions that are one 
standard deviation above and below the average nucleation time. There is excellent agreement 
between equations 6-8 and experimental values. We include two additional curves on the figure to 
contextualize the importance of including temperature gradients and convective boundary 
conditions, as described next.  
 
Previous related work  [24,28,29] had two key simplifying assumptions: (i) a lumped temperature 
response (that is, 𝑇(𝑡) only); (ii) constant cooling rate, 𝛽. The present work focuses on relaxing 

Insulation
Insulation
Insulation

𝑉 = 2.6 ∗ 10!_mY = Constant 

Fig 3. Experimental setup to test general theory. NPG (blue) was cast into 
cylinders of varying lengths and diameters, but constant volume. The cylinders 
were suspended between two foam insulation columns such that the end faces 
were insulated.   Heat transfer is in the radial direction (red arrows) during these 
cooling experiments.


 
13

both of these requirements by considering non-lumped temperature response (that is, (𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡)) 
and convectively coupled cooling which leads to variable cooling rate. To demonstrate the effect 
of relaxing these requirements, we show two additional predictions in Figure 4. First, we compare 
to the lumped constant cooling rate case, where the average nucleation time is given by equation 
10b Because the physical system experienced convective cooling and not constant cooling rate, 
we approximated a constant cooling rate, 𝛽, by evaluating the convective cooling rate at 𝑡 = 0 
from Newton’s Law of Cooling. This gives 

(-

(% |%?G = −𝛽 = −

2*

.75 (𝑇U − 𝑇F). We used this 𝛽 and 

the system volume, 𝑉 = 2.6 ∗ 10!_𝑚Y, as inputs into equation 10b and the results are plotted as 
the gray dotted line in figure 4. It can be seen that using the lumped approximation with constant 
cooling rate gives average nucleation times that are ~1.5x lower than that given by the more 
detailed treatment of the non-lumped (𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑡)) with equations 5-8.  
 
Next, we maintained the lumped approximation and relax the constant cooling rate assumption by 

using Newton’s law of cooling 𝑇(𝑡) = 𝑇F + (𝑇U − 𝑇F)𝑒

!` 67

%85a% to describe the time-dependent 

convective cooling, which was used as the input into equations 6-8. This ensures that the sample 
is convectively-coupled to the surroundings with the same value of ℎ = 18

K

.+L used in the more 

detailed simulations.  The predictions for this lumped, convective cooling are shown as the gray 
dashed line in figure 4, and now overpredict the actual cooling time by around a factor of 2. It 
overpredicts because the lumped assumption ignores large temperature gradients which generally 
arise near the material surface. The large temperature gradients lead to much lower temperature 
near the surface, which catalyzes nucleation. Because the lumped assumption ignores these 
temperature gradients, the catalyzed effect on nucleation is missed, leading to over-prediction. We 
show these comparisons to highlight the fact that the lumped assumption can easily cause large 
(~2x) errors. Thus, accounting for the temperature gradients within the sample during cooling is 
very important for an accurate description of a sample’s supercooling behavior.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
14

 
 

 
  

 

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Diameter/Length

time to nucleation (minutes)

Lumped convective cooling

Lumped, constant cooling rate

Non-lumped 

convective cooling

FIG 4: Experimental vs Predicted supercooling times for NPG at fixed 
volume with varying aspect ratio (see figure 3) The black dots represent 
the experimental averages and their standard deviations on the vertical. 
The solid blue line represents the predicted supercooling times from 
equations 5-8 using 𝛾 = 4.2 ∗ 10233 and 𝑛 = 35.87. The blue shaded 
zone represents ± 1 standard deviation from equation 8. The gray 
dashed and dotted lines show predictions for lumped convective and 
lumped constant cooling cases, and are included to highlight the 
importance of taking into account temperature gradients (non-lumped) 
to correctly predict the supercooling behavior of a system. 


 
15

Conclusion 
 
Using lab scale experimental data to predict supercooling performance in large scale thermal 
energy storage applications is crucial for the analysis and prediction of PCM performance metrics. 
This paper has outlined experimental characterization techniques for supercooling in thermal 
energy storage applications and developed a theoretical framework to use that characterization for 
prediction of supercooling in a generalized system.  The analysis can be used in conjunction with 
existing numerical methods to accurately incorporate supercooling into phase change models, thus 
combining material modeling with system modeling. This framework has been validated by 
comparing to experimental results in neopentyl glycol, which shows how the model successfully 
predicts the changes in subcooling temperature across a large range of cooling rates (2 orders of 
magnitude) and volumes (3 orders of magnitude). To expand this framework, future efforts should 
explore the characterization of more exotic and complex materials (e.g. polymers, mixtures).  
 
Acknowledgement: 
This work was supported by Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Building Technologies 
Program, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DEAC02-05CH11231. 
 
 
References 
 
[1] 
I. Gur, K. Sawyer, and R. Prasher, Science (80-. ). 335, 1454 (2012). 

[2] 
A. Henry, R. Prasher, and A. Majumdar, Nat. Energy 5, 635 (2020). 

[3] 
A. S. B. Ankit Gupta, Thermal Energy Storage Market Size By Storage Material (Water, 
Molten Salt, PCM), By Technology (Sensible Heat, Latent Heat, Thermochemical), By 
Application (Power Generation, District Heating & Cooling, Process Heating & 
Cooling), By End-Use (Residential (2018). 

[4] 
A. Safari, R. Saidur, F. A. Sulaiman, Y. Xu, and J. Dong, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 
70, 905 (2017). 

[5] 
Y. Peng and Y. Cui, Joule 724 (2020). 

[6] 
A. K. Stark and J. F. Klausner, Joule 1, 416 (2017). 

[7] 
Z. Ling, Z. Zhang, G. Shi, X. Fang, L. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Fang, T. Xu, S. Wang, and X. 
Liu, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 31, 427 (2014). 

[8] 
F. Souayfane, F. Fardoun, and P. H. Biwole, Energy Build. 129, 396 (2016). 

[9] 
J. Pereira da Cunha and P. Eames, Appl. Energy 177, 227 (2016). 

[10] V. I. Kalikmanov, in (Springer, Dordrecht, 2013), pp. 17–41. 
[11] G. Wilde, J. L. Sebright, and J. H. Perepezko, Acta Mater. 54, 4759 (2006). 
[12] W. Sun and G. Ceder, CrystEngComm 19, 4576 (2017). 
[13] K. Biswas, J. Lu, P. Soroushian, and S. Shrestha, Appl. Energy 131, 517 (2014). 
[14] S. Morales-Ruiz, J. Rigola, C. Oliet, and A. Oliva, Appl. Energy 179, 1006 (2016). 
[15] X. Jin, M. A. Medina, and X. Zhang, Appl. Therm. Eng. 103, 1057 (2016). 
[16] K. D’Avignon and M. Kummert, Appl. Therm. Eng. 99, 880 (2016). 
[17] S. Jiang and J. H. Ter Horst, Cryst. Growth Des. 11, 256 (2011). 
[18] A. Filipponi, A. Di Cicco, and E. Principi, Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Nonlinear, Soft Matter 

Phys. 86, (2012). 

[19] V. Bhamidi, P. J. A. Kenis, and C. F. Zukoski, (2017). 


 
16

[20] J. Bokeloh and G. Wilde, (n.d.). 
[21] J. Bokeloh, R. E. Rozas, J. Horbach, and G. Wilde, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, (2011). 
[22] G. M. Maggioni and M. Mazzotti, Cryst. Growth Des. 17, 3625 (2017). 
[23] G. M. Maggioni, L. Bosetti, E. Dos Santos, and M. Mazzotti, Cryst. Growth Des. 17, 5488 

(2017). 

[24] N. Kubota, J. Cryst. Growth 418, 15 (2015). 
[25] J. Kingman, Poisson Processes (1993). 
[26] D. Heim, Renew. Energy 35, 788 (2010). 
[27] F. Mathieu-Potvin and L. Gosselin, Int. J. Therm. Sci. 48, 1707 (2009). 
[28] N. Kubota, Y. Fujisawa, and T. Tadaki, J. Cryst. Growth 89, 545 (1988). 
[29] N. Kubota, J. Cryst. Growth 345, 27 (2012). 
[30] E. Günther, L. Huang, H. Mehling, and C. Dötsch, Thermochim. Acta 522, 199 (2011). 
[31] F. Cao and B. Yang, (2013). 
[32] X. Tang, W. Li, X. Zhang, and H. Shi, Energy 68, 160 (2014). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
17

Supplementary Information 

 

 

1. Experimental Supercooling Data and Quality of Distribution 

 

10mg of NPG was cycled 150 times from 25°𝐶 to 50°𝐶 in a DSC at a heating and cooling rate of 10

°.

/01 . The 

cooling curves  from each run are shown in figure 1 of the main text. The supercooling temperatures were 
determined as the first deviation from the heat capacity that exceeded the minimum accuracy of heat flow on the 
DSC (first detectable deviation). For the DSC 2500, the minimum deviation is 20 𝜇𝑊. The extracted values are 
plotted below as a function of trial number.  
 

 

 

To check for signs of material aging, we provide a linear fit (black solid line) to the data, and compare that with the 
average of the distribution (orange solid line). It is seen that the average fit is nearly constant vs trial number, 
indicating little to no aging. In addition, we take the raw data and generate a normal probability plot. This plots the 
CDF of the experimental data vs the CDF of a theoretical normal distribution. If the experimental data is perfectly 
normally distributed about the mean, the plot would show a straight 45° line. As can be seen from the normal 
probability plot below, the experimental data is approximated well by a normal distribution, indicating that there’s 
no aging or systematic bias.  
 

y = -0.0022x + 13.029

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180

Super Cooling

Trial Number

Supercooling vs Trial Number -- NPG


 
18

 

 

 

2. Experimental Setup for Uniform Temperature Distribution Approximation 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Experimental CDF

CDF of Normal Distribution

Normal Probability Plot


 
19

 
 
 

3. Convection Heat Transfer Coefficient Calibration 

 
 
To make the predictions in figure 4, we needed to calibrate for the convection coefficient.  We calibrated by placing 
a thermocouple on the outer surface of a 

3

9 " diameter NPG cylinder, equilibrating the NPG at 50°C, and then 

measuring the temperature vs time curve after it was brought to ambient at 24°𝐶. To find the convection heat 
transfer coefficient associated with the experiment, we solved for the temperature vs time of the equivalent physical 
and geometric system in COMSOL Multiphysics, and fitted the numerical solutions to the experimental data to 
determine ℎ. The calibration yielded ℎ = 18

:

/!; which is a reasonable value for free convection and was used for 

the predictions in figure 4.  
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

0
100
200
300
400
500
600

Temperature (C)

time (s)

Heat Transfer Coefficient Calibration

Fitting: h=18

Experimental Data

Ambient Temperature


 
20

 
 
 
 


