 

 

Review 
Mirrors for space telescopes: degradation issues  

Denis Garoli1*, Luis V. Rodriguez De Marcos2, Juan I. Larruquert3, Alain J. Corso4, Remo Proietti 
Zaccaria5,6, and Maria G. Pelizzo4 

1 
Faculty of Science and Technology Free University of Bozen, Piazza Università 5, 39100 Bolzano, Italy 

2 
The Catholic University of America and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (CRESST II), 620 Michigan 
Ave., N.E. Washington, DC 20064, USA  

3 
GOLD-Instituto de Optica-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Serrano 144, Madrid 28006, 
Spain 

4 
CNR-IFN, Via Trasea 7, Padova, Italy 

5 
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16136 Genova, Italy 

6 
Cixi Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Zhongguan West Road 1219, Ningbo 315201, China 
 

* Correspondence: denis.garoli@unibz.it 

Received: date; Accepted: date; Published: date 

Abstract: Mirrors are a subset of optical components essential for the success of current and future 
space missions. Most of the telescopes for space programs ranging from Earth Observation to 
Astrophysics and covering all the electromagnetic spectrum from X-rays to Far-Infrared are based 
on reflective optics. Mirrors operate in diverse and harsh environments that range from Low-Earth 
Orbit, to interplanetary orbits and the deep space. The operational life of space observatories spans 
from minutes (sounding rockets) to decades (large observatories), and the performance of the 
mirrors within the optical system is susceptible to degrade, which results in a transient optical 
efficiency of the instrument. The degradation that occurs in space environments depends on the 
operational life on the orbital properties of the space mission, and it reduces the total system 
throughput and hence compromises the science return. Therefore, the knowledge of potential 
degradation physical mechanisms, how they affect mirror performance, and how to prevent it, is of 
paramount importance to ensure the long-term success of space telescopes. In this review we report 
an overview on current mirror technology for space missions with a particular focus on the 
importance of degradation and radiation resistance of the coating materials. Particular detail will be 
given to degradation effects on mirrors for the far and extreme UV as in these ranges the degradation 
is enhanced by the strong absorption of most contaminants. 

Keywords: space optics; mirrors; coatings; radiation; thin film; multilayer; degradation; 
contamination; optical systems. 

 

1. Mirror Technology  

The trend for the future space missions is the use of high-resolution, large bandwidth telescopes 

[1][2][3]. This will require new optical systems with large apertures and extreme operation 
conditions. Examples are mission concepts such as LUVOIR, HabEx, Galaxy Evolution Probe, and 
the X-Ray Observatories [4][5,6][7]. These and many other present or future space concepts [8] 
introduce new challenges in mirror technologies, from the optical design, to the substrate and the 
coatings. Mirrors are critical components in space telescopes, which are extensively used for the 
observations of Earth and astronomical objects. Mirror technology is evolving continuously due to 
improvements in materials, design, manufacture and metrology. The main advantages of mirrors 
with respect to refractive optics such as lenses are the following: (i) they can work over a very wide 


spectral bandwidth (achromat); (ii) they can be manufactured with different shapes and large 
dimensions compared to lenses; (iii) they are suitable for scanning devices; (iv) for some applications 
such as X-ray optics, grazing incidence mirrors are the only option available. Future large telescopes 
will cover an increased spectral range of observation with a broad range of multi-spectral and hyper-
spectral instruments, and this can be achieved only with reflective telescopes.  

A mirror consists in a substrate and, most often, a coating. Substrates can be selected among a 

limited number of materials. Fundamental parameters are: i) Specific stiffness; ii) thermal stability, 
iii) space environmental resistance, iv) achievable surface quality, v) weight, and vi) financial aspects. 
Regarding the choice of mirror substrates, extensive work has been performed and reported 
[9][10][2][11][12].  

Al or Al alloys, Be, Si, SiC, Zerodur®, nickel and fused silica have been used employed 

[10][2][3][12][13], although glass has been the most used material for mirror substrates wing to its 
thermal stability and ease engineering into high-quality optical surface [14]; for instance, it is used as 
substrate in the Hubble Space Telescope, the largest space mirror still operating. However, one 
important shortcoming of using glass is its weight, which often limits its use to small aperture 
mirrors. For this reason, new materials have been developed with the near future state-of-the-art 
mirror research focusing on segmented mirrors prepared on Zerodur, Be, Al, Si or SiC substrates [14]. 
New large telescopes with active mirrors are now developed with carbon based (lightweight) 
materials. Silicon Carbide (SiC), in particular, has been successfully used in ESA Herschel Space 
Observatory [15] and it’s still extensively investigated as potential standard because of its superior 
stiffness, strength and thermal properties [16][17]. Additionally, as illustrated by M. Bavdaz et al. 
[18], Silicon Pore Optics (SPO) is the new X-ray optics technology under development in Europe, 
forming the ESA baseline technology for the International X-ray Observatory candidate mission 
studied jointly by ESA, NASA, and JAXA. 

As mirror substrates not always provide the desired optical performance, the use of optical 

coatings to step it up is often required. Coatings has a major impact on the instrument optical 
performance. Even if mirrors are insensitive to chromatic aberrations, the need of large bandwidth 
impacts the coating design and the technologies to reach broadband reflective coatings with high 
reflectivity and low polarization sensitivity. In particular, while most mirrors used for space systems 
that operate from the ultraviolet (UV) to the infrared (IR) wavelength regions rely on coatings of Ag, 
Al, Au or Be, extreme regions such as X-Ray, extreme UV and far-IR require specific engineered 
designs comprising multilayers of different materials. The coating may include adhesion layers 
(between substrate and reflective layer), interdiffusion layers (between layers of different species) 
and protection or enhancement layers (on top of the reflective layer or multilayer). Dielectric mirror 
coatings can be used alone or in combination with metallic ones to prepare multilayer designs. 
Multilayers of metal-dielectric and all-dielectric films have been extensively used to prepare narrow 
band reflectors for several spectral bands [19][20]. Multilayers consist in several layers of two or more 
materials with the right thicknesses to obtain the desired spectral, angular, and/or polarization 
profile. In the visible and close ranges, multilayers alternate layers of transparent (dielectric) 
materials, which enable the theoretical design of virtually any arbitrary profile. In ranges such as  
the extreme UV and the soft x-rays, where the absorption of materials in nature strongly differs from 
the visible, multilayers may typically alternate a dielectric material and a metal or even two metals. 

Both mirror substrates and coatings materials, but also detector technologies and the telescope 

systems, are all involved in the success or failure of a space observatory. The extreme environment 
where they must operate implies severe issues in terms of stability and resistance.  

2. Degradation of materials in space - Stability issues on mirrors 

Common to all orbits is the degradation of materials by the hazardous space environment, 

whose importance in space technology is undeniable [21][22]. Degradation may be caused by atomic 
oxygen, thermal stress, electromagnetic radiation, telescope outgassing or self-contamination, 
charged particles, space debris and micro-meteorites. In Low Earth Orbits (LEOs), atomic oxygen 
(AO) is the main source of degradation, while in the interplanetary medium, the solar wind and solar 


electromagnetic radiation dominate the degradation effects. Most of the materials used for space 
optics need to be evaluated for their behavior under several of the aforementioned degradation 
mechanisms. It is known that these degradation mechanisms can significantly degrade materials and 
lead to changes in their mechanical behavior or thermo-optical properties [21]. These changes can 
cause early failures of satellite components or even failures of complete space missions.  

The main challenge in the assessment of degradation of materials in space is in the development 

and choice of the most representative ground testing and extrapolation to end of-life conditions for 
thermal cycle and for charged particles, AO, UV irradiation, and high-velocity impacts of 
microparticles. These tests have to account for the different environments in which the mirrors will 
operate, ranging from Low-Earth Orbit (LEO), to interplanetary orbits and deep space. 

Investigations on the behavior of optical materials and coatings in space environment had been 

reported in a large number of papers starting in the 1970’s. Pre-launch acceptance testing and 
evaluation of mirrors coated for use in space are almost never performed on the actual flight mirror. 
Smaller witness mirrors, coated at the same time as the flight component, are used as test proxies for 
the spaceflight component. The intent of the acceptance testing generally aims at identifying any 
mirror surface quality problem before performing the qualification testing of the final and larger 
mirror, when recovery from a flaw can be costly. The use of tests samples to verify the performances 
of the whole mirror is even more important for complex optical coatings such as reflective multilayers 
[23,24]. Environmental tests are performed to check the resistance of a mirror coating that is exposed 
to ambient conditions simulating the space environment for the instrument lifetime. As an example, 
Fig. 1 shows reflectance degradation as a function of wavelength in the UV-Vis spectral range of 
protected Ag mirrors under various degradation sources. This combination of environmental 
resistance tests helps to predict, model, and account for the in-orbit degradation of the optical system. 

 

    
 

Figure 1. a) Reflectivity of protected Ag mirrors from various sources, unexposed. The differences in 
the mirror spectral performance is explained by the differences in composition and thickness of the 
protective coatings on the Ag layer. b) Effect of several degradation mechanisms on the reflectivity of 
protected Ag mirrors. Red curve: Degradation after 37h of exposure to 5eV AO beam (4×1020 
atom/cm2) [25]. Blue curve: Degradation after 279h of simultaneous exposure to 10 keV electrons 
(5.3×1015 e-/cm2), 2 keV protons (3.5×1014 p+/cm2), and 5 keV protons (3.4×1014 p+/cm2) [26]. Green curve: 
Degradation after 1436h of simultaneous exposure to solar-equivalent UV, 10 keV electrons (1.4×1018 

e-/cm2), and 5 keV protons (1.6×1017 p+/cm2). These dosage levels are equivalent to the radiation 
exposure at the L2 orbit location over 5 years mission lifetime [27]. Brown curve: Degradation after 
240h of simultaneous exposure to purified air mixed with Cl2 (10 ppb), H2S (10 ppb), and NO2 (200 
ppb), at 30°C and 70% relative humidity. These conditions are fairly similar to pre-launch 
environments [28]. Magenta curve: Degradation after 30 thermal cycles from -80°C to +35°C [29].  

For each of the key degradation sources (i.e. AO, UV radiation, thermal cycling, charged 

particles, telescope outgassing, space debris and dust several mitigation techniques and strategies 


have been proposed, most of them based on coatings. Coatings are in general a fundamental 
technology for space science and applications, and degradation and radiation issues have been 
extensively investigated since the beginning of space programs. In particular, coatings performing 
critical optical functions have been used in space instrument applications for NASA, ESA and the 
other international and national space agencies for more than 50 years. The performance of the first 
coatings launched into space had been observed to change with time. Starting from that, pre-flight 
testing in simulated space environments have been developed to verify spectral and efficiency 
performance, which desirably predict the changes observed in space. The effect of real or simulated 
space conditions on mirrors has been investigated during the last decades and in the following 
sections we will discuss the main results and developments reported in literature.   

The next subsections address the main degradation sources in space environment. A large 

emphasis is given to the far UV (FUV, λ in the 100-200 nm) and the extreme UV (EUV, λ in the 50-
100 nm), due to the enhanced degradation that arises due to the strong absorption of most 
contaminants in these ranges compared to longer wavelengths. 

2.1 Atomic Oxygen 

AO is the main atmospheric component in LEO up to altitudes of 700 km. It is a species with 

large harmful potential over many materials. The intrinsic reactive capacity of AO as a free radical of 
a very electronegative element adds to the strong relative velocity between the orbiting spacecraft 
and the thermal distribution of orbital AO, which strengthens oxygen capacity to react with and to 
sputter off the target material. It is also an indirect source of contamination, as its interaction with 
organic materials, such as polymers, may originate secondary volatile compounds which in turn 
might condensate on critical elements of the telescope, such as on optical surfaces. Optical surfaces 
are degraded in a level directly proportional to AO fluence. This, in turn, is determined by several 
factors, including [30]: spacecraft altitude, as AO decreases with altitude; optical surfaces orientation, 
as surfaces in the ram or windward direction will be exposed the most; orbital inclination, as high 
inclination orbits expose optics to cosmic radiation which in turn may increase the AO generation 
and hence exposure; solar activity, as the Sun emits radiation and charged particles that can promote 
the generation of AO; and mission duration. The degradation issues caused by the impact of AO in 
the space environment has been investigated by several authors [31]. It is particularly harmful in 
LEO, where AO is formed by molecular oxygen dissociation through solar UV radiation at altitudes 
greater than 100 km. When combined with typical spacecraft orbital velocities of several km/sec, it 
has the effect of exposing the optical system to a stream of AO at an energy of approximately 5 eV. 
Hence, optical components intended to operate in LEOs need to be designed to resist atomic oxygen. 
Nowadays most of the flight optics undergo a critical 5-eV energy AO test for their space 
qualification, where the AO total fluence and exposure time on the coatings is typically calculated 
from numerical models and intended to mimic the extent of the entire mission [32]. 

 While most of the oxide-based substrates are resistant to AO, bare metal surfaces and coatings 

may be vulnerable. The EOIM-III experiment tested the resistance of several optical materials to AO 
during the Space Shuttle mission 46 [33]. Among the most interesting results, coating materials such 
as fluorides (MgF2, CaF2 and LiF) and Ir and Pt showed no significant damage, but Ni mirrors showed 
oxide formation and the reflectivity of Au mirrors overcoated with Ni was decreased by the 
degradation of Ni. W. Duan et al. [34] investigated the effect of space AO on the polarization contrast 
of polarization modulated mirrors under different experimental doses by using a terrestrial 
simulator. Peters et al. [35] exposed Os, C, and bare Ag to ambient AO in a space shuttle flight. Post-
flight laboratory analysis revealed that the unshielded C and Os films were totally removed, 
presumably by formation of volatile oxides. Bare Ag was drastically modified to a nonconductor. A 
later attempt to protect Os with a 6-nm thick Pt film did not resist exposure to AO in the orbital 
direction and volatile Os oxide escaped through gaps in the Pt film, which resulted in a poor UV 
reflectance measurements on both the unexposed as well as the exposed areas; on the other hand, a 
10-nm thick film of Pt provided almost complete protection [36]. However, such protection thickness 
would hinder the relatively large EUV reflectance of Os. Peters et al. [37] exposed films of various 


metals to a long LEO exposure. All materials, Cu, Ni, Pt, Au, Sn, Mo and W, were somewhat affected 
by oxidation with AO, mostly in the ram direction of the spacecraft, although they were not affected 
as severely as it had been found for Os, C and Ag. Oxidation ranged between Au, the most stable, 
and Cu, the most affected. Another experience to protect Os in order to avoid AO attack was carried 
out by Hemphill et al. [38]. A 2-to-3-nm thick Ir film was seen to protect an Os film, which had been 
deposited either on a Rh film or on a second Ir film. Such 3-layer structure preserved the Os high 
EUV reflectance characteristic at grazing incidence to be used on gratings in the 9-26-nm spectral 
range. The effect of LEO AO on C was also analyzed by Hadaway et al. [39], who exposed diamond-
like C (along with 12 other materials) to LEO environment and measured the total integrated 
scattering in situ over time. After several weeks, the C film was completely eroded away. Gull et al. 
[40] exposed films of Os, Cr, Pt, and Ir to the LEO environment for a few days and its effect on EUV 
reflectance was measured. Os was the most severely affected when exposed to the ram direction, 
where it disappeared, whereas there was little change when it was masked. Cr, Pt, and Ir were much 
less affected. Ir underwent some reflectance decrease at wavelengths longer than 160 nm. Pt increased 
reflectance after exposure, which was attributed to the cleaning effect of AO on a sample that was 
assumed to be previously contaminated. As mentioned above, the presence of AO on the orbit may 
not only degrade the coating, but it also has the potential to remove contaminants from various sorts 
of coatings. 

Herzig et al. [41] also exposed transition-metal mirrors of Au, Ir, Os, and Pt to LEO environment, 

close to the ram direction. As with the aforementioned experiments, Os disappeared, whereas Pt and 
Ir behaved relatively well after exposure. Au suffered a severe reflectance decrease, but, even though 
some outer monolayers may have been sputtered off, the decrease was attributed to contamination 
from the surrounding areas. The same authors also exposed chemical-vapor-deposited (CVD) SiC to 
LEO environment and found that its EUV-FUV reflectance was severely affected, and the degradation 
was much larger for the exposed area than for a masked area. Degradation was attributed to surface 
oxidation to SiO2. The effect of AO on CVD-SiC EUV-FUV reflectance and the synergic effect of AO 
along with UV radiation on the CVD-SiC near-UV reflectance were reported by G. Raikar et al. [42] 
and S. Mileti et al. [43], respectively. The loss in performance does not exclude the use of CVD-SiC 
for missions where oxygen in not present. Other than high temperature CVD-SiC, carbides deposited 
by sputtering at room temperature are a choice of moderate EUV-reflectance mirror that is attractive 
for optical coatings [44,45]. Keski-Kuha et al. [46] tested the ability of ion-beam-sputtered deposited 
SiC and B4C to withstand the exposure to the LEO AO. For SiC, a severe reflectance decrease was 
observed when the coating was oriented in the ram direction and 3 more times silicon oxide was 
found compared with the control sample that was kept in the lab, which was attributed to the direct 
exposure to AO. A second SiC sample was exposed to LEO AO but it was placed at 160 from the 
ram direction, so that it was protected from the effects of direct AO bombardment. This sample 
displayed only a slight reflectance degradation, typical of an aged sample. Three B4C samples were 
also exposed to LEO AO at 0, 26, and 160 from the ram direction. All three samples experienced 
some EUV reflectance reduction, larger than the typical sample ageing, but reduction was not as 
drastic as with SiC. The extra B4C reflectance reduction was mostly attributed to contamination. No 
roughness increase was observed for either SiC or B4C. 

Herzig et al. [41] flew Al/MgF2 mirrors and exposed them to LEO environment. Even though 

some samples kept their FUV reflectance, one sample experienced significant reflectance degradation 
in the range around 150 nm, and smaller degradation was produced at a wavelength of ~120 nm or 
200 nm. Degradation could not be attributed to contamination, since the largest sensitivity to 
contamination was expected at ~200 nm, where 25-nm thick MgF2 layer happens to be a quarterwave 
thick. The change at 150 nm was then attributed to plasma resonance absorption in Al induced by 
surface roughness, even though no significant difference in roughness before and after orbit exposure 
was observed.  

To reduce or eliminate atomic oxygen erosion of materials in space, the application of thin-film 

protective coatings made of durable materials is the most used approach [25,26,47–51]. As previously 
described, oxides and fluorides are materials relatively resistant to AO, making them suitable as a 
capping layers in coatings for space optics. For example, I. Gouzman et al. reported on the durability 


of protected silver surfaces in an AO environment [25]. In this case the protective layer consisted of 
a thin Al2O3 film, as alumina has been considered one of the suitable material choice to be applied as 
protective coating. Interestingly they applied two approaches to test AO resistance: radio-frequency 
(RF) oxygen plasma exposure and laser detonation source of 5 eV AO. It was suggested that the RF 
plasma environment is too severe for realistic simulation of the AO interaction while a 5 eV AO 
exposure demonstrated that the protective coating was suitable for potential LEO applications. 
Silicon Dioxide (SiO2) and Magnesium fluoride (MgF2) are other commonly used coatings in the 
vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) spectral region because of their high reflectivity down to 110 nm. MgF2 
coating, for example, is used on Hubble Space Telescope optics covering the wavelength range from 
110 nm to near infrared. Even though quite effective, MgF2 protected aluminum is a soft coating that 
scratches easily [3]. Therefore optical components with this coating have to be handled carefully to 
avoid damage to the coating. Lithium fluoride can extend the useful range of aluminum down to the 
LiF absorption cutoff of 102.5 nm. Unlike MgF2 characterized by excellent protection capability and 
long life, LiF thin films are hygroscopic and exhibit reflectance degradation and increased scatter 
with age. Al high intrinsic reflectance extends beyond MgF2 and LiF cutoff wavelengths down to ~83 
nm. However, Al reactivity in presence of oxygen results in a dramatic FUV/EUV reflectance decrease 
and no transparent material is available in nature to preserve reflectance to such a short wavelength. 
The degradation of FUV reflectance of unprotected Al through controlled oxidation to O2, H2O, and 
other species[52][53] and to AO [54] has been investigated. AO was found to be orders of magnitude 
more effective to degrade Al reflectance compared with the same doses of O2. Non-protected Al 
mirrors have been also exposed to LEO environment [41]; even though Al oxidation occurs rapidly, 
which had happened right after the sample was taken out of the vacuum chamber in the lab, Al 
mirrors experienced further reflectance losses below 250 nm once in orbit, which was attributed to a 
greater reactivity of Al with AO compared to atmospheric O2. In view of the sensitivity of bare Al to 
react with AO, some procedure to significantly reduce the rate of impingement of oxidizing species 
must be developed, either based on going to high enough orbits [55] or through the use of some 
scheme that shields the mirrors from ambient oxygen [56][57]. Al extended reflectance was not 
ignored by space instrument developers since early stage in the space era, and such an extension 
would be very beneficial for space observations due to the presence of important spectral lines in the 
extended region. Especially one main difficulty was envisaged: how to keep a bare Al coating free of 
contaminants, mainly free of oxygen. Two strategies were then conceived: i) Depositing the Al 
coating when the optical instrument is already in orbit and after a long-enough time for a thorough 
spacecraft outgassing; ii) Depositing the Al coating on Earth together with some volatile material to 
prevent Al deterioration, a material that could be removed once in orbit through some mild bakeout. 
The main impulse for the latter strategy was named REVAP [58]. Among the two mentioned 
strategies, the in-space aluminization has been addressed in a higher number of proposals, with the 
first studies dating back to the mid 1960’s. A demonstration to aluminize mirrors in space was 
performed in 1975 onboard of the Orbiting Solar Telescope in the Soviet space station Salyut 4 on a 
337-350-km altitude orbit. Even though the process of Al evaporation worked well, no UV reflectance 
increase was observed after two aluminization processes, probably due to fast oxidation by ambient 
AO [59]. Several other experiments have been considered or proposed [58][60] but, to the best of our 
knowledge, no other experiment to aluminize mirrors in space have been carried out.  

2.2 Thermal processes 

Thermal cycling may cause mechanical defects that can grow and degrade the optical system 

performance on orbit. Thermal fluctuations may, for instance, induce mechanical stress that may lead 
to alterations in the figure of optics [61], or modify the stress balance between the coating and 
substrate, or even between different materials within the coating. Nowadays most of the flight optics 
undergo a critical thermal cycling test for their space qualification. This test exposes optics to a one 
or more cycles over temperature ranges typically within [-100°C, +100°C] for 24 h or more, although 
for some missions this test might be more extreme. As a reference, MIL-M-13508C specifies that 
protection Al coatings located in front mirrors have to survive at least 5h at -62 °C and 5h at 71 °C. 


One example of an extreme temperature range test was the coating qualification of the oxide-
protected Au-coated Be mirrors for JWST, in which witness samples were cryogenically cycled to 
down to 15 K four times and to 328 K one time [62].  

Among others, R. K. Banyal et al. reported on thermal characteristics of a classical solar telescope 

primary mirror [63] (similar investigations have been reported by L. Rong et al. [64]). They used a 
heat transfer model that considers the heating caused by a smooth and gradual increase of the solar 
flux during the day-time observations and cooling resulting from the exponentially decaying ambient 
temperature at night. The thermal and structural response of SiC and Zerodur was investigated in 
detail. The low thermal conductivity of Zerodur mirror gives rise to strong radial and axial 
temperature gradients for the day-time heating and night-time cooling. Heat loss by free convection 
is very slow so the mirror retains significant heat during the night. The observed thermal response of 
the SiC mirror is significantly different from Zerodur. The temperature within the SiC mirror 
substrate equilibrates rather quickly due to high thermal conductivity. The thermal expansion of 
ceramic, silicon and SiC optical substrate materials was also investigated in regard to Herschel (2009-
2013) observatory [15]. In particular, SiC is one of the most investigated materials for an observatory 
in cryogenic environment [65][66][8,63][67].  

Research on coatings and thin films demonstrated that the instability of properties in optical film 

was attributed to the coating materials and their deposition process [26,29][50,68][69][70]. For 
example, with respect to metals, metal oxide compound coating materials possess large energy gaps 
and provide high transmission to short, near-UV wavelengths because their optical absorption edge 
is outside (shorter than) the wavelength of interest. Therefore, they are intrinsically less vulnerable 
to damaging by thermal effect, ionizing and UV radiation. The most commonly used coating 
materials are MgF2, ZrO2, TaO5, TiO2, HfO2, and SiO2 [71].  

2.3 Ultraviolet Radiation 

UV radiation comprises the spectral range of wavelengths between few nanometers up to 400 

nm. The effects of high energy photons on mirrors are not strictly related to the reflectivity or 
morphological properties. The effects from these photons are not the determining factor contributing 
to radiation damage. However, chemical changes such as reduction and oxidation reactions can 
induce optical absorption in thin film layers, and UV photons can promote such reactions, changing 
the composition of the materials. For these reasons, space UV and ionizing radiation durability of 
materials must be considered. Importantly, the radiation effects are synergistic with other effects and 
must be considered together [72]. One of the principal effects of UV radiation is the polymerization 
and darkening of silicones and hydrocarbons, which are ubiquitous contaminants in space telescopes. 
This darkening effect is often enhanced by electron irradiation [73]. Hence, the UV resistance of 
mirrors is often tested during space qualification tests. It is common to use a distribution of Xe lamps 
(or similar sources) to obtain a spectral intensity profile similar to the solar irradiance, and the mirrors 
are exposed for a time equivalent to the intended operation hours under solar ultraviolet exposure 
[74]. 

The first space optical coatings used for band-pass filters were constructed of thermally-

evaporated soft materials such as ZnS and MgF2. Exposure to the space environment containing 
ionizing radiation, solar UV, atomic oxygen and high vacuum revealed the unstable operation of 
those coatings. In addition to humid-vacuum shifts in wavelength properties, filters, anti-reflective 
(AR) coatings and other coatings suffered radiation-induced transmission loss that was especially 
pronounced at short wavelengths. UV exposure may have effects on polymers and other materials 
used in lightweight mirror material in spacecraft applications. In this latter case, the effects of UV 
exposure need to be accounted for due to their potential impacts on the thermal management of a 
spacecraft and during application in composite mirror structures [75][76,77].  

ZnS deposited by evaporation was a coating material used decades ago for its moderate FUV 

reflectance and its transparency above 400 nm. Hass et al. [78] evaluated the resistance of a ZnS film 
to intense UV irradiation as it would be expected in a space instrument. ZnS experienced a dramatic 
reflectance decrease in the UV after a long UV irradiation in air, whereas reflectance decrease was 


relatively small longwards of 400 nm. The outermost 15-20 nm thickness was seen to have changed 
from polycrystalline ZnS to amorphous ZnO. The authors also studied a multilayer with single Al 
and Ge films under outermost ZnS film to enhance FUV reflectance and to decrease near UV and 
visible reflectance. The Ge/Al/ZnS multilayer was UV irradiated in vacuum, which resulted in a 
severe FUV reflectance decrease, increasingly more severe towards shorter wavelengths, whereas no 
change was observed longwards of 260 nm. Again, there was a predominant presence of oxygen over 
sulphur in the outermost 10-20 nm. The paper reported that, even in the total absence of oxygen upon 
UV irradiation, sulphur is expected to sublime, leaving a metallic film of Zn. All this behavior 
recommends caution in employing ZnS as the outer coating of an optics in space. 

Fuqua at al. [79] reported the on-orbit degradation of Ag mirrors on the Suomi-NPP spacecraft. 

They sensed an important degradation in near-IR bands of the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer 
Suite instrument, but little degradation in the green and blue channels. They first considered the 
possibility that the mirrors had become contaminated either before launch or on-orbit, and that the 
contaminant was darkening with UV exposure. However, the spectral signature of the degradation 
was uncharacteristic of UV darkened molecular contamination, which typically results in greater 
losses in the short wavelengths rather than the NIR. After an investigation on flight witness mirrors, 
they concluded that a non-qualified process was employed in the production of the flight mirrors, 
which inadvertently deposited a thin layer of tungsten oxide, WOx, on the surface of the mirrors. The 
tungsten oxide, when illuminated with UV, becomes absorptive in the near infrared with a spectral 
dependence that compared very well with the inferred behavior of the mirrors on orbit.   

2.4 Outgassing and cross-contamination 

As previously mentioned, one of the main contamination sources in space mirrors originates 

from outgassing in the space vacuum environment. Due to the strong absorption of materials, 
particularly contaminants in the FUV range, space contamination mainly originated in the vehicle 
and instrument outgassing has been investigated by several authors and the FUV properties of most 
volatile spacecraft materials have been measured [55][80–84], which indicate larger absorption in the 
FUV compared to longer wavelengths. These experiments are useful to evaluate the top allowable 
contaminant thickness before FUV reflectance is unacceptably degraded. When the coating is 
irradiated with strong UV radiation, this results in that the contaminant is transformed through a 
photopolymerization process and becomes non-volatile, so that it gets stuck to the coating. UV 
radiation provides the energy to break bonds in the hydrocarbon chain and stimulates intermolecular 
crosslinking [55]. The photopolymerization process mostly depends on the coating and contaminant 
nature, on substrate temperature and on the specific UV radiation energy and intensity [85]. A facility 
was developed at GSFC to controllably contaminate mirrors and in situ measure their FUV 
degradation [85]. It is important to point out that UV irradiation with no contamination does not 
degrade Al, Ag or Au based mirrors (e.g. Al/MgF2 reflectance [86]), but the combination of both does. 
Other than UV, energetic protons and electrons may also contribute to turn a contaminant into 
nonvolatile [55]. 

A strong manifestation of the concomitance between contamination in space and UV was 

observed after the first servicing mission on HST [87]. The Wide Field and Planetary Camera I 
(WFPC-1) was replaced and returned to Earth. The WFPC-1 pickoff mirror was analyzed. The 
Al/MgF2 mirror was found to be covered with a 45-nm thick contaminant, which severely degraded 
FUV reflectance. The contamination was attributed to the outgassing of HST during its first 3.5 years 
operation. The mirror was found to be contaminated with hydrocarbons, esters, and silicones. Figure 
2 shows drastic reduction in reflectivity, and x-ray photoemission spectroscopy data on the surface 
of the returned mirror revealing the composition of the contaminants. The mirror was carefully 
cleaned and the preflight reflectance was fully restored, so that it was demonstrated that the Al/MgF2 
coating had not been degraded [87]  


 

Figure 2. Evolution of the far-ultraviolet reflectance of the Wide Field and Planetary Camera-1 
(WFPC-1) pick-off mirror (based on Al protected with MgF2). Purple points: pre-flight data. Blue: 
post-flight data after 3.5 years of deployment in space, with a severe reflectance degradation. Red: 
reflectance recovery after contamination removal with a chemical cleaning. The inset on the right 
depicts XPS data acquired on the surface of the recovered mirror after its return to Earth, showing the 
presence of contaminants such as C, O, Si, and N. [88]  

A later servicing mission enabled retrieve other Al/MgF2 mirrors from HST instruments for 

inspection after 15.5 years in space [89]. While two COSTAR optics mirrors kept a relatively high 
FUV reflectance, comparable to or even better than a witness sample that had been stored in a 
desiccator, WFPC-2 pick off mirror resulted in a reflectance degradation as severe as for the 
aforementioned WFPC-1 mirror. This suggested a similar contamination for both mirrors, in spite of 
the efforts carried out to reduce contamination on WFPC-2 after the experience with WFPC-1. The 
different levels of contamination through the mirrors were unexpected and attributed to 
contamination dependent on the specific location within HST hub. 

Regarding grazing-incidence mirrors, Osantowski calculated the sensitivity of mirror reflectance 

to a range of optical constants selected for generic contaminants, such as hydrocarbons [90]. Three 
wavelengths were investigated, 10, 50, and 100 nm, as representative of the EUV. He calculated 
critical contaminant thicknesses to reach allowable reflectance changes. A preliminary conclusion 
was that Au and Zerodur mirrors are relatively insensitive to surface films, which can even result in 
an increased reflectance in some cases. Mrowka et al. investigated the effect of intentional 
contamination of grazing incidence Au mirrors with vacuum pump oil to evaluate the allowable 
reflectance decrease by contaminants of an instrument to be part of EUVE space telescope [91]. To 
check the effect of contamination with a common contaminant, a coating with 15-nm oil resulted in a 
total recovery of the original EUV reflectance after a long-enough outgassing time in the reflectometer 
vacuum chamber, with no increase of scattering either. But when a 50-nm thick oil was deposited, 
outgassing reduced such thickness just to 35 nm, and mirrors kept a hazy look. Since the remaining 
oil deposit was known to be in droplet form, an increased scattering for the coating was expected. 
Polymerization was discarded because the estimates of UV irradiation and charged particle fluxes 
were too small.  

2.5 Charged particles 

An additional concern in space optics regards the degradation occurring on mirrors when they 

are exposed to charged particles and ions. During an inter-planetary journey, galactic cosmic rays 
background and Sun are the main sources of such particles and ions. Galactic Cosmic Rays (GCRs) 
are a continuous and isotropic flow of charged particles reaching the solar system from outside the 


heliosphere. They are approximately composed by 85% of protons, 14% of helium, and the residual 
1% of heavy ions. The energy spectrum ranges from few MeV up to GeV with particles fluxes that 
decrease with increasing energy. Inside the heliosphere, GCRs decreases by a few %/Astronomic Unit 
(AU) with heliocentric distance (R) and the solar activity modifies the GCRs flux. As the solar activity 
undergoes the 11-year cycle, the GCRs flux varies with the maximum during solar minimum periods 
[92]. Sun emits particles such as protons, electrons, alpha particles and less abundant heavy ions such 
as O+6 and Fe+10 continuously (solar wind) or as part of eruptions (unpredictable occurrences) or 
coronal mass ejections. The solar wind is an outflow of completely ionized gas originating from the 
solar corona and expanding outwards to the interplanetary regions. Different components are 
contained in the solar wind, which differ for particles speed, spectral flux (particles / eV cm2 s) of the 
constituents and solar region of provenience. For instance, the “quiet” solar wind in the ecliptic plane 
is constituted by protons of ~1 keV and alpha particles of ~4 keV whereas out of the ecliptic such 
energies can increase up to 4 times [93]. More severe but transient disturbances can be caused by 
energetic particles events occurring during coronal mass ejections or solar flares. Such events can 
potentially lead to high fluxes of protons in the energy range from tens to hundreds of MeV, whose 
effects can be occasionally detected even at Earth ground. This proton emission occurs randomly and 
usually during periods of solar maxima, and it is accompanied by heavy ions. In general, the fluence 
of solar energetic particles scales with distance from the Sun as R-3 at a few MeV and R-2 at tens of 
MeV and above [94].  

Around planets, the space environment is also affected by their magnetosphere, which interacts 

with charged particles present in the heliosphere. Moreover, albedo neutrons generated by GCRs 
interaction with the planet atmosphere decay into protons, giving an additional source of ions around 
planets. These particles are confined via magnetic mirroring and trapped preferably in some regions 
around the planets, forming radiation belts [95]. For example, Earth has two main electrons belts at 
about 3000 km and 25000 km of altitude with energies varying from few keV up to 10 MeV; protons 
are instead confined in a belt at around 3000 km of altitude in which the energies span between 100 
keV and several hundred MeV. Outside these radiation belts the distribution and flux of particles 
depend on the characteristics of the magnetosphere, the planetary atmosphere, the Sun distance and 
the phase of the solar cycle. Earth geostationary orbits (GEO; circular orbits at 35786 km altitude) has 
an electron flux ranging between 109 e/(cm2s) and 108 e/(cm2s) in the energy interval 1-10 keV and 105 
e/(cm2s) at 1 MeV. The proton fluence in the same orbit is 1010 p/(cm2s) at 1 MeV and decreases by 
two orders of magnitude at 10 MeV and four at 100 MeV. The magnetosphere of giant planets, such 
as Jupiter, becomes an important source of high-energy electrons (>10 MeV) in the interplanetary 
space [96]. 

The spacecraft components need to be protected by highly penetrating radiation and particles 

encountered in the operational environment. In fact, highly energetic photons as well as MeV 
particles can easily penetrate mm thicknesses of materials, undergoing a deceleration in case of 
particles and, in general, producing secondary photon and particle emissions. By its nature, 
secondary particles have to be analyzed on a case-by-case basis through Monte-Carlo simulation in 
order to obtain global information that can be used during the design and testing procedures. For 
this reason, spacecraft requirements always include a total ionizing dose (TID) specification 
(expressed in krad), a value that corresponds to the total energy deposited in matter by ionizing 
radiation per unit of mass. By definition, TID is an integral dose, and therefore it takes into account 
the cumulative effect due to particles of different energies. The ground validation of the spacecraft 
components is then usually performed by evaluating the effect given by a specific TID, deposited via 
acceleration facilities. Although this approach is suitable for testing the radiation-hardness of an 
electronic component or investigating the degradation of the opto-mechanical properties of bulk 
materials, it becomes inappropriate for the optical coatings because the effects occurring in the thin 
films strongly depend on the proton energy and therefore the implantation depth of particles. High-
energy particles penetrate deeper in the optical components, in the order of tens of µm or more, 
interacting very little with the nanometric coatings and depositing all the energy in the substrate. In 
contrast, keV ions implants within the coatings with a profile highly dependent on their density, 
potentially inducing changes of their optical, structural and morphological properties. As a general 


rule, we can affirm that thin films in the nanometric scale are mostly affected by low energy particles, 
that implant in the coating itself, but not by MeV particles, which overcome the structure, eventually 
reaching the substrate. Experiments with MeV electrons and protons with typical fluences faced in 
the space environment (i.e. < 1012 ions/cm2) have proven negligible degradation effects on optical 
coatings having a total thickness lower than few microns in the visible-UV [97][98][99], in FUV [86] 
and even in the EUV [100]. Visible multilayer filters irradiated with protons at 4, 18 MeV and 30 MeV 
[97] [99] and electrons at 50 MeV [98] showed no changes after irradiation. Canfield et al. [86] 
irradiated Al/MgF2 mirrors with 1-Mev electrons and 5-Mev protons. No effect on the reflectance at 
121.6 nm was observed. Hass and Hunter [55] reported also the effect of energetic electrons and 
protons on Al/MgF2 coatings.  

The investigation of the effects induced on optical mirrors by low-energy particles and ions are 

performed by using terrestrial facilities based on ion implanters and accelerators. However, 
simulation of the space environment exposure is extremely challenging since it is impossible to 
approach the irradiation conditions occurring in space. For example, while the exposure in space 
typically lasts for several years, a ground-based experiment needs high particle flux rates in order to 
reach the mission life-time expected fluences in a reasonable amount of time. Moreover, during the 
accelerating tests potential synergistic effects, not present in space, can arise, such as thermal effects 
related to the high flux and surface contaminations due to the contaminants present in the vacuum 
chamber [101]. Moreover, irradiation experiments are also highly influenced by practical reasons, 
such as the availability of a facility able to provide a specific ion species, energy and flux.  

In the case of low energy particles, damage depends on energy, flux and fluence. Low energy 

proton irradiations (< 500 keV) with fluences lower than 1016 p/cm2 have shown negligible changes in 
the near infrared reflectance of SiO2-protected Al mirrors [102][103]. A degradation dependent on the 
proton fluence have been instead observed in the visible and near ultraviolet. For example, Hai et al. 
and Qiang et al., [104][105][103][106] investigated the effect of 60-keV protons on Al protected with 
SiO2. These mirrors were measured from the near UV to the IR. Reflectance was monotonously 
degraded with proton dose (see Figure 3a): with a fluence of 1016 p/cm2 , a reflectance drop of 5% at 
700 nm and 10% at 500 nm was observed, whereas in the UV this drop goes over 20%. Moreover, 
fluences in the order of 1017 p/cm2 heavily compromise the Al-protected mirror reflectance up to over 
1000 nm. Similarly, Al/MgF2 mirrors of unknown design but optimized for the near UV or visible, 
hence with a thicker MgF2 protective coating than FUV mirrors, were exposed to a geostationary orbit 
simulator consisting in simultaneous irradiation with UV, electrons and protons [72]. UV reflectance 
decay depended on the specific mirror, which had been prepared by a specific vendor, so that some 
degradation could not be discarded for the mirrors in space environment. Such degradation may not 
have been due to the presence of contaminants but to the shallow penetration of electrons and even 
more to less penetrating protons. Such reflectance decrease was attributed to the change of Al optical 
constants or to the appearance of ripples and hillocks on the surface of the Al mirror. Calculations on 
the effect of protons over general metallic surfaces predict the recombination of protons to form H2 
bubbles; these bubbles will result in a significant roughness increase. The proton energy used in the 
irradiation experiment greatly influences the degradation results. For example, based on the results 
reported in [103] it can be observed that a fluence of 1017 p/cm2 induces a higher reflectance 
degradation when the proton energy is low. This fluence at 60keV induce a reflectance drop of 99% 
at 400 nm while at 160 keV this drop is about 20% (see Figure 3b). This degradation is due to the 
different ion implantation profile inside the coating: the lower is the energy the shallower is the ion 
implantation peak. In case of metallic mirrors, if the implantation peak falls in the topmost part of 
the metallic layer or inside an eventual protective layer, the bubble formation inside the coating will 
provide a greater degradation. 

 


 

Figure 3: a) Evolution of the UV-VIS reflectance of a SiO2-protected Al mirror irradiated with protons 
at 60 keV with different fluences (data retrieved from [103]). b) Evolution of the UV-VIS reflectance 
of SiO2-protected Al mirror irradiated with protons at different energies and keeping a fluence of 
1·1017 p/cm2 (data retrieved from [103]). 

 

Gillette and Kenyon [107] exposed Al/MgF2 and Al/LiF FUV mirrors to 10-keV protons to 

simulate several-year exposure in a synchronous earth orbit. Such irradiation resulted in a broad-
band reflectance decrease centered at ~210 nm (Al/MgF2) and ~190 nm (Al/LiF). Reflectance decrease 
grew with proton dose. Reflectance decrease was negligible at the short-end of the high FUV 
reflectance range of these mirrors, which was due to the presence of contamination but not coating 
degradation. The contamination thickness was calculated to be 4-5 nm. Even though an undulating 
pattern on the coating surface was induced by irradiation, its small width did not result in observable 
scattering. Most reflectance degradation could be reverted to close to the original reflectance after 
exposing both Al/MgF2 and Al/LiF mirrors to AO, which was attributed to oxidation of the 
contaminant to turn it volatile. Gillette and Kenyon [107] exposed Pt mirrors to 10-keV protons to 
simulate a long exposure in a synchronous earth orbit. Reflectance degradation in the full 93-250 nm 
measured range presented no spectral structure, which may be due to the lack of interferences, 
contrary to what was observed for Al/MgF2 and Al/LiF mirrors.  

a)  
 b) 

Figure 4: a) Evolution of the EUV reflectance at 30.4 nm of an un-capped and Ir-capped Si/Mo 
multilayer coating versus 1 keV protons ad 4 keV He ions fluence (data from ref. [108][109]). b) 
Delamination occurring on a Si/Mo multilayer under a 1 keV proton irradiation with a fluence of 
3.6·1016 p/cm2 (image from Ref. [108]).  

 


A similar behavior was observed with He ions. Low energy He ion irradiations on metallic thin 

films of Au and Cu demonstrate that with fluences of the order of 1015 - 1016 ion/cm2, a faint dislocation 
band starts forming, with preservation of the optical performance in the visible spectral range and a 
fluence-proportional degradation in the ultraviolet [110]. Fluences of the order of 1017 ions/cm2 induce 
a large formation of bubbles inside the films and a deep transformation of the surface morphology 
[111][112] with a consequent degradation of the visible and UV reflectance. The diameter and the 
density of such bubbles increase with the fluence due to the tendency of helium ions to migrate form 
agglomerates. This behavior has been confirmed not only in metals, but also in semiconductors [113].  

A particular case is instead that of ML stacks for the EUV. Several studies have demonstrated 

that protons and alpha particles with energy of few keV can already lead to dramatic degradation of 
performance with fluences in the order of 1016 ions/cm2 [108][109][114]. For example, Mo/Si structures 
with different capping-layers were irradiated by protons at 1 keV with fluences of 9·1015 p/cm2 and 
36·1015 p/cm2 showing a change of the peak position and a degradation of the reflectance (Figure 4a). 
Such effect was attributed to the blistering, expansion and delamination and occurring in the topmost 
layers of the ML stack (see the TEM image reported in Figure 4b) [115][116][117]. After He+ ion 
irradiation with fluences of 2.5·1015 ions/cm2, 5·1015 ions/cm2 1016 ions/cm2 the exposed MLs show a 
drop of reflectance but no appreciable reflectance peak shifts [109]. In this case, the degradation was 
attributed to an increase of the intermixing at the interfaces in the topmost layers.  

Recently, Al/Mo/B4C and Al/Mo/SiC were also irradiated with 1 keV and 100 keV protons with 

doses of 7.4·1012 p/cm2 and 9·1015 p/cm2. The lowest dose was chosen in order to simulate the situation 
expected inside the High Resolution Imager (HRI) and Full Sun Imager (FSI) telescopes of Solar 
Orbiter mission, where the mechanical structure and the front filters drastically reduce the proton 
flux impinging on the multilayers. None of the irradiated structures showed appreciable changes of 
their performance, suggesting that at these fluences MLs can be considered stable. 

2.6 Dust and Space Debris 

Dust (or meteoroids) and space debris are important sources of mirror degradation. In extreme 

conditions, meteoroids may cause a full spacecraft failure; one example of the latter was the Olympus 
communications spacecraft (ESA), in which the general failure of the satellite was attributed with a 
high probability to a Perseid meteoroid impact[118]. Although dust and debris are small in weight 
and size (e.g. millimeter- and micron-size particles are the most abundant in LEO), their high 
velocities, ranging from few m/s up to dozens of km/s, represent a threat for space optics. In the near-
Earth, space debris is generated by launch activity and subsequent operational practices, and its flux 
is comparable with the one of meteoroids in the size range between 10 μm to 1 mm[119]. However, 
meteoroids are generally more harmful than space debris, as the average velocity of the former is 
higher. Beyond LEO, space dust is dominant, where short-period comets with aphelia less than 7 AU 
have been identified as a major source of interplanetary dust released through the sublimation of 
cometary ices[120]. Aside from the mass and velocity, the effect of these particles can be further 
exacerbated by the directionality of the optical surfaces relative to the ram direction. The exposure 
time is also critical; it has been reported that even after a short exposure to the space environment, 
exposed surfaces can be covered with impacts from small-size debris and meteoroids[121]. The 
chemical composition of dust is diverse, but mostly are silicates, ice, and iron and organic 
compounds. Depending on several factors, dust can accumulate on the surface of the optics and 
increase the scattered radiation[122], or flake the protective coating leaving reactive materials 
exposed (which could be subsequently degraded by AO, for instance), or it can even blast away the 
coating and produce craters on the substrate. In extreme conditions, high-velocity collisions may 
produce plasma, generating side-effects that may be more damaging than the purely mechanical 
effects[118]. Additionally, the collateral effects of impacts may damage or contaminate optics; an 
example of the latter will be explained below in the description of one of the NASA Long Duration 
Exposure Facility (LDEF) experiments.  


The experimental verification is often necessary to better understand the effect of high-velocity 

particles in optics. This can be performed in dedicated testing facilities, such as Heidelberg Dust 
Accelerator, in which particles of various materials can be accelerated to velocities up to 40km/s.[123] 
Heaney el al. [124] utilized the aforementioned facility to simulate the effect of the impacts of iron (1.2 
μm diameter) and latex (0.75 μm diameter) to mimic inorganic- and organic-based meteoroids, at 
velocities of 2-20 km/s on an oxide-protected, Au-coated Be witness mirrors for the JWST. He found 
that both latex and iron particles had the ability to blast away the protective coating, creating craters 
in which the Be substrate was exposed. He reported ratios between the crater diameter and the 
incident particle kinetic energy of 0.09 μm/nJ for latex and of 0.07 μm/nJ for iron. Yet, most of the 
knowledge of the mass and velocity distribution of dust, composition, flux and the effect of impacts 
in space instrumentation has been gathered in the last decades from dedicated experiments in space, 
such as dust detectors onboard GALILEO and ULYSSES, or the cosmic dust analyzer (CDA) aboard 
the CASSINI[123]. As an example, the CDA instrument has two sensors, the first one was a high-rate 
detector to count the number of particles and the second one analyzed the dust's charge, speed, size 
and direction. Another important source of knowledge of dust and debris characteristics has been 
obtained from satellites or parts thereof returned from space (Shuttle, Solar Max, Palapa, Westar, 
MIR, EURECA, HST). As an example, the chemical analysis of the craters on solar cells returned from 
the HST showed that caters with diameters of 100-3500 µm were produced by meteoroids, whereas 
craters with diameters of 1-100µm were produced mostly by space debris composed by aluminum 
and aluminum oxide, indicative of solid rocket motor fuel debris[125]. Special mention deserves the 
LDEF experiment, in which a tray with several optics was mounted in the exterior of the spacecraft 
(see Fig. 5a and b), then the optics were exposed 5 years and 8 months (32,422 orbits in LEO, from 842 
km to 340 km) to micrometeoroids and space debris, and then the optics were returned and analyzed 
on Earth. This extended duration presented a unique opportunity to study the long-term effects of 
space exposure on the coatings and substrate materials flown. Among the most spectacular results, a 
1-mm diameter impact in a bare CaF2 substrate produced a 2-directions full cleavage, breaking the 
sample into 3 pieces, as shown in Fig. 5c. Another impact on a PbTe/ZnS multilayer-coated Ge 
substrate caused a coating delamination in the surroundings of the spallation area of 4.5 mm 
diameter; posterior analysis on the multilayer coating showed that the impact did not add stress or 
induce any further coating damage beyond the spallation area. The contamination of the SiO-coated 
Si substrate by aluminum provided the best example on LDEF of secondary ejecta and collateral 
effects of impacts. An impact occurred into the edge of the aluminum sample holder (see Fig. 5d), 
leaving secondary ejecta spray patterns of molten aluminum on the surface of the sample[126][127] . 


 

Figure 5: a) Tray B08 with several optics mounted. There were bare substrates and coated substrates, 
among other samples [https://www2.physics.ox.ac.uk, LDEF project]. b) The LDEF in orbit. The 
location of tray B08 in LDEF can barely be seen, but it is indicated with a red arrow [NASA Image 
and Video Library]. c) Impact and cleavage of the BaF2 substrate [available at www.reading.ac.uk, 
Infrared Laboratory, LDEF]. d) Impact on the edge of the Al holder for the SiO-coated Si sample. 
Molten Al spray patterns can be seen on the sample surface.  

Summarizing, space dust and debris can affect the performance of mirrors and coatings, or even 

produce a full mission failure. The body of spacecrafts can be protected from micrometeoroids and 
space debris impacts. F. Whipple proposed in 1947 [128] that a steel “skin” of one millimeter thickness 
spaced one inch from the main spacecraft body would disintegrate along with the high-velocity 
meteoroid upon impact, thus preventing the latter causing damage to the spacecraft. Even though 
this protective system has been verified, implemented, and improved since then, this cannot be used 
to protect the primary mirror of an optical telescope, for instance. Hence, for exposed optical systems 
protection relies mostly on prevention and prediction. It is common to all space agencies to pursue 
the common goal of reducing the generation of space debris from in-orbit explosions or collisions, 
discourage anti-satellite missile tests, and reduce the debris generated by rocket upper stages. In 
terms of prediction, models that can precisely account for (1) meteoroid velocity and mass 
distributions as a function of orbit altitude, (2) flux of meteoroids of larger sizes (>100 microns), (3) 
effects of plasma during impacts, and (4) variations in meteoroid bulk density with impact velocity, 
have been identified as a powerful tool to foresee the effect of dust and debris in future space 
observatories [119]. 

3. Conclusions 

Optical coated elements for space instrumentation are mainly optimized in terms of efficiency 

and required working spectral band. After fabrication, witness samples undergo a series of laboratory 
tests required by the space agencies in order to qualify the components.   

However, laboratory tests rarely reproduce the conditions in space, because the quality of the 

vacuum is not the same in space, some contaminants coming from the satellite itself are neglected, 


space environment is not always known precisely, the flux of particles and contaminants is lower in 
space than in accelerated tests. Moreover, very few experimental data are made available by the re-
testing of components in those few cases in which the optics have been collected after a flight. The 
results of the qualification tests are rarely published and made available to the scientific community, 
as they are perceived as small technical details and because there is not a reference scientific journal 
which offers a solid background in this field, as opposite of the case of the electronics components. 

On the other hand, both mirror substrates and coatings are a key component of space optics. 

Space mirrors must withstand a harsh environment, where servicing campaigns to clean or replace 
degraded optics are very limited or, most often, impossible. Mirrors must be able to keep acceptable 
performance through missions that may have a lifetime as long as decades. In fact, optical 
performance of the components strongly affects the scientific data outcomes, and their degradation 
can lead to a misinterpretation data due to an unknown change of the instrument radiometric 
response. In a more dramatic scenario, unpredicted mirror degradation may kill an expensive 
mission along with the strong expectations of the community for decades.   

Hence, space opticians need to predict the behavior of coatings and substrates at the specific 

orbit and space conditions and for the full mission lifetime. In order to accomplish this, more 
experimental data need to be collected and shared. The clear definition of testing procedures to assess 
the robustness of optical components against the operational environment is pivotal to gain this 
knowledge, and thus for preventing in-flight failures, to fabricate robust coatings, or simply to model 
their degradation. In-situ testing experiments in which simple optical systems are coupled to the 
mirror optics for efficiency measurement over time during a flight could be an advantage.  This 
paper is intended to contribute to build of a background knowledge in the field. Attention has been 
devoted to the main sources of mirror degradation: atomic oxygen, thermal processes, ultraviolet 
radiation, outgassing and cross-contamination, charged particles, and space debris and dust. An 
effort has been made to cite and comment the main literature on the degradation effects of all these 
sources on mirrors all over the electromagnetic spectrum, with emphasis at short wavelengths. 
Available information combines space simulation in the lab and also the heritage of six decades of 
space optics. Despite the long literature on space mirrors and degradation/stability issues, significant 
improvements are still desired for future space observatories. The development of large size and 
broadband mirrors will come together with new materials and coating designs. Future low-orbit to 
deep-space exploration will need to keep solving new issues on degradation resistance of mirrors. 

 

Author Contributions: All authors have contributed to prepare the manuscript. They have read and agreed to 
the published version of the manuscript. 

Funding: JIL acknowledges funding by Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Gobierno de España (PID2019-
105156GB-I00). 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

References 

 

1.  
Postman, M. Advanced Technology Large-Aperture Space Telescope: science drivers and technology 

developments. Opt. Eng. 2012, 51, 011007. 

2.  
Trumper, I.; Hallibert, P.; Arenberg, J.W.; Kunieda, H.; Guyon, O.; Stahl, H.P.; Kim, D.W. Optics 

technology for large-aperture space telescopes: from fabrication to final acceptance tests. Adv. Opt. 

Photonics 2018, 10, 644. 

3.  
Feinberg, L. Space telescope design considerations. Opt. Eng. 2012, 51, 011006. 

4.  
Gaier, T.; Mikhail, R.; Cavaco, J.; Vayda, J.; Steeves, J.; Wallace, J.K.; Redding, D.; Lawrence, C.; Bartman, 

R. Active mirrors for future space telescopes. In Proceedings of the Advances in Optical and Mechanical 

Technologies for Telescopes and Instrumentation III; Geyl, R., Navarro, R., Eds.; SPIE, 2018; p. 38. 

5.  
Bolcar, M.R.; Balasubramanian, K.; Clampin, M.; Crooke, J.; Feinberg, L.; Postman, M.; Quijada, M.; 


Rauscher, B.; Redding, D.; Rioux, N.; et al. Technology development for the Advanced Technology Large 

Aperture Space Telescope (ATLAST) as a candidate large UV-Optical-Infrared (LUVOIR) surveyor. In 

Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; MacEwen, H.A., Breckinridge, J.B., Eds.; 2015; p. 960209. 

6.  
Bolcar, M.R.; Balasubramanian, K.; Crooke, J.; Feinberg, L.; Quijada, M.; Rauscher, B.J.; Redding, D.; 

Rioux, N.; Shaklan, S.; Stahl, H.P.; et al. Technology gap assessment for a future large-aperture 

ultraviolet-optical-infrared space telescope. J. Astron. Telesc. Instruments, Syst. 2016, 2, 041209. 

7.  
Philip Stahl, H. Advanced ultraviolet, optical, and infrared mirror technology development for very 

large space telescopes. J. Astron. Telesc. Instruments, Syst. 2020, 6, 1. 

8.  
Villalba, V.; Kuiper, H.; Gill, E. Review on thermal and mechanical challenges in the development of 

deployable space optics. J. Astron. Telesc. Instruments, Syst. 2020, 6, 1. 

9.  
Stahl, H.P. Mirror technology roadmap for optical/IR/FIR space telescopes. In Proceedings of the SPIE 

Conf. Proceeding; Mather, J.C., MacEwen, H.A., de Graauw, M.W.M., Eds.; 2006; p. 626504. 

10.  
Lewis, W.C. Space Telescope Mirror Substrate. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Wyman, 

C.L., Ed.; 1979; pp. 114–119. 

11.  
Zhang, W.W.; Chan, K.-W.; Content, D.A.; Lehan, J.P.; Petre, R.; Saha, T.T.; Gubarev, M.; Jones, W.D.; 

O’Dell, S.L. Development of lightweight x-ray mirrors for the Constellation-X mission. In Proceedings 

of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Turner, M.J.L., Hasinger, G., Eds.; 2006; p. 62661V. 

12.  
Parsonage, T.B. JWST beryllium telescope: material and substrate fabrication. In Proceedings of the SPIE 

Conf. Proceeding; Atad-Ettedgui, E., Dierickx, P., Eds.; 2004; p. 39. 

13.  
Witkin, D.B.; Palusinski, I.A. Material testing of silicon carbide mirrors. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. 

Proceeding; Robichaud, J.L., Goodman, W.A., Eds.; 2009; p. 742509. 

14.  
Baiocchi, D.; Stahl, H.P. Enabling future space telescopes: mirror technology review and development 

roadmap. In Proceedings of the astro2010: The Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal Survey; 2009; Vol. 

2010, p. 23. 

15.  
Pilbratt, G.L.; Riedinger, J.R.; Passvogel, T.; Crone, G.; Doyle, D.; Gageur, U.; Heras, A.M.; Jewell, C.; 

Metcalfe, L.; Ott, S.; et al. Herschel Space Observatory. Astron. Astrophys. 2010, 518, L1. 

16.  
Korhonen, T.; Keinanen, P.; Pasanen, M.; Sillanpaa, A. Polishing and testing of the 3.5 m SiC M1 mirror 

of the Herschel space observatory of ESA. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Duparré, A., 

Geyl, R., Eds.; 2008; p. 710218. 

17.  
Steeves, J.; Laslandes, M.; Pellegrino, S.; Redding, D.; Bradford, S.C.; Wallace, J.K.; Barbee, T. Design, 

fabrication and testing of active carbon shell mirrors for space telescope applications. In Proceedings of 

the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Navarro, R., Cunningham, C.R., Barto, A.A., Eds.; 2014; p. 915105. 

18.  
Bavdaz, M.; Collon, M.; Beijersbergen, M.; Wallace, K.; Wille, E. X-ray pore optics technologies and their 

application in space telescopes. X-Ray Opt. Instrum. 2010, 2010. 

19.  
Piegari, A.; Bulir, J.; Krasilnikova Sytchkova, A. Variable narrow-band transmission filters for 

spectrometry from space 2 Fabrication process. Appl. Opt. 2008, 47, C151. 

20.  
Rodríguez-de Marcos, L.; Aznárez, J.A.; Méndez, J.A.; Larruquert, J.I.; Vidal-Dasilva, M.; Malvezzi, 

A.M.; Giglia, A.; Capobianco, G.; Massone, G.; Fineschi, S.; et al. Advances in far-ultraviolet reflective 

and transmissive coatings for space applications. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Navarro, 

R., Burge, J.H., Eds.; 2016; p. 99122E. 

21.  
de Groh, K.K.; Banks, B.A.; Miller, S.K.R.; Dever, J.A. Degradation of Spacecraft Materials. In Handbook 

of Environmental Degradation of Materials; Elsevier, 2018; pp. 601–645. 

22.  
Lu, Y.; Shao, Q.; Yue, H.; Yang, F. A Review of the Space Environment Effects on Spacecraft in Different 

Orbits. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 93473–93488. 


23.  
Tagliaferri, G.; Basso, S.; Borghi, G.; Burkert, W.; Citterio, O.; Civitani, M.; Conconi, P.; Cotroneo, V.; 

Freyberg, M.; Garoli, D.; et al. Simbol-X Hard X-ray Focusing Mirrors: Results Obtained During the 

Phase A Study. In Proceedings of the AIP Conference Proceedings; AIP, 2009; pp. 35–40. 

24.  
Garoli, D.; Boscolo Marchi, E.; Mattarello, V.; Bertoli, J.; Salmaso, G.; Kools, J.; Spiga, D.; Tagliaferri, G.; 

Pareschi, G. Enabling deposition of hard x-ray reflective coatings as an industrial manufacturing 

process. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Hudec, R., Pina, L., Eds.; 2009; p. 73600U. 

25.  
Gouzman, I.; Grossman, E.; Murat, M.; Noter, Y.; Saar, N.; Zilberman, G.; Minton, T.K.; Garton, D.J.; 

Buczala, D.; Brunsvold, A. A study of atomic oxygen interactions with protected silver surfaces. Eur. Sp. 

Agency, (Special Publ. ESA SP 2003, 2003, 487–492. 

26.  
Sheikh, D.A. Improved silver mirror coating for ground and space-based astronomy. Adv. Opt. Mech. 

Technol. Telesc. Instrum. II 2016, 9912, 991239. 

27.  
Heaney, J.B.; Kauder, L.R.; Freese, S.C.; Quijada, M.A. Preferred mirror coatings for UV, visible, and IR 

space optical instruments. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Butler, J.J., Xiong, X., Gu, X., 

Eds.; 2012; p. 85100F. 

28.  
Folgner, K.A. Towards understanding the environmental durability and corrosion behavior of protected 

silver mirrors, 2019. 

29.  
Sheikh, D.A.; Connell, S.J.; Dummer, R.S. Durable silver coating for Kepler Space Telescope primary 

mirror. Sp. Telesc. Instrum. 2008 Opt. Infrared, Millim. 2008, 7010, 70104E. 

30.  
Dooling, D.; Finckenor, M.M. Material Selection Guidelines to Limit Atomic Oxygen Effects on Spacecraft 

Surfaces; 1999; 

31.  
Banks, B.; Miller, S.; de Groh, K. Low Earth Orbital Atomic Oxygen Interactions with Materials. In 

Proceedings of the 2nd International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference; American Institute of 

Aeronautics and Astronautics: Reston, Virigina, 2004. 

32.  
Banks, B.A.; Stueber, T.J.; Norris, M.J. Monte Carlo Computational Modeling of the Energy Dependence 

of Atomic Oxygen Undercutting of Protected Polymers. In; 2001; pp. 1–14. 

33.  
Koontz, S.L.; Leger, L.J.; Rickman, S.L.; Cross, J.B.; Hakes, C.L.; Bui, D.T. Evaluation of Oxygen Interactions 

with Materials III -- mission and induced environments; Los Alamos, NM, 1994; 

34.  
Duan, W.; Liu, B.; Li, D.; Yu, D.; Liu, D. Study on the Polarization Contrast of Polarization Modulated 

Mirror Affected by Simulated Space Atomic Oxygen. In Proceedings of the Optical Interference Coatings 

Conference (OIC) 2019; OSA: Washington, D.C., 2019; p. MA.4. 

35.  
Peters, P.N.; Linton, R.C.; Miller, E.R. Results of apparent atomic oxygen reactions on Ag, C, and Os 

exposed during the Shuttle STS-4 orbits. Geophys. Res. Lett. 1983, 10, 569–571. 

36.  
Peters, P.N.; Gregory, J.C.; Swann, J.T. Effects on optical systems from interactions with oxygen atoms 

in low earth orbits. Appl. Opt. 1986, 25, 1290. 

37.  
P. N. Peters, J. M. Zwiener, J. C. Gregory, G. N. Raikar, L. C.Christl, D.R.W. Changes in chemical and 

optical properties of thin film metal mirrors on LDEF. In Proceedings of the LDEF: 69 Months in Space. 

Third Post-Retrieval Symposium; 1995; pp. 703–725. 

38.  
Hemphill, R.; Hurwitz, M.; Pelizzo, M.G. Osmium atomic-oxygen protection by an iridium overcoat for 

increased extreme-ultraviolet grating efficiency. Appl. Opt. 2003, 42, 5149. 

39.  
Hadaway, J.B.; Ahmad, A.; Pezzaniti, J.L.; Chipman, R.A.; Wilkes, D.R.; Hummer, L.L.; Crandall, D.G.; 

Bennett, J.M. Real-time total integrated scattering measurements on the Mir spacecraft to evaluate 

sample degradation in space. Appl. Opt. 2001, 40, 2755. 

40.  
Gull, T.R.; Herzig, H.; Osantowski, J.F.; Toft, A.R. Low earth orbit environmental effects on osmium and 

related optical thin-film coatings. Appl. Opt. 1985, 24, 2660. 


41.  
Herzig, H.; Toft, A.R.; Fleetwood, C.M. Long-duration orbital effects on optical coating materials. Appl. 

Opt. 1993, 32, 1798. 

42.  
Raikar, G.N.; Gregory, J.C.; Partlow, W.D.; Herzig, H.; Choyke, W.J. Surface characterization of SiC 

mirrors exposed to fast atomic oxygen. Surf. Interface Anal. 1995, 23, 77–82. 

43.  
Mileti, S.; Coluzzi, P.; Marchetti, M. Degradation of silicon carbide reflective surfaces in the LEO 

environment. AIP Conf. Proc. 2009, 1087, 67–74. 

44.  
Garoli, D.; Monaco, G.; Frassetto, F.; Pelizzo, M.G.; Nicolosi, P.; Armelao, L.; Mattarello, V.; Rigato, V. 

Thin film and multilayer coating development for the extreme ultraviolet spectral region. Radiat. Phys. 

Chem. 2006, 75. 

45.  
Garoli, D.; Frassetto, F.; Monaco, G.; Nicolosi, P.; Pelizzo, M.-G.; Rigato, F.; Rigato, V.; Giglia,  a; 

Nannarone, S. Reflectance measurements and optical constants in the extreme ultraviolet-vacuum 

ultraviolet regions for SiC with a different C/Si ratio. Appl. Opt. 2006, 45, 5642–5650. 

46.  
Keski-Kuha, R.A.M.; Blumenstock, G.M.; Fleetwood, C.M.; Schmitt, D.-R. Effects of space exposure on 

ion-beam-deposited silicon-carbide and boron-carbide coatings. Appl. Opt. 1998, 37, 8038. 

47.  
Packirisamy, S.; Schwam, D.; Litt, M.H. Atomic oxygen resistant coatings for low earth orbit space 

structures. J. Mater. Sci. 1995, 30, 308–320. 

48.  
Wang, X.; Li, Y.; Qian, Y.; Qi, H.; Li, J.; Sun, J. Mechanically Robust Atomic Oxygen-Resistant Coatings 

Capable of Autonomously Healing Damage in Low Earth Orbit Space Environment. Adv. Mater. 2018, 

30, 1803854. 

49.  
Delfini, A.; Vricella, A.; Morles, R.B.; Pastore, R.; Micheli, D.; Gugliermetti, F.; Marchetti, M. CVD nano-

coating of carbon composites for space materials atomic oxygen shielding. Procedia Struct. Integr. 2017, 

3, 208–216. 

50.  
F. L. Bouquet,  et al. Recent advances in long-lived mirrors for terrestrial and space applications. Sol. 

Energy Mater. 1987, 16, 423–433. 

51.  
Heaney, J.B.; Kauder, L.R.; Freese, S.C.; Quijada, M.A. Preferred mirror coatings for UV, visible, and IR 

space optical instruments. Earth Obs. Syst. XVII 2012, 8510, 85100F. 

52.  
Edmends, J.; Maldé, C.; Corrigan, S. Measurements of the far ultraviolet reflectivity of evaporated 

aluminum films under exposure to O2, H2O, CO and CO2. Vacuum 1990, 40, 471–475. 

53.  
Larruquert, J.I.; Méndez, J.A.; Aznárez, J.A. Far-UV reflectance of UHV-prepared Al films and its 

degradation after exposure to O_2. Appl. Opt. 1994, 33, 3518. 

54.  
Larruquert, J.I.; Méndez, J.A.; Aznárez, J.A. Life prolongation of far ultraviolet reflecting aluminum 

coatings by periodic recoating of the oxidized surface. Opt. Commun. 1997, 135, 60–64. 

55.  
Hass, G.; Hunter, W.R. Laboratory Experiments to Study Surface Contamination and Degradation of 

Optical Coatings and Materials in Simulated Space Environments. Appl. Opt. 1970, 9, 2101. 

56.  
Ignatiev, A.; Chu, C.W. A proposal for epitaxial thin film growth in outer space. Metall. Trans. A 1988, 

19, 2639–2643. 

57.  
Naumann, R.J. Prospects for a contamination-free ultravacuum facility in low-Earth orbit. J. Vac. Sci. 

Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film. 1989, 7, 90–99. 

58.  
Burton, W.M. Removable volatile protective coatings for aluminised mirrors used in far-ultraviolet space 

astronomy. J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 1983, 16, L129–L132. 

59.  
Perkin-Elmer Optical Coating In Space Final Report; 1983; 

60.  
Heaney, J.B.; Herzig, H.H.; Osantowski, J.F.; Toft, A.R. Optical surface refurbishment in space 

environment. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Crawford, D.L., Ed.; 1990; p. 858. 

61.  
Quijada, M.A.; Sheikh, D.A.; Del Hoyo, J.Z.G.; Richardson, J.G. ZERODUR(R) substrates for application 


of high-temperature protected-aluminum far-ultraviolet coatings. 2019, 25. 

62.  
Keski-Kuha, R.A.; Bowers, C.W.; Quijada, M.A.; Heaney, J.B.; Gallagher, B.; McKay, A.; Stevenson, I. 

James Webb Space Telescope optical telescope element mirror coatings. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. 

Proceeding; Clampin, M.C., Fazio, G.G., MacEwen, H.A., Oschmann, J.M., Eds.; 2012; p. 84422J. 

63.  
Banyal, R.K.; Ravindra, B. Thermal characteristics of a classical solar telescope primary mirror. New 

Astron. 2011, 16, 328–336. 

64.  
Li, R.; Shi, H.L.; Chen, Z.P. Study on Thermal Analysis of Main Mirror in Space Solar Telescope. Adv. 

Mater. Res. 2011, 328–330, 300–304. 

65.  
Onaka, T.; Kaneda, H.; Kawada, M.; Enya, K.; Nakagawa, T. Cryogenic silicon carbide mirrors for 

infrared astronomical telescopes: lessons learnt from AKARI for SPICA. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. 

Proceeding; Robichaud, J.L., Krödel, M., Goodman, W.A., Eds.; 2013; p. 88370K. 

66.  
Middelmann, T.; Walkov, A.; Bartl, G.; Schödel, R. Thermal expansion coefficient of single-crystal silicon 

from 7 K to 293 K. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92, 174113. 

67.  
Eng, R.; Arnold, W.R.; Baker, M.A.; Bevan, R.M.; Burdick, G.; Effinger, M.R.; Gaddy, D.E.; Goode, B.K.; 

Hanson, C.; Hogue, W.D.; et al. Cryogenic optical performance of a lightweighted mirror assembly for 

future space astronomical telescopes: correlating optical test results and thermal optical model. In 

Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Robichaud, J.L., Krödel, M., Goodman, W.A., Eds.; 2013; p. 

88370B. 

68.  
Poletto, L.; Naletto, G.; Tondello, G.; Patelli, A.; Rigato, V.; Salmaso, G.; Silvestrini, D.; Larruquert, J.I.; 

Mendez, J.A. Grazing-incidence reflectivity of Si-Au coatings for optics with high thermal load. In 

Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Fineschi, S., Gummin, M.A., Eds.; 2004; p. 344. 

69.  
Gutiérrez-Luna, N.; Perea-Abarca, B.; Espinosa-Yáñez, L.; Honrado-Benítez, C.; de Lis, T.; Rodríguez-de 

Marcos, L.V.; Aznárez, J.A.; Larruquert, J.I. Temperature Dependence of AlF3 Protection on Far-UV Al 

Mirrors. Coatings 2019, 9, 428. 

70.  
Gutiérrez-Luna, N.; Perea-Abarca, B.; Espinosa-Yáñez, L.; Honrado-Benítez, C.; de Lis, T.; Rodríguez-de 

Marcos, L.V.; Aznárez, J.A.; Larruquert, J.I. Temperature dependence of AlF3 protection on far-UV Al 

mirrors. Coatings 2019, 9. 

71.  
Wang, F.; Li, S.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, Z.; Zhou, H.; Huo, T. Effect of MgF2 deposition temperature on Al 

mirrors in vacuum ultraviolet. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Thin Film 

Physics and Applications (TFPA 2019); Chu, J., Shao, J., Eds.; SPIE, 2019; p. 42. 

72.  
Heaney, J.B.; Kauder, L.R.; Bradley, S.E.; Neuberger, D.E. Mirror degradation in orbit due to space 

radiation exposure. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Barnes, W.L., Ed.; 2000; p. 339. 

73.  
Fuqua, P. D.; Morgan, B. A.; Adams, P. M.; Meshishnek, M.J. Optical Darkening During Space 

Environmental Effects Testing-Contaminant Film Analyses; 2004; 

74.  
Heaney, J.B.; Kauder, L.R.; Bradley, S.E.; Neuberger, D.E. Mirror degradation in orbit due to space 

radiation exposure. Earth Obs. Syst. V 2000, 4135, 339. 

75.  
Dever, J.; Pietromica, A.; Stueber, T.; Sechkar, E.; Messer, R. Simulated space vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) 

exposure testing for polymer films. In Proceedings of the 39th Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit; 

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics: Reston, Virigina, 2001. 

76.  
Heltzel, S.; Semprimoschnig, C.O.A.; van Eesbeek, M.R.J. Environmental Testing of Thermal Control 

Materials at Elevated Temperature and Intense Ultraviolet Radiation. J. Spacecr. Rockets 2009, 46, 248–

254. 

77.  
Cesul, B.T.; Mall, S.; Matson, L. Optical Response of Metakaolin after Ultraviolet and High Energy 

Electron Exposure. J. Mater. 2014, 2014, 1–5. 


78.  
Hass, G.; Heaney, J.B.; Hunter, W.R.; Angel, D.W. Effect of UV irradiation on evaporated ZnS films. Appl. 

Opt. 1980, 19, 2480. 

79.  
Fuqua, P.D.; Barrie, J.D.; Meshishnek, M.J.; Ciofalo, M.R.; Chu, C.T.; Chaney, J.A.; Moision, R.M. On-

orbit degradation of silver mirrors exposed to ultraviolet radiation. Opt. InfoBase Conf. Pap. 2013, 2011–

2013. 

80.  
Hass, G.; Hunter, W.R. Laboratory Experiments to Study Surface Contamination and Degradation of 

Optical Coatings and Materials in Simulated Space Environments. Appl. Opt. 1970, 9, 2101. 

81.  
Kerr, G.D.; Williams, M.W.; Birkhoff, R.D.; Painter, L.R. Optical Properties of Some Silicone Diffusion-

Pump Oils in the Vacuum Ultraviolet—Using an Open-Dish Technique. J. Appl. Phys. 1971, 42, 4258–

4261. 

82.  
Muscari, J.A. Absorption spectra of typical space materials in the Vacuum Ultraviolet. In Proceedings of 

the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Hunter, W.R., Ed.; 1981; pp. 195–200. 

83.  
Osantowski, J.F. Contamination sensitivity of typical mirror coatingsa parametric study. In 

Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Maag, C.R., Ed.; 1983; pp. 80–87. 

84.  
Welsh, B.Y.; Jelinsky, S. The effect of out-gassing from commonly used spacecraft/space instrument 

materials on the UV-visible-IR reflectivity of optical surfaces. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. 

Proceeding; Taylor, E.W., Ed.; 2005; p. 58970B. 

85.  
Meier, S.R.; Tveekrem, J.L.; Keski-Kuha, R.A.M. A far-ultraviolet contamination-irradiation facility for 

in situ reflectance measurements. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 1998, 69, 3642–3644. 

86.  
Canfield, L.R.; Hass, G.; Waylonis, J.E. Further Studies on MgF_2-Overcoated Aluminum Mirrors with 

Highest Reflectance in the Vacuum Ultraviolet. Appl. Opt. 1966, 5, 45. 

87.  
Tveekrem, J.L.; Leviton, D.B.; Fleetwood, C.M.; Feinberg, L.D. Contamination-induced degradation of 

optics exposed to the Hubble Space Telescope interior. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; 

Glassford, A.P.M., Breault, R.P., Pompea, S.M., Eds.; 1996; pp. 246–257. 

88.  
Heaney, J.B.; Herzig, H.; Osantowski, J.F. Auger spectroscopic examination of MgF_2-coated Al mirrors 

before and after uv irradiation. Appl. Opt. 1977, 16, 1886. 

89.  
Quijada, M.A.; Henry, R.M.; Madison, T.; Boucarut, R.; Hagopian, J.G. Post-flight reflectance of COSTAR 

and WF/PC 2 pickoff mirrors upon their return from space. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; 

2010; p. 77392J. 

90.  
Osantowski, J.F.; Fleetwood, C.F. Contamination Of Grazing Incidence EUV Mirrors-An Assessment. In 

Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Bowyer, C.S., Ed.; 1988; p. 306. 

91.  
Mrowka, S.; Jelinsky, S.; Jelinsky, P.; Malina, R.F. Contamination Control Approach For The Extreme 

Ultraviolet Explorer Satellite Instrumentation. In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Glassford, 

A.P.M., Ed.; 1987; p. 34. 

92.  
George, J.S.; Lave, K.A.; Wiedenbeck, M.E.; Binns, W.R.; Cummings, A.C.; Davis, A.J.; de Nolfo, G.A.; 

Hink, P.L.; Israel, M.H.; Leske, R.A.; et al. ELEMENTAL COMPOSITION AND ENERGY SPECTRA OF 

GALACTIC COSMIC RAYS DURING SOLAR CYCLE 23. Astrophys. J. 2009, 698, 1666–1681. 

93.  
McComas, D.J.; Bame, S.J.; Barraclough, B.L.; Feldman, W.C.; Funsten, H.O.; Gosling, J.T.; Riley, P.; 

Skoug, R.; Balogh, A.; Forsyth, R.; et al. Ulysses’ return to the slow solar wind. Geophys. Res. Lett. 1998, 

25, 1–4. 

94.  
Allen, C.S.; Giraudo, M.; Moratto, C.; Yamaguchi, N. Spaceflight environment. In Space Safety and Human 

Performance; Elsevier, 2018; pp. 87–138. 

95.  
Bourdarie, S.; Xapsos, M. The near-Earth space radiation environment. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 2008, 55, 

1810–1832. 


96.  
Heber, B.; Potgieter, M.S.; Ferreira, S.E.S.; Dalla, S.; Kunow, H.; Müller-Mellin, R.; Wibberenz, G.; Paizis, 

C.; Sarri, G.; Marsden, R.G.; et al. An overview of Jovian electrons during the distant Ulysses Jupiter 

flyby. Planet. Space Sci. 2007, 55, 1–11. 

97.  
Naletto, G.; Boscolo, A.; Wyss, J.; Quaranta, A. Effects of proton irradiation on glass filter substrates for 

the Rosetta mission. Appl. Opt. 2003, 42, 3970. 

98.  
Pelizzo, M.G.; Corso, A.J.; Tessarolo, E.; Zuppella, P.; Böttger, R.; Huebner, R.; Della Corte, V.; Palumbo, 

P.; Taglioni, G.; Preti, G.; et al. Optical components in harsh space environment. In Proceedings of the 

SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Hughes, G.B., Ed.; 2016; p. 99810G. 

99.  
Di Sarcina, I.; Grilli, M.L.; Menchini, F.; Piegari, A.; Scaglione, S.; Sytchkova, A.; Zola, D. Behavior of 

optical thin-film materials and coatings under proton and gamma irradiation. Appl. Opt. 2014, 53, A314. 

100.  
Rousseau, A.D.; Windt, D.L.; Winter, B.; Harra, L.; Lamoureux, H.; Eriksson, F. Stability of EUV 

multilayers to long-term heating, and to energetic protons and neutrons, for extreme solar missions. In 

Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Citterio, O., O’Dell, S.L., Eds.; 2005; p. 590004. 

101.  
Pelizzo, M.G.; Corso, A.J.; Tessarolo, E.; Böttger, R.; Hübner, R.; Napolitani, E.; Bazzan, M.; Rancan, M.; 

Armelao, L.; Jark, W.; et al. Morphological and Functional Modifications of Optical Thin Films for Space 

Applications Irradiated with Low-Energy Helium Ions. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 34781–34791. 

102.  
Pellicori, S.F.; Martinez, C.L.; Hausgen, P.; Wilt, D. Development and testing of coatings for orbital space 

radiation environments. Appl. Opt. 2014, 53, A339. 

103.  
Wei, Q.; Liu, H.; Wang, D.; Liu, S.-X. Degradation in optical reflectance of Al film mirror induced by 

proton irradiation. Thin Solid Films 2011, 519, 5046–5049. 

104.  
Hai, L.; Qiang, W.; Shi-Yu, H.; Dan, Z. Proton radiation effects on optical constants of Al film reflector. 

Chinese Phys. 2006, 15, 1086–1089. 

105.  
Qiang, W.; Hai, L.; Shi-Yu, H.; Zhen-duo, C.; Kleiman, J.I. Characterization of Surface Morphology 

Changes Induced by Proton Irradiation of an Aluminum Film Reflector. In Proceedings of the AIP 

Conference Proceedings; AIP, 2009; pp. 657–664. 

106.  
Qiang, W.; Dan, W.; Shengxian, L.; Hai, L. The effects of 60 keV proton irradiation on aluminum film 

reflector. Spacecr. Environm. Eng. 2010, 27, 434–436. 

107.  
Gillette, R.B.; Kenyon, B.A. Proton-Induced Contaminant Film Effects on Ultraviolet Reflecting Mirrors. 

Appl. Opt. 1971, 10, 545. 

108.  
Pelizzo, M.G.; Corso, A.J.; Zuppella, P.; Windt, D.L.; Mattei, G.; Nicolosi, P. Stability of extreme 

ultraviolet multilayer coatings to low energy proton bombardment. Opt. Express 2011, 19, 14838. 

109.  
Nardello, M.; Zuppella, P.; Polito, V.; Corso, A.J.; Zuccon, S.; Pelizzo, M.G. Stability of EUV multilayer 

coatings to low energy alpha particles bombardment. Opt. Express 2013, 21, 28334. 

110.  
Zuccon, S.; Napolitani, E.; Tessarolo, E.; Zuppella, P.; Corso, A.J.; Gerlin, F.; Nardello, M.; Pelizzo, M.G. 

Effects of helium ion bombardment on metallic gold and iridium thin films. Opt. Mater. Express 2015, 5, 

176. 

111.  
Wang, W.; Roth, J.; Lindig, S.; Wu, C.. Blister formation of tungsten due to ion bombardment. J. Nucl. 

Mater. 2001, 299, 124–131. 

112.  
Livengood, R.; Tan, S.; Greenzweig, Y.; Notte, J.; McVey, S. Subsurface damage from helium ions as a 

function of dose, beam energy, and dose rate. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B Microelectron. Nanom. Struct. 2009, 27, 

3244. 

113.  
Raineri, V.; Coffa, S.; Szilágyi, E.; Gyulai, J.; Rimini, E. He-vacancy interactions in Si and their influence 

on bubble formation and evolution. Phys. Rev. B 2000, 61, 937–945. 

114.  
Delmotte, F.; Meltchakov, E.; de Rossi, S.; Bridou, F.; Jérome, A.; Varnière, F.; Mercier, R.; Auchère, F.; 


Zhang, X.; Borgo, B.; et al. Development of multilayer coatings for solar orbiter EUV imaging telescopes. 

In Proceedings of the SPIE Conf. Proceeding; Fineschi, S., Fennelly, J., Eds.; 2013; p. 88620A. 

115.  
Kuznetsov, A.S.; Gleeson, M.A.; Bijkerk, F. Ion effects in hydrogen-induced blistering of Mo/Si 

multilayers. J. Appl. Phys. 2013, 114, 113507. 

116.  
Kuznetsov, A.S.; Gleeson, M.A.; Bijkerk, F. Hydrogen-induced blistering of Mo/Si multilayers: Uptake 

and distribution. Thin Solid Films 2013, 545, 571–579. 

117.  
van de Ven, T.H.M.; Reefman, P.; de Meijere, C.A.; van der Horst, R.M.; van Kampen, M.; Banine, V.Y.; 

Beckers, J. Ion energy distributions in highly transient EUV induced plasma in hydrogen. J. Appl. Phys. 

2018, 123, 063301. 

118.  
Douglas Caswell, R.; McBride, N.; Taylor, A. Olympus end of life anomaly — a perseid meteoroid impact 

event? Int. J. Impact Eng. 1995, 17, 139–150. 

119.  
Limiting Future Collision Risk to Spacecraft; Programs, N.R.C.D. on E. and P.S.A. and S.E.B.C. for the A. of 

N.O.D., Ed.; National Academies Press: Washington, D.C., 2011; ISBN 978-0-309-21974-7. 

120.  
Jones, J. Meteoroid Engineering Model – Final Report; 2004; 

121.  
Drolshagen, G.; Carey, W..; McDonnell, J.A..; Stevenson, T..; Mandeville, J..; Berthoud, L. HST solar array 

impact survey: Revised damage laws and residue analysis. Adv. Sp. Res. 1997, 19, 239–251. 

122.  
Young, R.P. Low-Scatter Mirror Degradation by Particle Contamination. Opt. Eng. 1976, 15. 

123.  
Stübig, M.; Schäfer, G.; Ho, T.-M.; Srama, R.; GrunGrün, E. Laboratory simulation improvements for 

hypervelocity micrometeorite impacts with a new dust particle source. Planet. Space Sci. 2001, 49, 853–

858. 

124.  
Heaney, J.B.; Pearl, J.C.; Stuebig, M.A.; Wang, L.L.; He, C.C. Hypervelocity particle impact studies 

performed on a gold-coated beryllium substrate mirror. Opt. Infrared, Millim. Sp. Telesc. 2004, 5487, 1100. 

125.  
Graham, G.A.; Kearsley, A.T.; Drolshagen, G.; McBride, N.; Green, S.F.; Wright, I.P. Microparticle 

impacts upon HST solar cells. Adv. Sp. Res. 2001, 28, 1341–1346. 

126.  
See, T.; Allbrooks, M.; Atkinson, D.; Simon, C.. Z.M. Meteoroid And Debris Impact Features Documented On 

The Long Duration Exposure Facility: A Preliminary Report; 1990; 

127.  
Hawkins, G. J.; Hunneman, R.; Seeley, J.S. Space exposure of infrared filters and materials on the NASA Long 

Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF).; Reading, U. of, Ed.; Space Expo.; 1991; 

128.  
Whipple, F.L. Meteorites and space travel. Astron. J. 1947, 52, 131. 

 

 


