Multigaps superconductivity at unconventional Lifshitz transition in a 3D Rashba
heterostructure at atomic limit

Maria Vittoria Mazziotti and Roberto Raimondi
Dipartimento di Matematica e Fisica, Universit√Ý Roma Tre, via della Vasca Navale 84 00146 Roma, Italy

Antonio Valletta
Italian National Research Council CNR, Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems IMM,
via del Fosso del Cavaliere, 100, 00133 Roma, Italy

Antonio Bianconi
RICMASS Rome International Center for Materials Science,
Superstripes Via dei Sabelli 119A, 00185 Roma, Italy
Institute of Crystallography, CNR, via Salaria Km 29. 300, Roma I-00016, Italy and
National Research Nuclear University MEPhI (Moscow Engineering Physics Institute), 115409 Moscow, Russia
(Dated: February 3, 2021)

It is well known that the critical temperature of multi-gap superconducting 3D heterostructures
at atomic limit (HAL) made of a superlattice of atomic layers with an electron spectrum made of
several quantum subbands can be amplified by a shape resonance driven by the contact exchange
interaction between different gaps. The TC amplification is achieved tuning the Fermi level near
the singular nodal point at a Lifshitz transition for opening a neck. Recently high interest has been
addressed to the breaking of inversion symmetry which leads to a linear-in-momentum spin-orbit
induced spin splitting, universally referred to as Rashba spin-orbit coupling (RSOC) also in 3D
layered metals. However the physics of multi-gap superconductivity near unconventional Lifshitz
transitions in 3D HAL with RSOC, being in a non-BCS regime, is not known. The key result of this
work getting the superconducting gaps by Bogoliubov theory and the 3D electron wave functions
by solution of the Dirac equation is the feasibility of tuning multi-gap superconductivity by suitably
matching the spin-orbit length with the 3D superlattice period. It is found that the presence of
the RSOC amplifies both the k dependent anisotropic gap function and the critical temperature
when the Fermi energy is tuned near the circular nodal line.
Our results suggest a method to
effectively vary the effect of RSOC on macroscopic superconductor condensates via the tuning of
the superlattice modulation parameter in a way potentially relevant for spintronics functionalities
in several existing experimental platforms and tunable materials needed for quantum devices for
quantum computing.

I.
INTRODUCTION

It is known that the structure inversion asymmetry
(SIA) which stems from the inversion asymmetry of the
confining potential in a 2D electron gas induces a spin-
orbit band splitting with states of different helicity [1‚Äì
9]. Giant spin-orbit induced spin splitting in the range
150‚Äì450 meV has been found in metal alloys [10] and
transition-metal dichalcogenides [11].
A three dimen-
sional Rashba spin splitting has been observed in PtBi2,
BiTeX (X = Br, Cl, or I ) and GeTe which show disper-
sion along the out-of-plane direction (kz) [12‚Äì14]. The re-
alization of the three-dimensional Rashba-like spin split-
ting [15] in quantum materials and heterostructures po-
tentially unfolds numerous promising applications. Fol-
lowing the first theoretical study of superconductivity
[16] with spin-orbit band splitting in a 2D metallic layer
or at the surface of doped WOx oxides, several theoretical
works have studied the emergence of superconductivity
in the presence of spin-orbit coupling in a 2D metallic
layer [17‚Äì23].

Recently, experimental evidence that the strength of
spin-orbit interaction is correlated with quasi 2D super-

conductivity in the (111) LaAlO3/ SrTiO3 interface has
been reported [24] and confirmed in several systems [25‚Äì
28]. The spin polarized energy bands near a topologi-
cal Lifshitz transition can be detected experimentally by
ARPES spectroscopy as it has been observed in com-
plex oxide heterostructure interface [29] and in layered
cuprate perovskite superconductors [30]. Today there is
a high interest in the physics of quantum complex mate-
rials aimed at the realization of mesoscopic quantum het-
erostructures for novel superconducting Josephson junc-
tions [31-32].
The theoretical studies of superconductivity coexisting
with spin-orbit coupling have been limited to a 2D super-
conducting layer and to a single band metal [16‚Äì23], while
it is not known how superconductivity will arise in a 3D
Rashba system. Moreover, previous theoretical investiga-
tions have considered single-gap superconductors while,
in multi-band 3D superconductors, multiple-gap super-
conductivity, in the clean limit, need to be considered
in the presence of band spin splitting due to spin-orbit
coupling.
In fact, in multi-gap superconductivity, it is no longer
possible to neglect the key role of quantum configuration
interaction between superconducting gaps as, for exam-

arXiv:2011.02311v2  [cond-mat.supr-con]  2 Feb 2021


2

ple, the BEC-BCS crossover gap at Lifshitz transitions
near a band edge and other gaps in the BCS limit far from
band edges [33‚Äì41]. Finally, all theoretical approaches
have been developed in the BCS regime where the Fermi
energy is much higher of both the spin-orbit energy band
splitting and the energy gap, while the most interesting
physics occurs in the regime where the Fermi energy is
in the same energy range as the superconducting energy
gaps and the spin-orbit-splitting.
The main results of this work is the theoretical descrip-
tion of multi-gap superconductivity [33‚Äì42] at the uncon-
ventional Lifshitz transition [43] in a 3D heterostructure
at the atomic limit with a periodicity of few nanometers
with tunable spin-orbit strength.
We consider a 3D superlattice of metallic layers of
thickness L separated by spacers of thickness W and over-
all periodicity d. Our aim is to show that the interplay
between the Rashba spin-orbit coupling (RSOC) and su-
perlattice structure allows for a fine tuning of the critical
temperature. To appreciate this point, consider the en-
ergy splitting due to the RSOC and the corresponding
difference of the Fermi momenta of the two spin eigen-
states. This difference introduces a typical SOC length
scale lSOC, which may be compared with the modulation
of the superlattice d. In a bulk system lSOC can be com-
pared only with the Fermi wavelength, which is typically
of the order of 0.1 nm. In contrast in a superlattice, the
modulation is of the order of tens of nm, which matches
the order of magnitude of the RSOC. The RSOC energy
is linear in the wave vector œµ ‚àº Œ±k, with the constant
Œ± ‚àº 0.01 eV nm. By defining lSOC = 2œÄ‚Ñè2/ (Œ±m), m be-
ing the electron mass, one estimates lSOC ‚àº 10 nm. As
a result the tuning of the RSOC may be achieved via the
variation of the modulation of the superlattice structure.
The layout of the paper is the following. In the next
section, we introduce the model Hamiltonian of a 3D lay-
ered superconductor in the presence of RSOC. In section
III we study the normal phase paying special attention to
the topology of the Fermi surface and to the associated
features in the single-particle density of states (DOS). In
section IV we turn our attention to the superconducting
phase where we derive the superconducting gap equation
and discuss its numerical solution in the multi-band case.
Finally, in section V we state our conclusions.

II.
THE MODEL

The Hamiltonian of the system under study reads

H = H0 + HI,
(1)

where H0 is the single-particle contribution, which in-
cludes the RSOC

H0 = p‚à•2

2m + p2
z

2mz
+ V (z) ‚àí iŒ± (œÉx‚Ñè‚àÇy ‚àí œÉy‚Ñè‚àÇx) .
(2)

In the above equation, p = ‚àíi‚Ñè‚àá is the usual mo-
mentum operator and p‚à• its projection in the xy plane.
V (z) = V (z + d) is the periodic potential modeling the
superlattice structure V (z) = ‚àíV [Œ∏ (z ‚àí d) ‚àí Œ∏ (z ‚àí L)],
where d = L + W and V is a positive constant.
The
single-particle Hamiltonian H0 has solutions of the form

œànkŒª (r) = œïnkz (z) eik‚à•¬∑r‚à•

‚àö

A
Œ∑Œª (Œ∏) ,
(3)

where the wave vector components k = (kx, ky, kz) ‚â°
ÔøΩ
k‚à•, kz
ÔøΩ
label plane waves in the xy plane of area A and
the Bloch functions œïnkz (z) along the z axis, n being
a subband index. The functions œïnkz (z) and the corre-
sponding eigenvalues are obtained by imposing the con-
tinuity of the wave function and its first derivative at the
discontinuity points of the potential

œï (z + d) = eikzdœï (z) , œï‚Ä≤ (z + d) = eikzdœï‚Ä≤ (z) ,
(4)

where the phase factor is required by Bloch‚Äôs theorem.
Finally the effect of the RSOC is encoded in the spinors

Œ∑Œª (Œ∏) =
1
‚àö

2

ÔøΩ
1
iŒªeiŒ∏

ÔøΩ
,
Œª = ¬±1,
(5)

where Œ∏ is the angle which defines the direction of the
wave vector in the plane kx = k‚à• cos (Œ∏), ky = k‚à• sin (Œ∏).
As a result the single-particle energies read

œµnkŒª = Œµnkz +
‚Ñè2k2
‚à•

2m + ŒªŒ±k‚à• ‚â° Œµnkz + ŒµŒªk‚à•.
(6)

As for the second contribution to the Hamiltonian in
Eq.(1), we adopt the standard contact interaction with a
cut-off energy ‚Ñèœâ0

HI = U0

2

ÔøΩ
drŒ® ‚ÄÝ
Œ± (r) Œ® ‚ÄÝ
Œ≤ (r) Œ®Œ≤ (r) Œ®Œ± (r) ,
(7)

where Œ®Œ± (r) is the annihilation fermion field operator
and summation over the repeated spin indices (Œ±, Œ≤) is
understood.
Before considering the superconducting phase in sec-
tion IV, it is useful to analyze first in the next section the
effects of the RSOC in the normal phase and in particu-
lar on the density of states. To this end, we first consider
a simplified tight-binding model and then we turn our
attention to the model defined in Eq.(2), by confining to
the two lowest subbands for numerical reasons.
For the following discussion it is useful to introduce two
dimensionless parameters: the Lifshitz parameter defined
as

Œ∑ = ¬µ ‚àí E2

‚Ñèœâ0
(8)

and the rescaled Lifshitz parameter


3

Œ∑R = ¬µ ‚àí ER

‚Ñèœâ0
,
with
ER = E2 ‚àí ‚àÜERSOC
(9)

where ¬µ is the chemical potential which at zero tem-
perature coincides with the Fermi energy, E2 is the band
edge energy of the second subband in the absence of
RSOC, œâ0 is the cut- off and ‚àÜERSOC is the energy shift
due to the RSOC.

III.
THE NORMAL PHASE

In the presence of a RSOC, the trend of the DOS can
be understood by considering the evolution of the Fermi
surface. In this context we will limit our analysis to a two-
band system obtained by taking the two lowest subbands.
The starting point is the single-particle energy disper-
sion (6), which we report here for the sake of clarity:

ŒµnkŒª =
k2
‚à•

2m + ŒªŒ±k‚à• + Œµnkz,
(10)

where for simplicity we adopt units such that ‚Ñè = 1.
For both the first and second subband, the energy dis-
persion along the z axis, which is numerically solved as
shown below, can be fitted in terms of a tight-binding
model.
In particular, for odd n the agreement is ob-
tained with a two-harmonic expansion, while for n even
the agreement is obtained with a three-harmonic expan-
sion. All this can be combined with the observation that,
for the purpose of the subsequent discussion, we do not
need to specify the precise form of the dispersion along
the z-axis, but for the fact the Œµnkz increases (for n odd)
or decreases (for n even) monotonically between kz = 0
and kz = œÄ/d and, furthermore, is an even function with
respect to kz ‚àí‚Üí ‚àíkz, for both even and odd n.
Hence, in order to illustrate the key features of the
DOS, we start our analysis with a simplified expression
of Œµnkz, namely:

Œµ1kz = t(1‚àícos(d¬∑kz)),
t = 1 and 0 < kz < œÄ/d (11)

for the first subband and

Œµ2kz = t(1+cos(d¬∑kz)),
t = 1 and 0 < kz < œÄ/d (12)

for the second subband.
To simplify the notation in the following discussion,
the parameters of the in-plane dispersion in Eq.(10) are
expressed in units such that 2m = 1 and we define the
spin-orbit typical momentum k0 = mŒ±.
For the sake of definiteness we assume that the mini-
mum energy for the z axis is zero and the maximum is Œµz,
i.e., Œµ2n+1,0 = 0 and Œµ2n+1,œÄ/d = Œµz for the odd subbands,
while we have Œµ2n,0 = Œµz and Œµ2n,œÄ/d = 0 for the even sub-
bands. Hence from (10) we take the zero of the energy
at the origin in the in-plane momentum space. Thus the

kz
kx
G
Z

ez

DEz1

DERSOC

kx

Energy

DEz2=w0

DERSOC

1st band

2nd band ez

Figure 1.
The dispersion along kx is shown together with
the dispersion along kz, in arbitrary units, both for n odd
(bottom panel) and for n even (top panel).
In this figure
‚àÜEzn is the dispersion in the z direction equal to Œµz for both
n even and odd (in the numerical model we will assume that
‚àÜEz2 is equal to the cut-off energy œâ0). ‚àÜERSOC = ‚àík2
0 is,
instead, the shift of the Dirac point (defined as the point at
which the in-plane dispersions with opposite helicity meet)
as a consequence of the dispersion along kz. The Œì and Z
points are the center and the edge of the first Brillouin zone
(IBZ). We then indicate the three different regimes in which to
study the system: I) Œµz < ¬µ (light-yellow box); II) 0 < ¬µ < Œµz
(light-green box); III) ‚àík2
0 < ¬µ < 0 (light-blue box).

dispersion along z for the first and second subband will
be equal to ‚àÜEzn = Œµz.
The quasi particle energy (10) has axial symmetry so
that we may first study it in the (k‚à•, kz)-plane. From the
isoenergetic curves in this plane one can obtain the isoen-
ergetic surfaces by performing a rotation around the kz
axis. At a given chemical potential ¬µ, from the expres-
sion of the quasiparticle energy we derive the values of
k‚à• at fixed kz and helicity Œª

k‚à•(kz, Œª) = ‚àíŒªk0 ¬±
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµn,kz),
(13)

from which we start our discussion.
It is useful to
distinguish three separate regimes for the Fermi energy:
I) Œµz < ¬µ; II) 0 < ¬µ < Œµz; III) ‚àík2
0 < ¬µ < 0, where, in
this simplified model, ‚àÜERSOC = ‚àík2
0 is the energy shift
due to RSOC coupling (see the Fig.(1)).
Let us examine them in detail.

A.
Regime I

When selecting the sign in Eq.(13) we must keep in
mind that k‚à• ‚â• 0. Let us start with the helicity Œª = 1.
In this case for both even and odd n the only allowed
sign is the positive one:

k‚à•(kz, 1) = ‚àík0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµn,kz).
(14)


4

1st
(l = -1)

1
1

A)

kx

kz

-p/d

0

p/d

0
2
4

Regime I

Regime IIIb

-0.5

-1

-0.125

1st
(l = 1)

1
2
3

Regime I

4
5

Regime II

B)

kx

kz

-p/d

0

p/d

0
1
2

2nd
(l = -1)

1

Regime II

1

Regime IIIa

C)

kx

kz

-p/d

0

p/d

0
2
4

Regime I

Regime IIIb

-0.5

-1

-0.125

2nd
(l = 1)

1

Regime I

2

D)

kx

kz

-p/d

0

p/d

0
1
2

Regime II

0.5
2.5

Figure 2. Top panel: contour plots in the (k‚à•, kz) plane for Œª = ‚àí1 (left) and Œª = +1 (right) for a single-harmonic tight-binding
model for the first subband of Eq.(11). Parameters are d = 1, t = 1 so that Œµz = 2. The RSOC momentum k0 = 1.5. On top
of some of the isoenergetic curves are shown the corresponding Fermi surfaces. Bottom panel: contour plots as above for the
second subband of Eq.(12). The orange numbers are the values of the Lifshitz parameter, defined in the Eq.(8) of the different
level curves, for the choice of the parameters made in this simplified model, while the dashed green curves on the 3D Fermi
surfaces of panels A and C are represents the nodal line of singular points at an unusual van Hove singularity.

For n odd at kz = 0 one has k‚à•(0, 1) = ‚àík0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + ¬µ,
whereas at kz
= œÄ/d one has k‚à•(œÄ/d, 1) = ‚àík0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµz), so that k‚à•(œÄ/d, 1) < k‚à•(0, 1).
Hence
the isoenergetic curve, when rotated around the kz axis

generates a corrugated cylinder wider in kz = 0 and nar-
rower in kz = ¬±œÄ/d. For n even we have a diametrically
opposite situation, i.e., we still have a corrugated cylin-
der which, however, is narrower in kz = 0 and wider in
kz = ¬±œÄ/d (Fig.(2)).

Let us consider next the case Œª = ‚àí1. Since ¬µ > Œµnkz,
the radicand is always greater than k0, and, therefore,
the only allowed sign is the positive one:

k‚à•(kz, ‚àí1) = k0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµn,kz).
(15)

For n odd at kz = 0, one has k‚à•(0, ‚àí1) = k0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + ¬µ,
whereas at kz
= œÄ/d one has k‚à•(œÄ/d, ‚àí1) = k0 +

ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµz).
Hence, also in this case, the isoener-
getic curve, when rotated around the kz axis generates
a corrugated cylinder, which is bigger than the previous
one.
For n even at kz
=
0 one has k‚à•(0, ‚àí1)
=
k0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµz), whereas at kz = œÄ/d one has
k‚à•(œÄ/d, ‚àí1) = k0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + ¬µ. Hence, also in this case,
the isoenergetic curve, when rotated around the kz axis


5

generates a corrugated cylinder, with opposite curvature
compared to the case of odd n (Fig.(2)).

B.
Regime II

Let us begin again by considering first the helicity
Œª = 1.
Clearly the only sign allowed is the posi-
tive one. One notices that exactly at ¬µ = Œµz one has
k‚à•(œÄ/d, 1) = 0, which implies a Lifshitz transition for
the Fermi surface. For the energies in this regime we see
that not all the values of kz are allowed. The maximum
kz = k‚àó
z is determined by the condition k‚à•(k‚àó
z, 1) = 0

i.e. k0 =
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµnk‚àóz). For odd n, the isoenergetic
curve starts at a point (0, k‚àó
z) on the kz axis and ends at
a point k‚à•(0, 1), 0 in the k‚à• axis. The Fermi surface has
a fuse-like shape (Fig.(2)).
For even n, the isoenergetic curve starts at a point
(0, k‚àó
z) on the kz axis and ends at a point k‚à•(œÄ/d, 1), œÄ/d
on the k‚à• axis. In this case, for Fermi surfaces, we obtain
half of a spindle that has the tip in (0, 0) and reaches the
maximum diameter in kz = œÄ/d (Fig.(2)).
In this regime the case for helicity Œª
=
‚àí1 is
more complex.
The positive sign is of course al-
lowed.
The branch with the positive sign starts at
the point (k‚à•(œÄ/d, ‚àí1), œÄ/d) and ends at the point
(k‚à•(0, ‚àí1), 0) for odd n, while per even n the positive sign
starts at the point (k‚à•(0, ‚àí1), 0) and ends at the point
(k‚à•(œÄ/d, ‚àí1), œÄ/d). In both cases these curves generate
corrugated cylinders by rotation around kz (Fig.(2)). For
this helicity there is also a possibility of the other branch
with the negative sign:

k‚à•(kz, Œª) = k0 ‚àí
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµn,kz).
(16)

However this branch is only allowed for a restricted range
of kz values, i.e. (k‚àó
z, œÄ/d) which is the complementary
range with respect to that allowed for the other helicity.
Hence in this regime of energies the helicity Œª = 1 does
not exist for the range (k‚àó
z, œÄ/d), when the helicityŒª = ‚àí1
develops another branch exactly in this range. As a result
the Fermi surface for the Œª = ‚àí1 gets a apple-like shape
with the poles pushed inwards. This is due to the fact
that the points where the phase velocity vanishes are no
longer isolated points, but due to the rotation around kz
they form circles with finite measure.

C.
Regime III

In this regime there is only the helicity Œª = ‚àí1, which
however has two branches:

k‚à•(kz, ‚àí1) = k0 ‚àí
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµn,kz),
(17)

k‚à•(kz, ‚àí1) = k0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + (¬µ ‚àí Œµn,kz).
(18)

If k2
0 + ¬µ ‚àí Œµz = 0 then both branches start at the same
point (k0, œÄ/d) for odd n ((k0, 0) for even n) and from
there depart ending at the points (k0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + ¬µ, 0) and
(k0 ‚àí
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + ¬µ, 0) for odd n ((k0 +
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + ¬µ, œÄ/d) and
(k0 ‚àí
ÔøΩ

k2
0 + ¬µ, œÄ/d) for even n) in the k‚à• axis, respec-
tively. This is the case when the singularity in the phase
velocity, which in the absence of RSOC is at the isolated
point (0, œÄ/d) for odd n or (œÄ/d, 0) for even n, becomes
a finite-measure manifold and develops a van Hove sin-
gularity in the DOS (Fig.(2)). Hence we may distinguish
two cases: IIIa) 0 < k2
0+¬µ < Œµz and IIIb) 0 < k2
0+¬µ > Œµz.
In the case IIIa) the argument of the square root is neg-
ative, hence the two branches start at a point (k0, k‚àó‚àó
z )
with k‚àó‚àó
z given by the condition k2
0 +¬µ = Œµnk‚àó‚àó
z . Then the
two branches end on the k‚à• axis. The Fermi surface gen-
erated by these curves has a torus-like shape. In regime
IIIb) instead, the two branches remain disconnected from
each other. The Fermi surface has an external and inter-
nal part and has a torus-like shape, with the toruses of
neighboring zones touching each other (Fig.(2)).
Our aim is to evaluate the density of states (DOS) in
order to compare it with the detailed calculations made
with the more realistic periodic potential model. There-
fore, we derive the analytical DOS expression for both
helicity values, Œª = ¬±1:

N‚àí(¬µ) =
1

2œÄ2

ÔøΩ ‚àû

‚àík0
dx(x + k0)

Œ∏(¬µ + k2
0 ‚àí x2)Œ∏(x2 + 2t ‚àí ¬µ ‚àí k2
0)
ÔøΩ

(¬µ + k2
0 ‚àí x2)(x2 + 2t ‚àí ¬µ ‚àí k2
0)

(19)

N+(¬µ) =
1

2œÄ2

ÔøΩ ‚àû

k0
dx(x ‚àí k0)

Œ∏(¬µ + k2
0 ‚àí x2)Œ∏(x2 + 2t ‚àí ¬µ ‚àí k2
0)
ÔøΩ

(¬µ + k2
0 ‚àí x2)(x2 + 2t ‚àí ¬µ ‚àí k2
0)

(20)

where x = k‚à•‚àìk0 for Œª = ‚àì1 and Œ∏(x) is the Heaviside
step function.
Let us analyze the integral defined in the Eq.(19)
and in the Eq.(20).
As a function of the variable x,
the integrand has singularities at x = ¬±
ÔøΩ

¬µ + k2
0 and
x = ¬±
ÔøΩ

¬µ + k2
0 ‚àí 2t. All singularities have index ‚àí1/2
and hence are integrable. When ¬µ + k2
0 = 2t, the denom-
inator acquires a zero at the origin. In the absence of
spin-orbit interaction, the 1/|x| behavior of the denomi-
nator is compensated by the numerator and the integral
is finite. However, in the presence of spin-orbit interac-
tion, there is a term proportional to k0 in the numerator
and a van Hove singularity develops. The singularity has
a logarithmic behavior.
The DOS expression can be computed with Math-
ematica by using the built-in Heaviside function and
numerical integration command.
In Fig.(3) are re-
ported the plots of N‚àí, N+ (partial DOS), and N‚àí +
N+ (total DOS), respectively for four values of k0 =


6

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
k0=0.00, l=¬±1
k0=0.20, l=¬±1
k0=0.30, l=¬±1
k0=0.41, l=¬±1
k0=0.50, l=¬±1
k0=0.60, l=¬±1

Partial DOS (arb. units)

k0=0.70, l=¬±1
k0=0.80, l=¬±1

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0
0.50
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5

hR= (m-ER)/DEz2

DOS (arb. units)

Figure 3. Total and partial DOS as a function of Œ∑R (Eq.(9)).
Top panel: the partial DOS N‚àí (Eq.(19)) and N+ (Eq.(20))
as function of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter Œ∑R. The black
curve is k0 = 0. The other curves have increasing values of
k0 = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.41, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8.
Here t = 1.
Bottom panel: the total DOS N‚àí + N+ given in Eqs.(19),
(20) as function of rescaled Lifshitz parameter Œ∑R. The black
curve is k0 = 0. The other curves have increasing values of
k0 = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.41, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8. Here t = 1.

0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.41, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8 and t = 1. The
partial and the total DOS are reported as a function
of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter defined in the Eq.(9)
where, in this case, E2 = 0, ‚àÜERSOC = ‚àík2
0 and
œâ0 = ‚àÜEz2 = Œµz = 2t.
The black curve corresponds to the case when there is
no spin-orbit present. Clearly, the value Œ∑R = 1 (in units
of t) marks the point of the band edge for the dispersion
along the z axis. The spin-orbit interaction develops a
van Hove singularity exactly at this point. This behavior,
as we will see below, appears in agreement with the more
realistic model. This point, Œ∑R = 2t/‚àÜEz2, corresponds
to the singularity in the two-dimensional Rashba model
at the bottom of the lower band with helicity Œª = ‚àí1.
In the 3D case the singularity appears at the edge of the
band due to the motion along z.
Fig.(3), also, shows that as k0 increases, N‚àí increases
while N+ decreases, in the sum this involves a change
only in the proximity of the van Hove singularity. More
precisely, while at the Lifshitz transition the partial den-
sities combine to yield a strong change in the DOS, at

high energies they compensate, so that the total DOS
coincides with the total DOS in the absence of RSOC.
This means that in the high-energy limit the parameters
of the normal phase and, as we will see below, of the su-
perconducting phase do not depend on k0, in accordance
with the work of Gorkov and Rashba [16].

D.
Numerical results for the full model

After the analysis of the simplified tight-binding
model, we study the properties of the normal phase start-
ing from the solution of the model of Eq.(2) obtained
numerically.
For the numerical solution of the normal phase the cho-
sen parameters are: the barrier V = 0.5 eV, the thick-
nesses of the metallic and insulating layers L = 23 √Ö,
W = 7 √Ö, respectively, with total periodicity d = 30 √Ö,
the effective masses m = mz = me , the cut-off energy
‚Ñèœâ0 = 30 meV and the coupling constant g = 0.4.
According to the works [3, 6], we express the Rashba
coupling constant in the following form:

Œ± = 2 ‚Ñè2

2m
2œÄ
d Œ±SO,
(21)

where Œ±SO is a dimensionless parameter which describes
the strenght of the Rashba momentum in units of the
inverse lattice spacing along the z direction.
Similarly to what has been done for the tight-binding
model, we carry out the analysis of the evolution of Fermi
surfaces for Œµ2kz obtained numerically by distinguishing
for each of the listed regimes three distinct cases: ‚àÜEz2 ‚™å
‚àÜERSOC, where ‚àÜEz2 = Œµ2kz,max ‚àíŒµ2kz,min is the band-
width of the dispersion along the axis of confinement z
in the presence of a potential of the form Kronig-Penney,
while in this case ‚àÜERSOC = E0 = ‚àí(mŒ±2)/(2‚Ñè2) is the
energy shift due to the RSOC. The model parameters are
chosen so that ‚àÜEz2 is of the same order of magnitude
as the cut-off energy.
This study concerns a two-band system, where the first
subband has a s-symmetry, while the second one has p-
symmetry. The results are shown in the Fig.(4): in the
panels A, B, C and D we plot the isoenergetic curves
in the (kx, kz)-plane for Œª = ¬±1 and for the first and
the second subbands versus the Lifshitz parameter, Œ∑,
Eq.(8) where E2 = 163.64 meV is the band edge of the
second subband in the absence of RSOC and œâ0 is the
cut-off energy for ‚Ñè = 1. In this figure we also report
the evolution of Fermi surfaces for three distinct values
of the parameter Œ∑. The analysis is made for Œ±SO = 0.41
value for which the condition ‚àÜERSOC = ‚àÜEz2 = œâ0 is
verified. In the case of the second subband for an energy
value close to the van Hove singularity (Œ∑L) we take into
account that in the presence of RSOC the spinor (Eq.(5)),
and the gap (Eq.(39)), depend on a phase factor eiœë and
the removal of the spin degeneration splits the dispersion
in two bands with opposite helicity.
To take this into
account we plot the FS at the Lifshitz transition with a


7

1st

aSO=0.41
l=-1

kx

kz

ha<hL

hL
hb>hL
A)

1st

aSO=0.41
l=1

kx

kz

ha<hL

hL
hb>hL
B)

2nd

aSO=0.41
l=-1

kx

kz

ha<hL

hL
hb>hL

C)

2nd

aSO=0.41
l=1

kx

kz

ha<hL

hL

hb>hL

D)

Figure 4. Isoenergetic curves, Fermi surfaces for the first and second subbands at three different values of Lifshitz parameter.
The top panels show the case of Œª = 1 (left) and Œª = ‚àí1 (right) for the first subband and for ‚àÜERSOC = ‚àÜE2z (Œ±SO = 0.41).
The bottom panels show the same analysis carried out for the second subband. The DOS maximum is observed at Œ∑L where
the system develops a van Hove singularity. In this case the Fermi surface develops a nodal line highlighted in panels A and C
with a dashed green line. For Œª = 1, both for the first and for the second subband, Œ∑L is independently of the value of Œ±SO
and it‚Äôs equal to ‚àí3.9 meV and 0.92 meV , respectively. While for Œª = ‚àí1, Œ∑L changes with Œ±SO (as underlined in Fig.(5)), for
the first subband Œ∑L = ‚àí4.6 meV , for the second Œ∑L = ‚àí0.11 meV . In the panel C) and D), for Œ∑ = Œ∑L we highlight the phase
factor with the colors of the rainbow and the nodal line (white dashed curve) of the singular points.

color that varies with œë in panels (c) and (d) of Fig. 4.
In particular, for Œª = 1 it varies from red to purple, while
for Œª = ‚àí1 it varies from purple to red.

We highlight the three regimes analyzed previously and
a change in symmetry in passing from the first to the
second subband. Such a change, for the first subband,
occurs at the point Œì, origin of the first Brillouin zone
(IBZ), while, in the second subband, it occurs at the point
Z, edge of the IBZ in the z direction. As the Rashba cou-
pling changes (‚àÜEz ‚™å ‚àÜERSOC), only a flattening of the
contour lines and Fermi surfaces is observed to the left
and a shift to the right of the singular points. The lat-

ter are the points where the phase velocity vanishes and
which generate, for rotation around the kz axis, circles
whose radius increases with Œ±SO. The energy in which
this van Hove unusual singularity occurs is indicated in
the figure with Œ∑L and in the literature it is called neck
opening energy.
We can note that for the bands with
positive helicity Œ∑L is independent of the value of Œ±SO,
while for the bands with negative helicity it varies as the
RSOC varies.


8

hL=-5.2

hL=-4.6

hL=-4.0

hL=-0.37

hL=0.11

hL=0.78

SF aSO=0.41 

kx

ky

2nd

aSO=0.20, l=¬±1
aSO=0.41, l=¬±1
aSO=0.50, l=¬±1
aSO=0.20, l=¬±1
aSO=0.41, l=¬±1
aSO=0.50, l=¬±1

1st

Figure 5. Partial density of the states vs Œ∑ and projection of the FS in the plane (kx, ky) at kz = Z. In the left panel the
continuous curves represent the partial DOS for Œª = ‚àí1, the dots those for Œª = 1, the shades of blue refer to the first subband
for three different values of Œ±SO = 0.20, 0.41, 0.50, while the shades of red to the second subband. The figure shows that the
value of Œ∑L, for which the FS have a nodal line (Fig.(4)), decreases as Œ±SO increases by an amount equal to E0/œâ0, while the
peak of the partial DOS Œª = +1 increases. In the right panel the light blue curve represents the projection of the FS relative
to Œª = ‚àí1 in the plane for the first subband, the light blue dashed curve is relative to Œª = 1. Similarly, the orange curves refer
to the second subband. This panel is built for Œ±SO = 0.41 and Œ∑ = 3.

This behavior is confirmed by Fig.(5) where we plot the
partial DOS for Œ±SO = 0.20 (‚àÜERSOC > ‚àÜEz2), Œ±SO =
0.41 (‚àÜERSOC > ‚àÜEz2) and Œ±SO = 0.50 (‚àÜERSOC >
‚àÜEz2).
In this figure Œ∑L coincides with the value for
which the partial DOS relative to Œª = ‚àí1 for the first
and second subband has a maximum. As you can see,
as Œ±SO increases, the Œ∑L parameter decreases while the
value of the partial DOS peak Œª = ‚àí1 increases.
In
particular, in the case of the first subband for Œª = ‚àí1

Œ∑L = ‚àí5.2 for Œ±SO = 0.50, Œ∑L = ‚àí4.6 for Œ±SO = 0.41
and Œ∑L = ‚àí4.0 for Œ±SO = 0.20. Indeed, in the case of the
second subband for Œª = ‚àí1 Œ∑L = ‚àí0.37 for Œ±SO = 0.50,
Œ∑L = 0.11 for Œ±SO = 0.41 and Œ∑L = 0.78 for Œ±SO = 0.20.
In the right panel of Fig.(5) we report the projection of
the Fermi surfaces in the plane (kx, ky) at the point Z
of the IBZ for Œ∑ = 3, where we have highlighted the two
possible values of helicity with different colors (light blue
for Œª = ‚àí1 and orange for Œª = 1).

What can be seen from the graphs in the Fig.(5) is a
peak in the partial DOS, and then in the total DOS,
corresponding to an energy value equal to E0/œâ0 =
‚àí(mŒ±2)/(2œâ0) which, as the coupling constant Rashba
increases, it increases and shifts to gradually smaller Lif-
shitz parameter values, and the shift involves only the
negative helicity bands. This is underlined in the Fig.(6),
in which we have reported the normalized band-edge en-
ergy, ER in the Eq.(9), for the first and the second sub-
band for the two distinct helicity values as a function of
the RSOC constant.
Finally, note that, for the values of the normalized
band-edge energy, from this point on, we report the re-
sults in terms of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter (Eq.(9)).
In the normal phase for a two-band system we plot the
total density of the states (DOS) and the partial DOS
as the Rashba coupling changes (‚àÜEz ‚™å ‚àÜERSOC) and

compare it with the case without RSOC (Fig.(7)).
In
Fig.(7) the DOS is plotted versus the rescaled Lifshitz
parameter, Œ∑R (Eq.(9)) for different values of Œ±SO.
In the case of positive helicity the DOS trend is that of
a sloped step, very similar to the trend observed in the
absence of RSOC, while in the case of negative helicity
we can observe a peak in the density of the states and
a shift of the latter towards the left as the parameter
Œ±SO increases. This confirms what has been commented
for the figures (2, 3, 4, 5), or that the effects of a Rashba
spin-orbit coupling become more marked for the negative
helicity subband.
In a generic 3D system with free-electron like disper-
sion relation, the DOS behaves as the square root of
energy, whereas in a quantum layer (2D) the DOS is
constant and so that it jumps sharply every time a new
quantum number from a new layer takes over. In present


9

Figure 6. Normalized band-edge energy as a function of the
RSOC constant. The orange empty circles represent the band
edge energy vs Œ±SO for the second subband and Œª = 1, while
the blue empty squares are relative to the first subband at
the same helicity value.
The red dots, on the other hand,
represent the band edge energy for the second subband at
Œª = ‚àí1, the light blue dots refer to the first subband for the
same helicity value. As noted earlier, a Rashba shift can only
be observed for negative helicity bands.

case, the DOS shows almost a 2D ‚àílike behavior for the
first subband. In fact, this is nearly pure 2D subbands
with a negligible transversal hopping between the layers.
Instead, at the bottom of the second subband appears
a sharp step due to contribution of the partial density
of states of the second subband to the total density of
states. The total energy dispersion of the second sub-
band, ‚àÜEz2 determines the energy separation between
the top and the band edge energy for the second sub-
band.
In the energy range Œ∑2edge < Œ∑ < Œ∑2top (where
Œ∑2edge and Œ∑2top are, respectively, the Lifshitz parameter
at the edge and at the top of the second subband), the
electronic structure is like that of an anisotropic 3D elec-
tron gas, while the 2D character appears at higher energy
Œ∑ > Œ∑2top.
The observed Rashba shift can be understood by con-
sidering the simplified model previously introduced. In
the absence of RSOC the vanishing of the energy gradi-
ent occurs in an isolated point and, therefore, there are
no singularities in the DOS. In contrast in the presence
of RSOC, the energy gradient vanishes at finite values of
the absolute values in-plane momentum, k‚à•, therefore we
have singular points distributed on circumferences that
generate van Hove peaks in the DOS. As the RSOC in-
creases, the energy at which van Hove peaks occur moves
to the left, but, as underlined in the discussion of the
tight-binding model, the difference in energy between the
band edge and the maximum DOS value remains con-
stant and equal to the dispersion along z.
The shape of the Fermi surface is crucial for under-
standing the electronic properties of metals.
As first
noticed by Lifshitz [44], changes in the Fermi surface
topology cause anomalous behavior of thermodynamic,
transport and elastic properties of materials. Intuitively,

Figure 7. The DOS for the first and the second subband as
the Œ±SO changes.
In particular, we have chosen values for
this parameter between 0.2 and 0.8 in order to reproduce the
three cases previously discussed ‚àÜEz ‚ãõ ‚àÜERSOC and com-
pare them with the case of no RSOC, Œ±SO = 0.
What is
observed is that as the RSOC increases, the DOS peak be-
comes more pronounced and shifts to gradually smaller ener-
gies, since the peak occurs at E0/œâ0.

the simplest way to observe such an electronic topolog-
ical transition, also known as Lifshitz transition, is by
tuning the Fermi level to the singular point in the band
structure where the change of topology takes place. This
requires considerable variations of the electron density.
A quantum critical point appears in the proximity of a
Lifshitz transition with typical quantum criticalities and
possible quantum tricritical behavior in itinerant electron
systems.
There are two types of Lifschitz transition: type I, the
appearing of a new detached Fermi surface region or ap-
pearing or disappearing of a new Fermi surface (FS) spot,
and type II, the disrupting or the neck-collapsing-type of
Lifschitz transition with a change of dimensionality that
can be induced by orbital symmetry breaking in lightly


10

hole doped bands. In the Fig.(4) we show that a new
3D FS opens when the chemical potential crosses the
band edge energy, and the electron gas in the metal-
lic phase undergoes an electronic topological transition
(ETT). When the chemical potential is beyond the band
edge in an anisotropic system at a higher energy thresh-
old, the electronic structure undergoes a second ETT, the
3D-2D ETT, where the FS changes topology from 3D to
2D or vice versa, called also the opening or closing of a
neck in a tubular FS or neck collapsing. This ETT is a
common feature of all existing high-temperature super-
conductors and novel materials synthesized by material
design in the search for room temperature superconduc-
tivity.
However, the analysis made in this section highlights
some surprising results, the first is that there is a change
in symmetry of the evolution of the FS topology in pass-
ing from the first to the second subband. The second
is that in the proximity of a type II Lifshitz transition
we have a curve of critical points and no longer an iso-
lated point, a fact which explains the appearance of a
very pronounced peak in DOS values. The radius of this
curve increases with the intensity of the RSOC and this
is reflected in an increase and at the same time a true
right shift of the DOS maximum. In this situation, the
variation in the Fermi surface (FS) topology is absolutely
non-trivial.
Clearly, we want to see how the above features of the
electron spectrum and DOS are reflected in the properties
of the superconducting phase.
Therefore, after having
analysed in detail the structure of the FS and the DOS
in the normal phase, we turn, in the next section, to the
study of the superconducting phase.

IV.
THE SUPERCONDUCTING PHASE

To investigate how the shape of the Fermi surface and
the behavior of the DOS manifest in the superconducting
properties of the system with RSOC, we first derive the
equations for computing the energy gap. The approach
used is the one originally introduced by D. Innocenti
et al. [36] and successively developed in Refs.[37]-[42],
where the Bogoliubov equations are solved analytically
and numerically without the typical approximations of
the BCS theory. The entirely new thing in the follow-
ing discussion, however, consists in using non-relativistic
Dirac wave functions in order to take into account the
additional spin degree of freedom.
The field operators of Eq.(7) can be written in terms
of the single-particles states

œànkŒ± (r) = œïnkz (z) eik‚à•¬∑r‚à•

‚àö

A
œáŒ± ‚â° Àúœànk (r) œáŒ±,
(22)

where œáŒ± with Œ± =‚Üë, ‚Üì are the usual spinors associated
to the quantization of the spin along the z axis. This is
a legitimate expression for the field operators since the

functions œànkŒ± (r) are the eigenfunctions of the Hamilto-
nian H0 obtained by setting Œ± = 0 in Eq.(2), i.e. com-
pletely neglecting the Rashba term. If we indicate with
cnkŒ± the operators that destroy a particle in the state
(22) then the field operators become

Œ®Œ± (r) =
ÔøΩ

n,k
œànkŒ± (r) cnkŒ±
(23)

and the interaction term can be written as:

HI =U0

2

ÔøΩ

k1,k2,k3,k4

ÔøΩ

Œ±,Œ≤
In1,k1;n2,k2
n3,k3;n4,k4
¬∑

¬∑
c‚ÄÝ
n1,k1,Œ±c‚ÄÝ
n2,k2,Œ≤cn3,k3,Œ≤cn4,k4,Œ±

,
(24)

with the overlap integrals defined by

In1,k1;n2,k2
n3,k3;n4,k4 =
ÔøΩ
Àúœà‚àó
n1,k1 (r) Àúœà‚àó
n2,k2 (r) ¬∑

¬∑ Àúœàn3,k3 (r) Àúœàn4,k4 (r) dr.
(25)

The integrals in Eq.(25) appear in the treatment of
the superconductive phase transition in the presence of
a periodic potential and have been extensively discussed
[36]. The operators a‚ÄÝ
n,k,Œª that create a particle in the

state Eq.(3) are related to the c‚ÄÝ
n,k,Œ± operators by an
unitary transformation

a‚ÄÝ
n,k,Œª =
ÔøΩ

Œ±
c‚ÄÝ
n,k,Œ±UŒ±,Œª (k) ,
(26)

where the matrix element of the change of basis is equal
to UŒ±,Œª (k) = œá‚ÄÝ
Œ±¬∑Œ∑Œª
ÔøΩ
Œ∏k‚à•
ÔøΩ
. As a result, the four operator
products that appear in the expansion of the right hand
side of Eq.(7) can be written as

c‚ÄÝ
n1,k1,Œ±c‚ÄÝ
n2,k2,Œ≤cn3,k3,Œ≤cn4,k4,Œ± =
ÔøΩ

Œª1,Œª2,Œª3,Œª4
MŒª1,Œª4
ÔøΩ
Œ∏k1‚à• ‚àí Œ∏k4‚à•
ÔøΩ
MŒª2,Œª3
ÔøΩ
Œ∏k2‚à• ‚àí Œ∏k3‚à•
ÔøΩ
¬∑

¬∑ a‚ÄÝ
n1,k1,Œª1a‚ÄÝ
n2,k2,Œª2an3,k3,Œª3an4,k4,Œª4,

(27)

where we have defined

MŒª1,Œª4(Œ∏k1‚à• ‚àí Œ∏k4‚à•) =
ÔøΩ

Œ±
U ‚ÄÝ
Œª1,Œ±(k1)UŒª4,Œ±(k4),
(28)

and similarly for MŒª2,Œª3
ÔøΩ
Œ∏k2,‚à• ‚àí Œ∏k3,‚à•
ÔøΩ
. Since the œïn,kz
are Bloch wavefunctions, the integral (25) is different
from zero only for k1 + k2 = k3 + k4 and the expres-
sion for HI becomes:

HI =1

2

ÔøΩ

n1,n2,n3,n4,k1,k2,K
U n1,Œª1;n2,Œª2
n3,Œª3;n4,Œª4 (k1, k2; K)

a‚ÄÝ
n1,k1,Œª1a‚ÄÝ
n2,‚àík1+K,Œª2an3,‚àík2+K,Œª3an4,k2,Œª4,

(29)


11

where the effective potential reads

U n1,Œª1;n2,Œª2
n3,Œª3;n4,Œª4 (k1, k2; K) = U0In1,k1;n2,‚àík1+K
n3,‚àík2+K;n4,k2
MŒª1,Œª4(Œ∏k1‚à• ‚àí Œ∏k2‚à•)MŒª2,Œª3(Œ∏‚àík1‚à•+K‚à• ‚àí Œ∏‚àík2‚à•+K‚à•).
(30)

Equation (29) is the expression of the interaction term
when both RSOC and a periodic potential are present.
It can be viewed as the natural extension to a multi-
band system of Eq.(4) of [16] and, from this point on,
the computation of the superconducting gap follows the
same steps. In agreement with Gor‚Äôkov and Rashba [16]
we assume that the normal and the anomalous Green
functions are diagonal in the helicity base.
Hence we
consider only Cooper pairs with zero net momentum
(K = 0), formed with particles in the same band and
with the same helicity, {(n, k, Œª), (n, ‚àík, Œª)}, which are
connected by the time reversal symmetry operator. We
allow for the contact exchange interaction HI to con-
nect pairs in different bands with different helicity: the
pair {(n, k, Œª), (n, ‚àík, Œª)} can be scattered into the pair
{(l, q, ŒΩ), (l, ‚àíq, ŒΩ)} where n, Œª, l, and ŒΩ can assume any
allowed value. We emphasize that, as discussed in Ref.
[16], the existence of a different pairing function in each
helicity band implies a mixture of singlet and triplet pair-
ing.
Symmetric and antisymmetric combinations (see
Eq.(22) of Ref. [16]) of the pairing functions for the two
helicity bands correspond to the singlet and triplet com-
ponent with respect to the original spin quantization axis
taken along the z direction. This can be seen by using
the transformation (26) connecting the electron operators
between the original spin basis and the helicity basis.
Following the standard Gor‚Äôkov approach at finite tem-
perature, we introduce the Matsubara imaginary time
operators an,k,Œª(œÑ) that follow the imaginary time evo-
lution equation ‚àí‚àÇœÑan,k,Œª(œÑ) = [an,k,Œª(œÑ), H]. In terms
of these operators the normal [Gn,Œª(k, œÑ ‚àí œÑ ‚Ä≤)] and the
anomalous [F ‚ÄÝ
n,Œª(k, œÑ ‚àí œÑ ‚Ä≤) and F ‚ÄÝ
n,Œª(k, œÑ ‚àí œÑ ‚Ä≤)] Green‚Äôs
functions are defined as

Gn,Œª(k, œÑ ‚àí œÑ ‚Ä≤) ‚â° ‚àí‚ü®TœÑan,k,Œª(œÑ)a‚ÄÝ
n,k,Œª(œÑ ‚Ä≤)‚ü©,
(31)

F ‚ÄÝ
n,Œª(k, œÑ ‚àí œÑ ‚Ä≤) ‚â° ‚ü®TœÑa‚ÄÝ
n,‚àík,Œª(œÑ)a‚ÄÝ
n,k,Œª(œÑ ‚Ä≤)‚ü©,
(32)

Fn,Œª(k, œÑ ‚àí œÑ ‚Ä≤) ‚â° ‚ü®TœÑan,‚àík,Œª(œÑ)an,k,Œª(œÑ ‚Ä≤)‚ü©,
(33)

where TœÑ denotes the imaginary-time ordering operator.
By using a mean-field approach, we arrive, after a lenghty
algebra, to the self-consistent gap equation:

‚àÜn,Œª(k) = ‚àí1

2

ÔøΩ

l,q,ŒΩ
U ‚Ä≤
n,Œª;l,ŒΩ(k, q) ‚àÜl,ŒΩ(q)

2El,ŒΩ(q)tanh
ÔøΩŒ≤El,ŒΩ(q)

2

ÔøΩ
,

(34)
where ‚àÜn,Œª(k) is defined as

‚àÜn,Œª(k) ‚â° 1

2

ÔøΩ

l,q,ŒΩ
U ‚Ä≤
n,Œª;l,ŒΩ(k, q)Fl,ŒΩ
ÔøΩ
q, 0+ÔøΩ
,
(35)

and the quasiparticle energy is

El,ŒΩ(q) =
ÔøΩ

(ŒµŒΩ,q‚à• + Œµl,qz ‚àí ¬µ)2 + |‚àÜl,ŒΩ(q)|2
(36)

and the pairing potential reads

U ‚Ä≤
n,Œª;l,ŒΩ(k, q) ‚â° U n,Œª;n,Œª
l,ŒΩ;l,ŒΩ (k, q; 0) ‚àí U n,Œª;n,Œª
l,ŒΩ;l,ŒΩ (‚àík, q; 0)

= U0In,l(kz, qz)ŒªŒΩe‚àíi(Œ∏k‚à•‚àíŒ∏q‚à•),
(37)

with the overlap integral

In,l(kz, qz) ‚â° In,k;n,‚àík
l,q;l,‚àíq .
(38)

The matrix elements defined in the Eq.(38) depend
on the subband index (n and l) and on the wavevector
transversal to the layers (kz and qz). In the superposition
integrals (Eq.(38)) only the dependence on the trans-
verse moment remains, since the wave functions in the
plane are plane waves which compensate for the choice
made on K. For a periodic potential barrier associated
with the superlattice of layers the density histogram of
pairing interaction matrix elements between subbands is
illustrated in the Fig.(8). The intraband (diagonal ele-
ments of matrix) and interband (off-diagonal elements of
matrix) distributions show different shapes and widths
and have different range of values.
In particular, the
off-diagonal elements have a probability density function
which is about half of the diagonal elements which in-
stead are of the same order of magnitude.
While in the Fig.(8) the dependence on the band in-
dices of the exchange integral is highlighted, in the Fig.(9)
the dependence on wave vectors is highlighted. This last
figure clearly shows that the diagonal elements of the
matrix defined by the superposition integral are greater
than those off-diagonal, whatever the value of the wave
vectors. Furthermore, for both the intraband and the in-
terband there is a curve of values of kz and qz for which
I11 = I22 and I12 = I21, whereas on the right of this
curve I11 < I22 and I12 < I21, the opposite being true on
the left.
The integral equation (34) shows a dependence of the
gap ‚àÜn,Œª(k), reminiscent of the Rashba spinors Eq.(5),
upon the helicity and the in-plane component of the wave
vector through a phase factor ŒªeiŒ∏k‚à• . To get rid of this
dependence in the self-consistent equation, we define an
auxiliary gap function ‚àÜn(kz) as

ŒªeiŒ∏k‚à• ‚àÜn(kz) ‚â° ‚àÜn,Œª(k).
(39)

Then, the self-consistent equation for ‚àÜn(kz) can be
cast in the form

‚àÜn(kz) = ‚àíU0

2

ÔøΩ

l,qz
In,l(kz, qz)‚àÜl(qz)

√ó
ÔøΩ

ŒΩ

ÔøΩ

qx,qy

tanh
ÔøΩ
Œ≤
2 El,ŒΩ(q)
ÔøΩ

2El,ŒΩ(q)
,

(40)


12

Figure 8. Histogram of the matrix elements defining the su-
perposition integral of Eq.(38). The green and blue bars re-
fer, respectively, to the intraband pairings I1,1(kz, qz) and
I2,2(kz, qz), while the red and yellow bars refer to, respec-
tively, to the interband couplings I1,2(kz, qz) and I2,1(kz, qz).
The histogram shows a marked anisotropy.

Figure 9. Terms of the matrix of the exchange integral defined
in Eq.(38) as a function of the wave vectors in the direction
of the confinement potential. The green plan corresponds to
I1,1(kz, qz), the blue plan corresponds to I2,2(kz, qz), the red
plan corresponds to I1,2(kz, qz) and the yellow plan corre-
sponds to I2,1(kz, qz).

where it is understood that the wave vector q appear-
ing in the last term is q = (qx, qy, qz). The solution of
Eq.(40) is obtained numerically by starting with a guess
for ‚àÜn(kz) and iterating until convergence is reached.
Since the computational effort is considerable, it becomes
important to speed-up the calculations by reducing the
dimensionality of the summations. In fact, once qz has
been fixed, the argument of the last sum depends on
q‚à• only trough the in-plane dispersion energy ŒµŒΩ,q‚à•. It
is, then, convenient to define a partial density of states
gŒΩ(Œµ‚à•) that allows a transformation of the double sum in

Eq.(40) into a one-dimensional integral:

ÔøΩ

qx,qy
f(ŒµŒΩ,q‚à•) = A

4œÄ2

ÔøΩ Œµ‚à•,max

Œµ‚à•,min
gŒΩ(Œµ‚à•)f(Œµ‚à•)dŒµ‚à•.
(41)

The integration extrema, Œµ‚à•,min and Œµ‚à•,max, are com-
puted by introducing the contact interaction energy cut-
off in the sense that the condition Œµ‚à•,min < Œµ‚à• < Œµ‚à•,max
implies the inequality |Œµ‚à• + Œµl,qz ‚àí ¬µ| < ‚Ñèœâ0.
It is worth to point out that gŒΩ(Œµ‚à•) cannot be formu-
lated as a single analytical function but it has to be de-
fined with a piecewise expression that reflects the topol-
ogy change of the Fermi Surface when switching from one
regime to another (see sections III.A, III.B, and III.C). In
fact, the expression defining the partial density of states
is:

A
4œÄ2 gŒΩ(Œµ‚à•) =
ÔøΩ

qx,qy
Œ¥(Œµ‚à• ‚àí ŒµŒΩ,q‚à•)

= A

4œÄ2

ÔøΩ ‚àû

0
2œÄq‚à•Œ¥
ÔøΩ
Œµ‚à• ‚àí ŒµŒΩ,q‚à•
ÔøΩ
dq‚à•

(42)

where the double sum has been transformed in a inte-
gral in polar coordinates in the last line. This leads to
the following expression for gŒΩ(Œµ‚à•):

gŒΩ(Œµ‚à•) =

Ô£±
Ô£¥
Ô£¥
Ô£¥
Ô£≤

Ô£¥
Ô£¥
Ô£¥
Ô£≥

4œÄm
‚àí2ŒΩk0
‚àö

2mŒµ‚à•+k2
0
if ‚àí k2
0

2m ‚â§ Œµ‚à• < 0, ŒΩ = ‚àí1

4œÄm
ŒΩk0+‚àö

2mŒµ‚à•+k2
0
‚àö

2mŒµ‚à•+k2
0
if Œµ‚à• > 0

0
otherwise
(43)
where k0 is defined as in the discussion preceding Eq.(13),
but this time we do not set 2m = 1.
The Eq.(40) has been solved both in the limit T ‚Üí 0,
(that is Œ≤ ‚Üí ‚àû), and in the limit T ‚Üí TC, (that is
‚àÜn(kz) ‚Üí 0 for every n and kz). The first limit allows to
determine the gaps while the second allows to determine
the critical temperature.
The results of the numerical computations for the gaps
are shown in the Fig.(10)A, in which we plot both par-
tial DOS and ‚àÜn(kz) for the first and second subbands
in kz = œÄ/2d as a function of the Lifshitz parameter
rescaled, Œ∑R (Eq.(9)). The numerical values of the shift
due to the Rashba coupling are indicated in the various
panels which differ in the value of the Œ±SO parameter.
Furthermore, in this discussion, we set the value of the
superconducting coupling at g = 0.4, where g is defined
as g = g3D(¬µ)U0 with g3D =
1

(2œÄ)2(‚àö

‚Ñè2/2m)3
‚àö¬µ being

the DOS at the Fermi level for a homogeneous system
(no RSOC, no peridodic potential along z). In the nu-
merical simulation we assume that g is a constant, so
as the chemical potential changes both g3D and U0 are
continuously recalculated.


13

150

100

50

0

100

60

20

0

-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5

1
2
3

2

3
1

1
2
3

2

3
1

(A)
(B)

Figure 10. Properties of the normal phase and the superconductive phase vs the rescaled Lifshitz parameter without and with
RSOC for different Œ±SO values such that ‚àÜERSOC ‚™å ‚àÜE2z. Panel A left side: starting from the bottom, the first panel shows
the DOS for the first subband (blue curve) and the second subband (red curve) and the trend of the gap relative to the first
subband (blue curve) and to the second subband (red curve) as a function of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter. The other panels
in (A) are related to the four values of Œ±SO previously discussed, Œ±SO = 0.30, 0.41, 0.50, 0.70, and show the partial DOS
for the first subband with positive helicity (light blue curves) and with negative helicity (blue curves) and the partial DOS for
the second subband with positive helicity (orange curve) and with negative helicity (red curves). We also report the trend of
the gap relative to the first subband (blue curve) and to the second subband (red curve) as a function of the rescaled Lifshitz
parameter. An anomalous behavior and an amplification of the parameters of the superconductive phase are observed in a
range of rescaled Lifshitz parameter 0 < Œ∑R < 1. i.e., in the proximity to the unusual van Hove singularity. Panel B right side:
the values of the gaps for the second subbands at Œ±SO = 0 and Œ±SO = 0.41 versus the rescaled Lifshitz parameter for different
values of kz = 0, œÄ/2d, œÄ/d show a small variation in a neighborhood of van Hove unusual singularity. We have highlighted
the variation on the Fermi surface for three values of the Lifshitz parameter in Œ∑R = Œ∑L and Œ∑R = Œ∑L ¬± 0.5 by choosing the
black color for kz = œÄ/d, the red color for kz = œÄ/2d and the orange color for kz = 0 to show the trend of the charge of the
gap values at different kz.


14

We emphasize that, in order to have the full gap, i.e.
‚àÜŒªn(k), we must also consider the dependence on the
phase factor and on the helicity, for this purpose we keep
in mind the Fig.(5).
The Fig.(10)A shows that both for the gap of the first
subband (‚àÜ1) and for the gap of the second subband
(‚àÜ2) it is possible to distinguish three distinct regimes of
multigap superconductivity as a function of the rescaled
Lifshitz parameter when is tuned around the unusual van
Hove singularity: an antiresonance regime in which the
gaps reach a minimum value for Œ∑R < Œ∑L, where Œ∑L is the
value of the van Hove energy for which the DOS shows a
peak, a resonance regime for Œ∑R = Œ∑L in which the gaps
reach their maximum value and, finally, a multi-band
BCS-like regime for Œ∑R > Œ∑L.
In particular, it can be observed that ‚àÜ1 has a mini-
mum when the chemical potential is near the bottom of
the second subband. The partial DOS relative to the first
subband, both for Œª = 1 and for Œª = ‚àí1, does not change
as the chemical potential changes, therefore, the presence
of such a pronounced minimum may be due to the exis-
tence of a Fano-type antiresonance in superconducting
gaps. An antiresonance can be due to an interband ex-
change term that generates interference effects between
the wave functions of a single particle by coupling in a
non-trivial way the parameters of the superconducting
phase relating to different bands. Both the depth and
the position of the minimum in the ‚àÜ1 depend on this
term.
A minimum in ‚àÜ1 appears below the band edge where
the DOS of the second subband changes abruptly and the
Fermi surfaces, as seen above, are in a Lifshitz transition
of the first type. That is, the partial filling of the second
subband is reflected in the appearance of two new three-
dimensional (3D) Fermi surfaces, one for each helicity.
As for the gap of the second subband (‚àÜ2), the
Fig.(10)A shows that it starts to assume non-zero val-
ues when the chemical potential has not yet reached the
bottom of the second subband. This effect emphasizes,
once again, the non-banal role of interband coupling in a
multicomponent system.
‚àÜ2 reaches the maximum corresponding to the maxi-
mum of the partial DOS relative to the second subband
and to a negative helicity, i.e. when the chemical poten-
tial is near the unusual van Hove singularity, in which
the Fermi surfaces changes topology passing from a 3D
to a two-dimensional (2D) geometry. As the Rashba pa-
rameter Œ±SO varies, as seen previously, the radius of the
circumference of the singular points that characterizes
the Fermi surface in a Lifshitz transition of the type II
(3D-2D ETT) increases, and, as shows the Fig.(10)A,
the maximum values of ‚àÜ1 and ‚àÜ2 also increase.
By
varying the parameter Œ±SO, we distinguish three differ-
ent regimes: if Œ±SO is such that ‚àÜERSOC < ‚àÜEz2 the
maximum of ‚àÜ1 has a value greater than the maximum
of ‚àÜ2, for ‚àÜERSOC = ‚àÜEz2 = œâ0 the maxima of the
two gaps coincide within the limits of the numerical ap-
proximations made and, finally, for ‚àÜERSOC > ‚àÜEz2

the maximum of ‚àÜ2 exceeds the value of the maximum
of ‚àÜ1.
It can also be noted that in the high energy limit the
values of the gaps are to a good approximation close to
the BCS limit, i.e. in the high energy limit the gaps no
longer depend on Œ± [16].
In Fig.(10)B, we plot the values of ‚àÜ2 as a function
of Œ∑R for different values of kz. It can be observed that
‚àÜ1 does not vary as kz varies from point Œì to point Z of
the IBZ, while it is possible to notice a small variation of
‚àÜ2 in a neighborhood of Œ∑L, where the role of exchange
integrals (Eq.(25)) becomes crucial.
For values of the Lifshitz parameter close to the van
Hove singularity, for the second subband and for a helic-
ity Œª = ‚àí1 (the only one present) we plot the correspond-
ing FS highlighting the dependence of ‚àÜ2 from kz with
three different colors. In proximity of the unusual van
Hove singularity the gap is not constant in kz since the
partial filling of the second subband causes the weight of
Œµl,qz in the Eq.(36) to be not negligible.
By solving the Eq.(40) in the limit ‚àÜn(kz) ‚Üí 0 we can
be compute the critical temperature, TC.
In the Fig.(11), panel A, we plot the values of the criti-
cal temperature at different values of the Rashba parame-
ter, Œ±SO, as a function of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter.
The critical temperature appears as an asymmetric func-
tion of the Lifshitz parameter regardless of the value of
the Œ±SO parameter and shows the typical trend of a Fano
antiresonance with a minimum at the first Lifshitz tran-
sition and a maximum at the second Lifshitz transition
where the Fermi surfaces switch from 3D geometry to 2D
geometry. From the Fig.(11)A one can observe that in
the presence of RSOC the energies are shifted to the left
by an amount equal to E0 = ‚àí(mŒ±2)/(2‚Ñè2) and that the
values of the TC are amplified with respect to the case in
which there is no RSOC. In particular, a maximum TC
value is observed in correspondence with the van Hove
singularity in the DOS because we have assumed the en-
ergy cut off and the energy dispersion in the z direction to
be the same. The BCS theory predicts a value of about
32 Kelvin for the critical temperature, with the model
parameters chosen in this work, for Œ±SO = 0.4 this value
increases about four times.
In the panel B of Fig.(11) we show in a log-log plot
the critical temperature TC as a function of the effective
Fermi temperature TF = EF /kB where the Fermi level
is calculated from the bottom of the first subband and
kB is the Boltzmann constant. The critical temperature
is calculated for different values of the Rashba coupling
constant, Œ±SO = 0, 0.30, 0.41, 0.50, 0.70. The Fano
resonance at the bottom of the second subband occurs
in this so called Uemura plot [45] TC versus TF . In this
figure the dashed line indicates the BEC-BCS crossover
predicted to be TC = TF /(kF Œæ0) [46‚Äì48]. The Fano res-
onance clearly occurs on the BCS side of the BCS-BEC
crossover where the ratio between TF and TC is in the
range between 10 and 20. The calculated Fano resonance
in the white region occours on the BCS side up to the


15

A)

B)

Figure 11. Panel A: the critical temperature TC versus Lif-
shitz parameter for different values of Rashba coupling Œ±SO
on a semilogarithmic scale.
The critical temperature ap-
pears as an asymmetric function of the Lifshitz parameter
and if Œ±SO < 0.41 the maximum of TC grows slowly, while
if Œ±SO > 0.41 it grows faster and faster. Panel B: In this
Uemura plot the critical temperature TC is plotted on a log-
log scale versus the Fermi temperature for different values of
Rashba coupling Œ±SO. The white box refers to the Fano res-
onance appearing near the BEC-BCS crossover indicated by
the dashed line.

largest spin-orbit coupling. In fact the Fano resonance
occurs in the range between the BEC crossover and the
line TC = TF /20 in the BCS side. From the figure it
can be seen that the critical temperature values remain
included in a BCS regime although as Œ±SO increases the
Fano resonance appears increasingly shifted towards the
BEC limit.
Furthermore, it is possible to observe that the value of
Œ±SO for which ‚àÜERSOC = ‚àÜEz2 = œâ0 i.e. Œ±SO = 0.41
marks the boundary between two distinct situations: if
Œ±SO < 0.41 the maximum of TC grows slowly, while if
Œ±SO > 0.41 it grows faster and faster. All this is high-
lighted in the Fig.(12) in which we report the maximum

Figure 12.
The maximum value of the critical temperature
(red curve) and critical temperature predicted by the BCS the-
ory ratio for different values of Œ±SO parameter.
What is
observed is a marked amplification of The maximum of the
TC when a Rashba coupling is introduced into the system.
In particular, the maximum of the critical temperature in-
creases slowly for Œ±SO < 0.41 and always becomes faster for
Œ±SO > 0.41.

of the TC as a function of the Rashba coupling constant
(red curve). The maximum of critical temperature in-
creases linearly with RSOC for Œ±SO ‚â• 0.41.
Previously we stressed the fact that near Œ∑L the gaps
vary with kz, this being strongly reflected in the calcula-
tion of the gap ratio, 2‚àÜ/TC. Therefore, in order to plot
this parameter correctly we consider ‚àÜ averaged over kz.
So, starting from the bottom of the Fig.(13) we plot the
gap ratio, 2‚àÜ/TC, where TC is the critical temperature,
for the first and the second subband for different values of
the Œ±SO parameter as a function of the rescaled Lifshitz
parameter.
We observe that the gap ratio differs from the constant
value 3.5 foreseen by the BCS theory when the rescaled
Lifshitz parameter is closed to 0 < Œ∑R < 1. In particular,
the 2‚àÜ1/TC ratio for the first subband reaches a min-
imum, lower than the value predicted by BCS theory,
when the rescaled Lifshitz parameter is approximately
equal to zero. That is, when ‚àÜ1 is in an antiresonance
regime and the system is close to a Lifshitz transition of
the first type.
The 2‚àÜ1/TC ratio reaches a maximum
value for Œ∑R ‚âà 1, when the superconducting parameter
‚àÜ1 is in a resonance regime, this occurs close to the type
II Lifshitz transition.
Regarding to the gap ratio for the second subband,
2‚àÜ2/TC, we observe a significant deviation from the
value predicted by the BCS theory in a range of values
of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter equal to 0 < Œ∑ < 1. In
particular, when the system is in an antiresonance regime
2‚àÜ2/TC diverges, while when ‚àÜ2 is in a resonance regime
it shows a maximum. By contrast, such a maximum is
not present in the absence of the RSOC as the bottom


16

Figure 13. Properties of the superconductive phase vs the Lif-
shitz parameter without and with RSOC for different Œ±SO val-
ues such that ‚àÜERSOC ‚™å ‚àÜE2z. This figure shows both the
trend of the gap ratio for the first subband (blue curves) and
the second subband (red curves) compared to the constant
value predicted by the BCS theory (black curves).

panel of Fig. 13 shows. As the parameter Œ±SO changes,
the maximum of 2‚àÜ2/TC increases and, as in the case
of the Fig.(10), we observe three distinct regimes: when
‚àÜERSOC < ‚àÜEz2 we have 2‚àÜ2/TC < 2‚àÜ1/TC, when
‚àÜERSOC < ‚àÜEz2 = œâ0 the two gap ratios intersect
and, finally, for ‚àÜERSOC > ‚àÜEz2 we have 2‚àÜ2/TC >
2‚àÜ1/TC.
We see in Fig. 13 that the gap ratio to the transition
temperature 2‚àÜ2/TC < 3.9 in the second subband, at the
maximum critical temperature, in spite of the peak of the
partial DOS in the second subband due the van Hove sin-
gularity brought about by the largest spin-orbit coupling
Œ±SO = 0.7, does not show a large deviation from the stan-
dard weak coupling universal value 3.52 predicted by the
single-band BCS theory. This is in agreement with the
corresponding gap ratio 2‚àÜ1/TC = 3.4 in the first sub-
band. We plot TC versus the ‚àÜ2/‚àÜ1 ratio for different
values of the parameter Œ±SO in Fig. 14, which shows that
‚àÜ2/‚àÜ1 ratio is only 1.12, at maximum TC, for Œ±SO = 0.7.
Moreover we want to point out that for Œ±SO = 0.41 the
gap ratio ‚àÜ2/‚àÜ1 < 1 while the ratio between the partial
DOS N2/N1 > 1 due to the van Hove singularity in the
second subband. These results show that the present su-
perconducting scenario is in the weak coupling regime
where the mean field approximation is valid.
In fact
the aim of this work is to show a scenario with weak
electron-phonon coupling, where the amplification of the
critical temperature has been driven by interband pair-
ing in the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling. It is
well known that in the multigap Bogoliubov supercon-
ductivity [49‚Äì51] the ‚àÜ2/‚àÜ1 ratio becomes proportional
to N1/sN2 where the contact non retarded-exchange in-
teraction (interband pairing) becomes more relevant that
the retarded bosonic exchange pairing. From Fig. 14 we
can see a marked anisotropy in the trend of the critical
temperature which shows a maximum corresponding to
the maximum value of the ‚àÜ2/‚àÜ1 ratio.
Further work is in progress to study the cooperative
role of contact and retarded interactions in anisotropic
superconductivity related with the anisotropic k-space
pairing in the Fermi surface topology at unconventional
Lifshitz transitions.
As we have just seen, the Fig.(10) and the Fig.(13)
clearly show a quantum resonance characterized by a
Fano-type asymmetry in the superconducting parame-
ters and a considerable deviation from the predictions of
the BCS theory. To further highlight this last aspect we
graph the isotopic coefficient, Œ≥ = ‚àÇlnTC/‚àÇlnM, as a
function of the rescaled Lifshitz parameter for different
values of the parameter Œ±SO, assuming that the cut-off
energy depend on the isotopic mass as œâ0 ‚àù M ‚àí1/2 [52-
53] (Fig.(15)).
In the BCS theory, the isotope coefficient has a con-
stant value as the chemical potential changes equal to 0.5,
in our case instead we can notice a considerable deviation
from this value when the rescaled Lifshitz parameter is
in the range 0 < Œ∑R < 1 (for this range of values, the
behavior of the Œ≥ parameter is that typical of the Fano


17

Figure 14. The trend of the critical temperature versus the
‚àÜ2/‚àÜ1 ratio for different values of the parameter Œ±SO. The
TC trend shows a strong asimmetry which becomes maximum
when the ‚àÜ2/‚àÜ1 ratio is maximum.

antiresonance), that is, when the system is close to a Lif-
shitz transition. These deviations from the BCS theory
increase as the Rashba coupling, Œ±SO, increases, there-
fore there exists an unconventional dependence of the
critical temperature on the cut-off energy unlike what is
proposed in the BCS theory.
In the high-energy limit, the gap ratio and the isotope
coefficient tend to the values predicted by the BCS the-
ory, so we are dealing with two BCS-like condensates.
In Fig.(16) we plot the isotope coefficient as a function
of the critical temperature for different values of Œ±SO for
the range of energies delimited in Fig.(15) by the dashed
lines. This parameter, in this range of energies, can be
measured and this prediction can be experimentally ver-
ified.
These results confirm that in correspondence with the
van Hove singularity there is an amplification of the char-
acteristic parameters of the superconductive phase which
becomes more and more evident when the Rashba cou-
pling exceeds a limit value of 0.4.
The works [36-42] investigated the superconducting
properties for a superlattice of quantum wells and ob-
served that there is an optimum condition for the ampli-
fication of the critical temperature that is obtained when
the cut-off energy is equal to the dispersion along the
confinement direction of the higher energy band.
The
particular geometry considered creates, in fact, a multi-
component system. Here, instead, by introducing the de-
gree of freedom of spin in the solution of the Bogoliubov
equations, as well as having the possibility of dealing with
realistic cases, we can overcome the limit imposed by
previous works simply by suitably increasing the Rashba
coupling that exists by definition at the interface between
different materials that make up a heterostructure.

Figure 15.
Properties of the superconductive phase vs the
Lifshitz parameter without and with RSOC for different Œ±SO
values such that ‚àÜERSOC ‚™å ‚àÜE2z.
This figure shows the
variation of the critical temperature with the cut-off energy
via the isotope coefficinet. The constant value predicted by
the BCS theory is the black line.


18

Figure 16. The isotope coefficient as a function of the critical
temperature for different values of Œ±SO.

V.
CONCLUSIONS

The aim of this work has been to investigate theoret-
ically and numerically the electronic structure and the
superconducting properties of a nano-structured super-
lattice of quantum layers in the presence of RSOC. We
have described the unconventional Lifshitz transition in
a 3D superlattice of metallic layers characterized by the
length of the circular nodal line increasing with RSOC in
the negative helicity states of the spin-orbit split electron
spectrum. Here we have provided the description of the
tuning the multigap Bogoliubov superconductivity near
the bottom of the upper subband with negative helicity
shifted by the RSOC. Our theory overcomes the limita-
tions present so far due to common BCS approximations
used in previous theoretical works on superconductivity
in presence of spin-orbit interactions which mostly de-
scribe superconductivity only at very high Fermi energy.
The work in Re.[54] constitutes an important exception,
focussing on superconductivity in low-density semimet-
als in the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling and an-
alyzing the superconducting instability in different pair-
ing channels.
This latter work clearly shows the need
to systematically develop the extension of the BCS the-
ory in strongly spin-orbit coupled systems (see also [55]).
We have shown the key role of the quantum configura-
tion interaction between the gaps in the self-consistent
mean-field equation which requires the calculation of the
exchange interactions between singlet pairs in subbands
with different quantum number and different helicity.
The exchange interactions are key contact interactions
which have been shown to be essential in condensation
phenomena in fermionic quantum ultracold gases.
In
our theory the contact interactions are in action together
with the phonon exchange cooper pairing. The key re-
sult of this work has been the calculation of the overlap
of the electron wave.functions by solving the non rela-

tivistic Dirac equation. The results of this work provide
a roadmap for the quantum material design of a super-
lattice of periodicity d made of superconducting atomic
flakes of thickness L separated by spacers of thickness W
where the energy dispersion in the transversal direction is
of the order the pairing energy cut-off and the spin-orbit
length is of the order of the 3D superlattice period. Res-
onant and crossover phenomena in the normal state are
amplified when the transverse energy dispersion of elec-
trons in the superlattice is of the same order of magnitude
of the energy cutoff ‚àÜEz ‚àº ‚Ñèœâ0 of the effective pairing
interaction. Under these conditions the introduction of a
RSOC creates a completely unexpected variation in the
topology of the Fermi surface, especially for the negative
helicity band. In particular, the RSOC induces an uncon-
ventional Lifshitz transition with an associated extended
van Hove singularity. For the non-BCS superconducting
phase we have solved the Bogoliubov equation for the
multiple gaps numerically.
The unusual complexity in
the properties of the normal phase is reflected in an am-
plification of the gap and the critical temperature in pre-
cise energy ranges. We have found that the enhancement
of the superconducting parameters takes place when the
chemical potential is tuned around the Lifshitz transition.
Under these circumstances it is necessary to include the
configuration interaction between different gaps in differ-
ent subbands.
The issue of superconducting fluctuations in a multi-
band and multigap configuration deserves a comment
at this point.
Whereas amplitude and phase fluctua-
tions of the order parameter are in general detrimental
and a source of large suppression of the (otherwise en-
hanced) critical temperature in low dimensional and/or
strongly coupled superconductors, their effect can be re-
duced by the recently proposed mechanism [56 and 57]
of the screening of superconducting fluctuations in a (at
least) two-band system. References [56 and 57] demon-
strated that a coexistence of a shallow carrier band with
strong pairing and a deep band with weak pairing, to-
gether with the exchange-like pair transfer between the
bands to couple the two condensates, realizes an optimal
and robust multicomponent superconductivity regime: it
preserves strong pairing to generate large gaps and a
very high critical temperature but screens the detrimen-
tal superconducting fluctuations, thereby suppressing the
pseudogap state. The screening is found to be very effi-
cient even when the pair exchange is very small. Thus,
a multi-band superconductor with a coherent mixture
of condensates in the BCS regime (deep band) and in
the BCS-BEC crossover regime (shallow band) offers a
promising route to enhance critical temperatures, elim-
inating at the same time the suppression effect due to
fluctuations. In the light of these considerations, a quan-
titative calculation of the screening in the system here
considered, requiring the inclusion of the spin-orbit cou-
pling terms in the fluctuation propagator, is postponed
to a future work.
The coexistence of at least one large Fermi surface and


19

at least one small Fermi surface appearing or disappear-
ing with small changes in the chemical potential is the
key ingredient for the shape resonance idea in supercon-
ducting gaps [35, 36] which is a type of Fano-Feshbach
resonance. By changing the chemical potential, the crit-
ical temperature (TC) decreases towards 0 K when the
chemical potential is tuned to the band edge, because of
the Fano antiresonance, and the TC maximum appears
(as in Fano resonances) at higher energy, between one and
two times the pairing interaction above the band edge
[35, 36, 38]. Finally, one of the most interesting aspects
highlighted by this work is the existence of an optimal
condition for the amplification of the critical tempera-

ture when the band shift due to RSOC is larger than the
dispersion along z of the upper subband and the cut-off
energy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We gratefully thank Andrea Perali for discussions.
We thanks the staff of Department of Mathematics and
Physics of Roma Tre University and Superstripes-onlus
for support of this research project.

1 Y. A. Bychkov and √â. I. Rashba, JETP lett 39, 78 (1984).
2 E. I. Rashba, Soviet Physics, Solid State 2, 1109 (1960).
3 V. M. Ramaglia, D. Bercioux, V. Cataudella, G. De Filip-
pis, C. Perroni, and F. Ventriglia, The European Physical
Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 36,
365 (2003).

4 J.
Zhang,
H.
Hu,
X.-J.
Liu,
and
H.
Pu,
in

Annual Review of Cold Atoms and Molecules (World Sci-
entific, 2014) pp. 81‚Äì143.

5 C.
Perroni,
D.
Bercioux,
V.
M.
Ramaglia,
and
V. Cataudella, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 19,
186227 (2007).

6 V. M. Ramaglia, V. Cataudella, G. De Filippis,
and
C. Perroni, Physical Review B 73, 155328 (2006).

7 S. Caprara, F. Peronaci,
and M. Grilli, Physical Review
Letters 109, 196401 (2012).

8 D. Bucheli, M. Grilli, F. Peronaci, G. Seibold,
and
S. Caprara, Physical Review B 89, 195448 (2014).

9 S. Caprara, D. Bucheli, M. Grilli, J. Biscaras, N. Bergeal,
S. Hurand, C. Feuillet-Palma, J. Lesueur, A. Rastogi, and
R. Budhani, in Spin, Vol. 4 (World Scientific, 2014) p.
1440004.

10 C. R. Ast, J. Henk, A. Ernst, L. Moreschini, M. C. Falub,
D. Pacil√©, P. Bruno, K. Kern,
and M. Grioni, Physical
Review Letters 98, 186807 (2007).

11 M.
Sakano,
J.
Miyawaki,
A.
Chainani,
Y.
Takata,
T. Sonobe, T. Shimojima, M. Oura, S. Shin, M. Bahramy,
R. Arita, et al., Physical Review B 86, 085204 (2012).

12 K. Ishizaka, M. Bahramy, H. Murakawa, M. Sakano,
T. Shimojima, T. Sonobe, K. Koizumi, S. Shin, H. Miya-
hara, A. Kimura, et al., Nature materials 10, 521 (2011).

13 M. Liebmann, C. Rinaldi, D. Di Sante, J. Kellner, C. Pauly,
R. N. Wang, J. E. Boschker, A. Giussani, S. Bertoli,
M. Cantoni, et al., Advanced Materials 28, 560 (2016).

14 Y. Feng, Q. Jiang, B. Feng, M. Yang, T. Xu, W. Liu,
X. Yang, M. Arita, E. F. Schwier, K. Shimada, et al., Na-
ture communications 10, 1 (2019).

15 V. Brosco and C. Grimaldi, Physical Review B 95, 195164
(2017).

16 L. P. Gor‚Äôkov and E. I. Rashba, Physical Review Letters
87, 037004 (2001).

17 A. Chaplik and L. Magarill, Physical review letters 96,
126402 (2006).

18 E. Cappelluti, C. Grimaldi,
and F. Marsiglio, Physical
review letters 98, 167002 (2007).

19 J. P. Vyasanakere and V. B. Shenoy, Physical Review B
83, 094515 (2011).

20 S. Takei, C.-H. Lin, B. M. Anderson,
and V. Galitski,
Physical Review A 85, 023626 (2012).

21 G. Goldstein, C. Aron, and C. Chamon, Physical Review
B 92, 020504 (2015).

22 J. Hutchinson, J. Hirsch, and F. Marsiglio, Physical Re-
view B 97, 184513 (2018).

23 H. Allami, O. Starykh, and D. Pesin, Physical Review B
99, 104505 (2019).

24 D. Stornaiuolo, D. Massarotti, R. Di Capua, P. Lucignano,
G. Pepe, M. Salluzzo, and F. Tafuri, Physical Review B
95, 140502 (2017).

25 D. Massarotti,
A. Miano,
F. Tafuri,
and D. Stor-
naiuolo, Superconductor Science and Technology
33,
034007 (2020).

26 P. Rout, E. Maniv, and Y. Dagan, Physical Review Letters
119, 237002 (2017).

27 A. Ptok, K. Rodr√≠guez, and K. J. Kapcia, Physical Review
Materials 2, 024801 (2018).

28 C. Liu, X. Yan, D. Jin, Y. Ma, H.-W. Hsiao, Y. Lin, T. M.
Bretz-Sullivan, X. Zhou, J. Pearson, B. Fisher, et al., arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.07416 (2020).

29 R. Mori, P. B. Marshall, K. Ahadi, J. D. Denlinger,
S. Stemmer, and A. Lanzara, Nature communications 10,
1 (2019).

30 K. Gotlieb, C.-Y. Lin, M. Serbyn, W. Zhang, C. L. Small-
wood, C. Jozwiak, H. Eisaki, Z. Hussain, A. Vishwanath,
and A. Lanzara, Science 362, 1271 (2018).

31 D.
Stornaiuolo
and
F.
Tafuri,
in

Fundamentals and Frontiers of the Josephson Effect
(Springer, 2019) pp. 275‚Äì337.

32 R.
Caruso,
H.
G.
Ahmad,
A.
Pal,
G.
P.
Pepe,
D. Massarotti,
M. G. Blamire,
and F. Tafuri, in

EPJ Web of Conferences, Vol. 233 (EDP Sciences, 2020)
p. 05007.

33 A. Valletta,
A. Bianconi,
A. Perali,
and N. Saini,
Zeitschrift f√ºr Physik B Condensed Matter 104, 707
(1997).

34 A. Bianconi, A. Valletta, A. Perali, and N. L. Saini, Phys-
ica C: Superconductivity 296, 269 (1998).

35 A. Bianconi, Journal of Superconductivity 18, 625 (2005).
36 D. Innocenti, N. Poccia, A. Ricci, A. Valletta, S. Caprara,
A. Perali, and A. Bianconi, Physical Review B 82, 184528
(2010).


20

37 A. Shanenko, M. D. Croitoru, A. Vagov, V. M. Axt, A. Per-
ali, and F. Peeters, Physical Review A 86, 033612 (2012).

38 A. Bianconi, D. Innocenti, A. Valletta, and A. Perali, in

Journal of Physics: Conference Series, Vol. 529 (IOP Pub-
lishing, 2014) p. 012007.

39 T. Jarlborg and A. Bianconi, Scientific reports 6, 24816
(2016).

40 M. V. Mazziotti, A. Valletta, G. Campi, D. Innocenti,
A. Perali,
and A. Bianconi, EPL (Europhysics Letters)
118, 37003 (2017).

41 M. Cariglia, A. Vargas-Paredes, M. M. Doria, A. Bianconi,
M. V. Milo≈°eviƒá, and A. Perali, Journal of Superconduc-
tivity and Novel Magnetism 29, 3081 (2016).

42 D. Innocenti, S. Caprara, N. Poccia, A. Ricci, A. Valletta,
and A. Bianconi, Superconductor Science and Technology
24, 015012 (2010).

43 G. E. Volovik, Physics-Uspekhi 61, 89 (2018).
44 I. Lifshitz et al., Sov. Phys. JETP 11, 1130 (1960).
45 Y. Uemura, Physica C: Superconductivity 282, 194 (1997).
46 N. Andrenacci, A. Perali, P. Pieri, and G. Strinati, Phys-
ical Review B 60, 12410 (1999).

47 A. Perali, P. Pieri, and G. Strinati, Physical review letters
93, 100404 (2004).

48 F. Pistolesi and G. C. Strinati, Physical Review B 49, 6356
(1994).

49 A. Bussmann-Holder and A. Bianconi, Phys. Rev. B 67,
132509 (2003).

50 Y. Bang and H.-Y. Choi, Phys. Rev. B 78, 134523 (2008).
51 O. V. Dolgov, I. I. Mazin, D. Parker, and A. A. Golubov,
Phys. Rev. B 79, 060502 (2009).

52 A. Perali, A. Valletta, G. Bardeiloni, A. Bianconi, A. Lan-
zara, and N. Saint, Journal of Superconductivity 10, 355
(1997).

53 A. Perali, D. Innocenti, A. Valletta, and A. Bianconi, Su-
perconductor Science and Technology 25, 124002 (2012).

54 L. Savary, J. Ruhman, J. W. F. Venderbos, L. Fu,
and
P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 96, 214514 (2017).

55 P. M. R. Brydon, L. Wang, M. Weinert, and D. F. Agter-
berg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 177001 (2016).

56 L. Salasnich, A. Shanenko, A. Vagov, J. A. Aguiar,
and
A. Perali, Physical Review B 100, 064510 (2019).

57 T. T. Saraiva, P. J. F. Cavalcanti, A. Vagov, A. S. Vasenko,
A. Perali, L. Dell‚ÄôAnna, and A. A. Shanenko, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 125, 217003 (2020).


