Title: Photonic topological valley-locked waveguides 
 
Qiaolu Chen, Li Zhang, Qinghui Yan, Rui Xi, Hongsheng Chen*, and Yihao Yang* 
 
Q. Chen, L. Zhang, Q. Yan, Dr. R. Xi, Prof. H. Chen, Dr. Y. Yang 
Interdisciplinary Center for Quantum Information, State Key Laboratory of Modern 
Optical Instrumentation, College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. 
(*hansomchen@zju.edu.cn (Hongsheng Chen); yangyihaooo@zju.edu.cn (Yihao 
Yang)) 
 
Q. Chen, L. Zhang, Q. Yan, Dr. R. Xi, Prof. H. Chen, Dr. Y. Yang 
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Science and Technology Innovation Center, Key Lab. of 
Advanced Micro/Nano Electronic Devices & Smart Systems of Zhejiang, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou 310027, China. 
 
Q. Chen, L. Zhang, Q. Yan, Dr. R. Xi, Prof. H. Chen, Dr. Y. Yang 
International Joint Innovation Center, ZJU-UIUC Institute, Zhejiang University, 
Haining 314400, China 
 
Dr. Y. Yang 
Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical 
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371, 
Singapore. 
 
Dr. Y. Yang 
Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies, The Photonics Institute, Nanyang 
Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore. 
 
Keywords: topological photonics, waveguides, valley Hall effect. 
 
 


Abstract: 

Topological valley kink states have become a significant research frontier with 

considerable intriguing applications such as robust on-chip communications and 

topological lasers. Unlike guided modes with adjustable widths in most conventional 

waveguides, the valley kink states are usually highly confined around the domain walls 

and thus lack the mode width degree of freedom (DOF), posing a serious limitation to 

potential device applications. Here, by adding a photonic crystal (PhC) featuring a 

Dirac point between two valley PhCs with opposite valley-Chern numbers, we design 

and experimentally demonstrate topological valley-locked waveguides (TVLWs) with 

tunable mode widths. The photoinc TVLWs could find unique applications, such as 

high-energy-capacity topological channel intersections, valley-locked energy 

concentrators, and topological cavities with designable confinement, as verified 

numerically and experimentally. The TVLWs with width DOF could be beneficial to 

interface with the exsisting photonic waveguides and devices, and serve as a novel 

platform for practical use of topological lasing, field enhancement, on-chip 

communicaitons, and high-capacity energy transport. 
 


1. Introduction: 

Inspired by the valleytronics,[1-4] researchers have recently proposed a novel class 

of photonic crystals (PhCs) featuring non-zero Berry curvatures at two opposite valleys 

in their band structures, also known as valley PhCs.[5-15] At domain walls between two 

valley PhCs with opposite valley-Chern numbers, valley-locked kink states exist, which 

are topologically protected against random disorders or defects, due to the strongly 

suppressed inter-valley scattering. Such robust valley kink states have shown excellent 

potentials in many modern photonic devices, such as topological channel 

intersections,[7,14,16] topological lasers,[17] and robust on-chip communications.[11-12,15] 

The widths of conventional waveguides, such as silicon rib waveguides and 

rectangular waveguides, are usually adjustable, providing a new degree of freedom 

(DOF) for manipulating guided modes and designing photonic devices.[18-21] More 

remarkably, the waveguides with the width DOF are more flexible to interface with 

other photonic waveguides or devices than those without the width DOF. However, as 

the valley kink states are usually highly confined around the domain walls, the previous 

domian wall structures lack the width DOF, which possess an obvious limitation to 

potential device applications.  

To overcome the above challenges, we design and experimentally demonstrate a 

topological valley-locked waveguide (TVLW), where a PhC featuring a Dirac point is 

sandwiched by two valley PhCs with opposite valley-Chern numbers. The topological 

guided modes in TVLWs are characterized with gapless dispersions, valley-momentum 

locking, robustness against defects, and, more importantly, a tunable mode width. Such 


TVLWs with the width DOF could be very promising in applications. For example, by 

abruptly adjusting the waveguide width, valley-locked reflection-free energy squeezing 

effect (similar to the squeezing effect in ε-near-zero narrow waveguide channels)[22-23] 

could be achieved, which may lead to potential applications in light harvesting[24], field 

enhancement,[24] and boosting nonlinear effects.[25] Additionally, topological cavities 

based on TVLWs have tunable mode confinement, which could enable novel 

topological lasing functions.[17,26-28] Via direct near-field measurements, we 

experimentally demonstrate a high-energy-capacity topological channel intersection, a 

valley-locked topological energy concentrator, and a topological cavity with tailorable 

mode confinement. 

 

2. Results and Discussions 

The designed TVLW comprises three domains A |Bx| C (see Figures 1a and 1b), 

where x represents the number of layers in domain B. Domain B is a PhC with lattice 

constant a = 12.12 mm, w = 0.6 mm, r = 7 mm, and l1 = l2 = 2.5 mm. Each unit cell has 

a metallic pattern with 35-μm thickness, deposited on a dielectric substrate (F4B with 

relative permittivity ε = 2.20 and thickness h = 2 mm). Due to the C6 symmetry, the 

PhC in domain B features a pair of Dirac points at K and K’ valleys in the band structure 

at 9.39 GHz (see blue lines in Figure 1c). Domain A and C are two valley PhCs with 

opposite valley-Chern numbers, which have similar unit cells to those in domain B, 

except that l1 = 2.1 mm and l2 =2.9 mm in domain A and l1 = 2.9 mm and l2 =2.1 mm in 

domain C. Because l1 ≠ l2, the inversion symmetry of the PhCs in domain A and C is 


broken. Consequently, the Dirac points are lifted, and a topological valley bandgap 

opens from 8.62 to 10.26 GHz (see red lines in Figure 1c).  

Figure 1d shows the dispersion relations of the guided modes in the TVLW with 

layers x = 8, i.e., A |B8| C. One can see a gapless dispersion marked as a red line within 

the bulk bandgap. The group velocity of the topological guided mode bounded to K and 

K’ valleys is exactly opposite, exhibiting the valley-chirality locking property, which 

shares similarity to that of valley kink states in A | C domain wall.[5-15] From the 

simulated field (Hz) map of guided mode (see the right panel of Figure 1d), one can see 

the field concentrates in entire domain B and decays into domain A and C, in contrast 

to the field distributions of the valley kink states. In addition, there are two 0th non-

topological guided modes with gapped dispersions that lack momentum-valley locking 

property.[16] Between 0+th and 0-th modes, there is a topological frequency window 

highlighted in shaded grey, where only the topological guided mode exists. In Figure 

1e, it is observed that the width of the topological frequency window decreases as x in 

domain B increases. Meanwhile, higher-order non-topological guided modes appear in 

the bulk bandgap. To understand it, one can consider an extreme case that, when x in 

domain B is large enough, the bulk-edge correspondence between domain A and C is 

so weak that the topological frequency window tends to close to finally reproduce the 

Dirac points of the PhC in domain B. 

 


 

Figure 1. A topological valley-locked waveguide (TVLW) consisting of three 

domains A |Bx| C. (a) Photograph of an experimental sample. The white rhombus or 

the hexagon represents a unit cell. (b) Schematic view of the TVLW. Right panel: unit 

cells of PhCs in domain A and C with broken inversion symmetry, and that in domain 

B with inversion symmetry. The structural parameters are l1 = 2.1 mm and l2 = 2.9 mm 

for domain A (l1 = l2 = 2.5 mm for domain B, l1 = 2.9 mm and l2 = 2.1 mm for domain 

C), h = 2 mm, w = 0.6 mm, r = 7 mm, and lattice constant a = 12.12 mm. The 

background dielectric material has a relative permittivity ε = 2.20. (c) Band diagrams 

of PhC in domain B (blue lines) with a Dirac point at 9.39 GHz, and band diagrams of 

PhC in domain A/C (red lines) with a bandgap from 8.62 to 10.26 GHz. Inset is the first 

Brillouin zone. (d) Band diagrams of A |B8| C domain wall. Red line: a topological 

guided mode. The 0th bands are non-topological gapped guided modes. The grey 

regions represent the projection of the bulk bands. The shaded area depicts a topological 


frequency window, where only the topological guided mode exists. Right panel: 

simulated field map of Hz component showing the topological guided mode. (e) The 

width of the topological frequency window as a function of number of layers x in 

domain B.  

 

The topological guided mode in the TVLW can be explained from an effective 

Hamiltonian model intuitively. According to the k•p theory,[7,29] the effective 

Hamiltonian of the PhCs around the K valley is 

(
)
2
K
D
x
x
D
y
y
D
z
H
k
v
k
v
k
mv
δ
δ
δ
σ
δ
σ
σ
=
+
+
 

where δk = k-kK is the displacement of wave vector k to K valley in momentum space, 

vD is the group velocity, and σi = (i=x, y, z) are elements in the Pauli matrices. m is the 

effective mass term with m < 0 for domain A, m = 0 for domain B, and m > 0 for domain 

C. We can also obtain the effective Hamiltonian around K’ valley by applying the time-

reversal operation. Solving the eigenvalue equation 
HK
w
δ
= δ φ
 , the dispersion 

relation can be derived as 

2
2
2
2
2
4
)
D (
x
y
D
w
v
k
k
m v
δ
δ
δ
=
+
+
 . Next, we consider the 

topological guided mode 
φABC
 in the TVLW. According to the field map in Figure 1d 

that the 
φABC
 mode exponentially attenuates along +y direction in domain A and along 

–y in domain C, we obtain a specific solution with 
D
x
w
v
k
δ
δ
=
  and 
(1,1)T
φABC
=
 , 

whose slope 
D
v  is the same as that of bulk states in domain B (
D
w
v
k
δ
δ
= ±
). Thus, the 

topological guided mode could be regarded as a combination of the valley kink states 

in A | C domain wall and the bulk states in domain B.[16] 

We then plot the simulated Hz field maps of three TVLWs with x = 2, 8, 16 at 9.20 


GHz in Figure 2a. As displayed in the field maps, the energy is concentrated in domain 

B for all three cases. Besides, by integrating Hz field on the waveguide cross section, 

we obtain the energy capacity for the TVLWs with different x, which obviously reveals 

that a TVLW with larger x in domain B has higher capacity for energy transport (i.e., 

9.3 A•m for x = 2, 33.0 A•m for x = 8, and 61.4 A•m for x = 16). Note that we use a line 

of 2, 8, 16 identical point sources for TVLWs with x = 2, 8, 16, respectively, in order to 

guarantee the uniform energy distributions along the waveguides.  

Next, we set an experiment to visualize the topological guided mode in a straight 

TVLW with x = 8. In the experiments, an electric-dipole-like antenna is fixed on the 

left side of the TVLW, to excite the topological guided mode, and another magnetic 

dipole antenna is placed above the sample to measure the field patterns or transmissions. 

Both antennas are connected to the vector network analyzer (VNA) to record the 

amplitude and phase of the measured field (see more details in Supporting Information). 

The measured transmissions (see Figure 2b) show an obvious bandgap from 8.60 

to 10.28 GHz. Moreover, we directly map out the topological guided mode by scanning 

the Hz component on the xy plane above the experimental sample. Figure 2c is the 

measured |Hz|2 field distributions at 9.60 GHz, which clearly shows the energy is 

localized in domain B with suppressed inter-valley scattering. The spatial Fourier 

spectrum in the inset of Figure 2c (transformed from the interior region marked as a 

green rectangle) indicates that only the K valley is excited, hence the topological guided 

mode is K-valley locked. Besides, by applying the spatial Fourier transform along the 

green dashed line in Figure 2c, we obtain the experimental dispersion relations of the 


topological guided mode (see Figure 2d), which have a good agreement with the 

simulated counterparts.[7,16] 

 

Figure 2. Topological guided mode in a straight TVLW and its experimental 

characterization. (a) Top panels: schematics of three straight TVLWs with x = 2, 8, 16. 

Bottom panels: simulated Hz field maps at 9.20 GHz in three straight TVLWs. (b) 

Measured transmissions in the straight TVLW with x = 8. Blue line: bulk state. Red line: 

guided mode in the TVLW. Shaded area: bulk bandgap. (c) Measured |Hz|2 field 

distributions at 9.60 GHz in the straight TVLW with x = 8. Green star: point source. 

Inset: spatial Fourier spectrum transformed from the field pattern in the green 

rectangular area. Green hexagon: the first Brillouin zone. (d) Measured dispersions that 

are obtained by applying Fourier transform to the field pattern along a green dashed 

line in (c). Green solid lines are the simulated dispersions.  

 

We further design a valley-locked topological channel intersection, based on the 

TVLW.[16] The configurations of the topological channel intersection are shown in the 

top panel of Figure 3a or 3b, which consists of five domains, and domain B has layers 


x = 8. There are four ports labeled as 1-4 at the terminals of the outer domain walls. To 

experimentally show the device performance, we place the source at port 1 and port 4, 

respectively, and measure the field distributions at 9.60 GHz. The measured results are 

shown in the bottom panels of Figures 3a and 3b, where the green stars denote the 

sources. One can observe that the topological guided mode launched at port 1 (port 4) 

could propagate to the port 2 and port 4 (port 1 and port 3), and is suppressed when 

transporting to port 3 (port 2). This is because, when we excite the source at port 1 (port 

4), the transport routes from port 1 to port 2 or port 4 (from port 4 to port 1 or port 3) 

have the same valley pseudo-spin, while the transport routes from port 1 to port 3 (from 

port 4 to port 2) have the opposite valley pseudo-spins.[7,14,16] 

Besides, we measure the transmissions (i.e., Hz amplitude ratios), which are 

labeled as Sij by the input port j and output port i. From the transmissions, it is evident 

that the transmissions S21 and S41 are much larger than S31 within the photonic 

bandgap frequency window (see Figure 3c). Similar phenomenon could be found when 

launching the excitation at port 4 (see Figure 3d). These observations indicate that in 

the channels, the valley pseudo-spins are bounded to the propagations of the topological 

guided mode, confirming the momentum-valley locking in the TVLW. 

 


 

Figure 3. A TVLW-based topological channel intersection. (a), (b) Top panels: 

schematics of a topological channel intersection with layers x = 8. Bottom panels: 

measured |Hz|2 field distributions in the topological channel intersection at 9.60 GHz 

when placing a point source at port 1 (a) and port 4 (b), respectively. Green star: point 

source. (c), (d) Measured transmissions when placing a point source at port 1 (c) and 

port 4 (d), respectively. The region highlighted in shaded gray indicates the bulk 

bandgap.  

     

Since the existence of the topological guided mode is independent of the number 

of layers x in domain B, we can take this advantage to realize valley-locked reflection-

immune energy squeezing or concentrating.[16] Figure 4a shows the schematic of a 

topological concentrator composed of three domains. The width of domain B abruptly 


changes from x = 16 to x = 1 in the middle of the device. Figure 4b illustrates the 

experimental energy transport of the topological guided mode excited by a point source 

marked as a green star. It is evident that the energy firstly converges in the narrow part 

of domain B and then diverges in the broad part of domain B. To quantitatively analyze 

the energy intensity, the measured intensity profiles along three dashed green lines in 

Figure 4b are plotted in Figure 4c, where the energy intensity along line 2 is much larger 

than that along line 1 and line 3, indicating a strong field enhancement. Such a 

topological concentrator possibly finds applications in energy harvesting, field 

enhancement, and boosting nonlinear effect.[24-25] 

 

 

Figure 4. A valley-locked topological energy concentrator. (a) Schematic of a 

topological concentrator. The width of domain B abruptly changes from 16 layers to 1 

layer in the middle of the device. (b) Measured |Hz|2 field distributions in the 

topological concentrator at 9.55 GHz. Green star: point source. (c) Measured intensity 

profiles along three dashed green lines in (b).  

 

Topological resonant cavities with tunable confinement and high energy capacity 

could also be devised based on the TVLW, which could be very useful for robust 

lasing.[17,26-28] Here, we design a topological cavity with triangular geometry that 


consists of A, C, B with layers x = 4, as depicted in the top panel of Figure 5a. The 

bottom panel of Figure 5a is the simulated Hz field distributions in the cavity A |B4| C 

at 8.9 GHz, showing the energy is uniformly distributed in the whole cavity. For 

reference, we design a topological cavity A | C with only A and C domains, and the 

corresponding simulated Hz field distributions at 8.8 GHz are displayed in Figure 5b. 

Compared to the conventional topological cavity A | C,[17] the cavity A |B4| C has higher 

energy capacity, which is evidenced by the simulated energy intensity along the dashed 

blue lines in Figures 5a and 5b, as shown in Figures 5c and 5d. Besides, the energy 

capacity is tailorable, by changing the number of layers x in domain B.  

To further confirm the topological cavity modes, we perform the experiments to 

measure the |Hz|2 field distributions at 9.55 GHz (see Figure 5e). Additionally, the 

spectrum intensity of the topological cavity A |B4| C illustrates four regularly spaced 

peaks of topological cavity modes, locating at 9.22, 9.55, 9.91, and 10.31 GHz (see 

Figure 5f). These regularly spaced peaks are the signature of running modes circulating 

around the triangular cavity without experiencing localization, owing to the existence 

of topological protection of the cavity modes. Such a topologically-protected cavity 

with tunable confinement and high energy capacity could be very promising for novel 

topological lasing.[17,26-28] 

 


 

Figure 5. A topological cavity based on the TVLW. (a), (b) Top panels: schematics 

of topological cavities composed of A |B4| C (a) and A | C (b), respectively. Bottom 

panels: simulated Hz field distributions in the cavity A |B4| C at 8.9 GHz (a) and in the 

cavity A | C at 8.8 GHz (b), respectively. (c), (d) Simulated energy intensity along the 

dashed blue lines in (a) and (b), respectively. (e) Measured |Hz|2 field distributions in 

the cavity A |B4| C at 9.55 GHz. Green star: point source. (f) Spectrum intensity of the 

topological cavity A |B4| C with four regularly spaced peaks at 9.22, 9.55, 9.91, and 

10.31 GHz. 

 

3. Conclusions: 

To conclude, we experimentally demonstrate a photonic TVLW where a Dirac PhC 

is sandwiched by two valley PhCs with opposite valley-Chern numbers. The 

topological guided mode in the TVLW is characterized with gapless dispersions, 

momentum-valley locking, robustness against defects, and tunable mode width. The 


present TVLW has found some unique applications, such as high-energy-capacity 

topological channel intersections, valley-locked energy concentrators, and topological 

cavities with tailorable mode confinement, which are enabled by the mode width DOF. 

Besides, in comparison to the previous domain wall structures hosting the valley kink 

states, the TVLW is more flexible to interface with the existing photonic waveguides 

and devices. Looking ahead, there are further potentials to incorporate the TVLW with 

mode width DOF into other photonic active device applications with high energy 

capacities. 

 

Supporting Information 

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. 

 

Acknowledgements 

The work at Zhejiang University was sponsored by the National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (NNSFC) under Grants No. 61625502, No.11961141010, and No. 

61975176, the Top-Notch Young Talents Program of China, and the Fundamental 

Research Funds for the Central Universities.  

 

Conflict of Interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest.  
 

References: 

 [1] Y. P. Shkolnikov, E. P. De Poortere, E. Tutuc, M. Shayegan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89. 

 [2] O. Gunawan, Y. P. Shkolnikov, K. Vakili, T. Gokmen, E. P. De Poortere, M. Shayegan, Phys. Rev. 


Lett. 2006, 97. 

 [3] A. Rycerz, J. Tworzydlo, C. W. J. Beenakker, Nat. Phys. 2007, 172. 

 [4] J. R. Schaibley, H. Yu, G. Clark, P. Rivera, J. S. Ross, K. L. Seyler, W. Yao, X. Xu, Nat. Rev. 

Mater. 2016, 1. 

 [5] T. Ma, G. Shvets, New J. Phys. 2016, 25012. 

 [6] Z. Gao, Z. Yang, F. Gao, H. Xue, Y. Yang, J. Dong, B. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96. 

 [7] X. Wu, Y. Meng, J. Tian, Y. Huang, H. Xiang, D. Han, W. Wen, Nat. Commun. 2017, 8. 

 [8] F. Gao, H. Xue, Z. Yang, K. Lai, Y. Yu, X. Lin, Y. Chong, G. Shvets, B. Zhang, Nat. Phys. 2018, 

14. 

 [9] J. Noh, S. Huang, K. P. Chen, M. C. Rechtsman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 120. 

[10] X. Chen, W. Deng, J. Lu, J. Dong, Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97. 

[11] M. I. Shalaev, W. Walasik, A. Tsukernik, Y. Xu, N. M. Litchinitser, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2019, 14. 

[12] X. He, E. Liang, J. Yuan, H. Qiu, X. Chen, F. Zhao, J. Dong, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10. 

[13] Q. Chen, L. Zhang, M. He, Z. Wang, X. Lin, F. Gao, Y. Yang, B. Zhang, H. Chen, Adv. Opt. Mater. 

2019, 7. 

[14] L. Zhang, Y. Yang, M. He, H. X. Wang, Z. Yang, E. Li, F. Gao, B. Zhang, R. Singh, J. H. Jiang, H. 

Chen, Laser Photonics Rev. 2019, 13. 

[15] Y. Yang, Y. Yamagami, X. Yu, P. Pitchappa, J. Webber, B. Zhang, M. Fujita, T. Nagatsuma, R. 

Singh, Nat. Photon. 2020, 14. 

[16] M. Wang, W. Zhou, L. Bi, C. Qiu, M. Ke, Z. Liu, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11. 

[17] Y. Zeng, U. Chattopadhyay, B. Zhu, B. Qiang, J. Li, Y. Jin, L. Li, A. G. Davies, E. H. Linfield, B. 

Zhang, Y. Chong, Q. J. Wang, Nature 2020, 578. 

[18] A. G. Rickrnan, G. T. Reed, IEE Proc.-Optoelectron. 1994, 6. 

[19] Y. Rong, K. A. Zaki, IEEE T. Microw. Theory 2000, 48. 

[20] O. Powell, J. Lightwave Technol. 2002, 20. 

[21] Y. Cassivi, L. Perregrini, P. Arcioni, M. Bressan, K. Wu, G. Conciauro, IEEE Microw. Wirel. Co. 

2002, 12. 

[22] M. Silveirinha, N. Engheta, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97. 

[23] R. Liu, Q. Cheng, T. Hand, J. J. Mock, T. J. Cui, S. A. Cummer, D. R. Smith, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 

100. 

[24] Q. Liang, T. Wang, Z. Lu, Q. Sun, Y. Fu, W. Yu, Adv. Opt. Mater. 2013, 1. 

[25] M. Soljacic, J. D. Joannopoulos, Nat. Mater. 2004, 3. 

[26] B. Bahari, A. Ndao, F. Vallini, A. A. El, Y. Fainman, B. Kante, Science 2017, 358. 

[27] G. Harari, M. A. Bandres, Y. Lumer, M. C. Rechtsman, Y. D. Chong, M. Khajavikhan, D. N. 

Christodoulides, M. Segev, Science 2018, 359. 

[28] M. A. Bandres, S. Wittek, G. Harari, M. Parto, J. Ren, M. Segev, D. N. Christodoulides, M. 

Khajavikhan, Science 2018, 1231. 

[29] J. Mei, Y. Wu, C. T. Chan, Z. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B, 2012, 86. 
  


