Accessing topological surface states and 

negative MR in sculpted nanowires of Bi2Te3 

at ultra-low temperature 

Reena Yadav†, ‡,  Biplab Bhattacharyya‡, Animesh Pandey†, ‡, Mandeep Kaur‡,   

R. P. Aloysius,†, ‡ Anurag Gupta,†, ‡ and Sudhir Husale,†, ‡ * 

† Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad-201002, India. 

‡ National Physical Laboratory, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Dr. K. S Krishnan Road, New Delhi-110012, 

India. 

 
 

*E-mail: husalesc@nplindia.org 

 

Abstract 

Milling of 2D flakes is a simple method to fabricate nanomaterial of any desired shape and size. Inherently milling process 

can introduce the impurity or disorder which might show exotic quantum transport phenomenon when studied at the low 

temperature. Here we report temperature dependent weak antilocalization (WAL) effects in the sculpted nanowires of 

topological insulator in the presence of perpendicular magnetic field. The quadratic and linear magnetoconductivity (MC) 

curves at low temperature (> 2K) indicate the bulk contribution in the transport.  A cusp feature in magnetoconductivity 

curves (positive magnetoresistance) at ultra low (< 1K) temperature and at magnetic field (< 1T) represent the WAL 

indicating the transport through surface states.  The MC curves are discussed by using the 2D Hikami –Larkin-Nagaoka 

theory. The cross-over/interplay nature of positive and negative magnetoresistance observed in the MR curve at ultra-low 

temperature. Our results indicate that transport through topological surface states (TSS) in sculpted nanowires of Bi2Te3 can 

be achieved at mK range and linear MR observed at ~ 2 K could be the coexistence of electron transport through TSS and 

contribution from the bulk band. 

Keywords: Topological Insulators, magnetoresistance, low temperature, FIB  

Supplementary material for this article is available online 

1. Introduction 

Topological insulators (TI) possess very interesting transport through topologically protected metallic surface states (TSS)1,2 

without backscattering events and these TSS are potentially important for achieving the dissipation less electron transport in 

nano devices. Electron’s spin and momentum are locked in these materials and are protected by the time reversal symmetry 

due to which electron acquires  Berry phase. Accessing transport through TSS is a challenging task because influence of the 

bulk channel which often gives signatures of the multiple conduction channels3,4. Dominance of bulk states indicates the fermi 


 

 
2 
 

 

level in the bulk bands which impedes the transport through the TSS. WAL (weak anti-localization) effect is supposed to be a 

property of topological surface states and occurrence of it indicates the TSS dominated transport.  

The magnetoresistance (MR) study is a simple method to investigate the type of conduction mechanism such as  weak 

antilocalization (WAL) and weak localization (WL) effects which represent corrections to the conductivity arising from 

quantum interference of the electron wave functions between two time-reversed paths. These effects are noticeable in quantum 

diffusive regime where mean free path is much shorter than phase coherence length of quasi particles. Numerous studies have 

shown that these corrections in conductivity are affected by thickness of films, interaction of surface state and bulk carriers, 

presence of disorder and electron-electron interactions, where a crossover from WAL to WL can be observed5. 

The observance of linear MR (magnetoresistance) and negative MR (NMR), their cross over are important for technological 

applications as well understanding of these MR signatures is a basic research problem and recently it has been subject of intense 

research6-14 in topological insulator based materials or in strongly correlated systems. NMR has been observed in non-magnetic 

materials such as Dirac and Weyl semimetals resulting from chiral anomaly15,16. However, in topological insulators NMR is 

not well defined and the observation of unusual NMR in these material is signature of peculiar physics9,11,17. Thus, there is 

growing interest to understand the mechanism for origin of NMR in TIs based nanomaterials. 

 

Further robustness of the surface states is mainly theoretically predicated and there is very less work has been done on the 

experimental testing of TSS to answer very basic question whether one can demonstrate the robustness of TSS in the presence 

of introduced disorders (nonmagnetic impurities and deformations) in the sample without breaking the fundamental symmetry. 

 

There are some strategies to make bulk insulating samples for accessing the transport through surface states e.g. suppressing 

bulk carriers by metal doping18, changing the experimental conditions like gate voltage19, improving the crystal quality20, use 

of ultrathin samples21, etc. The other alternative approach of nanosculpting or nanomilling reduces the size of sample, from 

micron sheets to nanowire and this method has been reported in the past22-26. The nanostructures such as nanowires or 

nanoribbons are more preferable over the bulk samples because of the reduction in surface to volume ratio which is useful for 

realizing the transport through the TSS. It has been observed that sculpting width of a nanowire down to 150 nm can be made 

easily and further reduction in the width of the nanowire may lose the crystalline nature or becomes more amorphous26. The  

Ga ions used during sculpting of the samples are also inherently introduces the impurity in the sample which might change the 

transport property at low temp transport10. Thus this method inherently introduces the deformations or impurities in the samples 

which is simple and important for investigating the robustness of TSS and MR studies. 

 

Hence to overcome the dominance of bulk contribution, to study the MR signatures and to check the robustness of TSS we 

reduce the sample dimension by simply sculpting the nanosheeets into the nanowires or nanoribbons and we report the 

magnetoconductivity measurements on bismuth telluride nanowires at ultra low temp. The temp dependent evolution of WAL 

effects in magnetoresistance/conductivity curves have been studied here. The MR shows temp dependent evolution of three 

phases i.e. quadratic, linear and nonlinear. We analyze these results using Hikami –Larkin-Nagaoka (HLN) equations and study 

the phase coherence length, its temperature dependence  and 2D nature of the transport.  Surprisingly we find negative MR at 

ultra low temp < 0.12 K and crossover between positive MR to negative MR was observed which we correlates could be due 

to disorder in the system. Our results indicate that LMR (linear magnetoresitance) observed at high temp range (>2K) is not 

sufficient for accessing the TSS and measurements at ultra low temp give more access to TSS.  


 

 
3 
 

 

 

2. Results and discussion 

Figure 1 shows the temperature dependent quadratic to linear MR change in the presence of perpendicular magnetic field. 

Inset in Fig. 1a shows the nanowire device used for the low temp measurements where sculpted Bi2Te3 nanowire is electrically 

contacted by using Pt electrodes.  The MR curves are normalized and plotted for change in MR %. The curves measured at 

10K and 5 K show quadratic or parabolic nature of MR with no linearity. At high temperature logarithmic MR mostly indicates 

the presence of Coulomb interaction. The quadratic nature of MR has been observed in different topological systems mainly 

indicating the dominance of bulk transport27,28. The curves at 2K and 1K represent linear relationship (range 0-8 T). Contrast 

to pure metals which show a quadratic MR at low temp and saturates at high magnetic field but materials like topological 

insulators display non saturating positive LMR. The non-saturating linear MR often described as an origin of all states separated 

by landau levels. At 1K, MR shows sharp dip at low field corresponding to the suppression of WL (weak localization) effect. 

In the literature, MR measurements showing WAL effects were heavily used to prove the transport through TSS13,14,19,29-31.   

 

The dependency of MR on 1/B2 was observed for high temp 5 K and 10 K and is shown in the Fig. 1a. The black line curves 

show the HLN fitting performed using following equation no. 1. HLN analysis helps in understanding the phase coherence 

length and strength of spin orbit coupling of the 2D system and rigorously used for the study of electron localization problems 

involving spin orbit couplings and the magnetic scattering. Strong SOC (spin orbit coupling) suppresses electron – electron 

interactions hence we find usefulness of HLN equation to explain the perpendicular field MR.  

 

𝑅(𝐵)−𝑅(0𝑇)

𝑅(0𝑇)
= − [

𝑒

𝜋ℎ

2 { (

1

2 +

ℏ

4𝑒𝐿2𝐵) − 𝑙𝑛 (

ℏ

4𝑒𝐿2𝐵) } + 𝐵2] ∗ 𝑅(𝐵) 
 
 
 
 
(2) 

 

 

The logarithmic dependence of magnetoconductivity at high temp can be understood with the help of the electron -electron 

interaction which shows localization tendency indicating disordered nature. The arrows in Fig. 1 indicate that the equation 1 

does not show good fit at low field (< 1T) and deviates at high field ∼ (> 8T) for the temp 2K and 1K. At 2K, it clearly shows 


 

 
4 
 

 

the linear MR  but cusp like feature at low magnetic field is not convincing which might indicate that both TSS and bulk bands 

contributes during the electron transport.  

 

Fig. 1b shows the MR curves measured below 1K. Here we have observed three regions in MR curves namely occurrence 

of sharp cusp at very low fields which is represented by region I.  WAL effects showing sharp cusp in MR curves have been 

observed in TI systems like bismuth selenide nanoribbons32, Bi2Se3 thin films33,34 . The origin of such WAL effects is reported 

as the negative interference in electrons path and commonly observed in TIs which we have explained in the next section with 

the help of HLN analysis (equation 2). Region II for applied field B from ∼ 0.4 T to 1.5 T shows the negative MR. Recently 

negative MR study in Dirac metal or semimetal is very hot topic in research due to its different origin 10. Interestingly at critical 

field ∼1.6 T crossover takes place and curve displays positive MR as shown in the region III which we have explained in the 

later part.  

 

 

∆𝐺(𝐵) = 𝐺(𝐵) − 𝐺(0𝑇)@ 𝛼𝑒2

𝜋ℎ { (
ℏ

4𝑒𝐿2𝐵 + 1

2) − 𝑙𝑛 (
ℏ

4𝑒𝐿2𝐵)}                         (2) 

 

 

HLN relation describes the correction in the conductance in presence of spin orbit coupling to the temperature dependent 

WAL effects. In presence of perpendicular magnetic field, Zeeman Effect is suppressed in topological insulator due to strong 

spin orbit couplings35. HLN gives the quantum conductivity correction for both SOC and non SOC systems, for non SOC 

systems alpha prefator value changes sign and if in equation 1, alpha is set 0, the quantum correction term is no more and only 

classical MR is present. For the first part of equation, quantum term is valid at low field but when we add second classical 

parabolic term in equation 1 then it accounts for higher fields too. Further HLN fit estimate the phase coherence length, and a 

Figure 1. MR study of Bi2Te3 nanowire. a) MR measurements performed for temp  1K. Inset represent the 
device image. b) MR measurements performed at ultra low temp  0.14 K. Note that curves have been shifted 
for clarity


 

 
5 
 

 

prefactor (fitting parameter) which is mostly reported negative for topological insulator systems and observed in the range -0.3 

to - 1.1.  

 

Fig. 2a shows the HLN fitting performed for temp range 1K to 0.3 K range. MC curves clearly show the formation of cusp 

at low field only (-0.5 to 0.5 T).  Observance of WAL at low temp suggests that the self-intersecting scattering trajectories of 

electron follows destructive quantum interference. The conductivity of the nanowire at low temp increases this could be due to 

suppression of backscattering and decoherence of electrons. An increase in magnetic field destroys the WAL interference 

effects by lifting the time reversal symmetry. For higher fields B, the MC curves show linear dependency on the applied B for 

all the temp ranges as shown in the graph. The cusp becomes more sharp when measured for the temp range 0.17 K to 50 mK 

and interestingly the linearity observed at high field for the temp range 1 K to 0.3 K vanishes at this range (Fig 2b).  

Fig. 2c shows the   prefactor that tells the mechanism of transport (the number of channels present in the interference 

effect). The variation of  from -1 to -0.5 indicate the presence of transport through TSS and bulk bands i.e. both are weakly 

coupled and bulk is still contributing in the conductance. The obtained fit values of prefactor  and phase coherence length are 

shown in the Fig. 2c.  If the  value is 0 that corresponds to strong magnetic scattering and incoherent quantum phases. The  

values about -0.5 suggests surface state dominated transport and observed in presence of strong SOC and weak magnetic 

scattering. In this regime destructive interference occurs which give rise to WAL. Since our fitted values of  are not exactly -

0.5 for all the temp that means the regime where WAL and WL  

are competing with each other. Note that experimentally it is 

very difficult to prove the transport through TSS with single 

mechanism only and hence we assume the value alpha indicates 

the intermediate regime where the surface state dominated 

transport is present.   

The phase coherence length (L )  was obtained by using the 

above HLN fit equation 2 for the various temperature range as 

shown in the Fig. 2c which is complicated and represents 

contributions from several effects. We observed that L  decays 

Figure 2. Magnetoconductivity (MC) measurement data and HLN analysis of Bi2Te3 nanowire. a) MC curves measured 
at  0.3K and HLN curve fit (black line) at low field. b) MC curves measured at  0.17K. Black line curve is the HLN fit. 
Note that curves are shifted for clarity. c) Represent the HLN fit parameter  and L as a function of temp. 

Figure 3. Temp dependent evolution of MR curves. 


 

 
6 
 

 

with the increase in temperature and follows the power law fit relation L  T P.    If the value of fit parameter P is close to  -0.5 

which indicates two dimensional nature of the transport36 and dephasing due to prominent electron- electron interaction. The 

values less than -0.5 suggests the quasi one dimensional nature of the transport system. At higher temp, fit deviates which might 

indicate the electron phonon dominant interactions.  

 

Figure 3 shows the comparison of three MR curves measured at 1K, 0.176 K and 0.12K. The transition in MR curves are 

clearly visible from linear, linear with sharp cusp and mixed behavior respectively. The strong spin orbit scattering is supposed 

to show the weak antilocalization effects.  Spin orbit scattering can act like spin dependent magnetic scattering and this effect 

should overcome the transport through the bulk channels and may give rise the single channel representing the WAL and we 

have observed sharp cusp formation at temp far below (0.176 K) than the temp (1K) where we saw linear MR with no 

convincing WAL effect. Strikingly MR curve at 0.12 K shows negative MR for the field window (0.2 T to 2.5 T).  The negative 

(positive) contribution in MR (MC) curves originate at 0.14 K. The positive slope in MR curve is a characteristic of the WAL 

effects and negative slope indicates the WL effects due to the presence of strong SOC. Understanding the origin of it cannot be 

explained by the HLN model used here. Positive LMR and MR with sharp cusp have been observed and very common in 

topological insulators because magnetic field localizes electron in cyclotron orbits while negative MR is uncommon effect 

which underlies interesting physics. NMR has been previously observed in non-magnetic materials such as Dirac and Weyl 

semimetals and which is reported due to chiral anomaly15,16. However, in topological insulators chiral anomaly is not well 

defined and the observed NMR has created a great confusion in the past9,11,17. MR switching from positive to negative MR in 

the ultrathin films of Bi2Se3 was also reported due to the interference  of top and bottom surface wave functions which opens a 

gap in the surface states37. Previously negative MR was observed due to disorder formed in the sample which increases the 

density of defect states whereas the surface state were unaffected11. Other systems such as thin films of (Bi1-xSbx)2Te3 and 

Bi2(Te0.4Se0.6)3 have also reported NMR due to  Anderson localization in disordered systems and WL effects17,38. 

Crossover of weak anti-localization to weak localization is possible if Berry phase = 0, in case of WAL  Berry phase changes 

from  to 2 and this could be the one reason to observe such change in the MR.  Fermi level shifting causes competition 

between TSS electrons and bulk electrons and bulk gap can shift either valence bands or conduction bands. Thus Fermi level 

shift is also responsible for the crossover of the positive to negative magnetoconductivity. The WL is observed if the system is 

governed by the constructive interference of coherent quantum phases and often these type of systems show the presence of 

weak SOC or magnetic scattering. Previoulsy crossover from WAL to WL have been observed in many experiments, e.g. 

magnetically doped surface states39, due to presence of bulk states in topological insulator19  etc.  

 

In our present result, we observed a combination of WAL and WL in MR data. At low temp, where topological surface states 

(TSS) are dominant, we observed a WAL cusp near 0T, which is suggestive of the non-trivial -Berry phase that’s a signature 

of TIs. However, with increasing temp, we observe that at 0T cusp becomes weaker and fades away, suggesting more bulk 

conduction channels in the sample due to higher thermal activation energies. Also, we observe that with increasing B-field, 

there is an interplay between WAL and WL features. Previously such effects have been characterized using spin-orbit scattering 

time (τSO) and electron dephasing time (τϕ)40. In regime 1 (as shown in the fig 1b), τϕ τSO, this shows that spin orbit scattering 

leading to frequent spin flips is significant. The quantum interference of the electron wave functions between two time-reversed 

paths is destructive and manifests WAL effect (PMR). In regime 2 (fig  1b), τSO  τϕ, means spin orbit scattering is weak and it 


 

 
7 
 

 

barely affects the spin orientation. Resistance of the material decreases with increasing magnetic field in this regime which 

results into WL (NMR). This intermediate regime is represented as a crossover from WAL to WL and vice-versa. For regime 

3(fig 1b), τϕ  τSO, suggests strong spin orbit coupling leading to large increase in the resistance with magnetic field. This can 

be seen as large PMR in the devices. This physical picture can also be understood by using Berry phase language. Berry phase 

is a geometrical phase accumulated with a quantum mechanical system when system is subjected to an adiabatic cyclic 

process41. Time reversed scattering trajectories are equivalent to moving an electron on fermi surface by one cycle. So, electron 

picks up a Berry phase:  

  ϕ𝑏  ≡ −i ∫
dφ 〈ψk(r) |

∂

∂φ| ψk(r)〉 = 

2π
0
π (1 − ∆/2𝐸𝐹)   

For massless Dirac fermions which lies on the surface states, =0 so ϕ𝑏= π,  which suggests quantum interference between 

time reversed trajectories is destructive that suppresses backscattering and enhances the conductivity, leading to occurrence of 

WAL effect. While for massive bulk electrons, where mass term is the band gap between conduction and valence band, so ϕ𝑏=0. 

In this large-mass limit, quantum interference changes from destructive to constructive and crossover from WAL to WL takes 

place. 

 

Note that here we used sculpted nanowires which could inherently introduce the disorder in the system. It has been observed 

that the locally conducting puddles of hole or electrons appear in some regions when the valence band top or conduction band 

bottom crosses the chemical potential. Such system coexist positively and negatively charged empty donors and occupied 

acceptors respectively. The   thermally activated carriers do not show any significant screening at low temp and charged 

impurities pile up the fluctuations of the Coulomb potential7.  

In our previous work on FIB fabricated Bi2Te3 nanowires at ultra-low temp under in-plane parallel B-field, we demonstrated 

that spin-dependent scattering of surface and bulk electrons. The local magnetic moments produced by Ga ion milling 

contamination (with the help of first principles calculations) leads to the negative magnetoresistance in Bi2Te3 nanowires10. In 

this case under in-plane parallel B-field, Dirac cone only shifts in the X-Y plane with no gap term introduced in the energy 

eigenvalue 𝐸 = ±√(𝐴𝑘𝑥)2 + (𝐴𝑘𝑦 − 𝑚𝑥)

2, if B-field is in-plane-parallel in x-direction.   

 

In present study, we have used out-of plane perpendicular B-field, where all such magnetic moments will align perpendicular 

to surface resulting into zero exchange interaction energy with surface electron spin (which is in-plane perpendicular to electron 

momentum direction). But, due to out-of plane perpendicular external B-field, time reversal symmetry will be broken, creating 

a “mass” or magnetic gap in the previously gapless linear Dirac spectrum. 𝐸 = ±√(𝐴𝑘𝑥)2 + (𝐴𝑘𝑦)

2 + 𝑚𝑧2, if B-field is out-

of-plane perpendicular in z-direction, k is the wave-vector and m is the magnetic term. This will result into resistance increase 

(positive MR) with B-field.  

It might be possible that not all magnetic moments align in perpendicular field direction and some in-plane components 

might exist. However, these few in-plane moments will be then randomly oriented and will cause spin scattering, which should 

not decrease resistance and show negative MR. Scattering should cause resistance to increase and MR to show positive slope. 

In our previous work under in-plane (parallel to current) B-field, we observed large negative MR even at low B-fields around 

zero. The magnetic moments (due to Ga contamination) alignment is perpendicular to TSS spin in such case, which reduces 

spin scattering and causes this negative MR. Therefore, in present work, we believe that small negative MR in region 2 at T <= 


 

 
8 
 

 

0.14 K observed in these nanowires under out-of plane perpendicular B-field can be attributed to the small bulk contribution, 

where Weak localization effect is dominant. Overall MR change from negative to positive value is a complex phenomenon and 

more experimental work is necessary for understanding the other phenomena involved e.g.  fermi surface nesting arising from 

the quantum oscillations. 

3. Conclusion 

It is known that pure metals show a quadratic MR at low temp and saturates at high magnetic field but materials like topological 

insulators are mostly reported for non-saturating positive LMR hence it is important to study MR in TIs based nanodevices. 

We observed evolution of WAL effects from broad cusp to sharp cusp as a function of temp in sculpted nanowires of topological 

insulator. This indicates that bulk contribution to surface state transport can be minimized effectively at low temp. Strikingly, 

the negative magnetoresistance was also found at temp 0.14 mk range at low B field just after the sharp cusp and origin of it 

needs more investigations. Our results confirm that negative MR (NMR) can be observed even for field applied perpendicular 

and supports the fact that NMR is not limited to Weyl semimetals only. Here we have studied the WAL signatures in robust 

sculpted nanowires of Bi2Te3 and have analyzed the temp dependent WAL effects by using HLN equation. The important 

physical parameters  (related to SOC strength),  and phase coherence length  L  indicate the surface state dominated transport 

in the sculpted nanowire of TI which is considered as robust materials for back scattering events. Our results indicate the 

sculpted wires do show WAL effect of TSS and negative MR if measurements done at mk range and samples can be investigated 

further at such temp. Overall there is necessity of performing MR measurements at ultra low temp where exotic quantum nature 

dominates.  

 

Experimental  

Fabrication procedure: Bi2Te3 nanowires were fabricated from thin flakes of Bi2Te3 by using a scotch tape method and FIB 

milling technique as described in the literature 23,24. The high quality Bi2Te3 (99.99 pure) material was purchased from Alfa 

Aesar Company. Initially, Si/SiO2 chips (p type, highly doped with boron and resistivity  0.001 – 0.005 -cm) were 

ultrasonicated for 10 min and then cleaned with acetone, isopropanol, methanol and deionized water. The plasma cleaning 

with oxygen gas was performed for about 5 min. Au/Ti contact pads were deposited on cleaned wafers using DC magnetron 

sputtering. The standard scotch tape method was used for micromechanical cleavage of Bi2Te3 bulk crystals. The exfoliated 

flakes were deposited on Si/SiO2 chips with predefined Au/Ti contacts. Bi2Te3 flakes with random size and arbitrary thickness 

were produced in this method, which were observed under optical microscope (Olympus MX51) and field emission scanning 

electron microscopy (FESEM, Zeiss–Auriga) and very thin flakes were further localized. The atomic force microscopy 

(AFM) and cross-sectional FESEM technique were employed to determine thickness of these localized thin flakes.  A 

focused ion beam (Zeiss- Auriga) milling technique was used to fabricate the nanowire from located thin flake. 

Experimentally, it has been observed that FIB fabrication can introduce some Ga+ ion contamination. Hence extra care was 

taken during the device fabrication and sample was never exposed to Ga+ ion beam imaging. A low ion beam current (50 pA) 

was used to etch some portion of the deposited flake and beam exposure time was less than 20 sec. For electrical 


 

 
9 
 

 

measurements, four-probe geometry with two voltage electrodes, two current electrodes were deposited on the Bi2Te3 

nanowire using a gas injection system (GIS, FIB based metal deposition).  

Transport measurements: The transport measurements of the nanowires at ultra-low temperatures were carried out in a 

Dilution Refrigerator (Triton-200, Oxford Instruments) using low frequency ac (17 Hz) lock-in technique in the four-terminal 

configuration. In order to filter out noise due to EMI and other sources, we have incorporated (at room temperature) two 

Faraday enclosures and low pass filters (BLP −100 MHz mini-circuits) with a pass band of DC to 98 MHz in the 

measurement circuit. Faraday enclosures are used to intercept the measurement cables from the room temperature 

measurement equipment and the measurement cable (metal shielded twisted pairs of wires) coming from the top of the 

cryostat. The first Faraday enclosure is meant to cut off electric field dominated noise pick up and the second enclosure with 

a magnetic coating is meant to reduce the EMI due to low frequency signals. The transport measurements were done at 

current of 100 nA, derived from the oscillator output of the lock-in amplifier using a 1 MΩ series resistor.  

 

Conflicts of interests 

There are no conflicts to declare. 

Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge funding from National Physical Laboratory, India and  DST, India through the project SR/S2/PU-

0003/2010(G), Dilution Refrigerator facility at CSIR-NPL India. A.P.  and R.Y. acknowledge CSIR-Junior Research 

Fellowship (NET).  

References 

1 
Hasan, M. Z. & Kane, C. L. Colloquium: topological insulators. Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045 (2010). 

2 
Moore, J. E. The birth of topological insulators. Nature 464, 194 (2010). 

3 
Steinberg, H., Laloë, J.-B., Fatemi, V., Moodera, J. S. & Jarillo-Herrero, P. Electrically tunable surface-to-bulk coherent coupling 

in topological insulator thin films. Phy Rev B 84, 233101 (2011). 

4 
Chen, J. et al. Tunable surface conductivity in Bi2 Se3 revealed in diffusive electron transport. Phy Rev B 83, 241304 (2011). 

5 
Liu, W. E., Hankiewicz, E. M. & Culcer, D. Weak localization and antilocalization in topological materials with impurity spin-

orbit interactions. Materials 10, 807 (2017). 

6 
Dai, X., Du, Z. & Lu, H.-Z. Negative magnetoresistance without chiral anomaly in topological insulators. Phy Rev Lett 119, 

166601 (2017). 

7 
Breunig, O. et al. Gigantic negative magnetoresistance in the bulk of a disordered topological insulator. Nat Commun 8, 15545 

(2017). 

8 
Liu, M. et al. Crossover between weak antilocalization and weak localization in a magnetically doped topological insulator. Phy 

Rev Lett 108, 036805 (2012). 

9 
Wiedmann, S. et al. Anisotropic and strong negative magnetoresistance in the three-dimensional topological insulator Bi2Se3. Phy 

Rev B 94, 081302 (2016). 

10 
Bhattacharyya, B. et al. Spin-dependent scattering induced negative magnetoresistance in topological insulator Bi 2 Te 3 

nanowires. Sci Rep 9, 7836 (2019). 


 

 
10 
 

 

11 
Banerjee, K. et al. Defect-induced negative magnetoresistance and surface state robustness in the topological insulator BiSbTeSe 

2. Phy Rev B 90, 235427 (2014). 

12 
Chiu, S.-P. & Lin, J.-J. Weak antilocalization in topological insulator Bi2Te3 microflakes. Phy Rev B 87, 035122 (2013). 

13 
Li, H. et al. Quantitative Analysis of Weak Antilocalization Effect of Topological Surface States in Topological Insulator 

BiSbTeSe2. Nano Lett 19, 2450-2455 (2019). 

14 
Shrestha, K. et al. Extremely large nonsaturating magnetoresistance and ultrahigh mobility due to topological surface states in the 

metallic Bi2Te 3 topological insulator. Phy Rev B 95, 195113 (2017). 

15 
Li, H. et al. Negative magnetoresistance in dirac semimetal Cd3As2. Nat Commun 7, 1-7 (2016). 

16 
Zhang, C.-L. et al. Signatures of the Adler–Bell–Jackiw chiral anomaly in a Weyl fermion semimetal. Nat Commun 7, 1-9 

(2016). 

17 
Liao, J. et al. Observation of Anderson localization in ultrathin films of three-dimensional topological insulators. Phy Rev Lett 

114, 216601 (2015). 

18 
Li, M., Wang, Z., Yang, L., Gao, X. P. & Zhang, Z. From linear magnetoresistance to parabolic magnetoresistance in Cu and Cr-

doped topological insulator Bi2Se3 films. J Phys Chem Solids 128, 331-336 (2019). 

19 
Lang, M. et al. Competing weak localization and weak antilocalization in ultrathin topological insulators. Nano Lett 13, 48-53 

(2012). 

20 
Gehring, P., Gao, B. F., Burghard, M. & Kern, K. Growth of high-mobility Bi2Te2Se nanoplatelets on hBN sheets by van der 

Waals epitaxy. Nano Lett 12, 5137-5142 (2012). 

21 
Kong, D. et al. Few-layer nanoplates of Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 with highly tunable chemical potential. Nano Lett 10, 2245-2250 

(2010). 

22 
Bhattacharyya, B. et al. Observation of quantum oscillations in FIB fabricated nanowires of topological insulator (Bi2Se3). J Phy 

Condens Matter 29, 115602 (2017). 

23 
Sharma, A., Bhattacharyya, B., Srivastava, A., Senguttuvan, T. & Husale, S. High performance broadband photodetector using 

fabricated nanowires of bismuth selenide. Sci Rep 6, 19138 (2016). 

24 
Bhattacharyya, B., Sharma, A., Awana, V., Senguttuvan, T. & Husale, S. FIB synthesis of Bi2Se3 1D nanowires demonstrating 

the co-existence of Shubnikov–de Haas oscillations and linear magnetoresistance. J Phys Condens Matter 29, 07LT01 (2016). 

25 
Friedensen, S. E., Parkin, W. M., Mlack, J. T. & Drndić, M. Transmission Electron Microscope Nanosculpting of Topological 

Insulator Bismuth Selenide. ACS nano 12, 6949-6955 (2018). 

26 
Friedensen, S., Mlack, J. T. & Drndić, M. Materials analysis and focused ion beam nanofabrication of topological insulator 

Bi2Se3. Sci Rep 7, 13466 (2017). 

27 
Assaf, B. A. et al. Linear magnetoresistance in topological insulator thin films: Quantum phase coherence effects at high 

temperatures. Appl Phy Lett 102, 012102 (2013). 

28 
Zhang, H. et al. Weak localization bulk state in a topological insulator Bi2Te3 film. Phy Rev B 86, 075102 (2012). 

29 
Wang, W. J., Gao, K. H. & Li, Z. Q. Thickness-dependent transport channels in topological insulator Bi2Se3 thin films grown by 

magnetron sputtering. Sci Rep 6, 25291 (2016). 

30 
Chiatti, O. et al. 2D layered transport properties from topological insulator Bi2Se3 single crystals and micro flakes. Sci Rep 6, 

27483 (2016). 

31 
Shekhar, C. et al. Evidence of surface transport and weak antilocalization in a single crystal of the Bi2Te2 Se topological 

insulator. Phy Rev B 90, 165140 (2014). 

32 
Peng, H. et al. Aharonov–Bohm interference in topological insulator nanoribbons. Nat Mater 9, 225 (2010). 

33 
Chen, J. et al. Gate-voltage control of chemical potential and weak antilocalization in Bi2Se3. Phy Rev Lett 105, 176602 (2010). 

34 
Bansal, N., Kim, Y. S., Brahlek, M., Edrey, E. & Oh, S. Thickness-independent transport channels in topological insulator Bi2Se3 

thin films. Phy Rev Lett 109, 116804 (2012). 


 

 
11 
 

 

35 
Dey, R. et al. Strong spin-orbit coupling and Zeeman spin splitting in angle dependent magnetoresistance of Bi2Te3. Appl Phy 

Lett 104, 223111 (2014). 

36 
Cha, J. J. et al. Weak Antilocalization in Bi2 (Se x Te1–x) 3 Nanoribbons and Nanoplates. Nano Lett 12, 1107-1111 (2012). 

37 
Zhang, L. et al. Weak localization effects as evidence for bulk quantization in Bi2Se3 thin films. Phy Rev B 88, 121103 (2013). 

38 
Wang, Z., Wei, L., Li, M., Zhang, Z. & Gao, X. P. Magnetic field modulated weak localization and antilocalization state in 

Bi2(TexSe1− x)3 films. Phys Status Solidi (b) 255, 1800272 (2018). 

39 
Wray, L. A. et al. A topological insulator surface under strong Coulomb, magnetic and disorder perturbations. Nat Phys 7, 32-37 

(2011). 

40 
Wang, H. et al. Crossover between weak antilocalization and weak localization of bulk states in ultrathin Bi2Se3 films. Sci Rep 4, 

5817 (2014). 

41 
Berry, M. V. Quantal phase factors accompanying adiabatic changes. P Roy Soc A-Math Phy 392, 45-57 (1984). 

 

 

 


