Page 1 of 19 

Local "hard" and "soft" pinning of 180° domain walls in BaTiO3 probed 

by in situ transmission electron microscopy 

Reinis Ignatans, Dragan Damjanovic, and Vasiliki Tileli* 

Institute of Materials, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland 

Abstract 

We report on the electric field response of 180° nanodomain walls in BaTiO3 using in situ 

electrical biasing in transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The sample is biased on a micro-

device designed for reliable testing whose key attributes are confirmed by finite element 

calculations. The presence of weakly charged zig-zag domain walls at room temperature is 

attributed to the geometric confinement of the device. The motion of the domain walls under 

the applied electric field allows to extract local P-E loops where distinct domain wall pinning 

in deep and random energy potential profiles, characteristic for "hard" and "soft" ferroelectrics, 

respectively, are observed. "Hard" domain wall pinning results in asymmetrical loops typical 

for "hard" ferroelectrics while the "soft" domain wall pinning follows Rayleigh-like behaviour. 

All effects are measured locally and directly from the imaged domain structure. 

*vasiliki.tileli@epfl.ch

Published in Physical Review Materials, 4 (2020) 104403 | https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.4.104403


Page 2 of 19 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Understanding the electrical response, polarization switching, and domain wall movement 

processes in ferroelectric materials is important for the envisioned future applications such as 

field effect transistors for neuromorphic systems or the resurgence and optimization of devices 

including ferroelectric random-access memories (FeRAMs) [1], [2]. Particularly important is 

polarization switching through nucleation and movement of ferroelectric 180° domain walls as 

they offer the least amount of emerging strain during operation, thus minimizing issues 

associated with mechanical failure and cracking [3]. The functionality of many ferroelectric 

devices depends on the speed of switching of the polarisation states or domains [4], [5] and this 

is directly linked with the domain wall movement. Understanding the dynamics of the domains 

walls is highly relevant to already commercially applied ferroelectrics as domain wall 

movement contributes to the high dielectric permittivity, excellent electromechanical response, 

and associated electrical, dielectric and mechanical loss mechanisms in ferroelectric perovskite 

oxides [6], [7]. 

The origins of ferroelectricity at atomic scale can be understood via various quantum-

mechanical, order-disorder and displacive mechanisms [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. Neglecting the 

atomistic origins of ferroelectricity, Landau’s phenomenological theory and its extensions 

successfully deal with the phase transitions and the macroscopic physical properties of the 

material and their dependencies on the external stimuli [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]. 

Between the atomic and macroscopic scale lays the domain structure of the ferroelectric that 

can be experimentally accessed via various microscopy and scattering techniques [3]. Dynamic 

studies of the ferroelectric domain structure under external electric field in the mesoscopic 

length-scale is relevant due to the strong influence on the macroscopic properties of the 

material.  


Page 3 of 19 

The domain response to the electric field is typically probed indirectly using dielectric 

spectroscopy, polarization- or strain- response as a function of field, current response during 

switching or in situ diffraction techniques [19], [20]. These methods reveal mostly the average 

behaviour of the system. Studies of the local domain response usually involve piezo-force 

microscopy (PFM) or in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) [21], [22], [23]. With 

PFM quantitative measurements are difficult and the electric field is inherently 

inhomogeneous [24]. Technical requirements for interpretable in situ electric-field biasing 

results in the TEM also make the experiments challenging. For instance, specimen preparation 

is required to result in a sample with high electrical resistivity otherwise the current would flow 

across the conductive channels and the actual electric field would be smaller than the nominal 

(applied) field. In that case, the observed response would be dominated by Joule heating instead 

of the applied electric field. In most cases localized Joule heating leads to sample failure 

(cracking, electrode delamination due to the current surge, or complete sample disintegration). 

In all cases, it is necessary for the applied electric field to be homogeneous across the probed 

area in order to reduce complexity in interpretation of the observed dynamic processes.  

To perform in situ electrical biasing experiments in the TEM, several methods are available. 

Traditionally, biasing experiments were performed on TEM holders that could accommodate 

mechanically polished samples connected with electrodes far away from the area of interest, 

which could be contacted in several ways (wire bonding, silver paste etc.) [23]. The main 

advantage of this method is the excellent TEM sample quality, [23], [25], [26], [27], [28] 

however, the resulting electric field in a mechanically polished sample cannot be uniform and 

it is also difficult to control the geometry of the region of interest with respect to the direction 

of the electric field [28], [29]. For better control of the applied voltage, the probe technique is 

used for biasing ferroelectric structures in the TEM. In this case, a metallic probe is pressed 

against the ferroelectric material to apply the potential [30], [31], [32]. However, since 


Page 4 of 19 

ferroelectrics are highly responsive on the applied external stress, pressing the probe against 

the material can adversely influence the formation and switching of the domains. Additionally, 

this method creates a highly inhomogeneous local electrical field, which hinders interpretation 

of the results. These issues can be mitigated by sandwiching the ferroelectric between 

conductive layers and pressing the probe on the conductor far away from the region of 

observation [33]. Nevertheless, such configuration is viable for thin films [34], but not for 

samples with larger areas such as single crystals or ceramics and restrictions imposed on the 

sample geometry with the addition of conductive layers can influence the inherent switching 

properties of the ferroelectrics through interfacial effects.  More recently, advances in TEM 

holder instrumentation enabled microelectromechanical (MEMS) Si-based chips with 

patterned electrodes deposited on silicon nitride membranes to be used for heating and biasing 

experiments [23]. The sample is transferred on such chips using standard focused ion beam 

(FIB) lamella-making protocols [35]. The advantages of this method involve the ability to 

control the sample orientation and, consequently, to control the desired electric field direction 

with respect to the crystallographic orientation. However, ferroelectric sample preparation is 

especially challenging due to possible strain fields and emerging conduction channels due to 

ion implantation, surface amorphization and, redeposition of residuals while polishing the 

lamella [36], [37], [38].  

Herein, we used MEMS-based microchip TEM holder technology to systematically bias a 

single crystal BaTiO3 sample along the pseudo-cubic [100]PC direction. In particular, we use an 

optimized sample geometry that enables us to precisely control the applied voltage and, in 

consequence, the electric field distribution in the probed area. The electrical performance of 

the device is confirmed with simulations using finite element methods. To quantitatively 

evaluate our results, we focused on the motion of 180º domain walls at room temperature. 


Page 5 of 19 

Local physical phenomena such as weakly charged zig-zag domain walls and domain wall 

pinning as a function of the applied voltage are directly probed. 

 

II. METHODS 

A. Sample preparation 

Single crystalline BaTiO3 (001) (MTI corporation) was used for the device fabrication. The 

largest facets of the crystal were already polished to optical grade. For the preparation of the 

lamella, the top surface was sputter-coated with 30 nm thick carbon layer (Cressington 108 

series carbon coater). This step is required to dissipate the charges during electron imaging and 

to protect the surface from Ga ion implantation during ion beam milling.  

Inside the focused ion beam (FIB) milling instrument (Zeiss NVision 40, Ga+ source), two site-

specific carbon protective layers were additionally deposited. A thin electron-beam deposited 

(thickness in the range of ~100 nm at 5 kV) followed by a thicker ion-beam deposited protective 

layer (1.5 µm thickness at 30 kV and 150 pA current). Trenches around the protected area were 

etched consecutively with 27, 13, 6.5, and 0.7 nA ion beam currents at 30 kV. The lamella was 

thinned to about 1 µm prior to its transfer with a micromanipulator (Kleindiek Nanotechnik) to 

a 4-heating and 2-biasing MEMS chip (DENSsolutions). Complete details of the final steps of 

the device fabrication and the measurement of the thickness of the final lamella can be found 

in Supplemental Material, SM [39].  

Finally, the temperature on the heating element of the heating/biasing TEM holder was pre-

calibrated using its electrical resistance and the electrical bias to the sample was applied with 

a source meter (Keithley SMU-2450) using a script to generate a triangular voltage waveshape. 

 


Page 6 of 19 

 

B. Finite element calculations 

The electrostatic finite element model (FEM) of the device was created with COMSOL 

Multiphysics 5.4 package. Dimensions for the electrostatic model were measured from 

scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. The dimensions of the simulation box were 40 

µm width, 30 µm height, and 30 µm in depth. Tetrahedral adaptive mesh was used for the 

simulation. The general mesh element characteristics for the simulations involved the electron 

transparent window of 0.02 µm max and 0.008 µm min, the bulk part of the lamella of 0.05 

µm max and 0.008 µm min, the surface of the electrodes of 2.2 µm max and 0.16 µm min, the 

SiNx membrane of 0.2 µm max and 0.008 µm min, and the vacuum region around the device 

0.25 µm max and 0.008 µm min. The bulk part of the lamella was set to 1 μm thick and the 

electron transparent region to a thickness of 268 nm. The potential difference between the 

electrodes in the calculations was set to 1 V and it was used as a boundary condition.  

 

C. Electron Microscopy 

Bright field scanning transmission electron microscopy (BF-STEM) was performed on a 

double spherical aberration (Cs) corrected Titan Themis 60-300 (ThermoFischer Scientific) 

operated at 300 kV. A beam current of 100 pA was used, the beam convergence angle was 28 

mrad and the collection angle was 79 mrad. Serial STEM imaging was done with a pixel scan 

area of 1024x1024 (3.204 nm/pixel) and 2.0 µs dwell time resulting in 2.98 s/frame. The images 

were then cropped to 764x764 or 760x1024 pixel size. Images were cropped to remove 

completely dark parts from the sides of the electron transparent window. Post-processing was 

performed using ImageJ software to enhance the domain wall contrast. It involved the 

following steps: Fourier filtering to reduce the horizontal scan noise from the images, 


Page 7 of 19 

subtraction of the background (50 pixel rolling ball radius), and contrast and brightness 

adjustment.  

 

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

We used a six-contact MEMS chip (Fig. 1(a)) that utilizes four of the contacts for heating and 

precise temperature control and two for biasing (Fig. 1(b)). The BaTiO3 lamella was FIB-

prepared and planar Pt contacts were ion-deposited on the two sides of the lamella as depicted 

by the SEM image in Fig. 1(c). The sample was then thinned to a final thickness of 268 nm 

(details on the electron energy-loss spectroscopy-based thickness measurement are provided in 

SM and the thickness map is shown in Fig. S1 [39]). As a final step, to mitigate conductive 

paths caused by the contaminants introduced by the ion-beam preparation method, site specific 

etching was performed around the area of interest (green boxes in Fig. 1(c)).  

Fig. 1(d) shows FEM calculations of the field distribution for the final geometry of the device. 

The resulting electric field, E, in the central part of lamella is calculated to be ~1.65 kV/cm for 

1 V applied to the electrodes. This value is the upper bound of the electric field magnitude 

since the simulation does not consider leakage currents and effects of the interfaces. These 

effects might alter the magnitude of the applied field, however, the overall characteristics of 

the electric field distribution remain the same. The calculations predict a difference in the 

electric field of ~0.4 kV/cm field across the vertical direction of the lamella (white arrow in the 

Fig. 1(d)). Fig. 1(f) depicts the magnitude of the electric field along the arrow line and its 

dependence on the dielectric constant of the sample). The inhomogeneity of the electric field 

and small gradient across the lamella results from the etched-out regions. This inhomogeneity 

can be reduced by more conservative isolating cuts, however, this increases the probability of 

failure of the device during biasing. Considering the geometry of the lamella, for a given 


Page 8 of 19 

applied voltage the magnitude of the electric field in the sample is mainly influenced by the 

width (horizontal white arrows in Fig. 1(d)) and thickness of probed area. If the width of the 

probed area decreases (Fig. 1(e)), the magnitude of the electric field increases, which is similar 

to decreasing the plate distance in a parallel plate capacitor configuration. Reduction of the 

thickness of the lamella would also result in an increase in the magnitude of the applicable 

electric field (Fig. 1(e)) as the equipotential lines get “squeezed” together in the smaller 

volume. The overall electric field distribution is also dependent on the dielectric permittivity 

of the sample. Fig. 1(f) shows the dependence of E on the average dielectric constant of the 

probed material along the central part of the lamella (white vertical arrow in the Fig. 1(d)). For 

low values of the relative dielectric permittivity (below 100), the resulting electric field is 

highly dependent on the permittivity of the material. When the dielectric permittivity 

approaches the values corresponding to perovskite ferroelectrics (dielectric permittivity 

ranging between hundred to several thousands), the dependence of the field on the permittivity 

becomes minimal. Thus, the dielectric properties of BaTiO3 do not influence the magnitude of 

the electric field along the probed area. 

 


Page 9 of 19 

FIG 1. (a) Optical microscope image of the in situ biasing/heating TEM MEMS chip. Scale bar 
is 500 µm and red rectangle corresponds to the area depicted in (b). (b) SiNx membrane region 
with the heating spiral and two biasing electrodes (bright vertical features). Scale bar is 100 
µm and small green rectangle corresponds to the location of the lamella. (c) False colour SEM 
image of BaTiO3 sample mounted on the MEMS chip (black area corresponds to the vacuum 
region, blue to the silicon nitride membrane, pink to the Pt electrodes on the membrane, yellow 
to the FIB deposited Pt contact electrodes, grey to the bulk part of BaTiO3, light grey to the 
electron transparent window, and dark grey to the protective carbon layer). Scale bar is 5 µm. 
Green boxes represent the etched-out areas, dark blue rectangle represents the area for domain 
area – voltage loops determination and light square shows area imaged in Fig. 3. (d) Plot of the 
electric field distribution within the device as calculated by finite element methods, white 
arrows indicate width and length directions. (e) Plot showing the dependence of the calculated 
electric field on the thickness and width of the electron transparent area (ε = 1250, for varying 
thickness, the width was fixed at 2.275 µm; for varying width, the thickness was fixed at 100 
nm), black arrow shows the calculated electric field for the actual lamella thickness (268 nm). 
(f) Plot showing the dependence of the calculated electric field on the lamella’s dielectric 
constant. In both (e) and (f) the electric field is plotted along the central part of the electron 
transparent region (white vertical arrow in the (d)).  

 

Prior to biasing the sample, annealing above the Curie temperature (Tc) was performed inside 

the TEM. Heating is required to release most of the strain due to the FIB preparation 

process [36]. The sample was heated to 200 ºC, held at this temperature for 1 minute, then the 

temperature was lowered to 25 ºC in 20 min (the heating profile and respective image sequence 

are shown in Supplemental Video 1, SM [39]). The biasing experiments were performed at 

room temperature where the sample is dominated by unusually stable 180º walls [40]. Fig. 2(a) 

depicts bright field scanning TEM (BF-STEM) images of the domain structure at room 

temperature (the full image sequence during electrical biasing is shown in Supplemental Video 

2, SM [39]). The dark contrast in the images corresponds to the domain walls. To improve this 

contrast without interference due to diffraction effects, the sample was mistitled by ~10 mrad 

from the [001]PC zone axis and was postprocessed. The sample was then biased with a 

triangular waveform (ΔU = 0.0351 V/s in the case of Umax = 3.5 V, while ΔU was reduced for 

smaller Umax to improve temporal resolution) starting from the positive direction to the 


Page 10 of 19 

maximum of the positive voltage (3.5 V, Fig. 2(c)), continuing to negative applied voltage (-

3.5 V, Fig. 2(g)) before completing the loop at 0 V (Fig. 2(i)).  We note that the applied voltage 

of 3.5 V corresponds to electric field values of about 5.8 kV/cm, based on the FEM simulation. 

Considering the coercive field of BaTiO3 (approximately 0.5 kV/cm), by studying the domain 

response we conclude that the actual applied field is within one order of magnitude of the FEM 

calculated one [41]. This discrepancy is attributed to the sample-electrode interface and leakage 

current effects, which are difficult to be eliminated due to the microscopic size of the device 

and which are not included in the calculations of the electric field (more information on the 

equivalent expected electric circuit of the device, Fig. S2, and on the discrepancy of the FEM-

calculated electric field can be found in SM [39]). 

By examining the domain structure in the BF-STEM images, we firstly note the presence of 

weakly charged zig-zag domain walls (Fig. 2(a)). It is theoretically predicted that weakly 

charged domain walls are more stable in BaTiO3 when it is not in a bulk form and it is connected 

with platinum electrodes [42]. This corresponds well to the geometry of our device where the 

polarisation is essentially confined in a thin slab within two dimensions with Pt electrodes on 

the sides. The transition mechanism of the strongly charged domain wall into weakly charged 

zig-zag domain wall and the meaning of the periodicity has been previously described by 

Sidorkin [43]. 

The polarisation direction within the domains can be determined upon application of the 

electric field (Fig. 2(c)). The domain with polarisation pointing in the direction of the electric 

field should grow and, consequently, domains with polarisation vector opposite to the applied 

field should shrink. By examining domain and domain wall response on positive bias (the 

direction of the applied electric field is depicted with a black arrow at the start or end of the 

image rows in Fig. 2), the polarisation vectors in the visible 180º domains were determined and 

are indicated with red arrows in Fig. 2(c). Consequently, red shading in the BF-STEM images 


Page 11 of 19 

of Fig. 2 corresponds to domains with polarisation direction pointing to the right. It is noted 

that the periodic vertically aligned 180° domain walls, which appear as weak contrast in the 

central part of Fig. 2(a-f), do not respond as strongly to the external bias since the polarisation 

and the electric field vectors are orthogonal. 

When the direction of the electric field is changed, Fig. 2(d-g), the domains that span across 

the whole electron transparent window as bands, experience sideways growth. The observed 

domain wall bending in Fig. 2(g) is attributed to strong domain wall pinning possibly due to a 

dislocation centre. The domain wall displacement, 𝑢(𝑥), from the equilibrium position (which 

in this case is aligned along the [100]PC direction) has characteristic hyperbolic nature 

(theoretically 𝑢(𝑥) ~

!

√#), as the domain wall regains equilibrium when the distance, (𝑥), from 

the pinning centre increases [43]. 

Finally, the applied bias cycle terminates after completing the full loop (Fig. 2(i)). During the 

field cycling the domain structure exhibits hysteretic behaviour at all fields by not returning to 

the same state for the same voltage during increasing and decreasing steps of the full cycle (for 

example, compare panels b and d for +1.75V and a, e, and i for 0 V, in Fig. 2). 

 


Page 12 of 19 

 

FIG 2. BF-STEM micrographs showing the domain structure evolution during cyclic electrical 
biasing. In the image, the field is oriented along the [010]PC and black arrows indicate the 
direction of the electric field. (a) Initial domain structure at 0 V bias. (b) Domain structure at 
+1.75 V bias with increasing electric field strength. (c) Domain structure at maximum of +3.5 
V bias. Red arrows indicate the polarization direction in the two domains (d) Domain structure 
at 1.75 V with decreasing field strength. (e) Domain structure at 0 V in the middle of the cycle. 
(f) Domain structure at -1.75 V with increasing field strength. (g) Domain structure at minimal 
voltage -3.5 V. u(x) represents the magnitude of domain wall bending from the equilibrium 
position, which is marked with the dashed line (g). (h) Domain structure at -1.75 V with 
decreasing field strength. (i) Final domain configuration at the end of the cycle with 0 V. White 
indication lines depict the double domain that shows sideways growth and it is hysteric to the 
domain in (a). Red false-colour superimposed on all images corresponds to the domains with 
polarisation pointing to the right. Scale bar is 500 nm (shown in (a)).  

 

The response of the domains at different maximum applied voltages was further investigated 

to study the domain dynamics from weak to strong fields. The voltages ranged from 0.25 to 

3.5 V for 14 different values in total and all image sequences are shown in Supplemental Videos 

3-16, SM [39]). Analysis of the sequential BF-STEM images of the domains exhibiting the 

same polarization (i.e. the red shaded domains in Fig. 2), resulted in the domain area vs. applied 


Page 13 of 19 

potential loops shown in Fig. 3(a) (each data point corresponds to the domain structure image 

at given bias potential plotted as bias voltage–domain area loops for three cases corresponding 

to 3.5, 2.5, and 2.0 V maximum applied voltage, the methodology of calculating the loop at 3.5 

V is detailed in Fig. S3 in SM [39]). The measured area is proportional to the polarisation 

pointing to the right and this corresponds to domain growth with respect to negative applied 

voltage. The measured loops in Fig. 3(a) resemble the polarisation-electric field (P-E) loops in 

"hard" ferroelectrics where P-E loops are constricted at weak fields and open at larger 

fields [44], [45], [46], [47]. Remarkably, the local loops shown here reveal additional features 

which cannot be discerned in loops taken with classical approaches over macroscopic areas. 

These include domain wall pinning (weakly responsive polarization region in the -1 V to 1 V 

interval of the measured loops) and domain nucleation/annihilation accompanied with ballistic 

movement of domain walls. The apparent loop asymmetry and the fact that at 0 V the relative 

domain coverage does not reach 50 % (which would be a requirement for electro-neutrality) 

can be partly attributed to the nature of the local TEM measurements that do not necessarily 

correspond to the entire domain structure. On the other hand, the loop asymmetry and apparent 

pinching around 0 V bias indicate hard pinning of domain walls, which are released from 

pinning centres at higher fields as indicated by the loop opening. These defects exert restoring 

forces on the domain walls at weak fields limiting the movement of the wall and consequently 

pinching the loop. At higher electrical fields, the restoring forces are overcome and the domain 

wall movement is controlled by pinning centres randomly distributed in space and with variable 

strengths [47], [48].  

Fig. 3(b) depicts the totality of the results from the loop biasing experiments plotted as the 

minimal and maximal cycle voltage for each loop as a function of the domain surface coverage 

(again, the domains corresponding to the red shading in Fig. 2 were measured). At low voltages, 

the domain coverage reveals that new domains do not nucleate and existing domain walls do 


Page 14 of 19 

not move significantly as expected for a hard domain wall pinning (this region is marked with 

orange shading in Fig. 3(b)). At higher applied voltages (above ±1 V), the existing domain 

walls experience significant forward and sideways motion and domains start to nucleate or 

annihilate depending on the applied voltage as previously predicted [3]. Overall, a quadratic 

behaviour of the area (~polarization) vs electric field relation is observed, particularly 

pronounced at positive applied voltages. The function 𝑃~𝐸$, which essentially corresponds to 

classical Rayleigh’s law, represents the weak domain wall pinning on randomly distributed 

defects within the crystal [49], [50]. In principle, Rayleigh’s law is applicable at weak field 

conditions in a material with a broad distribution of pinning centre strengths, but in our case 

the local domain wall movements are hindered by hard pinning at weak fields, therefore domain 

walls do not move substantially and do not experience soft pinning upon random lattice defects. 

Rayleigh motion is achieved only at higher fields when the domain wall is de-pined and can 

move through the lattice with randomly distributed defects. The asymmetry of the loops 

indicates asymmetrical distribution of defects in the examined local area, which is again a 

feature that would not be necessarily noticed in a macroscopic loop measured over a much 

larger area. Similarly, the different slope of the positive and negative applied voltages of Fig. 

3(c) indicates the different response of the domain walls upon reversal of the magnitude of the 

electric field.  


Page 15 of 19 

 

 

FIG 3. (a) Selected domain area-voltage loops using triangle wave voltages of 2, 2.5, and 3.5 
V. (b) Relative domain coverage with respect to the maximal/minimal cycle voltage for the 
positive and negative branch of the loops (14 loops in total). The lines represent the quadratic 
polynomial fits for each branch and red/grey shaded regions correspond to 95% confidence 
interval. Orange shading corresponds to the flat region of the plot, where hard domain wall 
pinning occurs.  

 

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

In summary, we demonstrated a specialised sample preparation method, which allows to 

perform reliable in situ electrical biasing measurements in the TEM and provides the ability 


Page 16 of 19 

for interpretable physical processes of ferroelectric nanodomains. The meticulously designed 

and fabricated geometry of the device results in a homogeneous electric field, whose magnitude 

and direction are confirmed by finite element calculations. We used the classical ferroelectric 

BaTiO3 and we showed that precise control of the external electric field and sequential BF-

STEM imaging permits to locally study 180° domains and domain wall movements at room 

temperature. The origins and stability of weakly charged zig-zag nanodomain walls are 

associated with the thin slab geometry of the ferroelectric and interplay of BaTiO3 with Pt 

electrodes. Polarization-electric field loops calculated directly from the areas of the imaged 

domains elucidate the relation between bulk and nanoscale ferroelectric effects. The domain 

wall response at low electric field is associated with the hard pinning mechanisms on the 

defects within the lattice, which results in pinched and asymmetric domain area vs. voltage 

loops. At higher fields, domain walls are de-pined and localised effects such as new domain 

nucleation and sideways growth and domain wall bending were observed. At such fields (above 

the coercive field), we show that the domain wall motion follows Rayleigh–like behaviour. 

Thus, this controlled electrical biasing method can provide unprecedented insights on dynamic 

domain wall motion and domain interactions at the nanoscale 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) under award no. 

200021_175711. D.D. acknowledges support form ONR-Global (award no. N62909-18-1-

2078). 

 

 

 
 


Page 17 of 19 

Bibliography 

[1] 
D. A. Buck and M. I. of Technology. Digital Computer Laboratory, Ferroelectrics for 
Digital Information Storage and Switching (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, 1952). 

[2] 
H. Mulaosmanovic, T. Mikolajick, and S. Slesazeck, in (2020), pp. 399–411. 

[3] 
A. K. Tagantsev, L. E. Cross, and J. Fousek, Domains in Ferroic Crystals and Thin 
Films (Springer New York, New York, NY, 2010). 

[4] 
J. F. Scott, Ferroelectrics 236, 247 (2000). 

[5] 
V. Garcia and M. Bibes, Nature 483, 279 (2012). 

[6] 
O. V. Malyshkina, A. Y. Eliseev, and R. M. Grechishkin, Adv. Condens. Matter Phys. 
2017, 2 (2017). 

[7] 
S. Trolier-McKinstry, F. Griggio, C. Yaeger, P. Jousse, Dalong Zhao, S. S. N. 
Bharadwaja, T. N. Jackson, S. Jesse, S. V. Kalinin, and K. Wasa, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. 
Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 58, 1782 (2011). 

[8] 
W. Cochran, Adv. Phys. 9, 387 (1960). 

[9] 
J. Harada, J. D. Axe, and G. Shirane, Phys. Rev. B 4, 155 (1971). 

[10] Y. Luspin, J. L. Servoin, and F. Gervais, J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 13, 3761 (1980). 

[11] W. Cochran, Phys. Status Solidi 30, K157 (1968). 

[12] V. Polinger, P. Garcia-Fernandez, and I. B. Bersuker, Phys. B Condens. Matter 457, 296 

(2015). 

[13] A. F. Devonshire, Adv. Phys. 3, 85 (1954). 

[14] Q. M. Zhang, W. Y. Pan, S. J. Jang, and L. E. Cross, J. Appl. Phys. 64, 6445 (1988). 

[15] A. F. Devonshire, London, Edinburgh, Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci. 40, 1040 (1949). 

[16] W. Cao, Ferroelectrics 375, 28 (2008). 

[17] M. Dawber, K. M. Rabe, and J. F. Scott, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1083 (2005). 

[18] X. Lu, H. Li, and W. Cao, J. Appl. Phys. 114, 224106 (2013). 

[19] J. L. Jones, E. Aksel, G. Tutuncu, T.-M. Usher, J. Chen, X. Xing, and A. J. Studer, Phys. 

Rev. B 86, 024104 (2012). 

[20] C. D. Tan, C. Flannigan, J. Gardner, F. D. Morrison, E. K. H. Salje, and J. F. Scott, Phys. 

Rev. Mater. 3, 034402 (2019). 

[21] A. Gruverman and S. V. Kalinin, in Front. Ferroelectr. (Springer US, Boston, MA, 

2007), pp. 107–116. 

[22] P. Gao, J. Britson, C. T. Nelson, J. R. Jokisaari, C. Duan, M. Trassin, S. H. Baek, H. 

Guo, L. Li, Y. Wang, Y. H. Chu, A. M. Minor, C. B. Eom, R. Ramesh, L. Q. Chen, and 
X. Pan, Nat. Commun. 5, (2014). 

[23] A. Masseboeuf, in Transm. Electron Microsc. Micro-Nanoelectronics (John Wiley & 


Page 18 of 19 

Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ USA, 2013), pp. 199–218. 

[24] A. N. Morozovska, S. V. Svechnikov, E. A. Eliseev, and S. V. Kalinin, Phys. Rev. B 76, 

054123 (2007). 

[25] X. Tan, H. He, and J. K. Shang, J. Mater. Res. 20, 1641 (2005). 

[26] H. He and X. Tan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 3187 (2004). 

[27] Z. Xu, X. Tan, P. Han, and J. K. Shang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 3732 (2000). 

[28] M. Zakhozheva, L. A. Schmitt, M. Acosta, W. Jo, J. Rödel, and H. J. Kleebe, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 105, 2 (2014). 

[29] E. Snoeck, L. Normand, A. Thorel, and C. Roucau, Phase Transitions 46, 77 (1994). 

[30] H. Chang, S. V. Kalinin, S. Yang, P. Yu, S. Bhattacharya, P. P. Wu, N. Balke, S. Jesse, 

L. Q. Chen, R. Ramesh, S. J. Pennycook, and A. Y. Borisevich, J. Appl. Phys. 110, 
(2011). 

[31] T. Denneulin, N. Wollschläger, and M. Hÿtch, in Eur. Microsc. Congr. 2016 Proc. 

(Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany, 2016), pp. 1068–1069. 

[32] J. F. Scott, A. Hershkovitz, Y. Ivry, H. Lu, A. Gruverman, and J. M. Gregg, Appl. Phys. 

Rev. 4, 1 (2017). 

[33] M. G. Han, M. S. J. Marshall, L. Wu, M. A. Schofield, T. Aoki, R. Twesten, J. Hoffman, 

F. J. Walker, C. H. Ahn, and Y. Zhu, Nat. Commun. 5, 1 (2014). 

[34] C. T. Nelson, P. Gao, J. R. Jokisaari, C. Heikes, C. Adamo, A. Melville, S.-H. Baek, C. 

M. Folkman, B. Winchester, Y. Gu, Y. Liu, K. Zhang, E. Wang, J. Li, L.-Q. Chen, C.-
B. Eom, D. G. Schlom, and X. Pan, Science (80-. ). 334, 968 (2011). 

[35] M. Duchamp, Q. Xu, and R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Microsc. Microanal. 20, 1638 (2014). 

[36] F. Hofmann, E. Tarleton, R. J. Harder, N. W. Phillips, P.-W. Ma, J. N. Clark, I. K. 

Robinson, B. Abbey, W. Liu, and C. E. Beck, Sci. Rep. 7, 45993 (2017). 

[37] R. P. Babu, S. Irukuvarghula, A. Harte, and M. Preuss, Acta Mater. 120, 391 (2016). 

[38] M. J. Süess, E. Mueller, and R. Wepf, Ultramicroscopy 111, 1224 (2011). 

[39] See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for details on the 

device publication, measurement of thickness of lamella, a discussion of the electric 
field calculations, details on the domain area as a function of bias loops, and all videos. 

[40] T. Matsumoto and M. Okamoto, IEEE Int. Symp. Appl. Ferroelectr. 1 (2009). 

[41] M. Acosta, N. Novak, V. Rojas, S. Patel, R. Vaish, J. Koruza, G. A. Rossetti, and J. 

Rödel, Appl. Phys. Rev. 4, 041305 (2017). 

[42] M. Y. Gureev, A. K. Tagantsev, and N. Setter, Phys. Rev. B 83, 184104 (2011). 

[43] A. S. Sidorkin, Domain Structure in Ferroelectrics and Related Materials (Cambridge 

Int Science Publishing, 2006). 

[44] T. Granzow, E. Suvaci, H. Kungl, and M. J. Hoffmann, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 262908 

(2006). 


Page 19 of 19 

[45] Q. Tan, J. Li, and D. Viehland, Appl. Phys. Lett. 75, 418 (1999). 

[46] K. Carl and K. H. Hardtl, Ferroelectrics 17, 473 (1977). 

[47] D. Damjanovic, in The Science of Hysteresis (Elsevier, 2006), pp. 337–465. 

[48] T. Rojac, S. Drnovsek, A. Bencan, B. Malic, and D. Damjanovic, Phys. Rev. B 93, 1 

(2016). 

[49] D. Damjanovic, Reports Prog. Phys. 61, 1267 (1998). 

[50] L. Mitoseriu, V. Tura, D. Ricinschi, and C. Harnagea, Ferroelectrics 240, 1317 (2000). 

 


S1

Supplemental Material

Local "hard" and "soft" pinning of 180° domain walls in BaTiO3 probed 

by in situ transmission electron microscopy

Reinis Ignatans, Dragan Damjanovic, and Vasiliki Tileli

Institute of Materials, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, 

Switzerland

Device fabrication

Before transferring the semi-prepared lamella (~ 1 µm thick, 20 µm wide, 7 µm height) to the 

MEMS chip, the thin SiNx membrane in the window region was etched creating a hole and 

extending this hole along the direction of the electrodes (as seen in Fig. 1b-c of the main 

manuscript). This modification ensures that the contaminants from the FIB-deposited Pt 

contact electrodes and the residuals of the final polishing steps do not accumulate in the region 

between the electrodes, but rather fall in the void. Thus, eliminating the possibility of short

circuit due to redeposition layers on the chip.

After transfer, the Pt contacts were deposited firstly underneath the lamella to secure it to the 

chip at ~9° angle. This ensures good enough visibility upon ion polishing. Then additional Pt 

layers were deposited on the front side of the lamella (as seen in the Fig. 1c of the main text). 

Therefore, creating wide planar contacts on the sides (important pre-requisite to achieve 


S2

homogeneous electric field in the electron transparent window). Pt contacts were deposited 

with an ion beam voltage of 30 kV and 40 pA current.

The final polishing of the lamella took place at 0.7° relative to the ion beam at 30 kV and 40 

pA. Final cleaning of the sides of the lamella was performed at 5 kV and 30 pA with the 

polishing angle of 5° from both sides.

Additionally, three areas were further etched from the specimen. Two incisions were made at 

the top part and one large area was cut off at the bottom part of the lamella (the three cuts can 

be seen in Fig. 1(c) of the main manuscript). The top cuts are made to disconnect the protective 

carbon from the electrodes. The undercut incision was made after the final polish of the lamella, 

as this region is prone to accumulate polishing residuals, which often create short circuit across 

the bottom part of the electron transparent region. The isolating incisions are made with the ion 

beam normal to the surface of the lamella. Such geometry greatly reduces the chance of 

redeposition. Care must be taken not to expose the electron transparent window during this 

operation, therefore only the parts which were etched were exposed to the ion beam. The two 

isolating incisions in the protective carbon region (top) were made with 30 kV and 150 pA and

undercut region (bottom) was etched with 30 kV and 80 pA. 


S3

Measurement of thickness of the lamella

The thickness of the lamella was measured using low loss electron energy-loss spectroscopy

(EELS) on the same instrument (ThermoFischer Scientific Themis 60-300). An electron-beam 

current of 100 pA was used. Operating conditions included 70 µm C2 aperture, beam

convergence angle of 28 mrad, and collection angle of 19.8 mrad.

First, a controlled experiment was performed. A BaTiO3 lamella sample with known thickness 

was spectrally mapped at the low-loss energy region. The spectrometer dispersion was set to 

0.25 eV/channel. From the acquired map, the 𝑡/𝜆 calculation was done (where 𝑡 is the thickness 

of the lamella and 𝜆 is the mean free path of the electrons in the specimen).  The thickness of 

the lamella was measured with the SEM and the mean free path, at the specific conditions, was 

calculated to be 𝜆 = 156 ± 3 nm.

Second, the sample used in biasing experiments was mapped at the same conditions, giving 

𝑡/𝜆 measurements across the whole lamella and, by using the mean free path calculated from 

the control sample, the thickness map of the imaged area during biasing was measured, Fig. 

S1. The exact value is calculated to be 268 nm.

FIG. S1. Thickness map of BaTiO3 lamella used for the biasing experiments. (a) – Annular 
dark field (ADF) STEM image annotated with a white rectangle which represents the low-loss 
EELS mapping area. (b) ADF image with overlayed thickness map. Scale bar in both images
is 750 µm.


S4

Considerations of electric field calibration

A schematic illustrating an equivalent circuit of the microdevice fabricated for the biasing 

experiments is used to comprehend the expected electron transport behavior across the biased 

BaTiO3 sample and explain the discrepancies between the applied voltage and expected electric 

field as calculated with finite element methods. R1 is the electric resistance of the wires leading 

to the chip in addition with the resistance of the platinum electric lines of the MEMS chip - R1 

= 40 Ω. Part of the system consisting of R2, R3 and C is equivalent to the lamella with FIB 

deposited contacting layers. R2 is the electric resistance of the deposited contact layers between 

the MEMS Pt lines and the BaTiO3 lamella. R3 is the resistance of the conductive channels 

within the BaTiO3 lamella. Good preparation of a device should lead to a large R3 value and 

small R2 value. In that case, the voltage drop on C and R3 should be the same since the 

conductive channels can be imagined to be in a parallel geometry to a lamella (depicted as 

capacitor C). If R3 is large, then the applied potential drop at the lamella C is equivalent to the 

nominally applied potential (as in schematic +3.5 V). On the other hand, if R3 is small, 

comparably large current flows through the circuit and most of the potential drops within 

R1and R2. Therefore, the voltage on C (and therefore electric field within lamella) is 

considerably smaller.

FIG. S2. Equivalent circuit of in situ biasing system. R1 represents the resistance of the wires 
and Pt lines on the chip leading to the lamella. R2 is the resistance of the FIB deposited Pt 
contacting layers between the BaTiO3 lamella and the Pt electric lines on the chip. C represents
the insulating lamella as a capacitor and R3 is equivalent to conducting channels within this 
lamella.


S5

The FEM simulation is used to explore influence of the sample’s geometry on the magnitude 

and distribution of the electric field within the lamella. It is noted that the calculated electric 

field values from FEM are of the same order of magnitude but due to leakage effects and non-

ideal contact layers they are not expected to match one-to-one. The discrepancy between the 

FEM calculated electric field magnitude and the one applied during biasing experiments can 

be largely attributed to the FIB deposited Pt contacting layers between the BaTiO3 lamella and 

the electric lines of the MEMS chip. In the equivalent circuit above this is represented as R2. 

During the experiments resistance of the system is 33 MΩ. Comparably R1 is miniscule and 

can be easily neglected, therefore R2+R3 = 33 MΩ. The configuration of R2 and R3 in the 

equivalent circuit forms a voltage divider. Voltage drop 𝑈𝐶 on C in the equivalent circuit is as 

follows: 𝑈𝐶 =

𝑅3

𝑅3+𝑅2 × 3.5 𝑉. If the contacting layers are of good quality R2 is small and the 

voltage drop on the C is the same as the supplied voltage to the circuit. On the other hand, if 

R2 ~ R3, the voltage drop across the C is smaller than the supplied voltage. In our case, we 

expect R3 > R2. That is our sample preparation leads to a situation, where the resistance of the 

lamella is larger than the resistance of the contacting layers, and this is supported by directly 

observing the domain response at moderate voltages. Nevertheless, the largest unknown in the 

system is the quality of the contact between the lamella and the MEMS Pt electric lines, which 

could improve the in situ biasing experiments of the ferroelectric samples.


S6

Measurement of the domain area – bias loops

FIG. S3. Domain area – bias loop with images at 0 and ±3.5 V bias voltages (scale bar is 500 
nm). Each dot in the loop represents a measurement from one image. Selection of the 
appropriate domains (red shading in the STEM images) were made based on their response on 
the electric field – for example, only the domains, which grow with negative bias were 
measured. Domain area measurements were made manually for each image with ImageJ. The 
measured domain area was then divided by the total image area, which results in relative 
domain coverage in the given image.


