arXiv:2011.14879v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  30 Nov 2020

A closer look at how symmetry constraints and the spin-orbit

coupling shape the electronic structure of Bi(111)

Marisol Alc´antara Ortigoza∗ and Talat S. Rahman†

Department of Physics, Tuskegee University

Tuskegee Institute, Alabama 36088, USA
and

Department of Physics,

University of Central Florida

Orlando, Florida 32816, USA

(Dated: December 1, 2020)

1


Abstract

Fully relativistic density-functional-theory calculations of Bi(111) thin films are analyzed to re-

visit interpretations made about their electronic structure and the corresponding extrapolations to

explain that of macroscopic samples. Our calculated band structure of a 39-bilayer film (∼ 15 nm)

reproduces satisfactorily three independent measurements obtained for macroscopic samples and

shows that ∼9-nm films are thick enough to describe the band structure of Bi(111) within exper-

imental resolution. Our results indicate that the two split surface-state metallic branches along

the ΓM direction do not overlap with the bulk band at the zone boundary but lie within the

A7-distortion-induced conduction-valence band gap. We show that (1) neither the existence of the

metallic surface states nor their observed splitting is related to inversion asymmetry and (2) the

spin texture observed in such states cannot be attached to the lifting of the Kramers degeneracy.

Thus, such splitting is not of the Rashba-type. We hence provide grounds to identify the large

splitting of the metallic branches as a mj = ±1/2–mj = ±3/2 splitting. We also propose that

the spin texture observed for the metallic branches may only occur because the essentially unal-

tered strong covalent bonds retained by Bi(111) surface atoms cannot afford magnetic polarization.

Moreover, we emphasize that degeneracy at the M-point of the SBZ of Bi(111) —implied by the

translational symmetry of the surface and apparently not satisfied under the assumption that the

two split metallic branches are two singlets of opposite magnetic quantum number— is satisfied

irrespectively of the presence of inversion symmetry centers, even if not detectable by measure-

ments. We also show that the magnetic-moment discontinuity at M —also implied by the same

assumption— does not exist, which also explain why the measured spin-polarization of the metallic

branches vanishes near M. Furthermore, we investigate the Rashba effect on the band structure

of Bi(111) due to three different types of structural/electronic perturbations to reveal the actual

lifting of the Kramers degeneracy. We discuss that depending on the magnitude of the perturbation

imposed on a film, the magnitude of the splitting and the localization of the Rashba-split states

may change dramatically.

PACS numbers:

2


I.
INTRODUCTION

A.
The renewed interest in Bi

The singular properties and applications of Bismuth sprouting since 1911 make it one of

the most remarkable and enlightening elements of the periodic table: It is the heaviest non-

radioactive element. It has the lowest thermal conductivity after mercury and is the element

with largest diamagnetism. Bi allowed an ”early” discovery of the Seebeck, the de Hass-van

Alphen, the Shubnikov-de Haas, and the Nernst effects, all of which are inherently present in

all metals but were more challenging to observe. Bismuth was in fact the first metal whose

Fermi surface was experimentally identified1 and provided the basis to determine that of

any metal. Bi also set the grounds for the still ongoing rational search and optimization of

thermoelectric materials. Furthermore, Bi and Bi1−xSbx (x < 0.06) were among the first

materials for which the excitonic-insulator phase was considered and searched.2–4 Bulk Bi

was also the first non-superconducting material (at least in the ordered phase) that was

found to be superconductor for structurally bulk-like nanoparticles.5 Yet today, Bi remains

a prime subject of intense investigation just as more than 100 years ago.

The interest in Bi has revived at various research fronts. Of particular interest to the

present investigation is that its surfaces are declared to be much better conductors than

the bulk.6,7 Furthermore, and uncoincidentally perhaps,5,8 Bi bicrystals and nanoparticles

display a superconducting phase (Tc = 5K) not observed in ordered bulk Bi down to 50

mK.5,9–11 Moreover, because the spin-orbit coupling is stronger for heavier elements, lifting

of the Kramers degeneracy has been invoked recently to explain the two metallic surface-

state branches of Bi(111), by assuming and inherent lack of inversion symmetry because of

the Bi-vacuum interface.12–15

B.
Current state of knowledge of the geometric and electronic structure of bulk

Bi

The remarkable electronic properties of Bi are tightly related to its crystal structure,

the so-called A7 or αAs structure, which has the space group R3m. The primitive cell of

the A7 structure is a rhombohedron that contains two atoms. The A7 structure largely

resembles a simple cubic structure (SC) with a slight distortion along the body diagonal:

3


the so-called A7 distortion. In bulk Bi, each atom has three equidistant nearest-neighbor

atoms and three equidistant next-nearest neighbors, slightly further away. This structure

thus renders A7-materials as composed by bilayers (BLs) stacked perpendicular the c-axis

or trigonal axis (see Fig. 1). The three nearest neighbors of a Bi atom lie within the same

bilayer (BL), whereas its three next-nearest neighbors are located in the adjacent BL. As a

result, every atom in an A7-material has three equivalent ”short” and ”strong” covalent-like

bonds and three equivalent ”long” and ”weak” metallic-like bonds. A detailed description

of the above rhombohedral and hexagonal representation can be found elsewhere.16

Why Group–V elements arrange themselves in the A7 structure was not understood

until Jones proposed that the A7-distortion creates a band gap almost everywhere in the

Brillouin zone (BZ) that stabilizes the structure. We shall refer to this partial gap as the A7-

distortion pseudogap.18 The so-called Jones-Peierls mechanism explaining the A7 structure

has been amply supported by measurements and calculations (see Ref. 16). In fact, it will

be important for the later discussion to recall that the A7-distortion pseudogap makes all

A7 materials semimetals and exists independently of the strength of the spin-orbit coupling

(SOC) and its effects on the electronic band structure.

C.
Current state of knowledge of the geometric and electronic structure of Bi(111)

As a result of the A7 distortion, bulk Bi can be considered as formed by puckered bilayers

perpendicular to the trigonal axis (see Figures 1 and 2). The covalent intra-bilayer bonds

within each bilayer are much stronger than the metallic-like inter-bilayer bonds. This ex-

plains why Bi crystals easily cleave along the (111) plane, giving rise to the rhombohedral

Bi(111) surface — also known as the pseudocubic-(111) or the hexagonal-(0001) surface (In

the following, however, we confine ourselves to the rhombohedral notation only).

The first investigation of the low-index Bi surfaces was performed by Jona in 1967 via

low-energy electron spectroscopy.17 He found that (1) cleaving Bi perpendicular to the trig-

onal direction can be achieved easily and (2) the resulting Bi(111) surface does not recon-

struct.17,19,20 Jona et al.
also reported that Bi(111) is quite inert to oxygen adsorption

—unlike the other two low-index surfaces.
He ascribed the easy cleavage, the bulk-like

surface termination, and the inertness of Bi(111) to the fact that cleavage of Bi along the

trigonal direction breaks only the long and weak metallic bonds rather than the short and

4


strong covalent bonds, thus yielding a surface terminated in a bilayer and with no true

dangling bonds.17 These assertions were later confirmed by comparing low-energy electron

diffraction (LEED) intensities against dynamical LEED calculations21 and will be relevant

to argue later that macroscopic Bi single-crystals may preserve inversion symmetry with

respect to the trigonal axis when cleaved perpendicular to it.

In order to understand the electronic structure of Bi(111), it is useful to define and

distinguish between the A7-distortion pseudogap and the spin-orbit pseudogaps. The A7-

distortion pseudogap is around the Fermi level (EF) and separated the conduction and

valence bands. Its existence (though not its magnitude) is independent of the SOC, inasmuch

as it is the A7-pseudogap what makes all A7 materials semimetals. On the other hand,

Bi(111) has also SOC pseudogaps, which are known to lie inside the valence band (unlike

those of arsenic,22 for example) and to be caused solely by the SOC, as suggested by earlier

Density-Functional Theory (DFT) calculations of bulk Bi (see Fig. 3).23

Computational investigations on the electronic band structure of the (111) surface of

Group-V semimetals started as early as 1976 with the work of Anishchik et al.24 Their cal-

culations, using a Green-function formalism in the tight-binding representation,24 apparently

yielded pseudogaps within the (111)-projected bulk p-band of Group-V semimetals and sur-

face p-states inside of those pseudogaps. The latter, however, were not associated with the

SOC and were not necessarily metallic or outside the valance p-band. It is important to

note also that, in this investigation the appearance of surface states strictly demanded the

existence of some surface relaxation.24 A similar argument was invoked more recently by

Ast and H¨ochst.8 However, we shall see that the relaxation of the surface neither implies

nor affects significantly the metallic surface states. In fact, the next and more insightful

finding around the band structure of Bi(111) came not from the surface itself but from one

of the earliest fully relativistic pseudopotential calculations of the electronic band structure

of bulk Bi by Golin.25 These calculations did not tackle any implications upon the surfaces’

band structure whatsoever. Yet Golin’s calculations per se hinted that, in addition to the

A7-distortion pseudogap around EF, the (111)-projected band-structure of bulk Bi might

have other ”pseudogaps” around the zone center (the Γ point) of the surface Brilloiun zone

(see Fig. 2(c)) because of the spin-orbit splitting of the valence p-states along the ΓT line

of the bulk BZ (see Fig. 3).

The spin-orbit pseudogaps predicted by Golin’s calculations and their implications on the

5


existence of surface states inside them was the focus of several surface photoemission experi-

ments. Jezequel et al.26 were first to observe surface states on Bi(111) via angle-resolved pho-

toemission spectroscopy (ARPES). Moreover, by applying the same computational method

of Anishchik but explicitly including the spin-orbit coupling in the Hamiltonian, they showed

that the energy and wave-vector range of the calculated spin-orbit pseudogaps were consis-

tent with the observations (except for a measured surface state at 3 eV) and resolve that

these states have indeed a p-character. Until now, however, to our knowledge, the projected

band structure of bulk Bi has not been calculated from first principles to corroborate the

existence and position of such gaps and compare with these ARPES experiments.

Soon after the work of Jezequel et al., Patthey et al.27 detected that Bi(111) has an

enhanced metallicity with respect to bulk Bi. Later photoemission experiments aimed de-

termining the band-structure of Bi(111) with better accuracy.28,29 However, it was only until

Hengsberger et al.6 focused on probing energy scales of only few hundred meV below the

Fermi energy, that high-resolution photoemission studies at 12 and 300 K made patent the

existence of the two metallic branches of surface states from the zone boundary (the M point)

to the midpoint of the ΓM line, spanning regions closer to the Fermi level than those pre-

viously explored (though somehow predicted by the preliminary calculations of Jezequel26).

An important difference between the measurements of Hengsberger et al. and earlier ones

is that the latter focused on finding surface states within the spin-orbit pseudogaps, whereas

Hengsberger’s et al. scanned for surface states in the A7-distortion pseudogap. The two-

dimensional Fermi surface near Γ was later investigated by Ast and H¨ochst.7,30 Thus, their

results together with those of Hengsberger et al. resolved the band structure of Bi(111) all

along the ΓM direction of the surface Brillouin zone (Fig. 3).

D.
Current state of knowledge about the two surface-state metallic branches of

Bi(111)

Some doubts have been cast upon the reliability of Hengsberger’s et al.
measure-

ments close to M.8 The reason is that tight-binding-approximation calculations of the bulk-

projected bands (see e.g. Ref. 12,31) suggest that the energy range within which Hengsberger

et al. found the metallic surface states overlaps with the bulk band well before reaching the

M-point. If so, then the experiment could not have allowed surface states to be distin-

6


guished from bulk states around the zone edge (M). Nevertheless, independent ARPES

measurements around the M-point for a macroscopic sample by Ast and H¨ochst confirmed

the findings of Hengsberger et al.32 Remarkably, despite the presumed constraints on the

extent of the two metallic branches around the M-point implied by tight-binding calcula-

tions of the bulk band structure, a fitting of Lorenzian line shapes to the energy distribution

of the ARPES intensity —considering the Fermi function cutoff and removing a Shirley

background— confirm that the emission intensity of the two metallic surface-state branches

is weak but still detectable around the zone edge and display a gap of ∼ 37-meV at the

M-point.32

Further attention has been drawn to the two surface-state metallic branches of the Bi(111)

surface of macroscopic samples and thin films for over a decade.
One aim of the most

recent investigations has been to understand the origin of the energy splitting between

them.8,12–15,21 However, before going any further with the details, it may be helpful to clarify

the terminology to which we shall adhere. Lifting of the Kramers degeneracy because of

the lack of inversion-symmetry centers and the ubiquitous SOC is known in the literature

(including the works on Bi(111)33) as Rashba splitting,33–42 in regards to the lifting of the

twofold spin degeneracy of the electronic states of systems if they lack inversion symmetry

and the SOC is taken into account.43 In order to understand it, we can start by considering

systems whose Hamiltonian is conservative and whose geometric structure has an inversion

center. Such systems have at least two symmetries: One is the time-reversal symmetry, which

guarantees that for any electronic state defined by ǫ(k, ↑), there is a degenerate state with

ǫ(−k, ↓)=ǫ(k, ↑). The second one is the inversion symmetry, which implies that for each state

defined by ǫ(k, ↑), there is a degenerate state with ǫ(−k, ↑)=ǫ(k, ↑). Therefore, if a system

satisfies both symmetries, its electronic states are at least doubly degenerate. Specifically,

by combining the above two conditions, one gets that ǫ(k, ↑)=ǫ(k, ↓) for each k-vector.

The latter is known as the Kramers degeneracy8,44 and it is also often referred as the ”spin

degeneracy” because the two states have same k-vector but opposite spin. However, one must

be careful with the latter designation because ir implicitly assumes a framework in which

the spin-orbit coupling is neglected. That being said, the Rashba-type splitting is the lifting

of the Kramers degeneracy (1) because of an external and tunable perturbation breaks the

inversion symmetry and (2) by virtue of the inherent presence of the SOC (Though wurtzite

materials which inherently have no inversion symmetry also display Rashba/Dresselhaus

7


splitting).43 For example, the Rashba splitting model was initially applied to understand

systems with no inversion center either because of the action of an external electric field,45,46

heterojunctions,43,47,48 but it may also take place in the presence of reactive substrates,

surface passivation, or surface erosion. Also, since the Rashba-splitting exists because of

the SOC, it becomes most noticeable for the electronic states of heavy elements such as Bi.

Naturally, because the spin and angular momentum are no longer good quantum numbers,

the Rashba-type splitting breaks the magnetic quantum number degeneracy ±|mj| rather

than the ”spin degeneracy.”

Figure 4 is a qualitative diagram of the effect of the spin-orbit coupling on p-levels.49

Namely, were the SOC negligible, all bands would be at least doubly degenerate at any k-

point and all six states would be degenerate at Γ (Fig. 4(a)). The SOC, on the other hand,

leads to a splitting of the pj=3/2 and pj=1/2 levels even at Γ, but leaves the ±|mj| degeneracy

for systems with an inversion center (Fig. 4(b)). The latter case, in particular, is commonly

used to represent the splitting of the bands of semiconductors.44,50 On the other hand, in a

lattice without any inversion center, the Kramers or mj degeneracy (±|mj|) is lifted at all

k-points (Fig. 4(c)), except Γ (as required by the time-reversal symmetry and regardless of

the lack of inversion symmetry). That is the Rashba or so-called ’spin’ splitting.

Coming back to Bi(111), it was initially concluded that the two metallic surface-states

branches result from the removal of the spin (magnetic-quantum-number) degeneracy.12,13

In turn, as mentioned before, lifting of the Kramers degeneracy is always attached to the

lack of an inversion-symmetry center of the system plus the inherent SOC.12,13 The first

ARPES investigation of the two metallic surface-state branches on thin films was performed

using Si(111) as a substrate. The conclusion —aided by band-structure calculations of free-

standing Bi(111) films— was that the weak interaction between the Bi(111) surface and

the Si(111) substrate does not lift the spin degeneracy and the states behave as if the film

preserved space-inversion symmetry.13 Thus, at this point, it was accepted that the splitting

between the two metallic bands exists in the presence of inversion symmetry and that each

of the two branches are ”spin-degenerate.” At the same time, contradictorily, it was stated

again that the good agreement between experiment and DFT calculations shows that the

surface states of the Bi(111) films display a Rashba-type SOC splitting.13 Later on, the same

authors have acknowledged that non-supported Bi(111) films, or films supported by weakly-

interacting substrates such as Si(111), behave as if they preserved inversion symmetry and

8


for that reason the degeneracy of the surface states is not lifted.14,15 Thus, the spin-orbit

coupling is identified as a sufficient and necessary condition for the splitting. And yet, they

again ratify the notion that there are two metallic surface-state branches rather than a single

one because of the splitting caused by the Rashba effect (which is understood as that lifting

of the Kramers degeneracy because of lack of inversion symmetry33–42).14,15 We shall see that

assuming that the measured splitting is of the Rashba-type brings out several inconsistencies

about the origin of the two metallic surface-states branches.

In addition to the above-mentioned time-reversal symmetry —which guarantees that all

states must be doubly degenerate at Γ— the two metallic branches are also expected to be

degenerate at the M-point because of the two-dimensional translational symmetry of the

surface. The latter exists irrespectively of whether or not there is an inversion-symmetry

center. Specifically, on the surface layer (or any other layer below) there are six equivalent

directions (Fig. 2b) and correspondingly, for example, there are six equivalent M points

on the surface Brillouin zone (Fig. 2c). This implies that ǫ(−M, ↑) = ǫ(M, ↑). Clearly,

the latter equation combined with the time-reversal symmetry implies that all states at M

must be doubly degenerate. Nevertheless, the supposedly-Rashba-split metallic surfaces-

state branches turned out to split all the way up to M, according to measurements and

calculations.6,13,15,32 In other words, the expected degeneracy at M in fulfillment of the

translational symmetry is apparently not satisfied.15 Surprisingly, the seeming violation to

the translational symmetry was attached to the fact that the clean and relaxed Bi(111) slabs

used in calculations (a) do have inversion symmetry13 or (b) are sufficiently thin so that the

two surfaces interact,12,15 for which they do not represent an ideal semi-infinite surface,15

notwithstanding the splitting at all other intermediate points along the ΓM line has been

from the start attributed to the lack of inversion symmetry at the surface (Rashba split-

ting).12,13,15 Another inconsistency is that the latter assertion antagonizes two categorically

different aspects. Namely, finiteness of the thickness of the slab apparently counteracts the

in-plane translational symmetry. The seeming problem has thus been resolved by adsorbing

hydrogen on one side of a fairly thin Bi(111) slab.12,15 Thus, the calculated band structure

that is currently considered to simulate that of a macroscopic Bi(111) sample is the band

structure of one side of a film only 4-nm thick, with broken inversion-symmetry via the

adsorption of atomic H on the other side of the film, and whose metallic surface states are

strongly localized all the way up to the M-point (contrary to available measurements).15

9


A closer look to the above line of reasoning begs three questions: (1) Is H-adsorption

needed to originate the splitting along ΓM shown in Refs. 12,15, to break the inversion

symmetry, to impose the degeneracy at M,15 or to decouple the already weakly coupled

sides of a 10-BL Bi slab?12,15 or rather to better simulate a semi-infinite surface15?; (2)

Is it reasonable that one must break a symmetry (inversion symmetry) to fulfill another

(translational symmetry)15?; (3) Why shall we expect the two metallic branches to meet at

M —either for thin or macroscopic films— if it has been accepted that each metallic branch

corresponds to two degenerate states13 (which would automatically satisfy the degeneracy

at M)? In particular, although (1) the only reason to demand the double degeneracy at M

is the translation symmetry and (2) it had already been accepted that the two bands are

magnetic-quantum-number degenerate, at least for non-strongly perturbed finite films13, the

degeneracy at M has been further searched and its absence justified.15,33 For example, it has

been concluded that the expected degeneracies at Γ and M are in fact removed by the strong

interactions between the upper and the lower surface of a finite film,15,33 even though the the

time-reversal and translational symmetries (or any other symmetry) cannot be contingent on

such interactions. Furthermore, it was reported that by increasing the separation between

the upper and lower surfaces (i.e., increasing the film thickness), the gap between the two

branches at M progressively decreases. The gap was in fact estimated to decrease by a factor

2 if the number of layers is doubled. The latter estimation puts forth that even films as

thick as 16-nm (40 BLs) misrepresent a macroscopic sample. But moreover, since the only

argument to expect a degeneracy at M is the translational symmetry, it apparently implies

that the in-plane translational symmetry is fulfilled only in the limit of infinitely thick slabs.

Otherwise, we have to ask ourselves: Why is there is a concern about the behavior of the

metallic surface states at zone edge? and How is the splitting or degeneracy at M relevant

to the origin of the two metallic bands measured at M?

Spin-resolved ARPES (SARPES) measurements have shown that the two metallic

branches display opposite magnetic-quantum-number polarization in thin-films.14 These ex-

periments reaffirmed the notion that the Rashba-effect lifts the Kramers degeneracy, giving

rise to two branches of opposite magnetic quantum number.14 So, one may ask, how is it

possible that the spin texture is observable if the bands are degenerate states of opposite

magnetic-quantum-number? The reason is that the two degenerate bands composing each

branch are localized on opposite sides of a film.15 That is actually not surprising; the time-

10


reversal and the translational symmetries do not demand that the two degenerate bands

must be localized in the same spatial region. Thus, in practice, each side of a thin film bears

two non-degenerate bands of opposite magnetic-moment polarization. As such, dependently

on the situation, one could use the entanglement of the states of the two sides of the slab

or completely ignore the states of one side. Of course, in the experiments so far performed,

the measurements correspond to only on one side of the films. Thus, from that point of

view alone, it is not possible to determine whether the gap between the spin-texture states

corresponds to the Rashba splitting or not. Nevertheless, we shall see that the significance

of the splitting or degeneracy at the M point is that, if two spin-textured bands do not meet

at M, then that indicates that the measurements do not correspond to the lifting of the spin

or Kramers degeneracy. But then, the question arises: why does the spin texture of one

branch is opposite to that of the other branch if the two metallic branches are not correlated

(i.e., they do not correspond to split Kramers pairs)? Moreover, it remains to resolve why

the magnetic moment of each single band on a given side of the slab is double-valued and

discontinuous at the M-point (see Fig.4(b) of Ref. 14).

The significance of the splitting at M for the origin of the splitting everywhere else

along ΓM can be also appreciated in a more recent SARPES investigation of inversion-

asymmetric (supported) Bi films .33 The unexpected splitting at M was explained again by

the overlapping of the metallic states with the bulk band but also linked to the evanescence

of the spin polarization near M.
The metallic states are assumed to extend inside the

film because of the overlapping with the bulk band, reflect specularly at the film/substrate

interface and create quantum-well states, which in turn yield energetically separated bands

at the M-point. Then, the states become non-spin-polarized near M simply because only

in this region the splitting has no relation to the Rashba effect. Even more worrying is that

the states are also said to somehow become ”electronically inversion symmetric” only near

M.33 As such, the splitting of the metallic bands is now believed to arise from an exotic

combination of an inversion-asymmetry-driven Rashba-splitting (away from M) and a non-

inversion-asymmetry-driven parity-effect splitting (near M).33 It is true that the coupling

between the two sides of the film enhances the splitting between the metallic states at M

and that their increasing delocalization for decreasing wave vectors must reduce their spin

polarization. Nevertheless, there is neither bulk band for thin films nor energy overlapping

with any bulk-like state.
Moreover, we shall see that the only overlapping that totally

11


quenches the spin polarization of the metallic bands is that with its own Kramers pair

because the Kramers degeneracy is hardly lifted in films supported on weakly interacting

substrates.

Because of the considerations exposed in the above introduction, we believe it is timely to

revise the current interpretation of the electronic band structure of Bi(111) and, in particular,

of its metallic surface-state branches. We shall see that all experimental measurements and

previous computational results can be explained coherently and straightforwardly. In this

work, we shall address four main issues: (1) What is the origin and character of the splitting

of the two metallic branches? (2) What exactly is the role of the time-reversal, inversion and

translation symmetry in shaping the band structure of Bi(111)? (3) How is the splitting or

degeneracy at M relevant to the origin of the two metallic bands measured at M? and (4)

How does the Rashba splitting look like in Bi(111)? Can we tune it?

The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows: Section II describes the computa-

tional details of our investigation. Section III summarizes our results concerning the geo-

metric structure of bulk Bi and Bi(111) films for various thicknesses and the effect of the

H-adsorption perturbation. Section IV contains our results for the band structure of Bi(111)

for various thicknesses and examines the various aspects related to the electronic structure

of Bi(111) that we have discussed above, including the effect of H adsorption. Section V

describes the Rashba splitting of the two metallic branches of Bi(111) achieved by three

different perturbations and analyzes how the magnitude of the perturbation correlates with

that of the Rashba splitting and with the spatial localization of the surface states. Section VI

analyzes the density of electronic states as a function of thickness to resolve quantitatively

whether the concentration of charge carriers is localized at the surface is sufficiently high to

dominate the transport properties for thin films. Section VII discusses the implications of

our results. Finally, Section VIII summarizes our main results and the conclusions drawn

from them.

II.
COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS

Our investigation is based on fully relativistic periodic-supercell DFT calculations of the

electronic structure of bulk Bi and Bi(111). Our calculations are performed within the local

density approximation (LDA). For the exchange and correlation terms, we use the Ceperley

12


and Alder51 functional. The generalized gradient approximation with the Perdew-Burke-

Ernzerhof52 functionals was also applied to obtain the structural properties of bulk Bi and

used for comparison with the LDA functional.

The electron-ion interaction is treated within the pseudo-potential (PP) approach.53 We

use projector-augmented-waves pseudo-potentials.55 As valence electrons, we have taken into

account only the 6s2 and 6p3 electrons of Bi. The Kohn-Sham orbitals are expanded in plane

waves (PW) as implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP).54 The SOC

is implemented by the developers as described in Ref. 56. Notice that in this scheme, the

inversion symmetry is not assumed within the calculation even if the structure has inversion

symmetry so that the Kramers degeneracy is not assumed but derived. Moreover, all k-

points in the grid are used in the calculation.

We have used the both rhombohedral and hexagonal unit cells of Bi (which contain two

and six atoms per unit cell, respectively) to describe the bulk, and the hexagonal one8 to

describe the Bi(111) surface. The Bi(111) surface was modeled with a slab having on atom

per layer (1×1 in-plane periodicity) and 39 bilayers. In the calculations involving the surface,

a vacuum layer of 14 ˚A separate the periodic images of the slab to avoid interaction between

them.

For integrations over the Brilloiun zone, that of the bulk (in the hexagonal representation)

and surface were sampled by 2592 and 432 irreducible k-points, respectively, which are

selected while ignoring inversion symmetry. The integrations use a Gaussian broadening with

a smearing parameter of 0.1 eV. The Kohn-Sham orbitals were expanded in a plane-wave

basis set with a maximum kinetic energy of 163 eV. The kinetic energy for the augmentation

of charges is cut off at 265.4 eV. The positions of all atoms in the slab were optimized until the

forces on each atom and each direction was smaller than 6×10−3 eV/˚A. For this purpose, the

conjugate-gradient algorithm has been applied. The total energy for each ionic configuration

sampled within the relaxation process was convergent up to 2×10−5 eV.

Preliminary calculations of the lattice parameters, volume and cohesive energy of bulk

Bi show that (1) semicore d-electrons of Bi influence these properties negligibly; (2) the

generalized gradient approximation using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof52 functional does not

outperform LDA since significantly overestimates the length of the basis vectors and thus

nearest-neighbor distances and the supercell volume; (3) denser k-point grids to sample

the bulk Brillouin zone do not yield variations in the electronic properties of bulk Bi; (4)

13


doubling the energy cutoff for plane waves does not affect the electronic properties of bulk

Bi.

For the calculations concerning the Bi(111) surface, we consider slabs of various thick-

nesses, with inversion symmetry and without it. The inversion symmetry of a relaxed Bi(111)

slab is broken by (1) placing hydrogen at 2 ˚A of Bi, as in Ref. 12, and at 1.86 ˚A, which

is the distance resulting after relaxation; (2) an inter-bilayer perturbation —achieved by

increasing by 0.3 ˚A the distance between the first two bilayers of one side of the slab; and

(3) an intra-bilayer perturbation —achieved by increasing by 0.1 ˚A the distance between

the two layers forming the first bilayer of one side of the slab.

The XCrySDen software57 is used to obtain a schematic representation of the structure

of the bulk Bi and Bi(111).

III.
RESULTS: GEOMETRIC STRUCTURE OF BULK BI, CLEAN BI(111) AND

H/BI(111)

A.
Structure of Bi(111)

The Bi(111) surface is a triangular lattice (see Fig. 2(b)) perpendicular to the trigonal

axis. There are four parameters in A7-materials characterizing the bilayered structure that

facilitate the analysis of the properties of bulk Bi and, in particular, of Bi(111). These

parameters are the distance between first nearest neighbors d1NN, the distance between

second nearest neighbors d2NN, the intra-bilayer distance dij, and the inter-bilayer distance

djk. The bilayered structure of Bi underlying the Bi(111) surface is shown in Fig. 2(a). As

shown by the color code and the labels, the bilayered structure repeats itself only every six

planes. The vertical spacing between the layers forming a bilayer, the intra-bilayer distance,

is denoted by dij = d12, d34, etc., and is related to the strong, short and covalent bonds

existing among first nearest neighbors. In turn, the vertical spacing between two bilayers,

the inter-bilayer distance, is denoted by djk = d23, d45, etc., and is related to the weak,

long and metallic bonds existing among second nearest neighbors. A complete analysis of

the structure of Bi(111) will be provided elsewhere. Here it will be important to mention

only that the changes in dij and djk within the four topmost bilayers are well converged

for slabs of 10 or more bilayers (up to 39 BLs). Moreover, the bulk-like interlayer spacings

14


is recovered around the fifth bilayer, in the sense that at such distance from the surface,

changes of dij and djk with respect to the bulk values are less than 0.1%.

B.
Effect of H-adsorption on Bi(111) geometric structure

In this subsection, we present the results for H/Bi(111), which clearly is an inversion

asymmetric film. We limit ourselves to investigate a hydrogen monolayer (ML) adsorbed

atop on one side of a Bi(111) film of (a) 6 BLs, a thickness which in the absence of H is

insufficient to recover bulk-like dij and djk, and (b) 10 and 12 BLs, thickness which in the

absence of H are sufficient to recover bulk-like dij and djk. These calculations are performed

in order to analyze whether H-adsorption can be expected to help model the geometric

structure of a semi-infinite Bi(111) slab. Namely, as mentioned in Section I C, it has been

assumed in previous DFT calculations that it is possible to simulate the Bi(111) surface

of a semi-infinite system by using a film of 10 BLs with a monolayer of atop H placed

∼2˚A away from one side of the Bi film, the H-host surface.12,15 In this way, the other side

of the slab, the clean side, is expected to be a reliable model of the Bi(111) surface of a

semi-infinite system or, for that sake, of any macroscopic sample. Hence, our goal here is

to find out whether the clean side of H-adsorbed inversion-asymmetric films indeed displays

the converged structural properties of the clean inversion-symmetric films reported in the

previous subsection.

The first aspect that calls the attention is that a monolayer of atop H has been fixed at

a particular (and arbitrary) distance from the surface, ∼ 2˚A.12,15 We thus aim to find out

whether, with respect to the Bi-H radius of interaction, a distance of ∼2˚Ais long or short

so as to represent a small or large perturbation to the Bi slab, especially to the clean side of

it. One cannot obtain the structure of a Bi slab when the H ML is exactly 2˚A away unless

one fixes the position of both the topmost Bi surface layer and H. Nevertheless, should one

monolayer of H, situated at ∼2˚A from the surface, be a small perturbation, then either (1) 2˚A

is too long with respect to the relaxed distance or (2) the effect of one H ML on the structure

of the clean side is mild. Our results for the totally relaxed H/Bi(111) films displayed in

Table III indicate the opposite: (1) The relaxed distance between H and the topmost Bi

layer is actually not too far to 2˚A (1.86˚A) and (2) changes in the interlayer distances around

the relaxed clean side indicate that the perturbation induced by H is considerably strong and

15


of long range. Specifically, as shown in Table III, even for 12-BL films, H-adsorption causes

that the inter-layer distances adopted around the ”clean” side deviate significantly from

the converged distances that were thoroughly tested for inversion-symmetric slabs of up to

39 BLs. For example, ∆d12 for the clean side of the three H-adsorbed films is ∼-1.9%, whereas

the convergent value for clean inversion-symmetric films is ∼-1.6%. Therefore, because the

position of the atoms and their charge density entail each other, one cannot expect that a

monolayer of H will render a charge density —and thus a geometric structure— which is in

any way a good approximation of that of a semi-infinite slab, no matter whether one keeps

the positions of all atoms fixed at their converged values or not.

IV.
RESULTS: ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE OF BULK BI AND BI(111) THIN

FILMS

1.
The effect of structural relaxation on the metallic states of Bi(111)

It is worth to mention first that the metallic surface states along ΓM are quite insensitive

to the relaxation of the structure, as long as the inversion symmetry is preserved. Namely,

the electronic structure of a relaxed film does not differ significantly from that of a bulk-

terminated film. Also, if the inversion symmetry of a Bi(111) film is broken by hydrogen

adsorption on one of its surfaces, the electronic structure of the metallic states energy does

not depend on whether the system is relaxed or not. Specifically, the band structure of

H/Bi(111) in which H is placed 2 ˚A away from the Bi surface and the forces arising upon

adsorption are not relaxed (as in Ref. 12) is not significantly different from that in which H is

1.86 ˚A away from Bi surface after a full relaxation of the forces. In contrast, we shall see later

the noticeable differences between the metallic surface states of an inversion-symmetric clean

film and those of an inversion-asymmetric slab in which even minor perturbations break the

inversion symmetry.

2.
Ab initio projected band-structure of bulk Bi: The A7-distortion and SOC surface states

The effect of the SOC on the electronic structure of bulk Bi has long been known from ab

initio calculations through the early work of Golin,25 and more recently from Gonze et al.

16


(see Fig. 3).23 Nonetheless, the projected band-structure of bulk Bi on the SBZ of Bi(111)

has so far only been obtained from tight-binding calculations. In fact, even ab initio studies

of Bi(111) have used the tight-binding band structure of the bulk to draw conclusions about

that of Bi(111) and about the effects of the SOC on it.8,12 Thus, we shall first analyze the

ab initio and fully relativistic projected band-structure of bulk Bi on the SBZ of Bi(111) in

order to introduce and discuss the surface states of Bi(111) in a consistent manner.

Figure 6(top) shows the projected band structure of bulk Bi along the ΓM and ΓK

directions of the SBZ of Bi(111) in the energy range within which the spin-orbit coupling is

expected to give rise to gaps and surface states. It shows that there are indeed gaps at the

regions where Jezequel et al. observe surface states for Bi(111) via ARPES.26 Specifically,

there are gaps from Γ to 1

3K spanning from -0.6 to -0.8 eV and from -1.4 to -2.8 eV; and

from
3
4K to K spanning from -1.8 to -2.8 eV, that are consistent with Jezequel’s et al.

measurements.26 Furthermore, our calculation of the band structure of a 39-BL film with

inversion symmetry and including SOC confirms the existence of those states, as shown

in Figure 6(bottom).
Comparison between the top and bottom plots reveals that there

are surface states arising only if the SOC is taken into account and in regions gapped only

because of the SOC. These surface states are thus indeed ”spin-orbit coupling surface states”.

In contrast, the pair of metallic surface-state branches (denoting that it is not a single band)

around EF appear within the ”A7-distortion” gap and regardless of whether or not the SOC

is taken into account. In other words, the origin of both the conduction-valence band gap

and the metallic surface-state branch(es) does not lie in the SOC.

Note that for this inversion-symmetric film of up to 15.5 nm, with and without SOC, the

branches are at least doubly degenerate. Importantly, at least for inversion-symmetric films,

the two Kramers degenerate bands composing each metallic branch are primarily localized

on opposite sides of the film. Thus, the SOC alone does not lift the Kramers degeneracy

anywhere inside the SBZ. Namely, although the metallic branches appear separated all

along ΓM, each metallic branch in Fig. 6(bottom) is composed of two degenerate bands

(In other words, there are actually four metallic surface-state bands).
Because the film

is inversion-symmetric and the bands are doubly degenerate, that means that the splitting

arises without requiring inversion asymmetry and without breaking the Kramers degeneracy,

which demonstrates that the SOC splitting is not of the Rashba type. Moreover, it is clear

for the same reasons that, despite the splitting, the degeneracy at M is guaranteed for

17


inversion-symmetric films.

Figure 6(bottom) also shows that the splitting of the metallic branches exist all along

between the ΓM midpoint to M even if the SOC is ignored altogether and in the presence

of inversion symmetry for films our 15.5-nm film. In fact, the splitting between the two

metallic branches is about two times larger near M without SOC than with SOC (it might

really overlap with the non-SOC bulk band of bulk Bi). For example, the splitting at M

without SOC for the 15.5nm film can be as large as 90 meV, yet it bears no relation to the

SOC or the Rashba effect but to the coupling between the two side of a film, as noted in

Ref. 33. Figure 6(bottom) also shows that the splitting of the metallic branches from Γ to

the midpoint of the ΓM line arises only once the SOC is included. From the midpoint of

ΓM to M, the SOC significantly increases the energy of both metallic branches, for which

they do not overlap with the bulk band. Interestingly, the splitting between the metallic

branches that exists near M in the absence of SOC is reduced once the SOC is included.

However, it is not clear whether this reduction is caused by the directly by the SOC or

indirectly because of the energy increase.

3.
Splitting and delocalization of the metallic surface states along ΓM as a function of film

thickness

Figure. 7 displays the band-structure of Bi(111) around EF and including the SOC, for

an inversion-symmetric film of 39 BLs. The evolution and convergence of the dispersion will

be provided elsewhere. Here it will be important to mention only that 21 BLs are enough

to converge the dispersion of the two metallic branches along the ΓM line.

Note in Fig. 7 that our fully relativistic DFT calculations indicate that the width of the

A7-distortion gap of bulk Bi around at M is ∼120 meV and spans from 15 to 135 meV

below EF, in stark contrast to the ∼20–30-meV gap predicted by tight-binding calculations

(spanning at most from 20 to 50 meV below EF).12,32 In addition, contrary to the belief that

the surface states of macroscopic samples overlap with the bulk band (based on tight-binding

calculations12,31),8,32,33 our calculations for slabs thicker than 8 nm (∼ 21 BL) show that the

metallic branches do not overlap with the bulk bands at or in the vicinity of M. This is

important because, as mentioned in subsection I D, the alleged overlapping has served as a

premise to conclude on the behavior of the metallic branches at M and as an explanation for

18


the incapability of ARPES to confirm the expected degeneracy at M in macroscopic samples.

Namely, even for ultra-thin films, it has been argued that the observations are rather surface

resonances that result from the hybridization of the metallic surface state with quantum well

states13 and are, hence, so delocalized that the spin-splitting weakens.14 We shall address this

issue in subsection IV 7. In the meantime, we must highlight as well that our results in Fig. 7

also indicate that ARPES measurements around M6,32 are within the gap and, thus, are not

surface resonances (hybridization of surface states with quantum well states13) but surface

states. Therefore, our results indicate that ARPES measurements of the metallic branches

around M are reliable despite their low intensity because there is no overlapping with the

bulk band.
The intensity is certainly weak because the metallic branches become more

delocalized around M, whereas the energy of the X-rays used in ARPES to study surfaces

is fixed and chosen to sample the least amount of subsurface atoms.32,60,61 Nonetheless,

integration of partial intensities over a higher (or lower) photon energies might be useful to

resolve more clearly the dispersion of macroscopic samples without the concern that part of

the intensity comes from bulk states.

Importantly, there is good agreement between our calculations for inversion-symmetric

films and the ARPES measurements of Hengsberger et al.6 and Ast and H¨ochst (Fig.1(a) of

Ref. 32) for macroscopic slabs regarding the dispersion and the fact that the two bands do not

meet at the M point. This agreement supports that, should the crystal display inversion

asymmetry, (1) the splitting along ΓM of the metallic branches takes place regardless of

inversion symmetry and (2) the gap at M between the two metallic branches may comes

up not only for simulated inversion-symmetric thin films but also for macroscopic samples

and supported thin films. We shall denote the energy gap at M as ∆E and discuss it in

subsection IV 8.

4.
Evolution of the metallic branches along the ΓM as a function of the SOC strength in an

inversion-symmetric and -asymmetric film

We have seen that the two degenerate bands of each branch are localized on the opposite

surfaces of the slab. However, only one of them is investigated experimentally. In order

to understand the effect of the SOC and the inversion symmetry on the band-structure of

Bi(111) films, and compare with experimental observations, we show in Fig. 5(Top) the

19


evolution of the splitting between and degree of localization of the metallic branches of a

24-BL Bi(111) with inversion symmetry as a function of the strength of the SOC and on

a single chosen side of the slab. In order to do that, we must distinguish between the two

surfaces of the slab. We will refer to them as top and bottom surface. The states located on,

say, the top surface are then highlighted with red dots whose diameter represents to what

extent the state is localized on the surface. The Kramers pair at each k-point (located in

the bottom surface) cannot be appreciated because it is degenerate with the bands located

on the top surface.

As expected from available measurements and previous calculations,15,32 both metallic

branches bear some localization weight on any of the two surfaces of a film. As expected

from subsectionIV 2, the splitting between the two metallic branches increases almost all

along ΓM and decreases near M with increasing strength of the SOC. Fig. 5(Top) also shows

that with increasing strength of the SOC, the localization of the metallic branches on the

topmost bilayer slightly decreases from Γ to the midpoint of ΓM, slightly increases from the

midpoint of ΓM to M, and strongly increases along ΓK.

Let us now consider the effect of the SOC in a slab without inversion symmetry.

Fig. 5(Bottom) displays the evolution of the metallic branches of a 24-BL Bi(111) with-

out inversion symmetry as a function of the strength of the SOC. In this case, the symmetry

is broken by increasing the inter-bilayer distance djk between the bottom bilayer and the

rest of the film. Again, the red dots indicate how much the metallic states are localized on

the top bilayer. By comparing Figs. 5(Top) and (Bottom), one can see that the dispersion

of the bands on the top bilayer and their dependency on the strength of the SOC are nearly

the same with and without inversion symmetry. In addition, can see that, without inver-

sion symmetry, the metallic branches display extra splittings. In the absence of the SOC,

the branches resulting from the extra splitting are still doubly degenerate. Hence inver-

sion asymmetry alone does not lift the Kramers degeneracy either. However, with broken

symmetry and once the SOC is included, the obtained splitting finally lifts the Kramers

degeneracy and reveals the four states composing the two metallic branches. That is indeed

the lifting of the Kramers degeneracy, the spin or Rashba splitting. Still, Kramers pairs are

on opposite sides of the slab. Therefore, once again, the splitting found for the top bilayer

bears no relation to the lack of inversion symmetry or the lifting of the Kramers degener-

acy (Rashba effect). Importantly, Fig. 5(Bottom) shows that in this inversion-asymmetric

20


film, the resulting Rashba splitting does satisfy the translational-symmetry-required degen-

eracy at M. We shall come back to analyze inversion-asymmetric slabs when we discuss the

Rashba splitting in Bi(111) in section V.

5.
Origin of the two metallic bands along the ΓM

We have seen that the Kramers degeneracy is not lifted by the SOC alone and hence the

observed splitting between the metallic bands is not of the Rashba type. The question is,

what is then the origin of the splitting?

Ast and H¨ochst have proposed strong surface relaxations to explain the origin of the

metallic surface states of Bi(111), but it has long been clear that these are not dramatic.8

Moreover, the surface states appear regardless whether the surface is relaxed or not (subsec-

tion IV 1). Hofmann in turn has evoke the relation between the existence of surface states

and dangling bonds, later acknowledging that Bi(111) has no dangling bonds. He then pro-

poses the spin-orbit interaction as the origin of the surface states. However, our results in

Fig. 6 for a 39-BL slab demonstrate that the presence of two bands (and not one) is not even

necessarily attached to the spin-orbit-coupling. Thus, based on the fact that the metallic

surface states exist regardless of the SOC and/or the lack of inversion symmetry, we can say

that the surface states of Bi(111) are first of all a pair of Shockley states arising because

of the abrupt termination of the periodic potential for the highly delocalized p-states of Bi.

It is true though that the splitting is enhanced along the ΓM direction by the spin-orbit

coupling. However, around the M-point, the delocalized character of these states plays an

important role,33 for which the splitting exists regardless of the SOC for thin films.

Still, what does the SOC split then? We propose that the splitting does not lift the

Kramers degeneracy and yet it is caused by the SOC, and mainly around Γ, because it is a

mj = ±1/2–mj = ±3/2 splitting, as described in Fig. 4 in subsection I D. In the following, we

provide some arguments and indirect evidence that the two metallic branches (accounting for

a total of four bands) have a mj = ±1/2 and mj = ±3/2 character, respectively, particularly

from Γ to the k-point along ΓM where they reach highest energy.

The states shown in Fig. 6(top) appear as purely p-states of bulk Bi if projected on

spherical harmonics (s-states have much lower energy —∼8eV below EF, as shown in Fig. 3).

However, it would be necessary to project the wavefunction onto the eigenfunctions of the

21


J 2 and Jz operators to obtain their main total-angular-momentum and magnetic-quantum-

number character, which is a computational task that we could not afford. Nonetheless, by

analyzing the splittings of the bulk bands along ΓT and ΓKX occurring upon inclusion of

the SOC (Fig. 3) and comparing them with those sketched in Fig. 4(b), it is possible to

identify that along those directions the lower single p-band must have a j = 1/2 character

and the upper pair of p-bands must have a j = 3/2 character. The latter in turn must split

into mj = ±1/2- and mj = ±3/2-states. Therefore, one can conclude that in Fig. 6(top),

the projected bulk bands around Γ of the SBZ that span from ∼2 to ∼3 eV correspond

to the j = 1/2-states, whereas the upper occupied bands (those up to ∼1.5eV below EF)

correspond to j = 3/2-states that split into mj = ±1/2- and mj = ±3/2-states (even though

in other regions of the BZ the energy ordering of the j = 1/2 and j = 3/2 may be swapped

so that the two contributions overlap in that region25). One can thus speculate that along

ΓM of the SBZ (and particulary around Γ), the bulk bands up to ∼1.5eV below EF must

be in large part states of a mj = ±1/2 and mj = ±3/2 character that overlap energetically

for the most part once projected on the SBZ, whereas those below -1.5 eV have a j = 1/2

character. In line with these arguments, one can see that the surface states that peel off

from the lower band (j = 1/2) is a single band but the surface states that peel off from the

upper band (overlapping of mj = ±1/2 and mj = ±3/2) come in pairs (see Fig. 6(bottom)).

This includes the pair surface-state metallic bands. Thus, the surface states derived from

these three major bands (j = 1/2, mj = ±1/2- and mj = ±3/2), which do not overlap with

anything else, might acquire a relatively pure j, mj character.

The mj = ±1/2–mj = ±3/2 splitting is known in semiconductors physics as the split-

ting between the light-hole (LH) and heavy hole (HH) branches (the LH-HH splitting), in

reference to the effective masses attached to carriers because of their dispersion.44,50 In the

case of the metallic branches of Bi(111), the high-energy metallic branch has a larger disper-

sion than the low-energy branch. We would thus say that the high-energy metallic branch

(light) corresponds to lighter carriers than the low-energy metallic branch (heavy). In line

with this analogy (with the band-structure of semiconductors), there is also the anisotropy

of the charge density. Namely, the charge density associated to light and heavy bands is

anisotropic with respect to the direction perpendicular to the surface: while the correspond-

ing in-plane (xy) charge density is larger for a HH-band (mj = ±1/2) than for a LH-band

(mj = ±3/2), the charge density along the direction perpendicular to the surface (z) is

22


larger for a LH-band than for a HH-band.62 Indeed, as shown in Fig. 11, we find that, along

ΓM, the projected LDOS pxy attached to the low-energy metallic branch (heavy) is larger

than that of the high-energy branch (light), whereas the projected LDOS pz attached to the

high-energy branch (light) is larger than that of the low-energy metallic branch (heavy).

Up to now, we have just provided similarities between the two split metallic branches of

Bi(111) and the LH-HH splitting found in bulk semiconductors, suggesting that high- and

low-energy branches have a mj = ±1/2 and mj = ±3/2 character, respectively. However,

we now turn to the local magnetic moment of the two metallic branches of Bi(111), which

can gauge the mj = ±1/2 and mj = ±3/2 character of the two metallic branches of Bi(111).

The total magnetic moment is zero for both branches because of the Kramers degeneracy,

but we can focus on only one of two degenerate bands of each metallic branch, say, that

with positive magnetization. Namely, we will apply that for a quantization axis parallel

to the normal to the surface (z), states with a predominant mj = +1/2-character must

have a larger contribution to the in-plane magnetization than states with a predominant

mj = +3/2-character. We use the my magnetization because it dominates the in-plane

magnetization all along ΓM. Indeed, as shown in Figure 12, the low-energy metallic branch

(heavy) has a larger in-plane magnetization all along ΓM than the high-energy branch

(light), indicating that the low-energy branch has a predominant mj = +1/2-character and

the high-energy branch has a predominant mj = +3/2-character. In summary, our results

suggest that the reason for which the splitting of the two metallic branches is certainly the

result of the SOC but it does necessarily lift the Kramers degeneracy is that the splitting

correspond to the SOC-driven mj = ±1/2–mj = ±3/2 splitting.

6.
Origin of the spin polarization of the two metallic bands along the ΓM

Spin-resolved ARPES measurements for ultra-thin films have shown that the two metallic

branches display opposite magnetic-quantum-number polarization in thin-films.14,33 On the

other hand, we have shown that the spin texture observed in such states cannot be attached

to the lifting of Kramers degeneracy.
We must then explain why the measurements for

each branch give opposite magnetic-moment polarization if the two metallic branches are in

principle not correlated; i.e., they are not split Kramers pairs.

We propose that the spin texture observed for the metallic branches occurs only because

23


the surface cannot afford to be magnetic. Namely, covalent bonds are formed at the expense

of quenching spin pairing. Bi atoms, for example, have three unpaired electrons and never-

theless Bi is non-magnetic in the bulk phase precisely because the three covalent bonds that

each atom makes lower the energy more than retaining any spin pairing. Therefore, the net

magnetization of the surface bilayer is expected to be zero because the surface has no dan-

gling bonds (no covalent bonds are broken) and hence each surface atom retains essentially

unaltered the relatively strong covalent bonds that any bulk atom has. Thus, just as in the

bulk phase, the covalent bonds of surface atoms cannot afford magnetic polarization. That

being said, let us now analyze the observed spin texture of the metallic bands. Although

the SOC does not lift the Kramers degeneracy, the Kramers pairs (which have opposite

magnetic quantum number) cannot quench each other their spin polarization because, as

mentioned earlier, they are primarily located on opposite sides of the slab. So, for example,

if the high-energy band of the top bilayer yields a spin-up polarization, the only possibility

to cancel the net magnetization at the surface is that the low-energy branch acquires the

opposite spin polarization.

7.
The magnetic moment discontinuity at M

So far, we have shown that the splitting at M between the two metallic bands lying on a

single side of a film is not in conflict with the translational symmetry in inversion-symmetric

or inversion-asymmetric films because, as we have seen, (1) the splitting found on a single

side of a film does not correspond to the lifting of the Kramers degeneracy and (2) the

two-fold degeneracy at M is guaranteed for inversion-symmetric and even asymmetric films.

There could be, however, a subtle issue with the splitting at M for thin films. Namely,

spin-resolved ARPES measurements on ultra-thin films (7 BLs) have shown that the two

metallic branches display opposite magnetic-quantum-number polarization and this has been

confirmed by DFT calculations.14 Thus, even though the two-fold degeneracy at M is strictly

satisfied, there is an apparent non-physical discontinuity and indetermination of the magnetic

moment one either side of the film (top or bottom) at the M-point for each metallic band.

This magnetic discontinuity and indetermination at M can be appreciated if one focuses the

attention on one side of the slab, as illustrated in Fig. 9 (see also Fig.4(b) of Ref. 14).

On the other hand, as mentioned in subsection I D, SARPES measurements on Bi(111)

24


ultra-thin films also show that the measured net spin polarization of each metallic band

vanishes near M. Namely, both spin-up and spin-down intensities are detected and become

comparable at k-points near M.14,33 In that work, the evanescence of the spin polarization

near M is understood by simply declaring that only in this region the splitting does derive

from the Rashba effect. Yet, the opening premise of the above argument is that the surface

states overlap with the bulk band33 (or bulk-like quantum-well states14). Nevertheless, we

have shown that there is neither bulk band for such thin films nor overlapping of the metallic

surface states with any bulk-like state (see Fig. 7). The question is then, why does the spin

polarization vanish?
In this section, we shall resolve the non-physical discontinuity and

indetermination of the magnetic moment to put our understanding of the metallic branches

at the M point on firm grounds, and at the same time show that the solution to this issue

provides insight on the vanishing of the spin polarization obtained from the above spin-

resolved ARPES measurements.

Figure 10 provides the contribution of the two surface bilayers (top and bottom) of

an inversion-symmetric film to the magnetic moment associated with the high- and low-

energy metallic branches. Because experimentally only one surface has been sampled, we

concentrate only on the ”top” bilayer, though the same arguments apply for the other bilayer.

As expected from experiment, the high- and low-energy branches have opposite magnetic-

moment polarization. As shown in the figure, the top bilayer hosts mainly the the high-

energy band H1 and the low-energy band L2. Also, for the most part along the ΓM line, the

high-energy band H1 has ”up” polarization (Fig. 10(a)), whereas the low-energy band L2 has

”down” polarization (Fig. 10(b)). In agreement with experiment,14 the high-energy branch

has a smaller magnetic moment than the low-energy branch and the magnetic polarization

decreases as k approaches to M. The latter happens for the same reason that the ARPES

intensity decreases around the M-point. Namely, the metallic surface-state branch becomes

increasingly delocalized and so does the magnetic moment. Most importantly, note that,

close to M, it is no longer true that the top bilayer gets magnetic-moment contributions only

from the H1 and L2 bands since their Kramers degenerate pairs, H2 and L1, respectively, also

contribute. Yet the contributions of H2 and L1 have opposite polarization. The contributions

of the H2 and L1 bands further reduce the magnetic moment polarization of each band. So

that the magnetic moment of each band is exactly zero at M. This result hence implies

that there is no magnetic-moment discontinuity or indetermination. It remains, however, to

25


understand whether the exact cancelation of the magnetic moment at M is a general result

attached to the time-reversal symmetry.

Regarding the observed evanescence of the spin polarization near M,33 we conclude that

(1) the experiment detects ”spin-up” and ”spin-down” intensities around M and at the same

energy (within experimental resolution) because, at least around M, spin-resolved ARPES

has actually sampled the two states composing each Kramers pair (which at other regions

of the ΓM line are on opposite sides of the film) and (2) the interaction of the Bi film with

the substrate causes a negligible Rashba splitting around M, as we shall discuss in more

detail in section V. In summary, the fact that the spin polarization vanishes at M not only

precludes the magnetic-moment discontinuity and indetermination but is also a signature

that the Kramers degeneracy is hardly lifted.

8.
Significance and evolution as a function of thickness of the gap at M between the metallic

branches

Despite the splitting at M between the two metallic bands lying on a single side of a

film is not in conflict with the translational symmetry in inversion-symmetric or inversion-

asymmetric films, it is interesting to look into the evolution of gap ∆E as a function of

thickness, in order to address the issue of whether the metallic branches meet or not for

inversion-symmetric films. Fig. 7 shows that the gap ∆E between the two metallic branches

decreases as a function of thickness, in agreement with previous calculations.13,15 It has been

estimated that ∆E decreases as
1

NB , which suggest that the two bands are degenerate only in

the limit of an infinite number of layers. Accordingly, the converged band structure can be

attained only for semi-infinite slabs.15 We, nevertheless, do not find evidence that the bands

should meet in such limit. A non-linear regression fitting of our data (Fig. 8) indicates that

although ∆E varies as
1

NB within NB = 6 and NB = 39, there is an addition constant factor

C = 40 meV (∆E =
B
NB −C) that invalidates that the two bands are degenerate only in the

limit of an infinite number of layers. Our fitting in Fig. 8 is of course limited to the range

of the data but it shows that there are no grounds to conclude on the behavior of thicker

slabs. Thus, while it is true that the splitting around M is related to the interaction between

the two Bi surfaces, the two branches might not meet even at the macroscopic scale if the

gap remains once the two sides of the film are decoupled, as indicated so far by ARPES

26


measurements.6,32 Or, for example, the bands might meet at NB ∼72 BLs (see Fig. 8) and

then behave differently for thicker slabs if the two sides of the film remain coupled.

We have not pursued a fully relativistic calculation for NB ∼72 BLs for several reasons.

First of all, it is unfortunately an extremely demanding calculation. But more importantly,

we have shown already that the key aspects to understand ARPES measurements of Bi(111)

metallic bands is not buried in their behavior at the M point. Nevertheless, the thickness

at which the two states become essentially decoupled may have still a physical significance,

particularly if such thickness is finite, as suggested by the extrapolation in Fig. 8.

We have found, at least for calculations without SOC, that there might be indeed a

crossover thickness between the ultra-thin regime —in which the two sides of the film are

coupled— and a possible regime in which they are not coupled, which in turn might deter-

mine the behavior of the metallic bands. Preliminary calculations without SOC for NB = 39

and 78 BLs, show that for inversion-asymmetric slabs, if the two sides are separated by

15.5 nm or less, the metallic branches split and the Kramers pair of each branch live on

opposite sides of the film coupled (as we have seen in all the above discussion) but, if the

two sides are 31 nm apart and are thus nearly degenerate, the Kramers pair of each metal-

lic branch live on the same side of the film. Therefore, in order to fully understand the

band structure of macroscopic samples it remains to see whether the SOC reallocates each

Kramers pair on opposite sides of the slab or not and whether it increases the splitting of

the metallic branches (as it does around Γ) or leaves it unaffected. Moreover, if the two

bands composing each Kramers pair are located on opposite sides of the film only for films

as thin as 15 nm or less, then the entanglement of the Kramers pair may only exists in this

regime.

9.
The effect of hydrogen on the metallic states of Bi(111): deviations from the convergent

shape of the dispersion

As mentioned in subsection I D, previous investigations of the electronic structure have

resorted to place a monolayer of atomic hydrogen on one side of a thin (11 BLs) Bi(111)

slab with the aim of imposing a degeneracy at M,15 decoupling the two sides of a 10-

BL Bi slab12,15 and/or simulating a semi-infinite surface.15 Therefore, the calculated band

structure currently considered to simulate that of a macroscopic Bi(111) sample is that of

27


the ”clean side” of a 11-BL Bi(111) film with broken inversion-symmetry via the adsorption

of atomic H on the other side of the film, the hydrogen ”host” surface. We have seen that

no reinforcement of this symmetry is required, for which artificially breaking the symmetry

of the slab is not justified a priori. But moreover, we shall see that H-adsorption is a very

strong perturbation for a slab of only 11 BLs, as it yields a band structure that is actually

more deviated from the calculated converged and experimental ones than the same 11 BLs

slab without hydrogen. This result can be anticipated from the analysis of the structural

relaxations in subsection III B, which showed that H not only breaks the inversion symmetry

of Bi(111) films but is able to significantly change the geometric structure of the ”clean”

side that is ∼ 5 nm apart.

In order to investigate whether adsorbing hydrogen on one side of a film is meaning-

ful to simulate the band structure of the (111) surface of macroscopic samples12 and/or

useful to reach the convergent band structure of a semi-infinite slab, we have obtained

the dispersion of the metallic surface-state branches around EF of the ”clean” surface of

inversion-asymmetric Bi(111) films that are adsorbed with one monolayer atop H at 2 ˚A

from the ”host” surface. We have investigated three thicknesses: 6, 12, and 21 BLs. Our

results are shown in Figure 14 and compared with the metallic surface states of the Bi(111)

surface of an inversion-symmetric film of 39 BLs (equivalent to ∼15.5 nm, the thickest slab

we tackled).

Our results show that breaking the inversion symmetry by H adsorption does not help

to converge the dispersion of the metallic branches along ΓM. On the contrary, it makes it

worse. It causes that the two bands reach the M at a much lower energy than the convergent

range. That indeed predicts that the two metallic branches of a macroscopic slab indeed

overlap with the bulk band. Moreover, H-passivation for films of 12 BLs or less perturbs

the dispersion at regions where the bands of the corresponding inversion-symmetric clean

slabs were already converged (i.e regions that are no longer affected by an increase of the

thickness). Specifically, by comparing the dispersion of slabs of 7 and 27 BLs (Fig. 7), one

sees that 7 BLs are enough to reproduce the hole-pocket that appears within the second fifth

of the ΓM line and also the dispersion of the upper surface band within the first fifth of ΓM.

In turn, H on a 6-BL film (Fig. 14) changes significantly the diameter of the hole-pocket

and even deviates the dispersion of the upper surface state within the first fifth of ΓM.

Then, for a clean 12-BL film, both hole-pockets are well converged and everything within

28


the first three fifths of ΓM. Upon H-passivation, however, the small hole-pocket is shrunken

and the diameter of the bigger pocket is also slightly shrunken from the left side. For a

clean 21-bilayer slab, the convergence is perfect up to the resolution of the figure within the

first four fifths of the ΓM yet, even at that thickness, the effect of H does not completely

vanish within the latter segment. More importantly, our calculations shows that the band

structure of 12 BLs adsorbed on one side by H also strongly deviates from experimental

results, particularly from the midpoint of ΓM to M.6,32 Specifically, the comparison between

measurements and calculations is worsened in both the energy of the surface states and in

localization: Both metallic branches influenced by H indeed overlap with the bulk band

situated below the A7-distortion gap, 140 meV below EF, whereas the experiment shows

that the two branches —though not clearly resolved near M— never cross. The H-influenced

band structure of Bi(111) also misrepresents the band structure of macroscopic samples in

terms of localization because a 12-BL film with H yields metallic surface states that are

strongly localized all the way up to the M-point (see e.g Fig. of Ref. 15), which is also

not representative of the experiments performed on macroscopic samples,6,32 as discussed in

subsection IV 3. Moreover, the influence of H on the ”clean” surface is such that quenches

the surface states arising in the SOC gap at ∼0.7 eV below EF. In summary, the band

structure of a Bi(111) film of 21 BLs (or less) influenced by H adsorption is a much worse

approximation of the calculated converged and experimental band structure than that of a

clean inversion-symmetric 12-BL film.

Note that the metallic bands of the ”clean” surface of H/Bi(111) in Fig. 14 do split

because of the Rashba effect; there is a total depletion of the metallic states of the H-host

surface. In fact, one can see that the bands indeed meet at the M point. We shall discuss

the Rashba splitting in more detail the next section.

V.
RESULTS: RASHBA SPLITTING OF BI(111) METALLIC STATES DUE TO

THREE PERTURBATIONS

We have shown that the origin of the observed splitting between the two metallic branches

corresponds to the lifting of the mj = ±1/2–mj = ±3/2 degeneracy by the SOC. This does

not mean that the Rashba splitting is not possible but that it is just not intrinsic to Bi(111)

or to surfaces per se. In this section we shall discuss the Rashba splitting of the two metallic

29


branches of Bi(111) produced by three different perturbations to the inversion symmetry.

1.
The Rashba splitting by two structural perturbations

To test the true Rashba-type splitting and compare with experiments on ultrathin films,13

we have broken the inversion symmetry of a 12 BL Bi slab via (1) increasing by 0.3 ˚A the

relaxed inter-bilayer distance between the surface and subsurface bilayers of one side of the

slab (d23); and (2) increasing by 0.1 ˚A the relaxed inter-layer distance of the surface bilayer

(d12). We have chosen these perturbations because the Si(111) substrate of the Bi films

in the experiments of Refs. 14,33 most likely causes a weak perturbation on the Bi film

because (1) the grown Bi film has not dangling bonds and (2) Bi atoms have slightly higher

electronegativity that the atoms of the semiconducting Si substrate, for which no significant

ionic or covalent bond between the Si substrate and the Bi film is expected.

The resulting electronic structure after each structural perturbation is shown in Figure 13

and compared with that of an inversion-symmetric film. As expected, both structural pertur-

bations cause that the two metallic branches split and display a total of four non-degenerate

bands. That is indeed the Rashba splitting because it lifts the Kramers degeneracy. Not sur-

prisingly, the metallic surface-state branches of the perturbed surface are much less sensitive

to the perturbation of the weak inter-bilayer distance (Fig. 13(top)) than to the perturba-

tion of the relatively strong covalent intra-bilayer distance (Fig. 13(bottom)). In turn, this

correlates with the fact that the Rashba splitting is larger in the latter case.

There are several remarks that ought to be done about the effect of these perturbations.

Namely, note that (1) although both of the above structural perturbations clearly break

inversion symmetry, they do not empty the metallic states of the perturbed surface and thus

does not affect significantly the metallic bands of the other side; (2) comparison between

the metallic bands of the unperturbed surface of the inversion-asymmetric slab and those

of the surface of the inversion-symmetric slab (see e.g Fig. 13(bottom)) shows that they

are almost identical; (3) in both inversion-asymmetric films, the resulting Rashba splitting

certainly satisfies the degeneracy at M, required by translational symmetry; (4) Kramers

pairs lie mostly on opposite sides of thin films, as mentioned before. These four points

are important to explain the experimental observations in Refs.13,14,33. Specifically, for a

perturbation as those shown in Fig. 13, the M-degeneracy would be undetectable because

30


(1) the Kramers pair of each measured band is primarily localized on the other side and (2)

near M —i.e., the only small region where the two Kramers pairs could be detected one a

single side of the film (see subsection IV 7), the Rashba splitting is too small to be resolved

with the available resolution. In fact, that explains the measurements in Refs. 14,33: two

states of opposite spin polarization are detected at the same energy (within experimental

resolution).

Importantly as well, an experiment performed on the unperturbed surface of a film bear-

ing such kind of perturbations on the other side would not be able to (1) distinguish whether

the sample has inversion symmetry or not, certainly not based on the splitting at M and

(2) detect the Rashba splitting. In other words, the splitting of the metallic branches is not

of the Rashba type neither far from M (as proposed in Ref. 33) nor close to it. Moreover, it

is erroneous to attach inversion symmetry to systems in which the degeneracy at M is not

seen.33 Therefore, the idea that interaction between the two side of a film makes the metallic

branches ”electronically inversion symmetric”33 is not well based. Our calculations suggest

that as long as the perturbation let the states of the perturbed surface to be occupied, the

experiment will keep detecting the splitting (∆E(NB)) at the M, even though the degen-

eracy at M is satisfied as shown in Fig. 13. Interestingly, though, the Rashba splitting for

relatively mild perturbations could be measured if the two sides of a perturbed film were

investigated. We shall see, however, that this condition is not necessary if the perturbation

has a different nature, as we shall see in the following subsection.

2.
The Rashba splitting by H-adsorption perturbation

Remarkably, the earliest DFT work to understand the band structure of Bi(111) of clean

macroscopic samples7 obtained —not an intrinsic lifting of the spin degeneracy of the states

of Bi(111)— but the strong Rashba splitting, specific to the depletion of the metallic surface

states on the ”H-host” surface of ultra-thin films, of the only metallic surface-state Kramers

pair that remains occupied after H adsorption (which is situated on the ”clean” surface of

H/Bi(111)). Indeed, unlike the doubly-degenerate metallic bands of the clean and inversion-

symmetric Bi(111), the only two occupied metallic bands (see Fig. 14) that are on the ”clean”

side of the H/Bi(111) film are singly degenerate. We say that this Rashba splitting is specific

to the depletion of the surface states from one side of the film and not to H because other

31


species might have the same effect. In fact, note that the Rashba splitting may be large

but it is apparently always circumscribed within the limits of the mj = ±1/2–mj = ±3/2

splitting.

Thus, adsorption of H in Refs.12,15 and in Fig. 14 certainly not merely breaks the inversion

symmetry, as other ways of breaking the symmetry do not produce such a strong effect

(see also subsection IV 9). On the contrary, the structural perturbations described earlier,

although significantly splitting the magnetic-quantum-number (spin) degeneracy, cause so

little change in the electronic structure of the unperturbed surface that experiments cannot

tell whether the film has or not inversion symmetry. H-adsorption also not merely decouples

the two sides of a film, as macroscopic Bi samples32 have surely the two sides essentially

decoupled, and yet display metallic bands whose dispersion is closer to that of our inversion-

symmetric 15-nm film. H-adsorption does break the symmetry and ”decouples” (if we may

call it that way) the two sides of a thin film, but such ”decoupling” is actually a total

depletion of the metallic states of the H-host surface. H essentially takes charge from the

host Bi(111) surface, for which the metallic states of H-host surface become unoccupied and

pushed above EF. Of course, in this profoundly different scenario of inversion asymmetry,

the way the system satisfies translation symmetry (the M degeneracy) is also fundamentally

different. Namely, unlike the inversion asymmetries that do not involve charge donation,

sharing or polarization, the H-adsorption-induced asymmetry depletes the metallic states

of the host surface, for which (1) there is only one split Kramers pair occupied and (2) it

is not formed on opposite sides of the slab but on the same side. Therefore, for this type

of inversion asymmetry, one should really expect to find the degeneracy at M via ARPES

on a single side of the film. These results suggest that, depending on the nature of the

perturbation that breaks the symmetry, the splitting of the Kramers pairs may be found on

opposite sides of the slab (as in the structural perturbations in subsection V 1) or on the

same side (if there is charge depletion of the surface states).

This way of producing Rashba splitting is not alien to those used in semiconductors. The

charge depletion of the H-host surface creates a scenario similar to, for example, that in

which an inversion charge-density layer is created on the surface of semiconductors by an

external electric fields45,46 while the other side undergoes charge depletion. Therefore, should

such strong perturbation and the charge the reallocation within the film be possible by mere

chemisorption, it could be more interesting to study such systems than pristine Bi(111), in

32


part also because in H/Bi(111) films, the only one Kramers pair occupied is localized on the

”clean” side and there might be a stronger localization of the metallic states on the clean

bilayer of a H/Bi(111) film that in the topmost bilayer of an inversion-symmetric Bi(111)

film, as mentioned earlier. In fact, notice that the trend observed in Fig. 14 indicates that a

sufficiently thick film with inversion asymmetry caused by H-adsorption should give states

strictly lying in the gap and well localized all along ΓM.

VI.
THE ELECTRONIC DENSITY OF SURFACE CARRIERS

As shown in Fig. 6, the largest contribution to the density of states (DOS) of bulk

Bi around EF comes from states around Γ. For this reason the interpretation of ARPES

measurements of the metallic surface states around this area is a delicate issue. Namely,

even X-rays of ∼ 20 eV kick electrons into the vacuum that mostly come from layers as deep

as ∼1nm and probably deeper.60,61 Thus the largest contribution to ARPES measurements

around Γ may come, not from surface states, but from states buried in subsurface layers.

For example, while ARPES measurements have been able to detect many electronic bands

from Bi(111) ultrathin films,13 not all of them are localized in the first bilayer.

Despite the above reservations, based on ARPES measurements have suggested that the

carrier concentration (holes) at the surface —created by the presence of the metallic surface

states— could be high enough so as to dominate the transport properties of films whose

thickness is less than ∼ 30 nm (∼ 70-80 BLs) —even if only the Fermi surface elements

around Γ are taken into account.7 One reason supporting this prediction may be that the

contribution from bulk states to the DOS at EF is reduced for thin films because their

density becomes sparser with decreasing thickness (see Fig. 7). Another reason is that the

surface carriers velocity at EF is significantly lower than that of the bulk carriers, for which

the local density of states (LDOS) of surface atoms at EF should be larger than that of

an atom in the bulk.8 In order to confirm the latter assertion, however, one must calculate

the density of electronic states (DOS) around the Fermi level, which takes into account the

entire SBZ. Thus, we provide a quantitative assessment of the concentration of carriers by

comparing the LDOS of the surface atom —obtained from the converged electronic structure

of a slab of 39 BLs— and the LDOS of a bulk atom. Our results in Fig. 15 show that indeed,

the density of carriers at EF in a single surface atom is larger than that in a single bulk

33


atom. Our results, nevertheless, indicate that the LDOS of a surface atom is at most 15

times larger than that of a bulk atom. Thus, at ∼ 30 nm, the DOS of at least ∼140 bulk-like

atoms would be overwhelmingly larger than that of the surface atoms. In fact, as shown in

Figure 16(a) the DOS of the topmost bilayer is only ∼17% of the total DOS of a 15.5 nm

film.

Still, one could think that the carrier concentration of the topmost bilayer could dominate

the transport properties of thin films only if they are thinner than ∼6nm (15 BLs). In fact,

yet another reason to think that the carrier concentration at the surface could dominate the

transport properties of ultrathin films might be that the energy of the high-energy metallic

branch approaches the Fermi level as the thickness decreases below ∼6nm (15 BLs), as

suggested in Fig. 7. For example, for films thinner than ∼2nm (6-7 BLs), the high-energy

band is above the Fermi level for the most part along the ΓM line, except very close to Γ

(see Fig. 7). A qualitative assessment of the density of carriers at the surface is actually

not straightforward for ultrathin films. Namely, while decreasing the thickness causes that

(1) the density of bulk-like states at EF becomes increasingly sparser around Γ and (2) the

surface states get significantly closer to the Fermi level (for films thinner than ∼6nm) in a

relatively large vicinity around M, the spatial localization of the metallic branches at the

film surface decreases exactly in that vicinity around M (see e.g Fig.2 in Ref. 15). Indeed,

Figs. 16(b) and (c) compare the total electronic DOS of films of thickness of 6 and 3.2 nm

versus the LDOS at the topmost bilayer and show that even for films of 3.2nm (8 BLs) the

local DOS of states at EF from the topmost bilayer is not more than 20%. In other words,

according to our calculations, even in 8-BL films and although detectable by ARPES, ∼60%

of the carriers are localized in the six inner bilayers of the film.

The reason why most carriers are not in the surface layer and are detectable by ARPES is

that the contribution from subsurface layers is much larger than that from bulk-like atoms.

In fact, knowing from the analysis of the geometric structure that bulk-like atoms are found

as deep as in the fifth bilayer, one can estimate from Fig. 16(a) that, for a 15.5-nm film, each

of the two surface bilayers, each of the six subsurface bilayers, and each of the 31 bulk bilayers

contributes by 0.40(∼17%), ∼0.18(∼7%), and 0.02(∼0.8%) states per two atoms per eV,

respectively, to the total DOS at EF. Then, as expected from the increasing delocalization

of the metallic states with decreasing thickness, for films of 3.2 nm, the contribution from

each subsurface bilayer increases and that of each surface bilayers decreases to ∼0.21 and

34


∼0.28 states per two atoms per eV, respectively. In summary, our calculations suggest that

the carrier concentration of one surface alone (the topmost bilayer, for instance) cannot

outweigh that of the bulk or subsurface bilayers practically at any thickness. Yet the carrier

concentration at EF from atoms within a depth of ∼1.4 nm can certainly outweigh the

contribution of the rest of a film if the latter is thinner than ∼18 nm.

VII.
DISCUSSION

Our results have shown that the association between the spin-orbit coupling and various

observations in Bi(111) has been based on uncertain and unproved premises. Jezequel, for

example, first acknowledged that the existence of the surface states is, as in all covalently-

bonded materials, only due to the abrupt termination of the (periodic) crystal potential

but at the same time highlighted that the energy range of the surface states is necessarily

governed by the SOC.26 Our calculations indicate that this is not the case for the metallic

surface states of Bi(111) found by Hengsberger et al.6 Unfortunately, the ”spin-orbit” tag

seems to have been imparted to the A7-distortion pseudogap around the Fermi level to

the point that its very appearance in the (111)-projected bulk band and thus that of the

metallic surface states have been ascribed to the spin-orbit coupling,63–65 notwithstanding

that the works Gonze23 and Shick66 clearly confirmed that the existence of the gap around

the Fermi level along the ΓM direction is independent of the spin-orbit coupling but driven

by the u-deformation, reason for which it is present in the same degree in Sb and even in

the lightest group-V semimetal, As.

It has been alleged and accepted that there are two energetically distinct branches and

not one is because these two branches result from a strong spin or Rashba-type splitting,

i.e., from lifting the spin (or Kramers) degeneracy that occurs in the absence of inversion

centers.12,15,33,67 The splitting has in fact been tagged as a ”spin splitting” or ”lift of the

spin degeneracy” even though the spin and orbital momentum are not autonomous and

the essence of all these discussions8,12,13,15,67,68, including those related to the theory of

topological insulators, is the particulary large role of the SOC in heavy atoms such as Bi.

But more importantly, although the splitting is dramatically enhanced for short wavelengths

by the SOC, it is patently questionable that it is of the Rashba-type in the light of the

experimental evidence and all computational studies so far.13–15 Instead, we have provide

35


some evidence that the splitting corresponds to the SOC mj = ±1/2–mj = ±3/2 splitting.

As Rashba pointed out, it is only in the absence of inversion centers in a crystal that

the SOC splits the electronic bands that otherwise would be doubly degenerated (Kramers

degeneracy).69 Some materials have crystal structures with no inversion centers. Yet, in

a inversion-symmetry material such as Bi, some external factor must break the inversion

center of a Bi(111) film. In the case of pristine Bi(111), however, that the lack of inversion

symmetry is guaranteed in macroscopic samples because they are equivalent to system with

a semi-infinite number of layer, and then that the latter is equivalent to a two-sided ultra-

thin film having the surface states of one side depleted by H-adsorption13,15 are arguments

not supported by measurements. The first argument fails because, although the surface is

not an inversion center, it does not mean that the system is locally asymmetric.12,14 Namely,

the inversion symmetry or any other symmetry refers to the entire system and not to a

particular surface.

The SOC-driven Rashba-type splitting for surface states was first reported for the sp-

derived surface states of Au(111) that are found around the Fermi level.70 The inference

that the splitting is of the Rashba-type was based on the idea that creating a surface on

Au(111) guarantees automatically the elimination of inversion centers. The latter is not

necessarily true, but it is likely that a sample of Au displaying a (111) surface, which needs

to be prepared by extensive sputter anneal cycles,70 has no inversion centers. The situation,

however, is not the same for Bi(111) because, while its bilayers easily cleave, the intra-bilayer

bonds are quite stable.17 This was in fact confirmed in experiments on Bi(111) thin films.13

Still, it remains to investigate whether the splitting for Au(111) is a SOC mj = ±1/2–

mj = ±3/2 splitting.

That the metallic bands of inversion-symmetric films are doubly degenerate and primar-

ily localized on opposite sides of the film is a known13,15 and expected result. Namely, as

mentioned in the introduction (Subsection I D), the inversion symmetry center of the slab

and the time-reversal symmetry demand that all states in the irreducible surface Brillouin

zone must be doubly degenerate. What has not yet been acknowledged is that, because each

branch is a pair of degenerate bands, the degeneracy at M — demanded by the transla-

tional symmetry (see Subsection I D)— is automatically satisfied despite the branches split.

Therefore, neither the time-reversal, the translational or the inversion symmetry requires

that these two observed metallic branches meet at M for inversion-symmetric and even for

36


certain inversion-asymmetric slabs, as we showed in section V. Thus, although the coupling

between the two sides of the film indeed enhances the splitting of the bands at M (see

Fig. 7), one cannot argue that such coupling lifts an expected degeneracy at M,15,33 because

the degeneracy is already satisfied. Moreover, we have shown that an experiment performed

on a inversion-asymmetric thin film bearing a ”mild” perturbation (at least one that does

not deplete the metallic states on the other side) would still find the splitting at the M

point and would not be able to distinguish whether the sample has inversion symmetry or

not. Therefore, one cannot say that the interaction between the two sides of a film makes

the metallic branches ”electronically inversion symmetric.”33

Let us believe for a moment that the two branches are the result of a Rashba splitting,

therefore their splitting must arise from the combination of two factors: the SOC and the

lack on inversion symmetry. If that were the case, because of the time-reversal symmetry and

the translational in-plane symmetry of the hexagonal surface Brillouin zone, the branches

must become degenerate at Γ and M, respectively. However, computations from slabs with

inversion symmetry15 and measurements6,13,14 performed in supported thin Bi(111) films

(i.e., the inversion symmetry is broken by substrate) or in macroscopic samples do not

provide evidence of that. While the calculations and measurements do show the splitting,

in neither case the expected degeneracy at M is satisfied,8,13–15 that is, the branches are

always energetically separated by a gap ∆E. Clearly, if the splitting of the bands were of

the Rashba-type, that the supposedly Rashba-split bands split all the way up to M would

be a violation/contradiction of the patent inversion and translational symmetry existing at

least in periodic supercell calculations. Rather than addressing that, Koroteev et al.12,15

attached the inconsistency between symmetry conditions and results to the fact that the Bi

slabs used in calculations preserve the inversion symmetry (i.e., the bands are degenerate)

and are thus not representative of an ideal semi-infinite surface. So the inversion asymmetry

—necessary for the spin or Rashba splitting, supposedly giving rise to the splitting of the

surface states along ΓM, is in fact never fulfilled in clean inversion-symmetric Bi(111) slabs,

and yet the strong splitting near Γ was obtained.

The computational manoeuvre that followed, to apparently satisfy the translational sym-

metry condition, was to actually break the symmetry by adsorbing a monolayer of H on one

side of the slab.12,13,15 Here the concepts of a semi-infinite slab and that of broken inver-

sion symmetry have been mixed up through consideration of the M point. Specifically, on

37


the one hand, it was found that increasing the thickness of the slabs (slabs with inversion

symmetry) causes the gap between the two surface-state branches at M to decrease.15 On

the other hand, it was indirectly implied that ∆E vanishes only in the limit of an infinite

number of layers (it was stated in Ref. 15 that ∆E decreases by a factor of 2 when the

number of layer is doubled), which incidentally suggests that the branches would not merge

at M even in a macroscopic but finite sample. On the other hand, it was known12 that the

degeneracy at M can be achieved (i.e., ∆E=0) by adsorbing H. Thus, the logic applied is

to presume H absorbtion as the means to mimic a semi-infinite slab.15 The equivalency of

this two scenarios is rather questionable because the reasons underlying the behavior at M

in either case are physically different. Namely, in a very thick slab the states of the two

surfaces are decoupled. However, adsorption of H depletes the states of the H-host surface.

More problematic is the claim that, the supposedly spin-split states along the ΓM become

non-spin polarized because of the overlap with the bulk band.33 First of all, there is no bulk

band in thin films.
Second, the states do not overlap with anything.
Therefore, if the

states are still detectable, as they are in ARPES and SARPES, they must preserve their

polarization if they are indeed Rashba spin-split bands. Instead, we have shown that bands

lying on the ”top” surface loose polarization because the Kramers degeneracy is not lifted

and thus the Kramers pair of each band, mostly lying on the ”bottom” bilayer, overlaps with

as they gains some localization at the ”top” bilayer near M. Therefore, the origin of the spin

polarization as well as the explanation why it vanishes must be also address in the discussions

of the advances in TIs theory based on spin-resolved ARPES for a Bi(1−x)Sbx(111).68

We remark that even though the two branches are resolvable by spin-resolved ARPES,14

and have opposite mj, none of this contravene the fact that the Kramers degeneracy can

be preserved, and has been ”preserved” at least up to current experimental resolution. In

fact, as shown in our calculations, that the degeneracy at M of the metallic bands has not

yet been reported, confirms that the Si-substrate-driven Rashba splitting is weak as the

structural perturbation that we have studied and certainly weaker than that produced by

the H overlayer. In this sense, calling this a ”spin splitting” in the presence of the Kramers

degeneracy (either because of inversion symmetry or a negligible small true Rashba splitting)

may not be an adequate to describe this measurements. Specifically, although we may choose

to ignore that grown films and sharply cleaved surfaces have two surfaces, the symmetries

shaping the band-structure apply not only to one surface or the surface that is studied

38


experimentally but to both surfaces. Thus, in order to understand the implication of such

symmetries (or lack of them) on the observations, we have to keep in mind both surfaces.

For example, for thin-films with inversion symmetry considering the two sides of the film is

essential to understand how the translation symmetry is fulfilled even in the two metallic

branches do not meet at M. Moreover, it is important to be certain whether or not one

has achieved Rashba splitting. For example, if it is not Rashba splitting, as in the case of

the Bi(111) films in Ref. 14,33 the magnetic-moment polarization may simply vanish, i.e.,

the Kramers degenerate bands cancel each other’s spin polarization. In turn, if it is Rashba

splitting, then the spin polarization should be preserved, as it is expected for topological

insulators.

The efforts to explain the observed splitting at the M point for macroscopic samples and

supported ultra-thin films are prodigious.8,13–15,33 They involves doubts on the interpretation

of ARPES measurements at M because of the possible overlapping with the bulk band,

hybridization with quantum-well states, creation of other quantum-well states because of

the film/substrate interface, the even/odd characterization of the metallic bands as well as

their avoided crossing, and even a model of a crystal potential that is somehow inversion-

asymmetric for in-plane long-wavelengths states but inversion-symmetric for in-plane short-

wavelength states. WThe question is, Why? What is the significance of the splitting or

degeneracy at M?
The reason is clear: It is relevant to the origin of the two metallic

bands. Macroscopic samples and supported ultra-thin films must be inversion-asymmetric.

However, if the bands are found to split at M, that is taken as an indication that the

degeneracy is not broken. That, in turn, means that inversion symmetry is preserved and,

therefore, the splitting is not of the Rashba type.
So much so indeed that it has been

acknowledged that near M, but only near M, the splitting is not of the Rashba type.

Nevertheless, we have shown that experiments and calculations coherently complement each

other to reveal that all measurements of the metallic bands along ΓM are likely a mj =

±1/2–mj = ±3/2 splitting but certianly not a Rashba splitting.
We have shown that

pristine single Bi crystals and supported ultra-thin films may actually display a tiny Rashba

splitting because of weak inversion asymmetries. So, if ARPES experiments do not find that

the bands meet at M, it does not means that the inversion symmetry is preserved. It just

means that the Rashba-split pair of each band is not being measured. In other words, it

means that what is being measured is not the Rashba splitting.

39


The Rashba splitting has not yet been resolved experimentally on Bi(111), not even in

thin films supported on Si(111)13 because perhaps it has never been probed and furthermore

because of the resolution needed for a weakly interacting substrate. In order to observe the

Rashba splitting for such a weak perturbation, the electrons of both sides of the film have

to probed because the ±mj degeneracy is between the states lying on each side of a film.

Finally, the magnitude of the Rashba splitting depends on the strength and nature of the

external perturbation; its magnitude in Bi does not have a well-defined value for each k-point

as that of the mj = ±3/2 − mj = ±1/2-splitting, yet it remains to understand whether it is

limited by the mj = ±3/2 − mj = ±1/2-splitting.

VIII.
SUMMARY

We present fully relativistic density-functional-theory calculations of the electronic struc-

ture of Bi(111) films to revisit of the interpretation of the metallic surface states of Bi(111)

and some of the unresolved issues around thin films and their limit to macroscopic samples.

We investigate the spin-orbit pseudogaps and surface states in the valence band of the pro-

jected band-structure of bulk Bi and obtain for the first time some of the actual spin-orbit

surface states from first principles. The evolution of the electronic band structure as a func-

tion of thickness indicates that calculations for films as thick as ∼9 nm reproduce fairly well

the measured band-structure of macroscopic samples within experimental resolution. Our

first-principles calculations show that the metallic surface states near the zone edge (the

M point) are not resonances in the sense that they do not overlap with the bulk band at

the zone boundary. They lie strictly inside the A7-distortion conduction-valence band gap,

which at M is at least 3 times wider than predicted by tight-binding calculations and do

not meet at M for films of 15.5 nm. Thus, our results attest available measurements of

the metallic surface-state bands on a single surface of a macroscopic sample.6,32 This also

shows that juxtaposing tight-binding calculations of the bulk-projected band against first-

principles calculations of the surface states8,12 has been unsuitable, as well as the conclusions

drawn from the assumption that the metallic branches overlap with the bulk band. Our cal-

culations together with ARPES experiments6,32 show that the band structure obtained by

adsorbing H on one side of a film only 4 nm (11 BLs) is not representative of that of a

macroscopic sample. We show that the magnitude of the energy gap ∆E between the two

40


metallic branches at M as a function of thickness does not indicate that the two branches

become degenerate in the limit of infinite thickness. On the other hand, we show that, even

if the observed branches are separated by ∆E, the degeneracy at M is satisfied, as required

by the translation symmetry, for films with or even without inversion symmetry. Thus, the

splitting at M requires no further explanation,15,33 since the expected degeneracy may not

be accessible in thin films14 or even macroscopic samples. Our calculations show that H

adsorption does not help the electronic structure to converge to that of thicker slab (of up

to 15.5 nm). On the contrary, it rather deviates the dispersion of the surface states from

the found convergent dispersion. We find that the only reason for which the gap between

the two metallic branches at M could have been worrisome, the magnetic discontinuity and

indetermination at M, is resolved since the magnetization at M is zero because the Kramers

degeneracy is not lifted and the pairs do overlap spatially on the same side of a film near

M. We also confirm that two split metallic branches exists and would be measurable (on a

single side of a film) in the presence of inversion symmetry and, for sufficiently thin films,

even if the SOC were negligible. The latter splitting is related to the delocalized character

of the surface states since the energy gap between the two metallic bands at M progressively

reduces as the thickness of a film increases. Still, the behavior of the metallic states near M

and the effect of the SOC once they are totally decoupled needs further investigation. How-

ever, because the splitting between the two metallic branches, as measured in experiment,

exists in inversion-symmetric films, the presence of the two metallic bands is not caused by

a Rashba effect. In other words, it does not lift the Kramers or ”spin” degeneracy. In fact,

we have shown that if the supposedly ”spin”-split metallic bands of Bi(111) experimentally

do not merge at the M-point13 proves that, even for supported thin-films, ARPES is simply

not detecting the Rashba splitting. Thus, we show that considering the two sides of a film

is essential to understand how the translation symmetry is fulfilled even if the two metallic

branches do not meet at M, why the magnetic-moment discontinuity is not a concern, and

why the magnetic-moment polarization of each side of the film vanishes around M.14 We

show that the presence of the two metallic surface-state branches can be understood as a

SOC-induced mj = ±3/2 − mj = ±1/2-splitting. In addition, we provide a rationale for the

observed opposite spin-texture of the two metallic bands, in light of the fact that they cannot

be attached to a broken Kramers degeneracy and that they are not correlated. Specifically,

each surface atom retains essentially unaltered the relatively strong covalent bonds that

41


any bulk atom has, which cannot afford magnetization. Thus the two bands localized at

the surface, although non-correlated, must have opposite spin. We show that lifting of the

Kramers degeneracy (Rashba splitting) takes place only if the inversion symmetry is broken

and its magnitude is dependent upon the strength of the perturbation that breaks it. In

other words, the Rashba splitting is, in general, not intrinsic to surfaces but to the pertur-

bation imposed on the sample to which they belong. Thus, even though the surface is not

an inversion center, the sample may still have inversion symmetry and thus the Kramers

degeneracy must hold. Our calculations also illustrate that the Rashba-splitting is in general

dependent on the magnitude of the perturbation. We show that for structural perturbations

that do not involve charge polarization, donation or sharing, the Rashba splitting is so small

that it could not be detected within the current experimental resolution, which explain the

measurements in Refs. 13,14. In turn, the band structure yielded by H/Bi(111), although

not representative of that of pristine Bi(111), is representative of the Rashba splitting caused

by the strong perturbation imparted by H adsorption, which depletes the metallic states of

one side of the Bi film. Finally, we find that, as a result of the variations in the electronic

structure as a function of thickness, the highest valence band re-crosses the Fermi level and

creates extra electron pockets for films ∼3-nm thick. Still, the surface-states bands do not

dominate the DOS at EF even at this thickness, in part because thickness has a strong effect

on the localization of the metallic states. However, we find that the carrier concentration at

EF of atoms within a depth of ∼1.4 nm can certainly outweigh the contribution of the rest

of a film if the latter is thinner than ∼18nm.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the Karlsruher Institut f¨ur Technologie (KIT), Germany.

Computations were performed at the Institut f¨ur Festk¨orperphysik of KIT, the Stokes HPCC

facility at UCF Institute for Simulation and Training (IST) and local machines at UCF.

MAO is indebted to Sergey Stolbov for countless insightful discussions and computational

support.

∗ Electronic address: Marisol.AlcantaraOrtigoza@ucf.edu

42


† Electronic address: Talat.Rahman@ucf.edu

1 D. Shoenberg, Proc. Roy. Soc. A. Math. and Phys. Sci. 170, 341 (1939).

2 D. J´erome, T. M. Rice, and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 158, 462 (1967).

3 N. B. Brandt and S. M. Chudinov, J. Low temperarure Phys. 8, 339 (1972).

4 N. Miura, K. Hiruma, G. Kido, and S. Chikazumi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1339 (1982).

5 B. Weitzel and H. Micklitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 385 (1991).

6 M. Hengsberger, P. Segovia, M. Garnier, D. Purdie, and Y. Baer, Eur. Phys. J. B 17, 603

(2000).

7 C. R. Ast and H. H¨ochst, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 177602 (2001).

8 P. Hofmann, Prog. Surf. Sci. 81, 191 (2006).

9 C. Vossloh, M. Holdenried, and H. Micklitz, Phys. Rev. B 58, 12422 (1998).

10 F. M. Muntyanu, A. Gilewski, K. Nekov, A. Zaleski, and V. Chistol, Sol. State Comm. 147,

183 (2008).

11 M. Tian, N. Kumar, and M. H. W. Chan, Phys. Rev. B 78, 045417 (2008).

12 Y. Koroteev, G. Bihlmayer, J. E. Gayone, E. Chulkov, S. Bl¨ugel, P. Echenique, and P. Hofmann,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 046403 (2004).

13 T. Hirahara, T. Nagao, I. Matsuda, G. Bihlmayer, E. Chulkov, Y. M. Koroteev, P. M. Echenique,

M. Saito, and S. Hasegawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 146803 (2006).

14 T. Hirahara, K. Miyamoto, I. Matsuda, T. Kadono, A. Kimura, T. Nagao, G. Bihlmayer, E. V.

Chulkov, S. Qiao, K. Shimada, et al., Phys. Rev. B 76, 153305 (2007).

15 Y. M. Koroteev, G. Bihlmayer, E. V. Chulkov, and S. Bl¨ugel, Phys. Rev. B 77, 045428 (2008).

16 M. Alc´antara Ortigoza, I. Y. Sklyadneva, R. Heid, E. V. Chulkov, T. Rahman, K. P. Bohnen,

and P. M. Echenique, Phys. Rev. B 90, 195438 (2014).

17 F. Jona, Surf. Sci. 8, 57 (1967).

18 R. Peierls, More Surprises in Theoretical Physics (Princeton University Press, 1991).

19 He concluded that Bi(101) reconstructs, whereas Bi(110) and Bi(111) have in-plane bulk-like

structures .17 More recent measurements, however, concluded that Bi(101) does not recon-

struct.20.

20 J. Sun, A. Mikkelsen, M. Fuglsang-Jensen, Y. M. Koroteev, G. Bihlmayer, Chulkov, D. L.

Adams, P. Hofmann, and K. Pohl, Phys. Rev. B 74, 245406 (2006).

21 H. M¨onig, J. Sun, Y. M. Koroteev, G. Bihlmayer, J. Wells, E. V. Chulkov, K. Pohl, and

43


P. Hofmann, Phys. Rev. B 72, 085410 (2005).

22 M. S. Dresselhaus, The physics of semimetals and narrow-gap semiconductors: Proceedings

(Supplement No. 1 to the Journal of physics and chemistry of solids, v. 32, 1971) (Pergamon

Press, 1971).

23 X. Gonze, J. P. Michenaud, and J. P. Vigneron, Phys. Rev. B 41, 11827 (1990).

24 V. Anishchik, L. M. Falicov, and F. Yndurain, Surf. Sci. 57, 375 (1976).

25 S. Golin, Phys. Rev. 166, 643 (1968).

26 G. Jezequel, Y. Petroff, R. Pinchaux, and F. Yndurain, Phys. Rev. B 33, 4352 (1986).

27 F. Patthey, W. D. Schneider, and H. Micklitz, Phys. Rev. B 49, 11293 (1994).

28 A. Tanaka, M. Hatano, K. Takahashi, H. Sasaki, S. Suzuki, and S. Sato, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1786

(1999).

29 J. Thomas, G. Jezequel, and I. Pollini, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 11, 9571 (1999).

30 C. R. Ast and H. H¨ochst, Phys. Rev. B 66, 125103 (2002).

31 Y. Liu and R. E. Allen, Phys. Rev. B 52, 1556 (1995).

32 C. R. Ast and H. H¨ochst, Phys. Rev. B 67, 113102 (2003).

33 T. Hirahara, T. Miyamoto, A. Kimura, Y. Niinuma, G. Bihlmayer, E. V. Chulkov, T. Nagao,

I. Matsuda, S. Qiao, K. Shimada, et al., New J. Phys. 10, 083038 (2008).

34 A. M. Shikin, A. Varykhalov, G. V. Prudnikova, D. Usachov, V. K. Adamchuk, Y. Yamada,

J. D. Riley, and O. Rader, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 057601 (2008).

35 K. Ishizaka, M. S. Bahramy, H. Murakawa, M. Sakano1, T. Shimojima1, T. Sonobe1,

K. Koizumi, S. Shin, H. Miyahara, A. Kimura, et al., Nat. Mat. 10, 521 (2011).

36 Y. Zhang, K. He, C. Z. Chang, C. L. Song, L. L. Wang, X. Chen, J. F. Jia, Z. Fang, X. Dai,

W. Y. Shan, et al., Nat. Phys. 6, 584 (2010).

37 J. H. Dil, F. Meier, J. Lobo-Checa, L. Patthey, G. Bihlmayer, and J. Osterwalder, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 101, 266802 (2008).

38 M. Studer, G. Salis, K. Ensslin, D. C. Driscoll, and A. C. Gossard, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 027201

(2009).

39 A. Varykhalov, D. Marchenko, M. R. Scholz, E. D. L. Rienks, T. K. Kim, G. Bihlmayer,

J. S´anchez-Barriga, and O. Rader, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 066804 (2012).

40 M. Hortamani and R. Wiesendanger, Phys. Rev. B 2012, 235437 (86).

41 L. Moreschini, A. Bendounan, I. Gierz, C. R. Ast, H. Mirhosseini, H. H¨ochst, K. Kern, J. Henk,

44


A. Ernst, S. Ostanin, et al., Phys. Rev. B 79, 075424 (2009).

42 H. Bentmann and F. Reinert, New J. Phys. 15, 115011 (2013).

43 Y. A. Bychkov and E. I. Rashba, JETP Lett. 39, 78 (1984).

44 M. Grundmann, The Physics of Semiconductors: An Introduction Including Nanophysics and

Applications (Springer Science & Business Media, 2010).

45 M. G.E. and S. L.J., Surf. Sci. 113, 131136 (1982).

46 E. Bangert, K. v. Klitzing, and G. Landwehr, Proceedings of the Twelfth International Confer-

ence on the Physics of Semiconductors (Vieweg+Teubner Verlag, 1974).

47 E. A. de Andrada e Silva, G. C. La Rocca, and F. Bassani, Phys. Rev. B 55, 16293 (1997).

48 F. J. Ohkawa and Y. Uemura, J. Phys. Soc. of Jpn. 37, 1325 (1974).

49 O. Krupin,
Ph.D. thesis,
Freie Universit¨at Berlin,
Universit¨atsbibliothek (2004),
URL

http://www.diss.fu-berlin.de/diss/servlets/MCRFileNodeServlet/FUDISS_derivate_000000003802/.

50 R. Winkler, SpinOrbit Coupling Effects in Two-Dimensional Electron and Hole Systems

(Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 2003).

51 D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 566 (1980).

52 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

53 M. Payne, M. Teter, D. Allan, T. Arias, and J. Joannopoulos, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 1045 (1992).

54 G. Kresse and J. Furthmller, Comput. Mat. Sci. 6, 15 (1996).

55 G. Kresse and J. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B 59 59, 1758 (1999).

56 Vasp manual, http://cms.mpi.univie.ac.at/vasp/vasp.pdf.

57 A.
Kokalj,
J.
Mol.
Ghraphics
Modelling
17,
176
(1999),
Code
available
from

http://www.xcrysden.org/.

58 D. R. Lide, ed., CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 85th Edition (Taylor & Francis,

2004).

59 A. Tamt¨ogl, M. Mayrhofer-Reinhartshuber, N. Balak, W. E. Ernst, and K. H. Rieder, J. Phys.:

Condens. Matter 22, 304019 (2010).

60 M. P. Seah and W. A. Dench, Surf. Interface Anal. 2, 1 (1979).

61 A. Damascelli, Physica Scripta T109, 6174 (2004).

62 R. Ram and T. Orlando, 6.730 physics for solid-state applications (2003).

63 L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 76, 045302 (2007).

64 J. C. Y. Teo, L. Fu, and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 78, 045426 (2008).

45


65 P. Roushan, Phd. thesis (2011).

66 A. B. Shick, J. B. Ketterson, D. L. Novikov, and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. B 60, 15484 (1999).

67 M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045 (2010).

68 D. Hsieh, Y. Xia, L. Wray, D. Qian, A. Pal, J. H. Dil, J. Osterwalder, F. Meier, G. Bihlmayer,

C. L. Kane, et al., Science 323, 919 (2009).

69 ´E. I. Rashba, Soviet Phys. Uspekhi 7, 823 (1965).

70 S. LaShell, B. A. McDougall, and E. Jensen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3419 (1996).

71 L. E. D´ıaz-S´anchez, A. H. Romero, and X. Gonze, Phys. Rev. B 76, 104302 (2007).

72 R. N. Zitter, The physics of semimetals and narrow-gap semiconductors: Proceedings (Supple-

ment No. 1 to the Journal of physics and chemistry of solids, v. 32, 1971) (Pergamon Press,

1971).

73 R. W. G. Wyckoff, Crystal Structure, Vol. 1 (Interscience Publishers, New York, 1960).

74 P. Cucka and C. S. Barrett, Acta Crystallographica 15, 865 (1962).

75 C. S. Barrett, Australian J. Phys. 13, 209 (1959).

76 A. Goetz and R. C. Hergenrother, Phys. Rev. 40, 137 (1932).

77 R. W. James, Phil. Mag. Series 6 42, 193 (1921).

78 A. Tamt¨ogl, P. Kraus, M. Mayrhofer-Reinhartshuber, D. Campi, M. Bernasconi, G. Benedek,

and W. E. Ernst, Phys. Rev. B 87, 035410 (2013).

79 A. P. Jeavons and G. A. Saunders, Proc. Roy. Soc. A. 310, 415 (1969).

46


TABLE I: Structural rhombohedral and hexagonal parameters describing bulk Bi (see text and

Fig. 1); volume of the rhombohedral supercell (V), first and second nearest-neighbor distances

(d1NN and d2NN); the two bulk-like vertical inter-layer separations along the trigonal axis (dij and

djk). The results of the present work are compared with measurements at liquid helium and room

temperature (T), as well as with previous calculations.

Calculations
Experiments

This work
Ref. 71
Ref. 72
Ref. 73
Ref. 74
Ref. 75
Ref. 76
Ref. 77

GGA
LDA
LDA
T=4.2K
T=4.2K
T=300K

ar(˚A)
4.85
4.68
4.69
4.75
4.75
-
4.73
-
4.71-4.77

α(o)
57.30
58.05
57.57
57.27
57.24
-
57.31
-
57.20, 58.12

u
0.233
0.237
0.234
0.233
0.237
0.234
0.234
0.235
0.237

d1/d2
0.87
0.90
0.88
0.87
0.90
0.88
0.88
0.89
0.90

V(˚A3)
75.82
69.24
69.06
71.02
70.78
-
70.05
-
70.55, 73.30

ah(˚A)
4.65
4.54
4.52
4.55
4.55
-
4.53
-
4.57, 4.63

ch(˚A)
12.12
11.63
11.71
11.87
11.86
11.80
11.81
11.84
11.69, 11.84

ch/ah
2.61
2.56
2.59
2.61
2.61
-
2.60
-
2.56

d1NN(˚A)
3.13
3.08
3.05
3.06
3.11
-
3.06
-
3.11, 3.15

d2NN(˚A)
3.63
3.46
3.50
3.55
3.48
-
3.51
-
3.47, 3.52

dij(˚A)
1.608
1.615
1.58
1.58
1.67
1.59
1.59
1.62
1.66

djk(˚A)
2.432
2.262
2.33
2.38
2.28
2.34
2.35
2.33
2.28

47


TABLE II: Converged changes (%) in the interlayer spacing, ∆di,i+1, of Bi(111) films with re-

spect to those in bulk Bi obtained in this work, previous calculations and low-energy electron

diffraction experiments (LEED). The experimental values at T = 0 K are values obtained from an

extrapolation and linear fit based on measurements obtained at T=140 K.21

Calculations
LEED Experiment21

10–39 BLs
6-12 BLs
7 BLs
6 BLs
6 BLs

LDA (This work)
LDA16
LDA21
LDA15
GGA78
T=140K
T=0K

∆d12(%)
-1.57
-1.62/-1.56
+0.6
+0.9
-0.83
+0.5±1.1
+1.2±2.3

∆d23(%)
+1.31
1.37/1.32
+6.2
+6.5
+3.13
+1.9±0.8
+2.6±1.7

∆d34(%)
-0.87
-0.87/-0.87
-
-
-
0.0±1.1
-

∆d45(%)
+0.13
0.13/0.13
-
-
-
-
-

∆d56(%)
-0.31
-0.25/ -0.31
-
-
-
-
-

∆d67(%)
0.00
-
-
-
-
-
-

48


TABLE III: Changes (%) in the interlayer spacing, ∆di,i+1, of Bi(111) films with respect to those

in bulk Bi upon atop adsorption of one monolayer of atomic H. Results are compared with our

converged values (12 bilayers) in the absence of H (clean) reported in Table II. The distance between

the surface bismuth atom and H, d(Bi − H) is shown. The symbol (*) indicates the side of the

film on which H was adsorbed

H/Bi(111)
clean Bi(111)

6 BL
10 BL
12 BL
12 BL

∆d12(%)
-1.89
-1.83
-1.89
-1.57

∆d23(%)
+1.35
+1.40
+1.61
+1.31

∆d34(%)
-1.13
-1.19
-1.25
-0.87

∆d45(%)
+0.04
+0.35
+0.48
+0.13

∆d56(%)
-0.31
-0.56
-0.69
-0.31

∆d67(%)
-0.71
+0.13
+0.04
0.00

∆d78(%)
+0.06
-0.31
-0.50
+0.06

∆d89(%)
-2.21
+0.09
+0.18
0.00

∆d910(%)
+0.62
-0.19
-0.31
0.00

∆d1011(%)
-3.81
+0.04
+0.18
0.00

∆d1112(%)
-3.20*
-0.12
-0.31
0.00

∆d1213(%)
-0.22
+0.26
0.00

∆d1314(%)
+0.06
-0.25
0.00

∆d1415(%)
-0.76
+0.57
0.00

∆d1516(%)
+0.25
-0.12
0.00

∆d1617(%)
-1.94
+0.57
0.00

∆d1718(%)
+0.74
+0.06
+0.06

∆d1819(%)
-3.62
+0.18
0.00

∆d1920(%)
-3.13*
+0.25
-0.31

∆d2021(%)
-1.39
+0.13

∆d2122(%)
+0.80
-0.87

∆d2223(%)
-3.24
+1.31

∆d2324(%)
-3.00*
-1.57

d(Bi − H)
1.863
1.864
1.865
-

49


FIG. 1 (Color online): Hexagonal representation of the structure of bulk Bi. ah =
√

3b

and ch = 3cr, where b =
1
√3ar
�

2(1 − cosα); cr =
1
√3ar
√1 + 2cosα (ar, α, u, ah, and ch are

given in Table I). The position of the six atoms in the hexagonal unit cell are H1= 0; H2=

1
3[2ah1+ah2+(6u−1)ah3]; H3= 1

3[ah1+2ah2+ah3]; H4= 2uah3; H5= 1

3[2ah1+ah2+2ah3];

and H6= 1

3[ah1 + 2ah2 + (6u + 1)ah3].

FIG. 2 (Color Online) (a) Side view of a Bi slab underlying the Bi(111) surface. A, A’,

B, B’, C, and C’ represent the planes defined by each layer, which are perpendicular to the

trigonal axis. The sticks connecting the atoms indicate bonds between first NNs (between

atoms on planes A’ and B, C’ and A, or B’ and C), in order to highlight the puckered bilayer-

like structure of Bi(111). Lines l1, l2 and l3 and the white dots show the large separation

between an atom and the atom directly below (or above) along a direction parallel to the

normal to Bi(111). (b) Top view of the Bi(111) surface. The experimental and calculated

values of ah are given in Table I. The first light grey (yellow), grey (pink) and dark grey

(blue) balls represent the first, second and third layers of Bi(111). (c) Surface Brillouin

zone of Bi(111) indicating the high-symmetry points, including the six equivalent M points

around Γ, and the irreducible Brillouin zone (shaded).

FIG. 3 (Top) The first Brillouin zone of the A7 structure taken from Ref. 79, showing the

binary, bisectrix and trigonal axes and the notation for the high-symmetry points. (Bottom)

The first Surface Brillouin zone of Bi(111) showing the high-symmetry points. (Bottom)

Electronic stricture of bulk Bi along some of the high-symmetry lines with and without

taking into account the SOC by Gonze et al.23

FIG. 4 (Color Online) Schematic representation of p-levels (a) without the influence of the

SOC and inversion symmetry; (b) with the influence of the SOC and inversion symmetry;

and (c) with the influence of the SOC and without inversion symmetry.49,50

FIG. 6 (Color Online) (Top) Projected band-structure of bulk Bi on the SBZ of Bi(111)

from first-principles and including the SOC along the high-symmetry lines of the surface

Brillouin zone, ΓM and ΓK. (Bottom) Band-structure of a 39-bilayer slab along the high-

symmetry lines of the SBZ with and without SOC, indicating the surface states that arise

only if the SOC (red arrows) is taken into account and the pair of metallic surface states in

the ”A7-distortion” gap appearing regardless whether or not the SOC is taken into account

(blue arrows).

FIG. 7 (Color Online) Band-structure of Bi(111) around EF for slabs of various thick-

50


nesses (7, 12, 21, 27, and 39 BLs) along ΓM comparing the calculated surface states against

the measurements of Hengsberger et al.6 (Exp.1) and Ast and H¨ochst32 (Exp.2) and the

calculated projected band-structure of bulk Bi on the SBZ of Bi(111).

FIG. 8 (Color Online) Calculated gap ∆E between the two metallic bands as a function

of slab thickness and fitting curve ∆E =
B
NB − C, where B = 2866.1 meV and C = 40 meV.

FIG. 5 (Color Online) Evolution of the metallic branches (red lines) of a 24-BL Bi(111) as

a function of the strength of the SOC for films (Top) with inversion and (Bottom) without

inversion symmetry. The black lines correspond all other states of the band-structure. The

diameter of the dots represent how much the metallic band is localized on a single surface

of the film. In the case of the slab without inversion symmetry, the red dots correspond to

the unperturbed surface (see text).

Figure 9 (Color online) Metallic surface-state branches localized at the ”top” side of a

39-BL film with inversion symmetry indicating the polarization of the magnetic moment:

Red for positive (”up”) and black for negative (”down”).

Figure 10(Color online) Magnetic moment at the two surface bilayers (top and bottom)

of a 39-BL film associated with the (a) low-energy and (b) high-energy metallic branches.

The two degenerate bands composing the low (high) energy branch are denoted by L1 and

L2 (H1 and H2) and their localization at either the ”top” or ”bottom” layer is indicated.

FIG. 11 (Color online) pxy (left) and pz (right) character of the two metallic branches of

Bi(111) at the positions of the atoms of the surface bilayers.

FIG. 12 (Color online) Positive projection of the magnetization along the in-plane y-axis

corresponding to the contribution of the two metallic branches of Bi(111) as projected onto

the two surface bilayers.

FIG. 15 (Color Online) Local DOS of one bulk atom and one atom of the surface layer

of a 39-BL slab.

FIG. 16 (Color Online) Total DOS of a 3.2, 6, and 15 nm films (39 bilayers) versus the

LDOS contribution of the topmost bilayer.

FIG. 13 (Color Online) Band-structure of an inversion-symmetric Bi(111) slab of 12 BLs

(black) around EF and along ΓM and ΓK compared against (Top) a 12 BLs (pink) inversion-

asymmetric slab because of an artificial inter-bilayer perturbation that consisted of increasing

the inter-bilayer distance between the surface bilayer and the rest of the film by 0.3 ˚A and

(Bottom) a 12 BLs (red) inversion-asymmetric slab because of an artificial inter-bilayer

51


perturbation that consisted of increasing the intra-bilayer distance between the surface layer

and the rest of the film by 0.1 ˚A.

FIG. 14 (Color Online) Band-structure of H/Bi(111) around EF for slabs of various

thicknesses (6, 12, and 21 BL) comparing the calculated surface states against those of clean

Bi(111) for a slab of 39 BL and the projected band-structure of bulk Bi (black lines).

52


z

Trigonal or c-axis

a

h3

a

h1

x

y

H2

H3

H5

H6

H4

c

h

a

h

a

h

H1

a

h2

dij

djk

FIG. 1:

53


d78

d67

d56

d45

d34

d23

d12

l

2

B

B'

A'

C

A

C'

B

A'

l

1

l

3

l

2

(a)

(b)

ah

ah

M
M

M

M
M

M

K

(c)

FIG. 2:

54


55


1/2

 
p

mj=

 

3/2

 

p

mj=

 

p

mj= -3/2

 

p

mj=+3/2

 

sym m etry 

No-inversion 

SOC and  

k

(c)

p

mj= -1/2

 

p

mj=+1/2

 

p

mj= -1/2

 

p

mj=+1/2

 

p

j=1/2

 

p

j=3/2

 

k

(b)

sym m etry 

inversion 

SOC and  

}

k

(a)

No-SOC and  

sym m etry 

inversion 

FIG. 4:

M
Γ
-> K

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

E-EF (eV)

0%

M
Γ
-> K

20%

M
Γ
-> K

40%

M
Γ
-> K

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

E-EF (eV)

60%

M
Γ
-> K

80%

M
Γ
-> K

100%

M
Γ
-> K

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

E-EF (eV)

0%

M
Γ
-> K

20%

M
Γ
-> K

40%

M
Γ
-> K

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

E-EF (eV)

60%

M
Γ
-> K

80%

M
Γ
-> K

100%

FIG. 5:

56


-3
-3

-2.5
-2.5

-2
-2

-1.5
-1.5

-1
-1

-0.5
-0.5

0
0

E - EF (eV)

M
Γ
K

-3

-2.5

-2

-1.5

-1

-0.5

0

E - EF (eV)

No-SOC
SOC

M
Γ

A7-distortion 
 metallic 
 surface states

Spin-orbit
 coupling 
 surface states

K

FIG. 6:

57


-0.2
-0.2

-0.1
-0.1

0
0

0.1
0.1

0.2
0.2

E - EF  (eV)

7 BL
12 BL
21 BL
27 BL
39 BL
Bulk (Exp.1)
Bulk (Exp.2)

M
Γ
K

FIG. 7:

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Number of bilayers (NB) 

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Gap width ∆E (meV)

Fitting
DFT gap width

FIG. 8:

58


-0.15

-0.10

-0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

E-E

F

 (eV)

M

T

T

T

T

FIG. 9:

59


-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

band H2 - bottom bilayer

band H2 - top bilayer

band H1 - top bilayer

band H1 - bottom bilayer

M

Magnetic moment (

B

)

 

(a)

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

(b)

band L1 - top bilayer

band L2  - bottom bilayer

band L2 - top bilayer

 

Magnetic moment (

B

)

M

band L1 bottom bilayer

FIG. 10:

0.0

0.1

0.2

Low-energy 

(heavy) branch

High-Energy 

(light) branch

 spin down

 spin up

 spin down

 spin up

PLDOS - p

z

0.0

0.1

0.2

PLDOS - p

xy

 spin down

 spin up

 spin down

 spin up

Low-energy 

(heavy) branch

High-Energy (light) branch

FIG. 11:

60


0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.12

0.14

0.16

0.18

 High-energy (light) branch

 Low-energy (heavy) branch

 m

y

 (

B

)

M

FIG. 12:

61


-0.5
-0.5

-0.4
-0.4

-0.3
-0.3

-0.2
-0.2

-0.1
-0.1

0
0

0.1
0.1

0.2
0.2

0.3
0.3

0.4
0.4

0.5
0.5

E - EF  (eV)

With inversion symmetry
(unperturbed)
Broken Inversion symmetry
(by interbilayer perturbation)

M
Γ
K

True Rashba-
splitting

-0.5
-0.5

-0.4
-0.4

-0.3
-0.3

-0.2
-0.2

-0.1
-0.1

0
0

0.1
0.1

0.2
0.2

0.3
0.3

0.4
0.4

0.5
0.5

E-EF (eV)

With inversion symmetry
(unperturbed)
Broken inversion symmetry
(by intrabilayer perturbation)

Γ
M
K

True Rashba-
splitting

FIG. 13:

62


-0.2
-0.2

-0.1
-0.1

0
0

0.1
0.1

E - EF  (eV)

True Rashba-
splitting
caused by H

with H - 6 BL
with H - 12 BL
with H - 21 BL
clean - 39 BL

M
Γ
K

FIG. 14:

63


-2
-1
0
1
2

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

(a)

Local density of states 

E - E

F

 (eV)

Bulk atom
Surface atom

-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

(a)

Local density of states 

E - E

F

 (eV)

Bulk atom

Surface 

  atom

FIG. 15:

64


  first 

bilayer

 

Density of States

15.5-nm film

     (39 BL)

(a)

  first 

bilayer

 

 

Density of States

6-nm film

  (15 BL)

(b)

E - E

F

 (eV)

Density of States

3.2-nm film

    (8 BL)

  first 

bilayer

(c)

FIG. 16:

65


