1

Tuning nanoscale adhesive contact behavior to a near ideal 

Hertzian state via graphene coverage

Yongchao Chen1, Zhizi Guan1, Wei Yang1, Yongtao Yao2, Hailong Wang1, *

1 CAS Key Laboratory of Mechanical Behavior and Design of Materials, Department of 
Modern Mechanics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China

2 National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Advanced Composites in Special 
Environments, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150080, China

*E-mail: hailwang@ustc.edu.cn

ABSTRACT

We carry out molecular statics (MS) simulations to study the indentation process of Pt 
(111) surfaces using an indenter with the radius of 5-20 nm. The substrate and indenter 
surfaces are either bare or graphene-covered. Our simulations show that the influence 
of the adhesion between the bare substrate and indenter tip can be significantly reduced
by decreasing the adhesion strength and adhesion range between the atoms on the
substrate and indenter, or by enhancing the substrate stiffness. Our results suggest that 
the elastic response of the substrate exhibits weaker adhesion after the coating of
graphene layers on either side of the contacting interface, which is attributed to the 
weak interaction between the graphene layers. Based on these principles obtained for
the bare substrate, the nanoscale contact behavior of the substrate can be tuned into a 
near-ideal Hertzian state by increasing the number of graphene layers, applying pre-
strains to graphene on substrate, or using large indenters. Therefore, even for strong 
adhesion between tip, graphene, and substrate, mechanical properties of substrate can 
be determined by nanoindentation using graphene coverage. Our research provides 
theoretical guidance for designing adhesion-less coatings for AFM probes and 
MEMS/NEMS systems.

Keywords

Adhesive contact; Hertzian contact theory; Multilayer graphene-coating; In-plane 
straining; Size effect; Molecular statics simulation


2

1. Introduction

Graphene (Gr) is a two-dimensional (2D) material made of a single layer of carbon 
atoms [1] that possesses several exotic properties that make it uniquely suited for use 
as a protective coating and superior lubricant for electrical contacts [2, 3]:an ultimate 
tensile strength of 130 GPa [4], an ultralow surface energy of 46.7 mJ/m2 [5, 6], and an 
atomically-thin layer [7]. As a result, remarkable achievements such as layer-dependent 
transient friction strengthening [8], friction tuning via in-pane straining [9], and 
nanowear reduction by suppressing the contact pressure fluctuation [10] have been 
obtained in the exploration of the important low-friction and anti-wear properties of 
graphene. In addition to the graphene effects in lubrication, molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations of nanoindentation show that a graphene coating can make metallic 
substrates more resistant to plastic deformation and considerably improve the load-
bearing capacity; this has been attributed to atomic-scale surface roughness smoothing
[11, 12], homogenization of the contact stress distribution beneath the tip [13] and 
interactions between the dislocations and graphene coating interface [14].

Most of the studies of friction and nanoindentation have focused on the lateral friction 
behaviors [8, 9, 15, 16] and plastic deformation [11-13] but have not performed detailed 
investigations of the behaviors during the initial elastic contact stage. However, in fact, 
elastic contact is not only an inevitable process prior to the friction and plastic stage, 
but is also a completely different state for the graphene protective mechanism. Recently, 
it was reported that the experimental elastic load-displacement curves from a sub-
nanometer indentation on the graphene-coated Cu film are in a closer agreement with 
the Hertz model compared to bare Cu [17, 18]. Meanwhile, MD simulations have also
revealed that graphene regulates the interaction between the indenter tip and the 
substrate and yields a Hertz-type contact (with the modulus of the bulk substrate) due 
to the elimination of interatomic adhesion [11, 18]. Simultaneously, tremendous 
research efforts have been devoted to the studies of the adhesive contact behavior 
between various materials such as the theoretical description of adhesive contact [19, 
20], material transfer due to adhesion [21] and different factors influencing the adhesion 
strength [22, 23]. Hence, a well-established theory of this modification-by-graphene
phenomenon will open a new route for the research on adhesive contact. However, 
many factors that influence this regulating effect such as the number of graphene layers, 
in-plane pre-strain in graphene, and the size of indenter, are generally neglected, even 
though all of these may exert strong effects on the elastic response to nanoscale 
adhesive contact. Due to the importance of surface adhesion and the contact behavior 
of graphene-coated surfaces, a better insight into graphene’s adhesion and contact 
properties is highly necessary. 

In this work, through molecular statics (MS) simulations, we show that the elastic 
contact behavior of a metallic substrate exhibits a high load bearing capacity as well as 
a near ideal Hertzian contact that can be achieved by coating graphene on either side of 
the contact interface (upper spherical or lower flat surfaces). We analyze the atomic-
scale microstructure in the contact region between the tip and bare substrate, and find 


3

that the adhesion can be mitigated by reducing the adhesion strength and adhesion range
of the interaction between influence atoms on influence tip and influence substrate, or 
enhancing the stiffness of influence substrate surface. More specifically, the adhesion 
between the tip and graphene-coated substrate can be significantly reduced by 
increasing the covered graphene layers or applying pre-strains to the graphene 
monolayer, further regulating the elastic response and yielding a Hertz-type contact. 
Moreover, the regulation of the elastic contact behavior of a graphene-coated substrate 
can be enhanced by increasing the indenter size due to the reduction of the relative 
adhesive area on the indenter, particularly for high adhesion of the tip to the substrate.
As demonstrated in previous studies [11, 12, 17, 18, 24, 25], this adhesion-less contact
behavior regulated by graphene layers enables the measurement of the elastic modulus 
for various substrate materials via fitting the load-displacement curves extracted from 
nanoindentation to the Hertz theory. Aside from fundamental interest, proper 
tribological engineering that takes adhesion into account is crucial for the development 
of reliable MEMS devices such as the digital mirror and MEMS switches [26, 27] for
which the transfer between the contact and materials is generally an important issue. 
Hence, our investigation provides theoretical guidance for designing adhesion-less 
coatings for the AFM probes and MEMS/NEMS systems [28].

2. Methods

MS simulations in LAMMPS [29] are carried out to model the nanoindentation process 
on a Pt substrate with a rigid semispherical diamond tip. The tips are moved in steps of 
0.05 Å, after which the system is relaxed to the next local minimum until atomic forces 
drop below 10−4eV/Å. To eliminate the influence of atomic-scale geometry, the tips 
are produced by displacing the atoms of a (111) face-centered cubic (fcc) slab normal 
to the slab surface such that surface atoms precisely follow the surface of a sphere [11]. 
The radii of the bare or graphene-layers-wrapped tips are varied from 5 to 20 nm to 
study the size effects. The substrates are also bare or coated with graphene layers, 
periodically repeated cubic Pt crystals in their face centered cubic (fcc) ground-state 
structure with the (111) surfaces exposed toward the indenter. Graphene layers are 
placed on the surfaces with the graphene <10> direction parallel to the Pt <110> 
direction. One layer of atoms at the bottom of the surface is fixed during the calculations 
to anchor the solid within the simulation cell. To minimize the influence of periodic 
indenter images, the side length and height of the substrate are chosen to be roughly 
five and two times the indenter radius, respectively. Additional simulations for 
substrates with larger dimensions are carried out and suggest that our results do not 
depend on the size of substrate.

The embedded atom method (EAM) potential [30] is used to model the Pt-Pt interaction 
within the substrate. The C-C interaction within the same graphene sheet is modeled 
using the second-generation empirical reactive bond-order (REBO2) potential [31] with 
a modified cutoff scheme [32]. To study the effect of substrate stiffness, the EAM [33-
34] potentials are applied for the Pb and Al substrates, respectively. The truncated


4

Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential is used for the atomic interactions between the tip, 
graphene, and substrate, 

𝑈(𝑟) = {4𝜀 ((

𝜎

𝑟)

12

− (

𝜎

𝑟)

6
) − 4𝜀 ((

𝜎

𝑟𝑐)

12

− (

𝜎

𝑟𝑐)

6
) , 𝑟 < 𝑟𝑐

0, 𝑟 ≥ 𝑟𝑐

(1)

where 𝜀 and 𝜎 are parameters for LJ potential, 𝑟𝑐 = 2.5𝜎 is the cutoff radius. We 
set 𝜀𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0112 𝑒𝑉 and 𝜎𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.297 nm for the interaction between the 
tip and the Pt substrate, 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 = 0.00284 eV and 𝜎𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 = 0.34 nm for the 
interaction between the tip and graphene, 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0112 eV and 𝜎𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 =
0.297 nm for the interaction between the Pt substrate and graphene [35]. 𝜀𝐺𝑟 =
0.00284 eV and 𝜎𝐺𝑟 = 0.34 nm are the parameters for the interaction between
different graphene layers. To investigate the effects of adhesion strength and adhesion 
range on the nanoscale contact behavior, we tune the depth of the potential well
( 𝜀 ) and the equilibrium distance ( 𝜎0 = 21/6σ ). For bare substrate, we set
ε𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0224 eV and ε𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0056 eV for strong and weak adhesion,
respectively, and σ𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.1485 and σ𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.594nm for short-range and 
long-range adhesion, respectively. For the graphene-coated substrate, to optimally 
model extreme conditions, we artificially enlarge the depth of the potential well for 
strong tip-graphene-substrate adhesion. Therefore, four typical adhesion cases are 
considered for nanoindentation on the graphene-covered substrate in this work, namely,
normal adhesion ( 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 = 0.0112 eV, 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0112 eV ), strong Gr-Sub 
adhesion ( 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 = 0.0112 eV, 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.112 eV ), strong Gr-Tip adhesion 
( 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 = 0.112 eV, 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0112 eV ), and strong adhesion ( 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 =
0.112 eV, 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.112 eV). 

3. Results and Discussion

3.1. Influential factors for nanoscale adhesive contact on bare substrate

We start with indenting the bare substrate and analyzing the force versus displacement 
curves from these simulations to study the effects of tip-substrate adhesion and 
substrate stiffness on the contact behavior. In this regard, Hertz theory predicts that the 
force 𝑃 due to a displacement ℎ on a sphere of radius R is given by, 

P = (4𝐸∗𝑅2/3) (h/R)3/2 (2)

where the contact modulus 𝐸∗ = 𝐸/(1 − 𝜈2) for a rigid and isotropic substrate. To 
quantify the deviation from the Hertz prediction, the exponent 𝑁 and contact modulus 
𝐸∗ of a specific contact behavior is determined by fitting to 𝑃/(4𝐸𝑅

∗𝑅2/3) =

(𝐸∗/𝐸𝑅

∗) (ℎ/𝑅)𝑁 extracted from the load-displacement curve, where 𝐸𝑅

∗ = 207GPa is 

the fitted elastic modulus when employing a purely repulsive interaction. Fig. 1 
summarizes the plots of force 𝑃 on the indenter as a function of the scaled penetration 
depth ℎ/𝑅 obtained for the indenter radius 𝑅 = 5 nm on bare substrate. Fig. 1a shows
that in the elastic regime, the purely repulsive contact behavior is highly consistent with 
Hertz theory with a fitting exponent 𝑁 = 1.49 and 𝐸∗ = 205GPa (red curve), 


5

consistent with 𝐸∗ = 202GPa for the EAM Pt potential [30]. In Fig. 1a, the negligible 
deviation from the Hertz prediction (𝑁 = 1.50) is due to the morphological difference 
between a stepped tip and a strictly spherical tip. For comparison, the force-
displacement curve is also plotted for the normal tip-substrate adhesion in all panels
(𝑁 = 1.33 and 𝐸∗ = 190GPa for black curves), in which the deviation from Hertz 
theory is apparent due to the attractive contribution of the Lennard-Jones potential. This 
result indicates that with a purely repulsive interaction, nanoindentation can follow 
Hertz theoretical prediction even in the absence of graphene.

Figure 1. Factors that influence nanoscale adhesive contact on the bare substrate. (a) A near-ideal 
Hertz contact behavior when employing a purely repulsive interaction, compared with a normal 
interaction case (𝜀𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0112 eV, 𝜎𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.297 nm, 𝐸∗ = 𝐸𝑃𝑡

∗ ). (b-d) The effects of (b) 

adhesion strength (𝜀𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0224, 0.0112, 0.0056 eV), (c) adhesion range (𝜎𝑇𝑖𝑝−𝑆𝑢𝑏 =

0.1485, 0.297, 0.594 nm), and (d) substrate stiffness (𝐸∗ = 𝐸𝑃𝑡

∗ , 𝐸𝐴𝑙

∗ , 𝐸𝑃𝑏

∗ ) on the degree of 

deviations from the Hertz prediction. Plots of force 𝑃 vs. scaled penetration depth ℎ/𝑅 for the 
indenter radii of 𝑅 = 5 nm are depicted in each subfigure. (insets) The snapshots (green for the tip 
atoms and yellow for the substrate atoms) indicate stronger deviations for (b) strong adhesion 
strength, (c) long adhesion range, and (d) soft substrate contributed to more substrate atoms 
transferring to the tips. The inset in (c) illustrates the stress distribution during contact where the 
color of each atom represents the atomic stress 𝜎𝑧𝑧 component. For consistency, the color scheme 
for the atomic plots is preserved in the remaining figures. The indenter radius of 𝑅 = 5 nm is 
maintained in all of atomic simulations unless mentioned otherwise. 


6

To further investigate the effect of adhesion between the tip and the substrate, we 
systematically tune the adhesion strength, range of atomic interaction and substrate 
stiffness to compare with the normal adhesion. Fig. 1b shows that compared with the 
normal adhesion (𝑁 = 1.33 and 𝐸∗ = 190GPa for black curve), weak adhesion leads 
to a smaller deviation (𝑁 = 1.46 and 𝐸∗ = 205GPa for red curve) from the Hertz 
prediction. Furthermore, force fluctuation (blue circle in Fig. 1b) can arise due to the 
instantaneous adhesion of Pt atoms to the tip when the adhesive force is strong enough. 
The inset of Fig. 1b clearly shows that atoms transfer to the tip during the contact 
process, which is not observed in the snapshot for the normal adhesion (inset, Fig. 1a). 
The influence of the equilibrium distance is illustrated in Fig. 1c that shows that a short-
range adhesive interaction gives rise to less deviations (𝑁 = 1.42 and 𝐸∗ = 202GPa
for red curve) for the contact forces. 

The inset of Fig. 1c shows the specific distribution of atomic stress σzz, in which only 
the atoms of the outer sphere and near the contact region are affected by the apparent 
adhesive forces (red colored). It is clear that this phenomenon is caused by the 
restrictions from the force range between the indenter and the substrate. We also note 
that the large force drop in some curves in Fig. 1 indicates the plastic deformation in 
the substrate. Additional MS simulations are performed to compare the adhesive 
contact behaviors of the substrates with various stiffness values E*. Here, we change 
the substrate materials into Pb (𝐸𝑃𝑏

∗ = 39GPa, fcc lattice structure) and Al (𝐸𝐴𝑙

∗ = 78

GPa, fcc lattice structure), respectively. Fig. 1d illustrates that, compared to softer Pb 
and Al substrates, a stiffer Pt substrate suffers less deviation from adhesion and exhibits 
a contact behavior closer (black curve) to that predicted by the Hertz theory. This can 
be explained as due to the atoms at the contact area being strongly constrained by the 
surrounding atoms and cannot adhere to the tip. As a result, the hypothesis that adhesion 
can impose a deviation from ideal Hertz contact behavior is corroborated and more 
specifically, this deviation has three main characteristics, i.e., lower 𝑁 values, lower 
fitted contact modulus 𝐸∗, and greater force fluctuation. 

Therefore, there are three main factors affecting the adhesion, namely adhesion strength, 
adhesion range, and substrate stiffness that provide effective guidance for adhesion 
mitigation. Naturally, this gives rise to the question on how to minimize or even 
eliminate adhesion effects during nanoindentation.

3.2.
Reduce adhesion strength by coating graphene layers

Recent studies [15, 16, 18] have revealed that coating the substrate with graphene can 
mitigate the adhesion between the substrate and the tip. To elucidate the underlying 
mechanisms of the effects of the graphene coating on nanoindentation, MS simulations 
are conducted on a Pt substrate with graphene layers. Moreover, a systematic analysis 
is performed to investigate the regulation of the elastic response of graphene-layers-
covered substrate to nanoindentation based on the principles obtained for bare substrate.

Graphene monolayer coating: We coat a monolayer of graphene onto the substrate and 
simulate the indentation process of a diamond tip contacting a Pt substrate (inset, Fig. 


7

2a). As the distance between the substrate and the tip increases due to the isolation of 
graphene, the adhesion on the tip is significantly reduced and the transfer of the
substrate atoms to the tip is also substantially constrained; thus, this appears to be an 
ideal method to eliminate adhesion. Specifically, the contact response of the graphene-
coated substrate shows close-to-optimal contact behavior ( 𝑁 = 1.41 and 𝐸∗ =
198GPa for black curve in Fig. 2a), in which both the graphene-substrate and 
graphene-tip interactions are weak Pt-C adhesion. Generally, graphene shows weak 
adhesion to other materials, thus regulating the contact behavior to follow the Hertz 
prediction. However, in some cases, graphene may unavoidably have strong adhesion 
with the tip or the substrate such as the graphene-mica interaction [15, 36, 37] and 
interaction with oxidized graphene [38]. Therefore, it is urgently needed to study 
nanoscale contact in the presence of strong adhesion for either tip-graphene or 
graphene-substrate interaction. 

Figure 2. Influence of the number of layers of the graphene coatings on the degree of deviation 
from the Hertz prediction for typical interactions between the tips, graphene layers, and substrates: 
(a) normal adhesion (𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 = 0.0112 eV, 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0112 eV), (b) strong Gr-Sub adhesion 
(𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 = 0.0112 eV, 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.112 eV), (c) strong Gr-Tip adhesion (𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 = 0.112 eV,


8

𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.0112 eV), and (d) strong adhesion (𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑇𝑖𝑝 = 0.112 eV, 𝜀𝐺𝑟−𝑆𝑢𝑏 = 0.112 eV). Plots 

of force 𝑃 vs. scaled penetration depth ℎ/𝑅 for the graphene monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer
coatings on the substrate are depicted in each subfigure. The insets show the snapshots of 
nanoindentation on the monolayer and bilayer graphene-coated substrates. Schematic illustrations 
of the tip-graphene-substrate adhesion are also presented for the graphene monolayer case, where 
the gray and red regions indicate normal (𝜀𝐶−𝑃𝑡) and strong adhesion (10𝜀𝐶−𝑃𝑡), respectively. 

Figs. 2b-c illustrate two corresponding cases when strong adhesion is applied to 
graphene-substrate adhesion
and graphene-tip adhesion, respectively. It is 

demonstrated that the contact behavior is highly consistent with the Hertz contact 
prediction in the strong Gr-Sub adhesion case (𝑁 = 1.48 and 𝐸∗ = 204GPa for black 
curve in Fig. 2b), whereas the graphene apparently loses its regulation effect in the 
strong Gr-Tip adhesion case (𝑁 = 1.30 and 𝐸∗ = 188GPa for black curve in Fig. 2c). 
Fig. 2b (inset) schematically illustrates that a strong graphene-substrate adhesion will 
not lead to force deviations because the tip force is not directly related to the graphene-
substrate interaction. Strong graphene-substrate adhesion can even contribute to the 
regulation of the contact behavior by constraining graphene deformation and the 
interfacial contact between graphene and the tip, thus weakening graphene-tip adhesion
[15, 16]. Consistently, it was demonstrated by Niu et al. [39] and Zhou et al. [40] that 
normal graphene-tip adhesion can be neglected when fitting the results of FEM and MD 
simulations to the results of the indentation experiment if a strong graphene-substrate 
adhesion exits. As shown in Fig. 2c (inset), a proportion of graphene tightly adheres to 
the tip and the rest of the graphene covering the substrate significantly impacts the 
movement of the tip, thus leading to large deviations in the loading force. For the strong 
Gr-Tip adhesion case, the high out-of-plane flexibility of graphene coupled with strong 
tip–graphene adhesion causes local puckering near the contact edge. 

The force-displacement curve for the strong adhesion case presents a strong deviation 
from the Hertz contact behavior (𝑁 = 1.27 and 𝐸∗ = 186GPa for black curve in Fig. 
2d) that is due to the observed firm attachment of both sides of interface by graphene 
that acts as the intermediate for the adhesion force (inset, Fig. 2d). It should also be 
attributed to the fact that force fluctuation does not appear in the strong Gr-Tip adhesion 
case even if strong adhesion exists between the tip and the contact surface. This is
attributed to high in-plane stiffness of graphene providing an additional restriction to 
the single atoms’ transfer behavior. We conclude that the effectiveness of graphene in 
modifying the contact response also strongly relies on its unique properties, i.e., high 
in-plane stiffness [4] and low surface energy [5, 6]. This is also the reason why other 
coatings such as oxide layers lack this ability.

Multilayer graphene coatings: To further regulate adhesive contact behaviors for the 
monolayer system in the strong adhesion case, we increase the thickness of the
graphene coating to bilayer and trilayer (blue and red curves in Fig. 2). It has been
reported that the friction of graphite and other lamellar materials increases with 
decreasing number of atomic layers [15, 16, 38]. Fig. 2d shows that the fitted exponent 
(1.42 and 𝐸∗ = 195GPa for blue curve) for the load-displacement curve of bilayer 


9

coating of graphene is much closer to 1.50 than that of the monolayer coating (1. 27
and 𝐸∗ = 186GPa for black curve), but the small difference is due to the lateral 
constraint from the surface graphene layer. The schematic indicates that the 
transmission of adhesion between the tip and the substrate is blocked due to the weak 
interlayer interaction of graphene layers. As we further increase the thickness of the 
graphene coating to trilayer, the fitted exponent for the load-displacement curve is also 
N = 1.42 and 𝐸∗ = 195GPa, same as that of the bilayer coating. For a strong tip-
graphene and graphene-substrate interaction, the layer-dependent regulation can lead 
to the conclusion that the dominant effects in the change from monolayer to bilayer are 
due to the adhesion blocking by weak graphene interlayers interaction, but the same 
performance of the bilayer and multilayer is the result of the lateral constraint from 
graphene on the top surface. We note that this trend can be further supported by the 
experimental results for graphene-coated nanoindentation obtained by Suk et al. [41]
who found that multilayer coating has lower adhesion energy and force gap. We then 
apply the multilayer coverage system for the strong Gr-Tip adhesion case (Fig. 2c) and 
observe a contact response nearly identical to that observed in the strong adhesion case.
This corroborates the abovementioned finding that the graphene/substrate interaction 
cannot provide a substantial contribution to the tip force when a multilayer is applied.

Graphene coating on tip: Considering that in the above-mentioned strong Gr-Tip 
adhesion case where some of the graphene atoms tightly adhere to the tip and lead to a
severe deviation of the contact behavior, we naturally propose a method to coat a 
graphene monolayer directly onto the tip rather than the substrate [36, 42, 43]. Fig. 3
(inset) schematically elucidates the MS setup for the graphene coating on the tip when 
adopting a strong graphene-tip adhesion and a normal graphene-substrate adhesion. 
From the load-displacement curve (blue) in Fig. 3c, we observe the extracted fitting 
exponent N = 1.39 and 𝐸∗ = 193GPa, an apparent improvement compared to the 
model (𝑁 = 1.30 and 𝐸∗ = 188GPa) when graphene is covering the substrate (black). 
The graphene coating on the tip provides a separation for the tip-substrate adhesion but 
does not affect the loading force so that in this case, graphene can be viewed as a part 
of the nanoindenter. The small deviation from 1.50 can also be rationalized by the 
influence of the normal graphene-substrate adhesion because the adhering graphene can 
transmit the adhesion force to the tip. However, this adhesive deviation can be 
substantially eliminated by applying the monolayer graphene coating on each contact 
side because the interactions between the graphene layers are very weak (see MD 
snapshots in Fig. 3c (Inset)). We also note that coating monolayer graphene directly 
onto the tip does not exert better effects for other three cases. However, further 
simulations demonstrate that coating of graphene on both sides can also positively
influence the strong adhesion case regardless of the strength of the graphene-substrate 
adhesion (Fig. 3d). The weak tip-graphene interaction does not hamper the modification 
even though wrinkles emerge at the margin of graphene due to the geometrical 
mismatch between a sphere and a sheet (Figs. 3a-b). The full match of the lowest part 
of graphene and tip is sufficient for the stage of elastic contact. That is, the contact 


10

region is too shallow to touch the graphene wrinkles as shown in Figs. 3a-b (inset, red 
circle).

Based on these results, for strong Gr-Tip adhesion or strong Gr-Sub adhesion, the most 
effectual approach for monolayer graphene to diminish the adhesion effects is to apply 
graphene coverage to the strong-adhesion side, applying segregation to the adhesion 
effects. As confirmed by the simulations, in the case of strong adhesion for both 
graphene-tip and graphene-substrate interaction, increasing graphene layers can be an 
ideal method for modifying contact behavior, whereas the layer of graphene on the top 
layer can confine tip movement to a large extent. Nevertheless, we reveal that coating 
graphene on both contact sides can considerably improve the mitigation effect because 
the interaction between the graphene layers is quite weak. Furthermore, we must
mention that the original principle of this method is similar to that in the application of 
graphene-coated microsphere in superlubricity reported by Liu et al. [36], in which 
adhesion segregation and weak interlayer forces are critical.

Figure. 3. A novel morphology of paving graphene monolayer directly onto the indenter tip for 
quasi adhesion-less contact for (a) normal adhesion, (b) strong Gr-Sub adhesion, (c) strong Gr-Tip
adhesion, and (d) strong adhesion. Plots of force 𝑃 vs. scaled penetration depth ℎ/𝑅 for the 
graphene monolayer coating on the substrate, tip, or either side of the contacting interface are 
depicted in each subfigure. The insets show the snapshots of nanoindentation with graphene-
monolayer-coated tips on the bare and graphene-monolayer-coated substrates.


11

3.3.
Enhance substrate stiffness by applying pre-strain in graphene

Since the facial contact stiffness of the substrate is associated with the flexibility of 
graphene [44], we apply equivalent and incremental biaxial in-plane strain and regulate 
the deformability to control the adhesive contact behavior. Strain engineering is used 
based on our obtained results described in section 3.2 that graphene shows low surface 
adhesion to other materials and that atom attachment is constrained by its inherent high 
in-plane stiffness. Meanwhile, with regard to the friction behavior, Zhang et al. have 
proposed that effective modulation is achieved by tuning the flexibility of the graphene 
on the substrate via in-plane straining [9]. Additionally, as shown in Fig. 1d, a substrate 
with ultrahigh stiffness can efficiently prevent the interference from the adhesion of the 
substrate atoms. Therefore, a comprehensive study on the strain engineering used to 
tune the prediction performance is important and is carried out as described below. 

Figure 4. Modulation of contact behavior on the graphene-monolayer-coated Pt substrate with 
biaxial in-plane pre-strains for (a-b) strong adhesion and (c-d) normal adhesion. (a, c) Plots of force 
𝑃 vs. scaled penetration depth ℎ/𝑅 for graphene monolayer with -0.5%, 0, and +4.5% biaxial pre-
strain. (b, d) Side (top panel) and top (bottom panel) views for the graphene monolayer with different 
pre-strain when the penetration depth ℎ/𝑅 = 0.1. The color for each atom represents the out-of-
plane displacement (𝑢𝑧) and atomic stress component (𝜎𝑧𝑧), respectively. The ratio of adhesive 

atoms is calculated based on the identification of repulsive atoms (𝜎𝑧𝑧 < 0.1𝜎𝑧𝑧
𝑚𝑖𝑛) and adhesive 

atoms (𝜎𝑧𝑧 > 0.1𝜎𝑧𝑧
𝑚𝑎𝑥 ), where (𝜎𝑧𝑧
𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝜎𝑧𝑧
𝑚𝑎𝑥) are (−1 GPa,1 GPa) and (−0.1 GPa, 0.1 GPa)

for (b) strong adhesion and (d) normal adhesion, respectively.

In Fig. 4a, for the extreme conditions i.e., strong adhesion, compressive strain of -0.5% 
can noticeably enlarge the influence of adhesion on load deviations (𝑁 = 1.07 and 
𝐸∗ = 152GPa for blue curve) while tensile strain up to 4.5% can completely eliminate


12

the adhesion effects (𝑁 = 1.50 and 𝐸∗ = 208GPa for red curve). As illustrated in the 
top panels of Fig. 4b, compressive strain leads to a more flexible configuration and a 
more intimate contact (left panel), whereas tensile strain increases the facial stiffness, 
producing a less-pinned graphene-tip interface (right panel). Atoms on graphene 
coating that provide repulsive forces prevent tip penetration, while adhesion is related 
to the atoms on the graphene coating that provide adhesive forces to the tip. Therefore, 
we calculate the normal atomic stress (𝜎𝑧𝑧) distribution for the graphene monolayer at 
the same depth-radius ratio ℎ/𝑅 = 0.1 . The stress distribution of the graphene 
monolayer with various strains are shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 4b, indicating that 
the number of adhesive atoms (red, 𝜎𝑧𝑧 > 0.1𝐺𝑃𝑎) decreases with increasing pre-strain, 
whereas the number of repulsive atoms (blue, 𝜎𝑧𝑧 < −0.1𝐺𝑃𝑎 ) remains almost
unchanged. Therefore, adhesion can be significantly mitigated by applying pre-strain 
in graphene prior to nanoindentation. For normal adhesion, the load-displacement 
curves and atomic configurations in Figs. 4c-d show exactly the same trend as those in 
Figs. 4a-b, indicating that the application of tensile pre-strain to the graphene coating 
on a substrate is an effective method for modulating the elastic behavior of 
nanoindentation. 

To quantitatively describe the effect of in-plane strain during contact, the fitting 
exponent 𝑁 and contact modulus 𝐸∗ are plotted versus the biaxial strain in Fig. 5. 
These two fitting parameters of the load-displacement curve increase monotonically 
with incremental tensile strain and gradually plateau at high strain, indicating the 
gradual reduction and eventual elimination of adhesion interference. This outcome is 
understandable because strain engineering in graphene will change the out-of-plane 
flexibility and adjust the adhesion behavior of the graphene atoms to the tip, thereby 
affecting adhesion strength and contact quality. Therefore, by tuning the in-plane strain 
of graphene, we demonstrate that the surface adhesion of graphene-substrate system to 
the tip can be well regulated by altering the contact stiffness and atomic-scale adhesion 
quality. This conclusion provides an example of the direct regulation of the atomic-
scale contact behaviors via mechanical deformation.

Figure 5. Exponent 𝑁 and contact modulus 𝐸∗ obtained by fitting 𝑃/(4𝐸𝑅

∗𝑅2/3) = (𝐸∗/

𝐸𝑅

∗) (ℎ/𝑅)𝑁 versus biaxial pre-strain of the graphene monolayer coating for strong adhesion and 


13

normal adhesion. The black and blue open circles correspond to the MS simulations shown in Figs. 
4a and 4c, respectively.

3.4.
Size effect on nanoscale adhesive contact

As represented in Fig. 6a, to explore the effect of tip size, two indenter tips with 
different sizes (radii of 5 and 20 nm) are produced to indent the graphene-monolayer-
covered Pt substrate. For a thorough comparison, three typical tip-graphene interactions
are adopted here, namely, 1) purely repulsive potential, 2) normal adhesion, and 3) 
strong adhesion. The values of the exponent 𝑁 and contact modulus 𝐸∗ calculating 
from the fittings are provided in Figs. 6b-d, showing that indentations with a larger
indenter size exhibit a closer agreement with Hertz law. As illustrated in Fig. 1c (inset), 
the atoms providing adhesive forces to the tip (red) are only located at the margin of 
the contact interface, while the atoms preventing tip penetration (blue) are located on 
the contact surface. Hence, for the same depth-radius ratio ℎ/𝑅, we estimate that the 
number of adhesive atoms of graphene is proportional to the tip size, 𝑁𝑎 ∝ 𝑅. Based 
on the Hertz contact theory, the corresponding number of the repulsive atoms of 
graphene, i.e. the contact area, is estimated to be proportional to the square of tip size, 
𝑁𝑟 ∝ 𝑅2. We conclude that the proportion of adhesive atoms is inversely proportional 
to the tip size, 𝑁𝑎/𝑁𝑟 ∝ 1/𝑅, which leads to the significant influence of adhesion for 
smaller tip size. To further quantify the proportion of adhesive atoms for different tip 
sizes, we calculate the normal atomic stress ( 𝜎𝑧𝑧 ) distribution for the graphene
monolayer at the same depth-radius ratio ℎ/𝑅 = 0.2.

Figure 6. Effect of tip size on the adhesive contact behavior. (a) Schematic illustration of 
nanoindentation on a graphene-monolayer-covered Pt substrate with indenters of radii 𝑅 = 5 and 
20 nm. (b-d) Atomic stress distribution for the graphene monolayer on Pt substrates at the contact 
interface as the penetration depth ℎ/𝑅 = 0.2 for 5 nm (left) and 20 nm (right) tips. The color for 
each atom represents the atomic stress (𝜎𝑧𝑧) component. The ratio of adhesive atoms is calculated 
based on the identification of repulsive atoms (𝜎𝑧𝑧 < −0.1) GPa and adhesive atoms (𝜎𝑧𝑧 > 0.1) 


14

GPa. Here three typical adhesions are applied as (b) purely repulsive interaction, (c) normal 
adhesion, and (d) strong adhesion. The corresponding exponents 𝑁 are extracted by fitting 
𝑃/(4𝐸𝑅

∗𝑅2/3) = (𝐸∗/𝐸𝑅

∗) (ℎ/𝑅)𝑁 to the load-displacement curves from the MS simulations.

Figs. 6b-d show the stress distribution of the graphene monolayer for 5 nm and 20 nm 
tips for the three typical adhesion cases, respectively. It is clearly observed from Fig. 
6b that a purely repulsive interaction results in entirely repulsive forces of the graphene 
atoms in contact, whereas the proportion of atoms with adhesive forces increases
gradually with increasing adhesion as shown in Figs. 6c and 6d. The atoms with positive 
stress (red) provide adhesive force to indentation, whereas those with negative stress
(blue) hinder tip penetration. Here, we need to point out that the periodic stress 
distribution out of the contact area manifests the impact of the moiré pattern formed 
between the graphene and the supporting crystalline substrate [45, 46]. For a more 
quantitative description of the contact behavior, the proportions of the atoms with 
adhesive forces relative to the total number of atoms in contact (adhesive atom ratio) 
and the contact area providing repulsive forces (repulsive contact area) are calculated 
for each model. Based on Figs. 6b-d, we verified our previous theoretical estimation
that a larger tip possesses a lower proportion of adhesive atoms during contact. 
Meanwhile, for tips with a uniform size, the repulsive contact area remains constant 
regardless of the adhesion strength. For particular adhesion conditions, the ratios of the 
repulsive contact area between the tips with two different sizes are respectively, 12.31, 
13.76, 14.60, close to above theoretical value (=16).

Our conclusion corroborates the results of other studies obtained by FEA method
calculations [47]. It is important to note that the tip size effect is more significant for 
strong adhesion than for the normal adhesion, and the contact behavior of the purely 
repulsive case is independent of the tip size, as shown in Figs. 6b-d. In addition to the 
fundamental mechanism, the tip-size effect also emphasizes the significance of a better 
insight into the adhesive contact behavior, particularly at the nanoscale; that is, contact 
at this scale will strongly deviate from the traditional elastic model due to apparent 
adhesion.

4.
Conclusions

In conclusion, our research demonstrates that the graphene coverage will lose its contact 
modification effect in some usual cases (strong Gr-Tip adhesion and compressive pre-
strain of graphene), which is critical to applications. To solve this problem, we reveal 
that the elastic contact behavior of metallic substrate exhibits a near ideal Hertzian 
contact that is achieved by coating graphene layers on either side of the contact interface. 
This regulation effect can be explained by the high in-plane strength and low surface 
energy of graphene and originates from the modification of the interaction forces 
between the tip and the indented surface. For the bare substrate, the effect of adhesion 
on the nanoindentation can be significantly mitigated by reducing the amplitude and 
range of atomic interaction between the tip and substrate, or enhancing the substrate
stiffness. This principle shows that the elastic contact behavior for specific 


15

indenter/substrate interaction can be regulated by increasing the number of coated 
graphene layers due to the weak interlayer interaction between the graphene layers. 
Furthermore, the elastic contact behavior closer to the Hertz prediction can be obtained 
by using a larger indenter or by applying pre-strains to graphene layers. Hence, 
graphene-covered nanoindentation is an effective approach to measure mechanical 
properties of substrate for any adhesion between tip, graphene, and substrate. Our study 
confirms some related experimental results reported by other researchers and provides 
theoretical guidance for the design of adhesion-less coatings for the AFM probes and 
MEMS/NEMS systems.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge support from Science Foundation of the National Key Laboratory of 
Science and Technology on Advanced Composites in Special Environments and the 
fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (grant no. WK2480000006).

References:

[1]. Novoselov and S. K., Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. Science, 2004. 

306(5696): p. 666-669.

[2]. Zhang, S., et al., Tribology of two-dimensional materials: From mechanisms to modulating 

strategies. Materials Today, 2019. 26: p. 67-86.

[3]. Berman, D., A. Erdemir and A.V. Sumant, Graphene as a protective coating and superior lubricant 

for electrical contacts. Applied Physics Letters, 2014. 105(23): p. 231907.

[4]. Lee, C., et al., Measurement of the Elastic Properties and Intrinsic Strength of Monolayer Graphene. 

Science, 2008. 321(5887): p. 385-388.

[5]. Wang, S., et al., Wettability and Surface Free Energy of Graphene Films. Langmuir, 2009. 25(18): 

p. 11078-11081.

[6]. Kim, K.S., et al., Chemical Vapor Deposition-Grown Graphene: The Thinnest Solid Lubricant. Acs 

Nano, 2011. 5(6): p. 5107-5114.

[7]. Nilsson, L., et al., Graphene Coatings: Probing the Limits of the One Atom Thick Protection Layer. 

ACS Nano, 2012. 6(11): p. 10258-10266.

[8]. Li, S., et al., The evolving quality of frictional contact with graphene. Nature, 2016. 539(7630): p. 

541-545.

[9]. Zhang, S., et al., Tuning friction to a superlubric state via in-plane straining. Proceedings of the 

National Academy of Sciences, 2019. 116(49): p. 24452-24456.


16

[10]. Vasić, B., et al., Nanoscale wear of graphene and wear protection by graphene. Carbon, 2017. 120: 

p. 137-144.

[11].Klemenz, A., et al., Contact mechanics of graphene-covered metal surfaces. Applied Physics Letters, 

2018. 112(6): p. 061601.

[12]. Klemenz, A., et al., Atomic Scale Mechanisms of Friction Reduction and Wear Protection by 

Graphene. Nano Letters, 2014. 14(12): p. 7145-7152.

[13].Xu, Q., et al., Suppressing Nanoscale Wear by Graphene/Graphene Interfacial Contact Architecture: 

A Molecular Dynamics Study. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2017. 9(46): p. 40959-40968.

[14]. Peng, W., et al., Strengthening mechanisms of graphene coatings on Cu film under nanoindentation: 

A molecular dynamics simulation. Applied Surface ence, 2019. 487(SEP.1): p. 22-31.

[15]. Li, Q., et al., Substrate effect on thickness-dependent friction on graphene. physica status solidi (b), 

2010. 247(11-12): p. 2909-2914.

[16]. Lee, C., et al., Frictional characteristics of atomically thin sheets. Science, 2010. 328(5974): p. 76-

80.

[17]. Park, S., et al., Incipient plasticity and fully plastic contact behavior of copper coated with a 

graphene layer. APL Materials, 2019. 7(3): p. 031106.

[18]. Hammad, M., et al., Adhesionless and near-ideal contact behavior of graphene on Cu thin film. 

Carbon, 2017. 122: p. 446-450.

[19]. Johnson, K.L., K. Kendall and A.D.A. Roberts, Surface Energy and the Contact of Elastic Solids. 

Proc.r.soc.lond.a, 1971. 324(1558): p. 301-313.

[20]. Galanov, B.A., Models of adhesive contact between rough elastic solids. International Journal of 

Mechanical Sciences, 2011. 53(11): p. 968-977.

[21]. Song, J. and D.J. Srolovitz, Adhesion effects in material transfer in mechanical contacts. Acta 

Materialia, 2006. 54(19): p. 5305-5312.

[22]. Milne, Z.B., R.A. Bernal and R.W. Carpick, Sliding History-Dependent Adhesion of Nanoscale 

Silicon Contacts Revealed by in Situ Transmission Electron Microscopy. Langmuir, 2019. 35(48): p. 

15628-15638.

[23]. Milne, Z., et al., Covalent Bonding and Atomic-Level Plasticity Increase Adhesion in Silicon-

Diamond Nanocontacts. ACS applied materials & interfaces, 2019. 11(43): p. 40734-40748.

[24]. Xu, S., et al., Molecular dynamics simulations of nano-indentation and wear of the γTi-Al alloy. 

Computational Materials Science, 2015. 110: p. 247-253.

[25]. He, X., Q. Bai and R. Shen, Atomistic perspective of how graphene protects metal substrate from 

surface damage in rough contacts. Carbon, 2018. 130: p. 672-679.

[26]. Daneshmand, M. and R.R. Mansour, RF MEMS Satellite Switch Matrices. IEEE Microwave 

Magazine, 2011. 12(5): p. 92-109.

[27]. Kwon, H., et al. Contact materials and reliability for high power RF-MEMS switches. 2007: IEEE.

[28]. Hyman, D. and M. Mehregany, Contact physics of gold microcontacts for MEMS switches. 

Components & Packaging Technologies IEEE Transactions on, 1999. 22(3): p. 357-364.

[29]. Plimpton, S., Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics. Journal of 

Computational Physics, 1995. 117(1): p. 1-19.

[30]. Zhou, X., R. Johnson and H. Wadley, Misfit-energy-increasing dislocations in vapor-deposited 

CoFe/NiFe multilayers. Physical Review B, 2004. 69(14): p. 144113-0.


17

[31]. Brenner, D.W., et al., A second-generation reactive empirical bond order (REBO) potential energy 

expression for hydrocarbons. Journal of Physics Condensed Matter, 2002. 14(4): p. 783-802.

[32]. Pastewka, L., et al., Describing bond-breaking processes by reactive potentials: Importance of an 

environment-dependent interaction range. Physical review B, 2008. 78(16): p. 53-56.

[33]. Wang K., et al., Improved embedded-atom model potentials of Pb at high pressure: application to 

investigations of plasticity and phase transition under extreme conditions, Modelling and Simulation in 

Materials Science and Engineering, 2018. 27(1): p 015001.

[34]. Mendelev, M.I., et al., Analysis of semi-empirical interatomic potentials appropriate for simulation 

of crystalline and liquid Al and Cu. Philosophical Magazine, 2008. 88(12): p. 1723-1750.

[35]. Peeters, F.M. and M. Neek-Amal, Nanoindentation of a circular sheet of bilayer graphene. Physical 

Review B, 2010. 81(23): p. 235421.

[36]. Liu, S.W., et al., Robust microscale superlubricity under high contact pressure enabled by graphene-

coated microsphere. Nat Commun, 2017. 8: p. 14029.

[37]. Zhang, J., et al., Effects of grain boundary on wear of graphene at the nanoscale: A molecular 

dynamics study. Carbon, 2019. 143: p. 578-586.

[38]. Deng, Z., et al., Adhesion-dependent negative friction coefficient on chemically modified graphite 

at the nanoscale. Nature Materials, 2012. 11(12): p. 1032-1037.

[39]. Niu, T., G. Cao and C. Xiong, Indentation Behavior of the Stiffest Membrane Mounted on a Very 

Compliant Substrate: Graphene on PDMS. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 2017: p. 

S0020768317302512.

[40]. Zhou, L., Y. Wang and G. Cao, Estimating the elastic properties of few-layer graphene from the 

free-standing indentation response. J Phys Condens Matter, 2013. 25(47): p. 475301.

[41]. Suk, J.W., et al., Probing the adhesion interactions of graphene on silicon oxide by nanoindentation. 

Carbon, 2016. 103: p. 63-72.

[42]. Hui, F., et al., Moving graphene devices from lab to market: advanced graphene-coated nanoprobes. 

Nanoscale, 2016. 8(16): p. 8466-8473.

[43]. Martin-Olmos, C., et al., Graphene MEMS: AFM Probe Performance Improvement. ACS Nano, 

2013. 7(5): p. 4164-4170.

[44]. Kitt, A.L., et al., How graphene slides: measurement and theory of strain-dependent frictional forces 

between graphene and SiO2. Nano Letters, 2013. 13(6).

[45]. Liu, J., et al., Lateral force modulation by moiré superlattice structure: Surfing on periodically 

undulated graphene sheets. Carbon, 2017. 125: p. 76-83.

[46]. Chan, N., et al., Contrast in nanoscale friction between rotational domains of graphene on Pt(111). 

Carbon, 2017. 113: p. 132-138.

[47]. Zhang, X., X. Zhang and S. Wen, Finite Element Modeling of the Nano-scale Adhesive Contact 

and the Geometry-based Pull-off Force. Tribology Letters, 2011. 41(1): p. 65-72.


