1

Carrier Accumulation in Organic Heterojunctions

Controlled by Polarization

TAKAHASHI, Jun-ichi

8-3-5 Nagaura-ekimae Sodegaura, Chiba, 299-0246, Japan

Electronic mail: takajun@joy.ocn.ne.jp

Received 23 December 2020, Revised 13 February 2021, Accepted 15 February 2021

by Organic Electronics.


2

Abstract

The diode operation of OLEDs is characterized by the creation of a conductive space charge 

region in an insulating neutral dielectric region under the voltage application. It contrasts with

the semiconductor diodes, where an insulating space charge region is created in a conductive 

charge neutral region. We proposed a heterojunction theory based on the quasi-conductor 

concept to give a unified view, which gave a modified Mott-Schottky equation for OLEDs

(Org. Electron. 61, 10 (2018)). Based on this theory, we proposed a new mobility evaluation 

method using modulus spectroscopy and reported an in-situ simultaneous evaluation of 

mobilities and carrier densities of carrier transporting materials in a practical OLED 

configuration (Jpn.J.Appl.Phys. 59(7), 071005 (2020)). However, there were invalid 

handlings of the boundary conditions. We carefully reconsider the connection of the electric 

fields through the insulating and conductive regions based on the Dynamic Modulus Plot 

(DMP) analysis. It is proposed that the density of the accumulated carriers is governed by the 

fixed interface charges rather than the Activation of Localized Carrier Source (ALCS). 

Despite the errors in the previous derivation, the revised theory also gave luckily the same 

expression of mobility as a result, to ensure the validity of the quantitative estimation in the 

previous report.


3

Introduction

It had been known that crystals of organic materials were able to become semiconductors 

since the 1940s [1]. After two innovations of the discovery of conductive polymers in 1976

[2] and the invention of ultrathin organic multi-layered devices in 1986 [3], organic 

electronics have achieved great success in scientific and industrial fields. As of 2020, Organic 

Light Emitting Diode (OLED) has achieved the greatest success as a display device in the 

field. Besides, Organic Field Effect Transistor (OFET) as a fundamental technology for 

printed electronics and Organic Solar Cell (OSC) as a low-cost flexible energy sources are

being actively researched. While organic electronics are rapidly expanding in the market, our 

understanding of their operational dynamics is less developed. Even though
our 

understanding of electronic states in molecular systems deepens more and more, the 

mysteries of device physics get deeper and deeper [4-6]. The delocalized band structure in 

inorganic semiconductor crystals has been reinterpreted in terms of the localized levels of the 

Highest Occupied Molecular Orbitals (HOMO) and the Lowest Uoccupied Molecular 

orbitals (LUMO) in molecules, and the device theory established by the band theory has been 

used to explain organic device properties. Surprisingly, despite the patchwork theory in 

different material groups with a different electronic nature, the performance of organic 


4

devices can be explained quantitatively to some extent [7, 8]. What are the reasons for this 

success? Or are we just gorging ourselves on glory under phantom prosperity? The 

development of organic electronics has been guided by the semiconductor theory, but the 

fraying of the semiconductor theory would be a burden for the next stage of developments in 

organic electronics.

Among the various functional elements, a diode is the most basic active circuit 

element that exhibits a rectifying characteristic. When a diode is made from semiconductors 

by sandwiching them between metal electrodes, the device acts as a variable capacitor in the 

reverse bias region. The capacitor stores real charges as immobile ions in the depletion layer. 

On the other hand, organic multi-layered devices also act as variable capacitors in the reverse 

bias region, which has been investigated in detail by the displacement current measurement 

and Impedance spectroscopy [9-17]. In a sufficiently large negative bias region, the organic 

layers have few intrinsic carriers and are insulators. Polarizations are induced in the organic 

layers and real charges are induced on both electrode surfaces. This behavior is the same as 

that of an ordinary capacitor made of an insulating dielectric layer sandwiched by metal 

electrodes. When the bias voltage is increased and carriers are injected from the electrodes, 

the organic layers become conductors progressively, and the capacitance changes. The device 

operates as a variable capacitor. However, unlike Schottky junctions, no depletion layer is 


5

formed by immobile ions in OLEDs, and the capacitance changes come from the thickening 

of the conductive region and the thinning of the insulating dielectric region. These differences 

were summarized as a quasiconductor concept [16].

We analyzed the carrier accumulation by using the Poisson equation and the 

continuity equation in a dielectric material and obtained the modified Mott-Schottky equation 

that gave a quantitative relationship between the static carrier density of the accumulation 

layer, the applied voltage, and the thickness of the accumulation layer [16]. Since the 

conductivity of the accumulation layer can be determined directly from impedance 

spectroscopy, the mobility can also be determined from the equation. In the reference [17], 

we reported an evaluation of the mobility and the carrier density from practical OLEDs. From 

the Dynamic Modulus Plot (DMP) analysis, it was shown that the density of the accumulated 

carriers was reciprocally proportional to the accumulation layer thickness and therefore the 

carrier density per area was independent of the accumulation layer thickness. At the same 

time, it was independent of the neighboring insulating layer thickness also. From these results, 

we assumed that the accumulated carriers were supplied from a definite external finite carrier 

source, which was named as Activation of Localized Carrier Source (ALCS) model, with 

pending the discussion about the physical picture [15].

When solving the Poisson equation and the continuity equation, we assumed the 


6

abrupt distribution approximation of the space charge density distribution similar to the 

Schottky contact of the semiconductors. Under the assumption of the ALCS model, the 

constant accumulated carrier density at the full-accumulated state can be explained by 

assuming that all ALCS states are ionized. However, the ALCS dynamics has no way to keep 

the accumulated carrier density during accumulation to be the same as that at the full-

accumulated state. The quasiconductors have no intrinsic carrier density value unlike 

semiconductors, the carrier density during the accumulation cannot be determined a priori. 

The derivation in ref. (16) is no more justified. We revisited the DMP and the theory in detail 

and found invalid handling of the boundary conditions. In this article, we correct the errors in 

the theory and propose a revised assumption of the origin of the accumulation rather than 

ALCS. Even though another Mott-Schottky equivalent equation was obtained, the equation 

interrelating the accumulated carrier density and the applied voltage could be rewritten 

approximately as the same form as that in the previous work. The analysis in ref. (16) was 

found luckily to remain valid.

Theory and discussion

We start the discussion by summarizing the concept of the quasiconductor, the difference 

between the semiconductor devices and the organic multi-layered electronic devices. The 


7

electronic structure of semiconductors has a band structure. The atomic orbitals not only 

overlap between neighboring atoms, but also have continuation among distant atoms due to 

the periodicity of the crystal structure, and the charges are delocalized as the Bloch state. In 

the case of impurity semiconductors, the dopants are ionized. At the same time, the free 

charges delocalize in the crystal and become carriers, giving the semiconductor a finite 

conductivity. The number of immobile ions and mobile carriers is balanced, making the 

semiconductors a charge neutral state. When electrodes are provided, a Schottky junction is 

formed to exclude the mobile charges in the semiconductor, leaving a region of immobile ions. 

The space charge potential created by the immobile ions prevents the movement of the 

carriers through the space charge region and switches-off the conduction [18]. On the other 

hand, the organic materials used in OLEDs have an amorphous structure usually. In this case, 

there is an overlap of molecular orbitals between neighboring molecules, but their phases 

cancel each other out and they are localized to individual molecules (Anderson localization)

[19]. In the isolated state, there can be very few carriers in the bulk, and they are charge

neutral insulators. When electrodes are provided and a voltage is applied, charges are supplied 

to the organic layer from the electrode, which switches-on the conduction through the organic 

layer. The carriers are given by the electrodes as excess charges and become space charges in 

the organic layer, rather than an ionization of the neutral molecules and freeing the carriers 


8

in the organic layer. The charges are spatially delocalized by repeated hopping between 

adjacent localized states. Note that the roles of space charges in conductors and insulators are 

reversed in semiconductors and organics. In semiconductors, the charge neutral state is a 

conductor, and the space charge state is a depletion layer and an insulator, whereas in organics, 

the charge neutral state is an insulator, and the space charge state is a conductor. Rectification 

properties can be obtained by forming heterojunctions with electrodes in both cases. However, 

in the case of semiconductors, rectification properties are obtained by forming an insulating 

depletion layer by the voltage application to the charge neutral conductor. On the other hand, 

in the case of organic heterojunctions, rectification properties are obtained by forming a 

conductive space charge layer in charge neutral insulators by the voltage application. They 

have a complementary relationship. We proposed a classification of quasiconductors for the 

organic materials in the sense that they are not conductors inherently but can be given a

conductive state by appropriate manipulation, whereas semiconductors are inherent 

conductors that can be given an insulating state by appropriate manipulation. 

Quasiconductors can be defined as dielectrics with an external carrier source and finite 

mobility from another point of view [16]. Table 1 summarizes the differences between 

semiconductors and quasiconductors.

The space charge distribution in quasiconductors is described by the Poisson 


9

equation and the continuity equation so that the drift current and the diffusion current are 

balanced. [16].

Δ𝜙 = −

𝑞𝑁

𝜀 .
(1)

0 = 𝜎𝐸 − 𝑞𝐷∇𝑁.
(2)

With q the elementary charge,  the permittivity, =qN the conductivity,  the mobility, N

the carrier density, and D the diffusion coefficient. For one dimensional coordinate, the 

following equation is obtained after integration of eq. (2).

𝐴 =

𝜇

2𝐷 (

𝑑𝜙

𝑑𝑥)

2

+

𝑑2𝜙

𝑑𝑥2.
(3)

This equation has general solutions as

𝜙(𝑥) = −

2𝐷

𝜇 𝑙𝑛 (𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ (√

𝜇𝐴

2𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝑥0))) + 𝜙0(𝑥).
(4)

𝑑𝜙

𝑑𝑥 = −√

2𝐷𝐴

𝜇 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ (√

𝜇𝐴

2𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝑥0)) +

𝑑𝜙0(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥 .
(5)

𝑑2𝜙

𝑑𝑥2 = −

𝑞𝑁

𝜀 = 𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ−2 (√

𝜇𝐴

2𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝑥0)).
(6)

Here, 𝜙0(𝑥) are the solutions satisfying ∇𝜙0(𝑥) = 0. A is redefined as 𝐴 = 𝑞𝑁0/𝜀. D and μ

are interrelated by the Einstein relation, 1 = 𝑞𝐷/𝜇𝑘𝑇. In general, this value can be larger than 

1 [20,21]. The Debye length D in a dielectric material with permittivity  is defined by the 

following equation. 

𝜁 =

𝑞𝐷

𝜇𝑘𝑇.
(7)


10

𝜆𝐷0 = √

2𝜀𝑘𝑇

𝑞2𝑁0.
(8)

𝜆𝐷 = √

2𝜀

𝑞2𝑁0

𝐷

𝜇 = √𝜁𝜆𝐷0.
(9)

𝜁 is the measure of the deviation from the Einstein relation. In inhomogeneous dielectrics, 

charges are localized near the interface under the application of a potential. The extent of the 

localized region is expressed in terms of Debye length and becomes narrower as the charge 

density increases.

Next, we discuss the multi-layered devices. As noted already, the carrier behavior in 

organic multi-layered devices has been studied in detail by displacement current method and

impedance spectroscopy [9-17]. When a bias voltage is applied to the devices, stepwise carrier 

injection is observed in the multi-layered device. Part of the layers is observed to shift from 

the insulator to the conductor at the negative bias side of the threshold voltage before the start 

of DC current flow. The conductive region becomes progressively thicker and saturates as the 

voltage increases. The accumulation voltage is the offset of the start voltage of the 

accumulation from the built-in potential. The voltage is known also as the giant surface 

potential (GSP) [11-13]. GSP represents the polarization mismatch appearing at the 

heterointerface. The voltage is proportional to the layer thickness, which shows that the GSP 

comes from a spontaneous polarization. OLEDs have a parallel-plate capacitor structure in 

which the stacked dielectrics are sandwiched between conductive electrodes. The organics 


11

used in OLEDs are dielectrics with variable conductivity. The carrier dynamics are

represented by the charging process for the capacitors. It should be stressed that all the layers 

keep dielectric nature under different voltages, even though they change from insulators to 

conductors. It is important to pay attention to polarization and charge distribution in each

layer including electrodes. Consider an OLED consisting of two layers: an electron transport 

layer with spontaneous polarization (layer I) and a hole transport layer (layer II). Modern 

practical OLEDs consist of many layers, but under proper design, the carrier transport process 

is simplified, and the equivalent circuit behaves similarly to HT/ET bilayer devices. Figure 1 

shows the distribution of polarization and real charges under different voltages. The 

polarization is denoted by 𝑃 = 𝜒𝜀0(𝐸 + 𝐸0) with the spontaneous polarization 𝜒𝜀0𝐸0 and 

the electric field E. Under a sufficiently large negative bias, when there are no carriers in either 

layer, an electric field-induced polarization appears in layer I (red bars) in addition to the 

spontaneous polarization (yellow bars). At the same time, the same amount of the induced 

polarization occurs in layer II (red bars) so that the electric flux density is continuous. 

Corresponding to the polarization in each layer, surface charges appear on the electrodes

(gray and black bars) as in Fig.1(a). When the bias voltage is increased and the electric field 

in layer II becomes zero, the hole exclusion due to the reverse electric field inside layer II 

disappears and hole accumulation begins in layer II. There remains a spontaneous 


12

polarization in Layer I (yellow bars) and surface charges on the anode surface (a gray bar) at 

this voltage as in Fig.1(b). When further voltage is applied, layer II becomes conductive and 

the layer is shortened electrically, whereas layer I remains to be insulating. 

One must remember that the carriers in layer II are space charges in a dielectric that 

violate the charge neutrality. The potential and the charge distribution are not obvious 

problems. Comparing Fig.1(c) and the DMPs obtained from experiments [15-17], there are 

three characteristic features in the electric nature of the accumulated layer.

1. The Cole-Cole plot of modulus of the fully accumulated layer is a proper semicircle 

with small distortions.

2. The relaxation frequency of the accumulated layer above the full accumulation 

voltage does not depend on the applied voltage.

3. The relaxation frequency is reciprocally proportional to the thickness of the 

accumulation layer.

The first shows the following. Under a non-uniform electric field, the space charges 

are essentially localized in a region of about the Debye length. A typical carrier density in 

OLED is about 1016/cm3 and the Debye length becomes about 30 nm, which is the same order 


13

of magnitude as the layer thickness in a typical OLED, and thus the Debye shielding effect is 

expected to appear. However, the semi-circle of the Cole-Cole plot in the accumulation region 

is a proper circle, indicating that the carrier density in the accumulation layer is highly 

homogeneous [15]. Therefore, the effective Debye length must be sufficiently larger than the 

typical thickness of OLED, indicating that the Einstein relation is broken. Then equations 

from eq. (4) to (6) are approximated as the following for sufficiently large D. 

𝜙(𝑥) = −

𝑞𝑁0
2𝜀 (𝑥2 + 𝑚𝑥 + 𝑛).
(10)

𝐸(𝑥) =

𝑞𝑁0
2𝜀 (2𝑥 + 𝑚).
(11)

𝑁(𝑥) = 𝑞𝑁0.
(12)

Here, m and n are the numerical constants that are determined from the boundary conditions. 

If the Debye length is sufficiently larger than the organic layer, the abrupt distribution 

approximation that is popular in the analysis of semiconductor junction is effective for those 

devices [18]. 

The second shows the following. We have already mentioned that OLEDs have a 

capacitor structure. When a voltage is applied to the capacitor, polarization occurs in the 

dielectric layers and real charges appear on the electrode surfaces. The first feature shows that 

there is no carrier localized region in the accumulation layer. The relaxation frequency is 

proportional to the carrier density. Therefore, the additional storage of real charges to the 


14

capacitor in this voltage range does not take place in the organic layer, even though the 

accumulated layer works as an electrode. The additional storage of real charges must take 

place on the cathode metal surface.

The third shows the following. The volumetric carrier density is reciprocally

proportional to the thickness of the accumulation layer, and therefore the areal carrier density 

that is the integration over the thickness is constant with respect to the thickness. Here, if the 

origin of the accumulated carriers is due to injection from the electrode, then the accumulated 

carrier density will be dominated by the height of the energy barrier at the injection interface. 

Since the injection efficiency becomes independent of the layer thickness in such case, the 

thicker the layer, the more carriers are injected, and the volumetric density rather than the 

areal density will remain the same. The constant areal density indicates that there is some 

mechanism to limit the amount of carrier injection.

These three characteristics cannot be consistent with the simple capacitor model of 

a dielectric layer sandwiched by two metal electrodes, where real charges accumulate at the 

surface of the electrode metals. To account for these features, we proposed the ALCS 

mechanism [15], which was a phenomenological model without addressing a physical 

mechanism. Here, we reconsider the ALCS model and propose a new mathematical model 

based on the interface trap, which represents a potential balance based on the continuity of 


15

electric fluxes. It does not include the activation of the localized states explicitly, whereas the 

ALCS model assumes the localized states as the carrier source.

Figure 2 shows the potential and charge distribution of the model device. For 

simplicity, we consider a two-layer device with negative interface charges at the HT/ET 

interface, which accounts for the hole accumulation in the HT layer. The electron 

accumulation can be accounted for by the positive interface charges. The spontaneous 

polarization is written as only an offset of the electric field in a dielectric layer so that it is 

neglected here. The origins of the position and the potential are set at the HT/ET interface. 

We assume that there are fixed trap charges at the HT/ET interface. Due to them, there is a 

discontinuity of the electric field at the HT/ET interface. Holes start to accumulate in HT at 

the accumulation voltage Va, where the internal electric field in HT that prevents the flow of 

hole into HT disappears. At this voltage, the internal electric field in ET is compensated by 

the positive surface charges at the anode side as in Fig.2(a). When the bias voltage is increased, 

the positive surface charges at the anode decrease. At the same time, the negative charges on 

the opposite side decrease. When the HT/ET interface charges are fixed ones, the decrease 

of the negative charges is compensated by the increase of positive charges, the hole 

accumulation in HT in Fig.2(b). The number of accumulated carriers and the thickness of the 

accumulated region are linked by the applied voltage via the number of the interface charges. 


16

Here, 𝜙𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑡) is fixed to zero. When 𝜙𝐼𝐼(0) ≤ 0, carriers are injected from the electrode and 

diffuse into the layer. The distribution of charge in a dielectric under applied voltage is 

governed by the competition between drift and diffusion currents. When carriers enter the 

layer, the space charge induces polarization in the region where the space charge has not yet 

spread into, and an electric field is generated in the direction that inhibits the diffusion. The 

electric field due to the polarization does not exceed the electric field due to the space charge. 

And the direction of the total electric field is always from the cathode to the HT/ET interface 

at the boundary between the accumulated and the not-yet-accumulated region, which is given

from the potential connection condition in the discussion below. If 𝜙𝐼𝐼(0) is non-zero (i.e., 

takes a finite negative value), real charges flowing from the space charge region to x=0 will 

appear. Since the flow of real charge continues as long as the not-yet-accumulated polarization 

region exists, the partially accumulated state cannot be taken. Therefore, 𝜙𝐼𝐼(0) = 0 is 

required for the partially accumulated region to exist. In other words, from the beginning to 

the end of the accumulation, it is a kind of critical state, where the inflow of diffusion current 

and the counterflow of drift current are balanced. The thickness of the accumulated region is 

the internal state quantity and the potential at both ends of the layer is the conserved quantity 

of the critical state. The boundary conditions are 𝜙𝐼(−𝑙) = 𝑉, 𝜙𝐼(0) = 𝜙𝐼𝐼(0) = 0, 𝜙𝐼𝐼(𝑑) =

𝜙𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑑), 𝜙𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑡) = 0, and 𝐸𝐼𝐼(𝑑) = 𝐸𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑑). Here, 𝑙 is the thickness of the ET layer, t and d are 


17

the thicknesses of the HT layer and the accumulated region. Then, the potentials in ET (I),

the accumulated region (II), and the not-yet-accumulated region (III) are written as follows.

In region I, 

𝜙𝐼(𝑥) = −

𝑉𝑥

𝑙
(13)

In region II, 

𝜙𝐼𝐼(𝑥) = −

𝑞𝑁0
2𝜀1 𝑥(𝑥 − 𝑎).
(14)

𝐸𝐼𝐼(𝑥) =

𝑞𝑁0
𝜀1 (2𝑥 − 𝑎).
(15)

In region III,

𝜙𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑥) = −

𝑞𝑁0
2𝜀1 𝑑(𝑑 − 𝑎) − 𝐸𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑑)(𝑥 − 𝑑).
(16)

𝐸𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑥) = 𝐸𝐼𝐼(𝑑) =

𝑞𝑁0
2𝜀1 (2𝑑 − 𝑎).
(17)

Because 𝜙𝐼𝐼(0) = 𝜙𝐼𝐼𝐼(𝑡) = 0, the following relationship holds.

𝑎 = 2𝑡 −

𝑑2

𝑡 .
(18)

There appear surface charges at the cathode to compensate for the discontinuity of the electric 

field at the HT/cathode interface.

𝜀1𝜙𝐼𝐼𝐼

′ (𝑡) = −

𝑞𝑁0

2 (2𝑑 − 𝑎).
(19)

From the Gauss theorem, the electric field at the HT/ET interface satisfies the next equations.

𝜀1𝜙𝐼𝐼

′ (0) = −𝑞𝑁0𝑑 − 𝜀1𝜙𝐼𝐼𝐼

′ (𝑡) =

𝑞𝑁0(2𝑡𝑑−𝑑2)

2𝑡
.
(20)

𝜀1𝜙𝐼𝐼

′ (0) − 𝜀2𝜙𝐼

′(0) = 𝜎𝑠.
(21)


18

Here, 𝜎𝑠 is the fixed interface charges at the HT/ET interface. The permittivity of the ET, 

𝜀2 is distinguished from that of the HT, 𝜀1, here. We define the full accumulation voltage 𝑉𝑓, 

where the thickness of the accumulated region coincides with t. We obtain the accumulation 

equation equivalent to the Mott-Schottky equation as

𝜎𝑠

(𝑑−𝑡)2

𝑡2
= 𝜀2

𝑉−𝑉𝑓

𝑙
.
(22)

𝑞𝑁0𝑡 = 2𝜎𝑠.
(23)

Because the thickness of the accumulated region is zero at the accumulation voltage, 𝑉𝑎 −

𝑉𝑓 = 𝜎𝑠𝑙/𝜀2. It is shown that the areal carrier density is twice the amount of the fixed interface 

charges at the HT/ET interface, which is independent of the accumulation layer thickness as 

in Fig.2(c). It is noted that the amount of the accumulated carriers is governed by the localized 

states, where the localized states work as a control valve rather than a source of the carriers. 

It is as if the localized states activate the carries in the layer, even though the ALCS model 

itself is wrong. The carrier accumulation by the localized states can be considered to occupy 

the same position of carrier doping by the impurity doping in semiconductors as has been 

pointed out in ref. (15). This is another parallelism in device operation between 

semiconductors and quasiconductors other than table.1. The voltage difference between the 

start and the full state of accumulation is governed by the geometrical configuration of the 

device. Around the accumulation voltage, where d<<t, eq. (22) is written as


19

𝑞𝑁0𝑑 = 𝜀2

𝑉−𝑉𝑎

𝑙 .
(24)

From the obtained 𝑁0, the mobility equation is given

𝜇 =

𝜎

𝑞𝑁0 =

2𝜋𝜀1𝑓

𝑞𝑁0 .
(25)

Here, 𝑓 is the relaxation frequency of the fully accumulated HT layer that is read from the 

Modulus spectrum. 𝜀1 and  are the permittivity and the conductivity of the layer. Equations

(24) and (25) are the same equations as those derived in the ref. (16) and (17). Even though 

the derivation of Eq. (24) and (25) in ref. (16) was not correct, the estimation in ref. (17) 

remains valid by chance.

Above the full accumulation voltage, the carrier density is independent of the applied 

voltage. At the same time, their distribution is homogeneous. Therefore, the coefficient of the 

quadratic term of the potential in layer II keeps the same value as eq. (23). As 𝜙𝐼𝐼(𝑡) = 0, the 

potential is written as 

𝜙𝐼𝐼(𝑥) = −

𝑞𝑁0
2𝜀 (𝑥 − 𝑡)(𝑥 − 𝑏),
(26)

The boundary conditions at HT/ET interface, eq. (21) remains to hold. Finally, the following 

equations are obtained.

𝜙𝐼(𝑥) = 𝐸(𝑡 − 𝑥).
(27)

𝐸 =

𝑉

𝑡+𝑙.
(28)

𝜎 = 𝜎𝑠 − 𝜀𝐸.
(29)


20

𝑏 =

𝜀𝐸𝑡

𝜎𝑠 ,
(30)

where  is the areal density of the charges accumulated at the cathode surface that are the

stored real charges in the capacitor as in Fig.2(d). It should be stressed that the OLED works 

as a capacitor, all the organic layers of which are dielectrics, even though layer II is conductive. 

It is shown that the electric field in layer II is not shielded by the mobile carriers. The diffusion 

current surpasses the drift current.

The relaxation frequency of the accumulation layer keeps its value above the built-

in potential until the relaxation peak of the other layer overlaps. In other words, the 

accumulation layer works as a regulating valve of carrier density. However, the current density 

in this voltage region obeys the Shockley equation with an ideality factor of 1.5 to 2 [17,22,23].

Careful theoretical investigations will be necessary to make a consistent transport model. 

Finally, we point out one possibility of the nature of the accumulation. It is reported 

that the spontaneous polarization correlates with the molecular dipole moment in many 

molecules [12,13]. Within the model presented here, there is no relationship between the 

spontaneous polarization that governs the starting voltage of the accumulation and the 

interface trap charges that govern the amount of the accumulated carriers. However, the 

molecules during the deposition are in a very unstable state on the deposition surface and 

could be easily oriented under a slight forcing force. If there are surface charges on the 


21

heterointerface beforehand, the deposited molecules would feel the electrostatic field created 

by the interface charges as an orientation force that is proportional to their dipole moment.

Conclusion

In the previous article [16], we proposed an organic heterojunction theory based on the 

concept of quasiconductor. However, there were errors in the calculation. In the present 

article, we have corrected the derivation and revised the theory thoroughly. 

The Modulus spectroscopy revealed that the carrier dynamics of OLEDs was quite 

different from that of the semiconductor diodes having a Schottky junction. It was shown that 

the roles of carriers in conductive and insulating states were switched in the organic devices 

and the semiconductor devices. The static behavior of carriers in organics as dielectrics has 

been overlooked. The polarization of each layer has a significant impact on the operation of 

multi-layered devices. We focus on the polarization dynamics of carrier accumulation and 

have shown that the carrier distribution is cleverly controlled through polarizations of the 

constituent layers. We derived a Mott-Schottky-equivalent equation by solving the Poisson 

equation and the continuity equation. Surprisingly, the equation can be approximated by the 

same capacitor equation derived in the previous article, even though the calculation is revised.


22

The concept of quasiconductor was introduced to describe this duality for semiconductors. 

We consider that the quasiconductor is the missing link between organic electronics and 

semiconductors.


23

References

[1] H. Akamatsu and H. Inokuchi, J. Chem. Phys. 18, 810 (1950).

[2] H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang, and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. 

Soc., Chem. Commun. 1977, 578.

[3] C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett. 51, 913 (1987).

[4] H. Ishii, K. Kudo, T. Nakayama, and N. Ueno, editors, Electronic Processes in Organic 

Electronics: Bridging Nanostructure, Electronic States and Device Properties (Springer Japan, 

2015).

[5] A. Koehler and H. Baessler, Electronic Processes in Organic Semiconductors: An 

Introduction (Wiley-VCH, 2015).

[6] H. Klauk, editor, Organic Electronics II: More Materials and Applications (Wiley-VCH, 

2012).

[7] S. Altazin, S. Züfle, E. Knapp, C. Kirsch, T. D. Schmidt, L. Jäger, Y. Noguchi, W. Brütting, 

and B. Ruhstaller, Org. Electron. 39, 244 (2016).

[8] C. H. Kim, O. Yaghmazadeh, Y. Bonnassieux, and G. Horowitz, J. Appl. Phys. 110, 093722 

(2011).

[9] S. Ogawa, T. Naijo, Y. Kimura, H. Ishii, and M. Niwano, Synthetic Metals, 153, 253 


24

(2005).

[10] S. Nowy, W. Ren, A. Elschner, W. Lövenich, and W. Brütting, J. Appl. Phys. 107, 054501 

(2010).

[11] Y. Noguchi, H. Lim, T. Isoshima, E. Ito, M. Hara, W. W. Chin, J. W. Han, H. Kinjo, Y. 

Ozawa, Y. Nakayama, and H. Ishii, Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 203306 (2013).

[12] Y. Noguchi, Y. Miyazaki, Y. Tanaka, N. Sato, Y. Nakayama, T. D. Schmidt, W. Brütting, 

and H. Ishii, J. Appl. Phys. 111, 114508 (2012).

[13] Y. Noguchi, W. Brütting, and H. Ishii, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 58 (2019) SF0801.

[14] R. Maeda, H. Tokairin, H. Ikeda, J.-i. Takahashi, and Y. Yoshida, Adv. Mater. Phys. 

Chem. 5, 52912 (2015).

[15] J.-i. Takahashi and H. Naito, Org. Electron. 61, 10 (2018).

[16] J.-i. Takahashi, Org. Electron. 65, 26 (2019).

[17] J.-i. Takahashi, Jpn.J.Appl.Phys. 59(7), 071005 (2020).

[18] S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Device 2nd ed. (Wiley, New York, 1981) 

[19] S. Fratini, D. Mayou, S Ciuchi, Adv. Func. Mat., 2016, 26 (14), 2292 (2016).

[20] Y. Roichman and N. Tessler, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 1948 (2002).

[21] K. Harada, A. G. Werner, M. Pfeiffer, C. J. Bloom, C. M. Elliott, and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 94, 036601 (2005).


25

[22] G. Wetzelaer and P. Blom, NPG Asia Mater. 6, e110 (2014).

[23] K. Tvingstedt and C. Deibel, Adv. Energy Mater. 6, 1502230(2016).


26

Fig.1. Potential (above) and charge distribution (below) of a two-layer device with 

spontaneous polarization in ET (I) and accumulation in HT (II). (a) under negative bias 

voltage. (b) at the accumulation voltage where the externally applied electric field balances 

the spontaneous polarization. (c) above the accumulation voltage. Yellow bars are the 

spontaneous polarization. Black and gray bars are surface charges at the electrode surface, 

where the black bar corresponds to the spontaneous polarization and the gray bar to the 

induced polarization. Red bars are the polarization induced by the applied voltage. Blue flat 

bar is the accumulated charges.


27

Fig.2. Potential (above) and charge distribution (below) of a two-layer device with fixed 

negative charges at the interface. (a) at the accumulation voltage. (b) at a finite positive bias 

voltage. (c) at the full accumulation voltage. (d) above the full accumulation voltage. ET layer

(I), accumulated HT region (II), and not-yet-accumulated HT region (III). Black bars are real 

charges at the electrode surfaces and in the accumulated region, and blue bar is the fixed 

interface charges with a surface density of 𝜎𝑠.


28

Semiconductor
Quasiconductor

Charge Neutral Layer
Conductor
Insulator 

(Delocalized Bloch states)
(Anderson Localization)

Space Charge Layer
Insulator
Conductor

(Depletion layer)
(Carrier accumulation layer)

Charge Delocalization
Periodic continuation of

atomic orbitals

Neighboring overlap of

molecular orbitals

Carrier Doping
Thermal excitation from

mixed impurities

Electric field induced injection

from outside

Table.1 Comparison between semiconductor and quasiconductor.


