A compact and tunable forward coupler based on high-impedance

superconducting nanowires

Marco Colangelo,1, вҲ— Di Zhu,1, 2, вҲ— Daniel F. Santavicca,3 Brenden

A. Butters,1 Joshua C. Bienfang,4 and Karl K. Berggren1, вҖ 

1Research Laboratory of Electronics,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA

2John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Science,

Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA

3Department of Physics, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA

4National Institute of Standards and Technology,

Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA

(Dated: November 24, 2020)

1

arXiv:2011.11406v1  [physics.app-ph]  23 Nov 2020


Abstract

Developing compact, low-dissipation, cryogenic-compatible microwave electronics is essential

for scaling up low-temperature quantum computing systems.
In this paper, we demonstrate

an ultra-compact microwave directional forward coupler based on high-impedance slow-wave

superconducting-nanowire transmission lines. The coupling section of the fabricated device has

a footprint of 416 Вөm2. At 4.753 GHz, the input signal couples equally to the through port and

forward-coupling port (50:50) at вҲ’6.7 dB with вҲ’13.5 dB isolation. The coupling ratio can be con-

trolled with DC bias current or temperature by exploiting the dependence of the kinetic inductance

on these quantities. The material and fabrication-process are suitable for direct integration with

superconducting circuits, providing a practical solution to the signal distribution bottlenecks in

developing large-scale quantum computers.

The scalability of superconducting quantum systems is constrained by the distribution

of microwave signals to the quantum processors [1]. Within current designs, each qubit is

individually wired for readout and control [1, 2], entailing an increasing number of devices

and cables as the size of the circuit is increased. Inevitably, the present approach will lead

to challenges in packaging, routing, thermalization, and footprint [3]. To realize large-scale

circuits with thousands of qubits, most of the microwave electronics will need to be integrated

on-chip [1, 3], necessitating the development of miniaturized low-power, low-dissipation RF

devices. More broadly, a small-footprint cryogenic microwave electronics platform is also

required for the advancement of several other applications relying on processing electrical

signals at low temperature, such as single-photon detection [4], superconducting quantum

interference device (SQUID) magnetometry [5, 6], and radio astronomy [7, 8] .

Many of the proposals to address scalability in superconducting circuits face several

challenges in satisfying the requirements for on-chip integrability. Devices based on semi-

conductors [9вҖ“13] either dissipate too much power to be operated at a few milliKelvin [1] or

are made from unconventional materials for which integration with superconductors has not

yet been demonstrated. Among the superconducting solutions, 50 в„Ұ transmission-line-based

devices [14, 15] require too large a footprint for large-scale integration. Josephson junction

(JJ) electronics are a natural candidate for integration with JJ-based quantum processors

вҲ— These two authors contributed equally

вҖ  berggren@mit.edu

2


FIG. 1. Superconducting-nanowire directional forward coupler: device and model. (a) Optical and

scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of the fabricated device: (i) device die mounted in the radio-

frequency (RF) testing box; (ii) SEM showing the full four-port device before the fabrication of the

dielectric spacer and the top ground; (iii) close-up SEM of the impedance-matching taper; (iv) close-

up SEM of the coupled nanowire transmission lines. (b) Geometry, model, and implementation of

coupler: two nanowire transmission lines brought together for a coupling length l: (i) analytical

model: coupled LC ladder, where we explicitly separated the geometric (Faraday) component of

the total line inductance per unit length (p.u.l.), LF, from the kinetic inductance p.u.l. Lk; C is the

capacitance p.u.l. of each line; E is the coupling capacitance p.u.l.; M is the mutual inductance

p.u.l.; (ii) Implementation as side-coupled striplines. In the analytical model, the gold layers (Au)

have been treated as perfect electric conductors (PEC) (c) Simulation of the port voltages versus

coupler length at 5 GHz for 50:50 forward coupling (Lk = 80 pH per square).

[16вҖ“21], but they can be challenging to manufacture and require magnetic shielding.

Recently, superconducting nanowires have emerged as an alternative approach to realize

ultra-compact microwave devices [22, 23]. The high kinetic inductivity achieved with dis-

3


ordered superconducting thin-films provides an effective means of realizing extremely high

characteristic-impedance transmission lines with zero DC resistance, minimal microwave dis-

sipation, slow phase velocity (high effective refractive index), and very small footprint. The

native high-impedance, high-index operation generates electromagnetically-protected mi-

crowave environments that could well interface to superinductor-based qubits [24вҖ“27]. The

compatibility with these applications is guaranteed by the rather conventional materials

and by the few-layer fabrication process [28, 29], making the devices realized with super-

conducting nanowires a viable solution to the signal distribution bottlenecks of quantum

computers.

Conventional directional coupler modules split, combine and distribute microwave fields

to the subsequent processing layers or to the readout [15, 30, 31]. They carry out essen-

tial processing tasks but take up a significant volume inside the cryostat. Here, we use

high kinetic-inductance superconductors to demonstrate a compact high-impedance direc-

tional coupler. Our miniaturized coupler is based on niobium nitride (NbN) superconducting

nanowire side-coupled striplines embedded in a multilayer dieletric stack. Fig. 1(a) shows op-

tical and scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of the fabricated device. We achieve forward

coupling in the GHz range in an extremely reduced footprint and with impedance matching

flexibility. We further demonstrate that the non-linear dependence of the nanowireвҖҷs kinetic

inductance on DC current and temperature allow the microwave properties of the coupler to

be tuned. We suggest this device may find immediate application in superconducting quan-

tum computing systems and in other low-temperature applications where small-footprint

on-chip coupling at microwave frequency is needed.

Our device is designed following a traditional coupled-line architecture (Fig. 1(b)) where

two superconducting nanowires are brought together for a coupling length l. The struc-

ture can be modeled as a coupled LC ladder (Fig. 1(b)(i)) using a standard coupled-mode

formalism [32вҖ“34], with some modifications to capture the kinetic-inductive transmission

line [35]. To reflect the high-inductivity behavior of nanowires, we explicitly separate the

kinetic contribution (Lk), from the geometric (Faraday) contribution (LF) to the total line

inductance per unit length. The coupling produces mode splitting into common (c) and

differential (ПҖ) modes, with different effective indices and propagation constants (ОІc and

ОІПҖ). In a transmission line, a sinusoidal signal with frequency Пү is a superposition of these

eigenmodes and energy is continuously transferred between the two lines with a periodicity

4


lПҖ = ПҖ/вҲҶОІ = ПҖ/ (ОІПҖ вҲ’ ОІc). A section of coupled transmission line with a length that is

an odd-integer multiple of lПҖ/2 can perform, in the ideal case, 3 dB forward coupling at

Пү. In RF transmission lines made of conventional materials, the splitting in propagation

constant вҲҶОІ is relatively small and the minimum length required to achieve forward cou-

pling (at a target frequency) is relatively large. Therefore, it is generally more convenient

to exploit the difference in the characteristic impedance of the eigenmodes to realize low-

coupling backward directional couplers [33, 36]. With coupled superconducting nanowires,

the combination of high-kinetic inductance lines, high coupling capacitance, and low loss

boosts вҲҶОІ вҲқ вҲҡLkC
пҝҪ

1 + 2E/C and allows forward coupling in a small footprint (lПҖ is rela-

tively small). Moreover, backward reflections can be minimized by gradually tapering the

exits from the coupled-line section (Fig. 1(a)(iv)). See Supplemental Material (SM) for the

full derivation of the model.

To practically illustrate this concept, we consider the side-coupled stripline implementa-

tion, shown in Fig. 1(b)(ii), which we used to realize our device. The lines are made of a

300 nm-wide, 7 nm-thick NbN nanowire with a sheet kinetic inductivity of Lk = 80 pH per

square, separated by a 200 nm wide gap. The structures are patterned on silicon and refer-

enced to a 60 nm topside gold ground plane through a 450 nm thick hydrogen silsequioxane

(HSQ) dielectric layer, with Оөr = 2.9 [37, 38]. In this microwave environment, the simulated

characteristic impedance is Z0 = 1446 в„Ұ and the effective index neff = 54.5, which reduces

the phase velocity to 1.8% of c and highly compresses the guided wavelength. See SM for

details on the simulations. For clarity, the port naming convention is shown in Fig. 1(b).

Fig. 1(c) shows that a 5 GHz signal injected through the input port of the coupling section

takes lПҖ/2 = ПҖ/ (2вҲҶОІ) = 539 Вөm to forward couple 50% of the power to the other branch.

Compared to the same structure realized with conventional conductors [39], this coupling

section achieves almost two orders of magnitude footprint reduction (see SM).

The device was fabricated with parameters based on the modeling results. See SM for

details on the fabrication. Fig. 1(a) shows micrographs of the device before the fabrication

of the dielectric spacer and the top ground. In the final design we used a coupling length

l = 520 Вөm and we included four 2.5 GHz high-pass Klopfenstein impedance-matching ta-

pers (Fig. 1(a)(iii)) [38, 40вҖ“43]. Coplanar waveguide (CPW) signal feed lines (60 nm gold)

were also fabricated to allow wire-bonding and packaging. The footprint of the full super-

conducting structure (as outlined in Fig. 1(a)(ii)) was 1.75 mm2, while the high-impedance

5


FIG. 2. Microwave response of the microwave directional forward coupler. (a) Analytical mod-

eling of the coupling section (without taper) and simulation of the impedance-matched coupler.

Above 3 GHz the curves match, showing that the impedance-matching taper, interfacing the high-

impedance coupling section to the 50 в„Ұ RF electronics, does not disturb the coupling operation.

(b) Measured microwave response of the fabricated device at 1.3 K. We compare the data to simu-

lation, corrected for fabrication non-idealities, and including normal conductor losses from the Au

ground plane and CPW feedlines. The balanced forward coupling is observed at 4.753 GHz.

coupling section only occupied 416 Вөm2.

The addition of the tapers, while increasing the total footprint of the device, improves

flexibility, affording the possibility to interface the high-impedance coupling section to lower-

impedance environments without disturbing the forward coupling operation. In this case we

interfaced the high-impedance nanowire transmission line coupler to 50 в„Ұ RF electronics.

Fig. 2(a) shows that, in the taper passband (f вүҘ 3 GHz), the simulation results (full wave)

of the impedance-matched coupler correctly reproduce the analytic calculation of the high-

impedance coupling section response.
The 50% coupling point is at 4.99 GHz, with the

isolation parameter at вҲ’21.9 dB. See SM for details on the simulations.

We measured the microwave response of the fabricated coupler at 1.3 K with a vec-

tor network analyzer providing effective signal power lower than вҲ’60 dBm. In the same

cooldown, we calibrated the cable and connector loss (cryostat to device box inputs/outputs)

to scale the measured data. Fig. 2(b) shows that the forward coupling behavior is observed.

At 4.753 GHz, the input signal from Port 1 couples equally to the through port (Port 2)

6


and forward-coupling port (Port 4) with a level of вҲ’6.7 dB, and the isolation parameter

S31 = вҲ’13.5 dB. For comparison, we show simulations of the impedance-matched coupler,

including the response of the feed lines, and corrected to account for fabrication non-idealities

(see SM for additional details). The slight discrepancy (вүҲ 500 MHz) between the measured

and simulated coupling frequency can be attributed to the uncertainties in the device param-

eters. For example, the fabrication process, consisting of several lithographic and etching

steps, may induce a degradation of the film leading to an increase in the kinetic inductance

that would explain this observation. We attribute the inconsistency in the magnitude of

the S parameters to backward reflections, device-level conductor losses, and to additional

contributions that were not accounted for in the calibration. In this experiment, the cal-

ibration does not account for losses and reflection from the sample holder PCB and wire

bonds. The agreement with the simulation improves when we include normal conductor

losses for the Au layers. More details can be found in the SM. The isolation parameter is

at a significantly different level from the expected value. This discrepancy might be caused

by factors such as the impedance-matching taper deviating from the prescribed design, with

sub-optimal impedance matching and additional backward reflections, and the specific full

device simulation not including element-to-element transitions (e.g. stripline to CPW). See

SM for additional details.

The microwave response was characterized with effective injected currents much smaller

than the device depairing current Id (see SM). In this small-signal condition the device

response is independent of the applied microwave power. However, the kinetic inductance

strongly depends on carrier density, which can be tuned with current (Ib) and with tem-

perature (T): Lk = Lk(xвҖІ = Ib/Isw, t = T/Tc), where Isw is the switching current and Tc

is the critical temperature. Leveraging these dependencies affords the possibility of dynam-

ically modulating the microwave characteristics of the modes in the lines, creating active,

tunable devices. When the bias current in the nanowire approaches the depairing current

(x вҶ’ 1), the kinetic inductance diverges hyperbolically Lk(x) вҲқ (1 вҲ’ xОұ)вҲ’1/Оұ, with Оұ de-

termined by the operating temperature of the device [44]. Due to fabrication imperfections,

superconducting nanowire devices similar to the ones described in this paper typically can

only reach a fraction of the depairing current, with the switching current Isw вүҲ 70% Id [45].

Fig. 3(a) shows that with this assumption and given the measurement condition (Оұ = 2.27)

[44], a 30% theoretical maximum increment of the kinetic inductance might be expected.

7


FIG. 3. Non-linear dependence of the kinetic inductance Lk(xвҖІ = Ib/Isw, t = T/Tc) and coupler

response tunability at = 4.75 GHz with bias current and temperature. (a) Kinetic inductanceвҖҷs

dependence on current, for Isw/Id = 0.7, according to the fast relaxation model with Оұ = 2.27. (b)

Tunability of the transmission (S21) and coupling (S41) response as a function of the current (nor-

malized by Isw) supplied through the isolation port. The measured data (symbols) well match our

analytical model (lines) based on coupled-mode formulation with current-dependent kinetic induc-

tance. (c) Kinetic inductanceвҖҷs dependence on temperature calculated from the explicit solution of

the temperature dependence of the superconducting gap вҲҶ(T), with N(0)V = 0.32 and Tc = 8 K

(see SM). (d) Modulation of transmission and coupling parameters, as a function of the cryostat

temperature (normalized by Tc). The measured data (symbols) match our analytical model (lines)

based on the coupled-mode formulation with temperature-dependent kinetic inductance.

In the coupled-line architecture the two nanowires are galvanically isolated. Hence, the ki-

netic inductance of each nanowire can be tuned independently. We characterized the device

tunability at 4.75 GHz by biasing the coupler through the isolation port and measuring the

coupled and transmitted powers. Fig. 3(b) shows the change of scattering parameters вҲҶS

with the applied current, in agreement with analytical modeling. The increase of kinetic

inductance increases S41 and reduces S21 at the original equal-coupling frequency, which in

turn shifts the 50:50 coupling point to a lower frequency (see SM).

When changing the operating temperature, a much wider variation of the kinetic in-

8


ductance, and hence of the scattering parameters, can be achieved. Fig. 3(c) shows the

expected theoretical temperature dependence of the kinetic inductance obtained through

numerical calculation of the superconducting gap, and the corresponding kinetic inductance

Lk(T) вҲқ [вҲҶ(T) tanh (вҲҶ(T)/T)]вҲ’1 [46, 47], using characteristic values for NbN [48].
We

characterized the coupling tunability by varying the base temperature of the cryostat and

measuring the S21 and S41, at 4.75 GHz. With this measurement setup, the variation of

the temperature modulates the kinetic inductance of both the nanowires. Fig. 3(d) shows

tunability of the parameters with temperature and is in fair agreement with the model. The

observed discrepancies with the theoretical curves are attributed to the uncertainty in the

modeling parameters used for the calculation of вҲҶ(T). Moreover, as the calculation only in-

cludes the coupling section, the impact of other elements of the device (e.g. tapers) was not

captured. Note that when the kinetic inductance is far from the design value, the microwave

characteristics of the taper can significantly diverge from the intended behavior.

The device presented in this work achieves 50:50 forward coupling in a dramatically re-

duced footprint by exploiting the properties of high-inductance superconducting nanowire

transmission lines. The coupling section, as configured here, occupies only 416 Вөm2 and can

be integrated as-is in high-impedance environment circuits with Z0 вүҲ 1.5 kв„Ұ. Moreover,

as the characteristic-impedance depends strongly on the device geometry, the device can

be matched to a wide variety of high-impedance environments by redesigning the coupling

sectionвҖҷs width and length, while keeping a small footprint. As mentioned above, the possi-

bility of performing impedance matching using tapered structures allows one to interface the

directional coupler to lower-impedance environment as well. The total occupied footprint,

even including the tapers, is still lower than other conventional normal-conductor coupler

designs, such as hybrid, Lange, or parallel lines [33], which require вүҲ 10 mm2. Additional

footprint reduction may be achieved by optimizing the packing of current layouts, or by

using a higher effective-index transmission-line architecture [41]. Alternatively, a broadside-

coupler architecture might be realized allowing an increase of the capacitive coupling and a

further reduction of the coupling length (SM).

The model developed to support the design of the device is in agreement with the mea-

sured response. The disagreement with the measured data, observed in the magnitude of

the scattering parameters, are partially due to backward reflections and to device-level losses

which are not accounted for in the system calibration. The effects induced by the use of

9


normal conductors (feed lines and ground plane) or lossy dielectrics can be addressed by

redesigning the material stack and adapting the layout. The device model also does not in-

clude the power-dependent non-linear effects that might play an additional role when driving

the coupler in the highly non-linear kinetic-inductance regime. This could contribute to the

discrepancies observed when testing the coupler for t вҶ’ 1, where t is the reduced tempera-

ture. The study of the non-linearities in high-kinetic-inductance transmission lines is beyond

the scope of this paper.

The tunability of the coupling parameters opens up the opportunity for the realization

of high-impedance tunable microwave devices. For example, a high-impedance single-pole

double-throw non-linear switch could be realized based on this coupler architecture. Simi-

larly, tunability with temperature may become practical if a heater element is fabricated in

close proximity to the coupling section.

We suggest this device may find application in existing superconducting quantum archi-

tectures, where the integration of superconducting nanowires, in the form of superinductors,

has already been demonstrated [28, 29, 49]. A high-impedance cryogenic tunable coupler

could be used for tunable qubit-qubit coupling [50], on-chip integration of novel readout

techniques [51], and on-chip signal processing and multiplexing, drastically reducing the

necessary wiring from couplers and splitter on the higher temperature stage to the processor

at mK. In the effort to scale the size of single-photon detectors arrays, this device could be

used to implement architectures based on frequency-multiplexing readout [52, 53]. Further

development of this nanowire-based technology may lead to the realization of a family of

ultra-compact microwave devices that form the basis of a new superconducting nanowire

monolithic microwave integrated circuit technology.

See Supplemental Material for more details on modeling, simulation, fabrication and

measurements.
All files related to a published paper are stored as a single deposit and

assigned a Supplemental Material URL. This URL appears in the articleвҖҷs reference list.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank K. OвҖҷBrien, K. Peng, M. Naghiloo for helpful discussions. We thank E. Toomey,

J. Simonaitis, and M. Bionta for critical reading of the manuscript. Support for this work

was provided in part by the National Science Foundation grants under contract No. ECCS-

10


2000743 and ECCS-2000778 (UNF), and by the Army Research Office (ARO) under Cooper-

ative Agreement Number W911NF-16-2-0192. The views and conclusions contained in this

document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official

policies, either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Office or the U.S. Government.

The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government

purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein.
Di Zhu was supported by the

National Science Scholarship from A*STAR, Singapore, and Harvard Quantum Initiative

Postdoctoral Fellowship.

[1] A. Blais, S. M. Girvin, and W. D. Oliver, Quantum information processing and quantum

optics with circuit quantum electrodynamics, Nat. Phys. 16, 247 (2020).

[2] F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin, R. Barends, R. Biswas, S. Boixo, F. G.

Brandao, D. A. Buell, et al., Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting

processor. Nature 574, 505вҖ“510 (2019), Nature 574, 505 (2019).

[3] J. M. Gambetta, J. M. Chow, and M. Steffen, Building logical qubits in a superconducting

quantum computing system, npj Quantum Inf. 3, 1 (2017), arXiv:1510.04375.

[4] I. Holzman and Y. Ivry, Superconducting Nanowires for Single-Photon Detection: Progress,

Challenges, and Opportunities, Adv. Quantum Technol. 2, 1800058 (2019).

[5] R. Fagaly, Superconducting quantum interference device instruments and applications, Review

of Scientific Instruments 77, 101101 (2006).

[6] M. Buchner, K. HВЁofler, B. Henne, V. Ney, and A. Ney, Tutorial: Basic principles, limits

of detection, and pitfalls of highly sensitive SQUID magnetometry for nanomagnetism and

spintronics, J. Appl. Phys. 124, 161101 (2018).

[7] J. Zmuidzinas, Superconducting microresonators: Physics and applications, Annu. Rev. Con-

dens. Matter Phys. 3, 169 (2012).

[8] S. McHugh, B. A. Mazin, B. Serfass, S. Meeker, K. OвҖҷBrien, R. Duan, R. Raffanti, and

D. Werthimer, A readout for large arrays of microwave kinetic inductance detectors, Rev. Sci.

Instrum. 83, 44702 (2012), arXiv:1203.5861.

[9] J. C. Bardin, E. Jeffrey, E. Lucero, T. Huang, O. Naaman, R. Barends, T. White, M. Giustina,

D. Sank, P. Roushan, K. Arya, B. Chiaro, J. Kelly, J. Chen, B. Burkett, Y. Chen,

11


A. Dunsworth, A. Fowler, B. Foxen, C. Gidney, R. Graff, P. Klimov, J. Mutus, M. McEwen,

A. Megrant, M. Neeley, C. Neill, C. Quintana, A. Vainsencher, H. Neven, and J. Martinis, A

28nm Bulk-CMOS 4-to-8GHz 2mW Cryogenic Pulse Modulator for Scalable Quantum Com-

puting, in Dig. Tech. Pap. - IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., Vol. 2019-February (IEEE,

2019) pp. 456вҖ“458, arXiv:1902.10864.

[10] B. Patra, R. M. Incandela, J. P. Van Dijk, H. A. Homulle, L. Song, M. Shahmohammadi,

R. B. Staszewski, A. Vladimirescu, M. Babaie, F. Sebastiano, and E. Charbon, Cryo-CMOS

Circuits and Systems for Quantum Computing Applications, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 53,

309 (2018).

[11] J. M. Hornibrook, J. I. Colless, I. D. Conway Lamb, S. J. Pauka, H. Lu, A. C. Gossard, J. D.

Watson, G. C. Gardner, S. Fallahi, M. J. Manfra, and D. J. Reilly, Cryogenic control architec-

ture for large-scale quantum computing, Phys. Rev. Appl. 3, 24010 (2015), arXiv:1409.2202.

[12] P. Borodulin, N. El-Hinnawy, A. L. Graninger, M. R. King, C. R. Padilla, L. N. Upton, R. T.

Hinkey, T. E. Schlesinger, A. A. Pesetski, M. E. Sherwin, and R. M. Young, Operation of a

Latching, Low-Loss, Wideband Microwave Phase-Change Switch Below 1 K, J. Low Temp.

Phys. 194, 273 (2019).

[13] A. Ruffino, Y. Peng, F. Sebastiano, M. Babaie, and E. Charbon, A 6.5-ghz cryogenic all-pass

filter circulator in 40-nm cmos for quantum computing applications, in 2019 IEEE Radio

Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium (RFIC) (IEEE, 2019) pp. 107вҖ“110.

[14] M. Pechal, J. C. Besse, M. Mondal, M. Oppliger, S. Gasparinetti, and A. Wallraff, Supercon-

ducting Switch for Fast On-Chip Routing of Quantum Microwave Fields, Phys. Rev. Appl. 6,

24009 (2016).

[15] H. S. Ku, F. Mallet, L. R. Vale, K. D. Irwin, S. E. Russek, G. C. Hilton, and K. W. Lehnert,

Design and testing of superconducting microwave passive components for quantum information

processing, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 21, 452 (2011), arXiv:1010.3232.

[16] E. Leonard, M. A. Beck, J. Nelson, B. G. Christensen, T. Thorbeck, C. Howington, A. Oprem-

cak, I. V. Pechenezhskiy, K. Dodge, N. P. Dupuis, M. D. Hutchings, J. Ku, F. Schlenker, J. Sut-

tle, C. Wilen, S. Zhu, M. G. Vavilov, B. L. Plourde, and R. McDermott, Digital Coherent

Control of a Superconducting Qubit, Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 14009 (2019), arXiv:1806.07930.

[17] G. Brummer, R. Rafique, and T. A. Ohki, Phase and amplitude modulator for microwave

pulse generation, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 21, 583 (2011).

12


[18] B. J. Chapman, B. A. Moores, E. I. Rosenthal, J. Kerckhoff, and K. W. Lehnert, General

purpose multiplexing device for cryogenic microwave systems, Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 222602

(2016), arXiv:1603.02716.

[19] O. Naaman, J. A. Strong, D. G. Ferguson, J. Egan, N. Bailey, and R. T. Hinkey, Joseph-

son junction microwave modulators for qubit control, J. Appl. Phys. 121, 73904 (2017),

arXiv:1610.07987.

[20] O. Naaman, M. O. Abutaleb, C. Kirby, and M. Rennie, On-chip Josephson junction microwave

switch, Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 112601 (2016), arXiv:1512.01484.

[21] B. Abdo, M. Brink, and J. M. Chow, Gyrator Operation Using Josephson Mixers, Phys. Rev.

Appl. 8, 34009 (2017), arXiv:1702.01149.

[22] P. J. Lowell, J. A. Mates, W. B. Doriese, G. C. Hilton, K. M. Morgan, D. S. Swetz, J. N.

Ullom, and D. R. Schmidt, A thin-film cryotron suitable for use as an ultra-low-temperature

switch, Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 142601 (2016).

[23] A. Wagner, L. Ranzani, G. Ribeill, and T. A. Ohki, Demonstration of a superconducting

nanowire microwave switch, Appl. Phys. Lett. 115, 172602 (2019), arXiv:1910.09614.

[24] N. A. Masluk, I. M. Pop, A. Kamal, Z. K. Minev, and M. H. Devoret, Microwave characteriza-

tion of josephson junction arrays: Implementing a low loss superinductance, Phys. Rev. Lett.

109, 137002 (2012).

[25] P. Groszkowski, A. D. Paolo, A. L. Grimsmo, A. Blais, D. I. Schuster, A. A. Houck, and

J. Koch, Coherence properties of the 0-ПҖ qubit, New J. Phys. 20, 43053 (2018).

[26] M. Kjaergaard, M. E. Schwartz, J. BraumВЁuller, P. Krantz, J. I.-J. Wang, S. Gustavsson, and

W. D. Oliver, Superconducting qubits: Current state of play, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter

Phys. 11 (2019).

[27] L. GrВЁunhaupt, M. Spiecker, D. Gusenkova, N. Maleeva, S. T. Skacel, I. Takmakov, F. Valenti,

P. Winkel, H. Rotzinger, W. Wernsdorfer, A. V. Ustinov, and I. M. Pop, Granular aluminium

as a superconducting material for high-impedance quantum circuits, Nat. Mater. 18, 816

(2019), arXiv:1809.10646.

[28] T. M. Hazard, A. Gyenis, A. Di Paolo, A. T. Asfaw, S. A. Lyon, A. Blais, and A. A.

Houck, Nanowire Superinductance Fluxonium Qubit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 10504 (2019),

arXiv:1805.00938.

[29] D. Niepce, J. Burnett, and J. Bylander, High kinetic inductance nbn nanowire superinductors,

13


Physical Review Applied 11, 044014 (2019).

[30] X. Gu, A. F. Kockum, A. Miranowicz, Y. xi Liu, and F. Nori, Microwave photonics with

superconducting quantum circuits, Phys. Rep. 718-719, 1 (2017), arXiv:1707.02046.

[31] S. Krinner, S. Storz, P. Kurpiers, P. Magnard, J. Heinsoo, R. Keller, J. LВЁutolf, C. Eichler, and

A. Wallraff, Engineering cryogenic setups for 100-qubit scale superconducting circuit systems,

EPJ Quantum Technol. 6, 2 (2019), arXiv:1806.07862.

[32] K. C. Gupta, R. Garg, I. Bahl, and P. Bhartia, Microstrip Lines and Slotlines (Second Edition)

(Artech house, 1996).

[33] D. M Pozar, Microwave Engineering, 3rd (2005).

[34] R. Crampagne, L. Jinich, and G. Khoo, Asymmetric coupled lines in an inhomogeneous

medium, Electron. Lett. 12, 629 (1976).

[35] D. Zhu, Microwave Engineering in Superconducting Nanowires for Single-Photon Detection,

Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2019).

[36] M. Morgan and S. Weinreb, Octave-bandwidth high-directivity microstrip codirectional cou-

plers, in IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., Vol. 2 (IEEE, 2003) pp. 1227вҖ“1230.

[37] G. Maier, Low dielectric constant polymers for microelectronics (2001).

[38] D. Zhu, Q. Y. Zhao, H. Choi, T. J. Lu, A. E. Dane, D. Englund, and K. K. Berggren, A scalable

multi-photon coincidence detector based on superconducting nanowires, Nat. Nanotechnol. 13,

596 (2018), arXiv:1711.10546.

[39] P. K. IkВЁalВЁainen and G. L. Matthaei, Wideband, forward-coupling microstrip hybrids with high

directivity, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 35, 719 (1987).

[40] R. W. Klopfenstein, A Transmission Line Taper of Improved Design, Proc. IRE 44, 31 (1956).

[41] D. Zhu, M. Colangelo, B. A. Korzh, Q. Y. Zhao, S. Frasca, A. E. Dane, A. E. Velasco,

A. D. Beyer, J. P. Allmaras, E. Ramirez, W. J. Strickland, D. F. Santavicca, M. D. Shaw, and

K. K. Berggren, Superconducting nanowire single-photon detector with integrated impedance-

matching taper, Appl. Phys. Lett. 114, 42601 (2019), arXiv:1811.03991.

[42] Q. Y. Zhao, D. Zhu, N. Calandri, A. E. Dane, A. N. McCaughan, F. Bellei, H. Z. Wang, D. F.

Santavicca, and K. K. Berggren, Single-photon imager based on a superconducting nanowire

delay line, Nat. Photonics 11, 247 (2017).

[43] D. Zhu, M. Colangelo, C. Chen, B. A. Korzh, F. N. Wong, M. D. Shaw, and K. K. Berggren,

Resolving photon numbers using a superconducting nanowire with impedance-matching taper,

14


Nano Lett. 20, 3858 (2020).

[44] J. R. Clem and V. G. Kogan, Kinetic impedance and depairing in thin and narrow su-

perconducting films, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 86, 174521 (2012),

arXiv:1207.6421.

[45] S. Frasca, B. Korzh, M. Colangelo, D. Zhu, A. E. Lita, J. P. Allmaras, E. E. Wollman, V. B.

Verma, A. E. Dane, E. Ramirez, A. D. Beyer, S. W. Nam, A. G. Kozorezov, M. D. Shaw, and

K. K. Berggren, Determining the depairing current in superconducting nanowire single-photon

detectors, Phys. Rev. B 100, 54520 (2019), arXiv:1904.08596.

[46] D. F. Santavicca, J. K. Adams, L. E. Grant, A. N. McCaughan, and K. K. Berggren, Microwave

dynamics of high aspect ratio superconducting nanowires studied using self-resonance, J. Appl.

Phys. 119, 234302 (2016).

[47] J. C. Gallop, SQUIDs, Josephson Eff. Supercond. Electron. (Courier Corporation, 2018) pp.

1вҖ“21.

[48] T. Polakovic, S. Lendinez, J. E. Pearson, A. Hoffmann, V. Yefremenko, C. L. Chang, W. Arm-

strong, K. Hafidi, G. Karapetrov, and V. Novosad, Room temperature deposition of supercon-

ducting niobium nitride films by ion beam assisted sputtering, APL Mater. 6, 76107 (2018),

arXiv:1803.02417.

[49] J. Ku, V. Manucharyan, and A. Bezryadin, Superconducting nanowires as nonlinear inductive

elements for qubits, Physical Review B 82, 134518 (2010).

[50] P. Krantz, M. Kjaergaard, F. Yan, T. P. Orlando, S. Gustavsson, and W. D. Oliver, A

quantum engineerвҖҷs guide to superconducting qubits, Appl. Phys. Rev. 6, 21318 (2019),

arXiv:1904.06560.

[51] B. Abdo, N. T. Bronn, O. Jinka, S. Olivadese, A. D. CВҙorcoles, V. P. Adiga, M. Brink, R. E.

Lake, X. Wu, D. P. Pappas, and J. M. Chow, Active protection of a superconducting qubit

with an interferometric Josephson isolator, Nat. Commun. 10, 1 (2019), arXiv:1810.07234.

[52] S. Doerner, A. Kuzmin, S. Wuensch, I. Charaev, F. Boes, T. Zwick, and M. Siegel, Frequency-

multiplexed bias and readout of a 16-pixel superconducting nanowire single-photon detector

array, Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 32603 (2017).

[53] A. K. Sinclair, E. Schroeder, D. Zhu, M. Colangelo, J. Glasby, P. D. Mauskopf, H. Mani, and

K. K. Berggren, Demonstration of Microwave Multiplexed Readout of DC-Biased Supercon-

ducting Nanowire Detectors, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 29, 1 (2019), arXiv:1905.06880.

15


Supplemental Materials: A compact and tunable forward coupler

based on high-impedance superconducting nanowires

Marco Colangelo,1, вҲ— Di Zhu,1, 2, вҲ— Daniel F. Santavicca,3 Brenden

A. Butters,1 Joshua C. Bienfang,4 and Karl K. Berggren1, вҖ 

1Research Laboratory of Electronics,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology,

Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA

2John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Science,

Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA

3Department of Physics, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA

4National Institute of Standards and Technology,

Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA

1

arXiv:2011.11406v1  [physics.app-ph]  23 Nov 2020


CONTENTS

I. Analytic model
3

II. Microwave Simulation and Design
6

A. Generalities
6

B. Single nanowire microstrip
7

C. Coupled nanowire microstrip lines
7

D. Simulation of the full device
7

E. Design of the impedance-matching taper
8

F. Parallel line coupler with asymmetric dielectrics
9

G. Qualitative simulation of a broadside coupler architecture
10

III. Measurement setups, calibration and characterization
12

A. Estimation of Isw and Tc
12

B. Measurement setups for microwave characterization
13

C. Calibration and raw traces
13

D. Coupler phase
14

E. Taper characterization
15

IV. Fabrication process
16

V. Current in the nanowire
18

VI. Kinetic inductance non-linearities
18

References
20

вҲ— These two authors contributed equally

вҖ  berggren@mit.edu

2


I.
ANALYTIC MODEL

In this section we describe the analytical modeling of the nanowire coupler, originally

presented in [1]. It is based on a coupled-mode formalism [2, 3] adapted to explicitly include

the kinetic contribution to the total line inductance.

We consider here the schematic shown in the main text in Fig. 1(b). The inductance per

unit length (p.u.l.) of each line has been separated into two components La,b = LFa,Fb+Lka,kb,

which are the geometric (Faraday) and kinetic inductance contributions, respectively. M

and E are the p.u.l. mutual inductance and coupling capacitance between the two lines. Ca,b

are the p.u.l. self-capacitances, corrected for the fringing field component [4]. We can write

the coupled telegrapherвҖҷs equations:

вҲ’вҲӮz

пЈ®

пЈ°ia

ib

пЈ№

пЈ» =

пЈ®

пЈ°Ca + E
вҲ’E

вҲ’E
Cb + E

пЈ№

пЈ» вҲӮt

пЈ®

пЈ°va

vb

пЈ№

пЈ»
(1a)

вҲ’вҲӮz

пЈ®

пЈ°va

vb

пЈ№

пЈ» =

пЈ®

пЈ°La + M
вҲ’M

вҲ’M
Lb + M

пЈ№

пЈ» вҲӮt

пЈ®

пЈ°ia

ib

пЈ№

пЈ» .
(1b)

Taking the partial derivative with respect to z of Eq. (1b) and substituting in Eq. (1a) we

have:

вҲӮ2
z

пЈ®

пЈ°va

vb

пЈ№

пЈ» =

пЈ®

пЈ°Оұa Оіa

Оіb Оұb

пЈ№

пЈ» вҲӮ2
t

пЈ®

пЈ°va

vb

пЈ№

пЈ»
(2)

with

Оұa = (La + M)(Ca + E) + ME
(3)

Оіa = вҲ’E(La + M) вҲ’ M(Cb + E)
(4)

Оұb = (Lb + M)(Cb + E) + EM
(5)

Оіb = вҲ’M(Ca + E) вҲ’ E(Lb + M).
(6)

When two transmission lines are brought in close proximity, their coupling produces mode

splitting into common (c) and differential (ПҖ) modes, having different effective indices and

propagation constants. Assuming the voltages in the two lines va,b(z, t) propagate in the

form of va,b = Va,bejПүtвҲ’jОІz for the eigenmodes, we can solve the dispersion relation

ОІ2
c,ПҖ
Пү2 = (Оұa + Оұb) Вұ
пҝҪ

(Оұa вҲ’ Оұb)2 + 4ОіaОіb

2
,
(7)

3


and for the two eigenmodes, the voltage ratios on the two lines are

Rc,ПҖ = vb

va
= Оұb вҲ’ Оұa Вұ
пҝҪ

(Оұa вҲ’ Оұb)2 + 4ОіaОіb
2Оіa
.
(8)

We now derive the general solution for the voltages on the lines in terms of forward and

backward propagating waves for the c and ПҖ modes:

Va(z) =A1eвҲ’jОІcz + A2ejОІcz+

A3eвҲ’jОІПҖz + A4ejОІПҖz
(9)

Vb(z) =A1RceвҲ’jОІcz + A2RcejОІcz+

A3RПҖeвҲ’jОІПҖz + A4RПҖejОІПҖz.
(10)

The currents on the line can be obtained by substituting Eq.9 and Eq.10 in Eq.1b:

Ia(z) = A1

Zc,a
eвҲ’jОІcz вҲ’ A2

Zc,a
ejОІcz+

A3
ZПҖ,a
eвҲ’jОІПҖz вҲ’ A4

ZПҖ,a
ejОІПҖz
(11)

Ib(z) =RcA1

Zc,b
eвҲ’jОІcz вҲ’ RcA2

Zc,b
ejОІcz+

RПҖA3
ZПҖ,b
eвҲ’jОІПҖz вҲ’ RПҖA4

ZПҖ,b
ejОІПҖz
(12)

where Zc,a,b and ZПҖ,a,b denotes the common and differential mode impedances [3].

Zc,a = Пү

ОІc

(La + M) (Lb + M) вҲ’ M2

Lb + M + MRc
(13)

Zc,b = RcПү

ОІc

(La + M) (Lb + M) вҲ’ M2

(La + M) Rc + M
(14)

ZПҖ,a = Пү

ОІПҖ

(La + M) (Lb + M) вҲ’ M2

Lb + M + MRПҖ
(15)

ZПҖ,b = RПҖПү

ОІc

(La + M) (Lb + M) вҲ’ M2

(La + M) RПҖ + M
.
(16)

Finally, the port voltages can be evaluated by applying the following boundary conditions:

[VIN вҲ’ Va(z = вҲ’l)]/ZLa = Ia(z = вҲ’l)
(17)

вҲ’Vb(z = вҲ’l)/ZLb = Ib(z = вҲ’l)
(18)

Va(z = 0)/ZLa = Ia(z = 0)
(19)

Vb(z = 0)]/ZLb = Ia(z = 0)
(20)

4


where VIN is the input voltage at port 1 and ZLb and ZLa are the load impedances.

For a symmetric coupler, La = Lb = L and Ca = Cb = C. Moreover, we assume M/L вүӘ 1,

and the propagation constants reduce to

ОІc = Пү
вҲҡ

LC
(21)

ОІПҖ = Пү
вҲҡ

LC

пҝҪ

1 + 2E

C + 2M

L
+ 4ME

LC

вүҲ Пү
вҲҡ

LC
пҝҪ

1 + 2E/C
(22)

and similarly, the impedances for the c and ПҖ modes

Zc =

пҝҪ

L
C
(23)

ZПҖ =

пҝҪ

L
C

пҝҪ

1 + 2E

C + 2M

L + 4ME

LC

1 + 2E/C

вүҲ

пҝҪ

L
C
1
пҝҪ

1 + 2E/C
.

(24)

A signal injected through the input port is a superposition of the two modes and the energy

propagates through the coupled structures, shuttling between the two lines with a periodicity

lПҖ = ПҖ/вҲҶОІ. Here

вҲҶОІ = ОІПҖ вҲ’ ОІc вүҲ Пү
вҲҡ

LC
пҝҪпҝҪ

1 + E/C вҲ’ 1
пҝҪ
.
(25)

From Eq. 25, the minimum length required for 50:50 forward coupling is

lПҖ/2,sc = ПҖ

2
1
вҲҶОІ вүҲ О»c

4
1
пҝҪ

1 + E/C вҲ’ 1
,
(26)

where О»c is the guided wavelength for the common mode. Note that in the high-inductance

regime, the coupling is mostly determined by the kinetic inductance and the capacitance

terms.

In Fig. 1 we show the calculation for a symmetric coupling section (Fig. 1(a)). A 5 GHz

input signal (VIN) injected into Port 1 of a side-coupled stripline with thin-film supercon-

ductors (Lk = 80 pH per square) takes 539 Вөm to couple 50% of the power to the coupled

branch (Fig. 1(b)). A normal conductor side-coupled stripline architecture can achieve 50:50

forward coupling (Fig. 1(c)), but вүҲ 40 mm coupling length is required. This represents an

almost two-orders-of-magnitude size reduction.

5


V1 

V3

V2

V4

(a)

Оөr = 11.7

Оөr = 2.9
450 nm

PEC

300 nm

200 nm

(ii)

z=-l
z=0

branch b

(b)

(c)

0
20
40
60
80

Coupler length (mm)

0

0.5

1

|V/Vin|2

V1
V2
V3
V4

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1

0

0.5

1

|V/Vin|2

V1
V2
V3
V4

Lk = 0  

Lk= 80 pH/  

branch a

FIG. 1. Analytical model of the coupling section. (a) Schematic of the coupling section. The

ground layer was treated in simulation as a perfect electric conductor (PEC) (b) Voltage output

from the coupling section for superconducting microstrip with Lk = 80 pH per square. (c) Voltage

output from the coupling section for normal conductor (Lk = 0).

II.
MICROWAVE SIMULATION AND DESIGN

A.
Generalities

To perform microwave response simulations we used Sonnet EM from SonnetLab 1. Note

that, for simplicity, unless otherwise specified all the normal metal layers have been simu-

lated as perfect electric conductors (PEC). In actual experiments, the metallic ground does

contribute non-negligible losses. This, however, can be minimized by using superconducting

ground planes, such as Al at sub-1K temperature. In Table I we report the general material

parameters used in the simulations.

1 Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper to facilitate under-

standing. Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply

that the materials or equipment that are identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

6


Substrate thick.
500 Вөm

Substrate Пөr
11.7

Dielectric thick Пөr
450 nm

Dielectric Пөr
2.9

Au conductivity 4.09 Г— 107 S/m

Au thick.
60 nm

TABLE I. Material parameters used in the simulations.

B.
Single nanowire microstrip

The material stack and the geometry were set as in Fig.
2(a).
The results for the

characteristic impedance Z0 and phase velocity fraction versus the width of the conductor

for a sheet kinetic inductance Lk = 80 pH per square are shown in Fig. 2(b). Fig. 2(c)

shows the characteristic impedance and effective index for a 320 nm wide microstrip line, for

several values of the kinetic inductance.

C.
Coupled nanowire microstrip lines

The material stack and the geometry were set as in Fig.
3(a).
The results for the

characteristic impedances Z0 and effective indices are shown in Fig. 3(b). We performed

the simulation for several conductor widths w (keeping the gap constant) and gap spacings s

(keeping the width constant), starting from the design values, w = 300 nm and s = 200 nm,

which were selected to minimize challenges in the fabrication. The sheet kinetic inductance

was Lk = 80 pH per square.

D.
Simulation of the full device

The device was simulated as a netlist starting from full simulations of single components:

the 4 port coupler, the 2 port taper, and the coplanar waveguide feedline. This simulation

does not account for specific element-to-element transitions. For example, the transmission

line arcs connecting the 4 port coupler with each taper or the transition between the mi-

7


FIG. 2. Single nanowire microstrip simulation setup and result. (a) Stack and geometry setup as

in Sonnet EM. (b) Characteristic impedance and phase velocity fraction versus conductor width

for a sheet kinetic inductance Lk = 80 pH per square. (c) Characteristic impedance and effective

index for a 320 nm wide microstrip line, as a function of the kinetic inductance.

crostrip architecture to the CPW feed lines are not captured by the simulated layout. As the

isolation and directivity of a parallel line coupler depends on the real geometric layout of the

coupler [5], the simulated value may be inaccurate. This might also explain the significant

discrepancy with the measured isolation.

E.
Design of the impedance-matching taper

We designed a Klopfenstein impedance matching taper following the works in Ref. [6вҖ“8].

The taper transforms the impedance of a transmission line, minimizing reflections. One end

of the taper had a width of 300 nm to match the nanowire transmission line at the coupler

section. The other end of the taper is designed to provide a 50 в„Ұ characteristic impedance

to match the room-temperature testing electronics. For the microwave environment of this

transmission line, 50 в„Ұ is obtained with a width of вүҲ 15 Вөm. The taper had a total length

of вүҲ 1.97 mm in 5214 sections, with вүҲ 1178 squares, for a total inductance of вүҲ 94 nH

8


FIG. 3. Characteristic impedance and effective indices for coupled microstrip lines. (a) Stack and

geometry setup as in Sonnet EM. (b) Characteristic impedance and effective index for the common

and differential mode versus conductor width (with constant gap) or gap (with constant width),

for a sheet kinetic inductance Lk = 80 pH per square.

assuming Lk = 80 pH per square. The cut-off frequency was designed to be fco = 2.5 GHz.

In Fig. 4(a), we show the layout of the taper. In Fig. 4(b), we show the simulation of the

taper. The вҲ’3 dB cutoff frequency is at 2.5 GHz.

F.
Parallel line coupler with asymmetric dielectrics

In printed circuit boards, the performance of topside coupled-microstrip couplers is de-

graded due to asymmetry of the dielectrics (e.g. air/FR4). In this section we assess the

impact of asymmetric dielectrics on our integrated coupler. We simulate the same coupler

architecture described in the main text (Fig. 5(b)) with a symmetric dielectric, replacing

the HSQ layer with intrinsic silicon. The characteristic-impedance of the architecture in Fig.

5(a) resulted as Z0 = 965 в„Ұ. We used this value to terminate each port of the homogeneous-

dielectric coupler. In Fig. 5(c) and (d) we compare the S-parameters of the symmetric

9


FIG. 4. Taper: layout and microwave dynamics simulation. (a) Layout of the designed taper (b)

S parameters simulation of the taper assuming Lk = 80 pH per square.

dielectric coupler (c) with the original asymmetric dielectric coupler (d).
This analysis

shows that apart from frequency shifts, induced by the different microwave environments,

there are no significant differences. This is confirmed by the common and differential mode

profile simulated with finite element modeling (COMSOL). This qualitatively indicates the

absence of effects due to dielectric discontinuities and asymmetry.

G.
Qualitative simulation of a broadside coupler architecture

A broadside coupler architecture, where two nanowires are stacked vertically as shown in

Fig. 6 can be used to increase the coupling capacitance and obtain an even shorter coupling

length. To explore the impact of realizing a broadside coupler using nanowire transmission

lines we simulated the S-parameters of the architecture in Fig. 6, for several values of the

dielectric thickness h1. Other parameters were left unchanged to have minimal variation

compared to the side-coupled nanowire architecture explored in this work. In Table II we

report the value of the 50:50 coupling frequency. While decreasing h1, the 50:50 coupling

frequency also decreases.
As expected, the increase of coupling capacitance reduces the

minimum coupling length (compared to the side-coupled coupler).

10


FIG. 5. Cross section and S-parameters simulation of side-coupled coupler with symmetric dielectric

(a)-(b), and asymmetric dielectric (c)-(d). Apart from a slight shift in the frequency response,

dictated by the different impedance/index environment, there are no significant differences. (e)

and (f) show the simulation of the common and differential modes for the two cases.

FIG. 6. Broadside coupler architecture: cross-section sketch

11


h1
f50:50

50 nm
2.5 GHz

100 nm
3.6 GHz

180 nm
5.2 GHz

TABLE II. Broadside coupler design 50:50 coupling frequency.

III.
MEASUREMENT SETUPS, CALIBRATION AND CHARACTERIZATION

A.
Estimation of Isw and Tc

In Fig. 7(a) we show the (normalized) R vs. T, which we used to characterize the critical

temperature Tc = 8.78 K, taken at 50% of the superconducting transition, and the residual

resistance ratio RRR = 0.8. The characterization was performed in liquid He on a blanket

film from the same wafer used to fabricate the device. The sheet resistance was measured

at room temperature with a four-point probe setup as Rs = 360 в„Ұ per square.

After fabrication we measured the switching current of the coupler device at T = 1.3 K.

For the input/transmission branch (Port 1-2) we measured Isw = 72 ВөA. For the isola-

tion/coupling branch (Port 3-4), Isw = 68 ВөA. The variation in switching current is 4 ВөA

and reflects a slight electrical asymmetry that may be due to fabrication or local imperfec-

tions of the film.

FIG. 7. (a) Characterization of the critical temperature of a bare film from the same wafer used

to fabricate the coupler. (b) Characterization of the switching currents of the coupler branches.

12


B.
Measurement setups for microwave characterization

In this section we discuss the measurement setups used for the microwave characterization.

Fig. 8(a) shows a sketch of the measurement setup used for the characterization of the S

parameters and to perform the cable and connector loss calibration. The packaged device

was cooled down to 1.3 K in a closed-cycle cryostat (ICE Oxford) 2. The input of the coupler

was connected to the Port 1 of the vector network analyzer (VNA) (Keysight N5242A) 2.

The other three ports of the coupler (isolation, transmission and coupling) were connected

to an RF switch at room temperature (MSP4TA-18-12+) 2. The common port of the switch

was connected to the Port 2 of the VNA, through a DC block and a room-temperature

low-noise amplifier (RF Bay LNA-8G) 2. The cables illustrated with same colors are of the

same length and from the same manufacturer. The loss calibration was performed at every

cooldown and consisted of a transmission measurement (S21) of the input and output cable

assembly, connected together; the device was not included. To connect the cables, we used

a barrel female-to-female straight SMA connector, anchored to the 1.3 K stage. Therefore,

the calibration does not account for losses and reflections from the PCB, RF box, and wire

bonds.

Fig. 8(b) shows the measurement setup used for the characterization of the S-parameter

tunability. At the input, the VNA was replaced by a signal generator (Windfreak SynthHD

PRO) 2 and, at the output, by a spectrum analyzer (Aglient N9030A)2. The tuning DC

current was supplied with a current source to the isolation port of the coupler through a

bias tee (ZFBT-6GW+) 2. The temperature of the 1.3 K stage was controlled by a heater.

When measuring the coupling-point tunability with temperature, we allowed for a 5 minute

stabilization time to avoid temperature fluctuation during acquisition.

C.
Calibration and raw traces

In this section we show the calibration data and the measured S parameters before cor-

rection. The calibration included the cables at room temperature, the cables from room

temperature to the devices at 1.3 K, the intermediary connectors, the RF switch, the DC

2 Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper to facilitate under-

standing. Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply

that the materials or equipment that are identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

13


FIG. 8. Measurements setups. (a) Measurement setup used to characterize the microwave response

of the coupler and to perform the loss calibration. (b) Measurement setup used to characterize the

coupling-point tunability.

block, and the LNA.

FIG. 9. Loss calibration data and coupler S parameters before correction.

D.
Coupler phase

We measure the phase of the signals out of the coupler. The phase difference is fixed at

90в—Ұ due to the symmetry of the coupler [5]. This is confirmed by the the analytic model and

14


FIG. 10. (a) Sketch of the PCB used for measurements. (b) Phase shift of the signals at the two

output ports.

the simulation (in the taper passband).

The PCB used for the measurement has asymmetric trace lengths (Fig. 10(a)). In order

to calculate the phase of the signals out of the coupler we need to take into account the

phase shift due to the PCB trace lengths difference. The phase shift вҲҶОё(f) is estimated as

follows

вҲҶОё(f) = 360в—Ұf l1 вҲ’ l2

vph
(27)

where vph = c/n is the phase velocity, n is the effective index of the PCB transmission lines.

When taking into account the PCB phase shift, the phase difference is found to be higher

than 90в—Ұ. The shape of the measured phase resembles the one obtained with the simulation.

Therefore, we attribute this discrepancy to additional unaccounted phase shifts.

E.
Taper characterization

In this section we show the characterization of the impedance-matching taper. In the

main text we argued that the taper, which is indispensable to perform the measurement

with 50 в„Ұ electronics (as in this case), was deviating from the design and could be a source

of added reflection that could degrade the measured performances. In a separate cooldown,

we measured a two-port device consisting of only one of the branches of the coupler. This

device was fabricated in the same run as the coupler and included two CPW microwave

15


FIG. 11.
Characterization of the Taper-Line response and comparison with the corresponding

simulation.

launchers, two impedance-matching tapers and one 520 Вөm long nanowire. We will refer to

this device as Taper-Line, for convenience. In Fig. 11 we show the transmission S21 of the

Taper-Line and a corresponding simulation. Overall, compared to the design, the measured

microwave response was shifted to lower frequency, with a cutoff frequency fco вүҲ 2 GHz. The

magnitude difference and the presence of in-band frequency dependence (the transmission

decreases for higher frequencies) are attributed to device level loss induced by the presence

of normal conductors (Au top ground and CPW lines).

IV.
FABRICATION PROCESS

A вүҲ 7 nm-thick NbN film was sputter deposited [9] on a 2 cm x 2 cm high-resistivity Si

substrate. The room temperature sheet resistance was Rs = 360 в„Ұ per square, the residual

resistance ratio RRR = 0.8 and the critical temperature TC = 8.8 K.

The sheet kinetic inductance at T = 0 K can be estimated as [10] Lk = (в„ҸRs) / (RRRПҖвҲҶ0) вүҲ

70.5 pH per square, where вҲҶ0 is zero-temperature superconducting gap. Film storage and

fabrication process may induce the degradation of the superconducting properties of the

film, resulting in a higher sheet resistance and a lower critical temperature.
For a de-

vice fabricated with a similar NbN film, we recently reported Lk вүҲ 80 pH per square [6],

approximately 10% higher than the theoretical estimation.

We started with the fabrication of 50 в„Ұ coplanar waveguide (CPW) feed lines using direct

16


FIG. 12. Topside ground to feedline ground connection with cross section sketch.

writing photolithography (DWL), followed by gold evaporation and liftoff. We patterned the

nanowire transmission lines and Klopfenstein tapers by aligned negative-tone electron beam

lithography, using ma-N 2401 [11], and we transferred the patterns into the NbN through

reactive ion etching with CF4.
We completed the microstrip structure, by patterning a

450 nm hydrogen silsequioxane (FOx-16) dielectric spacer, having Пөr = 2.9, using a purposely

designed low-contrast electron beam lithography process [12]. Lastly, we fabricated the top

ground, with aligned DWL, followed by gold evaporation and liftoff. The contact between

the topside ground and the feedline ground is achieved by exploting the sloped sidewalls

of the dielectric brick resulting from the low contrast process (Fig. 12). After fabrication,

the width of the lines was 320 nm while physical separation was reduced to 180 nm, due to

proximity effect. The superconducting transition of the fabricated device was observed at

Tc вҲј 8 K, reflecting film degradation during fabrication. Each chip contained 4 coupler dies

and several other test structures. The measurements reported in this paper are all obtained

from one device. The micrographs are from a test structure fabricated with exactly the

same process on the same starting wafer. A die designed for 10 GHz was also fabricated and

tested, with worse performance due to limitations of the testing setup at higher frequencies.

The packaging consisted of a custom made gold-plated copper box with a copper-plated

Rogers 4003 PCB.

17


V.
CURRENT IN THE NANOWIRE

To characterize the microwave response of the coupler, we used a nominal signal power of

вҲ’40 dBm from the room temperature electronics. We estimate that the power at the deviceвҖҷs

input port, after accounting for system attenuation, was less than вҲ’60 dBm. Assuming an

ideal broadband impedance transformer, with perfect matching and transmission, we can

assume the following relation between the voltage applied at the low impedance end, VL,

and the current at the high impedance end IH [6]

IH =
VL
вҲҡZLZH
.
(28)

For ZL = 50 в„Ұ and ZH = 1446 в„Ұ, a вҲ’60 dBm signal converts to a Vpk,ZL = 316.2 ВөV and

Ipk,ZH = 1.2 ВөA. Ipk,ZH is much lower than the switching current of the wire. Therefore, we

assume the influence of kinetic inductance non-linearities to be negligible for these measure-

ments.

VI.
KINETIC INDUCTANCE NON-LINEARITIES

The kinetic inductance strongly depends on carrier density, which can be tuned with a

dc current and with temperature: Lk = Lk(x = Ib/Id, t = T/Tc), where Id is the depairing

current. Note that in the main text we used xвҖІ = Ib/Isw, where Isw is the switching current.

The dependence of the kinetic inductance on current, in the fast relaxation regime [13] for

t = 0.2, can be described to an accuracy of 1%, by

Lk(x, 0.2)
Lk(0, 0.2) =
пҝҪ
1

1 вҲ’ x2.27

пҝҪ
1

2.27
.
(29)

At the base temperature T = 1.3 K the curve at t = 0.2 should be reasonably accurate.

The dependence of the kinetic inductance on temperature is described by [14]

Lk(0, t)
Lk(0, 0) =
вҲҶ(0)

вҲҶ(T) tanh [вҲҶ(T)/ (2kBT)].
(30)

To simplify the calculation in the main text we made the assumption that Lk(0, 0.2) вүҲ

Lk(0, 0). From BCS theory it is possible to derive an integral expression for the supercon-

ducting gap dependence on temperature [10]

1

N(0)V =
пҝҪ в„ҸПүc

0

tanh 1

2ОІ (Оҫ2 + вҲҶ2)1/2

(Оҫ2 + вҲҶ2)1/2
dОҫ
(31)

18


FIG. 13. Result of the calculation of вҲҶ(T) with N(0)V = 0.32 and Tc = 8 K.

where ОІвҲ’1 = kBT (kB is the Boltzmann constant), N(0) is the density of states at Fermi

surface, V is the BCS interaction potential, вҲҶ is the superconducting gap, Пүc is the Debye

frequency, and Оҫ is the energy. This notation is inherited from the BCS pairing Hamiltonian

formulation [10]. We first simplified the integral expression (by using the solution for the

zero-temperature superconducting gap and for the critical temperature) to

1

N(0)V вүҲ
пҝҪ
вҲҶ(0)
вҲҶ(T ) sinh
1

N(0)V

0

tanh 1.76

2
вҲҶ(T)
вҲҶ(0) (1 + О¶2)1/2

(1 + О¶2)1/2
dО¶
(32)

where О¶ = Оҫ/вҲҶ. Then we numerically integrated and solved self-consistently by setting

N(0)V = 0.32 [15, 16]. This value holds for bulk NbN, so we might expect discrepancies

when used for calculation with thin-film NbN, where a correction should be applied. The

result of the calculation is shown in Fig. 13.

The curves shown in Fig. 3 of the main text were obtained by modulating the kinetic

inductance of the line according to Eq. 29 and Eq. 30.

The S parameter tunability data reported in the main text were obtained using the setup

of Fig. 8(b). In Fig. 14 we show the raw data for S21 and S41 with respect to the cryostat

temperature, obtained through a VNA. This measurement shows the direct effect of the

modulation temperature: the 50:50 coupling frequency shifts to lower frequencies while the

19


2
4
6
8
10
Frequency (GHz)

-140

-120

-100

-80

-60

-40

S parameters (dB)

S21
S41

increasing T

T = 1.3K, 1.5 K : 0.5 K : 7.5 K

FIG. 14. S parameters temperature tunability: raw data.

parameters at the original 50:50 coupling frequency get modulated accordingly.

[1] D. Zhu, Microwave Engineering in Superconducting Nanowires for Single-Photon Detection,

Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2019).

[2] K. C. Gupta, R. Garg, I. Bahl, and P. Bhartia, Microstrip Lines and Slotlines (Second Edition)

(Artech house, 1996).

[3] R. Crampagne, L. Jinich, and G. Khoo, Asymmetric coupled lines in an inhomogeneous

medium, Electron. Lett. 12, 629 (1976).

[4] S. S. Bedair, Characteristics of Some Asymmetrical Coupled Transmission Lines, IEEE Trans.

Microw. Theory Tech. 32, 108 (1984).

[5] P. K. IkВЁalВЁainen and G. L. Matthaei, Wideband, forward-coupling microstrip hybrids with high

directivity, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 35, 719 (1987).

[6] D. Zhu, M. Colangelo, B. A. Korzh, Q. Y. Zhao, S. Frasca, A. E. Dane, A. E. Velasco,

A. D. Beyer, J. P. Allmaras, E. Ramirez, W. J. Strickland, D. F. Santavicca, M. D. Shaw, and

K. K. Berggren, Superconducting nanowire single-photon detector with integrated impedance-

matching taper, Appl. Phys. Lett. 114, 42601 (2019), arXiv:1811.03991.

[7] R. W. Klopfenstein, A Transmission Line Taper of Improved Design, Proc. IRE 44, 31 (1956).

[8] D. Zhu, M. Colangelo, C. Chen, B. A. Korzh, F. N. Wong, M. D. Shaw, and K. K. Berggren,

20


Resolving photon numbers using a superconducting nanowire with impedance-matching taper,

Nano Lett. 20, 3858 (2020).

[9] A. E. Dane, A. N. McCaughan, D. Zhu, Q. Zhao, C. S. Kim, N. Calandri, A. Agarwal, F. Bellei,

and K. K. Berggren, Bias sputtered NbN and superconducting nanowire devices, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 111, 122601 (2017).

[10] J. C. Gallop, SQUIDs, Josephson Eff. Supercond. Electron. (Courier Corporation, 2018) pp.

1вҖ“21.

[11] E. Toomey, M. Colangelo, and K. K. Berggren, Investigation of ma-N 2400 series photoresist

as an electron-beam resist for superconducting nanoscale devices, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 37,

051207 (2019).

[12] D. Zhu, Q. Y. Zhao, H. Choi, T. J. Lu, A. E. Dane, D. Englund, and K. K. Berggren, A scalable

multi-photon coincidence detector based on superconducting nanowires, Nat. Nanotechnol. 13,

596 (2018), arXiv:1711.10546.

[13] J. R. Clem and V. G. Kogan, Kinetic impedance and depairing in thin and narrow su-

perconducting films, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 86, 174521 (2012),

arXiv:1207.6421.

[14] D. F. Santavicca, J. K. Adams, L. E. Grant, A. N. McCaughan, and K. K. Berggren, Microwave

dynamics of high aspect ratio superconducting nanowires studied using self-resonance, J. Appl.

Phys. 119, 234302 (2016).

[15] C. Zhang, Y. Wang, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. H. Liu, Q. R. Feng, and Z. Z. Gan, Suppression

of superconductivity in epitaxial MgB2 ultrathin films, J. Appl. Phys. 114, 33908 (2013).

[16] T. Polakovic, S. Lendinez, J. E. Pearson, A. Hoffmann, V. Yefremenko, C. L. Chang, W. Arm-

strong, K. Hafidi, G. Karapetrov, and V. Novosad, Room temperature deposition of supercon-

ducting niobium nitride films by ion beam assisted sputtering, APL Mater. 6, 76107 (2018),

arXiv:1803.02417.

21


