 
1

Remote detection of explosives using Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility 

Spectrometer installed on multicopter 

 

AUTHOR NAMES  

Yury Kostyukevicha,b,c,d, Denis Efremove Vladimir Ionovf Eugene Kukaevd and Eugene 

Nikolaeva,b,c,d  

AUTHOR ADDRESS 

a Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology Novaya St., 100, Skolkovo 143025 Russian 

Federation  

b Institute for Energy Problems of Chemical Physics Russian Academy of Sciences Leninskij pr. 

38 k.2, 119334 Moscow, Russia;  

cEmanuel Institute for Biochemical Physics Russian Academy of Sciences Kosygina st. 4, 

119334 Moscow, Russia.  

d Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 141700 Dolgoprudnyi, Moscow Region, Russia  

e Private educational institution of higher professional education Moscow Technological Institute 

Leninskii prospect 38a, Moscow, 119334 

f “Lavanda-U Limited” 111123, Moscow, shosse Entuziastov, d. 56, p. 27 


 
2

 

KEYWORDS  

FAIMS, Quadrocopter, Mass spectrometry, gas sensors, ecology, forensic, security.  

ABSTRACT  

The detection of explosives and drugs in hard-to-reach places is a considerable challenge. 

We report the development and initial experimental characterization of the air analysis system 

that includes Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometer (FAIMS), array of the semiconductor 

gas sensors and is installed on multicopter. The system was developed based on the 

commercially available DJI Matrix 100 platform. For data collection and communication with 

operator, the special compact computer (Intel Compute Stick) was installed onboard. The total 

weight of the system was 3.3 kg. The system allows the 15 minutes flight and provide the remote 

access to the obtained data. The developed system can be effectively used for the detection of 

impurities in the air, ecology monitoring, detection of chemical warfare agents and explosives, 

what is especially important in light of recent terroristic attacks. The capabilities of the system 

was tested on the several explosives such as trinitrotoluene and nitro powder.   

 

TEXT 

Mass spectrometry is one of the most sensitive and accurate analytical techniques for the 

investigation of the chemical composition of the unknown substance and has found various 

application in the chemistry, forensic science, food and drug monitoring etc. The only 

disadvantage of the mass spectrometer that limits filed use is the weight and power consumption. 


 
3

However, there are many cases when the sample collection and its transfer to the laboratory is 

impossible. For example, the unknown chemical weapon was recently used in Syrian city Khan 

Sheikhoun. This substance could be easily identified by a compact mass spectrometer carried by 

a drone. At the same time, sending troops to collect the sample would inevitably include the 

considerable risk.  

The first installation of the mass spectrometer on the aircraft dates back to the 50-th, 

when Bennett radio frequency mass spectrometers where installed on the sounding rockets and 

artificial satellites and were used for the investigation of the ionic composition of the upper 

atmosphere1-3. Further development of the field resulted in the introduction of more complicated 

aircraft-borne mass spectrometers designed for specific purposes: aerosol mass spectrometers4, 

dust impact mass analyzer5 etc. Currently, all modern scientific spacecraft, such as Phoenix6,   

Rosetta7, 8, Curiosity9, 10 are equipped with several mass spectrometers. Unfortunately, only few 

laboratories can afford the development of the aircraft-borne mass spectrometer and such 

instruments have considerable weight and size, what limits its use in the city.   

Recently a considerable progress has been achieved in the developing of low weight and 

portable mass spectrometers11-14. Miniature ion traps have found application in ecology 

monitoring15, 16, detection of explosives17 and drugs18. Miniature unmanned aircraft-borne mass 

spectrometer was  used for the in-situ volcanic plume analysis19. Considerable successes have 

been made in the area of  miniaturized and chip-based FAIMS20-22. Portable hand-held Ion 

mobility spectrometers (IMS) have been used for dietary supplements screening23, detection of 

drugs, explosives and chemical warfare24, 25.  


 
4

In the present paper we describe our approach for the developing portable, low weight 

aircraft-born measurement system that includes FAIMS and the array of gas sensors. The total 

weight of whole system is 3.3 kg, and the dimensions are 52*52*22 cm. The low cost and 

compact size allow our system being potentially suitable for the ecology monitoring in the cities 

and for the detection of chemical warfare agents.  

METHODS 

The flying vehicle. We have chosen a DJI matrice-100 as an aircraft to carry the measuring 

system. This multirotor unmanned aircraft vehicle (UAV) includes the frame, adapted for the 

mounting of additional custom equipment; the motor assembly able to keep the UAV in the air to 

40 minutes without payload; flight controller with GPS positioning with accuracy of hovering up 

to 2 meters; the control system over the distance of up to 2 km; the onboard telemetry data 

transmission system.  

Gas sensors. The array of the semiconductor gas sensors (DFRobot  company, Shanghai, China ) 

was installed on the UAV. Semiconductor gas sensors measures the changes of the conductivity 

of the thing film after the adsorption of the target gas26. Such devises are compact nave low 

energy consumption and do not require pumping. The array of gas sensors sensible to different 

gases can be used as a complementary to FAIMS technique. The detailed description of the 

sensors is given in the Table 1. 

FAIMS spectrometer. The FAIMS spectrometer was developed by the company Lavanda-U 

Limited and was initially optimized for the detection of the explosives. The schematic design is 

presented in the Fig.1. The FAIMS spectrometer consists of the ion source (63Ni), 2 coaxial 

electrodes, detection plates and the flow driver. The gas flow rate was equal to 6 l/min. The 


 
5

asymmetric impulse voltage with repeating frequency 100 kHz, duty cycle 3:1 and amplitude 5 

kV was used as a separating voltage. The FAIMS spectrometer requires 12V; 500mA power 

supply what enable its feeding from main copter battery.    

Data acquisition and transfer system. The Intel Compute Stick with installed Windows 10 was 

used as a main onboard computer. This device has the weight of 80 g and requires only 5V power 

supply what enable its feeding from main copter battery. The data from the gas sensors were 

collected by the Arduino UNO microcontroller and transferred to the onboard computer. To 

enable the communication with the operator the remote desktop access to the onboard computer 

was provided using TeamViewer 12 software. To enable the internet access, the 4G modem was 

installed onboard (we used Yota LTE 4G).             

 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  

The photo of the assembled system is presented in the Fig.2. The total weight of the system 

was equal to 3.3 kg what is lower than the maximum weight that can carry the DJI matrice 100 

(3.5 kg). The array of gas sensors was installed on top of the DJI matrice 100 platform (Fig.2 A). 

The onboard computer and FAIMS spectrometer were installed below the platform (Fig.2 C,D). 

The photo of the hovering system is presented in Fig.2B.  

It was observed, that the developed system provided the stable data acquisition and 

transmission. The readings of gas sensors and FAIMS spectrometer were transmitted to the 

smartphone fixed on the remote control. This allowed the operator to simultaneously control the 


 
6

flight and read the information from the sensors. All data were saved to file and additionally the 

video from smartphone screen was recorded.  

First we have investigated the capability of the developed system to detect the volatile organic 

in the air. For this experiment the FAIMS tube was used without the sucking cup (Fig.2D). To 

create the cloud of target gas we have used the spray can with the perfume. After several 

injections were made in the air, the quadrocopter flew through this region and data were 

acquired. We have observed that the major technical obstacle  for performing the measurements 

was the powerful airflow created by the rotating propellers. The wind was so strong that it 

instantly mixed the cloud of gas with the surrounding atmosphere what resulted in the rapid 

decrease of the concentration of the measured gas. As a consequence, the developed system can 

be used for the performing measurements in the homogeneous atmosphere, but considerable 

improvement is required for performing the measurements in the local regions such as: exhaust 

of ventilation pipes, vicinity of the small suspicious objects etc. Although, the system is suitable 

for the ecology monitoring and detection of chemical warfare agents.  

The results of the measurements are presented in the Fig.3. It can be seen that when the 

quadrocopter hovers in the clean atmosphere the reading of all gas sensors remains stable, but 

when the copter fly through the cloud of odorous gas, all gas sensors (except for H2 and CO2 

sensors) responded. The response of almost all sensors is expectable, because the sensors are not 

selective and differ only by the sensitivity to particular substances (see Fig.3 A,B). One of the 

disadvantages of the semiconductor gas sensors before the FAIMS is the considerable time 

required for the attenuation of the signal. This time is determined by the desorption of the gas 

from the surface of the sensor. The FAIMS spectrometer doesn’t have this disadvantage.  


 
7

The ionograms recorded by the FAIMS spectrometer are presented in Fig.3C – the case of 

clean atmosphere and Fig.3D – the case when copter flew through the cloud of gas. The distinct 

differences between two ionograms can be clearly seen. The appearance of new peaks indicate 

the transmission of the ionized impurities through the separating electrodes assembly for certain 

compensation voltage. Though the FAIMS spectrometer cannot identify the unknown substance, 

it can be carefully tuned for the detection of the target gas.  

After the validation of the system we have investigated its capability for the detection of the 

explosive. We have recorded the ionograms corresponding to the trace vapors of different 

chemical substances: trinitrotoluene (TNT), ionol, nitro powder and nitroglycerine. The results 

are presented in the Fig.4A. It can be clearly seen, that ionol is detected at the compensation 

voltage ~ 5.3V, TNT at ~8.5V and nitro powder and nitroglycerine at ~11V. To determine the 

limits of detection, we have recorded signals, corresponding to different concentration of TNT in 

the air. The ionograms are presented in the Fig.1S. The values of signal and signal/noise ratio are 

shown in the Fig.4B. We have estimated that the limit of detection for TNT is ~1*10-13 g/cm3. 

After proving the capabilities of the system for detection of explosives we have performed the 

in-filed experiments. The design of the experiment is presented in the Fig.5. The traces of 

different explosives (TNT and nitroglycerine) were put on the ground at some distance from the 

operator. The operator flew quadrocopter to the places of the deposition of explosives. The 

quadrocopter landed and vapors of the explosives were sucked via a suction cup into the FAIMS. 

The suction cup was placed near the ground to increase the sensitivity. The results are presented 

in the Fig.5B. We have observed that it is possible to detect traces of explosives and even 

separate TNT and nitroglycerine. So, the remote detection of explosives in hard-to-reach place 

was performed. 


 
8

 

CONCLUSION  

We have developed a multicopter-based air monitoring system that utilize array of the gas 

sensors and FAIMS spectrometer. The developed system allows the detecting of air impurities in 

hard-to-reach places and transferring data online to the operator. The major disadvantage of the 

developed system is the powerful airflow created by the rotating propellers that mixes and 

homogenizes the atmosphere and, therefore, decreases the concentration of the target gas in the 

vicinity of the multicopter. Also, the turbulent wind can disturb the air flow inside the FAIMS 

tube. This limits the application of the developed system for the analysis of small objects, such as 

ventilation exhausts, but the system still can be used for the ecology monitoring and detection of 

chemical warfare agents. The total cost of the system includes multicopter (~5000$), FAIMS 

spectrometer (~3000$), onboard computer and 3G modem (~700$), array of gas sensors (~100$). 

The capabilities of the system was tested on the several explosives such as trinitrotoluene and 

nitro powder. The limit of detection for TNT is ~1*10-13 g/cm3, the system can separate the TNT 

and nitroglycerin. Therefore, the developed system is relatively low cost, what makes it possible 

for almost any laboratory to assemble the remote FAIMS spectrometer. 

 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

Corresponding Author 

* Eugene Nikolaev ennikolaev@rambler.ru 

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 


 
9

The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval 

to the final version of the manuscript 

FUNDING SOURCES 

The research was supported by the Russian Scientific Foundation grant № 14-24-00114.  

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTEREST  

Authors declare no competing financial interests. 

 

TABLES 

Table 1. The description of the used gas sensors. 

N
Sensor
Description

1
MG811
Electrochemical CO2 sensor

2
MQ9
Semiconductor  CO/Combustible Gas sensor

3
MQ8
Semiconductor hydrogen gas sensor.

4
MQ7
Carbon Monoxide Sensor. Concentrations in the air from 20 to 
2000ppm.

5
MQ6
Semiconductor Propane Gas Sensor. Can be used to detect iso-
butane, propane and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG).

6
MQ5
Semiconductor gas sensor, which is very sensitive with LPG, natural 
gas , town gas. It is less sensitive with alcohol, cooking fumes and 
cigarette smoke

7
MQ4
Semiconductor gas sensor, which is able to detect nature gas, CH4. It 
is less sensitivity in detecting alcohol, cooking fumes, and cigarette 
smoke.


 
10

8
MQ3
Semiconductor alcohol sensor. It has a high sensitivity to alcohol and 
less sensitivity to benzine. 

9
MQ2
Semiconductor gas sensor, which is able to detect LPG, i-butane,
propane, methane ,alcohol, hydrogen, smoke.

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURES 

 


 
11

 

Fig.1 The schematic design of the FAIMS spectrometer developed by Lavanda-U Ltd. that was 

used in the present study. A – the schematic design of the device, B – the dependence of the 

signal on the compensation voltage. C – the shape of the potential applied to the high voltage 

electrode. 

 

 


 
12

 

Fig.2 The developed measuring system. A - The photo of the assembled system: 1 – array of gas 

sensors, 2 – the 3G modem, 3 – the camera, 4 – GPS antenna, 5 – suction cup. B – the hovering 

measuring system. C – side view: 6 -  the onboard computer,. D – the installed FAIMS 

spectrometer (7) without suction cups. 


 
13

 

Fig.3. The signal obtained from the developed system during the flight. A- The list of the gas 

sensors, B – the dependence of the sensors output signal on time. C – the ionogram detected by 

FAIMS spectrometer when the quadrocopter is in the clean air. D - the ionogram detected by 

FAIMS spectrometer when the quadrocopter is in the cloud of odorous gas. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
14

 

Fig.4 A - The ionogram corresponding to the traces of different chemicals: trinitrotoluene (TNT), 

Ionol, nitro powder and nitroglycerine. B – The value of signal and signal/noise ratio as a 

function of the TNT concentration in the air. 

 


 
15

 

Fig.5 A - The schematic representation of the detection of explosives in the hard-to-reach places. 

B – detection of nitroglycerine and simultaneous detection of nitroglycerine and TNT.  

 

 

REFERENCES 

1. 
Istomin, V. Mass spectrometric measurements of ion composition of the upper 
atmosphere of the Earth on the third artificial Earth satellite. Dokladi AN USSR (in 
russian) 129, 81-84 (1959). 

2. 
Istomin, V. Radio frequency mass spectrometer for studies of ion composition of the 
upper atmosphere. Artificial Earth satellites (in Russian) 3, 98-112 (1959). 

3. 
Meadows-Reed, E. & Smith, C.R. Mass spectrometric investigations of the atmosphere 
between 100 and 227 kilometers above Wallops Island, Virginia. Journal of Geophysical 
Research 69, 3199-3207 (1964). 

4. 
Bahreini, R. et al. Aircraft-based aerosol size and composition measurements during 
ACE-Asia using an Aerodyne aerosol mass spectrometer. Journal of Geophysical 
Research-Atmospheres 108 (2003). 


 
16

5. 
Kissel, J. et al. Composition of Comet Halley Dust Particles from Vega Observations. 
Nature 321, 280-282 (1986). 

6. 
Hecht, M.H. et al. Detection of Perchlorate and the Soluble Chemistry of Martian Soil at 
the Phoenix Lander Site. Science 325, 64-67 (2009). 

7. 
Balsiger, H. et al. Rosina - Rosetta orbiter spectrometer for ion and neutral analysis. 
Space Science Reviews 128, 745-801 (2007). 

8. 
Balsiger, H. et al. Rosetta Orbiter Spectrometer for ion and neutral analysis-ROSINA. 
Space Exploration of the Outer Space Solar System and Cometary Nuclei 21, 1527-1535 
(1998). 

9. 
Mahaffy, P.R. et al. The Sample Analysis at Mars Investigation and Instrument Suite. 
Space Science Reviews 170, 401-478 (2012). 

10. 
Leshin, L.A. et al. Volatile, Isotope, and Organic Analysis of Martian Fines with the Mars 
Curiosity Rover. Science 341 (2013). 

11. 
Snyder, D.T., Pulliam, C.J., Ouyang, Z. & Cooks, R.G. Miniature and Fieldable Mass 
Spectrometers: Recent Advances. Analytical Chemistry 88, 2-29 (2016). 

12. 
Li, L.F. et al. Mini 12, Miniature Mass Spectrometer for Clinical and Other Applications-
Introduction and Characterization. Analytical Chemistry 86, 2909-2916 (2014). 

13. 
Ouyang, Z., Noll, R.J. & Cooks, R.G. Handheld Miniature Ion Trap Mass Spectrometers. 
Analytical Chemistry 81, 2421-2425 (2009). 

14. 
Ouyang, Z. & Cooks, R.G. Miniature Mass Spectrometers. Annual Review of Analytical 
Chemistry 2, 187-214 (2009). 

15. 
Smith, J.N., Keil, A., Likens, J., Noll, R.J. & Cooks, R.G. Facility monitoring of toxic 
industrial compounds in air using an automated, fieldable, miniature mass spectrometer. 
Analyst 135, 994-1003 (2010). 

16. 
Hendricks, P.I. et al. Autonomous in Situ Analysis and Real-Time Chemical Detection 
Using a Backpack Miniature Mass Spectrometer: Concept, Instrumentation Development, 
and Performance. Analytical Chemistry 86, 2900-2908 (2014). 

17. 
Sanders, N.L., Kothari, S., Huang, G.M., Salazar, G. & Cooks, R.G. Detection of 
Explosives as Negative Ions Directly from Surfaces Using a Miniature Mass 
Spectrometer. Analytical Chemistry 82, 5313-5316 (2010). 

18. 
Ma, Q. et al. Rapid analysis of synthetic cannabinoids using a miniature mass 
spectrometer with ambient ionization capability. Talanta 142, 190-196 (2015). 

19. 
Diaz, J.A. et al. Unmanned Aerial Mass Spectrometer Systems for In-Situ Volcanic 
Plume Analysis. Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry 26, 292-304 
(2015). 

20. 
Shvartsburg, A.A. et al. Ultrafast Differential Ion Mobility Spectrometry at Extreme 
Electric Fields Coupled to Mass Spectrometry. Analytical Chemistry 81, 8048-8053 
(2009). 

21. 
Shvartsburg, A.A. et al. Ultrafast Differential Ion Mobility Spectrometry at Extreme 
Electric Fields in Multichannel Microchips. Analytical Chemistry 81, 6489-6495 (2009). 

22. 
Wilks, A. et al. Characterization of a miniature, ultra-high-field, ion mobility 
spectrometer. International Journal for Ion Mobility Spectrometry 15, 199-222 (2012). 

23. 
Dunn, J.D., Gryniewicz-Ruzicka, C.M., Kauffman, J.F., Westenberger, B.J. & Buhse, 
L.F. Using a portable ion mobility spectrometer to screen dietary supplements for 
sibutramine. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis 54, 469-474 (2011). 


 
17

24. 
Yamaguchi, S. et al. Detection performance of a portable ion mobility spectrometer with 
Ni-63 radioactive ionization for chemical warfare agents. Forensic Toxicology 28, 84-95 
(2010). 

25. 
Babis, J.S. et al. Performance evaluation of a miniature ion mobility spectrometer drift 
cell for application in hand-held explosives detection ion mobility spectrometers. 
Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 395, 411-419 (2009). 

26. 
Yamazoe, N. New Approaches for Improving Semiconductor Gas Sensors. Sensors and 
Actuators B-Chemical 5, 7-19 (1991). 

 
 


