1 / 34

Micro-cracking, microstructure and mechanical properties of Hastelloy-X alloy

printed by laser powder bed fusion: as-built, annealed and HIP

Hui Wanga, Liu Chenb*, Bogdan Dovgyyc, Wenyong Xub, Aixue Shab, Xingwu Lib, 

Huiping Tangd, Yong Liua, Hong Wua†, Minh-Son Phamc††

a State Key Laboratory for Powder Metallurgy, Central South University, Changsha 

410083, China

b Materials Evaluation Centre for Aeronautical and Aeroengine Applications, Beijing 

Institute of Aeronautical Materials, Beijing 100095, China

c Department of Materials, Royal School of Mines, Imperial College London, London SW7 

2AZ, UK

d State Key Laboratory for Porous Metals Materials, Northwest Institute for Nonferrous 

Metal Research, Xi'an 710016, China 

* Corresponding author. Email contact: leo.chern@yahoo.com

† Corresponding author. Email contact: wuhong927@126.com

†† Corresponding author. Email contact: son.pham@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract

This study analyses literature data to identify optimised print parameters and assesses 

the consolidation, microstructure and mechanical properties of Hastelloy-X printed by 

laser powder bed fusion. Effects of post annealing and hot isostatic pressing (HIP) on the 

microstructure and mechanical properties are also revealed. The susceptibility to the 

solidification cracking and the as-built microstructure such as precipitation and chemical 

segregation were predicted by the calculation of thermodynamics phase diagrams. The

distribution of solidification cracks throughout the builds was quantified for the as-built, 

annealed and HIP condition. The assessment reveals variation of cracks towards the bottom,

top and free surface of solid builds. This distribution of cracks is found to be associate with 

thermal gradient and thermal conductivity which were estimated by analytical thermal 

calculations. While the annealing and HIP both can alter the as-printed microstructure 


2 / 34

thanks to recovery and recrystallisation, the micro-cracks and pores were only successfully 

removed by HIP. In addition to the removal, recrystallisation and precipitation in HIP

(stronger than in annealing), resulting in optimal mechanical properties including a 

substantial increase in elongation from 13% to 20%, significant improvement of ultimate 

tensile stress from 965 MPa to 1045 MPa with moderately high yield stress thanks to 

precipitation.

Keywords: Hastelloy; Laser powder bed fusion; Crack density; Hot isostatic pressing; 

Mechanical property

1. Introduction

Ni-based Hastelloy-X superalloy is widely used in high temperature applications 

such as aeroengines, for example combustors or fuel nozzles, which generally have

complex internal geometries and therefore associated difficulties in fabrication. Additive 

manufacturing (commonly known as 3D printing) offers many advantages in 

manufacturing complex components, in particular with reduced lead time, cost and

optimisation freedom. Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) also commonly known as selective 

laser melting (SLM) is one of the most widely used techniques in additive manufacturing 

due to its versatility and reliability in fabricating intricate components. In LPBF, the 

powder is melted selectively according to a sliced 2D profile of a 3D part and then the 

powder platform is lowered by one layer thickness, repeated layer by layer until the 

completion of the 3D part [1, 2]. Thanks to its advantages, LPBF has been frequently used 

to fabricate metallic alloys including Ni-based superalloys [3-8] for various applications in 

particular for aerospace [9]. 

Despite the significant potential of LPBF, steep thermal gradient and high cooling 

rates varying from about 104~106 K ∙ s−1 [10, 11] cause significant concerns regarding 

the integrity and reliability due to pores, micro-cracks and high internal stresses, limiting 

the applicability of printed components. Many efforts have been made to improve the 

quality of AM Hastelloy-X by reducing the porosity. In general, the porosity depends 

closely on energy density, for example the area energy density [12]. Wang et al. 

investigated the relationship between printing parameters and build quality, demonstrated


3 / 34

that a near theoretical density could be achieved when the area energy density of laser beam 

is above 1.5~2 J mm−2 [13]. The energy density dependence of porosity is also reported 

in other studies of AM Hastelloy-X [12, 14, 15] and other Ni-based superalloys [6, 16].

It is reported that Hastelloy-X alloy is highly susceptible to cracking in LPBF [12]. 

As compared to the porosity, cracking is much more dependent on the solidification 

behaviour such as solidification gradient and the freezing range [17] and the thermal 

gradient [12] which can be estimated by Rosenthal’s model [18]. In the early work of Wang 

et al. [13], the density of micro-cracks was found decreasing with the increase of laser 

power density, manifesting that the higher laser power might be beneficial to lowering the 

micro-crack density. However, this relationship is not linear and has a limit beyond that 

the increase in laser power can lead to more cracks because high energy density can lead 

to more substantial changes in microrstructure (such as chemical segregation) in the weld 

bead and heat-affected zone, reflecting the difficulty in controlling the formation of micro-

cracks. To enhance the mechanical performance of AM alloys including the Hastelloy-X, 

it is necessary to reduce micro-cracks in AM  alloys. It was found that micro-cracks can be 

reduced not only by optimising the print parameters [6, 13] but also via tailoring the alloy 

composition [12]. For example, Harrison et al. [12] demonstrated that the crack 

susceptibility of Hastelloy-X alloy was  reduced by identifying an optimal window of laser 

power and tailoring the chemical composition. In particular, the tailored chemical 

composition significantly improved the thermal shock resistance of the alloy [12], 

highlighting the influential role of microstructure on the crack formation in AM. Moreover, 

Tomus et al. [14] showed that minor chemical elements such as Mn and Si are detrimental 

to the alloy because of the boundary cohesion due to forming brittle precipitates. This 

detrimental effect of microstructure was also supported by the work of Marchese et al. [19]

in which
Mo-rich carbides were found along both grain boundaries and crack paths. 

Therefore, minimising the chemical element segregation towards grain boundaries can lead 

to the reduction in hot cracking in the alloy [14, 20]. In this study, chemical segregation 

and microstructure in rapid cooling of Hastelloy-X were predicted by the calculation of 

thermodynamics phase diagrams (Calphad) that was shown to be capable of estimating the 

chemical segregation in AM alloys [21]. Solidification parameters (such as the 


4 / 34

solidification gradient and the freezing range) were also calculated using Calphad to study 

the susceptibility of the Hastelloy-X to solidification cracking.

In addition to the processing optimisation to improve the quality of AM Hastelloy-

X, post-processing such as heat treatment and hot-isostatic pressing (HIP) [9, 22] are also 

often used to obtain optimal microstructure and eliminate cracks and pores, thereby 

enhancing the mechanical performance of the alloy for the industrial use of AM. The relief

of residual stresses and improvement in consolidation thanks to HIP provide significant 

beneficial for the mechanical performance of AM components, in particular for superalloys 

that are often used in demanding environments including high temperatures and high 

mechanical loads [23]. Therefore, rigorous and quantitative characterisation of micro-

cracks and microstructure before and after heat treatment (including HIP) needs to be done 

to gain in-depth insights and confidence in the application of 3D-printed components made 

of Hastelloy-X especially in safety-critical application, e.g. hot-section parts of aero-engine.

Although the micro-crack is a great concern in AM Hastelloy-X,  it has not been well 

characterised and investigated quatitatively, in particular throughout the builds, which 

limits the understanding of cracking mechanisms in the fabrication of parts by additive 

manufacturing. The printing conditions (such as temperature and thermal conductivity) is 

varied during LPBF from the bottom to the top and from the interior to free surface of a 

build [24]. Therefore, a examination of cracks in few locations is not sufficient to 

characterise the spatial distribution of crack density, limiting the understanding of the 

relationship between LPBF parameters and crack density for AM Hastelloy-X. X-ray 

computed tomography (XCT) would be the best technique in quantifying the spatial 

distribution of defects including cracks. However, XCT is generally expensive and not 

accessible to wide communities. In addition, XCT has limitation in resolving small defects 

in particular hair-like micro-cracks found in highly optimised builds [25]. Although 

microscopic techniques (such as optical and electron microscopy) only provide 2D 

sectioned views of cracks, they are capable of resolving fine details of micro-cracks. In 

particular, the characterisation of spatial distribution of cracks via microscopic techniques 

can be significantly improved by observing many 2D sections throughout the build. 

Therefore, the detailed optical microscopy imaging at different positions throughout a build, 


5 / 34

together with automated image processing technique, is viable and reliable to quantify the 

crack densities inside the build. 

In this present study, we carried out detailed quantitative examinations of micro-

cracks, microstructure and mechanical behaviour of as-built and heat-treated (including 

HIPed) Hastelloy-X fabricated via LPBF. We identified a window of optimal printing 

parameters on the basis of literature review and further developed automated Python codes 

to quantify the spatial distribution of micro-cracks. Analytical estimates of thermal profile 

for different pre-heat temperatures and thermal conductivities were done to explain the 

spatial distribution observed by the crack quantification. The calculation of 

thermodynamics phase diagrams was also used to understand the mechanisms responsible 

for cracking in the alloy. In addition, the microstructure and mechanical properties of LPBF

Hastellow-X before and after heat-treament (including hot isostatic pressing) were 

examined to provide in-depth discussions into the cracking mechanism and the influence 

of post-processing on mechanical properties of the alloy. 

2. Experimental procedures and micro-crack quantification

2.1. Experimental procedures

2.1.1. Powder preparation

The Hastelloy-X alloy powder was supplied by Northwest Institute for Nonferrous 

Metal Research. Fig. 1 shows a representative micrograph of the as-received powder, and 

the inset to further details, showing powder particles were spherical with diameters of 15 −

53 μm and a mean diameter of 28 μm. The nominal chemical composition of the as-

received powder is shown in Table 1 in comparison with the compositions used in previous 

studies. 


6 / 34

Fig. 1 Secondary electron micrograph showing highly spherical particles of Hastelloy X 

alloy, with few small satellites (indicated by arrows in the inset).

Table 1 Chemical composition (wt.%) of Hastelloy-X powder used in literature and this 

study. 

Reference
Ni
Cr
Fe
Mo
Co
W
Mn
Si
C

Wang, et al. [13]
Bal.
20.6
18.4
8.8
1.3
0.62
0.69
0.78
0.009

Harrison, et al. [12]
Bal.
21.8
18.6
9.4
1.8
1.05
0.22
0.31
0.054

Tomus, et al. [18]
Bal.
21.4
18.4
8.8
1.8
0.86 <0.01 0.11
0.01

Sanchez-Mata, et 

al.[21]
Bal.
21.2
17.6
8.8
2.0
NM
<0.1
0.20
0.06

This study (by EDS)
Bal.
23.5
20.1
7.8
1.45
NM
NM
1.41
NM

2.1.2. Fabrication

The fabrication of Hastelloy-X builds was done using an EOS M280 machine 

equipped with a Yb:YAG fiber laser source of 400 W power capacity, within an Ar

protective atmosphere. The powder bed was preheated to 373 K before melting the powder. 

A meander scan strategy rastered with 16.5o for each layer was employed and the build 

volume was 10 × 10 × 100 mm3.  Previous studies on Hastelloy-X [12, 13, 20, 22]


7 / 34

suggest layer thickness of 20 μm and hatch spacing of 90 μm. Laser power and scanning 

speed were the two variables considered to identify an optimum window that gives minimal

porosity and crack density. Fig. 2a and b present a window of the two parameters and 

measured densities of cracks and porosity reported by Harrison et al. [12]. On the basis of 

the reported data, the Paraeto optimum suggested a laser power of 180 W and a linear

energy density of 0.54 J/mm. The optimal scanning speed corresponding to the identified 

optimal laser power and energy was 0.34 m ∙ s−1. Consequently, the identified power of 

180 W and scanning speed of 0.34 m ∙ s−1 were used to print  Hastelloy-X specimens in 

this study (Fig. 2b).

Fig. 2 Identification of optimized power intensity based on Harrison’s processing 

parameters [12]. (a) A window of the laser power and normalized beam energy (note the 

scan speed was incorporated in the linear energy density). (b) Objective space of crack 

density and porosity, where the Pareto front corresponds to the circle symbol in (a) (marked 

by a square).

2.1.3. Heat treatment and hot isostatic pressing

Heat treatments by annealing and hot-isostatic pressing (HIP) were carried out to 

study their effects on the process defects (such as porosity and cracks), microstructure and 

mechanical properties. The annealing was conducted in vacuum at 1450 K for 4 h, and then 

furnace-cooled while HIP was conducted at a hydrostatic pressure of 150 MPa, a 


8 / 34

temperature of 1450 K for 4 h, then slowly cooled in furnace at a cooling rate of about 

12 ℃ × min−1.

2.1.4. Mechanical testing and microstructural characterization

Fig. 3a shows the sampling layout for mechanical test and microstructural 

characterization. Optical microscopy (OM) observation position for the quantification of 

cracks is indicated in Fig. 3b as marked by white crosses. Fig. 3c and d show the geometries 

of  tensile specimens and as-built cuboids. 

Vicker’s micro-hardness indentation was operated using FM100 with a load of 20 g

and holding time of 15 s for each test. The indentation was repeated for more than 15 times 

for each specimen. Locations of micro-hardness tests for each polished surface are shown 

in Fig. 3b.

Quasi-static mechanical tensile tests were done using a MTS Landmark test machine 

at room temperature with a nominal strain rate of 5 × 10−4 s−1. Dog-bone specimens (Fig.

3c) had gauge dimensions of 12 × 2.5 × 1 mm3. The surface of specimens was polished 

and at least 3 tests were done for each material condition to check the repeatability of 

testing. 

Optical microscopic observation was done using a Leica DM4000M microscope. 

OM samples were prepared by grinding with silicon carbide papers from 600 to 5000 grits, 

followed by mechanical polishing with Struers OP-S suspension containing 0.06 m

particles. Polished samples were also examined by electron microscopy including electron 

back-scattered diffraction (EBSD), secondary electron imaging (SE), back-scattered 

imaging (BSE), and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) using a field emission JSM 

7100F scanning electron microscope (SEM) with a voltage of 20 kV. EBSD scanning was 

operated with a step size of about 1 μm and map size of 500×500 m2, and the data 

analysis was performed using OIM Analysis (EDAX-TSL). Chemical etching for 5~7 

seconds was done for SE scanning using a solution of 36% hydrochloric, 38% acetic and

65% nitric acid in a volumetric ratio of 3:2:2. The aspect ratio of grains (which were 

defined by a misorientation angle of 15o) was determined as the ratio of the major axis to 

the minor axis.


9 / 34

Fig. 3 (a) Schematic illustration of where samples were taken from the printed cuboid. (b) 

White crosses locating where the OM micrographs taking from at each slice with different 

height. (c) The tensile sample geometries, and (d) printed Hastelloy-X cuboids.

2.2. Micro-crack quantification

Crack quantification is done on the basis of number of cracks found in OM 

micrographs. This study used a Python-based package originally developed by Griffiths et 

al. [26] to automatically identify and analyze cracks and the associated statistics from a 

large number of OM micrographs taken on different locations in a LPBF build to quantify 

the spatial distribution of cracks. A dimensionless density of cracks is introduced using the 

Walsh 2D crack density [26, 27], 𝛾:

𝛾 = 𝑁𝐴𝑐2,
(1)

where 𝑁𝐴 is the number of cracks per unit area, and 𝑐 is the half of the mean of crack length.

The number density 𝑁𝐴 could be measured either by direct counting or by grid 

method, wherein the latter, two sets of perpendicular lines were generated automated to 

form the grid. The number of intersections between cracks and grid lines per unit length in 

the two orthogonal directions I and II is counted and labeled as 𝑃𝐼 and 𝑃𝐼𝐼. The crack length 


10 / 34

per unit area 𝐿𝐴 is linked to the number density 𝑁𝐴 and the mean crack length 2𝑐 through 

𝐿𝐴 ≈ 2𝑐𝑁𝐴 [26]. Based on the work of Underwood [28], the crack length per unit area 𝐿𝐴

can be equated to the numbers of intersections: 𝐿𝐴 =

𝜋

4 (𝑃𝐼 + 𝑃𝐼𝐼) . Therefore, 𝑁𝐴 =

𝜋

8𝑐 (𝑃𝐼 + 𝑃𝐼𝐼), thus the crack density is given by:

𝛾 =

𝜋𝑐

8 (𝑃𝐼 + 𝑃𝐼𝐼).
(2)

An example of image processing to quantify the densities of cracks is shown in Fig. 

4. The orginal OM image of an as-built specimen was converted to grayscale using (0.17 ×

Reds + 0.28 × Greens + 0.55 × Blues) to substantially increase the contrast (Fig. 4a). 

Some micro-cracks (marked by solid arrows) and minute pores (marked by open arrows ) 

are shown in Fig. 4a. To differentiate micro-cracks which has high aspect ratio feature from 

porosity, median filtering was operated using a window size serveral times greater than 

typical crack length. Subsequently, the watershed algorithm was employed to do 

segmentation based on the difference between the original and filtered images (Fig. 4b). 

To avoid a mis-identification of cracks from pores or polished stain, a feature was identified 

to be a crack if the diagonal length of a square that enclosed the feature of interest was 

equal or longer than a length threshold (which was a length of cracks typically observed 

by OM, and was found to be 10 m). The crack shown in the inset of Fig. 4b was thick 

and contained branches. Therefore, it was subsequently thinned (Fig. 4c) and pruned (Fig. 

4d) to ease the measurement of the length of a crack. The pruning process might remove 

the crack tips which were important to determine the crack length. The removed crack tips 

were, therefore, recovered afterwards (arrow in the inset of Fig. 4e). Further, the joint of 

multiple cracks was identified and such cracks were seperated at their joint junction (circle 

in the inset of Fig. 4e). Finally, the quantification of micro-cracks was conducted by either 

measuring the length of individual crack or 2D grid method (Fig. 4f). 


11 / 34

Fig. 4 Image processing to quantify micro-cracks. (a) Gray scale view of original image 

taken from an as-built specimen (the solid and open arrows highlighting cracks and minute 

pores, respectively. The inset shows a zoom-in of a crack marked as ‘1’ in (a). (b) 

Segmented image of (a) by median filtering. (c) Thinned cracks showing some small-crack 

branches remained. (d) Pruned cracks after trimming the small-crack branches. (e) Final 

cracks after restoring the tips (marked by the arrow in the inset) of the pruned crack 1 and 

the decomposition (located by the dotted circle in the inset) of the crack 1 into major and 

minor cracks to ensure only two end-points in each crack. (f) Cracks in (e) overlapped with 

grid to count the intersection points per length by Underwood's method [29].


12 / 34

2.3 Temperature profile produced by moving heat source 

Thermal profile parameters such thermal gradient are influential to the formation of 

porosity and cracks. Carslaw et al. had developed [29] the analytical solution of 

temperature distribution with a specific heat flux in a semi-infinite solid. With the heat 

supply from a laser beam over the duration time of 𝜏, the temperature in the solid at the 

depth 𝑧 beneath the heat source and time 𝑡 is given by the following formula assuming that 

the boundary (𝑧 = 0) is thermally insulated [29]:

𝑇(𝑧, 𝑡) = 𝑇0 +

2𝐻

𝑘 √𝛼𝑡 𝒊𝒆𝒓𝒇𝒄(

𝑧

2√𝛼𝑡),
𝑧 > 0, 0 < 𝑡 ≤ 𝜏,
(3)

where  𝑇0 is the initial temperature of the powder bed, 

H the laser power density (𝐻 =

𝐿𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝑝𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟

𝐿𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑚 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎),

𝑘 the thermal conductivity of the material (given in Table 2),

𝛼 the thermal diffusivity of the material (𝛼 =

𝑇ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦

𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦×𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡 𝑐𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦),

𝜏 is the laser exposure duration time which is calculated as 𝜏 =

𝐿𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑚 𝑑𝑖𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟

𝑆𝑐𝑎𝑛 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑒𝑑
,

𝒊𝒆𝒓𝒇𝒄 is the integral of the complementary error function. 

When the heat supply from the laser beam ceased after the duration 𝜏, the temperature 

is given by:

𝑇(𝑧, 𝑡) = 𝑇0 +

2𝐻

𝑘 √𝛼 [√𝑡 𝒊𝒆𝒓𝒇𝒄 (

𝑧

2√𝛼𝑡) − √𝑡 − 𝜏 𝒊𝒆𝒇𝒓𝒄(

𝑧

2√𝛼(𝑡−𝜏))].
(4)

with 𝑡 > 𝜏 and 𝑧 > 0

Values of thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity at calculated temperatures

used in calculation are listed in Table 2. The density of 8.22 × 103 kg/m3 at room 

temperature was used.

Table 2 Thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity of Hastelloy-X [30]. 

Temperature

(K)

Thermal conductivity

W/(m·K)

Specific heat capacity

J/(kg·K)

298
9.2
486

373
11.2
487

473
14.1
484


13 / 34

2.4. Solidification cracking prediction and thermodynamic phase diagram calculation

Scheil-Gulliver equation was used to predict the solidification range and 

solidification gradient that are the key parameters controling the solidification cracking

[17]. Solidification range is the temperature range bounded by the liquidus temperature (i.e.

start of solidification) and solidus temperature (i.e. end of solidification) of an alloy. Over 

this solidification range, the alloy is in a semi-liquid state, i.e. mushy zone. During cooling,

the mushy zone is subjected to solidification shrinkage and has a potential risk of 

developing a solidification crack. Another important metric associated with solidification 

cracking is the solidification gradient, defined by Kou as 𝑑(𝑇)/𝑑(solid fraction)0.5 at the 

terminal stage of solidification (typically taken as 0.87 < solid fraction < 0.94) [17]. In his 

work, Kou demonstrated that if the amount of solidification shrinkage exceeds the lateral 

growth of solidification cell, liquid film can break down and a crack may form. Both the 

solidification shrinkage and lateral growth of solidification cells are related to the 

solidification gradient. A lower absolute solidification gradient results in a higher 

resistance to solidification cracking. 

Calculation of phase diagrams (Calphad) method was performed to evaluate the

phase stability at different tempratures and during the temperature changes (solidification 

and heat treatments). Commecrial software package, ThermoCalc, was used alongside with  

thermodynamic superalloys database TCNI8 and mobility database MOBNI5, both 

provided by ThermoCalc. Alloy composition measured by EDS was used for the Calphad

calculations. Scheil approximation was used to evaluate the segregation of chemical 

elements and phase constitution during rapid solidification with a calculation step of 1K.

Simulations were carried out for alloy compositions as measured by EDS and reported by 

Harrisol et.al [12]. Both Scheil and equilibrium conditions were used to construct the 

property diagram of phase constitution from liquidus to room temperatures for the current 

alloy. This information was used to set up the simulation of the heat treatment. Heat 

treatment simulation was carried out in Thermocalc Dictra and Prisma modules. Triple

phase model of FCC, Sigma and M23C6 phases were used as an input with elemental 

segregation profile obtained from the Scheil calculation. The modelling domain was set up 


14 / 34

as a cylinder with a diameter of 600 nm (equivalent to the size of solidification cells). To 

reduce the computation cost the simulation was carried out in 2 stages. First stage analysed 

the effect of the heat treatment at 1450 K for 3600 s in ThermoCalc Dictra. Second stage 

was carried out in ThermoCalc Prisma, a precipitate formation module. Elemental 

segregation from the 1st stage were used to simulate the cooling of the material from 1450

K to 298 K. EBSD results were used to calculate the grain size and aspect ratio for each 

scenario. Precipitation was set to be able to form both in the bulk and on grain boundaries, 

as observed in SEM imaging. As a simplification, precipitates were set to be spherical, 

while the matrix was set to be isotropic with shear modulus of 77.5 GPa and Poisson’s ratio 

of 0.32 [31], to account for the transformation strain. Dislocation density for both materials 

was set to 1012 m-2, as a reflection of annealed state [32]. For HIP treatment the cooling 

rate was set to 0.2 K/s, while for air cooling it was estimated to be 8 K/s [33].  

3. Results

3.1 Thermal profile estimate

Thermal profile are influential in the microstructure [34] and crack formation during 

solidification in additive manufacturing. In powder bed fusion, the heat transfer is mainly 

done via conduction through the solid substrate and surrounding powder. However, the 

heat condutivity via powder is low due to gaps between powder particles. Therefore, most 

of heat should be conducted away via the solid substrate and the heat extraction decreases 

with increasing the distance from the substrate, resulting in higher cooling rates in the 

bottom part of a solid build than that towards the top of the build. Similarly, the cooling 

rate near the free surface of a solid build is lower than towards the centre of the solid build 

due to the presence of surrounding powder particles. In addition to the variation in cooling 

rates, residual heat generated in previous layers also affects the thermal profile towards the 

top of a build [24]. The effect of residual heat left in previous layers on the thermal profile 

of a new melt pool can be studied by using a different initial temperature of the substrate.

To estimate the change in thermal profile with varying the substrate temperature, 

three different initial temperatures (298 K, 373 K and 473 K) were used, by which to reflect 

the cold bed, pre-heated bed to 373 K, and bed temperature rise (to 473 K and even higer 

in practice) due to laser heating with proceeding of printing, respectively. Physical 


15 / 34

parameters in Table 2 were used for calculation. Eqn. 3 and 4 give the temperature and 

thermal gradient along the depth at the centre of a heated site at given times corresponding 

to three initial temperatures (Fig. 5a – c and e – g). The magnitude of thermal gradient was 

estimated to be very high (about 5 × 106 K ∙ m−1)  consistent with other studies which 

predicted and measured the thermal gradient to be in the order of 105 − 107 K ∙ m−1 in 

powder bed fusion [34, 35]. With the temperature increase of initial temperature from 298 

K to 473 K, the magnitude of thermal gradient at 300 m depth and 0.02 s was reduced

by about 2 × 106 K ∙ m−1 .

To estimate the influence of lower thermal conductivity to temperature distribution 

when print at the wall area of a build due to poor thermal conduction of adjacent powder, 

Fig. 5d shows the temperature profile at the same substrate temperature (473 K) but with a

lower thermal conductivity as compared with Fig. 5c. The corresponding thermal gradient 

of the lower thermal conductivity is shown in Fig. 5h. At a given time, the calculation 

predicts that lower thermal conductivity results in a higher magnitude of thermal gradient

as predicted by the Fourier’s law of heat conduction [29] with assumption of steady thermal 

conduction without convection and radiation.


16 / 34

Fig. 5 Influence of different base temperature and thermal conductivity on temperature 

profile. (a – d) Temperature and (e – h) thermal gradient profiles corresponding to three 

different base temperature: 298 K, 373K and 473K. The thermal conductivity in (d) is set 

lower to reflect the case of printing in wall area adjacent to power bed. (Legend refers to 

the time)

3.2. Mechanical properties

Fig. 6a shows the representative engineering stress-strain curves of the material in

as-built, annealed (HTed) and HIPed conditions. The as-built specimen showed the yield 

stress (at 0.2% strain offset) of about 780 MPa and a uniform elongation of about 13%. 

After annealing, the yield stress dropped substantially (by about 160 MPa), but the uniform 

elongation does not increase. HIP resulted in excellent combination between strength and 

ductility: a high yield stress (of about 530 MPa), the uniform elongation of 20 % (which is 

a significant increases from 13%) and an substantial increase in the ultimate tensile stress

to be about 1000 MPa which was higher than that of the as-built condition.

The micro-hardness of the different material conditions along building direction is 

presented in Fig. 6b. The micro-hardness data were consistent with the tensile strength. 

Comparing with the as-built one, the annealed condition showed a drastic decrease in

hardness while HIPing exhibited hardness comparable to the as-built condition. In addition, 

the measurement of micro-hardness from the bottom of the build toward the top appears to 

show a small increase for all three conditions (i.e. as-built, annealed and HIP) but it was

within the error ranges. The mechanical properties in present study as well as some reports 

in literature were detailed in Table 3.


17 / 34

Fig. 6 (a) Engineering stress−strain curves of Hastelloy-X alloy after annealing (HTed),

HIP (HIPed curve) in comparision to the as-built condition. (b) Microhardness values 

measured at different cross sections along the build direction.

Table 3: Summarization of mechanical properties of  Hastelloy-X printed by LPBF.

State
Elastic modulus

(GPa)

Yield stress

(MPa)

UTS
(MPa)

Elongation

(%)

Hardness
(Vickers)
Ref.

As-printed
149 ± 9
480 ± 10
620 ± 15
40 ± 1
NM
[15]
HIP
150 ± 5
350 ± 6
560 ± 9
41 ± 1

As-printed
175 ± 10
720 ± 2
882 ± 5
23 ± 2
277.1 ± 3.9 
[12]

As-printed

NM

650 ± 25
695 ± 2
9 ± 3
250 ± 10

[22]
HT
410 ± 10
666 ± 2
23 ± 1
212 ± 6

HIP
475 ± 50
808 ± 2
40 ± 1
205 ± 2

HIP+HT
435 ± 25
777 ± 2
49 ± 1
220 ± 5

As-printed
NM
814 ± 2
930 ± 4
35 ± 1
NM
[9]
HIP
556 ± 1
840 ± 1
30 ± 0.2

As-printed

NM

785 ± 18
970 ± 14
14 ± 2
290 ± 5

This Study
HT
735 ± 15
615 ± 12
13 ± 1.5
220 ± 5

HIP
635 ± 8
1050 ± 10 21.5 ± 2
290 ± 5

3.3. Process defect characterisation

The material was fabricated with an excellent consolidation with some minute 

defects (Figs 7 and 8) suggesting the effectiveness of the identification values of the 

parameters. Most of process defects were identified by electron microscopy to be micro-


18 / 34

cracks (Fig. 7), indicating the identified print parameters (Figure 2) were successfully in 

achieving a high consolidation with minimal porosity. The location of cracks were at the 

boundaries between different domains of solidification cellular microstructure (as marked 

by arrows in Fig. 7), suggesting cracks were due to the solidification cracking or chemical 

segregation-induced cracking during cooling. 

Fig. 7 Secondary electron micrographs showing solidification cracks in as-built specimens. 

(a, c) Fish-scale microstructure. (b) and (d) Magnified images of the rectangles marked in 

(a) and (c), respectively, showing solidification cracks at boundaries between solidification 

cellular domains.

Detailed quantification of the density distribution of micro-cracks is shown in Fig. 8. 

The as-built specimen showed drastic variations in the crack density along the build 

direction with higher concentrations near the bottom and top layers. In addition, the density 

of cracks is much higher near the free surface compared with that towards the centre of the 

build (Fig. 8a). Almost similar distribution of cracks was seen in annealed condition (Fig. 

8b). While there were a lot of cracks density in the annealed condition, the HIP treatment 

almost removed cracks in all inspected layers (Fig. 8c).


19 / 34

Fig. 8 Spatial distribution of crack density  at different heights of sections (from Z1 to Z4) 

for (a) as-built, (b) anneal and (c) post hot-isostatic pressed specimens.

The dimensionless crack density for each image is calculated according to Eqn. (1) 

and (2), then arithmatically averaged for images recorded at the same height to get the 

mean values and errors. Fig. 9 shows the mean of the density of micro-cracks at different 

heights along the build direction . The automated grid and direct counting methods give 

similar values at all heights for the different specimens, confirming the accuracy and 

reliability of the automated method. It is worth noting that the larger error bars of mean 

crack density for both the as-built and annealed specimens (Fig. 9a) due to more drastic 

variation of cracks in these two conditions compared to the HIPed condition (Fig. 9a, b).

Fig. 9a also shows the variation of crack density in the as-built and annealed were quite 

similar and followed the same trend with less cracks in the middle layers of builds.


20 / 34

Fig. 9 Quantification of micro-cracks. (a) Variation of the mean value of micro-crack 

density and (b) mean crack length at different locations along the build direction for the 

three material conditions.

3.4. Calphad prediction of solidification behaviour

Scheil-Gulliver solidification curve of the Hastelloy-X investigated in this study is 

shown in Fig. 10a in comparison with modified alloy by Harrison et al., termed MHX [12]. 

The Hastelloy-X, investigated in this study, has a quite large solidification range of 270 K 

in comparison to 110 K of the MHX. Solidification gradient of the currently studied 

Hastelloy X is about 1054 K, while the MHX has a lower solidification gradient of 586 K.

A lower absolute solidification gradient results in a higher resistance to solidification 

cracking [17]. 


21 / 34

Fig. 10 Solidification behaviour of Hastelloy-X predicted by ThermoCalc. (a) Scheil 

solidification curve of the alloy investigated in this study and MHX by Harrison et al. [12]

(b) Relative elemental segregation during Scheil solidification. (c) and (d) Phase fractions 

at different temperatures as expected during Scheil and equilibrium cooling respectively. 

(e), (f) ThermoCalc Prisma result for volume fraction of Sigma and M23C6 forming during 

cooling in HIP (0.2 K/s), (e) and annealing (8 K/s), (f), compared with Scheil solidification 

condition.


22 / 34

Fig. 10b shows the relative elemental segregation predicted by Scheil solidification, 

which can be interpreted as the compositional gradient in the solidification cell. The root

(core) of a solidification cell forms first at the liquidus temperature at which the fraction of 

solid equals to 0, then the cell grows radially towards the cell boundary where the solid 

fraction is 1.0. Therefore, Fig. 10b shows the chemical segregation from the core of cells 

(corresponding to the fraction of solid 0.0) towards the cell boundaries (the solid fraction

is 1.0). Elemental segregation directly affects the phase formation. As more segregating 

occurs towards the final stages of solidification, FCC structure cannot accommodate such 

enrichment in solutes and additional phases begin to form. In the case of Hastelloy X, small 

volume fractions of 𝜎 (2.2%) and M23C6 (0.18%) phases were predicted to form at 1536 K 

and 1487 K, respectively in fast solidification (Fig. 10c). 

Fig. 10d suggests that at 1450 K (temperature of the annealing) just the FCC phase 

is stable. Segregation from Fig. 10b was used as the starting point of the heat treatment 

simulation. Video S1 in the supplementary information shows the evolution of the 

elemental segregation for the duration of the heat treatment. Segregation was removed 

within a minute of the annealing. The second stage of the annealing, however, suggests 

that some 𝜎 and M23C6 phases form upon cooling in the annealing and HIP (Fig. 10e, f).

M23C6 formation was limited to grain boundaries, whereas 𝜎 was predicted to form both 

on the grain boundaries and in the grain interiors. Under both cooling conditions in 

annealling and HIP, 𝜎 and M23C6 started to form at about 1076 K. However, the 

equilibrium property diagram, Fig. 10d, predicts that 𝜎 and M23C6 should be stable at 1442

K, suggesting that 366 K of undercooling was required to nucleate 𝜎 and M23C6 phases. 

After passing 950 K, growth of all phases stoped in both cases. Cooling at a slower rate of 

0.2 K/s in HIP allowed to reach a volume fraction of 𝜎 and M23C6 of 0.17 and 0.01

respectively, approaching the thermodynamic maximum (Fig. 10d, e). A faster cooling rate 

of 8 K/s annealling reached only a volume fraction of 0.037 and 0.0016, respectively due 

to the limited kinetics (Fig. 10f). A much faster cooling rate is observed during LPBF 

process, 104~106 K ∙ s−1 , resulting in even lower volume fraction of 𝜎 and M23C6

forming (Fig. 10e, f).


23 / 34

3.5. Microstructure characterization

The microstructure in the as-built, annealed and HIPed conditions is shown in Fig. 

11a – c, d – f and g – i, respectively, with increased magnification gradually. The as-built 

specimen shows a good consolidation with defects consisting of mainly micro-cracks 

marked by the white arrows and very few minute gas pores (Fig. 11a – c) in agreement 

with the observation in Figs 7 and 8. No clear evidence of precipitates was detected in the 

BSE imaging of the as-built sample (Fig. 11b, c) while the Scheil-Gulliver calculation

predicted very small fractions of 𝜎 and M23C6 (Fig. 10c). In contrast, the annealing heat 

treatment resulted in precipitation occurring in particular along grain boundaries (dash lines 

in Fig. 11f) and cracks (arrows in Fig. 11e) in consistent with Calphad simulation 

predicting the precipitation of 𝜎 and negligible M23C6 (Section 3.4). Therefore, the 

observed precipitates were likely 𝜎. HIPing resulted in quite similar microstructure to the 

annealed condition (Fig 11g – i). However, the density of precipitates in HIPed condition 

was higher than that in the annealed one (Fig. 11e, h) in agreement with Calphad prediction 

that HIP resulted in a higher volume fraction of 𝜎 (Fig. 10e, f). Moreover, the precipitates 

formed both at grain boundaries and grain interiors in HIPed condition (Fig. 11i). Neither

cracks nor lack-of-fusion (and keyhole) pores were detected in the HIPed condition apart

from some minute round pores which were likely gas-entrapped (Fig. 11h). 


24 / 34

Fig. 11 SEM Back-scattered electron micrographs of (a ‒ c) as-built, (d ‒ f) post heat treated 

and (g – i) hot-isostatic pressed specimens. The solid arrows show the location of irregular 

cracks while the open one highlight a gas pore remained after HIP. Dash lines mark the 

grain boundaries.

The line EDS scanning of across crack in as-built specimen is shown in Fig. 12, from 

which the Si and O peaks and a slight C peak were detected, meaning higher Si, O and C 

concentration at the crack. Meanwhile, the Ni, Cr and Fe tend to be depleted at the crack 

edges.


25 / 34

Fig. 12 EDS linear scanning across a crack in as-built specimen showing higher 

concentration of Si, O and C near the crack.

The grain
microstructure including crystallographic orientation and grain 

morphology in the three different material condition are shown in Fig. 13 with a – c, d – f

and g – i showing the inverse pole figure (IPF) map along the building direction, grain size 

and aspect ratio in the as-built, annealed and HIP conditions, respectively. The EBSD did 

not show strong preferred texture in all the material conditions. However, grains were quite 

elongated along the building direction (Fig. 13a, d, and g) consistent with previous studies 

[36, 37]. It is worth noting that the mean grain size in all the three conditions was quite 

similar with almost the same mean grain size (namely, 21.6, 20.1 and 22.0 μm for as-built, 

annealed and HIP samples, respectively) (Fig. 13b, e, and h). However, grains in the HIP 

condition tend to be more equiaxed than those in the other two conditions. The aspect ratio 


26 / 34

of grain was calculated to reflect the columnarity in grain morphology, which is defined as 

the ratio between the length of the major and minor axes of a grain. The average aspect 

ratio for as-built, annealed and HIPed samples are 3.5, 3.3 and 2.8 (Fig. 13c, f and i), 

suggesting recrystallisation might happen more significantly in HIP than in annealling, 

leading to more equiaxed grains in the HIPed condition. 

Fig. 13 EBSD IPF maps along buiding direction and the distribution of grain size and grain 

aspect ratio for (a – c) as-built, (d – f) annealed and (g – i) hot-isostatic pressed samples.

4. Discussion

4.1. Cracking mechanisms and distribution

Hastelloy-X alloy is known to be susceptible to hot cracking (namely solidification 

cracking and ductility loss cracking) in LPBF [12]. While the solidification cracking are 

mainly influenced by solidification gradients and chemical segregation [14, 20], ductility 


27 / 34

loss cracking is governed by solid state phase transformation such as precipitation and to 

certain extent the chemical segregation [19]. The Scheil-Gulliver calculation of the 

solidification range and solidification gradient predict that the Hastelloy-X is susceptible 

to solidification cracking and more susceptible than the modified alloy studied by Harrison 

et. al. [12] (Figure 10a). Although the Scheil-Gulliver calculation predicts that there should 

be precipitation of 𝜎 and M23C6 in agreement with a study done by Marchese et al. [19], 

SEM imaging did not find clear evidence of precipitates in as-built condition consistent 

with Harrison et al.'s findings [12]. However, the Scheil-Gulliver calculation usually over-

estimate the chemical segregation due to an assumption that there is no diffusion in solids. 

The volume fractions of  𝜎 and carbides in the as-built would be very small and negligible. 

SEM imaging of 2D sections might not be able to reveal the small fraction of precipitates. 

Because no significant precipitates were seen in the as-built condition (Fig. 11c), the 

solidification cracking due to the shrinkage and thermal contraction during solidification

should be the main source causing the formation of cracks in the as-built alloy.

Solidification cracking occurs at the terminal stage of solidification. Therefore, 

solidification cracks are often found at inter-dendritic regions and grain boundaries, 

explaining cracks in the as-built condition of the alloy were often seen at the boundaries 

between different cellular domains (Fig. 7). The Hastelloy-X has a steeper solidification 

gradient at the terminal stage of solidification than the modified alloy studied by Harrison 

et al. [12] (Fig. 10a). Therefore, the Hastelloy-X in this alloy should contain more 

solidification cracks. In addition, because the solubility in solids is lower than in liquid, 

there is chemical segregation from solid to liquid during solidification. As the interdendritic 

(or inter-cellular) regions were the last regions of solidification, there is enrichment of 

solute atoms at the boundaries of inter-dendritic regions. Fig. 10b shows that Si, Mn, W 

and Mo were most segregated in agreement with Marchese et al. [19] in which the Mo 

segretation was evidenced. Segregated regions (either enrichment or depletion) can weaken

the alloy locally, making it more susceptible to cracking due to thermal stress in 

subsequently rapid cooling. Higher concentrations of Si and C towards the free surfaces of 

cracks found in the as-built condition (Fig. 12) indicate a significant role of the chemical 

segregation in formation of cracks.


28 / 34

The crack density distribution appears to be higher in the bottom, then decrease 

towards the middle, finally increase again in the top region of the build. As mentioned 

above (Section 3.1), higher cooling rates in the bottom part of a solid build than that 

towards the top of the build. Higher cooling rates cause faster and larger thermal 

contractions, inducing higher thermal stress that promote the formation of cracks in 

solidification. This probably explains the higher density of cracks observed in the bottom 

region in the as-built condition (Figs 8 and 9). In addition, tensile internal stresses tend to 

build up in regions towards the top and bottom layers while middle layers tend to be in 

compression [16, 38-40]. Compressive stresses in the middle of a build could help in 

closing the cracks, leading to a reduction of cracks in the middle, while tensile stresses 

increase the crack density towards the top of the build. More cracks were also seen near 

the free surface in the as-built condition (Fig. 8a). Fig. 5 shows that lower thermal 

conductivity (that should be the case near the free surface due to the surrounding powder) 

can lead to higher thermal gradient (Fig. 5d, h versus c, g). The higher thermal gradient 

could induce higher thermal stress, hence the crack density as seen in the as-built condition 

(Fig. 8a).  

Post-processing treatments (such as annealing and HIP) are often used to enhance the 

mechanical properties via optimising microstructure and removing cracks. Such clustering 

of cracks observed in the as-built condition should remain unchanged during annealing 

without hot isostatic pressing as it was confirmed by Fig. 8b. The variation trend of crack 

distribution in the annealed condition is quite similar to that in the as-built (Figs 8a, b and 

9). However, the combination of temperature and hydrostatic stress (i.e. HIP) can

significantly close cracks and pores to achieve a near defect-free condition (Fig. 8c). This 

indicates that there was no crack re-healing during the annealing without pressing. This is 

probably because of oxidation of the free surface of defects, preventing the re-heal of 

cracks in annealing, making the closure of defects at high temperatures only possible if 

there was hydrostatic pressure applied.

4.2. Influence of post-processing treatment in microstructure and mechanical properties

Due to rapid cooling and high thermal gradient in additive manufacturing, materials 

fabricated by AM are reported to have different microstructure and higher mechanical 


29 / 34

strength than those made by other processes [36]. For example, Pham et al. observed AM 

316L steel to have a strength which was about more than twice strongher than that of the 

conventional steel while the AM steel remains highly ductile thanks to a microstructure 

that promotes deformation twinning [41, 42]. High cooling rates and steep thermal gradient 

in powder bed fusion are believed to induce fine solidification cells of dense dislocations

in AM alloys. Similar to cellular microstructure found in other AM alloys, Montero-

Sistiaga et al. reported cellular structure of which the boundaries contain dense dislocations

in Hastelloy-X alloy after printing [36]. They also showed that the microstructure was 

removed after heat treatment at a temperature of 1428 K. The heat treatment at a high 

temperature (1450 K) used in our study is in the range of temperature for recrystallisation

which was also confirmed by Marchese et al.[43]. The recrystallisation often results in 

more equiaxed grains. This explains why smaller aspect ratios of grain morphology were 

seen in the heat-treated and HIP conditions (Fig. 13). The aspect ratio of grains in the 

annealed condition is still higher than that for the HIP condition, indicating a less degree 

of recrystallisation in annealing. Dislocations annihilated in recovery and recrystallisation 

in heat treatment at the high temperature of 1450 K, causing a decrease in the yield strength 

of the printed alloy after both the annealing and HIP (Fig. 6). Although precipitates were 

predicted by Calphad and observed via SEM for annealed and HIPed samples (Fig. 10e, f 

and Fig. 11f, i), the loss of the yield strength due to the disappearance of as-built dislocation 

microstructure should outweigh the hardening contribution of precipitates. Interestingly, 

the HIP specimen has higher yield stress  as compared with the annealed one (Fig. 6). This 

is believed due to the precipitation strengthening as the precipitation occurred more 

dominantly in the HIP condition (Fig. 10e, h). Fig. 11f shows that more precipitation was 

mainly due to a slower cooling rate in HIP. According to the Orowan's hardening 

mechanism [44], precipitates can cause more significant hardening in the HIP material, 

leading to higher ultimate strength than the as-build and annealed condition as seen in Fig. 

6a. HIP is also effective in closing pores and cracks, resulting in denser parts (Figs 8 and 

9). The defects like micro-crack are detrimental to both the strength and ductility of metals

[45]. In addition to the hardening induced by precipitates, the removal of cracks also 

contributes to the significant enhancement in strength (in particular the ultimate strength) 

in the HIP condition (Fig. 6a). The defect removal and higher hardening rate after HIP 


30 / 34

extended the uniform deformation before necking, hence increase the ductility of the HIPed 

alloy (Fig. 6a). The annealing without hydrostatic stress is not able to close cracks. Hence, 

there is no increase in the ductility observed for the annealed material.

5. Conclusions

This study identified optimized print parameters from literature data analysis. The 

identification was validated by fabricating Hastelloy-X with extremely high consolidation

using the parameters. Most of process defects were identified to be caused by solidification 

cracking due to steep solidification gradient and solidification range as shown by Scheil-

Gulliver calculation, and partly because of the chemical segregation. The distribution of 

crack density was quantified, showing higher densities in the bottom and top regions of 

builds. In addition, more cracks were detected near the free surface. Heat treatment without 

hydrostatic pressing (i.e. annealing) is not effective in removing the porosity, but results in 

significant decrease in yield strength due to the recovery and recrystallisation of 

microstructure at high temperatures. Although precipitation was predicted by Calphad and 

confirmed by SEM for the annealing, the yield strength was substantially reduced after 

annealing because the strength loss induced by the recrystallisation The unchanged density 

of cracks explains insignificant changes in the ductility of the annealed condition. By 

contrast, HIP – hot isostatic pressing (i.e. the use of heating and hydrostatic stress) is very 

effective in removing the process defects formed in the LPBF alloy to reach almost 100 % 

consolidation after HIP for the Hastelloy-X. The successful removal of defects and the 

more precipitation in HIP lead to significant improvement in uniform elongation 

(increasing from 13% to 20%), ultimate strength (from 965 MPa to 1045 MPa) while 

maintaining moderately high yield stress.

Acknowledgment

Much appreciated is the great support from Luke Griffiths for his original Python 

code package. L.C. acknowledge the support from National Key R&D Program of China 

(grant No. 2017YFB0305800). H.W. appreciated the support from the National Key R&D 

Program (Grant No. 2016YFB1100103) and National Natural Science Foundation of China 


31 / 34

(Grant No. 51771233). M.S.P thanks the support provided by the BIAM - Imperial Centre 

for Materials Characterisation, Processing and Modelling at Imperial College London.

References

[1] A.B. Badiru, V.V. Valencia, D. Liu, Additive manufacturing handbook: Product 
development for the defense industry, CRC Press2017.

[2] Y.H. Zhou, Z.H. Zhang, Y.P. Wang, G. Liu, S.Y. Zhou, Y.L. Li, J. Shen, M. Yan, 
Selective laser melting of typical metallic materials: An effective process prediction model 
developed by energy absorption and consumption analysis, Additive Manufacturing 25 
(2019) 204-217.

[3] Y. Lu, S. Wu, Y. Gan, T. Huang, C. Yang, L. Junjie, J. Lin, Study on the microstructure, 
mechanical property and residual stress of SLM Inconel-718 alloy manufactured by 
differing island scanning strategy, Optics & Laser Technology 75 (2015) 197-206.

[4] P. Kanagarajah, F. Brenne, T. Niendorf, H. Maier, Inconel 939 processed by selective 
laser melting: Effect of microstructure and temperature on the mechanical properties under 
static and cyclic loading, Materials Science and Engineering: A 588 (2013) 188-195.

[5] P. Wang, B. Zhang, C.C. Tan, S. Raghavan, Y.-F. Lim, C.-N. Sun, J. Wei, D. Chi, 
Microstructural characteristics and mechanical properties of carbon nanotube reinforced 
Inconel 625 parts fabricated by selective laser melting, Materials & Design 112 (2016) 
290-299.

[6] L.N. Carter, K. Essa, M.M. Attallah, Optimisation of selective laser melting for a high 
temperature Ni-superalloy, Rapid Prototyping Journal 21(4) (2015) 423-432.

[7] L.N. Carter, M.M. Attallah, R.C. Reed, Laser powder bed fabrication of nickel-base 
superalloys: influence of parameters; characterisation, quantification and mitigation of 
cracking, Superalloys 2012 (2012) 577-586.

[8] T. Vilaro, C. Colin, J.D. Bartout, L. Nazé, M. Sennour, Microstructural and mechanical 
approaches of the selective laser melting process applied to a nickel-base superalloy, 
Materials Science and Engineering: A 534 (2012) 446-451.

[9] F. Wang, Mechanical property study on rapid additive layer manufacture Hastelloy® 
X alloy by selective laser melting technology, The International Journal of Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology 58(5) (2012) 545-551.

[10] D. Herzog, V. Seyda, E. Wycisk, C. Emmelmann, Additive manufacturing of metals, 
Acta Materialia 117 (2016) 371-392.

[11] H.Y. Jung, S.J. Choi, K.G. Prashanth, M. Stoica, S. Scudino, S. Yi, U. Kühn, D.H. 
Kim, K.B. Kim, J. Eckert, Fabrication of Fe-based bulk metallic glass by selective laser 
melting: A parameter study, Materials & Design 86 (2015) 703-708.


32 / 34

[12] N.J. Harrison, I. Todd, K. Mumtaz, Reduction of micro-cracking in nickel superalloys 
processed by Selective Laser Melting: A fundamental alloy design approach, Acta 
Materialia 94 (2015) 59-68.

[13] F. Wang, X.H. Wu, D. Clark, On direct laser deposited Hastelloy X: dimension, 
surface finish, microstructure and mechanical properties, Materials Science and 
Technology 27(1) (2011) 344-356.

[14] D. Tomus, T. Jarvis, X. Wu, J. Mei, P. Rometsch, E. Herny, J.F. Rideau, S. Vaillant, 
Controlling the Microstructure of Hastelloy-X Components Manufactured by Selective 
Laser Melting, Physics Procedia 41 (2013) 823-827.

[15] Q. Han, R. Mertens, M.L. Montero-Sistiaga, S. Yang, R. Setchi, K. Vanmeensel, B. 
Van Hooreweder, S.L. Evans, H. Fan, Laser powder bed fusion of Hastelloy X: Effects of 
hot isostatic pressing and the hot cracking mechanism, Materials Science and Engineering: 
A 732 (2018) 228-239.

[16] M.M. Attallah, R. Jennings, X. Wang, L.N. Carter, Additive manufacturing of Ni-
based superalloys: The outstanding issues, MRS Bulletin 41(10) (2016) 758-764.

[17] S. Kou, A criterion for cracking during solidification, Acta Materialia 88 (2015) 366-
374.

[18] D. Rosenthal, The theory of moving sources of heat and its application of metal 
treatments, Transactions of ASME 68 (1946) 849-866.

[19] G. Marchese, G. Basile, E. Bassini, A. Aversa, M. Lombardi, D. Ugues, P. Fino, S. 
Biamino, Study of the microstructure and cracking mechanisms of hastelloy x produced by 
laser powder bed fusion, Materials (Basel, Switzerland) 11(1) (2018) 106.

[20] D. Tomus, P.A. Rometsch, M. Heilmaier, X. Wu, Effect of minor alloying elements 
on crack-formation characteristics of Hastelloy-X manufactured by selective laser melting, 
Additive Manufacturing 16 (2017) 65-72.

[21] M. Jin, A. Piglione, B. Dovgyy, E. Hosseini, P.A. Hooper, S.R. Holdsworth, M.-S. 
Pham, Cyclic plasticity and fatigue damage of CrMnFeCoNi high entropy alloy fabricated 
by laser powder-bed fusion, Additive Manufacturing 36 (2020) 101584.

[22] D. Tomus, Y. Tian, P.A. Rometsch, M. Heilmaier, X. Wu, Influence of post heat 
treatments on anisotropy of mechanical behaviour and microstructure of Hastelloy-X parts 
produced by selective laser melting, Materials Science and Engineering: A 667 (2016) 42-
53.

[23] L. Chen, T.E. James Edwards, F. Di Gioacchino, W.J. Clegg, F.P.E. Dunne, M.-S. 
Pham, Crystal plasticity analysis of deformation anisotropy of lamellar TiAl alloy: 3D 
microstructure-based modelling and in-situ micro-compression, International Journal of 
Plasticity 119 (2019) 344-360.


33 / 34

[24] R.J. Williams, A. Piglione, T. Rønneberg, C. Jones, M.-S. Pham, C.M. Davies, P.A. 
Hooper, In situ thermography for laser powder bed fusion: Effects of layer temperature on 
porosity, microstructure and mechanical properties, Additive Manufacturing 30 (2019) 
100880.

[25] E. Maire, P.J. Withers, Quantitative X-ray tomography, International Materials 
Reviews 59(1) (2014) 1-43.

[26] L. Griffiths, M.J. Heap, P. Baud, J. Schmittbuhl, Quantification of microcrack 
characteristics and implications for stiffness and strength of granite, International Journal 
of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 100 (2017) 138-150.

[27] J.B. Walsh, The effect of cracks on the compressibility of rock, Journal of Geophysical 
Research (1896-1977) 70(2) (1965) 381-389.

[28] E.E. Underwood, Quantitative evaluation of sectioned material, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1967, pp. 49-60.

[29] H.S. Carslaw, J.C. Jaeger, Conduction of heat in solids, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1959, 2nd ed.  (1959).

[30] Principal Features of Hastelloy-X alloy, (accessed 01 August 2019). 
http://www.haynesintl.com/alloys/alloy-portfolio_/High-temperature-
Alloys/HASTELLOY-X-alloy/HASTELLOY-X-principal-features.aspx.

[31] 
Product 
data 
of 
Hastelloy-X. 
http://www.spacematdb.com/spacemat/m-

datasearch.php?name=Hastelloy%20X.

[32] M. Ohring, 9 - How engineering materials are strengthened and toughened, in: M. 
Ohring (Ed.), Engineering Materials Science, Academic Press, San Diego, 1995, pp. 431-
500.

[33] H.-h. Ding, G.-a. He, X. Wang, F. Liu, L. Huang, L. Jiang, Effect of cooling rate on 
microstructure and tensile properties of powder metallurgy Ni-based superalloy, 
Transactions of Nonferrous Metals Society of China 28(3) (2018) 451-460.

[34] M.-S. Pham, B. Dovgyy, P.A. Hooper, C.M. Gourlay, A. Piglione, The role of side-
branching in microstructure development in laser powder-bed fusion, Nature 
Communications 11(1) (2020) 749.

[35] P.A. Hooper, Melt pool temperature and cooling rates in laser powder bed fusion, 
Additive Manufacturing 22 (2018) 548-559.

[36] M.L. Montero-Sistiaga, S. Pourbabak, J. Van Humbeeck, D. Schryvers, K. 
Vanmeensel, Microstructure and mechanical properties of Hastelloy X produced by HP-
SLM (high power selective laser melting), Materials & Design 165 (2019) 107598.


34 / 34

[37] O. Sanchez-Mata, X. Wang, J.A. Muñiz-Lerma, M. Attarian Shandiz, R. Gauvin, M. 
Brochu, Fabrication of crack-free nickel-based superalloy considered non-weldable during 
laser powder bed fusion, Materials 11(8) (2018) 1288.

[38] S. Zekovic, R. Dwivedi, R. Kovacevic, Thermo-structural finite element analysis of 
direct laser metal deposited thin-walled structures, Proceedings SFF Symposium,. Austin, 
TX, 2005.

[39] P. Mercelis, J.-P. Kruth, Residual stresses in selective laser sintering and selective 
laser melting, Rapid prototyping journal 12(5) (2006) 254-265.

[40] M.F. Zaeh, G. Branner, Investigations on residual stresses and deformations in 
selective laser melting, Production Engineering 4(1) (2010) 35-45.

[41] M.-S. Pham, P. Hooper, Roles of microstructures on deformation response of 316 
stainless steel made by 3D printing, AIP Conference Proceedings, AIP Publishing, 2017, 
p. 040017.

[42] M.S. Pham, B. Dovgyy, P.A. Hooper, Twinning induced plasticity in austenitic 
stainless steel 316L made by additive manufacturing, Materials Science and Engineering: 
A 704 (2017) 102-111.

[43] G. Marchese, E. Bassini, A. Aversa, M. Lombardi, D. Ugues, P. Fino, S. Biamino, 
Microstructural evolution of post-processed Hastelloy-X alloy fabricated by laser powder 
bed fusion, Materials 12(3) (2019) 486.

[44] E. Orowan, Internal stress in metals and alloys, The Institute of Metals, London 451 
(1948).

[45] L. Chen, L. Zhu, Y. Guan, B. Zhang, J. Li, Tougher TiAl alloy via integration of hot 
isostatic pressing and heat treatment, Materials Science and Engineering: A 688 (2017) 
371-377.


