Free-standing Pt nanowires

1

Fabrication of free-standing Pt nanowires for use as thermal anemometry probes in

turbulence measurements

Hai Le-The1,2,4, Christian Küchler3,4, Albert van den Berg2,4, Eberhard Bodenschatz3,4, Detlef 

Lohse1,4, Dominik Krug1.4

1Physics of Fluids Group, MESA+ Institute, University of Twente, Enschede 7522 NB, The 

Netherlands

2BIOS Lab-on-a-Chip Group, MESA+ Institute, University of Twente, Enschede 7522 NB, The 

Netherlands

3Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-Organization, 37077 Göttingen, Germany

4Max Planck-University of Twente Center for Complex Fluid Dynamics 

Correspondence: 
Hai Le-The (h.lethe@utwente.nl)

Dominik Krug (d.j.krug@utwente.nl)

KEYWORDS: Free-standing Pt nanowires, thermal anemometry probes, e-beam lithography, 

self-releasing, turbulence measurements


Free-standing Pt nanowires

2

ABSTRACT

We report a robust fabrication method for patterning free-standing Pt nanowires for the use as 

thermal anemometry probes for small-scale turbulence measurements. Using e-beam 

lithography, high aspect ratio Pt nanowires (~300 nm width, ~70 µm length, ~100 nm thickness) 

were patterned on the surface of oxidized silicon (Si) wafers. Combining wet etching processes 

with dry etching processes, these Pt nanowires have been successfully released free-standing 

between two silicon dioxide (SiO2) beams supported on Si cantilevers. Moreover, the unique 

design of the bridge holding the device allowed to release the device gently without damaging 

the Pt nanowires. The total fabrication time was minimized by restricting the use of e-beam 

lithography to the patterning of the Pt nanowires while standard photolithography was

employed for other parts of the devices. We demonstrate that the fabricated sensors are suitable 

for turbulence measurements when operated in a constant-current mode. A robust calibration 

between output voltage and fluid velocity was established over the velocity range from 0.5 m 

s-1 to 5 m s-1 in an SF6 atmosphere at a pressure of 2 bar and a temperature of 21℃. The sensing 

signal from the nanowires showed negligible drift over a period of several hours. Moreover, we 

confirmed that the nanowires are able to withstand high dynamic pressures by testing them in 

air at room temperature velocities up to 55 m s-1.


Free-standing Pt nanowires

3

INTRODUCTION

Even today, fully resolved measurements of flow velocities in highly turbulent flows remain 

highly challenging. The difficulty is best illustrated by considering the non-dimensional 

Reynolds number (Re), which measures turbulence intensity by relating the magnitudes of 

inertial and viscous forces acting in the flow. Accessing high Re flows experimentally is 

important from a practical perspective as many engineering applications, such as the boundary 

layers on the hulls of ships and planes or flow problems in wind farms, fall into this regime. 

Moreover, measurements in high Re flows are also highly relevant to foster and to validate our 

theoretical understanding of turbulence.

A hallmark of turbulence is the fact that ‘eddying motions’, i.e. seemingly random velocity 

fluctuations, across a wide range of scales contribute to the evolution of the flow. The range of 

spatial scales with Re as L/η ∼ Re3/4, which renders the measurement challenge obvious1. If the 

largest scale L is fixed, e.g. by the size of the lab facilities, high Re can only be reached if the 

smallest scale η (the so-called Kolmogorov scale) is decreased in size. Typical sizes of η – and 

consequently the spatial resolution requirements – are in the order of micrometers. Also the 

temporal resolution is essential to resolve the short turnover timescales of such small eddies2,3. 

Especially in cases where flow structures are advected past the probe by a strong mean flow, 

such as in investigations of turbulent boundary layers, frequency requirements can reach orders 

of 100 kHz4.

To date, the best resolution and bandwidth characteristics for measuring turbulent velocity 

fluctuations are achieved using ‘hotwire anemometry’ (HWA), which is a proven technique 

with a long history5–8. Its measurement principle is based on the velocity dependent convective 

cooling of a heated wire element (with wire diameter d) that is placed in the fluid. The time 

varying cooling leads to changes in the wire electrical resistance and thus to a voltage signal in 

the attached electrical circuit, which can be calibrated to yield a fluid velocity measurement. 

The effective sensor size in HWA is given by the length (ℓ) of the wire. However, ℓ cannot be 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

4

decreased arbitrarily. This is because a shorter wire length also increases the portion of the heat 

that leaves the wire via end-conduction, which is unwanted and detrimental to the measurement. 

This issue can only be overcome if shorter wires are also made thinner. Traditionally a 

minimum aspect ratio ℓ/d ≤ 200 has been used9, while more recently Hultmark et al.10 provided 

a refinement of this criterion. The conventional wire filaments with the best performance 

characteristics are produced from so-called “Wollaston wires” (thin Pt wires clad in silver) by 

etching away part of the silver jacket. The sensing element is then formed by the exposed 

platinum (Pt) wire for which minimum diameters of about 1 µm can be achieved in this way. 

Pushing beyond this limit has proven very difficult despite significant efforts. For example, 

Willmarth & Sharma produced wires with the length of 50 μm using a Wollaston wire of 0.5 

μm in diameter11. However, given the relatively low aspect ratio, the performance of this design 

was hampered by end-conduction effects. Ligrani & Bradshaw9 stuck to an aspect ratio of 

approximately 200 when designing the wires with a diameter of 0.625 μm, but with a minimum 

of 125 μm the resulting wire length was still rather large. The need to decrease sensor sizes 

below this limitation initiated a push towards nanofabrication techniques. Early efforts by 

Löfdahl et al.12 yielded only moderate improvements as their probes featured a large sensing 

area. Jiang et al.13 employed microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) techniques to fabricate 

a poly-silicon thermal anemometry probe but the very good spatial resolution came at the price 

of significant end-conduction losses in their case. End-conduction is also a problem for the 

multi-component hot-wire probes (50 μm × 6 μm × 2.7 μm) fabricated by Chen et al.14. 

Moreover, being fixed to a wall, these sensors are also not suitable for conventional turbulence 

measurements. 

More recently, the development of the nanoscale thermal anemometry probe, termed 

NSTAP15–19, provided a breakthrough towards unprecedented small-scale resolution. Some 

noteworthy later developments, such as a micro fabricated multi-array probe that provides 

access to the full velocity gradient tensor20, or a specialized hotwire sensor for measurements 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

5

in cryogenic helium21 have been reported since. For completeness, it should also  be mentioned 

that MEMS techniques have been employed to fabricate small-scale cantilevers for flow 

measurements22,23, but the measurement principle (beam deflection) is different in those cases. 

In terms of sensor size the NSTAP remains the state of the art to date. The production process 

of the NSTAP combines standard photolithography with a series of dry-etching and wet-etching 

processes. The sensing element consists of a Pt wire, which is approximately 100 nm thick, 

while its width is still 1 μm. The latter is a limitation of the photolithography process but in part 

also a choice in order to enhance the convective heat transfer from the wire16. Note also that for 

a variant of the NSTAP, the q-NSTAP reported by Fan et al.18, electron-beam lithography is 

employed. This reduces the width of the wire to between 600 nm and 800 nm. However, with 

a length of only 10 µm, the q-NSTAP is designed to measure humidity and is not suited for 

anemometry. Even with these reduced wire dimensions, the authors report issues regarding the 

structural integrity of the sensor due to internal stresses originating from wet etching of silicon 

dioxide (SiO2) to release the wire. 

Despite these efforts, measurement resolution remains the bottleneck for investigations of 

very high Re turbulence in a well-controlled lab environment. In an effort to push the envelope 

on this, we report a robust method for the fabrication of free-standing Pt nanowires here. These 

novel wires feature a reduced cross section (300 nm width, 100 nm thickness) compared to 

existing sensors. A lower cross section offers several advantages. On the one hand, it will allow 

to reduce the effective sensing length while keeping the aspect ratio constraint and thereby 

limiting conduction losses. Note that with a length of 70 µm we made a rather conservative 

choice in the design reported here, since as far as the fabrication and robustness are concerned, 

longer wires are more challenging.  On the other hand, reducing the cross section also reduces 

the thermal inertia of the sensor, which will lead to a better frequency response. Moreover, by 

approaching an aspect ratio of 1 between width and thickness of the wire, we expect to eliminate 

spurious angular sensitivity of the measured velocity signal. In this paper, we describe how by 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

6

combining e-beam lithography with wet etching processes and dry etching processes, Pt 

nanowires have been successfully fabricated free-standing between two silicon dioxide (SiO2) 

beams supported on Si cantilevers. We further confirm that the fabricated nanowires are capable 

and sufficiently robust to measure the velocity of turbulent flows even at large fluid densities. 

We tested this in the Variable Density Turbulence Tunnel (VDTT) with pressurized SF6 as 

working fluid as well as in an air flow with velocities up to 55 m s-1 without damaging the wires.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1 presents an overview over the processing sequence for the fabrication process of a 

device featuring a free-standing Pt nanowire. Further details on the dimensions of the structure 

are provided in the Supplementary information (Figure S1). We elaborate on individual 

fabrication steps in the following. Further details and the specific processing parameters 

employed are provided in the Materials and Methods section.


Free-standing Pt nanowires

7

Figure 1 Fabrication process for patterning free-standing Pt nanowires. (a) Wet thermal 

oxidation of a Si wafer. (b) Patterning a Pt nanowire using e-beam lithography. (c) Frontside 

patterning Pt connections to the Pt nanowire using standard photolithography. (d) Spin-coating 

of photoresist (PR) on the frontside of the patterned wafer, and (e) wet etching of SiO2 layer on 

its backside using a BHF solution. (f) Backside patterning a PR structure of the device base, 

followed by (g) deep dry etching of Si. (h) Frontside patterning a PR structure of the support 

cantilevers. (i) Wet etching of SiO2 using a BHF solution, resulting in a free-standing PR line 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

8

with the Pt nanowire. (k) Dry etching of Si, followed by (ℓ) dry etching of PR using O2 plasma 

at low power. (m) Isotropic dry etching of Si using XeF2 for self-releasing of the device.

Patterning Pt nanowires using electron beam lithography

An e-beam lithography (EBL) system operating at 100 kV (Raith EBPG 5150, Raith GmbH, 

Germany) was used to pattern Pt nanowires on the surface of oxidized Si wafers (Figure 1b). 

These wafers were prepared by wet thermal oxidation of conventional (100) 4-inch silicon (Si) 

wafers (385 μm thick, Okmetic, Finland) (Figure 1a). Prior to the sputtering of Pt, a thin 

titanium (Ti) layer of ~13 nm thickness was sputtered in order to improve the adhesion of these 

patterned Pt nanowires. The choice of Ti for the adhesion layer is beneficial here because it can 

be easily removed together with SiO2 layer in a buffered hydrofluoric acid (BHF) solution, thus 

leaving free-standing pure Pt nanowires. Figure 2 shows the high-resolution scanning electron 

microscopy (HR-SEM) images of a Pt nanowire fabricated on the surface of an oxidized Si 

wafer. A well-defined Pt nanowire was obtained with dimensions matching the specifications

(~300 nm width, ~70 µm length, ~100 nm thickness). The pattern was expanded slightly at the 

wire tips to facilitate the electrical connection

Figure 2 Top-view HR-SEM image (scale bar: 10 µm) of a Pt nanowire patterned on the surface 

of an oxidized Si wafer, with a close-up image of the tip of the wire which is expanded slightly 

to facilitate the connection with the Pt micropattern (scale bar: 1 µm).


Free-standing Pt nanowires

9

Patterning Pt connections to the Pt nanowires

For the electrical connection to the Pt nanowire, Pt micropatterns (termed Pt connections) were 

fabricated by combining standard photolithography with a lift-off process (Figure 1c). Figure 3

shows the optical microscopy images of Pt connections patterned on the surface of an oxidized 

Si wafer. It should be noted that the precision of the overlay of the Pt connections with the Pt 

nanowire is crucial in this step as any misalignment between these structures can disrupt the 

electrical connection with the Pt nanowire.

Figure 3 Optical microscopy image (scale bar: 500 µm) of Pt connections, with a close-up 

image at the Pt nanowire location (scale bar: 5 µm).

Backside patterning of the device base using dry etching of Si 

Prior to the backside patterning of the wafer, its frontside was covered with a PR layer (Figure 

1d). The wafer was then immersed in a BHF solution in order to completely remove the SiO2

layer on the backside (Figure 1e), while the SiO2 layer on the frontside containing the patterned 

Pt structures remained protected by the PR coating.

Subsequently, a PR structure of the device base was patterned on the backside of the wafer

using a standard photolithography process (Figure 1f). The patterned PR structure was hard-

baked at 120℃ for 10 min to harden the PR areas before conducting the etching of Si in an 

inductively coupled plasma (ICP) deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) instrument (SPTS Pegasus 

system, UK), using the standard Bosch process (Figure 1g). Figure 4 shows the HR-SEM 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

10

images of the device base after the dry etching process. It is worth mentioning that a negatively 

tapered profile was obtained after the deep Si etching. This needs to be taken into account when 

designing the holding bridge for the self-releasing of the device (Figure 1ℓ).

Figure 4 Side-view and cross-sectional HR-SEM images (scale bar: 200 µm) of backside 

patterning of the device base using dry etching of Si.

Frontside patterning of the device 

Figure 5 shows the optical microscopy images of a PR structure patterned on top of the Pt 

structure. Also in this case, the alignment of the patterned PR structure with the Pt structure 

needs to be precise so that the PR structure completely covers the Pt structure, especially at the 

Pt nanowire location where it is covered by a PR line, as shown in the close-up image (Figure 

5). This ensures that the Pt structure is not damaged during the subsequent patterning of the 

cantilevers by wet etching and dry etching processes (Figures 1i and 1k).


Free-standing Pt nanowires

11

Figure 5 Optical microscopy image (scale bar: 500 µm) of a PR structure patterned on top of 

the Pt structure, with a close-up image at the Pt nanowire location (scale bar: 100 µm).

For releasing the PR line, the patterned wafers were immersed in a BHF solution for 30 min. 

As a result, the SiO2 under the PR line was etched, thus leaving the free-standing PR line with 

the Pt nanowire stuck to it (Figures 1i and 6b). Since both PR and Si are hydrophobic any liquid 

trapped between the PR line and the Si surface was removed quickly and easily when spin-

drying the wafers. Importantly, this resulted in no damage to the free-standing PR line 

supporting the Pt nanowire.

Figure 6a shows the side-view HR-SEM image of the support cantilevers after dry etching 

of Si from the frontside of the wafer. This etching process needs to be stopped when the 

thickness of the remaining Si membrane (Figure 1k) is down to approximately 10 μm. Etching 

through the Si-layer can lead to a leak of cooling gas from the backside, thus terminating the 

etching process. Crucially, further etching without cooling can result in burning of the Pt line, 

and hence a breaking of the Pt nanowire.

Figure 6 (a) Side-view HR-SEM image (scale bar: 500 µm) support cantilevers after dry 

etching of Si from the frontside of the wafer. Note that the slight damage visible on the top 

surface of the device base was caused by handling during the SEM inspection. (b) Cross-

sectional HR-SEM image (scale bar: 20 µm) of a free-standing PR line with the Pt nanowire.

To remove the PR covering the Pt nanowire, reactive O2 plasma etching was used (Figure 

1ℓ). This needs to be done gently at low power to avoid burning the PR line, and thereby 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

12

breaking the Pt nanowire. The removal of PR was conducted before releasing the device 

because it turned out that the PR line became brittle after the dry etching process (Figure 1k). 

This resulted in frequent damage of the PR line during the releasing which then also affected 

the Pt nanowire. 

Isotropic dry etching of Si using XeF2

Figure 7 shows the HR-SEM images of a fabricated device consisting of a Pt nanowire free-

standing between two SiO2 beams supported on Si cantilevers (Figure 1m). After isotropic dry 

etching of Si in XeF2, the remaining Si membrane was completely etched, forming two free-

standing SiO2-coated Si cantilevers (Figure 7b). It should be noted that the Si underneath the Pt 

nanowire as well as the Si at the tip of two cantilevers were also etched, thus resulting in the Pt 

nanowire free-standing on SiO2 beams (Figure 7c). 

Thanks to special design of the device holding bridge (Figure 1ℓ), the final etching step also 

served to self-release the device from the wafer. The holding bridge also has a remaining Si 

layer of ~10 μm and is thus etched away in XeF2. This self-releasing procedure has proven 

necessary and important since it appeared that breaking the device led to frequent failures of 

the Pt nanowire (presumably due to the vibrations of the cantilevers). As confirmed in the close-

up images, the resulting free-standing Pt nanowire has a width of ~300 nm and a length of ~70 

μm.


Free-standing Pt nanowires

13

Figure 7 (a) Top-view and (b) side-view HR-SEM images (scale bar: 1 mm) with close-up 

images (scale bar: 5 µm) of a fabricated device consisting of a free-standing Pt nanowire (~300 

nm width, ~70 µm length, ~100 nm thickness). (c) Cross-sectional HR-SEM image (scale bar: 

50 µm) of a fabricated Pt nanowire hanging between two SiO2 beams supported on Si 

cantilevers.

Batch size and fabrication yield

With our mask design, each 4-inch wafer contains 150 devices. Typical yields in the trial 

fabrication processes performed so far were about 50% - 70% (~70 – 100 functional devices 

per wafer). A limiting factor for the fabrication yield was the manual handling of the self-

released devices by tweezers after dry-etching. We believe that the fabrication yield can be 

increased further by improving the device handling and by further optimizing the fabrication 

process steps, especially regarding the uniformity of the dry-etching steps over the entire wafer. 

Additionally, it should be mentioned that also even thinner wires with widths of 200 nm and 

100 nm were successfully produced with this process. However, in these cases the fabrication 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

14

yield was impractically low and the wires turned out to be not robust enough. We therefore did 

not pursue the production of wires thinner than 300 nm further. 

Performance of the fabricated devices used as thermal anemometer probes

A typical initial cold resistance for the nanowire is 820Ω, but this value was seen to drop 

significantly when the wire was first heated up. Annealing the nanowire with incrementally 

increasing currents up to ~1 mA reduced the resistance to Rw ≈ 740Ω, and this value was found 

to be stable over repeated heating cycles with comparable currents. The annealing was 

performed in the actual experiment with a weak flow of  either air or SF6 gas. While the cold 

resistance appeared stable after shorter times already, we typically annealed over several hours 

in order to avoid any spurious drift in the subsequent tests. By measuring the wire resistance in 

a temperature controlled environment we determined the temperature coefficient of resistivity 

to be α20℃ = 0.0021 K-1. 

Figure 8 (a) Sketch of the CCA circuit. (b) Measurement setup in the VDTT. (c) Calibration 

results in the VDTT along with a repeat taken several hours later. (d) Velocity power spectrum 

as a function of frequency f recorded with our device (in constant current mode) compared to a 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

15

commercial reference probe run by a constant temperature  anemometer (CTA). (e) Calibration 

results in air at room temperature.

The nanowires were operated in a bridge circuit (see figure 8a) and tested in the Variable 

Density Turbulence Tunnel (VDTT) in Göttingen24 in a gaseous sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) 

environment up to extremely high Reynolds numbers (see schematic in figure 8b). Note that 

the purpose of using SF6 here is to reduce the kinematic viscosity compared to e.g. air which 

allows to reach high Re while keeping flow velocities moderate. This effect can be enhanced 

by pressurizing the tunnel up to 15 bar. Further details of the setup and operating conditions are 

given in the Materials and Methods section. In order to calibrate the sensor output voltage Eb

against the fluid velocity, a time average of Eb was recorded for several settings of the tunnel 

velocity V in non-turbulent conditions. In order to gauge a potential drift of the bridge voltage, 

the calibration was performed both before and after a measurement series that spanned several 

hours. The calibration results are presented in Figure 8(c). There is a clear and monotonic trend 

between Eb and V that can be captured very accurately over the full velocity range by fitting a 

fourth-order polynomial (indicated by the lines), which is a standard procedure for hotwire 

measurements25. Importantly, calibration results before and after the measurement series are 

almost indistinguishable, indicating that the drift of the sensor is negligible over an operation 

period of several hours. As an additional validation, we compare the energy spectra of the 

fluctuating velocity v(t) measured by our probe to results obtained using a standard probe 

(length 450 µm, diameter 2.5 µm, Dantec Dynamics custom design) as a reference in Figure 

8(d). These measurements were taken in 2 bar SF6 with a mean flow velocity V = 3.75 m s-1. 

The Taylor Reynolds number was Reλ = 990 and the viscous length scale η ~ 63 µm. Generally 

the spectra agree very closely between the two sensors which also manifests in the fact that the 

velocity variances (i.e. the integral of the spectra) differ only by about 1%, which is on the order 

of the discrepancy expected as the probes are not located in the exact same location. The 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

16

collapse of the  spectra up to a frequency f ~1 kHz is in particular remarkable since the reference 

was operated in a constant temperature mode, which offers superior temporal resolution 

characteristics to the constant current mode employed to operate our wire here. The slightly 

elevated noise level at very high frequencies on the order of 10 kHz for our nanowire is also a 

result of the rather basic circuitry and components employed for these first tests. Further, there 

were no issues operating the wires at pressures up to 15 bar in SF6 , at which the gas density is 

more than 1/10th that of water at room temperature.  To test whether the wires also perform well 

in other fluids and at larger flow speeds, we additionally operated the wire in air at room 

temperature. In this case the flow was generated by pressurized air exiting a nozzle. Also here, 

the data can be very well represented by a monotonically increasing fourth-order polynomial 

across the full range of 5 m s-1 ≤ V ≤ 55 m s-1. The wire was able to withstand the dynamic 

pressure at the highest velocities without any problems (Figure 8e).

CONCLUSION

In summary, we report a robust fabrication method, combining e-beam lithography with wet 

etching and dry etching processes, for patterning free-standing Pt nanowires used as thermal 

anemometer probes for turbulence measurements. With precise control of the dry etching 

processes, Pt nanowires (~300 nm width, ~100 nm thickness) with a length of 70 µm have been 

successfully released free-standing between two SiO2 beams that are supported on Si cantilevers. 

A critical aspect is the design of the holding bridge, which ensures a safe and gentle release of 

the device without damaging the wires. Further, limiting the use of e-beam lithography to the 

patterning of the Pt nanowires renders the process cost and time efficient. These benefits far 

outweigh the additional complication arising from the resulting need to align e-beam and optical 

lithography patterns with high accuracy. The operational tests have confirmed that the wires 

are suitable for turbulence measurements in different working media and at a high dynamic 

pressures. 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

17

Further characterizations and developments regarding the circuitry, in particular the 

implementation of a CTA capable of handling the relatively high wire resistances, are necessary 

to exploit the full potential. However, it is already clear that the nanowire design presented here 

holds a lot of promise regarding several aspects: (i) A more slender wire allows to use shorter 

wire lengths without being compromised by end-conduction effects; (ii) Smaller sensing 

elements are expected to improve the frequency response of the anemometer even if the wire is 

operated in a constant temperature mode26; (iii) Due to its very small thermal inertia, the wires

can yield sufficient frequency resolution for many flow cases even when operated in constant-

current mode, as our preliminary results here prove. This eliminates the need for a feedback 

loop, thereby simplifying the circuitry significantly; (iv) The quasi circular shape of the sensing 

element is expected to avoid an unwanted pitch sensitivity of the sensor. We aim to explore and 

quantify these benefits in the future in an effort to push the limits for highly resolved high Re

turbulence measurements.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Wet thermal oxidation of Si wafers

Conventional (100) 4-inch Si wafers (385 μm thick, Okmetic, Finland) with a thick thermal 

oxide layer of approximately 2 μm were prepared by wet thermal oxidation (Figure 1a). Prior 

to the wet thermal oxidation process, all the Si wafers were cleaned to prevent cross-

contamination27. Subsequently, the Si wafers were loaded into a high temperature tube furnace 

(Model 287, TEMPRESS), using a quartz carrier to implement the wet oxidation at 1150℃ for 

12 h. During the oxidation process, the flow rate of a mixture of water vapor and nitrogen gas 

was fixed at 2 ℓ min-1. The ramping and cooling rates were set at 10℃ min-1 and 7℃ min-1, 

respectively.

Patterning Pt nanowires using electron beam lithography


Free-standing Pt nanowires

18

Prior to the e-beam writing, positive resist (NANOTM 950PMMA Series Resists in 

Chlorobenzene, MicroChem, US) was spin-coated over the surface of the oxidized Si wafers at 

2500 rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 165℃ for 2 min. Subsequently, an e-beam lithography 

(EBL) system with a 100-kV (Raith EBPG 5150, Raith GmbH, Germany) was used to write the 

nanowire pattern into the resist layer. The written wafers were then developed in a developer 

solution (MIBK-IPA mixture) in 90 s, followed by rinsing with deionized (DI) water using a 

quick dump rinser and spin-drying with nitrogen (N2).

A titanium (Ti) layer of ~13 nm and a platinum (Pt) layer of ~100 nm were sputtered over 

the patterned wafers using an ion-beam sputtering system (home-built T’COathy system, 

MESA+, NanoLab)28. The sputtering processes were performed at 200 W and at a pressure of 

6.6×10-3 mbar which was adjusted using an argon (Ar) flow. Subsequently, the wafers were 

immersed in acetone with sonication to perform the lift-off process. After rinsing the wafers 

with DI water and spin-drying with N2, the fabrication of Pt nanowires patterned on the surface 

of the oxidized Si wafers was finished (Figure 1b).

Patterning Pt connections to the Pt nanowires

A positive photoresist (PR) layer (OiR 907-17i, Fujifilm, Japan) was spin-coated over the wafer 

surface at 4000 rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 95℃ for 1 min. A photo-mask made of 

quartz containing inverted chromium (Cr) patterns connected to the patterned Pt nanowires was 

fabricated in-house by using a mask-making system (DWL 2000 Laser Lithography System, 

Heidelberg Instruments, Germany). The exposure process was performed by using a mask 

alignment system (EVG620, EV Group, Austria) for 5 s at an intensity of 12 mW cm-2 in hard 

contact mode. Thereafter, the wafers were post-baked at 120℃ for 1 min, followed by 

developing in a OPD4246 solution for 1 min, rinsing with DI water, and drying with N2. A Ti 

layer of ~6 nm and a Pt layer of ~100 nm were sputtered over the patterned wafers using the 

T’COathy system. The lift-off process was conducted in acetone with sonication, followed by 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

19

rinsing the wafers with DI water. After spin-drying with N2, the fabrication of Pt connections 

to the Pt nanowires was completed (Figure 1c).

Backside etching of the thermal oxide layer 

The patterned surface of the oxidized Si wafers was covered with a PR layer (OiR 908-35, 

Fujifilm, Japan) by spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 95℃ for 3 min

(Figure 1d). The wafers were then immersed in a buffered hydrofluoric acid (BHF) solution for 

30 min to remove the SiO2 layer completely (etch rate of ~68 nm min-1) on their backside

(Figure 1c).

Backside patterning of the device base using dry etching of Si 

After removing the PR layer in acetone, cleaning with DI water and drying with N2 gas, the 

backside of the wafers was spin-coated with a PR layer (OiR 908-35, Fujifilm, Japan) at 2000 

rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 95℃ for 3 min. A photo-mask containing a Cr pattern of 

the device base was used for the exposure process, which was performed by using the mask 

alignment EVG620 system for 15 s at an intensity of 12 mW cm-2 in hard contact mode. The 

alignment with the frontside Pt structures was performed using the bottom alignment with 

cross-hair mode. Thereafter, the wafers were post-baked at 120℃ for 1 min, followed by 

developing in the OPD4246 solution for 3 min, rinsing with DI water, and drying with N2. 

Subsequently, the wafers were baked at 120℃ for 10 min to harden the remaining PR areas for 

further backside etching of the Si (Figure 1f).

The etching of Si was conducted in an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) deep reactive ion 

etching (DRIE) instrument (SPTS Pegasus system, UK), using the standard Bosch process with 

105 cycles (0.6 s deposition of C4F8, 1.75 s etching of Si by SF6) (Figure 1g). After the deep Si 

etching, the wafers were immersed in a 99% nitric acid (HNO3) solution for 30 min to 

completely remove the PR layer and any other residues.


Free-standing Pt nanowires

20

Frontside patterning of the device

Subsequently, the wafers were flipped and their frontside was spin-coated with a positive PR 

layer (OiR 907-17i, Fujifilm, Japan) at 4000 rpm for 45 s, followed by baking at 95℃ for 1 

min. A photo-mask containing Cr pattern of support cantilevers was used for the exposure 

process was performed by using the mask alignment EVG620 system for 5 s at an intensity of 

12 mW cm-2 in hard contact mode. The wafers were then post-baked at 120℃ for 1 min, 

followed by developing in the OPD4246 solution for 1 min, rinsing with DI water, and drying 

with N2. Subsequently, the wafers were baked at 120℃ for 10 min to harden the PR layer 

(Figure 1h).

Releasing of the PR line with the Pt nanowire

The patterned wafers were then immersed in the BHF solution for 30 min to remove the 

unprotected SiO2 layer completely. Since the PR line covering the Pt nanowire at the tip of the 

cantilevers has a small width of approximately 3 μm, etching in the BHF solution for 30 min 

resulted in a complete removal of SiO2 under the PR line and Ti under the Pt nanowire. As a 

result, the PR line with the Pt nanowire stuck to it got released in this step (Figure 1i).

Patterning support cantilevers using dry etching of Si

The wafers were then etched in the SPTS Pegasus system using the fine-etching process with 

90 cycles (Figure 1k) until the remaining Si layer reached a thickness of approximately 10 µm.

Etching of the PR line using O2 plasma

To remove the PR covered the Pt nanowire, oxygen (O2) plasma etching was performed in a 

parallel plate reactive ion etching system (home-built TEtske system, MESA+, NanoLab) at 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

21

wafer-level, 10 mTorr, and 25 W for 20 min. A low power etching was used in order to not 

break the Pt nanowire during the etching of PR (Figure 1ℓ).

Isotropic etching of Si using XeF2

For the final patterning of the cantilevers and for releasing the devices, the wafers were put in 

a gas phase Xactix XeF2 E1 system (etching time per cycle: 30 s, temperate: 35℃, pressure: 

3000 mTorr), so that the Si was isotropically etched by xenon difluoride (XeF2, etching rate of 

~1 μm) (Figure 1m). This resulted in an etching through of the remaining Si layer, thus forming 

two free-standing SiO2-coated Si cantilevers. The Si underneath the Pt nanowire and the Si at 

the tip of two cantilevers were also etched, thus resulting in the Pt nanowire free-standing on 

SiO2 beams. The device was also self-released after this etching step thanks to the special design 

of the device holding bridge.

Electrical connection to the device using a silver conductive glue

For the electrical connection, the fabricated device was mounted on the prongs of a commercial 

probe holder (Dantec Dynamics A/S, Denmark) using a silver conductive glue (Figure S2). In 

order to cure the glue, the device mounted probe was baked in an oven at 120℃ for at least 15 

min.

Testing the fabricated devices used as thermal anemometer probes

To operate the nanowire, we used a constant current anemometer (CCA) circuit as sketched in 

Figure 8a. Here, the device was placed in a bridge that features large ballast resistances Rb = 12

kΩ at the top of both arms. Since Rb
Rw, this ensures that the wire current iw remains 

essentially constant, even as Rw changes slightly. With the nanowire exposed to the flow, we 

adjust the bridge voltage U0 until the desired overheat ratio a = Rw = Rw;20℃ is reached with 

typical values of a = 1.2 – 1.4 corresponding to wire overheat temperatures of 100℃ – 200℃. 


Free-standing Pt nanowires

22

The resistance Rp is chosen such that the bridge is balanced at working conditions. The bridge 

voltage is then proportional to small differences in Rw that come about as the time varying 

cooling by the flow changes the wire temperature slightly. Amplified by a factor K = 100 via 

an instrumentation amplifier, the bridge voltage Eb is recorded as the output parameter of the 

CCA using an analogue-digital converter (ADC). A calibration and additional signal processing 

(e.g. filtering) as required finally yield the desired measurement of the fluctuating fluid velocity.

The nanowire was tested in the VDTT in Göttingen described elsewhere24. The device was 

placed in the freestream behind an active turbulence generating grid as sketched in Figure 8b. 

The grid triggers turbulent motion in the fluid such that the fluid velocity v(t) at the hotwire 

location fluctuates in time around its mean V. For the present set of measurements, the VDTT 

was operated at a pressure p = 2 bar with SF6 at a temperature of 21℃ as the working medium. 

The overheat ratio was set to a = 1.24 and the wire current was iw = 0.622 mA.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is supported by the Max Planck-University of Twente Center for Complex Fluid 

Dynamics and by the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO) Gravitation 

programme funded by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science of the government of the 

Netherlands.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no conflict of interest

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Supplementary information accompanies the manuscript on the Microsystems & 

Nanoengineering website: http://www.nature.com/micronano.


Free-standing Pt nanowires

23

REFERENCES

1.
Pope, S. B. Turbulent Flows. (Cambridge University Press, 2000).

2.
Grossmann, S. & Lohse, D. Characteristic scales in Rayleigh-Benard turbulence. Phys. 

Lett. A 173, 58–62 (1993).

3.
Emsellem, V., Kadanoff, L. P., Lohse, D., Tabeling, P. & Wang, Z. J. Transitions and 

probes in turbulent helium. Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Physics, Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. 

Interdiscip. Top. 55, 2672–2681 (1997).

4.
Hutchins, N., Nickels, T. B., Marusic, I. & Chong, M. S. Hot-wire spatial resolution 

issues in wall-bounded turbulence. J. Fluid Mech. 635, 103–136 (2009).

5.
Perry, A. E. Hot-wire anemometry. Oxford Oxford Univ. Press. (1982).

6.
Bruun, H. H. Hot-wire anemometry. Oxford Oxford Univ. Press. (1995).

7.
Tropea, C, Yarin, A. L. & F. J. Springer handbook of experimental fluid mechanics. 

Berlin: Springer (2007).

8.
Comte-Bellot, G. Hot-wire anemometry. Annu. Rev. 209–231 (1976).

9.
Ligrani, P. M. & Bradshaw, P. Spatial resolution and measurement of turbulence in the 

viscous sublayer using subminiature hot-wire probes. Exp. Fluids 5, 407–417 (1987).

10.
Hultmark, M., Ashok, A. & Smits, A. J. A new criterion for end-conduction effects in 

hot-wire anemometry. Meas. Sci. Technol. 22, 055401 (2011).

11.
Willmarth, W. W. & Sharma, L. K. Study of turbulent structure with hot wires smaller 

than the viscous length. J. Fluid Mech. 142, 121–149 (1984).

12.
Löfdahl, L., Stemme, G. & Johansson, B. Silicon based flow sensors used for mean 

velocity and turbulence measurements. Exp. Fluids 12, 270–276 (1992).

13.
Jiang, F., Tai, Y.-C., Ho, C.-M. & Li, W. J. A micromachined polysilicon hot-wire 

anemometer. in Solid state sensor and actuator workshop (1994).

14.
Chen, J., Fan, Z., Zou, J., Engel, J. & Liu, C. Two-dimensional micromachined flow 

sensor array for fluid mechanics studies. J. Aerosp. Eng. 16, 85–97 (2003).


Free-standing Pt nanowires

24

15.
Kunkel, G. J., Arnold, C. B. & Smits, A. J. Development of NSTAP: Nanoscale thermal 

anemometry probe. J. Microelectromechanical Syst. 3, 1938–1945 (2006).

16.
Bailey, S. C. C. et al. Turbulence measurements using a nanoscale thermal anemometry 

probe. J. Fluid Mech. 663, 160–179 (2010).

17.
Vallikivi, M. & Smits, A. J. Fabrication and characterization of a novel nanoscale 

thermal anemometry probe. J. Microelectromechanical Syst. 23, 899–907 (2014).

18.
Fan, Y., Arwatz, G., Van Buren, T. W., Hoffman, D. E. & Hultmark, M. Nanoscale 

sensing devices for turbulence measurements. Exp. Fluids 56, 1–13 (2015).

19.
Fu, M. K., Fan, Y. & Hultmark, M. Design and validation of a nanoscale cross ‑ wire 

probe ( X ‑ NSTAP ). Exp. Fluids 1–14 (2019). doi:10.1007/s00348-019-2743-0

20.
Borisenkov, Y., Kholmyansky, M., Krylov, S., Liberzon, A. & Tsinober, A. Multiarray 

Micromachined Probe for Turbulence Measurements Assembled of Suspended Hot-Film 

Sensors. J. Microelectromechanical Syst. 24, 1503–1509 (2015).

21.
Diribarne, P., Thibault, P. & Roche, P. E. Nano-shaped hot-wire for ultra-high resolution 

anemometry in cryogenic helium. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 90, (2019).

22.
Puczylowski, J., Hölling, A., Peinke, J., Bhiladvala, R. & Hölling, M. A new approach 

to highly resolved measurements of turbulent flow. Meas. Sci. Technol. 26, 1–12 (2015).

23.
Salort, J., Monfardini, A. & Roche, P. E. Cantilever anemometer based on a 

superconducting micro-resonator: Application to superfluid turbulence. Rev. Sci. Instrum.

83, (2012).

24.
Bodenschatz, E., Bewley, G. P., Nobach, H., Sinhuber, M. & Xu, H. Variable density 

turbulence tunnel facility. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 85, 093908 (2014).

25.
Talluru, K. M., Kulandaivelu, V., Hutchins, N. & Marusic, I. A calibration technique to 

correct sensor drift issues in hot-wire anemometry. Meas. Sci. Technol. 25, (2014).

26.
Hutchins, N., Monty, J. P., Hultmark, M. & Smits, A. J. A direct measure of the 

frequency response of hot-wire anemometers: temporal resolution issues in wall-


Free-standing Pt nanowires

25

bounded turbulence. Exp. Fluids 56, (2015).

27.
Le-The, H. et al. Shrinkage Control of Photoresist for Large-Area Fabrication of Sub-30 

nm Periodic Nanocolumns. Adv. Mater. Technol. 2, (2017).

28.
Le-The, H. et al. Large-scale fabrication of highly ordered sub-20 nm noble metal 

nanoparticles on silica substrates without metallic adhesion layers. Microsystems 

Nanoeng. 4, 4 (2018).


