Carbon nanotube synthesis and spinning as
macroscopic fibers assisted by the ceramic reactor
tube

X. Rodiles1,†, V. Reguero1,†, M. Vila1, B. Alem´an1, L. Ar´evalo1, F. Fresno2, V.A. de la Pe˜na
O’Shea2,*, and J.J. Vilatela1,*

1IMDEA Materials Institute, 28906 Getafe, Madrid, Spain
2IMDEA Energy Institute, 28935 M´ostoles, Madrid, Spain
†These authors contributed equally to this work
*Corresponding author email: victor.delapenya@imdea.org, juanjose.vilatela@imdea.org

ABSTRACT

Macroscopic fibers of carbon nanotubes (CNT) have emerged as an ideal architecture to exploit the exceptional properties
of CNT building blocks in applications ranging from energy storage to reinforcement in structural composites. Controlled
synthesis and scalability are amongst the most pressing challenges to further materialize the potential of CNT fibers. This work
shows that under floating catalyst chemical vapor conditions in the direct spinning method, used both in research and industry,
the ceramic reactor tube plays an unsuspected active role in CNT growth, leading for example to doubling of reaction yield
when mullite (Al4+2xSi2-2xO10-x(x ≈ 0.4)) is used instead of alumina (Al2O3), but without affecting CNT morphology in terms
of number of layers, purity or degree of graphitization. This behaviour has been confirmed for different carbon sources and
when growing either predominantly single-walled or multi-walled CNTs by adjusting promotor concentration. Analysis of large
Si-based impurities occasionally found in CNT fiber fabric samples, attributed to reactor tube fragments that end up trapped in
the porous fibers, indicate that the role of the reactor tube is in catalyzing the thermal decomposition of hydrocarbons, which
subsequently react with floating Fe catalyst nanoparticles and produce extrusion of the CNTs and formation of an aerogel.
Reactor gas analysis confirms that extensive thermal decomposition of the carbon source occurs in the absence of Fe catalyst
particles, and that the concentration of different carbon species (e.g. carbon dioxide and ethylene) is sensitive to the reactor
tube type. These finding open new avenues for controlled synthesis of CNT fibers by decoupling precursor decomposition from
CNT extrusion at the catalyst particle.

Introduction

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are extraordinary building blocks due to their exceptional combination of mechanical, electrical
and thermal properties along the tube axis. They can be produced in large quantities as a highly graphitic material with a
well defined structure, in some cases with molecular composition control in terms of number of layers, diameter of nanotubes
and chiral angle. Their assembly into fibers and further arrays (yarns, tows, fabrics) has unlocked numerous applications in
diverse fields, including electrodes for energy storage1, neural stimulation2 and water desalination3, composite reinforcement
elements4, sensors5, and multiple wearable devices6.
This has been possible through the development of fiber spinning processes that can reproducibly produce uniform highly
controlled materials. An example is the direct spinning method, whereby an aerogel of CNTs is produced by floating catalyst
chemical vapor deposition (FC-CVD) and directly drawn out of a reactor and wound continuously as a macroscopic fiber7. It is
of particular interest because it combines independent control of CNT alignment,8 composition in terms of number of layers9

and CNT morphology,10 with large scale production in laboratory setting (> 10 km/day) and at industrial scaled-up facilities.
CNT fibers are stronger than carbon fibers11, with higher thermal conductivity than copper12,13 and higher mass-normalized
electrical conductivity than most metals13,14 have been produced using this method.
There have been substantial efforts to understand the key parameters during synthesis and spinning that control CNT fiber
structure and resulting properties. The process shares some features of conventional substrate-based CVD growth of CNT, both
being based on catalytic decomposition of a carbon source and extrusion as a CNT from a transition metal catalyst particle,
typically in a reducing (H2) atmosphere.
In the case of traditional substrate growth of CNTs by CVD, control over CNT type, quality and yield depend strongly on
the presence and choice of a MOx support layer. The MOx acts as a barrier for catalyst diffusion but has also influence on
the catalyst particle size/shape and catalytic activity15,16. The activity of supported catalyst vary depending on reducibility

arXiv:2011.10136v1  [physics.app-ph]  19 Nov 2020


of the metal oxide and formation of silicides17. In the context of CNT growth from pre-deposied Fe catalyst particles on Si
wafers with either SiO2 or Al2O3 thin coatings, for example, in-situ studies have shown that CNT morphology and areal density
strongly depend on strength (i.e. charge transfer at) of the molten Fe nanoparticle/MOx interface18,19. In general, the use of a
thin (100-400 nm) layer of SiO2 has been an effective route to achieve reproducible synthesis of highly graphitic aligned, long
CNTs on substrates ranging from Si wafers to carbon fibers20,21.
On the other hand, FC-CVD is conducted at higher temperature (> 1000 ºC) under conditions leading to the formation of
catalyst nanoparticles ”floating” in the gas phase, and which are assumed to entirely produce the decomposition of the carbon
source and formation of carbon nanotubes22–24. In the case of the direct spinning process, the presence of sulfur or another
promoter enables the formation of an aerogel that can be continuously drawn out of the reactor during CNT growth to form a
continuous macroscopic fiber. The promoter reduces carbon solubility in the catalyst, while also assists stabilization of the
nascent CNT nucleus through the minimization of the interfacial energy between the CNT edge and the catalyst particle. CNT
number of layers and yield are hence dependent on sulfur/carbon ratio (S/C) in the reaction,9 thus indirectly also on the choice
of sulfur precursor25. These roles are similar to the effect of S and other group 16 elements as a “surfactant” in cast iron and
graphitic poison in methanation reactions. In contrast, the concentration of Fe catalyst particles in the direct spinning process
has a minor effect on CNT morphology or yield, provided there are sufficient to carry out the reaction, with only < 0.01%
being active.
A prevalent assumption in CNT growth by FC-CVD is that the ceramic reactor tube, typically alumina, mullite or silica,
plays no active role in the reaction and simply act as reaction vessels. However, here we show that the ceramic tube that
hosts the FC-CVD plays an unsuspected active role in the FC-CVD reaction through carbon precursor decomposition. While
it does not change CNT morphology, which remains controlled by the S/C ratio, it can double reaction yield when mullite
(Al4+2xSi2-2xO10-x(x ≈ 0.4)) is used instead of alumina (Al2O3), for example. Analysis of Si-based impurities, occasionally
found in CNT fiber samples and presumed to detach from the reactor tube, helps understand general aspects of the reaction
mechanism.

Results

Synthesis in different reactor tubes
We have produced continuous CNT fibers in reactor tubes with different contents of SiO2. In our typical set-up mullite (62.6%
Al2O3, 35.2% SiO2, 2.2% others) is used as a reactor tube, leading to the formation of a dark aerogel of CNTs that can be
continuously spun for hours (Figure 1a). Interestingly, the use of an alumina reactor under otherwise identical synthesis (with
ferrocence as catalyst source, thiophene as S promoter source and a liquid carbon source) conditions, while still leading to
stable and continuous fiber spinning, produces a clear reduction in reaction conversion and changes in aerogel morphology.
This behaviour is observed under a wide range of synthesis conditions, for example when varying the S/C ratio so as to
control CNT number of layers, or when using different carbon sources. Figure 1b shows consistently higher carbon efficiency
in terms of conversion of injected carbon to graphitic carbon for mullite, under synthesis conditions to produce: predominantly
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT), multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), and when using butanol or toluene as
carbon sources.
To investigate intermediate SiO2 compositions we performed an additional experiment in which a mullite inner tube was
gradually introduced from the top of the reactor into the alumina reactor tube, until the bottom of the inner mullite tube was
in the region of 1250◦C, as schematically shown in Figure 2a. The resulting CNT fiber had an intermediate linear density
between those produced in alumina or mullite (Figure 2(a)). At a spinning rate of 5 m/min, the linear mass density of the
fiber produced in mullite is around 0.60g/km, higher than the fiber produced in alumina, which is 0.35g/km, whereas the fiber
produced in alumina after insertion of a mullite tube had a linear density of 0.43g/km (Figure 2(a)). These differences in linear
density correlated well with the perceived darkness of the CNT aerogel observed from the bottom of the reactor, as shown in
the photographs in Figure 2(b). No other major differences in the position or shape of the aerogel that could suggest growth of
the CNTs on the ceramic surface, were observed.
In order to shed light into the effect of the reactor tube on the reaction conditions, we studied the chemical composition of
gases at the reactor outlet by performing chromatography measurements on gas samples extracted from the reactor when using
mullite or alumina tubes. Reference measurements also included gas samples produced in the absence of Fe catalyst but with
the same injection of the remaining precursors. At present, the experimental protocol used (see experimental section) only
enables gas extraction from the lower part of the reactor, which can contain substantial nitrogen gas purposely introduced to
replace hydrogen at the reactor exit for safety reasons, but which does not take part in the reaction. As a consequence, only
relative concentrations of different species can be analyzed based on the chromatography data (Figure 3).
Interestingly, the analysis of the gases at the outlet of both reactor tubes reveals extensive thermal decomposition of the
carbon source (1-butanol) irrespective of the presence of catalyst. CO2 and C1-C3 hydrocarbons (methane, ethane, ethylene,
acetylene) are found in all conditions studied, together with minor amounts of carbonyl sulphide. Benzene, propene and

2/12


Figure 1. Effects of reactor tube composition for the spinning CNT fibers directly from the gas phase during FC-CVD. a)
Schematic of the reactor set-up. b) Carbon efficiency for mullite and allumina under different synthesis conditions including
low (high) S/C ratio to produce SWNTs (MWNTs) or when using different carbon sources (butanol and toluene). Ferrocene
used as Fe catalyst source

propyne are also observed in small quantities. These results are in agreement with thermal decomposition studies of n-butanol
reported in the literature26. The presence or absence of the main products does not appear to depend on the addition of catalyst
or the type of reactor tube used. This result reveals that the catalyst does not play an active role in the decomposition of the
carbon source, contrary to what is generally assumed. Having established that the reactor tube plays a central role in the
decomposition of the C source, it is not surprising that its composition affects the concentration of different C species in the
reactor. As observed in the comparison in Figure 3, the fraction of methane, ethylene and carbon dioxide, amongst other species,
is clearly sensitive to the composition of the rector tube. Determining the precise thermodynamic pathway for the cracking of
the hydrocarbons during FC-CVD synthesis of CNT fibers requires dedicated, advanced in-situ sampling methods that can
operate at reaction temperatures above 1000◦27, and is beyond the scope of this work.
In spite of the substantial change in reaction conversion the type and morphology of the constituent CNTs are not
significantly affected by the choice of reactor tube. The Raman spectra for samples produced in the different reactor tubes, but
with the same precursor composition, presented in Figure 4(a), show that in all three cases the CNTs consist of highly graphitic
few-layer multi-wall nanotubes (MWNTs). The spectra reveal no appreciable change in peak positions, for instance in the G
band (1583 cm−1, 1584 cm−1, 1583 cm−1 for alumina, alumina with concentric mullite tube and mullite tube, respectively).
Similarly, the ratio of intensities of ID/IG for the three fiber types (0.3 for alumina, 0.4 for alumina with mullite and 0.3 for
mullite) are within typical variation between samples and suggest no substantial differences in CNT morphology or degree of
graphitization.
Thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) (Figure 4(b)) also indicates that the use of different reactor tubes has no effect on the
quality and morphology of the graphitic materials, only on yield. A comparison of thermograms shows the three samples to
have similar thermal decomposition curves, with nearly identical onset for CNT oxidation at 530 ºC. The content of poorly
graphitized impurities, evolving at temperatures below 400 ºC, is very similar too. On the other hand, the relative content
of residual catalyst also follows the trend observed in Figure 2a (8.5%,7.4%and4.0% for mullite, mullite plus alumina and
alumina, respectively), reflecting mainly an increase in graphitic material and nearly constant Fe content.
Electron microscopic analysis of samples produced in mullite and alumina tubes, respectively, while only being qualitative,
also confirms the observations discussed above. Scanning electron micrographs (Figure 5(a)) gave no indication of the formation
of more particulate impurities or changes in bundle morphology. Similarly, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis
(Figure 5(b)) confirmed that the CNTs produced in both reactor tubes have a high degree of graphitization (i.e. high sp2

conjugation) and have predominantly 3-5 walls, with some of them being collapsed due to their relatively large diameter.

3/12


Figure 2. Effects of reactor tube material on CNT aerogel properties. (a) Relationship between linear density (g/km) and the
type of reactor tube. (b) Optical images showing increasing perceived thickness of the CNT aerogel when comparing reactions
in alumina, alumina + mullite or mullite.

Analysis of Si-containing impurities
The preceding discussion leaves no doubt that the reactor tube plays an active role in the synthesis of CNTs in the direct fiber
process. As a result of reactions at the reactor tube wall and of the SiO2 in the tube itself (vide infra), Si-containing impurities
are occasionally found in CNT fibers. They are scarce, mostly found on samples collected for long times (> 30 min) produced
in heavily used reactor tubes and when inspecting the samples with methods that probe large sample volumes and/or are
sensitive to Si-containing compounds, hence why they had been undetected so far. In fact, their presence in our CNT fiber
samples has been elucidated after analysis of combined data obtained using different characterization techniques over several
years. Some degree of analysis of these particles is instructive in trying to understand the role of the mullite reactor tube in the
CNT growth process.
Figure 6(a) presents an example of an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) spectrum obtained from a location on
a relatively thick CNT fiber sample, which gave a particularly high signal from the Si Kα-shell emission line at 1.74 KeV.
EDS intensities are strongly dependent on atomic ratio and probe a large sample volume, thus this result only confirms that Si
is present in the sample. Generally X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of CNT fibers shows no indication of
the presence Si9,28,29, however, in our extensive use of this technique we have occasionally found contributions from Si. The
example in Figure 6(b) shows the Si 2p XPS peak, fitted by Gaussian/Lorentzian peak shapes and after Shirley background
profile subtraction. The peaks at 102.6 and 103.8 eV are assigned to SiO2,30. This observation indicates that some of the
Si-containing impurities are in the form of SiO2, but without ruling out other forms of Si (e.g. SiC), particularly considering the
limited (< 5nm) probing depth of XPS.
Another evidence of Si-containing impurities in CNT fibers is found in X-ray diffraction patterns from fibers grown
in mullite, our standard reactor tube. Yet, the associated features can only occasionally be resolved and only when using
synchrotron radiation in transmission mode, which probes a large sample volume with a high intensity beam. An example
is presented in Figure 7, chosen because of the particularly strong intensity of impurity reflections in this part of the sample,
which favors their analysis. The same impurity features have been occasionally observed in fibers of single-wall nanotubes
(SWNTs) produced with a lower S/C ratio or in samples made using different carbon precursors.
The 2D wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) pattern (Figure 7a) shows that in addition to the standard features of CNT
fibers, namely the (002) reflection from CNTs on the equator and broad powder rings associated with the catalyst overlapped
with the 100 reflection from CNTs31, there are abnormal sharp powder rings. These extraneous peaks are clearly visible in the
radial profile obtained after azimuthal integration (Figure 7b). Interestingly, in addition to a strong reflection at q = 2.06 ˚A−1

attributed to SiO2 (96 – 500 – 0036) there are strong reflections at 2.50 ˚A−1 and 2.74 ˚A−1, which we assign to SiC (96 – 231 –
0936). These results do not fully determine the structure of these impurities, but they clearly show the presence of SiC, which is
a key observation as it implies a reaction of carbon precursors with SiO2 in the reactor tube.
Note that the Si-containing particles discussed above give rise to sharp X-ray diffraction (XRD) peaks and thus large crystal
sizes (> 120 nm). We take this observation as indicative that these impurities correspond to fragments of the reactor tube that

4/12


Figure 3. Chromatographs of gases present at the outlet of the reactor. Four gases have been sampled in four different
scenarios: when using either alumina or mullite tubes, and with or without catalyst. Chromatographs have been tiled vertically
for clarity.

detach during fiber spinning, particularly during stringing, and attach to the porous CNT fiber structure at its exit of the reactor.
These fragments originate from the inside wall of the reactor tube and thus correspond to the materials that is exposed to the
reaction and the highly reducing atmosphere, hence its composition is different from that of mullite.
Further analysis of these impurities is problematic because of the difficulty in locating them, since they are not associated to
the catalyst or the CNTs. Conventional analysis of samples by either SEM or TEM has not revealed the presence of Si-based
nanoparticles after years of studying these CNT fibers, which explains why, to our knowledge, there are no previous reports
suggesting the presence of Si-based impurities after CNT growth by CVD in mullite or quartz. SiO2 particles on graphene
grown by CVD on Cu in hydrogen in a quartz tube have indeed been observed32, but this in fact supports the view that the
reactor tube degrades under nanocarbon growth conditions typically used in CVD, irrespective of the presence of a transition
metal catalyst.
In order to gain more insight into the structure of Si-containing impurities in the fibers we subjected a CNT fiber sample to
ultrasonication in acetone, a known procedure to selectively remove extraneous materials from CNT fibers while preserving
their CNT network structure33. The resultant dispersion was deposited on a holey carbon grid to perform TEM analysis.
Extensive analysis of impurities showed mainly C- or Fe-based particles, as expected, but some evidence of Si-based
particles was also present. Figure 8(a) shows an example of extracted impurities consisting of agglomerated particles of irregular
morphology and size ranging from a few to hundreds of nanometers. TEM-EDS mappings performed on these agglomerated
particles clearly show that many of them are Silicon-based 8b. Yet, very importantly, there is no spatial correlation between the
Si and Fe signals. This confirms that while playing an active role in the CNT growth process, the SiO2 in the reactor tube does
not directly act on the catalyst particles, nor associates with them, for example as a silicide (FeSi2).

Discussion

The results presented above demonstrate that SiO2 in the reactor tubes plays an active role in CVD reaction, increasing yield of
CNTs but without affecting composition. They also show that some SiO2 reacts with carbon, leading to the formation of SiC,
but very importantly, there is no evidence that Si associates with the Fe-based catalyst or is even present near the catalyst in
CNT fibers. While these results might be surprising in the context of CNT growth, they are fully consistent with observations in
hydrocarbon heterogeneous catalysis, where SiO2 and aluminosilicates are known to catalyze multiple reactions, including
cracking of hydrocarbons. Referred to as examples of inorganic solid acids, aluminosilicates are amongst the most studied
catalysts in hydrocarbon reactions, most notably, because of their widespread use in oil refining-related reactions. Extensive
reviews can be found elsewhere34, but we note some related examples that help clarify the results presented above for the

5/12


Figure 4. Characterization of samples produced in different reactor tubes showing changes in reaction yield but not in CNT
morphology. (a) Typical Raman spectra showing nearly identical peak positions and ratio ID/IG. (b) Thermo-gravimetric curves
indicating similar composition of graphitic material and confirming higher yield for samples produced in mullite (through a
lower fraction of residual catalyst).

Figure 5. Electron micrographs of CNT fibers produced in an alumina (a) and mullite (b) reactor tubes, showing no changes
in composition or CNT type.

high-temperature catalytic decomposition of n-butanol.

The decomposition of hydrocarbons on the surface of aluminosilicates can lead to multiple path ways that produce both
carbon-carbon bond rupture and formation. Early studies showed, for example, that in low-temperature (320 to 550 ºC)
decomposition of a wide range of hydrocarbons (alkanes, aliphatic alcohols, etc) in the presence of an aluminosilicate with
85.6 wt.% SiO2 and 12.9 wt. % Al2O3, the rate of thermal cracking is negligible compared to the rate of catalytic cracking35.
Similarly, a monolayer of SiO2 on Al2O3 has been shown to act as an electron acceptor for 2-butanol dehydration and alkane
cracking, amongst other reactions36,37. It is most likely that the SiO2-catalyzed reaction in the direct spinning corresponds
to this type, whereby n-butanol decomposes at the surface of the reactor tube and forms smaller chemical species, including
carbocations, that ultimately react with the Fe-based catalyst particle and supply C for the nascent CNT, as shown in the
simplified schematic in Figure 9.

We note that mullite also assists CNT fiber growth when using CH4 as a C precursor38, a common choice in scaled-up
facilities. The catalytic degradation of CH4, which is more stable than butanol, could involve the formation of its carbenium ion
(CH3+), a chemical species also found in various aluminosilicate-catalyzed hydrocarbon reactions34. In fact, examples of the
effect of Si-based reactor tubes on the synthesis of graphitic materials by CVD date back to as early as 1948.39.

But to gain more insight into the extent to which the reactor tube can take part in the catalytic decomposition of C-precursors,
we have calculated the approximate total surface of Fe catalyst nanoparticles relative to that of the reactor tube. Under the
assumption that the residence time in the reactor is dictated by the carrier gas velocity and that the carried gas behaves as an

6/12


Figure 6. Evidence of Si-containing impurities occasionally found in CNT fibers. (a) EDS spectrum showing a strong Si
signal obtained from a thick CNT fiber sample observed under SEM. (b) Si 2p peak in the XPS spectrum of a CNT fiber,
corresponding to SiO2.

ideal gas, we find that the ratio of surfaces can be expressed as (see SOM)

SFe

Sreactor
= 3

2
˙mFerreactor
rFeρFe fH2
(1)

Where ˙mFe is the mass flow rate of Fe injected in the reactor, rreactor is the radius of the reactor tube (3.5cm), rFe the average
Fe catalyst particle radius (4.5nm), ρFe the density of Fe and fH2 the flow rate of the H2 carrier gas. For typical CNT fiber
spinning parameters used in laboratory settings the rate comes out as 0.05. This be initially surprising considering that the
radius of the particles is much smaller than that of the reactor tube, but note that the mass flow rate is very low (less than 3µg/s)
and hence the concentration of Fe particles is extremely small, which makes the two surfaces of similar order of magnitude.
Very importantly, we have observed gradual roughening of the surface of the reactor tube after its regular use over months. Such
roughening occurs through repetitive use in a highly reducing atmosphere (containing H2 and CH4), causing partial reduction
and re-oxidation (on cooling) of mullite40,41 and its consequent amorphization (see SOM). Together with catalyst plating near
the injection point at the cold end of the reactor, this could lead to even higher values of
SFe

Sreactor and variations in reaction yield
through a higher contribution of hydrocarbon decomposition at the reactor tube.

Conclusions

This work shows that the ceramic reactor tube used in FC-CVD synthesis of CNT fibers plays an active role in the reaction
by assisting in the decomposition of the n-butanol carbon source. Using a mullite reactor leads to higher reaction yields,
i.e. a higher fiber mass linear density, compared to alumina. This is consistent with their established catalytic activity for
the decomposition of hydrocarbons. In spite of the key contribution of the reactor tube to the synthesis of CNT fibers, the
morphology of the CNTs in terms of degree of graphitization and number of layers remains unaffected by the choice of reactor
tube and is instead controlled by the ratio of promoter to carbon source. Si-based impurities are occasionaly observed in CNT
fibers using different techniques. Their structure suggests that they correspond to reactor tube fragments that detach from the
main tube and end up trapped in the porous CNT fibers. All evidence suggests that Si does not associate with the Fe catalyst
nor take direct part in the extrusion of graphitic carbon at the catalyst particle surface. A main corollary of these results is the
possibility to decouple hydrocarbon decomposition from catalytic growth, which could greatly help increase reaction yield and
bring new opportunities for molecular control.This requires, amongst other advances, determining more precisely the catalytic
decomposition route of different C sources and separating contributions from the Fe catalyst particles and the reactor tube to
this process.

7/12


Figure 7. Observation of Si-containing impurities in CNT fibers observed by synchrotron radiation WAXS in transmission
mode. a) 2D WAXS pattern showing the standard reflections from CNTs and residual catalyst and the presence of sharp powder
rings from impurities. b) Radial profile after integration with assignation showing reflections from SiO2 and SiC. The latter
implies that SiO2 in the reactor tube reacts with carbon precursors.

Methods

Materials
Thiophene (extra purity ≥ 99 %) from Sigma Aldrich, ferrocene (purity = 98%) obtained from Acros Organics, 1-butanol
and toluene (purity > 99%) from Sigma Aldrich were used for the synthesis of CNT fibers. Ferrocene was purified by a
sublimation/recrystallization process.

Synthesis of CNT fibers
Carbon nanotubes fibers were synthesized by direct spinning method. The assembly of CNTs into a fiber in this method occurs
in the gas phase during growth by floating catalyst chemical vapor deposition, where the very long CNTs (1mm) entangle and
form an aerogel, which is then drawn through and out of the reactor tube and continuously deposited onto a winder,7. The
reaction was carried out at 1250 ºC under hydrogen atmosphere and three kind of CNT fibers was produced in three different
vertical tubular furnace reactors of alumina, alumina with mullite and mullite. Synthesis conditions were adjusted so as to
produce predominantly few-layer multiwalled CNTs (MWCNT) by using ferrocene as iron catalyst source, thiophene as sulfur
catalyst promoter and butanol and toluene as carbon sources, with different relative contents ranging from (0.8 : 1.5 : 97.7) to
(0.8 : 0.2 : 99.0).9

Characterization of CNT fibers
Raman spectroscopy was performed mainly using a Raman micro-spectroscopy system Renishaw with 532 nm laser line (2.33
eV), taking three accumulations at ≈ 1.68 mW. In order to maximize the Raman signal, the polarization of the excitation signal
was kept parallel to the CNT fiber axis.
SEM micrographs and EDS spectra were taken with a FIB-FEGSEM dual-beam microscope (Helios NanoLab 600i, FEI).
TEM samples were prepared by dispersing a small amount of CNT fiber sample in 99% pure acetone and sonicated in an
ultrasonic power bath to debundle the CNTs and isolate the extraneous materials or impurities. This resulted in the formation of
dark dispersion and sedimentation of material. Impurities were collected by depositing a drop of the dark dispersion on a holey
carbon TEM grid. TEM images and EDS elemental maps were taken using a FEG S/TEM microscope (Talos F200X, FEI)
equipped with a chemical analysis system via EDS mode.
Thermo-gravimetric analysis were recorded under air atmosphere in a TGA Q50 (TA Instruments). The analyses were
performed under air from 25ºC to 800ºC using a 10ºC/min ramp.
XPS data were collected with synchrotron radiation X-Ray source using a Phoibos 100 hemispherical energy analyzer
(SPECS GmbH) in ESCAmicroscopy beamline (ELECTRA synchrotron in Trieste, Italy), using a photon energy of 650 eV. Si
2p core level spectrum was fitted by Gaussian/Lorentzian peak shapes and Shirley background profile.

8/12


Figure 8. TEM and EDS analysis of impurities obtained after dispersion. (a) TEM micrograph showing irregular particles of
different sizes. (b) EDS elemental maps confirm the presence of Si, mostly associated with O but not spatially correlated with
either Fe or C.

2D WAXS patterns were collected at NCD BL11 ALBA Light Source using a wavelength of 1 ˚A. The data shown are
after sample-detector distance calibration and azimuthal integration. Powder XRD measurements of the reactor tube were
performed with a Bruker-AXS SMART 1000 single-crystal diffractometer using Mo KR radiation and a CCD detector. The
sample detector distance was determined sing a silicon single-crystal standard.

Gases sampling method
The gas near the outlet of the reactor tube was sampled by extracting a volume of gas from inside the lower part of the reactor
tube into Tedlar bags using a manual pump. The gas samples were then analyzed with a gas chromatograph (Agilent 7820 GC)
coupled to a mass spectrometer (Agilent 5977B MSD). The gas was injected through an automatic valve into a CarbonPLOT
column (30 m x 0.32 mm) using He as carrier gas with a split ratio of 1:20. The mass spectra were obtained by electronic
impact with a single quadruple analyzer and an extractor ion source. The identification of the peaks was performed using the
NIST Mass Spectral Search Program.

References

1. Senokos, E., Reguero, V., Palma, J., Vilatela, J. J. & Marcilla, R. Macroscopic fibres of cnts as electrodes for multifunctional
electric double layer capacitors: from quantum capacitance to device performance. Nanoscale 8, 3620–3628 (2016).

2. Vitale, F., Summerson, S. R., Aazhang, B., Kemere, C. & Pasquali, M. Neural stimulation and recording with bidirectional,
soft carbon nanotube fiber microelectrodes. ACS Nano 9, 4465–4474 (2015).

3. Santos, C. et al. Interconnected metal oxide cnt fibre hybrid networks for current collector-free asymmetric capacitive
deionization. J. Mater. Chem. A – (2018).

4. Gonz´alez, C., Vilatela, J. J., Molina-Aldaregu´ıa, J. M., Lopes, C. S. & LLorca, J. Structural composites for multifunctional
applications: Current challenges and future trends. Prog. Mater. Sci. 89, 194–251 (2017).

5. Fern´andez-Toribio, J. C. et al. A composite fabrication sensor based on electrochemical doping of carbon nanotube yarns.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 26 (2016).

6. Jiangtao, D. et al. Carbon-nanotube fibers for wearable devices and smart textiles. Adv. Mater. 28, 10529–10538 (2016).

7. Li, Y. L., Kinloch, I. A. & Windle, A. H. Direct spinning of carbon nanotube fibers from chemical vapor deposition
synthesis. Science 304, 276–278 (2004).

8. Alem´an, B., Reguero, V., Mas, B. & Vilatela, J. J. Strong carbon nanotube fibres by drawing inspiration from polymer
fibre spinning. ACS Nano 9(7), 7392–7398 (2015).

9. Reguero, V., Alem´an, B., Mas, B. & Vilatela, J. J. Controlling carbon nanotube type in macroscopic fibres synthesized by
the direct spinning process. Chem. Mater. 26(11), 3550–3557 (2014).

9/12


Figure 9. Scheme of carbon nanotube growth in FC-CVD used for direct spinning. Carbon source (n-butanol) decomposition
takes place at the reactor tube and forms smaller carbocations that finally react with the S-coated Fe catalyst particle and supply
C for the nascent CNTs

10. Mas, B. et al. Group 16 elements control the synthesis of continuous fibers of carbon nanotubes. Carbon 101, 458–464
(2016).

11. Koziol, K. et al. High-performance carbon nanotube fiber. Science 318, 1892–1895 (2007).

12. Gspann, T. et al. High thermal conductivities of carbon nanotube films and micro-fibres and their dependence on
morphology. Carbon 114, 160–168 (2017).

13. Behabtu, N. et al. Strong, light, multifunctional fibers of carbon nanotubes with ultrahigh conductivity. Science 339,
182–186 (2013).

14. Lekawa-Raus, A., Patmore, J., Kurzepa, L., Bulmer, J. & Koziol, K. Electrical properties of carbon nanotube based fibers
and their future use in electrical wiring. Adv. Funct. Mater 24(4), 3661–3682 (2014).

15. Cantoro, M. et al. Catalytic chemical vapor deposition of single-wall carbon nanotubes at low temperatures. Nano Lett. 6,
1107–1112 (2006).

16. Brownikowski, M. J. Longer nanotubes at lower temperatures: The influence of effective activation energies on carbon
nanotube growth by thermal chemical vapor deposition. The J. Phys. Chem. C 111, 17705–17712 (2007).

17. Fu, Q. & Wagner, T. Interaction of nanostructured metal overlayers with oxide surfaces. Surf. Sci. Reports 62, 431–498
(2007).

18. Mattevi, C. et al. In-situ x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy study of catalyst-support interactions and growth of carbon
nanotube forests. The J. Phys. Chem. C 112, 12207–12213 (2008).

19. Hofmann, S. et al. State of transition metal catalysts during carbon nanotube growth. J. Phys. Chem. C 113, 1648–1656
(2009).

10/12


20. Vilatela, J. J. et al. A spray pyrolysis method to grow carbon nanotubes on carbon fibres, steel and ceramic bricks. J.
Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 15, 2858–2864 (2015).

21. Delmas, M. et al. Growth of long and aligned multi-walled carbon nanotubes on carbon and metal substrates. Nanotech-
nology 23, 105604 (2012).

22. Moisala, A., Nasibulin, A. & I. Kauppinen, E. The role of metal nanoparticles in the catalytic production of single-walled
carbon nanotubes — a review. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 15, 3011–3035 (2003).

23. Moisala, A., Nasibulin, A., D. Shandakov, S., Jiang, H. & I. Kauppinen, E. On-line detection of single-walled carbon
nanotube formation during aerosol synthesis methods. Carbon 43, 2066–2074 (2005).

24. Moisala, A. et al. Single-walled carbon nanotube synthesis using ferrocene and iron pentacarbonyl in a laminar flow
reactor. Chem. Eng. Sci. 61, 4393–4402 (2006).

25. Sundaram, R. M., Koziol, K. K. K. & Windle, A. H. Continuous direct spinning of fibers of single-walled carbon nanotubes
with metallic chirality. Adv. Mater. 23, 5064–5068 (2011).

26. Harper, M. R., Geem, K. M. V., Pyl, S. P., Marin, G. B. & Green, W. H. Comprehensive reaction mechanism for n-butanol
pyrolysis and combustion. Combust. Flame 158, 16–41 (2011).

27. Hoecker, C., Smail, F., Pick, M. & Boies, A. The influence of carbon source and catalyst nanoparticles on cvd synthesis of
cnt aerogel. Chem. Eng. J. 314 (2016).

28. Aleman, B. et al. Inherent predominance of high chiral angle metallic carbon nanotubes in continuous fibers grown from
molten catalyst. Nanoscale 8, 4236–4244 (2016).

29. Bel´en, A., Mar´ıa, V. & Juan J., V. Surface chemistry analysis of carbon nanotube fibers by x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy.
Phys. Status Solidi A (2018).

30. Sivakumar, M., Venkatakrishnan, K. & Tan, B. Characterization of mhz pulse repetition rate femtosecond laser-irradiated
gold-coated silicon surfaces. Nanoscale Res Lett 6: 78 (2011).

31. Davies, J. R., Riekel, C., Koziol, K., J. Vilatela, J. J. & Windle, A. Structural studies on carbon nanotube fibres by
synchrotron radiation microdiffraction and microfluorescence. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 42, 1122–1128 (2009).

32. Islam, A. E. et al. Atomic level cleaning of poly-methyl-methacrylate residues from the graphene surface using radiolized
water at high temperatures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 103101 (2017).

33. M. Sundaram, R. & Windle, A. One-step purification of direct-spun cnt fibers by post-production sonication. Mater. &
Des. 126, 85 – 90 (2017).

34. Corma, A. Inorganic solid acids and their use in acid-catalyzed hydrocarbon reactions. Chem. Rev. 95, 559–614 (1995).

35. Franklin, J. L. & Nicholson, D. E. A kinetic study of the decomposition of hydrocarbons by silica–alumina catalysts. The
J. Phys. Chem. 60, 59–62 (1956).

36. Pines, H. & Manassen, J. The mechanism of dehydration of alcohols over alumina catalysts. Advan. Catal. rel. Subj. 16,
49–93 (1966).

37. Kn¨ozinger, H. & Scheglila, A. The dehydration of alcohols on alumina: Xii. kinetic isotope effects in the olefin formation
from butanols. J. Catal. 17, 252–263 (1970).

38. Winer, I. personal communication.

39. Iley, R. & Riley, H. The deposition of carbon on vitreous silicas. J. Chem. Soc. 0, 1362–1366 (1948).

40. Iso, S. T. & Pask, J. A. Reaction of silicate glasses and mullite with hydrogen gas. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 65, 383–387 (1982).

41. Herbell, T. P., Hull, D. R. & Garg, A. Hot hydrogen exposure degradation of the strength of mullite. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 81
(1996).

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful for generous financial support provided by the European Union Seventh Framework Program under
grant agreements 678565 (ERC-STEM), the Madrid Regional Government (MAD2D, S2013/MIT-3007) and the Spanish
Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (Project FOTOFUEL: ENE2016-82025-REDT). F.F. and V.A.P.O. thank
financial support from the European Research Council (HyMAP programme, 648319) and the Spanish Ministry of Science,
Innovation and Universities (Project SOLPAC: ENE2017-89170-R, MCIU/AEI/FEDER). M.V. acknowledges the Madrid
Regional Government (program “Atracci´on de Talento Investigador”, 2017-T2/IND-5568) for financial support. Support
from NCD beam-line staff at ALBA Synchrotron Light Facility for assistance with synchrotron experiments and from ESCA
microscopy beam-line staff (Elettra synchrotron, Italy) for SPEM experiments is also acknowledged.

11/12


Author contributions statement

J.J.V, V.P. and F.F. conceived the experiments, X.R., V.R., M.V., B.A., F.F. and L.A. conducted the experiments. All authors
analyzed the results and reviewed the manuscript.

Additional information

The authors declare no competing interests.

12/12


