> REPLACE THIS TEXT WITH YOUR PAPER ID NUMBER, e.g., 1MOrA-01 (double-click here to edit the header) <

Template version 8.0d, 22 August 2017. IEEE will put copyright information in this area

See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

1

Meissner levitation of a millimeter-size neodymium 
magnet within a superconducting radio frequency 

cavity

N. K. Raut, J. Miller, J. Pate, R. Chiao, and J. E. Sharping

Abstract— We report on the magnetic levitation of a millimeter-sized 
neodymium permanent magnet within the interior of a superconduct-
ing radio frequency (SRF) cavity. To the best of our knowledge, this 
is the first experimental work on levitating a magnet within an SRF 
cavity. The cavity is a coaxial quarter-wave microwave resonator made 
from 6061 aluminum, having a resonance frequency of 10 GHz and a 
loaded Q of 1400. The cylindrical magnet (N50) has a height of 1 mm, 
a diameter of 0.75 mm, a mass of 4 mg, and a remanence of 1.44 T. 
This produces a peak magnetic field 140 times greater than the critical 
field of aluminum. The magnet is placed either on the top of the coaxial 
portion of the cavity or on the cavity floor before cooling it below the 
superconducting transition temperature of aluminum. The coaxial 
mode's resonance frequency shifts as a function of the levitation height 
of the magnet and gives an idea of the magnet’s position and mechan-
ical motion. We observe a transition at a temperature of 650 mK where 
the Meissner effect levitates the magnet as the material beneath the 
magnet becomes superconducting. The magnet is levitated to a height 
of 2.5 mm above the surface of the cavity stub, which is a sufficient 
separation for the field strength of the magnet at the surface of the stub
to be less than the critical field strength of the superconducting alumi-
num. We measure a 120 MHz upshift in the cavity resonance as the 
magnet is levitated from the top of the stub and 15 MHz downshift as 
it levitates from the floor of the cavity. Our measurements are con-
sistent over several heating and cooling cycles. Our work provides a 
path towards a novel optomechanical system. 

Index Terms—Meissner Levitation, Superconducting cavity 

I.
INTRODUCTION

Superconducting radio frequency (SRF) cavities are promis-

ing for use in cavity optomechanics and quantum information 
processing due to their well-defined frequency spectrum, low 
loss and electric and magnetic field localization properties [1-
4]. Besides SRF cavities, various architectures have been devel-
oped to strongly couple an object’s mechanical modes with 
electromagnetic modes [5-11]. In the above examples, the me-

(Style: TAS First page footnote) Manuscript receipt and acceptance dates will 

be inserted here. Acknowledgment of support is placed in this paragraph as well.
Consult the IEEE Editorial Style Manual for examples. This work was supported 
by the IEEE Council on Superconductivity under contract. ABCD-123456789. 
(Corresponding author: Jay E. Sharping.)

N. K. Raut is with University of California, Merced, CA 95343 (e-mail: 

nraut@ucmerced.edu). 

J. Miller is with University of California, Merced, CA 95343 (e-mail: jmil-

ler@ucmerced.edu). 

chanical object is physically tethered in some way to a bound-
ary, and one can consider levitating the object so that the tether 
can be removed. Electromagnetic to mechanical coupling has 
been observed in optically levitated systems [12-20]. Here, the 
intense optical field is used to trap the dielectric particle so that
there is less dissipation arising from clamping. and reduced
thermal contact [21]. The main challenges become maintaining
stable trapping at high vacuum and reducing the mechanical
trapping noise arising from photon recoil and heating [22-23]. 
Theoretical and experimental studies of magnetic levitation 
suggest that it may be a good alternative to optical trapping [24-
27] in electro-mechanical systems. The work on stable mag-
netic levitation over a type II superconductors is well estab-
lished [28-30], and the basis for a common classroom demon-
stration. However, levitation above a type II superconductor ex-
hibits pinning of flux vortices arising from the magnetic field at 
the surface of the superconductor. Flux pinning introduces dis-
sipation in the system, but the Meissner state in a type I super-
conductor does not exhibit flux vortices, leading to more effi-
cient mechanics [31]. In recent years, a stable levitation of a 
permanent magnet above a punctured type I superconductor 
was demonstrated for use in optomechanical experiments [32], 
[33].
In this paper, we report field-cooled magnetic levitation of a 
millimeter-scale neodymium magnet within a cm-scale alumi-
num coaxial-stub SRF cavity. The SRF cavity has a resonance 
of 10.4 GHz and a loaded Q of 1400, and is fabricated from 
6061 (97.9% pure) aluminum. The cylindrical (0.75-mm diam-
eter by 1-mm high) neodymium magnet has a maximum mag-
netic field of 1.4 T, which is  ~140-times greater than the critical 
field of the aluminum. Below the critical temperature for super-
conductivity, the magnet levitates 2.5 mm above the surface of 
the material and its behavior is monitored by measuring 
changes in the SRF resonant frequency. Room temperature 
measurements and simulations of magnet position’s effect on 
the cavity mode support our conclusions. This novel magnet-
cavity system provides a means to couple the low-frequency 

J. Pate was with University of California, Merced, CA 95343 (e-mail: 

jpate@ucmerced.edu). 

R. Chiao was with University of California, Merced, CA 95343 (e-mail: 

rchiao@ucmerced.edu). 

J. E. Sharping is with University of California, Merced, CA 95343 (e-mail: 

jsharping@ucmerced.edu). 


2

mechanical motion of the magnet with other objects whose 
quantum states can be probed and manipulated, such as mag-
nons and transmons [3]. Consequently, the system is a promis-
ing candidate for studying the quantum mechanics of macro-
scopic oscillators [34].  

II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAIL

The experimental schematic is shown in the Fig. 1(b). The cav-
ity and magnet are placed on the base plate of the dilution re-
frigerator where the temperature can be reduced to ~50 mK, 
which is below the zero-field critical temperature of aluminum 
(TC~1.2 K), while the vacuum pressure is held to ~10-7 mbar.
A pin antenna is coupled to the quarter-wave SRF mode at the 
stub height inside the cavity, where the electric field is strongly 
localized. Measurements are performed using a vector network 
analyzer whose probe signal passes through a circulator, is re-
flected by the cavity, and the reflection is separated by the cir-
culator. For these measurements the cavity is over-coupled 
which reduces the loaded Q, but allows us to measure the reso-
nance frequency from room temperature down to 50 mK. The 
cavity is held in place with N-type cryo grease to ensure thermal 
conductivity with the cryostat.  We conducted a sequence of 
three experiments. First, the cavity (including a plastic sleeve 
around the stub whose purpose is to keep the magnet from fall-
ing off the top of the stub) is cooled without any magnet present. 
Here we see the dependence of the cavity resonance frequency 
as a function of temperature. Second, the magnet is placed 
within the cavity on the top of the stub where the plastic sleeve 
keeps the magnet from falling off of the top of the stub. Third, 
the same magnet is placed at the bottom of the same cavity. In 
all of these experiments all other experimental conditions re-
main the same. 

The dimension and shape of the cavity are shown in the Fig.

1 (a). This cavity is made up by 6061 aluminum. It is a coaxial 
cylindrical cavity with one end open. The outer cylinder has ra-
dius and height, respectively, 7 mm and 55 mm. The inner cyl-
inder has radius of 2 mm and height of 5 mm giving a quarter-
wave resonance of 10 GHz. In our design, the thickness of the 
metal on the bottom part of the cavity is 6.5 mm. The cylindrical 
neodymium magnet (shown in the Fig. 1 (c)) is 1 mm high and 
has a radius of 0.375 mm. The N50 magnet has a remanence of
1.44 T (provided by manufacturer) and a mass of 4 mg. Assum-
ing homogeneous magnetization, the magnetic dipole moment 
is 5×10-4 A.m2.

When the cavity is cooled to below its superconducting tran-

sition, we expect the magnet to levitate above the surface due 
to the Meissner effect in Type I superconductors. Fig. 1 (d) il-
lustrates the expected changes to the resonance frequency of the 
cavity during levitation experiments. The frequency, f, of a co-
axial stub cavity is determined by the height of the stub, l, where
𝑓𝛼

4

𝑙 [2]. Any perturbation within the coaxial region of the cav-

ity changes the shape of the cavity mode and hence its fre-
quency [35]. When a magnet is placed on the surface of the stub, 
it increases effective height of the stub and hence decreases fre-
quency of the cavity. The amount of this downshift corresponds 
to the interaction of the magnet with the electric field of the 

cavity mode, which is concentrated toward the edges of the 
stub. Conversely, when the magnet is placed on the bottom of 
the cavity it raises floor of the cavity. This reduces the effective 
length of the stub which causes the resonance frequency to in-
crease. As the magnet levitates above either surface of the cav-
ity, the frequency of the cavity shifts towards the frequency of 
the bare cavity (cavity without any magnet). 

III.
ROOM TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS AND

SUMILATION

In order to gain an understanding of the expected frequency 

shifts when levitation occurs, we measured the resonance fre-
quency as a function of the position of a magnet in the cavity at 
room temperature. The magnet was held in a dielectric capillary 
and its position was controlled using micrometer stages. Meas-
urements were also made with just the capillary and no magnet 

Fig. 1.  (a) This is a schematic of the the cavity used in our work. It has a
coaxial part, which contains a stub, and a cylindrical part has one open end and 
is closed at the other. (b) Schematic of the experimental set up. A magnet is 
placed on the top part of the stub of the coaxial microwave cavity. The cavity 
is probed by the signal sent from the network analyzer. (c) The shape and size 
of the N50 magnet used in our work. It has a maximum field strength of 1. 44 
T and surface field of 0.67 T. (d) Expected frequency shift with the position of 
the magnet. When there is no magnet in the cavity (a bare cavity), the resonance
frequency is fixed and given by the blue curve. If the magnet rests on the bottom 
of the cavity, the cavity resonance frequency is higher than that of the bare cav-
ity as shown by the green curve. As the magnet levitates above the bottom of 
the cavity, we expect the resonance frequency to shift lower as a function of 
levitation height (as indicated by the left-pointing purple arrow at the tip of the 
green curve). If the magnet rests on the top of the stub, its resonance frequency 
is significantly lower than that of the bare cavity as shown by the orange curve. 
As the magnet levitates above the stub, we expect the resonance frequency to 
shift higher as a function of levitation height (as indicated by the right-pointing 
red arrow at the tip of the orange curve). The sensitivity of the resonance fre-
quency as a function of position depends on the radial position of the magnet. 
In both cases, as the magnet levitates the resonance frequency shifts towards 
that of the bare cavity.


3

to eliminate the effect of the capillary on the measurements. Fig.
2 shows the resonance frequency shift as a function of the gap 
between the magnet and the tip of the stub. The solid curves are 
simulations and the symbols are experimental data. In particu-
lar, we expect the magnitude of the frequency downshift to be 
between -100 MHz and -200 MHz when the magnet is in con-
tact with the surface of the stub. The resonance frequency 
comes within 5 MHz of that of the bare cavity once the magnet 
height is greater than 3 mm. We observe stronger coupling 
when the magnet is located near the edge of the stub because 
the electric field is concentrated around the edge. Finite element 
calculations (COMSOL Multiphysics) reveal the same trends. 
In these calculations, the size of the magnet and the cavity are 
the same as the experimental work. These room temperature 
measurements and simulations allow us to predict the behavior 
of the system during levitation experiments.

IV.
LOW TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENTS

The frequency of the bare cavity without the magnet is 10.041 
GHz at 5K, shifting upward by 5 kHz as the temperature de-
creases from 5 K to 55 mK. With the bare cavity frequency as 
a reference, when the magnet is placed on the stub, the fre-
quency shifts down by 130 MHz to 9.910 GHz. The amount of 
frequency shift varies with the exact position of the magnet on 
the tip of the stub with the maximum shift occurring when the 
magnet is placed near the edge of the stub. For the case of a 
magnet on the stub, we observed 120 MHz of frequency change 
as the temperature drops from 5 K to 65 mK, as shown by the 
solid lines in Fig. 3(b). The sudden frequency shift at 650 mK 
is consistent with levitation due to expulsion of the magnetic 
field from the material below the magnet. As the temperature 
drops below 100 mK the frequency shift approaches -12 MHz. 
Our measurements are consistent over several heating and cool-
ing cycles. We also report measurements for the case where the 
magnet is placed in the bottom of the cavity. The variations in 
the cavity resonance frequency are smaller, but still measurable. 

At 5 K the difference between frequency of bare cavity and cav-
ity with magnet on the bottom is +11 MHz. As temperature is 
reduced to 57 mK the frequency difference drops to +5 MHz. 

The neodymium permanent magnet has a maximum mag-

netic field (remanence) of 1.44 T and a surface field of 0.67 T. 

When the magnet rests directly on the surface of the aluminum, 
the magnetic field strength at the interface is larger than the crit-
ical field of the aluminum 100 gauss at 1.2 K. This creates a 
normal conducting region having a depth of 1-2 mm directly 
below the magnet. As the temperature drops, the critical field 
increases and the normal region becomes thinner. Below 650 
mK there is sufficient lift due to the Meissner effect to offset 
the gravitational force and levitate the magnet. Once the magnet 
begins to lift at 650 mK, the normal region shrinks which in-
creases the Meissner force making magnet jump up to its equi-
librium position of 2.5 mm. At this point the magnetic flux is 
completely expelled from the volume of the superconductor. 
For the case of the magnet levitated 2.5 mm above the stub, the 
sensitivity of the resonance frequency to height fluctuations is 
10 MHz/mm. For levitation above the bottom of the cavity we 

Fig. 3.
(a): Cavity resonance frequency shift as a function of temperature. 

(b): A composite of reflection spectrum measurements for the three cavity con-
figurations and for a range of temperatures. When a magnet is located on the 
top of the stub and cooled to 70mK, we observe an downward shift in frequency 
(solid lines) which is reduced from -130 MHz at 1 K down to -12 MHz at 70 
mK. When the magnet is located on the bottom of the cavity, the frequency is 
up shifted and drops from 11 MHz at 1 K to 5 MHz at 50 mK (dashed lines). 

Fig. 2.
Measurements are taken at room temperature by putting a magnet 

inside a capillary tube and by sealing its end by a tape, and factoring out the 
effect of the capillary. The capillary tube with the magnet is positioned at 
different coordinates inside the cavity by the translational stage of the 
micrometer. The error bar is same for all experimental data.


4

expect the sensitivity to be less than above the stub by a factor 
of 50.

V.
CONCLUSION

We demonstrate levitation of a millimeter-sized neodymium 

permanent magnet to a height of 2.5 mm within the interior of 
a SRF cavity. The levitation temperature is 650 mK and we find 
that the levitation above the stub exhibits a larger sensitivity 
compared with levitation from the bottom of the cavity. Our fu-
ture goals include characterizing the mechanical vibrations of 
the levitated magnet and integrating this magnet-cavity system 
with other cavity optomechanical schemes. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

N. K. Raut would like to thank Dr. Luis Martinez, Dr. Ales-

sandro Castelli. The author would also like to thank Sharping 
group in UC Merced. 

REFERENCES

[1]
S. Kuhr, S. Gleyzes, C. Guerlin, J. Bernu, U. B. Hoff, S. Deléglise, S. 
Osnaghi, M. Brune, J. M. Raimond, S.  Haroche, and E. Jacques, 
“Ultrahigh finesse Fabry-Pérot superconducting resonator”, Applied 
Physics Letters, vol. 90, no. 16, April 2007, Art. no. 164101.

[2]
M. Reagor, P. Wolfgang, A. Christopher, W. H. Reinier, O. Nissim, S. 
Katrina, H. Eric et al., "Quantum memory with millisecond coherence in 
circuit QED", Physical Review B, vol. 94, no. 1, July 2016, Art. no.
014506.

[3]
Y. Tabuchi, S. Ishino, A. Noguchi, T. Ishikawa, R. Yamazaki, K. Usami, 
and Y. Nakamura, “Coherent coupling between a ferromagnetic magnon 
and a superconducting qubit”, Science, vol. 349, no. 6246, July 2015.

[4]
S. P. Wolski, D. Lachance-Quirion, Y. Tabuchi, S. Kono, A. Noguchi, K. 
Usami, and Y. Nakamura, “Dissipation-based Quantum Sensing of Mag-
nons with a Superconducting Qubit”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09250,
May 2020.

[5]
M. Aspelmeyer, T. J. Kippenberg, and F. Marquardt, “Cavity optome-
chanics”, Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 86, no. 4, December 2014.

[6]
A. Schliesser, and T. J.  Kippenberg, “Cavity optomechanics with whis-
pering-gallery mode optical micro-resonators”, In Advances In Atomic, 
Molecular, and Optical Physics, Vol. 58, 2010. 

[7]
S. Weis, R. Rivière, S. Deléglise, E. Gavartin, O. Arcizet, A. Schliesser, 
and T. J. Kippenberg, “Optomechanically induced transparency”, Sci-
ence, vol. 330, December 2010.

[8]
D. Kleckner, B. Pepper, E. Jeffrey, P. Sonin, S. M. Thon, and D. 
Bouwmeester. “Optomechanical trampoline resonators”, Optics ex-
press, vol. 19, no. 24, September 2011, Art. no. 19708. 

[9]
G. Flower, M. Goryachev, J. Bourhill, and M. E. Tobar, “Experimental 
implementations of cavity-magnon systems: from ultra strong coupling to 
applications in precision measurement”, New Journal of Physics, vol. 21, 
September 2019, Art. no. 095004.

[10]
J. D. Teufel, D. Tobias, L. Dale, W. H. Jennifer, M. S. Allman, K Cicak, 
A. J. Sirois, J. D. Whittaker, K. W. Lehnert, and R. W. Simmonds. "Side-
band cooling of micromechanical motion to the quantum ground 
state", Nature, vol. 475, July 2011, Art. no. 10261.

[11]
J. Chan, A. TP Mayer, H. Safavi-Naeini Amir, J. T. Hill, A. Krause, S.
Gröblacher, M. Aspelmeyer, and O. Painter. "Laser cooling of a nanome-
chanical oscillator into its quantum ground state", Nature, vol. 478, Octo-
ber 2011, Art. no. 10421.

[12]
J. Ahn, Z. Xu, J. Bang, Y. H. Deng, T. M. Hoang, Q. Han, T. Li et al., 
“Optically levitated nanodumbbell torsion balance and GHz nanomechan-
ical rotor”, Physical review letters, vol. 121, no. 3, July 2018, Art. no. 
033603.

[13]
R. Reimann, M. Doderer, E. Hebestreit, R. Diehl, M. Frimmer, D.
Windey, L. Novotny et al., “GHz rotation of an optically trapped nano-
particle in vacuum”, Physical review letters, vol. 121, no. 3, May 2018, 
033602.

[14]
J. M. Goodkind, “The superconducting gravimeter”, Review of scientific 
instruments”, vol. 70, no. 11, November 1999, Art. no. 4131.

[15]
Z. Q. Yin, A. A. Geraci, and T. Li, “Optomechanics of levitated dielectric 
particles”, International Journal of Modern Physics B, vol. 27, no. 26, 
2013, Art. no. 1330018.

[16]
T. M. Hoang, Y. Ma, J. Ahn, J. Bang, F. Robicheaux, Z. Q. Yin, and T.
Li, “Torsional optomechanics of a levitated nonspherical nanoparti-
cle”. Physical review letters, vol. 117, no. 12, September 2016, Art. no. 
123604.

[17]
P. F. Barker, and M. N. Shneider, “Cavity cooling of an optically trapped 
nanoparticle”, Physical Review A, vol. 81, no. 2, February 2010, Art. no. 
023826.

[18]
D. E. Chang, C. A. Regal, S. B. Papp, D. J. Wilson, J. Ye, O. Painter, H. 
J. Kimble, and P. Zoller, “Cavity opto-mechanics using an optically levi-
tated nanosphere”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 
107, no. 3, January 2010.

[19] J. Millen, T. Deesuwan, P. Barker, and J. Anders, “Nanoscale temperature 

measurements using non-equilibrium Brownian dynamics of a levitated 
nanosphere”, Nature nanotechnology, vol. 9, no. 6, June 2014.

[20] T. Li, S. Kheifets, D. Medellin, and M. G. Raizen, “Measurement of the 

instantaneous velocity of a Brownian particle”, Science, vol. 328, June 
2010.

[21]
M. Imboden, and P. Mohanty, “Dissipation in nanoelectromechanical 
systems”, Physics Reports, vol. 534, September 2014.

[22] J. Millen, T. S. Monteiro, R. Pettit, and A. N. Vamivakas, “Optomechan-

ics with levitated particles”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.08198, September 
2019.

[23] A. Vinante, A. Pontin, M. Rashid, M. Toros, P. F. Barker, H. Ulbricht, 

“Testing collapse models with levitated nanoparticles: detection chal-
lenge”, Physical Review A, vol. 100, no. 1, July 2019, Art. no. 012119.

[24]
L. Childress, M. P. Schmidt, A. D. Kashkanova, C. D. Brown, , G. I. 
Harris, , A. Aiello, and J. G. E. Harris, “Cavity optomechanics in a levi-
tated helium drop”, Physical Review A, vol. 96, no. 6, December 2017, 
Art. no. 063842.

[25]
P. Huillery, T. Delord, L. Nicolas, M. Bossche, M. Perdriat, and G. Hé-
tet, “Spin-mechanics with levitating ferromagnetic particles”, Physical 
Review B, vol. 101, no. 13, April 2020, Art. no. 134415.

[26]
C. C. Rusconi, V. Pöchhacker, K. Kustura, J. I. Cirac, and O. Romero-
Isart, “Quantum spin stabilized magnetic levitation”, Physical review let-
ters, vol. 119, no. 16, October 2017, Art. no. 167202.

[27]
C. Gonzalez-Ballestero, J. Gieseler, and O. Romero-Isart, “Quantum 
acoustomechanics with a micromagnet”, Physical review letters, vol. 124, 
no. 9, March 2020, Art. no. 093602.

[28] J.R. Hull, and A. Cansiz, “Vertical and lateral forces between a permanent 

magnet and a high-temperature superconductor”, Journal of Applied 
Physics, vol. 86, no. 11, August 1999.

[29] F. Hellman, E. M. Gyorgy, Jr, D. W. Johnson, H. M. O’Bryan, and R. C.

Sherwood, “Levitation of a magnet over a flat type II superconduc-
tor”, Journal of Applied physics, vol. 63, no. 447, August 1988.

[30]
H. Barowski, K. M. Sattler, and W. Schoepe, “Static and dynamic forces 
on a permanent magnet levitating between superconducting surfaces”, 
Journal of low temperature physics, vol. 93, no. 1-2, June 1993.

[31]
E. H. Brandt, “Levitation in physics”, Science, vol. 243, no. 4889, Janu-
ary 1989.

[32] C. Timberlake, G. Gasbarri, A. Vinante, A. Setter, and H. Ulbricht, “Ac-

celeration sensing with magnetically levitated oscillators”, arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1910.07078, November 2019.

[33]
J. Prat-Camps, C. Teo, C. C. Rusconi, W. Wieczorek, and O. Romero-
Isart, “Ultrasensitive inertial and force sensors with diamagnetically levi-
tated magnets”, Physical Review Applied, vol. 8, no. 3, September 2017, 
Art. no. 034002.

[34]
J. Gieseler, A. Kabcenell, E. Rosenfeld, J. D. Schaefer, A. Safira, M. J. 
Schuetz, C. Gonzalez-Ballestero, C. C. Rusconi, O. Romero-Isart, and M. 
D. Lukin, “Single-Spin Magnetomechanics with Levitated Micromag-
nets”, Physical Review Letters, vol. 124, no. 16, April 2020, Art. 
no.163604.

[35] J. E. Sharping, J. Pate, J. Parker, J. J. Thompson, L. A. Martinez, A. R. 

Castelli, and R. Y. Chiao, “Joints and shape imperfections in high-Q 3D 
SRF cavities for RF optomechanics,” vol. 128, no. 7,  August 2020.


