Nonlinear quantum processes in superconducting 
resonators terminated by neon-focused-ion-beam-

fabricated superconducting nanowires

J. A. Potter, O. W. Kennedy, J. C. Fenton and P. A. Warburton

London Centre for Nanotechnology,

University College London,
London, United Kingdom
p.warburton@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract—We have used a neon focused-ion-beam to fabricate 

both nanoscale Nb Dayem bridges and NbN phase-slip nanowires 
located at the short-circuited end of quarter-wavelength coplanar 
waveguide resonators. The Dayem bridge devices show flux-
tunability and intrinsic quality factor exceeding 10,000 at 300 mK
up to local fields of at least 60 mT. The NbN nanowires show 
signatures of incoherent quantum tunnelling of flux at 300 mK.

Keywords—
nanofabrication, 
superconducting 
nanowires, 

quantum electronics, flux tunnelling

I.
INTRODUCTION

Superconducting 
nanowires 
with
cross-sectional 

dimensions comparable to or less than the coherence length 
display nonlinear transport characteristics which can be 
exploited in quantum and classical electronics applications. 
The Dayem bridge [1] consists of a short region of suppressed 
superconducting order between two fully superconducting 
electrodes. Josephson coupling between the electrodes results 
in it behaving as a nonlinear inductor. If the superconducting 
nanowire has a high degree of structural disorder then the 
physics may be dominated by quantum phase-slips (QPS) [2,3]. 
The coherent-QPS nanowire is the charge-flux dual of the 
Josephson junction and it behaves as a nonlinear capacitor. 

For quantum device applications it is critical that 

dissipative loss mechanisms at non-zero frequencies (which, 
for example, suppress the T1
coherence lifetime) are 

minimised. The technological challenge is therefore to 
fabricate superconducting nanowires with widths a few tens of 
nanometres without significantly increasing the dissipative loss 
rate above that of the unpatterned film. Focused-ion-beams 
(FIB) are widely used for nanofabrication of superconductors
[4,5], and traditionally made use of gallium ions from a liquid 
metal ion source.
However, Ga-based FIB milling has 

undesirable effects such as gallium poisoning —giving
degraded superconducting material and increased dissipation
[6]— and gallium’s high mobility —leading to long-timescale 
device variability [7]. More recently the gas-field ion source

(GFIS) has been used to generate both helium and neon ion-
beams, with the latter having sufficient mass to perform FIB 
milling of metallic thin films. 

Here we demonstrate the use of neon-FIB milling for 

fabrication of superconducting nanowires. We have created
nanoscale superconducting loops containing either (a) Dayem 
bridges in Nb films or (b) phase-slip nanowires (operating here 
in the incoherent regime) in disordered NbN films. These 
nanowires 
are 
embedded 
within 
quarter-wavelength 

superconducting coplanar waveguide (CPW) resonators so 
measurements of the resonant frequency and quality factor
enable, respectively, the nonlinear properties of and losses in 
the nanowires to be extracted.

II. NANOWIRE-TERMINATED TRANSMISSION LINES

The impedance Zin seen at the input to a transmission line 

of length l which is terminated by a load impedance ZL that is 
not equal to the characteristic impedance Z0 of the line is given 
by


()

where  is the frequency and c is the phase velocity. At 
resonance the imaginary part of Zin is zero. Hence, modulation 
of the load inductance ZL results in tuning of the resonant 
frequency of the transmission line.

A DC-SQUID has flux-tunable inductance given by 


(2)

where Ic is the SQUID critical current at zero flux,  is the 
applied flux and 0 is the flux quantum. In the case of a 

This work is supported by EPSRC (grant references EP/H005544/1, 

EP/K024701/1, EP/L015242/1 and EP/P510270/1).


SQUID-terminated transmission line the load impedance ZL is
i2Lk.

If the Josephson junctions of the SQUID are replaced by 

two parallel superconducting nanowires then the form of the 
flux-modulation of the total inductive load is modified. In the
case of a highly disordered superconductor such as niobium 
nitride there is a large nonlinear kinetic inductance which 
varies with DC current, I, as Lk(I) = Lk(0)[1+I2/I*2] [8]. 
Therefore the total kinetic inductance of the combined loop-
nanowire system is given by


()

where I*1 and I*2 are the current scales which characterise the 
nonlinearity of the nanowires and the wider part of the loop 
respectively. These current scales are related to the transport 
critical current and so are related to each other by a geometric 
factor. Since I =  / Lk, the flux-dependence of the total kinetic 
inductance can be calculated.

III. NEON FOCUSED-ION-BEAM

A GFIS source [9] consists of a metallic (typically 

tungsten) tip which is cooled to below 100 K and sharpened by 
field emission to atomic dimensions. He or Ne gas is admitted 
to a pressure of ~10-6 mbar. The potential applied to the tip is 
adjusted so that the electric field is only sufficiently large to 
ionise the inert gas atoms at the apex of the tip. This results in 
an inert gas beam of very high brightness which emerges from 
the three-atom tip, one atom of which is selected as an atomic 
ion source. Ions are then accelerated and focused onto the 
sample using conventional ion-beam optics. Typical neon
beams in commercially available FIB systems have energy up 
to 30 kV, current up to 10 pA and beam diameter at the sample 
as small as 2nm. The beam energy, which is comparable to that 

in Ga-FIB, is controlled electrostatically. Its optimal value is 
chosen to give a balance between sputter yield and sample 
damage. The maximum beam current achievable with a neon 
beam is more than three orders of magnitude lower than that of 
commercially available gallium FIB systems, leading to 
significantly reduced volume milling rates for neon by 
comparison with gallium. 

IV. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

Films were grown by d.c. magnetron sputtering from a Nb 

target onto silicon (in the case of Nb) or c-axis oriented 
sapphire (in the case of NbN) substrates. For Nb deposition the 
sputter atmosphere is 100% argon, whereas for NbN deposition 
it is 50% argon – 50% nitrogen. The film thickness is ~50 nm 
for the Nb films and ~10 nm for NbN; the smaller thickness for 
NbN was chosen because the phase fluctuations leading to 
quantum phase-slip are enhanced in thinner films.

The larger-scale features of our devices were fabricated by 

electron-beam lithography and reactive ion etching in SF6. At 
this stage an r.f. feedline and quarter-wavelength CPW 

2μm

100nm

(a)
(b)

(c)

300μm

Fig. 1. Nb Dayem-bridge device. (a) Optical micrograph of the CPW 
meander resonator with feedline at the bottom of the image; (b) Helium 
FIB image of the highlighted region in (a) showing the SQUID loop; (c) 
Helium FIB image of the highlighted region in (b) showing a single 
Dayem bridge. In all images the Nb is bright and the exposed Si substrate 
is dark. Further details are given in [10].

Fig. 2. (a) Dependence of the resonant frequency (blue, left axis) and 
intrinsic quality factor (red, right axis) of the Nb Dayem-bridge device on 
a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the SQUID loop. (b) The same 
measurements extended to higher field. The lower axis shows the applied 
field and the upper axis shows the inferred local field at the SQUID. The 
line is a guide to the eye. Data presented and analysed further in [10].


resonators are defined. Multiple resonators with different 
resonant frequency are capacitively coupled to the same 
feedline, allowing multiplexed readout of up to 6 devices on 
the same chip. Each resonator is fabricated with a loop at the 
short-circuited end of the resonator, containing precursor 
‘microwires’ with dimensions of a few hundred nanometres.

Nanowires were fabricated by FIB milling the precursor 

microwires to the desired width using a 15-kV Ne beam with a 
current of ~2 pA. A dose of ≈2 nCµm-2 was sufficient to clear 
the 50-nm Nb film, while a dose of 1 nCµm-2 was used for the 
NbN devices. Ion milling on resistive or insulating substrates 
results in the build-up of positive charge on devices. This 
charge repels the incoming beam and can limit resolution. 
Charging effects during neon milling were mitigated by
connecting the sample to a copper electrode via aluminium 
wire bonds. This was found to be particularly important for the 
NbN samples due to the high normal-state resistivity of 
niobium nitride thin films together with the insulating sapphire 
substrate. The sputter yield using the Ne beam was sufficient to 
fabricate nanowires in less than a minute; the short time was 
important to avoid charging-induced drift.

Measurements were performed in a 3He cryostat at a 

temperature T ≈ 300 mK using an r.f. vector network analyser.
Magnetic field was applied using a superconducting solenoid 
and a precision current source.

V. NIOBIUM DAYEM BRIDGES

In Fig. 1 we show a Nb Dayem-bridge SQUID loop

coupled to a /4 resonator. The width of the two bridges is 
around 50 nm. The magnetic-field dependence of the resonant 
frequency and quality factor of this structure at T = 300 mK are 
shown in Fig. 2(a). In an applied field of 10 T, the resonant 
frequency is tuned by ~60 MHz from its zero-field value of 
7.41 GHz. The intrinsic Q of the resonance has a zero-field 
value of around 25,000. Another similar device fabricated on 
the same wafer has an intrinsic Q of 120,000 [10]. To our 
knowledge this is the highest reported Q of a SQUID-tunable 
resonator. Comparison with other on-chip resonators which do 
not include SQUIDs [10] confirms that the Q in these devices 

is limited by losses in the “bulk” superconducting films, and 
that the additional losses due to presence of the nanowires and 
FIB milling are negligible by comparison. 

In Fig. 2(b), we show the field dependence of the resonant 

frequency and Q of the same device at higher applied fields. 
Jumps in the resonant frequency occur as additional flux 
quanta tunnel into the SQUID loop. The field periodicity of 
hysteretic SQUIDs together with the known area of the SQUID 
loop allow us to determine an estimate of the flux focusing 
from the diamagnetic superconducting ground planes, F = 124,
and the field of maximal detuning in units of 0 allows us to 
extract a lower bound for the normalized inductance, L = 
2LkIc/0 > 3.4. The flux focusing factor allows us to rescale the 
field axis in Fig. 2(b) to give the local flux density, Blocal = 
FBapplied. At local fields higher than 30 mT, the device not only 
retains its flux-tunability but also the Q is flux-independent 
(within the noise level) and exceeds 10,000.

VI. NIOBIUM NITRIDE PHASE-SLIP NANOWIRES

Fig. 3 shows a typical device used to investigate nanowire 

phase-slip physics in NbN. The nanowire shown is 350 nm 
long and 30 nm wide. A particularly striking feature of the 
image is the ‘bubbled’ area of substrate around the nanowire.
This bubbling is caused by neon implanting in the sapphire 
substrate, disrupting the crystal structure and causing local 
swelling. Previous studies [11,12] into ion-beam-induced 
substrate bubbling have found the dimensions of these sub-
surface bubbles to be beam-energy- and ion-dose- dependent. 
Our SEM images (Fig. 3) show bubbles with diameters of tens 
of nanometres, which is consistent with the previous findings 
[11,12]. It was also previously observed that the bubbles stand 
a few tens of nanometres above the substrate surface, and in 
our case this height is greater than the thickness of the NbN 
film. In what follows, we report measurements of this device at 
T = 300 mK.

Fig. 3. Scanning electron microscope image of a NbN phase-slip 
nanowire. NbN appears brighter in contrast than the sapphire substrate.

Fig. 4. Dependence of the transmission of the nanowire phase-slip device 
upon frequency and magnetic field applied perpendicular to the plane of 
the superconducting loop. The white dashed line shows the fit to the 
resonant frequency using (2) and (3), with B* = 14 mT and F = 2.4.


The critical temperature of the NbN was measured to be 8.5 

K. Our measurements therefore are made at temperatures far 
below the predicted value of the crossover temperature below 
which the rate of quantum activation of phase slips exceeds the 
thermal rate [13]. The intrinsic Q for this device is 2,000 
whereas, prior to the neon FIB milling stage, it was 13,000.
Indeed, it has previously been shown that neon irradiation can 
have a damaging effect on resonator quality factor [14]. The 
higher loss in the NbN devices by comparison with the Nb 
devices discussed above, even before Ne milling, may be 
associated with the high level of structural disorder and low 
film thickness [15], both of which are necessary to maximise 
the QPS rate. Nevertheless, the Q of the neon-milled devices is 
two orders of magnitude larger than previously reported 
coherent-QPS devices based on indium oxide films [16] and 
somewhat larger than other NbN CQPS devices [17]. 

The magnetic-field dependence of the spectral response of 

this device is shown in Fig. 4. We observe two effects: (i) a 
slow decrease of the resonant frequency as the field increases. 
This matches the expected parabolic field-dependence of the 
kinetic inductance of the “bulk” NbN film, which (unlike for 
the Nb devices reported above) is significantly larger than the 
geometric inductance; (ii) a periodic modulation of the 
resonant frequency with period 0.42 mT, from which a flux 
focusing factor of F = 2.4 can be extracted. We argue that this 
periodic modulation arises from incoherent quantum phase-slip 
events occurring in the NbN nanowires, each allowing a single 
flux quantum to tunnel into the loop, and occurring when the 
flux difference between the inner and outer regions of the loop 
is equal to 0/2. We can rule out the presence of a weak-link 
Josephson junction at some point along the length of the 
nanowires, as this would lead to hysteretic tuning similar to 
that observed in our Nb SQUID devices.

The dashed line in Fig. 4 shows a fit to the data using (2) 

and (3), modified to include the parabolic field-dependence 
parametrised by a phenomenological field-scale B*. The fitting 
parameters are the flux focusing factor and B*. While we 
observe none of the avoided level crossings which would 
characterise coherent quantum phase-slip, the quality of the fit
and the lack of hysteresis provide good evidence that 
incoherent quantum phase-slips are occurring in the nanowires.
However, at this stage we cannot definitively rule out all other 
potential mechanisms for periodic flux tunnelling.

VII. CONCLUSIONS

We used neon FIB to fabricate nanowires of width less than 

50 nm which exhibit nonlinear quantum effects whilst 
maintaining low loss. The field resilience of the Nb Dayem 
bridges (shown here up to a perpendicular local field of 60 mT) 
suggests that they may be useful for application as a readout 
technology for spin qubits [10]. Furthermore, we have made
measurements of incoherent flux tunnelling in NbN nanowires 
at 300 mK, which is a key milestone towards future studies of
coherent quantum phase-slips in these devices. Future work 

will focus on minimising the losses at dilution-refrigerator 
temperatures where we expect CQPS phenomena to be 
observable.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The assistance of Jonathan Burnett, Nick Constantino, John 

Morton and Eva Dupont-Ferrier is gratefully acknowledged.

REFERENCES

[1] P.W. Anderson and A.H. Dayem, “Radio-frequency effects in 

superconducting thin film bridges,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 13, p. 195, 
1964. 

[2] J.E. Mooij and Y.V. Nazarov, “Superconducting nanowires as quantum 

phase-slip junctions,” Nature Physics, vol. 2, p. 169, 2006. 

[3]
N.G.N. Constantino, M.S. Anwar, O.W. Kennedy, M. Dang, P.A. 
Warburton and J.C. Fenton, “Emergence of quantum phase-slip 
behaviour in superconducting NbN nanowires: DC electrical transport 
and fabrication technologies,” Nanomaterials, 8(6), 442, 2018.

[4]
L. Hao, D.C. Cox and J.C. Gallop, “Characteristics of focused ion beam 
nanoscale Josephson devices,” Supercond, Sci, Technol., vol. 22 art. 
064011, 2009.

[5] M.D. Jenkins, U. Naether, M. Ciria, J. Sesé, J. Atkinson, C. Sánchez-

Azqueta, E. del Barco, J. Majer, D. Zueco and F. Luis, “Nanoscale 
constrictions in superconducting coplanar waveguide resonators,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., vol. 105, art. 162601, 2014. 

[6]
D.C. Cox, J.C. Gallop and L Hao, “Focused Ion Beam Processing of 
Superconducting 
Junctions 
and 
SQUID 
based 
devices,” 

Nanofabrication, vol. 1, pp. 53-64, 2014.

[7]
A.G.P. Troeman, H. Derking, B. Borger, J. Pleikies, D. Veldhuis and H. 
Hilgenkamp, “NanoSQUIDs based on niobium constrictions,” Nano 
Letters, 7 (7), 2152-2156, 2007.

[8]
J. Zmuidzinas, “Superconducting Microresonators: Physics and 
Applications,” Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys., 3:169–214, 2012.

[9] M.G. Stanford, B.B. Lewis, K.Mahady, J.D. Fowlkes and P.D. Rack, 

“Advanced nanoscale patterning and material synthesis with gas field 
He and Ne ion beams,” J. Vac. Sci. Tech. B, vol. 35, art. 030802, 2017. 

[10] O.W. Kennedy, J. Burnett, J.C. Fenton, N.G.N. Constantino, P.A.

Warburton, J.J.L. Morton and E. Dupont-Ferrier, “Tunable Nb 
superconducting resonator based on a constriction nano-SQUID,” Phys. 
Rev. Applied, vol. 11, art. 014006, 2019.

[11] R.
Livengood , S.
Tan , Y.
Greenzweig , J.
Notte and S.
McVey,

“Subsurface damage from helium ions as a function of dose, beam 
energy, and dose rate”, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. 
Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., vol. 27, 3244 —3249, 
2009.

[12] S. Tan , R. Livengood , D. Shima , J. Notte and S. McVey, “Gas field 

ion source and liquid metal ion source charged particle material 
interaction study for semiconductor nanomachining applications”, J. 
Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., 
Meas., Phenom., vol. 28, C6F15 —C6F21, 2010.

[13] T. Aref, A. Levchenko, V. Vakaryuk and A. Bezryadin, “Quantitative 

analysis of quantum phase slips in superconducting Mo,” Phys. Rev B, 
vol. 86, art. 024507, 2012.

[14] J. Burnett, J. Sagar, P.A. Warburton and J.C. Fenton, “Embedding NbN 

nanowires into quantum circuits with a neon focused ion beam,” IEEE 
TAS, vol. 26, no. 3, 2016.

[15] J. Burnett, J. Sagar, O.W. Kennedy, P.A. Warburton and J.C. Fenton,

“Low-loss superconducting nanowire circuits using a neon focused ion 
beam,” Phys. Rev. Applied, vol. 8, art. 014039, 2017.


[16] O.V. Astafiev, L.B. Ioffe, S. Kafanov, Yu.A. Pashkin, K.Yu. 

Arutyunov, D. Shahar, O. Cohen and J.S. Tsai, “Coherent quantum 
phase slip,” Nature, vol. 484, p. 355, 2012. 

[17] J.T. Peltonen, O.V. Astafiev, Yu. P. Korneeva, B.M. Voronov, A.A. 

Korneev, I.M. Charaev, A.V. Semenov, G.N. Golt’sman, L.B. Ioffe, 
T.M. Klapwijk and J.S.Tsai, “Coherent flux tunneling through NbN
nanowires,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 88, art. 220506, 2013.


