Thermoelectric power factor under strain-
induced band-alignment in the half-Heuslers 

NbCoSn and TiCoSb

Chathurangi Kumarasinghe*, and Neophytos Neophytou

School of Engineering, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK

* Chathu.Kumarasinghe@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract

Band convergence is an effective strategy to improve the thermoelectric perfor-

mance of complex bandstructure thermoelectric materials. Half-Heuslers are good 

candidates for band convergence studies because they have multiple bands near the 

valence bad edge that can be converged through various band engineering ap-

proaches providing power factor improvement opportunities. Theoretical calcula-

tions to identify the outcome of band convergence employ various approximations 

for the carrier scattering relaxation times (the most common being the constant re-

laxation time approximation) due to the high computational complexity involved in 

extracting them accurately. Here, we compare the outcome of strain-induced band 

convergence under two such scattering scenarios: i) the most commonly used con-

stant relaxation time approximation and ii) energy dependent inter- and intra-valley 

scattering considerations for the half-Heuslers NbCoSn and TiCoSb. We show   that 

the outcome of band convergence on the power factor depends on the carrier scat-

tering assumptions, as well as the temperature. For both materials examined, band 

convergence improves the power factor. For NbCoSn, however, band convergence 

becomes more beneficial as temperature increases, under both scattering relaxation 

time assumptions. In the case of TiCoSb, on the other hand, constant relaxation time 

considerations also indicate that the relative power factor improvement increases 

with temperature, but under the energy dependent scattering time considerations, 


2

the relative improvement weakens with temperature. This indicates that the scat-

tering details need to be accurately considered in band convergence studies to pre-

dict more accurate trends. 


3

Introduction

Thermoelectric materials are capable of direct conversion of thermal energy

into electricity and vice versa. They have drawn interest as an environment-friendly

and highly reliable energy conversion technology1–4. The efficiency of a thermoe-

lectric material is quantified by the thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT) given by:

ZT = (σ𝑆2𝑇)/𝜅 ,
(1)

where 𝜎 is the electrical conductivity, S is the Seebeck coefficient, T is the temper-

ature and 𝜅 is the thermal conductivity of the material. To obtain a high ZT, a high 

electrical conductivity, a high Seebeck coefficient, i.e. a high power factor (𝜎𝑆2), 

and a low thermal conductivity 𝜅 is needed, however, simultaneous optimization 

of these parameters is difficult due to their complex inter-dependencies.

Bandstructure engineering approaches such as ‘band-convergence’ also 

known as ‘band-alignment’, can overcome these inter-dependencies and improve 

the power factor (PF)5,6. The aim of band-convergence is to increase the number of 

carriers contributing to electronic transport by increasing the valley or orbital de-

generacy near conduction or valence bands edges. In bulk materials, bandstructures

can be manipulated to achieve this by applying strain, doping, alloying,  and second 

phasing with other suitable structures 7–9. For example, half-Heusler (HH) alloys 10–

14 have complex bandstructures with the potential for beneficial band convergence. 

They are also known to have good thermal and mechanical stability, large scale 

reproducibility, and made out of relatively inexpensive, non-toxic elements.

One of the most commonly used theoretical approaches for obtaining ther-

moelectric properties of materials is applying the Boltzmann transport theory in the 

relaxation time approximation using detailed material bandstructures obtained from 

ab initio density functional theory (DFT) 15,16. The carrier relaxation time is an im-

portant input in this calculation, but due to the high computational complexity in 

calculating accurate carrier relaxation times, a constant relaxation time is generally 

assumed (usually  𝜏 ≈ 10−14𝑠 is used). However, such simplifications are known 


4

to give less accurate predictions particularly during band-convergence optimization

studies 17. This is because, while band-alignment can increase the number of carriers 

available for conduction, it can also increase the number of states that carriers scat-

ter into. Therefore, the energy dependence of the scattering mechanisms, as well as 

intra- or inter-valley scattering considerations are important in identifying if a given 

bandstructure engineering approach leads to an improved power factor.  In addition, 

the scattering rate depends on the temperature as well with more scattering of elec-

trons/holes by phonons expected at higher temperatures.

In this work we study the effect of considering different scattering time 

scenarios on the strain-induced band-convergence for two Co-based half-Heuslers,

NbCoSn and TiCoSb. We consider constant (𝜏C), and energy dependent inter- and 

intra- valley scattering (𝜏IIV) relaxation time approximations, and quantify the rela-

tive power factor improvements that each predict at different temperatures and 

strain levels. We finally stress the importance of accurate treatment of scattering in 

arriving to useful predictions. 

Methods

Boltzmann Transport Theory: Thermoelectric coefficients are calculated us-

ing the Boltzmann transport formalism within the relaxation time approximation 

(RTA). We describe the material properties using bandstructures obtained from 

DFT calculations.
The thermoelectric coefficients, electrical conductivity 

𝜎𝛼𝛽(𝑇, 𝐸𝐹) and Seebeck coefficient 𝑆𝛼𝛽(𝑇, 𝐸𝐹) tensors, can be written as 18,19: 

𝜎𝛼𝛽(𝑇, 𝐸𝐹) = 𝑒2 ∫ Ξ𝛼𝛽(𝐸) 𝜕𝑓(𝐸, 𝐸𝐹, 𝑇)

𝜕𝐸
𝑑𝐸
(2)

𝑆𝛼𝛽(𝑇, 𝐸𝐹) =
𝑒

𝑇𝜎𝛼𝛽(𝑇, 𝐸𝐹) ∫ Ξ𝛼𝛽(𝐸)(−𝐸𝐹) 𝜕𝑓(𝐸, 𝐸𝐹, 𝑇)

𝜕𝐸
𝑑𝐸
(3)

where 𝑓(𝐸, 𝐸𝐹, 𝑇) is the fermi distribution function at a given temperature 𝑇 and a 

chemical potential level 𝐸𝐹 and 𝑒
is the charge of an electron. Ξ𝛼𝛽(𝐸) is the 

transport distribution (TD) function, which is given by:


5

Ξ𝛼𝛽(𝐸) = ∑ 𝜏𝑖,𝐤(𝐸)𝑣𝛼(𝑖, 𝐤)𝑣𝛽(𝑖, 𝐤) 𝛿(𝐸 − 𝐸𝑖,𝐤 )

𝑖,𝐤

,

(4)

where 𝑖 and 𝐤 represent the band index and the k-point, respectively.  𝜏𝑖,𝐤(𝐸) is 

the electron relaxation time and 𝑣𝛼(𝑖, 𝐤) (𝛼 = {𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧}) represents the 𝛼𝑡ℎ compo-

nent of the group velocity 𝐯(𝑖, 𝐤), which can be derived from the gradient of the 

bands in the bandstructure as: 

𝐯(𝑖, 𝑘) =
1
ℏ ∇𝐤 𝐸𝑖,𝐤 .
(5)

Ab initio electronic structure calculations: Ab initio DFT calculations were 

performed for the Co-based HHs, NbCoSn and TiCoSb with the QUANTUM 

ESPRESSO package 20. Projector augmented wave technique was used with the

PBE-GGA functional. Throughout our calculations, a kinetic energy cutoff greater 

than 60Ry was used for wavefunctions and an energy convergence criterion of 10-8

Ry was adopted for self-consistency. For transport property calculations, a 

15x15x15 Monkhorst–Pack k-point sampling was used for the primitive unit cell 

with three atoms. Calculations using denser k-points were carried out to confirm the 

convergence of the results.

Relaxation time approximation: By applying the Boltzmann transport theory

using the DFT extracted bandstructures, we examine the influence of the nature of 

scattering times on the power factor for various temperatures and upon strain-in-

duced band-convergence. We consider: i) the commonly employed constant relax-

ation time (𝜏i = 𝜏C) and ii) scattering proportional to total density of states, allowing 

both inter- and intra-band scattering (𝜏 𝑖(𝐸) = 𝜏𝐼𝐼𝑉 ∝ 1/ ∑ DOS𝑖(𝐸)
𝑖
). 

To obtain a general understanding about these two scattering scenarios, we 

first analyse them using a simple parabolic band model. Since under the parabolic 

band approximation, the velocity and density of states of each band is 𝑣𝑖(𝐸) =


6

(2𝐸/𝑚𝑖)1/2 , and DOS𝑖(𝐸) = 21/2𝑚𝑖

3/2𝑁𝑖𝐸1/2/(𝜋2ℏ3), respectively, the TD func-

tion given in Eq.4 for valence bands is reduced to:

Ξ(𝐸) ∝ ∑ 𝑁𝑖𝜏𝑖(E) 𝑚𝑖

1
2 𝐸

3
2

𝑖

(H[−Δ𝐸𝑖]).
(6)

where the subscript i indicates each band, Δ𝐸𝑖 indicates the distance to the band 

edge from the valence band edge, 𝑁𝑖 indicates the band degeneracy and H[Δ𝐸𝑖]

indicates the Heaviside step function. (For conduction bands, (H[−Δ𝐸𝑖]) should be 

replace by H[Δ𝐸𝑖].)

Under the constant relaxation time approximation, 𝜏𝑖(𝐸) = 𝜏C, where 𝜏C is 

a constant. Therefore, the TD function relation given by Eq. (6) can be further sim-

plified to: 

Ξ(𝐸) ∝ ∑

𝑖

𝑚𝑖

1
2 𝐸

3
2 H[−Δ𝐸𝑖].
(7)

This indicates that under a constant relaxation time, aligning a band of any 

mass will increase the TD function, resulting finally in an increased conductivity, 

with the larger masses resulting in larger improvements, a common scenario seen 

in most band-alignment theory literature. The magnitude and sign of the Seebeck 

coefficient are related to an asymmetry of the electron transport around the Fermi 

level 21,22, which is indicated by the energy gradient of the TD function. If the band 

convergence does not additionally introduce significant asymmetry (significant 

change in gradient of the TD function), there will not be a significant change in the 

Seebeck coefficient. Therefore, in the case of a constant relaxation time, a power 

factor improvement is always achieved upon band alignment, driven by improve-

ments in the conductivity, with a heavier aligning band being preferred, as it offers 

a higher density of conducting states (but not more scattering states under 𝜏C). As 

we discuss further below, this is not the case when 𝜏 = 𝜏IIV(𝐸). 

In the case of inter- and intra-band scattering (𝜏IIV(𝐸)) that we consider 

next, carriers are allowed to scatter elastically to the total density of states available


7

at the energy under consideration, without any selection rules, i.e. both intra and 

inter-band (with inter and intra-valley in multi-valley materials) scattering is al-

lowed (𝜏𝑖(𝐸) = 𝜏IIV(𝐸) ∝ 1/ ∑ DOS𝑖(𝐸)
𝑖
). The TD functions relation given by Eq. 

(6) in this case can be simplified to:

Ξ(𝐸) ∝

∑
𝑚𝑖

1
2 𝐸

3
2 H[−Δ𝐸𝑖]
𝑖

∑ 𝑚𝑖

3
2 𝐸

1
2
𝑖
H[−Δ𝐸𝑖]

(8)

From Eq. (8), since the denominator (its appearance being a result of the scat-

tering times being inversely proportional to the DOS), has a higher mass exponent, 

it can be deduced that upon full band alignment, the TD function will only increase 

when a light band is brought close to the band edge and is aligned with a heavier 

band. When additional bands are gradually brought close to the band edge to be 

aligned, three competing effects take place: i) the presence of the additional con-

ducting states tends to increase the TD function, ii) the same states increase the 

scattering of already aligned bands, which tends to reduce the TD function, and iii)

scattering from newly aligned bands reduces since there are less states to scatter into 

at energies closer to valence band edge (due to the energy dependence E1/2 of the 

DOS), increasing the TD function. These interdependences do not allow for signif-

icant improvements in the TD, the conductivity, and the PF as in the previous two 

scattering scenarios. As a result of these competing effects, aligning bands is not 

always advantageous for the power factor under 𝜏IIV(𝐸)17.

Temperature dependent carrier relaxation time: When performing temper-

ature dependent studies, and evaluating the trends under increasing temperature, the 

Fermi distribution broadens, which allows the occupation of more states, however, 

to satisfy charge neutrality the Fermi level will shift towards the bandgap, increas-

ing the Seebeck coefficient. If one compares at the same Fermi level position, rather 

than carrier density, however, the conductivity increases, while not many changes 

are observed in the Seebeck coefficient. On the other hand, temperature increases 


8

the population of phonons, which increase carrier-phonon scattering. In the most 

common acoustic deformation potential scattering scenario, under the equipartition 

approximation, the scattering rate increases linearly with temperature. Thus, we ac-

count for the increase in carrier scattering with increase in temperature by scaling 

the relaxation times by 1/𝑇. We refer to this as ‘T-normalized relaxation time’. In 

the case of the constant relaxation time, we take  𝜏C = 10−14 s at 300 K, and linearly 

scale for other temperatures as 𝜏𝐶 = 10−14 (

300

𝑇 ) 𝑠, to account for deviations from 

room temperature In the case of energy dependent relaxation time, temperature scal-

ing is implemented as 𝜏𝐼𝐼𝑉 ∝ 1/ ∑ DOS𝑖(𝐸)
𝑖
(300/𝑇).

Results and Discussion

Figure 1 shows the power factors calculated using both temperature nor-

malized and non-normalized relaxation times. Under non-normalized conditions

(solid lines), at the same Fermi level position, the power factor rises with the tem-

perature because the derivative of the Fermi distribution function ((𝜕𝑓(𝐸, 𝐸𝐹, 𝑇))/

𝜕𝐸) in the Eq. 2 broadens (for a given Fermi level), increasing the conductivity. 

However, when we take into account the increase in carrier scattering by normaliz-

ing the carrier scattering time by 300/𝑇, the power factor difference almost disap-

pears, and only modest differences exist between temperatures for both scattering 

scenarios. This illustrates that it is important to take increased carrier scattering into 

consideration when comparing thermoelectric parameters at different temperatures.

(Note that it is often the case in experiments to observe that the power factor changes 

with temperature. That is because those are performed at a constant density, rather 

than a constant Fermi level position, which would have shifted the two lines com-

pared to each other).

Band convergence can be achieved using a variety of methods including

applying strain 17,23,24 and alloying6,25,26. Here, for the purposes of our investigation 

into the influence of band alignment on the PF under different scattering scenarios 


9

and temperatures, we use the easiest method within DFT, which is the use of hydro-

static strain, either compressive or tensile.

In Fig. 2(c), in the unstrained NbCoSn bandstructure, it is apparent that

multiple bands from several valleys are available close to the valence band edge 

VB0. Bands at the L and W points are already aligned at VB0. There also exist 

heavy and light bands at the X and Γ points within 0.3eV of the VB0. Aligning these 

bands that are in the vicinity of the VB0, particularly the bands at the X point that 

have a large equivalent valley degeneracy of 3, can lead to an improved conductivity 

and power factor. As seen in Figure 2(a-d), the bands of NbCoSn can be manipu-

lated with compression and expansion. When the material is compressed, the bands 

at the X point are brought closer to VB0, reducing their energy separation 𝛥𝐸, and 

when expanded, Δ𝐸 increases. It is important to note, however, that the curvatures 

of the bands, i.e. the carrier effective masses also change with strain. Compression 

increases the band curvatures (lower carrier effective mass) in general and expan-

sion has the opposite effect. The fact that the masses are reduced with band conver-

gence is unfavorable under a constant scattering rate as seen above in Eq.7. It is, 

however, favorable under 𝜏IIV(𝐸) under most situations17 as it brings bands with 

higher velocities that scatter less within the transport window. We consider large 

strain values of up to 5% and achieve a degree of alignment, but a compressive

strain larger than 5% is required to completely align the bands.

We now examine the thermoelectric coefficients of NbCoSn under strain, 

for three different temperatures 300K, 600K, and 900K (Fig. 3). Figure 3 shows the 

TE coefficients conductivity, Seebeck coefficient and the power factor calculated 

under the assumption of a constant scattering time (𝜏C). Later on, we will show how 

these observations are altered in the case of energy dependent 𝜏IIV scattering.  At 

300K (Fig. 3a-c) we only see a 3% improvement in the PF with band convergence. 

With increasing temperature, the conductivity for non-degenerate Fermi levels in-

creases, while it decreases for higher Fermi levels. The opposite effect is seen in the 

Seebeck coefficient where its values decrease for non-degenerate conditions and 

increase for highly degenerate Fermi values (right versus left regions of the sub-


10

figures). Also, the gradients of conductivity and Seebeck coefficient curves are re-

ducing with increasing temperature. The combined effect is that with increasing 

temperature the power factor improves for all compressive strain value, which tend 

to align the bands, with the improvements at 5% compressive strain to increase from 

3% to 13% to 21% at temperatures of 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K, respectively. Note 

that the absolute PF values do not necessarily increase with temperature, it is the 

relative increase between the unstrained and strained cases that increases. 

Next, we examine the behavior of NbCoSn under the energy dependent 

𝜏IIV scattering for the three temperatures of interest, 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K (Fig.4, 

column-wise). In this case, the differences in the conductivity are more noticeable 

between the different strain conditions, compared to the 𝜏C case in Fig. 3. The See-

beck coefficients as in the 𝜏C case are almost unchanged with strain at the same 

Fermi level position, especially for the higher temperatures. The improvements to 

the PF, on the other hand, are larger with compressive strain, and they begin to 

appear and being significant even at 300 K. In this 𝜏IIV case, the PF improvements 

for the 5% compressive strain, at 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K are 20%, 23%, and 33%, 

respectively. 

The larger improvements compared to the 𝜏C case, originate from the 

changes in the curvature of the bands in addition to the reduced band separation. 

The bands that are brought closer to the band edge to be aligned as well as the bands 

already at the band edge become lighter in the process in NbCoSn 17. Specifically, 

the masses of the bands at X valley band, changes from 0.48m0 to 0.29m0 while its 

separation is reduced from 315 meV to 232 meV upon 5% compression. Alignment 

tends to increase the PF in both 𝜏C and 𝜏IIV, but in the 𝜏C case the fact that the bands 

become lighter, mitigates this benefit. On the other hand, in the case of 𝜏IIV, light 

bands are beneficial, which provides an additional improvement to the PF. Finally, 

the reason the benefits increase with temperature in both cases, is due to the simple 

fact that the broadening of the Fermi distribution with temperature, allows for an 

exponentially larger percentage contribution of the upper valleys to the total contri-

bution. The separation  Δ𝐸 is still large, even at 5% compression, accounting for 


11

several kB𝑇even at 900 K. Thus, at the same Fermi level position, the overall rela-

tive PF improvement with temperature increases with 𝑇. For NbCoSn, either 𝜏C or 

𝜏IIV indicate a higher benefits of band alignment at higher temperatures.

Next, we apply strain to TiCoSb in the same way. The smaller energy sepa-

ration Δ𝐸 between bands at L and Γ points (see Fig. 5c) can be reduced by applying 

compressive strain, leading to band convergence, as shown in Fig. 5 (a-d). The un-

strained Δ𝐸 value in this situation is only 40 meV ( 1.55 𝑘B𝑇 at T = 300 K), i.e. the 

bands are almost aligned even without strain. The bands can be fully aligned by 

applying only 2% compressive strain as shown in Fig. 5b (a much more realistic 

value compared to the one needed for NbCoSn).

Figure 6 shows the TE coefficients conductivity, Seebeck coefficient and PF 

for the constant time scattering assumption 𝜏C for 300 K, 600 K, and 900 K column-

wise, in the same manner as earlier for the NbCoSn. We only see 6% improvement 

when bands are fully aligned using compressive strain (Fig. 6(c)), but the improve-

ment increases for higher temperatures, reaching 13% and 19% at 600 K and 900K, 

respectively (Fig. 6(f), 6(i)). Again, the improvement in the PF with compression at 

a given temperature originates from the conductivity. Improvements increase in the 

higher temperatures because the positive contribution from the broadening of the 

𝜕𝑓(𝐸, 𝐸_𝐹, 𝑇))/𝜕𝐸 function overweight the negative effects on the TD function 

from increased scattering. 

We now examine the case where the relaxation time in TiCoSb is energy 

dependent (𝜏IIV). Figure 7 shows the TE coefficients conductivity, Seebeck coeffi-

cient and PF for this energy dependent scattering assumption for the three temper-

atures of interest, under 5% expansion, 2% compression, and 5% compression as 

before in Fig. 6. We observe a 37% improvement when bands are fully aligned 

using compressive strain (Fig. 7(a)) at 300 K. The fact that band curvatures also 

increase (carrier effective masses reduce) with alignment, is more favorable under 


12

the 𝜏IIV scattering scenario, which has contributed to this large improvement ob-

served. Interestingly, as opposed to all previous scenarios the improvement reduces

with temperature increase, down to 27% and 25% at 600 K and 900 K, respectively

(Fig. 6(f), 6(i)). The reason behind the smaller improvement variation with temper-

ature upon band alignment for TiCoSb compared to the NbCoSn case, is of course 

the fact that the bands were closer together to begin with, and thus in all temperature 

cases the initial and the aligning bands contribute similarly. In other words, the in-

fluence of the broadening of 𝜕𝑓(𝐸, 𝐸_𝐹, 𝑇))/𝜕𝐸 affects all cases similarly. The 

increase in scattering with temperature, however, overcomes any positive contribu-

tion from this broadening, reducing the PF improvement with temperature. 

In summary, as seen in Fig.8, band convergence is advantageous for both 

NbCoSn and TiCoSb (there is an improvement in the PF). Under both scattering 

scenarios we have considered, band convergence provides larger relative benefits 

for NbCoSn as the temperature increases (blue lines). Band convergence on the 

other hand, provides relative improvements in the PF for TiCoSb under 𝜏C, but re-

ductions under 𝜏IIV as the temperature increases. 


13

Conclusion

In this work we have used strain to align the bands near the valence band edge 

of the p-type Co-based half-Heuslers NbCoSn and TiCoSb for thermoelectric power 

factor improvements. Using the Boltzmann transport equation under the relaxation 

time approximation, we explored the band alignment effect on the power factor 

under two different scattering conditions (as the detail scattering physics of half-

Heuslers are still not known): i) the constant relaxation time approximation – as is 

common in the literature, ii) scattering rates depending on energy, proportional to 

the density of final states, with both inter- and intra-band\ inter- and intra-valley 

scattering considerations. We showed that the outcome of band alignment can be 

different in each of the different scattering cases and at different temperatures for 

these materials. It depends on the nature of the bandstructure, particularly on how 

the curvatures change with band convergence and the relative separations between 

bands to begin with. When benefits of broadening of 𝝏𝒇(𝑬, 𝑬_𝑭, 𝑻))/𝝏𝑬 overcome 

negative contributions from increased carrier scattering with temperature, we see 

increasing improvements in the PF with temperature. For NbCoSn, band 

convergence using strain is more beneficial in higher temperatures in both scattering 

scenarios, while for TiCoSb higher temperatures are only beneficial under a 

constant rate of scattering. Our work stresses the importance of more accurate 

theoretical treatment of carrier relaxation times and their temperature dependences.

Acknowledgements 

This work has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) un-

der the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme 
(Grant Agreement No. 678763).


14

Figures

Figure 1

Fig. 1. Power factors calculated using normalized (solid-lines) and non-normalized(dashed-
lines) carrier relaxation times at 600K (red) and 900K(blue) for (a) constant relaxation time
(𝜏C) and (b) energy dependent relaxation time (𝜏IIV) for NbCoSn.

Figure 2

Fig. 2. (a)-(d) Application of compressive and tensile strain in NbCoSb to align the X valley 
with the valence band edge. Strain values and the energy separation ΔE between the X valley 
and VB0 are noted above the sub-figures. Subfigure (d) shows the unstrained bandstructure.


15

Figure 3

Fig. 3. Thermoelectric coefficients (σ, S, and PF) calculated for NbCoSn using the tempera-
ture-normalized constant relaxation time approximation: (a)-(c) for 300K, (d)-(f) for 600K 
and (g)-(i) for 900K. The percentage improvement given is the peak to peak improvement 
between the unstrained (ΔE=315 meV) and 5% compressive strain (ΔE=232 meV), given by 
the yellow-solid lines and blue-solid lines, respectively.


16

Figure 4

Fig. 4. Thermoelectric coefficients (σ, S, and PF) calculated for NbCoSn using the tempera-
ture-normalized energy dependent 𝜏IIV relaxation time approximation: (a)-(c) for 300K, (d)-
(f) for 600K and (g)-(i) for 900K. The percentage improvement given is the peak to peak 
improvement between the unstrained (ΔE=315 meV) and 5% compressive strain (ΔE=232 
meV), given by the yellow-solid lines and blue-solid lines, respectively.

Figure 5

Fig. 5. (a)-(d) Application of compressive and tensile strain in TiCoSb to align the X valley 
with the valence band edge. Strain values and the energy separation ΔE between the X valley 
and VB0 are noted above the sub-figures. Subfigure (d) shows the unstrained bandstructure.


17

Figure 6

Fig. 6. Thermoelectric coefficients (σ, S, and PF) calculated for TiCoSb using the tempera-
ture-normalized 𝜏C approximation: (a)-(c) for 300K, (d)-(f) for 600K and (g)-(i) for 900K. 
The percentage improvement given is the peak to peak improvement between the unstrained 
(ΔE=40 meV) and 5% compressive strain (ΔE=-23 meV), given by the yellow-solid lines and 
blue-solid lines, respectively.


18

Figure 7

Fig. 7. Thermoelectric coefficients (σ, S, and PF) calculated for TiCoSb using the tempera-
ture-normalized 𝜏IIV relaxation time approximation: (a)-(c) for 300K, (d)-(f) for 600K and 
(g)-(i) for 900K. The percentage improvement given is the peak to peak improvement be-
tween the unstrained (ΔE=40 meV) and 5% compressive strain (ΔE=-23 meV), given by the 
yellow-solid lines and blue-solid lines, respectively.

Figure 8

Fig. 8. Percentage improvement of the power factor (from peak to peak between unstrained 
and 5% compression) under a constant rate of scattering (solid-lines), and energy dependent
𝜏IIV scattering(dashed-lines) versus temperature for NbCoSn, and TiCoSb. 


19

Bibliography

1.
Beretta, D. et al. Thermoelectrics: From history, a window to the future. 

Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports (2018). doi:10.1016/J.MSER.2018.09.001

2.
Bell, L. E. Cooling, heating, generating power, and recovering waste heat 

with thermoelectric systems. Science 321, 1457–61 (2008).

3.
Shakouri, A. Recent Developments in Semiconductor Thermoelectric 

Physics and Materials. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 41, 399–431 (2011).

4.
Koumoto, K. et al. Thermoelectric Ceramics for Energy Harvesting. J. Am. 

Ceram. Soc. 96, 1–23 (2013).

5.
Norouzzadeh, P. & Vashaee, D. Classification of Valleytronics in 

Thermoelectricity. Sci. Rep. 6, 22724 (2016).

6.
Pei, Y. et al. Convergence of electronic bands for high performance bulk 

thermoelectrics. Nature 473, 66–69 (2011).

7.
Bhattacharya, S. & Madsen, G. K. H. High-throughput exploration of 

alloying as design strategy for thermoelectrics. Phys. Rev. B 92, 85205 

(2015).

8.
Tan, G., Zhao, L.-D. & Kanatzidis, M. G. Rationally Designing High-

Performance Bulk Thermoelectric Materials. Chem. Rev. 116, 12123–

12149 (2016).

9.
Lee, J.-H. Significant enhancement in the thermoelectric performance of 

strained nanoporous Si. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 16, 2425–2429 (2014).

10.
Huang, L. et al. Recent progress in half-Heusler thermoelectric materials. 

Mater. Res. Bull. 76, 107–112 (2016).


20

11.
Page, A., Poudeu, P. F. P. & Uher, C. A first-principles approach to half-

Heusler thermoelectrics: Accelerated prediction and understanding of 

material properties. J. Mater. 2, 104–113 (2016).

12.
Xie, W. et al. Recent Advances in Nanostructured Thermoelectric Half-

Heusler Compounds. Nanomaterials 2, 379–412 (2012).

13.
Bos, J.-W. G. & Downie, R. A. Half-Heusler thermoelectrics: a complex 

class of materials. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 26, 433201 (2014).

14.
Casper, F., Graf, T., Chadov, S., Balke, B. & Felser, C. Half-Heusler 

compounds: novel materials for energy and spintronic applications. 

Semicond. Sci. Technol. 27, 063001 (2012).

15.
Scheidemantel, T. J., Ambrosch-Draxl, C., Thonhauser, T., Badding, J. V 

& Sofo, J. O. Transport coefficients from first-principles calculations. Phys. 

Rev. B 68, 125210 (2003).

16.
Yang, J. et al. Evaluation of Half-Heusler Compounds as Thermoelectric 

Materials Based on the Calculated Electrical Transport Properties. Adv. 

Funct. Mater. 18, 2880–2888 (2008).

17.
Kumarasinghe, C. & Neophytou, N. Band alignment and scattering 

considerations for enhancing the thermoelectric power factor of complex 

materials: The case of Co-based half-Heusler alloys. Phys. Rev. B 99,

195202 (2019).

18.
Mahan, G. D., Balseiro, Ti. & Atomico Bariloche, C. The Best 

Thermoelectric. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 93, 7436–7439 (1996).

19.
Neophytou, N., Wagner, M., Kosina, H. & Selberherr, S. Analysis of 

Thermoelectric Properties of Scaled Silicon Nanowires Using an Atomistic 

Tight-Binding Model. J. Electron. Mater. 39, 1902–1908 (2010).


21

20.
Giannozzi, P. et al. QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source 

software project for quantum simulations of materials. J. Phys. Condens. 

Matter 21, 395502 (2009).

21.
Corps, J. et al. Interplay of Metal-Atom Ordering, Fermi Level Tuning, and 

Thermoelectric Properties in Cobalt Shandites Co 3 M 2 S 2 (M = Sn, In). 

Chem. Mater. 27, 3946–3956 (2015).

22.
Roychowdhury, S., Shenoy, U. S., Waghmare, U. V. & Biswas, K. An 

enhanced Seebeck coefficient and high thermoelectric performance in p-

type In and Mg co-doped Sn 1−x Pb x Te via the co-adjuvant effect of the 

resonance level and heavy hole valence band. J. Mater. Chem. C 5, 5737–

5748 (2017).

23.
Capellini, G. et al. Tensile Ge microstructures for lasing fabricated by

means of a silicon complementary metaloxide-semiconductor process. Opt. 

Express 22, 399–410 (2014).

24.
Jeong, I., Kwon, J., Kim, C. & Park, Y. J. Design and numerical analysis of 

surface plasmon-enhanced fin Ge-Si light-emitting diode. Opt. Express 22,

5927 (2014).

25.
Low, K. L., Yang, Y., Han, G., Fan, W. & Yeo, Y.-C. Electronic band 

structure and effective mass parameters of Ge 1-x Sn x alloys. Cit. J. Appl. 

Phys. 112, 73707 (2012).

26.
Zhou, J., Cheng, S., You, W.-L. & Jiang, H. Effects of intervalley scattering 

on the transport properties in one−dimensional valleytronic devices. Sci. 

Rep. 6, 23211 (2016).


