arXiv:2012.11992v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  22 Dec 2020

The Effect of Strained Bonds on the Electronic Structure of Amorphous Silicon

Reza Vatan Meidanshahi,∗ Payam Mehr, and Stephen M. Goodnick
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Tempe, AZ, 85281, USA
(Dated: December 23, 2020)

Several amorphous silicon structures were generated using a classical molecular dynamics (MD)
protocol of melting and quenching with different quenching rates. An analysis of the calculated
electronic properties of these structures revealed that the midgap state density of a-Si which is of
interest for solar cell and thin film transistor applications can be correlated to bond angle standard
deviation. We also found that this parameter can strongly determine the excess energy of a-Si,
which is an important criteria in theoretically generating realistic atomic structures of a-Si.

PACS numbers: Valid PACS appear here

I.
INTRODUCTION

Amorphous silicon (a-Si) has been extensively inves-
tigated as the archetypal amorphous covalently bonded
material and is widely used in numerous electronic and
photovoltaic devices. These features have spurred an in-
tense interest in their electronic properties over the last
few decades. a-Si can be fabricated using different meth-
ods like laser melting, ion implantation, and growth tech-
niques [1–3]. The atomic structure of the a-Si obtained
using different fabrication methods to a large extent de-
pends on the preparation technique.
As an example,
ion implantation often gives samples with large dangling
bonds (DBs) and vapor deposition results in samples with
voids. These differences in atomic structure as a result
of the fabrication method, strongly affects the electronic
properties of a-Si. Though it has been extensively inves-
tigated, the exact nature of the relation, between atomic
structure and electronic properties, has been a subject
of intense contention. In addition to gaining a more ac-
curate understanding of the basic characteristics of co-
valently bonded amorphous materials, a better under-
standing of this relation would be helpful for technologi-
cal progress.
One of the main electronic features which makes a-Si
different from its crystalline counterpart is the presence
of electronic states in its energy gap which are called
midgap states. The density of midgap states can control
many electronic properties of the material by affecting
trapping and recombination processes and consequently
affect device functionality [4]. The common belief is that
midgap states are generated by coordination defects or
DBs. However, there is ample evidence that other less
unstable structural defects might also contribute to these
states [5–12]. Calculations of defects in a-Si with or with-
out hydrogen, were mostly involved in understanding its
physical behavior. Nevertheless, significant recent devel-
opments in the theoretical analyses of the defect-midgap
state relation took place were made by investigating the
electronic structure of several configurations of a-Si or a-

∗Electronic address: rvatanme@asu.edu

Si:H. Wagner et al. [8] created different amorphous struc-
tures by applying Wooten-Wiener-Weaire process with
the Keating potential and studied their electronic proper-
ties within a density-functional theory (DFT) approach.
They observed that configurations with high strained
bonds (SBs), as the configuration with DBs, contain
highly dense midgaps which are able to trap holes in a-Si.
Khomyakov et al. [9] created a-Si:H model of 500 atoms
by applying large-scale replica-exchange MD using DFT-
derived classical potentials.
Their bond-resolved den-
sity of states (DOS) indicated that, contrary to common
belief, domains with highly strained Si-Si bonds signifi-
cantly contribute to midgap states density no less than
DBs. Using a first principle study of electron paramag-
netic resonance (EPR), Pfanner et al. [10] showed that
a strong indirect effect of network and strained bonds on
creating midgap states. In addition to a-Si, the relative
importance of SBs and DBs in determining the midgap
state density is relevant for other amorphous materials
also. However, except for the correlation between midgap
state and DBs, none of the previous investigations have
provided a quantitative relation between midgap state
density and other structural parameters.
This paper presents quantitative insights on the rela-
tion between the midgap state density and several struc-
tural parameters.
The specific aim of this paper is
twofold: (i) to identify which of the structural defects
including dangling bonds (DBs), floating bonds (FBs),
bond length average (BLA), bond length standard de-
viation (BLSTD), bond angle average (BAA) and bond
angle standard deviation (BASTD) are capable of accu-
rately describing the nature of midgap state density (ii)
to clarify the role of these structural defect on the excess
energy of a-Si, which has been recently proposed as an
important electronic property in the simulation of a-Si
[13]. In our approach, the first step involves the gener-
ation of 23 different large supercells of a-Si models with
216 Si atoms.
In this step, molecular dynamics simu-
lation of melting and quenching process with different
cooling rate was applied to crystalline silicon (c-Si) su-
percell while the inter-atomic interaction is described by
the Tersoff potential. In the second step, the structures
are optimized by carrying out DFT relaxation calcula-
tions. In the third step, the integrated density of midgap


2

states, the excess energy of obtained structures are com-
puted on the relaxed structures using DFT simulations.
These quantities are then correlated to each of the afore-
mentioned structural parameters. Finally, the calculated
results are compared to previous computational investi-
gations.

II.
METHOD

A.
Technical Details

We use a melting and quenching approach to generate
a structural model of a-Si as the starting atomic struc-
ture for the DFT calculations. The LAMMPS molecular
dynamic code [14] is used for simulating the melting and
quenching processes. In the MD simulations, the Tersoff
interatomic potential [15] was employed for describing Si
atom interactions, with a cut-off radii of 2.7 ˚A (taper)
and 3.0 ˚A (maximum); this potential has been widely
used for generating Si based structures [16–18]. Full ion
relaxation of the resulting structure from the MD simu-
lation was performed at the DFT-level as implemented in
the Quantum Espresso 6.2.1 software package [19]. The
BFGS quasi-Newton algorithm, based on the trust radius
procedure was used as the optimization algorithm to find
the relaxed structure. The structural analysis of the final
a-Si structure was performed using the ISAACS software
[20]. Both ionic relaxation and electronic structure cal-
culations were performed using the Becke-Lee Yang-Parr
(BLYP) exchange-correlation functional [21, 22].
The
core and valence electron interactions were described by
the Norm-Conserving Pseudopotential function. Unless
otherwise stated, an energy cutoff of 12 Ry was selected
for the plane-wave basis set. A 4×4×4 k-point mesh with
the Monkhorst-Pack grids method for the Brillouin-zone
sampling was employed in all the calculations. To de-
termine the band occupations and electronic density of
states fixed method was exploited.

B.
Generation of a-Si:H/c-Si Structures

Molecular dynamics simulations in conjunction with
DFT calculations have been demonstrated to yield amor-
phous material structures whose properties are commen-
surate with experimental results [23, 24]. Therefore, we
initially carried out MD simulations to generate a general
form of the a-Si structure, and then relaxed the structure
using a DFT calculation to obtain experimentally com-
patible structures.
MD simulation of the melting and
quenching process was carried out on a crystalline Si
structure in order to create an a-Si supercell containing
216 Si atoms (a-Si216) with three dimensional (3D) pe-
riodic boundary conditions. A diamond starting atomic
structure of crystalline Si with a lattice constant of a0 =
5.46 ˚A was constructed using a cubic supercell with the
dimension of a = b = c = 3a0 , which was periodically

FIG. 1:
The atomic structure of a typical simulated a-Si216
supercell.

repeated in 3-D space to generate an infinite network of
atoms. The value of a0 was chosen in such a way that
the mass density of our supercell is equal to the mass
density of a-Si measured by experiments [25, 26]. Then,
we simulated a 10 ps melting process at 3000 K in 0.1
fs time steps, with a fixed volume and temperature en-
semble (NVT).The structure was then quenched to 300
K with different cooling rates ranging from 9×1010 to
3×1014 K/s, and annealed for 25 ps at 300 K afterwards.
Finally, the structure was optimized using a DFT relax-
ation calculation.
Figure 1 illustrates the atomic structures of a typical
simulated a-Si supercell containing 216 Si atoms obtained
from MD simulation with a cooling rate of
1011 and
DFT relaxtion calculation. Based on the periodic struc-
ture formed from the supercell in Figure 1, we found one
dangling bond and one floating bond per supercell, with
an assumed Si-Si bond length cutoff of 2.58 ˚A, which is
10% longer than the experimental Si-Si bond length (2.35
˚A). The structure mostly displays stable 5, 6, or 7 fold
rings, and there are no large voids or holes in it. The
average Si-Si bond length is 2.354 ˚A with an rms value of
0.049 ˚A. The average Si-Si-Si bond angle is 108.2◦ with
an rms value of 13.7◦. In the crystalline form of Si, the
Si-Si bond length is 2.35 ˚A and the Si-Si-Si bond angle
is 109.5◦.

III.
RESULTS

A.
Midgap States Density

The crystalline form of bulk Si shows clear valence
band to conduction band energy gap without any midgap
states inside the gap. However, midgap states only exist
in the amorphous form of Si.
The number of midgap
states is highly dependent on the atomic structure of
the amorphous network. In order to identify the struc-


3

FIG. 2:
Integrated midgap states vs different structural defects a) dangling bonds (DB) b) Floating Bonds (FB) c) bond
length average (BLA) d) bond length standard deviation (BLSTD) e) bond angle average (BAA) and f) bond angle standard
deviation (BASTD).

tural parameter having the most significant effect on the
midgap states, the total number of midgap states in the
obtained a-Si supercells were calculated by integrating
the density of states of a-Si inside the energy range of
band-gap of Si in its perfect crystal form. By performing
DFT calculations on perfect crystal form of Si, we found
that the energy range of Si band gap in crystalline form
is 6.6-7.5 eV.

Fig. 2 illustrates the integrated density of states vari-
ations versus different structural parameters. A linear fit
was applied to all the graphs and the obtained regression
coefficients were considered as the criteria for determin-

ing the accuracy of the fitted and the obtained relations.
As Figure 1 denotes, it is obvious that the greatest re-
gression is obtained for the relation of integrated midgap
states and bond angle standard deviation. The obtained
relation is as follow.

I = 3.35σBAST D − 22.86
(1)

Where I and σBAST D stand for integrated midgap
states and bond angle standard deviation, respectively.
According this relation, the integrated midgap states
monotonically increases as the bond angle standard devi-


4

ation increases. Since any bond angle deviation from the
ideal value (109.45◦) cause bond strain, the bond angle
standard deviation is an estimation of stored strain in
an amorphous structure. Therefore, the obtained depen-
dency of midgap state density and bond angle standard
deviation indicates that strained bonds can significantly
cause midgap states even more than dangling bond. This
finding is in contrast with the common belief that the
midgap states are only due to dangling bonds, and is
consistent with the recent studies in the importance of
strained bonds in creating midgap states [10, 11].
The low regression values for bond length average and
bond length standard deviation denote that none of these
quantities are good descriptors for midgap state density
of an amorphous structure.
As seen from the graphs,
bond length average and bond length standard deviation
changes is negligble from one structure to another is neg-
ligible and therefore the low sensitivity of midgap states
density to these quantities is not unexpected. In addi-
tion, the obtained regression indicate bond angle average
is not a proper quantity for describing the midgap state
density of amorphous Si. The reason for this observation
might be due to missing the information about the nega-
tive and positive bond angle deviation by canceling them
each other when they are added up.
Our observation regarding the strong dependency of
midgap states density to bond angle standard devia-
tion is reasonable from a chemical bonding perspective.
Bond angle standard deviation contains all the informa-
tion about any deviation, regardless its sign, from ideal
bond angle. An ideal bond angle of 109.45 corresponds
to the perfect SP3 hybridization which cause the bond-
ing and anti-bonding orbitals locate only in the valence
band and the conduction band sides, respectively, and no
atomic orbital in the band gap. However, when a bond
angle associated with a specific atom deviates from its
ideal value, the hybridization of that Si atom transform
from SP3 to SPn where n is an integer number. When
a bond angle is greater than 109.45 ◦, then n would be
less than 3 and consequently some midgap states appear
close to the conduction band edge, due to their S-like or-
bital properties. In vice versa, when a bond angle is less
than 109.45 ◦, then n would be greater than 3 and conse-
quently some midgap states appear close to the valence
band edge, due to their S-like orbital properties.
The accuracy of the integrated midgap states depen-
dency on the bond angle standard deviation was checked
by calculating the integrated midgap states and bond
angle standard deviation of the low strained supercell
simulated by Pedersen et. al. [13]. The mentioned su-
percell was taken from the reference [13] and then was op-
timized using BLYP functional and finally its electronic
density of states was computed. We found that the inte-
grated midgap states and bond angle standard deviation
are 11.49 and 10.920 respectively. If we calculate inte-
grated midgap states through the equation 1 using the
obtained bond angle standard deviation value, an inte-
grated midgap states of 13.72 will be resulted which is

close to the integrated midgap states obtained from DFT
calculations (14.15).

B.
Excess Energy

To further progress in generating an optimal a-Si
model, Pederson et al. have recently proposed to focus
on the excess energy of the amorphous structure relative
to the crystal, a quantity which can be measured from
calorimetry experiments [13]. This parameter has been
getting considered as a critical property in simulation of
amorphous structure. Therefore, we also researched the
effect of different structural defects on the excess energy
stored in an amorphous network.
In order to calculate the excess energy, we initially car-
ried out a DFT relaxation calculation on a crystalline sil-
icon (c-Si) supercell comprised of 216 Si atoms with the
same size as the a-Si supercells. Then, we subtracted the
energy of a-Si supercell from the energy of c-Si and finally
the energy difference is considered as the excess energy
stored in the a-Si model. Figure 3 shows the computed
excess energies versus different structural defects for the
simulated a-Si supercells. As in the midgap states den-
sity calculations, a linear regression method is used to fit
the resulting points to a line and the regression coeffi-
cient is considered as the criteria for the accuracy of the
linear relation. It can be concluded from Figure 3 that
the best correlation is observed between excess energy
and bond angle standard deviation with a regression co-
efficient of 0.92. As seen from the figure, the obtained
equation for calculating excess energy using bond angle
standard deviation is as follow.

Eex = 0.029σBAST D − 0.1
(2)

Where Eex and σ stand for excess energy and bond
angle standard deviation, respectively. From equation, it
is obvious that the excess energy linearly increases with
bond angle standard deviation. The same ration as part
a can be used for explaining the strong correlation be-
tween Eex and σ. As mentioned before, Si atoms with
bond angle deviation from ideal value gets hybridized
with SPn instead of SP3. The SPn hybridized orbitals can
not create strong equal number of chemical bonds due to
their weak overlap compared to SP3 orbitals. Hence, re-
gardless of the number of the dangling bonds which is
usually considered as the criteria for estimating the sta-
bility of a-Si model, the bond angle standard deviation
is more important in determining the stability of amor-
phous network. This finding also shows that the bond
angle standard deviation is the more fundamental prop-
erty of an amorphous network than excess energy that
can describe the quality of generated a-Si models. Same
as part A, we checked the accuracy of our obtained rela-
tion using the optimal a-Si model generated by Pedersen
et. al. [13]. The optimal a-Si structure was taken from
the reference and the excess energy was computed after


5

FIG. 3:
Excess energy vs different structural defects a) dangling bonds (DB) b) Floating Bonds (FB) c) bond length average
(BLA) d) bond length standard deviation (BLSTD) e) bond angle average (BAA) and f) bond angle standard deviation
(BASTD).

optimizing the structure by BLYP function. Calculating
the excess energy by plugging bond angle standard devi-
ation value to equation 2 results in 0.22 eV/atom, which
presents a 13.6% error with respect to the 0.19 eV/atom
resulted from the DFT simulations.

IV.
CONCLUSION

Molecular dynamic simulations and DFT relaxation
calculations of various a-Si supercells comprised of 216 Si
atoms revealed the strong dependency of both integrated

density of midgap states and excess energy on the bond
angle standard deviation. Consequently, the bond angle
standard deviation is more deterministic in the a-Si sta-
bility evaluation than the conventional methods in which
the number of the dangling bonds are being considered.

V.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This material is based upon work primarily supported
by the Engineering Research Center Program of the Na-
tional Science Foundation and the Office of Energy Ef-


6

ficiency and Renewable Energy of the Department of
Energy under NSF Cooperative Agreement No.EEC-
1041895. Any opinions, findings and conclusions or rec-

ommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect those of the Na-
tional Science Foundation or Department of Energy.

[1] K. Laaziri, S. Kycia, S. Roorda, M. Chicoine, J. Robert-
son, J. Wang, and S. Moss, Physical review letters 82,
3460 (1999).
[2] F. Kail, J. Farjas, P. Roura, C. Secouard, O. Nos,
J. Bertomeu, and P. R. i. Cabarrocas, physica status so-
lidi (RRL)–Rapid Research Letters 5, 361 (2011).
[3] Y. Fuentes-Edfuf, M. Garcia-Lechuga, D. Puerto, C. Flo-
rian, A. Garcia-Leis, S. Sanchez-Cortes, J. Solis, and
J. Siegel, Applied Physics Letters 110, 211602 (2017).
[4] P. Mehr, X. Zhang, W. Lepkowski, C. Li, and T. J.
Thornton, Solid-State Electronics 142, 47 (2018).
[5] T. Shimizu, Japanese journal of applied physics 43, 3257
(2004).
[6] T. Gotoh, S. Nonomura, M. Nishio, S. Nitta, M. Kondo,
and A. Matsuda, Applied physics letters 72, 2978 (1998).
[7] E. Stratakis, E. Spanakis, P. Tzanetakis, H. Fritzsche,
S. Guha, and J. Yang, Applied physics letters 80, 1734
(2002).
[8] L. K. Wagner and J. C. Grossman, Physical review letters
101, 265501 (2008).
[9] P. Khomyakov, W. Andreoni, N. Afify, and A. Curioni,
Physical review letters 107, 255502 (2011).
[10] G. Pfanner, C. Freysoldt, J. Neugebauer, F. Inam,
D. Drabold, K. Jarolimek, and M. Zeman, Physical Re-
view B 87, 125308 (2013).
[11] R. V. Meidanshahi, S. Bowden, and S. M. Goodnick,
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 21, 13248 (2019).
[12] R. V. Meidanshahi, S. M. Goodnick, and D. Vasileska,
arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.14158 (2020).
[13] A. Pedersen, L. Pizzagalli, and H. J´onsson, New Journal

of Physics 19, 063018 (2017).
[14] S. Plimpton, Journal of computational physics 117, 1
(1995).
[15] J. Tersoff, Physical Review B 39, 5566 (1989).
[16] T. Ohira, T. Inamuro, and T. Adachi, Solar energy ma-
terials and solar cells 34, 565 (1994).
[17] M. Nolan, M. Legesse, and G. Fagas, Physical Chemistry
Chemical Physics 14, 15173 (2012).
[18] M. Legesse, M. Nolan, and G. Fagas, Journal of Applied
Physics 115, 203711 (2014).
[19] P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car,
C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococ-
cioni, I. Dabo, et al., Journal of Physics:
Condensed
Matter 21, 395502 (2009).
[20] S. Le Roux and V. Petkov, Journal of Applied Crystal-
lography 43, 181 (2010).
[21] A. D. Becke, The Journal of Chemical Physics 98, 5648
(1993).
[22] C. Lee, W. Yang, and R. G. Parr, Physical review B 37,
785 (1988).
[23] M. Ishimaru, S. Munetoh, and T. Motooka, Physical Re-
view B 56, 15133 (1997).
[24] I. ˇStich, R. Car, and M. Parrinello, Physical Review B
44, 11092 (1991).
[25] J. Custer, M. O. Thompson, D. Jacobson, J. Poate,
S. Roorda, W. Sinke, and F. Spaepen, Applied physics
letters 64, 437 (1994).
[26] A. Smets, W. Kessels, and M. Van de Sanden, Applied
physics letters 82, 1547 (2003).


