1 

The pre-exponential voltage-exponent as a sensitive test parameter for 

field emission theories 

R.G. Forbes1*, E.O. Popov2**, A.G. Kolosko2, and S.V. Filippov2

1Advanced Technology Institute & Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 

 University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK 

2Ioffe Institute, ul. Politekhnicheskaya 26, Saint-Petersburg, 194021, Russia  

*e-mail: r.forbes@trinity.cantab.net ;  **e-mail: e.popov@mail.ioffe.ru .

Abstract 

For field electron emission (FE), an empirical equation for measured current Im as a function of 

measured voltage Vm has the form Im=CVm
k exp[–B/Vm], where B is a constant and C and k are 

constants or vary weakly with Vm. Values for k can be extracted (a) from simulations based on some 

specific FE theory, and in principle (b) from current-voltage measurements of sufficiently high 

quality. This paper shows that comparison of theoretically derived and experimentally derived k-

values could provide a sensitive and useful tool for comparing FE theory and experiment, and for 

choosing between alternative theories. Existing methods of extracting k-values from experimental or 

simulated current-voltage data are discussed, including a modernised "least residual" method, and 

existing knowledge concerning k-values is summarised. Exploratory simulations are reported. Where 

an analytical result for k is independently known, this value is reliably extracted. More generally, 

extracted k-values are sensitive to details of the emission theory used, but also depend on assumed 

emitter shape; these two influences will need to be disentangled by future research, and a range of 

emitter shapes will need examination. Other procedural conclusions are reported. Some scientific 

issues that this new tool may eventually be able to help investigate are indicated. 

Keywords—field electron emission, empirical field emission equation, pre-exponential voltage-

exponent, FE theory-experiment comparisons, least-residual method, local-gradient method  

Accepted for publication in: R. Soc. Open. Sci.


2 

 

1.  Introduction 

 

Field electron emission (FE) is one of the paradigm examples of quantum-mechanical tunnelling, and 

has importance as such. FE is also important in technological contexts, as the emission mechanism of 

the electron sources used in many machines of nanotechnology, including electron microscopes, and 

as one of the mechanisms contributing to undesired vacuum breakdown in many contexts, in 

particular the development of new high-gradient particle accelerators at organizations such as CERN. 

There is a strong case for having good detailed understanding of FE theory. 

For some years, the Ioffe Institute FE research group has studied the experimental behaviour of 

"CNT LAFEs", i.e., large-area field electron emitters (LAFEs) formed using carbon nanotubes 

(CNTs) partially embedded in a supporting matrix (e.g., [1–3]). The original motive for the work 

reported here was to improve understanding of how FE theory applies to CNT LAFEs, and how it 

could be used to extract information from experimental measurements. In particular, there is 

technological interest in defining and extracting the effective emission area, which is only a small 

fraction of the LAFE macroscopic area (or "footprint"). However, we have come to realize that more 

basic scientific problems need solution first. This paper begins to explore these problems. As is 

common in FE literature, this paper uses the so-called electron emission convention, whereby field, 

current density and current are taken as positive quantities that are the negatives of the corresponding 

quantities as derived in conventional electrical theory. Where stated, values of universal constants 

used in FE theory are given to 7 significant figures. 

A convenient starting point is Murphy-Good (MG) FE theory [4,5], which was developed in 1956 

in order to correct an error in the original 1928 FE theory of Fowler and Nordheim. MG FE theory is 

an established "mainstream" approach that (a) disregards the existence of atomic structure and (b) 

models field emitters as Sommerfeld-type free-electron conductors with a smooth planar surface of 

large lateral extent. Tunnelling takes place, from electron states near the emitter Fermi level, through 

a barrier that is assumed to be a planar image-rounded barrier––often now called a Schottky-Nordheim 

(SN) barrier [5]. 

The finite-temperature core form of the Murphy-Good FE equation gives the local emission 

current density (LECD) JL

MGT in terms of the local work function φ, the emitter temperature T and the 

magnitude FL of the local surface electrostatic field (FL is called here the local barrier field). The 

equation for JL

MGT can be written in the linked form 

 

 
JL

MGT  =  λΤ tF

–2 JkL

SN , 
(1.1a) 

 

 
JkL

SN  ≡  aφ–1FL

2 exp[–vFbφ3/2/FL] . 
(1.1b) 

 


3 

 

Here: a and b are the Fowler-Nordheim (FN) constants [6]; vF and tF are appropriate particular values 

of the field emission special mathematical functions v(x) and t1(x), as discussed in Appendix A; and 

λT is a temperature dependent correction factor as defined in Appendix A. JkL

SN is defined by equation 

(1.1b) and is termed the (local) kernel current density for the SN barrier. As demonstrated below, all 

of vF, tF and λT are dependent on barrier field. 

Some years ago [7], a simple good approximation was found for vF. In terms of FL, this takes the 

form [7,8] 

 

 
vF  ≈ 1 – (FL/FR) + (1/6) (FL/FR) ln(FL/FR) . 
(1.2) 

 

Here, the reference field FR is the barrier field necessary to pull the top of a SN barrier of zero-field 

height φ down to the Fermi level, and is given (originally, in older form, in Table1 in [9]) by 

 

 
FR  =  c–2φ2   ≅  (0.6944615 V/nm) (φ/eV)2 , 
(1.3) 

 

where the Schottky constant c [6] is given by c= (e3/4πε0)1/2, where e is the elementary positive charge 

and ε0 is the vacuum electric permittivity. For illustration, φ= 4.600 eV yields FR≈ 14.695 V/nm. 

Substitution of equation (1.2) into equation (1.1b), and algebraic manipulation, leads to the good 

approximation 

 

 
JkL

SN  ≈  aφ–1 (expη) FL

(2–η/6) exp[–bφ3/2/FL] , 
(1.4) 

 

where η is a dimensionless work-function-dependent parameter defined by: 

 

 
η(φ)    ≡   bc2φ–1/2  ≅  9.836239 (eV/f)1/2 
(1.5) 

 

For illustration, φ= 4.600 eV yields η  ≈ 4.5862. The expression (–η/6)  will re-emerge as a 

contribution to the parameter k in eq. (2.1).  

For a practical FE device/system, the relationship between FL and the measured voltage Vm can be 

written 

 
FL  =  Vm/ζL , 
(1.6) 

 

where ζL is the local voltage conversion length (VCL). A FE device/system is termed ideal if (a) the 

measured current Im is equal to the emission current Ie, and (b) emitter surface work functions can be 

treated as effectively constant, and (c) at every surface location "L" the VCL ζL can be treated as 

constant, independent of the values of FL, Vm and Im. Obviously, the value of ζL depends on location. 


4 

 

Many practical FE devices/system are non-ideal, over all or part of their range of operation, due to 

"complications", such as (amongst others) series resistance in the current path from the emitter to the 

high-voltage generator, current dependence in ζL, heating-induced changes in work function, space-

charge effects, and/or field dependence or time-dependence in emitter geometry. This paper deals 

only with ideal FE devices/systems. 

Real emitters are often post-shaped or needle-shaped, with rounded ends, or are otherwise 

"pointy". We call such emitters point-form emitters. For an ideal FE device/system involving a point-

form emitter, if some expression JL for LECD is available, and the local barrier field FL (and any 

other relevant parameters) are known at all relevant surface positions on the emitter, then the total 

emission current Ie (and hence the measured current Im) are found by integrating the LECD over the 

emitter surface "Σ", and writing the result in the form 

 

 
Im   =   Ie   =   ∫Σ JL dΣ   ≡   An(Fa) ⋅ Ja(Fa) . 
(1.7) 

 

The LECD apex value Ja(Fa) is a function of the apex barrier field Fa, and possibly of other relevant 

parameters not shown explicitly, such as the apex radius of curvature. The parameter An is defined by 

this equation and is termed the notional emission area. Old work [10] suggests that An is expected to 

be a function of Fa, rather than constant, and this is confirmed by recent theoretical analyses (see pp. 

406-408 in [11], and also [12]), as well as by the simulations discussed below. An may also depend on 

other relevant parameters. 

For ideal FE devices/systems, these theoretical dependences on Fa convert directly into 

corresponding experimental dependences on the measured voltage Vm, via the formula Fa=Vm/ζa 

(where ζa is the constant apex VCL), and we can write 

 

 
Im(Vm)  =  An(Vm) ⋅ Ja(Vm) . 
(1.8) 

 

Equation (1.1) above applies to FE from smooth, flat, planar structure-less surfaces. Strictly, 

when dealing with tunnelling from curved surfaces it is necessary to replace vF in equation (1.1b) by 

some more general barrier-form correction factor. However, for simplicity in our initial explorations, 

the present work uses the planar transmission approximation. For equation (1.1), this means that, in 

the integration in equation (1.3), we use––at any surface position "L"––the value of JL

MGT(FL) that 

corresponds to the local barrier field FL at "L". (And similarly for other LECD formulae strictly valid 

only for planar surfaces.) 

The planar transmission approximation is not, in fact, a good approximation if the emitter apex 

radius is "small" (often taken to mean "less than 10 to 20 nm" – though recent work [12] suggests that 

"less than 100 nm", or even "less than 1 µm", might be a better criterion). However, in this paper, the 


5 

 

planar transmission approximation is acceptable, because it allows us to start exploring how emitter 

shape affects the integration process. 

Partly because there is non-integral field dependence in the pre-exponential in equation (1.4), and 

partly because there is expected to be voltage dependence in An as well as in Ja (but mainstream FE 

theories usually take An as constant), the present work needs to employ a current-voltage FE equation 

different in form from those normally used. Hence, we use the so-called empirical FE equation 

 

 
Im  =   CVm

k exp[–B/Vm] , 
(1.9) 

 

where k is the pre-exponential voltage-exponent, and C and B are in the first instance treated as 

constants, at least over limited ranges of measured voltage and current. (The form of equation (1.4) 

shows that this could be a legitimate first approximation, at least for present purposes.) 

Equations of form (1.9) were first used in the early days of field electron emission, in particular 

by Abbott & Henderson [10], but only for integral values of k. Equation (1.9) was first used with a 

non-integral value of k by Forbes in [8] (but with the symbol κ instead of k). 

The issues of interest in the present work are the theoretically expected behaviour and values of k, 

and methodologies for extracting reliable values of k from experiments and simulations relating to 

current-voltage characteristics (IVCs). Predicting the behaviour and value of k seems to involve both 

relatively straightforward questions and very deep physical questions, well outside the scope of the 

present paper. The aim here is to begin to address some of the simpler issues, primarily by means of 

simulations based on variants of the Murphy-Good FE equation. What we shall show in the present 

paper is that the value of k is affected by both the details of local-emission-current-density (LECD) 

theory and by the details of the integration over emitter shape, and that the value of k seems to depend 

quite sensitively on details of LECD theory. 

This opens the possibility that, if effects due to LECD theory and effects due to integration over 

emitter shape can be disentangled, then measurement of the value of k might in principle provide a 

useful new tool for testing or distinguishing between different LECD theories. At the present time 

there seem to be few experimental results available that have sufficiently high quality to be useful. 

Our hope is that a demonstration, by means of simulations, of what seems a useful new tool will in 

due course stimulate the generation of high-quality experimental results, and thus facilitate FE theory-

experiment comparisons that are more precise and more reliable than has historically been the case. 

 The purpose of the present paper is to establish a "proof of concept". Detailed investigation of 

how the methods discussed here might be applied to the advanced modern treatments of FE theory 

that can now be found in the literature needs to be the subject of future research. 

The paper's structure is as follows. Section 2 develops background FE theory further, presents 

existing predictions for the value of k, and discusses methods for extracting k-values from simulated 

or experimental data. Section 3 tests two of these extraction methods by means of simulations on 


6 

 

planar emitter models; Section 4 then tests the methods using simulations on the so-called 

"hemisphere-on-cylindrical-post" (HCP) model for a carbon nanotube standing on a planar plate of 

large lateral extent. Section 5 looks again at the wider issue of how to compare FE experiment and 

theory, and outlines procedural conclusions reached in the present work. Section 6 provides a brief 

overall summary, indicates some experimental issues that will require attention, and indicates some of 

the scientific issues in FE theory that this new tool may eventually be able to help investigate. 

A preliminary account of this work was given as a conference poster in July 2019 [13]. 

 

 

2.  Background Theory 

 

(a)  Aspects of empirical current-voltage theory 

 

When written in so-called "power-k coordinates", equation (1.9) becomes 

 

 
ln{Im/Vm

k}  =  ln{C} – B/Vm. 
(2.1) 

 

A data plot of this form is called here a power-k plot. For ideal FE devices/systems, a power-k plot 

can generate straight (or nearly straight) lines, and hence a constant or nearly constant value for B, 

whatever value is chosen for k in the range of present potential interest, namely –1≤k≤4. 

However, questions exist about expected values for k. There has been intermittent discussion (still 

largely unresolved) for many years. For simplicity in this initial treatment, we shall limit detailed 

discussion to situations where there is only one emitter, to temperatures near room temperature and 

below, and make the usual assumption that (as a first approximation) the local work function can be 

taken as uniform across the emitter surface. However, we first set out a slightly more general 

theoretical discussion. 

 To discuss theoretical predictions (for an ideal FE devices/system), it is convenient to start from 

four linked equations that define a slightly generalised FE equation for Im in terms of Vm, namely 

 

Im =  An Ja , 
(2.2a) 

 

Ja  =  λ Jka , 
(2.2b) 

 

Jka  =  ZF

elDFa  =  (aφ–1Fa

2) DFa  =   (aφ–1ζa

–2Vm

2) DFa , 
(2.2c) 

 

DFa  =  1/(1+exp[GFa])  ≈  exp[–GFa] , 
(2.2d) 


7 

 

   

GFa  =  exp[–νFbφ 3/2/Fa]  =  exp[–νFbφ 3/2ζa/Vm]. 
(2.2e) 

 

In these equations, the symbol D denotes tunnelling probability. In principle, this is being 

evaluated here using the Kemble formalism [14], but our simulations in this paper will always be done 

for parameter ranges where this reduces (as shown) to the usual simple-JWKB formalism [14]. 

Equation (2.2d) is an expression for the apex value of this tunnelling probability, for an electron with 

normal-energy level equal to the Fermi level, and equation (2.2e) provides a definition of the related 

apex barrier strength GFa. νF ("nuF") is a barrier-form correction factor that relates to the form of 

tunnelling barrier seen by this electron, and ζa is the apex VCL. 

 In equation (2.2c), the apex kernel current density Jka is given as a product of DFa and the 

bracketed term (aφ–1ζa

–2Vm

2), which represents the "effective incident current density" ZF

el (at the 

Fermi level), onto the inside of the tunnelling barrier, as found in elementary theory based on 

assuming an exactly triangular tunnelling barrier and T= 0 K. 

In equation (2.2b), the LECD Ja is given as the product of Jka and a correction factor λ that 

accounts formally for various theoretical effects, including corrections due to the use of atomic-level 

wave-functions, corrections due to the use of improved tunnelling theory, and corrections to the 

effective incident current density, including corrections due to improved integration over internal 

electron states and to temperature effects. Equation (2.2a) is equation (1.8). 

In equations (2.2a) to (2.2e), the following symbols also refer to apex values, namely φ, νF, ZF

el, 

and λ, but (for notational simplicity) this is not explicitly shown. 

The generalised FE equation is written out in this way in order to display possible sources of 

voltage dependence in k, for ideal field-emitting systems. Strong dependence comes from the Vm

2 term 

in equation (2.2b), and significant dependence can come from the factor νF in equation (2.2e) and 

from the area An in equation (2.2a). Weak dependence (usually neglected) can come from field 

dependence in the local work function φ, though more so in the exponent in equation (2.2e) than in the 

pre-exponential in equation (2.2c). There will also be voltage dependence in the factor λ in equation 

(2.2b), but the full likely strength of this dependence is not known. For non-ideal systems there would 

or could be other significant sources of voltage dependence, not considered here. 

This brief discussion supports two procedural conclusions. (1) The planar-emitter case needs to be 

considered first, separately from the "point-form-geometry case". (2) Emission from real post-like or 

needle-like emitters needs to be investigated by simulations that involve appropriate geometrical 

models. We next review existing knowledge concerning the value of k. 

 

 

(b)  Review of previous discussions about the value of k  


8 

 

 

The original experimental discovery of approximate linearity between log10{Im} and 1/Vm, by 

Lauritsen [15,16], and apparently independently by Oppenheimer (though unpublished at the time), is 

equivalent to k=0. The original (1928) Fowler-Nordheim theoretical treatment [17] (a) disregarded 

atomic structure, (b) used a smooth planar emitter model, (c) is based on the assumption of an exactly 

triangular (ET) barrier, (d) took the emitter temperature T as zero, and (e) is obtained from 

equation (2.2) by setting: νF=1 and λ equal to the FN pre-factor PF

FN [6] (which is independent of 

field and voltage). As is well known, the predicted k-value is 2. In 1929, Stern et al. [18] concluded 

that (in the one case where sufficiently sensitive experimental data existed) k=2 gave better linearity 

than k=0. 

If the planar transmission approximation is used to apply the original 1928 FN FE theory to a 

point-form emitter, then the predicted "total" value kt of k is 2+kA, where kA is the contribution made 

by any dependence of An on apex field Fa and hence voltage Vm. In 1939, Abbott and Henderson (AH) 

[10] re-analysed existing experimental results and found the best empirical value was kt=4, though 

they also suggested that if the difference from the FN 1928 result were associated with voltage-

dependence in emission area, then kt=3 was the simplest theoretically expected result, since a Taylor-

expansion approach led to the result kA=1.  

The Schottky-Nordheim (SN) barrier that includes the classical image potential energy (PE) is 

better physics [19] than the ET barrier. The SN barrier was first used in FE theory in 1928 by 

Nordheim [20], but a mathematical mistake was made (see [19]). As already indicated, Murphy and 

Good (MG) introduced corrected equations in 1956 [4,5]. The finite-temperature MG FE equation, 

given earlier as equation (1), is obtained from equation (2.2) by setting νF=vF in equation (2.2d), and 

λ=λΤtF

–2 in equation (2.2b); the derivation of this finite-temperature FE equation is considered to be 

approximately valid within ranges of field and temperature shown in [4,21]. 

As compared with the (zero-temperature) original 1928 FN equation, there is additional field and 

voltage dependence in the functions vF, tF

–2 and λT. The voltage-dependence in vF

 is particularly 

significant, as is obvious from the "–η/6" term in the field-dependence in the pre-exponential in 

equation (1.4).  

When φ=4.600 eV, then –η/6 ≈ –0.7644. For a smooth planar emitter this yields the predicted 

value kt=kp≈ 1.236; for a point-form emitter (using the planar transmission approximation) 

kt≈1.236+kA. If the AH theory that kA=1 were correct, and if it were correct to disregard other sources 

of voltage dependence, then we might expect kt≈2.236.  [But, in fact, it is unlikely that either of these 

things are correct.] 

There are also more recent discussions. These imply that the predicted value of k may depend on 

the emitter shape (e.g., [11,12,22]), and on the range of voltages considered [1], and (for LAFEs) 

might be affected by electrostatic depolarization effects (commonly called "shielding") [22].  


9 

 

 

 

(c) Existing methods for extracting empirical values for k 

 

In the literature, three methods have been suggested for determining k experimentally. The first is the 

AH (or least-residual) method [10], as follows. (1) Plots of the form of equation (2.1) are made, for 

various values of k. (2) For each, a statistical parameter (the "residual") is evaluated that assesses the 

degree of linearity of the related plot. (3) The plot found to be "most linear" (by virtue of having the 

lowest residual) determines the value of k. AH used only integral values of k, but the theory above 

shows that non-integral k-values need to be considered [8]. The AH method derives from the earlier 

work by Stern et al. [18], noted above.  

The second method was suggested by Forbes [8]. On assuming that B and C can be treated as 

constants, use of equation (1.9) to differentiate ln{Im} with respect to 1/Vm leads to: 

 

 
gF1  ≡   –dln{Im}/d{1/Vm}  =   kVm + B . 
(2.3) 

 

Alternatively, result (2.3) can be written in the equivalent form 

 

 
gF2   ≡  (Vm

2/Im ) dIm/dVm  =   kVm + B , 
(2.4) 

 

Hence, one expects that k can be found from the slope of a plot of gF1 or gF2 against Vm. We refer to 

this as the local-gradient method.  

In [8], practical implementation of the local-gradient method met problems. The FE current-

voltage characteristics (IVCs) reported by Dyke and Trolan [23], for tungsten emitters in traditional 

field electron microscope geometry, are widely accepted as very careful measurements. But, the 

attempt [8] to re-plot them via equation (2.3) failed to yield a useful result, apparently due to noise in 

the original data and/or in its processing. It was suggested in [8] that probably the best experimental 

approach would be via equation (2.4), with dIm/dVm found directly by an experimental methodology 

that uses phase-sensitive detection techniques. 

More recently [24], IVC measurements on an array of nickel nanorods have been plotted both as a 

Millikan-Lauritsen (ML) plot (i.e., a plot of the form ln{Im} vs 1/Vm [15,25]), and as a plot of 

form (2.3). An apparent experimental value kexpt=1.82 was extracted from the second plot. However, 

since the ML plot, although quite smooth, is markedly non-linear, this result for kexpt cannot be 

considered reliable. 


10 

 

A third method, related to that of [8], has been suggested by Zubair, Y.S. Ang and L.K. Ang [26]. 

In fact, they considered an alternative empirical formula (thought to better represent emission from 

rough surfaces), but their method can also be applied to equation (1.9) and yields 

 

 
lim(1/Vm → 0) dln{Im/Vm

2}

d ln{Vm}
 =  k − 2 . 
(2.5)  

 

When their graphs are interpreted in this way, the results (for three data sets, taken from different 

emitter materials) are kexpt= 0.8, kexpt = 2, and "data too noisy". Unfortunately, because the method 

involves extrapolation to an axis well away from the data, the lever effect operates and significant 

uncertainty exists in the extracted numerical value. In principle, the Forbes local-gradient method 

looks more useful. 

 

 

 

3.  Testing extraction methods: planar emitters 

 

In the Ioffe FE Group experimental research, we attempted to apply both the least-residual (LR) 

method and the local-gradient (LG) method to IVC data taken from CNT LAFEs, but encountered 

severe problems with experimental data noise. Sections 3 and 4 originated as attempts 

validate/explore these extraction methods by means of simulations: current densities or currents are 

predicted using defined equations, and these predictions are then used as the inputs to the k-value 

extraction procedures. 

Both methods have been tested for the following two geometries: (a) the simple (but usually 

unrealistic) planar emitter case; and (b) the case in which a CNT is represented by a common 

literature emitter model, namely the "hemisphere-on-cylindrical-post (HCP)" model, where the post is 

standing upright on one of a pair of well-separated parallel planar plates. Sections 3 and 4 discuss the 

simulation results for these two cases. In all simulations the local work function was taken as constant 

across the emitter surface, and equal to 4.60 eV. 

In this part of the paper, in Murphy-Good FE theory, it is convenient to use as the independent 

variable the scaled field f defined by 

 

 
f  ≡  FL/FR  =  c2φ–2FL . 
(3.1) 

 

In the literature, this parameter f has also been called the "scaled barrier field" and also the 

"dimensionless field". In terms of f, equation (1.1b) can be re-written in so-called scaled form as [27] 


11 

 

 

 
JkL

SN  ≡  θf2exp[–vFη/f] , 
(3.2) 

 

where η is given by equation (1.5), as before, and θ is a work-function-dependent parameter given by 

 

 
θ(φ)  ≡  ac–4φ3 . 
(3.3) 

 

For illustration, φ=4.600 eV yields θ= 7.236×1013 A/m2. Appropriate values for the parameters vF and 

tF are obtained from the formulae in Appendix A, by setting the mathematical variable x (the Gauss 

variable) equal to the scaled field f, when using any particular chosen mathematical approximation for 

v(x). A formal justification for this procedure is given in [28] (see pp. 429–431).  

In the planar emitter case, the voltage conversion length ζa can be put equal to a suitable 

separation dsep between parallel plates (we took ζa = 200 nm). The various theoretical approximations 

used for the LECD JL, together with a "short name" for the related equation, are shown in Table 1. 

 

Table 1. Field electron emission equations used in the planar-emitter simulations. Each "named" 

equation is defined by the approximations used for the factors λ and νF in equation (2.2). The labels HP 

("high precision"), F06 ("Forbes 2006") and ES ("Elinson-Shrednik") refer to the approximate formulae 

for v(x) and t1(x) given in Appendix A, and hence for the particular values vF and tF. The labels "MG0" 

and "MG300" refer to the zero-temperature and finite temperature (T= 300 K) versions of the Murphy-

Good FE equation, and the label "KernelSN" to equation (3.2).  

 

Test 
Equation name 
λ 
νF 

1 
Elementary 
1 
1 

2 
MG0 (ES,ES) 
1/1.1 
0.95–1.03f 

3 
 KernelSN (F06) 
1 
vF(F06) 

4 
MG0 (F06,F06) 
tF

–2(F06) 
vF(F06) 

5 
KernelSN (HP)  
1 
vF(HP) 

6 
MG0 (HP,HP) 
tF

–2(HP) 
vF(HP) 

7 
MG300 (F06,F06) 
λT × tF

–2(F06) 
vF(F06) 

 

Our implementation of the least-residual method was then as follows. First, a suitable voltage 

range was decided. In practice, we normally used a voltage range corresponding to values of the apex 

scaled-field fa [=Fa/FR] in the range 0.15≤fa≤0.45, which is the "Pass" range for the orthodoxy test 

[27]. Then, for an ideal system, with a related set of predicted J(Vm) data based on a chosen equation, 

a data plot of the form ln{J/Vm

k} vs 1/Vm was built. Typically, about 1000 data points were used. A 

straight line was fitted to this data plot by "least squares" methods. The residual R(k) equal to the 


12 

 

"sum of least square deviations" is used as a measure of linearity. For a given data set, this procedure 

is carried out for numerous different values of k, and the value of k that gives the lowest value of R(k) 

is identified. The on-line data processing program allows the range (e.g., –5≤k≤+5) and the step-

length of k-values to be set. The outcome is a parabolic-like plot of R(k), as shown in Fig. 1(a), from 

which the k-value corresponding to the minimum value of R(k) is easily established. 

The software package LABVEW was used to carry out these calculations.  

 

 

1
2
3

0.0

5.0x10

-4

1.0x10

-3

LR method
7

6

5

4

3

2

Pre-exponential voltage exponent, k

Residual, R(k) (Np)

1
(a)

 

 

800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800

19000

20000

21000

22000

23000

(b)

6

7 4
5
3

2

(V

2/I)(dI/dV) (V)

V (V)

1

LG method

 

 

Figure 1. Simulated determinations of the value (kp) of k for a planar emitter by: (a) the least-residual 

(LR) method; and (b) the local-gradient (LG) method, using the various equations named in Table 1 to 

generate input data. The numerical labels correspond to the Test numbers in Table 1. With these 

simulations, V denotes the input voltage and I the related derived current. The deduced values of kp are 

shown in Table 2. 


13 

 

 

As shown in Table 1, seven different formulae were used to generate current-voltage data sets for 

our simulations and tests. Test 1 is based on the so-called elementary FE equation, in which the 

correction factors vF and tF in equation (1) are each replaced by unity. Tests 2 to 6 are based on 

different approximate versions of the zero-temperature MG FE equation (obtained by setting λT=1 in 

equation (1.1a). Test 7 is based on a version of the finite temperature MG FE equation that applies at 

room temperature, taken as 300 K. The outcomes from these tests are summarised in Table 2. 

 

 Table 2.  To show predicted values (where available) of the total "planar" pre-exponential voltage-

exponent kp, and values extracted from simulations based on the least-residual (LR) and local-gradient 

(LG) methods, for a planar emitter with uniform local work function 4.6 eV. The equations used for 

local emission current density (LECD) are specified in Table 1. In order to show the apparent 

consistency of the extraction methodology, predicted and extracted values for the least-residual method 

are given to 5 decimal places. 

 

Test 
LECD Equation 
Predicted kp 
Derived kp 

(LR) 

Derived kp 

(LG) 

1 
Elementary 
2.00000 
2.00000 
2.00 

2 
MG0 (ES, ES) 
2.00000 
2.00000 
2.00 

3 
 KernelSN (F06) 
1.23564 
1.23560 
1.28 

4 
MG0 (F06, F06) 
n/a 
1.13519 
1.17 

5 
KernelSN (HP)  
n/a 
1.21200 
1.26 

6 
MG0 (HP, HP) 
n/a 
1.11320 
1.15 

7 
MG300 (F06, F06) 
n/a 
1.21640 
1.24 

 

Results relating to the least-residual (LR) method were as follows. With the first two tests, the 

expression used for the correction factor in the exponent generates no voltage dependence in the pre-

exponential in equation (1), so the value kp=2 is expected and found. The first three tests indicate that 

the methodology looks capable of extracting values of k that are mathematically accurate to at least 

three decimal places. Comparison of Tests 3 and 5, or alternatively 4 and 6, suggests the difference in 

k-value between the F06 approximation and the high-precision formula for vF is around 0.021 (i.e. 

smaller than 2%), with the high-precision formula yielding a marginally lower result. Comparison of 

Tests 3 and 4, or alternatively tests 5 and 6, shows that the inclusion of the term tF

–2 in the expression 

for LECD reduces kp by about 0.1, that is about 10%. Comparison of Tests 4 and 7 shows that 

inclusion of the room-temperature correction term increases kp by about 0.08, i.e. about 7%; this 

increase is higher than was expected. 


14 

 

Results from the local-gradient (LG) method exhibit the same qualitative trends as do those for 

the LR method, but numerical results are systematically higher than the corresponding results from 

the LR method, by around 4%. The exact reason for this is not fully understood, but is assumed to be 

related to slight curvature in the plots shown in Fig. 1(b).  

Specific conclusions from this set of results are as follows. (1) For "good" (noise-free) 

experimental data––the LR method would probably be more precise than the LG method. (2) 

Certainly in this planar emitter case, the LR method seems capable of extracting k-values with a 

precision of at least three decimal places. (3) As regards the LECD formulae, there seems little 

physical merit in using anything other than the high-precision formulae for evaluating vF and tF in 

simulations of this kind, although it is conceivable that computing resource limitations could make 

use of the F06 formulae preferable in particular circumstances.  (4) The correction terms (tF

–2 and λT) 

in the pre-exponential have noticeable effects on the value of k. 

 

4.  Testing extraction methods: HCP Models 

 

With real point-form emitters, the local work function φ, barrier field FL and LECD JL all vary across 

the surface. For simplicity in modelling, φ is usually taken as constant; this is also done here. 

To model CNT shape, the well-known "hemisphere-on-cylindrical-post" (HCP) model (e.g., [29–

32]) is used, with the post standing on one of a pair of well-separated parallel planar plates.  

Three-dimensional modelling of the field distribution over the HCP model surface was carried out 

using the COMSOL finite-element software package. The strategy was to calculate the electrostatic 

fields that apply to small surface segments with height δh, for the hemispherical cap and the top part 

of the cylindrical surface. The total number of segments used was 1000. 

The HCP parameters used were similar to those for the single-walled (SWCNT) and multi-walled 

(MWCNT) carbon nanotubes used in our experiments. For SWCNTs, this is radius rc= 1 nm and 

height hpost= 2.5 µm (hpost/rc= 2500); for MWCNTs, this is radius 4 nm and length 5 µm 

(hpost/rc=1250). 

The simulation box was taken as a flat-ended cylinder with radius rsim=250 µm in both cases, and 

with height hsim given by 

 

 
hsim= 300 µm + hpost . 
(4.1) 

 

Since the dimensions of the simulation box are very much greater than those of the emitter, 

depolarization effects due to the emitter images in the sides and top of the box will be negligible, as 

shown by [32].  


15 

 

In parallel-planar-plate geometry, the (dimensionless) local field enhancement factor (FEF) γPL is 

given adequately by: 

 

 
γPL = FL dsep/VP , 
(4.2) 

 

where dsep is the separation of the plates (here identical with the simulation box height hsim), and VP is 

the voltage between the counter-electrode (anode) and the vacuum-facing surface of the emitter 

substrate. For an ideal FE system, VP is equal to the measured voltage Vm. 

Figure 2 shows values of γPL, as calculated using finite-element methodology, as a function of the 

distance L from the emitter apex, measured "along the surface" in a plane that includes the emitter 

axis, for HCP models of (a) our SWCNTs and (b) our MWCNTs. For the MWCNT, the inset shows 

how the related local current-density distribution (as calculated using the MG0 (F06, F06) formula) 

varies along the surface, in the case where the scaled-field value at the emitter apex is fa=0.3.   

Using the planar transmission approximation, and a chosen LECD formula, emission-current 

contributions from each segment were calculated and summed. Thus, current-voltage characteristics 

(IVCs) for HCP models representing SWCNT and MWCNT emitters were obtained. 

To explore the least-residual (LR) method, as applied to these HCP models, we used the same 

LECD expressions and methodology as before, but excluding the elementary FE equation. The 

results are summarised in Table 3. Related "parabolic graphs" would add little to the discussion, 

and are not provided. 

We also explored the local-gradient (LG) method, using the same set of LECD expressions. 

The k-values derived from all the LG-method plots are shown in Table 3. Illustrative plots for 

Tests 20, 21, 28 and 29 are shown in Figure 3. 

  

0
4
8
12
16
20

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400
MWCNT: J=t

-2Jk, fapex=0.3

MWCNT
r=4 nm, h=5 µm
γmax=734

γ (number)

L (nm)

SWCNT
r=1 nm, h=2.5 µm
γmax=1392 


16 

 

 

Figure 2.  Calculated values of the local surface FEF γPL as a function of the distance L from the 

emitter apex, measured "along the surface" in a plane that includes the emitter axis. Calculations are 

shown for a HCP-model post of height h = 2.5 µm and radius rc = 1 nm (h/rc = 2500 and apex FEF 

γa=1392, which models a SWCNT), and for a post of height 5 µm and radius 4 nm (h/rc = 1250, γa=734, 

which models a MWCNT). For the MWCNT model, the inset shows the variation, along the emitter 

surface, of the local current density, in A/m2, calculated using the MG0 (F06, F06) formula.  

 

500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000

16000

20000

24000

28000

32000

V (V)

28
20

21

(V

2/I)(dI/dV) (V)

 Test "21", HCP MWCNT: MG0(ES, ES) k=2,464 
 Test "20", HCP SWCNT: MG0(ES, ES) k=2,451
 Test "29", HCP MWCNT: MG0(HP, HP) k=1,625
 Test "28", HCP SWCNT: MG0(HP, HP) k=1,611

29

 

Figure 3. Illustrative results of investigations into using the local-gradient method to determine 

estimates of the total voltage-exponent kt, for HCP-model emitters, using various different formulae for 

local emission current density, as specified in Table 3. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


17 

 

 

Table 3.  To show values derived for the total voltage-exponent kt, for HCP (hemisphere-on-

cylindrical-post) models representing a single-walled carbon nanotube (SW) and a multi-walled CNT 

(MW). Evaluation of the total emission currents assumes: (a) the local work function is uniform, with 

value 4.6 eV; (b) the planar transmission approximation; (c) various different approximations, as 

defined in Table 1, to the Murphy-Good FE equation. Values of kt are extracted using both the least-

residual (LR) method and the local-gradient (LG) method. The columns labelled "change" show the 

differences from the corresponding "planar emitter" simulations. 

 

CNT 
Type 

LECD 
equation 
kp from 
Table 1 

Least Residual Method 
Local Gradient Method 

Test 
Derived 

kt 

Change, 

kA 
Test 
Derived 

kt 

Change, 

kA 

SW 
MG0 (ES,ES)  
2.000 
8 
2.455 
+0.455 
20 
2.451 
+0.451 

MW 
MG0 (ES,ES)  
2.000 
9 
2.463 
+0.463 
21 
2.464 
+0.464 

SW 
KernelSN (F06)  
1.236 
10 
1.731 
+0.496 
22 
1.728 
+0.492 

MW 
KernelSN (F06)  
1.236 
11 
1.740 
+0.504 
23 
1.743 
+0.507 

SW 
MG0 (F06,F06)  
1.135 
12 
1.637 
+0.502 
24 
1.631 
+0.496 

MW 
MG0 (F06,F06)  
1.135 
13 
1.646 
+0.511 
25 
1.645 
+0.510 

SW 
KernelSN (HP)  
1.212 
14 
1.707 
+0.495 
26 
1.707 
+0.495 

MW 
KernelSN (HP)  
1.212 
15 
1.716 
+0.504 
27 
1.722 
+0.510 

SW 
MG0 (HP,HP) 
1.113 
16 
1.614 
+0.501 
28 
1.611 
+0.498 

MW 
MG0 (HP,HP)  
1.113 
17 
1.624 
+0.511 
29 
1.625 
+0.510 

SW 
MG300 (F06,F06) 
1.216 
18 
1.719 
+0.503 
30 
1.699 
+0.481 

MW 
MG300 (F06,F06) 
1.216 
19 
1.728 
+0.512 
31 
1.710 
+0.494 

 

The most striking feature of the results in Table 3 is that, with the exception of the Elinson-

Shrednik (ES) approximation, all the various formulae give very similar results for kA, namely a value 

close to 0.5. In every case, the result for the SWCNT dimensions is slightly less than that for the 

MWCNT dimensions, suggesting that the shape of the HCP emitter does have at least a slight effect. 

Comparison of Tests 18 and 19 with 12 and 13 shows that the results at room temperature are only 

marginally different from those for zero-temperature. Comparison of Tests 12 and 13 with Tests 24 

and 25, or Tests 16 and 17 with 28 and 29, shows that essentially the same results are being obtained 

from the least residual and local gradient methods.  

Specific physical conclusions from these simulations on HCP models are as follows. (1) The 

effect of pointed-emitter shape is to increase the value of the pre-exponential voltage-exponent k, by 

an amount kA relative to the corresponding planar-emitter case. This is equivalent to dependence of 

the notional emission area An on the apex value Fa of local barrier field, and hence (for ideal emitters) 

to dependence on the measured voltage. For an emitter with apex radius of curvature ra, this can be 

represented in terms of the behaviour of a notional apex area efficiency gn defined by 

 

 
gn  ≡  An/2πra

2 . 
(4.3) 

 


18 

 

The parameter gn represents the fraction of the surface area (of a hemisphere of radius ra) that would 

be emitting if the current density within the emitting area were constant and equal to its apex value. 

Obviously for the HCP model, ra is equal to the cylinder radius rc. 

(2) With the exception of the Elinson-Shrednik approximation, all approximate versions of the 

Murphy-Good FE equation yield much the same value of kA, which is in the vicinity of 0.5 (for the 

work-function value 4.60 eV used). This is markedly less than the Abbott-Henderson value of kA=1, 

and shows that their linear-Taylor-expansion approach is a poor approximation. 

For the case of a hemisphere on a plane (hpost/ra= 1), Jensen has developed an analytic expression 

for gn (see pp. 407–408 in [11]); for a 4.50 eV emitter, his Fig. 30.3 appears to indicate a value of kA 

near 0.8. For the case of a parabolic tip, theoretical analysis by Biswas [33] has found kA values close 

to unity. These results, together with our own finding of a slight difference between the SWCNT and 

MWCNT cases, tend to confirm that the value of kA depends in principle on the precise shape of the 

emitter––and that more extensive research investigations into shape effects are needed. 

 

 

5. Discussion:  the comparison of FE theory and experiment 

 

(a)  The historical situation 

 

Making detailed comparisons between FE theory and experiment has long been a weak point of the 

subject area. Historically, the situation has been as follows. The good (albeit not precise) linearity of 

Fowler-Nordheim plots taken from ideal FE devices/systems establishes convincingly that FE is a 

wave-mechanical tunnelling process. However, apparent linearity of a FN plot does not by itself 

provide useful information about the details of FE theory. In practice, it has proved extremely difficult 

to use comparisons between theory and experiment to distinguish decisively between different 

detailed FE models/theories. 

For example, the FN (1928) and MG (1956) approaches to metal FE theory make significantly 

different physical assumptions about the nature of the tunnelling barrier. For the last 60 years or so, 

FE theoreticians have been in no doubt that the MG approach is "better physics" [19]. However, an 

exploration of a significant part of the available experimental evidence some years ago [34] concluded 

that, although the balance of experimental evidence tended to favour the MG physical assumptions, 

the totality of the evidence examined did not allow this to be presented as a decisive conclusion. For 

example, temperature and field dependent shifts in the peak of the total energy distribution (TED), 

which are certainly compatible [35] with the MG physical assumptions, also seem to be compatible 

[34] with the FN physical assumptions (within the accuracy of the published experimental TED data). 

This situation is a "gap in the background of FE science" that deserves to be filled. 


19 

 

Unfortunately, the longstanding IVC analysis techniques based on the use of FN plots are not very 

helpful for making basic theory-experiment comparisons. For ideal FE devices/systems, the slope S of 

a current-voltage-type FN-plot basically gives information about the electrostatics of the FE 

device/system in use, in that an extracted value of the apex VCL ζa can be obtained from the formula 

 

 
ζa

extr  =  –σtbφ3/2/S. 
(5.1) 

 

In MG FE theory, it is usually adequate to take the slope correction factor σt as 0.95. In the original 

1928 FN FE theory, σt = 1. Thus, any attempt to use the measured slope and the 5% difference in σt  

to distinguish between these two theories needs a highly accurate independent determination of ζa

extr; 

this would be very difficult in principle, and possibly impracticable in reality. 

For ideal FE devices/systems, estimates of formal emission area Af can be obtained from the FN-

plot intercept, most easily by using the relevant emission area extraction parameter (e.g., [36]). 

Estimates of Af derived, from a given experimental data set, (a) by using MG FE theory and (b) by 

using the original 1928 FN FE theory, can differ by a large factor, typically around 100. But there are 

extraordinary difficulties in making a reliable theoretical prediction of the value of Af, partly because 

of the limited information that currently exists about likely values of notional emission areas An, but 

more so because of the lack of good knowledge about the value and behaviour of the "uncertainty 

factor" λ in equation (2.2b). 

It might be thought that study of total energy distributions would provide a good comparison 

method. Whilst there is certainly scope for further careful numerical investigations, initial 

explorations did not lead to convincing results, as reported above. 

Against this background, studies of the pre-exponential voltage-exponent k in the empirical FE 

equation, i.e., equation (1.9), appear to show significant promise as a tool for using experiments to 

distinguish between different detailed FE theories. The results in this paper should be understood as 

part of a preliminary exploration of the issues involved. 

 

 

(b)  Summary of procedural conclusions 

  

From our experience in carrying out simulations and comparisons, as described above, we 

conclude the following. 

(1) 
At this point in time, theory and simulations need to work with ideal FE devices/systems, so 

that the complications associated with non-ideality can be avoided. Also, experiments should, 

as far as possible, be made on ideal devices/systems. The following remarks concentrate on 

ideal FE devices/systems. 


20 

 

(2) 
In the context of "empirical" equation (1.9), when dealing with classical-conductor models of 

field emitters, it appears that the theory can assume (at least initially) that the parameter B has a 

constant value, and that the issue is the behaviour of the pre-exponential CVm

k. 

(3)   Comparison of equations (1.8) and (1.9) suggests that this pre-exponential CVm

k can, at least 

conceptually, be decomposed as a product of two components: 

 

 
 
 CVm

k  =  C1Vm

k1  ⋅  C2Vm

k2  . 
(5.2) 

 

 
The second term relates to the behaviour of a current density defined at the emitter apex, and 

the first to the behaviour of an appropriately defined notional emission area.  

(4) 
Thus, we expect that the parameters C and k may both contain entangled information about the 

physics of the emission process and the shape of the emitter. In principle, what needs to be 

done is to untangle this information, in order to provide reliable information about the emission 

physics, the emitter shape and the effective emission area. This seems a research task that may 

prove complex and possibly lengthy. As things stand at present, it seems a higher priority to use 

extracted k-values to deduce conclusions about the emission physics, rather than to use 

extracted values of k and C to deduce conclusions about emission area. 

  

(5) 
There seem some obvious initial avenues of exploration, as follows.  

 
(a) Within the context of the planar transmission approximation, we need to explore more 

comprehensively how emitter shape affects the value of k. We also need to understand how 

these results are affected by the value chosen for the local work function. 

 
(b) We need to establish a link between (a) the results of simulations and (b) the analytical 

results of Jensen [11] and Biswas [33] concerning the notional apex area efficiency gn. Further, 

we need to establish how gn depends on emitter shape and on the assumptions made about the 

emission physics (particularly the barrier form). 

 
(c) We need to investigate the behaviour of the shape contribution kA in the limit of large 

emitter apex radius. If kA turns out to be small (or, alternatively, very well defined), then we 

need to explore whether experimental measurements on "blunt emitters" could provide decisive 

information about the emission physics for "nearly planar emitters". The mainstream 

approximation, as described at the start of this paper, involves the neglect of atomic structure, 

the use of the simple-JWKB tunnelling formalism and the assumption of a Schottky-Nordheim 

tunnelling barrier. As indicated above, it would be helpful to have it decisively confirmed 

experimentally that this is an "adequate physical approximation" for a blunt emitter. 

 


21 

 

The following detailed procedural conclusions have also been reached.  

(6) 
Given that the extracted value of kA depends relatively weakly on the precise approximate form 

used for the Murphy-Good FE equations, it should be sufficient––in initial future explorations 

of the effects of emitter shape––to approximate the local current density by the kernel current 

density for the SN barrier. 

(7) 
Given that our results for kt depend noticeably on the accuracy of the approximate formula used 

for vF, there will be little physical merit, in future simulations, in using anything other than the 

high-precision formula for v(x) given in Appendix A (though, as noted earlier, computing 

resource limitations might indicate the use of the F06 approximation in particular 

circumstances). 

(8) 
There seems limited merit in using the Elinson-Shrednik approximation in future simulations. 

(9) 
The present simulations cover the scaled-field range 0.15≤fa≤0.45, on the grounds that ideal FE 

devices/systems will normally operate within this range. In this range, extracted values of k 

appear (so far) to be nearly constant, and one would expect the least-residual and local-gradient 

methods to return nearly the same numerical result. However, when making comparisons 

between simulations and analytical models (e.g., for gn), it may be useful to carry out 

simulation and extraction procedures over a wider range of values within the range 0≤fa≤1. We 

have detected that, when considered over wider ranges of fa-values, k may need to be treated as 

a weakly varying function of fa, and hence of measured voltage. In this case, the least-residual 

method yields a reasonably precise "effective average value" of k, but the local-gradient method 

can indicate whether any significant variations in k exist as a function of voltage. 

 

 

6.  Summary and research outlook 

 

(a) The role of the present paper 

 

This investigation started as an attempt to understand in more detail the current-voltage characteristics 

(IVCs) derived from CNT-based LAFEs operating in industrial vacuum conditions. However, we 

came to realize that more fundamental questions relating to the analysis of IVCs and the effect of 

emitter shape on IVCs need to be explored first, and, further, that experiments that seek to establish 

the value of the pre-exponential voltage-exponent k might eventually open a path towards quantifying 

fundamental uncertainties known to currently exist in tunnelling theory, particularly as this applies to 

curved emitters. 


22 

 

By using the empirical FE equation, this paper has shown that comparisons of extracted k-values 

should provide a useful new tool for comparing FE theory and experiments. Simulations have shown 

that small theoretical variations, both in the barrier form correction factor and in pre-exponential  

correction factors, can be detected, by the "least residual" and/or "local-gradient" methods. Using the 

planar transmission approximation, it has been shown that emitter shape makes a significant 

contribution to k, and that small shape differences may have a detectable effect: this is an unwelcome 

(though not unexpected) complication. 

This paper has aimed to establish a "basic proof of concept" for this methodology based on 

finding k-values. We believe this has been achieved. The paper does not aim to provide full discussion 

either of theoretical details of how this methodology might be implemented, or of how appropriate 

apparatus and experimental procedures might be designed. However, we briefly comment below on 

possible ways forwards. 

To address the whole problem of developing and testing truly reliable FE theory, using k-value 

methodology, one must assess what contribution each part of existing theory (and each new 

development) makes to the total value of k. This seems likely to generate a complicated progressive 

process of making comparisons between theory and experiment, in order to reach definitive or 

provisional (with caveats) scientific conclusions, and is likely to involve careful design of 

experiments. 

 

 

(b) Research outlook: experimental issues 

 

As is usual scientific practice, initial experiments need to have as few "complications" as possible, 

at least until some basic facts are built up. Thus, one would work with emitters fabricated from good 

metallic conductors (so that the system is "ideal"); one would work with single emitters rather than 

arrays, and would avoid using excessively sharp emitters; one would work at room temperature (or 

maybe below); and one would work within a voltage range that corresponds a scaled-field range well 

within the validity limits for Murphy-Good finite-temperature FE theory. 

It would be desirable to work with stable, clean emitting surfaces, and to avoid noise issues of all 

kinds. This indicates the need to operate in good ultrahigh vacuum, with appropriate surface cleaning 

techniques applied before experiments are begun. It also indicates the need to use computerised 

control of voltages, computerised measurement of currents, and computerised recording of current-

voltage data. Conceivably, as previously suggested [8], one might wish to explore using phase-

sensitive detection techniques to measure how the quantity gF2 in equation (2.4) varies with measured 

voltage. 


23 

 

Clearly, to avoid the complications associated with non-planar emitter shape, it would be 

desirable (if at all possible) to measure currents from a defined area on an atomically flat plane, across 

which the applied electrostatic field is as uniform as possible. 

If an experiment of this kind proves impracticable, at least in the short term, one might use 

something approximating to a traditional field electron microscope configuration, with a probe hole 

that limits the current to that drawn from a well-defined crystallographic region. The shape of the 

emitter should be established by separate electron-microscope experiments. 

 

 

(c) Research outlook: theoretical scientific issues 

 

As discussed above, a longstanding FE problem is the desirability (for scientific completeness) of 

having a decisive experimentally based confirmation that 1956 Murphy-Good FE theory (which takes 

exchange-and-correlation effects into account by using image potential energies) is "better physics" 

than the original 1928 Fowler-Nordhein theory (which did not). For an emitter with uniform local 

work-function 4.60 eV, the predicted difference in k is around 0.7, as noted earlier, which is much 

greater that the apparent intrinsic accuracy of the simulations (around 0.001, or better). 

To solve this and other problems, one needs to identify the theoretical effects likely to make the 

greatest-magnitude contributions to k, and to determine/estimate related contribution sizes. Obviously, 

the biggest is the contribution "+2" that comes from summation over emitter electron states, using 

elementary theory. Two of the next largest contributions (namely, using the SN rather than the ET 

barrier, and using non-planar emitter shapes) have already been discussed. There is a need for further 

simulation-based research into how k-values are affected by emitter shape and size, and by the value 

and behaviour of the local work function. 

The introduction of emission models that involve the atomic wave-functions of surface atoms  

(e.g., [37]) will probably also contribute significantly to k-values. As suggested by Oppenheimer long 

ago [38], field electron emission from a surface atom resembles the field ionization of that atom, and 

it is known [39] that the accepted formula for the field ionization rate-constant of a hydrogen atom 

involves a pre-exponential field term of the form F–1. However, a closer analogy may be the Kingham 

[40] calculations on the post-field-ionization of field-evaporated metal ions, which are of significant 

interest in atom probe microscopy. In both cases, the implied contribution to k would or could be –1, 

or something close to this. Revisiting the theory of these topics, whilst also keeping an eye on modern 

density-functional-theory techniques of modelling charged metal surfaces (e.g. [37]), seems a useful 

line of exploration. 

Beyond this, and possibly of significantly more physical interest (though necessarily topics for 

later exploration), there will be situations where the differences between different FE theories might 

be expected to be somewhat smaller. In particular, one might expect a theory of FE from curved 


24 

 

surfaces, when the relevant LECD formula is used with a point-form emitter, to lead to a k-value 

slightly or somewhat different from that found using the planar transmission approximation. 

However, there is an issue of whether some existing methods of predicting tunnelling probabilities for 

curved emitters are strictly correct physical approximations; this is because careful reading of the 

analysis of hydrogen-atom field ionization by Landau and Lifschitz [39] suggests that the simple-

JWKB approximation is valid only if the relevant component of the electron wave-function in effect 

obeys the one-dimensional Schrödinger equation as found when separation is made in Cartesian 

coordinates. 

Further beyond this, there may be issues relating to the implementation and reliability of the more 

advanced FE theories that assess tunnelling probability by means of path-integral methods more 

sophisticated than those commonly used (for example, [41,42]), and/or assess effects (including 

"coherent-emission effects") occurring with emitters with apex shapes that are very small and very 

sharp (e.g., [43]).   

With these advanced modern theories, a suitable way forwards would be for their originators to 

use them to generate predicted current-voltage characteristics (or, where relevant, predicted plots of 

tunnelling probability versus field). These could then be analysed by the methods discussed above, to 

yield a predicted k-value or a predicted contribution to k.  

More generally, some of the known problems in FE theory appear, at least in part, to be general 

problems associated with tunnelling theory in quantum mechanics. The late Prof. Marshall Stoneham 

(a former President of the UK Institute of Physics) considered that some of the most difficult unsolved 

problems in theoretical physics were in field electron emission theory (private communication to 

RGF). There may be the hope that, eventually, future scientific developments in field electron 

emission could be of wider scientific use.  

 

 

Appendix  A:  Detailed formulae 

 

A1.  The FE special mathematical functions v(x), u(x) and t1(x) 

 

The field emission special mathematical functions are expressed here in terms of the Gauss variable x, 

i.e., the independent variable in the Gauss Hypergeometric Differential Equation (HDE). By 

appropriate choice [28,44] of the constants in the Gauss HDE, this equation can be reduced to the 

defining equation found by Forbes and Deane [5], namely 

 

 
x(1− x) d2W

dx2  =  3

16W  . 
(A1) 

 


25 

 

Note that the symbol l' used in [44] has been replaced here by the symbol x now preferred; there is no 

change in the underlying mathematics. 

The principal field emission special mathematical function v(x) is the particular solution of 

equation (A1) that satisfies the boundary conditions [40] 

 

 
v(0) =  1;     lim

x→0

dv
dx − 3

16 ln x

⎧
⎨
⎩

⎫
⎬
⎭

 =  − 9

8 ln2. 
(A2)  

 

A formal analytical solution for v(x) is stated, and an exact series expansion derived, in [44]. 

Related special mathematical functions u(x) and t1(x) are defined in terms of v(x) by 

 
 

 
u(x)  ≡  – dv/dx , 
(A3) 

 

 
t1(x)   ≡  v(x) + (4/3) x u(x) . 
(A4) 

 

The typesetting convention used here is that (like "sin") the symbols for special mathematical 

functions are typeset upright. 

It can be shown [28] (though the proof is not trivial) that these mathematical functions are 

applied to Murphy-Good FE theory by setting x equal to the local scaled field f defined by equation 

(3.1). In the main text, the simplified notation is used that vF≡v(x=f), tF≡t1(x=f); in some equations f 

has the emitter-apex value fa. 

Historically, the pure mathematics of "v" has been formulated in terms of the Nordheim 

parameter y [=+√x]. However, the discovery of equation (A1) as the defining equation for "v" has 

helped to show that this choice is inappropriate when discussing the pure mathematics of "v": the 

natural mathematical variable is the Gauss variable x. The Nordheim parameter y, when defined as 

+√f, remains acceptable as an alternative modelling variable, but strong reasons can be given [28] for 

preferring to use the scaled field f as the modelling variable when discussing FE current-voltage 

characteristics and related topics, and it would make for a cleaner overall system if the use of the 

Nordheim parameter y in such contexts were progressively discontinued. 

 

 

A2.  High-precision formulae ("HP formulae") 

 


26 

 

High-precision (HP) approximation formulae are given in [5] for v(x) and u(x). Over the range 0≤x≤1 

(but not outside this range), the magnitude of the maximum error in these formulae is 8×10–10. The HP 

formulae take the form below, where the constants have the values given in Table A1. 

 

 
v(x) ≅  (1− x) 1+
pixi

i=1

4
∑

⎡

⎣
⎢

⎤

⎦
⎥ +  xln x
qixi−1

i=1

4
∑
, 
(A5) 

 
u(x) ≅  u(1) −  (1− x)
sixi

i=0

5
∑
 −  ln x
tixi

i=0

4
∑
.  
(A6) 

 

Table A1. Constants for use in connection with equations (A5) and (A6). 

i 
pi 
qi 
si 
ti 

0 
- 
- 
  0.053 249 972 7 
0.187 5  [=3/16] 

1 
0.032 705 304 46 
0.187 499 344 1 
  0.024 222 259 59 
0.035 155 558 74 

2 
0.009 157 798 739 
0.017 506 369 47 
  0.015 122 059 58 
0.019 127 526 80 

3 
0.002 644 272 807 
0.005 527 069 444 
  0.007 550 739 834 
0.011 522 840 09 

4 
0.000 089 871 738 11 
0.001 023 904 180 
  0.000 639 172 865 9 
0.003 624 569 427 

5 
- 
- 
–0.000 048 819 745 89 
- 

u(1)  =  3π/8√2  ≅  0.8330405509 

 

 

A3.  The simple good approximations ("F06 formulae") 

 

Simple good approximations for the FE special mathematical functions are based on the formula for 

v(x) discovered empirically and reported in [7] (where the modelling variable f was used, rather than 

x). As noted earlier, this "F06 formula" has the form: 

 

 
v(x)  ≈ 1 – x + (1/6)xlnx . 
(A7) 

 

The equivalent F06 formula for t1(x), derived from (A7) via definitions (A2) and (A3) above, is: 

 

 
t1(x)   ≈  1 + x/9 – (1/18)xlnx . 
(A8) 

 

Maximum errors in these F06 formulae are listed in Table A2. As shown in [45], when considered 

over the wide range 0≤x≤1, these F06 formulae are more accurate than all older approximations of 


27 

 

equivalent complexity. The success of these F06 formulae presumably arises because the F06 formula 

for v(x) mimics the form of the lowest terms in the exact series expansion [44]. 

 

Table A2.  This table shows the maximum magnitudes of the errors in the F06 formulae 

for v(x) and t1(x), in relevant ranges of x. 

 

v(x) – exact ranges 
v(x) – errors in "F06 formula" 

x-range 
v-range 
max. {|error|} 
max. {|%error|} 

0≤ x ≤1 
1.0000≥ v ≥0.0000 
0.0024 
0.33 % 

0.15≤ x ≤0.45 
0.8002≥ v ≥0.4886 
0.0024 
0.33 % 

t1(x) – exact ranges 
t1(x) – errors in "F06 formula" 

x-range 
t1-range 
max. {|error|} 
max. {|%error|} 

0≤ x ≤1 
1.0000≤ t1 ≤ 1.1107  
0.0041 
0.39% 

0.15≤ x ≤0.45 
1.0070≤ t1 ≤ 1.0378 
0.0041 
0.38% 

 

 

A4.  The Elinson-Shrednik (ES) approximation 

 

One of the most effective of the older approximations is the Elinson-Shrednik (ES) approximation 

(see equation (6.10) on p. 168 of [46]). This formula has been widely used in older Russian-language 

literature, and in many contexts is a useful approximation. The ES approximation has the form 

 

 
v(x) ≈ 0.95 – 1.03x , 
(A9) 

 

 
t1(x) ≈ √(1.1) ≈ 1.05 . 
(A10) 

 

 

A5.  The Murphy-Good temperature correction factor λT 

 

An expression for the temperature correction factor λT in equation (1.1) was first developed by 

Murphy and Good [4]. In the Swanson and Bell notation [47], λT is written 

 

 
λT  =  pπ/sin(pπ) , 
(A11) 

 

and the Swanson-Bell parameter p is estimated by the ratio 

 

 
p  ≈  kBT/δF

SN , 
(A12) 

 


28 

 

where kBT is the Boltzmann factor, and the parameter δF

SN (called here the barrier-strength decay-

width, at the Fermi level, for the SN barrier) is obtained as follows. In the simple-JWKB tunnelling 

formalism, the tunnelling probability D for a SN barrier of zero-field height H can be written  

 

 
D   ≈  exp[–GSN]  =  exp[–vHbΗ3/2/FL] , 
(A13) 

 

where: G is called here the barrier strength, but is also known as the "Gamow factor"; GSN is the 

barrier strength for the SN barrier; and vH is the value of v(x) that applies to a SN barrier defined by H 

and FL. The parameter δF

SN is then given by 

 

 
1/δF

SN  ≡  (∂GSN/∂H)|H=φ   =  (3/2)tFbφ1/2FL

–1, 
(A14) 

 

where, as before, tF is the value of t1(x) that applies to a SN barrier defined by φ and FL. 

 

 

References 

 

1. 
Popov EO, Kolosko AG, Ershov MV, Filippov SV. 2012 Development of on-line emission 

parameters processing research technique of polymer-MWCNT emitter. In: 25th International 

Vacuum Nanoelectronics Conf., Jeju, July 2012. Technical Digest, pp. 306–307. Piscatawy: 

IEEE. 

2. 
Popov EO, Kolosko AG, Filippov SV, Romanov PA, Fedichkin IL, 2016 Mass spectrometric 

technique to study the complex field and the thermal properties of nanocomposite materials, 

Nanomaterials and Nanostructures - XXI century, N1 (14), 2016, pp. 14–26. 

3. 
Popov EO, Kolosko AG, Filippov SV, Romanov PA, Fedichkin IL, 2018 Multichannel 

registration of field emission and accompanying processes of nanomaterials with on-line 

modeling. Materials Today: Proc., 5, 13800–13806. 

4. 
Murphy EL, Good RH, Jr. 1956 Thermionic emission, field emission and the transition region. 

Phys. Rev. 102, 1464–1473. 

5. 
Forbes RG, Deane JHB. 2007 Reformulation of the standard theory of Fowler-Nordheim 

tunnelling and cold field electron emission. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 464, 2907–2927. 

6. 
Forbes RG, Deane JHB. 2011 Transmission coefficients for the exact triangular barrier: an 

exact general analytical theory that can replace Fowler & Nordheim’s 1928 theory. Proc. R. 

Soc. Lond. A 467, 2927–2947. See electronic supplementary material for information about 

universal constants used in FE. 

7. 
Forbes RG. 2006 Simple good approximations for the special elliptic functions in standard 


29 

 

Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling theory for a Schottky-Nordheim barrier. Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 

113122. 

8. 
Forbes RG. 2008 Call for experimental test of a revised mathematical form for field emission 

current-voltage characteristics. Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 193105. 

9. 
Schottky W. 1923 Über kalte und warme Elektronenentladungen, Z. Phys. 14, 63–106. 

10. 
Abbott FR, Henderson JE. 1930 The range and validity of the field current equation.  Phys. Rev. 

56, 113–118. 

11. 
Jensen KL. 2018 Introduction to the Physics of Electron Emission. Chichester, UK: Wiley. 

12. 
Biswas D, Ramachandran R. 2019 Curvature correction to the field emission current. J. Vac. 

Sci. Technol. B 37, 021801. 

13. 
Popov EO, Kolosko AG, Fillipov SV, Forbes RG. 2019 Emission area extraction for needle-

shaped and post-shaped emitters. 32nd International Vacuum Nanoelectronics Conf. & 12th 

International Vacuum Electron Sources Conf., Cincinnatti, July 2019. Technical Digest, p. 96. 

(doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.35337.19041) 

14. 
Forbes RG. 2008 Physics of generalized Fowler-Nordheim-type equations. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 

B 26, 788–793. 

15. 
Lauritsen CC. 1929 Electron Emission from Metals in Intense Electric Fields. PhD thesis, 

California Institute of Technology. 

16. 
Millikan RA, Lauritsen CC. 1928 Relations of field-currents to thermionic currents. Proc. Natl. 

Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 14, 45-49. 

17. 
Fowler RH, Nordheim L. 1928 Electron emission in intense electric fields. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 

A 119, 173-181. 

18. 
Stern TE, Gossling BS, Fowler RH. 1929 Further studies in the emission of electrons from cold 

metals. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 124, 699–723. 

19. 
Forbes RG. 2019 Comments on the continuing widespread and unnecessary use of a defective 

emission equation in field emission related literature. J. Appl. Phys. 126, 210901. 

20. 
Nordheim LW. 1928 The effect of the image force on the emission and reflexion of electrons by 

metals. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 121, 626–639. 

21. 
Modinos A. 1984 Field, Thermionic, and Secondary Electron Emission Spectroscopy. New 

York: Plenum. Reprinted by Springer, 2013. 

22. 
Amorim MV, Dall'Agnol, den Engelson D, de Assis TA, Baranauskas V. 2018 Numerical 

analysis of the notional area in cold field electron emission from arrays. J. Phys. Condens. 

Matter 30, 385303. 

23. 
Dyke WP, Trolan JK. 1953 Field emission: large current densities, space charge and the 

vacuum arc. Phys. Rev. 89, 799–808. 

24. 
Feizi E, Scott K, Baxendale M, Pal C, Ray AK, Wang W, Pang Y, Hodgson SNB. 2012 

Synthesis and characterisation of nickel nanorods for cold cathode fluorescent lamps. Materials 


30 

 

Chem. Phys. 135, 832–833. 

25. 
Forbes RG. 2009 Use of Millikan–Lauritsen plots, rather than Fowler-Nordheim plots, to 

analyze field emission current-voltage data. J. Appl. Phys. 105, 114313. 

26. 
Zubair M, Ang YS, Ang LK. 2018 Fractional Fowler–Nordheim law for field emission from 

rough surface with nonparabolic energy dispersion. IEEE Trans. Electron Dev. 65, 2089–2095. 

27. 
Forbes RG. 2013 Development of a simple quantitative test for lack of field emission 

orthodoxy. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 469, 20130271. 

28. 
Forbes RG. 2020 Renewing the mainstream theory of field and thermal electron emission. 

Chapter 9 (pp. 387–457) in: G. Gaertner, W. Knapp, R.G. Forbes (eds) Modern Developments 

in Vacuum Electron Sources. Switzerland: Springer Nature.  

29. 
Vibrans GE. 1964 Field Emission in Vacuum Voltage Breakdown. Technical Report No. 353, 

Lincoln Laboratory, MIT (NTIS ESDTDR 640327). 

30. 
Forbes RG, Edgcombe CJ, Valdrè U. 2003 Some comments on models for field enhancement. 

Ultramicroscopy 95, 57–65. 

31. 
Zhbanov AI, Pogerolov EG, Chang Y-C, Lee Y-G. 2011 Screened field enhancement factor for 

the floating sphere model of a carbon nanotube array. J. Appl. Phys. 110, 114311. 

32. 
de Assis TA, Dall'Agnol FF. 2019 Minimum domain size necessary to simulate the field 

enhancement factor numerically with specified precision. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 37, 022902. 

33. 
Biswas D. 2018 Field-emission from parabolic tips: Current distribution, the net current, and 

effective emission area. Phys. Plasmas 25, 043105. 

34. 
Forbes RG, Deane JHB. 2016 Testing Fowler-Nordheim-type equations. In 29th International 

Vacuum Nanoelectronics Conf., Vancouver, July 2016. Technical Digest, p.108. Piscatawy: 

IEEE (doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.15894.80966) 

35. 
Gadzuk JW, Plummer EW. 1971 Energy distributions for thermal field emission. Phys. Rev. B. 

3, 2125–2128. 

36. 
Forbes RG. 2019 The Murphy-Good plot: a better method of analysing field emission data. 

 
Roy. Soc. Open. Sci. 6, 190912. 

37. 
Lepetit, B. 2018 A three dimensional numerical quantum mechanical model of electronic field 

emission from metallic surfaces with nanoscale corrugation. J. Appl. Phys. 125, 025107. 

38. 
Oppenheimer JR. 1928 Three notes on the quantum theory of aperiodic effects. Phys. Rev. 13, 

66–81. 

39. 
Landau LD, Lifschitz EM. 1977 Quantum Mechanics, Third Edition. Oxford: Butterworth-

Heinemann. See Problem 1 on p. 295. 

40. 
Kingham DR. 1982 The post ionization of field evaporated ions: a theoretical explanation of 

multiple charge states. Surface Sci. 116, 273–301. 

41. 
Kyritsakis A, Xanthakis JP. 2015 Derivation of a generalized Fowler-Nordheim equation for 

nanoscopic field-emitters. Proc. R. Soc. A 471, 0140811. 


31 

 

42. 
Jensen KL, Shiffler DA, Peckerar M, Harris JR, Petillo JJ. 2017 Current from a nanogap 

hyperbolic diode using shape factors: Theory. J. Appl. Phys. 122, 064501.  

43.. Patterson AA, Akinwande AI. 2020 Semiclassical theory of cold field electron emission from 

nanoscale emitter tips. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B. 38, 023206. 

44. 
Deane JHB, Forbes RG. 2008 The formal derivation of an exact series expansion for the 

principal Schottky-Nordheim barrier function v, using the Gauss hypergeometric differential 

equation. J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 41, 395301. 

45. 
Forbes RG, Deane JHB. 2010 Comparison of approximations for the principal Schottky-

Nordheim barrier function v(f), and comments on Fowler-Nordheim plots. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 

B 28, C2A33–C2A42. 

46. 
Shrednik, VN. 1974 Field emission theory. Chap. 6 in: Elinson MI (ed). Unheated Cathodes. 

Moscow: Sovietskoe Radio. (In  Russian.) 

47. 
Swanson LW, Bell AE. 1973 Recent advances in field electron microscopy of metals. Adv. 

Electronics Electron Phys. 32, 193–309. 

 

 

Acknowledgements 

 

The authors are grateful to Fernando F. Dall'Agnol (Federal University of Santa Catarina) for his help 

in COMSOL simulations. 

 

 

Data, Code and Materials 

 

Computations described in this paper have been carried out using two standard commercial software 

packages. COMSOL™ has been used to carry out electrostatic modeling. LABVIEW™ has been used 

for: (a) calculation of emission current densities and emission currents; (b) regression-type 

calculations that generate values of the pre-exponential voltage-exponent k; and (c) implementation of 

the "local gradient" data analysis method described in the main text. When COMSOL™ is used, a 

large "internal" data file is generated by COMSOL™ and passed to LABVIEW™. Appropriate 

modeling information (as described in the main text) and appropriate sequences of input instructions 

have to be entered into the software packages, but there are no large data input files and there has 

been no need for low-level code to be written. It is assumed that researchers able to drive the software 

packages used (or packages with equivalent functionality) are able to generate the package input 

instructions needed to implement the procedures described in the main text or in the electronic 

supplementary material, and to generate associated diagrams. Additional details concerning the 


32 

 

electrostatic modeling, beyond those provided in the main text, are provided as electronic 

supplementary material. 

 

 

Authors' contributions 

 

EOP and RGF collaborated in directing the research and preparing the manuscript; AGK and SVF 

carried out the detailed calculations;  SVF and RGF collaborated in preparing the electronic 

supplementary material;  all authors contributed to research discussions. 

 
 


33 

 

The pre-exponential voltage-exponent as a sensitive test parameter for 

field emission theories 

R.G. Forbes1*, E.O. Popov2**, A.G. Kolosko2, and S.V. Filippov2 

1Advanced Technology Institute & Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 

 University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK 

2Ioffe Institute, ul. Politekhnicheskaya 26, Saint-Petersburg, 194021, Russia  

*e-mail: r.forbes@trinity.cantab.net;  **e-mail: e.popov@mail.ioffe.ru;  

 

Electronic Supplementary Information - Further details of electrostatic modeling 

 

Procedures for calculating the electric field distribution over the carbon nanotube 

surface using the "hemisphere-on-cylindrical-post (HCP)" model, 

and for generating related data 

Modeling was carried out in COMSOL (v.5.3) finite-element software package. Steps were 
as follows. 

1. Set the model parameters in Global Definitions – Parameters were set as in Table S1. 

 
Table S1. Parameters of HCP models. 

Parameter 
Description 
Expression 
Value 

MWCNT 
rc 
Apex radius of curvature 
- 
4 nm 

hpost 
Total emitter height 
- 
5 µm 

SWCNT 
rc 
Apex radius of curvature 
- 
1 nm 

hpost 
Total emitter height 
- 
2.5 µm 

BOTH 
dsep 
Anode-to-emitter separation 
- 
300 µm 

ΔΦ 
Anode-to-emitter potential difference 
- 
1500 V 

rsim 
Radius of simulation box 
- 
250 µm 

hsim 
Height of simulation box 
hsim=d+hpost 
Depends on 
CNT type 

ALSO 
FP 
Applied field between top and bottom 
"plates" of simulation box 
FP=ΔΦ /hsim 

Depends on 
CNT type 

 

Note all figures and calculations below are given specifically for the HCP model representing 
the MWCNT. Similar procedures apply to the SWCNT model, but with changed parameters 
as indicated. 
 
2. Establish geometry of HCP model using parameters specified in Table S1 (see Fig. S1). 


34 

 

 

 

Fig. S1.  Geometrical models.  Left: simulation box.  Right: top of the emitter. 

 

3. Set the material characteristics of the modeling region. Only the relative permittivity 

parameter (εr) is needed. The region outside the HCP model is vacuum, thus we set εr = 1. 
The HCP model body is omitted from the calculation, since the electric field does not 
penetrate inside a classical conductor.  

 

4. Set the boundary conditions for the electrostatic calculations. In accordance with 

conventional practice, all surfaces in the system are treated as having the same work 
function, and the potential difference ΔΦ between the top and bottom "plates" of the 
simulation box is set equal to the  voltage V that would be applied between these plates if 
they were good conductors in a real situation. The HCP model post and the base-plate on 
which it stands are set to potential Φbase=0. The top surface of the simulation box is set to 
potential Φtop =ΔΦ =V, as specified in Table 1. Along the cylindrical surfaces, a linear 
variation of potential between the base-plate and the top plate is implemented. The first 
two of these settings are illustrated in Fig. S2.  

 

Fig. S2. Setting boundary conditions for top and bottom surfaces of simulation box. 


35 

 

 

5. Generation and adjustment of the computational grid. This typically results in meshes 

similar to those shown in Fig. S3. 

 
 

 

Fig. S3. Examples of meshes.  Left: simulation box.  Right: top of the HCP emitter model. 

 

6. Solve electrostatic problem. The COMSOL software package applies finite-element 

methods to yield the distribution of the local electrostatic field FL across the HCP-model 
surface. From this we obtain the distribution across the model surface of the local values 
of the "plate-geometry" field enhancement factor (FEF) γPL defined by the formula γPL= 
FL/FP. These distributions are illustrated graphically in Fig. S4. The field values 
correspond to the particular values of the voltage difference and applied inter-plate field 
used in the simulations. The FEFs are characteristic of the geometry, and apply for all 
inter-plate field values. 
    

 


36 

 

Fig. S4. Distribution of (left) the local electrostatic field and (right) the plate-geometry field 
enhancement factor over the surface of the HCP model for the MWCNT. The field values are in V/m 
and correspond to the particular value of the voltage difference and applied inter-plate field used in the 
simulations. 

 

7. Evaluate field fall-off factors and local scaled-field values. The FEFs can then be used 

to generate a set of "local field fall-off factors" (ρL) defined by the formula 

 
ρL  =  γPL / (γPL)apex , 
(S1) 

where (γPL)apex is the value of the plate-geometry FEF at the apex of the HCP model. 

Let fa denote the apex value of the parameter "scaled field" used in emission theory. For 
any given value of fa , the local scaled-field value fL at any location on the HCP-model 
surface can be obtained from the formula 

 
fL  =  ρL fa . 
(S2) 

    

The above procedures need to be carried out for each of the two HCP models that represent, 
respectively, multi-walled (MWCNT) and single-walled (SWCNT) carbon nanotubes. 

For each of these two models, the next set of procedures need to be carried out for each 
assumed equation for emission current density. 

 

 

8. Define the range of apex-scaled-field values to be used. In this paper the range 

0.15≤fa≤0.45 (which corresponds to the "Pass" range of the orthodoxy test) has always 
been used. This corresponds to a given range of apex fields Fa, and hence a given range of 
potential differences ΔΦ, and hence a given range of "simulated measured voltages Vm". 
  

9.  Also define the increments of fa (and hence the increments in Fa, ΔΦ  and Vm) that are to be 

used in compiling the Ie(fa) [and hence Im(Vm)] data sets that are to be used in the regression 
analyses and in analyses by the "local gradient" method. 
 

10. Carry out Integration over the emitter surface, by splitting the HCP model surface into 

1000 "ring segments" each of small height δh . For each segment, carry out the following 
procedure, starting from the top of the model. 
a) Evaluate the local emission current density JL for the fL value appropriate to the 

segment. 

b) Evaluate the surface area aL appropriate to the segment. 
c) Evaluate the contribution δIe [=aLJL] made by the segment to the total emission 

current Ie. 

d) Add this contribution into a "running total" for the calculated emission current. 


37 

 

e) The procedure is terminated at a point where the calculated emission current has 

plateaued. 

The above algorithm is carried out for each appropriate value of fa (typically 1000 values 
in the chosen range), and results in a data set that describes the simulated functional 
dependence Ie(fa) or, equivalently, the simulated functional dependence of Im(Vm). 
 
For illustration, Fig. S5 shows a calculated distribution of local emission current density, 
using the Forbes 2006 approximations for the correction factors vF and tF that appear in 
the Murphy-Good FE equation. 

 

 

Fig. S5. Calculated distribution of the local emission current density over the surface of the HCP model 
for the MWCNT, evaluated using the Forbes 2006 approximations for the correction factors vF and tF, 
for the apex scaled-field value fa=0.3.  Currrent densities are given in A/m2. 
 
  

 

 

As a further illustration, Fig. S6 shows the direction of integration over segments (from 
top to bottom), and the calculated current-voltage characteristic that results from very 
many integrations of this kind. 


38 

 

 

 

Fig. S6. The direction of integration from top to bottom, and the current-voltage characteristic derived 

from the simulation. 

 
 
11. Generate data for Figures and appropriate images in the paper. 

 

12. Transfer data to long-term data storage. Data generated in step 11, and data relating to 

current-voltage characteristics, are transferred to a hard disc for long-term storage. 
 

13. Implement data-analysis procedures using LABVIEW.  The data relating to current-

voltage characteristics are used in the LABVIEW software package, to implement the 
"least residual" and "local gradient" analysis procedures, as described in the main text, 
and generate appropriate supporting outputs. These outputs include "best values" for the 
pre-exponential voltage exponent k. 


