Advanced Functional Materials

Volume 28, Issue 45, 1804355 (2018)

Highly Active Nanoperovskite Catalysts for 
Oxygen Evolution Reaction: Insights into 
Activity and Stability of Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O2+δ and 
PrBaCo2O5+δ

Bae‐Jung Kim, Xi Cheng , Daniel F. Abbott, Emiliana Fabbri, Francesco Bozza, Thomas Graule, Ivano E. 
Castelli, Luke Wiles, Nemanja Danilovic, Katherine E. Ayers, Nicola Marzari, Thomas J. Schmidt

First published: 20 September 2018

https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201804355

Abstract

It is shown that producing PrBaCo2O5+δ and Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O2+δ nanoparticle by a scalable synthesis 
method leads to high mass activities for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) with outstanding 
improvements by 10× and 50×, respectively, compared to those prepared via the state‐of‐the‐art synthesis 
method. Here, detailed comparisons at both laboratory and industrial scales show that Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O2+δ
appears to be the most active and stable perovskite catalyst under alkaline conditions, while PrBaCo2O5+δ
reveals thermodynamic instability described by the density‐functional theory based Pourbaix diagrams 
highlighting cation dissolution under OER conditions. Operando X‐ray absorption spectroscopy is used in 
parallel to monitor electronic and structural changes of the catalysts during OER. The exceptional BSCF 
functional stability can be correlated to its thermodynamic meta‐stability under OER conditions as 
highlighted by Pourbaix diagram analysis. BSCF is able to dynamically self‐reconstruct its surface, leading 
to formation of Co‐based oxy(hydroxide) layers while retaining its structural stability. Differently, PBCO 
demonstrates a high initial OER activity while it undergoes a degradation process considering its 
thermodynamic instability under OER conditions as anticipated by its Pourbaix diagram. Overall, this 
work demonstrates a synergetic approach of using both experimental and theoretical studies to understand 
the behavior of perovskite catalysts.


1 Introduction

Renewable energy sources show great potentials to alleviate the ongoing environmental 
threats from the non‐renewable energy sources. However, the implementation of renewable 
energy technologies is challenged by the intermittent production of electricity, which 
therefore requires an efficient energy storage system to mediate generation and consumption 
of energy. In this respect, the growing needs to store larger amounts of energy have recently 
angled the spotlight towards water electrolysis technologies.1 For an efficient water splitting 
process, an effective oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is required at the anode.2 In recent 
developments, members of the perovskite oxide family have been recognized as highly active 
electrocatalysts capable to facilitate an efficient water oxidation reaction relieving the need of 

rare and expensive precious metals.[2, 3] The perovskite oxide family has the general 
chemical formula –ABO3– composed of rare‐earth (e.g., Pr and La) or earth alkaline metal 
(e.g., Ba and Sr) in the A‐site and 3d transition metals in the B‐site (e.g., Co). Perovskite 
oxides offer a broad window of opportunities to explore different synergetic effects between 
various non‐precious metals in a crystalline structure owing to their capability to 
accommodate cation substitutions in both the A‐ and B‐sites with another cation element, 
resulting in (AxA′1‐x)(ByB′1‐y)O3 compositions.[3] Thus, one can benefit from substitutions that 
yield modified intrinsic properties, such as band structures and thus affecting electrical, 
optical, and magnetic properties, and ultimately tailoring the catalytic activity.4 This 

compositional modification of perovskites can take place in either an ordered or a random 
arrangement within a unit cell. To date, PrBaCo2O5+δ (PBCO)[3, 5] and 
Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O2+δ (BSCF)[2, 3, 5, 6] have been revealed as two of the most active 
perovskite catalysts for OER, each representing a different structure: a layered order (also 
known as double perovskite) and a random arrangement (single perovskite), respectively. In 
particular, these cobalt‐based perovskites have shown remarkable affinity towards oxygen 
evolution owing to the cobalt's unique ability to accommodate different oxidation states.7

The importance of fundamental understanding of reaction mechanisms cannot be stressed 
enough as it is the key for designing an optimal perovskite OER catalyst. In early works, 
Bockris proposed a variety of plausible OER mechanisms assuming that there is one rate 

determining step for each proposed mechanism based on experimentally determined Tafel 
slopes.8 In recent years, quantum‐mechanical computational methods, such as density‐
functional theory (DFT), have become a precious tool for thermochemical analyses to unravel 
catalytic mechanisms of oxygen evolution.[2, 9] This approach derives its accuracy by 
studying trends across different catalysts and on the discovery that kinetic barriers scale with 
thermodynamic barriers, which allows the understanding of kinetics from a thermodynamic 
basis.[2, 10] In this regards, detailed intermediates and transition states are still required in 
order to gain a precise understanding of catalyst's OER.[10]


As to acquire a deeper understanding of the complex mechanism behind OER of these active 

perovskite catalysts, operando X‐ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) offers an effective way 
to monitor changes in catalysts during operation.11 Our recent study takes advantage of this 
technique to investigate the local electronic and geometric structural changes of BSCF during 
OER.[3] In this study, the unique growth of a self‐assembled B‐site metal oxy(hydroxide) 
layer (i.e., Co/Fe–OOH) at the surface triggered by lattice oxygen evolution reaction (LOER) 
of the perovskite has been identified as the active species for OER on BSCF—a cubic 
perovskite.3, 12 Recent studies13 highlight the importance of the LOER process for an 
efficient oxygen evolution. Given the BSCF's unique structural flexibility, the dissolved 
cations during the LOER process are dynamically reconstructed as Co/Fe oxy(hydroxide) 
active layer from which oxygen is partially evolved; simultaneously oxygen is also evolved 

from the electrolyte.[3, 12] Alternatively, PBCO is structurally distinct from BSCF in its 
ordering of cations such that the lanthanide metal and the alkali‐earth metal planes are 
alternating while only Co is the only transition metal that occupies the B‐site. PBCO has been 
found to consist of a lower oxygen binding strength leading to a faster oxygen surface 
exchange rate and is able to accommodate swift ion migration.14 Given its difference in the 
ordering of cations than BSCF, PBCO may reveal a different mechanistic pathway during 
OER which is yet to be elucidated.

In the last decade, number of descriptors[3, 5, 13, 15] have been reported appraising the high 
OER activity of PBCO compared to other single perovskite catalysts. Particularly, PBCO's 

high activity towards OER was attributed to its O p‐band center being adequately close to the 
Fermi level, which would be able to activate the LOER leading to a different reaction 
pathway than the interaction between adsorbents at surface meatal sites.[3, 16] Also in these 
previous studies, PBCO has been considered to be a stable catalyst without cation dissolution 
and not undergoing amorphization during the oxygen evolution process in alkaline 
electrolyte, while there has been indications of oxygen participating from the oxide (i.e., 
LOER). However, the assessment of intrinsic properties of an electrocatalyst may not truly be 
revealed in a bulk scale considering that OER is an interfacial reaction that takes place at the 

surface of the catalyst material. Conventionally, sol–gel (SG) synthesis has been 
acknowledged as the state‐of‐the‐art method to prepare metal oxides with high phase purity. 

Nevertheless, the resulting particle size from this synthesis method generally scales from few 
to several micrometers after the subsequent thermal treatment and calcination. From a 
practical application standpoint, it is tremendously advantageous to have nano‐sized catalyst 
particles to yield high active surface area, for which the catalyst mass activity is maximized. 
Therefore, this work takes benefit of flame spray (FS) synthesis17 to produce nano‐sized 
catalysts with remarkably high surface areas yielding not only high OER mass activities but 
also enabling better extraction of catalytic properties during electrochemical reactions.


Overall, this study aims to provide a thermodynamic perspective in understanding the 

activities and functional stabilities of two among the most active perovskite catalysts for 
OER—PBCO and BSCF—combining with operando XAS to apprehend and compare their 
dynamic local electronic geometric structures under OER conditions. DFT computed 
Pourbaix diagrams are constructed to complement experimentally observed performances of 
the catalysts based on their thermodynamic nature. Furthermore, the selected perovskites are 
adopted in an operational alkaline exchange membrane water electrolyzer (AEMWE) cell as 
anode materials to exploit their practical performance in the technical application. Overall, 
we provide mechanistic overview behind the OER processes of BSCF and PBCO catalysts in 
alkaline environment. Moreover, we provide insights into employing BSCF and PBCO as the 
anode catalyst for a long‐term functionality.

2 Results and Discussion

Nanoparticulates of PBCO and BSCF are prepared via FS synthesis. Each of the constituent 
metal precursors are dissolved in a combustible solution and injected into the flame at a high 
temperature (possible up to ≈3000 °C) and the resulting precipitates are collected. The phases 
of FS synthesized perovskite oxides are identified using X‐ray diffraction (XRD), and 
compared to those of the same composition prepared via SG synthesis (Figure S1, Supporting 
Information). First referring to Figure S1a in the Supporting Information, BSCF produced 
from both synthesis methods reveal distinct peaks that are well indexed to those of the 

conventional BSCF [ICSD Collection Code: 162 269], yet the XRD peaks of BSCF prepared 
via FS synthesis (BSCF‐FS) reveal a broader width than those of BSCF prepared via SG 
method (BSCF‐SG). Note that some of the non‐indexed XRD peaks indicate minor quantities 
of secondary phases, mostly carbonate species (e.g., BaCO3). Also, these peaks of BSCF‐FS 
are revealed at a lower 2θ angle than those of BSCF‐SG. The earlier appearance of XRD 
peaks may be attributed to an increase in lattice parameter, which is typically ascribed to the 
presence of a reduced Co oxidation state in BSCF‐FS.[2] XRD patterns of PBCO prepared 
via FS and SG (Figure S1b, Supporting Information) shows similar qualitative difference as 
BSCF. Given that FS products display broader XRD peaks owing to smaller crystalline sizes, 
XRD peaks in PBCO‐FS displays convolution of some peaks located closely to another. 

Consistent with recent study,[3] and the FS synthesis method appears to promote 
accommodation of reduced Co (i.e., Co(II) rather than Co(III)) within the perovskite structure 
for a superior OER activity in alkaline electrolytes.

The physical traits of the perovskites prepared via FS and SG are compared using high‐
resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR‐TEM). Figure 1a,b displays HR‐TEM 
images of BSCF‐SG and PBCO‐SG, respectively. Although both perovskites prepared via SG 
method reveal pristine fringes ascribable to each of its specific crystalline structure, it is 


important to draw the attention to their large particle sizes (refer to insets of Figure 1a,b), 

with particle sizes that are in the average range of 3–5 µm. On the contrary, TEM images of 
BSCF‐FS and PBCO‐FS (Figure 1c,d, respectively) reveal nanosized particles (5–20 nm) as 
primary particulates retaining clear fringes (Figure 1c,d, insets). Consequently, these 
nanoscaled particles obtained from FS method exhibit significantly higher Brunauer–
Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas (refer to Table S1, Supporting Information), resulting in 
outstanding mass activities towards the OER. Figure 1e,f each compares OER activities in 
0.1 M KOH in Tafel plots for the catalysts prepared by the two synthesis methods. The FS 
synthesized BSCF and PBCO clearly reveal a remarkable increase in current densities at 
1.55 VRHE by factors of 57 and 10, respectively. Note, both perovskite oxides shows different 
Tafel slopes between SG and FS synthesis, which are related to their physico‐chemical 

differences of the catalysts produced by each method (refer to Figure S4, Supporting 
Information).[3] Also, notice that their improvements of OER activities are not proportional 
to their increases of surface areas. This suggests that the increase of surface area owing to 
having nanosized particles is not the only contribution to the enhanced mass activity. In this 
respect, previous studies[2, 5, 18] have shown a strong relationship between OER activity of 
cobalt‐based perovskites and their cobalt oxidation states; particularly, a higher OER activity 
was achieved by BSCF when its Co was in a more reduced oxidation state as an effect of 
carbon accompaniment. Also confirmed by our recent study,[3] BSCF with a reduced Co 
oxidation state accommodating a large number of oxygen vacancies without the aid of carbon 

also revealed a high‐mass activity compared to stoichiometric BSCF. Similarly, in the case of 
PBCO, the increase of the current density could be partially attributed to its increase of 
surface area and electronic structure. Yet, it is noteworthy that the increased activity of 
PBCO‐FS, in comparison to PBCO‐SG, does not surpass the relative increase of its BET 
surface area.


Figure 1
HRTEM images of a) BSCF‐SG, b) PBCO‐SG, c) BSCF‐FS, and d) PBCO‐FS. Each inset 
shows enlarged view of the respective catalysts. Tafel plots of e) BSCF‐SG and BSCF‐FS, 
and f) PBCO‐SG and PBCO‐FS in 0.1 M KOH

The direct comparison of OER activities of BSCF‐FS and PBCO‐FS in alkaline condition is 
shown in Figure 2a, which both perovskites show similar overpotentials at 10 A g−1 (1.55 and 
1.54 VRHE, respectively) and current densities at 1.55 VRHE of 13.8 and 10.5 A g−1, respectively, 
which overtake that of the precious metal catalyst (i.e., IrO2 1.59 VRHE at 10 A g−1 and current 
density of 2.8 A g−1 at 1.55 VRHE) (refer to Figure S7, Supporting Information). Nevertheless, it 
is interesting to note the difference in their Tafel slopes suggesting that each catalyst may 
take different mechanistic pathways during OER with different rate determining steps.19 All 


Tafel plots are determined from chronoamperometry measurements performed after the initial 

25 cycles of cyclic voltammetry (CV) in order to attain a steady‐state activity of a perovskite 
catalyst (see Figure S3, Supporting Information). Furthermore, the difference in their 
underlying electrocatalytic behavior is more evident from their contrasting trends during 500 
cycles of potential steps between 1.0 and 1.6 VRHE (Figure 2b). PBCO‐FS shows a decreasing 
trend losing about 74% of its initial current density, while BSCF‐FS reveals an increasing 
trend with a two‐fold increase in current density at the end of the 500 cycles. In detail, the 
initial current densities of BSCF‐FS and PBCO‐FS at 1.6 VRHE are 5.3 and 33.4 A g−1, 
respectively, which end up showing 18.8 and 8.9 A g−1 at the end of 500th cycle, respectively. 
These opposing trends between BSCF‐FS and PBCO‐FS shown during the course of cycles 
reflect upon their functional stabilities, which the increasing trend of current density for 

BSCF‐FS is appealing for practical applications.

Figure 2
Electrochemical study comparing a) Tafel plot of OER activities and b) mass normalized 
current densities at every 25 cycles over 500 cycles between 1.0 and 1.6 VRHE of BSCF‐FS and 
PBCO‐FS in 0.1 M KOH.

As discussed in our recent study,[3] the active Co/Fe‐oxy(hydroxide) species are dynamically 
constructed at the surface of BSCF‐FS as a result of LOER likely owing to its unique 
capability to accommodate a high oxygen vacancy. Nevertheless, the dissolution of the A‐site 
cations of BSCF‐FS was observed during OER due to their high solubility and LOER. 
Meanwhile, the current density of BSCF‐FS shows an increasing trend (see Figure 2b) 

indicating the self‐construction of the active Co/Fe‐O(OH) species. On the contrary, the 
observed loss of current density during the cycles for PBCO‐FS clearly suggests the loss of 
its active species. As a basis of elucidating these findings, it is essential that thermodynamics 
of the catalyst materials under study are well comprehended. As a resolution, Pourbaix 
diagrams are used as an aid to understand the thermodynamic natures of these catalyst 
materials in aqueous electrochemical environments. Pourbaix diagrams for BSCF and PBCO 
(Figure 3a,b, respectively) are constructed with DFT calculations using 2 × 2 × 2 cubic 
primitive cells, which the composition step of each of A and B cation site is in multiples of 


1/8 ( = 0.125, i.e., this constraint yields Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.75Fe0.25O3 rather than Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3). 

Particularly, thermodynamically stable phases under alkaline conditions (pH 13) within the 
working potential range that corresponds to 1.0–1.7 VRHE (0.23–0.93 VSHE) are to be 
highlighted to draw remarks on their respective functional stabilities. Referring to Figure 3a, 
BSCF under alkaline conditions above pH 12.6 is predicted to be meta‐stable with a stability 
threshold of 0.5 eV atom−1. Indeed, the A‐site cations would dissociate into their aqueous 
phases (i.e., Ba2+(aq) and Sr2+(aq) in region 11) while the overall BSCF perovskite structure is 
retained along with Fe in its individual oxide phase within the working potential region at pH 
13. Previous studies[3, 7, 20] have associated this A‐site cation dissolution to the OER 
activity; suggesting that an amorphous layer (i.e., self‐constructed metal oxy(hydroxide) 
layer) is created at its near‐surface (consequential to the A‐site cation leaching), which would 

increase the effective electrochemically active area and therefore render an enhanced activity. 
Likely, as mentioned above, this is also evident in the stability test during which BSCF‐FS 
reveals a significant increase of mass activity in the course of the potential cycle. 
Furthermore, the calculated Pourbaix diagram supports our previous findings of the enhanced 
performance of BSCF‐FS as OER catalyst based on its thermodynamic nature to retain its 
perovskite structure.[3]

Figure 3

DFT‐simulated Pourbaix diagrams of a) BSCF and b) PBCO. Blue bold line indicates the potential 
range in which chronoamperometry is carried out at pH 13.


Unlike in the case of BSCF‐FS, the Pourbaix diagram of PBCO anticipates the cation 

disintegration of its perovskite structure, where all of the constituent cations are dissolved out 
into their solvated phases. Consequently, this is clearly reflected during the stability test 
(Figure 2b) which PBCO‐FS reveals a considerable decrease in current density by 74% after 
cycling. Yet, a certain level of current density is still observed which may indicate that the 
cation dissolution is not an immediate process. A recent study21 elaborates that although the 
A‐site cations of PBCO—Pr and Ba—are leached out (like in the case of BSCF), PBCO tends 
to sustain its electrocatalytic properties longer. This was explained by relating to the defect 
chemistry of PBCO with the oxygen vacancy stoichiometry changing as Ba cations are 
leached out from the structure while Pr cations tend to remain at the near‐surface. In brief, the 
authors explain how this degradation mechanism would not influence its short‐term 

electrocatalytic properties. Nonetheless, the calculated Pourbaix diagram analysis suggests 
that PBCO would also experience B‐site dissolution (region 8 of Figure 3b). In fact, our 
extended stability test (Figure 2b) demonstrates that electrocatalytic properties of PBCO are 
not perpetual.21 Moreover, thermodynamic preference of cation dissolution of perovskite 
oxides during OER has been explained previously.12 Together with the Pourbaix diagram, it 
can be inferred that the process of reaching an end of service life of a perovskite oxide is a 
process that is principally induced from cation dissolution governed by thermodynamics.

Here, one has to recognize that the dissolution mechanisms during OER are also certainly 
kinetic processes which obviously cannot be deduced solely from Pourbaix diagrams since 

they only describe phases of catalysts under equilibrium conditions. In this essence, the 
electrocatalysts would undergo different mechanistic pathways during the OER process 
depending on the reaction kinetics, which can diverge from the observations drawn from 
Pourbaix diagrams. Therefore, operando XAS was employed in order to monitor electronic 
and structural changes associated to the perovskite catalyst during the OER process 
(Figure 4). Figure 4 shows comparisons between PBCO‐FS and BSCF‐FS in 
their operando XAS measurements. Figure 4a describes positive shifts for both BSCF‐FS and 
PBCO‐FS in their Co K‐edge energy levels from X‐ray absorption near edge spectra 

(XANES) during the operando flow cell measurement. Considering that Co species of BSCF‐
FS is in a lower oxidation state than those in PBCO‐FS (refer to Figure S5, Supporting 

Information), a greater extent of energy shift of the Co K‐edge is observed for BSCF‐FS 
(≈0.7 eV) than PBCO‐FS (≈0.3 eV). In our previous study,[3] the extent of Co K‐edge energy 
level shift is shown to be associated with the development of the OER active Co/Fe‐
oxy(hydroxide) layer, which is in a higher Co oxidation state than those inherent in the 
perovskite oxide structure. This is also evident in Figure 4b as BSCF‐FS shows a rapid shift 
of Co K‐edge energy when polarized into the oxygen evolution regime (above 1.4 VRHE). In 
the case of PBCO‐FS, referring to Figure 4b, the Co K‐edge energy shift is revealed to be 
consistently increasing even at potentials below the oxygen evolution regime, which is 


indicative of oxidation of Co species based on the anticipated dissolution described by its 

Pourbaix diagram (Figure 3b, region 8). In relevance to the stability test (Figure 2b), this 
complies with the observed decreasing trend of activity upon potential cycling, which can be 
attributed to the cation disintegration from the perovskite structure of PBCO. In summary, the 
DFT calculated Pourbaix diagram anticipates meta‐stability of BSCF, which then would 
enable BSCF to retain its perovskite structure providing substrate surface for the self‐
construction of active oxy(hydroxide) layer and LOER. In contrast, the increase of Co 
oxidation state in PBCO at potentials below the onset of OER suggests chemical dissolution 
of its cations regardless to the event of LOER as governed by thermodynamics.

Figure 4

Operando XAS study results of PBCO‐FS and BSCF‐FS; a) comparison of XANES of Co K‐edge at 1.2 
and 1.54 VRHE, b) edge shift measured with respect to the edge position at 1.2 VRHE at each potential 
during operando flow cell test, and c) comparison of FT‐FT‐EXAFS spectra at 1.2 and 1.54 VRHE.


Figure 4c shows the comparison of Fourier‐transformed (FT) k3‐weighted Co K‐edge 

extended X‐ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra of PBCO‐FS and BSCF‐FS. The 
EXAFS spectra of BSCF‐FS spectra reveals changes of peaks associated with Co–O and Co–
Co coordination shells each located at radial distances of ≈ 1.9 and ≈2.6–3.0 Å, respectively. 
First, the amplitude of the Co–O peak is increased indicating that the absorbing atom is 
bounded by more oxygen atoms at that radial distance. This is further supported by the 
observed positive shift in the Co K‐edge from its operando XANES (Figure 4b). Meanwhile, 
the second peak associated with the Co–Co coordination of BSCF‐FS undergoes significant 
changes during the anodic polarization. At 1.54 VRHE, the Co–Co peak clearly shows two 
peaks at slightly different radial distances of which the earlier peak (≈2.8 Å) has evolved to 
become more distinct. Initially at 1.2 VRHE, the observed FT‐EXAFS spectrum of BSCF‐FS 

reveals mainly a single peak for its Co–Co coordination shell at ≈3.0 Å, which is reduced in 
its amplitude as the applied potential is increased into the oxygen evolution regime. This 
single Co–Co peak is attributed to edge‐shared polyhedron which is from having a highly 
oxygen deficient perovskite oxide.22 The earlier Co–Co peak at ≈2.8 Å becomes apparent as 
polarization continues which is ascribable to Co–Co coordination shell of Co/Fe–
O(OH).23 This is known to be the key feature behind its high OER activity.[3, 24] As the 
Co/Fe‐oxy(hydroxide) is in a higher oxidation state (≈3) than that of the Co species of BSCF‐
FS perovskite structure (≈2.2), the increase of the Co oxidation state manifested by the shift 
of its Co K‐edge in XANES (Figure 4b) describes the construction of the active 

oxy(hydroxide) layers.

Regarding the operando FT‐EXAFS of PBCO‐FS, however, the cation dissolution is not 
evidently highlighted when comparing the spectra observed at the initial and the final 
potentials of the anodic polarization as they do not show significant changes (see Figure 4c). 
These insignificant changes can be elucidated by referring back to its Pourbaix diagram. 
Based on the region 8 of Figure 3b, it is anticipated that Ba and Pr of the perovskite structure 
would be dissolved into their respective aqueous phases (i.e., Ba++(aq) and Pr(OH)2+(aq), 
respectively), while Co would be oxidized to CoO(OH)−(aq).21 Unfortunately, CoO(OH)−(aq), 

the oxidized product of Co from the perovskite structure, exhibits a similar Co–Co radial 
distance as that of edge‐sharing Co octahedron within perovskite structure itself, which are 

generally induced by a high oxygen deficiency within the perovskite oxide. By the structural 
analysis obtained by XRD and neutron diffraction on BSCF and PBCO samples (Table S2, 
Supporting Information) the Co–Co distances of the edge‐shared polyhedron are estimated to 
be 2.793 and 2.741 Å for BSCF‐FS and PBCO‐FS, respectively. Notice that the Co–Co 
distances of edge‐sharing polyhedron of PBCO‐FS is shorter than that of BSCF by ≈0.05 Å. 
Coincidentally, the estimated Co–Co distance of edge‐sharing polyhedron of PBCO are close 
to that of CoO(OH) (≈2.5‐2.7 Å).23 Therefore, the peak of the Co–Co coordination shell in 
FT‐EXAFS of PBCO‐FS could be attributed both to Co–Co edge‐shared polyhedron 


scattering and to Co–Co scattering from Co–O(OH) species (see Figure S6, Supporting 

Information). Consequently, only limited information can be extracted from its FT‐EXAFS 
spectrum regarding the construction of the active CoO(OH) and/or the dissolution of Co from 
the perovskite. Based on this, even though the dissolution of PBCO is eventuated, it can only 
be speculated that the dissolution is not an immediate process owing to the hindrance of Co 
cation dissolution of PBCO during OER/LOER by the Pr hydroxyl phase formed at the 
surface as suggested in Bick et al.21 Furthermore, in the case of BSCF, Fe‐doped Co–O(OH) 
is formed owing to the Fe content in its perovskite structure, while only CoO(OH) can be 
possibly formed at the surface of PBCO. It is prevalent that Fe conveys beneficial effects to 
the Co‐based catalyst with respect to their OER activity.[24, 25] Therefore, the enhanced 
OER activity of BSCF would attribute to the presence of Fe with Co, while in the case of 

PBCO, in the absence of Fe, would continue in its degradation process as a less active 
oxy(hydroxide) layer is formed.

Additional to the fundamental understanding of thermodynamics and the operando changes 
of the catalyst during the OER process, the practical performances of BSCF‐FS and PBCO‐
FS are corroborated by adopting these perovskites as anodic electrode materials in a full 
AEMWE. Figure 5 shows AEMWE performances for membrane electrode assemblies 
(MEAs) having BSCF‐FS, PBCO‐FS, and commercial IrO2 as anodic electrode under actual 
operating conditions. Figure 5a,b presents polarization curves and voltage versus time 
behaviors at steady‐state current of 500 mA cm−2, respectively. Conforming to the trend 

observed in the rotating disk electrode (RDE) study, both perovskites revealed higher 
activities than commercial IrO2, among which the cell with BSCF‐FS‐based MEA 
demonstrates the highest activity (Figure 5a). It is noteworthy that the performance of BSCF‐
FS in AEMWE improves over time when the galvanodynamic test is repeated (refer to Figure 
S8, Supporting Information). Additionally, Figure 5b shows that the cell with BSCF‐FS 
based MEA demonstrates the lowest and the most stable cell voltage over time at the steady‐
state current of 500 mA cm−2. On the other hand, although the cell with PBCO‐FS‐based 
MEA shows a similar activity as the commercial IrO2 in the galvanodynmaic test (Figure 5a), 

a higher cell voltage was required than the cell with BSCF‐FS‐based MEA for the steady‐
state current of 500 mA cm−2.


Figure 5

Performance comparison of BSCF‐FS, PBCO‐FS, and IrO2 anode OER catalyst in a technical AEMWE. a) 
Polarization curves and b) voltage versus time at steady‐state current density of 500 mA 
cm−2 obtained for MEAs having BSCF‐FS, PBCO‐FS, and IrO2 as anodic electrode.

3 Conclusion

In this work, we assess the state‐of‐the‐art perovskite catalysts—PBCO and BSCF—from a 
thermodynamic perspective that evaluates their OER performances for AEMWE. In this 
context, we first report remarkably enhanced OER performances of PBCO‐FS and BSCF‐FS 

in alkaline electrolyte, which attribute to their uniformly distributed nanoparticles and a
capability to facilitate changes in their Co oxidation states imposed by the FS synthesis 
method. Although similar current densities were attained for both perovskite catalysts (13 and 

11 A g−1 for PBCO‐FS and BSCF‐FS, respectively), their current density show diverging 
trends during the stability test, with BSCF‐FS showing an exceptional long‐term 
performance.

In order to elucidate the observed stabilities and activities of PBCO and BSCF, DFT‐
calculated Pourbaix diagrams are constructed. First, the Pourbaix diagram describes that the 
BSCF perovskite structure is thermodynamically meta‐stable in alkaline electrolyte above pH 

12.6 within the OER potential range; its A‐site cations (Ba and Sr) are partially dissolved 
while the initial perovskite structure is retained. On this basis, the high‐mass activity of 
BSCF‐FS in the alkaline electrolyte, therefore, can be thermodynamically rationalized. This 
explanation is consistently valid for the previously reported behavior of BSCF.[3] In the case 
of PBCO, a decreasing trend of current density was observed which confirmed its 
thermodynamic instability as anticipated by the Pourbaix diagram.


From the above findings, important remarks are drawn relating thermodynamically stable 

phases of perovskite catalysts to their respective functional stability. First, the loss of initial 
activity during the stability test corresponds to the loss of perovskite structure as a result of 
A‐ and B‐site cation dissolutions. Exceptionally, BSCF is considered to be meta‐stable while 
allowing its perovskite structure to serve as the substrate for the active oxy(hydroxide) to 
self‐construct. This has been corroboratively confirmed by the results gathered 
from operando XAS study, which the comparison of FT‐EXAFS spectra revealed evident 
growth of the peak associated with the active CoO(OH) species. This is further supported by 
the increase of oxidation state recorded from reading the energy shift of Co K‐edge during 
operando study.

On the other hand, in the case of PBCO‐FS, the overlapping of Co–Co radial distance 
between those of CoO(OH) species and edge‐sharing Co polyhedron veils the reading of 
geometric structural changes of the perovskite catalyst. However, an increase of the Co 
oxidation state of PBCO‐FS was manifested below the oxygen evolution potential regime, 
suggesting the occurrence of chemical dissolution processes. Overall, insights into the 
dissolution mechanism of PBCO‐FS is vital in order to completely understand its functional 
stability and activity towards OER as these processes are intertwined.

Even though the cation dissolution is driven by thermodynamic forces, one should keep in 
mind that the dissolution is not an immediate process but occurs at a kinetically controlled 

rate. Therefore, kinetic parameters need to be clearly identified in order to come to a full 
understanding of OER activity of a perovskite oxide catalyst. Overall, the thermodynamically 
stable phases illustrated by a Pourbaix diagram show the most stable phase that a perovskite 
would transform into, but does not describe the transformation pathway. It is along this 
pathway that the OER activity of a perovskite catalyst is transpired, from which the 
understanding of its electrocatalytic behavior should hence be referred.

Based on the knowledge obtained from this investigation, the degradation mechanism of 

perovskite oxides is the key to fully understand its functional stability during the 
electrochemical reactions, which then can be also related to its activity. The presented 

approach of unraveling the relationships between functional stability, structure, and activity 
of perovskite oxides during OER will pave the way for optimizing an active perovskite 
catalyst for technical applications.


4 Experimental Section

Material Syntheses: For the preparation of the PBCO precursor solution, stoichiometric 
amounts of praseodymium oxide (Pr6O11, 99.9%, Auer Remy) were dissolved in water and 5 
vol.% nitric acid (70%, Alfa Aesar) at 80 °C, before mixing with stoichiometric amounts of 
barium carbonate (≥99.0%, Sigma–Aldrich) and cobalt nitrate hexahydrate (99.9%, Auer 
Remy), acetic acid (≥99.0%, Fluka) in 25 vol.%, and N,N‐Dimethylformamide (≥99.8%, 
Roth) in 45 vol.%. The total metal concentration in solution was fixed to 0.1 M.

The BSCF precursor solution was prepared by dissolving stoichiometric amounts of barium 
carbonate (≥99.0%, Sigma–Aldrich), strontium nitrate (≥98%, Sigma–Aldrich), cobalt nitrate 

hexahydrate (99.9%, Auer Remy), and iron nitrate non‐ahydrate (≥98%, Sigma–Aldrich) in a 
solution of de‐ionized water (DIW) and acetic acid (≥99.0%, Fluka) 25 vol. %. The total 
metal concentration in solution was fixed to 0.2 M.

For all the syntheses, the flow rate of dispersing oxygen was fixed at 35 mL min−1, while the 
flow rates of the combustion gases were fixed at 17 and 13 mL min−1 for the mixture of 
oxygen and acetylene.

Material Characterizations: Phase characterization of prepared materials was performed 
using powder XRD (Bruker D8 system in Bragg–Brentano geometry, Cu K‐α radiation (λ = 

0.15418 nm)). Specific surface area was calculated by BET analysis of 
N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms (AUROSORB‐1, Quantachrome). TEM and energy 
dispersive X‐ray spectroscopy (TECNAI F30 operated at 300 kV) were used to study the 
surface morphology and composition of the prepared materials.

Electrochemical Characterization: The electrochemical activities of the prepared catalysts 
were evaluated in a standard three‐electrode electrochemical cell using the thin‐film RDE 
methodology. The setup for OER and CV consists of a potentiostat (Biologic VMP‐300) and 
a rotation speed controlled motor (Pine Instrument Co., AFMSRCE). All the electrochemical 
measurements were performed at the standard room temperature using a reversible hydrogen 
electrode (RHE) as the reference electrode in 0.1 M KOH. A piece of gold mesh was used as 

the counter electrode separated via a salt bridge. A homemade Teflon cell was used to contain 
the electrolyte with the working electrode immersed under potential control. A porous thin 
film electrode was prepared by drop‐casting a catalyst ink on a polished glassy carbon 
electrode (5 mm OD/0.196 cm2).26 The catalyst ink was prepared from a catalyst suspension 
made from sonicating (Bandelin, RM 16 UH, 300 Weff, 40 kHz) 10 mg of catalyst in a 
solution mixture of 4 mL isopropyl alcohol and 1 mL of Milli‐Q water (ELGA, PURELAB 
Chorus), and 20 µL of Nafion (Sigma–Aldrich, 5 wt. %). The same method of preparation of 
the working electrode was used for all the samples. The 0.1 M KOH electrolyte was prepared 


by dissolving KOH pellets (Sigma–Aldrich, 99.99%) in Milli‐Q water. Initially, 25 reverse 

potentiostatic sweeps of CV were performed in synthetic air‐saturated electrolyte from 1.0 to 
1.7 VRHE at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Subsequently, chronoamperometric measurements were 
carried out holding each potential step for 30 s to obtain steady‐state currents in the potential 
range from 1.2 to 1.7 VRHE while rotating the working electrode at 900 rpm. Tafel plots were 
constructed from the resulting polarization curves for all materials under study for an 
effective comparison of OER activities. The potential stability of catalyst materials was 
conducted using the same setup; alternating electrode potential between 1.0 and 1.6 VRHE for 
500 times holding for 10 s each to reach steady state at each potential. Five cycles of CV and 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were carried out after every 100 cycles. All 
measured currents were normalized by the mass of catalyst loading, and potentials were 

corrected for the ohmic drop obtained from EIS.

Alkaline Exchange Membrane Water Electrolyzer Test: For the MEA, each anodic catalyst 
(BSCF‐FS, PBCO‐FS, and commercial IrO2) and cathode catalyst (Pt) were prepared by 
mixing the catalyst with water, isopropanol, and ionomer into an ink.27 The ink also 
consisted of a non‐functional binder in addition to the ionomer supplied by Tokuyama. The 
ink was made in several stages, with stirring in between each stage. The catalyst ink mixture 
was then sprayed onto the gas diffusion layer (GDL, Tokuyama) substrate using an airbrush 
to form gas diffusion electrodes (GDE). GDE's generally contained total catalyst loading of 3 
mg cm−2, and GDE composition was measured by mass change of the GDL. The cathode 

GDL's were carbon paper, while the anode GDL's were made from a titanium porous 
transport layer, which titanium oxide was purchased from Umicore AG & Co KG. 
Electrolysis testing was conducted using a modified 25 cm2 Fuel Cell Technologies cell, 
where the graphite flow field on the oxygen evolution side was replaced with a stainless steel 
parallel channel flow field for stability at high electrolysis potentials. The cell was assembled 
by placing the appropriate GDE on each side of the anion exchange membrane (Tokuyama 
A201). The MEA was assembled using Tefzel gaskets and by applying 4.52 Nm torque to the 
bolts. GDE's and membrane were exchanged in 0.5 M sodium hydroxide solution for 1 h prior 

to testing. The cell was supplied either with DIW on the anode side of the cell only. The 
cathode side was not pressurized and no sweep gas was used. The temperature was 

maintained at 50 °C during operation. After the cell reached the operating temperature, 
galvanodynamic test was carried out to obtain a polarization curve, and then a galvanostatic 
test was carried out at 500 mA cm−2 to assess initial stability.

Operando Flow Cell Test: For XAS measurements, catalyst powders were dispersed in a 
mixture of isopropanol and Milli‐Q water in the equal ratio sonicated for 30 min, and spray 
coated on Kapton film. XAS spectra at the Co and Fe K‐edge were recorded at the SuperXAS 
beamline of the Swiss Light Source (PSI, Villigen, Switzerland). The incident photon beam 


provided by a 2.9 T superbend magnet source was collimated by a Si‐coated mirror at 2.85 

mRad (which also served to reject higher harmonics) and subsequently monochromatized by 
an Si (111) channel‐cut monochromator. Rh‐coated toroidal mirror at 2.5 mRad to focus the 
X‐ray beam to a spot size of Ø 1 mm on the sample position. The SuperXAS 
beamline28 allowed for the rapid collection of 120 spectra during a measurement time of 60 s 
(QEXAFS mode), which were then averaged. The spectra of samples were collected in 
transmission mode using N2 filled ionization chambers, where a Co foil between the second 
and third ionization chambers served to calibrate and align all spectra. EXAFS spectra were 
analyzed using the Demeter software package,29 which included background subtraction, 
energy calibration (based on the simultaneously measured Co or Fe reference foil), and edge 
step normalization. The resulting spectra were converted to the photoelectron 

wavevector k (in units Å−1) by assigning the photoelectron energy origin, E0, corresponding 
to k = 0, to the first inflection point. The resulting χ(k) functions were weighted with k3 to 
compensate for the dampening of the EXAFS amplitude with increasing k. These χ(k) 
functions were FT over 3–12 Å−1.

The electrode materials were spray coated at the center of a Kapton film. Black Pearls (Cabot 
Corp.) were used as the counter electrode material. A silver chloride electrode (Ag+/AgCl) 
(Hugo Sachs Elektronik) was used as the reference electrode. During electrochemical testing, 
the electrolyte was drawn into the cell and collected in a syringe at the flow rate of 0.1 mL 
min−1. The chronoamperometry measurement was carried out holding for 2 min at each 

increasing potential step from 1.2 to 1.54 VRHE, and again during the reverse sequence back to 
1.2 VRHE. At each potential step, transmission XAS spectra at Co K‐edge were collected 
simultaneously for 1 min. The position of the Co K‐edge is determined at the half edge‐step 
intensity. The operando XAS flow cell was described in detail in our previous study.[11]

Density Functional Theory—Pourbaix Diagrams: The phase stability and stability in aqueous 
system of each perovskite was investigated using quantum mechanical simulations in the 
framework of DFT. All the structures considered have been fully relaxed using the Quantum 

ESPRESSO package,30 choosing PBEsol as the exchange‐correlation functional31 and 
pseudopotentials from the Standard Solid State Pseudopotential library (SSSP 

accuracy).32 Hubbard U+ correction of 4 eV is used and applied to Co, Fe, and Pr elements. 
The energies obtained from DFT have then been used to draw the Pourbaix diagrams by 
means of the phase diagram module implemented in the Atomic Simulation Environment.33

With these DFT Pourbaix diagrams we investigated the stability in water as a function of pH 
and electrochemical potential. We compare calculated DFT energies of all the possible solid 
phases in which the perovskites can separate (as enumerated in the Materials Project 


database34) with experimentally measured dissolution energies for the dissolved 

phases.35 Details of this method are available elsewhere in the literatures.36

Acknowledgements

The authors gratefully acknowledge the Swiss National Science Foundation through its 
Ambizione Program and the NCCR Marvel, CCEM through the project RENERG2, the 
Swiss Competence Center for Energy Research (SCCER) Heat & Electricity Storage through 
Innosuisse, Switzerland, and Paul Scherrer Institute for financial contributions to this work, 
respectively.

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES

1U. Babic, M. Suermann, F. N. Buehi, L. Gubler, T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164, F387.

2a) I. C. Man, H. Y. Su, F. Calle‐Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martinez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. 
Jaramillo, J. K. Norskov, J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem 2011, 3, 1159; b) X. Cheng, E. Fabbri, M. 
Nachtegaal, I. E. Castelli, M. El Kazzi, R. Haumont, N. Marzari, T. J. Schmidt, Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 7662;  
c) E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, X. Cheng, T. J. Schmidt, Adv. Energy Mater. 2015, 5, 1402033.

3a) A. Grimaud, K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, Y. L. Lee, M. Risch, W. T. Hong, J. G. Zhou, Y. Shao‐Horn, Nat. 
Commun. 2013, 4, 2439; b) M. H. Seo, H. W. Park, D. U. Lee, M. G. Park, Z. W. Chen, ACS 
Catal. 2015, 5, 4337; c) G. W. Simmons, A. Vertes, M. L. Varsanyi, H. Leidheiser, J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 1979, 126, 187; d) B. H. Han, M. Risch, Y. L. Lee, C. Ling, H. F. Jia, Y. Shao‐Horn, Phys. Chem. Chem. 
Phys. 2015, 17, 22576; e) E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kotz, T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. 
Technol. 2014, 4, 3800; f) E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, T. Binninger, X. Cheng, B. J. Kim, J. Durst, F. Bozza, T. 
Graule, R. Schaublin, L. Wiles, M. Pertoso, N. Danilovic, K. E. Ayers, T. J. Schmidt, Nat. 
Mater. 2017, 16, 925; g) D. X. Zhen, B. T. Zhao, H. C. Shin, Y. F. Bu, Y. Ding, G. H. He, M. L. Liu, Adv. 
Mater. Interfaces 2017, 4, 1700146.

4G. King, P. M. Woodward, J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20, 5785.

5a) R. Mohamed, X. Cheng, E. Fabbri, P. Levecque, R. Kotz, O. Conrad, T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 2015, 162, F579; b) J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough, Y. Shao‐
Horn, Science 2011, 334, 1383; c) B. T. Zhao, L. Zhang, D. X. Zhen, S. Yoo, Y. Ding, D. C. Chen, Y. 
Chen, Q. B. Zhang, B. Doyle, X. H. Xiong, M. L. Liu, Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 14586.

6a) Z. P. Shao, S. M. Haile, Nature 2004, 431, 170; b) J. I. Jung, M. Risch, S. Park, M. G. Kim, G. Nam, H. Y. 
Jeong, Y. Shao‐Horn, J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci. 2016, 9, 176; c) A. Tarancon, M. Burriel, J. Santiso, S. J. 
Skinner, J. A. Kilner, J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20, 3799; d) M. M. Kuklja, Y. A. Mastrikov, B. Jansang, E. A. 
Kotomin, J. Phys. Chem. C 2012, 116, 18605.


7a) M. Risch, A. Grimaud, K. J. May, K. A. Stoerzinger, T. J. Chen, A. N. Mansour, Y. Shao‐Horn, J. Phys. 
Chem. C 2013, 117, 8628; b) G. Kim, S. Wang, A. J. Jacobson, L. Reimus, P. Brodersen, C. A. Mims, J. 
Mater. Chem. 2007, 17, 2500.

8 J. O. Bockris, J. Chem. Phys. 1956, 24, 817.

9a) J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, J. K. Norskov, Chem. Phys. 2005, 319, 178; b) J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. 
Zhu, G. J. Kroes, J. K. Norskov, J. Electroanal. Chem. 2007, 607, 83.

10 a) T. Reier, H. N. Nong, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl, P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 7, 1601275; b) M. 
G. Mavros, T. Tsuchimochi, T. Kowalczyk, A. McIsaac, L. P. Wang, T. Van Voorhis, Inorg. 
Chem. 2014, 53, 6386.

11 a) T. Binninger, E. Fabbri, A. Patru, M. Garganourakis, J. Han, D. F. Abbott, O. Sereda, R. Kotz, A. 
Menzel, M. Nachtegaal, T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2016, 163, H906; b) E. Fabbri, D. F. Abbott, M. 
Nachtegaal, T. J. Schmidt, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 2017, 5, 20.

12 T. Binninger, R. Mohamed, K. Waltar, E. Fabbri, P. Levecque, R. Kotz, T. J. Schmidt, Sci. 
Rep. 2015, 5, 12167.

13 a) J. S. Yoo, X. Rong, Y. Liu, A. M. Kolpak, ACS Catal. 2018, 8, 4628; b) B. Han, Y. Shao‐Horn, Meeting 
Abstr. 2018, MA2018‐01, 1935.

14 a) R. A. Cox‐Galhotra, A. Huq, J. P. Hodges, C. F. Yu, X. Q. Wang, W. Q. Gong, A. J. Jacobson, S. 
McIntosh, Solid State Ionics 2013, 249–250, 34; b) A. A. Taskin, A. N. Lavrov, Y. Ando, Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 2005, 86, 091910.

15 W. T. Hong, K. A. Stoerzinger, Y. L. Lee, L. Giordano, A. Grimaud, A. M. Johnson, J. Hwang, E. J. 
Crumlin, W. L. Yang, Y. Shao‐Horn, Energy Environ. Sci. 2017, 10, 2190.

16 A. Grimaud, O. Diaz‐Morales, B. H. Han, W. T. Hong, Y. L. Lee, L. Giordano, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. T. M. 
Koper, Y. Shao‐Horn, Nat. Chem. 2017, 9, 457.

17 A. Heel, A. Vital, P. Holtappels, T. Graule, J. Electroceram. 2009, 22, 40.

18 R. Mohamed, E. Fabbri, P. Levecque, R. Kotz, T. J. Schmidt, O. Conrad, ECS Trans.. 2014, 58, 9.

19 T. Shinagawa, A. T. Garcia‐Esparza, K. Takanabe, Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 13801.

20 K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. Risch, J. Suntivich, Y. L. Lee, A. Grimaud, Y. Shao‐
Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2012, 3, 3264.

21 D. S. Bick, A. Kindsmuller, G. Staikov, F. Gunkel, D. Muller, T. Schneller, R. Waser, I. 
Valov, Electrochim. Acta 2016, 218, 156.

22a) P. D. Battle, T. C. Gibb, R. Strange, J. Solid State Chem. 1989, 81, 217; b) T. C. Gibb, J. Mater. 
Chem. 1992, 2, 387.

23a) J. H. Huang, Q. H. Liu, T. Yao, Z. Y. Pan, S. Q. Wei, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 2016, 712, 012128; b) J. H. 
Huang, Q. C. Shang, Y. Y. Huang, F. M. Tang, Q. Zhang, Q. H. Liu, S. Jiang, F. C. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Luo, T. 
Yao, Y. Jiang, Z. Y. Pan, Z. H. Sun, S. Q. Wei, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 2137; c) D. Totir, Y. B. 
Mo, S. Kim, M. R. Antonio, D. A. Scherson, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2000, 147, 4594. 24a) M. S. Burke, M. G. 
Kast, L. Trotochaud, A. M. Smith, S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 3638; b) M. S. Burke, L. J. 
Enman, A. S. Batchellor, S. H. Zou, S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 7549. 25a) T. Kishi, S. 


Takahashi, T. Nagai, Surf. Coat. Technol. 1986, 27, 351; b) R. D. L. Smith, M. S. Prevot, R. D. Fagan, Z. P. 
Zhang, P. A. Sedach, M. K. J. Siu, S. Trudel, C. P. Berlinguette, Science 2013, 340, 60.

26T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger, G. D. Stab, P. M. Urban, D. M. Kolb, R. J. Behm, J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 1998, 145, 2354.

27a) K. E. Ayers, J. N. Renner, N. Danilovic, J. X. Wang, Y. Zhang, R. Maric, H. R. Yu, Catal. 
Today 2016, 262, 121; b) S. Zhao, H. R. Yu, R. Maric, N. Danilovic, C. B. Capuano, K. E. Ayers, W. E. 
Mustain, J. Electrochem. Soc. 2015, 162, F1292.

28 O. Muller, M. Nachtegaal, J. Just, D. Lutzenkirchen‐Hecht, R. Frahm, J. Synchrotron Radiat. 2016, 23, 260.

29 B. Ravel, M. Newville, J. Synchrotron Radiat. 2005, 12, 537.

30 P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. 
Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. 
Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin‐Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. 
Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, R. 
M. Wentzcovitch, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2009, 21, 395502.

31 J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. L. Zhou, K. 
Burke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 136406.

32a) Standard Solid State Pseudopotential Library, http://materialscloud.org/sssp (accessed: November 2017); 
b) Precision and Efficiency in Solid‐State Pseudopotential 
Calculations, https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05609 (accessed: July 2018).

33a) Phase Diagrams and Pourbaix 
Diagrams, https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/ase/ase/phasediagram/phasediagram.html (accessed: November 2015); 
b) A. H. Larsen, J. J. Mortensen, J. Blomqvist, I. E. Castelli, R. Christensen, M. Dulak, J. Friis, M. N. 
Groves, B. Hammer, C. Hargus, E. D. Hermes, P. C. Jennings, P. B. Jensen, J. Kermode, J. R. Kitchin, E. L. 
Kolsbjerg, J. Kubal, K. Kaasbjerg, S. Lysgaard, J. B. Maronsson, T. Maxson, T. Olsen, L. Pastewka, A. 
Peterson, C. Rostgaard, J. Schiotz, O. Schutt, M. Strange, K. S. Thygesen, T. Vegge, L. Vilhelmsen, M. 
Walter, Z. H. Zeng, K. W. Jacobsen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2017, 29, 273002.

34a) J. W. Johnson, E. H. Oelkers, H. C. Helgeson, Comput. Geosci. 1992, 18, 899; b) M. Pourbaix, Atlas of 
Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, Pergamon Press, Oxford, New York 1966; c) The Materials 
Project, https://materialsproject.org/ (accessed: November 2017).

35a) K. A. Persson, B. Waldwick, P. Lazic, G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B 2012, 85, 235438; b) I. E. Castelli, K. S. 
Thygesen, K. W. Jacobsen, Top. Catal. 2014, 57, 265. 

36a) I. E. Castelli, F. Huser, M. Pandey, H. Li, K. S. Thygesen, B. Seger, A. Jain, K. A. Persson, G. Ceder, K. 
W. Jacobsen, Adv. Energy Mater. 2015, 5, 1400915; b) B. J. Kim, D. F. Abbott, X. Cheng, E. Fabbri, M. 
Nachtegaal, F. Bozza, I. E. Castelli, D. Lebedev, R. Schaeublin, C. Copéret, T. Graule, N. Marzari, T. J. 
Schmidt, ACS Catal.. 2017, 7, 3245.


Supporting Information for Adv. Funct. Mater., DOI: 

10.1002/adfm.201804355

Highly Active Nanoperovskite Catalysts for Oxygen Evolution Reaction: Insights into Activity and 

Stability of Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O2+δ and PrBaCo2O5+δ 

Bae-Jung Kim,* Xi Cheng, Daniel F. Abbott, Emiliana Fabbri,* Francesco Bozza, Thomas Graule, Ivano 

E. Castelli, Luke Wiles, Nemanja Danilovic, Katherine E. Ayers, Nicola Marzari, and Thomas J. Schmid
















