Substrate-free THz focal plane metamaterial 
array with high absorption ratio 

ZHIGANG LI,1,2 YI OU2, XUBIAO PENG1,4, JIANYU FU2, WEN OU2, WENJING 
JIANG AND QING ZHAO1,3,5 

1Center for Quantum Technology Research, School of Physics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 
100081, China 
2Institute of Microelectronics of The Chines Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100029, China 
3Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China 
4xubiaopeng@bit.edu.cn 
5qzhaoyuping@bit.edu.cn 
 

Abstract: Microelectromechanical system (MEMS) focal plane array (FPA) with optical 
readout offers exciting opportunities for real-time terahertz (THz) imaging. However, 
conventional FPA suffers from a low THz absorption ratio, which further decreases the 
performance of THz imaging. Here, we present a simple and scalable approach for the 
realization of THz focal plane metamaterial array with a relatively high absorption ratio. The 
key idea is to combine the advantages of substrate-free structures with metamaterial. A 100 × 
100 THz FPA with a 150 × 150 μm pixel is designed, fabricated, and characterized. The 
dependence of the THz absorption ratio on the thickness of SiNx dielectric substrate film is 
investigated. The fabricated FPA exhibits a 90.6% resonant absorption at 1.36 THz, agreeing 
considerably with the theoretical simulation results. Our results imply that such a substrate-
free THz focal plane metamaterial array enables the realization of THz imaging. 

© 2020 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement 

1. Introduction 

Technology development of components and instrumentation for the largely unexplored 
terahertz (THz) spectral region (1011–1013 Hz) has proceeded rapidly in the last fifteen years 
[1–3]. It has attracted considerable attention because of its unique advantages, such as the 
strong ability of THz waves to penetrate nonpolarized objects and the fact that this region of 
the spectrum contains characteristic absorption bands of many materials and molecules. The 
THz poses less harmful effects on the probed persons or objects except the associated heating 
effects [4]. This feature gives THz a significant advantage over the traditional probing 
method, such as using x-rays. In addition, the THz detectors are widely applied in the 
detection of concealed objects as well as in non-invasive medical imaging techniques [5,6].  

Metamaterial (MM) electromagnetic wave absorbers have shown great applications across 
numerous electromagnetic spectra and exhibit the ability to tailor the frequency-dependent 
emissivity and absorptivity [7,8]. Bi-material based substrate-free THz focal plane array 
(FPA) uses the MM absorbers for THz energy accumulation, and then transfer the absorbed 
energy into the small deformation of bi-material cantilevers [9,10]. 

The Bi-material based THz FPA can be used in THz imaging systems [11] when 
incorporated with an optical readout system, where the serpentine bi-material cantilevers are 
used as sensitive components. Fabio Alves et al. focused on the sensitive system of SiO2/Al 
bimaterial cantilever. Their metamaterial structure is also based on the SiO2/Al material 
system. At present, the absorption center frequency of SiO2/Al metamaterials is generally 
higher than 3 THz. Similar studies with central absorption frequency below 3 THz have not 
been reported. For the super absorption frequency below 3 THz, we use the sensing system of 


SiNx/Au bimaterial cantilever and its metamaterial absorption structure. In this study, we have 
designed and developed a substrate-free THz focal plane metamaterial array with SiNx/Au 
based bi-material cantilevers for real-time THz imaging.  

2. Principle and Device Structure 

A series of researches on THz metamaterial have been reported previously [12–14]. Those 
studies mainly focused on electromagnetic response analysis. In this work, a practical MEMS 
THz FPA with a metamaterial absorber was introduced, and the absorption of the detector was 
particularly investigated. It can be applied in THz imaging with an optical readout. The 
principle of the system is as follows: when the incident THz radiation is absorbed, the 
deflection is induced by the bi-material effect and can be further detected by the optical 
readout system, and finally, it is translated into a visible image. 

 

Fig. 1. (a) Top view of the pixel. (b) Cross-sectional view of the pixel. 

The scheme of a pixel in the THz FPA is shown in Fig. 1. In the cross-section view of the 
pixel, from bottom to top, it consists of four layers: the lowest is used as the structure layer, 
including cantilevers and plates; the next one is a metal layer acting as a reflecting mirror for 
the optical readout system; the third layer is the absorption layer for THz radiation; the top 
layer is used to pattern the metamaterial structure.  

The incident THz radiation from the target source is illuminated on the front of the FPAs. 
The absorbed radiation causes an increase in temperature, which results in the deformation of 
the micro-cantilever pixels in the array. Conversely, an LED is illuminated on the backside of 
the FPA. Then the light reflected from the FPA creates a thermal image and is recorded by a 
charge-coupled device (CCD) camera. The detailed operating principle was described in our 
previous work [9]. 

3. Design and Simulation 

To characterize the electromagnetic response as a function of orientation, terahertz time-
domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) [15] was performed at a frequency range of 0.1–3 THz. All 
the analyses and discussions below are within this frequency range.  

The low-stress silicon nitrogen film deposited by low-pressure chemical vapor deposition 
(LPCVD) was chosen as the structure layer of the FPA, due to its simple fabrication process 
and 
relatively 
high 
heat 
capacity. 
Afterward, 
plasma-enhanced 
chemical 
vapor 
deposition (PECVD) SiNx film was used as the absorption layer, and the reflecting mirror and 
metamaterial structure were made of gold. Hence, the bi-material cantilevers comprised the 
LPCVD SiNx film and the gold film.  

To improve the sensitivity of the detector, two limitations need to be considered. First, how 
to increase the absorption at expected THz frequency, and second, how to increase the 
temperature as much as possible. Ideally, a periodic array is an effective way to enhance the 


absorption, and the factors, such as the proper shape, thickness, and metallic properties, enable 
high absorption at a specific frequency. In practice, the resonant absorption can be affected by 
the dimension of a patch of the array and thickness of the dielectric film beneath the periodic 
array, which is a form of frequency selective surfaces (FSS). According to the equivalent 
circuit method, the resonant wavelength of FSS is related to the effective electric length of the 
FSS patch element by the following approximate formula:  

2
2
e

r
r

c
L
f

λ

ε
ε
=
=
                                                 (1) 

where f and λ are the frequency and wavelength of the incident electromagnetic wave, 
respectively, and εr and c are the dielectric constant of the substrate and velocity of light, 
respectively. The effective length of the FSS patch was calculated to be approximately 35 μm 
at the frequency of 1.3 THz. 

 

Fig. 2. (a) Metamaterial unit cell. (b) Power loss density distribution in the THz FPA. 

To better understand the measured response, a CST microwave studio was used to simulate 
the electromagnetic response [16]. The structure is depicted in Fig. 1. The FSS, metamaterial, 
and unit cell module configuration, as shown in Fig. 2, was used. The metamaterial unit cell 
was sandwiched between air regions with Zmax and Zmin ports, as indicated in Fig. 2. To 
improve the accuracy of the model, actual dimensions were used, including thicknesses of the 
metallic layers. Material properties were taken from Table 1. A perpendicular plane wave was 
sent through the Zmax port1, and the scattering parameters, S11 and S21, were extracted over the 
range of frequencies of interest. Reflectivity and transmissivity are given by |S11|2 and |S21|2, 
respectively. Absorptivity of the metamaterial is obtained directly by 1 − |S11|2− |S21|2. The 
power loss density in THz FPA is shown in Fig. 2(b). Simulations reveal that majority of the 
energy is dissipated as a dielectric loss at the edge of the square patch. 

Table 1. Properties of the constituent materials of the THz FPA 

 

Material 

Young’s 
Modulus  

E(GPa) 

Expansion 
Coefficient 

a(10−6K−1) 

Thermal 
Conductivity  

g(Wm−1K−1） 

Heat Capacity 

 
c(JKg−1K−1) 

Density 

 
ρ(kgm−3) 

Electric 
conductivity 

σ(106Sm−1) 

Relative 
permittivity 

ɛ 

Si 
112 
5.1 
148 
700 
2330 
- 
11.9 

SiNx 
180 
2.1 
19 
691 
2400 
- 
7.5 

Au 
78 
14 
314 
130 
19320 
45.61 
- 

The resonant frequency is mainly determined by the dimension of the patch array, i.e., the 
length of the patch side. In Fig. 3a, we present the simulation result on the relation between 


resonant frequency and patch side, where the curve is well fitted by a simple equation,
A

f
= L
 , 

according to equation (1), where
54.77
/
2
r

c

A
m
s
μ
ε
=
=
. In particular, when the patch side L= 

40 μm, the response frequency f = 1.36 THz, which is close to the frequency of the maximum 
spectral amplitude provided by the laser.  

 
 

Fig. 3. (a) Relationship between patch sides and response frequency, where the blue line is the 
simulation result, and the red dashed line is the fitting curve. (b) Relationship between the 
thickness of the silicon nitrogen film and absorption. 

Since the absorption can also be affected by the dielectric layer beneath the FSS, we also 
investigated the relationship between the SiNx film thickness and absorption at the expected 
frequency range obtained from simulations. The result is shown in Fig. 3b. It shows that the 
highest theoretical absorption level is 99.36% when the film thickness is 2 μm. We note that 
such a relation can be modeled by a simple equivalent LC circuit described in the literature 
[17], as indicated by the red-lined curve in Fig. 3b. The detailed parameters for the LC circuit 
model are described in Supplemental Material. 

Next, with SiNx film thickness at 2 μm and patches side length at 40 μm, the effects of the 
split ring resonator (SSR) in FPA was investigated. The resonant frequency of the SSR was 
determined by the ring length and the split size. In this work since the SSR is much longer 
than the patch side, the resonant frequency of the SSR is much lower than that of the FSS. 
Hence, the SSR has barely any effect on the response frequency and the absorption of the 
pixel. In Fig. 4, we show that there is a slight difference in the absorptions of FPA with 
different SSR split sizes from the simulation results.  

 

Fig. 4. Simulated absorption with deferent SSR split sizes. 


Besides the metamaterial structure, another way to improve the sensitivity of the FPA is to 
use the CCD with a high quantization level or to amplify the pixel deflection caused by the bi-
material effect. The detection sensitivity of the optical readout system was determined by the 
minimum detectable angle θmin corresponding to one grey level of CCD. It can be expressed as 
[9]:  

min
2
I
LN

θ
λ
θ
Δ
=
=
Δ
                                                           (2) 

where λ is the wavelength of the readout light, L is the reflector length along the cantilever 
direction, N is the quantization level of CCD, and Δθ and ΔI are the changes in the 
deformation angle and the grey level of CCD, respectively. Therefore, the reflector length 
along the leg is required to be as long as possible to minimize θmin. Contrarily, a larger 
deformation angle can be achieved by increasing the number of folded cantilevers. We note 
that both methods above are limited by fabrication, device volume, and image resolution. 

4. Fabrication and Measurement 

All the samples were prepared with conventional micro/nano-fabrication processes, as shown 
in Fig. 5. The fabrication process flow is as follows: a. LPCVD SiNx layer with a thickness of 
5000 Å was generated on double sides of the wafer; b. 1000 Å gold layer was evaporated on 
the front side; c. 1.8 μm PECVD SiNx layer was deposited on top of the gold layer; d. 
lithography and reactive ion etching (RIE) were performed to open the back etching window; 
e. Front lithography and RIE were performed to pattern the absorption layer below the 
metamaterial structure; f. Cantilevers etching; g. Cantilevers and metamaterial structure 
patterning by gold evaporation; h. Pixel release by backside silicon wet etching. 

 

Fig. 5. Fabrication flowchart of the MEMS THz FPA. 

An example of the fabricated free-standing THz FPA is shown in Fig. 6. The obtained FPA 
is 1.5 × 1.5 cm and holds an array of 100 × 100 pixels. 

 

Fig. 6. (a) Photograph of four fabricated THz FPA on a 4-inch silicon wafer. (b) Fabricated and 
diced THz FPA chip of 15 × 15 mm. 


In Fig. 7, we show the three-dimensional shape of pixels observed by 3D measuring laser 
microscope and the side view of the reflector, respectively. Using the low-stress silicon nitride 
film deposited by LPCVD at 900 °C, the smooth reflector was obtained, which contributed to 
the optical readout.  

 

Fig. 7. (a) Three-dimensional shape of pixels. (b) Measured flatness of the reflectors. 

Thermal sensitivity was measured using a hot plate and three-dimensional (3D) measuring 
laser microscope. As shown in Fig. 8, the deformation angle of the reflector is the result of 
angles from both the 1st and 2nd cantilevers, proving the amplifying design works. The 
thermal sensitivity was calculated to be 0.075 °/°C according to a linear fitting on the 
deformation angles of the reflector in Fig. 8a, which is greater than that of the infrared (IR) 
FPA with 0.051 °/°C as we reported previously [9]. A consideration of the conservation of 
energy allows us to describe the increase in temperature of the metamaterial as [18]: 

2
2
2

m
m

T

P
T
G
C

α

ω
Δ
=
+
                                                       (3) 

where αm is the emittance/absorbance of the metasurface, Pm is the incident THz power 
modulated at a specific frequency ω, C is the heat capacity of the metasurface, and GT is the 
thermal conductance of the total power loss, which consists of convection, conduction, and 
radiation. With the method described in [9], we obtained the thermal sensitivity, 4.96×105 
K/W, at the same modulated frequency, 0.25 Hz, which is approximately 20 times more than 
KEBIN FAN’s reported [18].  

 

Fig. 8. (a) Measured thermal sensitivity of THz FPA. The purple dashed line is a fitting of the 
deformation angle of the reflector using linear function y = 0.075x + 0.56. (b) Measured 
equipment. 

Finally, FPA absorption for THz radiation was measured using a THz time-domain 
spectroscopy system, which was reported by Xiaojun Wu [19]. The incident angle of the THz 
beam was fixed at 20° and 30°. In Fig. 9, an absorption peak of 90.6% at 1.36 THz was 


observed. From the comparison between the measurement and simulation results, a good 
agreement can be observed between them.  

 

Fig. 9. Measured absorption against frequency. 

5. Conclusion 

By investigating the relationship between the absorption and thickness of the SiNx dielectric 
film, we selected the optimal thickness for THz absorption. Afterward, a 100 × 100 THz FPA 
with a pixel of 150 × 150 μm and a fill factor of 66.7% was successfully designed. Through 
direct measurement, we find that it has higher thermal sensitivity (up to 0.075°/°C) than IR 
FPA. Furthermore, its absorption rate is up to 90.6% at 1.36 THz, which is consistent with the 
simulation result. Due to the above observed high thermal sensitivity and absorption ratio, we 
believe that this kind of FPA has a powerful potential application in THz imaging. 
 

Funding 

National Natural Science Foundation of China (61874137). 
 

Acknowledgments 

Zhigang Li and Yi Ou contributed equally to this work. The authors would like to thank Prof. 
Li Wang for the THz-TDS measurement. 
 

Disclosures 

The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
 
See Supplement 1 for supporting content. 
 

References 

1. 
H. T. Chen, W. J. Padilla, J. M. O. Zide, A. C. Gossard, A. J. Taylor, and R. D. Averitt. “Active terahertz 
metamaterial devices,” Nature 444, 597–600 (2006). 
2. 
T. J. Yen, W. J. Padilla, N. Fang, D. C. Vier, D. R. Smith, J. B. Pendry, D. N. Basov, and X. Zhang. “Terahertz 
Magnetic Response from Artificial Materials,” Science 303, 1494–1496 (2004). 
3. 
M. Choi, S. H.Lee, Y. Kim, S. B. Kang, J. Shin, M. H. Kwak, K.Y. Kang, Y.H. Lee, N. Park, and B.Min, “A 
terahertz metamaterial with unnaturally high refractive index,” Nature 470, 369-373 (2011). 
4. 
N. I. Zheludev and Y. S. Kivshar, “From metamaterials to metadevices,” Nat. Mater. 11, 917-924 (2012). 


5. 
M.Gupta, V. Savinov, N.N. Xu, L.Q. Cong, G. Dayal, S. Wang, W.L. Zhang, N. I. Zheludev, and R. Singh, 
“Sharp Toroidal Resonances in Planar Terahertz Metasurfaces,” Adv. Mater. 201601611 (2016). 
6. 
M. Lee and M. C. Wanke, “Searching for a solid-state terahertz technology,” Science 316, 64–65 (2007). 
7. 
C. M. Watts, X.L. Liu, and W. J.Padilla, “Metamaterial Electromagnetic Wave Absorbers,” Adv. Mater. 24, 
OP98-OP120 (2012).  
8. 
X. L. Liu, T. Tyler, T. Starr, A. F. Starr, N. M. Jokerst, and Willie J. Padilla, “Taming the Blackbody with 
Metamaterials,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 045901(2011). 
9. 
Y. Ou, Z. G. Li, F. L. Dong, D. P. Chen, Q. C. Zhang, and C. Q. Xie, “Design, Fabrication, and Characterization 
of a 240 × 240 MEMS Uncooled Infrared Focal Plane Array With 42-μm Pitch Pixels,” J. Microelectromech. 
Syst. 22(2), 452-461 (2013). 
10. A. Fabio, P. Leroy, and G. Dragoslav, “MEMS terahertz-to-infrared band converter using frequency selective 
planar metamaterial,” Sci. Rep. 8(1), 12466 (2018). 
11. A. Fabio, G. Dragoslav, K. Brian, V.L. Nickolay, and K. Gamani, “Bi-material terahertz sensors using 
metamaterial structures,” Opt. Express 21(11), 13256-13271 (2013). 
12. T. Kan, A. Isozaki, N. Kanda, N. Nemoto, K. Konishi, H. Takahashi, M. K. Gonokami, K. Matsumoto, and I. 
Shimoyama, “Enantiomeric switching of chiral metamaterial for terahertz polarization modulation employing 
vertically deformable MEMS spirals,” Nat. Commun. 6, 8422 (2015).   
13. A. Karvounis, N. Aspiotis, I. Zeimpekis, J. Y. Ou, C. C. Huang, D. Hewak, and N. I. Zheludev, 
“Mechanochromic Reconfigurable Metasurfaces,” Adv. Sci. 1900974 (2019). 
14. M. Manjappa, P. Pitchappa, N. Singh, N. Wang, N. I. Zheludev, C. K. Lee, and R. Singh. “Reconfigurable 
MEMS Fano metasurfaces with multiple-input-output states for logic operations at terahertz frequencies,” Nat. 
Commun. 9, 4056 (2018).  
15. F. Bradley and Z. X. Cheng, “Materials for terahertz science and technology,” Nat. Mater. 1, 26–33 (2002). 
16. H. Tao, A. C. Strikwerda, K. Fan, W. J. Padilla, X. Zhang, and R. D. Averitt, “Reconfigurable Terahertz 
Metamaterials,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 147401 (2009). 
17. F. Costa, A. Monorchio, and G. Manara, “An Overview of Equivalent Circuit Modeling Techniques of 
Frequency Selective Surfaces and Metasurfaces,” Appl. Comput. Electrom. 29(12), 960-976 (2014).  
18. K. Fan, J. Suen, X. Y. Liu, and W. J. Padilla, “All-dielectric metasurface absorbers for uncooled terahertz 
imaging,” Optica 4(6), 601-604 (2017). 
19. X. J. Wu, X. C. Pan, B. G. Quan, and L. Wang, “Optical modulation of terahertz behavior in silicon with 
structured surfaces,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 121112 (2013). 
 


