1 

Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining 
 
 
Andrew C. Madison1 John S. Villarrubia1 Kuo-Tang Liao1,2 Craig R. Copeland1 Joshua Schumacher3

Kerry Siebein3 B. Robert Ilic1,3 J. Alexander Liddle1 and Samuel M. Stavis1,*

 
1. National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 20899, United States  
2. Maryland Nanocenter, College Park, MD 20740, United States 
3. CNST NanoFab, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, 20899, United States 
* e-mail: samuel.stavis@nist.gov 
 
 
Abstract
Focused-ion-beam machining is a powerful process to fabricate complex nanostructures, often through a sacrificial mask  
that enables milling beyond the resolution limit of the ion beam. However, current understanding of this super-resolution 
effect is empirical in the spatial domain and nonexistent in the temporal domain. This article reports the primary study of 
this fundamental tradespace of resolution and throughput. Chromia functions well as a masking material due to its smooth, 
uniform, and amorphous structure. An efficient method of in-line metrology enables characterization of ion-beam focus by 
scanning electron microscopy. Fabrication and characterization of complex test-structures through chromia and into silica 
probe the response of the bilayer to a focused beam of gallium cations, demonstrating super-resolution factors of up to 6 Вұ 
2 and improvements to volume throughput of at least factors of 42 Вұ 2, with uncertainties denoting 95 % coverage intervals. 
Tractable theory models the essential aspects of the super-resolution effect for various nanostructures. Application of the 
new tradespace increases the volume throughput of machining Fresnel lenses by a factor of 75, which we introduce as 
projection standards for optical microscopy. These results enable paradigm shifts of sacrificial masking from empirical to 
engineering design, and from prototyping to manufacturing.  
 
 
Introduction
Nanoscale milling with a focused ion beam enables the direct formation[1] of nanostructures with complex surfaces in three 
dimensions. This process is broadly applicable to the fabrication of electronic[2], mechanical[3], photonic[4], and fluidic[5] 
devices, and is becoming increasingly important to prepare samples for materials characterization[6] and biological 
imaging[7]. Despite the widespread use of the focused ion beam as a machine tool, its limits of resolution and throughput 
remain unclear, masking its ultimate utility. 

Understanding the limits of focused-ion-beam machining begins with focus. A narrow focus of an ion beam with a 
low current enables patterning of fine features, whereas a high current enables rapid milling of deep features across wide 
areas. Although the de Broglie wavelength of gallium cations in a conventional focused-ion-beam system is at the 
femtometer scale, aberrations intrinsic to electrostatic lenses and space-charge effects from Coulomb interactions broaden 
the focus of such an ion beam into an approximately Gaussian profile at the nanometer scale[8]. For dielectric substrates, 
exposure to an ion beam results in electrostatic charging and repulsion of ions from the surface, further complicating the 
process of focusing the ion beam and degrading lateral and vertical resolution. The lateral extent of the ion-beam profile 
generally follows a power-law dependence on ion-beam current, with effective lateral resolution requiring 
characterization[9] for specific ion sources and substrate materials. Accordingly, reducing the lateral extent of the focused 
ion beam, simply by decreasing the current, generally improves lateral resolution and decreases the accumulation of charge. 
However, a lower current also results in a longer time to mill through the vertical range, prolonging any drift of the system 
and wear of the aperture that limits current. These issues can degrade lateral resolution[10] to an intolerable extent, while 
operating costs can accrue to an unsustainable level. Depending on the materials and dimensions, a single workpiece can 
take tens of hours to machine. 

This inherent coupling of lateral resolution and volume throughput yields a tradespace of spatial and temporal 
constraints. Although an explicit description of this tradespace is absent from the literature, there is a general tendency to 
consider the focused ion beam as being slow, costly, and more useful for prototyping than for manufacturing, with 
excursions into the latter domain often relying on pattern replication[5d, 11]. In contrast, previous studies have described a 
tradespace for lithographic processes, finding a power-law relation between lateral resolution and areal throughput[12] 
extending into the commercial domain of manufacturing[13]. These studies explicitly excluded the focused ion beam from 
analysis, for several reasons. First and foremost, direct milling conventionally involves a volume throughput rather than an 
areal throughput, without a separate process of pattern transfer. Second, focused beams of metal ions implant remnants of 
the machine tool in the workpiece, requiring additional study of the milling process and material responses. Third, 
conventional processes at the state of the art of focused-ion-beam machining are commercially viable for only a few 
products of high value, such as editing circuits[14] and repairing photomasks[15].  

Constraints on lateral resolution motivate the use of sacrificial films[4d, 5b, 16] to dissipate charge from insulating 
substrates[17], protect workpieces from redeposition and damage along the edges of device features[5b, 16b], enable super-
resolution of such edges down to the scale of one to ten nanometers[5b], and prepare samples for microscopy[6-7] and 
tomography[10b]. In each of these applications, a sacrificial film functions as a physical barrier that masks the workpiece 


2 

from the diffuse periphery, or tail, of the focused ion beam. This masking process effectively reduces the radius of the ion 
beam near boundaries of the milling pattern and yields edge profiles that are narrower than, and differ in shape from, those 
resulting from direct milling. In this way, sacrificial masking manifests as a super-resolution effect, in which a 
multiplicative factor quantifies the reduction of edge width and corresponding improvement from a conventional resolution 
to an unconventional resolution. Despite its common use, current understanding of spatial masking is incomplete, beginning 
with material selection. Milling rates of polymeric masks[16b, 16c] exceed those of common substrates such as silica[18], 
resulting in soft masks with low values of physical selectivity, a fundamental property of the maskвҖ“substrate bilayer. 
Metallic masks[4d, 5b, 16a, 16d], such as aluminum, platinum, and chromium, have lower milling rates but tend to be 
polycrystalline, with grain sizes ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometers. Additionally, milling rates depend on grain 
orientation[19], transferring surface and line-edge roughness into the substrate[16d], degrading lateral and vertical resolution, 
and potentially limiting the accuracy of models of ion transport[20] to understand the bilayer response. 
Reductions of electrostatic charging and edge defects are obvious advantages of a conductive sacrificial mask, and the 
super-resolution effect implies some advantage. However, it is nonobvious that a sacrificial mask presents any fundamental 
advantage to super-resolve nanostructure edges, in comparison to simply reducing ion-beam current to improve lateral 
resolution. To answer this open question, which is central to our study, we unmask the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace 
of focused-ion-beam machining, discovering that a sacrificial mask enables patterning with the effective resolution of a 
low value of ion-beam current and the volume throughput of a high value of ion-beam current. This dramatic improvement 
demonstrates that the dominant advantage of the super-resolution effect occurs in the temporal domain, rather than in the 
spatial domain.  

To substantiate this surprising finding, we perform the first comprehensive and systematic study of this topic, 
integrating five new concepts for the most widely available type of electronвҖ“ion beam system (Figure 1). First, we 
introduce a chromia, Cr2O3, film for electron microscopy and sacrificial masking of silica, characterizing the advantageous 
properties of this multifunctional masking material (Figure 1a). Second, we demonstrate a new method for in-line 
metrology of effective lateral resolution, enabling new efficiency and reproducibility (Figure 1b). Third, we pattern 
complex nanostructures through chromia and into silica, measuring and simulating responses of the bilayer to ion exposure, 
and quantifying vertical resolution and lateral super-resolution (Figure 1c). Fourth, we develop a model of the super-
resolution effect, achieving good agreement with experimental data, simulating the super-resolution of conventional test-
structures, and elucidating the temporal efficiency of the process (Figure 1d). Fifth, we test our model predictions in an 
application of sacrificial masking to the fabrication of arrays of Fresnel lenses, increasing volume throughput by a factor 
of 75 relative to a single, functionally equivalent lens that we fabricate directly into silica with a low value of ion-beam 
current (Figure 1e). These results demonstrate paradigm shifts of focused-ion-beam machining through sacrificial masks, 
from empirical to engineering design of processes for device fabrication and sample preparation, and from prototyping 
single devices to manufacturing device arrays and otherwise surpassing the volume throughput limit of conventional 
resolution. 

 

 

Figure 1. Experimental overview. (a) Materials characterization reveals the structure and solid state of a sacrificial mask of chromia on 
a silica substrate. (b) In-line resolution metrology enables reproducible and optimal focus of a beam of gallium cations. (c) Study of the 
bilayer structure before and after removal of the chromia elucidates milling responses. (d) Theory predicts spatial and temporal 
advantages of masking the periphery of the ion beam with a sacrificial film. (e) Application of the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace 
increases volume throughput of the fabrication of Fresnel lens arrays. 
 
 
 
Results and Discussion
Materials characterization
The semiconducting behavior[21], nanometer roughness[22], gigapascal hardness[22b, 23], and high selectivity in chemical 
etching of chromia against silica make this material a good candidate for our application. We form a silica film by thermal 
oxidation of a silicon substrate, over which we form a chromia mask by sputter deposition[24] (Note S1). To 
comprehensively characterize our bilayer and provide input quantities for theoretical models, we combine atomic force 
microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction (Note S2). 
 
Surface Structure 
The silica surface has a subnanometer root-mean-square roughness and sparse asperities with a height of 1.6 nm Вұ 0.2 nm 
(Figure S1). We report all uncertainties as 95 % coverage intervals, or we note otherwise. Atomic force micrographs 


3 

provide estimates of the lower bound[25] of root-mean-square roughness of 0.3 nm Вұ 0.2 nm for silica and 0.6 nm Вұ 0.2 nm 
for chromia (Figure 2, Figure 2a). X-ray diffractometry data are generally consistent with these measurements, yielding 
estimates of root-mean-square roughness of 0.4 nm Вұ 0.4 nm and 1.5 nm Вұ 0.4 nm (Figure 2g, Table S1). Scanning electron 
micrographs of the chromia surface indicate negligible charging during imaging and show lateral roughness ranging in 
scale from 10 nm to 40 nm (Figure 2b). We report quantitative ranges of experimental data as 95 % coverage intervals. 
Discrete Fourier transforms of atomic force micrographs (Figure 2d) and of scanning electron micrographs (Figure 2e) 
indicate an aperiodic structure of the chromia surface. 
 
 
 

 

Figure 2. Chromia characterization. (a) Atomic force and (b) scanning electron micrographs showing the surface structure of the 
chromia mask on silica before milling with a focused ion beam. (c) Transmission electron micrograph showing a cross section of the 
chromia mask. The carbon is an artifact of sample preparation. (d-f) Plots showing discrete Fourier transforms (DFT) of the micrographs 
in (a-c). The origin, corresponding to spatial frequencies of 0 nm-1, occurs at the center of each image. Horizontal and vertical lines in 
(d) indicate the presence of a convolution artifact of the probe tip in atomic force micrographs. (g) Plot showing (black) a grazing-
incidence 2Оё scan of X-ray diffraction and (red) a fit of an X-ray reflectivity model[26] with a reduced chi-square statistic, рқң’рқң’рқңҲрқңҲ2, of 0.4. (h) 
Plot showing a conventional 2Оё scan of X-ray diffraction. The gray regions around the black lines in (g) and (h) indicate the 95 % 
coverage interval of diffraction data.  
 
 
 
Volume Structure 
Ellipsometry data show a silica thickness of 488 nm Вұ 2 nm. Consistent with our measurements of surface roughness by 
X-ray diffraction, transmission electron micrographs show a chromia thickness of 63 nm Вұ 2 nm (Figure 2c, Table S1). In 
discrete Fourier transforms of these transmission electron micrographs (Figure 2f), a diffuse inner region with a sharp outer 


4 

edge around 4.0 nm-1 indicates a generally amorphous composition, which is consistent with X-ray diffraction data. A fit 
of a reflectivity model[26] to the X-ray diffraction data yields a chromia thickness of 65 nm Вұ 3 nm and density of 
5.3 g cm-3 Вұ 0.1 g cm-3 (Figure 2g). The X-ray diffraction pattern of the chromia (Figure 2h) shows a broad peak of low 
intensity below angles of 0.7 rad (40В°), indicating that the chromia is generally amorphous, and a narrow peak of low 
intensity at 0.901 rad Вұ 0.003 rad (51.6В° Вұ 0.2В°), suggesting the presence of crystalline domains of CrO[27] with a size of 
approximately 40 nm.  
 
 
In-line Resolution Metrology
Having comprehensively characterized our bilayer, we load a sample into an electronвҖ“ion beam system and focus both 
beams. Scanning electron microscopy offers the potential to measure and optimize the effect of the focused ion beam prior 
to nanofabrication. In such a process, the system operator mills an open cavity or pit, the simplest test structure, by dwelling 
the focused ion beam in a single position for a certain amount of time. Measurement of the radius of the pit by scanning 
electron microscopy quantifies the effective lateral resolution of the focused ion beam. Manual focusing of the ion beam 
proceeds by iteratively adjusting the voltage of the final lens in the ion-beam column, milling a new pit, and measuring its 
radius. This process can occur in real time if a fast method for dimensional metrology is available, and concludes with the 
estimation of a minimum radius, indicating that the focus of the ion beam is near optimal.  

There are two main challenges of such in-line measurements. The first is physical, as scanning electron microscopy is 
sensitive to dielectric charging, which our chromia mask mitigates. The second is analytical, as scanning electron 
microscopy yields an indirect measure of surface topography, with image contrast resulting primarily from local tilt, 
shadow, and material contrast[28]. Previous studies have taken different approaches to analyze the resulting images, yielding 
different combinations of efficiency and accuracy. Simple approximations without uncertainty evaluation[9] are unsuitable 
for dimensional metrology, whereas accurate physical models[29] of scanning electron microscopy require energy-loss 
functions of the constituent materials. Historically, these functions have required synchrotron measurements to obtain. 
Intermediate approaches can achieve both efficiency and accuracy, such as by using reference data from a physical model 
to calibrate an empirical model[30]. 
 
Image Formation 
We introduce an efficient method of measuring pit radius by scanning electron microscopy, in comparison to independent 
measurements of surface topography by atomic force microscopy (Figure 3, Figure 3a-b, Table S2). We make the novel 
observation of a near equality of pit radii corresponding to the maximum signals of secondary electrons in scanning electron 
micrographs (Figure 3d), and the maximum convexity of surface profiles in atomic force micrographs, where the negative 
value of the second derivative of the surface profile with respect to position is maximal (Figure 3e). This empirical 
correlation implies that the curvature of our test pits affects image formation, which we interpret by topographic 
calculations of tilt and shadow contrast (Note S3, Figure S2). This new analysis suggests that the implantation of gallium, 
sputtering and redeposition of chromia and silica, and resulting material contrast near the region of maximum convexity 
contributes to signal peaks in scanning electron micrographs. Further study is necessary to fully understand the cause of 
this empirical correlation, which we nonetheless put to good use. 
 
Correlative Measurements 
For a representative test pit, we compare a section from a scanning electron micrograph (Figure 3c) to a section of the 
negative of the second derivative from an atomic force micrograph (Figure 3d). The micrographs show pit asymmetry due 
to several non-ideal conditions of milling and microscopy, including astigmatism and drift of the focused ion beam during 
patterning and an artifact from probe-sample convolution in atomic force micrographs (Note S4, Figure S3, Figure S4). As 
a result, scanning electron microscopy yields a relatively narrow and approximately normal distribution of pit radius, 
whereas atomic force microscopy yields a relatively broad and asymmetric distribution of pit radius (Figure 3e). 
Regardless, the two measurements of mean pit radius agree to within a root-mean-square error ranging from 4 nm to 7 nm 
(Figure 3f-j, Table S4). These values are comparable to our estimate of statistical uncertainty for atomic force microscopy 
and range from 3 % to 5 % of the pit radii. Even better, our estimate of statistical uncertainty for scanning electron 
microscopy has a 95 % coverage interval of 1 nm, whereas accurate measurements with physical models can achieve a 
total uncertainty of approximately 1 nm, including systematic errors[29]. These results show that our new approach to in-
line metrology of effective lateral resolution is usefully precise, although further study is necessary to quantify systematic 
effects that limit accuracy. These results build confidence in our method of minimizing the radii of test pits, which we use 
to focus our ion-beam prior to nanofabrication of complex test-structures.  


5 

 

Figure 3. In-line resolution metrology. (a) Scanning electron micrograph and (b) atomic force micrograph showing a representative pit 
in the chromiaвҖ“silica bilayer. (c) Plots showing (gray) secondary electron signals from (a) and (black) z position from (b) for horizontal 
line scans through the center of either image. (d) Plot showing the secondary electron scattering intensity along a radial section from 
(a) in the direction of the largest radius of the pit. (e) Plot showing the negative of the second derivative of the z position of the pit 
along a radial section from (b) in the direction of the largest radius of the pit. (f) Plots showing angular dependence of pit radius for all 
values of section angle from (gray) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and (black) atomic force microscopy (AFM) after smoothing. 
Uncertainties are 95 % coverage intervals. (g) Histograms showing pit radius for all values of section angle of ten replicates from (gray) 
scanning electron microscopy and (black) atomic force microscopy. (h-k) Plots showing correlative measurements of mean radius of 
pits by atomic force microscopy and scanning electron microscopy for one decade of ion-beam current and two decades of dwell time. 
Panels (a-g) correspond to the black circle in (i). The lone black bars near the lower left corner of the plots in (h-k) represent 95 % 
coverage intervals of mean radius. More details are in Table S2, Table S3, Note S3, Note S4, Figure S3, Figure S4, and Table S4. 
 
 
 
Complex test-structures
Ion Exposure 
In contrast to lithographic patterning, which requires pattern transfer and is generally serial for each vertical feature 
dimension, focused-ion-beam milling directly forms complex nanostructures. To quantify the relationships between milling 
depth, mask thickness, effective lateral resolution, and volume throughput, we mill checkerboard patterns through the 
chromia mask and into the underlying silica (Figure 4, Figure 4a,b, Figure S5). The depths vary from 0 nm to 200 nm 
before removal of the chromia and from 0 nm to 130 nm after removal of the chromia by selective chemical etching. This 
complex pattern tests lateral resolution at the edges of square structures, which are more robust than pit or line structures 
to artifacts from probe-sample convolution in atomic force micrographs (Note S5). Subsequent simulations of conventional 
lineвҖ“space arrays supplement our experimental test-structures.  
 


6 

 

Figure 4. Complex test-structures. (a, b) Atomic force micrographs showing representative checkerboard patterns (a) before and (b) 
after removal of the chromia mask. (i, ii, iii, iv) (black line) representative features before and after removal of the chromia mask. The 
shaded regions around the black line indicate the 95 % coverage interval of the data from sections of atomic force micrographs. Panels 
(ii) and (iv) show the same feature before and after removal of the chromia mask by selective chemical etching, respectively. We define 
the zero plane to be top of the silica surface. The periodic surface topography within some squares may be due to an aliasing artifact[5a]. 
 
 
 
Vertical Responses 
Vertical responses of the bilayer include variable milling rates and apparent modification of the material interface. Milling 
rates increase monotonically through chromia into silica (Figure 5, Figure 5a, Figure S6, Table S5). A piecewise-linear 
approximation of the milling response fits four apparent milling rates. The initial milling rate of chromia is low, which is 
relevant to patterning near the top surface. At higher doses, the milling rate of chromia triples to a value representative of 
milling bulk chromia. Milling through bulk chromia, gallium ions penetrate the chromiaвҖ“silica interface, and the milling 
rate increases by approximately one third. Milling through the interfacial layer, bulk silica shows a milling rate that again 
increases by one third, indicating that any initial response of silica, such as a lower milling rate[5a], occurs through and 
under the chromia. The ratio of the bulk milling rate of silica to that of chromia exceeds unity, resulting in a physical 
selectivity of 1.63 +0.61 вҲ’0.44
пҝҪ
 (Table S6). This fractional notation denotes 95 % coverage intervals that are asymmetric. In 
addition to the critical parameter of physical selectivity, which exceeds unity for this bilayer, crystalline grains and surface 
roughness of hard masks should be minimal to reduce lateral and vertical anisotropy of the milling process. Our chromia 
mask performs well in this regard, lacking granular structure and having surface roughness of less than 2 nm in comparison 
to the roughness of the underlying silica surface, which is less than 1 nm (Figure 2a-c).  
 


7 

 

Figure 5. Vertical responses. (a) Plot showing milling responses of chromia on silica for an ion-beam current of 227 pA Вұ 1 pA (red 
circles) before and (blue triangles) after chromia removal. Uncertainties of ion-beam currents are conservative estimates of 100 % 
coverage intervals. The light and dark gray regions respectively indicate the 95 % coverage interval and the interval between the lower 
and upper quartiles of the piecewise-linear model of milling responses. The lone black crosses indicate representative uncertainties of 
dose and z position, which we plot as 95 % coverage intervals. (b) Histograms showing depth increments (red) before and (blue hatch) 
after removal of the chromia mask for all ion-beam currents. The lone black bar indicates a representative uncertainty of z position. 
(c) Histograms showing simulations of stopping range as a function of z position for depths that correspond to (roundels) inflection 
points in the milling rates of chromia on silica, (i) (69 pC Вөm-2, 59 nm), (ii) (366 pC Вөm-2, 16 nm), and (iii) (531 pC Вөm-2, -16 nm). The 
lone black roundel indicates the onset of a change in milling rate due to the underlying chromiaвҖ“silica interface. More details are in 
Figure S6, Table S5, Table S6, and Table S7. 
 
 
 
At intermediate doses, nanostructures rise above the zero plane of the chromiaвҖ“silica interface after exposure to chromium 
etchant (Figure 4, iii). In a previous study of a similar substrate, thermal oxide did not swell significantly at low doses [5a], 
suggesting that gallium cation penetration modifies the chromiaвҖ“silica interface, potentially forming a silicate with lower 
susceptibility to chromium etchant than chromia. Higher doses mill these nanostructures back down through the zero plane 
(Figure 5a). We achieve our target depth increment of 1 nm in silica, with standard deviations that are within 1 nm of the 
surface roughness of the silica, down to a depth of 130 nm (Figure 5b, Figure S6). Depth increment distributions broaden 
slightly after chromia removal (Table S5).  

To better understand these material responses, we perform three simulations of gallium cation penetration through 
chromia and silica, elucidating a primary interaction of the machine tool and workpiece. The suitability of amorphous 
materials for calculation of stopping ranges of ions in matter, and the input parameters from our materials characterization, 
build confidence in the simulation results. Three histograms of stopping range as a function of depth correspond to bulk 
chromia, the chromiaвҖ“silica interface, and bulk silica (Figure 5c, i-iii). The mean stopping range of gallium cations in bulk 
chromia agrees to within 2 nm with the z position onset of a higher milling rate of the chromiaвҖ“silica interface (Figure 5c, 
i-iii, Table S7). This consistency supports our experimental measurements, piecewise-linear approximations of vertical 
responses, and simulations of ion penetration. 
 
 
 


8 

Edge Profiles 
Completing our characterization of the test structures, we quantify widths of nanostructure edges before, рқ‘Өрқ‘Өb, and after, рқ‘Өрқ‘Өa, 
removal of the sacrificial mask. Edge and line widths are both straightforward to measure and are both proportional to the 
radius of the ion beam, which ultimately limits lateral resolution. Accordingly, we use edge width as a metric of effective 
lateral resolution and super-resolution. Focused-ion-beam milling of the bilayer yields edge profiles that are approximately 
sigmoidal. Removal of the sacrificial mask changes the shape of the profile, abruptly truncating the sigmoid, which can be 
advantageous for nanofluidic channels[5a, 5b], waveguides[16a], or for the process of replica molding[11]. Accordingly, the 
reduction of data from profiles in atomic force micrographs to quantities of edge width requires two different models. To 
extract widths and depths, we fit a common error function to edge profiles before removal of the sacrificial mask, and we 
truncate an error function to fit to edge profiles after removal (Figure S7)[31]. These approximations originate from 
integration of a Gaussian function, which is appealing for nanostructure edges resulting from exposure to a focused beam 
with a profile that is approximately Gaussian. However, edge profiles do include systematic effects from the dependence 
of milling rate on incidence angle, discontinuities in milling rate within the bilayer, and an overshoot artifact from atomic 
force microscopy. Even so, a novel Monte-Carlo statistical analysis with jack-knife resampling shows that measurement 
uncertainty dominates our estimates of uncertainty for рқ‘Өрқ‘Өb, рқ‘Өрқ‘Өa, and resulting super-resolution factors, в„ұSR = рқ‘Өрқ‘Өbрқ‘Өрқ‘Өa
вҲ’1 (Figure 
S7a, Figure S8, Figure S9, Table S8, Table S9, Table S10). After chromia removal, edge widths decrease by factors ranging 
from 2 for deep features to 6 for shallow features. Shallow features in chromia exhibit wider edges than features of similar 
depth in silica after removal of the chromia (Figure S8, Table S8), indicating that the sacrificial mask improves lateral 
resolution for features of similar depth. These results affirm the use of error functions to accurately extract edge widths, 
building confidence in the reliability of these measurement results and the validity of our subsequent use of error functions 
in models of spatial masking.  
 
 
 
ResolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace
Theoretical basis 
Characterization of the bilayer response enables a new study of the tradespace of lateral resolution and volume throughput. 
The effective lateral resolution, в„ӣ, can be either a conventional resolution, в„ӣR, or an unconventional super-resolution, в„ӣSR 
(Note S9). Effective lateral resolution improves as ion-beam current decreases[32], but reductions in ion-beam current, рқҗјрқҗј, 
incur a non-linear cost of milling time, degrading volume throughput and potentially lateral resolution by drift of the 
system. To elucidate how sacrificial masks affect this tradespace, we express effective lateral resolution and super-
resolution in terms of ion-beam current and equate them. Conventional lateral resolution results from milling a feature of 
a certain depth directly into a substrate with a low value of ion-beam current, рқҗјрқҗјlow, whereas super-resolution results from 
milling a similar feature through a sacrificial mask and into an underlying substrate with a high value of ion-beam current, 
рқҗјрқҗјhigh. The super-resolution factor, в„ұSR, relates the two quantities, 
 

в„ӣ = рқӣјрқӣјрқҗјрқҗјlow

рқӣҪрқӣҪ
= в„ұSR
вҲ’1рқӣјрқӣјрқҗјрқҗјhigh

рқӣҪрқӣҪ , 
(1) 

 
where we apply the approximation of a power-law relation of the radius of a focused ion beam with coefficient, рқӣјрқӣј, and 
exponent, рқӣҪрқӣҪ, the latter of which typically ranges from 0.25 to 1.00 for liquid-metal ion sources with ion-beam currents of 
less than 10 nA[32]. 
To test Equation (1) and further characterize our effective lateral resolution, we fit a power-law model to pit radius (Figure 
3h-k) as a function of total charge, and to edge width before and after removal of the chromia mask as a function of ion-
beam current (Figure S10). The trends for the different test structures are generally consistent and yield reasonable values 
of model parameters (Table S11), corroborating our results from in-line resolution metrology and building confidence in 
Equation (1) as the basis of the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace. 

An important issue to consider is that Equation (1) presents a theoretical perspective in which ion-beam current is a 
continuous variable. However, in typical focused-ion-beam systems, apertures limit the selection of ion-beam current to 
discrete values. Nonetheless, this theoretical perspective yields important insights into the spatiotemporal domain, while 
also accommodating experimental validation in the spatial domain. To this end, Equation (1) permits a substitution of 
terms, in which the widths of nanostructures resulting from milling with a single value of ion-beam current, before and 
after removal of the chromia mask, take the place of the power-law expressions for the radii of ion beams with low and 
high values of current. The resulting proportionality in Equation (2) avoids the experimental limitation of discrete values 
of ion-beam current, enabling validation of the kernel of our model of super-resolution with measurements of edge widths 
before and after removal of the chromia mask, 
 

в„ӣ вҲқ рқ‘Өрқ‘Өa = в„ұSR

вҲ’1рқ‘Өрқ‘Өb.
(2)

On the basis of Equations (1-2), we introduce new theory, in three aspects, to elucidate the super-resolution effect. First, a 
model of spatial masking maps patterns of ion dose to resulting nanostructures in chromia and silica to calculate factors of 
lateral super-resolution, predicting our experimental results without adjustable parameters and fitting other experimental 
results with adjustable parameters. Second, a model of temporal efficiency uses Equation (1) to account for the different 


9 

durations of milling a structure of a certain depth by a low or high current, elucidating the temporal advantage of the super-
resolution effect. Third, a comparison of the spatial and temporal effects of the sacrificial mask shows dramatic 
improvements depending on the mask selectivity and thickness, and a figure of merit quantifies performance within the 
tradespace to guide future optimization. 
 
 
Super-resolution 
The common approximation of the current density distribution of a focused ion beam by a Gaussian or bi-Gaussian function 
enables derivation of a closed-form solution to в„ұSR in terms of the complementary error function and geometric and 
physical parameters of the bilayer. We use the Gaussian approximation for simplicity, and we establish the validity of 
either approximation in our model of lateral super-resolution (Note S6, Figure S11). Our model relates the ratio of edge 
widths, рқ‘Өрқ‘Өb, and рқ‘Өрқ‘Өa, to the milling depth after normalization by the mask thickness, рқңҒрқңҒ = рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘§рқ‘§m
вҲ’1, and the physical selectivity 
of the bilayer, рқ’®рқ’® = рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm
вҲ’1, where рқ‘§рқ‘§s is the milling depth into the substrate, рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs is the bulk milling rate of the substrate, рқ‘§рқ‘§m 
is the thickness of the mask, and рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm is the bulk milling rate of the mask (Table S11, Figure S12). The simplifying 
assumption of bulk milling rates ignores the initial milling response, the transition in milling chromia and then silica, the 
dependence of milling rate on angle of incidence[33], and redeposition of the working material[34], yielding an analytic 
function, 
 

в„ұSR(рқңҒрқңҒ, рқ’®рқ’®) = рқ‘Өрқ‘Өb
рқ‘Өрқ‘Өa

=
2

1
вҲҡ2 erfcвҲ’1 пҝҪ 2рқ’®рқ’®
рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ + 1

. 
(3) 

 
Despite the Gaussian approximation of the ion-beam profile and the simplifying assumption of bulk milling rates, the 
predictions of our model are generally consistent with our experimental results and nearly within our uncertainty estimates. 
Experimental results from milling with an ion-beam current of 227 pA Вұ 1 pA show the best agreement with the model, 
which predicts higher super-resolution factors for shallower features and a monotonic decrease in super-resolution factor 
for deeper features (Figure 6). Similar trends result for ion-beam currents ranging from approximately 80 pA to 800 pA 
(Figure S13). In comparison to mean values of the spatial masking model, mean values of experimental super-resolution 
factors from all experiments show a root-mean-square error of 0.5 Вұ 0.1, corresponding to a mean relative error of 
approximately 20 %. At the cost of analytic utility, a computational model without our simplifying assumptions might 
improve agreement of theory and experiment. However, our simple model captures the general effect of spatial masking, 
enabling predictions of processes using only two parameters. 

Beyond this primary comparison of theory and experiment, two variants of our spatial masking model allow secondary 
tests of its reliability. The first variant models the milling of a single line, matching that of an experimental study which 
achieved super-resolution at the scale of one to ten nanometers[5b]. This line variant fits the experimental data with рқң’рқң’рқңҲрқңҲ
2=5.3 
and extracts reasonable parameter values from decreasing widths of nanochannels in quartz, resulting from line scans of a 
focused ion beam through sacrificial chromium masks of increasing thickness (Note S7, Figure S14). The second variant 
models the pattern of lines and spaces of variable pitch and duty cycle, simulating a conventional structure to test resolution, 
albeit with edge profiles that are characteristic of focused-ion-beam milling. This lineвҖ“space variant shows trends that are 
comparable to our experimental results (Figure S15, Figure S16), indicating that reductions in edge width translate to 
improvements of the conventional resolution metric of lineвҖ“space density or half-pitch of periodic features. 

The general agreement of our spatial masking model, various experimental results, and test-structure simulations 
substantiates our theory as a useful construct, which we extend into the temporal domain to explore the limits of the process 
of spatial masking. 
 
 


10 

 

Figure 6. Super-resolution. Plot showing lateral super-resolution factors as a function of the ratio of milling depth to mask thickness. 
The light and dark regions of cyan respectively indicate the 95 % coverage interval and the interval between the lower and upper 
quartiles of the spatial masking model. The black triangles represent all features below the zero plane that we mill with an ion-beam 
current of 227 pA Вұ 1 pA. The white triangle corresponds to a representative feature with a depth of approximately 18 nm and edge 
widths that decrease from 195 nm Вұ 18 nm before removal of the mask to 54 nm Вұ 12 nm after, yielding a super-resolution factor of 
3.6 +1.2 вҲ’0.7
пҝҪ
, which the black bars indicate. The distribution width in the рқңҒрқңҒ direction of Вұ 0.01 is smaller than the data marker. The 
gray triangles represent features that we mill with all other ion-beam currents, which range from approximately 80 pA to 800 pA. The 
white circles represent a subset of mean super-resolution factors from the entire data set, with downsampling for clarity. The black 
bars are 95 % coverage intervals of the mean values and are smaller than the data markers in the рқңҒрқңҒ direction. More details are in Figure 
S8, Table S8, and Figure S13. 
 
 
Temporal Efficiency 
Having demonstrated the capability of our analytic model to describe generally the spatial advantage of a sacrificial mask, 
we extend the model into the temporal domain to investigate the temporal efficiency of the fabrication process. We argue 
that spatial masking is rational under two conditions вҖ“ first, if patterning with a high value of ion-beam current through a 
sacrificial mask requires less time than patterning with a low value of ion-beam current directly into the substrate, and 
second, if the patterning resolution at a minimal value of ion-beam current, typically around 1 pA for commercial systems, 
exceeds critical dimensions of the nanostructure design. The temporal efficiency of spatial masking, рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ, describes the extent 
to which patterning with a high value of ion-beam current through a sacrificial mask to achieve a certain effective lateral 
resolution saves time,  
 

рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ =
рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs
рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўm + рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs

=
рқ‘үрқ‘үsрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs

вҲ’1рқҗјрқҗјlow

вҲ’1

рқ‘үрқ‘үmрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪmвҲ’1рқҗјрқҗјhigh

вҲ’1 + рқ‘үрқ‘үsрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsвҲ’1рқҗјрқҗјhigh

вҲ’1 = пҝҪ

рқҗјрқҗјhigh
рқҗјрқҗјlow

пҝҪ
рқңҒрқңҒ

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒ = в„ұSR(рқңҒрқңҒ, рқ’®рқ’®)

1
рқӣҪрқӣҪ
рқңҒрқңҒ

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒ , 
(4) 

 
where рқ‘үрқ‘үs and рқ‘үрқ‘үm are, respectively, the volumes of the substrate and mask that the ion-beam mills (Note S8). For simplicity, 
we neglect the time to deposit and remove the sacrificial mask, which is a fraction ranging from 10-3 to 10-1 of the time to 
mill with a low value of ion-beam current. Equation (4) predicts that the temporal efficiency of spatial masking increases 
as physical selectivity increases and decreases as milling depth increases with respect to mask thickness (Figure 7, Figure 
7a). Moreover, Equation (4) implies that the limits of milling depth for spatial masking occur where the temporal efficiency 
falls below unity. Solving for this condition numerically reveals that the efficiency limit is proportional to the physical 


11 

selectivity of the mask and substrate (Figure 7b). Applying this model, while accounting for all measurement uncertainties, 
yields a remarkable prediction for our bilayer system вҖ“ patterning a nanostructure with a certain edge width, using a high 
value of ion-beam current through a sacrificial mask, would require less time than directly milling a similar nanostructure 
with a low value of ion-beam current to depths ranging from 35 to 135 times the thickness of the chromia mask, or 
approximately 2 Вөm to 9 Вөm. In this way, even modest improvements in physical selectivity yield relatively large 
improvements in the milling range, рқңҒрқңҒmax. To better understand the intriguing implication of these results, we combine our 
experimental measurements of super-resolution factors with experimental values of temporal efficiency and revisit the 
resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace. 
 
 

 

Figure 7. Temporal efficiency. (a) Plots showing theoretical mean values of temporal efficiency, рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ, as a function of milling depth for a 
range of values of physical selectivity and a scaling exponent of 0.15 +0.06 вҲ’0.07
пҝҪ
. For clarity, we consider uncertainty only from the 
scaling exponent. The light and dark regions respectively indicate the 95 % coverage interval and the interval between the lower and 
upper quartiles of temporal efficiency.  The circles are positions of maximum milling depth, where the temporal milling efficiency 
equals unity. (b) Plot showing maximum milling depth as a function of physical selectivity. The circles correspond to theoretical values 
of maximum milling depth in (a). Uncertainties of the data, which are 95 % coverage intervals of the mean values, are smaller than the 
data markers. (c) Joint histogram showing physical selectivity and maximum milling depth with (dash line) contour indicating the 95 % 
coverage region. The roundels in (b) and (c) correspond to our experimental values that predict a maximum milling depth at which 
super-resolution patterning remains temporally efficient, рқңҒрқңҒmax, of 71 +64 вҲ’36
пҝҪ
. 

 
 
Paradigm Shift 
Lithographic patterning has a characteristic tradespace[12a], with lateral resolution following a power-law dependence on 
areal throughput for different processes. The tradespace of focused-ion-beam milling is analogous but requires 
consideration of volume throughput. A key finding of our study is that a sacrificial mask transforms the coupling of lateral 
resolution and volume throughput. This is evident in the improvement of conventional resolution to super-resolution by 
factors of 1.8 to 2.7 after removal of the mask. These experimental results are independent of our theoretical model of 
super-resolution (Figure 8, Figure 8a). Power-law models of each resolutionвҖ“throughput trend enable evaluation of the 
tradespaces to determine equivalent values of conventional resolution and super-resolution but dramatically different 
values of volume throughput that result from different ion-beam currents (Table S13, Note S6). A minimal extrapolation 
of experimental values of volume throughput for equivalent values of conventional resolution and super-resolution 
indicates an improvement by a factor of 42 Вұ 2 for our highest value of ion-beam current. Extrapolation to lower values of 
ion-beam current implies even more impressive improvements, ranging from two to three orders of magnitude (Table S13), 
while extrapolation to higher values of ion-beam current suggests potential limits of such improvements. To better 
understand the spatiotemporal advantages of spatial masking, we combine metrics of resolution and volume throughput to 
empirically investigate this limiting behavior. 
 


12 

 

Figure 8. Super-resolution and ultrahigh volume throughput. (a) Plots showing (red) effective lateral resolution and (blue) super-
resolution as a function of volume throughput. The horizontal dash arrow indicates a factor of improvement of 42 in volume 
throughput for an equal value of lateral resolution with minimal extrapolation outside of our experimental range. The vertical solid 
arrow indicates a mean factor of improvement of 2.7 in resolution for the volume throughput that corresponds to our lowest value of 
ion-beam current. (b) Plots showing figures of merit (red) before and (blue) after removal of the chromia mask. The vertical arrows 
indicate mean factors of improvement in figure of merit of 2.9 for our lowest value of ion-beam current and 1.8 for our highest value 
of ion-beam current. For both plots, solid lines are fits of power-law models to experimental data, dash lines extrapolate outside of 
the experimental range, roundels mark the intersection of conventional resolution and super-resolution trends, and uncertainties are 
smaller than data markers. 
 
 
We introduce a figure of merit, в„і, as a function of ion-beam current to elucidate the effect of spatial masking on the 
tradespace of lateral resolution, в„ӣ, and volume throughput, рқ’ұрқ’ұ,  
 

в„і = рқ’ұрқ’ұ

в„ӣ = в„ұSR(рқңҒрқңҒ, рқ’®рқ’®) рқҗјрқҗј1вҲ’рқӣҪрқӣҪ

рқӣјрқӣј
пҝҪ
рқ‘үрқ‘үm + рқ‘үрқ‘үs
рқ‘үрқ‘үmрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪmвҲ’1 + рқ‘үрқ‘үsрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsвҲ’1пҝҪ вү… в„ұSR(рқңҒрқңҒ, рқ’®рқ’®) рқҗјрқҗј1вҲ’рқӣҪрқӣҪ

рқӣјрқӣј пҝҪ
рқ‘§рқ‘§m + рқ‘§рқ‘§s
рқ‘§рқ‘§mрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪmвҲ’1 + рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsвҲ’1пҝҪ . 
(5)

 
The figure of merit, in units of Вөm2 hr-1, increases as ion-beam current increases, decreases as resolution degrades, and 
collapses to рқӣјрқӣјвҲ’1рқҗјрқҗј1вҲ’рқӣҪрқӣҪрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs in the absence of a sacrificial mask, where в„ұSR(рқңҒрқңҒ, рқ’®рқ’®) must equal unity. In this way, the figure of 
merit enables direct comparison of conventional milling of a bilayer before removal of the sacrificial mask, to super-
resolution milling through a sacrificial mask after removal. For our experimental system, the mask increases the figure of 
merit by a factor ranging from 1.8 to 2.9, due to better resolution with a mean factor of 2.1 Вұ 0.9 at a constant volume 
throughput (Figure 8b, Table S13). Extrapolation to low values of ion-beam current suggests higher factors of 
improvement, whereas extrapolation to high values of ion-beam current imply a limit to improvement by a sacrificial mask. 

Equation (5) yields two nonobvious insights into the effects of physical selectivity and milling depth on process quality 
(Figure S17). First, our model predicts that, for a constant value of milling depth, figure of merit increases as physical 
selectivity decreases. This implies that softer masks hasten the milling process, improving volume throughput with little 
cost to lateral super-resolution but some cost to milling range. Second, our model predicts that, for a constant physical 
selectivity, figures of merit increase as milling depth decreases. This implies that thicker masks yield nanostructures with 
narrower edges than thinner masks, improving lateral resolution and milling range with some cost to throughput. Other 
bilayer materials might optimize physical selectivity for particular objectives. These new insights into the resolutionвҖ“
throughput tradespace motivate experimental tests of the improvements in volume throughput that sacrificial masking 
enables. 
 
 
Lens array fabrication
Our new understanding of the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining predicts that sacrificial 
masking can increase the throughput of device fabrication at a higher value of ion-beam current. This improvement of 
throughput is relative to equivalent devices resulting from directly milling a workpiece at a lower value of ion-beam current. 
To test this prediction, we mill two arrays of Fresnel lenses that are nominally equivalent, either a single lens directly into 
silica with an ion-beam current of 26 pA, or 75 lenses through a sacrificial mask of chromia and into silica with an ion-
beam current of 2600 pA, in an equal time of 3.75 h. Without a chromia mask to dissipate the accumulation of positive 
charge[17b], direct milling of silica requires a modification of the fabrication process, such as simultaneous exposure by an 
electron beam or flood gun, which may or may not be available, to compensate for this effect and achieve comparable 
results (Table S14). We perform a control experiment to test this effect, milling single lenses directly into silica at an ion-
beam current of 2600 pA, with and without simultaneous exposure by an electron beam. Fresnel lenses are simple to 


13 

design[35] but their structural complexity and sharp transitions in surface relief make them challenging to machine and 
measure at small scales[36]. For both reasons, Fresnel lenses are suitable targets for novel fabrication and functional 
characterization. In testing the dose delivery to fabricate the Fresnel lenses, we develop methods to trim the dose around 
the peaks of concentric ridges to tune the super-resolution effect, and to exhaust the mask in the milling process (Note 
S10). 

In our application, the function of Fresnel lenses is to focus incident light into spots of a certain size at a certain distance 
away from the surface of a microscope coverslip, enabling projection standards for, and functional characterization by, 
optical microscopy. These primary metrics of performance are nearly equivalent for both lens arrays. The single lens that 
we mill directly into silica at an ion-beam current of 26 pA and with electron-beam exposure to achieve the best results 
serves as a reference. In comparison, the projection distances of the lenses that we mill through chromia are equal to within 
0.14 % +1.4 % вҲ’1.6 %
пҝҪ
 and the apparent spot sizes are equal to within вҲ’0.27 % +0.88 % вҲ’0.78 %
пҝҪ
 (Figure 9, Figure S19). In this 
way, the reference lens and lens array perform similarly as projection standards. In contrast, the projection distances and 
apparent spot sizes of the two control lenses differ significantly from the reference lens. Direct milling into silica at an ion-
beam current of 2600 pA with electron-beam exposure results in a lens with a projection distance that differs by 
3.46 % +3.27 % вҲ’3.14 %
пҝҪ
 and an apparent spot size that differs by 14.38 % +0.04 % вҲ’0.04 %
пҝҪ
 from the reference lens (Figure 
S20, Table S14). Without the electron beam, charge accumulation severely impairs the milling process, degrading the 
quality of the resulting lens structure so much as to compromise its performance. There is also a 30 % to 40 % reduction 
in the transmittance of the lenses that we mill through chromia, which is potentially attributable to the intermixing of 
chromia and silica and potentially remediable by pattern transfer to an optical polymer[37]. The similar performance of the 
reference lens and the lens that we mill through chromia demonstrates an improvement in fabrication throughput by a factor 
of 75, testing the new tradespace and showing a significant benefit from the paradigm shift. 
 


14 

 

Figure 9. Fresnel lens arrays. (a) Schematic showing the design of a single Fresnel lens. (b, c) Brightfield optical micrographs at best 
focus of the top of the central zone of Fresnel lenses that we mill (b) directly into silica with an ion-beam current of 26 pA and (c) 
through chromia and into silica with an ion-beam current of 2600 pA. Different background intensities result from the absence or 
presence of chromia. (d, e) Brightfield optical micrographs at best focus of the spots from the lenses in (b) and (c). (f, g) Volume 
reconstruction of the focal spots from brightfield optical micrographs that we register to surface reconstructions from atomic-force 
micrographs of the Fresnel lenses in (b) and (c). 
 
 
 
Conclusions
Focused-ion-beam machining occurs within a tradespace of lateral resolution and volume throughput. At the root of this 
tradespace is a power-law dependence of lateral resolution on ion-beam current, such that fine features mill slowly. This 
limits the utility of what is otherwise a powerful process to directly form complex nanostructures without serial lithography, 
yielding the conventional view of the focused ion beam as that of a machine tool for prototyping rather than for 
manufacturing. In this study, we comprehensively and systematically investigate how a sacrificial mask can radically 
improve the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace, using a chromia film to mask a silica substrate from gallium ions. Chromia 
proves to be a multifunctional mask, facilitating in-line metrology of ion-beam focus without issues from dielectric 
charging, enabling theoretical and experimental studies of the super-resolution effect, and being chemically suitable for a 
variety[23a] of processes and applications. This general process may extend to other bilayer materials and ion sources. 
Building on our characterization and application of these useful properties, we develop foundational theory for the spatial 
masking process and super-resolution effect, deriving an analytic model that generally predicts our experimental results 


15 

and provides key insight into the parameter space of the process. Our tractable theory informs a paradigm shift from 
empirical to engineering design of masking and milling processes. Through measurements that are independent of our 
model and its simplifying approximations, we experimentally demonstrate super-resolution factors of up to 6 Вұ 2, and 
improvements to volume throughput of at least factors of 42 Вұ 2 for our smallest mean super-resolution factor and with 
minimal extrapolation. For our larger super-resolution factors, further extrapolation to equal values of resolution at lower 
values of ion-beam current implies a higher volume throughput by two to three orders of magnitude. An effect of this scale 
is analogous to the gain mechanism of chemical amplification of resist materials, in which effective thresholding improves 
contrast in photolithography, or increases in sensitivity improve areal throughput of electron-beam lithography[38]. We test 
these predictions by the fabrication of Fresnel lenses, increasing throughput by a factor of 75 for functionally equivalent 
lenses that we mill through chromia and into silica relative to lenses that we mill directly into silica. Further work could 
develop the Fresnel lens array into a novel standard for projecting focused spots into a sample to perform magnification 
and distortion calibration in the presence of sample aberrations[39]. Further work is also necessary to explore this advantage 
and optimize the tradespace for different objectives, such as fabricating other types of diffractive optics[36c], electromagnetic 
metasurfaces[40], or nanofluidic molds[11, 41]. However, our results show a temporal advantage that is so decisive as to enable 
a paradigm shift from conventional machining to ultrarapid prototyping of complex structures for research and 
development, and even to commercial manufacturing of device arrays that would conventionally require hundreds to 
thousands of hours of machine time. Moreover, our chromia characterization and model development can impact sample 
preparation for materials characterization[6] and biological imaging[7], enabling prediction and optimization of the super-
resolution and volume throughput that are latent to masking and milling processes for volumetric imaging. In general, our 
new insights into the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace extend the utility of focused-ion-beam machining from fundamental 
science to commercial products. 
 
 
 
Methods
Experimental
Fabrication 
To form a bilayer to study the spatial masking process, we thermally oxidize p-type silicon substrates to produce a silica 
film, over which we deposit a sacrificial film of chromia. We mill arrays of pits to test the focus of the ion beam and arrays 
of squares to test the spatial masking process, using an electronвҖ“ion beam system with a focused beam of gallium cations 
at an accelerating voltage of 30 kV and ion-beam currents ranging from approximately 80 pA to 800 pA (Table S2). We 
mill all structures at the eucentric height of our system and at normal incidence to the ion-beam column, which requires a 
stage tilt of 0.9075 rad (52В°) with respect to the electron-beam column. After milling and characterizing the structures 
resulting from these patterns, we remove the sacrificial chromia mask by immersion in chromium etchant. 
 
We fabricate arrays of Fresnel lenses on silica coverslips. We estimate the ion doses for radial profiles of Fresnel 
lenses from design depths and mean milling rates of chromia and silica. We use the radial profiles to interpolate the ion 
doses for milling positions in a Cartesian coordinate system. To test direct fabrication, we mill a single Fresnel lens with 
an ion-beam current of approximately 26 pA in a time of 3.75 h, while scanning the electron beam over the patterning area 
at an electron-beam current of 100 pA to compensate for the accumulation of positive charge from ion irradiation. In a 
control experiment, we mill single Fresnel lenses with an ion-beam current of approximately 2600 pA in a milling time of 
0.04 h with and without charge compensation by an electron-beam current of 6400 pA. We deposit a sacrificial film of 
chromia onto one silica coverslip and mill an array of 75 Fresnel lenses with an ion-beam current of approximately 2600 pA 
in a similar time of 3.75 h. 
 
Characterization 
We measure the thickness of silica films by ellipsometry, and the thickness of chromia films by ellipsometry, transmission 
electron microscopy, and X-ray diffractometry.  

We measure surface topography of all structures that we fabricate by atomic-force microscopy. We measure the surface 
topography of complex test-structures before and after removal of the sacrificial mask. In all measurements by atomic-
force microscopy, we use probes that consist of silicon-nitride cantilevers with a length of 27 Вөm, a resonant frequency of 
approximately 1400 kHz, a force constant of 17 N m-1, and carrying a silicon tip with nominal front angle of 261 mrad Вұ 
44 mrad (15В° Вұ 2.5В°), a nominal back angle of 446 mrad Вұ 44 mrad (25В° Вұ 2.5В°), a nominal radius of 5 nm, and a maximum 
radius of 12 nm.  

We perform X-ray diffractometry with incident X-rays that correspond to copper KОұ transitions, which have an energy 
of 1.29 fJ (8.04 keV) and a wavelength of 0.1506 nm. We fit an X-ray reflectivity model[26] to the resulting data to measure 
density, surface roughness, and thickness. We fit all models to data by damped least-squares estimation with uniform 
weighting. We apply the Scherrer equation to estimate crystallite size. 
We perform scanning electron microscopy of secondary electrons incident on a through-lens detector with an acceleration 
voltage of 5 kV, an electron-beam current of approximately 100 pA, a working distance of 4.2 mm, at normal incidence.  

We characterize the projection distances and apparent spot sizes of Fresnel lens by brightfield optical microscopy, 
using an objective lens with a nominal magnification of 50Г—, a numerical aperture of 0.95, and trans-illumination at 
wavelengths ranging from 420 nm to 510 nm and a peak wavelength of approximately 460 nm. We use an array of 


16 

subwavelength apertures with a pitch of 5001.45 nm Вұ 1.08 nm to calibrate[42] the mean pixel size of all optical micrographs 
as 126.82 nm Вұ 0.03 nm. We record a series of micrographs of each lens and spot in focal volumes of approximately 
258 Вөm by 258 Вөm by 40 Вөm, scanning through focus in increments of approximately 40 nm. We measure the vertical 
positions of best focus of lens surfaces by finding local maxima of a ninth-order polynomial model of image contrast in a 
range of images that include the top surface of the central zones of the lenses. We measure the vertical positions of best 
focus of spots by fitting symmetric bivariate Gaussian models to the spot images and finding local minima of a ninth-order 
polynomial model of the apparent standard deviations. We calculate the projection distance as the difference between the 
two positions of best focus. 
 
In-line Resolution Metrology  
We correlate measurements of test pits by scanning electron micrography and atomic force microscopy, enabling 
quantitative assessment of pit radius by scanning electron microscopy as a measure of effective lateral patterning resolution 
just prior to the fabrication of complex test-structures. Our analysis correlates the maximum signals of intensity of 
secondary electron scattering of pits from scanning electron micrographs with the negative of the second derivative of their 
surfaces from atomic force micrographs, the latter of which requires second-order differentiation with respect to lateral 
position. We propagate uncertainties by Monte-Carlo simulations (Note S4, Table S3). 
 
Milling Responses 
We measure the depth, surface roughness, and edge width of square features in the checkerboard test-patterns by analyzing 
atomic force micrographs. We level all atomic force micrographs and propagate all uncertainties from atomic force 
microscopy by Monte-Carlo simulations (Table S3). We use an error function to empirically model the z position рқ‘§рқ‘§before(рқ‘ рқ‘ ) 
in sections of atomic force micrographs that transition from the bottom of a feature that we mill to the top of the chromia 
surface before chromia removal, Equation (6),  
 

рқ‘§рқ‘§before(рқ‘ рқ‘ ) = рқ‘‘рқ‘‘

2 пҝҪerf пҝҪ рқ‘ рқ‘  вҲ’ рқ‘ рқ‘ 0
вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺedge

пҝҪ + 1пҝҪ + рқ‘җрқ‘җ, 
(6) 

 
and an error function that we truncate at the zero plane to empirically model the same features after chromia removal, 
Equation (7), 

рқ‘§рқ‘§after(рқ‘ рқ‘ ) = пҝҪрқ‘‘рқ‘‘ вҲҷ erf пҝҪ рқ‘ рқ‘  вҲ’ рқ‘ рқ‘ 0
вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺedge

пҝҪ + рқ‘җрқ‘җ
рқ‘ рқ‘  вүӨ рқ‘ рқ‘ 0

рқ‘җрқ‘җ
рқ‘ рқ‘  > рқ‘ рқ‘ 0

, 
(7) 

 
where рқ‘‘рқ‘‘ is the depth of the feature, рқ‘ рқ‘ 0 is the location of the edge, рқңҺрқңҺedge is the standard deviation of the Gaussian function, 
and c is a constant. We approximate the width of edges as the 95 % coverage interval of the width of the error functions, 
which correspond to рқ‘Өрқ‘Өbefore = 4рқңҺрқңҺedge before chromia removal and рқ‘Өрқ‘Өafter = 2рқңҺрқңҺedge after chromia removal. We repeat this 
measurement along the widths of edges for each square feature in the checkerboard patterns. 
 
Theoretical 
Ion Penetration
We perform three simulations of ion penetration into the bilayer using Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) 
software (Table S7).[20] In three separate simulations, we input material densities, elemental compositions, and a chromia 
thickness of either 63.5 nm, corresponding to milling bulk chromia, 16 nm, corresponding to the z position at which the 
chromiaвҖ“silica interface evidently begins to influence the milling response of chromia, according to our experimental 
analysis of milling responses, and 0 nm, corresponding to milling bulk silica. In each Monte-Carlo simulation, 100000 
gallium ions, each with a landing energy of 4.81 fJ or 30 keV, bombard either a chromia on silica target or a silica target 
at normal incidence. We compute the resulting spatial distributions of gallium ions in the target materials to guide our 
interpretation of the nanostructure topographies that we measure by atomic force microscopy. 
 
Spatial Masking 
We derive an analytic expression for super-resolution factors that result after milling a uniform semi-infinite region through 
a sacrificial mask and into an underlying substrate in one dimension. For simplicity, we assume that the mask has an 
average milling rate рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm and a thickness рқ‘§рқ‘§m and that the substrate has an average milling rate рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs and a final depth рқ‘§рқ‘§s. A 
Gaussian approximation of the distribution of current density of the ion beam leads to a model of the spatial profile of the 
ion dose along the x direction, рқҗ·рқҗ·(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ), as an error function of the form, 
 

рқҗ·рқҗ·(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ) вү… рқҗ·рқҗ·0 пҝҪ1 вҲ’ 1

2 пҝҪerf пҝҪрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0

вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺ

пҝҪ + 1пҝҪпҝҪ , 
(8) 

 
where рқҗ·рқҗ·0 is the dose of the ion beam, рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0 is the center position of the edge of the pattern, which we assign to be zero, and 
рқңҺрқңҺ is the effective standard deviation of the Gaussian profile of the ion beam. The dose necessary to mill through the mask 


17 

and to a depth, рқ‘§рқ‘§s, into the substrate is the sum of the dose necessary to mill through the mask, рқҗ·рқҗ·m, and the dose necessary 
to mill the nanostructure, рқҗ·рқҗ·s. Accordingly, рқҗ·рқҗ·0 = рқҗ·рқҗ·m + рқҗ·рқҗ·s = рқ‘§рқ‘§mрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm
вҲ’1 + рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs
вҲ’1. Milling depths, рқ‘§рқ‘§m and рқ‘§рқ‘§s, have units of 
length and milling rates, рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm and рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs, have units of volume per current per second or Вөm3 nA-1 s-1. The quotient of 
measurements of length and milling rate yields a value with units of dose, nA s Вөm-2, which we convert to pC Вөm-2. 
The extent to which the ion beam mills the underlying substrate corresponds to the value of the x position of the dose in 
Equation (8) that exceeds the dose necessary to mill through the mask. In other words, the x position at which the mask 
begins to screen the tail of the ion beam occurs where рқҗ·рқҗ·(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ) = рқҗ·рқҗ·(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙm) = рқҗ·рқҗ·m (Figure S12), 
 

рқҗ·рқҗ·m = рқ‘§рқ‘§m
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm

= пҝҪ рқ‘§рқ‘§m
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm

+ рқ‘§рқ‘§s
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs

пҝҪ пҝҪ1 вҲ’ 1

2 пҝҪerf пҝҪ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙm
вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺ

пҝҪ + 1пҝҪпҝҪ 

= рқ‘§рқ‘§mрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs + рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm

рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪmрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs

пҝҪ1 вҲ’ 1

2 пҝҪerf пҝҪ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙm

вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺ

пҝҪ + 1пҝҪпҝҪ . 

(9)

 
Two dimensionless parameters simplify Equation (9)вҖ•the ratio of the milling depth of the substrate to the thickness of the 
mask, рқңҒрқңҒ = рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘§рқ‘§m
вҲ’1, and the ratio of the milling rate of the substrate to the milling rate of the mask, рқ’®рқ’® = рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡsрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡm
вҲ’1, which is the 
physical selectivity. Making these substitutions in Equation (9) and solving the resulting expression for рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙm yields the 
position at which the mask begins to screen the tail of the ion beam, 
 

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙm(рқңҺрқңҺ, рқ’®рқ’®, рқңҒрқңҒ) = вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺ erfвҲ’1 пҝҪ1 вҲ’
2рқ’®рқ’®

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ = вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺ erfcвҲ’1 пҝҪ 2рқ’®рқ’®

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ . 
(10) 

 
We compute the super-resolution factor as the ratio of the edge width resulting from a low value of ion-beam current, рқ‘Өрқ‘Өlow, 
to the edge width resulting from a high value of ion-beam current, рқ‘Өрқ‘Өhigh вҖ“ after removal of the sacrificial film, exploiting 
the favorable yield of secondary electrons of chromia to consistently focus the ion beam and circumventing the need for 
continuous control of current. We define the edge widths of the nanostructures to be the 95 % coverage interval of the 
width of the error function, which extends to Вұ2рқңҺрқңҺlow on either side of the center position of the edge resulting from low 
current, where рқңҺрқңҺlow is the effective standard deviation of the Gaussian profile of the beam resulting from a low current. The 
extents of the edge resulting from high current before removal of the sacrificial film are similarly Вұ2рқңҺрқңҺhigh, but after removal 
of the sacrificial mask layer, the edge width decreases from 4рқңҺрқңҺhigh to a final width of рқ‘Өрқ‘Өhigh = рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҘmпҝҪрқңҺрқңҺhigh, рқ’®рқ’®, рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ + 2рқңҺрқңҺhigh. The 
ratio of widths from either case yields the super-resolution factor, which is valid for рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҘmпҝҪрқңҺрқңҺhigh, рқ’®рқ’®, рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ > вҲ’2рқңҺрқңҺhigh,  
  

рқ‘Өрқ‘Өlow = 4рқңҺрқңҺlow,
(11)

 

рқ‘Өрқ‘Өhigh = вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺhigherfcвҲ’1 пҝҪ 2рқ’®рқ’®

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ + 2рқңҺрқңҺhigh, 
(12) 

and 

в„ұSRпҝҪрқңҺрқңҺlow, рқңҺрқңҺhigh, рқңҒрқңҒ, рқ’®рқ’®пҝҪ = рқ‘Өрқ‘Өlow
рқ‘Өрқ‘Өhigh

= пҝҪрқңҺрқңҺlow
рқңҺрқңҺhigh

пҝҪ пҝҪ
2
1
вҲҡ2 erfcвҲ’1 пҝҪ 2рқ’®рқ’®
рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ + 1

пҝҪ. 
(13)

 
Next, we apply the experimental constraint of sparse and discontinuous values of ion-beam current to Equation (13), to 
model the effect of removal of the sacrificial mask on edge width. Rather than analyzing the patterning resolution resulting 
from two different values of current that yield similar edge widths вҖ“ either in the absence of a mask for low current or after 
removal of the mask for high current вҖ“ we constrain the current to a single value, such that рқңҺрқңҺlow = рқңҺрқңҺhigh = рқңҺрқңҺ, and analyze 
the effect of the mask on the edge profile. This constraint yields an expression that is applicable to our experimental system, 
 

в„ұSR(рқңҒрқңҒ, рқ’®рқ’®) = рқ‘Өрқ‘Өb
рқ‘Өрқ‘Өa

=
4рқңҺрқңҺ

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙm(рқңҺрқңҺ, рқ’®рқ’®, рқңҒрқңҒ) + 2рқңҺрқңҺ =
2

1
вҲҡ2 erfcвҲ’1 пҝҪ 2рқ’®рқ’®
рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ + 1

. 
(14) 

 
 
 
 
 
LineвҖ“Space Patterns 
We simulate the focused-ion-beam milling of periodic lines and spaces to estimate the limitations of the process to form 
dense arrays in the presence and absence of a sacrificial mask (Figure S15, Figure S16). We apply our knowledge of the 
vertical milling response of our bilayer to predict structures resulting from patterns of ion dose with pitch, рқ‘қрқ‘қ, ranging from 
1рқңҺрқңҺ to 10рқңҺрқңҺ and duty cycle, рқӣҝрқӣҝ, ranging from 0 % to 100 %. For each set of parameters, we compute vertical profiles in silica 
that result from either direct exposure, рқ‘§рқ‘§direct(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ),  


18 

 

рқ‘§рқ‘§direct(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ) = рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡsilica пҝҪрқҗ·рқҗ·lsпҝҪрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ, рқңҺрқңҺ, рқңҒрқңҒdesign, рқ‘қрқ‘қ, рқӣҝрқӣҝпҝҪпҝҪ, 
(15) 

 
where рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡsilica is the milling rate of bulk silica and рқҗ·рқҗ·ls(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ) is a spatial pattern of ion dose resulting from positioning a Gaussian 
ion beam with standard deviation рқңҺрқңҺ, to form lines and spaces of design depth, рқңҒрқңҒdesign вҖ“ or from milling through a sacrificial 
mask, рқ‘§рқ‘§masking(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ), 
 

рқ‘§рқ‘§masking(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ) = рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡbilayer пҝҪрқҗ·рқҗ·lsпҝҪрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ, рқңҺрқңҺ, рқңҒрқңҒdesign, рқ‘қрқ‘қ, рқӣҝрқӣҝпҝҪпҝҪ, 
(16) 

 
where рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡbilayer is the milling rate of the chromia and silica bilayer. Both profiles are simplifications that neglect the 
dependence of incidence angle on milling rate, any effects of redeposition, and any defocus of the ion-beam due to charging. 
We compute the fraction of predicted depth to design depth as a metric of fabrication feasibility. We define a tolerance of 
0.975 to identify values of minimum pitch at which patterning is feasible and compare values of minimum pitch for direct 
milling and milling in the presence of a sacrificial mask. 
 
Temporal Efficiency 
We calculate values of the temporal efficiency, which we derive analytically (Note S8), as functions of milling depth after 
normalization by mask thickness and of physical selectivity, by Equation (4) and using Monte-Carlo methods to propagate 
uncertainties from physical selectivity, and of the scaling exponent of our effective lateral patterning resolution, which we 
estimate from fits of a power law model to edge widths as a function of ion-beam current (Table S3). Using parameters 
from such random sampling, we simulate values of temporal efficiency for рқ‘§рқ‘§Мғ ranging from 10-1 to 104 and compute values 
of milling depth where рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ = 1 by interpolation to define maximum milling depths for five mean values of physical 
selectivity ranging from 0.1 to 10 in increments with exponential spacing. We repeat this process 104 times to construct 
distributions of maximum milling depth. Similarly, we calculate distributions of maximum milling depth of our system 
using our analytic expression for temporal efficiency and propagating uncertainties from atomic force microscopy, normal 
distributions of mask thickness, uncertainties from physical selectivity, and of the exponent of the power-law model of our 
effective lateral patterning resolution (Table S11, Table S3). We use kernel density estimation[43] with a Gaussian kernel 
to estimate the joint probability density of physical selectivity and maximum milling depth. 
 
Throughput 
We calculate values of volume throughput for equivalent values of resolution and super-resolution in two steps. We fit 
power-law models to experimental values of resolution or super-resolution as a function of volume throughput. For each 
value of super-resolution, we set the power-law model of the resolution trend equal to the value of super-resolution and 
invert the resolution model, extrapolating outside of our range of experimental values, to solve for volume throughput. We 
refer to the results of such extrapolation as values of equivalent throughput (Table S13).  
 
 
Supporting Information 
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the corresponding author. 
 
 
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge helpful comments from Lindsay C. C. Elliot, Henri J. Lezec, Jacob M. Majikes, and Adam L. 
Pintar, and inspiration on silicate formation from Sven Larsen. A. C. M. acknowledges support of a National Research 
Council Research Associateship. S.M.S. supervised the study. A.C.M. and S.M.S. designed the study with contributions 
from all authors. K.-T.L. prepared silica substrates. B.R.I. optimized the deposition of chromia. A.C.M. performed atomic 
force microscopy. A.C.M and K.S. performed X-ray diffraction experiments and analysis. K.S. performed transmission 
electron microscopy. A.C.M., J.S.V., and S.M.S. developed the in-line metrology method. A.C.M. and J.S. performed 
focused-ion-beam milling and scanning electron microscopy. A.C.M. and S.M.S. performed SRIM simulations. A.C.M., 
J.S.V., and S.M.S. developed the theoretical model of super-resolution. A.C.M. and S.M.S. designed the Fresnel lenses. 
C.R.C. and A.C.M. performed optical microscopy. A.C.M. and S.M.S. designed the statistical analysis and prepared the 
manuscript with contributions from all authors. 
 
 
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no financial or non-financial conflicts of interests. 


19 

References
[1] 
L. E. Ocola, C. Rue, D. Maas, MRS Bulletin 2014, 39, 336. 

[2] 
a) A. Blaikie, D. Miller, B. J. AlemГЎn, Nature Communications 2019, 10, 4726; b) T. Xu, E. C. Walter, A. Agrawal, 
C. Bohn, J. Velmurugan, W. Zhu, H. J. Lezec, A. A. Talin, Nature Communications 2016, 7, 10479; c) R. Ahmed, 
R. H. Victora, Applied Physics Letters 2018, 112, 182401; d) S. C. Lee, A. Neumann, Y. B. Jiang, K. Artyushkova, 
S. R. J. Brueck, Nanotechnology 2016, 27, 375707. 

[3] 
a) M. Chen, L. PethГ¶, A. S. Sologubenko, H. Ma, J. Michler, R. Spolenak, J. M. Wheeler, Nature Communications 
2020, 11, 2681; b) H. Cho, J. Kim, H. Park, J. Won Bang, M. Seop Hyun, Y. Bae, L. Ha, D. Yoon Kim, S. Min 
Kang, T. Jung Park, S. Seo, M. Choi, K.-Y. Suh, Nature Communications 2014, 5, 3137. 

[4] 
a) A. Dhawan, M. Gerhold, A. Madison, J. Fowlkes, P. E. Russell, T. Vo-Dinh, D. N. Leonard, Scanning 2009, 
31, 139; b) W. Zhu, T. Xu, H. Wang, C. Zhang, P. B. Deotare, A. Agrawal, H. J. Lezec, Science Advances 2017, 
3, e1700909; c) P. Chen, I. W. Jung, D. A. Walko, Z. Li, Y. Gao, G. K. Shenoy, D. LГіpez, J. Wang, Nature 
Communications 2019, 10, 1158; d) N. D. Bassim, A. J. Giles, L. E. Ocola, J. D. Caldwell, Applied Physics Letters 
2018, 112, 091101. 

[5] 
a) K.-T. Liao, J. Schumacher, H. J. Lezec, S. M. Stavis, Lab on a Chip 2018, 18, 139; b) L. D. Menard, J. M. 
Ramsey, Nano Letters 2011, 11, 512; c) J. Zhou, Y. Wang, L. D. Menard, S. Panyukov, M. Rubinstein, J. M. 
Ramsey, Nature Communications 2017, 8, 807; d) P. Fanzio, V. Mussi, C. Manneschi, E. Angeli, G. Firpo, L. 
Repetto, U. Valbusa, Lab on a Chip 2011, 11, 2961. 

[6] 
a) S. Cao, W. Tirry, W. Van Den Broek, D. Schryvers, Journal of Microscopy 2009, 233, 61; b) L. A. Giannuzzi, 
F. A. Stevie, Micron 1999, 30, 197; c) P. M. Nellen, V. Callegari, U. Sennhauser, CHIMIA International Journal 
for Chemistry 2006, 60, 735. 

[7] 
K. Narayan, S. Subramaniam, Nature Methods 2015, 12, 1021. 

[8] 
J. Orloff, M. Utlaut, L. Swanson, High Resolution Focused Ion Beams: FIB and Its Applications, Kluwer 
Academic / Plenum Publishers, New York, NY 2003. 

[9] 
N. Vladov, J. Segal, S. Ratchev, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2015, 33, 041803. 

[10] 
a) D. Freeman, B. Luther-Davies, S. Madden, in Technical Proceedings Vol. 1 - 3, Nano Science and Technology 
Institute,  2006; b) L. Holzer, F. Indutnyi, P. H. Gasser, B. MГјnch, M. Wegmann, Journal of Microscopy 2004, 
216, 84. 

[11] 
K.-T. Liao, A. C. Madison, A. L. Pintar, B. R. Ilic, C. R. Copeland, S. M. Stavis, in arXiv:2101.03881 [cond-
mat.soft], arXiv 2020. 

[12] 
a) C. R. K. Marrian, D. M. Tennant, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A 2003, 21, S207; b) C. A. Mack, 
presented at Proceedings of SPIE 2019. 

[13] 
J. A. Liddle, G. M. Gallatin, ACS Nano 2016, 10, 2995. 

[14] 
a) H. Wu, L. A. Stern, D. Xia, D. Ferranti, B. Thompson, K. L. Klein, C. M. Gonzalez, P. D. Rack, Journal of 
Materials Science: Materials in Electronics 2014, 25, 587; b) S. Tan, R. Livengood, P. Hack, R. Hallstein, D. 
Shima, J. Notte, S. McVey, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2011, 29, 06F604. 

[15] 
a) R. CГіrdoba, P. OrГәs, S. Strohauer, T. E. Torres, J. M. De Teresa, Scientific Reports 2019, 9, 14076; b) A. Fumio, 
K. Tomokazu, M. Osamu, Y. Anto, Y. Shingo, K. Koichi, M. Hiroyuki, H. Naoya, presented at SPIE 2014. 

[16] 
a) A. Kannegulla, L.-J. Cheng, Nanotechnology 2016, 27, 36LT01; b) T. Vermeij, E. Plancher, C. C. Tasan, 
Ultramicroscopy 2018, 186, 35; c) J. A. Taillon, V. Ray, L. G. Salamanca-Riba, Microscopy and Microanalysis 
2017, 23, 872; d) M. Qu, Y. Shen, L. Wu, X. Fu, X. Cheng, Y. Wang, Precision Engineering 2020, 62, 10. 

[17] 
a) M. S. Alias, H.-Y. Liao, T. K. Ng, B. S. Ooi, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2015, 33, 06F701; 
b) D. J. Stokes, T. Vystavel, F. Morrissey, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 2007, 40, 874; c) H. Komoda, 
M. Yoshida, Y. Yamamoto, K. Iwasaki, I. Nakatani, H. Watanabe, K. Yasutake, Microelectronics Reliability 2006, 
46, 2085; d) H. Komoda, I. Nakatani, H. Watanabe, K. Yasutake, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 2005, 44, 
7907; e) G. Gervinskas, G. Seniutinas, S. Juodkazis, Laser & Photonics Reviews 2013, 7, 1049. 

[18] 
a) T. Blom, K. Welch, M. StrГёmme, E. Coronel, K. Leifer, Nanotechnology 2007, 18, 285301; b) H. Ostadi, K. 
Jiang, P. D. Prewett, Microelectronic Engineering 2009, 86, 1021. 

[19] 
a) B. W. Kempshall, S. M. Schwarz, B. I. Prenitzer, L. A. Giannuzzi, R. B. Irwin, F. A. Stevie, Journal of Vacuum 
Science & Technology B 2001, 19, 749; b) M. UrbГЎnek, V. UhlГӯЕҷ, P. BГЎbor, E. KolГӯbalovГЎ, T. HrnДҚГӯЕҷ, J. Spousta, 
T. Е ikola, Nanotechnology 2010, 21, 145304. 

[20] 
J. F. Ziegler, M. D. Ziegler, J. P. Biersack, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B 2010, 
268, 1818. 

[21] 
a) M. M. Abdullah, F. M. Rajab, S. M. Al-Abbas, AIP Advances 2014, 4, 027121; b) M. D. Julkarnain, J. Hossain, 
K. S. Sharif, K. A. Khan, Journal of Optoelectronics and Advanced Materials 2011, 13, 485; c) R. C. Ku, W. L. 
Winterbottom, Thin Solid Films 1985, 127, 241. 

[22] 
a) P. Hones, M. Diserens, F. LГ©vy, Surface and Coatings Technology 1999, 120-121, 277; b) K. Khojier, H. 
Savaloni, Z. Ashkabusi, N. Z. Dehnavi, Applied Surface Science 2013, 284, 489. 

[23] 
a) F. Aydinoglu, F. Saffih, R. K. Dey, B. Cui, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2017, 35, 06GB01; b) 
X. Pang, K. Gao, A. A. Volinsky, Journal of Materials Research 2007, 22, 3531. 

[24] 
B. R. Ilic, C. H. Ray, K. Seibein, J. A. Liddle, presented at The 61st International Conference on Electron Electron, 
Ion, and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication, Orlando, FL 2017. 


20 

[25] 
J. A. Liddle, F. Salmassi, P. P. Naulleau, E. M. Gullikson, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2003, 21, 
2980. 

[26] 
M. Yasaka, The Rigaku Journal 2010, 26. 

[27] 
B. Bhushan, Thin Solid Films 1980, 73, 255. 

[28] 
a) M. T. Postek, J. S. Villarrubia, A. E. VladГЎr, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2005, 23, 3015; b) J. 
S. Villarrubia, A. E. VladГЎr, M. T. Postek, Surface and Interface Analysis 2005, 37, 951; c) L. Reimer, Scanning 
Electron Microscopy: Physics of Image Formation and Microanalysis, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 1985. 

[29] 
J. S. Villarrubia, A. E. VladГЎr, B. Ming, R. J. Kline, D. F. Sunday, J. S. Chawla, S. List, Ultramicroscopy 2015, 
154, 15. 

[30] 
C. Mack, B. Bunday, presented at Proceedings of SPIE 2016. 

[31] 
a) M. Hagara, P. Kulla, Radioengineering 2011, 20, 516; b) S. W. Lee, S. Y. Lee, H. J. Pahk, Curr. Opt. Photon. 
2018, 2, 69. 

[32] 
N. S. Smith, W. P. Skoczylas, S. M. Kellogg, D. E. Kinion, P. P. Tesch, O. Sutherland, A. Aanesland, R. W. 
Boswell, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2006, 24, 2902. 

[33] 
X. Xu, A. D. Della Ratta, J. Sosonkina, J. Melngailis, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 1992, 10, 2675. 

[34] 
J. Han, H. Lee, B.-K. Min, S. J. Lee, Microelectronic Engineering 2010, 87, 1. 

[35] 
H. Nishihara, T. Suhara, in Progress in Optics, Vol. 24 (Ed: E. Wolf), Elsevier 1987, p. 1. 

[36] 
a) Y. Chiu, C.-H. Huang, Y.-C. Hsu, presented at Optical Data Storage, Portland, Oregon, 2007/05/20, 2007; b) 
T. Fujita, H. Nishihara, J. Koyama, Opt. Lett. 1982, 7, 578; c) S. Anna, M. Andrzej, M. Jacek, K. Katarzyna, 
Optical Engineering 2017, 56, 1. 

[37] 
A. Jacobo-MartГӯn, N. Jost, J. J. HernГЎndez, C. DomГӯnguez, G. Vallerotto, S. Askins, I. AntГіn, I. RodrГӯguez, Opt. 
Express 2021, 29, 34135. 

[38] 
a) I. Hiroshi, presented at Proceedings of SPIE 1999; b) E. Reichmanis, F. M. Houlihan, O. Nalamasu, T. X. 
Neenan, Chemistry of Materials 1991, 3, 394; c) A. S. Gangnaik, Y. M. Georgiev, J. D. Holmes, Chemistry of 
Materials 2017, 29, 1898. 

[39] 
C. R. Copeland, J. Geist, C. D. McGray, V. A. Aksyuk, J. A. Liddle, B. R. Ilic, S. M. Stavis, Light: Science & 
Applications 2018, 7, 31. 

[40] 
H.-H. Hsiao, C. H. Chu, D. P. Tsai, Small Methods 2017, 1, 1600064. 

[41] 
L. C. Campbell, M. J. Wilkinson, A. Manz, P. Camilleri, C. J. Humphreys, Lab on a Chip 2004, 4, 225. 

[42] 
C. R. Copeland, R. G. Dixson, A. L. Pintar, B. R. Ilic, S. M. Stavis, arXiv e-prints 2021, arXiv:2106.10221v2 
[physics.optics]. 

[43] 
D. W. Scott, Multivariate Density Estimation: Theory, Practice, and Visualization, John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, Chicester, 2015. 


 

1Microsystems and Nanotechnology Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA. 2Maryland Nanocenter, 
University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, USA. 3CNST NanoFab, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA.  
*e-mail: samuel.stavis@nist.gov. 4We report uncertainties as 95% coverage intervals, or we note otherwise. 5We fit models to data by damped least-
squares with uniform weighting, or we note otherwise. 

1

 
 

Supporting Information for 
Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
 
 
Andrew C. Madison1 John S. Villarrubia1 Kuo-Tang Liao1,2 Craig R. Copeland1 Joshua Schumacher3

Kerry Siebein3 B. Robert Ilic1,3 J. Alexander Liddle1 and Samuel M. Stavis1,*

 
 
Index4,5

Note S1  
Fabrication methods 

Note S2  
Characterization methods 

Figure S1 
Silica and chromia 

Table S1  
Material properties  

Table S2  
Milling parameters 

Table S3  
Statistical variables 

Note S3  
Image formation 

Figure S2 
Image formation 

Note S4  
In-line resolution metrology 

Figure S3 
Correlative measurements 

Figure S4 
Filter parameters 

Table S4  
Uncertainties and errors 

Figure S5 
Complex test-structures  

Figure S6 
Vertical control  

Table S5  
Depth increments 

Table S6  
Milling responses 

Table S7  
Gallium penetration 

Figure S7 
Model summary 

Figure S8 
Measurement and prediction 

Table S8  
Measurement and prediction 

Figure S9 
Numerical analysis 

Table S9  
Numerical analysis 

Table S10 
Edge widths 

Figure S10 Patterning resolution 
Table S11 
Symbols, values, and definitions 

Note S6  
Bi-Gaussian approximation 

Figure S11 Bi-Gaussian approximation 
Figure S12 Spatial masking 
Figure S13 Super-resolution 
Note S7  
Spatial masking of line or point 

Figure S14 Comparison to a previous study 
Figure S15 LineвҖ“space patterns 
Figure S16 Minimum pitch ratio 
Note S8  
Temporal efficiency 

Table S12 
Power-law models 

Note S9  
Milling currents of equivalent resolution 

Table S13 
Factors of improvement 

Figure S17 Figure of merit 
Note S10 
Design of Fresnel lenses 

Note S11 
Dose trimming 

Figure S18 Dose trimming 
Figure S19 Fresnel lens characterization 
Figure S20 Fresnel lens comparison 
Table S14 
Fresnel lens parameters


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
2

Note S1. Fabrication methods
We form a silica layer on substrates of p-type silicon with a crystallographic orientation of вҹЁ100вҹ© by thermal oxidation in 
a furnace at atmospheric pressure, at a temperature of 1100 В°C, with an oxygen flow rate of 1000 mL min-1 (1000 sccm) 
and a ratio of hydrogen to oxygen of 1.85. We sputter-deposit chromia, Cr2O3, of at least 99.8% purity on the silica layer, 
with a deposition power of 400 W, under argon at a pressure of 1.3Г—10-3 Pa (9.8Г—10-6 Torr), and with a deposition rate of 
0.215 Вұ 0.005 nm s-1, for 285 s.  

We use an electronвҖ“ion beam system with a focused beam of gallium cations at an accelerating voltage of 30 kV, ion-
beam currents ranging from 82 Вұ 1 pA to 796 Вұ 4 pA, which we measure prior to fabrication by deflecting the ion beam 
into a Faraday cup, a working distance between the final lens and the substrate surface of 4.2 mm, and normal incidence 
with respect to the sample (Table S2). Uncertainties of ion-beam currents are conservative estimates of 100% coverage 
intervals. We propagate uncertainties by Monte-Carlo methods.[1] We fit manufacturer specifications of the half-width at 
half-maximum of the focused ion beam as a function of ion-beam current to the power-law model in Equation (1). 

We approximate the radius of our focused ion beam from the values of ion-beam current that we measure prior to 
fabrication (Table 11, Table S3). We use the radii from this power-law approximation to achieve an overlap of the ion 
beam of at least 50% between neighboring positions in the patterns.  

For pattern control, we use text files with matrices that define lateral positions, dwell times, and Boolean parameters 
for beam deflection. We mill two test patterns. The first is a 10 by 10 array of points with dwell times that increase linearly 
across columns. We write this pattern in multiple passes ranging in total dwell time from 0.05 to 5 s to form approximately 
Gaussian pits (Table S2). The second test pattern resembles a darkening checkerboard, being a 20 by 20 array of adjacent 
squares of 1 by 1 Вөm, with ion doses that alternate between 0 pC Вөm-2 and a value that increases from 0 to approximately 
1000 pC Вөm-2 across the columns and rows of the array in uniform increments of approximately 5 pC Вөm-2. We choose 
this dose increment to target depth increments of 1 nm between adjacent squares in the checkerboard pattern on the basis 
of tests of the milling rate of silica.[2] We remove the sacrificial chromia mask by immersion in a mixture of nitric acid, 
ceric acid, and water with respective volumetric fractions of 6%, 16%, and 78% for 5 min.  

We mill Fresnel lenses into silica coverslips with a thickness of approximately 170 Вөm, a root-mean-square surface 
roughness of less than 0.8 nm, and a surface quality with a scratch/dig specification of 20/10. We sputter-deposit a 
sacrificial mask of chromia with a thickness of 103 Вұ 2 nm onto a silica coverslip. We estimate the ion doses for radial 
profiles of Fresnel lenses from design depths and mean milling rates of chromia and silica (Note S10). We calculate the 
curvature of the lens design and trim the ion dose where the curvature drops below a critical value set by the inverse of the 
lateral extent of the ion beam (Note S11). We use the resulting radial profiles to interpolate values of ion dose for milling 
positions for each lens in a Cartesian coordinate system. We mill a single Fresnel lens directly into a silica coverslip with 
an ion-beam current of 26.3 Вұ 0.3 pA in a time of 3.75 h. We mill 75 Fresnel lenses in a square array through the sacrificial 
chromia mask and into silica with an ion-beam current of 2600 Вұ 30 pA in a time of 3.75 h. In this process, we aim to 
exhaust the mask, milling through its entire thickness to pattern each Fresnel lens and obviating the need for subsequent 
removal of the chromia by chemical etching.  

Note S2. Characterization methods  
We measure the thickness of the silica layer by ellipsometry. We measure the surface topography of the silica substrates 
before and after depositing the chromia mask. For all atomic force micrographs, we image regions of interest of 
approximately 25 by 25 Вөm with a line-scan resolution of 2048 points and at a rate of approximately 0.67 Hz. We use 
silicon-nitride cantilevers with a length of 27 Вөm, a resonant frequency of approximately 1400 kHz, a force constant of 
17 N m-1, and carrying a silicon tip with nominal front angle of 261 Вұ 44 mrad (15В° Вұ 2.5В°), a nominal back angle of 
446 Вұ 44 mrad (25В° Вұ 2.5В°), a nominal radius of 5 nm, and a maximum radius of 12 nm. Assuming this geometry, the width 
of the probe is nominally 75 Вұ 7 nm at a depth of 100 nm, which is comparable to the smallest radii of test pits that we 
measure. Such a geometry imposes an upper limit on the aspect ratio of features that we expect to measure accurately. We 
input these manufacturer specifications of the probe tip geometry into a certainty-map algorithm to identify and ignore data 
in atomic force micrographs that exhibit artifacts from tip convolution.[3] We estimate uncertainties of atomic force 
microscopy by a combination of manufacturer specifications and previous tests (Table S3).[2]  

We perform scanning electron microscopy with an acceleration voltage of 5 kV, a nominal electron-beam current of 
100 pA, a working distance of 4.2 mm, and at normal incidence with respect to the microscope stage. In all scanning 
electron micrographs, the imaging mode is of secondary electrons incident on a through-lens detector. Before ion exposure, 
we record scanning electron micrographs of the chromia mask at a magnification of 250000Г— Вұ 7500Г—, which corresponds 
to a horizontal field width of 597 Вұ 18 nm. This uncertainty is a 100% coverage interval per the microscope specification. 

We prepare a cross section of the chromia and silica layers for transmission electron microscopy by ex situ lift-out.[4] 
The dimensions of the cross section are approximately 10 Вөm in length, 5 Вөm in width, and 100 nm in depth. We image 
the cross section by brightfield transmission electron microscopy at an acceleration voltage of 300 kV.  

We determine the solid-state of chromia by X-ray diffraction from 0.35 to 1.40 rad in increments of 0.1 mrad with a 
total reflection critical angle of 7.0 mrad. The incident X-rays correspond to copper KОұ transitions, which have an energy 
of 1.29 fJ (8.04 keV) and a wavelength of 0.1506 nm. We fit an X-ray reflectivity model[5] to the resulting data to measure 
density, surface roughness, and thickness. We fit all models to data by damped least-squares estimation with uniform 
weighting. We estimate the sizes of crystallites present in X-ray diffractometry data using the Scherrer equation.  

For in-line resolution metrology, we measure pits by scanning electron microscopy at a magnification of 
5000Г— Вұ 150Г—, which corresponds to a horizontal field width of 29.8 Вұ 0.9 Вөm. We measure the surface topography of 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
3

complex nanostructures that we mill through chromia and into silica by atomic force microscopy before and after removal 
of the sacrificial mask.  

We record brightfield micrographs of Fresnel lenses to characterize the projection distances and apparent sizes of focal 
spots from each lens through a focal volume of approximately 258 by 258 Вөm by 40 Вөm. We axially section the focal 
volume into 1001 micrographs, scanning vertically in increments of 40 Вұ 10 nm. For these micrographs, a light-emitting 
diode trans-illuminates the samples with a wavelength range from 420 to 510 nm. An objective lens with a nominal 
magnification of 50Г— and a numerical aperture of 0.95 collects transmission through air immersion. A tube lens projects 
the images onto a complementary metalвҖ“oxideвҖ“semiconductor (CMOS) camera with 2048 by 2048 pixels, each with an 
on-chip size of 6.5 by 6.5 Вөm. A mean factor of 2.0, per the specification of the camera manufacturer, converts from 
photoelectrons to analog-to-digital units. We operate the camera at a sensor temperature of -10 В°C by thermoelectric and 
water cooling, without on-board correction of pixel noise, and in fast-scan mode, and we calibrate the imaging system for 
these parameters. 

We calibrate the imaging system with an aperture array that has a pitch of 5001.45 Вұ 1.08 nm, determining a mean 
pixel size of 126.82 Вұ 0.03 nm.[6]  We determine positions of best focus of lens surfaces by finding local maxima of a ninth-
order polynomial model of image contrast in a range of images that we identify by inspection to include the top surface of 
the central zones of the lenses. We determine positions of best focus of images of focal spots by fitting symmetric Gaussian 
models to image data and minimizing a ninth-order polynomial model that we fit to the resulting standard deviations in a 
range of images that we identify by inspection. We determine projection distance as the difference between the two 
positions of best focus.  

 

Figure S1. Silica and chromia. Atomic force micrographs showing a) silica before deposition of chromia and b) chromia 
before ion exposure. Comparison of the micrographs indicates that the areal densities of silica asperities and chromia 
patches with lateral dimensions exceeding 50 nm are comparable, as well as a convolution artifact of the probe tip in (b). 

 

 
 
Table S1. Material properties  

Material 
Composition 
Function 
Measurement method 

Density 
(g cm-3) 

Thickness 

(nm) or (Вөm) 

Root-mean-square 

roughness 

(nm) 

Chromia 
Cr2O3 
Sacrificial mask 

Atomic force microscopy
вҖ“
вҖ“
0.6 Вұ 0.2

Transmission electron 

microscopy 
вҖ“ 
63 Вұ 2 nm 
вҖ“ 

X-ray diffraction
5.3 Вұ 0.1
65 Вұ 3 nm
1.5 Вұ 0.4

Silica 
SiO2 
Working material 
Atomic force microscopy
вҖ“
вҖ“
0.3 Вұ 0.2

X-ray diffraction
2.2 Вұ 0.1
488 Вұ 2 nm
0.4 Вұ 0.4

Silicon 
Si 
Substrate 
Atomic force microscopy 
вҖ“ 
вҖ“ 
0.3 Вұ 0.2 

Manufacturer specification
2.3
525 Вұ 25 Вөm
вҖ“

Uncertainties of density, thickness, and roughness by X-ray diffraction are conservative estimates of 100% coverage intervals. 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
4

 
Table S2. Milling parameters  

Ion-beam 
current 

(pA) 
Feature 

Elements 
in array  

Lateral extent 

of array 

(Вөm by Вөm) 

Pitch of milling 

positions  

(nm) 

Number 
of milling 
positions 

Dwell time 

(Вөs) 

Number 

of  

passes 

Total 
milling 
time  
(s) 

82 Вұ 1
pits
10 by 10
18 by 18 
12.3
100
100
3052
275.2

219 Вұ 2
pits
10 by 10
18 by 18 
19.8
100
100
1526
137.6

407 Вұ 2 
pits 
10 by 10 
18 by 18  
26.8
100 
100 
611 
55.0 

773 Вұ 3 
pits 
10 by 10 
18 by 18  
36.7
100 
100 
306 
27.5 

83 Вұ 1
squares
20 by 20
20 by 20 
12.4
1312200
100
59
1241.9

227 Вұ 1
squares
20 by 20
20 by 20 
20.2
472424
100
14
434.2

421 Вұ 3 
squares 
20 by 20 
20 by 20  
27.3
253504 
100 
22 
228.9 

796 Вұ 4 
squares 
20 by 20 
20 by 20 
37.2
133136 
100 
56 
118.6 

26 Вұ 0.3
lenses
1 by 1
15 by 15
7.0
3414413
50
155
13500

2600 Вұ 30
lenses
7.5 by 10
150 by 120 
66.4
2791725
50
166
13500

2600 Вұ 30 
lenses 
1 by 1 
15 by 15 
66.4
36473 
50 
143 
144 

Uncertainties of ion-beam current are conservative estimates of 100% coverage intervals.  
The milling time of pits includes a 0.4 Вөs pause to unblank and blank the ion beam before and after milling at each beam position.  
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
5

Table S3. Statistical variables  

Variable 

Type of  
variable 
Symbol Distribution 

Type[7] of 
evaluation
Value 
Units 

Localization uncertainty in SEM micrographs
Uncertainty рқ‘ўрқ‘ўloc, SEM
Normal
B
Mean: рқ‘ рқ‘ 0, SEM, SD: рқңҺрқңҺloc, SEM 
nm

Localization uncertainty in AFM micrographs
Uncertainty рқ‘ўрқ‘ўloc, AFM
Normal
B
Mean: рқ‘ рқ‘ 0, AFM, SD: рқңҺрқңҺloc, AFM
nm

Standard deviation of Gaussian filter
Dimension
рқңҺрқңҺG
Uniform
A
Range: 10 to 30
nm

Window length of Savitzky-Golay filter 
Dimension 
рқң”рқң”SG
Uniform 
A 
Range: 13 to 27, odd values 
pixels 

Secondary electron scattering intensity 
Dimension 
рқҗјрқҗјSE 
Normal 
B 
Mean: рқҗјрқҗјSEпҝҪрқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ)пҝҪ, SD: рқңҺрқңҺSE 
arb. 

Magnification uncertainty in SEM micrographs
Uncertainty
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўmag
Uniform
B
Range: -0.03рқ‘Һрқ‘ҺSEM to 0.03рқ‘Һрқ‘ҺSEM
вҖ“

Mean pixel size of SEM micrographs
Dimension
рқ‘Һрқ‘ҺSEM
Delta
A
4.9
nm

Calibration errors of atomic force microscope
Uncertainty
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal
Normal
A
Mean: 0, SD: 0.0025 вҲҷ рқ‘§рқ‘§
nm

Position errors from surface roughness 
Uncertainty
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough 
Normal 
A 
Mean: 0, SD: 0.030 
nm 

Position errors from flatness
Uncertainty
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat
Normal
A
Mean: 0, SD: 0.065
nm

Position uncertainty due to AFM probe tip
Dimension
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip
Uniform
B
Range: -0.5вҲҷ рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹtip to 0.5вҲҷ рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹtip
nm

Maximum nominal radius of AFM probe tip
Dimension
рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹtip
Delta
A
5
nm

Radius of pits in SEM micrographs
Dimension
рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹp, SEM
Empirical
B
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўloc, SEM, рқң”рқң”SG, рқңҺрқңҺG, рқҗјрқҗјSE, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўmag
nm

Radius of pits in AFM micrographs 
Dimension 
рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹp, AFM
Empirical 
B 
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўloc, AFM, рқң”рқң”SG, рқңҺрқңҺG, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip
nm 

X-ray diffraction intensity 
Dimension 
рқҗјрқҗјXRD
Normal 
B 
Mean: рқҗјрқҗјXRD, SD: рқңҺрқңҺXRD 
arb. 

Chromia density
Dimension
рқңҢрқңҢm 
Normal
A
Mean: 5.3, SD: 0.05
g cm-3

Silica density
Dimension
рқңҢрқңҢs
Normal
A
Mean: 2.2, SD: 0.05
g cm-3

Root-mean-square roughness of chromia
Dimension
рқ‘…рқ‘…q, m
Normal
A
Mean: 1.5, SD: 0.4
nm

Root-mean-square roughness of silica
Dimension
рқ‘…рқ‘…q, s
Normal
A
Mean: 0.4, SD: 0.2
nm

Depth of features in AFM micrographs 
Dimension 
рқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘ рқ‘ 
Empirical 
B 
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip
nm 

Chromia thickness  
Dimension 
рқ‘§рқ‘§m
Normal 
A 
Mean: 63, SD: 1 
nm 

Milling rates of chromia on silica
Dimension
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡрқ‘–рқ‘– 
Normal
B
Table S6
Вөm3 nA-1 s-1

Intercepts of milling responses
Dimension
рқ‘Ҹрқ‘Ҹрқ‘–рқ‘–
Normal
B
Table S6
nm

Mean milling rate of chromia
Dimension
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm
Normal
B
Mean: 0.15, SD: 0.02
Вөm3 nA-1 s-1

Mean milling rate of silica
Dimension
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs
Normal
B
Mean: 0.24, SD: 0.02
Вөm3 nA-1 s-1

Ion-beam current 
Dimension 
рқҗјрқҗј
Normal 
A 
Table S2 
pA 

Coefficient of power law of ion-beam HWHM
Dimension
рқӣјрқӣјbeam 
Normal
B
Mean: 1.43, SE: 0.12
nm pA-ОІ

Exponent of power law of ion-beam HWHM
Dimension
рқӣҪрқӣҪbeam
Normal
B
Mean: 0.49, SE: 0.01
вҖ“

Coefficient of power law of width of step edges Dimension
рқӣјрқӣј
Normal
B
Mean: 60, SD: 13
nm pA-ОІ

Exponent of power law of width of step edges 
Dimension 
рқӣҪрқӣҪ
Normal 
B 
Mean: 0.20, SD: 0.05 
вҖ“ 

Widths of edges before chromia removal 
Dimension 
рқ‘Өрқ‘Өb
Empirical 
B 
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip
nm 

Widths of edges after chromia removal
Dimension
рқ‘Өрқ‘Өa
Empirical
B
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip 
nm

Effective lateral resolution or super-resolution
Dimension
в„ӣ
Empirical
B
рқӣјрқӣј, рқӣҪрқӣҪ, в„ұSR
nm

Super-resolution factor
Dimension
в„ұSR
Empirical
B
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip 
вҖ“

Physical selectivity of chromia and silica 
Dimension 
рқ’®рқ’® 
Empirical 
B 
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip 
вҖ“ 

Temporal efficiency
Dimension
рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ 
Empirical
B
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip
вҖ“

Temporally efficient milling range 
Dimension 
рқңҒрқңҒmax 
Empirical 
B 
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip, рқӣҪрқӣҪ
вҖ“ 

Volume throughput
Dimension
рқ’ұрқ’ұ
Empirical
B
рқ‘ўрқ‘ўcal, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўrough, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўflat, рқ‘ўрқ‘ўtip, рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm, рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs, рқ‘–рқ‘– 
Вөm3 hr-1

Figure of merit of focused-ion-beam milling
Dimension
в„і
Empirical
B
в„ӣ, рқ’ұрқ’ұ
Вөm2 hr-1

SEM = scanning electron microscopy 
SD = standard deviation 
AFM = atomic force microscopy 
HWHM = half width at half maximum 
SE = standard error 
We treat the bulk milling rate of silica as its mean value.  
We extend the conventional evaluation Type from uncertainties to dimensions. 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
6

Note S3. Image formation 
We observe a near equality of test-pit radii corresponding to the maximum signals of secondary electrons in scanning 
electron micrographs and the maximum convexity of surface profiles in atomic force micrographs. Secondary electrons 
from test pits form images with two main features of dark centers within bright rings, both of which are within the outer 
rims of the test pits (Figure 3c). In a previous study,[8] similar signals resulted from test pits in silicon вҢ©111вҢӘ and glassy 
carbon. However, the authors of this previous study removed the bright rings by a threshold and approximated the dark 
central features with a symmetric bivariate Gaussian function. This approximation would be inaccurate for our scanning 
electron micrographs and would lead to errors in measurements of pit radius. To better understand the empirical correlation 
that we use for in-line resolution metrology, we investigate the influence of the surface topography on the theoretical signal 
of secondary electrons, using fundamental concepts of image formation in scanning electron microscopy. A symmetric 
bivariate Gaussian surface, which has deviations in z position of approximately 5% in comparison to the surface profiles 
of our test pits (Figure 3c), is a reasonable approximation of our pit topography for theoretical analysis. Our calculations 
lead to a new interpretation of the image data. 

We expect three effects to dominate image contrast in scanning electron micrographs of pits. First, tilt contrast results 
from the dependence of the secondary-electron yield on the tilt angle, рқңҷрқңҷ, of the local surface-normal relative to the incident 
electron-beam. The secant of the tilt angle, sec рқңҷрқңҷ, is a common approximation of secondary-electron emission due to 
surface topography.[9] Second, shadow contrast results from surfaces of the pit that reabsorb secondary electrons, obscuring 
access to the top surface of the sample where an extraction bias pulls electrons toward the detector, reducing signals that 
originate within the basin of the pit.[4, 9b, 10] Third, material contrast results from local variations in secondary-electron yield 
due to the presence of the chromiaвҖ“silica bilayer, gallium dopants from the ion beam, and redeposition during sputtering, 
further modulating the superimposition of tilt and shadow effects. Although diffusion effects are also relevant, we expect 
a diffusion length of order 100 nm for secondary electrons in our system. Additionally, we expect the diffusion effect to 
contribute more to image formation for surface regions of higher slope than for surface regions of lower slope. Therefore, 
we expect that our analysis of tilt contrast captures relevant spatial information from the diffusion effect.  

To investigate the effects of pit topography on image formation, we compute tilt and shadow contrast for images of 
the surface of a Gaussian pit, рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ, рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ), with an aspect ratio that is comparable to that of the test pits. With diameters ranging 
from approximately 160 to 360 nm and corresponding depths ranging from approximately 30 to 100 nm, the aspect ratios 
of test pits vary from approximately 0.2 to 0.3. For a path along the x direction and through the center of the Gaussian pit, 
we calculate the primary signal, sec рқңҷрқңҷ = пҝҪ1 + (рқң•рқң•рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ рқң•рқң•рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ
вҒ„
)2, resulting from tilt contrast. For simplicity, we exploit the axial 
symmetry of the pit and the orientation of the path of interest in the x direction to ignore the y component of the surface in 
our calculation of the primary signal. We model shadow effects by calculating the accessibility of the surface of the pit to 
the zero plane, which corresponds to the flat surface above the pit. For any point on the zero plane, the accessibility is the 
solid angle that a hemisphere subtends, 2рқңӢрқңӢ sr, as any secondary electron escaping the surface is free to move toward a 
detector above the surface. The concavity of the surface of a Gaussian pit reduces the accessibility from a maximum value 
of 2рқңӢрқңӢ sr far from the center of the pit to a minimum value at the center of the pit (Figure S2a).  

During imaging, an extraction field of approximately 17 kV m-1 pulls electrons toward an in-lens detector. However, 
the extraction field changes the electron energy by less than 1 part in 1000, so that straight lines are good approximations 
of electron trajectories within submicrometer test pits. This suggests that accessibility approximates shadow contrast from 
the surface of such pits. We calculate the accessibility, рқ’ңрқ’ң(рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ, рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘–), of the рқ‘–рқ‘–th point on a path through the center of рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ in three 
dimensions by integrating the intervisibility function over the solid angle that the hemisphere subtends, О©, in equation (S1), 
 

рқ’ңрқ’ң(рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ, рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘–) = 1
рқңӢрқңӢ пҝҪ рқ‘Јрқ‘ЈпҝҪрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ, рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘–, рқ’“рқ’“(рқң”рқң”)пҝҪрқ‘‘рқ‘‘рқң”рқң”

О©
, 
(S1)

 
where the intervisibility,[11] рқ‘Јрқ‘Ј(рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ, рқ’“рқ’“(рқң”рқң”), рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘–), is either one or zero if рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ occludes a ray, рқ’“рқ’“(рқң”рқң”), emanating from a point on the 
surface profile, рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘– = (рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–рқ‘–, рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұрқ‘–рқ‘–, рқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘–рқ‘–), in direction рқң”рқң” = (рқңғрқңғ, рқң‘рқң‘), where рқңғрқңғ is the polar angle and рқң‘рқң‘ is the azimuthal angle. We 
compute the intervisibility as 

рқ‘Јрқ‘Ј(рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ, рқ’“рқ’“(рқң”рқң”), рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘–) = 0 пҝҪ1, рқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ > рқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘–рқ‘– +
вҖ–рқ’“рқ’“(рқң”рқң”)вҖ–
вҖ–рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘ҳрқ‘ҳ вҲ’ рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘–вҖ– (рқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘ҳрқ‘ҳ вҲ’ рқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘–рқ‘–) for all рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘ҳрқ‘ҳ

0, otherwise
, 
(S2)

 
where рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘ҳрқ‘ҳ = (рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳрқ‘ҳ, рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұрқ‘ҳрқ‘ҳ, рқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘ҳрқ‘ҳ) are intermediate points on the surface of the pit between рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘– and the projection of рқ’“рқ’“(рқң”рқң”) onto the 
surface, рқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ is the рқ‘§рқ‘§ position of the terminus of рқ’“рқ’“(рқң”рқң”). We use Monte-Carlo integration to compute Equation (S1) along рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘–. 
We set the length of рқ’“рқ’“(рқң”рқң”) to span the computational domain and achieve uniform sampling of рқң”рқң” over О© in 105 random 
directions by рқңғрқңғ = cosвҲ’1пҝҪрқ’°рқ’°(0,1)пҝҪ and рқң‘рқң‘ = 2рқңӢрқңӢрқ’°рқ’°(0,1), where рқ’°рқ’°(0,1) represents a uniform distribution of with lower 
bound of zero and an upper bound of one. Lastly, we calculate the second spatial derivative of рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ and a factor of the signal 
intensity resulting from topographic contrast, рқҗјрқҗјtopography, as the product of the surface-tilt and shadowing effects,  


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
7

рқҗјрқҗјtopography вҲқ рқ’ңрқ’ң(рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ, рқ’ҷрқ’ҷрқ‘–рқ‘–)
2рқңӢрқңӢ
sec рқңҷрқңҷ . 
(S3)

Several results of this new analysis indicate a limit of tilt and shadow contrast to predict rings of high intensity in 
secondary electron images of Gaussian pits. First, the primary signals from tilt contrast appear as peaks in signal intensity 
at positions where the first spatial derivative, rather than the second spatial derivative, of рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ are maximal (Figure S2b). Next, 
the accessibility of рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ exhibits a concave structure, transitioning from maximum values of 2рқңӢрқңӢ sr outside of the pit to a 
minimum value of approximately рқңӢрқңӢ sr in the center of the pit (Figure S2c). In comparison, the negative of the second spatial 
derivative of рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ shows two maxima, each of which indicates positions of maximum convexity of рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ, and a global minimum 
in the center of the pit, indicating a position of maximum concavity (Figure S2d). We interpret these positions of maximum 
convexity as possible locations for material contrast to arise due to the implantation of gallium, interspersing of chromia 
and silica, and redeposition of the various materials on the surface of the pit. Last, the product of the tilt and shadow effects 
predicts a complex response that rises slowly near the outer rim of the pit and falls to a global minimum in the center of 
the pit (Figure S2e). The discrepancies between the product of tilt and shadow contrast, and the negative second derivative 
of рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ, also suggest that material contrast affects the formation of images of Gaussian pits. Further study is necessary to fully 
understand the cause of the empirical correlation of electron signals and pit curvature, which nonetheless enables in-line 
resolution metrology. 
 

 

Figure S2. Image formation. Plots showing a) an arbitrary surface profile of a Gaussian pit, рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ, b) the secant of the tilt 
angle, рқңҷрқңҷ, of the surface profile normal, рқ‘ӣрқ‘ӣ, c) accessibility of the surface profile, d) the negative of the second derivative 
of the surface profile, and e) an overlay of (solid orange line) the negative of the second derivative and (yellow dash line) 
the product of sec рқңҷрқңҷ and accessibility. Black arrows in (a) indicate rays that escape the surface and gray dash arrows 
indicate rays that the surface occludes. Abrupt changes in (c) are artifacts from discretization of the computational 
domain and numerical integration. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
8

Note S4. In-line resolution metrology 

To measure pit radii in both scanning electron micrographs and atomic force micrographs, we localize pit centers using 
empirical model approximations and then localize maxima in radial sections of regions of interest of each pit. We propagate 
uncertainty through our analysis by perturbing position and image data in Monte-Carlo simulations of our measurements.  

Our analysis begins by thresholding each micrograph and computing centroids of simply connected regions to obtain 
the approximate positions of each pit. To localize the center of each pit in each imaging mode, we fit model approximations 
to image data. In images of pits in atomic force micrographs, we approximate the depths by an asymmetric bivariate 
function, рқҗәрқҗә(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ, рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ),  
 

рқҗәрқҗә(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ, рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ) = рқҗҙрқҗҙG вҲҷ exp пҝҪвҲ’ пҝҪ
1

2(1 вҲ’ рқңҢрқңҢ2) пҝҪ

(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0)2

рқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ2
вҲ’ 2рқңҢрқңҢ

(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0)(рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ вҲ’ рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ0)

рқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҘрқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ

+

(рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ вҲ’ рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ0)2

рқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ2
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ + рқ‘җрқ‘җ, 
(S4)

 
where рқҗҙрқҗҙG is the amplitude, (рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0, рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ0) is the center position of the pit in the x and y directions, рқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ and рқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ are the standard 
deviations in the x and y directions, рқңҢрқңҢ is the correlation coefficient between the x and y directions, and c is a constant 
background. In images of pits in scanning electron micrographs, we approximate the secondary-electron intensity as the 
sum of two functions. First, the Gaussian function in Equation (S4) approximates the intensity minimum at the center of a 
pit. Second, an elliptical annulus, рқҗёрқҗё(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ, рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ), with the Gaussian profile in Equation (S5), approximates the ring of maximum 
intensity that circumscribes the center of the pit, 
 

рқҗёрқҗё(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ, рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ) = рқҗҙрқҗҙE вҲҷ exp пҝҪвҲ’ пҝҪ
1
2рқң”рқң”2(1 вҲ’ рқңҢрқңҢ2) пҝҪ
(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0)2

рқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ2
вҲ’ 2рқңҢрқңҢ
(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0)(рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ вҲ’ рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ0)
рқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҘрқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ

+
(рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ вҲ’ рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ0)2

рқңҺрқңҺрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ2
вҲ’ 1пҝҪ

2
пҝҪпҝҪ + рқ‘җрқ‘җ, 
(S5)

 
where рқҗҙрқҗҙE is the amplitude, рқң”рқң” is the width of the annulus. We estimate the localization uncertainties of the center of pit 
images by perturbing image and position data of either micrograph, fitting models to the resulting data, and extracting the 
resulting center positions. Repeating this process 103 times for each pit, we construct distributions of center positions from 
which we calculate standard deviations as localization uncertainties of center positions for each micrograph of each pit. 
We perturb values of position within regions of interest with random noise from uniform distributions, which correspond 
to lateral uncertainties from the probe tip for atomic force micrographs, or from magnification errors for scanning electron 
micrographs. We perturb values of the z position and intensity of secondary-electron scattering in regions of interest with 
random noise from normal distributions, which respectively correspond to errors in calibration, flatness, and various 
scanning artifacts for atomic force micrographs, or to estimates of the standard deviation of the background intensity of 
secondary-electron scattering for scanning electron micrographs, which we measure on the borders of regions of interest. 
This process of perturbing position and image data forms the basis of our Monte-Carlo simulation.  

After localizing each pit, we align the array of pits in each micrograph by rotation of the micrographs so that the rows 
of pits in each micrograph are horizontal, corresponding to an angle of 0 rad. We then extract regions of interest of 1 by 
1 Вөm and concentric with each pit from each micrograph. A symmetric bivariate Gaussian filter with an isotropic standard 
deviation ranging from 10 to 30 nm smooths image data within the region of interest (Table S3, Figure S3, Figure S4). To 
evaluate uncertainties of pit locations, we perturb the initial values of the center position of a pit with random noise from 
normal distributions of the localization uncertainty in the x and y directions. We excise one-dimensional sections of length 
500 nm from the center position of the pit at an angle, рқңғрқңғ, with respect to the horizontal direction of each image, for angles 
ranging from 0 to 2ПҖ rad. As before, we apply our Monte-Carlo simulation approach, perturbing the position and image 
data of these radial sections to propagate uncertainty through our analysis. 

Both atomic force micrographs and scanning electron micrographs comprise discrete data with independent sources 
of noise that degrade images of the pits. Such noise complicates differentiation and may contribute to inaccurate 
measurements of the positions of extrema of the second derivative. To address this issue, we apply a Savitzky-Golay[12] 
digital smoothing filter with a cubic polynomial and a window length ranging from 13 to 27 pixels to smooth the one-
dimensional sections and to enable second-order differentiation of the sections from atomic force micrographs (Table S3, 
Figure S3, Figure S4). We vary the window length of the filter to evaluate both random and systematic effects with respect 
to mean radius (Figure S4). Optimal window length depends primarily upon the signal-to-noise ratio present within an 
image and may vary with different imaging conditions. 

After smoothing and differentiation, the sections from each micrograph include a single global maximum, with a 
position corresponding to the pit radius of the section. We model the local vicinity of the maximum with a quartic 
polynomial to localize the maximum of each radial section, рқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ). We define the angle-dependent radius of the pit in 
scanning electron micrographs, рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹp, SEM(рқңғрқңғ), to be the distance between the center of the pit, рқ‘ рқ‘ 0, SEM, and the position of the 
maximum of the intensity of secondary electron scattering in scanning electron micrographs,  
 

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹp, SEM(рқңғрқңғ) = arg max

рқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ)
пҝҪрқ‘ӯрқ‘ӯSGпҝҪрқ‘ӯрқ‘ӯGпҝҪрқ’©рқ’©пҝҪв„җSEпҝҪрқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ)пҝҪ, рқңҺрқңҺSE

2 пҝҪ, рқңҺрқңҺG

2пҝҪ, рқң”рқң”SGпҝҪпҝҪ вҲ’ рқ’©рқ’©пҝҪрқ‘ рқ‘ 0, SEM, рқңҺрқңҺloc, SEM

2
пҝҪ, 
(S6)

 
where рқ‘ӯрқ‘ӯSG denotes the application of the Savitzky-Golay filter with window length, рқң”рқң”SG, рқ‘ӯрқ‘ӯG denotes the application of the 
Gaussian filter with standard deviation рқңҺрқңҺG, рқ’©рқ’© denotes a normal distribution, в„җSEпҝҪрқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ)пҝҪ is the intensity of secondary 
electron scattering on the section, рқңҺрқңҺSE is the standard deviation of the background intensity of secondary electron scattering, 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
9

рқңҺрқңҺloc, SEM is the localization uncertainty of the center of the pit, and the x and y components of the section on the sampling 
radius, рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘ рқ‘ , рқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ) = (рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘ рқ‘ cosрқңғрқңғ, рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘ рқ‘ sinрқңғрқңғ), are each subject to uncertainty from a uniform distribution of рқ’°рқ’°пҝҪвҲ’0.5рқӣҝрқӣҝmag, 0.5рқӣҝрқӣҝmagпҝҪ 
from the uncertainty of the magnification of the scanning electron micrographs, рқӣҝрқӣҝmag = 0.03рқ‘Һрқ‘ҺSEM, where рқ‘Һрқ‘ҺSEM is the mean 
value of pixel size of the scanning electron micrograph. Similarly, we define the angle-dependent radius of the pit in 
scanning electron micrographs, рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹp, AFM(рқңғрқңғ), to be the distance between the center of the pit, рқ‘ рқ‘ 0, AFM, and the position of the 
maximum value of convexity of the pit in atomic force micrographs,  
 

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹp, AFM(рқңғрқңғ) = arg max

рқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ)
пҝҪвҲ’ рқң•рқң•2

рқң•рқң•рқ‘ рқ‘ 2 рқ‘ӯрқ‘ӯSGпҝҪрқ‘ӯрқ‘ӯGпҝҪрқ’©рқ’©пҝҪрқ‘§рқ‘§пҝҪрқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ)пҝҪ, рқңҺрқңҺcal
2 пҝҪ + рқ’©рқ’©(0, рқңҺрқңҺr
2) + рқ’©рқ’©(0, рқңҺрқңҺf
2), рқңҺрқңҺG
2 пҝҪ, рқң”рқң”SG пҝҪпҝҪ вҲ’ рқ’©рқ’©пҝҪрқ‘ рқ‘ 0, AFM, рқңҺрқңҺloc, AFM
2
пҝҪ, (S7)

 

where рқ‘§рқ‘§пҝҪрқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ)пҝҪ is the z position on the section, рқңҺрқңҺcal = 0.0025рқ‘§рқ‘§ accounts for a 0.5% systematic error from calibration of the 
atomic force microscope, рқңҺрқңҺr accounts for uncertainty from the configuration of scan rate, scan resolution, and probe tip,[2] 
рқңҺрқңҺf accounts for flatness errors, and the x and y components of the section, рқ‘ рқ‘ (рқңғрқңғ) = (рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘ рқ‘ cosрқңғрқңғ, рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘ рқ‘ sinрқңғрқңғ), are subject to 
uncertainty from a uniform distribution of рқ’°рқ’°пҝҪвҲ’0.5рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹtip, 0.5рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹtipпҝҪ from the probe tip, where рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹtip is the radius of the tip. 

For each imaging mode, we repeat these measurements 30 times for angles ranging from 0 to 2ПҖ rad in increments of 
approximately 100 mrad. To propagate uncertainty, we perturb the position and image data with random noise from 
uncertainty parameters each time, resulting in 1860 measurements of radius for each pit, and a total of 18600 measurements 
for each set of 10 replicates. We record measurements of radius from all Monte-Carlo simulations, compiling distributions 
of radii for all replicates in each micrograph. Table S3 summarizes all statistical variables that are relevant to the Monte-
Carlo simulation of the measurements of pit radii. 

Our in-line measurements and topographic analyses of test pits are highly relevant for focusing and calibrating 
electronвҖ“ion beam systems. Moreover, our methods of image analysis are broadly applicable to localizing features and 
inferring dimensions of similar nanostructures in scanning electron micrographs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
10

 

Figure S3. Correlative measurements. a) Scanning electron and b) atomic force micrographs showing the same 
representative array of pits that we mill with a focused ion beam with an ion-beam current of 219 Вұ 2 pA for dwell times 
ranging from 0.25 to 1.25 s in increments of 0.25 s. Dash boxes indicate the same region of interest in (c). c) Plots showing 
measurements of pit radius by (black) AFM and (gray) SEM for section angles ranging from 0 to 2ПҖ rad in increments of 
20 mrad. The mean radius of the pit is 122 Вұ 4 nm by atomic force microscopy and 122 Вұ 1 nm by scanning electron 
microscopy. Bars indicate radius distribution widths as 95% coverage intervals. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
11

 

Figure S4. Filter parameters. a, b) Plots showing measurements of mean radius of a pit by (gray circles) scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) and (black squares) atomic force microscopy (AFM) as functions of a) the standard deviation of the 
symmetric bivariate Gaussian filter and b) the window length of the Savitzky-Golay digital smoothing filter for the central 
pit in Figure S3a,b. Single values of the standard deviation of the Gaussian filter in (a) pair with a uniform distribution of 
the window length of the Savitzky-Golay filter in 1240 Monte-Carlo simulations of pit radius to isolate the effect of the 
value of standard deviation on measurements of pit radius. Similarly, single values of the window length of the Savitzky-
Golay filter in (b) pair with a uniform distribution of the standard deviation of the Gaussian filter in 1240 Monte-Carlo 
simulations of pit radius to isolate the effect of the value of window length on measurements of pit radius. Gray dash 
lines indicate experimental ranges of the standard deviation of the Gaussian filter and the window length of the Savitzky-
Golay filter (Table S3). These plots show the potential of each filter parameter to bias the measurements. Our 
simultaneous use of a range of values for each filter parameter yields measurements of mean pit radius in the center of 
these ranges with uncertainties of approximately 1 nm for scanning electron microscopy and 4 nm for atomic force 
microscopy. 
 
 
Note S5. Milling Responses 
We measure the depth, surface roughness, and edge width of the square features of checkerboard test-structures by analysis 
of atomic force micrographs. We level the atomic force micrographs and propagate uncertainties by Monte-Carlo 
simulations (Table S3). For each square feature, we extract image data from regions of interest of size 0.36 by 0.36 Вөm, or 
30 by 30 pixels, and concentric with the center of the square. We perturb values of the z position with random noise from 
normal distributions to account for errors in calibration, flatness, and scanning artifacts for atomic force micrographs. We 
compute the mean depth and root-mean-square value of surface roughness of the flat of each square. For each edge in the 
scanning dimension of a square feature, we extract image data from five sections within regions of interest of size 1 by 
0.36 Вөm, or 82 by 30 pixels. For each section, we propagate uncertainties from measurements by Monte-Carlo simulation 
and account for errors from systematic deviations in residuals from fits of models of step edges to data with leave-one-out 
jack-knife resampling.[13] We iteratively exclude one data point from the section and perturb all remaining values of position 
within this section with random noise from a uniform distribution corresponding to the lateral uncertainty from the radius 
of the probe tip. We perturb values of z position with random noise from normal distributions to account for errors from 
calibration, flatness, and scanning artifacts. We use an error function to empirically model the z position, рқ‘§рқ‘§before(рқ‘ рқ‘ ), in 
sections of atomic force micrographs that transition from the bottom of a feature that we mill to the top of the chromia 
surface before chromia removal, Equation (S8),  
 

рқ‘§рқ‘§before(рқ‘ рқ‘ ) = рқ‘‘рқ‘‘

2 пҝҪerf пҝҪ рқ‘ рқ‘  вҲ’ рқ‘ рқ‘ 0

вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺedge

пҝҪ + 1пҝҪ + рқ‘җрқ‘җ, 
(S8) 

 
and we use an error function that we truncate at the zero plane to empirically model the same features after chromia 
removal, Equation (S9), 

рқ‘§рқ‘§after(рқ‘ рқ‘ ) = пҝҪрқ‘‘рқ‘‘ вҲҷ erf пҝҪ рқ‘ рқ‘  вҲ’ рқ‘ рқ‘ 0
вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺedge

пҝҪ + рқ‘җрқ‘җ
рқ‘ рқ‘  вүӨ рқ‘ рқ‘ 0

рқ‘җрқ‘җ
рқ‘ рқ‘  > рқ‘ рқ‘ 0

, 
(S9) 

 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
12

where рқ‘‘рқ‘‘ is the depth of the feature, рқ‘ рқ‘ 0 is the location of the edge, рқңҺрқңҺedge is the standard deviation of a Gaussian, c is a 
constant, and рқ‘ рқ‘  is subject to uncertainty from a uniform distribution of рқ’°рқ’°пҝҪвҲ’0.5рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹtip, 0.5рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹtipпҝҪ from the radius of the probe tip. 
We approximate the width of edges as the 95% coverage interval of the width of the error functions, which correspond to 
рқ‘Өрқ‘Өbefore = 4рқңҺрқңҺedge before chromia removal and рқ‘Өрқ‘Өafter = 2рқңҺрқңҺedge after chromia removal. We repeat this measurement 820 times 
for each section, retaining all fit parameters. This sampling results in a total of 8200 measurements of the widths of edges 
for each square feature in the checkerboard patterns. 
 
 
 
Table S4. Uncertainties and errors 

 
Measurement uncertainty 
Estimate of error 

Ion-beam current  

(pA) 

Uncertainty of mean 

radius by atomic 
force microscopy  

(nm) 

Uncertainty of mean 
radius by scanning 
electron microscopy  

(nm) 

Root-mean-square 
residual to line of 

equality  

(nm) 

Root-mean-square  

error 
(nm) 

82 Вұ 1
3.1 Вұ 0.6
1.0 Вұ 0.1
3.7 Вұ 1.7
3.8 Вұ 1.8

219 Вұ 2
4.1 Вұ 1.9
1.0 Вұ 0.1
3.6 Вұ 1.6
6.7 Вұ 1.6

407 Вұ 2 
6.5 Вұ 3.8 
1.0 Вұ 0.1 
3.4 Вұ 1.6 
4.9 Вұ 1.1

773 Вұ 3 
7.4 Вұ 4.4 
1.0 Вұ 0.1 
5.5 Вұ 2.6 
5.8 Вұ 1.4

Uncertainties of ion-beam current are conservative estimates of 100% coverage intervals. 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
13

 

Figure S5. Complex test-structures. a-h) Atomic force micrographs showing checkerboard structures before and after 
chromia removal for several values of ion-beam current: (a,b) 83 Вұ 1 pA; (c,d) 227 Вұ 1 pA; (e,f) 421 Вұ 3 pA; and 
(g,h) 796 Вұ 4 pA. Uncertainties of ion-beam current are conservative estimates of 100% coverage intervals. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
14

 

Figure S6. Vertical control. Plot showing milling responses of chromia and silica for a range of ion-beam currents (red 
circles) before and (blue triangles) after chromia removal. The color codes are logarithmic. The lone black cross near the 
lower left corner of the plot indicates a 100% coverage interval of dose and a 95% coverage interval of depth. 
 
 
 
 
Table S5. Depth increments 

Depth increment before removal of chromia mask
Depth increment after removal of chromia mask

Ion-beam current 

(pA) 

Mean 
(nm) 

Standard deviation 

(nm) 

Mean 
(nm) 

Standard deviation 

(nm) 

83 Вұ 1 
1.11 Вұ 0.22 
1.23 Вұ 0.18 
1.19 Вұ 0.24 
0.94 Вұ 0.14 

227 Вұ 1
1.13 Вұ 0.16
0.99 Вұ 0.10
1.18 Вұ 0.16
0.93 Вұ 0.10

421 Вұ 3
1.14 Вұ 0.12
0.91 Вұ 0.08
1.17 Вұ 0.14
0.99 Вұ 0.08

796 Вұ 4 
1.14 Вұ 0.12 
0.98 Вұ 0.06 
1.16 Вұ 0.12 
0.97 Вұ 0.06 

Uncertainties of ion-beam current are conservative estimates of 100% coverage intervals. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
15

Table S6. Milling responses 

Segment 
Material 
Dose offset 
(pC Вөm-2) 

z position  

(nm) 

Milling rate  
(Вөm3 nA-1 s-1) 

Intercept  

(nm) 

вҖ“
вҖ“
0 Вұ 0
63 Вұ 1
вҖ“
вҖ“

1
Top surface of silica
69 Вұ 6
59 Вұ 1
0.05 Вұ 0.03
66 Вұ 2

2
Bulk silica
366 Вұ 10
16 Вұ 3
0.15 Вұ 0.04
101 Вұ 10

3
ChromiaвҖ“silica interface
531 Вұ 10
-16 Вұ 4
0.19 Вұ 0.04
126 Вұ11

4
Bulk chromia
1020 Вұ 0
-132 Вұ 6
0.24 Вұ 0.04
170 Вұ 14

 
 
 
 
 
Table S7. Gallium penetration 

z direction
x and y directions

Figure 

z

position 

(nm)

Chromia 
thickness 

(nm)

Mean 
(nm)

Standard 
deviation 

(nm)
Skew
Kurtosis

Mean 
(nm)

Standard 
deviation 

(nm)
Skew
Kurtosis

Figure 5c-i
59
59
13.9
5.7
0.4
0.1
0.0
4.6
0.0
0.5

Figure 5c-ii
16
16
15.3
7.9
1.0
1.0
0.0
5.3
0.0
1.3

Figure 5c-iii
-16
0
27.6
9.1
0.4
0.1
0.0
7.0
0.0
0.4

All simulations are of 105 gallium ions with a landing energy of 4.81 fJ (30 keV) at normal incidence, a chromia, Cr2O3, density of 5.3 g cm-3, and a silica, 
SiO2, density of 2.2 g cm-3. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure S7. Model summary. a-d) Plots showing representative (a,c) model fits and (b,d) residuals (a,b) before, and (c,d) 
after chromia removal. Overshoot artifact is apparent in (c). The root-mean-square of residuals in (a,b) and (c,d) are 
respectively 1.9 and 2.0 nm. e) Histograms showing the root-mean-square of residuals of fits of all test structures and 
ion-beam currents. Lone black bars in (a) and (c) indicate representative uncertainties of x position as 95% coverage 
intervals. Uncertainties of z position are smaller than the data markers. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
16

 

Figure S8. Measurement and prediction. a) Plots showing representative edge profiles. The solid regions show profiles 
resulting from a dose of 536 pC Вөm-2 and from an ion-beam current of 227 Вұ 1 pA, (red circles) before and (blue triangles) 
after removal of the chromia mask. The dark red squares are from a feature with a similar depth resulting from a dose of 
189 pC Вөm-2 and from an ion-beam current of 227 Вұ 1 pA. The lone black bar in (a) indicates a representative uncertainty 
of x position as a 95% coverage interval. Uncertainties of z position are smaller than the data markers. The inset bar chart 
shows the edge width of each profile with black bars indicating edge width distributions as 95% coverage intervals. b) 
Histograms showing edge widths (light red) before and (dark blue) after removal of the chromia mask. c) Histograms 
showing super-resolution factors, в„ұSR, from (dark blue) measurement and (magenta) prediction by the spatial masking 
model. Additional details are in Table S8. 
  
 
 
 
 
Table S8. Measurement and prediction 

Method 

Depth  
(nm) 

Depth after  

normalization by 
mask thickness 

Edge width  

(nm) 
Super-resolution 

factor  
(рқ“•рқ“•SR) 

Before removal  

(рқ’ҳрқ’ҳb)

Before removal at reference 

depth (рқ’ҳрқ’ҳb, ref)

After removal 

(рқ’ҳрқ’ҳa)

Measurement 17.7 +0.8 -0.9
пҝҪ
0.278 +0.014 -0.014
пҝҪ
 
195 +16 -18
пҝҪ
 
139 +9 -9
пҝҪ  
54 +11 -12
пҝҪ
 
3.6 +1.2 -0.7
пҝҪ
 

Prediction 
вҖ“ 
0.278 +0.010 -0.010
пҝҪ
 
вҖ“ 
вҖ“ 
вҖ“ 
4.3 +1.0 -0.7
пҝҪ
 

Fractional notation denotes 95% coverage intervals that are asymmetric. 
The sample size is 830 for all values. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
17

 

Figure S9. Numerical analysis. a,c,e,g) Histograms showing edge widths (light shading) before and (dark shading) after 
chromia removal and b,d,f,h) histograms showing super-resolution factors for three simulation and resampling methods: 
(white region with gray outline) jack-knife resampling only; (magenta and black hash region) Monte-Carlo simulation 
only; and (black region) jack-knife resampling with Monte-Carlo simulation. (a,b) A feature resulting from a dose of 
561 Вұ 2 pC Вөm-2 and having a depth of 24 Вұ 1 nm. (c,d) A feature resulting from a dose of 663 Вұ 3 pC Вөm-2 and having a 
depth of 49 Вұ 1 nm. (e,f) A feature resulting from a dose of 765 Вұ 3 pC Вөm-2 and having a depth of 71 Вұ 2 nm. (g,h) A 
feature resulting from a dose of 969 Вұ 4 pC Вөm-2 and having a depth of 114 Вұ 4 nm. In each panel, counts of distributions 
from the Monte-Carlo and jack-knife Monte-Carlo methods correspond to vertical axes on the left, and counts of 
distributions from the jack-knife method correspond to vertical axes on the right. Depths after normalization by mask 
thickness appear in the lower right corner of panels (b,d,f,h). Additional details are in Table S9. 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
18

Table S9. Numerical analysis 

Depth
Super-resolution factor

Method 

Feature 
number 
Samples 

Mean  
(nm) 

Mean after 

normalization 

(вҖ“) 

Mean 

(вҖ“) 

Standard deviation 

(вҖ“) 

Jack-knife
110
8300
23.7 Вұ 0.02
0.373 Вұ 0.0004
4.531 Вұ 0.006
0.302 Вұ 0.003

Monte-Carlo
110
8300
23.6 Вұ 0.02
0.372 Вұ 0.0004
4.660 Вұ 0.012
0.564 Вұ 0.008

Jack-knife Monte-Carlo
110
8300
23.7 Вұ 0.02
0.373 Вұ 0.0004
4.691 Вұ 0.014
0.618 Вұ 0.010

Jack-knife
130
8300
48.2 Вұ 0.03
0.759 Вұ 0.0004
2.709 Вұ 0.004
0.206 Вұ 0.004

Monte-Carlo
130
8300
48.2 Вұ 0.03
0.760 Вұ 0.0004
2.857 Вұ 0.006
0.290 Вұ 0.004

Jack-knife Monte-Carlo
130
8300
48.2 Вұ 0.03
0.760 Вұ 0.0004
2.862 Вұ 0.008
0.316 Вұ 0.005

Jack-knife
150
8300
70.8 Вұ 0.03
1.115 Вұ 0.0006
2.325 Вұ 0.001
0.026 Вұ 0.001

Monte-Carlo
150
8300
70.8 Вұ 0.04
1.115 Вұ 0.0006
2.336 Вұ 0.004
0.151 Вұ 0.002

Jack-knife Monte-Carlo
150
8300
70.8 Вұ 0.03
1.115 Вұ 0.0006
2.339 Вұ 0.004
0.157 Вұ 0.002

Jack-knife
190
8300
114.3 Вұ 0.05
1.801 Вұ 0.0008
2.212 Вұ 0.001
0.021 Вұ 0.001

Monte-Carlo
190
8300
114.3 Вұ 0.05
1.800 Вұ 0.0008
2.222 Вұ 0.004
0.167 Вұ 0.002

Jack-knife Monte-Carlo
190
8300
114.3 Вұ 0.05
1.800 Вұ 0.0008
2.220 Вұ 0.004
0.172 Вұ 0.002

 
 
Table S10. Edge widths  

 
Ion-beam current 

(pA) 

 
83 Вұ 1 
227 Вұ 1 
421 Вұ 3 
796 Вұ 4 

Metric 

Before
(nm) 

After
(nm) 

Before
(nm) 

After
(nm) 

Before
(nm) 

After
(nm) 

Before
(nm) 

After
(nm) 

2.5th percentile 
117 
32 
116 
51 
127 
64 
137 
66 

25th percentile 
133 
43 
135 
67 
157 
83 
165 
94 

Mean 
142 
54 
154 
79 
174 
101 
195 
113 

75th percentile 
148 
59 
171 
84 
185 
105 
221 
132 

97.5th percentile 
173 
87 
216 
117 
241 
165 
276 
179 

Uncertainties of ion-beam current are conservative estimates of 100% coverage intervals. 
Uncertainties of values of percentiles[14] are all less than 1 nm.  
 
 
 

 

Figure S10. Patterning resolution. a) Plot showing pit radius by scanning electron microscopy as a function of charge, рқ‘„рқ‘„, 
with fits of power-law models. The non-monotonic trend in pit radius as a function of ion-beam current shows 
imperfections in the reproduction of ion-beam focus due to manual operation of the system, motivating development of 
methods for complete automation of ion-beam focusing, which our study of in-line resolution metrology enables. b) Plot 
showing edge width by atomic force microscopy before chromia removal as a function of ion-beam current, рқҗјрқҗј. Violin plots 
show distributions of edge widths from complex test-structures below the zero plane, corresponding to the metrics in 
Table S10 for edge widths (red) before and (blue) after removal of chromia. The dark lines in violin plots indicate mean 
values. The solid and dash lines indicate representative fits of power-law models to data. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
19

Table S11. Symbols, values, and definitions

Symbol

Range of 

values 
Units 
Definition 

рқҗјрқҗј
83 to 796
pA
Ion-beam current

рқ‘§рқ‘§
вҲ’150 to 65
nm
рқ‘§рқ‘§ position of edge profile resulting from exposure of substrate to a focused ion beam

рқ‘§рқ‘§m
61 to 65
nm
Mask thickness

рқ‘§рқ‘§s
0 to 150
nm
Milling depth into the substrate

рқңҒрқңҒ
0 to 2.2
вҖ“
Milling depth into the substrate after normalization by mask thickness, рқңҒрқңҒ = |рқ‘§рқ‘§|рқ‘§рқ‘§m

вҲ’1

рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm
0.11 to 0.19
вҖ“
Average milling rate of the mask

рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs
0.20 to 0.28
вҖ“
Average milling rate of the substrate

рқ’®рқ’®
1.0 to 2.1
вҖ“
Physical selectivity, the ratio of average milling rates of the substrate, рқ’®рқ’® = рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm

вҲ’1

рқ‘Өрқ‘Өb
116 to 276
nm
Width of nanostructure edges before removal of the mask

рқ‘Өрқ‘Өa
32 to 179 
nm
Width of nanostructure edges after removal of the mask

в„ұSR
1 to 6
вҖ“
Super-resolution factor, ratio of widths of step edges before and after removal of the mask, в„ұSR = рқ‘Өрқ‘Өbрқ‘Өрқ‘Өa

вҲ’1

в„ӣ
32 to 276 
nm
Effective lateral patterning resolution or super-resolution

рқ‘үрқ‘үm
0.000 to 0.065 
Вөm3
Volume of the mask that the ion-beam mills for each square feature of the complex test-structures 

рқ‘үрқ‘үs
0.000 to 0.150
Вөm3
Volume of the substrate that the ion-beam mills for each square feature of the complex test-structures

рқ’ұрқ’ұ
55 to 530 
Вөm3 hr-1 Volume throughput of material that the ion-beam mills per unit time

рқӣјрқӣј
34 to 86 
nm pA-ОІ
Coefficient in power-law model of the widths of step edges with respect to ion-beam current

рқӣҪрқӣҪ
0.1 to 0.3
вҖ“
Exponent in power-law model of the widths of step edges with respect to ion-beam current

рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ
10-1 to 105
вҖ“
Temporal efficiency, ratio of milling times in the absence, рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs, and presence, рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs + рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўm, of a mask, рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ = рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs(рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs + рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўm)вҲ’1

в„і
102 to 105 
Вөm2 hr-1 Figure of merit for focused-ion-beam milling, в„і = рқ’ұрқ’ұ в„ӣвҲ’1

 
 
 
Note S6. Bi-Gaussian approximation 
Under the conditions that are necessary to mill a semi-infinite edge, an error function is a good approximation of the total 
dose pattern from both Gaussian and bi-Gaussian approximations of the current density distribution of a focused ion beam. 
The bi-Gaussian[15] model, рқҗөрқҗөрқҗәрқҗә(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ; рқҗҙрқҗҙ, рқңҺрқңҺcore, рқңҺрқңҺtail, рқң”рқң”, рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–рқ‘–), in Equation (S10) accounts for contributions to the total current 
density from both the core and the tails of the ion beam in a summation of two Gaussian functions,  
 

рқҗөрқҗөрқҗәрқҗә(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ; рқҗҙрқҗҙ, рқңҺрқңҺcore, рқңҺрқңҺtail, рқң”рқң”, рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–рқ‘–) = рқҗҙрқҗҙ пҝҪрқң”рқң” exp пҝҪвҲ’
(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–рқ‘–)2

2рқңҺрқңҺcore2 пҝҪ + (1 вҲ’ рқң”рқң”) exp пҝҪвҲ’
(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–рқ‘–)2

2рқңҺрқңҺtail2 пҝҪпҝҪ , 
(S10)

 
where рқҗҙрқҗҙ is the amplitude of the ion beam dose, рқң”рқң” is a parameter that varies between 0 and 1 to weight the Gaussian 
components, рқңҺрқңҺcore is the standard deviation of the core of the ion beam, рқңҺрқңҺtail is the standard deviation of the tail of the ion 
beam, and рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–рқ‘– is the milling location of the ion beam. Equation (S10) reduces to a Gaussian model when рқң”рқң” = 1. Models of 
the ion-beam shape and size inform discrete positioning of the ion beam during the direct-write process of focused-ion-
beam milling. In particular, the full-width at half-maximum of the core of the ion beam is a common approximation of the 
diameter of the ion beam, рқ‘‘рқ‘‘beam = 2пҝҪ2 ln(2)рқңҺрқңҺcore. The diameter of the ion beam and the overlap, рқңҠрқңҠ, define the pitch or 
spacing of adjacent milling positions in a rectilinear coordinate system, О”рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ = (1 вҲ’ рқңҠрқңҠ)рқ‘‘рқ‘‘beam. As such, a semi-infinite dose 
pattern comprises a series of milling positions that occur with equal spacing, О”рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ, on the half-line in one-dimensional space. 
As previous studies[8, 16] show, an overlap greater than or equal to 0.35 ensures the delivery of a uniform dose in the bulk 
of the half-line. 

Our study of spatial masking motivates an inquiry into the effect of the bi-Gaussian approximation of the profile of a 
focused ion beam on the edge of a semi-infinite dose pattern. In particular, the deviation from an error function of a semi-
infinite dose pattern that the bi-Gaussian model imposes is of interest. We model a semi-infinite dose pattern in one 
dimension, рқҗ·рқҗ·(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ), as a series of discrete milling locations of a focused ion beam that follows the bi-Gaussian approximation, 
 

рқҗ·рқҗ·(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ) = рқҗ·рқҗ·0

рқҗ·рқҗ·рқ‘Ғрқ‘Ғ

пҝҪ рқҗөрқҗөрқҗәрқҗә(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ; рқҗҙрқҗҙ, рқңҺрқңҺcore, рқңҺрқңҺtail, рқң”рқң”, рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–рқ‘–),

рқ‘Ғрқ‘Ғ

рқ‘–рқ‘–

 
(S11)

 
where рқҗ·рқҗ·0 is the value of dose in the bulk of the half-line and рқҗ·рқҗ·рқ‘Ғрқ‘Ғ is a factor that normalizes the maximum value of the 
summation in Equation (S11) to unity. To quantify the deviation of the semi-infinite dose pattern from an error function, 
we simulate dose patterns for ratios of рқңҺрқңҺtail to рқңҺрқңҺcore ranging from 1 to 10, a range of weights ranging from 0 to 0.5, an 
amplitude of the bi-Gaussian model of 1, and an overlap of 0.5 (50%). We fit an error function, 
 

рқҗ·рқҗ·(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ) = рқҗ·рқҗ·0
рқҗ·рқҗ·рқ‘Ғрқ‘Ғ

пҝҪ рқҗөрқҗөрқҗәрқҗә(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ; рқҗҙрқҗҙ, рқңҺрқңҺcore, рқңҺрқңҺtail, рқң”рқң”, рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–рқ‘–)

рқ‘Ғрқ‘Ғ

рқ‘–рқ‘–
вү… рқҗ·рқҗ·0 пҝҪ1 вҲ’ 1

2 пҝҪerf пҝҪрқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0

вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺeff

пҝҪ + 1пҝҪпҝҪ , 
(S12)

 
the resulting dose patterns, where рқңҺрқңҺeff is the effective standard deviation of the edge of the dose pattern and рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0 is the 
position of the center of the edge. For each parameterization, we compute the root-mean-square error between each dose 
pattern and its corresponding fit.  


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
20

Values of root-mean-square error are less than 2.5% for all parameterizations of the focused-ion-beam shape (Figure 
S11). This good agreement indicates a general consistency between the bi-Gaussian approximation of the current density 
distribution of a focused ion beam and the error function model of the semi-infinite dose pattern that results from milling 
in discrete positions, which supports the validity of our use of the error function in our model of the lateral super-resolution 
effect. 
 
 

 

Figure S11. Bi-Gaussian approximation. a) Plots showing (solid black line) the relative amplitude of ion dose resulting 
from milling an array of (gray ticks) discrete positions and (red dash line) fits of the error function in Equation (S12) for 
four combinations of values of рқңҺрқңҺtailрқңҺрқңҺcore
вҲ’1  and рқң”рқң” : (i) рқңҺрқңҺtailрқңҺрқңҺcore
вҲ’1 = 1.00 , рқң”рқң” = 1.000 ; (ii) рқңҺрқңҺtailрқңҺрқңҺcore
вҲ’1 = 3.25 , рқң”рқң” = 0.125 ; 
(iii) рқңҺрқңҺtailрқңҺрқңҺcore
вҲ’1 = 5.5, рқң”рқң” = 0.250; and (iv) рқңҺрқңҺtailрқңҺрқңҺcore
вҲ’1 = 7.75, рқң”рқң” = 0.375. The insets of panels (a-iвҖ“a-iv) show the spatial 
profile of the ion beam over the extents of the spatial domain, Вұ10рқңҺрқңҺcore, for each parameterization. b) Contour plot 
showing root-mean-square error of fits of the error function to relative dose profiles for a subset of the parameter space 
of the bi-Gaussian function. The position on the contour plot of the Gaussian profile in (a-i) is beyond the vertical extent 
of the plot. The root-mean-square error of fits of the error function to the relative dose profile corresponding to the 
Gaussian profile is zero. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
21

 

Figure S12. Spatial masking. a) Plot showing z position as a function of dose for a simple model of milling in which a 
sacrificial mask of thickness, рқ‘§рқ‘§m, and average milling rate, рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm, screens a substrate with an average milling rate of рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs. b) 
Plot showing spatial ion-dose pattern from (violet) discrete positions of an ion beam as a function of x position. c) Plot 
showing (solid black line) a theoretical surface profile resulting from application of the dose in (b) to the milling model in 
(a). The red dash-dot line is a theoretical surface profile that results from the application of a dose of similar magnitude 
to that in (b) but from a lower value of ion current and milling directly into the silica substrate. Consequently, the red 
profile has a different shape from the black profile. After removal of the chromia mask, both profiles have an edge width 
of 2рқңҺрқңҺ + рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙm. The red profile includes the entire transition region of the sigmoid of the dose profile, whereas after removal, 
the black profile shows truncation of a sigmoid. The black and the red profiles are simplifications that neglect the 
dependence of incidence angle on milling rate, any effects of redeposition, and any defocus of the ion-beam due to 
charging. However, the standard deviation of the ion-beam that yields the black profile, which has the greater value of 
current, is рқңҺрқңҺhigh = рқңҺрқңҺ while the standard deviation of the ion-beam that yields the red profile is рқңҺрқңҺlow = 0.53рқңҺрқңҺ. An exponent 
of рқӣҪрқӣҪ = 0.2 in the power-law model from Equation (1) implies a ratio of the two currents of пҝҪрқңҺрқңҺhighрқңҺрқңҺlow
вҲ’1пҝҪ
1 рқӣҪрқӣҪ
вҒ„ , or approximately 
24. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
22

 

Figure S13. Super-resolution. Plot showing values of super-resolution factors, в„ұSR, as a function of the ratio of milling 
depth into the substrate after normalization by mask thickness, рқңҒрқңҒ, for features below the zero plane resulting from four 
values of ion-beam current. The light and dark gray shading respectively indicate the 95% coverage interval and the 
interval between the lower and upper quartiles of the spatial masking model. The triangles are features that we mill with 
ion-beam currents that range from approximately 80 to 800 pA. The white circles are mean super-resolution factors from 
the entire data set. For clarity, we show only a fraction of these values. The black bars indicate uncertainties of mean 
super-resolution factor as 95% coverage intervals. Uncertainties of О¶ are smaller than the data markers. 
 
 
Note S7. Spatial masking of a line or point 
We derive an analytic expression for the spatial limit of a sacrificial mask to screen the tails of ion beam from an underlying 
substrate during exposure in one dimension. We apply the resulting model to fit the experimental data of Menard and 
Ramsey,[17] with several simplifying assumptions. We assume that the mask has a bulk milling rate, рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡm, and a thickness, 
рқ‘§рқ‘§m, and similarly, that the substrate has a bulk milling rate, рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡs, and a final depth, рқ‘§рқ‘§s, and that the spatial profile of the ion 
dose along the x direction, рқҗ·рқҗ·(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ), follows a Gaussian function of the form, 
 

рқҗ·рқҗ·(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ) = рқҗ·рқҗ·0 exp пҝҪвҲ’

(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0)2

2рқңҺрқңҺ2
пҝҪ , 
(S13) 

 
where рқҗ·рқҗ·0 is the dose that is necessary to mill through the mask and into the working material, рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ0 is the center position of 
the line scan, which we assign to be 0, and рқңҺрқңҺ is the effective standard deviation of the Gaussian profile of the ion beam. 
Substitution into Equation (S13) of рқҗ·рқҗ·0 = рқҗ·рқҗ·m + рқҗ·рқҗ·s = рқ‘§рқ‘§mрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡm
вҲ’1 + рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡs
вҲ’1, the ratio of milling depth of the substrate to the 
thickness of the mask, рқңҒрқңҒ = рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘§рқ‘§m
вҲ’1, and the ratio of the milling rate of the substrate to the milling rate of the mask, рқ’®рқ’® =
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡsрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡm
вҲ’1, yields the condition for spatial masking of the dose pattern, where 

 

рқҗ·рқҗ·m = рқ‘§рқ‘§m
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡm

= пҝҪ рқ‘§рқ‘§m
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡm

+ рқ‘§рқ‘§s
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡs

пҝҪ exp пҝҪвҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ2

2рқңҺрқңҺ2пҝҪ = рқ‘§рқ‘§mрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡs + рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡm
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡmрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡs

exp пҝҪвҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ2

2рқңҺрқңҺ2пҝҪ , 
(S14) 

 
which implies 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
23

 

рқ’®рқ’®

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒ = exp пҝҪвҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ2

2рқңҺрқңҺ2пҝҪ . 
(S15) 

 
Solving Equation (S15) for рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ yields the positions at which the mask begins to screen the tails of the ion beam, 
 

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ = ВұрқңҺрқңҺпҝҪвҲ’2 ln пҝҪ
рқ’®рқ’®
рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ . 
(S16) 

 
The diameter of a pit or the width of a nanochannel resulting after removal of the sacrificial mask is the distance between 
these positions, 
 

рқ‘Өрқ‘Өa = 2рқңҺрқңҺпҝҪвҲ’2 ln пҝҪ
рқ’®рқ’®
рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ .  
(S17) 

 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
24

 
 

 

Figure S14. Comparison to a previous study. Plot showing widths of channels as a function of the thickness of sacrificial 
masks of chromium after removal of the mask. The channels result from the spatial masking of line scans of a focused 
beam of gallium ions, milling through sacrificial chromium masks and into underlying quartz substrates. The data markers 
show the experimental results from Menard and Ramsey.[17] Using approximate values of experimental parameters from 
correspondence with these scholars, we bound the values of the effective standard deviation of the ion beam to the 
range from 20 to 60 nm, the milling depth parameter to the range from 0 to 20 nm, and the value of the physical 
selectivity parameter to the range from 0 to 3, and we fit our spatial masking model of a line scan in Equation (S17). This 
fit yields a reduced chi-square statistic, рқң’рқң’рқңҲрқңҲ
2, of 5.3, extracts reasonable values of experimental parameters including 
standard deviation of the ion-beam profile, milling depth, and physical selectivity, and indicates that our spatial masking 
model is generally applicable beyond the specific system in our current study. The light and dark magenta regions indicate 
uncertainties of mean channel width respectively as 95% coverage intervals and interquartile ranges of fit results to our 
spatial masking model. This analysis yields estimates of experimental parameters, including an effective standard 
deviation of the ion beam of 46 +14 nm
пҝҪвҲ’15 nm
, a milling depth of 7.8 +3.9 nm вҲ’4.2 nm
пҝҪ
, and a physical selectivity of quartz to 
chromium of 1.5 +1.0 вҲ’0.6
пҝҪ
. Uncertainties of these parameters and of the data markers are 95% coverage intervals.  

 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
25

 

Figure S15. LineвҖ“space patterns. Plots showing theoretical profiles of lines and spaces that result from a) direct milling of 
silica and b) milling of silica through a sacrificial mask of chromia for nine combinations of pitch, ranging from 3.25рқңҺрқңҺ to 
8рқңҺрқңҺ, and duty cycle, ranging from 20% to 80%. Purple regions indicate the floor of the profile. Yellow regions indicate 
segments of profiles that exceed a tolerance threshold of 0.975. The profiles in (a) are ideal cases which neglect the 
dependence of incidence angle on milling rate, any effects of redeposition, and any defocus of the ion-beam due to 
charging. c) Contour plot showing the fraction of design depths for the set of profiles in panels (a-iвҖ“a-ix) that result from 
the direct milling of silica. d) Contour plot showing the fraction of design depth for the set of profiles in panels (b-iвҖ“b-ix) 
that result from milling of silica through a sacrificial mask of chromia. Our selection of nine combinations of pitch and 
duty cycle highlights the transition regions in both contour plots. In each contour plot, a sampling artifact, which is 
inconsequential to our analysis, is aparent for values of pitch of approximately 7рқңҺрқңҺ. 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
26

 

Figure S16. Minimum pitch ratio. a) Plot showing fraction of design depth as a function of pitch at a duty cycle of 50% 
and a design depth of рқңҒрқңҒ вүҲ 0.5 for (solid green line) milling of silica with a sacrificial mask of chromia and (solid red line) 
direct milling of silica. The trends in (a) represent ideal cases that neglect the dependence of incidence angle on milling 
rate, any effects of redeposition, and any defocus of the ion-beam due to charging. The gray dash line indicates a 
tolerance threshold of 0.975. The green and red vertical dash lines respectively indicate a minimum pitch for spatial 
masking of approximately 3рқңҺрқңҺ and a minimum pitch for direct milling of approximately 3рқңҺрқңҺ, yielding a ratio of minimum 
pitch of 3. b) Plot showing ratios of minimum pitch as a function of milling depth for duty cycles ranging from 40% to 60%. 
The green roundel corresponds to the simulation result in (a).  
 
 
Note S8. Temporal efficiency 
The time that is necessary to mill a certain nanostructure is typically inversly proportional to ion-beam current. 
Consequently, simply reducing the ion-beam current to improve lateral patterning resolution can dramatically increase the 
milling time. Furthermore, multicurrent processes involving a high current to mill coarse structures and a low current to 
mill fine structures increase the complexity of the process, requiring realignment after switching between the two ion beams, 
and can still require long milling times, depending on constraints of lateral resolution. These issues motivate our study of 
the temporal efficiency of sacrificial masking of a focused ion beam.  

We derive an analytic expression for temporal efficiency, defining the theoretical condition for which the use of a 
sacrificial mask and a high value of ion-beam current is faster than milling a structure with similar edge width directly into 
the substrate by use of a lower value of ion-beam current. We assume that the nominal radius of the ion-beam follows a 
power law approximation, рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹbeam вү… рқӣјрқӣјрқҗјрқҗјрқӣҪрқӣҪ, where рқӣјрқӣј is a constant, рқҗјрқҗј is the ion-beam current, and the scaling exponent, рқӣҪрқӣҪ, 
typically ranges from 0.3 to 1 for ion-beam currents of less than 10 nA.[18] In the absence of a sacrificial mask, the lateral 
resolution is, в„ӣ вү… рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹbeam. The presence of a sacrificial mask improves the lateral resolution by a multiplicative super-
resolution factor, в„ұSR, where рқңҒрқңҒ = |рқ‘§рқ‘§s|рқ‘§рқ‘§m
вҲ’1 is the ratio of the depth of the nanostructure, рқ‘§рқ‘§s to the thickness of the mask, рқ‘§рқ‘§m, 
and рқ’®рқ’® = рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm
вҲ’1 is the physical selectivity of the substrate and the mask, which we define as the ratio of their average 
milling rates, рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs and рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs, respectively. We consider an equality of lateral resolution from a low value of ion-beam current, 
рқҗјрқҗјlow, and lateral super-resolution from a high value of ion-beam current, рқҗјрқҗјhigh, milling through a sacrificial mask. Then, 
 

в„ӣ =  рқӣјрқӣјрқ‘–рқ‘–low

рқӣҪрқӣҪ
= в„ұSR
вҲ’1рқӣјрқӣјрқҗјрқҗјhigh

рқӣҪрқӣҪ ,  
(S18) 

 
which implies generally that  
 

в„ұSRпҝҪрқңҺрқңҺlow, рқңҺрқңҺhigh, рқ‘§рқ‘§Мғ, рқ’®рқ’®пҝҪ = пҝҪ
рқҗјрқҗјhigh
рқҗјрқҗјlow

пҝҪ

рқӣҪрқӣҪ

. 
(S19) 

 
The condition of equivalent edge widths for the high and low values of ion-beam current from Equations (11) and (12) 
imply that 
 

рқ‘Өрқ‘Өlow = рқ‘Өрқ‘Өhigh = 4рқңҺрқңҺlow = вҲҡ2рқңҺрқңҺhigherfвҲ’1 пҝҪ1 вҲ’
2рқ’®рқ’®

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ + 2рқңҺрқңҺhigh = рқңҺрқңҺhigh пҝҪвҲҡ2 erfcвҲ’1 пҝҪ 2рқ’®рқ’®

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ + 2пҝҪ , 
(S20) 

 
where we apply the identity, erf вҲ’1(1 вҲ’ рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ) = erfcвҲ’1(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ҙ). The power-law approximation of the radius of the ion beam relates 
our model of super-resolution factor from Equation (13) to values of ion-beam current that are necessary to achieve 
equivalent lateral resolution, 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
27

пҝҪ
рқҗјрқҗјhigh
рқҗјрқҗјlow

пҝҪ = пҝҪ
рқңҺрқңҺhigh
рқңҺрқңҺlow

пҝҪ

1
рқӣҪрқӣҪ = пҝҪ
2
1
вҲҡ2 erfcвҲ’1 пҝҪ 2рқ’®рқ’®
рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒпҝҪ + 1

пҝҪ

1
рқӣҪрқӣҪ

= в„ұSR(рқңҒрқңҒ, рқ’®рқ’®)
1
рқӣҪрқӣҪ. 
(S21) 

 
The time that is necessary to mill a nanostructure of arbitrary rectangular volume, рқ‘үрқ‘үs, through the sacrificial mask, рқ‘Ўрқ‘ЎM, with 
a high value of ion-beam current is the sum of the time that is necessary to mill through the chromia mask, рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўm, and the time 
that is necessary to mill the underlying substrate, рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs, 
 

рқ‘Ўрқ‘ЎM = рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўm + рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs вүҲ
рқ‘үрқ‘үm
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪmрқҗјрқҗјhigh

+ 
рқ‘үрқ‘үs
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsрқҗјрқҗјhigh

=
рқ‘§рқ‘§mрқ‘ҷрқ‘ҷ2

рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪmрқҗјрқҗјhigh

+
рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҷрқ‘ҷ2

рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsрқҗјрқҗјhigh

, 
(S22) 

 
where рқ‘ҷрқ‘ҷ2 is the area of the rectangular nanostructure and рқ‘үрқ‘үm is the volume of the mask above the milling area. For clarity, 
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm and have рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs units of volume per current per second or Вөm3 nA-1 s-1. Therefore, in Equation (S22), dividing a volume 
by the product of a milling rate and ion-beam current yields a value with units of time. In contrast, the time that is necessary 
to mill a similar nanostructure directly into the substrate with a low value of ion-beam current is 
 

рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs вүҲ 
рқ‘үрқ‘үs

рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsрқҗјрқҗјlow

= рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҷрқ‘ҷ2

рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsрқҗјрқҗјlow

. 
(S23) 

 
We define the temporal efficiency, рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ, to be the ratio of these milling times, 
 

рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ = рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ўs
рқ‘Ўрқ‘ЎM

=

рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҷрқ‘ҷ2
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsрқҗјрқҗјlow

рқ‘§рқ‘§mрқ‘ҷрқ‘ҷ2
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪmрқҗјрқҗјhigh +
рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҷрқ‘ҷ2
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪsрқҗјрқҗјhigh

= пҝҪ
рқҗјрқҗјhigh
рқҗјрқҗјlow

пҝҪ
рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm
рқ‘§рқ‘§mрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs + рқ‘§рқ‘§sрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm

. 
(S24) 

 
Substitution of рқ‘§рқ‘§s = рқңҒрқңҒрқ‘§рқ‘§m, рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs = рқ’®рқ’®рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm, and Equation (S21) into Equation (S24) yields an analytic expression for the 
temporal efficiency, which we argue must be greater than unity for masking to be beneficial, 
 

рқңӮрқңӮрқңҸрқңҸ = пҝҪ

рқҗјрқҗјhigh
рқҗјрқҗјlow

пҝҪ
рқңҒрқңҒ

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒ = в„ұSR(рқңҒрқңҒ, рқ’®рқ’®)

1
рқӣҪрқӣҪ
рқңҒрқңҒ

рқ’®рқ’® + рқңҒрқңҒ . 
(S25) 

 
 
Table S12. Power-law models 

Model parameters

Tradespace
рқң¶рқң¶

(nm (Вөm3 h-1)-ОІ)

рқң·рқң·
(вҖ“)

Resolution
76.4 Вұ 0.1
0.154 Вұ 0.001

Super-resolution
16.2 Вұ 0.1
0.314 Вұ 0.010

 
 
 
Note S9. Milling currents of equivalent resolution 
For two power law models, the condition of equivalent resolution is 
 

в„ӣR = рқӣјрқӣјRрқ’ұрқ’ұR

рқӣҪрқӣҪR = в„ӣSR = рқӣјрқӣјSRрқ’ұрқ’ұSR

рқӣҪрқӣҪSR. 
(S26) 

 
Solving for рқ’ұрқ’ұSR and accounting for the two different milling rates and thickness of the bilayer gives the volume 
throughput in terms of a high value of ion-beam current with equaivalent resolution, 
 

рқ’ұрқ’ұSR = пҝҪв„ӣSR
рқӣјрқӣјSR

пҝҪ

1

рқӣҪрқӣҪSR = рқҗјрқҗјhigh пҝҪ рқ‘§рқ‘§m + рқ‘§рқ‘§s
рқ‘§рқ‘§m
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm + рқ‘§рқ‘§s

рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs

пҝҪ . 
(S27) 

Applying the right side of the power-law equation (S26) gives 
 

рқ’ұрқ’ұSR = пҝҪ рқӣјрқӣјR
рқӣјрқӣјSR

рқ’ұрқ’ұR
рқӣҪрқӣҪRпҝҪ

1
рқӣҪрқӣҪSR = рқҗјрқҗјhigh пҝҪ рқ‘§рқ‘§m + рқ‘§рқ‘§s
рқ‘§рқ‘§m
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm + рқ‘§рқ‘§s

рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs

пҝҪ . 
(S28) 

Applying the left side of equation (S26) and solving for рқҗјрқҗјhigh, 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
28

 

рқҗјрқҗјhigh = пҝҪ рқӣјрқӣјR
рқӣјрқӣјSR

[рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡsрқҗјрқҗјlow]рқӣҪрқӣҪRпҝҪ

1
рқӣҪрқӣҪSR пҝҪ

рқ‘§рқ‘§m
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm + рқ‘§рқ‘§s
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs

рқ‘§рқ‘§m + рқ‘§рқ‘§s

пҝҪ. 
(S29) 

Conversely,  

рқҗјрқҗјlow = 1
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs

пҝҪрқӣјрқӣјSR
рқӣјрқӣјR

пҝҪрқҗјрқҗјhigh
рқ‘§рқ‘§m + рқ‘§рқ‘§s
рқ‘§рқ‘§m
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪm + рқ‘§рқ‘§s
рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡпҝҪs

пҝҪ

рқӣҪрқӣҪSR

пҝҪ

1
рқӣҪрқӣҪR

. 
(S30) 

 
 
 
 
Table S13. Factors of improvement 

 
Before chromia removal
After chromia removal
Factor of improvement

Ion-beam 
current 

(pA)

Throughput 
(Вөm3 hr-1)

Resolution 

(nm)

Figure of 

merit 

(Вөm2 hr-1)

Equivalent 
throughput 
(Вөm3 hr-1)

Super-

resolution 

(nm)

Figure of 

merit 

(Вөm2 hr-1)
Throughput
Resolution

Figure of 

merit

83 Вұ 1 
54.5 Вұ 0.2 
144.4 Вұ 0.2 
385 Вұ 2 
0.10 Вұ 0.02 
53.9 Вұ 0.4 
1112 Вұ 2 
528 Вұ 28 
2.678 Вұ 0.016 
2.890 Вұ 0.006 

227 Вұ 1 
151.0 Вұ 0.2 
160.7 Вұ 0.2 
986 Вұ 2 
1.25 Вұ 0.04 
79.2 Вұ 0.2 
2058 Вұ 4 
119 Вұ 4 
2.029 Вұ 0.006 
2.088 Вұ 0.004 

421 Вұ 3 
280.7 Вұ 0.2 
180.1 Вұ 0.2 
1621 Вұ 2 
5.52 Вұ 0.22 
99.3 Вұ 0.6 
3115 Вұ 6 
51 Вұ 3 
1.814 Вұ 0.010 
1.921 Вұ 0.004 

796 Вұ 4 
529.8 Вұ 0.4 
202.5 Вұ 0.2 
2773 Вұ 4 
12.72 Вұ 0.22 
112.9 Вұ 0.2 
5103 Вұ 10 
42 Вұ 2 
1.794 Вұ 0.004 
1.840 Вұ 0.006 

 
 
 

 

Figure S17. Figure of merit. a) Plot showing figure of merit, в„і, as a function of ion-beam current, рқҗјрқҗј, for a constant value 
of milling depth after normalization by mask thickness of рқңҒрқңҒ = 1 and values of physical selectivity, рқ’®рқ’®, ranging from 0.4 to 
6.4. Solid lines indicate the trends from experimental data and dash lines indicate values that we calculate using the 
relations in Equations (1) and (5). b) Plot showing figure of merit as a function of ion-beam current for a constant value 
of рқ’®рқ’® = 1.6 and values of рқңҒрқңҒ ranging from 0.1 to 10.0. Solid lines indicate the trends from experimental data and dash lines 
indicate values that we calculate using the relation in Equations (1) and (5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
29

 
Note S10. Design of Fresnel lenses 
A plane wave of incident light along the optical axis has a constant phase over the lateral extent of a spherical lens.[19] As 
a result of diffraction through the lens, the converging wave has the phase retardation distribution,  
 

рқң“рқң“(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ) = 2рқңӢрқңӢ

рқңҶрқңҶ пҝҪрқ‘“рқ‘“ вҲ’ пҝҪрқ‘“рқ‘“2 вҲ’ рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ2пҝҪ . 
(S31) 

 
where рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ is the radial position orthogonal to the optical axis, рқ‘“рқ‘“ is the focal length of the lens, and рқңҶрқңҶ is the wavelength. Fresnel 
lenses with blazing exploit a sawtooth profile to modify рқң“рқң“(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ) with a modulo 2рқңӢрқңӢ phase structure, 
 

рқң“рқң“F(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ) = рқң“рқң“(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ) + 2рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡрқңӢрқңӢ,
(S32)

 
for рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ < рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ вүӨ рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ+1 where рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡ = пҝҪ2рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡрқңҶрқңҶрқ‘“рқ‘“ + (рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҡрқңҶрқңҶ)2 is the inner radius of the zone radii. 
 
The phase shift in the converging wave results from differences in the relative optical path length along the lens profile. In 
the design process, the phase retardation distribution determines the thickness of the Fresnel lens, 
 

рқ‘Үрқ‘Ү(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ) =

рқңҶрқңҶ

О”рқ‘ӣрқ‘ӣ пҝҪ

рқң“рқң“F(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ)

2
+ 1пҝҪ. 
(S33) 

 
Fresnel lenses of this design have a numerical aperture of, 
 

NA =

1

пҝҪ1+пҝҪрқ‘“рқ‘“

рқ‘…рқ‘…пҝҪ
2 = sin рқңғрқңғ. 
(S34) 

 
The Rayleigh criterion is, 
 

рқ‘‘рқ‘‘=0.61

рқңҶрқңҶ

NA. 
(S35) 

  
 
Note S11. Dose trimming 
Tests of dose delivery are generally necessary in nanofabrication, and optimization methods can be either computational[15b] 
or empirical.[20] Our simple model of the bilayer response provides useful insights but ignores many details of the milling 
process, which would be desirable to account for in a computational optimization of dose delivery. At this state of the art, 
we develop an empirical method of dose optimization to minimize the differences between design and actual structure. 
This method involves trimming the ion dose near regions of high negative curvature to improve the masking of features 
that are sensitive to unintentional ion bombardment. Regions with high aspect ratios and extrema of negative curvature 
such as pillars, ridges, or blaze peaks are susceptible to such unintentional damage, which is likely to occur if actual and 
theoretical models of ion-beam profile deviate significantly or if dependences of milling rates on incidence angle are 
unknown. Reducing the ion dose in regions where the design of the surface specifies a curvature that exceeds a certain 
threshold can compensate for such discrepancies. The curvature of an axially symmetric surface, рқ‘§рқ‘§(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ), is 
 

рқң…рқң…(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ)=
рқ‘§рқ‘§вҖІвҖІ

(1 + рқ‘§рқ‘§вҖІ2)

3
2

, 
(S36) 

 

where рқ‘§рқ‘§вҖІ =
рқң•рқң•рқң•рқң•(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ)

рқң•рқң•рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ  and рқ‘§рқ‘§вҖІвҖІ =
рқң•рқң•2рқң•рқң•(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ)

рқң•рқң•рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ2  respectively denote the first and second derivatives of рқ‘§рқ‘§(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ) with respect to рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹ. A natural 
choice for a curvature threshold is the inverse of the lateral extent of the ion-beam profile, which we select to be a value of 
вҲ’(4рқңҺрқңҺ)вҲ’1, corresponding to the maximum negative curvature from the 95% coverage interval of a Gaussian approximation. 
Figure S18 shows the best result of three tests of trimming the ion dose around the blaze peaks in the milling of a Fresnel 
lens through chromia and into silica with an ion-beam current of 2600 pA. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
30

 

Figure S18. Dose trimming. a) Plot showing the radial profile of the design of a Fresnel lens, showing (black circles and 
solid black line) milling positions and (inset) an approximate profile of a Gaussian ion beam. b) Plot showing the curvature 
of the profile in (a) and (red dash line) a curvature threshold of вҲ’(4рқңҺрқңҺ)вҲ’1. c) Plot showing the radial dose profile resulting 
from trimming the ion dose at (white circles) milling positions that drop below the curvature threshold. 

 

 

 

 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
31

 

Figure S19. Fresnel lens characterization. a) and b) Scanning electron micrographs at a tilt angle of 0.9075 rad (52В°) 
showing Fresnel lenses. c) and d) Atomic force micrographs at the same tilt angle showing the same Fresnel lenses in (a) 
and (b). e) and f) Plots showing (blue) contrast and (orange) standard deviation of Gaussian model fits to focal spot images 
from Fresnel lenses as functions of z position. (i-iv) Brightfield optical micrographs showing (i,iii) focal spots and (ii,iv) top 
surfaces of Fresnel lenses. Panels (a,c,e) correspond to Fresnel lenses that we mill directly into silica with an ion-beam 
current of 26 pA. Panels (b,d,f) correspond to Fresnel lenses that we mill through chromia and into silica with an ion-
beam current of 2600 pA. Artifacts from charging are apparent in (a) and (b). Convolution artifacts of the probe tip are 
apparent in (c) and (d). The black triangle in (c,d) indicates the zero plane in both atomic-force micrographs and brightfield 
optical micrographs. Root-mean-square values of surface roughness in the central regions of either lens are approximatly 
4 nm. Differences in contrast between (e-ii) and (f-iv) are partially attributable to diffraction effects from multiple lenses 
in close proximity in (f-iv). Lone blue bars in (e) and (f) indicate representative uncertainties of contrast as 95% coverage 
intervals. Uncertainties of standard deviation and z position from measurement repeatability are smaller than the data 
markers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
32

 

 

Figure S20. Fresnel lens comparison. a-d) Brightfield optical micrographs showing focal spots from Fresnel lenses that we 
machine under a variety of conditions (Table S14). e-h) Scanning electron micrographs showing the Fresnel lenses that 
project the focal spots in (a-d). Machining defects from charge accumulation extend beyond the region of interest in (f).  
 
 
 
Table S14. Fresnel lens parameters 

Material system 

Ion-
beam 
current 

(pA) 

FWHM
of ion 
beam  
(nm) 

Electron-beam 

current 

(pA) 

Number of 

lenses 

(вҖ“) 

Milling 
time  
(h) 

Lenses 
per hour 

(вҖ“) 

Projection 
distance  

(Вөm) 

Apparent

standard deviation 

of focal spot 

(nm) 

Data 

location 

(вҖ“) 

Silica
26
14
100
1
3.75
0.27
11.97 Вұ 0.01
440.3 Вұ 0.1
Fig. S20 a,e

Silica
2600
133
0
1
0.04
25
вҖ“
вҖ“
Fig. S20 b,f

Silica
2600
133
6400
1
0.04
25
12.38 Вұ 0.40
503.6 Вұ 0.1
Fig. S20 c,g

Chromia on silica
2600
133
0
75
3.75
20
11.98 Вұ 0.19
439.1 Вұ 3.9
Fig. S20 d,h

FWHM = full width at half maximum 
95% coverage intervals for the single lens in silica are measurement uncertainty. 
95% coverage intervals for the 75 lenses through chromia in silica are measurement uncertainty and fabrication variability.  
Uncertainties in this table are from measurement repeatibility only, neglecting systematic effects such as actuator non-linearity and image scale 
uncertainty. We make the approximation that these systematic effects cancel in a calculation of ratios of distances and standard deviations to determine 
relative differences with corresponding uncertainties. 
 
 
 
References
[1] 
a) H. Janssen, Reliability Engineering & System Safety 2013, 109, 123; b) T. Lafarge, A. Possolo, NCSLI 
Measure 2015, 10, 20. 

[2] 
K.-T. Liao, J. Schumacher, H. J. Lezec, S. M. Stavis, Lab on a Chip 2018, 18, 139. 

[3] 
a) J. S. Villarrubia, Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology 1997, 102, 425; 
b) P. Klapetek, I. OhlДұМҒdal, Ultramicroscopy 2003, 94, 19. 

[4] 
J. S. Villarrubia, A. E. VladГЎr, M. T. Postek, Surface and Interface Analysis 2005, 37, 951. 

[5] 
M. Yasaka, The Rigaku Journal 2010, 26. 

[6] 
C. R. Copeland, J. Geist, C. D. McGray, V. A. Aksyuk, J. A. Liddle, B. R. Ilic, S. M. Stavis, Light: Science & 
Applications 2018, 7, 31. 

[7] 
a) A. Possolo, National Institute of Standards and Technology, United States Department of Commerce,  2015; 
b) B. N. Taylor, C. E. Kuyatt, National Institute of Standards and Technology, United States Department of 
Commerce,  1994. 

[8] 
N. Vladov, J. Segal, S. Ratchev, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2015, 33, 041803. 

[9] 
a) L. Reimer, Scanning Electron Microscopy: Physics of Image Formation and Microanalysis, Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, 1985; b) J. S. Villarrubia, R. G. Dixson, A. E. VladГЎr, presented at Proceedings of SPIE 
2010. 

[10] 
a) A. VladГЎr, J. Villarrubia, J. Chawla, B. Ming, J. Kline, S. List, M. Postek, presented at Proceedings of SPIE 
2014; b) J. S. Villarrubia, A. E. VladГЎr, B. Ming, R. J. Kline, D. F. Sunday, J. S. Chawla, S. List, 
Ultramicroscopy 2015, 154, 15. 

[11] 
D. Izraelevits, Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing 2003, 69, 767. 

[12] 
A. Savitzky, M. J. E. Golay, Analytical Chemistry 1964, 36, 1627. 


 
 
 
 
 
 

Supporting Information for Unmasking the resolutionвҖ“throughput tradespace of focused-ion-beam machining
33

[13] 
a) B. Efron, C. Stein, Annals of Statistics 1981, 9, 586; b) M. H. Quenouille, Annals of Mathematical Statistics 
1949, 20, 355. 

[14] 
T. Matsuyama, Advanced Powder Technology 2019, 30, 2616. 

[15] 
a) G. B. Assayag, C. Vieu, J. Gierak, P. Sudraud, A. Corbin, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 1993, 
11, 2420; b) J. Han, H. Lee, B.-K. Min, S. J. Lee, Microelectronic Engineering 2010, 87, 1. 

[16] 
N. I. Borgardt, A. V. Rumyantsev, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2016, 34, 061803. 

[17] 
L. D. Menard, J. M. Ramsey, Nano Letters 2011, 11, 512. 

[18] 
N. S. Smith, W. P. Skoczylas, S. M. Kellogg, D. E. Kinion, P. P. Tesch, O. Sutherland, A. Aanesland, R. W. 
Boswell, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 2006, 24, 2902. 

[19] 
H. Nishihara, T. Suhara, in Progress in Optics, Vol. 24 (Ed: E. Wolf), Elsevier 1987, p. 1. 

[20] 
H. Lee, J. Han, B.-K. Min, S. J. Lee, Applied Physics Express 2008, 1, 127002. 


 

 

 


