FEbeam: Cavity and Electron Emission Data Conversion, Processing and
Analysis. A Freeware Toolkit for RF Injectors

Mitchell Schneider,1, 2, a) Emily Jevarjian,2, 1, b) Jiahang Shao,3, c) and Sergey V. Baryshev1, d)

1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Michigan State University, MI 48824,
USA
2)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, MI 48824,
USA
3)High Energy Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, IL 60439, USA

FEbeam is a compact field emission data processing interface with the capability to analyze the field emission
cathode performance in an rf injector by extracting the field enhancement factor, local field, and effective
emission area from the Fowler-Nordheim equations. It also has the capability of processing beam imaging
micrographs using its sister software, FEpic. The current version of FEbeam was designed for the Argonne
Cathode Teststand (ACT) of the Argonne Wakefield Accelerator facility switch yard. With slight modifica-
tions, FEbeam can work for any rf field emission injector. This software is open-source and can be found at
GitHub.

INTRODUCTION

As field emitters are poised to be the next generation of
electron sources in rf and microwave systems, the ability
to analyze field emission cathode performance by process-
ing extensive raw data in a compact, easy-to-use format
is crucial. Therefore, a toolbox called FEbeam was de-
veloped to fill the existing gap. FEbeam consists of 17
different Matlab functions. A single graphical user inter-
face (GUI) conveniently combines and cross-links them
together. Fig. 1 shows the workflow map of all of the
components necessary to take the raw data and convert
it to analyze and compare the field emission cathode per-
formance. The green boxes in Fig. 1 are the input data
and parameter files, the blue boxes represent a simplified
version of the internal pipeline for data processing, the
red boxes are the output files, and the yellow boxes are
the output figures.

This paper is laid out as follows:
Section I de-
scribes how charge (Q)-electric field (E) curves are
obtained;
Section II describes how Fowler-Nordheim
(FN) fitting parameters get determined; Section III de-
scribes image and resulting scientific data postprocessing
and plotting; Section IV contains conclusion and out-
look.
Given the direct link with the physics of dark
current and vacuum breakdown/arc, additional sister
toolkits FEbreak (breakdown statistics) and FEpic (im-
age/pattern recognition)1 are being finalized to be jointly
used with FEbeam. Additional toolkit FEgen2 exists for
computational support.

a)Electronic mail: schne525@msu.edu
b)Electronic mail: jevarji1@msu.edu
c)Electronic mail: jshao@anl.gov
d)Electronic mail: serbar@msu.edu

I.
OBTAINING Q-E CURVES

This FEbeam version is specifically optimized to auto-
mate the Argonne Cathode Teststand (ACT) shown in
Fig. 2, which a part of the Argonne Wakefield Acceler-
ator (AWA) facility. The ACT is a 1/2 cell L-band (1.3
GHz) gun that can operate with field and photoemission
sources with the maximum macroscopic gradient of 105
MV/m (that is for a planar cathode). The ACT has three
yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG) screens which are used
for imaging of the transverse electron distribution. At
the location of YAG1, there is a dropdown Faraday cup
to measure the charge out of the gun. At the location of
YAG2, there is an exchangeable 1 mm aperture that is
used to collimate the beam. Finally, fixed YAG3 is used
for downstream electron beam imaging.
The forward and reverse power are measured using a
directional coupler on the waveguide near klystron. The
raw data used to calculate the field emission character-
istics is obtained from the oscilloscope in a CSV format
consisting of the voltage waveforms for the Faraday cup,
forward power, and reverse power. Each CSV file is a
single point in the Q-E curve where each point consists
of 10 individual pulse shots.
The opening GUI screen, Select Raw Data Files, is
shown in Fig. 3a. This allows the user to select the fold-
ers in which the raw CSV files are located.
The user
then selects the files that they want to process in the
GUI window. This screen has the options for image pro-
cessing and postprocessing that are discussed in further
detail in Section II. The default name setting for the CSV
files groups is derived from the experimentally achieved
conditioning gradient. For ease-of-use, FEbeam renames
the files based upon the conditioning gradient for that
dataset as shown in Fig. 3b, Datasets Information. The
conditioning field is the desired field that the cathode
was conditioned to for a given dataset. Note that the
conditioning field is used solely for naming convenience
and that the applied field is the actual measured value.
After the datasets have been selected, renamed, and

arXiv:2012.10804v1  [physics.acc-ph]  19 Dec 2020


Schneider et al.
MSU MAM Report #003

FIG. 1: FEbeamŌĆÖs workflow map showing how the data processing algorithm (in blue) takes the raw data from
input files (in green) to the output data (in red) and the output figures (in yellow).

FIG. 2: Schematic of ACT beamline with rf pickups
not shown, collimator denotes the 1 mm aperture.

translated into Matlab data files (.MAT format), the
rf parameters need to be set in the FEbeam screen, as
shown in Fig. 4. These parameters are used to translate
the raw data into Q-E curves after each individual file
is grouped based on the conditioning gradient entered in
Dataset Information (see Fig. 3b). Parameters include
options for a low charge or a high charge case scenario,
and for selection of the rf filter and rf envelope needed to
calculate the pulse length.
The difference between the high and low charge sce-
narios refers to the terminating impedance on the oscil-
loscope in the Faraday cup circuitry. The low charge case
uses the impedance of 1 MŌä” as the larger impedance al-
lows for larger voltage drop read by the scope and hence
higher sensitivity to lower charge beams. However, the

FIG. 3: (a) The initial window to select data to be
processed; (b) Display screen that allows for the
timestamp of the dataset to be associated with the
conditioning gradient that will be later used to rename
and group the files.

Faraday cup signal length will increase by a few orders of
magnitude. As a result rf pulse and Faraday cup signals
cannot be captured simultaneously. Therefore, Faraday
cup signal is recorded to only calculate RC time con-
stant ŽäRC as illustrated by the interface screen shown
in Fig. 5.
The charge in the Faraday cup for the low
charge scenario can be then found using the top expres-
sion in Eq. 1. When calculating the time constant, the
user selects a range to use as back subtraction to set the

page 2


Schneider et al.
MSU MAM Report #003

FIG. 4: The main interface of FEbeam. The top
portion sets the rf parameters to translate the raw data
into Q-E curves. The lower portion calculates the pulse
length of the function of the local field and calculates
the emission envelope using the Fowler-Nordheim
equations, based on the work function entered.

noise floor and a range to calculate the RC time constant.
Recommended values of 90% and 10% are the minimum
recommended to mitigate calculation errors and are il-
lustrated in Fig. 5.

FIG. 5: (a) Faraday Cup Settings display interface for
selecting the time constant for the low charge case. (b)
Plot where red square and circle denote the location of
the minimum and maximum threshold values
corresponding to 90% and 10% of the maximum value.

In the high charge case, which uses the terminating
impedance of 50 Ōä”, the charge is directly calculated by in-
tegrating the signal from the Faraday cup over the range
specified in the settings window (see Eq. 1). In the Pa-
rameter File Settings (see Fig. 6a), the operator selects
which of the three channels represents the forward power,
reverse power, and the Faraday cup signal. One gets to
enter then which time integration range will be used to
calculate the noise floor for the data. This integration
range is used to calculate the charge collected. The final
set of parameters associated with the specific rf system
includes the attenuation factors due to the waveguides,

the attenuators for the forward and reverse power, and
the power to electric field conversion factor for the output
power of a klystron.

FIG. 6: (a) Parameter File Settings for entering the rf
parameters to calculate the Q-E curves; (b) waveforms
for a low charge scenario; (c) waveforms for a high
charge scenario. Red marks denote the region that was
considered in the Faraday cup to calculate the charge.

In the ACT case, the waveguide attenuation is 0.2 dB,
and the power conversion factor is 208.5 W of the input
power corresponds to 1 MV/m of applied macroscopic
field. The 208.5 W power conversion factor was obtained
from SUPERFISH cavity simulation and is valid for pla-
nar cathode geometry only.
The forward and reverse
power attenuators, depending on the experiment set up,
are either 10 or 15 dB with an addition of 0.5 dB added
to account for the filter on the attenuator. The settings
window is the same for the high and low charge cases:
Fig. 6b and Fig. 6c show the Faraday cup waveforms for
the low and high charge case relaying the basic difference.
Summarizing, the charge is calculated as follows

’Ż▒
’Ż┤
’Ż▓

’Ż┤
’Ż│

Q = ŌłÆ V mean
F C
ZL
ŽäRC,
low charge

Q = ŌłÆ 1

ZL
’┐Į t2
t1 VF Cdt,
high charge
(1)

where VF C is the voltage waveform from the Faraday cup
within the specified boundaries in the settings, ŽäRC is the
time constant calculated for the low charge case, ZL is
the load impedance, and t1 and t2 are the 10% and 90%
boundaries.
If an oscilloscope with limited bandwidth is only avail-
able, it is still possible to measure envelope for the for-
ward and reflected power in order to establish the applied
field on the cathode. Fig. 6b and Fig. 6c demonstrate
the result of this approach.
For a narrow bandwidth
scope, the raw forward and reverse rf signal picked up on
the directional coupler installed on the waveguide near
the L-band driving klystron was passed through a diode

page 3


Schneider et al.
MSU MAM Report #003

(Keysight 423B) circuit to modulate the frequency low
enough that it can be read in by the oscilloscope. This
step is not necessary for systems and facilities with access
to a GHz scope, and can be bypassed if necessary. Dur-
ing data processing, the raw forward and reverse power
waveforms from the oscilloscope are translated back into
their original form by fitting the diode waveform to a 7-
order polynomial. These conversion equations [Eq. 2 and
Eq. 3] for the ACT are as follows

P original
F P
= ŌłÆ0.034 + 0.0477 ┬Ę VF P +

+6.617 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę V 2
F P +

+4.948 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ6 ┬Ę V 3
F P ŌłÆ

ŌłÆ5.411 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ8 ┬Ę V 4
F P +

+3.129 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ10 ┬Ę V 5
F P ŌłÆ

ŌłÆ8.789 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ13 ┬Ę V 6
F P +

+9.657 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ16 ┬Ę V 7
F P

(2)

P original
RP
= ŌłÆ0.159 + 0.07052 ┬Ę VRP +

+2.4 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ5 ┬Ę V 2
RP +

+1.86 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ5 ┬Ę V 3
RP ŌłÆ

ŌłÆ1.925 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ7 ┬Ę V 4
RP +

+1.079 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ9 ┬Ę V 5
RP ŌłÆ

ŌłÆ3.028 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ12 ┬Ę V 6
RP +

+3.37 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ15 ┬Ę V 7
RP

(3)

where power waveforms for both the forward (FP) and
reverse (RP) power have units of milliwatts in this equa-
tion.
To convert original voltage waveforms for the forward
and reverse power into actual power, the following equa-
tions are used

PF = P original
F P
┬Ę 10
’┐Į
AT TF P ŌłÆAT TW G+AT TDC

10
ŌłÆ3
’┐Į
(4)

PR = P original
RP
┬Ę 10
’┐Į
AT TRP +AT TW G+AT TDC

10
ŌłÆ3
’┐Į
(5)

where ATTF P is the forward power attenuator, ATTRP
is the reverse power attenuator, ATTW G is the waveg-
uide attenuation, and ATTDC is the attenuation for the
directional coupler which, in this case, is 60 dB. The ŌłÆ3
term denotes the conversion from milliwatts to watts.
It is assumed that the rf pulse is a flat top; therefore, if
we integrate over the forward power and then divide by
half, this midpoint should be where the level of the flat
top is, as shown by Eq. 6. This corresponds to the median
applied field over that rf pulse. Time k corresponding to
that midpoint is found from relation

’┐Į tk

ti
PF dt = 1

2

’┐Į tf

ti
PF dt
(6)

where ti and tf are initial/start and final/end time inte-
gration boundaries.
Finally the applied macroscopic electric field can be
found as

Ec =

’┐Į

P k
F

P ACT
factor
(7)

where P k
F is the power at time tk measured in W as found
from Eq. 6 and P ACT
factor is the ACT power conversion fac-
tor equal to 208.5 W┬Ęm2/MV2.
The applied field and
power conversion factor are imported from the Param-
eter File Settings, and labeled in accordance with the
highest Ec achieved, called Eh.
Subsequently, each of
the data points in the Q-E curve are combined into a
single file. The next step is converting the Q-E curve
into the Fowler-Nordheim coordinate representation to
further extract the field emission characteristic param-
eters, the field enhancement factor ╬▓, cathode local or
microscopic electric field EL = ╬▓ ├Ś Ec, and the effective
emission area Ae.

II.
DETERMINING FOWLER-NORDHEIM
PARAMETERS

According to the Fowler-Nordheim (FN) equation, the
transient field emission current when the cathode field is
positive (cos(Žēt) > 0) can be expressed as

IF (t) =1.54 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ6 ├Ś 104.52ŽåŌłÆ0.5Ae[╬▓Ec(t)]2

Žå

├Ś exp[ŌłÆ6.53 ├Ś 109Žå1.5

╬▓Ec(t)
]

(8)

where Žå is the work function. The emission profile can
be approximated by a Gaussian distribution whose stan-
dard deviation Žā depends on the maximum microscopic
cathode field ╬▓|Ec|, as illustrated in Fig. 7.

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800

t (ps)

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

IF (arb. units)

2
4
6
8
10

-|Ec| (GV/m)

20

40

< (ps)

FIG. 7: Emission profile within one rf cycle based on
Eq. 8 (blue solid line) and its Gaussian distribution
approximation (red dashed line). Inset: The standard
deviation of the Gaussian distribution as a function the
maximum microscopic cathode field. Reproduced from
Ref.3.

page 4


Schneider et al.
MSU MAM Report #003

To translate the Q-E curves into the Fowler-Nordheim
coordinate, first, we determine the pulse length as a func-
tion of the local field. In the rf environment, the Fowler-
Nordheim coordinates are different than those in the dc
environment: one plots log10(Q/E2.5
c ) as function of EŌłÆ1
c
instead of log10(Q/E2
c) as function of EŌłÆ1
c
(like it is in the
dc environment). The extra factor of 0.5 is a result of av-
eraging the Fowler-Nordheim current distribution over an
rf cycle. The current distribution for Fowler-Nordheim in
an rf environment reads4

IF (t) =5.7 ├Ś 10ŌłÆ12 ├Ś 104.52ŽåŌłÆ0.5Ae[╬▓|Ec(t)|]2.5

Žå1.75

├Ś exp[ŌłÆ6.53 ├Ś 109Žå1.5

╬▓|Ec(t)|
]

(9)

here the external electric field is modeled as a time vari-
ant sinusoidal oscillation which is a result of only con-
sidering the longitudinal component as rf guns are TM
mode cavity resonators.
To calculate the emission pulse length, envelope of the
drive rf is necessary to be known.
Predicted emission
profile, as illustrated in Fig. 8, is calculated for each |Ec|,
where ╬▓ is assumed to be constant and Žā of the longitu-
dinal emission profile is adjusted based on ╬▓|Ec|. It is
seen that IF (t) is highly sensitive to |Ec|, and emission
pulse can be approximated by using a square emission
profile of a length Žä with an average emission current of
IF,max calculated by using |Ec| = Ec,max in Eq. 9, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 8. The width of the square pulse is set
as Žä =
’┐Į

IF (t)dt/IF,max so as to keep the same charge.
It depends on ╬▓Ec,max, as calculated by Eq. 9 and illus-
trated in the inset of Fig. 8. Note that this calculation
routine is done in the wider range of 0-50 GV/m for the
local field to allow for convergence, but only the range of
0-10 GV/m is physically meaningful5, see Fig. 9a.

0
5
10
15

t (7s)

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

jEcj; IF (arb. units)

2
4
6
8
10

-Ec,max (GV/m)

1

2

3

= (7s)

FIG. 8: Blue: the normalized cathode field amplitude
|Ec(t)| measured by the rf pickup. Red: the predicted
average emission current IF (t) by Eq. 9. Black: the
square pulse approximation of the emission profile.
Inset: The width of the square emission profile as a
function of ╬▓Ec,max. Reproduced from Ref.3.

Red line in Fig. 9b illustrates rf pulse envelope mea-
surement. Additional smoothing is possible using an ap-

propriate frequency filter function that can be obtained
from the same scope. In Matlab, the smoothing is ap-
plied using the convolution command called conv. Both
Figs. 8 (6 ┬Ąs rf pulse) and 9 (8 ┬Ąs rf pulse) highlight that
the emission pulse length Žä is somewhat shorter than the
driving rf pulse length. FEbeam exports the rf envelope
and the pulse length as functions of the local field to the
figures folder.

FIG. 9: (a) The emission pulse pulse length (Žä) as a
function of the local field plotted in the entire fitting
range from 0 to 50 GV/m, inset is a zoom-in view of
the pulse length within the physically meaningful local
field range, from 0 to 10 GV/m. (b) In red is the rf
envelope after frequency filter was applied, in blue is
the actual pulse measured using pickup in the gun.

When the pulse length as a function of the local field is
found, Q-E or I-E dependences can be plotted. It is often
the case that the field emission characteristic plotted in
Fowler-Nordheim coordinates deviates from straight line
and multiple slopes can be seen; an example can be seen
in Fig. 10. There is a number of physical mechanisms at
play and this is currently a subject of intense research.
Thus, a routine searching for a knee point was devel-
oped based on an earlier idea implemented for dc case6.
It is included as an optional data processing tool. The
knee point is calculated using the Fowler-Nordheim co-

page 5


Schneider et al.
MSU MAM Report #003

ordinates of log10(Q/E2.5
c ) as function of EŌłÆ1
c . Since the
pulse length is known to be relatively constant through-
out conditioning, it does not change the selection of the
knee point location when using the Q-E version vs. the
I-E version of the Fowler-Nordheim coordinates. This
only constitutes an additional y-offset.
For the ACT, every data point of the Q-E measure-
ment consists of 10 pulses (or, shots).
Averaged val-
ues and an iterative fitting algorithm are used where the
Fowler-Nordheim plot is split into two independent line
segments shown in Fig. 10c. The first line (red line) ini-
tially only considers the first three data points and iter-
ates until it fits all but the last three data points. The
second line (black line) consists of the remaining points
not fit by the first line. The R2 values of each line are
recorded for each step in the iteration. The knee point
is chosen for the field at which the R2 values of each
line intersect, as this is the point where the linear fit is
optimized for each line.
If a knee point is found, the Fowler-Nordheim plot is
split into two regions. Each region is fit independently
of each other to find the ╬▓-factor and emission area Ae
for each line segment, i.e.
for the high and low field
regions. Additionally, the knee point is applied to extract
╬▓-factor and Ae for both the I-E and Q-E dependences.
A comparison between these two fitting methods can be
seen using the postprocessing options along with image
processing results. Both of these options are independent
from the main data processing pipeline and can be done
in tandem with the data processing.
If no knee point is found, the entire Fowler-Nordheim
plot is fit by a single line. FEbeam displays figures in
Fowler-Nordheim coordinates with the knee point indi-
cated. Additional plot showing the R2 value is generated
if the knee point was determined.
It should be noted
that if the algorithm cannot find the knee point due to
no diversions from the Fowler-Nordheim law, the user
is able to select an option on the FN Options interface
(seen in Fig. 10a) to fit the Q-E data without a knee
point. This interface also allows for the user to save the
data and figures of the Fowler-Nordheim plot and the R2

plot with the additional ability to change the axis range
for better display (Fig. 10b and Fig. 10c). This can be
changed for each conditioning field Eh chosen, and each
data set needs to be saved independently by selecting the
save button for each Eh.

III.
IMAGE PROCESSING AND POSTPROCESSING

The image processing option in FEbeam is self-
contained from the rest of the data processing pipeline
seen in Fig. 1. If the image processing option is selected
first, the operator imports the raw image files in the for-
mat of .DAT. The user selects the minimum and max-
imum pixel values which are then applied to all of the
images to be processed as the color bar. As this image
processing option (see Fig. 11) was specified for the ACT,

FIG. 10: (a) Display interface for the Fowler-Nordheim
fitting; (b) example of an R2 plot; (c) example of a
Fowler-Nordheim plot showing the fitting of the two
different regions emphasizing the knee point.

there are options for the three YAG screens on the ACT.
The YAG3 images can be processed with and without the
1 mm aperture (located at the position of YAG2). The
exported images are in the standard RGB color map as
found in Matlab, where the limits of the color bar are
set by the inputs (exampled in Fig. 11a), and an pseudo-
color example post-processed image is shown in Fig. 11b.
These results can then be coupled to the variety of post-
processing options as illustrated in Fig. 12a and Fig. 12b,
allowing the user to pick which conditioning fields are
postprocessed.
Beyond the traditional Fowler-Nordheim parameters
and Fowler-Nordheim plot, the fitting can also be com-
pared in both the I-E and Q-E versions. Additionally,
the dc Fowler-Nordheim plot log(I/E2) vs. 1/E is avail-
able. There are options for the Millikan plot log(I) or
log(Q) vs. 1/E and its R2 values which gives the user
better insight if significant space charge effect is present7.
The normalized space charge force can be plotted after
importing the number of emitters obtained from the op-

page 6


Schneider et al.
MSU MAM Report #003

FIG. 11: (a) Image Processing window showing options
to set minimum and maximum intensity threshold for
the color bar image. (b) Example image of a YAG3
image with a 1 mm aperture with color bar range 1,000
to 10,000.

FIG. 12: (a) Post Processing window showing all
available postprocessing options; (b) pop-up window
that allows the user to select which gradients they
would like to postprocess.

tional image reconginition module FEpic. FEpic calcu-
lates the number of field emission centers for each image
in a separate independent image processing pipeline1.

IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK

As field emission sources are notoriously difficult to
characterize, FEbeam provides an intuitive field emission
data processing pipeline with the additional benefit of
having image and post processing capabilities. FEbeam
is also of a highly modular design with only one subsec-
tion being specific to the ACT, which it was originally
designed for. Supplementary modules can be added for
additional functionality. New work is underway aiming to
join FEbeam, FEpic (expanded to unsupervised machine
learning algorithm), and a breakdown analyses module
FEbreak under a single umbrella called FEmaster.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the US Department of En-
ergy, Office of Science, High Energy Physics under Co-
operative Agreement award No. DE-SC0018362. This
material is also based upon work supported by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of High
Energy Physics under Award No. DE-SC0020429. Par-
tial support was provided under the Global Impact Ini-
tiative (College of Engineering, Michigan State Univer-
sity). The work at AWA is funded through the U.S. De-
partment of Energy Office of Science under Contract No.
DE-AC02-06CH11357.

REFERENCES

1T. Y. Posos, O. Chubenko, and S. V. Baryshev, ŌĆ£Fast pattern
recognition for electron emission micrograph analysis,ŌĆØ
(2020),

arXiv:2012.03578 [physics.app-ph].

2E. Jevarjian, M. Schneider, and S. V. Baryshev, ŌĆ£Fegen (v.1):
Field emission distribution generator freeware based on fowler-
nordheim equation,ŌĆØ (2020), arXiv:2009.13046 [physics.acc-ph].

3J. Shao, M. Schneider, G. Chen, T. Nikhar, K. K. Kovi, L. Spent-
zouris, E. Wisniewski, J. Power, M. Conde, W. Liu, and S. V.
Baryshev, ŌĆ£High power conditioning and benchmarking of planar
nitrogen-incorporated ultrananocrystalline diamond field emission
electron source,ŌĆØ Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 22, 123402 (2019).

4J. Wang and G. Loew, ŌĆ£Field emission and rf breakdown in high-
gradient room temperature linac structures,ŌĆØ
(1997), Stanford
Linear Accelerator Center [https://www.slac.stanford.edu/cgi-
bin/getdoc/slac-pub-7684.pdf].

5A. Grudiev, S. Calatroni, and W. Wuensch, ŌĆ£New local field quan-
tity describing the high gradient limit of accelerating structures,ŌĆØ
Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 12, 102001 (2009).

6T. Y. Posos, S. B. Fairchild, J. Park, and S. V. Baryshev, ŌĆ£Field
emission microscopy of carbon nanotube fibers: Evaluating and
interpreting spatial emission,ŌĆØ Journal of Vacuum Science & Tech-
nology B 38, 024006 (2020).

7J. P. Barbour, W. W. Dolan, J. K. Trolan, E. E. Martin, and
W. P. Dyke, ŌĆ£Space-charge effects in field emission,ŌĆØ Phys. Rev.
92, 45ŌĆō51 (1953).

APPENDIX A

Program versions:

ŌĆó Matlab version R2019b

ŌĆó Python version 2.7 ├Ś86-64 MSI

Follow documentation HERE to configure Matlab to in-
terface with Python (required for function).
In order for FEbeam to function and save files properly,
data files must be stored in the exact folder format shown
below.
Bolded folder names indicate that exact name
must be used in that location to ensure that FEbeam
can locate where to store files it creates. The folder for
each day must contain the folders as shown below

page 7


Schneider et al.
MSU MAM Report #003

ŌĆó Experiment

ŌĆō Day

ŌłŚ raw
ŌłŚ raw matlab
ŌłŚ settings
ŌłŚ EC info
ŌłŚ image

┬Ę DAT
┬Ę png

ŌĆō figures

ŌĆō all IV curves

ŌĆō FN data

Data Processing
Input Files
File Format
File Location

Raw data*
.CSV
raw

Parameters (low
charge case only)
.CSV
raw

Time constant
.MAT
settings

rf filter
.MAT
experiment

rf envelope
.DAT
experiment

*Raw data filenames must contain the timestamp that
corresponds to the gradient value entered in the window
shown in Fig. 3b.

Image
Processing Input
Files

File Format
File Location

Image files
.DAT
DAT

Postprocessing
Input Files
File Format
File Location

FN files**
.MAT
FN data

Local maxima files
.CSV
Ōł╝

**File grouping and numbering is done by the maximal
gradient Eh achieved in the given completed experimen-
tal cycle. If duplicate gradient values are being postpro-
cessed (say, when an experiment gets repeated for the
sake of reproducibility), the experiment number or ex-
perimental phase must be denoted in the filename by
using a decimal.
For example, if two 70 MV/m files
are being used, one filename must contain 70.1 and the
other must contain 70.2, denoting phase/experiment 1
and phase/experiment 2 respectively.
FEbeam allows
for a maximum of 9 phases at once for a single gradient
(phases 1-9). In the window shown in Fig. 12b, if phases
are used, the gradient values must be entered as 70.1 and
70.2, per this example case. Plots are titled accordingly,
such as containing ŌĆ£70 MV/m Phase 1ŌĆØ and ŌĆ£70 MV/m
Phase 2ŌĆØ. If duplicate gradients are used in postprocess-
ing, the phase must be denoted in this manner for all
duplicate values to ensure proper functionality.

page 8


