1

Ultrasensitive Field-Effect Biosensors Enabled by the Unique 

Electronic Properties of Graphene

Xiaoyan Zhang,1, 2 Qiushi Jing,1 Shen Ao,1 Gregory Schneider,2 Dmitry Kireev,3

Zhengjun Zhang1 and Wangyang Fu1, *

1School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Shaw technical 

science building, Haidian District, Beijing, 100084, P. R. China

2Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 55, 2333CC Leiden, the 

Netherlands

3Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, 

78757, Austin, USA

* to whom correspondence should be addressed: fwy2018@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

This feature article provides a critical overview of current developments on nanoelectronic 

biochemical sensors based on graphene. Composed of a single layer of conjugated carbon 

atoms, graphene has outstanding high carrier mobility, low intrinsic electrical noise, however, 

a chemically inert surface. Surface functionalization is therefore crucial to unravel the graphene 

sensitivity and selectivity for the detection of targeted analytes. To achieve optimal 

performance of graphene transistors for biochemical sensing, in this particular review we 

highlight the tuning of the graphene surface properties via surface functionalization and 

passivation, and the tuning of its electrical operation by utilizing multifrequency ambipolar 

configuration and high frequency measurement scheme to overcome the Debye screening to 

achieve low noise and highly sensitive detection. Potential applications and prospective of 

ultrasensitive graphene electronic biochemical sensors ranging from environmental monitoring 

and food safety, healthcare and medical diagnosis, to life science research will be presented as 

well.

Keywords: graphene, biochemical sensors, field-effect transistors, ultrasensitive, electronic 

properties


2

1. Introduction

While the molecules always need to be specifically labeled for optical[1-3] or magnetic[4-7]

based detection and analysis, label-free nanoelectronic biochemical sensing based on 

semiconducting techniques[8, 9] are more promising for portable point-of-care (POC) 

applications. Current research on such POC detection platforms has drawn worldwide interest, 

especially when driven by the concepts of Internet of Things (IoT), big data, and mobile health 

(mHealth). While versatile detection strategies exist, in order to fulfil all the requirements for 

a biosensor, the detection must be sensitive at clinically relevant concentrations of biomarkers 

as well as selective against various interferences that exist in biological samples.[10-12] In 

general, a specific chemical functionalization of the sensor surface with suitable biological 

recognition elements is required for selective detection. The sensitivity of a nanoelectronic 

biochemical sensor mainly depends on the immobilized receptor biopolymers, intrinsic 

electrical properties such as mobility and noise, as well as the sensing mechanism itself. 

Retrospectively, the so-called electric field effect is at the core technology of nanoelectronic 

biochemical sensing for detection of the charges that are introduced by a molecule. This field 

effect has been harvested to design the first generation of nanowire,[13] carbon nanotube,[14]

and graphene-based field-effect transistor (GFET).[15] The experimental preparations and 

observations of the electric field effect in nanomaterials have inspired numerous experimental 

and theoretical works related to the application of nanoscale field-effect transistors (FETs) for 

high performance label-free biochemical sensors.[16-21]

Among various nanomaterials, graphene holds a special place due to its high 

sensitivity,[22, 23] i.e., the significant change in graphene’s conductivity caused by charged 

biochemical molecules in direct contact with graphene. Due to a highly chemically stable planar 

sp2 hybridization, the crystal lattice of graphene is intrinsically chemically inert. Therefore, 

graphene is not naturally endowed with stereospecific recognition of biomarkers. To achieve 

graphene biochemical sensors, various functionalization processes have to be utilized to

introduce specific recognition moieties (e.g., antibody, antisense RNA, enzymes) onto the 

graphene surface to empower the recognition capability. The high sensitivity of graphene is 


3

attributed to its excellent electronic properties[15, 23] including room-temperature carrier 

mobility up to 106 cm2 V s-1 and large specific surface area. Nevertheless, several scientific 

challenges have been recognized and actively pursued for field-effect type of biosensors based 

on charge detection. The challenges mainly root on the complexity of biochemical detection 

environments, i.e., the sensors are surrounded by the interferences of various external noise and 

have to overcome the Debye screening effect to achieve in-situ biosensing in physiological 

solutions; at the same time, the possible adsorption of background ions on the sensor surface

and their effects on the sensing performance need to be investigated. Overcoming these 

challenges requires interdisciplinary research efforts in materials science, physics of 

semiconductor devices, chemistry, and biology. Along these lines, recent research trends on 

graphene nanoelectronic biochemical sensors now offer new opportunities for accurate 

measurements of human-based biomarkers at extremely low levels and/or monitoring trace 

amount of chemicals in environments,[19, 24] therefore providing great clinical value for early 

diagnosis and/or environmental monitoring and evaluation. 

In this feature article we will cover the most recent developments in graphene-based 

biosensing devices, starting from basic principles of operation and moving towards current

trends and future challenges. The discussion will begin with the advantageous electronic 

properties of graphene, i.e., the high carrier mobility, low intrinsic electrical noise, as well as 

the challenges ahead to achieve reliable biosensing operation of graphene electronic devices in 

biological environments. Functionalization of the chemically inert surface of graphene are at 

the core of graphene biosensors to unravel its sensitivity and selectivity performance for 

targeted analytes. In order to achieve optimal performance of GFET for biosensing, as 

illustrated in Figure 1, we split the approach in two strategies: one is tuning the graphene surface 

properties including surface functionalization and passivation; and the other is tuning the 

electrical operation of GFET. In this particular work we will highlight the utilization of 

multifrequency ambipolar detection and high frequency electrical field to overcome the Debye 

screening to achieve low noise and high sensitivity. Potential applications of GFET from 


4

environmental monitoring and food safety, healthcare, and disease detection, to life science 

research will be presented as well.

Figure 1. Operation, chemical functionalization and application of GFET devices that are both 
sensitive and selective.

2. Principle, fabrication, and operation of graphene nanoelectronics for biochemical 

sensing

Graphene is unique among solid-state materials as all carbon atoms are located on the surface

and are extremely sensitive to environmental changes. Graphene electronic biochemical sensors 

have been explored to harvest not only the electronic properties of graphene for conductance 

detection in real time, but also its optical and mechanical properties for transparent and flexible 

sensor design,[25-27] its quantum capacitance for passive wireless sensing,[28-30] and even 

its low-frequency noise signatures with respect to various biomolecular adsorption for 

frequency domain detection.[31] Up to now, various sensing mechanisms such as charge 

transfer,[32] scattering,[33] capacitive effect,[28] and field effect,[18] have also been realized 

for highly sensitive detection based on graphene nanoelectonics. Particularly, in a 

semiconducting transistor device, field effect refers to the modulation of its surface 


5

conductance (or resistance) upon the application of a vertical electric field, and has been widely 

accepted as one of the most reliable sensing mechanisms. In this respect, we will focus on the 

recent progress of graphene field-effect biosensors. In Table 1 shows comprehensively the 

state-of-the-art performance of different type of graphene-based biochemical sensors. 

Nevertheless, we note here that the complexity of biochemical environment as well as the 

difficulty in understanding its interactions at the surface of biochemical sensors, make the 

origin of the sensor response not always fully clear, particularly disentangling the achieved 

sensing response from any kind of noise sources, for example nonspecific binding, surface 

chemical instability, drifts, to name a few. In addition, precautions have to be taken as surface 

condition (functionalization) of graphene as well as the device geometry might be different 

from sample to sample (and is not always reported in the literature). For example, annealing 

exfoliated graphene exhibited a comparable carrier mobility to as-fabricated exfoliated

graphene (from ≈5000 cm2 V−1 s−1 to ≈5500 cm2 V−1 s−1), but also a strikingly decreased 

sensitivity to NH3 gas (from ≈1 ppm to ≈1000 ppm) due to mainly the difference in their surface 

conditions. Therefore it might not always be fair to make such comparisons with different 

samples.[16, 34]
For example, performing high quality biosensing (e.g., extracellular)

measurements reproducibly require identical or nearly identical devices.[35, 36]

Table 1. Selected examples of the state-of-the-art performance of different type of graphene-
based biochemical sensors. 

Type 
of 

graphene

Surface interaction
(Surface 
modification 
& 

Target biomolecules)

Carrier mobility

[cm2 V-1 s-1]

Sensing response
Detection 

limit

Refs

Concentration
Relative sensitivity 

(∆R/R or ∆I/I)

Exfoliated
2D heterostructure

(van der Waals)

≈100000
[37]

Bare graphene + BSA
300 pM
≈2 %
300 pM
[38]

Iminobiotin(IB)-pyrene 

derivatives + avidin

1000
1 pM
60 mV(|ΔVCNP|)*
[39]

Bare graphene
+ NH3
5000
1 ppm
300 %
1 ppb
[16]

Annealed graphene
5500
1000~1800 ppm
<2 %
1000 ppm
[34]


6

ssDNA + chemical 

vapors

Dimethyl 

methylpho

sphonate

1600
20 ppm
2.5 %
≈5.6 ppm
[40]

Propionic
90 ppm
1.5 %
≈31.3 ppm

Methanol
7500 ppm
1 %

Octanal
14 ppm
1 %

Nonanal
0.6 ppm
2 %

Decanal
1.7 ppm
2 %

CVD
ssDNA + 

Complementary ssDNA

10 nM
11.2 %
≈10 pM
[33]

20-mer DNA aptamer + ATP
10 pM
≈1 %
10 pM
[41]

HL-1 cells + action potentials
750
≈1200 μV**
≈200 μV
[36]

Copper(I) + C2H4
1500
1 ppm
≈64 %
2 ppb
[19]

Penicillinase + penicillin
3 mM
≈0.6 %
50 μM
[42]

PEG and aptamer + IgE
2.4 nM
0.06 μA(ΔIsd)**
47 pM
[43]

Anti-IL6(interleukin-6) + IL6
20 pg mL-1
≈3.7 %
2 pg mL-1
[44]

Bare graphene +11-mer ssDNA
1200
100 pM 
3.0 %
4 pM
[20]

Pyrene-linked PNA + HIV DNA
1100
10 pM 
≈33 %
2 pM
[24]

Phenol + H+ 

Crown ether + K+

2020

1520

pH=3 ~ 10

pK=0 ~ 4

49 mV pH-1(|ΔVCNP|)*

60 mV(|ΔVCNP|)*

≈10-5 pH
[18]

rGO
PSA monoclonal antibody + 

PSA  

≈30
≈1 nM
≈ 17 %
≈1.1 fM
[45]

Al2O3
layer/Au 
NPs 
and 

antibody + Ebola glycoprotein

1 ug mL-1
17 %
[46]

OC antibodies + Amyloid-β 

fibrils

1 pg mL-1 ~ 

10 ng mL-1

1.8 % ~ 8.4 %
1 pg mL-1
[47]

Polyethylenimine/urease + urea
15~30
1~1000 µM
9200 ± 500 μA cm-2

per decade of [urea]**

1 µM
[48]

* Voltage shift of the CNP.
** Relative changes not given.

2.1. Principle of GFET for biochemical sensing

Graphene field-effect biosensors come from the big family of ion-sensitive FETs (ISFETs), 

which detect the conductance changes of the semiconducting channel upon binding of 

charged ions or biomolecules due to the field effect. To ensure a stable operation of the 

electronic sensor devices in electrolyte solutions, insulating layers such as SiO2 and Al2O3

have been routinely adopted to isolate and protect the chemically reactive semiconducting 

channel from directly contacting the ions and biomolecules. Nevertheless, this relatively 


7

thick layer of insulating material also reduces the interfacial capacitive coupling between 

the sensor channel and the electrolyte solution, thus limiting the device sensitivity. 

Since graphene is a conductor with every atom on the surface and is chemically 

inert, one may use it as the conducting channel in an ISFET and at the same time as the 

sensing surface to reach the highest sensitivity. Indeed, as a modern version of the classical 

ISFET, electrochemically gated GFET (and FET based on other two-dimensional (2D)

materials) enables the detection of charged molecules in a label-free manner on a small 

footprint, and has demonstrated improved sensitivity compared to traditional bioassays.[16]

An applied gate voltage either from a back gate or an electrolyte gate via a reference electrode 

or adsorption of charged molecules is able to shift the Fermi level (EF) of the graphene layer, 

therefore modulating the conductance of the graphene device. Owing to the fact that graphene 

lacks an intrinsic band gap,[49, 50] typical transfer characteristics of the GFETs present an 

ambipolar behavior without an off-state. Generally, when sweeping the gate voltage VGS from 

negative to positive, the fermi energy EF of graphene shifts from the valence band to the 

conduction band. The resulting electron (e) and hole (h) conduction (respectively) leads to the 

ambipolar behavior. When EF crosses the Dirac point (ED, or charge neutrality point, CNP), the 

type of charge carriers is altered and the graphene conductance reaches its minimum with a 

finite value. We define the transconductance as the derivative of source-drain current IDS with 

respect to VGS: 𝑔 =

𝑑𝐼𝐷𝑆
𝑑𝑉𝐺𝑆, which reflects the resulting change in current in response to a small 

variation in the gate voltage, VGS, and is one of the most important characteristics to evaluate 

the sensing response of a graphene transistor. Systematic studies on the GFETs fabricated on a 

variety of substrates with different width to length ratio W/L, reveal a linear relation between 

the source-drain current IDS (and thus the transconductance) and the W/L:

𝐼𝐷𝑆 =

𝑊
𝐿 ∙ 𝐶𝐼 ∙ 𝜇 ∙ (𝑉𝐺𝑆 − 𝑉𝐶𝑁𝑃)
(1)

where CI is the interface capacitance, μ is the carrier mobility, and VCNP is the gate voltage at 

the CNP.


8

Conventionally, a GFET is favorably operated at its maximum transconductance 𝑔𝑚

to achieve the highest sensing response. As a result of the large interfacial capacitance and high 

carrier mobility, the value of the GFET transconductance can reach up to 200 µS,[35, 51] which 

is almost one order of magnitude larger than that of the other ISFET technologies based on Si 

or AlGaN materials. In practice, the maximum transconductance point of p-type doped 

graphene devices occurs in the hole conduction regime,[35] and vice versa for n-type doped 

devices. The doping effect could result from the water molecules trapped at the interface or 

from an unknown chemical doping,[35] induced by the external environment or process.[52]

Based on Eq. 1, to extract the value of the field-effect mobility, 𝜇 =

𝐿
𝑊 ∙

𝑔

𝐶𝐼𝑉𝐷𝑆, we 

model the direct current (DC, or low frequency) interfacial capacitor CI of an electrolyte-gated 

GFET as two capacitors in series. One part is the intrinsic quantum capacitance of graphene, 

CQ, which depends on the charge carrier concentration and can be determined as a function of 

the channel potential across the graphene sheet; and the other part is the virtual parallel-plate 

double layer capacitance, CDL, formed due to the separation of the charges adsorbed on the 

graphene surface and the solution side of the interface as governed by the Poisson-Boltzmann 

equation (and independent to the gate voltage).[18, 53] In practice, CQ has its minimum value 

CQ,min and is directly related to the density of so-called effective charged impurities n* (varying 

from 1×1011 to 1×1012 cm−2), which represents the global behavior of defects and can cause 

local potential fluctuations in graphene.[53-55] Experimentally, we may obtain CI either by 

performing impedance measurements or capacitive Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) current 

measurements at different scan rates.

We note here that, for hydrophobic materials such as graphene, the air gap capacitance 

(Cairgap) should be included in the interface capacitance CI.[56-58] Alternatively, a very recent 

research on the dielectric constant of water suggested the presence of an interfacial layer with 

vanishingly small polarization such that the out-of-plane dielectric constant of this very thin 

(~1.5-2 nm) confined water layer is only about 2.1 nm.[59] Interestingly, both hypothesises 


9

lead to an interfacial capacitance of about 1 μF cm-2, which is in agreement with experimental 

results. 

For liquid-gated GFETs, the major challenges lie in the control of the chemical 

functionalization, the identification of the exact sensing reactions at the graphene surface, and 

in the characterization of the number of charges each biomolecules carry. Usually, we assume 

a constant interfacial capacitance and carrier mobility μ of graphene upon biomolecular 

adsorption, which is correct in most cases where the targeted biomolecules adsorbed on the 

receptors and interact weakly with the underneath graphene lattice. However, additional 

scattering centers might be formed if biomolecules directly bind on a graphene surface. Such 

scattering centers are able to trigger a suppression of the mobility of charge carriers.[33] In 

addition, practical sensor designs should also take the possible changes of the interfacial 

capacitance upon biomolecule adsorption into account.[28]

2.2. Fabrication and operation of GFET

Usually, micromechanically exfoliated graphene has intrinsically higher quality with less 

defects.[34] Owing to the feasibility of large-scale fabrication at low cost, chemical vapor 

deposition (CVD) of graphene on metals thin films has been widely accepted as a more suitable 

technology platform for practical application compared to mechanical exfoliation. Additionally, 

further optimization of graphene biosensors also calls to study how the number of layers affects 

both the 1/f noise and the sensing response to the surrounding environments, as the electrical 

properties of monolayer graphene are different from those of its few-layer counterparts[60]. In 

general, few-layer graphene devices feature less steep transfer curves (i.e., reduced 

transconductances) as compared to the single-layer graphene, resulting in substantial 

suppression in the GFET amplification. In this regard, monolayer graphene with a large sensing 

response is beneficiary.[23, 35, 61] The appropriate fabricating and packaging of graphene-

based field-effect biosensors depends on their field of applications. In biotechnology, 

environmental monitoring, agriculture and food technology, the analysis of targeted analytes 

can be conducted in-line (e.g., in situ), on-line (e.g., discrete sampling) and off-line (e.g., in the 

laboratory). In general, the electrodes should be passivated or sealed with nonreactive materials 


10

to prevent any contact between the metal lines and the electrolyte, as well as to define the active 

gate area.[35] Technologically this requires an additional layer of a chemically stable resist, 

such as polyimide[62], polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)[63] or solid state thin film such as 

Al2O3[64], TiO2, HfO2[65] and Si3N4[66] to avoid possible electrochemical processes between 

the electrodes and electrolytes, as well as any false signal due to the surface interaction with 

electrode materials. In medical and life science applications biosensors are generally 

categorized as in vitro and in vivo. For in vivo biosensors operated inside the body, the implants 

have to fulfil additional strict regulations on sterilization to avoid inflammatory response and 

on long-term biocompatibility to avoid harmful interaction with the body environment during 

the period of use.[64, 67] Based on the type of applied gate voltage, GFETs can be grouped 

into two major classes: so-called back-gated and liquid-gated GFET.

2.2.1. Back-gated GFET

A back-gated GFET consists source and drain metallic electrodes bridged by a graphene 

conduction channel (Figure 2a). To ensure a negligible contact resistance, electrodes (e.g., 5 

nm Cr/50 nm Au) can be prepared directly on top of the graphene.[19] Double contacts are 

found to reduce the effective contact resistance. Usually, GFET devices are fabricated by 

transfer of CVD graphene onto highly doped conductive silicon substrates with silicon dioxide 

insulating layers. The carrier density, and the corresponding channel conductivity can be 

modulated by applying potential to the highly conductive silicon substrate to a range of back-

gate voltages VGS via field effect. In a typical measurement, one applies a constant source-drain 

bias voltage, VDS, and monitor the resulting source-drain current IDS between the source and the 

drain of the graphene channel, when changing the back-gate voltage VGS. However, GFET 

devices fabricated on bare SiO2/Si substrate are almost always haunted by intensive p+-doping 

(i.e., CNP shifts to more positive voltages) and large hysteresis due to the trap states at the 

graphene/SiO2 surface.[68] One possible way to avoid this unwanted doping is to transfer 

graphene 
onto 
surfaces 
treated 
with 
hexamethyldisilazane 
(HMDS)[69]
or 

octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) to shield it from trapped charges located at the SiO2 surface, 

resulting in advantageously hysteresis-free operation and close-to-zero CNP point. Such high-


11

performance back-gated GFETs with reliable operation have been successfully used for gas 

sensors.[19, 23] When the back-gate is held at a fixed voltage, physisorption or chemisorption 

of targeted molecules on the graphene surface can induce a change in the electric field, and thus 

the channel current due to field effect. 

2.2.2. Liquid-gated GFET

In comparison to the back-gate geometry, where the gate voltage is applied to the highly 

conductive silicon substrate, in a liquid-gate configuration a reference electrode together with 

the electrolyte serves as the ‘gate electrode’ (Figure 2b). The liquid gate is coupled to the 

graphene channel through the interfacial capacitance CI as introduced previously.[70]

During the fabrication of a GFET for liquid-gate operation, a passivation is required in 

order to prevent any contact between the metal lines and the electrolyte as well as to define the 

active gate area.[35] Technologically this means additional layer of chemically stable resist, 

such as polyimide or epoxy.[36] In a typical example, a biocompatible, two-component epoxy 

were applied after wire bonding for sealing the metallic electrodes against the liquid-gate 

voltage Vref applied via the Ag/AgCl reference electrode, to prevent any possible leakage 

current in electrolyte environment.[36] We note here that owing to the unique frequency 

dependent dielectric properties of the water solution, electrolyte gating is capable of tuning the 

conductance of GFETs without shunting the propagating radio frequency (RF) signal.[71] For 

life science application, a new passivation type has been recently introduced and argued to 

provide a better interface between the GFETs and neuronal cells.[36] This ‘feedline follower’ 

passivation covers only the area over the metallic feedlines, thus helping to prevent membrane 

bending as the neuron cell approaches the graphene and grows consistently on it. 

For comparison, the typical area normalized transconductance of an electrolyte-gated 

GFET is reported in the range of 1-2 mS V−1.[36] Figure 2c-e depict a typical GFET biosensing 

measurement. In Figure 2d, a receptor molecule is immobilized on the surface of graphene for 

specific recognition of target biomolecules. The binding of a negatively charged molecule 

causes a positive shift of the IDS(Vref) curve due to the field effect. In the time-dependent 

measurement as shown in Figure 2c, such positive shift of the transfer characteristics of the 


12

GFET results in an increase of the current IDS in the hole regime (as indicated by ‘h’ in red), 

and a decrease of the current in the electron regime (as indicated by ‘e’ in light blue), and vice 

versa for the detection of positively charged molecule (Figure 2d). In this respect, in principle 

no sensing response of GFET sensors is expected upon the binding of non-charged 

biomolecules, unless a charge variation can be introduced through subtle dipole fluctuation[72]

or molecular engineering[73].

Usually, even after the treatment of substrates (e.g., the SiO2 treated with HMDS[69]

prior to graphene transfer to support the graphene from trapped charges on the surface of SiO2), 

it is common that multiple neutrality points are observed together with relatively large 

hysteresis if measured against liquid-gate voltage sweeping.[24] These poor device 

performances indicate the presence of a large amount of surface contaminants or charged trap 

states at the graphene/electrolyte interface, even though ~200°C baking and thoroughly rinsing 

in isopropanol are routinely applied. To overcome this issue, an in-situ electrochemical 

cleaning method can be adapted for graphene surface refreshment.[24] Every consecutive 

cleaning cycle removes the spurious neutrality points and decreases the hysteresis, and usually 

after 10 cycles of refreshment, the G(Vref) curve of the GFET becomes completely stable, and 

both the spurious neutrality points and the initial hysteresis observed can be eliminated (Figure 

2f). 


13

Figure 2. Schematic representation of (a) a back-gated GFET and (b) a liquid-gated GFET. (c-
e) show the sensing principle of the liquid-gated GFET biosensor. (f) Upper panel shows the
plot of a GFET sheet conductance after electrochemical cycles under an operation of Vref 
between -0.4 V and 0.6 V. Lower panel shows the G(Vref) curves before electrochemical cycle
(line in gray), during the first electrochemical cycle (line and arrow in green), and after 5 times 
and 10 times electrochemical cycle (line and arrow in blue and red), respectively. Both hole 
and electron carriers represent symmetric ambipoar behavior with carrier mobility of ~1100 
cm2/Vs.

2.2.3. Bandgap engineering

The lack of electronic band gap of graphene leading to the metallic nature of graphene-

based FET devices, that cannot be switched off at room temperature. In order to 

overcome the limitation caused by the zero band gap structure, the engineering of 

bandgap is one of the most critical points for graphene-based digital devices. In this 

respect, graphene derivatives, including graphene nanoribbons (GNRs), heteroatoms 


14

(N, S, B, P) doped, functionalized, and bilayer graphene, were explored to modulate 

the electronic structure of graphene and improve the on/off current ratios of GFETs. 

Heteroatom-doping is a process that some carbon atoms in the graphene structure are 

replaced by the heteroatoms. The size and electronegativity of the heteroatoms are often 

different from those of carbon atom. Therefore, regardless of whether the dopants have 

a higher (as N) or lower (as B, P, S) electronegativity than that of carbon, the 

introduction of heteroatoms into graphene carbon networks could cause electron 

modulation on the charge distribution and electronic properties of carbon skeletons, 

which in turn affects their performance for electronic applications.[74] Besides 

chemical modification, graphene nanoribbon, graphene nanomesh, and graphene 

nanoring,[75] have also been proved as rational designs of the graphene to open a 

bandgap, yielding an improved transistor Ion/Ioff ratio. For example, GFETs prepared 

with sub-10-nm GNRs showed high on-off current ratios of 104.[76] By using a rapid-

heating plasma CVD, which is accessible for large-scale production, high-yield GNRs 

(250 000 cm−2) were prepared.[77] Remarkably, by the on-surface bottom-up approach, 

atomic level defined GNRs were synthesized with designed halogenated aromatic 

precursors. Depending on the structure of precursors, GNRs with defined width and 

edge-type can be achieved by converting monomers through dehalogenation and 

coupling reactions.[78, 79]
Recently, tuning the band-structure of graphene 

superlattices with hydrostatic pressure,[80] and even achievement of unconventional 

superconductivity and insulator behaviour with magic-angle[81, 82] were realized. The 

diversified approaches would promote the development of graphene-based electronic 

performance in logical circuits. Nevertheless, notably, the transistor Ion/Ioff ratio has no 

direct relation to the performances of a sensor device, although it is related to graphene 


15

digital applications requiring high on state current (Ion) and ultra-low power 

consumption at the off state (Ioff) of the transistors.

2.3. Challenges in GFET for achieving ultimate single molecular detection

Granted by the excellent electrical properties,[83, 84] including extraordinary high mobility[22, 

85, 86] and low intrinsic electrical noise,[87, 88] which gives a better signal-to-noise ratio 

(SNR),[56, 89-91] graphene-based biochemical sensors are reported to provide superior 

performances compared to their Si-based counterparts and/or traditional bioassays.[61]

However, there are challenges that remain to be solved with systematic and comprehensive 

research. Current reported GFETs still cannot achieve the theoretical predicted performance, 

which can be related to several basic and important properties of graphene affect the 

performance (especially electrical noise) of GFET. In the following section, starting from 

general considerations regarding the carrier mobility of graphene, we will focus on the 

electrical noise and Debye screening that hinder the practical application of GFET for 

ultrasensitive detection under high ionic or physiological solutions. 

2.3.1. Carrier mobility

The sensing response of GFET is defined as S = ∆IDS/N, that’s a minute field effect (the 

electrical current ∆IDS) induced by the binding of a biomolecule carrying electron charge Ne. 

According to Eq. 1, S is therefore proportional to the carrier mobility μ of graphene, as well as 

the slopes of the sublinear IDS(VGS) curves (i.e., transconductance g). In this respect, if the values 

of other parameters including the electrical noise amplitude are equal, a higher carrier mobility 

μ (up to 106 cm2 V-1 s-1 under room temperature) implies a better sensor performance upon the 

adsorption of charged biomolecules. Although there are no direct evidences or theories that 

could unambiguously relate the high mobility of GFETs to their noise performances, a higher 

carrier mobility indeed complies with graphene bearing less impurities and defects, and 

therefore being favor of an improved noise performance. Applications that could exploit these 

unique properties such as label-free electronic biochemical sensors with ultrahigh sensitivities 

will be introduced in Section 5. Specifically, owing to its exceptional high mobility, graphene 


16

is potentially well suited to RF applications,[71] and holds great promise for sensing 

applications at a high sampling rate where a wide bandwidth is of key importance.[18]

Since the sensing response of GFET sensors depends on the carrier mobility μ, it is 

preferential to use and integrate high quality graphene into devices. The factors that affect the 

carrier mobility of graphene are listed as follows. i) Among various synthesis methods, 

micromechanical cleavage yields graphene with less defects, and therefore higher carrier 

mobility and lower intrinsic electrical noise.[92] Generally, carrier mobility in the order of 

≈3 000-15 000 cm2 V−1 s−1 are routinely reported for exfoliated graphene on SiO2/Si wafers,[93, 

94] in comparison to ≈100-1500 cm2 V−1 s−1 of silicon materials.[95] The CVD grown 

graphene-based FETs would feature mobility in the order of 1 000-10 000 cm2 V−1 s−1. 

However, µ of CVD grown graphene can be substantially improved (50 000-350 000 

cm2 V−1 s−1) by using single-crystal graphene free of grain boundaries[96, 97] transferred onto 

a high-quality hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) substrate.[98-100] Such high µ of CVD 

graphene even rivals those of exfoliated samples, making the CVD method ideal for the 

synthesis of large-area, high-quality graphene for sensing applications. ii) The influence of 

surface functionalization on the electronic performance of the GFETs has been studied. To a 

large extend, the exceptional electrical properties of graphene can be preserved during the 

noncovalent chemical treatment process. For example, the transfer characteristics G(VGS) of 

these GFET devices exhibit symmetric shapes and field-effect hole carrier mobilities of ∼1500 

cm2 V−1 s−1, which are preserved to approximately 80% of their initial values upon the 

noncovalent surface functionalization with the copper(I) complexes via π-π and/or hydrophobic 

interactions. The affordable drop in the carrier mobility was ascribed to an increased scattering 

of the charge carriers.[19] As it was experimentally proven recently, noncovalent 

functionalization can indeed deliver GFETs with fully preserved mobility.[18] By using 

aromatic noncovalent functionalization,[18] the hole and electron mobilities of this phenol-

activated GFET for pH sensing were found to be 1770 cm2 V-1 s-1 and 2020 cm2 V-1 s-1, 

respectively. These mobilities, as well as those of the fluorobenzene-passivated GFET (2650 

cm2 V-1 s-1 for hole and 3260 cm2 V-1 s-1 for electron), show no degradation and are order-of-


17

magnitude higher than those of high-performance ISFETs formed on silicon-on-insulator (SOI) 

wafers.[18] On the other hand, covalent surface functionalization, for example, the addition of 

only one H-sp3 defect per ~250,000 down to ~145,000 sp2 hybridized carbon atoms 

(correspondingly decreasing carrier diffusion length, LD from 45 nm down to 35 nm) effectively 

affects the mobility of charge carriers in graphene compared to pristine graphene. Nonetheless, 

for sensing applications, the reduced carrier mobility of highly hydrogenated graphene is still 

sufficient.[101] iii) In fact, the extremely high mobility values only happen in devices with 

small channel areas (below 100 µm2), which may due to a finite crystallinity of the graphene. 

In smaller devices there are fewer grain boundaries and defects, reaching a situation when a 

GFET consists of a single graphene crystal. In this case, a drastic increase in that transistor’s 

charge carrier mobility is expected. While for the GFETs with channels over 100 μm2 in area, 

the chance of meeting grain boundaries and defects increases, restricting the electrical 

performance of the GFETs,[102, 103] although some researchers have specifically used the 

grain boundaries for e.g., ion channel sensing applications.[104] iv) Scattering induced by 

substrates that constricts the electrical properties of even single-crystalline graphene, is another 

affect for the observed limited mobility values. For example, the SiO2 substrate results in a 

suppression of the average mobility 750 ± 350 cm2 V−1 s−1[105] compared to HfO2 and 

polyimide substrates, whose value reaches up to 4.9 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1. Carrier mobility up to 

10 000-197 600 cm2 V−1 s−1 was achieved by encapsulating graphene in h-BN,[37, 106, 107]

providing unprecedented possibilities for sensing applications if considering recent progress 

towards the growth of large-area high-quality, single-crystal graphene[108] and h-BN 

monolayer on Cu.[109]

2.3.2. 1/f noise

GFETs have exceptionally high carrier mobility, which results in high transconductance that 

endows the sensors with a significant current response to minute changes in the surface 

potential of graphene caused by the adsorption of molecules. However, to determine the 

maximum sensitivity of GFET, it is essential to investigate the electronic noise performance, 

which is ubiquitous in solid-state electronic devices and sets a limit on the smallest signal that 


18

can be possibly resolved. Generally, the inherent 1/f noise dominates the electronic noise of 

GFET at biologically relevant low frequencies (≲1000 Hz). Such low-frequency 1/f noise, 

whose power spectral density (PSD) inversely depends on the frequency f, is governed by 

surface over bulk noise in graphene up to seven layers[60]. As valuable tools for predicting the 

detection limit of biochemical FET sensors, noise measurement and characterization are well-

established in the MOSFET community. It is revealed that the 1/f noise in graphene largely 

depends on the number of layers. For monolayer graphene supported on a SiO2/Si substrate, its 

1/f noise is comparable to that of bulk semiconductors (including Si).[110] Double- or few-

layer graphene devices are expected to reduce the 1/f noise because the potential fluctuations 

from external charged impurities such as oxide traps and/or interface states can be effectively 

screened.[60, 110] By comparing the noise performances of a SiO2/Si substrate supported 

GFET device and its counterpart after etching the underlying SiO2 substrate to suspend the 

monolayer graphene, one order of magnitude reduction on 1/f noise was observed.[88] Since 

the 1/f noise in monolayer graphene is a surface phenomenon, such dramatic reduction is mainly 

attributed to the removal of the supported SiO2 substrate, and thus any accompanied external 

trap states.[60]

Defects in the graphene lattice is another origin of noise. For example, compared to 

scotch-tape exfoliated graphene or CVD grown graphene, the permanent oxygen-based defects 

are introduced by over-oxidation of graphene oxide (GO). An incomplete removal of oxygen 

groups for reduced graphene oxide (rGO) also leads to degradation in the mobility and noise 

performance.[111] Interestingly, the large concentration of defects of GO (and rGO) leads to 

improved sensing responses when used as an active sensing electrode, compared to near defect-

free exfoliated monolayer graphene.[111, 112] In principle, optimal defect density can be 

achieved by balancing the gains in the sensing response against the rapidly degraded low-

frequency 1/f noise when increasing the density of defects.[111] In reality, the challenges lie in 

controlling the density of the defect, particularly when lacking of knowledge on the nature of 

the defect. Remarkably, either environmental exposure or aging of graphene devices increases 

the level of noise; in contrast, a proper capping layer or surface functionalization circumvents 


19

can even reduce the level of noise.[113] For example, by encapsulating a monolayer graphene 

between two sheets of h-BN, the channel area normalized PSD can be suppressed up to one 

order of magnitude lower compared to its non-encapsulated counterparts.[114]

The sensitivity limit of liquid-gated GFETs can also be indicated by an root-mean-

square (RMS) value of the gate voltage, which can be directly derived from the measured noise 

PSD and the device transconductance.[35] Liquid-gated GFETs should be capable of detecting 

single voltage spikes caused by a cardiomyocyte as low as 100 μV with a SNR above 10, which 

outperform FETs made from conventional materials such as Si and is comparable with that of

the state-of-the-art recording systems based on microelectrode arrays (MEAs).[35]

The sources of noise in the liquid-gated GFETs are still not fully understood. 

Nevertheless, the current noise PSD shows a minimum at the CNP, which increases when 

moving away from the CNP for |VGS| >> VCNP.[115, 116] Further systematical investigations on 

the 1/f noise behavior of graphene devices fabricated on different substrates, suggested a ‘V’-

or ‘M’-shaped feature of the noise amplitude regardless of the substrates (SiO2, Si3N4, and 

sapphire). 

As a special application, the low-frequency electronic noise can be advantageously 

adopted for realizing selective graphene gas sensors.[31, 117] The mechanism is based on the 

distinct noise features of the graphene transistors upon the adsorption of various vapors of 

different chemicals. This sensing mechanism achieves selective frequency domain detection 

without specific surface functionalization of graphene, and calls for future exploration for other 

2D materials.

2.3.3. Electrochemistry 

In liquid-gated GFET biosensors, the electrical current should be confined transversely in the 

graphene conductive channel, which can sustain a high current density over 1000 μA μm-1

before Joule-heating breakdown.[118] Whereas spurious electrochemical current due to redox 

reaction at the graphene/liquid interface flows vertically and interferences the sensing 

performance of gate controlled GFET devices.[17] To suppress electrochemical processes and 

the resulting exchange ionic currents, generally GFETs are operated at low electrolyte-gate 


20

voltage, where the interface is considered to be inert and purely capacitive. Although it is not 

always explicitly stated in most of the literature, the design of electrochemically-gated GFET 

for detecting targeted analytes in real time greatly depends on our ability to understand and 

maintain a low level of electrochemical current. Basically, the electrochemical current (or gate 

leakage current) IGS increases with the gate source voltage VGS. For example, application of high 

VGS potentials up to 1.4 V via an Ag/AgCl electrode, increases the gate leakage current up to 

tens of nA. Such experimental artifacts at moderate or relatively high electrolyte-gate voltages 

are considered of electrochemical nature, rooting on the exchange ionic current between the 

graphene channel and possible redox active molecules in the solution phase. As we will discuss 

in details in Section 3.2, where we will probe into the interplay between the electrical in-plane 

transport and the electrochemical activity of graphene, it is possible to maintain a lower level 

of the gate leakage by tuning the density of H-sp3 defects introduced by using plasma 

treatment.[52]

On the other hand, as we introduced previously in Figure 2f, an electrochemical gate 

leakage current can induce consecutive cleaning and improving the performance of the 

GFETs.[36]

2.3.4. Debye Screening

Debye screening effect describes the tendency of plasma to eliminate internal electrostatic field. 

As a large system containing mobile ionic charges, an electrolyte solution can be regarded as 

plasma. The screening layer is composed of diffusive movable ions attracted to a charged 

surface via the Coulomb electrostatic force. At room temperature, the Debye length[119] can 

be formulated as: λD = 0.304/I1/2, where I is the ionic strength, and is typically ≈0.7 nm under 

physiological conditions. Given the size of biomolecules is in the range of several nanometers, 

it is therefore unlikely that they can approach the sensor surface within the Debye length to be 

recorded by the transistor. For example, for biotin receptors anchored on the nanowire surface 

with near side distance of ≈1 nm, no response can be observed upon the binding of streptavidin 

from a 10 nM solution under physiological conditions (1×PBS, λD ≈ 0.7 nm).[119] At low salt 

concentrations of 0.1×PBS, the hybridization of complementary DNA molecules exhibits a 


21

normalized resistance change of 80%. When increasing the buffer concentration to 1×PBS, 

such sensing response decreases dramatically to 12%, which was found to follow the Debye 

length considerations.[120] A full screening of the biological binding signal happens when 

increasing further the buffer concentration to 10×PBS, resulting in negligible sensing response 

even at a relatively high complementary DNA concentration of 1 μM. So in fact, the Debye 

screening effect has put a fundamental obstacle to the possible sensing applications of the 

GFETs (and ISFETs in general) for real-time detection of relatively large biomolecules at high-

salt/physiological conditions, although in principle GFETs are sensitive to changes below one 

single charge.[16, 121] Indeed, various approaches have been pursued to circumvent the Debye 

screening effect towards ultimate detection of biomolecules, including rational design of short 

antibodies, ex-situ measurement in low ionic strength buffers, and incorporation of porous 

polymer layers permeable to biomolecules.[41, 119, 122-124] Nevertheless, to achieve highly 

sensitive, real-time detection in high-salt/physiological conditions without any specific aptamer 

molecular design and restriction on interface environment, more general and novel operation 

strategy still have to be developed. 

As a new sensing technology, radio frequency (RF) method is not restricted by Debye 

screening, and can detect biological molecules deep into the solution. This is because at RF 

frequencies (starting from ~10 MHz), due to the viscous effect of the solution, the movement 

of mobile ions in the electrolyte will lag behind the change of the AC electric field.[70]

Therefore, aqueous solutions can be considered as dielectrics at high frequencies, and the 

Debye screening can be overcome. As a result, the binding events of biological molecules on 

the sensor surface can be detected as the changes of capacitance (or dielectric environment) 

caused by the replacement of water molecules with very high dielectric constant (= 80) by the 

target biological molecules with low dielectric constant (= 3-5). The development of RF sensors 

for biological detection is the current research trend. So far, most RF sensing schemes for 

biomolecular recognition, including biotin-streptavidin, DNA hybridization and glucose, have 

been demonstrated based on RF passive devices and circuits (e.g., various resonators and 

interdigital circuits), with a focus on basic research to test and study the interaction between 


22

RF and biomolecules to further improve the performance of the biosensor.[125] For example, 

the University of California, Davis, reported an RF resonant sensor based on a metal 

transmission line, which can detect the binding and activity of biological molecules at depths 

ranging from 10 nm to the surface of the sensor in a physiological solution environment.[126]

The University of Michigan reported that carbon nanotube-based mixers could detect 

streptavidin macromolecules.[72] Twente University used high-frequency CMOS capacitance 

detection technology to achieve imaging of living cell networks at the single or even subcellular 

level.[127] However, it should be noted here that high frequency signals can deeply diffuse into 

buffer solution, which makes this sensing scheme more vulnerable to external environmental 

noise and RF detection of single biomolecule has not been realized.

3. Graphene surface property tuning in graphene biochemical sensing

Ideally, the crystal lattice of graphene is free of dangling bonds and intrinsically chemically 

inert. Therefore, to achieve graphene biochemical sensors, specific recognition moieties

(antibody, antisense RNA enzymes, etc.) have to be introduced via both covalent[128-130] and 

noncovalent[131-133] approaches. Chemical functionalization of graphene surface using 

different biochemical molecules and chemical treatments, not only is essential for unlocking its 

sensing potential, but also plays a vital role in surface passivation of graphene against 

unintended non-specific binding to achieve high sensitivity and selectivity in high ionic 

background levels (Figure 3), which will be discussed in the following sections. 


23

Figure 3. An illustration of graphene surface property tuning for biochemical sensing.

3.1. Functionalization of graphene for biochemical sensing applications

3.1.1. Covalent functionalization 

Chemical functionalization of graphene is routinely achieved using either covalent[111, 115, 

116, 128-130, 134]
or noncovalent[40, 131-133]
strategies. Covalent chemical 

modification[135] reliably modify the graphene surface by reacting with the sp2 carbon atoms 

in the aromatic lattice. The covalent approaches allow engineering the properties of graphene 

with respect to its band gap and biointerfacing to a large extend. However, the resulted sp3

centers at the reaction sites jeopardize the aromaticity of the graphene lattice and yield inferior 

electrical mobility and noise performance compared to pristine graphene. Covalent 

functionalization process also reveals the possibility to continuously transform graphene – a 

highly conductive zero-band gap semimetal – into an insulator known as graphane[128] or 2D 

Teflon.[129, 136] The reaction efficiency depends on parameters including the number of 

graphene layers,[137] the electrostatic charges,[138] and the defect density.[139] GO (or rGO) 

is a typical example of graphene materials resulted from covalent modification of the graphene 

scaffold with oxygen functional groups (e.g., carboxyl, hydroxyl and epoxy moieties) by using 

oxidative reactions (or with a chemical reduction step for rGO).[140] As a result of the large 

concentration of defects in comparison to near defect-free exfoliated graphene, GO and rGO 

show improved sensing responses yet inferior field-effect properties.[111, 112] Particularly, 

without damaging the lattice integrity and the resilient basal plane, halogenated graphene[141]

(include hydrogenated graphene and fluorinated graphene, etc.) are promising for progressively 

tweaking graphene with sp3 defects by introducing atomic hydrogen or fluorine into the 

honeycomb graphene scaffold. Regarding sensing applications, calculations predicted that 

partially hydrogenated graphene has a high affinity for NO2,[142] while fluorographene can be 

applied for the detection of ammonia,[143] ascorbic acid, and uric acid.[144] The fluorine-

enriched material, on the other hand, could also be adopted for genosensing upon further 


24

functionalized with thiol groups.[145] Cyanographene and graphene acid represent newly 

developed graphene derivatives,[146] which are promising for electrochemical sensing for the 

detection of biomarkers (e.g., ascorbic). Particularly, positively charged cyanographene 

exhibits a higher affinity for negatively charged analytes due to the electrostatic attraction 

compared to negatively charged graphene acid. In this respect, the optimisation of graphene 

derivatives (in the nature and the concentration of the functional groups, etc.), is mandatory for 

achieving sensing applications with high selectivity and sensitivity. Besides the defects on the 

basal plane of graphene, the edge of graphene represents another type of defects, which also 

plays an important role in the determination of its electronic and chemical properties for sensing 

applications. For example, defective rGO can be achieved by using enzymatic oxidation 

followed by hydrazine reduction. Such prepared rGO samples contain abundant edge defects 

and exhibit a prominent and selective sensing response towards the detection of hydrogen, 

particularly when activated with catalytic Pt nanoparticles.[147]

3.1.2. Noncovalent functionalization 

Alternatively, noncovalent functionalization has the major advantage of fully preserving the 

aromatic lattice and thus the electrical performance of graphene lattice,[18, 19, 23, 135] for 

applications including band gap engineering, controllable n- or p-doping of GFETs, and linker 

molecular design. Noncovalent bond achieved via aromatic molecules can also be quite strong. 

For instance, the π-π interactions of graphene-benzene leads to a considerable binding energy 

of about 0.1 eV per carbon atom, and the binding energy of graphene-tetraphenylporphyrin can 

be estimated as 3.2 eV, i.e., approximately 90% of the typical binding energy of covalent C-C 

bond (≈3.6 eV).[148, 149] However, compared to covalent functionalization, noncovalent 

functionalization is believed to be less compatible with long term usage, where the stability and 

reliability are of key importance. Nevertheless, the weaker interactions of noncovalent 

functionalization could also be an asset for regenerating and recycling the sensor surface and 

thus the sensor devices. 

Generally speaking, noncovalent approaches can be classified based on their 

intermolecular interactions with graphene, including π-π or hydrophobic interaction, 


25

electrostatic interaction, and van der Waals stacking.[135] The corresponding molecular self-

assembly process on the surface of graphene could be accurately controlled in favor of an actual 

sensor design.[150] Functional molecules with a specific aromatic linker group (e.g., a pyrene 

unit) can be anchored onto graphene surface noncovalently via π-π and/or hydrophobic 

interaction, which is robust upon exposure to ambient conditions.[151] For example, a synthetic 

complementary peptide nucleic acid (PNA) molecules (5′-AAG CTA CTG GA-Lys (Pyrene)-

3′) with a pyrene group has been introduced onto a graphene surface, which can perform as a 

receptor to target HIV virus related 11-mer ssDNA molecules (5′-TCC AGT AGC TT-3′, a 

fragment of the HIV-1 Nef gene29).[20] The final graphene surface features firmly adsorbed 

ssDNA molecules via π-π interaction.[40, 61, 152] Such a noncovalent π-π stacking between 

the pyrene linker group of the ssDNA molecules and graphene sheet results in an increase of 

the CNP resistance from 23.6 kΩ to 24.3 kΩ, suggesting a slightly increased carrier scattering 

due to pyrene-linked ssDNA molecules in the vicinity of the graphene. Also, chemical 

gating[61] by the negative charges of the ssDNA molecules causes a positive shift of the 

transfer curve (+150 mV),[20] corresponding to an adsorbed total negative charge density of 

−2e per 100 square nanometers.[56] Nevertheless, most of the previous studies have not taken 

into consideration, for example the effects from the conformational change of attached/bounded 

molecules, which may significantly influence the sensing response of GFETs. As an example, 

study on the RNA hairpins on a graphene surface indicated that biomacromolecules can display 

very different behaviours depending on the surface hydrophobicity, concentration of RNA and 

temperature.[153] Besides DNA, proteins[154-157] or peptides[131, 132] containing aromatic 

moieties could also self-assemble on a graphene scaffold.[132] Besides the charges that the 

biomolecules carry, depending on the Hammett constants σp, charge transfer from these 

molecules to graphene would result in a shift of the Dirac point before and after the surface 

functionalization of graphene.

Phenyl rings can also be included in the ligands functionalized with trifluoromethyl 

groups. Such aromatic moiety helps to stabilize copper complex in its monocationic state for 

ethene sensing, as well as to induce π-π stacking interactions to enhance the electronic coupling 


26

and thus the attachment between the sensitizer molecules and graphene.[19] Although the field-

effect mobility is reduced to approximately 80% of the initial values upon the self-assembly of 

the copper(I) molecules on the surface of graphene (as we discussed previously in Section 2.3.1), 

no trend in the change of the Dirac points before and after the functionalization has been found. 

Therefore, it is likely that the differences in scattering rates caused by the organization of the 

complexes on the surface of graphene obscure the more subtle field effect of the complexes of 

different polarities.[19]

In these studies, noncovalent functionalization has demonstrated its suitability as 

nondestructive process for engineering the property of graphene. However, to what extend the 

outstanding electrical properties of graphene can be preserved, as well as what detection limit 

can be achieved by using such graphene sensors, are not always clear. To answer these 

questions, researchers configured GFETs with aromatic molecules containing hydroxyl (OH) 

groups (phenol), which protonate or deprotonate when decreasing or increasing the pH values 

of the buffer solutions, respectively. Such GFET sensors demonstrated fully preserved high 

mobility and exhibited a significant pH response (see also Section 2.3.1). Therefore these 

results increase the credibility and fidelity of high-performance graphene biochemical sensors 

and expand their applications for potential development of ultrafast detection at a high sampling 

rate where a high mobility is of key importance.[18]

Additionally, we can exploit the weak van der Waals-like interaction between layers to 

sandwich graphene with other 2D layers, including MoS2, mica, or h-BN, to adjust and to 

achieve astonishing electronic properties. Such process is also called ‘encapsulation’. For 

example, encapsulating graphene in a h-BN stacking layer can achieve high carrier mobility up 

to 140 000 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is close to the theoretical limit imposed by acoustic phonon 

scattering at room temperature. Such extraordinary high value can be ascribed to very clean 

interfaces between graphene and h-BN, as well as their perfect lattice matching and effective 

screening of all the defects and roughness.[106] Similarly, the tunnel barrier for graphene 

spintronics can also be realized by CVD h-BN, placed over the graphene and used either as a 

monolayer or bilayer.[158] Moreover, graphene-MoS2-metal hybrid structures can be used as 


27

ultrasensitive plasmonic biosensor.[159] MoS2 as well as other 2D materials by themselves 

provide additional possibility for noncovalent functionalization as routes towards novel field-

effect based biosensors.[160-162]

3.2. Passivation of graphene surface to achieve high selectivity

As previously discussed, surface functionalization including noncovalent and covalent 

approaches are essential to unlock the sensing potential of graphene surface, but it is important 

to keep in mind that chemical passivation plays a critical role for surface functionalization of 

graphene to realize high selectivity. 

Figure 4. (a) GFETs are inert to pH variations in solutions. (b) Gsd versus Vref of a GFET 
functionalized with fluorobenzene and measured in buffer solutions with different pH values. 
Inset indicates the CNP of the transfer curves keeps constant under different pH. (c) Monolayer 
graphene Raman spectroscopies under hydrogen radical plasma treatment of different duration. 
(d) The electron transfer rate k0 and average DOS (ADOS) of graphene under hydrogen radical 
plasma treatment with different time.

Here we specially focus on the passivation of active graphene surface of GFET in order 

to avoid unwanted non-specific binding, reduce electrical noise and leakage current. Chemical 

passivation is crucial to avoid false positive reactions when complex biological analytes are 

assayed and is of key importance to achieve very low detection limits in the presence of 

interference buffer solution background with high ionic strength.[163, 164] For example, 

GFETs exhibit a pH response about 12-45 mV per pH that can be ascribed to uncontrollable 


28

and random surface contaminations and/or defects (introduced during device fabrication or 

storage) that react with protons. However, as shown in Figure 4a and 4b, these defects can be 

neutralized by covering the surface with fluorobenzene, consequently reducing sensitivity 

substantially down to <1 mV per pH.[17] A clean GFET therefore acts as a reference electrode 

that is sensitive to only the change of electrostatic potential in aqueous electrolytes, unless a 

chemo-adsorption or a physico-adsorption of charged ions is considered.[17] Besides the 

fluorobenzene, BSA and Tween 20 are commonly used molecules to self-assemble on the 

graphene surface to rule out possible false nonspecific reactions and thus maximizing 

biospecific binding.[24, 163]

In fact, to achieve the suppression of certain property or performance of GFET, 

graphene surface passivation techniques include not only self-assembly, noncovalent bonding, 

or layer encapsulation, but also chemical reaction or even introduction of defects. For example, 

the Raman results in Figure 4c shows that the hydrogen radical plasma introduces a low density 

of H-sp3 defects into the monolayer graphene lattice upon continuous exposure (more than 1 

s).[52] Further hydrogenation reduces μ (and Gmin, not shown) of graphene from ~1250 cm2 V−1

s−1 down to ~750 cm2 V−1 s−1 (2-5 s), after which μ stabilizes at 450 - 660 cm2 V−1 s−1 (5-30 s). 

In the meanwhile, k0 first sharply drops from 6.77 × 10−4 cm s−1 down to ~1.70 × 10−4 cm s−1

(within 5 s) and then stabilizes at 1.50 × 10−4 cm s−1 after 30 s of hydrogenation (Figure 4d).

Thus, these studies on the interplay between the electrochemical activity and the electrical in-

plane transport of graphene, indicate that the addition of one H sp3 defect per 100 000 carbon 

atoms reduces the electron transfer rate of the graphene basal plane by more than 5 times while 

preserving its excellent μ to a large extend.[52] Indeed, quantum capacitance measurements 

demonstrated that the mild hydrogenation within 1-5 s effectively depresses the average density 

of state (ADOS) in graphene (Figure 4d). These insights into using hydrogenation to change 

the electronic structure of graphene, and predict well the electrochemical activity suppression 

based on the non-adiabatic theory of electron transfer.[52] Such an interesting coordination

suggests hydrogenated graphene as a potential approach to improve the sensitivity of GFET 

(with lower electrochemical current) going beyond previously reported GFET.


29

4. Operation tuning of GFET for biochemical sensing

Unlike traditional electronic devices that are carefully processed to remove any possible surface 

contaminants or trap states, graphene biosensors have to be functionalized with elaborated 

biopolymers as receptors against target biomolecules. To achieve in-situ biosensing, graphene 

biosensors are handled under liquid environments, i.e., far from ideal operation conditions of 

electronic devices, which are normally deliberately sealed against moist in the ambient air. Thus, 

the sophisticated sensing conditions in aqueous solutions have posted great challenges for 

achieving reliable operation of electronic devices with optimized performances. That is, 

biosensors have to overcome the interferences of external noise, as well as the ionic atmosphere 

screening in the physiological solution to detect a trace of the charges of the biomolecules, 

which call for interdisciplinary research efforts not only in materials and chemistry/biology, 

but also in physics and semiconductor devices. In the following, we will highlight our recent 

progress along these lines based on ambipolar operation near the CNP and high frequency 

measurements towards low noise and highly sensitive biodetections.

4.1. Ambipolar frequency multipliers

By changing gate voltage VGS of GFET, the Fermi energy of graphene sheet (i.e., the 

electrochemical potential of the charge carriers) can be modulated and the type of charge 

carriers that flow in the graphene channel can be continuously tuned from holes to electrons, 

yielding the so-called ‘ambipolar behavior’. Therefore, as a peculiar characteristics of GFETs, 

the ambipolar behavior of graphene stems from its lack of an inherent band gap,[15, 49] and

can be utilized to design electronic circuits,[165] such as frequency doublers and/or multipliers 

with excellent performance.[50, 166, 167]

The first frequency-doubling biosensor device was implemented by biasing an

ambipolar GFET in a common configuration (Figure 5a). That is, the input sinusoidal voltage 

applied to the electrolyte gate with frequency f can be amplified and sampled at the drain contact 

at frequency 2f (Figure 5b). The strong electrolyte-gate coupling results in a high output purity 

(more than 95%) and a high unity gain of the frequency 2f sine wave at the drain electrode 

(Figure 5c).[20] An improved drift characteristics combined with low 1/f noise by sampling at 


30

doubled the signal frequency, indicates that the graphene frequency doubler is promising for

biochemical sensing. Additionally, due to the cleaning effect and the suppression of the 

resistance drift (either from the graphene channel or from the contact), such GFET operated at 

frequency-doubling mode shows electrolyte-gate voltage referred input drift less than

0.1 mV h-1 during a one-week period. This is equivalent to or exceeds the drift performance of 

diamond-, high-performance Si-, and conventional graphene-based biochemical sensors. Thus, 

electrolyte-gated GFET in frequency-doubling mode provides much high flexibility and 

tunability for realizing biochemical sensors with great reliability and stability.[20]

4.2. Biosensing near the neutrality point of graphene

Conventionally, in order to achieve maximum sensing response, graphene transistors are 

operated at the maximum transconductance point. However, it is found that the electronic noise 

is unfavorably large, and thus representing a major limitation for realizing the next generation 

graphene biochemical sensors with ever-demanding sensitivity. Interestingly, for graphene

supported on SiO2/Si substrate, the electrical noise exhibits a (local) minimum at the neutrality 

point with the lowest density of states.[110] Biasing at such a low-noise CNP has been 

advantageously designed into the graphene Hall bar devices that have demonstrated the steepest 

sensing response with respect to Hall resistivity.[16, 33] Nevertheless, such sensor devices in 

Hall geometry require an elaborate magnet setup, which makes it unsuitable for integration and 

portable application. 

The first example of graphene sensors operated near the low-noise neutrality point in a 

transistor geometry is realized by making use of the unique ambipolar behavior of graphene. 

That is, applying a sine wave on the gate voltage of GFET near its CNP and monitoring the 

output current under a constant bias voltage Vbias (Figure 5d, e),[24] which exhibits significantly

reduced electronic noise, as the current noise PSD is at its (local) minimum. It is worth noting 

that this electronic noise reduction is achieved without compromising the high GFET sensing 

response and thus resulting in a significantly increase in SNR, compared to a conventional 

GFET (Figure 5f). In order to explore the broader range of biochemical sensing applications of 

the near-neutrality point operated GFET, HIV-related DNA hybridization was selected as the 


31

test bed and ultrasensitive detection at picomolar concentrations can be received,[24] with the 

label-free and portable prospects of graphene nanoelectronics devices.

Figure 5. (a) Illustration of a liquid-gated GFET operated in the frequency-doubling mode. (b) 
Transfer curve VGS(Vref) (blue stars) and parabolic fitting results (red) of GFET around CNP. (c) 
GFET’s power spectrum at Vref = 50 mV (black) and 120 mV (red). (d) Illustration of a liquid-
gated GFET operated near CNP. (e) Transfer curve I(Vref) (black) and parabolic fitting results 
(blue) of the GFET near CNP, and the linear fit (gray) away from CNP. (f) Comparison of the 
SNRs of the GFETs operated in traditional mode (upper panel) and close to CNP (lower panel) 
with 200 μV step gate voltage variation, respectively.

4.3. Overcome the Debye screening effect with RF-operated GFETs

Conventional GFETs are able to sensitively response to the adsorption of biomolecules with 

charge close to the surface of graphene. However, as mentioned in Section 2.3.4, GFET-based 

biosensors (and ISFETs in general) have the problem of ionic screening due to the mobile ions 

in the solution, also known as the Debye screening effect.[119, 120] At physiological 

conditions with a Debye length around 0.7 nm, the charges on the target molecules are heavily 

screened. It is difficult or even impossible to detect if the distance between the graphene surface

and the charged biomolecules exceeds several Debye lengths (Figure 6a). For better 

performance, various approaches, especially high-frequency measurements have been reported

to circumvent the Debye screening effect as previously discussed in Section 2.3.4. 


32

As a promising alternative strategy to overcome the Debye screening effect in 

physiological conditions, measuring at high frequencies is able to achieve improved sensitivity 

while no special design or engineering of the sensor environments or the receptor molecules is 

needed.[71] Indeed, graphene is potentially suited for high-frequency applications owing to its 

exceptional high carrier mobility.[22] For example, the intrinsic cut-off frequency (fT, the 

highest frequency of a FET under RF) of GFETs is 100-300 GHz,[168-170] which surpasses 

the best silicon based FETs.[171, 172] In order to enlarge our understanding on the RF 

properties of GFET, in particular sensing in liquid, an electrolyte-gated GFET operated at ≈2-

4 GHz has been demonstrated (Figure 6c).[71] The sensitivity to the load is optimized by 

utilizing a tunable stub-matching circuit implemented on printed circuit boards (PCB) with 

ground planes and coplanar waveguides (CPWs) (Figure 6c). Using reflectometry technique, 

the reflection coefficient S11 under a range of electrolyte-gate voltages can be achieved and 

analyzed. According to the kinetic inductance and negligible skin effect,[110] atomically thin 

large area graphene behaves as a wideband resistor. However, at RF the device resistance 

cannot be directly measured because of the large shunt capacitance in conventional RF GFET, 

which has a significant influence on the RF performance and hinders the extraction of the 

intrinsic parameters of graphene.[71] Due to the special frequency dependent properties of the 

electrolyte, the properties of GFETs can be tuned by means of liquid gating without a significant 

spreading of the RF signal. Therefore the gate dependent resistivity of graphene at RF can be 

extracted by considering an RC dissipative transmission line mode, which perfectly matches its 

DC counterparts in the full range of gate voltage sweeping.[71] Due to its wide bandwidth (100 

MHz) and a significant reduction in 1/f noise at RF, such RF GFET achieved ultrafast 

measurements (10 ns time resolution in the electrolytes) with good detection limits (Figure

6d).[71] As a proof-of-concept for ultrafast sensing in liquid environment, this work initiates

the further study on a new generation of biosensors in the field of environmental, biomedical, 

in particular with great potential to applications from POC medical diagnosis to neuronal 

sensing.[89-91, 173] In addition, AC field also has great effect on the liquid and leads to micro-

nanoelectrokinetic phenomena e.g., dielectrophoresis and electroosmosis,[174] which could be 


33

used to classify, manipulate, and concentrate different biomolecules and nanoparticles at the 

strongest field to further improve the detection limit. 

Figure 6. (a) Debye screening effect prevents the charged biomolecules from delivering an 
appreciate sensing signal outside the Debye length. (b) Debye screening effect mainly occurs 
under DC and low frequency (<10 MHz). In contrast, the electrolytes behave as dielectrics 
under higher frequencies. (c) Optical image of a PCB used for the impedance match between 
load impedance (typical resistances of 1-100 kΩ) and the transmission line impedance at 50 Ω. 
(d) GFET responses to KCl solutions with different concentrations under a liquid gate of 500 
ns square signal with 200 mV voltage. Right inset is an optical image of the SU-8 sealed GFET. 
Scale bar: 10 µm. The left insert indicates a linear 1/C behavior, i.e., the measured rise times 
as a function of the KCl concentration C.

4.4. Other electronic tuning approaches

Due to the peculiar electronic band structure with linear dispersion,[15, 49] graphene lacks a 

band gap and is of metallic nature. Thus, GFET devices cannot be turned off at room 

temperature. For digital applications where an ultra-low power consumption is required at the 

off state (Ioff) of FET, chemical treatment, nanomesh, nanoribbon, and nanoring,[75] have been

widely applied and proven as rational designs to open a bandgap in graphene for achieving an 

improved Ion/Ioff ratio. However, bandgap engineering is more crucial for large-scale integration 

of sensor devices, where power consumption and heating dissipation due to off-state current 

are of key importance. For general applications, rather, the performance of sensor devices

depends primarily on sensitivity and selectivity. To meet the ever-demanding requirements on 

a)

+
+
+

+

+

-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Debye 
screening

RF field

sensor

targeted biomolecule

receptor

b)

c)
d)


34

sensitivity, nanopores and nanometer-sized gaps based on translocation blockage current and 

tuning current, respectively, have been proposed and realized for ultimate single molecular 

detection. GFET-based DNA sensors in the form of a nanopore in the center of a graphene 

nanoribbon FET have also been fabricated.[175-177] Translocation of the ssDNA molecules 

through the graphene nanopore results in variation in the conductance of the GFET.[178]

Another commonly utilized technology for single molecule study uses graphene break junctions. 

Compared to the most common break junctions, which consist mainly of gold as electrode 

material, monolayer graphene grants an easy access for not only optical and scanning probe 

imaging, but also ex-situ gating experiments owing to its ultimate thickness, flexibility and 

robustness.[179]

5. Applications of graphene biochemical sensors

Graphene nanoelectronic devices provide a versatile platform for a wide range of biosensing 

applications.[180] Particularly, the design and fabrication of the first GFET[15] has inspired 

considerable theoretical and experimental studies on the applications of GFET for high-

performance and label-free biochemical sensing[16, 17] on the presence, adsorption, and 

reactivity of gases and ions, DNA, proteins, cells and tissues. In this Section, we review the 

development (especially our recent achievements) on GFET-based sensors in meeting the 

social/scientific needs on biochemical sensing for environmental monitoring and food safety, 

human health and medical diagnosis and life science research.

5.1. Graphene biochemical sensing for environmental monitoring and food safety

The growth of population puts an increased requirement for high quality living conditions, and

environmental monitoring and food safety appear to be serious problems in front of our society. 

As a new emerging material with unique properties, graphene shows its potential as highly 

sensitive and biocompatible material for gas and ion sensors that could be used for food safety

and environmental monitoring. Nonetheless, it is now widely accepted that the previous 

reported sensitive responses of graphene to the presence of gas molecules or ions could be due 

to the sensitivities of polymer contaminations or defects introduced during graphene device 

fabrication and/or storage, and clean graphene should be insensitive. Indeed, after removing the 


35

possible surface contaminations by annealing at high temperature of 400 °C in Ar/H2

atmosphere,[181] the cleaned graphene surface is insensitive even upon the exposure to 1000 

ppm NH3[34] or to 100 ppm dimethylmethylphosphonate (DMMP) vapor.[40] We have also 

discussed in Figure 4a and b that the passivation of graphene transistors using fluorobenzene 

molecules, results in an inert sensing response to the change of pH values in the buffer solutions. 

Only via deliberated surface functionalization of graphene, highly sensitive and selective 

detection of targeted biochemical molecules can be achieved.

5.1.1. Ethene gas sensors

Monitoring the concentration of ethene is critically important for the storage and transport of 

crops to avoid ethene-induced spoilage, i.e., when the concentration of ethane rises, the 

resulting deleterious effects will lead to over-ripeness or even spoilage of crops.[182]

Particularly, the highly diffusive and relatively unreactive ethene induces deleterious effects at

very low concentrations of parts per billion (<100 ppb). In this respect, the development of 

ultrasensitive detector systems with good ethane selectivity for in-situ monitoring of the 

ripening processes of crops is highly desired. Copper(I) compounds are able to selectively 

detect ethene either optically by combining the polymers with fluoresce[183] or electrically by 

using carbon nanotube network as conductive channel.[184] However, the good selectivity, 

reasonable sensitivity (down to 500 ppb) are offset by the poor reproducibility of the sensors

due to the use of the randomly placed single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and the 

inhomogeneous crystallites of the complex distributed among the conductive nanotube network. 

The use of 2D graphene materials instead of nanotube networks allows for the 

exploitation of the ultrahigh sensitivity granted by the carbon allotropes with all-surface-atom 

makeup like graphene and SWCNTs, but without the aforementioned practical shortcomings.

Indeed, GFET functionalized with copper complexes (Figure7a) is able to detect ethene at a 

concentration of low part per billion (ppb, Figure 7b).[19] In order to understand the chemical 

interactions between molecules, which leads to the sensing response, a systematically 

engineered series of copper complexes with deliberated varied dipole moment has been 

designed.[185] GFET is adopted to harvest the molecular dipole fluctuations when the copper 


36

complexes undergo a chemical reaction upon the introduction of ethene. In this respect, GFET 

is a promising platform for studying the interplays between molecules. Remarkably, it is 

possible to track the chemical reaction and probe into the mechanism that was, until now, out 

of reach. In Figure 7c, by using a Langmuir adsorption isotherm, the equilibrium constant KD

can be extracted, which is useful for deriving a plausible reaction mechanism. With further 

attention on the sensitivity and/or reproducibility, these small GFETs have the potential to be

widely applied in the greenhouses as well as in the storage and transportation of crops to meet 

the demand for a safe and stable supply.

Figure 7. (a) Schematic representation of a GFET device functionalized with copper complex. 
Zoom: The space-filling projections of the acetonitrile adduct of the copper complex stacks on 
graphene. (b) GFET response to ethene with different concentrations. Inset: The back-gate 
voltage (VG) versus graphene conductance (σ) on SiO2/Si substrate before (black) and after (red) 
the functionalization of copper complex. (c) The equilibrium dissociation constant KD of 
ethylene (red) and ethanol (black) on GFET as a function of the Hammett parameter σP of the 
substituent on the sensitizer ligand.

5.1.2. Ion sensors

Ion sensors based on highly sensitive GFETs have potential applications especially in medical 

diagnosis and food industry that require glass-free ion measurement with small size, high 

performance, and/or flexibility.[186] After systematically studying the response of GFET to a 

b

c

b

c

a)

b)
c)


37

large range of pH solutions, it is clear that graphene is intrinsically insensitive to pH.[187]

Whereas an appreciable pH response (~40-50 mV per pH) is expected if the graphene surface 

is covered with an ideal Al2O3 layer, which can be protonized and deprotonized through the 

terminal hydroxyl groups, yielding a layer with charge density related to the proton 

concentration in solution.[188] Similarly, by anchoring a crown ether (dibenzo-18-crown-6-

ether) with high affinity to K+ on the surface of graphene via π-π stacking, a desirable sensing 

response can be recorded when increasing ion concentrations in a wide range from 100 μM to 

1 M. Whereas as-fabricated GFETs exhibit only a weak sensitivity (about 3 mV per pK).[18]

Due to the hazardous effect of heavy metals (e.g., Cr, Hg, Pb, Cd) on environment and 

health, highly sensitive and selective heavy metal sensors have attracted a wide research 

interests.[189, 190] For example, graphene surface can be functionalized with a self-assembled

1-octadecanethiol monolayer for the detection of Hg2+ at 10 ppm,[191] the sensitivity of which 

can be attributed to the firm binding between the Hg2+ and the thiol groups of the 1-

octadecanethiol. Moreover, prototype devices decorated with DNAzyme aptamer are capable 

of detecting Pb2+ down to 37.5 ng L−1 in real blood samples.[192] Besides the basal plane, the 

edge of graphene and the underneath substrates are also of key importance on determining its 

sensing properties (as well as the electronic, chemical, and physical properties). For example, 

defective and holey rGO might contain abundant edge defects due to enzymatic oxidation and

hydrazine reduction processes, resulting in a selective and sensitive electronic detection of

hydrogen, particularly if functionalized by using Pt nanoparticles.[147]

5.2. Graphene biochemical sensing for human health and medical diagnosis

Graphene electronic biosensors for POC applications may have a significant societal impact for 

medical diagnosis, including DNA and protein biomarker detection. The engineering of 

graphene-protein interfaces is crucial for efficient sensing.[193] For example, by bounding 

enzymes (e.g., glucose oxidase) onto the graphene surface and integration into a microfluidic 

device, a graphene-based POC biosensor platform for glucose detection of diabetes patients is

suitable for home use.[194] A rGO FET with functionalization of PSA monoclonal antibody 

was reported able to detect a complex biomarker (i.e., prostate specific antigen/α1-


38

antichymotrypsin) in prostate cancer diagnosis in femtomolars concentration.[45] A rapid POC 

sensor based on a dielectric-gated and resonance-frequency modulated GFET was able to detect 

the Ebola glycoprotein with a sensitivity of ∼36-160% and ∼17-40% for 0.001-3.401 mg L-1

at high and low inflection resonance frequencies, respectively.[46] By using bioactive 

hydrogels as the gate material and encapsulating biospecific receptors inside, enzymatic 

reaction can be effectively catalysed in the confined microenvironment, enabling real time, 

label-free detection of biomolecules (e.g., penicillin down to 0.2 mM). Bioactive hydrogels are

able to significantly reduce the nonspecific binding of nontarget molecules to graphene 

channels as well as preserve the activity of encapsulated enzyme for more than one week, which 

is important for POC application.[42] ssDNA strands can be detected through hybridization

with complementary ssDNA anchored on the GFET surface.[195] Such GFET DNA sensors

are able to distinct the hybridization of DNA with single-base precision[196] or distinguish the 

four DNA nucleobases based on different dipole field upon their adsorption.[152] Multiplexed 

CVD grown GFET-based DNA sensor arrays can also be manufactured and acted as an 

electrophoretic electrode not only for immobilization of site-specific DNA but also for 

detection of complementary DNA with concentration of 100 fM.[61] Aptamers with high 

specificity and affinity to certain biomolecules, are another pre-selected analytes for novel 

GFET sensors.[197-199] Such graphene-aptamer complexes have been successfully used to 

detect immunoglobulin E (IgE) proteins,[197]
Hg2+,[200]
small molecule steroid 

hormones,[201] interferon-gamma (IFN-γ),[202] and adenosine triphosphate (ATP).[41]

A recently developed novel operational scheme of biosensing near the neutrality point 

of graphene, is able to further optimize the sensing performance as a result of its extremely low 

noise level and excellent detection limit, compared to traditional conductance measurements. 

The simple sensing scheme is achieved by operating a GFET in an ambipolar mode close to its 

CNP, where the low-frequency 1/f noise is found to be minimized (see also Section 4.2). Using 

specifically designed aptamers anchored on the surface of GFETs (Figure 8a, b), the GFET 

operated in ambipolar mode is capable of detecting an HIV-related DNA hybridization process 

at picomolar concentrations.[24] The graphene surface was first functionalized with pPNA


39

aptamer that can hybrid with the target complementary HIV ssDNA (see also Section 3.1.2) 

and passivated with self-assembled Tween 20 to rule out possible false non-specific positives 

(Figure 8c). When operated near its neutrality point, GFET functionalized with the pPNA are 

able to detect 11mer ssDNA at a limitation of ∼2 pM 1 mM PBS with an RMS SNR of 1 (Figure

8d). The same HIV related ssDNA can also detected by using GFET operated in frequency-

doubling mode (see also Section 4.1).[20] It is expected that sub-pM sensitivity can be achieved 

if carefully controlling the Debye screening. Therefore, GFETs operated near the neutrality 

point or in frequency-doubling mode are able to promote the application of low-noise graphene 

sensors for biomarker detections, which are at the core of biochemical sensing for human health 

and medical diagnosis. In addition, biomolecules (e.g., short RNA) may undergo 

conformational change (e.g., melt or unfold) when attached on graphene surface, which could 

complicate design but also imply possibility of manipulating the properties of surface-bound 

biomolecules.[153]

Figure 8. (a) Optical image of a GFET array and an individual GFET device. (b) Schematic 
representation of the binding if a negatively charged complementary ssDNA molecule to a 
pDNA molecule that is noncovalently bounded on the surface of graphene. The self-assembly 
of Tween 20 on the graphene surface is applied to avoid the non-specific adsorption on the 
sensor surface. (c) Variations in the sensor ΔI during traditional GFET measurement upon the 
self-assembly of pDNA and Tween 20. The RMS current noise is estimated to be 0.22 nA. (d) 
Variations in the sensor If operated around CNP upon introducing 1 nM and 10 pM (inset) 
complementary ssDNA show a current noise of 0.1 nA.


40

5.3. Graphene biochemical sensing for life science research

New generation of neuroprosthetic sensor development requires advances in material science, 

solid-state sensors, and actuators to further improve signal detection capabilities with good

stability in biological environments and compatibility with living tissue. The drawbacks 

associated with
the conventional silicon technology[203], such as its mechanical 

mismatch,[204] instability in liquid environments[205] as well as the high  electrical noise,[206]

triggered the research on alternative technologies and materials.[23, 35, 36] Besides the 

superior FET performance compared to the most semiconductors due to its excellent electrical 

properties,[49] graphene also possesses good chemical stability[207] and biocompatibility,[208]

which is beneficiary for both integration with biological systems and operation of GFETs

without dielectric protection. In addition, graphene devices integrated with flexible substrates 

opens up the possibility of developing flexible and soft devices, a crucial requirement for 

reducing tissue scarring and damage from implantation.[209, 210] The first realization of using

GFETs to detect electrogenic signals of cardiomyocyte cells (Figure 9a) was achieved with a 

SNR >4.[211] Further development of the array of GFETs (Figure 9b) towards cellular 

electrophysiology comes together with the advances in large-scale CVD growth technology. In 

such GFETs, graphene as a conductive channel can not only detect the presence and the activity 

of the cells, but also act as conductive electrode to transduce stimuli into the cells.[195] In 

general, GFETs are regarded as active components with tunable and functional performance in 

comparison to the passive MEAs technology.[212] Moreover, the size of graphene devices can 

be more aggressively scaled down while preserve its super electronic performance if only 

keeping the W/L ratio.[213]


41

Figure 9. (a) Schematic presentation of using a GFET for the detection of single or multiple 
electrogenic cells. (b) Optical image of a wafer has numerous chips with arrays of GFETs. (c) 
An example of a GFET array where each transistor has a separate source and a separate drain 
connection, while (d) shows an example when a single common source is used to contact 
multiple transistors per chip. (e) 8 time traces of extracellular activity of cardiomyocyte cells 
with visible time delay between the transistors that can be consequently recalculated into signal 
propagation velocity. (f) Neuronal recording time tracking features of a burst of intrinsic neuron, 
when neurons show alternative high frequencies (bursts) and low frequencies, intermittent, 
spikes. The inset shows an average AP (red) of 77 individual APs (gray).

For the detection of the action potentials of cells cultured on graphene surface, mainly 

two designs of GFET arrays have been developed and reported. One design uses two contacts 

for a single transistor (Figure 9c). The another design implements a single common electrode 

that works as a common source or drain for all transistors at the same time.[35] Both designs 

have their advantages and drawbacks. In the first approach it is possible to specifically tune the 

operational parameters for each transistors, while in the latter case all transistors are configured

with the same operational parameters. Advantage of the common electrode design, however is 

the possibility to measure a larger number of FETs per chip to study the cellular signal 

propagation in better resolution. Typically, the action potentials propagation across the 

electrically active cells can be detected by measuring the flow of current through each GFET

in the array. The cell-graphene interface variations and the action potential propagation across 

the beating cellar network can be depicted as spikes in current trace. The action potentials of 

electrically active cardiomyocyte cells could be detected and monitored across GFET arrays

(see Figure 9e), making it possible to calculate signal propagation velocity as well as to track 


42

the spatial signal propagation. Even in the early stage of its development, the detected signals 

together with the related transistor noise exhibit a SNR better than ten, which surpasses that of 

the state-of-the-art techniques based on planar FET, MEAs, and nanowire FET.[211, 214-216]

One challenge for modern bioelectronics is to record and stimulate the neurons’ extracellular 

or even intracellular potentials with branched transistors.[217] The first in vitro neuronal 

signals (the action potentials, APs) with clear bursting detected by GFETs is shown in Figure 

9f,[36] although the APs of extracellular neurons are small compared to those of heart 

tissue[218]. Based on the transconductance of transistor, spikes of gate voltage can be deduced 

from the spikes of current, yielding a value of 900 μV with a RMS of 50 μV.[35] For future 

prospective, integrating high-performance GFETs with flexible substrates may initiate a

breakthrough on bioelectronics, especially for electrically neural prostheses.[219]

Interestingly, one of the advantages of the emerging 2D materials beyond graphene is 

their ultimate thinness, allowing them to be integrated into extremely thin and even soft shells, 

creating a promise for a fully 2D based neuroelectronic implantation. One of such materials is 

a 2D Ti3C2-MXene that is fabricated by selective etching of Al in the Ti3AlC2 three-dimensional 

structure. It was found experimentally that the material is sensitive to neurotransmitters, such 

as dopamine,[220] and can serve as a conductive microelectrode,[221] thus representing an 

intriguing opportunity for building future bio- and neuroelectronic interfaces.

6. Challenges, perspectives and conclusions

6.1. Reliability and reproducibility 

Improving further sensitivity with ever-demanding reproducibility and reliability should be the 

focus of future direction for GFET-based biosensor.[18, 20] Although graphene-based 

electronic devices with superior performances have been achieved, the reproducibility and 

reliability of GFET biosensors were not always studied or achieved, which represent a big 

challenge for the development of next generation GFET sensor devices.

To date, CVD graphene grown on Cu with meter-length crystals has been achieved in 

laboratory,[108] which opens the window towards industrial production of high-quality 

graphene with mobilities over 104 cm2 V−1 s−1. In order to scale up the fabrication of single-


43

device into wafer-scale, mass producing of large-scale graphene with a well-defined atomic 

structure, including disorders, defects, impurities, heteroatom and adatoms, is highly desired. 

Along this direction, novel approaches to minimize the flaws or fluctuations of epitaxially 

grown graphene[222, 223] and CVD grown graphene have been actively pursued.[224-226] On 

the other hand, transfer of graphene onto device-compatible substrates is an indispensable

fabrication step, and represents another critical challenge. The introduction of defects during 

the transfer process, results in a low yield of the graphene devices and calls for the exploration 

of effective, large-scale transfer approach.[227, 228] Indeed, conventionally used polymers for 

transferring 2D materials such as PMMA – tends to attach on the surface of graphene 

irreversibly, leading to various unwanted chemical contaminations.[229-231] Therefore, the 

influences of these possible polymer residues is necessary to be taken into account on the 

performance of sensor device as they impede the graphene surface functionalization. In this 

respect, decent polymer-free transfer methods are highly demanded,[232-234] such as using a 

biphasic oil-water interface for clean transfer.[235] In the meantime, the transfer of crack- and 

fold-free large area graphene sheet is still a tricky skill, although combined with 

nano/microfabrication technique, high-throughput transfer of graphene and large scale 

fabrication of GFET arrays (52 devices per 4-inch wafer) was achieved for more reproducible 

performance of the GFETs.[236, 237] Direct growth technology on arbitrary substrates[238] is 

an alternative way to avoid this issue caused by graphene transfer, but generally resulting in 

low quality of graphene compared to metal catalysts. On-surface bottom-up approach is 

promising for achieving atomically defined GNRs, offering additional opportunity to control 

the microstructure of graphene.[238]

Conventionally, SEM, AFM, STM and Raman spectroscopy, are wildly adapted in 

laboratory as crucial tools to identify the structure and the physical property of graphene. 

However, such means are either invasive or not applicable to the characterization of the 

electrical properties of large-batch graphene films. In this respect, novel techniques with non-

destructive, high accuracy and speed, are urgently needed. In pursuit of rapid property 

evaluations (conductivity, uniformity, continuity, etc.) of large-area graphene, researchers have 


44

developed terahertz time-domain spectroscopy[239] and microwave resonator[240] for 

effective characterization of graphene conductivity (and even quantum capacitance) without 

physical contact. The development and evolution of such characterization technologies 

highlight great opportunities in both scientific research and business.

6.2. Perspectives and conclusions

Applying graphene-based electronic devices for biochemical sensing applications, including 

environmental monitors, portable POC devices for remote diagnostics, and even for DNA 

sequencing technologies, etc. has risen a vast interest from scientific community, industry, and 

society.[89-91] Although in principal and also experimentally demonstrated GFETs are able to 

reach ultimate single molecule sensitivity and various prototype forms of GFET chips were 

developed,[89-91] the research outcomes have not reach the market yet.[241] Smart GFET 

biochemical sensors will be an impressive prospective, those can be wearable and wireless [29, 

242, 243] with low energy consumption and low maintenance cost for event-based, real-time 

monitoring in pervasive healthcare IoT applications.[173]

In an attempt to compete with current mature material in the market, GFET sensor 

devices have to stand out in both cost and performance. Compared to exfoliated graphene, high-

quality CVD-grown graphene is promising for large scale production of GFETs. Nevertheless, 

the consumption of the substrate and energy during high-temperature CVD synthesis are not 

cost-efficient. To accelerate the commercialization of high-performance GFET devices, reuse 

of metal by optimizing transfer technique and cold-wall CVD (e.g. PECVD at temperatures 

below 500°C,[244] would be beneficial to promote the mass-production of graphene at 

industrial level. 

Up to now, large-scale, high quality graphene sensors with average mobility ~5000 cm2

V-1
s-1
can be routinely fabricated.[44, 245] Nevertheless, the reported electronic 

characterizations of GFET biochemical sensors are still behind expectation (see also Section 

2.3). To improve the electrical performance of GFETs towards their theoretical predictions, 

basic outlines include doping, surface treatments, edge contacts, modifications of substrates, 

graphene, and the interaction between them. For instance, it is well-known that on standard 


45

oxide substrates, such as SiO2 or Al2O3, graphene devices are highly disordered and exhibit 

inferior characteristics. In this regard, h-BN with atomically flat surface free of dangling bonds, 

is an ideal substrate to match and suppress disorder in graphene electronics to achieve 

theoretical performance.[85]

In summary, this article features recent progresses on research efforts devoted to 

understanding the sensing mechanisms of GFETs, to functionalizing the surface of graphene 

with recognition groups to unblock its selectivity and sensitivity towards targeted molecules, 

and to conditioning the sensor devices under optimized operational conditions by utilizing the 

unique electronic properties of graphene. We firmly believe that graphene holds great promise 

to meet the high requirements on next generation biosensor development, especially combining

the tuning strategies enabled by graphene surface functionalization, multifrequency ambipolar 

detection and high-frequency operation.

Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no conflict interest. 

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation 

of China, the Swiss National Science Foundation, European Commission Horizon 2020-

Research and Innovation Framework Programme (Marie Sklodowska-Curie actions 

Individual Fellowship No.749671).

References

[1]
P. Mao, C. X. Liu, G. Favraud, Q. Chen, M. Han, A. Fratalocchi, S. Zhang, Nature 

Communications 2018, 9.
[2]
M. Liebel, C. Toninelli, N. F. van Hulst, Nat Photonics 2018, 12, 45.

[3]
N. P. Mauranyapin, L. S. Madsen, M. A. Taylor, M. Waleed, W. P. Bowen, Nat 

Photonics 2017, 11, 477.


46

[4]
S. Eckart, M. Kunitski, M. Richter, A. Hartung, J. Rist, F. Trinter, K. Fehre, N. Schlott, 

K. Henrichs, L. P. H. Schmidt, T. Jahnke, M. Schoffler, K. L. Liu, I. Barth, J. Kaushal, F. 
Morales, M. Ivanov, O. Smirnova, R. Dorner, Nature Physics 2018, 14, 701.
[5]
A. Cini, M. Mannini, F. Totti, M. Fittipaldi, G. Spina, A. Chumakov, R. Ruffer, A. 

Cornia, R. Sessoli, Nature Communications 2018, 9.
[6]
C. Muller, X. Kong, J. M. Cai, K. Melentijevic, A. Stacey, M. Markham, D. Twitchen, 

J. Isoya, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, J. F. Du, M. B. Plenio, B. Naydenov, L. P. McGuinness, F. 
Jelezko, Nature Communications 2014, 5.
[7]
Y. Zheng, G. W. Miller, W. A. Tobias, G. D. Cates, Nature 2016, 537, 652.

[8]
E. Macchia, K. Manoli, B. Holzer, C. Di Franco, M. Ghittorelli, F. Torricelli, D. 

Alberga, G. F. Mangiatordi, G. Palazzo, G. Scamarcio, L. Torsi, Nature Communications 2018,
9.
[9]
R. Ren, Y. J. Zhang, B. P. Nadappuram, B. Akpinar, D. Klenerman, A. P. Ivanov, J. B. 

Edel, Y. Korchev, Nature Communications 2017, 8.
[10]
A. P. F. Turner, Chemical Society Reviews 2013, 42, 3184.

[11]
T. M. H. Lee, Sensors-Basel 2008, 8, 5535.

[12]
M. Y. Shen, B. R. Li, Y. K. Li, Biosensors & Bioelectronics 2014, 60, 101.

[13]
Y. Cui, Z. H. Zhong, D. L. Wang, W. U. Wang, C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett. 2003, 3, 149.

[14]
R. Martel, T. Schmidt, H. R. Shea, T. Hertel, P. Avouris, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1998, 73, 

2447.
[15]
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. 

V. Grigorieva, A. A. Firsov, Science 2004, 306, 666.
[16]
F. Schedin, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, E. W. Hill, P. Blake, M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. 

Novoselov, Nature Materials 2007, 6, 652.
[17]
W. Y. Fu, C. Nef, O. Knopfrnacher, A. Tarasov, M. Weiss, M. Calame, C. 

Schonenberger, Nano Letters 2011, 11, 3597.
[18]
W. Fu, C. Nef, A. Tarasov, M. Wipf, R. Stoop, O. Knopfmacher, M. Weiss, M. Calame, 

C. Schonenberger, Nanoscale 2013, 5, 12104.
[19]
W. Fu, T. F. van Dijkman, L. M. C. Lima, F. Jiang, G. F. Schneider, E. Bouwman,

Nano Lett 2017, 17, 7980.
[20]
W. Fu, L. Feng, D. Mayer, G. Panaitov, D. Kireev, A. Offenhausser, H. J. Krause, Nano 

Lett 2016, 16, 2295.
[21]
B. M. Lowe, K. Sun, I. Zeimpekis, C. K. Skylaris, N. G. Green, Analyst 2017, 142, 

4173.
[22]
F. Schwierz, Nature Nanotechnology 2010, 5, 487.

[23]
W. Y. Fu, L. Jiang, E. P. van Geest, L. M. C. Lima, G. F. Schneider, Adv Mater 2017,

29.
[24]
W. Y. Fu, L. Y. Feng, G. Panaitov, D. Kireev, D. Mayer, A. Offenhausser, H. J. Krause,

Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1701247.
[25]
Y. H. Kwak, D. S. Choi, Y. N. Kim, H. Kim, D. H. Yoon, S. S. Ahn, J. W. Yang, W. 

S. Yang, S. Seo, Biosensors & Bioelectronics 2012, 37, 82.
[26]
H. Choi, J. S. Choi, J. S. Kim, J. H. Choe, K. H. Chung, J. W. Shin, J. T. Kim, D. H. 

Youn, K. C. Kim, J. I. Lee, S. Y. Choi, P. Kim, C. G. Choi, Y. J. Yu, Small 2014, 10, 3685.
[27]
E. Lee, K. Lee, C. H. Liu, G. S. Kulkarni, Z. H. Zhong, Nature Communications 2012,

3.
[28]
S. Chen, Z. B. Zhang, L. P. Ma, P. Ahlberg, X. D. Gao, Z. J. Qiu, D. P. Wu, W. C. Ren, 

H. M. Cheng, S. L. Zhang, Applied Physics Letters 2012, 101.
[29]
D. A. Deen, E. J. Olson, M. A. Ebrish, S. J. Koester, Ieee Sens J 2014, 14, 1459.

[30]
Y. Zhang, R. Ma, X. V. Zhen, Y. C. Kudva, P. Buhlmann, S. J. Koester, ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 38863.
[31]
S. Rumyantsev, G. X. Liu, M. S. Shur, R. A. Potyrailo, A. A. Balandin, Nano Letters

2012, 12, 2294.
[32]
S. X. Wu, Q. Y. He, C. L. Tan, Y. D. Wang, H. Zhang, Small 2013, 9, 1160.

[33]
C. T. Lin, P. T. K. Loan, T. Y. Chen, K. K. Liu, C. H. Chen, K. H. Wei, L. J. Li, Adv 

Funct Mater 2013, 23, 2301.


47

[34]
Y. P. Dan, Y. Lu, N. J. Kybert, Z. T. Luo, A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Letters 2009, 9, 

1472.
[35]
L. H. Hess, M. Jansen, V. Maybeck, M. V. Hauf, M. Seifert, M. Stutzmann, I. D. Sharp, 

A. Offenhausser, J. A. Garrido, Adv Mater 2011, 23, 5045.
[36]
D. Kireev, M. Brambach, S. Seyock, V. Maybeck, W. Fu, B. Wolfrum, A. 

Offenhausser, Sci Rep 2017, 7, 6658.
[37]
D. H. Tien, J. Y. Park, K. B. Kim, N. Lee, T. Choi, P. Kim, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, 

Y. Seo, Acs Appl Mater Inter 2016, 8, 3072.
[38]
Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi, Y. Yamashiro, K. Matsumoto, Nano Letters 2009, 9, 3318.

[39]
Y. Taniguchi, T. Miki, Y. Ohno, M. Nagase, Y. Arakawa, M. Yasuzawa, Jpn J Appl 

Phys 2019, 58.
[40]
Y. Lu, B. R. Goldsmith, N. J. Kybert, A. T. C. Johnson, Applied Physics Letters 2010,

97.
[41]
S. Mukherjee, X. Meshik, M. Choi, S. Farid, D. Datta, Y. Lan, S. Poduri, K. Sarkar, U. 

Baterdene, C. E. Huang, Y. Y. Wang, P. Burke, M. Dutta, M. A. Stroscio, Ieee T Nanobiosci
2015, 14, 967.
[42]
H. H. Bay, R. Vo, X. C. Dai, H. H. Hsu, Z. M. Mo, S. R. Cao, W. Y. Li, F. G. Omenetto, 

X. C. Jiang, Nano Letters 2019, 19, 2620.
[43]
X. J. Wang, Y. B. Zhu, T. R. Olsen, N. Sun, W. J. Zhang, R. J. Pei, Q. Lin, Electrochim 

Acta 2018, 290, 356.
[44]
B. R. Goldsmith, L. Locascio, Y. N. Gao, M. Lerner, A. Walker, J. Lerner, J. Kyaw, A. 

Shue, S. Afsahi, D. Pan, J. Nokes, F. Barron, Sci Rep-Uk 2019, 9.
[45]
D. J. Kim, I. Y. Sohn, J. H. Jung, O. J. Yoon, N. E. Lee, J. S. Park, Biosensors & 

Bioelectronics 2013, 41, 621.
[46]
A. Maity, X. Y. Sui, B. Jin, H. H. Pu, K. J. Bottum, X. K. Huang, J. B. Chang, G. H. 

Zhou, G. H. Lu, J. H. Chen, Analytical Chemistry 2018, 90, 14230.
[47]
D. Jeong, J. Kim, M. S. Chae, W. Lee, S. H. Yang, Y. Kim, S. M. Kim, J. S. Lee, J. H. 

Lee, J. Choi, D. S. Yoon, K. S. Hwang, Sensors-Basel 2018, 18.
[48]
E. Piecinini, C. Bliem, C. Reiner-Rozman, F. Battaglini, O. Azzaroni, W. Knoll,

Biosensors & Bioelectronics 2017, 92, 661.
[49]
S. Das Sarma, S. Adam, E. H. Hwang, E. Rossi, Rev Mod Phys 2011, 83, 407.

[50]
H. Wang, D. Nezich, J. Kong, T. Palacios, Ieee Electron Device Letters 2009, 30, 547.

[51]
L. H. Hess, M. V. Hauf, M. Seifert, F. Speck, T. Seyller, M. Stutzmann, I. D. Sharp, J. 

A. Garrido, Applied Physics Letters 2011, 99.
[52]
L. Jiang, W. Fu, Y. Y. Birdja, M. T. M. Koper, G. F. Schneider, Nat Commun 2018, 9, 

793.
[53]
J. L. Xia, F. Chen, J. H. Li, N. J. Tao, Nature Nanotechnology 2009, 4, 505.

[54]
A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha, U. V. Waghmare, K. S. 

Novoselov, H. R. Krishnamurthy, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari, A. K. Sood, Nature 
Nanotechnology 2008, 3, 210.
[55]
S. Adam, E. H. Hwang, V. M. Galitski, S. Das Sarma, P Natl Acad Sci USA 2007, 104, 

18392.
[56]
L. H. Hess, M. Seifert, J. A. Garrido, P Ieee 2013, 101, 1780.

[57]
M. Dankerl, M. V. Hauf, A. Lippert, L. H. Hess, S. Birner, I. D. Sharp, A. Mahmood, 

P. Mallet, J. Y. Veuillen, M. Stutzmann, J. A. Garrido, Adv Funct Mater 2010, 20, 3117.
[58]
H. N. Wang, L. Pilon, J Phys Chem C 2011, 115, 16711.

[59]
L. Fumagalli, A. Esfandiar, R. Fabregas, S. Hu, P. Ares, A. Janardanan, Q. Yang, B. 

Radha, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, G. Gomila, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, Science 2018,
360, 1339.
[60]
G. X. Liu, S. Rumyantsev, M. S. Shur, A. A. Balandin, Applied Physics Letters 2013,

102.
[61]
G. Y. Xu, J. Abbott, L. Qin, K. Y. M. Yeung, Y. Song, H. Yoon, J. Kong, D. Ham,

Nature Communications 2014, 5.


48

[62]
D. Kireev, I. Zadorozhnyi, T. Y. Qiu, D. Sarik, F. Brings, T. R. Wu, S. Seyock, V. 

Maybeck, M. Lottner, B. M. Blaschke, J. Garrido, X. M. Xie, S. Vitusevich, B. Wolfrum, A. 
Offenhausser, Ieee T Nanotechnol 2017, 16, 140.
[63]
H. G. Sudibya, Q. Y. He, H. Zhang, P. Chen, Acs Nano 2011, 5, 1990.

[64]
K. A. Son, B. H. Yang, H. C. Seo, D. Wong, J. S. Moon, T. Hussain, Ieee T 

Nanotechnol 2017, 16, 239.
[65]
M. A. Giambra, A. Benfante, R. Pernice, V. Miseikis, F. Fabbri, C. Reitz, W. H. P. 

Pernice, R. Krupke, E. Calandra, S. Stivala, A. C. Busacca, R. Danneau, Acs Omega 2019, 4, 
2256.
[66]
F. Su, Z. H. Zhang, S. S. Li, P. A. Li, T. Deng, Appl Surf Sci 2018, 459, 164.

[67]
S. B. Shi, E. L. Ang, H. M. Zhao, J Ind Microbiol Biot 2018, 45, 491.

[68]
S. Y. Chen, P. H. Ho, R. J. Shiue, C. W. Chen, W. H. Wang, Nano Letters 2012, 12, 

964.
[69]
M. Lafkioti, B. Krauss, T. Lohmann, U. Zschieschang, H. Klauk, K. von Klitzing, J. H. 

Smet, Nano Letters 2010, 10, 1149.
[70]
J. O. Bockris, E. Gileadi, K. Muller, Journal of Chemical Physics 1966, 44, 1445.

[71]
W. Fu, M. El Abbassi, T. Hasler, M. Jung, M. Steinacher, M. Calame, C. 

Schönenberger, G. Puebla-Hellmann, S. Hellmüller, T. Ihn, A. Wallraff, Applied Physics 
Letters 2014, 104, 013102.
[72]
G. S. Kulkarni, Z. H. Zhong, Nano Lett 2012, 12, 719.

[73]
K. S. Chang, C. C. Chen, J. T. Sheu, Y. K. Li, Sensor Actuat B-Chem 2009, 138, 148.

[74]
J. Liu, Y. H. Xue, M. Zhang, L. M. Dai, Mrs Bull 2012, 37, 1265.

[75]
J. Yang, M. Z. Ma, L. Q. Li, Y. F. Zhang, W. Huang, X. C. Dong, Nanoscale 2014, 6, 

13301.
[76]
L. X. Chen, L. He, H. S. Wang, H. M. Wang, S. J. Tang, C. X. Cong, H. Xie, L. Li, H. 

Xia, T. X. Li, T. R. Wu, D. L. Zhang, L. W. Deng, T. Yu, X. M. Xie, M. H. Jiang, Nature 
Communications 2017, 8.
[77]
H. Suzuki, T. Kaneko, Y. Shibuta, M. Ohno, Y. Maekawa, T. Kato, Nature 

Communications 2016, 7.
[78]
H. Sakaguchi, S. T. Song, T. Kojima, T. Nakae, Nature Chemistry 2017, 9, 57.

[79]
Z. P. Chen, W. Zhang, C. A. Palma, A. L. Rizzini, B. L. Liu, A. Abbas, N. Richter, L. 

Martini, X. Y. Wang, N. Cavani, H. Lu, N. Mishra, C. Coletti, R. Berger, F. Klappenberger, M. 
Klaui, A. Candini, M. Affronte, C. W. Zhou, V. De Renzi, U. del Pennino, J. V. Barth, H. J. 
Rader, A. Narita, X. L. Feng, K. Mullen, Journal of the American Chemical Society 2016, 138, 
15488.
[80]
M. Yankowitz, J. Jung, E. Laksono, N. Leconte, B. L. Chittari, K. Watanabe, T. 

Taniguchi, S. Adam, D. Graf, C. R. Dean, Nature 2018, 557, 404.
[81]
Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, P. Jarillo-Herrero,

Nature 2018, 556, 43.
[82]
Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, A. Demir, S. Fang, S. L. Tomarken, J. Y. Luo, J. D. Sanchez-

Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, R. C. Ashoori, P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature
2018, 556, 80.
[83]
A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, Nature Materials 2007, 6, 183.

[84]
P. Avouris, Z. H. Chen, V. Perebeinos, Nature Nanotechnology 2007, 2, 605.

[85]
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. 

Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard, J. Hone, Nature Nanotechnology 2010, 5, 722.
[86]
J. Baringhaus, M. Ruan, F. Edler, A. Tejeda, M. Sicot, A. Taleb-Ibrahimi, A. P. Li, Z. 

G. Jiang, E. H. Conrad, C. Berger, C. Tegenkamp, W. A. de Heer, Nature 2014, 506, 349.
[87]
A. A. Balandin, Nature Nanotechnology 2013, 8, 549.

[88]
Z. G. Cheng, Q. Li, Z. J. Li, Q. Y. Zhou, Y. Fang, Nano Letters 2010, 10, 1864.

[89]
B. Veigas, E. Fortunato, P. V. Baptista, Sensors-Basel 2015, 15, 10380.

[90]
O. Moldovan, B. Iniguez, M. J. Deen, L. F. Marsal, Iet Circ Device Syst 2015, 9, 446.

[91]
B. B. Zhan, C. Li, J. Yang, G. Jenkins, W. Huang, X. C. Dong, Small 2014, 10, 4042.

[92]
V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker, S. Seal, Prog Mater Sci 2011, 56, 

1178.


49

[93]
E. W. Hill, A. Vijayaragahvan, K. Novoselov, Ieee Sens J 2011, 11, 3161.

[94]
H. C. Cheng, R. J. Shiue, C. C. Tsai, W. H. Wang, Y. T. Chen, Acs Nano 2011, 5, 2051.

[95]
E. Stern, J. F. Klemic, D. A. Routenberg, P. N. Wyrembak, D. B. Turner-Evans, A. D. 

Hamilton, D. A. LaVan, T. M. Fahmy, M. A. Reed, Nature 2007, 445, 519.
[96]
Z. Yan, Z. W. Peng, J. M. Tour, Accounts Chem Res 2014, 47, 1327.

[97]
T. R. Wu, X. F. Zhang, Q. H. Yuan, J. C. Xue, G. Y. Lu, Z. H. Liu, H. S. Wang, H. M. 

Wang, F. Ding, Q. K. Yu, X. M. Xie, M. H. Jiang, Nature Materials 2016, 15, 43.
[98]
K. H. Lee, H. J. Shin, J. Lee, I. Y. Lee, G. H. Kim, J. Y. Choi, S. W. Kim, Nano Letters

2012, 12, 714.
[99]
N. Petrone, C. R. Dean, I. Meric, A. M. van der Zande, P. Y. Huang, L. Wang, D. 

Muller, K. L. Shepard, J. Hone, Nano Letters 2012, 12, 2751.
[100]
L. Banszerus, M. Schmitz, S. Engels, J. Dauber, M. Oellers, F. Haupt, K. Watanabe, T. 

Taniguchi, B. Beschoten, C. Stampfer, Sci Adv 2015, 1.
[101]
A. Y. S. Eng, Z. Sofer, P. Simek, J. Kosina, M. Pumera, Chem-Eur J 2013, 19, 15583.

[102]
P. Yasaei, B. Kumar, R. Hantehzadeh, M. Kayyalha, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, C. H. Wang, 

R. F. Klie, Y. P. Chen, P. Kral, A. Salehi-Khojin, Nature Communications 2014, 5.
[103]
V. Kochat, C. S. Tiwary, T. Biswas, G. Ramalingam, K. Hsieh, K. Chattopadhyay, S. 

Raghavan, M. Jain, A. Ghosh, Nano Letters 2016, 16, 562.
[104]
F. Veliev, A. Cresti, D. Kalita, A. Bourrier, T. Belloir, A. Briancon-Marjollet, M. 

Albrieux, S. Roche, V. Bouchiat, C. Delacour, 2D Mater. 2018, 5, 045020.
[105]
J. H. Chen, C. Jang, S. D. Xiao, M. Ishigami, M. S. Fuhrer, Nature Nanotechnology

2008, 3, 206.
[106]
L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Y. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, 

L. M. Campos, D. A. Muller, J. Guo, P. Kim, J. Hone, K. L. Shepard, C. R. Dean, Science 2013,
342, 614.
[107]
G. Auton, J. W. Zhang, R. K. Kumar, H. B. Wang, X. J. Zhang, Q. P. Wang, E. Hill, 

A. M. Song, Nature Communications 2016, 7.
[108]
X. Z. Xu, Z. H. Zhang, J. C. Dong, D. Yi, J. J. Niu, M. H. Wu, L. Lin, R. K. Yin, M. 

Q. Li, J. Y. Zhou, S. X. Wang, J. L. Sun, X. J. Duan, P. Gao, Y. Jiang, X. S. Wu, H. L. Peng, 
R. S. Ruoff, Z. F. Liu, D. P. Yu, E. G. Wang, F. Ding, K. H. Liu, Sci Bull 2017, 62, 1074.
[109]
L. Wang, X. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Qiao, M. Wu, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, J. Liang, Z. Zhang, 

Z. Zhang, W. Chen, X. Xie, J. Zong, Y. Shan, Y. Guo, M. Willinger, H. Wu, Q. Li, W. Wang, 
P. Gao, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiang, D. Yu, E. Wang, X. Bai, Z.-J. Wang, F. Ding, K. Liu,
Nature 2019.
[110]
Y. M. Lin, P. Avouris, Nano Letters 2008, 8, 2119.

[111]
J. T. Robinson, F. K. Perkins, E. S. Snow, Z. Q. Wei, P. E. Sheehan, Nano Letters 2008,

8, 3137.
[112]
S. J. Lee, M. S. Huh, S. Y. Lee, S. Min, S. Lee, H. Koo, J. U. Chu, K. E. Lee, H. Jeon, 

Y. Choi, K. Choi, Y. Byun, S. Y. Jeong, K. Park, K. Kim, I. C. Kwon, Angew Chem Int Edit
2012, 51, 7203.
[113]
G. Liu, W. Stillman, S. Rumyantsev, Q. Shao, M. Shur, A. A. Balandin, Applied 

Physics Letters 2009, 95.
[114]
M. A. Stolyarov, G. X. Liu, S. L. Rumyantsev, M. Shur, A. A. Balandin, Applied 

Physics Letters 2015, 107.
[115]
E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, P. Ramesh, C. Berger, M. Sprinkle, W. A. de Heer, R. C. 

Haddon, Journal of the American Chemical Society 2009, 131, 1336.
[116]
F. M. Koehler, W. J. Stark, Accounts Chem Res 2013, 46, 2297.

[117]
S. Rumyantsev, G. X. Liu, R. A. Potyrailo, A. A. Balandin, M. S. Shur, Ieee Sens J

2013, 13, 2818.
[118]
M. Freitag, M. Steiner, Y. Martin, V. Perebeinos, Z. H. Chen, J. C. Tsang, P. Avouris,

Nano Letters 2009, 9, 1883.
[119]
E. Stern, R. Wagner, F. J. Sigworth, R. Breaker, T. M. Fahmy, M. A. Reed, Nano 

Letters 2007, 7, 3405.
[120]
S. Sorgenfrei, C. Y. Chiu, M. Johnston, C. Nuckolls, K. L. Shepard, Nano Letters 2011,

11, 3739.


50

[121]
N. Clement, K. Nishiguchi, J. F. Dufreche, D. Guerin, A. Fujiwara, D. Vuillaume,

Applied Physics Letters 2011, 98.
[122]
G. J. Zhang, G. Zhang, J. H. Chua, R. E. Chee, E. H. Wong, A. Agarwal, K. D. 

Buddharaju, N. Singh, Z. Q. Gao, N. Balasubramanian, Nano Lett 2008, 8, 1066.
[123]
N. Gao, W. Zhou, X. C. Jiang, G. S. Hong, T. M. Fu, C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett 2015,

15, 2143.
[124]
E. Stern, A. Vacic, N. K. Rajan, J. M. Criscione, J. Park, B. R. Ilic, D. J. Mooney, M. 

A. Reed, T. M. Fahmy, Nature Nanotechnology 2010, 5, 138.
[125]
H. J. Lee, J. G. Yook, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2014, 61, 448.

[126]
Q. Chen, D. Roitman, A. Knoesen, Sens. Actuators, A 2009, 152, 151.

[127]
C. Laborde, F. Pittino, H. A. Verhoeven, S. G. Lemay, L. Selmi, M. A. Jongsma, F. P. 

Widdershoven, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 791.
[128]
D. C. Elias, R. R. Nair, T. M. G. Mohiuddin, S. V. Morozov, P. Blake, M. P. Halsall, 

A. C. Ferrari, D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, Science 2009,
323, 610.
[129]
R. R. Nair, W. C. Ren, R. Jalil, I. Riaz, V. G. Kravets, L. Britnell, P. Blake, F. Schedin, 

A. S. Mayorov, S. J. Yuan, M. I. Katsnelson, H. M. Cheng, W. Strupinski, L. G. Bulusheva, A. 
V. Okotrub, I. V. Grigorieva, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, Small 2010, 6, 
2877.
[130]
K. Yang, L. Z. Feng, H. Hong, W. B. Cai, Z. Liu, Nature Protocols 2013, 8, 2392.

[131]
Y. Cui, S. N. Kim, S. E. Jones, L. L. Wissler, R. R. Naik, M. C. McAlpine, Nano Letters

2010, 10, 4559.
[132]
J. Katoch, S. N. Kim, Z. F. Kuang, B. L. Farmer, R. R. Nalk, S. A. Tatulian, M. 

Ishigami, Nano Letters 2012, 12, 2342.
[133]
Z. X. Zhang, H. L. Huang, X. M. Yang, L. Zang, J Phys Chem Lett 2011, 2, 2897.

[134]
F. M. Koehler, N. A. Luechinger, D. Ziegler, E. K. Athanassiou, R. N. Grass, A. Rossi, 

C. Hierold, A. Stemmer, W. J. Stark, Angew Chem Int Edit 2009, 48, 224.
[135]
V. Georgakilas, M. Otyepka, A. B. Bourlinos, V. Chandra, N. Kim, K. C. Kemp, P. 

Hobza, R. Zboril, K. S. Kim, Chem Rev 2012, 112, 6156.
[136]
J. T. Robinson, J. S. Burgess, C. E. Junkermeier, S. C. Badescu, T. L. Reinecke, F. K. 

Perkins, M. K. Zalalutdniov, J. W. Baldwin, J. C. Culbertson, P. E. Sheehan, E. S. Snow, Nano 
Letters 2010, 10, 3001.
[137]
F. M. Koehler, A. Jacobsen, K. Ensslin, C. Stampfer, W. J. Stark, Small 2010, 6, 1125.

[138]
Q. H. Wang, Z. Jin, K. K. Kim, A. J. Hilmer, G. L. C. Paulus, C. J. Shih, M. H. Ham, 

J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Kong, P. Jarillo-Herrero, M. S. Strano,
Nature Chemistry 2012, 4, 724.
[139]
G. L. C. Paulus, Q. H. Wang, M. S. Strano, Accounts Chem Res 2013, 46, 160.

[140]
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. 

Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen, R. S. Ruoff, Nature 2007, 448, 457.
[141]
F. Karlicky, K. K. R. Datta, M. Otyepka, R. Zboril, Acs Nano 2013, 7, 6434.

[142]
L. Y. Feng, Y. Chen, J. S. Ren, X. G. Qu, Biomaterials 2011, 32, 2930.

[143]
K. K. Tadi, S. Pal, T. N. Narayanan, Sci Rep-Uk 2016, 6.

[144]
X. Y. Chia, A. Ambrosi, M. Otyepka, R. Zboril, M. Pumera, Chem-Eur J 2014, 20, 

6665.
[145]
V. Urbanova, K. Hola, A. B. Bourlinos, K. Cepe, A. Ambrosi, A. H. Loo, M. Pumera, 

F. Karlicky, M. Otyepka, R. Zboril, Adv Mater 2015, 27, 2305.
[146]
Y. H. Cheong, M. Z. M. Nasir, A. Bakandritsos, M. Pykal, P. Jakubec, R. Zboril, M. 

Otyepka, M. Pumera, Chemelectrochem 2019, 6, 229.
[147]
H. Vedala, D. C. Sorescu, G. P. Kotchey, A. Star, Nano Letters 2011, 11, 2342.

[148]
S. D. Chakarova-Kack, E. Schroder, B. I. Lundqvist, D. C. Langreth, Phys Rev Lett

2006, 96.
[149]
W. Orellana, J. D. Correa, Journal of Materials Science 2015, 50, 898.

[150]
F. Yan, M. Zhang, J. H. Li, Advanced Healthcare Materials 2014, 3, 313.

[151]
G. F. Schneider, Q. Xu, S. Hage, S. Luik, J. N. Spoor, S. Malladi, H. Zandbergen, C. 

Dekker, Nat Commun 2013, 4, 2619.


51

[152]
N. Dontschuk, A. Stacey, A. Tadich, K. J. Rietwyk, A. Schenk, M. T. Edmonds, O. 

Shimoni, C. I. Pakes, S. Prawer, J. Cervenka, Nature Communications 2015, 6.
[153]
Q. Li, J. P. Froning, M. Pykal, S. Zhang, Z. Wang, M. Vondrak, P. Banas, K. Cepe, P. 

Jurecka, J. Sponer, R. Zboril, M. Dong, M. Otyepka, 2d Mater 2018, 5.
[154]
J. M. Wang, H. H. Zhu, Y. H. Xu, W. R. Yang, A. Liu, F. K. Shan, M. M. Cao, J. Q. 

Liu, Sensor Actuat B-Chem 2015, 220, 1186.
[155]
Q. Guo, H. Zhu, F. Liu, A. Y. Zhu, J. C. Reed, F. Yi, E. Cubukcu, Acs Photonics 2014,

1, 221.
[156]
M. B. Lerner, F. Matsunaga, G. H. Han, S. J. Hong, J. Xi, A. Crook, J. M. Perez-Aguilar, 

Y. W. Park, J. G. Saven, R. Y. Liu, A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Letters 2014, 14, 2709.
[157]
S. Eissa, C. Tlili, L. L'Hocine, M. Zourob, Biosensors & Bioelectronics 2012, 38, 308.

[158]
W. Y. Fu, P. Makk, R. Maurand, M. Brauninger, C. Schonenberger, J Appl Phys 2014,

116, 074306.
[159]
S. Aksimsek, H. Jussila, Z. P. Sun, Opt Commun 2018, 428, 233.

[160]
D. Sarkar, W. Liu, X. J. Xie, A. C. Anselmo, S. Mitragotri, K. Banerjee, Acs Nano

2014, 8, 3992.
[161]
H. W. Lee, D. H. Kang, J. H. Cho, S. Lee, D. H. Jun, J. H. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. 

Interfaces 2018, 10, 17639.
[162]
H. Nam, B. R. Oh, M. K. Chen, S. Wi, D. Li, K. Kurabayashi, X. G. Liang, J. Vac. Sci. 

Technol., B 2015, 33, 2166.
[163]
L. Y. Feng, L. Wu, J. S. Wang, J. S. Ren, D. Miyoshi, N. Sugimoto, X. G. Qu, Adv 

Mater 2012, 24, 125.
[164]
J. P. Wang, B. J. Zou, J. Z. Rui, Q. X. Song, T. Kajiyama, H. Kambara, G. H. Zhou,

Microchim Acta 2015, 182, 1095.
[165]
Y. R. Liang, X. L. Liang, Z. Y. Zhang, W. Li, X. Y. Huo, L. M. Peng, Nanoscale 2015,

7, 10954.
[166]
Z. X. Wang, Z. Y. Zhang, H. L. Xu, L. Ding, S. Wang, L. M. Peng, Applied Physics 

Letters 2010, 96.
[167]
M. E. Ramon, K. N. Parrish, S. F. Chowdhury, C. W. Magnuson, H. C. P. Movva, R. 

S. Ruoff, S. K. Banerjee, D. Akinwande, Ieee T Nanotechnol 2012, 11, 877.
[168]
Z. Y. Xia, F. Leonardi, M. Gobbi, Y. Liu, V. Bellani, A. Liscio, A. Kovtun, R. J. Li, X. 

L. Feng, E. Orgiu, P. Samori, E. Treossi, V. Palermo, ACS Nano 2016, 10, 7125.
[169]
P. Fortgang, T. Tite, V. Barnier, N. Zehani, C. Maddi, F. Lagarde, A. S. Loir, N. 

Jaffrezic-Renault, C. Donnet, F. Garrelie, C. Chaix, Acs Appl Mater Inter 2016, 8, 1424.
[170]
A. Y. S. Eng, Z. Sofer, S. Huber, D. Bousa, M. Marysko, M. Pumera, Chem-Eur J 2015,

21, 16828.
[171]
L. Liao, Y. C. Lin, M. Q. Bao, R. Cheng, J. W. Bai, Y. A. Liu, Y. Q. Qu, K. L. Wang, 

Y. Huang, X. F. Duan, Nature 2010, 467, 305.
[172]
Y. Q. Wu, K. A. Jenkins, A. Valdes-Garcia, D. B. Farmer, Y. Zhu, A. A. Bol, C. 

Dimitrakopoulos, W. J. Zhu, F. N. Xia, P. Avouris, Y. M. Lin, Nano Letters 2012, 12, 3062.
[173]
H. Y. Huang, L. Tao, F. Liu, L. Ji, Y. Hu, M. M. C. Cheng, P. Y. Chen, D. Akinwande,

Microsyst Nanoeng 2016, 2.
[174]
R. Pethig, Biomicrofluidics 2010, 4.

[175]
R. Q. Li, Q. Li, Y. Zhou, K. P. Chen, C. X. Zhang, L. Chen, L. Gao, J. J. Cui, Mater 

Technol 2015, 30, B163.
[176]
S. J. Heerema, C. Dekker, Nature Nanotechnology 2016, 11, 127.

[177]
H. Arjmandi-Tash, L. A. Belyaeva, G. F. Schneider, Chemical Society Reviews 2016,

45, 476.
[178]
F. Traversi, C. Raillon, S. M. Benameur, K. Liu, S. Khlybov, M. Tosun, D. Krasnozhon, 

A. Kis, A. Radenovic, Nature Nanotechnology 2013, 8, 939.
[179]
C. Nef, L. Posa, P. Makk, W. Y. Fu, A. Halbritter, C. Schonenberger, M. Calame,

Nanoscale 2014, 6, 7249.
[180]
Q. Y. He, S. X. Wu, Z. Y. Yin, H. Zhang, Chem Sci 2012, 3, 1764.

[181]
M. Ishigami, J. H. Chen, W. G. Cullen, M. S. Fuhrer, E. D. Williams, Nano Letters

2007, 7, 1643.


52

[182]
N. Keller, M. N. Ducamp, D. Robert, V. Keller, Chem Rev 2013, 113, 5029.

[183]
B. Esser, T. M. Swager, Angew Chem Int Edit 2010, 49, 8872.

[184]
B. Esser, J. M. Schnorr, T. M. Swager, Angew Chem Int Edit 2012, 51, 5752.

[185]
T. F. van Dijkman, M. A. Siegler, E. Bouwman, Dalton T 2015, 44, 21109.

[186]
C. Toumazou, P. Georgiou, P. Bergveld, Electron Lett 2011, 47, S7.

[187]
W. Fu, C. Nef, O. Knopfmacher, A. Tarasov, M. Weiss, M. Calame, C. Schonenberger,

Nano Lett 2011, 11, 3597.
[188]
O. Knopfmacher, A. Tarasov, W. Y. Fu, M. Wipf, B. Niesen, M. Calame, C. 

Schonenberger, Nano Letters 2010, 10, 2268.
[189]
Z. Y. Yang, N. N. Dai, R. T. Lu, Z. H. Huang, F. Y. Kang, New Carbon Mater 2015,

30, 511.
[190]
J. B. Chang, G. H. Zhou, E. R. Christensen, R. Heideman, J. H. Chen, Anal Bioanal 

Chem 2014, 406, 3957.
[191]
T. Zhang, Z. G. Cheng, Y. B. Wang, Z. J. Li, C. X. Wang, Y. B. Li, Y. Fang, Nano 

Letters 2010, 10, 4738.
[192]
C. Y. Wang, X. Y. Cui, Y. Li, H. B. Li, L. Huang, J. Bi, J. Luo, L. Q. Ma, W. Zhou, Y. 

Cao, B. G. Wang, F. Miao, Sci Rep-Uk 2016, 6.
[193]
K. K. Tadi, T. N. Narayanan, S. Arepalli, K. Banerjee, S. Viswanathan, D. Liepmann, 

P. M. Ajayan, V. Renugopalakrishnan, J Mater Res 2015, 30, 3728.
[194]
S. Viswanathan, T. N. Narayanan, K. Aran, K. D. Fink, J. Paredes, P. M. Ajayan, S. 

Filipek, P. Miszta, H. C. Tekin, F. Inci, U. Demirci, P. Li, K. I. Bolotin, D. Liepmann, V. 
Renugopalakrishanan, Materials Today 2015, 18, 513.
[195]
N. Mohanty, V. Berry, Nano Letters 2008, 8, 4469.

[196]
X. C. Dong, Y. M. Shi, W. Huang, P. Chen, L. J. Li, Adv Mater 2010, 22, 1649.

[197]
Y. Ohno, K. Maehashi, K. Matsumoto, Journal of the American Chemical Society 2010,

132, 18012.
[198]
D. R. Mills, R. L. Peterson, S. Spiegelman, P Natl Acad Sci USA 1967, 58, 217.

[199]
D. J. Kim, H. C. Park, I. Y. Sohn, J. H. Jung, O. J. Yoon, J. S. Park, M. Y. Yoon, N. E. 

Lee, Small 2013, 9, 3352.
[200]
J. H. An, S. J. Park, O. S. Kwon, J. Bae, J. Jang, ACS Nano 2013, 7, 10563.

[201]
C. Wang, J. Kim, Y. B. Zhu, J. Y. Yang, G. H. Lee, S. Lee, J. Yu, R. J. Pei, G. H. Liu, 

C. Nuckolls, J. Hone, Q. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 71, 222.
[202]
S. Farid, X. Meshik, M. Choi, S. Mukherjee, Y. Lan, D. Parikh, S. Poduri, U. Baterdene, 

C. E. Huang, Y. Y. Wang, P. Burke, M. Dutta, M. A. Stroscio, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 71, 
294.
[203]
P. Fromherz, A. Offenhausser, T. Vetter, J. Weis, Science 1991, 252, 1290.

[204]
J. Ryu, T. W. Chen, T. Bok, G. Song, J. Ma, C. Hwang, L. L. Luo, H. K. Song, J. Cho, 

C. M. Wang, S. L. Zhang, S. Park, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 2924.
[205]
I. N. Lees, H. H. Lin, C. A. Canaria, C. Gurtner, M. J. Sailor, G. M. Miskelly, Langmuir

2003, 19, 9812.
[206]
M. V. Hauf, L. H. Hess, J. Howgate, M. Dankerl, M. Stutzmann, J. A. Garrido, Applied 

Physics Letters 2010, 97.
[207]
L. H. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. M. Li, H. B. Feng, J. Lu, J. H. Li, Adv Funct Mater 2009, 19, 

2782.
[208]
W. C. Lee, C. H. Y. X. Lim, H. Shi, L. A. L. Tang, Y. Wang, C. T. Lim, K. P. Loh,

Acs Nano 2011, 5, 7334.
[209]
T. Stieglitz, H. Beutel, M. Schuettler, J. U. Meyer, Biomed Microdevices 2000, 2, 283.

[210]
S. P. Lacour, G. Courtine, J. Guck, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2016, 1, 16063.

[211]
T. Cohen-Karni, Q. Qing, Q. Li, Y. Fang, C. M. Lieber, Nano Letters 2010, 10, 1098.

[212]
M. E. Spira, A. Hai, Nature Nanotechnology 2013, 8, 83.

[213]
J. F. Eschermann, R. Stockmann, M. Hueske, X. T. Vu, S. Ingebrandt, A. Offenhausser,

Applied Physics Letters 2009, 95.
[214]
M. D. Halbach, U. Egert, J. Hescheler, K. Banach, Cell Physiol Biochem 2003, 13, 271.

[215]
F. Heer, S. Hafizovic, T. Ugniwenko, U. Frey, W. Franks, E. Perriard, J. C. Perriard, 

A. Blau, C. Ziegler, A. Hierlemann, Biosensors & Bioelectronics 2007, 22, 2546.


53

[216]
S. Ingebrandt, C. K. Yeung, M. Krause, A. Offenhausser, Biosensors & Bioelectronics

2001, 16, 565.
[217]
X. J. Duan, R. X. Gao, P. Xie, T. Cohen-Karni, Q. Qing, H. S. Choe, B. Z. Tian, X. C. 

Jiang, C. M. Lieber, Nature Nanotechnology 2012, 7, 174.
[218]
J. Pine, J Neurosci Meth 1980, 2, 19.

[219]
D. Kireev, A. Offenhausser, 2d Mater 2018, 5.

[220]
B. Z. Xu, M. S. Zhu, W. C. Zhang, X. Zhen, Z. X. Pei, Q. Xue, C. Y. Zhi, P. Shi, Adv. 

Mater. 2016, 28, 3333.
[221]
N. Driscoll, A. G. Richardson, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, O. Adewole, P. Lelyukh, L. 

Escobedo, D. K. Cullen, T. H. Lucas, Y. Gogotsi, F. Vitale, ACS Nano 2018, 12, 10419.
[222]
Y. M. Lin, C. Dimitrakopoulos, K. A. Jenkins, D. B. Farmer, H. Y. Chiu, A. Grill, P. 

Avouris, Science 2010, 327, 662.
[223]
W. S. Hwang, P. Zhao, K. Tahy, L. O. Nyakiti, V. D. Wheeler, R. L. Myers-Ward, C. 

R. Eddy, D. K. Gaskill, J. A. Robinson, W. Haensch, H. Xing, A. Seabaugh, D. Jena, Apl Mater
2015, 3.
[224]
A. Avsar, T. Y. Yang, S. Bae, J. Balakrishnan, F. Volmer, M. Jaiswal, Z. Yi, S. R. Ali, 

G. Guntherodt, B. H. Hong, B. Beschoten, B. Ozyilmaz, Nano Letters 2011, 11, 2363.
[225]
A. D. Smith, S. Vaziri, S. Rodriguez, M. Ostling, M. C. Lemme, Solid State Electron

2015, 108, 61.
[226]
N. C. S. Vieira, J. Borme, G. Machado, F. Cerqueira, P. P. Freitas, V. Zucolotto, N. M. 

R. Peres, P. Alpuim, J Phys-Condens Mat 2016, 28.
[227]
J. Kang, D. Shin, S. Bae, B. H. Hong, Nanoscale 2012, 4, 5527.

[228]
X. L. Liang, B. A. Sperling, I. Calizo, G. J. Cheng, C. A. Hacker, Q. Zhang, Y. Obeng, 

K. Yan, H. L. Peng, Q. L. Li, X. X. Zhu, H. Yuan, A. R. H. Walker, Z. F. Liu, L. M. Peng, C. 
A. Richter, Acs Nano 2011, 5, 9144.
[229]
X. S. Li, Y. W. Zhu, W. W. Cai, M. Borysiak, B. Y. Han, D. Chen, R. D. Piner, L. 

Colombo, R. S. Ruoff, Nano Letters 2009, 9, 4359.
[230]
L. B. Gao, G. X. Ni, Y. P. Liu, B. Liu, A. H. C. Neto, K. P. Loh, Nature 2014, 505, 

190.
[231]
Y. D. Su, H. L. Han, Q. Cai, Q. Wu, M. X. Xie, D. Y. Chen, B. S. Geng, Y. B. Zhang, 

F. Wang, Y. R. Shen, C. S. Tian, Nano Letters 2015, 15, 6501.
[232]
W. H. Lin, T. H. Chen, J. K. Chang, J. I. Taur, Y. Y. Lo, W. L. Lee, C. S. Chang, W. 

B. Su, C. I. Wu, Acs Nano 2014, 8, 1784.
[233]
I. Pasternak, A. Krajewska, K. Grodecki, I. Jozwik-Biala, K. Sobczak, W. Strupinski,

Aip Adv 2014, 4.
[234]
G. H. Zhang, A. G. Guell, P. M. Kirkman, R. A. Lazenby, T. S. Miller, P. R. Unwin,

Acs Appl Mater Inter 2016, 8, 8008.
[235]
L. A. Belyaeva, W. Y. Fu, H. Arjmandi-Tash, G. F. Schneider, Acs Central Sci 2016,

2, 904.
[236]
D. Kireev, D. Sarik, T. Wu, X. Xie, B. Wolfrum, A. Offenhausser, Carbon 2016, 107, 

319.
[237]
X. F. Lu, N. Z. Wang, H. Wu, Y. P. Wu, D. Zhao, X. Z. Zeng, X. G. Luo, T. Wu, W. 

Bao, G. H. Zhang, F. Q. Huang, Q. Z. Huang, X. H. Chen, Nature Materials 2015, 14, 325.
[238]
J. M. Cai, P. Ruffieux, R. Jaafar, M. Bieri, T. Braun, S. Blankenburg, M. Muoth, A. P. 

Seitsonen, M. Saleh, X. L. Feng, K. Mullen, R. Fasel, Nature 2010, 466, 470.
[239]
P. A. George, J. Strait, J. Dawlaty, S. Shivaraman, M. Chandrashekhar, F. Rana, M. G. 

Spencer, Nano Letters 2008, 8, 4248.
[240]
J. Krupka, W. Strupinski, Applied Physics Letters 2010, 96.

[241]
M. Peplow, Nature 2015, 522, 268.

[242]
M. S. Mannoor, H. Tao, J. D. Clayton, A. Sengupta, D. L. Kaplan, R. R. Naik, N.

Verma, F. G. Omenetto, M. C. McAlpine, Nature Communications 2013, 4.
[243]
X. J. Huang, T. Leng, M. J. Zhu, X. Zhang, J. C. Chen, K. Chang, M. Aqeeli, A. K. 

Geim, K. S. Novoselov, Z. R. Hu, Sci Rep-Uk 2015, 5.
[244]
D. C. Wei, L. Peng, M. L. Li, H. Y. Mao, T. C. Niu, C. Han, W. Chen, A. T. S. Wee,

Acs Nano 2015, 9, 164.


54

[245]
M. B. Lerner, D. Pan, Y. N. Gao, L. E. Locascio, K. Y. Lee, J. Nokes, S. Afsahi, J. D. 

Lerner, A. Walker, P. G. Collins, K. Oegema, F. Barron, B. R. Goldsmith, Sensor Actuat B-
Chem 2017, 239, 1261.


