 

 
1

Inverse-design magnonic devices 

Qi Wang1*, Andrii V. Chumak1, Philipp Pirro2 

1 Faculty of Physics, University of Vienna, Boltzmanngasse 5, A-1090 Vienna, Austria 

2 Fachbereich Physik, Technische Universitaet Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany 

 

The field of magnonics offers a new type of low-power information processing, in 

which magnons, the quanta of spin waves, carry and process data instead of electrons. 

Many magnonic devices were demonstrated recently, but the development of each of 

them requires specialized investigations and, usually, one device design is suitable for 

one function only. Here, we introduce the method of inverse-design magnonics, in 

which any functionality can be specified first, and a feedback-based computational 

algorithm is used to obtain the device design. Our proof-of-concept prototype is based 

on a rectangular ferromagnetic area which can be patterned using square shaped voids. 

To demonstrate the universality of this approach, we explore linear, nonlinear and 

nonreciprocal magnonic functionalities and use the same algorithm to create a 

magnonic (de-)multiplexer, a nonlinear switch and a circulator. Thus, inverse-design 

magnonics can be used to develop highly efficient rf applications as well as Boolean 

and neuromorphic computing building blocks.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

* qi.wang@univie.ac.at 


 

 
2

Introduction 
 

Magnonics is an emerging field of science in which magnons, the quanta of spin waves, 

are used to carry and process information instead of electrons [1-4]. Spin waves are 

propagating disturbances in the spin system of a solid body that can be used for a low-

loss information transfer without any motion of real particles [5-7]. They have 

wavelengths ranging from micrometers down to atomic scales [7-9] and show a variety 

of pronounced nonlinear phenomena [10-12] that makes spin waves to be promising 

for Boolean computing [13-15], radio frequency applications [16,17] and 

neuromorphic computing [18,19] at the nanoscale. Many magnonic devices have been 

demonstrated recently: frequency (de-)multiplexers [16,17], nonlinear units [12,19], 

nonreciprocal diodes/circulators [20-22], and an integrated magnonic half-adder [23]. 

However, the development of each of these devices requires specialized efforts-

demanding and complex investigations. In contrast, modern electronics is much more 

advanced and the design of even the most complex circuits is usually performed using 

automatized electronic software such as VHDL [24]. Moreover, recently the field 

photonics, which operates with light waves to process data, proposed the approach of 

inverse-design devices [25-28]. The main idea of this approach is to create a special 

medium divided into small elements arranged in a matrix, in which the refractive index 

can be changed locally for every element. This medium can perform, in principle, any 

functionality by the proper tuning of the state of each element in the matrix. A feed-

back loop-based numerical optimization algorithm is used to define the required states 

of the matrix elements automatically. Different linear optical devices have been 

proposed and realized using this method [25-28]. However, nonlinear phenomena, e.g., 

the dependence of the wavelength on the amplitude, are strongly needed for a 

computing system, which is still a challenge due to the rather low intrinsic photonic 

nonlinearity [29]. Besides (1) the pronounced natural nonlinearity, the field of 

magnonics offers (2) a scalability of the devices down to the scale of a few nanometers 

[6,30] and, thus, the integrability with CMOS devices [13] and (3) pronounced 

nonreciprocal properties associated with the gyrotropic magnetization precession 

motion and breaking of time symmetry [20-22,31].  

Here, we introduce the inverse-design method into the field of magnonics and 

demonstrate its high performance, flexibility and potential. We show numerically that 

a design region of only 1×1 µm2 is sufficient to perform conceptually different 


 

 
3

functionalities. To demonstrate this, we explore linear, nonlinear and nonreciprocal 

functionalities of the device and use the same automatic feed-back algorithm to 

develop a nanoscale magnonic (de-)multiplexer, a nonlinear switch and a circulator. 

The size of each element in the used 10×10 (or 10×20) matrix was chosen to be 

100×100 nm2, in order to ensure simplicity in the experimental realization of the 

matrix [6,30]. In addition, we show that this size can be easily decreased to, e.g., 

10×10 nm2 (so, the whole matrix is 100×100 nm2) since the fundamental limitation of 

the element size is given by the lattice constant of a magnetic material (see the 

Supplementary Information). We are confident that inverse-design magnonics will be 

intensively used in future because it allows for the automatic (efforts-less) design of 

practically any spin-wave based rf device, any spin-wave logic gate for binary data 

processing as well as for more complex units of unconventional data processing like 

neuromorphic computing. It is noted, that our manuscript is submitted simultaneously 

with Ref. [32] in which the authors use the inverse-design magnonics approach to 

demonstrate the concept of a nanoscale neural network. 

Inverse design 

As the first example, the structure of the inverse-designed magnonic frequency 

demultiplexer is shown in Fig. 1. It is designed based on a 100-nm-thick Yttrium Iron 

Garnet (YIG) film [33] and consists of one input waveguide, two output waveguides 

with the same width of 300 nm, and a design region of 1×1 µm2 between them. The 

design region has been divided into 10×10 elements, each with a size of 100×100 nm2, 

in which the magnetic material (YIG) is allowed to be entirely removed. This structure 

can be fabricated using focused ion beam [34,35] or by Ar+ ion etching [6,30,36,37] 

and the further miniaturization is possible. The yellow regions in Fig. 1 indicate the 

YIG and the square-shaped white holes imply the empty areas. It is noted that here we 

just demonstrate the concept and, for simplicity, use a “binary approach” where each 

region can have two states: 1 (YIG) or 0 (vacuum). But since the complexity of the 

functionality of an inverse-design device is fundamentally limited by the number of 

the degrees of freedom [24,25], namely by the design space, the following approaches 

can be used: (1) The switch from the 2D to 3D matrices [38，39] or the incremental 

engineering of (2) the thickness of the elements [35,40], (3) the saturation  


 

 
4

 

Figure 1. Structure of the inverse-designed magnonic frequency demultiplexer. The 

magnonic frequency multiplexer consists of one input waveguide and two output 

waveguides with the width of 300 nm which are connected by a 1×1 µm2 design region. 

The design region has been divided into 10×10 elements each with a size of 100×100 nm2. 

The yellow region indicates the magnetic material (YIG) and the white holes imply that 

the material has been fully removed. An external field of 200 mT is applied along the z-

axis.  

magnetization [40-42] or (4) the exchange stiffness of the magnetic material [42]. An 

external field of 200 mT is applied out-of-plane along the z-axis, and Forward Volume 

Spin Waves (FVSWs) are investigated (please note that this is not a classical FV 

magnetostatic wave (FVMSW) in a plane film since here also an exchange energy is 

taken into account). Spin waves of two frequencies f1 = 2.6 GHz (corresponds to a 

wavelength l = 2 µm) and f2 = 2.8 GHz (l = 1 µm) are excited in the input waveguide 

and are separated into the different output waveguides after they pass through the 

design region optimized by a modified version of the direct binary search (DBS) 

algorithm [28,43].  

The DBS algorithm is an optimization method that sequentially evaluates every 

element of the design region. The optimization process of the DBS algorithm is shown 

in Fig. 2a. First, a random initial saturation magnetization distribution matrix M0(m,n) 

(
,
 are the indices of the element) is created in the design region, in 

which the material of a few elements has been randomly removed as shown in Fig. 2(b). 

Subsequently, the initial saturation magnetization distribution is introduced into 

Mumax3, a micromagnetic simulation software [44]. The ground state is obtained by 

relaxation and subsequently, the spin-wave propagation in the structure is simulated to 

calculate the spin-wave intensity in the output waveguides. The excitation and 

detection regions are marked by red regions in Fig 2b. The details of the  

mÎ[1,10]
nÎ[1,10]


 

 
5

 

Figure 2. The optimization procedure of direct binary search algorithm. a, Flow chart 

of the Direct Binary Search (DBS) algorithm for one iteration. Every iteration includes 

100 simulations in our examples. b, The random initial magnetization distribution and the 

magnetization distribution after four iterations. The red regions show the excitation and 

detection regions. c, Evolution of objective function O as a function of the iteration 

number. The DBS algorithm has shown a particularly high efficiency in the case of spin 

waves and all the designs reported further required below 5 iterations only.    

micromagnetic simulations can be found in Methods. The objective function, which is 

to be maximized by the DBS algorithm, is a crucial control knob in the design and 

varies depending on the different optimization goals. For the magnonic demultiplexer, 

we define the objective function as: 

 
 
 
 
(1) 

where 
 is the spin-wave intensity of frequency fi at the j-th output waveguide 

(i,j = 1,2). The values of each bracket are evaluated individually and only positive 

values are accepted. The aim of this objective function is to maximize the transmission 

of the spin wave of frequency f1 (f2) to the output waveguide 1 (2) and simultaneously, 

to minimize the crosstalk between them, in short, i.e., to realize the function of the 

demultiplexer.  

1
1
1
2
2
2
2
1
,
,
,
,
(
)(
)
f o
f o
f
o
f
o
O
I
I
I
I
=
-
-

i ,
I f oj


 

 
6

Second, a random indices combination (m,n) is produced. If the magnetization of the 

initial element M0(m,n) is zero, i.e., the material has been removed, the magnetization 

of this element is toggled to one, i.e., filled with YIG, or vice versa as indicated in the 

flow chart of Fig. 2a. The updated magnetization distribution is loaded into Mumax3 

again to calculate a new objective value denoted as Om,n. If this new one is better than 

the previous one, i.e., Om,n > O, then the change of the magnetization of the element is 

accepted, and then the value of O is replaced by the new one Om,n for the next 

evaluation. Otherwise, the change of the magnetization is undone. This procedure is 

repeated until all the elements have been evaluated, and then the magnetization 

distribution after this first iteration is marked as M1(m,n) and will be used as an initial 

state for the second round. The whole optimization process finishes when the objective 

value exhibits no further improvement after one iteration or the improvement is smaller 

than a threshold (<1% for our case). The evolution of the objective function O is 

plotted in Fig. 2c as a function of the iteration number, which converges after three 

iterations. The fast speed of convergence is due to the randomized selection order of 

elements rather than the sequential selection order of elements in the traditional DBS 

algorithm [45]. For our case, the 100 elements in the design region would provide 2100 

element combinations and it is obviously not possible to evaluate all the possibilities. 

One can expect that there should be a number of possible element combinations which 

show similar performances comparing with the global maximum. However, the DBS 

algorithm is sensitive to the initial state and also to the selection order of the elements 

and tends to suffer from premature convergence in local maxima. Therefore, we repeat 

the same optimization procedure several times with random initial conditions and 

chose the best design with the largest objective function as shown in Fig. 2b (bottom 

panel). Therefore, although the potential of the inverse-design magnonics is shown 

already here, only the further development of the powerful optimization algorithms 

(e.g., with the usage of deep machine learning approaches) will allow for the 

realization of the full inverse-design magnonics potential [46]. 

Demonstrator 1: Magnonic frequency demultiplexer and multiplexer 

Figure 3a shows the color maps of the normalized spin-wave amplitude in the designed 

device for different input frequencies. As expected, the spin wave of the frequency 

f1 = 2.6 GHz is practically entirely guided into the first output waveguide, whereas the  


 

 
7

 

Figure 3. Working principle of inverse-designed magnonic demultiplexer and 

multiplexer. a, Demultiplexer: The normalized spin-wave amplitude map. The guiding 

of the waves of different frequency towards different outputs is clearly visible. b, The 

simulated transmission of spin waves towards different output waveguides as a function 

of frequency simulated for the same optimized structure. A broad 3 dB bandwidth of the 

device around 120 MHz is found. c-d, Multiplexer: The same dependencies for the 

magnonic multiplexer. Number of iterations is 3. 

signal of the frequency f2 = 2.8 GHz is almost fully guided into the second output 

waveguide. The crosstalk between the two frequencies is low (<3%). The functionality 

of the demultiplexer is mainly realized by the multi-path interference in the design 

region, i.e., the spin waves of frequency f1 constructively interfere at output 1 and 

destructively interfere at output 2 and the opposite situation happens for frequency f2 

as shown in Fig. 3a (see Animation 1).  

In order to analyze the frequency bandwidth of the designed device, the same structure 

is simulated by sweeping the frequencies from 2.5 GHz to 3 GHz. The transmission 

spectra at different output waveguides are shown in Fig. 3b. The transmission values 

are obtained by the normalizing of spin-wave intensity at the outputs with the intensity 

in a straight reference waveguide of the same length. In this way, the influence of the 


 

 
8

spin-wave damping is excluded that allows us to study the insertion losses of the 

device. The transmission of frequencies f1 and f2 are around 96 % and 80 %, which 

correspond to the low insertion losses of 4 % and 20 %. These insertion losses are 

mainly caused by the reflections in the design region and at the input and output 

regions. As seen in Figs. 3b, the device exhibits a broad 3 dB bandwidth of around 

120 MHz for both center frequencies, which implies that the design is robust with 

respect to the change in magnetic field or temperature shifting spin-wave dispersions. 

It is noted that this multiplexer is optimized for the operations with the two frequencies 

of 2.6 GHz and 2.8 GHz only. The bandwidths can be further improved by using 

multifrequency optimization, in which several frequencies with equal spacing around 

each center frequency are chosen in the optimization procedure [27].  

If the system is perfectly reciprocal, one can obtain the multiplexer just by reversing 

the spin-wave flow direction. However, as discussed below, a weak nonreciprocity 

exists in our system and the multiplexer based on the design shown in Fig. 3a is not 

optimal (see Supplementary information). So, we use the same algorithm design a 

dedicated multiplexer. It provides the inverse functionality of demultiplexer, i.e., 

combines two inputs signals into one output waveguide which is clearly shown in the 

Fig. 3c 
(see 
Animation 2). 
The 
objective 
function 
is 
defined 
as: 

 ,where 
 and 
 are the spin-wave 

intensity of frequency fi at the output waveguide and at the j-th input waveguide 

(i,j = 1,2). This device also shows a high transmission of around 80 % at f1 and 81 % 

at f2 and a broad 3 dB bandwidth of around 120 MHz as shown in Fig. 3d. The 

influences of the simulation cell size, temperature, and the possible influence of 

inaccuracies in the nano-structuring process are shown in Supplementary Materials. 

Finally, the functionality of the miniaturized demultiplexer of the size of the design 

region of 100×100 nm2 (10×10 nm2 element size) is presented in Supplementary 

Materials. The fundamental limitation of the element size coincides with the 

fundamental limitation of the spin-wave wavelength and is given by a lattice constant 

of the used magnetic material [3,47]. 

Demonstrator 2: Nonlinear magnonic switch 

Nonlinear phenomena are required for data processing and pronounced nonlinear spin-

wave properties are one of the significant added values offered by magnonics [10- 

1
1
2
2
2
1
,
,
,
,
(
)(
)
f out
f input
f
out
f
input
O
I
I
I
I
=
-
-
,
I if out
i ,
I f inputj


 

 
9

 

Figure 4. Inverse-design nonlinear magnonic switch. a-c, The normalized spin-wave 

amplitude distribution for excitation fields (a) b = 0.5 mT, (b) b = 1.2mT and (c) 

b = 2.0 mT. One can clearly see that the low-power spin wave is guided into the output 1 

and the high-power spin wave (the power is increased by a factor of 16 times) is guided 

to the output 2. The design region was increased twice to reach high efficiency of the 

nonlinear switch. d, The spin-wave transmission to the different output waveguides and 

the summarized total transmission (dashed blue line) as a function of the excitation 

field b. The decrease in the total transmitted power suggests that a part of spin-wave 

energy is stored in the form of standing waves in the structure. e, The maximal precession 

angle in the reference straight waveguide (black dots line) and design region (red dots 

line) as a function of the excitation field b. f, The absolute spin-wave output power at the 

second output waveguide as a function of the input power (the square of excitation field 

b2) and the linear fit to the first four points (red dashed line). The nonlinear properties are 

getting pronounced for the microwave fields > 0.5 mT. Number of iterations is 3. 

13,23]. Here, we demonstrate the use of the inverse-design approach for the 

development of a nonlinear magnonic switch, in which a low-power spin wave is 

guided into one output waveguide while the high-power wave is guided into another 

one. Similar functionality was shown recently experimentally in the nanoscale 

directional coupler and was used for the development of a magnonic half-adder via the 

realization of AND and XOR logic gates [23]. Moreover, it allows for the realization 

of rf devices like power limiters or signal-to-noise enhancers, as well as, together with 

the nonlinear ring resonator [19], can be a key building block for future neuromorphic 

networks. To design the nonlinear switch, we keep the spin-wave frequency fixed at 

2.6 GHz and run two parallel simulations with two values of excitation fields 


 

 
10

(b1 = 0.5 mT and b2 = 2 mT) to operate with spin waves of different powers. To 

achieve the nonlinear functionality of high efficiency, the design region was increased 

twice to 1×2 µm2 as it is shown in Fig. 4a. The objective function is defined as: 

, where 
 and 
 represent the spin-wave 

intensity for low and high input power at the i-th output waveguide (i = 1,2), 

respectively. Figure 4a-c clearly shows the switching between two outputs: (a) the low-

power spin wave (@b = 0.5 mT) is guided into the first output waveguide, (b) the 

medium-power spin wave (@b = 1.2 mT) is guided into both output waveguides, (c) 

while the high-power wave (@ b = 2 mT) changes its path and is guided into the 

second waveguide (see Animation 3). The nonlinear switching can be explained by the 

power-dependent change in the effective saturation magnetization that shifts the 

dispersion curve [10,11,23]. For the case of FVSWs, the dispersion curve is shifted up 

with the increase in the magnetization precession angle [11] (see the Supplementary 

Information) what, consequently, results in the increase of the spin-wave wavelength 

at a fixed frequency. The change in the wavelength changes the interference pattern in 

the design region (see Fig. 4a-c and Animation 3) and, finally, switches the output 

channel.  

Further, we investigate the continuous evolution of the functionality of the device in 

the range of fields b from 0.1 mT to 2 mT. The spin-wave transmission towards the 

different outputs (red and black dots lines) and the total summarized transmitted spin-

wave power (blue dashed line) are shown in Fig. 4d as a function of the excitation 

field. The total transmission is around 75 % at b = 0.1 mT, and decreases down to 64 % 

with the increase in the excitation field up to 1.2 mT. This indicates that either the total 

parasitic reflection is increased or the energy is temporary stored in the designed region 

in the form of standing waves [12,19]. Figure 4e shows the maximal precession angle 

in a straight reference waveguide (black dots line) and in the design region (red dots 

line) as a function of the excitation field. The increased precession angle in the design 

region clearly indicates the resonator-like behavior. A further increase in the excitation 

field up to 2 mT results in the increase of the total transmission up to 88 %. The 

transmission increase can be explained by the change in the interference pattern that 

“releases” the stored energy – see the decreased spin-wave intensity inside the design 

region in Fig. 4c with respect to Fig .4a. The red and black dotted lines in Fig. 4f, 

clearly show the nonlinear switch functionality of the prototype device: The 

1
2
2
1
,
,
,
,
(
)(
)
low o
low o
high o
high o
O
I
I
I
I
=
-
-
, i
Ilow o
, i
Ihigh o


 

 
11

transmission at the second output waveguide is almost constant and stays below 3.3 % 

for the excitation fields smaller than b = 0.5 mT (linear regime) but gradually increases 

up to 86 % at the field of 2 mT due to the nonlinear shift. High isolation of around 26 

times (~14 dB) between the two outputs is observed. Figure 4d shows the power of 

output 2 as a function of input spin-wave power (b2) and the increase in the input power 

by a factor of 16 results in the output power increase by a factor of around 400 what 

can be used for signal-to-noise enhancement. The linear fit in the figure (red dashed 

line) also clearly shows that this nonreality starts to play a pronounced role when the 

external field exceeds the value of 0.5 mT (b2=0.25).  

Demonstrator 3: Nonreciprocal magnonic circulator 

The realization of a nonreciprocal device, such as isolators and circulators, is of 

fundamental importance in electronic, photonic and magnonic systems. In the field of 

magnonics, this effect is usually achieved by the usage of ferromagnetic dipolar-

coupled bilayer systems [21,22], interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction [31,48] 

or complex topological structures [20]. However, these approaches are hard to be 

applied in real devices due to the comparably large damping in these systems. Here, 

we demonstrate the potential of inverse-design magnonics by a three-port magnonic 

circulator and the optimization algorithm “has found on its own” another mechanism 

to achieve nonreciprocal spin-wave properties. The mechanism is also based on the 

complex dynamic demagnetization tensors but, as opposite to the bilayers systems [21] 

or 3D structures [22], is achieved by the use of a nonintuitive 2D planar matrix made 

of the same material with low damping.  

Similar to the previous optimization procedure, the spin wave frequency is fixed at 

2.6 GHz and three parallel simulations are performed with the excitation of spin waves 

in different input waveguides. In order to realize the functionality of the magnonic 

circulator, 
the 
objective 
function 
of 
the 
optimization 
is 
defined 
as: 

, where 
 represents the spin-wave 

intensity from the input i to the port j (i,j = 1,2,3). Figure 5a-c show the operation 

principle of the optimized magnonic circulator after 5 iterations: A spin-wave signal  

1
2
1
3
2
3
2
1
3
1
3
2
,
,
,
,
,
,
(
)(
)(
)
I P
I P
I
P
I
P
I
P
I
P
O
I
I
I
I
I
I
=
-
-
-
i ,
II Pj


 

 
12

 

Figure 5. Nonreciprocal magnonic circulator. a, The normalized spin-wave amplitude 

distribution for different inputs at the same frequency of 2.6 GHz. Spin waves are excited 

at the three different ports and are guided to one of the other ports according to the rule: 

1®2®3®1. b, The transmissions of spin waves between different inputs (open 

direction) as a function of the frequency simulated for the same optimized device. A broad 

3 dB bandwidth of around 100 MHz and a transmission for all the three cases close to 

70 % is observed (the crosstalk is smaller than 12 %). The number of iterations is 5. 

from port 1 is transmitted to port 2, the one from port 2 is transmitted to port 3, and 

finally, the third spin-wave signal from port 3 is transmitted to port 1 (see 

Animation 4). The same structure is used for additional simulations in the frequency 

range from 2.5 GHz to 2.7 GHz and the spectra for all three (open direction) cases are 

shown in Fig. 5b. The spectra show a broad 3 dB bandwidth of around 100 MHz and 

the transmission for all the three cases is close to 70 % at 2.6 GHz while the crosstalk 

is smaller than 12 % (i.e., the isolation is larger than 7.7 dB). These characteristics can 

be further improved by the use a larger matrix of elements or a wider parameters space 

as was discussed above. Moreover, the design itself (e.g., the positions of the inputs 

and outputs) can be optimized further since in this demonstrator we have used on 

purpose a design similar to the other devices.  

In order to understand the physical phenomena staying behind the nonreciprocal 

functionality, additional simulations are performed in a single waveguide of the same 

width as the input and output waveguides in Fig. 5. It is noted that the FVMSWs are 

well known to be isotropic and reciprocal in an unstructured film [49]. Figure 6a shows 

the normalized amplitude of a spin wave excited at the center of the waveguide (waves 

propagating to the opposite directions marked as -k and +k). Figure 6b shows the spin- 

wave profiles across the width of the waveguide extracted from the regions marked 


 

 
13

 

Fig. 6. Physical phenomena behind the nonreciprocity of FVSWs. a, The normalized 

spin-wave amplitude in the single waveguide. Spin waves are excited in the middle of the 

waveguide and propagate into opposite directions. b, The spin-wave profiles along the 

width of the waveguide for the positive and negative wavenumbers extracted from the 

regions as marked with the dashed white lines. The weak localization of the waves closer 

to one of the waveguide edges depending on the propagation directions is visible. c and 

d, The normalized spin-wave amplitude in the same circulators with (c) inverted external 

field direction (the functionality 3®2®1®3 is achieved) and (d) with the original field 

direction like in Fig. 5a but with the flipped design structure along y-axis (the 

functionality 1®2®3®1 is achieved). The results show that nonreciprocal behavior is 

associated with the gyrotropic magnetization precession motion and breaking of time 

symmetry.  

with dashed white lines. A small shift around 6 nm is clearly observed in the profiles 

and indicates that the FVSWs in the nanoscale waveguide are nonreciprocal in a way 

typical for Damon-Eshbach geometry, in which the external field is applied in-plane 

transversally to the waveguide [15,49,50]. 


 

 
14

This nonreciprocity is caused by the off-diagonal element of the dipole-dipole 

interaction, which breaks time-reversal symmetry [49,50]. Our case can be considered 

as a 90-degree rotated Demon-Eshbach geometry and the spin waves are localized at 

one of the waveguide edges (depending on the direction of propagation) rather than on 

the surfaces. It is noted that the nonreciprocity observed here is much weaker than in 

the classical case of Demon-Eshbach geometry in a thick film since also the exchange 

interaction defines the properties of spin waves at the nanoscale in addition to the 

dipolar contribution [30,50]. To double check the statement on the nonreciprocity, the 

same simulations are performed with the reversed external field direction Bext = -

200 mT – see Fig. 6c. As expected, the circulation of the magnonic circulator is 

inverted from 1®2®3®1 (Fig. 5a) to 3®2®1®3 (Fig. 6c) due to the reverse of the 

magnetization precession from counterclockwise to clockwise (top view). Furthermore, 

additional simulations are performed with the design region (matrix of elements) to be 

flipped along the y-axis as shown in Fig. 6d. The obtained result is similar to the 

original one shown in Fig. 5a, which indicates that the nonreciprocity mainly depends 

on the direction of the external field, i.e., the direction of the magnetization precession. 

Additional simulations with increased damping and two cells along the thickness of 

the structure are shown in the Supplementary Information to exclude other possible 

mechanisms behind the nonreciprocity. Finally, we would like to emphasize that the 

functionality of the magnonic circulator is realized by the accumulation of the rather 

weak intrinsic nonreciprocity of FVSWs in a nanoscale structure. This suggests that 

the inverse-design approach can be also used for the finding and exploration of the up-

to-know overlooked potential capacity of physical phenomena for applications.  

Conclusion 

We have developed an inverse-design method for magnonics and demonstrated its 

capabilities and potential by designing various linear, nonlinear and nonreciprocal 

magnonic devices. The simulated (de-)multiplexer, nonlinear switch and circulator 

have similar architectures and their functionalities were achieved automatically by the 

feed-back DBS optimization algorithm. The proposed devices have compact footprints 

(down to 200×100 nm2), exhibit high efficiency with the high potential for further 

improvement, and can be easily manufactured as well as scaled down to the CMOS 

scale. We expect that any other functionality of the device for microwave application, 

Boolean logic or unconventional computing can be achieved using the same approach 


 

 
15

because particularly inverse-design magnonics allows for the simultaneous operation 

with nonlinear and nonreciprocal waves. Moreover, the inverse-design algorithm 

attracted our attention to the week nonreciprocity of Forward Volume Spin Waves in 

the nanostructures and accumulated it for the realization of the magnonic circulator. 

We sincerely believe that inverse-design magnonics provides a new significant 

momentum to the development of the applied solid-state physics and technology.  

Methods 

Micromagnetic simulations 

The micromagnetic simulations were performed by the GPU-accelerated simulation 

package Mumax3 to calculate the space- and time-dependent magnetization dynamics 

in the investigated structures [44]. The parameters of a nanometer thick YIG film were 

used [33]: saturation magnetization Ms = 1.4×105 A/m, exchange constant 

A = 3.5 pJ/m, and Gilbert damping a = 2×10-4. In our simulations, the Gilbert damping 

at the end of the device was set to exponentially increase to 0.5 to avoid spin-wave 

reflection. The mesh was set to 20×20 nm2. A smaller mesh size (10×10 nm2) was also 

checked in Supplementary Information and did not show a significant difference. An 

external field Bext = 200 mT is applied along the out-of-plane axis (z-axis as shown in 

Fig. 1) which is sufficient to saturate the structure along this direction. To excite a 

propagating spin wave, we applied a sinusoidal magnetic field by = bsin(2pft) at the 

input waveguide over an area of 300 nm in length, with a varying microwave 

frequency of f. If it is not stated otherwise in the paper, the amplitude of the excitation 

field b is 0.1 mT. The My(x,y,t) of each cell was collected over a period of 50 ns and 

recorded in 50 ps intervals during the optimization procedure. This time is increased 

to 100 ns for the simulations of frequency (power) sweeping which is long enough to 

reach a stable dynamic equilibrium. The fluctuations my(x,y,t) were calculated for all 

cells via my(x,y,t) = My(x,y,t) – My(x,y,0), where My(x,y,0) corresponds to the ground 

state. The spin-wave intensities were calculated performing a fast Fourier 

transformation for a dynamic equilibrium range. If it is not mentioned, all simulations 

were performed without taking temperature into account. The influence of temperature 

is also investigated in the Supplementary Information. The whole size of the simulated 

structure in our optimization procedure was 10240×1280 nm2 including 512×64 cells. 

The time for one single simulation is around 45 s with two gaming graphic cards 

(TITAN xp GPUs). One iteration (including 100 simulations for the inverse-design of 


 

 
16

the magnonic (de-)multiplexer and circulator) took roughly 1.3 h, in total, it took about 

4~7 h to optimize one device. The total optimization time depends on the mesh size, 

the whole structure size, design region size and the convergence speed.  

References 

1. Kruglyak, V. V., Demokritov, S. O. & Grundler, D. Magnonics. J. Phys. D Appl. 

Phys. 43, 264001 (2010). 

2. Khitun, A. Bao, M. & Wang, K. L. Magnonic logic circuits. J. Phys, D Appl. Phys. 

43, 264005 (2010).  

3. Chumak, A.V., Vasyuchka, V. I., Serga, A. A. & Hillebrands, B. Magnon 

spintronics. Nat. Phys. 11, 453-461 (2015). 

4. Dieny, B. et al. Opportunities and challenges for spintronics in the microelectronic 

industry (Topical Review). Nat. Electron. 3, 446-459 (2020).  

5. Collet, M. et al. Spin-wave propagation in ultra-thin YIG based waveguides. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 110, 092408 (2017).  

6. Heinz, B. et al. Propagation of spin-wave packets in individual nanosized Yttrium 

Iron Garnet magnonic conduits. Nano Lett. 20, 4220 (2020). 

7. Liu, C. et al. Long-distance propagation of short-wavelength spin waves. Nat. 

Commun. 9, 738 (2018).  

8. Che, P., Baumgaertl, K., Kúkol’ová, A., Dubs, C. & Grundler, D. Efficient 

wavelength conversion of exchange magnons below 100 nm by magnetic coplanar 

waveguides. Nat. Commun. 11, 1445 (2020). 

9. Wintz, S. et al. Magnetic vortex cores as tunable spin-wave emitters. Nat. Nano., 

11, 948-953 (2016).  

10. Verba, R., Carpentieri, M., Finocchio, G., Tiberkevich, V. & Slavin, A. 

Amplification and stabilization of large-amplitude propagating spin waves by 

parametric pumping. Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 042402 (2018).  

11. Krivosik P. & Patton, C. E. Hamiltonian formulation of nonlinear spin-wave 

dynamics: Theory and applications. Phys. Rev. B 82, 184428 (2010).  

12. Chumak, A. V., Serga, A. A. & Hillebrands, B. Magnon transistor for all-magnon 

data processing. Nat. Commun. 5, 4700 (2014).  

13. Mahmoud, A. et al. An introduction to spin wave computing (Tutorial Article), J. 

Appl. Phys. 128, 161101 (2020) 


 

 
17

14. Fischer, T. et al. Experimental prototype of a spin-wave majority gate. Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 110, 152401 (2017).  

15. Jamali, M., Kwon, J. H., Seo, S.-M., Lee, K.-J. & Yang, H. Spin wave 

nonreciprocity for logic device applications. Sci. Rep. 3, 3160 (2013).  

16. Heussner, F. et al. Experimental realization of a passive GHz frequency‐division 

demultiplexer for magnonic logic networks. Phys. Status Solidi RRL 14, 1900695 

(2020). 

17. Vogt, K, et al. Realization of a spin-wave multiplexer. Nat. Commun. 5, 3727 

(2014). 

18. Brächer, T. & Pirro, P. An analog magnon adder for all-magnonic neurons, J. Appl. 

Phys. 124, 152119 (2018). 

19. Wang, Q. et al. A nonlinear magnonic nano-ring resonator. arXiv:2007.09205 

(2020) (accepted by npj Computational Materials). 

20. Lan, J., Yu, W., Wu, R. & Xiao, J. Spin-wave diode. Phys. Rev. X 5, 041049 

(2015).  

21. M. Grassi et al. Slow-wave-based nanomagnonic diode. Phys. Rev. Appl. 14, 

024047 (2020). 

22. Szulc, K et al. Spin-wave diode and circulator based on unidirectional coupling. 

Phys. Rev. Appl. 14, 034063 (2020).  

23. Wang Q. et al. A magnonic directional coupler for integrated magnonic half-

adders. Nat. Electron. (2020). DOI: 10.1038/s41928-020-00485-6 

24. Ashenden, P. J. The Designer’s Guide to VHDL 3rd edition (Morgan Kaufmann, 

2008).  

25. Molesky, S. et al. Inverse design in nanophotonics. Nat. Photon, 12, 659-670 

(2018). 

26. Su, L. et al. Nanophotonic inverse design with SPINS: Software architecture and 

practical considerations, Appl. Phys. Rev. 7, 011407 (2020). 

27. Piggott, A. Y. et al. Inverse design and demonstration of a compact and broadband 

on-chip wavelength demultiplexer. Nat. Photon. 9, 374-377 (2015). 

28. Shen, B., Wang, P., Polson, R. & Menon, R. An integrated-nanophotonics 

polarization beamsplitter with 2.4 × 2.4 μm2 footprint. Nat. Photon. 9, 378-382 

(2015). 


 

 
18

29. Hughes, W. T., Minkov, M., Williamson, I. A. D. & Fan, S. Adjoint method and 

inverse design for nonlinear nanophotonic devices. ACS Photonics 5, 4781-4787 

(2018). 

30. Wang, Q. et al. Spin pinning and spin-wave dispersion in nanoscopic 

ferromagnetic waveguides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 247202 (2019). 

31. Verba, R., Tiberkevich, V. & Slavin, A. Hamiltonian formalism for nonlinear spin 

wave dynamics under antisymmetric interactions: Application to Dzyaloshinkii-

Moriya interaction. Phys. Rev. B 99, 174431 (2019). 

32. Papp, Á., Porod, W. & Csaba, G. Nanoscale neural network using non-linear spin-

wave interference. arXiv (2020). 

33. Dubs, C. et al. Low damping and microstructural perfection of sub-40nm-thin 

yttrium iron garnet films grown by liquid phase epitaxy. Phys. Rev. Materials 4, 

024426 (2020). 

34. Schneider, M. et al. Bose–Einstein condensation of quasiparticles by rapid cooling. 

Nat. Nano. 15, 457 (2020). 

35. Schlitz, R. et al. Focused ion beam modification of non-local magnon-based 

transport in yttrium iron garnet/platinum heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett. 114, 

252401 (2019). 

36. Pirro, P. et al. Spin-wave excitation and propagation in microstructured 

waveguides of yttrium iron garnet/Pt bilayers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 012402 

(2014). 

37. Hahn, C. et al. Measurement of the intrinsic damping constant in individual 

nanodisks of Y3Fe5O12 and Y3Fe5O12|Pt. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 152410 (2014). 

38. Fernández-Pacheco, A. et al. Writing 3D nanomagnets using focused electron 

beams. Materials 13, 3774 (2020).  

39. Gubbiotti, G. Three-dimensional magnonics: layered, micro- and nanostructures. 

Jenny Stanford Publishing; (2019). 

40. Dobrovolskiy, O. V., et al. Spin-wave phase inverter upon a single nanodefect. 

ACS Appl. Mater. Interface 11, 17654-17662 (2019). 

41. Burn, D. M., Hase, T. P. A. & Atkinson, D. Focused-ion-beam induced interfacial 

intermixing of magnetic bilayers for nanoscale control of magnetic properties. J. 

Phys. Condens. Matter 26, 236002 (2014). 

42. Bunyaev, S. A., et al. Engineered magnetization and exchange stiffness in direct-

write Co-Fe nanoelements, arXiv:2012.01481 (2020). 


 

 
19

43. Liu, J., Yu, C. & Tsang, P. Enhanced direct binary search algorithm for binary 

computer-generated Fresnel holograms. Appl. Opt. 58, 3735-3741 (2019). 

44. Vansteenkiste, A. et al. The design and verification of MuMax3. AIP Adv. 4, 

107133 (2014).  

45. Kang, J.-H., Leportier, T., Kim, M. & Park, M.-C. Non-iterative direct binary 

search algorithm for fast generation of binary holograms. Opt. Laser Eng. 122, 

312-318 (2019).  

46. Gospodaric, J. et al. 3D-printed phase waveplates for THz beam shaping. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 112, 221104 (2018). 

47. Hutchings, H. T. & Samuelsen, E. J. Measurement of spin-wave dispersion in NiO 

by inelastic neutron scattering and its relation to magnetic properties. Phys. Rev. B 

6, 3447 (1972). 

48. Lucassen, J. et al. Extraction of Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction from 

propagation spin waves. Phys. Rev. B 101, 064432 (2020). 

49. Stancil, D. D. & Prabhakar, A. Spin waves: theory and applications. Springer 

(2009). 

50. Mohseni, M et al. Backscattering immunity of dipole-exchange magnetostatic 

surface spin waves. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 197201 (2019). 

Acknowledgements 

The authors thank Gyorgy Csaba, Markus Becherer, Claas Abert and Dieter Süss for 

the valuable discussions. The project is funded by the European Research Council 

(ERC) Starting Grant 678309 MagnonCircuits, the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) for 

support 
through 
Grant 
No. 
I 
4917-N 
(MagFunc) 
and 
the 
Deutsche 

Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) - TRR 173 - 

268565370 (“Spin + X”, Project B01), the Nachwuchsring of the TU Kaiserslautern. 

Author Contributions  

Q. W. conceived the idea and carried out the micromagnetic simulations. P. P. and 

A. V. C led this project. Q. W. wrote the manuscript with the help of all the coauthors. 

All authors contributed to the scientific discussion and commented on the manuscript. 

Competing Interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Q. W. 


 

 

Supplementary information 

Inverse-design magnonic devices 

Qi Wang1, Andrii V. Chumak1, Philipp Pirro2 

1 Faculty of Physics, University of Vienna, Boltzmanngasse 5, A-1090 Vienna, Austria 

2 Fachbereich Physik, Technische Universitaet Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany 

 

In the supplementary information, the ten times smaller magnonic demultiplexer is designed 

using the same algorithm and its functionality is discussed in Section 1. In Section 2, the 

situation of reversed spin-wave flow direction in the magnonic demultiplexer is discussed. The 

influence of simulation cell size (Section 3), possible over-etch during the fabrication process 

(Section 4), and temperature (Section 5) are discussed. In Section 6, the nonlinear shift of the 

dispersion curves in the nanoscale waveguide is shown. In the last section, the potential 

influences of the nonlinearity and possible artifacts in the ground state of the single-layer 

simulation on the nonreciprocity of the circulator are evaluated. All these additional 

simulations suggest that our device is robust and manufacturable.  

1. 
 Magnonic demultiplexer with exchange spin waves of ultrashort wavelength 

In the main text, we chose a large design region and elements as well as long wavelengths of 

spin waves due to the current nanofabrication limitations and the reduced excitation efficiency 

for short wavelengths of spin waves. In order to check the capability of the presented method 

for small size and short wavelength, we scale down the structure size by 10 times. Figure S1a 

shows the sketch of the scaled magnonic demultiplexer, which similarly has one input and two 

output waveguides with width down to 30 nm and a 100×100 nm2 design region. This design 

region has been divided into 100 elements, each with a size of 10×10 nm2. The thickness of the 

YIG is reduced to 20 nm and the cell size of simulations is decreased to 5 nm. The same 

external field 200 mT is applied along the out-of-plane direction. The functionality of the 

scaled demultiplexer is shown in Fig. S1b, in which the spin wave of the frequency f1 = 16 GHz 

(wavelength l = 70 nm) is guided into the first output, whereas the signal of frequency 

f2 = 18 GHz (l = 60 nm) is transmitted to the second output. The crosstalk between the two 

outputs is less than 5 %. These additional simulations prove that the same inverse design 

method could be used for smaller structures and shorter wavelengths. The whole size of the  


 

 

 

Fig. S1 a, The sketch of the scaled magnonic demultiplexer consists of 30 nm wide input and 

output waveguides, and a 100×100 nm2 design region, which has been divided into 100 

elements each with a size of 10×10 nm2. The thickness of the YIG is 20 nm. b, The 

normalized spin-wave amplitude for frequencies of 16 GHz and 18 GHz.  

scaled demultiplexer is around 200×100 nm2, which shows another advantage of spin wave, i.e., 

its short wavelength. 

2. 
Reversed spin-wave flow direction in the magnonic demultiplexer 

In the main text, we show that the demultiplexer could efficiently separate the spin waves 

depending on their frequencies. If the system is perfect reciprocal, one could obtain the 

multiplexer, which combines different frequencies of spin waves from two inputs into one 

output waveguide, just by reversing the spin-wave flow direction. Figure S2 shows the spin- 

 

 

Fig. S2 The simulated spin-wave amplitude of the magnonic demultiplexer with reversed 

direction of spin-wave flow. 


 

 

wave amplitude of the demultiplexer with reversed directions of spin-wave flow. For the spin-

wave frequency of 2.6 GHz, the device is reciprocal, and all the energy of the spin wave from 

output 1 is guided into the input and the interference pattern in the design region is similar to 

Fig. 3a in the main text. However, for the case of 2.8 GHz, a part of the spin wave from output 2 

is guided to output 1 and the interference pattern in the design region is also slightly different 

comparing Fig. 3a in the main text. This can be explained by the weak nonreciprocity of 

Forward Volume Spin Waves in a nanoscale waveguide, which has been discussed in the main 

text. 

3. 
Influence of simulation cell size 

Choosing an appropriate resolution is essential for inverse design methods since this can 

shorten the optimization time without sacrificing precision. In the main text, the simulation cell 

size was set as 20 nm, which is slightly larger than the exchange length of YIG (~16 nm), but 

it is much shorter than the minimum studied wavelength (1 µm). Here, we perform additional 

simulations with smaller cell sizes of 10 nm and studied the influence on the characteristics of 

the magnonic demultiplexer. The simulated spin-wave amplitude distribution with 10 nm cell 

size is shown in Fig. S3a, which exhibits minor changes compared to the results for a 20 nm 

cell size shown in Fig. 3a in the main text. Figure S3b summarized the transmission spectra 

with different cell sizes. The dashed lines show the results of 10 nm cell size, which slightly 

shift to higher frequencies. The negligible difference between the two transmissions reveals 

that 20 nm cell size meets our needs.  

 

Fig. S3 a, The simulated spin-wave amplitude distribution of different spin-wave frequencies 

with 10 nm cell size. b, The transmission as a function of frequency for different cell sizes 

(dashed lines: 10 nm cell size, solid lines: 20 nm cell size). 

 


 

 

4. 
Fabrication robustness of the magnonic demultiplexer  

In this section, we would like to discuss the influence of a potential over-etch, i.e., an 

unintended increase of the size of the holes which might result from inaccuracies in the  

 

Fig. S4 a, The simulated spin-wave amplitude distribution of different spin-wave frequencies 

with 10 nm over-etched holes. b, The transmission as a function of the frequency for the 

optimized design (solid lines) and the 10 nm over-etch structure (dashed lines).  

fabrication process, on the characteristics of the magnonic demultiplexer. Additional 

simulations were performed with 10 nm over-etched holes on both sizes. The size of the holes 

is thus 120×120 nm2 with round corners as shown in Fig. S4a. The area is 40 % larger than the 

design size (100×100 nm2). Figure S4b summarized the transmission spectra for different sizes 

of holes. Only a small difference in the operational characteristics of the demultiplexer was 

found: The transmission of both frequencies is greater than 60 % and the crosstalk is smaller 

than 13 % despite up to 40 % area change. Further improvement can be achieved if the details 

of the fabrication process are included into the optimization algorithm (e.g., direct optimization 

including the over-etching etc.). 

5. 
Temperature robustness of the magnonic demultiplexer 

In the main text, all the simulations were performed without taking into account temperature. 

Here, additional simulations were performed at an effective temperature of 300 K using the 

embedded package in Mumax3 to explore the influence of temperature on the characteristics of 

the magnonic demultiplexer. Figure S5a and b show that the difference between these two 

temperatures is neglectable: The transmission and crosstalk of frequency 2.6 GHz are almost  

 


 

 

 

Fig. S5 a, The simulated spin-wave amplitude distribution of different spin-wave frequencies 

at an effective temperature of 300 K. b, The transmission as a function of frequency for the 

temperature of 0 K (solid lines) and 300 K (dashed lines).  

identical. The transmission of frequency 2.8 GHz slightly decreases from 80 % to 72 % 

and the crosstalk is nearly the same. 

6. 
Nonlinear dispersion shift 

In this section, we simulate the dispersion curves in a 300 nm wide straight waveguide with a 

fixed frequency of 2.6 GHz for different excitation fields. Figure S6 shows that the 

wavenumber of the spin wave is decreased from k = 3.3 rad/µm at b = 0.5 mT to 

k = 2.8 rad/µm at b = 2.0 mT due to the up-shift of the dispersion curve. This shift is the 

physical origin of the nonlinear switching shown in the main text. 

 

 

Fig. S6 Simulated spin-wave dispersion curves of fixed frequency of 2.6 GHz in a straight 

waveguide with (a) low excitation field b = 0.5 mT and (b) high excitation filed b = 2.0 mT. 

 


 

 

7. 
Influence of nonlinearity and ground state on nonreciprocity 

In the main text, the physics of the nonreciprocal magnonic circulator has been discussed, 

which is caused by the intrinsic nonreciprocity of the forward volume spin waves in the 

nanoscaled structure. Here, we evaluate other potential influences on the nonreciprocity, i.e., 

nonlinearity and possible artifacts in the ground state which might occur in the single-layer 

simulations. Additional simulations with five times higher damping (a = 1×10-3) are used to 

evaluate the influence of the nonlinearity on the nonreciprocity. Single-layer simulations are 

performed in the main text, in which only one layer along the thickness is taken into account, 

i.e., the profile of the spin wave along the thickness is uniform. This approximation is valid for 

the studied thickness of 100 nm, what has also been discussed in our previous paper [1].  

 

Fig. S7 The normalized spin-wave amplitude in magnonic circulator with (a) high damping 

(1×10-3) and (b) two layers simulation along thickness direction.  

In order to double-check the influence of the single-layer simulation on the 

nonreciprocity, additional simulations with two layers along the thickness are 

performed. Figure S7a and b show the results of the high damping and two layers 

simulations. No significant change is observed compared to Fig. 5a in the main text, 

which indicates that the influences of nonlinearity and single-layer simulation can be 

ignored. The high damping simulations suggest that the circulator can also be 

fabricated using high damping magnetic metals, which are more compatible with 

complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor technology. 

1. Wang, Q. et al. Spin pinning and spin-wave dispersion in nanoscopic ferromagnetic 

waveguides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 247202 (2019). 


