1 

 

Identifying the origin of the non-monotonic thickness dependence of spin-orbit torques and 

interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in a ferrimagnetic insulator heterostructure 

Shilei Ding 1,2,3, Lorenzo Baldrati 2, Andrew Ross 2,3, Zengyao Ren 2,3,4, Rui Wu 2,7, Sven Becker 2, Jinbo Yang 1,5,6, 

Gerhard Jakob 2,3, Arne Brataas7, Mathias Kläui 2,3,7* 

1State Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. 

2Institute of Physics, Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Staudingerweg 7, 55128 Mainz, Germany. 

3Graduate School of Excellence Materials Science in Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany. 

4School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, 

China. 

5Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing, 100871, P.R. China. 

6Beijing Key Laboratory for Magnetoelectric Materials and Devices, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. 

7Center for Quantum Spintronics, Department of Physics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NO-

7491 Trondheim, Norway. 

*Correspondence to [klaeui@uni-mainz.de] 

 

Abstract 

Electrical manipulation of magnetism via spin-orbit torques (SOTs) promises efficient 

spintronic devices. In systems comprising magnetic insulators and heavy metals, SOTs have started to 

be investigated only recently, especially in systems with interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction 

(iDMI). Here, we quantitatively study the SOT efficiency and iDMI in a series of gadolinium gallium 

garnet (GGG) / thulium iron garnet (TmIG) / platinum (Pt) heterostructures with varying TmIG and Pt 

thicknesses. We find that the non-monotonic SOT efficiency as a function of the magnetic layer 

thickness is not consistent with the 1/thickness dependence expected from a simple interfacial SOT 

mechanism. Moreover, considering the insulating nature of TmIG, our results cannot be explained by 

the SOT mechanism established for metallic magnets where the transverse charge spin current can 


2 

 

inject and dephase in the magnetic layers. Rather we can explain this non-monotonic behavior by a 

model based on the interfacial spin mixing conductance that is affected by the thickness-dependent 

exchange splitting energy by determining the phase difference of the reflected spin-up and spin-down 

electrons at the TmIG / Pt interface. By studying the Pt thickness dependence, we find that the effective 

DMI for GGG / TmIG / Pt does not depend on the Pt thickness, which indicates that the GGG / TmIG 

interface is the source of the iDMI in this system. Our work demonstrates that SOT and DMI can 

originate from two different interfaces, which enables independent optimization of DMI and SOT for 

advanced chiral spintronics with low damping magnetic insulators. 

 

Keywords: magnetic insulator; spin-orbit torque; Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction; spin mixing 

conductance 

 

Electrical manipulation of the magnetization in ferromagnet (FM) / heavy metal (HM) bilayers 

via spin-orbit torques (SOTs) has attracted great interest in the field of spintronics for its potential use 

in logic and memory applications [1-7]. SOTs [3] occur by a non-equilibrium spin current or spin 

density generated by the spin Hall effect (SHE) [1,4,5] or the inverse spin galvanic effect (ISGE) [6,7], 

and these spins then interact with the magnetization. So SOT efficiency depends on the exchange 

interaction between the spins of the spin current and local magnetic moments. The torque exerted on 

the magnetic moments can be decomposed into two components with different symmetries, namely 

the damping-like torque 𝝉𝑫𝑳 proportional to 𝒎 × (𝒎 × 𝝈) and the field-like torque 𝝉𝑭𝑳 proportional 

to 𝒎 × 𝝈, where 𝝈 is the polarization direction of the spin current and 𝒎 is the magnetization vector 

in the FM [3]. A spin current of polarization 𝝈  that is not parallel to 𝒎 (transverse spin current) can 

transfer the angular momentum to the magnetization and thereby exert torques. The role of the 

transverse spin currents in systems comprising ferromagnetic metals (FMM) has been widely studied, 


3 

 

for its importance in the spin-transfer torque switching of the magnetization of the free layer in metallic 

spin-valve devices [8,9], where the spins are carried by electrons. The injected spins interact with the 

magnetic moments and dephase in the FMM leading to the transfer of angular momentum mentioned 

above.  

The situation is different in ferrimagnetic insulators (FMI), where a spin-polarized charge 

current cannot flow. In FMI / HM systems, one can drive a charge current in the HM layer and generate 

a spin accumulation at the FMI / HM interface by the spin Hall effect [1]. A collinear spin current with 

polarization parallel (antiparallel) to the magnetization can create (annihilate) magnons in the FMI [10]. 

In the case of a transverse spin current, the electrons in the HM are unable to enter the insulator, 

however theoretically it is predicted that the exchange splitting energy and spin mixing conductance 

can influence the magnitude of the SOT generated at the FMI / HM interface [11]. To date, the behavior 

of a transverse spin current at the FMI / HM interface has not been fully understood, but it is of key 

importance, as it governs the SOT induced switching of any FMI. The second main ingredient for the 

magnetic switching, via domain wall motion induced by SOT, is the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction 

(DMI), which also results from spin-orbit coupling effects [12,13]. Often, a sizeable DMI is found in 

systems where SOT are observed, and the DMI stabilizes chiral spin structures such as skyrmions and 

chiral domain walls [14], which can then be efficiently manipulated by SOT [15,16]. Some models 

predict that SOT and DMI can be related [17], while experimentally in some metallic systems they are 

found not to share the same origin [18]. However, in multilayers with ferromagnetic insulators the 

situation is fundamentally different from metals: While in metals, a charge current can flow across 

both interfaces of a magnetic layer, in a system with an insulator and a conducting layer, the current 

can flow only at one interface. This allows one to confine the SOT generation at one interface, while 

the DMI can be generated at the other interface, and thus potentially both can be tuned independently. 

In particular, the magnetic insulator thulium iron garnet (Tm3Fe5O12;TmIG) was shown to host 

chiral spin structures that can be manipulated by SOT [19-26]. Moreover, spin Hall magnetoresistance 


4 

 

[19,21], efficient magnetization switching [19-21] and current-induced domain wall motion [21-26] 

have been reported in systems comprising this material. TmIG shows perpendicular magnetization 

anisotropy (PMA) in a large range of thicknesses from 1.7 nm to at least 15 nm, and, in PMA GGG / 

TmIG / Pt heterostructures, the robust anomalous Hall effect (AHE) makes it a good candidate to 

explore the role of SOT at the FMI / HM interface. In addition, it was reported that the DMI in TmIG 

is of interfacial origin (iDMI) [21, 23-26], with some reporting that the iDMI originates from the TmIG 

/ HM (e.g Pt) interface [23,24], while others claim that the interface between TmIG and the substrate 

is responsible for the iDMI [21,25,26], so that the origin of the iDMI is currently being debated. It is 

thus important to understand the origin of the SOT and the DMI in a substrate / FMI / HM structure, 

where the SOT and DMI could originate from two different interfaces, as this potentially enables also 

independent optimization of the DMI and SOT in magnetic insulators.  

In this work, we perform a systematic thickness dependence study of the SOT efficiency and 

DMI in GGG / TmIG / HM heterostructures. We find that the SOT efficiency exhibits a non-monotonic 

dependence on the TmIG thickness (𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺), with a peak at 5.4 nm. We explain this finding using a 

model that combines the thickness-dependent magnetic properties of the TmIG in the low thickness 

region, which influence the spin mixing conductance via the spin splitting of the magnon modes, and 

the decay expected from an interfacial mechanism for thicker TmIG. Comparing SOT and DMI, we 

find that the DMI energy density is almost constant as a function of the Pt thickness (𝑡𝑃𝑡), which 

strongly suggests that the iDMI in this system is not originating from the TmIG / HM interface but is 

rather determined by the GGG / TmIG interface. Our results show that it is possible to independently 

optimize the interfacial SOT and DMI in TmIG (see schematic in Figure 1a), which is important in 

view of device applications. 

To obtain high-quality crystalline epitaxial samples, we have grown TmIG films with PMA on 

(111)-oriented gadolinium gallium garnet (Gd3Ga5O12, GGG) substrates by pulsed laser deposition. 


5 

 

The deposition conditions have been reported elsewhere [21], The Pt, W, and Cu layers have been 

deposited subsequently by sputtering in a chamber with a base vacuum pressure of 3 × 10-9 mbar, the 

sputtering Ar pressure is 0.013 mbar. The Pt thickness 𝑡𝑃𝑡 is varied in fine steps from 0.5 to 7 nm. In 

order to study the SOT and DMI, the thin film samples have been patterned and etched into 6 μm × 30 

μm Hall bars by photolithography and ion milling. All measurements shown below are carried out at 

room temperature (RT), and the effective thickness of TmIG is modified by subtracting the magnetic 

dead layer (details, see supplemental material S1 [27]). 

 

Figure 1. (a) The SOT and iDMI can originate from different interfaces in a GGG / TmIG / Pt 

heterostructure. (b) Horizontal shift of the out-of-plane hysteresis curves measured with an applied in-

plane field of 𝜇0𝐻𝑥 =10 mT, slight vertical offsets are introduced for clarity. The probe current density 


6 

 

is 2.2 × 1010 Am-2 with different polarities. The inset shows the Hall bar schematic. (c) The 𝜇0𝐻𝑥 

dependence of the effective SOT efficiency ξeff for GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Pt (7) (units in nanometer). 

 

First, we start by measuring the hysteresis loop of the Hall resistance 𝑅𝐻 as a function of the 

out-of-plane magnetic field, in the presence of different applied in-plane field 𝜇0𝐻𝑥 and charge current 

density j. In a system with sizable DMI, Néel type domain walls are energetically favorable over the 

Bloch type domain walls [28]. The current-induced effective field 𝜇0Heff, generated by the damping-

like spin orbit torque, can drive the Néel domain wall similarly to the effect of an out-of-plane field in 

a direction related to the chirality of the domain wall [28], which will lead the horizontal shift of the 

hysteresis loops, similarly to the exchange bias field in PMA exchange bias systems [29]. Figure 1b 

shows the shifted hysteresis loops in the presence of a charge current of density +2.2 × 1010 Am-2 and 

-2.2 × 1010 Am-2 for a GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Pt (7) (units in nanometer) sample, where reversing the 

polarity of the probing current leads to a negative displacement of the out-of-plane hysteresis. We 

obtain a current-induced effective damping-like field (measured by the shift of the hysteresis) 𝜇0Heff = 

0.25 mT for the current density used. The SOT efficiency is defined as at the effective damping-like 

field, generated via the spin-orbit torque, per unit applied current density j, ξeff  = ∂(𝜇0Heff) /∂ jc, as 

described in Ref. [28]. The 𝜇0𝐻𝑥 dependence of the SOT efficiency is shown in Figure 1c.  The slope 

∂(𝜇0Heff) / ∂jc is linear for small 𝜇0𝐻𝑥 before saturating at larger fields, from which we can estimate 

the saturation SOT efficiency ξeff  = 1.0 ± 0.2 T / 1014 A m-2. We then use the dependence of the SOT 

efficiency on the in-plane magnetic field to estimate the value of the DMI in this system [28]. The 

effective DMI field can be estimated from the saturation in-plane field 𝜇0𝐻𝑥−𝑠𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 𝜇0𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼 = 9 

± 1 mT for GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Pt (7). We compute the effective DMI energy density |𝐷| =

𝑀𝑠∆𝜇0|𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼| = 22.7 ± 4.0 μJ/m2 (details, see supplemental material S2 [30]). 


7 

 

 

Figure 2. (a) SOT efficiency for GGG / TmIG(𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺) / Pt (7) as a function of TmIG thickness 𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺. 

The inset shows the thickness dependence of saturation magnetization for TmIG. (b) The ratio 

𝜌𝑥𝑦

𝐴𝐻𝐸/𝜌𝑥𝑥

𝑃𝑡 increases with 𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺 which indicates the increase of the spin mixing conductance. 

 

We next consider the behavior of the SOT in a magnetic insulator, for which we perform a 

thickness dependent study of the SOT efficiency. For most of the studies based on metals, the SOT 

efficiency ξeff scales inversely proportional to the thickness of the magnetic material [8,31], as expected 

from an interface effect. However, we find here a non-monotonic trend for GGG / TmIG (𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺) / Pt 

(7) heterostructures with different TmIG thicknesses: ξeff increases up to around 5.4 nm and decreases 

with increasing TmIG thickness as shown in Figure 2a. To understand this behavior, we measured the 

evolution of 𝑀𝑠 and the relative amplitude of the AHE resistivity 𝜌𝑥𝑦

𝐴𝐻𝐸/𝜌𝑥𝑥

𝑃𝑡 as a function of the TmIG 

thickness in Figure 2b. To extract 𝜌𝑥𝑦

𝐴𝐻𝐸/𝜌𝑥𝑥

𝑃𝑡, we first quantify the amplitude 𝑅𝑥𝑦

𝐴𝐻𝐸 from the anomalous 

Hall hysteresis loop, from which we obtain the thickness dependence of the anomalous Hall resistivity 

𝜌𝑥𝑦

𝐴𝐻𝐸 = 𝑅𝑥𝑦

𝐴𝐻𝐸𝑡𝑃𝑡. By using the value 𝜌𝑥𝑥

𝑃𝑡 measured on the Hall device, we calculate the ratio 𝜌𝑥𝑦

𝐴𝐻𝐸/𝜌𝑥𝑥

𝑃𝑡 

as a function of the TmIG thickness, as shown in Figure 2b. The amplitude of the AHE in FMI / HM 

bilayers can depend on two mechanisms, one is the magnetic proximity effect (MPE) in the Pt and the 


8 

 

other one is the AHE induced by the spin current reflection / absorption related to the spin 

accumulation induced by the SHE [32]. It has been reported that at a FMI / Pt interface, the magnetic 

moment induced in the Pt from the magnetic insulator is less than 0.1𝜇𝐵 [33] and the spin-Hall induced 

AHE dominates over the AHE induced by the MPE at room temperature in YIG / Pt bilayer system 

[34]. Given the similarity between YIG and TmIG, it is reasonable to assume that in TmIG / Pt the 

SHE-induced AHE also dominates at room temperature, implying that the magnitude of 𝜌𝑥𝑦

𝐴𝐻𝐸/𝜌𝑥𝑥

𝑃𝑡 is 

a good indicator for the magnitude of the imaginary part of the spin mixing conductance [35]. 

According to this interpretation, the 𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺 dependence of 𝜌𝑥𝑦

𝐴𝐻𝐸/𝜌𝑥𝑥

𝑃𝑡 indicates that the spin mixing 

conductance increases with 𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺 for low TmIG thicknesses. Also note that in the Supplemental 

material Figure S3 we show that the effective spin Hall angle increases for low TmIG thickness and 

then plateaus, which should not be interpreted as resulting from a change in the intrinsic spin Hall 

angle of Pt, but rather as an increasing spin mixing conductance for increasing thickness. 

With these experimental observations, we then develop a model to explain our experimental 

results. It has been reported that the increase of ξeff is influenced by the 𝑀𝑠 of TmIG in the thinner 

TmIG region [20], where the authors of Ref. [20] claim that ξeff is proportional to 𝑀𝑠. We find that our 

thickness dependence of 𝑀𝑠 of TmIG shown in the inset of Figure 2a is consistent with this previous 

report. In Ref. [20] the dependence of ξeff on 𝑀𝑠 was obtained phenomenologically, by assuming the 

expression of the s-d exchange interaction. Here, we provide a model that can as well explain the 

results, where we focus on how the spin mixing conductance can determine the spin torque efficiency, 

noting that it is indirectly linked to the magnetization via the exchange splitting of the magnon modes. 

In fact, the spin mixing conductance depends on the thickness 𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺 through the phase shift of the 

reflected electrons acquired inside the magnetic insulator. This dependence is controlled by the 

exchange potentials for spin-up and spin-down electrons [11]. In a simple model, the dimensionless 

spin mixing conductance for a single conducting channel is 𝐺↑↓ = 1 − 𝑟↑𝑟↓∗, where 𝑟↑ and 𝑟↓ are the 


9 

 

reflection coefficients for scattered electrons, initially flowing from the normal metal towards the 

magnetic insulator. At a metal-insulator interface, the reflection probabilities are equal to one, but the 

reflection coefficients for spin-up and spin-down electrons have different phases, 𝑟↑ = 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (𝑖𝜑↑) and 

𝑟↓ = 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (𝑖𝜑↓) [36]. When an electron with momentum k enters the magnetic insulator of thickness t 

with decay lengths 2/𝑞↑  and 2/𝑞↓  for spin-up and spin-down electrons, respectively, the phase 

difference 
of 
the 
reflection 
coefficients 
is 
however
 𝜑↑ − 𝜑↓ = 𝐴𝑟𝑐𝑇𝑎𝑛 (

𝑇𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑞↑𝑡)𝑘

𝑞↑
) −

𝐴𝑟𝑐𝑇𝑎𝑛 (

𝑇𝑎𝑛ℎ(𝑞↓𝑡)𝑘

𝑞↓
). Thinner magnetic layers influence this phase difference in two ways. The first is 

the direct impact through the reduced thickness t where the different exchange potential is experienced. 

When the magnetic insulator becomes thinner than the decay length, the electrons penetrate the 

magnetic insulator and reach the substrate (vacuum in our simple model), significantly reducing the 

phase difference and thus the efficiency of the SOT. Second, the larger atomic surface to volume ratio 

decreases the exchange interaction and Curie Temperature (𝑇𝐶) [37] as well as the exchange splitting 

energy  2∆𝐸𝑒𝑥 . In studies on other magnetic insulators such as EuO, 2∆𝐸𝑒𝑥  was shown to be 

proportional to 𝑀𝑠 [38]. As 𝑀𝑠 increases with 𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺 when 𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺 < 5.4 nm, the exchange splitting 

energy for TmIG increases, yielding the increased spin mixing conductance and hence SOT efficiency 

ξeff with increasing of the TmIG thicknesses. If the sample is thicker (𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺 > 5.4 nm), the exchange 

interaction reaches a bulk saturation value, 𝜑↑ − 𝜑↓ = 𝑘/𝑞↑ − 𝑘/𝑞↓, and the interfacial torque is 

diluted in thicker samples, leading to the decrease of the SOT efficiency ξeff through its simple 1/t 

dependence, which is consistent with our model. 


10 

 

 

Figure 3. (a) TmIG thickness dependence of 𝜇0𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼 and 𝜇0𝐻𝑘 (inset). (b)The effective DMI energy 

density |𝐷| as a function of 1/𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺, the linear relationship indicates an interfacial origin of the DMI. 

 

The SOT determination discussed above are based on the current driven Néel domain wall 

motion, and the spin structure of these walls is stabilized by the DMI. As previously reported, the 

interfacial spin-orbit coupling in metals can induce both SOT and DMI at the FMM / HM interface 

[17], and in insulators the two effects can occur at different interfaces, in the case that the DMI is 

generated at the GGG / TmIG interface [21,26], We next study the DMI origin in GGG / TmIG / Pt, 

by means of the effective DMI energy density as a function of the TmIG and Pt thickness, to see if in 

this system the SOT and DMI are indeed originated at different interfaces. Figure 3a shows the TmIG 

thickness dependence of 𝜇0𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼 for GGG / TmIG (𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺)/ Pt (7) samples. The 𝜇0𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼 decreases 

monotonically with increasing 𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺, which indicates the interfacial origin of the DMI. Together with 

the 𝑡𝑇𝑚𝐼𝐺  dependence of 𝜇0𝐻𝑘, we can calculate the DMI energy density as discussed previously [21]. 

The value of the |𝐷| scales linearly with the inverse of the TmIG thickness, as shown in Figure 3b, 

confirming the interfacial origin. Moreover, to conclude whether the GGG / TmIG or the TmIG / Pt 

interface is responsible for the interfacial DMI, we studied the 𝑡𝑃𝑡 thickness dependence of the DMI 


11 

 

energy density, expecting that the Pt thickness would influence the DMI if this was generated at the 

TmIG / Pt interface [39]. 

 

Figure 4. (a) Measured SOT efficiency ξeff and 𝜇0𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼 for GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Pt (1) and Pt (5). ξeff 

significantly depends on the Pt thickness, while 𝜇0𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼 is not affected. (b) The systematic comparison 

of the DMI energy density as a function of the HM thickness (Pt), HM material (W), and spacer layer 

(Cu). The magnitude of |𝐷| does not depend on the TmIG / HM interface (Note: The data for the 0.5 

nm Pt sample is obtained from GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Pt (0.5) / Cu (3)) (units in nanometer). 

 

Figure 4a shows the dependence of SOT efficiency ξeff on the in-plane field 𝜇0𝐻𝑥 for GGG / 

TmIG (5.4) / Pt (1) and GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Pt (5) samples, respectively. The torque efficiency ξeff is 

smaller for the sample with smaller 𝑡𝑃𝑡 since the charge-to-spin conversion rate due to the SHE in Pt 

is reduced if the thickness is much smaller than the spin diffusion length. However the decrease of spin 

accumulation does not affect the value of 𝜇0𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼, we find 𝜇0𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼 = 10 ± 1 mT for both samples. 

Since the thicknesses of TmIG and the effective anisotropy field 𝜇0𝐻𝑘= 45 ± 5 mT are the same for both 

samples (details, see supplemental material S3 [40]), the same DMI energy density can be estimated. 

Furthermore, the Pt thickness dependence of |𝐷| in GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Pt (𝑡𝑃𝑡) can be found in Figure 


12 

 

4b. If the iDMI originates from the ferromagnet / Pt interface, one would expect that |𝐷| increases with 

increasing 𝑡𝑃𝑡, and reaches a saturation value at a thickness larger than the spin diffusion length [39]. 

Instead, we do not detect a significant variation of |𝐷| with varying 𝑡𝑃𝑡, which indicates that the GGG 

/ TmIG interface is the origin of the iDMI [41]. The effective spin Hall angle of GGG / TmIG (5.4) / 

Pt (𝑡𝑃𝑡) can be found in the inset of Figure 4b. We can estimate the spin diffusion length λsf in Pt, 

neglecting the spin relaxation caused by the Elliott-Yafet (EY) mechanism, by fitting with the function: 

𝜃(𝑡Pt) =  𝜃(∞)(1 – 𝑠𝑒𝑐ℎ( 𝑡Pt / 𝜆sf ) ) [42], which yields λsf  =1.8 ± 0.3 nm.  

To further check if the GGG/ TmIG interface is the source of the iDMI, we included a 3 nm 

Cu spacer layer between Pt and TmIG to make a GGG / TmIG (5.4) / Cu (3) / Pt (1.5) structure. Cu is 

a typical light metal with a long spin diffusion length and small spin-orbit coupling. As shown in Figure 

4b, inserting a Cu spacer does not strongly affect the DMI energy density. Hence, direct contact with 

HM and proximity effect are not the main reasons for the iDMI [26]. Replacing the Pt with W also 

induces little changes in the iDMI shown in Figure 4b, which indicates that the HM is not responsible 

for the iDMI [43]. This again shows that the iDMI is majorly determined by the GGG / TmIG interface 

in this stack, which is not the interface where the SOTs originate from.  

In summary, we have performed a systematic thickness dependence study to reveal the origin 

of the SOT and DMI in GGG / TmIG / Pt heterostructures. We quantify the SOT efficiency as a 

function of the TmIG thickness, revealing a non-monotonic dependence. We can explain our results 

by considering that the SOT is an interfacial effect in this system, but the spin mixing conductance of 

the TmIG / Pt interface is affected by the thickness-dependent exchange splitting energy and the 

resulting spin current penetration depths in TmIG. The reduction of the spin-torque efficiency at low 

TmIG thickness is correlated with the reduction of the saturation magnetization in the thin films and 

both originate from a thickness-dependent exchange interaction. Comparing SOTs and DMI, we find 

from the TmIG and Pt thickness-dependence of the DMI energy that the GGG / TmIG interface is 


13 

 

responsible for the iDMI. Our results show that the thickness-dependent properties of the ferromagnetic 

insulators have a strong influence on the SOT and DMI that are crucial to manipulate the domain walls 

and magnetization electrically. Moreover, these results pave the way towards the control of the chiral 

magnetic textures in insulating systems, where the SOT and DMI efficiencies can be independently 

controlled by tuning the properties of the different interfaces. 

 

Corresponding Author  

Corresponding Authors 

*E-mail: klaeui@uni-mainz.de 

 

Acknowledgments: 

We acknowledge support from the Graduate School of Excellence Materials Science in Mainz 

(MAINZ) DFG 266, the MaHoJeRo (DAAD Spintronics network, Project No.57334897), Deutsche 

Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – Spin+X TRR 173 – 268565370 

(project B02), DFG project 358671374, the Research Council of Norway (QuSpin Center 262633), 

ERATO “Spin Quantum Rectification Project” (Grant No. JPMJER1402), National Key Research and 

Development 
Program 
of 
China 
(Grant 
No. 
2016YFB0700901, 
2017YFA0206303, 

2017YFA0403701), and National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51731001, 

11675006, 11805006, 11975035). L.B acknowledges the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research 

and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreements ARTES number 793159. 

A.R acknowledge the Max Planck Graduate Center with the Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz 

(MPGC). 


14 

 

 

References: 

1. J. Sinova, S. O. Valenzuela, J. Wunderlich, C. H. Back, and T. Jungwirth, Spin Hall Effect, 

Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 1213 (2015).  

2. I. M. Miron, K. Garello, G. Gaudin, P. J. Zermatten, M. V. Costache, S. Auffret, S. Bandiera, 

B. Rodmacq, A. Schuhl, and P. Gambardella, Perpendicular Switching of a Single 

Ferromagnetic Layer Induced by In-Plane Current Injection, Nature 476, 189 (2011).  

3. A. Manchon, J. Železný, I. M. Miron, T. Jungwirth, J. Sinova, A. Thiaville, K. Garello, and P. 

Gambardella, Current-Induced Spin-Orbit Torques in Ferromagnetic and Antiferromagnetic 

Systems, Rev. Mod. Phys. 91, 035004 (2019).  

4. C. O. Avci, K. Garello, M. Gabureac, A. Ghosh, A. Fuhrer, S. F. Alvarado, and P. Gambardella, 

Interplay of Spin-Orbit Torque and Thermoelectric Effects in Ferromagnet/Normal-Metal 

Bilayers, Phys. Rev. B 90, 224427 (2014).  

5. L. Liu, C. F. Pai, Y. Li, H. W. Tseng, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, Spin-Torque Switching 

with the Giant Spin Hall Effect of Tantalum, Science 336, 555-558 (2012).  

6. X. Qiu, K. Narayanapillai, Y. Wu, P. Deorani, D. H. Yang, W. S. Noh, J. H. Park, K. J. Lee, 

H. W. Lee, and H. Yang, Spin-Orbit-Torque Engineering via Oxygen Manipulation, Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 10, 333 (2015).  

7. H. Kurebayashi, J. Sinova, D. Fang, A. C. Irvine, T. D. Skinner, J. Wunderlich, V. Novák, R. 

P. Campion, B. L. Gallagher, E. K. Vehstedt, L. P. Zârbo, K. Výborný, A. J. Ferguson, and T. 

Jungwirth, An Antidamping Spin-Orbit Torque Originating from the Berry Curvature, Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 9, 211 (2014).  

8. A. Ghosh, S. Auffret, U. Ebels, and W. E. Bailey, Penetration Depth of Transverse Spin Current 

in Ultrathin Ferromagnets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 127202 (2012).  


15 

 

9. S. Zhang, P. M. Levy, and A. Fert, Mechanisms of Spin-Polarized Current-Driven 

Magnetization Switching, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 236601 (2002).  

10. J. Li, Y. Xu, M. Aldosary, C. Tang, Z. Lin, S. Zhang, R. Lake, and J. Shi, Observation of 

Magnon-Mediated Current Drag in Pt/Yttrium Iron Garnet/Pt(Ta) Trilayers, Nat. Commun. 7, 

10858 (2016).  

11. X. Jia, K. Liu, K. Xia, and G. E. W. Bauer, Spin Transfer Torque on Magnetic Insulators, EPL 

96, 17005 (2011).  

12. M. Filianina, J. P. Hanke, K. Lee, D. S. Han, S. Jaiswal, A. Rajan, G. Jakob, Y. Mokrousov, 

and M. Kläui, Electric-Field Control of Spin-Orbit Torques in Perpendicularly Magnetized 

W/CoFeB/MgO Films, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 217701 (2020).  

13. A. R. Fert, Magnetic and Transport Properties of Metallic Multilayers, Mater. Sci. Forum 59–

60, 439 (1991).  

14. M. Bode, M. Heide, K. Von Bergmann, P. Ferriani, S. Heinze, G. Bihlmayer, A. Kubetzka, O. 

Pietzsch, S. Blügel, and R. Wiesendanger, Chiral Magnetic Order at Surfaces Driven by 

Inversion Asymmetry, Nature 447, 190 (2007).  

15. R. Lo Conte, E. Martinez, A. Hrabec, A. Lamperti, T. Schulz, L. Nasi, L. Lazzarini, R. 

Mantovan, F. Maccherozzi, S. S. Dhesi, B. Ocker, C. H. Marrows, T. A. Moore, and M. Kläui, 

Role 
of 
B 
Diffusion 
in 
the 
Interfacial 
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya 
Interaction 
in 

Ta/Co20Fe60B20/MgO Nanowires, Phys. Rev. B 91, 014433 (2015).  

16. S. Emori, U. Bauer, S. M. Ahn, E. Martinez, and G. S. D. Beach, Current-Driven Dynamics of 

Chiral Ferromagnetic Domain Walls, Nat. Mater. 12, 611–616 (2013).  

17. K. W. Kim, H. W. Lee, K. J. Lee, and M. D. Stiles, Chirality from Interfacial Spin-Orbit 

Coupling Effects in Magnetic Bilayers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 216601 (2013).  

18. R. Lo Conte, G. V. Karnad, E. Martinez, K. Lee, N. H. Kim, D. S. Han, J. S. Kim, S. Prenzel, 

T. Schulz, C. Y. You, H. J. M. Swagten, and M. Kläui, Ferromagnetic Layer Thickness 


16 

 

Dependence of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction and Spin-Orbit Torques in Pt\Co\AlOx, 

AIP Adv. 7, 065317 (2017). 

19. C. O. Avci, A. Quindeau, C. F. Pai, M. Mann, L. Caretta, A. S. Tang, M. C. Onbasli, C. A. 

Ross, and G. S. D. Beach, Current-Induced Switching in a Magnetic Insulator, Nat. Mater. 16, 

309–314 (2017).  

20. Q. Shao, C. Tang, G. Yu, A. Navabi, H. Wu, C. He, J. Li, P. Upadhyaya, P. Zhang, S. A. 

Razavi, Q. L. He, Y. Liu, P. Yang, S. K. Kim, C. Zheng, Y. Liu, L. Pan, R. K. Lake, X. Han, 

Y. Tserkovnyak, J. Shi, and K. L. Wang, Role of Dimensional Crossover on Spin-Orbit Torque 

Efficiency in Magnetic Insulator Thin Films, Nat. Commun. 9, 3612 (2018).  

21. S. Ding, A. Ross, R. Lebrun, S. Becker, K. Lee, I. Boventer, S. Das, Y. Kurokawa, S. Gupta, 

J. Yang, G. Jakob, and M. Kläui, Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction and Chiral 

Magnetic Textures in a Ferrimagnetic Insulator, Phys. Rev. B 100, 100406(R) (2019).  

22. S. Vélez, J. Schaab, M. S. Wörnle, M. Müller, E. Gradauskaite, P. Welter, C. Gutgsell, C. 

Nistor, C. L. Degen, M. Trassin, M. Fiebig, and P. Gambardella, High-Speed Domain Wall 

Racetracks in a Magnetic Insulator, Nat. Commun. 10, 4750 (2019).  

23. A. J. Lee, A. S. Ahmed, J. Flores, S. Guo, B. Wang, N. Bagués, D. W. Mccomb, and F. Yang, 

Probing the Source of the Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction Responsible for the 

Topological Hall Effect in Metal/Tm3Fe5O12 Systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 107201 (2020).  

24. Q. Shao, Y. Liu, G. Yu, S. K. Kim, X. Che, C. Tang, Q. L. He, Y. Tserkovnyak, J. Shi, and K. 

L. Wang, Topological Hall Effect at above Room Temperature in Heterostructures Composed 

of a Magnetic Insulator and a Heavy Metal, Nat. Electron. 2, 182–186 (2019).  

25. L. Caretta, E. Rosenberg, F. Büttner, T. Fakhrul, P. Gargiani, M. Valvidares, Z. Chen, P. 

Reddy, D. A. Muller, C. A. Ross, and G. S. D. Beach, Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya 

Interaction Arising from Rare-Earth Orbital Magnetism in Insulating Magnetic Oxides, Nat. 

Commun. 11, 1090 (2020).  


17 

 

26. C. O. Avci, E. Rosenberg, L. Caretta, F. Büttner, M. Mann, C. Marcus, D. Bono, C. A. Ross, 

and G. S. D. Beach, Interface-Driven Chiral Magnetism and Current-Driven Domain Walls in 

Insulating Magnetic Garnets, Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 561–566 (2019).  

27. See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for the magnetic dead layer 

determination of TmIG. 

28. C. F. Pai, M. Mann, A. J. Tan, and G. S. D. Beach, Determination of Spin Torque Efficiencies 

in Heterostructures with Perpendicular Magnetic Anisotropy, Phys. Rev. B 93, 144409 (2016).  

29. S. Ding, Y. Peng, M. Xue, Z. Liu, Z. Liang, W. Yang, Y. Sun, J. Zhao, C. Wang, S. Liu, J. 

Han, and J. Yang, J. Phys. Condens. Matter. 32, 405804 (2020).  

30. See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for the details about the 

calculation of the effective DMI energy density. 

31. X. Fan, H. Celik, J. Wu, C. Ni, K. J. Lee, V. O. Lorenz, and J. Q. Xiao, Quantifying Interface 

and Bulk Contributions to Spin-Orbit Torque in Magnetic Bilayers, Nat. Commun. 5, 3042 

(2014).  

32. C. Tang, P. Sellappan, Y. Liu, Y. Xu, J. E. Garay, and J. Shi, Anomalous Hall hysteresis in 

Tm3Fe5O12/Pt with strain-induced perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, Phys. Rev. B 94, 

140403(R) (2016).  

33. Y. M. Lu, Y. Choi, C. M. Ortega, X. M. Cheng, J. W. Cai, S. Y. Huang, L. Sun, and C. L. 

Chien, Magnetic Polarization on Y3Fe5O12 and Magnetotransport Characteristics, Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 110, 147207 (2013).  

34. X. Liang, G. Shi, L. Deng, F. Huang, J. Qin, T. Tang, C. Wang, B. Peng, C. Song, and L. Bi, 

Magnetic Proximity Effect and Anomalous Hall Effect in Pt/Y3Fe5−xAlxO12 Heterostructures, 

Phys. Rev. Appl. 10, 024051 (2018).  

35. Y. T. Chen, S. Takahashi, H. Nakayama, M. Althammer, S. T. B. Goennenwein, E. Saitoh, and 

G. E. W. Bauer, Theory of Spin Hall Magnetoresistance, Phys. Rev. B 87, 144411 (2013).  


18 

 

36. A. Brataas, G. E. W. Bauer, and P. J. Kelly, Non-collinear magnetoelectronics, Phys. Rep. 427, 

157–255 (2006).  

37. R. Schiller and W. Nolting, Prediction of a Surface State and a Related Surface Insulator-Metal 

Transition for the (100) Surface of Stochiometric EuO, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3847 (2001).  

38. T. S. Santos, J. S. Moodera, K. V. Raman, E. Negusse, J. Holroyd, J. Dvorak, M. Liberati, Y. 

U. Idzerda, and E. Arenholz, Determining Exchange Splitting in a Magnetic Semiconductor by 

Spin-Filter Tunneling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 147201 (2008).  

39. S. Tacchi, R. E. Troncoso, M. Ahlberg, G. Gubbiotti, M. Madami, J. Åkerman, and P. 

Landeros, Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction in Pt/CoFeB Films: Effect of the 

Heavy-Metal Thickness, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 147201 (2017).  

40. See Supplemental Material at [URL will be inserted by publisher] for the measurement of the 

effective anisotropy field. 

41. A. K. Chaurasiya, S. Choudhury, J. Sinha, and A. Barman, Dependence of Interfacial 

Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction on Layer Thicknesses in Ta/CoFeB/TaOx Heterostructures 

from Brillouin Light Scattering, Phys. Rev. Appl. 9, 014008 (2018).  

42. L. Liu, T. Moriyama, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, Spin-Torque Ferromagnetic Resonance 

Induced by the Spin Hall Effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 036601 (2011).  

43. X. Ma, G. Yu, C. Tang, X. Li, C. He, J. Shi, K. L. Wang, and X. Li, Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-

Moriya Interaction: Effect of 5d Band Filling and Correlation with Spin Mixing Conductance, 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 157204 (2018).  

 

 


