1

Plasma-assisted Discharges and Charging in EUV-induced 
Plasma

Mark van de Kerkhofa,b*, Andrei M. Yakunina, Vladimir Kvona, Selwyn Catsa, Luuk 
Heijmansa, Manis Chaudhuria, Dmitry Asthakovc

a) ASML Netherlands B.V., De Run 6501, 5504 DR Veldhoven, The Netherlands
b) Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
c) ISTEQ B.V., Eindhoven, The Netherlands; and Institute for Spectroscopy of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Troitsk, Moscow, Russia

Abstract. In the past years, EUV lithography scanner systems have entered High-Volume Manufacturing for 
state-of-the-art Integrated Circuits (IC), with critical dimensions down to 10 nm. This technology uses 13.5 nm 
EUV radiation, which is transmitted through a near-vacuum H2 background gas, imaging the pattern of a reticle 
onto a wafer. The energetic EUV photons excite the background gas into a low-density H2 plasma. The resulting 
plasma will locally change the near-vacuum into a conducting medium, and can charge floating surfaces and 
particles, also away from the direct EUV beam. This paper will discuss the interaction between EUV-induced 
plasma and electrostatics, by modeling and experiments. We show that the EUV-induced plasma can trigger 
discharges well below the classical Paschen limit. Furthermore, we demonstrate the charging effect of the EUV 
plasma on both particles and surfaces. Uncontrolled, this can lead to unacceptably high voltages on the reticle 
backside and the generation and transport of particles. We demonstrate a special unloading sequence to use the 
EUV-induced plasma to actively solve the charging and defectivity challenges.

Keywords: EUV Lithography, EUV-induced Plasma, Reticle, Particles, Electrostatics, Discharge

*Mark van de Kerkhof, E-mail: mark.van.de.kerkhof-msd@asml.com

1.
Introduction

The ongoing technological evolution in Integrated Circuits (IC’s) is driven by an exponential 
growth in demand for computing power and data transport, and is expected to accelerate 
further in coming years with the advent of Artificial Intelligence running partly on high-
performance centralized servers but also on local and mobile edge-computing devices. Power 
consumption and computing performance will be key drivers for improving architectures as 
well as further increases in pattern density. Driven by Moore’s law1, named after Intel co-
founder Gordon Moore, the critical dimensions of IC’s have shrunk by a factor of 2 every 
1.5-2 years; nowadays, the critical dimensions of the most advanced devices are in order of 
10 nm. This has been enabled by advances in all processing steps, but mainly by continuous 
advances in photolithography, by decreasing the (UV) wavelength and increasing the 
numerical aperture of the photolithographic tools (also known as scanners – see fig. 1), and 
introducing resolution enhancements such as polarization2,3 and immersion4. Recently, the 
introduction of Extreme Ultra-Violet (EUV) scanners into high-volume manufacturing5 has 
ensured that Moore’s law can continue for the coming years6.


2

Figure 1: Basic principle of an EUV scanner; the object on a reticle (or mask) is illuminated and imaged onto a 
portion of a wafer by the Projection Optics Box (POB) while scanning; after which the wafer is moved to a new 

position and the process is repeated (source: ASML). 

Even with the outstanding imaging and overlay capability of the EUV scanners, device yield 
can still be affected adversely by other factors, such as particles ending up on critical 
surfaces. The current state-of-the-art lithography node has critical device structures of below 
20 nm at wafer level. This translates to 80 nm at reticle level (multiplied by 4x, because of 
the scanner de-magnification M=1/4), and a printing particle size limit of dc =~40 nm at 
reticle level. For future nodes, this printing defect size will decrease further. Therefore 
particle contamination control, or defectivity control, is a key aspect of scanner system 
design. The industry is pursuing a dual-path approach to defectivity. One path is advanced 
particle contamination control to ensure zero particles reaching the sensitive reticle and wafer 
surfaces. In parallel, EUV-compatible pellicles are now available (transparent films shielding 
the reticle from particles), which are fully supported by the scanner7. Pellicles have intrinsic 
benefits in terms of particles, but come at the cost of reduced system transmission and 
productivity; the cost/risk-driven trade-off between the two options depends on application 
details and can vary for different chip manufacturers and even for different exposure layers8.
This paper will focus on the case of advanced particle contamination control, without pellicle.

Particles can come from parts and scanner integration, or can be generated by the moving 
parts in the scanner or can be carried in with the reticles and wafers. It was found that the 
EUV-induced plasma in the scanner can be a major factor in releasing and transporting 
particles via electrostatic release and under-etching9. This plasma is the result of ionization of 
the protective hydrogen background gas in the scanner10. Besides direct impact on particles, 
the EUV-induced plasma can also interact with electrostatics in several ways: it can e.g. 
reduce the safe voltage in terms of gas breakdown. In the subsequent sections these aspects 
will be described in more detail and design consideration will be discussed.

2.
EUV-induced plasma

Current EUV Sources for lithography are based on EUV emission by a hot Sn (tin) plasma:
this Sn plasma is formed by irradiating a stream of Sn droplets by a high-power pulsed IR 
laser (LPP – laser-produced plasma)11. The Sn plasma has a peak temperature of several 10’s 
of eV, which efficiently emits EUV radiation around 13.5 nm. High conversion efficiency is 
achieved by an IR pre-pulse to enlarge the target and reduce the Sn density12. The raw 
emission spectrum is broadband, and includes longer-wavelength Vacuum UV (VUV)
components, but in the scanner this spectrum is filtered by the narrow-band Bragg-reflection 


3

mirrors to 13.5 nm (± 0.2 nm)13. Current LPP EUV Sources are highly transient, firing short 
<100 ns pulses with energy of ~5 mJ at 50 kHz (250W output), with the peak of EUV in the 
first 50 ns and a tail of broadband radiation.

EUV lithography employs a low-pressure background gas of 1-10 Pa hydrogen (H2), to 
maintain self-cleaning conditions for the sensitive EUV mirrors in the optical system of the 
scanner. Hydrogen was chosen as background gas, because of high chemical activity of H-
ions14,  high transmission of H2 for EUV, and low/negligible sputtering by the light H-ions.
The 92 eV EUV photons will lead to some absorption and photo-ionization of the hydrogen 
background gas, creating a plasma, as outlined in fig. 2. Because of the low absorption of 𝐻2
(attenuation coefficient  = 0.0078 m-1 at 5 Pa), the ionization degree will be low at ~10-4 % 
(for a 250 W Source), and secondary interactions between hot electrons and ions will have 
low probability. Momentum conservation dictates that the large excess energy of 76 eV is 
carried by the photoelectron while the ions remain at room temperature15. These hot 
photoelectrons will lose energy by secondary ionizations and dissociations of the neutral 
hydrogen molecules within first 2 s; this results in an increase of plasma density even after 
the EUV pulse has passed, and to formation of up to 3 pairs of ions and electrons per 
absorbed photon16.

Figure 2: Basic processes of EUV-induced hydrogen plasma.

When the electron energy is reduced to beneath 20 eV by these secondary events, subsequent 
cooling will slow down and the plasma will decay by diffusion and wall recombination. In 
view of the low ionization degree and the proximity of wall surfaces, volume recombination 
will be a minor effect, and can be effectively ignored17. During the EUV pulse of <100 ns, the 
plasma will instantaneously expand several cm’s beyond the EUV beam by the fast photo-
electrons, and subsequently expand and decay by diffusion. Given the LPP Source frequency 
of 50 kHz, this cycle repeats every 20 s; as the decay time of the plasma will typically 
exceed 20 s at pressures of 1 - 10 Pa18, there will be build-up of a steady-state plasma, with 
repeating highly transient peaks every 20 s, as illustrated in fig. 3. The resulting quasi-
steady-state background plasma can be described as weakly coupled, diffuse and cold; but the 
transient plasma will typically not be in local thermal equilibrium (LTE), and the electron 
energy distribution will not be Maxwellian19. This in turn means that many classical plasma 
assumptions will not or not always apply and care must be taken with classical equations for
plasma temperature, Debye shielding length and plasma sheath.


4

Figure 3: Left: Build-up, steady-state and decay of pulsed EUV-induced plasma, as measured by Retarding Field 
Energy Analyzer (RFEA) in scanner-like test-stand directly after LPP Source exit20. Right: zoom-in on first two 

pulses; also visible is the minor plasma formation due to the pre-pulse.

The energetic photoelectrons will set up a significant plasma-to-wall potential difference in
order of 76 V, peaking during the EUV pulse and dropping fast in the afterglow21. In practice, 
this plasma-wall potential will be reduced by photo-electric effect which results in low-
energy electrons being released from any wall (or mirror) irradiated by the EUV beam or by 
EUV flare22, by secondary electron emission, and by charge compensation by ions; the 
resulting steady state potential of floating surfaces and dielectrics exposed to the EUV-
induced plasma is in order of a few volts (typically ~2 V). As the mean free path of the 
energetic photoelectrons can be several cm’s (given electron-neutral collision cross-section 
of ~10-20 m2 at ~76 eV; from Tawara23), the plasma can be significantly larger in dimensions 
than the EUV beam itself, and also charging of floating surfaces to negative potential can 
occur up to significant distances within the vessel. 
The plasma sheath is the potential drop region near the wall surface, and will depend on the 
local plasma density and electron temperature24. Even though care should be taken with using 
standard equations for sheath thickness and potential drop over the sheath, since the 
underlying thermal equilibrium assumptions are not always satisfied, they give a good 
approximation for the steady-state background plasma, which is likely to dominate the 
average behavior over time. For a 250 W Source, the sheath thickness can be estimated to be 
in order of ~0.1-1 mm, increasing to several mm’s away from the EUV beam; the electric 
field at the surface can be estimated to be up to ~10 kV/m close to the beam, and decreasing 
sharply away from the beam.

For particle contamination control, the zone around the reticle is of specific interest, as 
particles on the reticle have the most severe impact25. The reticle is clamped to a scanning 
stage and faces downwards, with metal reticle masking blades and other conductive surfaces 
in close proximity. The resulting slits suppress plasma diffusion of plasma, and transport of 
plasma through these slits is largely driven by the fast photo-electrons, as shown in fig. 4. It 
should be noted that the EUV-induced plasma will be different for different locations in the 
scanner, since every successive mirror in the optical system will absorb ~30% of light26; still, 
as the reticle is in the center of the scanner system, it can be taken as a reasonable first 
approximation for the entire scanner.


5

Figure 4: Schematic of reticle zone, showing EUV beam region (A), floating reticle surface (B), grounded 
reticle masking blades (C). Left (a): during isolated EUV pulse the electrons from the EUV beam penetrate 

through the slits. Right (b): plasma accumulation beyond the beam confines over multiple pulses. 

At first glance these plasma parameters seem indicative of a glow discharge, but the pulsed 
photo-ionization origin of the plasma leads to important differences, such as strong transients 
and non-Maxwellian energy distribution function during and after the EUV pulse (of <100 
ns). This precludes the use of fluid-like models, which rely on continuity equations for 
moments of the distribution functions for electron density, velocities and energies. Instead, a 
kinetic model must be used that can solve the full equations for the electron distribution 
functions without any a priori assumptions about their shapes, such as (Monte-Carlo) 
Particle-in-Cell (PIC)27. The essence of this model consists of a Poisson equation solver, 
followed by updating the charged particles positions and velocities based on the obtained 
electric field distribution and individual particle velocities. This model has been tailored for 
simulation of EUV-induced plasma28, and validated at a relevant pressure of 5 Pa in an off-
line test setup using an Electrostatic Quadrupole Plasma (EQP) Analyzer29. Recently, we 
have further extended this model to a full 3D PIC model, with options to speed up 
calculations by hybridization of the model with fluid-like model for the cooled electrons.

3.
Plasma and electronics: plasma-assisted discharges

Classically, the risk of discharges is described by the Paschen criterion. This describes the 
condition where the gain factor by cathode electron generation plus gas ionizations by 
accelerating electrons exceeds the loss factor of electrons to the anode surface, to trigger a 
self-amplifying discharge30. This requires that electrons can gain enough energy between 
collisions, requiring a sufficiently long mean free path and high enough electric field, but also 
have sufficient collisions. These considerations yield a voltage threshold as function of gas
type, pressure and distance, above which a self-amplifying avalanche effect will occur, 
driving the current through the gas sharply up. This can be plotted as breakdown voltage 
versus pressure times distance (p.d), which is called the Paschen curve (see fig. 5). Compared 
to air, hydrogen has a relatively low minimum breakdown voltage of 273 V, at p.d = 1.5 
Pa.m31; for pressures of ~5 Pa this translates to critical distances of ~30 cm.

For a near-vacuum system, left of the minimum, the Paschen criterion in principle allows 
very high voltages but care should be taken for long discharge path lines (e.g. to vessel 


6

walls), and for points of field amplification, such as a sharp edge or protrusion, or a particle, 
especially at the anode32. A notable concern is coating edges, such as on both backside and 
frontside of the reticle coating edge, which will have an effective submicron edge radius, 
resulting in significant field amplification (which can acerbated by the triple point junction of 
dielectric glass substrate, conductive coating and vacuum). Also, care should be taken that 
AC or switching voltages can reduce the Paschen threshold33. Given the high energy 
densities, a Paschen-discharge may easily both generate and release particles, mainly by local 
overheating at the point of contact of the electrons.
While the Paschen criterion has proven to work well in ambient conditions (to the right of the 
minimum), care should be taken in (near-)vacuum, for several reasons: surface properties and 
feedback mechanisms become more important w.r.t. gas properties, adsorbed gases can 
become dominant over background gas (especially H2O, but also e.g. O2 and N2), and curved 
electrical field lines at electrode edges can lead to longer discharge paths34. At the same time, 
surfaces can act as electron sinks; it has been shown that the minimum breakdown voltage is 
somewhat increased in presence of surfaces, as shown in fig. 5, but the steep slope for the 
low-p.d regime is significantly reduced suppressed: even at low p.d values, critical discharge 
voltages remain well limited to well below 1 kV, in clear contradiction of Paschen 
prediction35.

Figure 5: Left (a): Paschen curve for H2, showing good match between analytical expression and 

measurements36. Right (b): Modified breakdown curves in presence of a surface (insulating epoxy, with 
different nanoparticle additions), showing a more gentle slope at low p.d-values (reproduced from Li37).

In-house experiments confirmed these trends. A slowly increasing voltage (2 V/s) was 
applied to a reticle placed on top of a standard baseplate in a low-pressure N2 environment, 
with insulating polyimide spacers of ~100 m. This confirmed discharges at voltages well 
below the Paschen prediction and with a weaker pressure dependence than predicted by 
classical Paschen theory (fig. 6), consistent with the findings in fig. 5. Figure 6 also shows 
that while lower pressure allows for somewhat higher voltage, the amplitude of the discharge 
is larger. Tests at 5 Pa did not show discharges up to 800 V.
The discharges caused particle removal from the reticle. In the experiment, the baseplate was 
seeded with 5 m SiO2 particles. These were observed to be removed from the baseplate and 
transferred to the reticle. This is not simple electrostatic release, as one might expected for 
field strengths in order of ~5 MV/m38, because it is not observed for 5 Pa and lower 
pressures, which were exposed to the highest fields: up to 8 MV/m. It is correlated to the 
local discharges that happen at pressures of 10 and 40 Pa at lower field strengths 
(respectively 7 MV/m and 4.5 MV/m). Our proposed explanation is that the ~5 m particles 
act as field amplification points to trigger discharges which also release the particle, but this 


7

hypothesis could not be positively confirmed due to insufficient accuracy in measuring pre 
and post conditions.

Figure 6: Left (a) and middle (b): gradual voltage ramp at 2 V/s until breakdown for 10 and 40 Pa; blue line is 
voltage to frontside, red line is frontside voltage as measured by ESVM. Right (c): summary of the breakdown 

voltages for different p.d values (no discharge was observed at 5 Pa for up to 800 V maximum)39.

When surface aspects dominate, this also implies a higher likelihood of surface flashovers 
versus through-gas discharges to opposite surfaces40. For reticle discharges as outlined above, 
this is a concern for frontside defectivity, since a flashover from the charged backside via the 
floating frontside to the (grounded) baseplate would increase the risk of particles being 
generated that can reach the frontside. In view of this, it is advised to have dissipative reticle 
support studs to allow the reticle to gradually de-charge to the baseplate.

In presence of plasma, the free electrons and ions invalidate the basic Paschen assumptions, 
and result in a significant shift of the avalanche threshold to lower voltages. In itself, the 
plasma will not focus either electrons or ions, so local discharge-like damage such as 
overheating is not to be expected from plasma. However, in combination with an external 
voltage, current focusing can indeed occur, and such a plasma-assisted discharge can induce 
surface damage and create particles. This is obviously a concern for the high-voltage 
electrostatic clamps used in the EUV scanner41, so these must be perfectly shielded from 
EUV, including the volume extending several cm’s around the EUV beam. Less 
straightforward is that this is also a concern for switching power supplies and circuit boards 
for fast sensors, which in practice can have voltages above 100 V42, so these also must be 
properly shielded from the EUV-induced plasma.

Interaction of a plasma with biased electrodes can lead to formation of different structures43. 
When the bias voltage of positively biased electrode becomes too high, formation of the so-
called “fireball” structure may occur. Formation of a “fireball” in the scanner vessel is not 
intended, as it is very similar to a discharge, and a large current can be focused into a small 
area.  In the presence of slits and complicated geometries the conditions for formation of the 
“fireball” and similar discharges will be different as compared to bulk plasma.
We studied this with our PIC model, and validated experimentally in a set-up with a 
simplified geometry, as shown in fig. 7. This geometry was modeled using a fast 2D PIC 
model, for computational efficiency, with the same underlying physics and cross sections as 
our 3D-PIC model used for more realistic geometries.

The model shows a breakdown or discharge towards the positive anode when the plasma is 
switched on. This can be explained by electrons being accelerated towards the anode and 
achieving sufficient energy for further ionizations of hydrogen molecules. As the electrons 
are accelerated further to the positive anode, a positively charged plasma cloud is formed 
which screens the electrode potential and moves the zone of electron acceleration away from 
the electrode, thus effectively forming a channel of current, as illustrated in fig. 8. This is a 
similar mechanism to streamer formation in tip-shaped anodes44. Once this channel is fully 


8

formed, after ~2-3 s, breakdown is complete as shown by the sharp increase in current. 

Figure 7: Simplified 2D model geometry. Depicted are the cylindrical tube with a dielectric wall (gray), 

electrodes (orange) and plasma-filled region (pink). Neutral H2 gas is represented with green dots.

In contrast to Paschen theory, the plasma-assisted breakdown is not determined by the 
product of distance and pressure: for a given distance, higher pressure and/or higher plasma 
power result in higher plasma electron density and lower breakdown voltage.

Figure 8: Simulated plasma dynamics for 10 Pa (a,b) and 1 Pa (c,d), showing electron and ion densities (left and 
right side of each image) and voltage contour lines, for specific time stamps. Anode potential was set to 500 V.
The snapshots for 10 Pa show the transition to breakdown at ~3 s, while the snapshots for 1 Pa show the more 

or less stable anode glow.

As fig. 9 shows, the model shows a peaked threshold behavior in the current at the moment of 


9

breakdown for higher pressure (10 Pa); this is the “Fireball” mode. For lower pressure (1 Pa), 
the model shows an oscillating current, but no breakdown, since the number of ions formed 
in this case is too low to achieve sufficient screening of the positive electrode to move the 
acceleration zone away from the anode and form the conductive channel as above. In that 
case, the plasma formed will remain in an oscillatory anode glow mode.

Figure 9: Model showing avalanche and breakdown at 10 Pa, with sharply peaked increase in current (green 

line); and oscillating glow discharge at 1 Pa (purple line).

The experimental set-up is essentially a cylindrical tube with two electrodes and a possibility 
to add free charge carriers from an RF plasma, as shown schematically in fig. 10. Hydrogen 
pressure was varied in the range of 1 – 10 Pa, and RF power varied between 10 to 60 W and 
the distance between electrodes was varied in range of 1 – 10 cm. After applying a given 
combination of these parameters, the bias voltage on the positive electrode is scanned from 0 
– 250 V, remaining always below the Paschen minimum of hydrogen, while the electrode 
currents was measured continuously by a Keithley 2010 multimeter.

Figure 10: Experimental setup for plasma-assisted discharge: 1 – Cesar 1312 RF generator; 2 – stainless steel 

chamber; 3 – hydrogen valve; 4 - hydrogen plasma; 5 – glass tube; 6 - micrometer translation stage; 7 –

insulated PTFE rod with a connector; 8 – power supply/multimeter; 9 – stainless steel electrode; 10 – pressure 

gauge; 11 – turbo-pump; 12 – rotary pump.

The resulting breakdown threshold was observed to be in order of ~100 V, significantly 
below the predicted Paschen threshold for this configuration and even well below the 
theoretical Paschen minimum of 273 V. It was also confirmed that the avalanche is directed 
towards the anode, while the ion current to the cathode is ~10x lower. As predicted by the
model, the moment of breakdown shows a sharp peak in current, after which a steady high 


10

current flows and voltage drops somewhat, as shown in fig. 11. Varying conditions of 
electrode distance and pressure resulted in observations of breakdown below and around the 
Paschen minimum voltage, even for low pressure and short distances, in what classically 
should be a ‘safe’ zone of p.d-V combinations.

Figure 11: Left (a): example of plasma-assisted discharge and current when ramping up voltage between 

electrodes while plasma switched on in neighboring chamber (using 60W plasma, 5 Pa, 10 cm distance). Right
(b): examples of significant reduction of breakdown voltage when plasma is switched on (10W plasma; 5 cm 

distance; 1, 2 and 5 Pa); both with and without plasma, the observed breakdown voltages at low pressures are all 

significantly reduced with respect to classical Paschen prediction of >105 V (see fig. 6), which is attributed to 

the glass tube wall surfaces.

In general, the critical ion density 𝑛𝑖

𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 to trigger a plasma-assisted discharge can be 

estimated from the condition of positive electrode screening: the potential drop due to volume 
charge should be comparable with the electrode potential drop:

𝑛𝑖(𝑡) > 𝑛𝑖

𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡~

2𝜖0

𝑒 ∙

𝜑

ℎ2 ~108 𝑐𝑚−3
(1)

With the electrode potential drop 𝜑 ≈ 30-70 eV (to accelerate electrons to energies at which 
ionization is most efficient45), the region of ion accumulation ℎ ≈ 1 cm, and e the elementary 
charge. This estimate of 𝑛𝑖

𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 is in line with the 2D PIC simulations above. In more 

complicated geometries, the exact value of the critical ion density will depend on the 
(in)homogeneity of the electric field and the distance of the plasma source to the anode. Still, 
rather than a discharge threshold being determined by voltage and the product of pressure and 
distance, as in the case of Paschen, the discharge threshold is now driven by applied voltage
Vext, pressure pH2 and local plasma density, which in turn scales with pressure and EUV 
power IEUV and with a suppression factor 𝛾𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝 that describes the fall-off of plasma away 
from the EUV-beam.

𝑛𝑖

𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 ~ 𝑉𝑒𝑥𝑡 ∙ 𝑝𝐻2

2 ∙ 𝐼𝐸𝑈𝑉 ∙ 𝛾𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑝
(2)

Equation 2 illustrates that the risk of plasma-assisted discharge needs to be re-evaluated for 
any increase in either EUV power, local pressures or external voltages. For the complicated 
internal geometries of an EUV-scanner, no analytical expression can be used. However, our 
3D PIC model, with the same underlying physics and cross sections as the 2D PIC model as 
used and validated above, can now be used to check any design proposal for safe limits on 
local voltages and pressures plasma-assisted discharges. 
Also, as general guidelines, floating or insulating surfaces should be avoided as much as 
possible to minimize the risk of surface flashovers, and edges and protrusions should be 
sufficiently rounded to avoid dangerous field amplification points.


11

4.
reticle charging and discharges

As outlined in section II, floating surfaces and dielectrics close to the EUV-induced plasma
may become charged. In particular the reticle needs to be considered in this respect, since it 
consists of an insulating glass substrate with a conductive coating on the backside (for 
electrostatic clamping purposes), and a conductive reflective multi-layer coating on the 
frontside; both conductive layers are floating independently; this is outlined in fig. 12.

Figure 12: Sketch of reticle cross-section, showing conductive coating stacks on frontside and backside; adapted 

from McLellan46

The reticle backside is clamped electrostatically to a movable positioning module, while the 
frontside is directly exposed to the EUV beam and EUV-induced plasma. Grounding of the 
reticle is impractical in view of the risk of particles generated when making electrical 
connection through the oxide top layers on the moving/scanning reticle47. During exposures 
the reticle frontside will acquire a transient potential due to competing direct photoelectric 
effect from EUV irradiation (driving to positive) and subsequently de-charging from plasma, 
and will return to ~0 V after every pulse, as shown in fig. 13.

Figure 13: PIC simulation of electron density (blue line) and reticle frontside surface potential (red line), 

showing accumulation of plasma over pulses but no build-up of surface potential.

The reticle backside is quite different, since this is not exposed directly to EUV irradiation 
and shielded by the clamp. The backside coating plane is connected to the plasma volume 
through only a small gap, which acts as a spatial filter to suppress diffusion for both positive 
and negative charges. Still, two effects can result in charging of the reticle backside: and 
secondary gas ionizations and secondary electron emission by the surrounding clamp, of 


12

which secondary gas ionizations are expected to be dominant. 
Secondary ionizations in the gas surrounding the reticle by the energetic photoelectrons result 
in electrons propagating more or less isotropically around the actual EUV beam, which 
allows electrons to reach the conductive backside coating even if the coating is recessed from 
the edge. The ions have a lower likelihood to reach the backside as these are accelerated more 
along the electrical field lines, scatter less and have higher inertia; so ions will likely hit 
surrounding surfaces and stick there. This results in a net negative charging of the reticle 
backside, as is shown schematically in figure 14.

Figure 14: Left (a): basics of charging mechanism of reticle backside; Top right (b): 
energy spectrum of electrons reaching reticle edge modelled by 3D PIC code. Bottom 
right (c): energetic secondary electrons charge reticle backside, while ions are carried 

by field and momentum towards nearest wall resulting in a net negative charge on 

reticle.

As the reticle backside charge and voltage build up, electrons will be repulsed and ions 
attracted, which will result in an equilibrium charge and voltage, which will depend on details 
of plasma (e.g. EUV power, pressure and beam position with respect to reticle edge). PIC 
modelling for the reticle geometry in NXE:3400 of electron spectrum reaching the backside 
reticle edge shows that the cumulative process of charging by fast electrons and partial 
neutralization by ions result in an equilibrium negative voltage in order of -10 V. This 
voltage, and the associated excess electrons, will remain on the reticle backside after the 
plasma fully decays at the end of exposures. The backside voltage has been simulated to scale 
inversely quadratically with increasing pressure, as shown in fig. 15; this is due to the 
combined effect of reduced average frontside potential and increased collisions at higher 
pressure which act to reduce the high-energy tail of the EEDF.


13

Figure 15: PIC simulations of backside voltage dependence on time and pressure, showing >2x reduction in 

voltage for 1.5x higher pressure.

Also reticle geometry and coating details are relevant: a recessed coating will show a higher 
equilibrium charge since this will increase the spatial filtering of ions, and more so than for 
electrons (due to secondary electron emission or bouncing of electrons from surfaces). This 
implies an additional consideration for the reticle backside coating beyond the existing 
specifications for clamping, with the coating preferably extended as close as possible to the 
edge. The acquired backside voltage may seem negligible, but during reticle unloading the 
backside voltage is amplified by the changing capacitance between reticle and clamp, as 
outlined in fig. 17, while the charge locked onto the floating surface remains constant48. This 
is reflected in the basic equations:

𝑈 =

𝑄

𝐶 =

𝑄∙𝑑

𝜖0∙𝐴𝑐𝑙
(3)

𝑈𝑢𝑛𝑙 = 𝑈𝑐𝑙 ∙

𝑑𝑢𝑛𝑙
𝑑𝑐𝑙
(4)

With 𝐴𝑐𝑙 the (constant) area of the clamping electrode, Uunl the backside potential during 
unload, Ucl the backside potential as clamped, dcl the distance as clamped, which is in order 
of microns, and dunl the distance during unloading, which is in order of cm’s (as sketched in
fig. 16), giving a potentially ~1000x increase. 

Figure 16: Illustration of reticle unloading sequence. While clamped the separation between reticle backside and 

clamp electrode is in order of a few micrometers, resulting in strong capacitive coupling; during unload the 

separation is increased to ~1 cm, reducing the capacitance by several orders of magnitude.


14

In reality, capacitive coupling between backside and frontside and to the unloading plate will 
complicate this relation and limit the voltage amplification to about 50x, as shown in fig. 17; 
this still means that during unloading the backside potential can reach a value of up to 1000 
V. This is well above the Paschen minimum of ~275 V for H2, implying a risk of electrostatic 
breakdown and discharges.

Figure 17: Example of backside (BS) potential amplification from ~14 V to ~600 V 

during reticle unload (blue line), caused by increasing gap between reticle and clamp 
(stepwise from t=8 sec on in this capacitive model); also shown is the induced frontside 

voltage (red line) and the induced clamp voltage (yellow line)49.

The high level of reticle charging has been confirmed by electrostatic voltage measurements 
(ESVM), using dual Trek PD15035 555P-style probes with a 6000B-6 sensor (in combination 
with a modified reticle pod to allow simultaneous access of the probes to reticle front and 
backside), directly after unloading the reticle from the scanner. Fig. 18 shows comparison of 
reticle backside voltage measured after full reticle cycle through EUV machine with and 
without EUV exposures. Test reticles exposed to EUV confirm the high voltage of ~600 V, 
while reticles that were not exposed to EUV remained neutral. Optical microscope inspection 
of these test reticles indicated cosmetic damage of reticle backside coating after EUV 
exposures, which could be traced back to imperfections in the coating edges on the test 
reticles used, but also showed a clear sensitivity to backside discharges from these high 
backside voltages.

Figure 18: Left (a): modified reticle pod for ESVM measurements; Middle (b): ESVM measurement of high 

voltage on reticle backside when reticle has been exposed to EUV; Right (c): Observation of ESD damage on a

test reticle.


15

Besides this backside discharge risk (which might in practice be acceptable, since the 
backside is not as critical as the imaging frontside of the reticle), the increase of backside 
voltage during unload also induces a frontside voltage in order of 70 V by their capacitive 
coupling (red line in fig. 17), which might not be so high as to cause concerns for discharges 
to the critical reticle frontside surface, but is a concern for particle attraction to the reticle, as 
demonstrated by Amemiya (see fig. 19)50. 

Figure 19: Particle pick-up as a function of reticle surface potential; from Amemiya50.

Even while the EUV reticle pod is designed with electrostatics in mind (e.g. metal inner body 
to prevent ESD risk as present in DUV pod51), the pod does not fully resolve this: frontside 
grounding has to be soft to prevent particle generation from hard grounding contact, so will 
make poor electrical contact through the insulating top oxide of the reticle frontside coating 
for low voltages52. Although the backside pod cover itself is grounded, this does not make 
grounding contact to the reticle backside within the scanner vacuum system or the internal 
reticle library, but only makes contact when the EUV pod is locked at the load port to be 
removed from the scanner. It should be considered that this grounding is by soft contact to a 
potentially oxidized backside coating, so this contact might be poor in practice, and should 
not be relied upon for backside de-charging.

The issue of backside voltage excursions during unload can be remedied in two ways: 1) by 
creating a (negative) offset in the clamping scheme to shift the equilibrium of the EUV-
plasma charging to (near) zero during the exposures, or 2) by supplying free charge carriers 
during the unload sequence to dynamically reduce the charge on the reticle as the voltage 
builds up.
A negative clamping offset has indeed been observed to result in lower backside voltage, 
with near-zero backside voltages during unload being achieved for an offset of roughly -25 
V, as shown in fig. 20, using ESVM. However, as can also be seen in fig. 21, for reasons of 
reticle chamfer and coating tolerances this offset would need to be calibrated per reticle to 
guarantee sufficiently low voltage at unload. The observed limit at ~-800V is most likely an 
artefact of the ex-situ ESVM measurements: ESVM can only be done outside of the scanner, 
after fully unloading the reticle, and voltages above ~800V are expected to result in 
discharges during the unloading of the reticle to ambient conditions.


16

Figure 20: Reticle backside voltage as function of clamping offset; the colors denote different specimens of test 

reticles from two different suppliers.

An alternative solution is dynamic charge compensation during the unload sequence by 
creating a supply of free charge carriers; this will reduce the charge on the reticle as the 
voltage builds up and thus will maintain acceptably low voltage levels throughout the 
unloading sequence, to prevent any risk of discharge. 
This could be achieved by a miniature plasma generator, such as proposed and developed by 
Hopwood53; though such a device has been shown to work for hydrogen54, the additional 
hardware is hard to retrofit into the existing scanner modules and reliably igniting the 
hydrogen plasma at ~5 Pa is still considered a challenge. Fig. 21 shows a prototype 
demonstration of such a device.

Figure 21: Left (a): prototype of miniature inductively-coupled plasma generator, with (A) inductive coil, (B) 

high-Q capacitors, (C) impedance matching and (D) RF current monitoring coil (only for prototype). The 

diameter of the assembly is approximately 2 cm. Middle (b): ignition of the discharge at 3Pa hydrogen. Right 

(c): stable operation at 2W RF power and 3Pa hydrogen. Images courtesy of ISAN.

Dynamic charge compensation can also be achieved by turning on the EUV-induced plasma 
during the unload sequence, which has been termed “EUV@unload”55. During the unload 
sequence the reticle is moved to a position next to the EUV beam, is placed onto a baseplate 
and subsequently lowered from the clamp. As the gap between reticle and clamp increases, 
the capacitance drops and the negative backside voltage builds up, attracting the ions from 
the EUV-plasma; simultaneously the opening gap allows the ions to reach the backside 
coating more easily to reduce the net charge. Even though the reticle is moved several cm’s 
away from the EUV beam during unload, the ions are pulled towards the high negative 
potential on the reticle backside which develops as the reticle is moved away from the clamp. 
It should be noted that volume recombination is very low at this low ionization degree and 
pressure, so ions can travel a long distance if the directional motion in the electric field is 
stronger than diffusion to the walls. This is shown in fig. 22. Full scanner tests have 


17

confirmed that the EUV-induced plasma density is sufficient to counter the voltage 
amplification effectively, without delays or slowdowns in the unload sequence. Besides being 
relatively insensitive to reticle tolerances, this also has key benefits in using pre-existing 
hardware and having no ignition threshold. Therefore, this scheme has been chosen as 
baseline for the current generation of EUV-scanners. 

Figure 22: EUV-plasma now neutralizes reticle backside during reticle unload, even with the EUV beam several 

cm’s away. Left (a): reticle location with respect to EUV beam and modeled ion densities; Right (b): reticle 

backside voltages measured by ESVM, without and with EUV on during unload.

Recent customer data has shown that EUV@unload significantly suppresses defectivity 
associated with electrostatic pick-up from the reticle pod baseplate, such as carbon-based fall-
on particles, without deterioration of other particle types. Also, in-house testing on system 
(which had a known grounding issues) showed the effectiveness of EUV@unload to mitigate 
the resulting defectivity issue, as shown in fig. 23.

Figure 23: Effective mitigation of ESD-related particles (solid blue) by EUV@unload; ~4x improvement in non-

ESD, or fall-on, particles (orange striped) cannot be attributed to EUV@unload but is likely due to flushing in 

between the two measurements.

Although current performance of the EUV@unload scheme is satisfactory, further 
improvements or accelerations are currently being investigated. One option could be to 
combine EUV@unload with clamp electrode biasing as outlined above, or alternatively to 
apply a negative bias voltage to the clamp during unloading to attract more ions from the 
EUV-plasma. For the long term, it is recommended to investigate grounding of both reticle 
surfaces during scanning; one option could be to ground the backside via hard electrical 
contact to the clamp and to create electrical connection between backside and frontside 
coatings.


18

5.
Particle Transport and reticle Protection

Another electrostatic aspect of EUV is that, as shown above, during the EUV pulse the 
floating reticle surface will instantaneously charge positively by photoelectric effect to ~20-
40 V, and subsequently will be neutralized within ~5 s to zero volt by charge compensation 
from the EUV-induced plasma. This process repeats after 20 s with the next pulse. So on 
average the reticle will be charged ~1-2 V positively with respect to the surrounding 
grounded surfaces. As the reticle top layers (Ru cap and Ta absorber) are conductive and 
continuous, all of the reticle will take on this average positive potential, also the (large) part 
of the reticle that is away from the actual EUV-beam. Away from the EUV-beam, plasma 
density is too low to effectively shield the resulting electric field between reticle and the 
nearby grounded reticle masking blades, which can be in order of >100 V/m given the small 
gap.

Free particles are preferentially charged negatively in and around the EUV-beam56, although 
there might be transient phase of positive charging by photo-electric effect57. This results in 
an attractive electric force between reticle and particle. Charging of free particles inside the 
EUV beam will show transients with the EUV pulses, first charging positively by photo-
electric effect, then negatively due to the higher mobility of the plasma electrons, and 
subsequently (partly) neutralizing due to the ions, as described by Orbital Motion Limited 
(OML) theory58. Assuming thermal equilibrium, OML provides the steady state potential of 
the particle 𝜙𝑝when the electron and ion fluxes are balanced:

exp (

𝑒𝜙𝑝
𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑒) = √

𝑚𝑒𝑇𝑖
𝑚𝑖𝑇𝑒 (1 −

𝑒𝜙𝑝
𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑖)
(5)

With me,mi and Te,Ti the masses and temperatures of the electrons and ions respectively. With 
the ions close to room temperature, the particle potential is mainly determined by the electron 
temperature. Approximating the particle by a sphere, the particle charge 𝑄𝑝 follows from the 
potential via the capacitance of a sphere, and scales linearly with the particle diameter 𝑑𝑝

59.

𝑄𝑝 = 2𝜋𝜖0 ∙ 𝑑𝑝 ∙ 𝜙𝑝
(6)

In the transient EUV-induced plasma, no analytical equations exist for the potential or charge 
of a free particle, and PIC modeling is used to determine the evolution of particle charge over 
time. PIC simulations of the EUV-induced plasma in the region below the reticle show that 
micron-sized particles get a short positive charge, after which they reach an equilibrium 
between electron and ion currents, as illustrated in fig. 24. For submicron particles, 
neutralization will typically take longer than the pulse interval, and negative particle charge 
will build up over multiple pulses until an equilibrium is reached between the photo-
ionization and the electron currents, as illustrated in fig. 25. For an electron temperature of 
~0.5 eV, the equilibrium particle charge is predicted to be roughly 2𝑑𝑝 [e], with 𝑑𝑝 the 
particle diameter.
Free particles next to the EUV beam will not experience the initial photo-electric effect, so 
will charge negatively by the more mobile electrons and will reach an equilibrium between 
electron and ion collection currents; this results in a similar steady-state value negative 
charge as for particles within the beam, or somewhat more negative for submicron particles.
Further away from the beam, plasma density will drop and the charging will be much slower, 
but will still result in an average negative charge (again due to the more mobile electrons).


19

Figure 24: Left (a): PIC model of charging of a 10 m particle in the EUV beam, showing fast transient positive 
photo-charging and subsequent negative charging (to ~1 e per nm); quasi steady-state charge (balanced electron 

and ion currents) is achieved within ~5 s. The insert shows the electron and ion temperatures. Right (b): 

repeating charging pattern over multiple pulses.

Figure 25: Left (a): PIC model of charging of a 100 nm particle in the EUV beam, showing fast transient 

positive photo-charging and subsequent negative charging. Right (b): increasing charge for over multiple pulses 

for 100 nm particle.

Extending the PIC simulations for particle charge with dynamic reticle potential and resulting 
electric fields yields an electric force on the particle near the reticle surface. Comparing the 
resulting electric force against the other forces that might work on a free-floating particle
(gravitational force, neutral and ion drag forces, and for completeness, thermophoretic force 
(driven by temperature differences between the irradiated reticle surface and reticle-facing 
masking blades)), it is clear that the dominant forces for submicron particles are the electric 
force and the neutral drag force, as illustrated by fig. 26.


20

Figure 26: Volume force estimates for submicron particles in the gap between reticle and grounded reticle

masking blades, for 250W Source and 5 Pa H2.

Combining the vector force fields of electric and neutral drag forces, particle trajectories can 
be calculated, as shown in fig. 27. This allows to design the local flows and pressures such
that no particles larger than a given critical size (50 nm in this example) will reach the reticle 
frontside surface. The most effective optimization parameter is pressure: increasing pressure 
will increase neutral drag force60 and reduce the electric attraction force (as outlined above), 
but will come at expense of EUV transmission. Increasing flow in itself will increase neutral 
drag force and does not affect the electric force, but in practice flow is not independent of 
pressure.

Figure 27: Left (a): Particle-in-Cell simulations of the force map for a 50-nm diameter particle in the reticle 
zone, just after the EUV pulse (180 ns). More yellow means higher force (blue means lower); arrows indicate 

local direction of force. Right (b): modeled trajectory for a 50 nm test particle

6.
Conclusion

Understanding of the specific nature of the EUV-induced scanner plasma and the interaction 
of this plasma with surfaces and particles has improved significantly in the past years. This 
has allowed scanner design optimizations as well as targeted improvements in manufacturing 
and cleaning processes, for both plasma and related electrostatics aspects, to continue to drive 
down the corresponding contributors behind defectivity. Analysis of plasma-assisted 
discharges has resulted in design guidelines for allowed voltages and pressures at various 
distances from the EUV-beam, to prevent discharges and improve the robustness of high-
voltage electronics. Prevention of high reticle charging during unloading and handling, with
the associated risk of discharges, removes a potential source of particles. These measures 


21

have brought particle contamination control of the EUV-scanner to a regime where customers 
have the freedom to operate without protective pellicle for high-volume manufacturing. For 
future EUV lithography systems, continued improvements in plasma models and 
understanding will ensure plasma-aware designs that will be compatible at increasing source 
powers and reducing critical particle sizes.

7.
acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank the ASML Research and Development teams for Scanner Plasma 
and Defectivity for scanner testing, fruitful discussions and general support. Also, we would 
wish to thank Ronald van der Wilk, Alex Yanson, Frank van Lier and Jeroen van Duivenbode 
for the electrostatic measurements and electrostatic reticle model; and Edgar Osorio Oliveros 
and Vladimir Krivtsun, Maxim Spiridonov, Slava Medvedev of ISAN for the miniature ICP 
work. And finally, we would like to thank Pavel Krainov, Bogdan Lakatosh and ISAN for the 
PIC simulations. 

8.
References

1 G. Moore, “Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits”, Electronics, pp. 114-
117 (1965)
2 W. de Boeij et al, “Enabling the 45nm node by hyper NA polarized Lithography”, Proc. of 
SPIE Vol. 6154 (2006)
3 E. van Setten et al, "Pushing the boundary: low-k1 extension by polarized illumination." 
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6520 (2007)
4 H. Jasper et al, “Immersion lithography with an ultrahigh-NA in-line catadioptric lens and a 
high-transmission flexible polarization illumination system”, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 6154 (2006)
5 M. van de Kerkhof et al, “EUV for HVM: towards an industrialized scanner for HVM 
NXE3400B performance update”, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 10583 (2018)
6 M. van de Kerkhof et al, “Lithography for now and the future”, Solid-State Electronics, 155 
(2019)
7 D. Brouns et al, “NXE pellicle: offering a EUV pellicle solution to the industry" Proc. of 
SPIE Vol. 9776 (2016)
8 M. Lercel et al, “EUV reticle defectivity protection options”, Photomask Technology Vol. 
11148, International Society for Optics and Photonics (2019)
9 M. van de Kerkhof et al, “Particulate and molecular contamination control in EUV-induced 
H2-plasma in EUV lithographic scanner”, Proc. of SPIE Vol. 11489 (2020)
10 M. van de Kerkhof et al, "Understanding EUV-induced plasma and application to particle 
contamination control in EUV scanners", Proc. of SPIE Vol. 11323 (2020)
11 V. Bakshi, “EUV Lithography”, 2nd edition, chapter 3A (2018) [xx]
12 A. Schafgans et al, “Performance optimization of MOPA pre-pulse LPP light source”, 
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 9422 (2015)
13 M. van de Kerkhof et al, “High-power EUV lithography: spectral purity and imaging 
performance”, Journal of Micro/Nanolithography, MEMS, and MOEMS (2020)


22

14 O. Braginsky et al, “Removal of amorphous C and Sn on Mo: Si multilayer mirror surface 
in Hydrogen plasma and afterglow”, Journal of Applied Physics 111 (2012)
15 M. van der Velden et al, "Kinetic simulation of an extreme ultraviolet radiation driven 
plasma near a multilayer mirror" J. Appl. Phys. (2006)
16 I. Mendez et al, “Atom and ion chemistry in low pressure hydrogen DC plasmas”, Journal 
of Physical Chemistry A (2006)
17 R. Plasil et al, Advanced integrated stationary afterglow method for experimental study of 
recombination of processes of H3+ and H3+ ions with electrons’, Int.
J. Mass Spectrom. 218 (2002)
18 R. van der Horst et al, “Dynamics of the spatial electron density distribution of EUV-
induced plasmas”, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 48 (2015)
19 R. van der Horst, “Ion fluxes towards surfaces exposed to EUV-induced plasmas”, Electron 
dynamics in EUV-induced plasmas”, PhD thesis (2015)
20 M. van Kampen, internal ASML report
21 T. van de Ven, “Ion fluxes towards surfaces exposed to EUV-induced plasmas”, PhD thesis 
(2018)
22 M. van der Velden et al, "Kinetic simulation of an extreme ultraviolet radiation driven 
plasma near a multilayer mirror" J. Appl. Phys. (2006)
23 H. Tawara et al, "Cross sections and related data for electron collisions with hydrogen 
molecules and molecular ions." Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 19.3 (1990)
24 M. Lieberman, “Principles of plasma discharges and materials processing” (2005)
25 M. van de Kerkhof et al, “Advanced particle contamination control in EUV scanners”, 
Proc. Of SPIE Vol. 10957 (2019)
26 E. Louis, et al, “Multilayer coated reflective optics for extreme UV lithography”, 
Microelectronic Engineering, 27 (1995)
27 M. van der Velden et al, “Particle-in-cell Monte Carlo simulations of an extreme ultraviolet 
radiation driven plasma”, Phys. Rev. E, 73 (2006)
28 D. Astakhov, “Exploring the electron density in plasma induced by EUV radiation: II. 
Numerical studies in argon and hydrogen”. J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. (2016)
29 T. van de Ven, “Ion energy distributions in highly transient EUV induced plasma in 
hydrogen”, J. Appl. Phys. (2018)
30 H. Kreuger, “Industrial high DC voltage: 1. Fields, 2. Breakdowns, 3. Tests”, Delft 
University Press, Delft (1995)
31 M. Naidu et al, “High Voltage Engineering”, p. 27, McGraw-Hill (1995)
32 P. Osmokrovic et al, “Mechanism of electrical breakdown left of Paschen minimum”, IEEE 
Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation (1994)
33 E. Hastings et al, “Threshold voltage for arcing on negatively biased solar arrays”, Journal 
of Spacecraft and Rockets Vol. 27 (1990)
34 R. Latham, “High Voltage Vacuum Insulation”, Author House, Bloomington (2006)
35 Z. Li et al, “Surface flashover of nanodielectrics with varying electrode architectures in 
partial vacuum under DC and kHz pulsed fields”, IPMHVC 2012 (2012)
36 I. Korolov et al, “Breakdown in hydrogen and deuterium gases in static and radio-
frequency fields”, Physics of Plasmas (2015)
37 Z. Li et al, “Surface flashover of nanodielectrics with varying electrode architectures in 
partial vacuum under DC and kHz pulsed fields”, IPMHVC 2012 (2012) [double]
38 D. Cooper et al, “Electrostatic removal of particle singlets and doublets from conductive 
surfaces”, Aerosol Science and Technology (1990)
39 R. van der Wilk, ASML internal report (2018)


23

40 H. Miller, “Flashover of insulators in vacuum: review of the phenomena and techniques to 
improved holdoff voltage”, IEEE transactions on electrical insulation 28 (1993)
41 K. Asano et al, “Fundamental Study of an Electrostatic Chuck for Silicon Wafer 
Handling”, Microelectronic Engineering, Vol. 38 (2002)
42 B. Oni, “Observations of voltage breakdown in ultra-low pressure environments under 
varied voltage and frequency conditions”, Journal on Electrical Engineering 12 (2019)
43 S. Baalrud et al, “Interaction of biased electrodes and plasmas: sheaths, double layers, and 
fireballs”, Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. (2020)
44 J. Holtzhausen et al, “High Voltage Engineering Practice and Theory”, Stellenbosch, 
Western Cape (2014)
45 J.S. Yoon et al, “Cross sections for electron collisions with hydrogen molecules”, Journal 
of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (2008)
46 P. McLellan, https://community.cadence.com/cadence_blogs_8/b/breakfast-
bytes/posts/iedm-sc-euv
47 K. Ota et al, “Evaluation results of a new EUV reticle pod having reticle grounding paths”, 
EUVL Symposium (2010)
48 A. van den Biggelaar, “Modeling of dynamic effects in high-voltage electrostatic clamps”, 
MSc thesis TU Eindhoven (2016).
49 J. van Duivenbode, internal ASML report (2018)
50 M. Amemiya et al, “Experimental study of particle-free mask handling”, Proc. of SPIE 
7271 (2009)
51 G. Rider, “A critique of the approach to controlling electrostatic risk in semiconductor 
production and identification of a potential risk from the use of equipotential bonding”,
AIMS Electronics and Electrical Engineering (2019)
52 K. Ota et al, “Evaluation results of a new EUV reticle pod having reticle grounding paths”,
Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7969 (2011)
53 J. Hopwood et al, “Fabrication and characterization of a micromachined 5 mm inductively 
coupled plasma generator”, J. Vac. Sc. & Techn. B (2000)
54 E. Osorio Oliveros, internal ASML report (2019)
55 M. van de Kerkhof, Worldwide Patent No. WO2019197128A2 (2019)
56 A. Sickafoose et al, “Experimental investigations on photoelectric and triboelectric 
charging of dust”, Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics (2001)
57 S. Frazier et al, “Charging Behavior of Dust Aggregates in a Cosmic Plasma 
Environment”, ?[xx]
58 H. Mott-Smith et al, “The Theory of Collectors in Gaseous Discharges”, Phys. Rev. 28 
(1926)
59 L. Heijmans, “Quantifying Plasma Particle Lofting”, PhD thesis (2017)
60 X. Chen, “The drag force acting on a spherical non-evaporating or evaporating particle 
immersed into a rarefied plasma flow”, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 29 (1996)

Biography

Mark van de Kerkhof began his career at ODME, developing then-novel DVD mastering, 

and later worked on Deep-UV and Immersion technologies for Blu-Ray. In 1999 he joined 
ASML as senior designer, working on miscellaneous projects for both DUV and EUV scanners, 
and was responsible for the technical definition and integration of the NXE:3400B EUV scanner 


24

as Product System Engineer. He is currently responsible for EUV Scanner Plasma Technology. 
He co-authored more than 30 scientific papers and holds more than 70 USA patents.

Caption List

Figure 1: Basic principle of an EUV scanner; the object on a reticle (or mask) is illuminated and imaged onto a 
portion of a wafer by the Projection Optics Box (POB) while scanning; after which the wafer is moved to a new 
position and the process is repeated (source: ASML).
Figure 2: Basic processes of EUV-induced hydrogen plasma.
Figure 3: Left: Build-up, steady-state and decay of pulsed EUV-induced plasma, as measured by Retarding Field 
Energy Analyzer (RFEA) in scanner-like test-stand directly after LPP Source exit. Right: zoom-in on first two 
pulses; also visible is the minor plasma formation due to the pre-pulse.
Figure 4: Schematic of reticle zone, showing EUV beam region (A), floating reticle surface (B), grounded 
reticle masking blades (C). Left (a): during isolated EUV pulse the electrons from the EUV beam 
penetrate through the slits. Right (b): plasma accumulation beyond the beam confines over 
multiple pulses.
Figure 5: Left (a): Paschen curve for H2, showing good match between analytical expression and measurements. 
Right (b): Modified breakdown curves in presence of a surface (insulating epoxy, with different nanoparticle 
additions), showing a more gentle slope at low p.d-values (reproduced from Li).
Figure 6: Left (a) and middle (b): gradual voltage ramp at 2 V/s until breakdown for 10 and 40 Pa; blue line is 
voltage to frontside, red line is frontside voltage as measured by ESVM. Right (c): summary of the breakdown 
voltages for different p.d values (no discharge was observed at 5 Pa for up to 800 V maximum).
Figure 7: Simplified 2D model geometry. Depicted are the cylindrical tube with a dielectric wall (gray), 
electrodes (orange) and plasma-filled region (pink). Neutral H2 gas is represented with green dots.
Figure 8: Simulated plasma dynamics for 10 Pa (a,b) and 1 Pa (c,d), showing electron and ion densities (left and 
right side of each image) and voltage contour lines, for specific time stamps. Anode potential was set to 500 V.
The snapshots for 10 Pa show the transition to breakdown at ~3 ms, while the snapshots for 1 Pa show the more 
or less stable anode glow.
Figure 9: Model showing avalanche and breakdown at 10 Pa, with sharply peaked increase in current (green 
line); and oscillating glow discharge at 1 Pa (purple line).
Figure 10: Experimental setup for plasma-assisted discharge: 1 – Cesar 1312 RF generator; 2 – stainless steel 
chamber; 3 – hydrogen valve; 4 - hydrogen plasma; 5 – glass tube; 6 - micrometer translation stage; 7 –
insulated PTFE rod with a connector; 8 – power supply/multimeter; 9 – stainless steel electrode; 10 – pressure 
gauge; 11 – turbo-pump; 12 – rotary pump.
Figure 11: Left (a): example of plasma-assisted discharge and current when ramping up voltage between 
electrodes while plasma switched on in neighboring chamber (using 60W plasma, 5 Pa, 10 cm distance). Right
(b): examples of significant reduction of breakdown voltage when plasma is switched on (10W plasma; 5 cm 
distance; 1, 2 and 5 Pa); both with and without plasma, the observed breakdown voltages at low pressures are all 
significantly reduced with respect to classical Paschen prediction of >105 V (see fig. 6), which is attributed to 
the glass tube wall surfaces.
Figure 12: Sketch of reticle cross-section, showing conductive coating stacks on frontside and backside; adapted 
from McLellan
Figure 13: PIC simulation of electron density (blue line) and reticle frontside surface potential (red line), 
showing accumulation of plasma over pulses but no build-up of surface potential.
Figure 14: Left (a): basics of charging mechanism of reticle backside; Top right (b): energy spectrum of 
electrons reaching reticle edge modelled by 3D PIC code. Bottom right (c): energetic secondary electrons charge 
reticle backside, while ions are carried by field and momentum towards nearest wall resulting in a net negative 
charge on reticle.
Figure 15: PIC simulations of backside voltage dependence on time and pressure, showing >2x reduction in 
voltage for 1.5x higher pressure.
Figure 16: Illustration of reticle unloading sequence. While clamped the separation between reticle backside and 
clamp electrode is in order of a few micrometers, resulting in strong capacitive coupling; during unload the 
separation is increased to ~1 cm, reducing the capacitance by several orders of magnitude.


25

Figure 17: Example of backside (BS) potential amplification from ~14 V to ~600 V during reticle unload (blue 
line), caused by increasing gap between reticle and clamp (stepwise from t=8 sec on in this capacitive model); 
also shown is the induced frontside voltage (red line) and the induced clamp voltage (yellow line).
Figure 18: Left (a): modified reticle pod for ESVM measurements; Middle (b): ESVM measurement of high 
voltage on reticle backside when reticle has been exposed to EUV; Right (c): Observation of ESD damage on a
test reticle.
Figure 19: Particle pick-up as a function of reticle surface potential; from Amemiya50.
Figure 20: Reticle backside voltage as function of clamping offset; the colors denote different specimens of test 
reticles from two different suppliers.
Figure 21: Left (a): prototype of miniature inductively-coupled plasma generator, with (A) inductive coil, (B) 
high-Q capacitors, (C) impedance matching and (D) RF current monitoring coil (only for prototype). The 
diameter of the assembly is approximately 2 cm. Middle (b): ignition of the discharge at 3Pa hydrogen. Right 
(c): stable operation at 2W RF power and 3Pa hydrogen. Images courtesy of ISAN.
Figure 22: EUV-plasma now neutralizes reticle backside during reticle unload, even with the EUV beam several 
cm’s away. Left (a): reticle location with respect to EUV beam and modeled ion densities; Right (b): reticle 
backside voltages measured by ESVM, without and with EUV on during unload.
Figure 23: Effective mitigation of ESD-related particles (solid blue) by EUV@unload; ~4x improvement in non-
ESD, or fall-on, particles (orange striped) cannot be attributed to EUV@unload but is likely due to flushing in 
between the two measurements.
Figure 24: Left (a): PIC model of charging of a 10 mm particle in the EUV beam, showing fast transient positive 
photo-charging and subsequent negative charging (to ~1 e per nm); quasi steady-state charge (balanced electron 
and ion currents) is achieved within ~5 ms. The insert shows the electron and ion temperatures. Right (b): 
repeating charging pattern over multiple pulses.
Figure 25: Left (a): PIC model of charging of a 100 nm particle in the EUV beam, showing fast transient 
positive photo-charging and subsequent negative charging. Right (b): increasing charge for over multiple pulses 
for 100 nm particle.
Figure 26: Volume force estimates for submicron particles in the gap between reticle and grounded reticle
masking blades, for 250W Source and 5 Pa H2.
Figure 27: Left (a): Particle-in-Cell simulations of the force map for a 50-nm diameter particle in the reticle 
zone, just after the EUV pulse (180 ns). More yellow means higher force (blue means lower); arrows indicate 
local direction of force. Right (b): modeled trajectory for a 50 nm test particle


