Second harmonic generation from Chalcogenide 

metasurfaces via mode coupling engineering

Tapajyoti Das Gupta,a Louis Martin-Monier,a Jeremy Butet, b Kuang-Yu Yang, b Andreas Leber,a Chaoqun Dong, a Tung Nguyen-
Dang, a Wei Yan, a Olivier J.F. Martin, b Fabien Sorin a†

a Laboratory of Photonic Materials and Fiber Devices, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland.

b Nanophotonics and Metrology Laboratory, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland.

† Corresponding Author, email: fabien.sorin@epfl.ch

Abstract: Dielectric metasurfaces have shown prominent applications in nonlinear optics due to strong field 

enhancement and low dissipation losses at the nanoscale. Chalcogenide glasses are one of the promising materials 

for the observation of nonlinear effects due to their high intrinsic nonlinearities. Here, we demonstrate, 

experimentally and theoretically, that significant second harmonic generation can be obtained within amorphous 

chalcogenide based metasurfaces by relying on the coupling between lattice and particle resonances. We further 

show that the high quality factor resonance at the origin of the second harmonic generation can be tuned over a 

wide wavelength range using a simple and versatile fabrication approach. The measured second harmonic intensity 

is orders of magnitude higher than that from a deposited chalcogenide film, and more than three orders of 

magnitude higher than conventional plasmonic and Silicon-based structures. Fabricated via a simple and scalable 

technique, these all-dielectric architectures are ideal candidates for the design of flat non-linear optical components 

on flexible substrates.

Introduction 

High refractive index dielectric metasurfaces1–4are sub-wavelength nanostructured arrays that provide a 

promising alternative to plasmonic structures5,6, especially thanks to their intrinsic low dissipation losses2, multipolar 

resonances7 and their inherent magnetic response. An important application of such dielectric resonators lies in 

nonlinear optics7. In particular, second harmonic (SH) generation has thus far mainly relied on III-V semiconductors8,9

due to their non-centrosymmetric crystalline structures. Other common candidates include silicon10, plasmonic-based 

metasurfaces11,12 and hybrid structures13 which have all shown a strong SH generation enhancement as compared to 

their thin films counterpart. 

SH signals can also be strongly enhanced by using properly engineered resonances. For example, resonators 

with broken symmetry8,14 have proven efficient to produce high quality factor (Q.F.) resonances and hence strong field 

enhancement at both the fundamental and the SH wavelengths. Other approaches lie in the fabrication of high aspect 

ratio pillar-like structures15, where the so-called bound state in continuum allows for a high Q.F. using single pillar 

structures. Similar high efficiency has also been reported in plasmonic architectures, for example with complex Metal-


Dielectric-Metal (MDM) cavities relying on patch antennas16 or chiral structures17. These interesting designs 

nevertheless require a high aspect ratio or sophisticated shapes, thus involving complex e-beam processes, which limits 

the applicability of such devices. 

Another way to engineer high Q.F. metasurfaces is to use surface lattice resonances. For a bare lattice made 

from non-resonant particles, near-field enhancement is observed at the Rayleigh-anomaly wavelength.
21,22. This 

resonance spectral position is defined by:

𝝀(𝒊,𝟎) = 𝒂𝟎. ( 𝒏

|𝒊| − 𝒔𝒊𝒏𝜽

𝒊
)
(i)

where 𝑎0 is the periodicity or the lattice constant of the arrays, 𝑛 is the surrounding refractive index, 𝜃 is the angle of 

incidence, and 𝑖 is an integer denoting the diffraction order. Under normal incidence, this resonance is hence solely 

dependent on the lattice periodicity and the surrounding refractive index18. By additionally considering resonant 

nanoparticles, a wealth of optical phenomena and spectral features can be exploited by relying on the coupling between

lattice and Mie-type modes associated to the particle23, as illustrated in Fig. 1.

For weak coupling, both resonances are barely modified and the response of the system remains essentially 

Lorentzian. When coupling reaches the critical regime, this interaction leads to the emergence of a high Q.F. Fano-type 

resonance24,25. A strong coupling regime further leads to an energy splitting yielding two characteristic peaks 26. 

Interestingly, the entire response of the system can be controlled by the interactions between particle resonance 

(determined by its material composition and shape) and the lattice resonance, which is governed by the array periodicity 

and the surrounding refractive index 27,28. Simple geometrical levers such as lattice periodicity or interparticle gap 


(equivalent to particle size for a fixed period) allow for tunable coupling between particle and lattice modes. The 

resonator shape or constituting materials further represent additional degrees of freedom. Engineering strong resonance 

through engineered mode coupling proves a versatile platform for light-matter interaction at the nanoscale, and in 

particular for enhancing SHG emission29.

However, independent control over geometrical parameters commonly relies on time and cost-intensive

lithographic techniques and thus fails to optimize the nano-structures for enhanced SH performance. Previous works 

have proposed simple techniques to controllably tune a single geometrical parameter without relying on lithographic 

techniques, for example using thermoplastics19, stretched PDMS during nanoimprinting process30, or using elastomeric 

PDMS31 as a substrate. By either using a constant particle size or constant lattice period, these works provided a single 

geometrical lever to control mode coupling. A simple and versatile way to independently tune two or more geometrical 

parameters remains to be developed. 

Here, we address this issue and demonstrate a novel materials and fabrication platform for high conversion 

efficiency SH dielectric nanostructures from the coupling between particle resonance with lattice resonance, via the 

template dewetting of chalcogenide glasses-based metasurfaces. Chalcogenides32–36 are ideal dielectric for SHG in the 

proper form and configuration37,38, yet they have been seldom used due to a lack of proper resonance engineering

strategy, and versatile materials processing approach. The process we developed39 enables tuning independently the 

lattice period (through imprinting pressure) and the particle size or diameter (through successive dewetting) in order to 

understand and optimize the emergence of Fano-type surface lattice resonance.  With this fabrication flexibility, 

coupling between the diffractive lattice and the radiative particle modes can be properly controlled, which is 

subsequently exploited to enhance the SH signal. We observe an enhanced SHG at the Fano-type surface lattice 

resonance of two orders of magnitude larger than the non-resonant region and four orders of magnitude higher 

compared to unstructured thin films. The SH conversion efficiency we observe is of the order of 10-6, which outperforms 

conventional plasmonics and Si-based structures. This experimental effect is investigated through finite difference time 

domain (FDTD) simulations by relating the origin of the strong SHG to the field enhancement induced by critical 

coupling between the lattice and radiative modes. The design methodology and SH efficiency reported in this article 

pave the way for nonlinear chalcogenide-based light sources using a highly scalable and versatile fabrication platform.

Experimental Section

Fabrication Technique

An array of inverted pyramids with different periods and sizes was obtained by interference lithography

followed by KOH anisotropic etching on p-doped Si [100] wafer (CEMITEC, Spain). Using a negative PDMS stamp 

(Sylgard 184, Dow Corning, USA), the Si microstructure was reproduced via nano-imprinting onto a thermoplastic 

polycarbonate sheet (Goodfellow, UK). The thin chalcogenide film (ChG) was then deposited by thermal evaporation 

(UNIVEX 250, Oerlikon, Germany). Annealing was achieved on a hot plate (Isotemp Fisher Scientific) (80°C) to 

induce thermal dewetting.


SEM characterization and analysis

All SEM samples were coated with a 10 nm carbon film. The SEM images were taken with a Zeiss Merlin field 

emission SEM equipped with a GEMINI II column operating at 3.0 kV with a probe current of 120 pA. All SEM image 

analysis were done using Image J software, averaging the measures over a large number N of particles for the size 

distribution (N>100) and a reduced number of periods P for the period extraction (P>5).

Simulations

The linear simulations were performed using commercially available FDTD software Lumerical (version 2018 

a). The optical constants were obtained experimentally via spectroscopic ellipsometry (Sopra GES 5E) analysis of thin 

film of selenium (Figure S.I.3). A linearly polarized plane wave source was used for all the simulations. The substrate 

index was chosen to be 1.6, which is the average index of polycarbonate40. Periodic boundary conditions were used in 

the transverse direction and a perfectly matched layer was used in the wave propagation direction. The particle is 

defined as the overlap between an ellipsoid with in-plane radius r and conical shape of base length d. The ellipsoid in-

plane radius r is defined as r = d.(1+√𝟐)/2, while the ellipsoid center coincides with the pyramid base center. The particle 

radius in this work refers to the ellipsoid radius in the model. The height of the pyramid shape was kept fixed at 200 

nm. For the electric field amplitude spectral evolution, a time monitor was placed in the interparticle gap i.e. in between 

two neighbor ellipsoids as well as in the center of the ellipsoidal particle. For magnetic field amplitude spectral 

evolution, a time monitor was placed at the particle center (i.e the ellipsoid center). For the maximal electric field 

enhancement calculation, the value of the maximal field intensity was extracted from the electric field distribution map

at the corresponding resonance wavelength, within the metasurface’s symmetry plane. Additional calculations based 

on the Mie theory were performed to determine the resonance conditions for Se particles as a function of their radius 

(Figure S.I.4).

Linear and Non-linear measurements 

The linear transmission spectra were measured using an integrating sphere coupled with a spectrometer (Ocean 

Optics, UV-Vis USA). For the non-linear optical measurements, a commercial multiphoton scanning microscope

(LEICA SP5MULTI-PHOTON) combined with a 20x/1.00 NA water-immersion objective (HCX PL APO) and a 

Ti:Sapphire femtosecond laser (Chameleon ultra-laser, repetition rate: 80 MHz, operating wavelength λ = 800 nm, 

pulse duration: 140 fs) combined with an electro-optical modulator (EOM) to adjust the input power was used. The 

backward scattered SHG from the structures was collected by the same objective followed by a beam splitter, a band-

pass filter (of different wavelengths with a bandwidth of 10 nm), and a photomultiplier tube (NDD PMT). The XY 

scanner (400 Hz scanning speed) of the microscope enabled a 387.5 μm × 387.5 μm field range with 758.32 nm pixel 

resolution at 800 nm. The quadratic dependence between the SH intensity and the input power was recorded be carefully 

tuning the input power.


Results and discussion

Fabrication of metasurfaces 

The fabrication process is schematized in Figure 2(a) and is detailed in the experimental section (Technique of 

fabrication). The obtained pattern is illustrated in the SEM images in Figure 2(b) (see Figure S.I.1 for additional details 

on the fabrication method). 

We start by investigating a simple, yet thus far unexplored, approach to tailor the lattice period of the underlying 

pattern, via engineering the applied pressure during the imprinting step. Figure 2(b) shows the change in period on a 

bare polycarbonate (PC) textured sample when the pressure varies from 0.05 MPa to 0.2 MPa. As the applied pressure 

during the nanoimprinting process is increased we observe an increase in the period.  The SEM images (see Figure 

Figure 2: Fabrication process of the metasurfaces. (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the process of fabrication. (b) Variation 

of the periodicity with the applied pressure. (c) Scanning electron microscopy image of dewetted Se nano-arrays obtained by 

successive dewetting corresponding to a total cumulative thickness of 60nm for a fixed periodicity of 400nm. The scale bar is 2 

μm. The graph in inset shows the particle size distribution. A Gaussian fit provides a average radius value r=181±13 nm.


SI.1) suggest a well-controlled increase of the array periodicity with the applied pressure, which will be later exploited 

to tune the lattice resonance. 

On the other hand, our process also proposes a way to control Se particle size or radius (or equivalently their 

spacing distance, labeled G in this work). By successively depositing and dewetting thin layers of Se of controlled 

thickness, it is possible to control the inter-particle distance down to approximately 10 nm (Figure S.I.2) while

increasing the particle size. Controlling evaporated thickness hence provides a lever over the interparticle gap. As 

apparent in Figure 2(c), there is an inherent size distribution for dewetted particles. This size distribution is intricately

linked to a number of factors including substrate inter-pyramid spacing, local substrate curvature and film thickness. 

Interestingly, the particle size distribution can be narrowed down by reducing the interparticle gap (equivalent to 

increasing the particle size), independently of the factors cited above. This point has already been extensively 

investigated in reference 39, and we refer the reader to this work for more details on this point. The particles shown in 

Figure 2(c) have a radial distribution of r = 181 ± 13 nm, which suggests a high degree of order. Reduced ordering 

proves detrimental to the resonance sharpness, characterized by the Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM). The sharpness 

of the resonances experimentally obtained in this work further support that the high degree of order is maintained for 

the considered range of particle sizes and periods.

Note that the Se particles must be tailored to support resonances at wavelengths longer than the spectral 

absorbing region of amorphous Se (non-negligible losses below 600 nm, see Figure S.I.3) and within the spectral range 

of our Ti: sapphire femtosecond laser (λ = 650 nm – 1200 nm). The computed single particle scattering spectra (Figure 

S.I.3) show broad resonances, indicating that a particle size of radius above 300 nm is a prerequisite to have a resonance 

inducing a strong field enhancement at approximately 700 nm.

Tunable optical properties

a)
Linear optical properties

Figure 3(a) shows the change in the experimental transmission spectrum when we fix the lattice period P and 

vary the particle size S= 2.r = P - G by the process of successive dewetting, where r is defined as the radius of the 

particle. The total deposited thicknesses represented in the graph (40 nm, 50 nm and 60 nm) dictates the size of the 

particles and therefore also their spacing. The initial broad dip for 40 nm thickness decouples into two dips, which red 

shift as the thickness (and hence the size of the particles) increases, indicative of a change in the coupling regime as the 

particles resonance shift, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Before investigating and exploiting this effect, we experimentally study

the effect of changing the lattice period P, while keeping the same deposition conditions (60 nm film thickness). As 

shown in Figure 3(b), it reveals the appearance of a strong asymmetric resonance, which increases when P is varied 

from 360 nm to 400 nm. A further increase of the period to 450 nm leads to spectral reshaping from one asymmetric 

Fano-type resonance to two symmetric resonances, indicative of a change in the coupling strength in the system 23. From 

these experimental results, we identify a sharp resonance of FWHM of approximately 5 nm in air for a lattice period of 

400 nm and 60 nm total thickness.


To unveil the origin of the different resonances and their coupling, FDTD simulations were performed using 

the commercially available Lumerical software. The effect on the transmission spectrum of decreasing the inter-particle 

gap upon successive dewetting is first illustrated in Figure 4(a), keeping a fixed period P = 400nm. The inter-particle 

gap distance was varied from 50 to 10 nm while keeping the lattice period at 400 nm. The simulated transmission 

spectra (Figure 4(a)) show a sharp asymmetric dip that red-shifts on decreasing the inter-particle gap, which 

corresponds to experimental observations. Figure 4(b) and (c) relate the respective evolution of the electric field 

magnitude in the interparticle gap and the magnetic field amplitude at the particle center with wavelength. The 

interparticle electric field maximum (associated to the lattice resonance) both decreases and red-shifts with a reduced 

interparticle gap (Figure 4(b) and (d)). The evolution in Figure 4(b) corroborates the trend observed for maximal electric 

field intensity at resonance in the metasurface’s symmetry plane (Figure 4(d)), which strongly decreases as the gap is 

reduced from 50 nm to 10 nm. This effect contrasts with the appearance of hot-spots at lower gap in plasmonic

metasurfaces.41,42 As shown in Figure 4(c), the magnetic field monitor (at particle center) indicates a broad magnetic 

resonance associated to the particle, which overlaps with another sharper magnetic peak, located at the exact position 

of the electric lattice resonance. This clearly suggests that Mie (magnetic) and Lattice (electric) modes interfere for the 

considered range of interparticle gaps.

We now turn towards the influence of the array periodicity on the optical spectrum, keeping a fixed particle 

size S = P - G = 350 nm. Structures with varying lattice period (from 370 nm to 450 nm, see Figures 4(e)-(g)) are 

illuminated with a polarized plane wave at normal incidence. The sharp asymmetric resonance apparent in the 

transmission spectrum (Figure 4(e)) for an initial small period increases in strength and then transforms to a symmetric 

dip for the highest periodicities considered in this work (450 nm). As the period increases to 600 nm (Figure S.I.4), the 

two resonances merge, leading to a single resonance, which disappears upon increasing the period to 800 nm. The 

asymmetric resonance observed in the experimental (Figure 3(a)) and simulated (Figure 4(e)) transmission spectra for 

Figure 3: Experimental transmission spectra illustrating the gap and the lattice effect. (a) Transmission spectra obtained for 

successive dewetting steps corresponding to an increased equivalent thickness T, maintaining the pressure during the 

nanoimprint at 0.1 MPa. The transmission spectrum is observed to split from a single broad resonance (at 40 nm) to two 

resonances (50 and 60 nm). (b) Transmission spectra for a 60 nm deposited film obtained as the pressure during the imprinting 

process is varied from 0.1 MPa to 0.2 MPa. As the nanoimprinted pressure is increased, the asymmetric resonance becomes 

sharper (0.15MPa) corresponding to increase in lattice periodicity to 400 nm. Further increases of the pressure leads to the 

disappearance of Fano resonance and gives rise to two broad symmetric dips (period 450 nm).


a small period, is mainly attributed to the electric lattice resonance. Figure 4(f) and 4(g) show the electric and magnetic 

field amplitude at the interparticle gap and particle center respectively as the array period is varied from 370 nm to 450 

nm. The interparticle electric field maximum (associated to the lattice resonance, Figure 4(f)) first increases with an 

increase in period from 370 nm to 410 nm, and decreases when the period is further expanded beyond 410 nm. This is 

in line with the trend observed for maximal electric field intensity at resonance, based on the electric intensity profile 

distribution in the metasurface’s symmetry plane (Figure 4(h)), which reaches a maximal value at around 400 nm. The 

electric resonance associated to the lattice interferes with the broad electric resonance associated to the particle up to 

Figure 4: Effect of the periodicity and gap on the mode properties.  (a)-(d): Effect of gap / particle size for a period of 400 nm. 

(a) Simulated transmission spectra, (b) simulated electric field magnitude in the interparticle region, and (c) simulated magnetic 

field magnitude at particle center as a function of wavelength with a reduction of interparticle gap from 50 nm to 10 nm. (d) 

Simulated maximal electric field intensity along the unit period’s symmetry plane.(e)-(h) : Effect of periodicity for a fixed particle 

diameter of 350 nm. (e) Simulated transmission spectra, (f) simulated electric field magnitude in the interparticle region, and 

(g) simulated magnetic field magnitude at particle center as a function of wavelength with an increase in period from 370 nm to 

400 nm. (h) Simulated maximal electric field intensity along the unit period’s symmetry plane.


430 nm period, as suggested in Figure 4(g). Increasing the period beyond 430 nm leads to a sharp drop in the field 

enhancement, indicating that electric lattice and electric particle modes no longer interfere.18,43

Thus, to obtain a high quality factor, engineering mode coupling through the fine tuning of lattice period and 

particle size allowed by our process is essential. For this specific substrate, texture, and dielectric material, we find that 

the optimal resonance overlap occurs at 700 nm for a lattice period of 400 nm and a Se particle size of 350 nm. This 

architecture leads to sharp resonant modes with a strong field enhancement and a high experimental Q.F. of 175 at 700 

nm wavelength. 

b)
Second harmonic generation

To demonstrate the potential of our metasurfaces design capabilities, we used the previously demonstrated 

nano-photonic structures with optimized light-matter interactions for resonantly-enhanced SHG. Simulated linear 

transmission spectrum (Figure 5(a), wine-red curve) for a nanoparticle size of 350 nm and a period of 400 nm reveals 

a dip associated to the lattice resonance excitation. The experimental linear measurement is in line with simulation 

predictions, showing a corresponding dip in transmission at 700 nm (Figure 5(b), wine-red curve). This resonance leads 

to an enhancement of the electric field intensity by two orders of magnitude (~90x) in comparison with off-resonance 

spectral regions (Figure 5(b), light red markers).

SHG measurements were performed in reflection using a previously reported setup44. From each of the obtained 

scanned image, the SH intensity at particular wavelength was calculated from the mean value of those images as shown 

in Figure 5(c) (light red dots) when the pump wavelength is tuned between 680 nm and 780 nm. The conversion 

efficiency η is defined as:

where 𝒏𝒑𝒉𝒐𝒕𝒐𝒏

𝑺𝑯
and 𝒏𝒑𝒉𝒐𝒕𝒐𝒏

𝑭𝒖𝒏𝒅𝒂𝒎𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒂𝒍 are the photon counts of the generated second harmonic (SH) and the fundamental 

incident signal respectively. The intensity I is related to the photon count according to the following equation:

where I is the energy and λ the corresponding wavelength. We proceed to measure the re-emitted SH intensity 𝑰𝑺𝑯 over 

a fixed integration time (10 second), as well as the intensity of the fundamental 𝑰𝑭𝒖𝒏𝒅𝒂𝒎𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒂𝒍 reflected from a gold 

mirror surface over a reduced integration time to avoid saturation (1 second). All measurements are done under normal 

incidence. Normalizing these powers with time and combining relations (ii) and (iii) finally provide the conversion 

efficiency, which is evaluated here at 10-6 at resonance and at 10-8 off-resonance. The normalized SHG power shows a 

peak at the asymmetric electric resonance (700 nm) due to the electromagnetic field enhancement (Figure 5(a)). When 

exciting at the resonant wavelength of 700 nm (i.e. maximal field enhancement), SH signal normalized with the incident 

power exhibits a 100 times enhancement with respect to the non-resonant region (800 nm), and almost 4 orders of 

magnitude enhancement as compared to the non-patterned Se thin film of comparable thickness in the off-resonant 

𝜼 = 𝒏𝒑𝒉𝒐𝒕𝒐𝒏

𝑺𝑯

𝒏𝒑𝒉𝒐𝒕𝒐𝒏

⁄ 𝑭𝒖𝒏𝒅𝒂𝒎𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒂𝒍
(ii)

𝑰(𝝀) = 𝒏𝒉 𝒄

𝝀
(iii)


region (800 nm) (Figure S.I.5). Figure 5(d)-(c) reproduce the study done for Figure 5(a)-(c) for an increased period of 

470nm with a fixed particle size of 350 nm. Based on the transmission spectrum, this situation is akin to strong coupling, 

and demonstrates comparatively lower field enhancement and this SHG emission as compared with the critically 

coupled case of Figures 5(a)-(c).

Figure 5: Resonantly Enhanced Second Harmonic Generation in critically and strongly coupled conditions. (a)-(c): Fixed 

period of 400 nm and particle size of 350 nm, providing critical coupling conditions. (a) Simulated linear transmission 

spectrum (wine-red) and electric field intensity evaluated at the Se nanoparticle center (light red). (b) Experimental 

transmission spectrum (wine-red curve) and normalized second harmonic signal (with respect to the incident power, in light 

red dots) showing a ~90x signal enhancement. (c) Distribution of the electric field intensity in a plane perpendicular to the 

metasurface for an incident wavelength λ = 700 nm. (d)-(f): Fixed period of 470 nm and particle size of 350 nm, yielding a 

strongly coupled regime. (d) Simulated linear transmission spectrum (wine-red) and electric field intensity evaluated at the Se 

nanoparticle center (light red). (e) Experimental transmission spectrum (wine-red curve) and normalized second harmonic 

signal (with respect to the incident power, in light red dots) showing a ~ 38x signal enhancement. (f) Distribution of the 

electric field intensity in a plane perpendicular to the metasurface for an incident wavelength λ = 750 nm.


The dependence of the field intensity enhancement (𝑰𝝎 = |𝑬|𝟐) on the lattice period (𝑷) for these structures, 

follows a quadratic law  defined by:

where 𝑨𝒐 is determined by the nature of meta-atoms and metasurface design (see S.I. Figure S.I.7(top)). It is worth 

noting that a similar quadratic dependency on the critical coupling has been observed for asymmetric structures.45

Furthermore, the FWHM is also observed to scale quadratically with the lattice period based on numerical simulations 

(S.I. Figure S.I.7 (bottom)):

where 𝑩𝒐 is a constant governed by the metasurface structure and 𝑷𝒄 is the critical period, which leads to critical

coupling of the radiative dipole and the in-plane diffractive modes. To illustrate the SHG efficiency as a function of the 

period, we plotted the maximum SH signal for different periodicities (Figure S.I.8). It is observed that below and above 

the critical period (𝑷𝒄), the SH intensity scales as the 4th power of the period (𝑷). This can be rationalized from our 

previous numerical analogy where the fundamental intensity (𝑰𝝎) scales quadratically (𝑷−𝟐) above 𝑷𝒄. In a first 

approximation46, the observed SH intensity is expected to scale quadratically with the fundamental field enhancement, 

thus demonstrating a quadratic dependency on period (𝑰𝟐𝝎𝜶 𝑰𝝎

𝟐 → 𝑰𝟐𝝎𝜶 𝑷−𝟒). From our simulation, it appears that 

the SH signal should be at-least 8100 times.  The discrepancy seen between our numerical simulation and experimental 

data (Figure 4) can have different origins. The total scattered SH far field intensity is proportional to the perpendicular 

component of the electric field intensity (𝑬𝒛(𝒓, 𝝎)).  To further analyses the perpendicular (𝑬𝒛(𝒓, 𝝎)) and parallel 

component (𝑬𝒚(𝒓, 𝝎)) of the electric field, we plotted the mode profiles as shown in Figure S.I.9.  From such mode 

profile plots, it suggests that the field intensity is significantly enhanced along the substrate plane, while along the z 

plane it is only enhanced 10 times, indicating that the normal component of the field is mainly contributing to the SH 

enhancement16. Furthermore, the detection of the SH signal in reflection mode might also be another cause of the 

discrepancy, since a non-negligible part of the SH wave can also propagate in the forward direction. Nevertheless, the 

experimental results clearly show the ability of our fabrication technique to produce efficient metasurfaces that yield 

both high SHG and tunable Q.F. with a low FWHM. 

Conclusions

In conclusion, with a simple process of nanoimprinting and dewetting, we developed a technique whereby 

optical properties of all-dielectric metasurfaces can be finely tuned whilst keeping the same original Si master. The 

tunability of the optical properties is possible by applying different pressures, leading to a controlled change in period. 

By a process of successive dewetting, increasing particle sizes were obtained, which in turn tuned the inter-particle gap. 

With this ability to control these two independent parameters, different optical modes with large Q.F. were observed in 

a simple way without undergoing any hard lithographic steps. In particular, we have shown that by this programmable 

process, field enhancement could be increased up to a 100 times. Such enhancement of field could give rise to SHG 

with a tailored FWHM using an amorphous structure. We have experimentally and numerically verified that the 

performance of SH intensity can be significantly improved by proper tuning the different optical modes in our 

metasurface. We demonstrated a SH conversion efficiency that is significantly larger compared to plasmonic 

𝑰𝝎 = 𝑨𝒐𝑷−𝟐
(iv)

𝐅𝐖𝐇𝐌 = 𝑩𝒐|𝑷 − 𝑷𝒄|−𝟐
(v)


metasurfaces and Silicon. Our approach could also be generally applied to III-V semiconductor in the UV or VUV 

regions, where sharp SH signals are required for bio-molecule sensing application.  Such general design approach could 

indeed pave the way for fabrication of nonlinear meta-devices, fast optical switching, frequency conversion, and light-

based communication.

Conflicts of interest

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge the European Research Council for funding support (ERC starting grant 679211 

‘FLOWTONICS’ and ERC-2015-AdG-695206 Nanofactory) and the Swiss National Science Foundation (project 

200020_153662). The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Christian Santschi and Thierry Laroche for their help in 

the non-linear measurements.


Supplementary Informations

1. Sample Fabrication process

Figure S.I.1. SEM image illustrating the effect of applied pressure during nanoimprinting (left) period 360 nm (applied Pressure 

0.05 MPa) (right) period 480 nm (applied pressure 0.2MPa) . Scale Bar 350 nm.

Figure S.I.2. Successive dewetting process. SEM images (a) to (d) illustrating that by the process of successive dewetting 

(deposition and dewetting of successive thin films) the inter-particle gap and particle size can be tuned. Inset shows the total 

deposited thickness of the film. 

2. Optical constant of Selenium

Figure S.I.3. Optical constant of Selenium obtained by ellipsometry


3. Single particle scattering analysis

Figure S.I.4. Single particle numerical analysis as a function of radius (a) multipole expansion of scattering spectra (b) electric 

dipole (c) magnetic dipole evaluated with Mie theory for Selenium (Se).

Mie theory was used to calculate the single particle scattering cross-section.  Scattering cross-section of a single 

homogeneous sphere is given by:

𝐶𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑡 = 2𝜋

𝑘2 ∑(|𝑎𝑛|2 + |𝑏𝑛|2)

𝑛

Where 𝑘 is the wavenumber , 𝑎𝑛, 𝑏𝑛 are the nth order of electric and magnetic Mie coefficients respectively; and n=1 

and 2 indicates the dipole and quadruple moments respectively. Figure 1(a) shows the calculated 𝐶𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑡 as a function of 

particle radius and wavelength, revealing a red-shift for both the electric dipole (ED) and the magnetic dipole (MD) 

resonance. In a sharp contrast to the broad ED, MD exhibits a narrower linewidth with a larger contribution to the total 

extinction cross-section than the ED resonance. The main contribution of the scattering spectra thus comes from the 

MD for larger particle size. Importantly, both the ED and MD resonances lie above the lossless region of the bulk 

selenium for a particle size of 300 nm, satisfying design criteria.

4. Effect of mode coupling by lattice tuning

Figure S.I.5. Simulation of transmission illustrating the dip positions with increasing periodicities.


5. Field profile distribution at critical coupling

Figure S.I.6. (a) Magnetic and (b) electric plot at their corresponding resonance for a 400 nm period.

6. Power law dependency of SHG

Figure S.I.7. Power law dependency of the emitted signal at 400 nm when the fundamental wavelength is 800 nm. Inset shows 

the log-log plot of the curve showing a linear fit of slope 2. SHG intensity of the metasurface due to fundamental field 

enhancement is at least 4 orders of magnitude higher than the thin film.


7.  SHG Spectrum at Resonant and non resonant region

300
320
340
360
380
400
420

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

SHG Intensity (Arb Unit)

Wavelength (nm)

 340 nm
 350 nm
 360 nm
 370 nm

Resonant Region

Non-Resonant Region

SHG emission wavelengths

Figure S.I.8. SHG emitted spectrum at resonant and non-resonant region

8.  Polarization dependency of emitted SHG

340
350
360
370
380
390

0

20

40

60

80

100

Polarization

 0o 
 90o 

Normalized SHG Intensity (Arb. Unit)

SHG Wavelength (nm)

Figure S.I.9. Polarization dependency of SHG emission


9. Quadratic dependency of the Field enhancement

Figure S.I.10. (a) Quadratic dependency of electric field Intensity (E) on lattice period (b) Plot of Full Width Half-Maximum 

(FWHM) with lattice period showing the Minimum FWHM (corresponding to maximum Q.F.) with lattice period (P).

8. SH-signal 4th Power dependency with lattice period

Figure S.I.11. Plot illustrating the 4th power dependency of SH intensity as a function of lattice period (P). The SH intensity is 

seen to reach maximum at the critical lattice period attributed to critical coupling.


9. Electric field component distribution

Figure S.I.12. Electric Field component distribution (a) in z-direction showing near 10 times field intensity enhancement in the 

z-direction. (b) 100 times enhancement in the y direction. 

References

1
A. Arbabi, Y. Horie, M. Bagheri and A. Faraon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 937–943.

2
D. G. Baranov, D. A. Zuev, S. I. Lepeshov, O. V. Kotov, A. E. Krasnok, A. B. Evlyukhin and B. N. Chichkov, Optica, 2017, 4, 814.

3
M. Decker and I. Staude, J. Opt., 2016, 18, 103001.

4
M. Decker, I. Staude, M. Falkner, J. Dominguez, D. N. Neshev, I. Brener, T. Pertsch and Y. S. Kivshar, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 

813–820.

5
N. Yu and F. Capasso, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 139–150.

6
B. Metzger, M. Hentschel and H. Giessen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1931–1937.

7
D. Smirnova, A. I. Smirnov and Y. S. Kivshar, Phys. Rev. A, 2018, 97, 013807.

8
P. P. Vabishchevich, S. Liu, M. B. Sinclair, G. A. Keeler, G. M. Peake and I. Brener, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 1685–1690.

9
J. D. Sautter, L. Xu, A. E. Miroshnichenko, M. Lysevych, I. Volkovskaya, D. A. Smirnova, R. Camacho-Morales, K. Zangeneh 

Kamali, F. Karouta, K. Vora, H. H. Tan, M. Kauranen, I. Staude, C. Jagadish, D. N. Neshev and M. Rahmani, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 

3905–3911.

10
S. V. Makarov, M. I. Petrov, U. Zywietz, V. Milichko, D. Zuev, N. Lopanitsyna, A. Kuksin, I. Mukhin, G. Zograf, E. Ubyivovk, D. 

A. Smirnova, S. Starikov, B. N. Chichkov and Y. S. Kivshar, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3047–3053.

11
J. Butet, P.-F. Brevet and O. J. F. Martin, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10545–10562.

12
M. J. Huttunen, R. Czaplicki and M. Kauranen, J. Nonlinear Opt. Phys. Mater., 2019 , 28,  1950001.

13
M. Hentschel, B. Metzger, B. Knabe, K. Buse and H. Giessen, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2016, 7, 111–120.

14
M. Parry, A. Komar, B. Hopkins, S. Campione, S. Liu, A. E. Miroshnichenko, J. Nogan, M. B. Sinclair, I. Brener and D. N. Neshev, 

Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 053102.


15
M. V. Rybin, K. L. Koshelev, Z. F. Sadrieva, K. B. Samusev, A. A. Bogdanov, M. F. Limonov and Y. S. Kivshar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 

2017, 119, 243901.

16
F. Wang, A. B. F. Martinson and H. Harutyunyan, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1188–1194.

17
J. T. Collins, D. C. Hooper, A. G. Mark, C. Kuppe and V. K. Valev, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5445–5451.

18
D. C. Hooper, C. Kuppe, D. Wang, W. Wang, J. Guan, T. W. Odom and V. K. Valev, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 165–172.

19
M. H. Lee, M. D. Huntington, W. Zhou, J.-C. Yang and T. W. Odom, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 311–315.

20
V. G. Kravets, A. V. Kabashin, W. L. Barnes and A. N. Grigorenko, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5912–5951.

21
A. Hessel and A. A. Oliner, Appl. Opt., 1965, 4, 1275.

22
A. Maradudin, I. Simonsen, J. Polanco, and R. Fitzgerald, Jour. Opt., 2016, 18, 024004 .

23
B. Gallinet, T. Siegfried, H. Sigg, P. Nordlander and O. J. F. Martin, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 497–503.

24
Y. Chu and K. B. Crozier, Opt. Lett., 2009, 34, 244.

25
A. Christ, Y. Ekinci, H. H. Solak, N. A. Gippius, S. G. Tikhodeev and O. J. F. Martin, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 

2007, 76, 201405.

26
P. Törmä and W. L. Barnes, Reports Prog. Phys., 2015, 78, 013901.

27
L. Michaeli, S. Keren-Zur, O. Avayu, H. Suchowski and T. Ellenbogen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 118, 243904.

28
R. Czaplicki, A. Kiviniemi, M. J. Huttunen, X. Zang, T. Stolt, I. Vartiainen, J. Butet, M. Kuittinen, O. J. F. Martin and M. Kauranen, 

Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7709–7714.

29
A. Kiselev, G. D. Bernasconi and O. J. F. Martin, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 38708.

30
L. Liu, J. Zhang, M. A. Badshah, L. Dong, J. Li, S. Kim and M. Lu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22445.

31
A. Yang, A. J. Hryn, M. R. Bourgeois, W.-K. Lee, J. Hu, G. C. Schatz and T. W. Odom, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 

14201–14206.

32
B. J. Eggleton, B. Luther-Davies and K. Richardson, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 141–148.

33
H. Lin, Y. Song, Y. Huang, D. Kita, S. Deckoff-Jones, K. Wang, L. Li, J. Li, H. Zheng, Z. Luo, H. Wang, S. Novak, A. Yadav, C.-C. 

Huang, R.-J. Shiue, D. Englund, T. Gu, D. Hewak, K. Richardson, J. Kong and J. Hu, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 798–805.

34
W. Yan, T. Nguyen-Dang, C. Cayron, T. Das Gupta, A. G. Page, Y. Qu and F. Sorin, Opt. Mater. Express, 2017, 7, 1388.

35
W. Yan, Y. Qu, T. Das Gupta, A. Darga, D. T. Nguyên, A. G. Page, M. Rossi, M. Ceriotti and F. Sorin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 

1700681.

36
Y. Zou, L. Moreel, H. Lin, J. Zhou, L. Li, S. Danto, J. D. Musgraves, E. Koontz, K. Richardson, K. D. Dobson, R. Birkmire and J. 

Hu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 759–764.

37
M. Guignard, V. Nazabal, J. Troles, F. Smektala, H. Zeghlache, Y. Quiquempois, A. Kudlinski and G. Martinelli, Opt. Express, 2005, 

13, 789.

38
C. R. Ma, J. H. Yan, Y. M. Wei and G. W. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 425206.

39
T. Das Gupta, L. Martin-Monier, W. Yan, A. Le Bris, T. Nguyen-Dang, A. G. Page, K.-T. Ho, F. Yesilköy, H. Altug, Y. Qu and F. 

Sorin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 320–327.

40
N. Sultanova, S. Kasarova and I. Nikolov, in Acta Physica Polonica A, Polish Academy of Sciences, 2009, vol. 116, pp. 585–587.

41
C. Readman, B. De Nijs, I. Szabó, A. Demetriadou, R. Greenhalgh, C. Durkan, E. Rosta, O. A. Scherman and J. J. Baumberg, Nano 

Lett., 2019, 19, 2051–2058.


42
A. Manjavacas, L. Zundel and S. Sanders, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10682–10693.

43
M. J. Huttunen, P. Rasekh, R. W. Boyd and K. Dolgaleva, Phys. Rev. A, 2018, 97, 053817.

44
K. Y. Yang, J. Butet, C. Yan, G. D. Bernasconi and O. J. F. Martin, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1522–1530.

45
K. Koshelev, Y. Tang, K. Li, D.-Y. Choi, G. Li and Y. Kivshar, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1639–1644.

46
J. Wang, J. Butet, A.-L. Baudrion, A. Horrer, G. Lévêque, O. J. F. Martin, A. J. Meixner, M. Fleischer, P.-M. Adam, A. Horneber and 

D. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17699–17710.


