 
1

  
 

Uncertainty Analysis for Material 
Measurements Using the Vector Network Analyzer 

 

Nosherwan Shoaib*#, Marco Sellone*, Luciano Brunetti* and Luca Oberto* 

 

*Nanoscience and Materials Division, National Institute of Metrological Research - 
INRiM, Strada delle cacce 91, Torino, ITALY 
E-mail: m.sellone@inrim.it, l.brunetti@inrim.it and l.oberto@inrim.it 

 

#Petroleum Institute, P. O. Box 2533, Abu-Dhabi, UAE 

Email: nshoaib@pi.ac.ae 

 

 

Abstract 

 
This paper presents the characterization measurements and related uncertainty evaluation of a non- 
 
magnetic material using the Vector Network Analyzer (VNA) at microwave frequencies. The permittivity 
 
of the material under test is computed from the scattering parameters (S-parameters). The aim of the work 
 
is to highlight the different uncertainty contributions affecting the permittivity.  

 
 

Index terms 

 
 

Microwave Measurements, Scattering Parameter Measurements, Relative Permittivity, Dielectric Constant, 
Vector Network Analyzer Uncertainty Evaluation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 


 
2

1. Introduction 
 
 
The measurements of dielectric properties of materials at radio frequency have gained importance in the RF  
 
& microwave research field. The dielectric measurements are useful because they provide important  
 
information about the electric and magnetic properties of the materials under test (MUTs). The VNAs are  
 
widely used for material measurements and provide the material characterization in terms of scattering  
 
parameter (S-parameters) [1]-[4]. The S-parameters are further post-processed to obtain the permittivity of  
 
the MUTs [4]. However, the complete uncertainty estimation for permittivity measurements using the  
 
VNAs is still an open and active research topic. Even the recent works on material measurements using the  
 
VNA system are limited to the uncertainty due to VNA residual deviations of the pre-calibration only [3].  
 
Therefore, the complete uncertainty budget showing different uncertainty contributions is still missing. 

 
In this work we present a complete uncertainty evaluation along with uncertainty budgets for permittivity  

 
measurements of a non-magnetic material following a differential numerical approach [5]-[7]. The   
 
uncertainty analysis is carried out for complex-valued S-parameters. The S-parameter uncertainty is  
 
linearly propagated to the complex-valued permittivity, εr = εr
′ − jεr
′′, where 𝜀𝜀𝑟𝑟
′ and 𝜀𝜀𝑟𝑟
′′ are the real and  

 
imaginary parts of 𝜀𝜀𝑟𝑟 respectively. The 𝜀𝜀𝑟𝑟
′ is also known as dielectric constant, while the 𝜀𝜀𝑟𝑟
′′ is usually  

 
referred to as the loss factor. Moreover, the dielectric loss tangent of the material sample (tan δ) can  
 
be.written.as: 
 

                                                                            tan δ =
𝜀𝜀𝑟𝑟′′

𝜀𝜀𝑟𝑟′                                                                         (1) 

 
The schematic of the measurement setup is shown in Fig. 1. A waveguide fixture is filled with the material  
 
sample and the S-parameters are measured.  The layout of the waveguide fixture and the MUT is shown in  
 
Fig. 2.  
 
Fig. 1. Schematic of the measurement setup 
 
Fig. 2. Layout of the waveguide fixture and the MUT 
 

The dimensional measurements of both the sample and the fixture are also performed. The propagation of  


 
3

 
uncertainties due to S-parameters and the dimensional measurements are carried out to compute the total  
 
uncertainty of the permittivity results. The uncertainty propagation is compliant with the “Guide to the  
 
expression of the uncertainty in measurements - (GUM)” [8]. The measurements are traceable to the SI  
 
(International System of units) through dimensional measurements. The traceability of the measurements is  
 
important for the comparison of the results obtained using different measurement systems. As an example,  
 
a sample of Teflon was used as MUT and a WR-90 VNA waveguide setup was used as measurement  
 
system. The complete uncertainty budgets at different frequencies are also presented for permittivity  
 
results. 
 
 
2. Measurement Model and Uncertainty Analysis 
 
 
The VNA measurement model used is described in [5] (see Eqn. 1) in which uncertainties are associated to  
 
the error terms. It includes the VNA noise, linearity, drift, cable stability and connector repeatability   
 
contributions related to S-parameters. This model has been implemented in a data acquisition software  
 
package. The measured transmission S-parameter (S21) of the MUT in the X-band is further post-processed  
 
to compute the complex-valued permittivity in an iterative way by solving the following equation [4]: 
 

                                                         S21 = e−γo(Lf−L) T(1−Γ2)

1−Γ2T2,                                                                (2) 

 

where, Γ =
γ0−γ1
γ0+γ1

, T = e−γ1L, γo and γ1 are the propagation constants in air and the material sample of  

 
length L, respectively. Lf is the length of the waveguide fixture. γo  and γ1 depend on the width of the  
 
waveguide fixture. The air gap corrections are also applied for the air gap that exists between the sample  
 
and the waveguide fixture. The air gap corrections are the function of the height of the waveguide fixture  
 
and the sample [4]. The dimensional measurements of the fixture and the sample have been performed and  
 
shown in Table 1. Their tolerance is 10 µm.  
 
Tab. 1. Dimensional measurements of waveguide fixture and the Teflon sample (in mm). 

 
The VNA setup has been previously characterized in terms of noise, linearity, drift, cable stability and  


 
4

 
connector repeatability and the different S-parameter uncertainty influences have been computed [9]. The  
 
permittivity results also include the uncertainty contribution due to dimensional tolerances of the fixture  
 
and the sample dimensions. 
 

The uncertainty propagation from the S-parameters to the permittivity results has been carried out by   

 
using a general purpose library, known as Metas.UncLib [6] and a custom MATLAB [10] code. This   
 
library allows the propagation of variances of the input probability density functions (pdfs) through a  
 
measurement model, taking the correlations between the quantities fully into account. Metas.UncLib uses  
 
differentiation techniques and keeps track of the dependencies throughout the measurement model [6], [7]. 
 
 
3. Experimental Results 
 
 
Measurements have been performed with a two-port VNA in a temperature and humidity controlled  
 
shielded room. The temperature and the relative humidity during the measurements were of (23.0 ± 0.3)°C  
 
and (45 ±5)% respectively. The VNA was calibrated using the Thru-Reflect-Line (TRL) calibration  
 
technique [11]. This technique requires a direct (thru) connection between the two test ports, one port  
 
reflect standard of unknown reflection at both test ports and a line standard to calibrate the VNA. The   
 
Teflon sample has been machined to fit inside the WR-90 waveguide fixture which was also used as line  
 
standard during the TRL calibration. The measurement frequency ranges from 8.2 to 12.4 GHz. The  
 
permittivity results included the dielectric constant (εr
′) and the dielectric loss tangent (tan.δ). 
 

The measurement results and the uncertainty budgets for the dielectric constant and the dielectric loss  

 
tangent for the Teflon are presented here. The expanded uncertainties have been computed with a coverage  
 
factor of k=2. The behavior of εr
′ and tan δ as function of frequency including the uncertainty are shown  

 
in Figs. 3 and 4.  
 
Fig. 3. Dielectric constant (εr
′) for the Teflon sample 

 
Fig. 4. Dielectric loss tangent (tan δ) for the Teflon sample 

 


 
5

Teflon has low dielectric constant (εr
′ = 2 .03 [12]) and very low dielectric loss tangent in the X-band  

 
(tan δ < 4 · 10− 4 [12], [13]). From Fig. 3, it can be seen that the measured dielectric constant results closely  
 
correspond to the known dielectric constant values for Teflon in X-band waveguide. The dielectric loss  
 
tangent shown in Fig. 4 is also lower than the typical loss tangent limit value for Teflon in X band (i.e.  
 
tan δ < 4 · 10− 4).  

 
The uncertainty budgets for the Teflon sample showing different uncertainty contributions for εr
′ and  

 
tan δ are shown at selected frequencies in Tables 2 and 3. The uncertainty contributions include both  
 
S-parameter uncertainties and the dimensional uncertainties. The uncertainty contributions are cable  
 
stability (Cable Stab.), connector repeatability (Conn. Rep.), drift, linearity (Lin.), noise and dimensional  
 
uncertainty (Dim. Unc.). The different uncertainty contributions have been square root summed to form the  
 
combined standard uncertainty (Std. Unc.).  
 
Tab. 2. Uncertainty budget for the Teflon sample at selected frequencies for the real part of permittivity 
(εr
′) 

 
Tab. 3. Uncertainty budget for the Teflon sample at selected frequencies for the Dielectric loss tangent  
(tan δ) 
 
 It can be observed from Table 2 that the cable stability uncertainty has the most significant influence on  
 
εr
′, while the connector repeatability, the VNA linearity and the dimensional uncertainty have significant  
 
influence on tan δ. However, compared to dimensional uncertainty, the S-parameter uncertainty has    
 
dominant contributions to the permittivity results. 
  
4. Conclusion 
 
 
In this paper, a fully comprehensive measurement uncertainty analysis for permittivity results has been  
 
presented. This analysis allows the optimization of the setup with regards to the measurement uncertainty  
 
by analyzing the influence of different uncertainty sources. Results are also metrologically traceable to the  
 
SI through dimensional measurements. A Teflon sample has been measured from 8.2 to 12.4 GHz using a  
 
WR-90 VNA waveguide setup. The transmission S-parameters has been used, iteratively, to compute the  


 
6

 
complex-valued permittivity. The linear propagation of uncertainties through the measurement model has  
 
been carried out. The permittivity results agree very well to the known properties of the Teflon sample in  
 
the X-band. The uncertainty budgets are also presented at different frequencies. The results highlight that  
 
the cable stability has the major influence on the dielectric constant of the Teflon sample. Therefore, one  
 
should minimize the cable movements during the VNA measurements to get accurate measurements.  
 
Dimensional measurements are also critical. For what concerns the loss tangent, the most influential  
 
contributions are related to dimensional measurements, connectors repeatability and cable stability. 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
 
The authors are indebted with Danilo Serazio (INRIM) for providing and machining the Teflon sample.  
 
The authors are also thankful to Michael Wollensack of Federal Institute of Metrology - METAS,  
 
Switzerland for useful discussions and information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
7

References 
 

 

1. Rohde & Schwarz, Application Note RAC-0607-0019, Measurement of Dielectric Material Properties. 

 

2. J. R. Baker-Jarvis, M. D. Janezic, J. H. Grosvenor and R. G. Geyer, Transmission/reflection and short-circuit line methods  

 
for measuring permittivity and permeability, NIST Technical Note: 1355, 1992. 
 

3. Y. Kato, M. Horibe, M. Ameya, S. Kurokowa, and Y. Shimada, New uncertainty analysis for permittivity measurements  

 
using the Transmission/Reflection method, IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 64 (2015), 1748–1753. 
 

4. Standard Number: ASTM D5568 – 08, Standard Test Method for Measuring Relative Complex Permittivity and Relative  

 
Magnetic Permeability of Solid Materials at Microwave Frequencies Using Waveguide, ASTM International, Book of  
 
standards, vol. 10.02, 2009. 
 

5. M. Wollensack, VNA Tools II: S-parameter uncertainty calculation, 79th ARFTG Microwave Meas. Conf., (2012), 1–5. 

 

6. M. Zeier, J. Hoffmann and M. Wollensack, Metas.UncLib - a measurement uncertainty calculator for advanced problems  

 
Metrologia 49 (2012), 809–815. 
 

7. B. D. Hall, Calculating measurement uncertainty using automatic differentiation, Measurement Science and Technology 13  

 
(2002), 421–427. 
 

8. BIPM, IEC, IFCC, ILAC, ISO, IUPAC, IUPAP and OIML, JCGM 102:2011, Evaluation of measurement data – Supplement  

 
2 to the “Guide to the expression of uncertainty in measurement” - Extension to any number of output quantities,   
 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), 2011.  
 
Available at: http://www.bipm.org/en/publications/guides/gum.html 
 

9. M. Sellone, N. Shoaib and P. Terzi, Characterization of the Vector Network Analyzer used as primary S-parameter standard,  

 
Technical report no. 3/2015, Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica (INRIM), Turin, Italy, (2015), 1–202. 
 

10. MATLAB 2011- The Language of Technical Computing. Information available at: http://www.mathworks.com 

 

11. G. F. Engen and C. Hoer, A Thru-reflect-line: An improved technique for calibrating the dual six port automatic network  

 
analyzer, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. MTT-27 (1979), 987–993. 

 
12. B. W. Wier, Automatic Measurement of Complex Dielectric Constant and Permeability at Microwave Frequencies,  

 
Proceedings of the IEEE 62 (1974), 33–36. 
 

13. A. R. Von Hipple, Dielectric Materials and Applications, Artech House, 1995.

 
 
 
 
 
 


 
8

List of Figures 

 
 

Fig. 1. Schematic of the measurement setup 
 
Fig. 2. Layout of the waveguide fixture and the MUT 
 
Fig. 3. Dielectric constant (εr
′) for the Teflon sample 

 
Fig. 4. Dielectric loss tangent (tan δ) for the Teflon sample 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
9

List of Tables 

 
 

Tab. 1. Dimensional measurements of waveguide fixture and the Teflon sample (in mm) 
 
Tab. 2. Uncertainty budget for the Teflon sample at selected frequencies for the real part of permittivity (εr
′) 

 
Tab. 3. Uncertainty budget for the Teflon sample at selected frequencies for the Dielectric loss tangent (tan δ) 


