1 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Although the principles underlying dynamic nuclear 

polarization (DNP) — in its many incarnations — were 
introduced more than half a century ago1, the last two decades 
have witnessed a sustained, widespread interest in the 
topic2-7. This trend can largely be seen as a response to 
fundamental, well-known traits of nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR), outstanding in its versatility and range of 
applications but inherently limited in its detection sensitivity. 
Understandably, much of the effort has been devoted to 
developing dynamic polarization strategies applicable to high 
magnetic fields, a route that promises to reap the benefits of 
enhanced NMR signals without sacrificing on spectral 
resolution8-10. On the other hand, low-field setups — 
especially those based on optical pumping and detection — 
allow the experimenter to study regimes otherwise difficult to 
access11,12. Particularly important is the ability to probe the 
dynamics of nuclear spins adjacent to paramagnetic defects, 
typically 
invisible 
in 
traditional 
high-field 
DNP 

experiments13-15.  

From among various existing routes, optical spin 

pumping 
of 
paramagnetic 
defects 
in 
wide-bandgap 

semiconductors has garnered recent attention as a broadly 
applicable DNP platform, largely due to the potential for 
room temperature (or near room temperature) operation16-20. 

Often hosting a dilute set of nuclear spins, materials such as 
diamond or silicon carbide have also emerged as versatile 
systems to investigate fundamental questions on the spin 
dynamics governing DNP21-24, most notably the transport of 
spin polarization from strongly-hyperfine-coupled to bulk 
nuclei. For example, diamond was recently exploited to show 
how coupled electron spin networks can effectively mediate 
interactions between remote nuclei, in the process 
circumventing the transport restrictions created by the ‘spin 
diffusion barrier’ surrounding individual paramagnetic 
defects25-28.  

Here we extend prior work on optical spin pumping of 

NV-hosting diamond to investigate the impact of a 
continuous radio-frequency (RF) drive on the generation of 
13C spin polarization via electron spin cross relaxation. We 
focus 
on 
strongly 
hyperfine-coupled 
carbons 
and 

experimentally show that sufficiently strong RF excitation 
during optical spin pumping can invert the sign of the 
observed nuclear polarization. With the aid of numerical 
modeling, we interpret this counter-intuitive finding as a 
consequence of electron/nuclear spin mixing, allowing us to 
RF-drive typically hindered transitions between electron spin 
states with (nearly) the same Zeeman energy. Examining the 
system response at variable magnetic fields, we find this 
process emerges from a subtle interplay between the type and 

Nuclear spin temperature reversal via continuous radio-frequency driving 

Pablo R. Zangara1,2,*, Daniela Pagliero3,*, Ashok Ajoy5,7, Rodolfo H. Acosta1,2, Jeffrey A. Reimer6,7,  

and Carlos A. Meriles3,4, † 

 

1Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Facultad de Matemática, Astronomía, Física y Computación, Córdoba, Argentina.  

 2 CONICET, Instituto de Física Enrique Gaviola (IFEG), Córdoba, Argentina. 

3Department. of Physics, CUNY-City College of New York, New York, NY 10031, USA.  

4CUNY-Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.  

5Department of Chemistry, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.  

6Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, 

USA.  

7Materials Science Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.  

 

*Equally contributing authors 

†Corresponding author. E-mail: cmeriles@ccny.cuny.edu. 

 

Optical spin pumping of color centers in diamond is presently attracting broad interest as a platform for dynamic nuclear 

polarization at room temperature, but the mechanisms involved in the generation and transport of polarization within the host 
crystal are still partly understood. Here we investigate the impact of continuous radio-frequency (RF) excitation on the generation 
of nuclear magnetization produced by optical illumination. In the presence of RF excitation far removed from the nuclear Larmor 
frequency, we witness a magnetic-field-dependent sign reversal of the measured nuclear spin signal when the drive is sufficiently 
strong, a counter-intuitive finding that immediately points to non-trivial spin dynamics. With the help of analytical and numerical 
modeling, we show our observations indicate a modified form of ‘solid effect’, down-converted from the microwave to the radio-
frequency range through the driving of hybrid transitions involving one (or more) nuclei and two (or more) electron spins. Our 
results open intriguing opportunities for the manipulation of many-electron spin systems by exploiting hyperfine couplings as a 
means to access otherwise forbidden intra-band transitions.  
 


2 

relative concentrations of paramagnetic defects present in the 
sample, the number of nuclei featuring a given hyperfine 
coupling, and their spin transport efficiency at the applied 
magnetic field. 
 

II. RESULTS 

We work under conditions similar to those reported 

previously26,31. Briefly, we implement a field-cycling 
sequence that starts with simultaneous laser illumination and 
RF drive of variable frequency and amplitude for a time 
interval 𝑡"#, followed by sample shuttling to a high-field 
magnet (Fig. 1a). We probe the 13C magnetization using one-
pulse excitation at the 13C Larmor frequency at 9 T (~100 
MHz) to produce a free induction decay (FID); upon Fourier 
transform, we monitor the peak amplitude of the in-phase 
component (referred to below as the ‘13C NMR signal’), 
adjusted to yield a positive (negative) sign when the 
dynamically-pumped and thermal 13C magnetizations are 
parallel (anti-parallel). In all instances, we choose 𝑡"# = 5 s 

— i.e., comparable to the 13C spin-lattice relaxation at the 
pumping field — so as to attain maximum signal amplitude. 

For the present experiments, we use a high-

pressure/high-temperature (HPHT) [100] diamond crystal 
engineered to host nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers at a 
concentration of ~10 ppm; green illumination (532 nm, 1 W) 
spin-pumps NV centers into the 𝑚' = 0 state of its ground 
spin triplet (𝑆 = 1), which we ultimately exploit to 
dynamically polarize 13C spins. To this end, we set the 
magnetic field during 𝑡"# somewhere near the matching field 
𝐵, — 52.5 mT under our present experimental conditions — 
where the energy separation between the 𝑚' = 0  and 
𝑚' = −1  states of the NV coincides with the Zeeman 
splitting of coexisting spin-1/2 paramagnetic defects. 
Particularly relevant herein are the so-called P1 centers — 
point defects formed by neutral substitutional nitrogen 
featuring a spin number 𝑆′ = 1 2 — present in our sample at 
a concentration of 50 ppm. Slightly below (or above) 𝐵,, a 
simultaneous NV–P1 ‘double flip’ — corresponding to a 

Fig. 1: Dynamic nuclear polarization in the presence of an RF drive. (a) We use a field cycling protocol to monitor the 13C 
polarization induced by optical spin pumping at a low magnetic field 𝐵 in the presence of an RF drive of variable frequency. (b) 
(Top) 13C NMR signal amplitude as a function of 𝐵 without RF. NV-P1 cross polarization leads to positive (negative) polarization 
below (above) the matching field 𝐵, = 52.5 mT. (Bottom) 13C signal amplitude at 𝐵,

(2) as a function of RF frequency for a 

constant (i.e., frequency-insensitive) RF drive of amplitude Ω56 = 0.7 kHz. In both panels, solid lines are guides to the eye. (c) 
13C signal amplitude as a function of RF power for a drive frequency (𝜔56 = 560 kHz) resonant with the 13C Larmor frequency 
at 𝐵,

(2). The signal decreases to 50% the original amplitude with an RF amplitude as low as Ω56 = 15 Hz (insert). The solid line 

indicates an exponential fit. (d) Same as in (c) but for an RF frequency of 9.5 MHz. As inferred from the exponential fit (solid 
line), we observe a slower decrease with RF power and a trend toward negative signal amplitudes.  


3 

transition from 𝑚' = 0, 𝑚'; = + 1 2  to 𝑚' = −1, 𝑚'; =
− 1 2  — polarizes adjacent 13C spins positively (or 
negatively), as dictated by spin energy conservation (top 
panel in Fig. 1b). Repeated NV initialization followed by 
three-spin flips and nuclear spin diffusion to bulk (i.e., non-
hyperfine-coupled) carbons ultimately leads to the observed 
sample magnetization. We refer the reader to Refs. [29–32] 
for a more thorough discussion on 13C-enabled NV–P1 cross-
relaxation.  

While the physical picture above provides an intuitive 

starting point, the mechanisms allowing nuclear polarization 
to spread to bulk nuclei are far from simple. Part of the 
problem is the large energy mismatch between nuclei 
featuring different hyperfine couplings, a regime that 
truncates nuclear flip-flop terms in the Hamiltonian and thus 
(presumably) quenches spin diffusion. We found in prior 
work26 that, contrary to expectations, nuclear spins strongly 
coupled to the NV contribute to transporting polarization to 
the bulk, a process mediated by interactions between 
electronic spins. For completeness, we reproduce part of 
these results in Fig. 1b (lower panel), where we plot the 13C 
NMR signal at 𝐵,

2 , here defined as the magnetic field where 

the carbon polarization is maximum, see upper panel in Fig. 
1b. Under an RF drive of fixed amplitude (corresponding to 
a 13C Rabi frequency Ω56 = 0.7 kHz) and variable frequency 
𝜔56, we find a broad RF absorption spectrum that can be 
related to the family of hyperfine-coupled carbons26 (found in 
second- and higher-order atomic shells around NVs33-35).  

Although the above observations expose the important 

role strongly-hyperfine-coupled carbons play in transporting 
nuclear polarization, the exact nature of the RF absorption at 
play — meaning the type of spin levels we couple via the 
drive — remains unclear. In the most intuitive picture, RF 
excitation 
drives 
nuclear-spin-only 
transitions 
(i.e., 

transitions where the electron spin projections are conserved), 
thus causing ‘saturation’ (i.e., effective equilibration between 
nuclear spin population differences) and, correspondingly, a 
reduction of the observed 13C NMR signal. This process is 
most clearly exposed at ~560 kHz — associated to the 
Larmor frequency of bulk nuclei — where weak cw 
excitation during 𝑡"# is sufficient to extinguish the observed 
nuclear polarization (Fig. 1c). An immediate question 
therefore arises, namely, is this same description applicable 
to hyperfine-coupled carbons as well? Initial observations at 
higher frequencies suggest this is not the case. An illustration 
is presented in Fig. 1d where we plot the 13C NMR signal for 
an RF drive at 9.5 MHz. Relative to the results in Fig. 1c, we 
find a much slower decrease indicating the RF drive is not as 
efficient in saturating the set of spin transitions resonant at 
this frequency. Perhaps more intriguingly, an extrapolation to 
higher RF powers — beyond our reach in this early set of 
experiments — suggests that the sign of the NMR signal 
reverses for sufficiently strong drives.  

To further investigate these observations, we altered the 

probe in our shuttling experiments — initially designed to 
yield 
RF 
excitation 
of 
uniform, 
nearly-frequency-

independent amplitude over a range reaching 150 MHz26  — 
to 
feature 
a 
resonance 
around 
𝜔56

5=> ≈ 11.5 MHz, 

approximately coincident with the range of transition 
frequencies expected for second shell carbons33-35. Even if at 
the expense of a non-uniform response, this setup allows us 
to generate RF amplitudes (near 𝜔56

5=>) beyond those possible 

in our prior design, thus allowing to probe strongly-
hyperfine-coupled nuclei in the unexplored regime of strong 
drives.  

Fig. 2: The limit of strong RF drive. (a) 13C signal 
amplitude at 𝐵,

(2) as a function of RF frequency for a 

modified RF probe featuring a resonance at 11.5 MHz. At the 
highest RF power (Ω56 = 10 kHz at 11.5 MHz), we observe 
inversion of the NMR signal. (b) 13C signal at 𝐵,

(2) and 𝐵,

(A)

(purple and red squares, respectively) as a function of the RF 
power for a drive at 11.5 MHz.


4 

Fig. 2a reproduces the measured RF absorption spectrum 

observed with this modified setup. We find an altered 
frequency dependence with a clear dip centered at 𝜔56

5=>, a 

consequence of the locally-enhanced RF transmission. 
Remarkably, we witness — to our knowledge, for the first 
time — a sign reversal in the crystal polarization when the RF 
amplitude is sufficiently strong (lower trace in Fig. 2a). As 
shown in Fig. 2b, the signal inversion is partial and saturates 
to about one fourth of the starting amplitude when the RF 
Rabi field reaches 10 kHz. Further, we find that changing the 
magnetic field from 𝐵,

2  to 𝐵,

A  — see notation in the upper 

panel of Fig. 1b — produces a mirrored response, where the 
system polarization (negative in the absence of RF) gradually 
reaches a partially inverted amplitude (red trace in Fig. 2b).  

While simple in its exterior, the finding above is 

profound in its implications. First off, we note that the 
continuous wave (cw) nature of the RF excitation (in all 
experiments, 𝑡"# = 5 s) strongly suggests that the observed 
signal inversion cannot derive from coherent spin 
manipulation: As shown in Appendix A, such a scenario 
would require a near-perfectly timed process of polarization 
generation, storage, and transport, an unlikely mechanism 
given the diffusive nature of the dynamics in all steps. On the 

contrary, we hypothesize simultaneous RF and NV optical 
pumping drive hyperfine-coupled nuclei into a steady state of 
inverted spin temperature, ultimately spreading to bulk 
carbons and correspondingly reversing the sign of the 
observed magnetization.  

To more clearly lay out our theoretical framework, we 

return to the 13C–NV–P1 system considered above and focus 
our attention on the set of (nearly degenerate) states 

𝑎 , 𝑏 , 𝑐 , 𝑑
 within the 𝑚' = 0, 𝑚'; = + 1 2  and 

𝑚' = −1, 𝑚'; = − 1 2  manifolds (see Fig. 3a and 
Appendix B). For clarity, we first consider the case where 
states 𝑏  and 𝑐  share the same energy. Provided optical 
pumping initializes the system into equally populated states 
𝑎  and 𝑏 , positive nuclear spin polarization follows from 
the population exchange between states 
𝑏  and 
𝑐  

(accompanied by spin diffusion31). With the understanding 
that the magnetic field enabling this process depends on the 
assumed magnitude of the hyperfine coupling, in our 
simulations we generically associate the above spin dynamics 
to 𝐵,

2 .  
To quantitatively model the system evolution in the 

simultaneous presence of RF and optical excitation, we 
transform the 13C–NV–P1 Hamiltonian to an effective 

Fig. 3. Dynamic nuclear polarization in the presence of an RF drive. (a) We consider a 13C–NV–P1 set where a 13C nucleus 
is hyperfine-coupled to an NV, in turn, experiencing a dipolar interaction ℐG with a neighboring P1. We restrict the energy 
diagram to eigenstates {|𝑎⟩, |𝑏⟩, |𝑐⟩, |𝑑⟩} within the manifold |𝑚' = 0, 𝑚'; = + 1 2
⁄ ⟩ and |𝑚' = −1, 𝑚'; = − 1 2
⁄ ⟩ and use 

blue {↑, ↓} arrows to denote nuclear spin projections; 𝜔O is the 13C Larmor frequency, and ΔAQ = R(𝐴TU)V + (𝐴TT + 𝜔O)V where 
𝐴TT and 𝐴TU denote the secular and pseudo-secular hyperfine coupling constants. We set the magnetic field to 𝐵,

(2), where states 

|𝑏⟩ and |𝑐⟩ are degenerate and assume that optical pumping initializes the system in the |0, +1/2⟩ manifold; under strong RF 
(wavy arrows), the otherwise positive nuclear polarization developing at 𝐵,

(2) (blue arcs) is destroyed without, however, 

producing polarization inversion. Note the weak exchange between states |𝑎⟩ and |𝑐⟩, responsible for the resulting zero net 
magnetization (see text). (b) Calculated 13C polarization as a function of time and RF frequency assuming 𝐴TT = 𝐴TU = 6.5
MHz and ℐG = 100 kHz; the RF Rabi amplitude is Ω56 = 50 kHz. (c) Calculated 13C polarization as a function of time and Ω56
for a cw drive at 𝜔56~9.5 MHz. (d) Same as in (a) at the same field 𝐵,

(2) but for a 13C–NV–P1 set featuring a hyperfine splitting 

ΔZAQ; we use tildes throughout the diagram as a reminder this is not the spin system considered in (a). (e) Same as in (b) but 
assuming 𝐴[TT = 𝐴[TU = 5.7 MHz, which yields a mismatch 𝛿 ≈ 𝜔O between states ]𝑏^_, |𝑐̃⟩. (f) Same as in (c) but assuming the 
system in (d) and a cw drive at 𝜔56~9.5 MHz. Strong RF excitation induces polarization inversion.   


5 

rotating frame, and implement a quantum jump Monte Carlo 
that stochastically projects the NV into 𝑚' = 0  (Appendix 
B). Fig. 3b shows the 13C spin polarization as a function of 
time for an RF drive of variable frequency assuming the spin 
set starts from an equal mixture of states 𝑎  and 𝑏 . The 
system quickly evolves into a steady state of positive nuclear 
polarization except at select frequencies (or frequency bands) 
where the RF drive leads to near-complete saturation. In each 
case, the nature of the transition at play can be (qualitatively) 
established with the help of the system’s energy diagram. An 
illustration is presented in Fig. 3c where we analyze the 
polarization dip near 9.5 MHz. In the spin set assumed for 
these simulations, this frequency corresponds to the hyperfine 
splitting  ΔAQ between states 𝑐  and 𝑑  (see Appendix B), 
implying that a sufficiently strong RF drive can quickly 
redistribute spin populations and hence preempt the 
generation of nuclear polarization. Note that because states 
𝑏  and 𝑐  are degenerate at the chosen magnetic field, RF 
excitation also induces a population exchange between states 
𝑏  and 𝑑 , belonging to different electronic spin manifolds. 
Further, the proximity between states 𝑎  and 𝑐  — separated 
only by ωO — also leads to a weak population exchange 
(dotted line in Fig. 3a). The result is a complete saturation of 
the nuclear spin polarization (lower right corner in Fig. 3c) 
without leading, however, to signal inversion.  

From the above considerations, we conclude the steady 

state nuclear polarization emerges from an intricate interplay 
between the NV–P1 dipolar coupling (governing the 
exchange rate between 𝑏  and 𝑐 ) and the RF amplitude 
(connecting 𝑑  with states 𝑐  and 𝑏 ). The calculated time 
evolution for variable RF amplitude Ω56 is shown in Fig. 3c 
assuming an NV–P1 coupling ℐG = 100 kHz. The system 
reaches a steady state after only a few milliseconds though 
the polarization remains positive at all times, even under 
strong RF*. It is worth mentioning that a similar physical 
picture — leading to polarization saturation without signal 
inversion, not included here for brevity — applies to the dip 
at ~10.1 MHz in Fig. 3b, this time associated to an RF-
induced transition between states 𝑎  and 𝑑 . 

To address the question as to how an RF drive induces 

negative nuclear polarization, we consider the dynamics of a 
13C–NV–P1 spin set with a different 13C–NV coupling — i.e., 
featuring a different hyperfine splitting ΔAQ — at the same 
applied magnetic field (Fig. 3d). For future reference, here we 
choose the hyperfine coupling so that 𝛿 — the energy 
mismatch between states 𝑏  and 𝑐  — amounts to 𝜔O, 
though this condition is, in general, unnecessary. The 
calculated 13C polarization as a function of time at a variable 
RF frequency is shown in Fig. 3e: In the presence of a 
mismatch, virtually no net magnetization develops over time 
except near 9.5 MHz, where the 13C spin polarizes negatively.  

                                                        
* Mild signal inversion was seen in these simulations as a result 
of the Bloch-Siegert effect, but the required Rabi fields — in 

The schematic in the diagram of Fig. 3d reveals the 

dynamics at play, namely, nuclear polarization emerges from 
a selective population exchange between 𝑎  and 𝑑 . Since 
the latter correspond to states where all spins (both nuclear 
and electronic) have different projections, this transition 
(otherwise prohibited) is enabled here thanks to the 
hybridization caused by hyperfine and electron-electron 
interactions (see Appendix B). Correspondingly, the RF 
amplitude required to induce full polarization inversion — in 
general dependent on the specifics of the modelled spin set 
— must grow as the inter-particle couplings become weaker. 
We note that contrary to what the simplified energy diagram 
in Fig. 3a may suggest, similar considerations apply to all 
dips in Fig. 3b as well because the degeneracy between 𝑏  
and 𝑐  creates a situation where nuclear spin projections 
(maintained in the diagram for simplicity) lose their meaning 
(both combine ↑  and ↓  nuclear spin states as well as 
0, +1/2  and −1, −1/2  contributions). The consequence is 
that the RF amplitude required to saturate the 13C polarization 
is analogous to that needed to reach the inverted steady state, 
as a comparison between Figs. 3c and 3f confirms. 

Out of the two spin sets we consider, only one of them 

polarizes positively when no RF is present (Figs. 3a-3c), 
while the other one acts as a source of negative polarization 
just when the RF is on (Figs. 3d-3f). Both exhibit dips at the 
same frequency (~9.5 MHz in this example, a consequence of 
having chosen 𝛿 = 𝜔O), meaning that for the observed signal 
to reverse sign, the RF drive must gradually shift the leading 
role away from the ‘matched’ set (saturating as the RF 
increases, Fig. 3c) to the group of ‘mismatched’ spins 
(evolving from passive bystanders to the source of inverted 
polarization, Fig. 3g). Therefore, in an experiment where the 
magnetic field and RF drive are constant — as in the present 
case — the sign of the observed bulk polarization emerges 
from a statistical average between contributions from both 
types of spin sets.  

It is interesting to compare the above process with the 

well-known “solid-effect”36: In the simplest case where the 
electronic and nuclear spin numbers are both equal to 1/2, 
nuclear polarization emerges as microwave excitation drives 
“forbidden” transitions between states whose electron and 
nuclear spin projections are different. Something similar can 
be said about the spin subspace in the 13C–NV–P1 set of Fig. 
3d except that the near-degeneracy between the 0, + 1 2  
and −1, − 1 2  states allows us to bring down the excitation 
frequency to the RF range. As discussed above, this double 
electron spin flip is allowed via the NV–P1 dipolar coupling 
so the proposed mechanism simultaneously capitalizes on the 
“solid” and “cross” effects.  

Fig. 4a shows an extension of the experiments in Fig. 2 

to variable magnetic fields and RF drive of fixed frequency 
(𝜔56

5=> = 11.5 MHz). Consistent with the observations in Fig. 

excess of 200 kHz — are beyond those attained in our present 
experiment and cannot be invoked to explain our observations.  


6 

2b, we find that the 13C signal reverses sign near 𝐵,

± , though 

a comparison of the full response shows a non-uniform 
change marked by the gradual disappearance of signal 
inversion for large magnetic field shifts relative to 𝐵,  (Fig. 
4b). Qualitatively, we relate this dependence to the combined 
effect of contributions from heterogeneous spin sets, each 
reacting differently to the RF drive and applied magnetic 
field. We illustrate this interplay in Fig. 4c where we consider 
the nuclear polarization in 13C–NV–P1 spin sets featuring 
different hyperfine couplings: Besides the expected 
contributions from energy matching (represented as blue 
positive and negative Lorentzians), RF excitation leads to 
additional ‘peaks and dips’ whose relative position depends 
on the ratio between the hyperfine splitting ΔAQ and the RF 
frequency ω56 (green Lorentzians). Sufficiently far away 
from 𝐵,, contributions stemming from the RF drive have the 
same sign as those derived from field matching implying that 
no reversal of the observed bulk signal is expected, in 
agreement with experiment. Closer to 𝐵,, however, overlaps 
between positive and negative contributions from different 
spin sets are unavoidable. The result is that the sign of the 
observed signal can only derive from a subtle interplay that 
factors in not only the statistical abundance of a given 
hyperfine coupling but also the RF efficiency in driving a 

forbidden transition as well as the transport dynamics from 
the relevant spin set into bulk nuclei.  

We emphasize that the above physical picture must be 

seen as a crude simplification, as the three-spin system 
studied herein serves only as a footprint for more complex 
interacting sets — likely involving multiple electron and 
nuclear spins — whose formation largely depends on the 
sample composition. A strong indication supporting this view 
can be found in the pattern of Fig. 4b, twice as broad 
compared to similar observations in other diamond samples32. 
While larger arrays will likely exhibit analogous spin 
dynamics, a quantitative connection between the observed RF 
absorption dips and the exact type of the transitions involved 
becomes increasingly difficult — if not impossible — 
without a detailed sample characterization. This problem 
becomes all the more apparent in Fig. 4c, where we extend 
the sampled magnetic field range to encompass the full set of 
NV–P1 transitions (each centered around a ‘matching field’ 
whose exact value depends on the nuclear spin projection of 
the host 14N spin in each defect31,32). While signal inversion 
clearly extends beyond the central range, the irregular 
response we find fully exposes the complexity of the problem 
at hand. Future work — likely relying on diamond crystals 
with a lower nitrogen content where simpler spin sets become 

Fig. 4. The interplay between RF drive and applied magnetic field. (a) Experimental protocol. We monitor the 13C DNP 
signal under a continuous RF drive at 𝜔56

5=> = 2𝜋×11.5 MHz of variable amplitude for different applied magnetic fields. (b) 

13C NMR signal as a function of 𝐵 near 𝐵, for variable RF amplitude. Signal reversal is observed both near 𝐵,

(2) and 𝐵,

(A), 

though the resulting pattern lacks overall symmetry. Solid lines are guides to the eye. (c) Schematics of 13C polarization for the 
three-spin model as a function of the electron Larmor frequency 𝛾=𝐵 assuming an RF drive of frequency 𝜔56. We use light 
green (blue) traces to indicate polarization stemming from the RF-drive (NV–P1 cross-relaxation). The upper (lower) diagram 
refers to a 13C–NV–P1 spin set where the hyperfine splitting is greater (smaller) than 𝜔56

5=>; as before, we use tildes to 

differentiate eigenstates from one set or the other. Energy or frequency separations are not to scale. (d) Same as in (b) but for a 
wider magnetic field range that includes all 14N-induced hyperfine shifts. The Rabi field is 10 kHz in the lower trace and 
negligible in the upper trace.   


7 

dominant — will therefore be needed to gain a more 
quantitative understanding.  
 

III. CONCLUSIONS 

While the basic ideas governing dynamic nuclear 

polarization have long been established, a broad effort is 
ongoing to shed light on the microscopic mechanisms 
involving the generation and transport of polarization to bulk 
nuclei from near-defect sites. NV-hosting diamond provides 
an attractive platform to investigate these processes not only 
due to the promise of low-field, room-temperature DNP, but 
also because its comparatively simple composition makes it 
a clean platform to expose fundamental phenomena.  

Capitalizing on these singular properties, this work 

explored the generation of 13C polarization under the 
combined action of optical and radio-frequency excitation. 
Unexpectedly, we observed inversion of the polarization 
signal under a strong RF drive far removed from the 13C 
Larmor frequency, a finding we interpreted as a form of ‘solid 
effect’ in an effective four-level subset of a three-spin 13C–
NV–P1 model system. Unlike the standard case, however, 
here spin initialization derives from NV optical pumping, not 
temperature. More importantly, the reduced energy 
separations between different multi-electronic configurations 
allows one to drive the system via radio-frequency, not 
microwave (MW). The latter is made possible by nuclear 
spins, whose hyperfine interactions with defects mix the 
character of the system eigenfunctions to enable otherwise 
forbidden magnetic dipole transitions. Naturally, similar 
ideas also apply to more complex spin sets not considered 
here involving, e.g., more than two electron spins, though a 
quantitative description becomes increasingly involved. 
Since contributions from these ill-defined spin sets become 
dominant in a diamond crystal with a high concentration of 
nitrogen impurities such as ours, additional work in more 
suitable samples — including strong RF driving at other 
frequencies and RF-absorption spectra at varying magnetic 
fields — will be required to gain a fully quantitative 
description. Alternatively, optically detected magnetic 
resonance experiments on individual NV centers whose 
nuclear and electronic neighbors have been previously 
characterized37-40 could provide a more controlled route to 
exposing the action of continuous RF excitation (even though 
the impact of this polarization on bulk spins becomes 
unobservable).  

The ability to access the electronic bath through ‘intra-

band’ transitions — i.e., transitions between electronic levels 
within a Zeeman-defined manifold — could perhaps be 
exploited to implement microwave-free routes to DNP, even 
in the absence of optical spin pumping. For example, 
assuming thermal initialization in the lowest electronic 
Zeeman manifold, different spin dynamics follow from an 
NV or a P1 spin flip, each taking place with a different unit 
time probability. Given a characteristic spin transport time 
away from the source electron/nuclear set, the above 
differences should lead to a net injection of nuclear spin 

magnetization into the bulk. A full analysis of this MW-free 
DNP process — involving not only the generation but also 
the transport of spin polarization — is presently under study 
and will be the subject of future work. 
 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

D.P. and C.A.M. acknowledge support from the National 

Science Foundation through grant NSF-1903839; they also 
acknowledge 
access 
to 
the 
facilities 
and 
research 

infrastructure of the NSF CREST IDEALS, grant number 
NSF-HRD-1547830. PRZ and RHA acknowledge financial 
support from CONICET (PIP-111122013010074 6CO), 
SeCyT-UNC (33620180100154CB) and ANPCYT (PICT-
2014-1295). 
 

APPENDIX A: Model of synchronic  

inversion during spin diffusion 

 

Here we consider (and rule out) a hypothetical scenario 

where 
polarization 
inversion 
emerges 
from 
partly 

synchronous RF excitation during spin diffusion from 
strongly hyperfine-coupled to bulk nuclei. Imagining a 
spectral chain where polarization flows from more to less 
strongly hyperfine-coupled sites (Fig. 5a), continuous RF 
inverts the observed NMR signal as polarization comes in and 
out of resonance with the applied RF; in other words, a sign 
reversal is a priori conceivable if the inverse polarization flow 
rate (i.e., the equivalent of a ‘residence time’ in the spectral 
chain) coincides with half the RF Rabi period. 

Since the flow of magnetization is an intrinsically 

complex, many-body process, a quantum mechanical 
description is difficult. Instead, we build on the classical 
model introduced in Ref. [26] and reproduced in Fig. 5a. In 
this model, 𝑚 ‘spectral boxes’ represent groups of spins 𝑁g ,
𝑖: 1 … 𝑚 with given hyperfine couplings. Every spin in the 𝑗-
th box has a resonance frequency lying within a range ∆𝜈n 
centered at the effective hyperfine shift 𝐴n . Boxes are 
arranged following a decreasing order in the hyperfine shifts: 
The first box corresponds to strongly hyperfine-coupled 
nuclear spins, while the last box, 𝑚, corresponds to ‘bulk’ 
nuclear spins, i.e. those that are experimentally accessible.  

We assume that only the first box is initially magnetized, 

i.e., ‘populated’. Such a population has a positive ‘character’, 
which stands for a positive magnetization. The flow of 
magnetization occurs due to an inter-box transfer at rate 
𝛾g,g2Q. This flow is impacted by the RF irradiation, which can 
drive the magnetization of nuclear spins within some 
effective bandwidth 𝛿𝜈o. In terms of our model, the RF 
changes the character of the population in the irradiated box. 
This driving takes place at a flipping rate corresponding to 
the Rabi frequency, Ω56. The action of the RF at a particular 
box does not affect the overall time scale at which the 𝑚-th 
box is populated. This means that positive and negative 
magnetization diffuse at the same rate. Instead, RF ultimately 
modulates the amount and sign of magnetization that reaches 


8 

the final box.  

The time-evolution of the system can be evaluated by 

solving the appropriate set of differential equations or by 
Monte Carlo trajectory sampling. Using this last approach, 
we show in Fig. 5b the asymptotic population state of the 𝑚-
th box as a function of Ω56.  For the sake of simplicity, we 
assume a homogeneous transfer rate, 𝛾g,g2Q = 𝛾O = 1 kHz ∀𝑖. 
In addition, we consider that the RF irradiation acts on an 
intermediate box 𝑖O with 1 < 𝑖O < 𝑚. We observe that for 
very weak driving Ω56 ≪ 𝛾O, the last box is positively 
magnetized, since the time needed for flipping the character 
of the population at the irradiated box 𝑖O is much longer than 

the typical residence time at such box. In the opposite limit, 
Ωvw ≫ 𝛾O, the character of the population at the irradiated 
box flips many times before it continues its flow towards the 
final box. Due to the intrinsically diffusive nature of 
magnetization transport, the flipping operation cannot occur 
in synchrony with the passage across the box 𝑖O. Loosely 
speaking, a perfect 𝜋-pulse cannot take place at any 
intermediate stage of the magnetization transport.  

Figure 5c reinforces the physical picture just described 

by showing the distribution of residence times at the 
irradiated box 𝑖O, i.e. the amount of time the magnetization 
stays at such spectral box. Similar distributions are found for 
any other site along the spectral chain. Even though the mean 
value of such distribution precisely corresponds to 𝛾O

AQ, it is 

clear that the flipping mechanism would sample the whole 
distribution of residence times, producing both positive and 
negative outcomes. So, either the final box is positively 
populated or its character averages to zero, which means an 
equal contribution of positive and negative population 
characters. 

APPENDIX B: Quantum model of  
spin dynamics under RF excitation 

B1. The spin Hamiltonian 

We formalize here the quantum-mechanical few-level 

system description of the RF-induced signal reversal. We 
stress that this approach focusses exclusively on the 
generation, not the transport, of magnetization.  

We start by considering a three-spin system, including a 

13C nuclear spin 𝐈 (𝐼 = 1/2), a NV center spin 𝐒 (𝑆 = 1) and 
an electronic P1 spin 𝐒| (𝑆| = 1/2). The complete 
Hamiltonian 𝐻~ in the laboratory-frame is given by: 

𝐻~ = −𝜔O𝐼T + 𝜔•𝑆T + 𝜔•𝑆|T + 𝐷 𝑆T V + 𝐴TT𝑆T𝐼T            

+ 𝐴TU𝑆T𝐼U + ℐG 𝑆2𝑆|2 + 𝑆A𝑆|A     (B. 1) 

Here, 𝜔O = 𝛾‚𝐵, and 𝜔• = 𝛾• 𝐵, while 𝐷 indicates the NV 
zero-field splitting. Coefficients 𝐴TT and 𝐴TU denote the 
(secularized) hyperfine tensor components coupling the 13C 
and NV spins, and ℐG stands for the dipolar coupling strength 
between the NV and P1. Additionally, we assume the 
magnetic field direction is aligned with the NV axis and its 
modulus is tuned such that 2𝜔• ≈ 𝐷. This implies that the 
spin state 0 ↑  for the NV-P1 pair is almost degenerate with 
−1 ↓ . The degeneracy condition justifies the double-
quantum terms in the NV-P1 ‘secular’ dipolar interaction. 
Following the notation 𝑚', 𝑚'|, 𝑚‚  for the three-spin states, 
the explicit matrix representation of 𝐻~ in the subspace 
spanned by the states 
0, +1/2, ↑ , 0, +1/2, ↓ ,
−1, −1/

2, ↑ ,
−1, −1/2, ↓  is:  

𝐻~ =

−𝜔O + 𝜔•

2
0
ℐG
0

0
𝜔O + 𝜔•

2
0
ℐG

ℐG
0
− 𝜔O + 𝐴TT

2
+ 𝐷 − 3𝜔•

2
− 𝐴TU

2

0
ℐG
− 𝐴TU

2

𝜔O + 𝐴TT

2
+ 𝐷 − 3𝜔•

2

  

 (B.2) 

Figure 5. Classical picture of spin diffusion. (a) Spectral 
chain introduced in Ref. [26] to model magnetization 
transport from strongly-hyperfine coupled to bulk nuclear 
spins (see text). (b) Normalized population in the last box of 
the chain (corresponding to bulk magnetization) as a function 
of the RF Rabi amplitude Ω56. (c) Normalized histogram of 
residence times at the irradiated box 𝑖O. Vertical dashed line 
corresponds to the mean value of the distribution, which 
coincides with the inverse of the inter-box hopping rate 
𝛾g,g2Q. In (b-c) we used a 20-box model, with 𝛾g,g2Q = 𝛾O =
1 kHz ∀𝑖, 𝑖O = 8 and 10… Monte Carlo realizations for 
trajectory sampling. 


9 

Since we assume large hyperfine strengths, the natural 

quantization axis for nuclear spins in the 𝑚' = −1 subspace 
has to be given by the hyperfine vector instead of the external 
magnetic field. This is not the case for 𝑚' = 0, where the 
nuclear quantization axis is still given by the Zeeman term. 
Thus, we rotate the nuclear quantization axis to coincide with 
the vector 

𝒵 = 𝑚‡𝐴TU𝒊 + 𝑚‡𝐴TT − 𝜔O 𝒌           (B. 3) 

with the corresponding angle, 

tan 𝜃Ž• =
𝑚‡𝐴TU

𝑚‡𝐴TT − 𝜔O

                  (B. 4) 

and 

∆Ž•= 𝒵(𝑚‡) =
𝑚‡𝐴TU V + 𝑚‡𝐴TT − 𝜔O V .   (B. 5)    

The matrix representation of the Hamiltonian after this 
rotation is given by  

𝐻~

| =

−𝜔O + 𝜔•

2
0
ℐG𝑐Q
−ℐG𝑠Q

0
𝜔O + 𝜔•

2
ℐG𝑠Q
ℐG𝑐Q

ℐG𝑐Q
ℐG𝑠Q
− ∆AQ

2 + 𝐷 − 3𝜔•

2
0

−ℐG𝑠Q
ℐG𝑐Q
0
∆AQ
2 + 𝐷 − 3𝜔•

2

, 

      (B.6) 

where 𝑐Q = cos (𝜃AQ/2) and 𝑠Q = sin (𝜃AQ/2). Notice that 
the NV-P1 dipolar coupling term leads to relatively small, 
off-diagonal matrix elements (of order ~ℐG). In what follows, 
the nuclear states in the subspace 𝑚' = −1 are denoted with 
primes, ↑| and ↓|, as a reminder that they are referenced to 𝒵. 

The effect of optical pumping is introduced here by 

means of a projective, non-unitary operation. With that 
purpose, we enlarge the Hilbert space and introduce two 

ancillary states, 0, −1/2, ↑  and 0, −1/2, ↓ . Then, we 
implement a Monte Carlo quantum jump approach that 
stochastically projects  

−1, −1/2, ↑| → 0, −1/2, ↑  

and 

−1, −1/2, ↓| → 0, −1/2, ↓ . 

The probability of such a projection corresponds to the NV 
repolarization rate per unit time, and each trajectory is 
averaged over a sufficiently large number of realizations. 

Using the above framework, in Fig. 6a we evaluate the 

time dependence of the 13C nuclear polarization as a function 
of time and the external magnetic field. As in Fig. 1b, we 
identify the two matching fields 𝐵,

2  and 𝐵,

A  for the 

simplified three-spin system defined above. In particular, we 
show in Fig. 6b the build-up of nuclear polarization at 𝐵,

2 , 

which corresponds to the solution of the nonlinear equation 

𝜔O + 𝜔•

2
= − ∆AQ

2 + 𝐷 − 3𝜔•

2  .                (B. 7) 

This equation represents the quasi-degeneracy condition 
between states 0,1/2, ↓  and −1, −1/2, ↑| , and its precise 
solution ultimately depends on the particular hyperfine 
coupling.  
  

B2. RF irradiation 

Now we want to consider the effect of a time-dependent 

term that describes the effect of RF excitation, 

𝐻vw = −γ˜𝐵Q𝐼U cos 𝜔𝑡 = −Ωvw𝐼U cos 𝜔𝑡      (B. 8) 

where the frequency 𝜔 is set to drive strongly-hyperfine 
shifted nuclear spins (i.e., 𝜔 ≫ 𝜔O). In order to derive an 
effective, time-independent Hamiltonian we stay at a fixed 

Figure 6. Time dependence of nuclear polarization. (a) 13C Nuclear spin polarization as function of time and the external 
magnetic field. Here, 𝐴TT = 𝐴TU = 6.5 MHz, ℐG = 100 kHz and the NV repolarization rate is 10 kHz. Each time-trace is 
averaged over 10š Monte Carlo trajectories to account for the NV repolarization (see text). (b) Cross section of the dynamics 
shown in (a), i.e. single time-trace, at the particular field 𝐵,

(2) ≈ 51.106 mT. 


10 

magnetic field, which corresponds to 𝐵,

2  for a particular 

hyperfine coupling. For (large) hyperfine couplings (≫ 𝜔O) 
where the degeneracy condition (Eq. B.8) does not hold, a 
detuning 𝛿 can be associated to the energy difference between 
states 0,1/2, ↓  and −1, −1/2, ↑| . For simplicity, we 
assume 𝛿 ≪ ∆AQ. We stress, however, that the validity of our 
observations does not rely on this assumption. 

The above considerations lead to a well-defined 

hierarchy of states. The energies of the first three states, 
0,1/2, ↑ , 0,1/2, ↓  and −1, −1/2, ↑| , are assumed very 
close to each other. In fact, these energies differ in 
~𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝜔O, 𝛿 . The remaining state, 
−1, −1/2, ↓| , is 

energetically distant by an amount equal to ∆AQ. Since, in 
general, 𝜔~∆AQ, the natural unitary transformation that 
defines the rotating frame in this system is given by  

𝑅 = exp −𝑖𝕎𝑡 ,                             (B. 9) 

where  

𝕎 =

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0

0
0
0
𝜔

.                     (B. 10) 

Before computing the lowest order in Average 

Hamiltonian Theory41,42 (AHT), we diagonalize 𝐻~

|  by means 

1 A. Abragam, M. Goldman, Nuclear Magnetism: Order and Disorder, 
Clarendon, Oxford (1982). 

2 R.G. Griffin, T.F. Prisner, “High field dynamic nuclear polarization—
the renaissance”, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12, 5737 (2010). 

3 K. Ooi Tan, Mardini, M., Yang, C., Ardenkjær-Larsen, J. Henrik, R.G. 
Griffin, “Three-spin solid effect and the spin diffusion barrier in 
amorphous solids”, Sci. Adv. 5, eaax2743 (2019). 

4 D. Gajan, A. Bornet, B. Vuichoud, J. Milani, R. Melzi, H.A. van 
Kalkeren, L. Veyre, C. Thieuleux, M.P. Conley, W.R. Grüning, M. 
Schwarzwälder, A. Lesage, C. Copérete, G. Bodenhausen, L. Emsley, 
S. Jannin, “Hybrid polarizing solids for pure hyperpolarized liquids 
through dissolution dynamic nuclear polarization”, Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 111, 14693 (2014). 

5 K. Ooi Tan, C. Yang, R.T. Weber, G. Mathies, R.G. Griffin, “Time-
optimized pulsed dynamic nuclear polarization,”, Sci. Adv. 5, eaav6909 
(2019). 

6 A. Equbal, A. Leavesley, S.K. Jain, S. Han, “Cross-effect dynamic 
nuclear polarization explained: polarization, depolarization, and 
oversaturation”, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 10, 548 (2019). 

7 A.S.L. Thankamony, J.J. Wittmann, M. Kaushik, B. Corzilius, 
“Dynamic nuclear polarization for sensitivity enhancement in modern 
solid-state NMR”, Prog. NMR Spectros. 102, 120 (2017). 

8 G. Mathies, M.A. Caporini, V.K. Michaelis, Y. Liu, K-N. Hu, D. 
Mance, J.L. Zweier, M. Rosay, M. Baldus, R.G. Griffin, “Efficient 
dynamic nuclear polarization at 800 MHz/527 GHz with trityl-nitroxide 
biradicals”, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 54, 11770 (2015). 

9 R.G. Griffin, T.M. Swager, R.J. Temkin, “High frequency dynamic 
nuclear polarization: New directions for the 21st century,”, J. Magn. 
Reson. 306, 128 (2019). 

of the appropriate rotation 𝒰 into its eigen-frame. This 
rotation retains the hybridization of states induced by the off-
diagonal matrix elements ∝ ℐG, and thus avoids losing it in 
the lowest-order AHT averaging. The set of exact eigenstates 
is labeled by 𝑎 , 𝑏 , 𝑐 , 𝑑
, and since the mixing is weak, 

we can safely associate 

𝑎 ⇢ 0, +1/2, ↑                                            
𝑏 ⇢ 0, +1/2, ↓                                            
𝑐 ⇢ −1, −1/2, ↑|                                       
𝑑 ⇢ −1, −1/2, ↓| .                     (B.11) 

Finally, following the standard AHT recipe, 

ℋ = 𝑅 𝒰 𝐻~

| + 𝐻vw 𝒰AQ 𝑅AQ − 𝑖𝑅𝑅AQ   (B.12) 

and, since 𝒰𝐻~

| 𝒰AQ is diagonal by definition, we obtain 

ℋ = 𝒰𝐻~

| 𝒰AQ + 𝑅𝒰𝐻vw𝒰AQ𝑅AQ − 𝕎           (B.13) 

The effective Hamiltonian we employed for simulating the 
effect of RF irradiation is given by the zeroth-order in AHT, 

𝐻=§§ 𝜔, Ωvw = 1

𝑇
ℋ 𝑡| 𝑑𝑡|

~

O

,                 (B. 14) 

with 𝑇 = 2𝜋/𝜔. Notice that the only time-dependent term in 
ℋ(𝑡′) corresponds to 𝑅𝒰𝐻vw𝒰AQ𝑅AQ. 

10 C. Sauvée, M. Rosay, G. Casano, F. Aussenac, R.T. Weber, O. Ouari, 
P. Tordo, “Highly efficient, water-soluble polarizing agents for 
dynamic nuclear polarization at high frequency”, Angew. Chem. 125, 
11058 (2013). 

11 A. Ajoy, K. Liu, R. Nazaryan, X. Lv, P.R. Zangara, B. Safvati, G. 
Wang, D. Arnold, G. Li, A. Lin, P. Raghavan, E. Druga, S. Dhomkar, 
D. Pagliero, J.A. Reimer, D. Suter, C.A. Meriles, A. Pines, 
“Orientation-independent 
room-temperature 
optical 
13C 
hyper-

polarization in powdered diamond”, Science Adv. 4, eaar5492 (2018). 

12 P.R. Zangara, S. Dhomkar, A. Ajoy, K. Liu, R. Nazarian, D. Pagliero, 
D. Suter, J.A. Reimer, A. Pines, C.A. Meriles, “Dynamics of frequency-
swept nuclear spin optical pumping in powdered diamond at low 
magnetic fields”, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116, 2512 (2019). 

13 R. Fischer, A. Jarmola, P. Kehayias, D. Budker, “Optical polarization 
of nuclear ensembles in diamond”, Phys. Rev. B 87, 125207 (2013).   

14 G.A. Alvarez, C.O. Bretschneider, R. Fischer, P. London, H. Kanda, 
S. Onoda, J. Isoya, D. Gershoni, L. Frydman, “Local and bulk 13C 
hyperpolarization in nitrogen-vacancy-centred diamonds at variable 
fields and orientations”, Nat. Commun. 6, 8456 (2015). 

15 V. Jacques, P. Neumann, J. Beck, M. Markham, D. Twitchen, J. 
Meijer, F. Kaiser, G. Balasubramanian, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, 
“Dynamic polarization of single nuclear spins by optical pumping of 
nitrogen-cacancy color centers in diamond at room temperature”, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 102, 057403 (2009). 

16 J.P. King, K. Jeong, C.C. Vassiliou, C.S. Shin, R.H. Page, C.E. 
Avalos, H-J. Wang, A. Pines, “Room-temperature in situ nuclear spin 
hyperpolarization from optically pumped nitrogen vacancy centres in 
diamond”, Nat. Commun. 6, 8965 (2015). 
17 C.O. Bretschneider, Ü. Akbey, F. Aussenac, G.L. Olsen, A. 
Feintuch, H. Oschkinat, L. Frydman, “On the potential of dynamic 

 
REFERENCES 


11 

 
nuclear polarization enhanced diamonds in solid-state and dissolution 
13C NMR spectroscopy”, Chem. Phys. Phys. Chem. 17, 2691 (2016).  

18 P.R. Zangara, J. Henshaw, D. Pagliero, A. Ajoy, J.A. Reimer, A. 
Pines, C.A. Meriles, “Two-electron-spin ratchets as a platform for 
microwave-free dynamic nuclear polarization of arbitrary material 
targets”, Nano Lett. 19, 2389 (2019). 

19 D. Abrams, M.E. Trusheim, D. Englund, M.D. Shattuck, C.A. 
Meriles, “Dynamic nuclear spin polarization of liquids and gases in 
contact with nanostructured diamond”, Nano Lett. 14, 2471 (2014). 

20 F. Shagieva, S. Zaiser, P. Neumann, D.B.R. Dasari, R. Stöhr, A. 
Denisenko, R. Reuter, C.A. Meriles, J. Wrachtrup, “Microwave-
assisted cross-polarization of nuclear spin ensembles from optically-
pumped nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond”, Nano Lett. 18, 3731 
(2018). 

21 E. Scott, M. Drake, J.A. Reimer, “The phenomenology of optically 
pumped 13C NMR in diamond at 7.05 T: Room temperature 
polarization, orientation dependence, and the effect of defect 
concentration on polarization dynamics”, J Magn Reson. 264, 154 
(2016). 

22 R. Wunderlich, J. Kohlrautz, B. Abel, J. Haase, J. Meijer, 
“Investigation of room temperature multispin- assisted bulk diamond 
13C hyperpolarization at low magnetic fields”, J. Phys.: Condens. 
Matter 30, 305803 (2018). 

23 B.L. Green, B.G. Breeze, G.J. Rees, J.V. Hanna, J-P. Chou, V. Ivády, 
A. Gali, M.E. Newton, “All-optical hyperpolarization of electron and 
nuclear spins in diamond”, Phys. Rev. B 96, 054101 (2017). 

24 A.L. Falk, P.V. Klimov, V. Ivády, K. Szász, D.J. Christle, W.F. 
Koehl, A. Gali, D.D. Awschalom, “Optical polarization of nuclear spins 
in silicon carbide”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 247603 (2015). 

25 A.A. Smith, B. Corzilius, A.B. Barnes, T. Maly, R.G. Griffin, “Solid 
effect dynamic nuclear polarization and polarization pathways”, J. 
Chem. Phys. 136, 015101 (2012). 

26 D. Pagliero, P. Zangara, J. Henshaw, A. Ajoy, R.H. Acosta, J.A. 
Reimer, A. Pines, C.A. Meriles, “Optically pumped spin polarization as 
a probe of many-body thermalization”, Science Adv. 6, eaaz6986 
(2020). 

27 D. Pagliero, P.R. Zangara, J. Henshaw, A. Ajoy, R.H. Acosta, N. 
Manson, J. Reimer, A. Pines, C.A. Meriles, “Magnetic-field-induced 
delocalization in hybrid electron-nuclear spin ensembles”, Phys. Rev. 
B, in press. See also arXiv:2006.07736 (2020). 

28 A. Leavesley, D. Shimon, T.A. Siaw, A. Feintuch, D. Goldfarb, S. 
Vega, I. Kaminker, S. Han, “Effect of electron spectral diffusion on 
static dynamic nuclear polarization at 7 Tesla”, Phys. Chem. Chem. 
Phys. 19, 3596 (2017). 

29 S. Armstrong, L.J. Rogers, R.L. McMurtrie, N.B. Manson, “NV–NV 
electron–electron spin and NV–NS electron — electron and electron-
nuclear spin interaction in diamond”, Phys. Proc. 3, 1569 (2010). 

30 R. Fischer, C.O. Bretschneider, P. London, D. Budker, D. Gershoni, 
L. Frydman “Bulk nuclear polarization enhanced at room temperature 
by optical pumping”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 057601 (2013). 

31 D. Pagliero, K.R. Koteswara Rao, P.R. Zangara, S. Dhomkar, H.H. 
Wong, A. Abril, N. Aslam, A. Parker, J. King, C.E. Avalos, A. Ajoy, J. 
Wrachtrup, A. Pines, C.A. Meriles, “Multispin-assisted optical 
pumping of bulk 13C nuclear spin polarization in diamond”, Phys. Rev. 
B 97, 024422 (2018). 

32 R. Wunderlich, J. Kohlrautz, B. Abel, J. Haase, J. Meijer, “Optically 
induced cross relaxation via nitrogen-related defects for bulk diamond 
13C hyperpolarization”, Phys. Rev. B 96, 220407(R) (2017).  

33 B. Smeltzer, L. Childress, A. Gali, “13C hyperfine interactions in the 
nitrogen-vacancy centre in diamond”, New J. Phys. 13, 025021 (2011). 

34 S. Felton, A.M. Edmonds, M.E. Newton, P.M. Martineau, D. Fisher, 
D.J. Twitchen, J.M. Baker, “Hyperfine interaction in the ground state 
of the negatively charged nitrogen vacancy center in diamond”, Phys. 
Rev. B 79, 075203 (2009). 

35 A. Dreau, J.R. Maze, M. Lesik, J-F. Roch, V. Jacques, “High-
resolution spectroscopy of single NV defects coupled with nearby 13C 
nuclear spins in diamond”, Phys. Rev. B 85 134107 (2012). 

36 A. Abragam, M. Goldman, “Principles of Dynamic Nuclear 
Polarization”, Rep. Prog. Phys. 41, 395 (1976). 

37 A. Laraoui, C.A. Meriles, “Approach to dark spin cooling in a 
diamond nanocrystal”, ACS Nano 7, 3403 (2013). 

38 A. Laraoui, D. Pagliero, C.A. Meriles, “Imaging nuclear spins weakly 
coupled to a probe paramagnetic center”, Phys. Rev. B 91, 205410 
(2015). 

39 C.E. Bradley, J. Randall, M.H. Abobeih, R.C. Berrevoets, M.J. 
Degen, M.A. Bakker, M. Markham, D.J. Twitchen, T.H. Taminiau, “A 
ten-qubit solid-state spin register with quantum memory up to one 
minute”, Phys. Rev. X 9, 031045 (2019). 

40 M.J. Degen, S.J.H. Loenen, H.P. Bartling, C.E. Bradley, A.L. 
Meinsma, M. Markham, D.J. Twitchen, T.H. Taminiau, “Entanglement 
of dark electron-nuclear spin defects in diamond”, arXiv:2011.09874v1 
(2020).  

41 R.R. Ernst, G. Bodenhausen, A. Wokaun, Principles of Nuclear 
Magnetic Resonance in One and Two Dimensions, Clarendon Press, 
Oxford (1987).  

42 J.S. Waugh, Average Hamiltonian theory. Encyclopedia of Magnetic 
Resonance, John Wiley, New York (2007). 


