1

Upgraded Metallurgical Grade Silicon for solar electricity 

production: a comparative Life Cycle Assessment

Laura Méndez1, Eduardo Forniés1, Daniel Garrain2, Antonio Pérez Vázquez3, Alejandro Souto3, Timur 

Vlasenko4

1Aurinka PV Group, Marie Curie 19, 28521 Rivas-Vaciamadrid (Madrid), Spain

2CIEMAT, Av. Complutense 40, 28040 Madrid (Madrid), Spain

3Ferroglobe, Pol. Sabón, 15142 Arteixo (La Coruña), Spain

4FerroSolar, Ucrania 6, 13500 Puertollano (Ciudad Real), Spain

Corresponding author: email: lmendez@aurinkapv.com

Abstract

Solar grade silicon (SoG-Si) is a key material for the development of crystalline silicon 
photovoltaics (PV), which is expected to reach the tera-watt level in the next years and around 
50TW in 2050. Upgraded metallurgical grade silicon (UMG-Si) has already demonstrated to 
be a viable alternative to standard polysilicon in terms of cost and quality. This study presents 
the life cycle assessment (LCA) of UMG obtained by the FerroSolar process. Moreover, it 
shows the environmental impacts of PV modules and electricity generation based on this 
material. For this, an exhaustive review of the life cycle inventory (LCI) of PV value chain, 
from metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si) down to electricity generation, has been carried out 
updating inputs for all processes. The Balance of System (BoS) has also been updated with 
real state of the art data for a fixed open ground large PV site (100 MW). Two different 
electricity mixes, with low and high carbon intensities, have been considered. The results 
reveal that for PV electricity generation using UMG instead of polysilicon leads to an overall 
reduction of Climate change (CC) emissions of over 20%, along with an improvement of the 
Energy Payback Time (EPBT) of 25%, achieving significantly low values, 12 gCO2eq / kWhe
and 0.52 years, respectively. Moreover, it is shown that UMG silicon feedstock is not the 
main contributor to the carbon and energy footprint of the produced electricity, leaving the 
first place to PV module manufacturing.

Keywords: Solar energy, Life cycle assessment, UMG silicon, polysilicon, Environmental 
Impact 


2

Graphical Abstract


3

1
Introduction

Solar photovoltaics is a crucial technology for achieving a decarbonized electricity in the 
coming years (Breyer et al., 2018). The power sector is the main responsible of the world’s 
greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions, with approximately 70%, due to the predominant share 
of fossil fuels. The decarbonization of the power sector is mandatory to achieve the objective 
of limiting the global average temperature rise to 1.5 ºC (Jäger-Waldau, 2019), as stablished 
in the Paris Agreement, back in 2016.

PV has already demonstrated to be an economically viable source of electricity. Its current 
and expected Levelized costs of Energy (LCOE) are below either fossil or other renewable 
energies (IEA, 2020; Vartiainen et al., 2020). To achieve the present status, many 
contributions have been made along the whole value chain in terms of cost reduction and 
increase of efficiency. Silicon material usage for crystalline cells has been reduced 
significantly during the last decade from around 16 to below 4 g/Wpk due to increased 
efficiencies, thinner wafers and wires as well as larger ingots and cells (VDMA, 2019).

As PV worldwide installed capacity points to the terawatt-level in the next five years (Haegel 
et al., 2019), the production of silicon for PV applications will have to grow accordingly to 
cover the demand. Nowadays, crystalline silicon technology accounts for over 95% of the 
worldwide market and it can be safely assumed that will remain the same for the following 
years (Philipps and Warmuth, 2020).

Under the denomination of “solar grade silicon” (SoG-Si), different grades are described, 
regarding to their concentration of impurities according to the “Specification for Virgin 
Silicon Feedstock Materials for Photovoltaic Applications” (SEMI PV17-1012) (Ceccaroli 
et al., 2016). Nowadays the market demand of solar grade silicon is almost completely 
covered by polysilicon, produced by different configurations of the Siemens process.
Alternatives to Siemens polysilicon are Fluidized Bed Reactor (FBR) Solar Silicon and 
upgraded metallurgical grade silicon (UMG), and even direct carbothermic reduction of 
silica. All of the have in common their lower energy consumption (Forniés et al., 2016; 
Maldonado, 2020), and therefore low energy and carbon footprints. Even though the 
penetration in the market of alternative feedstocks of has not yet become significant, these 
still raise the attention of the research community (Chen et al., 2019; Cherif et al., 2019; Du 
and Liu, 2020; Ye et al., 2019) and the industry (Osborne, 2020; Verdu, 2020).

The UMG silicon assessed in this work has been manufactured through the metallurgical 
route by means of the process developed by Ferrosolar in Spain. In a previous mass 
production test, performed in commercial solar cells and modules production lines, this 
feedstock has proven to be appropriate for PV applications (Forniés et al., 2019), reaching, 
in a conventional production line, up to 20.76% of solar cell efficiency with multicrystalline 
cells made of 100% UMG silicon. Additional results have been recently presented (Fornies 
et al., 2021), on defect engineering and outdoor degradation of UMG-Si PV modules
compared to polysilicon, including some partial results presented in the present work.


4

For the past decade, new PV manufacturing capacity has been mostly installed in China and 
other places in Asia, covering the whole value chain, from polysilicon to PV modules. It has 
been previously pointed out that the environmental impact of these production sites is higher 
than in other regions, in spite of the contribution of higher scale to the optimization of the 
technologies (Leccisi et al., 2016; Stamford and Azapagic, 2018; Yue et al., 2014). In the 
case of the European Union, the attention has been drawn to the need of a larger local installed 
capacity of PV manufacturing in order to ensure the supply of PV devices for the predicted 
new installations (Jäger-Waldau et al., 2020), that must be cost-effective (Rentsch et al., 
2019) in order to be successful.

The potential of PV as leading decarbonization technology rests upon the zero-emissions 
production of electricity for its lifetime, but the environmental impact associated to its full 
life cycle needs to be addressed. Countries as France, and recently South Korea, are 
regulating the carbon footprint of PV modules eligible for large scale tenders and subsidies 
(Stoker, 2020), as the impact of PV electricity is concentrated in the production stage.

Life Cycle Assessment is a comprehensive, standardized and internationally recognized 
approach for quantifying all emissions, resource consumption and related environmental and 
health impacts linked to a product. A fair amount of publications have dealt with LCA for 
PV for the past three decades including various recent reviews (Ludin et al., 2018; Muteri et 
al., 2020). Other studies show the relationship between cost and environmental impact 
(Louwen et al., 2016; Mayer et al., 2021), which are deeply related to Si material and energy 
consumption, and consequently to environmental footprint.

The objective of this research work is to assess the environmental impacts of UMG silicon 
based solar PV systems in comparison with traditional state of the art polysilicon-based ones, 
by means of a comparative LCA. Climate change (CC) emissions and EPBT have been 
selected as main indicators and Cumulative Energy Demand (CED) and Acidification 
(terrestrial and freshwater) (ATF) are also reported. To achieve a fair comparison of UMG 
and standard polysilicon, a comprehensive full PV value chain analysis has been carried out. 
Moreover, the analysis has been made for two electricity mixes, with different carbon 
intensities, as electrical power input has a decisive role in the overall impact of PV value 
chain (Yue et al., 2014).


5

2
Methods

The environmental impacts have been estimated using process-based LCA, according to the 
Methodology Guidelines on Life Cycle Assessment of Photovoltaic Electricity published by 
the International Energy Agency (Frischknecht et al., 2016) and following the Environmental 
Footprint (EF) 3.0 impact assessment method (Biganzioli et al., 2018), proposed by the 
European Union. The software used for the study has been Simapro 9.0, with ecoinvent 3.5
as database for all the background data (Wernet et al., 2016). Processes included in this 
database are used for most of the steps included in this study, except for the process for UMG-
Si production, which have been set from scratch. All these processes have been updated to 
the best of the authors’ knowledge, recurring to up-to-date literature or data provided by 
industry, to account for the technical improvements that have been developed in the past 
years by the PV industry. The key parameters used for this study, according to the IEA 
guidelines, are shown in Table 1.

Table 1. LCA Key Parameters

PV technology
Silicon feedstock: UMG and polysilicon
Multicrystalline Al-BSF cell technology

Production location
Processes: 
Electricity: 

Europe 
Europe (Spanish mix) 
China (Chinese mix)

Type of system
Ground-mount, fixed-tilt

Module efficiency
UMG: 18.43%
Polysilicon: 18.55%

Module degradation rate
0.4%

PV lifetime
30 years

BOS lifetime
15 years electrical gear 
30 years structure

Location of installation
Tabernas (Almería, Spain)

Annual irradiation
2160 kWh/m2 year

Inclination / Performance Ratio
Optimal tilt angle 34º / 82,5%

Time frame of data
2015-2020

2.1
Goal and Scope

The main goal of the study is to characterize the environmental impact associated to the use 
of solar grade silicon produced by a metallurgical direct route (UMG) by the Ferrosolar 


6

process for electricity production. The functional unit used in this study is 1 kWh of 
electricity produced by a ground mounted multicrystalline PV system with a nominal 
capacity of 100 MW. The selected functional units for each step included within the 
boundaries of the studied system can be found in the Supplementary Material (S1).

This “cradle to use” system includes the following items:

-
Production of raw material: metallurgical grade silicon from silica sand

-
Production of the solar grade silicon feedstock: Ferrosolar UMG silicon and 
polysilicon for solar applications

-
Production of multicrystalline silicon ingots and wafers

-
Al-BSF (Back Surface Field) multicrystalline solar cell manufacturing

-
Multicrystalline PV module manufacturing

-
Balance of system (BoS), ground mounting and electrical gear for a 100MW plant

-
Installation, operation and maintenance of the PV system

In general terms, transport of the different materials between production steps has been not 
considered, with exception of PV modules transport to PV site location. Production sites do 
not have a defined location and may be very close to each other. Moreover, it has been shown 
before that transportation only accounts for a minor part of the final impact in electricity 
(Stamford and Azapagic, 2018). Packaging has been taken into account only for silicon 
wafers, due to their fragility, and PV modules that have to be protected in order to be 
transported to the PV site.

End-of-life (EoL) has been taken out of this study due to the lack of industrial scale data, as 
this PV systems have not still reached the minimum volume needed for economical 
reutilization and recycling processes that will be needed by the end of the next decade 
(Chowdhury et al., 2020). No difference should be found in recycling between polysilicon 
and UMG-Si as the recovery of silicon is expected to provide low grade silicon (similar to 
metallurgical grade) (Latunussa et al., 2016).

An uncertainty analysis was not performed in this study as no coherent sets of values where 
available for all the stages. Previous results indicate that the main factor for uncertainty is 
electrical consumption and the most affected stage is the silicon feedstock production (Huang 
et al., 2017).

Regarding the environmental impacts, all categories present in the EF method were 
calculated, but the focus was set on Climate Change. Additionally, Acidification terrestrial 
and freshwater (ATF) results are presented. To complement this result, cumulative energy 
demand (CED), total and non-renewable, was also assessed, together with the energy pay-
back time (EPBT) for the considered scenarios. This parameter, expressed in years, was 
calculated as per equation (1) (Frischknecht et al., 2016):


7

𝐸𝑃𝐵𝑇 =

𝐶𝐸𝐷
𝑂𝑒,𝑦𝑟

𝜂𝐺

(1)

Where: 

CED: Total cumulative primary energy demand for the considered system [kWh].
Oe,year: Average electricity delivered by the considered system over the course of one year of 
its lifetime [kWh·year-1].
G: 
Life-cycle energy efficiency of the grid mix into which the considered system is 

embedded (a value of 0.31 is assumed).

2.2
LCI data

All background inventory data is taken from ecoinvent 3.5 database. The selection criteria 
for processes in the database has been using Europe [RER] values when available, and Global 
[GLO] when no specific values for Europe where available. In some cases, only values for 
Rest of the World [RoW] where available. The full life cycle inventory data can be found in 
the Supplementary Material (S3). Data sources and assumptions are explained in the 
following sections for the selected foreground processes.

2.2.1
Electricity mix

All calculations have been carried out for both UMG and polysilicon feedstocks considering 
two different electricity mixes: Spanish (ES) and Chinese (CN) (Supplementary Material S2). 
Spanish mix (REE, 2019) has been selected because Ferrosolar process is meant to be carried 
out in the facilities located at Puertollano, Spain (Forniés et al., 2019), and can be considered 
among lower carbon intensity mixes. Chinese mix has been selected for comparison as China 
is currently the major PV devices manufacturer, reaching a share of the market of over 70% 
in all stages of the value chain (Philipps and Warmuth, 2020). Chinese mix is high-carbon 
intensity mix, with a high contribution of fossil fuels-based electricity production (BP, 2019). 
Electricity production for low, medium and high voltage supply, for both mixes, has been 
included in the LCA. 

No other difference has been made between the scenarios calculated for ES and CN 
electricity mix, as it is not in the scope of this work to evaluate the impact of the 
manufacturing locations of the different stages and would introduce additional variability in 
the results.

2.2.2
Raw Materials: Silica Sand and Metallurgical grade silicon

The metallurgical production of silicon (MG-Si) implies the reduction of quartz with carbon 
in electric arc furnaces to obtain the silicon. Some wood chips are normally added to the 


8

reacting mix too, in order to get permeability in the mass and promote reaction between 
gaseous intermediates present in the furnace, as SiO(g) and CO(g) (Schei et al., 1998). 
Depending on the type of coal used in the process, the amount of CO2 emissions coming from 
it can be very different.

Extractive mining of quartz main inputs are petrol based fuels and electricity, both of which
depend significatively on the mine characteristics and the processes employed for product 
beneficiation (Grbeš, 2015). The data available in ecoinvent database has been used in this 
work, as no more meaningful values for this study could be found.

Metallurgical grade silicon production is a mature process from a technical point of view. 
Values from ecoinvent have been used for inventory, with some minor changes. The values 
presented in this database are representative of the Norwegian producer (Elkem). Electricity 
consumption diverges from some values for Chinese production that can be found in 
literature (Huang et al., 2017) but are in good agreement with experts’ criteria. The 
manufacturing infrastructure has been changed from “silicone plant” to “electric arc furnace” 
as silicon production belongs to the metallurgic sector and not to the chemical one, as 
silicones do.

2.2.3
Silicon feedstock: Polysilicon

Solar grade silicon used by industry as silicon source for crystalline silicon PV devices 
manufacturing at the present time is produced mainly by a closed-loop Siemens process, in 
which trichlorosilane Siemens CVD deposition technology is combined with 
hydrochlorination of silicon tetrachloride for recovery of vent gases. This is the technology 
used by leading SoG-Si producers in China (Xie et al., 2018). Traditional western 
manufacturers as Wacker Chemie AG (Germany) or Hemlock Semiconductor (US), which 
account for around one quarter of the worldwide total production, use other technological 
schemes that rely on a high integration of chlorine use and production of chlorosilanes for 
other industries. Moreover, Chinese manufacturers are increasing each year their installed 
capacity. Polysilicon production technology has seen a very intense reduction of energy 
consumption and cash costs over the past decade (Chunduri, 2017; Woodhouse et al., 2019), 
although not updated values for input consumption can be found in open literature. The 
inventory data for closed loop hydrochlorination process adjusted to meet current material 
and energy consumption that has been used in this study can be found in the Supplementary 
Material (S3). Estimated quantities of nitrogen and graphite have been also included in the 
inventory, as they are known to be used by all polysilicon producers.

2.2.4
Silicon feedstock: UMG-Silicon

Ferrosolar’s UMG silicon for solar applications has a boron concentration bellow 0.2 ppmw 
and a phosphorous concentration that can be tailored between 0.1 and 0.3 ppmw. Metals 


9

concentration is below 0.5 ppmw (including Fe, Al, transition, alkaline and alkaline earth 
elements). These specifications are suited for multicrystalline silicon applications. 

The UMG production process description can be found in previous works (Forniés et al., 
2019). For inventory purposes the process has been divided in its main steps: slagging, 
vacuum refining and directional solidification. Two additional processes have been 
modelled: an inert melting step, whose purpose is to recycle non pure Si material from the 
final steps of the process to reduce material consumption, and a final step in which the final 
formulation of the product is obtained. A simplified block diagram for the process is shown 
in Figure 1, illustrating the main inputs and output of the process. Further details cannot be 
disclosed in this work due to confidentiality reasons.

Mass allocation has been applied to by-products, as avoidance or economical criterions are 
difficult to formulate and can be considered a source of arbitrariness.

Figure 1. UMG-Silicon production diagram: main inputs and outputs

2.2.5
Multicrystalline silicon ingot and wafer manufacturing

As it has been pointed out, polysilicon, silicon ingot and wafer production, have seen an 
important improvement in their yield and energy consumption, driven by optimization of 
processes and equipment. In this study only the multicrystalline silicon process is analysed
because UMG Silicon application without blending is limited to this technology, due to its 
higher level of impurities when compared with high quality polysilicon. High performance 
multicrystalline casting (HP-mc) (Lan, 2019) is the standard method used nowadays by 
industry and can be industrially applied to UMG silicon (Buchovska et al., 2017). 


10

Regarding the wafering process, the most important development, diamond wire sawing
(DWS) has been included in the LCI. The implementation of DWS has been very disruptive, 
becoming the only technique used for multicrystalline silicon wafering by 2019 (VDMA, 
2019). This cutting technology relies on a wire that contains, embedded in its surface, 
synthetic diamond particles (Diamond-Like Carbon, DLC). Therefore, in order to cut the 
silicon ingot, it does not require an abrasive suspension. In the case of traditional cutting by 
Multiwire Slurry Saw (MWSS), the cut is made using a metal thread that presses an abrasive 
suspension, called slurry, on the ingot, which contains polyethylene glycol (PEG) and silicon
carbide particles. One of the main advantages of DWS is the reduction of kerf loss, since the 
groove left by the diamond wire is about 80 microns compared to the 120-200 microns of the 
traditional slurry cut, leading to a productivity of 45 wafers per kg of ingot compared to 60 
wafers per kg of MWSS (Rentsch et al., 2018). Multicrystalline silicon is less suited for this 
technique than monocrystalline silicon but this drawback has been overcome by the 
improvement of the wet chemical processes needed for texturing and saw damage removal
(Shetty et al., 2020).

For the LCI formulation of the wafering process main assumptions include a silicon 
consumption of 0.665 kg per 1m2 of wafer, for 156.75 x 156.75 mm wafers. The yield of the 
process, in terms of silicon mass, is over 60%, much higher than the 40% achieved by MWSS 
technique.

2.2.6
Al-BSF Cell and PV Module manufacturing

Standard Aluminium Back Surface Field (Al-BSF) technology for PV solar cells 
manufacturing has been considered. Details regarding said process can be found in a previous 
work (Fornies, Energies 2019). It is assumed that the needed amount of wafers per cell is 
1.02 m2 wafer/ m2 cell. Module manufacturing has been developed intensively over the past 
few years in a pursue of a lower cost-higher efficiency devices. The characteristic parameters 
of the PV modules used for this study are shown in Table 2. A loss from broken cells of 
1.67% has been considered. The LCI tables for both processes are available in the 
Supplementary Material (S3).


11

Table 2. PV Module characteristic parameters

UMG
polysilicon

Maximum Power at STC (*)
Wp
325.88
328.08

Module size
m2
1.938396

Mass
kg
22 ± 3%

Glass thickness
mm
3.2

Cell number
72

Solar cell efficiency
%
18,52
18,64

Solar cell size
mm
156,75

Bus bar
5

CTM (**) losses
%
99.5

(*) Factory Standard Test Conditions": 1,000 W/m2 solar irradiance, 1.5 AM, 25ºC

(**) Cell-to-module

2.2.7
Balance of system, installation and plant operation

The BoS includes all the necessary equipment to install the PV modules in the desired 
configuration and transform the electricity to its final use. The following processes have been
contemplated: site conditioning, mounting structure, electrical installation and inverters, PV 
panel transportation and installation.

Inventory for mounting structure and electrical installation has been calculated from current 
real data gathered from TINOSA Project, comprised of several plants, with a total installed 
power of 180MW. This PV site, located in Almería (Spain), is currently under construction 
by Aurinka PV International (Sánchez Molina, 2020).

The modelled PV plant has a total installed power of 100 MWpk, a fixed structure and a set 
of PV skids comprised of central inverter, switchgear and transformer. Production values are 
also calculated for the ubication of the mentioned project. A reduction of 0.5% in the 
produced electricity due to self-consumption was set for EPBT calculations.


12

3
Results and discussion

Tables reporting the full results obtained for the life cycle assessment can be found in the 
Supplementary Material (S4) for all process stages studied in this work. 

3.1
LCIA Results 

3.1.1
Electricity mix

The results for electricity mixes used in this study are first discussed, in order to support the 
analysis of the results obtained for the rest of the analysed processes, some of which have 
large electricity consumptions. Results can be found in the Supplementary Material (S5). The 
impacts considered for Spanish (ES) and Chinese (CN) electricity mixes present very large 
differences, about 3 and 10 times higher for the latter for CC and ATF categories respectively. 
This essentially is the result of the different weight of fossil-based electricity production 
technologies. Coal (hard coal and lignite) is responsible for more than 90% of CC emissions 
and ATF, in the case of CN mix, whereas natural gas accounts for around 60% of CC for ES 
mix, that adds up to the contribution of coal (around 20%) and oil (5%). Nuclear and 
renewables (60% of the mix) do not add significative CC emissions in this case.

On the other hand, the coal contribution to ATF in ES mix goes over 75%, despite its 
relatively low share in the mix (about 5%), thus giving a low absolute total value when 
compare to CN mix. CED comparison shows much less differences, being 15% higher for 
CN, relying mainly on coal instead of natural gas combined cycle and nuclear, as non-
renewable generation technologies. CC emissions calculated for Spanish mix, 0.201 kgCO2eq
/ kWhe, are very similar to those published by the responsible official entity (European 
Environment Agency, 2020), and can be considered among low intensity mixes, whereas 
Chinese mix, with 0.591 kgCO2eq / kWhe, would belong to high carbon intensity mix group.

3.1.2
PV Electricity Production

The results for PV electricity production in the assessed scenarios are presented in Figure 2.
In the case UMG-ES, the value obtained for Climate Change (CC) category is 12.10 gCO2eq
/ kWhe and for Acidification (terrestrial and freshwater) (ATF) is 9.25·10-5 molH⁺eq/ kWhe, 
according to the definitions in the EF method. The result for Total Cumulative Energy 
Demand (CED) is 5.67·10-2 kWh/ kWhe. 


13

Figure 2. Main impacts per kWh of produced electricity for the defined scenarios (100MW@2100W/m2year)

Predictably, due to the higher carbon intensity of its energy mix, UMG-CN CC category 
result is 33% higher than UMG-ES. As explained in the previous section, the only difference 
considered in the LCI between these scenarios is the electricity mix. ATF category behaves 
in a similar manner, although in this case UMG-CN is 133% higher than UMG-ES. This is 
due to the important share of hard coal in Chinese mix, in contrast to the relatively low share 
in the Spanish mix (see Supplementary Material S5). On the other hand, when the CED is 
compared the differences are not as significant, achieving UMG-ES scenario a result less 
than 5% lower than UMG-CN.

The same trend is observed when poly-ES and poly-CN scenarios are compared, intensified 
by the higher energy demand, mostly electricity, of these scenarios when compared to the 
former. This results in a difference of 43% in CC, 185% in ATF and 6% in CED categories, 
between poly-ES and poly-CN scenarios. 

The comparison of UMG-ES/poly-ES and UMG-CN/poly-CN scenarios indicate that in the 
cases where UMG-Si was used as feedstock, electricity production impacts are noteworthy 
lower, although the differences where not as remarkable as in the previous comparison for 
ATP, being more significant in the case of CED. The differences between the pairs UMG-
ES/poly-ES and UMG-CN/poly-CN are 24% and 15% for CC and 33% and 41% for ATF 
respectively. The observed results can be attributed to the higher electricity and heat demand 
characteristic of polysilicon manufacture, that will be shown in detail in next section.


14

Climate change calculated emissions vary between 12.1 and 21.4 gCO2eq/ kWhe for UMG-
ES and poly-CN scenarios. Comparing with previous studies that can be found in literature
shows that the results are somewhat lower than those published before. It is important to note 
that these comparisons are not straight forward, as parameters that characterize each case 
study may differ, having some of them very important influence on the overall result, as for 
example the efficiency of the solar cell, and therefore of the PV module, the irradiation of 
the location selected or size of the installation, which may vary from less than 10 kWpk for 
domestic installations to hundreds of MWp for utility-scale PV parks. It is also common in 
literature to find studies in which the type of silicon used is a mixture of both mono and 
multicrystalline materials. Moreover, different systems boundaries are defined, and various
LCA assessment methods are used, leading to different results.

In order to put the obtained outcomes into context, a set of case studies from literature have 
been selected and their conditions and results gathered in the Supplementary Material (S6).
The criteria for selection have been that the systems considered resembled the present study 
as much as possible. We are aware that this evaluation is problematic, for example for climate 
change emissions, as assessment methods have different definitions for impact categories, 
but nonetheless it provides useful information for discussion. This was in fact the main reason 
to evaluate four different scenarios in this work, ensuring that the results would be 
comparable to each other. Some very complete works (Hong et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017; 
Xie et al., 2018) have not been included as they have applied different LCA methods, as they 
provide non comparable results to ours.

In the case of UMG feedstock, literature values are scarce. Elkem Solar, back in 2012 (de 
Wild-Scholten and Gløckner, 2012), reported values for UMG electricity production GWP 
of about 29 gCO2eq / kWhe. It is to note that Elkem used for their calculations of the UMG 
silicon feedstock impact the Norwegian electricity mix, which has an especially low carbon 
intensity as it relies mainly on hydropower. In a more recent work (Yu et al., 2017), a value 
of 20 gCO2eq / kWhe was reported which is in line with the results of the present work, 16.1 
gCO2eq / kWhe when Chinese mix is considered. Yu et.al. considered a process for UMG 
silicon feedstock production that differs from the Ferrosolar process, including two steps of 
directional solidification and an electron beam melting step in between. Both processes have 
in common a low energy consumption when compared to the conventional modified Siemens 
process for production of solar grade silicon. Additionally, the conditions used in this study
are more favourable: apart from better irradiation and bigger size of the installation for the 
selected site, the used of higher power modules with better performance along its lifetime
have an important influence on the results. 

Regarding polysilicon performance, more information is available in literature for a 
validation of the results. A recent study (Raugei et al., 2020) discussing the impact of the 
inclusion of batteries to the PV systems, come up with a value for GWP of 27 gCO2eq/ kWhe
(37 gCO2eq/ kWhe @1700 kWh/m2·year). In their work they use a mixture multi and 


15

monocrystalline silicon feedstock with a distribution of 55%-65%, of Chinese provenance, 
including a similar electricity mix to CN mix in the present work. In another study, dealing 
with the comparison of fixed and single axis tracking PV systems environmental impacts
(Antonanzas et al., 2019) obtained a value for CO2 emissions of 23.0 gCO2eq/ kWhe. These
results are slightly higher than 21.4 gCO2eq/ kWhe. This may be attributed to the update of 
some important inputs of the life cycle inventory of the different stages that the PV value 
chain comprises, as older studies (Fu et al., 2015) show higher scores than more recent ones.

3.1.3
PV Value Chain

In order to gain insight of the reasons behind the obtained overall result for PV electricity 
production, an analysis of the contribution of the different production stages is carried out. 
The share of each process for CC, ATF and CED is shown in Figure 3, Figure 4 and Figure 
5, respectively. A full table can be found in the Supplementary Material (S7). The result of 
each stage excludes the contribution of the previous one: ingot production contribution does 
not include the silicon feedstock, PV cell fabrication does not include the contribution of the 
multicrystalline wafer production, and so on.

The absolute contribution of the BoS and Installation to the overall result are the same in all 
the scenarios, as only one location for the PV site has been considered. It is to be noted that 
the inputs for the inventory have been obtained from a specific project (TINOSA plant, in 
Almería (Spain)) and are therefore conditioned by the characteristics of the site: i.e., wind 
velocity, ground slope profiles… On the other hand, the values used are representative of the 
state-of-the art regarding BoS of large size ground installations. The calculated need of 
structural steel is 42 kg per kWpk installed, which is of the same order as 31 kg/kWpk (Mason 
et al., 2006) and very similar to the 38 kg/ kWpk calculated recently by Antonanzas et.al.


16

Figure 3. Climate change contributions of different stages of the production of PV systems per kWh of produced electricity

Figure 4. Acidification terrestrial and freshwater: Contributions of different stages of the production of PV systems per 
kWh of produced electricity


17

Figure 5. Cumulative Energy Demand: Contributions of different stages of the production of PV systems per kWh of 
produced electricity

The calculated climate change emissions of BoS and Installation account for around 130 kg 
CO2eq / kWp of installed power in the PV site, in contrast for example to the 494 kg CO2eq / 
kWp coming from the PV Modules in UMG-ES or the 974 kg CO2eq / kWpk in poly-CN 
scenarios, best and worst cases of the set. The obtained values are similar to recent results 
for ground mounted fixed structures: 143.7 kgC2eq /kW (Antonanzas et al., 2019) and much 
lower than older studies: about 300 kgCO2eq about/kW (de Wild-Scholten, 2013; Leccisi et 
al., 2016). This reduction is the result of several positive effects combined, the increase of 
the ratio of power and weight of the PV modules power over the years, resulting in less 
demanding need of structural components and electrical gear per installed kWpk and the 
improvements in the components fabrication itself, avoiding the use of aluminium and 
concrete in fixed installations and cooper for electrical cables (substituted by aluminium
where possible) and optimizing the needed amount of materials. This has been pointed out 
before by Antonanzas et.al. as many works rely on ecoinvent data (Wernet et al., 2016), that 
must be corrected according to the power of the PV modules. As it is shown in Figure 6,the 
PV panel itself account for about 80% of the impact, being the other major contributors the 
mounting system, the electrical gear and the inverter. 

Regarding PV module manufacturing, impacts are also very similar in all the scenarios for 
both CC and ATF categories (see Table 3). On the one hand, the energy consumption is low 
when compared to the rest of process steps. On the other hand, the difference in calculated 
module power at STC conditions for UMG and polysilicon modules is about 0,67%, 
according to the efficiency stablished in a previous work (Forniés et al., 2019) , which was 


18

18,515% for UMG based cells and 18,640% for standard polysilicon-based ones. This
outcome on slightly higher values for UMG when compared to poly scenarios, around 1%, 
due to the decrease of efficiency. CED values are also mostly the same for all the scenarios. 
As can be seen in Figure 6, apart from the PV cell, the main contributors to CC and ATF are 
the aluminium frame, the backsheet and the solar glass, thus the impact is not affected either 
by the silicon feedstock or the electricity mix. EVA does also have an important contribution 
to CED, while cooper does to ATF.

Results for polysilicon are comparable to those found recently in published works. Luo et.al 
obtained a CC of 215.9. kg CO2eq /module (219.5 for PERC modules), applying Singapore 
electricity mix (0.4846 kg CO2eq /kWh) (Luo et al., 2018). Corresponding values in this study 
are 210.4 and 228.7 kg CO2eq /module, for ES and CN mix respectively. Recently NREC 
(Korea’s New and Renewable Energy Centre) classified Chinese PV modules in a category 
with over 830 kg CO2eq /kWp (Stoker, 2020). The result is highly influenced by the efficiency 
of the PV cell, as the same quantity of materials and energy are used to obtain modules with 
varying nominal power. Sooner or later, regulations considering the carbon footprint of PV 
modules are likely to be stablished in more countries, other than France and South Korea, in 
particular in the European Union, making UMG-Si PV modules more attractive to the end 
users, when compared to polysilicon.

Although this work does not account for PERC processing, the CC emissions for UMG 
modules can be estimated from Luo et.al. results. In their work they found a difference
between PERC and BSF of 1.67%. In our previous work, a mean efficiency of 20.13% for 
UMG black silicon PERC cells was obtained, which would correspond to a 354.3 W module. 
Assuming no other differences, the CC emission for this module result in 478 kgCO2eq/kW, 
showing a reduction of 3%.

Regarding the absolute total results for ingot, wafer and cell manufacture steps, consumption
of electrical power is relevant, leading to big differences of the impact calculated for 
scenarios with different electricity mixes. As no distinction is considered in the processing 
of UMG and polysilicon for ingot, wafer and cell production, variations are caused solely by 
the energy mix used for calculations, resulting in very large differences between ES and CN 
scenarios, about 85% higher values for the later in the case of CC. The same behaviour is 
observed in the ATF category results, intensified by the big difference between ES and CN 
mixes for this category, leading to values over 4.5 times higher for these processes when 
Chinese mix is employed.

The critical role of electricity in the impact of these processes is clearly shown in Figure 6
(c, d and e). In the case of PV cells and wafers it accounts for about 15% of the total impact
and a little less for silicon multicrystalline ingots for both CC and ATF categories.

The trends observed for CC and ATF are not found in CED results for the different scenarios, 
as this parameter is only slightly affected by the electricity mix. As could be expected, a big 


19

discrepancy is found between UMG and poly scenarios, whereas small variations are 
observed when the Spanish mix is compared to the Chinese one. The use of UMG instead of 
polysilicon leads to a reduction of 33% in the CED per kWhe. This is of much importance in 
the calculation of the energy payback time of the different technologies. For UMG scenarios 
the main contributor to CED is the PV module fabrication step, followed by PV cell 
production, while for poly scenarios it is the silicon feedstock the largest contributor.

The obtained results are difficult to compare to those than can be found in open literature, 
because even the more recent studies do not include the use of DWS, and still rely on data 
from MWSS processes, essentially taken from databases or previous literature(Fan et al., 
2020; Raugei et al., 2020). The wafering step contribution to the total impact is much less 
with DWS as it improves the yield very much while reducing the need of other materials such 
as silicon carbide and PEG. 

Regarding the impact of the silicon feedstock Fan et.al. studied four scenarios including both 
materials, for multi and monocrystalline wafers. Their results show that ratios between 
multicrystalline UMG and poly are 0.235 for PED (Primary Energy Demand) and 0.267 for 
CO2 emissions. In the present work the calculated ratios are 0.432 and 0.456, respectively, 
higher because of the lower impact of the wafering process.

Multicrystalline ingot casting, apart from the mentioned contribution of electrical power, has 
a significant one by argon. This consumption (0.75 kg/ kg ingot) was found out to be 
significantly lower than some literature values (1.92 kg/kg ingot (Fu et al., 2015)) but also 
higher than others (0.25 kg/kg ingot (Frischknecht et al., 2015)). The difference with the later 
might be attributed to the introduction of the high performance multi casting.

Table 3. Contribution of the different process step to Climate Change (per m2 and kW of nominal PV module power)

Silicon
Ingot
Wafer
PV Cell
PV module
Total

Climate change (kgCO2eq/m2)

UMG ES
12,1
2,9
4,4
17,6
45,9
83,0

UMG CN
25,0
6,5
10,2
29,6
46,7
117,9

Poly ES
37,6
2,9
4,4
17,6
45,9
108,4

Poly CN
71,8
6,5
10,2
29,6
46,7
164,7

Climate change (kgCO2eq/kW@STC)

UMG ES
72
17
26
105
273
493

UMG CN
149
38
61
176
278
701

Poly ES
222
17
26
104
271
641

Poly CN
424
38
60
175
276
973


20

Figure 6. Detailed individual contribution breakdown for the different steps of the PV value chain (UMG-ES scenario)


21

3.1.4
Silicon feedstock: UMG vs. polysilicon

It has already been revealed that UMG based PV electricity has less carbon footprint and a 
smaller demand of energy than polysilicon, but in order to explain the differences a detailed 
comparative analysis of both materials is carried out. The full results of the assessment for 
UMG-Si and polysilicon can be found in the Supplementary Material (S4), both for ES and 
CN electricity mixes. CC, ATF and CED results per kg of SoG-Si produced are shown in 
Figure 7. As expected, polysilicon scores higher in every category, as it is reported in 
previous studies (Yu et al., 2017). UMG-ES calculated impacts are the lowest of the four 
scenarios. These values are 17.9 kg CO2eq/kg for CC and 11.2·10-2 molH⁺eq/kg for ATF
category, according to the definitions in the EF method. The result for CED is 113 kWh/kg.
On the other side, poly-CN has the highest impacts: CC 106.2 kgCO2eq/kg, ATF 185.3·10-2

molH⁺eq/kg and CED is 387 kWh/kg.

The trends observed for ATF and CED are very similar to those found for PV electricity. For 
ATF, we find higher value in CN mix scenarios, being the contribution of this coal intensive 
generation more important than the process for SoG-Si production itself. That means that 
UMG-Si obtained applying CN mix would have more impact in terms of ATF than the 
polysilicon obtained with a mix including less share of coal, 69.8·10-2 against 29.9 
molH⁺eq/kg. On the contrary, it is the SoG-Si production process the determining factor for 
CED results, those obtained for polysilicon are about 3 times higher than for UMG. This is 
related to a higher electrical power consumption (85 kWh/kg for polysilicon and 26.5
kWh/kg for Ferrosolar UMG considered process) and the use of heat as input in polysilicon 
production (180 MJ/kg). The electrical mix is solely responsible for the differences found 
between the results obtained for each material. 

Regarding Climate Change (Figure 3), the discussion of the results is not straight forward
although the influence of the electricity mix is clear as the CC for CN mix double those for 
ES mix, both for UMG and polysilicon. The contribution of the main inventory inputs for 
UMG and polysilicon production processes is shown in Figure 8. Metallurgical grade silicon 
(MG-Si), electricity and heat in the case of polysilicon are the most important contributors to 
this category.


22

Figure 7. Main impacts per kg of SoG-Si for UMG and polysilicon with ES and CN electricity mixes

Figure 8. Climate change distribution of main inputs for UMG and polysilicon 


23

Metallurgical grade silicon is the starting raw material for both, polysilicon and UMG 
obtention, although these processes differ on the amount of raw material needed to obtain a
kg of usable product, that is higher in the case of UMG Ferrosolar process. This quantity may 
vary as it depends on the specific process studied. In the work of Yu.et.al. the ratio MG-Si to 
SoG-Si is 1.23 (Yu et al., 2017) for UMG, smaller and very close to the ratio used in this 
work for polysilicon, 1.26 (Woodhouse et al., 2019). The latter, is reduced in contrast to other 
values found in literature, for example 1.39 (Huang et al., 2017; Xie et al., 2018) although is 
higher than the value included in ecoinvent database: 1.13.

As this ratio has an important influence in CC, especially for UMG-Si, the breakdown of the 
contribution of the main inputs in the production of MG-Si has been calculated. The absolute 
values MG-Si are 7.65 and 13.29 kg CO2eq/kg for ES and CN mixes, respectively and the two 
main contributions are electrical power (38% and 64% for ES and CN mixes), and process 
emissions (48% and 26%).

Process emissions are inherent to the oxidation of the carbonous material that is used for the 
reduction of silica. They may vary, depending on the nature of the coal mix used and have
been studied before (Monsen et al., 1998) being possible the adjust the ratios between fossil 
and renewable carbon sources. On the other hand, electricity consumption is a key contributor 
to climate change emissions of MG-Si. As shown in Figure 8, about half of the CC impact in 
the case of UMG-Si comes from the MG-Si, so any improvement in its production process 
would lead to even lower emissions when compared to polysilicon, for which MG-Si CC 
contribution accounts only for around 15%.

Regarding energy consumption of SoG-Si production processes, it is important to note that 
polysilicon production has a high demand of heat (as steam) apart from electrical power. A 
heat input of 180 MJ and a electricity consumption of 85 kW/kg of polysilicon have been 
considered for this work, similar to those found in literature and ecoinvent database. If these 
values are further reduced, assuming 65 kWh and 90 MJ / kg of polysilicon, CC results would 
be 40.9 and 81.3 kgCO2eq / kg of polysilicon for ES and CN mixes respectively, still far from 
UMG results (17.9 and 37.0 kgCO2eq / kg of UMG).

The contribution to CC of the different steps used to model UMG production by the 
Ferrosolar process can be found in the Supplementary Material (S8). The share of the MG-
Si used as starting material is for both (ES and CN) mixes the most important, as shown also 
in Figure 8. The slagging step, meant for boron removal, is also responsible for an essential 
part of the total CC impact, followed by vacuum refining, whose objective is phosphorous 
removal, and directional solidification, that serves as final purification of the UMG. All these 
steps have in common that they are electric power consumers, being the impacts very affected 
by the electricity mixed applied in the considered scenarios.

The comparison of the obtained results with published values is not easy as this kind of 
studies are few and aggregated impacts are provided. Recent work by Yu et.al does not 


24

provide any detail result for UMG, although they infer from PV production that this material 
is advantageous in terms of environmental impact (Yu et al., 2017). Values of 15 and 31
kgCO2eq/kg UMG, for Norway (12 gCO2eq/kWh) and UCTE (Europe) (530 gCO2eq/kWh)
electricity mixes were published for the Elkem Solar process (de Wild-Scholten and 
Gløckner, 2008) and updated afterwards to 10 kgCO2eq/kg UMG (de Wild-Scholten and 
Gløckner, 2012), also with Norwegian electricity mix. Elkem Solar process is different than 
the one assessed in this work, including a leaching step instead of a vacuum refining of the 
intermediate product obtained after a slagging step. In the first work a detailed analysis of 
different configurations of the Siemens process was carried out, obtaining around 57 kgCO2eq
/ kg polysilicon obtained by a route named “TCS with dirty STC recycling” which 
corresponds to the modified Siemens process used in the present work, being electricity 
consumption (UCTE mix) responsible for about 80% of the total impact. In their more recent 
work, they indicate that the CC emissions of polysilicon, according to ecoinvent 2.2 database,
are around 40 kgCO2eq. / kg polysilicon. The inventory included in ecoinvent 3 considers a 
total electricity consumption of 110 kW / kg polysilicon, of which 65 kWh/ kg are from 
hydroelectric power, having thus very small effect on the calculated CC impact.

3.2
System Energy Payback Time

The results of the assessment for Cumulative Energy Demand have already been presented 
for each stage of the PV value chain in the previous section, however additional detail is 
shown in Supplementary Material (S9) for further clarification. The part of the background 
processes (taken from ecoinvent database, not part of the modelled system) in the CED is 
found to be 8.1% of the total value for UMG scenarios and 6.4% for polysilicon ones. The 
background energy comes from the material used in the different stages, in particular from 
the components of the PV module: aluminium frame, solar glass, encapsulant and backsheet, 
which eventually account for over 10 kg /m2 of PV module, or which is the same, over 90% 
of the total mass of each module.

EPBT for each scenario is calculated from these values and a mean annual electricity 
production of 1.82·108 kWhe /year for the 100 MW installed power PV site. 0.5% is 
subtracted in account for maintenance (9.12·105 kWhe /year). A total EPBT of 0.52, 0.55, 
0.69 and 0.72 years are obtained for UMG ES and CN and poly ES and CN, respectively. 
The values of the nr-EPBT (non-renewable) and the r-EPBT (renewable) are shown in Figure 
9. UMG based PV electricity has a less than 6 months of nr-EPBT, whereas polysilicon based 
are about 30% higher.

These results are significantly better than other published values for highly irradiated PV 
sites, both for UMG, as expected, but for polysilicon also. Similar values can be found in the 
work of Antonanzas et.al. for fixed CN manufacturing polysilicon PV site with a 2327 
kWh/m2·year, indicating a value of 0.65 years.


25

Figure 9. EPBT (non-renewable and renewable) for the considered scenarios

4
Conclusions

A comprehensive comparative life cycle analysis of UMG and polysilicon based PV 
electricity generation was performed “cradle to use”. Both silicon feedstocks have been 
evaluated employing a low and a high carbon intensity electricity mix. The contribution of 
stages and components to environmental impacts was calculated by EF method. Cumulative 
energy demand was included in the analysis. The LCI where revised and updated to the best 
of the authors’ knowledge, matching the production flow used in a previous work, in which
the mean efficiency of an industrially manufactured UMG BSF solar cell achieved was over 
18% efficiency, very close to that obtained for polysilicon. A large scale, 100MW, ground 
fixed PV site was considered, employing data a current project being developed in Almería 
(Spain) by Aurinka PV. This location is among the best in Europe for PV solar, as its annual
in-plane irradiation is over 2000 kWh/m2.

As was expected, the electricity mix plays a very important role in most impact categories, 
as the processes of which the crystalline silicon PV chain if comprised of demand substantial
amounts of electricity, especially the silicon feedstock production. Acidification (ATF) 
impacts were specially affected by the electricity mix, as the coal intensive Chinese mix was 
compared to much lower impact Spanish mix.

The full PV value chain stages contribution was analysed, showing that when UMG is used 
as feedstock, its contribution to climate change, acidification and cumulative energy demand 
was not the highest, as it happened when polysilicon is used as feedstock and is usually 


26

reported in literature. PV module followed by cell manufacturing had the highest shares. In 
general, the calculated impacts are lower than those presented in previous studies, also for 
polysilicon, due to the update, most frequently reducing the quantity of materials and energy 
employed, of the inventories of the different stages of PV manufacturing. This is especially 
important in the wafering process, for which state of the art DWS technology has been used,
that reduces the amount of silicon losses when compared to slurry based traditional process.

Among the most important results of the study where the verification that the use of 
Ferrosolar’s UMG, instead of conventional polysilicon, can lead to a reduction of over 20% 
for climate change emissions for ES mix (12 vs. 15 gCO2eq/ kWhe) and over 25% for EPBT
of the electricity generated (0.52 vs. 0.68 years) during the expected lifetime of PV system, 
considered 30 years. Regarding the silicon feedstock itself, the reduction of CC impact 
obtained was 50% for ES mix (18 vs. 56 gCO2eq/ kWhe), being electricity and metallurgical 
grade silicon the main contributors.

Although the results obtained for UMG are encouraging, more advanced technology should 
be evaluated to find the real potential of this material. PERC and half cells have not been 
included in current LCA study and are part of the next steps. A more detailed study of the 
BoS, especially inverters, would also provide useful results, as it plays an important part of 
the total impacts, due to the reduction of the PV module fabrication impact.

5
Funding

The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of 
this article.

6
References

Antonanzas, J., Arbeloa-Ibero, M., Quinn, J.C., 2019. Comparative life cycle assessment of 

fixed and single axis tracking systems for photovoltaics. J. Clean. Prod. 240, 118016. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118016

Biganzioli, S., Laurentiis, F.D., Diaconu, S., 2018. Supporting information to the 

characterisation factors of recommended EF Life Cycle Impact Assessment methods 
49.

BP, 2019. BP Statistical Review - 2019. China’s energy market in 2018. [WWW Document]. 

URL https://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/business-sites/ en/global/corporate/pdfs 


27

/energy-economics/statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2019-china-insights.pdf 
(accessed 1.31.20).

Breyer, C., Bogdanov, D., Aghahosseini, A., Gulagi, A., Child, M., Oyewo, A.S., Farfan, J., 

Sadovskaia, K., Vainikka, P., 2018. Solar photovoltaics demand for the global energy 
transition in the power sector. Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl. 26, 505–523. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2950

Buchovska, I., Liaskovskiy, O., Vlasenko, T., Beringov, S., Kiessling, F.M., 2017. Different 

nucleation approaches for production of high-performance multi-crystalline silicon 
ingots and solar cells. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 159, 128–135. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.08.038

Ceccaroli, B., Ovrelid, E., Pizzini, S., 2016. Solar Silicon Processes : Technologies, 

Challenges, and Opportunities. CRC Press. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315369075

Chen, H., Morita, K., Ma, X., Chen, Z., Wang, Y., 2019. Boron removal for solar-grade 

silicon production by metallurgical route:A review. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
203, 110169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.110169

Cherif, F., Ahmed, I.B., Abderrahmane, A., Hamzaoui, S., 2019. Effect of pellet size and 

additive on silica carbothermic reduction in microwave furnace for solar grade 
silicon. Mater. Sci.-Pol. 37, 122–126. https://doi.org/10.2478/msp-2019-0014

Chowdhury, Md.S., Rahman, K.S., Chowdhury, T., Nuthammachot, N., Techato, K., 

Akhtaruzzaman, Md., Tiong, S.K., Sopian, K., Amin, N., 2020. An overview of solar 
photovoltaic panels’ end-of-life material recycling. Energy Strategy Rev. 27, 100431. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2019.100431

Chunduri, 2017. Market Survey Polysilicon CVD Reactors 2017 | TaiyangNews. URL 

http://taiyangnews.info/reports/market-survey-cvd-reactors/ (accessed 5.4.20).

de Wild-Scholten, 2013. Energy payback time and carbon footprint of commercial 

photovoltaic systems. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, Thin-film Photovoltaic Solar 
Cells 119, 296–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2013.08.037

de Wild-Scholten, M., Gløckner, R., 2012. Environmental footprint of Elkem Solar Silicon, 

in: Silicon for the Chemical and Solar Industry XI. p. 11.

de Wild-Scholten, M., Gløckner, R., 2008. LCA Comparison of The Elkem Solar 

Metallurgical Route and Conventional Gas Routes To Solar Silicon. 23rd Eur. 
Photovolt. Sol. Energy Conf. Exhib. 5.

Du, S., Liu, L., 2020. Numerical simulation of particle growth process in a polysilicon 

fluidized 
bed 
reactor. 
Part. 
Sci. 
Technol. 
38, 
261–270. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/02726351.2018.1528487

European Environment Agency, 2020. Greenhouse gas emission intensity of electricity 

generation in Europe [WWW Document]. URL https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-
maps/indicators/overview-of-the-electricity-production-3/assessment 
(accessed 

2.18.21).

Fan, M., Yu, Z., Ma, W., Li, L., 2020. Life Cycle Assessment of Crystalline Silicon Wafers 

for Photovoltaic Power Generation. Silicon. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12633-020-
00670-4

Forniés, Ceccaroli, Méndez, Souto, Pérez Vázquez, Vlasenko, Dieguez, 2019. Mass 

Production Test of Solar Cells and Modules Made of 100% UMG Silicon. 20.76% 
Record Efficiency. Energies 12, 1495. https://doi.org/10.3390/en12081495


28

Fornies, E., del Canizo, C., Mendez, L., Souto, A., Perez-Vazquez, A., Garrain, D., 2021. 

UMG silicon for solar PV: from defects engineering to PV module degradation. 
ArXiv210108019 Phys.

Forniés, E., Méndez, L., Tojeiro, M., 2016. Polysilicon vs. upgraded metallurgical- grade 

silicon (UMG-Si): Technology, quality and costs. Photovolt. Int. 31, 10.

Frischknecht, R., Heath, G., Raugei, M., Sinha, P., de Wild-Scholten, M., 2016. Methodology 

Guidelines on Life Cycle Assessment of Photovoltaic Electricity: 3rd Edition. Paris, 
France: International Energy Agency (IEA), United States.

Frischknecht, R., Itten, R., Sinha, P., de Wild-Scholten, M., Zhang, J., Heath, G.A., Olson, 

C., 2015. Life Cycle Inventories and Life Cycle Assessments of Photovoltaic Systems 
(No. NREL/TP-6A20-73853, 1561526). https://doi.org/10.2172/1561526

Fu, Y., Liu, X., Yuan, Z., 2015. Life-cycle assessment of multi-crystalline photovoltaic (PV) 

systems 
in 
China. 
J. 
Clean. 
Prod. 
86, 
180–190. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.07.057

Grbeš, A., 2015. A Life Cycle Assessment of Silica Sand: Comparing the Beneficiation 

Processes. Sustainability 8, 11. https://doi.org/10.3390/su8010011

Hong, J., Chen, W., Qi, C., Ye, L., Xu, C., 2016. Life cycle assessment of multicrystalline 

silicon photovoltaic cell production in China. Sol. Energy 133, 283–293. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.04.013

Huang, B., Zhao, J., Chai, J., Xue, B., Zhao, F., Wang, X., 2017. Environmental influence 

assessment of China’s multi-crystalline silicon (multi-Si) photovoltaic modules 
considering 
recycling 
process. 
Sol. 
Energy 
143, 
132–141. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2016.12.038

IEA, 2020. Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2020. IEA, Paris.
Jäger-Waldau, A., 2019. PV Status Report 2019 (No. EUR 29938), JRC118058. Publications 

Office of the European Union, Luxembourg. https://doi.org/10.2760/326629

Jäger-Waldau, A., Kougias, I., Taylor, N., Thiel, C., 2020. How photovoltaics can contribute 

to GHG emission reductions of 55% in the EU by 2030. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 
126, 109836. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.109836

Jia, X., Lv, F., Li, P., Wang, W., 2020. Life-cycle assessment of p-type multi-Si back surface 

field (BSF) solar module in China of 2019. Sol. Energy 196, 207–216. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.12.018

Lan, C.W., 2019. Growth of Multicrystalline Silicon for Solar Cells: The High-Performance 

Casting Method, in: Yang, D. (Ed.), Handbook of Photovoltaic Silicon. Springer, 
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 175–191. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-56472-1_34

Latunussa, C.E.L., Ardente, F., Blengini, G.A., Mancini, L., 2016. Life Cycle Assessment of 

an innovative recycling process for crystalline silicon photovoltaic panels. Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 156, 101–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.03.020

Leccisi, E., Raugei, M., Fthenakis, V., 2016. The Energy and Environmental Performance of 

Ground-Mounted Photovoltaic Systems—A Timely Update. Energies 9, 622. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en9080622

Louwen, A., van Sark, W.G.J.H.M., Faaij, A.P.C., Schropp, R.E.I., 2016. Re-assessment of 

net energy production and greenhouse gas emissions avoidance after 40 years of 
photovoltaics 
development. 
Nat. 
Commun. 
7, 
13728. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13728

Ludin, N.A., Mustafa, N.I., Hanafiah, M.M., Ibrahim, M.A., Asri Mat Teridi, M., Sepeai, S., 

Zaharim, A., Sopian, K., 2018. Prospects of life cycle assessment of renewable energy 


29

from solar photovoltaic technologies: A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 96, 11–
28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.07.048

Luo, W., Khoo, Y.S., Kumar, A., Low, J.S.C., Li, Y., Tan, Y.S., Wang, Y., Aberle, A.G., 

Ramakrishna, S., 2018. A comparative life-cycle assessment of photovoltaic 
electricity generation in Singapore by multicrystalline silicon technologies. Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 174, 157–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2017.08.040

Maldonado, S., 2020. The Importance of New “Sand-to-Silicon” Processes for the Rapid 

Future 
Increase 
of 
Photovoltaics. 
ACS 
Energy 
Lett. 
5, 
3628–3632. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.0c02100

Mason, J.E., Fthenakis, V.M., Hansen, T., Kim, H.C., 2006. Energy payback and life-cycle 

CO2 emissions of the BOS in an optimized 3·5 MW PV installation. Prog. Photovolt. 
Res. Appl. 14, 179–190. https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.652

Mayer, M.J., Szilágyi, A., Gróf, G., 2021. Ecodesign of ground-mounted photovoltaic power 

plants: Economic and environmental multi-objective optimization. J. Clean. Prod. 
278, 123934. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123934

Monsen, B., Lindstad, T., Tuset, J., 1998. CO2 Emissions from the Production of Ferrosilicon 

and Silicon metal in Norway.

Muteri, V., Cellura, M., Curto, D., Franzitta, V., Longo, S., Mistretta, M., Parisi, M.L., 2020. 

Review on Life Cycle Assessment of Solar Photovoltaic Panels. Energies 13, 252. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/en13010252

Osborne, M., 2020. GCL-Poly’s FBR polysilicon production capacity on target for end of 

2020. PV Tech. URL https://www.pv-tech.org/gcl-polys-fbr-polysilicon-production-
capacity-on-target-for-end-of-2020/ (accessed 2.20.21).

Philipps, S., Warmuth, W., 2020. Photovoltaics Report Fraunhofer ISE.
Raugei, M., Leccisi, E., Fthenakis, V.M., 2020. What Are the Energy and Environmental 

Impacts of Adding Battery Storage to Photovoltaics? A Generalized Life Cycle 
Assessment. Energy Technol. 8, 1901146. https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.201901146

REE, 2019. El sistema eléctrico español. Previsión de cierre 2019 | Red Eléctrica de España 

[WWW Document]. URL https://www.ree.es/es/datos/publicaciones/informe-anual-
sistema/sistema-electrico-espanol-prevision-cierre-2019 (accessed 1.31.20).

Rentsch, J., Kafle, B., Hofmann, M., Krieg, K., Zimmer, M., 2018. Texture etching 

technologies for diamond-wire-sawn mc-Si solar cells. Photovolt. Int. 38, 56–66.

Rentsch, J., Nold, S., Preu, R., 2019. Competitiveness of a European PV Manufacturing 

Chain. Photovolt. Int. 43, 8–15.

Sánchez Molina, P., 2020. Aurinka Internacional escoge a SENS para desarrollar 180 MW 

en Almería [WWW Document]. PV Mag. Esp. URL https://www.pv-
magazine.es/2020/05/08/aurinka-internacional-escoge-a-sens-para-desarrollar-180-
mw-en-almeria/ (accessed 10.25.20).

Schei, A., Tuset, J.K., Tveit, H., 1998. Production of high silicon alloys. Tapir, Trondheim, 

Norway.

Shetty, K., Kaushal, Y., Chikkan, N., Murthy, D.S., Kumar, C.M., 2020. Challenges in 

Processing Diamond Wire Cut and Black Silicon Wafers in Large-Scale 
Manufacturing of High Efficiency Solar Cells. J. Power Energy Eng. 8, 65–77. 
https://doi.org/10.4236/jpee.2020.82003

Stamford, L., Azapagic, A., 2018. Environmental Impacts of Photovoltaics: The Effects of 

Technological Improvements and Transfer of Manufacturing from Europe to China. 
Energy Technol. 6, 1148–1160. https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.201800037


30

Stoker, L., 2020. Chinese manufacturers slam South Korean solar module carbon emissions 

results. PV Tech. URL https://www.pv-tech.org/chinese-manufacturers-slam-south-
korean-solar-module-carbon-emissions-results/ (accessed 2.21.21).

Vartiainen, E., Masson, G., Breyer, C., Moser, D., Medina, E.R., 2020. Impact of weighted 

average cost of capital, capital expenditure, and other parameters on future utility-
scale PV levelised cost of electricity. Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl. 28, 439–453. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.3189

VDMA, 2019. International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic 2019 (No. 10th Edition).
Verdu, D., 2020. Taking a Big Step in Making Solar Industry Circular [WWW Document]. 

URL 
https://prosin.no/media/905959/david-verdurec-solar-taking-a-big-step-in-

making-solar-industry-circular-1108-prosin-2020.pdf (accessed 2.20.21).

Wernet, G., Bauer, C., Steubing, B., Reinhard, J., Moreno-Ruiz, E., Weidema, B., 2016. The 

ecoinvent database version 3 (part I): overview and methodology. Int. J. Life Cycle 
Assess. 21, 1218–1230. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11367-016-1087-8

Woodhouse, M.A., Smith, B., Ramdas, A., Margolis, R.M., 2019. Crystalline Silicon 

Photovoltaic Module Manufacturing Costs and Sustainable Pricing: 1H 2018 
Benchmark and Cost Reduction Road Map (No. NREL/TP--6A20-72134, 1495719). 
https://doi.org/10.2172/1495719

Xie, M., Ruan, J., Bai, W., Qiao, Q., Bai, L., Zhang, J., Li, H., Lv, F., Fu, H., 2018. Pollutant 

payback time and environmental impact of Chinese multi-crystalline photovoltaic 
production based on life cycle assessment. J. Clean. Prod. 184, 648–659. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.02.290

Ye, K., Wang, J., Xing, P., Du, X., Gao, B., Kong, J., Luo, X., 2019. Study of the Preparation 

of High Purity Silicon by a New Electro-thermal Metallurgy Method. Silicon 11, 
1175–1184. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12633-017-9679-x

Yu, Z., Ma, W., Xie, K., Lv, G., Chen, Z., Wu, J., Yu, J., 2017. Life cycle assessment of grid-

connected power generation from metallurgical route multi-crystalline silicon 
photovoltaic 
system 
in 
China. 
Appl. 
Energy 
185, 
68–81. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.10.051

Yue, D., You, F., Darling, S.B., 2014. Domestic and overseas manufacturing scenarios of 

silicon-based photovoltaics: Life cycle energy and environmental comparative 
analysis. Sol. Energy 105, 669–678. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2014.04.008


31

CRediT author statement

Laura Méndez: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing-
Original 
draft 
preparation, 
Visualization. 
Eduardo 
Forniés: 
Conceptualization,

Methodology, Investigation, Writing - Review & Editing. Daniel Garrain: Methodology,
Formal analysis, Resources, Writing - Review & Editing. 
Antonio Pérez Vázquez:

Investigation, Writing - Review & Editing. Alejandro Souto: Investigation, Writing -
Review & Editing. Timur Vlasenko: Investigation, Writing - Review & Editing.


32

Highlights

•
Life Cycle Assessment methodology is applied to UMG silicon based large-scale 
PV site electricity generation.

•
A comprehensive review and analysis of the full PV value chain is undertaken.

•
A double comparison is carried out: UMG and polysilicon as silicon feedstock and 
two electricity mixes with low and high carbon intensity.

•
Key factors that contributed the overall environmental burden are identified.

•
Climate change emission of UMG PV electricity are 20% less than for polysilicon 
and energy payback time is decreased in 25%.


Supplementary Material

S1 – Functional Units

Table 1. Functional Units for LCA foreground processes

Process Step
Functional Unit

Metallurgical grade silicon
1 kg

Solar grade silicon (UMG and polysilicon)
1 kg

Multicrystalline silicon ingot
1 kg

Multicrystalline silicon wafer
1 m2

Al-BSF PV Cell
1 m2

PV Module
1 m2

BoS – Mounting structure (total site area)
1 m2

BoS – Electrical installation (50MW)
1 p

Installation (100MW)
1 kWpk

Operation (during lifetime)
1 kWhe

S2 – Electricity Mixes

Table 2. Share of different technologies in electricity production for China and Spain

China CN
Spain ES

Coal
65,9%
5,0%

Oil
2,9%
2,2%

Natural gas
0,0%
33,3%

Nuclear
4,8%
22,2%

Hydropower
17,8%
9,0%

PV Solar
3,1%
5,0%

Wind
5,5%
21,6%

Cogeneration (biogas)
0,0%
1,7%


S3 - Life Cycle Inventory tables

Values taken form ecoinvent 3.5 (Wernet et al., 2016), unless otherwise noted.

Table 3 Metallurgical grade Silicon LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products
Silicon, metallurgical grade
1
kg

Materials
Charcoal {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0,17
kg

Coke {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
23,12
MJ

Graphite {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0,1
kg

Petroleum coke {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0,5
kg

Oxygen, liquid {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
0,02
kg

Silica sand {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
2,7
kg

Wood chips, wet, measured as dry mass {Europe w/o CH}| 
market | Cut-off, U

0,549757
kg

Electric arc furnace converter {RER}| construction | Cut-off, U
1E-11
p
Updated for a metallurgical plant

Electricity/heat
Electricity, high voltage, production 
11
kWh
Selected electricity mix

Emissions to air
Aluminum
1,5508E-06
kg

Antimony
7,8519E-09
kg

Arsenic
9,4223E-09
kg

Boron
2,7914E-07
kg

Cadmium
3,1408E-10
kg

Calcium
7,7538E-07
kg

Carbon dioxide, biogenic
1,6098
kg

Carbon dioxide, fossil
3,5808
kg

Carbon monoxide, biogenic
0,00062027
kg

Carbon monoxide, fossil
0,0013797
kg

Chlorine
7,8519E-08
kg

Chromium
7,8519E-09
kg

Cyanide
6,8704E-06
kg

Fluorine
3,8769E-08
kg

Hydrogen fluoride
0,0005
kg

Hydrogen sulfide
0,0005
kg

Iron
3,8769E-06
kg

Lead
3,4352E-07
kg

Mercury
7,8519E-09
kg

Nitrogen oxides
0,0097432
kg

NMVOC, 
non-methane 
volatile 
organic 
compounds, 

unspecified origin

0,000096
kg


Particulates, > 10 um
0,0077538
kg

Potassium
0,00006203
kg

Silicon
0,0075134
kg

Sodium
7,7538E-07
kg

Sulfur dioxide
0,012241
kg

Tin
7,8519E-09
kg

Waste to treatment
Slag from metallurgical grade silicon production {GLO}| market
| Cut-off, U

0,025
kg

Table 4 Closed loop Siemens process for solar grade Silicon LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products
Silicon, solar grade, closed loop Siemens process
1
kg
From previous step

Materials

Silicon, metallurgical grade (current study)
1,2621
kg
Estimation (Xie et al., 2018)
(Fu et al., 2015) (Huang et 
al., 2017)

Chlorine, gaseous {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
0,215
kg
Updated for closed-loop 
process

Hydrogen, liquid {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
0,0536
kg
Updated for closed-loop 
process

Sodium hydroxide, w/o water, in 50% solution state {GLO}| 
market | Cut-off, U

0,35
kg
Final product etching

Quicklime, milled, packed {RER}| market quicklime, milled, 
packed | Cut-off, U

0,58
kg
Chlorine neutralization

Nitrogen, liquid {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
12,9
kg
Estimation for tank 
blanketing and systems 
purging

Water, completely softened, from decarbonised water, at user 
{RoW}| production | Cut-off, U

1262
kg
For cooling purposes

Graphite {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0,0054
kg
Estimation for seed chuks

Silicone factory {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
1E-11
p

Electricity/heat
Electricity, high voltage, production market
85
kWh
Selected electricity mix
Estimation (Huang et al., 
2017; Woodhouse et al., 
2019)

Heat, from steam, in chemical industry {RER}| market heat, from 
steam, in chemical industry | Cut-off, U

180
MJ
Estimation (Huang et al., 
2017)

Emissions to air
Heat, waste
396
MJ

Emissions to water
AOX, Adsorbable Organic Halogen as Cl
1,2619E-05
kg

BOD5, Biological Oxygen Demand
0,00020471
kg

COD, Chemical Oxygen Demand
0,00202
kg


Chloride
0,035991
kg

Copper
1,0236E-07
kg

Nitrogen
0,00020751
kg

Phosphate
2,8043E-06
kg

Sodium
0,03379
kg

Zinc
1,963E-06
kg

Iron
5,6085E-06
kg

DOC, Dissolved Organic Carbon
0,00090998
kg

TOC, Total Organic Carbon
0,00090998
kg

Table 5 Multicrystalline silicon ingot LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products
Silicon, multicrystalline ingot
1
kg
From previous step

Materials

Silicon feedstock (current study)
1.10
kg
Selected silicon feedstock
No mono scrap

Argon, liquid {RER}| market argon, liquid | Cut-off, U
0.75
kg
Higher demand for HPmc

Nitrogen, liquid {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0302
kg
Helium is not used

Ceramic tile {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.164
kg

Graphite {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0068
kg
Crucible lining

Silica fume, densified {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.000448
kg
Crucible coating

Alkylbenzene sulfonate, linear, petrochemical {GLO}| market | 
Cut-off, U

0.08
kg
Cleaning starting material

Nitric acid, w/o water, in 50% solution state {RER}| Cut-off, U
0.0562
kg
Etching

Hydrogen fluoride {RER}| market hydrogen fluoride | Cut-off, U
0.00466
kg
Etching

Water, deionised, from tap water, at user {Europe w/o CH}| 
market Cut-off, U

3.2
kg

Nickel, 99.5% {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.000189
kg
Wire for briquetting and 
cropping

Steel, chromium steel 18/8, hot rolled {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.001457
kg

Water, cooling, unspecified natural origin
0.943
m3

Electricity/heat
Electricity, medium voltage
11.35
kWh
Higher demand for HPmc
Selected mix

Emissions to air
Heat, waste
69.463
MJ


Table 6 Multicrystalline silicon wafer LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products

Silicon, multicrystalline wafer 
1
m2
From previous step

Materials
Silicon, multi-Si, (current study)
0.665
kg

Water, deionised, from tap, at user {RER w/o CH} |Cut-off, U
57.81
kg
Wafer cleaning

Tap water {Europe w/o CH}| market | Cut-off, U
0.006
kg

Sodium hydroxide, w/o water, in 50% solution state {GLO}| 
market | Cut-off, U

0.0038
kg

Acetic acid, w/o water, in 98% solution state {GLO}| market | Cut-
off, U

0.056
kg

Alkylbenzene sulfonate, linear, petrochemical {GLO}| market | 
Cut-off, U

0.088
kg
Detergent

Acrylic binder, w/o water, in 34% solution state {RER}| market
acrylic binder, | Cut-off, U

0.0028
kg

Flat glass, uncoated {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0408
kg

Brass {RoW}| market brass | Cut-off, U
0.00745
kg

Steel, chromium steel 18/8, hot rolled {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0028
kg
Diamond wire sawing

Steel, chromium steel 18/8, hot rolled {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0177
kg

Wire drawing, steel {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0028
kg

Nickel, 99.5% {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0010
kg

Paper, woodfree, coated, at integrated mill/RER U
0.19
kg
Packaging

Polystyrene, high impact, HIPS, at plant/RER U
0.014
kg

Packaging film, LDPE, at plant/RER U
0.1
kg

Wafer plant/ES U 
6.7837E-09
p
Updated 

Electricity/heat
Electricity, medium voltage
12.13
kWh

Heat, district or industrial, natural gas {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
4
MJ

Emissions to air
Heat, waste
74.9
MJ

Emissions to water
AOX, Adsorbable Organic Halogen as Cl
0.00050129
kg

Cadmium
6.0508E-06
kg

Chromium
3.0254E-05
kg

COD, Chemical Oxygen Demand
0.029555
kg

Copper
6.0508E-05
kg

Lead
3.0254E-05
kg

Mercury
6.0508E-06
kg

Nickel
6.0508E-05
kg

Nitrogen
0.0099449
kg

Phosphate
0.00050129
kg

BOD5, Biological Oxygen Demand
0.029555
kg


DOC, Dissolved Organic Carbon
0.011083
kg

TOC, Total Organic Carbon
0.011083
kg

Table 7 Multicrystalline silicon solar cell LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products
Multicrystalline silicon PV cell (current study)
1
m2
From previous step

Materials
Silicon, multicrystalline wafer
1.02
m2

Nitrogen, liquid {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
1.9273
kg
Argon is no used

Oxygen, liquid {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0115
kg
(Frischknecht et al., 2015; 
Huang et al., 2017)
Industrial Tier 1 Producers

Ammonia, liquid {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0334
kg
(Frischknecht et al., 2015; 
Huang et al., 2017)
Industrial Tier 1 Producers

Calcium chloride {RER}| market calcium chloride | Cut-off, U
0.021573
kg

Ethanol, w/o water, in 99.7% solution state, from ethylene {RER}| 
market | Cut-off, U

0.019
kg
Cleaning (Fu et al., 2015; 
Huang et al., 2017; Yu et al., 
2017)

Water, completely softened, from decarbonised water, at user 
{RER}| production | Cut-off, U

59
kg
Industrial Tier 1 Producers

Nitric acid, w/o water, in 50% solution state {RER}| | Cut-off, U
0.02416
kg
(Huang et al., 2017; Luo et 
al., 2018; Yu et al., 2017)

Silicon tetrahydride {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.014771
kg
(Huang et al., 2017; Yu et 
al., 2017) Industrial Tier 1 
Producers

Hydrochloric acid, w/o water, in 30% solution state {RER}| market
| Cut-off, U

0.0785
kg
(Frischknecht et al., 2015; 
Huang et al., 2017; Yu et al., 
2017)

Hydrogen fluoride {RER}| market hydrogen fluoride | Cut-off, U
0.01
kg
(Frischknecht et al., 2015; 
Huang et al., 2017; Yu et al., 
2017)

Metallization paste, back side, aluminium {RER}| market | Cut-off, 
U

0.05495
kg
Updated, Industrial Tier 1 
Producers

Metallization paste, back side {RER}| market metallization paste, 
back side | Cut-off, U

0.00081
kg
Updated, Industrial Tier 1 
Producers

Metallization paste, front side {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
0.00366
kg
Updated, Industrial Tier 1 
Producers

Phosphoryl chloride {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0011
kg
Emitter (Frischknecht et al., 
2015; Huang et al., 2017; 
Luo et al., 2018; Yu et al., 
2017)

Potassium hydroxide {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0291
kg
(Frischknecht et al., 2015; 
Huang et al., 2017; Luo et 
al., 2018; Yu et al., 2017)

Sodium silicate, spray powder, 80% {RER}| market sodium 
silicate, spray powder, 80% | Cut-off, U

0.074786
kg

Solvent, organic {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0014341
kg


Tetrafluoroethylene {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0031558
kg

Steel, chromium steel 18/8, hot rolled {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0000156
kg

Wire drawing, steel {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0000156
kg

Polystyrene, expandable {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.00040722
kg

Cell plant
0.0000004
p
Updated current study

Electricity/heat

Electricity, medium voltage
25.75
kWh
(Fu et al., 2015; Huang et 
al., 2017; Woodhouse et al., 
2019)

Heat, district or industrial, natural gas {RER}| market group for | 
Cut-off, U

3.5841
MJ
(Fu et al., 2015)

Emissions to air
Heat, waste
108.88
MJ

Aluminium
0.00077252
kg

Ethane, hexafluoro-, HFC-116
0.00011861
kg

Hydrogen chloride
0.00071
kg

Hydrogen fluoride
0.00057
kg

Lead
0.00077252
kg

NMVOC, non-methane volatile organic compounds, unspecified 
origin

0.19354
kg

Nitrogen oxides
0.00686
kg

Methane, tetrafluoro-, CFC-14
0.00024763
kg

Particulates, < 2.5 um
0.0026627
kg

Silicon
7.2732E-05
kg

Silver
0.00077252
kg

Sodium
4.8488E-05
kg

Tin
0.00077252
kg

Chlorine
0.0031
kg

Ammonia
0.0016
kg

VOC, volatile organic compounds
0.0028492
kg

Emissions to water
COD, Chemical Oxygen Demand
0.004884
kg

Chloride
0.0252
kg

Fluoride
0.3187
kg

Waste to treatment
Treatment, PV cell production effluent, to wastewater treatment, 
class 3/CH U

0.0272
m3

Disposal, waste, Si waferprod., inorg, 9.4% water, to residual 
material landfill/CH U

0.27572
kg


Table 8 Multicrystalline silicon PV module LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products

Multicrystalline silicon PV module
1
m2

Materials
Photovoltaic cell, multi-Si (current study)
0.9059
m2
From previous step

Aluminium, wrought alloy {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
1.374
kg
Frame
Updated
Industrial 

Tier 1 producers

Silicone product {RER}| market silicone product | Cut-off, U
0.1977
kg
Industrial Tier 1 producers

Tap water {Europe w/o CH}| market | Cut-off
21.286
kg

Solar glass, low-iron {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
7.768
kg
For 3.2 mm

Ethylvinylacetate, foil {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.88
kg
Encapsulant 
updated

Industrial Tier 1 producers

Polyvinylfluoride, film {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.4438
kg
Backsheet updated Industrial 
Tier 1 producers

Wire drawing, copper {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.135
kg

Brazing solder, cadmium free {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U
0.0087647
kg
Tab-ribbon

Tin {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0236
kg

Copper {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.137
kg

Polyethylene terephthalate, granulate, amorphous {GLO}| market
| Cut-off, U

0.37297
kg

1-propanol {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.004
kg

Acetone, liquid {RER}| market acetone, liquid | Cut-off, U
0.012959
kg

Methanol {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0021556
kg

Vinyl acetate {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0016434
kg

Lubricating oil {RER}| market lubricating oil | Cut-off, U
0.0016069
kg

Ethylene vinyl acetate copolymer {RER}| market ethylene vinyl 
acetate copolymer | Cut-off, U

0.02228
kg
Electric connectors

Copper {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0396
kg
Electric connectors 

Glass fibre reinforced plastic, polyamide, injection moulded {GLO}| 
market | Cut-off, U

0.18781
kg
Connection box

Silicon capacitor (diode) 
0.002505
kg
Updated 

Corrugated board box {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
1.0956
kg
Packaging

Transport, lorry >16t, fleet average/RER U
1.6093
tkm

Transport, freight, rail/RER U
9.4484
tkm

Module plant 
6.5923E-09
p
Updated Estimation

Electricity/heat
Electricity, medium voltage, Aurinka 2019 market
1.41
kWh

Heat, central or small-scale, natural gas {Europe w/o CH}| market
| Cut-off, U

5.4071
MJ

Emissions to air

Heat, waste
16.958
MJ

VOC, volatile organic compounds, unspecified origin
0.00030609
kg
(Yu et al., 2017)

Waste to treatment


Disposal, municipal solid waste, 22.9% water, to municipal 
incineration/CH U

0.0089
kg

Disposal, 
polyvinylfluoride, 
0.2% 
water, 
to 
municipal 

incineration/CH U

0.1104
kg

Disposal, plastics, mixture, 15.3% water, to municipal 
incineration/CH U

1.6861
kg

Disposal, used mineral oil, 10% water, to hazardous waste 
incineration/CH U

0.0016069
kg

Treatment, sewage, from residence, to wastewater treatment, 
class 2/CH U

0.001616
m3

Table 9 Balance of system: Electric installation LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products

Electric installation for 50 MWp open ground module 
1
p

Materials
Aluminium, wrought alloy {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
96945
kg
Electrical cables

Wire drawing, copper {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
96945
kg

Polyethylene, high density, granulate {GLO}| Cut-off, U
40535
kg

Polyvinylchloride, bulk polymerised {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
28083
kg

Epoxy resin, liquid {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
2
kg

Epoxy resin, liquid {RoW}| market | Cut-off, U
10
kg

Nylon 6 {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
1568.9
kg

Polycarbonate {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
13
kg
Cabinets

Waste to treatment
Waste electric wiring {RoW}| market | Cut-off, U
165563
kg

Waste polyethylene/polypropylene product {Europe w/o CH}|| 
Cut-off, U

40535
kg

Waste polyvinylchloride {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
28083
kg

Data from TINOSA project

Table 10 Balance of system: Mounting system LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products
Photovoltaic mounting system, for 50MWp open ground
1
m2

Resources

Transformation, from pasture, man made
4.7
m2
1.5 Ha / MWp

Transformation, to industrial area
4.7
m2

Materials
Concrete, normal {RoW}| market | Cut-off, U
0.00002
m3

Reinforcing steel {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
1.4043
kg


Section bar rolling, steel {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
1.4087
kg

Steel, chromium steel 18/8, hot rolled {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0044
kg
Screws

Zinc coat, pieces {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0312
m2
Galvanized steel

Polyethylene, high density, granulate {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.00090909
kg

Polystyrene, high impact {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
0.0045455
kg
Cabinets

Waste paperboard, unsorted {GLO}| waste paperboard, unsorted, 
Recycled Content cut-off | Cut-off, U

-0.086364
kg
Packaging

Corrugated board box {CA-QC}| market | Cut-off, U
0.00079731
kg

Corrugated board box {RER}| market | Cut-off, U
0.01783257
kg

Corrugated board box {RoW}| market | Cut-off, U
0.06773413
kg

Waste to treatment

Scrap steel {RoW}| market scrap steel | Cut-off, U
1.4087
kg

Waste polyethylene/polypropylene product {Europe w/o CH}| 
market | Cut-off, U

0.00090909
kg

Waste polystyrene isolation, flame-retardant {Europe w/o CH}| 
market | Cut-off, U

0.0045455
kg

Waste reinforced concrete {Europe w/o CH}| market waste 
reinforced concrete | Cut-off, U

0.00002
kg

Data from TINOSA project

Table 11 PV Installation LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products
PV installation
100000
kWpk

Resources
Occupation, unspecified, natural (non-use)
47934884.9
m2a
Calculated for polysilicon

48054550.6
m2a
Calculated for UMG

Materials
Photovoltaic panel, multi-Si, at plant/RER/I U AURINKA
590829
m2
Calculated for polysilicon

594818
m2
Calculated for UMG

Inverter, 500kW {RER}| production | Cut-off, U
273.4
p
Calculated for mass ratio per 
kW of 1.75, assuming one full 
substitution.

Photovoltaic plant, electric installation for 50 MWp open ground 
2
p
From previous step

Photovoltaic mounting system, for 50MWp open ground module 
{GLO}| production | Cut-off, U Aurinka

1597829
From previous step
Calculated for polysilicon

1601818
m2
From previous step
Calculated for UMG-silicon

Diesel, burned in building machine {GLO}| market | Cut-off, U
807684.211
MJ
For construction 
(Antonanzas et al., 2019)

Electricity/heat
Electricity, low voltage 
3792.94737
kWh
For ES mix


Table 12 End-user: Electricity production LCI

Item
Qty.
Unit
Source / comments

Products

Electricity PV production (100MW plant, 30 years) 
5168104629
kWh
Calculated for production site

Materials
PV Installation
100000
kWpk
From previous step


S4 - Life Cycle Assessment Results

Table 13 Raw materials LCA results

Impact 
Unit

Silica Sand (1 kg)

Metallurgical grade Silicon (1kg)
MG-Si ES
MG-Si CN

CC
kg CO2 eq
2.13E-02
10.62
13.29

OD
kg CFC11 eq
3.77E-09
7.37E-07
2.83E-07

IR
kBq U-235 eq
2.61E-03
3.32E+00
8.05E-01

POF
kg NMVOC eq
5.69E-05
4.06E-02
6.30E-02

RI
disease inc.
6.80E-10
2.51E-07
3.03E-07

NCHHE
CTUh
2.93E-09
4.70E-07
8.08E-07

CHHE
CTUh
1.23E-10
3.75E-08
7.41E-08

ATF
mol H+ eq
7.17E-05
9.43E-02
2.22E-01

EF
kg P eq
1.15E-06
3.55E-03
1.10E-02

EM
kg N eq
1.60E-05
1.35E-02
1.83E-02

ET
mol N eq
1.79E-04
1.42E-01
1.78E-01

ETF
CTUe
9.17E-03
1.58
2.56

LU
Pt
8.14E-02
8.35
227.62

WS
m3 depriv.
1.38
1991
2842

RUEC
MJ
3.09E-01
161.10
116.51

RUMM
kg Sb eq
8.63E-09
1.06E-06
3.44E-06

CCF
kg CO2 eq
2.13E-02
10.36
13.05

CCB
kg CO2 eq
2.88E-06
2.51E-01
2.41E-01

CCLUT
kg CO2 eq
1.69E-07
7.54E-04
1.15E-03

CC: Climate change; OD: Ozone depletion; IR: Ionising radiation, HH; POF: Photochemical ozone formation, HH; RI: 
Respiratory inorganics; NCHHE: Non-cancer human health effects; CHHE: Cancer human health effects; ATF: 
Acidification terrestrial and freshwater; EF: Eutrophication freshwater; EM: Eutrophication marine; ET: Eutrophication 
terrestrial ; ETF: Ecotoxicity freshwater; LU: Land use; WS: Water scarcity; RUEC: Resource use, energy carriers;  RUMM: 
Resource use, mineral and metals; CCF: Climate change – fossil; CCB: Climate change – biogenic; CCLUT:  Climate 
change - land use and transform.


Table 14 Silicon Feedstock: polysilicon and UMG-Silicon LCA results

Silicon Feedstock (1kg)
Impact 
Unit
Poly ES
Poly CN
UMG ES
UMG CN

CC
kg CO2 eq
55.60
17.90
106.25
37.00

OD
kg CFC11 eq
6.58E-06
1.67E-06
4.19E-06
7.63E-07

IR
kBq U-235 eq
2.99E+01
1.06E+01
9.58E+00
2.94E+00

POF
kg NMVOC eq
1.33E-01
5.86E-02
4.26E-01
1.69E-01

RI
disease inc.
1.82E-06
6.22E-07
2.41E-06
8.44E-07

NCHHE
CTUh
2.54E-06
7.89E-07
7.95E-06
2.83E-06

CHHE
CTUh
2.44E-07
9.14E-08
6.97E-07
2.62E-07

ATF
mol H+ eq
2.99E-01
1.12E-01
1.85E+00
6.98E-01

EF
kg P eq
1.44E-02
5.12E-03
9.74E-02
3.64E-02

EM
kg N eq
4.12E-02
1.66E-02
1.38E-01
5.29E-02

ET
mol N eq
4.57E-01
1.74E-01
1.34E+00
5.07E-01

ETF
CTUe
9.73E+00
3.30E+00
2.44E+01
8.82E+00

LU
Pt
3.77E+02
2.98E+02
4.20E+02
3.14E+02

WS
m3 depriv.
1.31E+04
4.92E+03
2.56E+04
9.63E+03

RUEC
MJ
1.00E+03
3.01E+02
1.16E+03
3.60E+02

RUMM
kg Sb eq
4.88E-05
2.62E-05
3.39E-05
2.05E-05

CCF
kg CO2 eq
5.51E+01
1.75E+01
1.06E+02
3.67E+01

CCB
kg CO2 eq
4.57E-01
3.48E-01
3.87E-01
3.22E-01

CCLUT
kg CO2 eq
1.21E-02
4.02E-03
1.21E-02
4.03E-03

CC: Climate change; OD: Ozone depletion; IR: Ionising radiation, HH; POF: Photochemical ozone formation, HH; RI: 
Respiratory inorganics; NCHHE: Non-cancer human health effects; CHHE: Cancer human health effects; ATF: 
Acidification terrestrial and freshwater; EF: Eutrophication freshwater; EM: Eutrophication marine; ET: Eutrophication 
terrestrial ; ETF: Ecotoxicity freshwater; LU: Land use; WS: Water scarcity; RUEC: Resource use, energy carriers;  
RUMM: Resource use, mineral and metals; CCF: Climate change – fossil; CCB: Climate change – biogenic; CCLUT:  
Climate change - land use and transform.


Table 15 Silicon Ingot LCA

mc-Si Ingot (1kg)
Impact 
Unit
Poly ES
Poly CN
UMG ES
UMG CN

CC
kg CO2 eq
65.83
24.36
127.37
51.20

OD
kg CFC11 eq
7.76E-06
2.35E-06
4.85E-06
1.08E-06

IR
kBq U-235 eq
36.73
15.48
12.00
4.70

POF
kg NMVOC eq
1.58E-01
7.62E-02
5.14E-01
2.31E-01

RI
disease inc.
2.51E-06
1.20E-06
3.23E-06
1.51E-06

NCHHE
CTUh
3.18E-06
1.25E-06
9.75E-06
4.11E-06

CHHE
CTUh
3.21E-07
1.53E-07
8.71E-07
3.93E-07

ATF
mol H+ eq
3.61E-01
1.56E-01
2.25E+00
9.79E-01

EF
kg P eq
1.81E-02
7.89E-03
1.19E-01
5.18E-02

EM
kg N eq
4.95E-02
2.24E-02
1.67E-01
7.35E-02

ET
mol N eq
5.55E-01
2.44E-01
1.63E+00
7.11E-01

ETF
CTUe
12.24
5.16
30.03
12.92

LU
Pt
430.38
343.38
482.54
366.12

WS
m3 depriv.
15942.24
6950.64
31140.67
13578.73

RUEC
MJ
1207.60
435.94
1395.15
517.72

RUMM
kg Sb eq
7.03E-05
4.54E-05
5.22E-05
3.75E-05

CCF
kg CO2 eq
65.29
23.95
126.91
50.82

CCB
kg CO2 eq
5.27E-01
4.07E-01
4.42E-01
3.70E-01

CCLUT
kg CO2 eq
1.60E-02
7.18E-03
1.61E-02
7.20E-03

CC: Climate change; OD: Ozone depletion; IR: Ionising radiation, HH; POF: Photochemical ozone formation, HH; RI: 
Respiratory inorganics; NCHHE: Non-cancer human health effects; CHHE: Cancer human health effects; ATF: 
Acidification terrestrial and freshwater; EF: Eutrophication freshwater; EM: Eutrophication marine; ET: Eutrophication 
terrestrial ; ETF: Ecotoxicity freshwater; LU: Land use; WS: Water scarcity; RUEC: Resource use, energy carriers;  
RUMM: Resource use, mineral and metals; CCF: Climate change – fossil; CCB: Climate change – biogenic; CCLUT:  
Climate change - land use and transform.


Table 16 Silicon wafer LCA

mc-Si Wafer (1m2)
Impact 
Unit
Poly ES
Poly CN
UMG ES
UMG CN

CC
kg CO2 eq
48.59
21.01
95.73
45.08

OD
kg CFC11 eq
5.73E-06
2.13E-06
3.50E-06
9.91E-07

IR
kBq U-235 eq
28.00
13.87
9.05
4.20

POF
kg NMVOC eq
1.19E-01
6.46E-02
3.92E-01
2.04E-01

RI
disease inc.
1.91E-06
1.03E-06
2.46E-06
1.31E-06

NCHHE
CTUh
2.97E-06
1.69E-06
8.00E-06
4.25E-06

CHHE
CTUh
5.02E-07
3.91E-07
9.24E-07
6.06E-07

ATF
mol H+ eq
2.75E-01
1.38E-01
1.72E+00
8.77E-01

EF
kg P eq
1.44E-02
7.56E-03
9.16E-02
4.70E-02

EM
kg N eq
3.73E-02
1.93E-02
1.27E-01
6.51E-02

ET
mol N eq
4.16E-01
2.09E-01
1.24E+00
6.28E-01

ETF
CTUe
17.32
12.61
30.95
19.57

LU
Pt
333.40
275.54
373.36
295.94

WS
m3 depriv.
12344.28
6364.87
23988.74
12310.05

RUEC
MJ
912.55
399.39
1056.24
472.75

RUMM
kg Sb eq
1.01E-04
8.40E-05
8.67E-05
7.69E-05

CCF
kg CO2 eq
48.20
20.71
95.42
44.82

CCB
kg CO2 eq
3.72E-01
2.92E-01
3.07E-01
2.59E-01

CCLUT
kg CO2 eq
1.14E-02
5.56E-03
1.15E-02
5.57E-03

CC: Climate change; OD: Ozone depletion; IR: Ionising radiation, HH; POF: Photochemical ozone formation, HH; RI: 
Respiratory inorganics; NCHHE: Non-cancer human health effects; CHHE: Cancer human health effects; ATF: 
Acidification terrestrial and freshwater; EF: Eutrophication freshwater; EM: Eutrophication marine; ET: Eutrophication 
terrestrial ; ETF: Ecotoxicity freshwater; LU: Land use; WS: Water scarcity; RUEC: Resource use, energy carriers;  
RUMM: Resource use, mineral and metals; CCF: Climate change – fossil; CCB: Climate change – biogenic; CCLUT:  
Climate change - land use and transform.


Table 17 PV Cell LCA results

mc-Si PV Cell (1 m2)
Impact 
Unit
Poly ES
Poly CN
UMG ES
UMG CN

CC
kg CO2 eq
68,98
40,85
130,29
78,62

OD
kg CFC11 eq
1,84E-05
1,47E-05
1,55E-05
1,29E-05

IR
kBq U-235 eq
36,92
22,51
12,28
7,33

POF
kg NMVOC eq
3,71E-01
3,15E-01
7,25E-01
5,33E-01

RI
disease inc.
3,27E-06
2,38E-06
3,99E-06
2,82E-06

NCHHE
CTUh
3,14E-05
3,01E-05
3,80E-05
3,42E-05

CHHE
CTUh
6,96E-07
5,82E-07
1,24E-06
9,20E-07

ATF
mol H+ eq
3,91E-01
2,51E-01
2,27E+00
1,41E+00

EF
kg P eq
2,68E-02
1,99E-02
1,27E-01
8,17E-02

EM
kg N eq
6,15E-02
4,31E-02
1,78E-01
1,15E-01

ET
mol N eq
6,72E-01
4,61E-01
1,74E+00
1,12E+00

ETF
CTUe
87,17
82,37
104,89
93,29

LU
Pt
417,52
358,50
469,48
390,52

WS
m3 depriv.
16089,11
9990,11
31230,33
19318,06

RUEC
MJ
1212,30
688,88
1399,14
803,98

RUMM
kg Sb eq
1,96E-03
1,94E-03
1,94E-03
1,93E-03

CCF
kg CO2 eq
68,49
40,45
129,88
78,27

CCB
kg CO2 eq
4,66E-01
3,84E-01
3,81E-01
3,32E-01

CCLUT
kg CO2 eq
2,57E-02
1,97E-02
2,57E-02
1,97E-02

CC: Climate change; OD: Ozone depletion; IR: Ionising radiation, HH; POF: Photochemical ozone formation, HH; RI: 
Respiratory inorganics; NCHHE: Non-cancer human health effects; CHHE: Cancer human health effects; ATF: 
Acidification terrestrial and freshwater; EF: Eutrophication freshwater; EM: Eutrophication marine; ET: Eutrophication 
terrestrial ; ETF: Ecotoxicity freshwater; LU: Land use; WS: Water scarcity; RUEC: Resource use, energy carriers;  
RUMM: Resource use, mineral and metals; CCF: Climate change – fossil; CCB: Climate change – biogenic; CCLUT:  
Climate change - land use and transform.


Table 18 PV Module LCA results

mc-Si PV Module (1m2)
Impact 
Unit
Poly ES
Poly CN
UMG ES
UMG CN

CC
kg CO2 eq
108,44
82,95
164,70
117,89

OD
kg CFC11 eq
1,99E-05
1,65E-05
1,72E-05
1,49E-05

IR
kBq U-235 eq
36,66
23,60
14,05
9,56

POF
kg NMVOC eq
5,07E-01
4,57E-01
8,32E-01
6,58E-01

RI
disease inc.
6,06E-06
5,25E-06
6,72E-06
5,66E-06

NCHHE
CTUh
3,89E-05
3,77E-05
4,49E-05
4,14E-05

CHHE
CTUh
2,03E-06
1,93E-06
2,53E-06
2,24E-06

ATF
mol H+ eq
7,41E-01
6,14E-01
2,47E+00
1,69E+00

EF
kg P eq
5,40E-02
4,77E-02
1,46E-01
1,05E-01

EM
kg N eq
1,15E-01
9,84E-02
2,22E-01
1,65E-01

ET
mol N eq
1,23
1,04
2,21
1,65

ETF
CTUe
120,98
116,63
137,24
126,73

LU
Pt
692,92
639,46
740,61
669,07

WS
m3 depriv.
14879,40
9354,31
28774,54
17983,22

RUEC
MJ
1665,43
1191,26
1836,88
1297,73

RUMM
kg Sb eq
2,74E-03
2,73E-03
2,73E-03
2,72E-03

CCF
kg CO2 eq
107,71
82,31
164,05
117,29

CCB
kg CO2 eq
6,15E-01
5,41E-01
5,37E-01
4,93E-01

CCLUT
kg CO2 eq
1,11E-01
1,06E-01
1,11E-01
1,06E-01

CC: Climate change; OD: Ozone depletion; IR: Ionising radiation, HH; POF: Photochemical ozone formation, HH; 
RI: Respiratory inorganics; NCHHE: Non-cancer human health effects; CHHE: Cancer human health effects; ATF: 
Acidification terrestrial and freshwater; EF: Eutrophication freshwater; EM: Eutrophication marine; ET: 
Eutrophication terrestrial ; ETF: Ecotoxicity freshwater; LU: Land use; WS: Water scarcity; RUEC: Resource use, 
energy carriers;  RUMM: Resource use, mineral and metals; CCF: Climate change – fossil; CCB: Climate change 
– biogenic; CCLUT:  Climate change - land use and transform.


Table 19 Balance of system LCA results

Balance of System
Impact 
Unit
Electrical Installation (1 kWpk)
Mounting Structure (1 m2) (*)

CC
kg CO2 eq
35.76
3.70

OD
kg CFC11 eq
1.04E-06
2.32E-07

IR
kBq U-235 eq
9.11E-01
0.17

POF
kg NMVOC eq
1.04E-01
1.75E-02

RI
disease inc.
2.53E-06
2.94E-07

NCHHE
CTUh
6.79E-06
2.45E-06

CHHE
CTUh
1.37E-06
5.47E-07

ATF
mol H+ eq
2.11E-01
1.95E-02

EF
kg P eq
1.57E-02
2.19E-03

EM
kg N eq
3.27E-02
3.91E-03

ET
mol N eq
3.32E-01
0.04

ETF
CTUe
40.27
8.61

LU
Pt
93.86
621.78

WS
m3 depriv.
15.71
1.74

RUEC
MJ
340.88
39.72

RUMM
kg Sb eq
2.25E-04
2.39E-04

CCF
kg CO2 eq
35.56
3.69

CCB
kg CO2 eq
1.00E-01
5.25E-03

CCLUT
kg CO2 eq
9.62E-02
7.97E-03

CC: Climate change; OD: Ozone depletion; IR: Ionising radiation, HH; POF: Photochemical ozone formation, HH; RI: 
Respiratory inorganics; NCHHE: Non-cancer human health effects; CHHE: Cancer human health effects; ATF: 
Acidification terrestrial and freshwater; EF: Eutrophication freshwater; EM: Eutrophication marine; ET: Eutrophication 
terrestrial ; ETF: Ecotoxicity freshwater; LU: Land use; WS: Water scarcity; RUEC: Resource use, energy carriers;  
RUMM: Resource use, mineral and metals; CCF: Climate change – fossil; CCB: Climate change – biogenic; CCLUT:  
Climate change – land use and transform.
(*) For a 50MW open ground installation


Table 20 PV Installation LCA results

PV Installation (1 kWp)
Impact 
Unit
Poly ES
Poly CN
UMG ES
UMG CN

CC
kg CO2 eq
7,72E+02
6,25E+02
1,10E+03
8,33E+02

OD
kg CFC11 eq
1,26E-04
1,07E-04
1,10E-04
9,71E-05

IR
kBq U-235 eq
2,26E+02
1,50E+02
9,23E+01
6,62E+01

POF
kg NMVOC eq
3,61E+00
3,33E+00
5,53E+00
4,53E+00

RI
disease inc.
4,56E-05
4,11E-05
4,95E-05
4,35E-05

NCHHE
CTUh
3,12E-04
3,07E-04
3,48E-04
3,29E-04

CHHE
CTUh
2,55E-05
2,50E-05
2,84E-05
2,68E-05

ATF
mol H+ eq
5,50E+00
4,78E+00
1,57E+01
1,12E+01

EF
kg P eq
4,74E-01
4,38E-01
1,02E+00
7,79E-01

EM
kg N eq
8,39E-01
7,45E-01
1,47E+00
1,14E+00

ET
mol N eq
8,94E+00
7,86E+00
1,47E+01
1,15E+01

ETF
CTUe
1,10E+03
1,08E+03
1,20E+03
1,14E+03

LU
Pt
6,39E+04
6,37E+04
6,41E+04
6,39E+04

WS
m3 depriv.
8,80E+04
5,57E+04
1,70E+05
1,07E+05

RUEC
MJ
1,14E+04
8,60E+03
1,24E+04
9,23E+03

RUMM
kg Sb eq
2,25E-02
2,25E-02
2,24E-02
2,24E-02

CCF
kg CO2 eq
7,67E+02
6,21E+02
1,10E+03
8,29E+02

CCB
kg CO2 eq
3,97E+00
3,56E+00
3,51E+00
3,27E+00

CCLUT
kg CO2 eq
1,02E+00
9,96E-01
1,02E+00
9,96E-01

CC: Climate change; OD: Ozone depletion; IR: Ionising radiation, HH; POF: Photochemical ozone formation, HH; RI: 
Respiratory inorganics; NCHHE: Non-cancer human health effects; CHHE: Cancer human health effects; ATF: 
Acidification terrestrial and freshwater; EF: Eutrophication freshwater; EM: Eutrophication marine; ET: Eutrophication 
terrestrial ; ETF: Ecotoxicity freshwater; LU: Land use; WS: Water scarcity; RUEC: Resource use, energy carriers;  
RUMM: Resource use, mineral and metals; CCF: Climate change – fossil; CCB: Climate change – biogenic; CCLUT:  
Climate change - land use and transform.


Table 21 PV Electricity production LCIA results

Electricity production (1 kWhe)(*)
Impact 
Unit
Poly ES
Poly CN
UMG ES
UMG CN

CC
kg CO2 eq
1,49E-02
1,21E-02
2,14E-02
1,61E-02

OD
kg CFC11 eq
2,44E-09
2,07E-09
2,13E-09
1,88E-09

IR
kBq U-235 eq
4,37E-03
2,90E-03
1,79E-03
1,28E-03

POF
kg NMVOC eq
6,99E-05
6,45E-05
1,07E-04
8,77E-05

RI
disease inc.
8,83E-10
7,95E-10
9,58E-10
8,42E-10

NCHHE
CTUh
6,04E-09
5,94E-09
6,73E-09
6,36E-09

CHHE
CTUh
4,93E-10
4,83E-10
5,50E-10
5,19E-10

ATF
mol H+ eq
1,06E-04
9,25E-05
3,04E-04
2,16E-04

EF
kg P eq
9,16E-06
8,48E-06
1,97E-05
1,51E-05

EM
kg N eq
1,62E-05
1,44E-05
2,85E-05
2,21E-05

ET
mol N eq
1,73E-04
1,52E-04
2,85E-04
2,22E-04

ETF
CTUe
2,14E-02
2,10E-02
2,32E-02
2,21E-02

LU
Pt
1,24E+00
1,23E+00
1,24E+00
1,24E+00

WS
m3 depriv.
1,70E+00
1,08E+00
3,29E+00
2,07E+00

RUEC
MJ
2,20E-01
1,66E-01
2,39E-01
1,79E-01

RUMM
kg Sb eq
4,35E-07
4,35E-07
4,33E-07
4,34E-07

CCF
kg CO2 eq
1,49E-02
1,20E-02
2,13E-02
1,60E-02

CCB
kg CO2 eq
7,68E-05
6,88E-05
6,79E-05
6,33E-05

CCLUT
kg CO2 eq
1,98E-05
1,93E-05
1,98E-05
1,93E-05

CC: Climate change; OD: Ozone depletion; IR: Ionising radiation, HH; POF: Photochemical ozone formation, HH; RI: 
Respiratory inorganics; NCHHE: Non-cancer human health effects; CHHE: Cancer human health effects; ATF: 
Acidification terrestrial and freshwater; EF: Eutrophication freshwater; EM: Eutrophication marine; ET: Eutrophication 
terrestrial ; ETF: Ecotoxicity freshwater; LU: Land use; WS: Water scarcity; RUEC: Resource use, energy carriers;  
RUMM: Resource use, mineral and metals; CCF: Climate change – fossil; CCB: Climate change – biogenic; CCLUT:  
Climate change - land use and transform.
(*) The calculated total production for the 100MW site during its expected lifetime (30 years) is 5168.1 GWh


S5 – LCA Results: Electricity Mix

Figure 1. Main impacts per kWh of the electricity mixes

Figure 2. Normalized technology contributions to CC, ATF and CED for ES an CN electricity mixes 


S6 – LCA Results: Literature Summary

Table 22. Summary of selected results from this work and literature for UMG and polysilicon PV electricity generation (per kWhe) 

Silicon 

Feedstock

PV Cell / 
Module

PV System
Irradiation 
kWh/m2·year

Assessment 

method

Elec. 
mix

CC

gCO2eq

CED

kWh·102

EPBT
Years

Source

UMG
mc-Si

BSF

325.9W
18.43%

30 years 100MW Tilted 

fixed

PR 82.5%

2160
EF
ES
12.10
5.67
0.52
Present work

CN
16.12
5.94
0.55

UMG
BSF
14.3%

30 years Rooftop

PR 75%

1700
IPCC2007
NO
27
n.a.
1.05
(de Wild-Scholten and Gløckner, 

2012)

UMG
mc-Si

BSF
230W
14.08%

30 years 10MW

Tilted fixed
PR 79.6%

1670
IPCC2007
CN
20
9.87
3.06
(Yu et al., 2017)

Polysilicon

mc-Si

BSF

328.1 W
18.55%

30 years 100MW Tilted 

fixed

PR 82.5%

2160
EF
ES
14.95
7.50
0.69
Present work

CN
21.38
7.93
0.72

Polysilicon

mc-Si

mono-Si

BSF
16,7%
18%

30 years 100MW

Tilted fixed
PR 80%

2300
Midpoint CML
CN
27
nr
9.44

0.95
(Raugei et al., 2020)

Polysilicon

mc-Si

BSF
17.5%

30 years

Tilted Fixed

PR 85%

2327
Midpoint 

ReCiPe 1.11

CN
23
n.a.
0.65
(Antonanzas et al., 2019)

Polysilicon

mc-Si

BSF
14.3%

30 years Rooftop

PR 75%

1700
IPCC2007
UCTE
31.3
n.a.
1.25
(de Wild-Scholten and Gløckner, 

2012)

Polysilicon

mc-Si

BSF 15.9%
PERC 16.7%

25 years
PR 78.5%

1580
IPCC 2013
SIN
30.2
29.2

8.61
8.78

1.11
1.08

(Luo et al., 2018)

Polysilicon

mc-Si

BSF
18.7%

25 years
PR 85.0%

BOS excluded

1770
Midpoint 

ReCiPe 1.11

CN
21
n.a.
1.16
(Jia et al., 2020)

Polysilicon

mc-Si

BSF
16%

25 years
PR 85.0%

BOS excluded

2100
CML2001
CN
51
14.1
2.22
(Fu et al., 2015)

mc: multicrystalline, mono; monocrystalline; electricity mixes: ES: Spain, CN: China, NO: Norway, SIN: Singapore, UCTE: Union for the Coordination of the Transmission of 
Electricity (nowadays ENTSO-E, Europe), SIN: Singapore; Cell technologies: BSF: Aluminium back surface field, PERC: Passivated Emitter and Rear Cell; PR: performance ratio; 
CC: climate change, CED: cumulative energy demand, EPBT: energy payback time; nr: non-renewable, r: renewable; n.a.: not available.


S7 – LCA Results: PV Electricity contributions breakdown

Table 23. Contribution of the different process step to Climate Change, CC (gCO2eq / kWhe), Acidification 

terrestrial and freshwater, ATF (10-5 molH⁺eq/ kWhe), and Cumulative energy demand (10-2 kWh/ kWhe

Impact
category

PROCESS STEP

Silicon
Ingot
Wafer
PV Cell
Module
BoS&Inst.

UMG

ES

CC
1,39
0,33
0,51
2,03
5,29
2,55

ATF
0,87
0,23
0,37
1,15
4,45
2,18

CED
0,88
0,26
0,43
1,05
2,12
0,94

CN

CC
2,88
0,74
1,17
3,40
5,37
2,55

ATF
5,43
1,49
2,40
5,38
4,71
2,18

CED
0,98
0,29
0,47
1,14
2,12
0,94

poly

ES

CC
4,30
0,33
0,51
2,01
5,25
2,55

ATF
2,31
0,23
0,37
1,14
4,42
2,18

CED
2,74
0,26
0,43
1,04
2,10
0,94

CN

CC
8,21
0,74
1,17
3,38
5,34
2,55

ATF
14,32
1,48
2,39
5,34
4,67
2,18

CED
2,99
0,29
0,47
1,13
2,11
0,94

S8 – LCA Results: UMG-Si production stages contributions breakdown

Table 24. Contribution of process steps in Climate Change for UMG (kg CO2eq/ kg of SoG-Si)

MG-Si
Slagging
Vacuum 
Refining

Directional 
Solidification
Other

UMG ES
10.00
4.27
1.97
1.48
0.17

UMG CN
17.51
9.08
6.07
4.02
0.31


S9 – Cumulative Energy Demand: PV Electricity total and background processes

Table 25. Cumulative Energy Demand detailed results for PV electricity generation and background 

processes for UMG and poly scenarios (kWh·106 / kWhe).

CED

kWh·106 / kWhe

Total
Background processes

UMG ES
UMG CN
poly ES
poly CN
UMG
poly

Non-renewable, 
fossil
39765
48379
51035
64813
3795
3944

Non-renewable, 
nuclear
9429
4756
13947
6473
404
467

Non-renewable, 
biomass
4
4
4
4
0
0

Renewable, 
biomass
2249
1746
2716
1910
185
178

Renewable, wind, 
solar, etc.
2500
967
3922
1469
14
19

Renewable, water
2798
3535
3406
4584
281
305

Subtotal, NRE
49198
53140
64986
71290
4199
4411

Subtotal, RE
7548
6248
10044
7964
480
502

Total
56746
59387
75030
79254
4679
4913


