– 1 –

Image reconstruction method for dual-isotope 
positron emission tomography

T. Fukuchi,a,1 M. Shigeta,a H. Haba,b D. Mori, b T. Yokokita, b Y. Komori,b

S. Yamamotoc and Y. Watanabea

a RIKEN Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research, Kobe 650-0047, Japan
b RIKEN Nishina Center for Accelerator-Based Science, Wako 351-0198, Japan
c Department of Radiological and Medical Laboratory Science, Nagoya University Graduate School of 

Medicine, Nagoya 461-0047, Japan
E-mail: tfukuchi@riken.jp

ABSTRACT: We developed a positron emission tomography (PET) system for multiple-isotope
imaging. Our PET system, named multiple-isotope PET (MI-PET), can distinguish between 
different tracer nuclides using coincidence measurement of prompt γ-rays, which are emitted 
after positron emission. In MI-PET imaging with a pure positron emitter and prompt-γ emitter, 
because of the imperfectness of prompt γ-ray detection, an image for a pure positron emitter 
taken by MI-PET is superposed by a positron-γ emitter. Therefore, in order to make isolated 
images of the pure positron emitter, we developed image reconstruction methods based on data 
subtraction specific to MI-PET. We tested two methods, subtraction between reconstructed 
images and subtraction between sinogram data. In both methods, normalization for position 
dependence of the prompt γ-ray sensitivity is required in addition to detector sensitivity 
normalization. For these normalizations, we performed normalization scans using cylindrical 
phantoms of the positron-γ emitters 44mSc (prompt γ-ray energy: 1157 keV) and 22Na (prompt γ-
ray energy: 1274 keV). A long period measurement using the activity decay of 44mSc (T1/2 = 
58.6 hours) elucidated that the acquisition ratio between the prompt γ-rays coincided with PET 
event and pure PET event changes on the basis of object activities. Therefore, we developed a 
correction method that involves subtraction parameters dependent on the activities, i.e., the 
counting rate. We determined that correction for sensitivity normalization in variation of 
activity can be performed using only the triple-coincidence rate as an index, even if using a 
different nuclide from that used for normalization. From analysis of dual-tracer phantom images
using 18F and 44mSc or 18F and 22Na, data subtraction in the sinogram data with sensitivity 
correction gives a higher quality of isolated images for the pure positron emitter than those from 
image subtractions. Furthermore, from dual-isotope (18F-FDG and 44mSc) mouse imaging, we 
concluded that our developed method can be used for practical imaging of a living organism.

KEYWORDS: Positron emission tomography; Dual-isotope imaging; Image reconstruction.

1Corresponding author.


– 2 –

Contents

1. Introduction
2

2. Multiple-isotope PET
3

3. Methods
4

3.1 Image subtraction
4

3.2 Sinogram subtraction  
5

3.3 Counting rate correction                                                                                                 
6

4. Measurements
7

4.1 Normalization scans
7

4.2 18F + 44mSc rod phantom imaging
8

4.3 18F + 22Na rod phantom imaging
9

4.4 18F-FDG + 44mSc mouse                                                                                                                     9

5. Results
9

5.1 Normalization data                                                                                
9

5.2 18F + 44mSc rod phantom                                                                                                               
11

5.3 18F + 22Na rod phantom                                                                                              
13

5.4 18F-FDG + 44mSc mouse                                                                                                                     14

6. Discussion
15

7. Conlusion
15

1. Introduction

Positron emission tomography (PET) is a powerful tool for radio-tracer imaging in a living 
biological object. PET was mainly developed for nuclear medicine imaging, such as clinical 
diagnoses and preclinical studies [1]. Contemporary PET systems consist of a large number of 
finely pixelized detectors and fast signal processing devices [2-4]. In addition to the 
development of PET devices, image reconstruction methods have been also developed to obtain 
high spatial resolution and quantitative images from acquired PET data. Image reconstruction 
methods have developed from primary simple projection methods to iterative calculation 
methods as computational power has increased over time[5].

Consequently, recent PET gives high quality images for various tracers and can be used 

widely, from basic science to clinical diagnosis. Unfortunately, conventional PET is useful only 
for single tracer imaging due to the energy constancy of annihilation photons, which are used
for PET imaging. In order to improve PET imaging, we have developed a new PET system that
can be used for multiple-tracer simultaneous imaging. Our PET system, named multiple-isotope 
PET (MI-PET), detects not only annihilation photons but also prompt γ-rays, which are emitted
successively after positrons, using additional γ-ray detectors. Since a prompt γ-ray has an 
energy intrinsic to each radio-isotope, MI-PET can identify the tracer radio-isotopes by using 
prompt γ-ray detection. Previously, we succeeded in proving the basic principle of MI-PET 
using a prototype system [6]. However, because most image reconstruction methods for PET 


– 3 –

imaging presuppose single tracer imaging, study of image reconstruction methods specifically
for multiple-tracer imaging is necessary along side MI-PET scanner development.

In previous research, several PET systems dedicated to multiple-tracer imaging have been 

developed by a few groups [6-10], and a small number of specific image reconstruction methods
for multiple-tracer PET imaging have been reported. One method based on simulational data 
was used by Andreyev et al., in which they simulated a normal PET scanner in the case of a
prompt γ-ray detected by a PET detector, and they proposed a specific image reconstruction 
method based using a random distribution to compensate for different data amounts between the 
normal PET events and the prompt γ-ray coincidence events [7].

By contrast, our MI-PET system is special in terms of using additional detectors for prompt 

γ-ray detection, and therefore we need to develop an image reconstruction method specific for 
our system. In particular, because of the imperfectness of prompt γ-ray detection in MI-PET 
imaging with a pure positron emitter and positron-γ emitter an image for a pure positron emitter 
taken by MI-PET is superposed by a positron-γ emitter. Therefore, in order to make an isolated 
image of the pure positron emitter, we developed a method to make an isolated image of the 
pure positron emitter and also a system-specific dead-time correction method. We conducted 
dual-isotope phantom and mouse imaging, and reconstructed images that used the developed 
methods were evaluated from both quantitative and practical qualitative viewpoints.

2. Multiple-isotope PET

MI-PET consists of a ring-type small-animal PET system and additional γ-ray detectors. The 
PET scanner is fabricated using pixelized gadolinium orthosilicate scintillators. Eight large 
volume (50×50×30 mm3) bismuth germanium oxide (BGO) detectors are used for the detection 
of prompt γ-rays, and they are arranged into two rings mounted on each side of the PET ring. 
The inner diameter of the PET ring is 95 mm, and axial length of the field-of-view (FOV) is 
37.5 mm. A schematic illustration and a photography of MI-PET are shown in figure 1.

The signal processing system of MI-PET can acquire list-mode data of both coincident 

annihilation photons and annihilation photons with coincident prompt γ-rays in parallel. The 
width of the coincidence time windows is set to 20 ns. Events of coincident annihilation photons
are used for conventional PET imaging, and events of coincident annihilation photons with the 
presence or absence of prompt γ-rays are used for tracer identification.

Figure 1. Schematic illustration (left) and photograph (right) of MI-PET.


– 4 –

For our purposes, coincidence detection of annihilation photons by PET detectors is denoted 

as double-coincidence, and coincidence detection of annihilation photons with prompt γ-ray 
coincidence by an additional detector is denoted as triple-coincidence.

The list-mode data are classified into two groups based on the presence or absence of prompt 

γ-rays. Different images of tracers are obtained by using a conventional image reconstruction 
method. Details of the system and its basic performance have been described by Fukuchi et al.
[6].

The sensitivity for a prompt γ-ray of 1275 keV (22Na prompt γ-ray) in the center position is 

about 7%. This sensitivity includes not only full-energy absorption events but also Compton 
partial energy deposited events of the energy threshold setting in 1000 keV. The energy 
resolution of an additional BGO detector is about 10%. The energy threshold of a BGO detector 
is changed according to the nuclide and set at 1000 keV for 22Na or 800 keV for 44mSc (1157-
keV prompt γ-ray).

3. Methods

The simplest MI-PET operation for dual-isotope imaging uses a pure positron-emitter and a 
positron-γ emitter. In this case, a reconstructed image from an event data set with the presence 
of prompt γ-ray detection (triple-coincidence) reflects the distribution of the positron-γ emitter.
Because of the imperfection of prompt γ-ray detection, the reconstructed image from the 
absence of prompt γ-ray detection (double-coincidence) contains a distribution of both the pure 
positron emitter and the positron-γ emitter. Therefore, a method to reconstruct the isolated 
image of the pure positron emitter is required, and that method and its performance evaluation 
are described in this paper.

For our purposes, tracer nuclides used as pure positron emitters and those used as positron γ-

ray emitters are called tracer-A and tracer-B, respectively, and the isolated images for tracer-A 
and -B are called image-A and image-B, respectively. The images reconstructed from the data 
sets without and with prompt γ-ray detection are called image-D (double-coincidence) and -T 
(triple-coincidence), respectively.

In both image-D and -T, the positional dependences of scanner sensitivities were normalized 

by normalization scan data using a cylindrical phantom with a pure positron emitter, 18F. The 
position dependences of the prompt γ-ray detection sensitivities were also normalized using a 
cylindrical phantom with positron-γ emitters 44mSc and 22Na. The details of the normalization 
scans and their results are described in Sections 4.1 and 5.1, respectively.

In this section, we describe isolation methods for image-A. All isolation methods are based 

on subtraction between reconstructed image or sinogram data for image-D and image-T. We 
also describe a correction method for subtraction parameters depending on the activities of 
measured objects.

3.1 Image subtraction

A primitive method to obtain an isolated image of tracer-A is given by subtraction between 
reconstructed image-D and image-T. Each component in voxel i of image-D (Di ) and -T (Ti) is
expressed using the prompt γ-ray detection efficiency for each voxel position εpi as

𝐷𝑖 = 𝐴𝑖 + 𝐵𝑖
(3.1)

𝑇𝑖 = 𝜀𝑝𝑖𝐵𝑖,                                                              (3.2)


– 5 –

where Ai and Bi are the contents of actual activities in voxel i for tracer-A and -B, respectively.
These operations are applied for each voxel, but hereafter voxel index i is omitted. From eq.
(3.2), B is represented by

𝐵 =

1
𝜀𝑝 𝑇,
(3.3)

therefore, from eq. (3.1), isolated image A is represented as

𝐴 = 𝐷 −

1
𝜀𝑝 𝑇.
(3.4)

Due to the finite accuracy of measurement, a reconstructed image is different from a true tracer 
distribution, therefore images A and B contain image noise, artifacts and etc. The detection 
efficiency of the triple-coincidence εt in each voxel position is represented as

𝜀𝑡 = 𝜀𝑑𝜀𝑝,
(3.5)

where εd is the detection efficiency for the double-coincidence. These double- and triple-
coincidence efficiencies in each voxel position are determined by a normalization scan using 
tracer-B. From eq. (3.5), prompt γ-ray efficiency εp is written as

𝜀𝑝 =

𝜀𝑡
𝜀𝑑 .
(3.6)

Then, from eq. (3.4), image A is

𝐴 = 𝐷 −

𝜀𝑑
𝜀𝑡 𝑇.
(3.7)

The whole procedure to reconstruct an isolated image of tracer-A from list mode data is shown
in figure 2.

3.2 Sinogram subtraction

The other method to reconstruct an isolated image for tracer-A is subtraction using sinogram 
projection data. In this method, the subtraction coefficient is also determined by the ratio of
triple- to double-coincidence by the normalization scan using tracer-B. In the same manner as
the image subtraction method (eq. (3.7)), an isolated sinogram for tracer-A (PA) is obtained by

Figure 2. Data flow diagram to reconstruct isolated image of tracer-A using image subtraction.


– 6 –

𝑃𝐴 = 𝑃𝐷 −

𝜀′𝑡
𝜀′𝑑 𝑃𝑇,
(3.8)

where PD and PT are sinograms from double- and triple-coincidence data, and ε'd and ε't are 
detection efficiencies for sinograms of double- and triple-coincidence data derived by the 
normalization scan, respectively. As with image subtraction, voxel index i is omitted, but this
operation is applied for each pixel of the sinogram. From isolated sinogram PA, image-A is
reconstructed by using a conventional image reconstruction method. This procedure is 
summarized in figure 3.

3.3 Counting rate correction

Due to the system dead-time difference of single-event acquisition between double- and triple-
coincidence, the data acquisition ratio of double- and triple-coincidence events changes
depending on the tracer activities in our system. To correct this variation in the reconstruction of 
isolation images of tracer-A, we developed a method to correct the subtraction coefficient
depending on the counting rate.

In our system, the data acquisition system, which causes the main component of dead-time, 

works with a non-paralyzable behaviour. In general, the recorded count rate m with a non-
paralyzable model is

𝑚 =

𝑛

𝑛𝜏+1 ,
(3.9)

where n and τ are the true detection rate and the system dead-time for single-event recording, 
respectively [11]. Applying this equation for the recorded counting rate of double- (m2) and 
triple- (m3) coincidences,

𝑚2 =

𝑛2

𝑛2𝜏2+1 , and
(3.10)

𝑚3 =

𝑛3

𝑛3𝜏3+1 ,
(3.11)

Figure 3. Data flow diagram to reconstruct isolated image of tracer-A using sinogram subtraction.


– 7 –

where n2 and n3 are the true detection rates for double- and triple-coincidence, respectively, and 
τ2 and τ3 are the dead-times for single-event recording in double- and triple-coincidence, 
respectively.
The true counting rates can be expressed using detection efficiencies and activity A Bq,

n2 = ε2A
(double-coincidence), and
(3.12)

n3 = ε3A
(triple-coincidence),
(3.13)

where ε2 and ε3 are the efficiencies for double- and triple-coincidence, respectively. Using these 
equations, recorded counting rates are

𝑚2 =

𝜀2𝐴

𝜀2𝐴𝜏2+1 , and
(3.14)

𝑚3 =

𝜀3𝐴

𝜀3𝐴𝜏3+1 .
(3.15)

From eqs. (3.12) and (3.13), the true counting rate for triple-coincidence is

𝑛2 =

𝜀2
𝜀3 𝑛3.
(3.16)

Accordingly, the ratio of recorded count rates between triple- and double-coincidence f is

𝑓 =

𝑚3
𝑚2 =

𝜀2
𝜀3𝑛3𝜏2+1

𝜀2
𝜀3(𝑛3𝜏3+1) .
(3.17)

Using the efficiency ratio between double- and triple-coincidence (ε2/ε3) from the normalization 
scan of tracer-B, the single-event dead-time of τ2 and τ3 can be determined by fitting eq. (3.17) 
as a function of triple-coincidence count rate n3.

The image subtraction (eq. (3.7)) to reconstruct an isolated image for tracer-A is corrected by 

the variation of ratio m3/m2 as a function of n3  using

𝐴 = 𝐷 −

𝑓 𝑁
𝑓 𝐼

𝜀𝑑
𝜀𝑡 𝑇,  
(3.18)

where fN and fI are count rates between triple- and double-coincidences (eq. (3.17)) in 
normalization and imaging scan, respectively. The same correction is applied for sinogram 
subtraction (eq. (3.8)) using correction parameter.

Using activity decay of positron-γ emitter 44mSc, which has a half-life of 58.6 hours, recorded 

counting-rates for double- and triple-coincidence in the normalization scan were determined and 
are described in Sections 4.1 and 5.1. Furthermore, because eq. (3.17) depends only on the 
triple-coincidence detection rate, in the case using tracer-B other than 44mSc, which has different 
prompt γ-ray energy, counting rate correction can be applied based on a 44mSc normalization
scan.

4. Measurements

4.1 Normalization scans

For the spatial normalizations of the PET and the prompt γ-ray sensitivity, long-period
measurements were performed using cylindrical phantoms of 18F, 44mSc, and 22Na. Each
cylindrical phantom was 180 mm in length and 78 mm in diameter. The volume of the 
cylindrical phantom inside of the FOV was 20.8% of the total volume. Fluorine-18 and 22Na 
were dissolved in water and 44mSc was dissolved in HCl (0.5 M) to pour into the phantom
vessels.

The normalization scan of pure positron emitter 18F was used for sensitivity normalization of 

the PET detectors. The initial activity of 18F measurement was 63.1 MBq, and the measuring 


– 8 –

time was 12 hours. Because the half-life of 18F is 109.8 min, almost all activity decayed during
measurement.

The normalization scans of positron-γ emitters
44mSc and 22Na were performed for the 

normalization of the prompt γ-ray sensitivities. 44mSc was also used for analysis of the counting 
rate dependence using its proper decay half-life of 58.6 hours. The initial activity of the 44mSc
phantom was 2.45 MBq, and the measuring time was 235 hours, which corresponds to about 4 
half-lives.

Scandium-44m was produced via the reactions of 45Sc(d, p2n)44mSc (for phantom imaging) 

and 44Ca(d, 2n)44mSc (for mouse imaging) with a 24-MeV deuterium beam and was purified by 
chemical processes at the RIKEN AVF cyclotron. Since there were about 48 hours of 
purification and transportation time from the production site to our facility, a short-lived 44Sc 
(T1/2 = 6.84 hours) and by-products were attenuated.

The 22Na cylindrical phantom had 1.1 MBq of activity, and the scanning time was 87 hours.

4.2 18F + 44mSc rod phantom imaging

In order to evaluate the quantitative performance of our image reconstruction methods, we 
conducted two phantom experiments with dual isotopes (experiment 1: 18F and 44mSc, 
experiment 2: 18F and 22Na). These phantoms are referred to as the F-Sc phantom (experiment 1) 
and the F-Na phantom (experiment 2).

Table 1. Nuclides and activities in rod phantom experiments

Exp. 1
Exp.2

Rod 1
18F 546 kBq
18F 636 kBq

44mSc 497 kBq
22Na 585 kBq

Rod 2
18F 546 kBq
18F 636 kBq

Rod 3
44mSc 497 kBq
22Na 585 kBq

In the first experiment, 18F and 44mSc were used as tracer-A and -B, respectively. Three rods 

were arranged in an equilateral triangle at a distance of twice the rod diameter. The 
configuration of the rod phantom is shown in figure 4. The rods were positioned at the scanner's 
center parallel to the scanner's axial direction. Fluorine-18 and 44mSc dissolved in 1 M HCl  
were poured into the rods. The first rod had 18F (546 kBq at the start of the measurement) and 

Figure 4. Illustration of dual-tracer rod phantom configuration for F-Sc phantom and F-Na phantom.


– 9 –

44mSc (497 kBq) activities. The second and third rods had 18F (546 kBq at the start of the 
measurement) and 44mSc (497 kBq) activities, respectively. These activities are summarized in 
table 1. A 30-min scan was performed. The energy threshold of the BGO detectors was set to 
800 keV to match the 1157-keV prompt γ-ray of 44mSc.

4.3 18F + 22Na rod phantom imaging

To evaluate the performance of our method for a nuclide with a different energy from the 
prompt γ-ray from 44mSc, phantom data using 18F and positron-γ emitter 22Na were used. This 
experimental data has been previously reported [6].

The phantom configuration was the same as that of the F-Sc phantom (figure 4). The first rod 

had 18F (686 kBq at the start of the measurement) and 22Na (585 kBq) activities. The second and 
third rods had 18F (686 kBq at the start of the measurement) and 22Na (585 kBq) activities, 
respectively. These nuclides and activities are summarized in table 1. The energy threshold of 
the BGO detectors was set to 1000 keV for the prompt γ-ray of 22Na. The measurement duration 
was 30 min.

4.4 44mSc + 18F-FDG mouse scan

To evaluate the practical performance of our methods, mouse scanning with a dual-isotope was 
performed using 18F-FDG and a simple-substance of 44mSc. In this experiment, 1.13-MBq 18F-
FDG and 1.23-MBq 44mSc were administered to an 8-week-old normal male mouse by a tail 
vein injection. After 38 min from administration, a 30-min scan with bed motion was performed 
under anaesthesia.

This animal experiment was performed in accordance with the Principles of Laboratory 

Animal Care (NIH Publication No. 85-23, revised 1985) and approved by the Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of RIKEN, Kobe Branch.

5. Results

For all experiments, the acquired list-mode data were categorized into two groups by the 
presence or absence of prompt γ-ray detection. Two kinds of sinogram data were made from 
each categorized group of data. The image reconstruction from the sinogram data was
performed using an inter-update Metz-filtered ordered subset expectation maximization by a 
program called Software for Tomographic Image Reconstruction [12, 13] with four iterations 
and four subsets. To eliminate random coincidence background, delayed coincidence 
components were subtracted from true coincidence components. Because the phantoms and 
animals used for measurements had small volumes, photon absorptions in the imaged objects
were ignored. In this section, we describe the results of analysis for the isolated images of 
tracer-A using various methods.

5.1 Normalization scans

The normalization scan data of 18F was used for sensitivity normalization of the PET detectors. 
The sinogram projection data was applied for the correction of each imaging projection data
group. Using normalization scan data of 44mSc and 22Na, the position dependence of the 


– 10 –

sensitivity for the prompt γ-ray, i.e., the subtraction parameters for making an isolated image of 
tracer-A, was determined for each nuclide.

In addition to sensitivity normalization, 44mSc normalization data was used for evaluation of 

the counting rate dependence of the prompt γ-ray sensitivity as a ratio of double- and triple-
coincidence. The counting rate of the double- and triple-coincidence as a function of 
measurement time in 44mSc is shown in figure 5 (i). In this graph, the counting rate for triple-
coincidence is ten-fold that of double-coincidence. The activity of 44mSc in the FOV at the start 
was 510 kBq, and the counting rate for triple-coincidence at that time was 136.9 cps. Since the
measuring time of 235 hours corresponds to 4 times the half-life of 44mSc (58.6 hours), the 
counting rates of both double- and triple-coincidences were decreased according to activity 
decay. The curves fitted by the exponential functions (solid line) and mathematical expressions
are also shown in figure 5 (i). From these fittings, the attenuation coefficients were different 
between double- and triple-coincidence. This is because of the difference of the dead-time for 
the single event processing time for double- and triple-coincidences, as mentioned in Section 
3.3.

The functions obtained by division of triple- and double-coincidence as a function of the 

triple-coincidence counting rate are shown in figure 5 (ii). The variation of this value indicates 
the necessity of correction in data subtraction for the reconstruction of isolation images of  
tracer-A. The ratio from a total event of a normalization scan of 44mSc was determined to be 57.0 
cps, and this value correspond to the time point at 2.69 × 103 sec. This value was indicated in 
figure 5 (ii). The correction factor f in eq. (3.18) for imaging using the 44mSc tracer is determined
by the difference between this average value and the counting rate in the imaging.

The triple-coincidence counting rate of the
22Na normalization scan is constant during 

measurement because of the 2.6-year half-life, and the counting rate was determined to be 86.7 
cps (shown in figure 5 (ii)). For the imaging with 22Na, which has a different energy from the 
prompt γ-ray from 44mSc, assuming the correction factor depended only on the counting rate 
even if the efficiency for the prompt γ-ray is different, the subtraction parameter f for 22Na 
imaging was deduced using the ratio between the counting rates in the 22Na normalization
measurement and the imaging object using the function in figure 5 (ii).

Figure 5. Results of normalization scan with 44mSc. (i) Counting rate of double- and triple-
coincidence as a function of measurment time in 44mSc (The counting rate for triple-
coincidence is ten-fold that of double-coincidence). (ii) Functions obtained by division of 
triple- and double-coincidence as a function of triple-coincidence counting rate.


– 11 –

5.2 18F + 44mSc rod phantom

The reconstructed images in xy-projection for the F-Sc phantom with the absence (image-D) 
and presence (image-T) of prompt γ-ray detection are shown in figure 6 (i) and (ii), respectively.
Distributions of both tracer-A and -B appear in image-D, and the distribution of tracer-B 
appears in image-T. An isolated image of tracer-A obtained by image subtraction between 
image-D and image-T (method in Sec. 3.1) is shown in figure 6 (iii). In this subtraction, 
sensitivity normalization in each voxel using eq. (3.7) was performed using 44mSc normalization 
of the total data.

To analyze quantitatively these images, regions of interest (ROIs) were set on each rod of the 

xy-slices, and values in the ROIs are shown in figure 7. The upper row shows values for image-
D and image-T, and the lower row shows them for isolated image-A. The ROI numbers 
correspond to the rod numbers. In the isolated image of tracer-A, ROI-2 values are over-
subtracted, and the image for tracer-A (figure 6 (iii)) has large statistical fluctuations. In 
addition, ROI analysis for this image shows worse uniformity than for image-D and image-T.

Figure 7. Results of ROI analysis for F-Sc phantom images. Upper row: results of image-D and image-T. 
Lower row: isolated image-A.

Figure 6. F-Sc phantom images in xy-projection. (i) Image reconstructed from double-coincidence data 
(image-D, 18F and 44mSc). (ii) Image reconstructed from triple-coincidence data (image-T, 44mSc). (iii) 
Isolated image of tracer-A (18F) by subtraction between image-D and image-T. 


– 12 –

Isolated image-A with counting rate corrections (method in Section 3.3, eq. (3.18)) 

reconstructed by image subtraction using eq. (3.7) and sinogram data subtraction using eq. (3.8)
are shown in figure 8 (i) and (ii), respectively. Correction factor fN/fI was common for both 
images and was determined to be 0.933 from the triple-coincidence counting rate on F-Sc 
phantom imaging of 223.4 cps (as indicated in figure 5 (ii)). Results of the ROI analyses for 
these images (upper row: image subtraction; lower row: sinogram subtraction) are shown in 
figure 9. Over-subtraction is resolved in the reconstructed image of subtraction with rate 
correction (figure 9 (i)), however, statistical fluctuations still remain. While over subtraction is 
also resolved in the reconstructed image by sinogram data subtraction (figure 9 (ii)), image 
uniformity in the xy-slices is comparable with that in image-D and image-T.

In conclusion, the isolated image of tracer-A from the sinogram data subtraction with 

counting rate correction gives the best quality. Therefore, hereafter, isolated images of tracer-A 
in the Na-F phantom and mouse experiments were reconstructed by using this method.

Figure 9. Results of ROI analysis for isolated image-A with counting rate corrections. (i) Isolated image-
A by subtraction of images. (ii) Isolated image-A by subtraction of sinograms.

Figure 8. Isolated image-A (18F) with couting rate correction. (i) Isolated image-A by subtraction of 
images. (ii) Isolated image-A by subtraction of sinograms.


– 13 –

5.3 18F + 22Na rod phantom 

The reconstructed images in xy-projection for the F-Na phantom with the absence (image-D) 
and presence (image-T) of prompt γ-ray detection are shown in figure 10 (i) and (ii), 
respectively. The isolated image of tracer-A constructed by subtraction of the sinogram data 
with counting rate correction is shown in figure 10 (iii).

To determine the prompt γ-ray efficiency as a subtraction parameter, 22Na normalization scan 

data was used. Counting rate correction factor was determined by extrapolation of the curve in 
figure 5 (ii) as the triple-coincidence counting rate from 22Na normalization (86.2 cps) to this 
phantom (192.8 cps). Correction factor fN/fI was determined to be 0.962.

ROI analysis in the same manner as with F-Sc phantom was performed, and those results are 

shown in figure 11. From projection images and ROI analyses, image-A reconstructed by
sinogram subtraction with counting rate correction had equivalent qualities with image-D and 
image-T.

Figure 11. Results of ROI analysis for F-Na phantom images. Upper row: results of image-D and 
image-T. Lower row: isolated image-A.

Figure 10. F-Na phantom images in xy-projection. (i) Image reconstructed from double-coincidence 
data (image-D, 18F and 22Na). (ii) Image reconstructed from triple-coincidence data (image-T, 22Na). (iii) 
Isolated image of tracer-A (18F) by subtraction between sinogramas with counting rate correction. 


– 14 –

5.4 18F-FDG + 44mSc mouse

Similar to the rod phantoms, an isolated image of tracer-A for the mouse scan was reconstructed 
using a subtraction between sinogram data with absence and presence of the prompt γ-ray 
detection. The subtraction parameter was determined by using 44mSc normalization scan data, 
and counting rate correction was also performed based on the counting rate in each bed position.

Reconstructed image-D, image-T, and isolated image-A are shown in figure 12 (i), (ii), and 

(iii), respectively. From image-T, we can clearly observe 44mSc accumulation in the liver, 
whereas from isolated image-A, 18F-FDG accumulated in the heart and urinary bladder. These 
distributions are reasonable from a physiological viewpoint.

To make a quantitative comparison, 3D volumes of interest (VOIs) were set on the heart, liver,

and bladder for image-D, image-T, and image-A. Result values of these VOIs are shown in table 
2. The activity values in table 1 are indicated by the positron emission rate, i.e., normalized by 
the positron emission rates (18F: 96.73%, 44mSc: 94.27%). For the activity of 18F-FDG, 
considering attenuation during the scan, the accumulated activities were calculated using an
average value during the scan. Direct subtraction of VOI values between image-D and image-T 
(D-T) are also shown in table 2.

Table 2. ROI analysis of mouse. ROI values are shown in kBq.

Image-D
Image-T
D-T
Image-A

Heart
31.7
10.2
21.5
23.9

Liver
421.3
427.6
-6.3
0.9

Bladder
69.0
9.2
59.8
77.3

Figure 12. Photograph (left) and reconstructed images for 18F-FDG and 44mSc administrated mouse. (i) 
image-D (18F and 44mSc), (ii) image-T (44mSc), (iii) image-A (18F) reconstructed by sinogram subtraction 
with counting rate correction.


– 15 –

6. Discussion

From the analysis of the F-Sc phantom data, to reconstruct an isolated image of tracer-A by data 
subtraction, data subtraction in sinogram data using 44mSc normalization data gave better quality
image data than did subtraction in reconstructed image data. A reason that sinogram subtraction 
gives a better quality isolated image-A than image subtraction is probably the less biased 
distribution of sinograms differed from images that have partial volume effects or other effects.
Furthermore, if measured activity is different from normalization scanning, correction for the 
ratio between double- and triple-coincidence is needed in image subtraction to reconstruct an 
isolated image of tracer-A. For this correction, only the counting rate of triple-coincidence is an 
indicator for this activity correction.

From the F-Na phantom imaging, for the counting rate correction for 22Na, which emits  

prompt γ-rays with different energy and gives different detection efficiency and position 
dependence of the prompt γ-rays, we found that the normalization data of 22Na can be scaled 
only by the triple-coincidence rates. This correction is useful for a long-lived nuclide, such as 
22Na, for which normalization scanning with activity function is difficult. However, this method 
is also useful for a short-lived nuclide, in which it can be difficult to acquire a sufficient amount 
of normalization data.

From the VOI analysis of the mouse experiment with 18F-FDG and 44mSc, the D-T activity of 

18F-FDG (table 2) in the liver was negative. However, activity in the liver of image-A, which 
has no biological specific accumulation of 18F-FDG, was nearly zero and was comparable with 
other non-accumulated sections. From this result, we determined that our newly developed 
image-A isolation and counting rate correction method are useful for practical dual-isotope 
imaging using MI-PET.

Our method can probably be applied not only to MI-PET imaging using dual-isotope tracer-A 

and tracer-B, but also to those such as tracer-B and tracer-B', or for three tracers with tracer-A, 
tracer-B, and tracer-B'.

Furthermore, our correction method can be also applied for similar types of systems, namely 

parallel data acquisition for different types of events, which have different data-times.

7. Conclusion

To make an isolated image of tracer-A, we developed an image reconstruction method based on 
data subtraction specific for MI-PET. For prompt γ-ray sensitivity normalization that is used as 
a subtraction parameter, we performed normalization scans using cylindrical phantoms of the 
positron-γ emitters 44mSc and 22Na.

From a long-period measurement using the activity decay of 44mSc, the ratio between the 

prompt γ-ray and the PET sensitivity changes as a function of the activities. Therefore, we 
developed a subtraction parameter correction method that depends on the activities.

From analyses of dual-tracer phantom imaging, we determined that data subtraction in the 

sinogram data gives a higher quality of isolated images for the pure positron emitter than those 
reconstructed images from image subtractions. We determined that sensitivity correction for the 
normalization factor in variation of activity can be performed using only the triple-coincidence 
rate as an index even with a different nuclide from that used for normalization.

From ROI analyses of dual-tracer phantom imaging, the isolated image of a pure positron 

emitter reconstructed by our image reconstruction method with sensitivity correction had a 


– 16 –

quality equal to that of the original images. Furthermore, from dual-isotope mouse imaging, our
method was found to provide practical images in imaging for a living organism.

Acknowledgments

The authors thank Mr. H. Mashino, who produced the detection system. This work was 
supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP15H04770. The 44mSc was supplied through 
Supply Platform of Short-lived Radioisotopes, supported by JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Scientific 
Research on Innovative Areas, Grant Number 16H06278.

Conflict of interest disclosure

The authors have no relevant conflicts of interest to disclose.

References

[1] T. Jones and D. Townsend, “History and future technical innovation in positron emission 
tomography,” Jour. Nucl. Med. 4(1), 011013 (2017).

[2] T. Kaneta, M. Ogawa, N. Motomura, H. Iizuka, T. Arisawa, A. Hino-Shishikura, K. Yoshida, 
and T. Inoue, “Initial evaluation of the Celesteion largebore PET/CT scanner in accordance with 
the NEMA NU2-2012 standard and the Japanese guideline for oncology FDG PET/CT data 
acquisition protocol version 2.0,“ EJNMMI Research 

[3] D. F. C. Hsu, E. Ilan, W. T. Peterson, J. Uribe, M. Lubberink, and C. S. Levin, “Studies of a 
Next-Generation Silicon-Photomultiplier-Based Time-of-Flight PET/CT System,“ Jour. Nucl. 
Med. 58, pp. 1511-1518 (2017).

[4] J. van Sluis, J. de Jong, J. Schaar, W. Noordzij, P. van Snich, R. Dierckx, R. Borra, A. 
Willemsen, and R. Boellaard, “Performance Cahracteristics of the Digital Biography Vision 
PET/CT System, “ Jour. Nucl. Med. 60 pp.1031-1036 (2019).

[5] Fei Gao, Kuangyu Shi, Shuo Li, “Computational Method for Molecular Imaging (Lecture 
Notes in Computational Vision and Biomechanics),” Springer (2016).

[6] T. Fukuchi, T. Okauchi, M. Shigeta, S. Yamamoto, Y. Watanabe, and S. Enomoto, “Positron emission 
tomography with additional γ-ray detectors for multiple-tracer imaging,” Med. Phys. 44(6), pp. 2257-
2266 (2017).

[7] A. Andreyev and A. Celler, “Dual-isotope PET using positron-gamma emitters,” Phys. Med. Biol. 56, 

pp. 4539-4556 (2011).

[8] R. S. Miyaoka, W. C. J. Hunter, A. Andreyev, L. Pierce, T. K. Lewellen, A. Celler, and P. E. Kinahan, 

“Dual-radioisotope PET data acquisition and analysis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Nuclear Science 
Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference 2011 (IEEE, Valencia, Spain, 2011), pp. 3780-3783 
(2012).

[9] E. González, P. D. Olcott, M. Bieniosek, and C. S. Levin, “Methods for increasing the sensitivity of 


– 17 –

simultaneous multi-isotope positron emission tomography,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Nuclear Science 
Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference 2011 (IEEE, Valencia, Spain, 2011), pp. 3597-3601 
(2012).

[10] A. Andreyev, A. Sitek, A. Celler, “EM reconstruction of dual isotope PET using staggerd injections 
and prompt gamma positron emitter, “ Med. Phys. 41 022501 (2014).

[11] G. F. Knoll, Radiation Radiation detection and measurements, John Willey and Sons, Inc., New 
York 2000.

[12] M. Jacobson, R. Levkopvitz, A. Ben-Tal, K. Thielemans, T. Spinks, D. Belluzzo, E Pagani, 
V. Bettinardi, A. Zverovich, M.C. Gilardi, and G. Mitra, “Enhanced 3D PET OSEM reconstruction using 
inter-update Metz filtering,” Phys. Med. Biol. 45(8), pp. 2417-2439 (2000).

[13] K. Thielemans, C. Tsoumpas, S. Mustafovic, T. Beisel, P. Aguiar, N. Dikaios, and M. W. Jacobson,
“STIR: software for tomographic image reconstruction release 2,” Phys. Med. Biol. 57, pp. 867-883 

(2012).


