Mie Resonance Enhancement of

Laser Cooling in Rare-Earth Doped Materials

GALINA NEMOVA1, *AND CHRISTOPHE CALOZ1,2

1Polytechnique Montréal, 2500 ch. de Polytechnique, Montréal, H3T 1J4, QC, Canada.

2 KU Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, box 2444, 3001 Leuven, Belgium.

*Corresponding author: galina.nemova@videotron.ca

Laser cooling of solids keeps attracting attention owing to abroad range of its applications that extends from cm-sized all-optical cryocoolers for 
airborne and space-based applications to cooling on nanoparticles for biological and mesoscopic physics. Laser cooling of nanoparticles is a 
challenging task. We propose to use Mie resonances to enhance anti-Stokes fluorescence laser cooling in rare-earth (RE) doped nanoparticles made 
of low-phonon glasses or crystals. As an example, we consider an Yb3+:YAG nanosphere pumped at the long wavelength tail of the Yb3+ absorption 
spectrum at 1030 nm. We show that if the radius of the nanosphere is adjusted to the pump wavelength in such a manner that the pump excites 
some of its Mie resonant modes, the cooling power density generated in the sample is considerably enhanced and the temperature of the sample is 
consequently considerably (~ 63%) decreased. This concept can be extended to nanoparticles of different shapes and made from different low-
phonon RE doped materials suitable for laser cooling by anti-Stokes fluorescence. 

I. INTRODUCTION

In 1929, Peter Pringsheim proposed the idea to cool sodium 
vapor with light using anti-Stokes fluorescence [1]. This idea 
was based on experimental evidence that some materials emit 
light at shorter wavelength than the material illumination 
wavelength. The source of this quantum defect was inelastic 
collisions of sodium atoms that is thermalization. Light 
cooling in solids by anti-Stokes fluorescence was realized 
only in 1995, by Richard Epstein and colleagues [2]. They 
experimentally demonstrated a drop of the temperature of a 
cm-sized ytterbium-doped fluorozirconate ZrF4-BaF2-LaF3-
AlF3-NaF-PbF2 (ZBLANP) glass sample by 0.3 K below 
room temperature. This success was largely owed to the
recent
development of high-quality ZBLANP for the 

telecommunication industry and of coherent light sources 
(lasers).

Since its first experimental demonstration by Epstein,

laser cooling of solids via anti-Stokes fluorescence has been 
realized with different rare-earth (RE) ions, including Yb3+, 
Er3+, Tm3+ and Ho3+ ions, doped in a wide variety of low-
phonon glasses and crystals [3–8]. The ytterbium (Yb3+) ions 
have eventually been found to represent the best choice for 
laser cooling applications. Indeed, ytterbium has only one 
excited manifold, and it therefore is free from excited state 
absorption, which is a source of undesirable non-radiative 
decay that results
in heat generation. A record low 

temperature of ~ 91 𝐾 has been achieved in an Yb3+:YLF 
sample [9, 10]. 

The technology of laser cooling by
anti-Stokes 

fluorescence has numerous applications. For example, it can 
be used for development a solid-state all-optical cryocoolers, 
which are based on cm-sized RE-doped low-phonon crystal or 
glass samples. Such all-optical cryocoolers are compact, 
reliable, and free from vibrations and moving parts or fluids
devices. They can be used for the cryogenic refrigeration of 

semiconductor devices in applications with tight weight and 
size constraints, such as airborne and space-based detector 
systems. The first all-solid-state optical cryocooler was
demonstrated in 2018 [11]. 

Laser cooling by anti-Stokes fluorescence can also be 

realized in radiation-balanced solid-state bulk lasers where 
the heat generated by the quantum defect between the pump 
and laser signals is offset by cooling from anti-Stokes 
emission [12]. This technology can be used for mitigating heat 
generation in disc lasers [13, 14]. Specifically, researchers 
proposed the idea to cool an RE-doped fiber laser cladding 
with anti-Stokes fluorescence to mitigate heat generated in the 
RE-doped fiber laser core during the amplification process
[15], this proposal was experimentally demonstrated in [16, 
17]. 

The size and shape of the laser cooled sample as well as 

RE ion concentration in this sample are important parameters 
in the optimization of the laser cooling process [18]. In the 
resent years, interest has emerged in the laser cooling of small,
µm- and nm-sized RE-doped samples [19-21]. Such small 
samples are of interest for biological applications and 
mesoscopic physics. However, laser cooling at the nanoscale 
is not an easy task [18].

In this paper, we propose an approach to enhance the laser 

cooling process in RE–doped nanospheres with a diameter of 
a few hundreds of nanometers. Our approach is based on 
optimization of the sample size by leveraging the Mie 
resonance concept and theory [22]. 
As an example, an

Yb3+:YAG nanosphere pumped at the wavelength 𝜆𝑃 =
1030 𝑛𝑚 located in the 
long wavelength tail of  the 

Yb3+absorption spectrum is considered (Fig. 1). The mean 
fluorescence wavelength of the spontaneous radiation 𝜆𝐹 <
𝜆𝑃. A bulk Yb3+:YAG sample was laser cooled in [23]. 
Section II describes the theory of laser cooling in bulk and 
nanosphere samples. Section III presents and discusses the 
results. Conclusions are given in Sec. IV.


Fig. 1 Nanosphere system under investigation. Here 𝜆𝑃 and is 𝜆𝐹 are 
the pump and mean fluorescence wavelengths, respectively.

II. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS

A.
Laser Cooling in Yb3+:YAG

The process of laser cooling with anti-Stokes fluorescence 

of RE-doped samples has been considered in details in a 
number of works [6, 8, 18]. Here we only briefly discuss this 
process. It is well known that the energy levels of RE ions 
doped in a host material undergo splitting as a result of the 
Stark effect. In the case of Yb3+:YAG samples two energy 
levels 2F7∕2 and 2F5∕2 of Yb3+ ions split into four and three 
sublevels, respectively (Fig. 2a). It is worth to remind that 
YAG (yttrium aluminum garnet) is one of the most widely 
used optical materials in laser physics and laser cooling of 
solids, due to its high thermal stability, good chemical 
resistance, and low-phonon energy. In thermal equilibrium, 
the population of each sublevel is described by the Boltzmann 
distribution. This thermal equilibrium can be reached via
phonon absorption and phonon emission. Indeed, each 
electron at each sublevel of the ions interact with phonons of 
the host material by absorbing phonons at the rate
+
ANR
or 

emitting phonons at the rate
−
ANR
, as shown in Fig. 2a. This 

process, known as the thermalization, takes place at the ps-
time scale.

Let us consider a laser cooling cycle in Yb3+:YAG. It 

includes phonon absorption at the wavelength 𝜆𝑃, 
thermalization in the exited 2F5∕2 manifold accompanied by 
phonon absorption, and spontaneous photon emission from 
the exited 2F5∕2 manifold to the ground 2F7∕2 manifold. All 
photon absorption-emission cycles where the energy of the 
radiated photon exceeds the energy of the absorbed one (anti-
Stokes fluorescence) result in cooling, since this energy 
difference has to be compensated by phonon absorption. All 
the photon absorption-emission cycles where the energy of 
the absorbed photons exceeds the energy of the radiated ones 
(Stokes fluorescence) causes heat generation in the sample, 

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2 Spectroscopy of the Yb3+:YAG sample. (a) Energy levels.  (b) 
Absorption and emission cross sections versus wavelength. 

since the energy difference in these cycles has to be 
compensated by phonon generation (Fig. 2a).

Spontaneous emission is characterized by the mean 

fluorescence frequency

𝜈𝐹 = ∫ Φ(𝜈)𝜈𝑑𝜈

∫ Φ(𝜈)𝑑𝜈 ,     
(1)

where Φ(𝜈) is the fluorescence flux density, which can be 
obtained experimentally, and 𝜈𝐹 = 𝑐 𝜆𝐹
⁄
. Here 𝜆𝐹 is the mean 

fluorescence wavelength and 𝑐 is the speed of light in 
vacuum. If one wants to cool a sample, the pump wavelength, 
𝜆𝑃, has to exceed the mean fluorescence wavelength, 𝜆𝐹, and 
all radiated photons with wavelengths smaller then 𝜆𝐹 must 
leave the sample (not to be reabsorbed by Yb3+ ions). Indeed,
these short-wavelength reabsorbed photons serve as the
source of heat generation in the sample, which is undesirable 
for cooling. The efficiency of the cooling cycle can be 
estimated as the difference between the energies of the anti-
Stokes emitted photon and the pump photon normalized by 
the energy of the pump photon that is

𝜂𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙 =

ℎ𝜈𝐹 −ℎ𝜈𝑃

ℎ𝜈𝑃
=

𝜆𝑃
𝜆𝐹 − 1.
(2)


The electrons excited to the 2F5∕2 manifold can also decay 
nonradiatively to the ground 2F7∕2 manifold generating 
phonons. The “competition” between the radiative and 
nonradiative decays of the 2F5∕2 electrons can be quantified by
the quantum efficiency 

𝜂𝑞 =

𝑊𝑟

𝑊𝑟+𝑊𝑛𝑟
(3)      

where 𝑊𝑟 = 1 𝜏𝑟
⁄
and 𝑊𝑛𝑟 = 1 𝜏𝑟𝑛𝑟
⁄
are the radiative and 

nonradiative decay rates, respectively, with 𝜏𝑟 and 𝜏𝑛𝑟 being
the radiative and nonradiative lifetimes of the excited 
manifold, respectively.
We consider only high-quality 

Yb3+:YAG samples with the quantum efficiency as high 
as 𝜂𝑞 ≥ 99%. Only such samples are suitable for laser 
cooling. Indeed, in this case the probability of nonradiative 
decay with phonon generation from the exited 2F5∕2 to the 
ground 2F7∕2 manifold is very low [8].

The strength of the pump absorption process can be 

quantified by the absorption cross section (Fig. 2b), which can 
be obtained experimentally. For example, if the intensity of 
the pump source at the wavelength 𝜆𝑃 is 𝐼𝑃(𝜆𝑃), the number 
of photons absorbed per unit volume of the RE-doped sample 
per second is 𝑁𝑇𝜎𝑎(𝜆𝑃)𝐼𝑃(𝜆𝑃) (ℎ𝜈𝑃)
⁄
, where 𝑁𝑇 is the RE-

ion concentration in the sample, h is the Planck constant, 𝜈𝑃 =
𝑐 𝜆𝑃
⁄
is the pump photon frequency. The cooling power 

generated in the sample, 𝑃𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙, can be estimated as the
difference between the absorbed and radiated powers. In the 
steady-state regime the cooling power generated in the sample 
with the volume 𝑉 is [6]

𝑃𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙 =

ℎ𝜈̃𝐹 −ℎ𝜈𝑃

ℎ𝜈𝑃

𝑉𝑁𝑇𝜎𝑎(𝜈𝑃)𝐼𝑃

[1+𝐼𝑃

𝐼𝑆(1+𝜎𝑒(𝜈𝑃)

𝜎𝑎(𝜈𝑃))]

≈

ℎ𝜈̃𝐹 −ℎ𝜈𝑃

ℎ𝜈𝑃
𝑉𝑁𝑇𝜎𝑎(𝜈𝑃)𝐼𝑃,
(4)                                                 

where 𝐼𝑆 = ℎ𝜈𝑃 [𝜂𝑞𝜏𝑟𝜎𝑎(𝜈𝑃)]
⁄
is the saturation intensity and

𝜈̃𝐹 = (2𝜂𝑞 − 1)𝜈𝐹 ≈ 𝜂𝑞𝜈𝐹
is
the 
effective 
mean 

fluorescence frequency. If the sample is placed on a low-
contact and low-thermal conductivity support in a vacuum 
chamber, only radiative heat load may take place in the 
system. The final equilibrium temperature of the sample, 𝑇𝑆, 
can then be estimated by the Stefan-Boltzmann law,

𝑃𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙 = 𝜀𝜎𝐵𝑆(𝑇𝑟

4 − 𝑇𝑆

4),                            (5)                                                            

where 𝑆 is the total surface area of the sample, 𝑇𝑟 is room 
temperature, and ε is the sample emissivity. As one can 
understood from (2), the efficiency of laser cooling cycles is 
very low (a few %). Enhancement of the laser cooling process 
is therefore highly desirable.

B.
Mie Resonance Cooling

Les consider the laser cooling process in a Yb3+:YAG
nanosphere pumped with a plane electromagnetic wave 
propagating vacuum at the pump wavelength 𝜆𝑃 (Fig. 1).

According to Mie theory, the pump plane wave can be 
expanded in spherical harmonics as 

𝐸⃗ 𝑃 = 𝐸0 ∑
𝑖𝑛 2𝑛+1

𝑛(𝑛+1) [𝑀⃗⃗ 𝑜1𝑛

(1) − 𝑖𝑁⃗⃗ 𝑒1𝑛

(1) ]
∞
𝑛=1
,           
(6)

where 𝐸0 is the amplitude of the incident field, 𝑀⃗⃗ 𝑜1𝑛 and 𝑁⃗⃗ 𝑒1𝑛
are the vector spherical harmonics

𝑀⃗⃗ 𝑜1𝑛

(1) = 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜑 ⋅ 𝜋𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃) ⋅ 𝑗𝑛(𝑟̃)𝑒̂𝜃 − 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜑 ⋅

𝜏𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)𝑗𝑛(𝑟̃)𝑒̂𝜑,

(7)

𝑁⃗⃗ 𝑒1𝑛

(1) = 𝑛(𝑛 + 1)𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜑 ⋅ sin 𝜃 ⋅ 𝜋𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃) ⋅

𝑗𝑛(𝑟̃)

𝑟̃
𝑒̂𝑟 + cos 𝜑 ⋅

𝜏𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)

[𝑟̃𝑗𝑛(𝑟̃)]′

𝑟̃
𝑒̂𝜃 − 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜑 ⋅ 𝜋𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)

[𝑟̃𝑗𝑛(𝑟̃)]′

𝑟̃
𝑒̂𝜑,

where 𝑟̃ = 2𝜋𝑛𝑌𝑏𝑟 𝜆𝑃
⁄
and 𝑟 is the radial distance.  The index 

n = 1 stands for dipole, n = 2 quadrupole, etc., 𝑗𝑛 are the 
spherical Bessel functions, and 𝜋𝑛 and 𝜏𝑛 are the angle-
dependent functions defined as 

𝜋𝑛 =

𝑃𝑛1

𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃 , and 𝜏𝑛 =

𝑑𝑃𝑛1

𝑑𝜃 ,
(8)

where 𝑃𝑛

1 in the associated Legendre function of first kind of 

degree 𝑛 and the first order. The field inside the sphere reads
[22, 24]

𝐸⃗ = 𝐸0 ∑
𝑖𝑛 2𝑛+1

𝑛(𝑛+1) [𝑐𝑛𝑀⃗⃗ 𝑜1𝑛

(1) − 𝑖𝑑𝑛𝑁⃗⃗ 𝑒1𝑛

(1) ]
∞
𝑛=1
,              (9) 

where the coefficients 𝑐𝑛 and 𝑑𝑛 are functions of the 
normalized radius of the sphere, 𝑥 = 2𝜋𝑅 𝜆𝑃
⁄
, with 𝑅 being 

the radius of the sphere, and read

𝑐𝑛 =

𝑗𝑛(𝑥)[𝑥ℎ𝑛

(1)(𝑥)]

′
−ℎ𝑛

(1)(𝑥)[𝑥𝑗𝑛(𝑥)]′

𝑗𝑛(𝑚𝑥)[𝑥ℎ𝑛

(1)(𝑥)]

′
−ℎ𝑛

(1)(𝑥)[𝑚𝑥𝑗𝑛(𝑚𝑥)]′ ,
(10)

𝑑𝑛 =

𝑚𝑗𝑛(𝑥)[𝑥ℎ𝑛

(1)(𝑥)]

′
−𝑚ℎ𝑛

(1)(𝑥)[𝑥𝑗𝑛(𝑥)]′

𝑚2𝑗𝑛(𝑚𝑥)[𝑥ℎ𝑛

(1)(𝑥)]

′
−ℎ𝑛

(1)(𝑥)[𝑚𝑥𝑗𝑛(𝑚𝑥)]′,       
(11)

where  ℎ𝑛

(1) is the spherical Hankel functions, 𝑚 = 𝑛𝑌𝑏 The 

𝑐𝑛 coefficients describe the magnetic multipole modes and the 
𝑑𝑛coefficients describe the electric multipole modes. At 
values of 𝑅 for which the denominator of 𝑐𝑛 coefficient or the 
denominator of 𝑑𝑛 vanishes, the sphere resonantes and 
scattering exhibits therefore a peak that dominates the 
response of the sphere. The radial dependence of the absolute-
square of the electric field averaged over polar angle, 𝜃, and 
azimuthal angle, 𝜑, of spherical coordinates has the form 

〈|𝐸⃗ |

2〉 =

𝐸02

4 ∑
(𝑚𝑛|𝑐𝑛|2 + 𝑛𝑛|𝑑𝑛|2)
∞
𝑛=1
,             (12)


where 𝑚𝑛 and 𝑛𝑛 are functions of the radial distance, 𝑟,  and 
are given as

𝑚𝑛 = 2(2𝑛 + 1)|𝑗𝑛(𝑟̃)|2, 
(13)               

𝑛𝑛 = 2𝑛(2𝑛 + 1) [(𝑛 + 1) |

𝑗𝑛(𝑟̃)

𝑟̃ |

2

+ |

(𝑟̃⋅𝑗𝑛(𝑟̃))′

𝑟̃
|

2
],
(14)

where 𝑟̃ = 2𝜋𝑛𝑌𝑏𝑟 𝜆𝑃
⁄
.

The cooling power generated in the sphere can be 

estimated as the difference between the pump power absorbed 
by the Yb3+ ions in the sphere and the power radiated with 
anti-Stokes 
fluorescence
at 
the 
mean 
fluorescence 

wavelength. The field intensity given by (12) can then be 
integrated over the nanosphere and then inserted into (4) as

𝑃𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙 = 4𝜋 (

ℎ𝜈̃𝐹 −ℎ𝜈𝑃

ℎ𝜈𝑃
) 𝑁𝑇𝜎𝑎(𝜈𝑃)√

𝜀0
𝜇0 ∫ 〈|𝐸⃗ |

2〉
𝑅
0
𝑟2𝑑𝑟,
(15)

which corresponds to the cooling power generated in the Mie-
resonant nanosphere.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Let us consider an RE-doped nanosphere with radius of a 

few hundred nanometers. The energy levels of Yb3+ ions in a 
bulk Yb3+:YAG sample, shown in Fig. 2a, remain essentially 
unchanged when the size of the sample is reduced to a few 
hundred nanometers. Moreover, phonon quantization, which
can affect the thermalization process in the RE-doped 
nanocrystal, is inessential in such samples. We consider, as an 
example, a sample with ion concentration of ~10%, which is 
smaller than the critical concentration of Yb3+:YAG (17%). 
Such samples are free from cooperative effects such as 
resonant-radiative 
transfer 
(reabsorption), 
resonant 

nonradiative transfer and so on, which deteriorate laser 
cooling [6]. Indeed, these cooperative effects result to the

excited energy migration from the ion to ion inside the 
sample. This migrating energy can excite impurities in the 
sample and decay nonradiatively causing heat generation in 
the sample. The pump power considered in all our simulations 
is 
𝐼𝑃 = 0.5 ⋅ 10−4 𝑊 𝜇𝑚2
⁄
. 
Physical 
properties 
and 

parameters of Yb3+:YAG samples  used in our simulations are 
summarized in Table 1. 

As one can see in relations (5), the temperature of the 

sample depends on the cooling power generated in the sample. 
The cooling power generated in the nanosphere can be 
estimated with relation (15), which depends on the electric 

field intensity distribution, 〈|𝐸⃗ |

2〉, inside the sample. This 

distribution depends on the Mie resonant modes. Let us 
consider Mie modes of spheres with different radii. As may 
be seen in (10, 11), if the 𝑐𝑛 coefficient exhibits a peak, a
magnetic multipole mode dominates the response of the 
sphere, while if the 𝑑𝑛 coefficient exhibits a peak, an electric
multipole mode dominates the sphere. These coefficients 
exhibit peaks when their denominators tend to zero. For each 
𝑛, there are several radii for which the denominators of 𝑐𝑛 and 
𝑑𝑛 tend to zero. For example, at the pump wavelength 𝜆𝑃 =
1030 𝑛𝑚 the magnetic dipole (MD) mode (𝑛 = 1) can be 
supported by the sphere with the resonant radius ~ 200 𝑛𝑚 or 
~ 485 𝑛𝑚, the magnetic quadrupole (MQ) modes (𝑛 = 2)
can be supported by the sphere with the resonant radius 
~ 312 𝑛𝑚 or ~ 600 𝑛𝑚. The electric dipole (ED) mode 
(𝑛 = 1) can be supported by the sphere with the resonant 
radius ~ 325 𝑛𝑚; and the electric quadrupole (EQ) mode 
(𝑛 = 2) can be supported by the sphere with the resonant 
radius ~ 423 𝑛𝑚. The absolute-square of the electric field 
averaged over polar angle, 𝜃, and azimuthal angle, 𝜑, of 

spherical coordinates, 〈|𝐸⃗ |

2〉, for the ED mode of the sphere 

with the resonant radius ~ 325 𝑛𝑚 and for the MQ mode of 
the sphere with the resonant radius ~ 312 𝑛𝑚 is presented in 
Fig. 3. These field distributions have been simulated with 
relation (12). 

(a)


(b)

Fig. 3.  Dispribution of the squared modulus of the electric field 
averaged over the polar angle, 𝜃, and the azimuthal angle, 𝜑, along 
the radius of the sphere. (a) Electric dipole mode in the sphere with 
the radius 𝑅 ≈ 325 𝑛𝑚. (b) Magnetic quadrupole mode in the sphere 
with the radius 𝑅 ≈ 312 𝑛𝑚. These results have been computed 
using (12).

The cooling power density generated in the nanosphere, 
𝜌𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙 = 𝑃𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙 𝑉
⁄
, where 𝑉 =

4

3 𝜋𝑅3 is the volume of the 

sphere, can be estimated using (15). 𝑅 is the radius of the 
sphere. The cooling power density for nanospheres with 
different radii in the range between 150 𝑛𝑚 and  650 𝑛𝑚 is 
plotted in Fig. 4. It changes considerably on this range and has 
several peaks. The radii of the nanospheres corresponding to 
these peaks are very close to the resonant radii of the Mie 
resonant modes.

Fig. 4.  Cooling power density generated in nanospheres with 
different radii. Resonant radii of the nanospheres supporting MD, 
ED, MQ, and EQ mode are presented for simplity of understanding.

As may be seen in Fig. 4, the values of these peaks are 
different from each other. The largest peak corresponds to the 
radius ~ 317 𝑛𝑚. The nanosphere with this radius can 

support both the MQ and ED modes. The resonant radii for 
these modes (~ 312 𝑛𝑚 and ~ 325 𝑛𝑚) are very close to the
radius of the nanosphere ~ 317 𝑛𝑚. If the radius of 
nanosphere is ~ 200 𝑛𝑚, only the MD mode can be supported 
by the sample. If the radius of the nanosphere is equal to 
~ 430 𝑛𝑚 the peak is very broad, since one of the Mie 
resonant modes (the EQ mode) has the resonant radius, which 
is very close the radius of this peak, but the MD mode has the 
resonant radius ~ 485 𝑛𝑚, which is essentially different from 
the radius of the nanosphere (~ 430 𝑛𝑚). This MD mode 
only weekly influence this peak. The peak corresponding to 
the nanosphere with the radius ~ 612 𝑛𝑚 is small. It is 
located near the resonant radius of the MQ mode, which is 
~ 600 𝑛𝑚. There are no any other Mie modes with the 
resonant radii close to ~ 612 𝑛𝑚.

With the knowledge of the cooling power density, it 

is possible to estimate the temperature of the nanospheres
using relation (5). These results are presented in Fig. 5, which 
plots the temperature of the nanosphere, 𝑇𝑆, versus its radius 
in the same radius range between 150 𝑛𝑚 and 650 𝑛𝑚 as the 
cooling power density has been calculated in Fig. 4.

Fig. 5. Sample temperature, 𝑇𝑆, versus the radius of the sample. 
Resonant radii of the nanospheres supporting MD, ED, MQ, and EQ 
mode are presented for simplity of understanding.

As one might expect, the radii of the nanospheres for 

which temperature reaches minima almost perfectly coincide 
with those associated with highest cooling power density (Fig. 
4), the small discrepancy between the two being caused by the 
nonlinear relation between the cooling power and the 
temperature of the nanosphere (5), which for the spherical 
sample has the form 𝑅𝜌𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙 = 3𝜀𝜎𝐵(𝑇𝑟

4 − 𝑇𝑆

4). As is obvious 

from this relation, the radius of the nanosphere and the cooling 
power density generated in the nanosphere influence the drop 
in the temperature of the sample. The cooling power density 
generated in the nanospheres with the radii  ~ 200 𝑛𝑚 and 
~ 432 𝑛𝑚 are almost equal to each other (Fig. 4), but the 
temperature of the nanosphere with the radius ~ 432 𝑛𝑚
exceeds the temperature of the nanosphere with the radius 
~ 200 𝑛𝑚 (Fig. 5). The minimal temperature in Fig. 5 is 𝑇𝑆 =
107 𝐾. It can be reached if the radius of the nanosphere is 
equal to ~320 𝑛𝑚. The temperature of this nanosphere drops 


by ~ 60% of the temperature of the nanosphere (𝑇𝑆 =
265 𝐾) with the radius ~ 250 𝑛𝑚; it drops by ~ 63% of the 
temperature of the nanosphere (𝑇𝑆 = 288 𝐾) with the radius 
~ 150 𝑛𝑚,  and by ~ 51% of the temperature of the 
nanosphere (𝑇𝑆 = 222 𝐾) with the radius~ 375 𝑛𝑚. This 
considerable decrease in the temperature of the nanosphere at 
the radius 𝑅 = 320 𝑛𝑚 is caused by the enhancement of the 
cooling power density in the sample which is itself caused by 
the ED and MQ Mie resonating modes.  

IV. CONCLUSIONS

We have proposed to use Mie resonant modes to enhance 

laser cooling in RE-doped nanospheres made of low-phonon 
glasses or crystals. This concept have been comprehensively 
investigated for Yb3+:YAG nanospheres with radii in the 
order of a few hundred nanometers. We have considered 
Yb3+:YAG nanospheres pumped in the long-wavelength tail 
of the Yb3+ absorption spectrum at the wavelength 𝜆𝑃 =
1030 𝑛𝑚. We have shown a considerable enhancement of the 
cooling power density due to the Mie resonant modes and a 
related substantial (~ 60%) decrease in the temperature of the 
laser cooled samples with the radius ~ 320 𝑛𝑚. This sample 
supports MQ and ED Mie modes. A smaller decrease in the 
temperature of the laser cooled nanosphere is obtained if the 
sample supports only one Mie mode, as in the case of the 
Yb3+:YAG nanospheres with the radii ~ 200 𝑛𝑚, ~ 450 𝑛𝑚, 
and
~ 650 𝑛𝑚.
Nanospheres with the radii hundred 

nanometers are used widely in biophysics and mesoscopic 
physics. 

As we already mentioned for samples of such a size scale, 

phonon quantization, which can influence the thermalization 
process, the change in the energy levels of the RE ions doped 
in the sample, as well as the Purcell effect, are not essential. 
Quantization becomes important only for spheres with 
smaller radii, in the order of a few nanometers. For such small 
sphere, quantization can dramatically enhance the laser 
cooling process, but the related technology becomes naturally 
challenging.

A lot of theoretical and experimental research is currently 

devoted to the laser cooling of nanoparticles. In the majority 
of the related work, only the translational energy of the 
particles has been suppressed. Removal of the internal energy
embedded in the vibrational degrees of freedom of the 
particles, which has been considered in this work, remains an 
unsettled problem. Nowadays, laser cooling with anti-Stokes 
fluorescence is the only possible technique permitting to 
remove the internal energy of the sample, but the efficiency 
of this technique is very low (a few %). Our proposed 
approach based on the Mie resonant modes may therefore be 
considered as a timely new tool for experimentalists working 
on the laser cooling of solid nano-samples.   

References
1.
P. Pringsheim, Zwei Bemerkungen über den Unterschied 
von Lumineszenz- und Temperaturstrahlung, Z. Phys., 
57, 739-746 (1929).

2.
R. I. Epstein, M. I. Buchwald, B. C. Edwards, T. R. 
Gosnell and C. E. Mungan, Observation of laser-induced 
fluorescent cooling of a solid, Nature (London), 377, 
500-502 (1995).

3.
M. Sheik-Bahae, R. I. Epstein, Laser cooling of solids, 
Laser Photon. Rev. 3, 67-84 (2009).

4.
G. Nemova, R. Kashyap, Laser cooling of solids, Rep. 
Prog. Phys., 73, 086501:1-20 (2010).

5.
D. V. Seletskiy, M. P. Hehlen, R. I. Epstein, M. Sheik-
Bahae, Cryogenic optical refrigeration, Adv. Opt. 
Photon., 4, 78-107 (2012).

6.
G. Nemova, Field guide to laser cooling methods, SPIE 
Press, Bellingham, Washington (2019).

7.
S. Rostami, A. R. Albercht, M. R. Ghasemkhani, S. D. 
Melgaard, A. Gragossian, M. Tonelli, M. Sheik-Bahae, 
Optical refrigeration of Tm:YLF and Ho:YLF crystals, 
Optical and Electronic Cooling of Solids, 9765:97650P 
(2016).

8.
G. Nemova (ed), Laser cooling: fundamental properties 
and application, Pan Stanford Publishing, Singapore 
(2016).

9.
S. D. Melgaard, D. V. Seletskiy, V. Polyak, Y. Asmerom, 
M. Sheik-Bahae, Identification of parasitic losses in 
Yb:YLF and prospects for optical refrigeration down to 
80K, Optics Express, 22, 7756-7764 (2014).

10. S. D. Melgaard, D. V. Seletskiy, A. Albrech, M. Sheik-

Bahae, First solid-state cooling below 100K, SPIE 
Newsroom 
(March 
13, 
2015). 

doi:10.1117/2.1201503.005790.

11. M. P. Hehlen, J. Meng, A. R. Albrecht, E. R. Lee, A.

Gragossian, S. P. Love, C. E. Hamilton, R. I. Epstein, M.
Sheik-Bahae,  First demonstration of an all-solid-state 
optical cryocooler, Light: Science & Applications, 7(15), 
1-10 (2018).

12. S. R. Bowman, Laser without internal heat generation, 

IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 35, 115 (1999).

13. G. Nemova, R. Kashyap, Thin-disk athermal laser 

system, Opt Commun, 319, 100-105 (2014).

14. Z. Yang, J. Meng, A. R. Albrecht, M. Sheik-Bahae, 

Radiation-balanced Yb:YAG disk laser, Optics express, 
27 (2), 1392-1400  (2019).

15. G. Nemova, R. Kashyap, Fiber amplifier with integrated 

optical cooler, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 26, 2237-2241 (2009).

16. E. Moboni,  M. Peysokhan,  A. Mafi, Heat mitigation of 

a core/cladding Yb-doped fiber amplifier using anti-
Stokes fluorescence cooling,  J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 
36(8):2167 (2019).

17. X. Xia, A.Pant, J. Davis, P. J. Pauzauskie, Design of a 

radiation-balanced fiber laser via optically active 
composite cladding materials, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 
36(12):3307 (2019).

18. G. Nemova, R. Kashyap, Optimization of optical 

refrigaration in Yb3+:YAG samples, J. Lumin., 164, 99-
104 (2015).

19. S. S. Rudyi, T. A. Vovk, A. V. Kovalev, V. M. Polyakov, 

A. V. Ivanov, E. Y. Perlin, Y. V. Rozhdestvensky, Deep 
laser cooling of rare-earth-doped nanocrystals in a radio-


frequency trap, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 34(12), 2441-2445 
(2017).

20. A. T. M. Anishur Rahman, P. F. Barker, Laser 

refrigeration, alignment and rotation of levitated 
Yb3+:YLF nanocrystals, Nature Photonics, 11, 634-638 
(2017).

21. P. B. Roder, B. E. Smith, X. Zhou, M. J. Crane, P. J. 

Pauzauskie, 
Laser 
refrigeration 
of 
hydrothermal 

nanocrystals in physiological media, Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA,112, 15024-15029 (2015).

22. G. Mie, Beitrage zur Optik truber Medien, speziell 

kolloidaler Metallosungen, Ann. Phys. 330, 377-445 
(1908).

23. E. Soares de Lima Filho, G. Nemova, S. Loranger, R. 

Kashyap, Ytterbium-doped glass-ceramics for optical 
refrigeration, Opt. Express, 23(4), 4630-4640 (2015).  

24. C. F. Bohren, D. R. Huffman, Absorption and scattering 

of light by small particles. WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH 
& Co. KGaA, Weinheim (2004).


