Letter
Optics Letters
1

Anisotropic Confinement of Chromophores Induces
Second-Order Nonlinear Optics in a Nanoporous
Photonic Metamaterial

KAROLINA WASZKOWSKA1, PIERRE JOSSE1, CLÉMENT CABANETOS1, PHILIPPE BLANCHARD1,
BOUCHTA SAHRAOUI1, DOMINIQUE GUICHAOUA1, IGOR SYVOROTKA2, OLHA KITYK3, ROBERT
WIELGOSZ3, PATRICK HUBER4,5,6, AND ANDRIY V. KITYK7,*

1University of Angers, MOLTECH-Anjou, UMR CNRS 6200, 2 Bd. Lavoisier, 49045 Angers Cedex 01, France
2SRC "Electron-Carat", 202 Stryjska str., 79031 Lviv, Ukraine
3Energia Oze Sp. z o.o., ul. Cz˛estochowska 7, 42-274 Konopiska, Poland
4Technische Universität Hamburg, TUHH, Center for Integrated Multiscale Materials Systems CIMMS, Eißendorfer Str. 42, 21073 Hamburg, Germany
5Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron, DESY, Center for X-ray and Nano Science CXNS, 22603 Hamburg, Germany
6Universität Hamburg, Center for Hybrid Nanostructures CHyN, 22607 Hamburg, Germany
7Czestochowa University of Technology, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Al. Armii Krajowej 17, 42-200 Czestochowa, Poland
*Corresponding author: kityk@ap.univie.ac.at

Compiled February 11, 2021

Second-order nonlinear optics is the base for a large
variety of devices aimed at the active manipulation of
light.
However, physical principles restrict its occur-
rence to non-centrosymmetric, anisotropic matter. This
significantly limits the number of base materials ex-
hibiting nonlinear optics.
Here, we show that em-
bedding chromophores in an array of conical chan-
nels 13 nm across in monolithic silica results in meso-
scopic anisotropic matter and thus in a hybrid mate-
rial showing second-harmonic generation (SHG). This
non-linear optics is compared to the one achieved in
corona-poled polymer films containing the identical
chromophores.
It originates in confinement-induced
orientational order of the elongated guest molecules in
the nanochannels. This leads to a non-centrosymmetric
dipolar order and hence to a non-linear light-matter
interaction on the sub-wavelength, single-pore scale.
Our study demonstrates that the advent of large-scale,
self-organised nanoporosity in monolithic solids along
with confinement-controllable orientational order of
chromophores at the single-pore scale provides a reli-
able and accessible tool to design materials with a non-
linear meta-optics.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/OL.416948

Second-order optical nonlinearity gives rise to three wave
mixing processes including the linear electrooptic (Pockels) ef-
fect, second-harmonic generation (SHG), sum- or difference-
frequency mixing as well as parametric generation and ampli-
fication [1, 2]. These effects, observed first in inorganic crystal
materials, have been demonstrated later also in a broad class
of organic, organo-polymeric and organic-inorganic composite

materials. In the last decades they have been in the focus of
intensive experimental and theoretical studies, since they give
rise to a large variety of novel nonlinear optical concepts and
corresponding applications [3].
SHG consists in generating of optical waves of a doubled fre-
quency 2ω induced by high intensity incident light of frequency
ω. By symmetry principles such a nonlinear optical effect, simi-
larly as other three wave mixing processes, is allowed only in
non-centrosymmetric media, e.g. polar and piezoelectric crys-
tals. SHG can also be observed in doped polymer films that have
previously been subjected to electrical poling, i.e. the exposure
of a polymer film being heated to moderate temperatures to an
high external electric field [4]. This so-called ”corona poling”
induces a preferred orientation of the chromophores in thin sur-
face layers of the polymer films inducing or enhancing thereby a
second-order nonlinear polarization and thus nonlinear optical
effects.
Here, we first explore SHG induced by corona poling in a
chromophore-doped polymer film and then we demonstrate
that confinement of the identical chromophore in a nanoporous
medium can also result in a composite exhibiting SHG - without
corona poling. To that end we deposit the chromophore in
parallel, tubular nanochannels 13 nm across in silica (pSiO2)
membranes, see Fig. 1. The channels are of sub-wavelength size
and thus allow us by modification of the channel filling to tune
the mesoscale light-matter interaction and thus the resulting
effective meta-optics [5–8] of the nanoporous composite.
The chromophoric dimer Ethane-1,2-diyl (2E,2’E)-bis(2-
cyano-3-(5-(4-(diphenylamino)phenyl)thiophen-2-yl)acrylate)
(hereafter termed D1, see structure in Fig. 1(a)) has been synthe-
sized by linking two identical π-conjugated push-pull segments
through a non-conjugated ethylene chain.
The molecular
structure of D1 has been confirmed by NMR spectroscopy and
high-resolution mass spectrometry. HRMS (EI) calculated for

arXiv:2102.05322v1  [physics.optics]  10 Feb 2021


Letter
Optics Letters
2

C54H38N4O4S2 870.2334, found 870.2338 (∆= 0.4 ppm). UV-vis
(CH2Cl2): λmax = 478 nm (ε = 66500 L·mol −1·cm−1).
A strong electron-donating triphenylamine group (D) of the
D1-dimer is linked to an electron-withdrawing cyanoacrylic es-
ter group (A) by a thiophene ring as π-spacer. The D-π-A push-
pull segments are characterized by an intramolecular charge
transfer band observed in the visible spectral region.
The red colored chromophore D1 was used as dopant (10
wt%) for a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) host film de-
posited on a glass substrate, see Fig. 1(b). 5 mg of D1 and 50 mg
of PMMA was dissolved in 1 ml of chloroform (CHCl3). The
solution was then deposited on an ultrasonically cleaned glass
substrate of 1 mm thickness. Spin-coating deposition were per-
formed by a spin coater (Spin200i, POLOS) at 2000 rpm. The
thickness of the polymer doped film, characterized with a pro-
filometer (Dektak 6M, Veeco) was 1020±20 nm.
The free standing pSiO2-membranes of 300 µm thickness were
synthesized by thermal oxidation of electrochemically formed
pSi-membranes at T =800 oC for 12 h under normal atmosphere
[6]. The resulting membranes are characterized by an array
of slightly conical nanochannels and an average pore diame-
ter 2R =13 nm, as determined by recording a volumetric N2-
sorption isotherms at T = 77 K. The conicity of the pores results
from the unidirectional pSi etching process [9].

Fig. 1. Molecular structure of the D1 chromophore (a) used
as dopant for submicron polymer film (PMMA:D1) spin-
coated on the glass substrate (b) and as guest material for the
host nanoporous silica membrane forming nanocomposite,
pSiO2:D1 (c). Section (d) sketches the nonlinear optical setup
(SHG experiment): laser Nd:YAG (λ=1064 nm, 100 µJ, 30 ps,),
halfwave plate λ/2, Glan polarizer GP, lense L, measured
sample Smp, interference filter (532 nm) F, photodide PD, pho-
tomultiplier PM.

The guest chromophore dimer D1 has been deposited into
the pSiO2 by slow evaporation of its nearly saturated chloroform
solution imbibed by the pore network, adding in each succes-
sive filling step equal portions of D1 chromophore (∆ f = 0.5%
of pore volume, f is the fraction filling) as controlled and/or

Fig. 2. SHG response vs incident angle, α, for S and P light po-
larizations measured in an poled and unpoled D1-doped sub-
micron PMMA film, see labels. The insets sketch the corona
poling procedure which leads to preferential ordering of chro-
mophore dipole moments parallel to the electric poling field
resulting in appearing of macroscopic polarization ⃗P.

verified by optical absorption.
In Fig. 1(d) the nonlinear optical setup used to record angular
dependencies of the SHG response is sketched. The rotating λ/2-
plate serves to set a polarization direction (S- or P-component)
of the incident picosecond Nd:YAG-laser light (λ=1064 nm, 100
µJ, 30 ps). The SHG-signal, selected by the interference filter F
(λ = 532 nm), is detected by a photomultiplier PM with a boxcar
averager (integration time 0.1 s) employing baseline subtraction.
The measured SHG signal is normalized to the SHG response
of a crystal quartz measured in ooo-geometry, i.e. χ111(SiO2)
component.
In Fig. 2 the SHG response for the chromophore doped poly-
mer film is depicted. As expected, the unpoled PMMA:D1 film
exibits no SHG effect as explainable by orientational disorder
of the chromophores in the polymer host layer. The samples
subjected to corona poling (external electric field of 6 kV/cm,
time = 60 min, T=373 K) result in an SHG response appearing in
both S- and P-polarization. The nonlinear optical conversion is
anisotropic with a maximum SHG response at an incident angle
α ≈60o, apparently dominating in P-polarization.
The pSiO2-membrane with chromophore coated pore walls,
by contrast, exhibits the SHG response without poling, see in
Fig. 3 the SHG response versus incident angle, α, for S- (a) and P-
(b) light polarizations measured from the pSiO2:D1 nanocompos-
ite at different filling fractions of guest D1 molecules deposited
in nanochannels. Similarly to the chromophore doped polymer
film the SHG response of the pSiO2:D1 nanocomposite exhibits
a strong spatial anisotropy both with respect to the incident
angle and the light polarization. The characteristics of these
angular dependencies change somewhat upon increasing frac-
tional filling f. However, in all cases both the measured P- and
S-components of the SHG signal almost vanish at normal in-


Letter
Optics Letters
3

Fig. 3. SHG response vs incident angle, α, for S (a) and P (b)
light polarizations measured in pSiO2:D1 nanocomposite for
different filling fractions f of guest D1 chromophore, see la-
beled. Inset: Orientational ordering of elongated D1 molecules
in conical nanochannels of mesoporous pSiO2 membranes
enforced by tubular confinement leads to a macroscopic polar-
ization ⃗P parallel to channel axes.

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

SHG / SHG[χ111(SiO2)]

 P-polarization
 S-polarization   

f [%]

α = 60o

Fig. 4. SHG response vs filling fraction, f, for S and P light
polarizations measured in pSiO2:D1 nanocomposite at the
incident angle α=60 deg.

cidence (α=0) and a maximum SHG response is detectable for
incident angles, 50< α <70o. More surprising and unusual are
the dependencies of the measured SHG signals on the fraction
filling f. In Fig. 4 we present the SHG responses versus f for S-
and P-polarization components of the pSiO2:D1 nanocomposite
at an incident angle α=60 deg as derived from the data presented
in Fig. 3. At small f both SHG signals rise reaching their maxima
at f ≈2.5 wt% and then gradually decrease with increasing f.
The measured optical absorption spectra of the pSiO2:D1 hy-
brid, presented in Fig. 5, shed light on a potential reason for
such a behavior. The characteristic feature of these spectra is a
quite broad optical absorption band, centered at about 450 nm,
strongly rising with concentration of deposited chromophore
molecules in the mesoporous silica matrix, i.e. the fraction fill-
ing f of the nanochannels. The narrow SHG emission at 532
nm appears in the region of the long-wavelength wing of this
band, as marked by a vertical line in Fig. 5, and is considerably
absorbed. In terms of the Lambert-Beer law the SHG inten-
sity decays exponentially with the concentration of deposited
molecules in nanochannels. Accordingly, at large filling fractions
only a thin surface layer of chromophore doped silica matrix is
expected to contribute effectively to the outcoming SHG light.
Thus, one expects a saturation of the SHG intensity at larger f
and a subsequent decrease in agreement with the observations,
see Fig. 5.

Fig. 5. Optical absorbance vs filling fraction, f, measured in
pSiO2:D1 nanocomposite at several filling fractions, see la-
beled. Vertical lines trace wavelengths of fundamental (1064
nm) and SHG radiations.

The observation of an SHG effect in pSiO2:D1 nanocomposite
constitutes an interesting finding with regard to potential appli-
cations as nonlinear optical materials. It is however also a very
interesting observation from a fundamental point of view and
deserves a more detailed discussion. In the chromophore doped
polymer film the second-order nonlinear polarization is induced
by corona poling, i.e. orientation and/or conformational dis-
tortion of chromophores molecules under a long term action
of high electric field applied to the composite polymer film at
temperatures close to the polymer glass transition point Tg.
In the pSiO2:D1 nanocomposite, however, the second-order
optical nonlinearity likely follows from the geometrical con-
finement along with the conicity of the channels. From liquid-
crystal based nanocomposites it is known that confinement in
nanochannels effectively acts like a geometrical field [10, 11].
Particularly, it results for rod-like nematic molecules confined
in cylindrical nanochannels to preferred molecular orientations


Letter
Optics Letters
4

along the channel axis in the pore wall proximity, i.e. the spa-
tial constraints act similar as external electric or magnetic fields
[10, 11]. Such a phenomenology may also explain the peculiar
optical behavior of the elongated D1 molecules. Presumably,
during the deposition they get preferentially oriented along the
nanochannels, as sketched in the insert of Fig. 3(a). Note that
it has been established for liquid crystalline systems that the
strength of the confinement-induced molecular ordering field
or capillary nematization [12] is σ ∝ R−1. Thus, the effective
moments enforcing axial alignment of the guest molecules are
expected to be large here, since the average channel diameter
(2R = 13 nm) is only a few times the length of the chromophore
molecules (LD1 ∼ 3.6 nm).

Fig. 6. Examples of equilibrium (metastable) conformations
of dimer molecule D1 obtained by DFT optimization in the
ground state. (a) represents strait centrosymmetric conforma-
tion with zero permanent dipole moment (⃗P =0). (b) and (c)
are the two examples of bend shaped conformations character-
ized by large permanent dipole moment (⃗P ̸= 0).

A crucial issue in these considerations is the polar property of
the guest molecules. For D1 it strongly depends on the conforma-
tion. In Fig. 6 we show examples of equilibrium conformations
of the dimer molecule obtained by Density Functional Theory
(DFT) optimization (CAM-B3LYP functional, 6-31+G(d,p) basis
set) in the ground state using the Gaussian-16 quantum-chemical
package [13]. Amazingly, the molecules characterized by the
most stable centrosymmetric conformation (see Fig. 6(a)) have
zero dipole moment (⃗P =0) and do not contribute to a second-
order nonlinear polarization. Rotations of molecular segments
about single bonds result, however, in a number of metastable
non-centrosymmetric conformations. Some of them are charac-
terized by quite large permanent dipole moments, as exampli-
fied in Figs. 6(b) and 6(c). Due to small energy barriers these
metastable conformational states may be thermally activated or
induced by interfacial interactions with the pore walls. Thus we
suggest that this molecular polarity along with the confinement-
induced alignment in conical channels results in a macroscopic
polarization along the channel axis and thus causes the SHG
effect, see Fig. 2. A quantitative description of the SHG effect
would necessitate a thorough determination of confined, non-
centrosymmetric D1 confirmations, which goes beyond of our
dominantly experimental study.
In conclusion we demonstrate that it is possible to embed the
chromophore dimer D1 into polymer PMMA films and meso-
porous silica (pSiO2) matrices with mean pore diameter of 13 nm.

The synthesized PMMA:D1 and pSiO2:D1 composites exhibit
second-order nonlinear optical properties. The SHG response,
absent in the unpoled chromophore doped polymer film, ap-
pears after long-term poling in high electric fields performed
at temperatures close to the polymer glass transition point Tg.
More importantly, the nanoporous pSiO2 membranes with chro-
mophore coated pore walls exhibit an SHG response without
poling. We explain this by an orientational ordering of elongated
guest chromophore molecules in the tubuluar, slightly conical
nanochannels, i.e. as orientational alignment of chromophore
molecules enforced by the geometrical confinement fields.
From a more general perspective our study exemplifies how
by filling of nanoporous media confinement-controlled order-
ing on the single-pore scale can be employed to tune the sub-
wavelength light-matter interaction and thus the effective meta-
optics of the hybrid materials. From a materials science perspec-
tive the resulting hybrids have an integrated optical functional-
ity in combination with a mechanical rigidity provided by the
nanoporous silica scaffold structure. Thus our study is a fine
example, how self-organized nanoporosity in solids in combi-
nation with confinement-induced orientational order of organic
chromophores results in materials with a non-linear meta-optics.

Funding. The presented results are part of a project that has
received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 re-
search and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-
Curie grant agreement No 778156. Support from resources for
science in years 2018-2022 granted for the realization of interna-
tional co-financed project Nr W13/H2020/2018 (Dec. MNiSW
3871/H2020/2018/2). DFT calculations have been carried out
using resources provided by Wroclaw Centre for Networking
and Supercomputing (http://wcss.pl), grant No. 160. P.H. ac-
knowledges support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
within the SFB 986 (#192346071).
Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

1.
J. A. Armstrong, N. Bloembergen, J. Ducuing, and P. S. Pershan, Phys.
Rev. 127, 1918 (1962).

2.
N. Bloembergen, Nonlinear Optics (World Scientific, 1996).

3.
A. Zheltikov, A. L’Huillier, and F. Krausz, “Nonlinear optics,” in Springer
Handbook of Lasers and Optics, F. Träger, ed. (Springer, 2007).

4.
B. Sahraoui, J. Luc, A. Meghea, R. Czaplicki, J.-L. Fillaut, and
A. Migalska-Zalas, J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 11, 024005 (2009).

5.
M. Kadic, G. W. Milton, M. van Hecke, and M. Wegener, Nat. Rev. Phys.
1, 198–210 (2019).

6.
K. Sentker, A. W. Zantop, M. Lippmann, T. Hofmann, O. H. Seeck, A. V.
Kityk, A. Yildirim, A. Schönhals, M. G. Mazza, and P. Huber, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 120, 067801 (2018).

7.
K. Sentker, A. Yildirim, M. Lippmann, A. W. Zantop, F. Bertram, T. Hof-
mann, O. H. Seeck, A. V. Kityk, M. G. Mazza, A. Schönhals, and
P. Huber, Nanoscale. 11, 23304 (2019).

8.
I. A. Kolmychek, V. B. Novikov, I. V. Malysheva, A. P. Leontiev, K. S.
Napolskii, and T. V. Murzina, Opt. Lett. 45, 1866 (2020).

9.
M. Thelen, N. Bochud, M. Brinker, C. Prada, and P. Huber, arXiv. p.
2010.14947 (2020).

10.
A. V. Kityk, M. Wolff, K. Knorr, D. Morineau, R. Lefort, and P. Huber,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 187801 (2008).

11.
Z. Kutnjak, S. Kralj, G. Lahajnar, and S. Zumer, Phys. Rev. E 68,
021705 (2003).

12.
R. van Roij, M. Dijkstra, and R. Evans, Europhys. Lett. (EPL) 49, 350
(2000).

13.
M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, and et al, Gaussian 2016,
Revis. B.01 (2016).


