Chiral photodetector based on GaAsN

R. S. Joshya,1 H. Carr`ere,1 V. G. Ibarra-Sierra,2 J. C. Sandoval-Santana,2 V. K.
Kalevich,3 E. L. Ivchenko,3 X. Marie,1 T. Amand,1 A. Kunold,2 and A. Balocchi1, ∗

1Universit´e de Toulouse, INSA-CNRS-UPS, LPCNO, 135 Avenue Rangueil, 31077 Toulouse, France
2Area de F´ısica Te´orica y Materia Condensada, Universidad Aut´onoma Metropolitana Azcapotzalco,
Av. San Pablo 180, Col. Reynosa-Tamaulipas, 02200 Cuidad de M´exico, M´exico
3Ioffe Physical-Technical Institute, 194021 St.
Petersburg, Russia

The detection of light helicity is key to several research and industrial applications from drugs
production to optical communications.
However, the direct measurement of the light helicity is
inherently impossible with conventional photodetectors based on III-V or IV-VI semiconductors,
being naturally non-chiral. The prior polarization analysis of the light by a series of often moving
optical elements is necessary before light is sent to the detector. A method is here presented to
effectively give to the conventional dilute nitride GaAs-based semiconductor epilayer a chiral photo-
conductivity in paramagnetic-defect-engineered samples. The detection scheme relies on the giant
spin-dependent recombination of conduction electrons and the accompanying spin polarization of the
engineered defects to control the conduction band population via the electrons’ spin polarization.
As the conduction electron spin polarization is, in turn, intimately linked to the excitation light
polarization, the light polarization state can be determined by a simple conductivity measurement.
This effectively gives the GaAsN epilayer a chiral photoconductivity capable of discriminating the
handedness of an incident excitation light in addition to its intensity. This approach, removing
the need of any optical elements in front of a non-chiral detector, could offer easier integration
and miniaturisation. This new chiral photodetector could potentially operate in a spectral range
from the visible to the infra-red using (In)(Al)GaAsN alloys or ion-implanted nitrogen-free III-V
compounds.

INTRODUCTION

In nature, the animal kingdom has developed the abil-
ity to detect or reflect circular polarized light (CPL) as
an added modality for enhanced vision, better navigation
or “private communications” [1–3]. The characterization
of light polarization states is also essential in a variety of
reasearch and industry fields ranging from pharmaceutics
drugs circular dichroism [4], polarimetric enhanced vision
and imaging [5], spectroscopic material characterization,
medical and scientific diagnosis [6, 7] and optical com-
munications [8]. The development of a simple, efficient
and integrable chiral photodetector could offer improve-
ments in actual uses but also favour novel device design
and applications inspired by natural vision systems.
The inherent difficulty in discriminating the circular po-
larization states of light resides in the lack of chirality in
materials commonly employed in optoelectronics. Com-
mon (non-chiral) photodetector are thus used in com-
bination with a set of moving, and often bulky optics
such as quarter waveplates and polarizers [9].
Thus,
conventional systems make it a challenge to construct
robust, miniature and integrated devices. A direct de-
tection of the CPL state is a desirable improvement of-
fering advantages in term of robustness and integrabil-
ity in addition to a simplified technology. Albeit ultra-
compact optical elements for manipulating circularly po-
larized are actively investigated [10, 11], the realization
of a simple, room temperature “single-measurement”
circular polarization degree photo-detector remains elu-

sive. Different approaches have put forward plasmonic
or CMOS-like nanostructures [12–14] or organic chiral
molecules [15, 16]. These devices often suffer from lim-
ited acceptance angle and with the use of multiple op-
tical elements it makes technically challenging to realise
miniature and integrated CPL detectors. Recent mea-
surements on quantum-dots-based hybrid devices have
shown a photocurrent helicity asymmetry of 0.4% at 4
K [17], 2% (T=4 K) in a similarly designed quantum
wells hybrid ferromagnetic/semiconductor structures or
again 5.9% in a Ge-based device (T=4 K) [18]. Better
results have been reported in chiral plasmonic metamate-
rials. However, these are absorption devices lacking the
direct electrical detection [19]. Very recently, 2D WTe2
has been used by exploiting the spin photogalvanic ef-
fect [20]. Each of these approaches tackles one or more
of the desired characteristics, but suffers some drawbacks
such as a narrow spectral range or they do require mul-
tiple, complex technological processing steps to be fabri-
cated.

Here we implement the simple solution to this chal-
lenge recently proposed in [21] which makes use of a di-
lute nitride GaAsN semiconductor epilayer as the spin
photoconductive device capable of determining directly,
by a voltage or current measurement, the handedness of
an incident light. The device operation relies on the spin
dependent recombination of conduction electrons and on
the hyperfine interaction (HFI) between bound electrons
and nuclei on paramagnetic centers to provide the device
with respectively a sensitivity to the degree of circular

arXiv:2102.13399v2  [physics.app-ph]  22 Mar 2021


2

0
50
100
150

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

 

 

NormalisedPhotoluminescence

B field (mT)

0
50
100
150

0.8

0.9

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

 Normalised Photoconductivity

 

B field (mT)

PL

Vbias
PC  
a)

b)

incident

light

Normalized  PL            

Normalized  PC            

Bext[mT]

s+, s-, p

s-
s-

s+
s+

p
p

Bext[mT]

FIG. 1.
a) Sketch of the experimental configuration used
to simultaneously measure the photoluminescence (PL) and
the photoconductivity (PC). BN and Bext indicate respec-
tively the induced nuclear magnetic field and the external
magnetic field created by a permanent magnet in the config-
uration when the magnetic fields are parallel (see text). b)
Variation of PL and PC signals as a function of the external
magnetic field for different light polarizations. λexc=852 nm,
Pexc=20 mW.

polarization and its handedness.
This semiconductor belongs to the family of dilute ni-
tride materials consisting of a GaAs-based semiconduc-
tor where a small percentage of N is introduced to induce
the formation of Ga2+ interstitial paramagnetic defects
which display both an exceptionally large spin depen-
dent recombination (SDR) for conduction band electrons
and a defect nuclear hyperpolarization at room tempera-
ture [22–25]. A very efficient defect recombination is usu-
ally an undesirable feature for optoelectronics devices.
However, as the capture rate is here dependent on the
spin polarization of the conduction band electrons, it
provides a way of controlling the conduction band pop-
ulation and thus the conductivity via the spin polariza-
tion. Key to this device workings is the fact that this
spin polarization is likewise transferred not only to the
defect-bound electron but also to the surrounding nu-
clei via a concomitant action of the hyperfine interaction
and dipole-dipole spin relaxation [26]. This yields a size-
able effective nuclear magnetic field BN whose direction
is parallel to the conduction electron spin polarization

weak
capture

Large conductivity

CB

VB

Intermediate cond. 

intermediate
capture

CB

VB

Large
capture

Low conductivity

no SDR

CB

VB

CB population

b)

a)

c)

d)

s+
s-

p

p
s+

s-

Ga2+
Ga2+

Ga2+

BN

BN

Bext

Bext

BN
Bext
0

FIG. 2. a) to c): Schematic view of the SDR capture under
different excitation polarizations when a positive (same ori-
entation as the σ− photo-generated spins) external magnetic
field is applied to the epilayer in Faraday geometry. d) Repre-
sentation of the corresponding conduction electron population
at dynamical equilibrium.

and thus to the photon helicity.
This phenomenon is
however equally efficient for spin up or spin down con-
duction electron polarization allowing only the determi-
nation of a circular polarization degree without its hand-
edness. By exploiting in addition the interplay between
the HFI and a small external magnetic field, the GaAsN
epilayer acquires a chiral photoconductivity (PC) capa-
ble of discriminating the handedness of an incident light
in addition to a linearly polarized one as demonstrated
below.
It is important to note that spin dependent recombina-
tion and nuclear polarization can occur on many defects
and in various materials but typically with a weak ef-
ficiency or at cryogenic temperatures.
In contrast, in
GaAsN-based semiconductors they manifest with macro-
scopic record-high values at room temperature, paving
the way to a practical exploitation of the phenomenon.
In addition, these paramagnetic defects can be induced to
the whole range of GaAs-based alloys from AlGaAsN to
InGaAsN [22], thus allowing a wide range of wavelength
operation from the visible to the infra-red spectral re-
gion. Nitrogen-free gallium-ion implanted semiconductor
systems have also been shown to display this giant spin-
dependent recombination, allowing dissociating the spin
dependent recombination efficiency and the defect den-


3

Mixed
spin
states

Separeted

spin
states

PC

increases

PC

decreases

BN

BN+Bext

E

FIG. 3. Schematic of the hyperfine and Zeeman splitted levels
of the electron-defect system as a function of the total mag-
netic field (BN +Bext). The vertical dotted line schematically
indicates the value of BN when the external magnetic field
is zero. If Bext is decreased or increased from 0 the defect
capture rate will respectively increase or decrease leading re-
spectively to lower or higher PC. The shaded regions near the
origin and for high total magnetic field schematically indicate
respectively the regions where the nuclear and electron spin
states are fully mixed or substantially independent.

sity from the material gap and to offer extended device
configurations and applicabilities [27]. Finally, as the the
working principle relies on the creation of a spin polar-
ized conduction-band population, the device’s working
range can in principle cover a wide spectrum of excita-
tion wavelength as long as a minimum optical orientation
in the conduction band can be achieved.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1b presents the simultaneous measurement of
the PL and PC of a GaAsN (2.1% N) sample for different
light polarization states as a function of the applied ex-
ternal magnetic field Bext in Faraday geometry for a 20
mW excitation at 852 nm. We can see a very similar be-
haviour for PL and PC as a function of the magnetic field
and light polarization, confirming that the same physical
phenomena underpin both measurements.
From these
data two features can be noted: (i) The conduction elec-
tron population, as revealed by the PL or PC intensities,
depends on the incident light helicity as soon as Bext ̸= 0
and for a very small magnetic field strength. This weak

field rules out any macroscopic Zeeman effect on the con-
duction or defect electron states capable of producing a
thermal spin population. (ii) The asymmetry persists for
a large range of magnetic fields (the PL and PC inten-
sities under circular polarization are expected to even-
tually become identical for Bext > 300 mT [21]). These
data identify a broad range in external magnetic field
where the discrimination of the light polarization can be
achieved and used in a single-reading electrical detection.
The particular dependence of the PL and PC signals as
a function of the external magnetic field for different po-
larization has been successfully interpreted in the frame-
work of an interplay between the hyperfine interaction
ˆHHF I = AˆI · ˆS (where A is the hyperfine interaction
constant) between the Ga2+ nuclei (spin I=3/2) and the
bound electrons (spin S=1/2), and the Zeeman interac-
tion induced by the external magnetic field. The hyper-
fine interaction reduces the SDR efficiency due to the
mixing of the electron’s and nucleus’s spins [28], but al-
lows for the flow of angular momentum transfer from the
conduction band electron to the defect nucleus in combi-
nation with the SDR [29]. The way this interplay is ex-
ploited can be clarified with the help of figure 2 and 3:
When the spin of the conduction electrons shows a pref-
erential orientation (such as under an at least partially
circularly polarized light, figure 2a) the defect resident
electron acquires the same spin orientation, through the
spin dependent recombination, in a few tens of picosec-
onds [22]. This spin polarization is likewise transferred
to the defect nucleus and neighbouring nuclei through a
combination of the hyperfine interaction and dipole re-
laxation, yielding an effective nuclear magnetic field BN.
This spin polarization transfer from the conduction band
to the defect electron and nuclear spins has a fundamen-
tal role: (i) by forcing the same spin orientation onto
the defect resident electron, it prevents any further con-
duction electron capture thanks to the Pauli’s principle.
The capture of the conduction electrons is greatly re-
duced giving the sample a “Large” conduction popula-
tion. Without an external magnetic field this happens
with the same efficiency for a right or left circular ex-
citation.
Instead, under a linearly-polarized excitation
(figure 2c) an equivalent density of spin-up and spin-
down conduction population is photo-generated and no
net transfer of spin polarization to the defects can occur.
The conduction capture is no more spin-dependent and
the defect can efficiently capture the conduction electrons
leading to a “Low” conduction population. (ii) Under a
weak external magnetic field in Faraday geometry, the PL
(or PC) intensity under a circularly polarized light takes
the form of an inverted Lorentzian (figure 2d) [29] dis-
placed from the origin in opposite direction for a right or
left circular incident polarization due to the presence of
the nuclear field BN which adds up to the external field.
Now the system is effectively chiral: When BN is paral-
lel or antiparallel to an applied external magnetic field


4

of comparable strength, the HFI in the defect system is
proportionally weakened or strengthened with respect to
the electron Zeeman effect offering a way to proportion-
ally control the SDR efficiency (figure 3). The conduction
carrier capture time (figure 2a and b) becomes dependent
on the total magnetic field Btot = BN +Bext. As the sign
of BN is directly linked to the average conduction elec-
trons spin orientation, the sample conductivity becomes
now dependent on the average conduction electrons spin
orientation and therefore on the light polarization state
incident on the sample.
In more details, the device works on the following prin-
ciple: A permanent magnet with a field of 30 to 50 mT
is placed on the substrate side of the GaAsN epilayer to
have the field parallel (or anti-parallel) to the optical axis
of the incident light. The magnetic field is chosen such
that it falls in the optimum region for the discrimination
between a circular right or left incident polarization [21],
which is of the same order of magnitude as BN. A con-
stant voltage in the range 0.1 to 4 V is applied to the
sample contacts. At this point, the reading of the pho-
toconductivity value reflects the polarization state of the
incident light. Figure 4a presents such a measurement
in the case of a 30 mW incident light at 852 nm under
the 50 mT magnetic field. We observe a clear difference
between the signal measured for a right, left or linear in-
cident polarization, which allows for the determination
of the light helicity with a simple PC reading. Figure 4b
shows how the signal varies when the incident polariza-
tion is continuously modified from right circular to linear
and to left circular by turning the angle of the quarter-
wave plate in the incident optical path. This shows in
addition that, albeit for a small polarization interval, the
device can also determine the polarization degree of an
incident light in a single measurement. Considering that
the root mean square error RMS = 0.0068 mV as mea-
sured from a linear fit of the first plateau signal for a σ−

excitation in figure 4a, and the signal difference between a
linear and σ− excitation, δ =0.36 mV, we can estimate a
measurement of a circular polarization degree with a pre-
cision of about 2% in this proof of concept device.
We
have characterized the PC contrast ∆P C =
P C−−P C+
P C−+P C+
(PC−/+ indicates respectively the PC under a σ− or σ+

excitation) as a function of the incident wavelength and
power. Figure 5a reports the data obtained as a func-
tion of the SDR ratio at BN=0, SDRr(0) = 100 P Cσ

P Cπ ,
by varying the incident power. The contrast reaches a
maximum for a relatively weak powers and then mono-
tonically decreases as the power is increased. This be-
haviour is well accounted for [21] at low power by the
power threshold for the build-up of the nuclear magnetic
field. Increasing the excitation power beyond the opti-
mum leads to a decrease of the SDR, leading in return
to a decrease of the photocurrent contrast.
Figure 5b
presents the PC contrast as a function of the excitation

B=50mT

B=50mT

a)

b)

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2.0

2.1

 

 

mV

Time (arb. u.)
Time [arb. u.]

PC signal [mV]

s+
s-

p

s+
s-

p

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2.0

2.1

 

 

mV

Time (arb. u.)

Waveplate angle [rad]

-p/4

PC signal [mV]

-p/4
p/4

FIG. 4. (a) Photoconductivity signal measured at 50 mT for
different polarizations of the incident light. b) Photoconduc-
tivity signal measured as a function of the quarter-wave plate
angle with respect to the incoming linearly polarized light
excitation.

0
10
20
30

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

 

 

Contrast

Power (mW)

700
800
900
0.00

0.01

0.02

 Wavelength (nm)

 

 

Contrast

852 nm

GaAs

Spin-orbit

GaAs
Gap

a)
b)

Power [mW]
Wavelength  [nm]   

DPC

DPC

FIG. 5. a) The PC contrast ∆P C as a function of the exci-
tation power at 852 nm excitation. b) The PC contrast as a
function of the excitation wavelength.

wavelength. A constant incident power Pexc= 20 mW has
been used here for the whole spectral range explored. We
can deduce that for this Nitrogen content and for this
simple photoconductivity configuration, the device can
be used over 100 nm range. The hight wavelength limit
(λ= 870 nm, E= 1.424 eV) is due to the change in the
absorption coefficient of the device once the excitation


5

energy is smaller than the GaAs gap energy. Exciting
with photon energies above the GaAs gap allows instead
for a larger absorption of the incoming light as this can
occur over the thicker GaAs buffer layer and not only
on the thin 100 nm GaAsN one, while preserving a sub-
stantial conduction electron spin polarization during the
thermalisation and diffusion into the GaAsN layer [30].
No higher excitation wavelength has been tested. How-
ever, thanks to the optical selection rules, a PC contrast
should in principle be observable for wavelengths up to
the GaAsN gap as the conduction spin polarization will
increase for excitations closer to the gap, albeit higher
powers will be necessary to compensate for the lower ab-
sorption in the thin layer. The low wavelength limit (λ=
704 nm, E= 1.76 eV) is instead linked to the onset of the
spin-orbit band where no or very weak conduction spin
polarization can be achieved. It is important also to con-
sider here that both the absorption coefficient and the
photogenerated conduction spin polarization are wave-
length dependent. As the SDR depends on the absorbed
power and the spin polarization achieved at the bottom
of the conduction band, the relation between the PC con-
trast and wavelength is non-linear.
As suggested in [21] an improved version of the device
could be envisaged in the form of either a balanced
photodetector composed of two slabs of GaAsN each
subject to opposite magnetic fields B1 and B2 = −B1.
A common voltage source is used to drive in both
GaAsN slabs and the measured PCs from the two
photodetectors are subtracted. In this configuration, the
sign and not the magnitude of the resulting current will
reveal the polarization state of the incident light.
An
alternative solution is also proposed where the differen-
tial measurement is obtained in a single GaAsN layer
subject to an alternating magnetic field produced by a
micro-coil powered by an alternating current (figure
6a).
In order to make a proof of concept, we have
tested a modified version of the second device design
where the single GaAsN is here subject to a constant
magnetic field while the incident light has a periodically
varying polarization state (figure 6b). The polarization
modulation is obtained by rotating a quarter-wave plate
at a frequency frot = ωrot/2π. In this configuration, the
polarization state after the waveplate will periodically
change from linear to circular right, linear, circular left
and back to linear, twice per rotation. By demodulating
the measured photocurrent at a frequency 2frot using
a lock-in amplifier, the resulting signal is proportional
to (iσ− − iσ+), i.e.
the difference in the photocurrent
signal between a circular right and circular left polarized
excitation.
Figure 7 reports the direct measurements
of the difference between a circular right and circular left
incident polarization using the set-up presented above,
as a function of the excitation power at 852 nm for 25 -
40 mW and frot= 21 Hz. We observed that a sizeable
differential signal can be obtained for a large range of

µ-coil

light
alternating
polarization

permanent

magnet

alternating

B field

a)
b)

FIG. 6. a) A representation of one of the differential measure-
ment photodetector designs proposed in [21].
A micro-coil
provides an alternating positive and negative magnetic field
and the light polarization is determined by the resulting sign
of the measured current by subtracting the measurements ob-
tained under opposite magnetic fields. b) The scheme used
here for the proof of concept where a constant magnetic field
is used and the device is illuminated with an alternating cir-
cular polarization.

0
50
100
150

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

s PC  s

+-s
-  arb.u.

Magnetic field (mT)

 40 mW
 35 mW
 30 mW
 25 mW

Magnetic field [mT]         

|PC- - PC+| [arb. u.]

FIG. 7. The PC measured using the polarization-modulation
technique as a function of the incident power.
The curves
have been vertically displaced for clarity.

external magnetic fields. In the differential configuration
the signal will be different than zero only for circularly
polarized light and the limit to the minimum measurable
circular polarization degree will be set mainly by the
noise equivalent signal of the reading. This is expected
to be greatly improved with a photodiode design instead
of a photoconductor one. A linear or unpolarized light
will give instead a zero reading.

CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we have shown that leveraging the giant
spin dependent recombination and the hyperpolarization
of Ga2+ interstitial defect in dilute nitrides epilayers al-


6

lows for the realization of a chiral III-V dilute nitride
semiconductor useable for the direct electrical measure-
ment of the incident light helicity at room temperature.
As the working principle relies on the optical orienta-
tion of conduction electrons, the working spectral range
could be easily extended for wavelengths up to the mate-
rial band gap and as long a non zero spin polarization of
photoexcited electrons can be achieved. This paradigm,
enabled by the presence of Ga paramagnetic defects in
dilute nitrides, can in principle be extended to the whole
family of (In)(Al)GaAsN alloys with gaps ranging from
the visible to the infrared. The possibility of producing
interstitial defects by implantation in N-free alloys [27]
could also provide further application possibilities.

METHODS

The sample studied for the proof of principle demon-
stration consists of a 100 nm thick GaAs1−xNx epilayer
(x = 0.021) grown by molecular beam epitaxy on a
(001) semi-insulating GaAs substrate and capped with
10 nm GaAs.
The room temperature gap is at 1080
nm.
The excitation light was provided by either a
852 nm laser diode or a continuous wave Ti:Sa laser
as the tunable wavelength source.
The lasers were
focused to a ≈ 100 µm diameter spot (FWHM), in
between two Ag electrodes deposited onto the sample
surface about 1 mm apart (figure 1a). The laser light
polarization was controlled by a Glan-Taylor polarizer
followed by a quarter wave plate.
The laser intensity
was modulated by a mechanical chopper at 170 Hz.
The
sample
photoconductivity
(PC)
was
measured
synchronously using a lock-in amplifier from the voltage
drop at the terminals of a 1 MΩ load resistor placed
in series with the sample.
We have carefully focused
the laser in order to avoid any spurious effects related
to the contact illumination.
A constant voltage has
been applied between the sample electrodes to perform
the PC reading. The photoluminescence (PL) intensity
was simultaneously measured with the same lock-in
technique by recording its total intensity, filtered of the
laser scattered light and substrate contribution using a
series of long-pass optical filters, and integrated by an
InGaAs photodiode. A permanent Neodymium magnet
has been used to apply a magnetic field in the Faraday
geometry and the field strength on the sample surface
has been varied by changing the magnet’s distance from
the sample. All the experiments were performed at room
temperature.

∗ andrea.balocchi@insa-toulouse.fr

[1] S. Rossel, R. Wehner, Nature 1986, 323 128.
[2] T. W. Cronin, N. Shashar, R. L. Caldwell, J. Marshall,
A. G. Cheroske, T.-H. Chiou, Integrative and Compara-
tive Biology 2003, 43, 4 549.

[3] T.-H. Chiou, S. Kleinlogel, T. Cronin, R. Caldwell, B. Lo-
effler, A. Siddiqi, A. Goldizen, J. Marshall, Current Bi-
ology 2008, 18 429.

[4] N. Purdie, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1996, 118, 50 12871.
[5] M. Khorasaninejad, W. T. Chen, A. Y. Zhu, J. Oh, R. C.
Devlin, D. Rousso, F. Capasso, Nano Letters 2006, 7,
16 4595.

[6] N. J. Greenfield, Nature Protocols 2006, 1, 6 2876.
[7] W. B. Sparks, J. Hough, T. A. Germer, F. Chen,
S. DasSarma, P. DasSarma, F. T. Robb, N. Manset,
L. Kolokolova, N. Reid, F. D. Macchetto, W. Martin,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2009,
106, 19 7816.

[8] R. Farshchi, M. Ramsteiner, J. Herfort, A. Tahraoui,
H. T. Grahn,
Applied Physics Letters 2011, 98, 16
162508.

[9] H. G. Berry, G. Gabrielse, A. E. Livingston, Appl. Opt.
1977, 16, 12 3200.

[10] N. Yu, F. Aieta, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats, Z. Gaburro,
F. Capasso, Nano Letters 2012, 12 6328.

[11] J. K. Gansel, M. Thiel, M. S. Rill, M. Decker, K. Bade,
V. Saile, G. von Freymann, S. Linden, M. Wegener, Sci-
ence 2009, 325, 5947 1513.

[12] W. Li, Z. J. Coppens, L. V. Besteiro, W. Wang, A. O.
Govorov, J. Valentine, Nature Communications 2015, 6,
1 8379.

[13] A. Basiri, X. Chen, J. Bai, P. Amrollahi, J. Carpenter,
Z. Holman, C. Wang, Y. Yao, Light: Science & Applica-
tions 2019, 8, 1 78.

[14] W. Wu, Y. Yu, W. Liu, X. Zhang, Nanophotonics 2019,
8, 3 467.

[15] M. Schulz, F. Balzer, D. Scheunemann, O. Arteaga,
A. Lutzen, S. C. J. Meskers, M. Schiek, Advanced Func-
tional Materials 2019, 29, 16 1900684.

[16] Y. Yang, R. C. da Costa, M. J. Fuchter, A. J. Campbell,
Nature Photonics 2013, 7, 8 634.

[17] F. Cadiz, D. Lagarde, B. Tao, J. Frougier, B. Xu, X. De-
vaux, S. Migot, Z. G. Wang, X. F. Han, J. M. George,
H. Carrere, A. Balocchi, T. Amand, X. Marie, B. Ur-
baszek, H. Jaffr`es, Y. Lu, P. Renucci, Phys. Rev. Mate-
rials 2020, 4 124603.

[18] C. Rinaldi,
M. Cantoni,
D. Petti,
A. Sottocorno,
M. Leone, N. M. Caffrey, S. Sanvito, R. Bertacco, Ad-
vanced Materials 2012, 24, 22 3037.

[19] S. H¨ovel, N. C. Gerhardt, M. R. Hofmann, F.-Y. Lo,
A. Ludwig,
D. Reuter,
A. D. Wieck,
E. Schuster,
H. Wende, W. Keune, O. Petracic, K. Westerholt, Ap-
plied Physics Letters 2008, 93, 2 021117.

[20] Z. Ji, W. Liu, S. Krylyuk, X. Fan, Z. Zhang, A. Pan,
L. Feng, A. Davydov, R. Agarwal, Science 2020, 368
763.

[21] V. G. Ibarra-Sierra, J. C. Sandoval-Santana, R. S.
Joshya, H. Carr`ere, L. A. Bakaleinikov, V. K. Kale-
vich, E. L. Ivchenko, X. Marie, T. Amand, A. Balocchi,
A. Kunold, arXiv 2021, 2102.10208.

[22] D.
Lagarde,
L.
Lombez,
X.
Marie,
A.
Balocchi,
T. Amand, V. K. Kalevich, A. Shiryaev, E. Ivchenko,
A. Egorov, physica status solidi (a) 2007, 204, 1 208.

[23] L.
Lombez,
P.
Braun,
H.
Carrere,
B.
Urbaszek,
P. Renucci, T. Amand, X. Marie, J. Harmand, V. Kale-


7

vich, Applied Physics Letters 2005, 87 252115.

[24] X. J. Wang, I. A. Buyanova, F. Zhao, D. Lagarde,
A. Balocchi, X. Marie, C. W. Tu, J. C. Harmand, W. M.
Chen, Nature Mat. 2009, 8, 3 198.

[25] V. K. Kalevich, M. M. Afanasiev, A. Y. Shiryaev, A. Y.
Egorov, Physical Review B 2012, 85 035205.

[26] J. C. Sandoval-Santana, V. G. Ibarra-Sierra, H. Carr`ere,
M. M. Afanasiev, L. A. Bakaleinikov, V. K. Kalevich,
E. L. Ivchenko, X. Marie, T. Amand, A. Balocchi,
A. Kunold, Phys. Rev. B 2020, 101 075201.

[27] C. T. Nguyen, A. Balocchi, D. Lagarde, T. T. Zhang,
H. Carrere,
S. Mazzucato,
P. Barate,
E. Galopin,

J. Gierak, E. Bourhis, J. C. Harmand, T. Amand,
X. Marie, Applied Physics Letters 2013, 103 052403.

[28] E. L. Ivchenko, L. A. Bakaleinikov, V. K. Kalevich, Phys.
Rev. B 2015, 91 205202.

[29] V. G. Ibarra-Sierra, J. C. Sandoval-Santana, S. Azaizia,
H. Carr`ere, L. A. Bakaleinikov, V. K. Kalevich, E. L.
Ivchenko, X. Marie, T. Amand, A. Balocchi, A. Kunold,
Phys. Rev. B 2017, 95 195204.

[30] F. Nastos, J. Rioux, M. Strimas-Mackey, B. S. Mendoza,
J. E. Sipe, Phys. Rev. B 2007, 76 205113.


