1

Passive radiative temperature regulator:
principles and absorption-emission manipulation

HAIPENG ZHAO,1,2 YAOHUI ZHAN,1,2,5 SHULIANG DOU,3 LIANG WANG,4

YAO LI,3 AND XIAOFENG LI1,2,6

1School of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering & Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano 
Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China.
2Key Lab of Advanced Optical Manufacturing Technologies of Jiangsu Province & Key Lab of Modern 
Optical Technologies of Education Ministry of China, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China.
3National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Advanced Composites, Harbin Institute of 
Technology, Harbin 150001, China. 
4State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute 
of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050, China.
5Corresponding author:Y Zhan (yhzhan@suda.edu.cn) 
6Corresponding author:X Li (xfli@suda.edu.cn)

Abstract: As a representative device exploiting both the solar energy and the radiative cooling 
of deep-sky, the radiative temperature regulator (RTR) could switch between heating and 
cooling modes self-adaptively at different temperatures. However, the concept of RTR is
challenging to be implemented due to the intense parasitic absorption in phase-changing layers.
Here, based on the theoretical framework of energy conservation, we quantitatively reveal the 
intrinsic relationships between solar heating and radiative cooling, especially addressing the 
fundamental limiting factors, including the parasitic absorption and the spectral emission 
selectivity, as well as the dynamic responses of the phase-changing device under various 
operating conditions. The investigation presents more insight into the underlying physics of 
RTRs and provides feasible architectures for realizing such a kind of new functional device.

1. INTRODUCTION

While the sun is a heat source with a constant temperature of ~6000 K, the deep-sky can be 
deemed a tremendous cold reservoir with a ~3 K [1–3]. Both resources have long been of 
interest to researchers, especially in recent years, as green energy has become increasingly 
advocated. For harvesting solar energy, many technologies are exploited to convert solar light 
directly to electricity, thermal, or chemical energy, such as photovoltaic conversion [1,4], solar 
thermal collection [5,6], solar seawater desalination [7–9], and solar water splitting [10,11]. On 
the other hand, the deep-sky is mainly exploited by using radiative cooling, which is a 
thermodynamic mechanism that can dissipate the surplus thermal energy of the terrestrial 
object and thus realizes a steady temperature beneath the ambient circumstance even under the 
direct sunlight illumination [12–15]. For fully exerting the potential of radiative cooling,
Granqvist et al. showed multiple dielectric thin-film designs with highly selective thermal 
emittance [16], and Gentle and Smith originally proposed the particle-polymer metamaterial 
[17] as described in other patents as well [18, 19]. To further perfect the solar reflection at 
daytime, these radiative coolers were advanced with the silvered reflectors [20–25] and the 
porous scattering structures, the latter of which was also aimed towards improving on existing 
white cool-roof paints [26]. In general, the radiative cooler is designed to minimize the parasitic 
absorption while maximizing the thermal emissivity.

Although solar heating and radiative cooling are two opposite physical processes, they can 

be combined into the same devices for utilizing the solar energy and deep-sky simultaneously
[27–29]. The radiative temperature regulator (RTR) is a representative of this kind of device, 


2

which might as well be thought of as a self-adaptive thermostat that heats itself by collecting 
solar energy in cold weather but cools by radiative cooling in hot weather [30]. The switching 
functionality is ascribed to the insulator-metal transition (IMT) mechanism by which the phase-
changing materials undergo a dramatic increase in thermal emissivity at mid-infrared as the 
temperature reaches its critical point [31–34]. The most widely investigated IMT material is 
vanadium dioxide (VO2), the transition temperature of which is 68°C intrinsically, and can be
artificially tailored over a wide range by doping, strain-inducing, and nanostructuring [35–37].
The tunability and dynamic feature enable the radiative RTR to find various promising
applications, such as building energy-saving, spacecraft thermal control, personal thermal 
management, and infrared camouflage.

However, realizing the passive RTR is challenging since it relies on a precise balance of

solar heating and radiative cooling, unlike the dynamic radiative coolers based solely on the 
radiative cooling effect [32–34,38–40]. For instance, Ono et al. have invented a tandem 
photonic structure that can self-adaptively turn ‘on’ and ‘off’ radiative cooling based on the 
ambient temperature [33], which initiates a pioneering endeavor toward new functionalities of 
radiative cooling, as well as providing a promising solution to simultaneously utilizing the solar 
energy and radiative cooling. Nevertheless, the relevant work has not discussed the realization 
of self-heating functionality, especially the capability of switching ‘cooling’ and ‘heating’ 
modes for RTR. Recently, a VO2-based configuration is proposed, which paves an ingenious 
way towards passive RTR enabled by phase-changing materials; however, due to the idealistic 
permittivity that has been employed for the phase-changing material, the solar heating effect is 
underestimated [30]. While the proposed design may work for a specific data set for VO2, care 
has to be taken as the samples with a high absorption coefficient could lead to an inoperative 
photonic RTR. Therefore the critical technical point of suppressing solar parasitic absorption 
in the RTR has to be carefully studied. Moreover, a range of relevant issues concerning
fundamental operation mechanisms and realistic system designs have to be clarified for 
promoting the advancement of radiative RTRs.

In this work, starting from the theoretical framework of radiative cooling, we focus 

especially on the core matter of RTRs, i.e., the balance of solar heating and radiative cooling,
and explore the fundamental limit of the RTR with ideal selective and non-selective emissions
comprehensively. Considering the relative temperature of RTRs with respect to the ambient 
temperature, the preference of spectral selectivity of emissivity is illustrated, and the underlying 
physics is explained from the thermal equilibrium perspective. The dynamic performances of 
the RTR with different parasitic absorption rates are also evaluated under typical weather 
conditions. We find that solar heating plays a crucial but subtle role in achieving the 
multifunctional mode of RTRs: on the one hand, if there is no solar absorption in the phase-
changing device, the RTRs can switch between two modes (i.e., cooling and no-cooling modes) 
like [33]; on the other hand, if the solar absorption is too large, there is only one mode (i.e., 
heating mode) left; if and only if the solar absorption is moderate, three modes (i.e., cooling, 
heating, and no-cooling/heating modes) can be achieved and self-adaptively modulated with 
the ambient temperature. Notably, the so-called ‘moderate solar absorption’ is actually very 
small (i.e., αsolar < 0.13 for the ideal emitter and a far smaller value for the general emitters) 
according to our theoretical calculations, which is far beyond the experimentally available VO2
film. Besides pointing out the problem, we further give a frequency-selective photonic design 
based on the experimental material properties, showing that the parasitic absorption can be 
tailored to a moderate condition without degrading the emissivity switching for a well-
performed RTR. The investigation theoretically sorts out a most important pair of competing 
mechanisms in RTRs, technically clears the obstacles involved in the device design, and thus 
provides useful guidance for implementing this kind of novel device.

2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION


3

2.1 Principle of radiative RTRs

Material requirements of RTRs. The concept of radiative RTRs based on phase-changing 
material is explicitly given in Fig. 1. The phase-changing materials usually have distinct 
extinction coefficients (κ) at different phase-states. For instance, Fig. 1(a) gives the extinction 
coefficients of VO2, which is a typical phase-changing material with a moderate and tunable 
transition point close to room temperature [41]. For instance, Wang et al. have demonstrated 
that the IMT temperature of as-prepared VO2 can be decreased from 58°C to 5°C as the 
tungsten doping concentration increased from 0 wt% to 3 wt% [42]. Because the doping amount 
is ultra-small and mainly plays the role of inducing phase-transition, the optical property of the 
doped VO2 is still dominated by the base material with a modified phase-transition degree. 
Therefore, the phase-transition temperature of VO2 can be exemplified as ~17°C throughout 
the work for either the static or dynamic calculation. As shown in Fig. 1(a), in the insulator 
state, the value of κ is relatively small across all the concerned wavelength range; however, 
after the insulator-metal transition, κ changes little in the spectral range where solar irradiance 
accumulates but grows quite significantly in the near- to mid-infrared waveband (especially in
the atmospheric window where thermal emission occurs). The dramatic change of κ before and 
after phase-change indicates a strong capability of VO2 on thermal modulation. On the other 
hand, it’s noted that the absolute value of κ in the insulator state (i.e., in the range of 0.1 to 
0.5μm) is not that small, which is even comparable to that of Si widely used in solar harvesters
[43]. The combination of solar absorption and thermal modulation makes VO2 a most 
promising candidate for constructing self-adaptive temperature-control devices such as RTRs.

Fig. 1 Sketch for the working principle of self-adaptive thermostats based on phase-changing 
materials. (a) The frequency-dependent extinction coefficient (κ) of VO2 in the insulator (blue 
curve) and metal state (red curve), indicating a strong tunability of VO2 on the infrared 
emissivity. (b) In cold temperature, the thermostat mainly composed of VO2 layer absorbs more 
energy from solar irradiance than it emits to deep sky (i.e., Psun > Prad) due to VO2 stays at an 
insulator state with low emissivity, which makes the thermostat heat itself spontaneously. (c) In 
hot temperature, as the VO2 layer changes into a metal state with high emissivity, the increment 
of thermal emission (green arrow) is much more than that of parasitic absorption (red arrow); 
therefore, the thermostat cools itself self-adaptively due to Psun < Prad.  

Working modes of self-adaptive RTRs. Due to the phase transition is a temperature-driven 
process, the radiative RTRs can work in a self-adaptive way at different ambient temperatures. 
In cold weather, as shown in Fig. 1(b), the ambient temperature is too low to induce phase


4

changing, and the radiated power (Prad) of the device would be much less than the absorbed 
power (Psun) from solar illumination (i.e., Psun > Prad) leading the device temperature to rise to 
a steady-state above the ambient temperature. In hot weather, as shown in Fig. 1(c), the phase
changing occurs due to the high ambient temperature, and then Psun < Prad, which results in a 
temperature reduction via the so-called radiative cooling. Therefore, the temperature can be
modulated in a self-adaptive manner, and the heating and cooling functions can switch as the 
temperature varies in different weathers or even during a day.

2.2. Tradeoff between solar parasitic absorption and radiative cooling

To clarify the underlying physical relationships quantitatively, we begin with the formula of 
net cooling power modified from the well-developed theory for radiative cooling [14],

(
,
, )
(
, )
(
)
(
, )
(
,
)
net
thermo
amb
solar
rad
thermo
sun
solar
atm
amb
cc
thermo
amb
P
T
T
P
T
P
P
T
P T
T









,
(1)

where
1.5
1.5
( ) ( )
/
( )
AM
AM
solar
I
A
d
I
d






 

is the parasitic absorption ratio,
 
  the spectral 

emissivity, Tthermo and Tamb the temperatures of the RTR and ambient circumstance, A(λ) the 
solar absorbance,
IAM1.5( )
 the standard solar irradiance,
1.5
9
(
00
)
sun
solar
AM
solar
P
I
 d






the absorbed power due to solar irradiation,
( ,
) ( , )cos
rad
BB
thermo
P
I
T
d d

  




 
the 

radiated power due to thermal emission,
(
)
cc
c
amb
thermo
P
h T
T


the dissipated power due to heat 

conduction 
and 
convection, 
hc
the 
heat 
transfer 
coefficient,
and

( ,
)
( , ) ( , )cos
atm
BB
amb
atm
P
I
T
d d


    




 
the absorbed power due to the atmospheric 

opacity. The angle-dependent atmospheric emissivity (εatm) is related to atmospheric
transmittance (T) by 
1/cos
( , )
1
( )
atm
T


 

 
, where T(λ) employs the transmittance data from 

the ‘US standard 1976’ atmosphere model with the meteorological conditions as follows: Water 
Column, 1762.3 atm-cm; Ozone Column, 0.34356; CO2, 400 ppmv; CO, 0.15 ppmv; CH4, 1.8 
ppmv, Ground Temperature 300 K; Aerosol Model, Rural; Visibility, 23; Sensor Altitude, 50 
km; Sensor Zenith, 180 deg [44]. It can be deduced that, by letting Tthermo=Tamb=300K, Eq. (1) 
can be simplified to the version with respect to αsolar and ε since Pcc = 0, i.e.,

(
, )
( )
(
)
( )
net
solar
rad
sun
solar
atm
P
P
P
P








(2)

In Eq. (2), we assume that αsolar is wavelength-independent, while 𝜀 is wavelength-dependent 
and might either be the selective or the non-selective spectrum relative to the atmospheric 
window. As shown in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b), the selective (non-selective) type has unit emissivity 
within the atmospheric window (throughout the entire wavelength range of 2.5< λ <20μm ) and 
zero emissivity elsewhere. According to Eq. (2), the contour map of Pnet versus αsolar and ε is 
given in Fig. 2(c), which is a result corresponding to selective emissivity case and that of the 
non-selective case (not shown) is almost (but not exactly) the same, which is due to Pnet can 
degenerate at Tthermo=Tamb in Eq. (2) if the the atmospheric transmittance is zero outside the 
atmospheric window; here the slight difference is ascribed to the non-ideal transmittance data
from ‘US standard 1976’ model. If Tthermo ≠ Tamb, the contour maps of two cases would become
different, indicating that the two ideal spectra behave quite differently under a more frequently 
encountered temperature condition. As shown in Fig. 2(c), the blue and red regions respectively
correspond to the dual functionalities of cooling and heating, which are bordered by the dashed 
line of Pnet=0. In an extreme situation of αsolar=ε=0, there is no absorption and emission in the 
system and therefore the line of Pnet=0 goes through the origin; however, this is valid only for
Tthermo=Tamb since Pcc=0. In the situation of ε = 0, which corresponds to the bottom boundary of 
the contour map in Fig. 2(c), Pnet =-Psun(αsolar) < 0; therefore, as αsolar increases, Pnet decreases, 
suggesting an enhanced heating effect. In the situation of αsolar=0, which corresponds to the left 
boundary of the contour map in Fig. 2(c), Pnet = Prad (ε)-Patm (ε) > 0; therefore, as ε increases,


5

Pnet increases and results in an enhanced cooling effect. Generally, a combination of larger ε 
and smaller αsolar is preferred for cooling, while an inverse combination for heating. The 
tradeoff between ε and αsolar enables the possibility of minimizing the temperature variation of 
RTRs under different solar irradiances.

However, as shown in Fig. 2(c), the αsolar corresponding to Pnet=0 is actually fairly small, 

indicating the parasitic absorption of RTRs has to be carefully suppressed. To highlight the 
limiting factor of parasitic absorption, the relationships of ultimate temperature differences 
(i.e.,ΔT=Tthermo-Tamb) versus 𝛼 under ideal emissivity spectra are given in Figs. 2(d) and 2(e), 
where ΔT is derived by letting Pnet (Tthermo,Tamb) = 0 , Tamb = 300K and hc=6.9W/(m2·K) as 
routine. As shown in Fig. 2(d), in the range of 0 < αsolar < 0.13, ΔT can be > 0 or < 0 as ε varies 
from 0 to 1, which means the switch between heating and cooling is possible in such a situation.
However, as αsolar>0.13, the cooling mode is cut off completely, and merely the heating mode 
is possible, suggesting the self-adaptive RTRs function well only as αsolar is lower than the 
critical condition (e.g., αsolar ≈ 0.13 as discussed in Fig. 2(d)). The critical condition can also be 
observed in Fig. 2(e), which is due to that the intersection point is very close to the degenerate 
criteria of the selective and non-selective cases (i.e., Tthermo ≈ Tamb) discussed in Fig. 2(c). By 
comparing Figs. 2(d) and (e), it can be seen that the red (blue) region in Fig. 2(d) corresponding 
to heating (cooling) is smaller (larger) than that in Fig. 2(e), which is apparently due to the 
slope of line  = 1 in the former is higher than that in the latter. The underlying physics is that 
as ΔT >0 (i.e., Tthermo>Tamb), the cooling effect of non-selective emissivity is superior to that of 
the selective counterpart and therefore the temperature increment is retarded for the non-
selective case; while ΔT<0 (i.e., Tthermo<Tamb), the cooling effect of non-selective emissivity is 
inferior to that of the selective counterpart, leading the cooling region in blue to decrease
accordingly. 

Fig. 2 Tradeoff between the parasitic absorption ratio (αsolar) and the emissivity (ε) for achieving 
the functionality of cooling or heating in theoretically extreme situations. (a) The ideal selective 
emissivity spectrum where ε = 1 within the atmospheric window. (b) The ideal non-selective 
emissivity spectrum where ε = 1 across all the wavelength range beyond 2.5 μm. (c) Net cooling 
power (Pnet) as a function of αsolar and ε, for both the selective and non-selective cases. The 
dashed lines indicate the critical condition (i.e., Pnet= 0) falling in between the heating (Pnet < 0) 


6

and the cooling (Pnet > 0) regimes. (d) and (e) show the influences of the parasitic absorption 
ratio (αsolar) on the temperature difference (i.e., ΔT=Tthermo-Tamb) under ultimate emissivity 
values (ε = 0, 1). The left and right columns correspond to the selective and non-selective cases, 
respectively. 

2.3. Spectral preference of RTRs with moderate parasitic absorption

To determine the advantage or the application scope of the selective and non-selective 
emissivity spectra, the difference of net cooling powers is evaluated with an explanation from
the thermal equilibrium perspective, which is crucial for exploring the ultimate capability of 
RTRs.

Fig. 3 Spectral preference and its underlying physics of the thermostats without considering the 
phase transition process. Pnet versus Tthermo and Tamb for (a) selective and (b) non-selective cases, 
respectively. (c) Contour map of ΔPnet versus Tthermo and Tamb, where ΔPnet = Pnet (non-selective) 
- Pnet (selective). (d) Line plots of ΔPnet as a function of Tthermo at typical Tamb values. (e, f, g) 
Spectral power densities of Prad (blue line) and Patm (red line) in the cases of Tthermo<Tamb, 
Tthermo~Tamb, and Tthermo>Tamb, respectively. (h, i, j) Spectral power densities of Prad -Patm (gray 
line) corresponding to (e), (f), and (g), respectively. The blue and red fillings correspond to the 
heat loss and heat surplus, respectively. The parasitic absorption ratio is set at αsolar = 0.1 in the 
calculations.  


7

Without consideration of the phase-changing effect. Although previous works have 
discussed the spectral preference for general radiative cooling, they are not specifically 
prepared for the RTRs discussed below. Therefore, we briefly discuss it for completeness and 
convenience of a direct comparison with the following RTRs. According to Eq. (1), it can be 
concluded that once the physical parameters αsolar and ε are determined, the net cooling powers 
(as shown in Figs. 3(a) and (b)) and their difference ΔPnet=P

non 
net -P

selective 
net
(as shown in Fig. 3(c)) 

can be reduced to functions with respect to ambient and RTR temperatures, i.e.,
ΔPnet=ΔPnet(Tthermo,Tamb). In the calculations, a mild weather condition (i.e., 5°C≤Tamb≤30°C) is
considered, and a slightly narrower temperature range of RTRs (i.e., 10°C≤Tthermo≤25°C) is 
matched accordingly. Following the requirement of RTRs, a moderate parasitic absorption of 
αsolar=0.1is employed in the presentation. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the blue and red regions 
represent ΔPnet>0 (i.e., P

non 
net >P

selective 
net
) and ΔPnet<0 (i.e., P

non 
net <P

selective 
net
), respectively. The contour

line of ΔPnet=0 is located parallel to the dashed line of Tthermo=Tamb, the distance between which 
is no more than 1 °C. Fig. 3(d) selects three typical situations from Fig. 3(c) to show the 
interdependency between Tamb and Tthermo more clearly. As shown in Figs. 3(e) and 3(h), when 
Tthermo<Tamb, Prad<Patm outside the atmospheric window, and consequently non-selective 
emission would bring more heat than selective emission. When Tthermo≈Tamb as shown in Figs. 
3(f) and 3(i), still focusing on the wavelength range outside the atmospheric window, Prad ≈
Patm, suggesting a balance condition for the two-type emissions. When Tthermo>Tamb as shown in 
Figs. 3(g) and 3(j), Prad>Patm and the non-selective emission could contribute more cooling 
power than the selective counterpart. In Figs. 3(e–j), with Tamb=17°C(290K), Tthermo values are 
12°C, 16.3°C, and 22°C for the scenarios of Tthermo<Tamb, Tthermo≈Tamb, and Tthermo>Tamb,
respectively.

Fig. 4 Modulating capability and the spectral preference of the thermostats with considering the 
phase transition process. (a, b) Net cooling powers (Pnet) of thermostats as a function of Tamb and 
Tthermo, for the selective and non-selective cases, respectively. (c) Line plots of ΔPnet (i.e., P

non 
net - P

selective 
net
) versus Tthermo at typical Tamb values. (d) Contour map of ΔPnet as a function of Tthermo and 

Tamb. A moderate parasitic absorption coefficient of αsolar = 0.1 is adopted in the calculations.


8

With consideration of the phase-changing effect. Next, we take the phase-change transition
into account to investigate further the dynamic thermal modulating capability of selective and 
non-selective emissions. The emissivities of RTRs before and after phase-change are supposed 
ideally to be 0 and 1, respectively. During phase-changing, the emissivity can be treated as 
εf=εinsulator(1-f )+εmatalf based on the effective media theory, where f ={1+exp[-k(Tthermo-Tpc)]}-1

is the ratio of the metallic phase to the insulator phase, Tpc=17°C, and k=1K-1[30]. Figs. 4(a) 
and 4(b) display the contour maps of Pnet versus Tthermo and Tamb for selective and non-selective 
cases, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4(a), a transition zone can be observed in the range of 14≤ 
Tthermo≤20°C, which is highlighted by using a pair of dashed light-blue lines. Within the 
transition zone, the contour lines exhibit a non-linear correlation between Tthermo and Tamb, 
indicating a retarding effect of Tthermo due to gradually enhanced radiative cooling in the process 
of increasing Tamb. The contour lines are linear beyond the transition zone since the phase-
changing has finished or has not yet started. For completeness, the dynamic cooling power of 
non-selective cases is also given in Fig. 4(b), showing a similar tendency to that of the selective 
counterparts. For quantitative comparisons, the differences between Pnet of selective and non-
selective cases are derived at special Tamb values. As shown in Fig. 4(c), when Tthermo < 14°C, 
ΔPnet≈0 regardless of the ambient temperature, suggesting there is almost no difference 
between selective and non-selective emissions. When Tthermo > 14°C, as Tamb stays much lower 
than the critical phase-change temperature (e.g., Tamb = 5°C << Tpc = 17°C), the advantage of 
non-selective emission is overwhelming until Tamb approaches to Tpc (e.g., Tamb = 15°C). As 
Tamb surpasses Tpc, the selective emission is preferred firstly, and then the non-selective, which 
becomes similar to that has been discussed in Fig. 3. The above results demonstrate that besides 
Tthermo, Tpc is also a crucial factor that can be adjusted to facilitate the RTRs adapting to working 
conditions and emitter properties. Fig. 4(d) gives a full comparison between Figs. 4(a) and 4(b), 
which confirms further the conclusions in Fig. 4(c). As shown in Fig. 4(d), although the contour 
line of ΔPnet=0 keeps the same as that in Fig. 3(a), the region of ΔPnet≈0 (e.g., -1< ΔPnet < 
5W/m2) has significantly expanded, manifesting that the phase-changing feature highly 
alleviates the dependence of emission selectivity and extends the design tolerance consequently.

Fig. 5 The self-adaptive temperature of the VO2 based thermostat (Tthermo) with selective 
emissivity as a function of the parasitic absorption ratio (αsolar) in typical scenarios: (a–c) Tamb > 
Tpc; (d–f) Tamb ~ Tpc; (g–i) Tamb < Tpc. The left, middle and right columns correspond to αsolar = 0, 
αsolar=0.1 and αsolar=0.2, respectively. Without loss of generality, the ambient temperatures (Tamb) 
are modeled by the formula of Tamb = Tmin +ΔTmaxexp[(t-12)2/(-Δt)], where Tmin is the minimum 


9

temperature of a day, ΔTmax is the maximal temperature difference, Δt is the daytime period 
across 5:00–19:00. The temperature zone of phase-transition is set as 14 – 20°C.

2.4. Dynamic response of radiative RTRs with typical parasitic absorptions

The working modes of RTR during a whole day under various circumstances are further 
investigated. Without loss of generality, the ambient temperature is modeled by using the 
expression of Tamb = Tmin +ΔTmaxexp[(t-12)2/(-Δt)], where Tmin is the minimum temperature of 
a day, ΔTmax the maximal temperature difference, and Δt the daytime period across 5:00–19:00. 
Fig. 5 gives the self-adaptive temperature of the VO2-based RTR (Tthermo) with selective 
emissivity as a function of the parasitic absorption ratio (αsolar) in typical scenarios: (a–c) Tamb > 
Tpc; (d–f) Tamb ~ Tpc; (g–i) Tamb < Tpc. The left, middle and right columns correspond to αsolar= 
0, αsolar = 0.1 and αsolar = 0.2, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5(a), since Tamb > Tpc throughout 
the whole day, the RTR presents a fully metal state with ideal emissivity, and thus gains a 
dramatic temperature reduction of 4°C (11°C) in the nighttime (daytime). In the whole day (Fig. 
5(a)), Tamb increases largely from 20°C to 30°C, while Tthermo varies only from 16°C to 19°C, 
showing a 70% reduction of temperature difference. If the weather cools down (i.e., the average 
of Tamb decreases 7°C compared to that in Fig. 5(a)), as shown in Fig. 5(d), Tthermo equals to Tamb
and is no longer reduced during nighttime due to Tamb is beneath the phase-transition zone;
however, the temperature drop in the daytime is still available but is cut down (e.g., 
approximately 64% at midday) in a self-adaptive manner. As the weather cools down further, 
it can be seen from Fig. 5(g) that the temperature reduction continues to drop, leaving only 2°C
at noon. The comparison between Figs. 5(a, d, g) clearly shows that the hotter the weather is, 
the stronger the radiative cooling effect is (vice versa), which exactly is what the RTR needs.

Besides the ideal case of zero-heating process (i.e., αsolar = 0), a moderate parasitic 

absorption of αsolar = 0.1 is further taken into account. As shown in the middle column of Fig. 
5, due to solar heating, Tthermo in the daytime increases drastically for all the cases of Tamb > Tpc, 
Tamb ~ Tpc and Tamb < Tpc. More importantly, a class of perfect temperature modulation mode is 
achieved through appropriately balancing the solar heating and radiative cooling. As shown in 
Figs. 5(b) and 5(h), the RTR cools down (i.e., Tthermo< Tamb) in hot weather (i.e., Tamb > Tpc) and 
heats up (i.e., Tthermo > Tamb) in cold weather (i.e., Tamb < Tpc), respectively. Furthermore, as 
shown in Fig. 5(e), the daily temperature can also be tailored promptly, i.e., the RTR cools 
down at noon when the temperature rises high and heats up in the morning/evening when the 
ambient temperature is relatively low. In addition, as shown in Fig. 5(h), the RTR heats up
largely by 5°C as Tamb=10°C at 8:00 AM but by only 2°C as Tamb=17°C at noon. In brief, the 
self-adaptiveness of RTR based on phase-changing material can be fully exerted to modulate 
the temperature of different weather and even that of a day. Meanwhile, it is found that the 
proper parasitic absorption and phase-change temperature are also incredibly vital for realizing
the stringent balance condition. If parasitic absorption breaks the limiting condition, e.g., the 
case of αsolar = 0.2 as given in the right column of Fig. 5, the heating effect will play an
overwhelming role in the regulation of temperature. More specifically, as shown in Fig. 5(c) 
corresponding to hot weather, Tthermo surpasses Tamb in the hours of 8:00–16:00, with a 
maximum temperature difference of 4°C above the ambient temperature at noon. As the 
weather becomes cooler (as shown in Figs. 5(f) and 5(i)), the increment of Tthermo compared to 
the ambient becomes larger and larger as indicated by the red-line filling, showing the device 
has substantially turn into a self-adaptive heater.

As for the dynamic temperature of the non-selective case, its tendency is similar, but its

magnitude is a little different from that of the selective case. The difference lies in the fact that 
while the cooling effect dominates, the temperature drop of the non-selective case is smaller
than that of the selective case since Tthermo < Tamb; while the heating effect dominates, the 
temperature increment (which is inversely proportional to the cooling power) of the non-
selective case is also smaller than that of the selective cases since Tthermo > Tamb. Therefore, it is 
expected that the tolerance of the non-selective emission to high parasitic absorption must be 


10

better than that of the selective counterparts. That is, if the parasitic absorption can not be well 
suppressed, the non-selective type might be the preferred emission spectra for RTRs.

2.5. Practical configurations for suppressing parasitic absorption

Finally, the possible configurations of RTRs are discussed for providing a practical solution to 
realizing such a self-adaptive temperature modulator. Firstly, the radiative RTR needs to 
possess a sharp contrast of mid-infrared emissivity before and after the phase change process 
for enabling a wide range of regulation on the thermal emission. To accomplish this, as shown 
in Fig. 6(a), a sandwich configuration of VO2(20 nm)/ZnSe(1000 nm)/Ag(200 nm) is employed
according to our optimization based on the experimental refractive index data from [41, 45–
47], which can form an F-P cavity as the VO2 layer turns into the metallic phase [48]. The 
physical principle is the same as the switching component of VO2/MgF2/W proposed by Ono 
et al. [33]. By using the sandwich configuration, as shown in Fig. 6(b), a high contrast
emissivity is successfully achieved in the atmospheric window. However, as shown in Fig. 6(b), 
the parasitic absorption is too high in both the insulator (αsolar = 0.32) and metal states (αsolar = 
0.44), which fails to satisfy the requirement of RTRs on parasitic absorption ratio (i.e., αsolar < 
0.13). The strong parasitic absorption of the sandwich configuration is reasonable due to the F-
P resonances in the visible range and the large absorption coefficient of VO2 [41,49–51], which 
is also a well-known open technical challenge in the field of smart windows. Based on the 
experimental material data of VO2 [37], the configuration of RTRs proposed by [26] is revisited, 
which proves that the structure without solar shielding could not function as an ideal RTRs
efficiently, mainly due to the high parasitic absorption of VO2 layers.

Fig. 6 An exemplary scheme for realizing VO2 based thermostat with the aid of tandem photonic 
crystals. (a) Sketch of the conceptual configuration where the tandem photonic crystal generates 
extended photonic bandgap for selectively reflecting most of the solar irradiation. (b, c) 
Absorption/emissivity spectra across a broad waveband (from 0.3 to 20 μm), corresponding to 
the system without and with photonic crystals, respectively. (d, e) Azimuthal emissivity spectra 
of the proposed thermostat in the insulator and metal states, respectively. (f, g) Averaged 


11

emissivity in the mid-infrared corresponding to (b) and (c), respectively. (h, i, j) The dynamic 
temperature of the thermostat under typical weather conditions. The modeled temperature curves 
and the phase transition zone are the same as those in Fig. 5. The blue and red colors indicate 
the cooling and heating temperature differences. 

To suppress the parasitic absorption, the tandem photonic crystals (PCs) are placed on the 

top, which works by forming an extended photonic bandgap in the solar spectrum. The tandem 
PCs consist of four groups, and each group has five pairs of ZnSe and BaF2 layers. We refer to 
also [46] for the refractive index of BaF2. The optical thickness of each layer is a quarter of the 
center wavelength, as listed in Table 1. As shown in Figs. 6(c), with the presence of PCs, the 
parasitic absorption is reduced dramatically to a suitable level of αsolar = 0.05 and αsolar = 0.06 
for the insulator and the metal states, respectively. Moreover, the emissivity is almost 
unchanged by the presence of PCs, since PCs are practically transparent to the mid-infrared. 
And the slightly increased absorption beyond 12 μm wavelengths is ascribed to the intrinsic 
absorption of BaF2. 

Besides the situation of normal incidence given in Figs. 6(b) and 6(c), the angle-dependent 

emissivity spectra of the device in insulator and metal states are given in Figs. 6(d) and 6(e), 
respectively. As shown in Fig. 6(d), the weak emissivity peaks of 8 μm and 12 μm blueshift as 
the angle increases, and the emissivity intensities are increased by a small amount 
concomitantly. The blue-shiftiness of emissivity is also observed in Fig. 6(e) for the device in 
metal states; however, the intensity of emissivity has not distinctly diminished until the angle 
reaches to 70°. The azimuthal emissivities before and after the phase change are given in Figs. 
6(f) and 6(g), respectively. As shown in Fig. 6(f) for the insulator state, the average emissivity 
εaverage is no more than 0.06 throughout all the angle θ. As the device switches to the metal state,
the average emissivity εaverage > 0.95 as θ = 0° and εaverage > 0.8 as θ < 60°, which starts to drop 
largely until θ > 75°. Due to the excellent spectral properties, it can be predicted that the 
proposed configuration is very suitable for RTRs. As shown in Figs. 6(h), 6(i), and 6(j), 
although the actual emissivity is adopted rather than the ideal emissivity as discussed before, 
an ideal working mode is successfully achieved, which is similar to that as discussed in Figs. 
5(b), 5(e), and 5(h), respectively. As an exemplified configuration, the tandem PCs demonstrate 
the possibility of implementing the RTRs. To further ease the fabrication, the tandem PCs can 
be replaced by few-layer thin films, which can be optimized based on genetic algorithms.

Table. 1 Structure parameters of the tandem photonic crystals

Layer groups
Materials
Center wavelength (nm)
Thickness(nm)

1
(ZnSe/ BaF2)5
400
(35/58)5

2
(ZnSe/ BaF2)5
550
(54/90)5

3
(ZnSe/ BaF2)5
750
(80/133)5

4
(ZnSe/ BaF2)5
1100
(110/183)5

3. CONCLUSION

In summary, we have comprehensively investigated the physical process of RTRs dictated by 
both solar heating and radiative cooling, especially focusing on exploring the fundamental limit 
and practical challenge in realizing this kind of new functional device. From the theoretical 
formula of power conservation, the quantitative relation between the parasitic absorption rate 
and the average emissivity is derived, which perfectly represents the two competing aspects of 
parasitic absorption and thermal radiation. Unexpectedly, the parasitic absorption rate has to 
be small enough, even in the case with ideal emissivity, to enable the dynamic balance between 
heating and cooling. With a very low parasitic absorption (e.g., αsolar = 0), radiative cooling 
always dominates the system response; with a high parasitic absorption (e.g., αsolar = 0.2), solar 


12

heating dominates; only with a moderate parasitic absorption (e.g., αsolar = 0.1), the tradeoff 
between the two competing effects mentioned above can be controlled self-adaptively to 
prevent overcooling when the ambiance is cold, and thus providing a unique advantage over 
the general radiative coolers. However, results show that it is challenging to achieve such a
moderate parasitic absorption in the VO2 system. Therefore, exemplified photonic structures 
are designed carefully for shielding the phase-changing layer from solar illumination, which 
allows the realization of well-performed RTRs in this study. It is also worth noting that 
although the discussed RTRs can switch between the heating/cooling mode self-adaptively, its 
modulation magnitudes of the temperature rise and drop to the ambient are mutually restricted 
due to the mentioned two competing factors underlying the working principle.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20181167, 
BK20180042), National Natural Science Foundation of China (61675142, 61875143), Opening 
Project of State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure 
(SKL201912SIC), and the Priority Academic Program Development (PAPD) of Jiangsu 
Higher Education Institutions.

Disclosures

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References

1. 
M. Zeyghami, D. Y. Goswami, and E. Stefanakos, "A review of clear sky radiative cooling developments and 
applications in renewable power systems and passive building cooling," Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 178, 115–
128 (2018).

2. 
B. Zhao, M. Hu, X. Ao, N. Chen, and G. Pei, "Radiative cooling: A review of fundamentals, materials, 
applications, and prospects," Appl. Energy 236, 489–513 (2019).

3. 
D. Zhao, A. Aili, Y. Zhai, S. Xu, G. Tan, X. Yin, and R. Yang, "Radiative sky cooling: Fundamental principles, 
materials, and applications," Appl. Phys. Rev. 6(2),021306 (2019).

4. 
Y. Zhan, X. Li, and Y. Li, "Numerical simulation of light-trapping and photoelectric conversion in single 
nanowire silicon solar cells," IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 19(5),1–8 (2013).

5. 
S. A. Kalogirou, "Solar thermal collectors and applications," Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 30(3), 231–295(2004)

6. 
Y. Tian and C. Y. Zhao, "A review of solar collectors and thermal energy storage in solar thermal applications," 
Appl. Energy 104, 538–553 (2013).

7. 
A. D. Khawaji, I. K. Kutubkhanah, and J. M. Wie, "Advances in seawater desalination technologies," 
Desalination 221(1–3), 47–69 (2008).

8. 
S. A. Kalogirou, "Seawater desalination using renewable energy sources," Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 31(3), 
242–281 (2005).

9. 
Z. C. Xiong, Y. J. Zhu, D. D. Qin, and R. L. Yang, "Flexible salt-rejecting photothermal paper based on reduced 
graphene oxide and hydroxyapatite nanowires for high-efficiency solar energy-driven vapor generation and stable 
desalination," ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12(29), 32556–32565 (2020).

10. 
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori, and N. S. Lewis, "Solar water 
splitting cells," Chem. Rev. 110(11), 6446–6473 (2010).

11. 
H. C. Fu, P. Varadhan, C. H. Lin, and J. H. He, "Spontaneous solar water splitting with decoupling of light 
absorption and electrocatalysis using silicon back-buried junction," Nat. Commun. 11(1), 1–9 (2020).

12. 
C. Ziming, W. Fuqiang, G. Dayang, L. Huaxu, and S. Yong, "Low-cost radiative cooling blade coating with 
ultrahigh visible light transmittance and emission within an “atmospheric window,”" Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. 
Cells 213, 110563 (2020).

13. 
J. Peoples, X. Li, Y. Lv, J. Qiu, Z. Huang, and X. Ruan, "A strategy of hierarchical particle sizes in nanoparticle 
composite for enhancing solar reflection," Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 131, 487–494 (2019).

14. 
A. P. Raman, M. A. Anoma, L. Zhu, E. Rephaeli, and S. Fan, "Passive radiative cooling below ambient air 
temperature under direct sunlight," Nature 515(7528), 540–544 (2014).

15. 
J. Mandal, Y. Yang, N. Yu, and A. P. Raman, "Paints as a scalable and effective radiative cooling technology 
for buildings," Joule 4(7), 1350–1356 (2020).

16.
C. G. Granqvist and A. Hjortsberg, "Radiative cooling to low temperatures: General considerations and 
application to selectively emitting SiO films," Journal of Applied Physics 52, 4205–4220 (1981).


13

17.
A. R. Gentle and G. B. Smith, "Radiative heat pumping from the earth using surface phonon resonant 
nanoparticles," Nano Lett. 10, 373–379 (2010).

18.
C. S. Wojtysiak, “Radiative cooling surface coatings,” U.S. patent application 20050064094A1 (24 March 2005)

19.
N. Yu, J. Mandal, A. Overvig, and N. Shi, “Systems and methods for radiative cooling and heating,” U.S. patent 
2016205717A1 (22 December 2016)

20. 
K. Yao, H. Ma, M. Huang, H. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y. Li, S. Dou, and Y. Zhan, "Near-Perfect selective photonic crystal 
emitter with nanoscale layers for daytime radiative cooling," ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2(9), 5512–5519 (2019).

21. 
H. Ma, K. Yao, S. Dou, M. Xiao, M. Dai, L. Wang, H. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y. Li, and Y. Zhan, "Multilayered 
SiO2/Si3N4 photonic emitter to achieve high-performance all-day radiative cooling," Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
212, 110584 (2020).

22. 
D. Chae, M. Kim, P. H. Jung, S. Son, J. Seo, Y. Liu, B. J. Lee, and H. Lee, "Spectrally selective inorganic-based 
multilayer emitter for daytime radiative cooling," ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12(7), 8073–8081 (2020).

23. 
J. long Kou, Z. Jurado, Z. Chen, S. Fan, and A. J. Minnich, "Daytime radiative cooling using near-black infrared 
emitters," ACS Photonics 4(3), 626–630 (2017).

24. 
Y. Zhai, Y. Ma, S. N. David, D. Zhao, R. Lou, G. Tan, R. Yang, and X. Yin, "Scalable-manufactured randomized 
glass-polymer hybrid metamaterial for daytime radiative cooling," Science. 355(6329), 1062–1066 (2017).

25. 
J. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Wu, T. Zhang, H. Zeng, and X. Li, "Nanoporous silica microspheres-ploymethylpentene 
(TPX) hybrid films toward effective daytime radiative cooling," Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 206, 110301 
(2020).

26. 
J. Mandal, Y. Fu, A. C. Overvig, M. Jia, K. Sun, N. N. Shi, H. Zhou, X. Xiao, N. Yu, and Y. Yang, 
"Hierarchically porous polymer coatings for highly efficient passive daytime radiative cooling," Science. 
362(6412), 315–319 (2018).

27. 
J. Mandal, M. Jia, A. Overvig, Y. Fu, E. Che, N. Yu, and Y. Yang, "Porous polymers with switchable optical 
transmittance for optical and thermal regulation," Joule 3(12), 3088–3099 (2019).

28. 
W. Li, S. Buddhiraju, and S. Fan, "Thermodynamic limits for simultaneous energy harvesting from the hot sun 
and cold outer space," Light Sci. Appl. 9(1),68 (2020).

29. 
Z. Chen, L. Zhu, W. Li, and S. Fan, "Simultaneously and synergistically harvest energy from the sun and outer 
space," Joule 3(1), 101–110 (2019).

30. 
W. J. M. Kort-Kamp, S. Kramadhati, A. K. Azad, M. T. Reiten, and D. A. R. Dalvit, "Passive radiative 
“thermostat” enabled by phase-change photonic nanostructures," ACS Photonics 5(11), 4554–4560 (2018).

31. 
M. M. Qazilbash, M. Brehm, B. G. Chae, P. C. Ho, G. O. Andreev, B. J. Kim, S. J. Yun, A. V. Balatsky, M. B. 
Maple, F. Keilmann, H. T. Kim, and D. N. Basov, "Mott transition in VO2 revealed by infrared spectroscopy and 
nano-imaging," Science. 318(5857), 1750–1753 (2007).

32. 
S. R. Wu, K. L. Lai, and C. M. Wang, "Passive temperature control based on a phase change metasurface," Sci. 
Rep. 8(1),7684 (2018).

33. 
M. Ono, K. Chen, W. Li, and S. Fan, "Self-adaptive radiative cooling based on phase change materials," Opt.
Express 26(18), A777–A787 (2018).

34. 
W.-W. Zhang, H. Qi, A.T. Sun, Y.T. Ren, and J.-W. Shi, " Periodic trapezoidal VO2-Ge multilayer absorber for 
dynamic radiative cooling," Opt. Express 28(14), 20609–20623 (2020).

35. 
Y. Muraoka and Z. Hiroi, "Metal-insulator transition of VO2 thin films grown on TiO2 (001) and (110) 
substrates," Appl. Phys. Lett. 80(4), 583–585 (2002).

36. 
M. Liu, A. J. Sternbach, M. Wagner, T. V. Slusar, T. Kong, S. L. Bud’ko, S. Kittiwatanakul, M. M. Qazilbash, 
A. McLeod, Z. Fei, E. Abreu, J. Zhang, M. Goldflam, S. Dai, G. X. Ni, J. Lu, H. A. Bechtel, M. C. Martin, M. 
B. Raschke, R. D. Averitt, S. A. Wolf, H. T. Kim, P. C. Canfield, and D. N. Basov, "Phase transition in bulk 
single crystals and thin films of VO2 by nanoscale infrared spectroscopy and imaging," Phys. Rev. B - Condens. 
Matter Mater. Phys. 91(24), 245115 (2015).

37. 
L. L. Fan, S. Chen, Z. L. Luo, Q. H. Liu, Y. F. Wu, L. Song, D. X. Ji, P. Wang, W. S. Chu, C. Gao, C. W. Zou, 
and Z. Y. Wu, "Strain dynamics of ultrathin VO2 film grown on TiO2 (001) and the associated phase transition 
modulation," Nano Lett. 14(7), 4036–4043 (2014).

38. 
L. Long and H. Ye, "Dual-intelligent windows regulating both solar and long-wave radiations dynamically," Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 169, 145–150 (2017).

39. 
H. Kim, K. Cheung, R. C. Y. Auyeung, D. E. Wilson, K. M. Charipar, A. Piqué, and N. A. Charipar, "VO2-based 
switchable radiator for spacecraft thermal control," Sci. Rep. 9(1), 11329 (2019).

40.
Z. Xu, Q. Li, K. Du, S. Long, Y. Yang, X. Cao, H. Luo, H. Zhu, P. Ghosh, W. Shen, and M. Qiu, "Spatially 
resolved dynamically reconfigurable multilevel control of thermal emission," Laser Photonics Rev. 14(1), 
1900162 (2020).

41. 
R. Beaini, B. Baloukas, S. Loquai, J. E. Klemberg-Sapieha, and L. Martinu, "Thermochromic VO2-based smart 
radiator devices with ultralow refractive index cavities for increased performance," Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 
205, 110260 (2020).

42.
X. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, L. Yan, and Y. Li, "Fabrication of VO2-based multilayer structure with variable 
emittance," Appl. Surf. Sci. 344, 230–235 (2015).

43. 
M. A. Green, "Self-consistent optical parameters of intrinsic silicon at 300K including temperature coefficients," 
Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 92(11), 1305–1310 (2008).

44.
Spectral Sciences Incorporated, “MODTRAN®.” http://modtran.spectral.com/modtran_home (accessed Feb. 6, 
2021).


14

45.
S. Adachi and T. Taguchi, "Optical properties of ZnSe," Phys. Rev. B 43, 9569–9577 (1991).

46.
R. J. Bell, Optical Constants of Minerals and Other Materials from the Millimeter to the Ultraviolet (PN, 1988).

47. H. U. Yang, J. D'Archangel, M. L. Sundheimer, E. Tucker, G. D. Boreman, M. B. Raschke. Optical dielectric 

function of silver, Phys. Rev. B 91, 235137 (2015).

48. C. L. Zhou, L. Qu, Y. Zhang, and H. L. Yi, "Fabry-Perot cavity amplification of near-field thermal rectification," 

J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf. 251, 107023 (2020).

49.
Y. Ke, S. Wang, G. Liu, M. Li, T. J. White, and Y. Long, "Vanadium dioxide: the multistimuli responsive material 
and its applications," Small 14(39),1802025 (2018).

50. S. Y. Li, G. A. Niklasson, and C. G. Granqvist, "Nanothermochromics: Calculations for VO2 nanoparticles in 

dielectric hosts show much improved luminous transmittance and solar energy transmittance modulation," J. 
Appl. Phys. 108(6),063525 (2010).

51.
C. Sol, M. Portnoi, T. Li, K. L. Gurunatha, J. Schläfer, S. Guldin, I. P. Parkin, and I. Papakonstantinou, "High-
performance planar thin film thermochromic window via dynamic optical impedance matching," ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 12(7), 8140–8145 (2020).


