Engineered platforms for topological superconductivity and Majorana zero modes

Karsten Flensberg
Center for Quantum Devices, Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark

Felix von Oppen
Dahlem Center for Complex Quantum Systems and Fachbereich Physik, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Ady Stern
Department of Condensed Matter Physics, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel

Among the major approaches that are being pursued for realizing quantum bits, the Majorana-
based platform has been the most recent to be launched. It attempts to realize qubits which store
quantum information in a topologically-protected manner. The quantum information is protected
by its nonlocal storage in localized and well-separated Majorana zero modes, and manipulated
by exploiting their nonabelian quantum exchange properties.
Realizing these topological qubits
is experimentally challenging, requiring superconductivity, helical electrons (created by spin-orbit
coupling) and breaking of time reversal symmetry to all cooperate in an uncomfortable alliance.
Over the past decade, several candidate material systems for realizing Majorana-based topological
qubits have been explored, and there is accumulating, though still debated, evidence that zero
modes are indeed being realized. This paper reviews the basic physical principles on which these
approaches are based, the material systems that are being developed, and the current state of the
field. We highlight both the progress made and the challenges that still need to be overcome.

I.
INTRODUCTION

In the realm of condensed matter physics, Majorana
zero modes (MZMs) [1, 2] are supposed to be the cake
we can both eat and have. The cherries in the cake are
the qubits of quantum information that the MZMs are
supposed to host. Having the cake here means having
qubits that, due to their topological protection, are
not easily measured or disturbed by their environment.
These qubits are expected to enjoy very long coherence
times, growing exponentially with the distance between
the Majoranas and the inverse of the temperature. On
the other hand, eating the cake means interacting with
the qubits, manipulating and reading their states. This
is enabled by well-designed ways to measure and affect
the state of the qubits, ways that are accessible to us,
but not to a randomly fluctuating environment [3, 4].

The beauty of this vision is obvious to anyone who has
ever experienced the desire to eat a cake and have it,
too. This short review is aimed at giving the reader a
status report on the baking of this cake. We introduce
the general concepts underlying the field, survey several
material systems that are being experimentally studied,
discuss the difficulties in identifying the MZMs in these
experiments, and conclude with an outlook for the
future.
The research effort involved is rather broad
in scope, and is difficult to cover in a short review
paper.
Various aspects of the field have already been
described in several review papers [5–12]. The angle we
chose here is to cover broadly the experimental systems
that are being explored in attempts to discover zero-
dimensional localized Majorana zero modes (MZMs) in
engineered systems combining metals, semiconductors, or
superconductors. Among other things, our choice leaves

out theoretical models with no immediate candidates
for realization and candidate systems for realizing one-
dimensional Majorana modes.
The key concept behind the notion of Majorana
fermions, or MZMs, as they are more properly called in
the condensed matter context, is that of a topologically-
protected degeneracy of the ground state.
In a
system with 2N MZMs, the ground state is 2N-fold
degenerate. The MZMs are described by operators γi,
with i = 1, . . . , 2N, that take the system from one
ground state to another, at zero energy cost, hence the
name zero modes.
These operators are hermitian and
obey fermionic commutation rules, and hence the name
Majorana fermions (see Box 1 for more information).
The number of such modes must be even, and it is
this constraint that protects them.
If the MZMs are
localized and spatially distant from one another, a
local perturbation cannot shift any of them away from
zero energy.
As a consequence, both the ground-state
degeneracy and the state vector in this manifold are
protected against any local perturbation, or at least any
perturbation that does not add or remove single electrons
from the system.
Single-electron processes, however,
are exponentially suppressed due to the existence of an
energy gap.
For a fermionic operator to be hermitian, it must
be a superposition of a creation and an annihilation
operator, and such excitations occur primarily when
superconductors are involved. Thus, most realizations of
Majorana fermions involve a superconducting element in
the system. Conceptually the most straightforward of all,
the Kitaev chain, is a one-dimensional system of spinless
fermions which are made superconducting by a p–wave
order parameter.
In the topological phase, the chain
hosts one MZM at each of the two ends [1]. Similarly,

arXiv:2103.05548v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  9 Mar 2021


2

in a two-dimensional p–wave topological superconductor,
the core of a vortex hosts a MZM [13].
Unfortunately,
conceptual
simplicity
and
natural
abundance do not go hand in hand here, and p–wave
superconductors are, at best, rare.
Fortunately, their
topological properties can be realized based on more
conventional s–wave superconductors, if the latter are
combined with spin-orbit coupling and a magnetic field
(or another time-reversal-symmetry breaking agent).
Indeed,
most
candidate
systems
for
realizing
and
exploring MZMs involve these three ingredients - spin-
orbit coupling, magnetic field, and superconductivity.
Below,
we
survey
different
ways
in
which
these
ingredients are combined (Sec. II), before discussing the
extent to which MZM physics has already been realized
(Sec. III) and providing an outlook (Sec. IV).

II.
PLATFORMS AND OBSERVATIONS

A.
Topological insulators

Majorana
zero
modes
would
be
much
more
commonplace if only they were carried by the “usual
suspects” of superconductivity – s-wave superconductors
such as aluminum or niobium.
The reason this is
not the case is that a MZM is an isolated zero mode
which is localized far from any other zero mode.
For
s-wave superconductors, the symmetry of the pairing
makes
each
excitation
mode
doubly
degenerate,
a
degeneracy whose roots lie in the Fermi surface having
two degenerate copies, one for each spin state as dictated
by Kramers’ theorem.
With the existence of two Fermi surfaces being an
obstacle to realizing MZMs, there are two directions
to pursue for reducing that number - either looking
for systems which have only a single Fermi surface,
or starting with a system that has two surfaces and
finding a mechanism to gap one of them.
The first
direction was suggested by Fu and Kane [14, 15], building
on two observations.
First, the one-dimensional edge
state of a two-dimensional topological insulator has a
single Fermi surface, here in the form of a single pair
of Fermi points with opposite spin directions [16, 17].
And second, the two-dimensional surface of a three-
dimensional topological insulator hosts a single Dirac
cone, in which the spin direction is locked to the direction
of the momentum [18–21].
Both systems have only a
single Fermi surface, but still allow for efficient coupling
to an s-wave superconductor through the proximity effect
as electronic states of opposite momenta carry opposite
spins.
The one-dimensional edge state of a two-dimensional
topological insulator may be gapped in two ways.
A
gap may develop by spin-flip scattering between opposite
momenta, which is allowed only when time-reversal
symmetry is broken.
Alternatively, superconductivity
gaps
the
edge
of
the
two-dimensional
topological

insulator by forming a Cooper pair with the two electrons
being
from
the
two
counter-propagating
branches,
breaking charge conservation on the edge.
When
adjacent regions of the edge are gapped by these two
different mechanisms, the transition from one type of
gapping to the other requires a closure of the energy gap,
and the localized gapless mode at the interface is a MZM.

In the case of a three-dimensional topological insulator,
proximity
to
an
s-wave
superconductor
creates
a
superconductor of a single Fermi surface, but not yet
a MZM, for two reasons.
First, we need to find a
location for the MZM to localize. And second, we need
to break time reversal symmetry that enforces a twofold
Kramers degeneracy of the excitation modes. Both needs
are addressed by introducing vortices in the proximity-
coupled superconductor. Indeed, the core of each such
vortex carries a single MZM.

The observation of vortex-bound MZMs is complicated
by
the
existence
of
additional
(Caroli-Matricon-de
Gennes) states localized in the vortex cores. For weak-
coupling superconductors, with the energy gap ∆ much
smaller than the Fermi energy EF , the energy of these
additional intra-core states can be close to zero, with a
level spacing of ∆2/EF .
Thus, the spectral difference
between topological and trivial superconductors is that
the lowest state has zero energy for the former and an
energy of order ∆2/2EF for the latter. Since ∆2/2EF
is typically much smaller than attainable temperatures,
this difference is challenging to detect. Other differences
involve the shape and spin polarization of the wave
function of the intra-core states [22], their magnetic field
dependence, and the difference between MZMs carried
by vortices and anti-vortices [23].

Experimentally, a natural tool to observe a MZM in a
vortex core is a scanning tunneling microscope (STM).
However, if the MZM is buried at the interface between
a topological insulator and a superconductor, the STM
cannot approach it. An elegant solution to this inherent
problem may be provided by iron-based supercondutors,
in which several bands overlap in energy, with one band
being topological and insulating, hence carrying a surface
state, and the other bands forming a 3D superconductor
that proximity couples to the surface state. Experimental
studies of these surfaces have discovered states at the
cores of vortices [24], but their identification as MZMs is
still under debate.

Alternatively, MZMs can be created on a topological-
insulator surface along a one-dimensional domain wall
separating an island which is gapped, say, by an s-wave
superconductor from its surrounding, which is gapped by
a magnetic field (or the exchange field of a ferromagnet).
In this case, the MZM is a one-dimensional object and
part of a propagating chiral Majorana mode, whose
direction of propagation can be reversed by switching
the direction of the magnetization, or the roles of
superconductor and magnet [14].


3

B.
Engineered semiconductor-superconductor
platforms

Inspired by the Fu-Kane proposal to use topological
insulators
and
their
built-in
nontrivial
topological
structure, researchers realized that a similar situation
can be engineered by a combination of more conventional
materials with sufficiently strong spin-orbit coupling,
proper breaking of time-reversal symmetry and, as in
the Fu-Kane scheme, a strong interface to an ordinary s-
wave superconductor [25–31]. The time-reversal breaking
agent could be the exchange field of a ferromagnetic
insulator [25], layers of half-metals [29, 30], or simply
an externally applied magnetic field [27, 28].
Several
of
these
proposals
have
since
been
experimentally
realized
[32–37]
and
characterized
by
transport
measurements
using
nanofabricated
devices [32, 34, 35, 38–50].
Below, we review the
various platforms and discuss their advantages and
disadvantages.

1.
Semiconductor quantum wires

As mentioned in Sec. II A, creating MZMs requires a
single – or more generally an odd number of – Fermi
surfaces.
For a quasi-one-dimensional material, this
corresponds to an odd number of Fermi points with
positive momenta. This can, of course, be arranged by
applying a sufficiently strong magnetic field to a wire
and adjusting the chemical potential such that, say, only
the lowest spin-split energy band is occupied. However,
gapping such a spin-polarized system by superconducting
pairing would seem to require a triplet superconductor.
Extending ideas developed for two-dimensional systems
[14, 25, 26] (see also below), it was proposed by Lutchyn
et al.
[27] and Oreg et al.
[28] that the combination
of Rashba spin-orbit coupling and conventional s-wave
superconductivity removes the necessity for intrinsic
triplet pairing.
The Rashba spin-orbit coupling exposes the electron
spin to an effective Zeeman field whose direction is
perpendicular both to the electric field exerted on the
electron by the crystal and to the electron’s velocity.
This effective Zeeman field points in opposite directions
for electrons of opposite velocities, so that the spin-
orbit coupling twists the spin directions at the two Fermi
points in different directions. As a consequence, a pair
of electrons with opposite momenta now has both a
triplet and a singlet component, allowing them to be
proximitized by a conventional superconductor. When
the electron dispersion is approximated as parabolic, the
corresponding energy scale is parametrized as αkF , where
α encodes the magnitude of the electric field and kF is
proportional to the velocity.
For a strong magnetic field, B, and weak spin-orbit
coupling, αkF , this physical picture implies that the
proximity-induced gap in the nondegenerate band (i.e.,

the “topological gap”) is proportional to the product of
the gap ∆ind induced by the superconductor into the
semiconductor and the angle by which spin-orbit coupling
tilts the spins away from being parallel to one another,
αkF /gµBB.
(Here g is the semiconductor’s g-factor,
and µB is the Bohr magneton.)
It is this tilting that
enables proximity coupling between a semiconductor and
an s-wave superconductor, where Cooper pairs are spin
singlets.
The important material parameters are thus
the spin-orbit coupling and the g-factor. From the above
estimate, it would seem that the g-factor should be small
such that the gap becomes large, but this in fact is not
the case, because the Zeeman energy, 1

2gµBB, should also
be larger than the induced gap, for the system to enter
the topological phase.
In fact, the precise criterion is
1
2gµBB >
�

∆2
ind + µ2 [27, 28], where µ is the chemical
potential of the unsplit one-dimensional band, measured
with respect to the midpoint of the Zeeman-induced
gap.
From this expression, we see that the Zeeman
energy needs to be larger than the induced gap. At the
same time, the Zeeman energy should not suppress the
superconducting gap ∆S of the parent superconductor
too strongly, and one therefore also requires gSµBB <
∆S (with gS the g-factor of the superconductor). The
optimal parameter regime is thus large g/gS, large α,
and large ∆ind/∆S.

In the original theory papers [27, 28], it was suggested
that this rather precise set of requirements can be met
in InAs or InSb nanowires in proximity to a conventional
superconductor with not too small a pairing gap. Indeed,
the materials of choice of the first experiment [32] were
InSb nanowires and a NbTiN superconductor which
was evaporated to cover part of the wire.
Using
the sample shown in Fig. 1a, the experiment probed
the subgap spectrum at the end of the proximitized
nanowire by tunneling spectroscopy from a normal
metal (Au) lead (see Box 2 for further discussion of
spectroscopic signatures of MZMs).
The results were
exciting and promising because they were consistent with
an interpretation in terms of Majorana end states. These
observations included the appearance of a zero-bias peak
at a finite magnetic field, which disappeared again at
larger fields. This is consistent with the magnetic field
first driving the system from a trivial phase at low
fields to a topologically nontrivial phase at intermediate
fields and then inducing a reemergence of a trivial
phase at yet higher fields.
Moreover, theory predicts
a distinct dependence on the magnetic-field direction.
The optimal field orientation for inducing a topological
state is perpendicular to the spin-orbit field, so that
the latter maximally twists the electron spins.
Since
the spin-orbit field points perpendicular to both the
propagation direction of the electrons and the interface
between superconductor and semiconductor, the plane
of optimal magnetic-field orientations can be deduced
from the device layout. Mourik et al. [32] probed this
prediction by tilting the magnetic field out of this plane
and observed, consistent with the Majorana picture, that


4

the peak and the “topological gap” vanish when the field
aligns with the presumed direction of the spin-orbit field,
see Fig. 1b.
Encouraged by the initial experiments [32, 38–41],
other labs picked up the challenge of producing better
hybrid materials.
A major breakthrough came with
the invention of epitaxially grown hybrid semiconductor-
superconductor systems [33, 34, 48] in which some
facets of the semiconducting wires are covered by
a
superconducting
shell.
The
cleaner
and
more
homogenous interface was shown to be key to induce
a hard gap in the semiconductor. This type of devices
led to further studies of near zero-bias peaks, as well as
more detailed topological phase diagrams [35, 44, 46, 51].
According to theory, the two Majorana bound states
at the ends of the wire split away from zero energy,
when they overlap. As a consequence, one should also
observe two conductance peaks. Tunneling spectroscopy
with a quantum dot between the normal lead and the
topological superconductor provides a means to study
this splitting with improved sensitivity. Corresponding
experiments were reported in Ref. [44], later refined both
experimentally [51] and theoretically [52, 53].
A key prediction for the Majorana zero-bias peak
of a normal metal-topological superconductor junction
is that its height is quantized to a value of 2e2/h
[54–57].
This is, however, not what is observed in
experiments.
One complication is that a zero-bias
peak at the quantized value is only reached when
temperature is much lower than the broadening of the
Majorana resonance induced by the tunnel coupling
between topological superconductor and normal lead. At
the same time, the broadening should be much smaller
than the topological gap, typically leaving a rather
small window.
One study showed that by correlating
the tunnel coupling (as determined from the above-gap
conductance) and the width (as determined by fitting
to a thermally broadened Lorentzian-shaped Majorana
peak), one could obtain scaling behavior consistent with
a zero-temperature quantized conductance [47].
As a
word of caution, it should be noted that in certain cases,
a conductance quantized at 2e2/h can also result from
trivial states [58–60].
Tunneling spectroscopy as discussed so far can only
give indirect information about the nonlocal properties of
Majorana bound states. Other transport measurements
which provide somewhat complementary information
include Coulomb-blockade [43, 61, 62] or three-terminal
experiments [63].
Coulomb-blockade experiments [43]
using finite segments of superconducting islands found
a transition from 2e-periodic to 1e-periodic Coulomb-
blockade peaks, as expected from Majorana physics
[64, 65]. Moreover, for finite-length wires the coupling
between the Majoranas would predict an alternating
energy difference for even and odd island occupations.
This was indeed observed and the extracted splitting was
found to be consistent with the expected exponential
decay as a function of wire length.
More details on

Coulomb blockade signatures of MZMs are given in Box
2.
Proximitized nanowires are presumably the best-
studied Majorana-candidate system,
with numerous
detailed experiments – including tunneling spectroscopy,
Coulomb-blockade
measurements,
multi-terminal
transport, or Josephson junctions – probing various
aspects of the expected Majorana physics.
While
several observations are consistent with a Majorana
interpretation, it should be noted that the observed
signatures may also have alternative interpretations.
This is discussed further in Sec. III below.
One challenging aspect of the proximitized nanowires
discussed so far is that the magnetic field required to
enter the topological regime is frequently rather high.
This may induce states within the superconducting
gap and soften the gap considerably.
The required
spin splitting can alternatively be induced by proximity
to a ferromagnetic insulator, as was proposed in a
variety of contexts [14, 15, 25, 26]. It recently became
possible to grow the ferromagnetic insulator EuS on
InAs [66], producing nanowires with a hexagonal cross
section, of which three facets each are covered by the
superconductor and the ferromagnetic insulator [37, 50].
When one facet has overlapping covers, it appears that a
transition to a state with a zero-bias peak is induced [50].
The physics of this transition is not yet fully understood
and calls for further investigation.
a.
Full-shell
quantum
wires.
Wires
which
are
entirely surrounded by a layer of superconductor are
referred to as full-shell wires (Fig. 1c and e).
This
geometry clearly has a different symmetry from the
partially-covered wires. Instead of the Rashba spin-orbit
coupling creating an effective Zeeman field in a fixed
direction perpendicular to the wire, here the effective
Zeeman field must by symmetry point in the azimuthal
direction. Naively, one might therefore guess that its net
effect averages out.
Despite this intuition, an experimental group went
ahead
and
investigated
the
end-state
spectrum
of
corresponding nanowires by tunneling spectroscopy [49],
finding a zero-bias peak when the magnetic flux through
the wire causes the superconducting phase to wind
by 2π around the aluminum shell and thus creates
a fluxoid in the induced pairing (see Fig. 1d).
The
change in winding number, related to the Little-Parks
effect [67], was indeed key to understanding the possible
transition into a topologically nontrivial state. Although
the effective Zeeman field is azimuthal, it introduces
a handedness to the problem, when combined with
the phase winding of the superconducting phase: For
electrons moving in one direction, the spin-orbit field is
along the phase winding, whereas for electrons moving
in the opposite direction, the spin-orbit field winds
against the superconducting phase.
Based on this
observation, Ref. [49] developed a Majorana-based theory
and numerical modelling that agreed with the data to
some extent.
This interpretation was challenged by


5

(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(d)

FIG. 1.
Two realizations of engineered topological superconductors based on semiconducting nanowires proximitized by
conventional superconductors. The first experiment [32] from Delft is shown in panels (a) and (b). (a) shows the device layout
where a nanowire is contacted by a superconductor (labelled S) which is evaporated onto one side of the nanowire.
Also
shown are gates to control the density in the wire (labelled 1,2,3,4) and the tunnel barrier (green marker) to the normal probe
(labelled N). In (b), the differential conductance is shown for different angles of the applied magnetic field corresponding to
the colors in the panels below. Consistent with the expectation, the zero-bias peak is most prominent for B perpendicular to
the expected spin-orbit field BSO. The band-structure sketches to the right illustrate the difference between the two B-field
directions. Only for B ⊥ BSO does the system have a single Fermi point for positive wave numbers. An alternative approach
to induce a topological state is shown in panels (c)-(e). Here the wire is fully covered by the superconductor, see panel (c)
for a cross section and the device geometry. A topological state can be realized when the shell is pierced by more than half a
flux quantum such that the energy is minimized when the phase of superconducting order parameter in the shell has a winding
number n = 1. In this situation, a zero-bias peak is indeed observed, in agreement with a detailed theoretical calculation (panel
d). This is made possible by a spin-orbit field in the azimuthal direction which defines an angular direction (e) relative to the
phase winding and can thus cause the system to become helical. Panels reprinted from Refs.: (a) and (b) [32]; (c) and (d) [49].

a later experiment [68], that interpreted the zero-bias
peak as originating from Andreev states. Full-shell wires
enjoy the advantage that the magnetic field needed to
induce a phase winding is much smaller than the critical
Zeeman field of partially covered wires. A disadvantage
is that full-shell coverage makes it impossible to tune
the electron density by gating, eliminating an important
control for tuning the wire into the topological phase.

2.
Two-dimensional platforms.

The same technique that allows near-perfect epitaxial
growth of thin aluminum layers on GaAs or InAs
wires, can also be used to grow two-dimensional layers
of superconductor on a semiconductor heterostructure,
based for instance on InAs [69].
This allows for new
and interesting design possibilities of one-dimensional
topological superconductors.
The first One geometry,
referred to as S-stripes, is formed by removing the
superconducting cover everywhere except along a narrow
one-dimensional strip and depleting the exposed electron
gas by a negatively charged gate [70]. In this way, one
effectively creates a situation similar to the partially-
covered nanowires discussed earlier.
A second option,
referred to as N-stripes [70, 71] and depicted in Fig.
2a, has in some sense an inverted geometry.
The
superconductor is removed only along a narrow stripe,
leaving an exposed semiconductor not covered by the
superconductor.
This effectively realizes an “Andreev
quantum well” or a wide Josephson junction, which binds
one-dimensional electronic states within the energy gap
of the superconductor.
Both geometries were studied
theoretically as well as experimentally, as we review in

the following.
a.
One-dimensional
wires
in
a
two-dimensional
setting (S-stripes).
The S-stripe geometry showed zero-
bias peaks similar to what was seen in nanowires.
This was used to perform the above-mentioned study
of
the
temperature
dependence
of
the
peaks
for
various tunnel couplings [47], which suggests that the
conductance measurements are consistent with a zero-
bias conductance of 2e2/h at low temperatures.
The
new capability of designing more complicated networks
provided by the two-dimensional platform was exploited
to realize an interferometer with a Majorana wire
incorporated into one its arms [72].
b.
Planar
Josephson
junctions
(N-stripes).
The
quantum-wire realization of one-dimensional topological
superconductivity exploits the chemical potential, the
Zeeman field, and the superconducting pair potential
as tuning parameters.
Within this parameter space,
there are regions where the wires carry Majorana end
modes. In particular, the chemical potential needs to be
tuned to a region in which one pair of Fermi points is
gapped by the Zeeman field, while the other is gapped
by superconductivity.
Tuning the chemical potential
is experimentally challenging, given that the potential
exerted by metallic gates is heavily screened by the
superconductors in proximity to the wires.
The
Josephson
junction
geometry
(N-stripes)
considerably weakens the dependence of the phase
diagram on the chemical potential and also reduces
the magnetic field required for achieving topological
superconductivity [70, 71].
In this setup, depicted
in Fig. 2a, a 2DEG with strong spin-orbit coupling
replaces the quantum wire, while the superconductor
that couples to the wire is replaced by superconductors
on both sides of the junction.
The phase difference


6

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

FIG. 2. Realization of one-dimensional topological superconductivity in a superconductor-normal-superconductor Josephson
junction (N-stripe).
(a) The setup.
A superconductor-normal-superconductor Josephson junction, where the normal part
is subject to Rashba spin-orbit coupling, the two supeconductors are maintained at a phase difference φ, and the system is
exposed to a parallel magnetic field B∥ coupling to the electrons’ spins. (b) Phase diagram as a function of B∥ and φ. (c)
Differential conductance measured by tunneling from an external normal lead via the quantum point contact (QPC) shown in
(a). A zero-bias peak emerges when the phase difference is zero, and is absent when the phase difference is π. (d) The sign
of the second derivative of the differential conductance, indicating the presence of a zero-bias peak, as a function of B∥ and φ.
Panels reprinted from Refs.: (a) and (c) [73]; (b) [71]; (d) [74].

between these superconductors constitutes a useful
additional tuning parameter.
A Zeeman field pointing
parallel to the normal channel is required here, as
well.
The topological superconductivity is realized in
the quasi-one-dimensional channel between the two
superconductors, and transitions from topological to
trivial phases take place through a closure of the energy
gap within the channel.
In the ideal limit of semi-infinite superconducting
banks and spin-orbit coupling much stronger than the
Zeeman energy, the phase diagram depends primarily
on two parameters, the phase difference φ between the
two superconductors and EZW/vF , the Zeeman energy
multiplied by the time it takes an electron to cross the
junction of width W. (Here, vF is the Fermi velocity).
The phase diagram is shown in Fig. 2b, and shows
topological superconductivity in half of the parameter
plane. In particular, when φ = π, an arbitrarily weak
Zeeman energy is in principle sufficient to drive a clean
Josephson junction into the topological phase [70, 71].
Although the topological superconductivity realized
in this system is one dimensional, the system itself is
two dimensional, since the normal part may in principle
host many subbands. Semiclassically, then, the electron
motion has components both along and across the
junction and the magnitude of the velocity is equal
to the Fermi velocity.
Every reflection from one of
the superconductors involves an amplitude for Andreev
reflection, converting an electron to a hole or vice versa,
as well as an amplitude for a normal reflection, in which
the reflected particle is not converted.
In the ideal
limit as defined above, the Andreev amplitude dominates.
Away from the ideal limit,
the phase dependence
weakens, the dependence on chemical potential sharpens,
and the junction becomes more similar to the quantum-
wire case [75].
For an infinitely long junction, the spectrum of in-gap
excitations associated with the normal channel may be

characterized by the wavevector kx along the channel.
The topological phase diagram can be deduced from the
properties of the junction at kx = 0, which corresponds
semiclassically to electrons and holes propagating across
the junction.
The energy gap, in contrast, is smallest
for electrons that move primarily along the channel,
since they are least affected by the superconducting
banks.
Realizing and probing a topological phase in
experiment frequently depends on a sufficiently large
energy gap. Here, enhancing the gap requires means to
limit trajectories that move long distances parallel to the
superconducting banks.
A simple and straight-forward way to limit such a
trajectory is to design the normal part of the junction
in a zig-zag shape, forcing the semiclassical trajectories
to undergo Andreev reflections whenever the zig-zag
changes direction [76]. This approach comes at a price,
however.
In a zig-zag geometry, a uniform magnetic
field inevitably has a component perpendicular to the
local direction of the channel.
This tends to suppress
the energy gap, and the details of the zig-zag pattern
need to be optimized to maximize the gap. A possible
approach to this optimization replaces the Zeeman field
by an applied supercurrent along the junction [77].
Long parallel trajectories are also naturally limited by
disorder in the channel. Indeed, when the effect of weak
disorder is analyzed perturbatively, it is found to enhance
the localization of the MZMs close to the junction ends
[78].
This setup has been examined experimentally by
several groups, using different material systems. In one
experiment [74], see Fig. 2d, the 2DEG was based on
a HgTe quantum well, coupled to superconducting Al
leads.
In two experiments [73, 79], see Fig. 2c, the
2DEG was formed in an InAs heterostructure, with the
superconductivity again provided by aluminum. And a
fourth experiment used an InSb-based 2DEG and NbN3
as the superconductor [80].
Two of these experiments


7

[73, 74] measured the tunneling density of states of the
junction near its ends, where MZMs are expected to
appear in the topological phase, and observed zero-bias
peaks for parameter values, which are consistent with the
expected phase diagram.

C.
Chains of magnetic adatoms

A paradigmatic model for one-dimensional topological
superconductors is provided by the Kitaev chain with
nearest-neighbor hopping and pairing between adjacent
single-orbital sites [1]. A rather faithful realization of this
model can be imagined in chains of magnetic adatoms
on conventional superconducting substrates [84, 85], see
Fig. 3a. An individual magnetic adatom induces a pair
of spin-polarized subgap states [86–88] in the substrate
superconductor.
These states are referred to as Yu-
Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states.
When adatoms are in
sufficiently close proximity, their YSR states hybridize
with one another.
In a chain of such YSR states,
hopping between neighboring sites broadens the particle-
hole symmetric pair of YSR states into bands. Once the
bands formed by the negative and positive-energy YSR
states overlap at the center of the gap, p-wave pairing
correlations can reopen a gap and turn the adatom chain
into a one-dimensional topological superconductor with
Majorana end states.
The mechanism of inducing p-wave pairing depends
on
the
magnetic
ordering
of
the
adatoms.
The
YSR states are spin polarized,
so that the spin-
singlet Cooper pairs of s-wave superconductors cannot
proximity couple to a strictly ferromagnetic chain.
Proximity coupling becomes possible in the presence
of spin-orbit coupling, for instance in the substrate
superconductor. Alternatively, p-wave superconducting
correlations can be induced when the adatoms form a
helical magnetic state in which the spin polarization of
the YSR states rotates along the chain, thus creating an
alternative coupling between spin and orbital degrees of
freedom [89, 90].
Several works suggested that a topological phase can
form in a self-organized fashion without a need for
tuning the chemical potential [91–94].
Coupling a
one-dimensional electronic system to magnetic moments
induces a tendency to form a spiral spin structure as a
result of the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY)
interaction.
Due to its wavevector of 2kF which is
inherently tied to the Fermi wavevector kF
of the
electronic channel, the spin spiral opens a partial gap
at the Fermi level. In conjunction with superconducting
correlations, this leads to a topological superconducting
phase without tuning of the chemical potential.
A
realization
of
these
dilute-chain
scenarios
for
topological superconductivity remains an outstanding
experimental
challenge.
Existing
experiments
on
topological superconductivity with magnetic adatoms
are presumably based on chains in which the adatoms

themselves are strongly coupled.
Direct hybridization
of the adatom d orbitals causes the formation of spin-
split bands [95]. With the same ingredients as for dilute
chains, the substrate superconductor can then induce
p-wave correlations in those bands that cross its Fermi
energy. Topological superconductivity ensues for an odd
number of partially filled bands.
First experimental evidence for MZMs in chains of
magnetic adatoms was found by Nadj-Perge et al.
[81] using a self-organized chain of Fe adatoms on a
superconducting Pb substrate.
Probing the chains by
scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) using a normal-
metal STM tip revealed zero-bias peaks localized at the
end of the chain, but no such peaks elsewhere along
the chain (see Fig. 3b and c for low-temperature data).
Measurements with a spin-polarized tip suggest that the
adatoms order ferromagnetically. Surprisingly, the end
states were strongly localized, on a scale much shorter
than a naive estimate of the coherence length of the
induced superconductivity.
This has been interpreted
as a result of renormalizations resulting from the strong
coupling of the adatom d orbitals to the substrate
superconductor [96], which can also be understood from
a semiclassical perspective [97].
Measurements with superconducting tips can improve
resolution owing to the suppression of thermal excitations
by the superconducting gap and the sharp coherence
peak in the superconducting density of states.
With
superconducting tips, MZMs no longer appear as zero-
bias peaks.
Since the tunneling process leaves an
unpaired electron behind in the tip, they rather appear
at a bias voltage given by the superconducting gap of the
tip (see also Box 2). The particle-hole symmetry of the
MZMs implies that there must be symmetric peaks at
positive and negative bias voltages [98].
Experimental
results probing this symmetry are promising, but not
yet fully conclusive [82, 98].
With superconducting
tips, identification of zero-energy states generally requires
accurate knowledge of the tip gap. The energy of subgap
states can, however, be measured directly as a line
splitting in photon-assisted tunneling experiments [99].
Additional
experiments
with
Fe
chains
on
Pb
substrates have probed the zero-energy end states by
spin-polarized tips [100, 101] or atomic force microscopy
[102]. Experiments using Co chains on a Pb substrate
did not exhibit signatures of MZMs [83],
see Fig.

3d.
As Co has an additional d electron compared
to Fe, this has been interpreted as reflecting an even
number of occupied d bands.
Possible evidence for
topological superconductivity and MZMs has, however,
been observed in two-dimensional islands of Co on Si,
covered by a monolayer of Pb [103, 104].
Pb
substrates
are
not
suitable
for
controllably
manipulating the adatom positions by an STM tip.
Atom-by-atom construction of chains of Fe adatoms by
means of the STM tip was possible on Re [105] and Ta
surfaces [106].
STS measurements on the Re system
reveal zero-bias features (but no peaks) at both ends of


8

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

FIG. 3.
Topological superconductivity and Majorana zero modes in chains of magnetic adatoms on superconductors. (a)
Schematic rendering of a chain of magnetic adatoms on a superconductor, probed by an STM. (b) High-resolution dI/dV
(color scale) spectroscopy along a chain of Fe adatoms on a Pb(110) substrate, using a normal-state STM tip, showing a
zero-bias peak localized within 1nm of the end of the wire (indicated by dashed white line). (c) Representative line cuts show
a pronounced zero-bias peak at the end of the wire, but no such peak away from the end. (d) Corresponding data on a Co
chain, showing no signatures of Majorana zero modes (now expected at voltages equal to the tip gap, eV = ±∆tip due the use
of a superconducting tip for improved resolution. Panels reprinted from Refs.: (a) [81]; (b) and (c) [82]; (d) [83].

the wire which are interpreted as evidence for MZMs in
Ref. [105]. Compared to Pb, Rhenium has a considerably
smaller superconducting gap.
Measurements with a
magnetic tip suggest that the Fe adatoms on Re order
into a spin spiral, presumably as a result of the strong
Dzyaloshinsky-Moriya interactions on a 5d transition
metal substrate.
Magnetic adatoms on conventional superconductors
have
specific
advantages
for
studying
topological
superconductivity.
STM provides spatial information
on MZMs and adatom structures can be constructed by
tip manipulation on appropriate substrates. The latter
might ultimately allow one to track the emergence of
MZMs as the chain is built up adatom by adatom, or
enable the implementation of more involved structures
[107]. At the same time, the larger energy scales, while
stabilizing the topological phase, make it challenging to
manipulate the MZMs, in particular for strongly coupled
adatoms.

D.
Metallic surface states with strong spin-orbit
coupling

The
spin-orbit
coupling
that
is
found
in
semiconductors is weaker than the record couplings
found in metallic systems.
In particular, Au has a
strongly Rashba split surface state.
This makes it
an attractive system in the context of the search for
topological superconductivity and MZMs [31], albeit
with the difficulty of a high electron density that
makes confinement to quantum wires challenging.
In
a recent experiment, gold wires were grown on top of
a superconducting Vanadium substrate and covered
by islands of EuS, a ferromagnetic insulator [108].
It
was found that the coupling to EuS drastically reduces
the Fermi energy in the Au wires and consequently
the number of transverse channels.
Zero-bias peaks
observed by STS at the edges of EuS islands covering
the Au nanowires when applying a magnetic field were

interpreted as (strongly localized) MZMs.

III.
PROVING AND DISPROVING MAJORANA
PHENOMENOLOGY

The study of Majorana zero modes in condensed
matter systems is strongly motivated by the prospect of
topologically protected operations on Majorana qubits
and the search for Majorana bound states has indeed
stimulated enormous progress in the material science and
device fabrication of hybrid systems. A significant body
of transport experiments has provided data which are
consistent with an interpretation in terms of Majorana
bound states. But despite this success, the community
remains unable to conclude whether single localized
Majorana bound states have been observed.
The difficulty of demonstrating the existence of MZMs
is inherent in two of their defining properties.
First,
MZMs are largely robust against many interactions with
their environment. Given that experiments typically rely
on the response of the measured system to perturbations
introduced by the experimental apparatus, this is a
difficulty.
As described above, several properties of
MZMs allow one to circumvent this challenge, most
notably the tunneling conductance at zero bias. Second,
identifying features of a MZM should be insensitive
to variations of parameters.
This is a difficulty as
it forces one to look for negative results.
Clearly,
there are numerous parameters that would not affect
a zero-bias peak in the conductance, but for most this
is just reflecting a lack of coupling to the measured
system. This difficulty can be handled by studying how
parameters cease to affect one-dimensional topological
superconductors as they become longer and the MZMs
tend to decouple.
In addition to these two inherent difficulties, there
is another challenge that obstructs the identification of
MZMs in several of the experimental systems, namely,
the possible existence of multiple almost-zero-energy end


9

states which exist in parallel with (or instead of) the
MZMs.
These may have topological or nontopological
origins.
In particular, under certain conditions, both
multi-subband wires and planar Josephson junctions
approximately obey a composite anti-unitary symmetry
that places them in symmetry class BDI. In contrast
to the binary Z2 classification of class D, which allows
for only one Majorana mode at each end, class BDI is
characterized by a topological Z index which counts the
number of Majorana zero modes at the system’s ends and
can take on any integer value (see Box 1).
The simplest example of this difference is furnished by
wires with several subbands at the Fermi energy [109–
111]. When superconductivity is sufficiently weak, only
electrons with opposite momenta in the same subband
are paired.
Each subband may be regarded as a
separate single-subband wire realizing either a trivial or a
topological superconductor. The number of MZMs at the
ends is then equal to the number of topological subbands.
A variation of the electrostatic potential towards the
wire’s end may induce individual subbands to become
trivial close to the wire’s end. This pushes the MZMs
of those subbands into the wire’s bulk, thus changing
the number of modes that are coupled to the leads.
Moreover, the additional symmetry that protects the
MZMs at the ends from hybridization is nonlocal and as
such easily broken, e.g., by disorder or the confinement
potential close to the system’s ends.
Then, MZMs
on each end may hybridize and split, possibly leaving
different numbers of unsplit modes on the two ends. In
the simplest example, two modes may be left unsplit on
one end, appearing as a zero-energy Andreev state [112–
114], with no modes on the other end. In the presence
of such a zero-energy Andreev state, the system has the
same degeneracy of the ground state as a “proper” one-
dimensional topological superconductor, but the state is
not protected, and may shift away from zero energy under
the effect of a perturbation. Furthermore, such a state
would behave differently from topologically defined MZM
when attempting to braid.
In principle, the experimental tools we described so far
should be able to distinguish between a one-dimensional
topological superconductor with a single MZM on each
end and a system with a different distribution of
MZMs. In practice, this is a difficult task. Tunneling
measurements, regardless of whether they are based on a
scanning tunneling microscope or static tunnel contacts,
measure tunneling peaks at zero voltage bias when they
couple to MZMs.
But they do not easily discern the
number of MZMs. In the right range of temperatures,
the height of the zero-bias peak caused by a single
MZM is universal while the height of a a similar peak
caused by several overlapping MZMs is nonuniversal.
However, there may be other reasons for not observing
the universal value. Coulomb-blockade experiments, in
principle, probe whether the ground state is degenerate
due to the presence of MZMs. However, they do that
only if the MZMs couple to the outside world and,

moreover, the experiments cannot easily discern between
different possible numbers of degenerate ground states.
Experiments probing the system by electromagnetic
waves, measuring for example absorption or reflection,
couple only to excitations that conserve the number
of electrons and therefore do not probe ground state
degeneracies.
Photon-assisted tunneling in transport
experiments are different and provide additional energy
resolution [99, 115], but do not give fundamentally
different information from dc transport experiments.
Indeed, features which have been taken as evidence of
Majorana physics in transport experiment have also been
explained in terms of model systems with an even number
of spatially-overlapping Majorana bound, or so-called
Andreev states [75, 109–112, 116–121] (for a recent review
on transport spectroscopy of Andreev and Majorana
states, see Ref. [12]).
Transport experiments which
discern the multiple-Majorana from the true single-
Majorana scenario by probing the coherence of the
nonlocal fermion made out of two MBS [64, 122, 123]
have been proposed, with some experimental progress in
this direction [72].
With these difficulties in mind, it is plausible to expect
that transport experiments of the types that have been
performed so far will confirm the existence of MZMs only
with an ever growing level of confidence. An improved set
of transport experiments to accumulate evidence for the
existence of a single pair of MZMs in a one-dimensional
topological superconductor could combine measuring the
tunneling density of states on both ends simultaneously
with a measurement of the bulk energy gap, in such a
way that the trivial phase, the topological phase, and
the gapless transition points between them can all be
identified and shown to be insensitive to gap-preserving
variations of relevant parameters such as magnetic field
or chemical potential (see [124] for an initial attempt in
this direction).
A more refined level of confidence will, however, most
likely require new types of experiments that address
the nonlocal and nonabelian properties of Majorana
states (see Box 3 for an introduction to the nonabelian
properties).
An important class of experiments would
probe the low-energy subspace of many-body states
that is spanned by the MZMs.
At fixed fermion
parity and in the absence of above-gap Bogoliubov
quasiparticles, a system with four MZMs spans a two-
dimensional subspace and can be regarded as realizing
a single qubit.
Multiple qubit degrees of freedom
can be realized in systems containing more than four
MZMs [4, 11].
Variations of the fermion parity can
be suppressed when placing the MZMs on Coulomb-
blockaded islands.
This has been demonstrated for
semiconductor quantum wires, including the S-stripe
geometry based on two-dimensional heterostructures, but
is clearly less natural in other Majorana platforms. At
sufficiently low temperatures, above-gap quasiparticles
are suppressed by virtue of the superconducting gap.
In practice, fermion parity will only be preserved for a


10

finite duration and it would be important to measure
the lifetime of a fixed parity state. Initial experiments
of parity lifetimes, though not in the topological regime,
have been performed and give encouraging results [42,
61]. Within the fermion parity lifetime, the qubit degrees
of freedom can be described in terms of Pauli operators
composed of products of two MZMs each.
Coupling
judiciously to these two MZMs, one can in principle read
out these Pauli operators. Various readout schemes have
been discussed in the literature [125–131], all utilizing
that when splitting the ground state degeneracy by
coupling two (or more) MZMs, the parity can be read
out by charge, energy, or spin measurements.
This readout capability would open the door to
probing the dynamics of the system within the qubit
subspace.
In an ideal topological qubit, the overlap
of the MZMs is negligible and all qubit states have
the same energy.
Experiments can then probe the
(anti)commutation relations between the Pauli operators
of a qubit.
Consecutive projective measurements of
the qubit Pauli operators give characteristic results,
as
familiar
from
Stern-Gerlach
experiments,
and
would
provide
strong
evidence
for
the
realization
of
MZMs.
Alternatively,
transport
measurements
probing interference can implement simultaneous weak
measurements of two distinct Pauli operators and reveal
signatures of their noncommutativity [132]. Hybridizing
the MZMs introduces additional (unitary) dynamics
within the qubit subspace.
Controlling the coupling
between the MZMs, e.g., via an intermediate quantum
dot, can thus be used to implement standard experiments
probing
the
quantum
dynamics
of
qubits.
The
noise-induced dephasing of this quantum dynamics of
Majorana qubits may also be a sensitive probe of their
nonlocal nature and help distinguish truly isolated MZMs
from situations which are akin to Andreev bound states
with near-zero energy [133].
It is important to stress that the above-mentioned
experiments relying on the degenerate subspace spanned
by MZMs critically depend on the topological state
having a sufficiently hard gap. Otherwise, the quantum
state stored in the parity degree of freedom will
be corrupted by quasiparticle exchanges with non-
Majorana subgap states, resulting in a very short parity
lifetime.
It is presently unclear whether a sufficiently
hard gap can be realized in any of the engineered
topological superconductors.
A fundamental obstacle
might be the absence of Anderson’s theorem for p-
wave superconductors.
Thus,
imperfections in the
crystal structure or inhomogeneous electric or pairing
potentials will in general induce subgap states.
With
an almost continuum of trivial (Andreev) subgap states,
the parity degree of freedom associated with the MBSs
effectively spreads out. Topological protection may still
be maintained if the subgap states are localized by
disorder, and the separation of the MZMs is larger than
the localization length of the in-gap states [134], but this
condition makes it increasingly difficult to control and

read out the Majorana joint parities [135–137]. Judging
from the currently available experimental data, the gap
is unfortunately rather soft on the topological side of the
transition, constituting a major challenge for probing the
nonlocal and nonabelian properties of Majorana states.

IV.
OUTLOOK

Once it is experimentally verified that a set of MZMs
spans a degenerate subspace of ground states with a
sufficiently long parity lifetime, braiding experiments
probing the nonabelian properties of MZMs come within
reach.
There are various proposals for experimental
setups that could probe and exploit braiding of MZMs.
A full account of these ideas is beyond the scope of this
review (see Refs. [138] and [7] for reviews which discuss
this in more detail).
Braiding can be implemented in
a variety of ways (see also Box 3).
The most direct
implementation relies on actually braiding Majorana
states in real space [139].
Alternatively, braiding can
be performed in parameter space, using couplings to
auxiliary Majoranas, either by controlling the couplings
directly [140] or by using Coulomb blockade to mediate
interactions [125, 126].
Finally, measurement-based
protocols [141] can effectively emulate braiding processes
of Majorana states [127, 128].
MZMs
spanning
a
degenerate
subspace
are
also
a
prerequisite
for
quantum-computing
applications
of MZMs.
There have been numerous proposals
for implementing quantum information storage and
quantum information processing using Majorana-based
qubits [3, 4, 11, 125, 127, 128, 131, 141–146].
While
MZM-based schemes do not allow for universal quantum
computation in a fully topologically protected manner,
quantum information storage and some (braiding-based)
quantum gate operations can be topologically protected
(see Box 3).
The remaining gate operations required
for universal quantum computation can in principle be
implemented with high levels of accuracy [128, 142, 146–
149]. However, these schemes tend to involve projective
measurements of Majorana qubit operators, emphasizing
again the importance of implementing and understanding
readout schemes for Majorana qubits. It is interesting
to note that Majorana-based qubits have other unique
features which may be useful for quantum information
processing. In particular, the qubits can be read out in
the Pauli bases to exponential precision in the distance
of the MZMs.
This is a consequence of the fact that
the qubit’s three Pauli matrices are composed of distinct
products of two MZMs.
Moreover, in some qubit
implementations, readout is equally easy in the three
Pauli bases and can be easily switched between them.
This potentially allows for a significant reduction in the
number of hardware-based gate operations by virtue of
the Gottesman-Knill theorem [146].
The nonabelian nature of MZMs in conjunction with
Coulomb charging effects provide a starting point for


11

numerous intriguing constructions (see also [11] for a
review).
In the context of quantum computation, one
can imagine to use networks of MZMs to implement
topological error correcting codes, including the toric
or surface code [146, 150–152] as well as color codes
[145].
While it is hoped that MZM-based hardware
is intrinsically error resilient, the corresponding qubit
lifetimes will still be finite. It may then be attractive to
combine MZM-based hardware with topological quantum
error correction.
The error resilience of MZM-based
qubits would hopefully make it sufficient to work with
small logical qubits, thus limiting the required hardware
overhead. Very similar constructions based on Majorana
networks can be used to implement various intriguing
topological or strongly interacting models such as the
Kitaev spin models [153–155], Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev models
[156, 157], or realizations of supersymmetric models
[158]. Coupling the spin-like parity degrees of freedom
to electronic leads is also associated with remarkable
Kondo physics [159, 160], which may be experimentally
much easier to realize and constitutes an interesting
test of Majorana physics. All of these exotic ideas rely
on the phenomenology of nonlocal quantum information
expected for Majorana states.
Engineering systems
with topologically protected ground-state degeneracies
(or ruling out that it can be done) would thus have a
substantial impact on future studies of these intriguing
systems.
Readers
who
hope
that
this
paper
ends
with
the authors’ bet for the date by which nonabelian
physics will be harnessed for processing topologically
protected
quantum
information
are
heading
for
a
disappointment, we are afraid.
In our opinion, it
does seem that the observed MZM signatures in the
systems that we reviewed are caused by the relevant
physics, i.e., roughly the right combination of spin-orbit
interactions, superconductivity, and breaking of time-
reversal symmetry.
However, it could be that there
still need to be critical developments in the material
and device-fabrication technology to reach a point where
the nonabelian nature of the MZMs will dominate the
physical properties of the systems, and will survive the
detrimental effects of in-gap states and unwanted almost-
zero modes.

V.
BOX 1: TOPOLOGICAL
SUPERCONDUCTIVITY AND MAJORANA
ZERO MODES

Topological phases of fermionic systems with a bulk
gap are frequently characterized by gapless boundary
modes.
Historically, the first example of this bulk-
boundary correspondence were the chiral edge modes of
the integer quantum Hall states, later complemented by
the helical edge modes of the quantum spin Hall state and
many more.
Topological superconductors also support
gapless edge states, which are Majorana modes as a result

of particle-hole symmetry. In one-dimensional systems,
these edge modes are MZMs localized at the ends of
the wire or at domain walls between the topological
superconductor and a gapped nontopological phase.
In
superconductors,
fermionic
quasiparticles
are
superpositions of electrons and holes.
Their effective
lack of charge conservation is made possible by the
superconducting condensate of Cooper pairs with charge
2e. The creation operator of a quasiparticle of energy E
has the form

γE =
�
dx
�
fE,h,↑(x)Ψ↑(x) + fE,h,↓(x)Ψ↓(x)

+f ∗
E,e,↑(x)Ψ†
↑(x) + f ∗
E,e,↓(x)Ψ†
↓(x)
�
,
(1)

where Ψ†
σ(x) is the electron creation operator that creates
an electron with spin σ at position x, and the subscripts
h, e stand for holes and electrons.
The particle-hole
symmetry inherent to superconductors implies that each
quasiparticle described by Eq. (1) has a partner of energy
−E for which electron and hole amplitudes are exchanged
and complex conjugated:

f−E,h,σ = f ∗
E,e,σ
(2)

f−E,e,σ = f ∗
E,h,σ
(3)

A localized zero energy mode (E = 0) therefore satisfies
fe,σ = f ∗
h,σ for both spin components.
Thus, for a
MZM the amplitudes of electrons and holes have the
same absolute values. Any deviation from E = 0 tips
the balance towards one sign of charge.
Furthermore, Eq. (3) implies that for a MZM, the
quasiparticle is self-adjoint, γE=0 = γ†
E=0.
Therefore,
γ2
E=0 does not vanish, there is no Pauli principle, and
no notion of a single Majorana zero mode being full
or empty. This familiar fermionic intuition comes back
when considering two Majorana zero modes, γ1 and
γ2. These can be combined into an ordinary (complex)
fermion mode d =
1
2(γ1 + iγ2), which can be empty
or occupied, respecting the Pauli principle.
As the
Majoranas making up this complex fermion are gapless,
the energy of the system does not depend on the
occupation d†d.
Consequently, each pair of Majorana
zero modes implies a twofold degeneracy of the ground
state of the topological superconductor. As mentioned,
the existence of Majorana zero modes is protected and
therefore this degeneracy is also topologically protected
and exact, up to corrections arising from the spatial
overlap between the MZMs. In schemes for a Majorana-
based topological quantum computer, the manifold of
degenerate ground states is exploited to host the qubits.
We can now understand the resilience of the system’s
ground states to local noise:
A local (for example
electrical) disturbance couples to the local charge in the
superconductor: ρ(x) = Ψ†
↑(x)Ψ↑(x) + Ψ†
↓(x)Ψ↓(x). If
the extent of the disturbance is smaller than the distance
between the Majorana end modes, there is no way that
it can involve both γ1 and γ2. The quantum information
stored in the d fermion degree of freedom is hence immune


12

to (local) noise, at least up to corrections controlled by
the overlap of the localized MZMs.
Their localization
length, ξ = ℏvF /∆, is determined by the bulk gap, ∆,
of the topological superconductor and the Fermi velocity,
vF . Thus, in principle the overlap between MZMs can be
made exponentially small when their separation is large
compared to the coherence length ξ.
A systematic approach shows that there are different
topological superconducting phases, depending on the
symmetries of the system [161].
The generic case
(referred to as class D) has only particle-hole symmetry.
It has a single MZM localized at each end of the one-
dimensional system in its topological phase.
In the
presence of further symmetries, there may be more than
one MZM at each end of a one-dimensional system,
even when they spatially overlap. Some one-dimensional
models exhibit a chiral symmetry (class BDI) and have
arbitrary numbers of MZMs localized at their ends.
Time-reversal-invariant topological superconductors are
characterized in 1D by a Z2 index reflecting the presence
or absence of a Kramers pair of MZMs at each end.
Generally, a multitude of MZMs at each end is an
obstacle for quantum information processing, since the
symmetry that protects the degeneracy of the MZMs
when they are static does not protect their decoupling
when they are braided [162].

VI.
BOX 2: SPECTROSCOPY OF MAJORANA
ZERO MODES

Experiments recording current-voltage characteristics
frequently probe the existence of subgap states at zero
or near-zero energy. When tunneling into a topological
superconducting wire through a tunnel barrier from a
normal-state electrode, the zero-energy end state will
lead to a zero-bias peak in the differential conductance.
At subgap voltages,
tunneling occurs via resonant
Andreev reflection with an electron tunneling, say, into
the wire and a hole tunneling out into the lead, see Fig.
4(a). Both electron and hole have tunneling amplitudes
of equal magnitudes as a consequence of particle-hole
symmetry. This implies that at zero temperature, the
zero-bias peak is quantized to 2e2/h [54–56] and has
a width given by the coupling strength between the
Majorana bound state and the lead.
As temperature
becomes larger than the zero-temperature width, the
peak reduces in height and broadens.
Majorana zero modes have also been probed with
superconducting leads, especially in the context of STM
experiments [81, 82, 98].
The superconducting gap
∆ suppresses thermal excitations in the lead and the
sharp BCS singularity in the density of states provides
improved resolution. The basic tunneling process is the
same as for normal-metal leads, except that electron
and hole in the lead now require a minimal excitation
energy of ∆, see Fig. 4(b). As a result, the Majorana
peak will appear at bias voltages of eV = ±∆.
The

peak height is no longer quantized but depends on the
superconducting density of states of the lead (STM tip).
For a conventional BCS density of states, one finds a
value of (4 − π)2e2/h. Moreover, particle-hole symmetry
implies that the peaks at positive and negative bias
voltages are symmetric [96].
When a semiconducting quantum wire is proximity-
coupled to a superconductor which is sufficiently small
and is only weakly connected to the outside world, the
hybrid semiconductor-superconductor wire has a finite
charging energy EC.
When changing a gate voltage
applied to a wire in a nontopological superconducting
state, electrons are added in pairs (2e processes) when
∆ > EC and individually (1e processes) when EC > ∆.
In the latter case, the gate voltage spacing between
consecutive additions of electrons exhibits an even-odd
alternation, reflecting the fact that an odd electron
remains unpaired and requires an additional energy cost
of ∆, see Fig. 4(c). For a topological superconducting
wire,
this
extra energy
cost does
not exist
since
the odd electron can occupy the zero-energy fermion
associated with the Majorana end states [Fig. 4(d)].
Experimentally, this phenomenon is reflected in the gate-
voltage spacing between Coulomb blockade peaks, and
one observes characteristic changes in these spacings
when driving a hybrid semiconductor-superconductor
wire from the trivial into the topological phase by an
applied magnetic field [43].
Coupling two superconductors by a tunnel junction or
a normal-metal region leads to the Josephson effects.
When
coupling
two
conventional
superconductors,
Cooper pairs moving between the superconductors lead
to a Josephson current which is periodic in the phase
difference φ of the two superconducors with period
2π.
When coupling two topological superconducting
wires, the pair of MZMs hybridize across the junction,
allowing for the coherent exchange of single electrons
which manifests itself in a 4π-periodic Josephson effect
[15, 27, 28].
Due to hybridization of the MZMs, the
ground-state energy varies as ±EM cos(φ/2). The sign
depends on the fermion parity of the junction, so that
the 4π-periodic Josephson effect can only be observed
in the absence of quasiparticle poisoning processes, such
that the parity does not fluctuate.
While this may
be hard to satisfy in dc experiments, signatures of
topological superconductivity may persist in the presence
of quasiparticle poisoning when measuring on sufficiently
short time scales, for instance by measuring Shapiro steps
[164–167], noise correlations [167], or Josephson radiation
[168].
The topological nature of Josephson junctions can
also be revealed by spectroscopically probing the subgap
states localized at the junction. While tunneling changes
the fermion number parity, microwave experiments give
access to excitations at fixed fermion parity.
Thus,
at zero temperature, absorption of a microwave photon
must be associated with the creation of two quasiparticles
[163, 169–172].
In the absence of subgap states, the


13

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

FIG. 4.
Illustration of selected spectroscopic techniques. (a) Resonant Andreev reflection process probing a MZM with a
normal-metal electrode. (b) Same for a superconducting electrode. (c) Charging energy of a Coulomb-blockaded wire in the
topologically trivial phase. The charging parabolas for odd electron numbers (blue dashed lines: ∆ > EC with electron-pair
additions; green dashed line: ∆ < EC with single-electron additions) are shifted upward relative to the parabolas for even
electron numbers (red) by the pairing energy ∆. (d) Charging energy of a Coulomb-blockaded wire in the topological phase.
The charging parabolas for odd electron numbers (dashed orange) are shifted upward by a small hybridization energy of the
MZMs, which decreases to zero with increasing distance between the MZMs. (e) Excitation of quasiparticles by a microwave
field. A photon breaks a Cooper pair into two above-gap quasiparticles (process 1) or into the hybridized Majorana mode at
energy EM and an above-gap quasiparticle (process 2). If the hybridized Majorana mode is occupied, the subgap quasiparticle
can also be excited into the above-gap continuum (process 3). A process in which both electrons of the Cooper pair are excited
into the hybridized Majorana mode is impossible, since the latter is nondegenerate. Panel (e) reprinted from [163].

minimal energy cost is given by 2∆.
For a short
topological Josephson junction, one of the quasiparticles
can occupy the subgap state formed by the pair of MZMs,
which allows one to measure the characteristic phase
dependence of its energy in suitable setups. The phase-
dependence of the subgap spectrum can also be probed by
other techniques such as switching current measurements
[163, 173].

VII.
BOX 3: NONABELIAN PROPERTIES AND
TOPOLOGICAL QUANTUM COMPUTING

Perhaps the most coveted property of Majorana
zero modes is their nonabelian exchange properties,
sometimes referred to as “nonabelian statistics" even
though the MZMs are not particles.
As discussed in
Box 1, the ground state becomes 2N-fold degenerate in
the presence of 2N MZMs.
Adiabatically exchanging
the positions of the Majoranas leaves the system in
this ground-state manifold, but not necessarily in the
same state.
Instead, the state changes by a unitary
transformation, which depends on the order in which
the exchanges are being performed.
This nonabelian
exchange “statistics" contrasts sharply with the case of
bosons, fermions, or abelian anyons, for which exchanges
merely modify the state by factors of +1, −1, or eiα,
respectively.
Physically, braiding operations can be implemented
most directly by explicitly moving Majoranas around
each other in real space. This can be done for Majoranas
in two dimensions or on a network of wires [139].
In
either case, the location of the MZM is tied to a defect
such as a vortex or a domain wall whose location can
be manipulated. For a defect trajectory to correspond

to a nontrivial braiding operation, the ground-state
degeneracy has to remain unchanged throughout the
trajectory, but must change somewhere along the way
when the trajectory is contracted to a point.
Such
braiding operations in real space are a particular case
of a more general notion. Braiding operations satisfying
the above conditions can also be implemented in other
parameter spaces, for instance by judiciously varying
overlaps between pairs of MZMs [125, 126, 140].
The unitary transformation implemented by braiding
γi
with
γj
may
be
obtained
from
rather
general
arguments. Since the MZMs are hermitian, we expect
UγiU † = ±γj, where the sign remains to be determined.
Moreover, U should conserve fermion number parity
and involve only the braided MZMs, γi and γj. These
considerations fix U to be

Uij =
1
√

2(1 + γiγj).
(4)

One readily checks that these transformations do not
necessarily commute.
Experimentally, braiding can be implemented by using
a variety of knobs – such as gate voltages, charging
energies, or supercurrents – that move MZMs around
and/or control their couplings.
The simplest braiding
scheme involves two wires, with the pair of MZMs of each
wire initialized in a state with, say, even fermion number
parity.
A single braid of MZMs from the two wires
would transform the system into a superposition of even
and odd parities, with equal probabilities.
Strikingly,
two consecutive braids would leave both wires in odd-
fermion-number states. This outcome is independent of
the details of the braiding process as long as the ground-
state degeneracy remains unchanged.


14

The nonlocal and nonabelian properties are at the
heart of quantum information processing in topological
quantum computers. Information stored in the manifold
of ground states is topologically protected against local
sources of decoherence as long as the excitation gap
does not close.
However, this also implies that local
(say, electric or magnetic) fields do not manipulate the
quantum information. Here, the nonabelianess comes to
the rescue.
Braiding processes can be used to change
the state of the qubits and thus to process the quantum
information, depending only on the topology of the
exchange process and not on the detailed trajectory. In
general, universal quantum computation can be realized
on the basis of the single-qubit Clifford gates (Hadamard
and
phase
gate),
the
T-gate,
and
the
entangling
controlled-NOT (CNOT) gate acting on a pair of qubits.
For a Majorana-based quantum computer, braiding alone
only implements the single-qubit Clifford gates.
It
thus cannot implement universal quantum computation
in a manner which is fully topologically protected.
Nevertheless, the CNOT gate can be implemented when
including additional ancilla qubits combined with two-

qubit-parity measurements. The T-gate can in principle
be enacted in an accurate, though not topologically
protected manner, by magic state distillation [142].
Interestingly,
schemes
for
universal
Majorana-based
quantum computation need not even involve any explicit
braiding operations when performing the single-qubit
Clifford gates by measurements [141] or when effectively
outsourcing the corresponding operations to a classical
computer [128, 146].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We
acknowledge
support
from
ERC
projects
LEGOTOP (AS) and NONLOCAL (KF), Israel Science
Foundation within the ISF-Quantum program (AS),
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through CRC 183
(AS, KF, FvO), Danish National Research Foundation
(KF), Independent Research Fund Denmark | Natural
Sciences
(KF),
and
QuantERA
project
Topoquant
(FvO).

[1] A. Y. Kitaev, Phys. Usp. 44, 131 (2001).
[2] N. Read and D. Green, Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267 (2000).
[3] A. Y. Kitaev, Annals of Physics 303, 2 (2003).
[4] C. Nayak, S. H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman,
and
S. Das Sarma, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 1083 (2008).

[5] J. Alicea, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 076501 (2012).
[6] C. W. J. Beenakker, Ann. Rev. Cond. Mat. Phys. 4, 113
(2013).

[7] R.
M.
Lutchyn,
E.
P.
A.
M.
Bakkers,
L.
P.
Kouwenhoven, P. Krogstrup, C. M. Marcus,
and
Y. Oreg, Nat. Rev. Mat. 3, 52 (2018).

[8] R. Aguado, Riv. Nuovo Cim. 40, 523 (2017).
[9] A. Haim and Y. Oreg, Physics Reports 825, 1 (2019).

[10] R. Aguado and L. Kouwenhoven, Physics Today 73, 44
(2020).

[11] Y. Oreg and F. von Oppen, Ann. Rev. Cond. Mat. Phys.
11, 397 (2020).

[12] E. Prada, P. San-Jose, M. W. A. de Moor, A. Geresdi,
E. J. H. Lee, J. Klinovaja, D. Loss, J. Nygård, R.
Aguado, L. P. Kouwenhoven, arXiv:1911.04512.

[13] N. B. Kopnin and M. M. Salomaa, Phys. Rev. B 44,
9667 (1991).

[14] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407
(2008).

[15] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 79, 161408 (2009).
[16] B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, and S.-C. Zhang, Science
314, 1757 (2006).

[17] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 76, 045302 (2007).
[18] L. Fu, C. L. Kane, and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,
106803 (2007).

[19] L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. B 76, 045302 (2007).
[20] J. E. Moore and L. Balents, Phys. Rev. B 75, 121306
(2007).

[21] X.-L. Qi, T. L. Hughes, and S.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B
78, 195424 (2008).

[22] J. J. He, T. K. Ng, P. A. Lee,
and K. T. Law, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 112, 037001 (2014).

[23] Y. E. Kraus, A. Auerbach, H. A. Fertig,
and S. H.
Simon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 267002 (2008).

[24] D. Wang, L. Kong, P. Fan, H. Chen, S. Zhu, W. Liu,
L. Cao, Y. Sun, S. Du, J. Schneeloch, R. Zhong, G. Gu,
L. Fu, H. Ding, and H.-J. Gao, Science 362, 333 (2018).

[25] J. Sau, R. Lutchyn, S. Tewari,
and S. Das Sarma,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 040502 (2010).

[26] J. Alicea, Phys. Rev. B 81, 125318 (2010).
[27] R. M. Lutchyn, J. D. Sau,
and S. Das Sarma, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 105, 077001 (2010).

[28] Y. Oreg, G. Refael, and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett.
105, 177002 (2010).

[29] S. B. Chung, H. J. Zhang, X. L. Qi, and S. C. Zhang,

Phys. Rev. B 84, 1 (2011).

[30] M. Duckheim and P. W. Brouwer, Phys. Rev. B 83,
054513 (2011).

[31] A. C. Potter and P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 85, 094516
(2012).

[32] V. Mourik, K. Zuo, S. M. Frolov, S. R. Plissard, E. P.
A. M. Bakkers, and L. P. Kouwenhoven, Science 336,
1003 (2012).

[33] P. Krogstrup, N. L. B. Ziino, W. Chang, S. M. Albrecht,
M. H. Madsen, E. Johnson, J. Nygård, C. M. Marcus,
and T. S. Jespersen, Nat. Mater. 14, 400 (2015).

[34] W.
Chang,
S.
M.
Albrecht,
T.
S.
Jespersen,
F. Kuemmeth, P. Krogstrup, J. Nygård,
and C. M.
Marcus, Nat. Nano. 10, 232 (2015).

[35] Ö. Gül, H. Zhang, J. D. Bommer, M. W. De Moor,
D. Car, S. R. Plissard, E. P. Bakkers, A. Geresdi,
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi,
and L. P. Kouwenhoven,

Nat. Nano. 13, 192 (2018).

[36] H. Zhang, Ö. Gül, S. Conesa-Boj, M. P. Nowak,
M. Wimmer, K. Zuo, V. Mourik, F. K. De Vries,


15

J. Van Veen,
M. W. De Moor,
J. D. Bommer,
D. J. Van Woerkom, D. Car, S. R. Plissard, E. P.
Bakkers, M. Quintero-Pérez, M. C. Cassidy, S. Koelling,
S. Goswami, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi,
and L. P.
Kouwenhoven, Nat. Comm. 8, 16025 (2017).

[37] Y. Liu, S. Vaitiekenas, S. Marti-Sanchez, C. Koch,
S. Hart, Z. Cui, T. Kanne, S. A. Khan, R. Tanta,
S. Upadhyay, M. E. Cachaza, C. M. Marcus, J. Arbiol,
K. A. Moler,
and P. Krogstrup, Nano Lett. 20, 456
(2020).

[38] M. T. Deng, C. L. Yu, G. Y. Huang, M. Larsson,
P. Caroff, and H. Q. Xu, Nano Lett. 12, 6414 (2012).

[39] L. P. Rokhinson, X. Liu, and J. K. Furdyna, Nat. Phys.
8, 795 (2012).

[40] H. O. H. Churchill, V. Fatemi, K. Grove-Rasmussen,
M. T. Deng, P. Caroff, H. Q. Xu, and C. M. Marcus,
Phys. Rev. B 87, 241401 (2013).

[41] A. Das, Y. Ronen, Y. Most, Y. Oreg, M. Heiblum, and
H. Shtrikman, Nat. Phys. 8, 887 (2012).

[42] A. P. Higginbotham, S. M. Albrecht, G. Kiršanskas,
W.
Chang,
F.
Kuemmeth,
P.
Krogstrup,
T.
S.
Jespersen, J. Nygård, K. Flensberg, and C. M. Marcus,
Nat. Phys. 11, 107 (2015).

[43] S. M. Albrecht, A. P. Higginbotham, M. Madsen,
F. Kuemmeth, T. S. Jespersen, J. Nygård, P. Krogstrup,
and C. M. Marcus, Nature 531, 206 (2016).

[44] M. T. Deng, S. Vaitiek, E. B. Hansen, J. Danon,
M. Leijnse, K. Flensberg, P. Krogstrup,
and C. M.
Marcus, Science 354, 1557 (2016).

[45] H. J. Suominen, M. Kjaergaard, A. R. Hamilton,
J. Shabani, C. J. Palmstrøm, C. M. Marcus,
and
F. Nichele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 176805 (2017).

[46] J. Chen, P. Yu, J. Stenger, M. Hocevar, D. Car, S. R.
Plissard, E. P. Bakkers, T. D. Stanescu,
and S. M.
Frolov, Science Adv. 3, 1701476 (2017).

[47] F. Nichele, A. C. C. Drachmann, A. M. Whiticar,
E. C. T. O’Farrell,
H. J. Suominen,
A. Fornieri,
T. Wang, G. C. Gardner, C. Thomas, A. T. Hatke,
P. Krogstrup, M. J. Manfra, K. Flensberg, and C. M.
Marcus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 136803 (2017).

[48] J. E. Sestoft, T. Kanne, A. N. Gejl, M. V. Soosten,
J. S. Yodh, D. Sherman, B. Tarasinski, M. Wimmer,
E. Johnson, M. Deng, J. Nygård, T. S. Jespersen, C. M.
Marcus, and P. Krogstrup, Phys. Rev. Mat. 2, 044202
(2018).

[49] S. Vaitiekenas, G. W. Winkler, B. van Heck, T. Karzig,
M. T. Deng, K. Flensberg, L. I. Glazman, C. Nayak,
P. Krogstrup, R. M. Lutchyn,
and C. M. Marcus,

Science 367, 1442 (2020).

[50] S. Vaitiekenas, Y. Liu, P. Krogstrup, C. M. Marcus,

arXiv:2004.02226.

[51] M. T. Deng, S. Vaitiekenas, E. Prada, P. San-Jose,
J. Nygård, P. Krogstrup, R. Aguado,
and C. M.
Marcus, Phys. Rev. B 98, 085125 (2018).

[52] E. Prada, R. Aguado,
and P. San-Jose, Phys. Rev. B
96, 085418 (2017).

[53] D. J. Clarke, Phys. Rev. B 96, 201109(R) (2017).
[54] K. Sengupta, I. Žutić, H.-J. Kwon, V. M. Yakovenko,
and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 63, 144531 (2001).

[55] K. T. Law, P. A. Lee, and T. K. Ng, Phys. Rev. Lett.
103, 237001 (2009).

[56] K. Flensberg, Phys. Rev. B 82, 180516(R) (2010).
[57] M. Wimmer, A. R. Akhmerov, J. P. Dahlhaus,
and
C. W. J. Beenakker, New J. Phys. 13, 053016 (2011).

[58] P. Yu, J. Chen, M. Gomanko, G. Badawy, E. P. A.
M. Bakkers, K. Zuo, V. Mourik, and S. M. Frolov,
arXiv:2004.08583.

[59] H. Pan, C.-X. Liu, M. Wimmer, and S. Das Sarma,

arXiv:2102.02218.

[60] H. Zhang, M. W. A. de Moor, J. D. S. Bommer, D.
Xu, G. Wang, N. van Loo, C.-X. Liu, S. Gazibegovic,
J. A. Logan, D. Car, R. L. M. Op het Veld, P.
J. van Veldhoven, S. Koelling, M. A. Verheijen, M.
Pendharkar, D. J. Pennachio, B. Shojaei, J. S. Lee, C.
J. Palmstrom, E. P. A. M. Bakkers, S. Das Sarma, and
L. P. Kouwenhoven, arXiv:2101.11456.

[61] S. M. Albrecht, E. B. Hansen, A. P. Higginbotham,
F. Kuemmeth, T. S. Jespersen, J. Nygård, P. Krogstrup,
J.
Danon,
K.
Flensberg,
and
C.
M.
Marcus,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 137701 (2017).

[62] J.
Shen,
S.
Heedt,
F.
Borsoi,
B.
van
Heck,
S. Gazibegovic, R. L. Op Het Veld, D. Car, J. A. Logan,
M. Pendharkar, S. J. Ramakers, G. Wang, D. Xu,
D. Bouman, A. Geresdi, C. J. Palmstrøm, E. P. Bakkers,
and L. P. Kouwenhoven, Nat. Comm. 9, 4801 (2018).

[63] G. C. Ménard, G. L. R. Anselmetti, E. A. Martinez,
D. Puglia, F. K. Malinowski, J. S. Lee, S. Choi,
M. Pendharkar, C. J. Palmstrøm, K. Flensberg, C. M.
Marcus, L. Casparis,
and A. P. Higginbotham, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 124, 036802 (2020).

[64] L. Fu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 056402 (2010).
[65] B. van Heck, R. M. Lutchyn, and L. I. Glazman, Phys.
Rev. B 93, 235431 (2016).

[66] Y. Liu et al., arXiv:1908.07096.
[67] M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity, 2nd
ed., International Series in Pure and Applied Physics
(McGraw-Hill, New York, 1996).

[68] M. Valentini, F. Penaranda, A. Hofmann, M. Brauns,
R. Hauschild, P. Krogstrup, P. San-Jose, E. Prada, R.
Aguado, and G. Katsaros, arXiv:2008.02348.

[69] J. Shabani, M. Kjaergaard, H. J. Suominen, Y. Kim,
F. Nichele, K. Pakrouski, T. Stankevic, R. M. Lutchyn,
P. Krogstrup, R. Feidenhans, S. Kraemer, C. Nayak,
M. Troyer, C. M. Marcus,
and C. J. Palmstrøm,

Phys. Rev. B 93, 155402 (2016).

[70] M. Hell, M. Leijnse, and K. Flensberg, Phys. Rev. Lett.
118, 107701 (2017).

[71] F. Pientka, A. Keselman, E. Berg, A. Yacoby, A. Stern,
and B. I. Halperin, Phys. Rev. X 7, 021032 (2017).

[72] A. M. Whiticar,
A. Fornieri,
E. C. T. OFarrell,
A. C. C. Drachmann, T. Wang, C. Thomas, S. Gronin,
R. Kallaher, G. C. Gardner, M. J. Manfra, C. M.
Marcus, and F. Nichele, Nat. Comm. 11, 3212 (2020).

[73] A. Fornieri,
A. M. Whiticar,
F. Setiawan,
E. P.
Marín, A. C. C. Drachmann, A. Keselman, S. Gronin,
C. Thomas, T. Wang, R. Kallaher, G. C. Gardner,
E. Berg, M. J. Manfra, A. Stern, C. M. Marcus,
and
F. Nichele, Nature 569, 89 (2018).

[74] H. Ren, F. Pientka, S. Hart, A. T. Pierce, M. Kosowsky,
L. Lunczer, R. Schlereth, B. Scharf, E. M. Hankiewicz,
L. W. Molenkamp, B. I. Halperin,
and A. Yacoby,

Nature 569, 3 (2019).

[75] F. Setiawan, A. Stern, and E. Berg, Phys. Rev. B 99,
220506 (2019).

[76] T. Laeven,
B. Nijholt,
M. Wimmer,
and A. R.
Akhmerov, arXiv:1903.06168.

[77] A. Melo, S. Rubbert,
and A. R. Akhmerov, SciPost
Phys. 7, 39 (2019).


16

[78] A. Haim and A. Stern, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 126801
(2019).

[79] W.
Mayer,
M.
C.
Dartiailh,
J.
Yuan,
K.
S.
Wickramasinghe, A. Matos-Abiague, I. Zutic, and J.
Shabani, arXiv:1906.01179.

[80] C. T. Ke, C. M. Moehle, F. K. de Vries, C. Thomas,
S. Metti,
C. R. Guinn,
R. Kallaher,
M. Lodari,
G. Scappucci, T. Wang, R. E. Diaz, G. C. Gardner,
M. J. Manfra, and S. Goswami, Nat. Comm. 10, 3764
(2019).

[81] S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, J. Li, H. Chen, S. Jeon,
J. Seo, A. H. MacDonald, B. A. Bernevig,
and
A. Yazdani, Science 346, 602 (2014).

[82] B. E. Feldman,
M. T. Randeria,
J. Li,
S. Jeon,
Y. Xie, Z. Wang, I. K. Drozdov, B. A. Bernevig,
and
A. Yazdani, Nat. Phys. 13, 286 (2017).

[83] M. Ruby, B. W. Heinrich, Y. Peng, F. von Oppen, and
K. J. Franke, Nano Lett. 17, 4473 (2017).

[84] S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, B. A. Bernevig,
and
A. Yazdani, Phys. Rev. B 88, 020407 (2013).

[85] F. Pientka, L. I. Glazman,
and F. von Oppen, Phys.
Rev. B 88, 155420 (2013).

[86] L. U. H. Yu, Acta Phys. Sin. 21, 75 (1965).
[87] H. Shiba, Prog. Theor. Phys. 40, 435 (1968).
[88] A. I. Rusinov, Sov. Phys. JETP 29, 1101 (1969).
[89] B. Braunecker, G. Japaridze, J. Klinovaja, and D. Loss,

Phys. Rev. B 82, 045127 (2010).

[90] M.
Kjaergaard,
K.
Wölms,
and
K.
Flensberg,

Phys. Rev. B 85, 020503 (2012).

[91] B. Braunecker and P. Simon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
147202 (2013).

[92] J. Klinovaja, P. Stano, A. Yazdani, and D. Loss, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 111, 186805 (2013).

[93] M. M. Vazifeh and M. Franz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
206802 (2013).

[94] M. Schecter, K. Flensberg, M. H. Christensen, B. M.
Andersen,
and J. Paaske, Phys. Rev. B 93, 140503
(2016).

[95] J. Li, H. Chen, I. K. Drozdov, A. Yazdani, B. A.
Bernevig,
and A. H. MacDonald, Phys. Rev. B 90,
235433 (2014).

[96] Y. Peng, F. Pientka, Y. Vinkler-Aviv, L. I. Glazman,
and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 266804 (2015).

[97] T. Kiendl, F. von Oppen,
and P. W. Brouwer, Phys.
Rev. B 99, 104510 (2019).

[98] M. Ruby, F. Pientka, Y. Peng, F. von Oppen, B. W.
Heinrich,
and K. J. Franke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115,
197204 (2015).

[99] S. A. González, L. Melischek, O. Peters, K. Flensberg,
K. J. Franke,
and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. B 102,
045413 (2020).

[100] S. Jeon, Y. Xie, J. Li, Z. Wang, B. A. Bernevig,
and
A. Yazdani, Science 358, 772 (2017).

[101] J. Li, S. Jeon, Y. Xie, A. Yazdani, and B. A. Bernevig,

Phys. Rev. B 97, 125119 (2018).

[102] R. Pawlak, M. Kisiel, J. A. Klinovaja, T. Meier,
S. Kawai, T. Glatzel, D. Loss,
and E. Meyer, npj
Quantum Inf. 2, 16035 (2016).

[103] G. C. Menard, S. Guissart, C. Brun, R. T. Leriche,
M. Trif, F. Debontridder, D. Demaille, D. Roditchev,
P. Simon, and T. Cren, Nat. Comm. 8, 2040 (2017).

[104] G. C. Menard, A. Mesaros, C. Brun, F. Debontridder,
D. Roditchev, P. Simon, and T. Cren, Nat. Comm. 10,
2587 (2019).

[105] H. Kim, A. Palacio-Morales, T. Posske, L. Rózsa,
K.
Palotás,
L.
Szunyogh,
M.
Thorwart,
and
R.
Wiesendanger,
Science
Adv.
4
(2018),
10.1126/sciadv.aar5251.

[106] A.
Kamlapure,
L.
Cornils,
J.
Wiebe,
and
R. Wiesendanger, Nat. Comm. 9, 3253 (2018).

[107] J. Li, T. Neupert, B. A. Bernevig, and A. Yazdani, Nat.
Comm. 7, 10395 (2016).

[108] S. Manna, P. Wei, Y. Xie, K. T. Law, P. A. Lee, and
J. S. Moodera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117, 8775 (2020).

[109] G. Kells, D. Meidan, and P. W. Brouwer, Phys. Rev. B
86, 100503(R) (2012).

[110] C. X. Liu, J. D. Sau, T. D. Stanescu, and S. Das Sarma,

Phys. Rev. B 96, 075161 (2017).

[111] A. Vuik, B. Nijholt, A. R. Akhmerov, and M. Wimmer,

SciPost Phys. 7, 61 (2019).

[112] C. Moore, T. D. Stanescu, and S. Tewari, Phys. Rev.
B 97, 165302 (2018).

[113] T. D. Stanescu and S. Tewari, Phys. Rev. B 100, 155429
(2019).

[114] J.
Avila,
F.
Penaranda,
E.
Prada,
P.
San-Jose,
and R. Aguado, Communications Phys. 2 (2019),
10.1038/s42005-019-0231-8.

[115] D. M. T. van Zanten, D. Sabonis, J. Suter, J. I.
Väyrynen, T. Karzig, D. I. Pikulin, E. C. T. OFarrell,
D. Razmadze, K. D. Petersson, P. Krogstrup, and C. M.
Marcus, Nature Phys. , 663 (2020).

[116] E. J. Lee, X. Jiang, R. Aguado, G. Katsaros, C. M.
Lieber,
and S. De Franceschi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109,
186802 (2012).

[117] J. Liu, A. C. Potter, K. T. Law, and P. A. Lee, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 109, 267002 (2012).

[118] A. Ptok, A. Kobiałka, and T. Domański, Phys. Rev. B
96, 195430 (2017).

[119] F. Penaranda, R. Aguado, P. San-Jose, and E. Prada,

Phys. Rev. B 98, 235406 (2018).

[120] C. Reeg, O. Dmytruk, D. Chevallier, D. Loss,
and
J. Klinovaja, Phys. Rev. B 98, 245407 (2018).

[121] C. Jünger, R. Delagrange, D. Chevallier, S. Lehmann,
K. A. Dick, C. Thelander, J. Klinovaja, D. Loss,
A.
Baumgartner,
and
C.
Schönenberger,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 017701 (2020).

[122] M. Hell, K. Flensberg,
and M. Leijnse, Phys. Rev. B
97, 161401 (2018).

[123] C. Drukier, H.-G. Zirnstein, B. Rosenow, A. Stern, and
Y. Oreg, Phys. Rev. B 98, 161401 (2018).

[124] A. Grivnin, E. Bor, M. Heiblum, Y. Oreg,
and
H. Shtrikman, Nat. Comm. 10, 1940 (2019).

[125] T. Hyart, B. V. Heck, I. Fulga, M. Burello, A. R.
Akhmerov, and C. W. J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. B 88,
035121 (2013).

[126] D. Aasen, M. Hell, R. V. Mishmash, A. Higginbotham,
J. Danon, M. Leijnse, T. S. Jespersen, J. A. Folk, C. M.
Marcus, K. Flensberg, and J. Alicea, Phys. Rev. X 6,
031016 (2016).

[127] S. Plugge, A. Rasmussen, R. Egger, and K. Flensberg,

New J. Phys. 19, 012001 (2017).

[128] T. Karzig, C. Knapp, R. M. Lutchyn, P. Bonderson,
M. B. Hastings, C. Nayak, J. Alicea, K. Flensberg,
S. Plugge, Y. Oreg, C. M. Marcus, and M. H. Freedman,
Phys. Rev. B 95, 235305 (2017).

[129] C. Schrade and L. Fu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 267002
(2018).


17

[130] M. Leijnse and K. Flensberg, Phys. Rev. B 86, 104511
(2012).

[131] S. Hoffman, C. Schrade, J. Klinovaja,
and D. Loss,

Phys. Rev. B 94, 045316 (2016).

[132] J.
Manousakis,
C.
Wille,
A.
Altland,
R.
Egger,
K. Flensberg,
and F. Hassler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124,
096801 (2020).

[133] R. V. Mishmash, B. Bauer, F. von Oppen,
and
J. Alicea, Phys. Rev. B 101, 075404 (2020).

[134] A. R. Akhmerov, Phys. Rev. B 82, 020509 (2010).
[135] M. I. K. Munk, R. Egger, and K. Flensberg, Phys. Rev.
B 99, 155419 (2019).

[136] M. I. K. Munk,
J. Schulenborg,
R. Egger,
and
K. Flensberg, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 033254 (2020).

[137] J. F. Steiner and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Research 2,
033255 (2020).

[138] C.W.J. Beenakker, arXiv:1907.06497.
[139] J. Alicea, Y. Oreg, G. Refael, F. von Oppen,
and
M. P. A. Fisher, Nat. Phys. 7, 412 (2011).

[140] J. Sau, D. Clarke,
and S. Tewari, Phys. Rev. B 84,
094505 (2011).

[141] P.
Bonderson,
M.
Freedman,
and
C.
Nayak,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 010501 (2008).

[142] S. Bravyi, Phys. Rev. A 73, 042313 (2006).
[143] E. Ginossar and E. Grosfeld, Nat. Comm. 5 (2014),
10.1038/ncomms5772.

[144] M Barkeshli and J. D. Sau, arXiv:1509.07135.
[145] D. Litinski, M. S. Kesselring, J. Eisert,
and F. von
Oppen, Phys. Rev. X 7, 031048 (2017).

[146] D. Litinski and F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. B 97, 205404
(2018).

[147] S. Bravyi and A. Kitaev, Phys. Rev. A 71, 022316
(2005).

[148] T. Karzig, Y. Oreg, G. Refael,
and M. H. Freedman,

Phys. Rev. X 6, 031019 (2016).

[149] T. Karzig, Y. Oreg, G. Refael,
and M. H. Freedman,

Phys. Rev. B 99, 144521 (2019).

[150] S. Vijay, T. H. Hsieh, and L. Fu, Phys. Rev. X 5, 041038
(2015).

[151] L. A. Landau, S. Plugge, E. Sela, A. Altland, S. M.
Albrecht, and R. Egger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 050501
(2016).

[152] S.
Plugge,
L.
A.
Landau,
E.
Sela,
A.
Altland,
K. Flensberg, and R. Egger, Phys. Rev. B 94, 174514
(2016).

[153] G. Kells, V. Lahtinen,
and J. Vala, Phys. Rev. B 89,
075122 (2014).

[154] E. Sagi, H. Ebisu, Y. Tanaka, A. Stern, and Y. Oreg,

Phys. Rev. B 99, 075107 (2019).

[155] A. Thomson and F. Pientka, arXiv:1807.09291.
[156] A. Chew, A. Essin,
and J. Alicea, Phys. Rev. B 96,
121119 (2017).

[157] D. I. Pikulin and M. Franz, Phys. Rev. X 7, 031006
(2017).

[158] H. Ebisu, E. Sagi, and Y. Oreg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123,
026401 (2019).

[159] B. Béri and N. R. Cooper, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 156803
(2012).

[160] A. Altland and R. Egger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 196401
(2013).

[161] S. Ryu, A. P. Schnyder, A. Furusaki,
and A. W. W.
Ludwig, New J. Phys. 12, 065010 (2010).

[162] K. Wölms, A. Stern, and K. Flensberg, Phys. Rev. B
93, 045417 (2016).

[163] Y. Peng, F. Pientka, E. Berg, Y. Oreg,
and F. von
Oppen, Phys. Rev. B 94, 085409 (2016).

[164] L. Jiang, D. Pekker, J. Alicea, G. Refael, Y. Oreg, and
F. von Oppen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 236401 (2011).

[165] F. Domínguez, F. Hassler, and G. Platero, Phys. Rev.
B 86, 140503 (2012).

[166] P. San-Jose, E. Prada, and R. Aguado, Phys. Rev. Lett.
108, 257001 (2012).

[167] M. Houzet, J. S. Meyer, D. M. Badiane,
and L. I.
Glazman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 046401 (2013).

[168] R.
S.
Deacon,
J.
Wiedenmann,
E.
Bocquillon,
F. Domínguez, T. M. Klapwijk, P. Leubner, C. Brüne,
E.
M.
Hankiewicz,
S.
Tarucha,
K.
Ishibashi,
H. Buhmann,
and L. W. Molenkamp, Phys. Rev.
X 7, 021011 (2017).

[169] L. Bretheau, C. O. Girit, H. Pothier, D. Esteve,
and
C. Urbina, Nature 499, 312 (2013).

[170] L. Bretheau, C. O. Girit, C. Urbina, D. Esteve,
and
H. Pothier, Phys. Rev. X 3, 041034 (2013).

[171] P. Virtanen and P. Recher, Phys. Rev. B 88, 144507
(2013).

[172] J. I. Väyrynen, G. Rastelli, W. Belzig,
and L. I.
Glazman, Phys. Rev. B 92, 134508 (2015).

[173] M. Zgirski, L. Bretheau, Q. Le Masne, H. Pothier,
D. Esteve, and C. Urbina, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 257003
(2011).


