Data-driven modelling of scalable spinodoid structures for
energy absorption

Hirak Kansara1, Gary Koh1, Merrin Varghese1, John Z. X. Luk1, Emilio F. Gomez1, Siddhant
Kumar2, Han Zhang1, Emilio Mart´ınez-Pa˜neda3, Wei Tan1∗

1 School of Engineering and Material Science, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK

2 Material Science and Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands

3 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Imperial College London, London, UK
* Corresponding author (wei.tan@qmul.ac.uk)

Abstract
The project aims to explore a novel way to design and produce cellular materials with good energy
absorption and recoverability properties. Spinodoid structures offer an alternative to engineering
structures such as honeycombs and foam with scalability ensuring microscale benefits are reaped
on a larger scale.
Various materials and topologies have been utilised for numerical modeling
and prototyping through additive manufacturing. Each design was evaluated using finite element
modelling. Initial results from numerical models show anisotropic structures achieving high energy
absorption efficiency. Through data-driven optimisation, results show a peak energy absorption
value of 5.34 MJ/m3 for anisotropic columnar structure. A physics-informed biased grid-search
optimisation is faster due to parameters being explored in parallel.
To validate the numerical
model, compressive tests on various prototypes were conducted.

Key words: Cellular Materials; Energy Absorption; Crashworthiness

1
Introduction

There has been significant progress in the advancement of architected materials over the past
few decades with the central goal of developing lightweight, high performance materials.
The
use of energy-dissipating structures play an integral role in engineering and the rapid advance-
ment in engineering fields such as transportation, aeronautics and automotive. They have led to
an increased importance in the research of energy absorption capacity of structures. Examples
of energy-dissipating structures used widely in engineering include crash boxes utilised in front
bumper system in the automotive industry. Over the years, many studies focusing on various high
specific energy absorbing materials and structures such as thin vessel structures and graded honey-
combs have been conducted. Energy absorbers work by reducing the impact load distribution over
a period of time and as such, an ideal material for use in impact protection systems would exhibit
both increased energy absorption capability and increased strength. Through the use of optimal
designs, lattice topologies can be constructed to have characteristics such as high strength, high
damping, high stiffness, high deformability and low density [1]. The energy absorption of a material
under deformation is defined as the integral of the resultant stress-strain response and can be opti-
mised through high stress plateaus over a long strain regime [2]. Traditional thin walled prismatic
structures are the industry standard, however, they offer limited energy absorption density during
high impact scenarios.

Recoverable cellular materials offer increased structural integrity due to their exceptional energy
absorption and impact resistance. The main properties displayed by cellular structures involve
being lightweight, reducing critical load, absorbing energy by irreversible means and having an
increased specific energy absorption capacity [3]. Honeycombs, foams and fiber composite tubes
are heavily utilised in various engineering applications as compared to monolithic solids they offer
a compromise with increased stress plateaus enabling progressive failure through localized fracture,
friction and instability. Spinodal structures offer an alternative to the high stress concentrations
experienced traditional shell based structures at junctions as a result of their smooth topologies
with minimised curvature [4]. They are a group of shell based architectures which upon loading
provide near consistent strain distribution, while also displaying fully homogenised behaviour and

1

arXiv:2103.16292v1  [physics.app-ph]  30 Mar 2021


decreased imperfection sensitivity due to their stochastic nature [1]. The aim of this project is
to provide a novel way to engineer the topology design and material selection so that an optimal
design can be produced in terms of both energy absorption and recoverability.

2
Numerical Modelling

Numerical models of isotropic and a number of anisotropic cases of spinodoid topologies were gen-
erated and investigated. The crystallographic texture of the spinodoid structures were controlled
using a number of parameters represented by Θ

Θ = (ρ,θ1,θ2,θ3)
(1)

With relative density (ρ) being defined as ρ∗/ρs, the ratio between the density of generated topol-
ogy and homogenised solid, giving an indication of the structure porosity. The relative density
of structures has been restricted to a range of [0.3, 1] as densities ρ << 1 result in discontinuous
geometries, similar with angles being restricted to a minimum of 15°. Additionally, θi ∈ {0} ∪
[π/12,π/2] allows a fine control of grain orientation, with θ1 = θ2 = 0 and θ3 = π/2 corresponding
to an isotropic structure, as angles are restricted to a cone. In addition, values of θ3 < π/2 results
in the formation of Lamellar spinodoid structure. However, at θ3 = 0 ∩ θ1,2 > 0, results in the
formation of Columnar structures. Finally, specific values of θi results in the formation of Cubic
topology, each yielding a unique set of mechanical properties, shown in Figure 1. The materials
utilised for finite element model are treated as isotropic homogenised continuum. Material prop-
erties of three different polymer types were employed; Thermoplastic Polyurethane (TPU) being
soft and ductile, Polyethylene Terephthalate Glycol (PET-G) a relatively brittle thermoplastic in
comparison to TPU with high density and Carbon fibre reinforced PET-G (Carbon-P) being a
composite; lightweight and stiff. To assess the failure of ductile materials, the Von Mises yield
criterion is utilised. Capturing the elastic-plastic behaviour of spinodoid structures is essential
in determining the energy absorption. Elastic region provides a recoverable method of absorb-
ing energy, comparatively, plastic region has a larger potential for energy storage through plastic
deformation, hence a trade-off between energy absorption and recoverability. The behaviour of
numerical model undergoing high-strain compressive loading is assessed with a maximum strain
of 50%. To find the topological parameters that ensures highest energy absorption, data-driven
optimisation approach is adopted, in tandem with preliminary testing of special topological cases.

a)
b)
c)
d)

Figure 1: Spinodoid topologies a) Columnar, b) Isotropic, c) Cubic and d) Lamellar.

3
Results

Preliminary numerical testing of design space revealed an affinity for anisotropic structures, that
are parallel to the direction of loading. Cases such as the columnar hence performed significantly
better than other topologies in terms of energy absorption with deformation primarily through
buckling of columns, fracture and plastic deformation. Relative densities of 0.3, 0.5 and 0.7 were
tested with energy absorption scaling with higher relative densities at the cost of heavier structure.
It is not feasible to explore every combination of parameters provided by the large design space

2


of inversely generated spinodoid structures. A guided, data-driven approach was adopted to find
parameters that yielded exceptional energy absorption capability. This involved the use of prior
knowledge, provided by preliminary testing. To reduce the design space needed to be explored,
the consideration of relative density was omitted as high relative density resulted in greater energy
absorption. Furthermore, as columnar spinodoid topologies resulted in higher energy absorption,
hence θ3 was excluded. This allowed the design space to be optimised using two angles θ1,2. The
optimisation of the two angles involved investigation of various samples of thetas from a range of
[15,70]. From previous results, high θ1,2 results in isotropic material behaviour.

A biased sampling method on a polar coordinate grid was adopted to capture the behaviour of
structure at low cone angles θ1,2, shown in Figure 2a). This revealed high energy absorption po-
tential with angles in the range of [15,25]. Following the initial optimisation results, a further
optimisation was completed within the theta range of [15.25], where angles closer to (15,15,0) re-
sulted in higher energy absorption. The peak value of specific energy absorption was obtained
to be approximately 5.34 MJ/m3 at angles (15,15,0), with the effect of various angles on energy
absorption also being shown by Figure 2a). To eliminate the stochastic nature of topology gen-
eration, higher wave numbers were utilised to obtain homogenised energy absorption value, with
a converged value being obtained of 3.18 MJ/m3 at wave number of 30π, shown in Figure 2b).
The energy absorption efficiency of optimised spinodoid topologies was found to be of a larger
magnitude than pre-existing structures - achieved at relatively low density.

Figure 2: a) Optimisation results for angles between 15 to 25 degrees on a polar grid and b) The
convergence of energy absorption value over various wave numbers.

4
Manufacturing and Experimental testing

Spinodal structures are typically manufactured through spinodal decomposition. This is when an
epoxy template is formed by curing an epoxy and polyethylene glycol emulsion. It is then coated
with the desired material and the epoxy template is removed through O2 plasma ashing [6]. Whilst
this manufacturing process is scalable, optimising the spinodoid for high energy absorption and
low density is difficult due to the multitude of possible polymer ratios for the emulsion. Trying to
reproduce a specific topology of spinodoid also proves challenging due to this natural process.

To avoid these issues, additive layer manufacturing methods were explored as the numerical model
of the spinodoid could be reproduced indefinitely with consistent mechanical properties. Fused de-
position modelling was used to prototype the numerical models whilst another additive layer man-
ufacturing method such as selective laser sintering would then be used to scale up their production.
Some features that were experimented with was the material and the scale of the spinodoid. There
are three potential materials for the structure which are TPU, PET-G and Carbon Fibre-PET.

3


Each material has a range of suitable temperatures to print with. Selecting an appropriate temper-
ature for the spinodoid is important as it would reduce printing deformities such as stringing and
extrusion issues. Printing the spinodoid topologies with each material allowed the material with
the highest energy absorption to be identified. Another consideration to have is the scale of the
spinodoid. A structure with features smaller than the nozzle diameter will also produce printing
issues such as under extrusion or failure to extrude at all. The minimum nozzle diameter available
is 0.4mm, meaning the smallest feature on the spinodoid must be greater than 0.4mm to avoid
any defects. Once the prototyping has concluded, an appropriate scalable manufacturing method
can be used to mass-produce the structures. As the scale of the spinodoid has been identified for
a nozzle diameter of 0.4mm, the structure can be scaled appropriately for different sized nozzles.

Initial tensile and compression tests for each material was done to verify the manufacturer’s given
mechanical properties. Fused deposition modelling was used to print a solid dog bone test specimen
for the tensile tests and a solid cube for the compression tests. The resulting data was used to
improve the accuracy of the simulations by adjusting the material properties for their respective
numerical model. Once each spinodal topology was printed out of the three materials, they were
compressed until failure. This allowed the energy absorption for each structure to be measured
and allowed the numerical simulations to be experimentally validated.

5
Conclusions

Spinodoid topologies exploits the double curvature orientation of surfaces, enhancing the entrap-
ment of energy through plastic deformation resulting from a stiffer structure. When designed in
optimal configuration, the architecture gives a specific energy absorption value of 5.34 MJ/m3,
higher than other pre-existing structures, such as the honeycombs or lattice-based structures. This
is an optimistic finding in the potential of spinodoid topologies in the field of impact energy ab-
sorption. The method of data-driven modelling allows a supervised approach to find optimised
topological parameters. Comparatively, this approach is faster than traditional sequential optimi-
sation approach, where individual parameters are tested one at a time. Furthermore, multi-variable
optimisation can also be considered as a way to fine-tune the optimised topology, depending on
the application.

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Queen Mary’s Apocrita HPC facility, supported by QMUL Research-IT and
HPC facility at TU Delft for allowing us to run numerical simulations. W. Tan acknowledges finan-
cial support from the European Commission Graphene Flagship Core Project 3 (GrapheneCore3)
under grant No. 881603.

References

[1] Guell Izard,
A.,
Bauer,
J.,
Crook,
C.,
Turlo,
V.,
and Valdevit,
L. Glassy Carbon Nanospinodals:
Ultra-
high Energy Absorption Multifunctional Spinodal Nanoarchitectures (Small 45/2019). Small, 15(45), 1970241.
https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201970241 (2019).

[2] Jawaid, M., Thariq, M., and Saba, N. Failure Analysis in Biocomposites, Fibre-Reinforced Composites and Hybrid
Composites (1st ed.). Woodhead Publishing. (2019).

[3] Galehdari, S., Kadkhodayan, M., and Hadidi-Moud, S. Low velocity impact and quasi-static in-plane loading on a
graded honeycomb structure; experimental, analytical and numerical study. Aerospace Science And Technology, 47,
425-433. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2015.10.010 (2015).

[4] Al-Ketan, O. and Abu Al-Rub, R. Multifunctional Mechanical Metamaterials Based on Triply Periodic Minimal
Surface Lattices. Advanced Engineering Materials, 21(10), p.1900524. (2019).

[5] Kumar, S., Tan, S., Zheng, L. et al. Inverse-designed spinodoid metamaterials. npj Comput Mater 6, 73 (2020)

[6] Portela, C.M., Vidyasagar, A., Kr¨odel, S., Weissenbach, T., Yee, D.W., Greer, J.R. and Kochmann, D.M. Extreme
mechanical resilience of self-assembled nanolabyrinthine materials. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
117(11), pp.5686–5693. (2020).

4


