1

Femtosecond laser micromachining of diamond: current research status, applications and 

challenges

Bakhtiar Ali Khan a, b, Igor V. Litvinyuk b, c, Maksym Rybachuk a, b *

a
School of Engineering and Built Environment, Griffith University, 170 Kessels Rd, 

Nathan QLD 4111, AUSTRALIA

b
Centre for Quantum Dynamics and Australian Attosecond Science Facility, Griffith 

University, Science Road, Nathan QLD 4111, AUSTRALIA

c
School of Environment and Science, Griffith University, Nathan QLD 4111, 

AUSTRALIA

* Corresponding author. Tel: +61 (0)7 5552 7268. E-mail: m.rybachuk@griffith.edu.au


2

TITLE

Femtosecond laser micromachining of diamond: current research status, applications and 

challenges

ABSTRACT

Ultra-fast femtosecond (fs) lasers provide a unique technological opportunity to precisely and 

efficiently micromachine materials with minimal thermal damage owing to the reduced heat 

transfer into the bulk of the work material offered by short pulse duration, high laser intensity 

and focused optical energy delivered on a timescale shorter than the rate of thermal diffusion 

into the surrounding area of a beam foci. There is an increasing demand to further develop the 

fs machining technology to improve the machining quality, minimize the total machining time 

and increase the flexibility of machining complex patterns on diamond. This article offers an 

overview of recent research findings on the application of fs laser technology to micromachine

diamond. The laser technology to precisely micromachine diamond is discussed and detailed, 

with a focus on the use of fs laser irradiation systems and their characteristics, laser interaction

with various types of diamonds, processing and the subsequent post-processing of the irradiated 

samples and, appropriate sample characterisation methods. Finally, the current and emerging 

application areas are discussed, and the challenges and the future research prospects in the fs

laser micromachining field are also identified.

KEYWORDS

diamond; ultra-fast laser; femtosecond laser; materials processing; laser machining


3

CONTENTS
pages

1. INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………………4

2.
LIGHT-INDUCED STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN DIAMOND……………………………..5

2.1
Diamond absorption of laser energy…………………………………………………..5

2.2
Photoinduced changes in diamond properties……………………………………..…..8

2.3
Photoinduced changes in diamond surface topography……………………………...12

3.
LASER MICROMACHINING OF DIAMOND……………………………………………..15

3.1
Conventional (nano-, pico- second) laser micromachining of diamond……………...15

3.2
Femtosecond laser micromachining of diamond…………………………………..…19

4.
DIAMOND SAMPLE PROCESSING…………………………………………………….....21

4.1
Common fs-laser micromachining systems…………………………………………..21

4.2
The effects of fs-laser process parameters on micromachining quality………………23

4.3
Post-processing of the fs-laser irradiated diamond samples………………………….33

4.4
Characterisation of micromachined diamond samples………………………………33

5.
APPLICATIONS OF FS-LASER MICROMACHINED DIAMOND……………………….35

6.
SUMMARY AND FUTURE RESEARCH PROSPECTS……………………………………32

6.1
Summary……………………………………………………………………………..32

6.2
Future research prospects………………………………………………………....….33

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS………………………………………………………………………..33

CONFLICT OF INTEREST…………………………………………………………………………...33

REFERENCES………………………………………………………………………………………..33


4

1
INTRODUCTION

Diamond remains a material of choice for applications where extremes of thermal conductivity

(2000 W m-1 K-1), Young’s modulus (1220 GPa), mechanical surface and bulk hardness (100 

GPa), optical index of refraction from ultra-violet (UV) to infra-red (IR) range (2.41), dielectric 

constant (5.7) and electrical resistivity (1013-1016 Ohm-cm) and low thermal expansion (1.1 ×

10-6 K-1) are required [1-4], such as in ultra-high precision machining tools [5], micro-electro 

mechanical system (MEMS) and MEMS components [6], robust optical gratings [7], inert and 

environmentally stable medical coatings [8-10], and electronic devices for harsh environments

[11]. The availability of synthetic diamonds in different grades (i.e., ‘a’ and ‘b’ grades), in 

various degrees of crystallinity, purity, degrees and types of doping, physical shapes and forms

and, subsequently, at highly varied prices, made synthetic diamonds both more attractive and 

more economically accessible for a wide range of industrial applications compared to their 

natural counterpart [12, 13]. This also includes the engineering applications where diamond

and its derivatives are used as machining tools [14]. The advantage of using tailor-made 

diamond products lies in its exceptionally high mechanical hardness that originates from 

directional sp3- hybridised bonds arranged in tetrahedral configuration that compose a single 

crystal [15]. It is the world’s most desirable, albeit most notoriously known as ‘hardest-to-

machine’ material, since there are no conventional material removal processes (MRPs) that are 

capable to effectively shape diamond crystals with an acceptable precision and accuracy at the 

nano- and/or at micro- scale. Historically, a number of MRPs have been employed to process 

diamond into the desired shapes including electrical discharge [16, 17] and abrasive waterjet 

machining [18], mechanical grinding [19], and laser machining [20, 21]. These methods utilise 

the ability of diamond’s intrinsic sp3- hybridised bonds to become converted, through 

externally applied energetic processes, into much weaker, sp2-hybridised bonds (as in graphite)

and after their subsequent removal, impart a final shape to the product [15]. Among these 

methods, laser machining (aka. laser processing) has been widely and, so far, the most 

successfully used MRP [21-23], since an appropriate selection of wavelengths, pulse durations 

and power results in a high quality, tailored materials’ surface and precise volumetric 

processing down to a few nanometres precision [24, 25].

Ultra-fast laser micromachining using femto-second (fs) pulses offers many distinct advantages 

compared to any other laser machining processes. For diamond, the advantages are the 

following: firstly, the interaction time of laser light with diamond sample is very short (e.g.,

pulse duration is less than a picoseconds) resulting in a low volume, insignificant amount of 


5

heat dissipating into the surrounding bulk of the matter from the irradiated area, which in turn

minimises the thermal and mechanical stresses within the surrounding area, the latter can also 

be further minimised by reducing the laser beam spot size. Secondly, fs-laser light interactions 

with diamond crystal are independent of its orientation and, subsequently, no specific 

requirements for diamond sample positioning (in a sample holder) prior to laser processing are 

required. Thirdly, the laser beam used in material processing, as a ‘machining tool’ depends 

only on the optical quality of the beam and therefore, it is not affected by the sample-to-tool 

interaction, unlike in other conventional MRPs. Owing to these characteristics fs laser 

micromachining is able to successfully support several high impact engineering applications 

that exploit devices’ complex surface topography and miniaturised features, including electron 

emitting devices for high-power/high-speed electronics [26, 27] and robust microfluidic 

devices [28] made entirely of diamond, fabrication of which would not be technologically 

attainable using conventional machining methods.

This article reviews the state of knowledge and the research work performed to date on fs-laser 

micromachining of diamond and addresses several important questions:

1) What light-induced changes occur in diamond and how these changes affect diamond 

properties and its surface topography (Section 2)?

2) Why fs-laser machining should be preferred to precisely micromachine diamond, despite 

other (nano- and pico- second) laser processing methods currently available (Section 3)?

3) What are the processing parameters to machine diamond using a laser light, how to select 

and tailor the laser system and sample processing parameters, and how to select the most 

appropriate analytical methods to study the topography and chemical structure of machined 

diamond crystals (Section 4)?

4) What are the current and forthcoming future applications for machined diamond, and what 

are the future research prospects in this developing field (Section 5 and 6)?

We expect this brief review to appeal to the entire carbon research community and the broader 

laser processing/laser machining community as a whole. Given that the article addresses an 

intricate combination of diamond physicochemical properties, laser system design, photo-

induced ablation mechanism of carbon materials, it will also appeal to laser engineers, optical 

physicists and materials engineers in other fields.


6

2
LIGHT-INDUCED STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN DIAMOND

2.1
Diamond absorption of laser energy

Laser ablation (aka. photoablation) is the process of removing material from a solid or, 

occasionally, liquid surface by irradiating it with a laser beam. At low laser flux, the material 

is heated by the absorbed laser energy and evaporates (or sublimates). The nature of the effects 

of the interaction of the laser light with a solid depends on many factors, among which the most 

relevant are the laser pulse duration (τ), wavelength (λ), laser power (Pavg) (i.e., beam energy 

density), exposure time and repetition rate (Rp) (in case of pulsed lasers), the beam 

characteristics, the optical characteristics of the applicator and physical properties of a solid. 

Inside the solid, light can be reflected, transmitted, scattered and absorbed. Only absorbed 

energy can produce the desired ablation effects in a solid, whereas reflected, transmitted and 

scattered light could affect the shape, the extension and the position of the warmed-up volume 

within the ablated area. The depth to which a certain amount of energy can ablate a solid 

depends on its absorption coefficient (i.e., attenuation coefficient) and its enthalpy of 

vaporization (i.e., heat of vaporization), which for diamond is around 711 kJ/mol [29]. The 

phase diagram of carbon, given in Fig. 1, shows that at ambient pressure diamond when 

subjected to heat first, converts to graphite and, eventually sublimates bypassing the liquid state 

[30].

Fig. 1. Phase diagram of carbon [30].


7

The ablation begins above the threshold fluence (TF), which predominantly depends on 

material properties and the presence of intrinsic and extrinsic defects in the bulk and at/on the 

surface of an ablated solid. The ablation TF also varies with the pulse duration (see Fig. 2). 

Ablation threshold for the synthetic diamond in the ultrashort fs regime is about 3 J/cm2 [31]. 

Laser-based MRPs often employ the application of multiple pulses to reduce the ablation 

threshold at the ablated surface area owing to the defect accumulation at the uppermost surface 

of the ablated area [29]. Notably, the material removal rate (MRR) per pulse above the ablation 

threshold, in effect, follows the Beer–Lambert law, with optical attenuation of the ablating laser 

light directly related to the optical path length and absorptivity of the ablated specimen [32].

Fig. 2. Ablation threshold fluence vs. pulse duration [31].

There is a considerable difference between the optical absorption of a short-pulse, such as a 

nano-second and a pico-second (i.e., ns and ps, respectively) and an fs-pulsed laser radiation in 

diamond [29]. The laser energy absorption in pure, single crystal diamond (SCD) occurs 

through the electronic excitation across the  - * bond forming an exceptionally wide 

bandgap, Eg, which depending on crystallinity, varies between 5.0 and 5.5 eV [15]. The Eg can 

only be bridged by high energy UV photons ranging from approximately 250 nm (for a 5.0 eV 

Eg) down to ~ 225 nm (for 5.5 eV) diamond crystals. However, conventional laser ablation 

systems normally use a visible 532 nm (green) or a near infra-red (N-IR) 1064 nm light for 

laser machining processes and, as a result, are unable to sublime pure diamond efficiently. 


8

Ablation in diamond is strongly affected by the presence of intrinsic and extrinsic defects 

including ad-atoms, interstitial or substitutional defects in the crystal lattice, point, line (e.g.,

grain boundary), volume and surface defects [15]. These defects collectively reduce the TF and 

high defect concentrations are associated with low ablation TFs in diamond, which is 

advantageous for laser machining. In an instance when defects/impurities are absent altogether, 

multiple photons are able to excite an electron in a process known as multiphoton absorption

resulting in improved ablation rates [15], the latter, requires a high spatial and temporal photon 

density of an fs-pulsed laser with a focused beam [29]. Ramanathan et al. [33] reported that 

even though the optical transparency of diamond is quite high for a vis – N-IR laser light, high 

peak power enables a stable absorption through a multiphoton ionization and absorption at 

defects in diamond. Kononenko et al. [34] demonstrated that a precise multiphoton absorption 

prevails in laser fluences over a wide range. Both studies show that a severe non-linear 

transformation is experienced by fs-pulsed laser beam at path lengths of tens of microns or 

longer, which determines the energy absorbed by the diamond’s crystal lattice.

In the process of ablation the sp3- tetrahedral phase of diamond is generally removed (i.e.,

sublimed) through a combined process of graphitization, in which the sp3 phase is thermally 

converted into olefinic and/or aromatic sp2 fraction , and ablation and oxidization processes 

[35]. The heat affected zone (HAZ) can be effectively minimised by using fs-pulsed laser 

irradiation owing to its ultra-short interaction time, which promotes the formation of a narrow 

ablation profile with a minimal pile up and skirting features [29, 33]. Ogawa et al. [36] noted 

that fs-pulse transfers its energy via a photon-electron coupling fully prior to phonon-driven 

diffusion, which induces an ablation process that is, unique for fs-light, occurs without a 

significant graphitisation. It has been proposed that diamond sublimation occurs when the peak 

temperature reaches above 4800 K, whereas it graphitizes when the temperature in HAZ 

remains between 2000 K and 4800 K [15].

Additionally, it is now known that the MRR increases with an increase of incident fs-laser 

ablation energy, however only a minimal change in the thickness of an sp2-graphitised layer is 

observed [36]. Notably, all types of laser irradiation reduce optical transmittance of diamond’s 

surface owing to the optical breakdown of the bulk transparent solid, the latter, in fact further 

reduces the suitability of laser ablated diamonds for optical applications [37]. Nonetheless, the 

use of fs-pulsed light significantly minimises the severity of the observed optical breakdown 

as ultra-short pulse durations in fs-generated pulses are several orders of magnitude lower in 

frequency compared to the electron-lattice relaxation time (10-10-10-12 sec) [38].


9

2.2
Photoinduced changes in diamond properties

In diamond, carbon, C, atoms form an sp3 hybridized directional covalent bonds with the 

neighbouring atoms in tetrahedral orientation with an s orbital overlapping three p orbitals and, 

hereby, providing strength to the σ bonds at an enclosed C–C–C angle of 109.47  and C–C 

bond length of 1.54 Å and a bandgap of 5.5 eV [39]. Laser irradiation cleaves one (or at higher 

fluences, a few) of covalent C–C σ bonds allowing for three covalently-bonded electrons to re-

arrange themselves to a planar orientation by slightly opening the enclosed C–C–C bond angle 

to 120  and reducing the C–C bond length to 1.42 Å. The fourth electron becomes delocalised 

over the entire π - π sheet, overall forming an sp2 hybridized bonding arrangement as in 

graphite. This sp3 to sp2 phase transition drastically reduces the bandgap to  -0.04 eV. Notably, 

the sp3 to an sp2 phase transition performed in a controlled manner opens a unique opportunity 

for the development of ‘all-carbon’ electronic, optical and even quantum devices [40, 41]

owing to the extreme differences in atomic structure, electron arrangement and chemical 

configuration and interaction mechanism between the two most common carbon allotropes. 

In the fs regime, when diamond is irradiated with an applied fluence above its ablation threshold 

of approximately 3 J/cm2, ablation with minimal graphitization is observed (at depths fewer 

than 50 nm) [36], whereas at fluences below the ablation threshold (i.e., < 3 J/cm2) no ablation 

is occuring and mostly graphitization is obserbved marked with a formation of an sp2 phase. 

This phenomenon is graphically shown in Fig. 3a, where the optical transmission of chemical 

vapor deposited (CVD) diamond rapidly falls at 0.3 J/cm2 (well below diamond’s ablation 

threshhold) indicating the start of graphitization process [12]. It has been suggested, that the 

bulk transformation process from an sp3 to an sp2 bonding proceeds with the direct 

photodamage of the diamonds’ sp3 lattice creating an sp2 nuclei and subsequent heating of 

newly formed and embedded sp2 graphitic centres in the irradiated sp3 volume [42]. Fig. 3b 

shows the reduction in total optical transmittance attributed to an increasing local graphitization 

relative to the projected optical power (the number of laser shots at different incident fluences) 

for a ps-laser light [43]. Notably, there is an initial photonic accumulation period observed, 

where the energy density remains low for relatively low laser fluences.


10

Fig. 3. a) Optical transmission of CVD diamond specimens vs. incident laser fluence (120 fs, 

800 nm) [12], b) changes in the optical transmittance of CVD diamond vs. number of laser 

shots at different fluences (220 ps, 539 nm) [43], c) Raman spectra of original CVD diamond 

(bottom) and laser modified region (top) [12].

The structure of downconverted sp2 phase that is formed following the laser irradiation of 

diamond samples in air is never purely crystalline but is highly amorphous. For example, a 532 

nm Raman spectra of the original nitrogen, N, doped CVD diamond commonly displays the 

characteristic sp3 vibrational mode at ~1331 cm-1 and, a low intensity broad mode at ~1420 –

1425 cm-1, which is commonly atributed to an N-doped CVD, as shown in Fig. 5 [12]. Laser 

irradiation gives rise to additonal vibrational modes attributed to microcrystalline graphite at 

~1417 cm−1 (peak 1, Fig. 3c), amorphous sp2 carbon at ~1450 cm−1 (peak 2, Fig. 3c) and 

distorted microcrystalline graphite at ~1560 cm−1 (peak 3, Fig. 3c) and 1580 cm−1 (peak 4, Fig. 

3c) [44, 45]. The sp2 rich phase formed in diamond following laser irradiation is mostly 

composed of a mixture of an sp2 aromatic clusters and sp2 olefinic chains [46, 47] and often 

contains poly(p-phenylene vinylene) and poly(p-phenylene) sp2 fractions, analogous to those 

found in amorphous carbon materials synthesised in hydrocarbon plasmas [48-50].

Following the preliminary sp3 to sp2 phase conversion and the formation of a graphitised nuclei

the photoablation of diamond proceeds as a combined process of vaporization and oxidation.

The vaporization process occurs both in air and in vacuum, whereas the oxidation process 

occurs only in the presence of oxygen. Komlenok et al. [51] reported that at high laser fluences 

of 1.2 - 3.8 J/cm2 that are a fraction below and slightly above its TF, diamond can be sublimed 

at a rate of 30 - 200 nm per pulse in both air and vaccum owing to vaporization driven 

photoablation. At low fluences of 0.34 - 0.55 J/cm2, which are an order of magnitude lower 

than the diamond’s TF, the siblimation is minimal at 0.01 nm per pulse as the process is mainly 


11

driven by oxidation [51] and, no submimation occured at low fluences in the absence of oxygen 

(in vaccum).

The photoelectric properties of diamond, including optical absorption and photon-to-electron 

quantum efficiency, depend strongly on its intrinsic crystalline structure and the presence of 

impurities. Owing to its high refractive index, n, that is 2.4 at 590 nm [52], photocurrent in a 

pure diamond crystal can be induced by photon absorption in the UV range (below 225 nm)

[53], however in an instance when impurities and defects are present, - in the visible range

(415-478 nm) [54]. This is a very important experimental observation indicating that the 

presence of defects in diamond increases the photoconductivity by enabling light of lower 

energy to be absorbed in the material. Brecher et al. [15] recently reported that UV induced 

photoconductivity over a prolonged period reduced the sensitivity of diamond-based UV 

detectors. The sensitivity could be fully restored by thermal annealing of diamond crystals in 

white light [15].

2.3
Photoinduced changes in diamond surface topography

Descriptions of surface topography in applications to laser-processed materials normally refer 

to the shape of the surface profile (i.e., waviness, type of surface finish) and an average 

arithmetic surface roughness, Ra, value, which are known to significantly impact the material’s 

bulk properties and its suitability for applied applications. Irradiation of materials surface 

changes the surface topography depending on the shape, intensity and polarization of an 

incident laser beam. Laser irradiation results in the formation and growth of an sp2 graphitized 

region immediately within the HAZ in diamonds at lower fluence, which can be rapidly and 

easily sublimated at higher fluence [55], depending on the pulse width of the incident laser 

pulse. The use of fs-pulse light is associated with the reduced heat transfer into the bulk of the 

work material [56], sharp thermal profiles and high precision machining [33, 55] compared to 

conventional ns- and or ps-laser processing methods. Using an fs beam with a circular 

polarization enables effective micromachining of various spherical, rounded, globular and 

conical features on the surface of the ablated solid, while preserving the sp3 phase composition, 

including curved profiles when accelerating beams are employed [57]. The use of laser beam 

with a linear polarization generates graphitic periodic surface structures over the irradiated 

surface [58, 59], including ripple-like features with a characteristic periodicity, close to the 

wavelength of the incident light. The latter phenomenon arises from the interference of the 


12

incident laser beam with the scattered waves from the surface of an ablated solid. The 

interference between the incident light wave and the surface plasmon excitation is responsible 

for the generation of the surface structures that display periodicity patterns close to or, 

sometimes, less than the laser incident wavelength. The latter is dependent on the intrinsic Ra

values and surface features of the irradiated workpiece [59]. It is important to point out that the 

periodic ripples of the surface of an ablated solid display the periodic features that are much 

smaller compared to the irradiated laser wavelength range, are smaller for fs-laser irradiated 

solids compared to ps- or ns- irradiated materials [44, 45, 60, 61]. Fig. 4 shows surface 

morphology of CVD diamond samples irradiated with linearly polarized fs- laser beam at 

fluences near the ablation threshold (i.e., 1.9 J/cm2) [62]. The scanning electron microscopy 

(SEM) images of nano-sized gratings with regular ~170 nm periodicities are shown displaying

abrupt verges between the grooves and ridges [62]. However, the use of a slightly higher 

fluence (2.8 J/cm2) results in an increased periodicity of ~190 nm and a smoother profile of the 

gratings due to stronger thermal effect [62].

Fig. 4. SEM images of diamond irradiated by 800 nm fs laser light: (a) 3000 pulses at a 

fluence of 1.9 J /cm2 result in a periodicity of ~170 nm, (b) 8000 pulses at a fluence of 2.8 J 

/cm2 produce smoother periodicities of ~190 nm [62].


13

Various features can also be laser written (aka. scribed) on diamond with a suitable periodicity 

and spacing for applied waveguide applications. Recently, Bharadwaj et al. [63] reported on 

successful fabrication of mid-IR waveguides by scribing two 40 µm waveguide lines on SCD, 

which were designed to operate at 2.4 µm and 8.6 µm wavelengths; the waveguiding was 

possible owing to an increased polarizibility and a greatly reduced refractive index in the 

waveguide’s sp2 rich cladding sheath [64].  Laser irradiation can be tuned to reduce Ra value 

of the machined workpiece, which is generally considered as an indicator of improved 

machining surface quality. Moreover, for applied applications it is important to maximise 

MRRs in laser ablation processes as a measure of improved machining efficiency. Yao et al. 

[65] have shown that in an instance, when nano-crystalline CVD diamond with is subjected to 

fs laser ablation, the Ra and MRR are almost linearly co-dependent (Fig. 5; notably, the Ra of 

as-grown CVD was 0.342 μm).

Fig. 5. The Ra and MRR vs. single pulse energies (100 fs, 800 nm, 1 kHz, Ss: 1 mm/s) [65].

Fs laser irradiation enables precise modification of diamond surface profile depending on laser 

beam characteristics. However, the increase of MRR in laser machining adversely affects the 

surface roughness of processed samples, the latter effect to be minimized through a careful 

selection of process parameters and the use of appropriate to the sample ablation threshold 

parameters.


14

3
LASER MICROMACHINING OF DIAMOND

3.1
Conventional (nano-, pico- second) laser micromachining of diamond

Laser irradiation, a versatile tool for material processing, enables precise control over the 

amount of energy focused at a specific location on the sample by selecting appropriate to the 

sample process parameters [66]. Laser ablation processes normally include laser grooving, 

scribing, drilling and marking [10, 67], all of which are used to remove bulk of the material. 

The ns- laser ablation process is governed by electrons in an ablated media absorbing laser 

photon energy and reaching a thermal equilibrium with the lattice during the laser pulse 

duration [68]. Owing to a relatively short electron-lattice relaxation time of 10-10-10-12 s, that 

is up to three orders of magnitude smaller, compared to ns- laser pulse duration [38], the ns-

laser ablation processes are thermally destructive to the sample media as extended HAZs are 

generated in the process. Takayama et al. [69] classified four different forms of damage and 

their causes that occur during ns- laser processing of diamond (employing 15.6 ns, 532 nm, 

Pavg > 1W system as a study model), namely: cracking, groove shape deformation, ripple 

formation, and debris deposition. Cracking resulted from a rapid temperature change, groove 

shape deformation resulted from an improved absorption of the plasma generated through ns-

laser irradiation, surface ripples were formed by the ns- laser beam interference with the groove 

walls, whereas laser induced debris deposition was attributed to the use of sample-specific

ablation regimes [69]. Cadot et al. [10] (see Fig. 6) have shown that graphitisation and sp2

amorphization of diamond occurs at relatively low fluences for ns-pulsed laser as evidenced 

by appearance of characteristic disordered graphite D and G Raman modes at ~1350 cm-1 and 

1580 cm-1, respectively [48, 49, 70], which are becoming broader and display higher intensities 

at higher fluences.


15

Fig. 6. 1064 nm Raman spectra of diamond irradiated with 30 ns pulsed laser at 35 kHz at 

various fluences (adapted from [10]).

Kononenko et al. [71] reported that reduction of ns- pulse width resulted in less graphitization 

and the disordered graphitized layer thickness was found to be independent of the laser energy 

for fluence ranges above the ablation threshold, namely at or above 0.2 J/cm2. Ohfuji et al. [21]

found that the ambient conditions during ns-pulsed laser machining of PCD samples had a 

negligible effect on both the thickness of the final graphitized layer and the recorded MRR

values. These works additionally confirm that the predominant mechanism of material removal 

in diamond is by graphitization and subsequent sublimation of the graphitized layer from the 

ablated volume/region, as noted ealier.

It has been reported that excimer lasers commonly operating in the range of 5 – 20 ns pulse

lengths are capable of producing deep holes in diamond during laser drilling operations [72], 

the actual depth of the hole that can be created is, however, limited by the generated 

hydrocarbon plasma plume, which obstructs the laser energy from reaching towards the bottom 

of the hole and thus reducing the pressure available to expel the melted and graphitised material 

out. Typical ablation plasma attributes include characteristics such as ion density, ion flow 

velocity, free electron velocity as well as electron temperature [73]. Naturally, longer pulses 

generate plasma plumes of higher ion density and electron temperature and, therefore short 

pulse widths have been recommended for laser drilling processes where an increase in the depth 

of hole was required. Earlier works of Kononenko et al. [74] have shown that ps- pulsed laser 

drilling of CVD diamond generated less plasma plume while creating a deeper hole (i.e., 500 


16

μm) compared to a ns- pulsed laser used under similar conditions, which produced a much 

shallower hole (i.e., 50 μm). 

Additionally, it was also observed that a significantly higher threshold fluence (~17 J/cm2) was 

required for the through-hole laser drilling process compared to the blind-hole shallow drilling 

process (2 J/cm2) for the same workpiece material type. The latter observation was attributed 

to an increased photon absorption of dense plasma restricted by the wall of a deep hole. To 

curtail the photon scavenging effects of plasma plume during laser drilling of CVD diamond 

Migulin et al. [75] employed an additional oxidation potential of an O2 jet to facilitate the 

removal of sublimed graphitised fractions from the ablated volume through CO- and CO2

formation, and found the solution reasonably effective. 

It is often noted that the thickness of the graphitized layer formed on diamond sample is 

inversely proportional to the projected ns-laser fluence since complete down-conversion from 

an sp3 to aromatic sp2 fraction is only possible when diamond sublimes above its ablation 

threshold. Mouhamadali et al. [76] showed that CVD diamond transformed to a ‘thicker’ 

amorphous sp2 graphite-like (a-C) when irradiated with a green (532 nm) 40 ns light at a 

relatively low fluence of 4.9 J/cm2, whereas only a ‘thin’ sp2 aromatic phase was observed at 

much higher 15 J/cm2 fluences. Additionally, multiple micro cracks on the surface of aromatic 

sp2 sites ablated at 15 J/cm2 were observed, while only minor cracks were detected on a-C sites 

ablated at 4.9 J/cm2 and the thickness of a-C layer was found to be ~1.5 thicker compared to 

sp2 aromatic phase.

Ps-laser machining was found to be more effective compared to ns-pulsed laser processes given 

a significantly shortened pulse durations and, subsequently, the likelihood of HAZ formation

in the ablated volume. Such as Takayama et al. [77] performed a ps-pulsed laser irradiation 

(1030 nm, 800 ps) using variable repetition rates on a SCD sample to make a tool with a micro-

grooved edge and found that 15.3 J/cm2 fluence at 100 kHz afforded rapid machining with 

limited graphite deposition and devoid of any edge cracking. Guo et al. [78] investigated the 

effect of ps-laser-induced micro-grooves on  the grinding performance of coarse-grained 

diamond wheels for optical glass surface grinding and reported that the laser micro-structuring 

reduces the subsurface damage depth, d’, effectually from 5 to 1.5 
m. Both the d’ and an Ra

values were found to be lower with reducing the micro-groove spacing. Zhang et al. [79]

produced macro-patterns on the diamond grinding wheel surface to improve the grinding 

performance and reported that the grinding temperature and sub-surface damage decreased 

significantly for macro-structured grinding condition. The normal and tangential grinding 


17

forces were reduced by approximately 15% for ps-laser macro-structured grinding wheels 

compared to the conventional grinding wheels.

Various methods have been proposed to improve the laser machining performance. For 

instance, Park et al. [80] performed micromachining with a ns-pulsed excimer laser and an 

assisted compressed auxiliary gas in the machining of diamond films, and observed that the 

laser beam breaks the atomic bonds in the work material and the resultant plasma plume gets 

expelled away by an assisted gas jet, improving machining quality of the diamond surface. 

Additionally, both the ns- and ps-laser processing has been successfully combined with 

precision grinding to improve the machining performance by several researchers, such as 

Brecher et al. [15, 81] employed a ns-laser combined with grinding for fabrication of PCD 

turning tools. In this process, the surface was micromachined using ns-laser irradiation to 

remove the bulk of the material, assisted by conventional grinding process to remove the 

residual. The cutting forces, the magnitude of grinding wheel vibration and the overall 

processing time were significantly reduced by approximately 50 % compared to traditional 

grinding. Likewise, Yang et al. [82] performed the laser induced graphitization of CVD 

diamond into predominantly aromatic graphite, which was subsequently removed via precision 

grinding process.

A fundamental problem with a ns-laser ablation lies in its inability to generate suitably high 

ablation rates and acceptable machined surface quality, the problem is also extended to the 

application of a ps-laser, albeit to a lesser extent. The cracking tendency, the generation of 

pervasive HAZs and poorly controlled graphitization of machined diamond surfaces are mostly 

attributed to relatively long (i.e., ns- and ps-) pulse durations compared to electron-lattice 

relaxation times of 10-10-10-12 s [83]. In particular, ns- process generates more recast layers, 

debris and HAZ compared to the ps-laser process owing to the extended photon-lattice 

interaction time [84] and is associated with significant and stable plasma formation at the 

surface of the ablated media [85]. It is hardly a materials processing method of choice in 

instances where integrity, composition and properties of tetrahedral sp3 organisation in 

diamond are to be preserved during the post laser machining.


18

3.2
Fs- laser micromachining of diamond

The first reported attempts to develop an ultrashort-pulsed laser with a pulse duration of less 

than 0.1 ps were made in early 1980s by Fork et al. [86] and it has taken over two decades to 

recognise an opportunity offered by ultrashort laser technology for precise photoablation of 

diamond. In fs- laser machining, optical energy is transferred to the target media through 

photoinduced optical breakdown, in which a majority of electrons are ionized resulting in a 

structural and, in the instance of diamond ablation, a phase (i.e., sp3 to sp2) transformation and,

subsequent ablation of the irradiated volume. In a highly transparent material, such as dopant-

free pure diamond, the energy absorption must be non-linear due to the insufficient incident 

photon energy avaiable for ionisation [87, 88], and for a non-linear absorption to occur, the 

strength of the electric field in the laser pulse needs to be equal to the electric-field strength, 

something in the order of 109 V m-1 (approximately corresponding to laser intensity of 5 × 1020

W m-2) [89]. High intensity and tight focusing are required to achieve electric-field strengths

of such a magnitude. The non-linear absorption and tight focusing confine the absorption inside 

the bulk of the material to the focal volume preventing the absorption at the surface and thus 

yielding micromachined volumes as small as 0.008 μm3 [90].

The ultrashort laser pulses deposit the laser energy in thin layers with the thickness of 1/α, 

where α is the optical absorption coefficient and, sublime the material through a direct 

vaporisation from the surface [91], which for diamond occurs through conversion of sp3 into a 

full- or a partial- sp2 phase configuration and, subsequent sublimation of sp2 phase from the 

irradiated volume. The sublimation occurs only at or above the sample ablation threshold, and 

it is the critical threshold fluence, which causes the material removal within the irradiated spot 

area and the focal volume in the sample. The fluence, however, should not exceed a certain 

value, specific for a given diamond sample, to avoid the thermal damage and an uncontrolled 

increase of the HAZ in the focal volume. The fs-pulsed lasers are able to generate extremely 

high-power density (up to a few GW) at relatively low average laser power (as low as 100 mW)

[92], high enough to dissociate C–C covalent bonds in a diamond lattice. Graphitization occurs 

by electrons absorbing energy through an inverse bremsstrahlung process and, thus facilitating

a transition from an sp3 tetrahedral to an sp2 aromatic and/or an sp2 olefinic bonding state [93]. 

The sp3 to sp2 transition increases C–C interatomic distances, lowers the density of states 

(DOS) and changes the physico-chemical properties of the irradiated solid [47-50]. Notably, 

the fs-lasers operating at short pulse durations (e.g., in 10-15 s range) enable precise 

manipulation of DOS owing to a relatively long electron-lattice relaxation times of 10-10-10-12


19

s, reduce the probability of  HAZ formation, sublime diamond with minimal thermal damage

and enable the manufacture of surface structures with clear and well-defined edges as shown 

in the Fig. 7(a) and 7(b) and only displaying nanoscale surface ripples Fig. 7(c). 

Fig. 7. SEM images of the high pressure high temperature (HPHT) synthetic SCD surface 

with a pulse train of 200 fs- laser pulses at a rate of 250 kHz: (a) curved structures machined 

at a laser pulse energy of 1.2 mJ, (b) image of the machined surface at pulse energy of 840 

nJ, (c) magnified image of (b) (adapted from [94]).

Fs-laser micromachining involves several physical processes with fairly well-defined 

timescales as shown in Fig. 8(a) [95] and 8(b) [89]. 


20

Fig. 8. a) Ablation mechanism of a short pulse (i.e., ns- laser ablation), adapted from [95]

and b) timescale of physical phenomena associated with the interaction of an ultra-short fs-

pulse laser ablation, adapted from [89].

Namely, it takes a few ps for electrons to transfer absorbed optical energy to the lattice, it takes 

few ns for a dynamic shock/pressure wave to separate hot and dense focal volume [96, 97] and,

an additional few µs for the thermal energy to diffuse out of the focal volume. These processes 

result in a non-thermal ionic motion at a sufficiently high energy to leave behind permanent 

and lasting structural changes [98]. There is a fundamental difference between the fs-photon 

induced damage and that of the ps- or ns- ones [89]. For sub-ps pulsed lasers, the timescale 

over which an fs-pulse excites an electron is much smaller than the electron–phonon scattering 

time (about 1 ps), and as a result, the fs pulses end before the electrons supply its thermal energy 

to any ions. Heat diffusion is confined to the focal area and, as a result, the precision of the 

method is increased [84]. In addition, fs-laser processing does not require defect electrons for 


21

seeding the absorption process; the fs-pulse generates enough seed electrons through non-linear 

ionization [99], making the fs-pulsed laser suitable for the precision micromachining 

applications. Additionally, Zalloum et al. [14] showed high quality micromachining with 

precise geometry can be achieved using fs-pulsed laser employing pulse energies that are 

significantly above diamond’s ablation threshold owing to the minimal thermal effects and 

hydrodynamic expansion of the ablated sample material. Ogawa et al. [36] reported that with 

an increase in energy level, there is an increase in MRR with very minimal change in sp2

graphitised layer thickness.

4
DIAMOND SAMPLE PROCESSING

4.1
Common fs laser micromachining systems

Ultrashort pulsed laser ablation systems are technologically advanced tools capable of 

processing various materials at extremely high peak powers (up to few GW), while delivering 

a highly localized energy that enables a non-thermal ablation of even transparent and low-

absorption samples with high precision and accuracy [92]. Active and passive mode-locked 

oscillators generate ultrashort pulses, that require amplification to reach the desired energy 

levels to process diamond above its ablation threshold (i.e., at or above 3 J/cm2 [31], see Section 

2.1). High peak powers generated in fs-pulsed laser system can also inadvertently damage the 

amplifier, making the fs-pulse amplification a challenging task. In passive mode-locking, the 

energy is transferred from an external source into a gain medium using a semiconductor diode

[100], the latter can be of different chemical composition and structure, commonly a synthetic 

crystal of the garnet group, which enables the generation of discreet wavelengths, pulse 

durations, output power range and pulse repetition rates in fs- pulsed lasers as summarised in 

Table 1, below.


22

Table 1. Fs-laser systems
currently employed in laser micromachining
and their 

characteristics.

Laser type
Wavelengths

(nm)

Pulse 

durations

Power (W)
Repetition 

rate (MHz)

Ti:sapphire 

[57, 101-104]

650 – 1100
5 fs – 50 ps
0.3 – 1.0
80 – 100

Nd:YAG

[35, 105]

1064
30 fs – 30 ps
0.1 – 1.0
10 – 80

Yb:YAG

[106-108]

1030
30 fs – 30 ps
0.1
–
80.0

[109, 110]

10 – 80

[111]

Yb:KGW

[112]

1064
30 fs – 30 ps
0.1
–
3.0

[113]

10 – 80

Fiber

[112, 
114, 

115]

1030 – 1100
50 fs – 500 fs
0.05 – 0.1
20 – 80

Titanium sapphire (Ti:Al2O3) is one of the most common gain medium used in ultra-fast lasers 

owing to its high gain bandwidth enabling the delivery of the short pulses that are highly 

scalable to high pulse energy and average power. Neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet 

(Nd:YAG) and ytterbium-doped (Yb:YAG) gain mediums emit radiation in the N-IR region 

with Nd+ and Yb+ ions, respectively, providing the lasing activity. The Yb:YAG systems are 

the highest power systems that use conventional rod, slab and thin disk configuration. 

Ytterbium-doped potassium gadolinium tungstate (Yb:KGW) compared to Yb:YAG displays 

large gain bandwidth enabling sub-100 fs-pulse durations in mode-locked regime and a low 

quantum defect that is well below 1.0 %, and a relatively high absorption coefficient, k, of 26 

cm-1, high emission and absorption cross sections characteristics. Fibre lasers are low power, 

sub-500 fs pulse systems with inherently flexible gain mediums which are normally pumped 

by semiconductor laser diodes and producing a wavelength in N-IR region. A typical fs- laser 


23

system is normally equipped with a pump and an oscillator, a chirped pulse amplification 

(CPA), a ¼- and a ½- wave plates, a beam expander and prism polarizer, a number of steering 

mirrors, lenses and objectives, a set of light modulators and phase masks, a 

translational/rotational stage with a sample holder, an light-emitting diode (LED) for 

illumination of the sample and a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera for viewing and 

monitoring the sample machining process as schematically shown in Fig. 9.

Fig. 9. Schematic layout of a typical fs-laser system (a Ti:sapphire oscillator is shown).

Additionally, the fs- laser machining system may include a separate sample handling and 

cleaning stage, and, occationally, a vacuum chamber equipped with an axillary low pressure 

pump. Since preliminary sp3 to sp2 phase conversion in diamond and the formation of a 

graphitised nuclei occurs via a mutually linked process of vaporization and oxidation, laser 

machining is normally performed in air under abmient conditions, vacuum chambers, however, 

can be used in instances, where controlled formation of periodic structures on diamond surface 

is required.

4.2
The effects of fs-laser process parameters on micromachining quality

The laser processing parameters include the following: laser wavelength, λ (nm); pulse energy 

Ep (mJ); pulse duration, τ (fs); pulse repetition rate, Rp (kHz); scanning speed, Vs (mm/s); beam 

quality, M2; focal length, f (mm); beam diameter, db (mm) and numerical aperture of the 


24

focusing objective, NA. Along with these parameters, some common terms are also used, such 

as laser peak power, Pp (GW); average power, Pavg (mW); beam intensity, Ip (W/cm2); focal 

spot area, Af (cm2) and focal spot diameter, Df (mm).

The peak power Pp is related to Ep and τ as

𝑃𝑝 = 𝐸𝑝

𝜏
(1)

The pulse energy Ep is related to Pavg and Rp as 

𝐸𝑝 = 𝑃𝑎𝑣𝑔

𝑅𝑝

(2)

The beam intensity, Ip which is the energy delivered per unit focal spot area per unit time, is 

related to Pp and Af as

𝐼𝑝 = 𝑝𝑝

𝐴𝑓

(3)

Substituting Pp from Eq. 1 into Eq. 3 gives

𝐼𝑝 = 𝐸𝑝

τ. 𝐴𝑓

(4)

The fluence, F, which is the energy delivered per unit focal spot area, is related to Ep and Af as

𝐹 = 𝐸𝑝

𝐴𝑓

(5)


25

The focal spot area Af is related to Df as

𝐴𝑓 = 𝜋 𝐷𝑓

2

4
(6)

The focal spot diameter Df is related to M2, λ, f, and db as

𝐷𝑓 = 4 .𝑀2.𝜆. 𝑓

𝜋. 𝑑𝑏

(7)

Substituting Df from Eq. 7 into Eq. 6, gives a relationship between an Af and M2, λ, f, and db as

𝐴𝑓 = 𝜋.

(4 . 𝑀2𝜆.
𝑓

𝜋 𝑑𝑏)

2

4
(8)

Substituting Af from Eq. 8 into Eq. 5, gives a governing relationship between the F and Ep, M2, 

λ, f and db as

𝐹 =
4.𝐸𝑝

𝜋 (4 .𝑀2𝜆.
𝑓

𝜋 𝑑𝑏)

2
(9)

The size as well as the intensity distribution profile of the projected beam within the irradiated 

area affect the material response to the applied laser energy [116]. Also, the laser beam 

propagation characteristics are known to vary during processing in high power laser delivery 

systems [117]. A small change in the focal length has a measurable effect on the spot size and 

the intensity distribution of the projected beam, which in turn influences the stability of the 

machining process, the local material response and overall the MRR [116]. Also, the size of 


26

the laser beam diameter is strongly related to the induced damage probability, overall affecting

the damage threshold of the optic system. The smallest diameter of the laser beam permitted 

for laser induced damage threshold testing as noted in ISO 21254-1:2011 standard is 200 mm

[118]. Since higher fluences can be obtained using smaller laser beam diameters many 

commercial laser machining system suppliers are aiming at providing laser machining centres 

capable of generating smaller beam diameters. A small micrometre-sized focal spot is achieved 

by focusing fs laser pulses using external lenses, which normally results in a non-linear 

absorption. For a collimated Gaussian beam focused on a dielectric material, the diffraction-

limited minimum waist radius w0, that is ½ of the Df, is given in the Eq. 10, as

𝑤0 =
𝑀2𝜆
𝜋(𝑁𝐴)
(10)

Rayleigh range, z0, which is expressed as ½ of the depth of focus, DOF, in a transparent material 

with retractive index, n, and free space wavelength, λ, is given in Eq. 11, as

𝑍0 = 𝑀2𝑛 𝜆

𝜋(𝑁𝐴)2
(11)

Eqs. 10 – 11 show that a laser beam with a shorter wavelength and a larger NA produce a

smaller beam waist diameter and a smaller depth of focus, which in turn result in a pulse of a 

higher fluence.

The number of pulses, N, delivered to a specific spot is related to the Df, Rp and Vs as

𝑁 = 𝐷𝑓 𝑅𝑝

𝑉𝑠

(12)

Eq. 4 shows that a laser beam intensity is directly related to its pulse energy and inversely

related to pulse duration and focal spot area. Fluence is linearly related to laser pulse energy 

and has an inverse square relationship with the beam wavelength (see Eq. 9). A number of 

pulses delivered at a specific spot on a sample is linearly related to a focal spot diameter and 


27

pulse repetition rate, and inversely related to the scanning speed (see Eq. 12). All these 

parameters influence the characteristics of material ablation and the effect of these laser 

processing parameters on machining of diamond has been reported in the following 

experimental studies.

It is known that the laser pulse duration is inversely proportional to its beam intensity( see Eq. 

4), and therefore having a strong influence on the machining quality and the MRRs. Ogawa et 

al. [36] compared the surface quality of diamond micromachined by an fs- and a ns- laser and 

reported that in an instance when machining was performed using a ns- pulsed laser (τ 140 ns, 

λ 1064 nm, Df 40 mm, Rp 10–100 kHz, Pavg <100 W, Ep <1000 mJ), significant amounts of re-

solidified materials or debris were left on the machined diamond surface. However, when the 

surface was micromachined using a fs-pulsed laser (τ 350 fs, Rp 200 kHz, Df 40 mm, Ep <50 

mJ, λ 1045 nm (IR), Pavg < 10 W), no post-machining debris were found as shown in Fig. 10. 

Fig. 10. Machined surfaces by (a) 140 ns-pulsed and, (b) 350 fs-pulsed laser; adapted from 

[36].

It was reported that an fs-pulsed laser machining of diamond with circular polarization 

produces an Ra of ~0.02 m and an MRR of 0.004 mm3/s with no detectable surface layer 

graphitization as shown in Fig. 11(a) and Ra remains below 0.3 m range irrespective of the 

laser power projected on the sample [36]. Notably, the desired high MRR and a relatively low 

Ra during laser machining were only achieved by employing an fs- pulsed laser, as shown in 

Fig. 11(c).


28

Fig. 11. a) Raman spectra after 140 ns- (1064 nm) and 350 fs- (1045 nm) machining; 

comparative MRR and Ra values for 140 ns- (1064 nm) and 350 fs- (1045 nm) machining

operations on dimaond [36].

Fs- laser machining with a linear polarized light is normally associated with the formation of 

so-called light induced periodic surface structures (LIPSS), which appear on the uppermost 

surface of an ablated workpiece [119]. LIPSSs features vary significantly depending on the 

selected wavelength and polarization [120, 121], and as shown in Fig. 12(a-c) LIPSS 

topological features can be spatially reduced from ~0.2 µm (Fig. 12 (a)) to 90 nm (Fig. 12(b)), 

when an fs laser wavelengths is reduced from 800 nm to 400 nm during laser machining of a 

diamond sample. Additionally, the application of an fs- pulsed laser light with a circular 

polarization results in an Ra reduction from 0.16 µm to 0.096 µm and almost complete 

disappearance of LIPSS at the same wavelength [36]. The thickness of graphitised sp2-rich 

layer at the uppermost surface of diamond specimens irradiated using a ns-pulsed laser is 

commonly reported to be a few µm (e.g., 2–5 µm), in contrast, the fs-pulsed laser efficiently 

ablates the material and the thickness of graphitized layer is normally much lower, often only 

a few tens of nms (e.g., less than 50 nm) as reported by Ogawa et al. [36]. Therefore, the fs-

pulsed laser produces quality ablated surface in diamond with minimal graphitization. A higher 

pulse energy results in higher fluence, which in turn generates higher MRRs (refer to Eq. (9)). 

Zalloum et al. [14] investigated the effect of varying the pulse energy on the micromachining 

of HPHT SCD (τ 200 fs, λ 800 nm, Rp 250 kHz) and reported no LIPSS-like formation below 

75 nJ ablation threshold, which corresponds to a laser fluence of 9.6 J/cm2 using Df of 1 mm. 

However, using pulse energies that are significantly above the ablation threshold (i.e., 0.42 

mJ), it was shown that fs pulses produce clear LIPSS-like saw-tooth structures in diamond at a 


29

scale below the diffraction limit (Fig. 12 (c). Increasing the pulse energy to 2.52 mJ increased 

the depth of LIPSS-like saw-tooth structures (Fig. 12 (d).

Fig. 12. a) SEM images of LIPSS on diamond film treated by near normal incidence P-

polarized 100 fs- laser with 1 kHz, after 3000 pulses: (a) 800 nm laser with 1.90 J/cm2, (b) 

400 nm laser with 0.25 J/cm2, adapted from [36]; (c) formation of LIPPS-like saw-tooth 

structures during fs-laser micro-structuring, (d) dependence of LIPSS-like saw-tooth depths

on fs-pulse energy, adapted from [14].

By using higher laser beam power and lower scanning speed an improved material ablation is 

achieved (refer to Eq. (12)). Dou et al. [122] showed that the width and depth of an fs-laser (λ

800 nm, τ 120 fs, Pavg 5 W, Rp 1 kHz) induced microgrooves in CVD SCD increased with the 

increase of laser power and decreased with an increase of scanning speed. The suitable 

scanning speed for maximizing MRR in fs-laser machining was suggested to be about 0.1 mm/s

[122]. The ablation rate in the depth direction was found to decrease when the scanning speed 

was greater than 0.3 mm/s [122].

Similarly, the machined structure geometry in fs-single shot ablation regime is affected by the 

fluence as well as an NA, which affects the focal spot radius, as given in Eq. (10). For 

applications that require high depth and high aspect ratio features, it is useful to irradiate the 


30

sample sufficiently above its ablation threshold fluence value. The micromachined structures 

were reported to be spherically symmetric for NAs larger than 0.6, for NAs lower than 0.6 the 

resulting structures become asymmetric (τ 200 fs, λ 800 nm, Rp 250 kHz) [14]. 

Ionin et al. [103] investigated microscale linear damage tracks inside natural SCD ablated at 

different NAs and focal depths using an fs-pulsed laser source (λ 744 nm, τ 120 fs, Ep 6.5 mJ, 

Rp 10 Hz) and reported that there were no detectable bulk damage to the samples at NA of 0.17 

in 400 – 1600 MW power range, whereas at NA of 0.4, 120 μm long continuous graphitic sp2-

rich micro-tracks were machined. 

Vermeulen et al. [102] studied the effects of ionization regime in SCD samples using a range 

of laser fluences (from 0.29 J/cm2 to 2.35 J/cm2) and power (from 6.92 mW to 55.79 mW) 

during fs-pulsed laser (800 nm, τ 50 fs, Rp 1 kHz, Df 77.9 mm) ablation and showed that 

tunnelling ionization was dominant at high (i.e., 2.35 J/cm2) fluences, whereas multi-photon 

ionization prevailed at low fluences. However, a transition in the ionization regime was 

observed around the laser fluence of 3.2 J/cm2 from the multi-photon ionization to the 

tunnelling ionization. The tunnelling ionization regime is believed to enhance the 

graphitization in the high laser fluence stage where a strong surface cracking phenomenon was 

also observed. The diameter of the dimple in SCD sample was found to increase from 18.5 mm 

to 71.9 mm with an increase in the laser power from 10 mW to 260 mW, as shown in Fig. 13. 

This means that the MRR increases with increasing the laser power and incident fluence.

Fig. 13. (a) Dimples machined with fs-pulsed laser at varying power, (b) A relationship 

between the dimple diameter and the projected fs-laser power, adapted from [102].


31

Likewise, an increase in pulse repetition rate leads to an improved material ablation, due to 

having a greater number of pulses projected over an irradiated area, for the same pulse energy 

and pulse duration, as given in Eq. (12). 

Sotillo et al. [112] studied the effect of repetition rate on the fs-laser induced microfabrication 

on the diamond surface machining double line structures at repetition rates of 5, 25, and 500 

kHz, while keeping other parameters constant (i.e., τ 230 fs, λ 515 nm, Ep 200 nJ, Vs 0.5 mm/s, 

1.25 NA). Their results showed that high repetition rate of 500 kHz resulted in minimal laser-

induced graphitization on the sample. The repetition rates not only influence the formation of 

graphitised sp2-rich layer, but also affect the Ra values of the machined sample. Lower 

repetition rates induce greater compressive stress in machined samples and facilitate an sp2

fraction formation, which results in a reduced refractive index [123]. White et al. [124] also 

showed higher pulse repetition rates produced drilled holes of larger diameters in PCD diamond 

films machined using an single and multiple fs-laser (τ 200 fs, Ep 0.8 mJ, NA 0.85) pulses, as 

shown in Fig. 14.

Fig. 14. Fs-laser structuring of a PCD film surface at with 1 mm beam diameter: (a) single 

pulse; (b) 50 pulse at 1 kHz and (c) 750 pulses at 250 kHz machining.

The presence of intrinsic and extrinsic defects and impurities in the synthetic diamond serve as 

absorption sites that reduce its ablation threshold and need to be considered while comparing 

different fs- pulsed laser ablation results on seemingly similar diamond samples. 

Kononenko et al. [12] showed that the impurities and defects in the CVD diamond sample 

contributed to the process of ionization and increased the seed electrons production for the 

impact ionization, overall reducing the damage threshold for CVD diamond samples by ~30 % 


32

compared to a pure, defect-free, natural diamond. The reported damage thresholds for the CVD 

diamond and the natural diamond sample were 10 – 80 J/cm2 and 2 – 4 J/cm2, respectively for 

fs-laser irradiation (800 nm, 120-fs, 8 mm objective; beam waist diameter 3.0 µm). 

The laser process parameters, including the wavelength, pulse energy, power, pulse duration

and repetition rates, the scanning speed, numerical aperture and beam polarization are to be 

selected carefully to maximise MRRs, attain low Ra values and produce minimal sp2-graphitised

layer in processed diamond samples. One of the most important laser process parameters is

pulse duration, τ, which influences the intensity of the incident beam (refer to Eq. (4)) and, 

thus, affecting the MRR, Ra and HAZ mostly. For a specific pulse duration regime, the next 

most important factor is the laser fluence, F, which depends on the Ep, M2, λ, f and db (refer to 

Eq. (9)). In the ultrashort fs-pulsed regime, the ablation threshold for diamond is over 3 J/cm2

[31]. The third most important factor is the number of pulses delivered at a specific spot, N, 

which is influenced by Df, Rp and Vs (refer to Eq. (12)). Hence, the pulse duration, fluence and 

number of pulses at specific spot are the three most important factors dictating the material 

ablation.

4.3
Post-processing of the fs laser irradiated diamond samples

The fs-laser machining is a relatively clean process, however a small graphitic debris still may 

form on the machined surface of diamond, which requires removal.

The most economical and the simplest method is a chemo-mechanical scrub, in which Q-tips, 

wipes or soft brushes soaked in hydrocarbon solvents such as ethanol, methanol, acetone, etc. 

and/or demineralised water with anionic cleaning surfactants are employed to manually 

dislodge and remove  the debris [14, 107].

The acid-scrub involves cleaning the samples in a solution of sulphuric (H2SO4), perchloric 

and nitric (HNO3) acids (mixed at 5:3:1 wt.%) and heated to 200 °C to remove the graphitized 

layer formed on the machined surface [35]. Likewise, an aqua regia, a mixture of HNO3 and 

hydrochloric acids (1:3 wt.%) can be employed to boil the samples at 120 °C for 2 hrs [106]. 

Following the acid cleaning process, the samples are rinsed in deionised water and dried with 

compressed nitrogen gas [106]. 

Ultrasonic cleaning [114, 125] enables removal of debris from machined diamond samples by 

using cavitation bubbles produced by high frequency (15–400 kHz) sound waves to agitate the 


33

liquid media in which the samples are placed for the duration of the US cleaning cycle. Higher 

frequency produces smaller nodes between the cavitation points resulting in a more precise 

cleaning of finer features. Often diamond samples are ultrasonically cleaned in H2SO4 or HNO3

acids for 0.5 – 1 hr, followed by deionised water rinse [114, 125].

One of the advantages of fs-laser machining is the easy, economical and uncompromising way 

by which the samples can be cleaned compared to ns- or ps-laser machined samples. The latter

require more rigorous post-processing methods to remove the fused sp2-debris including the 

use of multiple repeated steps of chemo-mechanical, acid-scrub and an ultrasonic cleaning and 

even mechanical grinding [82] and high pressure gas jet ablation [80].

4.4
Characterisation of micromachined diamond samples

In industrial settings laser irradiated diamond samples are typically analysed employing a 

limited range of optical and electron microscopy tools to characterise the 3D surface 

topography and Ra and spectroscopic techniques to characterise their chemical composition.

These techniques vary by their processing capabilities and scalability and are often employed 

for batch sample screening.

The pattern and geometry of laser machined surfaces is normally visually inspected using an 

optical microscope equipped with a high magnification (i.e., 100X) objective lenses [35, 82, 

104, 106, 107]. The diffraction limits the spatial resolution of examined features to ~200 nm

(~½ of blue 400 nm light). A 3D optical microscopy analysis represented by a laser scanning 

confocal microscopy (LSCM) and a white light interferometry (WLI) enables a detailed 

observation of surface profile, 3D surface topography and the ablated structures [114] by using 

a light directed in such a way that it detects the 3D surface. The capabilities of LSCM and WLI 

vary significantly to batch sample processing, however both the LSCM [115] and the WLI 

[107, 125] offer a sub-μm spatial resolution and detailed measurement and analysis of 3D 

surface topography.

Mechanical surface profilometry uses a contact physical probe with contact force feedback and 

allows a limited but a straightforward characterisation of surface morphology at ~10 μm

resolution in samples were surface features are highly pronounced and surface roughness is 

high [126]. To a lesser degree, atomic force microscopy (AFM) analysis with a spatial 


34

resolution of a few-nm allows precise surface topography studies including the LIPSS features

[106], but at a much reduced sample processing rates and increased costs. 

SEM with spatial resolution of sub-50 nm generates the image of a sample by detecting the 

reflected electrons focusing only on the surface. SEM provides a relatively simple, relatively 

quick and less costly method to study samples with diverse geometries [107, 125, 127].

However, application of SEM to diamond batch processing is limited as the measurements 

require a compensation for a non-conducting (i.e., diamond) sample charge accumulation 

[128].

By using surface profile data the MRR can be calculated by (i) multiplying cross-sectional area 

by the scanning speed [125] and/or, (ii) dividing the total material removal volume by the laser 

machining time [82, 129, 130].

The physico-chemical and structural characterization of the laser irradiated diamond samples 

is often performed using Raman and Fourier Transform IR (FT-IR) spectroscopy analysis. The 

structural transformation in samples can be distinguished by the unique Raman vibrational 

modes in visible (442 - 633 nm) range at ~1332 cm-1 and ~1580 cm-1 for tetrahedral diamond 

and graphite, respectively [35, 36, 104, 114, 131, 132]. Multiwavelength Raman in UV – N-IR 

range offers significantly enhanced probing capabilities since 244 nm (~ 5 eV) and 325 nm 

(~3.8 eV) UV Raman directly probes sp3 density of states (DOS) making the signature ‘T’ 

resonance mode at ~1030 cm-1 [49, 132-134] directly visible. The 785 nm (~1.5 eV) IR Raman 

allows an enhanced screening for possible polymeric inclusions [133-135] that are often 

present in CVD NCD samples. Raman measurements allow quantitative and qualitative 

estimation of the degree of thermal damage to the samples, to monitor the degree of 

crystallinity/amorphization and with a relative accuracy, to quantitatively estimate the 

thickness of the sp2 rich layer [136] on laser irradiated samples. Raman in N-IR – visible range 

is only sensitive to homo-nuclear bonds (e.g., C-C and C=C) of sp2-fraction and therefore its 

application to precise screening of hydrogenated diamond samples is limited, unless 

complimented with a UV Raman with its capability to directly probe sp3 DOS. FT-IR, on the 

other hand, allows the measurement of protonated and hetero-nuclear functional groups (e.g.,

-OH) and as a traditional and a well-established method FT-IR often compliments Raman when 

used to classify diamonds [137].

Other analytical techniques such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) [49, 138, 139], 

electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA), X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) [127]


35

despite offering an enhanced capability to identify sp2 and sp3 phase and surface and subsurface 

chemical compositions in samples are used sparingly in industrial settings owing to their low 

batch processing capabilities and a rather involved analytical methods. 

5.
APPLICATIONS OF FS-LASER MICROMACHINED DIAMOND

Laser micro-patterned diamond tools [140] that are used to mechanically machine multiple 

micro-patterns on ultra-hard workpiece upon direct contact can be effectively fabricated using

fs-laser irradiation process [130]. In their production, a high intensity spatial light modulator, 

such as digital micro-mirror device is employed to project complex patterns into a diamond

workpiece sample. This method of production is also making its way to fabrication of 

identification tags on diamond and direct machining of ultra-hard ceramic materials [141]. Fs-

pulsed laser micromachining of diamond can potentially be employed for fabrication of 

diamond pencils or micro grinding wheels to produce MEMS [114], light emitting diodes [142, 

143], precision photonic components, flat panel display components [57] including, nano- and 

micro-scale photonic channels. Fs-laser machining has an immense potential to be employed 

in the fabrication (i.e., drilling) of ultra-precise circular holes in pre-indented diamond anvil 

cell (DAC) gaskets used in DAC ultra-high-pressure devices [144, 145] and photonics systems 

such as birefringent regions and Bragg gratings [146, 147]. Diamonds are the prime candidate 

materials for X-ray compound refractive lenses [148], since they are not only able to withstand 

extreme radiation and thermal loads but also provide an exceptionally effective and robust 

optical focusing solution [149, 150]. To manufacture such X-ray lenses, the fs-laser 

micromachining is the only technique devoid of any known technological and manufacturing 

drawbacks but that is capable of producing lenses with the lowest surface roughness [151].

Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centres, which occur when a N atom and a vacancy replace two 

adjacent sites in diamond crystal lattice [152], have shown a potential for quantum computing 

and sensing applications [150, 153, 154], since NV centres can be optically found, read out and 

manipulated owing to their long electron-spin coherence times [155-158]. However, the 

intrinsic inertness of diamond is a significant obstacle to the fabrication of NV-integrated 

optical systems. The application of fs- laser pulses with high repetition rate can solve this 

problem by machining optical waveguides in diamond and connecting multiple diamond NVs 

together [112] since there are established routes to fabrication of single mode waveguides the 

visible to the IR in situ in diamond crystal that enable applications such as evanescent field 


36

sensors, quantum information systems, and magnetometry [112]. Since fs-laser processing 

produces a reversible but controllable change in the refractive index in diamond membranes, 

these changes can be effectively exploited for sensing or optical engineering applications [159].

The LIPSS that appear on the surface of diamond open new application avenues such as micro–

solar cells devices [160, 161]. 

In semiconductor manufacturing, diamond can be efficiently sliced into thin semiconductor 

wafers, a process that is by all means quite challenging, owing to its hard and brittle nature. 

Since fs-laser internal processing converts an inner layer of diamond to an sp2 graphite, which 

can be easily separated, a fabrication of ultra-thin diamond wafers of 1×1 mm2 is possible 

[162]. 

Likewise, by using fs-laser irradiation it is possible to fabricate deep-buried graphitic pillars 

inside the diamond [108] that can function as 3D detectors for hadron therapy to reach deep 

tumours without damaging the nearby healthy tissues [163]. Conduction in such detectors 

occurs through highly conductive buried sp2 graphitic channels that can be fabricated with a

diameter of ~1.5 μm and ~1150 μm long [12].

Non-thermal photo-ablation of diamond produces negative electron affinity (NEA), an effect 

by which a  conduction band is shifted higher in energy than the vacuum level [164]. Diamond 

surfaces terminated with H- display NEA only up to ∼700 °C (above 700 °C H- is cleaved), 

making them unsuitable for diamond-based thermionic applications [165], where high 

temperatures are converted into electricity via an electron emission process. Diamond-based 

thermionic energy converters that have an emitter (i.e., cathode) made of ‘black diamond’ [166]

absorbing more than 99.9% of the light that strikes them could possibly be fabricated using an 

fs-laser ablation simultaneously with a nano-textured LIPSS surface that is required to harvest 

solar radiation in diamond-based proton-enhanced thermionic emission (PETE) devices [167]. 

Evidently, the fs-laser-induced properties in diamond are technologically significant and await 

many other industrial applications.

Fs-laser processing technology offers new opportunities for unique applications owing to its 

clean and essentially non-thermal processing nature which produces minimal HAZs, the lowest 

technologically attainable surface roughness and allows processing of transparent materials 

through a non-linear absorption mechanism. Compared to the conventional ns- and ps-laser 

ablation processes, the fs-machining can also generate exceptionally high peak powers and 

ablate diamond samples with minimal graphitization.


37

6.
SUMMARY AND FUTURE RESEARCH PROSPECTS

6.1
The findings of this review can be summarized as follows:

1.
Fs-laser irradiation can precisely alter the surface topography and transform the 

chemical structure of diamond depending on the beam characteristics, its intensity and 

polarization. The application of multi-photon absorption using a focused fs-pulsed laser with a 

high spatial and temporal photon density is able to generate high MRRs;

2.
The HAZ and Ra can be effectively minimised by using an fs-pulsed laser owing to its 

ultra-short interaction time. An fs-pulse transfers its energy via a photon-electron coupling prior 

to phonon-driven thermal diffusion;

3. 
The laser induced ablation is significantly improved by the presence of intrinsic and 

extrinsic defects in diamond, which serve as absorption sites;

4. 
Among all the laser systems, Ti:Sapphire laser can generate the shortest pulses (as short 

as 5 fs) in mode-locked regime of operation and can be exploited in future applications;

5. 
The laser process parameters are to be selected carefully to maximise MRRs, attain low 

Ra and produce minimal sp2 graphitized region. Among all, the pulse duration, fluence and 

number of pulses at specific spot are the three (3) most important factors dictating the response 

of the material to the incident laser energy;

6. 
The fs-laser processing is a relatively clean process generating minimal sp2 graphitized 

layer and requires minimal post-processing;

7. 
3D surface topography and Ra can be precisely studied using 3D optical microscopy 

measurements. MRR can then be calculated from the 3D surface profile. Chemical composition 

of the micromachined samples can be precisely studied using UV Raman, and especially 

multiwavelength Raman, spectroscopy;

8. 
Applications of the fs-laser processing are diverse owing to its unique characteristics, 

such as non-linear absorption and non-thermal nature, that extend its application to processing 

of transparent and ultra-hard materials.


38

6.2
Future research prospects

The future research prospects are identified as follows:

1.
Laser process parameters need to be optimized to maximize the MRR, minimize Ra and 

further reduce the occurrence of HAZs in processed diamond samples;

2. 
Theoretical framework to accurately describe the response of diamond to the fs-laser 

pulses need to be further refined;

3. 
Fs-laser ablation technique needs to be further developed to be able at 250 nm (~5 eV) 

wavelength to effectively excite sp3 DOS.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

BAK carried out the search and collection of review data, carried out data analysis, drafted the 

manuscript. MR designed, conceptualised and coordinated the study, carried out data analysis, 

drafted and critically revised the manuscript. IVL revised the manuscript. All authors gave the 

final approval for publication and agree to be held accountable for the work performed therein.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this 

publication and there has been no significant financial support of this work that could have 

influenced its outcome.

REFERENCES

[1] W.H. Taylor, Structure and properties of diamond, Nature 159(4048) (1947) 729-731.

[2] J.E. Field, The mechanical and strength properties of diamond, Reports on Progress in 

Physics 75(12) (2012) 126505.


39

[3] Q. Huang, D. Yu, B. Xu, W. Hu, Y. Ma, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, B. Wen, J. He, Z. Liu, Y. Tian, 

Nanotwinned diamond with unprecedented hardness and stability, Nature 510(7504) (2014) 

250-253.

[4] A.T. Collins, Synthetic diamond: Emerging CVD science and technology. Edited by Karl 

E. Spear and John P. Dismukes, Wiley, Chichester, UK 1994, XV, 663 pp., hardcover, £74.00, 

ISBN 0-471- 53589-3, Chemical Vapor Deposition 1(1) (1995) 33-33.

[5] A. Meier, Diamond turning of diffractive microstructures, Precision Engineering 42 (2015) 

253-260.

[6] Z. Cao, D. Aslam, Fabrication technology for single-material MEMS using polycrystalline 

diamond, Diamond and Related Materials 19(10) (2010) 1263-1272.

[7] P. Forsberg, M. Karlsson, High aspect ratio optical gratings in diamond, Diamond and 

Related Materials 34 (2013) 19-24.

[8] C. Wei, K.-S. Peng, M.-S. Hung, The effect of hydrogen and acetylene mixing ratios on the 

surface, mechanical and biocompatible properties of diamond-like carbon films, Diamond and 

Related Materials 63 (2016) 108-114.

[9] R.J. Narayan, R.D. Boehm, A.V. Sumant, Medical applications of diamond particles & 

surfaces, Materials Today 14(4) (2011) 154-163.

[10] G.B.J. Cadot, K. Thomas, J.P. Best, A.A. Taylor, J. Michler, D.A. Axinte, J. Billingham, 

Investigation of the microstructure change due to phase transition in nanosecond pulsed laser 

processing of diamond, Carbon 127 (2018) 349-365.

[11] C.J.H. Wort, R.S. Balmer, Diamond as an electronic material, Materials Today 11(1) 

(2008) 22-28.

[12] T.V. Kononenko, M. Meier, M.S. Komlenok, S.M. Pimenov, V. Romano, V.P. Pashinin, 

V.I. Konov, Microstructuring of diamond bulk by IR femtosecond laser pulses, Applied 

Physics A 90(4) (2008) 645-651.


40

[13] M. Shinoda, K. Saito, T. Kondo, A. Nakaoki, M. Furuki, M. Takeda, M. Yamamoto, T.J. 

Schaich, B.M. van Oerle, H.P. Godfried, P.A.C. Kriele, E.P. Houwman, W.H.M. Nelissen, G.J. 

Pels, P.G.M. Spaaij, High-Density Near-Field Readout Using Diamond Solid Immersion Lens, 

Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 45(2B) (2006) 1311-1313.

[14] O.H.Y. Zalloum, M. Parrish, A. Terekhov, W. Hofmeister, On femtosecond 

micromachining of HPHT single-crystal diamond with direct laser writing using tight focusing, 

Opt. Express 18(12) (2010) 13122-13135.

[15] C. Brecher, M. Emonts, J.-P. Hermani, T. Storms, Laser Roughing of PCD, Physics 

Procedia 56 (2014) 1107-1114.

[16] C.J. Morgan, R.R. Vallance, E.R. Marsh, Micro machining glass with polycrystalline 

diamond tools shaped by micro electro discharge machining, Journal of Micromechanics and 

Microengineering 14(12) (2004) 1687-1692.

[17] D. Wang, W.S. Zhao, L. Gu, X.M. Kang, A study on micro-hole machining of 

polycrystalline diamond by micro-electrical discharge machining, Journal of Materials 

Processing Technology 211(1) (2011) 3-11.

[18] D.A. Axinte, D.S. Srinivasu, M.C. Kong, P.W. Butler-Smith, Abrasive waterjet cutting of 

polycrystalline diamond: A preliminary investigation, International Journal of Machine Tools 

and Manufacture 49(10) (2009) 797-803.

[19] P.-L. Tso, Y.-G. Liu, Study on PCD machining, International Journal of Machine Tools 

and Manufacture 42(3) (2002) 331-334.

[20] C. Dold, M. Henerichs, P. Gilgen, K. Wegener, Laser Processing of Coarse Grain 

Polycrystalline Diamond (PCD) Cutting Tool Inserts using Picosecond Laser Pulses, Physics 

Procedia 41 (2013) 610-616.

[21] H. Ohfuji, T. Okuchi, S. Odake, H. Kagi, H. Sumiya, T. Irifune, Micro-/nanostructural 

investigation of laser-cut surfaces of single- and polycrystalline diamonds, Diamond and 

Related Materials 19(7) (2010) 1040-1051.


41

[22] C. Phipps, Laser Ablation and its Applications, Springer US 129 (2007).

[23] V.I. Konov, Laser in micro and nanoprocessing of diamond materials, Laser & Photonics 

Reviews 6(6) (2012) 739-766.

[24] R.R. Gattass, E. Mazur, Femtosecond laser micromachining in transparent materials, 

Nature Photonics 2 (2008) 219-225.

[25] M.K. Bhuyan, F. Courvoisier, P.A. Lacourt, M. Jacquot, R. Salut, L. Furfaro, J.M. Dudley, 

High aspect ratio nanochannel machining using single shot femtosecond Bessel beams, 

Applied Physics Letters 97(8) (2010) 081102.

[26] K. Subramanian, W.P. Kang, J.L. Davidson, M. Howell, Nanodiamond lateral field emitter 

devices on thick insulator substrates for reliable high power applications, Diamond and Related 

Materials 17(4) (2008) 786-789.

[27] Y.-F. Tzeng, K.-H. Liu, Y.-C. Lee, S.-J. Lin, I.N. Lin, C.-Y. Lee, H.-T. Chiu, Fabrication 

of an ultra-nanocrystalline diamond-coated silicon wire array with enhanced field-emission 

performance, Nanotechnology 18(43) (2007) 435703.

[28] D. Gomez, I. Goenaga, I. Lizuain, M. Ozaita, Femtosecond laser ablation for 

microfluidics, Optical Engineering 44(5) (2005) 051105.

[29] Jan-Patrick Hermania, Christian Brechera, M.E. , Nanosecond Laser Processing of 

Diamond Materials, Lasers in Manufacturing Conference  (2015).

[30] F.P. Bundy, Pressure-temperature phase diagram of elemental carbon, Physica A: 

Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 156(1) (1989) 169-178.

[31] D.M. Trucchi;, A. Bellucci;, M. Girolami;, M. Mastellone;, S. Orlando, Surface Texturing 

of CVD Diamond Assisted by Ultrashort Laser Pulses, Coatings 7(185) (2017) 1-18.

[32] M.S. Brown, C.B. Arnold, Fundamentals of Laser-Material Interaction and Application to 

Multiscale Surface Modification, in: K. Sugioka, M. Meunier, A. Piqué (Eds.), Laser Precision 

Microfabrication, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 91-120.


42

[33] D. Ramanathan, P.A. Molian, Micro- and Sub-Micromachining of Type IIa Single Crystal 

Diamond Using a Ti:Sapphire Femtosecond Laser, Journal of Manufacturing Science and 

Engineering 124(2) (2002) 389-396.

[34] V.V. Kononenko, V.I. Konov, V.M. Gololobov, E.V. Zavedeev, Propagation and 

absorption of high-intensity femtosecond laser radiation in diamond, Quantum Electronics 

44(12) (2014) 1099-1103.

[35] N.Y. Takayama, Jiwang, Laser irradiation responses of a single-crystal diamond produced 

by different crystal growth methods, Applied Sciences 7(8) (2017) 1-15.

[36] Y. Ogawa, M. Ota, K. Nakamoto, T. Fukaya, M. Russell, T.I. Zohdi, K. Yamazaki, H. 

Aoyama, A study on machining of binder-less polycrystalline diamond by femtosecond pulsed 

laser for fabrication of micro milling tools, CIRP Annals 65(1) (2016) 245-248.

[37] T.V. Kononenko, P.A. Pivovarov, A.A. Khomich, R.A. Khmelnitsky, V.G. Plotnichenko, 

V.I. Konov, Processing of polycrystalline diamond surface by IR laser pulses without interior 

damage, Optics & Laser Technology 117 (2019) 87-93.

[38] L. Jiang, A.-D. Wang, B. Li, T.-H. Cui, Y.-F. Lu, Electrons dynamics control by shaping 

femtosecond laser pulses in micro/nanofabrication: modeling, method, measurement and 

application, Light: Science & Applications 7(2) (2018) 17134-17134.

[39] R.-S. Zhang, J.-W. Jiang, The art of designing carbon allotropes, Frontiers of Physics 

14(1) (2018) 13401.

[40] S. Prawer, D.N. Jamieson, R. Kalish, Investigation of carbon near the graphite-diamond-

liquid triple point, Physical Review Letters 69(20) (1992) 2991-2994.

[41] V.I. Konov, Carbon photonics, Quantum Electronics 45(11) (2015) 1043-1049.

[42] V.V. Kononenko, V.M. Gololobov, T.V. Kononenko, V.I. Konov, Photoinduced 

graphitization of diamond, Laser Physics Letters 12(1) (2014) 016101.


43

[43] V. Kononenko, T. Kononenko, S. Pimenov, V. Konov, P. Fischer, V. Romano, H. Weber, 

A. Khomich, R. Khmelnitskiy, V. Strekalov, Laser-induced structure transformations of 

diamonds, SPIE2003.

[44] A. Hu, M. Rybachuk, Q.-B. Lu, W.W. Duley, Femtosecond pulsed laser deposition and 

optical properties of diamond-like amorphous carbon films embedded with sp-bonded carbon 

chains, Diamond and Related Materials 17(7-10) (2008) 1643-1646.

[45] A. Hu, Q.B. Lu, W.W. Duley, M. Rybachuk, Spectroscopic characterization of carbon 

chains in nanostructured tetrahedral carbon films synthesized by femtosecond pulsed laser 

deposition, J Chem Phys 126(15) (2007) 154705.

[46] P.K. Chu, L. Li, Characterization of amorphous and nanocrystalline carbon films, 

Materials Chemistry and Physics 96(2) (2006) 253-277.

[47] J. Robertson, E.P. O’Reilly, Electronic and atomic structure of amorphous carbon, 

Physical Review B 35(6) (1987) 2946-2957.

[48] M. Rybachuk, A. Hertwig, M. Weise, M. Sahre, M. Maenn, U. Beck, J.M. Bell, Near 

infrared optical materials from polymeric amorphous carbon synthesized by collisional plasma 

process, Applied Physics Letters 96(21) (2010).

[49] M. Rybachuk, J.M. Bell, Electronic states of trans-polyacetylene, poly(p-phenylene 

vinylene) and sp-hybridised carbon species in amorphous hydrogenated carbon probed by 

resonant Raman scattering, Carbon 47(10) (2009) 2481-2490.

[50] M. Rybachuk, A. Hu, J.M. Bell, Resonant Raman scattering from polyacetylene and 

poly(p-phenylene vinylene) chains included into hydrogenated amorphous carbon, Applied 

Physics Letters 93(5) (2008).

[51] M.S. Komlenok, V.V. Kononenko, V.G. Ralchenko, S.M. Pimenov, V.I. Konov, Laser 

Induced Nanoablation of Diamond Materials, Physics Procedia 12 (2011) 37-45.

[52] T. Ruf, M. Cardona, C. Pickles, R. Sussmann, Temperature dependence of the refractive 

index of diamond up to 925 K, Phys. Rev. B 62 (2000).


44

[53] A. Bennett, B. Wickham, H. Dhillon, Y. Chen, S. Webster, G. Turri, M. Bass, 

Development of High Purity, Optical Grade Single Crystal CVD Diamond for Intra-Cavity 

Cooling, Proceedings of SPIE - The International Society for Optical Engineering 8959 (2014).

[54] J. Shigley, C. Breeding, Visible Absorption Spectra of Colored Diamonds, Gems & 

Gemology 51 (2015) 41-43.

[55] G. Dumitru, V. Romano, H.P. Weber, M. Sentis, W. Marine, Femtosecond ablation of 

ultrahard materials, Applied Physics A 74(6) (2002) 729-739.

[56] S. Preuss, M. Stuke, Subpicosecond ultraviolet laser ablation of diamond: Nonlinear 

properties at 248 nm and time‐resolved characterization of ablation dynamics, Applied Physics 

Letters 67(3) (1995) 338-340.

[57] A. Mathis, F. Courvoisier, L. Froehly, L. Furfaro, M. Jacquot, P.A. Lacourt, J.M. Dudley, 

Micromachining along a curve: Femtosecond laser micromachining of curved profiles in 

diamond and silicon using accelerating beams, Applied Physics Letters 101(7) (2012) 071110.

[58] J.E. Sipe, J.F. Young, J.S. Preston, H.M. van Driel, Laser-induced periodic surface 

structure. I. Theory, Physical Review B 27(2) (1983) 1141-1154.

[59] S.E. Clark, D.C. Emmony, Ultraviolet-laser-induced periodic surface structures, Physical 

Review B 40(4) (1989) 2031-2041.

[60] A. Hu, S. Griesing, M. Rybachuk, Q.B. Lu, W.W. Duley, Nanobuckling and x-ray 

photoelectron spectra of carbyne-rich tetrahedral carbon films deposited by femtosecond laser 

ablation at cryogenic temperatures, J. Appl. Phys. 102(7) (2007).

[61] A. Hu, M. Rybachuk, I. Alkhesho, Q.B. Lu, W. Duley, Nanostructure and sp(1)/sp(2) 

clustering in tetrahedral amorphous carbon thin films grown by femtosecond laser deposition, 

Journal of Laser Applications 20(1) (2008) 37-42.

[62] M. Huang, F. Zhao, Y. Cheng, N. Xu, Z. Xu, Mechanisms of ultrafast laser-induced deep-

subwavelength gratings on graphite and diamond, Physical Review B 79(12) (2009) 125436.


45

[63] V. Bharadwaj, Y. Wang, T.T. Fernandez, R. Ramponi, S.M. Eaton, G. Galzerano, 

Femtosecond laser written diamond waveguides: A step towards integrated photonics in the far 

infrared, Optical Materials 85 (2018) 183-185.

[64] B. Sotillo, V. Bharadwaj, J.P. Hadden, M. Sakakura, A. Chiappini, T.T. Fernandez, S. 

Longhi, O. Jedrkiewicz, Y. Shimotsuma, L. Criante, R. Osellame, G. Galzerano, M. Ferrari, K. 

Miura, R. Ramponi, P.E. Barclay, S.M. Eaton, Diamond photonics platform enabled by 

femtosecond laser writing, Scientific Reports 6(1) (2016) 35566.

[65] C. Wei, Y. Ma, Y. Han, Y. Zhang, L. Yang, X. Chen, Study on Femtosecond Laser 

Processing Characteristics of Nano-Crystalline CVD Diamond Coating, Applied Sciences 

9(20) (2019) 4273.

[66] M. Rekow, T. Panarello, N. Falletto, M. Guevremont, Understanding and enabling laser 

processing of solar materials through temporal pulse control, Laser Material Processing for 

Solar Energy2012.

[67] D. Breitling, A. Ruf, F. Dausinger, Fundamental aspects in machining of metals with short 

and ultrashort laser pulses, SPIE2004.

[68] Y.L. Yao, H. Chen, W. Zhang, Time scale effects in laser material removal: a review, The 

International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 26(5) (2005) 598-608.

[69] N. Takayama, J. Yan, Mechanisms of micro-groove formation on single-crystal diamond 

by a nanosecond pulsed laser, Journal of Materials Processing Technology 243 (2017) 299-

311.

[70] M. Rybachuk, J.M. Bell, The observation of sp(2) fraction disorder using dual wavelength 

Raman spectroscopy in a-C : H films fabricated using an open inductively coupled plasma 

reactor, Diamond and Related Materials 15(4-8) (2006) 977-981.

[71] T.V. Kononenko, V.V. Kononenko, S.M. Pimenov, E.V. Zavedeev, V.I. Konov, V. 

Romano, G. Dumitru, Effects of pulse duration in laser processing of diamond-like carbon 

films, Diamond and Related Materials 14(8) (2005) 1368-1376.


46

[72] M. Heglin, S. Govorkov, M. Scaggs, H. Theoharidis, T. Schoelzel, Short-pulse-width 

micromachining of hard materials using DPSS Nd:YAG lasers, SPIE2002.

[73] J. Haverkamp, R.M. Mayo, M.A. Bourham, J. Narayan, C. Jin, G. Duscher, Plasma plume 

characteristics and properties of pulsed laser deposited diamond-like carbon films, J. Appl. 

Phys. 93(6) (2003) 3627-3634.

[74] T. Kononenko, S. Garnov, S. Pimenov, V. Konov, F. Dausinger, Processing of diamond 

and ceramics by picosecond/nanosecond laser pulses in IR-UV spectral range, SPIE1998.

[75] V. Migulin, V. Ralchenko, Y.-J. Baik, Oxygen-assisted laser cutting and drilling of CVD 

diamond, SPIE1998.

[76] F. Mouhamadali, S. Equis, F. Saeidi, J.P. Best, M. Cantoni, P. Hoffmann, K. Wasmer, 

Nanosecond pulsed laser-processing of CVD diamond, Optics and Lasers in Engineering 126 

(2020) 105917.

[77] N. Takayama, J. Ishizuka, J. Yan, Microgrooving of a single-crystal diamond tool using a 

picosecond pulsed laser and some cutting tests, Precision Engineering 53 (2018) 252-262.

[78] B. Guo, Q. Zhao, X. Fang, Precision grinding of optical glass with laser micro-structured 

coarse-grained diamond wheels, Journal of Materials Processing Technology 214(5) (2014) 

1045-1051.

[79] X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Deng, S. Li, Q. Wu, Z. Kang, Precision grinding of silicon nitride 

ceramic with laser macro-structured diamond wheels, Optics & Laser Technology 109 (2019)

418-428.

[80] J.K. Park, V.M. Ayres, J. Asmussen, K. Mukherjee, Precision micromachining of CVD 

diamond films, Diamond and Related Materials 9(3) (2000) 1154-1158.

[81] C. Brecher, F. Klocke, F. Schindler, A. Janssen, B. Fischer, J.-P. Hermani, Finishing of 

polycrystalline diamond tools by combining laser ablation with grinding, Production 

Engineering 7(4) (2013) 361-371.


47

[82] Y. Yang, G. Zhao, M. Hu, L. Li, N. He, M. Jamil, Fabrication of CVD diamond micro-

milling tool by hybrid machining of laser-induced graphitization and precision grinding, 

Ceramics International 45(18, Part A) (2019) 24127-24136.

[83] P.W. Butler-Smith, D.A. Axinte, M. Pacella, M.W. Fay, Micro/nanometric investigations 

of the effects of laser ablation in the generation of micro-tools from solid CVD diamond 

structures, Journal of Materials Processing Technology 213(2) (2013) 194-200.

[84] B.N. Chichkov, C. Momma, S. Nolte, F. von Alvensleben, A. Tünnermann, Femtosecond, 

picosecond and nanosecond laser ablation of solids, Applied Physics A 63(2) (1996) 109-115.

[85] A.K. Dubey, V. Yadava, Laser beam machining—A review, International Journal of 

Machine Tools and Manufacture 48(6) (2008) 609-628.

[86] R.L. Fork, B.I. Greene, C.V. Shank, Generation of optical pulses shorter than 0.1 psec by 

colliding pulse mode locking, Applied Physics Letters 38(9) (1981) 671-672.

[87] T. Brabec, F. Krausz, Intense few-cycle laser fields: Frontiers of nonlinear optics, Reviews 

of Modern Physics 72(2) (2000) 545-591.

[88] C.B. Schaffer, A. Brodeur, E. Mazur, Laser-induced breakdown and damage in bulk 

transparent materials induced by tightly focused femtosecond laser pulses, Measurement 

Science and Technology 12(11) (2001) 1784-1794.

[89] R.R. Gattass, E. Mazur, Femtosecond laser micromachining in transparent materials, 

Nature Photonics 2(4) (2008) 219-225.

[90] E.N. Glezer, M. Milosavljevic, L. Huang, R.J. Finlay, T.H. Her, J.P. Callan, E. Mazur, 

Three-dimensional optical storage inside transparent materials, Opt. Lett. 21(24) (1996) 2023-

2025.

[91] M. Lenzner, J. Krüger, W. Kautek, F. Krausz, Precision laser ablation of dielectrics in the 

10-fs regime, Applied Physics A 68(3) (1999) 369-371.


48

[92] M. Qu, T. Jin, G. Xie, R. Cai, Developing a novel binderless diamond grinding wheel with 

femtosecond laser ablation and evaluating its performance in grinding soft and brittle materials, 

Journal of Materials Processing Technology 275 (2020) 116359.

[93] Y. Sun, J. Dou, M. Xu, J. Cui, X. Mei, W. Wang, M. Gao, Research on the mechanism of 

micromachining of CVD diamond by femtosecond laser, Ferroelectrics 549(1) (2019) 266-275.

[94] O.H.Y. Zalloum, M. Parrish, A. Terekhov, W. Hofmeister, An amplified femtosecond 

laser system for material micro-/nanostructuring with an integrated Raman microscope, 

Review of Scientific Instruments 81(5) (2010) 053906.

[95] X. Li, Y. Guan, - 3(- 3) (2020) - 125.

[96] C.B. Schaffer, N. Nishimura, E.N. Glezer, A.M.T. Kim, E. Mazur, Dynamics of 

femtosecond laser-induced breakdown in water from femtoseconds to microseconds, Opt. 

Express 10(3) (2002) 196-203.

[97] M. Sakakura, M. Terazima, Initial temporal and spatial changes of the refractive index 

induced by focused femtosecond pulsed laser irradiation inside a glass, Physical Review B 

71(2) (2005) 024113.

[98] S.K. Sundaram, E. Mazur, Inducing and probing non-thermal transitions in 

semiconductors using femtosecond laser pulses, Nature Materials 1(4) (2002) 217-224.

[99] B.C. Stuart, M.D. Feit, S. Herman, A.M. Rubenchik, B.W. Shore, M.D. Perry, 

Nanosecond-to-femtosecond laser-induced breakdown in dielectrics, Physical Review B 53(4) 

(1996) 1749-1761.

[100] S.K. Sudheer, V.P.M. Pillai, V.U. Nayar, Characterization of laser processing of single-

crystal natural diamonds using micro-Raman spectroscopic investigations, Journal of Raman 

Spectroscopy 38(4) (2007) 427-435.

[101] Front matter, in: H. Jelínková (Ed.), Lasers for Medical Applications, Woodhead 

Publishing2013, pp. i-iii.


49

[102] M. Wu, B. Guo, Q. Zhao, P. He, Z. Zeng, J. Zang, The influence of the ionization regime 

on femtosecond laser beam machining mono-crystalline diamond, Optics & Laser Technology 

106 (2018) 34-39.

[103] A.A. Ionin, S.I. Kudryashov, K.E. Mikhin, L.V. Seleznev, D.V. Sinitsyn, Bulk 

femtosecond laser marking of natural diamonds, Laser Physics 20(8) (2010) 1778-1782.

[104] M. Takesada, E. Vanagas, D. Tuzhilin, I. Kudryashov, S. Suruga, H. Murakami, N. 

Sarukura, K. Matsuda, S. Mononobe, T. Saiki, M. Yoshimoto, S.-y. Koshihara, Micro-

Character Printing on a Diamond Plate by Femtosecond Infrared Optical Pulses, Japanese 

Journal of Applied Physics 42(Part 1, No. 7A) (2003) 4613-4616.

[105] S. Odake, H. Ohfuji, T. Okuchi, H. Kagi, H. Sumiya, T. Irifune, Pulsed laser processing 

of nano-polycrystalline diamond: A comparative study with single crystal diamond, Diamond 

and Related Materials 18(5) (2009) 877-880.

[106] G.C.B. Lee, S. Su, J. Li, K. Sugden, N. Roohpour, H. Yan, H. Ye, Analysis of 

femtosecond laser surface patterning on bulk single-crystalline diamond, Journal of 

Experimental Nanoscience 7(6) (2012) 662-672.

[107] T.V. Kononenko, V.G. Ralchenko, E.E. Ashkinazi, M. Polikarpov, P. Ershov, S. 

Kuznetsov, V. Yunkin, I. Snigireva, V.I. Konov, Fabrication of polycrystalline diamond 

refractive X-ray lens by femtosecond laser processing, Applied Physics A 122(3) (2016) 152.

[108] M.C. Rossi, S. Salvatori, G. Conte, T. Kononenko, V. Valentini, Phase transition, 

structural defects and stress development in superficial and buried regions of femtosecond laser 

modified diamond, Optical Materials 96 (2019) 109214.

[109] E. Innerhofer, T. Südmeyer, F. Brunner, R. Häring, A. Aschwanden, R. Paschotta, C. 

Hönninger, M. Kumkar, U. Keller, 60-W average power in 810-fs pulses from a thin-disk 

Yb:YAG laser, Opt. Lett. 28(5) (2003) 367-369.

[110] F. Brunner, E. Innerhofer, S.V. Marchese, T. Südmeyer, R. Paschotta, T. Usami, H. Ito, 

S. Kurimura, K. Kitamura, G. Arisholm, U. Keller, Powerful red-green-blue laser source 

pumped with a mode-locked thin disk laser, Opt. Lett. 29(16) (2004) 1921-1923.


50

[111] S. Reuter, J. Kleinbauer, R. Knappe, R. Wallenstein, B. Henrich, High average power 80 

MHz repetition rate additive pulse mode-locked femtosecond Yb:YAG laser, Summaries of 

Papers Presented at the Lasers and Electro-Optics. CLEO '02. Technical Diges, 2002, pp. 343-

344 vol.1.

[112] B. Sotillo, V. Bharadwaj, J.P. Hadden, S. Rampini, A. Chiappini, T.T. Fernandez, C. 

Armellini, A. Serpengüzel, M. Ferrari, P.E. Barclay, R. Ramponi, S.M. Eaton, Visible to 

Infrared Diamond Photonics Enabled by Focused Femtosecond Laser Pulses, Micromachines 

8(2) (2017) 60.

[113] H. Zhao, A. Major, Powerful 67 fs Kerr-lens mode-locked prismless Yb:KGW oscillator, 

Opt. Express 21(26) (2013) 31846-31851.

[114] W.Q. Li ZQ, Wang J., Ultrashort Pulsed Laser Micromachining of Polycrystalline 

Diamond, Advanced Materials Research 497 (2012) 220–224.

[115] T. Okuchi, H. Ohfuji, S. Odake, H. Kagi, S. Nagatomo, M. Sugata, H. Sumiya, 

Micromachining and surface processing of the super-hard nano-polycrystalline diamond by 

three types of pulsed lasers, Applied Physics A 96(4) (2009) 833-842.

[116] W.A. Ayoola, W.J. Suder, S.W. Williams, Effect of beam shape and spatial energy 

distribution on weld bead geometry in conduction welding, Optics & Laser Technology 117 

(2019) 280-287.

[117] P. Sprangle, B. Hafizi, High-power, high-intensity laser propagation and interactions, 

Physics of Plasmas 21(5) (2014) 055402.

[118] A. Stratan, A. Zorila, L. Rusen, S. Simion, C. Blanaru, C. Fenic, L. Neagu, G. Nemes, 

Automated test station for laser-induced damage threshold measurements according to ISO 

21254-1,2,3,4 standards, SPIE2012.

[119] L. Li, M. Hong, M. Schmidt, M. Zhong, A. Malshe, B. Huis in’tVeld, V. Kovalenko, 

Laser nano-manufacturing – State of the art and challenges, CIRP Annals 60(2) (2011) 735-

755.


51

[120] S. Gräf, F.A. Müller, Polarisation-dependent generation of fs-laser induced periodic 

surface structures, Applied Surface Science 331 (2015) 150-155.

[121] E.V. Golosov, A.A. Ionin, Y.R. Kolobov, S.I. Kudryashov, A.E. Ligachev, Y.N. 

Novoselov, L.V. Seleznev, D.V. Sinitsyn, Ultrafast changes in the optical properties of a 

titanium surface and femtosecond laser writing of one-dimensional quasi-periodic 

nanogratings of its relief, Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Physics 113(1) (2011) 14.

[122] J. Dou, Y. Sun, M. Xu, J. Cui, X. Mei, W. Wang, X. Wang, Process research on micro-

machining diamond microgroove by femtosecond laser, Integrated Ferroelectrics 198(1) 

(2019) 9-19.

[123] J. Fontanella, R.L. Johnston, J.H. Colwell, C. Andeen, Temperature and pressure 

variation of the refractive index of diamond, Appl. Opt. 16(11) (1977) 2949-2951.

[124] Y. White, M. Parrish, X. Li, L. Davis, W. Hofmeister, Femtosecond micro- and nano-

machining of materials for microfluidic applications, SPIE2008.

[125] Y. Xing, L. Liu, X. Hao, Z. Wu, P. Huang, X. Wang, Micro-channels machining on 

polycrystalline diamond by nanosecond laser, Optics & Laser Technology 108 (2018) 333-345.

[126] M. Rybachuk, J.M. Bell, The morphology of hydrogenated diamond-like films and the 

effect of the sp(2) fraction disorder on electronic and micro-mechanical properties, in: A.J. 

Harlz (Ed.), Microelectronics: Design, Technology, and Packaging Ii2006.

[127] D.-w. Zhang, Y.-x. Cui, Surface chemical modification of CVD diamond films by laser 

irradiation, International Journal of Refractory Metals and Hard Materials 81 (2019) 36-41.

[128] G. Eberle, C. Dold, K. Wegener, Picosecond laser fabrication of micro cutting tool 

geometries on polycrystalline diamond composites using a high-numerical aperture micro 

scanning system, SPIE2015.

[129] M. Wu, B. Guo, Q. Zhao, Laser machining micro-structures on diamond surface with a 

sub-nanosecond pulsed laser, Applied Physics A 124(2) (2018) 170.


52

[130] M. Wu, B. Guo, Q. Zhao, R. Fan, Z. Dong, X. Yu, The influence of the focus position 

on laser machining and laser micro-structuring monocrystalline diamond surface, Optics and 

Lasers in Engineering 105 (2018) 60-67.

[131] A. Hu, M. Rybachuk, Q.B. Lu, W.W. Duley, Direct synthesis of sp -bonded carbon 

chains on graphite surface by femtosecond laser irradiation, Applied Physics Letters 91(13) 

(2007) 131906.

[132] A.C. Ferrari, J. Robertson, Resonant Raman spectroscopy of disordered, amorphous, and 

diamondlike carbon, Physical Review B 64(7) (2001) 075414.

[133] A. Ferrari, J. Robertson, Origin of the 1150 cm-1 Raman mode in nanocrystalline 

diamond, Physical Review B 63 (2001) 121405.

[134] M. Rybachuk, A. Hu, J.M. Bell, Resonant Raman scattering from polyacetylene and 

poly(p-phenylene vinylene) chains included into hydrogenated amorphous carbon, Applied 

Physics Letters 93(5) (2008) 051904-3.

[135] M. Rybachuk, A. Hertwig, M. Weise, M. Sahre, M. Mann, U. Beck, J.M. Bell, Near 

infrared optical materials from polymeric amorphous carbon synthesized by collisional plasma 

process, Applied Physics Letters 96(21) (2010) 211909.

[136] M.S. Komlenok, M.A. Dezhkina, A.A. Khomich, A.S. Orekhov, A.S. Orekhov, V.I. 

Konov, Measuring the Local Thickness of Laser-Induced Graphitized Layer on Diamond 

Surface by Raman Spectroscopy, physica status solidi (b) 256(9) (2019) 1800686.

[137] C.M. Breeding, J.E. Shigley, THE ‘TYPE’ CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM OF 

DIAMONDS AND ITS IMPORTANCE IN GEMOLOGY, Gems & Gemology 45(2) (2009) 

96–111.

[138] J.X. Liao, W.M. Liu, T. Xu, Q.J. Xue, Characteristics of carbon films prepared by 

plasma-based ion implantation, Carbon 42(2) (2004) 387-393.


53

[139] A. Hu, S. Griesing, M. Rybachuk, Q.-B. Lu, W.W. Duley, Nanobuckling and x-ray 

photoelectron spectra of carbyne-rich tetrahedral carbon films deposited by femtosecond laser 

ablation at cryogenic temperatures, Journal of Applied Physics 102(7) (2007) 074311-6.

[140] J. Kim, T.-J. Je, S.-H. Cho, E.-C. Jeon, K.-H. Whang, Micro-cutting with diamond tool 

micro-patterned by femtosecond laser, International Journal of Precision Engineering and 

Manufacturing 15(6) (2014) 1081-1085.

[141] B. Mills, D.J. Heath, M. Feinaeugle, J.A. Grant-Jacob, R.W. Eason, Laser ablation via 

programmable image projection for submicron dimension machining in diamond, Journal of 

Laser Applications 26(4) (2014) 041501.

[142] W. Konrad, D. Claus, H. Marcel, W. Christian, Laser Prepared Cutting Tools, Physics 

Procedia 39 (2012) 240-248.

[143] L.S.G. Plano, Growth of CVD Diamond for Electronic Applications, in: L.S. Pan, D.R. 

Kania (Eds.), Diamond: Electronic Properties and Applications, Springer US, Boston, MA, 

1995, pp. 61-138.

[144] Y. Nakamoto, H. Sumiya, T. Matsuoka, K. Shimizu, T. Irifune, Y. Ohishi, Generation of 

Multi-Megabar Pressure Using Nano-Polycrystalline Diamond Anvils, Japanese Journal of 

Applied Physics 46(No. 25) (2007) L640-L641.

[145] R. Hrubiak, S. Sinogeikin, E. Rod, G. Shen, The laser micro-machining system for 

diamond anvil cell experiments and general precision machining applications at the High 

Pressure Collaborative Access Team, Rev Sci Instrum 86(7) (2015) 072202.

[146] G.D. Marshall, M. Ams, M.J. Withford, Direct laser written waveguide-Bragg gratings 

in bulk fused silica, Opt. Lett. 31(18) (2006) 2690-2691.

[147] R. Osellame, V. Maselli, R.M. Vazquez, R. Ramponi, G. Cerullo, Integration of optical 

waveguides and microfluidic channels both fabricated by femtosecond laser irradiation, 

Applied Physics Letters 90(23) (2007) 231118.


54

[148] A. Snigirev, V. Kohn, I. Snigireva, B. Lengeler, A compound refractive lens for focusing 

high-energy X-rays, Nature 384(6604) (1996) 49-51.

[149] A. Snigirev, V. Yunkin, I. Snigireva, M. Di Michiel, M. Drakopoulos, S. Kouznetsov, L. 

Shabel'nikov, M. Grigoriev, V. Ralchenko, I. Sychov, M. Hoffmann, E. Voges, Diamond 

refractive lens for hard x-ray focusing, SPIE2002.

[150] V. Kumar, A.A. Bergman, A.A. Gorokhovsky, A.M. Zaitsev, Formation of carbon 

nanofilms on diamond for all-carbon based temperature and chemical sensor application, 

Carbon 49(4) (2011) 1385-1394.

[151] M. Polikarpov, I. Snigireva, J. Morse, V. Yunkin, S. Kuznetsov, A. Snigirev, Large-

acceptance diamond planar refractive lenses manufactured by laser cutting, J Synchrotron 

Radiat 22(1) (2015) 23-8.

[152] S.M. Eaton, J.P. Hadden, V. Bharadwaj, J. Forneris, F. Picollo, F. Bosia, B. Sotillo, A.N. 

Giakoumaki, O. Jedrkiewicz, A. Chiappini, M. Ferrari, R. Osellame, P.E. Barclay, P. Olivero, 

R. Ramponi, Quantum Micro–Nano Devices Fabricated in Diamond by Femtosecond Laser 

and Ion Irradiation, Advanced Quantum Technologies 2(5-6) (2019) 1900006.

[153] A. Sbartai, P. Namour, A. Errachid, J. Krejči, R. Šejnohová, L. Renaud, M. Larbi 

Hamlaoui, A.-S. Loir, F. Garrelie, C. Donnet, H. Soder, E. Audouard, J. Granier, N. Jaffrezic-

Renault, Electrochemical Boron-Doped Diamond Film Microcells Micromachined with 

Femtosecond Laser: Application to the Determination of Water Framework Directive Metals, 

Analytical Chemistry 84(11) (2012) 4805-4811.

[154] M. Solà-Garcia, S. Meuret, T. Coenen, A. Polman, Electron-Induced State Conversion 

in Diamond NV Centers Measured with Pump–Probe Cathodoluminescence Spectroscopy, 

ACS Photonics 7(1) (2020) 232-240.

[155] B. Hensen, H. Bernien, A.E. Dréau, A. Reiserer, N. Kalb, M.S. Blok, J. Ruitenberg, 

R.F.L. Vermeulen, R.N. Schouten, C. Abellán, W. Amaya, V. Pruneri, M.W. Mitchell, M. 

Markham, D.J. Twitchen, D. Elkouss, S. Wehner, T.H. Taminiau, R. Hanson, Loophole-free 


55

Bell inequality violation using electron spins separated by 1.3 kilometres, Nature 526(7575) 

(2015) 682-686.

[156] M.W. Doherty, F. Dolde, H. Fedder, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, N.B. Manson, L.C.L. 

Hollenberg, Theory of the ground-state spin of the NV− center in diamond, Physical Review 

B 85(20) (2012) 205203.

[157] F. Dolde, H. Fedder, M.W. Doherty, T. Nöbauer, F. Rempp, G. Balasubramanian, T. 

Wolf, F. Reinhard, L.C.L. Hollenberg, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, Electric-field sensing using 

single diamond spins, Nature Physics 7(6) (2011) 459-463.

[158] A. Faraon, C. Santori, Z. Huang, V.M. Acosta, R.G. Beausoleil, Coupling of Nitrogen-

Vacancy Centers to Photonic Crystal Cavities in Monocrystalline Diamond, Physical Review 

Letters 109(3) (2012) 033604.

[159] J. Preclíková, A. Kromka, B. Rezek, P. Malý, Laser-induced refractive index changes in 

nanocrystalline diamond membranes, Opt. Lett. 35(4) (2010) 577-579.

[160] P. Calvani, A. Bellucci, M. Girolami, S. Orlando, V. Valentini, A. Lettino, D.M. Trucchi, 

Optical properties of femtosecond laser-treated diamond, Applied Physics A 117(1) (2014) 25-

29.

[161] P. Calvani, A. Bellucci, M. Girolami, S. Orlando, V. Valentini, R. Polini, D.M. Trucchi, 

Black diamond for solar energy conversion, Carbon 105 (2016) 401-407.

[162] H. Hirai, H. Hidai, S. Matsusaka, A. Chiba, Y. Mokuno, M. Yamaguchi, N. Morita, 

Diamond slicing using ultrashort laser-induced graphitization and additional nanosecond laser 

illumination, Diamond and Related Materials 96 (2019) 126-133.

[163] G. Pellegrini, P. Roy, A. Al-Ajili, R. Bates, L. Haddad, M. Horn, K. Mathieson, J. 

Melone, V. O’Shea, K.M. Smith, I. Thayne, M. Rahman, Technology development of 3D 

detectors for medical imaging, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section 

A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 504(1) (2003) 149-153.


56

[164] V.S. Robinson, Y. Show, G.M. Swain, R.G. Reifenberger, T.S. Fisher, Thermionic 

emission from surface-terminated nanocrystalline diamond, Diamond and Related Materials 

15(10) (2006) 1601-1608.

[165] M.C. James, F. Fogarty, R. Zulkharnay, N.A. Fox, P.W. May, A review of surface 

functionalisation of diamond for thermionic emission applications, Carbon 171 (2021) 532-

550.

[166] O. Dunseath, E.J.W. Smith, T. Al-Jeda, J.A. Smith, S. King, P.W. May, A.H. Nobbs, G. 

Hazell, C.C. Welch, B. Su, Studies of Black Diamond as an antibacterial surface for Gram 

Negative bacteria: the interplay between chemical and mechanical bactericidal activity, 

Scientific Reports 9(1) (2019) 8815.

[167] M. Girolami, L. Criante, F. Di Fonzo, S. Lo Turco, A. Mezzetti, A. Notargiacomo, M. 

Pea, A. Bellucci, P. Calvani, V. Valentini, D.M. Trucchi, Graphite distributed electrodes for 

diamond-based photon-enhanced thermionic emission solar cells, Carbon 111 (2017) 48-53.


