Thermally Regenerative Flow Batteries with pH Neutral Electrolytes for Harvesting Low-

Grade Heat

Xin Qian*, Jungwoo Shin, Yaodong Tu, James Han Zhang, and Gang Chen*

Department of Mechanical Engineering, 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139

Corresponding email: 

xinq@mit.edu

gchen2@mit.edu

Abstract

Harvesting waste heat with temperatures lower than 100 oC can improve system efficiency and

reduce greenhouse gas emission, yet it has been a longstanding and challenging task. 

Electrochemical methods for harvesting low-grade heat have attracted research interest in recent 

years due to the relatively high effective temperature coefficient of the electrolytes (> 1 mV/K) 

compared with the thermopower of traditional thermoelectric devices. Comparing with other 

electrochemical devices such as
temperature-variation based thermally
regenerative 

electrochemical cycle and temperature-difference based thermogalvanic cells, the thermally 

regenerative flow battery (TRFB) has the advantages of providing a continuous power output, 

decoupling the heat source and heat sink and recuperating heat, and compatible with stacking for 

scaling up. However, TRFB suffers from the issue of stable operation due to the challenge of pH 

matching between catholyte and anolyte solutions with desirable temperature coefficients. In this 


work, we demonstrate a pH-neutral TRFB based on KI/KI3 and K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 as the 

catholyte and anolyte, respectively, with a cell temperature coefficient of 1.9 mV/K and a power 

density of 9 μW/cm2. This work also presents a comprehensive model with coupled analysis of 

mass transfer and reaction kinetics in a porous electrode that can accurately capture the flow rate 

dependence of power density and energy conversion efficiency. We estimate that the efficiency of 

the pH-neutral TRFB can reach 11% of the Carnot efficiency at the maximum power output with

a temperature difference of 37 K. Via analysis, we identify that the mass transfer overpotential 

inside the porous electrode and the resistance of the ion exchange membrane are the two major

factors limiting the efficiency and power density, pointing to directions for future improvements. 

Keywords: Thermally regenerative flow battery, low-grade waste heat, electrochemical heat 

engine, pH neutral flow battery


1. Introduction

Low-grade heat sources (<100 oC) contain more than half of the global energy rejection,1

therefore the reuse of low-grade waste heat is a promising route to improve energy efficiency and 

reduce CO2 emissions. However, due to the distributed nature and the small temperature difference 

between the heat source and the environment, harvesting low-grade heat has always been a 

challenging task. In the past few years, electrochemical methods emerged as a promising

alternative to thermoelectrics for converting low-grade heat to electricity. This recent pursuit is

because the “effective thermopower” (on the order of 1 to 10 mV/K) 2-5 is relatively high compared 

with thermoelectric materials (~ 200 μV/K).6 Several different types of devices have been 

investigated,7,8
including thermionic
capacitors,9,10
thermogalvanic cells,11,12
thermally 

regenerative electrochemical cycles (TREC)13-15 and thermally regenerative flow batteries

(TRFB)16,17. Thermionic capacitors rely on the thermodiffusion of ions, also known as the Soret 

effect. Driven by a temperature gradient applied between the two electrodes, a concentration 

gradient of cations and anions is created. If the thermal mobilities of cations and anions are 

mismatched, a net charge profile will build up, which further generates an electric field across the 

device. Although thermionic capacitors have shown giant Seebeck coefficients, the device cannot 

operate in a continuous manner. Heat conduction leakage along with the long thermal charging 

time has led to low efficiency (0.01%).5,18 Thermogalvanic cells, on the other hand, generate 

electricity using a single redox pair while the two electrodes are kept at different temperatures.

The electrode potential of a general redox reaction 𝑂 + 𝑛𝑒 ⇋ 𝑅 would depend on temperature, if 

the entropy change is nonzero. This temperature dependence is quantified by the temperature 

coefficient 𝛼,4 which is related to the entropy change of the cathodic reaction: 


𝛼 = (𝑠𝑅 − 𝑠𝑂)/𝑛𝐹
(1)

where 𝑠𝑅 and 𝑠𝑂 are the partial molar entropies of species 𝑂 and 𝑅, and 𝐹 the Faraday constant. 

The redox species at each electrode are rebalanced via Soret diffusion (and hence the measured 

voltage also includes thermodiffusion contributions) through the electrolyte, enabling 

thermogalvanic cells to operate continuously similar to thermoelectric devices. Yet its efficiency 

remained very low (~ 0.8% relative to the Carnot efficiency),19 due to the undesirable heat 

conduction across the device 20 and the low ionic conductivity compared with electron and holes 

in thermoelectric materials.21

Compared with thermionic capacitors and thermogalvanic cells operating under a temperature 

gradient, the TREC is more suitable to harvest the temperature difference in time-domain, such as 

the temperature change between the daytime and the nighttime.22 A TREC device is similar to a 

normal battery with cathode and anode materials and can operate in two modes: (1) electrically 

assisted13,21 and (2) charging-free.14
In an electrically assisted device (Figure 1a), the total 

temperature coefficient of the cell 𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 is the difference between that of the cathode 𝛼+ and the 

anode 𝛼−: 𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 = 𝛼+ − 𝛼−, and its sign determines the discharge and charge temperature. If

𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 > 0, then the TREC battery needs to be discharged at high temperature, and recharged at low 

temperature (Figure 1a). The charge and discharge temperatures would be swapped for a negative 

𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙. In charging-free TREC, the standard electrode potentials of cathode and anode redox pairs 

at room temperature are matched such that the open circuit voltage is close to zero.14 Either 

temperature rise or decrease would generate a nonzero electromotive force, driving

electrochemical reactions and generating power at both high or low temperatures. The directions

of electrochemical reactions are opposite at high and low temperatures so that reactants are 

regenerated while generating power.  Both electrically-assisted and charging-free devices have 


high relative efficiency to the Carnot limit (10~30 %), depending on the heat recuperating 

efficiency 50%~85%.13,14 However, the requirement of periodic temperature changes does not 

match waste heat sources, which are usually continuous.

Continuously operation of TREC can be achieved via the thermally regenerative flow battery 

(TRFB) configuration7,16 device that composes of two flow batteries working at different 

temperatures, while using pumps to circulate the electrolytes (Figure 1b). In the example of a 

TRFB with positive temperature coefficient, the flow cell at high temperature works as a galvanic 

cell providing current and the voltage for the cold flow cell responsible for regenerating the 

reactants.
To ensure continuous operation, the redox active species ideally only exist in the 

solution, and the electrodes only provide electrons but do not directly participate in redox reactions. 

In TRFB, one cell serves as a galvanic cell generating current while providing the electromotive 

force for the other electrolytic cell to regenerate the redox species. Therefore, TRFB does not need 

any auxiliary power supplies. Another advantage of TRFB is that heat recuperation can be easily 

achieved with heat exchangers to pre-heat or pre-cool the regenerated electrolytes. For example, 

Majumdar demonstrated a 15% efficiency relative to the Carnot efficiency can be achieved using 

TRFB based on V3+/V2+ and Fe(CN)63-/Fe(CN)64-.16

However, there are several challenges that needs to be resolved before practical 

implementation of TRFB, which has not received significant attention so far. The most important 

challenge is the difficulty in simultaneously achieving high value of 𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 while ensuring the 

stability of electrolytes. Similar to TREC, the cell temperature coefficient of TRFB is calculated 

as 𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 = 𝛼+ − 𝛼−. Ideally, achieving a high absolute value of 𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 requires not only large 

absolute values of the temperature coefficients, but also opposite signs of temperature coefficients 

of the catholyte and the anolyte.


We can understand the routes to high 𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 qualitatively using Born’s solvation model.

According to Born’s solvation model,23,24 the entropy change of the reaction 𝑂 + 𝑛𝑒 ⇋ 𝑅 is 

proportional to the change of squared valence number 𝑧2 divided by the ionic radii 𝑟:

𝛼 = 𝑠𝑅 − 𝑠𝑂

𝑛𝐹
∝ (𝑧𝑂

2

𝑟𝑂

− 𝑧𝑅

2

𝑟𝑅

)
(2)

where 𝑠 denotes the partial molar entropy of the oxidized species 𝑂 and the reduced species 𝑅, and 

𝐹 is the Faraday constant. In many redox reactions like Fe3++e ⇋ Fe2+, the change of the ionic 

radii is not large enough to affect the sign of 𝛼. For cation redox pairs, the reduced ion species 

usually has smaller valence value, 𝑧𝑂

2 − 𝑧𝑅

2 > 0, giving rise to a positive 𝛼. In contrast, anion redox 

pairs usually have a negative 𝛼 according to Born’s solvation model. Born’s solvation model also 

indicates that higher valence ions with smaller radii tend to have relatively large temperature 

coefficients. However, another factor that needs to be simultaneously considered is the hydrolysis 

of these redox ions, which affects the stability of the electrolyte solution. For example, metallic 

cations like V3+/V2+ and Fe3+/Fe2+ are good candidates for relatively large positive temperature 

coefficients,16 but these solutions are only stable in low pH environments.25,26 Anions like 

Fe(CN)63-/Fe(CN)64-, however, are usually stable in neutral or basic environments. Such a 

mismatched stable range of pH greatly affects the stability of TRFB cells. For example, although 

pairing cations such as Fe3+/Fe2+ and V3+/V2+ with Fe(CN)63-/Fe(CN)64- can achieve a high value 

of |𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙|~ 2.7 mV/K and 3.1 mV/K,16 the proton exchange across the ion exchange membrane 

would gradually shift the pH value on the Fe(CN)63-/Fe(CN)64- side, resulting in a complicated 

decomposition of the Fe(CN)63-/Fe(CN)64- ions releasing toxic CN- once the solution becomes 

acidic.27 Such cells can only operate stably until the pH buffer is consumed. In addition to the pH 

matching problem, it is also preferred that the redox active species have the same sign of charges. 


For example, the TRFB based on Cu(NH3)42+/ Cu(NH3)2+ and Fe(CN)63-/Fe(CN)64- has a high

temperature coefficient |𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙| = 2.9 mV/K;17 however, the different sign of charges between the 

reactive ion pairs makes it difficult to find the optimal ion exchange membrane to prevent the

cross-over of redox active ions.17

In addition to the challenges of pH matching and electrolyte stability, there also lacks a 

comprehensive analysis of coupled mass transfer and electrochemical kinetics. For flow batteries, 

the steady-state current density is determined by the rate of redox reaction at the electrode surface, 

which is proportional to the local concentration of redox species at the liquid-electrode interfaces.

28 When the mass transfer is slow compared with the redox reaction rate, there could be a large 

concentration gradient near the electrode, resulting in concentration overpotential and limiting the 

maximum current of the cell. When reactants are depleted locally at electrode surfaces, the current 

reaches the limiting current. Clearly, such mass transfer process and thus the discharging current 

depends on flow rates.  Another factor that can limit the reaction rate is the polarization of 

electrodes, which becomes important when a porous electrode is used in the battery. Consider a 

cathodic reaction with 𝑛 electrons transferred from the electrode to the electrolyte. Charge 

conservation dictates that this amount of extra negative charges needs to be compensated by the 

ionic current (Figure 1b). If the ionic diffusion in the porous electrode is slow, the total current 

that can be extracted from TRFB would also be limited, which is known as electrode polarization. 

All these kinetic processes described would result in an additional potential drop at the 

electrode/electrolyte interface, known as the overpotential. However, the analysis of TRFB in the 

literature either neglected the overpotential29 or assumed an infinitely large mass transfer 

coefficient.16 In addition, these irreversible losses are usually coupled with the forced convection 

of electrolytes, dictating the flow-rate dependent power density. It is therefore necessary to 


comprehensively study the coupled effects of mass transfer and reaction kinetics at different flow 

rates for optimized performance. 

Figure 1. (a) Temperature-entropy diagram of the thermally regenerative electrochemical cycle
(TREC) for positive temperature coefficient αCell > 0. If the temperature coefficient of the cell is 
negative, then the charging takes place at the higher temperature while the discharging is 
performed at lower temperature. For charging-free TREC, both high temperature and low 
temperature reactions can output power, but directions of electrochemical reactions are opposite.
(b) Schematic of thermally regenerative flow battery (TRFB) with αCell > 0. Catholyte (or anolyte)
is the electrolyte that is reduced (or oxidized) in the discharging cell, which is the cell operating at 
higher temperature for αCell > 0. The flow direction of electrons is indicated by the blue arrow, 
while the ionic current (Jion) across the cation exchange membrane (CEM) is indicated by the 
white arrows. Two heat exchangers (HEXs) are implemented for heat recuperation of the catholyte 
(+) and the anolyte (-). 

Here we tackle the challenges aforementioned and demonstrated a pH neutral TRFB using 

KI/KI3 as the catholyte and K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 as the anolyte with all-anionic redox active ion 

pairs. The redox reaction of catholyte between the iodide ion (I-) and triiodide ion (I3-) is a two-

electron process:


I3- + 2e ⇋ 3I-, 𝐸0 = 0.53 V
(3)

while the redox reaction for the anolyte is written as:

Fe(CN)63- + e ⇋ Fe(CN)64-, 𝐸0 = 0.37 V
(4)

where 𝐸0 denotes the standard electrode potential with respect to the standard hydrogen electrode 

(SHE). Such pairing of electrolytes only involve anions as the redox active species while sharing 

the same K+ counterion, allowing convenient cation exchange without shifting the pH value and 

preventing the proton induced decomposition of K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6. This pH neutral TRFB 

has a temperature coefficient of 1.9 mV/K and a maximum power density of 9 μW/cm2 at the high 

limit of flow rates. To analyze the energy conversion efficiency and factors affecting the 

performance of TRFB, we develop a comprehensive porous electrode model for TRFBs, which 

can capture the effect of flow-rate, mass transfer, surface kinetics, and electrode polarization on 

the power density and efficiency. We estimate that the maximum efficiency can reach ~ 11% 

relative to the Carnot limit at a flow rate of 1 μL/min, assuming 90% of heat recuperation. We also 

pinpoint the mass transfer inside the porous electrode, membrane resistance and heat recuperation 

effectiveness as the key factors for improving efficiency and power factors in the future.


2. Theoretical Model of TRFB with Porous Electrode

Figure 2 shows the geometry of the porous electrode considered in the model. For the 

convenience of notation, we consider a general half-cell reaction:

𝜈𝑂𝑂 + 𝑛𝑒 ⇋ 𝜈𝑅𝑅
(5)

where 𝑂 denotes the oxidized species and 𝑅 denotes the reduced species, with 𝑛 electrons 

transferred per unit reaction, 𝜈𝑂 and 𝜈𝑅 the stochiometric number. The electrochemical potential 

of the electrolyte at thermal equilibrium is determined by the concentration of reactants through 

the Nernst equation:

𝐸𝑒𝑞 = 𝐸0′ + ℛ𝑇

𝑛𝐹 ln 𝑐𝑂

𝜈𝑂

𝑐𝑂

𝜈𝑅
(6)

where ℛ is the universal ideal gas constant, the 𝑐𝑘 = 𝐶𝑘/𝐶0 (𝑘 = 𝑂, 𝑅) denotes the dimensionless 

concentration of species to the standard concentration 𝐶0 (1 M), and 𝐸0′ = 𝐸0 +

𝑅𝑇

𝑛𝐹 ln

𝛾𝑂

𝜈𝑂

𝛾𝑅

𝜈𝑅 is the 

formal potential with 𝛾 the activity coefficients and 𝐸0 the standard electrode potential.  

Apparently, the electrochemical potential of the electrode 𝜙1 would equilibrate with that of the 

electrolyte 𝜙2 when the discharging current is zero: 𝜙1 = 𝜙2 = 𝐸𝑒𝑞 . However, when the 

discharging current is nonzero, the equilibrium condition is broken resulting in a kinetic potential 

drop across the interface, known as the overpotential (𝜂 = 𝜙1 − 𝜙2). In addition, the equilibrium 

potential becomes location dependent because the concentration profile inside the bulk is 

nonuniform at a finite discharging current. Such a nonuniform concentration profile further affects 

the surface kinetics and mass transfer, resulting in a nonuniform profile of overpotential. 


Figure 2. Schematic of the porous electrode sandwiched between the CEM and the current 
collector or the channel wall. The flow direction is along the 𝑥-axis.

This section derives a model to determine the overpotential drop inside the porous media as a 

combined result of mass transfer, electrode polarization and surface reaction kinetics. Section 2.1

outlines the mass transfer inside the porous electrode. An empirical mass-transfer relation for 

interdigitated media is used to consider the local concentration gradient between the mean 

concentration and the microscopic concentration at interface between electrolyte and the fibers of 

the electrode.  In Section 2.2, the extended Butler-Volmer equation and condition of charge 

neutrality are used as the bridges coupling the effects of local mass transfer, surface reaction 

kinetics and electrode polarization. In Section 2.3, we derive the self-consistent equation for 

determining the discharge current and outlined the evaluation of efficiency.

2.1 Mass Transfer in the porous electrode. 

We start deriving the TRFB model by considering spatial profile of concentration, which can be

obtained by solving the continuity equation:


𝑑
𝑑𝑥 (−𝐷̃𝑘

𝑑𝐶𝑘
𝑑𝑥 + 𝑢𝑠𝐶𝑘) = ±𝜈𝑘𝑅𝑉
(7)

where 𝑅𝑉 is the rate of reaction that takes the positive sign for the cathodic reaction per unit volume.

Eq. (7) can be obtained by integrating the two-dimensional equation of mass conservation along 

the 𝑦-direction, with the boundary conditions that 𝑦-component of the ionic diffusion currents at 

𝑦 = 0 and 𝑦 = 𝐿 are zero, because active species cannot penetrate across the current collector or 

membrane. Such treatment is reasonable because the convective transfer along the 𝑥-direction is 

dominant over the diffusion process along 𝑦, with the dimensionless Peclet number PeH = 𝑢𝑠𝐻/𝐷̃

estimated on the order of 103. The subscript 𝑘 (= 𝑂 or 𝑅) denotes the redox species, 𝜈 the 

stochiometric number and 𝑢𝑠 the superficial velocity of the electrolyte. 𝐷̃𝑘, the effective diffusivity 

inside the porous electrode, can be related to the diffusivity of the bulk solution 𝐷𝑘 through 𝐷̃𝑘 =

𝜖𝐷𝑘/𝒯, where 𝜖 is the porosity and 𝒯 the tortuosity factor of the porous media. The sign of the 

source term takes + when 𝑘 = 𝑂 and the − when 𝑘 = 𝑅 . By nondimensionalizing the 

concentration 𝑐𝑘 = 𝐶𝑘/𝐶0 and the coordinate 𝑋 = 𝑥/𝐿 with 𝐿 the electrode length, Eq. (7) can be 

written as:

𝑑2𝑐𝑘
𝑑𝑋2 − Pe𝑘

𝑑𝑐𝑘
𝑑𝑋 + 𝑔̇𝑘 = 0
(8)

where Pe𝑘 = 𝑢𝑠𝐿/𝐷̃𝑘 is the Peclet number of species 𝑘 and 𝑔̇𝑘 is the normalized rate of generating 

the species 𝑘 inside the porous electrode: 

𝑔̇𝑂 = −𝜈𝑂

𝑅𝑉𝐿2

𝐷̃𝑂𝐶0 ,
𝑔̇𝑅 = 𝜈𝑅

𝑅𝑉𝐿2

𝐷̃𝑅𝐶0
(9)

The concentration profile can be solved analytically with the boundary condition 𝑐𝑘(𝑋 = 0) = 𝑐𝑘

0

and 

𝑑

𝑑𝑋 𝑐𝑘(𝑋 = 1) = 0:


𝑐𝑘(𝑋) = 𝑐𝑘

0 + 𝑔̇𝑘

Pe𝑘

𝑋 −
𝑔̇𝑘

(Pe𝑘)2 [exp(−Pe𝑘(1 − 𝑋)) − exp(−Pe𝑘)] ≈ 𝑐𝑘

0 + 𝑔̇𝑘

Pe𝑘

𝑋
(10)

In TREC flow batteries, the superficial velocity of electrolyte is on the order of 0.1~1 mm/s, 

yielding a large Peclet number 103~104, therefore the mean concentration profile is approximately

linear along the flow direction. 

At steady-state, the rate of consuming and generating reactants should also be balanced with 

the flux of reactants from the bulk solution to the electrode surface, therefore: 

𝜈𝑂𝑅𝑉/𝐴𝑒 = ℳ𝑂(𝐶𝑂 − 𝐶𝑂

𝑠),
𝜈𝑅𝑅𝑉/𝐴𝑒 = ℳ𝑅(𝐶𝑅

𝑠 − 𝐶𝑅)
(11)

where ℳ𝑂 and ℳ𝑅 are the mass transfer coefficient, and 𝐶𝑂,𝑅

𝑠
is the mean concentration at the 

surface of the electrode.𝐴𝑒 is the specific electrode area per unit volume, determined by the 

porosity 𝜖 and fiber diameter 𝑑𝑓 as 𝐴𝑒 = 4(1 − 𝜖)/𝑑𝑓.30 The dimensionless form of Eq. (10) can 

be written as:

−𝜁𝑔̇𝑂 = Sh𝑂(𝑐𝑂 − 𝑐𝑂

𝑠),
𝜁𝑔̇𝑅 = Sh𝑅(𝑐𝑅 − 𝑐𝑅

𝑠)
(12)

where Sh = ℳ𝑑𝐻/𝐷 is the Sherwood number of mass transfer, 𝑑𝐻 is the hydrodynamic diameter 

for the porous media, calculated as 𝑑𝐻 = 0.471

𝜖

1−𝜖 𝑑𝑓 , and  𝜁 = 𝑑𝐻/𝐴𝑒𝐿2 is a geometric factor 

of the porous electrode.31 The Sherwood number of the interdigitated flow field inside the porous 

electrode can be described by: 32

Sh = 0.018Re0.68Sc0.50
(13)

where Re = 𝜌𝑢𝑠𝑑𝐻/𝜖𝜇 is the Reynolds number and the Sc = 𝜇/𝜌𝐷 is the Schmidt number where 

𝜇 is the dynamical viscosity. 


2.2 Overpotential and Current Density. 

The extended Butler-Volmer equation is the key to correlate the current density to the overpotential 

loss, surface concentration and the local current density (𝐽):

𝐽 = 𝐽0 [𝐶𝑂

𝑠

𝐶𝑂

exp (𝛼𝑆

𝑛𝐹
𝑅𝑇 𝜂) − 𝐶𝑅

𝑠

𝐶𝑅

exp (−(1 − 𝛼𝑆) 𝑛𝐹

𝑅𝑇 𝜂)]
(14)

where 𝛼𝑆 is the symmetry factor of the excitation energy barrier, and 𝐽0 = 𝑛𝐹𝑘0𝐶0𝑐𝑂

1−𝜈𝑂𝛼𝑆𝑐𝑅

𝜈𝑅𝛼𝑆

is the exchange current density with 𝑘0(𝑇) the rate constant calculated through the Arrhenius law:

𝑘0(𝑇) = 𝑘0(𝑇0) exp [− Δ𝐺

𝑅 (1

𝑇 − 1

𝑇0)]
(15)

Eq. (14) converges to the original Butler-Volmer equation when 𝐶𝑂

𝑆 = 𝐶𝑂 and 𝐶𝑅

𝑠 = 𝐶𝑅:

𝐽

Sh→∞
→   𝐽0 [exp (𝛼𝑆

𝑛𝐹
𝑅𝑇 𝜂) − exp (−(1 − 𝛼𝑆) 𝑛𝐹

𝑅𝑇 𝜂)]
(16)

which is valid when the mass transfer coefficients approach infinity (Sh → ∞). 

The current density 𝐽 is evaluated per unit electrode surface area, and can be related to the 

volumetric reaction rate through charge balance across the electrode/electrolyte interface: 

𝑛𝐹𝑅𝑉 = 𝐽𝐴𝑒
(17)

The charge balance condition in the electrolyte should also be considered along the normal 

direction to the membrane (𝑦-axis). For each mole of cathodic reaction happening, the amount of 

negative charges transferred to the electrolyte is 𝑛𝐹𝑅𝑉 per unit volume, which needs to be 

balanced with ionic current: 

𝑛𝐹𝑅𝑉 = ∇ ⋅ 𝑱𝑖𝑜𝑛 ≈ 𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝑑2𝜂
𝑑𝑦2
(18)


with the divergence of ionic current written as ∇ ⋅ 𝑱𝑖𝑜𝑛 = −𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓∇2𝜙2 = 𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓∇2𝜂, using the 

Ohm’s law. For cells with flow-by geometry, the 𝑥-derivatives of the Laplacian ∇2 can be 

neglected since the length of the electrodes is orders of magnitude larger than the thickness, 

therefore the last approximating equality in Eq. (18) holds.  The potential variation inside the 

conductive electrode (𝜙1) is neglected. 𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓 is the effective ionic conductivity of the electrolyte 

inside the porous media, estimated as 𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓 = ∑ 𝐹2

𝑗 𝑅𝑇
𝑧𝑗

2𝐷̃𝑗𝐶𝑗. Together with Eqs. (11), (14), (17)

and (18), we can obtain an ordinary differential equation (ODE) considering the electrode 

polarization:

𝑑2𝜂
𝑑𝑦2 =

exp (𝛼𝑆 𝑛𝐹

𝑅𝑇 𝜂) − exp (−(1 − 𝛼𝑆) 𝑛𝐹

𝑅𝑇 𝜂)

𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓
𝐴𝑒 (1

𝐽0 +
𝜈𝑂

ℳ𝑂𝐶𝑂𝑛𝐹 exp (𝛼𝑆 𝑛𝐹

𝑅𝑇 𝜂) +
𝜈𝑅

ℳ𝑅𝐶𝑅𝑛𝐹 exp (−(1 − 𝛼𝑆) 𝑛𝐹

𝑅𝑇 𝜂))

(19)

Using the nondimensionalized coordinate 𝑌 = 𝑦/𝐻 with 𝐻 the thickness of the porous electrode, 

and the nondimensionalized overpotential 𝜓 =

𝑛𝐹

𝑅𝑇 𝜂, we can derive in the following equivalent 

ODE: 

𝑑2𝜓
𝑑𝑌2 =
exp(𝛼𝑆𝑛𝜓) − exp(−(1 − 𝛼𝑆)𝑛𝜓)

𝒦 [1

𝑗0 + 𝜁 (𝜈𝑂Da𝑂

Sh𝑂𝑐𝑂 exp(𝛼𝑆𝑛𝜓) + 𝜈𝑅Da𝑅

Sh𝑅𝑐𝑅 exp(−(1 − 𝛼𝑆)𝑛𝜓))]
(20)

where 𝑗0 = 𝑐𝑂

1−𝜈𝑂𝛼𝑆𝑐𝑅

𝜈𝑅𝛼𝑆 = 𝐽0/𝐽0

0 is the dimensionless exchange current, with 𝐽0

0 = 𝑛𝐹𝑘0𝐶0. Dak

is the Damköhler number characterizing the relative ratio between the reaction rate to the mass 

diffusion rate, defined as Da𝑘 = 𝑘0𝐴𝑒𝐿2/𝐷̃𝑘. 𝒦 is the dimensionless conductivity 𝒦 = 𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓 ⋅

(𝑅𝑇/𝐹)/(𝐽0

0𝐴𝑒𝐻2), which can be interpreted as the ratio of conduction current driven by the 

“thermal voltage” 𝑅𝑇/𝐹 to the exchange current 𝐽0

0 at standard concentration. The dimensionless 

ODE (Eq. (20)) clearly shows that the overpotential is a combined result of mass transfer quantified 


by the Sherwood number Sh and reaction kinetics characterized by the Damköhler number Da, 

and the activities of redox species 𝑐𝑂 and 𝑐𝑅. 

Finally, we consider the boundary conditions for solving the overpotential. At 𝑦 = 𝐻, the ionic 

current across the membrane should equal to the discharging current of the cell, and at 𝑦 = 0

where the electrode is in contact with either the current collector or wall of flow channel, the ionic 

current should be zero. The boundary condition for solving the Eq. (18) or (19) can therefore be 

written as:

𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓 (𝑑𝜂

𝑑𝑦)

𝑦=0

= 0,
𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓 (𝑑𝜂

𝑑𝑦)

𝑦=𝐻

= 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙/𝐴
(21)

where 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙 is the discharging current of TRFB and apparent 𝐴 is the electrode area.

For each location 𝑥 along the flow direction, we solve the ODE (Eq. 19) using the boundary 

value problem solver bvp4c of Matlab to obtain the overpotential profile 𝜂(𝑥, 𝑦). In this work, we 

assume the electrode is conductive enough and neglected the electric potential variation in the solid 

phase, hence the overpotential drop inside the electrode is then taken as the mean value across the 

entire electrode domain.33 Similarly, the electrochemical potential 𝐸(𝑥) of the electrolyte is 

calculated with the local concentrations 𝐶𝑂(𝑥) and 𝐶𝑅(𝑥), and we take the electrode potential as 

the mean value of the 𝐸(𝑥).33 Rigorously, a full set of two-dimensional hydrodynamic, mass 

transfer and polarization model should be solved, but we shall see later such the mean-field 

approach taken in our modeling can already achieve reasonable agreement with experiments and 

capture the coupled effects of mass transfer, electrochemical kinetics and electrode polarization. 

2.3 Self-Consistent Solution of Discharging Current. 


After discussing the mass transfer and the overpotential inside the electrolyte, we now solve the 

total current that can be extracted from the cell. We first consider the discharging cell operating at 

𝑇1, with the electrode potential of cathode (+) and anode (-) expressed as:

𝐸±(𝑇1) = 𝐸(𝑇0) + 𝛼±(𝑇1 − 𝑇0)
(22)

For convenience, we denote the solution to the ODE of overpotential (Eq. 17) as 𝜂 = 𝑓(𝑅𝑉), then 

the overpotential at the two electrodes for the discharging cell are expressed as

𝜂1

± = 𝑓(± 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙

𝑛±𝐹𝒱)
(23)

where the subscript 1 indicates the discharging cell operating at 𝑇1, 𝒱 the volume of the porous 

electrode, 𝑛± the electron transfer number for the redox reaction of the catholyte (+) and anolyte

(-) correspondingly. The anode will adopt a negative sign when computing the volumetric reaction 

rate since we define cathodic reaction as the positive direction. At a finite discharging current, the 

voltage for the discharging cell (𝑉1) is therefore

𝑉1(𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙) = 𝑉𝑜𝑐(𝑇0) + 𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙(𝑇1 − 𝑇0) − (𝜂1

+ − 𝜂1

−) − 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙 ⋅ 𝑅𝑖𝑛
(24)

where 𝑉𝑜𝑐(𝑇0) = 𝐸+(𝑇0) − 𝐸−(𝑇0) is the open circuit voltage at reference temperature, and 

𝑅𝑖𝑛 = 𝑅𝑚𝑒𝑚 + 𝑅Ω is the internal resistance as a combination of the membrane resistance 𝑅𝑚𝑒𝑚

and electrical Ohmic resistance 𝑅Ω of the electrode and current collector. Note here we did not 

lump the overpotential into the internal resistance, since the overpotential loss depends on 

discharging current and cannot be simply understood as a resistive component. From the extended 

Butler-Volmer equation, the sign of the overpotential is the same as the sign of current and 𝑅𝑉, 

thereby 𝜂1

− < 0, and the total overpotential for the cell is positive (𝜂1

+ − 𝜂1

−) > 0. 


The voltage of the charging cell operating at 𝑇2 can be computed in the same manner by simply 

replacing 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙 → −𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙, since all the chemical reactions are opposite to the discharging cell. The 

overpotential for the cathode and the anode can be written as:  

𝜂2

±(𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙) = 𝑓(∓ 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙

𝑛±𝐹𝒱)
(25)

The voltage of the charging cell at finite current is therefore:

𝑉2(𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙) = 𝑉𝑜𝑐(𝑇0) + 𝛼𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙(𝑇2 − 𝑇0) − (𝜂2

+ − 𝜂2

−) + 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑅𝑖𝑛
(26)

Finally, the measured potential for the full TRFB is:

𝑉(𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙) = 𝑉1 − 𝑉2 = 𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙(𝑇1 − 𝑇2) − 𝜂𝑡𝑜𝑡(𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙) − 2𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑅𝑖𝑛
(27)

where 𝜂𝑡𝑜𝑡(𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙) = (𝜂1

+ − 𝜂1

−) − (𝜂2

+ − 𝜂2

−) is the total overpotential drop. Similarly, (𝜂2

+ −

𝜂2

−) < 0 and hence the total overpotential drop is positive. In addition, the current is also 

determined by the load 𝑅𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑 in the external circuit, hence the current can be determined by the 

following equation:

𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙(𝑇1 − 𝑇2) − 𝜂𝑡𝑜𝑡(𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙)

(2𝑅𝑖𝑛 + 𝑅𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑)
= 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙
(28)

Eq. (28) can be solved self-consistently using a minimization solver of Matlab. Finally, the 

efficiency 𝜂𝐸 of the TRFB system can be determined as:34

𝜂𝐸 =
𝑉(𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙) ⋅ 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙 − 𝑃𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝

𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 ⋅ max[𝑇1, 𝑇2] + ∑
𝑗=±[(1 − 𝜖𝐻𝑋,𝑗) ⋅ 𝜌𝑗𝑐𝑝,𝑗𝑄𝑗(𝑇1 − 𝑇2)]
− 𝑖𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙

2
𝑅𝑖𝑛

(29)

where the subscript 𝑗 in the denominator sums over catholyte and anolyte, 𝜖𝐻𝑋 the effectiveness 

of heat recuperation of, 𝜌 and 𝑐𝑝 the density and specific heat of the electrolytes, and 𝑄 the flow 

rate. The pump work 𝑃𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 = Δ𝑝 ⋅ (𝑄+ + 𝑄−), where Δ𝑝 is pressure drop along the flow direction 

inside the porous media is estimated using the Ergun equation: 35


Δ𝑝 = 150𝜇𝐿

𝑑𝑓

(1 − 𝜖)2

𝜖3
𝑢𝑠 + 1.75𝜌𝐿

𝑑𝑓

1 − 𝜖

𝜖3
𝑢𝑠

2
(30)

where 𝜇 is the dynamic viscosity of the electrolytes. In our work, the flow rate across the cell is 

small and the pump work is negligible compared with the output power of the TRFB.

The porous electrode model of TRFB presented here will be used to comprehensively analyze 

the factors and sources limiting the power density and efficiency in the following sections, 

including operating factors such as flow rates, heat recuperation effectiveness and temperature 

differences, as well as the electrolyte and electrode properties such as rate constants and ionic 

conductivities. 

3. Experimental Implementation of the TRFB

In this section, we describe the experimental details of the TRFB testing system. As shown in 

Figure 3(a-b), the testing system was composed of two flow batteries, two heat exchangers and a 

heating box for temperature control. As shown in Figure 3b, the heating box chamber was built 

with pink insulation foam and filled with extra ceramic fiber insulation blankets at the top, the 

bottom and the backside walls. Heating was performed with a coil heater and a heating plate placed 

at the bottom of the box. The heating plate consisted of an OMEGA silicone fiberglass heater 

attached to a piece of aluminum plate. The coil heater and the heating plate was connected in 

parallel to a programmable power supply (BK precision 9130). A thermocouple was suspended in 

the chamber to monitor the temperature. Temperature control was achieved via a home-built PID 

model through LABVIEW.

Figure 3(c-d) shows the assembly of the flow cell, with the flow channels created by cutting 

the silicone gaskets (2.5 mm thick) filled with the graphite felt (AvCarb® G200, with fiber 

diameter ~ 10μm) 36 as the porous electrode. The graphite felt was cut into dimensions of 1.3 cm


× 6 cm × 2.5 mm to fit into the flow channel. To improve the hydrophilicity, the graphite felt was 

heated up to 400 oC in ambient condition up to 24 hours. A Nafion 115 cation exchange membrane

was used as the separator between the catholyte and the anolyte to prevent cross over of negatively 

charged redox species and short circuiting.  Each porous electrode was in contact with a strip of 

Titanium foil (grade II, 25 μm) as the current collector. A thermocouple coated with epoxy was 

embedded in the flow channel of the anolyte Fe(CN)63-/ Fe(CN)63- to monitor the temperature of 

the cells. We did not embed the thermocouple into the channel of I3/I- solutions, because the 

dissolved iodine could penetrate through the thin layer of epoxy coating and corrode the 

thermocouple junction. Gaskets, electrodes and membrane were compressed with two pieces of 

acrylic plates. Heat exchangers were assembled in a similar way as shown in Figures 3(e-f).  At 

relatively high flow rates (340 μL/min), the heat exchanger had a reasonable effectiveness (~ 90%), 

estimated by the temperature readings of the four thermocouples embedded inside the flow 

channels of the heat exchangers. However, due to the small heat capacitance rate, the heat loss 

across the tube walls was significant, especially at smaller flow rates. The temperature difference 

between the inlet temperature of hot channel and the hot cell could reach ~20 ℃ when the hot cell 

temperature was higher than ~55 ℃, despite the insulation foam surrounding the heat exchangers.

However, this problem of insulating the tubes would not be as significant when flow rates are 

scaled up by stacking multiple flow cells. Therefore, we assumed 90% of the heat recuperation 

effectiveness when estimating the efficiency of the TRFB devices, which is also the typical 

effectiveness for heat exchangers for liquid-liquid heat transfer. A peristaltic pump was used to 

inject the electrolytes into the flow cells. The anolyte solution contained 0.375M K3Fe(CN)6 and 

0.375M K4Fe(CN)6 and the catholyte solution contained 0.1 M KI3 an 1 M KI. The catholyte 

solution was prepared by dissolving 0.1 M iodine (I2) into 1.1 M of KI solution. Both the catholyte 


and anolyte chosed are stable near neutral pH and can be paired without the pH buffer solutions. 

In addition, the active ions of both solutions are anionic, therefore can be well separated using a 

cation exchange membrane.  

We used a potentiostat (BioLogic VSP-300) to characterize the cell temperature coefficient 

𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙, open circuit voltage and the discharging performance. The current collectors of the anodes

(Fe(CN)63-/ Fe(CN)63-) of the two cells were connected by a wire, and the current collector of the

cathode (I3-/ I-) of the hot cell was connected with the working electrode terminal of the potentiostat, 

and the other cathode of the cold cell served as the counter and reference electrode. Before heating, 

we maintained the system at room temperature for nearly 20 minutes for equilibration of 

temperature and the relaxation of the initial built in voltage. Then we increased the temperature in 

a stepwise manner and recorded the open circuit voltage as shown in Figure 4a. By linear 

regression, the cell temperature coefficient was extracted as 𝛼𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙 = 1.9 mV/K (Figure 4b), with 

only slight deviations from the measurement done by Yu’s group due to the difference of

electrolyte concentrations.22


Figure 3. TRFB experimental testing system. (a) Schematic of the testing system, with temperature 
difference between the hot cell and cold cell achieved by a heating box chamber made with thermal 
insulation foams. (b) Picture of the dissembled heating box chamber showing the structure of 
temperature control system. (c) The schematic structure (not to scale) of the flow battery. Two 
acrylic caps were used as the structure host. The flow channel was created by silicone gaskets and 
filled with graphite felt as the porous electrode. A Nafion cation exchange membrane (CEM) was
sandwiched between the gaskets and porous electrodes to separate the catholyte and anolyte. (d) 
The picture of the flow battery assembly. An epoxy sealed thermocouple as also inserted into the 
flow channel to monitor the temperature of the electrolyte. (e) The schematic structure (not to scale)
and (f) the picture of planar heat exchanger. 


Figure 4. Temperature coefficient measurement of the TRFB using 0.1 M I2 / 1 M KI as the 
catholyte, and 0.375M K3Fe(CN)6 / 0.375 M K4Fe(CN)6 as the anolyte. (a) Open circuit voltage 
(OCV) and temperature difference (𝛥𝑇) as function of time. The vertical black arrow indicates the 
time start heating. (b) Temperature coefficient extracted by linear fitting the relation between OCV 
and 𝛥𝑇. The obtained temperature coefficient of the cell is 𝛼𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙 = 1.9 mV/K. 

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Time (h)

OCV (mV)

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

 ΔT (oC)

OCV (mV)

ΔT (K)

(a)
(b)


4.
Results and Analysis of the TRFB’s Performance 

This section discusses the experimental results of flow rate dependent discharging performance 

of the TRFB cell, together with the theoretical analysis pointing to the factors limiting the 

efficiency and power density. 

In Figures 5a-b, we first compared the measured flow rate dependent voltage and power 

density at Δ𝑇 = 37 ℃ as a function of discharging current with the modeling results. Good 

agreement is achieved between the predicted and measured discharging behavior, indicating that 

our model accurately captures the coupled effect mass transfer, electrode polarization and reaction 

kinetics, which has been ignored in previous works. The parameters for the model prediction are 

summarized in Table 1. Only two parameters, the internal cell resistance 𝑅𝑖𝑛 = 7.25 Ω and the 

tortuosity factor 𝒯 = 5 of the media, were fit from the data obtained at 230 μL/min (Re ≈ 3×10-

3). This obtained tortuosity factor agreed reasonably with the literature values of graphite felts in 

the range of 5~6.30 For other flow rates tested, we fixed these parameters and directly computed

the results as plotted in Figure 5. In general, the mass transfer overpotential was larger at lower

Reynolds numbers and flow rates, thus decreasing the power density. However, the extra amount 

of heat needed to increase the temperature of the electrolyte also decreased at smaller flow rate, 

and the efficiency 𝜂𝐸 increased at a smaller flow rate (Figure 5c). We estimated that 11% of 

𝜂𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑡 can be achieved at 1 μL/min at maximum power output, while the power density can 

approach 9.5 μW/cm2 at 0.5 mL/min. In general, simply choosing operating conditions 

(temperature difference Δ𝑇 and flow rate 𝑄) of the TRFB cell cannot simultaneously optimize the 

power density and efficiency. Figure 6a-b show the map of peak power density and the 

corresponding efficiency as a function of temperature difference and flow rate. Although 


increasing temperature difference could simultaneously improve efficiency and power density, the 

effect of flow rate on power density and efficiency is opposite with nonperfect heat recuperation. 

Figure 5. (a) Voltage and (b) areal power density as functions of discharge current 𝐽 at 𝛥𝑇 = 37℃,
with the hot cell kept at 60oC and the cold cell left at the ambient temperature (23℃). The symbols 
represent the experimental results and solid lines as modeling results. At a small flow rate (62 
μL/min), current dependent discharging voltage deviated from the linear relation as indicated by 
the dashed green line. (c) Trade-off between the maximum power density and maximum relative 
efficiency 𝜂𝐸/𝜂𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑡 (in absolute scale from 0 to 1) as a function of flow rate. 


Figure 6. Map of (a) power density and (b) absolute efficiency (in absolute scale) as a function of 
temperature difference and flow rate, with heat recuperation effectiveness fixed at 90%. 

Effectiveness of heat recuperation is pivotal to improving the energy efficiency of TRFB 

systems. Figure 7a-b show the map of absolute 𝜂𝐸,𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥 and relative efficiency 𝜂𝐸,𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥/𝜂𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑡 at 

the maximum power density, as a function of temperature difference Δ𝑇 and heat recuperation 

effectiveness 𝜖𝐻𝑋. Figure 7b also highlights that the relative efficiency is very sensitive to the heat 


recuperation effectiveness, especially in the range 𝜖𝐻𝑋 > 95%. With perfect recuperation, the 

relative efficiency could reach 50%, but decreases fast below 15% with 𝜖𝐻𝑋 of 95%. 

Figure 7. (a) Absolute and (b) relative efficiency map in absolute scale (from 0 to 1) at maximum 
power density as a function of heat recuperation effectiveness and temperature difference. Flow 
rate is fixed at 4 μL/min and the cold cell temperature is fixed at 𝑇𝐶 = 300 K.

In addition to the operating parameters such as flow rate, temperature and heat recuperation, it 

is also important to understand the factors contributing to the overpotential as irreversible loss, 


which is important for designing TRFB cells to achieve higher efficiency and power density. Such 

irreversible loss is especially important when the flow rate is small, manifested in the clear 

deviation of the voltage drop from the linear voltage-current (𝑉 − 𝐽) relation at large discharge 

current (Figure 5a). Such nonlinear 𝑉 − 𝐽 curve would result in lower thermodynamic efficiency. 

By pushing the effective ionic conductivity of the porous electrode 𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓 → ∞, the nonlinearity of 

𝑉 − 𝐽 curve is eliminated. This loss due to the finite ionic conductivity inside the porous electrode 

is referred as the electrode polarization, as shown in Figure 8a. The major factor limiting both the 

power density and the efficiency is the mass transfer induced overpotential. By further pushing the 

Sherwood number to infinity, the relative efficiency can increase almost by two-fold from 7.5% 

to 14% (Figure 8b). Such analysis also shows that optimizing the electrochemical kinetics at the 

electrode might have negligible improvement on TRFB performances, if the other factors such as 

mass transfer becomes the dominant bottleneck.


Figure 8. (a) Effect of the mass transfer overpotential loss, electrode polarization loss on the 
discharging voltage (𝑉) – current (𝐽) relation. The model is not sensitive to the electrochemical 
rate constant in the range of 𝑘0 > 0.75×10-5 m/s. The discharging curve is almost unchanged by 

further letting the rate constant approaching 𝑘0 → ∞, based on discharge curve at the nonpolarized 
and infinite mass transfer limit (𝑆ℎ → ∞, 𝜎𝑒𝑓𝑓 → ∞). (b) The corresponding relative efficiency 
versus the power density. Efficiency is estimated assuming 90% heat recuperation effectiveness. 
This figure is estimated at the flow rate of 4 μL/min and the temperature difference of 𝛥𝑇 = 37 ℃. 

Finally, the internal resistance (𝑅𝑖𝑛) of the TRFB cells is also a major factor contributing to 

the loss, which is composed of the electrical ohmic resistance and the membrane resistances. 

Electrical resistance of the porous electrode and the contact resistance between the current 

collector and the electrode should not be the major contribution to 𝑅𝑖𝑛. We characterized the total 

electrical Ohmic resistance (𝑅Ω) by measuring the resistance of the cell assembly without the 

Nafion membrane, showing that electrical Ohmic resistance is ~3 Ω. Since Nafion membrane has 

relative low ionic conductivity of K+ (3.3×10-4 S/cm), 37 the membrane resistance 𝑅𝑚𝑒𝑚was

estimated to be ~ 5 Ω. Adding the 𝑅𝑚𝑒𝑚 and 𝑅Ω together, 𝑅𝑖𝑛 of a single cell was estimated to be 


around 8 Ω, agreeing with the 𝑅𝑖𝑛 obtained by fitting the experimental discharging curves in Table 

1. The fitted 𝑅𝑖𝑛 value was slightly smaller, which might be attributed to the fact that electrodes 

were wetted by the electrolytes, and ionic conduction contributed to the extra conductance. If the 

membrane conductivity of K+ can be improved close to that of proton H+ (7.8×10-2 S/cm), then 

the membrane resistance would become negligible compared with the electrical Ohmic resistance. 

In this case, the power density at high flow rates (340 μL/min) can increase by two-fold from 9 

μW/cm2 to 18 μW/cm2. However, the membrane resistance would have a smaller effect at low 

flow rates due to the limitation of the mass transfer. At the flow rate of 4 μL/min, the corresponding

relative efficiency could be improved from 7.8% to 8.3%, while the power density increased by 

14% at from 2.2 μW/cm2 to 2.5 μW/cm2.


Table 1. Summary of parameters used for the theoretical model

Parameters
Values
Reference or Method

Internal resistance (𝑅𝑖𝑛)
7.25 Ω
Fitted to discharging curve

Porosity (𝜖)
95%
Ref. [38]

Tortuosity (𝒯)
5.0
Fitted to discharging curve

Fiber diameter (𝑑𝑓)
10 μm
Ref. [36]

Density of the catholyte (𝜌+)
1191 kg/m3
Measured

Density of the anolyte (𝜌−)
1282 kg/m3
Measured

Kinematic viscosity (𝜈)
8×10-7 m2/s
Ref. [39]

Diffusivity of KI3 (𝐷𝑂,+)
7.0×10-10 m2/s
Ref. [22]

Diffusivity of KI (𝐷𝑅,+)
5.4×10-9 m2/s
Ref. [22]

Diffusivity of K3Fe(CN)6 (𝐷𝑂,−)
7.6×10-10 m2/s
Ref. [22]

Diffusivity of K4Fe(CN)6 (𝐷𝑅,−)
6.9×10-10 m2/s
Ref. [22]

Rate constant I3-/I- (𝑘0,+)
6.7×10-5 m/s
Ref. [22]

Rate constant of Fe(CN)63-/4- (𝑘0,−)
0.75×10-5 m/s
Ref. [22]


5. Conclusions

In summary, we demonstrate a prototype of an all-anionic thermally regenerative flow battery 

operated with pH-neutral K3Fe(CN)6/K4Fe(CN)6 and KI3/KI electrolytes for the anolyte and 

catholyte solutions, respectively. A reasonably high temperature coefficient of the cell 𝛼𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 = 1.9 

mV/K and a power density of 9 μW/cm2 at Δ𝑇 = 37 oC was measured. Such cell design is free of 

pH-matching issue affecting the stability of electrolytes and the issue of cross-over of active 

species since both active ions are anions. Combining the experiments with the porous electrode 

model, this work quantitatively captures the flow-rate dependent discharging behavior, even the 

nonlinear discharging characteristics at low flow rate or low Reynolds number. We showed that 

the efficiency relative to the Carnot limit can achieve 50% at the limit of perfect heat recuperation 

and 7.5% at 90% heat recuperation.  For the first time, this work comprehensively analyzed the 

coupled effects of surface kinetics, mass transfer and electrode polarization on energy efficiency

and power of TRFB for harvesting low-grade heat. At a fixed flow rate and internal resistance, 

mass transfer overpotential inside the porous electrode is the major factor limiting both the power 

density and efficiency. Electrode polarization becomes pronounced at low flow rates and large 

discharging currents, resulting in nonlinearity of the discharging voltage-current curves. Surface 

reaction kinetics characterized by the rate constant, however, does not significantly affect the 

performance of the system in the case when the mass transfer is the major limiting factor. We also 

expect that the power density and efficiency could be significantly improved in the future, with 

the development of proper cationic membranes with high conductivity or mobility of alkali metal 

cations to reduce the membrane resistance. 


Acknowledgment

X.Q. acknowledges helpful and productive discussions with Dr. Haoran Jiang and Xun Wang. The 

authors gratefully acknowledge Prof. Evelyn Wang for valuable suggestions in the preparation of 

this manuscript. This work was supported by the Center for Mechanical Engineering Research and

Education at MIT and SUSTech. Device modeling was partially performed using the Stampede2 

supercomputer through the startup allocation (TG-DMR200043) of Extreme Science and 

Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE). The authors declare no conflict of interests.


References

1
Forman, C., Muritala, I. K., Pardemann, R. & Meyer, B. Estimating the global waste heat potential. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 57, 1568-1579, (2016).

2
Bonetti, M., Nakamae, S., Roger, M. & Guenoun, P. Huge Seebeck coefficients in nonaqueous 
electrolytes. The Journal of chemical physics 134, 114513, (2011).

3
Li, T. et al. Cellulose ionic conductors with high differential thermal voltage for low-grade heat 
harvesting. Nat Mater 18, 608-613, (2019).

4
deBethune, A. J., Licht, T. S. & Swendeman, N. The temperature coefficients of electrode 
potentials: the isothermal and thermal coefficients — the standard ionic entropy of 
electrochemical transport of the hydrogen ion. J. Electrochem. Soc. 106, 616, (1959).

5
Han, C.-G. et al. Giant thermopower of ionic gelatin near room temperature. Science 368, 1091-
1098, (2020).

6
Poudel, B. et al. High-thermoelectric performance of nanostructured bismuth antimony telluride 
bulk alloys. Science 320, 634-638, (2008).

7
Chum, H. L. Review of thermally regenerative electrochemical systems. Vol. 332 (Solar Energy 
Research Institute, 1981).

8
Rahimi, M. et al. Emerging electrochemical and membrane-based systems to convert low-grade 
heat to electricity. Energy & Environmental Science 11, 276-285, (2018).

9
Wang, H. et al. Ionic Thermoelectric Figure of Merit for Charging of Supercapacitors. Advanced 
Electronic Materials 3, 1700013, (2017).

10
Wang, X. & Feng, S.-P. Thermal Capacitive Electrochemical Cycle on Carbon-Based Supercapacitor 
for Converting Low-grade Heat to Electricity. Frontiers in Mechanical Engineering 3, (2017).

11
Yu, B. et al. All-Day Thermogalvanic Cells for Environmental Thermal Energy Harvesting. Research 
(Wash D C) 2019, 2460953, (2019).

12
Hu, R. et al. Harvesting waste thermal energy using a carbon-nanotube-based thermo-
electrochemical cell. Nano Lett 10, 838-846, (2010).

13
Lee, S. W. et al. An electrochemical system for efficiently harvesting low-grade heat energy. 
Nature communications 5, 3942, (2014).

14
Yang, Y. et al. Charging-free electrochemical system for harvesting low-grade thermal energy. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 111, 17011-17016, (2014).

15
Yang, Y. et al. Membrane-free battery for harvesting low-grade thermal energy. Nano Lett 14, 
6578-6583, (2014).

16
Poletayev, A. D., McKay, I. S., Chueh, W. C. & Majumdar, A. Continuous electrochemical heat 
engines. Energy & Environmental Science 11, 2964-2971, (2018).

17
Hammond, R. H. & Jr, W. M. R. An electrochemical heat engine for direct solar energy conversion. 
Solar Energy 23, 443-449, (1979).

18
Zhao, D. et al. Ionic thermoelectric supercapacitors. Energy & Environmental Science 9, 1450-1457, 
(2016).

19
Duan, J. et al. Aqueous thermogalvanic cells with a high Seebeck coefficient for low-grade heat 
harvest. Nature communications 9, 5146, (2018).

20
Quickenden, T. I. & Mua, Y. A Review of Power Generation in Aqueous Thermogalvanic Cells. 
Journal of Electrocheical Society 142, 3985, (1995).

21
Gao, C., Lee, S. W. & Yang, Y. Thermally Regenerative Electrochemical Cycle for Low-Grade Heat 
Harvesting. ACS Energy Letters 2, 2326-2334, (2017).

22
Ding, Y. et al. Simultaneous energy harvesting and storage via solar-driven regenerative 
electrochemical cycles. Energy & Environmental Science 12, 3370-3379, (2019).


23
Hupp, J. T. & Weaver, M. J. Solvent, Ligand and Ionic Charge Effects on Reacion Entropies for 
Simple Transition-Metal Redox Couples. Inorg. Chem. 23, 3639-3644, (1984).

24
Huang, B. et al. Non-covalent interactions in electrochemical reactions and implications in clean 
energy applications. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 20, 15680-15686, (2018).

25
Post, K. & Bobins, R. G. Thermodynamic diagrams for the vanadium-water system at 298.15 K. 
Electrochemica Acta 21, 401-405, (1976).

26
Huang, H.-H. The Eh-pH Diagram and Its Advances. Metals 6, 23, (2016).

27
Domingo, P. L., Garcia, B. & Leal, J. M. Acid-base behavior of ghe ferricyanide ion in perchloric acid 
media. Specrophotometric and kinetic study. Can. J. Chem. 68, 228-235, (1990).

28
Bard, A. J. & Faulkner, L. R. Electrochemical methods: fundamentals and applications, 2nd edition.  
(Wiley, 2000).

29
Fathabadi, H. Improving the Power Efficiency of a PV Power Generation System Using a Proposed 
Electrochemical Heat Engine Embedded in the System. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 34, 
8626-8633, (2019).

30
Castañeda, L. F., Walsh, F. C., Nava, J. L. & Ponce de León, C. Graphite felt as a versatile electrode 
material: Properties, reaction environment, performance and applications. Electrochim. Acta 258, 
1115-1139, (2017).

31
Nakayama, A., Kuwahara, F. & Sano, Y. Concept of equivalent diameter for heat and fluid flow in 
porous media. AlChE J. 53, 732-736, (2007).

32
Barton, J. L., Milshtein, J. D., Hinricher, J. J. & Brushett, F. R. Quantifying the impact of viscosity on 
mass-transfer coefficients in redox flow batteries. J. Power Sources 399, 133-143, (2018).

33
Barton, J. L. & Brushett, F. R. A One-Dimensional Stack Model for Redox Flow Battery Analysis and 
Operation. Batteries 5, 25, (2019).

34
Fathabadi, H. Solar energy harvesting in buildings using a proposed novel electrochemical device 
as an alternative to PV modules. Renewable Energy 133, 118-125, (2019).

35
Ergun, S. & Orning, A. A. Fluid Flow through Randomly Packed Columns and Fluidized Beds. 
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry 41, 1179-1184, (1949).

36
Griškonis, E. et al. Enhanced Performance of Microbial Fuel Cells with Anodes from 
Ethylenediamine and Phenylenediamine Modified Graphite Felt. Processes 8, 939, (2020).

37
Sanginov, E. A. et al. Study of the transport of alkali metal ions in a nonaqueous polymer 
electrolyte based on Nafion. Solid State Ionics 300, 26-31, (2017).

38
Jiang, H. R., Shyy, W., Wu, M. C., Zhang, R. H. & Zhao, T. S. A bi-porous graphite felt electrode with 
enhanced surface area and catalytic activity for vanadium redox flow batteries. Applied Energy
233-234, 105-113, (2019).

39
Holman, J. P. Heat Transfer. 10th edn,  (McGraw-Hill Education, 2009).


