1

Dual Universality and Unconventional Phase Diagram of a Clean 2D 

Superconductor with Tunable Disorders

Puhua Wan1, Qihong Chen1,2, Oleksandr Zheliuk1, Le Zhang3,1, 

Minpeng Liang1, Xiaoli Peng1, Jianting Ye1*

1 Device Physics of Complex Materials, Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, 

University of Groningen, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands.

2 Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.

3 Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Laser Engineering, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, 

Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China.

* e-mail: j.ye@rug.nl

Weakly disordered two-dimensional (2D) superconductors can host richer quantum 

phase transitions than their highly-disordered counterparts1–6. This is due to the insertion 

of a metallic state in the transition between a superconductor and an insulator. Disorders 

were predicted to show profound influences on the boundaries surrounding this 

intermediate metallic phase, affecting the existence of a metallic ground state called Bose 

metal1,2 and the dynamic processes in a quantum Griffiths state7,8. Here we present a 

study on quantum phase transitions of a clean 2D superconductor, MoS2, under a

perpendicular magnetic field as a function of disorder strength that is tuned 

electrostatically. We found two universal scaling behaviors independent of disorders: a 

power-law scaling applies for all metallic states, and an activated dynamical scaling 

characterizes transitions between quantum Griffiths state and weakly localized metal. 

The phase diagram in this unexplored clean regime shows that a Bose metal ground state 

is expected only below a critical disorder. Whereas, stronger disorders can stabilize a true 

2D superconductivity and enhances the quantum Griffiths phase. These behaviors are 

diametrically different from the conventional understanding of the clean regime.


2

The disorder has significant influences on macroscopic quantum coherent states of 

superconductors. Physically, the presence of disorders requires treating the disorder scattering 

prior to superconductivity, where the electrons in the normal state are described by a diffusive 

motion. The mean free path lm of the electron, which is determined by the strength of disorder 

scattering, becomes an important parameter that defines the so-called “cleanness” of a 

superconductor. Compared with coherence length 0 found in the superconducting state, lm ~ 

0 marks the borderline towards the clean (lm >> 0) or dirty (lm << 0) limits. In two-

dimensional (2D) systems,
the increase of disorder can drastically suppress the 

superconductivity by reducing the transition temperature Tc and increasing the normal state 

resistance RN. When the disorder reaches a critical strength in many granular films, these

highly-disordered 2D superconductors (lm << 0) turn into insulators at a universal resistance 

close to h/4e2 9,10. Transport properties measured in the vicinity of the transitions often exhibit 

a universal scaling behavior, belonging to the universal class of dirty bosons11–13.

On the other hand, two distinct features were observed in many weakly-disordered systems 

(lm ~ 0)based on 2D single crystals6,14,15 and granular thin films with enhanced crystallinity16,17. 

First of all, an intermediate metallic state emerges after suppressing the superconductivity in a 

magnetic field B, which was theoretically proposed to be a quantum metallic phase. At zero 

temperature, the ground state of this metallic state was predicted to be a Bose metal1–4. As 

described in the Bose metal model, the superconductor to quantum metal transition (SMT) 

originates from the activation of free vortex dislocations following a power-law dependence 

on the B field. This gives rise to a finite resistance even if the field is infinitesimal1–3,14. 

Secondly, a quantum Griffiths state, in which the Cooper pairs are isolated in superconducting 

rare regions under a large B field, dominates the phase transitions from a quantum metal to a 

weakly-localized metal (normal-metal state)5,6. The transition dynamics are increasingly frozen 

when temperature decreases. At zero temperature, the dynamical exponent 𝑧𝜈 becomes infinite 

reaching the so-called quantum Griffith singularity8,18,19. Compared with the constant 

dynamical rate found in dirty Bosons, here, the 𝑧𝜈 value varies as a function of temperature at 

the phase boundary between the quantum Griffiths and the weakly-localized metallic states.

Although the phase diagram in the dirty regime has been studied extensively11,20,21, the 

clean regime (lm > 0) remains largely unexplored, where disorders are predicted to influence 

both quantum metal and quantum Griffith state as a function of external magnetic field B

applied perpendicular to the 2D plane. It was theoretically proposed that depending on the 


3

interplay between disorder strength and quantum fluctuation at zero temperature1,2, in the low 

B field regime, the critical field Bc0 –the external magnetic field required for the system to enter 

the metallic state– can be either Bc0 = 0 or Bc0 > 0. This corresponds to a proposed ground state 

of either a Bose metal or the zero-resistance state of a true 2D superconductor, respectively.

Experimentally, although having different disorders can lead to zero or non-zero Bc0 values for 

different ground states, it is an open question whether the intermediate metallic states all belong 

to a universality class of power-law scaling. In the large B field regime, where the 

superconducting rare regions dominate the phase transitions, a quantum Griffiths state is 

theoretically predicted for all systems with non-zero disorders7,8. The activated dynamic 

scaling has been widely studied in
the quantum
Griffiths states of
many 2D 

superconductors6,17,22,23 at individual states of static disorders. Whereas, studying the 

universality requires preparing a range of states, where the scaling behavior can be analyzed

for different disorders in searching for identical behaviors. It is encouraging that a recent 

preprint reported that the activated dynamical scaling is universal in the dirty regime by varying 

the film thickness24. Nevertheless, it remains unknown whether the rare region effect will also 

dominate the clean regime since the spatial fluctuation of the order parameter decreases when 

the disorder is weakened25. Therefore, it is also highly demanded to find a clean system with 

variable disorders to exam the validity of the proposed universal exponent 𝜓𝜈7,8,26,27.

Compared with the extensive studies on universal scaling in the dirty regime11,20,21,24, the 

research in the clean regime (lm > 0) is seriously limited by the available 2D systems where 

scaling analyses can be performed. As shown in Fig. 1a, the clean regime of 2D 

superconductors is mostly accessed by bulk 3D single crystals with strong anisotropy, which 

behaves as 2D superconductors (the third quadrant, lower left). The granular films and 

atomically thin superconducting single crystals are affected by the intrinsic defects and being 

air unstable28,29. Except for monolayer NbSe2 protected by h-BN14,30, other films and interfaces 

all reside on the dirty side (first quadrant, upper-right). To resolve these difficulties, ionic 

gating on intrinsically semiconducting 2D crystals stands out as the choice, which can induce 

2D superconductivity on air-stable single-crystalline channels31,32, hence achieving weak 

disorders15. Nevertheless, the conventional ionic gating33 is still hampered by the low mobility, 

therefore, remains at the first quadrant.

To prepare a range of states in the second quadrant of Fig. 1a, we developed the following 

ionic gating with enhanced mobility. This starts with preparing ion-gated MoS2 transistors as 


4

shown in Fig. 1b and c. The Hall bar channel is shaped by a 50 nm thick Al2O3 film that isolates 

the field effect of ionic liquid. All carriers are induced by a single ionic gating and fixed by 

freezing the device below the glass transition temperature Tg of the ionic liquid. This initial 

gating (up to 6 V) is also limited to the electrostatic regime, where identical states can be 

reproduced in two consecutive gatings (Fig. S1). As shown in the simplified Helmholtz double 

layer formed on the channel (Fig. 1d), strong gating pushed the ions close to the channel surface 

(upper panel) generating non-uniform potentials, acting as disorders. In the cases of monolayer 

channels, these disorders can be strong enough to completely localize the electrical transport, 

reentering highly insulating states34,35. On the other hand, the discreteness of ion can be 

smoothed out by thermally releasing the ions away from the channel, forming a more uniform 

potential when the double layer thickness z becomes larger (lower panel of Fig. 1d). Therefore, 

the strength of the disorder can be tuned electrostatically by varying the distance z between the 

ions and the induced carriers.

By grounding the ionic gate and warming the device up to a temperature slightly higher 

than Tg, disorder states with different strengths can be accessed through sequential thermal 

releases. It worth noting that the thermally activated ionic motion is limited to the z-direction

out of the channel plane. Whereas, the in-plane motion of ions is restrained due to the rubbery 

state of high viscosity. As a result, different disorder strengths can be accessed in a single 

device with identical disorder distribution in the xy plane. Compared with different disorders 

accessed by preparing multiple samples, either by thin film deposition or post annealing20,36, 

varying disorder strength in the same device also maintains the identical intrinsic disorders 

caused by structural defects and impurities.

The disorder strength can be parameterized as 𝑊~𝑙𝑚

−1 2
⁄
37,38 (section 1 of the 

supplementary materials). From the band structure calculation of the ion-gated MoS2 39, the 

carriers are primarily doped on the outmost layer at the K/K’ points of the Brillouin zone. Since 

transport measurement can determine the 2D carrier density n2D (by Hall effect, Fig. S2) and 

sheet resistance Rs measured right before superconducting transition, we can obtain lm = vF, 

where Fermi velocity vF and scattering time  are calculated in section 1 of the supplementary 

materials. As shown in Fig. 1f, we prepared in situ 11 different states on a single device (device 

A). The effect of having different disorders is conspicuous because the Rs varies oppositely to 

the change of n2D when both parameters are measured at a normal state (T = 13 K) above the 

superconducting transition. With the decrease of n2D, the Rs conversely decrease as well due to 


5

a faster increase of Hall mobility  (derived in Eq. 5 of supplementary materials) from 119 to 

834 cm2V-1s-1 (inset of Fig. 1e). Therefore, the lm values increase from 12.4 to 71.6 nm when 

the disorder strength reduces. The first state, having a Tc = 7.1 K (with lm = 12.4 nm) is induced 

by the initial gating at the right side of the superconducting dome of MoS2 induced by field 

effect32. The Tc is defined at the temperature when transition reaches half of the normal 

resistance RN (measured at T = 13 K). By thermal releasing, both , and lm follow the variation 

of the superconducting dome as a function of the n2D (inset of Fig. 1e).

When a magnetic field is applied to a highly-disordered 2D superconductor, the 

superconducting islands gradually lose the long-range correlations. At the zero-temperature 

limit, transition appears at the quantum resistance, h/4e2, where the islands are isolated by 

insulating regions25. In the vortex tunneling model, the magnetoresistance of such a system 

varies exponentially with the B field as logR ~ B 40–42. In contrast, even for the most disordered 

state (lm = 12.4 nm shown in Fig. 1f), the RN of our sample –after suppressing the 

superconductivity at a high field– is one order of magnitude smaller than h/4e2. Unlike the 

dome-like variation of Tc, the upper critical field Bc2 (derived from Fig. S3a by extrapolating 

to T = 0 K) decreases monotonically when the system is tuned to a cleaner state with larger lm

(inset of Fig. 1e). Compared with the coherence length 0 extracted from Bc2 = Φ0/2π02, where 

Φ0 is the magnetic flux quantum, the mean-free path lm is a few times larger than ξ0 (Fig. S3).

Therefore, our system is located inside the clean regime, where lm > 0. Both analyses above 

suggest that our states are in the weakly disordered regime, which is beyond the description of 

the dirty boson model20. Consistently, the magnetoresistances of all states, with different mean-

free paths, cannot be fitted with the vortex tunneling model in the framework of dirty Bosons

(Fig. S4).

Instead, the magnetoresistances can be well described by the Bose metal model2, where 

R(B) follows the power-law scaling 𝑅~(𝐵 − 𝐵c0)2𝜈SMT. Here, 𝐵c0 is the critical field that can 

cause the transition from a zero-resistance state to a metallic state (SMT), 𝜈SMT the exponent 

of the superfluid correlation length. By fitting the magnetoresistance isotherm (shown in Fig.

2a) with power-law scaling as a function of external B field for different disordered states, we 

can obtain the Bc0 and 𝜈SMT as the fitting parameters. As shown in Fig. 2a, we plot Rs as a 

function of ∆𝐵 = 𝐵 − 𝐵c0 for different disordered states measured at T = 1.9 K. The gray 

dashed lines show the best fitting using the power-law scaling. For a representative state with 

lm = 28.4 nm (Fig. 2b), the magnetoresistances at different temperatures can also be well 


6

described by the power-law scaling yielding the temperature dependence of 𝜈SMT. In the present 

system with a wide range of disorders in the clean regime, the power-law scaling shows 

universal validity. The varying exponent 𝜈SMT from each disordered state are plotted in Fig. 2c

as a function of temperature. Note the 𝜈SMT values are all obtained below TQ, a temperature 

below which the exponentially diminishing thermal effect is overwhelmed by the quantum 

fluctuations (section 3 of supplementary materials). The dashed line at 𝜈SMT = 0.5 (Fig. 2c) 

indicates the limit of unhindered flux flow, where the vortex-pinning effect is absent. 

Consequently, vortexes can move freely, and the Rs shows a linear dependence on the B field: 

Rs ~ B/Bc2 14,43,44. Crossing the SMT boundary, the superfluid correlation length scales as 

𝜉+~(𝐵 − 𝐵c0)−𝜈SMT in the quantum-metal phase2. Since the νSMT ≥ 0.5, the state with larger 

νSMT shows a slower divergence in 𝜉+ with the increase of the magnetic field. Following each 

disorder state shown in Fig. 2c, an increase in temperature enhances the dynamics, causing a 

decrease of 𝜈SMT due to the enhanced thermal fluctuation (section 3 of supplementary 

materials). For a vertical cut in Fig. 2c at T = 1.9 K, when the system is thermally released 

towards the cleaner states, the 𝜈SMT for different disorder states decreases and approaches the 

limit 𝜈SMT = 0.5 for the cleanest state with lm = 65.2 nm. At higher temperatures (T = 2.5, 3.6, 

and 4.4 K, etc.), where the thermal fluctuation is stronger, unhindered vortex flow can be 

accessed by states with larger disorders (lm = 59.5, 51.1, and 44.3 nm, etc.).

The excitation current can also assist the vortex motion via Lorentz force43,44. In another 

measurement (device B), a zero-resistance state below the superconducting transition can be 

observed only by applying a small excitation current (Fig. S5). The leveling of Rs, which has 

been interpreted as the evidence of quantum metal at T = 0 14,15,41, appears when current

excitations are applied. With a small excitation (0.4 A) in the measurement of device A, 

approaching 𝜈SMT = 0.5 (Fig. 2c) is assisted by the thermal fluctuations at finite temperature, 

alongside the quantum fluctuation. In the T → 0 limit, where the thermal fluctuation is absent, 

the quantum fluctuation is expected to destroy the phase coherence in a critical-clean 2D 

superconductor, forming Bose metal ground state1. Compared with the smooth decrease of 

𝜈SMT as a function of temperature shown in clean states with large lm values, it is noted in Fig. 

2c that a signature of saturation in the temperature dependence of 𝜈SMT showing in the state 

with lm = 12.4 nm below T = 3 K. Such a saturation is also observed in another crystalline 2D 

superconductor14.


7

As shown in Fig. 3, we then move to a higher magnetic field to explore the 

superconducting rare regions, where nearly isolated superconductivity islands are embraced by 

normal metals6,22,45. In panel A-C, we show the magnetoresistances of three representative 

states with high, medium, and low disorder strengths (the other states are shown in Fig. S7). 

Multiple crossing points can be identified in panels A and B for the states with large and 

medium disorders, forming a phase boundary in the B–T phase diagram6,45. For the case of 

weak disorder strength shown in panel C, the magnetoresistances tend to saturate and collapse 

together at a high magnetic field. We can divide the multiple crossing points into narrow 

temperature ranges45 (Fig. S8a-h). Within each division, the magnetoresistances can be 

analyzed by the finite-size scaling: 𝑅(𝐵, 𝑇) = 𝑅𝑐𝑓 (

|𝐵−𝐵c|

(𝑇/𝑇L)1 𝑧𝜈
⁄
), where Rc and Bc are the critical 

resistance and critical magnetic field defined by the crossing point of the adjacent Rs(B) curves, 

and f is an arbitrary function with f(0) = 1, 𝑧 the dynamical critical exponent, 𝜈 the correlation 

length exponent, TL the lowest temperature of the division. When our system is released to 

cleaner states with lm > 44.3 nm, determining the crossing points and extract accurate exponent 

𝑧𝜈 becomes increasingly difficult because the magnetoresistance curves merge (Fig. 3c).

As shown in Fig. 3d, the magnetic field dependence of 𝑧𝜈 increases from a plateau 𝑧𝜈 ≈

0.5 for all disordered states. In a clean (2+1)D XY superconductor (the extra dimension is 

imaginary time), 𝑧 is general set as 1 due to the long-range correlation5,45, and 𝜈 = 0.5 5,6,17,18. 

Here, the plateau at 𝑧𝜈 ≈ 0.5 (Fig. 3d) corresponds to the clean states free from the rare region 

effects, which is caused by thermal fluctuation at finite temperature. Above the plateau, 

superconducting rare regions can be locally ordered. In the present 2D system (d = 2), the 

Harris criterion 𝑑𝜈 > 2 is violated when 𝜈 = 0.5. Therefore, 𝑧 is expected to diverge when the 

temperature approaches zero 5. Starting from the initial state with the highest disorder strength 

(lm = 12.4 nm, purple dots), 𝑧𝜈 increases from the plateau and grows rapidly towards a zero-

temperature crossing point Bc* = 8.5 T (extrapolated from Fig. S10). A similar trend can be 

observed in less disordered states, where the fast increase of 𝑧𝜈 occurs at a lower Bc*. Above 

the plateau 𝑧𝜈 ≈ 0.5 (Fig. 3d), the phase transition is increasingly affected by the rare region 

effect. In the vicinity of Bc*, the optimal rare regions (ORR) become exponentially rare to find 

and dominate the phase transition. The size of ORR, LORR, can be obtained from Bc*~ 𝛷0 𝐿ORR

⁄ 2
, 

where 𝛷0 is the magnetic flux quantum45,46. Consistently, as disorder strength decreases 

towards cleaner states in Fig. 3d, the LORR increases accordingly, hence showing smaller Bc*.


8

In contrast to the strong influence of disorders on the magnetic field dependences shown 

in Fig 3D, the temperature dependence of 𝑧𝜈 shows a very similar trend for all disorder states 

(Fig. 3e). We analyzed the magnetoresistances following the activated dynamical scaling: 

𝑅 (𝐵, ln

𝑇0
𝑇 ) = 𝜙 [𝛿 (ln

𝑇0
𝑇 )

1
𝜓𝜈 ]. Here, T0 is a fitting parameter, 𝜓 tunneling exponent, 𝜈 the 

correlation length exponent, 𝛿 = |𝐵 − 𝐵𝑐|/𝐵𝑐 characterize the difference from the crossing 

point17,47. At finite temperature, we can obtain the (𝜓𝜈)eff from 

1

𝑧𝜈 = (

1

𝜓𝜈)

eff

1

ln(𝑇0 𝑇
⁄ ) by two-

parameter fitting, which approaches 𝜓𝜈 at zero temperature17 (section 4 of the supplementary 

materials). As shown in Fig. 3e, the scaling analysis collapses independent of disorders, 

yielding (𝜓𝜈)eff = 0.68. This is in good agreement with the theoretically predicted 𝜓𝜈 = 0.6

for a critical point with infinite randomness19,48,49. Unlike the multiple curves found in 𝑧𝜈(𝐵), 

the collapse of 𝑧𝜈(𝑇), for different strengths of disorders, suggests a universal scenario for 

weakly disordered 2D superconductors. Theoretically, a weak disorder can always enhance to 

be a strong disorder after renormalization. Thus, phase transitions with any finite disorder are 

governed by a critical point of infinite randomness with a universal exponent 𝜓𝜈 7,8,26,27. To 

further exam the universality, we apply the same scaling to several similar 2D superconductors 

with weak disorders. This includes MBE-grown Ga thin films6, annealed single-crystalline 

InOx films17, and LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interfaces50. As shown in Fig. 3e, the extracted 𝑧𝜈 can be well 

fitted with (𝜓𝜈)eff equals 0.61, 0.62, and 0.64, where T0 = 0.38, 1.21, and 4.3 K, respectively. 

In addition to MoS2, the consistent (𝜓𝜈)eff values also found in different materials strongly 

support a general universality of activated dynamical scaling in the weakly-disordered 2D 

superconductors.

As shown in Fig. 3e, the universality is valid when the rare region effect exists, 

corresponding to T < 𝑇c

0. Here, 𝑇c

0 is the critical temperature above which the system enters 

the clean state free from rare region effects. Therefore, we can obtain 𝑇c

0 from 𝑧𝜈(𝑇c

0) = 0.5. 

When T > 𝑇c

0 = 5.5 K, a deviation was observed from activated dynamical scaling for the data 

enclosed by the dashed box (Fig. 3e), which corresponds to the plateau of 𝑧𝜈 ≈ 0.5 shown in 

Fig. 3d. When T < 𝑇c

0, rare regions can be locally ordered, dominating the scaling behavior18. 

The 𝑇c

0 extracted from activated dynamical scaling is also in good agreement with that (5.8 K) 

derived from the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) analysis (Fig. S10) for the onset of 

rare region effect.


9

For different disorders, the LORR varies with the disorder's strength. Each disorder state has 

a LORR that corresponds to a specific Bc value (Fig. 3d). However, the T0 = 10. 4 K, obtained 

from fitting 

1

𝑧𝜈 = (

1

𝜓𝜈)

eff

1

ln(𝑇0 𝑇
⁄ ) and extrapolating to 𝑧𝜈(T0) = 0, turns out to be identical for all 

accessed states in gated MoS2. As a result, an identical critical temperature 𝑇c

0 is obtained for 

states with different disorder strengths. In the rare region regime, the probability 𝜔 of finding 

a superconducting rare region scales with the rare region size LRR as a Gaussian distribution 

𝜔(𝐿RR)~exp (−𝑝𝐿RR

𝑑), where 𝑝 is the disorder concentration, 𝑑 the dimensionality of the 

rare region18. Since the thermal release of gating only varies the disorder strength while keeping 

the 𝑝 constant, we expect the same distribution of rare regions in the vicinity of 𝑇c

0 . 

Consequently, when (

1

𝜓𝜈)

eff

is universally valid, the fitting parameter T0 is expected to be 

identical for different disordered states, as long as the disorder concentration holds constant. In 

comparison, the consistency in T0 values cannot be observed the -W thin films, where the 

disorder is tuned by varying the thickness of thin films in separate samples24.

Based on the scaling analysis on MoS2 in the clean regime, we could propose a phase 

diagram of the 2D superconductor as a function of the disorder strength in the clean regime. 

The phase diagram can be then compared with that proposed 30 years ago by Fisher11, which 

is 
still 
widely 
used 
as 
general 
guidance 
for 
the 
quantum 
phases 
in 
2D 

superconductors10,13,20,51,52. The magnetoresistance isotherms measured at a finite temperature

corresponds to the shaded slice shown in Fig. 4a. The Fisher diagram predicts that the 2D 

superconductivity persists though out the clean regime up to the clean limit.

For the variable disorder states with lm < 0, at finite T = 1.9 K, the magnetoresistances

measured for different disorders are plotted as a function of applied B field and disorder 

strength, which scales as ~𝑙𝑚

−1 2
⁄ . With the increase of B field, quantum phases appear at both 

low and high field regimes, and the transitions occur between zero-resistance, quantum metal, 

quantum Griffiths (rare region state), and weakly-localized metal (normal metal state). In the 

low field regime of the phase diagram, a universal power-law scaling applies to all metallic 

states of different disorders, showing different 𝜈SMT and Bc0 values. With the reduction of 

disorder strengths, zero-resistance states gradually disappear due to the weaker pinning effect 

from the disorders. The extracted Bc0 decreases from 1.1 T for the most disordered state (lm = 

12.4 nm) to nearly zero for the critical state with 𝑙m

c = 31.7 nm. Above this critical disorder, 

the vortex motion is collectively pinned. The large pinning energy might not be overcome by 


10

the quantum fluctuation when disorder strength is sufficiently high53. As a result, a zero-

resistance can exist in states with strong disorders (lm < 31.7 nm). The vortexes can be unpinned 

also by the enhanced quantum fluctuation2, which is fulfilled when a magnetic field B > Bc0 is 

applied. Whereas, in cleaner states having 𝑙m > 𝑙m

c , free vortex dislocation can be generated 

by applying an infinitesimal B field, forming a quantum metal. It worth noting that present 

samples are measured at finite temperature and finite current excitation (Fig. S5). Nevertheless, 

we can expect that the true 2D superconducting regime would expand if we lower the 

temperature further towards zero. Therefore, the Bose metal ground state (at T = 0) is expected 

in even cleaner states below the critical disorder (𝑙m > 𝑙m

c ).

In the high field regime above the quantum metal states, where BRR <B < Bc, the quantum 

Griffiths states appear when the locally ordered rare regions are embraced by normal metallic 

regions. Here, BRR is extrapolated from Fig. S10, marking the B field, above which the rare 

region effect starts to develop6. Considering the fast increase of zv found in Fig. 3d, the 

quantum Griffith transition corresponds to a quick frozen of dynamics toward zero temperature, 

which is governed by infinite randomness. Since disorder enhances the spatial fluctuation of 

order parameter25, the distribution of rare regions can then be extended to a wider B field range. 

Therefore, the quantum Griffiths state (BRR <B < Bc) expands with the increase of disorder in 

the phase diagram. Towards the clean side, the LORR grows when the disorder strength 

decreases. Theoretically, an infinitesimal amount of disorder can already cause infinite 

randomness7,8, hence, the rare-region regime is expected to close only in the ideal state with 

zero disorder. The order parameter of the superconducting rare regions is gradually suppressed 

by the increase of the B field up to Bc (T = 1.9 K), at which the system eventually enters the 

normal state as a weakly localized metal. Along the phase boundary (blue line in Fig. 4), the 

transitions from the quantum Griffiths to the weakly localized metal in the vicinity of Bc (T = 

1.9 K) can be described by an activated dynamical scaling function with a universal 

exponent (𝜓𝜈)𝑒𝑓𝑓 (Fig. 3e).

In conclusion, we’ve presented a clean 2D superconductor with in-situ tunable disorders. 

The quantum phase transitions in the unexplored clean regime are characterized by two 

universal scaling behaviors in a perpendicular magnetic field. In the low field, the 

superconductor-quantum metal transitions follow a power-law scaling. While, in the high field, 

the quantum metal-normal metal transition is characterized by an activated power-law scaling. 

Besides the dual universality, a clean 2D superconductor shows an unconventional phase 


11

diagram. The true zero-resistance states appear only at a critical disorder and the 2D 

superconductivity enhances by the stronger disorders. Below the critical disorder, the system 

enters the quantum metal state at B = 0; where the quantum Griffiths region diminishes

gradually toward the clean limit. These behaviors observed in the clean regime are strikingly 

different from the widely accepted Fisher diagram. Our phase diagram can act as a guide to 

both clean and dirty limits. To the clean limit, our result indicates that a super-clean 

superconductor should have a ground state of Bose metal that is also affected by infinite 

randomness from even infinitesimal defects. Namely, it is intriguing to study whether the 

Griffith regime will eventually close if we can go closer to the clean limit. On the other hand, 

following our phase diagram to the dirty side, variable disorders can also be prepared by strong 

ionic gating34,35. The variable strong disorder could be used to bridge the activated power-law 

scaling with multiple zv values and the single zv scaling observed towards the limit of critical 

disorder c (Fig. 4a, the Fisher diagram), where the process of crossover in scaling behaviors

remains unknown.

Methods

MoS2 thin flakes are mechanically exfoliated from a bulk single crystal onto the silicon 

substrate with an oxide layer of ~285 nm thick. The electrodes (50 nm Au on 1 nm Ti) and an 

Al2O3 isolation layer (50 nm) are deposited by electron beam evaporation after standard 

electron-beam lithography processes. Three SR830 DSP lock-in amplifiers were used for 4-

probe measurement and a Keithley 2450 DC meter was used for applying gate bias Vg. The 

data presented in this work were collected from 2 devices. The 11 different disordered states 

were achieved on a single device (device A). Device A (channel width = 3 m) was measured 

with a constant AC current of 0.4 A. And the data shown in Fig. S5 were collected from

device B (channel width = 3 m) with various current excitations.

The first state with the highest disorder strength (smallest mean free path lm) is prepared 

at 220 K by applying a gate voltage Vg = 6 V through an ionic liquid: N, N-Diethyl-N-methyl-

N-(2-methoxyethyl) ammonium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (DEME-TSFI). The 

applied Vg breaks the equilibrium distribution of ions and accumulates excess cations on the 

channel surface. This then induces free carriers on the channel by field-effect, forming the so-

called Helmholtz double layer. The device is then cooled down with applied Vg to 170 K (below 


12

the glass transition temperature Tg  190 K of DEME-TSFI) to freeze the ionic motion. The Vg

is then removed for the remaining experiments by grounding the ionic gate electrode.

The following states with decreasing disorder strengths are subsequently obtained by 

warming the device to a temperature slightly higher than Tg. With a grounded gate, the 

accumulated ions tend to diffuse away from the MoS2 surface towards the equilibrium state. 

Since applying Vg breaks the equilibrium of ion distribution only along the z-direction, the 

thermal release of the accumulated ions is also along the same direction to larger z values. 

Therefore, a smoother potential on the channel surface can be obtained after each thermal 

release corresponding to the different disorder strengths. Due to the very slow ionic motion 

near the Tg, new states can be then controllably accessed by freezing the ionic motion again by

fast cooling down. The disorder strength stays constant as long as the ions are frozen below the 

Tg.

This disorder-tuning method can ensure a few crucial technical details that substantiate the 

whole analysis. First of all, the disorder is variable only for its strength. The 2D disorder 

distribution is kept for all states due to the lack of ionic diffusion in the xy plane because the 

ions are in a very viscous state close to Tg. Moreover, all states are accessed after one ionic 

gating on the same device, which maintains the intrinsic disorder and eliminates any possible 

difference in chemical details accessed by two different gatings. In reality, the sample is 

chemically inert if gated at 220 K. Identical states can be achieved by applying the same Vg

(Fig. S1).


13

References

1.
Das, D. & Doniach, S. Existence of a Bose metal at T = 0. Phys. Rev. B 60, 1261–1275 
(1999).

2.
Das, D. & Doniach, S. Bose metal: Gauge-field fluctuations and scaling for field-tuned 
quantum phase transitions. Phys. Rev. B 64, 134511 (2001).

3.
Dalidovich, D. & Phillips, P. Interaction-induced Bose metal in two dimensions. Phys. 
Rev. B 64, 052507 (2001).

4.
Dalidovich, D. & Phillips, P. Phase Glass is a Bose Metal: A New Conducting State in 
Two Dimensions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 027001 (2002).

5.
Vojta, T. & Hoyos, J. A. Criticality and Quenched Disorder: Harris Criterion Versus 
Rare Regions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 075702 (2014).

6.
Xing, Y. et al. Quantum Griffiths singularity of superconductor-metal transition in Ga 
thin films. Science 350, 542–545 (2015).

7.
Hoyos, J. A., Kotabage, C. & Vojta, T. Effects of Dissipation on a Quantum Critical 
Point with Disorder. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 230601 (2007).

8.
Hoyos, J. A. Weakly disordered absorbing-state phase transitions. Phys. Rev. E 78, 
032101 (2008).

9.
Haviland, D. B., Liu, Y. & Goldman, A. M. Onset of superconductivity in the two-
dimensional limit. Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2180–2183 (1989).

10.
Goldman, A. M. & Marković, N. Superconductor‐Insulator Transitions in the Two‐
Dimensional Limit. Phys. Today 51, 39–44 (1998).

11.
Fisher, M. P. A. Quantum phase transitions in disordered two-dimensional 
superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 923–926 (1990).

12.
Sondhi, S. L., Girvin, S. M., Carini, J. P. & Shahar, D. Continuous quantum phase 
transitions. Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 315–333 (1997).

13.
Sacépé, B., Feigel’man, M. & Klapwijk, T. M. Quantum breakdown of 
superconductivity in low-dimensional materials. Nat. Phys. 16, 734–746 (2020).

14.
Tsen, A. W. et al. Nature of the quantum metal in a two-dimensional crystalline 
superconductor. Nat. Phys. 12, 208–212 (2016).

15.
Saito, Y., Kasahara, Y., Ye, J., Iwasa, Y. & Nojima, T. Metallic ground state in an ion-
gated two-dimensional superconductor. Science 350, 409–413 (2015).

16.
Christiansen, C., Hernandez, L. M. & Goldman, A. M. Evidence of Collective Charge 
Behavior in the Insulating State of Ultrathin Films of Superconducting Metals. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 88, 037004 (2002).

17.
Lewellyn, N. A. et al. Infinite-randomness fixed point of the quantum superconductor-
metal transitions in amorphous thin films. Phys. Rev. B 99, 054515 (2019).

18.
Vojta, T. Rare region effects at classical, quantum and nonequilibrium phase 
transitions. J. Phys. A. Math. Gen. 39, R143–R205 (2006).

19.
Vojta, T., Farquhar, A. & Mast, J. Infinite-randomness critical point in the two-
dimensional disordered contact process. Phys. Rev. E 79, 011111 (2009).

20.
Steiner, M. A., Breznay, N. P. & Kapitulnik, A. Approach to a superconductor-to-


14

Bose-insulator transition in disordered films. Phys. Rev. B 77, 212501 (2008).

21.
Han, Z. et al. Collapse of superconductivity in a hybrid tin-graphene Josephson 
junction array. Nat. Phys. 10, 380–386 (2014).

22.
Saito, Y., Nojima, T. & Iwasa, Y. Quantum phase transitions in highly crystalline two-
dimensional superconductors. Nat. Commun. 9, 778 (2018).

23.
Xing, Y. et al. Ising Superconductivity and Quantum Phase Transition in Macro-Size 
Monolayer NbSe2. Nano Lett. 17, 6802–6807 (2017).

24.
Huang, C. et al. The Discovery of Tunable Universality Class in Superconducting β-W 
Thin Films. arXiv: 2010.12775 (2020).

25.
Dubi, Y., Meir, Y. & Avishai, Y. Nature of the superconductor–insulator transition in 
disordered superconductors. Nature 449, 876–880 (2007).

26.
Kirkpatrick, T. R. & Belitz, D. Long-Range Order versus Random-Singlet Phases in 
Quantum Antiferromagnetic Systems with Quenched Disorder. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 
2571–2574 (1996).

27.
Janssen, H. K. Renormalized field theory of the Gribov process with quenched 
disorder. Phys. Rev. E 55, 6253–6256 (1997).

28.
Xi, X. et al. Strongly enhanced charge-density-wave order in monolayer NbSe2. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 10, 1–6 (2015).

29.
Manzeli, S., Ovchinnikov, D., Pasquier, D., Yazyev, O. V. & Kis, A. 2D transition 
metal dichalcogenides. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2, (2017).

30.
Khestanova, E. et al. Unusual Suppression of the Superconducting Energy Gap and 
Critical Temperature in Atomically Thin NbSe2. Nano Lett. 18, 2623–2629 (2018).

31.
Ye, J. T. et al. Liquid-gated interface superconductivity on an atomically flat film. Nat. 
Mater. 9, 125–128 (2010).

32.
Ye, J. T. et al. Superconducting Dome in a Gate-Tuned Band Insulator. Science 338, 
1193–1196 (2012).

33.
Chen, Q. et al. Continuous Low-Bias Switching of Superconductivity in a MoS2
Transistor. Adv. Mater. 30, 1800399 (2018).

34.
Lu, J. et al. Full superconducting dome of strong Ising protection in gated monolayer 
WS 2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, 3551–3556 (2018).

35.
Ovchinnikov, D. et al. Disorder engineering and conductivity dome in ReS2 with 
electrolyte gating. Nat. Commun. 7, 12391 (2016).

36.
Kang, H. J. et al. Microscopic annealing process and its impact on superconductivity 
in T′-structure electron-doped copper oxides. Nat. Mater. 6, 224–229 (2007).

37.
Lee, H., Kim, J., Mucciolo, E. R., Bouzerar, G. & Kettemann, S. RKKY interaction in 
disordered graphene. Phys. Rev. B 85, 075420 (2012).

38.
Qiao, Z., Jung, J., Niu, Q. & MacDonald, A. H. Electronic Highways in Bilayer 
Graphene. Nano Lett. 11, 3453–3459 (2011).

39.
Brumme, T., Calandra, M. & Mauri, F. First-principles theory of field-effect doping in 
transition-metal dichalcogenides: Structural properties, electronic structure, Hall 
coefficient, and electrical conductivity. Phys. Rev. B 91, 155436 (2015).


15

40.
Shimshoni, E., Auerbach, A. & Kapitulnik, A. Transport through Quantum Melts. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3352–3355 (1998).

41.
Ephron, D., Yazdani, A., Kapitulnik, A. & Beasley, M. R. Observation of Quantum 
Dissipation in the Vortex State of a Highly Disordered Superconducting Thin Film. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 1529–1532 (1996).

42.
Breznay, N. P. & Kapitulnik, A. Particle-hole symmetry reveals failed 
superconductivity in the metallic phase of two-dimensional superconducting films. Sci. 
Adv. 3, e1700612 (2017).

43.
Tinkham, M. Introduction to Superconductivity 2nd. (Dover, 1996).

44.
Kunchur, M. N., Christen, D. K. & Phillips, J. M. Observation of free flux flow at high 
dissipation levels in YBa2Cu3O7−δ epitaxial films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 998–1001 
(1993).

45.
Biscaras, J. et al. Multiple quantum criticality in a two-dimensional superconductor. 
Nat. Mater. 12, 542–548 (2013).

46.
Spivak, B., Oreto, P. & Kivelson, S. A. Theory of quantum metal to superconductor 
transitions in highly conducting systems. Phys. Rev. B 77, 214523 (2008).

47.
Del Maestro, A., Rosenow, B., Hoyos, J. A. & Vojta, T. Dynamical Conductivity at 
the Dirty Superconductor-Metal Quantum Phase Transition. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 
145702 (2010).

48.
Kovács, I. A. & Iglói, F. Renormalization group study of the two-dimensional random 
transverse-field Ising model. Phys. Rev. B 82, 054437 (2010).

49.
Del Maestro, A., Rosenow, B., Müller, M. & Sachdev, S. Infinite Randomness Fixed 
Point of the Superconductor-Metal Quantum Phase Transition. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 
035701 (2008).

50.
Shen, S. et al. Observation of quantum Griffiths singularity and ferromagnetism at the 
superconducting LaAlO3/SrTiO3 (110) interface. Phys. Rev. B 94, 144517 (2016).

51.
Elusive, T. & Metal, B. The Elusive Bose Metal. 302, 243–248 (2003).

52.
Goldman, A. M. SUPERCONDUCTOR-INSULATOR TRANSITIONS. Int. J. Mod. 
Phys. B 24, 4081–4101 (2010).

53.
Feigel’man, M. V., Geshkenbein, V. B. & Larkin, A. I. Pinning and creep in layered 
superconductors. Phys. C Supercond. 167, 177–187 (1990).

54.
Devarakonda, A. et al. Clean 2D superconductivity in a bulk van der Waals 
superlattice. Science 370, 231–236 (2020).


16

Fig. 1 | Thermal releasing of the ionic gating for different disorder states. a, Quadrant chart 
of 2D superconductors in the clean and dirty regimes evaluated as the ratio between coherent 
length/mean-free-path 0/lm. The ratios of most bulk superconductors are calculated in Pippard
coherent length p54. The p ~ 0 in pure superconductors without considering the scattering42.
A range of disorder states is prepared in the dirty regime for  – W, and in the clean regime for 


17

MoS2, where the universality of quantum phase transitions can be analyzed. b, Schematics of 
an ion-gated MoS2 device. A Hall bar structure is electrostatically defined. The conducting 
path is shaped to a specific geometry by coating a 50 nm thick Al2O3 film, which isolates the 
MoS2 surface from ionic liquid, hence eliminates the field-effect from ions. c, An optical image 
of a typical Hall bar device on a multilayer (~ 5 nm) MoS2 flake. The length of the scale bar is 
5 m. d, A schematic illustration of tuning the disorder strength. The initial strong gating forms 
a narrow Helmholtz double layer31 with width z1. By warming the frozen ionic liquid to T > Tg, 
the accumulated ions diffuse away from the channel to a larger distance z2 > z1, achieving a 
smoother electric field distribution on the channel and a weaker disorder strength. e, The 
temperature dependence of sheet resistance Rs of different disorder states prepared in situ on a 
single device (device A, channel width = 3 m). Inset is the Hall mobility  and the mean free 
path lm of each state for different n2D values. The localization of field-induced carriers can be 
observed at the low mobility side, where both lm and n2D decrease, after passing the 
superconducting dome peak32,34. The cleanest state can reach Hall mobility  ~800 cm2V-1s-1

and a mean free path lm ~70 nm. f, Magnetoresistances of various disordered states at T = 1.9 
K. Inset: upper critical field Bc2 (Fig. S3) and Tc as a function of lm. A dome-like dependence 
of Tc was observed as a function of lm, which is consistent with the monotonic dependence 
between lm and n2D. On the other hand, the upper critical field Bc2 varies monotonically with 
the change of lm.


18

Fig. 2 | Power-law scaling at the low magnetic field regime for different disordered states.
The magnetoresistances are fitted to 𝑅s~∆𝐵2𝜈SMT, where ∆𝐵 = 𝐵 − 𝐵c0 , for a, various 
disorder states at T = 1.9 K and b, a representative state with lm = 28.4 nm at different 
temperatures. The 𝜈SMT and 𝐵c0 are tunable fitting parameters. All analyses are made below 
the thermal activation temperature TQ (Fig. S6). The dashed lines are the best linear fittings. c,
The temperature dependence of the superfluid correlation exponent 𝜈SMT extracted from the 
magnetoresistances of states with different lm values.


19

Fig. 3 | Multiple crossing points in the magnetoresistance isotherms and the activated 
dynamical scaling. a-c, Crossing points of three representative states with lm = 12.4, 31.7, and 
59.5 nm, respectively. In panel a, the magnetoresistance isotherms are measured at the labeled
temperatures. The temperatures in panels b and c are labeled in detail in Fig. S7. The 
magnetoresistance isotherms gradually collapse when the system becomes cleaner. Insets in 
panels B and C are the expanded area marked by the dashed squares for a closer look at the 
diminishing crossing regions in cleaner states. The resistance range (y-axis) is set to be identical 
for panels A to C. d, The B-field dependences of the exponent 𝑧𝜈. For all accessed states, the 
𝑧𝜈 values show fast increases when approaching zero temperature crossing point 𝐵c

∗ (dashed 

line, extrapolated from Fig. S10). In the zero-temperature limit, 𝑧𝜈 → ∞ at 𝐵c

∗8,18,19. e, The 

temperature dependence of 𝑧𝜈 shows identical activated dynamical scaling behavior for all 
disordered states accessed in MoS2. Similar scaling can be found in other weakly-disorder 2D 
superconductors with static disorders. This suggests that a universal scenario applies to the 
weakly disordered superconductors in this rare-region regime. The dashed box encloses the 
data points that deviate from the fitting. This corresponds to the high-temperature region T > 
𝑇c

0, where the system starts to be free from the rare region effect due to the thermal fluctuation.


20

Fig. 4 | Phase diagram measured at T = 1.9 K as a function of magnetic field B and 
disorder strength that scales as 𝑾~𝒍𝒎

−𝟏 𝟐
⁄ . a, Schematic phase diagram proposed by Fisher11

as the generic guidance to the quantum phases in 2D superconductors. All experiments reported 
so far are confined in the dirty regime (lm < 0). b, The present measurement enters the clean 
regime (lm > 0). The individual states are marked by the corresponding Tc. The most disordered 
state has a Tc = 7.1 K, which is on the right side of the superconducting dome. The second state 
with Tc = 7.8 K is close to the dome peak. The Bc0 (red dots) is the boundary between a true 
2D superconductor and quantum metal, following the Bose metal analysis. The BRR values 
(white dots) are extrapolated from the fitting shown in Fig. S8. The white dashed line marks 
the B field range, from which the rare region (RR) effect starts to influence. For B > BRR, 
superconducting rare regions can be locally ordered, forming a quantum Griffiths state. The Bc
values (blue dots) are the crossing points of two adjacent magnetoresistance isotherms 


21

measured at T = 1.9 and 2 K, separating the weakly localized metal (WLM) and quantum 
Griffiths state. A true 2D superconductor exists only when the disorder strength is sufficiently 
large. When the disorder strength is reduced, the true 2D superconducting region gradually 
shrinks and eventually disappears at a critical mean free path 𝑙𝑚

𝑐 . Although quantum phases at 

zero field can be either a true 2D superconductor or a quantum metal, depending on the disorder 
strength, both phases follow a universal power-law scaling independent of the disorders. In the 
high field regime between BRR and Bc, a quantum Griffiths state exists for all disordered states. 
Along the blue line, in the vicinity of Bc, the transitions from the quantum Griffiths to the 
weakly localized metal follow an activated dynamical scaling function with a universal 
exponent (𝜓𝜈)eff = 0.68.


