CG-05 

 

 

Magnetic Reversal and Critical Current Transparency of CoFeB 
Superconductor-Ferromagnet-Superconductor Heterostructures 

 

Melissa G. Loving, Thomas F. Ambrose, Shawn Keebaugh, Donald L. Miller, Robert Pownall, Nicholas D. Rizzo, 

Anton N. Sidorov, Nathan P. Siwak  

 

Advanced Technology Laboratory, Northrop Grumman Corporation, 1212 Winterson Road, Linthicum, MD 21090 

In this work, we show fundamental low temperature (T) magnetic and Ic responses of a magnetic Josephson Junction (MJJ) S/F/S 

heterostructure - Nb/ Co56Fe24B20 /Nb. The ultra-thin Co56Fe24B20 (CFB) films (0.6-1.3 nm) were deposited onto two separate buffer 
layers: 150 nm Nb/5 nm Cu and 150 nm Nb/ (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu. Both film sets were capped with 5 nm Cu/500 nm Nb. 
Magnetic results show reduced switching distributions in patterned arrays measured at near liquid Helium  temperature (~ 10 K), 
with the incorporation of the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm multilayer. In electrical devices, the critical current (Ic) through the CFB 
layer decays exponentially with increasing ferromagnetic layer thickness and shows a dip in Ic at 0.8 nm, characteristic of a change 
in the equilibrium Josephson phase in an S/F/S structure.  

Index Terms— Superconducting spintronics, Josephson junctions, Josephson magnetic random-access memory, cryogenic memory 

 

I. INTRODUCTION  

The rising demand for high efficiency computing has 

driven development pursuits to identify a “beyond-CMOS” 
dimensionally scalable logic technology. Superconducting 
digital technologies, such as reciprocal quantum logic (RQL) 
[1] and efficient rapid single flux quantum (eRSFQ) logic [2] 
offer a significant improvement in energy efficiency over 
CMOS technology, and are therefore under consideration for 
power-efficient, high-performance computing systems. [3] 
[4] Ultimately, such computing systems require a compatible 
low temperature memory solution that is power efficient, 
dense, and fast. To meet this need, Josephson magnetic 
random access memory (JMRAM) is being pursued. [5] [6] 
[7] [8] [9].  

In 
its’ 
simplest 
form, 
JMRAM 
combines 

superconducting electrodes (S) with a ferromagnetic (F) spin 
valve to form magnetic barrier Josephson Junctions (MJJs). 
The write-schemes for JMRAM are similar to conventional 
field-switched MRAM devices wherein JMRAM utilizes bit- 
and word-write applied magnetic fields to set the 
magnetization of the free layer in a magnetic spin valve. 
Contrary to MRAM, readout is not based on magneto-
resistance, but rather on the Josephson Effect in the magnetic 
junctions. Utilizing well-established physics of S/F/S 
junctions [10], the junction’s equilibrium phase can be 
toggled between a zero and a  state based on the relative 
magnetization of the ferromagnetic barrier that stores the 
data, facilitating readout of the bit by a dc-SQUID via the 
Josephson Effect. Our group has recently demonstrated the 
ability to build a cryogenic magnetic memory unit cell built 
in a superconducting integrated circuit, however further 
efforts for materials optimization must be pursued in order to 
advance and scale this technology.  

For incorporation into a superconducting memory 

solution, JMRAM optimization requires that magnetic layers 
exhibit single domain switching with abrupt magnetization 
reversal and low switching fields, at cryogenic temperatures 
(e.g. T ~ 4 K). JMRAM requirements are further complicated 
as materials selection and thicknesses must allow MJJs to 
carry a sufficient critical current (Ic), consistent with low error 
rate operation at 4 K, and the barrier thickness choice must 

be in one of two possible junction ground states differing in 
their equilibrium superconducting phase (0 or π). To date, 
systems comprised of Ni, Ni80Fe20 and (NixFe1-x)1-yMy  
(where M = a normal metal dopant) have demonstrated the 
ability to carry a measureable critical current and observable 
0- π transition thickness, however, the magnetic switching 
character of these materials may not be sufficient for 
incorporation into a final memory solution. [5] [11] [6] [12] 
[7] To this end, it is necessary to examine low temperature 
magnetic switching and electrical performance of S/F/S 
systems with novel ferromagnetic barriers. In this work, we 
show fundamental magnetic and Ic responses of an S/F/S 
system with a Co56Fe24B20 (CFB) ferromagnetic barrier. To 
date, CFB has been widely examined as a soft magnetic layer 
for magnetic tunnel junctions, which utilize a room 
temperature magnetoresistance–based readout. However, this 
model system has not been examined at temperatures relevant 
to a cryogenic memory, nor has it been examined in the 
context of S/F/S heterostructures. Here, we show magnetic 
and electrical results of ultra-thin CFB, incorporated into a 
S/F/S heterostructure. Further, we compare the role of 
incorporating a simple Cu seed layer against a Nb/Cu 
multilayered buffer, which provides a smoother starting 
surface for the ultra-thin film system. [13] While the ultimate 
objective of these efforts is to achieve a cryogenic memory 
solution, the work described here probes the fundamental 
properties of low T magnetics and S/F/S character of a new 
candidate material for this emerging technology. 

II. EXPERIMENTAL 

Magnetic Josephson junctions (MJJs) containing ultra-

thin CFB barriers have been fabricated. The ferromagnetic 
(F), CFB, barriers have been deposited using magnetron 
sputter deposition in an applied field (~50 Oe) from a single 
target (>99.9% purity) at ambient temperature with a high 
purity Ar sputter gas and a base pressure of <3x10- 9 torr. The 


films were deposited at a 30-degree angle from the wafer 
normal, producing a gradient in the F layer thickness of 0.6-
1.3 nm across a 150 mm wafer.  The wedge films allow for a 
large number of samples to be deposited at the same time 
under the same conditions, where the only varying 
component is the F layer thickness. The CFB films have been 
sputter-deposited onto two separate surfaces: 1) 150 nm Nb/1 
nm Cu and 2) 150 nm Nb/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu; 
both film sets have been capped with 5 nm Cu/50 nm Nb. 
Here, the incorporation of the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu 
starting surface ultimately reduces the Nb surface roughness 
and its’ deleterious impact on magnetic switching. [13] 

The film thicknesses and amorphous structure of the 

CFB were confirmed with x-ray reflectivity and diffraction. 
The thickness gradient of the CFB wedge was determined by 
measuring the film thickness at multiple locations across the 
150 mm wafer and fitting the result to a quadratic function. 
X-ray diffraction results confirm a (110)-oriented BCC Nb 
phase and (111)-oriented Cu that may be indexed to an FCC 
structure. These structural results are not shown here, but are 
discussed in our previous work. [14]  

Tapping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) images 

were collected on the starting surfaces of the films over 
multiple points within the sample area, prior to CFB 
deposition. Root mean squared surface roughness (Rq) values 
were obtained within a 1×1μm2 field of view and averaged 
over three separate measurements.  

The measured bulk properties for this specific 

composition of CFB are as follows.  For a 100 nm thick film, 
the saturation magnetization was measured to be 1625 kA/m 
with a resistivity (R) of ~ 110 u-cm at T = 10 K. Note, the 
residual resistivity ratio, RRR = R(300 K)/R(10 K) ~ 1. Using 
patterned Hall bars and high magnetic field resistance values 
(H > 3 T) to measure the ordinary Hall Effect contribution, 
the mean free path for both spin channels was determined to 
be less than 0.1 nm at 10 K, which is expected for an 
amorphous ferromagnetic metal.   

Room temperature measurements of magnetic induction 

(B) vs. field (H) of continuous, single thickness, CFB films 
were made using a SHB Looper (Mesa600). The continuous 
films lithographically patterned into bit arrays comprised of 
1×2 µm2 ellipses whose major axis of the shape is parallel to 
the applied field direction during film growth and the wedge 
gradient direction. Magnetic characterization of both the 
blanket films and patterned arrays was carried out at a 
temperature of T = 10 K, using a vibrating sample 
magnetometer (Quantum Design, VSM). Magnetic moment 

(m) vs. H data was collected at a rate of ~1 Oe/second with H 
applied parallel to the film plane and bit long axis direction; 
no demagnetization corrections were applied. The resultant 
hysteresis loops were fit to a standard error function to obtain 
magnetic coercivity (Hc) and switching field distributions (σ) 
where, σ is defined as the field range at which 68% of the 
magnetic moments in a film have switched orientation 
direction.  

Separate CFB wedge films were patterned into magnetic 

Josephson junction (MJJ) devices, comprised of columns of 
discrete 1×2 µm2 ellipses which spanned the entire 150 mm 
wafer diameter parallel to the F wedge thickness gradient, to 
examine the critical current transparency of the F barrier 
across the deposited thickness range. Here, 5×5 mm2 chips 
were diced from the wafer and mounted on specially designed 
non-magnetic 84 pin packages, manufactured by Kyocera, to 
be inserted into custom liquid He dip probes for cryogenic 
testing. Measurements of the MJJ I-V relationship was 
obtained at T = 4 K under nominally zero applied field using 
a standard kelvin-probe technique. The critical current, Ic, 
was then extracted from a fit to the standard non-hysteretic 
Josephson junction relationship. These measurements were 
performed on a selection of chips which comprised a long 
column parallel to the varying F thickness, providing 
approximately 350 sample points across the whole F wedge. 
This high density of samples allows for a more accurate 
determination of the 0-π phase transition in these films. 

 

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The topography (AFM) of the 150 nm Nb/5 nm Cu and 

150 nm Nb/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu films  are shown 
in Fig. 1. These images display the starting interface on which 
the magnetic layers were deposited. The starting 150 nm Nb 
film layer exhibits a small, elongated, rice-grain morphology 
(Fig. 1(a)) with an rms roughness of Rq = 1.02 nm ± 0.05 nm. 
Fig. 1(b)-(c) shows the loss of the underlying Nb rice-grain 
morphology and reduction of the surface roughness to 0.61 
nm ± 0.05 nm and 0.59 nm ± 0.05 nm with the incorporation 
of the 5 nm Cu and (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu seed 
layers, respectively.   

Fig. 2 shows easy and hard axis switching of continuous 

1.5 nm CFB films (measured at T = 300 K) on the two 
different starting surfaces: 150 nm Nb/5 nm Cu (Fig. 2(a)) 
and 150 nm Nb/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu (Fig. 2(b)). 
Here, the CFB films exhibit low reversal fields at 300 K with 

Figure 1: AFM images of (a) 150 nm Nb, (b) 150 nm Nb/5 nm Cu, (c) 150 nm Nb/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu


a MS value ~ 0.38 nWb (1525 kA/m), irrespective of the 
starting surface for magnetic layer growth. These room 
temperature results are consistent with conventional MRAM 
devices that utilize CFB alloys as a soft ferromagnet. Both 
sets of CFB films exhibit an easy axis Hc < 0.4 mT, 
squareness (Sq) ~1 and hard axis anisotropy which is induced 
by the magnetic field applied during the film deposition. 
Here, the thin (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu buffer layer at 
the Nb interface does not significantly improve the CFB 
switching character at room temperature. This is likely due to 
the fact that CFB is an amorphous film and as such may not 
be substantially impacted by seed layers. The strong 
anisotropy observed in these films is induced during the film 
growth due to the application of an applied field.  

Fig. 3 shows easy axis hysteresis loops of the patterned 

1×2 µm2 elliptical arrays at T = 10 K. Overall, an ~8× 
expansion in the easy axis Hc, and increase in ms is observed 
in the patterned films as compared to the room temperature 
blanket film data (Fig. 2). The increase in the magnetization 
of ferromagnetic materials when cooled to low temperature is 
a well-known effect, as related to the Curie-Weiss law, and 
an increase in Hc with magnetization may be expected. 
Further, the expansion of the magnetic hysteresis loop and 
loss of soft magnetic switching character is consistent with 
low temperature results observed by our group for single 
layer NiFe films [14] and similar low temperature studies 
carried out by other groups [15]. While the magnetic 
switching character of both film sets are similar  at room 
temperature, the CFB films deposited on the 5 nm Cu seed 
layer exhibit a larger Hc, as compared to the film deposited 
directly on the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu starting 

surface (3.3 mT vs. 3.2 mT). The CFB switching distribution 
on the 5 nm Cu seed exhibits a loss of squareness as 
demonstrated by the increased σ values (1.2 vs. 0.6 mT) as 
compared to the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu buffer. The 
increased σ values observed in the CFB film deposited on the 
5 nm Cu seed may be attributed to variations observed in the 
surface morphology of this starting surface as compared to 
the 150 nm/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu starting buffer, 
as suggested from the topography images (Fig. 1).  

Fig. 4 shows the thickness dependence of 1×2 µm2 

elliptical MJJs with a CFB ferromagnetic barrier, as 
measured at 4.2 K and zero applied magnetic field. The CFB 
films deposited on both seed layers exhibit an expected 
oscillatory decay in the critical current observed described by 
the following expression:  

 

𝐽𝐶 = 𝐽0 ∗ 𝑒

− 𝑑𝐹

𝜉𝐹1 ∗ cos (

𝑑𝐹
𝜉𝐹2 − 𝜑)   
(1) 

 

where J0 is the maximum critical current density for a device 
of zero ferromagnetic thickness, dF is the ferromagnetic 
thickness, ξF1 is the pair correlation length, ξF2 is the 
oscillation period, and φ is a phase offset. [16]  [10] Fit 
parameters may be extracted from fits to the Ic vs. F thickness 
data shown in in Fig. 4. It is noted that the absence of multiple 
minima make the calculated value for the “0 – π” thickness 
somewhat ambiguous, therefore, only the fitted values for the 
pair correlation length are reported here. 

The pronounced dips in Ic of both wedge films, 

regardless of the buffer layer materials, at 0.8 nm shows the 
characteristic of a change in the equilibrium Josephson phase 
of the S/F/S structure (i.e. the “0 – π” thickness) and appears 

Figure 2: BH Looper plots of magnetic induction vs. applied field 
of 1.5 nm CFB films deposited on (a) 150 nm Nb/5 nm Cu and (b) 
150 nm Nb/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu

Figure 3: T = 10 K VSM data of patterned 1 x 2 um elliptical arrays 
of 1.5 nm CFB films deposited on (a) 150 nm Nb/5 nm Cu and (b) 
150 nm Nb/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu. Raw data and fits are 
both shown here. 


related to the CFB material intrinsically. This indicates that 
the differing buffer layers do not affect the magnetic 
properties of the F layer in the sample. It can be seen, both 
from graphical trends and the extracted fitting parameters, 
that the wedge film with the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu 
seed layer buffer shows an overall lower critical current 
carrying capacity with respect to the single Cu buffer layer 
sample. It also appears to show a slightly slower decay rate 
of Ic across the CFB thickness range tested here. This 
suggests that the incorporation of additional layers and 
interfaces into the junction stack has a more complex impact 
on the overall current transparency of the MJJ. 

Data in the thicker portion of the F wedge range shows 

increased scatter with respect to the thinner and middle 
thickness ranges. This increased scatter is believed to be 
predominantly due to the non-initialized magnetic state of the 
MJJ, which provides a random “fraunhofer-shift” in the 
junction critical current that cannot be easily predicted or 
decoupled when performing the measurements in 0-applied 
field conditions. [16]  [5] [9] Fraunhofer switching 
measurements of these devices in the thicker regions of the 
wedge film were not performed here due to the limitations of 
the testing setup. In the future, performing these types of 
measurements may provide higher fidelity data in this region 
of the sample.  

Divergence of the theoretical curve from the data can be 

seen near the edges of the thickness range as well. It is 
suspected that this is due to the “fraunhofer-shift” effect 
described above or unintended shadowing effects of the 
oblique deposition technique near the edges of the wafer. 
Future measurement of films with overlapping, but different, 
thickness ranges may provide insight into the exact origins of 
this deviation from theoretical behavior. 

 

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

Here, we have shown magnetic and electrical properties 

of ultra-thin CFB films. At room temperature, these films 
show near ideal soft magnetic switching, making this system 
of interest for a free layer in memory applications which 

utilize a magnetic spin valve. When patterned into arrays and 
measured at low temperature, this system shows an expansion 
of 
the 
magnetic 
hysteresis 
loop. 
Specifically, 
the 

incorporation of the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu buffer 
shows reduced Hc and σ of the magnetic hysteresis of 
patterned arrays, measured at 10 K, relative to the 5 nm Cu 
seed layer. Electrical data of fabricated MJJs shows a dip in 
the Ic at 0.8 nm suggesting a 0-π phase shift, at this thckness. 
A slight reduction in the MJJ Ic is observed with the 
incorporation of the (1 nm Cu/0.5 nm Nb)6/1 nm Cu buffer 
which suggests that incorporating additional layers into S/F/S 
structures may lead to a reduction in Ic transparency, however 
the 0-π transition thickness remains unchanged in the case of 
amorphous CFB.  
 

 
 

V. REFERENCES 

 
[1] Q. P. Herr, A. Y. Herr, O. T. Oberg and A. G. 

Loannidis, "Ultra-low-power superconductor logic," 
Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 109, no. 10, p. 103903, 
2011. 

[2] O. A. Mukhanov, "Energy-Efficient Single Flux 

Quantum Technology," IEEE Transactions on Applied 
Superconductivity, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 760-769, 2011. 

[3] D. S. Holmes, A. L. Ripple and M. A. Manheimer, 

"Energy-Efficient 
Superconducting 
Computing 
-

Power Budgets and Requirements," IEEE Transactions 
on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 23, no. 3, p. 
1701610, 2013. 

[4] I. I. Soloviev, N. V. Klenov, S. V. Bakurskiy, M. Y. 

Kupriyanov, A. L. Gudkov and A. S. Sidorenko, "After 
Moore's technologies: operation principles of a 
superconductor 
alternative," 
arXiv:1706.09124v1, 

2017.

[5] B. Baek, W. H. Rippard, S. P. Benz, S. E. Russek and 

Dresselhaus, 
"Hybrid 
superconducting-magnteic 

memory device using competing order parameters," 
Nature Communications, vol. 5, pp. 1-6, 2014. 

[6] E. C. Gingrich, B. M. Niedzielski, J. A. Glick, Y. 

Wang, D. L. Miller, R. Loloee, J. W. P. Pratt and N. O. 
Birge, 
"Controllable 
0–pi 
Josephson 
junctions 

containing a ferromagnetic spin valve," Nature 
Physics, vol. 12, no. 6, p. 2016. 

[7] M. A. Qader, A. Vishina, L. Yu, C. Garcia, R. K. Singh, 

N. D. Rizzo, M. Huang, R. Chamberlin, K. D. 
Belashchenko, M. Schilfgaarde and N. Newman, "The 
magnetic, electrical and structural properties of copper-
permalloy alloys," Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic 
Materials, vol. 442, p. 45.52, 2017. 

[8] A. Y. Herr and Q. P. Herr, "Josephson Magnetic 

Random Access Memory System and Method". US 
Patent US20110267878 A1, 30 April 2010.

[9] I. M. Dayton, T. Sage, E. C. Gingrich, M. G. Loving, 

T. F. Ambrose, N. P. Siwak, S. Keebaugh, C. Kirby, D. 
L. Miller, A. Y. Herr, Q. P. Herr and O. Naaman, 
"Experimental Demonstration of a Josephson Magnetic 

Figure 4: Critical current (Ic) vs thickness trend across CFB wedges 
deposited on 150 nm Nb/5 nm Cu and 150 nm Nb/(1 nm Cu/0.5 nm 
Nb)6/1 nm Cu buffer layers. The extracted pair-correlation lengths 
from fits to Eq. 1 are shown as lines and presented in the legend.
ML corresponds to the multilayed Cu/Nb buffer layer. 


Memory Cell With a Programmable pi-junction," IEEE 
Magnetics Letters, vol. 9, pp. 1-5, 2018. 

[10] A. I. Buzdin, "Proximity effects in superconductor-

ferromagnet heterostructures," Reviews of modern 
physics, vol. 77, p. 935, 2005. 

[11] B. Baek, M. L. Schneider, M. R. Pufall and W. H. 

Rippard, "Phase Offsets in the Critical-Current 
oscillations of Josephson Junctions Based on Ni and 
Ni-(Ni81Fe19)xNby 
Barriers," 
Physical 
Review 

Applied, vol. 7, no. 064013, pp. 1-5, 2017. 

[12] B. M. Niedzielski, E. C. Gingrich, R. Loloee, W. P. 

Pratt and N. O. Birge, "S/F/S Josephson junctions with 
single-domain 
ferromagnetics 
for 
memory 

applications," 
Superconductor 
Science 
and 

Technology, vol. 28, no. 085012, pp. 1-5, 2015. 

[13] T. F. Ambrose and M. G. Loving, "Repeating 

alternating multilayer buffer layer". Patent 10,879,447, 
29 December 2020.

[14] M. G. Loving, T. F. Ambrose, H. Ermer, D. L. Miller 

and O. Naaman, "Interplay between interface structure 
and magnetism in NiFe/Cu/Ni-based pseudo-spin 
valves," AIP Advances, vol. 8, no. 5, p. 056309, 2018. 

[15] J. P. Liu, R. Skomski, Y. Liu and D. J. Sellmyer, 

"Temperature dependence of magnetic hysteresis of 
RCox :Co nanocomposites (R = Pr and Sm)," Journal 
of Applied Physics, vol. 87, no. 9, p. 6740, 2000. 

[16] J. Glick, M. A. Khasawneh, B. M. Niedzielski, R. 

Loloee, W. P. Pratt, N. O. Birge, E. C. Gingrich, K. P. 
G. and N. Missert, "Critical current oscillations of 
elliptical Josephson junctions with single-domain 
ferromagnetic layers," Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 
122, p. 133906, 2017. 

[17] C. J. Gadsden and M. Heath, "The first three anisotropy 

constants of nickel," Solid State Communications, vol. 
20, pp. 951-952, 1976. 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


