1

Novel Inertial Self-Assembly Dynamics and Long-Range Spatial Ordering of 
Interacting Droplet Ensembles in Confined Microfluidic Flows

Wenyang Jing1 and Hee-Sun Han1,2,3*

1. Center for Biophysics and Quantitative Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-

Champaign, Urbana, IL, 61801

2. Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, 61801
3. Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 

1206 W. Gregory Dr, Urbana, IL 61801 

*Corresponding author: hshan@illinois.edu

Abstract

The multiphase flow of droplets is widespread, both at the industrial and the microscale, 

for both biological and non-biological applications alike. But the ensemble interactions of such 
systems are inherently nonlinear and complex, compounded by interfacial effects, making it a 
difficult many-body problem to understand, especially for theory. In comparison, the self-
assembly dynamics of solid particles in flow have long been described and successfully 
exploited in the field of inertial microfluidics, where particle crystals can be realized from inertial 
forces and hydrodynamic interactions. Here, we report novel self-assembly dynamics of liquid 
drops in confined microfluidic channels that contrast starkly with the established paradigm of 
inertial microfluidics, which stipulates that higher inertia leads to better spatial ordering. Instead, 
we find that the most commonly used straight wall channel geometry not only fails to achieve 
regular spatial ordering for drops but actually exacerbates it with increasing inertia. Conversely, 
an asymmetric serpentine geometry is able to achieve long-range, periodic spatial ordering over 
length scales that are at least 3 orders of magnitude greater than the drop diameter, particularly
at low inertia. Experimentally, we are able to decouple droplet generation from ordering, 
enabling independent variation of the additional parameters of number density, confinement, 
inertia, and surfactant concentration. We find the inertia-dependent emergence of preferred 
drop separations and show for the first time that Marangoni effects can influence the longitudinal 
ordering of multidrop arrays, with less surfactant being more detrimental at lower confinement.
These results present a largely unexplored direction for inertial microfluidics but also show the 
potential of its unification with the versatile field of droplet microfluidics. In particular, the utility of 
passively restoring uniform drop spacing on-chip is a key requirement for the streamlined 
integration of incubation and drop-by-drop interrogation capabilities, which would greatly
enhance the many droplet-based biological assays currently in use.

I. Introduction

The field of inertial microfluidics [1–4] has seen growth in the past decade due to the 

potential for many applications that can make use of the passive, label-free, and high-
throughput nature of inertial microfluidics. Examples include particle/cell sorting and 
enrichment [2,5–11], particle self-assembly [12,13], deterministic cell encapsulation [14,15] for 
overcoming Poisson loading, and micro-mixing [1,16–19]. Inertial focusing originates in 1961, 
when Segré and Silberberg observed particles focusing into an annulus under laminar flow in a 
circular pipe [20]. This discovery triggered subsequent studies to better understand the 
dynamics of inertial focusing [21–24], though they were under the context macroscopic flows, 
where dominance of fluid inertia was a given. In contrast to microfluidics, where flow rates are
typically low and length scales are small, the prevailing thought had instead been that inertial 
forces and inertial effects were negligible [25]. This assumption holds true when the 
dimensionless Reynolds number, 𝑹𝒆 = 𝝆𝑼𝑯/𝝁, is << 1. Here, 𝝆 is the mass density of the fluid, 


2

𝑼 is the average fluid velocity, 𝑯 is the hydraulic diameter, and 𝝁 is the dynamic viscosity of the 
fluid. Yet, it is not difficult to achieve microfluidic flows with a Reynolds number of order 1 or 
higher [1], where the aforementioned inertial particle focusing can manifest. And indeed, this 
was demonstrated by Di Carlo et al. in 2007 [26], thus leading the way for inertial focusing to be 
harnessed at the microfluidic length scale for the manipulation and spatial ordering of solid 
particles and cells [2]. However, the potential of inertial ordering has not been similarly 
harnessed for liquid drops due to a deficient understanding of the different multiphase fluid 
dynamics governing the longitudinal or axial interactions between drops—interactions that we 
will show can give rise to previously undescribed self-assembly dynamics. Such dynamics can 
either result in ordered droplet crystals with long-range persistence or longitudinal disorder that 
positively correlates with fluid inertia against the established paradigm of inertial microfluidics.

Inertial microfluidic studies of particle ordering fall broadly under two particle types: solid 

particles and droplets. Solid particles—commonly beads—are the most extensively studied, 
being the simplest go-to model and having direct applicability to cells [2]. Although cells are 
deformable, they have been more comparable to solid particles than to liquid drops due to 
several distinguishing traits. One is the confinement, defined as 𝒂/𝑯, where 𝒂 is the particle 
diameter. Confinement significantly influences the flow and hydrodynamic forces surrounding 
both solid particles [27] and drops [28–30]. For beads and cells, confinement is low in practice 
(typically ≤ 0.4) to avoid clogging [26,31]. In contrast, microfluidic drops are typically made at 
high confinement to minimize wasteful oil use. Another trait is that both cells and solid particles 
rotate in flow, whereas drops experience internal fluid circulation instead [32,33], which can 
affect drop dynamics via surfactants. Indeed, internal fluid circulation is coupled to perhaps the 
most defining traits for drops: the fluid viscosity ratio [34,35] and the presence of 
interfacial/Marangoni effects [36–42], both of which differentiate drop deformability from that of 
cells, which is instead governed by complex viscoelastic cellular components. These differences 
demonstrate that drops are a distinct system requiring separate consideration, which has been 
duly recognized in the form of dedicated studies investigating the lateral dynamics of 
drops [35,41–48]. These studies have shed light on the deformation-induced lift force and the 
unique impact of surfactants and Marangoni effects on lateral dynamics. While the lateral aspect 
is important, it can be analyzed in the dilute limit and neglects the ensemble behavior and self-
organization which can arise from the many-body drop interactions that are necessarily part of 
longitudinal ordering and real systems. The longitudinal dimension, however, has remained 
largely unexplored for drops, not just experimentally, but also computationally and theoretically 
due to the immense difficulties of a many-body problem with multifaceted nonlinear interactions, 
thus limiting such studies to more tractable pair-wise interactions [49,50].

Investigation into the longitudinal inertial ordering of solid particles has been more 

extensive, and have documented hydrodynamic forces acting between them [12,51,52]. 
Research into these particle-particle interactions as well as the stability of particle trains have 
spanned both Newtonian fluids [53–59] and non-Newtonian ones [13,31,60]. While substantial 
and of benefit to the wide use of particles in microfluidics, these efforts have primarily been 
phenomenological, and have not yet culminated in a general theoretical framework capable of 
robustly predicting interparticle spacings. Yet, a rivaling body of work for drops achieving at 
least a similar level of understanding is—to the best of our knowledge—severely lacking, even 
though the application of drops in microfluidics has certainly not been [61,62]. 

Droplet microfluidics has enabled a myriad of biotechnologies [63,64], such as single-

cell [65] and single-virus [66] sequencing. Despite its immense potential, drop microfluidics is
mostly limited to single-step reactions per chip [65–69] and performing multistep reactions in 
drops still poses practical challenges. Most biological assays involve repeated incubation and 


3

reagent addition steps. Unfortunately, on-chip incubation often disturbs even spacing of drops, 
making it difficult to manipulate drops downstream [70]. Disruption of uniform drop spacing is 
particularly disadvantageous for reagent addition, picoinjection [71], and sorting. As a result, 
multistep procedures tend to be performed off-chip, followed by reinjection of drops into a 
separate device. However, reinjection often leads to drop merging and loss of material during 
flow rate optimization. Oil removal modules have been developed to restore regular 
spacing [72], but this requires delicate flow balancing, preventing simple and effective 
integration of on-chip incubation and drop manipulation. Therefore, a better understanding of 
the conditions for passively achieving the longitudinal ordering of drops could streamline on-chip 
integration and improve throughput by reducing the number of off-chip processing steps. Such 
conditions must also include low flow rates, which are necessary to facilitate drop-by-drop 
screening [73,74] and to ensure sufficient on-chip incubation times. However, the conventional 
wisdom of inertial microfluidics stipulates high mL·hr-1 flow rates to achieve inertial ordering for 
solid particles. We will show that the practical high confinement of microfluidic drops enables the 
use of lower flow rates, with effectual particle Reynolds numbers 𝑹𝒑 < 1, where 𝑹𝒑 = 𝑹𝒆(𝒂/𝑯)𝟐. 
The dynamics presented here could not only remedy the aforementioned deficiencies but also 
spur the new subfield of inertial droplet microfluidics.

In this study, we explore how the parameters of channel geometry, number density, 

confinement, inertia, and Marangoni effects influence the longitudinal inertial ordering of drops. 
In particular, we employ high confinement (𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 and 0.64) and particle Reynolds numbers 
ranging from 𝑶(0.1) to 𝑶(1). Surprisingly, our comparison of the traditional straight wall channel 
geometry to the asymmetric serpentine channel geometry [8,26] shows that not only is the latter
capable of establishing persistent periodic droplet arrays, but the former actually exacerbates 
spacing heterogeneity—especially at higher inertia—which is counter to the paradigm of inertial 
microfluidics. Through independent variation of the experimental parameters, we identified 
conditions that can enable long-range ordering of coherent droplet arrays on length scales that 
are at least three orders of magnitude greater than the drop diameter. Furthermore, we 
experimentally demonstrate for the first time that Marangoni effects can directly influence 
longitudinal inertial ordering. Overall, this study presents novel self-assembly dynamics of an 
interacting, three-dimensional, and many-body dispersed flow while also demonstrating the 
practical feasibility of achieving long-range longitudinal ordering for drops at very low flow rates 
(60 μL·hr-1), which are well-suited to droplet microfluidic applications.

II. Experimental Design

For spacing measurements, fluorescent drops are first made separately using 2% 

surfactant (see Appendix) and then reinjected into inertial ordering devices. By reinjecting the 
drops instead of inertially ordering them on the chip in which they are made, drop size, flow rate, 
and drop number density can all be decoupled and varied independently, thus overcoming a 
common experimental limitation inherent to most studies investigating hydrodynamic 
phenomenon with microfluidic drops. These reinjected drops are then respaced using oil but are 
immediately randomized so as to disrupt the otherwise even spacing that the oil would create 
(see Fig. 1A-C). Drop coalescence during reinjection is sensitive to various factors, but can be
minimized through elimination of static and slow, gentle pipetting. However, if coalescence is 
high, data is not taken. Limited coalescence is acceptable (approximately 2-3 per 1500 drops), 
and they are deleted from the data set.    

Drops flowing through the main ordering channel are measured optically using a laser 

line to detect the fluorescent drops at set positions along the channel in 1 cm increments. 
Fluorescence is detected at a photomultiplier tube (PMT) and converted to voltage peaks (see 


4

Supplementary Fig. S1 for example PMT trace). Data is taken using a custom LabVIEW™ 
program that records peak size and time between peaks. This method allows rapid automated 
recording of drops without resorting to more involved image analysis. The time values measured 
are used to measure the edge-to-edge distance between drops and to directly evaluate the 
dispersion of the droplet spacing distribution, which is characterized by the dimensionless 
coefficient of variation 𝑪𝒐𝑽:

( 1)

𝑪𝒐𝑽 = 𝑺

〈𝐗〉 ,

where 𝑺 is the standard deviation and 〈𝐗〉 is the mean. A lower 𝑪𝒐𝑽 represents a more 
homogeneously spaced and well-ordered droplet array. 

Figure 1. Overview of device used for spacing measurements with reinjected drops. (A) Device 
diagram. Reinjected drops are close-packed and then respaced with fluorinated oil. To avoid 
creating even spacing, drops pass through a spacing disruptor region where obstructions assist 
with randomizing drops. The ordering portion of the device (asymmetric serpentine or straight 
geometry) follows this spacing disruptor region (continuing toward the right) and extends 5 cm
along the chip. Spacing measurements are made at 1 cm increments by fluorescence detection. 
(B) Example of close-packed drops after reinjection. (C) Image showing drops being scrambled 
in the spacing disruptor region. (D) Top image shows asymmetric serpentine geometry, with 
channel height of 50 μm and radii of curvature of 25 and 75 µm for the smaller curve and 100
and 200 μm for the larger curve. The periodicity is 350 μm. Bottom image shows the straight 
wall geometry, with channel height and width at 50 μm. For the asymmetric geometry, the 
hydraulic diameter is calculated using the narrowest part of the curve, as that is where the 
spacing measurements are made with the laser. Scale bars (white) in B and C are 100 μm. 
Scale bars (black) in D are 200 μm.


5

III. Results and Discussion

A. Longitudinal Inertial Ordering of Droplets Depends on Channel Geometry

Especially for the practical aspect of identifying suitable conditions for the longitudinal 

inertial ordering of drops, channel geometry is an important consideration. We tested two 
geometries: the standard straight wall and the asymmetric serpentine (Fig. 1A and 1D), both 
with typical rectangular cross-sections. Due to Dean flow [75], serpentine geometries have been 
shown to achieve lateral focusing within shorter distances and at lower 𝑹𝒑 than the straight wall 
geometry for solid particles at low confinement [26], with the asymmetric variant biasing 
particles to a single stream instead of two. Lateral ordering was considered as it appears that 
longitudinal ordering may possibly only follow when the former is achieved first [51]. Different 
from previous works, our study with high confinement droplets show that the traditional straight
wall geometry not only failed to improve spacing uniformity, but actually worsened it (Fig. 2B). In 
comparison, the asymmetric serpentine geometry was able to achieve stable long-range, 
longitudinal ordering of continuous single-file drop trains over distances that are at least 3 
orders of magnitude greater than the drop diameter (Fig. 2A). This long range stands in stark 
contrast to the short 10-15 particle trains reported previously [26], and only represents a lower 
limit on the range because the ordering channel was not made longer. The histogram of droplet 
spacing at the 5 cm mark in the asymmetric serpentine channel shows significant narrowing 
compared to the initial distribution (Fig. 2C, total flow rate: 60 μL hr-1, 𝑹𝒑: 0.139). Fig. 2A and 
2G together show that the spacing improvement could be achieved quickly (within 3 cm, 
contour length ~6 cm), and is stable afterwards. Fig. 2D and 2H similarly compare the 
distributions of drop spacing in the straight wall geometry at 𝑹𝒑 = 0.139, but the geometry-
specific difference is stark; at the downstream position, the shape of the distribution does not 
evolve toward spacing uniformity and instead shows an enrichment of small spacing counts as 
well as more frequent large spacings (> 400 µm). The spacing distribution also evolves very 
differently with inertia for each geometry. In the asymmetric serpentine (Fig. 2E), the shape and 
peak position remain the same, but in the straight wall (Fig. 2F), the counts for large spacings 
increase further with inertia, along with a significant increase in counts for even smaller drop 
spacings than before. Supplementary Fig. S2 also shows this inertia-dependent progression for 
the two intermediate flow rates. These results are counter to the conventional wisdom of inertial 
microfluidics developed predominantly from studying solid particles in straight wall channels, 
whereby higher inertia tends to produce stronger ordering. 

The increasing polarization of large and small drop spacings in the straight wall 

geometry underlies the increasing 𝑪𝒐𝑽 plotted in Fig. 2B. This polarization likely indicates the 
emergence of at least 2 fixed points for drop separation in the straight wall geometry at high 
confinement. These fixed points appear to be stable as they act as attractors that increase the 
counts for both very large and small drop spacings. On the contrary, drop separation in the 
asymmetric serpentine appears to exhibit only one fixed point, which is stable. The likely 
presence of two fixed points in the straight wall geometry qualitatively disagrees with a recent 
numerical study looking at a limited case of a pair of non-spherical drops that are perfectly 
centered in a straight channel [50]. This study identified only a single stable fixed point at 
similarly high confinement, though it used viscosity and mass density ratios of 1, and Marangoni 
effects were ignored. Our study, however, reflects the practical conditions that are commonly 
used for droplet microfluidics. The aid of further numerical studies will likely be necessary to fully 
elucidate this matter.


6

Figure 2. Comparison of channel geometries. Both use a droplet number density of ~3700 
drops·µL-1 (denoted medium number density) and confinement 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 (𝒂 = 40 µm). 𝑪𝒐𝑽
averages and error bars (standard deviations) are plotted in A and B, with each point coming 
from 3 to 4 trials, and for each trial 𝑵 = 1500 drops. 𝑵 = 1500 drops for C-F and for each 
histogram at each channel position in G and H. Bin sizes for histograms are 10 μm. Total flow 
rates corresponding to 𝑹𝒑values (low to high) are 60, 300, 600, and 900 μL·hr-1, or average 
velocities of approximately 0.667, 3.33, 6.67, and 10 cm·s-1, respectively. (A) Asymmetric 
serpentine channel geometry shows decreasing 𝑪𝒐𝑽 with distance traveled for all tested flow 
rates. (B) Straight wall geometry shows increasing 𝑪𝒐𝑽, indicating worsening spacing 
distribution with distance traveled. (C) Example histogram of spacing distribution in the 


7

asymmetric serpentine geometry for the lowest 𝑹𝒑 = 0.139. Start position and end position refer 
to data plotted at the 0 cm and 5 cm positions, respectively. Inset is a zoomed in view on the 
counts for the largest spacings. (D) Example histogram of lowest 𝑹𝒑 case in the straight wall 
geometry. Here, inset shows that there are more occurrences of these large spacings for drops 
at the end position than at the start. (E) and (F) Histograms of the asymmetric and straight wall 
geometries at 𝑹𝒑 = 2.078, respectively. Note the more polarized spacing distribution between D 
and F. (G) and (H) Histograms of spacing distribution as a function of position along the 
channel. Stable ordering is achieved in the asymmetric serpentine.

The underlying ordering of drops in each geometry is further analyzed through plotting 

the autocorrelation function (ACF) as a function of lag, as shown in Fig. 3. The autocorrelation 
𝑨𝒌, for lag 𝒌, is defined as:

( 2)

𝑨𝒌 = 𝑽𝒌

𝑽𝟎

,

where 𝑽𝟎 is the variance of the base time series 𝐗 of length 𝑻, and 𝑽𝒌 is the covariance of 𝐗
with its lagged version, given by:

( 3)

𝑽𝒌 = 𝟏

𝑻 ∑(𝑿𝒕 − 〈𝐗〉)(𝑿𝒕+𝒌 − 〈𝐗〉)

𝑻−𝒌

𝒕=𝟏

,

As expected, the spacing disruptor randomizes the initial drop spatial distribution (Fig. 3A and 
3B). The ACF trace generated from 𝑵 ≈ 1500 drops shows the periodic ordering of drops in the 
asymmetric serpentine, evidenced by the peaks at multiples of 80 µm (Fig. 3C) and the steady 
state images (Fig. 3G). This ordering is also stable over time, which is shown through the ACF 
of 𝑵 = 6000 drops combined from multiple data sets (Supplementary Fig. S3). The periodic 
nature of the ACF directly relates to the low 𝑪𝒐𝑽 (~0.15) shown in Fig. 2A. However, higher 
inertia leads to slightly poorer ordering in the asymmetric serpentine, resulting in a faster decay 
in the ACF (Fig. 3E) and a slightly higher 𝑪𝒐𝑽 (~0.2, Fig. 2A). In contrast, the ACF trace for 
drops in the straight wall geometry does not show periodic spacing. At the lowest inertia (Fig. 
3D), the ACF shows a secondary peak away from 0, which reflects short-range correlations 
from neighbor-to-neighbor hydrodynamic interactions. There may be a degree of very localized 
ordering at the lowest inertia, which is supported by a lesser 𝑪𝒐𝑽 rise shown in Fig. 2B and the 
peak position being away from 0 in Fig. 2D. At higher inertia (Fig. 3F), the ACF does not initially 
decay below 0 and then rise to a secondary peak, but instead the decay toward statistical 
insignificance is fairly monotonic, reflecting the change in ordering dynamics that resulted in 
greater spacing polarization (Fig. 2F). An example of the visual difference between the low and 
high inertia cases is shown in Fig. 3H, where drops tend to self-organize into clusters at higher 
inertia. Despite the lack of uniform spacing being established for drops in the straight wall 
geometry, the ACFs show that the organization is not random (as opposed to Fig. 3B). This 
reflects undescribed hydrodynamic interactions for high confinement drops in the conventional 
straight wall geometry—hydrodynamic interactions that are very much different from those in the 
asymmetric serpentine geometry.


8

Figure 3. The autocorrelation functions for both geometries and 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 are plotted as 

a function of lag. Horizontal blue lines represent 95% confidence intervals. (A) and (B) The 
ACFs at the start position for the asymmetric serpentine and straight wall geometries, 
respectively, showing a randomized spacing, as intended. (C) and (D) The ACFs at the end 
position, or 5 cm position, in the asymmetric serpentine and straight wall geometries, 
respectively. (E) and (F) ACFs for the asymmetric serpentine and straight wall geometries, 


9

respectively, at the highest flow rate used. (G) and (H) These images are examples of the 
downstream steady state of the drops. They are well-spaced in the asymmetric geometry. In the 
straight wall geometry, drops are not well-spaced but still have inertia-dependent organization. 
Scale bars are 100 µm.

The temporal, and by extension spatial, persistence of the ordered droplet array and the 

range of the hydrodynamic interactions between drops can be characterized through the Hurst 
exponent 𝒉 via rescaled range analysis [76], where 𝒉 is a measure of the decay of the ACF and 
an indication of long-range dependence.

( 4)

𝔼 [𝑹𝒊(𝒏)

𝑺𝒊(𝒏)] = 𝑪𝒏𝒉 ,

Here, 𝔼 denotes the expectation value over 𝒊, 𝑪 is a constant, 𝑹𝒊(𝒏) is the rescaled 

range for the 𝒊𝒕𝒉 subset of size 𝒏, and 𝑺𝒊(𝒏) is the corresponding standard deviation. For a time 
series 𝐗 of length 𝑻 (~1500), 𝒏 is chosen to be = 𝑻, 𝑻/2, 𝑻/4, … , 𝑻/128. For each 𝒏, there are 
𝒊 = 1 … 𝒎 subsets, where 𝒎 = 𝑻/𝒏, and 𝑹𝒊(𝒏) is defined as:

( 5)

𝑹𝒊(𝒏) = 𝐦𝐚𝐱[𝐙𝒊(𝒏)] − 𝐦𝐢𝐧[𝐙𝒊(𝒏)] ,

where 𝐙𝒊(𝒏) is the cumulative deviation series given by:

( 6)

𝐙𝒊(𝒏) = ( ∑ 𝒀𝒋

𝒊

𝟏

𝒋 = 𝟏

(𝒏) , … , ∑ 𝒀𝒋

𝒊

𝒏

𝒋 = 𝟏

(𝒏)) ,

and 𝐘𝒊(𝒏) is the 𝒊𝒕𝒉 mean centered series:

( 7)

𝐘𝒊(𝒏) = 𝐗𝒊(𝒏) − 〈𝐗𝒊(𝒏)〉 ,

The Hurst exponent 𝒉 is found from the slope of the linear fit after log-transforming Eq. 4:

( 8)

𝐥𝐨𝐠 𝔼 [𝑹𝒊(𝒏)

𝑺𝒊(𝒏)] = 𝒉 𝐥𝐨𝐠 𝒏 + 𝑪′,

Shown in Fig. 4 are representative time series (i) of the drop spacings, corresponding to 

the ACF’s plotted in Fig. 3. Accompanying each is a log-log plot (ii) of the rescaled range 
analysis, with the slopes of the linear fits given as 𝒉. For the drops in the asymmetric serpentine 
at 𝑹𝒑 = 0.139 (Fig. 4A), there is a high 𝒉 of 0.84(4), indicating strong long-range dependence 
and in agreement with the low 𝑪𝒐𝑽 in Fig. 2A and the periodic ACF in Fig. 3C. Similarly, 𝒉 is 
lower but still > 0.5 at 𝑹𝒑 = 2.078 due to the slightly poorer ordering at high inertia (Fig. 4B). For 
drops in the straight wall channel, 𝒉 = 0.52(2) at 𝑹𝒑 = 0.139 (Fig. 4C), indicating a lack of long-


10

range dependence. However, an 𝒉 of 0.5 does not preclude the existence of short-range 
correlations, which is consistent with Fig. 3D. For the drops at 𝑹𝒑 = 2.078 in the straight wall 
channel (Fig. 4D), the fluctuations in the time series are much more frequent and greater in 
amplitude. Correspondingly, 𝒉 = 0.36(2), which is indicative of the fluctuations between high and 
low values. These fluctuations also reflect the increased 𝑪𝒐𝑽 (Fig. 2B) as the spacing 
heterogeneity reflects a greater dispersion in the distribution. In addition, Supplementary Fig. S4 
shows a representative rescaled range analysis on the randomized initial drop distribution 
measured at the start position, confirming a lack of long-range correlations, 𝒉 = 0.48(2), as 
expected.

Although ordering for solid particles is known to be achievable in both channel 

geometries, our results show that a serpentine geometry is necessary for drops, suggesting a 
critical role played by the nonlinear Dean flow. Previous studies on neutrally buoyant, solid
particles at low confinement showed that the Dean drag force 𝑭𝑫, which scales as:

( 9)

𝑭𝑫 ~ 𝝆𝑼𝟐𝒂𝑯𝟐

𝑹
,

where 𝑹 is the radius of curvature of the channel, induces mixing and can help particles reach 
equilibrium faster through quicker sampling of their lateral positions [26]. These studies show 
that particle ordering is most efficient when the ratio between the inertial lift force and the Dean 
drag force is ~1. If the ratio is >> 1, then inertial lift forces are dominant, and no advantage will 
be gained from the Dean flow. If the ratio is << 1, the Dean drag force becomes disruptive. As 
guidance [17], Di Carlo suggests a ratio, given by 𝟐𝑹𝒂𝟐/𝑯𝟑, to be at least > ~0.08. Here, the 
ratio is of order 1 for the smallest average radius of curvature used (50 μm) and a drop diameter 
of 40 μm, which is ideal [26]. While this is perhaps supportive of the asymmetric serpentine 
results as the ratio should be satisfied at all 𝑹𝒑 used, it is necessary to acknowledge the fact 
that these are high confinement drops, not solid particles, and deformation, buoyancy, as well 
as Marangoni effects may influence the criterion for drop ordering in undescribed ways. To 
better understand the flow topology and hydrodynamic forces among deformable drops in 
serpentine geometries, numerical analysis of such systems will likely be required. Recent 
computational efforts have acknowledged the need to better understand flows in serpentine
geometries, further investigating both the base fluid behavior in these channels [77] as well as 
the forces imposed upon small solid particles [78]. 

The characteristic of buoyancy is also at play in our system due to the different mass 

densities of the aqueous dispersed phase and the oil continuous phase, which is typical in 
droplet microfluidics and most systems with two immiscible fluids. Density matching is
commonly and easily done for solid particles by slightly adjusting the density of the aqueous 
carrier fluid. However, this is impractical for drop systems cannot be done without appreciably 
changing the viscosity ratio and therefore fundamentally altering the system, especially here, 
where the continuous phase ~1.6x denser than the dispersed phase. We employed CsCl salt to 
minimize changes to viscosity while increasing the dispersed phase density, but even so, the 
viscosity was appreciably altered (see Supplementary Fig. S5, which shows visible differences 
in drop deformation). On account of the viscosity change, as well as observations that ordering 
was not prevented in the asymmetric serpentine nor enabled in the straight wall channel after 
density matching, this was not pursued further. However, we also sought to verify if the inherent 
buoyancy presented a problem if the magnitude was large enough to force drops to rise up and 
engage in frictious contact with the upper channel wall. A comparative calculation was done 


11

using the net upward force 𝑭𝑩,𝒏𝒆𝒕 on the drop due to the buoyant force and the weight of the 
drop vs the net empirical lift force 𝑭𝑳,𝒆𝒎𝒑𝒊𝒓𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒍 on the drop [41], which is pointed toward the 
channel center. 𝑭𝑩,𝒏𝒆𝒕 is given by:

( 10)

𝑭𝑩,𝒏𝒆𝒕 = (𝟒𝝅

𝟑 )𝒓𝟑𝒈(𝝆𝒐𝒖𝒕 − 𝝆𝒊𝒏) ,

where 𝒓 is the drop radius, 𝒈 is the gravitational acceleration, 𝝆𝒐𝒖𝒕 is the mass density of the 
continuous phase, and 𝝆𝒊𝒏 is the mass density of the dispersed phase. 𝑭𝑳,𝒆𝒎𝒑𝒊𝒓𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒍 is given by:

( 11)

𝑭𝑳,𝒆𝒎𝒑𝒊𝒓𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒍 = 𝑪𝑳𝝁𝑼𝒓 (𝒓

𝑯)

𝟑

(𝒅
𝑯) ,

where 𝑪𝑳 is the empirical lift coefficient, which the authors recommend to be 500 for general 
estimates, and 𝒅 is the distance of the drop center from the channel center. For numerical 
details, see Supplementary Material. But the calculation shows that 𝑭𝑳,𝒆𝒎𝒑𝒊𝒓𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒍 > 𝑭𝑩,𝒏𝒆𝒕 even at 
the lowest flow rate used and for both drop sizes. Thus, buoyancy here is insufficient to push 
drops up against the top channel wall, avoiding the complication of friction effects influencing 
drop behavior. 

With contrasting duality, we demonstrated aperiodic self-assembly dynamics against the 

inertial microfluidic paradigm while also showing the longitudinal ordering of droplet crystal 
arrays on length scales that are at least three orders of magnitude greater than the drop 
diameter. Furthering this dichotomy, the lack of ordering for the former worsened with higher 
inertia whereas the spatial uniformity for the latter was best at the lowest 𝑹𝒑 of 0.139 (60 µL·hr-

1), also against the norm of high mL·hr-1 flow rates required for solid particles. Practically, this
long-range ordering (𝒉 > 0.5) is critical for the consistent, deterministic manipulation of drops, 
and the low flow rates are necessary for accurate drop-by-drop screening, sorting, and 
picoinjection. The passive inertial ordering of drops shown here greatly extends the potential of 
droplet microfluidics by enabling a streamlined integration of on-chip incubation and drop 
manipulation functions. 


12

Figure 4. Example time series of observed drop spacings at the highest and lowest 𝑹𝒑

in both channel geometries at the 5 cm position and for 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 are shown in (i). In (ii) are the 


13

log-log plots of the results from the rescaled range analysis of the corresponding time series. 
The slope of the linear fit (standard error in parentheses) on log-log scale gives the Hurst 
exponent 𝒉, a measure of long-range dependency. R-squared for the fits are also shown. (A) 
and (B) Asymmetric serpentine geometry. (C) and (D) Straight wall geometry.

B. Number Density Alters Hydrodynamic Interaction Strength and Ordering

For the longitudinal interactions themselves, the parameter that most directly modulates 

their strength, which scales inversely with the distance between the drops, is the drop number 
density. Shown in Fig. 5A is a diagram of the base forces experienced by the drops in both 
geometries—discounting interfacial effects—including the known lateral lift forces, 
hydrodynamic repulsion, as well as the net effect of buoyancy. These forces have been shown 
experimentally for solid particles in a straight wall channel [17,51,52]. Similar to the solid particle 
case, the primary longitudinal force is a hydrodynamic repulsion between the drops, which 
arises from the reversing streamlines that develop between them [49]. Fig. 5B directly visualizes 
the presence of the repulsive force in the asymmetric serpentine geometry, which also induces 
Dean flow. The left most image shows a continuous train of drops, while the middle and right 
images show the end of the train later in time, when a disruption to the continuous train is 
introduced. The three drops framed in yellow, blue, and red are the last drops in the train. It is 
evident that the spacing at the end is not only greater than the spacing in the continuous drop 
train (𝒅𝟎), but the spacing actually increases between the last and second last drops (𝒅𝟐) 
compared to the second and third last drops (𝒅𝟏). This observation is explained by the mutual 
repulsion between them and the boundary condition of not having a neighbor at the end. As a 
result, the last drop feels a repulsion in only one direction, which moves it further from the drop 
in front. The increased distance then weakens their mutual repulsion, allowing the second last 
drop to also move further away from its forward neighbor (𝒅𝟎 < 𝒅𝟏 < 𝒅𝟐). 

Figure 5. This figure illustrates the base forces common to both channel geometries. Dean drag 
forces (not shown) are present in the asymmetric serpentine geometry only, and are 
perpendicular to the primary flow direction. (A) The lateral lift forces are well known, and are 
present for lone particles. The longitudinal hydrodynamic repulsion is the primary force directly 


14

influencing self-ordering along the direction of flow and is affected by the number density. Note 
that buoyancy here refers to the net force on the drop as a result of the buoyant force and the 
weight of the drop; in this study, the dispersed aqueous phase has a lower mass density than 
the continuous oil phase. (B) These images show that even in the more complex case of the 
asymmetric serpentine geometry where Dean flow is present, hydrodynamic repulsion still 
manifests. The image on the far left (𝒕𝟎) shows a steady train of drops, with 𝒅𝟎 depicting the 
distance between two drops. After some time (𝒕𝑨), there is a disruption to the drop train that is 
introduced. The three drops framed in yellow, blue, and red are the three last drops in the train. 
Note that the spacing between the yellow-framed drop and the blue-framed drop (𝒅𝟏), is greater 
than 𝒅𝟎 but smaller than 𝒅𝟐, as depicted in the right image (𝒕𝑩). Scale bars are 50 µm.

Note that we use number density and not volume fraction because the former allows 

direct comparison between different sized drops. In other words, if drops in a single-file train
have the same number density, their center-to-center distance is the same regardless of drop 
size. In contrast, the same volume fraction would result in approximately double the number 
density for 32 µm drops vs 40 µm drops (volume ratio ≈ 0.5), which implies a shorter mean 
drop-to-drop distance for 32 µm drops. The number density, which is defined by the drops·µL-1, 
is estimated using the aqueous flow rate, the total flow rate, and the volume of an individual 
drop. This estimate assumes that drops are close-packed during reinjection. The close-packing 
of equal solid spheres implies that the spheres themselves constitute approximately 74% of 
their occupied volume. Given that the drops are deformable, the number density in flow could be 
slightly higher. The number densities we have denoted as low, medium, and high are estimated 
to be approximately ~1900, ~3700, and ~7400 drops·µL-1, respectively. Using these number 
density approximations, they are equivalent—inside an idealized infinite 50 µm x 50 µm straight 
wall channel where the drops are uniformly spaced—to a length per drop of approximately 
~210, ~110, and ~50 µm, respectively.

Fig. 6A and 6B summarize the effects of number density as well as inertia on the ability 

of their respective geometries to affect ordering. Here, the degree of drop ordering is 
represented using a 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio, which is the ratio of the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 at the 5 cm position to the 0 cm
position. This value measures the final improvement of spacing distribution. These results show 
that number density is critical to influencing the degree of improvement and the inertial 
dependence. Only the asymmetric serpentine geometry allows for meaningful spacing 
improvement (𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio notably < 1), with the medium number density condition, previously 
presented in Fig. 2A, showing the best reduction in 𝑪𝒐𝑽 and having insignificant dependence on 
𝑹𝒑. In the high number density case, interactions are stronger, but it also means greater 
crowding and less space to rearrange out of nonuniform starting configurations. The disruptive 
effect of overcrowding has also been observed for solid particle trains [53,54] when suspensions 
are too concentrated. Unsurprisingly, it represents the worst number density for ordering (see 
Supplementary Fig. S6 for detailed 𝑪𝒐𝑽 data as a function of channel position). At the low 
number density, there is more space for drop movement, but longitudinal interactions are also 
weakened, and 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratios are predominantly higher than those at the medium number density. 
Moreover, 𝑹𝒑 dependence emerges in this case with better ordering at lower 𝑹𝒑 than at higher 
𝑹𝒑. The best 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio achieved in the low number density is still not as good as that in the 
medium number density case, possibly due to weakened longitudinal interactions. It is worth 
noting that an increase in average drop-to-drop distance does not prevent the drops from 
individually achieving lateral focusing. Therefore, the fact that the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 increases with 𝑹𝒑 much 
more strongly at low number density than at medium number density suggests the sole 
influence of longitudinal interactions in countering a disruptive effect that strengthens with higher 
inertia.


15

Different from the asymmetric serpentine geometry, the straight wall geometry 

significantly exacerbates drop spacing in all conditions (𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio > 1, Fig. 6B). The effect of 
weakened longitudinal interactions due to lower number density is also seen in the straight wall 
geometry (more detail in Supplementary Fig. S6D). Despite the continued trend of increasing 
𝑪𝒐𝑽, it does not increase as much overall as compared to the high (Supplementary Fig. S6C) 
and medium (Fig. 2B) number density cases. 

Our results emphasize the importance of drop number density for longitudinal ordering. 

Although it is evident that the straight wall geometry systematically fails to improve longitudinal 
spacing uniformity, the asymmetric serpentine geometry does not just automatically guarantee 
good ordering. Instead, the number density dictates the ordering capability (Fig. 6A), with no 
meaningful improvement at high number density. Moreover, inertial dependence only emerges 
for the low number density condition in the asymmetric serpentine. These results reaffirm that 
both the particle concentration—which sets the strength of longitudinal interactions—and the 
accompanying crowding effects play crucial roles in governing the dynamics of multidrop trains. 

Figure 6. Spacing results demonstrating the effect of number density on the previously 
observed trends in the asymmetric serpentine and straight wall geometries. 𝑪𝒐𝑽’s are originally 
computed in the same manner described in Fig. 2, with 𝑵 ≈ 4500-6000 drops per data point. 
Confinement is 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 for all cases. Flow rates corresponding to the three highest 𝑹𝒑 values 
are the same as before, but the 0.277 value in the low number density case corresponds to a 
flow rate of 120 μL·hr-1. 𝑪𝒐𝑽 data as a function of channel position is shown in Supplementary 
Fig. S5. (A) and (B) Asymmetric serpentine and straight wall geometries at all 3 number 
densities, respectively. Data plotted represents the ratio of the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 at the 5 cm channel position 
to the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 at the 0 cm position. 

C. Confinement Effects on Longitudinal Ordering, Fixed Points, and Inertial Dependence


16

Figure 7. Longitudinal ordering at lower confinement (𝒂/𝑯 = 0.64, 𝒂 = 32 µm). See 
Supplementary Fig. S8 for detailed 𝑪𝒐𝑽 plots. Lowest 𝑹𝒑 of 0.177 for the medium number 
density corresponds to a total flow rate of 120 µL·hr-1, and the lowest 𝑹𝒑 of 0.296 for the low 
number density corresponds to 200 µL·hr-1. Example histograms for the straight wall geometry 
and medium number density are shown. Bin size is 10 µm. 𝑵 = 1500 drops for each histogram 
at each channel position. See Supplementary Fig. S8 for additional histograms. (A) Diagram 
illustrating that confinement directly affects the magnitude of lift forces as well as the 
deformation of the drop. Length of arrows only indicate force magnitudes at higher confinement 
compared to those at lower confinement, not to indicate that lift forces are equal at a given 
confinement. Wall and shear lift forces scale differently with confinement [2]. Confinement 
scaling for longitudinal repulsive interactions between drops have not been described 
analytically or numerically, but the data demonstrates confinement dependent longitudinal 
ordering. *This analytical solution assumes drops are far from the wall [41,48], thus this 


17

previously described confinement scaling is imperfect, particularly with respect to our study. (B) 
and (C) Summary plots of final spacing improvement, similar to those shown in Fig. 5. 𝑵 ≈
4500-6000 drops per data point. (D) and (E) Straight wall geometry at total flow rates of 120
and 900 µL·hr-1, respectively. Ordering similarly worsens with increasing inertia, as in the 0.8 
confinement case. However, the spacing is not as strongly polarized between very small and 
very large values. In addition, it appears that two peaks form in the highest flow rate case, at 
spacings < 100 µm.

We initially tested drop ordering at a very high confinement (𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8), which defines 

an ordering regime that is both practically relevant to droplet microfluidics as well as being 
understudied. In this section, we present how confinement alters longitudinal inertial ordering by 
comparing the same set of experiments using 32 μm drops (𝒂/𝑯 = 0.64), where the diameter 
change corresponds to nearly halving the drop volume. Despite what is known about the effects 
of confinement on general lateral lift forces, how longitudinal interactions scale with confinement 
for drops is undescribed, both analytically and numerically. As illustrated in Fig. 7A, when 
confinement is decreased, lift forces also weaken. One of these lift forces is the deformation-
induced lift force, which scales with confinement [29,30,48] and is weakened for smaller drops 
as they deform less. Supplementary Fig. S7 shows the lower confinement drops being less 
deformed at the highest flow rate compared to the higher confinement drops, as characterized 
with the capillary number. Deformation is directly tied to confinement due to the fact that the 
shear stress exerted on the drop strengthens with increasing confinement [30]. Simulations 
have also shown that the local topology of reversing streamlines is altered by drop 
deformation [49]; the larger the confinement, the greater the deformation, with the reversing 
streamlines being closer to the more confined and deformed drop [29]. A more deformed drop 
also has a lower slip velocity and can travel faster down the channel [35], which further 
influences the dynamics of drop-drop interactions. Coupling to interfacial surfactant effects will 
be discussed in the following section.

Fig. 7B and 7C summarize the final spacing improvements using 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratios, similar to 

Fig. 6A and 6B. For the lower confinement drops in the asymmetric serpentine geometry, the 
high number density case also does not lead to meaningful ordering, with the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio being 
close to 1 at all 𝑹𝒑 values. The medium number density case shows inertial dependence, with 
only the highest 𝑹𝒑 exhibiting a similarly low 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio (~0.15) compared to the drops at 𝒂/𝑯 =
0.8 (Fig. 6A). At low number density, there is instead a lack of inertial dependence. The inertial 
dependence at medium number density and lack thereof at low number density is the opposite 
of what is observed at 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8. However, the precise nature of the inertial dependence is also 
different, with the 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.64 drops showing decreasing 𝑪𝒐𝑽 with increasing 𝑹𝒑 (at medium 
number density), but the 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 drops showing increasing 𝑪𝒐𝑽 with increasing 𝑹𝒑 (at low 
number density). This reversal of sensitivity to inertia is purely due to a change in confinement 
and highlights the direct influence of this parameter on the longitudinal inertial ordering of drops. 

Drops in the straight wall geometry do not achieve uniform spacing (Fig. 7C) and the 

CoV ratios increase with inertia, rising above 1. But the rise is significantly less compared to that 
of the drops at 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 (Fig. 6B). Furthermore, the inertial dependence and the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratios 
themselves are very similar for all three number densities. This relative homogeneity across 
number densities is, in fact, distinctive compared to the other three confinement/geometry 
combinations. This distinction is most notably exemplified in Fig. 7D vs 7E (medium number 
density) and Supplementary Fig. S9A vs S9C (low number density) and S9B vs S9D (high 
number density). At high 𝑹𝒑, there are two notable peaks at the same locations in the 
histograms: one large peak at the 20 µm bin and one smaller peak at the 60 µm bin. The 


18

presence of these two peaks is only seen for the lower confinement drops in the straight wall 
geometry, and only at higher 𝑹𝒑, regardless of number density. Number density primarily 
manifests inertia-dependent differences in these histograms based on the frequency of large 
spacing values, which is positively correlated with inertia and negatively correlated with number 
density. These results suggest that at high 𝑹𝒑, there exists 2 number-density-independent, 
stable fixed points for the lower confinement drops in the straight wall geometry. There is also a 
possible third fixed point that arises with decreasing number density due to the observation of 
more frequent large spacing values. The trend of more fixed points appearing when lowering 
confinement qualitatively agrees with the previously discussed numerical study [50], wherein 3 
fixed points—2 stable and 1 unstable—emerge at low confinement. Quantitatively, however, our 
results differ, as the numerical study predicts 3 fixed points only at 𝒂/𝑯 < 0.2, and still predicts 
only a single stable fixed point at 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.64. 

A key influence of confinement on longitudinal inertial ordering is the strength and role of 

the wall force. We confirm that the drops with both confinements sense the wall force. 
Supplementary Movie S1 shows that a drop (𝒂/𝑯 ≈ 0.6) moving in the middle of a sawtooth wall 
geometry senses the wall pattern through induced deformations that result in an undulating drop 
interface (Supplementary Movie S1). As the wall force is from all directions, it serves to counter 
“buckling”, which is counterproductive to ordering and has been observed in smaller solid 
particle trains [54] as well as our lower confinement drops (Supplementary Fig. S7). Buckling 
occurs when the wall force is too weak to prevent the repulsive longitudinal interactions from 
pushing particles out of a focused single line and into a staggered formation, which is the case 
at lower confinement. Despite the minimization of buckling for high confinement drops, our 
observations show that uniform longitudinal ordering could not be achieved in the straight wall 
geometry (Fig. 6B). In addition, the higher confinement drops at low number density and high 
𝑹𝒑 (Fig. 6A) in the asymmetric serpentine geometry show worse 𝑪𝒐𝑽 compared to the lower 
confinement drops at similar conditions (Fig. 7B). Although Dean flow and deformation 
complicates buckling for drops in the asymmetric serpentine, overall, our results show that the 
positive correlation of wall force strength with confinement is not a universal predictor of better 
longitudinal ordering outcomes when increasing drop confinement. 

The question of high confinement, which we have experimentally demonstrated to be a 

crucial parameter for longitudinal inertial ordering, has not been thoroughly investigated. 
Numerical treatments of drops moving near walls have not been profuse [44,46,47] and do not 
adequately incorporate the parameter values relevant to our study and to most droplet 
microfluidics applications (i.e. high confinement, Marangoni effects, Dean flow, drop-drop
interactions). Experimentally, we are not aware of any report investigating the role of 
confinement on the longitudinal inertial self-assembly of drops. Note that if 𝒂/𝑯 ≥ 1, flow 
becomes constricted and is no longer three-dimensional, which is a flow regime where normal 
inertial focusing would not apply. Furthermore, such a flow regime can also lead to wall friction 
effects and unpredictable instabilities [79] that would be highly sensitive to the inevitable 
fabrication defects inherent to the channel walls.

D. Surfactant Concentration and Marangoni Forces Change Ordering Dynamics

Marangoni forces stem from surface tension gradients that can arise due to the uneven 

distribution of surfactants at the interface between two fluids. Given that microfluidic drops are 
made using surfactant and subject to shear flow, this could induce a rearrangement of 
surfactant molecules leading to surface tension gradients. These gradients lead to interfacial 
flows, for which the approximate speed 𝒗 can be estimated by:


19

( 12)

𝒗 ≈ 𝜟𝝈

𝝁 ,

Given that 𝝁 is of order 1 mPa·s and 𝝈 is of order 10 mN·m-1 here (see Appendix), a ~10-50% 
differential in 𝝈, which simulation has shown can be within that range [36], can lead to
Marangoni flow speeds of order 1-5 m·s-1. These flows can lead to viscous interactions with the 
surrounding fluid (Fig. 8B), which have been described as a potential “swimming” action in 
drops [41]. By dimensional analysis, the magnitude of these viscous forces 𝑭𝒇 can be estimated 
using 𝝁, 𝒗, and the length scale of the drop 𝒂:

( 13)

𝑭𝒇 ~ 𝝁𝒗𝒂 ,

For a drop diameter of 40 µm and the range of 𝒗 estimated above, 𝑭𝒇 is of order 40-200 pN, 
which is comparable to the lift force given in Eq. 11 at the lowest 𝑹𝒑 (see Supplementary 
Material), making these forces a non-negligible factor. The influence of such Marangoni effects 
on the lateral migration of drops has been documented experimentally [41,42], but they could 
conceivably affect the longitudinal many-body dynamics of drops as well, which has not been 
demonstrated. To test this hypothesis, drops of both sizes were made using 0.5% surfactant
(𝝈 = 14.58(3) mN·m-1) to ensure an appreciable effect without risking significant drop 
coalescence during reinjection, whereas all previous experiments used the standard 2% 
common in droplet microfluidics (𝝈 = 9.44(1) mN·m-1). Comparison was done using only the 
asymmetric serpentine geometry as the straight wall geometry previously demonstrated an 
inability to longitudinally order drops. Fig. 8 plots the position-by-position ratio of the 𝑪𝒐𝑽’s
measured for the 0.5% drops to those previously measured for the 2% drops. Thus, a 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio 
> 1 would indicate poorer ordering due to less surfactant. Only the medium and low number 
densities were examined since the high number density condition fails to achieve meaningful 
ordering.

Our observations suggest that the effects of Marangoni forces on longitudinal inertial 

ordering are less pronounced at higher confinement than at lower confinement. Fig. 8C vs 8E 
(medium number density) and Fig. 8D vs 8F (low number density) show that there are greater 
overall deviations from a 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio of 1 at lower confinement. In particular, decreasing surfactant 
concentration tends to worsen performance (higher 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio) at lower confinement. These 
results indicate that at least for the surfactant concentrations tested here—which are in a range
typical of droplet microfluidics—confinement is the more dominant factor.


20

Figure 8. Results demonstrating the impact of surfactant concentration and the Marangoni 
effect on longitudinal inertial drop ordering. Channel geometry is asymmetric serpentine for all 
cases. 𝑵 ≈ 4500-6000 drops per data point. The data points are the ratio of the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 for 0.5% 
surfactant drops (higher surface tension, 𝝈) to the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 of 2% surfactant drops at each channel 
position. A 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio above 1 indicates poorer longitudinal ordering performance at 0.5% 
surfactant. See Supplementary Fig. S10 and S11 for individual plots. (A) Sketch indicating that 
lower surfactant concentration leads to less available coverage of the drop. Amount of 
surfactant molecules depicted is exaggerated and not an accurate representation of surface 
saturation percentage. (B) Sketch depicting that deformed drops in flow tend to have surfactant 
more localized at the two tips [36], creating low surface tension poles that result in surface 
tension gradients (black arrows). These gradients can result in interfacial flow away from the 
drop tips, potentially generating viscous forces against this flow, shown with red arrows [41]. (C) 
and (D) contrasts the effect of number density on the comparison between 0.5% and 2% 
surfactant drops at 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8. (E) and (F) contrasts the two surfactant concentrations at the 
lower confinement of 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.64. Here, stronger inertial dependence emerges and 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratios 
tend to be higher.


21

For the inertial dependence aspect, the data shows that it is influenced differently by 

confinement based on the number density. At low number density, decreasing confinement 
causes the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio to trend noticeably above 1 at all 𝑹𝒑, but the increase is similar and the 
curves overlap (Fig. 8F). At medium number density, however, changing confinement leads to 
drastically divergent outcomes at the higher 𝑹𝒑 values. At 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 (Fig. 8C), the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio 
trends below 1 at 𝑹𝒑 > 0.7, implying that any negative effects on longitudinal ordering due to a 
lower surfactant concentration are eliminated at higher inertia under high confinement. This 
stands in contrast to the 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.64 case (Fig. 8E), where the 𝑪𝒐𝑽 ratio rises to between 2 and 
3 at 𝑹𝒑 > 0.7, indicating a confinement-dependent reversal of the influence on longitudinal 
ordering due to a lower surfactant concentration. As a lower concentration equals a higher 
average surface tension, the medium number density results seem to suggest that making 
drops less deformable in the face of higher inertia—which increases deformation—is conducive 
to longitudinal ordering at higher confinement but detrimental to it at lower confinement. This 
observation may imply that an optimal degree of deformation exists at each confinement, and at 
higher 𝑹𝒑, it lies above the degree experienced by 2% surfactant drops at 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.64 
confinement but below that experienced by 2% drops at 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8. 

The dependence of the deformation parameter on surfactant concentration is further 

complicated by effects that extend beyond the simple modulation of average surface tension. 
The degree of drop deformation can change the sign of the normal interfacial stresses [80] and 
couple to the spatial distribution of surfactants, which gives rise to the tangential Marangoni 
stresses. A study [36] has shown that surfactant tends to concentrate at the tips of drops under 
shear flow, which favors greater deformation. The deformation-confinement coupling also feeds 
this surfactant distribution aspect as confinement affects the inclination angle of the drop with 
respect to the axis of flow [28], and this determines how pointed the drop tips are [29]—which is 
where the surfactant is concentrated. Curiously, a simulation study shows that the resultant 
Marangoni stresses, which form surface tension gradients pointing away from the drop tips and 
toward the drop belly (Fig. 8B), could have a negligible impact on the deformation [36].
However, this study simulated perfectly centered drops with viscosity and mass density ratios of 
1. Nonetheless, it is the spatial distribution of surfactants and the accompanying Marangoni 
effects that is significant, as despite the fact that 𝝈 is within a factor of two for 0.5% and 2% 
surfactant drops, 𝜟𝝈 and therefore 𝑭𝒇 can be dynamically and appreciably different. 

We have presented the first experimental evidence of surfactant and Marangoni effects 

influencing the longitudinal inertial self-assembly of microfluidic droplet arrays. Considering the 
core usage of surfactants in droplet microfluidics, knowledge of this parameter’s effects on self-
ordering is pivotal for integrating inertial principles into droplet microfluidics.

IV. Conclusion

In this study, we have experimentally shown that even when using conventional channel 

geometries, the unique properties of droplets can yield unexpected results in inertial ordering 
compared to solid particles, such as the failure of the traditional straight wall geometry to 
achieve uniform spacing—counter to established paradigm. On the other hand, the asymmetric 
serpentine geometry was able to restore regular drop spacing over length scales at least 3 
orders of magnitude greater than the drop diameter, especially at low inertia. We independently
varied the parameters of channel geometry, number density, confinement, inertia, and 
surfactant concentration to investigate how they can affect the longitudinal inertial ordering of 
drops. However, many questions have been raised through our work regarding the complex 
nature of these fluid interactions, which cannot be adequately explained by existing literature. 
To gain a better understanding of the underlying physics, it seems that new computational 


22

efforts will be required to grapple with these multiphase fluid systems. A recent review [81] has 
indicated that key areas are still missing in the computational research surrounding the inertial 
ordering of deformable particles, particularly under high confinement, Dean flow, and the 
influence of interfacial effects. But we hope this work inspires and provides the experimental 
impetus for future theoretical and computational endeavors. Experimentally, we will continue to 
study this system to evaluate the stability these droplet arrays under perturbations and to 
expand this work toward non-Newtonian fluids. In the meantime, our results can still serve to 
inform on the utility of incorporating inertial ordering principles for direct application in droplet 
microfluidics. Our identification of conditions yielding stable, long-range, and passive ordering of 
drops achievable at the range of flow rates compatible with droplet microfluidics enables the 
simple integration of incubation and deterministic interrogation modules. These capabilities 
should prove useful for streamlining multiplexed and multistep droplet microfluidic assays.

Acknowledgments

This work was funded by the UIUC Startup Grant, with fabrication and physical 

characterization carried out in part in the Materials Research Laboratory Central Research 
Facilities, University of Illinois. 

Appendix

A. Materials

All devices (drop makers and inertial ordering chips) are made with a single layer of 

polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mixed at a ratio of 1:10 (curing agent to base) and plasma 
bonded to a glass slide. These processes employ the standard methods of soft and 
photolithography, with master molds made using SU-8 2050 photoresist. Channels are made 
hydrophobic through Aquapel™ treatment. In all experiments, flow is driven by syringe pumps
(Poiseuille flow). Aqueous drops serve as the dispersed phase and constitute water with 
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) dye while the continuous phase is hydrofluoroether oil 
(Novec™ HFE 7500), which is the denser (𝝆 = 1.61 g·cm-3) and more viscous fluid (𝝁 = 1.24 
mPa·s). For drop making, the continuous phase (HFE) also contains fluorosurfactant (RAN 
Biotechnologies™ 004B) dissolved at either 2% or 0.5% w/v. 

References

[1]
D. Di Carlo, Inertial Microfluidics, Lab Chip 9, 3038 (2009).

[2]
J. M. Martel and M. Toner, Inertial Focusing in Microfluidics, Annu Rev Biomed Eng 16, 
371 (2014).

[3]
Y. Gou, Y. Jia, P. Wang, and C. Sun, Progress of Inertial Microfluidics in Principle and 
Application, Sensors (Switzerland) 18, 1762 (2018).

[4]
J. Zhang, S. Yan, D. Yuan, G. Alici, N. T. Nguyen, M. Ebrahimi Warkiani, and W. Li, 
Fundamentals and Applications of Inertial Microfluidics: A Review, Lab Chip 16, 10 
(2016).

[5]
G. Y. Kim, J. I. Han, and J. K. Park, Inertial Microfluidics-Based Cell Sorting, Biochip J 12, 
257 (2018).

[6]
S. C. Hur, N. K. Henderson-Maclennan, E. R. B. McCabe, and D. Di Carlo, Deformability-
Based Cell Classification and Enrichment Using Inertial Microfluidics, Lab Chip 11, 912 


23

(2011).

[7]
E. Guzniczak, O. Otto, G. Whyte, N. Willoughby, M. Jimenez, and H. Bridle, 
Deformability-Induced Lift Force in Spiral Microchannels for Cell Separation, Lab Chip 20, 
614 (2020).

[8]
J. Oakey, R. W. Applegate, E. Arellano, D. Di Carlo, S. W. Graves, and M. Toner, Particle 
Focusing in Staged Inertial Microfluidic Devices for Flow Cytometry, Anal Chem 82, 3862 
(2010).

[9]
M. Li, M. Van Zee, K. Goda, and D. Di Carlo, Size-Based Sorting of Hydrogel Droplets 
Using Inertial Microfluidics, Lab Chip 18, 2575 (2018).

[10]
M. G. Lee, J. H. Shin, C. Y. Bae, S. Choi, and J. K. Park, Label-Free Cancer Cell 
Separation from Human Whole Blood Using Inertial Microfluidics at Low Shear Stress, 
Anal Chem 85, 6213 (2013).

[11]
M. E. brahim. Warkiani, B. L. ua. Khoo, L. Wu, A. K. a. P. Tay, A. A. sga. S. Bhagat, J. 
Han, and C. T. ec. Lim, Ultra-Fast, Label-Free Isolation of Circulating Tumor Cells from 
Blood Using Spiral Microfluidics, Nat Protoc 11, 134 (2016).

[12]
W. Lee, H. Amini, H. A. Stone, and D. Di Carlo, Dynamic Self-Assembly and Control of 
Microfluidic Particle Crystals, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107, 22413 (2010).

[13]
L. Liu, H. Xu, H. Xiu, N. Xiang, and Z. Ni, Microfluidic On-Demand Engineering of 
Longitudinal Dynamic Self-Assembly of Particles, Analyst 145, 5128 (2020).

[14]
H. S. Moon, K. Je, J. W. Min, D. Park, K. Y. Han, S. H. Shin, W. Y. Park, C. E. Yoo, and 
S. H. Kim, Inertial-Ordering-Assisted Droplet Microfluidics for High-Throughput Single-
Cell RNA-Sequencing, Lab Chip 18, 775 (2018).

[15]
J. F. Edd, D. Di Carlo, K. J. Humphry, S. Köster, D. Irimia, D. A. Weitz, and M. Toner, 
Controlled Encapsulation of Single-Cells into Monodisperse Picolitre Drops, Lab Chip 8, 
1262 (2008).

[16]
A. P. Sudarsan and V. M. Ugaz, Multivortex Micromixing, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103, 
7228 (2006).

[17]
H. Amini, W. Lee, and D. Di Carlo, Inertial Microfluidic Physics, Lab Chip 14, 2739 (2014).

[18]
A. F. Domingues, R. J. Poole, and D. J. C. Dennis, Inertial Instabilities in a Microfluidic 
Mixing-Separating Device, Phys Fluids 31, 074101 (2019).

[19]
Q. Zhao, D. Yuan, J. Zhang, and W. Li, A Review of Secondary Flow in Inertial 
Microfluidics, Micromachines 11, 461 (2020).

[20]
G. Segré and  a. Silberberg, Radial Particle Displacements in Poiseuille Flow of 
Suspensions, Nature 189, 209 (1961).

[21]
G. Segré and A. Silberberg, Behaviour of Macroscopic Rigid Spheres in Poiseuille Flow 
Part 2. Experimental Results and Interpretation, J Fluid Mech 14, 136 (1962).

[22]
B. P. Ho and L. G. Leal, Inertial Migration of Rigid Spheres in Two-Dimensional 
Unidirectional Flows, J Fluid Mech 65, 365 (1974).

[23]
J. A. Schonberg and E. J. Hinch, Inertial Migration of a Sphere in Poiseuille Flow, J Fluid 
Mech 203, 517 (1989).


24

[24]
E. S. Asmolov, The Inertial Lift on a Spherical Particle in a Plane Poiseuille Flow at Large 
Channel Reynolds Number, J Fluid Mech 381, 63 (1999).

[25]
T. M. Squires and S. R. Quake, Microfluidics Fluid Physics at the Nanoliter, 77, (2005).

[26]
D. Di Carlo, D. Irimia, R. G. Tompkins, and M. Toner, Continuous Inertial Focusing, 
Ordering, and Separation of Particles in Microchannels, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104, 
18892 (2007).

[27]
D. Di Carlo, J. F. Edd, K. J. Humphry, H. A. Stone, and M. Toner, Particle Segregation 
and Dynamics in Confined Flows, Phys Rev Lett 102, 094503 (2009).

[28]
A. Vananroye, P. Van Puyvelde, and P. Moldenaers, Effect of Confinement on the 
Steady-State Behavior of Single Droplets during Shear Flow, J Rheol (N Y N Y) 51, 139 
(2007).

[29]
N. Ioannou, H. Liu, and Y. H. Zhang, Droplet Dynamics in Confinement, J Comput Sci 17, 
463 (2016).

[30]
N. Ioannou, H. Liu, M. S. N. Oliveira, and Y. Zhang, Droplet Dynamics of Newtonian and 
Inelastic Non-Newtonian Fluids in Confinement, Micromachines 8, 57 (2017).

[31]
F. Del Giudice, G. D’Avino, F. Greco, P. L. Maffettone, and A. Q. Shen, Fluid 
Viscoelasticity Drives Self-Assembly of Particle Trains in a Straight Microfluidic Channel, 
Phys Rev Appl 10, 064058 (2018).

[32]
S. Ma, J. M. Sherwood, W. T. S. Huck, and S. Balabani, On the Flow Topology inside 
Droplets Moving in Rectangular Microchannels, Lab Chip 14, 3611 (2014).

[33]
C. M. Leong, Y. Gai, and S. K. Y. Tang, Internal Flow in Droplets within a Concentrated 
Emulsion Flowing in a Microchannel, Phys Fluids 28, 112001 (2016).

[34]
R. K. Singh and K. Sarkar, Effects of Viscosity Ratio and Three Dimensional Positioning 
on Hydrodynamic Interactions between Two Viscous Drops in a Shear Flow at Finite 
Inertia, Phys Fluids 21, 103303 (2009).

[35]
S. Mortazavi and G. Tryggvason, A Numerical Study of the Motion of Drops in Poiseuille 
Flow. Part 1. Lateral Migration of One Drop, J Fluid Mech 411, 325 (2000).

[36]
G. Soligo, A. Roccon, and A. Soldati, Deformation of Clean and Surfactant-Laden 
Droplets in Shear Flow, Meccanica 55, 371 (2020).

[37]
V. Narsimhan and E. S. G. Shaqfeh, Lateral Drift and Concentration Instability in a 
Suspension of Bubbles Induced by Marangoni Stresses at Zero Reynolds Number, Phys 
Fluids 22, 101702 (2010).

[38]
S. Takagi and Y. Matsumoto, Surfactant Effects on Bubble Motion and Bubbly Flows, 
Annu Rev Fluid Mech 43, 615 (2011).

[39]
J. A. Hanna and P. M. Vlahovska, Surfactant-Induced Migration of a Spherical Drop in 
Stokes Flow, Phys Fluids 22, 013102 (2010).

[40]
M. Fukuta, S. Takagi, and Y. Matsumoto, Numerical Study on the Shear-Induced Lift 
Force Acting on a Spherical Bubble in Aqueous Surfactant Solutions, Phys Fluids 20, 
040704 (2008).

[41]
C. A. Stan, A. K. Ellerbee, L. Guglielmini, H. A. Stone, and G. M. Whitesides, The 


25

Magnitude of Lift Forces Acting on Drops and Bubbles in Liquids Flowing inside 
Microchannels, Lab Chip 13, 365 (2013).

[42]
C. A. Stan, L. Guglielmini, A. K. Ellerbee, D. Caviezel, H. A. Stone, and G. M. Whitesides, 
Sheathless Hydrodynamic Positioning of Buoyant Drops and Bubbles inside 
Microchannels, Phys Rev E - Stat Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys 84, 036302 (2011).

[43]
X. Chen, C. Xue, L. Zhang, G. Hu, X. Jiang, and J. Sun, Inertial Migration of Deformable 
Droplets in a Microchannel, Phys Fluids 26, 112003 (2014).

[44]
J. Magnaudet, S. Takagi, and D. Legendre, Drag, Deformation and Lateral Migration of a 
Buoyant Drop Moving near a Wall, J Fluid Mech 476, 115 (2003).

[45]
W. Hiller and T. A. Kowalewski, An Experimental Study of the Lateral Migration of a 
Droplet in a Creeping Flow, Exp Fluids 5, 43 (1986).

[46]
J. Magnaudet, Small Inertial Effects on a Spherical Bubble, Drop or Particle Moving near 
a Wall in a Time-Dependent Linear Flow, J Fluid Mech 485, 115 (2003).

[47]
F. Takemura, J. Magnaudet, and P. Dimitrakopoulos, Migration and Deformation of 
Bubbles Rising in a Wall-Bounded Shear Flow at Finite Reynolds Number, J Fluid Mech 
634, 463 (2009).

[48]
P. C. H. Chan and L. G. Leal, The Motion of a Deformable Drop in a Second-Order Fluid, 
J Fluid Mech 92, 131 (1979).

[49]
P. O. Olapade, R. K. Singh, and K. Sarkar, Pairwise Interactions between Deformable 
Drops in Free Shear at Finite Inertia, Phys Fluids 21, 063302 (2009).

[50]
O. Aouane, A. Farutin, M. Thiébaud, A. Benyoussef, C. Wagner, and C. Misbah, 
Hydrodynamic Pairing of Soft Particles in a Confined Flow, Phys Rev Fluids 2, 063102 
(2017).

[51]
K. J. Humphry, P. M. Kulkarni, D. A. Weitz, J. F. Morris, and H. A. Stone, Axial and 
Lateral Particle Ordering in Finite Reynolds Number Channel Flows, Phys Fluids 22, 
081703 (2010).

[52]
J. P. Matas, V. Glezer, É. Guazzelli, and J. F. Morris, Trains of Particles in Finite-
Reynolds-Number Pipe Flow, Phys Fluids 16, 4192 (2004).

[53]
S. Kahkeshani, H. Haddadi, and D. Di Carlo, Preferred Interparticle Spacings in Trains of 
Particles in Inertial Microchannel Flows, J Fluid Mech 786, R3 (2015).

[54]
A. E. Reece and J. Oakey, Long-Range Forces Affecting Equilibrium Inertial Focusing 
Behavior in Straight High Aspect Ratio Microfluidic Channels, Phys Fluids 28, 043303 
(2016).

[55]
A. Gupta, P. Magaud, C. Lafforgue, and M. Abbas, Conditional Stability of Particle 
Alignment in Finite-Reynolds-Number Channel Flow, Phys Rev Fluids 3, 114302 (2018).

[56]
C. Dietsche, B. R. Mutlu, J. F. Edd, P. Koumoutsakos, and M. Toner, Dynamic Particle 
Ordering in Oscillatory Inertial Microfluidics, Microfluid Nanofluidics 23, 83 (2019).

[57]
Y. Gao, P. Magaud, L. Baldas, C. Lafforgue, M. Abbas, and S. Colin, Self-Ordered 
Particle Trains in Inertial Microchannel Flows, Microfluid Nanofluidics 21, 154 (2017).

[58]
X. Hu, J. Lin, D. Chen, and X. Ku, Stability Condition of Self-Organizing Staggered 


26

Particle Trains in Channel Flow, Microfluid Nanofluidics 24, 25 (2020).

[59]
C. Schaaf and H. Stark, Particle Pairs and Trains in Inertial Microfluidics, Eur Phys J E 
43, 50 (2020).

[60]
G. D’Avino and P. L. Maffettone, Numerical Simulations on the Dynamics of Trains of 
Particles in a Viscoelastic Fluid Flowing in a Microchannel, Meccanica 55, 317 (2020).

[61]
W. wen Liu and Y. Zhu, “Development and Application of Analytical Detection Techniques 
for Droplet-Based Microfluidics”-A Review, Anal Chim Acta 1113, 66 (2020).

[62]
S.-Y. Teh, R. Lin, L.-H. Hung, and A. P. Lee, Droplet Microfluidics., Lab Chip 8, 198 
(2008).

[63]
A. Suea-Ngam, P. D. Howes, M. Srisa-Art, and A. J. Demello, Droplet Microfluidics: From 
Proof-of-Concept to Real-World Utility?, Chem Commun 55, 9895 (2019).

[64]
E. M. Payne, D. A. Holland-Moritz, S. Sun, and R. T. Kennedy, High-Throughput 
Screening by Droplet Microfluidics: Perspective into Key Challenges and Future 
Prospects, Lab Chip 20, 2247 (2020).

[65]
E. Z. Macosko, A. Basu, R. Satija, J. Nemesh, K. Shekhar, M. Goldman, I. Tirosh, A. R. 
Bialas, N. Kamitaki, E. M. Martersteck, J. J. Trombetta, D. A. Weitz, J. R. Sanes, A. K. 
Shalek, A. Regev, and S. A. McCarroll, Highly Parallel Genome-Wide Expression 
Profiling of Individual Cells Using Nanoliter Droplets, Cell 161, 1202 (2015).

[66]
H.-S. Han, P. G. Cantalupo, A. Rotem, S. K. Cockrell, M. Carbonnaux, J. M. Pipas, and 
D. A. Weitz, Whole-Genome Sequencing of a Single Viral Species from a Highly 
Heterogeneous Sample, Angew Chemie 127, 14191 (2015).

[67]
M. Napiorkowska, L. Pestalozzi, S. Panke, M. Held, and S. Schmitt, High-Throughput 
Optimization of Recombinant Protein Production in Microfluidic Gel Beads, Small 17, 
202005523 (2021).

[68]
C. Sun, K.-C. Chang, and A. R. Abate, Sequencing Ultrarare Targets with Compound 
Nucleic Acid Cytometry, Anal Chem 93, 7422 (2021).

[69]
M. Xiao, K. Zou, L. Li, L. Wang, Y. Tian, C. Fan, and H. Pei, Stochastic DNA Walkers in 
Droplets for Super-Multiplexed Bacterial Phenotype Detection, Angew Chemie - Int Ed 
58, 15448 (2019).

[70]
L. Frenz, K. Blank, E. Brouzes, and A. D. Griffiths, Reliable Microfluidic On-Chip 
Incubation of Droplets in Delay-Lines, Lab Chip 9, 1344 (2009).

[71]
A. R. Abate, T. Hung, P. Marya, J. J. Agresti, and D. A. Weitz, High-Throughput Injection 
with Microfluidics Using Picoinjectors, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107, 19163 (2010).

[72]
S. C. Kim, I. C. Clark, P. Shahi, and A. R. Abate, Single-Cell RT-PCR in Microfluidic 
Droplets with Integrated Chemical Lysis, Anal Chem 90, 1273 (2018).

[73]
J. J. Agresti, E. Antipov, A. R. Abate, K. Ahn, A. C. Rowat, J.-C. Baret, M. Marquez, A. M. 
Klibanov, A. D. Griffiths, and D. A. Weitz, Ultrahigh-Throughput Screening in Drop-Based 
Microfluidics for Directed Evolution, Proc Natl Acad Sci 107, 4004 (2010).

[74]
L. Mazutis, J. Gilbert, W. L. Ung, D. A. Weitz, A. D. Griffiths, and J. A. Heyman, Single-
Cell Analysis and Sorting Using Droplet-Based Microfluidics, Nat Protoc 8, 870 (2013).


27

[75]
S. A. Berger, L. Talbot, and L. S. Yao, Flow in Curved Pipes, Annu Rev Fluid Mech 15, 
461 (1983).

[76]
H. H. E., Long-Term Storage Capacity of Reservoirs, Trans Am Soc Civ Eng 116, 770 
(1951).

[77]
T. Shen, Z. Zhu, L. Huang, and J. Chang, Transient Flow Behavior in Serpentine Curved 
Microchannel of Inertial Microfluidic Devices, J Micromechanics Microengineering 30, 
025005 (2020).

[78]
E. Pedrol, J. Massons, F. Díaz, and M. Aguiló, Study of Local Inertial Focusing 
Conditions for Spherical Particles in Asymmetric Serpentines, Fluids 5, (2020).

[79]
T. Beatus, T. Tlusty, and R. Bar-Ziv, Phonons in a One-Dimensional Microfluidic Crystal, 
Nat Phys 2, 743 (2006).

[80]
R. K. Singh and K. Sarkar, Inertial Effects on the Dynamics, Streamline Topology and 
Interfacial Stresses Due to a Drop in Shear, J Fluid Mech 683, 149 (2011).

[81]
S. Razavi Bazaz, A. Mashhadian, A. Ehsani, S. C. Saha, T. Krüger, and M. Ebrahimi 
Warkiani, Computational Inertial Microfluidics: A Review, Lab Chip 20, 1023 (2020).


28

Supplementary Material

Wenyang Jing and Hee-Sun Han

Buoyancy vs Net Lift Force Calculation

According to Stan et al. [1], the net empirical lift force on a drop, directed toward the 

channel center, is given by:

( 14)

𝑭𝑳,𝒆𝒎𝒑𝒊𝒓𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒍 = 𝑪𝑳𝝁𝑼𝒓 (𝒓

𝑯)

𝟑

(𝒅
𝑯),

Here, 𝑪𝑳 is empirical lift coefficient, which the authors recommend to be 500 for general order of 
magnitude estimates, 𝝁 is the dynamic viscosity of the carrier fluid, which = 𝟏. 𝟐𝟒 𝐦𝐏𝐚 · 𝐬 for 
HFE oil, and 𝑼 is the average velocity of the fluid in the channel, which for the purposes of this 
calculation will correspond to the lowest flow rate used: 𝟔𝟎 𝒖𝑳 · 𝒉𝒓−𝟏 and 𝑼 ≈ 𝟎. 𝟔𝟔𝟕 𝐜𝐦 · 𝒔−𝟏. 𝑯
is the hydraulic diameter (50 µm), 𝒓 is the drop radius, and 𝒅 is the distance from the center of 
the channel. The empirical lift force will be computed for 40 µm and 32 µm drops in the scenario 
where they are positioned just so they are midway between the channel center and the upper 
channel wall. This scenario is to confirm if the buoyant force is sufficient to make the drops rise 
to this midpoint. Therefore,  𝒅/𝑯 will be 0.05 and 0.09 for 40 µm and 32 µm drops, respectively. 

The net upward force resulting from the difference in the buoyant force and the weight of 

a water drop is given by:

( 15)

𝑭𝑩,𝒏𝒆𝒕 = (𝟒𝝅

𝟑 ) 𝒓𝟑𝒈(𝝆𝒐𝒖𝒕 − 𝝆𝒊𝒏),

Here, 𝒈 = 𝟗. 𝟖𝟏 𝒎 · 𝒔−𝟐 is the gravitational acceleration, 𝝆𝒐𝒖𝒕 = 𝟏𝟔𝟏𝟒 𝒌𝒈 · 𝒎−𝟑 is mass density 
of the carrier fluid, HFE, and 𝝆𝒊𝒏 = 𝟏𝟎𝟎𝟎 𝒌𝒈 · 𝒎−𝟑 is mass density of the water drop.

40 µm drops:

𝑭𝑳,𝒆𝒎𝒑𝒊𝒓𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒍 = 500 ∗ 0.00124 ∗ 0.00667 ∗ 20 ∗ 10−6 (20

50)

3

(2.5

50) = 𝟐𝟔𝟓 𝒑𝑵

𝑭𝑩,𝒏𝒆𝒕 = (4𝜋

3 ) (20 ∗ 10−6)3 ∗ 9.81 ∗ (1614 − 1000) = 𝟐𝟎𝟐 𝒑𝑵

32 µm drops:

𝑭𝑳,𝒆𝒎𝒑𝒊𝒓𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒍 = 500 ∗ 0.00124 ∗ 0.00667 ∗ 16 ∗ 10−6 (16

50)

3

(4.5

50) = 𝟏𝟗𝟓 𝒑𝑵

𝑭𝑩,𝒏𝒆𝒕 = (4𝜋

3 ) (16 ∗ 10−6)3 ∗ 9.81 ∗ (1614 − 1000) = 𝟏𝟎𝟑 𝒑𝑵

The empirical lift force assumes a capillary number and Reynolds number < 0.01, but 

only the capillary number condition is satisfied. Nonetheless, this estimate is still useful to show 
that the net upward force from buoyancy should not be sufficient to push the drops up against 


29

the upper wall of the channel as the lift force will only get stronger with higher inertia while the 
buoyant force will remain constant. Lateral equilibrium positions affected by buoyancy, but is 
also a natural part of droplet microfluidic systems, where density matching is impractical. How 
buoyancy affects the lateral dynamics in the asymmetric serpentine geometry is more 
complicated due to the influence of Dean flow, but given its success over the straight wall 
geometry, this is a lesser practical concern.


30

Fig. S1. Example PMT trace of fluorescein drops, as seen in LabVIEW. Peak width and spacing 
between peaks are recorded as time values (ms). 


31

Fig. S2. Example histograms of spacing distribution at the medium number density, 
confinement of 0.8 (40 µm drops), and 2% surfactant. Bin size is 10 µm. Start and End 
Positions refer to 0 and 5 cm locations in the channel. 𝑵 = 1500 drops in all graphs, for each 
respective histogram. (A) and (B) Asymmetric serpentine geometry and total flow rates of 300
and 600 µL·hr-1, respectively. (C) and (D) Straight wall geometry and total flow rates of 300 and 
600 µL·hr-1, respectively. Note that in this geometry, not only are larger spacings more 
prevalent in the end position histogram, but the number of short spacings also increases with 
inertia.


32

Fig. S3. The autocorrelation function for the combination of 4 separate data files each 
containing 𝑵 = 1500 drops for the asymmetric serpentine geometry, 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8, and 2% 
surfactant. As these 4 data files were taken at different points in time, covering approximately 20 
minutes of flow at this condition, the periodic nature still evident here demonstrates stability in 
the system with time. Blue lines represent 95% confidence intervals. 


33

Fig. S4. Example rescaled range analysis for drops at the start position in the channel following 
the spacing disruptor, which is the same initial condition for both channel geometries. Drop 
distribution is indeed randomized and uncorrelated, as confirmed by the Hurst exponent being 
0.48(2), where 0.02 is the standard error of the slope on the log-log plot.


34

Fig. S5. Images of drops flowing the asymmetric serpentine geometry at a total flow rate of 900
µL·hr-1, 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8, and 2% surfactant. (A) Drops that have their mass density matched to HFE 
oil (𝝆 = 1.61 g·cm-3) by dissolving cesium chloride salt. Note that the drops are more deformed. 
(B) The aqueous drops used in this study without mass density adjustment. This indicates that 
viscosity in the drops has changed, and unfortunately shows that the drops cannot be made 
neutrally buoyant without affecting other properties, such as the viscosity ratio. Scale bars are 
50 µm. 


35

Fig. S6. Individual CoV plots for the higher confinement case (𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8), complementary to 
plots shown in Fig. 2 and 6. 𝑵 ≈ 4500-6000 drops per data point. High number density is ~7400 
drops·µL-1, and low number density is ~1900 drops·µL-1. (A) Asymmetric serpentine geometry, 
no meaningful longitudinal ordering achieved despite the channel geometry, likely too much 
steric interference at high number density. (B) Asymmetric serpentine geometry, divergent 
inertial dependence at low number density, in contrast to Fig. 2A. (C) Straight wall geometry, at 
high number density, spacing distribution reflecting drops becoming more clustered with short 
drop spacings within clusters and large gaps between clusters. (D) Straight wall geometry, the 
lower number density weakens longitudinal interactions and so the coefficient of variation does 
not increase as much as the medium and high number density cases. There is also less inertial 
dependence.


36

Fig. S7. Images of drops at lowest and highest total volumetric flow rates (𝑸) used, showing the 
extent of drop deformation and the lateral organization of the drops at both confinements. The 
highest 𝑸 for both confinements is 900 µL·hr-1, the lowest 𝑸 is 60 µL·hr-1 and 120 µL·hr-1 for the 
confinements of 0.8 and 0.64, respectively. Capillary number 𝑪𝒂 is defined as 𝝁𝑼𝒂/(𝝈𝒚) [2], 
where 𝝁 is the dynamic viscosity of the continuous phase, 𝑼 is the average fluid velocity, 𝒂 is 
the drop diameter, 𝝈 is the surface tension, and 𝒚 is the channel height. (A) and (E) Drops 
always hug the inner radius as it rounds the smallest curve in the asymmetric serpentine, see 
Movie S2. The drop is visibly non-spherical at the highest 𝑸. (B) and (F) Smaller drops also 
prefer the inner radius, but are not as deformed at the highest 𝑸. They can also be seen to be in 
different focal planes. (C) and (G) At the lowest 𝑸, the drops at this confinement prefer a more 
centered lateral alignment. But at the highest 𝑸, drops tend to be closely clustered and off-
centered in their lateral alignment, which also deforms them more due to a more uneven shear 
as a result of their off-center position. (D) and (H) The smaller drops do not experience a 
specific inertia-dependent lateral alignment, unlike at higher confinement. Scale bars are 50 µm
for all images.


37

Fig. S8. This figure shows the explicit spacing characterization data as a function of 
downstream channel position for the lower confinement case. 𝑹𝒑 values of 0.443, 0.886, and 
1.329 correspond to total flow rates of 300, 600, and 900 µL·hr-1, respectively. The 𝑹𝒑 of 0.177 
for the medium number density case corresponds to 120 µL·hr-1, and the 𝑹𝒑 of 0.296 for the low 
number density case corresponds to 200 µL·hr-1. This was necessary as the aqueous flow rate 
could not be reliably lowered below 10 µL·hr-1, so the oil flow rate had to be increased to 
decrease number density. 𝑵 ≈ 4500-6000 drops per data point, with error bars being the 
standard deviation from averaging separate trials at 𝑵 ≈ 1500 drops each. The summary results 
are presented in Fig. 7, where the ratio of the CoV at the 5 cm position to 0 cm position for each 
is plotted. (A)-(C) Asymmetric serpentine. Medium number density achieves the best possible 
result for 𝑹𝒑 = 1.329, and shows inertial dependence. (D)-(F) Straight wall geometry. No 
meaningful ordering is achieved. Also exhibits the greatest inertial dependence—split between 
the upper and lower 𝑹𝒑 pairs—at the medium number density. Increases in 𝑪𝒐𝑽 do not rise as 
much compared to 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 in the straight wall geometry. 


38

Fig. S9. Example histograms for the 32 µm drops (𝒂/𝑯 = 0.64) in the straight wall geometry at 
the lowest and highest flow rates tested and for the low and high number densities. 𝑹𝒑 values of 
0.0886, 0.296, and 1.329 correspond to total flow rates of 60, 200, and 900 µL·hr-1, 
respectively. 𝑵 = 1500 drops for each histogram and bin size is 10 µm. (A) and (C) Low number 
density cases, note the presence of a single peak at lower 𝑹𝒑 but the presence of two peaks at 
𝑹𝒑 = 1.329 in exactly the same positions as shown in Fig. 7E, which is the medium number 
density. (B) and (D) High number density cases, where at low 𝑹𝒑, the histograms at the start 
and end positions are very similar, but at high 𝑹𝒑, there are again both peaks in the same 
position as was shown in Fig. 7E and here in C. 


39

Fig. S10. Asymmetric serpentine geometry and number density is ~3700 drops·µL-1 for all 
graphs. 𝑵 ≈ 4500-6000 drops per data point. (A) and (C) rescaled versions of Fig. 2A and S8B, 
reproduced here for comparison purposes. (B) and (D) are same size drops made using 0.5% 
surfactant. Influence of surfactant effects and Marangoni forces is confinement dependent, with 
greater 𝑹𝒑 sensitivity at lower confinement (C vs D). In particular, better longitudinal ordering is 
positively correlated with increasing 𝑹𝒑 and increasing surfactant concentration at lower 
confinement but more weakly at higher confinement.


40

Fig. S11. Asymmetric serpentine geometry and number density is ~1900 drops·µL-1 for all 
graphs. 𝑵 ≈ 4500-6000 drops per data point. (A) and (C) are rescaled from Fig. S6C and S8C. 
(B) and (D) are same sized drops made using 0.5% surfactant. At lower surfactant 
concentration, the divergent behavior at low vs high 𝑹𝒑 in A is weakened compared to B. For 
lower confinement (C vs D), 𝑪𝒐𝑽 improvement with 𝑹𝒑 is lessened across the board when
Marangoni forces are weaker, with emergent disparity between the lower and higher 𝑹𝒑 values. 


41

Movie S1. This video shows strength of the wall influence, keenly felt by drops at a confinement 
of ~0.6. The drops’ edges undulate in response to the periodic sawtooth wall. Scale bar is 60 
µm.

Movie S2. This shows drops at 𝒂/𝑯 = 0.8 and 𝑹𝒑 = 2.078. Note that the drops prefer to hug the 
inner radius on the smallest of the two curves in the asymmetric serpentine. This is true at all 
the flow rates tested, and both confinements. Scale bar is 50 µm.


42

References

[1]
C. A. Stan, A. K. Ellerbee, L. Guglielmini, H. A. Stone, and G. M. Whitesides, The 
Magnitude of Lift Forces Acting on Drops and Bubbles in Liquids Flowing inside 
Microchannels, Lab Chip 13, 365 (2013).

[2]
H. Amini, W. Lee, and D. Di Carlo, Inertial Microfluidic Physics, Lab Chip 14, 2739 (2014).


