1

Van der Waals phonon polariton microstructures for configurable infrared
electromagnetic field localizations

Wuchao Huang, Fengsheng Sun, Zebo Zheng, Thomas G. Folland, Xuexian Chen, Huizhen
Liao, Ningsheng Xu, Joshua D. Caldwell, Huanjun Chen* & Shaozhi Deng*

W. Huang, F. Sun, Dr. Z. Zheng, X. Chen, H. Liao, Prof. N. Xu, Prof. H. Chen, Prof. S. Deng
State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, Guangdong Province
Key Laboratory of Display Material and Technology, School of Electronics and Information
Technology
Sun Yat-sen University, 510275, China
E-mail: chenhj8@mail.sysu.edu.cn; stsdsz@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
Dr. T. G. Folland, Prof. J. D. Caldwell
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37235, USA

Keywords: phonon polaritons, van der Waals crystals, nano-imaging, microstructures,
electromagnetic field localizations

Polar van der Waals (vdW) crystals that support phonon polaritons have recently attracted

much attention because they can confine infrared and terahertz (THz) light to deeply

subwavelength dimensions, allowing for the guiding and manipulation of light at the

nanoscale. The practical applications of these crystals in devices rely strongly on deterministic

engineering of their spatially localized electromagnetic field distributions, which has

remained challenging. This study demonstrates that polariton interference can be enhanced

and tailored by patterning the vdW crystal α-MoO3 into microstructures that support highly

in-plane anisotropic phonon polaritons. The orientation of the polaritonic in-plane

isofrequency curve relative to the microstructure edges is a critical parameter governing the

polariton interference, rendering the configuration of infrared electromagnetic field

localizations by enabling the tuning of the microstructure size and shape and the excitation

frequency. Thus, our study presents an effective rationale for engineering infrared light flow

in planar photonic devices.


2

1. Introduction

Phonon polaritons (PhPs) are quasi-particles arising from the coupling of photons and

optical phonons in polar crystals.[1‒2] Compared to bulk crystals, the recently identified two-

dimensional (2D) vdW atomic crystals are attracting increasing attention due to the exotic

PhPs they can support, which originate from their highly anisotropic, polar crystal

structure.[3‒9] Due to in-plane covalent bonding and out-of-plane vdW coupling, the

permittivity tensors of 2D vdW crystals can exhibit opposite signs for the components parallel

and perpendicular to the stacked planes, making the PhPs hyperbolic in nature. These

hyperbolic PhPs (HPhPs) exhibit low losses and high quality factors, which enable the

confinement and manipulation of electromagnetic fields at a deeply subwavelength scale and

give rise to various important applications such as super-resolution imaging,[10, 11]

ultrasensitive sensing,[12] and thermal management.[13, 14] In particular, recently explored 2D

transition metal oxides, such as α-MoO3[8, 9, 15, 16] and α-V2O5,[17] represent natural biaxial

hyperbolic crystals. The permittivities are highly anisotropic and even exhibit components

with opposite signs along orthogonal in-plane directions over a broad spectral range, giving

rise to PhPs with in-plane hyperbolicity. These HPhPs are observed as propagating

wavefronts of concave shape, in striking contrast to those propagating in uniaxial crystals,

such as hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN).[3, 4] Such anisotropic characteristics open up new

opportunities for confining and configuring electromagnetic waves at the nanoscale,

especially in the mid-infrared to terahertz spectral range with limited photonic material

candidates. For example, very recent studies have demonstrated that the stacking and twisting

of two α-MoO3 layers result in intriguing planar light propagation and localization

behaviors.[18‒21]

The practical utilizations of vdW HPhPs strongly rely on the configuration of their

electromagnetic fields to overlap with the functional components of a device or photonic

circuits. Several approaches have been proposed to engineer HPhPs, including controlling the


3

dielectric environment,[22‒25] carrier concentration,[26, 27] material composition,[28, 29] and

geometry[30‒32] of the crystals and devices. In particular, patterning the crystals into micro- or

nanostructures can generate localized electromagnetic fields with configurable spatial

distributions that are strongly dependent on geometric parameters.[30–32] Recent studies have

successfully demonstrated rich and intriguing localized electromagnetic modes in micro- or

nanostructured polaritonic crystals, such as graphene,[33] h-BN,[30‒32] SiC,[34] and hybrids.[32, 35]

Most of the previous results focused on uniaxial crystals, where the in-plane polariton

propagation is isotropic. Recently, subwavelength mid-infrared electromagnetic field

localizations have been reported in circular and square α-MoO3 micro-disks.[8, 9] Nevertheless,

configuring the near-field distributions associated with the in-plane anisotropic, and critically

hyperbolic polaritons, via patterning and the associated design principles is still incomplete.

As such developing these understandings of highly anisotropic polariton propagation and

spatial confinement is anticipated to open a new degrees of freedom for sub-diffraction-limit

light focusing and manipulation.

Here, through the combination of theoretical calculations and real-space nano-imaging,

we demonstrate the engineering of infrared electromagnetic field localization of HPhPs in

microstructures constructed from biaxial α-MoO3 crystal. The polariton waves that propagate

inside a specific microstructure will encounter and be reflected by boundaries, whereby

polariton interference results, generating complex standing wave patterns. We show that such

interference is governed by the orientation of the in-plane polaritonic isofrequency curve (IFC)

relative to the microstructure edges. This is possible because the energy flow directions of the

incident and reflected polariton waves are both normal to the IFC. Therefore, the

electromagnetic field spatial distributions within a microstructure can be configured by tuning

the size and shape, as well as the excitation frequency. The obtained localized fields are

highly anisotropic, irrespective of the symmetric microstructure shapes that are supported

within. Moreover, we show that the spatial near-field distributions of a wedge-shape


4

microstructure are strongly dependent on the angles between the bisector of the vertex angle

and the [001] axis of the α-MoO3 crystal. Such result further illustrates the combination of in-

plane anisotropy and boundary manipulation as a paradigm for configuring electromagnetic

fields at the nanoscale.

2. Results

α-MoO3 supports anisotropic PhPs throughout the mid-infrared (545 to 1010 cm−1) and

THz (267 to 400 cm−1) spectral range,[8, 9, 15, 16] over much of which these modes are

hyperbolic in nature. These hyperbolic spectral bands originate from the opposite signed

permittivities along different crystalline directions: Re(εi)·Re(εj) < 0, with i and j representing

the [100] (x-axis), [001] (y-axis), and [010] (z-axis) crystalline axes (Figure S1a and S1b).[8, 9]

In the x−y plane, the HPhPs exhibit open hyperbolic-shaped IFCs and propagate with concave

wavefronts inside Restrahlen Band 1 (545 to 851 cm−1) and Band 2 (820 to 972 cm−1) (Figure

1a, 1b, 1d, and 1e, Figure S2b and S2c). Even for Restrahlen Band 3 (958 to 1010 cm−1)

where the IFC is closed due to both in-plane permittivities being positive, the polaritons

remain anisotropic featuring elliptical wavefronts (Figure 1g, 1h and Figure S2d) as Re(εx) ≠

Re(εy). For ease of discussion, hereafter Band 1, 2, and 3 will be named as negative-εy-Band,

negative-εx-Band, and elliptical band, respectively. Every polariton wave launched into a

microstructure will propagate with the energy flow in direction orthogonal to the IFC. This

will be reflected by the boundaries of the microstructure and subsequently interfere with the

reflected wave, thereby generating standing-waves of various spatially localized

electromagnetic field distributions.[33] Because the interference effects originate from the

superpositions of the polariton wavefronts, the standing-waves are determined by the

wavevector distributions, i.e., polariton IFC topology. Consequently, the anisotropic IFCs can

bring a new degree of freedom for configuring the localized electromagnetic fields in α-MoO3

microstructures, which, otherwise is exclusively determined by the microstructure geometry


5

fabricated from crystals with an isotropic IFCs (i.e., Re(εx) = Re(εy), Figure S2a, Figure

S3a−S3c).[3, 4]

Figure 1. HPhPs in biaxial vdW crystals. a, d, and g) Calculated 3D isofrequency contours in
the α-MoO3 slab. The calculations were performed at 700 cm−1 (negative-εy-Band), 937 cm−1
(negative-εx-Band), and 980 cm−1 (elliptical band), respectively. b, e, and h) Calculated Re(Ez)
above the α-MoO3 slab surface at the same three frequencies. Green arrows indicate the
propagation directions of the polariton waves. c, f, and i) Isofrequency curves of the α-MoO3
slab at the same three frequencies. The Re(Ez) distributions were calculated by launching the
HPhPs on the sample surfaces using z-polarized electric dipoles. The isofrequency curves
shown in (c), (f), and (i) were obtained as Fourier transforms of (b), (e), and (h), respectively.
The
dashed
lines
represent
the
in-plane
dispersions
obtained
from
the
analytical

electromagnetic waveguide model calculations. The α-MoO3 slab is 170-nm thick.

An analytical model was first developed to calculate the in-plane IFC
  
 
 
,d,
q 
, of

the HPhPs propagating inside a vdW slab of finite thickness (see note S1).[36, 37] To simplify

the discussion, ε denotes the real part of the permittivity in our following discussion.

According to the model calculations, the electromagnetic waves in the hyperbolic vdW slab

are dominated by the TM polariton modes with a dispersion relation:


6


















 



M

q
k

k
q

q
k

k
q
q d
k

z

s

s

z
t

z

c

c

z
t

z

z

t
 
















 



















2
2
0

2
0

2

2
2
0

2
0

2

2
2
0
arctan
arctan
(1)

where





2
2
cos
cos
y
x
t


; d is the slab thickness; k0 is the free-space wavevector; θ

denotes the angle of the propagation direction relative to the x-axis, M represents the order of

the different TM modes, and εc and εs are the dielectric constants for air and the substrate,

respectively. Using the permittivity of α-MoO3 as the input parameter (see note S1, table S1),

the in-plane IFCs of the slabs were calculated according to Equation (1) at representative

frequencies, which agree well with the numerical results (Figure 1c, 1f, and 1i). Specifically,

for an α-MoO3 slab, the IFCs in negative-εx-Band is hyperbolas opening toward the x-axis

(Figure 2a). The polariton wave vectors are restricted inside the opening angle of

 
 

  
 

y
x
i/
 2arctan
bisected by x-axis. As a result, polaritons within the Restrahlen

band are forbidden to propagate along y-axis. Similar calculation results can be obtained for

the negative-εy-Band (see note S2, Figure S4a). In elliptical band, the IFCs are ellipses (Figure

2b), resulting in polaritons spreading along all directions in the x−y plane, but with

orientation-dependent wavevectors.


7

Figure 2. HPhP interferences in a α-MoO3 micro-disk. a, b) In-plane IFCs at two
representative frequencies in negative-εx-Band (a) and elliptical band (b). The dashed lines in
(a) denote the asymptotes of the IFCs. c−f) Calculated interference patterns of a 1.0-μm-
radius, 170-nm-thick micro-disk at different excitation frequencies using the
phenomenological model (see note S3). The two dashed white lines in (c) and (d) indicate the
extent of the outmost bright fringes. g−j) Real-space nano-imagings of the corresponding
micro-disks. The boundaries are marked with white dashed circles. k, m) Experimental
(dashed) and calculated (solid) amplitude profiles extracted along the horizontal dashed lines
marked in (c) to (f). The amplitudes are normalized by those from the substrate next to the
disk. l, n) Field confinement factors of the micro-disk at different excitation frequencies. The
symbols are the experimental values, and the solid lines are the calculation results. The error
bars in (l) and (n) are obtained based on the two symmetrical points along the y-axis on the
outmost fringes. Angle γ is defined as the angle with respect to x-axis along the center of the
outmost fringe. Scale bars: 500 nm.


8

Having established the IFC, the interference patterns of α-MoO3 microstructures can be

readily calculated using the phenomenological cavity model (see note S3).[15, 20, 36, 38] Only the

boundary perpendicular to the polariton wavevector is considered in our calculations to

simplify the discussion and correlate the model calculations directly with near-field

measurements performed using scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-

SNOM).[8] In other words, the interference effects are dominated by those between a polariton

wave and its antiparallel back-reflected wave. As will be shown in the following discussion,

this approximation already captures the main physics of the polariton interference in α-MoO3

microstructures. To demonstrate the impacts of IFCs on the interference patterns, we first

consider the polariton waves launched into a circular micro-disk of rotational symmetry

(radius L = 1.0 μm, thickness t = 170 nm). The circular edge guarantees that all polariton

waves propagating through the center can be back-reflected. For two typical frequencies in

negative-εx-Band, i.e., ω = 900 cm−1 and 930 cm−1, the calculation indicates deformed bright

(dark) fringes along the y-axis due to constructive (destructive) interference that results

(Figure 2c and 2d). These features result from reduction of polariton wavelength λp

(corresponding to the fringe spacing) along the y-axis, which are consistent with previous

results.[8, 9] For the polaritons in elliptical band, the interference fringes are a series of ellipses

(Figure 2e and 2f, Figure S5a−S5e).

In addition to the fringe shapes, the anisotropic IFCs can modulate the interference

patterns in three aspects. First, in negative-εx-Band, the IFCs exhibit a larger φ at a smaller ω

(Figure 2a and Figure S4b). Therefore, as ω is reduced, interference fringes contributed by

polaritons with wavevectors close to the IFC asymptotes will extend toward the two disk end

points along the y-axis (Figure 2c, 2d, and Figure S5f−S5j). Second, in both negative-εx-Band

and ellptical band, the fringe spacings are smaller for excitation frequencies corresponding to

IFCs with larger wavevectors (Figure 2c−2f, 2k, 2m, Figure S5f−S5j, and Figure S5p). As the

fringe spacings are reduced, the widths of the bright fringes become smaller, indicating


9

stronger electric field confinements. To quantitatively evaluate the field localization, a

confinement factor defined as CF = λ0/W is employed, with λ0 and W as the free-space

excitation wavelength and full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the outermost bright

fringe to the edge, respectively. CF clearly increases as the excitation frequency is increased

for negative-εx-Band (Figure 2l and Figure S5q), whereas a reverse evolution is observed in

elliptical band (Figure 2n and Figure S5r). Third, the field confinements are non-uniform

within an individual bright fringe. In negative-εx-Band, the CF of the outermost fringe

increases as the angle γ with respect to x-axis becomes larger (Figure 2l and Figure S5q). In

contrast, in elliptical band, the CF weakens as γ is increased (Figure 2n and Figure S5r).

These behaviors can be understood by considering that the evolution of q as a function of γ in

negative-εx-Band is opposite with those in elliptical band (Figure 2a and 2b). It should be

noted that polariton interferences behaviors in negative-εy-Band are similar to those in

negative-εx-Band, where the calculated fringes deform along the x-axis (see note S2, Figure

S5k−S5p, and Figure S5s).

The above model calculation results can be verified experimentally. To that end, α-MoO3

microstructures of various sizes and shapes are fabricated by employing the focus-ion beam

(FIB) technique (Figure S6a and Figure S7). The interference patterns are visualized using a

real-space nano-imaging approach based on s-SNOM (Figure S6b). As shown in Figure 2g−2j,

the measured near-field distributions agree with the calculated interference features, showing

similar deformed and elliptical fringes for the excitation frequencies in negative-εx-Band and

elliptical band. By extracting the respective amplitude profiles crossing the disk center along

the x- and y-axes (Figure 2k, 2m, and Figure S8), it is observed that both numbers of the

oscillating maxima and their dependence on the excitation frequency are consistent between

the experimental and calculation results. Additionally, the s-SNOM characterizations and the

model calculations are in good quantitative agreement in terms of CF dependence on γ (Figure

2l and 2n). Note the differences between the experimental and calculated amplitudes close to


10

the disk center, where the nano-images show small fluctuations. We attribute these

discrepancies to the defects and impurities introduced during the micro-disk fabrication.

We further corroborate the model calculation results and reveal the complex interference

fields by calculating the near-field distributions, Re(Ez), above the micro-disks launched by a

z-polarized electric dipole. Such a simulation configuration guarantees that all reflected waves,

and not just the back-reflected ones, are included in the interference fields. The simulations

are performed using finite element method (FEM, Comsol). The results indicate that unlike

other polaritons generating isotropic concentric patterns,[33, 39] the localized fields in the

micro-disk clearly reveal highly anisotropic frequency-dependent spatial distributions. Cross-

shape fringes that stem from the directional polariton propagation associated with the in-plane

hyperbolic response of the α-MoO3 can be observed near the disk center at ω = 900 cm−1

(negative-εx-Band) (Figure 3a and Figure 1e). Meanwhile, elongated concentric fringes that

originate from the in-plane elliptical response can be observed for excitation at 994 cm−1

(elliptical band) (Figure 3d and Figure 1h). These anisotropic HPhPs will be reflected by the

circular edge and generate deformed fringes close to the edge (Figure 3a and 3d). The phase

difference between two adjacent bright fringes is approximate π, which is a typical

characteristic of a wave interference. Accordingly, the polariton wavelengths can be readily

quantified by measuring the separations between the near-field maxima and minima (as

indicated in Figure 3a and 3d) yielding λp/2. The extracted polariton wavelengths are

consistent with the model calculations and s-SNOM measurements (Figure 3c and 3f). For a

more direct comparison with the s-SNOM measurements, near-field images are simulated by

recording the |Ez| as a function of the dipole position. The obtained |Ez(x, y)| corroborates with

the experimental results in terms of fringe shapes and spacings (Figure 2j, Figure 3b, 3c, 3e,

3f, Figure S8a, and S8b). It should be noted that the polariton field decays faster at 994 cm−1

outside the disk than that at 900 cm−1 (Figure 3a, 3b, 3d, and 3e). Such a difference can be

understood from two aspects. First, polaritons excited by 900 cm−1 exhibit in-plane


11

hyperbolicity. The energy density within the IFC cone at 900 cm−1 will be larger than that at

994 cm−1. This can lead to stronger polariton reflection and transmission at the disk edge,

which will result in longer decay length of the polariton field outside the disk. Second, the

diameter of the disk excited at 900 cm−1 (1.5 μm) is smaller than that excited by 994 cm−1 (2.0

μm). A larger disk diameter will lead to a longer polariton propagation length and therefore a

stronger damping. This will also make the polariton field decay fast outside the disk at 994

cm−1.

Figure 3. FEM simulations of HPhP interferences in a α-MoO3 micro-disk. a, d) Simulated
spatial near-field distributions of Re(Ez). The z-polarized electric dipoles are placed at
positions d1 and d2. b, e) Simulated near-field images (|Ez|). Scale bars: 250 nm. c, f)
Experimental (symbols), simulated (dashed lines), and model calculated (solid lines)
amplitude profiles extracted along the dashed lines marked in (b) and (e). The amplitudes are
normalized by those from the substrate next to the disk. The excitation frequencies are 900
cm−1 (a−c) and 994 cm−1 (d−f).


12

Interference is governed by the phase factor
eiq
, where ∆ denotes the polariton

propagation lengths that can be controlled by tuning the micro-disk size. We then perform

nano-imaging on a set of micro-disks with varied radii (L = 0.75, 1.0, and 1.26 μm) and fixed

thicknesses (t = 170 nm). Near-field images are recorded at two representative frequencies at

900 cm−1 (negative-εx-Band) and 986 cm−1 (elliptical band). Figure 4a−4c (Figure 4e−4g)

depict that all of the micro-disks, irrespective of their sizes, exhibit highly anisotropic fringe

shapes. The number of bright fringes particularly decreases as the disk size is reduced. These

results can be validated by the corresponding cavity model calculations (Figure S9). To

quantify the dependence of field localizations on the disk radius, we examine the near-field

amplitudes at three different positions inside each disk as typical examples (indicated by

letters “a,” “b,” and “c” in Figure 4a and 4e). For the two excitation frequencies, the

experimental and calculated near-field amplitudes at these three exemplary positions all

exhibit oscillations against L (Figure 4d and 4h). In addition, a bright fringe periodically

appears at the center of the disk with a decreasing L, providing clear evidence of the phase

factor modulations. Another interesting observation is that the oscillation periods at b and c

are different and can be seen more clearly from the model calculation results (solid lines in

Figure 4d and 4h). For ω = 900 cm−1, the period at b (452 nm) is smaller than that at c (458

nm), while for ω = 986 cm−1, an opposite result is obtained (i.e., the period at b (283 nm) is a

bit larger than that at c (280 nm)). These behaviors can be understood by considering the

phase factor
eiq
and the highly anisotropic in-plane polariton wavevectors in these two bands.

In negative-εx-Band, the polariton interference at positions b and c are contributed by the

polaritons with a large q near the IFC asymptotes and a relatively small q near the qx-axis

(Figure 2a). Accordingly, a smaller oscillation period against the disk size is observed at

position b. In contrast, in elliptical band, the interference at position b is caused by the

superposition of the polariton waves with smaller wavevectors (Figure 2b) giving rise to a


13

larger oscillation period. These results clearly indicate that the micro-disk radius is an

important parameter for configuring the spatial localization field distributions.

Figure 4. HPhP interferences in α-MoO3 micro-disks of varied sizes. a−c and e−g)
Experimental near-field amplitude images of micro-disks with different radii L. The excitation
frequencies are 986 cm−1 (a−c) and 900 cm−1 (e−g). The white dashed circles indicate the disk
boundaries. d, h) Normalized near-field amplitudes at positions a (green spheres), b (blue
spheres), and c (purple spheres) marked in (a) and (e). Normalizations are performed by
dividing the amplitudes in the micro-disk by that of the substrate. The green, blue, and purple
solid lines are the corresponding calculations by the cavity model. The error bars in (d) and (h)
are obtained based on the measurements on five points closest to a, b, and c. Scale bars: 500
nm.

As discussed before, the HPhP interferences are dominated by the boundaries

perpendicular to the wavevectors of the polariton waves. Consequently, the interference fields

can be tailored by modifying the shapes (i.e. boundary numbers and types) of the α-MoO3

microstructures. Figure 5 illustrates the spatial near-field distributions obtained by the model

calculations and the experimental measurements in three typical microstructures (Figure S7c,

S7e, and S7f). For ease of discussion, the left most boundary of each microstructure is kept

parallel to the y-axis ([001] crystalline direction). In contrast to the highly symmetric standing

wave patterns formed by isotropic polariton superpositions,[33, 39] the in-plane anisotropic

HPhPs will lead to abnormal asymmetric interference patterns in each microstructure.


14

Specifically, for excitations in elliptical band (986 cm−1), where the HPhPs can spread along

all directions with orientation-dependent wavevectors, all boundaries can act as reflectors and

generate polariton interferences that are strongly dependent on the microstructure shapes. For

square (Figure 5a and 5g), regular pentagon (Figure 5b and 5h), and regular hexagon (Figure

5c and 5i), the bright spots formed by constructive interferences generally exhibit spatial

distributions distorted from the geometrical symmetries of the microstructures. This can be

more directly observed on the near-field profiles crossing the microstructure centers along the

x- and y-axes (solid and dashed lines, respectively, in Figure 5m−5o). In the square and

regular hexagonal, the bright spots particularly follow elongated distributions along the x-axis

([100] crystalline direction). Thus, the fringe spacings along the x-axis are smaller than those

along the y-axis (solid and dashed lines, respectively, in Figure 5m, o) due to the larger

wavevector of the HPhPs parallel to the x-axis (Figure 2b).

Figure 5. HPhP interferences in α-MoO3 microstructures of varied shapes. a−c) Calculated
interference patterns of square (a), regular pentagon (b), and regular hexagon (c)
microstructures. The excitation frequencies are 986 cm−1. d−f) Corresponding calculated
interference patterns using excitations at 915 cm−1. g−l) Experimental near-field amplitude
images of the microstructures corresponding to those in (a−f). Dashed white lines mark the
boundaries. m−r) Normalized field profiles along the dashed white lines indicated in (a−f).
The profiles for (e) and (k) are drawn along x-axis and direction of 36° with respect to x-axis.


15

The normalizations are done by dividing the calculated or experimental field amplitudes of
the microstructures by that of the substrate. Scale bars: 1.0 μm.

The interference patterns become even more asymmetrical for the excitation frequency in

negative-εx-Band (915 cm−1). Both the square and regular hexagon microstructures only

exhibit fringes parallel to the y-axis, with the two strongest located next to the edges (Figure

5d, 5j, 5f, and 5l). This result can be understood by considering that the IFC at 915 cm−1 is a

hyperbola opening toward the x-axis. The opening angle between the two asymptotes is φ =

108°. Therefore, for polaritons with wavevectors confined by the two asymptotes, only the

two boundaries parallel to the y-axis can reflect the polariton waves, leading to the observed

fringes along the y-axis. The polariton wavelengths extracted from the near-field profiles of

these two microstructures are 475 nm and 480 nm (Figure 5p and 5r), respectively. These

values match well with λp = 2π/q[100] = 480 nm, where q[100] is the wavevector determined

from the IFC for the HPhPs propagating along the x-axis. However, for a regular pentagon

microstructure, the angle between the two edges intersecting with the x-axis is 108°. Two

polariton waves can always be back-reflected by these two edges because π−108° = 72° < φ.

As a result, additional fringes parallel to the two edges can be observed (Figure 5e and 5k).

Moreover, due to the forbidden of polariton propagation, no fringes emanating from the

rotated edges can be observed in all of the three microstructures (Figure 5d−5f and 5j−5l).

Most interestingly, according to the IFC, the q associated with the polariton waves

propagating toward the two oblique edges is much larger than q[100] (Figure 2a), thereby

rendering much shorter polariton wavelengths (λp = 190 nm) (Figure 5q) and indicating much

stronger electric field confinements near the oblique edges. Another feature should be noted is

that slightly deformed fringes can be observed experimentally at corners of square

microstructure, while they are absent in the calculated image (Figure 5d and 5j). These

deformed fringes are due to interference involve high-wavevector polaritons, which are

similar to those observed in the circular micro-disk (Figure 2c−2j). As mentioned before, in


16

our calculations only the boundary perpendicular to the polariton wavevector is considered.

Therefore, in the square microstructure, the contributions from polaritons with high

wavevectors are neglected, giving rise to discrepancy of interference fringes at the corners

between calculation and experimental results.

The results above unambiguously demonstrate that the electromagnetic field

localizations can be configured by controlling the shape and the size of an α-MoO3

microstructure, and the excitation frequency. We further demonstrate the configurability by

fabricating and imaging a set of α-MoO3 micro-wedges with fixed vertex angles at 30° and

varied skew angles (β) from 0 to 90°, which is defined by the angle between the wedge

bisector and the y-axis (upper panel, Figure 6a). The near-field distributions were first

examined at an excitation frequency of 990 cm−1, where the IFC is an ellipse (Figure 2b). Two

polariton waves that can be back-reflected by the two edges always exist, leading to the

interference fringes parallel to the wedge boundaries (Figure 6a). In particular, the

orientations of the two edges relative to the major axes of the IFC will be adjusted by rotating

the wedge around the z-axis (i.e., changing the β). Therefore, the two reflected polariton

waves will exhibit different wavevectors, enabling modifications of their interference fields

(see note S4 and Figure S10). For ease of discussion, the edge above (below) the x-axis is

labeled as Edge I (Edge II) (as indicated in Figure 6a). For β = 0 and 90°, the wedges exhibit

lateral symmetries relative to the y- and x-axes, respectively. The polariton waves

perpendicularly reflected by the two edges exhibit the same q (Figure S10), making the two

sets of fringes close to the edges equivalent (Figure S11). The q of the polariton wave

reflected by Edge I will first be reduced and then increased as β is steadily decreased from 90°.

This is opposite to that of the polariton wave reflected by Edge II (Figure S11). Consequently,

the corresponding two sets of fringes will differ from each other in terms of their spacings and

linewidths (Figure S11). Specifically, λp associated with Edge I (Edge II) will first increase

(decrease) and then decrease (increase), as confirmed by the experimental measurements


17

(Figure 6b). The model calculation results agree very well with the experimental

measurements.

Figure 6. HPhP interference effects in α-MoO3 micro-wedges of varied skew angles and fixed
vertex angles. a, c) Calculated and experimental HPhP interference patterns in a
representative micro-wedge. Left panels: schemes of typical micro-wedges. The skew angle is
defined by the angle between the bisector of the wedge and the y-axis. The two edges are
labeled as Edge I and Edge II, respectively. Right panels: typical near-field image of the
micro-edge. The excitation frequency is 990 cm−1 (elliptical band). b, d) Dependence of the
HPhP wavelength on the skew angle of the wedge. The wavelengths are extracted from the
fringes parallel to Edge I and Edge II. The solid lines and symbols in (b) and (d) denote the
calculation and experimental results, respectively. Error bars in (b) and (d) are based on
analyses of five typical amplitude line profiles perpendicular to Edge I and Edge II,
respectively, in each experimental near-field image. The micro-wedge thickness is 170 nm.
The excitation frequencies are 990 cm−1 (a and b) and 915 cm−1 (c and d). Scale bars: 1.0 µm.

The interference patterns are more interesting for an excitation frequency of 915 cm−1 in

the negative-εx-Band. For β = 90°, because the angle of the two wedge edge normal directions

is 150°, polariton waves cannot propagate perpendicularly towards Edge I and II (Figure

S12a). No interference fringes can be observed parallel to the two edges (Figure S13a). As β


18

is progressively decreased, the two normal directions will successively sweep the two

asymptotes of the IFC (Figure S12a and S12b), enabling polariton reflection and interference

at the edges. Specifically, when the β is reduced by more than 21° (β < 69°), the normal

direction of Edge II will intersect with the IFC, while the normal direction of Edge I is still

outside the IFC. As a result, polariton fringes parallel to Edge II appear, while those parallel

to Edge I are still absent (Figure S13a). When β is further reduced, polariton wave vector qII

will be reduced and then increased again as β is smaller than 15° (Figure S12b and S12c).

Accordingly, polariton wavelength λp associated with Edge II will first increase and then

decrease against β (Figure 6d and Figure S13a). On the other hand, the normal direction of

Edge I can intersect with the IFC only when β is smaller than 39°. Therefore, the fringes

parallel to Edge I will not appear unless β < 39° (Figure 6c and Figure S12c). Afterwards, the

wave vector qI is reduced against β, giving rise to monotonically increased λp at Edge I

(Figure 6d). These experimental findings are well corroborated with the model calculations

(Figure 6d and Figure S13b).

3. Conclusion

The patterning of photonic materials into micro- and nanostructures has been well

established for controlling electromagnetic waves at the nanoscale. Our study demonstrates

that by combining in-plane anisotropic polaritons with high spatial confinement, that polariton

interference effects inside an α-MoO3 microstructures can be controlled by tuning the

excitation frequency (IFC topology), shape (number and type of the boundary), and size

(polariton propagation length) of the microstructure. Thus, the configurability of the

nanoscale electromagnetic fields can be extended in terms of anisotropic spatial distributions

and orientation dependence, which, otherwise, usually requires the design and patterning of

complex architectures in isotropic counterparts. It should be noted that very recently two in-

plane THz polaritonic bands have been discovered in α-MoO3.[16] The results obtained in the


19

current study can therefore also be applied to the THz spectral region, which can help design

of nanophotonic devices for THz applications. In principle, this rationale can also be

generalized to other types of vdW crystals and artificial metasurfaces with in-plane optical

responses, which is expected to open up a new paradigm for confining and manipulating light

flow in planar photonics. From a fundamental point of view, the α-MoO3 microstructures

sustaining highly anisotropic localized electromagnetic fields can provide a testing platform

for studying light−matter interactions in complex spatially confined electromagnetic

environments.

During submission of our manuscript, we became aware of a very recent publication

reporting similar studies.[40] Our work was conducted independently. In addition, in our

present study, we further demonstrated configuring the electromagnetic field localizations in

α-MoO3 microstructures of different sizes and shapes.

4. Experimental Section

Fabrication of α-MoO3 Microstructures: α-MoO3 single crystal slabs were prepared using

thermal physical vapor deposition method.[41] The crystals were directly synthesized on

silicon substrate grown with 300-nm thick SiO2 layer. The various α-MoO3 microstructures

were fabricated using the focused ion beam (FIB) technique. Specifically, Ga+ ions were used

as ion sources in our FIB etching system (AURIGA, Zeiss). The acceleration voltage and

current of Ga3+ beam were respectively set as 30 kV and 10 pA, with a Ga3+ beam dose of 1

nC/μm2. The dwell time was 0.5 μs. After the microstructures were constructed, they were

annealed at 300 °C for 2 h in O2 ambient condition to eliminate the Ga3+ embedded in the α-

MoO3.

Numerical Simulations: Numerical simulations were performed using the finite element

method (FEM, Comsol). To generate the near-field spatial distributions above the various 2D

slabs and microstructures, HPhPs were launched using a z-polarized electric dipole source.


20

Specifically, in each simulation, the dipole was located 200-nm above the sample surface. The

near-field distributions, Re(Ez), were obtained on the plane 20-nm above the sample surface.

The dipole was scanned across the sample at a step of 5 nm. The thicknesses of the slabs and

α-MoO3 microstructures were set as 170 nm. Permittivities of the samples were modeled by

fitting their respective experimental data using Lorentzian dielectric models.[3, 15]

Nanoimaging of Various α-MoO3 Microstructures: Real-space nanoimaging was performed

using an s-SNOM (NeaSNOM, Neaspec GmbH), which was built based on an atomic force

microscope (AFM). In a specific measurement, the metal-coated tip (Arrow-IrPt, NanoWorld)

was illuminated by a mid-infrared laser source with tunable frequencies from 900 to 1240

cm−1 (quantum cascade laser, Daylight Solutions). The tip was vibrated at a frequency of

~270 kHz. The back-scattered light from the tip was directed to an MCT detector (HgCdTe,

Kolmar Technologies). The near-field signal was then extracted using a pseudo-heterodyne

interferometric method, and the detected signal was demodulated at a third harmonic of the tip

vibration frequency.

Statistical Analysis: The error bars in Figure 2l and Figure 2n are obtained based on the two

symmetrical points along the y-axis on the outmost fringes in Figure 2h and Figure 2j. To

obtain the error bars in Figure 4d and Figure 4h, five points closest to positions a, b, and c in

Figure 4a and Figure 4e are analyzed. Error bars in Figure 6b and 6d are based on analyses of

five typical amplitude line profiles perpendicular to Edge I and Edge II, respectively, in each

experimental near-field image. All of the data were represented in form of average ± standard

deviations.

Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.

Acknowledgements
W.H., F.S., and Z. Z. contributed equally to this work. We acknowledge support from the
National Key Basic Research Program of China (grant no. 2019YFA0210203), the National


21

Natural Science Foundation of China (grant nos. 91963205 and 11904420), Guangdong Basic
and Applied Basic Research Foundation (grant nos. 2019A1515011355 and
2020A1515011329). H.C. acknowledges the support from Changjiang Young Scholar
Program. Z.Z. acknowledges the project funded by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
(grant no. 2019M663199). J.D.C. acknowledges support from the National Science
Foundation, Division of Materials Research (grant no. 1904793), while support for T.G.F.
was provided by Vanderbilt University through the startup package of J.D.C..

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))
Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

References

[1] R. Hillenbrand, T. Taubner, F. Keilmann, Nature 2002, 418, 159−162.

[2] T. Dekorsy, V. A. Yakovlev, W. Seidel, M. Helm, F. Keilmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 90,

055508.

[3] J. D. Caldwell, A. V. Kretinin, Y. G. Chen, V. Giannini, M. M. Fogler, Y. Francescato, C.

T. Ellis, J. G. Tischler, C. R. Woods, A. J. Giles, M. Hong, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S.

A. Maier, K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 5221.

[4] S. Dai, Z. Fei, Q. Ma, A. S. Rodin, M. Wagner, A. S. Mcleod, M. K. Liu, W. Gannett, W.

Regan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. Thiemens, G. Dominguez, A. H. C. Neto, A. Zettl,

F. Keilmann, P. Jarillo-Herrero, M. M. Fogler, D. N. Basov, Science 2014, 343, 1125–

1129.

[5] J. D. Caldwell, L. Lindsay, V. Giannini, I. Vurgaftman, T. L. Reinecke, S. A. Maier, O. J.

Glembocki, Nanophotonics 2015, 4, 44–68.

[6] T. Low, A. Chaves, J. D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N. X. Fang, P. Avouris, T. F. Heinz, F.

Guinea, L. Martin-Moreno, F. Koppens, Nat. Mater. 2017, 16, 182–194.

[7] D. N. Basov, M. M. Fogler, F. J. García de Abajo, Science 2016, 354, aag1992.


22

[8] W. Ma, P. Alonso-González, S. Li, A. Y. Nikitin, J. Yuan, J. Martín-Sánchez, J. Taboada-

Gutiérrez, I. Amenabar, P. Li, S. Vélez, C. Tollan, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, S. Sriram, K.

Kalantar-Zadeh, S. -T. Lee, R. Hillenbrand, Q. Bao, Nature 2018, 562, 557–562.

[9] Z. Zheng, N. Xu, S. L. Oscurato, M. Tamagnone, F. Sun, Y. Jiang, Y. Ke, J. Chen, W.

Huang, W. L. William, A. Ambrosio, S. Deng, H. Chen, Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, eaav8690.

[10]
S. Dai, Q. Ma, T. Andersen, A. S. Mcleod, Z. Fei, M. K. Liu, M. Wagner, K.

Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. Thiemens, F. Keilmann, P. Jarillo-Herrero, M. M. Fogler, D.

N. Basov, Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 6963.

[11]
P. Li, M. Lewin, A. V. Kretinin, J. D. Caldwell, K. S. Novoselov, T. Taniguchi, K.

Watanabe, F. Gaussmann, T. Taubner, Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7507.

[12]
M. Autore, P. Li, I. Dolado, F. J. Alfaro-Mozaz, R. Esteban, A. Atxabal, F. Casanova,

L. E. Hueso, P. Alonso-González, J. Aizpurua, A. Y. Nikitin, S. Vélez, R. Hillenbrand,

Light Sci. Appl. 2018, 7, 17172.

[13]
S. -A. Biehs, M. Tschikin, P. Ben-Abdallah, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 104301.

[14]
D. G. Baranov, Y. Xiao, I. A. Nechepurenko, A. Krasnok, A. Alù, M. A. Kats, Nat.

Mater. 2019, 18, 920–930.

[15]
Z. Zheng, J. Chen, Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Chen, P. Liu, J. Xu, W. Xie, H. Chen, S.

Deng, N. Xu, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1705318.

[16]
T. V. A. G. D. Oliveira, T. Nörenberg, G. Álvarez‐Pérez, L. Wehmeier, J.

Taboada‐Gutiérrez, M. Obst, F. Hempel, E. J. H. Lee, J. M. Klopf, I. Errea, A. Y. Nikitin,

S. C. Kehr, P. Alonso‐González, L. M. Eng, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 2005777.

[17]
J. Taboada-Gutiérrez, G. Álvarez-Pérez, J. Duan, W. Ma, K. Crowley, I. Prieto, A.

Bylinkin, M. Autore, H. Volkova, K. Kimura, T. Kimura, M. -H. Berger, S. Li, Q. Bao, X.

P. A. Gao, I. Errea, A. Y. Nikitin, R. Hillenbrand, J. Martín-Sánchez, P. Alonso-González,

Nat. Mater. 2020, 19, 964–968.


23

[18]
G. Hu, Q. Ou, G. Si, Y. Wu, J. Wu, Z. Dai, A. Krasnok, Y. Mazor, Q. Zhang, Q. Bao,

C. -W. Qiu, A. Alù, Nature 2020, 582, 209–213.

[19]
M. Chen, X. Lin, T. H. Dinh, Z. Zheng, J. Shen, Q. Ma, H. Chen, P. Jarrillo-Herrero, S.

Dai, Nat. Mater. 2020, 19, 1307–1311.

[20]
Z. Zheng, F. Sun, W. Huang, J. Jiang, R. Zhan, Y. Ke, H. Chen, S. Deng, Nano Lett.

2020, 20, 5301–5308.

[21]
J. Duan, N. Capote-Robayna, J. Taboada-Gutiérrez, G. Álvarez-Pérez, I. Prieto, J.

Martín-Sánchez, A. Y. Nikitin. P. Alonso-González, Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 5323–5329.

[22]
S. Dai, Q. Ma, M. K. Liu, T. Andersen, Z. Fei, M. D. Goldflam, M. Wagner, K.

Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. Thiemens, F. Keilmann, G. C. A. M. Janssen, S. -E. Zhu, P.

Jarillo-Herrero, M. M. Fogler, D. N. Basov, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 682–686.

[23]
J. Duan, R. Chen, R, J. Li, K. Jin, Z. Sun, J. Chen, Adv. Mater. 2017, 29, 1702494.

[24]
T. G. Folland, A. Fali, S. T. White, J. R. Matson, S. Liu, N. A. Aghamiri, J. H. Edgar,

R. F. Haglund Jr, Y. Abate, J. D. Caldwell, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 4371.

[25]
A. M. Dubrovkin, B. Qiang, H. N. S. Krishnamoorthy, N. I. Zheludev, Q. Wang, Nat.

Commun. 2018, 9, 1762.

[26]
A. D. Dunkelberger, C. T. Ellis, D. C. Ratchford, A. J. Giles, M. Kim, C. S. Kim, B. T.

Spann, I. Vurgaftman, J. G. Tischler, J. P. Long, O. J. Glembocki, J. C. Owrutsky, J. D.

Caldwell, Nat. Photonics 2018, 12, 50–56.

[27]
H. Karakachian, M. Kazan, J. Appl. Phys. 2017, 121, 093103.

[28]
A. J. Giles, S. Dai, S, I. Vurgaftman, T. Hoffman, S. Liu, L. Lindsay, C. T. Ellis, N.

Assefa, I. Chatzakis, T. L. Reinecke, J. G. Tischler, M. M. Fogler, J. H. Edgar, D. N.

Basov, J. D. Caldwell, Nat. Mater. 2018, 17, 134–139.

[29]
Y. Wu, Q. Ou, Y. Yin, Y. Li, W. Ma, W. Yu, G. Liu, X. Cui, X. Bao, J. Duan, G.

Álvarez-Pérez, Z. Dai, B. Shabbir, N. Medhekar, X. Li, C. -M. Li, P. Alonso-González, Q.

Bao, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 2646.


24

[30]
S. Dai, M. Tymchenko, Y. Yang, Q. Ma, M. Pita-Vidal, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P.

Jarillo-Herrero, M. M. Fogler, A. Alù, D. N. Basov, Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 1706358.

[31]
B. Liao, X. Guo, D. Hu, F. Zhai, H. Hu, K. Chen, C. Luo, M. Liu, X. Xiao, Q. Dai,

Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1904662.

[32]
K. Chaudhary, M. Tamagnone, M. Rezaee, D. K. Bediako, A. Ambrosio, P. Kim, F.

Capasso, Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, eaau7171.

[33]
Z. Zheng, J. Li, T. Ma, H. Fang, W. Ren, J. Chen, J. She, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, H. Chen, S.

Deng, N. Xu, Light Sci. Appl. 2017, 6, e17057.

[34]
N. Ocelic, R. Hillenbrand, Nat. Mater. 2004, 3, 606–609.

[35]
A. M. Dubrovkin, B. Qiang, T. Salim, D. Nam, N. I. Zheludev, Q. Wang, Nat.

Commun. 2020, 11, 1863.

[36] F. Sun, W. Huang, Z. Zheng, N. Xu, Y. Ke, R. Zhan, H. Chen, S. Deng, Nanoscale,

DOI:10.1039/D0NR07372E, 2021.

[37]
G. Álvarez-Pérez, K. V. Voronin, V. S. Volkov, P. Alonso-González, A. Y. Nikitin,

Phys. Rev. B 2019, 100, 235408.

[38]
J. A. Gerber, S. Berweger, B. T. O’Callahan, M. B. Raschke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014,

113, 055502.

[39]
A. Y. Nikitin, P. Alonso-González, S. Vélez, S. Mastel, A. Centeno, A. Pesquera, A.

Zurutuza, F. Casanova, L. E. Hueso, F. H. L. Koppens, R. Hillenbrand, Nat. Photonics

2016, 10, 239–243.

[40]
Z. G. Dai, G. W. Hu, G. Y. Si, Q. D. Ou, Q. Zhang, S. Balendhran, F. Rahman, B. Y.

Zhang, J. Z. Ou, G. G. Li, A. Alù, C.-W. Qiu, Q. L. Bao, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 6086.

[41]
Y. Wang, X. Du, J. Wang, M. Su, X. Wan, H. Meng, W. Xie, J. Xu, P. Liu, ACS Appl.

Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 5543–5549.


25

Keywords: Phonon polaritons, van der Waals crystals, nano-imaging, microstructures,
electromagnetic field localizations

Wuchao Huang, Fengsheng Sun, Zebo Zheng, Thomas G. Folland, Xuexian Chen, Huizhen
Liao, Ningsheng Xu, Joshua D. Caldwell, Huanjun Chen* & Shaozhi Deng*

Title Van der Waals phonon polariton microstructures for configurable infrared
electromagnetic field localizations

By taking advantage of the in-plane hyperbolic phonon polariton and spatial confinement
effects, we demonstrate the nanoscale tailoring of mid-infrared electromagnetic field
localizations in van der Waals α-MoO3 microstructures of different shapes and sizes. We
further show that orientation of the in-plane isofrequency curve relative to the microstructure
edge is a critical parameter governing the localized electromagnetic field distributions.


