1 

 

Ultrashort pulsed laser induced complex surface structures 

generated by tailoring the melt hydrodynamics 

F. Fraggelakis 1*, G. D. Tsibidis 1,2* and E. Stratakis 1,2*  

1 Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser (IESL), Foundation for Research and Technology (FORTH), N. Plastira 100,  

Vassilika Vouton, 70013, Heraklion, Crete, Greece  

2 Department of Physics, University of Crete, 71003 Heraklion, Greece 

Correspondence: fraggelakis@iesl.forth.gr, tsibidis@iesl.forth.gr, stratak@iesl.forth.gr 

 
Abstract: We present a novel approach for tailoring the laser induced surface topography upon femtosecond (fs) pulsed laser 

irradiation. The method employs spatially controlled double fs laser pulses to actively regulate the hydrodynamic microfluidic 

motion of the melted layer that gives rise to the structures formation. The pulse train used, in particular, consists of a previously 

unexplored spatiotemporal intensity combination including one pulse with Gaussian and another with periodically modulated 

intensity distribution created by Direct Laser Interference Patterning (DLIP). The interpulse delay is appropriately chosen to 

reveal the contribution of the microfluidic melt flow, while it is found that the sequence of the Gaussian and DLIP pulses 

remarkably influences the surface profile attained. Results also demonstrate that both the spatial intensity of the double pulse 

and the effective number of pulses per irradiation spot can further be modulated to control the formation of complex surface 

morphologies. The underlying physical processes behind the complex patterns’ generation were interpreted in terms of a 

multiscale model combining electron excitation with melt hydrodynamics. We believe that this work can constitute a significant 

step forward towards producing laser induced surface structures on demand by tailoring the melt microfluidic phenomena.  

1   Introduction 

During the past decades, materials’ micro and nano fabrication using ultrashort laser pulses have emerged as a key 

technology, which has contributed to major advances in science, technology and industry 1-6. Compared to expensive 

and time consuming techniques, such as photo- or electron beam-lithography 7, 8 that do not provide the necessary 

specificity and scalability for industrial applications, laser-based processing constitutes an efficient and precise 

technology to fabricate novel functional materials and devices 9, 10.   

Laser surface processing is a rapid and scalable chemical-free technique for surface functionalization that can be 

applied on almost any kind of material. Laser Induced Periodic Surface Structures (LIPSS) is the most common type 

of morphology that can be produced via irradiation of solids’ surfaces by Gaussian beams 1, 11. Depending on the 

laser wavelength, λL, used to fabricate LIPSS, their period Λ varies from (i) deep/shallow subwavelength (Λ <<λL/2), 

termed as High Spatial Frequency LIPSS (HSFL) 11, 12 to (ii) subwavelength (λL/2< Λ< ~λL), coined as Low Spatial 

Frequency LIPSS (LSFL) 13, 14, to (iii) suprawavelength (Λ>λL), called  grooves 15-18 or spikes 17, 19, as well as  other 

complex structures 20, 21. The formation mechanisms of both the LSFL and HSFL structures is attributed to a 


2 

 

spatially modulated deposition of the laser energy as a result of the interference of the incident beam and 

electromagnetic waves scattered on a rough surface in the far- and near-field respectively 1, 14, 22, 23.  

Apart from LIPSS formation, an alternative laser processing method, namely the Direct Laser Interference 

Patterning (DLIP), has recently been introduced to fabricate periodic structures on solid surfaces. DLIP is based on 

the use of two or more coherent laser beams that interfere and the resulting laser intensity profile irradiates the 

material to fabricate periodic structures on large areas 24-27. The imprinted pattern is determined by the angle, the 

number and the coherence of the interfering beams 28, 29. The capability to tailor the features of a surface topography 

by controlling the angle of incidence of the coherent beams offers the capability to form a broad range of surface 

structures for potential applications 24-27. Nonetheless, despite the ongoing research and investigation of the various 

surface patterns, a quantitative analysis of the underlying physical mechanisms behind the DLIP structures’ 

formation is still missing. In some recent works, the role of the induced thermal effects has been investigated 30, 31. 

Recently, we have introduced a multiscale theoretical model taking into account the impact of the microfluidic 

factor as well to interpret the DLIP pattern formation upon double pulse irradiation (DPI) 32. Theoretical simulations 

of the periodic patterns formed by two- and four-beam DLIP double pulses, confirmed by experiments, demonstrate 

the significant role of melt hydrodynamics in the surface structuring process 32.  

Despite the significant progress to date, the desired level of control of laser induced structures’ characteristics 

including symmetry, size and hierarchical features formation is far from being accomplished. LSFL and HSFL with 

multiple axis of symmetry have been only reported as a result of polarisation modification or DPI 19, 21. Matching the 

extraordinary variety of structures and functionalities found in nature requires an in-depth understanding of the 

formation mechanism along with developing the suitable irradiation techniques. 

Given the impact of the intensity profile and polarisation in the produced structures, it would be crucial to explore 

whether appropriate control of the spatiotemporal energy deposition profile would lead to more complex surface 

morphologies with enhanced application-based functionalities. To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has 

been conducted on the investigation of the type of topographies that can be produced if double pulses of different 

spatial intensity are used. In principle, double pulses of Gaussian 33, 34 or DLIP 32 shapes have been previously 

reported, however the combined effect of Gaussian and DLIP profiles should be important to explore. As pointed 

out above, the Gaussian beam leads to the formation of LSFL structures, while DLIP yields morphologies that 

depend on the angle between the coherent beams and the polarisation. Therefore, a thorough investigation of the 

combined effect of such pulses and inter-pulse delay on surface structures’ formation would be important to study. 

Of further importance is the investigation of the resultant microfluidic movement derived from the phase transition 

caused under laser irradiation. The application of delayed pulses is crucial to reveal the impact of melt flow, 

considering that sufficient time is required for hydrodynamical effects to dominate, prior to the action of the second 

pulse that arrives at the materials’ surface and influences the melt flow. For this purpose, the pulse separation here is 

kept on the order of ~500 ps, which has been proven to be suitable to highlight the role of the melt microfluidic 

movement 35.  


3 

 

2   Experimental and simulation protocols 

a. 
Laser processing 

In the experiments, we utilize a DPI irradiation scheme employing two temporally delayed fs pulses with different 

intensity distribution. Namely, a pulse with Gaussian distribution (Figure 1-III, indicated as G) is combined with a 

pulse with a 1D or 2D intensity distribution produced by DLIP ( Figure 1-III, indicated as V, H or D). For the 

experiments, fs pulses, emitted by a Pharos (Light Conversion) laser source with duration of τp ≅ 170 fs at a 

wavelength λL = 1026 nm have been used. As shown in Figure 1 a delay line is built to generate double pulses. In 

particular, the primary pulse is initially divided into two pulses with perpendicular polarisation orientation by a 

polarizing beam splitter. The energy distribution between the pulses is regulated by a half waveplate (HWP) placed 

before the polarizing beam splitter (PB). The two generated pulses pass through the arms A and B corresponding to 

optical paths that differ by 150 ± 1 mm acquiring an interpulse delay of Δτ = 500 ± 3 ps. The two pulses are guided 

to a computer controlled programmable Spatial Light Modulator (SLM) and via a suitable optical system, 

comprising two lenses, and interfere onto the sample. The two focusing lenses f1 = 400 mm and f2 = 30 mm are 

placed on the appropriate distances recombine the beams on the sample giving a spot diameter of 190 μm radius 

(2w). The working principle of the SLM screen is described in Figure 1 (I). Although the s-polarized pulse is 

reflected from the SLM and maintains its Gaussian shape (Figure 1, G), the p-polarized one interacts with the SLM 

screen and is divided into two or four beams acquiring on the sample a profile comprising vertical (Figure 1, V), or 

horizontal (Figure 1, H) lines, or a periodic array of dots ( Figure 1, D). The periods of DLIP patterns used, ΛDLIP, 

were comparable to the laser wavelength. Owing to a rotating HWP placed before the DLIP part, the initial order of 

the s- and p- pulse can be inverted enabling one to control whether the Gaussian or the DLIP pulse reaches the 

sample first. The total energy, Etot, for the pair of pulses, the total number of irradiation shots, NP, as well as the 

order of the pulses was varied, as indicated in the experimental section. The energy distribution was 2/3 of Etot for 

the Gaussian and 1/3 Etot for the DLIP pulse respectively, tuned to maintain a similar effective fluence in the 

Figure 1.Left: Experimental Setup. Abbreviations: Half-Wave Plate (HWP), Linear Polarizing Cube (LPC), Beam Splitter (BS), 
Spatial Light Modulator (SLM), focusing lenses (f1,f2); Right: SLM function (I); Spot profile distribution at the sample: Gaussian 
(G) and DLIP (V, H, D) profiles. The red arrow indicates the polarisation vector (III). 


4 

 

irradiated areas. NP was varied in the range of 10 and 500 pulses. Images of the processed surfaces were acquired 

via Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) microscopy, while a Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) was performed to 

calculate the periodicities of the induced structures, through the use of the open source software Gwyddion. For all 

the experiments, mirror polished commercially available 316-stainless steel (provided by RS) substrates have been 

used. 

b. 
Theoretical model 

 
DLIP Intensity profiles 

DLIP is based on the superposition of the electric field vectors of coherent beams. The electric field of a light wave 

n is equal to  𝐸⃑ 𝑛 = 𝐴𝑛𝑝 𝑛𝑒𝑖(𝜔𝑡−𝑘⃑ 𝑛⋅𝑟 ) where 𝐴𝑛 is the amplitude, 𝑝 𝑛 is the polarisation vector, 𝑘⃑ 𝑛  (i.e. |𝑘⃑ 𝑛| ≡ 𝑘 =

2𝜋

𝜆𝐿) 

stands for the wavevector, 𝑟  is the position vector, ω is the angular frequency, and t is the time. It is noted that the 

resulting interference pattern for N beams is calculated through the expression 𝐸⃑ 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = ∑
𝐸⃑ 𝑛

𝑁
𝑛=1
. Each laser beam 

irradiates the material at an incident angle with the vertical axis equal to 𝜃𝑛 and azimuthal angle 𝜑𝑛. It is assumed 

that all laser beams are linearly polarised and the polarisation direction is the same for all DLIP beams (i.e. 

perpendicular to that of the Gaussian). The total spatial intensity distribution is, then, provided by the formula 

𝐼0 =c𝜀0|𝐸⃑ 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙| 2/2, where c and 𝜀0 stand for the speed of light and dielectric vacuum permittivity, respectively. For 

interference with two (𝜑1= 𝜑2=0, and 𝜃1 = 𝜃2 = 𝜃) and four beams (𝜑1= 𝜑2=0, 𝜑3= 𝜑4=π/2, 𝜃1 = 𝜃2 = 𝜃3 = 𝜃4 =

𝜃), the following total intensities are 𝐼0

(2) and 𝐼0

(4) on the surface of the material, respectively (by calculating the 

Poynting vector and by taking the average value 〈𝐼0〉 over the laser period 𝜆𝐿/𝑐) 

𝐼0

(2)
=
𝐼1[1 + 𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑘𝑥𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃)]

𝐼0

(4)
=
𝐼1 {[1 +

1

2 𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑘𝑥𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃) +

1

2 𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝑘𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃) + 2𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑘𝑥𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃)𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑘𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃)]}

  
 
(1) 

, where I1 is the intensity of each of the constituent laser beams of the DLIP in which a Gaussian envelope is 

included (~𝑒

−2(𝑥2+𝑦2

𝑅02
)
) with an e-2 Gaussian spot radius equal to R0; similarly, I1 includes the Gaussian distribution 

in time, 𝑒

−4ln (2)(

(𝑡−3𝜏𝑝)2

𝜏𝑝2
)
. It is noted that a Cartesian coordinate system is used (x,y,z). It is evident that the choice of 

𝜃𝑛 can be used to define the periodicities of the interference pattern. More specifically, for two-beam DLIP, a 

sinusoidal (of periodicity equal to Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 =

𝜆𝐿

(2𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃) along x-axis) or for a four-beam DLIP, a dot-type intensity 

distribution (of periodicity equal to Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 =

𝜆𝐿

(𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃) along x-axis and y-axis and a secondary Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 =

1

√2

𝜆𝐿

(𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃) along 

the direction defined by 𝑥̂+𝑦̂ (𝑥̂, 𝑦̂ are unit vectors) are derived as illustrated in Figure 1. 

 

Modelling of laser-matter interaction 


5 

 

To simulate the surface modification processes and reveal the impact of excitation levels and hydrodynamical 

effects following irradiation with fs pulses, a multiscale description of the underlying physical mechanisms is 

required to account for the response of the material. Given that the intensity profile changes spatially with the 

combination of temporarily separated Gaussian and DLIP pulses, a detailed investigation of the excitation, 

relaxation processes and propagation of the produced hydrothermal waves can be performed through a theoretical 

framework that comprises modules that model the processes in various temporal regimes. A detailed description of 

the theoretical model that simulates the physical mechanisms that characterize irradiation of stainless steel with 

DLIP pulses is presented in Ref. 32. In that report, the thermophysical properties and optical parameters of the 

material are also provided.  

In summary, a three-dimensional Two Temperature Model (TTM) represents the standard theoretical framework to 

investigate laser-matter interaction and the energy transfer between the electron and lattice subsystems 

𝐶𝑒

𝜕𝑇𝑒
𝜕𝑡
=
∇⃑⃑ (𝑘𝑒∇⃑⃑ 𝑇𝑒) − 𝑔(𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝐿) + 𝑊

𝐶𝐿

𝜕𝑇𝐿
𝜕𝑡
=
∇⃑⃑ (𝑘𝐿∇⃑⃑ 𝑇𝐿) + 𝑔(𝑇𝑒 − 𝑇𝐿)

  
  
    
 
 
 
(2) 

where 𝐶𝑒 and 𝐶𝐿 are the heat capacities of the electron and lattice subsystems, respectively while 𝑇𝑒 and 𝑇𝐿 are the 

temperatures of the two systems. By contrast, 𝑘𝑒 (𝑘𝐿~0.01 𝑘𝑒) stand for the electron (lattice) conductivity, 𝑔 is the 

electron-phonon coupling parameter while W corresponds to the absorbed laser power density that is related to the 

laser intensity. It is noted that the wavelength of all laser beams is equal to λL=1026 nm. As the laser intensity 

comprises two (temporarily separated with a delay Δτ) pulses, W includes the variation of the total intensity of the 

laser beam (i.e. αΙtotal, where α is the absorption coefficient of the material at λL=1026 nm). Due to the presence of 

two pulses, one Gaussian and one DLIP (with either two or four beams), the total laser intensity on the material 

surface is provided from the following expression (see derivation in the Supplementary Material) 

𝐼𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑡, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒) = [𝑃1𝑒

−4 ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝− 𝐺1𝛥𝜏 

𝜏𝑝
)

2

+ 𝑃2𝑒

−4ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝−𝐺2𝛥𝜏 

𝜏𝑝
)

2
]       
 
(3) 

, where τp is the pulse duration of each laser beam and P1 and P2 are the two temporarily separated36 pulses with a Δτ 

sdelay. With respect to the laser beams: (i) the Gaussian beam irradiates the material first if G1=1, G2=0, otherwise, 

G1=0, G2=1 if the DLIP irradiation comes first, (ii) P1 (or P2) is the (spatial) profile of the Gaussian (or the DLIP) 

beam. More specifically, for the DLIP beam, P2= 𝐼0

(2), 𝐼0

(4) which depends on the number of beams that comprise the 

total beam. In the experiments performed in this work, the total laser energy Etot that is distributed in the system is 

split into two parts, 2/3 Etot are provided from the Gaussian beam while the rest is attributed to the DLIP beam.  

It is noted that the values of the energy per pulse used in the experiments (i.e. 40 μJ, 60 μJ, 80 μJ) are found, by the 

simulations, to result to mass removal (i.e. ablation) 32. To account for the experimental results and considering that 

mass removal is observed to be minimal in the experiments, all simulations have been carried out using lower 

energy values of the order of ~25 μJ. 


6 

 

 

 

It is emphasised that special attention is required to determine the impact of the (absorbed) laser energy given that 

the pulse separation in the double pulse experiment (Δτ =500 ps) indicates that the second pulse irradiates a material, 

which is in its molten phase. Results for the maximum lattice temperature 𝑇𝐿

𝑚𝑎𝑥 evolution with time at various 

depths are illustrated in Figure 2 following irradiation of a flat surface with Etot=25 μJ for G1=1, G2=0 (Figure 2A) 

and G1=0, G2=1 (Figure 2B); results show that this energy value leads to a phase change in the second case. 

Interestingly, when the Gaussian pulse irradiates the material first, the impact of the second pulse leads also to 

minimal mass removal that is simulated with the removal of material lattice points with temperatures higher than 

0.9Tcr [Tcr stands for the thermodynamic critical temperature which for stainless steel is ~8500 Κ] 32, 37, 38 (Figure 

2C). Although the volume of the ablated material is minimal at Etot =25 μJ, a substantially larger ablation is 

predicted at higher energies (results are not shown).  

Interestingly, both the values and evolution of 𝑇𝐿

𝑚𝑎𝑥 are dependent on which pulse irradiates the material first, since 

the energies of the two pulses are different (Figure 2C). Furthermore, the material response is related to what phase 

the material is in at the time of irradiation; more specifically, it is shown that if the second pulse irradiates a molten 

volume, a significant reflectivity variation 32 leads to a distinct thermal response of the material causing different: (i) 

absorption levels produced by the sequence of the double pulses and (ii) temperature gradients. The evolution of 

𝑇𝐿

𝑚𝑎𝑥, illustrated in Figure 2C is calculated for a flat surface. Although such 𝑇𝐿

𝑚𝑎𝑥 evolutions illustrate the thermal 

response of the system for NP=1, similar conclusions are also deduced for non-flat profiles. 

On the other hand, to interpret the induced surface modification, the development and evolution of hydrothermal 

waves and the dynamics of the produced fluid movement as a result for the phase transformation is mathematically 

described by the Navier-Stokes equations (NSE) 36 

𝜌0 (

𝜕𝑢⃑⃑ 

𝜕𝑡 + 𝑢⃑ ∙ ∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ ) = ∇⃑⃑ ∙ (−𝑃𝟏 + 𝜇(∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ ) + 𝜇(∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ )

𝑇) 
 
  
 
 
 
(4) 

where 𝜇 and 𝜌0 stand for the viscosity and density, respectively, of the molten (uncompressed) material, while P and 

𝑢⃑  are the pressure and velocity of the fluid and superscript T denotes the transpose of the vector ∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ , and 1 is a 3×3 

Figure 2: 𝑇𝐿

𝑚𝑎𝑥 evolution at different depths for (A) G1=1, G2=0 and (B) G1=0, P2=1, after irradiating a flat profile (NP=1) with 

E=25 μJ, Δτ =500 ps.; (c) 𝑇𝐿

𝑚𝑎𝑥 on the sample surface as a function of time in the cases shown in A and B.


7 

 

identity matrix. It is noted that velocity gradient tensor is a 3×3 matrix (∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ )𝑖𝑗 =

𝜕𝑢𝑖
𝜕𝑥𝑗 (see Ref [36] and 

Supplementary Material) where (u,v,w) are the components of 𝑢⃑  in Cartesian coordinates (x,y,z) The solution of NSE 

is conducted through the employment of appropriate thermocapillary boundary conditions. More specifically, to 

describe the Marangoni flow, a shear stress balance on the free surface is described by the equation 

𝜕𝑢𝜏
𝜕𝑛 = −

1

𝜇

𝜕𝜎

𝜕𝑇𝐿

𝜕𝑇𝐿
𝜕𝜏  

at the liquid free surface where 𝑢𝑇 corresponds to the component of the velocity on the surface tangent direction τ 

while n indicates the component normal to the free surface. This expression turns into two equations for NP=1 (i.e. 

flat surface): 

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑧 = −

1

𝜇

𝜕𝜎

𝜕𝑇𝐿

𝜕𝑇𝐿

𝜕𝑥  and 

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑧 = −

1

𝜇

𝜕𝜎

𝜕𝑇𝐿

𝜕𝑇𝐿

𝜕𝑦 .  In Eq.4, σ stands for the surface tension of the material (see 32 for 

parameter values and for a more detailed description of the fluid dynamics module). As discussed in previous 

reports 14, 32, 39, inhomogeneous energy deposition leads to the development of Marangoni effects (i.e. surface 

tension-driven molten material flow) and displacement of material from regions of high to low temperatures. In 

addition, it is assumed that non-slipping conditions (𝑢⃑ = 0) are applied on the interface between solid-and liquid 

interface. Finally, the molten material is considered to be an incompressible fluid (∇⃑⃑ ∙ 𝑢⃑ = 0). To simulate the fluid 

movement and dynamics of the molten material, the affected region has been divided in two subregions, one that 

contains a material in solid phase and another in liquid phase. The hydrodynamic equations are solved in both 

regions. To include the ‘hydrodynamic’ effect of the solid domain, material in the solid phase is modelled as an 

extremely viscous liquid (μsolid=105 μ), which will result into velocity fields that are infinitesimally small. An 

apparent viscosity is then defined with a smooth switch function of Gaussian form to emulate the step of viscosity at 

the melting temperature 14. A moving boundary for the two phases (solid-liquid interface) is based on position of the 

isothermal TL=Tmelting, where Tmelting stands for the melting point of the material. 

As the theoretical model aims to describe both the thermal response and dynamics of the molten material that leads 

eventually to morphological changes, topography variations should be considered due to consecutive irradiation as a 

result of increasing the energy dose. Therefore, apart from the aforementioned boundary conditions used to solve 

NSE (i.e. shear stress balance on a free but nonflat surface), appropriate conditions need to be introduced for the 

electron and lattice temperatures. More specifically, negligible heat loss from the free surface should be considered 

while it is also assumed that at large distances from the affected region both the electron and lattice temperatures are 

~300 K. Special attention is required to evaluate the lattice temperature resulting from multiple irradiations. While 

the initial conditions for the velocity and lattice/electron temperatures before the delayed pulse irradiates the 

material are determined from the combined solution of NSE and TTM at the moment the second pulse heats the 

material, it is assumed that every consecutive double pulse in the train always irradiates a material at room 

temperature.      

Results and discussion 

A. Single pulse irradiation 

The morphology obtained following irradiation with trains of single pulses are illustrated in Figure 3, assuming 

various intensity profile types: Gaussian distribution (G), vertical DLIP (V), horizontal DLIP (H) and a DLIP profile 


8 

 

produced with four beams (D) (Figure 3A). Different pulse energies were used for the Gaussian and the DLIP 

distribution in order to maintain similar effective fluence value on the irradiated areas; the energy per pulse is 80 μJ 

for G, and 57 μJ for V, H and D. The total number of pulses is NP = 50 in all cases. For the Gaussian distribution 

subwavelength LSFL are formed throughout the irradiated area with orientation perpendicular to the laser beam 

polarisation (Figure 3B) as reported in previous works 1, 14, 40. For the vertical DLIP some small corrugation has been 

observed in-between the DLIP pattern (Figure 3, V). The type of the additional corrugation is dependent on the 

DLIP periodicity. More specifically, small protrusions inside the crater are produced if the DLIP periodicity is 

comparable to λL, otherwise, LIPSS are formed for Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 > ~2 λL 32. The formation of these structures have been 

reported in a previous work 32. On the other hand, for the horizontal DLIP, LIPSS are formed unperturbed among 

the DLIP grooves (Figure 3, H). It is possible that a surface plasmon wave-assisted mechanism is capable to explain 

the fabrication mechanism of those structures, however, further investigation is required [27]. Finally, for a four 

beam-based DLIP, formation of ripples inside holes produced in regions of high intensity is observed 32 (Figure 3, 

D). 

The FFT diagrams corresponding to the aforementioned topographies are illustrated in Figure 3C. In these FFT 

images, the spatial frequency values of LSFL structures correspond to the green dotted circles, while those of DLIP 

structures to the blue ones. More specifically, for G, the calculated LIPSS periodicity is equal to ~818 ± 7 nm. On 

the other hand, for V, the competition between DLIP and the impact of G leads to a more complex profile that is 

indicated by the presence of an additional protrusion corresponding to a larger periodicity As a result, the period of 

the DLIP, for V, is ΛDLIP  = 1660 ± 4 nm marked with blue circles in the corresponding FFT diagram. In the case of 

Figure 3: A: Spot intensity distribution; B: SEM images of processed surface; C: Fourier transform diagrams, produced by trains 
of single pulses. The total number of pulses is NP = 50, the energy per pulse is Etot = 80 μJ for G, and Etot = 57 μJ for the DLIP 
distribution V, H and D. The red arrow in A indicates the polarisation direction.


9 

 

H, the LSFL formation is not disturbed by the DLIP pattern due to the configuration of the polarisation with the 

DLIP. Results indicate that the induced LSFL have a period of 907 ± 15 nm for ΛDLIP  = 1666 ± 5 nm. The areas 

corresponding to LSFL frequencies are marked in the FFT diagram, nonetheless the zone does not feature a clear 

peak, compared to the other cases, due to the fact that ripples formation occurs only inside the DLIP groove. In the 

case of D, the period obtained from the FFT diagram in the horizontal and vertical axes are ΛDLIP  = 3230 ± 100 nm 

and ΛDLIP  = 3114 ± 60 nm, respectively, which is equivalent to the distance between the craters. Finally, the period 

of the LIPSS formed inside the craters is measured to be equal to 818 ± 20 nm, (i.e. similar to that of the G beam).  

B. Combining a Gaussian with a DLIP pulse in DPI 

In this section the result of irradiation of stainless steel with two subsequent pulses, each having a Gaussian or DLIP 

profile is investigated both experimentally and theoretically. The experimental results together with theoretical 

simulations are shown in Figure 4, where the order of the pulses is varied as indicated. The interpulse delay was 

always Δτ = 500 ps, while the total energy per pair of pulses was Etot = 80 μJ and NP = 50. The label of each figure 

indicates the type of the distribution and the order of the pulses; for example, “G↕+D↔” in Figure 4E corresponds 

to a morphology that was obtained after irradiation of the sample with 50 double pulses where the Gaussian pulse 

precedes while the second 2D DLIP pulse irradiates the material after 500 ps. To account for the induced 

topography, a parametric study has been performed to describe both the interpulse and the intrapulse surface 

modification and how a corrugated profile influences the energy absorption and thermal response of the irradiated 

material 14, 32. Theoretical predictions for the induced structures are derived in all cases and compared with the 

experimental findings for the laser conditions used. At the same time, appropriate experimental protocols were 

applied, aimed to emphasise the role of hydrodynamic melt flow due to the cumulative action of the two pulses. All 

the results obtained for double pulses at the different sequences tested, i.e. G+V, V+G, G+H, H+G, G+D, D+G are 

presented in Figure 4 and discussed below. It should be noted that the size of the arrows in the third and fourth 

columns of Figure 4 present an estimate of the magnitude of the speed of the material flow at each spatial point; 

these results are derived from the solution of the Navier-Stokes equations providing the dynamics of the molten 

material at those time points and constitute a guide to eye. A more detailed and accurate representation is presented 

in Section D, in which the spatial distribution of the magnitude and direction of the calculated fluid velocity vectors 

are illustrated for a representative, G+V, case. Simulation results for the rest of the irradiation schemes applied are 

provided in the supplementary material. Surface patterns illustrated in the fifth column of Fig.4 depict contour plots 

that indicate the depth variation for NP = 50 (see also Supplementary Material). The maximum depth attained for the 

pattern is ~230 nm. 

 

(i) 
G+V and V+G 

Experimental results illustrate (Figure 4) that the G+V combination leads to the formation of LSFL structures that 

are affected from the impact of the DLIP pulse on the irradiated area. In particular, LIPSS originating from G, with 

ΛLIPSS  = 946 ± 17 nm, and DLIP structures from the V, with ΛDLIP  = 1700 ± 55 nm, pulse smoothly overlap. 

Theoretical predictions show that when the V pulse (i.e. Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 = 1700 nm, for θ=180) irradiates the material after 

Δτ, LIPSS that have been produced from the Gaussian pulse G are not destroyed from V in the region where the 


10 

 

DLIP intensity is low; by contrast, shallow ripples are formed along the region where the intensity of V is higher. To 

explain the produced topography, a theoretical investigation is conducted to evaluate the role of electrodynamics, 

thermal effects and fluid dynamics that yield those particular morphological features. As the increase of NP affects 

the morphology, a feedback mechanism is incorporated into the model to derive the absorbed energy and response 

of the material. To evaluate the influence of the second beam (Figure 4), the lattice temperature on the transverse 

plane (i.e. x-y plane) is illustrated at time t=490 ps and at t=520 ps (third and fourth column images in Figure 4A, 

respectively), for NP=50. Simulations indicate that there are regions in which sufficiently high values of laser 

energy is absorbed along the wells of the rippled zone that leads to phase transition and therefore, V irradiates 

predominantly a molten material. The Gaussian beam dictates the development of the horizontally orientated ripples 

through the excitation of surface plasmons and the frequency of LIPSS is determined by the effect of the 

interference of SP with the incident beam 41. For NP=50, the LIPSS periodicity is calculated to be equal to 

ΛLIPSS~915 nm that is comparable to the experimental value 𝛬𝐿𝐼𝑃𝑆𝑆

𝑒𝑥𝑝 =946 ± 17 nm. What is also observed is that 

relaxation processes and temperature gradients of the induced molten material lead to melt movement away from the 

valleys of the rippled zone and always along the (i.e. at t=490 ps). On the other hand, the V pulse increases the 

temperature at locations on the topography where the energy deposition from the DLIP is higher (i.e. at t=520 ps). 

As a result of the enhanced temperature gradient along the x-axis, melt movement occurs, indicated by respective 

vectors in the temperature profiles presented in Figure 4B. The combined effect leads to the formation of depressed 

zones at the valleys of the ripples (depicted by ‘darker regions’ of high temperatures in Figure 4) and to a periodic 

topography that agrees with the experimental results (see left column in Figure 4)). A more precise illustration of the 

hydrothermal melt movement at each point in a particular region that illustrates the effect of the hydrodynamical 

process is presented in the Supplementary material.  In a V+G scheme, the DLIP (Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 = 1700 nm) first irradiates 

the material surface; as a result, in locations where the DLIP intensity is higher, the enhanced energy absorption 

influences the response of the material when the Gaussian beam arrives with a delay of 500 ps. In that case, the main 

pattern observed is the DLIP with period of ΛDLIP  = 1701 ± 9 nm. Moreover, on top of the DLIP grooves, dots that 

originate from a spatially modulated periodic energy absorption, induced from the Gaussian beam, lead to ‘dot-like’ 

periodic structures of period equal to ΛLIPPS  = 885 ± 32 nm. More specifically, G first excites charge carriers and 

subsequently, through relaxation, the temperature rises in the regions among the DLIP intensity maxima, i.e. the 

DLIP valleys, as surface depression will take place there due to hydrothermal melt movement. At the same time, the 

induced surface plasmon excitation in the region outside such valleys and coupling with the incident radiation leads 

again to inhomogeneous energy deposition. 

As a result of the temperature gradients induced within the molten material the melt is pushed away from the DLIP 

valleys along the x-axis (shown for t=490 ps in Figure 4B). On the other hand, the G pulse increases the temperature 

outside the DLIP valleys driving the produced hydrothermal waves along the y-axis (shown for t=520 ps in Figure 

4B). The combined effect of the above phenomena gives rise to the formation of surface patterns that comply well 

with the experimental observations (Figure 4B). The theoretical prediction of the period of LIPSS is estimated to be 

~890 nm that is similar to the experimentally measured value of ~885 ± 32 nm.  


11 

 

To emphasise the special role of hydrothermal movement and provide a more detailed picture of the impact of the 

induced hydrothermal waves, the melt fluid velocity vectors at every lattice point in a region ~3x3 μm2 are 

illustrated for G+V at 490 ps and 520 ps respectively (Figure 4). These vectors present an estimate of the magnitude 

of the speed of the material flow at each spatial point, providing the dynamics of the molten material at those time 

points.  


12 

 

 

Figure 4: SEM images of the double pulse irradiation schemes used (1st column) together with the respective FFT analyses (2nd

column) and simulation results (columns 3-5). The pulse profile and the order are indicated in the legends of the 1st column, 
while the superscript arrows indicate the pulse polarization in each case. The total energy of the double pulse pair is 80 μJ/pulse 
and NP = 50 pulses. Simulation results are shown in each case, just before (3rd column, Δτ = 490 ps) and right after (4th column, 
Δτ = 520 ps) the arrival of the second pulse. The final morphology predicted by the simulation experiment is shown in the 5th

column (contour plots to illustrate the height). The arrows in the 3rd and 4th column provide a guide to eye representation of the 
fluid transport direction. The color bars at the bottom of the figure provide the temperature (3rd and 4th columns) and height (5th

column) values range.


13 

 

 

(ii) G+H and H+G 

In the case of a double pulse experiment in which the contributing pulses to the DLIP yield an interference pattern 

parallel to the x-axis, the impact of the DLIP pulse leads to a different surface topography.  More specifically, as in 

the G+V case, it is expected that the first pulse (G) excites surface plasmons and leads to subwavelength LIPSS 

oriented perpendicularly to the laser polarisation that will lead to a rippled profile. Nonetheless, analysis of the 

experimental results indicate that only one ripple frequency is observed, that of the DLIP, with a period of ΛDLIP  = 

1630 ± 14 nm. In Figure 4C, the respective temperature profile at t=490 ps is illustrated, i.e. before the arrival of the 

H pulse onto the hot material. Upon the incidence of the H pulse (i.e. t=520 ps in Figure 4C), the temperature in the 

valleys of the periodic regions formed by G will further rise above that attained with the initial DLIP pulse. As 

shown by the respective simulations shown in the same figure, hydrodynamical movement drives the melt flow 

parallel to the y-axis before solidification, giving rise to a topography formation that closely resembles the 

experimental one. It should be noted that Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 is a multiple of the predicted LIPSS period (ΛLIPSS~850 nm) and 

therefore there is no overlap between the patterns produced from the combined effect of G and H.  

A different profile is induced for the H+G pulse sequence (Figure 4D). In that case, the DLIP pulse leads to the 

formation of long stripes (tops and valleys) periodically situated at distances defined by Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃, however, the 

polarisation beam direction of the DLIP pulse (along the x-axis) yields excitation of surface plasmon waves of ~880 

nm periodicity and hydrothermal waves that propagate along the x-axis. Similar structures have been observed and 

interpreted in a previous report 32. On the other hand, irradiation with a G pulse with a 500 ps delay, enable 

excitation of surface plasmon along the y-axis, with hydrothermal waves propagating along this axis, as well and 

yielding LIPSS parallel to the x-axis. As noted in the previous paragraph, the fact that the Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 is a multiple of the 

predicted period of the LIPSS, produced from G, leads to surface patterns similar to experimental results (Figure 

4D). By contrast, a different relation between the periodicity due to the Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 and G would lead to a distinctly 

different profile with a substantial overlapping of the respective periodicities. In Figure 4D, the temperature profile 

and melt movement are illustrated at t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively. According to the simulation results, 

vertical ripples produced by H are much more pronounced in H+G case because the melt flow is already developed 

upon arrival of G, in contrast to the G+H pulse sequence case. 

(iii) G+D and  D+G 

Interesting morphologies are obtained when a combined G plus a D pulse with Λ𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 =3100 nm is used (Figure 4E). 

Theoretical results indicate that the action of the G beam leads to an expected surface plasmon excitation and 

hydrothermal waves, while the D pulse increases further the temperature at points where the DLIP intensity is high.  

Thus, a periodic profile is produced (Λ𝐿𝐼𝑃𝑆𝑆 =  824 ±  46 nm) with the ripples oriented parallel to the x-axis that 

are interrupted with periodically situated subsided regions due to the impact of the D pulse (Figure 4E). The latter 

regions exhibit the ripple periodicity attained by G. The respective simulated temperature profile as well as the 


14 

 

propagation of the induced hydrothermal waves are presented in Figure 4D for t=490 ps and t=520 ps respectively, 

for NP=50. 

By contrast, when D precedes the irradiation to G, a quite different profile, comprising high-aspect ratio asperities, is 

obtained. The horizontal spacing among those structures is 3163 ± 55 nm, while the vertical one is 3072 ± 67 nm, 

coinciding with the distance between the craters in the D case of Figure 3. Among the peaks, traces of LIPSS with a 

period in the range of 620-720 nm are observed both in horizontal as well as in vertical direction. More specifically, 

the intensity profile of D (Figure 2) leads to a temperature rise in the locations where the energy deposition is high. 

Furthermore, repetitive irradiation with D (at NP>2) will enable excitation of surface plasmons and the subsequent 

formation of ripples oriented parallel to y-axis. Following irradiation with the G pulse, i.e 500 ps after the impact of 

the first pulse, the material in the region which is not affected by the D pulse will be excited and surface plasmon 

waves, before leading to a rippled periodic pattern similar to the one observed in SEM images (Figure 4F). The 

respective temperature profile and hydrothermal melt movement at t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively, are 

illustrated in Figure 4F. 

To summarise, the experimental observations and simulations indicate the following: comparing G+V and V+G, 

LIPSS originating from G are more pronounced when G comes first. Comparing G+H and H+G, LIPSS resulting 

from the action of H are observed only in the case that H irradiates the material first. Similarly, for G+D and D+G, 

LIPSS are more pronounced when the G precedes the action of D. LIPSS are always formed perpendicular to the 

polarisation of the first pulse. In addition, the above discussion shows that promotion of SP excitation-based 

mechanisms for the formation of LIPSS are influenced a lot on the following: (i) G always leads to excitation of SP 

waves, (ii) the DLIP polarisation and periodicity (as also shown in Ref.[32])account on whether SP excitation is 

possible or fluid transport will determine surface pattern formation, (iii) The order of irradiation with Gaussian and 

DLIP pulses can impact on the conditions for periodic structure formation through SP excitation or fluid movement 

along prepatterned topographies. 

 

C. Generation of complex patterns  

In the previous sections, the effect of different pulse intensity profiles and pulse sequences was investigated and 

evaluated. It is evident that the spatio-temporal intensity distribution significantly influences the hydrothermal melt 

waves and the subsequent superposition of fluid transport derived from each pulse separately. It was shown that the 

combined effect of different intensity profiles predominantly influences the behaviour of the produced molten 

material through variation of its vorticity; this effect has proven to influence the final topography attained, giving 

rise to patterns of higher geometrical complexity. Two parameters that are expected to tune the surface morphology 

are the laser energy and the number of pulses; the increase of both parameters leads to higher temperature gradients 

and therefore to large vorticity changes. A characteristic example of the evolution of surface topography upon 

increasing NP at specific pulse energy is presented in Figure 5 (rows), for the D+G pulse sequence.  


15 

 

Results demonstrate the pronounced influence of the first pulse in the sequence in the feedback mechanism, while 

each subsequent dose of the series enhances the depth of the induced topography. Similar results (not shown here) 

are derived for the rest of the pulse sequences. On top of that, the role of hydrothermal phenomena and the impact of 

the topography in the produced temperature gradients that lead to a dynamic evolution of the surface patterns at 

increasing dose, are very critical. Simulation results indicate that deeper profiles promote larger energy deposition 

locally that influences the melt movement.  

In Figure 5 indicative results on the combined effect of pulse energy and energy dose (ΝP) on the induced 

topography, upon irradiation with the D+G sequence, are also shown. Notably, significant variations in the surface 

morphology attained, is observed, and an ensemble of complex structures can be realized. In particular, for Etot = 80 

μJ and for low NP random LIPSS structures are formed, while the fingerprint of the DLIP pattern becomes evident 

at elevated NP. Similarly, for Etot = 60 μJ and NP = 10, the DLIP undulation is not visible and the surface comprised 

LIPSS patterns oriented in different directions. For low NP, neighbouring ripples create square patterns, while at the 

higher NP=20 a supra-wavelength morphology resulting from DLIP takes place. Further irradiation (e.g. NP=50) 

reveals the impact of the DLIP, as the DLIP pattern is clearly visible on the surface surrounded by dotted structures 

(see also Figure 5). Finally, at even lower energies (Etot = 40 μJ and NP = 50), LIPSS-like complex structures, 

resulting from the combined effect of the two pulses, become present. These results indicate that hydrothermal 

waves possibly coupled with mass removal effects should be the predominant factors that explain the induced 

topography. Comparing the three images of high magnification (Figure 5, zoomed region for NP=50) the impact of 

fluence in the generation of high-complexity structures, is unveiled. When the fluence is low and close the ripple 

formation threshold (Etot = 40 μJ) ripples are only formed in perpendicular directions due to DPI. When the fluence 

is higher (Etot = 60 μJ) the temperature gradient applied by the DLIP pattern is strong enough to displace material 

and form valleys. Blue arrows indicate the trajectory of the flow and the orange dotted circle the area that the 

material is accumulated. In even higher pulse energy (Etot = 80 μJ) the temperature gradient is stronger, and the 

volume of the displaced material is higher (blue arrows in Figure 5, zoomed region for NP=50 and at 80 μJ). In that 

case the displaced material is accumulated away from the areas irradiated with higher intensity and forms the 

observed protrusions marked by the orange dotted circle.  Simulations have been performed for Etot = 20 μJ to 

illustrate the topographies attained at low energies and the role of hydrothermal phenomena. Results show that the 

ultrafast dynamics and the induced hydrothermal effects lead to a different surface profile than the one produced for 

25 μJ (shown in 4). More specifically, lower energies produce smaller temperature gradients therefore the 

fingerprint of either D or G pulses will be more pronounced.   


16 

 

  

The ability to simultaneously control the two key structure formation mechanisms, namely the inhomogeneous 

absorption and the microfluidic melt motion, offers potentially endless possibilities in controlling laser induced 

morphology in the submicron scale. Apart from the complex structures presented above, in the following we show 

that suitable combination of DPI parameters enable the formation of hierarchical complex structures as well, which 

in some cases are similar to those observed in natural systems 42). 

For example, Figure 6 presents the generation of a multiple-length-scale morphology upon irradiation with Etot = 70 

μJ and NP = 100 for the D+G irradiation scheme. The features of the three prominent periodicities, visualized via a 

reciprocal FFT algorithm are presented in the same Figure (Reconstructed Surface Profile). In particular, the first 

with smaller period (~500 nm) corresponds to LIPSS which are oriented perpendicularly in adjacent areas, similarly 

to Etot = 40 μJ and NP = 50 (see Figure 5). The highest one corresponds to the effect of D pulse of DLIP, whilst the 

middle one corresponds to the 1D DLIP period, when the V and H schemes are combined. The advantage of such 

Figure 5: Stainless steel surface morphology following variation in pulse energy and NP, as indicated in the respective legends, 
for the D+G pulse sequence case. The corresponding result of theoretical simulations for 20 μJ pulse energy is shown as an inset 
defined by the dashed rectangle, illustrating (i) the temperature profile for NP = 50 and t = 520 ps and (ii) the final surface 
morphology for NP = 50.


17 

 

complex surface morphology attained, compared to the previously reported DLIP morphologies, is that it combines 

multiscale structures (DLIP and LIPSS) over the whole processed area in a single step. 

 

D. Underlying mechanism 

In the previous sections, the characteristics of complex structures’ formation upon irradiation of stainless steel with 

double pulses of a Gaussian and DLIP profiles, were investigated, both experimentally and theoretically. The impact 

of parameters such as the pulse profile, order of pulses, interpulse delay, pulse energy and energy dose were 

presented and discussed. A key element of the formation processes is the dynamic variation of the hydrothermal 

melt movement due to the action of the two irradiation pulses, which depends on the interpulse delay. In particular, 

at t<500 ps a melt flow is developed by hydrothermal waves created due to induced temperature gradients. Upon the 

impact of the second pulse the temperature profile changes drastically, as indicated by the pronounced decrease of 

the reflectivity in areas that are in molten phase 32;  indeed such pre-heated regions enable high energy absorption 

levels locally when the second pulse irradiates the material. As a consequence of the absorbed energy following the 

second pulse, together with the pre-existing surface temperature due to the first pulse, a complex temperature profile 

is generated, that is unfeasible to be created by single pulse irradiation. To further shed light on the effect of such 

temperature profile on hydrothermal melt movement, we present in Figure 7 simulation results, for the G+V case, 

for very low NP values, i.e. during the first steps of structures’ formation. When NP = 2, the molten material at t = 

490 ps (Figure 7A) develops a complex flow trajectory that differs substantially from that observed at t= 520 ps 

(Figure 7B), as a response to the applied temperature profile. Considering that resolidification occurs in the order of 

nanoseconds, for the range of energies tested 43, a significant volume of the material has been already displaced upon 

the impact of the second pulse. Therefore, the overall trajectory followed by the molten material upon a single pair 

Figure 6: Complex structures generated with Etot =70 μJ, NP = 100 with the D+G pulse sequence irradiation scheme. The SEM 
image is analysed with FFT and reconstructed surfaces comprising structures at different length scales are illustrated. The areas 
corresponding to the different periodicities are highlighted in FFT diagrams.


18 

 

of double pulse irradiation can be considered as the product of the two separate trajectories imposed by each 

individual pulse. This demonstrates that the shape of the induced structures can be controlled by imposing different 

pulse profiles with suitable interpulse delays. 

A key element is the value of the pulse delay (~500 ps). The choice of such a large value for the pulse separation 

between the two constituent pulses of the train of pulses was to illustrate the impact of the molten material when the 

second pulse arrives 32. Although electron-phonon relaxation processes are completed within some tens of 

picoseconds and molten material is produced during that timescale, the lattice temperature of the material is quite 

high (>6000 K as seen Fig.3C). Furthermore, high temperature gradients (that occur till up to some hundreds of ps) 

is set to influence greatly the response of the material leading to complex dynamics. Thus, any effort to highlight the 

impact of the hydrothermal profile that is generated before the second pulse irradiates the material will be hindered. 

By contrast, if we allow longer pulse separations, the temperature of the fluid relaxes to substantially lower (but still 

above the melting point) values and therefore it is easier to reveal the variation in the fluid dynamics that is caused 

as a result of exposure to the second pulse. 

The surface relief attained in the early stages of structures’ formation will eventually determine the topology of the 

structures obtained for elevated number of pulses, due to the optical and hydrodynamic feedback mechanisms. 

Indeed, upon increasing the dose to NP = 5, the temperature gradient of t= 490 ps and t = 520 ps differ mainly in 

amplitude, but not in topology. The stability of the topology of the structures is evident in the fact that the vector 

fields, observed in Figure 7B and C, are quite similar. Conclusively, the combined action of the two pulses has 

greater impact in the first steps of the structure formation, defining the pattern of the structures, whilst the 

extraordinary trajectory followed by the molten material as NP increases, enhances the structures’ aspect ratio. 

Following the formation of significantly deep valleys and high hills, i.e in NP ~ 50 (see Supplementary Material), 

the surface morphology will prevail over the pulse profile in the determination of the temperature gradient. It is 

evident that the laser conditions and selection of NP (i. e. 𝑁𝑃 ≤ 50) were appropriately chosen to correlate 

experimental observations with simulations results. Certainly, higher laser fluences or increasing NP are expected to 

produce deeper profiles and gradually alter the surface topography. This might be the objective of further 

investigation, however, in the current study we focused on how consecutive pulses of different intensity profiles 

influence the final topography. On the other hand, it is also important to correlate the value of Δτ with particular 

characteristics times such as those associated to electron-phonon relaxation and Marangoni flow. The pulse 

separation is much larger (about two order of magnitude) than the electron-phonon relaxation time. By contrast, it is 

much smaller than the expression that has been used in some reports 44, 45 as the characteristic time for Marangoni 

flow effect  
 
 

 
𝜏𝑚 =

𝜂𝐿2

| 𝑑𝜎
𝑑𝑇𝐿|𝑇𝑚ℎ  
 
 
 
 
 
(5)  

where η stands for the dynamic viscosity, Tm is the melting temperature, h corresponds to the thickness of the 

volume in liquid phase, |

𝑑𝜎

𝑑𝑇𝐿| is the absolute value of the derivative of the surface tension with the lattice 

temperature and L is a radial dimension. Assuming the values for the parameters for stainless steel, and setting L 


19 

 

(>10) μm, h=20 nm, 𝜏𝑚>50 μs. According to the use of τmas a criterion that determines when thermocapillary 

effects become competent in the surface modification process, it appears that the Marangoni flow does not appear to 

play the predominant role in the surface structure formation at very small timescales. The fact, though, that pulse 

separations of  Δτ=500 ps lead to significant surface modification and simulations demonstrate the impact of 

thermocapillary effects indicate that further exploration of Eq.5 is required as it yields an underestimation of the 

fluid movement due to surface tension. 

The analysis performed in this work demonstrated the impact of the polarisation-dependent process on the LSFL 

Figure 7: Simulation results showing the surface temperature profile obtained for the G+V case at different time moments and 
NP, as indicated. The arrows in the figures in the zoomed regions illustrate the spatial distribution of the magnitude and direction 
of the calculated fluid velocity vectors.


20 

 

formation for either G or DLIP pulses. Experimental results showed that while periodic patterns were visible at 

small pulse energy levels or doses, the DLIP pattern imprint became more pronounced at higher pulse energies 

(Figure 5). As shown in Figure 5, experimental observations are significantly sensitive to the laser conditions and 

small changes in the parameters such as the energy values or dose are expected to lead to different topographies due 

to the involvement of more complex mechanisms (i.e. ablation processes, stronger temperature gradients, 

overlapping between DLIP and surface plasmon wave period, etc). Although the applied conditions used in this 

work were predominantly aimed to interpret the experimental observations in the absence of ablation effects 

(discussed previously in 32), a generalized scenario can be addressed and investigated in more detail by incorporating 

appropriate modules in the theoretical model. For example, a more precise evaluation of the spatial distribution of 

the laser energy and the energy absorption from the material can be achieved through the employment of advanced 

computational electrodynamics based models 22. Furthermore, appropriate modules based on atomistic molecular 

dynamics could also be incorporated to provide an alternative description of microscopic processes related to 

kinetics and phase transition-related mechanisms 46.  Another issue that requires further investigation is whether the 

large temperatures that are reached during the exposure of the material to a train of double pulses (>6000 K) are 

sufficient to cause ablation/evaporation. More specifically, the attained temperatures are substantially higher than 

the melting (1800 K)/boiling (3100 K) points. As emphasised in this work and previous reports 32, 37, 38, mass 

removal is associated with temperatures larger than 0.9Tcr; therefore more exploration is needed to evaluate if that 

threshold constitutes an overestimation of evaporation/mass removal. Nevertheless, while further development of 

the model towards providing a more complete description of the processes could be the objective of a future work, 

the present approach demonstrates in a consistent way the capability to control laser-matter interaction through 

tailoring the features of the spatial intensity profile. The multiscale model that was employed is aimed also to allow 

an optimisation of the pattern features assuming the influence of the underlying physical processes and more 

importantly the role of hydrodynamical fluid transport. The agreement of simulation and experimental data 

demonstrates that using double, spatially tailored, fs pulses it is possible to actively control the melt microfluidic 

flow and in principle to make possible the generation of laser induced structures by design. 

Conclusions 
In conclusion, the investigation performed in this work indicated that combining Gaussian beams with DLIP in 

double pulse trains enables the generation of unique sub-micron surface topographies with increased complexity. 

Results showed that the order of the Gaussian and DLIP pulses in train sequences influences the final surface profile 

attained. Furthermore, experimental results and multiscale modelling revealed that both the spatial intensity of the 

two pulses, as well as hydrodynamical effects have a significant impact on the pattern features. Our experiments and 

results presented here emphasise the capability to actively tailor the microfluidic melt motion that dominates the 

structure formation process, via controlling the applied temperature gradient’s temporal profile. More important, the 

unique irradiation schemes examined here lead to the generation of novel complex morphologies comprising 

features in multiple length scales. This demonstrates an unparalleled capacity towards tailoring laser-induced 

morphology and obtaining complex topographies for a variety of applications. 


21 

 

References 
1. 
Stratakis E, Bonse J, Heitz J, Siegel J, Tsibidis GD, et al. Laser engineering of biomimetic 
surfaces. Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports 141, 100562 (2020). 

 
2. 
Vorobyev AY, Guo C. Direct femtosecond laser surface nano/microstructuring and its 
applications. Laser & Photonics Reviews 7, 385-407 (2012). 

 
3. 
Zorba V, Stratakis E, Barberoglou M, Spanakis E, Tzanetakis P, et al. Biomimetic Artificial 
Surfaces Quantitatively Reproduce the Water Repellency of a Lotus Leaf. Advanced Materials 
20, 4049-+ (2008). 

 
4. 
Zorba V, Persano L, Pisignano D, Athanassiou A, Stratakis E, et al. Making silicon hydrophobic: 
wettability control by two-lengthscale simultaneous patterning with femtosecond laser irradiation. 
Nanotechnology 17, 3234-3238 (2006). 

 
5. 
Diels J-C, Rudolph W. Ultrashort laser pulse phenomena : fundamentals, techniques, and 
applications 
on 
a 
femtosecond 
time 
scale, 
2nd 
edn, 

http://www.loc.gov/catdir/enhancements/fy0745/2007279739-d.html. (Elsevier / Academic Press, 
Amsterdam ; Boston, 2006). 

 
6. 
Papadopoulou EL, Samara A, Barberoglou M, Manousaki A, Pagakis SN, et al. Silicon Scaffolds 
Promoting Three-Dimensional Neuronal Web of Cytoplasmic Processes. Tissue Eng Part C-Me 
16, 497-502 (2010). 

 
7. 
Cirelli RA, Watson GP, Nalamasu O. Optical Lithography. Buschow KHJ, Cahn RW, Flemings 
MC, Ilschner B, Kramer EJ, et al., ed.^eds. Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology, 
edn, https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-08-043152-6/01138-4, 6441-6448 (Elsevier, Oxford, 2001). 

 
8. 
Smith CLC, Thilsted AH, Garcia-Ortiz CE, Radko IP, Marie R, et al. Efficient Excitation of 
Channel Plasmons in Tailored, UV-Lithography-Defined V-Grooves. Nano Lett 14, 1659-1664 
(2014). 

 
9. 
Sugioka 
Kj, 
Meunier 
M, 
Piqué 
A. 
Laser 
precision 
microfabrication, 

http://www.loc.gov/catdir/enhancements/fy1316/2010931868-b.html 

http://www.loc.gov/catdir/enhancements/fy1316/2010931868-d.html 

http://www.loc.gov/catdir/enhancements/fy1316/2010931868-t.html. (Springer, Berlin, 2010). 

 
10. 
Stratakis E, Bonse J, Heitz J, Siegel J, Tsibidis GD, et al. Laser engineering of biomimetic 
surfaces. Materials Science and Engineering: R: Reports 141, 100562 (2020). 

 
11. 
Bonse J, Höhm S, Kirner SV, Rosenfeld A, Krüger J. Laser-Induced Periodic Surface Structures-
A Scientific Evergreen. Ieee J Sel Top Quant 23, 9000615 (2017). 


22 

 

 
12. 
Rudenko A, Colombier JP, Hohm S, Rosenfeld A, Kruger J, et al. Spontaneous periodic ordering 
on the surface and in the bulk of dielectrics irradiated by ultrafast laser: a shared electromagnetic 
origin. Sci Rep-Uk 7, 12306 (2017). 

 
13. 
Bonse J, Krüger J, Höhm S, Rosenfeld A. Femtosecond laser-induced periodic surface structures. 
Journal of Laser Applications 24, 042006 (2012). 

 
14. 
Tsibidis GD, Barberoglou M, Loukakos PA, Stratakis E, Fotakis C. Dynamics of ripple formation 
on silicon surfaces by ultrashort laser pulses in subablation conditions. Physical Review B 86, 
115316 (2012). 

 
15. 
Allahyari E, Jj Nivas J, Skoulas E, Bruzzese R, Tsibidis GD, et al. On the formation and features 
of the supra-wavelength grooves generated during femtosecond laser surface structuring of 
silicon. Applied Surface Science, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2020.146607, 146607 (2020). 

 
16. 
Tsibidis GD, Skoulas E, Papadopoulos A, Stratakis E. Convection roll-driven generation of 
supra-wavelength periodic surface structures on dielectrics upon irradiation with femtosecond 
pulsed lasers. Physical Review B 94, 081305(R) (2016). 

 
17. 
Tsibidis GD, Fotakis C, Stratakis E. From ripples to spikes: A hydrodynamical mechanism to 
interpret femtosecond laser-induced self-assembled structures. Physical Review B 92, 041405(R) 
(2015). 

 
18. 
JJ Nivas J, He S, Rubano A, Vecchione A, Paparo D, et al. Direct Femtosecond Laser Surface 
Structuring with Optical Vortex Beams Generated by a q-plate. Sci Rep-Uk 5, 17929 (2015). 

 
19. 
Papadopoulos A, Skoulas E, Mimidis A, Perrakis G, Kenanakis G, et al. Biomimetic 
Omnidirectional Antireflective Glass via Direct Ultrafast Laser Nanostructuring. Advanced 
Materials 31, 1901123 (2019). 

 
20. 
Tsibidis GD, Skoulas E, Stratakis E. Ripple formation on nickel irradiated with radially polarized 
femtosecond beams. Optics Letters 40, 5172-5175 (2015). 

 
21. 
Skoulas E, Manousaki A, Fotakis C, Stratakis E. Biomimetic surface structuring using cylindrical 
vector femtosecond laser beams. Sci Rep-Uk 7, 45114 (2017). 

 
22. 
Rudenko A, Mauclair C, Garrelie F, Stoian R, Colombier JP. Light absorption by surface 
nanoholes and nanobumps. Applied Surface Science 470, 228-233 (2019). 

 
23. 
Sipe JE, Young JF, Preston JS, van Driel HM. Laser-induced periodic surface structure. I. 
Theory. Physical Review B 27, 1141-1154 (1983). 

 


23 

 

24. 
Milles S, Soldera M, Voisiat B, Lasagni AF. Fabrication of superhydrophobic and ice-repellent 
surfaces on pure aluminium using single and multiscaled periodic textures. Sci Rep-Uk 9, 13944 
(2019). 

 
25. 
Rosenkranz A, Hans M, Gachot C, Thome A, Bonk S, et al. Direct Laser Interference Patterning: 
Tailoring of Contact Area for Frictional and Antibacterial Properties. Lubricants 4 (2016). 

 
26. 
Alamri S, Aguilar-Morales AI, Lasagni AF. Controlling the wettability of polycarbonate 
substrates by producing hierarchical structures using Direct Laser Interference Patterning. 
European Polymer Journal 99, 27-37 (2018). 

 
27. 
Peter A, Lutey AHA, Faas S, Romoli L, Onuseit V, et al. Direct laser interference patterning of 
stainless steel by ultrashort pulses for antibacterial surfaces. Opt Laser Technol 123 (2020). 

 
28. 
Alamri S, Fraggelakis F, Kunze T, Krupop B, Mincuzzi G, et al. On the Interplay of DLIP and 
LIPSS Upon Ultra-Short Laser Pulse Irradiation. Materials (Basel) 12, 1018 (2019). 

 
29. 
Voisiat B, Aguilar-Morales AI, Kunze T, Lasagni AF. Development of an Analytical Model for 
Optimization of Direct Laser Interference Patterning. Materials (Basel) 13, 200 (2020). 

 
30. 
Müller DW, Fox T, Grützmacher PG, Suarez S, Mücklich F. Applying Ultrashort Pulsed Direct 
Laser Interference Patterning for Functional Surfaces. Sci Rep-Uk 10, 3647 (2020). 

 
31. 
Bieda M, Siebold M, Lasagni AF. Fabrication of sub-micron surface structures on copper, 
stainless steel and titanium using picosecond laser interference patterning. Applied Surface 
Science 387, 175-182 (2016). 

 
32. 
Fraggelakis F, Tsibidis GD, Stratakis E. Tailoring submicrometer periodic surface structures via 
ultrashort pulsed direct laser interference patterning. Physical Review B 103, 054105 (2021). 

 
33. 
Barberoglou M, Tsibidis GD, Gray D, Magoulakis E, Fotakis C, et al. The influence of ultra-fast 
temporal energy regulation on the morphology of Si surfaces through femtosecond double pulse 
laser irradiation. Applied Physics A: Materials Science and Processing 113, 273-283 (2013). 

 
34. 
Hohm S, Herzlieb M, Rosenfeld A, Kruger J, Bonse J. Femtosecond laser-induced periodic 
surface structures on silicon upon polarization controlled two-color double-pulse irradiation. 
Optics Express 23, 61-71 (2015). 

 
35. 
Fraggelakis F, Mincuzzi G, Lopez J, Manek-Hönninger I, Kling R. Controlling 2D laser nano 
structuring over large area with double femtosecond pulses. Applied Surface Science 470, 677-
686 (2019). 

 


24 

 

36. 
Pozrikidis 
C. 
Introduction 
to 
theoretical 
and 
computational 
fluid 
dynamics, 

http://www.loc.gov/catdir/enhancements/fy0603/96026420-d.html 

http://www.loc.gov/catdir/enhancements/fy0603/96026420-t.html. (Oxford University Press, New York, 

1997). 

 
37. 
Bulgakova NM, Bourakov IM. Phase explosion under ultrashort pulsed laser ablation: modeling 
with analysis of metastable state of melt. Applied Surface Science 197, 41-44 (2002). 

 
38. 
Kelly R, Miotello A. Comments on explosive mechanisms of laser sputtering. Applied Surface 
Science 96-98, 205-215 (1996). 

 
39. 
Rudenko A, Mauclair C, Garrelie F, Stoian R, Colombier J-P. Self-organization of surfaces on the 
nanoscale by topography-mediated selection of quasi-cylindrical and plasmonic waves. 
Nanophotonics-Berlin 8, 459 (2019). 

 
40. 
Bonse J, Rosenfeld A, Krüger J. On the role of surface plasmon polaritons in the formation of 
laser-induced periodic surface structures upon irradiation of silicon by femtosecond-laser pulses. 
Journal of Applied Physics 106, 104910 (2009). 

 
41. 
Tsibidis GD, Stratakis E. Ripple formation on silver after irradiation with radially polarised 
ultrashort-pulsed lasers. Journal of Applied Physics 121, 163106 (2017). 

 
42. 
Hensel R, Helbig R, Aland S, Voigt A, Neinhuis C, et al. Tunable nano-replication to explore the 
omniphobic characteristics of springtail skin. NPG Asia Materials 5, e37-e37 (2013). 

 
43. 
Sedao X, Shugaev MV, Wu C, Douillard T, Esnouf C, et al. Growth Twinning and Generation of 
High-Frequency Surface Nanostructures in Ultrafast Laser-Induced Transient Melting and 
Resolidification. Acs Nano 10, 6995-7007 (2016). 

 
44. 
Fang RR, Vorobyev A, Guo CL. Direct visualization of the complete evolution of femtosecond 
laser-induced surface structural dynamics of metals. Light-Sci Appl 6 (2017). 

 
45. 
Bonse J, Wiggins SM, Solis J. Phase transitions induced by femtosecond laser pulse irradiation of 
indium phosphide. Applied Surface Science 248, 151-156 (2005). 

 
46. 
Lin Z, Zhigilei LV, Celli V. Electron-phonon coupling and electron heat capacity of metals under 
conditions of strong electron-phonon nonequilibrium. Physical Review B 77, 075133 (2008). 

 

 

 


25 

 

Acknowledgements  
The authors would like to acknowledge support by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 

program through the project BioCombs4Nanofibres (Grant Agreement No. 862016).  Furthermore, the authors 

acknowledge A. Manousaki for the SEM images and A. Oikonomakis for the setup scheme.  

 

 
 


26 

 

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

 

ULTRASHORT PULSED LASER INDUCED COMPLEX SURFACE STRUCTURES 

GENERATED BY TAILORING THE MELT HYDRODYNAMICS  

 

F. Fraggelakis 1*, G. D. Tsibidis 1,2♣ and E. Stratakis 1,2♦  

1 Institute of Electronic Structure and Laser (IESL), Foundation for Research and Technology (FORTH), N. Plastira 100,  

Vassilika Vouton, 70013, Heraklion, Crete, Greece  

 

2 Department of Physics, University of Crete, 71003 Heraklion, Greece 

 

 

A. Temperature profiles and fluid movement  

Simulations results and enlarged images that illustrate the temperature profiles and molten 

material transport at the timepoints t=490 ps (before the second of the double pulse train  

X [m]

Y [m]

 

 

-2
-1
0
1
2

-2

-1

0

1

2

TL [103 K]

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

X [m]

Y [m]

 

 

-2
-1
0
1
2

-2

-1

0

1

2

TL [103 K]

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

X [m]

Y [m]

 

 

-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-1

-0.5

0

TL [103 K]

2

4

6

X [m]

Y [m]

 

 

-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
-1

-0.5

0

TL [103 K]

2

4

6

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)


27 

 

Figure 1: G+V: Temperature profiles at (a) t=490 ps (a) and (b) t=520 ps. Fluid movement is illustrated in (c) and 

(d) for t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively. 

 

irradiates the material) and t=520 ps (after thermalisation following the impact of the second 

pulse) are presented below for NP=50. Results are classified according to the order of the pulses 

in the sequence (see main text for further explanation). The size of the velocity vectors that 

indicate the fluid movement are rescaled to the maximum lattice temperature value attained at 

each time point. The direction of the vectors indicate the fluid direction based on the temperature 

gradient (i.e. spatial change of the temperature). White dots that appear is some regions indicate a 

stagnant behaviour (i.e. nearly immobile fluid). A blue-to-red colorbar was used to emphasise 

better the range of temperature values and indicate more clearly the fluid direction.   

 

Figure 2: V+G: Temperature profiles at (a) t=490 ps (a) and (b) t=520 ps. Fluid movement is illustrated in (c) and 

(d) for t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively. 

 
 

X [m]

Y [m]

 

 

-2
-1
0
1
2

-2

-1

0

1

2

TL [103 K]

1

2

3

4

5

6

X [m]

Y [m]

 

 

-2
-1
0
1
2

-2

-1

0

1

2

TL [103 K]

1

2

3

4

5

6

(a)
(b)

(d)


28 

 

 

Figure 3: G+H: Temperature profiles at (a) t=490 ps (a) and (b) t=520 ps. Fluid movement is illustrated in (c) and 

(d) for t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively. 

 
 


29 

 

 

Figure 4: H+G: Temperature profiles at (a) t=490 ps (a) and (b) t=520 ps. Fluid movement is illustrated in (c) and 

(d) for t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively. 

 
 


30 

 

Figure 5: G+D: Temperature profiles at (a) t=490 ps (a) and (b) t=520 ps. Fluid movement is illustrated in (c) and 

(d) for t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively. 

 
 


31 

 

Figure 6: D+G: Temperature profiles at (a) t=490 ps (a) and (b) t=520 ps. Fluid movement is illustrated in (c) and 

(d) for t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively. 

 

 

B. Temperature profiles and fluid movement for NP=2 and NP=5 (for G+V) 

 

To illustrate the impact of the surface topography and describe quantitatively the interpulse 

surface pattern changes, temperature profiles are shown for NP=2 (Figure 7) and NP=5 (Figure 

8) at t=490 ps and t=520 ps for G+V. White dots that appear is some regions indicate a stagnant 

behaviour (i.e. nearly immobile fluid). In (c) and (d) a blue-to-red colorbar was used to 

emphasise better the range of temperature values and indicate more clearly the fluid direction. 

By contrast, a red-to-white colorbar was used in (a) and (b) (similar to the one used in the main 

manuscript). 

 

 

Figure 7: Temperature profiles for G+V at (a,c) t=490 ps (a) and (b,d) t=520 ps for NP=2. Fluid movement is 

illustrated in (c) and (d) for t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively. 

 
 


32 

 

 

Figure 8: Temperature profile at (a,c) t=490 ps (a) and (b,d) t=520 ps for NP=5. Fluid movement is illustrated in (c) 

and (d) for t=490 ps and t=520 ps, respectively. 

 

 

C. Total Intensity profile 
 

The laser intensity of the Gaussian profile is given by  

 

𝐼𝐺𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑎𝑛 = 𝐴𝑒

−4 ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝 

𝜏𝑝
)

2
𝑒

−2(𝑥2+𝑦2

𝑅02
)

= 𝑃1𝑒

−4 ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝 

𝜏𝑝
)

2
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 

 

 where 𝑃1 ≡ 𝐴𝑒

−2(𝑥2+𝑦2

𝑅02
)
, and A contains the pulse duration and fluence [1],  

 

By contrast, the DLIP intensity is provided by the expression  

 

𝐼𝐷𝐿𝐼𝑃 = 𝐵𝐼0

(𝑖)𝑒

−4 ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝 

𝜏𝑝
)

2
𝑒

−2(𝑥2+𝑦2

𝑅02
)

= 𝑃2𝑒

−4 ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝 

𝜏𝑝
)

2
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 

where 𝑃2 ≡ 𝐵𝐼0

(𝑖)𝑒

−2(𝑥2+𝑦2

𝑅02
)
 (i=2 or 4 for a DLIP with two or four laser pulses, respectively, as given in Eq.1 in the 

main text) while B contains the pulse duration and fluence [2],  

Assuming that there is a temporal separation between the two pulses (equal to 𝛥𝜏), there are two 

possibilities for the total intensity that depends on which pulse irradiates the material first 

 

𝐼𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑡, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒) = [𝑃1𝑒

−4 ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝 

𝜏𝑝
)

2

+ 𝑃2𝑒

−4ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝−𝛥𝜏 

𝜏𝑝
)

2
]  
 
 
 
(3) 

 

if the Gaussian pulse precedes the DLIP pulse 

 

and  

 

𝐼𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑡, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒) = [𝑃2𝑒

−4 ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝 

𝜏𝑝
)

2

+ 𝑃1𝑒

−4ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝−𝛥𝜏 

𝜏𝑝
)

2
]  
 
 
 
(4) 


33 

 

 

if the Gaussian pulse follows the DLIP pulse.  

 

We can write Eqs.3,4 in a compact form in which  𝐺1 = 0, 𝐺2 = 1 (Eq.3) and  𝐺1 = 1, 𝐺2 = 0 (Eq.4). 

 

𝐼𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑡, 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑓𝑎𝑐𝑒) = [𝑃1𝑒

−4 ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝− 𝐺1𝛥𝜏 

𝜏𝑝
)

2

+ 𝑃2𝑒

−4ln 2(

𝑡−3𝜏𝑝−𝐺2𝛥𝜏 

𝜏𝑝
)

2
]       
 
(5) 

 

 

D. Navier-Stokes Equations 
 

Below, the Navier-Stokes equations (for an incompressible fluid ∇⃑⃑ ∙ 𝑢⃑ = 0) are presented in a matrix form in 3D [3]. 

We know that 

 

𝜌0 (

𝜕𝑢⃑⃑ 

𝜕𝑡 + 𝑢⃑ ∙ ∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ ) = ∇⃑⃑ ∙ (−𝑃𝟏 + 𝜇(∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ ) + 𝜇(∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ )

𝑇) 
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 

 

where 

 

(∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ ) =

(

 
 

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑥

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑥

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑥

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑦

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑦

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑦

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑧

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑧

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑧)

 
  , (∇⃑⃑ 𝑢⃑ )

𝑇 =

(

 
 

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑥

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑦

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑧

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑥

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑦

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑧

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑥

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑦

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑧)

 
  , 𝑃𝟏 = (

𝑃
0
0

0
𝑃
0

0
0
𝑃

) ,  and 𝑢⃑ = (𝑢, 𝑣, 𝑤) 

 

After the calculations, we obtain the following formulae in matrix form (by taking into account that the fluid is 

incompressible) 

𝜌0  (

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑡 + 𝑢

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑥 + 𝑣

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑦 + 𝑤

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑧)
=
−

𝜕𝑃

𝜕𝑥 + 𝜇 (

𝜕2𝑢

𝜕𝑥2 +

𝜕2𝑢

𝜕𝑦2 +

𝜕2𝑢

𝜕𝑧2)

𝜌0  (

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑡 + 𝑢

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑥 + 𝑣

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑦 + 𝑤

𝜕𝑣

𝜕𝑧)
=
−

𝜕𝑃

𝜕𝑦 + 𝜇 (

𝜕2𝑣

𝜕𝑥2 +

𝜕2𝑣

𝜕𝑦2 +

𝜕2𝑣

𝜕𝑧2)

𝜌0  (

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑡 + 𝑢

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑥 + 𝑣

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑦 + 𝑤

𝜕𝑤

𝜕𝑧)
=
−

𝜕𝑃

𝜕𝑧 + 𝜇 (

𝜕2𝑤

𝜕𝑥2 +

𝜕2𝑤

𝜕𝑦2 +

𝜕2𝑤

𝜕𝑧2)

  
 
 
 
(7) 

 

Eq.7 represents the standard notation of NSE. 

 

 

 

E. Surface patterns 
 


34 

 

In the following figures, we illustrate enlarged contour plots of the surface patterns in which depth variation is 

shown (enlarged contour plots shown in last column of Figure 4 in the main text).  

 

 

Figure 9: Surface contour plots for NP=50 for (a) G+V, (b) V+G, (c) G+H, (d) H+G, (e) G+D, (f) G+D 

 

 

F. Surface distribution of height 
 

In the following figures, we illustrate surface patterns in which surface distribution of height is shown (in a ‘blue to 

red’ colorbar)  

 

 

Figure 9: Spatial distribution of height for NP=50 for (a) G+V, (b) V+G, (c) G+H, (d) H+G, (e) G+D, (f) G+D 

 

 

 

  

 

References 

[1] Tsibidis GD, Barberoglou M, Loukakos PA, Stratakis E, Fotakis C. Dynamics of ripple formation on silicon 

surfaces by ultrashort laser pulses in subablation conditions. Physical Review B 86, 115316 (2012). 

[2] Fraggelakis F, Tsibidis GD, Stratakis E. Tailoring submicrometer periodic surface structures via ultrashort 

pulsed direct laser interference patterning. Physical Review B 103, 054105 (2021). 

[3] C.Pozrikidis, ‘Introduction to Theoretical and Computational Fluid Dynamics’, Oxford University Press, 1997 

 

 


35 

 

 

 


