 
1

Electrically driven strain-induced deterministic single-photon 

emitters in a van der Waals heterostructure 

Jae-Pil So1, Ha-Reem Kim1, Hyeonjun Baek1,2, Hoo-Cheol Lee1, Woong Huh3, Yoon Seok Kim3, 

Kenji Watanabe4, Takashi Taniguchi5, Jungkil Kim6, Chul-Ho Lee3, and Hong-Gyu Park1,3* 

 

1Department of Physics, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea. 

2Center for Quantum Information, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 02841, 

Republic of Korea. 

3KU-KIST Graduate School of Converging Science and Technology, Korea University, Seoul 

02841, Republic of Korea. 

4Research Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, 

Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. 

5International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-

1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. 

6Department of Physics, Jeju National University, Jeju 63243, Republic of Korea. 

*Corresponding author. E-mail: hgpark@korea.ac.kr 

 

Abstract 

Quantum confinement in atomically-thin TMDCs enables the realization of deterministic 

single-photon emitters. The position and polarization control of single photons have been 

achieved via local strain engineering using nanostructures. However, most existing TMDC-


 
2

based emitters are operated by optical pumping, while the emission sites in electrically 

pumped emitters are uncontrolled. Here, we demonstrate electrically driven single-photon 

emitters located at the positions where strains are induced by atomic-force-microscope 

indentation on a van der Waals heterostructure consisting of graphene, hexagonal-boron 

nitride, and tungsten diselenide. The optical, electrical, and mechanical properties induced 

by the local strain gradient were systematically analyzed. In particular, single-photon 

emission was observed at the indentation sites at 4 K. The emission exhibits photon anti-

bunching behavior with a g(2)(0) value of ~0.3, intensity saturation and a linearly cross-

polarized doublet. This robust spatial control of electrically driven single-photon emitters 

will pave the way for the practical implementation of integrated quantum light sources. 

 

Introduction 

Quantum emitters created by natural or artificial defects in two-dimensional (2D) transition 

dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have been widely studied because of their unique 2D nature1-3. For 

example, the weak van der Waals forces between their layers enable TMDCs to be easily exfoliated 

and integrated with other structures, thereby allowing the development of the complex and 

functional quantum systems including single-photon devices4,5. TMDC-based emitters exhibit a 

very high light extraction efficiency compared to one-dimensional or three-dimensional emitters 

because of the absence of total internal reflection in the 2D geometry6. Furthermore, the electrical 

and optical properties of TMDCs can be modulated to large extents via strain engineering, owing 

to their small stiffness for out-of-plane displacements and their high strain limits7-15. Local tensile 

strains are efficiently induced in the TMDCs transferred onto nanostructures, resulting in exciton 

funneling and localized emission16. Thus, position-controlled optically-pumped single-photon 


 
3

emitter arrays have been successfully demonstrated using various nanostructures, including 

dielectric pillars7,8, nanobubbles9, optical waveguides10-13, metal nanogaps14, and metal 

nanoparticles15. More recently, deterministic control of the polarization in single-photon emission 

was achieved in a TMDC placed on a nanogap array17. The polarization direction changed 

depending on whether the nanogap was larger or smaller than a critical value. 

The physical properties of TMDC-based emitters can be readily and reliably manipulated 

by electrical control18-20. Single-photon emitters in a TMDC heterostructure containing insulating 

and conducting layers such as h-BN and graphite can reflect the complexity and functionality of 

the potential landscape, which can be systematically controlled by band-structure engineering 

through the application of an electric field to the 2D heterostructure21-23. In particular, the 

demonstration of electrically driven single-photon devices based on tunnel junctions in 

graphene/h-BN/TMDC multilayers proves the feasibility of practical integrated quantum light 

sources24-26. However, despite the necessity of accurately positioning the emitters for next-

generation on-chip quantum emitter devices, such positioning has not yet been achieved for 

electrically pumped emitters.  

In this work, we demonstrate an electrically driven single-photon emitter array with 

deterministically controlled emission sites. A tunneling device based on a graphene/h-BN/WSe2 

heterostructure was placed on a deformable substrate, and a local tensile strain was applied on the 

2D heterostructure by indentation using an atomic-force-microscope (AFM) tip27. A numerical 

simulation was performed to elucidate the indentation process. In the experiment, narrow 

electroluminescence (EL) emission peaks were obtained from the position-controlled emitters, 

which exhibited the single-photon features of photon anti-bunching with a g(2) of ~0.3, intensity 

saturation, and linearly cross-polarized zero-field splitting. We believe these electrically driven 


 
4

strain-induced single-photon emitters will be useful for the practical implementation of quantum 

technologies such as quantum communication and quantum information. 

 

Results 

Design and fabrication of electrically driven single-photon emitters. Figure 1A shows a 

schematic illustration of an electrically driven single-photon emitter in a vertical van der Waals 

heterostructure. A monolayer bottom graphene, few-layer hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), 

monolayer WSe2, and monolayer top graphene layers are stacked in turn from the bottom to the 

top on a deformable polymer substrate. Tensile strain is induced at the sites via indentation by an 

AFM tip27. Current is injected into the WSe2 monolayer, which has a direct band gap, by applying 

a bias voltage between the top and bottom graphene layers.  

The van der Waals heterostructure is rationally designed based on the following 

specifications. First, the bottom graphene is separated from the WSe2 monolayer by the h-BN 

insulating layer; thus, the current can be injected uniformly into the entire area of the WSe2 by 

tunneling. This current injection scheme is distinct from that in lateral split-gate p-n junction 

devices28-30 and transient devices31, in which EL emission was observed only near the source or 

gate contact edges. Second, an h-BN layer is not introduced between the top graphene and WSe2 

monolayer, because tunneling and current spreading are already achieved by the h-BN layer 

underneath the WSe224. In addition, the increase in the thickness of the heterostructure due to the 

introduction of an additional h-BN layer would have hindered the indentation of the WSe2 

monolayer. Third, the deformable substrate is useful for forming a permanent indentation site and 

preventing a return to the strain-free geometry. If an indentation site is fabricated in a van der 


 
5

Waals heterostructure on an inelastic substrate using the tip-based approach, it is inevitable that 

defects such as scratches and piercings in the structure will be formed32.  

The operating mechanism of the proposed device is schematically illustrated in Figure 1B. 

At zero bias between the bottom and top graphene layers, no charge flows through the vertical 

layers owing to the constant Fermi energy (EF) across the heterojunction. When a bias voltage is 

applied, the EF increases above the conduction band edge of the monolayer WSe2 and electron 

tunneling occurs through the h-BN barrier. This initiates the radiative recombination of electron-

hole pairs residing in the optically active WSe2 region. In particular, because the band gap is 

engineered by the induced strain, the electron-hole pairs funnel into the localized exciton trap and 

EL emission occurs at the indentation site. 

Van der Waals heterostructures with indentation sites were fabricated via the following 

procedures (Fig. 1C). Exfoliated monolayer WSe2 and few-layer h-BN were first placed in turn on 

monolayer graphene on a SiO2/Si substrate using the conventional pick-and-place method with an 

adhesion material33. Another graphene monolayer was placed on top to cover the entirety of the 

monolayer WSe2 (see Methods and fig. S1). We note that this heterostructure was stacked in the 

reversed order. Next, a polymer (PMMA) layer was spin-coated on the whole structure, and the 

structure was peeled off from the SiO2/Si substrate via solution-based transfer method (Fig. 1C, 

(i)). The PMMA-coated heterostructure was turned upside-down as it floated on DI water. The 

inverted heterostructure on the PMMA layer was transferred and aligned on another SiO2/Si 

substrate (Fig. 1C, (ii)). The sample was heated at 120 °C to anneal the bottom PMMA layer until 

it adhered to the target substrate. Finally, we formed indentation sites on the heterostructure using 

an AFM tip (Fig. 1C, (iii)). The adhesive interaction between the PMMA layer and the 

heterostructure led to the permanent elastic deformation of the indentation sites. The optical 


 
6

microscope image of the fabricated sample shows that all the layers were stacked as desired (Fig. 

1D). We note that the indentation sites were created in the WSe2 monolayer on the bottom 

graphene layer because the separation of the top and bottom graphene layers leads to efficient 

current injection into the region (Fig. 1E).  

Mechanical properties of the indented heterostructure. The close-up AFM topography images 

of the indentation sites show the height profiles across the horizontal and vertical cross-sections. 

The heterostructure was permanently deformed with a depth of ~25 nm, which is the average value 

of the seven indentation sites fabricated by the AFM tip at the applied load of 6.33 µN (Fig. 2A). 

The maximum standard deviation of the depth was 6.9 nm, which was attributed to the 

heterogeneities in the WSe2/h-BN/graphene/PMMA interfaces. The relatively large stiffness of the 

heterostructure, compared with that of the monolayer TMDC, led to the asymmetric shape of the 

indentation site: the tip could slide slightly along the surface instead of remaining at the same 

location during the indentation process. Nonetheless, this fabrication method effectively reduced 

the occurrence of uncontrolled wrinkles and random strain gradients, which were frequently 

observed in 2D layers transferred onto nanopatterned substrates, because only a small area of the 

AFM tip was in contact with the heterostructure27. In addition, the PMMA substrate held the 

heterostructure in place and forced it to follow the deformation contour, resulting in a highly 

localized strain field. 

To further understand the indentation process, we performed a finite-element method 

(FEM) simulation to calculate the morphology of the indent on the heterostructure when it was 

pressed by an incompressible conical tip with a radius of curvature rt (see Methods). The van der 

Waals heterostructure was modeled as a single linear elastic material with effective mechanical 

parameters34, and placed on the PMMA substrate (see Methods). The simulation shows that a 


 
7

conic-shaped deformation occurred at the indentation site (Fig. 2B). The indentation depth was 25 

nm when the force applied by a tip with rt = 5 nm was 6,000 nN, which agrees well with the 

experimental result shown in Fig. 2A. Figure 2C shows the calculated indentation depth as a 

function of the force applied on the heterostructure on the PMMA substrate. The indentation depth 

increased and became saturated as the applied force increased. As the indentation deepened, the 

contact stiffness was dominated by the behavior of the polymer substrate. Because of the large 

strain limit for vertical displacements35,36, plastic deformation of the PMMA substrate occurred, 

resulting in a saturation of the indentation depth. In addition, we calculated the line profiles of the 

diagonal strain component along the vertical direction (|εzz|) at various tip radii (rt = 5, 10 and 15 

nm) at the fixed force of 6,000 nN (Fig. 2D). The calculated |εzz| exhibited a higher and narrower 

peak when a sharper tip was used. Therefore, the shape and size of the tip can provide additional 

degrees of freedom in strain engineering27. 

 

Measurement of single-photon emission. To investigate the emission properties of the fabricated 

heterostructure with indentation sites, a high-resolution confocal raster scan was performed at 4 K 

using two scanning galvo mirrors, while a bias voltage was applied to the heterostructure. The EL 

emission was collected by a 100× objective lens with the numerical aperture of 0.85 and sent to 

avalanche photodiodes (APD) via optical fibers (see Methods). Figure 3A shows the measured EL 

intensity map of the heterostructure at the bias voltage of 2.0 V. Bright spots were exhibited at all 

seven indentation sites. The integrated intensities at the indentation sites were ~10 times higher 

than those at the surroundings without indents. A comparison of the EL before and after indentation 

reveals the following features. First, no point-like bright emission was observed before the 

indentation (fig. S2). This indicates that localized emission was induced only at the indentation 


 
8

sites. Second, the indentation changed the measured I-V curves (Fig. 3B). Whereas the turn-on 

voltage due to the tunneling current was ~4.0 V before the indentation, the indentation resulted in 

a lowering of the turn-on voltage to ~1.5 V and the appearance of an additional kink. These 

observations therefore show that the electrically driven excitons were efficiently funneled into 

individual exciton traps at the indentation sites, resulting in a decrease in the operating voltage.  

We also measured the EL spectra at the indentation sites (Fig. 3C). The spectra exhibited 

the following features. First, narrow individual emission peaks with central wavelengths varying 

from 735 to 785 nm were observed. These wavelengths were longer than those of the charged or 

neutral excitons because the peaks originated from the localized exciton state. Second, the spectral 

linewidths of the peaks were almost two orders of magnitude narrower than those of the 

delocalized excitons. There were only one or two peaks with such sub-nanometer linewidths at 

each indentation site. Third, all seven indentation sites exhibited spectrally isolated peaks, while 

conventional defect-based TMDC light-emitting devices have one or two emitters over an area of 

~40 µm2 on average24. These characteristics of the emission peaks motivate the investigation of 

the emitter photon statistics. 

To investigate the single-photon nature of the localized emissions from the indentation 

sites, we performed photon-correlation measurements using a Hanbury Brown and Twiss 

interferometer (see Methods). A narrow spectral window with the width of 10 nm was opened to 

select the desired peak in the EL spectra (black arrows in Fig. 3C). The spectrally filtered EL 

emission was split into two paths using a non-polarizing fiber beam splitter and detected by two 

APDs and time-tagging electronics that measured the time correlation between the detectors. We 

observed the single-photon properties from all seven indentation sites. Figure 3D shows three 

representative photon-correlation functions g(2)(τ) measured at the indentation sites 1, 2, and 3 at 


 
9

the bias voltage of 2.0 V. The measured data were fitted with a three-level model curve (red lines 

in Fig. 3D). We then obtained the g(2)(0) values of 0.298 ± 0.036, 0.396 ± 0.032, and 0.353 ± 0.041 

at the indentation sites 1, 2, and 3, respectively. These g(2)(0) values were below the threshold of 

0.5 and exhibit the photon anti-bunching behavior expected in single-photon emission. The 

background EL emission was well suppressed, indicating a high purity of single-photon emission. 

We note that the measured g(2) data were not corrected for the background emission of the broad 

spectral window or the detector response that caused the non-zero value of g(2)(0); thus, the actual 

values for the purity of single-photon emission could be higher. 

 

Voltage-dependent EL measurements. We next measured the EL spectrum at an indentation site 

(point 1 in Fig. 3A) under different bias voltages. The graphs in Fig. 4A show a strong emission 

peak at 739.8 nm with a narrow linewidth (<1 meV) at the bias voltages of 2.0 and 6.0 V. Only a 

single peak was observed at 2.0 V, whereas small side peaks appeared at 6.0 V. Other states, 

including unbound exciton emission, contributed to EL emission at a higher bias voltage24-26. In 

addition, we measured the evolution of the EL emission spectrum as the bias voltage increased 

(Fig. 4B). A single strong peak started to appear at ~1.5 V and its wavelength remained constant 

up to the bias voltage of 8 V. Additional peaks and broad background EL emission from the 

unbound exciton state appeared and became stronger as the bias voltage increased, but the strong 

peak at 739.8 nm was still dominant. This feature of the voltage-dependent EL spectrum was also 

reflected in the measured I-V characteristics shown in Fig. 3B. A strong single peak was observed 

at the turn-on voltage of >1.5 V, while the appearance of more emission peaks caused an additional 

kink at ~4 V in the I-V curve. 


 
10

In addition, we plotted the measured peak intensity and linewidth from the indentation site 

1 as a function of the bias voltage (Figs. 4C and D). As indicated in Fig. 2D, the EL emission 

started to emerge at a bias voltage of ~1.5 V and increased rapidly until ~2.5 V (Fig. 4C). 

Saturation behavior was also observed above ~2.5 V. The full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) 

of the EL emission increased from 0.164 nm (369 µeV) at ~1.5 V to 0.453 nm (936 µeV) at ~2.5 

V as the bias voltage increased (Fig. 4D). Furthermore, the spectral stability of the sub-nanometer 

scale was measured for 5 min, which is required for practical single-photon emitters (fig. S3). 

Taken together, these measurement results indicate the single-photon nature of the electrically 

driven emission from the indentation sites. 

 

Fine-structure of single-photon emission. A higher-resolution EL spectrum was next measured 

over the wavelength range of 738–742 nm to further investigate the optical properties of the 

dominant sharp emission peak (Fig. 5A). In the EL spectrum taken from indentation site 1 at 2.0 

V, the fine-structure splitting was observed. There were two narrow peaks at the wavelengths of 

739.5 and 740.0 nm with linewidths of ~400 µeV separated by 755 µeV. These narrow peaks were 

also observed at all seven indentation sites and showed similar emission characteristics, such as 

linewidths of a few hundred µeV and splittings of 700–1000 µeV. The zero-field splitting may 

possibly have originated from the anisotropic electron-hole exchange interaction caused by the 

low symmetry of the indentation sites37-39. In addition, we measured the polarization states of the 

two split peaks by placing a linear polarizer in front of the detector. The EL intensity was plotted 

as a function of the polarization direction (Fig. 5B). Strongly linear polarized states with the 

polarization degrees of 0.946 and 0.965 were observed at the lower (black) and higher (red) energy 

peaks, respectively. Notably, their polarization directions differed by 90°, and the photon energies 


 
11

were separated by ~800 µeV (Fig. 5C). A similar cross-polarized fine-structure splitting has also 

been observed in single neutral excitons localized in optically activated quantum emitters in 

TMDCs1-3, as demonstrated by the energy level diagram with linearly polarized optical selection 

rules at zero magnetic field6. 

 

Discussion 

In summary, we demonstrated electrically driven deterministic single-photon emitters in a 

vertical heterojunction with an active WSe2 monolayer indented by an AFM tip. The employment 

of nanoscale elastic strain engineering to achieve exciton localization in the electronic structure 

enabled the efficient generation of robust single photons in our design. The fabrication process of 

the indentations was elucidated by numerical simulations. The turn-on voltage of the light-emitting 

heterostructure was manipulated through the band-structure engineering by local strain gradients. 

Indeed, we observed localized bright spots at the indentation sites, which exhibited narrow EL 

emission peaks with photon anti-bunching and intensity saturation behaviors at applied voltages 

of >1.5 V. We note that linear cross-polarized doublet in the localized emission can provide a 

valley degree of freedom as an information carrier.  

Our fabrication procedure is scalable and applicable for integration with other photonic 

platforms such as high-quality optical cavities and/or low-loss optical waveguides. For example, 

the performance of single-photon emission can be further improved through Purcell enhancement 

by placing a nanoscale cavity on the indentation site. We believe that this work demonstrates an 

efficient approach for electrically driven single-photon sources in van der Waals heterostructure, 

outperforming the present emitters with random occurrence, and suggests next-generation single-

photon devices for quantum information and quantum communication. 


 
12

Methods 

Device fabrication. Graphene/WSe2/h-BN/graphene stacks on a polymer substrate were 

fabricated using typical mechanical exfoliation and transfer methods. Graphene monolayers grown 

on a copper film (2D Semiconductors) were first patterned using photolithography and oxygen 

plasma on a SiO2/Si substrate. Mechanically exfoliated monolayer WSe2 (HQ graphene) and few-

layer h-BN were assembled on the other SiO2/Si substrate, and monolayer graphene was placed 

on top via a dry transfer method. The stacked graphene/WSe2/h-BN heterostructure was then 

placed on the other patterned graphene monolayer (fig. S1A). Next, PMMA was spin-coated on 

the heterostructure and the entire structure was peeled off using a water-assisted pick-up. The 

floated PMMA membrane was inverted and transferred onto another SiO2/Si substrate, and 

annealed at 120 °C to make the PMMA layer uniform. Indentations were performed by adjusting 

the maximum cantilever displacement (i.e. z-piezo displacement) using commercial AFM 

equipment (Park Systems, NX10). We used the “Nanoindentation” mode in AFM to form 

nanoindents at the desired locations with the applied cantilever displacement of 1500 nm. 

Numerical simulation. Mechanical contact simulations were performed using FEM (COMSOL 

Multiphysics, structural mechanics module) to calculate the deformation and strain field of the 

indented heterostructure on the elastic polymer substrate. The material properties of the polymer 

substrate were described by the Neo-Hookean hyperelastic material model: the density was 1,185 

kg/m3 and the Lamé parameter was 0.383 GPa. The indentation force was applied to the 

heterostructure using a contacted incompressible AFM tip with a radius of rt. Based on the three-

layer composite model in beam vibration theory, the TMDC heterostructure was assumed to be a 

single linear elastic material with the following effective mechanical parameters: the density was 

2,950 kg/m3, the Young’s modulus was 884 GPa, and the Poisson’s ratio was 0.2. The deformation 


 
13

of the indented heterostructure was then calculated as the force applied by the tip varied from 100 

to 7,000 nN. The forces were determined based on the actual values used in the experiment. 

Furthermore, we obtained the displacement along the z-axis and calculated the absolute value of 

the diagonal strain tensor |εzz|. 

Optical measurements. Optical measurements were performed on the samples using a home-built 

confocal microscope in a He-flow cryostat (Montana Instruments s50) at 4 K. For the high-

resolution raster scans, two scanning galvo mirrors were used with a 4-f confocal alignment system. 

A bias voltage was applied to the samples using a source measurement unit (Keithley 2450). The 

EL emission was collected by a 100× objective lens with the numerical aperture of 0.85, and sent 

to either a monochromator/CCD (Princeton Instruments PIXIS 400 BRX) or avalanche 

photodiodes (Excelitas SPCM AQRH 13). Photon statistics measurement was performed using the 

HBT setup. The photons were spectrally filtered by band-pass filters, coupled to an optical fiber, 

split into two paths using a non-polarizing 50:50 fiber beam splitter, and finally detected by two 

identical avalanche photodiodes and time-tagging electronics (PicoQuant Picoharp 300). To 

perform polarization-resolved measurements, a linear polarizer was placed in front of the fiber 

coupler. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  


 
14

Data availability. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the 

corresponding author upon request. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Samsung Research Funding & Incubation Center of Samsung 

Electronics (SRFC-MA2001-01). 

Author contributions 

J.-P.S. and H.-G.P. designed the experiments. J.-P.S., H.-R.K., H.-C.L., W.H., Y.S.K., K.W., T.T. 

and J.K. prepared the samples and performed experiments. J.-P.S. and H.-R.K. performed the 

simulations. H.B. and C.-H.L. analyzed the data. J.-P.S., H.B. and H.-G.P. wrote the paper. All 

authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.  

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests.  

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.-G.P. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
15

References 

1. A. Srivastava, M. Sidler, A. V. Allain, D. S. Lembke, A. Kis, A. Immamoglu, Optically active 

quantum dots in monolayer WSe2. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 491-496 (2015). 

2. Y.-M. He, G. Clark, J. R. Schaibley, Y. He, M.-C. Chen, Y.-J. Wei, X. Ding, Q. Zhang, W. 

Yao, X. Xu, C.-Y. Lu, J.-W. Pan, Single quantum emitters in monolayer semiconductors. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 10, 497-502 (2015). 

3. P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, R. Schneider, J. Kern, M. Buscema, G. A. Steele, A. Castellanos-

Gomez, H. S. Zant, S. M. Vasconcellos, R. Bratschitsch, Single-photon emission from 

localized excitons in an atomically thin semiconductor. Optica 2, 347-352 (2015). 

4. D. White, A. Branny, R. J. Chapman, R. Picard, M. Brotons-Gisbert, A. Boes, A. Peruzzo, C. 

Bonato, B. D. Gerardot, Atomically-thin quantum dots integrated with lithium niobate 

photonic chips. Opt. Mater. Express 9, 441-448 (2019). 

5. T. Cai, J.-H. Kim, Z. Yang, S. Dutta, S. Aghaeimeibodi, E. Waks, Radiative enhancement of 

single quantum emitters in WSe2 monolayers using site-controlled metallic nanopillars. ACS 

Photon. 5, 3466-3471 (2018). 

6. C. Chakraborty, N. Vamivakas, D. Englund, Advances in quantum light emission from 2D 

materials. Nanophotonics 8, 2017-2032 (2019). 

7. C. Palacios-Berraquero, D. M. Kara, A. R. Montblanch, M. Barbone, P. Latawiec, D. Yoon, 

A. K. Ott, M. Loncar, A. C. Ferrari, M. Atatüre, Large-scale quantum-emitter arrays in 

atomically thin semiconductors. Nat. Commun. 8, 15093 (2017). 

8. A. Branny, S. Kumar, R. Proux, B. D. Gerardot, Deterministic strain-induced arrays of 

quantum emitters in a two-dimensional semiconductor. Nat. Commun. 8, 15053 (2017). 

9. G. D. Shepard, O. A. Ajayi, X. Li, X.-Y. Zhu, J. Hone, S. Strauf, Nanobubble induced 

formation of quantum emitters in monolayer semiconductors. 2D Mater. 4, 021019 (2017). 

10. F. Peyskens, C. Chakraborty, M. Muneeb, D. V. Thourhout, D. Englund, Integration of single 

photon emitters in 2D layered materials with a silicon nitride photonic chip. Nat. Commun. 10, 

4435 (2019). 

11. M. Blauth, M. Jürgensen, G. Vest, O. Hartwig, M. Prechtl, J. Cerne, J. J. Finley, M Kaniber, 

Coupling single photons from discrete quantum emitters in WSe2 to lithographically defined 

plasmonic slot waveguides. Nano Lett. 18, 6812-6819 (2018). 

12. T. Cai, S. Dutta, S. Aghaeimeibodi, Z. Yang, S. Nah, J. T. Fourkas, E. Waks, Coupling 


 
16

emission from single localized defects in two-dimensional semiconductor to surface plasmon 

polaritons. Nano Lett. 17, 6564-6568 (2017). 

13. P. Tonndorf, O. D. Pozo-Zamudio, N. Gruhler, J. Kern, R. Schmidt, A. I. Dmitriev, A. P. 

Bakhtinov, A. I. Tartakovskii, W. Pernice, S. M. Vasconcellos, R. Bratschistsch, On-chip 

waveguide coupling of a layered semiconductor single-photon source. Nano Lett. 17, 5446-

5451 (2017). 

14. J. Kern, I. Niehues, P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, D. Wigger, R. Schneider, T. Stiehm, S. M. 

Vasconcellos, D. E. Reiter, T. Kuhn, R. Bratschitsch, Nanoscale positioning of single-photon 

emitters in atomically thin WSe2. Adv. Mater. 28, 7101-7105 (2016). 

15. Y. Luo, G. D. Shepard, J. V. Ardelean, D. A. Rhodes, B. Kim, K. Barmak, J. C. Hone, S. Strauf, 

Deterministic coupling of site-controlled quantum emitters in monolayer WSe2 to plasmonic 

nanocavities. Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 1137-1142 (2018). 

16. L. Linhart, M. Paur, V. Smejkal, J. Burgdörfer, T. Mueller, F. Libisch, Localized intervalley 

defect excitons as single-photon emitters in WSe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 146401 (2019). 

17. J.-P. So, K.-Y. Jeong, J. M. Lee, K.-H. Kim, S.-J. Lee, W. Huh, H.-R. Kim, J.-H. Choi, J. M. 

Kim, Y. S. Kim, C.-H. Lee, S. Nam, H.-G. Park, Polarization control of deterministic single-

photon emitters in monolayer WSe2. Nano Lett. 21, 1546-1554 (2021).  

18. A. Hötger, J. Klein, K. Barthelmi, L. Sigl, F. Sigger, W. Männer, S. Gyger, M. Florian, M. 

Lorke, F. Jahnke, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. D. Jöns, U. Wurstbauer, C. Kastl, K. Müller, 

J. J. Finley, A. W. Holleitner, Gate-switchable arrays of quantum light emitters in contacted 

monolayer MoS2 van der Waals heterodevices. Nano Lett. 21, 1040-1046 (2021). 

19. C. Chakraborty, K. M. Goodfellow, S. Dhara, A. Yoshimura, V. Meunier, A. N. Vamivakas, 

Quantum-confined Stark effect of individual defects in a van der Waals heterostructure. Nano 

Lett. 17, 2253-2258 (2017). 

20. C. Chakraborty, L. Kinnischtzke, K. M. Goodfellow, R. Beams, A. N. Vamivakas, Voltage-

controlled quantum light from an atomically thin semiconductor. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 507-

511 (2015). 

21. A. K. Geim, I. V. Grigorieva, Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature 499, 419-425 (2013). 

22. F. Withers, O. D. Pozo-Zamudio, A. Mishchenko, A. P. Rooney, A. Gholinia, K. Watanabe, 

T. Taniguchi, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, A. I. Tartakovskii, K. S. Novoselov, Light-emitting 

diodes by band-structure engineering in van der Waals heterostructures. Nat. Mater. 14, 301-


 
17

306 (2015). 

23. F. Withers, O. D. Pozo-Zamudio, S. Schwarz, S. Dufferwiel, P. M. Walker, T. Godde, A. P. 

Rooney, A. Gholinia, C. R. Woods, P. Blake, S. J. Haigh, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, I. L. 

Aleiner, A. K. Geim, V. I. Fal’ko, A. I. Tartakovskii, K. S. Novoselov, WSe2 light-emitting 

tunneling transistors with enhanced brightness at room temperature. Nano Lett. 15, 8223-8228 

(2015). 

24. C. Palacios-Berraquero, M. Barbone, D. M. Kara, X. Chen, I. Goykhman, D. Yoon, A. K. Ott, 

J. Beitner, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. C. Ferrari, M. Atatüre, Atomically thin quantum 

light-emitting diodes. Nat. Commun. 7, 12978 (2016). 

25. G. Clark, J. R. Schaibley, J. Ross, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, J. R. Hendrickson, S. Mou, W. 

Yao, X. Xu, Single defect light-emitting diode in a van der Waals heterostructure. Nano Lett. 

16, 3944-3948 (2016). 

26. S. Schwarz, A. Kozikov, F. Withers, J. K. Maguire, A. P. Foster, S. Dufferwiel, L. Hague, M. 

N. Makhonin, L. R. Wilson, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, A. I. Tartakovskii, Electrically 

pumped single-defect light emitters in WSe2. 2D Mater. 3, 025038 (2016). 

27. M. R. Rosenberger, C. K. Dass, H.-J. Chuang, S. V. Sivaram, K. M. McCreary, J. R. 

Hendrickson, B. T. Jonker, Quantum calligraphy: Writing single-photon emitters in a two-

dimensional materials platform. ACS Nano 13, 904-912 (2019). 

28. B. W. H. Baugher, H. O. H. Churchill, Y. Yang, P. Jarillo-Herrero, Optoelectronic devices 

based on electrically tunable p-n diodes in a monolayer dichalcogenide. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 

262-267 (2014). 

29. A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi, T. Mueller, Solar-energy conversion and light emission in an 

atomic monolayer p-n diode. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 257-261 (2014). 

30. J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. 

Watanabe, K. Kitamura, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden, X. Xu, Electrically tunable excitonic light-

emitting diodes based on monolayer WSe2 p-n junctions. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 268-272 (2014). 

31. D.-H. Lien, M. Amani, S. B. Desai, G. H. Ahn, K. Han, J.-H. He, J. W. Ager III, M. C. Wu, A. 

Javey, Large-area and bright pulsed electroluminescence in monolayer semiconductors. Nat. 

Commun. 9, 1229 (2018). 

32. P. Kumar, V. Balakrishnan, Nanosculpting of atomically thin 2D materials for site-specific 

photoluminescence modulation. Adv. Optical. Mater. 6, 1701284 (2018). 


 
18

33. A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Buscema, R. Molenaar, V. Singh, L. Janssen, H. S. Zant, G. A. 

Steele, Deterministic transfer of two-dimensional materials by all-dry viscoelastic stamping. 

2D Mater. 1, 011002 (2014). 

34. K.-H. Cho, Y. Kim, Elastic modulus measurement of multilayer metallic thin films. J. Mater. 

Res. 14, 1996-2001 (1999). 

35. D. Akinwande, N. Petrone, J. Hone, Two-dimensional flexible nanoelectronics. Nat. Commun. 

5, 5678 (2014). 

36. R. C. Cooper, C. Lee, C. A. Marianetti, X. Wei, J. Hone, J. W. Kysar, Nonlinear elastic 

behavior of two-dimensional molybdenum disulfide. Phys. Rev. B. 87, 035423 (2013). 

37. C. Chakraborty, N. R. Jungwirth, G. D. Fuchs, A. N. Vamivakas, Electrical manipulation of 

the fine-structure splitting of WSe2 quantum emitters. Phys. Rev. B. 99, 045308 (2019). 

38. C, Chakraborty, A. Mukherjee, L. Qiu, A. N. Vamivakas, Electrically tunable valley 

polarization and valley coherence in monolayer WSe2 embedded in a van der Waals 

heterostructure. Opt. Mater. Express. 9, 1479-1487 (2019). 

39. S. Kumar, M. Brotons-Gisbert, R. Al-Khuzheyri, A. Branny, G. Ballesteros-Garcia, J. F. 

Sanchez-Royo, B. D. Gerardot, Resonant laser spectroscopy of localized excitons in monolayer 

WSe2. Optica 3, 882-886 (2016). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
19

 

Fig. 1. Electrically driven single-photon emitter formed by AFM indentation. (A) Schematic 

of the vertical heterostructure consisting of top-graphene/WSe2/h-BN/bottom-graphene on the 

polymer substrate. The emission site is indented by an AFM tip. (B) Schematic band diagram of 

the strained heterostructure under external bias. The Fermi level (EF) of the monolayer bottom 

graphene (gray) is raised above the conduction band edge of the monolayer WSe2. This allows 

electrons to tunnel from the bottom graphene to WSe2 through the h-BN. The exciton trap in the 

bandgap of WSe2 is modulated by the local strain (red), resulting in single-photon emission. (C) 

Schematics of the fabrication procedures: (i) The PMMA layer was spin-coated on top of the 

TMDC heterostructure on the SiO2/Si substrate and peeled off together with the heterostructure 

from the substrate. (ii) The detached PMMA layer was turned upside down while floating on DI 


 
20

water, and placed and aligned on another substrate. (iii) AFM indentation was performed to apply 

a strain to the heterostructure on the PMMA layer. (D) Optical microscope image of the 

heterostructure placed on the PMMA substrate. The dashed lines highlight the footprints of the 

monolayer top graphene and bottom graphene (white), the few layer h-BN (blue), and the 

monolayer WSe2 (red). Scale bar, 10 µm. (E) AFM image of the fabricated heterostructure. The 

indents were formed on the stacked WSe2 area (white arrow). Scale bar, 5 µm. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
21

 

Fig. 2. Mechanical properties of the indented heterostructure. (A) Measured line profiles of 

the heights averaged from seven indents formed along the lines (black and red) labeled in the inset 

image. The error bars indicate the standard deviation. The inset shows a magnified image of the 

indents in Fig. 1E. Scale bar, 200 nm. (B) Simulated morphology of the heterostructure indented 

at various applied forces using a tip with the radius of 5 nm. The inset image shows the top-view 

of the height profile for the applied force of 7,000 nN. Scale bar, 100 nm. (C) Simulated maximum 

indented depth as a function of the applied force. The inset shows the schematic of the simulation 

where the TMDC heterostructure is modeled as a single linear elastic material with effective 

mechanical parameters. (D) Calculated diagonal component of the strain along the vertical 

direction, |εzz|, for the three different tip radii of 5, 10, and 15 nm. Continuum theory was used for 


 
22

an elastic plate as follows: |εzz| = �
vt

1−v (
∂2h

∂x2 +
∂2h

∂y2)�, where h is the height profile of WSe2, t is the 

thickness of WSe2, and v is Poisson’s ratio. We set t = 0.7 nm and v = 0.19. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
23

 

Fig. 3. Measured optoelectronic properties at the indentation sites. (A) EL intensity map 

measured in the heterostructure in Fig. 1E. Localized emissions were observed at indentation sites 

1 to 7. The bias voltage was 2.0 V. Scale bar, 2 µm. (B) Plot of current vs. voltage at 4 K before 

(black) and after (red) indentation. (C) EL spectra at the indentation sites labeled in (A). (D) 

Measured second-order correlation function g(2)(τ) at the indentation sites 1, 2, and 3 in (C). The 

bias voltage was 2.0 V, and a 10 nm-wide spectral filter was used. The fitted red curves indicate 

photon anti-bunching and correspond to the g(2)(0) values of 0.298 ± 0.036 (bottom), 0.396 ± 0.032 

(middle), and 0.353 ± 0.041 (top), respectively. 


 
24

 

Fig. 4. EL emission at different bias voltages. (A) Normalized EL spectra measured at 

indentation site 1 at the bias voltages of 2.0 V (bottom) and 6.0 V (top). (B) Plot of bias voltage 

vs. wavelength of the EL spectrum. (C) Measured EL intensity as a function of the bias voltage. 

Intensity saturation was observed at biases above 2.5 V. (D) Measured peak linewidth as a function 

of the bias voltage at indentation site 1 in Fig. 3A. The error bars indicate the standard deviation. 

 

 


 
25

 

Fig. 5. Fine-structure splitting of the single-photon emission. (A) High-resolution EL spectrum 

measured at indentation site 1 labeled in Fig. 3A. The fine-structure splitting has a separation of 

755 µeV and a linewidth of ~400 µeV. (B) Polar plots of the normalized EL intensities of the lower 

(black) and higher (red) energy peaks, which are denoted by arrows with the corresponding colors 

in (A), as a function of the polarization angle. The lines indicate the fitted curves. The polarization 

angles and degrees are 56° and 0.946 (black) and 148° and 0.965 (red), respectively. (C) EL 

spectrum of (A) as a function of the polarization angle. 

 

 

 

 


 
26

Supplementary Information for: 

Electrically driven strain-induced deterministic single-photon 

emitters in a van der Waals heterostructure 

Jae-Pil So1, Ha-Reem Kim1, Hyeonjun Baek1,2, Hoo-Cheol Lee1, Woong Huh3, Yoon Seok Kim3, 

Kenji Watanabe4, Takashi Taniguchi5, Jungkil Kim6, Chul-Ho Lee3, and Hong-Gyu Park1,3* 

 

*Corresponding author. E-mail: hgpark@korea.ac.kr 

 

 

 

 

 

This PDF file includes: 

Supplementary Figures S1–S3 

 

 

 

 


 
27

 

Fig. S1. 2D heterostructure on SiO2/Si substrate. (A) Schematic of the heterostructure. (B) 

Optical microscope image of the fabricated structure. Scale bar, 5 µm. (C) EL (left) and PL (right) 

intensity maps measured at room temperature for the structure in (B). Scale bar, 5 µm. (D) EL 

(black) and PL (red) spectra for the structure in (B). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
28

 

Fig. S2. Measurement of EL emission in the heterostructure without indentation sites. (A) 

Measured EL intensity map at 4 K for the structure in Fig. 1D before indentation. The emission 

was delocalized and roughly uniform. The bias voltage was 8.0 V. Scale bar, 2 µm. (B) Measured 

EL spectrum in (A). The peaks for charged excitons (marked as X-) and weakly defect-bound 

excitons (marked as Xd) are shown. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
29

 

Fig. S3. Spectral stability. The EL spectrum was measured as a function of time over a duration 

of 5 min. The dominant narrow peak occurred at ~740 nm. We acquired the spectrum data every 

1 s. This result confirms the spectral stability of the single-photon emission at the indentation site. 

 


