1

Chiral Plasmonics

Mario Hentschel1, Martin Schäferling1, Xiaoyang Duan2,3, Harald Giessen1, and Na 

Liu2,3

14th Physics Institute and Research Center SCoPE, University of Stuttgart, 

Pfaffenwaldring 57, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany

2Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Heisenbergstrasse 3, 70569 Stuttgart, 

Germany

3Kirchhoff Institute for Physics, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 227, 

69120 Heidelberg, Germany

Abstract

We present a comprehensive overview of chirality and its optical manifestation in

plasmonic nanosystems and nanostructures. We discuss top-down fabricated structures

that range from solid metallic nanostructures to groupings of metallic nanoparticles 

arranged in three dimensions. We present the large variety of bottom-up synthesised

structures. Using DNA, peptides, or other scaffolds, complex nanoparticle arrangements

of up to hundreds of individual nanoparticles have been realized. Beyond this static 

picture, we give also an overview over recent demonstrations of active chiral plasmonic 

systems where the chiral optical response can be controlled by an external stimulus. We 

discuss the prospect of utilizing the unique properties of complex chiral plasmonic 

systems for enantiomeric sensing schemes.

Teaser

We present a comprehensive overview of chirality and its optical manifestation in 

plasmonic nanosystems and nanostructures.

Keywords 

Plasmons, circular dichrosim, chirality, stereochemistry, enantiomers.


2

Introduction

Most generally, chirality refers to the symmetry properties of an object. Mathematically 

speaking, a chiral object does not possess mirror planes or inversion symmetry. The 

object and its mirror image can thus not be made to coincide by simple rotations or 

translations. One calls the object and its mirror image two enantiomorphs, or, in 

molecular systems, two enantiomers. As our own hands are chiral themselves, a chiral

object is also termed “handed”.

While this terminology sounds fairly technical, chiral objects are quite ubiquitous 

in nature. Apart from our own hands and feet, a large number of objects show chirality:

The essential amino-acids, carbohydrates, nucleic acids, proteins, seashells, and the 

tendrils of climbing plants are examples from nature. In art and architecture chirality is 

an often seen feature in towers, columns, and staircases, to name a few. Also, a lot of 

daily objects are handed, such as corkscrews or keys. In fact, nature itself has been 

called chiral as many important and central aspects lead us to the so-called asymmetry 

of life: a large number of biomolecules only exist in one handedness, e.g., all 21 essential 

amino-acids are L-enantiomers, indicating that the associated physiological processes 

show 100 % stereoselectivity. Accordingly, chirality has been the subject of intense

research investigations along the route to unravel the basic origin of life itself (1).

Apart from the purely geometrical considerations, chirality can also manifest itself 

in physical properties. In fact, symmetries are at the basis of the properties of nearly 

every physical system as they dictate the electronic structures, crystallographic ordering, 

chemical bonds, etc. (2). Chirality can for example manifest itself optically via a different 

response to right- or left-handed circularly polarized light (RCP and LCP), being the 

“chiral state” of light. A chiral medium exhibits different complex refractive indices for 

those two polarization states (3). The difference in the imaginary part results in a 

different absorption of RCP and LCP light, which is called circular dichroism (CD). A 

linearly polarized light field, on the other hand, will be rotated with respect to its original 

orientation while traveling through a chiral medium. This effect is called optical rotatory

dispersion (ORD) and can be explained by the difference in the real part of the refractive 

index: A linearly polarized light field can be described as a superposition of LCP and RCP 

light. Due to the different refractive indices, a phase shift between the two orthogonal 

polarizations is induced. As a result, the plane of polarization will be rotated. Similar to 

the absorption and refractive index of an achiral medium, CD and ORD are Kramers-

Kronig related (4).

CD and ORD spectroscopy are powerful tools in biology, medicine, chemistry, and 

physics for studying chiral molecules of different kinds and sizes, especially for analyzing 

the secondary structure and conformation of macromolecules (5). Structural, kinetic, and 

thermodynamic information of macromolecules can be readily derived from CD and ORD 

measurements. It should be noted that the chiral optical response of most biomolecules 


3

or other natural chiral media is generally very weak. High concentrations or large analyte 

volumes are required to study many of the aforementioned properties. Plasmonics, on 

the other hand, deals with the optical properties of metallic nanoparticles (6). The 

plasmonic resonances of metallic particles fundamentally stem from a large number of 

quasi-free conduction electrons. An impinging light field can induce a harmonic oscillation 

of these quasi-free electrons, which concentrate far-field radiation into subwavelength 

volumes. What is even more exciting is the extremely large dipole strength that is 

associated with these resonances. Particles of subwavelength sizes can have significantly 

large interaction cross-sections,
which render individual particles extremely bright. 

Additionally, by virtue of the strong near-fields, resonances of individual particles can be 

coupled together and form collective modes that extend over the entire nanoparticle 

arrangement. In analogy to molecular physics, where the electronic wavefunctions of 

individual atoms mix and hybridize to form molecules, such plasmonic nanoparticle 

groupings have been termed plasmonic molecules in which plasmons from individual 

nanoparticles mix and hybridize. The related theory is called plasmon hybridization.(7)

The last few years have seen a tremendous interest in such plasmonic molecules for 

creation of unusual optical properties and extended plasmon modes with modified 

properties as compared to the individual nanoparticles (8).

The field of chiral plasmonics can in fact be seen as an extension of these efforts. 

As described above, chirality is a very intriguing property in its very own right. In 

recognizing the weak chiral optical responses of natural systems on the one hand and the 

strong light-matter interaction in plasmonic systems on the other hand, the idea of 

enhanced and tailored chiral optical responses in chiral plasmonic systems holds great 

promises (9).

Most research in the field can be understood and classified following the same 

rules as in molecular systems. Nature offers a large variety of chiral molecules, with very 

distinct working principles. A hexahelicene molecule consists of a ring of six benzene 

units. Six such units constitute a full 360° turn. However, for such a hexahelicene 

molecule the ring is not closed in-plane, but cut and bent open. Depending on an upward 

or downward bending, the molecule can either be left- or right-handed. The molecule 

possesses delocalized electronic orbitals that extend over the entire structure. Another 

prominent example is the so-called chiral center in which the tetravalent bonds of a 

central carbon atom are dressed with four different atoms or molecular groups, rendering 

the structure chiral. One can imagine the structure as a symmetric three-sided pyramid 

whose four corners are each dressed with a different object. The unhanded symmetric

pyramid therefore becomes chiral.
Again, such a molecular structure is rendered chiral 

by the nature and symmetry of the interaction as well as the bond formation in the 

molecules. Therefore, they also exhibit a strong chiral optical response due to the 

handedness not only of the structure but also of the collective wave functions. As soon as 


4

the molecular entities become more complex and more individual subunits and 

compounds are involved, another very different working principle can be observed. For 

example achiral chromophores can be arranged in a handed fashion, e.g., helically 

attached to a central backbone. These chromophores can either have degenerate or 

nondegenerate energies (3). In the latter case the collective wave functions or orbitals of 

the subgroups only interact very weakly with the neighbouring ones, so that crosstalk is 

mainly mediated by Coulomb interaction between the charge clouds. A chiral optical 

response is in this case not caused by a collective handed orbital, but rather by an 

additional interaction between individual subgroups that are arranged in a handed 

fashion. The aforementioned chiral center is another example of this working principle: 

Many biomolecules do actually consist of several chiral centres which do not necessarily 

all share a collective orbital (10, 11).

Chiral plasmonic structures can be classified in a very similar fashion, mainly 

depending on whether or not a collective plasmonic mode of handed character is formed 

along the entire structure. Collective plasmonic modes can form either in metallic 

nanoparticles which are themselves handed or in handed groupings of individual resonant 

nanoparticles. These two cases exhibit the strongest chiral optical responses and in fact 

represent the vast majority of chiral plasmonic structures in literature. Both concepts 

have been used in top-down fabricated systems, e.g., utilizing two-photon direct laser 

writing or electron-beam exposure, as well as in bottom-up synthesized structures, for 

example using DNA self-assembly. In analogy to biphenyl, one can also create handed 

arrangements of non-resonant (non-degenerate) plasmon modes. In such systems no 

collective modes of handed character are formed. However, a scattering type interaction 

is still possible which can lead to a chiral optical response (12). This response, as it is not 

associated with a handed plasmonic mode with large dipole strength, is much weaker.

One crucial difference between natural molecules and artificially created plasmonic 

molecules should be noted: a molecule is a bound system of individual atoms or 

molecular subgroups. Its structural symmetry and properties are determined by the 

interaction of the individual orbitals as well as by the symmetry and properties of the 

bond formation. Such a molecule therefore necessarily reflects its symmetry in the 

optical properties. A plasmonic molecule, however, is an artificially created entity that is 

not bound by the plasmonic interaction but by a physical scaffold that can be, e.g., a 

dielectric medium or DNA origami, among others. Thus, even though a plasmonic 

molecule might be handed from a geometrical point of view, there is no guarantee that 

the molecule will exhibit a chiral optical response. That said, a similar effect can be 

observed in molecular systems, in the extremely large size regime: As soon as a 

molecular system becomes so large that opposite ends are only weakly bound to each 

other they do not share a common electronic wavefunction. As a result the handed 


5

information of the structure is lost and the molecule shows extremely weak or no chiral 

optical response.

The following sections are structured as follows: first, we will discuss chiral 

plasmonic systems that are created using top-down fabrication methods, such as direct 

laser writing or lithography techniques. Subsequently, we will review the efforts of 

bottom-up synthesis using peptides or DNA-scaffolds. Different from natural molecules, it 

is fairly straightforward to manipulate the structure and arrangement of elements in 

artificial plasmonic molecules. This has led to the realization of active and tuneable

plasmonic chirality, both in top-down and bottom-up structures, which we will discuss 

afterwards. We will end the review with a discussion on the potential applications of 

chiral plasmonics, particularly in view of the recent efforts in chiral sensing, that is, the 

ultimate goal of discriminating the handedness of single (or few) chiral molecules utilizing 

appropriate chiral plasmonic sensing platforms.

Top-down fabrication methods for static chiral plasmonics

An archetype chiral structure is a helix or a spiral, an object exhibiting a distinct twist

and is well-known
from daily life and from nature. Gansel and co-workers have 

demonstrated plasmonic helices, which were fabricated by two-photon direct laser writing 

and a subsequent electroplating step that filled the helical voids in the photoresist (13).

The resulting free-standing helices exhibited plasmonic modes that extended over the 

entire structure, as can be seen in the simulated mode profiles shown in Figure 1A. The 

authors showed that the modes were of standing wave type, with increasing number of 

nodes, indicating higher order modes. Each of these modes had a distinct handedness 

and thus predominately interacted with light of the same handedness. The authors 

demonstrated that light of opposite, that is, non-matching handedness was blocked by 

the array of helices as the plasmonic antennas exhibited a very broad transmission 

minimum for LCP light while being highly transmittive for RCP light from 4000 nm to 

8000 nm, cf. Figure 1A. The arrays therefore effectively behaved as a circular polarizer 

which converted linear incident light, which is a superposition of LCP and RCP light, into 

circular polarized light as the non-matching component was removed in the transmitted 

light field.

The same authors have studied the influence of pitch and diameter of the helices

in great detail (14). A variation of the two parameters and the creation of tapered helices 

as shown in Figure 1B can further increase the operation bandwidth of the polarizer or in 

other words extend the spectral width of the respective plasmonic modes which 

underlines the direct connection of shape, plasmon modes, and chiral optical response. 

With impressive advances in fabrication technology the helices could be further optimized 

by nesting several helices into one another, as shown in Figure 1C (15–17). The authors 

used a lithography technique inspired by Stimulated Emission Depletion Microscopy to 


6

further increase the resolution of the two-photon direct laser process (18). It should be 

noted that this structural change has a major effect on the working principle of the 

polarizer: While for a single helix the suppressed transmission of one polarization is due 

to a difference in the reflection, the symmetry of three intertwined helices enforces 

similar reflectance for LCP and RCP. Thus, the observed transmittance difference is 

purely due to a difference in absorption, similar to chiral molecules where no scattering is 

observed. Another particularly intriguing structure has been described by Kaschke and 

co-workers (19). The authors stacked two helices of opposite handedness on top of each 

other. Due to the direct ohmic contact the helices are strongly coupled. The isolated 

upper spiral would block light of one handedness while transmitting the other polarization 

state. However, due to the strong conductive coupling between the two spirals the 

energy stored in the fundamental mode of the upper helix is efficiently transferred into 

the fundamental mode of the lower helix, which is then radiated to the far-field. As the 

modes have opposite handedness the combined
structure
thus acts as a circular 

polarization converter.

Apart from direct laser writing other techniques have been used to create chiral 

plasmonic structures. Frank and co-workers used colloidal nanohole lithography, a 

technique at the boundary of top-down and bottom-up techniques, to create gold spirals 

or ramps (20). Figure 1D depicts an exemplary tilted overview and close-up image of the 

structures. The authors observed a number of plasmonic modes which extended over 

the entire nanostructure, thus leading to the strong chiral optical response. Using 

glancing angle deposition a number of researchers have demonstrated high quality 

plasmonic spirals (21). Mark and co-workers showed two-pitched gold nanohelices with a 

strong chiral optical response around 700 nm (22). The TEM images and the mirrored CD 

spectra for the two enantiomers, as shown in Figure 1E, underline the excellent quality of 

the structures. Using a similar technique, Bai and collaborators observed a strong CD 

response in silver nanohelices at even shorter wavelength in the blue spectral region

(23). The overall scheme can also be reversed by drilling a “solid” handed aperture into a 

metallic film leading to an “inverse” spiral structure (24). Höflich and co-workers

demonstrated that electron-beam induced deposition could be used to produce plasmonic 

spirals (25). While the technique is highly versatile and allows to directly write functional 

structures, most structures suffer from rather low material quality. The precursor gases 

used in the deposition often cause carbon and other contaminations which harm the 

material quality. However, Esposito et al. have recently demonstrated plasmonic spirals 

that exhibited multiple plasmonic modes and pronounced chiral optical signatures in the 

visible regime, indicating excellent material quality (26–28). An array of such structures 

is depicted in Figure 1F.

The aforementioned structures are real spirals, some of them even exhibiting 

several pitches.
Another possibility is to create structures that are not directly 


7

reminiscent of a spiral but do still possess a handed character, such as staircases or a 

Möbius strip (29). Dietrich and co-workers used the so-called on-edge lithography to 

create a three-dimensional L-shaped metallic strip, as can be seen from the close-up 

scanning electron
micrograph shown in Figure 1G
(30).
Strong plasmonic modes 

extending over the whole length of the structure could be observed (31). Using a similar 

idea, Dietrich and co-workers evaporated gold through a star-shaped aperture onto cone-

shaped posts. The obtained 3D chiral structures also exhibit a strong CD response (32).

Another related ansatz by Yeom et al. utilized tilted evaporation of gold onto hexagonally 

shaped dielectric posts leading to a handed metallic film on this platform exhibiting a CD 

response in the visible wavelength region (33, 34). Helgert et al. have used very 

sophisticated
multi-step electron beam lithography to create a handed metallic 

nanostructure fused from two individual L-shaped nanoparticles exhibiting a CD response 

in the near infrared spectral region (35). Anther interesting concept has been introduced 

by McPeak and co-workers. They utilized different etching rates in silicon to fabricate 

complex indentations in high index wafers. By pre-structuring a resist film on the wafer 

they demonstrate remarkable shape control of the indentations. Using a sophisticated 

evaporation and lift-off technique they could transform the indentations into solid gold

nanoparticles with distinct structural handedness. The resulting nanoparticle solutions 

exhibited a strong chiral optical response in the visible and near-infrared spectral range.

It needs to be stressed that all the mentioned structures can in fact be viewed as 

intrinsically chiral structures as they are all made of metals and exhibit a distinct 

handedness. Therefore they exhibit strong chiral optical responses. The formation of 

chiral plasmonic modes is intrinsically ensured. It should also be noted that many 

deformed particles and shapes can in fact be chiral: Spheres, rods, or similar with 

specifically designed (or random!) indentations or deformations can lead to a chiral 

geometry which is also intrinsically handed (36). Many of these chiral particles do not at 

all resemble spirals or similar systems, but can still not be superimposed with their 

mirror images – they are sometimes colloquially called “potato-shaped”. The major 

difference between these two classes is that it is usually straightforward to tell the 

handedness of objects from the first class (such as a helix), while this is not the case for 

potato-shaped structures (37). Whether or not such deformed particles exhibit a strong 

chiral optical response is somewhat complicated and is also largely determined by the 

extent of the deformation, which in turn influences the deformation of the plasmon mode 

excited in the nanoparticles. Many plasmon modes, despite irregularities in their shape, 

still very well resemble a simple dipole.


8

Figure 1: Solid plasmonic chiral structures. All these structures are intrinsically chiral, 

meaning they are all made of solid metal and exhibit a distinct handedness due to their shape. A) 

Simulated transmittance spectra and plasmonic modes of a metallic spiral with two pitches. The 

structures basically blocks LCP light while transmitting RCP light nearly without loss. The observed 

plasmonic modes extend over the entire structure thus being strongly handed themselves. B) 

Tapered gold helices. In manipulating pitch and diameter of the spirals, the plasmonic modes can 

be manipulated and an even larger operational wavelength band can be generated. C) Nested 

plasmonic helices fabricated via STED direct laser lithography. D) SEM image of plasmonic spirals 

fabricated via colloidal nanohole-lithography. Being at the boundary of top-down and bottom-up 

techniques, this lithography technique allows for large area fabrication. E) GLAD (glancing angle 

deposition) allows for the fabrication of extremely small solid gold spirals exhibiting a strong CD 

response in the visible wavelength range, with excellent mirror symmetry of the CD spectra of the 

two enantiomers, as expected from theory. F) Free-standing metallic spirals fabricated by electron 

beam induced deposition, which allows to directly write functional nanostructures. G) A two-step 

lithography process allows fabricating on-edge solid metallic L-shapes which show a strong chiral 

optical response. Figures reproduced with permission from… A,(13) B,(14) C,(18) D(20), E,(22)

F,(26) G.(30)

The majority of micro-
and nanostructuring is lithography based, i.e., 

manufacturing was carried out by optical or electron beam lithography, which is generally 

associated with a planar and layered process. As researchers in plasmonics have mostly 


9

being using these lithographic techniques, the majority of chiral plasmonic structures 

have been fabricated in layers, meaning they consist of several functional layers that are 

stacked on top of each other in order to render the structure three-dimensional, a 

prerequisite for a structure to be chiral. Consequently, all these systems are 

plasmonically coupled systems. In order to show modes that extend over the entire 

structure, resonant coupling is crucial. 

Conceptually, it is possible to arrange 
achiral constituents to form
a 

superstructure that is chiral. The most straightforward design consists of two individual 

nanorods that are stacked on top of each other and are twisted with respect to each 

other, see Figure 2A (38). Despite its simplicity, this system has a number of degrees of 

freedom, including the twisting angle, the lateral alignment, and the vertical spacing 

distance. In general, the optical response is complicated due to the presence of two

modes whose resonance frequencies and amplitudes sensitively depend on the relative 

orientation as well as the excitation direction (39, 40). Yin et al. have shown that two 

orthogonally coupled nanorods can be viewed as the plasmonic version of the so-called 

Born-Kuhn model (41). The coupled systems exhibits two modes, the symmetric and the 

antisymmetric one, each exhibiting a distinct handedness. If the vertical coupling 

distance is matched to the resonance wavelength of the system, each mode is excited 

solely by RCP or LCP light. Figure 2A illustrates this mode behaviour. As a result, the 

observed CD spectrum shows one single dispersive lineshape, cf. Figure 2B, which is well 

known from chiral molecules. Knowing the CD response of the system, it is possible to 

calculate the optical rotatory dispersion (ORD) as the two quantities are Kramers Kronig 

related. This finding also indicates that in many studied systems a multitude of individual 

modes can be excited and lead to complicated CD spectra that are not always 

straightforward to interpret. Zhao and co-workers have studied the response upon 

stacking multiple rod layers on top of each other, rendering the mode formation more 

intriguing (42).

Other than nanorods, basically every plasmonic element can be utilized as a 

fundamental building block. Over the years a variety of structures have been 

demonstrated, using gammadions of different shapes (43, 44), split ring resonators (45, 

46), direct and inverse crosses (47, 48), L-shapes (49, 50), and others, see Figure 2. In 

particular, the more complex building blocks, such as gammadions, support several

plasmonic modes already in the individual building blocks, rendering the resulting 

structures somewhat broadband in their operation. Additionally, due to their physical size 

and volume, the resonance dipole strength tends to become very large allowing for very 

strong chiral optical responses, for example high gyrotropy as shown by Rogacheva and 

co-workers (43). Such structures have also been discussed in the framework of negative 

index matermaterials, see Figure 2C (44). Split ring resonators as well as crosses have 

been used to unravel the plasmonic coupling between the individual building blocks as 


10

well as the nature of the plasmonic modes (46, 47). Decker and co-workers also pointed 

out the importance of the grating and periodicity in the systems (45). While molecules in 

a solution do not show any relative order and therefore lead to isotropic media, top-down 

fabricated structures are always restricted on an interface. The authors stressed that the 

arrangement of the individual nano-objects on the surface can lead to a biaxial system in 

which the refractive indices for light polarized along these axis are different. Therefore, 

the systems exhibit strong polarization conversion phenomena, which can
mask, 

influence, or appear as a chiral optical response. In terms of symmetry and modes, the 

arrangement of the individual structures needs to be such that the eigenpolarizations are 

circular. Examples include the in plane isotropic symmetry groups C3 or C4, as is nicely 

illustrated in the scanning electron micrographs shown in Figure 2D. This effect, arising 

from the nature of top-down techniques, is always present in top-down fabricated 

systems and can be seen as a unique feature, different from natural chiral molecules.

If one uses nanospheres or nanodisks as simplest building blocks, one has 

generally two possibilities to render an arrangement chiral, as illustrated in Figure 2F

(51–53). One can arrange identical objects in a handed fashion, termed configurational 

chirality. Alternatively, one can arrange different objects in an unhanded fashion, for 

example at the tips of a symmetric pyramid (which is in fact the analogy of the

aforementioned chiral center) or at the corners of a square (see Figure 2G) (53) termed 

constitutional chirality. In doing so, chirality and any resulting chiral optical response 

cannot be explained by the symmetry of the individual building blocks, but rely on their 

three-dimensional arrangement. It is important to note that in both cases plasmonic 

coupling or cross talk is of crucial importance. The formation of collective plasmon modes 

that extend over the entire structure, similar to the case of more complex building 

blocks, is crucial. In fact, it has been shown that a strong chiral optical response cannot 

be obtained once the individual building blocks are strongly detuned (52). It should be 

noted, though, that plasmons can also interact via scattered radiation and via Coulomb 

interaction and not only via near-field coupling (51). This phenomenon is very similar to 

the case of biphenyl where the chiral response is not induced due to the formation of 

shared orbitals but due to Coulomb interaction. It has recently been shown that such a 

phenomenon can also be obtained in off-resonantly coupled plasmonic nanostructures in 

which indeed no collective modes are formed but off-resonant scattering in between the 

building blocks leads to a chiral optical response (12). However, as expected, the 

response is significantly weaker as compared to that of the resonant systems.


11

Figure 2: Chiral assemblies of achiral and chiral building blocks. A) Two bars stacked on-top 

of each other can be viewed as a fundamental chiral building block and as an analogy to the well-

known Born-Kuhn-Model. The assembly supports two modes which, if ideally tuned, lead to a single 

dispersive lineshape in the CD spectrum, shown in B). The ORD spectrum can be calculated from 

the CD spectrum as they are Kramers Kronig related.  C) Two-layered chiral structures composed 

of two individual 2D chiral gammadion shapes. D) Stacked and twisted split ring resonators 

arranged in a C4 symmetric lattice in order to render the eigenmodes of the system truly chiral. E) 

Twisted stacked crosses. F) Assemblies of achiral nanoparticles can be rendered handed due to 

configuration or constitution. G) Illustration of constitutional chirality: Four particles of different 

height (as can be seen due to their different brightness) in an achiral arrangement generate a 

handed system. Figures reproduced with permission from… A,B(41), C,(44) D,(45) E,(47) F,(52)

G.(53)

Bottom-up fabrication methods for static chiral plasmonics

For large scale and solution-based synthesis of chiral plasmonic structures self-assembly 

has been a particularly powerful route. In general two different strategies have been 

used: Metallic nanoparticles can be organized with the help of molecular scaffolds that 

take the form of fibers and possess either an intrinsic twist or are applied in twisted 

layers. The other option uses self-assembly via self-terminated interaction that lead to 

chiral clusters, that is, individual plasmonic molecules. Due to the tailorability of the 

molecular interaction this route tends to show a larger degree of structural control over 

the end products.

Guerrero-Martinez and co-workers used anthraquinone based oxalamide fibers 

infiltrated with gold nanorods (54). In solution, the fibers took a twisted form so that the 

gold particles, as they were attached to the fibers, exhibited a helical arrangement. (see 

the TEM image in Figure 3A). A scattering type or Coulomb interaction between the 

individual particles led to the observed chiral optical response (51). In a related ansatz 

Song et al. used peptites to organize gold nanoparticles on a double helical scaffold (55).

The resulting chiral nanoparticle chains reached considerable length with densely spaced 


12

nanoparticles facilitating coupling between the individual particles. The overall system 

showed a strong chiral optical response, similarly to the previous study, in the visible 

wavelength regime, see Figure 3B. Jung et al. used so-called modular gelator 

components which were self-assembled into stacks and thus formed a handed hydrogel 

scaffold for the subsequent growth of gold nanoparticles (56). Due to the even smaller 

sizes, the chiroptical response shifted to shorter wavelengths. Another very interesting 

motif was introduced by from Querejeta-Fernandez and co-workers (57, 58). The authors 

used
self-assembled cellulose nanocrystals loaded
with gold nanoparticles, as 

schematically illustrated in Figure 3C. The nanocrystal itself took the form of stacked 

layers of fibers twisted with respect to one another. The particles immersed into the 

crystal were oriented along the fiber axis in the twisted layers and thus also formed a 

handed system. All the aforementioned examples are large scale handed plasmonic 

systems. However, despite their beauty and ingenuity, they offer little to no distance 

control in between the particles and thus only allow tuning of the plasmon coupling 

strength via particle concentration and thus the average inter-particle distance which, in 

particular in the fiber based strategies, tends to be rather large.

Figure 3: Chiral plasmonic structures assembled on scaffolds. A) TEM image of twisted 

anthraquinonebased oxalamide fibers which are infiltered with gold nanorods. B) CD spectra of 

double helix assembled using peptides. The structure is illustrated with the help of 3D surface 

renderings of topographic volumes. C) A system of layered twisted cellulose nanocrystals is used as 

a scaffold for gold nanorods. Figures reproduced with permission from… A,(54) B,(55) C.(58)

The very powerful bottom-up strategy via DNA self-assembly has been introduced 

many years ago. In general there are two working principles, DNA-origami and DNA-


13

scaffolding. The first one uses templates, such as sheets, constructed from long DNA 

strands. The origami is dressed by designable binding sites, composed of single stranded 

DNA 
(ssDNA)
for 
attachment 
of 
nanoparticles 
which
are 
functionalized 
with 

complementary ssDNA strands through DNA hybridization. The latter method uses single 

ssDNA strands on individual nanoparticles that facilitate the binding between two 

specifically chosen nanoparticles or a group of particles such that they assemble only 

following the designed scheme. Both methods have a very high degree of tunability, 

programmability, and control over particle number, position, and sequence. Kuzyk and 

co-workers demonstrated
an gold nanoparticle helix structure
constructed from a 

sophisticated origami template (59). A DNA bundle made from 24-helices was helically 

dressed with nine specific binding sites. The addition of gold nanospheres functionalized 

with complementary DNA strands led to the formation of plasmonic helices with an 

impressively high yield. The assemblies showed a chiral optical response around 550 nm, 

see Figure 4A. The authors demonstrated an enhancement of the chiral optical response 

by overgrowing the gold nanoparticles with silver shells. The CD spectra shown in Figure 

4B demonstrate that due to the stronger coupling between the individual nanoparticles 

the strength of the chiral eigenmodes of the helices increases. This bottom-up result 

further underlines the importance of efficient coupling and hybrid mode formation in 

these plasmonic nanostructures.

Shen and co-workers assembled a similar helical structure, yet with an intriguing 

strategy using an origami sheet (60). After dressing the origami sheet with two linear 

chains of the helper 
strands (ssDNA), 
gold nanoparticles functionalized 
with 

complementary strands were subsequently attached. The origami sheet was rolled up 

into a cylinder by the folding strands, which resulted in a two-pitched gold nanoparticle 

helix, exhibiting a chiral optical response around 550 nm, close to the resonance of the 

individual nanoparticles. TEM images of the resulting structures are shown in Figure 4C.

Shen and co-workers also assembled chiral structures composed of two nanorods 

aligned tip-to-tip under an 90° angle, schematically illustrated in Figure 4D (61). The 

attachment sites for the two nanorods were attached on opposite sides of the nanosheet. 

The position, orientation, and relative angle between the nanorods can be precisely 

controlled by the attachment sites on the nanosheet
(62). Lan et al. used DNA 

nanosheets to create stacks of rotated gold nanorods (63). The individual sheets were 

dressed with capture strands on both sides, forming an ‘X’-shape, as shown in Figure 4E. 

The strands were both complementary to the ssDNA used to assemble the gold nanorods. 

Mixing both entities led to the formation of nanorod stacks, exhibiting a chiral optical 

response around 700 nm. A distribution of finite stacks forms, as indicated by the TEM 

images in Figure 4E.

Drawing inspiration from molecular physics, the analogy to a chiral center, as 

introduced above, has been studied extensively as well. Here, four different particles are 


14

arranged in a symmetric frame in order to form a chiral entity. First results were

demonstrated by Mastroianni and co-workers (64) as well as Chen and co-workers (65)

using DNA scaffolds, that is, single and complementary ssDNA on individual nanoparticles 

lead to rationally designable molecules. Using the same concept, Yan et al. have created 

nanoparticle pyramids constructed from two differently sized gold nanoparticles, a silver 

nanoparticle as well as a quantum dot (66). Due to the specific interaction between the 

DNA strands the authors of both studies demonstrated precise control over the position 

and sequence of the nanoparticles, as illustrated by the schematic scheme shown in 

Figure 4F. However, only the latter study could demonstrate a chiral optical response in 

the blue spectral region. One possible explanation lies in the rather inefficient interaction 

between the individual nanoparticles as the resonance energies and the resonance dipole 

strength are highly detuned. In any case, the overall structure is highly tunable and the 

chiral optical response can even be inverted by appropriate symmetry breaking (67).

Shen and co-workers could indeed show how to increase the chiral optical response in 

such a four-particle self-assembled geometry (68). They used an origami sheet, here 

with four docking sites, three along an L-shape on the one interface, one on the other, as 

shown in Figure 4G. Addition of identical-sized gold nanoparticles led to the formation of 

a chiral quadrumer. The handedness depended on the position of the fourth particle 

relative to the L-shape and could be freely chosen in the design process of the origami. 

In this structure, the handedness was induced due to the geometrical placement of the 

particles (configuration) rather than by size (conformation). In the experiment, depicted 

in Figure 4G, one observes a strong chiral optical response due to the efficient plasmonic 

coupling of the resonant particles and the formation of a chiral mode extending over the 

entire handed structure, such also being handed. Urban and co-workers used four curved 

DNA origami monomers to create an origami ring that was dressed with a total of 24 gold 

nanoparticles which were arranged in a spiral fashion around the ring (69). The resulting 

structure constitutes a plasmonic toroidal structure with a strong chiral optical response.


15

Figure 4: Chiral plasmonic structures assembled with the help of DNA strands and DNA 

origami. A) A DNA backbone with helically attached binding sites is used to create helices of gold 

nanoparticles exhibiting a CD response around 550nm. B) Overgrowth of the particles with silver 

leads to an increased coupling strength, a much stronger CD response, and a small spectral red 

shift due to the increased coupling. C) Gold nanoparticles are arranged in two parallel rows on a 

DNA origami and subsequently rolled up to form a spiral. D) Utilizing the possibility to differently 

facilitate the two sites of a DNA origami sheet, a handed rod-dimer can be assembled. E) Origami 

sheets are used to create stacks of rotated gold nanorods. The individual sheets are dressed with 

capture strands on both sides and adding gold nanorods which are dressed with complementary 

ssDNA to the formation of nanorod stacks. F) Using specifically designed ssDNA nanoparticle 

pyramids constructed from two differently sized gold nanoparticles, a silver nanoparticle, as well as 

a quantum dot can be assembled. G) An origami sheet with four docking sites, three along an L-

shape on the one interface, one on the other is used to assemble a chiral quadrumer. The 

handedness depends on the position of the fourth particle relative to the L-shape. The structures 

show a strong CD response. Figures reproduced with permission from… A,(59) B,(59) C,(60)

D,(61) E,(63) F,(66) G.(68)


16

Active chiral plasmonics

The handedness of a molecule is a fixed and well defined property. Fundamentally 

speaking, this is the reason why CD spectroscopy is an important tool for structural 

investigations as the spectral response is uniquely related to a certain handedness or to a 

single enantiomer of a system. In chiral plasmonics, researchers have demonstrated 

excellent structural control, both using top-down and bottom-up techniques. With such 

control, systems with switchable chirality can be realized, i.e., systems that show 

different chiral optical responses under a certain external stimulus. In molecular physics 

a change in the chiral optical response is always related to a real change in the 3-

dimensional arrangement, hence, the geometry of a system. In artificial structures it is 

not straightforwardly possible to change the arrangement of the structures post-

fabrication. 

However, changing the chiral optical response is still possible by any manipulation 

that suitably influences the plasmon modes of the system, even if the geometrical 

handedness of the structure stays unchanged. Zhang and co-workers demonstrated a 

highly sophisticated
top-down structure 
which showed
a photoinduced 
optical 

handedness change (70), see Figure 5A. Using multi-layer lithography they created a 

three-dimensional molecule composed of two individual chiral units that together defined

the optical response of the entire system. The incorporation of silicon pads allowed to

optically address the chiral units and to manipulate their relative contribution to the 

overall response. Under illumination with an external light field the optical response 

changes without a structural reconfiguration of the chiral molecule. Yin and co-workers 

showed a similar system, shown in Figure 5B, using a phase change material (GST-326) 

as the switchable medium, allowing for a spectral shift as well as a sign change of the 

optical response (71). GST exhibits a large refractive index change when the material is 

thermally switched from its amorphous state into the crystalline state. The authors 

demonstrated a very large spectral shift of the chiral optical response of a two-bar 

system 
utilizing 
this 
active 
thermal 
switching
mechanism. 
Additionally, 
they 

demonstrated the switching of the chiral optical spectrum by using a similar bias-

structure concept as in the previously mentioned work. Two chiral units, one active chiral 

dimer and one bias dimer, generated the overall chiral optical response. One of them 

could be actively detuned with help of the GST layer which lead to a pronounced sign 

change in the optical response.

A similar tuning concept was introduced by Duan and co-workers (72). They used

a hybrid chiral plasmonic system that consisted of individual gold and magnesium 

nanoparticles in a gammadion-like arrangement, shown in Figure 5C. Hydrogen allowed 

for switching the magnesium to magnesium hydride, which is a dielectric. Consequently, 

the plasmon modes of the magnesium particles vanished. With these modes no longer 

present, the near-field coupling in the entire systems broke down. The remaining


17

plasmon modes in the gold nanoparticles were no longer chiral. The chiral optical 

response was turned off. The structure thus enabled a continuously tunable chiral optical 

response depending on the hydrogen concentration within the magnesium.

In all the aforementioned systems, the change in the chiral optical response is 

enabled by sophisticated designs and is a consequence of the superposition of different 

signals. Schreiber et al. demonstrated a switchable system that relies on the fact that the 

excitation of plasmon modes strongly depends on the orientation of the nanostructure

(73). Plasmonic helices, assembled using DNA origami templates (59), were tethered to a 

surface in solution. In solution the helices stood upright. After removal of the buffer 

solution and drying of the sample the helices lied flat on the surface. This change of the 

relative orientation between the helices and the incident light lead to a switching of the 

chiral optical response.

Beyond these methods to manipulate the plasmon modes, the post-fabrication 

tunability of bottom-up structures additionally allows for actively and reversibly changing 

the geometrical arrangement and configuration of a chiral plasmonic molecule, that is, its 

handedness, and consequently fully inverting the chiral optical response. The first fully 

switchable system has been shown by Kuzyk and co-workers: The authors constructed 

an origami template which consisted of two intersecting twisted bundles held together, 

shown in Figure 5D. The tunable angle between the two bundles was controlled by two

DNA locks (74). These locks could be locked or unlocked with the help of specifically 

designed fuel DNA strands. Two gold nanorods were attached on the two bundles. 

Addition of the fuel DNA strands as the external stimulus allowed to controllably and 

reproducibly switch the twisting angle between the rods and thus change the handedness 

of the structure, leading to a flipped chiral optical spectrum. The stimulus that triggered 

the structural and thus the optical change was differently sequenced DNA strands that 

mediated the opening or closing of the DNA locks. While highly interesting, this is 

obviously a challenging experimental technique. The same group of authors presented a 

different design that uses ultraviolet and visible light illumination as the input trigger. A 

similar structure of two origami bundles with two gold nanorods was locked in a twisted

and therefore handed geometry by an azobenzene-modified lock. Under UV (VIS) 

illumination, the molecule underwent a trans-cis photoisomerization locking or unlocking 

state of the two DNA bundles, thus rendering the gold nanoparticle pair either handed or 

achiral. The strong chiral optical signal in the locked state vanished under UV illumination 

due to formation of the relaxed state and reappeared under VIS illumination due to 

formation of the locked state.

Another concept uses DNA origami with individually addressable binding sites

(75). Two nanorods were attached under a 90° angle on the opposite sites of a DNA 

origami sheet, shown in Figure 5 E. One was static on the sheet, the other one could 

walk over the surface of the sheet with the help of fuel strands interacting with 6 specific 


18

binding sites arranged along the track. Upon addition of the fuel strands, the DNA 

strands covered on the walker nanorod were released from the previous binding sites and 

were attached to the next binding sites successively, thus walking along the track. The 

arrangement of the two nanorods could in this way be manipulated in five distinct steps 

switching the handedness of the system from left to right and back. Along with the 

structural change, the spectra showed distinct changes and an ultimate full reversal of 

the spectrum. In creating an even more complex walker landscape out of DNA the 

authors demonstrated the ability to deduce structural changes and arrangement on the 

nanoscale from the optical response alone. The same group of authors extended the 

concept by incorporating a total of three rods . They showed that the optical response 

could not only be fully controlled with the help of an external stimulus but also that is 

also possible to optically resolve the movements of two separate and individually 

addressable walkers on the DNA origami (76).

Figure 5: Switchable chiral plasmonic structures. A) Top-down fabricated three-dimensional 

molecule consisting of two individual chiral units which together define the optical response of the 

entire system. The incorporation of silicon pads (green) allows to optically address the chiral units 

and to manipulate their relative contribution to the overall response. B) Two chiral units, one active 

chiral dimer (bottom) and one bias dimer (top), generate the overall chiral optical response while 

one of them can be actively detuned with help of the GST layer, leading to a pronounced sign 

change in the optical response. C) Switchable hybrid chiral plasmonic system, consisting of gold 

and magnesium nanoparticles in a ratchet wheel-like arrangement. Switching the magnesium 

plasmon off via hydration switches the chiral plasmonic response off. D) Interlocked DNA bundles 

are dressed with two gold nanorods. The locks can be unlocked with the help of specifically 

designed DNA strands, followed by the formation of new DNA bonds that lock the two bundles with 


19

the opposite twisting angle thus inverting the handedness and the chiral optical response. E) 

Schematic illustration of DNA nanowalker. The lower red rod is static while the upper yellow one 

can walk over the origami sheet successively switch the chirality of the system. Figures reproduced 

with permission from… A,(70) B,(71) C,(72) D,(74) E.(75)

Chiral Sensing

As shown, one of the main striking features of plasmonic chirality is its strength

compared to naturally occurring chiral molecules. Even dense solutions of chiral 

molecules might show a CD response of only a few milidegrees. Accordingly, the so-

called dissymmetry factor is only in the range of 10-7 to 10-5. Plasmonic molecules and 

structures, on the other hand, can exhibit CD responses of tens of degrees for structures 

less than a wavelength in thickness. In the extreme case, this can result in responses 

where one handedness is fully absorbed while the other is transmitted (77). The resulting 

dissymmetry factors approach unity. The reason, as discussed above, is not surprising. 

In contrast to molecules, plasmonic structures are excellent scatters and absorbers for 

light.

It is an intriguing question whether it is possible to combine plasmonic and 

molecular systems such that the chiral optical response of the chiral molecule will be 

increased. Such hybrid chiral systems could result in novel chiral optical spectroscopy 

techniques with largely increased sensitivity, similar to plasmonically enhanced 

spectroscopy techniques for achiral molecules such as SERS or SEIRA (78, 79). The field 

of plasmonically enhanced chiral optical spectroscopy has been very active because of 

the high potential benefit for both fundamental physical and chemical research as well 

life science applications. However, it has also been a field of intense discussions as many 

of the aspects of the assumed interaction and processes are not yet well understood.

Many studies rely on the interaction of an achiral plasmonic resonance with chiral 

molecules. The plasmonic resonance can either result from one single achiral 

nanostructure or in an achiral assembly of several nanostructures. In the following, we 

will discuss some important findings. More comprehensive reviews can be found in Ref. 

(80, 81).

In such a hybrid chiral system, two distinct features can be observed: Firstly, the 

intrinsic CD of the molecule itself is modified. Secondly, an additional feature in the CD 

spectrum appears at the plasmon resonance wavelength. This second effect shifts the CD 

response from the UV, where it generally occurs in molecular systems, more into the 

visible 
wavelength 
region 
around 
the 
plasmon 
resonance. 
Using 
plasmonic 

nanostructures with resonances in the UV or blue wavelength region increases the 

strength of the effect
(82, 83).
Govorov and co-workers interpret the observed 

phenomena as a Coulomb interaction (84). Several experiments reported both the 

modified CD response as well as the induced signal at the plasmon resonance, using gold 


20

nanoparticles and peptides
(85),
silver nanocrystals and cysteine
(86),
or gold 

nanoparticles and tobacco mosaic viruses (87), underlining the generality of the effect. A 

first definitive proof of the importance of plasmonic coupling was reported by Maoz and 

co-workers (88). They introduced molecular spacer layers of well-controllable thickness 

between the plasmonically active particles and the chiral analyte which lead to a 

suggestive decrease of the induced CD signal, as expected for a near-field interaction. 

Abdulrahman and co-workers have further shown that induced chirality can also occur in 

a far-field coupling scheme, similar to the coupling of purely plasmonic systems (89). It 

should be noted that the enhancement of the chiral optical response and the strength of 

the induced CD are rather weak and will not exceed roughly one order of magnitude if 

only one close-by nanoparticle is considered. Stronger enhancements can be observed in 

the hot-spots of nanoparticle assemblies. Gerard and co-workers studied an aggregated 

system of gold nanoparticles and oligonucleotide molecules (90). Only in case of the 

formation of small gaps an induced CD signal could be detected. Govorov and Zhang 

could further confirm that the effect depends strongly on the field enhancement in the 

gap and is also highly sensitive to the relative orientation of the molecular dipole and the 

dimer axis (91, 92).

More complex geometries of the nanostructure result in even more sophisticated 

chiral interactions, which cannot be fully described by the aforementioned dipolar 

coupling schemes. Tang and Cohen introduced a measure for the chiral interaction 

strength of an arbitrary electromagnetic field, which they termed optical chirality (93).

Complex plasmonic nanostructures were optimized to generate near-fields with high

optical chirality (94), where the best results could be obtained for chiral plasmonic 

nanostructures (95). However, geometrical chirality is not mandatory; even achiral 

plasmonic nanostructures can generate chiral near-fields locally (96, 97). This behaviour 

constitutes a major difference between the chiral optical far-field and near-field response. 

An important conclusion is that the CD of a nanostructure cannot be used as a measure 

when designing a structure with strong a structure with strong chiral near-fields and vice 

versa (98).

Although the concept of optical chirality offers a powerful tool to quickly check 

different designs regarding their potential usefulness for plasmonically enhanced chiral 

sensing, the theory assumes no back action of the chiral molecule on the nanostructure 

and, therefore, cannot fully predict the response of such hybrid systems. Rigorous 

numerical simulations that include the chiral medium close the gap because they take all 

electromagnetic interactions into account. The results of such simulations indicate that 

strong field enhancement and the correct alignment of the enhanced fields with respect 

to the incident field is more crucial than the chirality of the nanostructure (99). Some 

experimental investigations have been performed by Hendry and co-workers, who used a 

gammadion-shaped nanoparticle to study the interaction of such complex nanostructures 


21

with chiral molecules (100). They claimed a sizable resonance shift of the chiral optical 

response of the metallic nanostructure when adding the chiral analyte. Molecules with 

different handedness resulted in different signs of the shift. The strength of the response 

could not completely be explained by theoretical considerations, indicating that the 

interaction mechanisms in such complex hybrid systems have not been fully revealed 

yet.

However, a different approach for ultra-sensitive detection of chiral molecules has 

been discussed in literature during the last years. It utilizes the strong CD response of 

chiral plasmonic systems, which has been extensively discussed in this review, in a highly 

ingenious way. In this approach, the addition of the analyte triggers a self-assembly 

process which results in coupled plasmonic structures that exhibit a CD response. The 

emergence of the plasmonic CD response, which can be traced with standard CD 

spectrometers, therefore reports the presence of the analyte. Several systems have been 

studied. For example, Wu and co-workers used the formation of nano-particle dimers for 

the detection of microcysteine-LR and a cancer biomarker (101). Similar mechanisms 

have been used for the detection of silver ions(102) and bisphenol A (103).
Zhao et al. 

used shell-engineered systems for DNA detection (104). In all these cases, the analyte 

molecules link the nanoparticles which results in a plasmonic chiral optical response due 

to the prolate shape of the nanoparticles. This concept, however, relies on random 

defects of nominally highly symmetric nanoparticles for the generation of plasmonic 

chirality. The sensitivity can be largely increased if either particles of lower symmetry, 

such as rods, or intrinsically chiral assemblies are used. Ma and co-workers used the DNA 

triggered assembly of twisted chains of gold nanorods for DNA detection (105). The 

importance of the orientation of the nanorods has been pointed out by Han and 

collaborators, who showed that the side-by-side arrangement leads to stronger 

responses than an end-to-end configuration (106). Wen and collaborators detected 

copper ions in L-cysteine and gold intrinsic three-dimensional structure, that is, a 

pyramidal grouping of four nanoparticles. In the first study the presence of the target 

DNA molecule triggered a structural alteration and thus an increase in the chiral optical 

response. In the study of Oh and collaborators, a helical arrangement of gold 

nanoparticles was achieved (107). Li et al. used a combination of gold nanoparticles and 

luminescent particles that even allowed for a double detection, monitoring CD as well as 

the luminescence. It has to be mentioned that this indirect detection scheme is, in 

contrast to the previously discussed interaction of plasmonic and molecular resonances, 

not generally applicable. Only analytes that trigger the corresponding self-assembly 

process can be detected. However, if such a process exists, the resulting enhancement is 

beyond reach for any other method known thus far.


22

Conclusions

Chirality, in a very general sense, refers not only to a geometrical property but also to 

the optical response of a particular system. While the handedness of a system, from a 

purely geometrical point of view, constitutes a per se intriguing concept, a chiral optical 

response is a highly desirable property. While those two concepts are inextricably 

connected in molecular systems, chiral optical responses of plasmonic systems result 

from the handedness of the underlying plasmon modes, which not necessarily follow the 

structural symmetry of the plasmonic system.

Advances in micro- and nanofabrication techniques have enabled the realization of 

sophisticated chiral plasmonic systems. Direct laser writing, multi-layer lithography, self-

assembly via scaffolds or DNA, and many more have been used to study the working 

principle of plasmonic chirality. In order to truly benefit from the strong light-matter 

interaction of plasmons collective mode formation has been identified as a key feature. 

Resonant interaction between adjacent nanoparticles enables a strong chiral optical 

response, much larger than in molecular systems and even large enough to create

circular polarizers. Sophisticated materials and designs have furthermore lead to active 

chiral systems where the chiral optical response or even the handedness of the structure 

itself could be switched. The combination of plasmonic systems with chiral molecules 

shows promising prospects for enhanced enantiomer detection. With this rich set of 

fascinating results, chiral plasmonics has lived up to many of the original promises and 

hopes and will most definitely remain an interesting and fruitful field of research for the 

years to come.

Associated Content

Materials and Methods

None, review paper.

Author Information

Corresponding Author: Na Liu, na.liu@kip.uni-heidelberg.de

Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Author contributions: All authors contributed to the discussion, outline, and writing of the 

manuscript.


23

Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the 

paper are present in the paper. Additional data related to this paper may be requested 

from the authors.

Acknowledgments

We gratefully acknowledge financial support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 

(SPP1391, FOR730, and GI 269/11-1), by the Bundesministerium für Bildung und 

Forschung (13N9048 and 13N10146), by the Baden-Württemberg Stiftung, by the 

Ministerium für Wissenschaft, Forschung und Kunst Baden-Württemberg (Az: 7533-7-

11.6-8), Zeiss Foundation, Alexander-von-Humboldt Foundation, by the European 

Research Council (ERC Advanced Grant Complexplas),
and by the German-Israeli 

Foundation. We also acknowledge financial support by the Sofja Kovalevskaja grant from 

the Alexander von Humboldt-Foundation, the Marie Curie CIG grant, and the European 

Research Council (ERC Dynamic Nano) grant. 

References

1. 
U. J. Meierhenrich, Amino Acids and the Asymmetry of Life (Springer, Berlin, 
2008).

2. 
Haken H., Wolf H. C., Molecular physics and elements of quantum chemistry
(Springer, Berlin, 2003).

3. 
A. Rodger, B. Norden, Circular Dichroism and Linear Dichroism (Oxford University 
Press, 1997).

4. 
L. D. Barron, Molecular light scattering and optical activity (Cambridge Univ. Press, 
2nd Editio., 2004).

5. 
N. Berova, K. Nakanishi, R. W. Woody, Circular Dichroism, Principles and 
Applications (Wiley, New York, 2000).

6. 
M. I. Stockman, Nanoplasmonics: past, present, and glimpse into future. Opt. 
Express. 19, 22029 (2011).

7. 
E. Prodan, C. Radloff, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, A Hybridization Model for the 
Plasmon Response of Complex Nanostructures. Science (80-. ). 302, 419–422 
(2003).

8. 
N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W.-S. Chang, S. Link, P. Nordlander, Plasmons in strongly 
coupled metallic nanostructures. Chem. Rev. 111, 3913–3961 (2011).


24

9. 
V. K. Valev, J. J. Baumberg, C. Sibilia, T. Verbiest, Chirality and chiroptical effects 
in plasmonic nanostructures: fundamentals, recent progress, and outlook. Adv. 
Mater. 25, 2517–34 (2013).

10. 
E. L. Eliel, W. S. H., L. N. Mander, Stereochemistry of organic compounds (Wiley, 
1994).

11. 
M. Eichelbaum, A. S. Gross, Stereochemical Aspects of Drug Action and 
Disposition. Adv. Drug Res. 28, 70376 (1996).

12. 
V. E. Ferry, M. Hentschel, A. P. Alivisatos, Circular Dichroism in Off-Resonantly 
Coupled Plasmonic Nanosystems. Nano Lett. 15, 8336–8341 (2015).

13. 
J. K. Gansel, M. Thiel, M. S. Rill, M. Decker, K. Bade, V. Saile, G. von Freymann, S. 
Linden, M. Wegener, Gold helix photonic metamaterial as broadband circular 
polarizer. Science. 325, 1513–1515 (2009).

14. 
J. K. Gansel, M. Latzel, A. Frölich, J. Kaschke, M. Thiel, M. Wegener, Tapered gold-
helix metamaterials as improved circular polarizers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 101109 
(2012).

15. 
J. Fischer, J. B. Mueller, J. Kaschke, T. J. a. Wolf, A.-N. Unterreiner, M. Wegener, 
Three-dimensional multi-photon direct laser writing with variable repetition rate. 
Opt. Express. 21, 26244 (2013).

16. 
J. Kaschke, M. Blome, S. Burger, M. Wegener, Tapered N -helical metamaterials 
with three-fold rotational symmetry as improved circular polarizers. Opt. Express. 
101109, 1021–1025 (2014).

17. 
J. Kaschke, M. Wegener, Optical and Infrared Helical Metamaterials. 
Nanophotonics. 5, 38–51 (2016).

18. 
J. Kaschke, M. Wegener, Gold triple-helix mid-infrared metamaterial by STED-
inspired laser lithography. Opt. Lett. 40, 3986–3989 (2015).

19. 
J. Kaschke, L. Blume, L. Wu, M. Thiel, K. Bade, Z. Yang, M. Wegener, A Helical 
Metamaterial for Broadband Circular Polarization Conversion. Adv. Opt. Mater. 3, 
1411–1417 (2015).

20. 
B. Frank, X. Yin, M. Schäferling, J. Zhao, S. M. Hein, P. V Braun, H. Giessen, 
Large-area 3D chiral plasmonic structures. ACS Nano. 7, 6321 (2013).

21. 
J. G. Gibbs, A. G. Mark, S. Eslami, P. Fischer, Plasmonic nanohelix metamaterials 
with tailorable giant circular dichroism. Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 213101 (2013).

22. 
A. G. Mark, J. G. Gibbs, T.-C. Lee, P. Fischer, Hybrid nanocolloids with 
programmed three-dimensional shape and material composition. Nat. Mater. 12, 
802–807 (2013).

23. 
F. Bai, J. Deng, M. Yang, J. Fu, J. Ng, Z. Huang, Two chiroptical modes of silver 
nanospirals. Nanotechnology. 27, 115703 (2016).

24. 
M. V. Gorkunov, a. a. Ezhov, V. V. Artemov, O. Y. Rogov, S. G. Yudin, Extreme 
optical activity and circular dichroism of chiral metal hole arrays. Appl. Phys. Lett.
104, 221102 (2014).


25

25. 
K. Höflich, R. Bin Yang, A. Berger, G. Leuchs, S. Christiansen, The direct writing of 
plasmonic gold nanostructures by electron-beam-induced deposition. Adv. Mater.
23, 2657–61 (2011).

26. 
M. Esposito, V. Tasco, M. Cuscunà, F. Todisco, A. Benedetti, I. Tarantini, M. De 
Giorgi, D. Sanvitto, A. Passaseo, Nanoscale 3D Chiral Plasmonic Helices with 
Circular Dichroism at Visible Frequencies. ACS Photonics. 17, 105–114 (2014).

27. 
A. Benedetti, M. Esposito, V. Tasco, F. Todisco, M. Cuscuna, D. Sanvitto, A. 
Passaseo, Triple-helical nanowires by tomographic rotatory growth for chiral 
photonics. Nat. Commun. 6, 6484 (2015).

28. 
M. Esposito, V. Tasco, F. Todisco, A. Benedetti, D. Sanvitto, A. Passaseo, Three 
Dimensional Chiral Metamaterial Nanospirals in the Visible Range by Vertically 
Compensated Focused Ion Beam. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2, 154–161 (2014).

29. 
C. Rockstuhl, C. Menzel, T. Paul, F. Lederer, Optical activity in chiral media 
composed of three-dimensional metallic meta-atoms. Phys. Rev. B. 79, 035321 
(2009).

30. 
K. Dietrich, D. Lehr, C. Helgert, A. Tünnermann, E.-B. Kley, Circular Dichroism 
from Chiral Nanomaterial Fabricated by On-Edge Lithography. Adv. Mater. 24, 1–5 
(2012).

31. 
C. Han, H. M. Leung, C. T. Chan, W. Y. Tam, Giant plasmonic circular dichroism in 
Ag staircase nanostructures. Opt. Express. 23, 2542–2547 (2015).

32. 
K. Dietrich, C. Menzel, D. Lehr, O. Puffky, U. Hübner, T. Pertsch, A. Tünnermann, 
E.-B. Kley, Elevating optical activity: Efficient on-edge lithography of three-
dimensional starfish metamaterial. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 193107 (2014).

33. 
B. Yeom, H. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Il Park, K. Kim, A. O. Govorov, N. A. Kotov, Chiral 
plasmonic nanostructures on achiral nanopillars. Nano Lett. 13, 5277–83 (2013).

34. 
C. Han, W. Y. Tam, Chirality from shadowing deposited metallic nanostructures. 
Photonics Nanostructures - Fundam. Appl. 13, 50–57 (2015).

35. 
C. Helgert, E. Pshenay-Severin, M. Falkner, C. Menzel, C. Rockstuhl, E.-B. Kley, A. 
Tünnermann, F. Lederer, T. Pertsch, Chiral metamaterial composed of three-
dimensional plasmonic nanostructures. Nano Lett. 11, 4400–4 (2011).

36. 
Z. Fan, A. O. Govorov, Chiral nanocrystals: plasmonic spectra and circular 
dichroism. Nano Lett. 12, 3283–3289 (2012).

37. 
P. W. Fowler, Quantification of Chirality: Attempting the Impossible. Symmetry 
Cult. Sci. 16, 321–334 (2005).

38. 
Y. Svirko, N. Zheludev, M. Osipov, Layered chiral metallic microstructures with 
inductive coupling. Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 498–500 (2001).

39. 
B. Auguie, J. L. Alonso-Gomez, A. Guerrero-Martinez, L. M. Liz-Marzan, Fingers 
Crossed : Optical Activity of a Chiral Dimer of. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2, 846–851 
(2011).


26

40. 
Y. Tang, L. Sun, A. E. Cohen, Chiroptical hot spots in twisted nanowire plasmonic 
oscillators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 043103 (2013).

41. 
X. Yin, M. Schäferling, B. Metzger, H. Giessen, Interpreting chiral nanophotonic 
spectra: the plasmonic born-kuhn model. Nano Lett. 13, 6238–43 (2013).

42. 
Y. Zhao, M. A. Belkin, A. Alù, Twisted optical metamaterials for planarized ultrathin
broadband circular polarizers. Nat. Commun. 3, 870 (2012).

43. 
a. V. Rogacheva, V. a. Fedotov, a. S. Schwanecke, N. I. Zheludev, Giant gyrotropy 
due to electromagnetic-field coupling in a bilayered chiral structure. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 97, 1–4 (2006).

44. 
R. Zhao, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, T. Koschny, C. M. Soukoulis, Conjugated gammadion 
chiral metamaterial with uniaxial optical activity and negative refractive index. 
Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 83, 4–7 (2011).

45. 
M. Decker, R. Zhao, C. M. Soukoulis, S. Linden, M. Wegener, Twisted split-ring-
resonator photonic metamaterial with huge optical activity. Opt. Lett. 35, 1593–
1595 (2010).

46. 
N. Liu, H. Liu, S. Zhu, H. Giessen, Stereometamaterials. Nat. Photonics. 3, 157–
162 (2009).

47. 
M. Decker, M. Ruther, C. E. Kriegler, J. Zhou, C. M. Soukoulis, S. Linden, M. 
Wegener, Strong optical activity from twisted-cross photonic metamaterials. Opt. 
Lett. 34, 2501–2503 (2009).

48. 
K. Hannam, D. a. Powell, I. V. Shadrivov, Y. S. Kivshar, Broadband chiral 
metamaterials with large optical activity. Phys. Rev. B. 89, 125105 (2014).

49. 
C. Menzel, C. Helgert, C. Rockstuhl, E.-B. Kley, A. Tünnermann, T. Pertsch, F. 
Lederer, Asymmetric Transmission of Linearly Polarized Light at Optical 
Metamaterials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 253902 (2010).

50. 
M. Hentschel, V. E. Ferry, A. P. Alivisatos, Optical Rotation Reversal in the Optical 
Response of Chiral Plasmonic Nanosystems: The Role of Plasmon Hybridization. 
ACS Photonics. 2, 1253–1259 (2015).

51. 
Z. Fan, A. O. Govorov, Plasmonic circular dichroism of chiral metal nanoparticle 
assemblies. Nano Lett. 10, 2580–2587 (2010).

52. 
M. Hentschel, M. Schäferling, T. Weiss, N. Liu, H. Giessen, Three-dimensional 
chiral plasmonic oligomers. Nano Lett. 12, 2542–7 (2012).

53. 
R. Ogier, Y. Fang, M. Svedendahl, P. Johansson, M. Käll, Macroscopic layers of 
chiral plasmonic nanoparticle oligomers from colloidal lithography. ACS Photonics. 
1, 1074–1081 (2014).

54. 
A. Guerrero-Martínez, B. Auguié, J. L. Alonso-Gómez, Z. Džolić, S. Gómez-Graña, 
M. Žinić, M. M. Cid, L. M. Liz-Marzán, Intense optical activity from three-
dimensional chiral ordering of plasmonic nanoantennas. Angew. Chemie. 50, 
5499–5503 (2011).


27

55. 
C. Song, M. G. Blaber, G. Zhao, P. Zhang, H. C. Fry, G. C. Schatz, N. L. Rosi,
Tailorable Plasmonic Circular Dichroism Properties of Helical Nanoparticle 
Superstructures. Nano Lett. 13, 3256–3261 (2013).

56. 
S. H. Jung, J. Jeon, H. Kim, J. Jaworski, J. H. Jung, Chiral Arrangement of Achiral 
Au Nanoparticles by Supramolecular Assembly of Helical Nano fi ber Templates. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 6446–6452 (2014).

57. 
A. Querejeta-Fernandez, B. Kopera, K. S. Prado, A. Klinkova, M. Methot, G. 
Chauve, J. Bouchard, A. S. Helmy, E. Kumacheva, Circular Dichroism of Chiral 
Nematic Films of Cellulose Nanocrystals Loaded with Plasmonic Nanoparticles. ACS 
Nano. 9, 10377–10385 (2015).

58. 
A. Querejeta-Fernández, G. Chauve, M. Methot, J. Bouchard, E. Kumacheva, Chiral 
Plasmonic Films Formed by Gold Nanorods and Cellulose Nanocrystals. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 136, 4788–4793 (2014).

59. 
A. Kuzyk, R. Schreiber, Z. Fan, G. Pardatscher, E.-M. Roller, A. Högele, F. C. 
Simmel, A. O. Govorov, T. Liedl, DNA-based self-assembly of chiral plasmonic 
nanostructures with tailored optical response. Nature. 483, 311–314 (2012).

60. 
X. Shen, C. Song, J. Wang, D. Shi, Z. Wang, N. Liu, B. Ding, Rolling up gold 
nanoparticle-dressed DNA origami into three-dimensional plasmonic chiral 
nanostructures. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 146–9 (2012).

61. 
X. Shen, P. Zhan, A. Kuzyk, Q. Liu, A. Asenjo-garcia, 3D plasmonic chiral colloids. 
Nanoscale. 6, 2077–2081 (2014).

62. 
X. Lan, Z. Chen, G. Dai, X. Lu, W. Ni, Q. Wang, Bifacial DNA Origami-Directed 
Discrete, Three-Dimensional, Anisotropic Plasmonic Nanoarchitectures with 
Tailored Optical Chirality. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 11441–11444 (2013).

63. 
X. Lan, X. Lu, C. Shen, Y. Ke, W. Ni, Q. Wang, Au Nanorod Helical Superstructures 
with Designed Chirality. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 457–462 (2015).

64. 
A. J. Mastroianni, S. A. Claridge, A. P. Alivisatos, Pyramidal and chiral groupings of 
gold nanocrystals assembled using DNA scaffolds. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 8455–
8459 (2009).

65. 
W. Chen, A. Bian, A. Agarwal, L. Liu, H. Shen, L. Wang, C. Xu, N. A. Kotov, 
Nanoparticle superstructures made by polymerase chain reaction: Collective 
interactions of nanoparticles and a new principle for chiral materials. Nano Lett. 9, 
2153–2159 (2009).

66. 
W. Yan, L. Xu, C. Xu, W. Ma, H. Kuang, L. Wang, N. A. Kotov, Self-assembly of 
chiral nanoparticle pyramids with strong R/S optical activity. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
134, 15114–15121 (2012).

67. 
V. E. Ferry, J. M. Smith, A. P. Alivisatos, Symmetry Breaking in Tetrahedral Chiral 
Plasmonic Nanoparticle Assemblies. ACS Photonics. 1, 1189–1196 (2014).

68. 
X. Shen, A. Asenjo-Garcia, Q. Liu, Q. Jiang, F. J. García de Abajo, N. Liu, B. Ding, 
Three-Dimensional Plasmonic Chiral Tetramers Assembled by DNA Origami. Nano 
Lett. 13, 2128–2133 (2013).


28

69. 
M. J. Urban, P. K. Dutta, P. Wang, X. Duan, X. Shen, B. Ding, Y. Ke, L. N. Liu, 
Plasmonic Toroidal Metamolecules Assembled by DNA Origami. Joournal Am. 
Chem. Soc. 138, 5495–5498 (2016).

70. 
S. Zhang, J. Zhou, Y. Park, J. Rho, R. Singh, S. Nam, A. K. Azad, H. Chen, X. Yin, 
A. J. Taylor, X. Zhang, Photoinduced handedness switching in terahertz chiral 
metamolecules. Nat. Commun. 3, 942 (2012).

71. 
X. Yin, M. Schäferling, A.-K. U. Michel, A. Tittl, M. Wuttig, T. Taubner, H. Giessen, 
Active Chiral Plasmonics. Nano Lett. 15, 4255 (2015).

72. 
X. Duan, S. Kamin, F. Sterl, H. Giessen, N. Liu, Hydrogen-Regulated Chiral 
Nanoplasmonics. Nano Lett. 16, 1462–1466 (2016).

73. 
R. Schreiber, N. Luong, Z. Fan, A. Kuzyk, P. C. Nickels, T. Zhang, D. M. Smith, B. 
Yurke, W. Kuang, A. O. Govorov, T. Liedl, Chiral plasmonic DNA nanostructures 
with switchable circular dichroism. Nat. Commun. 4, 1–6 (2013).

74. 
A. Kuzyk, R. Schreiber, H. Zhang, A. O. Govorov, T. Liedl, N. Liu, Reconfigurable 
3D plasmonic metamolecules. Nat. Mater. 13, 862–6 (2014).

75. 
C. Zhou, X. Duan, N. Liu, A plasmonic nanorod that walks on DNA origami. Nat. 
Commun. 6, 1–6 (2015).

76. 
M. J. Urban, C. Zhou, X. Duan, N. Liu, Optically Resolving the Dynamic Walking of 
a Plasmonic Walker Couple. Nano Lett. 15, 8392–8396 (2015).

77. 
I. Fernandez-Corbaton, M. Fruhnert, C. Rockstuhl, Objects of maximum 
electromagnetic chirality. Phys. Rev. X. 6, 1–13 (2016).

78. 
F. Neubrech, A. Pucci, T. Cornelius, S. Karim, A. García-Etxarri, J. Aizpurua, 
Resonant plasmonic and vibrational coupling in a tailored nanoantenna for infrared 
detection. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 157403 (2008).

79. 
S. Schlücker, Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy: Concepts and Chemical 
Applications. Angew. Chemie. 53, 4756–4795 (2014).

80. 
A. Ben-Moshe, B. M. Maoz, A. O. Govorov, G. Markovich, Chirality and chiroptical 
effects in inorganic nanocrystal systems with plasmon and exciton resonances. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 42, 7028–41 (2013).

81. 
A. O. Govorov, Y. K. Gun’ko, J. M. Slocik, V. a. Gérard, Z. Fan, R. R. Naik, Chiral 
nanoparticle assemblies: circular dichroism, plasmonic interactions, and exciton 
effects. J. Mater. Chem. 21, 16806 (2011).

82. 
F. Lu, Y. Tian, M. Liu, D. Su, H. Zhang, A. O. Govorov, O. Gang, Discrete 
Nanocubes as Plasmonic Reporters of Molecular Chirality. Nano Lett. 13, 3145–
3151 (2013).

83. 
K. M. Mcpeak, C. D. Van Engers, S. Bianchi, A. Rossinelli, L. V Poulikakos, L. 
Bernard, S. Herrmann, D. K. Kim, S. Burger, M. Blome, S. V Jayanti, D. J. Norris, 
Ultraviolet Plasmonic Chirality from Colloidal Aluminum Nanoparticles Exhibiting 
Charge-Selective Protein Detection. Adv. Mater. 27, 6244–6250 (2015).


29

84. 
A. O. Govorov, Z. Fan, P. Hernandez, J. M. Slocik, R. R. Naik, Theory of circular 
dichroism of nanomaterials comprising chiral molecules and nanocrystals: plasmon 
enhancement, dipole interactions, and dielectric effects. Nano Lett. 10, 1374–82 
(2010).

85. 
J. M. Slocik, A. O. Govorov, R. R. Naik, Plasmonic circular dichroism of Peptide-
functionalized gold nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 11, 701–5 (2011).

86. 
P. Rezanka, K. Záruba, V. Král, Supramolecular chirality of cysteine modified silver 
nanoparticles. Colloids Surfaces A. 374, 77–83 (2011).

87. 
M. Kobayashi, S. Tomita, K. Sawada, K. Shiba, H. Yanagi, I. Yamashita, Y. Uraoka, 
Chiral meta-molecules consisting of gold nanoparticles and genetically engineered 
tobacco mosaic virus. Opt. Express. 20, 24856 (2012).

88. 
B. M. Maoz, R. van der Weegen, Z. Fan, A. O. Govorov, G. Ellestad, N. Berova, E. 
W. Meijer, G. Markovich, Plasmonic Chiroptical Response of Silver Nanoparticles 
Interacting with Chiral Supramolecular Assemblies. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 
17807–17813 (2012).

89. 
N. a Abdulrahman, Z. Fan, T. Tonooka, S. M. Kelly, N. Gadegaard, E. Hendry, A. O. 
Govorov, M. Kadodwala, Induced chirality through electromagnetic coupling 
between chiral molecular layers and plasmonic nanostructures. Nano Lett. 12, 
977–83 (2012).

90. 
V. a Gérard, Y. K. Gun’ko, E. Defrancq, A. O. Govorov, Plasmon-induced CD 
response of oligonucleotide-conjugated metal nanoparticles. Chem. Commun. 
(Camb). 47, 7383–7385 (2011).

91. 
A. O. Govorov, Plasmon-Induced Circular Dichroism of a Chiral Molecule in the 
Vicinity of Metal Nanocrystals. Application to Various Geometries. J. Phys. Chem. 
C. 115, 7914–7923 (2011).

92. 
H. Zhang, A. O. Govorov, Giant circular dichroism of a molecule in a region of 
strong plasmon resonances between two neighboring gold nanocrystals. Phys. Rev. 
B. 87, 075410 (2013).

93. 
Y. Tang, A. E. Cohen, Optical Chirality and Its Interaction with Matter. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 104, 163901 (2010).

94. 
M. Schäferling, D. Dregely, M. Hentschel, H. Giessen, Tailoring Enhanced Optical 
Chirality: Design Principles for Chiral Plasmonic Nanostructures. Phys. Rev. X. 2, 
031010 (2012).

95. 
M. Schäferling, X. Yin, N. Engheta, H. Giessen, Helical Plasmonic Nanostructures as 
Prototypical Chiral Near-Field Sources. ACS Photonics, 140512145119006 (2014).

96. 
M. Sch, X. Yin, H. Giessen, Formation of chiral fields in a symmetric environment 
Abstract : 20, 856–858 (2012).

97. 
T. J. Davis, Superchiral electromagnetic fields created by surface plasmons in 
nonchiral metallic nanostructures. 085405, 1–5 (2013).

98. 
L. V. Poulikakos, P. Gutsche, K. M. McPeak, S. Burger, J. Niegemann, C. Hafner, D. 
J. Norris, Optical Chirality Flux as a Useful Far-Field Probe of Chiral Near Fields. 
ACS Photonics. 3, 1619–1625 (2016).


30

99. 
M. L. Nesterov, X. Yin, M. Scha, H. Giessen, T. Weiss, The Role of Plasmon-
Generated Near Fields for Enhanced Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy (2015), 
doi:10.1021/acsphotonics.5b00637.

100. E. Hendry, T. Carpy, J. Johnston, M. Popland, R. V Mikhaylovskiy, A. J. Lapthorn, 

S. M. Kelly, L. D. Barron, N. Gadegaard, M. Kadodwala, Ultrasensitive detection 
and characterization of biomolecules using superchiral fields. Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 
783–787 (2010).

101. X. Wu, L. Xu, L. Liu, W. Ma, H. Yin, H. Kuang, L. Wang, C. Xu, N. a Kotov, 

Unexpected chirality of nanoparticle dimers and ultrasensitive chiroplasmonic 
bioanalysis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 18629–36 (2013).

102. Z. Xu, L. Xu, L. M. Liz-Marzán, W. Ma, N. A. Kotov, L. Wang, H. Kuang, C. Xu, 

Sensitive Detection of Silver Ions Based on Chiroplasmonic Assemblies of 
Nanoparticles. Adv. Opt. Mater. 1, 626–630 (2013).

103. Z. Xu, L. Xu, Y. Zhu, W. Ma, H. Kuang, L. Wang, C. Xu, Chirality based sensor for 

bisphenol A detection. Chem. Commun. (Camb). 48, 5760–2 (2012).

104. Y. Zhao, L. Xu, W. Ma, L. Wang, H. Kuang, C. Xu, N. a Kotov, Shell-Engineered 

Chiroplasmonic Assemblies of Nanoparticles for Zeptomolar DNA Detection. Nano 
Lett. 14, 3908–3913 (2014).

105. W. Ma, H. Kuang, L. Xu, L. Ding, C. Xu, L. Wang, N. A. Kotov, Attomolar DNA 

detection with chiral nanorod assemblies. Nat. Commun. 4, 3689 (2013).

106. B. Han, Z. Zhu, Z. Li, W. Zhang, Z. Tang, Conformation Modulated Optical Activity 

Enhancement in Chiral. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 16104–16107 (2014).

107. H. S. Oh, S. Liu, H. Jee, A. Baev, M. T. Swihart, P. N. Prasad, Chiral Poly(fluorene-

alt-benzothiadiazole) (PFBT) and Nanocomposites with Gold Nanoparticles: 
Plasmonically and Structurally Enhanced Chirality. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 17346–
17348 (2010). 


