Non volatile photo-switch using a diamond pn junction

Cédric Masante,1 Martin Kah,1 Clément Hébert,2 Nicolas Rouger,3 and Julien Pernot1, a)

1)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Institut Néel, 38000 Grenoble,

France

2)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, INSERM, U1213, Grenoble Institut des Neurosciences (GIN),

Grenoble, France

3)LAPLACE, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INPT, UPS, Toulouse,

France

Ultrawide bandgap semiconductor technologies offer potentially revolutionary advances in

the rapidly developing areas of quantum communication, short wavelength optics, smart

energy conversion and biomedical interfaces. These strongly demanding technologies can

be partly constructed using conventional devices but new hybrid architectures are needed

to overpass current performances and add functionalities. Here, we propose a new concept

based on the specific properties of a diamond pn junction combined with both an electric

and optical control of the depletion region. Using this junction as a gate in a junction field

effect transistor, we report a proof of concept of a non volatile diamond photo-switch. A

diamond pn junction made with nitrogen deep donors in the n?side is demonstrated to be

optically activated thanks to visible light. The n-type diamond gate is almost devoid of

free carriers in the dark and thus insulating. Illuminating the device renders the standard

electrical gate control of the transistor efficient. Without illumination, the device is frozen,

keeping a permanent memory of the current state. This new way of operating the device

opens numerous possibilities to store and transfer information or energy with applications

in the field of electrical aircraft or aerospace electronics, power electronics, bio-electronics

and quantum communication.

a)julien.pernot@neel.cnrs.fr

1

arXiv:2105.08329v1  [physics.app-ph]  18 May 2021


I.
INTRODUCTION

Because of their exceptional characteristics, ultrawide bandgap semiconductors (UWBGS) like

diamond, aluminium nitride, boron nitride, gallium oxide are already in focus for producing de-

vices beyond state-of-the-art semiconductor technologies1. For electronics, most researchers and

engineers are still using concepts envisaged for silicon and wide bandgap semiconductors (like

silicon carbide and gallium nitride) where much smaller band gap energies are at stake. The limits

of this incremental approach for the fabrication of UWBGS-based devices are already well known

and established. In this paper, we propose to go beyond current paradigms by putting forward

the design of novel hybrid technologies (optical and electrical) based on unconventional concepts

which exploit the huge energy scale of UWBGS.

Diamond’s outstanding properties like wide bandgap, elevated carrier mobility, high break-

down field and huge thermal conductivity make it a unique material for high power and/or high

temperature and/or radiation-resistant electronics. The long valley-polarization relaxation times

of electrons make diamond a good candidate for use as valleytronics transistor2,3.
Diamond

takes also advantage of point defects, like nitrogen vacancy centres, for applications in quan-

tum sensing4, quantum communication5 or spin-based photonic quantum technologies6. Finally,

its bio-compatibility offers the possibility of integrating diamond electronics into the human

body7–13. To summarize, this material provides new opportunities to locally probe electric or

magnetic signals, to reliably process data and to safely communicate them in harsh or living en-

vironments. Diamond devices capable of storing charges in a non volatile manner or addressing

individual devices are needed to develop monolithic diamond-based systems. As examples, the

charge accumulations could be used for power supply (local on-chip energy storage) or informa-

tion storage with read and write access (non volatile memory) and individual on-chip address-

ing for application in neuronal multiplexers. Embedded on-chip devices coupled with an ultra

high conversion efficiency of beta-voltaic cell using diamond pn junction15 can be envisaged for

aerospace or harsh environment applications.

In this paper, we report on a diamond-based non volatile photo-switch with a permanent off

state having no loss. The concept is demonstrated by using monocristalline p−type diamond

deposited by plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition on a highly nitrogen-doped diamond

2


substrate manufactured using high pressure and high temperature. In the first part, the concept will

be described. Then, the active and freeze state of the pn junction will be established and the proof

of concept of a non volatile photo-switch will be demonstrated thanks to an electro-optical control

of a diamond junction field effect transistor. Then, we will discuss examples of application fields

in which this concept can efficiently operate such as power electronics, quantum communication

or bio-electronics.

II.
NON VOLATILE DIAMOND-BASED PHOTO-SWITCH CONCEPT

For analogue or digital operations, the ubiquitous silicon-based field effect transistors work by

using a gate bias voltage to deplete (OFF state) or populate (ON state) the channel. In the hybrid

structure proposed here, the external illumination activates or freezes the device. In this way, the

device can be driven by a combination of electrical and optical signals, providing a higher degree

of freedom. In conventional semiconductors with shallow energy levels associated to donors or ac-

ceptors, doping level and carrier concentrations are almost equal at room temperature. The doped

material is conducting. In nitrogen doped diamond, nitrogen impurities in substitutional sites cre-

ate deep donor levels at 1.7 eV from the conduction band. Consequently, at room temperature,

electrons remain bound to the dopants. Even at high doping levels (1018 cm−3 to 1019 cm−3) ni-

trogen doped (N-doped) diamond samples are completely insulating, and so cannot be electrically

driven. This is the freeze state of the device. Thanks to external illumination, the absorption of

photons promotes some of the bound electrons to the conduction band, increasing the free carrier

concentration. The device thus becomes conducting and prone to be electrically driven. This is the

active state of the device. The control of the ON and OFF states of the transistor is still ensured by

a gate bias voltage. However, the switch from ON to OFF will only be achievable during the active

state. This concept has to be distinguished from photo-conductive semiconductor switch devices16

which have also been demonstrated to use N-doped diamonds17 well. Optically generated carri-

ers most participate in conduction which means these devices require a high power pulsed laser

source to be efficient. For example, the device reported in17 makes use of a pulsed laser with pulse

power of about 6.7 kW (the average power is 25 mW). In this work, a bulk boron doped (p−type)

diamond is used as the channel and the nitrogen doped diamond as the gate. The lower ionization

energy of boron acceptor (0.38 eV) means it can conduct at room temperature in the dark while the

gate requires external optical excitation to generate free electrons. Optically generated carriers do

3


not significantly participate in the channel conduction. Only the n-type gate junction is optically

controlled by the light source.

III.
OPTICALLY CONTROLLED DIAMOND PN JUNCTION

A schematic description of the sample structure is shown in Figure 1a and top view images

in Figure 1b and 1c. A white LED driven by a tuneable current was used to optically excite the

sample from the top surface. The average power density of the beam was measured with a photo-

diode detector, ranging from 0 to 11 mW.cm−2. Part of the light was absorbed and reflected by

the top metallic layer. The Figure 1d shows a room temperature current-voltage characteristic

under various optical power varying between 0 and 11 mW.cm−2. A diode characteristic was

clearly measured under optical excitation while the dark current was below detection limit (<

10−8 A.cm−2) in the whole voltage range. The threshold voltage was around 3 V, as expected

for a diamond pn junction where the Fermi level lies close to the deep nitrogen donor level in

n-side region. This clearly demonstrates that a nitrogen doped and boron doped diamond junction

can be optically activated by continuous low power white light excitation. The LED does not

emit in the UV range required for electron-hole generation in diamond (λ < 225 nm)18. Also,

no intrinsic carriers were generated from the valence band to the conduction band. The linear

relationship between the substrate conductivity and the irradiance (Figure 1d) is characteristic of

a one photon impurity ionization process. In this experiment, the white light was found to be

efficient to observe a photo-current because the transition from the nitrogen impurity level to the

conduction band is efficient for wavelengths lower than 550 nm with absorption coefficients of

the order of 10 to 100 cm−119. The corresponding absorption depths were between 1 and 0.1

mm, from the diamond surface. As expected, the forward current was greatly limited by the thick,

resistive n−type substrate with a current density in the µA.cm−2 range in the forward regime

at room temperature (the current was normalized by the p−type layer surface area, delineated

by the mesa etching). One can however extrapolate that the pn junction conductivity could be

increased by orders of magnitude by (i) using a higher power continuous light sources up to 1000

W.cm−2 light output power than can be achieved with LEDs or lasers, (ii) depositing transparent

top contacts or illuminating from the backside of the sample, (iii) using a <500 nm light source to

maximize the optical absorption, (iv) using a thinner N-doped substrate and (vi) forming a proper

ohmic contact on the N-doped diamond. However this simple setup provides a strong proof of

4


Figure 1. Optically controlled diamond pn junction a Schematic representation of the device and the

measurement setup during the pn diode electrical characterization. The p−type layer resistance is neglected

in comparison with the substrate resistance. b Optical view of the sample. c Secondary electron microscope

top view image of a singular test device (colours added). d Room temperature current-voltage characteristic

of the drain-gate pn diode activated by a white light LED with various optical power ranging between 0 and

11 mW/cm?. The source is floating and the gate/substrate is grounded. The current is normalized by the

p−type layer area delineated by mesa etching. e Current-voltage characteristic of the pn diode under light

exposure at −50°C.

concept of the nitrogen-doped diamond electrical activation under light exposure.

IV.
HIGH BREAKDOWN CAPABILITY OF THE PN JUNCTION GATE

As an UWBGS, diamond is expected to be able to sustain an extreme electric field before

reaching its breakdown. Hiraiwa et al.20 estimated the diamond breakdown field for a doping level

[NA]= 2×1017 cm−3 at 10 MV.cm−1 and Kamakura et al.21 at 7 MV.cm−1, compared to 0.2 to 0.6

MV.cm−1 for silicon. However experimental demonstrations are challenging in diamond devices

at the moment due to the presence of a strong leakage current which causes an early soft break-

5


down. To circumvent this difficulty in this original structure, we performed the measurement at

−50°C in order to reduce the temperature dependent leakage current. Since the substrate carriers

were optically generated, and the substrate was still more resistive than the p−layer, no significant

variation of the diode resistance was measured. In the dark, the reverse bias is held by the full

thickness of the insulating substrate and the current is below the detection limit for a bias up to

1 kV. However when the diode was reverse biased under optical excitation, because the N-doped

substrate is activated with a doping level much higher than the p−type layer, the Space Charge

Region (SCR) was found to extend almost exclusively in the p−side. Almost all the potential drop

is then sustained by the 400 nm boron doped layer. The Figure 1e shows the obtained IV curve,

exhibiting a clear change of slope at V=-156 V attributed to the junction’s breakdown. Due to

the large substrate serial resistance, the breakdown characteristic did not exhibit the sharp increase

of current with a power law, but was instead immediately limited by the substrate resistance and

appears linear. A local breakdown, not occurring on the full surface of the diode, might explain

the higher serial resistance measured after the breakdown compared to the forward regime. This

is represented by an additional serial resistance RBD in Figure 1e. The maximum electric field at

breakdown has been estimated to be 5.2 MV.cm−1 in a 1D punch-through configuration. This is a

remarkably high value which is among the highest critical fields reported for diamond and much

larger than other common wide band gap materials such as SiC and GaN (ideal breakdown around

2-3 MV.cm−1). Since no special care to reduce the 2D and 3D effects was implemented in the

fabrication process, the real value is most probably higher due to the well known electric field

crowding effect. The high breakdown voltage of diamond pn junction will ensure the fabrication

of reliable and robust devices able to work in high voltage operations under illumination but even

more importantly, it ensures a galvanometric insulation of the source to the gate of the junction

field effect transistor described below without illumination.

V.
ELECTRO-OPTICAL CONTROL OF A DIAMOND TRANSISTOR

A junction field effect transistor device was fabricated on the same sample to demonstrate the

first non volatile photo-switch using diamond pn junction. The current flows through the bulk

of the p−type layer between the drain and source under bias. Under optical illumination, the

gate contact on the back side of the substrate controls the SCR extension in the channel. The

drain to source distance is 10 µm and contacts have a 70 µm width. It is remarkable that room

6


temperature transistor characteristics under an optical power of 11 mW/cm? were obtained as

shown in Figure 2a and 2b. The typical ON-state linear regime, pinch-off and OFF-state are

schematically drawn in Figure 2c, 2d, and 2e, respectively. The pinch-off is due to the extension

of the SCR close to the drain contact, when the drain to gate bias approaches or is greater than

the threshold bias (i.e. the drain to source bias VDS is around -30 V or more for VSUB = 0 V). Due

to the low carrier density in the nitrogen doped substrate, the gate junction can be forward biased

(i.e. VSUB ≲ −4 V) without any significant gate current. The SCR modulated by the gate bias can

be fully removed to increase the channel conduction (0.25 mA/mm). Figure 2a shows that a gate

to source bias VSUB = −10 V significantly increases the drain current. The gate current remains

orders of magnitude lower, i.e. less than 2×10−6 mA.mm−1. No drain current modulation from

the gate could be observed without optical illumination.

A measured commutation cycle at a fixed drain to source bias VDS = −40V (Pinch-off) is

shown in Figure 2f, where the freezing of the device’s electrostatic can be optically controlled.

The following paragraph describes each step represented in Figure 2f: (1), the substrate to source

bias VSub is set at 0 V with the light on, a bulk conduction channel between the drain and source

is obtained (normally-on device). (2), the light is switched off, the free electron concentration

in the N-doped substrate is extremely low (freeze state). In an ideal case without compensation

from acceptor ions at room temperature, the free electron concentration is below 104 cm−3. (3)

The gate substrate electric command was applied (VSub = 40V) to fully deplete the channel (OFF

state). However, because the N-doped gate is devoid of free carriers in the dark, no electrostatic

modulation can occur in the dark and the channel remains conductive even if the gate voltage

corresponds to a OFF state. (4) The light is switched on, providing the optical signal activating

the device (active state). The device was able to respond to the electrical gate command and

switches to OFF state. The channel was fully depleted and the drain current IDS dropped below

the detection limit. (5) The light was switched off (freeze state). (6) The gate electric command to

switch the device in ON state was applied, VSub = 0 V, but the channel remained insulating due to

the absence of optical excitation. (7) The light was switched on (active state) and the device was

able to switch to the ON state.

This sequence was replicated several times as shown in Figure 3a to ensure the reliability of

the measurements. Although the first cycle seems different, all the following cycles were found

7


Figure 2. Non volatile photo-switch using a diamond junction field effect transistor. a Quasi-static room

temperature transistor characteristic, drain current versus drain-source voltage, measured for a substrate to

source bias VSub varying from -10 V to +30 V with 10 V step and continuous 11 mW/cm? optical power

density. b Drain current density as function of VSub in the Pinch-off regime at VDS=-40 V. c Schematic

cross section of the device in ON-state at low VDS (linear regime), d at high VDS (pinch-off regime) and

e in OFF-state. f Measured switched drain current over one commutation cycle of the fabricated JFET at

VDS = −40 V, as function of the light and substrate bias. The device is only able to commute under an

optical signal.

to exhibit the same characteristic. In order to check the non volatile character of this optically

activated switch, the device was tested during a long time in the off and freeze state. Figure 3b

and 3c shows the drain current versus time for VDS=-40 V at room temperature and 100°C, re-

spectively for long duration (2 days at room temperature and 140 minutes for 373 K). One can

observe that the ION/IOFF ratio is larger than 4 orders of magnitude during more than 48 hours

at room temperature and larger than 3 orders of magnitude during more than 1 hour at 100°C.

8


This non-volatile photo-switch benefits from the unique properties of diamond such as its huge

breakdown field and high temperature operation.

The large RC time constant and, more precisely, the huge resistance R caused by the high

substrate’s thickness and resistivity meant that the turn-on time was long but the modulation was

clearly observed. Effects of traps most likely present at the substrate/epilayer and epilayer/oxide

interfaces could not be distinguished. Reducing the turn-on time is a key factor in obtaining an

efficient device, but as discussed previously, this could be decreased by orders of magnitude as

it directly depends on the N-doped layer resistance. Additionally, in this kind of FET device the

optical excitation only has to be present during the short time of the device switching. As well as

the previously mentioned ways to increase this simple proof of concept performances, the use of

a pulsed light source could provide a stronger optical excitation with limited total power usage.

Figure 3. Temporal stability of the non-volatile photo-switch.
a Drain current density versus time for

VDS=-40 V at T=297 K for multiple commutation cycles alternating freeze/active and on/off states by using

various substrate voltages and optical powers as described by the chronogram. Drain current versus time for

VDS=-40 V b at T= 297 K and c T= 373 K , for long duration in order to illustrate the non volatile character

of the off state in the freeze state.

9


VI.
NON VOLATILE PHOTO-SWITCH FOR NEW APPLICATIONS

The next challenge to create new devices will be to grow nitride-based light emitting diodes

(LED) directly on diamond transistor. Indeed, creating electrically driven visible or sub-band gap

UV LEDs on top of the diamond transistors will enable high optical power density excitation

to be attained. This would in turn enable the efficient control of the non volatile photo-switch,

i.e. to read or write the transistor state (ON or OFF thanks to the FET gate) and store or reset

the transistor state (freeze or activate thanks to the LED electrode). This new device paves the

way for numerous practical applications where the superior properties of diamond semiconduc-

tors can be advantageously exploited. For embedded electronics, non volatile memories, i.e. the

association of a switch with a capacitance for example, could be very useful to store and read in-

formation in a harsh environments (radiation resistant and high temperature) like in aerospace and

aeronautic applications. For power electronics, the gate terminal of classical power transistors is

affected by high dV/dt and Miller coupling, causing undesired turn-ON and possible catastrophic

shoot-through. Thanks to the perfect galvanic insulation of the gate terminal without illuminating

light, the Miller coupling between the Drain and the Gate is completely removed thus offering

the strongest immunity to parasitic turn ON. For quantum communication, the LED will make the

excitation of a nitrogen vacancy (NV) centre possible but more importantly the diamond FET will

also permit control of electrostatics and a non-volatile storage of the NV charge state. Finally, we

shall describe a bio-electronics applications in which the unique properties of diamond in the con-

text of this concept are fully exploited. Diamond-based electronic is a perfect candidate for chronic

biomedical implants since it provides solution for most of the scientific barriers that prevent most

advanced technology to be transferred to clinical applications. Its chemical inertness combined

with its carbon nature make it a biocompatible material compatible with all the standard medical

imaging techniques including Magneto Resonance Imaging22. Furthermore, diamond electronic

can be easily sterilized without damaging its performances. Diamond electrodes and transistors

have thus already proved to be very interesting candidate combination for interaction with the body

for both sensing and stimulation12,13. This is particularly true in the case of neural implants where

bidirectional communication is required to develop neural prosthesis, help neural regeneration and

gain further understanding of brain signal processing and dynamics. Future diamond embedded

electronics have the potential to create implants with a high level of stability that do not require

heavy hermetic insulation as is the case with silicon and other emerging polymer and flexible logic

10


electronics10. The concept offered by the photo-switch using a diamond pn junction is one of the

first diamond implantable logic electronics which can be combined with a diamond sensor to de-

velop a low power diamond time division multiplexer. Each line of an array of solution gated field

effect diamond transistor can be sequentially read as in the case of CCD sensor, allowing for the

reduction of the cumbersome electric wires that dramatically increase the size of the implant23.

Additional the freezing state of the switch means low power consumption can be achieved which

is a key parameter for chronic implants.

VII.
CONCLUSION

We demonstrated a novel concept of device with a hybrid optical and electric gate control. The

pn junction made of N-doped diamond can be optically controlled using a white light LED. A

breakdown of -156 V at −50°C has been measured, corresponding to a peak electric field es-

timated to be superior to 5.2 MV.cm−1. This proof of concept of hybrid electrical and optical

switching device consists of a diamond p−type channel JFET. A clear transistor effect was mea-

sured under light exposure (active state) while almost no current modulation was observed in the

dark (freeze state). The robustness of the non volatile photo-switch has been demonstrated dur-

ing two days at room temperature and more than 140 minutes at 100°C The high turn-on and

turn-off times are the consequence of the thick, resistive, substrate used as the gate, the low light

power density and the opaque metallic top contacts. They could be drastically reduced by simple

changes to design of the device, opening the route to numerous applications in the field of power

electronics, bio-electronics and quantum devices.

VIII.
EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

A.
Diamond pn junction structure deposition

The sample structure is depicted in Figure 1a. The p−type layer consists of a 400 nm boron-

doped ([NA-ND]= 2 × 1017 cm−3) diamond layer grown by microwave plasma assisted CVD,

provided by DiamFab, on a 4×4×0.5 mm3 Sumitomo High Pressure High Temperature (HPHT)

Nitrogen-doped (n−type) diamond substrate, also referred as 1b diamond. Its nitrogen content

is estimated to be in the order of 1019 cm−3, mostly in single substitutional sites. The precise

doping level was not measured but the sample exhibited the characteristic yellow tint of a high

11


nitrogen content, as shown in the optical top view of the sample in Figure 1b. But, conversely, the

p−type layer doping level was confirmed by capacitance-voltage measurements, not shown here,

performed on metal oxide semiconductor capacitors test devices, fabricated on the same sample.

B.
Fabrication of diamond transistor

To lower the energy barrier between the top metal contacts and the p−type epilayer, a 200

nm highly boron-doped ([B]> 4 × 1020 cm−3) diamond layer was selectively grown using an

aluminium mask. A mesa etching was then performed down to the substrate by reactive ion etching

with an oxygen plasma. This enabled the electric separation of each test devices on the sample

surface from each other. The top metallic contacts were formed by a Titanium/Platinum/Gold

(30 nm/20 nm/30 nm) stack deposited by electron beam evaporation and annealed for 30 min at

500°C in high vacuum condition (< 10−7 mBar). An UV ozone treatment was performed on the

surface before the deposition of 50 nm alumina layer by atomic layer deposition to passivate the

whole surface, followed by post annealing in high vacuum condition (< 10−7 mBar) at 500°C for

1 hour24. The top drain and source contact consists of a Titanium/Platinum/Gold (30 nm/20 nm/30

nm) stack, deposited by electron beam evaporation on the 50 nm alumina layer. No lithography

step has been performed after the passivation oxide deposition. Also the metal oxide metal stack

thus formed is electrically broken at the time of the first measurement by applying a few volts bias

voltage. The detailed process is given in Ref.25. The back contact between the substrate and the

gold layer on the alumina plate was done thanks to silver paste.

C.
Electrical characterization of the device

The PN diode electrical characterization was performed using a Keithley 2612. The JFET

electrical characterization was performed using a Modulab Solartron including the low current

module. The electrical contacts were obtained using probes moved by a piezoelectric system with

a LINKAM system to control temperature under vacuum. The microscope white LED light beam

was used to optically excite the sample from the top. The use of a nitrogen-doped substrate as

n−type layer is convenient and greatly simplifies the fabrication process. However it also causes

a very large serial resistance RSub due to its thickness (0.5 mm) and large resistivity. Also the

silver paste back contact is probably of poor quality. Capacitance measurements are prohibited

12


by the low cut-off frequency induced by the serial resistance so we only relied on static electrical

measurements. This simple design was however found to be well suited to demonstrate this proof

of concept.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are thankful to David Eon (Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Institut Néel, France),

Etienne Gheeraert (Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Institut Néel, France), Juliette Letellier (Di-

amFab, France), Khaled Driche (DiamFab, France), Hitoshi Umezawa (National Institute of Ad-

vanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan) and Robert Nemanich (Arizona State University,

USA) for fruitful discussions.

REFERENCES

1J. Y. Tsao, S. Chowdhury, M. A. Hollis, D. Jena, N. M. Johnson, K. A. Jones, R. J. Kaplar,

S. Rajan, C. G. V. de Walle, E. Bellotti, C. L. Chua, R. Collazo, M. E. Coltrin, J. A. Cooper,

K. R. Evans, S. Graham, T. A. Grotjohn, E. R. Heller, M. Higashiwaki, M. S. Islam, P. W.

Juodawlkis, M. A. Khan, A. D. Koehler, J. H. Leach, U. K. Mishra, R. J. Nemanich, R. C.

N. Pilawa?Podgurski, J. B. Shealy, Z. Sitar, M. J. Tadjer, A. F. Witulski, M. Wraback, J. A.

Simmons, Advanced Electronic Materials 2018, 4, 1600501.

2J. Isberg, M. Gabrysch, J. Hammersberg, S. Majdi, K. K. Kovi, D. J. Twitchen, Nat Mater 2013,

12, 760.

3N. Suntornwipat, S. Majdi, M. Gabrysch, K. K. Kovi, V. Djurberg, I. Friel, D. J. Twitchen, J.

Isberg, Nano Lett. 2021, 21, 868.

4H. J. Mamin, M. Kim, M. H. Sherwood, C. T. Rettner, K. Ohno, D. D. Awschalom, D. Rugar,

Science 2013, 339, 557.

5B. Hensen, H. Bernien, A. E. Dréau, A. Reiserer, N. Kalb, M. S. Blok, J. Ruitenberg, R. F. L.

Vermeulen, R. N. Schouten, C. Abellán, W. Amaya, V. Pruneri, M. W. Mitchell, M. Markham,

D. J. Twitchen, D. Elkouss, S. Wehner, T. H. Taminiau, R. Hanson, Nature 2015, 526, 682.

6M. Atature, D. Englund, N. Vamivakas, S.-Y. Lee, J. Wrachtrup, Nature Reviews Materials 2018,

3, 38.

7A. Rifai, S. Houshyar, K. Fox, Annals of 3D Printed Medicine 2021, 1, 100002.

13


8S. G. Lichter, M. C. Escudié, A. D. Stacey, K. Ganesan, K. Fox, A. Ahnood, N. V. Apollo, D. C.

Kua, A. Z. Lee, C. McGowan, A. L. Saunders, O. Burns, D. A. X. Nayagam, R. A. Williams, D.

J. Garrett, H. Meffin, S. Prawer, Biomaterials 2015, 53, 464.

9K. Fox, N. Mani, A. Rifai, P. Reineck, A. Jones, P. A. Tran, A. Ramezannejad, M. Brandt, B. C.

Gibson, A. D. Greentree, N. Tran, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 2020, 3, 29.

10N. Mani, A. Rifai, S. Houshyar, M. A. Booth, K. Fox, Medical Devices and Sensors 2020, 3,

e10127.

11B. Fan, C. A. Rusinek, C. H. Thompson, M. Setien, Y. Guo, R. Rechenberg, Y. Gong, A. J.

Weber, M. F. Becker, E. Purcell, W. Li, Microsystems and Nanoengineering 2020, 6, 1.

12M. Dankerl, S. Eick, B. Hofmann, M. Hauf, S. Ingebrandt, A. Offenhausser, M. Stutzmann, J.

A. Garrido, Advanced Functional Materials 2009, 19, 2915.

13G. Piret, C. Hébert, J.-P. Mazellier, L. Rousseau, E. Scorsone, M. Cottance, G. Lissorgues, M.

O. Heuschkel, S. Picaud, P. Bergonzo, B. Yvert, Biomaterials 2015, 53, 173.

14P. Siyushev, M. Nesladek, E. Bourgeois, M. Gulka, J. Hruby, T. Yamamoto, M. Trupke, T. Teraji,

J. Isoya, F. Jelezko, Science 2019, 363, 728.

15T. Shimaoka, H. Umezawa, K. Ichikawa, J. Pernot, S. Koizumi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2020, 117,

103902.

16E. Majda-Zdancewicz, M. Suproniuk, M. Paw?owski, M. Wierzbowski, Opto-Electronics Re-

view 2018, 26, 92.

17D. L. Hall, L. F. Voss, P. Grivickas, M. Bora, A. M. Conway, P. ??ajev, V. Grivickas, IEEE

Electron Device Letters 2020, 41, 1070.

18S. Koizumi, K. Watanabe, M. Hasegawa, H. Kanda, Science 2001, 292, 1899.

19F. De Weerdt, A. T. Collins, Diamond and Related Materials 2008, 17, 171.

20A. Hiraiwa, H. Kawarada, Journal of Applied Physics 2013, 114, 034506.

21Y. Kamakura, T. Kotani, K. Konaga, N. Minamitani, G. Wakimura, N. Mori, in 2015 IEEE

International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2015, p. 5.2.1-5.2.4.

22C. Hébert, J. Warnking, A. Depaulis, L. A. Garcon, M. Mermoux, D. Eon, P. Mailley, F. Omnès,

Materials Science and Engineering: C 2015, 46, 25.

23N. Schaefer, R. Garcia-Cortadella, J. Martinez-Aguilar, G. Schwesig, X. Illa, A. M. Lara, S.

Santiago, C. Hébert, G. Guirado, R. Villa, A. Sirota, A. Guimera-Brunet, J. A. Garrido, 2D

Mater. 2020, 7, 025046.

14


24T. T. Pham, M. Gutiérrez, C. Masante, N. Rouger, D. Eon, E. Gheeraert, D. Araujo, J. Pernot,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 2018, 112, 102103.

25C. Masante, N. Rouger, J. Pernot, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2021, 54, 233002.

15


