Scaling Theory of Two-Dimensional 

Field Effect Transistors

Saurabh V. Suryavanshi, Chris D. English, H.-S. P. Wong, and Eric Pop

Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University

Stanford, CA 94305, USA

Abstract: 

We present a scaling theory of two-dimensional (2D) field effect transistors (FETs). For de-

vices with channel thickness less than 4 nm, the device electrostatics is dominated by the 

physical gate oxide thickness and not the effective oxide thickness.  Specifically, for symmet-

ric double gate (DG) FETs the scale length (Λ) varies linearly with the gate oxide thickness 

(tox) as Λ ~ ¾tox. The gate oxide dielectric permittivity and the semiconductor channel thick-

ness do not affect the device electrostatics for such device geometries. For an asymmetric de-

vice such as single gate (SG) FETs, the fringing fields have a second order effect on the scale 

length. However, like symmetric DG FETs, the scale length in asymmetric FETs is also ulti-

mately limited by the physical gate oxide thickness.  We compare our theoretical predictions 

for scaled monolayer MoS2 DG FETs.  


I. INTRODUCTION

Moore’s law [1] has encouraged the steady reduction in the size of field effect transistors

(FET) for decades, and this has followed Dennard’s recommendation [2] at least until 2005. After 

2005, these “geometric scaling” trends have slowed down, but progress was sustained by “equiv-

alent scaling” innovations [3], such as the introduction of metal gates with high-κ dielectrics, Fin-

FET (or tri-gate) geometries, and strain engineering.

In extremely small FETs, the drain contact is physically closer to the source contact and influ-

ences the injection of carriers into the channel, which is undesirable. In other words, FETs with 

short channel length (L) are more difficult to turn off using the gate voltage, and the subthreshold 

leakage currents are increased. The minimum channel length for a given transistor technology is 

limited to a multiple of a scale length Λ [4][5], for example ~3Λ for planar bulk FETs [4]. Tran-

sistors with shorter channels would suffer from so-called short channel effects (SCEs), which in-

clude drain induced barrier lowering (DIBL), increased subthreshold slope (SS), and threshold 

voltage (VT) roll-off.

Extensive research into FET electrostatics has pointed out that Λ depends on the channel 

thickness (tch), and specifically that a smaller tch yields a shorter Λ. This has driven significant ef-

forts to replace bulk Si, Ge, or III-V FETs with ultrathin semiconductor-on-insulator (SOI) tran-

sistors [6]–[8], FinFETs or tri-gate transistors [9][10], and surround-gate transistors [11], includ-

ing recent multi-stacked nanosheet designs [12]. However, in all such devices based on bulk sem-

iconductors, the channel thickness is greater than the gate oxide thickness, tch > tox.

In contrast to bulk semiconductors, the atomic limit of transistor scaling could be enabled by 

semiconducting two-dimensional (2D) materials and devices [13]. These materials are intrinsi-

cally made of single molecular layers with a thickness less than 1 nm [14]. For example, one of 

the most studied 2D materials, MoS2, has a single layer thickness of three atoms or 6.15 Å. These

2D FETs can be viewed as an extreme example of SOI technology with an atomically thin chan-

nel and the special case of tch < tox. However, unlike ultra-thin SOI these 2D materials retain ex-

cellent transport properties even at small channel thickness [10], [15], yet their device electrostat-

ics and specifically their scale length have not been studied in depth. 

In this work, we employ finite element simulations to analyze the device electrostatics for 2D 

FETs with an extremely thin channel. We show that for symmetric double-gate (DG) FETs with

tch < 4 nm, the scale length is mostly independent of tch and gate oxide dielectric constant (εox). In 

this limit of an extremely thin channel, the dominant determining factor for the scale length is the 

physical thickness of the gate oxide (tox). This sharply contrasts with previous findings regarding 

bulk semiconductor FETs (including SOI) that εox and tch are the primary variables for reducing 


Λ. Instead, we show that the gate oxide dielectric constant plays a secondary and not a dominant 

role in determining SCE such as DIBL. We also analyze single gate (SG) FETs based on 2D sem-

iconductors and elucidate the effect of drain fringing fields (also known as fringing field induced 

barrier lowering or FIBL [16]) on the scale length. Furthermore, we compare our theory with ex-

perimental data for monolayer MoS2 DG FETs and show that our simulations agree with the ex-

isting experimental results. Using the experiments and simulations, we also highlight the im-

portance of the contact architecture on device electrostatics. 

II. Methodology

The sample device geometries are shown in Figs. 1a and 1b. The source and drain contacts

effectively act as edge contacts to the 2D channel and extend over the thickness of the gate ox-

ides. We refer to them as tall contacts and the height of the tall contact to DG FET is tc = 2tox + 

tch. Note that such tall contacts capture the worst-case impact as the drain field can penetrate the 

device through a larger cross-section area. We later also discuss short contacts in which the con-

tact is only made to the semiconductor channel and not the side of the gate oxide, representing 

real devices. For short contacts, tc = tch. The contacts are assumed to be Ohmic in all simulations. 

We are primarily interested in device electrostatic simulation in the absence of charge carriers 

in the channel. This involves solving Poisson’s equations inside the device using commercially 

available tools [17]. As explained later, we do not simulate carrier transport and therefore do not 

need to include quantum effects.  We capture the SCE by simulating devices in the sub-threshold 

region of operation (VGS < VT). For these undoped devices (VT ≈ 0 V), VGS = -1 V is maintained 

in all simulations to keep the device in the sub-threshold regime. Channel lengths are incremented 

from L = 5 nm to 500 nm to observe the onset of the SCE. For each configuration (with an L, tch, 

tox, and other device parameters), we extract the minimum electrostatic potential (ψs,min) along the 

channel (x-direction, white dashed lines, Figures 1a-b). 

Figure 1c shows electrostatic potential ψs and ψs,min for a DG FET with L = 40 nm, tox = 4 nm, 

and tch = 0.6 nm. (Thickness of a 1L of MoS2 is ~ 0.6 nm.) For a symmetric DG FET, the ψs,min is

located exactly in the middle of the channel (y = 0). For the SG and asymmetric DG FETs (with 

different oxides on either side of the channel), ψs,min needs to be extracted off-center along the 

path of the maximum current flow. For the long channel case (L ≫ Λ), the drain is farther away 

from the source and ψs,min is approximately constant irrespective of L. However, for small L, the 

onset of SCE causes ψs,min to increase. In Fig. 1d, we plot the deviation of the ψs,min (Δψs,min) from 

that of the long-channel (L = 500 nm). Note that this Δψs,min is representative of DIBL and in-

creases exponentially with reduced channel length [4]. We, therefore, fit an exponential of the 

form ~exp(-Λ/L) to the Δψs,min(L) curve and extract the scale length, Λ, as shown in Fig. 1d. The 


extracted Λ is a constant for a particular gate stack and channel thickness and does not depend on 

the channel length. THE SCE such as DIBL on the other hand depends on Λ as well as the chan-

nel length.

III. Results and Discussion

Scale length in symmetric DG FET. In Fig. 2, we compare the scale length obtained from 

simulations to previous scale length models [6]–[8]. In 2D FETs, a majority of the drain influence 

over the channel barrier is due to fringing fields through the gate oxide or FIBL. The effect of this

fringing field has not been dominant in the literature as traditional transistor devices have had 

channels thicker than the gate oxide. Especially for smaller tch (< 2 nm), it can be observed in Fig. 

2 that Yan et al. [8] and Suzuki et al. [6] severely underestimate the scale length. These scale 

length studies approximated as Λ  √𝜖𝑐ℎ𝑡ch𝑡ox/𝜖ox also predict a much smaller Λ as tch → 0. On 

the other hand, our finite-element simulations show a much higher and a non-zero Λ as tch → 0. 

Frank et al. [7] iteratively solves for electrostatic in a DG FET with tall source and drain contacts

and get results similar to our simulations. 

We first study the scale length in detail for the symmetric DG FET as shown in Fig. 3. The 

Λ is simulated for different oxide dielectric constants (εox), oxide thickness (tox), and channel 

thickness (tch). We have kept the dielectric constant of the semiconductor (εch) constant with 

channel thickness in all cases. In Fig. 3a, we plot Λ for a fixed oxide thickness (tox = 5 nm) versus 

channel thickness for different oxide dielectric constants. We observe that for large tch, Λ reduces 

with increasing εox. However, as we reduce tch, Λ converges to a single value of ~6.6 nm irrespec-

tive of the oxide dielectric constant. This shows that in the limit of tch → 0, Λ is independent of 

εox. In Fig. 3b, we plot Λ vs. tch for different tox while maintaining εox = 12. In this figure, we ob-

serve two distinct regimes. For thicker channels, Λ increases with tch. On the other hand, for thin-

ner channels Λ is mostly independent of tch. Thus, for applications such as 2D FETs where tch < 

1nm, Λ is mostly independent of tch and εox. In other words, Λ depends only on the geometry of 

the gate oxide (tox). This observation is similar to electrically doped 2D Tunnel FETs [18], where 

the channel thickness has minimal influence on the device electrostatics. 

In Fig. 3c, we plot Λ versus tox for the symmetric DG FET with small tch (= 0.5 nm) and εox

= 12. We consider two types of contacts: the short contact (realistic case) and the tall contact 

(worst case). In the case of the short contact, the source and the drain terminal contact only the 

semiconductor channel. For the tall contact, the source and drain extend all the way to the gate 

oxide as shown in the Fig. 1a-b. We observe that for both types of contacts Λ is proportional to 

tox. The scale length for short contacts and tall contacts start to deviate from each other and from 


the linear approximation when tox/tch > 10. The slope, γ, represents the strength of the gate control; 

smaller γ implies better gate control (small Λ) while large γ implies poor gate control (large Λ).

For 2D DG FETs, we see that γ ~ 4/3 irrespective of the gate-oxide dielectric constant.

For an ideal transistor switch, we expect the gate field to completely control the switching 

operation. The undesirable short channel effects such as DIBL are a consequence of competition 

between the drain electric field and the gate electric field to influence the channel barrier. This 

influence can also be thought of as an effective capacitive coupling from the drain and the gate to 

the channel barrier. Larger the capacitive coupling, larger is the influence of the drain or the gate. 

In devices with a thicker channel, the drain field influences the channel barrier through the gate 

oxide (also known as field induced barrier lowering or FIBL) as well as the semiconducting chan-

nel. In the case of thinner channels, the drain field affects the channel barrier predominantly 

through the gate oxide (FIBL). Therefore, for devices with extremely thin channels such as 2D 

FETs, the relative capacitive coupling between the drain and the gate to the channel barrier (near 

the source terminal) does not change with the gate-oxide dielectric constant. The geometry of the 

gate oxide (i.e. tox, L), and not the dielectric constant, controls short channel effects. 

To further understand device electrostatics, we show the electrostatic potential in representa-

tive structures in Fig. 4 with L = 10 nm. The structure in Fig. 4a-c have εox = 1 while Fig. 4d-f 

have εox = 10. For all structures, tox is fixed at 5 nm. For thinner channels (Fig. 4a and 4d), the im-

pact of dielectric constant on the device electrostatic is negligible. For thicker channels (Figs. 4c

and 4f), however, larger oxide dielectric constant reduces the relative penetration of the drain 

field into the channel and improves the gate control.

Scale length in asymmetric FETs or SG FETs. We simulate the SG FET as an extreme ex-

ample of asymmetric FETs. As shown in Fig. 1b, the SG FET has a gate electrode on one side.

The other side of the semiconducting channel can be air (in the case of most experimental back-

gate FETs) or a dielectric with a dielectric constant of εsd (such as oxide in SOI structures). In the

case of an SG FET, the drain field influences the channel potential barrier through the surround-

ing dielectric in addition to the gate oxide.

The scale length in the asymmetric FETs such as SG FET depends on the oxide dielectric 

constant as well as the surrounding dielectric constant. For symmetric DG FET, the gate coupling 

strength γ  4/3. In Fig. 5a, for a fixed εsd, γ reduces with εox indicating better gate control. On the 

other hand, for a fixed εox, the gate control degrades with increasing εsd as shown in Fig. 5b. The 

FIBL from the drain through the surrounding dielectric increases and γ increases. Notably, in both 

Figs. 5a and 5b, the device electrostatics is ultimately limited by the limit of the symmetric DG 

FET (γ  4/3), which depends only on the gate oxide thickness. 


Discussion on DIBL and relevance of the gate oxide dielectric constant. We showed that 

Λ does not depend on εox. Though DIBL has an exponential dependence on Λ as ∝ exp(-Λ/L), it 

does have a negligible dependence on gate oxide dielectric constant. In Fig. 6 we plot DIBL for 

various channel lengths and gate oxide dielectric constants in a DG FET.  As expected, the DIBL 

varies exponentially with the channel length. This can be seen from Fig. 6 where for different val-

ues of εox the slope of the curve (Λ) remains the same. We also see the DIBL reduces with in-

creasing dielectric constant. However, even for a high dielectric constant (εox = 100), the reduc-

tion in DIBL is not significant for all practical purposes. 

IV. Comparison with Experiments

We use the experimental data from ref. [19], [20] to compare our simulations. We perform 

the calculations mentioned in Section I to extract the scale length for the experimental device

structure. The device has a 5 nm HfO2 as back gate oxide and 5 nm Al2O3 as top gate oxide. In

these simulations, we use short contacts to best represent electrostatics of the real device. The de-

vice schematic is shown in Fig. 7a. Using simulations, we plot in Fig. 7b the scale length for dif-

ferent tch. We can also define and extract a minimum channel length (Lmin) below which the device 

DIBL is more than 100 mV/V. The Lmin is also plotted in Fig. 7b. For tch ~ 0.6 nm, Λ ≈ 6 nm and 

the Lmin ≈ 22 nm. Note that Λ is slightly different than our previous analytical expression of 

4/3tox = 7.5 nm because the device geometry and contacts are different than the ideal symmetric 

DG FET design. As seen from Fig. 7b, we also note that L ~ 3.5Λ instead of the usually accepted 

3Λ [4]. 

We further compare the scale length for short and tall contacts in Fig. 7c. For the short 

contact, the impact of the drain field on the channel is smaller compared to the tall contact. As a 

result, the scale length with short contact is smaller. In Fig. 7d, we calculate DIBL as a function 

of channel length for short and tall contacts. The experimental results match quite well with the 

short contact as seen in Fig. 7d, which supports our theory. 

We can use the theory developed in this paper to design a hypothetical 2D FET with 5 nm 

channel length and negligible SCE. The best electrostatic for such a transistor can be achieved by 

constructing a symmetric DG FET (γ = 4/3) which should have a Λ = L/3.5 ~ 1.4 nm or smaller. 

As per our simulations, this implies that the gate oxide thickness for the 2D FET should be 

smaller than 1.1 nm. As we wish to scale down the transistor to even smaller channel lengths, we 

also need to scale the oxide thickness, which will be eventually limited by the gate leakage cur-

rent. 


V. Conclusion

We have established the scale length theory for 2D FETs. We show that for 2D DG FETs, Λ 

scales linearly with tox or Λ ~ 4/3tox. The oxide dielectric constant does not affect the scaling in 

DG FETs. Most importantly, the well know scaling length expression Λ  √𝜖𝑐ℎ𝑡chtox/ϵox used 

to design modern transistors is incorrect for transistors with tch < 4 nm. The oxide dielectric con-

stant and the surrounding dielectric constant still play a minor role in scale lengths for SG FETs. 

Nonetheless, the scale length in SG FETs will always be larger than symmetric DG FETs for the 

same gate oxide thickness. We have also uncovered that in addition to an exponential dependence 

on the scale length, the DIBL for 2D FETs has a sub-linear dependence on the oxide dielectric 

constant. 

Eventually, we use the scaling theory to explain a surprisingly high DIBL of 120 mV/V in a 

20 nm channel length 2D DG FET. We have also found that the device electrostatic can be af-

fected by the contact geometry. To avoid SCEs, the 2D transistors below 5 nm channel lengths

will need a gate oxide thinner than 1.1 nm.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge technical discussion with Dr. Paul Solomon from IBM (Yorktown Heights).

Authors would also like to acknowledge Isha Datye for help with proofreading the manuscript. 

This work has been partly supported by the NCN-NEEDS program, which is funded by the NSF 

contract 1227020-EEC and by the Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC). The study was 

partly supported by the NSF EFRI 2-DARE grant 1542883, by the AFOSR grant FA9550-14-1-

0251, and by the Systems on Nanoscale Information fabriCs (SONIC, one of six SRC STARnet 

Centers sponsored by MARCO and DARPA).

References

[1]
G. E. Moore, “Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits,” Electronics, 

vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 1–14, 1965.

[2]
R. H. Dennard, F. H. Gaensslen, V. L. Rideout, E. Bassous, and A. R. LeBlanc, 

“Design of ion-implanted MOSFET’s with very small physical dimensions,” IEEE J. 

Solid-State Circuits, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 256–268, 1974.

[3]
P. A. Gargini, “How to Successfully Overcome Inflection Points, or Long Live 

Moore’s Law,” Comput. Sci. Eng., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 51–62, 2017.

[4]
Q. Xie, J. Xu, and Y. Taur, “Review and critique of analytic models of MOSFET 


short-channel effects in subthreshold,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 59, no. 6, 

pp. 1569–1579, 2012.

[5]
W. Haensch et al., “Silicon CMOS devices beyond scaling,” IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 50, 

no. 4.5, pp. 339–361, 2006.

[6]
K. Suzuki, T. Tanaka, Y. Tosaka, H. Horie, and Y. Arimoto, “Scaling Theory for 

Double-Gate SOI MOSFET,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 

2326–2329, 1993.

[7]
D. J. Frank, Y. Taur, and H. S. P. Wong, “Generalized scale length for two-

dimensional effects in MOSFET’s,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 

385–387, 1998.

[8]
R. H. Yan, A. Ourmazd, and K. F. Lee, “Scaling the Si MOSFET: From Bulk to SOI 

to Bulk,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1704–1710, 1992.

[9]
W. Yang, Z. Yu, and L. Tian, “Scaling theory for FinFETs based on 3-D effects 

investigation,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1140–1147, 2007.

[10]
X. He et al., “Impact of Aggressive Fin Width Scaling on FinFET Device 

Characteristics,” 2017 IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meet., pp. 493–496, 2017.

[11]
C. P. Auth and J. D. Plummer, “Scaling theory for cylindrical, fully-depleted, 

surrounding-gate MOSFET’s,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 74–76, 

1997.

[12]
N. Loubet et al., “Stacked nanosheet gate-all-around transistor to enable scaling 

beyond FinFET,” Dig. Tech. Pap. - Symp. VLSI Technol., no. August, pp. 230–231, 

2017.

[13]
P. Miro, M. Audiffred, and T. Heine, “An Atlas of Two-Dimensional Materials,” 

Chem. Soc. Rev., vol. 43, no. 18, pp. 6537–6554, 2014.

[14]
K. K. H. Smithe, C. D. English, S. V Suryavanshi, and E. Pop, “Intrinsic electrical 

transport and performance projections of synthetic monolayer MoS2 devices,” 2D 

Mater., vol. 4, no. 1, p. 011009, 2017.

[15]
C. D. English, G. Shine, V. E. Dorgan, K. C. Saraswat, and E. Pop, “Improved 

Contacts to MoS2 Field-Effect Transistors by Ultra-High Vacuum Metal Deposition,” 

Nano Lett., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3824–3830, 2016.

[16]
G. C. F. Yeap, S. Krishnan, and M. R. Lin, “Fringing-induced barrier lowering (FIBL) 

in sub-100nm MOSFETs with high-K gate dielectrics,” Electron. Lett., vol. 34, no. 11, 

pp. 1150–1152, 1998.

[17]
“Sentaurus, www.synopsys.com.” .


[18]
H. Ilatikhameneh, G. Klimeck, J. Appenzeller, and R. Rahman, “Scaling Theory of 

Electrically Doped 2D Transistors,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 

726–728, 2015.

[19]
C. D. English et al., “Approaching Ballistic Transport in Monolayer MoS2 Transistors 

with Self-Aligned 10 nm Top Gates,” in IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meet., 2016.

[20]
C. D. English et al., “Quasi-Ballistic Three-Atom-Thick Transistors with Double 

Gates,” Submitted, 2019.


Figure 1: Methodology. (a) DG FET structure and (b) SG FET structure used to extract scale 

length (Λ) using TCAD simulations. For all simulations, VGS = -1 V and VDS = 1 V. For both 

structures, the electrostatic potential ψs is calculated along the dashed white line which is 

along the path of maximum current flow. We perform finite element simulation on DG FET 

with tox = 4 nm and tch= 0. 6 nm, which is equivalent to the thickness of the single layer 

MoS2.  (c) ψS vs. x for DG FET with L = 40 nm and calculated ψs,min shown by blue star. (d) 

The difference between the minimum potential at each channel length with the minimum po-

tential at a channel length of 500 nm (Δψs,min = ψs,min(L = 500 nm) - ψs,min(L)) is shown in the 

figure using red square symbols. Δψs,min is also known as drain induced barrier lowering or 

DIBL. The black bold lines show the exponential fit to the symbols.  

Source

Ψs (V)

~exp(-L/Λ)
Simulation

Λ ≈ 5.3 nm

tox

tox
Semi. Channel

tch

Dielectric

Top Gate

Bottom Gate

Top Gate

Source

Drain
Drain

tox

(a)

(b)

(d)

tox = 4 nm
tch = 0.6 nm

L (nm)

VDS = 1V
L = 40 nm

Ψs,min

tch

x
y

x

y

ψs

ψs

ΔΨs,min (V) or DIBL (V/V)

(c)

x (nm)

~Λ
~Λ


Figure 2: Comparison of scale lengths (Λ) calculated by Frank et al. [7], Suzuki et al. [6], 

and Yan et al. [8] For the sake of consistency, we keep the dielectric constant of the semicon-

ductor the same with thickness. 

Λ (nm)

tox = 2 nm
εox = 12
εch = 3.3

tch (nm)

This work (TCAD)

Frank 1998

Suzuki 1993

Yan 1992

2D DGFETs
3D DGFETs


Figure 3: Symmetric double-gate (DG) FET: (a) Extracted scale length for DG FET versus

the semiconductor channel thickness. The calculations are done for different oxide dielectric 

constants. (b) Extracted scale length for DG FET versus the semiconductor channel thickness 

for different oxide thickness. (c) Scale length vs. the physics gate-oxide thickness for short 

and long contacts. For the two extreme cases of the contact architecture, the scale length 

shows a linear trend with gate-oxide thickness with a slope (γ) of 4/3. 

Λ (nm)

tox = 5 nm 

εox = 4

8

12

16

2 nm

4 nm
6 nm

tox = 8 nm

εox = 12

(a)
(b)

Λ (nm)

tch (nm) 
tch (nm) 

(c)

Λ (nm)

tox (nm) 

tch = 0.5 nm
ΛDG ≈ 4/3·tox = γtox

Short contacts 
(circles)

Tall 

contacts 
(squares)
tox/tch=10


Figure 4: Electrostatic potential in DG FET for different tch and εox. (a) to (c) tch increases 

from 0.5 nm to 4 nm, with εox = 1. (d) to (f) tch increases from 0.5 nm to 4 nm, with εox = 10. 

For all the structures, VGS = -1 V and VDS = 1 V. The legend at the top shows the potential.


Figure 5: Single-gate (SG) FET: (a) γ versus oxide dielectric constant (εox) keeping the sur-

rounding medium dielectric constant (εsd) fixed. (b) γ versus surrounding dielectric constant 

(εsd) keeping the oxide dielectric constant (εox) fixed. The dotted lines are drawn as guides for 

the eye.

γ

(a)
(b)

γ = 4/3
γ = 4/3

tch = 0.5 nm
tox = 5 nm
εsd = 1
ΛSG = γtox

γ

tch = 0.5 nm
tox = 5 nm
εox = 1
ΛSG = γtox

εsd
εox


Figure 6: Extracted DIBL for a symmetric double-gate FET for various values of oxide 

dielectric constant with tox = 5 nm and tch = 0.6 nm. 

L (nm) 

DIBL (V/V)

εox = 1,2,4,100

~ exp(-L/Λ)

[Λ ~ 4/3tox = 6.6 nm]


Figure 7: Comparison between theory and experimental data. (a) Electrostatics in a struc-

ture representing the experimental device from ref [19]. (b) The plot shows extracted Lmin and 

Λ for the structure in (a) for varying channel thickness (tch). (c) Comparison of scale length 

extracted for short and tall contacts. (d) Extracted DIBL for the experimental device as a 

function of the channel length for short and tall contacts. 

Λ (nm)

tch (nm) 

Lmin (nm)

Top Gate  (5 nm Al2O3)

D rain

Source

Bottom Gate (5 nm HfO2)

1L MoS2 tch  = 0.6 nm

-1 V
1 V
0 V

Potential

(a)
(b)

Lmin

Λ

Λ (nm)

tch (nm) 

Short contact (only 
semi. channel)

Tall contact

tch = 0.6 nm

(c)

L (nm) 

DIBL (V/V)

Short contact 

Tall contact

Experiment

(d)

Short contact 


