1

Chiral Plasmonic Nanostructures Enabled by 

Bottom-Up Approaches

Maximilian Urban1,2§, Chenqi Shen3,4§, Xiang-Tian Kong5§, Chenggan Zhu3, Alexander 
Govorov5*, Qiangbin Wang3*, Mario Hentschel6*, and Na Liu1,2*

1Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Heisenbergstrasse 3, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany

2Kirchhoff-Institute for Physics, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 227, 69120 
Heidelberg, Germany

3CAS Key Laboratory of Nano-Bio Interface, Division of Nanobiomedicine and i-Lab, Suzhou 
Institute of Nano-Tech and Nano-Bionics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Suzhou, 215213 
China

4College of Materials Science and Opto-Electronic Technology, University of Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Beijing, 100049 China

5Department of Physics and Astronomy, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701, USA

64th Physics Institute and Research Center SCoPE, University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, 
D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany

§ These authors contributed to this work equally.
*Corresponding authors. E-mail: govorov@phy.ohiou.edu, qbwang2008@sinano.ac.cn, 
m.hentschel@pi4.uni-stuttgart.de, na.liu@kip.uni-heidelberg.de


2

Abstract

We present a comprehensive review of recent advances and developments in the field of 

chiral plasmonics. Chiral plasmonic systems exhibit tailored chiroptical properties vastly 

outperforming their molecular counterparts. In gaining insight into the working principle, the 

chiroptical response has become fully tailorable via composition and arrangements of the 

individual subunits or by shape and size. With advances in micro- and nanofabrication 

techniques many of these intriguing systems have also been realized in experiment. Here, we 

focus on bottom-up synthetics methods which do not only allow for rational design and 

fabrication of structures but most intriguingly in many cases also for post-fabrication 

manipulation and tuning. Apart from purely plasmonic systems we will also discuss so-called 

induced chirality, that is, the interaction of chiral molecules with plasmonic excitations which 

renders achiral plasmonic systems chiral. Chiral plasmonics systems are very promising 

candidates for investigating conformations and conformational changes on the nanoscale, 

similarly as in molecular circular dichrosim spectroscopy. The significantly larger signal 

strength promises few-structure sensitivity. We thus expect the field of chiral plasmonics to 

attract further widespread applications and attention.

Keywords

Plasmonics, Chirality, Nanostructures, Circular Dichroism, DNA, Self-assembly


3

1. Introduction

Man is eager to understand the properties of matter and also strives to manipulate matter at 

will. For centuries, alchemists and scientists have endeavored to control and tailor the 

properties of matter. A large number of sophisticated techniques have been invented over 

time, including deposition, etching, doping, synthesis, self-assembly, and many more. One of 

the most striking material properties of matter is visual appearance, that is, its reflectivity, 

absorptivity, and most importantly its color. Among the earliest examples of tailored visual 

appearances is colored glass. Some of the colored glass was later discovered to contain 

nano-sized gold (Au) particles. Such glass, coined cranberry glass, represents one of the 

earliest manmade nanostructured materials – obviously unknown at the time.

The origin of the colors lies in the absorption and scattering behavior of the metal

nanoparticles in the glass. When light impinges on a metal particle of a few tens of 

nanometers in diameter, collective oscillations of the quasi-free conduction electrons are 

excited with respect to the ionic background. One terms this resonant excitation, a plasmon 

resonance. What makes plasmonic resonances so special? On one hand, the metal particles 

can be good scatters and absorbers of light. On the other hand, the resonance position, that 

is, the position of the most efficient scattering and absorption, can be tuned via the size, the 

material, and the surroundings of the particle. Thus, metal nanoparticles can be tuned to 

exhibit bright and vivid colors, given their plasmonic resonances are in the visible wavelength 

range.

What makes plasmonic resonances more interesting is the ability to couple to one 

another. The harmonic oscillations of the conduction electrons give rise to plasmonic 

near-fields, which are regions of strong local electromagnetic fields within sub-wavelength 

volumes. When the local fields of adjacent nanoparticles overlap, coupling among the 

particles is mediated. In direct analogy to molecular hybridization and the formation of 

shared orbitals, the plasmonic resonances of adjacent particles can mix and hybridize, giving 

rise to collective resonant modes spanning the entire structure. The extraordinary number of 

possible coupling scenarios offers an additional degree of freedom in creating plasmonic 

nanostructures with interesting optical properties.

In recent years, advances in micro- and nanotechnologies have enabled unprecedented 


4

opportunities to manipulate and tailor the optical properties of plasmonic nanostructures

according to a designer’s wish. Top-down techniques such as electron-beam lithography, 

focused ion beam etching, direct laser writing, etc., excel in creation of structural arrays and 

layered interfaces, whereas bottom-up techniques such as self-assembly, chemical synthesis 

allow for more arbitrary structural geometries and richer biochemical functionalization 

possibilities. A plethora of complex plasmonic architectures that draw direct analogies to 

natural molecules have been designed and explored over the years. As a matter of fact, one 

may argue that significant research on plasmonic nanostructures has taken inspirations from

natural molecules due to the beautiful physics and chemistry involved.

One of the most fascinating molecular motifs is chirality. A chiral or handed structure

cannot be superimposed with its mirror image. Every chiral object therefore may exist in two 

distinct handednesses, called two enantiomorphs or enantiomers. Chiral objects are 

ubiquitous in nature, ranging from macroscopic systems such as seashells to molecular 

systems such as carbohydrates. Interestingly, many chiral biomolecules are found only in one 

handedness. For instance, the essential amino acids are all L- enantiomers, meaning the D-

enantiomers are absent. This phenomenon is called homochirality, which has intrigued 

researchers for a long time but a conclusive interpretation remains elusive.

Apart from the structural aspect, chirality can also manifest itself optically. A chiral 

structure that is optically active can absorb left- and right-handed circularly polarized light 

(LCP and RCP, respectively) differently. This phenomenon is called circular dichroism (CD).

Moreover, a chiral structure can also cause the rotation of linearly polarized light, called 

optical rotatory dispersion (ORD), resulting from different refractive indices for LCP and RCP 

light when interacting with the chiral structure. CD and ORD are therefore Kramers-Kronig 

related.

Chirality is a structural property and closely correlated with the spatial arrangement of 

the individual constituents in three dimensions. The optical responses of chiral structures are

thus widely used in structure-related studies. For instance, CD spectroscopy can be used to 

reliably report the handedness and even subtle conformational changes of chiral molecules.

CD spectroscopy is thus a standard tool in biology and life sciences for chiral discrimination. 

One major hurdle, however, lies in the weak chiroptical responses of natural chiral molecules.


5

For most chiral molecules, their CD bands are located in the UV spectral region and the 

asymmetry factors, which characterize the strength of optical chirality, are very small. Even 

concentrated solutions result in polarization rotation of light by only a few millidegrees,

rendering sensitive detection and investigation of chiral molecules with low amounts very 

difficult.

The aforementioned findings and challenges have motivated scientists to enhance the 

strength of molecular chirality as well as to achieve pronounced and tunable chiroptical 

responses using artificial plasmonic structures. Some studies transfer the intriguing concept 

of molecular chirality to the realm of plasmonics, whereas others indeed combine the two 

fields altogether. It has been demonstrated that chiral pure plasmonic structures can exhibit 

large chiroptical responses, orders of magnitude stronger than those of chiral molecules. 

These experiments have stimulated further research on the interaction of plasmonic

nanoparticles and chiral molecules, with the hope to enhance and possibly to spectrally 

manipulate optical chirality, rendering the detection of a few chiral molecules possible.

In this article, we will present a comprehensive review of recent advances and 

developments in the field of chiral nanoplasmonics. We will focus on bottom-up technique 

related strategies to create chiral plasmonic nanostructures following the outline of (i) 

plasmon-induced chirality: chiral molecules in the vicinity of achiral plasmonic nanoparticles,

(ii) intrinsically chiral colloids: plasmonic particles that are chiral objects themselves, and (iii) 

plasmonic chirality: achiral plasmonic particles arranged into handed configurations on static 

and active templates, respectively.

2. Plasmon-induced Chirality 

2.1 Theoretical Background

CD signals from natural chiral molecules are typically very weak and occur in the ultra-violet 

spectral range (150 – 300 nm). Considerable efforts have been devoted to enhance CD 

signals of chiral molecules as well as to bring chiroptical responses to the visible and 

near-infrared ranges. The local near-fields generated by a metal nanoparticle upon light 

illumination can mediate the interaction of the particle and a chiral molecule placed in close 

proximity. The nanoparticle, as a scatterer and absorber of light, can thus be viewed as a 


6

reporter of the molecular chirality from the near-field to the far-field. In this case, a new CD 

line is induced and occurs near the plasmonic resonance position of the metal nanoparticle.

Figure 1. (a) Plasmon-induced chirality from a hybrid system containing a 

chiral molecule in the vicinity of a plasmonic object. Panel a adapted from 

Reference 1 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) CD

spectra of a Ag dimer with a chiral molecule in the gap region. Upper panel: 

schematic of the Ag dimer; Middle panel: calculated CD spectrum for the 

electric dipole of the molecule parallel to the dimer axis; Lower panel: 

calculated CD spectrum averaged over the molecular orientations. Panel b

adapted from Reference 2 with permission from the American Physical 

Society. 

Theoretically, the CD responses of a hybrid system containing a chiral molecule and a 

metal nanoparticle (Figure 1a) can be written as follows:

total
molecule
plasmon-induced
CD
CD
CD


(1)

where CDmolecule and CDplasmon-induced are the CD signals from the differential dissipations of LCP 

and RCP light inside the molecule and the metal nanoparticle, respectively. The molecular CD 


7

modified by the plasmonic near-fields can be written as

2

molecule
0
0
0
12
21
2

0

8
ˆ
CD
Im
3
|
|
E
P
i
 










 
μ
m

(2)

Here, E0 and 0 are the incident electric field and matrix permittivity, respectively. The 

molecule is described by its electric and magnetic transition dipole moments, denoted by 12

and m21, respectively. The initial absorption line shape of the molecule is described by the 

energy,
0
 , and broadening Г of the molecular transition. The operator ˆP is the matrix 

of the near-field enhancement at the position of the chiral molecule. The plasmonic 

near-field enhancement decreases as the distance between the molecule and metal surface 

increases. In the dipolar limit of the molecule-plasmon interaction, the plasmonic 

enhancement matrix is proportional to a3 / d3, where a and d are the nanoparticle size and

the separation between the molecule and the metal surface, respectively.4

The second term in Eq. (1) strongly relies on the shape and size of the metal nanoparticle. 

It can be explicitly expressed only for simple cases, such as for small spherical nanoparticles 

with dipolar approximations. In general, this term can be written as

plasmon
resonant
me al
12
21
t
ˆ
CD
Im
Im(
(
)
) f
K




μ 
m
(3)

Here εmetal is the dielectric function of the metal. The operator ˆK describes the interactions

between the molecule and the plasmonic near-fields. The resonant factor, fresonant, which 

strongly depends on the size and shape of the nanoparticle, describes the plasmonic 

enhancement in the metal. 

Hotspots generated between two metal nanoparticles can be exploited to amplify the 

plasmonic field enhancement. Figure 1b shows an example of the plasmon-induced CD from

a silver (Ag) dimer. Both the molecular CD lines and the plasmon-induced CD lines are excited. 

Specifically, compared to the molecular CD line, the plasmon-induced CD responses shift to 

longer wavelengths and are much stronger. It should be noted that the direction of the 

electric dipole of the molecule considerably influences
the amplitude of the 

plasmon-induced CD in an anisotropic system. In this case, the strongest plasmon-induced 

CD occurs, when the molecule dipole 12 is perpendicular to the metal surfaces. The 

plasmon-induced CD drops to approximately one quarter of the strongest value, when 


8

averaged over the dipole orientations.

The above theory of the plasmon-induced CD can be applied to the cases, in which the 

metal particles are small compared to the wavelength of light, so that the retardation effects

are negligible. However, retardation effects have to be taken into account for large metal 

structures, which are comparable to the wavelength of light. In this case, the CD response 

has to be calculated by solving Maxwell’s equations. For a chiral medium, Maxwell’s 

equations can be written as

c

c

i

i













D
E
B

B
H
E
(4)

where 
= 
(
, r) is the permittivity, 
c(
, r) describes the chiral property of the 

medium, and 
is the permeability. For nonmagnetic materials, such as Au, Ag, and chiral 

biomolecules, we have 
= 1. In general, the CD signal linearly increases with the chiral 

medium thickness (when the thickness is less than the wavelength of light) for the far-field 

induction model. 

2.2 Experimental Realizations

Attaching chiral molecule ligands on the surfaces of achiral metal nanoparticles has recently 

become an efficient and convenient route to chemically acquire optical chirality in the visible 

spectral range 4, 9-14. In order to achieve strong CD from such complexes, metal particles with 

different morphologies including nanorods (NRs) 15 and nanocubes 1 have been employed 

due to their pronounced plasmonic resonances. Chiral molecules such as cysteines
16, 

peptides 17-19 , DNA 20, etc., generally have strong binding affinities to the surfaces of metal

particles. The chiroptical responses of the complexes can be precisely tuned through rational 

control of the chiral ligands on the particle surfaces 21, 22. For instance, Markovich et al.

reported Ag nanocubes capped with glutathione, which possessed drastic CD changes upon

slightly lowering the pH from 5 to 4.5 as shown in Fig. 2a 5. A chemical effect of catalyzing the 

formation of diglutathione took place during the process, resulting in the CD changes. The 

orientations of the chiral ligands on the particle surfaces can also have a significant impact 

on the chiroptical properties. Gang et al. demonstrated discrete Au/Ag core-shell nanocubes 


9

surface-functionalized with DNA 23. When the DNA ligands were perpendicular to the cube 

surface, strong plasmon-induced CD was observed. In contrast, when the salt concentration 

increased, the resulting random DNA orientations led to gradual decrease of the CD

responses.

Plasmon-induced chirality can be effectively enhanced when the chiral ligands are in close 

proximity of the particle surface 13. In a newly developed strategy, chiral ligands have been

embedded within core-shell structures through multi-step metallization processes. For 

example, Wu et al. optimized cysteine-modified Au nanorods via Ag coating
24. The 

entrapment of cysteines at the Au-Ag interface amplified the localized electromagnetic fields

around the ligands, producing a large enhancement of the CD responses. Wang et al.

demonstrated a similar approach with Ag shell coating on DNA-capped Au nanorods. In these 

morphologically diverse core-shell structures, the induced CD was readily manipulated over a 

broad spectral range by simply controlling the shape anisotropy of the building blocks 25. Xu 

et al. reported hybrid Au core-DNA-Ag shell nanoparticles with strong and tunable CD using 

cytosine-rich single-stranded DNA as guiding template for the subsequent Ag shell growth

(see Fig. 2b) 6. In another work 7, the same authors fabricated Au-gap-Ag quasi-spherical 

nanoarchitectures with interior nanobridged gaps filled with cysteines (see Fig. 2c). The

induced CD from the structures was tailored by carefully adjusting the nano-gap distance and 

the ligand density. Apart from organic and biological chiral molecules, inorganic chiral 

materials can also couple with metal nanoparticles to form hybrid complexes 26. Tang et al.

showed a typical example by coupling chiral mesoporous silica (CMS) with Au nanorods as 

shown in Fig. 2d 8. The authors synthesized Au nanorod-CMS core-shell structures with 

distinct CD signatures in the visible spectral range, enabled by the interactions between the 

Au nanorods and the chiral molecules in the mesopores of the silica shells.


10

Figure 2. Examples of plasmon-induced chirality due to the interaction of 

chiral molecular species with achiral plasmonic nanoparticles. (a) Ag

nanocubes
capped with glutathione.5
(b) Au
core-DNA-Ag
shell 

nanoparticles6. (c) Au-gap-Ag quasi-spherical structures with nanogaps filled 

with cysteine.7(d) Au
nanorod-chiral mesoporous silica core-shell 

structures.8 (e) Cholate-coated Ag nanoparticle networks. All images are 

adapted from the mentioned references with permission from the copyright 

holder ACS and WILEY-VCH.

Apart from these discrete nanostructures, plasmon-induced chirality has also been

achieved in large assemblies, in which nanoparticles were linked together by chiral molecules

27, 28. One challenge lies in the fact that the metal particle assembly itself may give rise to 

plasmonic chirality, resulting from the handed arrangements of the metal particles. The CD 

responses associated with plasmonic chirality in general are much stronger than 

plasmon-induced CD and also spectrally overlap with the latter 29. Random nanoparticle

aggregates are often used to avoid the generation of plasmonic CD, if only plasmon-induced 

CD is desired. Tang et al. created one-dimensional assemblies of cysteines and Au nanorods30. 

The chiroptical responses were induced by the cysteine molecules attached to the ends of 

the nanorods. In another example, Markovich et al. reported nanostructures composed of 

crosslinked cholate-coated Ag nanoparticles, illustrated in Figure 1e. In this case, the induced 

CD was enhanced by localization of the cholate molecules in the large field-strength regions 


11

between the nanoparticles 3.

3. Intrinsically Chiral Colloids

Chiroptical responses can also be generated from plasmonic nanoparticles, which are 

intrinsically chiral. The excited plasmonic modes span in the entire chiral object. The CD 

strength and line shape thus can be readily controlled by tuning the geometry of the particle.

Figure 3a depicts an interesting example studied theoretically. A spherical particle is 

deformed with a ridge running in a spiral fashion around the particle surface. Similarly, one 

can create a spiral slit cut into the particle. Such a structure can be called a twister and its 

counterpart can be called an antitwister. The chiroptical responses arise from the mixing of 

the particle plasmon modes of different orders due to rather small geometrical distortions.

The mode formation is complex and sensitively depends on small geometrical perturbations. 

In general, the observable chiroptical responses are quite small.

One can increase the chiroptical responses with larger deformations of the particles. In 

Figure 3b, experimental CD results from plasmonic nanohelices are shown. The nanohelices

were fabricated using a sophisticated evaporation scheme that allow for high-quality chiral 

structures with full control over the handedness and geometry properties. The colloids take 

the shape of a helix, i.e., a classical chiral object, and the excited plasmonic modes are 

expected to have a very strong chiral nature. The measured CD spectra underpin this 

expectation and also show excellent mirror symmetry for left- and right-handed nanohelices

(see Figure 3b).

It has been reported that enantioselective control of lattice and shape chirality could be

achieved in inorganic nanostructures made of tellurium as shown in Figures 3c. The 

chiroptical responses of these tellurium nanocrystals were controlled at two hierarchies, 

atomic lattice and mesoscale shape. Firstly, the tellurium nanocrystals are of a chiral atomic 

space group, either P3121 or its enantiomorph P3221. Secondly, the overall chiral shapes can 

be synthesized and controlled with chiral biomolecules, for example with glutathione. Figure 

3d shows experimental CD spectra of such nanocrystals. It is assumed that the chiroptical 

responses mainly originated from the shape of the nanoparticle and the crystal structure 

played at best a secondary role. The chiroptical responses could for example be further 


12

amplified by utilizing the tellurim structures and templates to overgrow them with high 

quality plasmonic materials.

Figure 4. Plasmonic structures that are intrinsically chiral. (a) Sketch as well 

as the theoretical CD response for chiral Au nanocrystals: twister and 

anti-twister.14 (b) Experimental CD spectra of solid metal Au nanospirals.32

Inset: TEM images of the spirals with left (top) and right (bottom) chirality 

(image dimensions: 85nm × 120nm). (c) A chiral tellurium nanocrystal with 

chiral atomic symmetry group synthesized with reducing agent (hydrazine) 

and thiolated chiral biomolecules (glutathione).33 Left: TEM image; Right: 

theoretical model. (f) Experimental and theoretical CD spectra of tellurium 

nanocrystals of the chiral shape shown in (e) and with two different sizes. 

All images reproduced with permission by the copyright holders Nature 

publishing group and ACS.

4. Plasmonic Chirality

4.1 Theoretical Background

Chiral plasmonic nanostructures composed of individual nanoparticles arranged in chiral 

geometries can generate strong CD signals in the visible and near-infrared spectral ranges. 

Figure 4a shows an example of such a system. Spherical and thus achiral nanoparticles are 

arranged in a helical frame. The plasmonic modes of the individual particles can interact via 


13

their respective electromagnetic fields to generate collective modes of the entire structure. 

Figure 4b shows the characteristic and strong plasmonic CD spectra of such chiral assemblies 

in the visible spectral range. The dipolar limit applies when the size of the metal nanoparticle

a is small compared with the inter-particle distance R. In this case, the resulting plasmonic 

CD follows the following relation

12
8

Dplasmon-plasmon
/
C
a
R

(5)

These high power orders clearly show that the strength of the plasmonic CD significantly 

depends on the nanoparticle size and the distance between them.

Figure 4b depicts the calculated CD spectra of the structures in Figure 4a. Clear bisignate 

shapes that are well known in CD spectroscopy are observed. Interestingly, the sign of the 

bisignate shape is a function of the number of particles in the spiral. At the first sight, this is 

counterintuitive as the handedness of the spirals does not change and thus also the sign 

should not change. However, as the formation of collective modes in the assembly is strongly 

influenced by the number and coupling strength between the particles, a change in the 

number of particles is very likely to cause major spectral shifts in the formed collective 

modes. This phenomenon is indeed very interesting as the sign change of the bisignate 

shape is thus not indicative of a change in the handedness of the structure. Here it is related 

to the strong influence of the plasmonic coupling in the system.

Figure 4c depicts another interesting chiral arrangement. Here, four achiral particles of 

two different sizes are arranged in an asymmetric chiral frame. [cite Ferry] In contrast to the 

helices shown in Figure 4a, the handedness of the structure is less obvious and is caused by a 

shift of the lower smaller particle out of the symmetric position, breaking mirror symmetry. 

What is interesting in this configuration is the possibility to invert the handedness of the 

structure by subtle changes. As soon as the particle crosses the mirror plane, the 

handedness changes and so does the sign of the bisignate shape of the CD response. In this 

case, the sign change is therefore indeed indicative of a change in structural handedness.


14

Figure 4. Achiral colloids can be grouped such that the resulting 

arrangement is chiral. Panel (a) depicts the most straightforward design of a 

spiral. Given the particles are spaces accordingly, the plasmonic modes of 

the structure can interact with one another generating an overall chiral 

optical response.31 Panel (b) depicts the theoretical CD spectra of the 

assemblies of Au nanoparticles shown in (a) in an aqueous surrounding. 

Interestingly, the exact shape of the bisignate shape of the CD spectrum 

sensitively depends on the number of particles. (c) Four achiral particles are 

arrangement into an asymmetric chiral frame. [cite Ferry]. The handedness 

is less apparent as for the structures in panel (a). Very small shifts of one of 

the particles can invert the handedness of the structure and thus the CD 

response. All images are adapted from the mentioned references with 

permission from the copyright holder ACS.

(Ferry, V. E., Smith, J. M., & Alivisatos, A. P. (2014). Symmetry Breaking in Tetrahedral Chiral 

Plasmonic Nanoparticle Assemblies. ACS Photonics, 1(11), 1189–1196)

4.2 Experimental Realizations

4.2.1 Chiral Templates

Templating is one powerful strategy to organize metal nanoparticles into chiral plasmonic 

assemblies 39-42. Useful chiral templates include biomacromolecules 43-45 and polymers 46-49, 

which can be exploited to pattern a variety of plasmonic building blocks for achieving chiral 


15

nanostructures
50-52. In general, the template-guiding scheme can produce large-scale

plasmonic nanostructures with strong chiral responses. In some cases, a contribution due to

plasmon-induced chirality from interactions between the chiral template and metal 

nanoparticles, as discussed in section 2, might also be present 29. In other words, the 

resulting CD often possesses a complex origin from both exciton-plasmon and 

plasmon-plasmon interactions. However, in most cases the overall chiroptical response is 

dominated by purely plasmonic effects. In the following, we will thus focus on the 

contribution from plasmonic chirality.

Rosi et al. reported peptide-templated chiral assembly of Au nanoparticles and 

constructed a series of helical superstructures
53-57. In a first step, rationally designed

peptides were assembled to form chain-like helices as frameworks. Au nanoparticles were 

then synthesized at the Au-binding sites on the peptides by in situ reduction. The 

conjugation sites played a dual role in this methodology: anchoring the Au species for Au

nanoparticle nucleation and growth, as well as directing the helical assembly of the 

as-formed Au nanoparticles. Both LH and RH double-helical arrays with tunable particle sizes 

were obtained via alteration of the peptide templates and reduction conditions. Strong and 

tunable CD signals were demonstrated from these superstructures. The experimental 

procedure was further optimized in a recent work shown in Fig. 5a 34. Chemical modification 

of the conjugation sites led to the formation of Au nanoparticle single-helical arrays, which

exhibited the highest CD responses among the peptide-directed assemblies. Another 

template with organogelators has also been widely exploited for in situ preparation of chiral 

plasmonic nanoassemblies 58, 59. In coordination with noble metal ions such as Au(III) and 

Ag(I), the designed organogelators were turned into gels through a sol-gel transition process. 

Au and Ag chiral superstructures and large-scale films templated by the gels were formed by 

subsequent in situ reduction of the ions. In addition, CMS, a more rigid template 60, 61, was 

utilized for the synthesis of chiral plasmonic materials 62, 63. Che et al. reported Ag nanowire 

arrays supported by CMS with a distinct multihelix through in situ synthesis in the mesopores, 

which possessed distinct CD responses originated from the interactions between the Ag

nanowires 64.


16

Figure 5. Examples of Au nanoparcitles organized with the help of tamplates. 

(a) Au nanoparticle single-helical arrays templated by peptides.34 (b) Au

nanocubes loaded on cellulose nanocrystals chiral films.35
(c) Au

nanorod/CTAB/lipid chiral hybrid structures.36 (d) Au nanorod chiral 

superstructures templated by twisted supramolecular fibers.37 (e) Chiral 

nanocomposites with layer-by-layer assembled Au nanoparticle films coated 

on macroscale twisted PDMS substrates.38 All images reproduced with 

permission by the copyright holders ACS, Royal Society of Chemistry, 

WILEY-VCH, and Nature Publishing Group.

The as-synthesized metal nanoparticles can also be directly absorbed onto the chiral 

templates. In particular, liquid crystalline polymers offer a broad family of such templates 

that can be used to efficiently guide the construction of chiral plasmonic assemblies65-68. 

Cellulose nanocrystals are considered as representative materials among them, which show

twisted rod-like morphologies 69-71. For example, a chiral nematic phase with orientational 

order was formed by aggregation of the anisotropic cellulose nanocrystals. Thin films of 

these cellulose nanocrystals offer solid orientational host sites for assembling guest 

nanoparticles
72-75. After the introduction of plasmonic building blocks, the host-guest 


17

composites showed strong CD, much stronger than those from the templates themselves. Xu 

et al. reported Au nanoparticle chiral assemblies loaded on free-standing cellulose 

nanocrystals films 76. These host-guest composites not only exhibited tunable and switchable 

CD responses but also showed unique angle-dependent plasmon resonance properties. 

Moreover, ultra-long silver nanowires were used as building blocks 77. The authors realized 

tunable chiral distribution of the aligned silver nanowires with long-range order through the 

cellulose nanocrystal liquid crystals mediated realignment. It is noteworthy that chiral 

organization of anisotropic nanoparticles such as nanowires and nanorods usually display 

more pronounced CD responses when compared with the spherical counterparts owing to 

their larger resonance dipole moments. Kumacheva et al. demonstrated a similar system, in 

which Au nanorods were loaded on cellulose nanocrystal films to generate chiral plasmonic

complexes 78. Later, the authors tuned the chiroptical properties using Au nanorods with 

different aspect ratios and different types of cellulose nanocrystals as shown in Fig. 5b 35. 

Nanocubes containing octahedral Au cores and Ag shells were integrated in these chiral films

as well. Apart from cellulose nanocrystals, other cholesteric liquid crystals were also utilized 

as chiral templates. Chung et al. reported a Au nanorod/CTAB/lipid, a chiral hybrid 

superstructure, in which the Au nanorods were well dispersed on a CTAB/lipid 

supramolecular template (see Fig. 5c) 36. Strong chiral responses were achieved due to the

helical alignment of Au nanorods in the CTAB/lipid nanoribbons. Similar to a molecular liquid 

crystalline phase, helical geometries of the Au nanorod superstructures and the resulting CD 

responses were found to show interesting temperature dependence.

Expanding the scale of the plasmonic assemblies has proved to be an efficient approach

for acquiring stronger CD as more intense coupling effects can take place between the 

numerous metal nanoparticles. As shown in Fig. 5d, Liz-Marzán et al. demonstrated Au

nanorod superstructures templated by chiral fibers
37. Specifically, Au nanorods were 

adsorbed onto the supramolecular fiber scaffolds with twisted morphologies through 

particular non-covalent interactions to form 3D helical ordering. These remarkable

composites possessed lengths up to micrometers. The Au nanorods on the fibers were 

strongly coupled due to their nearly end-to-end arrangement. As a result, giant chiral 

responses as well as unprecedented levels of anisotropy factors in the visible to near infrared 


18

regime were observed from the superstructures. Additionally, the CD signals and the 

anisotropy factors of the composites could be precisely tailored via tuning of the Au nanorod 

concentration. In a recent work, Kotov et al. realized chiral plasmonic composites using 

macroscale templates (see Fig. 4e) 
38. Exploited as templates, macroscale elastic 

poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) substrates were conformally coated with layer-by-layer 

assembled Au nanoparticle films. The substrates were mechanically twisted in opposite 

directions to form LH and RH structures, respectively. The chiral responses could be 

reversibly reconfigured and cyclically modulated through mechanical stretching. The layered 

composites of Au nanoparticles exhibited strong CD observed as distinct features around the 

plasmonic resonance positions.

4.2.2 DNA Origami Templates

Among a variety of materials for self-assembly, DNA represents one of the most attractive 

candidates largely owing to its unprecedented programmability and sequence specificity. 

Structural DNA nanotechnology takes the unique advantage of highly sequence-specific 

interactions between complementary DNA strands to create DNA nanostructures that can be 

programmed in a rational manner. The breakthrough in structural DNA nanotechnology came 

with a concept called DNA origami, which involves the folding of a long DNA scaffold strand

by hundreds of designed short oligonucleotides 83. The so-called staple oligonucleotides are 

hybridized to the DNA scaffold through Watson-Crick base pairing to create arbitrary 2D or 

3D nanostructures. As the positions of the staples within the origami are predetermined, the

formed DNA nanostructure is fully addressable. Functionalization of DNA origami is enabled

by capture strands that extend from the origami. This allows for DNA origami-assembly of

metal nanoparticles, quantum dots, fluorescent dyes, and other entities. Compared to other

assembly strategies based on discrete DNA strands, the DNA origami approach offers several 

major advantages: The folding is more robust against imperfections in the stoichiometry of 

the individual DNA strands and the formed origami template is more rigid, enabling

nanoparticle assemblies with defined configurations. 


19

Figure 6. (a) (left) Schematic of nanoparticle helices, (right) Experimental results from CD 

spectroscopy and TEM.79 The left- and right-handes helices show a clear and mirror 

symmetric CD response in the visible wavelength range. (b) Different arrangements of Au

nanorod dimers assembled on a rectangular DNA origami structure.80 The assembly strategy 

allows to straightforwardly create left- and right-handed as well as achiral structures. (c) 

Schematic of a 3D reconfigurable plasmonic metamolecule consisting of two nanorods on a 

DNA template. The relative orientation (i.e., the rotation angle) can be controlled 

post-assembly and switched repeatably.81 (d) (left) Schematic of a plasmonic Au nanorod 

walker assembled on a rectangular DNA origami. The lower rod is immobilized, while the 

upper one can walk over the origami sheet by addition of the appropriate DNA strands to the 

solution. (right) In situ monitoring of the walking process. The numbers I-IV represent 

different states of the system (see inset) and clearly demonstrate the stability and 

reproducibility of subsequent walking-stepc.82 Figures adapted with permission from the 

Nature Publishing Group and ACS.

Yan and coworkers were the first to assemble multiple Au nanoparticles on DNA 

origami84, which has inspired researchers to step beyond simple plasmonic geometries such 

as dimers and trimers. In 2012, the experimental realization of chiral plasmonic 

nanostructures was demonstrated by Kuzyk et al. 79. The authors created Au nanoparticle

helices that exhibited designated chiroptical properties. The Au nanoparticles were wound

around a rigid DNA origami core in both handedness (see Fig. 6a). The helical 

arrangementsof Au nanoparticles gives rise to a characteristic bisignate CD spectrum


20

centered on the plasmon resonance frequency of the individual nanoparticles. As expected, 

Au nanoparticle helices of opposite handedness showed mirrored CD signals. Shen et al. as 

well demonstrated the formation of Au nanoparticle helices using DNA origami 85. A 2D 

rectangular DNA origami was first utilized to organize Au nanoparticles precisely at 

well-defined binding sites along two linear chains. 3D Au nanoparticle helices were then 

achieved by rolling and stapling the 2D origami sheets into tubes.

The essential ingredients for achieving strong plasmonic chirality were studied in detail 

by Shen et al 86. The authors utilized a rigid addressable DNA origami template to precisely 

organize four nominally identical Au nanoparticles into a 3D asymmetric tetramer. It was

demonstrated that the structural asymmetry and the plasmonic resonant coupling were both 

required for achieving strong chiral responses. DNA origami also enabled chiroptical 

responses from centrosymmetric octahedral DNA-frames87. In this case, the Au nanoparticles

were arranged at prescribed locations on the vertices of the frame. The CD responses

resulted from the use of different-sized nanoparticles arranged in an octahedral 

heterocluster.
Later, the assembly of multiple chiral building blocks into larger chiral 

architectures has also been investigated88. Urban et al. demonstrated hierarchical assembly 

of plasmonic toroidal metamolecules, consisting of four identical origami-templated helical 

building blocks. Plasmonic toroidal metamolecules showed a stronger chiroptical response 

than the constituent building blocks including helical monomers and dimers.

Compared to spherical nanoparticles, anisotropic Au nanrods possess stronger resonant 

diploe moments and more efficient spectral tunability. In addition, it is possible to create a

3D chiral nanostructure using only two identical Au nanrods. Nevertheless, assembly of Au

nanrods on DNA origami with a high yield is considerably more challenging than assembly of 

isotropic nanoparticles, which are not orientation dependent. Lan et al. 80 reported Au

nanrod crosses with controlled interparticle distance and spatial orientations on rectangular 

bifacial DNA origami (see Fig 4 b). Tuning the docking positions of the Au nanrods allowed for 

the realization of left- and right-handed nanostructures. In a subsequent work, the authors 

demonstrated helical Au nanrod superstructures with tailored chirality in a programmable 

manner89. By designing the arrangement pattern of the DNA capture strands on both sides of 

a 2D DNA origami template, Au nanrods were assembled into Au nanrod helices with 


21

intercalated origami. Left- and right-handed Au nanrod helices were fabricated by tuning the 

mirrored-symmetric patterns of the capture strands on the origami.

Efforts have been made to control the position and orientation of single stranded DNA on 

Au nanoparticles 90 . A recent work by Zhang et al. 91 combined the advantage of the DNA 

origami technique and the assembly strategy of discrete DNA strands. By attaching a Au

nanoparticle to a set of patterned DNA strands on origami, the positions of the strands on 

the Au nanoparticle could be controlled. Subsequent detachment of the modified Au

nanoparticle allowed for assembly with additional Au nanoparticles to form chiral plasmonic 

nanostructures. The authors demonstrated great control over the chirality of pyramidal 

nanoparticle groupings.

The most unique feature of the DNA origami technique lies in the possibility to reconfigure

assembled nanostructures. This allows for the generation of dynamic optical elements. 

When designing dynamic nanoscale devices, three prerequisites are of paramount 

importance. First, an efficient energy source for triggering conformation changes at the 

nanoscale is crucial. Equally important is the reversible control over conformation of 

individual nanostructures. Last but not least is the ability to report such nanoscale 

conformation changes and translate them into tunable functionalities. Kuzyk et al.
81

demonstrated the first reconfigurable 3D plasmonic nanostructures, which executed

DNA-regulated conformational changes at the nanoscale (see Fig. 6c). DNA served as both a 

construction material to organize AuNRs in three dimensions, as well as fuel for driving the 

nanostructure
to distinct conformational states
through toehold-mediated strand 

displacement reactions. Simultaneously, the nanostructure worked as its own optical 

reporter, transducing the conformational changes into CD changes in real time. Two AuNRs

were hosted on a reconfigurable DNA origami template. By adding specifically designed DNA 

fuel strands, the plasmonic nanostructures
could
be switched between different 

conformational states characterized by distinct CD spectra. The same authors extended the 

concept to a light switchable DNA lock where a photoresponsive active site was introduced.

92
In a recent work, Kuzyk et al. reported the realization of DNA-assembled reconfigurable 

plasmonic nanostructures, which could respond to a wide range of pH changes 93. Such

programmability allowed for selective reconfiguration of different plasmonic species 


22

coexisting in solution through pH tuning by utilizing pH-sensitive DNA locks as active sites to 

trigger structural regulation of the chiral plasmonic nanostructures over a wide pH range.

In a study by Zhou et al. 82, the authors demonstrated a dynamic plasmonic system, in 

which a Au nanorod could perform stepwise walking directionally and progressively on DNA 

origami (see Fig. 6 d). The nanoscale steps were in situ monitored by CD spectroscopy. The 

key idea was to create a plasmonically coupled system, in which a walker and a stator, 

constituted a conformationally sensitive geometry. When the walker carried out stepwise 

movements, it triggered a immediate spectral response that could be read out optically. As a 

result, stepwise walking with step size far below the optical resolution limit could be optically 

discriminated in real time. Urban et al. further modified the system and showed a plasmonic 

walker couple system, in which two nanorod walkers could independently or simultaneously 

perform stepwise walking powered by DNA hybridization along the same DNA origami track

94.

5. Summary and Outlook

We have reviewed the current trends and directions in chiral nnaoplasmonics. Due to the 

wealth of research, it is not possible to give credit to all the interesting work conducted, in 

particular as this review has focused on bottom-up technique related strategies. 

Firstly, chiral molecules, which are surprisingly abundant in nature, can interact with 

achiral plasmonic structures and render the overall composite chiral and lead to chiroptical 

responses. While the observed signal strength is comparably small, the effect is interesting 

for several reasons. On one hand, the interaction between entities with remarkably different

size scales and dipole strengths is per se interesting, as partially unexpected. On the other 

hand, the induced CD from the composite is generally observable centered at the resonance 

positions of the plasmonic nanoparticles, which can effectively shift the observation window 

for molecular CD from the UV towards the visible region. Moreover, researchers have the 

hope to achieve stronger chiral effects from the composites than from pure chiral molecules.

Secondly, we discussed in detail how to use achiral plasmonic building blocks and 

assemble them into handed geometries. Templates, such as peptides or PDMS, can be used 

to organize nanoparticles of different sizes and shapes with high efficiency. These assemblies 


23

of nanoparticles normally take the structure of the underlying template. While the control 

over structurally parameters is comparably limited, the technique can be straightforwardly 

scaled to large quantities. The DNA self-assembly techniques offer tremendous control over 

the geometry and placement of nanoparticles. A long DNA strand is folded with the help of 

stable strands into nearly arbitrary structures, depending on the design of the DNA strands. 

These origami templates, which can for example take the shape of a sheet, can be dressed 

with additional capture strands that extend from pre-programmed position of the template. 

With these strands nanoparticles can be selectively placed on the origami with excellent 

yield. What is even more fascinating is the possibility to manipulate the structures after 

assembly by appropriate design of the capture sides. So called fuel strands can unbind 

particles and rebind them to other position, changing the conformation of the molecules. 

While all these aspects are very intriguing, the scalability of the technique is limited at this 

time and design and fabrication are challenging and costly.

Lastly, there is also the possibility to create intrinsically chiral colloids. In these cases the 

particles take the shape of helices or similar handed structures. Depending on the degree of 

asymmetric, the chiroptial response can be comparably small. However, true solid metal

helices have shown huge CD responses, even in the visible wavelength range.

A significant portion of the reported research has been motivated by the importance of 

chirality and CD spectroscopy in general and the overall fascination of the concept of chirality. 

One of the most striking properties of chirality is its unique ability to report 

three-dimensional information. Chirality is in fact a truly three-dimensional property. CD 

spectroscopy has consequently extensively been used to analyze molecular conformation 

and observe conformational changes. There is still large interest in utilizing plasmonic 

structures for enhanced CD spectroscopy or for conformational analysis. This strategy is 

mostly motivated by the very efficient light scattering and absorption of plasmonic structures 

which largely outperforms molecular systems. Whether or not this goal can be reached and 

to what degree it can be exploited remains to be seen. However, the research conducted and 

reported here has unambiguously shown that chiral structures are uniquely suited to report 

nanoscale arrangements in form of far-field scattering, as for example in case of the 

plamsmonic walker.82 The field of chiral plasmonics therefore remains interesting and many 


24

fascinating problems lie ahead to be studied.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

The authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings 

that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

LITERATURE CITED

1.
Levi-Belenkova, T.; Govorov, A. O.; Markovich, G. Orientation-Sensitive Peptide-Induced 

Plasmonic Circular Dichroism in Silver Nanocubes. J Phys Chem C 2016, 120, 12751-12756.

2.
Zhang, H.; Govorov, A. O. Giant circular dichroism of a molecule in a region of strong 

plasmon resonances between two neighboring Au nanocrystals. Phys Rev B 2013, 87.

3.
Layani, M. E.; Ben Moshe, A.; Varenik, M.; Regev, O.; Zhang, H.; Govorov, A. O.; 

Markovich, G. Chiroptical Activity in Silver Cholate Nanostructures Induced by the Formation 

of Nanoparticle Assemblies. J Phys Chem C 2013, 117, 22240-22244.

4.
Govorov, A. O.; Fan, Z. Y.; Hernandez, P.; Slocik, J. M.; Naik, R. R. Theory of Circular 

Dichroism of Nanomaterials Comprising Chiral Molecules and Nanocrystals: Plasmon 

Enhancement, Dipole Interactions, and Dielectric Effects. Nano Lett 2010, 10, 1374-1382.

5.
di Gregorio, M. C.; Ben Moshe, A.; Tirosh, E.; Galantini, L.; Markovich, G. Chiroptical 

study of plasmon–molecule interaction: The case of interaction of glutathione with silver 

nanocubes. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2015, 119, 17111-17116.

6.
Wu, X.; Xu, L.; Ma, W.; Liu, L.; Kuang, H.; Yan, W.; Wang, L.; Xu, C. Au Core‐DNA‐Silver 

Shell Nanoparticles with Intense Plasmonic Chiroptical Activities. Advanced Functional 

Materials 2015, 25, 850-854.

7.
Hao, C.; Xu, L.; Ma, W.; Wu, X.; Wang, L.; Kuang, H.; Xu, C. Unusual Circularly Polarized 

Photocatalytic Activity in Nanogapped Au–Silver Chiroplasmonic Nanostructures. Advanced 

Functional Materials 2015, 25, 5816-5822.


25

8.
Liu, W.; Zhu, Z.; Deng, K.; Li, Z.; Zhou, Y.; Qiu, H.; Gao, Y.; Che, S.; Tang, Z. Au nanorod@ 

chiral mesoporous silica core–shell nanoparticles with unique optical properties. Journal of 

the American Chemical Society 2013, 135, 9659-9664.

9.
Schaaff, T. G.; Whetten, R. L. Giant Au− glutathione cluster compounds: intense optical 

activity in metal-based transitions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2000, 104, 2630-2641.

10. Behar‐Levy, H.; Neumann, O.; Naaman, R.; Avnir, D. Chirality induction in bulk Au and 

silver. Advanced Materials 2007, 19, 1207-1211.

11. McPeak, K. M.; van Engers, C. D.; Bianchi, S.; Rossinelli, A.; Poulikakos, L. V.; Bernard, L.; 

Herrmann, S.; Kim, D. K.; Burger, S.; Blome, M. Ultraviolet Plasmonic Chirality from Colloidal 

Aluminum Nanoparticles Exhibiting Charge‐Selective Protein Detection. Advanced Materials 

2015, 27, 6244-6250.

12. Carmeli, I.; Lieberman, I.; Kraversky, L.; Fan, Z.; Govorov, A. O.; Markovich, G.; Richter, S. 

Broad band enhancement of light absorption in photosystem I by metal nanoparticle 

antennas. Nano Lett 2010, 10, 2069-2074.

13. Govorov, A. O. Plasmon-induced circular dichroism of a chiral molecule in the vicinity of 

metal nanocrystals. application to various geometries. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 

2011, 115, 7914-7923.

14. Fan, Z. Y.; Govorov, A. O. Chiral Nanocrystals: Plasmonic Spectra and Circular Dichroism. 

Nano Lett 2012, 12, 3283-3289.

15. Yan, J.; Hou, S.; Ji, Y.; Wu, X. Heat-enhanced symmetry breaking in dynamic Au nanorod 

oligomers: the importance of interface control. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 10030-10034.

16. Li, T.; Park, H. G.; Lee, H.-S.; Choi, S.-H. Circular dichroism study of chiral biomolecules 

conjugated with silver nanoparticles. Nanotechnology 2004, 15, S660.

17. George, J.; Thomas, K. G. Surface plasmon coupled circular dichroism of Au 

nanoparticles on peptide nanotubes. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2010, 132, 

2502-2503.

18. Slocik, J. M.; Govorov, A. O.; Naik, R. R. Plasmonic circular dichroism of 

peptide-functionalized Au nanoparticles. Nano Lett 2011, 11, 701-705.

19. Lieberman, I.; Shemer, G.; Fried, T.; Kosower, E. M.; Markovich, G. Plasmon‐Resonance‐

Enhanced Absorption and Circular Dichroism. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2008, 


26

47, 4855-4857.

20. Shemer, G.; Krichevski, O.; Markovich, G.; Molotsky, T.; Lubitz, I.; Kotlyar, A. B. Chirality 

of silver nanoparticles synthesized on DNA. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2006, 

128, 11006-11007.

21. Maoz, B. M.; van der Weegen, R.; Fan, Z.; Govorov, A. O.; Ellestad, G.; Berova, N.; Meijer, 

E.; Markovich, G. Plasmonic chiroptical response of silver nanoparticles interacting with 

chiral supramolecular assemblies. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2012, 134, 

17807-17813.

22. Maoz, B. M.; Chaikin, Y.; Tesler, A. B.; Bar Elli, O.; Fan, Z.; Govorov, A. O.; Markovich, G. 

Amplification of chiroptical activity of chiral biomolecules by surface plasmons. Nano Lett 

2013, 13, 1203-1209.

23. Lu, F.; Tian, Y.; Liu, M.; Su, D.; Zhang, H.; Govorov, A. O.; Gang, O. Discrete nanocubes as 

plasmonic reporters of molecular chirality. Nano Lett 2013, 13, 3145-3151.

24. Hou, S.; Yan, J.; Hu, Z.; Wu, X. Enhancing the plasmonic circular dichroism by entrapping 

chiral molecules at the core–shell interface of rod-shaped Au@ Ag nanocrystals. Chemical 

Communications 2016, 52, 2059-2062.

25. Lan, X.; Wang, Q. Optically Active AuNR@ Ag Core-Shell Nanoparticles and Hierarchical 

Assembly via DNA-Mediated Surface Chemistry. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2016.

26. Graf, P.; Mantion, A.; Haase, A.; Thünemann, A. F.; Mašić, A.; Meier, W.; Luch, A.; Taubert, 

A. Silicification of Peptide-Coated Silver Nanoparticles
A Biomimetic Soft Chemistry 

Approach toward Chiral Hybrid Core− Shell Materials. ACS nano 2011, 5, 820-833.

27. Wen, T.; Hou, S.; Yan, J.; Zhang, H.; Liu, W.; Ji, Y.; Wu, X. L-Cysteine-induced chiroptical 

activity in assemblies of Au nanorods and its use in ultrasensitive detection of copper ions. 

RSC Advances 2014, 4, 45159-45162.

28. Han, B.; Shi, L.; Gao, X.; Guo, J.; Hou, K.; Zheng, Y.; Tang, Z. Ultra-stable silica-coated 

chiral Au-nanorod assemblies: Core–shell nanostructures with enhanced chiroptical 

properties. Nano Research 2016, 9, 451-457.

29. Wu, T.; Ren, J.; Wang, R.; Zhang, X. Competition of chiroptical effect caused by 

nanostructure and chiral molecules. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2014, 118, 

20529-20537.


27

30. Zhu, Z.; Liu, W.; Li, Z.; Han, B.; Zhou, Y.; Gao, Y.; Tang, Z. Manipulation of collective optical 

activity in one-dimensional plasmonic assembly. ACS nano 2012, 6, 2326-2332.

31. Fan, Z. Y.; Govorov, A. O. Plasmonic Circular Dichroism of Chiral Metal Nanoparticle 

Assemblies. Nano Lett 2010, 10, 2580-2587.

32. Mark, A. G.; Gibbs, J. G.; Lee, T. C.; Fischer, P. Hybrid nanocolloids with programmed 

three-dimensional shape and material composition. Nat Mater 2013, 12, 802-807.

33. Ben-Moshe, A.; Wolf, S. G.; Bar Sadan, M.; Houben, L.; Fan, Z. Y.; Govorov, A. O.; 

Markovich, G. Enantioselective control of lattice and shape chirality in inorganic 

nanostructures using chiral biomolecules. Nat Commun 2014, 5.

34. Merg, A. D.; Boatz, J. C.; Mandal, A.; Zhao, G.; Mokashi-Punekar, S.; Liu, C.; Wang, X.; 

Zhang, P.; van der Wel, P. C.; Rosi, N. L. Peptide-Directed Assembly of Single-Helical Au

Nanoparticle Superstructures Exhibiting Intense Chiroptical Activity. Journal of the American 

Chemical Society 2016, 138, 13655-13663.

35. Querejeta-Fernández, A.; Kopera, B.; Prado, K. S.; Klinkova, A.; Methot, M.; Chauve, G.; 

Bouchard, J.; Helmy, A. S.; Kumacheva, E. Circular dichroism of chiral nematic films of 

cellulose nanocrystals loaded with plasmonic nanoparticles. ACS nano 2015, 9, 10377-10385.

36. Wang, R.-Y.; Wang, H.; Wu, X.; Ji, Y.; Wang, P.; Qu, Y.; Chung, T.-S. Chiral assembly of Au

nanorods with collective plasmonic circular dichroism response. Soft Matter 2011, 7, 

8370-8375.

37. Guerrero‐Martínez, A.; Auguié, B.; Alonso‐Gómez, J. L.; Džolić, Z.; Gómez‐Graña, S.; Žinić, 

M.; Cid, M. M.; Liz‐Marzán, L. M. Intense Optical Activity from Three‐Dimensional Chiral 

Ordering of Plasmonic Nanoantennas. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2011, 50, 

5499-5503.

38. Kim, Y.; Yeom, B.; Arteaga, O.; Yoo, S. J.; Lee, S.-G.; Kim, J.-G.; Kotov, N. A. Reconfigurable 

chiroptical nanocomposites with chirality transfer from the macro-to the nanoscale. Nat 

Mater 2016, 15, 461-468.

39. Jung, S. H.; Jeon, J.; Kim, H.; Jaworski, J.; Jung, J. H. Chiral arrangement of achiral Au 

nanoparticles by supramolecular assembly of helical nanofiber templates. Journal of the 

American Chemical Society 2014, 136, 6446-6452.

40. Puma, G. Ag/AgCl@ helical chiral TiO 2 nanofibers as a visible-light driven plasmon 


28

photocatalyst. Chemical communications 2013, 49, 10367-10369.

41. Molotsky, T.; Tamarin, T.; Moshe, A. B.; Markovich, G.; Kotlyar, A. B. Synthesis of chiral 

silver clusters on a DNA template. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2010, 114, 

15951-15954.

42. Jones, M. R.; Osberg, K. D.; Macfarlane, R. J.; Langille, M. R.; Mirkin, C. A. Templated 

techniques for the synthesis and assembly of plasmonic nanostructures. Chemical Reviews 

2011, 111, 3736-3827.

43. Aggeli, A.; Nyrkova, I. A.; Bell, M.; Harding, R.; Carrick, L.; McLeish, T. C.; Semenov, A. N.; 

Boden, N. Hierarchical self-assembly of chiral rod-like molecules as a model for peptide 

β-sheet tapes, ribbons, fibrils, and fibers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

2001, 98, 11857-11862.

44. Bellesia, G.; Shea, J.-E. Self-assembly of β-sheet forming peptides into chiral fibrillar 

aggregates. The Journal of chemical physics 2007, 126, 06B616.

45. Duan, P.; Qin, L.; Zhu, X.; Liu, M. Hierarchical Self‐Assembly of Amphiphilic Peptide 

Dendrons: Evolution of Diverse Chiral Nanostructures Through Hydrogel Formation Over a 

Wide pH Range. Chemistry–A European Journal 2011, 17, 6389-6395.

46. Freire, F. l.; Seco, J. M.; Quiñoá, E.; Riguera, R. Nanospheres with tunable size and 

chirality from helical polymer–metal complexes. Journal of the American Chemical Society 

2012, 134, 19374-19383.

47. Ye, H.-M.; Wang, J.-S.; Tang, S.; Xu, J.; Feng, X.-Q.; Guo, B.-H.; Xie, X.-M.; Zhou, J.-J.; Li, L.; 

Wu, Q. Surface stress effects on the bending direction and twisting chirality of lamellar 

crystals of chiral polymer. Macromolecules 2010, 43, 5762-5770.

48. Wei, C. Radius and chirality dependent conformation of polymer molecule at nanotube 

interface. Nano Lett 2006, 6, 1627-1631.

49. Yashima, E.; Maeda, K.; Nishimura, T. Detection and amplification of chirality by helical 

polymers. Chemistry–A European Journal 2004, 10, 42-51.

50. Heinz, H.; Farmer, B. L.; Pandey, R. B.; Slocik, J. M.; Patnaik, S. S.; Pachter, R.; Naik, R. R. 

Nature of molecular interactions of peptides with Au, palladium, and Pd− Au bimetal 

surfaces in aqueous solution. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2009, 131, 

9704-9714.


29

51. Shemetov, A. A.; Nabiev, I.; Sukhanova, A. Molecular interaction of proteins and 

peptides with nanoparticles. ACS nano 2012, 6, 4585-4602.

52. Majzik, A.; Fülöp, L.; Csapó, E.; Bogár, F.; Martinek, T.; Penke, B.; Bíró, G.; Dékány, I. 

Functionalization of Au nanoparticles with amino acid, β-amyloid peptides and fragment. 

Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 2010, 81, 235-241.

53. Chen, C.-L.; Zhang, P.; Rosi, N. L. A new peptide-based method for the design and 

synthesis of nanoparticle superstructures: construction of highly ordered Au nanoparticle 

double helices. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2008, 130, 13555-13557.

54. Chen, C.-L.; Rosi, N. L. Preparation of unique 1-D nanoparticle superstructures and 

tailoring their structural features. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2010, 132, 

6902-6903.

55. Song, C.; Blaber, M. G.; Zhao, G.; Zhang, P.; Fry, H. C.; Schatz, G. C.; Rosi, N. L. Tailorable 

plasmonic circular dichroism properties of helical nanoparticle superstructures. Nano Lett 

2013, 13, 3256-3261.

56. Zhang, C.; Song, C.; Fry, H. C.; Rosi, N. L. Peptide conjugates for directing the morphology 

and assembly of 1d nanoparticle superstructures. Chemistry–A European Journal 2014, 20, 

941-945.

57. Merg, A. D.; Slocik, J.; Blaber, M. G.; Schatz, G. C.; Naik, R.; Rosi, N. L. Adjusting the 

Metrics of 1-D Helical Au Nanoparticle Superstructures Using Multivalent Peptide Conjugates. 

Langmuir 2015, 31, 9492-9501.

58. Zhu, L.; Li, X.; Wu, S.; Nguyen, K. T.; Yan, H.; Ågren, H.; Zhao, Y. Chirality Control for in 

Situ Preparation of Au
Nanoparticle Superstructures Directed by a Coordinatable 

Organogelator. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2013, 135, 9174-9180.

59. Li, Y.; Liu, M. Fabrication of chiral silver nanoparticles and chiral nanoparticulate film via 

organogel. Chemical Communications 2008, 5571-5573.

60. Che, S.; Liu, Z.; Ohsuna, T.; Sakamoto, K.; Terasaki, O.; Tatsumi, T. Synthesis and 

characterization of chiral mesoporous silica. Nature 2004, 429, 281-284.

61. Qiu, H.; Che, S. Chiral mesoporous silica: Chiral construction and imprinting via 

cooperative self-assembly of amphiphiles and silica precursors. Chemical Society Reviews 

2011, 40, 1259-1268.


30

62. Xie, J.; Duan, Y.; Che, S. Chirality of metal nanoparticles in chiral mesoporous silica. 

Advanced Functional Materials 2012, 22, 3784-3792.

63. Ma, L.; Huang, Z.; Duan, Y.; Shen, X.; Che, S. Optically active chiral Ag nanowires. Science 

China Materials 2015, 58, 441-446.

64. Xie, J.; Che, S. Chirality of anisotropic metal nanowires with a distinct multihelix. 

Chemistry–A European Journal 2012, 18, 15954-15959.

65. Wang, L.; Dong, H.; Li, Y.; Xue, C.; Sun, L.-D.; Yan, C.-H.; Li, Q. Reversible near-infrared 

light directed reflection in a self-organized helical superstructure loaded with upconversion 

nanoparticles. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2014, 136, 4480-4483.

66. Wang, L.; Dong, H.; Li, Y.; Liu, R.; Wang, Y. F.; Bisoyi, H. K.; Sun, L. D.; Yan, C. H.; Li, Q. 

Luminescence‐Driven 
Reversible 
Handedness 
Inversion 
of 
Self‐Organized 
Helical 

Superstructures Enabled by a Novel Near‐Infrared Light Nanotransducer. Advanced Materials 

2015, 27, 2065-2069.

67. Zheng, Z.-g.; Li, Y.; Bisoyi, H. K.; Wang, L.; Bunning, T. J.; Li, Q. Three-dimensional control 

of the helical axis of a chiral nematic liquid crystal by light. Nature 2016, 531, 352-356.

68. Bisoyi, H. K.; Li, Q. Light‐Directed Dynamic Chirality Inversion in Functional Self‐

Organized Helical Superstructures. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2016, 55, 

2994-3010.

69. Qu, D.; Zhang, J.; Chu, G.; Jiang, H.; Wu, C.; Xu, Y. Chiral fluorescent films of Au

nanoclusters and photonic cellulose with modulated fluorescence emission. Journal of 

Materials Chemistry C 2016, 4, 1764-1768.

70. Chu, G.; Yin, H.; Jiang, H.; Qu, D.; Shi, Y.; Ding, D.; Xu, Y. Ultrafast Optical Modulation of 

Rationally Engineered Photonic–Plasmonic Coupling in Self-Assembled Nanocrystalline 

Cellulose/Silver Hybrid Material. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2016, 120, 

27541-27547.

71. Jiang, H.; Zhou, D.; Qu, D.; Chu, G.; Xu, W.; Song, H.; Xu, Y. Self-organized helical 

superstructure of photonic cellulose loaded with upconversion nanoparticles showing 

modulated luminescence. RSC Advances 2016, 6, 76231-76236.

72. Thérien‐Aubin, H.; Lukach, A.; Pitch, N.; Kumacheva, E. Coassembly of nanorods and 

nanospheres in suspensions and in stratified films. Angewandte Chemie 2015, 127, 


31

5710-5714.

73. Thérien-Aubin, H.; Lukach, A.; Pitch, N.; Kumacheva, E. Structure and properties of 

composite films formed by cellulose nanocrystals and charged latex nanoparticles. Nanoscale 

2015, 7, 6612-6618.

74. Lukach, A.; Thérien-Aubin, H. l.; Querejeta-Fernández, A.; Pitch, N.; Chauve, G. g.; 

Méthot, M.; Bouchard, J.; Kumacheva, E. Coassembly of Au nanoparticles and cellulose 

nanocrystals in composite films. Langmuir 2015, 31, 5033-5041.

75. Vollick, B.; Kuo, P.-Y.; Thérien-Aubin, H.; Yan, N.; Kumacheva, E. Composite Cholesteric 

Nanocellulose Films with Enhanced Mechanical Properties. Chemistry of Materials 2016.

76. Chu, G.; Wang, X.; Yin, H.; Shi, Y.; Jiang, H.; Chen, T.; Gao, J.; Qu, D.; Xu, Y.; Ding, D. 

Free-standing optically switchable chiral plasmonic photonic crystal based on self-assembled 

cellulose nanorods and Au nanoparticles. ACS applied materials & interfaces 2015, 7, 

21797-21806.

77. Chu, G.; Wang, X.; Chen, T.; Gao, J.; Gai, F.; Wang, Y.; Xu, Y. Optically tunable chiral 

plasmonic guest–host cellulose films weaved with long-range ordered silver nanowires. ACS 

applied materials & interfaces 2015, 7, 11863-11870.

78. Querejeta-Fernández, A.; Chauve, G. g.; Methot, M.; Bouchard, J.; Kumacheva, E. Chiral 

plasmonic films formed by Au nanorods and cellulose nanocrystals. Journal of the American 

Chemical Society 2014, 136, 4788-4793.

79. Kuzyk, A.; Schreiber, R.; Fan, Z. Y.; Pardatscher, G.; Roller, E. M.; Hogele, A.; Simmel, F. C.; 

Govorov, A. O.; Liedl, T. DNA-based self-assembly of chiral plasmonic nanostructures with 

tailored optical response. Nature 2012, 483, 311-314.

80. Lan, X.; Chen, Z.; Dai, G.; Lu, X.; Ni, W.; Wang, Q. Bifacial DNA origami-directed discrete, 

three-dimensional, anisotropic plasmonic nanoarchitectures with tailored optical chirality. 

Journal of the American Chemical Society 2013, 135, 11441-4.

81. Kuzyk, A.; Schreiber, R.; Zhang, H.; Govorov, A. O.; Liedl, T.; Liu, N. Reconfigurable 3D 

plasmonic metamolecules. Nat Mater 2014, 13, 862-6.

82. Zhou, C.; Duan, X.; Liu, N. A plasmonic nanorod that walks on DNA origami. Nat 

Commun 2015, 6, 8102.

83. Rothemund, P. W. Folding DNA to create nanoscale shapes and patterns. Nature 2006, 


32

440, 297-302.

84. Pal, S.; Deng, Z.; Wang, H.; Zou, S.; Liu, Y.; Yan, H. DNA directed self-assembly of 

anisotropic plasmonic nanostructures. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2011, 133, 

17606-9.

85. Shen, X.; Song, C.; Wang, J.; Shi, D.; Wang, Z.; Liu, N.; Ding, B. Rolling up Au

nanoparticle-dressed DNA origami into three-dimensional plasmonic chiral nanostructures. 

Journal of the American Chemical Society 2011, 134, 146-149.

86. Shen, X. B.; Asenjo-Garcia, A.; Liu, Q.; Jiang, Q.; de Abajo, F. J. G.; Liu, N.; Ding, B. Q. 

Three-Dimensional Plasmonic Chiral Tetramers Assembled by DNA Origami. Nano Lett 2013, 

13, 2128-2133.

87. Tian, Y.; Wang, T.; Liu, W.; Xin, H. L.; Li, H.; Ke, Y.; Shih, W. M.; Gang, O. Prescribed 

nanoparticle cluster architectures and low-dimensional arrays built using octahedral DNA 

origami frames. Nature nanotechnology 2015, 10, 637-44.

88. Urban, M. J.; Dutta, P. K.; Wang, P. F.; Duan, X. Y.; Shen, X. B.; Ding, B. Q.; Ke, Y. G.; Liu, N. 

Plasmonic Toroidal Metamolecules Assembled by DNA Origami. Journal of the American 

Chemical Society 2016, 138, 5495-5498.

89. Lan, X.; Lu, X.; Shen, C.; Ke, Y.; Ni, W.; Wang, Q. Au nanorod helical superstructures with 

designed chirality. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2015, 137, 457-62.

90. Edwardson, T. G.; Lau, K. L.; Bousmail, D.; Serpell, C. J.; Sleiman, H. F. Transfer of 

molecular recognition information from DNA nanostructures to Au nanoparticles. Nature 

chemistry 2016, 8, 162-70.

91. Zhang, Y.; Chao, J.; Liu, H.; Wang, F.; Su, S.; Liu, B.; Zhang, L.; Shi, J.; Wang, L.; Huang, W.; 

Wang, L.; Fan, C. Transfer of Two-Dimensional Oligonucleotide Patterns onto 

Stereocontrolled Plasmonic Nanostructures through DNA-Origami-Based Nanoimprinting 

Lithography. Angewandte Chemie 2016, 55, 8036-40.

92. Kuzyk, A.; Yang, Y.; Duan, X.; Stoll, S.; Govorov, A. O.; Sugiyama, H.; Endo, M.; Liu, N. A 

light-driven three-dimensional plasmonic nanosystem that translates molecular motion into 

reversible chiroptical function. Nat Commun 2016, 7, 10591.

93. Kuzyk, A.; Urban, M. J.; Idili, A.; Ricci, F.; Liu, N. Selective control of reconfigurable chiral 

plasmonic metamolecules. Science advances 2017, 3, e1602803.


33

94. Urban, M. J.; Zhou, C.; Duan, X.; Liu, N. Optically Resolving the Dynamic Walking of a 

Plasmonic Walker Couple. Nano Lett 2015, 15, 8392-6.


