Free space optical communication receiver 
based on a spatial demultiplexer and a 
photonic integrated coherent combining 
circuit

VINCENT BILLAULT,1,* JEROME BOURDERIONNET,1JEAN PAUL MAZELLIER,1
LUC LEVIANDIER,1 PATRICK FENEYROU,1 ANAELLE MAHO,2MICHEL SOTOM,
2 XAVIER NORMANDIN, 3 HERVE LONJARET, 3 ARNAUD BRIGNON,1

1Thales Research and Technology, 1 Avenue Augustin Fresnel, 91767 Palaiseau, France.
2Thales Alenia Space, 26 Avenue J.F. Champollion – B.P. 33787, 31037 Toulouse Cedex 1, France 
3Thales LAS, 2 Avenue Gay Lussac 78995 Elancourt, France
*vincent.billault@thalesgroup.com

Abstract: Atmospheric turbulence can generate scintillation or beam wandering phenomena 
that impairs free space optical (FSO) communication. In this paper, we propose and 
demonstrate a proof-of-concept FSO communication receiver based on a spatial demultiplexer 
and a photonic integrated circuit coherent combiner. The receiver collects the light from several 
Hermite Gauss spatial modes and coherently combine on chip the energy from the different 
modes into a single output. The FSO receiver is characterized with a wavefront emulator bench 
that generates arbitrary phase and intensity patterns. The multimode receiver presents a strong 
resilience to wavefront distortions, compared to a monomode FSO receiver. The system is then
used to detect an analog modulation of an optical beam through a random wavefront profile to 
mimic the transmission of a signal on a degraded optical link.

© 2021 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement

1.
Introduction

Optical feeder links are currently considered as a promising technology to cope with the 

continuous growth in high data rate communication demand [1-2]. However, two mains factors 
limit the performances of optical communications with satellites: the low signal power 
delivered to the receiver and the atmospheric turbulence [3]. The low signal power and the 
weak signal-to-noise ratio at the receiver side practically limits the performances of the 
communication link. Besides, atmospheric turbulence distort the optical wavefront degrading
the optical coherence of the laser beam [4] and causing signal fading. These combined effects 
reduce drastically the single mode fiber (SMF) coupling efficiency of the free space optical 
(FSO) receiver.

To preserve a good coupling efficiency in a SMF FSO receiver, the aperture size of the 

collection lens is limited by the correlation length of the atmospheric turbulence to tens of 
centimeters [5]. A first route to overcome this limitation, lies in adaptive optics. It mitigates the 
atmospheric distortion with deformable mirrors. However, the complexity of the control 
algorithm limits in practice the correction loop bandwidth [6]. Recently, different realizations
of multichannel FSO receivers have been proposed with fast electronic signal recovery [7-8]. 
For multi-aperture (MA) receivers, the input wavefront is sampled by an aperture array to sum 
the energy from different positions of the wavefront. MA receivers are routinely used for 
radiofrequency systems [9], and MA FSO receivers have been presented to improve the optical 
feeder links efficiency [7]. However these architectures require a coherent receiver for each 
aperture and a synchronization of the channels in the electrical domain which impose strict 
constraints on the digital processing performances and limits practically the scalability to a high 
number of aperture. Alternatively, an original architecture of multichannel FSO receiver with 


a multimode fiber has been proposed to increase the collection area [8]: the light is coupled to 
a multimode fiber and a spatial demultiplexer projects the coupled light onto the multimode 
fiber’s modes basis. Each projection is then converted into a Gaussian profile and coupled to a 
separate SMF. Similarly to the MA FSO receiver, the collection area is wider than a SMF but 
it requires a coherent receiver for each mode which limits the scalability of the system. 

Recently, binary tree architectures (BTA) have been proposed to combine the light from an 

array of optical input beams to one output beam [10]. For FSO receivers, BTA avoid detecting
the light out of each channel and subsequently adding the data signal in the electrical domain 
after re-synchronization process. The use of BTA with FSO receiver has been proposed in [11-
12] for a few number of inputs with discrete elements. Practically, these systems show an 
enhancement of the signal to noise ratio and an also facilitate the demodulation step avoiding 
the active resynchronization of the channels. However, the setups with off-the-shelf elements 
are not viable for the operation with a large number of inputs, as the system size and total 
propagation losses increase with the number of modes [11].

Therein, photonic integrated circuits (PIC) exhibit attractive features for achieving the 

coherent combination of the multiple outputs of the receiver. PICs provide both optical and 
electronic functions with ultimate small footprint, and a remarkable thermal and mechanical 
stability [13-14]. The photonic integrated platform is also perfectly suited to scale to a high 
number of inputs with a wide flexibility to standard BTA [15] to fully reconfigurable photonic 
circuits [16], as the propagation on the chip through phase modulators and couplers can be as 
low as 0.5 dB/cm [17].

In this paper, we propose and demonstrate for the first time of our knowledge a complete 

FSO receiver for optical communications associating a spatial demultiplexer and a BTA on a 
PIC. This architecture thus combines the advantages of a BTA supporting multimode collection 
area and the high integration capability and robustness of PICs. In the first section, we describe 
the wavefront emulator that we developed in order to mimic phase and amplitude distortion and 
evaluate the receiver performances. The emulator is calibrated to selectively excite the 
demultiplexer eigenmodes in order to generate arbitrary phase and amplitude spatial beam 
profiles as a combination of the demultiplexer mode basis. In a second section we describe and 
characterize the combining PIC. In the last section the performances of the complete FSO 
receiver are evaluated.

2.
Experimental setup. 

The proposed receiver and wavefront emulator test bed are presented in Figure 1. The 

wavefront emulator (Fig. 1A) generates arbitrary amplitude and phase light field. The input 
profiles are decomposed on the Hermite Gauss (HG) basis by the spatial demultiplexer (Fig. 
1B), and each projection is coupled to a SMF. Finally, the power of each fiber is coherently 
combined with a PIC on a single output beam (Fig. 1C). 

Fig.1. Experimental setup of the FSO receiver. Col : collimator. Pol : polarizer. PD : photodiode. 
SLM : spatial light modulator. Focal lens : L1 = 30 cm, L2 = 7.5 cm, L3 = 30 cm, L4 = 50 cm.

The wavefront emulator is inspired from [18] and uses two nematic liquid crystal phase-

only spatial light modulators (LCOS SLMs) for intensity and phase modulation of an input 
field. The light from a CW laser operating at 1.55 µm passes through a half-wave plate (HWP) 
and a collimating lens (L1) to reach the SLM1. A 4f afocal system (with unit magnification) 


images the plane of SLM1 to that of SLM2. An iris, a polarizer and a HWP are placed between 
the two SLMs. The two SLMs modulate spatially the phase of the light for only one polarization
direction 𝑒⃗𝑆𝐿𝑀

∥
orthogonal to the plane of Figure 1. The first HWP controls the polarization of 

the light that addresses SLM1, in order to have the light linearly polarized along 𝑒⃗, oriented at 
45° from 𝑒⃗𝑆𝐿𝑀

∥
. With a polarizer in the same polarization direction 𝑒⃗, the SLM1 associated to 

the polarizer acts like an intensity spatial modulator. The second HWP orients the light
polarization direction to 𝑒⃗𝑆𝐿𝑀

∥
so that the SLM2 acts like a phase only spatial modulator. By 

applying respectively phase patterns 𝜑1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜑2(𝑥, 𝑦) to SLM1 and SLM2, the electric 
field 𝐸(𝑥, 𝑦) at the wavefront emulator output writes [18]:

𝐸(𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝐴0 cos (𝜑1(𝑥, 𝑦)

2
) exp (𝑖 𝜑1(𝑥, 𝑦) + 2𝜑2(𝑥, 𝑦)

2
) ,
(1)

with 𝐴0 the amplitude of the input wavefront on the SLM1. So, by changing the phase patterns
written onto SLM1 and SLM2, we manipulate the amplitude and phase of the wavefront 
independently at the same time. Figure 2 shows several profiles of HG modes generated with 
the wavefront emulator imaged on a camera (not shown in Fig. 1). The camera is imaging the 
plane of SLM2 through a 4f system (with a magnification of 0.7).

Fig. 2. Example of generated HG modes. Patterns display on SLM1 (up) and image with the 

camera (bottom).

The multichannel FSO receiver (CAILabs: Tilba) is a mutli-plane light conversion (MPLC) 

module that takes a FSO wavefront for input and returns its projection on a 15 HG modes basis, 
on 15 separated SMF. The modes basis at the output is given by the MPLC (in our case the HG
modes constitute a complete basis set of orthonormal functions that are therefore suited to the 
wavefront emulator). We first characterize the transmission of the MPLC module by generating
consecutively the different HG modes with the wavefront emulator. For a given mode HGx,y, 
we measure the free space input power (𝑃𝑥,𝑦

𝑖𝑛 ) and the ouput power for each fiber (the 15 𝑃𝑥′,𝑦′

𝑜𝑢𝑡 ) 

with a photodiode array. Figure 3 shows the transmission matrix 𝑃𝑖𝑛/𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡 of the MPLC, and 
the Table 1 sums up the MPLC characteristics. For each mode, we calculate the insertion losses 
with 𝑃𝑥,𝑦

𝑜𝑢𝑡/𝑃𝑥,𝑦

𝑖𝑛 and the cross talk with 𝑃𝑥′,𝑦′≠ 𝑥,𝑦

𝑜𝑢𝑡
/𝑃𝑥,𝑦

𝑖𝑛 of the MPLC in a receiver configuration. 

The transmission matrix is quasi-diagonal and the mean cross talk is very low (< −19 dB), 
making this architecture suitable for the reception and decomposition of distorted wavefronts.
The mean insertion loss (for the 15 HG modes) of the MPLC when measured in the other 
direction, i.e. from the single mode input to the multimode output, is 1 dB. The higher insertion 
loss per mode we obtain (~ 3.6 dB) comes mainly from the mismatch between the HG modes 
generated via the wavefront emulator and the actual eigenmodes of the MPLC.


Fig. 3. (a) Transmission matrix of the MPLC (logarithmic scale) (b) Output power distribution

(%); theoretical (blue) and measured via the photodiode array (red), inset : corresponding 

pattern on SLM1.

Table1. MPLC characteristics for HGx,y: insertion losses (IL) and mean cross talk (MCT) in dB

HGx,y
40
30
20
10
31
21
11
22

IL
-3.8
-3.5
-3.2
-3.6
-4.0
-3.9
-3.8
-4.2

MCT
-22
-23
-24
-22
-22
-21
-21
-23

HGx,y
00
12
13
01
02
03
04

IL
-3.5
-3.4
-4.0
-3.7
-3.2
-3.2
-3.6

MCT
-21
-21
-22
-19
-21
-20
-23

To verify the MPLC module linearity, we generate a wavefront corresponding to a combination
of 6 HG modes with random phase and power distribution. As the insertion losses slightly vary 
among the HG modes, we normalize each mode by the corresponding eigenvalue of the MPLC 
transmission matrix. The table in Fig.3b shows the theoretical random power distribution of the 
6 modes. Figure 3 presents the output power distribution of the 6 fibers measured with the 
photodiode array. The output power distribution is in excellent agreement with the theoretical 
distribution. The small differences that emerge come from the phase flicker of the SLMs and 
the residual cross-talk of the MPLC.

3.
Coherent combining photonic integrated circuit

We designed a photonic integrated BTA to combine the energy from the 15 output fibers 

of the MPLC. It has been fabricated within IMEC’s (Belgium) Silicon On Insulator (SOI) 
photonics foundry through multiprojects wafers shuttle and packaged by PHIX (Netherlands). 
The operating principle of the BTA is described in Figure 4. The PIC is divided in 14 unit cells, 
each cell being composed of two inputs (with a phase shifter in one of them), a Mach-Zehnder
interferometer between the two inputs (with a phase shifter in one arm) and two outputs [11-
19]. A photodiode at one of the cell outputs detects the interference intensity. By sweeping the 
voltage applied to the cell thermo-optical phase shifters, one can minimize the current on the 
photodiode. When it is minimum, the power at the complementary output of the interferometer 
is maximum, i.e. both amplitude and phase imbalance have been corrected and the power from 
the two inputs of the cell are equalized and coherently combined. A Nelder Mead optimization 
algorithm [20] has been implemented to minimize cell by cell the current of the photodiodes 
by adjusting the phase shifters driving voltages starting from the cells at the input side of the 
PIC, to the final output cell [21]. With the associated electronics (transimpedance amplifiers 


and amplifiers with tunable gain), the sensitivity of the detection is lower than 1 nW which is 
perfectly suited to follow long-term variably low coupling efficiency. The combined beam can 
be routed for direct detection (either on an on-chip photodiode or coupled outside the chip) or 
for phase and quadrature (I/Q) coherent detection with an on-chip 90° coupler and balanced 
detectors [22]. 

The optical coupling loss from fiber to waveguide is estimated to ~ 4dB / interface using 

shunt waveguides in the PIC (not represented). We measured a total insertion loss of 7dB at 
1535 nm from any of the 15 fiber inputs to the on-chip direct or (I/Q) coherent detection. The 
7dB breaks out in 4dB coupling loss plus 5 × 0.6dB for each of the 5 cascaded Mach-Zehnder 
interferometers in the total optical path of the PIC (see Fig. 4a). When the light is routed outside 
the chip, the insertion loss is increased by ~ 4dB due to the waveguide to fiber coupling. 

Fig. 4 (a) Scheme of the PIC. A unit cell is represented in yellow (b), (c) pictures of the PIC and 
packaged device.

To validate the operating principle of the PIC combiner, the optimization algorithm is 

implemented for optical waves from 6 fiber inputs as a first proof-of-concept experiment.
Figure 5 shows the evolution of the combined power without and with the feedback loop. The 
bundle of fibers coupled to the PIC is squeezed manually to generate different phase 
perturbations in the fibers. In open loop configuration, the phase variations between the 
different inputs cause large variations of the optical power. As soon as the feedback loop is 
switched on, the combined power reaches and stays to a maximum corresponding to the total 
coherent combination of the inputs. The observed residual fast fluctuations are due to the 2 pi 
phase jumps of the phase shifters (50 µs time scale). The perturbations induced to the system 
were not quantified nor related to any real FSO conditions, and were intended here to assess he 
system ability to maintain the coherent combination under dynamic phase fluctuations
conditions. The bandwidth of the loop correction is intrinsically limited by the dynamic of the 
thermooptic phase shifters that we used (typically ~ 1-10 kHz). However, this bandwidth is 


theoretically sufficient to mitigate atmospheric turbulence, as the perturbation bandwidth is 
typically below 1 kHz [23-24].

Fig. 5 Combined optical power at the PIC output with/without phase locking.

4.
Experimental results. 

To characterize the efficiency of the complete FSO emulator and receiver (MPLC and BTA

on the PIC), we generate arbitrary wavefronts as combination of HG modes with the setup of 
Fig. 1, and we detect and combine the power from the different modes. To compare our system 
to conventional FSO receivers, we add a second collection arm (cf. Fig. 1B) composed of a 
collimator and a SMF. An afocal system (with a magnification of 0.25) adapts the size of the 
wavefront without any spatial shaping to the collimator to optimize the coupling efficiency. We 
apply different waveform profiles with the wavefront emulator and compare the coupling 
efficiencies for the two receivers. We changed the CW laser wavelength to 1535 nm to optimize 
the efficiency of the coherent combiner: the coupling loss to the PIC is wavelength independent
(~ − 4dB) in the C band, but the propagation loss of the light on the PIC depends significantly 
of the wavelength (mainly because of the multimode interference couplers).

For the monomode receiver, the coupling efficiency 𝜂mono corresponds to the ratio of the 

coupled power in the output single mode fiber 𝑃out to the free space input power 𝑃in (cf. Fig 
6.a). For the multimode receiver, we defined the efficiency 𝜂PIC as the ratio of the combined 
power on-chip 𝑃out to the sum of the power in each fiber after the MPLC 𝑃in1 (cf. Fig 6. b).
Power-on-chip is considered here, illustrating the additional benefit of the PIC which
incorporates the detectors, thus avoiding out-coupling losses. The set of beam profiles tested 
corresponds to a combination of 6 HG modes with random amplitudes and phase (The six HG 
modes used are the modes HG22, HG31, HG00, HG20, HG13, HG40). 


Fig. 6 (a) Scheme of the efficiency measurement (a) for the monomode FSO receiver (b) for the 
MPLC + PIC FSO receiver. (c) Left : Coupling efficiency for the monomode FSO receiver and 
the MPLC + PIC FSO receiver for random beam. Right : histogram of the coupling efficiency 

For no spatial shaping on the SLM, the coupling efficiency for the SMF FSO receiver is 

equal to 4.6dB. The coupling efficiency for the SMF FSO receiver is higher than for the MPLC 
and PIC FSO receiver, mainly due to the propagation and coupling loss of our present PIC 
device (~ 7 dB). However, for random patterns, the coupling of the SMF FSO receiver strongly 
varies as the coupling of the spatial demultiplexer and PIC FSO receiver remains almost 
constant (see Figure 6.c). This shows that the latter is much more resilient than classical FSO 
receivers to phase and amplitude perturbations. This property is extremely valuable for 
telecommunications, as atmospheric perturbations rapidly change the phase and energy 
distributions between the modes. Besides, the efficiency of the PIC coherent combiner is higher 
than the FSO receiver for every random pattern tested. Even when considering also the loss of 
the MPLC (which are overestimated due to the wavefront emulator, as seen in section 2), the 
efficiency 𝜂MPLC_FSO (corresponding to the ratio of the combined power on-chip 𝑃out to the free 
space input power 𝑃in, see Fig. 6.b, dashed blue line), is higher in average than the efficiency 
of the monomode FSO receiver. 

Finally, to detect radiofrequency modulations applied to the electric field with the full setup 

(wavefront emulator and multimode receiver), we used the on-chip coherent receiver. The 
coherent receiver is composed of a 2x4 multimode interference (MMI) 90° hybrid coupler and 
two pairs of balanced photodiodes (cf. Fig. 4. a) to generate the phase and quadrature (I/Q) 
component of the radiofrequency field. We characterize the power and phase imbalance 
between the 4 outputs of the MMI coupler with an unbalanced Mach-Zehnder interferometer
test structure (MZI, cf. scheme of Fig. 7.a) [25], positioned at a corner of the PIC. By sweeping 


the wavelength of the MZI input, we determine the relative phase offsets and power imbalance 
of the 2x4 MMI hybrid coupler at the output ports (cf. Fig. 7.a). The MMI outputs are shifted 
from respectively 0, 82, 184 and 268° with a 0.4 dB power imbalance between the outputs.

As a preliminary evaluation of the on-chip I/Q receiver, we used an acousto-optic frequency 

shifter placed upstream of the wavefront emulator input to generate an analog frequency 
modulation of the optical link at 80 MHz. To mimic a degraded microwave photonic link, a 
random HG modes combination extracted from Fig. 6 is applied to the SLMs. Therefore, the
MPLC output corresponds to an excitation of 6 fibers, carrying each the 80 MHz analog 
frequency modulation. The relative true time delays mismatch between each channel (𝛿𝑡) must 
been compensated in order to use modulated signal with the BTA (𝛿𝑡 ≪ 2/BW, with BW the 
modulation bandwidth). With BW = 80 MHz, the true time delay must be much lower than 
25 ns (7.5 m of free space propagation). For that modulation bandwidth, the multimode FSO 
receiver presented in Fig. 1 is precise enough. The on-chip binary tree architecture with the 
Nelder Mead algorithm combines the energy of the 6 fibers in one single beam that is routed to 
the on-chip coherent receiver. The analog modulation is detected with respect to the CW laser
that is coupled to the chip. Figure 7.b shows the temporal profile of the I/Q detection at the 
coherent receiver output. The analog phase modulation (at 80 MHz) is successfully 
reconstructed after free space propagation through a random perturbation, collection with the 
MPLC and coherent recombination. This result validates the use of the spatial demultiplexer 
and PIC based FSO receiver for the balanced detection of modulated waveform. 

Fig. 7 (a) Characterization of the 2v4 MMI coupler: scheme of the MZI (up) and relative 
transmission of the 4 MMI outputs versus the input wavelength of the MZI (bottom) (b) Outputs 
of the on-chip coherent receiver (red : I, blue Q) with a 80 MHz modulation applied to the 
wavefront emulator input.

5.
Conclusion.

We have proposed and demonstrated a proof-of-concept FSO receiver based on a spatial
demultiplexer and a PIC coherent combiner. We have developed a wavefront emulator to test 
the receiver with arbitrary amplitude and phase patterns. The FSO receiver has proven the 
efficient coherent combination of 6 fibers for different random inputs. Compared to a 
conventional SMF FSO receiver, we have showed that our system is much less sensitive to 
phase and amplitude perturbations. In a final experiment, we validate the FSO receiver for the 
on-chip detection of a modulated input wavefront. This first characterization of the setup shows 
the great potential of this complete architecture, from the emulator bench to the BTA on the 
PIC. This setup will be further improved with a fine tuning of the delays between the different 
channels (with tunable optical delay line) to use the FSO receiver with modulated signals with 
an higher modulation bandwidth and more complex frequency modulation scheme (OOK, 
QPSK, DQPSK, …). The implementation of realistic atmospheric perturbation scenario (with 
the projection of simulated distorted wavefront on the HG basis) is also currently considered. 


As a conclusion, the implementation of FSO receivers based on a spatial demultiplexer with 

coherent combination presents several advantages compared to standard SMF FSO receiver: 
The architecture shows a strong resilience to random phase and intensity perturbation, as the 
coupling efficiency does not depend on the energy distributions among the spatial modes. As a 
consequence, this systems ought to be less sensitive to atmospheric turbulence. Then, the 
system is largely scalable, as MPLCs can project and convert wavefronts into a large number 
of spatial modes, and integrated photonic platforms allow to encompass a large number of 
photonic devices on the same chip. Moreover, since insertion loss in the PIC are mostly 
dominated by coupling loss, increasing the channel count will have a limited impact on the total 
insertion loss. For instance, since we estimated in section 3 the loss of one combining cell to 
~0.6dB, then doubling the number of input channels would only add 0.6dB to the total insertion 
loss. The scalability of the architecture to a large number of modes can provide significant 
benefit for FSO communication receivers: as the spatial demultiplexer collects a large number 
of spatial modes and have a high numerical aperture, the collection area is larger than standard 
SMF FSO receiver. The aperture diameter of the collection lens with this system could therefore 
become higher than the atmospheric turbulence correlation length and so increase the received
signal power. The present approach also opens up prospects for upcoming hybrid PIC platforms 
combining SOI, SIN and InP, offering ultra-low loss waveguides, high bandwidth phase shifters 
and high performance photodiodes, which would benefit the number of recombined channels.

Acknowledgment

We thank Arnaud Le Kernec for useful discussions. This work was partially supported by 

the VERTIGO project from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
program under grant agreement No. 822030.

Disclosure

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Data Availability

Data underlying the results presented in this paper may be obtained from the authors upon 

reasonable request.

References

1.
R. Saathof, R. den Breeje, W. Klop, S. Kuiper, N. Doelman, F. Pettazzi, A. Vosteen, N. Truyens, W. 
Crowcombe, J. Human, I. Ferrario, R. M. Calvo, J. Poliak, R. Barrios, D. Giggenbach, C. Fuchs, and S. Scalise,
“Optical technologies for terabit/s-throughput feeder link,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on 
Space Optical Systems and Applications (IEEE, 2017), pp. 123-129,

2.
A. Le Kernec, L Canuet, A. Maho, M. Sotom, D. Matter, and  L. Francou, “Optical feeder links for high 
throughput satellites and the H2020 VERTIGO project,” COAT-2019-workshop (Communications and 
Observations through Atmospheric Turbulence: characterization and mitigation) (2019).

3.
A. K. Majumdar and J. C. Ricklin, Free-space laser communications: principles and advances, Vol. 2. 
(Springer-Verlag, 2008).

4.
Y. Dikmelik and F. M. Davidson, “Fiber-coupling efficiency for free-space optical communication through 
atmospheric turbulence,” Appl. Opt. 44(23), 4946–4952 (2005). 

5.
S. Shaklan and F. Roddier, “Coupling starlight into single-mode fiber optics,” Appl. Opt. 27(11), 2334-2338
(1988).

6.
L. Rinaldi, V. Michau, N. Védrenne, C. Petit, L. M. Mugnier, C. Lim, J. Montri, L. Paillier, and M. Boutillier,
“Sensorless adaptive optics for optical communications,” Proc. SPIE 11678, (2021).

7.
D. J. Geisler, T. M. Yarnall, M. L. Stevens, C. M. Schieler, B. S. Robinson, and S. A. Hamilton, “Multi-
aperture digital coherent combining for free-space optical communication receivers,” Opt. Express 24(12),
12661-12671 (2016).

8.
M. Arikawa and T. Ito, “Performance of mode diversity reception of a polarization-division-multiplexed signal 
for free-space optical communication under atmospheric turbulence,” Opt. Express 26(22), 28263-28276 
(2018).

9.
V. Jamnejad, J. Huang, B. Levitt, T. Pham, and R. Cesarone, “Array antennas for JPLNASA deep space 
network,” in Proceedings of IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings 2, 911–921, (2002).

10.
D. A. B. Miller, “Self-aligning universal beam coupler,” Opt. Express 21(5), 6360-6370 (2013).


11.
Y. Yang, C. Geng, F. Li, G. Huang, and X. Li, “Multi-aperture all-fiber active coherent beam combining for 
free-space optical communication receivers,” Opt. Express, 25(22), 27519-27532, (2017).

12.
B. Zhang, J. Sun, C. Lao, C. H. Betters, A. Argyros, Y. Zhou, and S. G. Leon-Saval, “All-fiber photonic lantern 
multimode optical receiver with coherent adaptive optics beam combining,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.09516,
(2021).

13.
C. Scarcella, J. S. Lee, C. Eason, M. Antier, J. Bourderionnet, C. Larat, E. Lallier, A. Brignon, T. Spuesens, P. 
Verheyen, P. Absil, R. Baets, and P. A. O‘Brien, “Plat4m Progressing silicon photonics in Europe,” Photonics. 
3(1), 1-10 (2016).

14.
C. G. H. Roeloffzen, L. Zhuang, C. Taddei, A. Leinse, R. G. Heideman, P. W. L. van Dijk, R. M. 
Oldenbeuving, D. A. I. Marpaung, M. Burla, and K. J. Boller, “Silicon nitride microwave photonic circuits,”
Opt. express 21(19), 22937-22961 (2013).

15.
D. A. B. Miller, “Analyzing and generating multimode optical fields using self-configuring networks,” Optica, 
7(7), 794-801 (2020).

16.
W. Bogaerts, D. Pérez, J. Capmany, D. A. B. Miller, J. Poon, D. Englund, F. Morichetti, and A. Melloni, 
“Programmable photonic circuits,” Nature, 586(7826), 207-216, 2020.

17.
S. K. Selvaraja, P. De Heyn, G. Winroth, P. Ong, G. Lepage, C. Cailler, A. Rigny, K. Bourdelle, W. Bogaerts, 
D. Van Thourhout, J. Van Campenhout, and P. D. VanThourhout, J. Van Campenhout, and P. Absil, “Highly 
uniform and low-loss passive silicon photonics devices using a 300mm CMOS platform,” in Optical Fiber 
Communication Conference 2014, United States of America, paper Th2A.33 (2014).

18.
L. Zhu and J. Wang, “Arbitrary manipulation of spatial amplitude and phase using phase-only spatial light 
modulators”. Sci. Rep. 4(1), 1-7(2014).

19.
A. Annoni, E. Guglielmi, M. Carminati, G. Ferrari, M.Sampietro, D. A. B. Miller, A. Melloni, and F. 
Morichetti. “Unscrambling light—automatically undoing strong mixing between modes,” Light Sci. Appl. 
6(12), 2017.

20.
J. A. Nelder and R. Mead, “A simplex method for function minimization,” Comput J. 7(4), 308-313 (1965).

21.
K. Choutagunta, I. Roberts, D. A. B. Miller and J. M. Kahn, “Adapting Mach--Zehnder mesh equalizers in 
direct-detection mode-division-multiplexed links,” J. Light. Technol., 38(4), 723-735 (2019).

22.
J. Zhang, J. Verbist, B. Moeneclaey, J. Van Weerdenburg, R. Van Uden, H. Chen, J. Van Campenhout, C. 
Okonkwo, X. Yin, J. Bauwelinck, and G. Roelkens, “Compact low-power-consumption 28-Gbaud QPSK/16-
QAM integrated silicon photonic/electronic coherent receiver,” IEEE Photon. J. 8(1), 1-10 (2016).

23.
M. Toyoshima, S. Yamakawa, T. Yamawaki, K. Arai, M. Reyes, A. Alonso, Z. Sodnik, and B. Demelenne,
“Ground-to-satellite optical link tests between Japanese laser communications terminal and European 
geostationary satellite ARTEMIS,” Proc. SPIE 5338, 1–15 (2004).

24.
M. R. Garcia-Talavera, S. Chueca, A. Alonso, T. Viera, and Z. Sodnik, “Analysis of the preliminary optical 
links between ARTEMIS and the Optical Ground Station,” Proc. SPIE 4821, 33–43 (2002).

25.
K. Voigt, L. Zimmermann, G. Winzer, H. Tian, B. Tillack, K. Petermann, “C-Band Optical 90° Hybrids in 
Silicon Nanowaveguide Technology,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 23(23), 1769-1771 (2011).


