1

4D Optically Reconfigurable Volumetric Metamaterials

Dmitry Dobrykh, Anna Mikhailovskaya, Pavel Ginzburg and Dmitry Filonov*

Dmitry Dobrykh, Anna Mikhailovskaya, Prof. Pavel Ginzburg
School of Electrical Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel

Dmitry Dobrykh, Anna Mikhailovskaya
Department of Nanophotonics and Metamaterials, ITMO University, St. Petersburg 197101, 
Russia

Dmitry Filonov
Center for Photonics and 2D Materials, Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 
Dolgoprudny 141700, Russia
dimfilonov@gmail.com

Abstract - Metamaterials are artificially created media, which allow introducing additional 

degrees of freedom into electromagnetic design by controlling constitutive material parameters. 

Reconfigurable time-dependent metamaterials can further enlarge those capabilities by 

introducing a temporal variable as an additional controllable parameter. Here we demonstrate 

a first-of-its-kind reconfigurable volumetric metamaterial-based scatterer, wherein the 

electromagnetic properties are controlled dynamically with light. In particular, hybridized 

resonances in arrays of split ring resonators give rise to a collective mode that presents 

properties of artificial high-frequency magnetism for centimeter waves. Resonant behavior of 

each individual ring is controlled with a photocurrent, which allows the fast tuning of 

macroscopic effective permeability. Thus, the artificial gigahertz magnon resonant excitation 

within a subwavelength spherical scatterer is governed by light intensity. Four-dimensional 

control over electromagnetic scattering in both space and time opens new venues for modern 

applications, including wireless communications and automotive radars to name just a few.


2

Introduction

Metamaterials are artificially created media in which the electromagnetic properties can be 

controlled by subwavelength structuring of their unit cells.[1,2] As a result, quite peculiar values 

of material susceptibilities can be obtained. Widely employed metamaterial designs are based 

on arrays of compact resonators, which individual response hybridize and give rise to collective 

modes. Many different approaches, based on variations of loops (magnetic resonators), wires 

(electric), and their combinations have been developed and experimentally demonstrated.[3-9] 

The metamaterial approach has been found to be especially successful under conditions where 

incident illumination wavelength is relatively long. For example, GHz metamaterials can be 

fabricated by employing standard printed board lithographic techniques. Thus, the field of radio 

frequency (RF) antennas has benefited from introducing material degrees of freedom as an 

additional optimization parameter, as was successfully demonstrated in many recent studies.[10-

12] It is worth noting, however, that the vast majority of metamaterial-based devices are static, 

i.e., their electromagnetic properties cannot be controlled after fabrication. This low flexibility 

can be a significant disadvantage in many cases. For example, a typical invisibility cloaking 

device has a very narrow operational bandwidth, which is a direct consequence of the resonant 

nature of the negative index metamaterial
that was employed
in the
celebrated 

demonstration.[13] However, for application in radar invisibility, the negative index type of 

countermeasure fails against any basic frequency hopping system, which utilizes a sufficient 

bandwidth.[14] Hence, the ability of dynamic control over metamaterial parameters is a highly-

demanded functionality and has a very broad range of practical applicability, not necessarily 

limited to radar scenarios. 

Control over effective material properties can be achieved in many ways, including, for 

example, mechanical deformation and electronic control that are among the preferable and 

already proven strategies.[15,16] The latter approach utilizes electrically driven elements where 

impedance can be controlled by either external voltage or current. Two-dimensional versions 


3

of metamaterials (metasurfaces) especially benefited from this approach, and many useful 

practical devices have been developed.[10] For example, it was shown that laws of refraction can 

be controlled almost on demand.[17] Furthermore, several beam steering devices, where 

expensive phase shifting elements were replaced by low cost varactor diodes, were designed 

and have demonstrated remarkable electromagnetic performance.[18] Other reconfigurable 

metasurfaces capabilities have been demonstrated, e.g.[19-22]. However, the direct mapping of 

those techniques from two-dimensional prototypes to volumetric architectures is extremely 

challenging. The reason is the need for conducting wiring, which must connect each individual 

resonating element inside the volume to a drive. The result is that an undesirable branched 

network of conductors is created inside a structure and start affecting, even if not prevailing

over its electromagnetic properties. 

Here we propose a paradigm solution to this dynamic reconfigurability problem and 

demonstrate a first-of-its-kind tunable volumetric metamaterial. In particular, our architecture 

is based on arrays of split ring resonators (SRRs), serving as microscopic magnetic dipoles. 

Each SRR is loaded with a varactor, which in turn is driven by a photodiode. The tandem is 

activated with light and does not have any physical connection (wires) to an adjutant unit cell. 

The light is guided into the volume of the structure by optical fiber bundles that do not scatter 

centimeter waves significantly (see the inset in Figure 1 (a)).

Under uniform illumination, the collective resonance of the structure can be reconfigured with 

light. In particular, we show that artificial magnon resonance of a metamaterial-based sphere 

can be controlled with light, and the resulting scattering cross-sections can be tuned 

dynamically.[23]

The rest of this manuscript is organized as follows: The metamaterial design for achieving 

negative permittivity is described first and is then followed by optical control over relative 

material parameters, numerical demonstration of tunable artificial magnon resonance, 


4

experimental observation of electro-optical spectral shift in one unit cell, and backscattering 

resonance peak degeneration in metamaterial for different powers of non-uniform illumination.

Metamaterial Design

Metamaterial architecture is based on ordered arrays of SRRs, chemically etched on printed 

circuit boards (PCB).[2] Each individual resonator acts as a magnetic dipole within vertices of 

an artificial material crystal. The specific geometry of the deeply subwavelength unit cell

appears in Figure 1 (c). Near-field coupling between all unit cells in the artificial crystal, 

governs the electromagnetic properties of the homogenized structure. Many different 

homogenization techniques have been developed over the years that allow deriving effective 

material parameters of quite sophisticated structures, e.g.[24-26] Our unit cell design contains four 

split rings and interconnecting wires (within a single cell only). This architecture was chosen 

to reduce the number of light-rectification photodiodes discussed in the next paragraph. It is 

also noteworthy that the adjutant unit cells do not have direct wire connection with each other;

and, as a result, there is no conduction current flow between the cells. Conductive coupling 

between the metamaterials’ unit cell can give rise to difficulties in defining local effective 

susceptibilities, as shown, for example, in the case wire media.[27-29] Another strategy to prevent 

high-frequency current flow is to introduce decoupling coils. This approach, however, can 

significantly complicate the design and necessitate the use of lumped elements with high 

tolerance in their nominals. This approach is also associated with additional ohmic losses within 

a structure. Furthermore, the form factor of lumped elements starts affecting electromagnetic 

scattering from the entire structure, which can result in additional degradation of performance.

To extract the effective parameters of our structure, the numerical retrieval in a waveguide 

geometry was done with the help of CST Microwave Studio, based on the Nicolson–Ross–Weir 

method.[30] A typical two-port waveguide system, with relevant dimensions of 20 × 20 × 60 

mm, determined by the specific frequency range, was used. Complex-valued transmission and 


5

reflection coefficients (S-parameters) were calculated for three different orientations, 

corresponding to the main crystallographic axis of the metamaterial, and the permittivity and 

permeability tensors were extracted, following the formulation reported at.[4] The following 

parameters of the structure were chosen after a set of optimizations: radius of SRRs, r = 4 mm; 

w = 1 mm and C = 680 pF (the static capacitor within each ring). The substrate was taken to be 

FR4 (ε = 4.43, tgδ = 0.025) of 1.5 mm thickness, and the material chosen for the SRR was 

copper (conductivity of 5.96 × 107 S/m) (Figure 1 (c) for the geometrical definitions). 

The resulting effective permittivity and permeability, as a function of frequency, were extracted

numerically and are shown in Figure 2 (a). Both these quantities have a strong resonant 

absorption peak that results in significantly modified effective values of the real parts in its 

vicinity. The magnetic phenomenon, which is the subject for the optimization, is stronger in the 

case of sharp resonances. It is worth mentioning that the magnetic and electric phenomena are 

decoupled in cases
when deeply subwavelength scatterers are considered. Hence, 

electromagnetic properties, related to relative permeability (µ) values, e.g. -2 for achieving 

magnon resonance in a deeply subwavelength sphere, do not depend on values of a relative 

permittivity ε (although a far-field scattering pattern will be affected). A broad range of negative 

permeability values can be obtained, ensuring a resonant response even in the presence of 

retardation effects (𝜇 ≈ −2 condition is strictly valid only for point-like scatterers and changes 

with the non-negligible size of a scatterer).

Artificial magnon resonance resembles a celebrated phenomenon of localized plasmon 

resonances, taking place in noble metal nanoparticles. Duality of Maxwell’s equations allows 

drawing analogies between electric and magnetic phenomena, while the field of metamaterials 

enables replicating material properties. The polarizability of a small magnetic sphere is given 

by 

𝛼𝑚 = 4𝜋𝑟3 (

𝜇𝑟−1

𝜇𝑟+2)
(1)


6

where 𝜇𝑟 is the relative permeability of the material, while r is the radius of the sphere. The 

modified expression, which includes retardation effects and radiation reaction is given by 

𝛼𝑚 = 4𝜋 (

1

𝑟3 ×

𝜇𝑟+2

𝜇𝑟−1 − 𝑖

2

3 𝑘3 −

𝑘2

𝑟 )

−1

(2)

where k is the free space wavenumber of the incident radiation. Eq. 1 shows that the resonance

is obtained when 𝑅𝑒(𝜇𝑟) = −2 and the quality factor of the peak is governed by the radiation 

losses (Eq. 2). More detailed this phenomenon is described in work.[23] It should be noted that 

the material properties are frequency-dependent and, hence, photodiodes allow controlling the 

resonant condition (Eq. 2) by changing capacitances of varactors. 

Tunability properties of the structure will be assessed next. For this purpose, several capacitance 

nominals of the varactor diodes were chosen to demonstrate the tunability characteristics. 

Decrease in capacitance (demonstrated in the following experiment with light) shifts the 

resonance of the structure to higher frequencies, which is quite expected from the lumped circuit 

theory (Figure 2 (b)). An efficient tuning can be obtained within the frequency band, 

corresponding to 10% of the carrier frequency. In many practical applications, 10% bandwidth 

is quite sufficient for a normal performance.

Tolerance in lumped element nominals can be quite important if many of them are used in a 

structure with a strong resonant response. Furthermore, as it will be shown in the experimental 

part, the capacitance tuning will be performed with light. It means that non-uniform 

illumination of photodiodes and different efficiencies of the later elements will result in a 

pseudo-random spread of capacitances within a unit cell. To estimate the impact of these factors 

on performance degradation, a statistical model was developed. The parametric retrieval was 

performed on six unit cells, placed inside the waveguide with dimensions 20 × 20 × 60 mm. 

Capacitance nominals within each unit cells were taken to be equal since the same photodiode 

drives the voltage drop on the elements. However, nominals in the different unit cells were 

taken according to the following statistical model:


7

𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 = 𝐶0 − 𝛥𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 · 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑([0, 1]),
(3)

where 𝐶0 = 9.2 𝑝𝐹 and 𝛥𝐶 is varied from zero (all the elements are the same without a spread) 

to 1.2 pF (corresponding to the maximum 𝛥𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 for the Skyworks SMV 1413 varactors, driven 

by one PIN photodiode BWP34) and 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑([0, 1]) is a random variable with a uniform 

distribution between 0 and 1. This particular form was chosen to resemble the experimental 

scenario, where 𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 = 𝐶0 is the capacitance in the “dark” mode, and its value can only be 

reduced with the introduction of a photocurrent. For each specific value of 𝛥𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 𝑛 = 5

realizations have been considered. Permeability dispersion was extracted for each particular 

case and then averaged over the number of realizations. Figure 3 demonstrates the resonance 

degradation of the permeability as a function of the increased spread in the nominals, 𝛥𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟. It 

can be seen that around the critical value, 𝜗 =

𝛥𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟

𝐶0
= 0.13, the effective permeability does not 

reach the value of −2. Large values of 𝜗 lead to almost complete elimination of the effect, and 

the relative permeability averages to unity. This effect will be important for analyzing the 

experimental data, reported in the next section.

Tunable artificial magnon resonance

Electromagnetic scattering performance of 3D metamaterial-based sphere is assessed in this 

section. Numerical analysis was conducted with the help of frequency domain solver, 

implemented within the CST Microwave Studio software. The final design of the scatterer

consisted of 11 PCB layers with printed unit cells, which were assembled to form an 

approximately spherical shape with a radius of 60 mm. The distance between the layers was h 

= 9 mm. The geometry and materials of the unit cells were exactly the same as those 

investigated in the previous section. The structure was illuminated with a plane wave, polarized

along the y axis (see Figure 4 (a) for the geometric layout). The analysis was made by imposing  

open boundary conditions. The numerical modeling replicates performances of photodiodes 


8

with effective lumped elements. The varactors capasitance change was estimated via a voltage 

drop, which in turn is poroportional to the light intensity, driving the process. Additional 

capacitance of photodiodes was taken into account by plugging nominals, declared in a 

datasheet. The maximal change of 1.2pf was imposed in order to correlate the numerical

investigations with the experimental data. 

The backward scattering cross section was calculated for the following values of the varactor 

diodes:𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 = 9.2 𝑝𝐹, corresponding to the “dark” regime; 𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 = 8 𝑝𝐹, corresponding to the 

uniform “bright” regime; and 𝛥𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 = 1.2 𝑝𝐹, corresponding to the inhomogeneous 

illumination case. In the ideal case, the observed resonance shift was around 10% with respect 

to the carrier frequency (Figure 4 (b)). For an inhomogeneous illumination, however, the 

resonant scattering peak vanishes for the critical value of 𝛥𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟.

Since the structure is strongly anisotropic, it is worth investigating its scattering capabilities in 

the case of inclined incidence. The key parameter in this case is the projection of magnetic field 

polarization on the major axis of the structure. Fig. 5 shows the backscattering cross section for 

different Euler angles. Panel a corresponds to a normal incidence, where k-vector of the wave 

is parallel to the planes, containing SRRs and field’s polarization is rotated. A drop of the 

scattering peak with increasing the polarization mismatch can be clearly observed. Fig. 5(b) 

investigates another scenario, where both k-vector and the H-field polarization are rotated. 

Similar drop is observed. It is worth noting, however, that 45° polarization mismatch case in 

scenarios on panels (a) and (b) leads to slightly different peak heights, underlining the 

contribution of anisotropic permittivity contribution. 


9

Electro-optical tuning

To check the experimantal feasibility of light-induced tuning capabilities, a single unit cell was 

constructed first and its resonant properties were investigated. The unit cell was fabricated on 

FR-4 PCB (dielectric constant of 4.43, a thickness of 1.5 mm) by chemical etching. Lumped 

elements (Multilayer Ceramic Capacitors 500R07S0R5AV4T and Skyworks SMV 1413 

varactors) were soldered to the SRRs’ gaps. The capacitance of each varactor diode was 

controlled by soldering the BWP34 photodiode on the PCB. Complex reflection coefficient 

(S11) of the structure was acquired with the help of a small magnetic probe antenna connected 

to the transmitting port of a Vector Network Analyzer (VNA E8362B). The probe was placed 

5 mm above the unit cell and two regimes of illumination were tested: “dark” with no light 

source and “bright” with the light source turned on. In the “bright” regime, the photodiode was 

illuminated with 100 mW red laser pointer (λ = 655 nm). Experimenal results of a single unit 

cell tuning are shown in Figure 6 (a) that clearly show the efficent resonace shift of 10% with 

respect to the carrier frequency was achived.

Electro-optical tuning of the artificial magnon resonance

One of the main challenges in constructing volumetric tunable metamaterial is to provide a 

drive to each individual cell. Electrical wiring of a circuit board significantly affects antenna 

performance by introducing additional coupling channels. Furthermore, the introduction of 

bunched metal strips influences the scattering characteristics; and, in fact, can even govern the 

interactions with incident radiation. This problem can be partially solved in reflect arrays 

configuration, where the wires are hidden behind the ground plane that isolates them from 

antenna elements. It is important to note, however, that those architectures are planar and cannot 

be extended to the third dimension – this is the key difference between 2 and 3D. Here we 


10

introduce a new concept of electro-optical drive, distributed over an optical network, and 

implement it experimentally. 

The experimental sample was fabricated following the effective medium design, maintaining 

the same geometric parameters as in the numerical modeling. Overall, the structure has 1080

lumped elements. To provide an efficient scattering cross-section modulation with light, the 

capacitance of each varactor diode was controlled by the BWP34 photodiodes, exactly as in the 

case of unit cell discussed earlier. The light was guided to the diodes with the help of wide 

fiberglass fibers, which were roughened on purpose to out scatter a sufficient optical intensity. 

Those fibers (a total of 22) can be clearly seen on the photograph in Figure 1. Rectangular 

wideband horn antenna connected to the transmitting port of a Vector Network Analyzer (VNA 

E8362B) was used as an excitation source. The scatterer was then located in the far-field of the 

antenna (2 meters apart). Backward scattering cross section was obtained using the same horn 

antenna to collect the signal from the sphere. The backward cross section spectra were measured 

with and without the light illumination, provided in this case by a halogen fiber optic illuminator

(Thorlabs OSL2, Thorlabs, Inc.). Relatively small integral power of the red laser, used for 

investigations of a single cell, limits its use as a device to drive the whole structure. Differential 

RCS was measured as a difference between backward scattering cross-sections of object in dark 

and bright regimes, i.e., 𝜎𝑑𝑖𝑓 = |𝑆11

𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑘| − |𝑆11

𝑏𝑟𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡|. The current realization fails into the 

category where 𝛥𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 is above the critical value, corresponding to the degradation of the 

scattering peak with the light source switched on. This effect is demonstrated experimentally, 

and the results are shown in Figure 6 (b)—increasing the light intensity leads to the vanishing 

of the peak—and, hence, to the maximization of the differential RCS (blue line). For moderately 

low intensity, the light-induced modulation is moderately low, resulting in vanishing 

differential RCS as a function of frequency. This typical example demonstrates the capability 

to obtain amplitude modulation of RF signals with light. The light-induced elimination of the 


11

scattering peak corresponds to the random nominal spread theory, presented in Fig. 3. Slightly 

different light intensities, delivered to the unit cells reduce the element’s tolerance, which cause 

to the peak smearing. 

Conclusions

Volumetric reconfigurable metamaterial was designed and experimentally demonstrated. The 

concept of tunable RF magnon resonance, controllable with light, have been developed. The 

architecture is based on arrays of SRRs that serve as microscopic magnetic dipoles, which 

hybridize to a collective magnetic mode. Each SRR was loaded with a tandem of a varactor and 

a driving photodiode, which allowed replacing branched conducting wire network with optical 

fibers that are transparent to RF waves. It was shown that artificial magnon resonance within 

the metamaterial-based sphere can be controlled by light and scattering cross-sections are 

affected by it in real time. This demonstration can link to new solutions in the field of wireless 

communications and RFID technologies, where real-time control over scattering cross-sections 

is highly demanded. Furthermore, recent advances in additive manufacturing can allow 

exploring all three geometric degrees of freedom more efficiently and enhance the capabilities 

with additional temporal control.[31] 

Keywords

Metamaterials, Artificial magnon resonance, Reconfigurable materials 

Acknowledgments

The research was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (Project 19-79-10232), ERC 

StG ‘In Motion,’ PAZY Foundation, and  Israeli Ministry of Science and Technology (project 

“Integrated 2D & 3D Functional Printing of Batteries with Metamaterials and Antennas”. 


12

Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))
Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

References:

[1]
Engheta N., Ziolkowski R.W. Metamaterials: Physics and Engineering Explorations // 

Metamaterials: Physics and Engineering Explorations. 2006. 1-414 p.

[2]
Capolino F. Applications of metamaterials. 2009.

[3]
Smith D. et al. Composite Medium with Simultaneously Negative Permeability and 

Permittivity // Phys. Rev. Lett. 2000. Vol. 84, № 18. P. 4184–4187.

[4]
Schurig D. et al. Metamaterial electromagnetic cloak at microwave frequencies. // 

Science. 2006. Vol. 314, № 5801. P. 977–980.

[5]
Simovski C.R. et al. Wire Metamaterials: Physics and Applications // Adv. Mater. 

2012. Vol. 24, № 31. P. 4229–4248.

[6]
Fan B. et al. Low-frequency nonlocal and hyperbolic modes in corrugated wire 

metamaterials // Opt. Express. 2018. Vol. 26, № 13. P. 17541.

[7]
Filonov D. et al. Resonant metasurface with tunable asymmetric reflection // Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 2018. Vol. 113, № 9. P. 094103.

[8]
Kozlov V. et al. Asymmetric backscattering from the hybrid magneto-electric meta 

particle // Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016. Vol. 109, № 20. P. 203503.

[9]
T. Kodera, D. L. Sounas, C. Caloz, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 99, 031114.

[10]
Yuandan Dong, Itoh T. Metamaterial-Based Antennas // Proc. IEEE. 2012. Vol. 100, 

№ 7. P. 2271–2285.

[11]
Caiazzo M., Maci S., Engheta N. A metamaterial surface for compact cavity 

resonators // IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 2004. Vol. 3, № 1. P. 261–264.

[12]
Markovich H. et al. Bifocal Fresnel Lens Based on the Polarization-Sensitive 

Metasurface // IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 2018. Vol. 66, № 5. P. 2650–2654.


13

[13]
Pendry J.B., Schurig D., Smith D.R. Controlling electromagnetic fields. // Science. 

2006. Vol. 312, № 5781. P. 1780–1782.

[14]
Levanon N., Mozeson E. Radar signals. 2004. 411 p.

[15]
Zheludev N.I., Plum E. Reconfigurable nanomechanical photonic metamaterials // Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 2016. Vol. 11, № 1. P. 16–22.

[16]
Bang S. et al. Recent Advances in Tunable and Reconfigurable Metamaterials // 

Micromachines. 2018. Vol. 9, № 11. P. 560.

[17]
Mohammadi Estakhri N., Alù A. Wave-front Transformation with Gradient 

Metasurfaces // Phys. Rev. X. 2016. Vol. 6, № 4. P. 041008.

[18]
Sievenpiper D.F. et al. Two-dimensional beam steering using an electrically tunable 

impedance surface // IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 2003. Vol. 51, № 10. P. 2713–2722.

[19]     X. G. Zhang et al., “An optically driven digital metasurface for programming 

electromagnetic functions,” Nat. Electron., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 165–171, Mar. 2020.

[20]
L. Li and T. J. Cui, “Information metamaterials – from effective media to real-time 

information processing systems,” Nanophotonics, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 703–724, Mar. 2019.

[21]
M. T. Nouman, H. W. Kim, J. M. Woo, J. H. Hwang, D. Kim, and J. H. Jang, 

“Terahertz modulator based on metamaterials integrated with metal-semiconductor-metal 

varactors,” Sci. Rep., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–7, May 2016.

[22]
K. Fan and W. J. Padilla, “Dynamic electromagnetic metamaterials,” in Materials 

Today, 2015, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 39–50.

[23]
Filonov D. et al. Artificial localized magnon resonances in subwavelength meta-

particles // Appl. Phys. Lett. 2018. Vol. 113, № 12. P. 123505.

[24]
Simovski C.R. On electromagnetic characterization and homogenization of 

nanostructured metamaterials // J. Opt. 2011. Vol. 13, № 1. P. 013001.

[25]
Tsukerman I. Effective parameters of metamaterials: a rigorous homogenization 

theory via Whitney interpolation // J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 2011. Vol. 28, № 3. P. 577.


14

[26]
Silveirinha M.G. Time domain homogenization of metamaterials // Phys. Rev. B. 

2011. Vol. 83, № 16. P. 165104.

[27]
Pendry J.B. et al. Extremely Low Frequency Plasmons in Metallic Mesostructures // 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996. Vol. 76, № 25. P. 4773–4776.

[28]
Belov P.A. et al. Strong spatial dispersion in wire media in the very large wavelength 

limit // Phys. Rev. B. 2003. Vol. 67, № 11. P. 113103.

[29]
Filonov D.S. et al. Controlling electromagnetic scattering with wire metamaterial 

resonators // J. Opt. Soc. Am. A. 2016. Vol. 33, № 10. P. 1910.

[30]
Nicolson A.M., Ross G.F. Measurement of the Intrinsic Properties of Materials by 

Time-Domain Techniques // IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 1970. Vol. 19, № 4. P. 377–382.

[31]
Filonov D. et al. Volumetric 3D-Printed Antennas, Manufactured via Selective 

Polymer Metallization // Phys. status solidi - Rapid Res. Lett. 2019.

Figure 1. Electro-optically tunable artificial magnon resonance in a metamaterial-based sphere
(a) Photograph of sphere with a plastic 3D-printed bottom holder. (b) Photograph of sphere 
with optical drive switched on and the corresponding “bright” regime. (c) Schematics of a unit 
cell forming the metamaterial


15

Figure 2. (a) Numerically extracted (CST Microwave Studio) effective metamaterial 
parameters as a function of frequency for the unit cell, presented in Figure 1 (c). Real and 
imaginary parts of permittivity and permeability are indicated in the legends. (b) Tunability of 
the real part of numerically extracted effective permeability. Different nominals of the varactor 
diodes correspond to different light intensities, applied on the photoelement.

Figure 3. Degradation of resonant behavior of the effective permeability with the drop in 
tolerance of the lumped elements nominals. Real part of the effective permeability as a function 
of frequency is plotted for different values of the tolerance (𝛥𝐶𝑣𝑎𝑟 in the figure). 


16

Figure 4. Theoretical prediction of the artificial RF magnon resonant tuning with visible light 
(a) Basic setup for the numerical analysis—a plane wave is incident on the metamaterial-based 
spherical scatterer (b) Backward scattering cross section spectra of the sphere in “dark” mode—
green line, “bright” mode—blue line, and non-uniform illumination (𝜗 = 0.13)—magenta line.

Figure 5. Numerical analysis of back scattering spectra for different angle of incidence and 
polarization. (a) Schematics of the interaction scenario - φ is an angle between electric field and 
the major axis of the metamaterial, k-vector is in the plane, containing the resonators. (b) Back 
scattering spectra for different angles (scenario of panel a), indicated in the legend. (c)
Schematics of the interaction scenario, 𝜃 is indicated. (d) Back scattering spectra for different 
angles (scenario of panel c), indicated in the legend.


17

Figure 6. (a) Experimental demonstration of optical tunability of a single unit cell. “Dark” 
regime—no illumination; “bright” regime—the photodiode is illuminated with 100 mW laser 
(λ =655 nm). S11 parameter as a function of frequency is obtained by approaching the structure 
with a near-field probe (b) Experimental demonstration of optically tuned differential 
backscattering of an artificial magnon resonance


