 
1

Atomic-scale analysis of disorder by similarity learning 

from tunneling spectroscopy 

 

Petro Maksymovych1, Jiaqiang Yan2, Brian Sales2, Jun Wang1 

 

1Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, 37831 

2Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, 

37831 

 

Abstract 

Rapid proliferation of hyperspectral imaging in scanning probe microscopies creates 

unique opportunities to systematically capture and categorize higher dimensional datasets, toward 

new insights into electronic, mechanical and chemical properties of materials with nano- and 

atomic-scale resolution. One of the central goals of hyperspectral imaging is the development of a 

consistent framework for data analysis that would be effective, reproducible and transferrable in 

resolving the structure of the datasets, conceptually resembling the success of integral transforms 

in image analysis. Here we demonstrate a similarity learning for tunneling spectroscopy acquired 

on superconducting material (FeSe) with sparse density of imperfections (Fe vacancies). Popular 

methods for unsupervised learning and discrete representation of the data in terms of clusters of 

characteristic behaviors were found to produce inconsistencies with respect to capturing the 

location and tunneling characteristics of the vacancy sites. The underlying reason for their 

ambiguity was traced to continuous variation of the electronic properties across the surface and 

therefore absence of clear structural boundaries in the low-dimensional latent spaces of the data. 

We supported this hypothesis by direct analysis of the distributions of Euclidean distances within 

the dataset, and proposed distance rescaling with probabilistic description as a possible approach 

to mitigate the detrimental effect of the long tails of the distributions on the performance of 

clustering methods. Subsequently, we applied a more general, non-linear similarity learning, where 

dimension reduction was explicitly trained to amplify similarities and dissimilarities between data-

points. This approach was found to outperform several widely used methods for dimensionality 

reduction and produce a clear differentiation of the type of tunneling spectra. In particular, 


 
2

significant spectral weight transfer likely associated with the electronic reconstruction by the 

vacancy sites, is systematically captured, as is the spatial extent of the vacancy region. Given the 

fact that a great variety of electronic materials will exhibit similarly smooth variation of the 

spectral responses due to random or engineered inhomogeneities in their structure, we believe our 

approach will be useful for systematic analysis of hyperspectral imaging with minimal prior 

knowledge, as well as prospective comparison of experimental measurements to theoretical 

calculations with explicit consideration of disorder. 

 

Introduction 

Electrical and mechanical measurements on the nanoscale underpin most widely used 

scanning probe microscopy methods as well as many future electronic devices. An outstanding 

challenge in such studies is systematic and quantitative interpretation of the measurements, often 

in the absence of well-defined analytical models. On the one hand, localizing the probed volume 

to near-atomic scale almost inevitably introduces unknowns into electronic, mechanical and 

chemical properties of the contacts, resulting in persistent and often time-varying uncertainty in 

the transfer function of the measurement.  On the other hand, exponential amplification of physical 

properties in the measured observables is often the basis for enhanced sensitivity and spatial 

resolution achieved by imaging methods  [1–3]. For example, exponential distance dependence of 

tunneling probability enabled scanning tunneling microscopy  [4] and atomic resolution imaging 

of a broad variety structured and dynamics on surfaces  [5–8]. The joint effects of uncertain and 

non-linear transfer function  [9,10] generally complicate quantitative interpretation of data in 

scanning probe microscopy (STM) and related nanoscale device measurements. Moreover fully 

consistent theoretical treatment that accounts for the exact shape of the measurement probe, the 

non-equilibrium properties of electron tunneling and electronically excited states require extensive 

numerical simulation  [9,10] that may be computationally too prohibitive to complement extensive 

experimentation. Therefore, a specific task of increasing importance is the analysis of 

hyperspectral data with minimum prior information  [11]. The hyperspectral data volume can yield 

rich information even in the absence of a specific model, for example by identifying variability in 

the dataset or specific regions of interest.  


 
3

Figure 1. Conceptual goal of hyperspectral analysis of disorder is to infer the existence and structure 

of low dimensional latent space that effectively approximates the true parameter space, enabling 

reliable detection of disorder and further analysis. (a) Synthetic 2D parameter space, represented by 

multinormal distribution with two well separated centroids. (b) A family of polynomials parametrized 

by randomly sampled parameters from the synthetic space (a) (white dots in a). (c) First two principal 

components of the synthetic dataset (b), and the corresponding scree plot (inset), which show that 

projection on the first two principal components already capturers >99% of variability in the dataset. 

(d) Latent space of hyperspectral data projected onto first and second principal components (c), 

revealing structure very closely resembling the original parameter space. Two clusters (red and blue) 

are obtained by k-means clustering.  

 

In the past several years, approaches utilizing dimensionality reduction and classification 

by clustering were successfully applied to hyperspectral data spatially resolved tunneling 

spectroscopy  [12,13], force-distance spectroscopy  [14,15], and switching spectroscopy of 

ferroelectrics  [16,17]. The essential assumption of this approach is the existence of a low-

dimensional parameter space from which measured spectra arise through convolution with the 

instrument transfer function. One common goal of such analysis is then to infer discrete 


 
4

representation of the hyperspectral data, for example in the form of several clusters of 

characteristic behaviors. Figure 1 illustrates this concept on synthetic data, wherein random 

samples {Pi} from the “true” 2D parameter space Fig.1(a) are used to construct a series of 

polynomial curves Fig.1(b), representing the effect of the instrument function F[{Pi}] and added 

noise. Subsequently, principal component analysis projects the family of curves onto eigenvectors 

of the covariance matrix. The first two components already capture >99% of variability in the 

synthetic dataset (Fig.1(c)). The latent space of projections onto principal components Fig.1(d) 

can then be considered an effective representation of the data. Indeed, Fig.1(d) appears 

qualitatively very similar to Fig.1(a), and can become nearly identical by affine transformation 

that rotates and stretches the parameter space. Applying clustering is also very effective in this 

case, drawing clear decision boundaries that partition the latent space into two parts, reminiscent 

of the two centers of the original distribution. Therefore, such analysis will work well if the true 

parameter space and therefore the derived latent space are both well separated. However, disorder 

in electronic materials can manifest in a broad range of behaviors, many of which will be 

perturbative rather than drastically changing  [18–20].  In case of a sparse density of impurities, 

the number of data points originating from defect sites may be limited (it appears as an outlier), 

which may also confuse popular methods, such as k-means clustering  [21]. And the validity of 

classification approaches can also be questioned, wherein partitioning the dataset into integer 

number of clusters inevitably introduces ambiguity near decision boundaries. As a result, good 

parameter separation in the latent space may be more of an exception for atomically-resolved 

microscopy data, and alternatives, such as probabilistic description or non-linear methods that can 

separate the latent space are needed for the likely more common case of smooth variation of 

properties across the dataset. 

Here we demonstrate similarity analysis of hyperspectral data applied to detecting 

signatures of defects in tunneling spectroscopy of unconventional superconductors FeSe. 

Specifically, we identified the existence and electronic signature of iron defect sites in the 

hyperspectral cube, comprising spectra of energy-resolved density of states acquired over a spatial 

grid with near atomic-scale resolution. Despite apparent simplicity of the problem with just one 

kind of type of chemical vacancy, we show that conventional clustering methods may produce 

ambiguous if not conflicting results. We traced the origins of the ambiguity to the continuous and 


 
5

long-tailed structure of the distribution of Euclidian pairwise distances in the dataset. This 

conclusion was reinforced by the efficiency of ad-hoc rescaling of pairwise distances to identify  

Figure 2. Tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy of as-cleaved FeSe surface, with a small number of Fe vacancies. 

(a) Constant-current STM image showing the atomic lattice of the top surface layer, and Fe vacancy sites which 

appear as clear double-protrusions (this is primarily an electronic effect); (b) tunneling spectroscopy near the Fermi 

level, revealing the ~ 4 meV wide superconducting gap, and a broad distribution of the tunneling conductance due 

to combined effects of measurement noise and vacancy sites. Individual spectra were acquired on a 100x100 pixel 

spatial grid, with 512 sampling points per energy interval from -15 mV to +15 mV. Purple in (b) is an energy-

resolved histogram of all the spectra. Green and red mark the average spectra from the defect-free and defect regions 

of the surface, correspondingly. The vacancy sites were identified by segmentation analysis of an isoenergy slice 

of the hyperspectral volume at ~ -1 mV, and their approximate outlines are shown in purple in (a). 

 

the vacancy sites. Such analysis can be effective for low-defect scenarios even though it obscures 

well-defined geometric meaning of the latent space. To generalize, we applied effective weakly 

unsupervised neural network methodology, that explicitly learns pairwise similarities  [22] and 

enables most effective analysis of our data-sets, even more so than many popular techniques for 

non-linear dimensionality reduction. We believe that similarity learning can play an important role 

in future analysis of a broad spectrum of problems in materials physics, such detecting and 

analyzing effects of disorder, as well as classical and quantum phase transitions. 

 


 
6

Results and Discussion 

FeSe is an unconventional superconductor with a transition temperature of ~8K  [23].  For 

this study, FeSe single crystals were grown out of KCl-AlCl3 flux by liquid transport 

technique  [24]. The surfaces were cleaved in ultrahigh vacuum at a temperature of ~150K prior 

to STM measurements. Owing to lack of dangling bonds, FeSe surfaces contain only a small 

number of well-defined defects  [25–27]. Fe vacancies, for examples are readily detectable due 

their low surface density and the characteristic dumbbell shape (Fig. 2a), creating a model system 

for development of data analytics techniques. However, despite their chemical simplicity the 

vacancies in FeSe can have a profound impact on the electronic properties. For example, Fe 

vacancies locally modify magnetic ordering  [28,29]. Meanwhile, Se vacancies have been 

predicted to generate effective hole doping through a combined effect of electron scattering, lattice 

strains and charge doping  [30–32], contrary to intuitive expectation of electron-doping. The FeSe 

monolayer system can achieve almost 10x higher Tc due to combined effect of doping and strain 

at the interface [33]. Meanwhile, the interest in FeSe/Te system has been vigorously renewed in 

lieu of predictions for the topologically protected superconducting state in proximity of 50/50 

Se/Te ratio  [34], where intrinsic disorder of solid solutions also emerges  [35].  

 
To characterize spectral signatures of the Fe vacancies, we acquired tunneling spectra on a 

grid of 100x100 points in a nearly pristine surface area with a few vacancies (Fig. 2a). Energy-

resolved histogram of all the spectra clearly reveals the superconducting gap (Fig. 2b), as well as 

a rather broad distribution of density of states (about 4-fold variation), due to the effects of 

vacancies, electron scattering (resulting in Friedel oscillations), noise and other possible factors. 

Fe vacancies are already known to develop in-gap impurity states, and therefore increase the 

observed density of states inside the superconducting gap [36]. This effect enables partitioning of 

the spectra in the dataset into two groups – with and without vacancies – for example by 

segmentation of the iso-energy slice of the hyperspectral cube at an energy of ~ -1 mV. The 

corresponding outlines of the vacancy sites obtained by this segmentation are shown in Fig. 2a in 

purple. Quite notably, Fe vacancies significantly reconstruct the whole spectrum, not just the 

proximity of the superconducting gap (compare red and green curves in Fig. 2b). 


 
7

 

Although detecting vacancies in FeSe by visual inspection is remarkably easy, the 

multivariate workflow presented in Fig. 1 fails to do so reliably in the latent space. This is the main 

Figure 3. Dimensionality reduction and clustering applied to tunneling spectroscopy dataset in Fig. 2. (a) Principal 

component analysis (PCA): projection of the individual tunneling spectra into the latent space of two principal 

components (PC1, PC2) whose linear combination accounts for >90% of variability in the dataset. Green and red 

highlight projections due to surface and vacancy regions (determined by segmentation in Fig. 2), respectively. 

Purple are all the projections. (b) Partitioning of the PCA latent space by k-means clustering with 2 and 3 clusters. 

The decision boundary for 2 clusters is shown by the red dashed line. (c) Cluster centers (average IV curves within 

each cluster) for 3-means analysis in (b). Insets show spatial maps of clusters (left - 2, right - 3). The averaged I-V 

curve for the vacancy region (vac in the legend) from Fig. 2 is shown for reference.  (d) Results of agglomerative 

(hierarchical) clustering of the hyperspectral dataset, shown as a dendrogram. The y-axis shows linkage distance 

between individual clusters, while the numbers below show the number individual IV-curves in each shown branch 

of the dendrogram. Bottom panel shows the number of samples vs the hierarchical order of the specific cluster.  


 
8

focus of this article. Almost all methods presented below provide some level of separation in real-

space. However, in a very general case – e.g. sparsely sampled dataset, disordered samples, 

multiple kinds of defects, real-space information may not be readily available. And we would like 

to find reliable approaches to separate characteristic behaviors in the spectral space alone. 

Eventually, both real-space and spectral space information should be utilized to maximize 

efficiency of analysis. 

 Fig. 3a shows projection of the hyperspectral dataset onto its first two principal 

components (that account for over 90% of the observed variance in the data, with 3 components 

accounting for over 99%). Locating the projections of the spectra due to vacancies (red) and 

pristine (green) surface sites shows that the two are separated in the latent space, albeit without 

clear break into distinct groups of points.  

Application of two popular clustering methods to this latent space – k-means and 

agglomerative clustering - yields conflicting results: k-means points to few clusters in the dataset 

(Fig. 3b), while agglomerative clustering points to the opposite – dozens if not more distinct 

behaviors (Fig. 3d). K-means - a “top-down” algorithm - identifies k-number (where k is given) 

of centroids and iteratively refines their position until the net variances of the point-cluster 

distances are minimized  [21,37]. Agglomerative (hierarchical) clustering builds a “bottom-up” 

cluster hierarchy  [38], beginning with n clusters (where n is number of spectra in the dataset) and 

iteratively merging distinct clusters with the same linkage distance. At some intermediate value of 

linkage distance, a small number of clusters may be revealed. In our case, k-means is effective at 

approximate identification of the vacancy sites for 2 cluster partitioning, which is to be expected 

(see mask in the inset of Fig. 4c). Adding a 3rd cluster into partitioning, however, does not refine 

the location of the vacancy, instead partitioning the latent space region of the surface sites and 

assigns a few spurious locations to the vacancies (Fig. 3c inset). Meanwhile, hierarchical 

clustering, partitions the spectra into essentially arbitrarily many clusters, with dozens and even 

hundreds of clusters having approximately equal weighting. This is seen in Fig. 3d, where at no 

point up to even 300 clusters is the number of spectra in each cluster exceeds 10 spectra (and most 

often just one, Fig. 3d bottom panel). In an effective agglomerative clustering scenario, we would 

expect to have much more significant weighting for clusters already at the top of the hierarchy 

(e.g. for 3-4 cluster partitioning). In other words, according to agglomerative clustering, either 

there are hundreds of observable behaviors – which is unlikely given the origin of our data, or 


 
9

there are no significant clusters – i.e. vacancies and pristine surface are not statistically distinct – 

which contradicts direct observations.   

Given the extensive amount of literature on clustering methods, such ambiguities are not 

uncommon  [37]. It is rather clear that the Euclidian distance between individual spectra or 

between their projections in the latent space plays a key role in the subsequent performance of the 

clustering methods. In the synthetic dataset in Fig. 1, for example, there is a clear separation of the 

centroids in the parameter space, so that the clustering can readily succeed given enough samples 

from the distribution. No such clear separation is seen in Fig. 3a. Furthermore, we directly 

examined the distribution of Euclidian distances across the whole hyperspectral dataset (Fig. 4a). 

It is immediately apparent that the distribution is long tailed, which at least partially is caused by 

relatively small number of vacancy sites. The sparsity of the vacancies in the dataset creates an 

immediate problem for the k-means clustering method, which is most efficient when the number 

of samples from distinct behaviors is comparable in the data-set  [21,37]. The long tail also 

confuses agglomerative clustering, essentially due too slow pace of agglomeration, so that inferred 

clusters end up containing very few spectra up to a very high level in the hierarchy (Fig. 3d). 

Our reasoning can be further supported by an ad-hoc rescaling of the Euclidean distances 

between spectra. Fig. 4b plots the distributions of log(dij + n) with n from 0.1 to 8 (where dij is the 

Euclidean distance between a pair of spectra). In these cases, logarithmic rescaling symmetrizes 

the distance distribution by “contracting” the long tail of large relative distances while “expanding” 

smaller values. For n between 1 and 5, the distribution becomes not only much more symmetric, 

but it also clearly reveals a shoulder on the side of the main-peak (Fig. 4b. A weak shoulder is also 

visible in Fig. 4a). In this form, the modified distance distribution can be readily fit by two 

Gaussian distributions (Fig. 4c). The bimodality of the distribution then points to existence of at 

least two distinct groups of spectra, which are similar within the group (therefore yielding small 

relative Euclidean distance captured by the blue peak in Fig. 4c) and are dissimilar across the 

groups (with larger relative distance under the purple peak in Fig. 4c). Extending this logic, we 

can now take advantage of the sparsity of the vacancies on the surface to actually label the 

individual spectra as belonging to majority vs minority species. To this end, we first calculate 

distributions of log-Euclidean distance for each spectrum, and then effectively label each spectrum 

with its distance histogram. For majority (surface sites), the histograms are dominated by the first 

peak while for vacancies, the opposite is true (Fig. 4d inset). Visual inspection of the abundance 


 
10

maps of individual histograms in real space for the minority species in Fig. 4d indeed confirms 

our notions as well as the assignment of the assumed bimodal distribution in Fig. 4c.  

Figure 4. Statistics of pairwise Euclidean distances between single tunneling spectra in the FeSe 

dataset. (a) Distribution of Euclidean distances within the dataset from Fig. 2b exhibiting a long 

tail (inset shows distribution on the log scale). (b) Distributions of rescaled pairwise distances, 

with rescaling as (log (𝑑!" + 𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡). (c) Fitting rescaled distribution of the log-Euclidean 

distance by two normal distributions. (d) The abundance map of minority spectra in the dataset, 

obtained as value for each spectrum’s distance histogram at rescaled distance value of 

log.𝑑!" + 10 = 2.5. The inset clearly shows typical probability distributions for a majority 

(blue) and minority (orange) spectrum, with minority exhibiting a peak at approximately 2.5.  

 


 
11

The rescaling described above, which amounts to non-linear geometric transformation of 

the data space, is effective, but it is also arbitrary and is likely not generalizable to more complex 

cases. We therefore sought non-linear dimensionality reduction methodologies, that can achieve 

non-linear and effective separation between tunneling spectra algorithmically. Non-linear 

dimensionality reduction encompasses a large range of algorithms, such as kernel PCA  [39], 

TSNE (t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding)  [40], neural network autoencoders among 

others, each with its own approach to construction of the latent space.  

To aid in evaluation of the effectiveness of a specific technique we tracked the relevant 

geometry of the latent space by plotting the Euclidean distance of each spectrum from the average 

in data-set spectrum vs similar metric in the latent space (Euclidean distances of coordinates of 

these spectra in a given latent space from the coordinates of the average spectrum). Examples of 

such a distance correlation plot, in the form of the density histogram, are shown in Fig. 4d for PCA 

and our logarithmic rescaling of the distances discussed above. PCA is a linear dimensionality 

reduction technique, and this is very well reflected by the distance correlation plot with a clear 

linear scaling of distances between original and reduced dimensionality representations (Fig. 5a). 

Deviation from linearity in this case is the effect of partial loss of information due to dimensionality 

reduction). Meanwhile, the logarithmic rescaling appears as a log-function, by design (Fig. 5b). 

The transition from the long-tailed to the more symmetric distribution of the relative distances is 

also apparent by following the redistribution of the point density upon log-rescaling.  

Figure 5. Distance correlation plot that compares distances between individual points within the 

data-set (or distance from the mean) among two data spaces. (a) Comparison of the original data 


 
12

space before dimensionality reduction with the distance distribution in the latent space defined 

by first two principal components (Fig. 3a). (b) Similar comparison after logarithmic rescaling 

of the latent space. (c) Schematic for distance correlation plot for an idealized scenario of non-

linear dimensionality reduction, where two (or more) groups of spectra would be clearly 

separated from each other by the appropriate distortion of the latent space.  

 

Figure 6 shows the latent spaces and the distance correlation plots for the FeSe dataset 

generated by several popular methods for non-linear dimensionality reduction: kernel 

PCA  [39,41], (Fig. 6a), non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)  [42], U-MAP  [43] (Fig. 6c) 

and deep autoencoder (Fig. 6c). All the methods introduce various non-linearities as seen from the 

correlation plots: kPCA “squeezes” the latent space as a whole (Fig. 6a), somewhat similar to the 

log-rescaling in Fig. 5. UMAP on the other hand, introduces non-linearity while overall 

maintaining the original distance scale (Fig. 6c).  In neither of these cases is there a clear separation 

between separation between surface (blue) and vacancy (maroon) sites (Fig. 6a-c). One way such 

clear separation would be observed in the correlation plots is shown in Fig. 5c. The stepwise shape 

of the correlation plot would imply that non-linear dimensionality reduction partitions the data-set 

into several groups, and also separates them in the projected space. This specific shape is valid 

under the assumption that one group (group 2 in Fig. 5c) has a lot fewer data points than the other 

(e.g. group 1), which is typically the case for sparse density of vacancies and defects. Finally, the 

deep autoencoder does reconstruct the latent space, splitting it into approximately three regions, 

two of which (both surface sites, Fig. 6d) have comparable density. The vacancies however still 

maintain poorly separated. Thus, although non-linearities introduced by these methods have not 

yielded the sought-after result of clearly partitioning the data space, as is also evident from direct 

inspection of the latent spaces for all the methods (see insets). We do note that each of these 

methods has a set of hyper-parameters, and a pronounced sensitivity to specific choices of these 

parameters (e.g. compare kPCA results in Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b). However, we are seeking a more 

general solution. And given the relatively unsatisfactory performance of the unsupervised non-

linear dimensionality reduction techniques, we next applied algorithms where some prior 

information about the properties of the spectra is passed to the algorithm. 


 
13

Figure 6. Distance correlation plots for kernel-PCA (a), non-negative matrix factorization 

(NMF, with implementation in scikit-learn  [42] ), UMAP (c) and deep autoencoder (d) non-

linear dimensionality reduction methods applied to the spectroscopy dataset. Blue and red 

accents in the main figure highlight the positions of the surface and vacancy sites 

correspondingly. The insets show 2D latent spaces obtained by each method. The parameters 

used for each plot are as follows: (a), (b), (c), (d). 

 

We obtained satisfying performance with a twin neural network architecture (also referred 

to as Siamese networks), which was originally proposed by LeCun group  [44] to achieve better 

classification of image data-sets. The schematic of such a network is shown in Fig. 7a. The 

network is being trained by propagating a pair of spectra through a pair of identical networks. The 


 
14

network pair has both identical topology and shared trainable weights.  We chose a deep network 

consisting of three fully connected layers with dimensionality of 20®5®2 separated by non-linear 

activation functions. The network therefore maps the spectra into 2-dimensional projected space.  

Subsequently Euclidian distance is calculated between the outputs of the two networks (ED, Fig. 

7a). The key to twin network performance is a contrastive loss (CL in Fig. 7a), which computes a 

loss based on the distance across the twin network and a target that specifies whether the distance 

should be minimized or maximized. The network can therefore be trained to create projected 

spaces where similar spectra are grouped together as much as possible, and distinct spectra are 

separated as much as possible – exactly the goal we desire for the tunneling spectra. Moreover, 

because the number of pairs scales as N2 with the N-size of the data-set, twin networks work well 

with smaller size datasets characteristic of tunneling spectroscopy. 


 
15

Figure 7. Application of similarity learning by twin (Siamese) network architecture for the 

tunneling spectroscopy dataset. (a) Schematic structure of the basic twin architecture (DNN – 

deep neural network, wi – shared weights, ED – Euclidean distance, CL -contrastive loss layer). 

(b) Distance correlation plot for a typical projection of the trained Siamese network applied to 

the dataset (insets show two different projections, obtained by slight variation of the parameters 

of the training set, such as the threshold Euclidean distance beyond which the spectra are 

considered to be distinct). (c) The result of applying two Siamese networks to the dataset in 

sequence. First network to project the data-set onto two components (tC1 and tC2) – the 

projection is the same as the distance correlation plot in Fig. 7b. 2nd, simplified network, to create 

1D scores for each of the projection, based on their proximity to each other in the projected 

space. The field of scores is superimposed on top of the projection as a colormap, while (d) 

shows the abundance map of the scores in real-space. Very clearly, the scores act as unique 

labels for individual spectra, clearly separating vacancy, surface and intermediate sites. The 

image has been slightly smoothed by Gaussian convolution for presentation purposes. 

 

The unsupervised input into the twin network is a binary choice of whether the two spectra 

are of the same overall group. In our case we simply chose a particular threshold for the Euclidean 

distance in the original hyperspectral dataset, to partition the pairs within the dataset. As seen Fig. 

7b, vacancies (red) become well separated from surface sites in the projected space of the twin 

network (green). This is also clearly seen in the distance correlation, which bears closest similarity 

to idealized scenario in Fig. 5c. The training is also sensitive to hyper-parameters, although 

producing qualitatively similar results. Fig. 7b shows two qualitatively similar projected spaces 

obtained in different initialization and training runs (with randomly generated training sets in each 

case).  

The twin architecture then enables categorization of the projected and latent spaces, as 

shown in Fig. 7c, wherein another network with smaller and even simpler (10®5®1) topology 

was applied to the projected space in the upper corner of Fig. 7b. The network in this case outputs 

just one number, providing a continuously varying score for each spectrum based on its proximity 

to other spectra in the projected space. As seen in Fig. 7c, twin networks very effectively categorize 

the latent space, drawing clear decision boundaries for the surface (blue) and vacancy (red) sites, 

and rather remarkably outlining the transition region between the two (yellow). Because this type 


 
16

of classification avoids discretization of the clustering procedure, the surface map of the scores 

both confirms its assignment and separates the vacancy, surface sites, and the transition region in 

both projected and real spaces. 

Figure 8. Spectral weight transfer due to Fe vacancies in FeSe as seen by tunneling 

spectroscopy. (a) Average spectra due to surface, vacancy and transition regions (red, blue and 

yellow) identified by the appropriate scores in Fig. 7d. (b) Energy-resolved Euclidean distances 

between the collection of surface and vacancy spectra, plotted as a density histogram (yellow 

corresponds to high abundance). (c) Correlation plot for all spectra in the data-set, revealing two 

distinct anticorrelated energy windows for spectral changes (from -15 mV to -5 mV and from 7 

mV to 15 mV), as well as window of intermediate correlation (between about 0 mV and 7 mV). 

This plot statistically confirms that Fe vacancies reduce the density of filled states and increase 

the density of empty states compared to pristine surface. 

 

The key prospective advantage of being able to identify distinct tunneling spectra as well 

as transitions between them is analysis of the spectral weight transfer associated with disorder in 

any doped, but particularly highly correlated electronic materials  [19,20,45]. Fig. 8 shows the 

tunneling spectra of the vacancies, surface sites and transition region averaged within their 

characteristic score values as determined in Fig. 7c. For added clarity, we also show the Euclidean 

distances between the spectra in Fig. 8b and a correlation plot for the whole dataset in Fig. 8c. The 

spectral intensity is redistributed in the whole probed energy window +/-15 meV, not just around 

the superconducting gap. The correlation plot reveals that the changes from -15 mV to ~ +7 mV 

are anticorrelated with those from +7 mV to 15 mV, wherein suppression of the density of states 

in one region causes enhancement in the other. The redistribution of the spectral weight may signal 

significant electronic reconstruction associated with the vacancy site, that goes beyond charge 


 
17

doping expected of impurities and intentional dopants. In fact, Se vacancies were predicted to 

cause significant reconstruction within as much as +/- 2 eV window around Fermi level, causing 

substantially weaker doping of the Fe d-bands than expected based on stochiometric 

arguments  [31]. The detailed understanding and theoretical analysis of this phenomenon for the 

Fe vacancies is left for future work. However, we do note that the analysis presented here may also 

conceptually translate to analysis of the first principles data, providing a path to compare theory 

and experiment through the effects of disorder on the electronic structure.  

 

Conclusions 

To conclude, we applied several dimensionality reduction techniques toward effective 

measurement of effects of disorder on the electronic properties of FeSe superconductor using 

tunneling spectroscopy. It is shown that a combination of continuous variation of the electronic 

density of states, expected for atomic and nanoscale defects and impurities, combined with 

relatively low defect density contribute to inconsistent performance of discretizing clustering 

approaches to the structure of the hyperspectral dataset as well as identification of the vacancy 

sites.  Meanwhile, several common nonlinear dimensionality reduction algorithms were not 

effective in separation of the vacancy sites in the latent space, that could potentially improve the 

follow-on clustering. Instead, twin (Siamese) neural network architecture, that learns the similarity 

directly from the data and amplifies the similarities and dissimilarities during training was shown 

to be effective at both creating well-separated projected space of the tunneling spectroscopy 

dataset, as well as subsequently categorizing tunneling with continuous single-valued scores. The 

immediate advantage of this approach is the ability not only to detect and describe the properties 

of defects and impurities, but also those of the transition region between distinct behaviors in the 

dataset. This is arguably a key advantage over discretization of the hyperspectral dataset with 

clustering methods, wherein neither the uniform state within a cluster nor abrupt cluster boundaries 

are physically sound. Moreover, twin networks are well adapted to work with smaller size datasets 

characteristic of tunneling spectroscopy, due to N2 scaling of the training set size with the N-size 

of the dataset. In the specific case of FeSe, we have found that Fe impurities modify the density of 

states in a broad window around Fermi level, far beyond the superconducting gap. This may be an 

indication of an even more dramatic electronic reconstruction, qualitatively similar to earlier 

predictions of the effect of Se vacancies. The flexibility of twin network architecture not only 


 
18

enables capturing such effects in a more rigorous and systematic approach, but prospectively 

further comparison of theoretical and experimental methodologies for analysis of disorder on 

similar grounds. Ultimately, these methods will serve to better understand the effects of disorder 

in complex electronic materials, toward tailored fundamental and applied properties for 

advancement of quantum electronics.  

 

Methods 

Tunneling spectroscopy and microscopy was carried out using Specs Joule-Thomson STM 

microscope, operating at 4.5K base temperature. Freshly cleaved surfaces were obtained by 

delaminating a small sample of FeSe in low-vacuum of ~ 10-6 Torr, followed by rapid sample 

transfer to the cryogenic chamber. Data analysis presented above was carried out using primarily 

Wolfram Language, with additional use of Python libraries for non-linear dimensionality 

reduction. All the data and codes are available upon reasonable request. 

 

Acknowledgements 

We thank Rama Vasudevan for discussion and improvement of the manuscript. Research 

sponsored by Division of Materials Science and Engineering, Basic Energy Sciences, Office of 

Science, US Department of Energy. Experiments were carried out as part of a user project at the 

Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory. This research used 

resources of the Compute and Data Environment for Science (CADES) at the Oak Ridge National 

Laboratory, which is supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under 

Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725. 

 

Author contribution 

PM guided research, helped to acquire data, carried out machine learning and interpretation. JY 

and BS grew FeSe crystals. JW acquired the data and carried out initial data analysis. All authors 

contributed to writing of the manuscript. 

 

References 

[1] F. J. Giessibl, Advances in Atomic Force Microscopy, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 949 (2003). 


 
19

[2] L. Olesen, M. Brandbyge, M. R. Sørensen, K. W. Jacobsen, E. Lægsgaard, I. Stensgaard, and 

F. Besenbacher, Apparent Barrier Height in Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Revisited, 
Physical Review Letters 76, 1485 (1996). 

[3] P. Maksymovych, M. Pan, P. Yu, R. Ramesh, A. P. Baddorf, and S. V. Kalinin, Scaling and 

Disorder Analysis of Local I-V Curves from Ferroelectric Thin Films of Lead Zirconate 
Titanate, Nanotechnology 22, 254031 (2011). 

[4] G. Binnig and H. Rohrer, Scanning Tunneling Microscopy---from Birth to Adolescence, Rev. 

Mod. Phys. 59, 615 (1987). 

[5] L. Grill, Functionalized Molecules Studied by STM: Motion, Switching and Reactivity, J. 

Phys.: Condens. Matter 20, 053001 (2008). 

[6] P. Maksymovych, Excitation and Mechanisms of Single Molecule Reactions in Scanning 

Tunneling Microscopy, in Scanning Probe Microscopy of Functional Materials, edited by S. 
V. Kalinin and A. Gruverman (Springer New York, 2010), pp. 3–37. 

[7] Ø. Fischer, M. Kugler, I. Maggio-Aprile, C. Berthod, and C. Renner, Scanning Tunneling 

Spectroscopy of High-Temperature Superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 353 (2007). 

[8] J. E. Hoffman, Spectroscopic Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Insights into Fe-Based 

Superconductors, Reports on Progress in Physics 74, 124513 (2011). 

[9] H. Lin, J. M. C. Rauba, K. S. Thygesen, K. W. Jacobsen, M. Y. Simmons, and W. A. Hofer, 

First-Principles Modelling of Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Using Non-Equilibrium 
Green’s Functions, Front. Phys. China 5, 369 (2010). 

[10] 
J. M. Blanco, F. Flores, and R. Pérez, STM-Theory: Image Potential, Chemistry and 

Surface Relaxation, Progress in Surface Science 81, 403 (2006). 

[11] 
S. V. Kalinin, E. Strelcov, A. Belianinov, S. Somnath, R. K. Vasudevan, E. J. Lingerfelt, 

R. K. Archibald, C. Chen, R. Proksch, N. Laanait, and S. Jesse, Big, Deep, and Smart Data 
in Scanning Probe Microscopy, ACS Nano 10, 9068 (2016). 

[12] 
M. Ziatdinov, A. Maksov, L. Li, A. S. Sefat, P. Maksymovych, and S. V. Kalinin, Deep 

Data Mining in a Real Space: Separation of Intertwined Electronic Responses in a Lightly 
Doped BaFe 2 As 2, Nanotechnology 27, 475706 (2016). 

[13] 
A. Belianinov, P. Ganesh, W. Lin, B. C. Sales, A. S. Sefat, S. Jesse, M. Pan, and S. V. 

Kalinin, Research Update: Spatially Resolved Mapping of Electronic Structure on Atomic 
Level by Multivariate Statistical Analysis, APL Materials 2, 120701 (2014). 

[14] 
B. J. Albers, T. C. Schwendemann, M. Z. Baykara, N. Pilet, M. Liebmann, E. I. Altman, 

and U. D. Schwarz, Three-Dimensional Imaging of Short-Range Chemical Forces with 
Picometre Resolution, Nature Nanotechnology 4, 5 (2009). 

[15] 
E. Minelli, G. Ciasca, T. E. Sassun, M. Antonelli, V. Palmieri, M. Papi, G. Maulucci, A. 

Santoro, F. Giangaspero, R. Delfini, G. Campi, and M. De Spirito, A Fully-Automated 
Neural Network Analysis of AFM Force-Distance Curves for Cancer Tissue Diagnosis, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 143701 (2017). 

[16] 
J. C. Agar, Y. Cao, B. Naul, S. Pandya, S. van der Walt, A. I. Luo, J. T. Maher, N. Balke, 

S. Jesse, S. V. Kalinin, R. K. Vasudevan, and L. W. Martin, Machine Detection of Enhanced 
Electromechanical Energy Conversion in PbZr0.2Ti0.8O3 Thin Films, Advanced Materials 
30, 1800701 (2018). 

[17] 
S. M. Neumayer, S. Jesse, G. Velarde, A. L. Kholkin, I. Kravchenko, L. W. Martin, N. 

Balke, and P. Maksymovych, To Switch or Not to Switch - a Machine Learning Approach for 
Ferroelectricity, Nanoscale Advances 2, 2063 (2020). 


 
20

[18] 
F. Ming, S. Johnston, D. Mulugeta, T. S. Smith, P. Vilmercati, G. Lee, T. A. Maier, P. C. 

Snijders, and H. H. Weitering, Realization of a Hole-Doped Mott Insulator on a Triangular 
Silicon Lattice, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 266802 (2017). 

[19] 
B. W. Hoogenboom, C. Berthod, M. Peter, Ø. Fischer, and A. A. Kordyuk, Modeling 

Scanning Tunneling Spectra of Bi 2 Sr 2 CaCu 2 O 8 + δ, Phys. Rev. B 67, 224502 (2003). 

[20] 
M. J. Rozenberg, G. Kotliar, and H. Kajueter, Transfer of Spectral Weight in 

Spectroscopies of Correlated Electron Systems, Phys. Rev. B 54, 8452 (1996). 

[21] 
A. K. Jain, Data Clustering: 50 Years beyond K-Means, Pattern Recognition Letters 31, 

651 (2010). 

[22] 
S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, and Y. LeCun, Learning a Similarity Metric Discriminatively, 

with Application to Face Verification, in 2005 IEEE Computer Society Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’05), Vol. 1 (2005), pp. 539–546 vol. 1. 

[23] 
A. Kreisel, P. J. Hirschfeld, and B. M. Andersen, On the Remarkable Superconductivity 

of FeSe and Its Close Cousins, Symmetry 12, 9 (2020). 

[24] 
J.-Q. Yan, B. C. Sales, M. A. Susner, and M. A. McGuire, Flux Growth in a Horizontal 

Configuration: An Analog to Vapor Transport Growth, Phys. Rev. Materials 1, 023402 
(2017). 

[25] 
T. Berlijn, H.-P. Cheng, P. J. Hirschfeld, and W. Ku, Do Se Vacancies Electron Dope 

Monolayer FeSe?, Physical Review B 89, (2014). 

[26] 
X. Liu, L. Zhao, S. He, J. He, D. Liu, D. Mou, B. Shen, Y. Hu, J. Huang, and X. J. Zhou, 

Electronic Structure and Superconductivity of FeSe-Related Superconductors, J. Phys.: 
Condens. Matter 27, 183201 (2015). 

[27] 
D. Huang, T. A. Webb, C.-L. Song, C.-Z. Chang, J. S. Moodera, E. Kaxiras, and J. E. 

Hoffman, Dumbbell Defects in FeSe Films: A Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and First-
Principles Investigation, Nano Letters 16, 4224 (2016). 

[28] 
S. Qiao, P. Zhang, H. Ding, S. Zhang, L. Liang, Z. Zhang, X. Long, X. Chen, J. Lu, and 

J. Wu, Fingerprint of Checkerboard Antiferromagnetic Order in FeSe Monolayer Due to 
Magnetic-Electric Correlation, Materials Today 41, 44 (2020). 

[29] 
W. Li, Y. Zhang, P. Deng, Z. Xu, S.-K. Mo, M. Yi, H. Ding, M. Hashimoto, R. G. 

Moore, D.-H. Lu, X. Chen, Z.-X. Shen, and Q.-K. Xue, Stripes Developed at the Strong 
Limit of Nematicity in FeSe Film, Nature Phys 13, 957 (2017). 

[30] 
T. Berlijn, P. J. Hirschfeld, and W. Ku, Effective Doping and Suppression of Fermi 

Surface Reconstruction via Fe Vacancy Disorder in 
${\mathbf{K}}_{x}{\mathrm{Fe}}_{2\mathbf{\ensuremath{-}}y}{\mathrm{Se}}_{2}$, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 109, 147003 (2012). 

[31] 
T. Berlijn, H.-P. Cheng, P. J. Hirschfeld, and W. Ku, Doping Effects of Se Vacancies in 

Monolayer FeSe, Physical Review B 89, (2014). 

[32] 
K.-W. Lee, V. Pardo, and W. E. Pickett, Magnetism Driven by Anion Vacancies in 

Superconducting $\ensuremath{\alpha}{\text{-FeSe}}_{1\ensuremath{-}x}$, Phys. Rev. B 
78, 174502 (2008). 

[33] 
D. Huang and J. E. Hoffman, Monolayer FeSe on SrTiO3, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter 

Phys. 8, 311 (2017). 

[34] 
Z. Wang, P. Zhang, G. Xu, L. K. Zeng, H. Miao, X. Xu, T. Qian, H. Weng, P. Richard, 

A. V. Fedorov, H. Ding, X. Dai, and Z. Fang, Topological Nature of the 
${\mathrm{FeSe}}_{0.5}{\mathrm{Te}}_{0.5}$ Superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 92, 115119 
(2015). 


 
21

[35] 
L. Vlcek, A. Maksov, M. Pan, R. K. Vasudevan, and S. V. Kalinin, Knowledge 

Extraction from Atomically Resolved Images, ACS Nano 11, 10313 (2017). 

[36] 
L. Jiao, S. Rößler, C. Koz, U. Schwarz, D. Kasinathan, U. K. Rößler, and S. Wirth, 

Impurity-Induced Bound States inside the Superconducting Gap of FeSe, Phys. Rev. B 96, 
094504 (2017). 

[37] 
Y. P. Raykov, A. Boukouvalas, F. Baig, and M. A. Little, What to Do When K-Means 

Clustering Fails: A Simple yet Principled Alternative Algorithm, PLoS ONE 11, e0162259 
(2016). 

[38] 
F. Murtagh and P. Legendre, Ward’s Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering Method: 

Which Algorithms Implement Ward’s Criterion?, J Classif 31, 274 (2014). 

[39] 
H. Hoffmann, Kernel PCA for Novelty Detection, Pattern Recognition 40, 863 (2007). 

[40] 
L. van der Maaten and G. Hinton, Visualizing Data Using T-SNE, Journal of Machine 

Learning Research 9, 2579 (2008). 

[41] 
B. Scholkopf, A. Smola, and K.-R. Müller, Kernel Principal Component Analysis, in 

Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector Learning (MIT Press, 1999), pp. 327–352. 

[42] 
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, 

P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. 
Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, Scikit-Learn: Machine Learning in Python, Journal of 
Machine Learning Research 12, 2825 (2011). 

[43] 
L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and 

Projection for Dimension Reduction, ArXiv:1802.03426 [Cs, Stat] (2020). 

[44] 
G. Koch, R. Zemel, and R. Salakhutdinov, Siamese Neural Networks for One-Shot Image 

Recognition, 8 (n.d.). 

[45] 
T. C. Koethe, Z. Hu, M. W. Haverkort, C. Schüßler-Langeheine, F. Venturini, N. B. 

Brookes, O. Tjernberg, W. Reichelt, H. H. Hsieh, H.-J. Lin, C. T. Chen, and L. H. Tjeng, 
Transfer of Spectral Weight and Symmetry across the Metal-Insulator Transition in VO2, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 116402 (2006). 

 
 
 

 
 


