1

Broadband resonant calibration-free complex permittivity retrieval 

of liquid solutions

Dmitry S. Filonov1,2,=, Egor I. Kretov1,=, Sergei A. Kurdjumov1, Viacheslav A. Ivanov1 and Pavel Ginzburg2

1. Department of Nanophotonics and Metamaterials, ITMO University, St-Petersburg, Russia, 197101
2. School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 69978

=contributed equally

Material susceptibilities govern interactions between electromagnetic waves and matter. They are of a crucial 
importance for basic understanding of natural phenomena and for tailoring practical applications. Here we present a 
new calibration-free method for relative complex permittivity retrieval, which allows use of inexpensive and 
accessible equipment, and simplifies the measurement process. This method combines the advantages of resonant 
and non-resonant techniques, which allow the extraction of material parameters of liquids and solids in a broad 
frequency range, where material’s loss tangent is less than 0.5. The essence of the method is based on excitation of 
magnetic dipole resonance in a spherical sample with variable dimensions. The size-dependent resonant frequencies
and the quality factors of magnetic dipolar modes are mapped on real and imaginary parts of permittivity by 
employing Mie theory. Samples are comprised of liquid solutions, enclosed in stretchable covers, which allows
changing the dimensions continuously. This approach enables the tuning of the magnetic dipolar resonance over a 
wide frequency range, effectively making resonance retrieval method broadband. The technique can be extended to 
powders and solid materials, depending on their physical parameters, such as granularity and processability. 

I. INTRODUCTION

The retrieval of material parameters is of a crucial importance for 

a broad range of applications, based on propagation of electromagnetic 
waves and their interactions with matter1. Material`s susceptibilities 
govern constitutive relations, substituting Maxwell’s equations and 
enabling to find their unique solutions. While a general concept of the 
parametric retrieval is quite universe and is always based on probing a 
structure’s response to an applied electromagnetic field, practical 
constrains set numerous technical limitations and give rise to 
development of many complementary experimental techniques. 

The set of experimental methods for parametric retrieval is rather 

large, but the vast majority can be divided into two main groups: 
resonant 2 and non-resonant 3. Each group has its own advantages and 
drawbacks: while non-resonant methods are naturally broadband, 
resonant approaches are restricted to a limited frequency range with an 
advantage to provide more accurate data. The main approaches will be 
briefly surveyed, and the limitations highlighted. Regardless of the 
type of methods, most of them require the use of a vector network 
analyzer (VNA) to perform measurements of the reflection parameters 
at a certain frequency range. In addition, specialized equipment for 
sample positioning or shaping is also needed. These requirements are
related to some technical constrains in methods’ implementation. 

Non-resonant methods
Open-ended coaxial probe

An open-ended coaxial probe technique 4 is commonly used for quality 
control 5, antenna design 6 and in biomedical applications7. Specially 
designed probes are immersed in a liquid or placed on top of a solid.
The S11 parameter (complex-valued reflection) is then measured. The 
accuracy of the method is constrained by need for three-step 
calibration process. Interpretation of the results requires non-trivial 
processing, and calls for rather sophisticated software.

Rectangular waveguide

Another widely used method for parametric retrieval utilizes a 
waveguide configuration. Here a sample is inserted into a two-port 
waveguide section connected to a VNA. The retrieval is based on 
relating S-parameters to the impedance of an unknown material8,9. This 
approach allows extracting both permittivity and permeability of a 
dielectric slab by employing relatively straightforward mathematical 
formulation10,11. The commonly used Nicolson-Ross-Weir method is 
appropriate for solid samples thicker than half of a wavelength. 
Waveguide geometry has significant limitations when applied to liquid 
solutions, however cuvettes can be designed to hold liquids. Solid 
samples also require special shaping in order to fit waveguide cross-
sections. Furthermore, the single mode operation of a waveguide limits 
the operational bandwidth provided by a single device. The use of 
several waveguides (one per each frequency band) is possible, but ends 
up by relatively high investments in relevant equipment. Also, a number 
of calibrated cuvettes for liquid solutions will be required.  

Transmission lines

Another widely used approach utilizes transmission line geometry. A 
dielectric sample is placed on top of a microstrip line, connected to 
VNA ports. S-parameters are  then converted to complex permittivity
of the sample
12. This approach allows extraction over a wide 

frequency range (~0.05-75 GHz) and is also applicable to lossy 
materials. Accurate retrieval requires a VNA, which may be 
expensive, in the case of high frequency measurements. The 
investigation of liquid solutions also requires the use of cuvettes. 

Resonant Methods
Resonant cavity

Cavity configuration is one of the most commonly used resonant 
methods. It allows the extraction of permittivity values from resonant
responses, measured with and without a sample, incorporated inside the 
cavity 13,14. Here, the permittivity can be extracted only at a single 
(resonant) frequency. It is also worth noting that there are several 


2

extensions, where adjustable resonant cavities were reported
15,16.

Physical realization of those cavities, however, can be quite involved. 

Combination of resonant and non-resonant methods – Our 

Proposal

The beforehand presented survey demonstrates strengths and 
limitations of several existent methods. We propose an experimental 
technique, which combines the advantages of both resonant and non-
resonant methods. Our approach is based on Mie theory which 
describes electromagnetic scattering from the sphere 17. Mie theory 
links geometry, the material parameters of a sphere, and resonant peaks
in the scattering spectrum. Mie coefficients, describing the complete 
set of modes, have explicit closed form expressions in the form of 
Bessel functions. In the case of small high-index particles, Padé 
expansion for the so-called magnetic coefficient bn can be applied18. In 
this case, the resonant condition is given by 𝜀𝑟 = −2.07 + 10.02 𝑥2
⁄
+

1.42𝑥2 − 2𝑖𝑥(1.06 − 0.77𝑥2), where the dimensional parameter 𝑥 =
𝜋𝐷 𝜆𝑟𝑒𝑠
⁄
. 𝜆𝑟𝑒𝑠 is the resonant wavelength, 𝜀𝑟 is the sphere’s relative 

permittivity, and 𝐷 is the sphere’s diameter. This equation assumes 
relative permeability of the sphere μr=1. In the case of small high-
epsilon sphere, the main contribution to the resonant condition comes 
from the second term on the right hand side of the inline equation, 
written above (also the first and the third terms partially cancel each 
other – this was checked by substituting the range of relevant 
parameters and less than 1-2% deviation was found). Under those 
assumptions, the resonant condition for the first magnetic (dipolar) 
mode is given by:

𝜆𝑟𝑒𝑠 ≈ √𝜀𝑟 ∙ 𝐷,
(1)

where similar approximation were used in, e.g. 19. If a broad scattering 
spectrum is observed, the first magnetic dipole resonance at the lowest 
frequency obeys the condition of Eq. 1. In this way, we obtain the real 
part of the permittivity, while its imaginary component can be found by 
analyzing the spectral widths. Both radiative and material losses, as 
well as coupling with antenna contribute to this value. In addition,
overlapping resonances can further complicate direct retrieval. A 
complimentary method can be based on Kramers-Kronig relations,
which link real and imaginary parts via an integral relation. However
this approach has significant limitations when available experimental 
data has a finite bandwidth and a relatively small number of 
experimental points forms the spectra20. Here we found the first method 
of spectral resonance width to be more accurate, if several simplifying 
assumptions are made: (i) material losses prevail over radiation leakage, 
(ii) the spectrum has well defined and separated resonant features. In 
this case, the imaginary part of permittivity can be calculated via Q-
factor relation:

𝜀′′ =

𝜀′
𝑄.
(2)

Based on the formulation of Eqs. 1 and 2, we propose a new

technique for parametric retrieval. Our method is calibration-free and 
does not require expensive additional equipment (apart from a scalar 
network analyzer, phase information is not mandatory). Furthermore, 
the data post-processing is transparent and straightforward, which 
makes the method to be cheap and easy to handle.

II. METHODS

Liquid Solutions

In order to retrieve permittivity within a desired frequency range, the 
diameter of the sphere D should be varied continuously. This was
implemented by using a stretchable latex balloon, which contained a 
liquid solution. The volume of the incompressible liquid was controlled 
with a calibrated injecting syringe, connected to the latex enclosure via
a capillary. Schematic representation of the setup is depicted on Fig. 1, 
while its photograph appears in Fig. 2(a). An empirical relation between 
the surface tension of the balloon, the pressure, supplied by the syringe, 
and the overall volume of the sphere was obtained. This apparatus 
allowed us to achieve almost continuous control over the dimensions, 
which is the key factor for ensuring broadband operation of this 
resonance-based method. An additional important technical detail
involves monitoring of the shape of the balloon, which should be kept 
as spherical as possible in order to employ Eq. 1 for the permittivity 
retrieval. 

The resonance measurement was made by approaching the structure 

with a magnetic loop antenna (Fig. 1) positioned on top of the sphere.
The antenna’s feed was connected to Agilent E8362C VNA and S11
parameter was retrieved. According to Mie theory, the first dip (the 
lowest in frequency) in the reflection coefficient corresponds to the 
magnetic dipole mode, the resonance condition of which is described 
by Eq. 1. In order to avoid resonance hybridization, the internal 
resonance of the loop antenna should be engineered to fall outside of 
the frequency window, where permittivity is retrieved. In this case, the
loop resonance frequency was around 10 GHz, while all the resonances 
of spheres fall within 0.5-4 GHz range.

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the experimental setup for 

extraction of complex permittivity. Arrows illustrate the electric (blue) 
and magnetic (red) vector fields, corresponding to the magnetic dipole 
resonance. The sphere’s dimensions can be dynamically tuned, shifting 
the corresponding magnetic dipole resonance in frequency. A non-
resonant probe (loop antenna) is connected to a vector network 
analyser (VNA) and placed above the sphere. Permittivity is retrieved 
by monitoring spectral dips in the reflection coefficient from the probe 
(S11-parameter) – S11 spectrum is schematically depicted in the right 
inset. Resonant frequency fr, corresponding to the dipole magnetic 
resonance, along with the resonance quality factor, allow retrieval of 
complex permittivity in a broad spectral range, defined by the set of 
available sphere’s radii.

First, numerical simulation was performed to estimate the 

accuracy of the proposed method. A spherical thin shell filled with
distilled water, was analyzed numerically with Frequency Domain 
method, implemented in CST Microwave Studio. Permittivity
obtained with commercial dielectric assessment kit (DAK)18 was used 

r


3

as an input to the modeling. Resonant spectra for different sphere’s 
radii were obtained and post-process with the help of Eqs. 1 and 2. 
Ideally, the results of this resonant type of retrieval should return the 
input data, while any deviations will indicate systematic errors and 
inaccuracies. Fig. 2(b) summarizes this investigation - complex 
permittivity of distilled water in the range of 0.7-5 GHz was retrieved. 
The liquid’s temperature during the measurements was 16.3 degrees 
Celsius. A three-step calibration was performed, and permittivity was 
automatically obtained by using commercial software. DAK data was 
then compared to the resonant retrieval. The relative systematic 
inaccuracy of the method is in the range of 5% and provides a 
reasonable approximation of the reality. Deviation grows with the 
frequency as the result increase of losses. In order to perform a fair 
comparison and to factor out the probable influence of the liquid 
preparation protocol, we relied on the experimental (DAK data) rather 
than the tabulated data

After estimating the accuracy of the method
numerically, 

experimental retrieval was performed. The experimental setup is shown 
in Fig.2 (a). The sphere was formed by a shell made of widely available 
medical latex and was fastened with threads at the end of a capillary. 
The other end of the capillary was connected to a 200 ml syringe filled 
with a liquid (distilled water in this case) so the sphere’s radius could 
be varied. The loop antenna was placed around the supplying capillary, 
which position was found to be optimal in terms of ensuring a constant 
distance between the antenna and the surface of the sphere as the 
dimensions changed. We measured the S11 parameter of the loop 
antenna with Agilent E8362C VNA for 17 different diameters of the 
sphere between 10 and 60 mm. The obtained data was processed using 
the same procedure as in the numerical modeling (Eqs. 1 and 2). The 
extracted values of real and imaginary parts of permittivity are shown 
in Fig.2 (c) (red and blue circles) together with the reference DAK 
measurement (solid red and blue lines). Reasonable agreement was 
observed, however the deviation becomes greater due to losses which 
increase at higher frequencies.   

Solid materials

The proposed method can also be applied to solid materials. However, 
a set of samples with different dimensions should be prepared with
available fabrication techniques (e.g. machine milling). Another 
possible and even more valuable application of the resonance method 
could be as a quality check of materials, where responses of new 
fabricated samples are compared with a reference sample. Here we 

demonstrate this capability by investigating six identical high-quality 
ceramic spheres of 15 mm diameter (Fig. 3(a)). The deviation of the
radii was estimated to be in the order of 1 mm and less, according to 
measurements. The deviation in the resonant locations were observed 
to be in the range of less than 3% (Fig. 3(b) - S11 spectra, acquired with 
the same loop antenna probe). Reference characteristic of the ceramics
was 16 for real and 0.642 for imaginary part at 5 GHz frequency. 

The calculated values of the real and imaginary parts of the 

spheres’ permittivity are presented in the Table 1. For all the samples 
investigated, the losses were significantly higher than the reference 
data, while the real part of permittivity is quite accurate. We suggest 
that the losses depend on the internal granularity of ceramics obtained 
during the fabrication process. Fabrication methods of ceramic 
elements involve agglomeration of ceramic powder at
high 

temperature and high pressure, which can result nontrivial material’s 
microstructure.

Figure 3. (a) A photo of the ceramic samples. (b) Experimental S11

spectra of the samples. Dashed line shows the average position of the
magnetic dipole resonance frequency.

Figure 2. (a) Photograph of the experimental setup for parametric retrieval of liquid solutions. (b) Permittivity spectrum of distilled water - real 
(red) and imaginary (blue) parts of permittivity. Solid lines – permittivity, extracted with a commercial dielectric assessment kit (DAK). Circles –
permittivity, retrieved from numerical modeling with the subsequent post-processing via Eqs 1 and 2. Etalon permittivity (solid lines, DAK 
extraction) is used as an input to the modeling. Deviations between solid lines and circles demonstrate the accuracy of the method. (c) Complex 
permittivity of distilled water (red and blue colors stay for real and imaginary pats, correspondingly). Solid lines – values, extracted with DAK.  
Circles – values, extracted experimentally with setup from panel (a) by fitting resonance conditions, defined by Eqs. 1 and 2. 


4

№
ε’
ε”
ε’

(ref)

ε”
(ref)

Δε’,
%

Δε”,
%

1
15.78
0.78

16
0.64

1.37
20.88

2
16.00
0.72
0%
12.53

3
15.91
0.73
0.56
14.10

4
15.88
0.68
0.75
6.32

5
15.73
0.54
1.69
15.60

6
15.76
0.56
1.50
12.54

Table 1. Retrieved real and imaginary parts of permittivity of 6 

identical ceramic samples (from left to right, Fig. 3(a)).

IV. DISCUSSION

It is important to consider the limitations of the proposed method, 

namely, material losses which make the resonant response less 
pronounced. We therefore performed a set of numerical simulations, 
where the real part of the permittivity was kept constant (80) and the 
loss tangent was varied from 10-4 to ~1. The frequency range was taken 
to be between 0.5 and 3.5 GHz and the radius of the sphere was 10mm
Fig. 4 demonstrates the data where |S11| values are presented with 
colors, while vertical and horizontal axes are the frequency and loss 
tangent, respectively. Three first resonances can be clearly seen up to 
a point, where losses smear out the resonant behavior. This 
information is virtually lost for loss tangent staring from about 0.5 and 
higher. It can be also seen that resonance broadening affects the data 
already starting from 10-1-10-2, supporting the frequency dependent 
deviations on Fig. 2 (losses of water grow significantly with 
frequency). 

Figure 4. Influence of losses on the resonant retrieval - |S11| values 

are presented with colors, while vertical and horizontal axes stay for 
frequency and loss tangent, correspondingly. Magnetic dipole 
resonance is the lower branch (~1.5GHz). The black dashed line shows 
the range of applicability (0.5 is set as the higher bound for acceptable 
losses). Real part of the permittivity is 80, radius of the sphere 10mm.

V. CONCLUSIONS

We have demonstrated a new calibration-free method for extracting 
complex material permittivities of liquid solutions. Our methodology 
combines the advantages of both the accurate resonant and broadband 
non-resonant approaches. Our design is based on a stretchable 
enclosure, which allows continuous tuning of sample’s (resonant 
cavity) dimensions. Note, that the essence of the method is the 
resonant approach, while the broadband operation is achieved via 
continuous tuning of the resonant condition.  
The key for the extraction procedure is Mie theory which links 
resonant conditions, dimensions, and material parameters. The 

proposed methodology was compared to calibrated commercially 
available tools and showed a good agreement within 5% accuracy over 
a broad frequency range (0.5-3.5GHz). The main fundamental 
limitation of the method is related to loss tangent, which cannot access
the value of 0.5. Practical difficulties of the implementation are related 
to mechanical stabilization of samples and accurate maintenance of 
their spherical shape. Thermal control was found to be also an 
important factor. The temperature and chemical resistance of the 
enclosing spherical shell can be  increased, if PVC vinyl, neoprene or 
nitrile are used instead of latex. In this case, thicker enclosures might 
be employed. As the result, a core-shell geometry (shell – the 
enclosure; core – a liquid under investigation) will be involved. Core-
shell geometries can be also analyzed with Mie solutions21, which, 
however, become cumbersome in this case. Furthermore, the usage of 
thick shells might require a calibration step to account for their
response. In the case of latex enclosure, shells’ influence can be safely 
neglected. 
The accuracy of the methodology can be further improved if the entire 
Mie resonance spectra are post-processed and complexes-valued S-
parameters are analyzed. However, higher-order modes are more 
confined to the structure and, as the result, are more sensitive to surface 
imperfections and internal material losses, hence, they were excluded 
from the consideration in this work. 
The main advantages of the current method are its straightforward 
implementation, clear relation between measured data and the physical 
origin, and cheap experimental equipment. 
In terms of future practical application, this new broadband resonant 
approach can be employed for investigation of different types of 
materials, such as liquids, powders and solids. Continuous shape 
variation of the cavity configuration allows permittivity retrieval.
Additive manufacturing techniques and selective surface metallization 
can allow creating complex geometries 6,22 and, as the result, can allow 
more accurate parametric retrieval on expense of computational and 
post-processing simplicity.

Acknowledgments

The work was supported, in part, by ERC StG ‘In Motion’ (802279),
Pazy Foundation, and Ministry of Science and Technology (project 
“Integrated 2D & 3D Functional Printing of Batteries with 
Metamaterials and Antennas”). 

References:

1.
Costanzo, S. MICROWAVE MATERIALS Edited by Sandra 
Costanzo.

2.
Krupka, J. Frequency domain complex permittivity 
measurements at microwave frequencies. in Measurement 
Science and Technology 17, R55–R70 (IOP Publishing, 
2006).

3.
Severo, S. L. S., Salles, Á. A. A. de, Nervis, B. & Zanini, B. 
K. Non-resonant Permittivity Measurement Methods. J. 
Microwaves, Optoelectron. Electromagn. Appl. 16, 297–311 
(2017).

4.
Grant, J. P., Clarke, R. N., Symm, G. T. & Spyrou, N. M. A 
critical study of the open-ended coaxial line sensor 
technique for RF and microwave complex permittivity 
measurements. J. Phys. E. 22, 757–770 (1989).

5.
Donnell, K. M., McClanahan, A. & Zoughi, R. On the crack 
characteristic signal from an open-ended coaxial probe. 


5

IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 63, 1877–1879 (2014).

6.
Filonov, D. et al. Volumetric 3D-Printed Antennas, 
Manufactured via Selective Polymer Metallization. Phys. 
status solidi - Rapid Res. Lett. (2019). 
doi:10.1002/pssr.201800668

7.
La Gioia, A. et al. Open-Ended Coaxial Probe Technique for 
Dielectric Measurement of Biological Tissues: Challenges 
and Common Practices. Diagnostics 8, 40 (2018).

8.
Nicolson, A. M. & Ross, G. F. Measurement of the 
{Intrinsic} {Properties} of {Materials} by {Time}-
{Domain} {Techniques}. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 19, 
377–382 (1970).

9.
Luukkonen, O., Maslovski, S. I. & Tretyakov, S. A. A 
stepwise Nicolson-Ross-Weir-based material parameter 
extraction method. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 10, 
1295–1298 (2011).

10.
Weir, W. B. Automatic Measurement of Complex Dielectric 
Constant and Permeability. Proc. IEEE 62, 33–36 (1974).

11.
Belov, P. A. et al. Broadband isotropic ??-near-zero 
metamaterials. Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, (2013).

12.
Chen, L. F., Ong, C. K., Neo, C. P., Varadan, V. V. & 
Varadan, V. K. Microwave Electronics. (2004). 
doi:10.1002/0470020466

13.
Review, V. Dielectric Properties of. Changes 82, (1951).

14.
Krismer, N., Silbernagl, D., Malfertheiner, M. & Specht, G. 
Elevation enabled bicycle router supporting user-profiles. 

CEUR Workshop Proc. 1594, 74–79 (2016).

15.
Gershon, D., Calame, J. P., Carmel, Y. & Antonsen, T. M. 
Adjustable resonant cavity for measuring the complex 
permittivity of dielectric materials. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71, 
3207–3209 (2000).

16.
Fang, X., Linton, D., Walker, C. & Collins, B. A Tunable 
Split Resonator Method for Nondestructive Permittivity 
Characterization. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 53, 1473–
1478 (2004).

17.
Ehrenhaft, F. & Lorenz, L. Der physik. 1. (1908).

18.
Light Scattering by a Dielectric Sphere: Perspectives on the 
Mie Resonances. Appl. Sci. 8, 184 (2018).

19.
Kuznetsov, A. I., Miroshnichenko, A. E., Brongersma, M. 
L., Kivshar, Y. S. & Luk’yanchuk, B. Optically resonant 
dielectric nanostructures. Science (80-. ). 354, aag2472 
(2016).

20.
Waters, K. R., Mobley, J. & Miller, J. G. Causality-imposed 
(Kramers-Kronig) relationships between attenuation and 
dispersion. IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, 
Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control 52, 822–833 (2005).

21.
Filonov, D. S., Slobozhanyuk, A. P., Belov, P. A. & 
Kivshar, Y. S. Double-shell metamaterial coatings for 
plasmonic cloaking. Phys. Status Solidi - Rapid Res. Lett. 6, 
46–48 (2012).

22.
Filonov, D. et al. Flexible metalized tubes for 
electromagnetic waveguiding. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. 
Transf. 232, 152–155 (2019).


