1

Powder reuse cycles in electron beam powder bed fusion – Variation of 

powder characteristics

Gitanjali Shanbhag1, Mihaela Vlasea1

1University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, CANADA

Abstract:

A path to lowering the economic barrier associated with the high cost of metal additively 
manufactured components is to reduce the waste via powder reuse (powder cycled back into the 
process) and recycling (powder chemically, physically, or thermally processed to recover the 
original properties) strategies. In electron beam powder bed fusion, there is a possibility of reusing 
95 - 98% of the powder that is not melted. However, there is a lack of systematic studies focusing 
on quantifying the variation of powder properties induced by number of reuse cycles. This work 
compares the influence of multiple reuse cycles, as well as powder blends created from reused 
powder, on various powder characteristics such as the morphology, size distribution, flow 
properties, packing properties and chemical composition (oxygen and nitrogen content). It was 
found that there is an increase in measured response in powder size distribution, tapped density, 
Hausner ratio, Carr index, basic flow energy and specific energy, dynamic angle of repose, oxygen,
and nitrogen content, while the bulk density remained largely unchanged.

Figure: Graphical abstract

Keywords: Electron beam powder bed fusion; Powder reuse; Ti-6Al-4V; powder properties;
density, flowability, and composition


2

1
Introduction

The performance of a powder-based additively manufactured part highly relies on the quality of 
the powder feedstock properties. Vock et al. [1] stated that the correlation between bulk powder 
behavior, powder layer organization and final part quality is still not well understood. To improve 
the understanding of the powder-process-part relationship, there is a need to delve into quantifying 
the variability in powder properties, either as a function of print cycles, handling, or batch-to-batch 
variability and investigate their effects on the resulting part properties.

1.1
Powder parameters of interest for electron beam powder bed fusion (EB-PBF)
processes 

When looking at powder feedstock for powder bed fusion (PBF) processes, Popov et al. [2]
identified that some of the fundamental powder characteristics that need to be assessed include
shape, particle size, composition, gas infusions, flowability, tendency to oxidize and 
sintering/melting conditions. 

Particle morphology has a considerable influence on the powder bed packing density, and 

consequently  on  the  final  component  density, where the more irregular the particles, the lower 
the final density [3]. Higher apparent densities are preferred, as they provide better heat 
conduction, reducing the risk of sample swelling and overheating [4] in the EB-PBF process. In 
terms of powder morphology, spherical or regular, equiaxed particles, are less cohesive and tend 
to flow freely, arrange and pack more efficiently than irregular or angular particles [5]. As shape 
deviates from spherical, the interparticle friction increases and furthermore detrimentally affects 
the powder flowability and packing efficiency. Powder morphology can also affect the mechanical 
properties, microstructure, and surface finish of the final component. Consequently, Medina [6]
emphasizes that powder morphology examination should be performed to identify particle shape, 
the presence of satellites, foreign particles or contamination.
Most powders for PBF processes are manufactured via atomization. Powders used in the EB-PBF
process are typically manufactured via plasma atomization (PA). PA is the process of melting a 
wire spool feedstock of metal with a plasma torch and cooling it in an inert tower [7]. Powder 
particles manufactured by PA are usually spherical with minimal satellites and pores. It is of 
interest to quantify the effect of powder morphology on the EB-PBF processes as a function of 
powder reuse. 

Particle Size Distribution (PSD) is a significant parameter in determining the minimum 

layer thickness, the minimum achievable feature size in final parts; and affects the powder-energy 
source interaction. The EB-PBF process uses a nominal PSD between 45 μm to 105 μm. Simchi 
[8] explained that a deviation in the PSD  can lead to in-situ powder segregation and layer streaking 
due to coarser particles being pushed away from the powder bed. This could lead to variations in 
build quality. Consequently, it is of interest to quantify the effect of PSD on the EB-PBF process 
as a function of powder reuse.

The flowability of the powder is also very important, to ensure uniform layers when 

dispensed, distributed, and/or spread onto the build area. It is generally understood that in order to 


3

obtain powder layers with homogeneous density, it is important to ensure that the powders are 
free-flowing and exhibit good flow properties. Powder flowability behavior can be correlated to 
the size, shape, moisture content, and packing efficiency of the powder particles [9]. For example, 
larger and spherical particles tend to flow better than smaller and irregular particles. The Angle of 
Repose (AOR) can be used to characterize the flowability of powders [1]. The AOR is affected by 
various cohesive forces: Van der Waals, electrostatic and capillary, as well as the contact forces 
between powder particles. Teferra [10] states that powders that show a low AOR are categorized 
as non-cohesive, highly flowable powders and can be transported using gravitational force or very 
little energy. Powders with high AOR values are characteristic of cohesive powders and may lead 
to sporadic or intermittent flow. Powder rheometry characterization provides a suite of in-depth 
powder performance metrics such as tap density, apparent density, dynamic flow testing, dynamic 
angle of repose, shear index and cohesiveness. It is of interest to quantify the effect of powder 
flowability on the EB-PBF processes as a function of powder reuse.

Inert gas fusion analysis (i.e., LECO) provides quantitative data on the absolute oxygen and 

nitrogen content in the powders. This analysis is essential to understand whether the evolution of 
the oxygen and nitrogen content in the reused Ti-6Al-4V powder, is within the allowable 
concentration limits defined by ASTM 2924-14 [11] ( i.e. < 0.20 wt.% for oxygen and < 0.05 wt.% 
for nitrogen). It is of interest to quantify the effect of oxygen and nitrogen content on the EB-PBF 
processes as a function of powder reuse.

1.2
Powder parameter studies in EB-PBF of Ti-6Al-4V

There has been an increasing interest in fabricating parts using EB-PBF. The EB-PBF process 
offers distinct advantages when compared to other metal PBF processes. In EB-PBF, components 
are manufactured under a controlled vacuum and at an elevated temperature [12]. This 
environment is beneficial as it has the potential of having minimal impact on the chemical 
composition of the powders and is suitable for reactive materials such as titanium alloys [13] and 
it results in lower residual stresses in the deposited material by virtue of the elevated process
temperature [14]. In addition, the EB-PBF process enables faster build rates owing to the high 
power and fast beam scanning [4]. It is also a “tool-less” fabrication technology which requires 
neither fixtures nor tooling to obtain a custom part geometry, within tolerance limits. EB-PBF
technology also permits blends of used and new powders to be recycled back into the system,
therefore this technology has the potential to be an environmentally friendly process. 

To continually improve the process, it is important to identify, address, and overcome some 

of the process limitations. Debroy et al. [15] have identified that the cost of a manufactured part, 
in PBF processes, is essentially contributed by the additive manufacturing equipment, feedstock 
material, manufacturing and indirect costs [16].  Specifically, when looking at the cost of 1 build 
via EB-PBF, Baumers et al. [17] have identified that the feedstock powder makes up to ~ 28% of 
the total cost of the build. Therefore, we can conclude that the cost of the EB-PBF process heavily 
relies on the reusability of powders and may not be cost-affordable for complex applications if the 
un-melted powder in the build bed is not reused. However, there has been limited published 


4

information available on the role of feedstock powder on the final material properties. Thus, the 
evaluation of the maximum number of allowable powder reuse cycles is an essential factor to 
assess process affordability for a specific part or application. Reusing Ti-6Al-4V powder in EB-
PBF can result in changes in the chemical composition, powder morphology, powder size 
distribution, and flowability, resulting in changes in the properties of the solidified material.
Powder morphology has been observed to be modified after reusing Ti-6Al-4V powders in EB-
PBF. Tang et al. [18] observed that the particles became less spherical, had fractures, protrusions,
and concave sites after reusing. They also observed an increase in surface roughness and 
distortions in the final part. Strondl et al. [5] observed irregularities, impact marks, satellites, and 
stacked particles in the recycled powder. Similar findings were reported by Mohammadhosseini 
et al. [19], where satellites and aggregation of particles in the reused powder were observed. 

Some studies also reported flowability results for virgin and reused powders. Tang et al. 

[18] observed that the reused powder showed lower flowability when measured by Hall flowmeter 
and attributed this to the blasting process, which lead to irregular particle morphology and impact 
marks on the particle surface. Contradictory to this, Mohammadhosseini et al. [19] observed no 
change in the flowability when measured by Hall flowmeter and Carney funnel after reuse. 

Studies on the effect of reusing powder on chemical composition showed that reusing Ti-

6Al-4V can lead to an increase in oxygen content. Sun et al. [20] observed that after 30 reuses, 
there was a 35% increase in oxygen content in the reused powder, from 0.15 wt. % in virgin powder 
to 0.20 wt.%. Petrovic and Niñerola [21] observed that the oxygen content exceeded the 0.20 wt.% 
limit after 12 reuse cycles, where the initial oxygen content in the virgin powder was 0.14 wt.%.
They attributed this increase to the humidity pickup from the inner walls of the machine. Similarly, 
Tang et al. [18] observed that the oxygen content increased from 0.08 wt.% to 0.19 wt.% after 21 
reuse cycles. They attributed this oxygen increase to exposure of powder to the air, including 
processing in the powder recovery system and sieving. An increase in oxygen content typically 
results in an increase in the strength but lowers the toughness and ductility of the final part [22].
Therefore, the mechanical properties of the parts will be varying with the number of reuse cycles.

Based on these studies, a powder suitability criteria can be created for reused powders (see Table 
1), for use in the EB-PBF process, to understand what type of powder performance metric behavior 
is suitable with respect to the morphology, size distribution, sphericity, basic flow energy, specific 
energy, density, Hausner ratio, Carr index, cohesive index, angle of repose, oxygen content, and 
nitrogen content.

EB-PBF machines store about 100 – 180 kgs of powder (depending on the machine model) 

in the hoppers and it is often impossible to refill these hoppers with powder from the same reuse 
cycle. Hence blends of powders, either a mixture of virgin and reused or a mixture of different 
reuse cycles, are frequently used for manufacturing parts and such blend performances also need 
to be evaluated. These practices often pose challenges in isolating the effects of powder reuse in 
the above-mentioned studies. In addition, most published studies focus on assessing the effect of 
powder reuse on only a few specific powder performance metrics. Therefore, there is a need to 


5

assess the different powder characterization techniques and obtain the various powder performance 
metrics associated with these techniques to perform comprehensive powder reuse studies. This 
needs to be done by precisely isolating the powder blends used in the build, as well as performing 
a comprehensive study on effects of powder reuse on powder properties. 

Table 1 Powder suitability criteria for use in the EB-PBF process

Powder 

characteristic
Requirements

What other 

characteristics does 
this property have an 

influence on

Performance 

metrics that can 
help assess the 

powder property

Should this
performance

metric be 

maximized (↑), 
minimized (↓) or 
kept constant (↔)

Morphology

Spherical and equiaxed to 

increase flowability and avoid 

interparticle friction and 
mechanical interlocking

Powder bed packing 
density and the final 
component density, 

surface finish

Sphericity
↑

Apparent density

Should be high for improved 
heat conduction in the EB-PBF 

process

Heat conduction, 

Sample swelling and 

Overheating 

ρ0
↑

Compressibility

High compressibility is desirable 

to be able to achieve higher 

packing density in the powder 

bed

Powder bed packing 

density, layer thickness, 

heat conduction

Carr Index (𝐶)
↓

Particle Size 
distribution

(PSD)

Stay within the manufacturer’s 
size range and not drastically 

increase in order to obtain small 
feature sizes and thinner powder 

layers

Minimum layer 

thickness, Minimum 

achievable feature size, 
build quality, surface 

finish

D10, D50 and D90

values
↔

Chemical 

composition

The oxygen and nitrogen 

concentration should stay within 
allowable concentration limits 

Mechanical properties 

such as toughness, 

ductility of final parts, 

embrittlement 

Oxygen (in wt.%) 
and nitrogen (in 

wt.%)

↓

Spreadability

A dynamic cohesive index closer 

to zero corresponds to a non-
cohesive powder. A cohesive 
powder leads to a sporadic or 
intermittent flow while a non-

cohesive powder leads to a 

regular flow 

Powder bed packing 
density, powder layer 

uniformity, rake-ability, 
easy flow in the hoppers 

(i.e., powder storage).
Decreased spreadability 

and flowability may 
contribute to more 

defects in the final part 

Cohesive Index 

(CI)
↓

Flowability

Highly flowable powder 

minimizes the risk of mechanical 
interlocking and friction between 
particles and allows for smooth 
operation while raking and for 

uniform and homogenous 

distribution over the build plate

Hausner ratio (𝐻𝑟)
↓

Basic Flow 
energy (BFE)
↓

Specific Energy 

(SE)
↓

Angle of repose 

(AOR)
↓

The current comprehensive manuscript aims at advancing the preliminary study by the authors 

in Shanbhag and Vlasea [23], by identifying some of the major studies in literature and comparison 
of the authors results with those studies, determining a powder suitability criteria, describing the 


6

challenges related to a unified powder suitability criteria, analyzing robust trends with increase in 
powder reuse cycles for all characterization results, describing the potential impact of powder 
reuse on part properties as a precursor to a detailed follow-up study, establishing correlations 
between various powder performance metrics, evaluating relative performance of powder 
generations using a normalized radar diagram and formulating a unified powder suitability score 
that can be used by other researchers to compare powder performance.

2
Materials and Methods

The Ti-6Al-4V powder used was supplied by Advanced Powders & Coatings, Canada. The Grade 
5 plasma-atomized powder (Batch number: P1321) was obtained in its pre-alloyed form with a 
size range of 45–105 μm. The chemical composition of the powder conforms to ASTM F2924 for 
a Grade 5 Ti-6Al-4V powder (according to batch information provided by powder supplier). A 
total of seven powder types were assessed for this study. The powder obtained from the supplier 
is referred to as the virgin powder (henceforth known as Genesis 0 or G01). Powder that was used 
once (Genesis 1 or G1), was passed through a vibrating sieve (mesh size -140+325, i.e., 44 µm to 
105 µm) to recover the powder for reuse. Genesis 2 (G2) and Genesis 3 (G3) powders were 
similarly obtained after printing parts with G1 and G2 powder, respectively. For every powder type, 
approximately 500 grams of powder was collected in a metal can. These cans were subsequently 
sealed and rolled/tumbled, on a jar-mill (Labmill 8000, Gardco, USA), at 40 revolutions per minute 
(RPM), for 24 hours in order to homogenize the sample before conducting any characterization.
G1 and G2 powders were blended in equal wt.% to obtain the GB12 blend and compare its properties 
with the other powder types. Similarly, GB13 and GB23 blends were obtained based on equal wt.% 
of powder constituents. The individual powder genesis were first collected in metal cans and rolled 
for 24 hours as mentioned earlier. These were then mixed in equal parts to create the respective 
blends. This blended powder was also collected in metal cans, sealed, and rolled for another 24 
hours to ensure homogeneity and proper mixing in the blend. Therefore, the blended powders see 
a total rolling/tumbling time of 48 hours as compared to 24 hours for the unblended powders. All 
printing was done on an Arcam A2X machine using the default parameters provided for Ti-6Al-
4V (Theme 5.2.52, Arcam A2X, GE Additive). To ensure that a consistent beam scanning strategy 
was used for all builds, the parts built were constant across the 3 printing cycles.

In order to assess the powder particle morphology, field emission microscopy (SEM, Zeiss 

Ultra & Tescan VEGA3) observations were performed. A Camsizer X2 (Retsch GmbH, Germany) 
was used to measure the PSD of the various powder types. The system uses the principle of digital 
image processing [24], where the dispersed particles pass in front of LED light sources and their 
shadows are captured with two digital cameras. The Retsch software (Retsch GmbH, Germany) 

1 It should be noted that G0 powder did not undergo any processing in the EB-PBF machine, blasting in the 
powder recovery system and sieving to remove the fine powder particles. Therefore, this powder type may 
be considered an anomaly for the various powder characterization. Nevertheless, the results for G0 are 
presented in order to compare the results for all other powder types and use G0 as the baseline.


7

analyzes the size of each particle captured by the camera and calculates the respective distribution 
curves. 

Powder rheology was investigated using a powder rheometer (FT4, Freeman Technology, 

UK), rotating drum (Granudrum; Granutools, Belgium) and an automated tap density instrument
(GranuPack; Granutools, Belgium). Performance metrics were collected, such as the basic flow 
energy (BFE), specific energy (SE), bulk density (ρ0), tap density after 500 taps (ρ500), Hausner
ratio (𝐻𝑟) and Carr index (𝐶). To characterize the resistance to flow, eleven test cycles were run 
with a condition cycle run between each test. During the tests, the precision blade was rotated 
downwards and upwards through the fixed volume of powder to establish a flow pattern, where 
the resistance of the powder to the blade yielded the bulk flow properties. The BFE is defined as 
the energy required to displace a powder when the blade is moving downward, and the powder is 
constrained. As described by Freeman and Fu [25], the SE measures the powder’s flowability as 
the blade rotates upward and the powder is unconfined as there is no enclosure at the top of the 
vessel. The GranuPack measures the evolution of the powder density as a function of the tap 
number to obtain a compaction curve (as shown in Figure 1), which is used to calculate the 𝐻𝑟 and
𝐶 values. 𝐻𝑟 is a number that is correlated to the flowability of a powder and is calculated using 
the formula 𝐻𝑟 = 𝜌500 / 𝜌0 where 𝜌500 is the tapped density of the powder after 500 taps and 𝜌0
is the initial bulk density of the powder. 𝐶 is related to the compressibility of a powder and is 
calculated by the formula 100 (𝜌500 – 𝜌0)/ 𝜌0, where 𝜌0 is the initial bulk density of the powder 
and 𝜌500 is the final tapped density of the powder after 500 taps.

Figure 1 Example of compaction curve obtained by GranuPack - illustrating bulk density (ρ0), tap density 

(ρ500), Hausner ratio (𝐻𝑟) and Carr index (𝐶)

The GranuDrum instrument (Granutools, Belgium) is used to determine the dynamic angle 

of repose and the cohesive index. The GranuDrum is composed of a horizontal drum half-filled 
with powder that rotates around its axis at an angular velocity ranging from 2 rpm to 60 rpm. In 
total 17 velocities were tested, from 2 to 20 rpm at increments of 2 rpm followed by 25 to 60 rpm 
at increments of 5 rpm. To minimize internal sequence effects, a different velocity sequence was 
used for each replicate (3 replicates in total) such that the sequences for all replicates are minimally 
correlated. A camera takes snapshots for each angular velocity and the software calculates the 
flowing angle of powder (or AOR) and the cohesive index (CI) values. 


8

Chemical analysis for the various powders were performed using inert gas fusion using a 

LECO TCH 600 (Leco Corporation, USA) instrument to analyze the oxygen and nitrogen content 
in the powders. All powder characterisation experiments were performed in triplicate and the 
average values are reported in this manuscript.

3
Results and Discussion 

As the number of reuse cycles increases, properties such as chemical composition, surface features 
(e.g., surface roughness and overall particle roundness), and physical and thermal properties are 
expected to change. Therefore, understanding the powder behavior with reuse is important for both 
cost and quality control. 

3.1
Observations of Changes in Powder Properties with Reuse Cycles

The powder is predominantly spherical in its as-received (or virgin) condition. Figure 2 presents 
the high magnification SEM micrographs for all different powder types. These micrographs help 
define and depict defects such as satellites (Figure 2(a)), elongated particles (Figure 2(c)), broken 
particles (Figure 2(g),(h),(i) and (k)), deformed particles (Figure 2(b) and (f)), particle with molten 
specks (Figure 2(d)), clip-clap (Figure 2(e)), shattered particles (Figure 2(l)), and agglomerates
(Figure 2(j)). The nomenclature and morphology of  G0, G1, G2 and GB12  powder types has been 
previously described in [23], [26]. Other authors have also reported defects such as non-spherical 
particles and presence of agglomerates after reusing. Sun et al. [20] observed noticeable 
deformations and distortions on the surface of reused EB-PBF powder particles. Cordova et al. 
[27] observed that reused powder, in laser PBF processes, exhibits a deformation towards a 
teardrop shape and a rougher surface due to remelting. 

The deformed, broken, clip-clap and shattered particle defects are attributed to the recovery 

via the blasting procedure. The homogenization of powder via tumbling on a jar-mill, may result 
in numberless collisions between particles, and in friction and wear in presence of air and therefore 
the tumbling procedure may be another reason for these defects. The particles with molten specks 
and elongated particles are attributed to the temperature conditions that lead to overheating and 
smelting of the particles and satellites [26]. The agglomeration of powders is attributed to the high 
temperature of the process. Agglomerated particles result from the diffusion bonding obtained 
during preheating (to allow charge dissipation through the powder bed and reduce particle 
ejections resulting from the interaction of the electron beam during melting. The SEM micrographs 
(Figure 2) make it qualitatively evident that recovering and reusing the powder from the powder 
cake has changed the powder morphology significantly. 


9

Figure 2 SEM micrographs for all powder types depict (a) Satellites in G0 powder; (b), (f) Deformed 
particle in G1 and GB13 powders respectively; (c) Elongated particle in GB12 powder; (d) Particle with 
molten specks in G2; (e) Clip-Clap in GB13 powder; (g), (h), (i), (k) Broken particles in GB13, GB23 and 
G3 powders; (j) Agglomerate in GB23 powder and (l) Shattered particle in G3 powder. Nomenclature used 
to describe these micrographs was first defined by Popov et al. [26]. A Zeiss Ultra SEM instrument was 

used to capture the image shown in (a); all other images were captured using the Tescan VEGA3 

instrument.

Figure 3 shows the D10, D50 and D90 values of the different powders investigated. The D50

(median value), is described as the diameter where half of the population lies below this value. 
Similarly, 90% and 10% of the distribution lies below the D9 and D10, respectively. It is worth 
noting that the G0 powder has not undergone any processing in the EB-PBF machine, nor blasting 
or recovery through the sieve. This contributes to the discrepancies below 44 µm in the PSD of G0
when compared to the other powder types. As expected, the D10, D50, D90 values for GB12 GB13, 
and GB23 lie between their respective genesis powders. This is because the authors ensured that 
the powders blends were made from equal wt.% of powder constituents and mixed thoroughly 
before characterization. The D10, D50, D90 values for the individual genesis powders (i.e., G1, G2, 
G3) show an increasing trend (Figure 3). In other words, we can say that the D10, D50, D90 values 
increase with an increase in number of reuse cycles.


10

Slotwinski et al. [28] also reported an increase in particle size with increasing number of 

reuse cycles in LPBF. They associated this observation to the consolidation and loss of the small 
particles. Grainger [29] also noticed a disappearance of smaller particles with an increase in 
number of powder reuse cycles in LPBF. Although the LPBF process does not use the same energy 
source, nor result in a powder cake after sintering, the powders are exposed to sputter and undergo 
a sieving process to recover the powders for reuse; similarities in trends with EB-PBF are observed 
in the present work. 

Figure 3 D10, D50 and D90 values; for all powder types. Error bars in represent the min-max range.

The bulk density (ρ0) measured with the GranuPack instrument indicate that the values for 

the individual genesis powders and the powder blends do not significantly change with reuse (as 
seen in Figure 4(a)). Similar results were observed by Tang et al. [18] where the ρ0 remained 
unchanged after 21 reuse cycles. A powder with good flowability is usually characterized by a 
high ρ0 value. This is because free flowing particles (with minimum interparticle adhesion) would 
be able to find an optimum arrangement and pack densely, therefore corresponding to a higher ρ0 
value. For such a powder, the possibility of a density increase during tapping is limited and 
therefore the ratio of tap density (ρ500) to ρ0 (also known as the Hausner ratio) would be close to 
unity.

The ρ500 values are presented in Figure 4(a). It is observed that the tap density increases 

with the number of reuse cycles. For the most part, the tap density values for the powder blends 
lie between their respective genesis powders. The difference between the bulk and tapped densities
is significant and increases with an increase in number of reuse cycles. Interparticulate interactions 
are usually larger for poorly flowing powders and therefore a greater difference between the bulk 
and tapped densities is observed [27]. This suggests that the powder flowability is reduced when 
the number of reuse cycles increases. 

The Carr index (𝐶) is the measure of the extent to which a powder can be compressed 

(without deforming the particles). The compressibility of the powder is expected to affect the 


11

continuity and uniformity of the powder layer, with lower 𝐶 values in favor of the formation of 
denser layers. As mentioned earlier, 𝐻𝑟 is an index that helps assess the flowability of the powder. 
According to Goyal et al. [30], for excellent compressibility and flowability, the 𝐶 (%) and , 𝐻𝑟
should be lower than 10 % and 1.11, respectively. The 𝐻𝑟 and 𝐶 values measured in this study, are 
presented in Figure 4(b)). When looking at all powder types, a good correlation is observed 
between the 𝐻𝑟 values and number of reuse cycles as well as Carr index and number of reuse 
cycles such that an increase in these metrics is observed with an increase in number of reuse cycles. 
For the most part, the 𝐻𝑟 and 𝐶 values for the powder blends lie between their respective genesis 
powders. All the values indicate that the flowability and compressibility is excellent (as defined 
by Goyal et al. [30]), however, the increasing trend suggests a degradation in the powder 
flowability characteristics. These plots strongly indicate that the powder has deteriorated from its 
virgin state. This observation is also supported by the general increase of PSD and changes in 
powder morphology observed as a function of increased reuse cycles.

This degradation of flow properties of the powder blends, as well as the reused individual 

genesis powders is attributed to the deviation in the powder morphology as observed in the SEM 
micrographs (Figure 2). Such deviations from the spherical morphology are expected to not only 
decrease flowability but may also lead to uneven layer formation during raking and ultimately may 
result in powder bed non-uniformity across the build bed as mentioned in Table 1. On the other 
hand, the virgin (or G0) powder is observed to be more spherical and therefore flows easily due to 
lower surface friction and mechanical interlocking, thus displaying a lower value for 𝐻𝑟 and 𝐶
metrics. The packing ability of powder particles influences the sintering of the powder layer [31].
As Neira-Arce [32] describes, uniform and homogeneous layers are crucial to ensure that there is 
proper heat conduction and for achieving dimensional accuracy, which in turn reduces the risk of 
swelling or overheating in EB-PBF parts. 


12

Figure 4 (a) ρ0 and ρ500 values (b) Hr and C values; for all powders. Error bars represent the standard 

deviation.

The BFE and SE (Figure 5(b)) values for the reused powders and blends have also 

increased with an increase in number of reuse cycles. The effect of larger BFE and smaller bulk 
density of the powder blends might result in a more uneven layer distribution. When looking at 
the individual genesis powders (Figure 5(b)), it can be concluded that both BFE and SE show an 


13

increase in values with an increase in number of reuse cycles, with G3 being an exception. 
Similarly, there is a good correlation between BFE and SE (Figure 5(a)), for all powder types, 
where an increase in BFE leads to an increase in the SE values. 

Figure 5 (a) BFE v/s SE for all powder types (b) BFE and SE values. Error bars represent the min-max 

range.


14

Strondl et al. [5] observed similar results in EB-PBF powders where the BFE and SE values 

increased after reusing. Clayton et al. [33] also compared the BFE results for virgin and reused 
powders and concluded that processing significantly increases the BFE values for reused powders.
Both BFE and SE results suggest that the reused powders and blends would not flow as freely as 
G0. The energy to move the blade in the rheometer is increasing for the reused powders and blends 
mainly due to their deviation from an overall spherical shape (affected by the pre-heating, blasting 
and sieving procedures) which causes greater interparticle interactions during testing of the powder 
samples in the FT4 instrument. As explained by Clayton et al. [33], a higher SE indicates increased 
mechanical interlocking and friction between particles that may potentially lead to flow problems. 
An interesting observation is that the BFE and SE values for the G3 powder is lower than the G2
powder. The reason behind this behavior is not well understood and therefore this powder type 
needs to be studied more extensively. but the authors speculate that the blends have a much higher 
concentration of non-spherical particles when compared to their respective genesis powders. 

Figure 6(a) presents a plot of the dynamic angle of repose v/s rotating drum speed for all 

powder types. It is observed that below 25 rpm, it is difficult to make a differentiation between the 
various powders and all powder have excellent flowability at 2 rpm. Above 25 rpm, the AOR 
decreases with an increase in number of reuse cycles. As an example, from Figure 6(c), it can be 
observed that at the highest speed (i.e., 60 rpm), the AOR decreases from G1 to G3. It should be 
noted that G0 stands out, probably because this powder has not undergone any processing in the 
machine (pre-heating, blasting, sieving). 

The AOR values at the lowest and highest drum rotation speed (i.e., 2 rpm and 60 rpm, 

respectively) were correlated with the particle size D10, D50 and D90 values. As can be seen from 
Figure 6(e) and (f), an excellent correlation is observed where an increase in particle size leads to 
a decrease in the AOR value. It is recognised that larger particles tend to flow more easily than 
finer powder. It has been observed that the D10, D50 and D90 values increase with an increase in 
number of reuse cycles. Therefore, this increase in particle size is leading to a better flow in the 
rotating drum, thus suggesting that the flowability of the reused powders is better in this 
instrument. 

Figure 6(b) presents the Cohesive Index (CI) at various drum rotation speeds for all powder 

types. The CI metric is linked to the fluctuations of the interface between the powder and air. The 
dynamic cohesive index of a powder depends on the magnitude of the cohesive forces between the 
particles. Therefore, a value closer to zero corresponds to a non-cohesive powder. Per the flow 
guidelines provided in the GranuDrum instrument software, threshold values for cohesive index 
are: < 5 very good, 5-10 good, 10-20 fair, 20-30 passable, 30-40 poor, > 40 very poor. The CI 
follows the same trend (as observed in Figure 6(b) and (d)) as the AOR curves, where an increase 
in number of reuse cycles lead to a decrease in the CI value (except G0). An interesting observation 
is the fact that the CI values increase with an increase in number of reuse cycles (except G0). 

The GranuDrum data interpretation guide mentions that the flowability of a powder is 

measured as a function of the shearing rates, and therefore rheological properties like shear 
thinning or shear thickening could be evaluated with this instrument. If the powder AOR and CI 


15

increase with an increase in drum speed, the powder is said to show a shear-thickening behavior. 
All powders in this study show a shear-thickening behavior (Figure 6(a) and (b)). A powder 
material that shows a constant shear-thickening behavior is known to be a poor candidate for a 
dynamic process. That being said, there are portions in the CI v/s drum rotation speed curve Figure 
6(b) where a somewhat constant cohesive index can be observed between speeds of 15 rpm and 
40 rpm. The GranuDrum instrument helps identify an optimum raking/re-coating speed. The 
relationship between the drum rotating speed and surface flow speed (i.e., raking speed in mm/s) 
is displayed in Figure 6(g). It has been mentioned by the machine manufacturer [34], [35], that 
when selecting raking speeds, one should look at areas that display a constant cohesive index.
As mentioned earlier, drum rotating speeds between 15 rpm and 40 rpm (corresponding to 75 mm/s 
and 175 mm/s respectively, according to Figure 6(g)) show a constant cohesive index. Therefore, 
raking speeds between 75 mm/s and 175 mm/s should be considered when using powders for EB-
PBF processes.

The effect of powder reused on interparticle cohesion is contrary to the measurements done 

with FT4 instrument (higher BFE and SE with reuse). It is not clear at the moment whether the 
increase of the PSD with reuse is only associated with the agglomeration, the sieving, or a 
combination of both. Difference in flow regime and the sensitivity of the flowability to multiple 
powder modifications may explain the discrepancy in these results.

As mentioned by Brika et al. [36], powder flowability is not an inherent material property

and is the ability of the powder to flow in a  desired manner in a particular instrument. A powder 
may perform well in a certain instrument/piece of equipment while may perform poorly in another. 
Thus, additional tests are required to better understand which regime better represents the 
behaviour of the powder in an additive manufacturing (AM) machine. 


16

Figure 6 (a) AOR v/s speed of drum rotation for all powders (b) CI v/s speed of drum rotation for all 

powder (c) AOR at 2 and 60 rpm v/s number of reuse cycles (d) CI at 2 and 60 rpm v/s number of reuse 
cycles (e) AOR at 2 rpm v/s particle size (D values) for individual genesis powders (f) AOR at 60 rpm v/s 
particle size (D values) for individual genesis (g) Relationship between drum rotating speed and surface 
flow speed as identified by Granutools [34]. Note than G0 powder is considered an anomaly due to the 

fact that it has not undergone any processing, blasting, or sieving procedure. 

Figure 7 (a) and (b) shows the average values for oxygen and nitrogen concentration 

increases with number of reuse cycles. Specifically, a 37% and 44% increase was observed in the 
oxygen and nitrogen concentration, respectively, for G3 powder when compared to the G0 powder. 
However, the oxygen remains lower than 0.18 wt.% and below the limit outlined by ASTM F2924-
14 [11]. A logarithmic trendline seems to better fit the results when compared to the linear trendline 


17

(Figure 7(a)). From the trendline, it can be deduced that the O2 concentration will exceed the 0.2 
wt.% limit by 5-6 reuse cycles. The nitrogen concentration remains between 0.016 wt.% and 0.023 
wt.% (Figure 7(b)) which is well below the 0.05 wt.% limit outlined by ASTM 2924-14 [11]. 
Increase of nitrogen concentration with the number of reuse cycles is observed; the logarithmic 
trend line suggest that this nitrogen pick-up may reach a saturation level, suggesting that this is a 
surface contamination (formation of nitride or local concentration at the surface). The trend 
suggests that the maximum (i.e., 0.05 wt.%) will not be reached before a large number of reuse 
cycles. 

Some other studies have also looked at the increase in oxygen and nitrogen content with 

increase in number of reuse cycles. Ghods et al. [37] showed that the oxygen content was > 0.20 
wt.% after 11 reuse cycles. Grainger [29] observed a linear increase in oxygen and nitrogen 
concentrations in Grade 23 Ti-6Al-4V powder after reusing in the laser PBF process. However, 
after 30 builds, the oxygen concentration remained below 0.20 wt.%. These values are attributed 
to the fact that the starting oxygen concentration in Grade 23 Ti-6Al-4V is much lower than that 
of Grade 5 Ti-6Al-4V. Nandwana et al. [38] observed an increase in the oxygen concentration 
from 0.13 wt.% to 0.18 wt.%, however their nitrogen concentration remained the same over 5 reuse 
cycles for a Ti-6Al-4V powder. 

There are numerous factors which contribute to oxygen pick-up in Ti-6Al-4V powders 

processed through EB-PBF. One of the possible reasons for the increase of oxygen pickup is the 
fact that the powder is exposed to the ambient atmosphere and moisture when transferred from the 
machine to the PRS for part recovery, and then transferred from the PRS to the sieve. A study 
performed by Vluttert [39] shows that Ti-6Al-4V can pick up about 0.2 wt. % moisture (relative 
to dry weight) when left in an environment that was set to 25 °C and 90% humidity. Therefore, the 
presence of water vapor in the air may have a reasonable impact on oxygen pickup. Montelione et 
al. [37] compare the EB-PBF process to gas tungsten arc welding and suggest that when the powder 
is exposed to air, the water molecules adsorbed on the particle surface may dissociate during 
heating, allowing the oxygen to diffuse in the metal alloy. In addition, the deformation caused by 
blasting and sieving can also lead to an acceleration of the oxidation due to creation of new 
oxidation prone surfaces. Shvab et al. [40] describe that this will lead to a passive oxide layer 
formation that may diffuse inward and reform during heating cycles. Furthermore, oxygen pickup 
can also occur if the machine is not under vacuum when the powder is stored in the hoppers in 
between the builds. Finally, the major source of oxygen pickup is the reaction of titanium at high 
temperature with residual oxygen in the atmosphere of the machine. In addition, Mizuno et al. [41]
noted that all oxides in titanium alloys dissolve above 400 °C and the oxygen diffuses into the bulk 
through the bulk diffusion process. The EB-PBF process takes place at a relatively high 
temperature of 730°C where the titanium can react with residual oxygen, while the high 
temperatures can result in oxygen diffusion as described by Attalla et al. [42] (build chamber ≈ 
10−4 mbar and electron beam column ≈ 10−7 mbar). The oxygen and nitrogen can dissolve 
interstitially into the titanium lattice and form oxides and nitrides which can also impact the 
mechanical behavior. As stated by Donachie [43], an increase in the oxygen and nitrogen content 


18

in solution can lead to an increase in the strength, and decrease in the ductility which further leads 
to embrittlement. 

Figure 7 (a) Oxygen and (b) Nitrogen concentration for G0, G1, G2, and G3 powder types along with linear 

(in red) and logarithmic (in black) trendlines. Error bars represent the standard deviation.

3.2
Evaluation of the relative performance of powders 

It is quite challenging to deploy a unified metric to capture the absolute suitability of powders for 
PBF AM processes. The powder metrics measured are very different in nature and may impact the 
PBF process and final part properties in different ways. For instance, powder metrics variations 
may have opposite effects, i.e., some characteristics may lead to an improved behavior in the AM 
process, others may lead to a deterioration of the AM process behaviour, while some powder 
metrics may have limited effect. In literature, this is poorly understood at the moment. Variability 
is still relatively high for some of the powder measurement techniques, and are influenced by the 
testing equipment type, the testing conditions, the powder storage and handling conditions, the 
operator skill, the calibration of instruments, and many other factors. Care must be exercised in 
interpreting each powder metric result individually. Although it is challenging to capture the 
absolute suitability of powders for PBF AM processes via a consolidated index, there is a potential 
to describe the relative change in powder properties with respect to a reference state, if such 
reference should exist. A reference state, for instance, is often considered to be the virgin powder. 
Two examples of calculations of relative changes from a reference state are presented below. 

To understand the sensitivity of response to change of the various powder characteristics, from a 
reference powder (G0 in this work), the various properties measured were normalized to a range 
of 0 to 1 and a radar diagram of the normalized indices for the G0, G1, G2, and G3 powders was 
plotted in Figure 8. The normalization was done to transform the data into a dimensionless data 
sequence for ease of comparability. For this study, the approach used for normalizing all metrics
was taken from Mehat et al. [44]:

3.2.1
Relative Performance Evaluated via Radar Diagram


19

𝑥𝑖

∗(k) = 

𝑥𝑖

(0)(k)−min 𝑥𝑖

(0)(k)

max 𝑥𝑖

(0)(k)−min 𝑥𝑖

(0)(k)

where 𝑥𝑖

(0)(k) is the measurement of the quality characteristic, max 𝑥𝑖

(0)(k) is the largest value of 

𝑥𝑖

(0)(k), and min 𝑥𝑖

(0)(k) is the smallest value of 𝑥𝑖

(0)(k).

In accordance with the powder suitability criteria created in Table 1, the smaller the area 

covered by the radar diagram, the higher the powder suitability for the EB-PBF process. It is 
observed that the G0 powder has the smallest area, followed by G1, G2 and G3, indicating that the 
powder is becoming less-suitable with increasing number of reuse cycles.

Figure 8 Radar diagram comparing the performance of G0, G1, G2, and G3 powders w.r.t the D values, SE, 

BFE, Nitrogen (in wt.%), Oxygen (in wt.%), ρ0, Hr, C, CI, and AOR.

Efforts in assessing powder suitability for powder bed fusion were undertaken by Brika et al. [36]; 
they differentiated powders and assessed three powder types by calculating a figure of merit called 
AMS (Additive Manufacturing Suitability). While in this present study, the authors are not 
assessing an absolute suitability criteria due to challenges aforementioned, this approach is 
deployed herein to assess if this index can be used to quantify the relative changes in powder 
properties with respect to a reference state (G0 in this work). Since the current study focuses on 
EB-PBF powder suitability, the index will be referred as “ESF” (Electron-beam powder bed fusion 
Suitability Factor) and is inspired from Brika et al. [36]. As such, for each powder reuse cycle, a
cumulative sum of the normalized index presented in Figure 8 will provide an objective function:

ESF = 

(D10 + D50 + D90 + O2 + N2+ SE + BFE + 𝐻𝑟 + 𝐶 + CI @ 2 rpm + CI @ 60 rpm+ AOR @ 2 rpm + AOR @ 60 rpm )

13

3.2.2
Relative Performance Evaluated via Performance Index 


20

The ESF values for G0, G1, G2, and G3 powders are 0.176, 0.504, 0.609, and 0.659,

respectively. It is assumed that the lower deviation from the ESF value with respect to G0, the more
the properties of the powder will depart from the reference state. This is another example of efforts 
towards expressing the relative change in powder characteristics. 

As a conclusion, this study looked into comparing the influence of multiple reuse cycles, as 

well as powder blends created from reused powder, through various performance metrics such as 
morphology, size distribution, basic flow energy, specific energy, bulk density and tap density 
after 500 taps, Hausner ratio and Carr index, cohesive index, angle of repose, oxygen content, and 
nitrogen content. In accordance with the authors’ hypotheses established in Shanbhag and Vlasea 
[23], it was observed that reusing modifies the powder significantly when assessing the various 
performance metrics. Future research efforts will rely on this present study and will look into 
assessing the parts that were printed in the powder re-use campaigns to be able to understand the 
impact of reusing powders on part performance including surface roughness, porosity, and powder 
cake density.

4
Conclusions

Investigation into the effect of Plasma atomized Grade 5 Ti-6Al-4V powder reuse on the powder 
properties as well as properties of powder blends led to the following conclusions: 
(1) The SEM micrographs of the various powder types show extensive physical modification to 

the surface of the particles, with increasing degree of powder reuse. The micrographs depict 
features such as elongated particles, broken particles, deformed particles, particle with molten 
specks and agglomerates. The broke, shattered, clip-clap and deformed particles are attributed 
to the powder recovery process (i.e., blasting, sieving) and tumbling process; and the particles 
with molten specks, elongated particles and agglomerated particles are attributed to the high 
temperature conditions leading to overheating and smelting of particles and satellites. 

(2) The D10, D50 and D90 values increase with increasing degree of powder reuse. This observation 

is attributed to the agglomeration of powder particles.

(3) The ρ0 remained unchanged for all powders; however, the ρ500increases with increasing degree 

of powder reuse. The 𝐻𝑟 and 𝐶 values show an increase with an increase in number of reuse 
cycles. This trend indicates modification of reused powders from their virgin state. These 
observations have been attributed to the deviations from spherical morphology, for the reused 
powder, as observed in the SEM micrographs. Due to these deviations, uneven raking and non-
homogenous layers may be obtained.

(4) The BFE and SE measured using powder rheology increase with increasing degree of powder 

reuse. This suggests that the reused powder is more cohesive than the virgin powder. This 
behavior is attributed to the mechanical interlocking and friction between particles (caused by 
the non-spherical morphology).

(5) The dynamic AOR and CI values increase with an increase in number of reuse cycles. This 

behavior is attributed to the agglomeration and increase of the D10, D50 and D90 with the number 
of reused cycles. The variations of the metrics with drum rotating speed may help identify a 


21

range of optimum raking speeds that can be used for these powders when being used in the 
EB-PBF machine.

(6) The O2 and N2 concentration remain below the limits outlined by ASTM F2924. However, a 

gradual increase has been observed with increasing degree of powder reuse. Specifically, a 
37% and 44% increase was observed in the oxygen and nitrogen concentration. From the 
trendline, it can be deduced that the O2 concentration will exceed the 0.2 wt.% limit by 5-6
reuse cycles. 

(7) A unified powder quality score or powder quality metric was established to compare the effect 

of powder reuse on the various powder performance metrics. 

5
Funding

The authors appreciate the partial funding support received from the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) Holistic Innovation in Additive Manufacturing (HI-AM) 
grant NETGP 494158 - 16. The authors also appreciate the research contributions and funding 
support from the National Research Council, Canada (NRC) under the “Additive Manufacturing 
Materials and Processes” collaboration program 080531, sub-project SUB03280.

6
Acknowledgements

The authors would like to acknowledge Dr. Louis-Philippe Lefebvre, Research Officer at National 
Research Council Canada, for his significant efforts in the review of the paper, in providing 
editorial comments, scientific and technical feedback. In addition, the authors would like to 
acknowledge the support from the Multi Scale Additive Manufacturing Lab (MSAM, University 
of Waterloo) technical staff Jerry Ratthapakdee for assisting with the manufacturing process and 
interns (specifically Kate Pearson and Cecilia Cancellara) for assisting with powder
characterization datasets, as well as Shirley Mercier from NRC for conducting the LECO analysis.

7
Author Contributions

Conceptualization, G.S. and M.V.; investigation, G.S.; methodology, G.S.; project administration, 
G.S.; supervision, M.V.; writing — original draft, G.S..; writing — review and editing, M.V.; 
funding acquisition, M.V.

8
References

[1]
S. Vock, B. Klöden, A. Kirchner, T. Weißgärber, and B. Kieback, “Powders for powder bed 
fusion: a review,” Prog. Addit. Manuf., vol. 4, pp. 383–397, 2019, doi: 10.1007/s40964-
019-00078-6.

[2]
V. V. Popov et al., “Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing Using Critical Raw 
Materials: A Review,” Materials (Basel)., vol. 14, no. 4, p. 909, Feb. 2021, doi: 
10.3390/ma14040909.

[3]
R. M. German, Particle Packing Characterisitics. Princeton, N.J., USA: Metal Powder 
Industries Federation, 1989, 1989.


22

[4]
L. Yang et al., “Electron Beam Technology,” in Additive Manufacturing of Metals: The 
Technology, Materials, Design and Production, Springer International Publishing, 2017, 
pp. 63–79.

[5]
A. Strondl, O. Lyckfeldt, H. Brodin, and U. Ackelid, “Characterization and Control of 
Powder Properties for Additive Manufacturing,” JOM, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 549–554, Mar. 
2015, doi: 10.1007/s11837-015-1304-0.

[6]
F. Medina, “Reducing metal alloy powder costs for use in powder bed fusion additive 
manufacturing: Improving the economics for production,” University of Texas El Paso, 
2013.

[7]
M. Entezarian, F. Allaire, P. Tsantrizos, and R. A. L. Drew, “Plasma atomization: A new 
process for the production of fine, spherical powders,” JOM, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 53–55, 1996, 
doi: 10.1007/BF03222969.

[8]
A. Simchi, “The role of particle size on the laser sintering of iron powder,” Metall. Mater. 
Trans. B, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 937–948, Oct. 2004, doi: 10.1007/s11663-004-0088-3.

[9]
P. C. Angelo and R. Subramaniam, Powder Metallurgy : Science,Technology And 
Applications. Delhi: PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., 2008, 2008.

[10]
T. F. Teferra, “Engineering Properties of Food Materials,” in Handbook of Farm, Dairy and 
Food Machinery Engineering, Elsevier, 2019, pp. 45–89.

[11]
ASTM, “F2924:14-Standard Specification for Additive Manufacturing Titanium-6 
Aluminum-4 Vanadium with Powder Bed Fusion,” ASTM Int., 2014, doi: 10.1520/F2924-
14.

[12]
W. E. Frazier, “Metal Additive Manufacturing: A Review,” J. Mater. Eng. Perform., vol. 
23, no. 6, pp. 1917–1928, 2014, doi: 10.1007/s11665-014-0958-z.

[13]
L. E. Murr et al., “Fabrication of Metal and Alloy Components by Additive Manufacturing: 
Examples of 3D Materials Science,” J. Mater. Res. Technol., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 42–54, Apr. 
2012, doi: 10.1016/S2238-7854(12)70009-1.

[14]
P. Edwards, A. O’Conner, and M. Ramulu, “Electron Beam Additive Manufacturing of 
Titanium Components: Properties and Performance,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., vol. 135, no. 6, 
p. 061016, Nov. 2013, doi: 10.1115/1.4025773.

[15]
T. DebRoy et al., “Scientific, technological and economic issues in metal printing and their 
solutions,” Nat. Mater., vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1026–1032, Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1038/s41563-
019-0408-2.

[16]
N. Hopkinson and P. Dicknes, “Analysis of rapid manufacturing—using layer 
manufacturing processes for production,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part C J. Mech. Eng. Sci., 
vol. 217, no. 1, pp. 31–39, Jan. 2003, doi: 10.1243/095440603762554596.

[17]
M. Baumers, P. Dickens, C. Tuck, and R. Hague, “The cost of additive manufacturing: 
machine productivity, economies of scale and technology-push,” Technol. Forecast. Soc. 
Change, 
vol. 
102, 
no. 
C, 
pp. 
193–201, 
2016, 
[Online]. 
Available: 

https://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:tefoso:v:102:y:2016:i:c:p:193-201.

[18]
H. P. Tang, M. Qian, N. Liu, X. Z. Zhang, G. Y. Yang, and J. Wang, “Effect of Powder 


23

Reuse Times on Additive Manufacturing of Ti-6Al-4V by Selective Electron Beam 
Melting,” J. Miner. Met. Mater. Soc., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 555–563, Mar. 2015, doi: 
10.1007/s11837-015-1300-4.

[19]
A. Mohammadhosseini, D. Fraser, S. H. Masood, and M. Jahedi, “A Study of Morphology 
of Titanium Powder Used in Electron Beam Melting,” in Engineering and Manufacturing 
Technologies, 2014, vol. 541, pp. 160–163, doi: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMM.541-
542.160.

[20]
Y. Sun, M. Aindow, and R. J. Hebert, “The effect of recycling on the oxygen distribution 
in Ti-6Al-4V powder for additive manufacturing,” Mater. High Temp., vol. 35, no. 1–3, pp. 
217–224, 2018, doi: 10.1080/09603409.2017.1389133.

[21]
V. Petrovic and R. Niñerola, “Powder recyclability in electron beam melting for 
aeronautical use,” Aircr. Eng. Aerosp. Technol., vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 147–155, Mar. 2015, doi: 
10.1108/AEAT-11-2013-0212.

[22]
W. A. Grell et al., “Effect of powder oxidation on the impact toughness of electron beam 
melting 
Ti-6Al-4V,” 
Addit. 
Manuf., 
vol. 
17, 
pp. 
123–134, 
2017, 
doi: 

10.1016/j.addma.2017.08.002.

[23]
G. Shanbhag and M. Vlasea, “The effect of reuse cycles on Ti-6Al-4V powder properties 
processed by electron beam powder bed fusion,” Manuf. Lett., vol. 25, pp. 60–63, 2020, doi: 
10.1016/j.mfglet.2020.07.007.

[24]
ISO, “13322-2 Particle size analysis — Image analysis methods — Part 2: Dynamic image 
analysis 
methods,” 
Int. 
Organ. 
Stand., 
vol. 
2, 
2006, 
[Online]. 
Available: 

https://www.iso.org/standard/38665.html.

[25]
R. Freeman and X. Fu, “Characterisation of powder bulk, dynamic flow and shear properties 
in relation to die filling,” Powder Metall., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 196–201, Sep. 2008, doi: 
10.1179/174329008X324115.

[26]
V. V. Popov, A. Katz-Demyanetz, A. Garkun, and M. Bamberger, “The effect of powder 
recycling on the mechanical properties and microstructure of electron beam melted Ti-6Al-
4 V specimens,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 22, pp. 834–843, Aug. 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.addma.2018.06.003.

[27]
L. Cordova, M. Campos, and T. Tinga, “Revealing the Effects of Powder Reuse for 
Selective Laser Melting by Powder Characterization,” JOM, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 1062–1072, 
Mar. 2019, doi: 10.1007/s11837-018-3305-2.

[28]
J. A. Slotwinski, E. J. Garboczi, P. E. Stutzman, C. F. Ferraris, S. S. Watson, and M. A. 
Peltz, “Characterization of Metal Powders Used for Additive Manufacturing,” J. Res. Natl. 
Inst. Stand. Technol., vol. 119, p. 460, Oct. 2014, doi: 10.6028/jres.119.018.

[29]
L. Grainger, “Investigating the effects of multiple re-use of Ti6Al4V powder in additive 
manufacturing (AM),” White Pap. Renishaw, pp. 1–10, 2016.

[30]
A. Goyal et al., “Development and physico-chemical characterization of microencapsulated 
flaxseed oil powder: A functional ingredient for omega-3 fortification,” Powder Technol., 
vol. 286, pp. 527–537, Dec. 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.powtec.2015.08.050.


24

[31]
X. Gong, T. Anderson, and K. Chou, “Review on powder-based electron beam additive 
manufacturing 
technology,” 
Manuf. 
Rev., 
vol. 
1, 
p. 
2, 
Apr. 
2014, 
doi: 

10.1051/mfreview/2014001.

[32]
A. Neira-Arce, “Thermal Modeling and Simulation of Electron Beam Melting for Rapid 
Prototyping on Ti6Al4V Alloys,” North Carolina State University, 2012.

[33]
J. Clayton, D. Millington-Smith, and B. Armstrong, “The Application of Powder Rheology 
in Additive Manufacturing,” JOM, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 544–548, Mar. 2015, doi: 
10.1007/s11837-015-1293-z.

[34]
Granutools, “Linking Powder Rheology Characterization to Spreadability in Powder Bed-
Based AM,” AZO Materials, 2020. https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=19335 
(accessed Apr. 23, 2021).

[35]
Granutools, “Effect of Recycling on the Spreadability of Metallic Powder,” AZO Materials, 
2020. https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=19313 (accessed Apr. 23, 2021).

[36]
S. E. Brika, M. Letenneur, C. A. Dion, and V. Brailovski, “Influence of particle morphology 
and size distribution on the powder flowability and laser powder bed fusion 
manufacturability of Ti-6Al-4V alloy,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 31, no. August 2019, p. 100929, 
2020, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2019.100929.

[37]
A. Montelione, S. Ghods, R. Schur, C. Wisdom, D. Arola, and M. Ramulu, “Powder Reuse 
in Electron Beam Melting Additive Manufacturing of Ti6Al4V: Particle Microstructure, 
Oxygen Content and Mechanical Properties,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 35, p. 101216, Oct. 2020, 
doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2020.101216.

[38]
P. Nandwana et al., “Recyclability Study on Inconel 718 and Ti-6Al-4V Powders for Use 
in Electron Beam Melting,” Metall. Mater. Trans. B, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 754–762, Feb. 2016, 
doi: 10.1007/s11663-015-0477-9.

[39]
N. Vluttert, “The absorption of moisture by metal powder in a humid environment and the 
effects on its composition,” 2016. http://essay.utwente.nl/71620/ (accessed Apr. 23, 2014).

[40]
R. Shvab, E. Hryha, and L. Nyborg, “Surface chemistry of the titanium powder studied by 
XPS using internal standard reference,” Powder Metall., vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 42–48, Jan. 2017, 
doi: 10.1080/00325899.2016.1271092.

[41]
Y. Mizuno et al., “Temperature dependence of oxide decomposition on titanium surfaces in 
ultrahigh vacuum,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 
1716–1721, Sep. 2002, doi: 10.1116/1.1500746.

[42]
A. Attalla, R. C. J. Bowman, B. D. Craft, C. M. Love, and R. L. Yauger, “Investigation of 
moisture in titanium metal powder by pulsed NMR,” May 1977. doi: 10.2172/7257103.

[43]
M. J. Donachie, Titanium: A Technical Guide, 2nd Edition. ASM International, 2000.

[44]
N. M. Mehat, S. Kamaruddin, and A. R. Othman, “Hybrid Integration of Taguchi Parametric 
Design, Grey Relational Analysis, and Principal Component Analysis Optimization for 
Plastic Gear Production,” Chinese J. Eng., vol. 2014, pp. 1–11, Jan. 2014, doi: 
10.1155/2014/351206.


