Lamb waves sensor in liquid media utilizing 

higher-order quasi-longitudinal S5 and S6

modes

Muhammad Hamidullah, Nassim Rezzag, Céline Élie-Caille and Thérèse Leblois

FEMTO-ST Institute, CNRS UMR-6174,

University Bourgogne Franche-Comté, 25000 Besançon, France

Abstract— Higher-order quasi-longitudinal (QL) Lamb waves have been reported for sensor application 

in liquid media at a higher thickness-to-wavelength (h/) ratio than the fundamental symmetric modes, with
the main advantage of having higher operating frequency and reduction in the total size of the device without 
reducing the plate thickness. However, the trade-off in the reduction of the electromechanical coupling 
coefficient (K2) is a hinder in utilizing QL Lamb waves with higher-order numbers. Here we performed finite 
element simulation and verified experimentally the possibility of utilizing S5 and S6 QL Lamb wave modes in 
liquid media based on a two-port delay line device on a thick GaAs substrate. While the K2 values are lower 
for QL modes at higher-order numbers, the signal amplitude of S21 transmission parameter at the resonant
frequency is still distinguishable from the noise floor. The result demonstrates the feasibility of higher-order 
modes at higher h/ ratio for sensor application in liquid media, thus allowing further reduction in the 
wavelength and the total size of the sensor device.

Keywords—Lamb waves, GaAs, quasi-longitudinal modes, higher-order, liquid media

I.
INTRODUCTION 

Plate acoustic waves (PAW) with two free surfaces have an advantage over surface acoustic waves 

(SAW) with only one free surface for sensor application in liquid media [1]. In PAW, the sensing surface 
can be separated from the opposite surface with interdigital transducer (IDT), thus PAW-based sensors do
not require an extra protection layer for the IDT to prevent contact with liquid. Several types of in-plane 
polarised PAW for sensors in liquid media have been reported, such as shear-horizontal acoustic plate 
modes (SH-APM) [2] and Lamb waves (LW) [3]. 

Fundamental antisymmetric (A0) and symmetric (S0) modes of LW are commonly used for sensors in 

liquid media without significant radiation of acoustic energy into the liquid under specific conditions. For 
the A0 modes, the phase velocity (vph) must be lower than the sound velocity of the liquid so that the acoustic 
energy is not converted into longitudinal pressure waves in the liquid. In the case of S0 modes, the particle 
displacement components must be a dominantly longitudinal component (u1) with close to zero shear 
vertical (u3) component. Both conditions are achieved at a low plate thickness-to-wavelength ((h/) ratio, 
typically below 0.1). Therefore, for A0 and S0 modes sensor in liquid media, the reduction in the plate 
thickness is necessary which causing the device to be fragile, or by using a larger wavelength with a trade-
off in operating frequency and sensitivity reduction.

The limitations of low h/ ratio for A0 and S0 modes were solved by using higher-order symmetric 

modes with quasi-longitudinal polarisation (QL-Sn). Anisimkin et al [4] reported QL-Sn modes in ST-cut 
quartz for a sensor in liquid media utilizing higher-order symmetry mode at h/ ratio of 1.485. Verona et 
al [5] reported the occurrence of QL-Sn modes in layered thin film ZnO/Si-substrate/ZnO up the 4th higher-
order symmetric modes (S4) with h/ ratio of 2.6 [5]. Further reduction in the wavelength and the device 
size is an advantage of using symmetric modes with a higher order number, however, the electromechanical 
coupling coefficient (K2) reduces as the order number increases. For two-port delay line device 
implementation, the reduction of K2 will affect the signal strength received in receiver IDT and reduces the 
signal to noise ratio. In this paper, we perform finite element method (FEM) simulation to compare the 


performances of the first 6 higher-order symmetric QL-LW on GaAs substrate and we verify 
experimentally the feasibility of using S5 and S6 modes for sensor application in liquid media.

II.
FINITE ELEMENT SIMULATION

The occurrence of higher-order QL-LW modes at (100)-cut GaAs plate propagating along the <110>

direction is previously reported for S1 and S2 modes at h/ ratio of 0.6 and 1.2, respectively [6], where the 
vph of higher-order symmetric modes (Sn) are close to the vph of longitudinal bulk acoustic wave (LBAW). 
Due to the periodicity on the dispersion curves for higher-order modes, the h/ ratio of quasi-longitudinal 
symmetric modes at order number n (QL-Sn) can be approximately obtained by multiplying the order 
number n with the factor of 0.6. Thus h/ ratio for the first 6 higher-order QL modes are 0.6, 1.2. 1.8, 2.4, 
3 and 3.6.

Fig. 1. Normalised total displacement profile of the first six higher-order quasi-longitudinal symmetric modes (QL-Sn) on (100)-
cut GaAs propagating on <110> direction.

Figure 1 shows the total displacement profile of the first 6 QL-Sn modes on GaAs plate obtained by 

COMSOL Multiphysics eigenfrequency simulation with the wavelength of 168 µm and the plate thickness 
of 100 µm, 200 µm, 300 µm, 400 µm, 500 µm and 600 µm for QL-S1, QL-S2, QL-S3, QL-S4, QL-S5 and 
QL-S6 modes respectively.  As shown in figure 1, the total particle displacement profiles at the surface for 
all six modes are dominantly longitudinal.

Fig. 2. K2 of the first six QL-Sn modes with S-IDT and M-S-IDT coupling configuration

In PAW with two free surfaces, the electrical boundary condition (BC) of the surfaces affects the value 

of K2. The electrically shorted BC is achieved by the deposition of a metal layer on the opposite side of the 
IDT. Metal-substrate-IDT (M-S-IDT) and substrate-IDT (S-IDT) are electrical coupling configurations


with and without additional metal layers respectively. The K2 of the first six QL-modes are shown in figure 
2 for two different coupling configurations. As shown in figure 2, the K2 decreases as the order number 
increases. The K2 of S6 mode, for instance, is one order lower than the K2 of S1 mode which will be equal 
to 10 dB reduction in the signal strength. Furthermore, the M-S-IDT configuration slightly improves the 
K2 to around two times higher than the K2 value of the S-IDT configuration.

Fig. 3. (a) Particle displacement component profile of S5 and S6 modes and (b) Normalised shear vertical (u3) displacement at 
the surface of the plate

Figure 3a shows the particle displacement components: longitudinal (u1) and shear vertical (u3) for S5

and S6 modes at h/ of 3 and 3.6 respectively. The shear-horizontal (u2) displacement component is zero 
across the plate. As shown in figure 3a, the longitudinal displacement component is dominant across the 
plate for both modes. At the surface of the plate, the u3 is around 20% of the maximum u1 inside the plate.   
Figure 3b shows the normalised u3 at the surface at h/ ratio of 2.8 to 3.2 for S5 mode and 3.3 to 3.9 for S6 
mode. As shown in figure 3b, the lowest u3 component is at h/ of 3.1 for S5 and 3.7 at S6 with normalised 
u3 of 6.5% and 5.6% respectively. At these ratios, the lowest insertion loss is expected when the surface of 
the plate is in contact with liquid.

Fig. 4.
(a) The insertion loss due to liquid damping for delay line with a centre to centre distance of 250 and at h/ ratio of 

2.8 to 3.2 for S5 mode and 3.3 to 3.9 for S6 mode and (b) Displacement profile of S5 and S6 modes with h/ ratio of 3.1 and 
3.7 respectively.

Figure 4a shows the insertion loss simulation result when one surface of the plate is in contact with DI 

water for h/ ratio of 2.8 to 3.2 for S5 mode and 3.3 to 3.9 for S6 mode. Figure 4b shows the 3D total 
displacement profile of the S5 and S6 modes when the plate is in contact with the liquid. As expected, the 
lowest insertion loss is achieved at h/ of 3.1 for S5 mode and at 3.7 for S6 mode. For delay line with the 


centre to centre distance between transmitter and receiver IDT of 250, the minimum theoretical insertion 
loss due to the liquid damping is 1.34 dB for S5 mode and 1.04 dB for S6 mode. Furthermore, there is a 
margin of +/- 0.1 in h/ ratio with relatively low insertion loss.

III.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Two-port delay line devices were fabricated on (100)-cut GaAs wafer with the thickness of 500 µm and 

625 µm and thickness variation of +/- 25 µm. For both wafers, the design of the IDTs is identical and the 
wavelength of the IDTs are 168 µm. Considering the thickness variation of the wafer, the h/ ratios are 
ranging from 2.82 to 3.12 for S5mode and 3.57 to 3.86 for S6 mode. The waves propagate at <110> direction 
parallel to the wafer flat. The IDTs have 50 pairs of source and ground with an aperture of 50. The delay 
length is 200, thus the centre-to-centre distance from the IDT receiver to the IDT transmitter is 250 or 
equal to 42 mm. The metal electrode of 100 nm Al with 10nm Cr adhesion layer was deposited by a lift-
off process. Gold metal layer was deposited at the back of the substrate to obtain the M-S-IDT coupling 
configuration. Furthermore, the metal layer at the sensing surface will neutralise the effect of liquid 
permittivity on the sensor responses. The GaAs wafers are attached to PCBs with a circular hole so that the 
delay line structures and the IDTs are suspended. 4194A Impedance/Gain-Phase Analyzer was used to 
obtain the frequency response and the power received in the IDT receiver normalised to the power sent 
from the IDT transmitter (S21 scattering parameter). 

The S21 frequency responses of the sensor devices with the thickness of 500 µm and 625 µm are shown 

in figure 5a and 5b respectively. As shown in figure 5a, there are three resonant frequency peaks for the 
frequency range from 30 MHz to 33 MHz which correspond to A5, S5 and S6 modes when the device is in 
a dry environment. However, when the surface of the plate is in contact with DI water, the reduction in 
S21 signals are significant for A5 and A6 modes while the reduction in the S5 mode is only around 1 dB. 
Similarly, in figure 5b, there are three resonant frequency peaks in dry environment but only the S6 mode 
peak is observable when the plate is in contact with DI water with around 1.4 dB reduction in the S21
signal. The S21 signals of around -50 dB in contact with DI water for both S5 and S6 modes are
distinguishable from the noise floor of -65 dB, thus showing the feasibility of those modes for sensor 
application in liquid media. 

Fig. 5. Experimental result of two-port delay line device utilizing (a) S5 mode and (b) S6 mode in dry and liquid media


Fig. 6. Experimental results of QL-S5 mode as viscosity sensor with different concentrations of DI water/glycerol mixture

LabVIEW data acquisition software was used to evaluate the fluctuation in frequency and S21 amplitude 

at the resonant frequency of the S5 mode device. DI water/glycerol mixtures with different glycerol 
concentrations were used to evaluate the change in the signals under different liquid viscosity and the result 
is shown in figure 6. As shown in figure 6, both S21 amplitudes and resonant frequencies reduce as the 
glycerol concentration increases. The results agree with the previously reported result of PAW viscosity 
sensors such as SH-APM [7]. The S21 amplitudes return to the baseline amplitude after the device is no 
longer in contact with liquid, however, the frequency is remaining in the lower value, especially after the 
DI water/glycerol mixture was in contact with the plate surface. One possible explanation is the trace of 
glycerol remains in the plate surface act as a mass loading which reduces the resonant frequency. Thus, the 
S21 amplitude is a more reliable signal than the frequency for viscosity sensor application. 

IV.
CONCLUSION

The feasibility of utilizing quasi-longitudinal modes at higher-order numbers (QL-S5 and QL-S6) for a 

sensor in liquid media is reported in this paper using (100)-cut GaAs substrate. The employment of modes 
with higher-order numbers allows the reduction of wavelength thus increases the resonant frequency 
without reducing the thickness of the plate and improves the robustness of the device. While the reduction 
in K2 is inevitable, the S21 amplitude at the resonant frequency is distinguishable from the noise floor. The 
improvement in K2 can be achieved by depositing highly piezoelectric thin film such as ZnO on GaAs [6] 
or by using plate substrate material with higher piezoelectricity constant. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

This conference proceeding is part of SmOoC project that has received funding from the European 

Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant 
agreement No. 844135. The work was partly supported by the French Renatech network and its FEMTO-
ST technological facility


REFERENCES

[1]
Caliendo, C., and Hamidullah, M.. "Guided acoustic wave sensors for liquid environments." Journal of Physics D: Applied 
Physics 52.15 (2019): 153001

[2]
Déjous, C., et al. "A shear-horizontal acoustic plate mode (SH-APM) sensor for biological media." Sensors and Actuators 
B: Chemical 27.1-3 (1995): 452-456.

[3]
Zhou, L., et al. "A multi-parameter decoupling method with a Lamb wave sensor for improving the selectivity of label-
free liquid detection." Sensors 12.8 (2012): 10369-10380.

[4]
Anisimkin, I. V. "A new type of acoustic modes of vibration of thin piezoelectric plates: Quasi-longitudinal normal modes." 
Acoustical Physics 50.4 (2004): 370-374. 

[5]
Verona, E., et al. "Quasi longitudinal Lamb acoustic modes along ZnO/Si/ZnO structures." Ultrasonics 76 (2017): 227-
233. 

[6]
Hamidullah, M., et al.. "Theoretical study and finite element simulation of ZnO/GaAs higher-order Lamb waves for 
microsensor application in liquid media." 2020 IEEE Sensors. IEEE, 2020.

[7]
Ricco, A. J., and  Martin S. J.. "Acoustic wave viscosity sensor." Applied Physics Letters 50.21 (1987): 1474-1476.


