Impact of excitation energy on hot carrier properties in InGaAs 

MQW structure 

Hamidreza Esmaielpour1, Laurent Lombez2, Maxime Giteau3, Jean-François Guillemoles1 4, and Daniel 

Suchet1 4 

1 CNRS-Institute Photovoltaïque d’Ile de France (IPVF), UMR IPVF 9006, 91120 Palaiseau, France.

2 Laboratoire de Physique et Chimie des Nano-objets (LPCNO-INSA), 31077 Toulouse, France.

3 Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology (RCAST), The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

4 CNRS-Ecole Polytechnique, UMR IPVF 9006, 91120 Palaiseau, France.

Abstract — Hot carrier solar cells aim to overcome the 

theoretical limit of single-junction photovoltaic devices by
suppressing the thermalization of hot carriers
and 

extracting them
through
energy selective contacts. 

Designing efficient hot carrier absorbers requires further 
investigation on hot
carrier properties in materials. 

Although the thermalization of hot carriers is responsible 
for a large portion of energy loss in solar cells, it is still one 
of the least understood phenomena in semiconductors. 
Here, the impact of excitation energy on the properties of 
photo-generated hot carriers in an InGaAs multi-quantum 
well (MQW) structure at various lattice temperatures and 
excitation powers is studied. Photoluminescence (PL)
emission of the sample is detected by a hyperspectral 
luminescence imager, which creates spectrally and spatially 
resolved PL maps. The thermodynamic properties of hot 
carriers, such as temperature and quasi-Fermi level 
splitting, are carefully determined via applying full PL
spectrum fitting, which solves the Fermi-Dirac integral and 
considers the band-filling effect in the nanostructured 
material. In addition, the impact of thermalized power 
density and carrier scattering with longitudinal optical 
phonons on the spectral linewidth broadening under two 
excitation energies is studied.

Keywords —
hot carriers, carrier temperature, full 

spectrum fit, band-filling, thermalization coefficient.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Designing hot carrier absorbers capable of inhibiting 

hot 
carrier 
relaxation 
through 
electron-phonon 

interactions is of significant importance in advanced 
photovoltaic devices. In conventional solar cells, a large 
portion of absorbed solar energy is dissipated via 
thermalization of photo-generated hot carriers.[1] By 
harnessing the excess kinetic energy of hot carriers and 
converting it to electricity, it is possible to improve the 
efficiency of single-junction solar cells to 67% under one 
sun illumination.[2] To realize the objectives of such high 
efficiency solar cells, known as hot carrier solar cells, it 
is first required to slow down the thermalization rate of 
hot carriers in the absorber, then to extract them quickly 
before their kinetic energy is dissipated in the form of
heat.[3]

Several experimental approaches have been proposed 

to reduce the thermalization rate of hot carriers, such as 

increasing 
the 
solar 
concentration,[3]
designing 

nanostructured materials,[4-6] light trapping techniques 
in thin absorbers,[7-8] phonon engineering,[9-11] and 
extracting hot carriers stored in upper satellite 
valleys.[12-13] While the evidence of non-equilibrium 
hot carrier distribution has been observed in such designs, 
there are still open questions regarding the relaxation 
mechanisms of these particles.

Research on the properties of hot carriers has been 

carried out using various characterization techniques, 
such as steady-state photoluminescence (PL), [14] time-
resolved photoluminescence, [15] transient absorption,
[16-17] and electrical spectroscopy, [18] which has 
enabled us to broaden our knowledge of these non-
equilibrium particles. However, the thermodynamic 
properties 
of 
hot 
carriers 
measured 
by 
these 

characterization methods, such as the temperature, are 
rarely compared to each other, mainly due to difference 
in experimental conditions.

Relaxation dynamics of hot carriers excited to different 

allowed energy levels in the band structure provides 
information about their relaxation mechanisms and their 
interactions with phonons. At a such condition, it is also 
possible to evaluate the performance of a hot carrier 
absorber in inhibiting the thermalization of hot carriers. 
In this work, discussions on the influence of excitation 
energy on the properties of photo-generated hot carriers 
at various lattice temperatures and excitation powers are 
provided. In addition, a new approach for fitting the full
PL and absorption spectra is presented, which reduces the 
degrees of freedom of the fitting parameters, leading to a
simplified analysis and more accurate results of the 
carrier temperature and the quasi-Fermi level splitting.

II.
DETERMINATION OF CARRIER TEMPERATURE

AND QUASI-FERMI LEVEL SPLITTING

The properties of photo-generated hot carriers in the 

InGaAs MQW structure are investigated using a 
hyperspectral luminescence imager
under various 

continuous wave excitation wavelengths and lattice 


temperatures. By applying various calibration methods, 
the absolute photon flux emitted by the sample is 
determined. [19]

The un-doped MQW structure is grown by molecular 

beam epitaxy (MBE) and consists of five In0.53Ga0.47As 
wells with 5.5 nm thick and In0.8Ga0.2As0.44P0.56 barriers 
(10 nm). The active region (the QWs and barriers) of the 
sample is isolated by un-doped InP cladding layers to 
improve the localization of photo-generated carriers 
within the QWs. The description of the growth parameters 
is discussed elsewhere. [20]

PL spectroscopy provides information about the optical 

and thermodynamic properties of emitting particles in the 
system. The emission spectrum can be modeled by the 
Planck’s law of radiation, which considers a quasi-
equilibrium condition, as described by: [21-23]

𝐼𝑃𝐿(𝐸) = 2𝜋 𝐴(𝐸) (𝐸)2

ℎ3𝑐2
[𝑒𝑥𝑝 (𝐸 − ∆𝜇

𝑘𝐵𝑇 ) − 1]

−1

,
(1)

where "𝐼𝑃𝐿" is the PL intensity, "𝐴(𝐸)" the energy-
dependent absorptivity, "ℎ" the Planck constant, "𝑘𝐵" the 
Boltzmann constant, "𝑐" the speed of light, "𝑇" the carrier 
temperature, and "∆𝜇" the quasi-Fermi level splitting. By 
fitting the full PL spectrum, the absorptivity of the sample 
and the hot carrier properties can be determined. This 
fitting method considers the band-filling effect in the 
absorptivity term, which is important especially at high
excitation powers. In addition, driven by solving the
Fermi-Dirac integral,[24] this fitting method can be 
applied to PL spectra with a wide range of ∆𝜇 (below and 
above the bandgap energy). Moreover, applying the full 
spectrum fit is important for nanostructured materials
whose absorption spectra have energy dependence above 
the bandgap.

Here, the fitting processor is as follows: first, the 

temperature of carriers is found from the high energy side 
of the PL spectrum. Next, the relative quasi-Fermi level 
splitting of the PL spectra under various excitation 
powers is found. This relationship imposes a constraint on 
the degrees of freedom of the fitting parameters. Finally, 
by applying the full spectrum fit, the absolute values of 
the quasi-Fermi level splitting and the absorptivity of 
each individual spectrum are determined considering the 
impact of the band-filling effect on the absorptivity of the 
MQW structure as a function of the excitation power.

It is possible to estimate the carrier temperature from a 

spectrally calibrated PL spectrum by applying a linear 
regression to its high energy side in the range of energies 
in which the absorptivity is constant. This analysis can be 
performed by taking the derivative of Equation 1 respect 
to the photon energy under the Boltzmann approximation 

(𝑒

𝐸−∆𝜇
𝑘𝐵𝑇 ≫ 1), which is:

𝑑

𝑑𝐸 [ln(𝐼𝑃𝐿(𝐸)) − 2 ln(𝐸)] =

𝑑

𝑑𝐸 [ln(𝐴(𝐸))] −

1

𝑘𝐵𝑇 . (2)

Therefore, by plotting the left side of Equation 2, it is 

possible to determine the carrier temperature from the 
energy ranges where the slope of the graph is zero, which 
is attributed to the constant absorptivity. In other words, 
the offset of the region with a zero slope value is inversely 
proportional to the temperature of carriers. The key 
advantage of this method is to determine the range of 
energies with constant absorptivity, required for the basic 
linear fitting method. In bulk semiconductors, the 
absorptivity is (almost) constant above the bandgap, 
however, for
quantum-well (QW) structures, the 

absorptivity has a step-like behavior, but it is still constant 
in the energy ranges between discrete energy levels. [20]

Figure 1. Derivative of the natural logarithm of the PL 
intensity emitted by InGaAs MQW at 300 K (minus 2𝐿𝑛(𝐸))
with respect to the photon energy for various excitation 
powers. The red dashed lines indicate the range of energies 
where the slope of the curvature is zero.

In Figure 1, the carrier temperature associated with each 

spectrum is determined in the range of energies with zero 
slope values, shown by red dashed lines. It is observed
that by increasing the excitation power, the range of 
energies in which the derivative of the curve becomes 
zero shifts to higher energy values, attributed to the band-
filling mechanism. Without considering this effect and 
applying the linear fit to the same range of energies of the 
PL spectra emitted under various excitation powers, the 
extracted carrier temperatures become overestimated. 
Therefore, by finding the range of energies with constant 
absorptivity, it is possible to determine the temperature of 
carriers by applying the linear fitting method. At higher 
energies, as seen in Figure 1, a deviation from a straight 
line in the derivative of the absorptivity is observed, 


which is attributed to the low signal-to-noise ratio at 
energy values far from the peak of the PL spectrum. The 
second derivative of Equation 1 with respect to energy is 
performed, as shown in supplementary Figure S1, which 
indicates a zero value in the range of energies with 
constant absorptivity, determined from Equation 2. This 
result confirms that the offset values in Figure 1 is 
attributed to the inverse of the carrier temperature.

Finding the temperature of carriers from the derivative 

method requires the PL spectrum possesses a region with 
a constant absorptivity. However, if the absorption 
spectrum does not show an energy-independent behavior 
above the bandgap, this method cannot be applied. This 
can be the case in a QW structure with multiple discrete 
energy levels with low energy separation or in a sample 
with optical resonances (Fabry–Pérot oscillations) in its
emission spectrum. To address such cases, a second 
method is proposed, which finds the carrier temperature 
directly from the absorption spectrum, as given by:

ln(𝐴(𝐸)) = ln(𝐼𝑃𝐿(𝐸)) − 2 ln(𝐸) + 𝐸

𝑘𝐵𝑇 − ∆𝜇

𝑘𝐵𝑇 + ln (ℎ3𝑐2

2𝜋 ).

(3)

In Equation 3, the term (

∆𝜇
𝑘𝐵𝑇) is constant at a given 

excitation power and it only changes the magnitude, but 
not the shape of the absorption spectrum. However, 

𝐸

𝑘𝐵𝑇

in Equation 3, which is inversely proportional with the 
carrier temperature determines the slope of the 
absorptivity spectrum, especially at the high energy side. 
Therefore, the shape of the absorption spectrum can be 
determined by knowing the temperature of the emitting 
particles.

In this method, as shown in Figure S2(a) in the 

supplementary, one starts by plotting the absorption 
spectrum associated with the lowest excitation power 
(black), whose carrier temperature is equal to the lattice. 
Then, the next absorption spectrum is superimposed on 
the first one having the same slope on the high energy side
by adjusting the temperature of carriers. The range of 
energies where the absorption spectra are to be 
superimposed is determined from Figure 1. Via this 
technique, it is possible to determine the carrier 
temperature associated with each individual spectrum. 
The legend of Figure S2(a) indicates the values found for 
each spectrum by applying this method. The comparison 
between the results determined by the two techniques is
shown in Figure S2(b), which indicates good agreement
between them.

The determination of the quasi-Fermi level splitting 

from the absolute calibrated PL spectrum, 𝐼𝑎(𝐸), can be 
performed by taking an integral from Equation 3, as 
described by:

∫ 𝐿𝑛(𝐼𝑎(𝐸))𝑑𝐸

𝐸"

𝐸′

= ∫
[2𝐿𝑛(𝐸) + 𝐿𝑛(𝐴𝑎(𝐸)) −
𝐸

𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑎

+ ∆𝜇𝑎

𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑎

+ 𝐿𝑛 (ℎ3𝑐2

2𝜋 )] 𝑑𝐸

𝐸"

𝐸′

,
(4)

where 𝐸′ and 𝐸" are the range of energies where the 
absorption spectrum is not influenced by the band-filling 
effect, as shown in Figure S3 in the supplementary.
Integration over a wide energy range improves the 
accuracy of the results by mitigating fluctuations in the 
spectrum. The energy interval can also be selected where 
the absorption spectrum shows energy-dependent
behavior. Thus, this method is not limited only for an 
absorption spectrum with a constant value above the 
bandgap. However, the absorptivity must be independent 
of the excitation power in the energy range of the interval. 

By integrating another spectrum, 𝐼𝑏(𝐸), on the same 

energy range, [𝐸′, 𝐸"], and by looking at the difference 
with , 𝐼𝑎(𝐸), the relation becomes:

∫ [𝐿𝑛(𝐼𝑎(𝐸)) − 𝐿𝑛(𝐼𝑏(𝐸))]𝑑𝐸

𝐸"

𝐸′

= − ∫
( 1
𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑎

−
1

𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑏

) 𝐸 𝑑𝐸 + ∫
( ∆𝜇𝑎
𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑎

− ∆𝜇𝑏

𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑏

) 𝑑𝐸

𝐸"

𝐸′

𝐸"

𝐸′
.
(5)

In Equation 5, the term due to the absorptivity is 

canceled, because the integral is taken from the range of 
energies with the same absorption values for both spectra, 
as shown in the highlighted region of the Figure S3(a) in 
the supplementary.

From Equation 5, ∆𝜇𝑏 can be found as a function of 

∆𝜇𝑎, which is:

∆𝜇𝑏 = 𝑇𝑏

𝑇𝑎

∆𝜇𝑎 +
𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑏

(𝐸" − 𝐸′) ([𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑔(𝐼𝑎(𝐸)) − 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑔(𝐼𝑏(𝐸))]𝐸′

𝐸" +

+

1

2 (

1

𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑏 −

1

𝑘𝐵𝑇𝑎) (𝐸" 2 − 𝐸′ 2)).
(6)

In Equation 6, "Intg(Ia(E))" represents the integrated 

PL intensity from 𝐸′ to 𝐸", which can be determined 
directly from the absolutely calibrated PL spectrum. 
Equation 6 indicates that to find the absolute value of 
∆𝜇𝑏, it is required to know the value for the reference 
spectrum (∆𝜇𝑎 = ∆𝜇𝑟𝑒𝑓). Although Equation 6 does not 
directly determine the absolute value of ∆𝜇 for each 
individual PL spectrum, it reduces the degrees of freedom 
of the fitting variables by imposing a constraint, which
will then lead to finding the absolute values of the 
absorptivity and ∆𝜇.

By applying Equation 6, it is possible to plot the relative 

absorptivity of multiple absorption spectra, as shown in 
Figure S4(a). Although the absolute value of the 
absorptivity has not yet been determined (it depends on
∆𝜇 based on the generalized Planck’s law), the relative 


separation of the absorption spectra remains the same. To 
determine the absolute values of A(E), a full spectral fit is 
applied considering various optical transitions in the 
MQW structure, as given by: [25-26]

𝐴(𝐸) = [1 − 𝑅(𝐸)] ∙ (1 − 𝑒𝑥𝑝[−(𝛼𝑤𝑑𝑤 + 𝛼𝑏𝑑𝑏)]).
(7)

where "𝑅" is reflectivity, "𝛼" the absorption coefficient, 
an "𝑑" the absorber thickness. The indices "𝑤" and "𝑏"
refer to the QW and the barrier, respectively. The 
absorption coefficient "𝛼𝑤0" of the potential well is 
determined by:[6, 23]

𝛼𝑤0(𝐸) = 𝑎𝑥 ∙ exp [−

(𝐸−𝐸𝑥)2

2Γ𝑥2
] +
(8)

+ ∑ 𝑎𝑖

𝑛

𝑖=1

∙
1

1 + exp (− 𝐸 − 𝐸𝑖

Γ𝑖
)

∙
2

1 + exp (−2𝜋√
𝑅𝑦

|𝐸 − 𝐸𝑖|)

,

and the absorption coefficient "𝛼𝑏0" of the barrier:

𝛼𝑏0(𝐸) = 𝑎𝑏 ∙

1

1+exp(−

𝐸−𝐸𝑏

Γ𝑏 ) .
(9)

where "𝑎" is the amplitude, "𝐸" the energy of the optical 
transition, "Γ" the spectral linewidth broadening, and
"𝑅𝑦" the effective Rydberg energy of the material. The 
first term in Equation 8 is attributed to the excitonic
transition and it has a large contribution at zero 
wavenumber (k = 0).[25] The second term in Equation 8
is due to band-to-band transitions from multiple discrete 
energy levels (𝑖 = 1, … , 𝑛) in the MQW structure.

The band-filling effect in the QW structure is described 

by: [6, 27]
𝛼
𝛼0

= 𝑓𝑣

𝑒 − 𝑓𝑐

𝑒

=

sinh (𝐸 − ∆𝜇

2𝑘𝐵𝑇 )

cosh (𝐸 − ∆𝜇

2𝑘𝐵𝑇 ) + cosh [𝑚ℎ − 𝑚𝑒

𝑚ℎ + 𝑚𝑒 ∙ 𝐸 − 𝐸𝑔

2𝑘𝐵𝑇 − 1

2 ln (𝑚ℎ

𝑚𝑒)]

.

(10)

where "𝑓𝑣𝑒" and "𝑓𝑐𝑒" are respectively the electronic 
distributions in the valence and the conduction bands. 
"𝑚ℎ" and "𝑚𝑒" are the effective mass of holes and 
electrons, respectively. Due to the band-filling effect, by 
increasing the excitation power, the number of states 
available in the conduction and valence bands decreases, 
resulting in a drop in absorptivity.[27] Therefore, the 
absorptivity of the sample becomes dependent on the
thermodynamic properties (T and ∆𝜇) of the emitting 
particles, as indicated in Equation 10 through the band-
filling effect.

The absorptivity of the MQW structure under various 

excitation powers is plotted in Figure S4(a) in the 

supplementary. The absorption spectra indicate a step-
like behavior, especially at low excitation powers,
attributed to the 2D density-of-states (DOS) of the MQW
with two dominant discrete energy levels (E1 = 0.79 eV
and E2 = 0.83 eV). Figure S4(a) shows that by increasing 
the excitation power, the absorptivity of the sample 
reduces (it becomes more transparent) at energy values 
close to the discrete energy levels. At very low excitation 
powers, an excitonic transition is observed at energy 
values close to the ground state transition, E1, but not at 
the first excited state ( E2 ). Therefore, the drop in
absorptivity at low photon energies, near E1 is attributed 
to the combination of exciton dissociation and the band-
filling effect. However, at energy values close to the first 
excited state, E2, the drop in the absorption spectrum is 
attributed to the band-filling effect. Thus, by modeling the 
relative separation of the absorption spectra due to the 
band-filling effect, it is possible to estimate ∆𝜇𝑟𝑒𝑓
responsible for such a separation. 

Figure 2. (a) Excitation power-dependent PL and (b) 
absorption spectra of the InGaAs MQW structure at 300 K. 
The solid and the dashed lines are respectively the 
experimental and the fitting results.


Figure S4 (b-d) indicates the simulation results for 

various ∆𝜇𝑟𝑒𝑓 for the full fitting method. It is seen that 
only ∆𝜇𝑟𝑒𝑓 = 0.54 𝑒𝑉, as shown in Figure S4(c), shows
the best fitting results for the absorptivity of the MQW 
structure. Therefore, by finding ∆𝜇𝑟𝑒𝑓, it is possible to 
determine the absolute values of the absorptivity and ∆𝜇
for all other spectra. Figure 2 shows the results of the full 
spectrum fit for (a) the PL spectra, and (b) the absorption 
spectra under various excitation powers at 300 K. A good 
agreement between the experimental and the simulation 
results is observed in both panels. 

At very high excitation powers, when the quasi-Fermi 

level splitting is of the order of the bandgap or even larger 
( ∆𝜇 ≥ 𝐸𝑔 ), it is still possible to apply this method. 
However, first it is required to find the absorptivity of the 
sample at lower excitation powers, then, at higher powers 
the value of ∆𝜇 can be determined by considering the 
band-filling effect and by solving the Fermi-Dirac 
integral in generalized Planck’s law. 

III.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

The results of the carrier temperature difference (∆𝑇: 

the difference between the carrier and the lattice 
temperatures) as a function of the absorbed power 
density, "𝑃𝐴𝑏𝑠", at two lattice temperatures (300 K: green
triangles and 230 K: red dots) and two excitation 
wavelengths (980 nm: solid symbols and 405 nm: open
symbols) are plotted in Figure 3(a). The absorbed power 
density at each excitation wavelength is determined by 
the transfer matrix method.[28-29] The refractive indices 
of bulk semiconductors are applied for the analysis. The 
size of the laser spot is determined from its hyperspectral 
image at the full width at half maximum (FWHM)
intensity.

Figure 3(a) shows that at 300 K upon increasing the 

absorbed power density, the hot carrier effect becomes 
stronger; 
i.e. ∆𝑇
increases, 
for 
both excitation 

wavelengths. However, the results indicate that the rise in
∆𝑇 under the higher excitation energy (405 nm) is larger 
than that of the lower energy photons (980 nm). A similar 
dependence of
the excitation wavelength for the 

temperature of hot carriers at a given absorbed power 
density is observed at the lower lattice temperature (230 
K), see Figure 3(a). Therefore, it is noted that the photo-
generated hot carriers behave differently at a given 
absorbed power density under various excitation 
wavelengths. 

To assess the performance of the sample in inhibiting

the thermalization of hot carriers, it is required to
consider the fraction of the absorbed power density above 
the band edge, i.e. the intra-band thermalized power 
density, "𝑃𝑡ℎ" , which is given by:[30]

𝑃𝑡ℎ ≈ 𝐸𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟 − 𝐸𝑔𝑎𝑝

𝐸𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟

𝑃𝑎𝑏𝑠,
(11)

where "𝐸𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟" and "𝐸𝑔𝑎𝑝" are the laser and the bandgap 
energies, respectively.

Figure 3. ∆𝑇 versus (a) the absorbed power density, and (b) 
the thermalized power density, at two lattice temperatures 
(230 K: red dots and 300 K: green triangles) and two 
excitation wavelengths (980 nm: solid symbols and 405 nm: 
open symbols). The black dashed lines show the gradient of 
the curve at two lattice temperatures.

Figure 3(b) shows the results of ∆𝑇 versus the 

thermalized power density applied for the same data set
in panel (a). It is seen that by considering the thermalized 
power density, the dependence of ∆𝑇 on the excitation 
wavelength at 300 K is removed and the temperature of 
photo-generated hot carriers increases with the same rate
under both excitation wavelengths. Similar behavior has 


also been observed in thin film GaAs absorbers of various 
thickness under two different excitation wavelengths.
[30] In addition, it is seen that at the lower lattice 
temperature (230 K), the temperature dependence of the 
hot carriers with respect to the thermalized power density 
remains the same under two excitation wavelengths. The 
slope of the graph in Figure 3(b) is inversely proportional 
to the thermalization coefficient (Q) of the MQW 
structure, as described by:[30-31]

𝑃𝑡ℎ = 𝑄 ∙ ∆𝑇 exp [− ℏ𝜔𝐿𝑂

𝑘𝐵𝑇 ] ,
(12)

where "ℏ𝜔𝐿𝑂"is the longitudinal optical (LO) phonon 
energy of the QW structure. This empirical coefficient 
estimates the strength of the thermalization rate of hot 
carriers through phonon-mediated relaxation pathways in 
the system. In Equation 12, the exponential term, which 
is related to the population of LO-phonons (from the 
Bose-Einstein distribution), is considered due to 
relatively large ∆𝑇 at the two lattice temperatures. The 
thermalization coefficients of the MQW structure at 300 
K 
and 
230 K 
are
about 35 W K−1cm−2
and 

65 W K−1cm−2, respectively. 

The quasi-Fermi level splitting versus the thermalized 

power density is plotted for various lattice temperatures
and excitation wavelengths in Figure 4(a). The two 
dashed horizontal lines indicate the position of the 
effective bandgap energies at 230 K (red) and 300 K 
(green). By increasing the lattice temperature, the 
effective bandgap of the MQW structure shifts to lower 
energy values due to the expansion of the crystal 
structure.[32] As shown in Figure 4(a), ∆𝜇 increases with 
the thermalized power density attributed to the increase in 
the density of photo-generated carriers at higher 
excitation powers. In addition, it is seen that by 
decreasing the lattice temperature, ∆𝜇 at a given 
thermalized power density becomes larger. This effect is 
attributed to the lower rate of non-radiative recombination 
and the reciprocal relationship between the carrier
temperature and ∆𝜇 in the density of carriers under non-
equilibrium conditions.[33-34]

Figure 4(a) also indicates that the rate of change of ∆𝜇

decreases at high thermalized power densities. To assess 
the origin of this effect, the relationship between the 
absorbed power density and the intensity of PL emission
is studied, which allows to identify the type of dominant 
recombination mechanism in the system. [35] The results 
of the natural logarithm of the absorbed power density at 
the 405 nm excitation wavelength versus the natural 
logarithm of the integrated PL intensity at 300K and 230 
K are plotted in Figure 4(b). Due to the similar behavior 
observed for the two excitation wavelengths, only the 
results of the 405 nm laser are plotted here. The 

relationship between the absorbed power density and the 
integrated PL intensity is described by: [35-36]

𝑃𝐴𝑏𝑠. = 𝐴 𝐼𝑃𝐿

1 2
⁄ + 𝐵 𝐼𝑃𝐿 + 𝐶 𝐼𝑃𝐿

3 2
⁄ ,
(13)

where "𝐴", "𝐵", and "𝐶" are the coefficients attributed to 
Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH), radiative, and Auger 
recombination mechanisms, respectively. According to
Equation 13, if the change of the absorbed power density
with respect to the integrated PL intensity follows a power
of " 1 2
⁄ ", the dominant recombination mechanism is due 

to SRH, if it follows a power of "1", radiative, and " 3 2
⁄ ", 

Auger recombination mechanism. The slopes of the linear 
fitting of ln(𝑃𝐴𝑏𝑠.) versus ln(𝐼𝑃𝐿) are shown in the 
legends of Figure 4(b). The results indicate that at lower 
absorbed power densities, the dominant transition in the 
system is due to the radiative recombination (slopes are 
close to 1), and as the absorbed power density increases, 
the Auger recombination becomes more dominant (slopes 
become close to 3 2
⁄ ). The strong contribution of Auger 

recombination, observed at the two lattice temperatures,
explains the origin of the plateaus for ∆𝜇 at high
thermalized power densities. In addition, the greater
separation between the maximum ∆𝜇 and the bandgap 
energy, see the dashed lines in Figure 4(a), at the elevated 
lattice temperature is attributed to the combination of
Auger heating and the greater hot carrier temperature at 
300 K. 

The dynamics of hot carriers is also reflected in the 

spectral linewidth broadening of their optical transitions
in the system. The origin of linewidth broadening of a PL 
spectrum can be associated with the scattering of carriers 
with longitudinal optical
(LO)
phonons, acoustic 

phonons, ionized impurities,
excitons,
and charge 

screening effects.[37-39] At elevated lattice temperatures, 
the scattering of carriers with optical phonons in polar 
semiconductors (like group III-V) via the Fröhlich 
interaction is dominant.[37] At higher thermalized power 
densities, the population of non-equilibrium LO-phonons
(or hot phonons) increases, which enhances the rate of 
carrier scattering with LO-phonons.[40] This effect can 
increase 
the 
linewidth 
broadening 
of 
hot 

photoluminescence spectrum at high thermalized power
densities. 

Figure 5 shows the change in the linewidth broadening 

at 300 K as a function of the thermalized power density 
under two excitation wavelengths. The figure shows the 
results of each individual optical transition in the MQW 
structure determined from the full spectral fit. Figure 5 
indicates that by increasing the thermalized power 
density, the linewidth broadening of the excitonic 
transition (Γ𝑥 : blue squares) increases. This effect is 


attributed to the power-dependent excitonic dissociation, 
which is consistent with the drop of the amplitude of this 
transition at high thermalized power densities, see Figure 
S7(b)
in 
the 
supplementary.[39]
The 
linewidth 

broadening for the first band-to-band transition ( Γ1 : 
orange dots) shows a strong power-dependent behavior, 

unlike that of the second band-to-band transition (Γ2: 
magenta triangles), which does not indicate a significant 
change as a function of power.

To study the impact of carrier scattering by LO-

phonons on the PL spectrum, the linewidth broadening of 
the first band-to-band transition emitted by photo-
generated carriers at thermal equilibrium with the lattice
(𝑇𝐶 = 𝑇𝐿) is determined. This low excitation power data 
is determined from PL spectra emitted by carriers far from 
the laser spot, which are detected by the hyperspectral 
luminescence imager. The indication of emission by 
thermalized carriers is shown in Figure S8; it is seen that 
at large distances from the laser spot in the hyperspectral 
image (greater
than
the diffusion length of
hot 

carriers[41]), the shape of the PL spectra does not change
at various distances, which indicates that the temperature 
of emitting particles remains constant in this region.[20]
The broken x-axis at low powers in Figure 5 is attributed 
to a different relationship between the thermalized power
density of the PL spectra emitted from regions far from 
the concentrated light with those at the center of the laser 
spot.

Figure 5. Spectral linewidth broadening at 300 K versus the 
thermalized power density for various optical transitions in 
the MQW structure: "Γ𝑥", excitonic (blue squares), "Γ1",1st

band-to-band (orange dots), and "Γ2" , 2nd band-to-band 
(magenta triangles) transitions. The solid and open symbols 
are due to 980 nm and 405 nm excitation wavelengths, 
respectively. The spectral linewidth broadening attributed to 
the emission by carriers at thermal equilibrium with the 
lattice located at distances far from the laser spot is shown at 
low power region. A broken x-axis is applied to this low 
power data to indicate its different power relationship 
between the carriers emitted far from the laser spot and those
at its center. 

Figure 4.  (a) ∆𝜇 of the photo-generated hot carriers as a 
function of the thermalized power density at various lattice 
temperatures (230 K: red dots and 300 K: green triangles) 
and excitation wavelengths (980 nm: solid symbols and 405 
nm: open symbols). The dashed lines indicate the position of 
the 
effective 
bandgap 
energies 
at 
various 
lattice 

temperatures. (b) Natural logarithm of the absorbed power 
density versus the natural logarithm of the integrated PL 
intensity at 230 K (red) and 300 K (green) for the 405 nm 
excitation wavelength. The legends indicate the values of the 
slopes in the regions under low and high excitation powers. 


The relationship
between the spectral linewidth 

broadening and the population of LO-phonons at elevated 
lattice temperatures is described as: [37]

ΓHigh temperature(T) ≈ γLO ∙ NLO(𝑇) =
γLO

[exp (ℏωLO

kBT ) − 1]

, (14)

where "γLO" is the Fröhlich coupling constant and "NLO"
LO-phonon population. At the thermal equilibrium 
condition, the temperature of LO-phonons is equal to the 
lattice ( 𝑇𝐿𝑂 = 𝑇𝐿 ), therefore, the Fröhlich coupling 
constant under both excitation energies becomes
~ 9.5 𝑚𝑒𝑉, which is in good agreement with the values 
reported for InGaAs MQW structures.[42] At higher 
thermalized power densities, where the effect of non-
equilibrium hot carriers becomes evident, applying 
Equation 14 to find the spectral linewidth broadening will 
lead to values lower than the experimental results, see 
Figure S9 in the supplementary. This effect indicates that 
the determination of the spectral linewidth broadening
under non-equilibrium conditions requires carrying out
theoretical studies considering hot carrier scattering with 
hot phonons and charge screening effects, as seen by the 
wavelength-dependent 
behavior 
of 
the 
linewidth 

broadening.[43]
Such
a theoretical study provides 

insightful information on hot carrier dynamics in this 
MQW structure.

IV.
CONCLUSION

In conclusion, the effects of excitation wavelength on 

the properties of hot carriers in InGaAs MQW structure 
are studied. First, a developed model for the full PL 
spectrum fit is proposed, which facilitates the analysis and 
improves the accuracy of the fitting results. In this 
approach, it is discussed how to determine the unique 
values for the carrier temperature, the quasi-Fermi level 
splitting, and the absorptivity of the MQW structure from 
the PL spectrum by reducing the degrees of freedom of 
the fitting parameters.

The experimental results indicate that considering the 

absorbed power density, an excitation wavelength-
dependent behavior is observed for ∆T. However, the
change of ∆T as a function of the thermalized power 
density is the same under both excitation wavelengths
(405 nm and 980 nm), for different lattice temperatures. 
The results of ∆𝜇 as a function of the thermalized power 
density indicate that under low excitation powers, where 
the dominant recombination mechanism is attributed to 
radiative recombination, the gradient of ∆𝜇 is larger than 
when the Auger mechanism is dominant at high excitation 
powers. Finally, the impact of the thermalized power 
density on the spectral linewidth broadening is studied

and the Fröhlich coupling constant of the MQW structure
is determined.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The research is carried out within the framework of 

program 6: PROOF (ANR-IEED-002-02) at IPVF. The 
authors would like to acknowledge the financial support 
of the French ANR project ICEMAN (No. ANR-19-
CE05-0019). The author also would like to thank the 
Foton INSA Laboratory in Rennes, France, for providing 
the MQW structure.

REFERENCES

[1] Green, Martin A. "Third generation photovoltaics." 

(2006).

[2] Ross, Robert T., and Arthur J. Nozik. "Efficiency of 

hot‐carrier solar energy converters." Journal of 
Applied Physics 53, no. 5 (1982): 3813-3818.

[3] Conibeer, Gavin, Santosh Shrestha, Shujuan Huang, 

Robert Patterson, Hongze Xia, Yu Feng, Pengfei 
Zhang et al. "Hot carrier solar cell absorber 
prerequisites and candidate material systems." Solar 
Energy Materials and Solar Cells 135 (2015): 124-
129.

[4] Rosenwaks, Y., M. C. Hanna, D. H. Levi, D. M. 

Szmyd, R. K. Ahrenkiel, and A. J. Nozik. "Hot-
carrier cooling in GaAs: Quantum wells versus bulk." 
Physical Review B 48, no. 19 (1993): 14675.

[5] Hirst, Louise C., Hiromasa Fujii, Yunpeng Wang, 

Masakazu Sugiyama, and Nicholas J. Ekins-Daukes. 
"Hot carriers in quantum wells for photovoltaic 
efficiency 
enhancement." 
IEEE 
Journal 
of 

Photovoltaics 4, no. 1 (2013): 244-252.

[6] Nguyen, Dac-Trung, Laurent Lombez, François 

Gibelli, Soline Boyer-Richard, Alain Le Corre, 
Olivier Durand, and Jean-Francois Guillemoles. 
"Quantitative experimental assessment of hot carrier-
enhanced solar cells at room temperature." Nature 
Energy 3, no. 3 (2018): 236-242.

[7] Le Bris, Arthur, Jean Rodiere, Clément Colin, 

Stéphane Collin, Jean-Luc Pelouard, Ruben Esteban, 
Marine Laroche, Jean-Jacques Greffet, and Jean-
François Guillemoles. "Hot carrier solar cells: 
Controlling thermalization in ultrathin devices." 
IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics 2, no. 4 (2012): 506-
511.

[8] Giteau, Maxime, Daniel Suchet, Stéphane Collin, 

Jean-François Guillemoles, and Yoshitaka Okada. 
"Detailed balance calculations for hot-carrier solar 
cells: 
coupling 
high 
absorptivity 
with 
low 


thermalization 
through
light 
trapping." 
EPJ 

Photovoltaics 10 (2019): 1.

[9] König, D., Y. Yao, B. Puthen-Veettil, and S. C. 

Smith. "Non-equilibrium dynamics, materials and 
structures for hot carrier solar cells: a detailed 
review." Semiconductor Science and Technology 35, 
no. 7 (2020): 073002.

[10]
Levard, Hugo. Ingénierie phononique pour les 

cellules solaires à porteurs chauds. Diss. Université 
Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris VI, 2015, available at 
https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-01123624.

[11]
Esmaielpour, Hamidreza, Brandon K. Durant, 

Kyle R. Dorman, Vincent R. Whiteside, Jivtesh Garg, 
Tetsuya D. Mishima, Michael B. Santos, Ian R. 
Sellers, Jean-François Guillemoles, and Daniel 
Suchet. "Hot carrier relaxation and inhibited 
thermalization in superlattice heterostructures: The 
potential for phonon management." Applied Physics 
Letters 118, no. 21 (2021): 213902.

[12]
Ferry, D. K. "In search of a true hot carrier solar 

cell." Semiconductor Science and Technology 34, no. 
4 (2019): 044001.

[13]
Esmaielpour, Hamidreza, Kyle R. Dorman, 

David K. Ferry, Tetsuya D. Mishima, Michael B. 
Santos, Vincent R. Whiteside, and Ian R. Sellers. 
"Exploiting intervalley scattering to harness hot 
carriers in III–V solar cells." Nature Energy 5, no. 4 
(2020): 336-343.

[14]
Lyon, S. A. "Spectroscopy of hot carriers in 

semiconductors." Journal of luminescence 35, no. 3 
(1986): 121-154.

[15]
Shah, Jagdeep. "Hot carriers in quasi-2-D polar 

semiconductors." 
IEEE 
journal 
of 
quantum 

electronics 22, no. 9 (1986): 1728-1743.

[16]
Yang, Ye, David P. Ostrowski, Ryan M. France, 

Kai Zhu, Jao Van De Lagemaat, Joseph M. Luther, 
and Matthew C. Beard. "Observation of a hot-phonon 
bottleneck in lead-iodide perovskites." Nature 
Photonics 10, no. 1 (2016): 53-59.

[17]
Lim, Jia Wei Melvin, David Giovanni, Marcello 

Righetto, Minjun Feng, Subodh Gautam Mhaisalkar, 
Nripan Mathews, and Tze Chien Sum. "Hot carriers 
in halide perovskites: How hot truly?." The journal of 
physical chemistry letters 11, no. 7 (2020): 2743-
2750.

[18]
Sierra, Juan F., Ingmar Neumann, Marius V. 

Costache, and Sergio O. Valenzuela. "Hot-carrier 
Seebeck effect: diffusion and remote detection of hot 
carriers in graphene." Nano letters 15, no. 6 (2015): 
4000-4005.

[19]
Delamarre, Amaury, Laurent Lombez, and Jean-

François Guillemoles. "Characterization of solar cells 
using electroluminescence and photoluminescence 
hyperspectral images." Journal of Photonics for 
Energy 2, no. 1 (2012): 027004.

[20]
Esmaielpour, Hamidreza, Laurent Lombez, 

Maxime Giteau, Amaury Delamarre, Daniel Ory, 
Andrea Cattoni, Stéphane Collin, Jean-François 
Guillemoles, and Daniel Suchet. "Investigation of the 
spatial distribution of hot carriers in quantum-well 
structures via hyperspectral luminescence imaging." 
Journal of Applied Physics 128, no. 16 (2020): 
165704.

[21]
Wurfel, Peter. "The chemical potential of 

radiation." Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 
15, no. 18 (1982): 3967.

[22]
Lasher, Gordon, and Frank Stern. "Spontaneous 

and 
stimulated 
recombination 
radiation 
in 

semiconductors." Physical Review 133, no. 2A 
(1964): A553.

[23]
Gibelli, François, Laurent Lombez, and Jean-

Francois Guillemoles. "Two carrier temperatures 
non-equilibrium 
generalized 
Planck 
law 
for 

semiconductors." Physica B: Condensed Matter 498
(2016): 7-14.

[24]
Blakemore, J. S. "Approximations for Fermi-

Dirac integrals, especially the function F12 (η) used 
to describe electron density in a semiconductor." 
Solid-State Electronics 25, no. 11 (1982): 1067-1076.

[25]
Chemla, D. S., D. Miller, P. Smith, A. Gossard, 

and 
William 
Wiegmann. 
"Room 
temperature 

excitonic nonlinear absorption and refraction in 
GaAs/AlGaAs multiple quantum well structures." 
IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 20, no. 3 
(1984): 265-275.

[26]
Colocci, M., M. Gurioli, and A. Vinattieri. 

"Thermal ionization of excitons in GaAs/AlGaAs 
quantum well structures." Journal of applied physics 
68, no. 6 (1990): 2809-2812.

[27]
Zitter, Robert N. "Saturated optical absorption 

through band filling in semiconductors." Applied 
Physics Letters 14, no. 2 (1969): 73-74.

[28]
Pettersson, Leif AA, Lucimara S. Roman, and 

Olle Inganäs. "Modeling photocurrent action spectra 
of photovoltaic devices based on organic thin films." 
Journal of Applied Physics 86, no. 1 (1999): 487-496.

[29]
Peumans, Peter, Aharon Yakimov, and Stephen 

R. Forrest. "Small molecular weight organic thin-film 
photodetectors and solar cells." Journal of Applied 
Physics 93, no. 7 (2003): 3693-3723.


[30]
Giteau, Maxime, Edouard de Moustier, Daniel 

Suchet, 
Hamidreza
Esmaielpour, 
Hassanet 

Sodabanlu, Kentaroh Watanabe, Stéphane Collin, 
Jean-François Guillemoles, and Yoshitaka Okada. 
"Identification of surface and volume hot-carrier 
thermalization mechanisms in ultrathin GaAs layers." 
Journal of Applied Physics 128, no. 19 (2020): 
193102.

[31]
Le Bris, A., L. Lombez, S. Laribi, G. Boissier, 

Philippe 
Christol, 
and 
J-F. 
Guillemoles. 

"Thermalisation 
rate 
study 
of 
GaSb-based 

heterostructures 
by 
continuous 
wave 

photoluminescence and their potential as hot carrier 
solar cell absorbers." Energy & Environmental 
Science 5, no. 3 (2012): 6225-6232.

[32]
Varshni, Yatendra Pal. "Temperature dependence 

of the energy gap in semiconductors." physica 34, no. 
1 (1967): 149-154.

[33]
Würfel, Peter, and Uli Würfel. Physics of solar 

cells: from basic principles to advanced concepts. 
John Wiley & Sons, 2016.

[34]
Kluftinger, Benjamin, Keith Barnham, Jenny 

Nelson, Tom Foxon, and Tin Cheng. "Temperature-
dependent study of the quasi-Fermi level separation 
in 
double 
quantum 
well 
PIN 
structures." 

Microelectronic Engineering 51 (2000): 265-274.

[35]
Yoo, Yang-Seok, Tae-Moo Roh, Jong-Ho Na, 

Sung Jin Son, and Yong-Hoon Cho. "Simple analysis 
method for determining internal quantum efficiency 
and relative recombination ratios in light emitting 
diodes." Applied Physics Letters 102, no. 21 (2013): 
211107.

[36]
Ahrenkiel, R. K. "Measurement of minority-

carrier 
lifetime 
by 
time-resolved 

photoluminescence." Solid-State Electronics 35, no. 
3 (1992): 239-250.

[37]
Lee, Johnson, Emil S. Koteles, and M. O. Vassell. 

"Luminescence linewidths of excitons in GaAs 
quantum wells below 150 K." Physical Review B 33, 
no. 8 (1986): 5512.

[38]
Feldmann, J., G. Peter, E. O. Göbel, P. Dawson, 

K. Moore, C. Foxon, and R. J. Elliott. "Linewidth 
dependence of radiative exciton lifetimes in quantum 
wells." Physical review letters 59, no. 20 (1987): 
2337.

[39]
Gay, 
J. 
G. 
"Screening 
of 
excitons 
in 

semiconductors." Physical Review B 4, no. 8 (1971): 
2567.

[40]
Shah, Jagdeep. Hot carriers in semiconductor 

nanostructures: Physics and applications. Elsevier, 
2012.

[41]
Yuan, Pengyu, Jing Liu, Ridong Wang, and 

Xinwei Wang. "The hot carrier diffusion coefficient 
of sub-10 nm virgin MoS 2: uncovered by non-
contact optical probing." Nanoscale 9, no. 20 (2017): 
6808-6820.

[42]
Shen, W. Z. "Study of exciton–longitudinal 

optical phonon coupling in quantum wells for 
optoelectronic applications." Applied Physics Letters 
79, no. 9 (2001): 1285-1287.

[43]
Giustino, Feliciano, Marvin L. Cohen, and 

Steven G. Louie. "Electron-phonon interaction using 
Wannier functions." Physical Review B 76, no. 16 
(2007): 165108.


Supplementary Information

Impact of excitation energy on hot carrier properties in 

InGaAs MQW structure

Hamidreza Esmaielpour1, Laurent Lombez1 2, Maxime Giteau3, Jean-François Guillemoles1 4, and 

Daniel Suchet1 4

1 CNRS-Institute Photovoltaïque d’Ile de France (IPVF), UMR IPVF 9006, 91120 Palaiseau, France.

2 Laboratoire de Physique et Chimie des Nano-objets (LPCNO-INSA), 31077 Toulouse, France.

3 Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology (RCAST), The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8904, 

Japan.

4 CNRS-Ecole Polytechnique, UMR IPVF 9006, 91120 Palaiseau, France.


Supplementary Figure S1: Second derivative of ln (

𝐼𝑃𝐿
𝐸2 ) versus the photon energy at 300 K and under various 

excitation powers. The figure confirms that at photon energies above (E > 0.85 eV), the absorption spectrum is 
independent of photon energy (or constant absorptivity) and excitation power (no band-filling), which are consistent 
with the results observed in the 1st derivative, as discussed in the manuscript. 

𝑑2

𝑑𝐸2 [𝐿𝑛(𝐼𝑃𝐿(𝐸)) − 2 𝐿𝑛(𝐸)] = 𝑑2

𝑑𝐸2 [𝐿𝑛(𝐴(𝐸))] .


Supplementary Figure S2: (a) Absorption spectra of the MQW structure under low excitation power densities at 
room temperature. The black line shows the absorption spectrum of the sample at a condition, where emitting 
particles are at thermal equilibrium with the lattice (𝑇𝐶 = 𝑇𝐿). In Figure S8 of the supplementary it is discussed how 
to record the emission of carriers with a temperature equal to the temperature of the lattice. The temperature of 
carriers excited by higher power densities is determined by superimposing their absorption spectra on that of the
lowest excitation power (black) in the range of energies in which no band-filling effect is present. This method can 
also be applied even if the slope of the absorption spectrum at the high energy side is not zero; in other words, the
absorptivity can be energy-dependent. (b) The comparison between the carrier temperatures determined from the 
derivative method and the absorption spectra. A good agreement between the results of the two methods is observed. 
The x-axis shows a discontinuity because the first few temperatures under low excitation powers are found from the 
PL spectra emitted at positions far from the laser spot in the hyperspectral images.


Supplementary Figure S3: Excitation power-dependent (a) absorption and (b) PL spectra at 300 K of the MQW 
structure. The shaded area indicates the range of energies with constant absorptivity where the analysis for the 
determination of the Quasi-Fermi level splitting is applied.


Supplementary Figure S4: (a) Excitation power-dependent absorption spectra of the MQW structure at 300 K. 
The y-axis in panel (a) has an arbitrary unit; to find the absorptivity of the sample from the generalized Planck law, 
it is required to determine the absolute value of ∆𝜇 of each individual spectrum. At low photon energies (E <
0.82 eV), the relative change in the absorption spectra at various excitation powers is due to the combination of the 
exciton dissociation and the band-filling effect. However, at the energy ranges around the second band-to-band 
transition (0.83 eV < E < 0.88 eV) in the MQW, as shown by the red solid lines in panel (a), no excitonic transition 
(or peak) is present and the relative change at various powers is attributed to the band-filling effect. To determine 
the absolute value of ∆𝜇 for each spectrum, a numerical simulation is carried out considering various optical 
transitions (one excitonic, and two band-to-band) in the sample, as shown in panels (b), (c), and (d). It is seen that 
by considering ∆μref. = 0.54 eV, the spectral shape and the relative separation of the absorption spectra at various 
excitation powers are recovered. 


Supplementary Figure S5: Excitation power-dependent PL spectra at 300 K under (a) 980 nm and (c) 405 nm 
excitation wavelengths. The normalized PL spectra at 300 K are plotted in (b) and (d) for the excitation wavelengths 
of 980 nm and 405 nm, respectively.


Supplementary Figure S6: Excitation power-dependent PL spectra at 230 K under (a) 980 nm and (c) 405 nm 
excitation wavelengths. The normalized PL spectra at 230 K are plotted in (b) and (d) for the 980 nm and 405 nm 
excitation wavelengths, respectively.


Supplementary Figure S7: (a) Energy and (b) absorption amplitude of the MQW structure associated with each 
individual optical transition. 


Supplementary Figure S8: (a) 2D-PL map of the InGaAs MQW emission under the lowest excitation power
detected by the hyperspectral luminescence imager. The hot spot is the region, where the laser is concentrated. The 
red dashed line shows the area far from the laser spot (> 40 𝜇𝑚), where carriers are in thermal equilibrium with the 
lattice. (b) PL spectra at various distances from the PL (or laser) spot from the region indicated by the red dashed 
line. (c) Normalized PL spectra of the same data set shown in panel (b). It is seen that at large distances from the 
laser spot, the shape of the PL spectra remains the same and only their intensity changes. This effect indicates that 
at such distances, the emitting particles are in thermal equilibrium with the lattice (𝑇𝐶 = 𝑇𝐿). These PL spectra are 
applied to determine the smallest linewidth broadening of each optical transition in the system. 


Supplementary Figure S9: Comparison between the experimental (orange dots) and the theoretical (black 
triangles) results of the linewidth broadening for the 1st band-to-band transition. It is seen that by considering only 
the contribution of hot phonons in the linewidth broadening determined by Equation 14, the calculated values are 
smaller than the experimental results.


