saroj.dash@chalmers.se
1

Van der Waals Magnet based Spin-Valve Devices 

at Room Temperature

Bing Zhao1, Roselle Ngaloy1, Anamul Md. Hoque1 , Bogdan Karpiak1, Dmitrii Khokhriakov1, Saroj P. Dash1*

1Department of Microtechnology and Nanoscience, Chalmers University of Technology, 

SE-41296, Göteborg, Sweden

*Corresponding author: Saroj P. Dash, Email: saroj.dash@chalmers.se

Abstract

The discovery of van der Waals (vdW) magnets opened up a new paradigm for condensed matter 

physics and spintronic technologies. However, the operations of active spintronic devices with 

vdW magnets are so far limited to cryogenic temperatures, inhibiting its broader practical 

applications. Here, for the first time, we demonstrate room temperature spin-valve devices using 

vdW itinerant ferromagnet Fe5GeTe2 in heterostructures with graphene. The tunnel spin 

polarization of the Fe5GeTe2/graphene vdW interface is detected to be significantly large ~ 45 % 

and negative at room temperature. Lateral spin-valve device design enables electrical control of 

spin signal and realization of basic building blocks for device application such as efficient spin 

injection, transport, precession, and detection functionalities. Furthermore, measurements with

different magnetic orientations provide unique insights into the magnetic anisotropy of Fe5GeTe2
and its relation with spin polarization and dynamics in the heterostructure. These findings open

opportunities for the applications of vdW magnet-based all-2D spintronic devices and integrated 

spin circuits at ambient temperatures. 

Keywords: van der Waals magnet, room temperature, spin-valve, Fe5GeTe2, graphene, spin 

injection, spin detection, Hanle spin precession, van der Waals heterostructures, 2D magnets, 

ferromagnets, 2D materials, quantum materials.


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
2

Introduction

The creation of van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures by combining two-dimensional (2D) 

quantum materials with complementary properties can allow the discovery of basic new physical 

phenomena and the development of new device concepts1. The discovery of various 2D quantum 

materials and their heterostructures starting from graphene, insulators, semiconductors, 

superconductors, and topological materials has revolutionized both fundamental and applied 

research2,3. The most recent addition to this 2D family are magnets, which have offered various

advantages over the conventional magnets and open new perspectives in vdW heterostructure 

designs4,5. In addition to the atomically thin and flat 2D nature of magnets, flexibility, gate 

tunability, strong proximity interactions, and twist angle between the layers can offer a unique 

degree of freedom and innovative platform for all-2D vdW devices functionalities4,5.

Recently, several vdW magnets have emerged with the discovery of insulating Cr2Ge2Te66, 

semiconducting (CrI37, CrBr38), and metallic FexGeTe29,10 nature. The insulating 2D magnets are 

useful for spin-filter tunneling8,11 and proximity-induced magnetism12,13, and the metallic magnets 

can be used as electrodes in magnetic tunnel junctions14 and magnetic spin-orbit memory

devices15,16
for energy-efficient and ultra-fast spintronic
technologies. However,
the 

demonstration of these device operations with vdW magnets is so far limited to cryogenic 

temperatures. Although room temperature magnetism and proximity effects have been recently 

reported using 2D magnets17–19, the lack of active spintronic device operation at room 

temperature significantly limits its practical application potential18,20,21. Furthermore, a lateral spin-

valve device with vdW metallic magnets is not realized yet at room temperature, an essential

building block for proposed high speed and low power spin-based memory, logic, and 

neuromorphic computing architectures 22–25. 

Here, we demonstrate for the first time robust a room-temperature spin-valve device using 

metallic vdW itinerant ferromagnet Fe5GeTe2  in heterostructures with graphene. Significantly large

spin polarization of ~45 % could be detected at room temperature due to the successful 

fabrication of a good vdW interface with graphene. Taking advantage of the lateral spin-valve 

device design, we probe the unique spin-polarized carrier injection, transport, precession, and 

detection functionalities with Fe5GeTe2/graphene heterostructure. The spin-valve signal could be 

controlled by electric bias, and measurements with different magnetic orientations elucidate the 

evolution of magnetic anisotropy and spin polarization due to soft magnetic properties in 

Fe5GeTe2. Such device operation advances the synergy between spintronics and 2D materials, and 

is expected to boost practical applications of vdW magnets in all-2D spin-based integrated circuits

at room temperature.


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
3

Figure 1. Room temperature spin-valve device with van der Waals magnet Fe5GeTe2 and graphene 

heterostructure. a, Schematic of a spin-valve device with Fe5GeTe2 (FGT) on a graphene (Gr) channel with 

reference TiO2/Co and Ti/Au (red dots on FGT and graphene) contacts. The top inset shows the schematic 

of the atomic interface between FGT and graphene. The middle and bottom panels show the schematics 

for the Hanle spin precession measurements with Bx and Bz fields, respectively. b, Schematic illustration for 

spin injection from FGT into the graphene channel through the vdW gap, inducing a non-equilibrium spin 

accumulation Δμ in graphene. c, The measured nonlocal (NL) spin-valve signal Rnl=Vnl/Idc for parallel and 

antiparallel alignment of FGT and Co electrodes (light pink and blue arrows) with an applied bias current 

Idc=+15 μA across the FGT/Gr junction and NL voltage Vnl measured by the TiO2/Co detector, as shown in 

the measurement geometry in a. A representative spin-valve data is shown for an in-plane magnetic field 

sweep at an angle of -60o in the x-y plane relative to the +y axis. The arrows show the sweeping direction 

of the magnetic field. The switching fields for FGT and Co electrodes in the spin-valve measurement are

indicated. The measurements were performed in Dev 1 at room temperature.

Results and Discussion

The schematic of the spin-valve device with measurement geometry is shown in Fig. 1a, consisting

of multilayer Fe5GeTe2 as a spin injector (source) or detector (drain) on the few-layer graphene 

spin transport channel. The measurements with magnetic field (B) sweep along the y-axis provide 

information about in-plane spin polarization of Fe5GeTe2 along the y-axis, whereas the Hanle spin 


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
4

precession measurements with B along x(z)-axis is an unambiguous and reliable approach to 

extract the (initial) injected spin states and its dynamic properties. The vdW gap between Fe5GeTe2
and graphene should allow an efficient spin injection and detection process in the heterostructure 

(Fig. 1b). The motivation behind the use of Fe5GeTe2 is its ferromagnetic order with Curie 

temperature (Tc) close to room temperature18,21, compared to Fe3GeTe2 with Tc ~ 220 K9,10. An 

increased saturation magnetization in Fe5GeTe2 can also provide larger spin polarization due to 

the Fe-rich vdW heterostructure forming a three-dimension (3D)-like spin-pair interaction20,21. The 

motivation behind the use of graphene as the channel material is its excellent spin transport 

properties26 and ideal combination with Fe5GeTe2 for vdW heterostructure-based spin-valve 

devices operating at room temperature. The Fe5GeTe2/graphene heterostructures are prepared 

on Si/SiO2 substrate employing exfoliation and dry transfer techniques. The nonmagnetic Ti/Au 

and ferromagnetic (TiO2/Co) contacts are nanofabricated on Fe5GeTe2 flakes and graphene 

channels for reference electrodes. The contact resistance of Fe5GeTe2/graphene is ~ 6 kΩ and 

TiO2/Co is ~ 1-5 kΩ. For details of the device fabrication, see the Methods section and 

Supplementary Fig. S1. 

Room temperature spin valve with Fe5GeTe2/graphene heterostructure

We first measured the spin-valve operation with spin injection from Fe5GeTe2 into the graphene 

channel at room temperature. A source current was applied between Fe5GeTe2 and the reference 

Au electrode on graphene, and the nonlocal (NL) voltage was measured between detector Co 

contact and another reference Au contact (Fig. 1a). Figure 1c shows the measured spin-valve signal 

with switchings originating from Fe5GeTe2 injector and Co detector contacts with different coercive 

fields (Hc) for an in-plane magnetic (B) field sweep. By comparing the reference spin valve signal 

with all-Co injector and detector contacts (see Supplementary Fig. S2a), we can confirm that the 

sharp switching at higher Hc in the signal is the contribution from the detector Co contact, and 

the slow and lower Hc switching is originating from the Fe5GeTe2 injector electrode. The 

observation of the robust spin-valve signal shows the presence of an in-plane spin component in 

Fe5GeTe2 at room temperature. 

To investigate the anisotropy in spin injection from Fe5GeTe2 and to probe the out-of-plane spin 

component (along the z-axis), an angle dependence (Fig. 2a) of the spin-valve measurement was 

performed from +90o to -90o in the x-y plane (Fig. 2b and Fig. 2c). The measurements show that 

the Fe5GeTe2 has a very soft magnetization and can be easily rotated in the sample plane by a 

small applied field; however, it has a robust out-of-plane remnant spin polarization. Specifically, 

several features can be observed from in-plane angle-dependent measurements. First, the 

switching field of detector Co increases with the magnetic field rotation angle Φ, consistent with 

the strong uniaxial magnetic anisotropy of Co in a narrow stripe geometry (see Supplementary 

Fig. S2d and Fig. S2e). Second, the spin-valve signal can be seen as the result of the non-zero in-


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
5

plane projection of the injected spin polarization from Fe5GeTe2 on the magnetic moment 

direction of the detector Co electrode. Here, if we suppose the magnetic moment of Co remains

along the y-axis in the small field range (-0.1 to 0.1 Tesla, T), we observe that the saturation field 

of  Fe5GeTe2 is smallest at around Φ≈-50o. These measurements show the presence of an in-plane 

magnetic anisotropy in the Fe5GeTe2 flake. 

Third, the ±90o data represents the x-axis Hanle (xHanle) curves for spin precession measurement. 

Contrary to conventional symmetric xHanle signal with both Co-Co injector-detector devices (see 

Supplementary Fig. S2d), a sine-shaped signal is observed in the FGT-Co injector-detector 

geometry, which shows an out-of-plane spin injection Szfrom Fe5GeTe2 into the graphene channel 

(Fig. 2d and Fig. 2e)27,28. Notably, there is almost no symmetric Hanle component at Φ=±90o, 

suggesting minimum remnant spins Sy, i.e., no remnant magnetic moment My along y-axis when 

Bx=0T. Such observation indicates the soft magnetic property of the Fe5GeTe2 flake with the in-

plane component along the x-axis at remanence, however, with the presence of a robust out-of-

plane spin component Sz. Forth, both the spin valve and the xHanle signals coexist, for example,

at Φ=±60o and ±80o. Here, the contribution of Sy projection is identical; however, the Sz spin 

precession direction is opposite for positive and negative angles Φ, which induces a different sign 

of the sine-shaped Hanle signal. To extract the sine-shaped component from the nonlocal signals, 

we analyzed the measured data by removing the Co switching and symmetrizing the switched 

curves (see Supplementary Note 1 and Fig. S3). The magnitude of the normalized signal to the 

one at Φ=0o as a function of Φ is presented in Fig. 2f, agreeing well with the cos(Φ) ~ Φ curve. It 

confirms the projection of in-plane magnetic moment Meff in Fe5GeTe2 on the y-axis versus in-

plane magnetic field B rotation follows the cos(Φ) relation. From these observations of spin-valve 

and xHanle measurements, we found the Fe5GeTe2 flake to be a very soft ferromagnet with both 

in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic moments.

Large spin polarization in Fe5GeTe2 /graphene interface

To calculate the spin polarization of Fe5GeTe2, we consider the magnitude of the spin-valve signal 

(for Φ=0o), ∆Rnl=PFGT.PCo.λgr.Rsq.exp(-Lch/λgr)/wgr, where only the spin polarization of Fe5GeTe2, PFGT,
is unknown; and the other parameters (PCo the spin polarization of Co, λgr spin diffusion length, 

Rsq square resistance, Lch channel length and wgr width of the graphene channel) are extracted 

from the reference Co1-Co2 spin valve with the standard Hanle formula. From the standard Hanle 

data fitting, we extract the spin lifetime in the graphene channel 𝜏𝑠 = 198 ± 13ps, spin diffsusion 

constant Ds=0.008±0.001m2/s and spin diffusion legnth 𝜆gr = 1.26 𝜇𝑚. The spin polarization of 

Co is Pco=10.1%±4.1% (see more details in Supplementary Note 4). From the FGT-Co spin valve 

signal, we calculate the lower limit of effective in-plane spin polarization of Fe5GeTe2, 

|PFGT|=35.8%±1.3%. To be noted, in the spin valve signal, the switching of Co occurs before full 

saturation of Fe5GeTe2 (for Φ=0o), which is much larger than the Co coercive field. Therefore, a 


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
6

much larger spin valve signal can be achieved if the detector Co contact is designed to have a 

higher coercive field, and effective |PFGT| can be as large as ~44.9% if the fully saturated Fe5GeTe2
is considered. The out-of-plane spin polarization along the z-axis is calculated to be 

Pz=9.5%±0.3% from x-Hanle data in Fig. 2e. Moreover, the out-of-plane magnetic moment Mz
seems to be robust enough in the in-plane x-Hanle measurements and total spin polarization can 

be calculated by Ptot=√(𝑃𝑖𝑛

2 + 𝑃𝑧2) = √0.4492 + 0.0952 = 45.9% (see Supplementary Note 2 for 

details). Such a large spin polarization at the Fe5GeTe2/Gr interface suggests an efficient spin 

injection efficiency due to the vdW gap, the sharp interface between Fe5GeTe2/Gr, and the large 

saturation magnetization of Fe5GeTe2 at room temperature.

Figure 2. Anisotropy in spin-valve signal and spin precession. a. The top view schematic of the spin 

valve device with in-plane B field sweep in the x-y plane with an angle Φ with respect to y-axis. b, c. Angle 

dependence of the spin valve signal with angle Φ=0 to -90o and 0 to +90o, respectively. The switchings of 

injector FGT and detector Co electrodes in the spin valve signal are shown by black and blue arrows, 

respectively. A y-axis shift is added in the signals for clarity, and a small hysteresis of ~3.5mT from the 

magnet is corrected using control experiments of reference graphene Hanle signals. d. The side view 

schematic of the device for magnetic moment configuration in FGT with an external Bx field. M is the 

magnetic moment with components Mx (Mz) along the x (z)- axis. Sz and Sx are the corresponding injected 

spin orientations. e. xHanle signals at Φ=±90o with parabolic background subtraction. The inset shows the 

cartoon for spin precession direction with opposite B fields.f. Normalized spin valve signal components and 


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
7

comparison with the cosine function with the in-plane B rotation angle Φ. The error bars are within the data 

points, calculated based on the noise level of the signal. The inset is the schematic for the magnetic moment 

projection on the axes, where Sy is injected spins from My magnetization of FGT. The measurements were 

performed in Dev 1 at room temperature.

Negative spin polarization of Fe5GeTe2/graphene interface

To examine the sign of spin polarization of Fe5GeTe2contacts on graphene, we performed detailed 

bias dependence measurements and compared them with the standard Co contacts. We 

investigated the bias current dependence of the spin injection and extraction signal from Fe5GeTe2
on the graphene channel (Fig. 3a), where the direction of the generated spins s are found to be 

dependent on the polarity of the applied current bias. Reversing the bias current direction (+/−Idc) 

in Fe5GeTe2 results in an accumulation of opposite spin polarization in graphene and hence an 

inverted behavior of the measured spin‐valve signal (Fig. 3b). These measurements demonstrate 

that spin polarization direction can be controlled by electrical spin injection and extraction in 

Fe5GeTe2. As a reference, the control experiment with the Co1-Co2 spin-valve was also performed 

with +/−Idc bias currents (Fig. 3c), showing the expected sign change of the signal. The magnitude 

of the spin-valve signals with bias current for FGT-Co2 and Co1-Co2 spin valves are shown in Fig. 

3d for the spin injection and extraction regimes. The accumulated spin density is observed to scale 

linearly with the applied bias current for both Fe5GeTe2 and Co contacts on the graphene channel.

Surprisingly, we notice that the sign of spin signal with one Fe5GeTe2 electrode is the opposite 

compared to that of the standard all-Co spin valves, which implies the negative or opposite spin 

polarization of Fe5GeTe2 compared to Co contacts (see Supplementary Note 3). For example, in 

Fig. 3e, we plotted the comparison of spin valve signals with FGT-Co2 and Co1-Co2 injector-

detector contact configurations for positive bias currents, showing opposite spin polarization 

between Co and Fe5GeTe2 contacts. Such a negative spin polarization is found to be robust and 

could be reproducibly observed in multiple devices (also see data from Dev 2 and Dev 3 in 

Supplementary Fig. S5a and Fig. S5b). A possible origin can be due to the unique band structure 

with the ‘down’ spin state as the majority in Fe5GeTe2 at the interface with graphene. These 

observations agree with a recent theoretical prediction29, where the Fe atoms, with d-orbital 

electrons, dominate the contribution of the unique asymmetry in the electron population between 

spin-up and spin-down states. 


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
8

Figure 3. Negative spin polarization of Fe5GeTe2/graphene interface. a.  Top panel: Schematic of the 

nonlocal measurement geometries for FGT-Co2 and  Co1-Co2 spin valves. Bottom panels: Schematics for the 

spin injection and extraction process with FGT, showing the accumulation of down and up spins in the 

graphene channel, respectively. b. Spin valve signals with FGT-Co2 for different bias currents of +/-Idc. c. 

Co1-Co2 Spin valve signals with Idc=±100 μA. d. Bias dependence of the spin valve signal magnitude and 

the linear fittings. The error bars (within the data points) are calculated from the standard deviation of the 

measured background noise in the data. e. Comparison of spin valve signals ΔRnl (=ΔVnl/I) with Co1-Co2 and 

FGT-Co2 injector-detector contact configurations, showing opposite spin polarization between Co and FGT 

contacts. The Co1-Co2 spin valve signal is multiplied by 100 along the y-axis for clarity. The inset in the top 

and bottom panels are the schematics of the spin injection and detection process by Co1 and FGT, 

respectively. Both nonlocal spin valves share the same detector Co2 with the same switching field in the 

signals. All the measurements were performed on Dev 1 at room temperature.

Out of plane spin precession and dynamics in Fe5GeTe2/graphene spin valve

Next, to investigate Hanle spin precession of in-plane spin polarization, we carried out the 

measurements with an out-of-plane magnetic field (Bz) sweep30. However, with a soft magnet 

Fe5GeTe2 as an injector, the magnetic moment M and the injected spin s rotate to the out-of-

plane direction with a small external Bz field (Fig. 4a). The magnetic moment M also has an in-

plane component Meff, which induces the spin polarization Sxy, corresponding to the components 

along the y- and x-axis (Sy and Sx). As shown in Fig. 4b, we observed a modified Hanle signal due 

to the combined effect of magnetic moment rotation of Fe5GeTe2 and precession of the injected 


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
9

spins in the graphene channel. Furthermore, measurements with the different magnetization 

direction of Fe5GeTe2 and Co electrodes result in the sign reversal of Hanle curves (+/-Meff), as 

shown in Fig. 4c (bottom panel). To eliminate the non-spin-related background from the 

measured data, we take an average of the signals Ravg and decompose them into symmetric (Sys) 

and antisymmetric (Ays) components (Fig. 4c, top and middle panels), corresponding to the spin 

components Sy and Sx, respectively. 

First, considering the symmetric signal for the entirely out-of-plane moment of Fe5GeTe2 for 

|Bz|>0.15 T, there is no contribution to the spin precession signal and the magnitude of Rnl should 

be null. Notably, we observe that the symmetric signal shows a comparable magnitude of signals

at Bz=0T and |Bz|>0.15 T. Therefore, the in-plane spin Sy at Bz~0 T is also negligible and so is the 

remanent magnetization My. At the intermediate stages, where Bz is in the range of 0 to ±0.15 T, 

the My increases to a peak value and decreases again to zero for the magnetic moment M

saturation along the z-axis (Fig. 4a). This is supported by our simple simulation, which shows that 

My should be minimum at B~0 T (see Supplementary Note 4 and Note 5). Secondly, the 

antisymmetric component of the signal suggests the existence of the spins Sx along the x-axis. We 

can fit the Sx component and obtain the effective spin polarization Px=15.3%±4.8% (see 

Supplementary Fig. S4c.). These observations suggest that the in-plane magnetic moment Meff
does not align with the long axis of the flake, which can be due to the in-plane magnetic 

anisotropy and crystal symmetry of Fe5GeTe2. Therefore, the observed z-axis Hanle signals are 

combined effects of magnetic moment rotation of Fe5GeTe2, and precession and dephasing of the 

injected spins Sx and Sy in the graphene channel (see more discussions in Supplementary Note 1).

Furthermore, we extracted the magnetic moment rotation angle αM with Bz from the z-axis Hanle 

curves using opposite magnetic configurations +/-Meff in Fig. 4c (see details in Supplementary 

Note 4). It shows the evolution of local magnetic moment near the Fe5GeTe2/graphene interface 

with Bz and its saturation at ~ 0.15 T (Fig. 4d). To correlate the orientation of spin injection signal 

to the magnetization behavior of the Fe5GeTe2 with the external Bz field, the anomalous Hall effect 

(AHE) measurement was also performed in the same Fe5GeTe2 flake (Fig. 4e). The AHE curve 

suggests a rotation of the magnetization in Fe5GeTe2 along the z-axis, and the saturation point of 

the AHE curve is also consistent with that of the αM ~ Bz relation. Detailed angle dependence of 

the AHE measurement performed in a similar Fe5GeTe2 flake (see Supplementary Note 6) suggests

a presence of the magnetic anisotropy in Fe5GeTe2 (see Supplementary Note 2). This observation 

agrees well with the spin-valve Hanle spin precession results.

In addition to spin injection from Fe5GeTe2 into the graphene channel, we also demonstrated spin 

detection by Fe5GeTe2 using Dev 2 as shown in Supplementary Note 7 and Supplementary Fig. 

S8. The bias dependence of the spin signals with the Fe5GeTe2 detector also showed good linearity 

in the measured bias range. Furthermore, the gate voltage dependence of the spin valve signal 


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
10

for the spin injection and detection by Fe5GeTe2 shows a tunability (Supplementary Fig. S8c and 

S9c), mainly due to the modulation of the graphene channel resistance with gate voltage and 

conductivity mismatch between the Fe5GeTe2 and graphene channel31. 

Figure 4. Out-of-plane Hanle signal in Fe5GeTe2/graphene spin valve. a. Schematic of the magnetic 

moment configuration in FGT, where M represents the total magnetic moment of FGT, rotating with external 

out-of-plane magnetic field Bz. Meff is the effective in-plane projection of M with components (Mx, My) along 

the x-and y-axis. Sxy is the injected in-plane spins from Meff with components Sx and Sy, along the x- and y-

axis, respectively. βco is the relative angle between Meff and the y-axis. αM is the angle between M and the 

z-axis. b. Measured Hanle spin precession signal with Bz sweep for Idc = +15 µA with in-plane magnetization 

+Meff in FGT. The blue and green arrows show the FGT and Co magnetic moment evolution with Bz. The red 

arrow shows the B sweeping direction. The top inset shows the schematic of measurement geometry. c.

Hanle curves for the parallel and antiparallel magnetization direction of injector FGT and detector Co 

electrodes. Symmetric (Sys) and anti-symmetric (Ays) components of the averaged Hanle signal Ravg, where 

Ravg=[Rnl(+Meff)-Rnl(-Meff)]/2, and Rays=[Ravg(B)+Ravg(-B)]/2; Rsys=[Ravg(B)-Ravg(-B)]/2. d. Relation of the 

extracted αM as a function of Bz. The insets are the corresponding magnetic moment evolution in FGT with 

the external field Bz. e. Anomalous Hall effect (AHE) signal of FGT (Rxy) as a function of magnetic field Bz
sweeps along the z-axis. The Mz on the right axis is the out-of-plane magnetic moment in an arbitrary unit, 

Mz=±1 suggesting a total out-of-plane magnetic moment saturation. The inset shows the AHE 

measurement geometry. All the measurements were performed on Dev 1 at room temperature.


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
11

Summary and Outlook

In conclusion, we demonstrated a robust room-temperature operation of van der Waals magnet-

based spin-valve devices. Highly efficient spin injection, transport, dynamics, and detection could 

be observed with a large negative spin polarization of Fe5GeTe2 ~ 45% in the heterostructure with 

graphene channel. Furthermore, soft ferromagnetic properties and spin polarization anisotropy in 

Fe5GeTe2 could be probed via angle dependence measurements in the spin-valve devices. These 

studies provide unique insights into the room-temperature magnetism of Fe5GeTe2 and its 

relation with spin transport and precession in graphene heterostructure devices. These results 

establish the integration of vdW magnets with graphene spin valve devices and have a vast

potential in developing all-2D spintronics devices and integrated circuits at room temperature. 

Furthermore, this will also bring a strong synergy between 2D quantum materials and spintronics 

with the possibility of further control the figure of merits by twist angle between the layers, 

magnetic proximity effects, and gate tunability for energy-efficient and ultra-fast spintronic 

devices. These room-temperature developments in van der Waals heterostructure will open 

opportunities for the use of van der Waal magnets for fundamental studies in condensed matter 

physics and device applications in spintronic sensors, memory, logic, and neuromorphic 

computing architectures 32,33.

Methods

Fabrication of devices and electrical measurements 

The Fe5GeTe2 (FGT) crystal (from Hq Graphene) flakes (20~50 nm) were exfoliated and dry transferred onto 

the exfoliated few-layer graphene (from HOPG) on an n++doped Si substrate with 285 nm SiO2. For the 

device fabrication, the nonmagnetic and magnetic contacts were prepared by multiple electron beam 

lithography (EBL) processes and electron beam evaporation of metals. The nonmagnetic Ti/Au contacts 

were first prepared on FGT flakes and graphene for reference electrodes. The ferromagnetic contacts 

(TiO2/Co) on graphene were prepared in a two‐step deposition and an oxidation process was adopted, 0.4 

nm Ti was deposited, followed by a 10 Torr O2 oxidation for 10 min each, followed by 60 nm of Co 

deposition. Measurements were performed at room temperature with a magnetic field up to 0.8 Tesla and 

a sample rotation stage in vacuum conditions. The electronic measurements were carried out using current 

source Keithley 6221, nanometer 2182A, and dual‐channel source meter Keithley 2612B.

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge financial supports from EU Graphene Flagship (Core 3, No. 881603), Swedish 

Research Council VR project grants (No. 2016–03658), 2D TECH VINNOVA competence center (No. 2019-

00068), Graphene center, EI Nano, and AoA Materials program at Chalmers University of Technology. We 

acknowledge the help of staff at Quantum Device Physics laboratory and Nanofabrication laboratory in our 

Department of Microtechnology and Nanoscience at Chalmers University of Technology.


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
12

Data availability

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors on a 

reasonable request.

Author information

Affiliations

Department of Microtechnology and Nanoscience, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296, 

Göteborg, Sweden

Bing Zhao, Roselle Ngaloy, Anamul Md. Hoque , Bogdan Karpiak, Dmitrii Khokhriakov, & Saroj P. Dash

Contributions

B.Z and R.N fabricated and characterized the devices. A.M.H, B.K, D.K, S.P.D. participated in device 

preparation and measurements. B.Z. and S.P.D conceived the idea and designed the experiments. B.Z. and 

S.P.D. analyzed and interpreted the experimental data, compiled the figures, and wrote the manuscript with 

inputs from all co-authors. S.P.D. supervised the research project.

Corresponding author

Correspondence to Saroj P. Dash, saroj.dash@chalmers.se

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Reference

1.
Geim, A. K. & Grigorieva, I. V. Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature 499, 419–425 (2013).

2.
Novoselov, K. S., Mishchenko, A., Carvalho, A. & Castro Neto, A. H. 2D materials and van der Waals 

heterostructures. Science 353, aac9439 (2016).

3.
Žutić, I., Matos-Abiague, A., Scharf, B., Dery, H. & Belashchenko, K. Proximitized materials. Mater. Today 22, 85–

107 (2019).

4.
Gibertini, M., Koperski, M., Morpurgo, A. F. & Novoselov, K. S. Magnetic 2D materials and heterostructures. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 14, 408–419 (2019).

5.
Gong, C. & Zhang, X. Two-dimensional magnetic crystals and emergent heterostructure devices. Science 363, 

(2019).

6.
Gong, C. et al. Discovery of Intrinsic Ferromagnetism in Two-Dimensional van der Waals Crystals. Nature vol. 546

265-269 (2017).

7.
Huang, B. et al. Layer-dependent ferromagnetism in a van der Waals crystal down to the monolayer limit. Nature

vol. 546 270–273 (2017).


saroj.dash@chalmers.se
13

8.
Kim, M. et al. Micromagnetometry of two-dimensional ferromagnets. Nature Electronics 2, 457–463 (2019).

9.
Fei, Z. et al. Two-dimensional itinerant ferromagnetism in atomically thin Fe3GeTe2. Nat. Mater. 17, 778–782 (2018).

10.
Deng, Y. et al. Gate-tunable room-temperature ferromagnetism in two-dimensional Fe3GeTe2. Nature 563, 94–99 

(2018).

11.
Klein, D. R. et al. Probing magnetism in 2D van der Waals crystalline insulators via electron tunneling. Science 360, 

1218–1222 (2018).

12.
Karpiak, B. et al. Magnetic proximity in a van der Waals heterostructure of magnetic insulator and graphene. 2D 

Mater. 7, 015026 (2019).

13.
Ghiasi, T. S. et al. Electrical and thermal generation of spin currents by magnetic bilayer graphene. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. (2021) doi:10.1038/s41565-021-00887-3.

14.
Wang, Z. et al. Tunneling Spin Valves Based on Fe3GeTe2/hBN/Fe3GeTe2 van der Waals Heterostructures. Nano 

Lett. 18, 4303–4308 (2018).

15.
Wang, X. et al. Current-driven magnetization switching in a van der Waals ferromagnet Fe3GeTe2. Science 

Advances 5, eaaw8904 (2019).

16.
Alghamdi, M. et al. Highly Efficient Spin-Orbit Torque and Switching of Layered Ferromagnet FeGeTe. Nano Lett.

19, 4400–4405 (2019).

17.
Li, Q. et al. Patterning-Induced Ferromagnetism of Fe3GeTe2 van der Waals Materials beyond Room Temperature. 

Nano Letters vol. 18 5974–5980 (2018).

18.
Zhang, H. et al. Itinerant ferromagnetism in van der Waals Fe5−xGeTe2 crystals above room temperature. Physical 

Review B vol. 102 064417 (2020).

19.
Wang, H. et al. Above Room-Temperature Ferromagnetism in Wafer-Scale Two-Dimensional van der Waals 

Fe3GeTe2 Tailored by a Topological Insulator. ACS Nano 14, 10045–10053 (2020).

20.
Seo, J. et al. Nearly room temperature ferromagnetism in a magnetic metal-rich van der Waals metal. Sci Adv 6, 

eaay8912 (2020).

21.
May, A. F. et al. Ferromagnetism Near Room Temperature in the Cleavable van der Waals Crystal Fe5GeTe2. ACS 

Nano 13, 4436–4442 (2019).

22.
Behin-Aein, B., Datta, D., Salahuddin, S. & Datta, S. Proposal for an all-spin logic device with built-in memory. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 5, 266–270 (2010).

23.
Manipatruni, S. et al. Scalable energy-efficient magnetoelectric spin–orbit logic. Nature 565, 35–42 (2018).

24.
Grollier, J. et al. Neuromorphic Spintronics. Nat Electron 3, (2020).

25.
Zollner, K., Gmitra, M. & Fabian, J. Swapping Exchange and Spin-Orbit Coupling in 2D van der Waals 

Heterostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 196402 (2020).

26.
Roche, S. et al. Graphene spintronics: the European Flagship perspective. 2D Mater. 2, 030202 (2015).

27.
Safeer, C. K. et al. Room-Temperature Spin Hall Effect in Graphene/MoS2 van der Waals Heterostructures. Nano 

Lett. 19, 1074–1082 (2019).

28.
Benítez, L. A. et al. Tunable room-temperature spin galvanic and spin Hall effects in van der Waals heterostructures. 

Nat. Mater. 19, 170–175 (2020).

29.
Joe, M., Yang, U. & Lee, C. First-principles study of ferromagnetic metal Fe5GeTe2. Nano Materials Science 1, 299–

303 (2019).

30.
Tombros, N., Jozsa, C., Popinciuc, M., Jonkman, H. T. & van Wees, B. J. Electronic spin transport and spin precession 

in single graphene layers at room temperature. Nature 448, 571–574 (2007).

31.     Han, W. et al. Tunneling spin injection into single layer graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 167202 (2010).

32.
Dieny, B. et al. Opportunities and challenges for spintronics in the microelectronics industry. Nature Electronics 3, 

446–459 (2020).

33.
Lin, X., Yang, W., Wang, K. L. & Zhao, W. Two-dimensional spintronics for low-power electronics. Nature Electronics

2, 274–283 (2019).


