Defect detection 
Page nr. 1 of 10 

1 

Defect detection and NDE of low-modulus 

PMMA material using mechanical loading and 

WFT analysis  

Jitendra Dhanotia*, Amit Chatterjee*, Vimal Bhatia*, and Shashi Prakash# 

* Signals and Software Group, Discipline of Electrical Engineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Indore, Indore-453446, INDIA 

#Photonics Laboratory, Institute of Engineering & Technology, Devi Ahilya 
University, Khandwa Road, Indore-452001, INDIA  

 

 

Corresponding Author: 

Shashi Prakash, 

e-mail: sprakash_davv@rediffmail.com 

tel: +91 9977186156 

fax: +91 7312461116 

 


Defect detection 
Page nr. 2 of 10 

2 

The detection and analysis of defects in objects having complex shape is difficult using theoretical 

modeling. In present communication, we report our investigations undertaken towards detection of 

defects and non-destructive evaluation of low-modulus sample of Poly Methyl Metha Acrylate 

(PMMA) material using phase measuring deflectometry. Collimated light from He-Ne laser 

illuminates a sinusoidal grating. The resulting sinusoidal fringe pattern is projected onto the 

PMMA sample. The light reflected through the sample is recorded using Charge Couple Device 

(CCD) camera. When the sample was loaded along z-axis, the surface slope of the defective 

portions varies in an anomalous manner with respect to un-defective portions of the specimen. The 

prominent location and visualization of defects have been identified using windowed Fourier 

transform technique (WFT). The 3D phase plots reconstruct the profile of the specimen with 

presence of defects. The slope of the phase provides the information regarding defects and surface 

variation of the object. Experimental results conclusively establish the viability of the technique. 

 

  

Defect detection, deflectometry, phase detection, image processing,  

 

 


Defect detection 
Page nr. 3 of 10 

3 

Introduction 

In recent years, due to technology advancement and interdisciplinary work 

culture, fabulous improvement has been made in field of non-destructive testing 

using optical techniques. Non-destructive testing comprises the test methods 

which are used to examine an object, material or system without impairing its 

future usefulness. Hence, it has been used for measurement of wide range of 

parameters in science and engineering. Various techniques have been reported for 

non-destructive testing. Major among them may be categorized as Optical testing, 

testing based on X-ray and Gamma ray, Acoustic waves, Electrical and 

electrostatic field variations, etc.  Each of the technique has its area of influence 

within which it is most useful.  Optical based techniques comprise of moiré 

methods [1], Holographic interferometry [2], speckle interferometry [3], grating 

shearing [4], and photo-elastic methods [5]. These have been widely used for non 

destructive testing.  

 

The PMMA material has been investigated widely for various applications. 

Trivedi et al. proposed the use of Talbot interferometer for real time mapping of 

slope [6]. The work was extended towards testing the applicability of the 

technique for defect detection in bent plates. However, the method has a drawback 

that the distance between the two gratings is fixed and cannot be varied based on 

the demands of the set-up. Also, the wavefront reflected from the specimen tends 

to diverge and hence, the technique cannot be used for mapping surfaces with 

larger slope values. Tippur et al. proposed double grating lateral shearing 

interferometry called Coherent Gradient Sensing (CGS) and used it extensively in 

various engineering applications. The CGS method has been used to study the 

deformation near crack tip [7]. This technique was also used for simultaneous 

determination of slope and curvature from specularly reflective thin structures in 

real time [8]. However the technique requires a pair of grating for generation of 

fringe patterns. 

 

In this communication, we report our investigations undertaken towards detection 

of defects and NDE of low modulus triangular shaped specimen of Poly Methyl 

Metha Acrylate (PMMA) material using deflectometry in conjunction with 


Defect detection 
Page nr. 4 of 10 

4 

windowed Fourier fringe analysis. The experimental setup is simple and uses only 

a single grating. The accurate measurement of slope and detection of defect has 

been achieved by determining the phase plots of recorded fringe pattern. Only a 

single fringe pattern is required to extract the phase information and the phase 

plot. Defect detection has been successfully undertaken. Good agreement between 

theory and experiment is also observed. 

Methods 

Schematic of the experimental arrangement for defect detection using 

deflectometric set-up has been shown in Fig. 1. Spatially filtered and collimated 

light from He-Ne laser illuminates the sinusoidal grating ‘G’ of period 0.25 mm. 

The sinusoidal fringe pattern is projected onto a specimen (triangular plate of low 

modulus PMMA material). Depending on the applied load onto specimen from 

the back surface, the reflected pattern is distorted. The reflected pattern is 

captured using CCD camera.  

 

The recorded fringe pattern can be described as [9] 

( ,x y)]
y
2 f
x
b( ,x y)cos[2 f
a( ,x y)
,x y)
(f
oy
ox
 
 



  
 
(1) 

where
f (x, y)
 is the recorded intensity, 
a(x, y)
 is the background intensity,
b(x, y)
 

is the variation in the fringe visibility and 
(x, y)
 is the phase information of 

interest. The ox
f
and oy
f
 are the spatial carrier frequency in the x and y direction, 

respectively. They are usually constant. It is assumed that the input fringe pattern 

f (x, y)
has already been discretized into pixels when it was captured by CCD 

camera, and thus x and y are integers. The WFT program developed in Matlab is 

used to extract, 3D phase maps from the recorded pattern. By applying the WFT 

and Inverse WFT as per the procedure given in [9], the filtered wrapped phase 

(x, y)
 can be extracted as: 

,x y)]
(f[  
angle
( ,x y)


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 

where, 
,x y)
(f
 denotes the filtered fringe pattern obtained after thresholding. 

The deflection angle
(x, y)
can be written as, 

( ,x y)
d
2

p
( ,x y)
 


; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 


Defect detection 
Page nr. 5 of 10 

5 

Where p is the period of the grating and d is distance between grating and the 

specimen. By applying phase unwrapping algorithm over 
(x, y)
, we obtain a 

continuous phase map. Unwrapped phase map has been obtained using the 

strategy followed by Kemao et al. [10]. The phase so determined is plotted against 

the pixel position. The deflection angle

,x y

is related to 
(x, y)
and is 

effectively the measure of the slope of the rays in the direction perpendicular to 

the grating lines.  

 

When the test surface is without defects, a characteristic fringe pattern due to the 

slope of the surface is obtained. However, if there are an area of stress 

concentration, the slope around those regions varies in non-isocentric fashion, and 

hence, these areas of defects etc are prominently visualized.  Thus, based on the 

change in the slope pattern, the nature of defects and their effect on the stress field 

of bent plate can easily be predicted.  

Experimental arrangement 

 

 

Fig.1: Schematic of the experimental setup for detection of defect of PMMA plate. 
 

Fig. 1 shows the experimental setup for NDE and detecton of defect of PMMA 

plate. Light from He-Ne Laser of 15mW (λ=0.6328 µm) was used as a light 

source. The beam from He-Ne laser is spatially filtered using an arrangement 

comprising of microscope objective of magnification 60X and pinhole of 5 m 

diameter. Collimating lens, of focal length 250mm, is used to produce a 

collimated laser beam. A translation stage of resolution 1 m has been used to set 

the beam in collimation position. The collimated light is passing through 


Defect detection 
Page nr. 6 of 10 

6 

sinusoidal grating and is projected onto the specimen. The reflected light from the 

specimen is directly recorded using CCD camera.  

Results 

When a light beam is reflected from the object under study, the beam acquires a 

phase change, depending on the surface slope. The surface slope varies as the 

object was stressed by known amount. Low modulus specimen of PMMA 

material has been used during the experimentation. To analyze the defects, an 

equilateral triangular plate has been tested under flawless and defective mode. The 

equilateral-triangle-shaped plate has each side of 40mm and thickness of 2mm. It 

was mounted using a specially fabricated mechanical mount such that it was 

bound along the three corners. Artificial defects were created by making holes of 

approximately 1mm diameter and depth varying from 0.5mm to 1.5mm, at the 

back surface of the plate. Collimated light from the laser after passing through 

grating is incident onto the front surface of traingular plate. Under unstressed 

condition of the traingular plate, the back-reflected light beam remains collimated 

and parallel lines were observed onto the screen. When the specimen was loaded 

centrally along the negative z-direction by an amount of 0.3mm using a precision 

translating device, the slope fringes appeared on the screen.  

 

  
 

 

(a)        
 
 
 
 
(b) 

Fig.2: Recorded fringe pattern for triangular plate (a) Flawless specimen loaded by 0.3mm (b) 

defective specimen loaded by 0.3mm. 

 

Fig. 2(a) corresponds to the slope contour along the horizontal direction for the 

non-defective plate. When the defective plate was clamped and centrally loaded, 

the surface slope of the defective portions varies in an anomalous manner with 

respect to un-defective portions of the specimen. The effect of defects was very 


Defect detection 
Page nr. 7 of 10 

7 

prominent in terms of the change in orientation and spacing of the fringes at the 

defect site as shown in Fig. 2(b). Two defects were created on the plate (as shown 

in Fig. 2(b)) which are distingushed clearly in terms of change in orientation and 

shape of fringe patterns around the defect.  

 

 

 

   (a)        
 

 

(b) 

Fig.3: 3D map for the triangular plate loaded along negative z-direction. (a) flawless triangular 

plate loaded by 0.3mm (b) defected triangular plate loaded by 0.3mm. 

 


Defect detection 
Page nr. 8 of 10 

8 

To evaluate the phase values at each point of the interferogram a computer 

program based on the WTM algorithm [9] has been developed. In WFT 

algorothms, the fringe pattern is divided into a number of local fringe regions with 

a moving window. The choice of the window depends on the requirement; we 

used the Gaussian window in this work. The Fourier transform spectrum of each 

local fringe pattern is obtained using the moving window. All the local spectra are 

superimposed to obtain the complete spectra of the fringe pattern. In the next step, 

the fundamental spectrum of the whole fringe pattern’s spectrum is extracted. 

Taking the inverse FT, the phase information of the fringe pattern is retrieved. 

Undertaking WFT by appropriate filtering scheme and thresholding, the wrapped 

phase has been determined. 

 

To obtain reliable phase map, the field corresponding to the wrapped phase map is 

scanned and 2 is added or subtracted every time an edge is detected. The phase 

values so obtained are plotted against the pixel values using MATLAB toolbox. 

Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(b) shows three dimensional plot of the evaluated phase map 

with respect to the pixel position along x-axis for flawless and defective traingular 

plate, respectively. The colour bar has been used to depict the local variation in 

the defective portions and slope values. 

 

In case of centrally loaded traingular plate bounded along its circumference, as per 

the thin plate theory, slope pattern is represented by [11] 

 



















a

y
x
log

a

xw
4

x
w
2
2

2
max
 
 
 
 
 
      (4) 

where, wmax denotes the maximum out-of-plane displacement along negative z-

direction, a denotes plate radius and (x, y) denote the coordinates of the traingular 

plate. There is a good agreement between theoretical slope and measured slope. 

An averaged error of 2.2% was obtained with respect to the theoretical prediction.  

Conclusion 

In conclusion, we have successfully demonstrated the application of windowed 

Fourier fringe analysis technique for measurement of slope and defect detection of 

bent plates. Ttriangular shaped PMMA plates have been tested using the 


Defect detection 
Page nr. 9 of 10 

9 

technique. Based on the variation in slope values for regions where defects are 

located with respect to the flawless regions region, the defects are prominently 

visualized. Improved accuracy in the measurement of slope and defect detection 

was obtained using automated fringe analysis technique.  

 

Acknowledgement 

This publication is an outcome of the R&D work undertaken project under the 

Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme of Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 

Government of India, being implemented by Digital India Corporation. 

 

References 

[1]. 
P. S. Theocaris and A. Koutsabessis, Slope measurement by means of Moiré 

fringes, J. Sci. Instrum. 42 (1965) 607-610. 

[2]. 
P. K. Rastogi, Visualization and measurement of slope and curvature fields 

using holographic interferometry: an application to flaw detection, Journal of 

Modern Optics 38 (1991) 1251-1263. 

[3]. 
R. J. Jones and C. Wykes, “Holographic and Speckle interferometry”, 

Cambridge University Press (1989). 

[4]. 
J. Dhanotia, S. Prakash, S. Rana and O. Sasaki, Slope measurement of bent 

plates using double grating shearing interferometry, Applied Optics 50 

(2011) 2958-2963. 

[5]. 
M. Ramji, K. Ramesh “Whole field evaluation of stress components in digital 

photoelasticity—Issues, implementation and application” Optics and Lasers 

in Engineering, 46 (2008) 257-271. 

[6]. 
S. Trivedi, S. Prakash, S. Rana and O. Sasaki, Real-time slope mapping and 

defect detection in bent plates using Talbot interferometry, Applied Optics, 

49 (2010) 897-903. 

[7]. 
V. Tippur, S. Krishnaswamy and A. J. Rosakis, “A coherent gradient sensor 

for crack tip deformation measurements: analysis and experimental 

measurements,” International Journal of Fracture 48 (1991) 193-204. 

[8]. 
H. V. Tippur, “Simultaneous and real-time measurement of slope and 

curvature fringes in thin structures using shearing interferometry,” Optical 

Engineering 43(2004) 1-7. 


Defect detection 
Page nr. 10 of 10 

10 

[9]. 
Q. Kemao, “Two-dimensional windowed Fourier transform for fringe pattern 

analysis: Principles, applications and implementations,” Optics and Lasers in 

Engg. 45 (2007) 304-317. 

[10]. Q. Kemao, S. H. Soon, and A. Asundi, “A simple phase unwrapping 

approach based on filtering by windowed Fourier transform,” Optics & Laser 

Tech. 37 (2005) 458–462. 

[11]. S. Timoshenko and S. Woinowski-krieger, Theory of plates and shells, 

McGraw-Hill, Second Edition, London (1970). 


