Vol.:(0123456789)

Experimental Mechanics 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11340-021-00733-6

RESEARCH PAPER

Hard‑material Adhesion: Which Scales of Roughness Matter?

L. A. Thimons1 · A. Gujrati1 · A. Sanner2,3  · L. Pastewka2,3  · T. D. B. Jacobs1 

Received: 9 December 2020 / Accepted: 9 May 2021 
© The Author(s) 2021

Abstract
Background Surface topography strongly modifies adhesion of hard-material contacts, yet roughness of real surfaces  
typically exists over many length scales, and it is not clear which of these scales has the strongest effect. Objective: This 
investigation aims to determine which scales of topography have the strongest effect on macroscopic adhesion.
Methods Adhesion measurements were performed on technology-relevant diamond coatings of varying roughness using 
spherical ruby probes that are large enough (0.5-mm-diameter) to sample all length scales of topography. For each material, 
more than 2000 measurements of pull-off force were performed in order to investigate the magnitude and statistical distribu-
tion of adhesion. Using sphere-contact models, the roughness-dependent effective values of work of adhesion were measured, 
ranging from 0.08 to 7.15 mJ/m2 across the four surfaces. The data was more accurately fit using numerical analysis, where 
an interaction potential was integrated over the AFM-measured topography of all contacting surfaces.
Results These calculations revealed that consideration of nanometer-scale plasticity in the materials was crucial for a good 
quantitative fit of the measurements, and the presence of such plasticity was confirmed with AFM measurements of the 
probe after testing. This analysis enabled the extraction of geometry-independent material parameters; the intrinsic work of 
adhesion between ruby and diamond was determined to be 46.3 mJ/m2. The range of adhesion was 5.6 nm, which is longer 
than is typically assumed for atomic interactions, but is in agreement with other recent investigations. Finally, the numerical 
analysis was repeated for the same surfaces but this time with different length-scales of roughness included or filtered out.
Conclusions The results demonstrate a critical band of length-scales—between 43 nm and 1.8 µm in lateral size—that has 
the strongest effect on the total adhesive force for these hard, rough contacts.

Keywords Adhesion · Nanocrystalline diamond · Multi-scale surface roughness · Range of adhesion · Pull-off force

Introduction

All real surfaces exhibit roughness, which has profound 
effects on surface properties. This includes the mechanics 
of interfaces: adhesion [1, 2], contact stiffness [3–5], wet-
ting [6], and friction [7]. Various analytical models have 

been developed to describe the dependence of functional 
properties on the geometry of the rough surface. The clas-
sic Greenwood and Williamson [8] multiasperity model for 
contact between rough surfaces was extended by Fuller and 
Tabor [1] and Maugis [9] to include adhesion. Further pro-
gress was made in connecting contact properties and rough-
ness by Bush, Gibson, and Thomas (BGT) [10] and Rumpf 
[11, 12]. These models approximate real-world roughness 
using simpler mathematical functions and typically associ-
ate properties with a single geometric parameter, such as 
the root-mean square (RMS) height. More recent models 
have attempted to explicitly account for the hierarchical, 
multi-scale nature of roughness. Mandelbrot began char-
acterizing surfaces as fractal-like and self-affine using 
spectral analysis [13]. Later, Persson [14] created a theory 
for rubber friction which draws quantitative connections 
between fractal roughness and contact properties, including 
adhesion [15]. These multi-scale models are expansions 

 * T. D. B. Jacobs 
 
tjacobs@pitt.edu

1 
Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials 
Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, 
USA

2 
Department of Microsystems Engineering, University 
of Freiburg, Georges-Köhler-Allee 103, 79110 Freiburg, 
Germany

3 
Cluster of Excellence livMatS, Freiburg Center 
for Interactive Materials and Bioinspired Technologies, 
University of Freiburg, Georges-Köhler-Allee 105, 
79110 Freiburg, Germany


 
Experimental Mechanics

that start from the limit of conforming contacts. They bal-
ance the adhesive energy gained when making contact with 
the stored elastic deformation energy, and are expected to 
work well for soft, conformal contacts.
A simpler approach is sufficient for hard contacts, in 
which the elastic energy required for creating a conform-
ing contact is much larger than the interfacial adhesive 
energy gain: An interaction potential is integrated over 
the undeformed contacting geometry. This approach can 
be applied to simple analytical geometries, such as spheres 
[16, 17], and can also be applied to more complex geom-
etries, including rough surfaces, sharp tips, etc. [18–20]. 
Pioneering work by Delrio et al. [18] showed that long-
range Casimir forces contribute strongly to surface adhe-
sion of ultra-flat (RMS height of 2–10 nm) micromachined 
surfaces at separation distances up to tens of nanometers.
Three critical questions remain for describing the 
roughness-dependent adhesion of surfaces with multi-
scale topography. First, can the classic analytical models 
such as those proposed by Fuller and Tabor, Rumpf, and 
Maugis, be applied to describe their behavior? Second, is 
the importance of long-range adhesive interactions limited 
to ultra-flat surfaces (as found in [18]) or is it generalizable 
to real-world coatings that are rough over many length 
scales? Third, and most generally, which size-scales con-
tribute most strongly to adhesion?
The purpose of the present work is to investigate these 
questions using adhesion tests of some of the hardest mate-
rials: a ruby sphere on polycrystalline diamond substrates. 
Diamond coatings are technologically relevant in a number 
of applications [21], including medical devices [22, 23], 
tool coating [24], face seals [25], and microelectrome-
chanical systems (MEMS)[26]. The roughness of these 
films can be controlled by varying the growth condition 
or by polishing. Thus, we can test substrates with varying 
roughness but nominally identical surface chemistry. This 
allows us to isolate the effects of topography on adhesion. 
The surface topography [27] of these materials and their 
adhesion to soft PDMS [28] has been extensively char-
acterized in prior publications. The present investigation 
examines their adhesion to a hard material: ruby.
Many adhesion studies have used atomic force micros-
copy (AFM) or colloidal AFM to characterize surface 
topography and then perform tip-based adhesion tests on 
the measured surface [29–32]. Such investigations pro-
vide valuable information on the atomic-scale parameters 
governing nanoscale adhesion. However, the small size of 
the contact limits their applicability in understanding the 
contribution of multi-scale roughness to macroscale adhe-
sion. The present investigation overcomes this limitation 
by using AFM to characterize the topography, while using 
a large 0.5-mm-diameter sphere to measure adhesion.

Methods

Experimental Adhesion and Topography 
Measurements

Adhesion tests were carried out between ruby spheres and 
polycrystalline diamond coatings using a MEMS-based 
force sensing probe (FT-MA02, FemtoTools, Buchs, Swit-
zerland). The 0.5-mm-diameter spheres (B0.50R, Swiss 
Jewel, Philadelphia, PA) were pre-polished to an ultra-
smooth (RMS height < 1 nm) finish using a slurry of ruby 
particles (0.05 µm). The spheres were glued to the tips of 
the force-probes to create a sphere-on-flat geometry for the 
test. The substrates comprised four different polycrystalline 
diamond coatings, which were grown by hot-filament chemi-
cal vapor deposition (HF-CVD) and are boron-doped for 
electrical conductivity. The substrates have varying grain 
size, and are denoted microcrystalline diamond (MCD), 
nanocrystalline diamond (NCD), ultrananocrystalline dia-
mond (UNCD), and a polished form of UNCD. The deposi-
tion and surface topography of the diamond coatings are 
characterized in Ref. [33].
For this work, the topography of the spheres and sub-
strates were measured using atomic force microscopy (AFM)
(Dimension V, Bruker, Billerica, MA). Measurements were 
made using diamond-like carbon (DLC)-coated probes (Tap 
DLC300, Mikromasch, Watsonville, CA) in tapping mode. 
Scans with lateral size of 2.5 µm (512 × 512 pixels) were 
performed on each of the four substrates and on the ruby 
spheres.
Representative images for the surface topography of the 
substrates, and of the polished spheres are shown in Fig. 1. 
Using the AFM measurements of 2.5-micron lateral size,  
the root-mean-square height, slope, and curvature of the  

Fig. 1  AFM measurements of the four polycrystalline diamond sub-
strates (a-d) and one instance of a ruby sphere (e). The ruby sphere 
is also shown with its spherical geometry subtracted (f) to allow for 
direct comparison of roughness against the other substrates


Experimental Mechanics 

surfaces are given in Table 1. The surface topography of the 
polycrystalline diamond films has been extensively meas-
ured in Ref. [27]. The numerical analysis included here,  
however, uses only the AFM-based topography measurements.
The MCD and NCD have the largest roughness magni-
tude of the four substrates, as is shown by the vertical scale 
bar of the AFM images in Fig. 1. These two surfaces also 
show clear faceting due to the grain structure. The unpol-
ished UNCD is significantly smoother than the MCD and 
NCD, and the faceting is not apparent at these size scales. 
The features that are visible have been shown to correspond 
to clusters of much smaller grains [27]. The polished UNCD 
is the smoothest of the four surfaces and shows no obvi-
ous grain structure. Similarly, the ruby tip images show a  
very smooth surface; while scratches are visible from the 
polishing process, the peak-to-valley roughness of this ruby 
sphere is smaller than all other surfaces. These AFM images, 
along with four more measurements from different sample 
areas of the various materials, form the basis of the numerical  
analysis that was performed.
The adhesion testing was performed using a custom micro-
mechanical tester in a controlled-environment vacuum  
chamber on a vibration-isolation table. Dry air was flowed 
into the chamber prior to testing until the relative humidity 
was less than 1% (below the minimum reading of the humid-
ity sensor). Dry air was flowed in for the duration of the test 
at low flow rates to ensure consistently low humidity levels.
A three-axis slip-stick piezoelectric stage provides 
closed-loop motion control and real-time x–y-z posi-
tion data. For each individual adhesion measurement, 
the sphere was brought into contact with the substrate, 
loaded to a 10-µN preload (corresponding to a nominal 
Hertz stress of 135 MPa), and then withdrawn at a rate 
of 30 nm/s. The 10-µN preload occurs before the test and 
represents the minimum force required for the probe to 
find the point of contact. After finding contact the tip is  
lowered slowly onto the substrate up to a preload of 5µN. 

Then, the force required to pull the sphere off of the sur-
face is recorded as  Fpull-off, with a force resolution of 30 
nN. A single “test” comprised an array of individual adhe-
sion measurements (typically 1-by-1 mm), for a total of 
400 individual measurements per test. Tests were per-
formed in immediate sequence on all four samples in ran-
domized order, without opening the chamber or modifying 
test conditions. Six such sequences were performed with 
different spheres and different substrate samples, to ensure 
repeatability and reproducibility of results. A schematic of 
a typical test setup is shown in Fig. 2.

Numerical Analysis of Results

The experimental data was fitted using a cohesive zone 
model, using an exponential interaction potential with 
energy U given by

with a hard-wall repulsion at r = 0. Here,  Wadh,int is the 
intrinsic work of adhesion, r is the distance between inter-
acting bodies, and ρ is the “range of adhesion” [34], which 

(1)
U(r) = −Wadh,intexp

(

−r
휌

)

Table 1  RMS roughness values calculated from AFM data only (top) and also from the full-spectrum roughness data, (bottom) which includes 
topography data from stylus, AFM, and TEM measurements of the same surfaces

AFM Data Only
Polished UNCD
Unpolished UNCD
NCD
MCD

RMS height (nm)
3.2 ± 1.6
17.4 ± 2.1
97.1 ± 11.2
107.1 ± 12.0

RMS slope
0.04 ± 0.01
0.39 ± 0.05
0.51 ± 0.07
0.49 ± 0.07

RMS curvature  (nm−1)
2.0×10–3 ± 
1.3×10–3
4.8×10–2 ± 
3.8×10–3
3.9×10–2 ± 
1.1×10–2
2.8×10–2 ± 
6.6×10–3

Stylus, AFM & TEM Data [11]
Polished UNCD
Unpolished UNCD
NCD
MCD
RMS height (nm)
4.2 ± 0.8
17.4 ± 1.3
97.2 ± 11.7
101.2 ± 8.0
RMS slope
0.31 ± 0.08
1.17 ± 0.28
0.92 ± 0.10
0.85 ± 0.10
RMS curvature  (nm−1)
1.99 ± 0.35
6.32 ± 1.20
5.91 ± 1.83
5.04 ± 1.45

Fig. 2  The tester consisted of a ruby sphere glued to a MEMS-based 
force probe, as shown schematically (a) and in an optical image 
(inset). Arrays of measurements (b) were performed on a single sam-
ple, with one measurement per location. A typical force–displace-
ment curve is shown in (c), with the most-negative point recorded as 
the pull-off force


 
Experimental Mechanics

describes the characteristic length scale of the adhesive 
interaction. Note that U and W are energies per unit surface 
area. Since we do not know the exact nature of the atomic-
scale interaction between the two surfaces, this approach 
of using an empirical exponential interaction potential is a 
pragmatic approach to simplify the mathematical calcula-
tions. Similar results would be obtained using more com-
plicated functional forms, e.g. based on instantaneous or 
retarded dispersion interactions, electrostatic interaction, or 
others. Distinguishing precisely between competing func-
tional forms from our macroscopic experiments would be 
difficult. The functional form given in Eq. (1) allows sepa-
rate fitting of the intrinsic work of adhesion (U at distance 
r = 0) and the range of adhesion ρ, which yields the strength 
and length-scale of the interaction. This interaction poten-
tial has been widely used, including in the recent Contact 
Mechanics Challenge [34].
This interaction potential can be converted into a cohe-
sive law (stress-distance relationship) for two interacting 
bodies,

where p is the (compressive) pressure acting between the 
surfaces. For the present analysis, this potential was applied 
to each pixel pairing between the substrate and the tip, 
resulting in the following calculated force Fcalc between the 
two contacting surfaces at separation d:

Here, Apix is the area for a single surface pixel and the 
sum runs over all pixels in x and y. Note that gx,y in Eq. (3) 
is the difference of the topography maps of the ruby sphere 
and the diamond coating, while gx,y + d is the gap between 
the two interacting surfaces. The calculation can only be 
carried out for distances d where the gap gx,y + d is non-
negative everywhere and the surfaces do not interpen-
etrate. The calculated adhesion values were thus found 
by summing the interaction potential pixel-by-pixel over 
every pixel pair of the two scans. The pull-off force is the 
minimum value of the force-separation curve Fcalc(d) that 
is found at the point of closest approach d = -min gx,y.
Due to random topography variation, there were some-
times significant contributions to adhesion from near the 
edges of the AFM scans. Therefore, for all substrate-tip 
combinations, the scans were stitched together so that there 
were no longer edge contributions to the adhesive interaction 
between the rough surface and a sphere of 0.5-mm diam-
eter (< 0.5% change from additional stitching). The stitch-
ing was done by mirroring the surface scans horizontally 

(2)
p(r) = −dU

dr = −

Wadh,int

휌
exp

(

−r
휌

)

(3)
Fcalc(d) = −

∑

x,y

Wadh,int

휌
exp
(−(gx,y + d)

휌

)
Apix

and vertically to ensure that all edges matched up. This was 
needed because real topography measurements are not peri-
odic. Similar to the experiments, the tip was brought into 
contact with the substrate in many locations over a square 
array.
The above rigid analysis was supplemented by an elastic 
and a plastic analysis. For the elastic analysis, we computed 
surface deformation using a Fast-Fourier-transform-accel-
erated boundary element technique [2, 35]. The hard-wall 
constraint was realized using an L-BFGS-B optimizer [36]. 
Note that we do not report the results of the elastic analysis 
explicitly here, but it was carried out to rule out the influence 
of elastic surface deformation. From this elastic analysis, we 
generally found that the surface pressure was exceeding com-
mon hardness values in most of the contact area such that a 
purely plastic analysis is appropriate.
For the plastic analysis, we use a simple bearing-area 
approach. This assumes that the harder surface plastically 
deforms the softer surface on all points that penetrate, and 
that the pressure in the contact area is equal to the hardness 
H. The penetration of the tip is then such that the number of 
contacting (and hence plastically deformed) surface pixels 
is sufficient to support the preload, Ncontact = F∕HApix . A 
preload of 10 µN, chosen to match the experimental preload, 
was used to determine the amount of plastic deformation of 
the softer surface. No plastic deformation then occurs during 
pull-off; the pull-off force is simply a result of the plastically 
deformed geometry. Note that we did not employ a combi-
nation of elastic and plastic contact, but similar plasticity 
models were used in elasto-plastic contexts in Refs. [37–39]. 
For the plastic analysis, surfaces were brought into contact 
up to the specified preload, and the deformed surface at this 
preload was then used in a rigid pull-off calculation.

Experimental Results

The topography can be used to compute roughness metrics 
such as root-mean-square (RMS) height, slope, and curva-
ture, which are commonly used as inputs for rough-contact 
models. Table 1 shows the results of these calculations when 
performed only using the AFM measurements from this 
investigation (top) as compared to the same parameters that 
are computed when all of the many scales of roughness are 
included (bottom, using the full multi-scale spectral analysis 
from Ref. [27]). Table 1 shows the values that might serve 
as inputs to classical models, such as those of Maugis [9] 
or Rumpf [11]. Table 1 also serves to underscore just how 
widely varying these parameters can be when measured at 
different length scales. For example, the root-mean-square 
slope, a parameter that has been identified as important for 
multi-scale roughness models, varies for polished UNCD 
from 0.04 to 0.31 depending on how it is measured.


Experimental Mechanics 

Figure 3 shows the distributions of values for adhesion 
force that have been measured on these four substrates. More 
than 2000 adhesion tests have been performed on every sur-
face, with at least 6 different spheres. Each color on the his-
togram represents a new ruby sphere on a new sample of 
the diamond substrate. The mean adhesion of the polished 
UNCD was far higher than the unpolished version of the 
same material. Both UNCD surfaces showed higher adhe-
sion than either the MCD or the NCD. The mean (median) 
pull-off forces of all four surfaces are 0.11 µN (0.06 µN), 
0.16 µN (0.12 µN), 0.4 µN (0.31 µN), and 8.8 µN (1.75 µN), 
for MCD, NCD, unpolished UNCD, and polished UNCD 
respectively. Due to the large skew in the data, the mean 
value is shifted away from the peak of the distribution 
toward higher adhesion values.
All four of the distributions can be fit using a log-normal dis-
tribution. This is more difficult to see in the linear plots, given 
the skew of a large number of events with small pull-off force. 

Plotted on a log–log scale (Fig. 3, bottom), the log-normal dis-
tribution is shown to accurately fit the data over at least two 
decades of adhesive force. In all cases, the low end of the dis-
tribution is cut off at 30 nN, as this represents the sensitivity of 
the force probe. Similar shapes for adhesion distributions have 
been reported previously for measurements in various contexts, 
including: centrifugal adhesion studies of particle adhesion in 
powders [40, 41]; biological samples and cell adhesion [42, 
43] and many other studies using AFM adhesion measure-
ments [44–46]. The origin of this distribution shape is not yet 
clear. While the fit is good for a log-normal distribution, there 
are other distributions—such as half of a gaussian distribution 
an inverse-gaussian distribution— that also give good qualita-
tive fits. Further investigation is required to ascertain the origin 
of the shape of these distributions.

Discussion

Effective Work of Adhesion and the Application 
of Classical Rough‑adhesion Models

A standard method of analyzing adhesion in rough spheres 
is to use classical sphere-contact models (such as JKR or 
DMT [47]) to extract an effective work of adhesion Wadh,eff , 
and then to use standard roughness models (such as those 
described in the first paragraph of the introduction) to relate 
Wadh,eff to standard roughness parameters. Following the pro-
cedure of Grierson et al. [48], with material parameters of 
ruby (elastic modulus E = 365 GPa and Poisson ratio 휈=0.29) 
and diamond (E = 1010 GPa, 휈=0.22), a nominal sphere 
diameter of 0.5 mm, the Tabor parameter is determined 
to be 0.81. This falls in the transition region between the 
DMT and JKR models. Using Maugis’ analysis for the tran-
sition region between JKR and DMT, and an approximate 
equilibrium spacing of 0.3 nm, the analysis yields values of 
 Wadh,eff = 0.08, 0.13, 0.32, and 7.15 mJ/m2 for MCD, NCD, 
unpolished UNCD, and polished UNCD, respectively. The 
surface chemistry is assumed to be similar for all of these 
HF-CVD diamond coatings, and therefore this difference is 
attributed primarily to surface topography.
It is clear from these measured values of effective work of 
adhesion, along with the values of RMS parameters shown 
in Table 1, that there are no simple relationships between 
RMS parameters and effective work of adhesion. Attempts 
to fit this data using simple analytical models [1, 9, 11] 
were unsuccessful, regardless of which roughness param-
eters were used (AFM-based or multi-scale). One potential 
explanation for why these models fail here is that the pull-
off force for these hard materials is most dependent on the 
behavior of the uppermost contact points. These contacts 
represent the extreme-value statistics of the distribution of 
surface heights. They do not follow the central limit theorem 

Fig. 3  Experimental pull-off data is shown for the four substrates 
across different testing sessions (different colors) on a linear scale 
 (a1-d1). The same data from the top panel is combined into single 
datasets and shown on log–log plots  (a2-d2), with log-normal fits 
shown (red lines)


 
Experimental Mechanics

and are likely not described by the many models based on 
Gaussian statistics.

Intrinsic Work of Adhesion and Range of Adhesion

Instead of a single-asperity model extracting the effective  
work of adhesion for each substrate, a numerical analysis can 
be performed using the combined roughness of the sphere  
and substrate (see Methods). Like the experiments, the cal-
culations were repeated for an array of 20 × 20 contacts on 
each substrate. Each numerical calculation yields a com-
puted pull-off force Fcalc for a specific choice of input values  
for Wadh,int and ρ and a specific contact location on the rough  
surface (Fig. 4a). Then a fitting routine can be applied to all data to  
extract the best-fit values of those material parameters.
For numerical tractability, the analysis was only per-
formed over a square of size of 12.5 µm rather than the 1-mm 
size scale of the experiments. Initially, the calculations were 
performed assuming rigid and/or elastic deformation only. 
Elastic calculations were virtually indistinguishable from the 
rigid calculations and we concluded that elasticity does not 
play a significant role in these contacts. Additionally, the 
micronewton-scale adhesive forces measured experimentally 
could not be explained with adhesion models based on rigid 
or elastically deforming surfaces, thus indicating that plastic 
deformation is likely occurring in these contacts.
We incorporated plastic deformation of the ruby tip with 
hardness of H = 25 GPa [49, 50] into our model using a pen-
etration hardness model (see Methods). We first determine 
the plastic deformation in the softer sphere at a preload of 
10 µN, identical to the average load used to find contact in 
the experiments. Pull-off calculations using the plastically 
deformed topography of the sphere were able to accurately 
reproduce the micronewton scale of pull-off forces from the 
experimental data. The possibility of plastic flow in similar 
hard materials has been reported in nanopillars [51] and nan-
oparticles [52]. A more in-depth analysis of the role of plas-
ticity in these contacts is included in the following section.
The numerical analysis can be fit to the mean values of 
the experimental data from all four substrates in order to 
extract best-fit values for intrinsic work of adhesion and 
the range of adhesion. We note that while Wadh,int simply 
rescales the computed pull-off force, the dependence of Fcalc 
on ρ is nonlinear and depends on the specific topography. 
The range of adhesion ρ is extracted by analyzing the ratios 
of pull-off forces between materials, since this cancels the 
(unknown) intrinsic work of adhesion Wadh,int in our model 
equations. Figure 4b shows the ratio of the pull-off force 
of polished UNCD, NCD and MCD with respect to unpol-
ished UNCD. The solid horizontal lines are the experimen-
tal results and the data points represent calculations carried 
out at various values of ρ (x-axis). The error bars repre-
sent the variation over the contact points. Only for a range 

of adhesion of approximately ρ = 5 nm do all three lines 
cross the experimental results simultaneously. This means 
that while different values of ρ (with modified values of 
Wadh,int) can describe individual experiments, a simultane-
ous fit yields a range of adhesion around 5 nm. Note that 
the increase in pull-off force for small values for range of 
adhesion is due to the finite pixel size. Once the range of 
adhesion was fit, the data was scaled by a factor  Wadh,int to 
match the magnitude of the experiments. A second relative 
error minimization was performed to find the best-fit value 
for  Wadh,int at the best-fit range of adhesion. Figure 4c shows 
the computed pull-off results calculated at various points on 
the rough topography as a function of range of adhesion ρ. 
The work of adhesion used in this plot is the value that yields 
the best possible final fit.
It is clear from Fig. 4 that the range of adhesion strongly 
affects the values of adhesion force. Rougher surfaces, like 
MCD and NCD, are less strongly affected and can be fit 
over a wider band of values for ρ. Smoother surfaces, such 
as the polished UNCD, are more influenced by changes in 
ρ because the increasing range of adhesion enables more of 
the substrate to contribute to adhesion. This can be seen in 
Fig. 4c as a steeper slope for the smoothest polished UNCD 
surface and for the unpolished UNCD. The majority of the 
adhesion contribution to the rougher surfaces (MCD, NCD) 
comes from just one or two asperities, and therefore larger 
values for range of adhesion do not lead to such significant 
contributions to the area of interaction.
There is only one combination of parameters that enables 
the best fit for all samples. The fit was evaluated by comput-
ing and minimizing the mean relative error (MRE) between 

Fig. 4  Computed pull-off forces were calculated by integrating an 
interaction potential over the combined roughness of the sphere and 
substrate (a). The best-fit value of range of adhesion was found by 
fitting to ratios of pull-off force (b), to eliminate the absolute value of 
work of adhesion. Finally, the absolute values of pull-off force were 
matched (c) by finding the best-fit value of intrinsic work of adhesion


Experimental Mechanics 

the fitted and measured adhesion. The uncertainty in the fit 
was computed for all values around the best-fit value with 
MRE < 0.1. This match between calculated and experimen-
tal data was used to extract values for work of adhesion of 
46.3 ± 3.5 mJ/m2 and range of adhesion of 5.6 ± 0.5 nm. Pre-
vious adhesion measurements on rough contacts between 
diamond and other hard materials report similar values for 
the intrinsic work of adhesion by accounting for surface 
roughness [20, 53, 54].
The measured range of adhesion is much longer than is 
expected for typical atomic interactions such as covalent 
bonds or van der Waals forces, which are typically consid-
ered to have a range of adhesion around 0.3 to 0.6 nm [55]. 
However, there is prior nanoscale literature that supports 
a larger-than-expected value for range of adhesion. Using 
DLC-coated AFM tips, Grierson et al. have measured a 
range of adhesion between DLC and UNCD of 4–5 nm 
[56]. While for spherical (parabolic) tips the pull-off force 
does not depend on range of adhesion [57], their measure-
ments exploited the non-parabolic shapes of worn tips, 
where pull-off force does depend on range of adhesion. In 
separate experiments also involving AFM pull-off meas-
urements, Jiang et al. have measured a range of adhesion 
between UNCD and PMMA of 1.5–2.5 nm [20]. Similarly, 
in nanoindentation experiments adhesive forces were found 
to act over distances of 1.5–4.5 nm [58]. As mentioned in 
the introduction, the presence of long-range forces has also 
been observed by DelRio et al. [18] in adhesion experi-
ments involving silicon micro-cantilevers. The experiments 
showed contributions to adhesion from distances up to tens 
of nanometers.
The origin of these large values for range of adhesion is 
still in dispute. Previously proposed explanations involve 
electrostatic interactions due to contact charging [59–61], 
capillary adhesion [62–64], and Casimir forces [18]. First, 
electrostatic interactions have been proposed as a possi-
ble explanation because of the well-known phenomena of 
contact charging [60, 65–68]. While the detailed physical 
mechanism is still in discussion [69], the results are a net 
charge between the two materials that can result in measur-
able electrostatic interactions. In the present testing, these 
long-range electrostatic forces would be expected to be seen 
as measurable forces observed before and after contact. This 
can manifest as a tilting of the “out-of-contact” region of 
the force–displacement curve or as an earlier-than-expected 
snap-into-contact event as the charged sphere attracts the 
uncharged substrate in a new location. While such long-
range interactions have been observed in other, unrelated 
testing where ruby tips were brought into contact with non-
conductive substrates, the present substrates were boron-
doped for conductivity, and the tester and substrates were 
electrically grounded to the vacuum chamber. The meas-
ured force curves in the present testing were similar to that 

shown in Fig. 2d, with no interaction forces observed until 
contact was initiated. Additionally, the operation of a static-
reducing ionization bar had no measurable effect on adhe-
sive forces. Therefore, contact charging is not expected to 
have played a significant role in the present results.
A second common explanation for longer-than expected 
values for range of adhesion is capillarity. Water bridges 
across a contact can increase the area of interaction of a 
rough contact and are known to significantly increase the 
adhesive force. The relative humidity determines the pres-
ence and size of these capillary bridges, which in turn affect 
the adhesive force. The present testing was carried out in a 
dry atmosphere (< 1% RH). This is insufficient to eliminate 
all water from the contact, but will limit its contribution. 
He et al. [70] showed that, even for hydrophilic surfaces, 
capillary necks could not form below a relative humidity of 
20–40%. Numerical analyses [71] also suggests that capil-
lary formation should not play a role in adhesion at low 
humidity. Therefore, capillarity is not expected to be the 
dominant factor in explaining the effect of topography on 
adhesion.
A third common explanation for large values for range 
of adhesion is retarded dispersion, or Casimir, interactions. 
These forces arise due to the finite speed of electromag-
netic interactions and typically act over ranges larger than 
a few nanometers, even up to tens of nm [18]. The present 
investigation is consistent with these findings, since the large 
micronewton adhesive forces cannot be explained without 
considering longer-range interactions. Furthermore, the 
smoother surfaces show a stronger contribution from these 
longer-range interactions, while these interactions play a less 
important role for the rougher surfaces, with fewer, sharper 
asperities in contact. However, the interaction potential used 
here does not explicitly account for any specific attraction 
mechanism. It is an empirical potential that elucidates the 
strength and length-scale of the interaction. In this case, 
those parameters are consistent with Casimir forces, but 
further investigation would be required to conclusively dem-
onstrate the physical origin.

The Role of Plasticity in Adhesion of These Contacts

To specifically verify that plastic deformation can occur in 
these contacts, an additional investigation was performed 
with AFM imaging performed on the ruby sphere (softer 
material) in the exact location of contact before and after 
an array test was performed. The standard adhesion test 
setup does not permit this precise knowledge of test loca-
tion; therefore, an alternate custom micromechanical test 
setup was used, with a cantilever based force sensor, but 
otherwise similar setup. A ruby sphere was polished, pre-
imaged in the AFM (Fig. 5b), and then used in an array test 
of adhesion against an NCD substrate. This testing repeated 


 
Experimental Mechanics

the 400 measurements in an array of locations from a typi-
cal adhesion experiment, but used a preload of 20 µN (the 
minimum load of the alternate test apparatus). The apex of 
the sphere was imaged again after the test (Fig. 5c) and the 
location was matched to the pre-test image. The AFM imag-
ing presented clear evidence of indentations at the tip of the 
sphere. The indentations were approximately 150 – 300 nm 
in lateral size, and approximately 2 – 10 nm in depth. These 
indentations were scattered across the tip of the sphere, with 
single indents concentrated around a region of multiple over-
lapping indents.
The numerical modelling (recalculated at a preload of 20 
µN) predicted deformations with a depth of approximately 
2 nm and edge lengths of approximately 50 nm (Fig. 5a). 
The measurements are in reasonable agreement with predic-
tions. The region of overlapping indentations makes it dif-
ficult to determine the size of a single indentation. However, 
there do appear to be single indentations scattered around 
that region. The measured deformation for what appear to be 
single indents had depths ranging from single nanometers to 
nearly 10 nm and lateral sizes for measured deformation of 
approximately 100 – 500 nm. The computed deformations 
are for a single adhesion test, while the experimental defor-
mations correspond to the cumulative effect of 400 adhesion 
tests against different contact points. Therefore, the overall 
scales of deformations compare favorably, and likely indi-
cate that the tallest asperities on the substrates are serving 
to permanently indent the polished spheres.

Determining the Most Relevant Length‑scales 
of Roughness

The numerical analysis in this investigation has demon-
strated that adhesive interactions act over a length scale 
of greater than 5 nm, and that plasticity serves to increase 

contact area above the predictions of rigid or elastic cal-
culations. These two factors may limit the impact of cer-
tain length-scales of topography on the total macroscopic 
adhesion.
To check the influence of different roughness scales, 
we repeated the pull-off force calculations on a variety 
of virtual surfaces, with different scales of roughness fil-
tered out or included. This was accomplished by taking 
advantage of the all-scale measurements performed on 
the same substrates in Ref. [27] and combining them with 
the AFM measurements performed here. Since we do not 
have multi-scale measurements taken in the exact same 
location, we used the statistics of the random roughness 
to add smaller- and larger-scale roughness to the measure-
ments. Specifically, we started with an AFM image of the 
surface of the type shown in Fig. 1, then we superimposed 
artificially generated roughness that was created using a 
Fourier-filtering algorithm [72, 73] based on the meas-
ured PSD for that particular substrate. Therefore, these 
virtual surfaces are representative of the true multi-scale 
topography of each substrate. Then, from these multi-scale 
“master” surfaces, we filtered out different scales of rough-
ness. Finally, we performed the numerical calculations on 
each of the filtered surfaces to compute the pull-off force 
and determine the sensitivity to different scales of rough-
ness. The detailed approach of creating and filtering these 
surfaces is described in the next paragraph.
To add small-scale roughness, we first stitched the 
512 × 512 pixel AFM scan using mirror images, leading 
to a 1024 × 1024 periodic topography. This stitched sur-
face was first Fourier interpolated on an 8192 × 8192 grid 
(0.625 nm pixel size) and parts of the spectrum with wave-
length smaller than 휆T = 20 nm were cut out. A randomly 
rough surface that follows the substrate PSD for wavelengths 
𝜆 < 𝜆T and has a constant roll-off above 휆T was added to this 
interpolated topography. Features below the varying cutoff 
wavelengths 휆S are then filtered out to check their effect 
on the calculated pull-off force. To add large-scale rough-
ness, the AFM scan was again stitched to create a periodic 
topography, and this was stitched multiple times to yield an 
8192 × 8192 (20 µm linear size) grid. Fourier components 
at wavelengths bigger than 휆T = 1 µm were cut out. A ran-
domly rough surface with spectrum following the substrate 
PSD for wavelengths 𝜆 > 𝜆T and zero below 휆T was added to 
this topography. Features with wavelength above the varying 
cutoff wavelengths 휆L are then filtered out to check how they 
affected the calculated pull-off force.
Figure 6 shows the change in pull-off that occurs when dif-
ferent length scales of roughness are filtered out. In Fig. 6a, 
which shows the effect of small-scale roughness, the leftmost 
datapoints represent the pull-off force computed on the unfil-
tered surface. As the short-wavelength cutoff (x axis) gets 
larger, more and more small-scale roughness is removed from 

Fig. 5  The computed deformation for a single adhesion test is shown 
in panel (a) with the red and blue lines representing x and y direction 
line scans respectively. The actual deformation of the ruby sphere after 
an array of adhesion tests is measured using AFM images taken at the 
sphere apex before (b) and after (c) testing. The images have been pre-
cisely located at the apex of the tip where contact took place, and fidu-
cial markers have been used to orient the image. The after-test image 
confirm the presence of permanent deformation, as is assumed in the 
numerical modeling, seems to be in order-of-magnitude agreement 
with what would be expected after 400 tests in different locations, 
each with the deformation shown in (a)


Experimental Mechanics 

the surface. Thus, the surface is perfectly smooth below this 
cutoff; the rightmost data points approach the pull-off force 
from a perfectly flat plane. The value of pull-off force remains 
constant (within 10%) until the cutoff wavelength reaches 
43 nm. Removing roughness above this size scale has a strong 
effect on the adhesive force, but removing roughness below 
this size has almost no effect. Figure 6b shows a similar calcu-
lation, but now with long-wavelength roughness filtered out; 
thus, the rightmost datapoint represents a nearly unfiltered 
surface. As the long-wavelength cutoff decreases, shorter and 
shorter wavelengths of roughness are removed from the sur-
face, along with all wavelengths above the cutoff. The results 
show that, with removal of roughness with wavelength above 
approximately 1.8 microns, the adhesion remains constant 
(within 10%). Taken together, the two plots in Fig. 6 demon-
strate that there is almost no effect on adhesion from roughness 
with lateral length scales smaller than 43 nm or larger than 
1.8 microns. The critical finding of this analysis is that there 
is a certain band of length scales of roughness, 43 nm to 1.8 
microns, that most-strongly affects adhesion in these materi-
als; roughness outside of this band plays a secondary role in 
adhesion.
The explanation for this critical band of scales of topog-
raphy may be different for the large and small scales. The 
unimportance of large-scale topography is likely linked to 
the area that is interacting with the sphere. Given a range of 
adhesion ρ, a sphere of diameter D will interact with a flat 
surface within a disk of radius r =

√

D휌 . For D = 500 nm 
and ρ = 5.6 nm we obtain a radius of r = 1.7 μm, almost 
exactly the wavelength above which large-scale topography 
no longer matters. This shows that macroscopic pull-off 
forces are strongly affected by finite-size effects, and that 
the magnitude of pull-off forces will depend strongly on 

the sphere radius. This also means that the scales of rough-
ness that matter are determined by the macroscopic contact 
geometry, as long as sphere radius R is much larger than 
typical scales of the roughness.
For the unimportance of small-scale topography, there 
are two effects that enhance each other: the large range of 
adhesion, and the effect of plasticity. The large range of 
adhesion (5.6 nm), which was determined from the numeri-
cal analysis, indicates that topography variations below this 
scale have a reduced contribution to adhesion. For exam-
ple, for rigid surfaces with a sinusoidal gap of amplitude 
2 nm, a range of adhesion of 0.5 nm would mean that only 
the contacting peaks contribute to adhesion and the rest of 
the surface is irrelevant; while a range of adhesion of 5 nm 
would mean that all portions of the surface are adhering, 
with only small differences in relative contributions from 
different locations. An additional explanation is the effect of 
plasticity. The small-scale roughness has the highest local 
slope, and thus the highest surface stress. This means that 
the small-scale roughness will cause deformation, which 
smooths out these scales earlier than other scales, and 
reduces their contribution to macroscale adhesion.

Implications of the Present Findings

The results demonstrated that, for the macroscale adhe-
sion of extremely stiff materials, the very smallest scales 
of roughness do not determine adhesion. This is in stark 
contrast to the adhesion of nanoscale contacts of hard 
materials [19] and to the adhesion of macroscale contacts 
of soft solids [28], both of which show a critical influence 
of smallest-scale roughness. While the present work draws 
on extensive roughness characterization at all scales using 
stylus profilometry, AFM, and TEM, in the end the AFM-
scale roughness data (which covers the critical band of 
length scales discussed in the prior section) was sufficient 
to describe adhesion in these contacts. The introduction of 
smaller-scale roughness, as measured in the TEM, had little 
influence on the predicted adhesion. This means that param-
eters like RMS slope and curvature, that are most strongly 
influenced by the smallest-scale roughness, are less impor-
tant for these hard-material contacts.
In these measurements, the larger scales of roughness 
were also less significant. This implies that measurements 
based on stylus profilometry, which is resolution-limited by 
the micron-scale radius of the tip, are not sufficient to predict 
and describe adhesion of these materials. It also implies that 
a simple scalar parameter such as RMS height is insuffi-
cient to determine macroscale adhesion. We look forward to 
investigating this point further, with the goal to understand 
the generalizability of this result beyond the current experi-
mental setup.

Fig. 6  The contribution to pull-off force from various length scales 
can be directly demonstrated by recalculating pull-off force after filter-
ing out small (a) and large (b) scales of roughness. Specifically, the 
pull-off force calculated from the filtered surfaces is normalized by the 
pull-off force calculated from the unfiltered surfaces. In panel (a), the 
x-axis indicates a short-wavelength cutoff, where all roughness below 
this size scale has been removed. A value near 1 indicates that there 
is almost no effect on pull-off force of filtering out roughness below 
that size scale. In panel (b), the x-axis indicates a long-wavelength 
cutoff, where all roughness above this size is removed. Here, a value 
of 1 indicates no contribution to pull-off force from roughness above 
that size scale


 
Experimental Mechanics

Another key result of the calculations for hard materi-
als is that adhesion is dominated by the asperities at the 
very high end of the height distribution. This leads to highly 
variable extremes in adhesion that can far exceed common 
predictions based on the average asperity height. The adhe-
sion distributions appear to be log-normal, with a long tail, 
which strongly impacts the mean adhesion value and leads 
to rare but significant ultra-high-adhesion events. This has 
strong implications for real-world applications, such as 
MEMS devices, which must overcome such surface forces 
and the threat of stiction. The shape of the measured dis-
tributions would suggest that any moving parts should be 
significantly overdesigned to ensure they can overcome the 
long-tail events.
Another important finding is that the experimental results 
were unable to be fit without the inclusion of plasticity. The 
assumption is that at some length scale, the contact pressure 
will overcome the hardness of one of the materials. Ruby, in 
our experiments, is the softer material. Whether this results 
in plastic flow or fracture, the contact area should evolve to 
support the preload applied and will be significantly larger 
than predictions from elastic models. In recent work in 
both SEM [74] and TEM [51, 52] experiments, plasticity 
in nanoscale ruby and diamond samples has been reported. 
Simple experiments were performed to confirm the pres-
ence of small-scale plasticity on the ruby tip. These find-
ings are supported by prior work demonstrating connections 
between nanoscale plasticity and large-scale properties [75]. 
The nanometer-scale deformation is likely an important fac-
tor behind the presence of a small-wavelength cutoff in the 
roughness that affects adhesion.
The effective work of adhesion (that includes the effect of 
topography) of these surfaces varies by almost two orders 
of magnitude, from 0.08 to 7.15 mJ/m2. These values for 
 Wadh,eff are calculated from the overall sphere geometry 
using spherical contact-mechanics models. Given the wide 
variability of the adhesion force between interfaces of identi-
cal large-scale geometry, it is not surprising that the effective 
work of adhesion varies so much. These variations, how-
ever, are not explained by simple analytical models, such as 
those based on a Gaussian distribution of asperity heights, 
nor those based on a balance between elastic and adhesive 
energy.
Common (elasto-)adhesion theories balance the elas-
tic energy required for deformation with the interfacial 
energy (intrinsic work of adhesion) gained during contact 
[2, 15, 76–78]. In our case, the interfaces are so stiff that 
the deformation energy vastly exceeds any energy gain 
from making contact and we expect no pull-off force (or 
no stickiness [2]) in the “thermodynamic” limit of large 
surface areas and vanishing range of adhesion. In our case, 
the pull-off force is then determined by the interfacial 
stress carried by the intermolecular potential between the 

two surfaces and we can simply compute it by summing 
up these stress contributions (as we did in our numerical 
calculations); or in other words, the interface does not sep-
arate like a crack [76]. The explanation for the appreciable 
pull-off force is tightly linked to the long range (5.6 nm) 
of interaction extracted from this analysis.

Conclusions

By combining detailed measurements of topography, thou-
sands of mm-scale adhesion measurements, and numeri-
cal integration of an interaction potential, we computed 
both the intrinsic material parameters governing adhesion 
as well as the contributions to adhesion from multi-scale 
topography. The intrinsic work of adhesion between ruby 
and polycrystalline diamond was found to be 46.3 mJ/
m2 while the range of adhesion was 5.6 nm. This large 
value for range of adhesion, along with the requirement 
for plasticity in the calculations, leads to a diminished role 
of small-scale topography on the macroscale adhesion of 
these hard contacts. While prior work on soft-material 
adhesion on the same substrates [28] demonstrated the 
important role of single-digit-nm topography on adhe-
sion, the same is not true for the present measurements 
of hard-material adhesion. In fact, based on this analysis 
incorporating plasticity and the large range of adhesion, 
it has been demonstrated that there is a critical band of 
length scales of topography—43 nm to 1.8 µm—which 
plays the most significant role in macroscale adhesion for 
these hard materials.

Acknowledgements We thank Nathaniel Miller for useful discussion 
and feedback on the manuscript. TDBJ, AG, and LAT acknowledge 
support from the National Science Foundation under award CMMI-
1727378. AS and LP acknowledge funding by the Deutsche Forschun-
gsgemeinschaft under Germany’s Excellence Strategy (project EXC-
2193/1 – 390951807) and by the European Research Council (Starting 
Grant 757343). Use of the NanoFabrication and Characterization Facil-
ity (NFCF) in the Petersen Institute for Nano Science and Engineering 
(PINSE) is acknowledged.

Data Availability All data from this investigation is freely available 
for download. The surface topography data can be accessed using 
the following five URLS: (1) https:// conta ct. engin eering/ go/ btpax/ (2) 
https:// conta ct. engin eering/ go/ 4r74d/ (3) https:// conta ct. engin eering/ 
go/ jqcfh/ (4) https:// conta ct. engin eering/ go/ 9bcrf/ (5) https:// conta ct. 
engin eering/ go/ gneqk/ and the other measured data can be accessed 
using the following https:// doi. org/ 10. 18117/ x77q- fg63.

Conflict of Interests The authors declare that they have no potential 
conflicts of interest regarding this research.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 


Experimental Mechanics 

provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen ses/ by/4. 0/.

References

 1. Fuller KNG, Tabor D (1975) The Effect of Surface Roughness on 
the Adhesion of Elastic Solids. Proc R Soc Lond A 345:327–342

 2. Pastewka L, Robbins MO (2014) Contact between rough surfaces 
and a criterion for macroscopic adhesion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
111(9):3298–3303

 3. Berthoud P, Baumberger T (1998) Shear Stiffness of a 
Solid-Solid Multicontact Interface. Proc Math Phys Eng Sci 
454(1974):1615–1634

 4. Benz M, Rosenberg KJ, Kramer EJ, Israelachvili JN (2006) The 
deformation and adhesion of randomly rough and patterned sur-
faces. J Phys Chem B 110(24):11884–11893

 5. Akarapu S, Sharp T, Robbins MO (2011) Stiffness of contacts 
between rough surfaces. Phys Rev Lett 106(20):204301

 6. Nosonovsky M, Bhushan B (2008) Biologically inspired sur-
faces: Broadening the scope of roughness. Adv Funct Mater 
18(6):843–855

 7. Persson BNJ (2005) Sliding Friction. Springer
 8. Greenwood JA, Williamson JBP (1966) Contact of nomi-
nally flat surfaces. Proc R Soc London Ser A Math Phys Sci 
295(1442):300–319

 9. Maugis D (1995) On the contact and adhesion of rough surfaces. 
J Adhes Sci Technol 10(2):161–175

 10. Bush AW, Gibson RD, Thomas TR (1975) The Elastic Contact of 
a Rough Surface. Wear 35:87–111

 11. Rabinovich YI, Adler JJ, Ata A, Singh RK, Moudgil BM (2000) 
Adhesion between nanoscale rough surfaces. I. Role of asperity 
geometry. J Colloid Interface Sci 232(1):10–16

 12. Rabinovich YI, Adler JJ, Ata A, Singh RK, Moudgil BM (2000) 
Adhesion between nanoscale rough surfaces: II. Measurement and 
comparison with theory. J Colloid Interface Sci 232(1):17–24

 13. Mandelbrot BB, Passoja DE, Paullay AJ (1984) Fractal character 
of fracture surfaces of metals. Nature 308(5961):721–722

 14. Persson BNJ (2001) Theory of rubber friction and contact 
mechanics. J Chem Phys 115(8):3840–3861

 15. Persson BNJ, Tosatti E (2001) The effect of surface roughness on 
the adhesion of elastic solids. J Chem Phys 115(12):5597-5610

 16. Bradley RS (1932) The cohesive force between solid surfaces and 
the surface energy of solids. London, Edinburgh Dublin Philos 
Mag J Sci 13(86):853-862

 17. Greenwood JA (1997) Adhesion of Elastic Spheres. Proc R Soc 
Lond A 453:1277–1297

 18. Delrio FW, DeBoer MP, Knapp JA, Reedy ED, Clews PJ, Dunn 
ML (2005) The role of van der Waals forces in adhesion of 
micromachined surfaces. Nat Mater 4:629–634

 19. Jacobs TDB et al (2013) The effect of atomic-scale roughness on 
the adhesion of nanoscale asperities: A combined simulation and 
experimental investigation. Tribol Lett 50(1):81–93

 20. Jiang Y, Turner KT (2016) Measurement of the strength and range 
of adhesion using atomic force microscopy. Extrem Mech Lett 
9:119–126

 21. May PW (2000) Diamond thin films : a 21st-century material. Phil 
Trans R Soc Lond A 358:473–495

 22. Mochalin VN, Turcheniuk K (2017) Biomedical Applications of 
Nanodiamond (Review). Nanotechnology 28:252001

 23. Narayan R (2013) Diamond-Based Materials for Biomedical 
Applications. Woodhead Publishing 

 24. Sheikh-Ahmad J, Davim JP (2012) Machining Technology for 
Composite Materials.Woodhead Publishing

 25. Sumant AV et al (2005) Ultrananocrystalline diamond film as a 
wear-resistant and protective coating for mechanical seal applica-
tions. Tribol Trans 48(1):24–31

 26. Auciello O et al (2007) Are diamonds a MEMS’ best friend? IEEE 
Microw Mag 8(6):61–75

 27. Gujrati A et al (2021) Comprehensive topography characteriza-
tion of polycrystalline diamond coatings. Surf Topogr Metrol 
Prop 9(014003)

 28. Dalvi S, Gujrati A, Khanal SR, Pastewka L, Dhinojwala A, 
Jacobs TDB (2019) Linking energy loss in soft adhesion to sur-
face roughness. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 116(51):25484–25490

 29. Kumar A, Staedler T, Jiang X (2013) Role of relative size of 
asperities and adhering particles on the adhesion force. J Col-
loid Interface Sci 409:211–218

 30. Laitinen O, Bauer K, Niinimäki J, Peuker UA (2013) Validity 
of the Rumpf and the Rabinovich adhesion force models for 
alumina substrates with nanoscale roughness. Powder Technol 
246:545–552

 31. Zou Y, Jayasuriya S, Manke CW, Mao G (2015) Influence of 
Nanoscale Surface Roughness on Colloidal Force Measure-
ments. Langmuir 31:10341–10350

 32. Ramakrishna SN, Clasohm LY, Rao A, Spencer ND (2011) Con-
trolling adhesion force by means of nanoscale surface rough-
ness. Langmuir 27(16):9972–9978

 33. Gujrati A, Khanal SR, Pastewka L, Jacobs TDB (2018) Combin-
ing TEM, AFM, and Profilometry for Quantitative Topography 
Characterization Across All Scales. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 
10(34):29169–29178

 34. Müser MH et al (2017) Meeting the Contact-Mechanics Chal-
lenge. Tribol Lett 65(118)

 35. Pastewka L, Robbins MO (2016) Contact area of rough spheres: 
Large scale simulations and simple scaling laws. Appl Phys 
Lett 108(221601)

 36. Byrd RH, Lu P, Nocedal J, Zhu C (1995) A Limited Memory 
Algorithm for Bound Constrained Optimization. SIAM J Sci 
Comput 16(5):1190–1208

 37. Almqvist A, Sahlin F, Larsson R, Glavatskih S (2007) On the 
dry elasto-plastic contact of nominally flat surfaces. Tribol Int 
40(4):574–579

 38. Pérez-Ràfols F, Larsson R, Almqvist A (2016) Modelling of 
leakage on metal-to-metal seals. Tribol Int 94:421–427

 39. Weber B, Suhina T, Junge T, Pastewka L, Brouwer AM, Bonn 
D (2018) Molecular probes reveal deviations from Amon-
tons’ law in multi-asperity frictional contacts. Nat Commun 
9(1):1–7

 40. Salazar-Banda GR, Felicetti MA, Gonçalves JAS, Coury JR, 
Aguiar ML (2007) Determination of the adhesion force between 
particles and a flat surface, using the centrifuge technique. Pow-
der Technol 173(2):107–117

 41. Lam KK, Newton JM (1991) Investigation of applied compres-
sion on the adhesion of powders to a substrate surface. Powder 
Technol 65(1–3):167–175

 42. Chen Y, Busscher HJ, van der Mei HC, Norde W (2011) Statisti-
cal analysis of long- and short-range forces involved in bacterial 
adhesion to substratum surfaces as measured using atomic force 
microscopy. Appl Environ Microbiol 77(15):5065–5070

 43. Sztilkovics M et al (2020) Single-cell adhesion force kinetics 
of cell populations from combined label-free optical biosensor 
and robotic fluidic force microscopy. Sci Rep 10(1):1–13


 
Experimental Mechanics

 44. Tolias P et al (2018) Adhesive force distributions for tungsten 
dust deposited on bulk tungsten and beryllium-coated tungsten 
surfaces. Nucl Mater Energy 15:55–63

 45. Tormoen GW, Drelich J, Nalaskowski J (2005) A distribution of 
AFM pull-off forces for glass microspheres on a symmetrically 
structured rough surface. J Adhes Sci Technol 19:215–234

 46. Götzinger M, Peukert W (2004) Particle Adhesion Force Dis-
tributions on Rough Surfaces. Langmuir 20(20):5298–5303

 47. Jacobs TDB, Mate CM, Turner KT, Carpick RW (2013) Under-
standing the Tip–Sample Contact: An Overview of Contact 
Mechanics from the Macro- to the Nanoscale, in (Dalia G. 
Yablon, ed.) Scanning Probe Microscopy in Industrial Appli-
cations: Nanomechanical Characterization. John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc.

 48. Grierson DS, Flater EE, Carpick RW (2005) Accounting for the 
JKR-DMT transition in adhesion and friction measurements with 
atomic force microscopy. J Adhes Sci Technol 19(3–5):291–311

 49. Krell A, Schädlich S (2001) Nanoindentation hardness of submi-
crometer alumina ceramics. Mater Sci Eng A 307(1–2):172–181

 50. Krell A, Blank P (1995) Grain size dependence of hardness in 
dense submicronmeter alumina. J Am Ceram Soc 78:1118–1120

 51. Bu YQ, Wang P, Nie AM, Wang HT (2020) Room-temperature 
plasticity in diamond. Sci China Technol Sci 64:32–36

 52. Issa I et al (2018) Room temperature plasticity and phase transfor-
mation of nanometer-sized transition alumina nanoparticles under 
pressure. Acta Mater 150:308–316

 53. Mastrangelo CH, Hsu CH (1992) Simple experimental technique 
for the measurement of the work of adhesion of microstructures. 
Tech Dig IEEE Solid-State Sens Actuator Work 208–212

 54. Sumant AV, Grierson DS, Gerbi JE, Carlisle JA, Auciello O, 
Carpick RW (2007) Surface chemistry and bonding configura-
tion of ultrananocrystalline diamond surfaces and their effects on 
nanotribological properties. Phys Rev B - Condens Matter Mater 
Phys 76(23):1–11

 55. Atkins P, de Paula J (2006) Physical Chemistry for the Life Sciences, 
Oxford University Press

 56. Grierson DS, Liu J, Carpick RW, Turner KT (2013) Adhesion of 
nanoscale asperities with power-law profiles. J Mech Phys Solids 
61(2):597–610

 57. Maugis D (1992) Adhesion of spheres: The JKR-DMT transition 
using a dugdale model. J Colloid Interface Sci 150(1):243–269

 58. Wang M, Liechti KM, White JM, Winter RM (2004) Nanoindenta-
tion of polymeric thin films with an interfacial force microscope. 
J Mech Phys Solids 52(10):2329–2354

 59. Kovalev AE, Gorb SN (2012) Charge contribution to the adhe-
sion performance of polymeric microstructures. Tribol Lett 
48(1):103–109

 60. Feshanjerdi M, Malekan A (2019) Contact electrification 
between randomly rough surfaces with identical materials. J Appl 
Phys 125(165302)

 61. Tang T, Hui CY, Jagota A (2006) Adhesive contact driven by 
electrostatic forces. J Appl Phys 99(054906)

 62. de Boer MP, de Boer PC (2007) Thermodynamics of capil-
lary adhesion between rough surfaces. J Colloid Interface Sci 
311(1):171–185

 63. DelRio FW, Dunn ML, de Boer MP (2008) Capillary adhe-
sion model for contacting micromachined surfaces. Scr Mater 
59(9):916–920

 64. Sedighi M, Svetovoy VB, Palasantzas G (2016) Capillary-force 
measurement on SiC surfaces. Phys Rev E 93(062803)

 65. Muller VM, Aleinikova IN, Shcherbina GI, Toporov YP, Derjaguin 
BV (1994) The influence of contact electrification on the adhe-
sion of dielectric elastic spheres subjected to external loads before 
detachment. Prog Surf Sci 45(1–4):199–222

 66. Wang Y et al (2015) The Instability of Angstrom-Scale Head-
Disk Interface Induced by Electrostatic Force. IEEE Trans Magn 
51(11):1–4

 67. Burgo TAL, Silva CA, Balestrin LBS, Galembeck F (2013) Fric-
tion coefficient dependence on electrostatic tribocharging. Sci Rep 
3:2384

 68. Waitukaitis SR, Lee V, Pierson JM, Forman SL, Jaeger HM (2014) 
Size-dependent same-material tribocharging in insulating grains. 
Phys Rev Lett 112(21):1–5

 69. Lacks DJ, Sankaran RM (2011)Contact electrification of insulat-
ing materials. J Phys D: Appl Phys 44 (453001)

 70. He M, Szuchmacher Blum A, Aston DE, Buenviaje C, Overney 
RM, Luginbühl R (2001) Critical phenomena of water bridges in 
nanoasperity contacts. J Chem Phys 114(3):1355–1360

 71. Bazrafshan M, de Rooij MB, Schipper DJ (2018) Adhesive force 
model at a rough interface in the presence of thin water films: The 
role of relative humidity. Int J Mech Sci 140:471–485

 72. Ramisetti SB, Campañá C, Anciaux G, Molinari JF, Müser MH, 
Robbins MO (2011) The autocorrelation function for island areas 
on self-affine surfaces. J Phys Condens Matter 23(215004)

 73. Jacobs TDB, Junge T, Pastewka L (2017) Quantitative characteri-
zation of surface topography using spectral analysis. Surf Topogr 
Metrol Prop 5(013001)

 74. Regan B et al (2020) Plastic Deformation of Single-Crystal Dia-
mond Nanopillars. Adv Mater 32(1906458)

 75. Barenblatt GI, Monteiro PJM (2010) Scaling laws in nanomechan-
ics. Phys Mesomech 13(5–6):245–248

 76. Johnson KL, Kendall K, Roberts AD (1971) Surface energy and 
the Contact of Elastic Solids. Proc R Soc Lond A Math Phys Sci 
324(1558):201–313

 77. Muller VM, Yushenko VS, Derjaguin BV (1980) On the Influence 
of Molecular Forces on the Deformation of an Elastic Sphere. J 
Colloid Interface Sci 77(5):157-167

 78. Persson BN, Bucher F, Chiaia B (2002) Elastic contact between 
randomly rough surfaces: Comparison of theory with numerical 
results. Phys Rev B 65(18):184106

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


