© 2021 IEEE.  Personal use of this material is permitted.  Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any 
current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new 
collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other 
works. 
 
Published on IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 69, 3, pp. 5048-5053, 2021 
DOI: 10.1109/TAP.2021.3061010. 


8
First Author et al.: Title

Abstract— The aim of this Communication is to investigate and 

demonstrate the possibility to overcome the fundamental limitations of 
mantle cloaking for antennas by exploiting non-linear metasurfaces. First, 
we recap and give additional physical insights about the fundamental 
bounds that apply to the electric properties of an antenna that is made 
invisible at its own resonance frequency. Then, an innovative strategy is 
proposed to circumvent these limits through the introduction of non-linear 
elements that are able to dynamically transform the geometry of the 
cloaking metasurface depending on the power level of the impinging field. 
Different non-linear designs are discussed, and their effectiveness is 
assessed through the relevant benchmark example of a half-wavelength 
dipole antenna able to efficiently transmit high-power signals while being 
invisible to low power ones. In addition, the capability of such non-linear 
mantle cloaks to enable the shaping of the radiation pattern of an antenna 
array depending on the power level of the received/transmitted signal is 
demonstrated. These innovative cloaking devices may find applications in 
different radiating systems enabling unprecedented functionalities.

Index 
Terms—Electromagnetic 
cloaking, 
mantle 
cloaking, 

metasurfaces, 
receiving
antennas, 
non-linear 
metasurfaces, 

reconfigurable metasurfaces, scattering, phased arrays.

I.
INTRODUCTION

In the context of electromagnetic scattering theory, the optical 

theorem relates the forward scattering amplitude of a passive object 
to its total extinction cross section [1]. This theorem directly implies 
that any sensing device able to partially absorb an impinging signal 
necessarily introduces some “shadows”, which perturb the 
measurement and make the sensor detectable by an external observer. 
In this framework, the research has been focused on circumventing 
this fundamental limitation, starting from the concept of minimum-
scattering 
antennas 
[2],[3]. 
More 
recently, 
the 
advent 
of 

metamaterials and cloaking techniques has given new life to this 
research area, specifically in view of its application towards sensor

Manuscript received March XX, 2020; accepted XXX XX, 202X. Date of 

publication XXXX XX, 202X; date of current version XXXX XX, 202X. This 
work has been developed in the frame of the activities of the research contract 
MANTLES, funded by the Italian Ministry of Education, University and 
Research as a PRIN 2017 project (protocol number 2017BHFZKH). 
(Corresponding author: S. Vellucci)

S. Vellucci, G. Oliveri, and M. Salucci are with the ELEDIA Research 

Center (ELEDIA@UniTN - University of Trento), Trento, 038123 Italy (e-
mail: stefano.vellucci@unitn.com). 

A. Monti and M. Barbuto are with the Niccolò Cusano University, 00166, 

Rome, Italy.

A. Toscano, and F. Bilotti are with the Department of Engineering, ROMA 

TRE University, 00146 Rome, Italy.

Color versions of one or more of the figures in this communication are 

available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

Digital Object Identifier XXXXXXXXXXXXX

invisibility [4]-[6]. However, any sensor, even if covered with a 
cloaking structure, is still a passive object that must satisfy the optical 
theorem. Therefore, a cloaked passive sensor is always the result of a 
trade-off between the desired absorption level and its unavoidable 
“signature” in terms of scattered power [7]. 

The design of cloaked sensors has been thoroughly investigated in 

the last years, especially for antenna systems working at microwaves 
and radio frequencies. In particular, the mantle cloaking approach 
[8]-[10] has emerged as one of the most versatile among the available 
techniques suitable for antenna scenarios, since it enables the design 
of conformal cloaking devices that do not electromagnetically isolate 
the object to hide [11]-[14]. Several configurations have been 
proposed to reciprocally conceal antennas working at different 
frequencies, such that two radiating elements can be placed in close 
proximity without causing a mutual blockage [15]-[22]. However, the 
performance of such designs is not bounded by the optical theorem,
since the cloaking structure applied to each antenna is designed to 
reduce its scattered power at the operating frequency of the other 
elements, i.e., it introduces an out-of-band scattering reduction.
Therefore, the cloaked antenna actually scatters a non-negligible 
amount of power at its own operating frequency (i.e, in-band) thus
allowing an efficient operation in reception/transmission. 

On the contrary, the synthesis of antennas/sensors able to achieve 

invisibility at their own operating frequency turns out to be a much 
more challenging problem both from the theoretical and from the 
practical viewpoints. Indeed, the design of antennas able to 
efficiently transmit power while being invisible to an external 
radiating system operating at the same frequency is theoretically
forbidden (as stated by the optical theorem) if a linear, passive, and 
time-invariant cloak is used. In other terms, if we cloak an antenna in 
the receiving mode, the presence of the cloaking structure irreparably 
worsens the performance of the antenna in the transmission mode.

In recent years, some attempts to circumvent the limitations of 

linear, passive, and time-invariant cloaking devices have been made. 
More specifically, the use of active non-Foster circuits has been 
proposed to dramatically increase the operating bandwidth of mantle 
cloaks [23]. Moreover, the peculiar features of parity-time symmetric 
systems have been proposed as a possible route to compensate losses 
and, thus, to allow the design of a truly invisible sensor, i.e. 
exhibiting zero scattering but still being able to receive the impinging 
signal [24],[25]. Although active circuits potentially enable to 
overcome the fundamental limits of passive and linear cloaking 
structures, they are still affected by some drawbacks, such as stability 
issues and the need for an external feeding structure. However, some 
of these limitations could be also circumvented by breaking a 
different assumption, i.e., the linearity of the overall system. In this 
regard, non-linear elements have been used to obtain a cloaking 
structure exhibiting a power-dependent behavior [26]-[28]. However, 
in these cases, the non-linear cloak is still designed for passive 
scatterers, and, to the best of the authors' knowledge, no efforts have 

On the Use of Non-Linear Metasurfaces for Circumventing Fundamental 

Limits of Mantle Cloaking for Antennas

Stefano Vellucci, Student Member, IEEE, Alessio Monti, Senior Member, IEEE, Mirko Barbuto, 
Senior Member, IEEE, Giacomo Oliveri, Senior Member, IEEE, Marco Salucci, Member, IEEE

Alessandro Toscano, Senior Member, IEEE, and Filiberto Bilotti, Fellow, IEEE

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2021.3061010

Copyright (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


8
First Author et al.: Title

been carried out to exploit non-linearity to design an invisible 
antenna/sensor. In this framework, a different approach based on the 
use of cloaking devices able to distinguish between different 
waveforms has been recently proposed [29]. Thanks to the adoption 
of so-called waveform-selective circuits [30], an antenna has been 
made invisible/visible to either a short pulse or a continuous signal. 
However, in [29] the non-linear elements of the circuit (i.e., the 
diodes) are used to rectify to DC the incoming signal, and the power-
dependent behavior is not properly engineered and exploited.

Inspired by these studies, the aim of this contribution is to 

investigate the potentialities offered by non-linear elements, such as 
PIN diodes, to design a covering structure allowing to cloak a 
radiating element at its own operating frequency. In particular, by 
exploiting the mantle cloaking technique, the possibility to design an 
antenna covered with a non-linear metasurface that exhibits minimum 
scattering response for low-power (LP) levels and, simultaneously, 
efficient radiation for high-power (HP) signals at the same frequency 
is demonstrated. The adoption/customization of such an approach in 
those applicative scenarios where a considerable difference between 
transmitted and received power levels (e.g., an antenna operating in a 
hostile environment requiring radar invisibility but normal operation 
in transmission) is discussed. 

Furthermore, the effectiveness of non-linear cloaks is also 

demonstrated in invisibility problems involving multi-antenna 
complex systems. More in detail, the design of a bi-dimensional array 
of dipole antennas exhibiting a steerable high-gain beam in the 
transmitting mode and an omnidirectional radiation pattern for low-
power received signals is illustrated [31]. It is worth noticing that, 
compared to [28], here we deal with the design of a non-linear cloak 
for the in-band scattering reduction of active elements. Thus, since 
the fundamental limitations due to the optical theorem apply, the 
design process of the cloak proposed here is significantly different
and further complicated, as the radiating and electrical characteristics 
of the antenna elements must be preserved.

II.
NON-LINEAR METASURFACES FOR CLOAKED ANTENNAS

The optical (or “forward scattering”) theorem
defines
the

fundamental bounds relating the total scattered and absorbed powers 
to the forward scattered field of any passive scatterer [1] included, 
thus, sensors and antennas. From an antenna point of view, it follows 
that fundamental limitations exist for the absorption efficiency of 
radiating devices, which is defined as the ratio between the absorbed 
power over the sum of absorbed and scattered powers. 

As known, the power scattered by an antenna is due to the 

combination of two different quantities: the antenna re-radiation 
scattering, which is due to the mismatch between the antenna input 
impedance and its load, and the antenna structural scattering (also 
referred to as residual scattering [32],[33]). The first term introduces 
a fundamental difference between the antennas’ scattering and the 
scattering from passive objects. In this latter case, in fact, only 
structural scattering is present [32]. 

In the case of a matched antenna (i.e., assuming zero reradiation

scattering), lower and upper scattering power bounds have been 
derived [33], showing that an increasing directivity of the scattered 
power (tending to infinity) is required to maximize the absorption 
efficiency and, at the same time, massively reduce the structural 
scattering. Similar bounds have been defined for the particular case 
of an antenna/sensor coated by properly designed metamaterial 
covers [7]. In this case, however, the presence of the re-radiation 
scattering contribution, due to the mismatch between the antenna and 
its load, was considered. Indeed, it was shown that covering an
antenna with a plasmonic or a mantle cloak able to minimize the

antenna structural scattering (i.e., designed to reduce the scattering 
from the antenna under open-circuit conditions) allows tuning its
absorption efficiency by simply acting on the value of the load [7]. 
This example suggested the possibility to exploit plasmonic or mantle 
cloaks not only to achieve an invisibility effect minimizing the total 
scattering from the antenna, but also maximizing the absorption 
efficiency characteristic by acting just on the scattering structural 
term.

However, it is worth emphasizing that, in antenna scenarios, the 

presence of both the re-radiation and structural scattering terms 
makes the cloak design more challenging compared to the case of 
passive objects. In fact, the cloaking of a matched antenna introduces 
a perturbation of its matching condition, since the total scattering of 
the antenna also depends on the impedance matching through the 
reradiation scattering contribution.

For the sake of clarity, this phenomenon is illustrated in Fig. 1 for 

the general case of a half-wavelength dipole antenna resonating at the 
frequency f0 = 3GHz. When the antenna is coated by a mantle cloak 
designed to suppress the scattering of the antenna at f0 (Fig. 1 (b)), 
the realized gain pattern of the antenna (Fig. 1(d)) strongly 
deteriorates in comparison with the uncloaked case (Fig. 1(c)), due to 
the mismatch of the antenna with its load. In other terms, the cloaking 
device inevitably modifies the value of the antenna input impedance. 
As can be appreciated in Fig. 2, the imaginary part of the antenna 
input impedance is almost zero in the uncloaked case, and its real part 
turns out to be around the standard 50 Ω value. Therefore, the dipole 
antenna presents a good impedance matching at f0. Conversely, in the 
cloaked case, i.e., when the antenna scattering cross section (SCS) is 
suppressed at f0, the real part of the input impedance significantly 
increases, while the imaginary part tends to infinity (i.e., open-circuit 
condition), preventing the use of this cloaked antenna as an effective 
transmitting radiator. Thus, it is evident that, compared to the 
cloaking of passive scatterers, a different design approach should be 
used to preserve the electric and radiative characteristics of the 
antenna when the cloak is applied.

The idea explored in this paper is to circumvent this fundamental 

bound by exploiting a non-linear cloaking device able to turn 
ON/OFF its cloaking effects depending on the power level of the 
impinging wave [31]. To better explain this idea, let us consider a 
conventional mantle cloak for a wire antenna made of a purely 
reactive metasurface printed on a dielectric substrate [17]-[22]. 

Fig. 1. (a) 3D scattering pattern and (c) 3D realized gain pattern of a 

half-wavelength dipole antenna on a 50 Ω load, evaluated at the resonant 
frequency f0. (b), (d) Same as (a), (c) when the antenna is coated by a 
mantle cloak operating at f0.

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2021.3061010

Copyright (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


8
First Author et al.: Title

In order to achieve a cloaking effect, reactive metasurfaces made 

of either vertical or horizontal sub-wavelength metallic strips can be 
used [12]. These structures can be effectively characterized by using 
a purely imaginary surface impedance (Zscloaking), whose value can be 
analytically derived and simply controlled by acting on the width and 
distance between the strips [12].

To design a power-dependent mantle cloak, the gaps of these 

conventional metasurfaces can be loaded with diode pairs, as
schematically reported in Fig. 3, where two different configurations 
for capacitive or inductive metasurfaces are shown. Since the 
equivalent impedance of the diodes switches from one of a small 
resistance for HP signals (RHP), to a parallel between a large 
resistance (RLP) and a capacitance (CLP) for LP signals [34], the
diodes act as non-linear elements able to short/open circuiting 
consecutive strips. Thus, the loaded metasurfaces
exhibit an 

equivalent surface reactance that depends on the power level of the
impinging signal.

Furthermore, as long as the power is within the operating regime 

of the diode, multiple switching can be obtained without incurring in 
bistability or irreversible effects [35]-[36].

Fig. 3 reports two different unit-cells that can be used to design 

either a capacitive or inductive non-linear metasurface for cloaking 
application. In particular, when a non-linear cloaking capacitive 
metasurface is needed, the configuration reported in Fig. 3(a) can be 
exploited. Here, the equivalent surface reactance of the metasurface
is determined by the period D of the metasurface, the distance g
between the strips, and by the impedance of the diode loading the gap 
between consecutive strips. It is worth noticing that the absolute 
value of the surface reactance of the metasurface decreases by 
reducing the dimension of D (once fixed g) [12], and that the diode 
acts as a short-circuit in the HP scenario or as an open-circuit in the 
LP scenario [28]. Thus, the open/short-circuiting effect of the diodes 
is exploited to dynamically modify the period D of the metasurface 
unit cell.

Specifically, in the LP scenario (Fig. 3(b)), due to the open-

circuiting of the diodes, the period of the metasurface unit cell is D = 
DLP and the value of the surface reactance is ZsC*. Conversely, in the 
HP scenario (Fig. 3 (c)), the loaded strips are short-circuited and the 
periodicity D of the unit-cell is transformed into DHP. Thus, the value 
of the surface impedance is increased and is equal to ZsC**. Therefore, 
to design a capacitive metasurface whose cloaking effect turns ON 
for LP signals, its geometry should be chosen so that ZsC* is equal to 
the desired cloaking value (i.e., ZsC* = Zscloaking). The cloaking effect 
is, then, turned OFF for HP signals since the value of the surface 
impedance is varied to ZsC**. The opposite behavior (i.e., cloak ON 
for HP signals, OFF for LP signals) can be achieved by engineering 
the metasurface geometry such that ZsC** = Zscloaking.

The same approach can be exploited in the case of inductive 

metasurface using the configuration reported in Fig. 3(d), made of 
continuous vertical metallic strips interleaved by truncated loaded 
strips. In this case, the metasurface surface reactance depends on the 
period d and the width w of the strips. In particular, the surface 
reactance of the metasurface decreases by reducing the dimension of 
d for a constant value of w [12]. Thus, in the LP scenario (Fig. 3(e)), 
due to the open-circuiting of the diodes, the period of the metasurface 
unit cell is d = dLP and a desired value of the surface reactance can be 
obtained (ZsL*); in the HP scenario (Fig. 3(f)), the loaded strip is 
short-circuited, the period transformed into d = dHP, and the surface 
reactance is increased to ZsL**. Thus, to design an inductive 
metasurface whose cloaking effect turns ON for LP signals, its 
geometry should be engineered such that ZsL*
= Zscloaking. Instead, 

when an inductive metasurface whose cloaking effect turns ON for 
HP signals the metasurface should be designed such that its value of 
the surface impedance is  ZsL** = Zscloaking.

Finally, it is worth noticing that in the HP scenario, for both 

capacitive (Fig. 3(c)) and inductive configurations (Fig. 3(f)), in 
comparison with its equivalent unloaded value, the metasurface 
reactance exhibits a slight deviation due to the parasitic capacitance 
CLP of the diodes.

Fig. 2. Complex input impedance and total scattering cross section of a 

half-wavelength dipole antenna when coated by a mantle cloak operating at 
f0 (cloaked) and w/o the coating cloak (bare).

Fig. 3. Capacitive ((a), (b), (c)) or inductive ((d), (e), (f)) metasurface 

unit-cells loaded by diode pairs for designing non-linear mantle cloaks. (b) 
Equivalent schematic configuration for the capacitive metasurface unit cell 
for low-power (LP) signals. (c) Same as (b), but for high-power (HP) signals. 
(e), (f) Same as (b),(c), respectively, but for an inductive metasurface unit 
cell.

TABLE I

DIMENSIONS OF THE NON-LINEAR CLOAKED ANTENNA

Symbol
Quantity
Value

w
Width of the strip
λ0 / 165

dHP
Strip periodicity
λ0 /127

gap
Gap between the interleaved strip
λ0 / 100

L
Length of the dipole
λ0 / 2.5

a
Radius of the dipole
λ0 / 50

g
Gap of the dipole
λ0 / 100

ac
Radius of the cloak
1.2·a

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2021.3061010

Copyright (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


8
First Author et al.: Title

III.
NUMERICAL RESULTS

To demonstrate the validity of our approach, a half-wavelength 

dipole antenna covered with a non-linear metasurface has been 
designed to exhibit, at the resonant frequency f0 = 3GHz, minimum 
scattering for LP and efficient radiation for HP signals. Since an 
inductive metasurface is required to cloak a dipole antenna at its 
resonance frequency [7], the mantle cloak configuration reported in 
Fig. 3(d) has been exploited, and the value of its surface impedance
ZsL* has been engineered to be equal to the required Zscloaking [9] able 
minimizing the scattering cross section of the antenna when the 
loading diodes are open-circuited. The final geometry is reported in 
Fig. 4(a), and the electrical dimensions are summarized in Table I. In 
particular, the cloaking metasurface consists of four vertical metallic 
strips that extend along the whole dipole. These strips are interleaved 
by a sub-array of three truncated strips. The gaps between them are 
loaded with a commercial diode (Hitachi HVM14S), which adds the 
desired power-dependent behavior to the cloaking metasurface. The 
metasurface is printed on a dielectric cylindrical shell of Preperm 
L700HF (εr = 7.2, δtan = 0.0006). It is worth noticing that compared 
to Fig. 3(d), the number of truncated interleaved strips has been 
increased (from one to three) to emphasize the difference between the 
value of ZsL* and ZsL**, i.e., when short/open circuiting the diode.
Moreover, a feasible width of the strips has been also considered in 
the design process, and the truncated strips have been electrically 
connected (inset of Fig. 3(a)) to minimize the number of diodes. 

To analyze the scattering and matching properties of the antenna, 

circuital-electromagnetic co-simulations of the loaded/unloaded 
device have been performed using the commercial software CST 
Studio Suite [37]. In particular, the total scattered power of the 
antenna and the magnitude of its reflection coefficient for different 
scenarios have been reported in Fig. 4 (b) and Fig. 4 (c). 

As it can be appreciated, when the dipole is coated by the designed 

inductive metasurface without the loading diodes (magenta dash-
dotted lines), the total scattering cross section of the antenna is 
massively reduced at f0 compared to the uncoated case (Fig. 4(b)).

However, at the same time, the antenna is also totally mismatched 

at f0 (Fig. 4(c)). When the cloak is loaded by the diode pairs, it is 
possible to appreciate the dynamic behavior of the non-linear cloak 
for different values of the antenna input power. In the LP scenario,
for an input power lower than 0 dBm (continuous blue lines), a slight 
shift of the cloaking resonance appears due to the parasitic 
capacitance CLP exhibited by the diodes (Fig. 4(b)), and the antenna 
is still mismatched at f0 (Fig. 4(c)). A dynamic transition can be 
appreciated by gradually increasing the input power: the cloaking 
resonance shifts towards lower frequencies progressively restoring 
the scattering property of the antenna at f0 and, at the same time, the 
matching characteristic of the antenna at f0 improves. Finally, in the 
HP scenario, i.e, for an input power higher than 40 dBm (red 
continuous lines), the cloaking resonance shifts around 0.84f0, due to 
the short-circuiting of the interleaved strips, while the antenna 
exhibits a very good impedance matching at f0. As can be appreciated 
in Fig. 4 (d), where the total scattered power of the coated antenna 
evaluated at f0 for different level of the antenna input power is 
reported, a smooth transition region from a cloaked to an uncloaked 
behavior appears from 0 dBm to 30 dBm, without any sharp variation. 
It is worth noticing that this power range is directly related to the 
characteristics of the loading diodes, and a careful choice of the 
component depending on the actual needs is, thus, required. 

It is worth noticing that, the magnitude of the cloaking resonance 

at 0.84f0 is reduced in the HP scenario compared to the case of a 
perfect short circuit of the interleaved strips, due to the parasitic 
resistance RHP. Moreover, the antenna is mismatched at the cloaking 

frequency 0.84f0, as expected from the fundamental cloaking limits 
discussed above. Finally, it is also worth remarking that the designed 
antenna system would have been always mismatched at f0 if a linear 
conventional mantle cloak was exploited and, thus, it would have 
been an inefficient radiator for both LP and HP signals. On the 
contrary, the proposed non-linear metasurface cloak allows designing 
dipole antennas able to efficiently transmit high-power signals, while 
being invisible to low power ones.

IV.
NON-LINEAR CLOAKS FOR PHASED ARRAYS

In order to further investigate and demonstrate the possibilities

offered by the proposed concept, a non-linear cloaking device has 
been also designed to enable unprecedented functionalities in antenna 
arrays. As it is well known, the scanning capabilities of phased arrays 
are usually limited by the presence of mutual coupling effects among 
the array elements [32]. Indeed, due to the mutual coupling between 
neighboring radiators, the embedded element factor of each radiator 
is usually non-omnidirectional, thus resulting in limited scanning
ranges and undesired scan loss effects, even though the individual
radiating element is omnidirectional when operating in free-space. To 
illustrate such a scenario, the case of a 3x3 array of half-wavelength 
dipoles is considered (see Fig. 5(a)). As expected, the embedded 
element factor of the central element is significantly different from 
the omnidirectional pattern of the isolated radiator because of the 
blockage effects induced by the presence of the surrounding elements
[Fig. 5(b)].

Fig. 4. (a) Dipole antenna coated by the non-linear mantle cloak. In the 

inset, we show the detail of the cloaking metasurface made of alternatively 
continuous and separated vertical metallic strips. Depending on the power 
level, the metallic strips are short/open-circuited by the loading diodes. (b) 
Total scattered power of the antenna for different scenarios: without the 
mantle cloak (uncoated case); with the diode-unloaded mantle cloak (coated-
unloaded); with the diode-loaded mantle cloak for different values of the 
transmitted power (coated-loaded). (c) Magnitude of the antenna reflection 
coefficients for the same scenarios of (b). (d) Total scattered power evaluated 
at f0 of the antenna coated by the non-linear mantle cloak for different values 
of the antenna input power. 

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2021.3061010

Copyright (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


8
First Author et al.: Title

The
possibility to circumvent this limitation
is addressed 

hereinafter through the customization of a non-linear power-
dependent mantle cloak. More specifically, a radiating system 
exhibiting a directive pattern when operating in the transmitting 
mode, while presenting an omnidirectional pattern in the receiving 
mode, is designed. This solution can be of particular interest for radar 
system able to scan selectively the environment when transmitting 
high-power pulses, and able to receive from all directions low-power 
scattered signals.

The considered configuration is depicted in Fig. 6(a) where all the 

elements of the 3x3 array, except the central one, are covered by 
power-dependent mantle cloaks. The central frequency of operation 
of the half-wavelength dipoles is f0 = 3 GHz, and the array elements 
are coated by the inductive coating cloak discussed in the previous 
Section. 

According to the above discussion, the array is expected to behave

like a conventional phased array for HP signals (i.e., in the 
transmitting mode). Conversely, the array does act as a half-
wavelength dipole in the LP scenario (i.e., in the receiving mode,
when the surrounding elements are invisible to the central antenna 
thanks to the coating metasurfaces). This is confirmed by the 3D and 
2D radiation diagrams reported in Fig. 7 for high and low power 
excitations. In particular, the embedded gain polar plots of the central 
element of the array are plotted in Fig. 7(c) for different scenarios. As
it can be appreciated, the gains of the isolated and low-power 
excitation cases overlap. On the other hand, the curve in the high-
power scenario matches the one obtained when the power-dependent 
cloaking devices are not present (uncoated case), meaning that the
overall radiating system behaves as a conventional phased array. 
Thus, in this latter case, the radiation diagram is the one depicted in 
Fig. 7 (a).

It is worthwhile remarking that the discussed radiating system is 

only a benchmark example of the possibilities offered by the 

proposed approach. Further radiating systems with novel or enhanced 
functionalities could be envisioned by designing non-linear mantle 
cloaks and, thus, circumventing the inherent limitations of linear and 
passive cloaks for antennas that are made invisible at their own 
resonance frequencies.

V.
CONCLUSIONS

An innovative methodological strategy to
circumvent
the

fundamental bounds of mantle cloaking for antennas through the 
employment of non-linear cloaking metasurfaces has been introduced
in this Communication. The proposed approach relies on the 
possibility to achieve a dynamic transformation of the geometry of 
the cloaking metasurface depending on the power-level of the 
impinging field. The presented idea has been numerically validated 
with full-wave co-simulations and realistic examples of dipole 
antennas covered by non-linear mantle cloaks, discussing also 
different applicative scenarios. In particular, an antenna application 
involving a phased array able to transmit towards an arbitrary 
pointing direction and receiving with an omnidirectional pattern has 
been presented. The illustrated results suggest the possibility to 
extend and generalize the proposed findings beyond the discussed 
scenarios to introduce new degrees of freedom for designing complex 
antenna systems in which both the electric and the radiation 
properties may be made selective with respect to the input power.

REFERENCES

[1]
C. A. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by 
Small Particles. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2008.

[2]
C. G. Montgomery, R. H. Dicke, and E. M. Purcell, Principles of 
Microwave Circuits, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Radiation 
Laboratory, IET, 1987.

[3]
W. K. Kahn and H. Kurss, "Minimum-scattering antennas," IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 671-675, Sept. 1965. 

[4]
A. Alù and N. Engheta, “Cloaking a sensor,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 102, 
p. 233901, Jun. 2009.

[5]
A. Alù and N. Engheta, “Achieving transparency with plasmonic and

Fig. 7. (a) 3D radiation diagram of the coated phased array in the HP 

scenario. (b) 3D embedded element factor of the central antenna when the 
external elements are closed to matched loads. (c) Polar gain plots for 
different cases: external elements removed (isolated case); external elements 
without the cloaking devices (uncoated case); external elements with the 
cloaking devices in the low-power and high-power scenarios (LP and HP, 
respectively).

Fig. 5. (a) 3D radiation diagram of a phased array of half-wavelength 

dipole antennas, when the elements are excited to obtain the main beam 
pointing in a given direction. (b) 3D embedded element pattern of the central 
antenna when the external elements are closed on matched loads. 

Fig. 6. Phased array made of half-wavelength dipole antennas. All the 

external elements are covered by the non-linear cloaking metasurfaces.

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2021.3061010

Copyright (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


8
First Author et al.: Title

metamaterial coatings,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 72, p. 016623, Jul. 2005.

[6]
A. Alù and N. Engheta, “Cloaked near-field scanning optical microscope 
tip for noninvasive near-field imaging,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 105, no. 
26, p. 263906, Dec. 2010.

[7]
J. C. Soric, R. Fleury, A. Monti, A. Toscano, F. Bilotti and A. Alù, 
"Controlling Scattering and Absorption With Metamaterial Covers," 
IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 4220-4229, Aug.
2014.

[8]
A. Alù, “Mantle cloak: Invisibility induced by a surface,” Phys. Rev. B, 
vol. 80, no. 24, p. 245115, Dec. 2009.

[9]
P. Y. Chen and A. Alù, “Mantle-Cloaking using thin patterned 
metasurfaces,” Phys. Rev. B., vol. 84, p. 205110, 2011.

[10] S. Vellucci, A. Monti, A. Toscano, F. Bilotti, “Scattering manipulation 

and camouflage of electrically small objects through metasurfaces,” 
Phys. Rev. Appl., vol. 7, no. 3, p. 034032, Mar. 2017.

[11] J. C. Soric, P. Y. Chen, A. Kerkhoff, D. Rainwater, K. Melin, A. Alù, 

“Demonstration of an ultralow profile cloak for scattering suppression of 
a finite-length rod in free space,” New J. Phys., vol. 15, p. 033037 
2013.

[12] Y. R. Padooru, A. B. Yakovlev, P. Y. Chen, and A. Alù, “Analytical 

modeling of conformal mantle cloaks for cylindrical objects using 
subwavelength printed and slotted arrays,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 112, p.
0349075, 2012.

[13] S. Vellucci, A. Monti, M. Barbuto, A. Toscano and F. Bilotti, "Satellite 

Applications of Electromagnetic Cloaking," IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag., vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 4931-4934, Sept. 2017. 

[14] S. Vellucci, A. Monti, M. Barbuto, A. Toscano and F. Bilotti, "Use of 

Mantle 
Cloaks 
to 
Increase 
Reliability 
of 
Satellite-to-Ground 

Communication Link," IEEE J. Multiscale Multiphys. Comput. Tech., 
vol. 2, pp. 168-173, 2017.

[15] D. H. Kwon and D. H. Werner, “Restoration of antenna parameters in 

scattering environments using electromagnetic cloaking,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett., vol. 92, no. 11, p. 113507, 2008. 

[16] P. Alitalo, C. A. Valagiannopoulos, and S. Tretyakov, “Simple Cloak for 

Antenna Blockage Reduction,” 2011 IEEE International Symposium on 
Antennas and Propagation (APSURSI), Spokane, WA, pp. 669–672, Jul. 
2011.

[17] A. Monti, J. Soric, A. Alu, F. Bilotti, A. Toscano and L. Vegni, 

“Overcoming mutual blockage between neighboring dipole antennas 
using a low-profile patterned metasurface,” IEEE Antennas Wirel. 
Propag. Lett., vol. 11, pp. 1414–1417, 2012.

[18] J. C. Soric, A. Monti, A. Toscano, F. Bilotti and A. Alù, "Dual-Polarized 

Reduction of Dipole Antenna Blockage Using Mantle Cloaks," IEEE 
Trans. Antennas and Propaga., vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 4827-4834, Nov. 
2015.

[19] H. M. Bernety and A. B. Yakovlev, “Reduction of mutual coupling 

between neighboring strip dipole antennas using confocal elliptical 
metasurface cloaks,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 
1554– 1563, Apr. 2015.

[20] Z. H. Jiang, P. E. Sieber, L. Kang, and D. H. Werner, “Restoring 

intrinsic properties of electromagnetic radiators using ultralightweight 
integrated metasurface cloaks,” Adv. Functional Mater., vol. 25, pp. 
4708–4716, 2015.

[21] A. Monti, J. Soric, M. Barbuto, D. Ramaccia, S. Vellucci, F. Trotta, A. 

Alù, A. Toscano, and F. Bilotti, “Mantle cloaking for co-site radio-
frequency antennas,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 108, no. 11, p. 113502, 
2016.

[22] H. M. Bernety, A. B. Yakovlev, H. G. Skinner, S. Suh and A. Alù, 

"Decoupling and Cloaking of Interleaved Phased Antenna Arrays Using 
Elliptical Metasurfaces," IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 68, pp. 
4997–5002, 2020.

[23] P. Y. Chen, C. Argyropoulos, and A. Alù, “Broadening the cloaking 

bandwidth with non-foster metasurfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 111, p. 
233001, 2013.

[24] D. L. Sounas, R. Fleury and A. Alú, " Unidirectional Cloaking Based on 

Metasurfaces with Balanced Loss and Gain," Phys. Rev. Appl., vol. 4, 
no. 1, p. 014005, Jul. 2015.

[25] A. Kord, D. L. Sounas, and Andrea Alù, “Active Microwave Cloaking 

Using Parity-Time-Symmetric Satellites,” Phys. Rev. Appl., vol. 10, no. 
5, p. 054040, Nov. 2018.

[26] C. Argyropoulos, P.Y. Chen, F. Monticone, G. D’Aguanno, and A. Alù, 

“Nonlinear plasmonic cloaks to realize giant all-optical scattering 
switching,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 108, p. 263905, 2012.

[27] E. A. Gurvitz, E. A. Sedykh, and M. K. Khodzitskiy, “Nonlinear 

cloaking at microwave frequencies,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 8455, p. 845532, 
2012.

[28] A. Monti, M. Barbuto, A. Toscano, and F. Bilotti, “Nonlinear Mantle 

Cloaking Devices for Power-Dependent Antenna Arrays,” IEEE 
Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., vol. 16, pp. 1727-1730, 2017.

[29] S. Vellucci, A. Monti, M. Barbuto, A. Toscano, F. Bilotti "Waveform-

Selective Mantle Cloaks for Intelligent Antennas," IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1717-1725, Mar. 2020.

[30] H. Wakatsuchi, J. Long, D. F Sievenpiper, “Waveform selective 

surfaces,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 29, no. 11, p. 1806386, Mar. 2019.

[31] S. Vellucci, A. Monti, M. Barbuto, M. Salucci, G. Oliveri, A. Toscano,

and F. Bilotti “Overcoming Mantle Cloaking Limits in Antenna 
Applications through Non-Linear Metasurfaces,” 14th International 
Congress on Artificial Materials for Novel Wave Phenomena
(Metamaterials 2020), New York City, NY, pp. 355-357, 2020.

[32] C. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, John Wiley & Sons, 

Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2005.

[33] J. B. Andersen and A. Frandsen, "Absorption efficiency of receiving 

antennas," IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 2843-289, 
Sept. 2005.

[34] W. S. Wall, S. M. Rudolph, S. K. Hong, and K. L. Morgan, “Broadband 

switching nonlinear metamaterial,” IEEE AntennasWireless Propag. 
Lett., vol. 13, pp. 427–430, 2014.

[35] H. Chen, Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, an L. Gao, “Optical bistability in a 

nonlinear-shell-coated metallic nanoparticle,” Sci. Rep., vol. 6, 21741, 
2016.

[36] Y. Zhiyenbayev, Y. Kominis, C. Valagiannopoulos, V. Kovanis, and A. 

Bountis, “Enhanced stability, bistability, and exceptional points in 
saturable active photonic couplers,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 100, 043834, 
2019.

[37] CST Studio Suite, 2018 [Online]. Available: www.cst.com

This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication.

The final version of record is available at
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2021.3061010

Copyright (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org.


