Magnetic reshuffling and feedback on superconductivity in UTe2 under pressure

M. Valiˇska,1, 2 W. Knafo,3 G. Knebel,1 G. Lapertot,1 D. Aoki,4 and D. Braithwaite1

1Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Grenoble INP, IRIG, PHELIQS, 38000, Grenoble, France
2Charles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics,
Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Ke Karlovu 5, Prague 2, 121 16, Czech Republic
3Laboratoire National des Champs Magn´etiques Intenses - EMFL, CNRS,
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, INSA-T, Univ. Toulouse 3, 31400 Toulouse, France
4Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Ibaraki 311-1313, Japan
(Dated: August 31, 2021)

The discovery of superconductivity in the heavy-fermion paramagnet UTe2 has attracted a lot of
attention, particularly due to the reinforcement of superconductivity near pressure- and magnetic-
field-induced magnetic quantum phase transitions. A challenge is now to characterize the effects of
combined pressure and magnetic fields applied along variable directions in this strongly anisotropic
paramagnet. Here, we present an investigation of the electrical resistivity of UTe2 under pressure up
to 3 GPa and pulsed magnetic fields up to 58 T along the hard magnetic crystallographic directions
b and c. We construct three-dimensional phase diagrams and show that, near the critical pressure,
a field-enhancement of superconductivity coincides with a boost of the effective mass related to the
collapse of metamagnetic and critical fields at the boundaries of the correlated paramagnetic regime
and magnetically-ordered phase, respectively. Beyond the critical pressure, field-induced transitions
precede the destruction of the magnetically-ordered phase, suggesting an antiferromagnetic nature.
By bringing new elements about the interplay between magnetism and superconductivity, our work
appeals for microscopic theories describing the anisotropic properties of UTe2 under pressure and
magnetic field.

I.
INTRODUCTION

The recent discovery of superconductivity in the
strongly correlated system UTe2 has sparked enormous
interest1,2. This orthorhombic compound is a paramag-
net with anisotropic magnetic properties1–5: the mag-
netic susceptibility along the a-axis increases strongly at
low temperature, leading to the initial suggestion that
the system is very close to ferromagnetic order1, whereas
the other directions are ”hard” magnetization axes, with
b being the hardest at low temperature. But the prop-
erties of the superconducting state are the most striking
aspect, and in particular the strong enhancement of su-
perconductivity when a magnetic field H is applied along
the b-axis6,7. In this case superconductivity persists in
magnetic fields up to µ0Hm = 35 T, where a first or-
der metamagnetic transition occurs with a large jump of
the magnetization4, a similarly large jump in the residual
electrical resistivity of the normal state8, and the destruc-
tion of superconductivity6,7,9.
Even more remarkably
when the field is tilted by about 30 ◦ from the b-axis in
the hard b−c plane, superconductivity re-emerges above
µ0Hm ≃ 40 T for this angle6,10. The extremely high val-
ues of the upper critical field, Hc2, compared to the initial
superconducting critical temperature (Tsc = 1.6 K) sug-
gest a probable spin-triplet order parameter, at least in
some parts of the phase diagram. This enhancement of
superconductivity is very reminiscent of the phenomenon
found in the ferromagnetic superconductors URhGe11

and UCoGe12.
However, in these cases the reinforce-
ment of superconductivity, when a field is applied along
a hard magnetic axis, is understood as a consequence
of the collapse of ferromagnetism, since an enhancement

of the ferromagnetic fluctuations have been shown to be
responsible for the superconducting pairing13,14.
This
explanation can obviously not be directly transposed to
UTe2 where no sign of magnetic ordering has been found
down to very low temperatures15,16.
Low-dimensional
antiferromagnetic fluctuations were reported, suggesting
that UTe2, whose U ions form a magnetic ladder struc-
ture, is subject to antiferromagnetic exchange leading to
antiferromagnetic correlations17,18. The opening of a gap
associated with these antiferromagnetic fluctuations was
also observed in the superconducting phase19,20.
The
magnetic properties of UTe2 are thus associated to its
unusual superconducting properties. A full description
of the relationship between the two is essential to under-
stand superconductivity in UTe2, and may well advance
our understanding of magnetically-mediated supercon-
ductivity in general.

Applying pressure is the tool of choice to tune mag-
netism in strongly correlated systems.
Often pressure
(p) can drive a system towards and through a magnetic
instability, giving a direct probe of the relationship be-
tween magnetism and superconductivity.
For UTe2 it
has already been shown that hydrostatic pressure induces
an enhancement of Tsc by a factor 2, reaching about
3 K21–24. Pressure has also revealed further complexi-
ties of this system’s superconducting state, with multi-
ple superconducting order parameters appearing21,24–26.
It was also shown that above a critical pressure pc ≃
1.5 − 1.7 GPa, magnetic order occurs with the con-
comitant disappearance of superconductivity21–26. Fur-
thermore the metamagnetic field decreases strongly with
pressure for H ∥ b22, and when field is applied along the
a-axis (the easy axis at ambient pressure) the multiple su-

arXiv:2108.13247v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  30 Aug 2021


2

FIG. 1. (a) Zero-field temperature-dependence of the electri-
cal resistivity ρ of UTe2 under pressure.
The grey squares
show the curve at high pressure and high field that we take
as a background. (b) Temperature dependence of resistivity
∆ρ determined after subtraction of the background.

perconducting states have quite different behaviours25. A
large enhancement of Hc2 for H ∥ c was also found with
an inversion of the anisotropy of Hc2 in the b − c plane
for pressures close to pc22. A recent study showed that
the magnetic anisotropy is also significantly changed with
pressure, with b becoming the easy axis above pc27. In
addition, re-entrant superconductivity occurs for H ∥ c
just above the critical pressure28. The above studies were
mainly performed in static magnetic fields, but the high-
est static fields available, even in dedicated facilities, are
insufficient to reveal all the physics in UTe2. Here we
report on an experiment combining high pressure and
pulsed magnetic fields up to 60 T. These measurements
were also performed over a wide temperature range giv-
ing new insight into the evolution of the magnetic prop-
erties and their feedback on superconductivity in three-
dimensional (3D) (H, p, T) phase diagrams of UTe2.

II.
METHODS

We used a previously described pressure cell29 allow-
ing magnetoresistivity measurements in pulsed magnetic
fields up to 60 T and temperatures down to 1.4 K. Sin-
gle crystals of UTe2 were grown by the chemical vapor
transport technique as described elsewhere2. The crys-
tals were oriented by X-ray Laue diffraction and cut to
bar shaped samples of about 0.8 × 0.2 × 0.1 mm3. Two
successive experiments were performed in a pressure cell,
offering the simultaneous measurement of the electrical
resistivity of two samples in a magnetic field along the
b and c directions. First experiment was performed at
pressures above pc on samples ♯A with H ∥ b and ♯B
with H ∥ c (see Supplementary Materials30). Second ex-
periment was performed under a large set of pressures
below and above pc, from 0.3 to 3.1 GPa, on samples
♯C with H ∥ b and ♯D with H ∥ c, and corresponds
to the data presented in this manuscript (see also Sup-
plementary Materials30).
Both experiments gave simi-
lar results, although the samples set up for H ∥ b dis-
played an unintentional misalignment (see Section III),
probably having moved on pressurization.
A piece of
lead was also mounted in the cell to determine the pres-
sure.
High-pressure magnetoresistivity measurements
were performed at the Laboratoire National des Champs
Magn´etiques Intenses (LNCMI) in Toulouse under long-
duration (50 ms rise and 300 ms fall) pulsed magnetic
fields up to 58 T and temperatures down to 1.4 K. A stan-
dard four-probe method with a current I ∥ a of 0.5 mA,
at a frequency of 15-70 kHz and digital lock-in detection
was used. The temperature dependence of the resistivity
was also measured directly in zero field.

III.
RESULTS

A.
Zero-field high-pressure properties

Zero-field electrical resistivity ρ(T) curves measured
at different pressures are shown in Fig.
1(a-b).
Be-
low pc, the onset of superconductivity is visible at low
temperatures, leading to zero resistivity.
Above pc a
different anomaly appears in the resistivity curve (la-
beled TM) that is almost certainly the signature of long
range magnetic order. In the 1.8 GPa curve a further
anomaly is apparent at higher temperature (T kink
ρ
). A
similar anomaly has been seen in other resistivity stud-
ies at pressures just above pc24 and a broad anomaly is
also visible in the magnetization27. Another feature of
the ρ(T) curves is a broad maximum, which occurs at a
temperature T max
ρ
≃ 60 K at ambient pressure. T max
ρ
decreases with pressure down to about 20 K at pc and
then slightly shifts to higher temperatures again as pres-
sure is increased above pc. This maximum is a general
feature in heavy fermion systems and is an indication of
the energy scale below which the cross-over between a
high temperature paramagnetic state (PM) to a coher-


3

FIG. 2. Phase diagram of UTe2 from these and previous28

measurements. CPM and CPM/WMO denote the correlated
paramagnetic regimes stabilized at pressures below and above
pc, respectively, SC the superconducting phase, and MO the
magnetically-ordered phase.

ent heavy fermion state or correlated paramagnetic state
(CPM) occurs.
In Fig. 2 we show the zero-field pressure-temperature
phase diagram constructed from our measurements to-
gether with data from previous studies28. The supercon-
ducting critical temperature Tsc increases from an ini-
tial value of 1.7 K up to a maximum value of about
3 K at a pressure of about 1.3 GPa.
Tsc then de-
creases abruptly and disappears at a critical pressure
pc ≃ 1.5 GPa.
Reported values of pc vary, probably
due to different pressure conditions, ranging from about
1.4 to 1.7 GPa21–26,28. An interesting feature is the max-
imum in the susceptibility T max
χ(H∥b) observed for H ∥ b
below pc and for H ∥ a, c above pc1,3,22,28. T max
ρ
and
T max
χ(H∥b) show similar behavior with pressure up to pc,
although their values are quite different. Of course, nei-
ther feature is a precise indication of this energy scale
which is anyway a cross-over, but the large temperature
difference here is due to the effect of other contributions
to the resistivity, including (but not limited to) phonon
scattering, which should be subtracted to get the mag-
netic scattering. The temperature shift induced by this
effect can be quite significant in the case of UTe2, as the
maximum is rather broad and weak. To check, we sub-
tracted the background shown in Fig. 1(a), correspond-
ing to a ρ(T) curve obtained under combined high pres-
sure and magnetic field. This background corresponds
to a high-field regime where the ground state is mag-
netically polarized, and for which a significant part of
the magnetic correlations has been suppressed. Empir-
ically we see that, once the background is subtracted,
the maximum is much more pronounced and occurs at a
temperature T max
∆ρ
quite close to T max
χ(H∥b), which delim-

itates a CPM regime [see Fig. 1(b)]. Beyond the criti-
cal pressure, a switch of the magnetic properties is ob-
served, in relation with the onset of long-range magnetic
ordering (MO), and possibly higher-temperature corre-
lated paramagnetism or short-range weak magnetic or-
dering (noted CPM/WMO, see later): a maximum in
the magnetic susceptibility is observed for H ∥ a, c at
the temperatures T max
χ(H∥a) and T max
χ(H∥c), respectively, but
no maximum of the magnetic susceptibility is observed
for H ∥ b27. Knowing that it is also possible to follow
the maximum in ∆ρ to high fields as will be shown later,
we therefore conclude that T max
∆ρ
is a good criterion to
follow the cross-over to the CPM regime as a function of
pressure, field and temperature.

B.
High-field and high-pressure electrical
resistivity

In Fig. 3(a-b) we show the magnetoresistivity curves at
the lowest temperature (1.4 K) for different pressures and
the two magnetic-field orientations. Most of the main re-
sults of this study are already apparent here. For the
sample set up with H ∥ b, at low pressure the first-order
metamagnetic transition appears as a huge and sharp
increase of the resistivity, similar to what is seen at am-
bient pressure. However, here at 0.3 GPa this occurs at
µ0Hm ≃ 43 T, a field significantly higher than at am-
bient pressure (about 35 T) whereas it has previously
been shown that Hm decreases with pressure22,27. The
most likely explanation for this discrepancy is that the
sample was somewhat misaligned in respect to the field,
probably having moved inside the pressure cell on pres-
surization. Indeed, it has been shown that Hm increases
when the field is rotated away from the b-axis in both
the b − c and b − a planes6. The value of Hm found
here would imply quite a large misalignment, between
15 and 30 ◦. However, as the effect of a magnetic field
up to 35 T applied along the b-axis has already been well
studied22, we will see that this tilted configuration allows
us to capture the essential physics for H ∥ b, as well as
revealing interesting results for a field applied with some
misalignment from the b-axis. In the following we will re-
fer to this field configuration as H ≈∥ b. On increasing
pressure, the metamagnetic transition remains clear up
to pc where Hm decreases to about 12 T. At higher pres-
sure the aspect of the curve changes and shows several
features that we will explicit further on. For the sample
with H ∥ c the resistivity curve is basically featureless
at 0.3 GPa, similar to the ambient pressure results8. In
the high pressure curves (1.8 and 2.4 GPa), the zero field
resistivity at 1.4 K has increased considerably, and shows
a decrease with field in two steps with the correspond-
ing field values marked here as Hc and H∗
m. Concerning
the superconductivity, the lowest temperature reached
in this study (1.4 K) is only slightly below the ambient
pressure superconducting critical temperature, so at low
pressures we see almost no trace of superconductivity.


4

However, Tsc increases significantly with pressure, and
our measurements give a good indication of the super-
conducting phase diagram.
Two important effects are
visible here. First for H ≈∥ b, we see that at 1.3 GPa,
superconductivity extends up to µ0Hm ≃ 20 T. At ambi-
ent pressure, it has been shown that for a field perfectly
aligned along the b-axis, superconductivity is reinforced
with field and exists up to Hm, but that this effect dis-
appears with a misalignment of just a few degrees, and
Hc2 is considerably reduced. With the misalignment nec-

essary to explain the large value of Hm in our case we
would certainly not expect superconductivity to extend
up to Hm at ambient pressure, so this implies that pres-
sure strongly changes the phase diagram when the field
is rotated away from the b-axis. The second remarkable
effect is seen for H ∥ c, where at 1.55 GPa the resistivity
is not zero at low fields, but a re-entrant superconduct-
ing state with zero resistivity is found at high field, be-
tween approximately 8 and 18 T, similar to the previous
reports23,28.

FIG. 3. Magnetoresistivity ρ(H) curves at different pressures and at the lowest temperature (1.4 K) for the configurations
(a) H ≈∥ b and (b) H ∥ c. Reconstructed temperature dependence of the resistivity ∆ρ determined after subtraction of the
background under magnetic field (c) H ≈∥ b at 1.3 GPa and (d) H ∥ c at 1.8 GPa (2b).

A fuller understanding of the above effects and the
complex phase diagram can be obtained by looking in
detail at the temperature dependence of the magnetore-
sistivity. First, we examine the case for H ≈∥ b. Fig.
4 (left-hand graphs) shows the resistivity curves for dif-
ferent temperatures and three pressures. For p = 1 and
1.55 GPa, i.e. p < pc, the curves are qualitatively similar
to the ambient pressure results8. At low temperature, the
first-order metamagnetic transition to the polarized para-
magnetic (PPM) regime appears as a sharp and large in-

crease of the resistivity. As temperature is increased this
anomaly transforms into a broad maximum indicating
a crossover delimiting the CPM regime. Hm decreases
with pressure as mentioned previously, and apart from
the larger value of Hm due to the misalignment of the
field our results are similar to the previous study under
pressure for H ∥ b22. The phase diagrams drawn from
these anomalies are shown in the right-hand panels of Fig.
4. The field where the maximum of the resistivity occurs
decreases as pressure is increased, similarly to the ambi-


5

FIG. 4. Left-hand graphs: magnetoresistivity curves for the configuration H ≈∥ b at different temperatures for the pressures
(a) p = 1 GPa, (b) p = 1.55 GPa, and (c) p = 1.8 GPa. Right-hand graphs: obtained magnetic-field-temperature phase
diagrams of the superconducting and magnetically ordered phases, and of the CPM regime delimited by Hm and T max
∆ρ , for the
pressures (d) p = 1 GPa, (e) p = 1.55 GPa, and (f) p = 1.8 GPa. CPM denotes the correlated paramagnetic regimes , PPM
the polarized paramagnetic regime, SC the superconducting phase, and MO the magnetically-ordered phase.


6

ent pressure results8, and connects with the temperature
T max
χ(H∥a) that also decreases with pressure27. We can see
that the temperature T max
∆ρ
at the maximum of the zero-
field resistivity after subtraction of the background de-
scribed above, which corresponds approximately to T max
χ
at zero field, also corresponds to Hm in the range where
both features can be seen. This implies that T max
∆ρ
is in-
deed a good criterion to determine the boundary of the
CPM regime. The superconducting phase diagrams are
also plotted for p = 1 and 1.55 GPa.
For both pres-
sures Hc2 shows an S-shape and, as already mentioned,
at 1.55 GPa superconductivity extends up to Hm despite
the probable misalignment of field. These results will be
discussed in more detail further on. The lower panels of
Fig. 4 show the results for H ≈∥ b at 1.8 GPa. The high
temperature magnetoresistivity curves retain the char-
acteristic broad maximum seen at pressures below pc,
indicating a cross-over into a polarized state. This max-
imum disappears at temperatures above 10-15 K, cor-
responding to the value of T max
∆ρ , and becomes a broad
decrease of the resistivity with field. However, the mag-
netoresistivity curves at low temperature are quite dif-
ferent.
Now p > pc and the ground state is almost
certainly some kind of long range magnetic order below
TM ≃ 3 K. For T < TM a pronounced kink can be seen
at µ0Hc ≃ 13 T corresponding to the transition from the
long range magnetic order to the polarized paramagnetic
state. Several other features are visible in the magnetore-
sistivity at the fields µ0Hr,1 = 2.3 T, µ0Hr,2 = 4.3 T, and
µ0Hr,3 = 9.3 T < µ0Hc at T = 1.4 K. These transitions
are presumably related to magnetic moment reorienta-
tions within the magnetically ordered phase (see Supple-
mentary Materials30).

We now look at the case H ∥ c (Fig.
5).
For this
configuration no metamagnetic transition has been ob-
served at ambient pressure at least up to 70 T1. For the
pressures 1.3 and 1.55 GPa, i.e., p < pc, at high tem-
peratures no particular feature is apparent in the mag-
netoresistivity. The most interesting result here concerns
the superconductivity. At ambient pressure the Hc2(T)
curve for H ∥ c shows no indication of enhancement
of superconductivity with field.
However several stud-
ies have already shown that under pressure the situa-
tion changes, with the slope of Hc2 becoming extremely
steep21,22, possibly indicating the appearance of a field-
enhancement of superconductivity for H ∥ c, and re-
entrant superconductivity appearing close to the critical
pressure.
These effects are confirmed here: the upper
and middle panels of Fig.
5 show that µ0Hc2 reaches
about 20 T at 1.3 GPa and that re-entrant supercon-
ductivity develops at 1.55 GPa, where µ0Hc2 exceeds
20 T, respectively.
The lower panels of Fig.
5 show
that at 1.8 GPa, i.e., for p > pc, the critical field Hc
where the low-temperature long-range magnetic order
is destroyed can be seen as a well-defined kink in the
curves for temperatures below TM ≃ 3 K. At the low-
est temperature the critical field reaches µ0Hc ≃ 20 T
and it shifts slightly to lower field as the temperature

increases. Similarly to the H ≈∥ b configuration, three
anomalies in the electrical resistivity can be defined at
the critical fields µ0Hr,1 = 2.8 T, µ0Hr,2 = 8.1 T, and
µ0Hr,3 = 12.3 T < µ0Hc at T = 1.4 K, within the mag-
netically ordered state (see Supplementary Materials30).
As for the configuration H ≈∥ b, all these features dis-
appear when the temperature is raised above TM, con-
firming their link to the low-temperature magnetic order.
However, for p > pc, in contrast to the H ≈∥ b config-
uration a pronounced kink remains at higher field sug-
gesting a transition or a well-defined cross-over into the
polarized state. We denote this field µ0H∗
m ≃ 30 T and
speculate on its pseudo-metamagnetic nature, in analogy
with the metamagnetic field where the polarized state
occurs at low pressure for H ≈∥ b, although here it does
not show a sharp first-order transition. The nature of
the regime between Hc and H∗
m is not clear.
Anoma-
lies have previously been seen in the resistivity, the spe-
cific heat and the magnetization24,27 at a temperature
higher than TM for pressures close above pc.
Indeed,
in the present study a clear kink can be seen in the
zero-field resistivity at 1.8 GPa (Fig.
3).
It has been
suggested that this phase could correspond to static24

or short-range27 weak magnetic order (WMO). The field
H∗
m probably corresponds to a transition or crossover be-
tween this phase and the polarized paramagnetic regime.
Interestingly, a maximum in the magnetic susceptibility
was observed at a temperature T max
χ
= 11 K for a pres-
sure p = 1.8 GPa > pc and a magnetic field H ∥ c27.
Similarly to the low-pressure CPM regime delimited in
a magnetic field H ∥ b by T max
χ(H∥b) and Hm4,8 (see also
other heavy-fermion systems31,32), the WMO regime may
also correspond to a second CPM regime delimited in a
magnetic field H ∥ c by T max
χ(H∥c) and H∗
m. In the follow-
ing, we will label this regime as CPM/WMO.

C.
Magnetic quantum criticality and
superconductivity

The full 3D phase diagrams obtained for both con-
figurations of magnetic field H ∥≈ b and H ∥ c are
represented in Fig. 6. We see that the phase diagram
for the magnetic order is quite similar for both configu-
rations, with the ordering temperature being suppressed
with field, but with a well-defined transition even at high
field. A similar behavior has also been seen for H applied
along the easy magnetic axis a, where the critical field
is even smaller25. The succession of field-induced tran-
sitions at fields Hr,i < Hc, with i = 1 − 3, (presented
in Fig. 4 and 5, but not in Fig. 6 for clarity) indicates
the stabilization of different magnetic structures. Such
behaviour would not be expected for a ferromagnetically-
ordered phase, at least for a field applied along the easy
axis, strongly suggesting that the magnetic order is of an
antiferromagnetic (or spin-density-wave) type, as already
inferred from previous results21,22,24,25. A swich of polar-
ization processes occurs at pc and leads to quite different


7

FIG. 5. Left-hand graphs: magnetoresistivity curves for the configuration H ∥ c at different temperatures for the pressures (a)
p = 1.3 GPa, (b) p = 1.55 GPa, and (c) p = 1.8 GPa. Right-hand graphs: obtained magnetic-field-temperature phase diagrams
of the superconducting and magnetically ordered phases, and of the CPM regime delimited by Hm and T max
∆ρ , for the pressures
(d) p = 1.3 GPa, (e) p = 1.55 GPa, and (f) p = 1.8 GPa. CPM and CPM/WMO denote the correlated paramagnetic regimes
stabilized at pressures below and above pc, PPM the polarized paramagnetic regime, SC the superconducting phase, and MO
the magnetically-ordered phase.


8

FIG. 6. 3D magnetic-field-pressure-temperature phase diagrams for the configurations (a) H ≈∥ b and (b) H ∥ c. CPM
and CPM/WMO denote the correlated paramagnetic regimes stabilized at pressures below and above pc, PPM the polarized
paramagnetic regime, SC the superconducting phase, and MO the magnetically-ordered phase.

3D phase diagrams for the two configurations H ∥≈ b
and H ∥ c:

• At pressures below pc, for H ≈∥ b the CPM regime
appears as a well-defined 3D bubble, delimited by
the first-order transition at Hm at low tempera-
ture and the temperature T max
∆ρ
(or T max
χ
) at low
field.
However, for H ∥ c, while at zero field
the cross-over between the low-temperature CPM
and high-temperature PM regimes is obviously the
same, there is no signature of transition to the PPM
regime with field, and it is likely that a change
develops smoothly as a continuous rotation of the
moments. This is consistent with the absence of a
maximum in the magnetic susceptibility for H ∥ c,
which is almost Curie-Weiss-like down to the low-
est temperatures3,10, and with the fact that T max
∆ρ
increases with applied field for H ∥ c.

• For pressures above pc the situation is quite differ-
ent. Now a 3D bubble formed by the CPM/WMO
regime occurs for H ∥ c, with a quite well-defined
transition into the PPM regime, whereas for H ≈∥
b this probably occurs as a broad cross-over. This
is also consistent with the appearance of a maxi-
mum of magnetic susceptibility for H ∥ c and the
disappearance of such maximum for H ∥ b under
pressures beyond the critical pressure27.

This reshuffling of the magnetic properties at the critical
pressure pc is related to a switch of the anisotropy of the
magnetic susceptibility, with the hard magnetic axis b
at ambient pressure becoming the easy magnetic axis at
high-pressure27.

In heavy-fermion materials, magnetic quantum criti-
cality, generally accompanied by a Lifshitz Fermi-surface
instability, is reflected in the enhancement of the effective
mass m∗ as the field is increased towards Hm seen by a
direct measurement of the specific heat33, as well as from
magnetization4 and resistivity8 measurements. Magnetic
fluctuations are often considered as the origin of the large
effective mass m∗ observed in these materials32.
The
quadratic temperature coefficient A, obtained by a fit of
the resistivity to a Fermi-liquid behavior ρ = ρ0 + AT 2,
varies as m∗2 within first approximation and shows a pro-
nounced maximum at Hm for H ∥ b, as well for a field
tilted by 30 ◦ in the b−c plane10. In Fig. 7 we show the
field dependence of the A coefficient for different pres-
sures, extracted from the reconstructed temperature de-
pendences of the resistivity for both configurations. For
the configuration H ≈∥ b, at the lowest pressures the
metamagnetic transition appears as a very sharp peak
at Hm, starting at about 43 T at 0.3 GPa. As pressure
is increased the peak position moves to lower fields, the
value of A increases, and above 1.3 GPa the peak starts
to broaden noticeably. For the highest pressures (p > pc)
the low field (H < Hc) points are omitted as the onset
of magnetic order occurring close to the lowest tempera-
ture measured here made the analysis meaningless in this
case. For the configuration H ∥ c, at low pressure no fea-
ture is visible in A(H). However, above 1 GPa a broad
maximum becomes apparent that shifts to higher fields
and becomes more pronounced as pressure is increased,
remaining visible even for p > pc.

The considerable changes of the magnetic properties
with pressure have strong consequences on the super-
conductivity. In the 3D phase diagrams of Fig. 6, an


9

FIG. 7. Top graphs: Field dependence of the quadratic temperature dependence coefficient A at different pressures for the
configurations (a) H ≈∥ b and (b) H ∥ c. Lower graphs (c-d): colour plot of A with superimposed pressure-magnetic-field
phase diagrams showing how, for both configurations, the enhancement of superconductivity coincides with an enhancement of
A. The coefficient A was not determined within the grey regions.

enhancement of superconductivity can be seen close to
pc for both configurations of magnetic field H ≈∥ b and
H ∥ c. Previous studies have shown that field re-entrant
superconductivity develops at ambient pressure and low
temperature for a sample perfectly aligned with H ∥ b
and that at a temperature of 1.4 K the sample should
be superconducting at all fields up to Hm once a small
pressure is applied7,22. Here, due to misalignment, no
re-entrant superconductivity is seen for H ≈∥ b at low
pressure and Hc2 is quite low at T = 1.4 K. However, we
find that superconductivity extends up to Hm as pressure
is increased. A similar result was also found recently for a
sample oriented at an angle of 30 ◦ from the b-axis in the
b − c plane34. Concerning the configuration H ∥ c, we
have evidenced the presence of field-induced supercon-
ductivity under pressures p <∼ pc. The lower panels (c-d)
of Fig. 7 show the electronic (p, H) phase diagrams at
our base temperature, T = 1.4 K, with the evolution of A
as a color plot. They emphasize the relationship between
the enhancement of A and the high-field stabilization of

superconductivity. Field-reinforced or field-induced su-
perconductivity is observed close to the critical pressure,
where the collapse of the field scales Hm and H∗
m and
enhanced A coefficients are observed. For H ≈∥ b super-
conductivity survives up to Hm under pressures near to
pc, where A reaches its maximum value at Hm. For H ∥ c
and p = 1.55 GPa, although no field-induced magnetic
transition is observed and temperatures larger than Tsc,
superconductivity may result from the proximity of crit-
ical magnetic fluctuations, as indicated by the enhance-
ment of A in a nearby region of the phase diagram. A is
maximum near H∗
m for p >∼ pc, and the field-induced su-
perconducting phase which develops for p <∼ pc appears
as a prolongation of the H∗
m line.


10

IV.
DISCUSSION

Quantum criticality, either purely magnetic or accom-
panied by a Fermi-surface instability, is suspected to be
a driving force for superconductivity in many heavy-
fermion systems. In UTe2 this is evidenced by the en-
hancement of superconductivity on approaching the mag-
netic phase transition under pressure, and on approach-
ing metamagnetic transitions with field.
For the lat-
ter case, a quantitative analysis has shown that the re-
entrant superconducting behaviour for H ∥ b can be ex-
plained by a monotonic increase of the pairing strength
related to the increase of the effective mass m∗7,35. Fur-
thermore, the rapid disappearance of the re-entrant be-
haviour as soon as the field is rotated away from the
b-axis is a natural consequence, mainly due to the in-
crease of Hm. Indeed, as the enhancement of the pairing
strength occurs at higher fields, it is no longer sufficient
to overcome the orbital and possibly paramagnetic pair-
breaking effects at lower fields.
A small anisotropy of
m∗, that is maximum for H ∥ b can further amplify this
phenomenon. From this picture, it is easy to understand
our result.
As can be seen from the A(H) curves, as
pressure is increased the enhancement of m∗ and conse-
quently of the pairing strength will simultaneously occur
at lower fields and become stronger, allowing the field
enhancement of superconductivity to be effective over a
much wider angular range. We expect that, with a mea-
surement made at lower temperatures, we would have
found a superconducting state extending up to Hm at
even lower pressure. An open question is whether on ap-
proaching pc the field enhancement of superconductivity
is still effective or not. In a previous study with H ∥ b,
the characteristic S-shape of Hc2 was lost for pressures
of 1 GPa and above22. The initial slope remained large
but Hc2 showed a pronounced curvature that could be an
indication of increasingly effective Pauli limitation with
pressure. In the present study, for H ≈∥ b we see the
S-shape of Hc2 at 1.55 GPa implying that the field re-
inforcement effect might still be active. This would be
consistent with the pressure and field dependence of A,
which still shows a pronounced maximum at Hm, and
reaches higher values than at ambient pressure. What
is clear from the study with configuration H ≈∥ b is
that the metamagnetic transition at Hm still acts as a
very effective cut-off for superconductivity which does
not survive in the polarized state. This is similar to the
ambient pressure behavior for H ∥ b but now concerns
a wider angular range. It contrasts with the surprising
re-entrant superconducting phase only seen in the PPM
regime stabilized above Hm in the configuration with a
magnetic field H tilted by 30 ◦ from b toward c at am-
bient pressure6,10. Recently a study performed in this
configuration under pressure showed that superconduc-
tivity extends continuously below and above Hm34. It
seems that here we are not in this configuration, imply-
ing that we probably have also a component of field along
the a-axis, and so the extension of superconductivity up

to Hm may be found also for misalignement of the field
in the a − b plane under pressure.
For H ∥ c, the extremely steep slope found for Hc2 on
approaching pc, as well as the very high values (25−30 T)
found for Hc2 here and in a previous study28, strongly
suggest that pressure causes an enhancement of the su-
perconducting pairing strength to come into play. Fig. 7
shows clearly how this enhancement seems to be linked
to the maximum of A(H) that appears under pressure,
and thus to the new field scale H∗
m, corresponding to the
crossover to the polarized state from the CPM/WMO
state.
Approaching pc we find a re-entrant behaviour
of superconductivity as has been reported previously28.
While the field enhancement of the pairing strength is
certainly favorable for this re-entrant behavior, the main
ingredient is probably the competition between the mag-
netically ordered and superconducting phases.
Indeed
previous studies (in a magnetic field along c28 or along an
undetermined direction23) showed that superconductiv-
ity only appears above the field necessary to suppress the
magnetic order. This would suggest that in the present
work the measurement at 1.55 GPa is actually at a pres-
sure slightly above pc.
For H ∥ c and close to pc, a
question is whether superconductivity can develop in the
correlated or polarized paramagnetic regimes, or in both.
Interestingly, the electrical resistivity ρ measured here
with a current I ∥ a captures the physics driving the
maxima in the magnetic susceptibility for different di-
rections of magnetic field. Fig. 2 shows the similar val-
ues of T max
∆ρ
and T max
χ(H∥b) for p < pc, and of T max
∆ρ
and
T max
χ(H∥a) ≃ T max
χ(H∥c) for p >∼ pc27. A transverse relation-
ship between the electrical resistivity and the magnetic
susceptibility anisotropies may be the consequence of an
anisotropic Kondo hybridization between conduction and
localized f electrons in UTe2. Rich information about
the electronic interactions responsible for the magnetic
fluctuations in UTe2 in its normal non-superconducting
phases may be accessed via a careful investigation of
the anisotropy of the electrical resistivity, with differ-
ent electrical-current directions (see [36]), under different
magnetic-field directions possibly combined with pres-
sure.
We have seen that the application of pressure and high
magnetic field on UTe2 leads to an extremely complex
phase diagram with a complete reshuffling of the mag-
netic anisotropy and strong associated effects on super-
conductivity. This helps us understand the intricate re-
lationship between superconductivity and magnetism in
this system.
The clear signature of the destruction of
magnetic order with field, as well as the signature of
several field induced transitions inside the magnetically
ordered phase, show that this order may be of antifer-
romagnetic or SDW type. Different domains of stability
and exclusion of superconductivity are found under pres-
sure and magnetic fields. Critical magnetic fluctuations,
possibly of ferromagnetic kind, associated with Hm and
H∗
m, may induce the large values of A observed here,
in relation with the enhancement of the superconduct-


11

ing pairing mechanism. However, superconductivity does
not necessarily occur in all parts of the phase diagram
where A is enhanced. Quite simple pictures can explain
some parts of the phase diagram, but understanding why
superconductivity is destroyed below or beyond a meta-
magnetic field, depending on the field direction, and in
the magnetically-ordered phase stabilized under pressure
remains a theoretical challenge. Experimentally, a full
knowledge of the angle dependence of superconductivity
under pressure and very high magnetic field would help
gain a full understanding of superconductivity in UTe2.
Our study is a step in this direction.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank J. Flouquet and J.-P. Brison for use-
ful discussions.
We acknowledge financial support
from the Cross-Disciplinary Program on Instrumenta-
tion and Detection of CEA, the French Alternative
Energies and Atomic Energy Commission, KAKENHI
(JP15H05882, JP15H05884, JP15K21732, JP16H04006,
JP15H05745,
JP19H00646,JP19K03736) and GIMRT
(19H0416, 19H0414), and the French national research
agency Programme Investissements d’Avenir under Pro-
gram No. ANR-11-IDEX-0002-02, Reference No. ANR-
10-LABX-0037-NEXT, and the collaborative research
project FRESCO.

1 S. Ran, C. Eckberg, Q.-P. Ding, Y. Furukawa, T. Metz,
S. R. Saha, I.-L. Liu, M. Zic, H. Kim, J. Paglione,
and
N. P. Butch, Science 365, 684 (2019).

2 D. Aoki, A. Nakamura, F. Honda, D. Li, Y. Homma,
Y. Shimizu, Y. J. Sato, G. Knebel, J.-P. Brison, A. Pour-
ret, D. Braithwaite, G. Lapertot, Q. Niu, M. Valiˇska,
H. Harima, and J. Flouquet, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 88, 043702
(2019).

3 S. Ikeda, H. Sakai, D. Aoki, Y. Homma, E. Yamamoto,
A. Nakamura, Y. Shiokawa, Y. Haga,
and Y. Onuki, J.
Phys. Soc. Jpn. 75, 116 (2006).

4 A. Miyake, Y. Shimizu, Y. J. Sato, D. Li, A. Nakamura,
Y. Homma, F. Honda, J. Flouquet, M. Tokunaga,
and
D. Aoki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 88, 063706 (2019).

5 A. Miyake, Y. Shimizu, Y. J. Sato, D. Li, A. Nakamura,
Y. Homma, F. Honda, J. Flouquet, M. Tokunaga,
and
D. Aoki, arXiv:2108.08509.

6 S. Ran, I.-L. Liu, Y. S. Eo, D. J. Campbell, P. Neves, W. T.
Fuhrman, S. R. Saha, C. Eckberg, H. Kim, J. Paglione,
D. Graf, J. Singleton,
and N. P. Butch, Nat. Phys. 15,
1250 (2019).

7 G. Knebel, W. Knafo, A. Pourret, Q. Niu, M. Valiˇska,
D. Braithwaite, G. Lapertot, M. Nardone, A. Zitouni,
S. Mishra, I. Sheikin, G. Seyfarth, J.-P. Brison, D. Aoki,
and J. Flouquet, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 88, 063707 (2019).

8 W. Knafo, M. Valiˇska, D. Braithwaite, G. Lapertot,
G. Knebel, A. Pourret, J.-P. Brison, J. Flouquet,
and
D. Aoki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 88, 063705 (2019).

9 Q. Niu, G. Knebel, D. Braithwaite, D. Aoki, G. Lapertot,
M. Valiˇska, G. Seyfarth, W. Knafo, T. Helm, J.-P. Bri-
son, J. Flouquet, and A. Pourret, Phys. Rev. Research 2,
033179 (2020).

10 W. Knafo, M. Nardone, M. Valiˇska, A. Zitouni, G. Laper-
tot, D. Aoki, G. Knebel,
and D. Braithwaite, Commun.
Phys. 4, 40 (2021).

11 F. L´evy, I. Sheikin, B. Grenier, and A. D. Huxley, Science
309, 1343 (2005).

12 D. Aoki, T. D. Matsuda, V. Taufour, E. Hassinger,
G. Knebel, and J. Flouquet, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 78, 113709
(2009).

13 B. Wu, G. Bastien, M. Taupin, C. Paulsen, L. Howald,
D. Aoki, and J.-P. Brison, Nat. Commun. 8, 14480 (2017).

14 Y. Tokunaga, D. Aoki, H. Mayaffre, S. Kr¨amer, M.-H.
Julien, C. Berthier, M. Horvati´c, H. Sakai, S. Kambe, and

S. Araki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 216401 (2015).

15 S. Sundar, S. Gheidi, K. Akintola, A. M. Cˆot´e, S. R. Dun-
siger, S. Ran, N. P. Butch, S. R. Saha, J. Paglione,
and
J. E. Sonier, Phys. Rev. B 100, 140502 (2019).

16 C. Paulsen, G. Knebel, G. Lapertot, D. Braithwaite,
A. Pourret, D. Aoki, F. Hardy, J. Flouquet,
and J.-P.
Brison, Phys. Rev. B 103, L180501 (2021).

17 C. Duan, K. Sasmal, M. B. Maple, A. Podlesnyak, J.-X.
Zhu, Q. Si,
and P. Dai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 237003
(2020).

18 W. Knafo, G. Knebel, P. Steffens, K. Kaneko, A. Ro-
suel, J.-P. Brison, J. Flouquet, D. Aoki, G. Lapertot, and
S. Raymond, arXiv:2106.13087.

19 C. Duan, R. E. Baumbach, A. Podlesnyak, Y. Deng,
C. Moir, A. J. Breindel, M. B. Maple,
and P. Dai,
arXiv:2106.14424.

20 S. Raymond, W. Knafo, G. Knebel, K. Kaneko, J.-
P. Brison, J. Flouquet, D. Aoki,
and G. Lapertot,
arXiv:2107.13914.

21 D. Braithwaite, M. Valiˇska, G. Knebel, G. Lapertot, J.-
P. Brison, A. Pourret, M. E. Zhitomirsky, J. Flouquet,
F. Honda, and D. Aoki, Commun. Phys. 2, 147 (2019).

22 G. Knebel, M. Kimata, M. Valiˇska, F. Honda, D. Li,
D. Braithwaite, G. Lapertot, W. Knafo, A. Pourret, Y. J.
Sato, Y. Shimizu, T. Kihara, J.-P. Brison, J. Flouquet,
and D. Aoki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 89,
053707 (2020).

23 S. Ran, H. Kim, I.-L. Liu, S. R. Saha, I. Hayes, T. Metz,
Y. S. Eo, J. Paglione, and N. P. Butch, Phys. Rev. B 101,
140503 (2020).

24 S. M. Thomas, F. B. Santos, M. H. Christensen, T. Asaba,
F. Ronning, J. D. Thompson, E. D. Bauer, R. M. Fernan-
des, G. Fabbris, and P. F. S. Rosa, Sci. Adv. 6 (2020).

25 D. Aoki, F. Honda, G. Knebel, D. Braithwaite, A. Naka-
mura, D. Li, Y. Homma, Y. Shimizu, Y. J. Sato, J.-P.
Brison,
and J. Flouquet, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 89, 053705
(2020).

26 W. C. Lin, D. J. Campbell, S. Ran, I.-L. Liu, H. Kim, A. H.
Nevidomskyy, D. Graf, N. P. Butch, and J. Paglione, npj
Quantum Mater. 5, 68 (2020).

27 D. Li, A. Nakamura, F. Honda, Y. J. Sato, Y. Homma,
Y. Shimizu, J. Ishizuka, Y. Yanase, G. Knebel, J. Flouquet,
and D. Aoki, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 90,
073703 (2021).


12

28 D. Aoki, M. Kimata, Y. J. Sato, G. Knebel, F. Honda,
A. Nakamura, D. Li, Y. Homma, Y. Shimizu, W. Knafo,
D. Braithwaite, M. Valiˇska, A. Pourret, J.-P. Brison, and
J. Flouquet, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 90, 074705 (2021).

29 D. Braithwaite, W. Knafo, R. Settai, D. Aoki, S. Kura-
hashi,
and J. Flouquet, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 87, 023907
(2016).

30 See Supplementary Materials for details.
31 D. Aoki, W. Knafo, and I. Sheikin, C. R. Physique 14, 53
(2013).

32 W. Knafo, Habilitation `a Diriger des Recherches (Univer-
sity of Toulouse, 2021, arXiv:2107.13458).

33 S. Imajo, Y. Kohama, A. Miyake, C. Dong, M. Tokunaga,
J. Flouquet, K. Kindo,
and D. Aoki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.
88, 083705 (2019).

34 S. Ran, S. R. Saha, I.-L. Liu, D. Graf, J. Paglione,
and
N. P. Butch, arXiv:2107.02870.

35 J.-P. Brison, to be published.
36 Y. S. Eo, S. R. Saha, H. Kim, S. Ran, J. A. Horn,
H. Hodovanets, J. Collini, W. T. Fuhrman, A. H. Nev-
idomskyy, N. P. Butch, M. S. Fuhrer,
and J. Paglione,
arXiv:2101.03102.


