Meta-Programmable Analog Differentiator

Jérôme Sol1, David R. Smith2, and Philipp del Hougne3*

1 INSA Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France

2 Center for Metamaterials and Integrated Plasmonics, Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, 27708 USA

3 Univ Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France

* Correspondance to philipp.del-hougne@univ-rennes1.fr. 


Abstract

We show experimentally that the fundamental ingredient of wave-based signal 

differentiation, namely zeros of the scattering matrix that lie exactly on the real axis, can 

be imposed at will and in situ by purposefully perturbing an overmoded random 

scattering system. The resulting unprecedented flexibility overcomes current limitations 

of wave-based differentiators, both regarding their extreme vulnerability due to 

fabrication inaccuracies or environmental perturbations as well as their lack of in situ

adaptability. Moreover, in addition to current miniaturization efforts, we suggest that 

integrability of wave processors can also be achieved by endowing existing bulky 

everyday-life systems that naturally scatter waves with a second signal-processing 

functionality. We demonstrate our technique by placing a programmable metasurface 

inside a 3D disordered metallic box: the hundreds of available degrees of freedom allow 

us to impose at will reflection zeros on a connected port, such that the reflected signal 

envelope is the temporal derivative of the incident one. We demonstrate our ability to 

toggle between differentiation of envelopes modulated onto distinct carriers. We also 

parallelize multiple differentiation operations on the same device and implement higher-

order differentiators. Our “over-the-air” temporal differentiator for microwave carriers

may find civilian and military applications in processing wireless communication or radar 

signals, for data segmentation and compression, as well as machine vision and hearing. 

Our generic concept is also applicable to optical, acoustic, and elastic scattering.


Introduction

Differentiation is a pivotal mathematical operation with signal processing applications 

including edge-based segmentation for data compression or image sharpening, FM-to-

AM demodulation for communication or Doppler-radar processing, as well as machine 

vision and hearing. Analog implementations of differentiation on wave processors 

promise much higher speeds and minimal power consumption in contrast to their digital

electronic counterparts1,2. Yet, current wave-based differentiators are plagued by 

excessive sensitivity to fabrication inaccuracies and environmental conditions, and lack 

in situ adaptability. In this Article, instead of fabricating a carefully designed single-mode

structure, we take an overmoded random scattering system as starting point and show that 

purposeful perturbations of its scattering properties, here with hundreds of degrees of 

freedom offered by an array of programmable meta-atoms3,4, enable unprecedented 

flexibility and fidelity of “over-the-air” wave-based differentiators by imposing that zeros 

of the scattering matrix lie exactly on the real axis, at will and in situ.

Any linear wave system’s input-output relation is a linear transformation that can be 

either a discretized or a continuous operator. The input and output channels can originate 

from various degrees of freedom, such as space (guided or propagating in free space), 

frequency and polarization, or even a mix thereof. The needs of artificial intelligence 

have recently driven the implementation of arbitrary matrix multiplications5–11, mostly for 

discretized spatial channels12. At the same time, “basic” operations like differentiation 

continue to be of fundamental importance, for instance, in machine and human vision13

for data compression via edge detection. These mathematical operations are typically 

implemented as continuous operators. A differentiator is a linear filter whose transfer 

function, 𝐻(𝜔) = 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0) for first-order differentiation of the envelope of a carrier at 

𝜔0, can be found in many natural and artificial special physical scattering scenarios. If 

information is encoded spatially such as in an optical image, then critical-coupling (CC)

settings14,15, the Brewster effect16, and various (metamaterial) layer structures17–20 have 


been shown to yield this transfer function. For temporally encoded information, 

implementations based on fiber gratings21–24, critically coupled microring resonators25, 

directional couplers26, or interferometers27–29 have been put forward. All these settings 

require very careful fabrication and/or alignment and are hence highly vulnerable to 

inaccuracies in the fabrication or operation environment. Wave-based differentiators are 

some of the most vulnerable wave processors because the underlying wave system is 

operated at a scattering anomaly (𝐻(𝜔0) = 0); the origin of this extreme sensitivity can 

be traced back to a fundamental quantity in mesoscopic physics: the dwell time of the 

wave in the system30. We will elaborate on this link for the concrete case of CC for 

temporal differentiation in the following, which is also directly relevant to our 

experiments.

A longstanding question in wave physics and material science is how to excite a 

structure such that no wave energy is reflected back. CC is the simplest case of zero 

reflection and usually refers to coupling a single (guided) incident channel to an isolated 

mode of the structure31,32, requiring perfect matching of the structure’s excitation and 

decay rate. Moreover, perfect absorption has also been demonstrated for normal 

incidence of plane waves on thin metamaterials33–35. A generalized version of CC is 

coherent perfect absorption36–40 (CPA) of multi-channel radiation by a resonant structure 

(with possibly overlapping modes). In all these cases, one zero of the scattering matrix is 

real-valued such that the structure can act as a steady-state sink: all incident radiation can 

be perfectly absorbed

1. Since this zero’s imaginary part vanishes, the dwell time of the 

1 Because CPA has been introduced as the time-reverse of lasing (at threshold)36, the loss mechanisms should originate

from matter susceptibility rather than from undetected elastic scattering. Recently, there has been a growing interest in 

reflectionless coupling into (often quasi-lossless) structures which let radiation escape through unobserved channels41–

43. Sometimes this has also been referred to as CPA44 even though in these cases wave energy is not irreversibly 

transduced into other degrees of freedom such as heat. In the experiments we present, losses originate from absorption 

at the cavity boundaries (in line with the original definition of CPA), but the loss mechanism’s nature is irrelevant for 

our general idea.


corresponding wavefront in the system diverges36,45–47.

2 The latter makes for extremely 

sensitive detectors46,48, but conversely means that minute detuning of any system 

parameter moves the zero away from the real axis. As soon as the zero leaves the real axis, 

the spectrum’s linear “V” shape and the associated abrupt 𝜋 phase jump in the vicinity of 

𝜔0 are no longer possible. Consequently, minute imperfections severely deteriorate and 

rapidly undermine the faithfulness of an analog differentiator, to the point that it becomes

unsatisfactory, as illustrated in detail in Supplementary Note 2. This clarifies why tiny 

fabrication or alignment imperfections, or minute environmental perturbations, can 

severely impact the fidelity of a wave-based differentiator. Similarly, adapting, for 

instance, the filter’s 𝜔0 in situ in order to consecutively process envelopes on different 

carriers is generally very difficult or impossible. Wave processors realizing other 

functionalities which do not involve diverging dwell times are expected to display 

significantly less sensitivity. 

To overcome the excessive sensitivity of wave processors, a recent trend has been to 

explore ideas from topological photonics49–51 but the lack of in situ adaptability remains. 

In parallel, the switching between different functionalities (differentiation, equation 

solving, etc.) has been studied29,52,53 but this does not offer in situ adaptability of a given 

functionality, e.g. to the signal carrier, nor robustness to fabrication inaccuracies or 

environmental perturbations. A clear route to address the aforementioned challenges are 

wave processors that can be reprogrammed in situ. A notable application thereof to 

temporal differentiation involved a photonic integrated interferometer equipped with

programmable phase modulators29. On paper, it appears that a single degree of freedom is 

sufficient to introduce a relative phase shift of (2𝑚 + 1)𝜋 at 𝜔0 between the two 

interferometer arms29, yielding a perfect differentiator. In practice, however, the transfer 

function’s magnitude minimum in Ref.29 appears to be around 0.16; this system has a 

2 The divergence of the dwell time can also be understood from considering the phase delay time which is defined as 

the frequency derivative of the scattering phase: 𝜏 = d(arg(𝑆11))/d𝜔.30 Given the discontinuity of the phase of the 

transfer function 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0) at 𝜔 = 𝜔0, namely its phase jump of 𝜋, its derivative at 𝜔 = 𝜔0 diverges.


zero close to rather than on the real frequency axis, which jeopardizes a linear “V” shape 

and the associated abrupt 𝜋 phase jump. Such limitations are inherent in the use of a 

single or few degrees of freedom in systems with a single or few resonances, and these 

limitations are also found in tunable microwave notch filters54–57.

3 The limitations 

originate from unaccounted non-idealities in real-life implementations such as coupling 

dispersion, transmission-line length variation, parasitic coupling, and other properties of 

the microstrip lines. Using a single or few degrees of freedom, it is certainly possible to 

tune few-resonance systems such that the zeros move in the complex plane; however, 

only under special conditions of PT-symmetry41,42 that are certainly not met by simple 

tunable notch filters (the uncompensated presence of absorption already trivially breaks 

PT-symmetry) there is a guarantee that the zeros move exactly on the real frequency axis

upon tuning. Hence, upon tuning simple notch filters in practice, zeros do not remain on 

the real frequency axis, and a few degrees of freedom tend to be insufficient to prevent 

that they drift away from the real frequency axis.

In contrast, our approach offers at least two orders of magnitude more degrees of 

freedom. This massive increase in programmability, together with the high density of 

zeros inherent to overmoded random scattering systems, makes it easy for us to perturb 

the system such that one of its zeros is placed, at a desired frequency, on the real 

frequency axis with extremely high precision (notch depth < −70 dB). Moreover, we can 

also switch to different functionalities and simultaneously create multiple zeros at 

arbitrary frequencies which is of importance for parallel wave processing at distinct 

frequencies, exploiting the wave equation’s linearity58. Unlike conventional electronic 

processors, a single wave processor can simultaneously process various streams of 

information encoded on independent (spectral, polarization, etc.) channels53,58–60, directly 

3 Tunable microwave notch filters are developed for applications other than analog differentiation where different

metrics matter, resulting in filter shapes that are typically not only insufficiently deep but also oftentimes deformed 

with respect to the shape needed for analog differentiation.


multiplying its effective speed by the number of independent channels.

Our approach to rely on potentially bulky complex scattering systems such as a 3D 

disordered metallic box for microwave carriers may, at first sight, appear to be at odds 

with substantial efforts from the metamaterials community to miniaturize wave 

processors17,61–64. Indeed, the bulkiness of early optical processors, which relied on free-

space propagation65,66, but also the need for additional refractive elements (prisms, lenses) 

of many recent “flat” designs, thwarts integrability. Our technique, however, does not 

have any special requirements regarding the complex scattering system such that it can be 

implemented based on any existing bulky system whose primary functionality is not 

related to signal processing. We envision that ubiquitous metallic enclosures, such as a 

military toolbox or a microwave oven, can be endowed with a second signal processing 

functionality simply by inserting an ultrathin programmable metasurface3,4 at an arbitrary 

location in order to tune their scattering properties. Thereby, we introduce a new 

perspective on integrability that decouples it from device volume and related 

miniaturization efforts. As such, our approach is arguably at least as convenient regarding 

integrability as are miniaturized wave processors. Its strength becomes particularly 

apparent for processing long-wavelength signals such as microwaves or sound in their 

native analog domain. In such scenarios relevant to radar, wireless communication,

gesture recognition, ambient-assisted living, untethered virtual reality
or voice-

commanded devices, even metamaterial-based processors are cumbersome whereas our 

technique only requires the user to place an ultrathin programmable metasurface3,4 at an 

arbitrary location inside an existing enclosure. A related alternative view on the 

integrability of wave processors was introduced in Ref.9, but for less vulnerable spatially 

discrete monochromatic arbitrary matrix multiplications. Moreover, in Ref.9 the 

configuration of the programmable metasurface was interpreted as input, that is, the wave 

processor did not operate in the signal’s native domain, and furthermore averaging over 

multiple realizations was necessary as a consequence. If specific applications require far 

more compact implementations, it is also possible to implement our technique in flat 


quasi-2D programmable chaotic cavities with currently available technology67.

The technique underlying the present work to purposefully perturb a complex 

scattering system to impose real-valued scattering zeros “on demand” is, on the one hand,

conceptually a topic of significant contemporary interest in mesoscopic physics. The 

concept was proposed and experimentally demonstrated in Ref.48 for single-channel CPA 

in a lossy chaotic microwave cavity, with applications to precision sensing and secure 

communication. The idea was subsequently generalized to multiple channels46,68, 

including cases with additional constraints on the allowed input wavefront69. The notion 

of parameter tuning is also central to various other recent works on scattering 

anomalies42,70. On the other hand, our specific experimental implementation in the 

microwave domain leveraging programmable metasurfaces relates to a large body of 

literature: these arrays of meta-atoms with individually reconfigurable scattering 

properties (usually reflection coefficient) are primarily used for free-space applications 

such 
as 
adaptive 
beamforming3, 
holography71, 
diffuse 
scattering72, 
wireless 

communication73–75, (intelligent) imaging76–80,67,81,82 and spatio-temporal wave control83.

However, they also find increasingly use inside rich scattering environments84 as 

evidenced by various experiments on focusing85–88, (sub-wavelength) sensing89,90 and 

transmission matrix engineering9,91–93. Nonetheless, the generality of the discussed wave 

concepts implies that our idea can also be implemented in tunable acoustic or optical 

scattering systems94–97.

In this paper, we establish the unprecedented flexibility offered for wave-based 

differentiators based on judiciously tuned overmoded random scattering systems, through 

a series of microwave experiments in a prototypical metallic disordered box equipped 

with 1-bit programmable metasurfaces. Our work is realized in the WLAN 5-GHz band 

and hence of potentially direct technological relevance. First, we demonstrate our ability 

to impose in situ a scattering zero at any desired frequency in this band, and to toggle at 

will between them. We directly inject various complicated waveforms in time-domain 


experiments to provide direct experimental evidence of our ability to compute the 

temporal derivative of an envelope of an arbitrary carrier (within the 5-GHz band). 

Second, we generalize this concept to toggling between multiple simultaneous zeros of 

the scattering matrix—that lie on the real axis—of various spectral separations in order to 

demonstrate parallel wave processing on the same device. Finally, we cascade two 

tunable chaotic cavities to compute second order derivatives, thereby engineering a 

transfer function usually associated with CPA exceptional points98–101 that may also be 

enticing for applications in broadband near-perfect absorption.

Results

Operation principle. To start, our goal is to compute the temporal derivative of a 

function 𝑒(𝑡) that modulates an arbitrary carrier 𝜔0 by letting it bounce off the interface 

between a port and an irregularly shaped electrically large metallic box – see Figure 1. 

For the differentiation operation to happen, the system’s transfer function 𝐻(𝜔) (i.e., the 

port’s reflection spectrum) should approximate 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0) in the vicinity of 𝜔0 , as 

sketched in the inset. A zero of the scattering matrix that lies on the real axis at 𝜔0, which 

we define as a real-valued zero, yields this functional form of the reflection spectrum

upon excitation46,99. However, the chances of observing a real-valued zero at the desired 

frequency 𝜔0 within a random scattering system are extremely low48. By tuning a 

continuous system parameter, it is possible to observe a real-valued zero but most likely 

not at the targeted operating frequency42. Yet, our goal is to be able to re-program our 

analog wave-based differentiator in situ depending on the use case; specifically, as shown 

in Figure 1, we would like to adapt its transfer function to the incident carrier. To that end, 

we must be able to perfectly place a zero on the real-frequency axis “on demand” at any 

desired frequency.

To accomplish this goal, we mount two programmable metasurfaces3,4 on the walls 

of the disordered box at arbitrary locations. These metasurfaces are ultrathin arrays of 


meta-atoms whose scattering properties can be controlled via a simple bias voltage. Our 

generic technique is not limited to implementations based on a specific programmable 

metasurface design, all that matters is that the programmable meta-atoms control as many 

rays as possible. Each meta-atom of the utilized prototype (see Supplementary Note 3 for 

technical details) has two possible states and is capable of roughly mimicking Dirichlet or 

Neuman boundary conditions under normal incidence86. By judiciously choosing the 

coding matrix of the programmable metasurface (see Supplementary Note 4), it is 

possible to impose a real-valued zero “on demand” at a desired frequency48. For instance, 

if the incident carrier is 𝜔1 (blue), metasurface configuration 𝐶1 (blue) is used; if the 

incident carrier is 𝜔2 (red), metasurface configuration 𝐶2 (red) is used, etc. 

Figure 1. Operation principle of the meta-programmable analog temporal differentiator. 

A signal 𝑒(𝑡) is modulated as envelope onto a carrier 𝜔0 and incident via a guided single-mode 

channel on a disordered metallic electrically large box. The scattering properties of the latter can be 

tuned via programmable metasurfaces mounted on its walls such that the port’s reflection spectrum 

has a zero at the carrier frequency. Then, the port’s transfer function matches that of an ideal 

differentiator, displaying in the zero’s vicinity a linear “V” shape centered on 𝜔0 as well as an abrupt 


𝜋 phase jump at 𝜔0 (see inset). Consequently, the reflected signal’s envelope is the temporal 

derivative of 𝑒(𝑡). Incident and reflected signals are separated via a circulator, see Supplementary 

Note 4 for details. A computer program digitally controls the realized differentiation operation by 

toggling between different metasurface configurations (color-coded) depending on the current needs 

in terms of the incident signal’s carrier frequency.

Direct observation of meta-programmable differentiation. We begin by 

identifying eight metasurface configurations that yield a real-valued scattering matrix 

zero at eight distinct, evenly spaced frequencies between 5.05 GHz and 5.4 GHz. The 

resulting transfer functions are shown in Figure 2a,b. The desired linear “V” shapes, 

accompanied by abrupt phase shifts of 𝜋, are observed exactly at the eight chosen 

frequencies. In each case, the magnitude of the transfer function is below −70 dB at the 

central frequency (see Supplementary Note 5). The bandwidth over which the transfer 

functions are a good approximation to an ideal differentiator is around 15 MHz (see 

Supplementary Note 6). A global phase drift is observed and distinct for each operating 

frequency – however, as explained in Supplementary Note 1, this does not impact the 

desired differentiator functionality. Relative to the operating frequency, our fractional 

bandwidth of 3 × 10−3 outperforms a number of previously reported temporal 

differentiators; only Ref.22, a static non-programmable differentiator, achieves a 

considerably larger fractional bandwidth (see Supplementary Note 6). In comparison to 

the previously reported reconfigurable temporal differentiator from Ref.29, our device’s 

fractional bandwidth is an order of magnitude larger. More importantly, our device 

implements true real-valued zeros as evidenced by the depth of the reflection dips, their 

magnitude’s linearity in the vicinity of the central frequency and the abruptness of the 

phase jump.

A direct experimental observation of meta-programmable differentiation requires the 

injection of various waveforms modulated onto various carriers and the observation of 


their reflections. We modulate each of the considered carriers in turn with one of three 

envelope functions shown in Figure 2c,f,i. For a given carrier, we toggle the metasurface 

to its corresponding configuration, we let the signal impinge on the port-cavity interface, 

and we measure the reflected signal – technical details are provided in Supplementary 

Notes 3 and 4. The first waveform, a Gaussian pulse (0.1 µs duration, 10 MHz 

bandwidth), is a typical function to test the quality of analog differentiators. Its derivative, 

if correctly computed, should be perfectly symmetric and have exactly zero amplitude at 

its center (see Figure 2d). In Figure 2e we superpose the envelopes of the output signals 

measured in the eight different carrier use cases. It is apparent that they are all highly 

similar and extremely close to the ideal analytical derivative. We also test our meta-

programmable differentiator’s performance with two more complicated functions: a 

quadratic polynomial and the skyline of Rennes, France. For these two functions, some 

less dominant spectral components lie outside the differentiator’s operating bandwidth. In 

the former case (Figure 2h), the measured output signals faithfully reproduce the linear 

slopes expected for the derivative of a quadratic function, as well as the expected 

amplitudes. In the latter case (Figure 2k), the agreement with the analytical result is also 

very good; only for some very sharp peaks the measured magnitude is slightly below the 

expected one. Besides demonstrating differentiation based on a random scattering system, 

the major technological relevance of our work is the unprecedented flexibility of our 

differentiator: in this section, we leveraged its flexibility to toggle between differentiation 

for different carriers; in the following sections, we will further leverage this flexibility for 

more advanced and unique features.


Figure 2.
Direct experimental results of meta-programmable analog temporal 

differentiation. a,b, Amplitude (a) and phase (b) of the system’s transfer function for eight 

different metasurface configurations (color-coded) that correspond to reflection zeros at eight equally 

spaced carrier frequencies in the 5-GHz band. c,f,i, Envelopes 𝑒(𝑡) of experimentally injected 

waveforms corresponding to a Gaussian function (c), a set of quadratic polynomial functions (f), and a 

skyline of Rennes, France, composed of Basilique Saint-Sauveur, a traditional timber-framed house 

and Cathédrale Saint-Pierre (i). d,g,j,
Corresponding analytical derivatives 

d𝑒(𝑡)

d𝑡
. e,h,k,

Corresponding experimentally measured output signals. For a given waveform and carrier, the 

metasurface is toggled to the configuration optimized for this carrier, the input signal is injected, and 

the reflected signal is measured. The envelopes of the measured output signals for all eight considered 


carriers are superposed on these figures using the same colors to identify different carriers as in (a,b).

Parallelized meta-programmable differentiation. A unique but to date largely 

underexploited advantage of wave processors over their electronic counterparts is that a 

single device can simultaneously process multiple data streams thanks to the linearity of 

the wave equation53,58–60. Thereby, its computational efficiency in terms of equivalent 

digital operations per unit time can be multiplied by the number of independent data 

streams. The differentiation operation that we are concerned with in this paper can be 

parallelized, for instance, by encoding different data streams onto different carriers. The 

reflection spectrum of the system should then simultaneously present multiple real-valued 

scattering zeros corresponding to the targeted carrier frequencies. The experimental setup 

remains that from Figure 1, except that the impinging wave is now the sum of multiple 

independent carriers, each modulated by an independent data stream. This principle is 

illustrated in Figure 3a. Our parallelized meta-programmable analog differentiator can 

toggle between different simultaneously targeted carrier frequencies. As shown in Figure 

3a, for a first use case, a blue metasurface configuration may be used that imposes 

simultaneous real-valued scattering zeros for carriers 𝜔1,𝐴 and 𝜔1,𝐵; for a second use case, 

a red metasurface configuration may be used for carriers 𝜔2,𝐴 and 𝜔2,𝐵, etc.

In Figure 3b,c,f,g,j,k, three examples of experimental measurements of optimized 

transfer functions with two simultaneous real-valued zeros at different frequencies are 

shown. In all cases, the transfer function magnitude displays the linear “V” shape and the 

phase the corresponding abrupt 𝜋 jump. Examples with more than two simultaneous 

zeros are shown in Supplementary Note 8 but in the following we focus on two 

simultaneous zeros to directly test the meta-programmable parallelized differentiation 

ability of our system. To that end, we generate two independent signals and inject their 

sum into our system which is toggled to a state that corresponds to the two chosen 

carriers. We measure the reflected signal and bandpass-filter it around each of the two 

carriers, respectively. The resulting two demultiplexed data streams are shown in Figure 


3d,e,h,i,l,m. The obtained signal output envelops match very well the analytically 

expected ones for both carriers in all three cases. These results illustrate our ability to 

perform parallelized meta-programmable differentiation. Ref.29 based on a tunable 

interferometer did not discuss parallel computing but it is clear that if at all possible, the 

simultaneous real-valued zeros would have to be spaced according to the free spectral 

range as opposed to being able to place them at arbitrary locations as in our system. If the 

carrier frequencies’ separation exceeds the metasurface’s operation bandwidth, separate 

metasurfaces (one for each carrier) may be deployed. In that case, only the designated 

metasurface would modulate the corresponding carrier frequency such that the different 

metasurface configurations could be optimized independently from each other9.


Figure 3. Parallelization of meta-programmable wave-based differentiation. a, Principle 

of parallel computing with spectral degrees of freedom. The injected waveform is the sum of two 

signals (two independent envelopes 𝑒𝐴(𝑡) and 𝑒𝐵(𝑡) modulated onto distinct carriers 𝜔1,𝐴 and 𝜔1,𝐵)

and the reflected signal is the sum of the derivatives of these two envelopes, modulated onto the 

respective carriers. b,c,f,g,j,k, Amplitude and phase of the system’s transfer function for three 

examples (color-coded) of choices of two simultaneously imposed reflection zeros. The computer 

program can toggle between these by changing the metasurface configuration. d,e,h,i,l,m, Envelope of 

experimentally measured output signal (spectrally bandpass-filtered around the respective carrier 

frequencies) upon injecting the indicated waveforms (see Supplementary Note 4 for details) in the 

three considered use cases. 

Higher-order
meta-programmable differentiation. To this point, we have 

considered only first-order temporal differentiation; in this section, we generalize the 

previous concepts to higher-order differentiation. An 𝑛-th-order differentiator’s transfer 

function is [𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0)]𝑛, which can be physically implemented in various manners. For 

instance, instead of tuning our system to CPA, one could attempt to tune it to a CPA 

exceptional point (EP) at which two eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the wave operator 

associated with purely incoming boundary conditions coalesce99; such a CPA-EP would 

yield the transfer function associated with a second-order differentiator (see inset in 

Figure 4). However, preliminary tests following this route were unsuccessful, indicating 

that more degrees of freedom and/or more elaborate optimization protocols may be 

necessary. Another route to obtain the desired transfer function of a second-order 

differentiator is to cascade two first-order differentiators. If the input signal was known to 

have a sufficient temporal sparsity, a combination of directional couplers and delay loop 

could be added to the setup in Figure 1 to realize the higher-order differentiation via 

multiple passes across the same port-cavity interface. A more generic implementation is 

to physically cascade multiple setups akin to the one from Figure 1, all tuned to 

simultaneously have a real-valued scattering zero at the same frequency, as shown in 


Figure 4a. We adopt the latter approach in the following.

Our goal is now to simultaneously impose a real-valued scattering zero at the same 

frequency in two similar but distinct chaotic cavities, and to toggle between different 

examples thereof that differ in terms of the chosen frequency, in order to then directly 

illustrate our ability to perform meta-programmable second-order differentiation. Given 

that our experimentally available number of programmable meta-atoms is limited, we 

now split them equally between the two cavities. The optimization problem is now much 

harder since we have only half of the previously available degrees of freedom in each 

cavity. This is of course not a general limitation of our concept but related to our 

experimental constraints, and we cater to it by allowing some flexibility regarding the 

chosen frequency in our optimization protocol. In the left columns of Figures 4b,c,d,e, we 

report four examples of magnitude and phase of experimentally measured transfer 

functions for second-order differentiation. The flat phase (modulo 2𝜋 and ignoring the 

irrelevant background phase drift) matches that of the ideal transfer function shown in the 

inset of Figure 4a. The magnitudes also display the desired quadratic behavior in the 

vicinity of 𝜔0 but appear to offer a more limited useable bandwidth than those from 

Figure 2a. We directly test our meta-programmable second-order differentiator by 

injecting the Gaussian signal from Figure 2c, modulated onto different carriers, and in 

each case toggling the metasurfaces to the configuration corresponding to the carrier. 

Compared to first-order differentiation, the output signals are much weaker and hence 

noisier, such that we average the output measurements over 20 acquisitions. The averaged 

output envelopes for the four considered carriers in Figure 4b,c,d,e are close to the 

analytically expected output (see Figure 4a). The symmetry with respect to the central 

peak is very good, and the two dips on either side go as low as possible given the 

measurement noise. The measurement noise is also evident far away from the central 

peak where the output signal is analytically zero.

Beyond the wave computing functionality discussed so far, the setup from Figure 4 

emulates, as previously noted, the transfer function of CPA-EPs which are thus far mainly 


investigated for broadband near-perfect absorption applications. In contrast to the 

intensity-dependent nonlinear CPA-EP in Ref.100, our experiment offers this transfer 

function irrespective of the incident power signal. Moreover, the homogeneous 

absorption in our system due to Ohmic losses on the walls, as opposed to localized 

absorption mechanisms, enables the absorption of high-power incident signals without 

significant localized heating. Furthermore, the programmability of our setup regarding 

the CPA-EP frequency may be important for future absorption applications, too.

Figure 4. Meta-programmable second-order differentiator. a, Operation principle. Two 

setups akin to the one from Figure 1 are cascaded (using circulators as shown) in order to implement 

the transfer function associated with an ideal second-order differentiator (see inset). Again, the 

computer program can toggle between metasurface configurations such that second-order derivatives 

of signal envelopes are computed for different carriers (color-coded). b-e,Examples of four 


experimentally measured use cases corresponding to the four distinct indicated carrier frequencies. In 

each case, amplitude and phase of the system’s transfer function are shown, as well as the 

experimentally measured output signal envelope upon injection of a Gaussian pulse. The displayed 

output signal envelopes are averaged over 20 acquisitions to alleviate the impact of measurement 

noise.

Discussion

Besides speed and the ease of processing signals in their native domain, a compelling

argument for wave-based computing is its energy efficiency. Indeed, a passive material 

can offer a desired transfer function without any energy consumption. However, a passive 

material cannot serve as the basis of a fair comparison with our technique since a passive 

material lacks all the features and advantages of reconfigurability that motivate our

present work. Our device is “quasi-passive”: the programmable metasurface does not

provide any energy to the wave and only requires minimal power, as low as a few µW per 

meta-atom85, to maintain the meta-atom in the desired state or to flip it. Future 

metasurface technologies, such as those based on chalcogenide glasses, may even 

overcome the need for energy to maintain a state and only require minimal energy to flip 

the state. All this is in contrast to the proposed reconfigurable photonic interferometer-

based processor from Ref.29 which, besides phase modulators, also intrinsically relies on 

a multitude of signal amplifiers.

To summarize, we demonstrated experimentally the essential steps to implement a

meta-programmable
“over-the-air”
wave-based differentiator.
The unprecedented 

flexibility of our approach is enabled by not fabricating a carefully designed device with 

a single resonance and a few degrees of freedom but leveraging in situ the massive 

amount of degrees of freedom offered by a programmable metasurface inside a complex 

scattering system in order to tune scattering zeros onto the real axis at will. The resulting 

in situ adaptability overcomes the extreme sensitivity of analog differentiators to any sort 


of detuning which originates from the fact that they operate at a scattering anomaly 

associated with a diverging dwell time. We demonstrated with direct temporal 

measurements of the output signal that our technique can (i) toggle between operation at 

different carrier frequencies, (ii) parallelize the computational operation based on the 

wave equation’s linearity, and (iii) implement higher-order differentiation. Our approach 

can be extended to process spatially encoded information, to using overmoded random 

scattering systems based on guided waves, and to optical or acoustic scattering, as 

detailed in Supplementary Note 9. Besides the implementation of analog differentiation, 

the unprecedented flexibility and precision of the implemented filters is relevant to 

applications in wideband defense systems such as cognitive radio.

Looking forward, we envision that a frequency sensing module is integrated with the 

entire system such that the latter can autonomously adapt itself to the incident signal; 

such an “intelligent” control of the metasurface configuration based on sensor 

measurements is easily implemented with current technology102,103. We also note that the 

switching time between metasurface configurations can be as low as 20 µs with state-of-

the-art microcontrollers (see, for instance, Ref.74). The proposed meta-programmable 

differentiator can also serve as the pivotal ingredient of analog solvers of differential 

equations104.

Another avenue that can prove fruitful is to explore potential benefits of continuously 

programmable meta-atoms77 as well as multi-channel CPA46,68 for meta-programmable 

analog differentiators. The former may drastically simplify gradient-based search 

methods for the optimal configuration, and hence be worthwhile the additional electronic 

burden. The latter may, according to indications in our ongoing work, facilitate imposing 

real-valued zeros in our system which potentially offsets the requirement for multi-

channel amplitude and phase control, or an additional constraint to make the CPA 

eigenvector coincide with a predefined one69.


Methods

Experimental setup. A photographic image of the experimental setup from Figure 1 is 

shown in Supplementary Figure 2. A waveguide-to-coax adapter (RA13PBZ012-B-SMA-

F) couples a guided wave to an electrically large disordered metallic box. Two 

programmable metasurfaces, each containing 76 meta-atoms, cover 16.2% of the cavity 

surface. Within a 400 MHz interval centered on 5.2 GHz, this metasurface can efficiently 

manipulate the scattered field. Each meta-atom offers independent 1-bit control over two 

orthogonal field polarizations, mimicking approximately Dirichlet or Neuman boundary 

conditions under normal incidence. Ohmic losses on the cavity walls result in a quality 

factor of the enclosure on the order of 410 such that approximately 21 modes overlap at a 

given frequency on average. Further details about the experimental setup and the 

characterization of the metasurface prototype are provided in Supplementary Note 4.

Note that our concept is generic and could be implemented with any other programmable 

metasurface design, too.

Determination
of metasurface configurations. Identifying a metasurface 

configuration that yields a desired scattering response, e.g., a real-valued scattering zero 

at a desired frequency, is an inverse problem. For our proof-of-principle experiments, we 

solved this inverse problem via an iterative experimental trial-and-error algorithm 

detailed in Supplementary Note 4 which involved roughly 800 measurements with a 

vector network analyzer (Agilent Technologies PNA-L Network Analyzer N5230C, 0 

dBm emitted power, 10 kHz intermediate-frequency bandwidth). In the future, the 

inverse design of metasurface configurations can be performed much faster and in 

software, once an artificial neural network has been trained to approximate the function 

that maps the configuration to the scattering response. Ref.80 already employs a learned 

forward model to predict the scattering response of a programmable metasurface, albeit 

in quasi free space rather than inside a complex scattering enclosure. Next-generation 

meta-atoms with fine-grained programmability (> 1-bit) will expedite the optimization 

through their compatibility with continuous gradient-descent protocols. In certain settings 


without environmental perturbations during runtime, the identification of suitable 

metasurface configurations can be completed offline during a calibration phase and 

presents no burden during runtime. Generally speaking, when the optimization objectives 

are challenging and the available number of degrees of freedom is limited, in many 

applications one can find significant constraint relaxations such as not requiring the zero 

to occur at a specific frequency but within a certain interval.

Time-domain experiments. For a given test scenario involving a specific function 

𝑒(𝑡) to be derived and a specific carrier 𝜔0, we generated the waveform 𝑒(𝑡)𝑒𝑖𝜔0𝑡 with a 

signal generator (Aeroflex IFR 3416, 2 dBm emitted power, 33 MHz sampling rate) and 

toggled the metasurface to the configuration suitable for the chosen carrier. The input 

signal was injected via Port 1 of a circulator (PE83CR006; see Supplementary Figure 4b), 

impinged on the system interface via Port 2 of the circulator, and the output signal which 

exited through Port 3 of the circulator was measured on an oscilloscope (SDA 816Zi-B 

16GHz Serial Data Analyzer, 40GS/s sampling rate). For the experiments on parallelized 

computing, a second signal generator (Agilent MXG Analog N5183A) generated the 

second input signal, and the two input signals were summed before being injected via 

Port 1 of the circulator. More details on the time-domain experiments can be found in 

Supplementary Note 4.


Data Availability

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding

author upon request.

Code Availability

Code that supports the findings of this study is available upon reasonable request from

the corresponding author.

Author Contributions

P.d.H. conceived the project. J.S. and P.d.H. conducted the experiments. D.R.S. and P.d.H. 

interpreted the results. All authors contributed with thorough discussions. P.d.H. wrote the 

manuscript.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank Steven M. Anlage, Thomas M. Antonsen, Matthieu Davy, Edward Ott

and A. Douglas Stone for stimulating discussions, and François Yven for helpful 

exchanges regarding the time-domain measurement setup. The authors acknowledge 

funding from the European Union through the European Regional Development Fund

(ERDF), and the French region of Brittany and Rennes Metropole through the CPER 

Project SOPHIE/STIC & Ondes. The metasurface prototypes were purchased from 

Greenerwave.

Additional Information

Supplementary Information accompanies this article.

Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.


References

1. Solli, D. R. & Jalali, B. Analog optical computing. Nat. Photonics 9, 704–706 (2015).
2. Zangeneh-Nejad, F., Sounas, D. L., Alù, A. & Fleury, R. Analogue computing with metamaterials. 

Nat. Rev. Mater. 6, 207–225 (2021).

3. Cui, T. J., Qi, M. Q., Wan, X., Zhao, J. & Cheng, Q. Coding metamaterials, digital metamaterials 

and programmable metamaterials. Light Sci. Appl. 3, e218–e218 (2014).

4. Kaina, N., Dupré, M., Fink, M. & Lerosey, G. Hybridized resonances to design tunable binary 

phase metasurface unit cells. Opt. Express 22, 18881 (2014).

5. Miller, D. A. B. Self-configuring universal linear optical component [Invited]. Photonics Res. 1, 1 

(2013).

6. Carolan, J. et al. Universal linear optics. Science 349, 711–716 (2015).
7. Ribeiro, A., Ruocco, A., Vanacker, L. & Bogaerts, W. Demonstration of a 4 × 4-port universal 

linear circuit. Optica 3, 1348 (2016).

8. Shen, Y. et al. Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits. Nat. Photonics 11, 441–446 

(2017).

9. del Hougne, P. & Lerosey, G. Leveraging Chaos for Wave-Based Analog Computation: 

Demonstration with Indoor Wireless Communication Signals. Phys. Rev. X 8, 041037 (2018).

10.Matthès, M. W., del Hougne, P., de Rosny, J., Lerosey, G. & Popoff, S. M. Optical complex media 

as universal reconfigurable linear operators. Optica 6, 465 (2019).

11.Buddhiraju, S., Dutt, A., Minkov, M., Williamson, I. A. D. & Fan, S. Arbitrary linear 

transformations for photons in the frequency synthetic dimension. Nat. Commun. 12, 2401 (2021).

12.Moeini, M. M. & Sounas, D. L. Discrete space optical signal processing. Optica 7, 1325 (2020).
13.Hubel, D. H. Eye, Brain, and Vision. (Scientific American, 1995).
14.Zhu, T. et al. Plasmonic computing of spatial differentiation. Nat. Commun. 8, 15391 (2017).
15.Wesemann, L. et al. Selective near-perfect absorbing mirror as a spatial frequency filter for optical 

image processing. APL Photonics 4, 100801 (2019).

16.Youssefi, A., Zangeneh-Nejad, F., Abdollahramezani, S. & Khavasi, A. Analog computing by 

Brewster effect. Opt. Lett. 41, 3467 (2016).

17.Silva, A. et al. Performing Mathematical Operations with Metamaterials. Science 343, 160–163 

(2014).

18.Doskolovich, L. L., Bykov, D. A., Bezus, E. A. & Soifer, V. A. Spatial differentiation of optical 

beams using phase-shifted Bragg grating. Opt. Lett. 39, 1278 (2014).

19.Zangeneh-Nejad, F., Khavasi, A. & Rejaei, B. Analog optical computing by half-wavelength slabs. 

Opt. Commun. 407, 338–343 (2018).

20.Zangeneh-Nejad, F. & Fleury, R. Performing mathematical operations using high-index acoustic 

metamaterials. New J. Phys. 20, 073001 (2018).

21.Kulishov, M. & Azaña, J. Long-period fiber gratings as ultrafast optical differentiators. Opt. Lett.

30, 2700 (2005).

22.Slavík, R., Park, Y., Kulishov, M., Morandotti, R. & Azaña, J. Ultrafast all-optical differentiators. 

Opt. Express 14, 10699 (2006).

23.Berger, N. K. et al. Temporal differentiation of optical signals using a phase-shifted fiber Bragg 


grating. Opt. Express 15, 371 (2007).

24.Li, M., Janner, D., Yao, J. & Pruneri, V. Arbitrary-order all-fiber temporal differentiator based on a 

fiber Bragg grating: design and experimental demonstration. Opt. Express 17, 19798 (2009).

25.Liu, F. et al. Compact optical temporal differentiator based on silicon microring resonator. Opt. 

Express 16, 15880 (2008).

26.Huang, T. L., Zheng, A. L., Dong, J. J., Gao, D. S. & Zhang, X. L. Terahertz-bandwidth photonic 

temporal differentiator based on a silicon-on-isolator directional coupler. Opt. Lett. 40, 5614 (2015).

27.Hsue, C.-W., Tsai, L.-C. & Chen, K.-L. Implementation of First-Order and Second-Order 

Microwave Differentiators. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. 52, 1443–1448 (2004).

28.Park, Y., Azaña, J. & Slavík, R. Ultrafast all-optical first- and higher-order differentiators based on 

interferometers. Opt. Lett. 32, 710 (2007).

29.Liu, W. et al. A fully reconfigurable photonic integrated signal processor. Nat. Photonics 10, 190–

195 (2016).

30.Rotter, S. & Gigan, S. Light fields in complex media: Mesoscopic scattering meets wave control. 

Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 015005 (2017).

31.Cai, M., Painter, O. & Vahala, K. J. Observation of Critical Coupling in a Fiber Taper to a Silica-

Microsphere Whispering-Gallery Mode System. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 74–77 (2000).

32.Yariv, A. Critical coupling and its control in optical waveguide-ring resonator systems. IEEE 

Photon. Technol. Lett. 14, 483–485 (2002).

33.Landy, N. I., Sajuyigbe, S., Mock, J. J., Smith, D. R. & Padilla, W. J. Perfect Metamaterial 

Absorber. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 207402 (2008).

34.Watts, C. M., Liu, X. & Padilla, W. J. Metamaterial Electromagnetic Wave Absorbers. Adv. Mater.

24, OP98–OP120 (2012).

35.Asadchy, V. S. et al. Broadband Reflectionless Metasheets: Frequency-Selective Transmission and 

Perfect Absorption. Phys. Rev. X 5, 031005 (2015).

36.Chong, Y. D., Ge, L., Cao, H. & Stone, A. D. Coherent Perfect Absorbers: Time-Reversed Lasers. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 053901 (2010).

37.Wan, W. et al. Time-reversed lasing and interferometric control of absorption. Science 331, 889–

892 (2011).

38.Baranov, D. G., Krasnok, A., Shegai, T., Alù, A. & Chong, Y. Coherent perfect absorbers: linear 

control of light with light. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2, 17064 (2017).

39.Krasnok, A. et al. Anomalies in light scattering. Adv. Opt. Photonics 11, 892 (2019).
40.Li, H., Suwunnarat, S., Fleischmann, R., Schanz, H. & Kottos, T. Random Matrix Theory 

Approach to Chaotic Coherent Perfect Absorbers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 044101 (2017).

41.Dhia, A.-S. B.-B., Chesnel, L. & Pagneux, V. Trapped modes and reflectionless modes as 

eigenfunctions of the same spectral problem. Proc. R. Soc. A. 474, 20180050 (2018).

42.Sweeney, W. R., Hsu, C. W. & Stone, A. D. Theory of reflectionless scattering modes. Phys. Rev. A

102, 063511 (2020).

43.Grimm, P., Razinskas, G., Huang, J.-S. & Hecht, B. Driving plasmonic nanoantennas at perfect 

impedance matching using generalized coherent perfect absorption. Nanophotonics 10, 1879–1887 
(2021).

44.Pichler, K. et al. Random anti-lasing through coherent perfect absorption in a disordered medium. 


Nature 567, 351–355 (2019).

45.Asano, M. et al. Anomalous time delays and quantum weak measurements in optical micro-

resonators. Nat. Commun. 7, 13488 (2016).

46.del Hougne, P., Yeo, K. B., Besnier, P. & Davy, M. On‐Demand Coherent Perfect Absorption in 

Complex Scattering Systems: Time Delay Divergence and Enhanced Sensitivity to Perturbations. 
Laser Photonics Rev. 15, 2000471 (2021).

47.Chen, L., Anlage, S. M. & Fyodorov, Y. V. Generalization of Wigner time delay to subunitary 

scattering systems. Phys. Rev. E 103, L050203 (2021).

48.F. Imani, M., Smith, D. R. & del Hougne, P. Perfect Absorption in a Disordered Medium with 

Programmable Meta‐Atom Inclusions. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 2005310 (2020).

49.Zhu, T. et al. Topological optical differentiator. Nat. Commun. 12, 680 (2021).
50.Zangeneh-Nejad, F. & Fleury, R. Topological analog signal processing. Nat. Commun. 10, 2058 

(2019).

51.Zangeneh‐Nejad, F. & Fleury, R. Disorder‐Induced Signal Filtering with Topological

Metamaterials. Adv. Mater. 32, 2001034 (2020).

52.Li, M. et al. Reconfigurable Optical Signal Processing Based on a Distributed Feedback 

Semiconductor Optical Amplifier. Sci. Rep. 6, 19985 (2016).

53.Momeni, A., Rouhi, K. & Fleury, R. Switchable and Simultaneous Spatiotemporal Analog 

Computing. arXiv:2104.10801 [physics] (2021).

54.Gil, I. et al. Varactor-loaded split ring resonators for tunable notch filters at microwave frequencies. 

Electron. Lett. 40, 1347 (2004).

55.Ou, Y.-C. & Rebeiz, G. M. Lumped-Element Fully Tunable Bandstop Filters for Cognitive Radio 

Applications. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. 59, 2461–2468 (2011).

56.Wu, Z., Shim, Y. & Rais-Zadeh, M. Miniaturized UWB Filters Integrated With Tunable Notch 

Filters Using a Silicon-Based Integrated Passive Device Technology. IEEE Trans. Microwave 
Theory Techn. 60, 518–527 (2012).

57.Jeong, S.-W. & Lee, J. Frequency- and Bandwidth-Tunable Bandstop Filter Containing Variable 

Coupling Between Transmission Line and Resonator. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. 66, 
943–953 (2018).

58.Camacho, M., Edwards, B. & Engheta, N. A single inverse-designed photonic structure that 

performs parallel computing. Nat. Commun. 12, 1466 (2021).

59.Babaee, A., Momeni, A., Abdolali, A. & Fleury, R. Parallel Analog Computing Based on a 2 × 2 

Multiple-Input Multiple-Output Metasurface Processor With Asymmetric Response. Phys. Rev. 
Applied 15, 044015 (2021).

60.Zhou, Y. et al. Analogue Optical Spatiotemporal Differentiator. Adv. Opt. Mater. 9, 2002088 (2021).
61.Kwon, H., Sounas, D., Cordaro, A., Polman, A. & Alù, A. Nonlocal Metasurfaces for Optical 

Signal Processing. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 173004 (2018).

62.Mohammadi Estakhri, N., Edwards, B. & Engheta, N. Inverse-designed metastructures that solve 

equations. Science 363, 1333–1338 (2019).

63.Cordaro, A. et al. High-Index Dielectric Metasurfaces Performing Mathematical Operations. Nano 

Lett. 19, 8418–8423 (2019).

64.Zhou, Y., Zheng, H., Kravchenko, I. I. & Valentine, J. Flat optics for image differentiation. Nat. 


Photonics 14, 316–323 (2020).

65.Leger, J. R. & Lee, S. H. Coherent optical implementation of generalized two-dimensional 

transforms. Opt. Eng. 18, 185518 (1979).

66.Reck, M., Zeilinger, A., Bernstein, H. J. & Bertani, P. Experimental realization of any discrete 

unitary operator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 58–61 (1994).

67.Sleasman, T. et al. Implementation and characterization of a two-dimensional printed circuit 

dynamic metasurface aperture for computational microwave imaging. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 69, 2151 (2020).

68.Frazier, B. W., Antonsen, T. M., Anlage, S. M. & Ott, E. Wavefront shaping with a tunable 

metasurface: Creating cold spots and coherent perfect absorption at arbitrary frequencies. Phys. Rev. 
Research 2, 043422 (2020).

69.del Hougne, P., Yeo, K. B., Besnier, P. & Davy, M. Coherent Wave Control in Complex Media with 

Arbitrary Wavefronts. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 193903 (2021).

70.Kang, Y. & Genack, A. Z. Transmission zeros with topological symmetry in complex systems. Phys. 

Rev. B 103, L100201 (2021).

71.Li, L. et al. Electromagnetic reprogrammable coding-metasurface holograms. Nat. Commun. 8, 197 

(2017).

72.Moccia, M. et al. Coding Metasurfaces for Diffuse Scattering: Scaling Laws, Bounds, and 

Suboptimal Design. Adv. Opt. Mater. 5, 1700455 (2017).

73.Tang, W., Wong, K.-K., Li, X., Zhao, X. & Jin, S. MIMO Transmission Through Reconfigurable 

Intelligent Surface: System Design, Analysis, and Implementation. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 38, 
17 (2020).

74.Zhao, H. et al. Metasurface-assisted massive backscatter wireless communication with commodity 

Wi-Fi signals. Nat. Commun. 11, 3926 (2020).

75.Dai, L. et al. Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface-Based Wireless Communications: Antenna Design, 

Prototyping, and Experimental Results. IEEE Access 8, 45913–45923 (2020).

76.Sleasman, T., F. Imani, M., Gollub, J. N. & Smith, D. R. Dynamic metamaterial aperture for 

microwave imaging. Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 204104 (2015).

77.Sleasman, T., Imani, M. F., Gollub, J. N. & Smith, D. R. Microwave Imaging Using a Disordered 

Cavity with a Dynamically Tunable Impedance Surface. Phys. Rev. Applied 6, 054019 (2016).

78.Li, L. et al. Intelligent metasurface imager and recognizer. Light Sci. Appl. 8, 97 (2019).
79.del Hougne, P., Imani, M. F., Diebold, A. V., Horstmeyer, R. & Smith, D. R. Learned Integrated 

Sensing Pipeline: Reconfigurable Metasurface Transceivers as Trainable Physical Layer in an 
Artificial Neural Network. Adv. Sci. 7, 1901913 (2019).

80.Li, H.-Y. et al. Intelligent Electromagnetic Sensing with Learnable Data Acquisition and 

Processing. Patterns 1, 100006 (2020).

81.Li, W., Qi, J. & Sihvola, A. Meta‐Imaging: from Non‐Computational to Computational. Adv. Opt. 

Mater. 8, 2001000 (2020).

82.Saigre-Tardif, C., Faqiri, R., Zhao, H., Li, L. & del Hougne, P. Intelligent Meta-Imagers: From 

Compressed to Learned Sensing. arXiv:2110.14022 (2021).

83.Zhang, L. et al. Space-time-coding digital metasurfaces. Nat. Commun. 9, 4334 (2018).
84.Alexandropoulos, G. C., Shlezinger, N. & del Hougne, P. Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces for 


Rich Scattering Wireless Communications: Recent Experiments, Challenges, and Opportunities. 
IEEE Commun. Mag. 59, 28–34 (2021).

85.Kaina, N., Dupré, M., Lerosey, G. & Fink, M. Shaping complex microwave fields in reverberating 

media with binary tunable metasurfaces. Sci. Rep. 4, 6693 (2015).

86.Dupré, M., del Hougne, P., Fink, M., Lemoult, F. & Lerosey, G. Wave-Field Shaping in Cavities: 

Waves Trapped in a Box with Controllable Boundaries. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 017701 (2015).

87.del Hougne, P., Lemoult, F., Fink, M. & Lerosey, G. Spatiotemporal Wave Front Shaping in a 

Microwave Cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 134302 (2016).

88.del Hougne, P., Fink, M. & Lerosey, G. Shaping Microwave Fields Using Nonlinear Unsolicited 

Feedback: Application to Enhance Energy Harvesting. Phys. Rev. Applied 8, 061001 (2017).

89.del Hougne, P., Imani, M. F., Fink, M., Smith, D. R. & Lerosey, G. Precise Localization of Multiple 

Noncooperative Objects in a Disordered Cavity by Wave Front Shaping. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 
063901 (2018).

90.del Hougne, M., Gigan, S. & del Hougne, P. Deeply Subwavelength Localization with 

Reverberation-Coded Aperture. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 043903 (2021).

91.del Hougne, P., Fink, M. & Lerosey, G. Optimally diverse communication channels in disordered 

environments with tuned randomness. Nat. Electron. 2, 36–41 (2019).

92.del Hougne, P., Davy, M. & Kuhl, U. Optimal Multiplexing of Spatially Encoded Information 

across Custom-Tailored Configurations of a Metasurface-Tunable Chaotic Cavity. Phys. Rev. 
Applied 13, 041004 (2020).

93.Frazier, B. W., Antonsen, T. M., Anlage, S. M. & Ott, E. Deep Wavefront Shaping: Intelligent 

Control of Complex Scattering Responses with a Programmable Metasurface. arXiv:2103.13500 
[physics] (2021).

94.Bruck, R. et al. All-optical spatial light modulator for reconfigurable silicon photonic circuits. 

Optica 3, 396 (2016).

95.Resisi, S., Viernik, Y., Popoff, S. M. & Bromberg, Y. Wavefront shaping in multimode fibers by 

transmission matrix engineering. APL Photonics 5, 036103 (2020).

96.Ma, G., Fan, X., Sheng, P. & Fink, M. Shaping reverberating sound fields with an actively tunable 

metasurface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 6638–6643 (2018).

97.Tian, Z. et al. Programmable Acoustic Metasurfaces. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1808489 (2019).
98.Achilleos, V., Theocharis, G., Richoux, O. & Pagneux, V. Non-Hermitian acoustic metamaterials: 

Role of exceptional points in sound absorption. Phys. Rev. B 95, 144303 (2017).

99.Sweeney, W. R., Hsu, C. W., Rotter, S. & Stone, A. D. Perfectly Absorbing Exceptional Points and 

Chiral Absorbers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 093901 (2019).

100. Suwunnarat, S. et al. Towards a Broad-Band Coherent Perfect Absorption in systems without 

Scale-Invariance. arXiv:2103.03668 [physics] (2021).

101. Wang, C., Sweeney, W. R., Stone, A. D. & Yang, L. Observation of coherent perfect absorption at 

an exceptional point. Science 373, 1261–1265 (2021).

102. Ma, Q. et al. Smart metasurface with self-adaptively reprogrammable functions. Light Sci. Appl.

8, 98 (2019).

103.Qian, C. et al. Deep-learning-enabled self-adaptive microwave cloak without human intervention. 

Nat. Photonics 14, 383–390 (2020).


104. Tan, S. et al. All-optical computation system for solving differential equations based on optical 

intensity differentiator. Opt. Express 21, 7008 (2013).


Supplementary Materials for

Meta-Programmable Analog Differentiator

Jérôme Sol1, David R. Smith2, and Philipp del Hougne3*

1 INSA Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France

2 Center for Metamaterials and Integrated Plasmonics, Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, 27708 USA

3 Univ Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France

* Correspondance to philipp.del-hougne@univ-rennes1.fr. 

Table of Contents:

Supplementary Note 1: Transfer Function of an Ideal Differentiator 

Supplementary Note 2: Vulnerability of Analog Differentiators

Supplementary Note 3: Details on the Experimental Setup 

Supplementary Note 4: Details on the Experimental Procedure 

Supplementary Note 5: Experimentally Measured Notch Depths

Supplementary Note 6: Error Performance Evaluation: Bandwidth and Dip Symmetry

Supplementary Note 7: Operation in Transmission Mode 

Supplementary Note 8: Further Examples of Parallel Computing 

Supplementary Note 9: Generalizations

Supplementary References


Supplementary Note 1. Transfer Function of an Ideal Differentiator 

In this supplementary note, we prove for completeness that the transfer function of an ideal 

differentiator is 𝐻(𝜔) = 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0) . ee also discuss the impact of an additional 

background phase drift with frequency on the filter’s functionality. Finally, we provide the 

transfer function of an ideal second-order differentiator.

Let 𝑒(𝑡) be the function whose derivative is to be determined. This function 𝑒(𝑡)

modulates a carrier signal of angular frequency 𝜔0, yielding the input signal

𝐸𝑖𝑛(𝑡) = 𝑒(𝑡)𝑒𝑖𝜔0𝑡.

The desired output signal is thus

𝐸𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝑡) = d𝑒(𝑡)

d𝑡
𝑒𝑖𝜔0𝑡.

The Fourier transform of 𝐸𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝑡) is

𝐸̃𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝜔) = ∫
d𝑒(𝑡)

d𝑡

∞

−∞

𝑒−𝑖(𝜔−𝜔0)𝑡d𝑡.

Integration by parts yields

𝐸̃𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝜔) = 𝑒−𝑖(𝜔−𝜔0)𝑡𝑒(𝑡)| ∞

−∞ + 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0) ∫
𝑒(𝑡)

∞

−∞

𝑒−𝑖(𝜔−𝜔0)𝑡d𝑡 = 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0)𝐸̃𝑖𝑛(𝜔),

where we assume that lim

𝑡→±∞ 𝑒(𝑡) = 0 for any realistic signal 𝑒(𝑡).

The transfer function associated with the differentiation operation is thus

𝐻(𝜔) =

𝐸̃𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝜔)

𝐸̃𝑖𝑛(𝜔) = 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0).

An analog differentiator is in general satisfactory if its output is proportional (not 

necessarily equal) to 𝐸𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝑡), i.e., 𝐻(𝜔) ∝ 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0) is needed. In practice, we observe 

that instead we achieve 𝐻(𝜔) ∝ 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0)𝑒−𝑖𝜏𝜔 due to a slow background phase drift 

with frequency. The basic time-shifting property of the Fourier transform, namely that the 

Fourier transform of 𝑋(𝑡 − 𝑡0) is 𝑒−𝑖𝜔𝑡0𝑋̃(𝜔), implies that this background phase drift 

𝑒−𝑖𝜏𝜔 just shifts the desired output signal in time from 𝐸𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝑡) to 𝐸𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝑡 − 𝜏), and hence 

poses no problem for the analog differentiator.

The transfer function of higher-order derivatives is simply the product of several first-

order differentiator transfer functions, e.g. for the second derivative,

d2𝑦

d𝑡2 =

d

d𝑡

d𝑦

d𝑡 , the 

corresponding transfer function is |𝐻(𝜔)|2 = −(𝜔 − 𝜔0)2. The phase of an ideal second-


order differentiator is thus perfectly flat.

Supplementary Note 2. Vulnerability of Analog Differentiators 

In this supplementary note, we illustrate the vulnerability of analog differentiators in order 

to highlight why it is important to perfectly implement the transfer function derived in 

Supplementary Note 1 in the experiment. Specifically, we show that an experimental setup 

does not faithfully act as differentiator if it 

(i)
relies on a well-matched port (e.g., at −30 dB ) as opposed to a perfectly 

matched port,

(ii)
gets the central operating frequency slightly wrong, or

(iii)
presents an asymmetry around the central frequency.

To substantiate these points, without loss of generality, we take the analytical transfer 

function of a differentiator based on a simple Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI, akin to 

Refs.1,2) as starting point in order to work with a physically justified analytical expression. 

Assuming that transmission through the upper MZI arm, relative to the lower MZI arm, 

introduces an additional time delay 𝜏 and differs in amplitude by a factor 𝐴 , then the 

transfer function reads 𝐻(𝜔) = 1 + 𝐴𝑒𝑖𝜔𝜏. Under idealistic conditions, 𝐴 = 1 and one 

would choose 𝜏 =

(2𝑚+1)𝜋

𝜔0
, where 𝑚 is an arbitrary integer, such that 𝐻(𝜔0) = 0 and 

the desired transfer function from Supplementary Note 1 would be obtained in the vicinity 

of 𝜔0 (see Refs.1,2).

In column a of Supplementary Figure 1, we depict the ideal case in which the transfer 

function perfectly matches the required one (see Supplementary Note 1) in terms of 

magnitude and phase, and the output signal upon injection of a Gaussian envelope is 

perfectly symmetric and has exactly zero amplitude at its center. 


In column b, we introduce a minimal error by setting 𝐴 = 0.9975 instead of unity. 

The magnitude of the transfer function thereby deteriorates to −33.7 dB at 𝜔0 which is 

not even visible on the linear magnitude plot in the first row. However, it is clearly visible 

that the phase jump is not abrupt anymore. The output signal already displays substantial 

distortions: it is not symmetric anymore in the time domain and there is a non-zero 

component at 𝜔0 in its spectrum. This highlights that a well-matched port (−33.7 dB) is 

not good enough to construct a faithful differentiator. In column c, we use 𝐴 = 0.99

which makes the observations from b even more prominent.

In column d, we investigate the impact of deviating from the ideal case through a slight 

increase of the ideal value of 𝜏 by a factor of 1.01. This minimal change significantly 

shifts the frequency at which the zero lies on the real frequency axis to the left, such that 

the output signal has no resemblance with the analytically expected derivative of the 

Gaussian input envelope. 

In column e, we investigate the role of asymmetry of the transfer function around 𝜔0. 

ee alter the ideal transfer function by multiplying it with a factor of 0.75 for 𝜔 < 𝜔0. The 

output signal is again significantly distorted: it clearly does not have zero amplitude at its 

center in the time domain anymore, and its magnitude in the spectral representation is 

clearly asymmetric now.

These illustrative examples highlight the importance of perfectly placing a zero of the 

scattering matrix exactly on the real frequency axis and exactly at the desired frequency of 

operation.


Supplementary Figure 1. Vulnerability of analog differentiators. For different transfer functions 

(a-e), the top row shows the magnitude of the transfer function on a linear scale, the second row shows 

the magnitude of the transfer function on a logarithmic scale, the third row shows the phase of the 

transfer function, the forth row shows the magnitude of the output signal’s spectrum (for a Gaussian 

envelope as input signal), and the bottom row shows the envelope of the output signal (again for a 

Gaussian envelope as input signal). The different transfer functions correspond to: a, ideal; b, like ideal 

but with 𝐴 = 0.9975; c, like ideal but with 𝐴 = 0.99; d, like ideal but 𝜏 increased by a factor of 1.01; 

e, like ideal but amplitude of the transfer function for 𝜔 < 𝜔0 multiplied by a factor of 0.75.

Supplementary Note 3. Details on the Experimental Setup 

In this supplementary note, we provide further details on the experimental setup, including 

characterizations of the chaotic cavity in terms of its reverberation time and of the 

programmable metasurface in terms of its operating bandwidth.


Supplementary Figure 2. Photographic image of the experimental setup. (right) Overview of 
experimental setup involving the disordered metallic box, the signal generator (Aeroflex IFR 3416,
250kHz-6GHz) and the oscilloscope (SDA 816Zi-B 16GHz Serial Data Analyzer, 80GS/s). In the 
pictured instance, the signal generator injects a waveform with quadratic envelope (signal power: 2dBm; 
carrier frequency: 5.1GHz) into the system, and the corresponding output signal is seen on the 
oscilloscope’s display: a linear envelope. (left) Inside view of the metallic box with the top cover 
removed. Two programmable metasurfaces are placed on perpendicular walls, and a waveguide-to-coax 
adapter (RA13PBZ012-B-SMA-F) acts as port. A metallic cylinder breaks the symmetries of the box 
and ensures that the rays therein display chaotic behavior.

A photographic image of the setup corresponding to Figure 1 from the main text is shown 

in Supplementary Figure 2. The metallic box has dimensions of 0.385m × 0.422m ×

0.405m and hence a volume of 0.0658m3 . Chaotic behavior of the waves inside the 

metallic box is ensured via various mechanisms: on the one hand, the presence of metallic 

elements (notably the cylinder but also the port itself as well as irregularities on the wall) 

breaks the symmetries of the box; on the other hand, the use of metasurface configurations 

in which the meta-atoms are not all in the same state acts as an electronic equivalent of 

further geometric perturbations3. ee determine the enclosure’s quality factor as 𝑄 = 410

via the average decay rate of inverse Fourier transformed spectra measured for a series of 

random metasurface configurations. Based on eeyl’s law, this means that at a given 

frequency within the considered interval 𝑁~

8𝜋𝑉

𝑐3𝑄 𝑓0

3 =

8𝜋

𝑄

𝑉

𝜆0

3 = 21 modes overlap.


The programmable metasurface is an ultrathin array of meta-atoms whose 

electromagnetic scattering properties can be reconfigured electronically. The concept can 

be traced back to pioneering works in the early 2000s4,5 and received renewed attention in 

20146,7. Since then, many designs for programmable metasurfaces have been proposed, and 

such devices are also known as “tunable impedance surface”, “spatial microwave 

modulator” or “reconfigurable intelligent surface”. Our present work could be 

implemented with any programmable metasurface design because it solely relies on the 

ability to somehow tune the complex scattering system’s properties but not on the specific 

meta-atom properties. An ideal programmable metasurface for our purpose (i) interacts 

with as many rays as possible, meaning that each meta-atom has the largest possible 

scattering cross-section and the metasurface consists of as many meta-atoms as possible, 

(ii) the meta-atom programmability is as fine-grained as possible (but at least 1-bit), and 

(iii) insertion of the metasurface into the chaotic enclosure does not significantly alter the 

amount of absorption.

The prototype used in our experiments (purchased from Greenerwave) is based on the 

design introduced in Ref.7 and has previously been used in Refs.3,8–12. In our setup seen in 

Figure 1 of the main text and Supplementary Figure 2, the programmable metasurfaces 

cover 16.2% of the cavity’s wall surface. In the setup seen in Figure 4a of the main text, 

the programmable metasurface covers 8.1% and 7.2% of the wall surface area in the two 

cavities, respectively. Each meta-atom (see Supplementary Figure 3a) has two digitalized 

states, “0” and “1”, and can be toggled between these two states by controlling the bias 

voltage of an integrated PIN diode. Specifically, each meta-atom consists of two resonators 

that hybridize, as detailed in Ref.7, and via the bias voltage of a PIN diode the resonance 

frequency of one of the two resonators can be altered. Thereby, the phase change of the 

reflected wave can be tuned by roughly 𝜋. The meta-atoms in Ref.7 acted on a single field 

polarization, whereas the meta-atoms of the prototype that we utilize can be thought of as 

the fusion of two such meta-atoms, one rotated by 90°, each acting on one polarization of 

the electromagnetic field.

ee begin by characterizing the utilized programmable metasurface in the conventional 

way, namely to consider the phase shift of the reflected wave between the two possible 


states for normally incident waves. The metasurface consists of 76 of the above-described 

meta-atoms. To that end, we utilize the horn-antenna setup shown in Supplementary Figure 

3a and synchronize the states of all meta-atoms for this measurement. ee measure the 

return loss of the horn antenna when the meta-atoms are all simultaneously in their two 

possible states: “0” or “1”. The magnitude of the return loss in the two cases, as well as the 

phase difference of the return loss between the two cases, are plotted in Supplementary 

Figure 3b,c. The return loss magnitudes are of course modulated by the horn antenna’s 

transfer function and thus not a quantification of the energy that is absorbed by the 

metasurface, but it is apparent that there is no significant difference in terms of reflected 

field magnitude between the two states. The phase difference reaches the ideal value of 𝜋

in the vicinity of 5.15 GHz. In other words, at this frequency, every meta-atom can be 

configured to mimic Dirichlet or Neuman boundary conditions. Similar results were 

measured for the other field polarization.

The above “conventional” characterization is a useful first indication of the 

metasurface’s properties but of course it contains no information about the dependence of 

these properties on the angle of incidence or on the coupling between different meta-atoms.

Especially in a rich scattering setting such as the one we consider, in which certainly waves 

from all possible angles are incident on the metasurface, it is more meaningful to 

characterize the metasurface in situ13,14. To that end, we place the two programmable 

metasurfaces at their intended locations, as seen in Supplementary Figure 3d, and measure 

the scattering parameter of interest (here 𝑆11(𝑓)) for a series of 500 random metasurface 

configurations. By evaluating the standard deviation across these measurements, we obtain 

a useful metric to assess the extent to which the programmable metasurface impacts the 

considered scattering parameter in the considered setup. Of course, this metric is still 

somewhat influenced by the specific system, so we also plot a smoothed version of the 

curve, obtained with a sliding average filter. Overall, it can be seen that the programmable 

metasurface most efficiently modulates the field within a 400 MHz bandwidth centered 

roughly on 5.15 GHz.

For the experiment underlying Figure 4 in the main text, we use an additional second 

metallic box of dimensions 0.5m × 0.5m × 0.3m and hence of volume of 0.075m3 . 


Chaotic behavior of the waves inside the metallic box is ensured via various mechanisms: 

on the one hand, the presence of metallic elements (notably two metallic hemispheres but 

also the port itself as well as irregularities on the wall) breaks the symmetries of the box; 

on the other hand, the use of metasurface configurations in which the meta-atoms are not 

all in their perfect electric conductor (PEC) equivalent state acts as an electronic equivalent 

of further geometric perturbations3. ee determine the enclosure’s quality factor as 𝑄 =

446 via the average decay rate of inverse Fourier transformed spectra measured for a 

series of random metasurface configurations. Based on eeyl’s law, this means that 

𝑁~

8𝜋𝑉

𝑐3𝑄 𝑓0

3 =

8𝜋

𝑄

𝑉

𝜆0

3 = 22 modes overlap at a given frequency within the considered 

interval.

Supplementary Figure 3. Characterization of the programmable metasurface. a, Setup to 
characterize the response under normal incidence. b, Magnitude of the return loss measured with the 
setup from a when all meta-atoms are simultaneously either in state “0” or state “1”. c, Phase difference 
between the return losses measured with the setup in a in the two possible states. d, In situ
characterization of the metasurface via the standard deviation of the reflection spectrum measured inside 
the disordered metallic box for 500 random metasurface configurations. A smoothed version of the curve 
is also shown.


Supplementary Note 4. Details on the Experimental Procedure 

In this supplementary note, we discuss procedural details of our experiments, including the 

identification of suitable metasurface configurations, the direct observation of temporal 

differentiation of various waveforms, as well as details regarding the modified setups 

underlying Figures 3 and 4 of the main text.

In order to separate injected and reflected waveform, port 2 of a circulator 

(PE83CR006) is connected to the coax-to-waveguide adapter inside the metallic disordered 

box, as seen in Supplementary Figure 4. 

Supplementary Figure 4. Use of a circulator to separate injected and reflected signals. a, Port 
connections involving a VNA used to optimize the metasurface configuration. b, Port connections 
involving a signal generator and oscilloscope used to perform temporal differentiation.

Identifying a metasurface configuration that yields a zero at a desired frequency is not 

a trivial task because no analytical or learned forward model is available that would allow 

us to predict the scattering response which corresponds to a given metasurface 

configuration. Given that the amount of degrees of freedom in the present work is one order 

of magnitude larger than in Ref.15, measuring the scattering response for all possible 

metasurface configurations is intractable. Instead, we use an iterative experimental trial-

and-error optimization method. To that end, we connect a vector network analyzer (Agilent 

Technologies PNA-L Network Analyzer N5230C, 300kHz-20GHz) to ports 1 and 3 of the 

circulator, as shown in Supplementary Figure 4a. ee operate with an emitted power of 0 

dBm and an IF bandwidth of 10 kHz. The transmission from port 1 to port 3 of the circulator 

is the reflection off the port inside the disordered metallic box. First, we measure the 

scattering response for 100 random metasurface configurations. ee pick the one closest to 

our objective as starting point. Then, we flip the state of one meta-atom at a time; we keep 


the change if the resulting scattering response is closer to our objective. ee observe that 

typically after a maximum of roughly 700 iterations no further improvement is observed. 

Like most inverse design methods, ours does not guarantee the identification of the globally 

optimal metasurface configuration. However, we observe that different optimization runs 

yield outcomes of comparable quality. In the future, we are confident that learned forward 

models based on ANNs can be implemented, such that the need for this iterative 

experimental optimization can be circumvented. Ref.16 already employs a learned forward 

model to predict the scattering response of a programmable metasurface, albeit in quasi 

free space rather than inside a complex scattering enclosure. Such ANN-based approaches 

will greatly benefit from next-generation meta-atoms with fine-grained programmability 

(> 1-bit) because they become compatible with continuous gradient-descent optimization 

protocols. Note that in certain settings without environmental perturbations during runtime, 

the identification of suitable metasurface configurations can be completed offline during a 

calibration phase and presents no burden during runtime.

To directly observe the wave-based analog computation of temporal derivatives, we 

generate various waveforms with a signal generator and observe the reflected signals on an 

oscilloscope, with connections as shown in Supplementary Figure 4b. Specifically, for the 

main experiments we use a signal generator (Aeroflex IFR 3416, 250kHz-6GHz) to

generate a signal 𝑒(𝑡)𝑒𝑖𝜔0𝑡. An arbitrary signal envelope 𝑒(𝑡) is defined and sampled at 

33 MHz, and an arbitrary value of 𝜔0 can be chosen within the considered 5-GHz-band.

ee emit the signals at 2 dBm. The emitted signal envelopes (GAUSSIAN, QUADPOLY, 

SKYLINE) are displayed in Figures 2c,f,i in the main text. The signal envelopes are 

repeated in intervals of 3 µs. The oscilloscope (SDA 816Zi-B 16GHz Serial Data Analyzer 

80GS/s) measures a 10 µs interval of the reflected signal with a sampling rate of 40 GS/s.

In order to inject the sum of two signals 𝑒𝐴(𝑡)𝑒𝑖𝜔𝐴𝑡 + 𝑒𝐵(𝑡)𝑒𝑖𝜔𝐵𝑡 for the experiments 

underlying Figure 3 of the main text, we use a second signal generator (Agilent MXG 

Analog N5183A, 100kHz-20GHz). Signal generators A and B generate 𝑒𝐴(𝑡)𝑒𝑖𝜔𝐴𝑡 and 

𝑒𝐵(𝑡)𝑒𝑖𝜔𝐵𝑡, respectively, and the two generated signals are then summed using a simple 

“T” connector before being injected into the port. The second signal generator generates a

square wave with period 2.5 µs at -13 dBm and an arbitrary value can be chosen for 𝜔0. 


The reason for emitting at such low power is that the peaks of the square wave’s derivatives

are very large and we intend to measure them with the same dynamic range as the 

derivatives of the other signal envelopes (GAUSSIAN, QUADPOLY, SKYLINE). The two 

signals from generators A and B are not synchronized in any manner and have different 

repetition intervals.

To suppress measurement noise, all measured data is digitally filtered to impose a pass-

band of 𝑓0 ± 0.02 GHz , where 𝑓0 is the carrier frequency. The reflected signal’s 

amplitude is intrinsically low for a differentiator due to the zero at the carrier frequency in 

its transfer function. Hence, the output signal is particularly weak in the case of a second-

order differentiator as considered in Figure 4 of the main text. Therefore, the output signal 

envelopes displayed in Figure 4 of the main text are averaged over 20 acquisitions in order 

to limit the corruption through measurement noise.

Supplementary Note 5. Experimentally Measured Notch Depths 

In this supplementary note, we provide further details on the experimentally measured 

notch depths for the data displayed in Figure 2a of the main text. To that end, we reproduce 

Figure 2a,b from the main text in Supplementary Figure 5 and add a plot of the transfer 

function magnitude on a logarithmic scale. Moreover, we summarize the notch depth for 

each considered central frequency in a table below.


Supplementary Figure 5. Experimentally measured notch depths. Measured transfer functions 
in terms of magnitude on a linear scale (a), magnitude on a logarithmic scale (b), and phase (c).
Subfigures a and c are reproduced from Figure 2a,b in the main text.

Supplementary Note 6. Error Performance Evaluation: Bandwidth and Dip 

Symmetry

In this supplementary note, we analyze the computation error of our meta-programmable 

differentiator based on a measured system transfer function. We explore the error 

Central Frequency 

[GHz]

Notch Depth 

[dB]

5.05
-76.3

5.10
-72.5

5.15
-71.4

5.20
-82.0

5.25
-74.1

5.30
-75.3

5.35
-73.3

5.40
-73.5


dependence on the input signal’s bandwidth and discuss the role of the symmetry of the 

reflection dip.

Supplementary Figure 6. Evaluation of computation error as a function of input signal 

bandwidth. a,b, Magnitude (a) and phase (b) of the measured transfer function with a zero at 5.1 GHz 

that is used for the error evaluation. The shaded area indicates the bandwidth of 15 MHz within which 

this transfer function is a good approximation to that of an ideal differentiator. c,d, Computational error 

as a function of input signal duration in terms of two metrics: correlation coefficient (c) and relative 

mean error (d). To compute these metrics, the output signal for a given input pulse duration is calculated, 

normalized and compared to the analytically expected output signal. The red dot indicates the duration 

of the Gaussian pulse used in the main text (Figure 2c). 

The ideal differentiator’s transfer function is 
𝐻(𝜔) = 𝑖(𝜔 − 𝜔0)
–
see 

Supplementary Note 1; its magnitude is hence linear and symmetric with respect to 𝜔0. 

Any physical implementation of this transfer function is only an approximation within 

some bandwidth around 𝜔0 and hence intrinsically bandwidth-limited. Most wave-based 

differentiators that have been proposed so far (see references in the main text’s introduction) 

are based on regularly shaped devices and their scattering matrix often only has a single 

zero within the considered frequency range. In contrast, our overmoded random scattering 

system has typically many other poles and zeros (with non-zero imaginary component) in 


the vicinity of the zero that we tune to a real frequency. These are, of course, in principle 

not distributed symmetrically around the targeted frequency and can hence introduce strong 

asymmetries outside the direct vicinity of the real-valued zero. Therefore, our optimization 

protocol not only minimizes |𝐻(𝜔0)| but also pays attention to the symmetry of |𝐻(𝜔)|

in the vicinity of 𝜔0 . Indeed, different locally optimal metasurface configurations that 

minimize |𝐻(𝜔0)| have been found to sometimes vary drastically in terms of symmetry 

and thus useful bandwidth. The stronger the symmetry is, the larger is the maximum input 

signal bandwidth for which an acceptably low computation error can be guaranteed.

Considering the case of an ideal Gaussian pulse as input (similar to Figure 2c in the 

main text), we calculate the (normalized) output signal envelope and compare it to the 

analytically expected output signal envelope for an ideal differentiator using two metrics: 

the relative mean difference between the two, as well as the correlation coefficient of the 

two. This calculation is performed for various bandwidths of the input pulse. The results 

in Supplementary Figure 6 show that up to an input signal bandwidth of roughly 15 MHz 

our system’s performance is very close to that of an ideal differentiator.

In the table below, we compare the fractional bandwidth achieved by various wave-

based temporal differentiators reported in the literature. Refs.17–20 are static (not 

programmable) wave-based photonic differentiators, while Ref.2 is a reconfigurable 

integrated interferometric photonic differentiator. None of these devices experiences 

symmetry issues regarding the transfer function magnitude (as discussed above) but 

implementation-specific effects eventually cause deviations from the ideal linear shape; for 

instance, in Ref.17 due to a slight non-linear dispersion slope of the core and cladding modes.

In terms of fractional bandwidth, a quantity that is independent of the central operating 

frequency and hence most meaningful from a general wave engineering perspective, our 

device achieves a performance of the same order of magnitude as Ref.20 and only Ref.17

performs significantly better. Refs.17,20 are both static and the only report on a somewhat 

tunable differentiator in Ref.2 has a fractional bandwidth which is an order of magnitude 

lower than the one reported in this present work. Interestingly, Refs.2,19 observed that the 

computational error deteriorates if the input bandwidth gets too large or too small – unlike 

our work in which only too large signal bandwidths appear to deteriorate the computational 


precision. Finally, we note that our meta-programmable analog differentiator’s operating 

bandwidth of 15 MHz is of the same order of magnitude as the channel width of typical 

WLAN wireless communication channels operating at the same central frequency – paving 

the path to direct applications of our technique in this area.

Reference
Operation 
Principle

Central 

Frequency

𝑓0

Frequency 
Bandwidth

Δ𝑓

Fractional 
Bandwidth

Δ𝑓/𝑓0

Ref.17
Long-period 
fiber grating.
195 THz
2.3 THz
1.5 × 10−2

Ref.18
Microring 
resonator.
193 THz
42 GHz
2 × 10−4

Ref.19
Fiber Bragg 

grating.
193.5 THz
25 GHz
1 × 10−4

Ref.20
Directional 

coupler.
193.5 THz
1.25 THz
6.5 × 10−3

Ref.2
Tunable

interferometer.
192 THz
55 GHz
3 × 10−4

This work.
Tuned overmoded 

chaotic cavity.
5.1 GHz
15 MHz
3 × 10−3

Supplementary Note 7. Operation in Transmission Mode 

In the main text, we presented results obtained in reflection mode. In this supplementary 

note, we present complementary results obtained in transmission mode for a first-order 

temporal differentiator. In reflection mode, a single port is used but a circulator is necessary 

to separate incident and reflected signal (see Supplementary Figure 4); in transmission 

mode, two ports are required but there is no need for a circulator.

The main inconvenience of operating in transmission mode is the significantly weaker 

magnitude of the transfer function in comparison to operating in reflection mode; in our 

experiments, the transfer function magnitude, averaged over random metasurface 

configurations and all frequency points, is 17.74 dB lower if operating in transmission: 


⟨|𝑆11|⟩ = −15.22 dB in contrast to ⟨|𝑆21|⟩ = −27.96 dB . This difference in transfer 

function magnitude results in a drastically higher sensitivity to noise during the 

optimization of the metasurface configuration, as well as less energy-efficient analog wave 

processing, if operation in transmission mode is chosen.

Nonetheless, V-shaped transmission zeros can be imposed on demand analogously to 

the V-shaped reflection zeros discussed in the main text, and the resulting transfer function 

is that of a first-order differentiator. Refs.13,21 previously minimized the transmission

between two ports in comparable metasurface-tunable complex scattering settings to create 

“cold spots”, but these works did not implement true transmission zeros. An example of a 

transmission zero that we implemented in our transmission-mode setup is shown in 

Supplementary Figure 7 below. In comparison to the reflection-mode setup detailed in 

Figure 1 in the main text, we removed the circulator and instead added a second port inside 

the chaotic cavity. The second port is identical to the first port and placed at least half a 

wavelength away from the first port, in perpendicular orientation to the first port. The 

transfer function’s magnitude has the desired linear behavior around its minimum at 

−79.5 dB and the phase displays the required 𝜋 phase jump across the central frequency. 

Again, a global phase drift is seen, which does not impact the differentiator functionality 

(see Supplementary Note 1). Upon injection of a Gaussian pulse (same parameters as in 

the main text), the corresponding output measurement yields the curve displayed in 

Supplementary Figure 7d. The principal features of the analytically expected output signal 

envelopes are observed (two symmetric pulses and a zero between them), but the quality 

of the differentiation operation is clearly worse than that reported in the main text in 

reflection mode. The very low signal strength in comparison to the noise floor is apparent; 

neater results could be obtained by averaging over multiple acquisitions.


Supplementary Figure 7. Example of an analog differentiator operating in transmission mode
at 5.35 GHz. a,b,c, The left column displays the transfer function, here 𝑆21(𝑓), in terms of its absolute 
value on a linear (a) and logarithmic (b) scale, as well as the associated phase (c). d, Normalized
envelope of the measured output signal (upon injection of a Gaussian pulse). 

Supplementary Note 8. Further Examples of Parallel Computing 

In the main text, we provided in Figure 3 several examples of computing two derivatives 

simultaneously by imposing simultaneously two zeros on the transfer function at distinct 

frequencies 𝜔𝐴 and 𝜔𝐵. ee reported direct evidence of parallel computing by injecting 

the sum of two independent envelopes modulated onto carriers 𝜔𝐴 and 𝜔𝐵, respectively. 

In this supplementary note, we provide further examples of measured optimized transfer 

functions for parallel differentiation, for up to four independent data streams. Given that 

only two signal generators were at our disposal, we could not directly test these further 

examples of parallel computing which would require the simultaneous generation of three 

or four independent waveforms.


Supplementary Figure 8. Various examples of optimized transfer functions with multiple zeros 
for parallelized wave-based differentiation. For each example, the transfer function’s amplitude is 
shown on a linear scale (top row) and on a logarithmic scale (middle row), as well as the corresponding 
phase (bottom row). Four examples with three scattering zeros and one example with four scattering 
zeros are shown.

Five examples of experimentally optimized and measured transfer functions with three 

or four real-valued scattering matrix zeros in the considered 5-GHz-band are displayed in 

Supplementary Figure 8. The regular spacing of these zeros was chosen on purpose. It is 

apparent that closely spaced zeros are more difficult to impose (the first two examples in 

Supplementary Figure 8). However, in all shown cases the reflection dips are sufficiently 

deep to serve for the desired differentiation functionality. An example with four zeros is 

also shown in Supplementary Figure 8 (last example). In principle, such multi-objective 

optimizations are more demanding than imposing a single zero. To ease the optimization 

burden, depending on the requirements of the specific intended application it may be 

possible to relax constraints (for instance, to only fix the zeros’ spacing but not their exact 

positions; to only fix the number of desired zeros; etc.). Alternatively, more degrees of 

freedom by using a larger programmable metasurface can improve the ability to satisfy all 

constraints.

Finally, we point out that parallel computing as reported in our work based on an

overmoded chaotic cavity with many tunable degrees of freedom is not possible with the 

same flexibility if a tunable interferometer is used instead as physical device, as in Ref.2. 


Indeed, in the latter case, the spacing of carrier frequencies must be equal to the free 

spectral range and cannot be imposed at will – see, for instance, Figure 3b in Ref.2.

Supplementary Note 9. Generalizations 

In the main text, we presented meta-programmable analog differentiation of temporally 

encoded signals through “over the air” wave propagation in a programmable complex 

scattering enclosure in the microwave domain. In this supplementary note, we provide 

details on how our proposed concept can be generalized to (i) spatially encoded 

information, (ii) programmable overmoded random scattering system based on guided

waves, and (iii) acoustic or optical scattering.

(i)
Spatially Encoded Information

To obtain the hallmark V-shaped transfer function in our work, as seen for 

instance in Figure 2, we impose a zero for the chosen set of parameters at which 

we desire critical coupling (in particular, 𝜔0 ); then, we trace the transfer 

function upon continuous detuning of the frequency, yielding the V-shape in the 

vicinity of the critical coupling condition. Thus, information that is temporally 

encoded into the input signal will be subject to the differentiation transfer 

function.

However, the same V-shaped spectrum is also obtained in the vicinity of 

the critical coupling condition by detuning any other parameter. Therefore, if

the input signal is not incident through a mono-modal coaxial waveguide but 

carried by a wave propagating in free space that impinges at some angle 𝜃 on 


a perforated wall through which it couples to our programmable chaotic cavity, 

as sketched in Supplementary Figure 9, we can tune the system once again to 

critical coupling for a chosen set of parameters (in particular, 𝜃0); then, we can 

trace the transfer function upon continuously detuning the angle of incidence, 

yielding once again the V-shape in the vicinity of the critical coupling condition.

This time, however, the horizontal axis will be the angle of incidence as opposed 

to the frequency. Thus, information that is spatially encoded into the input signal 

(over a range of incidence angles) will be subject to the differentiation transfer 

function.

Supplementary Figure 9. Metaprogrammable spatial analog differentiator. a, Concept. b,

Implementation in a 3D chaotic cavity from Ref.22. c, Implementation in a flat quasi-2D chaotic cavity 

from Ref.23.

Therefore, our technique can straightforwardly be extended to meta-

programmable spatial (as opposed to temporal) analog differentiation, and 

various technique to perforate a wall of 3D or quasi-2D chaotic cavities are 


well-known from setups that are routinely used for computational meta-

imaging, e.g., in Refs.22,23. The optimization to tune a zero of the scattering 

matrix to the real frequency axis for the desired set of parameters (central 

frequency, angle of incidence) would be exactly the same as that used in the 

work we presented.

However, the differentiation of spatially as opposed to temporally encoded 

information appears more relevant to optical signal processing than to the 

microwave domain which is targeted in our work. In the microwave domain, 

information is temporally encoded into many signals of interest, for instance, in 

wireless communication or radar. 

(ii)
Programmable Overmoded Random Scattering System Based on Guided 

eaves

At the core of our technique lies the idea to purposefully perturb an overmoded 

random scattering system with many degrees of freedom, because such a system 

presents a high density of zeros that are statistically uniformly distributed along 

the real frequency axis. Therefore, our technique finds it easy to tune one or 

multiple of these zeros onto the real frequency axis at the desired position(s). 

Our experimental demonstration relies on a 3D metallic complex scattering 

enclosure because of its high practical relevance: The elegance of our 

experiments is that any metallic enclosure (toolbox, microwave oven, etc.) can 

be taken and only an ultrathin programmable metasurfaces needs to be attached 

to the walls. In the context of upcoming 6G wireless communication, many 

rooms which are also scattering enclosures at < 6 GHz will naturally be 

equipped with “reconfigurable intelligent surfaces“ such that the entire 

hardware needed to implement our concept “over the air“ is already there.


Nonetheless, our concept can also be implemented in programmable 

overmoded random scattering systems based on guided waves, such as a 

network of coupled transmission lines with complex connectivity (also known 

as graph)24,25. The programmability could then originate, for instance, from a 

series of phase shifters integrated into the connections between nodes of the 

graphs. Indeed, recently CPA has been experimentally observed also on chaotic 

graphs in Ref.26 (albeit not “on-demand” as in our work in order to impose CPA 

at any desired real frequency). In contrast to our “over-the-air” experimental 

implementation, a guided approach would require one to carry around a 

network of transmission lines unless there was a safe method to leverage, for 

instance, the wiring inside a building that exists for electricity supply.

(iii)
Toward Implementations in Acoustic and Optical Scattering

The experiments reported in our manuscript were conducted in the microwave 

domain not merely because this is a convenient regime for proof-of-principle 

experiments but because it is of direct technological relevance in sight of many 

examples of microwave signals carrying temporally encoded information, such 

as in wireless communication or radar. Nonetheless, the fundamental principles 

underlying our technique are generic to any wave scattering system and can 

hence be extended to different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum as well as 

to acoustic scattering, provided a suitable mechanism to implement individually 

programmable scatterers can be identified. In this section, we provide a succinct 

survey of recent works from the literature that implemented techniques which 

may be leveraged to implement our proposal, for instance, in acoustic or optical 

scattering.

To begin with, we note that programmable meta-atoms very similar to the 

microwave prototype we used can be implemented at much higher 

electromagnetic frequencies in the THz and even infrared regimes using several 


well-established switchable diodes. For example, Schottky diodes in the THz 

regime (see Ref.27
and the website of Teratech
Components Ltd: 

http://www.teratechcomponents.com/) and thermal VO2 diodes in the infrared 

regime (see Refs.28,29) can be used. Detailed design proposals for programmable 

meta-atoms based on these switchable diodes for operation around 350 GHz 

and 150 THz, respectively, can be found in the electronic supplementary 

material of Ref.30.

In the optical regime, programmable scatterers have been demonstrated 

based on electro-optical modulation31, phase-change materials32–34, applied-

voltage-sensitive graphene35–37, all-optical modification of the spatial refractive 

index profile38, acousto-optic modulation39, spatial light modulators (SLM, if 

the scattering system is defined as the ensemble of complex medium and 

SLM)40, as well as mechanical actuation41,42 and computer-controlled 

mechanical perturbations43.

In the acoustic regime, programmable scatterers have been demonstrated 

based on magnetic-field controlled elastomers44, tunable membranes45–48, 

geometrically-tunable resonators49–53, as well as electrolysis-controlled 

microbubble arrays for ultrasound54.

The existence of such a variety of experimental reports on tunable 

scattering in optics and acoustics suggests that our concept can be implemented 

with relative ease for optical or acoustic scattering, too.


Supplementary References

1. Park, Y., Azaña, J. & Slavík, R. Ultrafast all-optical first- and higher-order differentiators based 

on interferometers. Opt. Lett. 32, 710 (2007).

2. Liu, e. et al. A fully reconfigurable photonic integrated signal processor. Nat. Photonics 10, 

190–195 (2016).

3. Gros, J.-B., del Hougne, P. & Lerosey, G. Tuning a regular cavity to wave chaos with 

metasurface-reconfigurable walls. Phys. Rev. A 101, 061801 (2020).

4. Sievenpiper, D. F., Schaffner, J. H., Song, H. J., Loo, R. Y. & Tangonan, G. Two-dimensional 

beam steering using an electrically tunable impedance surface. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.
51, 2713–2722 (2003).

5. Holloway, C. L., Mohamed, M. A., Kuester, E. F. & Dienstfrey, A. Reflection and Transmission 

Properties of a Metafilm: eith an Application to a Controllable Surface Composed of Resonant 
Particles. IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat. 47, 853–865 (2005).

6. Cui, T. J., Qi, M. Q., ean, X., Zhao, J. & Cheng, Q. Coding metamaterials, digital metamaterials 

and programmable metamaterials. Light Sci. Appl. 3, e218–e218 (2014).

7. Kaina, N., Dupré, M., Fink, M. & Lerosey, G. Hybridized resonances to design tunable binary 

phase metasurface unit cells. Opt. Express 22, 18881 (2014).

8. del Hougne, P., Davy, M. & Kuhl, U. Optimal Multiplexing of Spatially Encoded Information 

across Custom-Tailored Configurations of a Metasurface-Tunable Chaotic Cavity. Phys. Rev. 
Applied 13, 041004 (2020).

9. del Hougne, P., Savin, D. V., Legrand, O. & Kuhl, U. Implementing nonuniversal features with 

a random matrix theory approach: Application to space-to-configuration multiplexing. Phys. Rev. 
E 102, 010201 (2020).

10. del Hougne, P., Yeo, K. B., Besnier, P. & Davy, M. Coherent eave Control in Complex Media 

with Arbitrary eavefronts. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 193903 (2021).

11. del Hougne, P., Yeo, K. B., Besnier, P. & Davy, M. On‐Demand Coherent Perfect Absorption 

in Complex Scattering Systems: Time Delay Divergence and Enhanced Sensitivity to 
Perturbations. Laser Photonics Rev. 15, 2000471 (2021).

12. del Hougne, P. et al. Diffuse field cross-correlation in a programmable-metasurface-stirred 

reverberation chamber. Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 104101 (2021).

13. Kaina, N., Dupré, M., Lerosey, G. & Fink, M. Shaping complex microwave fields in 

reverberating media with binary tunable metasurfaces. Sci. Rep. 4, 6693 (2015).

14. Alexandropoulos, G. C., Shlezinger, N. & del Hougne, P. Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces 

for Rich Scattering eireless Communications: Recent Experiments, Challenges, and 
Opportunities. IEEE Commun. Mag. 59, 28–34 (2021).

15. Imani, M. F., Smith, D. R. & del Hougne, P. Perfect Absorption in a Disordered Medium with 

Programmable Meta‐Atom Inclusions. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 2005310 (2020).

16. Li, H.-Y. et al. Intelligent Electromagnetic Sensing with Learnable Data Acquisition and 

Processing. Patterns 1, 100006 (2020).

17. Slavík, R., Park, Y., Kulishov, M., Morandotti, R. & Azaña, J. Ultrafast all-optical 


differentiators. Opt. Express 14, 10699 (2006).

18. Liu, F. et al. Compact optical temporal differentiator based on silicon microring resonator. Opt. 

Express 16, 15880 (2008).

19. Li, M., Janner, D., Yao, J. & Pruneri, V. Arbitrary-order all-fiber temporal differentiator based 

on a fiber Bragg grating: design and experimental demonstration. Opt. Express 17, 19798 (2009).

20. Huang, T. L., Zheng, A. L., Dong, J. J., Gao, D. S. & Zhang, X. L. Terahertz-bandwidth 

photonic temporal differentiator based on a silicon-on-isolator directional coupler. Opt. Lett. 40, 
5614 (2015).

21. Frazier, B. e., Antonsen, T. M., Anlage, S. M. & Ott, E. eavefront shaping with a tunable 

metasurface: Creating cold spots and coherent perfect absorption at arbitrary frequencies. Phys. 
Rev. Research 2, 043422 (2020).

22. Sleasman, T., Imani, M. F., Gollub, J. N. & Smith, D. R. Microwave Imaging Using a 

Disordered Cavity with a Dynamically Tunable Impedance Surface. Phys. Rev. Applied 6, 
054019 (2016).

23. Sleasman, T. et al. Implementation and characterization of a two-dimensional printed circuit 

dynamic metasurface aperture for computational microwave imaging. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 69, 2151 (2020).

24. Kottos, T. & Smilansky, U. Chaotic Scattering on Graphs. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 968–971 (2000).
25. Pluhař, Z. & eeidenmüller, H. A. Universal Chaotic Scattering on Quantum Graphs. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 110, 034101 (2013).

26. Chen, L., Kottos, T. & Anlage, S. M. Perfect absorption in complex scattering systems with or 

without hidden symmetries. Nat. Commun. 11, 5826 (2020).

27. Peatman, e. C. B., eood, P. A. D., Porterfield, D., Crowe, T. e. & Rooks, M. J. Quarter‐

micrometer GaAs Schottky barrier diode with high video responsivity at 118 μm. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 61, 294–296 (1992).

28. Barker, A. S., Verleur, H. e. & Guggenheim, H. J. Infrared Optical Properties of Vanadium 

Dioxide Above and Below the Transition Temperature. Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 1286–1289 (1966).

29. Ghanekar, A., Ji, J. & Zheng, Y. High-rectification near-field thermal diode using phase change 

periodic nanostructure. Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 123106 (2016).

30. Li, L. et al. Electromagnetic reprogrammable coding-metasurface holograms. Nat. Commun.

8, 197 (2017).

31. Stolyarov, A. M. et al. Fabrication and characterization of fibers with built-in liquid crystal 

channels and electrodes for transverse incident-light modulation. Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 011108 
(2012).

32. Gholipour, B., Zhang, J., MacDonald, K. F., Hewak, D. e. & Zheludev, N. I. An All-Optical, 

Non-volatile, Bidirectional, Phase-Change Meta-Switch. Adv. Mater. 25, 3050–3054 (2013).

33. eang, D. et al. Switchable Ultrathin Quarter-wave Plate in Terahertz Using Active Phase-

change Metasurface. Sci. Rep. 5, 15020 (2015).

34. eang, Q. et al. Optically reconfigurable metasurfaces and photonic devices based on phase 

change materials. Nat. Photon. 10, 60–65 (2016).

35. Ju, L. et al. Graphene plasmonics for tunable terahertz metamaterials. Nat. Nanotechnol. 6, 


630–634 (2011).

36. Yao, Y. et al. Broad Electrical Tuning of Graphene-Loaded Plasmonic Antennas. Nano Lett.

13, 1257–1264 (2013).

37. Huang, Y.-e. et al. Gate-Tunable Conducting Oxide Metasurfaces. Nano Lett. 16, 5319–5325 

(2016).

38. Bruck, R. et al. All-optical spatial light modulator for reconfigurable silicon photonic circuits. 

Optica 3, 396 (2016).

39. Bello-Jiménez, M. et al. Actively mode-locked all-fiber laser by 5 MHz transmittance 

modulation of an acousto-optic tunable bandpass filter. Laser Phys. Lett. 15, 085113 (2018).

40. Matthès, M. e., del Hougne, P., de Rosny, J., Lerosey, G. & Popoff, S. M. Optical complex 

media as universal reconfigurable linear operators. Optica 6, 465 (2019).

41. Ou, J. Y., Plum, E., Jiang, L. & Zheludev, N. I. Reconfigurable Photonic Metamaterials. Nano 

Lett. 11, 2142–2144 (2011).

42. Ou, J.-Y., Plum, E., Zhang, J. & Zheludev, N. I. An electromechanically reconfigurable

plasmonic metamaterial operating in the near-infrared. Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 252–255 (2013).

43. Resisi, S., Viernik, Y., Popoff, S. M. & Bromberg, Y. eavefront shaping in multimode fibers 

by transmission matrix engineering. APL Photonics 5, 036103 (2020).

44. Chen, X. et al. Active acoustic metamaterials with tunable effective mass density by gradient 

magnetic fields. Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 071913 (2014).

45. Xiao, S., Ma, G., Li, Y., Yang, Z. & Sheng, P. Active control of membrane-type acoustic 

metamaterial by electric field. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 091904 (2015).

46. Chen, Z. et al. A tunable acoustic metamaterial with double-negativity driven by 

electromagnets. Sci. Rep. 6, 30254 (2016).

47. Ma, G., Fan, X., Sheng, P. & Fink, M. Shaping reverberating sound fields with an actively 

tunable metasurface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 6638–6643 (2018).

48. Ao, e., Ding, J., Fan, L. & Zhang, S. A robust actively-tunable perfect sound absorber. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 115, 193506 (2019).

49. Tian, Z. et al. Programmable Acoustic Metasurfaces. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1808489 (2019).
50. Cao, e. K. et al. Tunable Acoustic Metasurface for Three-Dimensional eave Manipulations. 

Phys. Rev. Applied 15, 024026 (2021).

51. Zhang, C. et al. A reconfigurable active acoustic metalens. Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 133502 

(2021).

52. Zhao, S.-D., Chen, A.-L., eang, Y.-S. & Zhang, C. Continuously Tunable Acoustic 

Metasurface for Transmitted eavefront Modulation. Phys. Rev. Applied 10, 054066 (2018).

53. Fan, S.-e. et al. Tunable Broadband Reflective Acoustic Metasurface. Phys. Rev. Applied 11, 

044038 (2019).

54. Ma, Z. et al. Spatial ultrasound modulation by digitally controlling microbubble arrays. Nat.

Commun. 11, 4537 (2020).


