1

Classification and reconstruction of spatially overlapping phase images 

using diffractive optical networks

Deniz Mengua,b,c, Muhammed Velia,b,c, Yair Rivensona,b,c, Aydogan Ozcan*abc

aDepartment of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of California Los Angeles 

(UCLA), California, USA 

bDepartment of Bioengineering, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), California, USA 

cCalifornia NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), 

California, USA 

*E-mail: ozcan@ucla.edu  

Abstract

Diffractive optical networks unify wave optics and deep learning to all-optically compute a given 
machine learning or computational imaging task as the light propagates from the input to the output 
plane. Here, we report the design of diffractive optical networks for the classification and 
reconstruction of spatially overlapping, phase-encoded objects. When two different phase-only 
objects spatially overlap, the individual object functions are perturbed since their phase patterns 
are summed up. The retrieval of the underlying phase images from solely the overlapping phase 
distribution presents a challenging problem, the solution of which is generally not unique. We 
show that through a task-specific training process, passive diffractive networks composed of 
successive transmissive layers can all-optically and simultaneously classify two different 
randomly-selected, spatially overlapping phase images at the input. After trained with ~550 
million unique combinations of phase-encoded handwritten digits from the MNIST dataset, our 
blind testing results reveal that the diffractive network achieves an accuracy of >85.8% for all-
optical classification of two overlapping phase images of new handwritten digits. In addition to 
all-optical classification of overlapping phase objects, we also demonstrate the reconstruction of 
these phase images based on a shallow electronic neural network that uses the highly compressed 
output of the diffractive network as its input (with e.g., ~20-65 times less number of pixels) to 
rapidly reconstruct both of the phase images, despite their spatial overlap and related phase 
ambiguity. The presented phase image classification and reconstruction framework might find
applications in e.g., computational imaging, microscopy and quantitative phase imaging fields. 


2

Introduction

Diffractive Deep Neural Networks (D2NN) [1] have emerged as an optical machine learning 

framework that parameterizes a given inference or computational task as a function of the physical 

traits of a series of engineered surfaces/layers that are connected by diffraction of light. Based on 

a given task and the associated loss function, deep learning-based optimization is used to configure

the transmission or reflection coefficients of the individual pixels/neurons of the diffractive layers 

so that the desired function is approximated in the optical domain through the light propagation 

between the input and output planes of the diffractive network [1–24]. Upon the convergence of 

this deep learning-based training phase using a computer, the resulting diffractive surfaces are 

fabricated using, e.g. 3D printing or lithography, to physically form the diffractive optical network

which computes the desired task or inference, without the need for a power source, except for the 

illumination light.

A diffractive network can be considered as a coherent optical processor, where the input 

information can be encoded in the phase and/or amplitude channels of the sample/object field-of-

view. Some of the previous demonstrations of diffractive networks utilized 3D printed diffracted 

layers operating at terahertz (THz) wavelengths to reveal that they can generalize to unseen data 

achieving >98% and >90% blind testing accuracies for amplitude-encoded handwritten digits

(MNIST) and phase-encoded fashion products (Fashion-MNIST), respectively, using passive 

diffractive layers that collectively compute the all-optical inference at the output plane of the 

diffractive network [1,5,8]. In a recent work [6], diffractive optical networks have been utilized to 

all-optically infer the data classes of input objects that are illuminated by a broadband light source 

using only a single-pixel detector at the output plane. This work demonstrated that a broadband 

diffractive network can be trained to extract and encode the spatial features of input objects into 

the power spectrum of the diffracted light to all-optically reveal the object classes based on the 

spectrum of the incident light on a single-pixel detector. Deep learning-based training of diffractive 

optical networks have also been utilized in solving challenging inverse optical design problems 

e.g., ultra-short pulse shaping and spatially-controlled wavelength demultiplexing [3,4].

In general, coherent optical processing and the statistical inference capabilities of diffractive 

optical networks can be exploited to solve various inverse imaging and object classification

problems through low-latency, low-power systems composed of passive diffractive layers. One 


3

such inverse problem arises when different phase objects reside on top of each other within the

sample field-of-view of a coherent imaging platform: the spatial overlap between phase-only thin 

samples inevitably causes loss of spatial information due to the summation of the overlapping 

phase distributions describing the individual objects, hence, creating spatial phase ambiguity at the 

input field-of-view.

Here, we present phase image classification diffractive networks that can solve this phase 

ambiguity problem and simultaneously classify two spatially overlapping images through the same 

trained diffractive network (see Fig. 1). In order to address this challenging optical inference 

problem, we devised four alternative diffractive network designs (Figs. 1b-e) to all-optically infer 

the data classes of spatially overlapping phase objects. We numerically demonstrated the efficacy 

of these diffractive network designs in revealing the individual classes of overlapping phase 

objects using training and testing datasets that are generated based on phase-encoded MNIST 

digits [25]. Our diffractive optical networks were trained using ~550 million different input phase 

images containing spatially overlapping MNIST digits (from the same class as well as different 

classes);  blind testing of one of the resulting diffractive networks using 10,000 test images of 

overlapping phase objects revealed a classification accuracy of >85.8%, optically matching the 

correct labels of both phase objects that were spatially overlapping within the input field-of-view.

In addition to all-optical classification of overlapping phase images using a diffractive network, 

we also combined our diffractive network models with separately trained, electronic image 

reconstruction networks to recover the individual phase images of the spatially overlapping input

objects solely based on the optical class signals collected at the output of the corresponding

diffractive network. We quantified the success of these digitally reconstructed phase images using

the structural similarity index measure (SSIM) and the peak-signal-to-noise-ratio (PSNR) to reveal

that a shallow electronic neural network with 2 hidden layers can simultaneously reconstruct both

of the phase objects that are spatially overlapping at the input plane despite the fact that the number 

of detectors/pixels at the output plane of the diffractive network is e.g., ~20-65 times smaller 

compared to an ideal diffraction-limited imaging system. This means the diffractive network

encoded the spatial features of the overlapping phase objects into a much smaller number of pixels 

at its output plane, which was successfully decoded by the shallow electronic network to 


4

simultaneously perform two tasks: (1) image reconstruction of overlapping spatial features at the 

input field-of-view, and (2) image decompression.

We believe that the presented diffractive network training and design techniques for computational 

imaging of phase objects will enable memory-efficient, low-power and high frame-rate 

alternatives to existing phase imaging platforms that often rely on high-pixel count sensor arrays, 

and therefore might find applications in e.g. microscopy and quantitative phase imaging fields.  

Results

Spatial overlap between phase objects within the input field-of-view of an optical imaging system 

obscures the information of samples due to the superposition of the individual phase channels,

leading to loss of structural information. For thin phase-only objects (such as e.g., cultured cells 

or thin tissue sections), when two samples 𝑒𝑗𝜃1(𝑥,𝑦) and 𝑒𝑗𝜃2(𝑥,𝑦) overlap with each other in space, 

the resulting object function can be expressed as 𝑒𝑗(𝜃1(𝑥,𝑦)+𝜃2(𝑥,𝑦)), and therefore a coherent optical 

imaging system does not have direct access to 𝜃1(𝑥, 𝑦) or 𝜃2(𝑥, 𝑦), except their summation (see 

Fig. 1a). In the context of diffractive networks and all-optical image classification tasks, another 

challenging aspect of dealing with spatially overlapping phase objects is that the effective number 

of data classes represented by different input images significantly increases compared to a single-

object classification task. Specifically, for a target dataset with 𝑀 data classes represented through 

the phase channel of the input, the total number of data classes at the input (with two overlapping 

phase objects) becomes 𝐶 (𝑀

2 ) + 𝑀 =

𝑀(𝑀−1)

2
+ 𝑀, where 𝐶 refers to the combination operation . 

This means that if the diffractive optical network design assigns a single output detector to 

represent each one of these combinations, one would need

𝑀(𝑀−1)

2
+ 𝑀 individual detectors. With 

the use of a differential detection scheme [5] that replaces each class detector with a pair of 

detectors (virtually representing the positive and negative signals), then the number of detectors at 

the output plane further increases to 2 × (

𝑀(𝑀−1)

2
+ 𝑀). 

To mitigate this challenge, in this work we introduced different class encoding schemes that better 

handle the all-optical classification of these large number of possible class combinations at the 


5

input. The output detector layout, D-1, shown in Fig. 1b illustrates one alternative design strategy

where the problem of classification of overlapping phase objects is solved by using only 2𝑀

individual detectors with a significant reduction in the number of output detectors when compared 

to 

𝑀(𝑀−1)

2
+ 𝑀. The use of 2𝑀 single-pixel detectors at the output plane (see Fig. 1b), can handle 

all the combinations and classify the overlapping input phase objects even if they belong to the 

same data class or not. To achieve this, we have two different sets of detectors, 

{𝐷𝑚

𝑖 , 𝑚 = 0,1,2, … , 𝑀 − 1} and {𝐷𝑚

𝑖𝑖, 𝑚 = 0,1,2, … , 𝑀 − 1}, which represent the classes of the 

individual overlapping phase images. The final class assignments in this scheme are given based 

on the largest two optical signals among all the 2𝑀 detectors, where the assigned indices (𝑚) of 

the corresponding two winner detectors indicate the all-optical classification results for the 

overlapping phase images. This is a simple class decision rule with a look up table of detector-

class assignments (as shown Fig. 1b), where the strongest two detector signals indicate the inferred 

classes based on their 𝑚. Stated mathematically, the all-optical estimation of the classes, 𝒄̂ =

[𝑐1̂ , 𝑐2̂ ], of the overlapping phase images is given by,

where 𝑰 denotes the optical signals detected by 2𝑀 individual detectors, i.e., [𝐷𝑚

𝑖 , 𝐷𝑚

𝑖𝑖]. With the 

𝑚𝑜𝑑(∗) operation in Eq. 1, it can be observed that when the ground truth object classes, 𝑐1 and 

𝑐2, are identical, a correct optical inference would result in 𝑐1̂ = 𝑐2̂ . On the other hand, when 𝑐1 ≠

𝑐2, there are four different detector combinations for the two largest optical signals that would 

result in the same (𝑐1̂ , 𝑐2̂ ) pair according to our class decision rule. For example, in the case of the 

input transmittance shown in Fig. 1a, which is comprised of handwritten digits ‘6’ and ‘7’, the 

output object classes based on our decision rule would be the same if the two largest optical signals

collected by the detectors correspond to: (1) 𝐷6

𝑖 and 𝐷7

𝑖𝑖, (2) 𝐷7

𝑖 and 𝐷6

𝑖𝑖, (3) 𝐷6

𝑖 and 𝐷7

𝑖 or (4) 𝐷6

𝑖𝑖

and 𝐷7

𝑖𝑖; all of these four combinations of winner detectors at the output plane would reveal the 

correct classes for the input phase objects in this example (digits ‘6’ and ‘7’).

Therefore, the training the diffractive optical networks according to this class decision rule requires 

subtle but vital changes in the ground truth labels representing the inputs and the loss function 

driving the evolution of the diffractive layers compared to a single-object classification system. If 

we denote the one-hot vector labels representing the classes of the input objects in a single-object 

𝒄̂ = 𝑚𝑜𝑑(𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥2(𝑰), 𝑀)
1


6

classification system as, 𝒈𝟏 and 𝒈𝟐, with an entry of 1 at their 𝑐1

𝑡ℎ and 𝑐2

𝑡ℎ entries, respectively, 

for the case of spatially overlapping two phase objects at the input field-of-view we can define 

new ground truth label vectors of length 2𝑀 using 𝒈𝟏 and 𝒈𝟐. For the simplest case of 𝑐1 = 𝑐2

(i.e., 𝒈𝟏 = 𝒈𝟐), the 2𝑀-vector 𝒈𝒆 is constructed as 𝒈𝒆 = 0.5 × [𝒈𝟏, 𝒈𝟐]. The constant 

multiplicative factor of 0.5 ensures that the resulting vector 𝒈𝒆 defines a discrete probability 

density function satisfying ∑
𝑔𝑒

𝑚

2𝑀
1
= 1. It is important to note that since 𝑐1 = 𝑐2, we have

[𝒈𝟏, 𝒈𝟐] = [𝒈𝟐, 𝒈𝟏]. On the other hand, when the overlapping input phase objects are from 

different data classes i.e., 𝑐1 ≠ 𝑐2, we define four different label vectors {𝒈𝒂, 𝒈𝒃, 𝒈𝒄, 𝒈𝒅 }

representing all the four combinations. Among this set of label vectors, we set 𝒈𝒂 = 0.5 × [𝒈𝟏, 𝒈𝟐]

and 𝒈𝒃 = 0.5 × [𝒈𝟐, 𝒈𝟏]. The label vectors 𝒈𝒄 and 𝒈𝒅 depict the cases, where the output detectors 

corresponding to the input object classes lie within 𝐷𝑚

𝑖 and 𝐷𝑚

𝑖𝑖, respectively. In other words, the 

𝑐1

𝑡ℎ and 𝑐2

𝑡ℎ entries of 𝒈𝒄 are equal to 0.5, and similarly the (𝑀 + 𝑐1)𝑡ℎ and (𝑀 + 𝑐2)𝑡ℎ entries of 

𝒈𝒅 are equal to 0.5, while all the rest of the entries are equal to zero.

Based on these definitions, the training loss function (ℒ) of the associated forward model was 

selected to reflect all the possible input combinations at the sample field-of-view (input), therefore, 

it was defined as,

where ℒ𝑐

𝑎, ℒ𝑐

𝑏, ℒ𝑐

𝑐, ℒ𝑐

𝑑, and ℒ𝑐

𝑒 denote the penalty terms computed with respect to the ground truth 

label vectors 𝒈𝒂, 𝒈𝒃, 𝒈𝒄, 𝒈𝒅, and 𝒈𝒆, respectively, and 𝑠𝑔𝑛(. ) is the signum function. The 

classification errors, ℒ𝑐

𝑥, are computed using the cross-entropy loss [26],  

where x refers to one of a, b, c, d, or e, 𝐼𝑚
̅̅̅ denotes the normalized intensity collected by a given

detector at the output plane (see the Methods section for further details). The term 𝑔𝑚

𝑥 in Eq. (3) 

denotes the 𝑚𝑡ℎ entry of the ground truth data class vector, 𝒈𝒙.

Based on this diffractive network design scheme and the output detector layout D-1, we trained a 

5-layer diffractive network (Figs. 1,a,b) using the loss function depicted in Eq. 2 over 

~550 𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑜𝑛 input training images containing various combinations of spatially overlapping, 

ℒ = (1 − |𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝑐1 − 𝑐2)|) × ℒ𝑐

𝑒 + |𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝑐1 − 𝑐2)| × min{ℒ𝑐

𝑎, ℒ𝑐

𝑏, ℒ𝑐

𝑐, ℒ𝑐

𝑑}
2

ℒ𝑐

𝑥 = − ∑ 𝑔𝑚

𝑥 log(
𝑒𝐼𝑚
̅̅̅̅

∑
𝑒𝐼𝑘
̅̅̅
2𝑀
𝑘=1

)

2𝑀

𝑚=1

3


7

phase-encoded MNIST handwritten digits. Following the training phase, the resulting diffractive 

layers of this network, which we term as D2NN-D1, are illustrated in Fig. 2a. To quantify the 

generalization performance of D2NN-D1 for the classification of overlapping phase objects that 

were never seen by the network before, we created a test dataset, T2, with 10K phase images, where 

each image contains two spatially-overlapping phase-encoded test digits randomly selected from 

the standard MNIST test set, T1. In this blind testing phase, D2NN-D1 achieved 82.70% accuracy 

on T2, meaning that in 8,270 cases out of 10,000 test inputs, the class estimates [𝑐1̂ , 𝑐2̂ ] at the 

diffractive network’s output plane were correct for both of the spatially overlapping handwritten 

digits. For the remaining 1730 test images, the classification decision of the diffractive network is 

incorrect for at least one of the phase objects within the field-of-view. Figures 2b-e depict some of 

the correctly classified phase image examples from the test dataset T2 with phase encoded

handwritten digits, along with the resulting class scores at the output detectors of the diffractive 

network.

This blind inference accuracy of the diffractive network shown in Fig. 2a, i.e., D2NN-D1, can be 

further improved by combining the above outlined training strategy with a differential detection 

scheme, where each output detector in D1 (Fig. 1b) is replaced with a differential pair of detectors 

(i.e., a total of 2x2M detectors are located at the output plane, see Fig. 1c). The differential signal 

between a pair of detectors shown in Fig. 1c encodes a total of 2xM differential optical signals and 

similar to the previous approach of D1, the final class assignments in this scheme are given based 

on the two largest signals among all the differential optical signals. With the incorporation of this

differential detection scheme, the vector 𝑰 in Eq. 1 is replaced with the differential signal [5], Δ𝑰 =

𝑰+ − 𝑰−, where 𝑰+ and 𝑰− denote the optical signals collected by the 2𝑀 detector pairs, virtually

representing the positive and negative parts, respectively.

Using this differential diffractive network design, which we termed as D2NN-D1d (see Fig. 1c),

we achieved a blind testing accuracy of 85.82% on the test dataset T2. The diffractive layers

comprising the D2NN-D1d network are shown in Fig. 3a, which were trained using ~550 𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑜𝑛

input phase images of spatially overlapping MNIST handwritten digits, similar to D2NN-D1. 

Compared to the classification accuracy attained by D2NN-D1, the inference accuracy of its 

differential counterpart, D2NN-D1d, is improved by >3.1% at the expense of using 2𝑀 additional 

detectors at the output plane of the optical network. Figures 3b-d illustrate some examples of the 


8

correctly classified phase images from the test dataset T2 with phase encoded handwritten digits, 

along with the resulting differential class scores at the output detectors of the diffractive network.

The blind inference accuracies achieved by D2NN-D1 and D2NN-D1d (82.70% and 85.82%, 

respectively) on the test dataset T2, demonstrate the success of the underlying detector layout 

designs and the associated training strategy for solving the phase ambiguity problem to all-

optically classify overlapping phase images using diffractive networks. When these two diffractive 

optical networks (D2NN-D1 and D2NN-D1d) are blindly tested over T1 that provides input images

containing a single phase-encoded handwritten digit (without the second overlapping phase 

object), they attain better classification accuracies of 90.59% and 93.30%, respectively (see the 

Methods section). As a reference point, a 5-layer diffractive network design with an identical 

layout to the one shown in Fig. 1a, can achieve a blind classification accuracy of ~98% [5,8] on 

test set T1, provided that it is trained to classify only one phase-encoded handwritten digit per input 

image (without any spatial overlap with other objects). This reduced classification accuracy of 

D2NN-D1 and D2NN-D1d on test set T1 (when compared to ~98%) indicates that their forward 

training model, driven by the loss functions depicted in Eqs. 2-3, guided the evolution of the 

corresponding diffractive layers to recognize the spatial features created by the overlapping

handwritten digits, as opposed to focusing solely on the actual features describing the individual 

handwritten digits.

To further reduce the required number of optical detectors at the output plane of a diffractive 

network, we considered an alternative design (D-2) shown in Fig. 1d. In this alternative design 

scheme D-2, there are two extra detectors {𝐷𝑄

+, 𝐷𝑄

−} (shown with blue in Fig. 1d), in addition to 𝑀

class detectors {𝐷𝑚, 𝑚 = 1,2, … , 𝑀} (shown with gray in Fig. 1d). The sole function of the 

additional pair of detectors {𝐷𝑄

+, 𝐷𝑄

−} is to decide whether the spatially-overlapping input phase 

objects belong to the same or different data classes. If the difference signal of this differential 

detector pair (Fig. 1d) is non-negative (i.e., 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ ≥ 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−), the diffractive network will infer that the 

overlapping input objects are from the same data class, hence there is only one class assignment 

to be made by simply determining the maximum signal at the output class detectors: 

{𝐷𝑚, 𝑚 = 1,2, … , 𝑀} . A negative signal difference between {𝐷𝑄

+, 𝐷𝑄

−}, on the other hand, indicates 

that the two overlapping phase objects are from different data classes/digits, and the final class 


9

assignments in this case of 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ < 𝐼𝐷𝑄

− are given based on the largest two optical signals among all 

the remaining 𝑀 detectors at the network output, {𝐷𝑚, 𝑚 = 1,2, … , 𝑀}. Refer to the Methods 

section for further details on the training of diffractive networks that employ D-2 (Fig. 1d)

Similar to earlier diffractive network designs, we used ~550 𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑜𝑛 input phase images of 

spatially overlapping MNIST handwritten digits to train 5 diffractive layers constituting the D2NN-

D2 network (see Fig. 4a). Figures 4b-d illustrate sample input phase images that contain objects 

from different data classes, along with the output detector signals that correctly predict the 

classes/digits of these overlapping phase objects; notice that in each one of these cases, we have 

at the output plane 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ < 𝐼𝐷𝑄

− indicating the success of the network’s inference. As another 

example of blind testing, Fig. 4e reports the diffractive network’s inference for two input phase 

objects that are from the same data class, i.e., digit ‘3’. At the network’s output, this time we have 

𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ > 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−, correctly predicting that the two overlapping phase images are of the same class; the 

maximum output signal of the remaining output detectors {𝐷𝑚, 𝑚 = 1,2, … , 𝑀} also correctly 

reveals that the handwritten phase images belong to digit ‘3’ with a maximum signal at 𝐷3. This 

D2NN-D2 design provides 82.61% inference accuracy on the test set T2 with 10K test images, 

closely matching the inference performance of D2NN-D1 (82.70%) reported in Fig 2. In fact, an 

advantage of this D2NN-D2 design lies in its inference performance and blind testing accuracy on 

test set T1, achieving 93.38% for classification of input phase images of single digits (without any 

spatial overlap at the input field-of-view). 

We also implemented the differential counterpart of the detector layout D-2, which we term as D-

2d (see Fig. 1e), where the 𝑀 class detectors in D-2 are replaced with 𝑀 differential pairs of output

detectors. In this configuration D-2d, the total number of detectors at the output plane of the 

diffractive network becomes 2𝑀 + 2 and the all-optical inference rules remain the same as in D-

2: for 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ ≥ 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−, the class inference is made by simply determining the maximum differential 

signal at the output class detectors, and for the case of 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ < 𝐼𝐷𝑄

− the inference of the classes of 

input phase images is determined based on the largest two differential optical signals at the network 

output. Figure 5a shows the diffractive layers of the resulting D2NN-D2d that is trained based on 

the detector layout, D-2d (Fig. 1e) using the same training dataset as before: ~550 𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑜𝑛 input 

phase images of spatially overlapping, phase-encoded MNIST handwritten digits. This new 


10

differential diffractive network design, D2NN-D2d, provides significantly higher blind inference 

accuracies compared to its non-differential counterpart D2NN-D2, achieving 85.22% and 94.20%

on T2 and T1 datasets, respectively. Figures 5b-d demonstrate some examples of the input phase 

images from test set T2 that are correctly classified by D2NN-D2d along with the corresponding 

optical signals collected by the output detectors representing the positive and negative parts, 𝑰𝑴+

and 𝑰𝑴−, of the associated differential class signals, Δ𝑰𝑀 = 𝑰𝑴+ − 𝑰𝑴−. As another example, the 

input phase image depicted in Fig. 5e has two overlapping phase-encoded digits from the same 

data class, handwritten digit ‘4’, and the diffractive optical network correctly outputs 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ > 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−

with the maximum differential class score strongly revealing an optical inference of digit ‘4’.

Table 1 summarizes the optical blind classification accuracies achieved by different diffractive 

optical network designs, D2NN-D1, D2NN-D1d, D2NN-D2 and D2NN-D2d on test image sets T2 

and T1. Even though D2NN-D1d achieves the highest inference accuracy for the classification of 

spatially overlapping phase objects, D2NN-D2d offers a balanced optical inference system 

achieving very good accuracy on both T1 and T2. These two differential diffractive network models 

outperform their non-differential counterparts with superior inference performance on both T2 and 

T1. The confusion matrices demonstrating the class-specific inference performances of the 

presented diffractive networks, D2NN-D1, D2NN-D1d, D2NN-D2 and D2NN-D2d, are also

reported in Supplementary Figures 1-4, respectively. 

Next, we aimed to reconstruct the individual images of the overlapping phase objects (handwritten 

digits) using the detector signals at the output of a diffractive network; stated differently our goal 

here is to resolve the phase ambiguity at the input plane and reconstruct both of the input phase 

images, despite their spatial overlap and the loss of phase information. For this aim, we combined 

each one of our diffractive optical networks, D2NN-D1, D2NN-D1d, D2NN-D2 and D2NN-D2d, 

one by one, with a shallow, fully-connected (FC) electronic network with two hidden layers,

forming a task-specific imaging system as shown in Fig. 6. In these hybrid machine vision systems, 

the optical signals synthesized by a given diffractive network (front-end encoder) are interpreted 

as encoded representations of the spatial information content at the input plane. Accordingly, the 

electronic back-end neural network is trained to process the encoded optical signals collected by 

the output detectors of the diffractive network to decode and reconstruct the individual phase 

images describing each object function at the input plane, resolving the phase ambiguity due to the 


11

spatial overlap of the two phase objects. Figures 6a-d illustrate 3 different input images taken from 

the test set T2 for each diffractive network design (D2NN-D1, D2NN-D1d, D2NN-D2 and D2NN-

D2d) along with the corresponding image reconstructions at the output of each one of the electronic 

networks that are separately trained to work with the optical diffractive networks (front-end). As 

depicted in Fig. 6, the electronic image reconstruction networks only have 2 hidden layers with 

100 and 400 neurons, and the final output layers of these networks have 28×28×2 neurons, 

revealing the images of the individual phase objects, resolving the phase ambiguity due to the 

spatial overlap of the input phase images. The quality of these image reconstructions is quantified 

using (1) the structural similarity index measure (SSIM) and (2) the peak signal-to-noise ratio 

(PSNR). Table 2 shows the mean SSIM and PSNR values achieved by these hybrid machine vision 

systems along with the corresponding standard deviations computed over the entire 10K test 

images (T2). For these presented image reconstructions, we should emphasize that the 

dimensionality reduction (i.e., the image data compression) between the input and output planes

of the diffractive networks (D2NN-D1, D2NN-D1d, D2NN-D2 and D2NN-D2d) is 39.2×, 19.6×, 

65.33× and 35.63×, respectively, meaning that the spatial information of the overlapping phase 

images at the input field-of-view is significantly compressed (in terms of the number of pixels) at 

the output plane of the diffractive network. This large compression sets another significant 

challenge for the image reconstruction task in addition to the phase ambiguity and spatial overlap 

of the target images. With these large compression ratios, the presented diffractive network-based 

machine vision systems managed to faithfully recover the phase images of each input object

despite their spatial overlap and phase information loss, demonstrating the coherent processing 

power of diffractive optical networks as well as the unique design opportunities enabled by their 

collaboration with electronic neural networks that form task-specific back-end processors.

Discussion

The optical classification of overlapping phase images using diffractive networks presents a 

challenging problem due to the spatial overlap of the input images and the associated loss of phase 

information at the input plane. Interestingly, different combinations of handwritten digits at the 

input present different amounts of spatial overlap, which is a function of the class of the selected 

input digits as well as the style of the handwriting of the person. To shed more light on this, we 


12

quantified the all-optical blind inference accuracies of the presented diffractive optical networks 

as a function of the spatial overlap percentage, 𝜉, at the input field-of-view; see Fig. 7. In the first 

group of examples shown in Fig. 7a, the input fields-of-view contain digits from different data 

classes (𝑐1 ≠ 𝑐2) and in the second group of examples shown in Fig. 7b, the spatially overlapping 

objects are from the same data class, 𝑐1 = 𝑐2. The input phase images in T2 exhibit spatial overlap

percentages varying between ~20% and ~100%. Figures 7c,d illustrate the change in the optical 

blind inference accuracy of the diffractive network, D2NN-D1, as a function of the spatial overlap 

percentage, 𝜉, for the first (𝑐1 ≠ 𝑐2) and the second (𝑐1 = 𝑐2) group of test input images, 

respectively. When 𝑐1 ≠ 𝑐2 as in Fig. 7c, the optical inference accuracy is hindered by the

increasing amount of spatial overlap between the two input phase objects, as in this case, the spatial 

features of the effective input transmittance function significantly deviate from the features 

defining the individual data classes. In the other case shown in Fig. 7d, i.e., 𝑐1 = 𝑐2, the 

relationship between the spatial overlap ratio 𝜉 and the blind inference accuracy is reversed, since, 

with 𝑐1 = 𝑐2, increasing 𝜉 means that the effective phase distribution at the input plane resembles 

more closely to a single object/digit. The same behavior can also be observed for the other 

diffractive optical networks, D2NN-D1d, D2NN-D2 and D2NN-D2d, reported in Figs. 7e-f, 7g-h, 

7i-j, respectively. 

In summary, to the best of our knowledge, this manuscript reports the first all-optical multi-object 

classification designs based on diffractive networks demonstrating their potential in solving 

challenging classification and computational imaging tasks in a resource-efficient manner using 

only a handful detectors at the output plane. In the context of optical classification and 

reconstruction of overlapping phase objects, also resolving the phase ambiguity due to the spatial 

overlap of input images, this study exclusively focuses on a setting where the thin input objects 

are only modulating the phase of the incoming waves, and absorption is negligible. Without loss 

of generality, the presented diffractive design schemes with the associated loss functions and 

training methods can also be extended to applications, where the input objects partially absorb the

incoming light. 

Methods


13

Optical Forward Model of Diffractive Networks

D2NN framework formulates a given machine learning e.g., object classification or inverse design 

task as an optical function approximation problem and parameterizes that function over the 

physical features of the materials inside a diffractive black-box. As is the case in this study, this 

optical black-box is often modeled through a series of thin modulation layers connected by the 

diffraction of light waves. Here, we focused our efforts on 5-layer diffractive optical networks as 

shown in Fig. 1a, each occupying an area of 106λ × 106λ on the lateral space with λ denoting the 

wavelength of the illumination light. The modulation function of each diffractive layer was 

sampled and represented over a 2D regular grid with a period of 0.53λ resulting in 𝑁 = 200 ×

200 different transmittance coefficients, i.e., the diffractive ‘neurons’. Based on the 0.53λ

diffractive feature size, we set the layer-to-layer axial distance to be 40λ to ensure connectivity 

between all the neurons on two successive layers.

We selected the diffractive layer thickness, ℎ, as a trainable physical parameter dictating the 

transmittance of each neuron together with the refractive index of the material. To limit the 

material thickness range during the deep learning-based training, ℎ is defined as a function of an 

auxiliary, learnable variable, ℎ𝑎, and a constant base thickness, ℎ𝑏,

where the function, 𝑄∗(. ) represents the *-bit quantization operator and ℎ𝑚 is the maximum 

allowed material thickness. If the material thickness over the 𝑖𝑡ℎ diffractive neuron located at 

(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖) is denoted by ℎ(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖), then the resulting transmittance coefficient of that neuron, 

𝑡(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖), is given by,

where 𝑛(𝜆) and 𝜅(𝜆) are the real and imaginary parts of complex-valued refractive index of the 

diffractive material at wavelength, 𝜆. Following the earlier experimental demonstrations of 

diffractive optical networks, in this work we set the 𝑛(𝜆) and 𝜅(𝜆) values to be 1.7227 and 0.031, 

respectively [8]. The parameter 𝑛𝑠 in Eq. 5 refers to the refractive index of the medium, 

surrounding the diffractive layers; without loss of generality, we assumed 𝑛𝑠 = 1 (air). Based on 

the outlined material properties, the ℎ𝑚 and ℎ𝑏 in Eq. 4 were selected as 2λ and 0.66λ, respectively, 

ℎ = 𝑄4(sin(ℎ𝑎) + 1

2
(ℎ𝑚 − ℎ𝑏)) + ℎ𝑏
4,

𝑡(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖) = exp (− 2𝜋𝜅(𝜆)ℎ(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖)

𝜆
) exp (𝑗(𝑛(𝜆) − 𝑛𝑠) 2𝜋ℎ(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖)

𝜆
)
5,


14

ensuring that the phase modulation term in Eq. 5, (𝑛(𝜆) − 𝑛𝑠) 2𝜋ℎ(𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖,𝑧𝑖)

𝜆
, can cover the entire [0-

2π] phase modulation range per diffractive feature/neuron.

Based on the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction integral, a neuron located at (𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖) can be 

viewed as the source of a secondary wave, 

where 𝑟 denotes the radial distance √(𝑥 − 𝑥𝑖)2 + (𝑦 − 𝑦𝑖)2 + (𝑧 − 𝑧𝑖)2. Based on this, the output 

wave emanating from the 𝑖𝑡ℎ neuron on the 𝑘𝑡ℎ layer, 𝑢𝑖

𝑘(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) can be written as,

The term ∑
𝑢𝑞

𝑘−1(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖)
𝑁
𝑞=1
in Eq. 9 represents the wave incident on the 𝑖𝑡ℎ neuron on the 𝑘𝑡ℎ

layer, generated by the neurons on the previous, (𝑘 − 1)𝑡ℎ diffractive layer.

In this study we also assumed that the transmittance function inside the input field-of-view, 

𝑇𝑖𝑛(𝑥, 𝑦), covers an area of 53𝜆×53𝜆 and without loss of generality, it is illuminated with a uniform 

plane wave. At the output plane, the width of each single-pixel detector was set to be 6.36𝜆 on 

both x and y directions for all four output detector configurations shown in Figs. 1b-d. Based on 

the outlined optical forward model, the diffractive optical networks process the incoming waves 

generated by the complex-valued transmittance function, 𝑇𝑖𝑛(𝑥, 𝑦), formed by the overlapping thin 

phase objects and synthesize a 2D intensity distribution at the output plane for all-optical inference 

of the classes of the overlapping objects. The optical intensity distribution within the active area 

of each output detector is integrated to form elements of the vector, 𝑰 in Eq. 1. The number of 

elements in this optical signal vector, 𝑰, is equal to the number of output detectors, thus its length 

is 2𝑀, 4𝑀, 𝑀 + 2 and 2𝑀 + 2 for D2NN-D1, D2NN-D1d, D2NN-D2 and D2NN-D2d, 

respectively. As part of our forward training model, 𝑰 is normalized to form, 𝑰̅,   

where the coefficient c in Eq. 8 serves as the temperature parameter of the softmax function 

depicted in Eq. 3, and it was empirically set to be 0.1 for training of all the diffractive networks. It 

𝑤𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝑧 − 𝑧𝑖

𝑟2
( 1
2𝜋𝑟 + 𝑛𝑠

𝑗𝜆) exp(𝑗2𝜋𝑛𝑠𝑟

𝜆
)
6,

𝑢𝑖

𝑘(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝑤𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧)𝑡(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖) ∑ 𝑢𝑞

𝑘−1(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖)

𝑁

𝑞=1

7.

𝑰̅ =
𝑰

𝑐 max{𝑰}

8.


15

is important to note that this normalization step in Eq. 8 is only used during the training stage, and

once the training is finished, the forward inference directly uses the detected intensities to decide 

on the object classes based on the corresponding decision rules. While the vector 𝑰̅ is directly used

in Eq. 3 for the D2NN-D1 network, in the case of D2NN-D1d, 𝑰̅ is split into two vectors of length 

2𝑀, i.e., 𝑰+ and 𝑰−, representing the signals collected by the positive and negative detectors, and 

the associated differential signal is computed as Δ𝑰 = 𝑰+ − 𝑰−. Accordingly, during the training 

of D2NN-D1d, the loss function depicted in Eq. 3, were computed using Δ𝑰 instead of 𝑰̅.

For the diffractive network D2NN-D2, the output of the normalization defined in Eq. 8 was split 

into two: 𝑰𝑴 and 𝑰𝑸. The first part, 𝑰𝑴, represents the optical signals coming from the 𝑀 class 

specific detectors in the detector layout D-2 (the gray detectors Fig. 1d). The latter, 𝑰𝑸, contains

two entries describing the positive and the negative parts of the indicator signals, 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ and 𝐼𝐷𝑄

− (see 

the blue detectors Fig. 1d). These two extra detectors, {𝐷𝑄

+, 𝐷𝑄

−}, form a differential pair that 

controls the functional form of the class decision rule based on the sign of the difference between 

the optical signals collected by these detectors. We accordingly determine the class assignments

as follows,

To enable the training of diffractive optical networks according to the class assignment rule in Eq. 

9, we defined a loss function, ℒ = ℒ𝑄 + ℒ𝑐, that corresponds to the superposition of two different 

penalty terms, ℒ𝑄 and ℒ𝑐. Here, ℒ𝑄 represents the error computed with respect to the binary ground 

truth indicator signal, 𝑔𝑄, 

Accordingly, ℒ𝑄 was defined as,

where 𝜎(∙) denotes the sigmoid function. The classification loss, ℒ𝑐, on the other hand, is identical 

to the cross-entropy loss depicted in Eq. 3, except that the vector 𝑰 is replaced with 𝑰𝑴. Unlike the 

previous diffractive networks (D2NN-D1 and D2NN-D1d), the forward model of the diffractive 

𝒄̂ = {

[𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑰𝑴), 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑰𝑴)],
𝑖𝑓 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ ≥ 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−

𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥2(𝑰𝑴), 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒.

}

9

𝑔𝑄 = {1,
𝑖𝑓 𝑐1 = 𝑐2

0, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒} .
10

ℒ𝑄 = −𝑔𝑄 log (𝜎 (𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ − 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−)) − (1 − 𝑔𝑄) log (1 − 𝜎 (𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ − 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−))
11


16

optical networks trained based on the output detector layout D-2 do not require multiple ground 

truth vector labels. Simply the ground truth label vector of a given input field-of-view is defined 

as 𝒈 =

𝒈𝟏+𝒈𝟐

𝟐
satisfying the condition, ∑
𝑔𝑚

𝑀
1
= 1. 

In the case of D2NN-D2d, the vector 𝑰̅ contains 3 main parts, 𝑰𝑴+, 𝑰𝑴− and 𝑰𝑸 where 𝑰𝑴+ and 𝑰𝑴−

are length 𝑀 vectors containing the normalized optical signals collected by the detectors 

representing the positive and negative parts of the final differential class scores  Δ𝑰𝑀 = 𝑰𝑴+ −

𝑰𝑴−. Accordingly, in the associated forward training model, the intensity vector 𝑰𝑴 in Eq. (9) is 

replaced with the differential signal, Δ𝑰𝑀.

Testing of diffractive optical networks on the dataset T1

During the blind testing of the presented diffractive optical networks on the test set T1, the class 

estimation solely uses the 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥 operation, searching for the highest class-score synthesized by 

the diffractive networks, based on the associated output plane detector layouts shown in Fig. 1. 

The purpose of this performance quantification using T1 is to reveal whether the diffractive optical 

networks trained based on overlapping input phase objects can learn and automatically recognize 

the characteristic spatial features of the individual handwritten digits (without any spatial overlap). 

For this goal, in the case of D2NN-D1 and D2NN-D1d, the class estimation rule in Eq. 1 was 

replaced with, 𝑚𝑜𝑑(𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑰), 𝑀) and 𝑚𝑜𝑑(𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝚫𝑰), 𝑀), respectively. Since the input 

images in the test set T1 contain single, phase-encoded handwritten digits without the second 

overlapping phase object, the optical signals collected by the detectors, {𝐷𝑄

+, 𝐷𝑄

−}, at the output 

plane of the diffractive networks D2NN-D2 and D2NN-D2d become irrelevant for the classification 

of the images in T1. Therefore, the decision rule in Eq. 9 is simplified to 𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑰𝑴) and 

𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑎𝑥(Δ𝑰𝑀) for the all-optical classification of the input test images in T1 based on the 

diffractive networks D2NN-D2 and D2NN-D2d, respectively.

Architecture and Training of the Phase Image Reconstruction Network

The phase image reconstruction electronic neural networks (back-end) following each of the 

presented diffractive optical networks (front-end) include 4 neural layers. The number of neurons 

on their first layer is equal to the number of detectors at the output plane of the preceding diffractive 

network (D-1, D-1d, D-2 or D-2d, see Figs. 1a-d). The number of neurons, on the subsequent 3 


17

layers are 100, 400, 1568, respectively. Note that the output layer of each image reconstruction

electronic neural network has 2×28×28 neurons as it simultaneously reconstructs both of the 

overlapping phase objects, resolving the phase ambiguity due to the spatial overlap at the input 

plane. Each fully-connected (FC) layer constituting these image reconstruction networks applies 

the following operations:

where 𝝆𝒍+𝟏 and 𝝆𝒍 denote the output and input values of the 𝑙𝑡ℎ layer of the electronic network, 

respectively. The operator LReLU stands for the leaky rectified linear unit:

The batch normalization, BN, normalizes the activations at the output of LReLU to zero mean and 

a standard deviation of 1, and then shifts the mean to a new center, 𝛽(𝑙), and re-scales it with a 

multiplicative factor, 𝛾(𝑙), where 𝛽(𝑙) and 𝛾(𝑙) are learnable parameters, i.e.,

The hyperparameter 𝜖 is a small constant that avoids division by 0 and it was taken as 10−3. 

The training of the phase image reconstruction networks was driven by the reversed Huber (or 
“BerHu”) loss, which computes the error between two images, 𝑎(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝑏(𝑥, 𝑦), as follows:

The hyperparameter 𝜑 in Eq. 15 is a threshold for the transition between mean-absolute-error and 

mean-squared-error, and it was set to be 20% of the standard deviation of the ground truth image.

𝝆𝒍+𝟏 = BN{LReLU[FC{𝝆𝒍}]}
12.

𝐿𝑅𝑒𝐿𝑈[𝒙] = { 𝒙,
𝑖𝑓 𝑥 ≥ 0

0.1𝒙, 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒.} .
13 

BN[𝒙] = 𝛾(𝑙) ∙
𝑥 − 𝜇𝐵

(𝑙)

√ 𝜎𝐵

(𝑙)2

+ 𝜖

+ 𝛽(𝑙)

𝜇𝐵 = 1

𝑚 ∑ 𝑥𝑖

𝑚

𝑖=1

,
𝜎𝐵

2 = 1

𝑚 ∑(𝑥𝑖 − 𝜇𝐵)2

𝑚

𝑖=1

14a

14b 

𝐵𝑒𝑟𝐻𝑢(𝒂, 𝒃) =
∑
|𝑎(𝑥, 𝑦) − 𝑏(𝑥, 𝑦)|

𝑥,𝑦

|𝑎(𝑥,𝑦)−𝑏(𝑥,𝑦)|≤𝜑

+
∑

[𝑎(𝑥, 𝑦) − 𝑏(𝑥, 𝑦)]2 + 𝜑2

2𝜑
𝑥,𝑦

|𝑎(𝑥,𝑦)−𝑏(𝑥,𝑦)|>𝜑

15 


18

If we let 𝜙𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜙𝑞(𝑥, 𝑦) denote the first and second output of each image reconstruction

electronic network (i.e., 28x28 pixels per phase object), the image reconstruction loss, ℒ𝑟, was

defined as the minimum of two error terms, ℒ𝑟

′ and ℒ𝑟

′′, i.e.,

where 𝜙1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜙2(𝑥, 𝑦) denote the ground truth phase images of the first and second objects, 

respectively, which overlap at the input plane of the diffractive network. As there is no hierarchy 

or priority difference between the input objects 𝜙1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜙2(𝑥, 𝑦), Eq. 16 lets the image 

reconstruction network to choose their order regarding its output activations.

Other Details of Diffractive Network Training

With the 0.53𝜆 lateral sampling rate in our forward optical model, the transmittance function inside 

the field-of-view, 𝑇𝑖𝑛(𝑥, 𝑦), was represented as a 100 × 100 discrete signal. In our diffractive 

network training, the 8-bit grayscale values of the MNIST digits were first converted to 32-bit 

double format, normalized to the range [0,1] and then resized to 100 × 100 using bilinear 

interpolation. If we denote these normalized and resized grayscale values of the two input 

objects/digits that overlap at the input plane as 𝜃1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜃2(𝑥, 𝑦) then the transmittance 

function within the input field-of-view, 𝑇𝑖𝑛(𝑥, 𝑦),  is defined as,

During the training of the presented diffractive networks, 𝜃1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜃2(𝑥, 𝑦) are randomly 

selected from the standard 55K training samples of MNIST dataset without replacement, meaning 

that, an already selected training digit was not selected again until all 55K samples are depleted 

constituting an epoch of the training phase. In this manner, we trained the diffractive optical 

networks for 20,000 epochs, showing each optical network approximately 550 million different 

𝑇𝑖𝑛(𝑥, 𝑦) during the training phase. Supplementary Fig. 5 illustrates the convergence curves of our 

best performing diffractive networks models (D2NN-D1d and D2NN-D2d) over the course of these 

ℒ𝑟 = min{ℒ𝑟

′ , ℒ𝑟

′′},
16a

ℒ𝑟

′ =

[BerHu (𝜙𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦), 𝜙1(𝑥, 𝑦)) + BerHu (𝜙𝑞(𝑥, 𝑦), 𝜙2(𝑥, 𝑦))]

2
,

16b

ℒ𝑟

′′ =

[BerHu (𝜙𝑝(𝑥, 𝑦), 𝜙2(𝑥, 𝑦)) + BerHu (𝜙𝑞(𝑥, 𝑦), 𝜙1(𝑥, 𝑦))]

2
,

16c

𝑇𝑖𝑛(𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑒𝑗𝜋𝜃1(𝑥,𝑦)𝑒𝑗𝜋𝜃2(𝑥,𝑦)
17.


19

20,000 epochs. Similarly, to generate the input fields in test dataset T2, we randomly selected 

𝜃1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜃2(𝑥, 𝑦) among the standard 10K test samples of MNIST dataset, without 

replacement, and this was repeated two times providing us the 10K unique phase input images of 

overlapping handwritten digits constituting T2. In our T2 test set, 8998 inputs contain overlapping

digits from different data classes, while the remaining 1002 inputs have overlapping samples from 

the same data class/digit. The validation image set (Supplementary Fig. 5), on the other hand, 

contains 5K unique phase input images created by randomly selecting 𝜃1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜃2(𝑥, 𝑦) among 

the standard 10K test samples of MNIST dataset without replacement. Note that the 𝜃1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 

𝜃2(𝑥, 𝑦) combinations used in the validation set of Supplementary Fig. 5 are not included in T2 to 

achieve true blind testing without any data contamination.

The overlap percentage, 𝜉, between any given pair of samples, 𝜃1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜃2(𝑥, 𝑦) (see Fig. 7), 

is quantified by,

In Equations 18a-b, 𝜉1 and 𝜉2 quantify the percentage of the input pixels that contain the spatial 

overlap with respect to 𝜃1(𝑥, 𝑦) and 𝜃2(𝑥, 𝑦), respectively, and the final 𝜉 is taken as the max of 

these two values. 

For the digital implementation of the diffractive optical network training outlined above, we 

developed a custom-written code in Python (v3.6.5) and TensorFlow (v1.15.0, Google Inc.). The 

backpropagation updates were calculated using the Adam [27] optimizer with its parameters set to 

be the default values as defined by TensorFlow and kept identical in each model. The learning rate 

was set to be 0.001 for all the diffractive network models presented here. The training batch size

was taken as 75 during the deep learning-based training of the presented diffractive networks. The 

training of a 5-layer diffractive optical network with 40K diffractive neurons per layer for 20,000 

epochs takes approximately 24 days using a computer with a GeForce GTX 1080 Ti Graphical 

𝜉1 =

∑ ∑ |𝑠𝑔𝑛 (𝜃2(𝑥𝑞, 𝑦𝑝))|
𝑝
𝑞
𝜃1(𝑥𝑞, 𝑦𝑝)

∑
∑
𝑝′ 𝜃1(𝑥𝑞′, 𝑦𝑝′)
𝑞′

× 100
18a,

𝜉2 =

∑ ∑ |𝑠𝑔𝑛 (𝜃1(𝑥𝑞, 𝑦𝑝))|
𝑝
𝑞
𝜃2(𝑥𝑞, 𝑦𝑝)

∑
∑
𝑝′ 𝜃2(𝑥𝑞′, 𝑦𝑝′)
𝑞′

× 100
18b,

𝜉 = max{𝜉1, 𝜉2}
18c.


20

Processing Unit (GPU, Nvidia Inc.) and Intel® Core ™ i7-8700 Central Processing Unit (CPU, 

Intel Inc.) with 64 GB of RAM, running Windows 10 operating system (Microsoft). 

References

1. X. Lin, Y. Rivenson, N. T. Yardimci, M. Veli, Y. Luo, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, "All-

optical machine learning using diffractive deep neural networks," Science 361, 1004–1008 
(2018).

2. D. Mengu, Y. Luo, Y. Rivenson, and A. Ozcan, "Analysis of Diffractive Optical Neural 

Networks and Their Integration With Electronic Neural Networks," IEEE J. Select. Topics 
Quantum Electron. 26, 1–14 (2020).

3. M. Veli, D. Mengu, N. T. Yardimci, Y. Luo, J. Li, Y. Rivenson, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, 

"Terahertz pulse shaping using diffractive surfaces," Nature Communications 12, 37 (2021).

4. Y. Luo, D. Mengu, N. T. Yardimci, Y. Rivenson, M. Veli, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, 

"Design of task-specific optical systems using broadband diffractive neural networks," Light 
Sci Appl 8, 112 (2019).

5. J. Li, D. Mengu, Y. Luo, Y. Rivenson, and A. Ozcan, "Class-specific differential detection in 

diffractive optical neural networks improves inference accuracy," AP 1, 046001 (2019).

6. J. Li, D. Mengu, N. T. Yardimci, Y. Luo, X. Li, M. Veli, Y. Rivenson, M. Jarrahi, and A. 

Ozcan, "Spectrally encoded single-pixel machine vision using diffractive networks," Science 
Advances 7, eabd7690 (2021).

7. D. Mengu, Y. Rivenson, and A. Ozcan, "Scale-, Shift-, and Rotation-Invariant Diffractive 

Optical Networks," ACS Photonics (2020).

8. D. Mengu, Y. Zhao, N. T. Yardimci, Y. Rivenson, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, "Misalignment 

resilient diffractive optical networks," Nanophotonics 9, 4207–4219 (2020).

9. O. Kulce, D. Mengu, Y. Rivenson, and A. Ozcan, "All-optical information-processing 

capacity of diffractive surfaces," Light: Science & Applications 10, 25 (2021).

10. M. S. S. Rahman, J. Li, D. Mengu, Y. Rivenson, and A. Ozcan, "Ensemble learning of 

diffractive optical networks," Light: Science & Applications 10, 14 (2021).

11. C. Qian, X. Lin, X. Lin, J. Xu, Y. Sun, E. Li, B. Zhang, and H. Chen, "Performing optical 

logic operations by a diffractive neural network," Light Sci Appl 9, 59 (2020).

12. E. Goi, X. Chen, Q. Zhang, B. P. Cumming, S. Schoenhardt, H. Luan, and M. Gu, 

"Nanoprinted high-neuron-density optical linear perceptrons performing near-infrared 
inference on a CMOS chip," Light Sci Appl 10, 40 (2021).

13. T. Zhou, X. Lin, J. Wu, Y. Chen, H. Xie, Y. Li, J. Fan, H. Wu, L. Fang, and Q. Dai, "Large-

scale neuromorphic optoelectronic computing with a reconfigurable diffractive processing 
unit," Nat. Photonics 15, 367–373 (2021).

14. J. Chang, V. Sitzmann, X. Dun, W. Heidrich, and G. Wetzstein, "Hybrid optical-electronic 

convolutional neural networks with optimized diffractive optics for image classification," 
Scientific Reports 8, 12324 (2018).

15. S. S. Rahman and A. Ozcan, "Computer-free, all-optical reconstruction of holograms using 

diffractive networks," arXiv:2107.08177 (2021).


21

16. Y. Luo, Y. Zhao, J. Li, E. Çetintaş, Y. Rivenson, and A. Ozcan, "Computational Imaging 

Without a Computer: Seeing Through Random Diffusers at the Speed of Light," 
arXiv:2107.06586 (2021).

17. S. Jiao, J. Feng, Y. Gao, T. Lei, Z. Xie, and X. Yuan, "Optical machine learning with 

incoherent light and a single-pixel detector," Opt. Lett. 44, 5186 (2019).

18. Z. Huang, P. Wang, J. Liu, W. Xiong, Y. He, J. Xiao, H. Ye, Y. Li, S. Chen, and D. Fan, 

"All-Optical Signal Processing of Vortex Beams with Diffractive Deep Neural Networks," 
Phys. Rev. Applied 15, 014037 (2021).

19. J. Shi, L. Zhou, T. Liu, C. Hu, K. Liu, J. Luo, H. Wang, C. Xie, and X. Zhang, "Multiple-

view D 2 NNs array: realizing robust 3D object recognition," Opt. Lett. 46, 3388 (2021).

20. J. R. Ong, C. C. Ooi, T. Y. L. Ang, S. T. Lim, and C. E. Png, "Photonic Convolutional 

Neural Networks Using Integrated Diffractive Optics," IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in 
Quantum Electronics 26, 1–8 (2020).

21. J. Shi, M. Chen, D. Wei, C. Hu, J. Luo, H. Wang, X. Zhang, and C. Xie, "Anti-noise 

diffractive neural network for constructing an intelligent imaging detector array," Opt. 
Express 28, 37686 (2020).

22. Y. Li, R. Chen, B. Sensale-Rodriguez, W. Gao, and C. Yu, "Real-time multi-task diffractive 

deep neural networks via hardware-software co-design," Sci Rep 11, 11013 (2021).

23. T. Yan, J. Wu, T. Zhou, H. Xie, F. Xu, J. Fan, L. Fang, X. Lin, and Q. Dai, "Fourier-space 

Diffractive Deep Neural Network," Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 023901 (2019).

24. S. Colburn, Y. Chu, E. Shilzerman, and A. Majumdar, "Optical frontend for a convolutional 

neural network," Appl. Opt. 58, 3179 (2019).

25. Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Ha, "Gradient-Based Learning Applied to Document 

Recognition," Proceedings of the IEEE 86, 2278–2374 (1998).

26. I. M. Elfadel and J. L. Wyatt Jr., "The “Softmax” Nonlinearity: Derivation Using Statistical 

Mechanics and Useful Properties as a Multiterminal Analog Circuit Element," in Advances 
in Neural Information Processing Systems, J. Cowan, G. Tesauro, and J. Alspector, eds. 
(Morgan-Kaufmann, 1994), Vol. 6.

27. D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, "Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization," arXiv:1412.6980 

[cs] (2014).


22

Figures

Figure 1. Schematic of a diffractive optical network that can all-optically classify overlapping phase objects 
despite phase ambiguity at the input; this diffractive network also compresses the input spatial information 
at its output plane for simultaneous reconstruction of the individual phase images of the overlapping input 
objects using a back-end electronic neural network. a, Optical layout of the presented 5-layer diffractive 
optical networks that can all-optically classify overlapping phase objects, e.g., phase-encoded handwritten 
digits, despite the phase ambiguity at the input plane due to spatial overlap. The diffractive optical network 
processes the incoming object waves created by the spatially overlapping, phase-encoded digits e.g., ‘6’ and 
‘7’, to correctly reveal the classes of both input objects (green). A separately trained shallow electronic neural 
network (with 2 hidden layers) rapidly reconstructs the individual phase images of both input objects using the 
optical signals detected at the output plane of the diffractive network. (b-d), Different detector configurations 
and class encoding schemes at the output plane of a diffractive network, devised to represent all the possible 
data class combinations at the input field-of-view created by overlapping phase objects.  


23

Figure 2. All-optical classification of spatially-overlapping phase objects using the diffractive network D2NN-
D1, based on the detector layout scheme (D-1) shown in Fig. 1b. a, The thickness profiles of the diffractive 
layers constituting the diffractive network D2NN-D1 at the end of its training. This network achieves 82.70% 
blind inference accuracy on the test image set T2. b-e, Top: Individual phase objects (examples) and the 
resulting input phase distribution created by their spatial overlap at the input field-of-view. Bottom: The 
normalized optical signals, 𝑰, synthesized by D2NN-D1 at its output detectors. The output detectors with the 
largest 2 signals correctly reveal the classes of the overlapping input phase objects (indicated with the green 
rectangular frames).


24

Figure 3. All-optical classification of spatially-overlapping phase objects using the diffractive network D2NN-
D1d, based on the detector layout scheme D-1d shown in Fig. 1c. a, The thickness profiles of the diffractive 
layers constituting the diffractive network D2NN-D1d at the end of its training. This network achieves 85.82% 
blind inference accuracy on the test image set T2. b-e, Left: Individual phase objects (examples) and the 
resulting input phase distribution created by their spatial overlap at the input field-of-view. Middle: The 
normalized optical signals, 𝑰+ and 𝑰−, synthesized by D2NN-D1d at its output detectors. Right: The resulting 
differential signal, Δ𝑰 = 𝑰+ − 𝑰−. The largest two differential optical signals correctly reveal the classes of the 
overlapping input phase objects (indicated with the green rectangular frames). 


25

Figure 4. All-optical classification of spatially-overlapping phase objects using the diffractive network D2NN-
D2, based on the detector layout scheme D-2 shown in Fig. 1d. a, The thickness profiles of the diffractive 
layers constituting the diffractive network D2NN-D2 at the end of its training. This network achieves 82.61% 
blind inference accuracy on the test image set T2. b-e, Top: Individual phase objects (examples) and the 
resulting input phase distribution created by their spatial overlap at the input field-of-view. Bottom: The 
normalized optical signals, 𝑰, synthesized by D2NN-D2 at its output detectors. For 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ < 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−, the largest two 

optical signals correctly reveal the classes of the overlapping input phase objects (indicated with the green 
rectangular frames in b,c,d). For 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ ≥ 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−, the largest optical signal correctly reveals the class of the 

overlapping input phase objects (indicated with the green rectangular frame in e).


26

Figure 5. All-optical classification of spatially-overlapping phase objects using the diffractive network D2NN-
D2d, based on the detector layout scheme D-2d shown in Fig. 1e. a, The thickness profiles of the diffractive 
layers constituting the diffractive network D2NN-D2d at the end of its training. This network achieves 85.22% 
blind inference accuracy on the test image set T2. b-e, Left: Individual phase objects (examples) and the 
resulting input phase distribution created by their spatial overlap at the input field-of-view. Middle: The 
normalized optical signals, 𝑰+ and 𝑰− , synthesized by D2NN-D2d at its output detectors. Right: The differential 
optical signal, Δ𝑰 = 𝑰+ − 𝑰− (purple). For 𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ < 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−, the largest two differential optical signals correctly reveal 

the classes of the overlapping input phase objects (indicated with the green rectangular frames in b,c,d). For 
𝐼𝐷𝑄

+ ≥ 𝐼𝐷𝑄

−, the largest differential optical signal correctly reveals the class of the overlapping input phase 

objects (indicated with the green rectangular frame in e).


27

Figure 6. Reconstruction of spatially overlapping phase images using a diffractive optical front-end (encoder) 
and a separately trained, shallow electronic neural network (decoder) with 2 hidden layers. The front-end 
diffractive networks are (a) D2NN-D1, (b) D2NN-D1d, (c) D2NN-D2, and (d) D2NN-D2d, shown in Figs. 2a, 3a, 4a 
and 5a, respectively. The detector layouts at the output plane of these diffractive networks are (a) D-1, (b) D-
1d, (c) D-2, and (d) D-2d with 2𝑀, 4𝑀, 𝑀 + 2 and 2𝑀 + 2 single pixel detectors as shown in Figs. 1b-d, 
respectively; for handwritten digits 𝑀 = 10. These four designs create a compression ratio of 39.2×, 19.6×, 
65.33× and 35.63× between the input and output fields-of-view of the corresponding diffractive network, 
respectively. The mean SSIM and PSNR values achieved by these phase image reconstruction networks are 
depicted in Table 2 along with the corresponding standard deviation values computed over the 10K test input 
images (T2).


28

Figure 7. The variation in the optical blind inference accuracies of the presented diffractive optical networks 
as a function of the spatial overlap percentage (𝝃) between the two input phase objects. a, Sample input 
images from the test set T2 containing overlapping phase objects from different data classes along with the 
corresponding overlap percentages, 𝜉. b, Same as (a), except the overlapping objects are from the same data 
class. c, The blind inference accuracy of the diffractive network, D2NN-D1, as a function of the overlap 
percentage, 𝜉, and the histogram of 𝜉, for test inputs in T2 that contain phase objects from two different data 
classes. d, Same as (c), except that the test inputs contain phase objects from the same data class. e and f,
Same as (c and d), except, the diffractive network design is D2NN-D1d. g and h, Same as (c and d), except, the 
diffractive network design is D2NN-D2. i and j, Same as (c and d), except, the diffractive network design is D2NN-
D2d.


29

Tables

Table 1. The summary of the optical blind inference accuracies achieved by the presented diffractive 

optical networks on test sets T2 and T1 along with some input examples from these datasets.


30

Optical Classification
Image reconstruction

Diffractive 
Network

Number of 
detectors 
(𝑀=10)

Accuracy on T2

(%)

SSIM
PSNR
(dB)

D

2NN-D1
2𝑀
82.70
0.52±0.12
15.09±2.32

D

2NN-D1d
4𝑀
85.82
0.57±0.10
16.02±2.21

D

2NN-D2
𝑀+2
82.61
0.49±0.10
14.55±2.17

D

2NN-D2d
2𝑀+2
85.22
0.57±0.12
15.60±2.37

Table 2. The comparison of the presented diffractive optical networks, in terms of (1) all-optical 

overlapping object classification accuracies on T2 and (2) the quality of the image reconstruction

achieved through separately-trained, shallow, electronic networks (decoder). The mean SSIM and PSNR

values and their standard deviations were computed over the entire 10K blind test inputs (T2).


