1

Title: Moiré-localized interlayer exciton wavefunctions captured by imaging 

its electron and hole constituents

Authors: Ouri Karni1†, Elyse Barré2,3†, Vivek Pareek4†, Johnathan D. Georgaras5†, Michael K. 

L. Man4†, Chakradhar Sahoo4†, David R. Bacon4, Xing Zhu4, Henrique B. Ribeiro1,2, Aidan L. 

O’Beirne6, Jenny Hu1, Abdullah Al-Mahboob4, Mohamed M. M. Abdelrasoul4, Nicholas S. 

Chan4, Arka Karmakar4, Andrew J. Winchester4, Bumho Kim7, Kenji Watanabe8, Takashi 

Taniguchi9, Katayun Barmak10, Julien Madéo4, Felipe H. da Jornada5, Tony F. Heinz1,2, and 

Keshav M. Dani4*

Affiliations:

1 Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University; Stanford, California, 94305, USA.

2 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory; Menlo Park, California, 94025, USA.

3 Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University; Stanford, California, 94305, 

USA.

4 Femtosecond Spectroscopy Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate 

University, Onna-son; Okinawa, Japan 904-0495.

5 Department of Material Science and Engineering, Stanford University; Stanford, California, 

94305, USA.

6 Department of Physics, Stanford University; Stanford, California, 94305, USA.


2

7 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Columbia University; New York, New York 

10027, USA.

8 Research Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 

Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan.

9 International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials 

Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan.

10 Department of Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics, Columbia University; New 

York, New York 10027, USA.

† These authors contributed equally to this work.

*Corresponding author. Email: kmdani@oist.jp

Introductory paragraph: 

Interlayer excitons (ILXs) – electron-hole pairs bound across two atomically thin layered 

semiconductors – have emerged as attractive platforms to study exciton condensation,1–4 single-

photon emission and other quantum-information applications5–7. Yet, despite extensive optical 

spectroscopic investigations8–12, critical information about their size, valley configuration and the 

influence of the moiré potential remains unknown. Here, we captured images of the time- and 

momentum-resolved distribution of both the electron and the hole that bind to form the ILX in a 

WSe2/MoS2 heterostructure. We thereby obtain a direct measurement of the interlayer exciton 

diameter of ~5.4 nm, comparable to the moiré unit-cell length of 6.1 nm. Surprisingly, this large 

ILX is well localized within the moiré cell to a region of only 1.8 nm – smaller than the size of 


3

the exciton itself. This high degree of localization of the interlayer exciton is backed by Bethe-

Salpeter equation calculations and demonstrates that the ILX can be localized within small moiré 

unit cells. Unlike large moiré cells, these are uniform over large regions, thus allowing the 

formation of extended arrays of localized excitations for quantum technology. 

Main Text: 

Heterobilayers made by stacking different monolayers (1L) of transition-metal dichalcogenide 

(TMDC) semiconductors support ILXs, states in which the electrons and holes residing in 

separate layers bind to one another to form a neutral excitation 8. The utilization of these long-

lived and tunable excitations for quantum applications or for studying new many-exciton phases 

and interactions requires critical knowledge about the real- and momentum-space structure of the 

ILX: the valley character of its constituent electron and hole; its size, namely the extent of the 

electron distribution around its hole counterpart; and the degree of the ILX confinement within 

the moiré potential. These attributes are key to determining the nature of the light-matter 

interactions with the ILX, such as their direct bandgap character and their polarization selection 

rules, as well as the ability of the ILX to form uniform periodic arrays of localized quantum 

emitters in the moiré pattern 5. Additionally, the ILX size and localizability determine their 

density-dependent many-body physics – at low densities strong center-of-mass (COM)

confinement inhibits the formation of condensates 13, while at higher densities, the size and 

localization determine Mott dissociation thresholds2 or the formation of multi-ILX complexes3,4.

So far, studies on moiré-localized ILXs have been focused on large moiré unit cells due to the 

prevailing assumption that moiré confinement requires a moiré-period which is much larger than 

the ILX itself9,14. Such systems were studied by optical spectroscopy that could only access a 


4

narrow sector of the momentum-space distribution of the ILX wavefunction9,10,12,15. While such 

optical spectra were qualitatively consistent with a theoretical picture of ILXs spatially localized 

by the moiré-potential, these experiments did not yield the ILX size, and often relied on 

phenomenological moiré potentials that were not expected from first-principles calculations to 

deduce the presence of a moiré-localized ILX9,16. The valley configuration of the electron and 

hole of the ILX also remained contested9,17. Furthermore, such systems exhibit only small

regions of uniform periodicity of the moiré lattice due to strain fields18, and hence cannot support

the formation of extended arrays of localized ILX that are the starting point of recent quantum 

technology proposals. Revealing those hidden properties together with a direct measurement of 

the extent of the ILX localization requires knowing the full momentum-space distributions of 

both of its constituent particles. Recent time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy 

experiments on microscopic samples (TR-µ-ARPES) measured the size of the exciton in 1L 

WSe2 via the momentum distribution of only the constituent electron 19. However, accessing the 

coordinates of the constituent hole has remained beyond experimental reach because of the 

challenge in measuring the small, momentum-resolved, photo-induced reductions in electron 

density over sufficiently large momentum-space in the 2D valence band (VB) to cover the hole 

wavefunction.

Here we image both the electron and hole momentum-space distributions of an ILX in a TMDC

heterobilayer exhibiting a relatively small moiré pattern. From these distributions, we extract 

both the ILX size and its COM confinement, and find, surprisingly, that even though the ILX 

diameter is comparable to the moiré-period, its COM coordinate is tightly confined by the moiré-

potential. Further, we observe the direct bandgap nature of the ILX with the electron and hole 

residing in the K-valleys of the two layers, and the anomalous negative dispersion of the 


5

photoemitted electron, establishing the excitonic origin of the signal. Finally, the hole images, 

which are acquired independently of the photoemission matrix elements, offer a direct 

quantitative measurement of the ILX density and exhibit a broadening in momentum distribution 

when their density surpasses one ILX per moiré site, akin to excitons in quantum dots. In all, 

these findings promote the prospect of using small-period moiré patterns, which are 

homogeneous and more robust against strain than the large moiré lattices18,20, to host arrays of 

quantum emitters.

The studied heterobilayer consisted of 1L WSe2 placed on top of 1L MoS2 with a 2.2±0.8° twist-

angle between their crystallographic axes. Together with the 3.8 % lattice mismatch between the 

two layers this is expected to yield a 6.1 nm period for the moiré pattern5, which would make it 

more homogeneous compared to the larger moiré periods of more lattice-matched 

heterobilayers18,20. To isolate the ILX from the conducting substrate, while still preventing the 

sample from charging during the photoemission measurement, a thin hBN layer was placed on 

top of a conducting silicon substrate prior to stacking the sample 19,21 (see Fig. 1d, and Methods,

for fabrication details). Confirming the coupling between the WSe2 and MoS2 layers, the 

photoluminescence (PL) spectrum from the sample (Fig. 1b) exhibits an ILX peak at 1 eV11, and 

the optical reflection spectrum of the sample exhibits the expected signatures of the moiré pattern 

(Fig. S1).


6

Fig. 1 - Sample structure and experimental configuration. a. Schematic representation of the 

TR-µ-ARPES setup and sample structure. The XUV probe pulse impinges on the sample at a

delay Δt relative to the optical pump pulse. Photoemitted electrons from the excited sample are 

filtered through a micron-scale spatially selective aperture and resolved in energy and 

momentum by a 3D time-of-flight detector. We obtained a volumetric dataset of the band-

structure of the entire Brillouin zone with an energy range covering the relevant VB and the 

photoexcited electron features (Top). b. Low temperature (10 K) infrared PL of the 1L MoS2

(yellow), WSe2 (red), and the heterobilayer (blue). c. Schematic of the band-edge alignment of 

the layers and the electron-transfer process leading to formation of the ILX. d. The layer 

arrangement of the sample heterostructure.

We first characterized the unperturbed band-structure of the heterobilayer (prior to excitation) at 

100 K using our previously reported TR-µ-ARPES capabilities 19,21, based on a photoelectron 

momentum microscope 22,23 in combination with a table-top source of femtosecond XUV pulses 


7

at 21.7 eV (see Fig. 1a, and Methods for details). We observe a band-structure consistent with 

previous calculations (Fig. 2a) 11,24. The VB maxima (VBM) appear at the K valleys (defining 

the zero of our energy scale), with both the upper and the lower spin-orbit split bands of WSe2

clearly visible and separated by 0.5 eV. At lower energies (-0.85 eV) a single broad band is seen 

(Fig S2), corresponding to the two spin-orbit split VBs of MoS2 that are unresolvable in our 

measurement due to inhomogeneous broadening. At the Γ valley, we observe two hybridized 

bands. Figure 2b presents a view of the band-structure in 2D momentum space integrated over a 

small energy range (-0.2 to 0.2 eV) around the VBM. We clearly see the photoemission from the 

Γ, the K, and the K’ valleys. The variations in photoemission intensity across the image originate 

from the differing photoemission matrix elements 25, which depend sensitively on the incidence 

angle and the polarization 26 of the XUV pulse.

Having identified the signatures of the heterobilayer in equilibrium, we turned to study the ILX 

and the momentum-resolved distributions of its electron and hole by photoexciting the sample 

resonantly at the A-exciton in WSe2 with a 170 fs, 1.67 eV pump pulse. A rapid transfer of the 

electron from WSe2 to MoS2 results in the formation of the ILX (schematic in Fig. 1c). After a 

time-delay (Δt) of a few tens of picoseconds, we applied the XUV probe pulse to record the 

momentum- and energy-resolved photoemission spectra from the photoexcited heterobilayer and 

follow its evolution as the ILX cooled and reached quasi-equilibrium.


8

Fig. 2 - Static and photoexcited TR-μ-ARPES measurements. a, c. Energy-momentum cuts 

along the K-Γ direction without (a) and 25 ps after (c) optical excitation. b, d, e. Momentum-

space images around VBM (b), as well as 25 ps after photoexcitation around VBM (d) and 

around the ILX energy (e). These ARPES intensity maps are formed by integrating over the 

energy ranges defined by the blue brackets in (a) and (c). Clear signatures of the constituent 

electron and hole at 1 eV and at the VBM, respectively, can be seen after photoexcitation (c, d 

and e) in all K valleys. In (b), the dashed line marks the K3-Γ-K6 cut used in (a) and (c). In (c), 

the counts above 0.85 eV are enhanced by a factor of 50 for visibility. f. Emission from the 

constituent electron of the ILX exhibiting the anomalous negative dispersion 19 of the VB. This 

establishes the bound nature of the observed electrons and holes. Inset: Line-cuts of the 

dispersion of the constituent electron (dashed) and VB (continuous) along kx axis. 


9

The signatures of the ILX are immediately recognized (Fig. 2c, e) in the TR- μ-ARPES data:

Photoemitted electrons appear in all the corners of the Brillouin zone (BZ) 1eV above the VBM. 

This energy agrees well with the PL associated with the ILX. Furthermore, the dispersion curve 

of the photoemitted signal at 1 eV clearly shows a negative curvature similar to the negative 

dispersion of the K (and K’) valley VB of WSe2 (Fig. 2f). This anomalous dispersion, recently 

demonstrated for intravalley excitons in 1L WSe2, is a hallmark of the excitonic origin of the 

ARPES response 19,27. We note that this signal is qualitatively different from measuring the 

replica of the VB within a Bloch-Floquet picture 28, which requires a coherent pump that 

overlaps with the probe. Besides this signal, we observe a striking depletion of the ARPES signal 

around the WSe2 VBM. This depletion, seen in all K and K’ valleys (Fig. 2d), corresponds to the 

holes created in WSe2 as part of the ILX. This momentum-resolved distribution of the hole 

within an exciton provides a new route to understand excitons, well beyond recent experiments 

that measure only the properties of the electron 19.

To obtain the quantitative 2D momentum distributions of the holes, we compared TR-μ-ARPES 

spectra taken before and after excitation (Fig. S3), which allowed us to obtain the hole 

momentum-space images independent of the k-dependence of the photoemission matrix elements

(See Supplementary Material for details). At long delays, when excitons are in quasi-equilibrium 

at the lattice temperature, the depleted signal at wavevector k in the VB provides the probability 

of finding a hole with momentum −ℏ𝐤 (See Supplementary Material for details). We note that

integrating this quantity over all k-space provides a direct measurement of the ILX density at any 


10

given delay (Fig. 3d) – an important quantity that generally can only be estimated in time-

resolved optical experiments. In addition to momentum-space images of the hole distribution, we 

also obtained the momentum-resolved images of the electron distribution directly from the 

photoexcited TR-μ-ARPES spectrum 19. We extracted quantitative parameters at different time

delays by fitting these momentum-space electron and hole images to Gaussian distributions (Fig. 

3a).

One of the extracted parameters is the Gaussian widths of these distributions in momentum-

space, which provide important information about the ILX. This can be understood by noting the 

wavefunction of an idealized ILX, unconfined by any moiré potential, and with COM 

momentum ℏ𝐐, is given by |𝑋𝐐⟩ = ∑
𝐴𝑣𝑐𝐤

𝐐 𝑐𝑐,𝐤+𝛼𝐐

†
𝑐𝑣,𝐤−𝛽𝐐|0⟩
𝑣𝑐𝐤
, where 𝛼 =

𝑚𝑒

𝑚𝑒+𝑚ℎ and 𝛽 =

𝑚ℎ

𝑚𝑒+𝑚ℎ. Here 𝐴𝑣𝑐𝐤

𝐐
is the envelope function of the unconfined ILX, 𝑐𝑛,𝐤

†
is the creation operator of 

an electron in band n with wavevector k, and |0⟩ is the un-photoexcited ground state of the 

system27. For 𝐐 = 0, the momentum distributions of the electron and hole are identical and 

directly provide the size of the exciton, i.e., the relative electron-hole coordinate in real space 

(Fig. 3b) 19,27,29. For finite Q, the electron and hole distributions are mainly offset in momentum 

by different amounts, 𝛼𝐐 and 𝛽𝐐, respectively. Thus, a distribution of excitons with finite 𝐐

yields electrons and holes displaying distinct momentum distributions (Fig. 3c). In general, there 

are two processes that may lead to a distribution of excitons with finite Q: thermal effects and 

spatial confinement. For sufficiently low temperatures – smaller than the energy gap between 

different moiré-exciton bands, but still larger than the moiré-exciton bandwidth – thermal effects 

give rise to a small and temperature-independent broadening contribution that can be neglected 

(see Supplemental Materials). This is indeed the case in our experiments, as the extents of the 


11

electron and hole distributions display no meaningful temperature dependence (see Fig. S4). In 

contrast, the moiré potential localizes the COM coordinate of the ILX, resulting in a distribution 

of finite values of Q, which is encoded in the inequivalent electron and hole momentum 

distribution. We note that the above discussion assumes low-enough exciton densities to avoid 

multi-exciton and state-filling effects, as well as sufficiently long time-delays to allow the 

excitons to cool to the lattice temperatures. In our measurements, these conditions are achieved 

at photoexcitation densities below 3 × 1012 cm−2 (Fig. 3d,e), corresponding to less than one 

ILX per moiré cell, and after a few tens of picoseconds (Fig. 3f), at which point the hole 

distribution narrows to a width of 𝜎𝑘

ℎ = 0.042 ± 0.002 Å−1, while the electron momentum 

distribution exhibits a width of 𝜎𝑘

𝑒 = 0.061 ± 0.003 Å−1.

To deduce the ILX size and spatial confinement from the momentum distributions of the electron 

and hole measured by TR-μ-ARPES, we express the moiré-localized ILX |𝑋𝑚⟩ as a linear 

combination of unconfined interlayer excitons |𝑋𝐐⟩ with different COM momenta ℏQ=ℏG, 

|𝑋𝑚⟩ = ∑ 𝐶(𝐆)|𝑋𝐆⟩
𝐆
, where G is a reciprocal-lattice vector of the moiré unit cell and 𝐶(𝐆) are 

expansion coefficients. The measured intensity distributions of the electron and hole that 

constitute the ILX, 𝐼𝑒(𝐤) and 𝐼ℎ(𝐤), are expressed in terms of the expansion coefficients 𝐴𝑣𝑐𝐤

𝐐

and 𝐶(𝐆), as 𝐼𝑒(𝐤) = ∑ |𝐶(𝐆)𝐴𝐤−𝛼𝐆

𝐆
|
2

𝐆
and 𝐼ℎ(𝐤) = ∑ |𝐶(𝐆)𝐴𝐤+𝛽𝐆

𝐆
|
2

𝐆
. For Wannier-like 

excitons, the simultaneous measurement of these distributions allowed us to extract both 𝐴𝑣𝑐𝐤

𝐐=𝟎

and 𝐶(𝐆).Their Fourier transforms provided the envelope functions of the relative electron-hole 

separation 𝓻 as 𝜓(𝓻), and the COM coordinate 𝐑 as 𝐶(𝐑), respectively. With this, one can 

approximate the envelope of the two body exciton wavefunction as a product of 𝜓(𝓻) and 𝐶(𝐑), 

with the real-space exciton radius and its COM localization being inversely proportional to the 


12

extent in momentum-space of |𝐴𝑣𝑐𝐤

𝐐=𝟎|

2 and |𝐶(𝐆)|2, respectively (see Supplementary Materials 

for calculation details). Accordingly, we deduce an experimental ILX radius (i.e., the root-mean-

square (RMS) radius of its relative electron-hole separation distribution) of 2.7 nm (5.4 nm 

diameter), consistently larger than the 1.4 nm size of the intra-layer exciton in WSe219. We also 

obtain an RMS localization of the COM distribution of 0.9 nm, revealing an ILX whose COM 

coordinate is rather tightly pinned to the minimum of the moiré potential landscape. 


13

Fig 3 – Time- and momentum-resolved distributions of the ILX electrons and holes. a.

Distributions around the K valley (K6 from Fig. 2). Point clouds and heat maps represent the 

data. Teal surfaces are Gaussian fits. The coordinate (kx,ky)=(0,0) is set to the VB maximum. 

Delay values are indicated above each panel. The normalized photoexcited electron distribution

(top row) exhibits a much larger width than the hole distribution (bottom row). b. Schematic of 

the momentum distributions (yellow) electron and hole constituting an unconfined exciton with 

zero COM momentum, showing identical extents. The black curves indicate the conduction band

and VB with their different curvatures. c. Similar schematic for a confined exciton, composed of 

multiple non-zero Q states (blue, yellow, and red). The electron and hole each carry only a 

fraction of Q that is proportional to their respective effective mass, resulting in unequal 

momentum distributions as shown. d. Hole density, indicative of ILX density, as function of 

delay. The exponential fit yields a lifetime of 113 ± 34 ps, much longer than that of intralayer 

excitons. e. The quasi-equilibrium photoexcited electron and hole distribution widths at different 

densities, indicating the onset of a broadening at ∼ 3 × 1012 cm−2, corresponding to more than 

one ILX per moiré lattice. f. Width of the momentum distribution of the electron and hole versus 

time-delay showing the two distinct values for quasi-equilibrium at long-time delays.

Our experimental results on the spatial size and localization of the ILX in a well-characterized 

sample motivate us to seek deeper physical insight into the nature of moiré-confined ILXs using 

state-of-the-art many-body perturbation theory calculations. We have accordingly carried out a 

set of first-principles and effective-Hamiltonian calculations. We first performed ab initio GW 

plus Bethe-Salpeter equation calculations 30,31 of the Q = 0 ILX wavefunction distribution in an 


14

artificially commensurate MoS2/WSe2 heterobilayer to obtain 𝐴𝑣𝑐𝐤

𝐐=𝟎. This yielded an RMS radius 

of 2.4 nm (4.8 nm diameter) in real space (See Fig. 4a). A further calculation employing an 

effective moiré ILX Hamiltonian9,14 yielded a COM coordinate that is localized in real-space to 

within an RMS radius of 1.3 nm around the moiré potential minimum (See Fig. 4b). Our 

calculations show that both |𝐴𝑣𝑐𝐤

𝐐=𝟎|

2 and |𝐶(𝐆)|2 are well-described by Gaussian distributions, 

and both the ILX size and its COM localization are in reasonable agreement with our experiment

(see Methods for details).

Fig. 4 - ILX wavefunctions in real-space. a. Modulus squared of the ILX wavefunction 

|𝜓(𝐫𝑒, 𝐫ℎ)|2 (red) as a function of the electron coordinate 𝐫𝑒, for the hole coordinate 𝐫ℎ fixed as 

indicated in black. The moiré confinement was not included in this plot. b. The calculated real-

space envelope function squared for the COM coordinate of the ILX, |𝐶(𝐑)|2, on top of the 

calculated spatial landscape of the moiré potential V(R).


15

Our simultaneous measurement of the electron and hole momentum distributions in a bound state 

provides previously inaccessible information about both the relative and COM coordinates that 

characterize the ILX two-body wavefunction. A measurement of the relative coordinate accesses 

the envelope function of the exciton and provides, for the first time, its size – a critical parameter 

in determining the nature of and thresholds for various many-exciton processes, such as the Mott 

transition 32 and exciton-exciton annihilation33. For example, the measured ILX size suggests a

Mott transition density32 in the range of 1012 to 1013 cm−2, which coincides with a density of a 

few excitons per moiré unit cell. It thus raises interesting questions about the interplay of the 

moiré potential and the Mott transition. The COM coordinate of the exciton also plays an 

important role in understanding the underlying physics of excited states. The observed

localization, taken together with the onset of momentum-space broadening as the ILX density

crosses one per moiré cell, resembles the behavior of excitons in impurity-based quantum dots3,4.

Such observations support emerging schemes in quantum technology that utilize an array of

quantum-dot-like states created by the periodic moiré potential 5,7. Compared to larger moiré

periods, our use of lattice-mismatched heterobilayers with a small moiré period possesses the

crucial benefit of extended spatial homogeneity and robustness against strain fields18. For further

studies, the COM distribution also provides direct access to the temperature of an ensemble of 

excitons. Combined with the ability to read the exciton density directly from the data, such

wavefunction measurements offer an important new tool to study of many-body excitonic states, 

their interactions with correlated electrons34, and the corresponding phase diagrams.

Methods

Sample fabrication  


16

1L MoS2 (2D Semiconductors) and 1L WSe2 (flux-grown, Columbia University, NY, USA) flakes 

were exfoliated onto transparent polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps and identified by their 

optical contrast and their photoluminescence (PL). Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN-National 

Institute for Material Science, Japan) was directly exfoliated on a bare silicon wafer (with a 1-2 

nm thick native oxide). A flat and thin hBN flake of 18 nm thickness (as measured by AFM) was 

located by optical contrast. The heterostructure (clear area of 25x8 µm2) was assembled by dry-

transfer of the monolayer flakes onto the hBN, and then vacuum-annealed for 2 hr at 150° C. The 

crystallographic alignment of 1L WSe2 and 1L MoS2 was established judging by the sharp edges 

of the flakes. After fabrication, a polarization-resolved second-harmonic generation measurement 

determined the twist angle to be 2.2±0.8°. 

Optical characterization of the samples

The PL spectra of the monolayers and their heterostructure were measured in a home-built confocal 

microscope setup. The sample was held at a controlled temperature in a cryostat (Montana 

Instruments). Laser light at 532 nm wavelength was used for excitation and was focused to a 

diffraction-limited spot (~1 μm) on the sample by a microscope objective (Olympus 

LCPLN50xIR). The infrared PL was collected by the same objective; it was detected and analyzed 

by a Jobin Yvon iHR550 spectrometer equipped with a Spectrum One InGaAs array. For 

reflection-contrast measurements (shown in the Supplementary Material) white light from a 

stabilized tungsten-halogen light source (Thorlabs SLS201L) was delivered to the sample, and its 

reflection collected, through the same optical setup. To analyze the reflection spectrum in the 

visible range a Synapse CCD camera was employed as a detector.


17

Time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy 

Time- and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy is performed by coupling ultrafast pulses 

with an angle-resolved, energy-resolved electron microscope (Metis 1000, SPECS GmbH) 19,21. 

To monitor carrier dynamics, a pump-probe scheme has been developed with a tunable optical 

pump pulse that photo-excites the sample and an XUV probe pulse that photo-emits the electrons. 

Both pulses originate in a Yb-doped fiber laser producing 250 fs, 50 μJ pulses at a wavelength of 

1030 nm and a repetition rate of 2 MHz. The optical pump pulse, at 1.67 eV (740 nm), is produced 

by a non-colinear optical parametric amplifier (NOPA) pumped by part of the fundamental laser 

power. The high-energy XUV photons are produced by high-harmonic generation (HHG), 

achieved by frequency doubling the remaining of the fundamental laser light, and then focusing it 

into Kr gas. One of the high harmonics, at an energy of 21.67 eV is selected using a combination 

of Al and Sn filters. Both the pump and the probe are focused onto the region of interest on the 

sample. The pump energy was tuned in resonance with one of the absorption peaks of WSe2 in the 

heterobilayer at the relevant experimental temperatures ranging between 80 K to 100 K. The probe 

energy is sufficient to photo-emit electrons with momenta covering the entire BZ of the sample, 

which emerge with different energies and at different angles. The photoelectrons are guided by the 

electrostatic lenses of the electron microscope and are detected by a time-of-flight detector, which 

measures the energy of the emitted electrons. Finally, the electrons are imaged either in real space 

(spatial- and energy-resolved) or in k-space (momentum- and energy-resolved) for different pump-

probe time delays. More details of the TR- μ-ARPES instrumentation can be found in Ref. 19,21

Ab initio calculations


18

We performed our mean-field density-functional theory (DFT) calculations with a Perdew-Burke-

Ernzerhof exchange-correlation functional using the Quantum Espresso code 35. The calculations 

were done on a unit cell in the plane-wave basis using the Optimized Norm-Conserving Vanderbilt 

pseudopotentials from the SG-15 dataset 36. We first considered a unit cell for an artificially 

periodic MoS2/WSe2 heterobilayer, for which we take the lattice constant as the average of the 

individual MoS2 and WSe2 experimental lattice constants, 3.22 Å. The distance between repeated 

unit cells in the out-of-plane direction was taken as 25 Å and the Coulomb interaction was 

truncated 37 to effectively remove interaction between the repeated simulation cells along the out-

of-plane direction.

We relaxed the atomic positions for the MoS2/WSe2 heterostructure in the 𝑅ℎ

𝑋 stacking 5 including 

van der Waals interactions within the frameworks of Dione et al. 38 and Cooper 39, and obtained a 

separation of 6.2 Å between the center of MoS2 and WSe2 layers. The dielectric matrices used to 

solve the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE) to obtain excitonic states were evaluated up to a cutoff of 

6 Ry on a 90x90x1 Monkhorst-Pack k-point grid and computed with the BerkeleyGW software 

package 40.

To solve for the Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE), we first evaluated the electron-hole interaction 

kernel on a coarse 90x90x1 k-grid with a fully relativistic framework, which was then interpolated 

onto a patch of a 600x600x1 k-point grid around the K-valley. We diagonalized the BSE effective 

Hamiltonian with the BerkeleyGW package keeping four CBs and four VBs. Similarly to previous 

calculations41, the sample patch only includes the 9593 k-points within 0.2 Å-1 of the K point of 


19

the Brillouin zone and properly includes all the qualitative features of the desired interlayer 

excitons.

Model-Hamiltonian calculations of the exciton confinement

In the absence of any moiré effects, the excitons that we computed from first principles in the 

previous section can be labeled with respect to a principal band and wavevector (Q) quantum 

numbers. To a good approximation, because of vanishingly small exchange terms for ILX, these 

excitons can be described with an effective-mass approximation. The energy of the lowest moiré-

unconfined ILX is given by 𝐸𝐐 = 𝐸0 + ℏ2𝑄2/(2𝑀), where 𝐸0 is the energy of the lowest ILX and 

𝑀 is the total exciton mass. However, the presence of a moiré pattern with a periodicity larger than 

the lattice constants of the constituent monolayers allows for multiple excitons with distinct 

wavevectors (and, to lesser extent, band indices) to mix. This mixing can be rationalized in terms 

of an effective moiré potential, Δ(𝐑), that describes the local variation of the bandgap across the 

moiré unit cell stemming from a different atomic registry at each point R.

We follow refs. 14 and 9 and describe the effective Hamiltonian for an ILX with wavevector q

inside the moiré Brillouin zone that experiences a moiré potential as 

𝐻𝐪 = 𝐸0 + ℏ2|𝐪 − 𝜅|2

2𝑀
+ Δ(𝐑),

where the momentum offset of 𝜅 (𝜅 is the K point of the hexagonal moiré Brillouin zone) is due 

to the finite twist angle between the two individual TMDC layers 42.

The moiré potential energy is a smooth periodic function with extrema at specific high-symmetry 

points of the moiré lattice and can be approximated in the lowest-order harmonic expansion 9,14 as


20

Δ(𝐑) ≈ ∑ 𝑉𝑗 exp(𝑖𝐆𝑗 ⋅ 𝐑)

6

𝑗=1

,

where 𝐆𝑗 are the first-shell reciprocal lattice vectors of the moiré Brillouin zone 9,14. We first fit 

the potential parameter 𝑉𝑗 by performing DFT calculations on a series of high-symmetry stacking 

configurations and obtain a total potential width of 125 meV, similarly to previous calculations 

5,43, and hence |𝑉𝑗|𝑗=1..6 = 12.5 𝑚𝑒𝑉.

The model Hamiltonian expressed as such is solved in a plane-wave basis, where we retain moiré 

reciprocal-lattice vectors 𝐆 with maximum magnitude of |𝐆| = 10𝐆1. For each moiré-confined 

ILX with wavevector q, we obtain the ILX envelope function 𝐶𝐪(𝐆), as defined in the main text, 

by diagonalizing 𝐻𝐪. The envelope function squared of the lowest-energy eigenstate can be 

approximated as an effective 2D Gaussian distribution whose width 𝜎COM

𝑟
can be deduced from its 

momentum distribution – more specifically, from the variance ⟨|𝐆|2⟩𝐪=𝜅 ≡ ∑ |𝐆|2|𝐶𝐪=𝜅(𝐆)|

2

𝐆
=

2𝜎COM

2
. We find numerically 𝜎COM ≈ 0.053 Å−1. At 0 K, this width is directly related to the 

reciprocal of the COM localization radius (see Supplementary Material).

To account for thermal effects, we must consider the momentum distribution of |𝐶𝐪(𝐆)|

2 for a 

range of values of q in the moiré Brillouin zone, the variance of which is related to an effective, 

thermally averaged width 𝜎COM,𝑇. Because we are in a regime where 𝑊 < 𝑘𝑏𝑇 < Δ𝐸, where W is 

the bandwidth of the lowest-energy moiré exciton (∼ 2 meV, from our calculations), T is the 

temperature, and Δ𝐸 is the energy difference between the first and second moiré-exciton bands (∼

30 meV, from our calculations), we may assume that the lowest exciton band across the moiré 

Brillouin zone is uniformly occupied while higher bands are empty. From our numerical 


21

calculations, we find that finite-temperature effects increase 𝜎COM to a value 𝜎COM,𝑇 that is less 

than 10% larger. Furthermore, for sufficiently large 𝜎COM, one can approximate the thermal effects 

as 𝜎COM,𝑇

2
≈ 𝜎COM

2
+ 𝜎𝑇

2 , where 𝜎𝑇 = √7/6 |𝐆1|/4 ≈ 0.032 Å−1 is an effective thermal 

broadening contribution to the width of the COM distribution in reciprocal space and which only 

depends on the geometry of the moiré Brillouin zone.

References and Notes

1.
Wang, Z. et al. Evidence of high-temperature exciton condensation in two-dimensional 

atomic double layers. Nature 574, 76–80 (2019).

2.
Wang, J. et al. Optical generation of high carrier densities in 2D semiconductor 

heterobilayers. Sci. Adv. 5, eaax0145 (2019).

3.
Li, W., Lu, X., Dubey, S., Devenica, L. & Srivastava, A. Dipolar interactions between 

localized interlayer excitons in van der Waals heterostructures. Nat. Mater. 19, 624–629 

(2020).

4.
Kremser, M. et al. Discrete interactions between a few interlayer excitons trapped at a MoSe 

2 –WSe 2 heterointerface. Npj 2D Mater. Appl. 4, 1–6 (2020).

5.
Yu, H., Liu, G.-B., Tang, J., Xu, X. & Yao, W. Moiré excitons: From programmable 

quantum emitter arrays to spin-orbit–coupled artificial lattices. Sci. Adv. 3, e1701696 (2017).

6.
Liu, X. & Hersam, M. C. 2D materials for quantum information science. Nat. Rev. Mater. 4, 

669–684 (2019).

7.
Kennes, D. M. et al. Moiré heterostructures as a condensed-matter quantum simulator. Nat. 

Phys. 17, 155–163 (2021).


22

8.
Rivera, P. et al. Interlayer valley excitons in heterobilayers of transition metal 

dichalcogenides. Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 1004 (2018).

9.
Tran, K. et al. Evidence for moiré excitons in van der Waals heterostructures. Nature 567, 71 

(2019).

10. Seyler, K. L. et al. Signatures of moiré-trapped valley excitons in MoSe 2 /WSe 2 

heterobilayers. Nature 567, 66 (2019).

11. Karni, O. et al. Infrared Interlayer Exciton Emission in MoS2/WSe2 Heterostructures. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 123, 247402 (2019).

12. Zhang, L. et al. Highly valley-polarized singlet and triplet interlayer excitons in van der 

Waals heterostructure. Phys. Rev. B 100, 041402 (2019).

13. Fogler, M. M., Butov, L. V. & Novoselov, K. S. High-temperature superfluidity with indirect 

excitons in van der Waals heterostructures. Nat. Commun. 5, 4555 (2014).

14. Wu, F., Lovorn, T. & MacDonald, A. H. Theory of optical absorption by interlayer excitons 

in transition metal dichalcogenide heterobilayers. Phys. Rev. B 97, 035306 (2018).

15. Jin, C. et al. Identification of spin, valley and moiré quasi-angular momentum of interlayer 

excitons. Nat. Phys. 15, 1140–1144 (2019).

16. Jin, C. et al. Observation of moiré excitons in WSe 2 /WS 2 heterostructure superlattices. 

Nature 567, 76 (2019).

17. Gillen, R. & Maultzsch, J. Interlayer excitons in MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructures from first 

principles. Phys. Rev. B 97, 165306 (2018).

18. Shabani, S. et al. Deep moiré potentials in twisted transition metal dichalcogenide bilayers. 

Nat. Phys. 17, 720–725 (2021).

19. Man, M. K. L. et al. Experimental measurement of the intrinsic excitonic wave function. Sci. 

Adv. 7, eabg0192 (2021).


23

20. Li, H. et al. Imaging moiré flat bands in three-dimensional reconstructed WSe2/WS2 

superlattices. Nat. Mater. 20, 945–950 (2021).

21. Madéo, J. et al. Directly visualizing the momentum-forbidden dark excitons and their 

dynamics in atomically thin semiconductors. Science 370, 1199–1204 (2020).

22. Schönhense, G., Medjanik, K. & Elmers, H.-J. Space-, time- and spin-resolved 

photoemission. J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 200, 94–118 (2015).

23. Medjanik, K. et al. Direct 3D mapping of the Fermi surface and Fermi velocity. Nat. Mater.

16, 615–621 (2017).

24. Kunstmann, J. et al. Momentum-space indirect interlayer excitons in transition-metal 

dichalcogenide van der Waals heterostructures. Nat. Phys. 14, 801 (2018).

25. Moser, S. An experimentalist’s guide to the matrix element in angle resolved photoemission. 

J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 214, 29–52 (2017).

26. Beaulieu, S. et al. Revealing Hidden Orbital Pseudospin Texture with Time-Reversal 

Dichroism in Photoelectron Angular Distributions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 216404 (2020).

27. Rustagi, A. & Kemper, A. F. Photoemission signature of excitons. Phys. Rev. B 97, 235310 

(2018).

28. Wang, Y. H., Steinberg, H., Jarillo-Herrero, P. & Gedik, N. Observation of Floquet-Bloch 

States on the Surface of a Topological Insulator. Science 342, 453–457 (2013).

29. Ohnishi, H., Tomita, N. & Nasu, K. Direct determination of exciton wavefunction 

amplitudes by the momentum-resolved photo-electron emission experiment. Int. J. Mod. 

Phys. B 32, 1850094 (2017).

30. Hybertsen, M. S. & Louie, S. G. Electron correlation in semiconductors and insulators: Band 

gaps and quasiparticle energies. Phys. Rev. B 34, 5390–5413 (1986).


24

31. Rohlfing, M. & Louie, S. G. Electron-hole excitations and optical spectra from first 

principles. Phys. Rev. B 62, 4927–4944 (2000).

32. Meckbach, L., Stroucken, T. & Koch, S. W. Giant excitation induced bandgap 

renormalization in TMDC monolayers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 061104 (2018).

33. Sun, D. et al. Observation of Rapid Exciton–Exciton Annihilation in Monolayer 

Molybdenum Disulfide. Nano Lett. 14, 5625–5629 (2014).

34. Wu, F., Lovorn, T., Tutuc, E. & MacDonald, A. H. Hubbard Model Physics in Transition 

Metal Dichalcogenide Moir\’e Bands. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 026402 (2018).

35. Giannozzi, P. et al. QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source software project 

for quantum simulations of materials. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 21, 395502 (2009).

36. Schlipf, M. & Gygi, F. Optimization algorithm for the generation of ONCV 

pseudopotentials. Comput. Phys. Commun. 196, 36–44 (2015).

37. Ismail-Beigi, S. Truncation of periodic image interactions for confined systems. Phys. Rev. B

73, 233103 (2006).

38. Dion, M., Rydberg, H., Schröder, E., Langreth, D. C. & Lundqvist, B. I. Van der Waals 

Density Functional for General Geometries. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 246401 (2004).

39. Cooper, V. R. Van der Waals density functional: An appropriate exchange functional. Phys. 

Rev. B 81, 161104 (2010).

40. Deslippe, J. et al. BerkeleyGW: A massively parallel computer package for the calculation of 

the quasiparticle and optical properties of materials and nanostructures. Comput. Phys. 

Commun. 183, 1269–1289 (2012).

41. da Jornada, F. H., Qiu, D. Y. & Louie, S. G. Nonuniform sampling schemes of the Brillouin 

zone for many-electron perturbation-theory calculations in reduced dimensionality. Phys. 

Rev. B 95, 035109 (2017).


25

42. Alexeev, E. M. et al. Resonantly hybridized excitons in moiré superlattices in van der Waals 

heterostructures. Nature 567, 81 (2019).

43. Zhang, C. et al. Interlayer couplings, Moiré patterns, and 2D electronic superlattices in 

MoS2/WSe2 hetero-bilayers. Sci. Adv. 3, e1601459 (2017).

Supplementary Materials

Materials and Methods

Supplementary Text

Figs. S1 to S6

Acknowledgments:

We thank the OIST engineering support section, and Yuki Yamauchi from OIST Facilities 

Operations and Use section for their support. Sample fabrication made use of the facilities in the 

Stanford Nano Shared Facilities (SNSF), supported by the National Science Foundation under 

award ECCS-1542152. The computational work was supported by the Center for Computational 

Study of Excited State Phenomena in Energy Materials, which is funded by the US Department 

of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering 

Division, under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231, as part of the Computational Materials 

Sciences Program. We acknowledge the use of computational resources at the National Energy 

Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported by the 

Office of Science of the US DOE under the above contract.


26

Funding:

AMOS program, Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences Division, Basic 

Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy (TFH, OK, HBR)

Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation’s EPiQS Initiative through grant number 

GBMF9462 (JH, ALO)

Koret Foundation (OK)

Natural Science and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada, fellowship 

PGSD3-502559-2017 (EB)

Femtosecond Spectroscopy Unit (VP, MKLM, CS, DRB, XZ, AAM, MMMA, NSC, AK, 

AJW, JM, KMD)

JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. JP17K04995 (MM)

Kicks Startup Fund (KMD NSC)

JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. 21H01020 (JM)

FAPESP for post-doctoral fellowships, grant number 2018/04926-9 and 2017/20100-00 

(HBR).

National Science Foundation Materials Research Science and Engineering Center DMR-

1420634 and DMR- 2011738 (KB, BK)

Elemental Strategy Initiative, conducted by the MEXT, Japan, Grant No. 

JPMXP0112101001 (KW, TT)

JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. 19H05790 and JP20H00354 (KW, TT)


27

Department of Energy Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and 

Engineering Division, under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231 (FHJ, JDG)

Author contributions:

OK, EB and KMD conceived the project. KW and TT, BK and KB supplied raw 

materials for sample fabrication. EB and OK, supported by ALO, HBR, and JH, 

fabricated the samples. VP, MKLM, and CS collected the data with assistance from 

DRB, XZ, AAM, MMMA, AK, AJW and JM. VP, MKLM, CS, NSC and XZ performed 

preliminary analysis. EB and OK analyzed the data. FHJ and JDG performed theoretical 

calculations. JDG was supervised by FHJ. ALO, EB, HBR, JH, and OK were supervised 

by TFH. KMD supervised the project. All authors contributed to discussions and 

manuscript preparations.

Competing interests:

J.M., M.K.L.M., and K.M.D. are inventors on a patent application related to this work filed 

by the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology School Corporation (US 2020/0333559 

A1 published on October 22, 2020). The authors declare no other competing interests. 

Data and materials availability:

All data are available in the main text or the supplementary materials.


28


