A Photonics-based superheterodyne RF reception 

approach

Guangyu Gao, Qijun Liang, Ziyu Liu, Huanfa Peng, Qiang Zhao, Naijin Liu

Qian Xuesen Laboratory of Space Technology,

China Academy of Space Technology, Beijing 100094, China

Email: gaoguangyu@qxslab.cn

Abstract: A novel photonics-based RF reception approach is proposed as a competitive solution to meet the current challenges 
of photonic-based approaches and to realize high performances at the same time. The proposed approach adopts the 
superheterodyne configuration by a combination manner of electronic techniques and photonic techniques, including the ultra-
wideband generation of optical LO, the two-stage photonic superheterodyne frequency conversion and the real-time IF 
compensation. An engineering prototype has been developed and its performance has been evaluated in the laboratory 
environment. The experiment results preliminarily verify the feasibility of the proposed approach and its engineering potential. 
The typical performances are as follows: 0.1 GHz~ 45GHz operation spectrum range (>40 GHz), 900 MHz instantaneous 
bandwidth, 101 dB·Hz2/3 SFDR and 130 dB·Hz LDR, image rejections of ~80 dB for 1st frequency conversion and >90 dB for 
2nd frequency conversion.

keywords Superheterodyne · Optical LO · IF compensation · RF reception · Image Rejection

1
Introduction

RF receiver as the front-end in modern electronic system play essential roles in wide range of applications from spectrum sensing, 

electronic warfare (EW), Radar, to wireless communications. Continuous development is promoting RF receiver to satisfy the
increasing requirement on several key performances at the same time, such as wider operation spectrum range (>40 GHz), larger
instantaneous bandwidth (>500 MHz), higher interference/spurious suppression capability. Conventional receiver architectures
based on the electronic techniques and components have significant technical bottlenecks hardly satisfying these requirements [1-
4].

Typically, the superheterodyne configuration is the most common receiver architecture adopted by diverse applications requiring 

high reception performance, including Radar receiver, EW receiver, test receiver and spectrum/signal analyzer [2, 5-8]. The
superheterodyne receiver translates the desired RF signal to one intermediate frequency (IF) through multi-stage conversions and 
filters before digitization, having excellent reception performance in high imaging rejection, dynamic range, frequency selectivity 
and sensitivity. Whereas, it encounters four problems: 1) local oscillators (LO) with limited tuning range and low harmonic 
suppression, 2) RF mixers with limited frequency conversion range and instantaneous bandwidth, 3) tunable preselector with a 
narrow bandwidth and signal distortion, not compatible with large instantaneous bandwidth, 4) complex structure with multistage 
conversion leading to poor size, weight, and power consumption (SWaP).

Photonic techniques have attracted great attention in breaking through the bottlenecks of conventional electronic receiver

architectures due to its advantages such as ultra-wide operating spectrum range, large instantaneous bandwidth, low nonlinear 
distortion, low loss, light weight, high-efficiency tunable LO, and high interference/spurious suppression. In recent years, a variety 
of photonics-based RF reception approaches based on different architectures have been proposed and experimental demonstrated 
for various application purposes [4, 10-17]. However, three major challenges still need to be addressed. 1) The first challenge is
the generation of optical LO. Most of the approaches use electronic LO to generate optical LO by the method of electro-optic 
modulation (EOM), which brings the problems of electronic LO to the photonic-based RF receiver. For example, the limited 
frequency tuning range of the electronic LO makes it very difficult to do the frequency plan and parameter designing of the 
photonic-based the superheterodyne configuration. Furthermore, this method will deteriorate the spurious suppression performance
for that EOM of the electronic LO at high driver power will make complex high-order harmonic products. Although some other 
efforts [16, 18-20] such as optical combs and multiple lasers with injection locking have overcome the challenge to some extent, 
there exist some new problems in the complexity, reliability, tunability and other aspects. 2) The second challenge is the photonic 
frequency conversion. Current photonics-based RF reception approaches mainly adopt the direct conversion or low IF 
configurations [22-25]. On conditions of wide frequency conversion range (typ. 5 GHz~40 GHz) and large instantaneous 
bandwidth (typ. >500 MHz), these approaches showed better imaging rejections than the pure electronic counterparts, increasing 
by > 20 dB via the combination method of the photonic IQ down-conversion and the electronic or digital image-rejected processing.
But the residue unbalance of the amplitude and phase between I and Q channels makes the imaging rejection performance still lack 
of competitiveness in comparison with the superheterodyne configuration.

In this paper, we propose and demonstrate a novel photonics-based RF reception approach, which is competitive to meet the


current challenges and to realize high performances. The proposed approach adopts the superheterodyne configuration by a 
combination manner of electronic techniques and photonic techniques, including the ultra-wideband generation of optical LO, the 
superheterodyne photonic frequency conversion and the real-time IF processing. The photonic-based superheterodyne 
configuration has two stages of photonic-based frequency down-conversion, where two lasers are respectively used as the optical 
carrier and the optical LO. The other techniques including digital feed-back locking, analog feed-forward compensation, and RF 
processing in the frond-end and back-end are employed to optimize the system performance, such as frequency/phase noise
compensation, interference/spurs suppression. An engineering prototype has been developed and tested in detail. The proposed 
approach has two distinguishing features.

1) The optical LO is generated based on a wide-band tuning laser with two major steps, the coarse locking and tuning of the LO 

frequency by a digital locking unit, and the real-time compensation of the residue frequency-error and the phase-noise by the 
2nd frequency conversion unit and the reference extraction unit. The proposed optical LO serve has the advantages of ultra-
wide tuning range (>45 GHz), excellent harmonic spurious suppression, and its implementation is relatively simple and
reliability. 

2) The photonic frequency conversion is based on the superheterodyne configuration. This photonic-based superheterodyne 

configuration has two stages of frequency conversion. In the first stage, RF signals is converted to a fixed high-intermediate 
frequency (high-IF). In the second stage, the high-IF signal is down-converted to a low-IF. Combining with the RF processing 
in the front-end before EOM and the IF processing after the photoelectric detection, the proposed photonic frequency 
conversion shows several advantages of ultra-wide frequency conversion range (≥45 GHz), larger instantaneous bandwidth 
(>900 MHz), higher interference/spurious suppression capability.

Fig. 1. The schematic of the proposed photonics-based RF reception approach

2
Principles

The schematic of the proposed photonics-based RF reception approach is shown in Fig. 1, comprised of six main parts, the RF

reprocessing unit, the 1st frequency conversion unit, the 2nd frequency conversion unit, the reference extraction unit, the digital 
locking unit, and the management and control unit. The first part is the RF reprocessing unit at the RF input-end, the schematic 
diagram is shown in fig 2. Its main function is to filter the desired signal 𝑓𝑅𝐹

′
(see fig 1B and 2) and to reject the image interference 

from the input RF signal fRF (see fig 1A), when the system working at a wide operation range (tens of Gigahertz) and a large 
instantaneous bandwidth (> 500 MHz). For many of the superheterodyne receiver of high performance based on the conventional 
architectures, such as test receiver and spectrum/signal analyzer, the Yttrium Iron Garnet (YIG) filter are used to preselect desired 
RF signal due to a wide tuning range up to 40 GHz and a big out-of-band rejection (> 70 dB), while its main disadvantages are a 
small bandwidth (<50 MHz), a big insertion loss (typ. >5 dB), difficulty in current control and the intrinsic signal distortion. As a 


result, these receivers should bypass the preselector when working at the mode of wide-band signal receiving and analyzing at the 
expense of none of the out-of-the-band interferences at the 1st reception stage being suppressed. Thanks to the advantages of the 
ultra-wideband generation of optical LO and the superheterodyne photonic frequency conversion as mentioned in the introduction, 
the preselection of the input RF signal can be achieved with only several wideband fixed-frequency filters, which have high 
selectivity, low cost and small footprint, such as microstrip filter and cavity filter. And for our approach, when working at the 
wide-band mode, it is not necessary to bypass the preselecting function, for that the filters in this approach are intrinsic wide-band. 
For example, only two low-pass fixed-frequency microstrip filters, LPF I and LPF II with 3 dB cut-off frequencies at 18 GHz and 
32 GHz respectively as shown in fig 2, are used in our approach to achieved an 80 dB image suppression.

Fig. 2. The schematic of the RF reprocessing unit

In the 1st frequency conversion unit, the desired signal 𝐸𝑅𝐹

′ (𝑡) with frequency at 𝑓𝑅𝐹

′
input from the RF reprocessing unit is 

up-converted to the optical domain by modulating an optical carrier with frequency at fC through double-sideband carrier-
suppressed modulation (DSB-CS) in a Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) as shown in fig 1C. On the assumption that the spectral 
component at frequency fRF

'
has the expression 𝐸𝑅𝐹

′ (𝑡) = 𝑉𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ sin(2𝜋𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ 𝑡). Then the 𝐸𝑅𝐹

′ (𝑡) signal modulated on light can be 

expressed as 

𝐸𝐶_𝑅𝐹(𝑡) = 𝑒𝑗(2𝜋𝑓𝐶𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶) × 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝛽 sin(2𝜋𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ 𝑡))

= ∑
𝐽2𝑘−1(𝛽)
∞
𝑘=1
(𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐶+(2𝑘−1)𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ )𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶) − 𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐶−(2𝑘−1)𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ )𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶))
(1)

where 𝜑𝑛

𝑐 is the phase noise of optical carrier, 𝛽 is the modulation factor given as 𝜋𝑉𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ /𝑉𝜋_𝑀𝑍𝑀, 𝐽𝑘(𝛽) is the kth Bessel 

function of first kind. 𝑉𝑓𝑅𝐹

′
is the voltage of 𝑓𝑅𝐹

′
and 𝑉𝜋_𝑀𝑍𝑀 is the half-wave voltage of MZM. At the small signal condition 

𝛽 ≪ 1, 𝐽2𝑘−1(𝛽)~0. Thus, 𝐸𝐶−𝑅𝐹(𝑡) is simplified

𝐸𝐶_𝑅𝐹(𝑡) = 𝐽1(𝛽) (𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐶+𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ )𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝑐𝐶) − 𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐶−𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ )𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶))
(1-1)

After amplified by the EDFA 1, the upper side band signal with frequency at fC + fRF

'
is selected by a fixed-frequency and 

wideband optical band-pass filter OBPF 1, then

𝐸𝐶_𝑅𝐹

′
(𝑡) = 𝐽1(𝛽)𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐶+𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ )𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶)
(2)

One of the main aims of using OBPF 1 here is to reject the lower-side band of 𝐸𝐶−𝑅𝐹(𝑡), the residual optical carrier, the ASE 

noise from EDFA 1 and the residual image interference on light. For simplification, the OBPF 1 are not used in the experiment 
validation as descripted in the next section. 𝐸𝐶_𝑅𝐹

′
(𝑡) and an optical LO with frequency at 𝑓𝐿𝑂 are coupled in a 3 dB hybrid as 

shown in fig 1D. The output signals at the two ports of the 3 dB hybrid are

{

𝐸1 = 𝐽1(𝛽) (𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐶+𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ )𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶) + 𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐿𝑂+𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟)𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐿𝑂))

𝐸2 = 𝐽1(𝛽) (𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐶+𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ )𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶) − 𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐿𝑂+𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟)𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐿𝑂))

(3)

where 𝜑𝑛

𝐿𝑂 is the phase noise of optical LO and 𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟 is the frequency error of optical LO relative to optical carrier. The output 

signals of the 3 dB hybrid are fed into a balance PD for the optical-electronic down-conversion of the fC + fRF

'
signal through the 

coherent beat process. The output current of the balance PD is expressed as

𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔(𝑡) ∝ 𝐸1 ∙ (𝐸1)∗ − 𝐸2 ∙ (𝐸2)∗

∝ 2cos(2𝜋((𝑓𝐿𝑂 + 𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟) − (𝑓𝐶 + 𝑓𝑅𝐹))𝑡 + 𝜑𝑛

𝐿𝑂 − 𝜑𝑛

𝐶)

= 2cos (2𝜋 (fsig + 𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟) 𝑡 + ∆𝜑𝑛_𝐶,𝐿𝑂)
(4)

where fsig = 𝑓𝐿𝑂 − (𝑓𝐶 + 𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ ), and ∆𝜑𝑛_𝐶,𝐿𝑂 = 𝜑𝑛

𝐿𝑂 − 𝜑𝑛

𝐶. In the 1st frequency conversion unit, fsig is set as a constant high-IF, 

as shown in fig 1H.

For the superheterodyne configuration [6-9], the high-IF frequency should be as high as possible so as to push the image frequency 

far away from the desired signal for efficient signal selection from the interference by RF filters and as a result increasing the
instantaneous bandwidth. Suffering from the bottlenecks of electrical LO in limited tuning range and the RF mixer in limited 
operation range especially for the LO port, the high-IF frequency in the conventional superheterodyne receiver usually <2 GHz. 


These lead to complicating the frequency planning and the system configuration for suppressing the input interferences and the
spurious generated in the frequency conversion. Thanks again to the advantages of the ultra-wideband generation of optical LO
and the superheterodyne photonic frequency conversion, the high-IF frequency can be chosen at a big value (typ. 18.5 GHz in our 
approach) so that the optical LO always locates at the upper side of the signal frequency even up to 45 GHz as shown in fig 1D.
As a consequence, the 1st frequency conversion with a large instantaneous bandwidth, a high suppression of image frequency can 
achieve successfully with a considerably simple frequency planning and the system configuration. It should be noted that the 
optical frequency conversion has an advantage of intrinsic resistance to the spurious in the frequency conversion as compared to 
the RF mixer [15].

In expression (4), the high-IF signal 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔(𝑡) contains two disturbances, the residue frequency error 𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟 and the residue phase 

noise ∆𝜑𝑛_𝐶,𝐿𝑂. Although the optical LO laser is coarse frequency-locked (not phase-locked) to the optical carrier laser in a digital 
feed-back locking manner (details described in the following part), the 1st photonic frequency conversion in our approach will
introduces obvious frequency instability and phase noise to the high-IF signal 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔 due to the frequency instability and the 
noncoherence between the two lasers. In order to address these issues, the analog feed-forward compensation method is introduced.
The compensation signal is generated in the reference extraction unit, the schematic of which is shown in fig 1 (see the pink block).
In this unit, one copy of the optical carrier is modulated with a phase modulator (PM) driven by an electrical expansion source 
with a fixed-frequency at ∆f. The output signal after the phase modulation is 

𝐸𝐶_∆𝑓(𝑡) = 𝑒𝑗(2𝜋𝑓𝐶𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶+𝛼 sin(2𝜋∆𝑓𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐸))

= ∑
𝐽𝑙(𝛼)𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐶+𝑙∆𝑓)𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶+𝑙𝜑𝑛𝐸+𝑙𝜋

2)
+∞
−∞
(5)

where 𝜑𝑛

𝐸 is the phase noise of the expansion source, 𝛼 is the modulation factor given as 𝜋𝑉∆𝑓/𝑉𝜋_𝑃𝑀, 𝐽𝑙(𝛽) is the lth bessel 

function of first kind. 𝑉∆𝑓 is the voltage of ∆𝑓 and 𝑉𝜋_𝑃𝑀 is the half-wave voltage of PM. By properly setting 𝑉∆𝑓, several 
harmonic modes of 𝑓𝐶 with frequencies at 𝑓𝐶 ± 𝑙∆𝑓 as shown in fig 1E are generated with relatively flat power distribution when 
|𝑙| ≤ 2. After amplified by the EDFA 2 and filtering by a fixed-frequency optical band-pass filter OBPF 2, only one harmonic 
mode with the mode number 2 ≥ 𝑙 ≥ 0 is selected and coupled with one copy of the optical LO in a 3 dB hybrid as shown in fig 
1F. The output signal of the 3 dB hybrid is 

𝐸3 = 𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐿𝑂+𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟)𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐿𝑂) + 𝐽𝑙(𝛼)𝑒𝑗(2𝜋(𝑓𝐶+𝑙∆𝑓)𝑡+𝜑𝑛𝐶+𝑙𝜑𝑛𝐸+𝑙𝜋

2)
(6)

It is fed into a single PD to create a beating signal with frequency at 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡. The beating signal is used for the compensation signal 
extraction. The output current of the single PD (SPD) is 

𝐸𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡(𝑡) ∝ 𝐸3 ∙ (𝐸3)∗

∝ 2cos (2𝜋((𝑓𝐿𝑂 + 𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟) − (𝑓𝐶 + 𝑙∆𝑓))𝑡 + 𝜑𝑛

𝐿𝑂 − 𝜑𝑛

𝐶 − 𝑙𝜑𝑛

𝐸 − 𝑙

𝜋

2)

= 2cos (2𝜋(f𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 + 𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟)𝑡 + ∆𝜑𝑛_𝐶,𝐿𝑂 − 𝑙𝜑𝑛

𝐸 − 𝑙

𝜋

2)
(7)

where fbeat = 𝑓𝐿𝑂 − (𝑓𝑐 + 𝑙∆𝑓). Apparently, 𝐸𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡(𝑡) contains the same information of the two disturbances in 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔(𝑡), 𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟
and ∆𝜑𝑛_𝐶,𝐿𝑂. In the reference extraction unit, fbeat is set to satisfy the following relationship

fbeat ∈ (min(𝑓𝐿𝑂) − 𝑓𝐶，max(𝑓𝐿𝑂) − 𝑓𝐶 − max(𝑙) × ∆𝑓]
(8)

where min(∗) and max(∗) are the minimum and the maximum values of *. By mixing with a reference signal 𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑓(𝑡) from a 
tunable reference source with frequency at 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓, the beating signal fbeat is converted to a constant IF signal 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝(𝑡) with 
frequency at f𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 as shown in fig 1G, which serving as the compensation signal for reducing the residue frequency error and the 
residue phase noise of 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔(𝑡). 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓 is set to satisfy the following relationship 

fref ∈ (min(𝑓𝐿𝑂) − 𝑓𝐶，max(𝑓𝐿𝑂) − 𝑓𝐶 − max(𝑙) × ∆𝑓]
(9)

𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝(𝑡) can be given as

𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝(𝑡) = 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 =

1

2 cos (2𝜋 (f𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 + 𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟) 𝑡 + ∆𝜑𝑛_𝐶,𝐿𝑂 − 𝑙𝜑𝑛

𝐸 − 𝜑𝑛

𝑟𝑒𝑓 − 𝑙

𝜋

2)
(10)

where f𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 = f𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 − 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓. 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝(𝑡) is transferred to the 2nd frequency conversion unit, wherein 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝(𝑡) also serves as the 
2nd LO to down-convert 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔(𝑡) to a low-IF signal 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔

′ (𝑡) with frequency at 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔

′
= fsig − f𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝 in the RF mixer 2. 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔

′ (𝑡) as 

shown in fig 1H can be expressed as

𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔

′ (𝑡) = 𝐿𝑃𝐹(𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔(𝑡) × 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝) =

1

2 cos (2𝜋 (fsig − f𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝) 𝑡 + 𝑙𝜑𝑛

𝐸 + 𝜑𝑛

𝑟𝑒𝑓 + 𝑙

𝜋

2)

= cos (2𝜋𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔

′ 𝑡 + 𝑙𝜑𝑛

𝐸 + 𝜑𝑛

𝑟𝑒𝑓 + 𝑙

𝜋

2)

= cos (2𝜋(𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓 + 𝑙∆𝑓 − 𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ )𝑡 + 𝑙𝜑𝑛

𝐸 + 𝜑𝑛

𝑟𝑒𝑓 + 𝑙

𝜋

2)
(11)

According to (11), the output signal 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔

′ (𝑡) contains the information of the input signal 𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ , and the residual frequency error 

𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟 and the residual phase noise ∆𝜑𝑛𝐶,𝐿𝑂 are all eliminated. While, there are two additional phase noise terms in (11), 𝑙𝜑𝑛

𝐸 and 

𝜑𝑛

𝑟𝑒𝑓, which are introduced in the process of compensation. As for 𝑙𝜑𝑛

𝐸，it is originated from a single tone with a fixed-frequency 

at ∆f, but has neglectable influence on 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔

′ (𝑡). The main reason is that the single tone with frequency on 10 GHz level (typ. 15 

GHz in this work) and ultra-low phase noise and high frequency stability is easy to achieve and has a relatively low-cost and a 


small footprint, furthermore the mode number l is so small that has at most 6 dB influence on 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔

′ (𝑡). As for 𝜑𝑛

𝑟𝑒𝑓, it is originated 

from the tunable reference source with frequency at 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓 and has indistinct influence on 𝐸𝑠𝑖𝑔

′ (𝑡). Due to 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓 only depending on 

the value of f𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 as descripted in (8) and (9), 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓 has a limited tuning range typically covering 15 GHz and 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓 ∈
[1.5𝐺𝐻𝑧, 16.5𝐺𝐻𝑧]. This type of tunable source with a phase noise lower than -115 dBc/Hz (@ 10kHz offset and 10 GHz central 
frequency) is available and has a relatively low-cost and a small footprint.

The schematic of digital locking unit is shown in fig. 3, which is based on the offset-frequency discrimination and the digital 

feed-back decision control loop. In order to generate an RF beat-note with frequency within the bandwidth of the PD, the relative 
frequency difference 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 between the optical LO laser and optical carrier laser is initialed to be around 18.5 GHz (corresponding 
to the zero point of 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔 in the 1st frequency conversion unit) via thermal tuning the wavelength of the lasers. The 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 signal is 
sent to a RF frequency divider (FD). Then a low pass filter is used to abstract the 1st order of the frequency-divided signal with a 
frequency of 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡/N. A double-balanced mixer (DBM) is used as a frequency discriminator, which generates an error signal
through converting the output of the RF frequency divider by a frequency reference to a fixed frequency containing a frequency 
error information. After filtering out the high frequency components including the sum frequency and the other spurs, the error 
signal is sampled by an ADC and the error frequency is calculated by a FPGA-based program. According to the error frequency, 
the control signal is fed back to drive the TEC and PZT of the lasers, then the relative frequency difference 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 is stabilized by 
tracking the frequency of the LO laser to the frequency of the carrier laser. Once 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 is coarsely locked to 18.5 GHz, the agility 
mode is switched on, by which 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 is rapidly tuned by changing the control voltage on the PZT of the lasers, corresponding to 
the reception frequency of 𝑓𝑅𝐹 = 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 −18.5 GHz+ 𝑙∆𝑓. 

c.

Figure 3. Schematic of the digital locking unit. FD: Frequency divider, LPF: low pass filter, DBM: double-balanced mixer, RF 

ref: RF reference.

The main function of the management and control unit is to monitor and control each functional part as shown in fig 1. For 

example, it will transfer the frequency parameter of the desired input signal from the user interface to the digital locking unit for 
tuning the frequency of optical LO. A customized industrial computer module is used as the management and control unit, in which 
the user interface and the background program are developed based on the LabVIEW environment.

3
Results and discussion

An engineering prototype based on the proposed approach has been developed as shown in fig. 4. The performance evaluation 

of the engineering prototype is carried out in detail in the laboratory environment. The experiment results as reported in the 
following parts preliminarily verify the feasibility of the proposed approach and its engineering potential.


Figure 4 the engineering prototype of the proposed photonics-based RF reception approach

At the input end of the photonics-based RF receiver, the RF spectrum from DC to 45 GHz is divided into 3 bands as shown in 

fig 1A, and the band I and band II are respectively selected in the RF reprocessing unit by two low-pass fixed-frequency microstrip 
filters with 3 dB cut-off frequencies at 18 GHz and 32 GHz, LPF I (Marki FLP-1800) and LPF II (Marki FLP-3200). Due to the 
value of the high-IF fsig is set at 18.5 GHz and the optical LO locates at the upper-side of the modulation signal on light (𝑓𝐶 +
𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ ), the image interferences of band I and band II with frequency at 𝑓𝑅𝐹

′ + 37 GHz are all significantly rejected by LPF I and 

LPF II respectively with an out-band rejection ratio at ~80 dB. Two narrow-linewidth fiber lasers (NKT basik E15) with the center 
wavelengths at 1550.12 nm and a linewidth at 100 Hz and tuning range 100 GHz (temperature tuning) and 8 G (PZT tuning) are 
used to generate optical carrier and optical LO. The MZM (iXblue MXAN-LN-40) with a 3 dB bandwidth > 28 GHz and 𝑉𝜋_𝑀𝑍𝑀
< 6 V has an excellent suppression ratio of even-order components at > 30 dB for the optical carrier and ~65 dBc for the second-
order harmonics when the input power of 𝑓𝑅𝐹

′
at 0 dBm, far better than the wide-band RF mixer by about 20 dB. The BPD (Finisar 

BPDV2150R) and SPD (Finisar HPDV2120R) with the bandwidths >40 GHz and 50 GHz are used for optical-electronic down-
conversion. A tunable optical band-pass filter (Teraxion TFN) with bandwidth at 10 GHz and working at the fixed-frequency mode
is used as OBPF 2 for optical filtering in the reference extraction unit, which has a roll-off factor of >600 GHz/nm and out-of-band 
rejection of around 40 dB. An electrical spectrum analyzer (R&S FSW43) and a real-time oscilloscope (Keysight DSA91304A) 
are used to measure the electrical spectra and record the signal waveform.

The generation of optical LO is implemented by the procedure as following, and is evaluated by the performances of the 

frequency drift as well as the other supporting parameters, such as the frequency stability and the phase noise. The frequency 
stability of the narrow-linewidth fiber laser in free running has frequency drifts on the order of 1 GHz per day and 1 MHz per
second, dramatically affecting the frequency accuracy and precision of the photonic receiver. Due to phase-locked loop (PLL) 
having a small locking bandwidth and a weak robustness for the phase locking of the optical LO laser to the optical carrier when 
working on an ultra-wideband tuning mode, a coarse frequency-locked manner based on the digital feed-back locking is introduced 
to achieve a primary frequency control of high-robustness. The coarse frequency locking stabilizes the relative frequency difference
𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 between optical LO and optical carrier and is beneficial to reduce the design difficulties in frequency plan and component 
parameters, such as Low IF and the optical/electrical filters, especially in the processes of the 2nd frequency conversion and the
compensation signal extraction. The input frequency range of the frequency divider is 500 MHz~40 GHz with division ratio of 
125, so as to cover the full rapidly tunable frequency range (18.5 GHz~33.5 GHz) of 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 and provide enough margin for 
initialization. The signal after the frequency divider passes through a low pass filter with 3dB cut-off frequency of around 280 
MHz, so as to abstract the first order signal and suppress high order signals. The output of the RF frequency divider and a 
microwave reference is mixed and discriminated in the DBM. The output error signal of the DBM passes through a second low 
pass filter with 3dB cut-off frequency of 100 MHz, and then is sent to FPGA for real-time frequency estimation and digital feed-
back controlling. Ensuring that the beat-note frequency can be effectively controlled at both positive and negative directions, we 
chose 50 MHz as the determining condition of the frequency of the error signal. Once the frequency of the RF reference is set to 
be 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓, the frequency difference between the LO laser and reference carrier laser is rapidly locked at (𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑓 +50 MHz)×125. After 
the coarse frequency locking, the long-term frequency drift of the relative frequency difference f𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 is reduced to a small range 
of about 𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑟 ≤ 5 MHz. The instantaneous frequency 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 of the beating signal 𝐸𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡(𝑡) is measured using the electrical 
spectrum analyzer, and the results of the lasers in free running and digital locked are depicted in fig 5. In fig. 5A, the frequency 
drift of 𝑓𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑡 without digital locking is more than 100 MHz on 5 minutes. After digital locking as shown in fig. 5B, the frequency 
drift decreases to less than 10 MHz in a long term over several hours. This value mainly depends on the frequency threshold 
parameter set in the management and control unit and frequency controlling precision in the digital locking unit.


Figure 5 the frequency drift of the beating signal between optical LO and optical carrier before (A) and after (B) frequency locked

Figure 6 the spectral purity of the RF input signals before (A, C) and after (B, D) the analog feed-forward compensation. C and 

D are the zoom-in view of A and B, respectively.


Figure 7. the Allan variance (A) and the phase noise (B) performances of the proposed approach

In order to quantify the effectiveness of the proposed analog feed-forward compensation method, we have analyzed the spectral 

purity of the RF input signals after down-conversion to IF, before and after the analog feed-forward compensation. The results are 
shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 6A depicts the power spectrum of a multi-tone signal with spacing at 10 kHz generated from an arbitrary 
waveform generator (Keysight M8190A), which is measured directly after the BPD by the frequency spectrum analyzer, where its 
corresponding signal 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔 is not compensated. Fig. 6C is the zoom-in view of the multi-tone signal, where the comb-lines are 
indistinguishable. Fig. 6B depicts the power spectrum of the multi-tone signal after the compensation in the 2nd frequency 
conversion unit. From its zoom-in view shown in fig. 6D, the comb-lines are distinguishable. According to the results shown in
fig. 6, it is obvious that the compensation significantly optimizes the quality of signal output from the 1st frequency conversion 
unit. The spectral purity is further evaluated by calculating the Allan variance and the phase noise as shown in fig. 7. For calculating 
the Allan variance, a single tone signal with frequency at 40 GHz generated by a RF source (Keysight 8257D) is down-converted 
to the low-IF 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔

′
at 1.5GHz. The corresponding 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔

′
frequency is measured by a frequency counter (Keysight 53220A). The red 

line in fig. 7A is the calculated Allan variance of the low-IF 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔

′
versus the averaging time. The Allan variance is gradually going 

high from 0.1s to 1s, and slowly decreasing from 1s to 30s, and then rapidly increasing with averaging time after 30s. At one 
second average, the Allan variance is less than 10-9, which is determined by both the extension RF source in the reference extraction 
unit and the compensation RF source in the 2nd frequency conversion unit. Due to the poor frequency stability before the 
compensation, the Allan variance of the output signal from the 1st frequency conversion unit is not measured. The result of the 
Allan variance indicates that the analog feed-forward compensation significantly improves the frequency stability by a factor 
around 1e5 Hz for 1s averaging time. As a comparison, the Allan variance of one single tone signal with frequency at 1.5 GHz 
from the same RF source (Keysight 8257D) is shown in fig. 7A (the blue line). The single-side band phase noise (SSB phase noise)
of the same single tone signal with frequency at 40 GHz before and after the analog feed-forward compensation are measured as 
shown in fig. 7B. The waveforms of the high-IF signal 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔 at around 18.5 GHz and the low-IF signal 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑔

′
at 1.5GHz are 

respectively recorded by the real-time oscilloscope and then their SSB phase noises are calculated through a digital signal 
processing algorithm. As shown in fig. 7B, the SSB phase noise before the compensation (blue line) is above -60 dBc/Hz at the 
frequency offset below 100 kHz. The high phase noise at the low frequency offset reveals a bad frequency stability which makes
the main contribution to the difficulty in phase locking. After the feed-forward compensation (see red line in fig. 7B), the SSB 
phase noise is significantly reduced with the maximum at around 50 dB, to ~-103 dBc/Hz at the frequency offset 100 kHz. This 
result confirms the effectiveness of the analog feed-forward compensation.

The system performances are also characterized in terms of dynamic range and linearity as shown in fig. 8. Two tones with 

frequencies at f1=39.9 GHz and f2= 40 GHz generated respectively from Keysight 8257D and Keysight 8267D are used to measure 
the fundamental and the third-order intermodulation (IM3). In fig. 8A, the blue line and the red line depict respectively the linear 
response of the fundamental signal f1 and f2, and the third-order response of 2×f1－f2 and 2×f2－f1, and the spurious-free dynamic 
range (SFDR) is calculated near to 101 dB·Hz2/3 with the noise floor at ~-142 dBm/Hz. The distribution ranges of SFDR and 1dB 
compression point (P1dB) over the 40 GHz operation range are equal to 2.3 dB and 3.4 dB, as shown in fig. 8B and 8C, indicating
a good uniformity of the proposed approach over an ultra-wideband operation range. The linear dynamic range (LDR) at 40 GHz 
is estimated to be around 130 dB·Hz. The performances of SFDR, P1dB and the LDR of this approach are mainly limited by the 
dynamic range of the MZM modulator and the EDFA, and the noise contributions from ASE noise and BPD.


Fig. 8 A: the measured fundamental and IMD3 versus the input RF power. B and C: the SFDR and P1dB distributions over the 

whole operation range.

In order to evaluate the wideband reception performance of the proposed approach, a 16QAM wideband vector signal generated 

from the microwave signal generator with carrier frequency at 4 GHz and a symbol rate of 100 MSymbol/s and power of -5 dBm 
is down-converted and demodulated for the performance evaluation of the back-to-back reception. The low-IF power spectrum of 
the wideband signal and the constellation diagram are shown in Fig. 9A and 9B. A clear constellation diagram is observed, and the 
calculated error vector magnitude (EVM) is <1.7%, indicating a good wideband reception performance of the proposed photonic 
receiver. In fact, the instantaneous bandwidth of this approach mainly depends on the high-IF filter BPF1, which has a 3 dB flat-
top bandwidth of 900 MHz and a fixed center frequency of 18.5 GHz. If a bandwidth tunable filter is employed as BPF1, then the 
instantaneous bandwidth could be reconfigurable.

Fig.9. Constellation diagrams demodulated by subharmonic I/Q modulator

Two types of the image interferences exist in this approach, and they are both out of the instantaneous bandwidth as differring

from the direct conversion or low IF configurations. One image interferences is the far-end interference locating at the frequency
2×18.5 GHz away from the desired signal, and the other is the near-end interference locating at the frequency 2×1.5 GHz away 
from the desired signal. Thus, the rejection performances for the two types of image interferences are evaluated. The result shown 
in fig. 10A is the image rejection of the 1st frequency conversion. From 1 GHz to 7 GHz, the image rejections are around 80 dB. 
Due to the constraint of RF source (Keysight 8267D) which has a maximum output frequency at 44 GHz, the image rejection in 
the operation band above 7 GHz is not measured. In practicality, due to the frequency response constraints of RF components at 
image frequency above 45 GHz, such as antenna, LNA, switcher, to measure the image rejection above 7 GHz make little sense 
for the 1st frequency conversion. Fig. 10B is the image rejection of the 2nd frequency conversion. At several typical frequencies 
covering the whole operation range, the image rejections are > 90 dB. It should be noted that these measured values of the two 
types of image rejections are on the condition that only two RF filters are respectively used in the RF reprocessing unit as a 
wideband low-pass preselector and in the 2nd frequency conversion unit as a wideband band-pass IF filter, and no optical bandpass 
filter is used in the 1st frequency conversion unit in the experiment. The image rejections can be further improved to a large extent 
by connecting an extra RF filter with the same parameters in series or an optical bandpass filter after the EDFA 1 in the 1st frequency 
conversion unit.


Fig. 10 Measured image rejections for different frequencies of the input RF signal.

4
Conclusion

In conclusion, a novel photonics-based RF reception approach is proposed as a competitive solution to meet the current 

challenges of photonic-based approaches and to realize high performances at the same time. The proposed approach adopts the 
superheterodyne configuration by a combination manner of electronic techniques and photonic techniques, including the ultra-
wideband generation of optical LO, the superheterodyne photonic frequency conversion and the real-time IF compensation. The 
principle and the functional parts of the proposed approach are described in detail. An engineering prototype of the photonics-
based RF reception approach has been developed and its performance has been evaluated in the laboratory environment. The 
experiment results preliminarily verify the feasibility of the proposed approach and its engineering potential. The typical 
performances are as follows: 0.1 GHz~ 45GHz operation spectrum range (>40 GHz), 900 MHz instantaneous bandwidth, 101 
dB·Hz2/3 SFDR and 130 dB·Hz LDR, image rejections of ~80 dB for 1st frequency conversion and >90 dB for 2nd frequency 
conversion. The proposed approach has two distinguishing features.

1)
The optical LO is generated based on a wide-band tuning laser with two major steps, the coarse locking and tuning of the 
LO frequency by a digital locking unit, and the real-time compensation of the residue frequency-error and the phase-noise 
by the 2nd frequency conversion unit and the reference extraction unit. The proposed optical LO serve has the advantages 
of ultra-wide tuning range (>45 GHz), excellent harmonic spurious suppression, and its implementation is relatively simple 
and reliability.

2)
The photonic frequency conversion is based on the superheterodyne configuration. This photonic-based superheterodyne 
configuration has two stages of frequency conversion. In the first stage, RF signals is converted to a fixed high-intermediate 
frequency. In the second stage, the high-IF signal is down-converted to a low-IF. Combining with the RF processing in the 
front-end before EOM and the IF processing after the photoelectric detection, the proposed photonic frequency conversion 
shows several advantages of ultra-wide frequency conversion range (≥45 GHz), larger instantaneous bandwidth (>900 
MHz), higher interference/spurious suppression capability.

Acknowledgment

This work was partially supported by Independent Innovation Fund of Qian Xuesen Laboratory of Space Technology, and 

Independent research and development projects of China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation.

References

1. Ariel Luzzatto, Gadi Shirazi (2007) Wireless transceiver design. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester
2. Antonella Bogoni, Paolo Ghelfi and Francesco Laghezza (2019) Photonics for Radar Networks and Electronic Warfare Systems. SciTech Publishing, London
3. J. B. Tsui (2004) Digital Techniques for Wideband Receivers. SciTech Publishing, Raleigh.
4. Shilong Pan, Jianping Yao (2016) Photonics-based Broadband Microwave Measurement. Journal of Lightwave Technology 35:3498-3513
5. EMI measurement, test receiver vs spectrum analyzer. http://www.theky22.com/downloads/EMI%20Measurements%20-%20Spectrum%20analyzer%20vs.%

20Test%20receiver.pdf

6. Richard A. Poisel (2014) Electronic-warfare-receivers-and-receiver-systems. ARTECH HOUSE, Norwood
7. D. McCarthy (2015) Evolution of the Modern Receiver in a Crowded Spectrum Environment (White Paper). Rohde & Schwarz USA, Inc. https://cdn.rohde-

schwarz.com/us/campaigns_2/a_d/Evolution-of-the-Modern-Receiver.pdf

8. Blake Peterson (2016) Spectrum Analysis Basics (AN150). Keysight Technologies, https://www.keysight.com/us/en/assets/7018-06714/application-

notes/5952-0292.pdf


9. Christoph Rauscher (2021) Fundamentals of Spectrum Analysis. https://www.rohde-schwarz.com/us/products/test-and-measurement/analyzers/signal-

spectrum-analyzers/educational-note-fundamentals-of-spectrum-analysis-register_252824.html

10. Paolo Ghelfi, Francesco Laghezza, Filippo Scotti et al (2014) A fully photonics-based coherent radar system. Nature, 507:341-345
11. Richard W. Ridgway, Carl L. Dohrman,Joshua A. Conway (2014) Microwave Photonics Programs at DARPA. Journal of Lightwave Technology, 32: 3428 -

3439

12. S. L. Pan, D. Zhu, S. F. Liu, K. Xu, Y. T. Dai, T. L. Wang, J. G. Liu, N. H. Zhu, Y. Xue and N. J Liu (2015) Satellite Payloads Pay Off. IEEE Microwave 

Magazine 16:61-73

13. M. Sotom, M. Aveline, R. Barbaste et al (2017) Flexible photonic payload for broadband telecom satellites: from concepts to system demonstrators. 

International Conference on Space Optics 2016, Proc. of SPIE 105621Y. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2296157

14. Paolo Ghelfi, Filippo Scotti, Daniel Onori et al (2019) Photonics for Ultrawideband RF Spectral Analysis in Electronic Warfare Applications. IEEE IEEE 

Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, 25: 8900209

15. Zhenzhou Tang, Yifei Li, Jianping Yao et al (2019) Photonics-Based Microwave Frequency Mixing: Methodology and Applications. Laser Photonics Rev. 

14: 1800350

16. Jiyao Yang, Ruoming Li, Yitang Dai et al (2019) Wide-band RF receiver based on dual-OFC-based photonic channelization and spectrum stitching 

technique. Optics Express, 27: 33194-33204

17. Luis Romero Cortés,1 Daniel Onori,1 Hugues Guillet de Chatellus et al (2020) Towards on-chip photonic-assisted radio-frequency spectral measurement and 

monitoring. Optica, 7: 434-447

18. Wenhui Hao, Yitang Dai, Feifei Yin et al (2017) Chirped-pulse-based broadband RF channelization implemented by a mode-locked laser and dispersion. 

Optics Letters, 42: 5234-5237

19. Guangyu Gao, Lihua Lei (2017) Photonics-Based Broadband RF Spectrum Measurement With Sliced Coherent Detection and Spectrum Stitching Technique. 

IEEE Photonics Journal, 9: 5503111

20. Daniel Onori, Paolo Ghelfi, José Azaña et al (2018) A 0 - 40 GHz RF Tunable Receiver based on Photonic Direct Conversion and Digital Feed-Forward 

Lasers Noise Cancellation. Journal of Lightwave Technology, 36: 4423 – 4429

21. Daniel Onori, Filippo Scotti, Francesco Laghezza et al (2018) A Photonically-Enabled Compact 0.5 - 28.5 GHz RF Scanning Receiver. Journal of Lightwave 

Technology, 36: 1831-1839

22. Ziyi Meng, Jianqiang Li, Chunjing Yin et al (2017) Dual-band dechirping LFMCW radar receiver with high image rejection using microwave photonic I/Q 

mixer. Optics Express, 25: 22055-22065

23.Yongsheng Gao, Aijun Wen, Wei Jiang et al (2018) All-optical and broadband microwave fundamental/sub-harmonic I/Q downconverters. Optics Express, 

26: 7336-7350

24. Dan Zhu, Wenjuan Chen, Shilong Pan (2018) Photonics-enabled balanced Hartley architecture for broadband image-reject microwave mixing. Optics 

Express, 26: 28022-28029

25. Yamei Zhang, Zhaoyu Li, Wenjuan Chen et al (2020) Broadband Image-Reject Mixing Based on a Polarization-Modulated Dual-Channel Photonic 

Microwave Phase Shifter. IEEE Photonics Journal, 12: 7800409


