 

 

1 

 

 Correlation of strontium anharmonicity with charge-lattice dynamics of the 
apical oxygens and their coupling to cuprate superconductivity. 

 

Steven D. Conradsona,,b,*, Victor Velascoc Marcello B. Silva Netoc,*, Chang-Qing Jind,e,  Wen-Min Lid,e, Li-
Peng Caod,e†, Andrea Gauzzif, Maarit Karppineng, Andrea Peralih, Sandro Wimbergeri,j, Alan R. Bishopk, 
Gianguido Baldinozzil, Matthew Latimerm, Edmondo Giliolin 

aDepartment of Complex Matter, Josef Stefan Institute, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 

bDepartment of Chemistry, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 90164, U.S.A. 

cInstituto de Física, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Caixa Postal 68528, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 

dInstitute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.  

eSchool of Physics, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. 

fIMPMC, Sorbonne Universites-UPMC, CNRS, IRD, and MNHN, Paris 75005, France. 

gDepartment of Chemistry and Materials Science, Aalto University, Aalto FI-00076, Finland.  

hSchool of Pharmacy, Physics Unit, Università di Camerino, 62032 Camerino, Italy. 

iDipartimento di Scienze Matematiche, Fisiche e Informatiche, Università di Parma, 43124 Parma, Italy. 

jINFN, Sezione di Milano Bicocca, Gruppo Collegato di Parma, 43124 Parma, Italy 

kCenter for Nonlinear Studies, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, U.S.A. 

lSPMS, CNRS CentraleSupelec Universite Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette F-91192, France. 

mStanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 
94025, U.S.A. 

nInstitute of Materials for Electronics and Magnetism, CNR, Parma A-43124, Italy.   

*to whom correspondence should be addressed: Steven D. Conradson, Marcello B. Silva Neto 

Email:  st3v3n.c0nradson@icloud.com, mbsn@if.ufrj.br 

Author Contributions: Conceptualization-SDC, MBSN, CQJ, AG, MK, AP ARB; Methodology-SDC, 
MBSN, CQJ, AG, MK, GB; Investigation - SDC, MBSN, VV, WML, LPC, AP, SW, GB, ML; Visualization - 
SDC, MBSN, VV; Supervision - SDC, MBSN, CQJ, MK; Validation - AP, SW, ARB; Writing - original draft: 
SDC; Writing - review & editing: all authors. 

Abstract. Cu K edge X-ray absorption spectra of overdoped superconducting YSr2Cu2.75Mo0.25O7.54 and 
Sr2CuO3.3 show a remarkably strong correlation of their superconductivity with the local dynamics of their 
Cu-Sr and Cu-apical-O pairs. This finding that the entire alkaline earth cation-apical O “dielectric” layer 
has an active role in the unusual electronic properties of cuprates has not been previously considered 
and has far reaching implications. We develop this idea of a possible role for the apical oxygen charge 
dynamics via a soft mode of the Sr by applying Kuramoto's synchronization technique to exact 
diagonalization calculations of two neighboring Cu-apical O pairs bridged by Sr and a planar O atom.  
These calculations show a first order phase transition to a synchronized state of the Internal Quantum 
Tunneling Polarons (IQTPs) in which a fraction of the hole originally confined to the apical O atoms of the 


 

 

2 

 

cluster is transferred onto the planar O. This combination of experimental results and theory 
demonstrates that the Sr-O dielectric layer of cuprates most likely plays an important role in high 
temperature superconductivity via its collective charge dynamics that extends into the CuO2 conducting 
planes . 
 
Introduction 
 
Insofar as more than three decades of study of cuprates and related materials have not provided a 
consensus on the origins of high temperature superconductivity (HTSC) and related phenomena, there 
have been calls within the community for new ideas1-4. A source for these is found in recent reports on 
heavily overdoped superconducting compounds made with high pressure oxygen (HPO)5-7that describe 
exceptions to several of the common attributes of the more widely known cuprates doped by cation 
substitution or reaction with O2 gas. These include: short Cu-apical oxygen (Oap) distances in 
compounds that retain high transition temperatures8-10; an oblate Cu geometry and inversion of the Cu 
3dz2-r2 and 3dx2-y2 levels in Ba2CuO3.2

11; superconductivity at 55-115 K at Cu valences far beyond the of 

~2.27 limit of the "dome" of the conventional phase diagram10; the CuO~1.5 plane with rotated magnetism 
in Sr2CuO3.3 (SCO)12, 13; and the first observation of a substantial transformation of the dynamic structure 
concomitant with the superconducting transition, found in SCO14 and CuBa2Ca3Cu4O10+δ

15, 16. The 

extension of the superconductivity to excess charge of the CuO2 plane Cu, p, to the maximum possible 
value of 1 demonstrates that the “dome” of superconductivity in the phase diagram only applies to the 
fraction of cuprates doped  by reaction with O2 or cation substitution. The materials prepared with HPO 
therefore, obviate the presumed commonality of the widely accepted properties accruing to the dome and 
their basis for theories of HTSC.  
 
Notably in the search for a universal characteristic, two-site distributions17, 18 in the dynamic structures of 
Cu-apical O (Oap) (or occasionally other Cu-O) pairs (Fig. 1a, b) coupled to HTSC have been observed in 
virtually all hole-doped cuprates via EXAFS measurements that probe the instantaneous structure 
factor17-31, S(Q,t=0). This was corroborated by. neutron scattering measurements of the elastic structure 
factor32, 33, S(Q,ω=0) concomitantly with the original EXAFS results. Analogous behavior has also been 
found in non-cuprate HTSC compounds34, 35. Although we originally designated these as “tunneling 
polarons20, 21, 36,” a more precise term differentiating them from Holstein-type and related small polarons is 
“Internal Quantum Tunneling Polarons” (IQTPs). IQTPs21, 37, 38 occur when some of the excess charge of 
a Cu-centered small polaron is localized on one of its neighboring oxygen ions via, e.g., hybridization of 
the Zhang-Rice singlet state39, 40. This fractional decrease of its charge, δ, modifies the Cu-O bond, 
causing a displacement of the oxygen from its crystallographic position to give a second, distinct Cu-O 
distance as occurs in the coordination chemistry of Cu-O where the chemical speciation determines the 
Cu geometry. It could follow that the longer copper-oxygen distance could be assigned to, formally, Oδ-2 
and the shorter to the original O2-21, 25. The IQTP occurs when this charge and associated displacement 
shuttle back and forth between a pair of oxygen ions bonded to this same or adjacent copper ions via 
quantum (non-thermal) tunneling at a rate faster than the host polaron jumps to another Cu site, confining 
them to the O ions of this local cluster. Their essential characteristic is this fundamental internal charge-
lattice dynamics constrained within a small number of neighboring atoms.  
 
IQTPs become especially interesting from the perspective of the currently prevailing idea that the HTSC 
driver is primarily electron-electron interactions41-45 augmented by the phonons found to be strongly 
coupled to it in ARPES46-51 and other measurements52-59 and calculations60-62. We have shown that at a 
critical value of an anharmonic coupling between the oxygen ions the pairwise exchange of the charge 
and displacement synchronizes, merging the wave functions to encompass the entire system63, 64. As a 
form of direct electron-phonon coupling in which intrinsic quantum oscillations of the atoms between their 
two sites constitute lattice-assisted dynamic charge transfer, the electron-electron interactions and 
entanglement that are a consequence of the in-phase oscillations of the Cu-O pairs of the IQTPs are a 
conceptual basis for the role of the lattice.,Whether the lattice is involved in the mechanism beyond 
simply providing a platform for the carriers has been one of the principal issues in HTSC42 since shortly 
after its discovery. 


 

 

3 

 

 IQTPs are identified in inelastic neutron pair distribution function (pdf) analysis32, 65, while their coupling 
to,17 and role in,30 HTSC are elucidated by Extended X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS). Here, we 
exploit the capabilities of EXAFS to probe the Cu-Sr pairs and extract changes in their distributions with 
high precision to advance our findings on the IQTPs in YSr2Cu2.75Mo0.25O7.54 (YSCO-Mo, Tc=84 K, Fig. 1) 
and SCO, Tc=95 K12, 13. These data are conjugate to vibrational spectroscopy that probes vibrational 
states via the energies of the collective displacements of atoms in a lattice. Alternatively, the EXAFS 
signal contains a snapshot of the real space distribution of specific pairs averaged over the probed 
volume. Anharmonic deviations from Gaussian-like distributions that soften and distort IR and Raman 
peaks66 are manifested in the EXAFS as anomalously shaped increases in the normal exponential 
damping of its pairwise amplitudes that substantially diminish the magnitude of their Fourier transforms, 
χ(R)22. 
 

Figure 1. Structures of a) YSCO-Mo and b) SCO derived from crystallography and EXAFS, using the 
standard atom labels from the former. The directions of alignment in a magnetic field are shown at the 
bottom. The functional domains are: violet = conducting CuO2 planes; green = charge reservoir layer 
for YSCO-Mo; beige = dielectric layer that for HPO SCO contains Sr and Oap but in conventional, 
divalent cation-doped La2CuO4-type compounds is composed of La and the Ca/Sr/Ba. The Mo 
environment becomes octahedral by incorporating the excess O into neighboring vacancies, 
introducing a fifth O around adjacent Cu ions. For SCO, half of the O sites between Cu ions along the 
a direction and many of the Oap sites are vacant, In its dynamic structure we have posulated that 
some Oap tilt towards adjacent Oap vacancies. Cu-O pairs that will form the IQTPs are outlined in 
purple. c) The symmetry-allowed atom displacements of the “X2-(a,0)” zone-boundary phonon for 
YSCO-Mo described below. The displacement magnitudes are arbitrary. The calculations also 
discussed in the next section were performed on the six atom cluster within the red rectangle. 

Cu2,Cupl 

Cu1,Cuch 

O1,Oap 

O2,Opl 

Y 

Sr 

O3,Och 

Cu 

Sr 

O3,Oap 

O1,Opl 

a||H 

c 

b 

O3,Obr 

Mo 

a                                                 b                                           c 


 

 

4 

 

An active role for the Oap atoms in HTSC has been demonstrated by numerous experiments and 
calculations. A possibility that has been mostly67 neglected as unlikely because of the absence of any 
experimental data and the inert charge of the alkaline earth cations is analogous functionality for the 
entire Ba/Sr-Oap plane in the YBa2Cu3O7±δ-type (YBCO) and Bi/Hb/Tl-based compounds and the La1-

xBa/Srx-Oap= layer that is two atoms thick in the La2CuO4-type (LCO) compounds. This is often referred to 
as the “dielectric” domain whose function has been presumed to be passively maintaining the separation 
of the excess holes injected into the CuO2 “conducting layers” from the “charge reservoir” layer where 
they originate68 (Fig. 1). Our recent reports on the EXAFS of YSCO-Mo and SCO focused on the Cu-O 
pairs and their IQTPs, but also showed that χ(R) from the Cu-Sr pair in YSCO-Mo along the c axis began 
to decrease at Tc. To further investigate this correlation we have now performed a much more thorough 
analysis of this component of the EXAFS. We find are that the Cu-Sr pairs are not only unusually soft, 
extending previous reports on their disorder12, 69, but surprisingly they are also highly correlated with both 
the HTSC and the IQTPs. These results indicate that the entire dielectric domain, the cations as well as 
the Oap atoms, is highly active in HTSC via the local dynamical behavior of its constituent atoms. In 
addition, we have performed exact quantum diagonalization calculations on  subunit of the structure 
containing these atoms that point to a possible mechanism for this process63, 64. These calculations 
elucidate the functionality of IQTPs that would underlie an important role for the dynamic properties of 
these entities in HTSC. 
 
Materials and Methods 
 
The preparation and characterization of the samples and the transmission XAFS measurements at the Cu 
K edge at end station 2-2 of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource and analysis have been 
described previously in our reports on the local structure at a single temperatures10, 13 and the near 
neighbor Cu-O pairs over a range of temperatures through the HTSC transition14. The calculation 
methods have also been described in detail63, 64. 
 
Results  
 
EXAFS measurements of the two HPO cuprates were performed to probe their dynamic structure and its 
coupling to the SC. Descriptions of the materials, sample preparation, and experiments have previously 
been reported10, 13, 14. These previous reports also described the behavior of the Cu-O pairs of the IQTPs 
in detail, but with only the brief description of the Cu-Sr in YSCO-Mo The novel aspect of this report is the 
detailed comparative analysis of the IQTP and Sr contributions to the EXAFS over a wide temperature 
range through the superconducting transitions in both compounds and its ramifications vis-à-vis our 
recent calcuations. This identifies the surprising strength of the correlation and corresponding coupling to 
the projection of the Cu-Sr dynamics along the c-axis.  
 
This analysis is performed via direct visualization of the isolated contributions of the target Cu-O and Cu-
Sr pairs under the assumption that the numbers of neighbor atoms remain constant, i.e., structural 
transformations are limited to displacements that alter distances but do not move atoms out of their 
original local environments. Changes in the distributions on the target pairs caused by either shifts of O 
atoms between different components of their multisite distributions or originating in ther local, pairwise 
dynamics are easily identified in the amplitudes of the Fourier transforms of their EXAFS, χ(R). Since 
multifrequency Fourier transforms of altered sine waves over limited ranges are not linear with respect to 
overlapping peaks it is necessary to separate the contributions of the different neighbor shells. This is 
especially important for smaller features that overlap larger ones. The first step in this isolation process is 
curve-fitting that obtains the forms of the individual waves that sum to the total EXAFS10,. Curve-fitting 
also validates the structural model, finding the static neighbor shells that conform to the crystal structure 
and the dynamic ones that may deviate from it. The contribution of the target pair in χ(R) is then obtained 
by subtracting from the EXAFS these waves from those of the other shells of the structure. This process 
then expands the interpretation from a table of the metrical results from curve-fits to include a more 
qualitative visualization of correlations. Analogous to amplitude-ratioing analysis70-73, it exploits the 
extraordinary sensitivity of EXAFS to changes in the pair distributions of closely related samples, e.g., 


 

 

5 

 

temperature dependence and substitutions. Not only are the errors in the calculated phases and 
amplitude and backgrounds cancelled, but also the inability to determine exactly disordered structures 
and unknown pair distributions is rendered unimportant because the objective is to identify changes. Even 
if there are errors in the calculated waves that render the metrical data incomplete or with large 
uncertainties, the essential aspect is the reduction of the contributions of these errors to a level below that 
where it interferes with the spectral component of interest.  
 
Another critical factor is the experimental resolution and the confidence that the signal from the target 
neighbor shell is not affected by and correlated with those of the neighbors that are being subtracted72, 73. 
This becomes especially important in isolating a smaller signal from a larger one with which it overlaps. 
The resolution of EXAFS is defined as ΔR=π/2kmax where kmax= the highest energy in the analysis72; the 
signature of two shells is the beat in the phase that differs in shape from simple damping from a broad 
anharmonic distribution. A not uncommon misconception is to relate the resolution to the width of the 
Fourier transform modulus peaks, in which case the degree of correlation in the signals between 
neirghboring shells would follow from the overlap of their peaks in χ(R). However, the few to several 
tenths of an Å width of the (R) peaks is a function of the finite and relatively short total range of the data 
used in their calculation; the waves for 1.9 Å Cu-O distances complete only six full cycles by k=15 Å-1. 
That  the FT widths are largely an artifact of their calculation is is also demonstrated by the use of window 
functions applied to the χ(k) spectra that eliminate ripple while broadening the features. All χ(R) data 
presented here were calculated with a sine window. For these spectra extending to k=15 Å-1, 0.15 Å  
separations of the IQTP O shells give a beat at 11.5 Å-1 that is completely within the spectra. Potential 
correlation between sets of shells from different elements, e.g., Sr and O, is further reduced by their 
different amplitudes and phase shifts. 
 
This disconnect between the actual pair distribution and the shape of its feature in χ(R) is the 
interpretation of the behavior of the peaks in terms of changes in the distribution. In particular, this poses 
the question of the cause of the observable, which is amplitude reduction, which in the extreme case 
results in “spectroscopically” invisible neighbor shells. This originates in the limited range at both ends of 
the χ(k) spectrum, the inability to determine the amplitude at zero momentum transfer that defines the 
numbers of atoms, and the limited high energy range that results in the overlap of the contributions in 
χ(R) and the nonlinear summation of overlapping peaks even when their separation is much greater than 
the resolution. 
 
EXAFS of YSCO-Mo The Fourier transform moduli of the original Cu χ(k) EXAFS, χ(R), of the total 
structure, the Cu2-Oap, and c-oriented projection of the Cu-Sr pairs of YSCO-Mo from 53 to 110 K are 
shown in Fig. 2. These were obtained as described above. The k3-weighted spectrum was curve-fit with 
the Cu1-Oap, a single Cu2-Oap, Cu2-Y, Cu2-Sr, and Cu1-Cu2 neighbors. The curve-fits did not find the 
Cu1-Sr and Cu2-Cu2 waves, indicating that these pairs are so disordered that they meet the 
“spectroscopically silent” criteria. This disorder of the Cu2-Cu2 pair is most likely thermal because of the 
length and presumed poor correlation of the Cu-O-Y-O-Cu link. The Cu1-Ba behavior would be a more 
extreme extension of our findings for the Cu2-Ba pair that we discuss below. All but the Cu2-Oap waves 
were then subtracted from the total spectra. The residuals were then Fourier transformed to give the 
results in Fig. 2a, with the flatness of the regions R>2 Å corroborating the negligible Cu1-Sr and Cu2-Cu2 
contributions. These spectra have been presented before as overlays of the moduli. However, patterns 
and trends are more easily identified in these three-dimensional depictions, i.e., the absence of any 
anomalies in the major spectral features and very small change on the high R side of the O peak. This is 
especially true for the Cu2-Oap χ(R) (Fig. 2b). Above Tc the peak at R~1.8 Å that is the contribution of the 
Oap with the shorter Cu-O distance is highest. At Tc there is an abrupt drop in its amplitude, followed at 
lower temperatures by a shift of spectral weight to the R~2.0 peak that is assigned to the longer Oap.This 
plot highlights the extremely narrow width of the change at Tc and the subsequent loss of distinct features 
over a range below it. A change of the Oap contribution from a double or structured modulus peak to a 
more symmetric one at the transition is similar to the behavoir in other cuprates, although in those cases 
the cause was identified as a decrease in the separation between the two sites. YSCO-Mo differs from 
these other compounds in that, instead of recovering the original spectrum there is an obvious shift of 


 

 

6 

 

spectral weight signifying a shift of some of the Oap 
from its position closer to Cu2 to the longer Cu2-
Oap distance.Another peak at R=1.4 Å exhibits a 
distinct increase at Tc. Since this is too short for an 
actual Cu-O pair, we interpret it as SC-coupled 
anharmonicity in the Cu1-Oap distribution that 
does not affect its main peak and  is not captured 
by the fit of this pair with a Gaussian distribution. 
Similarly, the Cu2-Sr χ(R) is superior to the 
previous amplitude ratios in showing the onset of 
the slow amplitude reduction at Tc followed by the 
accelerating 
decrease 
with 
decreasing 

temperature (Fig 2c). 
 
The metrical data from from the curve-fits (Fig. 3) 
provide the additional details that make the 
essential connection. These were obtained by 
curve-fits of these residuals in which the sum of 
the numbers of oxygen atoms was fixed. The 
endpoint of k=14.7 Å-1 gives a resolution of 0.11 Å. 
Insofar as the separation between the two O 
atoms is 0.17 Å, giving the beat in the composite 
wave in the EXAFS  signifying the two Cu-O 
distances at k=9.3 Å, the Cu2-Oap χ(R) is not only 
asymmetric and and flattened across its top but 
shows two peaks when they are similar in 
amplitude. The Cu1-Oap distance that is the origin 
of the large O peak in Fig. 2a is 0.19 Å shorter 
than the shorter of the Cu2-Oap pairs, and the 
Cu1-Sr is more than 1 Å longer. Being 
substantially larger than the resolution, the 
separation is validated. Similarly, although the 
difference between the Cu2-Y and Cu2-Sr 
distances is just under the limit and their atomic 
numbers differ by only one, comparison of their 
waves from the curve-fits shows that they begin in 
phase at low energy, as expected, but are π out of 
phase by the higher energy limit. Insofar as the 

T (K) 

E||c  

u 
Cu 
O 
Y+
Sr 

b 

c 

a 
 Figure 2. E||c YSCO-Mo Cu EXAFS. (a) 
Modulus of χ(R) of the total spectrum showing 
the neighbor atoms that are the origins of the 
spectral features. The arrow indicates the 
transition temperature=84 K. (b) Subtraction of 
the Cu1-Oap, Y, Sr, and Cu-Cu waves from the 
spectra yields the χ(R) modulus of the two-site 
Cu2-Oap IQTP. The contributions of the two Oap 
sites to the broad or double peak are labeled 1 
and 2. The Cu1-Oap* peak is interpreted as the 
spectral contribution of an anharmonic 
component of the Cu1-Oap distribution after 
subtraction of the Cu1-Oap fit with a Gaussian 
distribution. (c) Cu2-Sr χ(R).modulus after 
isolation by same procedure.  


 

 

7 

 

crystal structure dictates two distinct shells and not 
a single wide one, the correlation between their 
signals is therefore negligible and the isolation 
procedure is effective for the Sr as well. 
 
Our prior analysis of the Cu-Oap pairs found that, 
based on the two independent Cu-O distances 
and numbers of atoms, the IQTPs exhiibit identical 
patterns of plateaus and discontinuities at the 
same temperatures. These delineate the normal 
phase, a fluctuation region at the transition, and 
two separate regions in the superconducting 
phase. Reproducing them here with the addition of 
the χ(R) to the difference in the numbers of 
oxygen atoms accentuates the novel finding:  the 
peak of the Sr χ(R) displays a remarkable 
correspondence with the shifts of the two O atoms 
between their two sites. This even includes the 
feature at 70 K that would be assigned to a noise 
spike if it only occurred in one of these results. We 
emphasize that nothing in the above data analysis 
would bias this correlation between these three 
parameters and the superconducting transition. 
The c-oriented χ(R) peak for the Cu2-Sr (Fig. 2c) 
is relatively flat at higher temperature, and then 
begins a slow curve downward at Tc that 
subsequently drops more steeply, albeit with some 
additional features. This behavior is indicative of 
increasing disorder with decreasing temperature, 
the opposite to the conventional thermal 
broadening of the distribution.  The correlation is 

with the difference in the populations of the two Cu2-Oap sites caused by changes in the relative energies 
of the two minima of the potential (Fig. 3). The high level of correlation demonstrates the direct coupling 
of the anharmonicity of the Cu2-Sr distribution to the renormalization of the Cu2-Oap potential and both of 
these to the SC, including the division into the four regions. 
  
XAFS of SCO. Although its composition and parent structure are simple, the EXAFS and local structure of 
our second material, SCO, are much more complicated than those of YSCO-Mo. A notable aspect is the 
large changes in the amplitudes with temperature. These are often opposite to the normal reduction with 
increasing temperature, and several occur over narrow ranges both in proximity to and away from the 
HTSC transition. Also remarkable are the significant features between the principal O and Sr peaks that 
do not correspond to sites in the crystallographic structure (Fig. 1) that essentially disappear at Tc. Our 
earlier study of SCO found that it is unique among cuprates in exhibiting oxygen vacancies not only in its 
apical positions but also in its CuO2 planes. That the planar vacancies occupy approximately half the sites 
on only one axis provides an explanation for why its alignment in a magnetic field is along that direction 
instead of its c axis. Because of this rotated magnetism, the Cu-O IQTP in SCO is observed in its 
crystallographic bc plane13. Another unique feature is the magnitude of the change in its dynamic 
structure through its superconducting transition (Fig. 4a).  
 
We originally postulated that the behavior of the spectra across the transition might include a Sr atom with 
a Cu-Sr distance less than 3 Å14. However, visualizing the affected spectral region by the isolation 
method shows for the first time that the large amplitude features at R=2.2-2.8 Å are present above as well 
as below the transition. The broad, flat top of this feature from 85-95 K (Fig. 4b) causes it to be assigned 
to the two-site Cu-O distribution characteristic of IQTPs. The remarkable result is its disappearance at Tc 

-0.5

0.0

0.5

0.8

1.2

55
65
75
85
95
105
T (K)

VARBL

Δ(N

short-Nlong)

Sr FTM Amp

2.05

2.15

2.25

Cu2-Oap distance

53-66 K    70-76 K  78-84 K             86-110 K

Figure 3. Results for YSCO-Mo. Top graph 
shows the two independent Cu-Oap distances 
calculated by curve-fits. They contract in parallel 
with decreasing temperature. The red trace in the 
lower graph shows the difference between the 
numbers of atoms at these shorter and longer 
distances. The blue, yellow, and orange zones 
delineate temperature ranges where the 
distances are constant within standard deviations 
less than the differences between them. Pink is a 
fluctuation region that begins at Tc for the 
distances and somewhat higher (the dashed line) 
for the numbers of atoms. The blue trace is the 
magnitude of the c-oriented Cu2-Sr χ(R).  


 

 

8 

 

signifying a radical change in the dynamic 
structure 
coupled 
to 
the 
superconducting 

transition, a finding not only outside of BCS SC but 
also for HTSC. The absence of a correlation 
between the amplitudes of the two contributions to 
the peak is also unique. The current best model 
for this behavior is that the IQTP oxygen atoms 
are most likely apical, next to an apical vacancy, 
displaced along the b axis to asymmetrically 
bridge two Cu atoms at ~2.66 and 2.91 Å. Both 
these distances and the 0.25 Å separation are 
much longer than any other cuprates. The radical 
difference in the Cu geometries relative to other 
cuprates, including Opl-Cu-Oap angles lower than 
90°, could be a consequence of the much higher 
Cu valence in this overdoped compound. The 
oxygen atom below them in the b-oriented Cu-O 
chain shifts away from this Oap to slightly expand 
its Cu-O bonds14. The IQTP could then involve 
tunneling of the oxygen atoms into equivalent sites 
across the ac plane that passes through the 
midpoint of the two coppers. χ(R) at 121 K in the 
normal phase has most of its amplitude in the 
peak for the longer Cu-O distance, with the shorter 
oxygen giving just a shoulder. The almost 
complete loss of amplitude at Tc could result from 
either the separation between the two sites 
decreasing to maximize the interference of their 
EXAFS 
waves 
and/or 
their 
distributions 

broadening in the fluctuation region of the 
transition. Below Tc the two contributions from the 
two sites are equal. They begin to fall off at ~80 K, 
with the higher R peak again being larger. A 
possible explanation for the diminished overall 
amplitude of the IQTP at lower temperature is that 
in this postulated configuration for SCO the 

oxygen could shift to a normal Oap position directly above the Cu along the c direction. 
 
The Cu-Sr contributions were fit with two Sr neighbors at ~3.23 and 3.36 Å. This 0.13-0.14 Å separation is 
only marginally larger than the resolution for the k=14.2 Å-1 upper limit of the curve-fit. In combination with 

Figure 4. E||bc SCO Cu EXAFS. (a) Modulus of 
χ(R) of the total spectrum showing the neighbor 
atoms that are the origins of the spectral features 
assigned to crystallographic sites. The arrow 
indicates the transition temperature=95 K. (b) 
Subtraction of the Cu-O, Sr, and Cu-Cu waves 
from the spectra yields χ(R) modulus of the two-
site Cu-Oap IQTP as described in the text. The 
contributions of the two Oap sites are evident in 
the broad peak below Tc, although they do not 
track together except for the loss of the total 
feature just above Tc. (c) Cu-Sr χ(R) modulus 
after isolation by same procedure. 

b 

c 

T (K) 

Cu 
O 
Sr 

a 

R-φ (Å) 

R-φ (Å) 

T (K) 

T (K) 

Figure 4. E||bc SCO Cu EXAFS. (a) Modulus of 
χ(R) of the total spectrum labeling the neighbor 
atoms that are the origins of the spectral features 
assigned to crystallographic sites. The arrow 
indicates the transition temperature=95 K. (b) 
Subtraction of the Cu-O, Sr, and Cu-Cu waves 
from the spectra yields the χ(R) modulus of the 
two-site Cu-Oap IQTP as described in the text. 
The contributions of the two Oap sites are 
evident in the broad peak below Tc, although they 
do not track together except for the loss of the 
total feature just above Tc. (c) Cu-Sr χ(R) 
modulus after isolation by same procedure. 


 

 

9 

 

the disorder that also drives the amplitude down at 
high k, the increase in the amplitude after the beat 
will be minimal and the Cu-Sr waves in χ(k) will be 
indistinguishable from a single, highly damped 
one. What is clearly observed now that was 
obscured in our prior report is that χ(R) shows a 
single, round peak with minimal structure. The Cu-
Sr χ(R) amplitude rises as the temperature is 
lowered from ~78 K, also developing a more 
distinct shoulder on the high R side, where the 
second Sr at the longer distance needed for a 
complete curve-fit makes its contribution. This 
relatively normal trend is broken by the peak 
beginning near 106 K that falls immediately at Tc, 
reflecting a narrowing and hardening of the Cu-Sr 
distribution in the fluctuation region that is 
eliminated on becoming superconducting. All of 
these changes can be presumed to originate in the 
shape and resultant ordering within the single 
peaked Cu-Sr distribution. 
 

Because of the difficulty of curve-fitting to extract metrical parameters when the features have vanished 
from the spectra, the correlation with the Sr is derived from comparing the isolated χ(R) peaks from the 
IQTP O and Sr atoms at, respectively, R=2.6 and 2.95 Å. The novel result is the high degree of 
correlation, or in this case anti-correlation, between the Cu-Sr and the IQTP χ(R) (Fig. 5), most notably 
the dramatic response to the onset of the SC. As with the YSCO-Mo, the O atoms of the IQTP and the Sr 
are strongly coupled both to each other and the SC. 
 
Modeling with IQTP-coupled anharmonic Sr. Our demonstration of an anomalous Cu-Sr distribution that 
is strongly correlated with both the dynamical structure of the Cu-Oap and HTSC poses the questions of 
the HTSC-lattice coupling and the interaction of the Sr with the IQTPs. We have explored this by applying 
exact quantum diagonalization21, 37 to a six-atom cluster (Fig. 1c) that is an extension of the original, three 
atom O-Cu-O moiety previously used to elucidate the experimental signatures of IQTPs on the elastic and 
instantaneous structure factors. Briefly summarizing the results of the calculations emphasizes the 
importance of the strong anharmonic coupling of the Sr to HTSC found in EXAFS and its possible or even 
likely role in the HTSC mechanism. The minimal subunit encompassing the relevant constituents consists 
of a pair of neighboring Cu-Oap IQTPs bridged between their Cu ions by an Opl and between their Oap by 
the Sr of the dielectric layer (Fig. 1)63, 64. The novel aspects enabled by this structure are the addition of 
the CuO2 plane through the inclusion of Opl and the anharmonic structural dynamics of the Sr atom that is 
incorporated via the nontrivial, Oap-Sr-Oap triatomic molecular structure indicated by these EXAFS results. 
A single extra hole initially localized on one of the two Oap atoms causes its displacement to give the two-
site distribution. The starting point for the calculation was to consider this cluster as a classic Holstein-
type polaron in which a significant fraction of the excess charge is found on the Oap. The standard 
Hubbard-Holstein Hamiltonian used to describe the interplay between electronic and lattice degrees of 
freedom was augmented by an anharmonic phonon-phonon coupling of strength K describing the 
interaction between the triatomic O-Sr-O molecular vibration and the independent apical phonons located 
on the Oap sites. Reiterating from the introduction, the internal dynamics within this cluster defines the 
IQTP as the oscillation of the excess charge and displacement on an Oap site via tunneling at a frequency 
higher than thermally activated hopping of the polaron to a neighboring site that is accomplished by 
exchanging these characteristics with an adjacent, degenerate oxygen.  
 
In addition to the numerically exact diagonalization calculation the charge-lattice dynamics was evaluated 
via the Kuramoto approach for synchronization of coupled oscillators by equating the anharmonic 
coupling K of the the O-Sr-O vibration to the coupling between phase oscillators in the Kuramoto model74, 

Figure 5. E||bc SCO χ(R). χ(R) modulus 
amplitudes of of the isolated Sr and R=2.6 Å 
IQTP  (= *) contributions. The inverse behavior of 
the two features is apparent. 


 

 

10 

 

75. In addition to its application here incorporating 
the EXAFS reults, this approach has also been 
applied to the emergence of superconductivity as 
a synchronization problem76. The calculations 
shown here were performed by varying the 
anharmonic interaction strength, K, while fixing the 
electron-phonon coupling, λ, in the non-adiabtic 
regime 
that 
defines 
the 
cluster. 
The 

diagonalization procedure showed that at a critical 
value of K, Kc, the system undergoes a first order 
transition defined by, discontinuities in e.g., the 
phonon order parameter, the charges on the 
oxygen ions, the tunneling frequency, etc. (Fig.6). 
The Kuramoto analysis showed that this transition 
can be understood as a dynamic synchronization; 
when K>Kc correlated, antiphase tunneling of the 
two Cu-Oap pairs is initiated between their opposite 
configurations 
of 
displacement 
and 
charge. 

Analogous calculations have shown that the 
formation of the synchronized phase does not 
occur with a harmonic bridging mode, the 
anharmonicity found by EXAFS is mandatory77, 78.  
 
For K<Kc that is the unsynchronized phase the 
excess charge is localized on either the left or right 
Oap, forming two separated potential wells (Fig. 
7a), between which no tunneling occurs. When the 
system transforms to the synchronized, phase 
locked state the resulting delocalization of the 
charge transfers a fraction of the excess charge 
originally on the two Oap atoms to Opl. The 
synchronization extends the wavefunction to form 
this third local minimum on Opl (Fig. 7a) and 
collapses the energy levels so that the excitation 
energies are greatly reduced. This delocalization 
and dispersion throughout the cluster of the hole 
that started on a single Oap is a clear signature 
that the synchronization of the IQTPs through the 
anharmonic Oap-Sr-Oap phonon modifies the 

electronic properties of the entire system. The resulting triple-well functions as an anharmonic-structural-
adiabatic-passage promoting charge delocalization, that once formed may further enhance the oscillator 
synchronization in a positive feedback loop. Using the example of the polaronic tunneling frequency, 
ℏ𝜔! = 𝐸! − 𝐸! (Fig. 6d), that is the difference in energy between the ground and first excited states, it is 
seen that at K values below the critical value Kc ℏ𝜔! = 0, no tunneling occurs, and the polarons are 
trapped on their original left or right sites. Above Kc the abrupt increase in ℏ𝜔! is the signature of the 
transition to the synchronized phase. Because it is essentially a spectroscopic parameter, an interesting 
aspect of ωT is the structure in the synchronized phase above Kc (Fig. 6d) that is caused avoided 
crossings in the ground to excited state transition. Such structure does not occur in the other parameters. 
 
Discussion 
 
These results provide a critical extension to our prior EXAFS study that demonstrated that the two-site 
Cu-O distributions in the dynamic structure that constitute the IQTPs are strongly coupled to the HTSC17, 

19, 23 24 30 in overdoped, superconducting SCO and YSCO-Mo14. One immediate issue raised by these two 

Figure 6. K dependence of cluster 
characteristics. a) O-Sr-O phonon order 
parameter. b) excess hole density on Oap. c) 
excess hole density on Opl. d) tunneling 
frequency. 


 

 

11 

 

compounds is the conservation or even enhancement of their HTSC after the insertion of the excess 
oxygen atoms by the HPO process that  raises the charge on the Cu to values far outside the "dome" of 
the conventional phase diagram79. Whereas this additional oxygen raises Tc by~1/3 relative to the 63 K of 
parent YSr2Cu3O7+δ, a vlaue still somewhat under the maximum of the YBCO family, the radically different 
locations of the adventitious oxygen and disruption of the CuO2 planes occur comcomitantly with a Tc of 
SCO that is more than 2-1/2 times that of its parent La2CuO4+δ. The loss of HTSC with overdoping by 
reaction with O2 or cation substitution that closes the dome on its high p side80, 81 therefore cannot result 
solely from saturation of the CuO2 planes with holes79 but must be at least partly a lattice effect specific to 
those structures. The quantum phase diagram without such lattice effects is the one for HPO cuprates7, 10 
where the HTSC extends to the highest attainable doping levels with retention of the transition 
temperature and superconducting volume. We point out that HTSC HPO compounds of both the YBCO 
and LSCO classes were first made shortly after the initial discovery of HTSC15, 82-84, but despite ongoing 
work6, 7, 9, 85, 86 have been neglected by the community. 

 
In addition to the challenges to existing theories posed by the HPO phase diagram, these differences 
between YSCO-Mo and SCO that reinforce their common factor being strong coupling of the anharmonic, 
dynamic structure of Cu-Sr and IQTPs to each other and the HTSC takes on added significance. These 
new EXAFS measurements greatly extend the range of the structure and behavior of IQTPs beyond the 
previously observed partial collapse of the double well potential near the HTSC transition. Not only are 
the two minima of the double well potential non-degenerate, but also the difference in their energies 
varies across the entire temperature range with a large shift at the superconducting transition even while 
their separation is unchanged. The essential factor in the HTSC-IQTP coupling is therefore not limited to 
the equal splitting in the dynamic structure of the Oap sites into a two-site distribution along the c axis with 
tunneling frequencies of the order of 100 cm-1. The coupling is enlarged to include alternative double well 
potentials and their associated charge dynamics where the two energies, locations in the lattice, and 
response to the HTSC transition can vary.  
 
The novel extension of the IQTP is the varied anharmonicity and coupling of the Oap of the IQTPs to the 
Sr2+ ion with which it constitutes the dielectric layer. Far from being passive68, our calculations 

Figure 7. Charge distributions. a) Density of 
excess hole on the two Oap and Opl in the three 
regimes of the phase diagram for different K 
values. Prior to synchronization the hole resides 
on either one of the other of the two Oap atoms. 
As K increases, starting at the to initiation of the 
IQTP synchronization at K~Kc, increasing 
amounts of hole density are transferred to Opl. b) 
Schematic of dielectric, Sr-Oap layer looking 
along c direction. In the static structure all of the 
Oap are in the same crystallographic postion. In 
the instantaneous or dynamic structure for K<Kc, 
in this snapshot half of the oxygen atoms are at 
the site with the longer Cu-O distance (green, 
“+”) and the other half exhibit the shorter Cu-O 
distance (blue, “-“), which are randomly 
distributed. For K>Kc in the synchronized phase 
the ratio is the same but now a snapshot of the 
Oap atoms shows alternating up and down to 
double the unit cell size of the dynamic structure. 
This structure exhibits d symmetry about the Sr 
ion at the center of the CuO2 squares.  

Sr-Oap 
plane 
a 
 
        a 

+ 
+ 
+ 
– 

+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 

– 

– 
– 
– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

– 
– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

– 

static 
K<Kc, ωτ=0 
K>Kc, ωτ>0 

– 
– 

Ba  Oap-static  Oap-no hole  Oap-hole δ+

a 

Oap             Oap   

Oap                 Oap   

Opl 

Opl 

Opl 

K<Kc                          K~Kc                          K>Kc 

Oap              Oap   

b 


 

 

12 

 

demonstrate that this coupling and consequent synchronized, antiphase motions of the Oap atoms and 
their associated charges have substantial effects on the dynamics and charge distributions in the other 
domains of the materials, notably the CuO2 planes where the charge on the oxygen is highly correlated 
with Tc

87. The extension of the localized wave function on Oap to multiple IQTPs and sites in the CuO2 

plane promotes electron-electron interactions that go far beyond the acknowledged special role of the Oap 
atom in controlling the carrier density87-89 or, in the extreme case, promoting pairing directly via lateral 
vibrations67 (that are not observed in EXAFS). The synchronization proffered by the anharmonically 
coupled two-site distributions of the IQTPs therefore also entangles at least some of the relevant degrees 
of freedom between the conduction layers and the dielectric layers and charge reservoirs. The addition of 
a second IQTP pair, encompassing all four neighboring IQTPs within the unit cell (Fig. 1), requires a 
second nearest neighbor coupling constant, K2, that describes the anharmonicity diagonally across the 
unit cell. Even so, in the trivial extension in the square lattice to larger clusters, or even to the 
thermodynamic limit of a large fraction of the crystal, the Kuramoto analysis persists in showing anti-
phase synchronization between nearest- (anharmonicity 𝐾!) and next-to-nearest- (anharmonicity 𝐾!) 
IQTP neighbors. This indicates that the entanglement is not confined but instead encompasses the entire 
synchronized domain that is capable of occupying the square lattice of the entire crystal. Furthermore, 
mapping this phase dynamics onto a 𝐾! − 𝐾! model for dipolar oscillators gives a ground state 
configuration corresponding to an angular momentum ℓ = 2 (Fig. 7b), i.e., d symmetry.  
 
This mapping of the d-wave symmetry of the HTSC to that of certain phonons, e.g., the B1g phonon that is 
the antiphase buckling of the Cu-O-Cu moieties of the CuO2 plane60, was shown shortly after the 
discovery of HTSC33, 90, although there is disagreement on the strength of its coupling to the HTSC91. 
Anomalies in phonon dispersions indicative of strong electron-phonon coupling that are correlated with 
the both Tc and the doping, e.g., the “giant softening” of the bond-stretching phonon frequencies off of the 
zone center caused by strong renormalization along [010] and [100] and avoided crossings are a 
common characteristic of cuprates53-56, 92. Although these are still insufficient to  HTSC, insofar as the 
doping-induced charge inhomogeneities are localized93, 94 the widths of the phonon peaks reflect their 
resulting wide range of energies95. The comparison the p-dependence of these ~70 meV phonon 
dispersion anomalies with the “kink” in angle-resolved photoemission denotes different origins for these 
two spectral signatures. Whereas this feature in ARPES would indicate electron-anomalous phonon 
coupling, its presence in neutron scattering would result from collective charge excitations56, 96 that would 
promote a novelthe  HTSC mechanism.This would be an apt description of an important role for a 
synchronized IQTP phase. Although there are no zone center phonons with the antiphase displacements 
of the synchronized phase of the IQTPs, analogous to the neutron scattering the correlated Cu-Oap 
motions could originate from a phonon not belonging to the Brillouin zone centre, Utilizing the YBa2Cu3O7 
(YBCO)-type structure (Fig. 1c)  the calculated atomic displacements are described by a symmetry-
adapted coordinate belonging to the X2

- irreducible representation at the X point of the tetragonal Brillouin 

zone, where only one branch of the star (0 1/2 0) is involved. This off zone-center phonon exhibits the 
same d-symmetry with respect to the centers of the CuO2 squares as found in the extension of our 
calculation results to neighboring IQTP pairs.  
 
Reiterating, in a doped system with the appropriate combination of U, t, J, and relative energies of the M 
and O states to give the requisite mix of ionic and covalent character in the Cu-O bond, and that also has 
two species possessing M-O bonds separated by a barrier of requisite height and width, the IQTPs are a 
natural outcome of coupling this phonon to the coordination chemistry of the transition metal ions and the 
preferred geometries associated with their valence. The partial localization of the charge causes the 
metal sites to adopt the these geometries and bond lengths within the lattice. This will also result in the 
known sensitivity to the interatomic distances and angles80, 81. If the thermal motion of the Cu-O pair 
traverses this range then instead of the potential being featureless it can evolve into the two-site 
distribution by developing local minima at those locations corresponding to the preferred charge 
distributions and their bonding modes. The EXAFS results therefore point to at least this candidate for the 
formation of entangled, synchronized Cooper pairs and condensation in a d-wave channel. Additional 
corroboration of this conjecture is provided by recent momentum-resolved electron energy loss 
spectroscopy results that, with other measurements on the strange metal phase, attribute its scale 


 

 

13 

 

invariance58, 97 to a”highly entangled man-body state” containing “new collective nonlocal entities as the 
charge carriers” that would originate in the combined electron-electron interactions and electron phonon 
coupling that we find in synchronized IQTPs. 
 
 
Acknowledgments. 
Funding for this work was provided by: Slovenian Research Agency core funding P1-0040 (SDC); 
National Science Foundation grant 1928874 (SDC); Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy 
Sciences contract DEAC02-76SF00515 (SDC, ML); Ministry of Science and Technology of China (CQJ, 
WML, LPC); Natural Science Foundation of China (CQJ, WML, LPC) 
Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences DEAC02-76SF00515 (SDC, ML). 
 
 

References 

 

1. M. Mitrano, et al. Anomalous density fluctuations in a strange metal. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 

115, 5392 (2018). 

2. I. Bozovic, X. He, J. Wu, and A. T. Bollinger. The Vanishing Superfluid Density in Cuprates-and Why 

It Matters. J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 31, 2683 (2018). 

3. A. R. Bishop. A Lattice Litany for Transition Metal Oxides. Condens. Matter 5 (2020). 
4. X. J. Zhou, W. S. Lee, M. Imada, N. Trivedi, P. Phillips, H. Y. Kee, P. Torma, and M. Eremets. High-

temperature superconductivity. Nat. Rev. Phys. 3, 462 (2021). 

5. M. Karppinen and H. Yamauchi. Hole-doping routes for understanding the relationship between 

atomic arrangements and superconductivity properties in multi-layered copper oxides. Int. J. Inorg. 
Mater. 2, 589 (2000). 

6. H. Yamauchi and M. Karppinen. Application of high-pressure techniques: stabilization and oxidation-

state control of novel superconductive and related multi-layered copper oxides. Supercond. Sci. Tech. 
13, R33 (2000). 

7. L. Sederholm, S. D. Conradson, T. H. Geballe, C. Q. Jin, A. Gauzzi, E. Gilioli, M. Karppinen, and G. 

Baldinozzi. Extremely Overdoped Superconducting Cuprates via High Pressure Oxygenation 
Methods. Condens. Matter 6 (2021). 

8. E. Gilioli, P. G. Radaelli, A. Gauzzi, F. Licci, and M. Marezio. Structure and superconductivity of 

YSr2Cu3O7-d. Physica C 341, 605 (2000). 

9. A. Gauzzi, et al. Bulk superconductivity at 84 K in the strongly overdoped regime of cuprates. Phys. 

Rev. B 94, 180509 (2016). 

10. S. D. Conradson, et al. Local lattice distortions and dynamics in extremely overdoped 

superconducting YSr2Cu2.75Mo0.25O7.54. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 4559 (2020). 

11. W. M. Li, et al. Superconductivity in a unique type of copper oxide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 

12156 (2019). 

12. W. B. Gao, Q. Q. Liu, L. X. Yang, Y. Yu, F. Y. Li, C. Q. Jin, and S. Uchida. Out-of-plane effect on the 

superconductivity of Sr2-xBaxCuO3+delta with T-c up to 98 K. Phys. Rev. B 80, 094523 (2009). 

13. S. D. Conradson, T. H. Geballe, C. Jin, L. Cao, G. Baldinozzi, J. M. Jiang, M. J. Latimer, and O. 

Mueller. Local structure of Sr2CuO3.3, a 95 K cuprate superconductor without CuO2 planes. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 4565 (2020). 

14. S. D. Conradson, et al. Nonadiabatic coupling of the dynamical structure to the superconductivity in 

YSr2Cu2.75Mo0.25O7.54 and Sr2CuO3.3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 33099 (2020). 

15. C. Q. Jin, S. Adachi, X. J. Wu, H. Yamauchi, and S. Tanaka. 117-K superconductivity in the Ba-Ca-

Cu-O system. Physica C 223, 238 (1994). 

16. H. Suematsu, T. Ito, T. Katsura, M. Karppinen, and H. Yamauchi. Peak effect in critical current 

density induced by oxygen deficiency in the CuBa2Ca3Cu4O10+delta superconductor. Supercond. 
Sci. Tech. 13, 930 (2000). 

17. S. D. Conradson, I. D. Raistrick, and A. R. Bishop. Axial oxygen centered lattice instabilities and high-

temperature superconductivity. Science 248, 1394 (1990). 


 

 

14 

 

18. J. M. Deleon, S. D. Conradson, I. Batistic, and A. R. Bishop. Evidence for an axial oxygen-centered 

lattice fluctuation associated with the superconducting transition in YBa2Cu3O7. Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 
1675 (1990). 

19. P. G. Allen, J. M. Deleon, S. D. Conradson, and A. R. Bishop. Characterization of a split axial-oxygen 

site in TlBa2Ca3Cu4O11 by extended x-ray-absorption fine-structure spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. B 44, 
9480 (1991). 

20. J. M. Deleon, S. D. Conradson, I. Batistic, and A. R. Bishop. Correlation between axial-oxygen 

anharmonicity and Tc in YBa2Cu3O7 and related-compounds. Phys. Rev. B 44, 2422 (1991). 

21. J. M. Deleon, I. Batistic, A. R. Bishop, S. D. Conradson, and S. A. Trugman. Polaron origin for 

anharmonicity of the axial oxygen in YBa2Cu3O7. Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 3236 (1992). 

22. J. M. Deleon, S. D. Conradson, I. Batistic, A. R. Bishop, I. D. Raistrick, M. C. Aronson, and F. H. 

Garzon. Axial oxygen-centered lattice instabilities in YBa2Cu3O7 - an application of the analysis of 
extended x-ray-absorption fine-structure in anharmonic systems. Phys. Rev. B 45, 2447 (1992). 

23. J. M. Deleon, G. G. Li, S. D. Conradson, A. R. Bishop, M. A. Subramanian, and I. D. Raistrick. Planar 

oxygen-centered lattice instabilities in Tl-based high-temperature superconductors. Physica C 220, 
377 (1994). 

24. C. H. Booth, F. Bridges, J. B. Boyce, T. Claeson, B. M. Lairson, R. Liang, and D. A. Bonn. 

Comparison of local structure measurements from c-axis polarized XAFS between a film and a single 
crystal of YBa2Cu3O7-delta as a function of temperature. Phys. Rev. B 54, 9542 (1996). 

25. J. M. DeLeon, S. D. Conradson, T. Tyson, A. R. Bishop, M. Salkola, F. J. Espinosa, and J. L. Pena, in 

Applications of Synchrotron Radiation Techniques to Materials Science III, edited by L. J. Terminello, 
S. M. Mini, H. Ade and D. L. Perry (Cambridge University Press, 1996), Vol. 437, p. 189. 

26. S. D. Conradson, J. M. DeLeon, and A. R. Bishop. Local phase separation in Tl-based oxide 

superconductors. J. Supercond. 10, 329 (1997). 

27. M. Acosta-Alejandro, J. M. de Leon, S. D. Conradson, and A. R. Bishop. Evidence for a local 

structural change in La2CuO4.1 across the superconducting transition. J. Supercond. 15, 355 (2002). 

28. G. Campi and A. Bianconi. Complex phase separation in oxygen-doped cuprates La2CuO4+y 

superconductors. J. Supercond. 18, 637 (2005). 

29. J. M. de Leon, M. Acosta-Alejandro, S. D. Conradson, and A. R. Bishop. Change of the in-plane Cu-O 

bond distribution in La2CuO4.1 across T-c. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 69, 2288 (2008). 

30. C. J. Zhang and H. Oyanagi. Local lattice instability and superconductivity in La1.85Sr0.15Cu1-xMxO4 

(M=Mn, Ni, and Co). Phys. Rev. B 79, 064521 (2009). 

31. H. Oyanagi, C. Zhang, A. Tsukada, and M. Naito. Lattice Instability in High-Temperature 

Superconducting Cuprates: Polarons Probed by EXAFS. J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 22, 165 (2009). 

32. T. Egami, et al. Local structural anomaly near Tc observed by pulsed neutron-scattering. Physica C 

185, 867 (1991). 

33. M. Arai, K. Yamada, S. Hosoya, A. C. Hannon, Y. Hidaka, A. D. Taylor, and Y. Endoh. Local 

structural instability of high-Tc oxide superconductors studied by inelastic neutron-scattering. J. 
Supercond. 7, 415 (1994). 

34. A. P. Menushenkov and K. V. Klementev. Extended x-ray absorption fine-structure indication of a 

double-well potential for oxygen vibration in Ba1-xKxBiO3. J. Phys.-Condens. Mat. 12, 3767 (2000). 

35. A. P. Menushenkov, K. V. Klementev, P. V. Konarev, A. A. Meshkov, S. Benazeth, and J. Purans. 

The double-well oscillating potential of oxygen atoms in perovskite system Ba(K)BiO3: EXAFS - 
analysis results. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 448, 340 (2000). 

36. M. I. Salkola, A. R. Bishop, J. M. Deleon, and S. A. Trugman. Dynamic polaron tunneling in 

YBa2Cu3O7 - optical-response and inelastic neutron-scattering. Phys. Rev. B 49, 3671 (1994). 

37. M. I. Salkola, A. R. Bishop, S. A. Trugman, and J. M. Deleon. Correlation-function analysis of 

nonlinear and nonadiabatic systems - polaron tunneling. Phys. Rev. B 51, 8878 (1995). 

38. A. R. Bishop, D. Mihailovic, and J. M. de Leon. Signatures of mesoscopic Jahn-Teller polaron 

inhomogeneities in high-temperature superconductors. J. Phys.-Condens. Mat. 15, L169 (2003). 

39. C. C. Chen, M. Sentef, Y. F. Kung, C. J. Jia, R. Thomale, B. Moritz, A. P. Kampf, and T. P. 

Devereaux. Doping evolution of the oxygen K-edge x-ray absorption spectra of cuprate 
superconductors using a three-orbital Hubbard model. Phys. Rev. B 87, 165144 (2013). 


 

 

15 

 

40. Y. J. Chen, et al. Doping evolution of Zhang-Rice singlet spectral weight: A comprehensive 

examination by x-ray absorption spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. B 88, 134525 (2013). 

41. T. Dahm, et al. Strength of the spin-fluctuation-mediated pairing interaction in a high-temperature 

superconductor. Nat. Phys. 5, 217 (2009). 

42. C. Giannetti, M. Capone, D. Fausti, M. Fabrizio, F. Parmigiani, and D. Mihailovic. Ultrafast optical 

spectroscopy of strongly correlated materials and high-temperature superconductors: a non-
equilibrium approach. Adv. Phys. 65, 58 (2016). 

43. G. R. Stewart. Unconventional superconductivity. Adv. Phys. 66, 75 (2017). 
44. A. M. Merritt, J. P. Castellan, T. Keller, S. R. Park, J. A. Fernandez-Baca, G. D. Gu, and D. Reznik. 

Low-energy phonons in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta and their possible interaction with electrons measured 
by inelastic neutron scattering. Phys. Rev. B 100, 144502 (2019). 

45. S. M. O’Mahony, W. Ren, W. Chen, Y. X. Chong, X. Liu, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, M. H. Hamidian, and J. 

C. Seamus Davis. On the electron pairing mechanism of copper-oxide high temperature 
superconductivity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 119, 2207449119 (2022). 

46. H. Anzai, M. Arita, H. Namatame, M. Taniguchi, M. Ishikado, K. Fujita, S. Ishida, S. Uchida, and A. 

Ino. A New Landscape of Multiple Dispersion Kinks in a High- T-c Cuprate Superconductor. Sci. Rep. 
7 (2017). 

47. Y. He, et al. Rapid change of superconductivity and electron-phonon coupling through critical doping 

in Bi-2212. Science 362, 62 (2018). 

48. Y. He, et al. Persistent low-energy phonon broadening near the charge-order q vector in the bilayer 

cuprate Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+delta. Phys. Rev. B 98, 035102 (2018). 

49. Z. X. Li, S. A. Kivelson, and D. H. Lee. Superconductor-to-metal transition in overdoped cuprates. Npj 

Quantum Mater. 6, 7 (2021). 

50. J. A. Sobota, Y. He, and Z. X. Shen. Angle-resolved photoemission studies of quantum materials. 

Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, 025006 (2021). 

51. S. Ideta, et al. Hybridization of Bogoliubov Quasiparticles between Adjacent CuO2 Layers in the 

Triple-Layer Cuprate Bi2Sr2Ca2Cu3O10+delta Studied by Angle-Resolved Photoemission 
Spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 217004 (2021). 

52. N. N. Kovaleva, et al. c-axis lattice dynamics in Bi-based cuprate superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 69, 

054511 (2004). 

53. L. Pintschovius, D. Reznik, W. Reichardt, Y. Endoh, H. Hiraka, J. M. Tranquada, H. Uchiyama, T. 

Masui, and S. Tajima. Oxygen phonon branches in YBa2Cu3O7. Phys. Rev. B 69, 214506 (2004). 

54. L. Pintschovius, D. Reznik, and K. Yamada. Oxygen phonon branches in overdoped 

La1.7Sr0.3Cu3O4. Phys. Rev. B 74, 174514 (2006). 

55. D. Reznik, et al. Electron-phonon coupling reflecting dynamic charge inhomogeneity in copper oxide 

superconductors. Nature 440, 1170 (2006). 

56. S. R. Park, T. Fukuda, A. Hamann, D. Lamago, L. Pintschovius, M. Fujita, K. Yamada, and D. Reznik. 

Evidence for a charge collective mode associated with superconductivity in copper oxides from 
neutron and x-ray scattering measurements of La2-xSrxCuO4. Phys. Rev. B 89 (2014). 

57. L. Braicovich, et al. Determining the electron-phonon coupling in superconducting cuprates by 

resonant inelastic x-ray scattering: Methods and results on Nd1+xBa2-xCu3O7-delta. Phys. Rev. 
Res. 2, 023231 (2020). 

58. E. W. Huang, K. Limtragool, C. Setty, A. A. Husain, M. Mitrano, P. Abbamonte, and P. W. Phillips. 

Extracting correlation effects from momentum-resolved electron energy loss spectroscopy: 
Synergistic origin of the dispersion kink in Bi2.1Sr1.9CaCu2O8+x. Phys. Rev. B 103, 035121 (2021). 

59. Y. Y. Peng, et al. Doping dependence of the electron-phonon coupling in two families of bilayer 

superconducting cuprates. Phys. Rev. B 105, 115105 (2022). 

60. S. Johnston, F. Vernay, B. Moritz, Z. X. Shen, N. Nagaosa, J. Zaanen, and T. P. Devereaux. 

Systematic study of electron-phonon coupling to oxygen modes across the cuprates. Phys. Rev. B 
82, 064513 (2010). 

61. T. Ohgoe and M. Imada. Competition among Superconducting, Antiferromagnetic, and Charge 

Orders with Intervention by Phase Separation in the 2D Holstein-Hubbard Model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
119, 197001 (2017). 


 

 

16 

 

62. S. Kim, X. Chen, W. Fitzhugh, and X. Li. Apical Charge Flux-Modulated In-Plane Transport Properties 

of Cuprate Superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 157001 (2018). 

63. V. Velasco, M. S. B. Neto, A. Perali, S. Wimberger, A. R. Bishop, and S. D. Conradson. Evolution of 

Charge-Lattice Dynamics across the Kuramoto Synchronization Phase Diagram of Quantum 
Tunneling Polarons in Cuprate Superconductors. Condens. Matter 6, 52 (2021). 

64. V. Velasco, M. B. S. Neto, A. Perali, S. Wimberger, A. R. Bishop, and S. D. Conradson. Kuramoto 

synchronization of quantum tunneling polarons for describing the structure in cuprate 
superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 105, 174305 (2022). 

65. M. Arai, K. Yamada, Y. Hidaka, S. Itoh, Z. A. Bowden, A. D. Taylor, and Y. Endoh. Anomaly of 

phonon state of superconducting YBa2Cu3O7 studied by inelastic neutron-scattering. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
69, 359 (1992). 

66. D. Oh, D. Song, Y. Kim, S. Miyasaka, S. Tajima, J. M. Bok, Y. Bang, S. R. Park, and C. Kim. B-1g-

Phonon Anomaly Driven by Fermi Surface Instability at Intermediate Temperature in YBa2Cu3O7-
delta. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 277001 (2021). 

67. B. Rosenstein and B. Y. Shapiro. Apical oxygen vibrations dominant role in d-wave cuprate 

superconductivity and its interplay with spin fluctuations. Journal of Physics Communications 5 
(2021). 

68. E. S. Bozin, A. Huq, B. Shen, H. Claus, W. K. Kwok, and J. M. Tranquada. Charge-screening role of 

c-axis atomic displacements in YBa2Cu3O6+x and related superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 93, 054523 
(2016). 

69. D. Haskel, E. A. Stern, D. G. Hinks, A. W. Mitchell, and J. D. Jorgensen. Altered Sr environment in 

La2-xSrxCuO4. Phys. Rev. B 56, R521 (1997). 

70. G. Bunker. Application of the ratio method of EXAFS analysis to disordered systems. Nucl. Instrum. 

Methods Phys. Res. 207, 437 (1983). 

71. S. D. Conradson, D. Manara, F. Wastin, D. L. Clark, G. H. Lander, L. A. Morales, J. Rebizant, and V. 

V. Rondinella. Local structure and charge distribution in the UO2-U4O9 system. Inorganic Chemistry 
43, 6922 (2004). 

72. S. D. Conradson, et al. Intrinsic Nanoscience of delta Pu-Ga Alloys: Local Structure and Speciation, 

Collective Behavior, Nanoscale Heterogeneity, and Aging Mechanisms. J. Phys. Chem. C 118, 8541 
(2014). 

73. S. D. Conradson, et al. Nanoscale heterogeneity, premartensitic nucleation, and a new plutonium 

structure in metastable delta fcc Pu-Ga alloys. Phys. Rev. B 89, 224102 (2014). 

74. Y. Kuramoto, in International Symposium on Mathematical Problems in Theoretical Physics, edited by 

H. Araki (Springer, Kyoto University, 1975), p. 420. 

75. Y. Kuramoto and I. Nishikawa. Statistical macrodynamics of large dynamical-systems - case of a 

phase-transition in oscillator communities. J. Stat. Phys. 49, 569 (1987). 

76. V. Velasco and M. B. S. Neto. Unconventional superconductivity as a quantum Kuramoto 

synchronization problem in random elasto-nuclear oscillator networks. Journal of Physics 
Communications 5, 015003 (2021). 

77. V. M. Stojanovic. Entanglement-spectrum characterization of ground-state nonanalyticities in coupled 

excitation-phonon models. Phys. Rev. B 101, 134301 (2020). 

78. V. M. Stojanovic and M. Vanevic. Quantum-entanglement aspects of polaron systems. Phys. Rev. B 

78, 214301 (2008). 

79. I. Grigoraviciute, M. Karppinen, T. S. Chan, R. S. Liu, J. M. Chen, O. Chmaissem, and H. Yamauchi. 

Electronic Structures, Hole-Doping, and Superconductivity of the s=1, 2, 3, and 4 Members of the 
(Cu,Mo)-12s2 Homologous Series of Superconductive Copper Oxides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 838 
(2010). 

80. O. Chmaissem, J. D. Jorgensen, S. Short, A. Knizhnik, Y. Eckstein, and H. Shaked. Scaling of 

transition temperature and CuO2 plane buckling in a high-temperature superconductor. Nature 397, 
45 (1999). 

81. S. Agrestini, N. L. Saini, G. Bianconi, and A. Bianconi. The strain Of CuO2 lattice: the second variable 

for the phase diagram of cuprate perovskites. J. Phys. A-Math. Gen. 36, 9133 (2003). 


 

 

17 

 

82. Y. Shimakawa, J. D. Jorgensen, D. G. Hinks, H. Shaked, R. L. Hitterman, F. Izumi, T. Kawashima, E. 

Takayamamuromachi, and T. Kamiyama. Crystal-structure of (Cu,c)Ba2Ca3Cu4O11+delta (T-
c=117K) by neutron-powder-diffraction analysis. Phys. Rev. B 50, 16008 (1994). 

83. Y. Shimakawa, J. D. Jorgensen, J. F. Mitchell, B. A. Hunter, H. Shaked, D. G. Hinks, R. L. Hitterman, 

Z. Hiroi, and M. Takano. Structural study of Sr2CuO3+delta by neutron powder diffraction. Physica C 
228, 73 (1994). 

84. C. Q. Jin, X. J. Wu, P. Laffez, T. Tatsuki, T. Tamura, S. Adachi, H. Yamauchi, N. Koshizuka, and S. 

Tanaka. Superconductivity at 80 K in (Sr,Ca)(3)Cu2O4+delta-Cl2-y induced by apical oxygen doping. 
Nature 375, 301 (1995). 

85. A. Ono. Superconductivity in Cr-1212 cuprates Sr2-xBaxYCu2.8Cr0.2Oz. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2 34, 

1528 (1995). 

86. A. Ono. Oxygenation and critical-temperature optimization in M-1212 cuprates (Sr, 

Ba)(2)YCu(2.8)M(0.2)O(z) (M=Ti, Ga, Ge, Al). Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2 35, L201 (1996). 

87. D. Rybicki, M. Jurkutat, S. Reichardt, C. Kapusta, and J. Haase. Perspective on the phase diagram of 

cuprate high-temperature superconductors. Nat. Commun. 7, 11413 (2016). 

88. A. Sahiner, E. D. Crozier, D. T. Jiang, and R. Ingalls. Pressure-induced bond buckling in YBa2Cu3O7-

delta. Phys. Rev. B 59, 3902 (1999). 

89. X. Chen, J. Dong, and X. Li. A picture of pseudogap phase related to charge fluxes. Npj Comput. 

Mater. 6, 103 (2020). 

90. T. P. Devereaux, A. Virosztek, and A. Zawadowski. Charge-transfer fluctuation, d-wave 

superconductivity, and the B-1g raman phonon in cuprates. Phys. Rev. B 51, 505 (1995). 

91. M. Raichle, et al. Highly Anisotropic Anomaly in the Dispersion of the Copper-Oxygen Bond-Bending 

Phonon in Superconducting YBa2Cu3O7 from Inelastic Neutron Scattering. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 
177004 (2011). 

92. D. Reznik, L. Pintschovius, J. M. Tranquada, M. Arai, Y. Endoh, T. Masui, and S. Tajima. 

Temperature dependence of the bond-stretching phonon anomaly in YBa2Cu3O6.95. Phys. Rev. B 
78, 094507 (2008). 

93. P. M. Singer, T. Imai, F. C. Chou, K. Hirota, M. Takaba, T. Kakeshita, H. Eisaki, and S. Uchida. O-17 

NMR study of the inhomogeneous electronic state in La2-xSrxCuO4 crystals. Phys. Rev. B 72, 
014537 (2005). 

94. W. Chen, G. Khaliullin, and O. P. Sushkov. Coulomb disorder effects on angle-resolved 

photoemission and nuclear quadrupole resonance spectra in cuprates. Phys. Rev. B 80, 094519 
(2009). 

95. S. R. Park, et al. Effects of charge inhomogeneities on elementary excitations in La2-xSrxCuO4. 

Phys. Rev. B 84, 214516 (2011). 

96. S. R. Park, Y. Cao, Q. Wang, M. Fujita, K. Yamada, S. K. Mo, D. S. Dessau, and D. Reznik. Broken 

relationship between superconducting pairing interaction and electronic dispersion kinks in La2-
xSrxCuO4 measured by angle-resolved photoemission. Phys. Rev. B 88, 220503 (2013). 

97. P. W. Phillips, N. E. Hussey, and P. Abbamonte. Stranger than metals. Science 377, 169 (2022). 

 


