Collection of Propagating Electromagnetic Fields by Uncoated 
Probe

Farbod Shafiei *, Michael C. Downer 

Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX 78712 USA 

*Correspondence to: farbod@physics.utexas.edu

Abstract:

Understanding light-matter interaction at the nanoscale by observation of 

fine details of electromagnetic fields is achieved by bringing nanoscale 

probes into the nearfield of light sources, capturing information that is lost 

in the far field. Although metal coated probes are often used for nearfield 

microscopy, they strongly perturb the electromagnetic fields under study. 

Here, through experiment and simulation, we detail light collection by 

uncoated fiber probes, which minimize such perturbation. Second-harmonic 

light from intensely-irradiated sub-wavelength sub-surface features was 

imaged to avoid otherwise dominating fundamental light background, 

yielding clear nearfield details through a 50 nm aperture uncoated probe 

with ~23 nm optical resolution. Simulations shows how a metallic coating 

distorts optical nearfields and limits optical coupling into the probe in 

comparison to an uncoated probe. 

Introduction:

As silicon-based electronics started facing physical challenges such as limited bandwidth, 

power dissipation and cross talk among carrier channels, photons and optics have been 

studied as alternative information pipelines and logic gates [ 1 - 4 ]. The nanoscale details 

of electromagnetic fields during the propagation and interaction became vital for the

future of nano-optics, nano-optoelectronic devices [ 5 - 10 ], and quantum optics and

computation with subwavelength interacting elements. [ 11, 12 ] Even if light could be used 

only as a transmitting element, the interaction with the electronics nanocircuit 


input/output demands nanoscale understanding of electromagnetic field interactions. [ 5,

13 ]

Understanding and controlling electromagnetic fields at the nanoscale has been a driving

force for e.g. optical information processing at the nanometer scale by metamaterials

nanocircuits [ 14 ], electrical control of light by graphene plasmons [ 15 ] and optical 

analogue computation by nanophotonics. [ 16 ]

Historically diffraction-limited optical microscopy has been the foundation of imaging, 

characterization and diagnosis in diverse fields such as living cells, materials science and

microstructures. Optical microscopy started from observing microorganisms in 1665 and 

reached nano-resolution in recent decades by overcoming the diffraction limit. [ 17, 18 ]

Nearfield probe microscopy and farfield super resolution microscopy have been the 

frontier of sub-diffraction-limited imaging with many breakthroughs. These include

single molecule detection with ~12 nm resolution by nearfield scanning optical 

microscope (NSOM) with a coated aperture probe [ 19 ], imaging intracellular fluorescent 

proteins by photoactivated localization microscopy (PALM) [ 20 ] with ~20 nm resolution,

and fluorescent imaging of proteins by stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy 

with ~20nm resolution. [ 21 ]

Farfield super resolution microscopy techniques such as PALM and STED are limited to 

biological samples. Moreover their imaging method does not involve direct interaction

with electromagnetic fields at the nanoscale. Nearfield probe microscopy, on the other 

hand, brings a nanoscale probe into direct contact with nanoscale details of the fields, in 

principle enabling extreme resolution. Probe microscopy has mostly been implemented 

by transmitting light through a metal-coated probe, by minimizing the area of excitation 

near the coated probe's aperture or by collecting non-propagating (evanescent) waves at 

the surface of the sample with a coated probe. This approach comes with the disadvantage 

that the metal coating significantly perturbs the studied fields. [ 22 ]. Alternatively, the 

uncoated fiber probe with tens of nm aperture has shown the capability of tens of nm 

optical resolving power. [ 23, 24 ]. For minimizing the metal coated probe's perturbation, 

approaches such as cloaking have been proposed. [ 25, 26 ]


Previous simulations of uncoated probes have focused almost entirely on the question of 

leakage of light propagating within the fiber and out through probe aperture/tip and 

tapered sides [ 27, 28 ]. Here we focus instead on the inverse question of light collection 

into the uncoated probe's 50 nm aperture, its coupling into a propagating fiber mode, 

and the electric field perturbation that accompanies these processes. Experimental data, 

supported by simulations, show optical resolution of ~23 nm and low light leak from 

side tapered area for the uncoated probe. Detailed simulation shows how an uncoated 

fiber probe has minimal effect on the electric fields while metallic coated fiber probe 

strongly perturbs the light electric fields around the probe with a poor feed through the 

coated probe. 

Second harmonic probe microscopy (SHPM) was used to collect nanoscale optical 

signatures of samples. The experimental setup used near-infrared femtosecond laser 

pulses to excite the sample, and an uncoated silica scanning probe with 50 nm aperture 

to collect near-ultraviolet second-harmonic generation (SHG) light. Fundamental light 

scattered from subsurface dislocation defects then localized and frequency-doubled

within the scattering medium (see the Method Section for details). By collecting SHG

light, the setup filtered out strong reflected fundamental light, which otherwise would 

have dominated the detected signal [ 24 ].

We define aperture as the near flat fiber tip end with ~50 nm diameter created by melting, 

pulling and tapering process that serve as the dominant conduits for incoming light. See 

the second part of Method Section for more details about 50 nm aperture fiber probe and 

its melting/pulling process.

Results and Discussion: 

We have previously demonstrated the fidelity and resolution of SHPM imaging. [ 24 ] Here 

we focus on uncoated probe collection and electric field (EF) behavior in the presence of 

this probe. To support experimental observations, we carried out finite element

simulations of the collection of EF by uncoated and Al coated fiber probes. Figure 1 shows 

simulated data for EF behavior with no probe (figure 1a), and in the presence of 50 nm 

aperture uncoated silica fiber probe (figure 1b) and 100 nm Al coated silica fiber probe 


(figure 1c). All fields are averaged over 3 spatial dimensions and time. The uncoated fiber 

probe perturbed the propagating fields much more weakly than the metallic coated fiber 

probe. The propagating fields for Figure 1 plots are S polarized 500 nm wide. Figure 1b 

shows that optical leakage from the tapered side of the uncoated probe is small and that

light collection is mostly through the aperture, not the tapered sides. Light transmission

through the uncoated probe is also much stronger than for the coated probe. The EF just 

20 nm and 100 nm inside the coated probe are 0.62 V/m and 0.18 V/m, respectively,

while fields at the same spots right inside the uncoated probe are 0.94 V/m and 1.04 V/m. 

Figure 1i plots the EF strength along the horizontal light propagation axis for no probe, 

and along the centers of non-coated and coated silica probes, corresponding to plots a-c. 

These profiles show that light transmission is higher through uncoated fiber probes than 

through coated probes while coated probes strongly perturb the propagating electric 

fields. Back reflection from the coated probe (Figure 1 c) creates a high-contrast 

interference pattern in front of the probe, while the corresponding pattern is much weaker 

for the uncoated probe (figure 1b).  At the same time the metallic coating helps keep the 

probe clear from side optical leakage. See supplementary data S-1 for more details. 

To replicate different intensity of EF, we used propagating EF with different widths and

checked the feed through of the probe by plotting the power-flow (W/m2) streamlines. 

Figure 1d-f shows the 500 nm, 200 and 50 nm wide propagating fields coupling to the 50 

nm uncoated probe. The power-flow streamlines show that the aperture area of the 

uncoated probe is the main coupling part even for weak electric fields (figure 1f), while 

the streamlines are flowing away from the probe around the taper side area. In contrast 

to a tapered probe, a cylindrical silica tube of 50 nm (figure 1 g and h) allows strong light 

leakage through its sides. Consequently, the probe's taper is critical in confining collected 

light and preventing leakage (figure 1b).

Figure 2 shows the results of experiments in which an uncoated 50 nm aperture probe 

scanned over GaAs thin films on Si, collecting SHG light generated by femtosecond laser 

irradiation.  These films have crystallographic dislocation defects due to lattice mismatch 

at the interface of the grown GaAs crystal and the Si substrate. The defects act as 

scattering sites for 780 nm pulsed laser light. The elastic scattered light becomes localized,

and the resulting interference [ 29 ] creates optical hotspots. [ 24 ] By collecting 390 nm 

signal from these hotspots, we avoid the otherwise dominating fundamental 780 nm laser 


light (see Method Section for details). Figure 2 a-c shows SHG (390 nm) signatures of 

these hotspots at different average laser power excitation (50 mW to 5 mW). The SHG 

hotspots maintain their shape and pattern for strong and weak signals, suggesting that 

collection is mostly through the probe aperture. This was supported by the simulations of 

probe coupling for a variety of intensities (figure 1d-f). 

We raster scanned over 2x2 µm of the same sample with the laser focal spot centered on 

the probe axis and again when stationed ~5 µm to one side of it (figure 2 d-f). This was to 

check if light leaks through the tapered side of the probe or is mostly collected through its 

50 nm entrance aperture. By moving the laser focal spot ~5 µm we could observe that 

most of the features and pattern maintain their original shape with small changes showing 

the collection of the SHG light has to be mostly through the 50 nm aperture. If there was 

a major leak from the large area of the taper side, moving the laser spot to the side should 

strongly affect the collected pattern and shape. An intensity drop is observed as the focal 

spot has weaker intensity at the side.   

Supplementary data S2 shows a variety of probe shapes to check the leakage of 

propagating electric fields into the probe from the side area. A 50 nm wide fiber tube (S2 

a) shows that simply having a narrow aperture does not keep the external field from 

leaking into the probe side (as figure 1 g, h). The wider 200 and 400 nm wide aperture 

fiber tube show that the wider probe cross section helps to push away the propagating 

fields away from the side of the fiber tube (s2 b, c) but such a probe does not have a high 

resolving power as a 50 nm tapered probe. Combining 50 and 400 nm fiber tubes (figure 

S2 d) does not help to prevent side leakage. A tapered shape on one side (figure S2 e) does 

show that propagating waves get pushed away from that side while there is more leak on 

the non-tapered side of the probe. The top tapered side collects a total 0.633 V/m electric 

field while the low non-tapered side collects 0.778 V/m for this configuration. Figure S2 

f-i shows a series of taper shape probes with different cone angles. This series shows 

propagating EF get pushed away from the probe side with minimum leakage by optimum 

half cone angle of ~20 O of 0.565 V/m leakage on one taper side (S2 g). Beyond this taper 

angle, the leakage becomes stronger again. Figure S2 i shows the side leakage for a very 

low angle (~5 O) is 1 V/m on one taper side. Probe leakage starts acting almost like a 50 


nm flat fiber tube when half cone angle goes below ~3 O. The probe with 45Ohalf cone 

angle (S2 f) has 0.672 V/m leakage on one taper side.

To check the precision of collection of the 50 nm aperture probe, we measured its optical 

resolving power. For this purpose, we used a known pattern with sharp edges made of 

alternating stripes of InP and SiO2. Here InP is a strong source of 390 nm SHG, SiO2 a 

negligibly weak source. Figure 3a shows a 2x2 µm SHPM scan of the InP-SiO2 sample 

with ~70 nm stripe width. The Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) micrograph in 

Figure 3b shows detailed features of the stripe pattern. The sample surface was flattened

through mechanical/chemical polishing, which was essential for avoiding any optical 

artifact due to topographical height differences. Figure 3c shows an SEM micrograph of 

the uncoated 50 nm aperture silica probe made through the melting and pulling process 

(see Methods Section for details). Figure 3d shows a profile cut of a typical sharp edge of

the SHPM stripe pattern. The derivatives of two such edges (Figure 3e, f) yield point 

spread functions (PSFs), which in turn yield optical resolution of 23 and 27 nm. These 

resolving power showing the 50 nm aperture of the probe serve as the dominant conduits 

for light collection proving light leakage from the side of the probe is minimal. A finite 

element simulation replicated the observed stripe pattern and its sharp edges using weak 

sources of EF ~80 nm apart (Figure 3g). Calculation from the simulated edges shows ~29 

nm wide PSF (Figure 3h, i), similar to the measured resolution. 

To further compare uncoated and coated probes, we simulated two weak 30 nm wide 

sources of P-polarized EF separated by 80 nm while 50 nm uncoated and Al-coated 

probes scanned over them 20 nm above the sample plane. Figure 4a-d shows the results

for the uncoated probe. The EF couples into the 50 nm probe aperture, but the uncoated 

probe perturbs its shape and intensity minimally. The two light sources are well resolved, 

and the signal profile approximates a simple convolution of the source and aperture 

shapes.   Figure 4e-h shows results for the coated probe.  Here the 100 nm Al coating 

strongly perturbs the EF. The shape and intensity of the EF changes to such an extent that 

in some cases the two separated sources of EF are not distinguished.

Figures 4i, j plot profile cuts of the EF 18 nm above the sample surface (2 nm below probe 

aperture) for the configurations shown in Figures 4b and f, respectively. For the metal 

coated probe (Fig. 4j), the 2 sources of EF appear as 4 separated EF peaks, while the 


intensity increases due to plasmonic effects. For the uncoated probe (Fig. 4i), the two 80 

nm separated sources maintain their original pattern. 

Supplementary data S-3 shows how the separated EF sources would be affected by the 

distance of the probe from the EF sources plane. The data show the approach of the 

uncoated (top row) and coated probe (bottom row) for 20 to 140 nm gap distance. The 

approach of coated probe strongly perturbs the EF sources shape in comparison to 

uncoated probe.  

Conclusion: 

We demonstrate that a second-harmonic probe microscope (SHPM) that collects SHG

light from fs-laser-irradiated surfaces with a 50 nm uncoated scanning fiber probe tip 

images sharp-edged features with ~ 23 nm resolution.  We observed in both experiments

and simulations that 390 nm light couples into an uncoated appropriately-tapered 

dielectric probe mainly through its 50 nm aperture. Experimental data shows SHG 

features maintain their shape and pattern over a wide range of excitation intensity,

despite lateral offsets of excitation and probe tip, showing that light collection occurs

mostly though the 50 nm aperture, not the tapered sides. Simulations corroborate the 

conclusion that SHG light couples predominantly through the 50 nm tip, if it is 

appropriately tapered.   They also show that an uncoated probe perturbs near-surface 

electric fields much less than an equivalently-shaped metal-coated probe, enabling more 

faithful scanned images of sub-wavelength features. Overall, the study shows that an 

uncoated tapered probe with 50 nm aperture is the right microscope tool to study the 

propagating electromagnetic waves with resolution below the diffraction limit. 

Method Section:

1) System: SHG optical study of semiconductor thin film was performed by a fiber based 

nonlinear nearfield scanning optical microscope (NSOM) system with 50 nm fiber 

aperture. This uncoated probe scanning approach was used to avoid and minimize any 

enhancement and perturbation of the electromagnetic field at the probe area. The probe 


was kept at ~ 20-30 nm above the sample with a feedback loop system monitoring the 

amplitude of the scanning probe. A 76 MHz laser with ~150fs pulse width at ~780nm was 

focused on an area about ~10 μm on the sample and collection was done at 390 nm. The 

incident excitation angle is ~45o with P polarization. The Sample was scanned by a 

piezoelectric stage under the stationary probe. Fiber probe which supports light only 

below 600 nm picks up the propagating SHG signal of III-V film at nearfield regime and 

the signal gets filtered for residue of fundamental light. Photomultiplier tube (PMT) 

sensitive only to photons at 200-700 nm range was used with a photon counter system to 

measure the photons. The nonlinear response of the GaAs-Si film is typically ~1015 times 

weaker than the fundamental reflection of the film. Nonlinear scanning probe microscope 

systems have advantages of having very high spatial resolution and being noise free by 

collecting the SHG signal away from the fundamental signal.
Studying in the 

fundamental regime with excitation at 780 nm has a dis-advantage of not being able to 

distinguish the very weak scattered and localized light which create those hotspots. If we 

use the probe microscopy to look at the same wavelength of excitation light, the reflection 

of the excitation light at the surface dominates all the intensity information and the weak 

scattered and localized light at sub-surface dislocation area would not be distinguished. 

Instead of the linear study, if we look at the nonlinear response of the III-V film at 390nm, 

then there would not be such a problem of dominating reflection light from the surface of 

the sample as the only reflected and dominating signal at the surface is 780 nm which is 

filtered. Then scattered and localized SHG light intensity can be distinguished from the 

film typical SHG background response. This filtering approach is capable of 

distinguishing the very weak SHG scattered and localized hotspot in the presence of 

dominating surface reflection. The high resolution of the scanning probe microscope was 

explored and confirmed. [ 25 ]

2) Probe with 50 nm aperture: ~ 50 nm aperture of silica probe was created by melting, 

pulling, and tapering process (electron micrograph - Figure 2c). The melting/pulling and 

tapering process was done by a Sutter P-2000 micropipette puller machine. These

parameters were used for optimum results: Heat 340, Filament 0 Velocity 15 Delay 128 

Pull 150 with the pulling process time of 0.13 second. The fiber has 125 µm cladding 

diameter and 2 µm core diameter. The numerical aperture of core is 0.13 


Data in Figure 2 shows that such near-flat regions of uncoated fiber tips serve as the 

dominant conduits for incoming light, enabling resolution of tens of nm. The SHG probe 

microscopy scans of control samples possessing a well-defined stripe pattern (sharp edge) 

demonstrate a spatial resolution of ~23 nm.

Prior experimental work [ 23, 24 ] showed that such near-flat regions of uncoated fiber tips 

serve as the dominant conduits for incoming light, enabling resolution of tens of nm.

Acknowledgments: 

The work was supported in part by the Welch Foundation grant F-1038. The authors 

acknowledge the III-V thin film samples preparation and diagnosis by SEMATECH.


Figure 1) Simulation of perturbation of propagating electric fields by probe. 
No probe, unperturbed propagating EF (at 390 nm) (a). Uncoated 50 nm aperture silica 
probe with weak perturbed propagating EF and weak leakage from taper sides and 
strong feedthrough (b). 100 nm Al coated silica probe with strongly perturbed 
propagating fields and weak feedthrough (c). Simulated EF and power-flow (black 
lines) for 500nm, 200 nm and 50 nm wide propagating EF (d-f). The light coupling is 
mostly through the 50 nm aperture for weak and strong fields. 50 nm fiber tube shows 
strong side optical leakage (g,h). EF profile cuts through the center of a-c plots show 
the weak and strong perturbation of propagating fields in front of the uncoated (red 
line) and coated probe (black line) (i). 


Figure 2) Check for probe side leak during the collection process by
different excitation power and steered focal spot. 5x5 µm SHG Raster scan of 
GaAs-Si at different excitation power of 50, 20 and 5 mW by uncoated 50 nm aperture 
probe at ~ 20-30 nm probe-sample distance (a-c). 2x2 µm SHG raster of the same 
sample while the laser focal spot was centered (d) and stationed ~ 5 µm to the side (e)
with respect to probe axis (relative size of drawn parts are not to the scale) (f). Shape 
and pattern of hotspots are maintained during these processes showing collection is 
mostly by 50 nm aperture area and light leak through the probe from taper sides is 
minimal. 


Figure 3) Uncoated probe optical resolution. Plot of SHG intensity as uncoated 
silica probe scans across stripe sample containing strong and weak sources of SHG light
(a) SEM micrograph of striped InP-SiO2 sample (b). SEM micrograph of 50 nm silica 
uncoated probe (c). A profile cut (d) of the optical stripe pattern (a), showing a sharp 
optical edge which provides the PSF determining optical resolving power of 23 and 27 
nm (e,f). Simulated EF collection of sharp edges (g), replicating the collection of light 
through a 50 nm silica probe, provides us sharp edge and its simulated optical resolving 
power of 29 nm (h,i).


Figure 4) Simulation of perturbation of electric field by uncoated and 
coated probes. Simulation EF for uncoated 50 nm probe scanning over two electric 
field sources 80 nm apart (a-d) shows small perturbation of the field by the probe. 
Simulation of EF for 100 nm Al coated probe scanning over the same sources (e-h),
shows stronger perturbation of the field. Profile cuts of electric field 18 nm above sample 
(2 nm below probe) for uncoated (i) and coated (j) probes.    


References

[1] Caulfield, H.J. and Dolev, S. Why future supercomputing requires optics. Nature
Photonics 4, 261 (2010)

[2] Zhu, T., Guo, C., Huang, J., Wang, H., Orenstein, M., Ruan, Z. and Fan, S. 
Topological optical differentiator. Nature communications 12,1 (2021)

[3] Maram, R., van Howe, J., Kong, D., Da Ros, F., Guan, P., Galili, M., Morandotti, R., 
Oxenløwe, L.K. and Azaña, J. Frequency-domain ultrafast passive logic: NOT and 
XNOR gates. Nature Communications 11, 1 (2020)

[4] Gorniaczyk, H., Tresp, C., Schmidt, J., Fedder, H. and Hofferberth, S. Single-photon 
transistor mediated by interstate Rydberg interactions. Physical Review Letters 113, 
053601 (2014)

[5] Rotenberg, N. and Kuipers, L. Mapping nanoscale light fields. Nature Photonics 8
919 (2014)

[6] Burresi, M., Van Oosten, D., Kampfrath, T., Schoenmaker, H., Heideman, R., Leinse, 
A. and Kuipers, L. Probing the magnetic field of light at optical frequencies. Science 326, 
550 (2009)

[7] Le Feber, B., N. Rotenberg, Daryl M. Beggs, and L. Kuipers. Simultaneous 
measurement of nanoscale electric and magnetic optical fields. Nature Photonics 8, 43 
(2014)

[8] Rubinsztein-Dunlop, H., Forbes, A., Berry, M.V., Dennis, M.R., Andrews, D.L., 
Mansuripur, M., Denz, C., Alpmann, C., Banzer, P., Bauer, T. and Karimi, E. Roadmap 
on structured light. Journal of Optics 19 013001 (2016)

[9] Bazylewski, P., Ezugwu, S. and Fanchini, G. A review of three-dimensional scanning 
near-field optical microscopy (3D-SNOM) and its applications in nanoscale light 
management. Applied Sciences 7, 973 (2017)

[10] Seo, E., Jin, Y.H., Choi, W., Jo, Y., Lee, S., Song, K.D., Ahn, J., Park, Q.H., Kim, 
M.K. and Choi, W. Near-field transmission matrix microscopy for mapping high-order 
eigenmodes of subwavelength nanostructures. Nature communications, 11, 1 (2020)

[11] O'brien, J.L., Furusawa, A. and Vučković, J. Photonic quantum 
technologies. Nature Photonics 3, no. 12 (2009): 687-695.

[12] Lodahl, P., Mahmoodian, S. and Stobbe, S. Interfacing single photons and single 
quantum dots with photonic nanostructures. Reviews of Modern Physics 87, 347 (2015)

[13] Lin, D., Fan, P., Hasman, E. and Brongersma, M.L. Dielectric gradient metasurface 
optical elements. Science 345, 298 (2014)

[14] Engheta, N. Circuits with light at nanoscales: optical nanocircuits inspired by 
metamaterials. Science 317, 1698 (2007)


[15] Chen, J., Badioli, M., Alonso-González, P., Thongrattanasiri, S., Huth, F., Osmond, 
J., Spasenović, M., Centeno, A., Pesquera, A., Godignon, P. and Elorza, A.Z. Optical 
nano-imaging of gate-tunable graphene plasmons. Nature 487, 77 (2012)

[16] Estakhri, N.M., Edwards, B. and Engheta, N. Inverse-designed metastructures that 
solve equations. Science 363, 1333 (2019)

[17] Novotny, L. and Hecht, B. Principles of nano-optics. Cambridge university press, 
2012.

[18] Weisenburger, S. and Sandoghdar, V. Light microscopy: an ongoing contemporary 
revolution. Contemporary Physics 56, 123 (2015)

[19] Betzig, E. and and Chichester, R., J. Single molecules observed by near-field 
scanning optical microscopy. Science 262, 1422 (1993)

[20] Betzig, E., Patterson, G.H., Sougrat, R., Lindwasser, O.W., Olenych, S., Bonifacino, 
J.S., Davidson, M.W., Lippincott-Schwartz, J. and Hess, H.F. Imaging intracellular 
fluorescent proteins at nanometer resolution. Imaging intracellular fluorescent proteins 
at nanometer resolution. Science 313, 1642 (2006)

[21] Göttfert, F., Wurm, C.A., Mueller, V., Berning, S., Cordes, V.C., Honigmann, A. and 
Hell, S.W. Coaligned dual-channel STED nanoscopy and molecular diffusion analysis at 
20 nm resolution. Biophysical journal 105, L01 (2013)

[22] García-Etxarri, A., Romero, I., de Abajo, F.J.G., Hillenbrand, R. and Aizpurua, J., 
2009. Influence of the tip in near-field imaging of nanoparticle plasmonic modes: Weak 
and strong coupling regimes. Physical Review B 79, no. 12 (2009): 125439.

[23] Madsen, S., Bozhevolnyi, S.I. and Hvam, J.M. Sub-wavelength imaging by 
depolarization in a reflection near-field optical microscope using an uncoated fiber 
probe. Optics communications, 146, 277 (1998)

[24] Shafiei, F., Orzali, T., Vert, A., Miri, M.A., Hung, P.Y., Wong, M.H., Alù, A., 
Bersuker, G. and Downer, M.C. Detection of Subsurface, Nanometer‐Scale 
Crystallographic Defects by Nonlinear Light Scattering and Localization. Advanced 
Optical Materials, 9, 2002252 (2021)

[25] Alù, A. and Engheta, N., Cloaked near-field scanning optical microscope tip for 
noninvasive near-field imaging. Physical Review Letters, 105, 263906 (2010)

[26] Bilotti, F., Pierini, F. and Vegni, L., Employment of metamaterial cloaks to enhance 
the resolution of near-field scanning optical microscopy systems based on aperture 
tips. Metamaterials, 5, 119 (2011)

[27] Novotny, L., Pohl, D.W. and Hecht, B. Light confinement in scanning near-field 
optical microscopy. Ultramicroscopy 61, 1 (1995)


[28] Müller, R. and Lienau, C. Propagation of femtosecond optical pulses through 
uncoated and metal-coated near-field fiber probes. Applied Physics Letters 76, 3367
(2001)

[29] Wiersma, D. S. Disordered photonics. Nature Photonics 7, 188 (2013)


Supplementary Data for:
Collection of Propagating Electromagnetic Fields by Uncoated 
Probe

Farbod Shafiei *, Michael C. Downer 

Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin TX 78712 USA 

*Correspondence to: farbod@physics.utexas.edu


Figure s1) Details of simulated EF in aperture/entrance area for coated and 
uncoated probe. Coupling of propagating electric field with 100 nm Al coated silica 
probe with 50 nm aperture by finite element simulation (a.b). Coupling of propagating 
electric field with uncoated 50 nm aperture probe by finite element simulation (c,d).
The3D plots (b,d) show the strong perturbation of the coming field by coated probe 
while the light coupling is very weak for this probe. Vertical plots (e,f) are profile cut 
250 nm and 500 nm away from the aperture for the coated and uncoated probes only 
inside the silica probe show intensity coupling is ~ 20 times weaker in the coated probe.  


Figure S2) Simulation of coupling of propagating electrified with different
silica probes. 50 nm fiber tube shows strong side optical leakage through finite 
element simulation (a). Wider apertures of 200 and 400nm fiber tubes (b, c) show that 
such wide apertures push away the propagating waves and protect the probes from side 
leakage. Combining the 50 nm tube and 400 nm tube (d) does not help prevent side 
leakage of light. Tapering the top part of this combined probe (e) does collect less 
(0.633 V/m) electric field compared to the non-tapered lower side (0.778 V/m). 
Different probe cone angle (f-i) shows optimum half cone angle is ~ 20 O (g) with
minimized light side leakage. Study of SEM graph (Fig.3c) shows the half cone angle of 
~18-20 for the pulled fiber probes. 


Figure S3) Simulation of manipulation of EF field by coated and uncoated 
probe as function of height. Series of height study (a-g) shows the EF perturbation 
of two separated sources by uncoated probe (top row) and 100 nm Al coated probe 
(bottom row). plots (a-c) for coated probe show this perturbation clearly. The presence 
of the uncoated probe 20 nm from surface (a) shows minimal perturbation compared to 
when the probe is at 140 nm distance (g) while the coated probe presence shows a 
distinct perturbation.  The 80 nm separated two sources of electric field are
unrecognizable when coated probe is very close to the source’s surface (a).


