Faulty evidence for superconductivity in ac magnetic susceptibility of sulfur hydride
under pressure

J. E. Hirsch
Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0319

It is generally believed that sulfur hydride under high pressure is a high temperature supercon-
ductor [1–7]. In National Science Review 6, 713 (2019) Huang and coworkers Ref. [8] reported
detection of superconductivity in sulfur hydride through a highly sensitive ac magnetic susceptibil-
ity technique and an unambiguous determination of the superconducting phase diagram. In this
paper we present evidence showing that the experimental results reported in that paper[8] do not
support the conclusion that sulfur hydride is a superconductor.

PACS numbers:

I.
INTRODUCTION

In 2015, Drozdov and coworkers reported the discovery
of high temperature superconductivity in sulfur hydride
[1]. The result is generally assumed to be true [2–7]. In-
dependently, Huang and coworkers measured ac magnetic
susceptibility of sulfur hydride [8] and in appearance con-
firmed the existence of superconductivity. According to
ref. [9], that work “sets a new standard for experimental
studies of superconductivity at high pressure”.
However, we have recently argued that the experimen-
tal evidence supporting superconductivity in sulfur hy-
dride presented in ref. [1] is not convincing [10], and that
neither is the one presented in refs. [11, 12] concerning
the Meissner effect [13, 14]. In this paper we argue that
the ac susceptibility measurements of ref. [8] provide no
support for the existence of superconductivity in sulfur
hydride either. No other studies of ac magnetic suscepti-
bility nor of other magnetic properties of sulfur hydride
besides those mentioned above have been reported so far.
Ac magnetic susceptibility is a superior test for super-
conductivity in materials under high pressure [15–20]. A
superconductor excludes magnetic flux, so upon cooling
into the superconducting state a sharp drop in the ac
magnetic susceptibility is observed. For experiments un-
der high pressures, because of the smallness of the sam-
ple required by the geometry of the diamond anvil cell,
the detected signal is a tiny drop in a large signal aris-
ing from the superposition of the sample and the back-
ground magnetic responses, with the background signal
being several orders of magnitude larger than the sample
signal [15, 16, 18, 20]. For that reason, it is customary to
subtract from the total signal (the so-called ”raw data”)
the background signal, according to the relation

data = raw data − background signal.
(1)

The background signal is usually obtained by measuring
the susceptibility at a pressure value such that no super-
conducting transition occurs in the temperature range of
interest [18].
Reference [8] reports measurements of ac magnetic sus-
ceptibility measurements for sulfur hydride at seven dif-
ferent pressure values. It only shows results for ac suscep-

tibility for four values of pressure. These results (figure
2 of ref. [8]) are reproduced in Fig. 1. The drops in the
signals seen in the figure were interpreted as due to the
onset of superconductivity at the critical temperatures
Tc shown in the figure [8].

FIG. 1: Magnetic susceptibility signals of sulfur hydride at
various pressures, Fig. 2 of ref. [8].

II.
THE MEASURED RAW DATA

The results shown in Fig. 1 are for the left side of Eq.
(1), i.e. are obtained by subtracting a background signal
from raw data. In order to assess the validity and signifi-
cance of these results, we requested from the authors the
raw data and background signal measured, from which
the results shown in Fig.
1 were obtained.
Following
generally accepted proper scientific practice, the authors
kindly sent us these data recently as well as gave us ad-

arXiv:2109.08517v2  [cond-mat.supr-con]  6 Feb 2024


2

raw 

background 

raw - background 

Fig 2a 

FIG. 2: Top panels: raw data and background signal for Fig.
2a of ref. [8] plotted from data supplied by the authors [21].
The lower left panel shows the difference between the upper
left and right panels, in agreement with the published results
shown on the lower right panel.

raw 

background 

raw - background 

Fig 2b 

FIG. 3: Top panels: raw data and background signal for Fig.
2b of ref. [8] plotted from data supplied by the authors [21].
The lower left panel shows the difference between the upper
left and right panels, in agreement with the published results
shown on the lower right panel.

ditional details of the measurements upon our request
[21].
From the data supplied by the authors, we made plots
of the raw data and the background signal and of their
difference according to Eq. (1). These are shown in Figs.
2 to 5. It can be seen that the difference calculated from
the raw data and background signal supplied by the au-
thors properly reproduces the data plotted in Fig. 2 of
ref. [8].
We also learn from these figures that the background
signal, which was collected separately for each tempera-

Fig 2c 

raw - background 

raw 

background 

FIG. 4: Top panels: raw data and background signal for Fig.
2c of ref. [8] plotted from data supplied by the authors [21].
The lower left panel shows the difference between the upper
left and right panels, in agreement with the published results
shown on the lower right panel.
RESEARCH ARTICLE
H

Figure 2. Magnetic susceptibility signals of sulfur hydride at various pressures. Curves
show typical amplitude records from the coil system during each temperature scan at
(a) 117 GPa, (b) 130 GPa, (c) 149 GPa and (d) 155 GPa. To obtain the strong amplitude
signal, we kept the sample and compensating coil signals in phase. The critical tem-
perature Tc is estimated from the onset of the superconducting transition.

targetpressurerangewasfrom155–171GPa.Awell-
defined and reproducible superconducting signal
was triggered at about 168 K at 155 GPa (Fig. 2d).
When the pressure was increased further, there was
an abrupt decrease in Tc, which shifted down to
140 K at 171 GPa. In the third run, we first ap-
plied 130 GPa on the sample at temperatures T <
100 K. Upon cooling the sample, at 130 GPa, the
superconducting transition appeared at about 55 K.
Thereafter, the sample was rapidly warmed to 300 K
with the pressure maintained at 130 GPa. Upon fur-
ther compression, the superconducting transition
appeared at about 173 K and 168 K at 143 GPa and
155 GPa, respectively. The variation tendency of Tc
with pressure is identical with the first and second
runs.However,whenthesamplewascompressedup
to 170 GPa, the diamond failed.

To shed further insight on the pressure de-

pendence of Tc in the high-temperature supercon-
ducting sulfur hydride system, we have plotted our
experimental data together with all previous exper-
imental measurements and our previous theoreti-
cal calculations (Fig. 3a) [10,14,15,22]. The uncer-
tainties in determining Tc are especially large above
150 GPa. To reach ultrahigh pressure the diameter

of the diamond anvil culets is reduc
reduction of the magnetic signal that
tothevolumeofthesample[23].The
ratio is thus reduced, resulting in th
tainty in Tc upon further compressio
of Fig. 3a shows that there is a pron
the pressure dependence of Tc at a
and the diagram can be divided into t
low 130 GPa the onset temperature T
100 K, which was also observed in th
trical resistance measurements [14].
high-Tc superconductivity appears
ously the H3S phase becomes the d
ponent in the sample, as shown b
X-ray diffraction data [22]. In this
oretical discussions are focused on
agram from magnetic susceptibility
and the inherent mechanism. To d
portant points are addressed in the d
in the hydrogen sulfur system, the
a complex superconducting behavio
sures with a change in both crysta
stoichiometry. It is almost impossibl
thecomplexsuperconductingbehavi
experimental techniques, as reporte
ous experiment by Drozdov et al. [
the crystal structure and stoichiomet
gen sulfur system under high pressur
alyzed by the reported first-principl
based on density functional theory (D
known that H2S is the only known sta
intheH–Ssystematambientpressur
dicted that H2S is stable below 43 G
poses into H3S and S above this pres

Except for H3S, other hydrogen-r

tries were also reported to be stable
and the superconducting critical te
calculated for various H–S compoun
with our experimental results, for
temperature Tc phase below 140 G
retically calculated Tc of the vario
tries H–S phase may quantitatively
low-Tc data [24,25]. It is propos
H–S stoichiometries may be mainly
the measured superconductivity of t
low 140 GPa. We have tried to e
composition process of H2S under
and deeply understand the format
H3S, through ab initio variable-cell
namics (MD) simulations. Our M
with the orthorhombic Pbcm for ph
ploying a simulation cell of 96 mol
tegrated radial distribution at 140 G
gives a reasonable H–S bond length
Fig. 4, the instantaneous snapshot of
works at 140 GPa shows that an SH

Fig 2d 

raw - background 

raw 

background 

FIG. 5: Top panels: raw data and background signal for Fig.
2d of ref. [8] plotted from data supplied by the authors [21].
The lower left panel shows the difference between the upper
left and right panels, in agreement with the published results
shown on the lower right panel.

ture range at a lower pressure [21], is smooth in all cases,
with nearly constant slope around the region where the
transition occurs.
This is what one expects for these
measurements, as also seen for example in ref. [20]. As a
consequence, the raw data shown in the top left panels of
Figs. 2 to 5 show similar slope versus temperature above
and below Tc.
This is in stark contrast with the raw data for ac
magnetic susceptibility of a carbonaceous sulfur hydride
(CSH) under pressure, claimed to be superconducting at
room temperature, shown in ref. [22]. For that mate-


3

(a)   
(b)   

(c)   
(d)   

Temperature   versus   line   number   for   background.   

T   
T   

T   

T   

line   number   

FIG. 6: Temperature versus line number in the file for the
background signal measurements used to obtain the data in
Fig. 1, measured at pressures lower than the values where
superconducting transitions occur.

rial, the published raw data for ac magnetic susceptibility
(Extended Data Fig. 7 d of ref. [22]) show a very sig-
nificant change in slope across the transition, similar to
what such data look like for the element europium at low
temperature [23]. I have suggested that this implies that
the published data for ac susceptibility of CSH are invalid
[24–26]. Instead, the authors of ref. [22] state that the
background signal is responsible for this unusual behav-
ior [27]. This would imply a very anomalous background
signal, qualitatively different from that seen in Figs. 2-5
here, arguably impossible [26]. The authors of ref. [22]
have declined to supply their raw data and background
signal measurements to verify or disprove their claim.

III.
FURTHER ANALYSIS

To further examine the validity and significance of the
susceptibility data for sulfur hydride reported in [8] un-
der discussion here, we have made graphs of the mea-
sured temperature versus line number in the data files
supplied by the authors [21]. The authors did not give
us a a time track record for each measurement, but in-
formed us that data were taken at a constant rate of
temperature change, mostly about 0.1K/min, sometimes
no bigger than 0.5K/min [21]. With the reasonable as-
sumption that data were taken at regular time intervals,
we would expect a smooth curve for the temperature as
a function of line number on the data file. Indeed, that
is what we see for the background signal measurements,
shown in Fig. 6.
Instead, when we do the same plots for the different
temperature ranges shown in Fig. 1 at the pressure values
given in Fig. 1 where the supposed superconducting tran-
sitions occur, we find the very surprising results shown in

Temperature versus line number for raw data. dashed line is nominal Tc. 

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 
(d) 

T 
T 

T 

T 

line number 

117 GPa 
130 GPa 

149 GPa 
155 GPa 

FIG. 7: Temperature versus line number in the file for the raw
data measurements for the four cases given in Fig. 1. The
dashed lines indicate the superconducting transition temper-
atures given in Fig. 1.

Temperature step versus T for raw data. dashed line is nominal Tc. 

ΔT 

T 
T 

Tc 

Tc 

ΔT 

(a) 
(b) 
117 GPa 
130 GPa 

FIG. 8: Change in temperature (∆T) between two subsequent
lines in the data file for the first two cases of Fig. 1, versus
temperature.

Fig. 7. Particularly for cases (a) and (b), a sharp break
in the temperature versus line number in the file occurs
right at the point where the assumed superconducting
transition takes place.
The behavior shown in Fig. 7 is very unexpected. It
suggests that the rate of temperature change is not con-
stant in time, contrary to what we were told was the
experimental protocol [21].
Indeed, in Fig.
8 we plot
∆T, the change in temperature between two subsequent
lines in the data file, versus temperature for two cases.
There is a sharp break at the critical temperature, with
the temperature changing faster above than below Tc.
If the system is being heated at a constant rate, as we
were informed [21], the sudden increase in the tempera-
ture change could indicate that the heat capacity of the
system suddenly decreased. For a superconducting tran-
sition this is in fact expected: the specific heat jump at
the critical temperature is given by (cs − cn)/cn = 1.43,
with cn and cs the heat capacities in the normal and
superconducting states.
However, the temperature sensor cannot be placed in
the diamond anvil cell next to the sample, that is phys-
ically impossible [28]. Assuming the temperature sensor


4

ΔT 

T 
T 

Tc 

Tc 

ΔT 
(c) 

(d) 

149 GPa 

155 GPa 

FIG. 9: Change in temperature (∆T) between two subsequent
lines in the data file for the last two cases of Fig. 1, versus
temperature. The insets show the regions enclosed in the red
rectangles enlarged, showing the change across Tc.

is located at a distance R ∼ 1cm from the sample, the
temperature measured would correspond to that of a vol-
ume of order ∼ 107 times larger than the volume of the
sample, so it cannot possibly be influenced to the degree
shown in Fig. 8 by a change in the heat capacity of the
sample.
Therefore, we have to conclude that the sudden change
in the temperature increment coinciding with the as-
sumed critical temperature is an experimental artifact.
This indicates that the observed change in slope in the
ac susceptibility observed at those temperatures is a con-
sequence of the same experimental artifact and cannot be
taken as evidence of a superconducting transition.
Fig. 9 shows the corresponding plots for the other two
values of pressure, 149 GPa and 155 GPa. There is also
evidence here that there are changes in the rate of tem-
perature change right at the assumed superconducting
transitions, which again is not expected and casts doubt
on the conclusion that the observed drops in Figs. 1c and
1d indicate superconductivity.

IV.
SPECULATION ON A POSSIBLE
SCENARIO

In this section we ask: assuming the sample did not
go superconducting at the Tc’s indicated in Fig. 1, what
could be a possible scenario that led to the obtention of
Fig. 1, which indicates that there were superconducting
transitions when in fact there were none?
Given the anomalous temperature steps found in Fig.
8, we hypothesize that there may also have been a prob-
lem with the temperature determination, i.e. that the
readings in the thermometer did not accurately reflect
the temperature of the sample.
As a simple scenario,
let us assume that for 117 GPa the temperature step
at the sample location was in fact constant below Tc,
given by the average value of what was measured below
Tc, ∆T = 0.0068K, and jumped up by a factor of three
at Tc, similarly to what the left panel of Fig. 8 shows,
remaining constant above Tc. This is indicated by the
dashed red lines on the left panel of Fig. 10, which is not
too different from what was measured (black lines). The

Temperature step versus T for raw data. dashed line is nominal Tc. 

ΔT 

T 

Tc 

(a) 117 GPa 

rawnew 

Fig 2a 

FIG. 10: Left panel: we assume that the temperature steps
were in reality given by the red dashed lines, constant below
and above Tc, changing by a factor of 3 at Tc.
The right
panel shows the resulting raw data plotted versus this new
temperature scale.

rawnew - background 
raw - background 
(a) 117 GPa 
(a) 117 GPa 

FIG. 11: The left panel shows the susceptibility after back-
ground subtraction assuming the raw data given in the right
panel of Fig. 10, i.e. with the new temperature scale. Note
that the jump reported to occur around 38 K, shown in the
right panel, is no longer there.

resulting raw data versus this new temperature scale are
shown on the right panel of Fig. 10, and no longer show
the structure near Tc that the original raw data showed
(top left panel of Fig. 2). If we now subtract the back-
ground, we obtain what is shown on the left panel of Fig.
11. The steep susceptibility drop at a temperature in-
terpreted as the superconducting transition temperature
has disappeared.
For 130 GPa, we assume again that the step was con-
stant below Tc and above Tc, but here we will assume
that the value was the same below and above Tc, given
by the average of the step value over the entire tempera-

Temperature step versus T for raw data. dashed line is nominal Tc. 

ΔT 

T 

Tc 

rawnew 

Fig 2b 
(b) 130 GPa 

FIG. 12: Left panel: we assume that the temperature steps
were in reality given by the red dashed line, i.e. the same
for all temperatures. The right panel shows the resulting raw
data plotted versus this new temperature scale.


5

rawnew - background 
raw - background 
(b) 130 GPa 
(b) 130 GPa 

FIG. 13: The left panel shows the susceptibility after back-
ground subtraction assuming the raw data given in the right
panel of Fig. 12, i.e. with the new temperature scale. Note
that the jump reported to occur around 55 K, shown in the
right panel, is no longer there.

ture range where data were given, ∆T = 0.0066K, shown
by the red dashed line in the left panel of Fig. 12. The
resulting raw data versus this new temperature scale are
shown on the right panel of Fig. 12, and again no longer
show the structure near Tc that the original raw data
showed (top left panel of Fig. 3). If we now subtract the
background, we obtain what is shown on the left panel
of Fig.
13.
There is no structure around the original
Tc ∼ 55K, both the rise above Tc and the steep drop
below Tc seen in the right panel of Fig. 13 are gone.
We conclude from this analysis that in the experiment
there may have been some unwanted/uncontrolled varia-
tions in the temperature step, as well as some discrepan-
cies between what was the actual value of the tempera-
ture at the sample position versus what the thermometer
measured at a different position. This, combined with a
bias towards taking seriously results that seemed to agree
with expectations, and discarding other results that did
not, may have led to ending up with the results shown in
Fig. 1 that did not properly reflect the physics going on
in the sample.

V.
CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have analyzed the raw data [21] asso-
ciated with the ac magnetic susceptibility measurements
of sulfur hydride [8] that were interpreted as providing
evidence that sulfur hydride under pressure becomes su-
perconducting [8, 9], supporting the claim of ref. [1]. We
concluded that the published data were correctly inferred
from obtained measurements of raw data and background
signal by subtraction, as given by Eq. (1).
However, when considering the rate of change of tem-
perature of the system shown in the raw data for the cases
where a superconducting transition was supposedly de-
tected, we found an anomalous jump that exactly lines
up with the inferred transition temperature. This, and
the fact that the anomaly is not found in the background
signal measurements, strongly suggests that the observed
change in slope of the susceptibility curves is not an indi-
cation of a superconducting transition but instead is an

experimental artifact.
Furthermore, we hypothesized that as a consequence of
this experimental problem the measurements of the tem-
perature were not necessarily accurate, and with small
modifications of the temperature scale we showed for two
cases that the jumps interpreted as indicating a super-
conducting transition completely disappear.
It should also be noted that the rise in the amplitude
of the signal right before the assumed superconducting
transition as the temperature is lowered seen in Fig. 1b,
for 130 GPa, is anomalous. The drop in susceptibility due
to the onset of superconductivity should not be preceded
by a susceptibility rise. In the raw data, this is signaled
by the flattening of the curve seen in the upper left panel
of Fig.
3.
This fact alone should cast doubt on the
validity of the results reported in Fig. 1b, even in the
absence of the other anomalies pointed out in this paper.
Ac magnetic susceptibility measurements of sulfur hy-
dride have not been independently reproduced. In view
of the results presented here, we urge that these experi-
ments be repeated to establish whether or not they pro-
vide support for the claimed superconductivity of sulfur
hydride [1].
We predict they will not.
Nor has other
claimed magnetic evidence for superconductivity of sul-
fur hydride [1, 11] been independently reproduced, and
its validity has been questioned [10, 13, 14].

Acknowledgments

I am grateful to the authors of ref. [8] and in particu-
lar to Dr. Xiaoli Huang for sending me the raw data and
additional information on the measurements. Addition-
ally, I am grateful to S. K. Sinha, A. Fra˜no and M. B. M.
Maple for helpful discussions.

Appendix A: Additional information

A shortened version of this paper [29] (due to length
constraints in the journal) was published in Nat.
Sci.
Rev.
as a Comment to Ref.
[8].
In a Reply [30],
the authors of Ref. [8] argued that “our measured data
demonstrate that there are no relationships between the
superconducting transition signals and those temperature
breaks.”
To address this point, we show in Fig. 14 the measured
raw susceptibility data and the temperature increments,
with high resolution, for two values of the pressure. It
can be seen in Fig. 14 that the temperature values where
the susceptibility sharply changes its slope and where the
temperature increments sharply change, coincide to bet-
ter than 1 part in 1000 for both pressure values.
We
argue that this indicates that with very high probabil-
ity there is a relationship between the superconducting
transition signals and the temperature breaks, contrary
to what the authors say in their Reply [30].


6

T (K) 

Tc=37.82 K 

ΔT (K) 

ΔT  
χ

117 GPa 

Tc=55.02 K 

T (K) 

ΔT  

130 GPa 

ΔT (K) 

χ

FIG. 14: Comparison of the position of the breaks in the temperature increments ∆T and the kinks in the raw susceptibility
data for pressure values 117 GPa and 130 GPa.

[1] A.P. Drozdov, M.I. Eremets, I. A.Troyan, V. Ksenofontov
and S. I. Shylin, ‘Conventional superconductivity at 203
kelvin at high pressures in the sulfur hydride system’,
Nature 525, 73-76 (2015).

[2] W. E. Pickett and M. I. Eremets, “The quest for room-
temperature superconductivity in hydrides”, Physics To-
day 72, 5, 52 (2019).

[3] J. A. Flores-Livas et al., “A perspective on conven-
tional high-temperature superconductors at high pres-
sure: Methods and materials”, Physics Reports 856, 1-78
(2020).

[4] K.
Shimizu,
“Investigation
of
Superconductivity
in
Hydrogen-rich Systems”, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 89, 051005
(2020).

[5] V. S. Minkov, V. B. Prakapenka, E. Greenberg and M. I.
Eremets, “A Boosted Critical Temperature of 166?K in
Superconducting D3S Synthesized from Elemental Sulfur
and Hydrogen”, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 59, 18970 (2020).

[6] S. B. Zhang, M. Zhang and H. Y. Liu, “Superconductive
hydrogen-rich compounds under high pressure”, Applied
Physics A 127, 684 (2021).

[7] Y. Sun, H.Y. Liu and Y. M. Ma, “Progress on hydrogen-
rich superconductors under high pressure”, Acta Physica
Sinica 70, 017407 (2021).

[8] X. Huang et al, “High-temperature superconductivity in
sulfur hydride evidenced by alternating-current magnetic
susceptibility”, Nat. Sci. Rev. 6, 713 (2019).

[9] D. Semenok and A. R. Oganov, “Measuring the Meissner
effect at megabar pressures”, Nat. Sci. Rev., Volume 6,
856 (2019).

[10] J. E. Hirsch and F. Marsiglio, “Absence of magnetic evi-
dence for superconductivity in hydrides under high pres-
sure”, Physica C 584, 1353866 (2021).

[11] I. Troyan et al, “Observation of superconductivity in hy-
drogen sulfide from nuclear resonant scattering”, Science
351, 1303 (2016).

[12] V. Struzhkin, “Squeezing into superconductivity”, Sci-

ence 351, 1260 (2016).

[13] J. E. Hirsch and F. Marsiglio, “Meissner effect in non-
standard superconductors”, Physica C 587, 1353896
(2021).

[14] J. E. Hirsch and F. Marsiglio, “Flux trapping in su-
perconducting hydrides under high pressure”, Physica C
589, 1353916 (2021).

[15] S. Klotz, J.S. Schilling and P. M¨uller, Frontiers of High-
Pressure Research 286, 473 (1991).

[16] Y. A. Timofeev et al, Rev. Sci. Inst. 73, 371 (2002).
[17] D. D. Jackson et al, Rev. Sci. Inst. 7374, 2467 (2003).
[18] J. J. Hamlin, “Superconductivity studies at extreme pres-
sure”, Dissertation, Washington University, 2007.

[19] M. Debessai, J.J. Hamlin and J.S. Schilling, “Compar-
ison of the pressure dependences of Tc in the trivalent
d-electron superconductors Sc, Y, La, and Lu up to
megabar pressures”, Phys. Rev. B 78, 064519 (2008).

[20] J. Song et al, “Pressure-Induced Superconductivity in El-
emental Ytterbium Metal”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 037004
(2018).

[21] X, Huang and T. Cui, private communications to author,
8/15/2021, 8/18/2021.

[22] E. Snider et al., ‘Room-temperature superconductivity in
a carbonaceous sulfur hydride’, Nature 586, 373 (2020).

[23] M. Debessai, T Matsuoka, J J Hamlin, J S Schilling and
K Shimizu, “Pressure-Induced Superconducting State
of Europium Metal at Low Temperatures”, PRL 102,
197002 (2009).

[24] J. E. Hirsch, “About the Pressure-Induced Supercon-
ducting State of Europium Metal at Low Temperatures”,
Physica C 583, 1353805 (2021).

[25] J. E. Hirsch, arXiv:2012.07537 v3(2020).
[26] J. E. Hirsch, arXiv:submit/3896758 [cond-mat.supr-con]
24 Aug 2021, arXiv:2110.12854v1 (2021).

[27] Ranga Dias, in “Feeling the Pressure”, by R. F. Service,

Science Vol. 373, Issue 6558, p. 954 (2021).

[28] D. Semenok, private communication to author (2020).


7

[29] J. E. Hirsch, “Faulty evidence for superconductivity in ac
magnetic susceptibility of sulfur hydride under pressure”,
National Science Review, 9, nwac086 (2022).

[30] X. Wang, X. Huang, Y. Gao and T. Cui, “Reply: Faulty

evidence for superconductivity in ac magnetic suscepti-
bility of sulfur hydride under pressure”. National Science
Review, 9, nwac087 (2022).


