 

 

 

EXPERIMENTAL STUDY TO OPTIMISE THE TREATMENT EFFICACY 

OF PHARMACEUTICAL EFFLUENTS BY COMBINING ELECTRON 
BEAM IRRADIATION WITH CONVENTIONAL TECHNIQUES 

 

Pankaj Kumar, Manisha Meena, Anjali Bhagwan Kavar, 

Pragya Nama, Abhishek Pathak, Raghava Varma 

Department of Physics 

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay 

Powai, Mumbai, 400076, India 

Abhay Deshpande, Tanuja Dixit, R. Krishnan, Chandrakant Nainwad 

Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering & Research (SAMEER) 

R&D Lab of Govt of India 
Mumbai, 400076, India 

ABSTRACT 

The inability of conventional methods to completely remove the contaminants from 
pharmaceutical effluents led us to study the effect of Electron Beam (EB) irradiation on real 
pharmaceutical wastewater. In this paper, the samples from different stages of existing treatment 
facilities of industry are irradiated with varying doses from 25 to 200 kGy. The study aimed to find 
a suitable combination of EB and conventional treatments for efficient degradation of complex 
pharmaceutical effluent. It has been successfully demonstrated that electron beam irradiation 
when combined with conventional techniques like coagulation before or after the irradiation 
improves the efficiency of the process, resulting in lower Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD). In this 
investigation, the maximum COD reduction was found to be around 65 percent. 

*Corresponding author: Pankaj kumar; E-mail: pankaj.r@iitb.ac.in; 

Keywords Suspended solids · Irradiation treatment · Sulphamic acid · Titanium dioxide (TiO2) · Chemical Oxygen 
Demand (COD) · Pharmaceutical effluents 

1 Introduction 

The water crisis across the world is now a reality. Climatic changes are not the only reason for this crisis, but a great 
part of it is primarily due to the non-sustainable use of our natural resources. To make matters worse, the population 
growth with rapidly growing standards of living have further introduced new pollutants called Contaminants of 
Emerging Concern (CECs) that include micro-pollutants, endocrine disruptors (EDs), pesticides, pharmaceuticals, 
hormones, toxins, and synthetic dyes ((Rasheed et al. (2019))). Amongst them, the pharmaceutical effluents are the 
most challenging to treat by conventional methods due to the presence of ammonium nitrogen, toxic and complex 
compounds that are produced as by-products in the production of anti-hypertensive, anti-asthmatic, anti-cancer, 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

2 

skin-care drugs. The types of impurities in pharmaceutical effluent depend on whether organic, inorganic or 
biological reactions are used in their production. 
The production of drugs or pharmaceutical ingredients consists of 4 major processes, Chemical synthesis, 
Fermentation, Biological extraction and Formulation (Gadipelly et al. (2014)). In chemical synthesis, large amounts 
of intermediate by-products including acids, bases, halides, nitrates, sulphates, cyanides, and metals are produced. 
In addition, organic solvents like benzene, phenol, toluene and cyanide are also used in this process. All of them 
finally end up in the effluent making it difficult to treat. The wastewater from this process has a high amount of 
chemical oxygen demand (COD), biological oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids (TSS). Fermentation 
process further increases the COD and BOD of the wastewater as it involves disinfectants, phenols and detergents. 
Hexane is most often used as a solvent for herbal extraction in biological extraction processes. The extracted 
chemicals with pharmaceutical ingredients and disinfectants find their way into the main waste stream from the 
biological extraction process. After these three processes, the drug products are converted into usable form like 
tablets and syrups. This process is known as the formulation process in which different types of chemicals like 
flavouring agents, preservatives, and antioxidants also find their way in the wastewater. The conventional 
wastewater treatment plants are unable to degrade these toxic and complex compounds as these are basically 
designed to transform the pollutants from one phase to another phase. These pollutants thus can pass into 
groundwater and pose a serious threat to the environment. One of the best ways is breaking and degrading these 
complex compounds into their smaller by-products. Irradiation of wastewater by electron beams has been observed 
to provide a mechanism which successfully fulfills this requirement. 
In a common scenario, the EB treatment process involves irradiation of water molecules with a high-power EB which 
causes radiolysis. In this process, water molecules are either excited or ionized by incident electrons until it dissipates 
nearly all its energy in water. This process results in the cascade formation of free reactive radical species of energy 
around 50 eV within 10−12 seconds of irradiation (Le Caer (2011)). These reactive species include both strongly 
reducing (hydrated electron: eaq-, hydrogen radical: H∗) and oxidising agents (hydroxyl radical: OH∗) along with other 
less reactive species like H+, H2O2, and H2 (Siwek, Edgecock (2020)). Therefore, this treatment falls under the class of 
Advanced Oxidation and Reduction process (AORP). All the free radical species chemically rearrange themselves by 
releasing thermal energy and are termed as spurs. The concentration (the number of moles) of spurs is determined 
by the radio-chemical yield known as G-Value (shown in bracket below). 

 

The OH radical is one of the most potent oxidising agents, reacting with many organic impurities with high reaction 
rate. It mineralises, decomposes, polymerizes, and detoxifies the impurities in wastewater (Capodaglio (2017); Siwek, 
Edgecock (2020)). Studies have shown that electron irradiation decomposes complex molecular contaminants which 
are non-biodegradable into smaller molecular structures which then become biodegradable. Electron beams have 
therefore been used in various wastewater treatment facilities in different countries such as Austria, Brazil, Iran, 
South Korea, and recently in China. Most common use of EB irradiation in these treatment facilities are chemical 
reduction and degradation of dyes, phenols, halomethanes and other complex and toxic non-biodegradable 
compounds (Hossain Kaizar (2018)). Moreover, studies have also been performed on textile industry and paper mill 
effluent with the combination of EB irradiation with existing conventional techniques (Han et al. (2012)). The results 
show that EB irradiation can be more efficient while combining with the conventional treatment. Furthermore, these 
existing EB treatment plants have pointed out that the savings resulting from installing an EB system in a typical setup 
would offset the expenditure of setting it up in just five years (Shin et al. (2002)). Apart from this, electron beam 
sources i.e. electron accelerators have been developed with high power efficiency bringing down the cost and 
treatment time. 
Prior studies on pharmaceutical effluent have been conducted using a simulated sample while in this paper, the 
effect of electron beam (EB) irradiation on real pharmaceutical wastewater is studied. For this study, the samples 
were collected from different stages of the treatment process of a pharmaceutical industry. The present paper is an 
effort to optimize the EB irradiation in conjunction with conventional methods like air flow, ozonation, coagulation, 
and air flow with TiO2 to increase the efficiency and reduce the treatment cost. The main goal was to reduce the 
organic content of wastewater effectively in a sequential treatment procedure. To obtain optimum removal 
effectiveness using E-beam treatment, the impacts of operating factors such as absorbed dose and coagulant 
material concentration were investigated. The degradation of all impurities in wastewater by electron beams are not 
discussed here. Only COD has been used to quantify the effect of EB irradiation and combinations on water quality. 
As this is a simple, quick analysis with high accuracy and it covers a wide range of chemical compounds in wastewater. 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

3 

2 Materials & methods 

To investigate the efficacy of the EBT in real life situations, samples from different stages of a wastewater treatment 
plant of a pharmaceutical industry were collected. As mentioned earlier, the EBT works better in conjunction with 
conventional methods. Depending on the type of effluent, sometimes EBT works better if it precedes the 
conventional treatment and sometimes if it follows the conventional treatment. In order to investigate whether this 
order affects the final outcome in our case, we have chosen three samples from different stages of their treatment 
plant (as outlined in section 2.1). 
 
2.1 
Wastewater sample 

Samples for the present study were collected from a pharmaceutical industry that contains heavy and sizable 
molecular compounds, primarily organic chemicals, heavy aromatic compounds such as phenol and its derivatives, 
acids, esters, and heterocyclic compounds. The industry has its own wastewater purification scheme with two 
different streams. Each stream has different stages of treatment as shown in figure 1 and 2. The treatment process 
includes soil bio-treatment (SBT), Fenton process, reverse osmosis (RO), multiple-effect evaporator (MEE), and 
stripper column. Three samples were selected for the study in this paper. The first sample was taken from stream-1 
feed to stripper line, second is from stream-1 feed to RO, and the third one is taken from stream-2 after the Fenton 
process and are named as S1, S2, and S3 respectively.  

 

Figure 1: Pharmaceutical wastewater stream-1 and its treatment stages 

 

Figure 2: Pharmaceutical wastewater stream-2 and its treatment stages 

The sample S1 is a raw wastewater from the first stream, it contains organic polyaromatic compounds like toluene, 
phenols, nitrophenols, nitroaniline, pharmaceutical compounds and their intermediates with solvents like hexane, 
xylene, aqueous ammonia etc (Gadipelly et al. (2014)). The chemical and biological materials in form of suspended 
solid (metals and insoluble compounds) and liquids also persist in this effluent. 
Sample S2 is taken after the Soil Biotreatment (SBT) process which is an environment friendly wastewater treatment 
process which uses microorganism (Indigenous soil microflora) and minerals to convert organic impurities into CO2 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

4 

in wastewater. This process also includes adsorption and filtration, so the suspended and dissolved solids are 
removed by adsorption and biodegradation and uptake by green plants. This plant also has limitations over non-
biodegradable impurities like other biological processes. The influent water in SBT process has comparatively lower 
amount of COD values (i.e., 1315 mg/L). The COD reduction by this process was observed around 10%, which means 
that most of the remaining COD was because of non-biodegradable compounds. Phenol is one of the non-
biodegradable compounds still present with concentration of 18.75 ppm in the effluent from SBT. 
The Sample S3 is collected after the Fenton process which is an advanced oxidation process in which hydroxyl radicals 
(*OH) are produced by chemical reaction of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) with ferrous ions (Fe2+). It has been published 
that about 95% of COD can be removed from pharmaceutical wastewater which contain chloramphenicol, 
paracetamol by this process (Gadipelly et al. (2014)). In this process, the hydroxyl radicals oxidize and reduce the 
toxicity by breaking most of the non-biodegradable compounds into biodegradable compounds. Influents into this 
process comes from the second wastewater stream of the pharmaceutical industry with COD value of 20000 mg/L. 
This second stream also contains effluents from dyes and pigment manufacturing units. The COD removal of this 
process depends on the FeSO4 (ferrous ion) dose. However, after a concentration of 500 mg/L the COD cannot be 
further removed (Aljuboury et al. (2014)). Because of high concentration of impurities, the Fenton process could not 
remove all dyes and pharmaceutical impurities from the second wastewater stream (Xu et al. (2004); Nidheesh et al. 
(2013)). All of these samples were analysed before the irradiation. Effluent quality parameters of the samples are 
given in Table 1.  

Table 1: The initial parameters of raw samples from different stages of the pharmaceutical industry 

 

Effluents 
pH 
COD (ppm) 
TDS (ppm) 

Feed to stripper (S1) 
11.11 
19,820 
853 

Feed to RO (S2) 
7.74 
704 
1,421 

MEE 
Feed Water

(S3) 
7.52 
2,336 
13,165 

 

The pH and conductivity of samples were monitored by OAKTON PH 150 pH meter and Hach Sension 156 multimeter, 
respectively. COD was analysed using the standard titration method (closed reflux, titrimetric method) as described 
in the APHA manual (APHA et al. (1981)) with HANNA USA (10oC to 160oC) COD Digester. 

2.2 
Materials 

All the solutions that were needed for the COD estimation, as per the APHA manual, were prepared in deionized 
water (APHA et al. (1981)). Coagulation before and after irradiation was performed with Ferric sulphate (Fe2(SO4)3) 
as coagulant material. The concentration of coagulant material was used up to 32mg/L. The sample used in this 
research contains high amount of ammonium nitrogen (2640 ppm) which on irradiation results in the final product 
of nitrate and nitrite compounds. One of the possible reactions is given below (Son et al. (2013)). 

 

Sulphamic acid was used for nitrite free COD estimation as it was observed that nitrite interferes with the estimation 
of COD (Ferraz, Yuan (2017)). Sulphamic acid concentration required is 10 times the nitrite amount in sample as per 
the APHA manual (APHA et al. (1981)). Nitrite concentration considered was 200 mg/l of the sample as an initial guess 
with which concentration of sulphamic acid used in testing is 2 mg/ml of the sample. Higher concentration of 
sulphamic acid of 4 mg/ml was also used to check the interference. The results are discussed in the results and 
discussion section. 

2.3 
Experimental setup 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

5 

Irradiation of effluent samples was performed using a 6 MeV, S-band standing wave side coupled, normal conducting, 
pulsed linac, situated at Society of Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research (SAMEER) in IIT Bombay 
campus. The average electron beam current during experiments was 16 µA. 
In order to optimize the dose deposition in the effluent, a detailed Fluka-Flair simulations were carried out (Battistoni 
et al. (2007)). Samples were irradiated in a 100 mL standard cylindrical borosilicate glass beaker having a diameter of 
46.2 mm which is the same as that used in the simulation. The penetration depth of 6 MeV electrons in pure water 
is 32 mm. The sample volume thus used was 55 ml resulting in a water layer of 33 mm thickness. 

Alignment: The accelerator is basically designed for cancer treatment which delivers a pencil beam of radius 6 mm. 
Due to the pencil beam the dose deposition was not uniform as shown in figure 3. The sample was thus continuously 
stirred using a magnetic stirrer for dose uniformity. As shown in figure 4, the beaker was placed beneath the exit 
window of the accelerator. 

2.4 
Dose calculation 

Fluka-Flair simulations were carried out with the same geometry as that during the experiments to determine the 
absorbed dose in the sample. Dose associated with the irradiation time is given in the Table 2. 

 

Figure 3: Fluka-Flair simulations for (a) Dose deposition along radial direction of electron beam, (b) and Depth dose 
profile in water sample 

 

Figure 4: Experimental setup of electron beam accelerator with wastewater 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

6 

3 Results and Discussion 

The results of irradiation on three pharmaceutical effluent samples are presented here in terms of COD which is 
reported as a function of absorbed dose. Samples were also treated with a combination of processes such as 
irradiation + airflow (EBA), irradiation + ozone-flow (EBO), irradiation + TiO2 + airflow (EBTA), and coagulation 
before (CEB) and after irradiation (EBC) to check the improvement in water quality parameters after irradiation. 
The behaviour of treatment of all three effluent samples by different processes were observed to be different. 
Therefore, the results are presented and discussed separately sample wise. 

3.1 
S1 Sample (Raw effluent) 

The irradiation of this waste water by electron beam generates the most reactive specie i.e., hydroxyl radicals (OH∗). 
OH radicals have a strong electrophilicity towards high electron density molecules such as the phenyl rings. It has 
also been established that pharmaceutical compounds like carbamazepine, ketoprofen, Mefenamic acid, clofibric 
acid (2-(4-Chlorophenoxy)-2-methylpropanoic acid), diclofenac and phenol are attacked by OH radicals with rate 
constant of the order of 109 (mol−1dm3 s−1) (Kimura et al. (2012)). The multiclass pharmaceutical residue in 
wastewater like Atenolol, Atorvastatin, Azithromycin, Caffeine, Carbamazepine, Ciprofloxacin, Clarithromycin, 
Diclofenac, Erythromycin, Ibuprofen, Ketoprofen, Losartan, Metoprolol, Naproxen, Sulfamethoxazole, Trimethoprim, 
Valsartan and Xylazine are also degraded by electron beam irradiation with radiation dose ranging from 0.5 to 25 
kGy (Reinholds (2017)). 

Table 2: Dose associated with irradiation time 

Irradiation time (s) 
15 
30 
60 
120 
480 

Associated Dose(kGy) 
25 
50 
100 
200 
800 

 
The rate constant of OH radicals for many organic compounds are around 106 to 1010 mol−1dm3 s−1 (Buxton et al. 
(1988)). Volatile organic compounds like toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes and chlorobenzene are easily degraded by 
the electron beam process (Do-Hung Han (2003)). Moreover, the detergent compound can also be easily degraded 
by the radiation dose, in the range of 3kGy to 100 kGy. (Selambakkannu et al. (2021)). The above data clearly shows 
that electron beam irradiation can degrade most of the impurities in pharmaceutical wastewater. It has been found 
that radiation treatment with conventional techniques (coagulation and biological process) can reduce the COD value 
by 89 to 94 % in pharmaceutical wastewater at a radiation dose from 25 to 100 KGy (Rahil Changotra (2019)). With 
this objective, the irradiation of raw wastewater by electron beam was carried out. After irradiation with different 
doses, suspended solids were formed and a coagulation process was required to remove those suspended solids. 
The suspended solids formation may have different reasons, one could be the conversion of organic compounds into 
insoluble compounds at higher dose (Al-Ani, Al-Khalidy (2006)) and other is the reduction of dissolved metals in 
wastewater into their insoluble form (Unob et al. (2003)). As discussed above the OH radicals prefer to attack the 
ortho carbon atom in the benzene ring for phenol-like compounds. For more than one benzene ring compound like 
naphthalene, the OH radical attacks on the para-position carbon atom (Zhengcheng Wen, Xu (2021)). The broken 
aromatic benzene ring results in long chain aliphatic compounds. Further possible reactions of these intermediate 
compounds with water radiolysis products are shown in figure (5). The intermediate products can be transformed 
into carboxylic acid and esters in the presence of oxygen molecules (Emmi, Takács (2008)). Large chain lengths of 
carboxylic acid decrease the solubility in water. The larger ester group may lead to polymerisation process in 
wastewater during irradiation. We have also found that during airflow with electron beam irradiation, a significant 
number of flocs were observed after irradiation. 

 

Figure 5: Possible combination of water radicals with intermediate compounds Emmi, Takács (2008) 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

7 

Figure 6 shows the percentage reduction in COD values of S1 sample after irradiation (EB), irradiation followed by 
coagulation (EBC) and coagulation followed by irradiation (CEB). When the sample was irradiated by EB, the 
percentage COD reduction was 11.6% for 25 kGy dose and reduction was 0.3% for 100 kGy. This rise in COD value 
with irradiation time can be attributed to conversion of complex non-biodegradable compounds into two or more 
simple biodegradable compounds (Bae et al. (1999); He et al. (2015); Siwek, Edgecock (2020)). It was also observed 
that the turbidity of water increased after irradiation possibly due to precipitation of soluble impurities. Further 
removal of the impurities was done with the help of coagulation by ferric sulphate. The maximum reduction in COD 
was observed at 100 kGy i.e. 33.87 % with EBC and 43.95% with CEB. The amount of coagulant used is incorporated 
in the name of the corresponding sample. As the presence of nitrite can interfere with COD measurements. Hence, 
we introduced a sulphamic acid concentration of 2 mg/ml and 4 mg/ml and measured COD values with EB, CEB and 
EBC for 25 and 100 kGy. The measurement with and without sulphamic acid is shown in the figure 6 with the error 
bar (±1.62 %). 

 

Figure 6: Percent COD reduction after treatment by EB, EBC and CEB process for different irradiation time for S1 with 
and without sulphamic acid 

3.2 
S2 Sample (After Soil Bio-treatment) 

This sample contains smaller structures of non-biodegradable compounds which could not be treated by the SBT 
plant. The EB process can easily break these impurities into smaller structures or fewer ring structures (Silva (2016); 
Tominaga et al. (2018); Qi Zou (2021)). This would be the main reason for the initial COD increment in figure 7 (a) 
with EB while on combining with coagulation the percentage COD reduction increases to 65.22% at 200 kGy. In this 
sample, coagulation was not observed before irradiation (CEB). Therefore, the data for CEB is not presented for this 
sample. This sample was irradiated by EB for 25, 100, and 200 kGy. COD reduction was 65% for EBC processes with 
200 kGy which is far better than 34% of reduction with EB after 800 kGy where 800 kGy dose was given just to check 
the maximum reduction possible. COD reduction observed after removal of nitrite interference by addition of 
sulphamic acid with concentration of 2 mg/ml is represented by figure 7(b). The results showed that the maximum 
COD reduction was 54% for 800 kGy while with the EBC process the maximum reduction was 66.9% after 200 kGy 
which clearly indicates that the EBC process is very effective for this sample.  


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

8 

 

Figure 7: Percent COD reduction after treatment by EB and EBC process for different irradiation time for S2 with and 
without sulphamic acid 

3.2.1 
The Scavengers Effect: 

The presence of compounds like nitrate (NO3−), nitrite (NO2−), oxygen molecule (O2), carbonate (CO), and bicarbonate 
(HCO3−) act as radical scavengers (Peter, Eschweiler (1999)). These scavengers react with free radicals before the 
radicals get a chance to act on impurities (Pikaev et al. (1997); M.H.O et al. (2001); Emmi, Takács (2008)). However, 
depending on the type of impurities these scavengers can be used advantageously to annul either reducing or 
oxidising radicals. In these experiments, three different radical scavengers namely air, TiO2 powder, and ozone were 
used. These scavengers scavenge the reducing agents and convert them into oxidizing species, which further help in 
mineralising the impurities. For example, with air flow, the oxygen molecules from air scavenge reducing species 
(e−aq) and convert it into oxidising agents (O2− and HO2−). The TiO2 powder is a semiconductor with a band gap energy 
of 3.2 eV. When electrons with energy higher than 3.2 eV interact with TiO2 molecules, an electron-hole pair is 
produced, and this electron-hole pair also results in the formation of new oxidising agents (OHabs, in the presence of 
oxygen molecules (O2−, OH*). The ozone gas converts reducing agents (aqueous electron and hydrogen atom) into 
O∗3 and HO∗3. The combination of EB irradiation with different treatment processes like airflow, ozone flow, and TiO2 
powder with airflow was performed with the hope to see further reduction in COD. However, the COD reduction was 
observed only in the S2 sample as shown in figure 8. The percentage reduction in COD value observed in the 
experiment is between 27 to 30% with error bar of ±4.5%. 
 

 

 

Figure 8: The percent reduction in COD for S2 wastewater after irradiation with airflow (EBA), ozone (EBO) flow and 
in the presence of TiO2 powder with airflow (EBTA) 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

9 

3.3 
S3 Sample (After Fenton process) 

This sample is the effluent from the Fenton process and after filtration, the color of this sample was blood red which 
indicates that low amounts of dyes and organic pollutants were present in this sample. Since the water is already 
filtered, the suspended solids were not detected. There was no effect of coagulation by ferric sulphate before and 
after irradiation. Fenton process is an advanced oxidation process which can degrade aromatic compounds like 
phenol up to 82% (Kavitha, Palanivelu (2004)). Thus, the irradiation of this wastewater sample leads to complete 
mineralization of the by-products as shown in the figure 9 along with remaining dyes and other remaining products 
(Chengji Zhang (2021)). This might be the main reason for increase in COD reduction as the dose increases. This 
sample was irradiated by EB for 25, 100, 200 and 800 kGy. The maximum COD reduction of 54.7% was observed for 
8 minutes of irradiation without sulphamic acid as shown in figure 10 whereas the reduction was 58.9% with 
sulphamic acid. 

 

Figure 9: Carbon chain mineralization process by water radiolysis products in the presence of oxygen molecules. 

 

Figure 10: The variation in COD with respect to irradiation time for S3 wastewater sample 

4 Conclusion 

In this study, we have irradiated three pharmaceutical wastewater samples with the help of a 6 MeV electron 
accelerator. The study was to optimize the EB treatment procedure in conjugation with conventional treatment 
methods like coagulation. Sample S1 was irradiated by EB and maximum percentage COD reduction was found to be 
11.6% for 25 kGy. Treatment of S1 with EBC and CEB gives a maximum reduction of 33.87% and 43.95% respectively, 
in COD value for 100 kGy. The obtained results suggest that CEB is more effective in this case. Whereas, the reduction 
of 65% was obtained by EBC, just after 200 kGy in sample S2. Results obtained for sample S1 and S2 clearly 
demonstrate that the conjugation of EB treatment with coagulation is more efficient than EB treatment alone. For 
sample S3, the maximum COD reduction of 54.7% was observed for 800 kGy. Along with COD reduction, we have 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

10 

also observed precipitate settled for the irradiated samples which shows that soluble impurities are converted into 
insoluble by the application of EB treatment. This study suggests that such difficult effluents can be treated by EB 
irradiation by combining it with a suitable conventional treatment method. Further optimization can help to fit the 
EB process in the existing facility of an industrial wastewater treatment plant. 

 
Compliance with Ethical Standards: 

Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest: The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 
Research involving Human Participants and/or Animals: Not applicable 
Informed consent: Not applicable 

Statements and Declarations 

Funding: The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received during the preparation of this 
manuscript. 
Author Contributions: Pankaj Kumar: Conceptualization, Material preparation and analysis, Writing - original draft. 
Raghava Varma: Supervision, Writing - review & editing. Abhishek Pathak: Writing - review & editing. Manisha 
Meena, Anjali Bhagwan Kavar and Pragya Nama: Data collection and analysis. Abhay Deshpande, Tanuja Dixit, 
Ramamoorthy Krishnan and Chandrakant Nainwad: Experimental setup design and irradiation. All authors 
commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 
Research Data Policy: The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author, 
[Pankaj Kumar], on special request. 

Acknowledgements 

We would like to thanks Prof. Sanjeev Chaudhari (Centre for Environmental Science & Engineering, IIT Bombay) and 
Prof. Arindam Sarkar (Chemical Engineering, IIT Bombay) for their valuable support and assistance at every stage of 
this work. Raghava Varma is indebted to Prof. Atsuto Suzuki for inspiring and motivating him to attempt something 
different for societal benefits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

11 

References 

APHA American, Association American, Federation Water. Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And 

Wastewater. 2. 01 1981. 

Al-Ani Mohammed Y., Al-Khalidy Firas R. Use of Ionizing Radiation Technology for Treating Municipal Wastewater // 

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2006. 3, 4. 360–368. 

Aljuboury Dr. Dheeaa, Palaniandy Puganeshwary, Aziz Hamidi, Feroz S. A Review on the Fenton Process for 

Wastewater Treatment // Journal of Innovative Engineering ISSN: 2347-7504. 09 2014. 2. 

Bae Byung-Uk, Jung Eui-Suk, Kim Yu-Ri, Shin Hang-Sik. Treatment of landfill leachate using activated sludge process 

and electron-beam radiation // Water Research. 08 1999. 33. 2669–2673. 

Battistoni Giuseppe, Cerutti F, Fasso A, Ferrari A, Muraro S, Ranft J, Roesler S, Sala PR. The FLUKA code: Description 

and benchmarking // AIP Conference proceedings. 896. 2007. 31–49. 

Buxton George, Greenstock Clive, Helman W., Ross Alberta. Critical Review of Rate Constants for Reactions of 

Hydrated Electrons, Hydrogen Atoms and Hydroxyl Radicals (*OH/*O-) in Aqueous Solution // Journal of Physical 
and Chemical Reference Data. 04 1988. 17. 

Capodaglio Andrea. High-energy oxidation process: an efficient alternative for wastewater organic contaminants 

removal // Clean Technologies and Environmental Policy. 10 2017. 19. 

Chengji Zhang Gang Xue Yanbiao Liu Shanping Chen Chuan Jia Hong Chen. A critical review of the aniline 

transformation fate in azo dye wastewater treatment // Journal of Cleaner Production. 2021. 321. 128971. 

Do-Hung Han Yang-Soo Won Wan-Sik Park Jae-Kyong Lim Tatiana Stuchinskaya. Oxidative decomposition of aromatic 

hydrocarbons by electron beam irradiation // Radiation Physics and Chemistry. 2003. 67. 51–60. 

Emmi Salvatore Silvano, Takács Erzsébet. Water Remediation by electron beam treatment. 01 2008. 79–95. 

Ferraz Fernanda, Yuan Qiuyan. Nitrite Interference with Soluble COD Measurements from Aerobically Treated 

Wastewater // Water Environment Research. 06 2017. 89. 549–554. 

Gadipelly Chandrakanth, Pérez-González Antía, Yadav Ganapati, Ortiz Inmaculada, Ibáñez Raquel, Rathod Virendra, 

Marathe Kumudini. Pharmaceutical Industry Wastewater: Review of the Technologies for Water Treatment and 
Reuse // Industrial Engineering Chemistry Research. 07 2014. 53. 11571–11592. 

Han Bumsoo, Kyu Kim Jin, Kim Yuri, Seung Choi Jang, Young Jeong Kwang. Operation of industrial-scale electron 

beam wastewater treatment plant // Radiation Physics and Chemistry. 2012. 81, 9. 1475–1478. Proceedings of 
the 12th Tihany Symposium on Radiation Chemistry. 27 August - 1 September 2011, Zalakaros, Hungary. 

He Shijun, Sun Weihua, Wang Jianlong, Chen Lvjun, Zhang Youxue, Yu Jiang. Enhancement of biodegradability of real 

textile and dyeing wastewater by electron beam irradiation // Radiation Physics and Chemistry. 12 2015. 124. 

Hossain Kaizar Das-N. Lakshmana Rawat-K. P. Sarma-K. S. S. Maruthi Y. Avasn. Irradiation of wastewater with 

electron beam is a key to sustainable smart/green cities: a review // Applied Water Science. 2018. 8. 

Kavitha V., Palanivelu K. The role of ferrous ion in Fenton and photo-Fenton processes for the degradation of phenol 

// Chemosphere. 2004. 55, 9. 1235–1243. 

Kimura Atsushi, Osawa Misako, Taguchi Mitsumasa. Decomposition of persistent pharmaceuticals in wastewater by 

ionizing radiation // Radiation Physics and Chemistry. 2012. 81, 9. 1508–1512. Proceedings of the 12th Tihany 
Symposium on Radiation Chemistry. 27 August - 1 September 2011, Zalakaros, Hungary. 

Le Caer Sophie. Water Radiolysis: Influence of Oxide Surfaces on H2 Production under Ionizing Radiation // Water. 

12 2011. 3. 

M.H.O. Sampa, P.R. Rela, C.L. Duarte, E.S.R. Borrely S.I.and Oikawa H.and Somessari, C.G. Silveira, F.E. Costa. 

Electron beam wastewater treatment in Brazil. Jun 2001. 

Nidheesh Puthiya Veetil, Gandhimathi Rajan, Ramesh Srikrishnaperumal Thanga. Degradation of dyes from aqueous 

solution by Fenton processes: a review // Environmental Science and Pollution Research. 2013. 

Peter Gehringer, Eschweiler Helmut. Ozone/electron beam process for water treatment: Design, limitations and 

economic considerations // Ozone: Science & Engineering. 1999. 21, 5. 523–538. 


Experimental study to optimise the treatment efficacy of pharmaceutical effluents by combining electron beam 

irradiation with conventional techniques 

12 

Pikaev A.K., Podzorova E.A., Bakhtin O.M. Combined electron-beam and ozone treatment of wastewater in the 

aerosol flow // Radiation Physics and Chemistry. 1997. 49, 1. 155–157. Trombay Symposium On Radiation and 
Photochemistry. 

Qi Zou Haiyang Shao-Jianzhong Gu Gang Xu Zhuhao Huo. Degradation of pyrazinamide in aqueous solution by 

electron beam irradiation: kinetics, influence factors and mechanism study // Journal of Radioanalytical and 
Nuclear Chemistry. 2021. 2. 

Rahil Changotra Jhimli Paul Guin Lalit Varshney Amit Dhir Himadri Rajput. Hybrid coagulation, gamma irradiation and 

biological treatment of real pharmaceutical wastewater // Chemical Engineering Journal. 2019. 370. 595–605. 

Rasheed Tahir, Bilal Muhammad, Nabeel Faran, Adeel Muhammad, Iqbal Hafiz M.N. Environmentally-related 

contaminants of high concern: Potential sources and analytical modalities for detection, quantification, and 
treatment // Environment International. 2019. 122. 52–66. 

Reinholds Pugajeva I. Perkons I. Lundanes E. Rusko J. Kizane G. Nikolajeva V. Mutere O. Petrina Z. Baumane L. 

Bartkevics V. I. Decomposition of multi-class pharmaceutical residues in wastewater by exposure to ionising 
radiation // International Journal of Environmental Science and Technology. 2017. 

Selambakkannu Sarala, Othman Nor Azillah Fatimah, Bakar Khomsaton Abu, Thailan Krishamani Mutiah, Karim 

Zulhairun. Degradation of surfactants from domestic laundry effluent by electron beam irradiation // Materials 

Today: Proceedings. 2021. 46. 1807–1812. Regional Congress on Membrane Technology 2020 (RCOM 2020) and 
Regional Conference Environmental Engineering (RCEnvE 2020). 

Shin Hang-Sik, Kim Yu-Ri, Han BumSoo, Makarov Igor E, Ponomarev Alexandr V, Pikaev Alexei K. Application of 

electron beam to treatment of wastewater from papermill // Radiation Physics and Chemistry. 2002. 65, 4. 539–
547. Environmental Applications of Ionizing Radiation PacifiChem 2002 December 14-19, 2000 Honolulu, Hawaii, 
USA. 

Silva dos Santos Batista Ana Paula Silva Costa Teixeira Antonio Carlos Borrely Sueli Ivone Vanessa Honda Ogihara. 

Degradation and acute toxicity removal of the antidepressant Fluoxetine (Prozac®) in aqueous systems by 
electron beam irradiation // Environmental Science and Pollution Research. 2016. 

Siwek Malgorzata, Edgecock Thomas. Application of electron beam water radiolysis for sewage sludge treatment—

a review // Environmental Science and Pollution Research. Dec 2020. 27, 34. 42424–42448. 

Son Youn-Suk, Kim Ki-Hyung, Kim Ki-Joon, Kim Jo-Chun. Ammonia Decomposition Using Electron Beam // Plasma 

Chemistry and Plasma Processing. 06 2013. 33. 617–629. 

Tominaga Flávio Kiyoshi, dos Santos Batista Ana Paula, Silva Costa Teixeira Antonio Carlos, Borrely Sueli Ivone. 

Degradation of diclofenac by electron beam irradiaton: Toxicitiy removal, by-products identification and effect of 
another pharmaceutical compound // Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering. 2018. 6, 4. 4605–4611. 

Unob F, Hagège A, Lakkis D, Leroy M. Degradation of organolead species in aqueous solutions by electron beam 

irradiation // Water Research. 2003. 37, 9. 2113–2117. 

Xu Xiang-Rong, Li Hua-Bin, Wang Wen-Hua, Gu Ji-Dong. Degradation of dyes in aqueous solutions by the Fenton 

process // Chemosphere. 2004. 57, 7. 595–600. 

Zhengcheng Wen Hongzhe Shen Yuan Li Yan Liu, Xu Jiangrong. A theoretical study on the destruction of typical 

biomass tar components (toluene, phenol and naphthalene) by OH radical // Journal of the Indian Chemical 
Society. 2021. 98, 2. 100015. 


