1

Single-Mode Emission in InP Microdisks on Si using Au Antenna

Preksha Tiwari, Anna Fischer, Markus Scherrer, Daniele Caimi, Heinz Schmid,

and Kirsten E. Moselund*

IBM Research Europe - Zurich, Säumerstr. 4, 8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland

*Correspondence to: kmo@zurich.ibm.com

Keywords
laser, nanoantenna, whispering gallery mode cavity, photonics, plasmonics

Abstract
An important building block for on-chip photonic 
applications is a scaled emitter. Whispering 
gallery mode cavities based on III-Vs on Si allow 
for small device footprints and lasing with low 
thresholds. However, multimodal emission and 
wavelength stability over a wider range of 
temperature can be challenging. Here, we explore 
the use of Au nanorods on InP whispering gallery 
mode lasers on Si for single mode emission. We 
show that by proper choice of the antenna size and 
positioning, we can suppress the side-modes of a 
cavity and achieve single mode emission over a 
wide excitation range. We establish emission 
trends by varying the size of the antenna and show 
that the far-field radiation pattern differs significantly for devices with and without antenna. 
Furthermore, the antenna-induced single mode emission is dominant from room temperature 
(300 K) down to 200 K, whereas the cavity without an antenna is multimodal and its dominant 
emission wavelength is highly temperature dependent.

Introduction
Integrated light sources show potential for a wide 
range of applications, from optical communication
to quantum information processing to sensing. 
Using Si as a material platform allows to leverage 
established fabrication processes for passive 
structures. Due to its indirect bandgap, however, an 
alternative material is needed for active devices.
Group III-V semiconductors pose a viable choice 
for emitters [1–5] and detectors [6–11] due to their 
direct and tuneable bandgap, high mobilities, and 

high absorption coefficients covering the entire 
telecommunication band.

Small mode volumes and low thresholds can be 

achieved by various cavity types, like photonic 
crystal cavities [12–17], metal-clad cavities [18–
23], semiconductor-on-metal cavities [24,25], or 
whispering gallery mode microdisk cavities [26–
29] based on total internal reflection. The latter 
have the advantage of possessing a simple 
fabrication scheme. However, mode selectivity 


2

and multimodal emission can be a challenge, 
which will be addressed in the present work.
Furthermore, a general challenge in III-V 
semiconductors
photonics 
is 
their 
strong 

temperature sensitivity: The bandgap follows the 
Varshni shift [30], leading to a change in spectral 
overlap between the material gain and resonant 
mode wavelengths at different temperatures.

Single mode emission can be achieved by 

supressing side-modes and breaking the symmetry 
of the devices: One way to achieve single mode 
lasing in microdisk cavities was demonstrated 
using suspended cavities with a proper choice of 
bridges manipulating the spatial symmetry [31].
Another strategy involves using grooves [32] or 
nanoantennae [33,34]. Recently, nanoantennae 
have also been combined with high-Q cavities 
containing quantum dots, leading to hybrid 
systems where emission enhancements exceed 
those of a bare cavity and allow for tuning the 
bandwidth [35,36]. These demonstrations show the 
strong potential of nanoantennae for single-photon 
devices [37] and towards strongly coupled systems 
[38]. For plasmonic nanoantennae it has been 
shown that, following the Mie-Gans scattering, the 
scattering cross sections in the visible and near 
infrared as well as resonances are tunable and 
dependent on the aspect ratio of the antennae [39–
41].
This enables optimization of antenna 

geometry to enhance or suppress emission of a 
specific wavelength range.

While side-mode suppression and enhanced 

directivity were successfully demonstrated for 
microdisk cavities coupled with a Pt antenna 
without degradation of the dominant mode in terms 
of threshold [33], the impact of the metallic 
antenna and its geometry on wavelength stability, 
also considering different temperatures, remains to 
be studied. Here we explore the effect of Au 
nanorod antennae on top of InP microdisk lasers 
fabricated on Si. Using a relatively simple process 
based on direct wafer bonding, etching, and lift-
off, we are able to fabricate a large number of 

devices. This allows us to get insight into general 
trends of the antenna size and position on the 
resonant emission of the WGM cavities. We 
observe 
significantly 
improved 
device 

performance in terms of side-mode suppression 
and 
wavelength 
stability 
for 
different 

temperatures. We believe that these findings are of 
general interest for the optimization of the 
emission characteristics of micro and nanolasers.

Device Fabrication
A 225 nm thick InP layer is grown on a lattice-
matched sacrificial InP wafer with an InGaAs etch 
stop layer in between using metal-organic 
chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). Then, the 
material is bonded onto a Si wafer with a 2 µm 
thick SiO2 layer in between, serving as an optical 
insulator layer, and the donor wafer material is 
removed. More information on direct wafer 
bonding techniques can be found in [42]. For the 
microdisk cavities, the antennae are first defined 
by a lift-off process using a PMMA bilayer as resist 
and 40 nm electron-beam evaporated Au and a 
2 nm Ti adhesion layer. Hexagonal microdisks are 
then patterned using HSQ as a resist. InP 
microdisks with a width of 1100 nm and a 
thickness of 225 nm are etched by inductively 
coupled plasma (ICP) dry etching using CH4, Cl2
and H2 . After the etch, the sample is cleaned with 
a 1:10 diluted phosphoric acid solution and capped 
with 3 nm of Al2O3 using atomic layer deposition. 
The antennae are between 40 nm to 70 nm wide 
and 150 nm to 300 nm long and are either placed 
along (parallel) the side facet of the InP cavity or 
rotated in-plane by 90 degrees (orthogonal) with 
respect to it. The distance between the antenna and 
the cavity edge is designed to be 50 nm but varies 
due to drift and alignment accuracy during the 
patterning process or non-optimal adhesion. Fig. 1 
illustrates the fabrication steps and shows a SEM 
image of the final device with a parallelly placed 
antenna.

All measurements are performed with a micro-

photoluminescence (micro-PL) setup where a ps-


3

pulsed excitation source with emission at 750 nm 
and a repetition rate of 78 MHz is focused onto the 
device with a 100 x objective (NA = 0.6) and a 
spot-size of approximately 1 µm. The emitted 
photoluminescence is collected in reflection mode 
from the top of the device and the spectrum is 
detected by a linear array InGaAs detector. In the 
following, we will discuss the impact on the 
emission spectrum of the microdisk through the 
use of Au antennae with varying cross-sectional 
area. In some cases, the different antenna widths 
will be additionally color coded in the figures, in
order to map them to respective cross-section 
areas.

Comparison of Different Orientations 
Fig. 2(a) shows the PL emission spectra of a 
1.1 μm wide device without antenna upon 
increasing input power with the bulk emission of 
InP in the inset. Two resonant emission peaks at 
around 925 nm (peak 1) and 960 nm (peak 2) 
emerge at higher excitation energies. Fig. 2(b) 
shows the emission spectra upon increasing input 
power for a cavity with a parallelly oriented Au 
antenna on top. Compared to the bare cavity case, 
peak 2 is supressed.

The light-in-light-out (LL) curve in Fig. 2(c) 

shows a
multimode behavior with
similar 

thresholds for peak 1 and 2 in the bare cavity case, 

which are
0.8 pJ/pulse and 1.2 pJ/pulse 

respectively. For the antenna-coupled cavity, the 
threshold of peak 1 is comparable to those of the 
bare cavity (1.1 pJ/pulse) and its intensity is 
slightly higher, but the latter is most likely a result 
of the stronger emission of InP at a wavelength of 
925 nm compared to 960 nm. Peak 2 of this device,
however, is significantly suppressed and only 
appears at higher powers, whereas at pump powers 
below ~6 pJ/pulse the antenna-coupled device is 
single mode, i.e., no second resonant wavelength 
peak is visible.

From LL curves like the one in Fig. 2(c), peak 

ratios between peak 1 and peak 2 are determined
and illustrated in Fig. 2(d) for the bare cavity and 
four different antennae of varying dimension and 
position: For the bare cavity, peak 1 is the 
dominant peak at first, then the ratio between the 
amplitude of the two peaks rapidly decreases and 
the longer-wavelength peak 2 dominates after 
around 2 pJ/pulse, indicated by a peak ratio 
value < 1. On the other hand, for the parallelly
oriented antennae, peak 1 stays dominant for the 
larger antennae over the entire excitation range. 
Only the small antenna with a cross section of 
0.007 µm2 has a crossover at around 10 pJ/pulse. 
Also, it is notable that the antenna-coupled devices 
are single-mode for lower excitation powers, and 
the slight multimode behavior only appears for 

Figure 1. Illustration of the fabrication steps. After wafer bonding, the Au antennae are defined via lift-off. The 
InP microdisk cavities are etched afterwards and the top HSQ resist is removed. The SEM image shows a device
with a parallelly placed antenna, and a zoom-in of the Au nanorod (false-colored).


4

increasingly higher powers as the size of the 
antenna is decreased.

For the orthogonally placed antenna, the multi-

mode behavior is similar to the bare cavity and 
there is no side-mode suppression effect. Only at 
higher excitation powers does the peak ratio 
deviate, potentially due to mode competition and 
other effects in the cavity. The low selectivity of 
the orthogonally placed antenna can potentially be 
attributed to the lower overlap of the resonant
mode, polarization of the mode, and the scattering 

cross section of the antenna: The whispering 
gallery mode is expected to be at the periphery of 
the cavity; hence, an orthogonal placed antenna 
may overlap with a node of the mode or only 
partially if not placed accurately. For the parallely 
placed nanoantenna, exact positioning may be less 
crucial because a larger fraction of the antenna is 
expected to be at the position of the electric field 
of the resonant mode.

Far-field radiation images showing first-order 

interference patterns were captured with an 

Figure 2. (a) Bulk emission (inset) and emission spectrum upon increasing excitation energy for a 1100 nm wide 
and 225 nm thick InP cavity bonded on Si. (b) Emission spectrum for a 1100 nm wide InP cavity with a parallelly
oriented Au antenna on top. (c) Light-in-light-out curve for the spectrum shown in (a) and (b) from which the 
threshold is extracted. (d) Peak ratio of peak 1 at 925 nm and peak 2 at 960 nm for a bare cavity and antenna 
with varying sizes and orientations. The shaded part highlights the region where the peak ratio is greater than 
10. The points with arrows pointing towards the “single mode” label, mark the excitation powers, up to which a 
certain device is single mode, i.e., where only one resonant emission peak is visible. Corresponding SEM image
for the orthogonal antenna and the parallel antenna with an area of 0.007 μm2 are shown on the right.


5

infrared camera and are shown in Figure 3(a) in the 
case of a bare cavity and in Figure 3(b)-(e) of 
representative antenna-coupled structures. While 
the far-field has a circular shape for the bare cavity 
case, it is dumbbell-shaped for the devices with an 
antenna. This suggests that the dominant resonant 
mode does interact with the antenna which acts as 
a near-to-far-field coupler.

Selectivity for Different Antenna Areas
In total, 121 devices with parallelly placed 
antennae covering areas from 0.00605 µm2 to
0.0194 µm2 were measured and the following 
results shall be representative for general trends. 
Fig. 4 shows the peak ratio versus the antenna 
cross-section area at 4 pJ/pulse and 10 pJ/pulse for 
all the measured devices. The peak ratios are 

Figure 3 . Far-field radiation images with first-order interference patterns for devices (a) without and (b) - (e) 
with antenna at 3 pJ/pulse and 5 pJ/pulse.

Figure 4. Peak ratio (counts peak 1/counts peak 2) for all the measured devices versus antenna area at an 
excitation power of (a) 4 pJ/pulse, and (b) 10 pJ/pulse. The circled devices were single mode (only one 
resonant emission peak visible). The shaded area corresponds to peak ratios which are higher than 10.


6

additionally color coded, corresponding to the 
different antenna widths for clearer visualization. 
If only one emission peak is visible, we refer to the 
devices as single mode. We define peak 1 to be 
dominating if the peak ratio rises over 10. When 
the peak ratio is below 1 this means that peak 2 is 
the dominant peak. This is the case for cavities 
without antenna (see solid line in Fig. 4 which 
corresponds to peak ratio values for the bare 
cavity), or for some of the smallest antennae sizes, 
especially at higher excitation energies. In general, 
antenna-coupled devices show a higher peak ratio 
value with a more dominant emission of peak 1 for
the entire excitation rage. Some cavities even 
exhibit single mode emission up to 10 pJ/pulse. 
Furthermore, the larger antennae tend to be more 
selective than the smaller ones with higher peak 
ratios and more single mode devices. The overall 
spread in the peak ratio for a certain antenna area 
can be explained by fabrication-related deviations 
of the antenna shape (varying width across the 
structure) and positioning (slight tilt and different 
edge-to-antenna spacing due to adhesion and drift 
during processing, see Fig. 3).

To quantify this trend further, the devices were 

binned into quintiles ranging from the smallest 
(Q1) to the largest (Q5) device areas and the 
number of single mode devices at different powers 
were determined. Figure 5(a) shows the percentage 
of measured devices which were single mode at 
4 pJ/pulse, 6 pJ/pulse, 8 pJ/pulse and 10 pJ/pulse. 
Figure 5(b) shows the absolute number of 
measured and single mode devices corresponding 
to the percentage shown in Figure 5(a). As in
Figure 4, a trend is visible towards larger antenna 
areas: While in the smallest quintile no device was 
single mode, in the largest two there are 80% and
almost 70% respectively. At 10 pJ/pulse only 4 of 
the measured devices are single mode, and three of
those are in the largest two quintiles. It seems that 
the most selective antennae were in the bin Q4, 
corresponding to the second largest quintile with 
areas ranging from 0.0141 μm2 – 0.0167 μm2. It 
should be noted, however, that for Q5 the total 
number of measured devices is lower than for Q4
(12 versus 35 devices), so a less selective antenna 
will weigh heavier in the percentage.

Figure 5. Single mode devices binned into areas of smallest to largest quintile, (a) in percentage and (b) in 
absolute numbers.


7

These results may be taken as an indication that 

there is a certain optimum in terms on antenna size:
Initially, an increase in antenna size will provide 
improved 
side-mode 
suppression, 
whereas 

eventually this effect saturates. It is expected that 
several effects might impact the mode selectivity 
and device performance: The scattering and 
absorption cross sections at a certain wavelength 
depend on the antenna area and substrate
[39,40,43,44]. So, depending on the antenna size 
and position, one resonant mode may be subject to 
stronger absorption than the other, or both modes 
might be affected similarly.

Performance at Different Temperatures
To investigate the extent to which the antenna not 
only allows for side-mode suppression but also 
wavelength stability, we performed micro-PL 
measurements at various temperatures. Since the 
bandgap of InP is temperature-dependent, the gain 
emission peak shifts to lower wavelengths upon 
temperature decrease, leading to a change of the 
dominant resonant mode to the one which now has 
a stronger overlap with the bulk PL. In the antenna-
coupled case, however, the resonant wavelength 
stays the same down to 200 K, as it is shown in 
Fig. 6(a). This indicates that the antenna is not 
merely preferentially scattering a particular 
wavelength, but that it enhances either the 
dominant mode or supresses the others and thereby 
counterbalances the temperature-dependent shift 
of the gain. This is a significant result as 
temperature 
stabilization 
in 
nanophotonic 

components is a great challenge.

When placing a metal in close proximity to a 

resonant cavity, the question naturally arises 
whether this will lead to an increase in absorption
losses and thereby an increase of the threshold for 
resonant emission. Fig. 6(b) shows the threshold of 
the different devices versus antenna area for peak 
1 at 300 K. The square, colored points correspond 
to devices, which are single mode at least up to 6 
pJ/pulse and the grey points correspond to all the 
antenna-devices which were measured.
The 

threshold of peak 1 is higher for the devices which 
were single mode up to 6 pJ/pulse and comparable 
to the bare cavity case for the other devices. This 
indicates that the most effective antenna in terms 
of side-mode suppression leads to a higher 
threshold, likely due to increased absorption losses 
associated with the antenna and the optical mode 
which is directly disturbed by it.

Fig. 6(c) shows the relative blue shift of the 

different devices which were single mode up to 
6 pJ/pulse and for the bare cavity case. The blue 
shift was measured at power levels which
corresponded to 2x (filled symbols for antenna-
coupled devices) and 4x (empty symbols for 
antenna-coupled devices) the threshold. The solid 
lines correspond to the average blue shift of 10 bare 
cavities at 2x (black) and 4x (grey) the threshold. 
They are around 1.5 nm at 2x threshold and almost 
6 nm at 4x threshold power. The dashed lines show 
the standard deviation of the blue shift for the bare 
cavities. The blue shift of the resonant mode upon 
increasing input power is related to the plasma 
dispersion effect [45], a change in refractive index 
caused by the presence of free carriers, and is 
commonly observed in III-V semiconductor lasers
[18,26,46]. Interestingly, the blue shift at 2x the 
threshold is in a comparable range for the different 
kind of devices, but it is larger for the bare cavity 
case than for the antenna-coupled devices at 4x the 
threshold.
This indicates that the antenna 

effectively clamps the emission wavelength of the 
resonant mode. This would support the assumption 
that the mode selectivity may result from a 
plasmonic effect.

An assessment of the carrier dynamics would be 

interesting, since plasmonics can for example be 
used for high-speed photonics components, such as 
detectors and modulators [47–49]. This was 
unfortunately not possible in the given setup, due 
to the resolution limit of the lifetime measurement 
set-up which is approximately 50 ps. Therefore, we 
cannot resolve the fast dynamics of this system.


8

Conclusion and Outlook
In this work, we presented a systematic study on
the effect of Au nanorod antennae on InP 
whispering gallery mode cavities. While the bare
InP cavity is multimodal and the dominant 
resonance wavelength changes significantly with 

temperature, we show that in antenna-coupled 
devices, we can achieve single mode emission and 
wavelength stability over 100 K (from 200 K up to 
room temperature at 300 K). The antenna must be 
aligned properly to the optical mode, as we only 
observed this side-mode suppression for antennae 

Figure 6. (a) Spectrum for devices with (light colors) and without antenna (dark colors) at different 
temperatures. The dark dashed line outlines the change of the dominant emission mode for the bare cavity, 
the light dashed line tracks the peak position for the antenna-coupled devices. (b) Threshold of the bare cavity 
(solid black line for average of ten devices and grey line indicating the standard deviation) and antenna-
coupled devices versus antenna area.. The square, colored points correspond to devices, which are single 
mode up to 6 pJ/pulse or more, and the grey points correspond to all the antenna-devices which were 
measured. (c) Relative peak shift for devices which were single mode up to 6 pJ/pulse or more at 2x (solid 
points), and 4x (hollow points) the threshold. The solid line corresponds to the average blue shift of 10 bare 
cavities (around 1.5 nm at 2x threshold and almost 6 nm at 4x threshold power). The dashed line shows the 
standard deviation of the blue shift for the bare cavities.


9

aligned along the cavity periphery (parallel) and 
not angularly (orthogonal). The beneficial effect of 
the antennae initially increases with its relative 
size, until it saturates at dimensions around 
0.014 µm2 – 0.017 µm2. The antenna reduces the 
relative blue shift due to the plasma dispersion 
effect, thereby providing for more stable emission 
at higher excitation powers. From the combination 
of these results, we can conclude that the antenna 
does not just impact light collection via scattering, 
but that the presence of the metal stabilizes the 
emission mode, thereby improving side-mode 
suppression 
and 
wavelength 
stability 
over 

variations in temperature and pumping powers.

Furthermore, we found that the threshold of the 

dominant peak is increased in antenna-coupled 
devices which are single mode up to 6 pJ/pulse,
whereas devices which have a lower side-mode 
suppression are more likely to have similar 

thresholds
compared to the devices without 

antenna. We attribute absorption losses due to the 
antenna to be the cause of the higher threshold. 

Table 1 summarizes some parameters found in 

the experiments above. Listed are the average 
values for the bare cavity and for selected antenna-
coupled devices, which were single mode up to 
6 pJ/pulse. For the antenna-coupled devices, 
values corresponding to the device with the overall 
highest side-mode suppression (single mode at 
> 10 pJ/pulse), the lowest relative blue shift, and 
the lowest threshold are listed.

We believe the findings to be relevant and 

portable to abroad range of nanophotonic 
architectures. A long-term goal would be the 
coupling to more complex laser architectures or 
exploration of antenna shapes specific to desired 
emission wavelengths and directions.

Antenna 
area [μm2]

Threshold Pth

[pJ/pulse]

Blue shift at 
2x Pth [nm]

Blue shift at 
4x Pth [nm]

Peak ratio at 
6 pJ/pulse

Bare cavity
-
0.79 ± 0.04
1.5 ± 0.5
5.9 ± 0.4
0.15 ± 0.05

Antenna with highest 
side-mode suppression
0.0153
1.49
1.6
4.25
Single mode

Antenna with lowest 

blue shift
0.0164
0.87
0.65
3.6
Single mode

Antenna with lowest 

threshold
0.0121
0.7
1.3
4.9
Single mode

Table 1. Comparison of bare cavities and selected antenna-coupled devices which were single mode (only 
peak 1) up to 6 pJ/pulse. Listed are average threshold, relative blue shift at 2x and 4x the threshold, and 
peak ratios at 6 pJ/pulse. For the antenna-coupled devices, the values for the microdisk with the highest 
side-mode suppression (single mode > 10 pJ/pulse), lowest blue shift, and lowest threshold are given.

Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge Rachel 
Grange and Andreas Schenk for fruitful technical 
discussions. We thank the Cleanroom Operations 
Team of the Binnig and Rohrer Nanotechnology 
Center (BRNC) for their help and support. The 
work presented here has received funding from the 
European Union H2020 ERC Starting Grant 
project PLASMIC (Grant Agreement No. 678567) 

and the European Union H2020 program 
SEQUENCE (Grant No.871764).

Author Contributions
P.T., A.F, and K.M. created the device concept. 
P.T. fabricated the sample with support of M.S. 
and H.S. for material growth, D.C. for the wafer
bonding, and A.F. for lift off. A.F. and P.T. 
performed the optical characterization on the 
devices. A.F. and P.T. analyzed the data. K.M. lead 
and managed the project. All authors discussed the 


10

results. The manuscript was written by P.T and 
K.M., with contributions of all authors, and all 
authors have given approval to the final version of 
the manuscript. 

References
1. 
H. Kim, W.-J. Lee, A. C. Farrell, A. 
Balgarkashi, and D. L. Huffaker, "Telecom-
Wavelength Bottom-up Nanobeam Lasers on 
Silicon-on-Insulator," Nano Lett. 17(9), 
(2017).

2. 
Y. Hu, D. Liang, K. Mukherjee, Y. Li, C. 
Zhang, G. Kurczveil, X. Huang, and R. G. 
Beausoleil, "III/V-on-Si MQW lasers by using 
a novel photonic integration method of 
regrowth on a bonding template," Light Sci. 
Appl. 8(1), (2019).

3. 
R. Chen, K. W. Ng, W. S. Ko, D. Parekh, F. 
Lu, T.-T. D. Tran, K. Li, and C. Chang-
Hasnain, "Nanophotonic integrated circuits 
from nanoresonators grown on silicon," Nat. 
Commun. 5(1), (2014).

4. 
T. Stettner, A. Thurn, M. Döblinger, M. O. 
Hill, J. Bissinger, P. Schmiedeke, S. Matich, T. 
Kostenbader, D. Ruhstorfer, H. Riedl, M. 
Kaniber, L. J. Lauhon, J. J. Finley, and G. 
Koblmüller, "Tuning Lasing Emission toward 
Long Wavelengths in GaAs-(In,Al)GaAs 
Core–Multishell Nanowires," Nano Lett. 
18(10), (2018).

5. 
P. Schmiedeke, A. Thurn, S. Matich, M. 
Döblinger, J. J. Finley, and G. Koblmüller, 
"Low-threshold strain-compensated 
InGaAs/(In,Al)GaAs multi-quantum well 
nanowire lasers emitting near 1.3 μ m at room 
temperature," Appl. Phys. Lett. 118(22), 
(2021).

6. 
Y. Baumgartner, D. Caimi, M. Sousa, M. 
Hopstaken, Y. Salamin, B. Baeuerle, B. I. 
Bitachon, J. Leuthold, J. Faist, B. J. Offrein, 
and L. Czornomaz, "High-speed CMOS-
compatible III-V on Si membrane 
photodetectors," Opt. Express 29(1), (2021).

7. 
S. Mauthe, Y. Baumgartner, M. Sousa, Q. 
Ding, M. D. Rossell, A. Schenk, L. 
Czornomaz, and K. E. Moselund, "High-speed 
III-V nanowire photodetector monolithically 
integrated on Si," Nat. Commun. 11(1), 4565 
(2020).

8. 
M. Takiguchi, S. Sasaki, K. Tateno, E. Chen, 
K. Nozaki, S. Sergent, E. Kuramochi, G. 
Zhang, A. Shinya, and M. Notomi, "Hybrid 
Nanowire Photodetector Integrated in a Silicon 
Photonic Crystal," ACS Photonics 7(12), 
(2020).

9. 
J. Zhang, A. De Groote, A. Abbasi, R. Loi, J. 
O’Callaghan, B. Corbett, A. J. Trindade, C. A. 
Bower, and G. Roelkens, "Silicon photonics 
fiber-to-the-home transceiver array based on 
transfer-printing-based integration of III-V 
photodetectors," Opt. Express 25(13), (2017).

10. 
P. Wen, P. Tiwari, S. Mauthe, H. Schmid, M. 
Sousa, M. Scherrer, M. Baumann, B. I. 
Bitachon, J. Leuthold, B. Gotsmann, and K. E. 
Moselund, "Waveguide coupled III-V 
photodiodes monolithically integrated on Si," 
(2021).

11. 
Y. Xue, Y. Han, Y. Tong, Z. Yan, Y. Wang, Z. 
Zhang, H. K. Tsang, and K. M. Lau, "High-
performance III-V photodetectors on a 
monolithic InP/SOI platform," Optica 8(9), 
(2021).

12. 
M. Scherrer, N. Vico Triviño, S. Mauthe, P. 
Tiwari, H. Schmid, and K. E. Moselund, "In-
Plane Monolithic Integration of Scaled III-V 
Photonic Devices," Appl. Sci. 11(4), (2021).

13. 
S. Mauthe, P. Tiwari, M. Scherrer, D. Caimi, 
M. Sousa, H. Schmid, K. E. Moselund, and N. 
Vico Triviño, "Hybrid III–V Silicon Photonic 
Crystal Cavity Emitting at Telecom 
Wavelengths," Nano Lett. 20(12), (2020).

14. 
G. Crosnier, D. Sanchez, S. Bouchoule, P. 
Monnier, G. Beaudoin, I. Sagnes, R. Raj, and 
F. Raineri, "Hybrid indium phosphide-on-
silicon nanolaser diode," Nat. Photonics 11(5), 
297–300 (2017).

15. 
K. Takeda, T. Sato, T. Fujii, E. Kuramochi, M. 
Notomi, K. Hasebe, T. Kakitsuka, and S. 
Matsuo, "Heterogeneously integrated 
photonic-crystal lasers on silicon for on/off 
chip optical interconnects," Opt. Express 
23(2), 702 (2015).

16. 
Y. Zhang, M. Khan, Y. Huang, J. Ryou, P. 
Deotare, R. Dupuis, and M. Lončar, "Photonic 
crystal nanobeam lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 
97(5), (2010).

17. 
M. Takiguchi, A. Yokoo, K. Nozaki, M. D. 
Birowosuto, K. Tateno, G. Zhang, E. 
Kuramochi, A. Shinya, and M. Notomi, 
"Continuous-wave operation and 10-Gb/s 
direct modulation of InAsP/InP sub-
wavelength nanowire laser on silicon photonic 
crystal," APL Photonics 2(4), (2017).

18. 
P. Tiwari, P. Wen, D. Caimi, S. Mauthe, N. V. 
Triviño, M. Sousa, and K. E. Moselund, 
"Scaling of metal-clad InP nanodisk lasers: 
optical performance and thermal effects," Opt. 
Express 29(3), (2021).

19. 
C. Xu, W. E. Hayenga, M. Khajavikhan, and P. 
Likamwa, "Measuring the frequency response 
of optically pumped metal-clad nanolasers," 


11

Opt. Express 27(15), 21834 (2019).

20. 
W. E. Hayenga, H. Garcia-Gracia, H. Hodaei, 
C. Reimer, R. Morandotti, P. LiKamWa, and 
M. Khajavikhan, "Second-order coherence 
properties of metallic nanolasers," Optica 
3(11), (2016).

21. 
K. Ding, M. T. Hill, Z. C. Liu, L. J. Yin, P. J. 
van Veldhoven, and C. Z. Ning, "Record 
performance of electrical injection sub-
wavelength metallic-cavity semiconductor 
lasers at room temperature," Opt. Express 
21(4), (2013).

22. 
M. T. Hill, Y.-S. Oei, B. Smalbrugge, Y. Zhu, 
T. de Vries, P. J. van Veldhoven, F. W. M. van 
Otten, T. J. Eijkemans, J. P. Turkiewicz, H. de 
Waardt, E. J. Geluk, S.-H. Kwon, Y.-H. Lee, 
R. Nötzel, and M. K. Smit, "Lasing in metallic-
coated nanocavities," Nat. Photonics 1(10), 
589–594 (2007).

23. 
S. Kreinberg, K. Laiho, F. Lohof, W. E. 
Hayenga, P. Holewa, C. Gies, M. Khajavikhan, 
and S. Reitzenstein, "Thresholdless Transition 
to Coherent Emission at Telecom Wavelengths 
from Coaxial Nanolasers with Excitation 
Power Dependent β‐Factors," Laser Photon. 
Rev. 14(12), (2020).

24. 
Y.-J. Lu, C.-Y. Wang, J. Kim, H.-Y. Chen, M.-
Y. Lu, Y.-C. Chen, W.-H. Chang, L.-J. Chen, 
M. I. Stockman, C.-K. Shih, and S. Gwo, "All-
Color Plasmonic Nanolasers with Ultralow 
Thresholds: Autotuning Mechanism for Single-
Mode Lasing," Nano Lett. 14(8), 4381–4388 
(2014).

25. 
G. Zhang, M. Takiguchi, K. Tateno, T. 
Tawara, M. Notomi, and H. Gotoh, "Telecom-
band lasing in single InP/InAs heterostructure 
nanowires at room temperature," Sci. Adv. 
5(2), eaat8896 (2019).

26. 
S. Mauthe, N. Vico Trivino, Y. Baumgartner, 
M. Sousa, D. Caimi, T. Stoferle, H. Schmid, 
and K. E. Moselund, "InP-on-Si Optically 
Pumped Microdisk Lasers via Monolithic 
Growth and Wafer Bonding," IEEE J. Sel. 
Top. Quantum Electron. 25(6), 1–7 (2019).

27. 
S. Wirths, B. F. Mayer, H. Schmid, M. Sousa, 
J. Gooth, H. Riel, and K. E. Moselund, "Room-
Temperature Lasing from Monolithically 
Integrated GaAs Microdisks on Silicon," ACS 
Nano 12(3), 2169–2175 (2018).

28. 
B. Shi, S. Zhu, Q. Li, Y. Wan, E. L. Hu, and K. 
M. Lau, "Continuous-Wave Optically Pumped 
1.55 μm InAs/InAlGaAs Quantum Dot 
Microdisk Lasers Epitaxially Grown on 
Silicon," ACS Photonics 4(2), 204–210 (2017).

29. 
Z. Yan, Y. Han, L. Lin, Y. Xue, C. Ma, W. K. 
Ng, K. S. Wong, and K. M. Lau, "A 

monolithic InP/SOI platform for integrated 
photonics," Light Sci. Appl. 10(1), (2021).

30. 
Y. P. Varshni, "Temperature dependence of the 
energy gap in semiconductors," Physica 34(1), 
(1967).

31. 
W. Noh, M. Dupré, A. Ndao, A. Kodigala, and 
B. Kanté, "Self-Suspended Microdisk Lasers 
with Mode Selectivity by Manipulating the 
Spatial Symmetry of Whispering Gallery 
Modes," ACS Photonics 6(2), (2019).

32. 
A. A. Bogdanov, I. S. Mukhin, N. V. 
Kryzhanovskaya, M. V. Maximov, Z. F. 
Sadrieva, M. M. Kulagina, Y. M. Zadiranov, 
A. A. Lipovskii, E. I. Moiseev, Y. V. 
Kudashova, and A. E. Zhukov, "Mode 
selection in InAs quantum dot microdisk lasers 
using focused ion beam technique," Opt. Lett. 
40(17), (2015).

33. 
E. I. Moiseev, N. Kryzhanovskaya, Y. S. 
Polubavkina, M. V. Maximov, M. M. 
Kulagina, Y. M. Zadiranov, A. A. Lipovskii, I. 
S. Mukhin, A. M. Mozharov, F. E. 
Komissarenko, Z. F. Sadrieva, A. E. Krasnok, 
A. A. Bogdanov, A. V. Lavrinenko, and A. E. 
Zhukov, "Light Outcoupling from Quantum 
Dot-Based Microdisk Laser via Plasmonic 
Nanoantenna," ACS Photonics 4(2), (2017).

34. 
N. Kryzhanovskaya, Y. Polubavkina, E. 
Moiseev, M. Maximov, V. Zhurikhina, S. 
Scherbak, A. Lipovskii, M. Kulagina, Y. 
Zadiranov, I. Mukhin, F. Komissarenko, A. 
Bogdanov, A. Krasnok, and A. Zhukov, 
"Enhanced light outcoupling in microdisk 
lasers via Si spherical nanoantennas," J. Appl. 
Phys. 124(16), (2018).

35. 
H. M. Doeleman, E. Verhagen, and A. F. 
Koenderink, "Antenna–Cavity Hybrids: 
Matching Polar Opposites for Purcell 
Enhancements at Any Linewidth," ACS 
Photonics 3(10), (2016).

36. 
H. M. Doeleman, C. D. Dieleman, C. Mennes, 
B. Ehrler, and A. F. Koenderink, "Observation 
of Cooperative Purcell Enhancements in 
Antenna–Cavity Hybrids," ACS Nano 14(9), 
(2020).

37. 
A. F. Koenderink, "Single-Photon 
Nanoantennas," ACS Photonics 4(4), (2017).

38. 
I. M. Palstra, H. M. Doeleman, and A. F. 
Koenderink, "Hybrid cavity-antenna systems 
for quantum optics outside the cryostat?," 
Nanophotonics 8(9), (2019).

39. 
M. A. El-Sayed, "Some Interesting Properties 
of Metals Confined in Time and Nanometer 
Space of Different Shapes," Acc. Chem. Res. 
34(4), (2001).

40. 
B. J. Wiley, Y. Chen, J. M. McLellan, Y. 


12

Xiong, Z.-Y. Li, D. Ginger, and Y. Xia, 
"Synthesis and Optical Properties of Silver 
Nanobars and Nanorice," Nano Lett. 7(4), 
(2007).

41. 
A. Djorović, S. J. Oldenburg, J. Grand, and E. 
C. Le Ru, "Extinction-to-Absorption Ratio for 
Sensitive Determination of the Size and 
Dielectric Function of Gold Nanoparticles," 
ACS Nano 14(12), (2020).

42. 
D. Caimi, P. Tiwari, M. Sousa, K. E. 
Moselund, and C. B. Zota, "Heterogeneous 
Integration of III-V Materials by Direct Wafer 
Bonding for High-Performance Electronics and 
Optoelectronics," IEEE Trans. Electron 
Devices (2021).

43. 
J. Liao, L. Ji, J. Zhang, N. Gao, P. Li, K. 
Huang, E. T. Yu, and J. Kang, "Influence of 
the Substrate to the LSP Coupling Wavelength 
and Strength," Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13(1), 
(2018).

44. 
M. Castro-Lopez, N. de Sousa, A. Garcia-
Martin, F. Y. Gardes, and R. Sapienza, 
"Scattering of a plasmonic nanoantenna 
embedded in a silicon waveguide," Opt. 

Express 23(22), (2015).

45. 
B. R. Bennett, R. A. Soref, and J. A. Del 
Alamo, "Carrier-induced change in refractive 
index of InP, GaAs and InGaAsP," IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron. 26(1), 113–122 (1990).

46. 
J. Tatebayashi, S. Kako, J. Ho, Y. Ota, S. 
Iwamoto, and Y. Arakawa, "Room-
temperature lasing in a single nanowire with 
quantum dots," Nat. Photonics 9(8), (2015).

47. 
Y. Salamin, P. Ma, B. Baeuerle, A. Emboras, 
Y. Fedoryshyn, W. Heni, B. Cheng, A. Josten, 
and J. Leuthold, "100 GHz Plasmonic 
Photodetector," ACS Photonics 5(8), (2018).

48. 
A. Melikyan, L. Alloatti, A. Muslija, D. 
Hillerkuss, P. C. Schindler, J. Li, R. Palmer, D. 
Korn, S. Muehlbrandt, D. Van Thourhout, B. 
Chen, R. Dinu, M. Sommer, C. Koos, M. Kohl, 
W. Freude, and J. Leuthold, "High-speed 
plasmonic phase modulators," Nat. Photonics 
8(3), (2014).

49. 
M. Thomaschewski, V. A. Zenin, C. Wolff, 
and S. I. Bozhevolnyi, "Plasmonic monolithic 
lithium niobate directional coupler switches," 
Nat. Commun. 11(1), (2020).


