Charge, bond, and pair density wave orders in a strongly correlated system

Anurag Banerjee,1 Catherine PВҙepin,1 and Amit Ghosal2

1Institut de Physique ThВҙeorique, UniversitВҙe Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
2Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Kolkata, Mohanpur, India-741246

The coexistence of multiple quasi-degenerate orders is the hallmark of the strongly correlated materials. Ex-
periments often reveal several spatially modulated orders in the underdoped cuprates. This has come to the
forefront with the possible detection of the pair density wave states. However, microscopic calculations often
struggle to stabilize such spatially modulating orders as the ground state in the strong correlation limit. This
work uses the t вҲ’ tвҖІ вҲ’ J-model with an additional nearest-neighbor repulsion to stabilize spatially oscillating
charge, bond, and pairing orders in the underdoped regime. We employ the standard Gutzwiller approach while
treating the inhomogeneity for the spatial orders using the self-consistent Hartree-Fock-Bogoliubov methodol-
ogy. Our calculations reveal that unidirectional bond density states coexisting with charge and pairing modu-
lations can have lower energy than the uniform superconducting state over an extensive doping range. These
modulating states vanish monotonically as the modulation wavevector becomes shorter with increased dopings.
The finite momentum orders give way to a vestigial nematic phase upon increasing doping which only breaks
the rotational symmetry of the system. The nematic order vanishes upon further increasing doping, and only
uniform superconductivity survives. The spatial features of the ground state at each doping reveal multiple
wavevectors, which potentially drives the incommensuration of charge orders. Interestingly, the spatially mod-
ulating states are absent when the strong correlations criteria are relaxed, suggesting that the removal of double
occupancy aids the stabilization of density wave orders.

I.
INTRODUCTION

The presence of multiple broken symmetry phases and
competing orders has become the new paradigm for describ-
ing correlated quantum matter featuring complex phase di-
agram [1вҖ“4]. Given the abundance of rich phase diagrams
in different materials suggests the intertwining of several or-
ders [5, 6]. In this scenario, a precursor state of all potentially
degenerate states forms at a high energy scale which cannot
be linked with one particular order. At low energies, slight
energy differences stabilize one order over the other.
A unique realization for intertwined orders is the vestigial
or composite phase, where a higher-order component of the
likely symmetry broken phase condenses although the indi-
vidual components vanish [5, 6]. Therefore, a vestigial state
has a smaller subset of broken symmetries than the parent
state. For instance, a nematic phase that breaks the rotational
symmetry is a vestige of the primary checkerboard and stripe
phase where both translation and rotational symmetries are
broken [7]. Recently, the sublattice phase-resolved study of
electronic structure in Bi-based cuprates compound finds a
vestigial nematic phase around 14 вҲ’ 17% hole doping [8].
Moreover, the nematic order coexists with the charge density
wave (CDW) orders at lower dopings [8].
The signatures of charge modulation are routinely observed
at moderate hole-doped materials in all cuprate families [9вҖ“
11]. Usually, the modulation wavevector, Q, reduces as the
doping increases [12, 13] except for the La2CuO4 where
the wavevector increases with doping [14вҖ“16].
Moreover,
detailed investigations have also revealed a bond-centered
charge order with a primarily d-wave form factor [17вҖ“19].
Furthermore, disorder severely affects the charge modula-
tions such that the unidirectional stripe and the bidirectional
checkerboard patterns become indistinguishable [20]. The lo-
cal spectroscopic probes indicate short-ranged domains with
unidirectional charge modulation [21, 22], albeit quantum os-

cillation measurements favor the bidirectional picture [23].
Recently the study of the modulated orders in cuprates
has gained impetus with the observations of pair density
wave (PDW) state coexisting with usual d-wave superconduc-
tivity (SC) using Josephson scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM) [24, 25]. In the same regime, d-wave CDW oscilla-
tions are also detected[25]. The importance of detecting the
PDW state is underlined by the several exotic proposals of the
celebrated pseudogap state that hinges on the quantum dis-
ordering [26] or fractionalization of the PDW state [27, 28].
However, it is extremely difficult to stabilize such PDW sates
as the ground state of a microscopic Hamiltonian [29вҖ“33].
The tJ-model and its parent Hubbard model at large re-
pulsion U are generally studied to extract the physics of spa-
tially modulated states [34вҖ“36]. The variational approaches
on the two-dimensional (2D) tJ model find a striking near-
degeneracy among the unidirectional charge order with stripe
SC, a PDW state with spin density wave component, and the
uniform d-wave SC state [37]. A few recent calculations on
the same model observe a pair density wave state with vanish-
ing mean SC pairing energetically very close to the uniform
d-wave SC [38, 39]. Such quasi-degeneracy among different
states suggests that a small perturbation to the tJ model will
favor one state over the other, thus giving rise to a wide variety
of phenomenology.
Using commonly accepted minimal models to describe
strongly correlated quantum matters, i.e., the t вҲ’ tвҖІ вҲ’ J model
with an additional nearest-neighbor repulsion, we study the
interplay of unconventional superconductivity with spatially
modulated charge-ordered states in the ground state. Early
investigations on such model manifest promising signatures
of density wave orders [40вҖ“44].
A careful analysis of the
variation of the ordering wavevector with doping, however,
is still missing.
In addition, the real-space pattern of the
charge, bond order, and the possibility of finding spatially
modulated pairing amplitude (similar to the Fulde-Ferrell-

arXiv:2110.05620v2  [cond-mat.supr-con]  22 Apr 2022


2

Larkin-Ovchinnikov phase but in the absence of magnetic
field) need to be studied.
Furthermore, the mechanism of
the demise of modulated orders with increasing doping re-
mains unexplored. In this work, we focus on the unidirec-
tional charge orders that are routinely observed in the un-
derdoped cuprates [21, 22, 45]. Furthermore, we neglect the
magnetically ordered states to keep the numerical calculation
tractable. In the next section, we describe the model and the
method in detail.

II.
MODEL AND METHODS

We work with the standard tJ-model on a two-dimensional
square lattice with all the double occupancy removed, with an
additional nearest neighbor repulsion. The model is given by

H =
пҝҪ

i,j,Пғ

пҝҪ
tijЛңcвҖ 
iПғЛңcjПғ + h.c.
пҝҪ
+ J
пҝҪ

вҹЁi,jвҹ©

пҝҪ
ЛңSi В· ЛңSj вҲ’ 1

4 ЛңniЛңnj

пҝҪ

+ W
пҝҪ

вҹЁi,jвҹ©,Пғ,ПғвҖІ
ЛҶniПғЛҶnjПғвҖІ вҲ’ Вө
пҝҪ

i,Пғ
ЛҶni,Пғ.
(1)

Here, tij = вҲ’t if i, j are nearest neighbors and tij = tвҖІ if
i, j are next nearest neighbor sites. We fix the t = 1 and
tвҖІ = 0.25t, and all the energy scales are in the units of t. To
compare with the experimental energy scales in cuprates, one
can use t вүҲ 300 meV.
The tJ Hamiltonian is an effective low-energy model ob-
tained from a Schrieffer-Wolf transformation of the Hubbard
model for large on-site repulsion U [46]. The Si are the elec-
tron spin operator and the exchange interaction J вүҲ (4t2)/U,
is set to J = 0.3t in this work. Furthermore, W is the nearest
neighbor repulsion term, which we fix to W = 0.6t for the
rest of the analysis.
The local number operators for a particular spin is given by
ЛҶni,Пғ = cвҖ 
i,Пғci,Пғ and the local density is the expectation value
of the number operator. The вҖҳtildeвҖҷ appearing on the creation
(annihilation) operators at site i with spin Пғ =вҶ‘, вҶ“, cвҖ 
i,Пғ (ci,Пғ)
in Eq. (1) is explained below. The local density is thus given
by ПҒi = пҝҪ
ПғвҹЁcвҖ 
iПғciПғвҹ©. Вө is the chemical potential that fixes the
average density of carriers ПҒ in the system. The spatial average
of the local density gives the average density of electrons ПҒ.
The (under) doping level from the half-filling is defined via
Оҙ = (1 вҲ’ ПҒ).
Strong on-site repulsions reduce the Hilbert space of the tJ-
model by eliminating all double occupancies. The вҖҳtildeвҖҷ on
operators appearing in the Eq. (1) signifies that they operate
on a truncated Hilbert space which projects out double occu-
pation on any site due to strong repulsive interactions. The
operators without вҖҳtildeвҖҷ live in the usual unrestricted Hilbert
space.

ЛңciПғ = ciПғ(1 вҲ’ ЛҶniПғ),
(2)

where c is the normal annihilation operator. A straightfor-
ward implementation of such a restriction is given by the

Gutzwiller approximation, which transforms the strongly in-
teracting problem to an unrestricted Hilbert space, at the ex-
pense of introducing вҖңGutzwiller factorsвҖқ, which renormalize
all operators [47вҖ“49].

вҹЁЛңcвҖ 
iПғЛңcjПғвҹ© вүҲ gt
ijвҹЁcвҖ 
iПғcjПғвҹ©0,
(3)

вҹЁЛңSi.ЛңSjвҹ© вүҲ gxy
ij вҹЁSi.Sjвҹ©0,
(4)

вҹЁniПғnjПғвҹ© вүҲ вҹЁniПғnjПғвҹ©0,
(5)

where вҹЁ. . . вҹ© is the expectation in the restricted Hilbert space
whereas вҹЁ. . . вҹ©0 is the expectation of operators in the unre-
stricted Hilbert space. The Gutzwiller factors in the absence
of any magnetic orders are given by

gt
ij =

пҝҪ

4xixj

(1 + xi)(1 + xj),
(6)

gxy
ij =
4

(1 + xi)(1 + xj),
(7)

where xi = 1вҲ’ПҒi. After removing the double-occupancy, we
perform the mean field decomposition of the interaction terms
in Hartree, Fock and Cooper channels as given below,

пҝҪ

Пғ
вҹЁcвҖ 
iПғciПғвҹ©0 = ПҒi,
(8)

вҹЁcвҖ 
iПғcjПғвҹ©0 = ПҮij,
(9)
вҹЁcjвҶ“ciвҶ‘ + ciвҶ“cjвҶ‘вҹ©0 = вҲҶij.
(10)

Note that we are not allowing for any magnetic orderings in
this system by focusing on superconducting with charge and
bond density wave (BDW) orders only. Therefore, we elim-
inate the spin-flip Fock terms from the mean-field Hamilto-
nian, to preserve the spin rotational symmetry. To perform the
mean field analysis we closely follow Ref. [38, 50, 51]. The
explicit expression for the mean-field Hamiltonian is given by

HMF =
пҝҪ

i,a,Пғ

пҝҪ
tgt
i,i+a вҲ’ W F S
i,i+a
пҝҪ
cвҖ 
i,Пғci+a,Пғ

+
пҝҪ

i,b,Пғ
tвҖІgt
i,i+bcвҖ 
i,Пғci+b,Пғ +
пҝҪ

i,Пғ
(вҲ’Вө + ВөHS
i
)ЛҶniПғ

+
пҝҪ

i,a

пҝҪ
Gi,a
1 вҲҶi,i+a
пҝҪ
cвҖ 
i,вҶ‘cвҖ 
i+a,вҶ“ + cвҖ 
i+a,вҶ‘cвҖ 
i,вҶ“
пҝҪ
+ h.c.
пҝҪ
.

(11)

Here, the sum over a = ВұЛҶx, ВұЛҶy are the nearest neighbor vec-
tors and b = Вұ(ЛҶxВұ ЛҶy) are the next neighbor vector. The other


3

variables are given by,

W F S
i,a = J

2

пҝҪ
3gxy
i,i+a
2
вҲ’ 1

2

пҝҪ

ПҮi,i+a + WПҮi,i+a,
(12)

Gi,a
1
= вҲ’J

4

пҝҪ
3gxy
i,i+a + 1

4

пҝҪ

,
(13)

ВөHS
i
= вҲ’4t
пҝҪ

a,Пғ

вҲӮgt
i,i+a
вҲӮni
ПҮi,i+a + 4tвҖІ пҝҪ

b,Пғ

вҲӮgt
i,i+b
вҲӮni
ПҮi,i+b

вҲ’ 3J

2

пҝҪ

a,Пғ

вҲӮgxy
i,i+a
вҲӮni

пҝҪ
вҲҶ2
i,i+a
4
+ ПҮ2
i,i+a

пҝҪ

вҲ’ J вҲ’ 2W

4

пҝҪ

i,a,Пғ
ПҒi+a.
(14)

Next, we diagonalize the Hamiltonian using Bogoliubov-
deGennes(BdG) transformation[52вҖ“54],

ciПғ =
пҝҪ

n

пҝҪ
ОіnПғui,n вҲ’ ПғОівҖ 
n,вҲ’ПғvвҲ—
i,n
пҝҪ
,
(15)

where ОівҖ (Оі) are Bogoliubov creation (annihilation) operator.
The resulting eigensystem is then solved self-consistently for
all the local Hartree, Fock and Bogoliubov order parameters
and Вө. If there are N lattice sites, then there are (5N +1) vari-
ables to be solved self-consistently. We initialize the SC pair-
ing вҲҶij and and the bond density ПҮij, and local density to be
the modulating around a mean value with a desired wavevec-
tor Q = (1/О»)2ПҖ/a0ЛҶx,. Here О» is the period of oscillations
and a0 is the lattice-spacing. We focus on the unidirectional
density wave orders in this paper. The initial guess is given by

вҲҶi,i+a = вҲҶ0 + вҲҶQ cos(Q.ri).
(16)

вҲҶ0 is the guess mean SC pairing amplitude, and вҲҶQ is the ini-
tial guess for SC pairing modulation amplitude. We initialize
the bond and local density similarly and use such a trail solu-
tion to achieve self-consistency. We perform further analysis
on those solutions for the cases we achieve self-consistency
with the desired wavevector.
One can evaluate the self-consistent d-wave and extended
s-wave components from the SC pairing вҲҶij by using the fol-
lowing definition

вҲҶd(i) = 1

4 (вҲҶi,i+ЛҶx + вҲҶi,iвҲ’ЛҶx вҲ’ вҲҶi,i+ЛҶy вҲ’ вҲҶi,iвҲ’ЛҶy) ,
(17)

вҲҶs(i) = 1

4 (вҲҶi,i+ЛҶx + вҲҶi,iвҲ’ЛҶx + вҲҶi,i+ЛҶy + вҲҶi,iвҲ’ЛҶy) .
(18)

Similar definition can be made for the d-wave and extended
s-wave component for the bond density order ПҮij.

ПҮd(i) = 1

4 (ПҮi,i+ЛҶx + ПҮi,iвҲ’ЛҶx вҲ’ ПҮi,i+ЛҶy вҲ’ ПҮi,iвҲ’ЛҶy) ,
(19)

ПҮs(i) = 1

4 (ПҮi,i+ЛҶx + ПҮi,iвҲ’ЛҶx + ПҮi,i+ЛҶy + ПҮi,iвҲ’ЛҶy) .
(20)

To extract the finite-momentum component of the charge,
bond and pairing, we first calculate the Fourier components

of the variation of an ordering. For example, the Fourier com-
ponent for the local density, is given by

ЛңПҒ(q) = 1

N

пҝҪ

i
exp(iq.ri)(ПҒi вҲ’ ПҒ).
(21)

Note that we remove the average density from the local den-
sity to consider only the oscillating part instead of the uniform
part. The principal peak from the Fourier component gives us
the modulation wavevector Q for the desired quantity. The
modulation amplitude from the local density is evaluated by
the strength of ЛңПҒ(q) at this wavevector such that ПҮQ
ПҒ вүЎ ЛңПҒ(Q).
Similarly, we can define the other modulation amplitude by
using the Fourier transform of the respective order parame-
ters, as

ЛңПҮd(q) = 1

N

пҝҪ

i
exp(iq.ri)(ПҮd(i) вҲ’ ПҮd),
(22)

ЛңПҮs(q) = 1

N

пҝҪ

i
exp(iq.ri)(ПҮs(i) вҲ’ ПҮs),
(23)

ЛңвҲҶd(q) = 1

N

пҝҪ

i
exp(iq.ri)(вҲҶd(i) вҲ’ вҲҶd),
(24)

ЛңвҲҶs(q) = 1

N

пҝҪ

i
exp(iq.ri)(вҲҶs(i) вҲ’ вҲҶs).
(25)

Here ПҮd are the spatially averaged component d-wave bond
density. The finite-momentum component at the dominant
wavevector is again defined as ПҮQ
d вүЎ ЛңПҮd(Q). Similar defi-
nitions are also used for the other variables.
We can also track the broken rotational symmetry of the
bond density and cooper pair density operators by using [7]

NПҮ = 1

2

пҝҪ

вҹЁПҮ2xвҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁПҮ2yвҹ©
(26)

NвҲҶ = 1

2

пҝҪ

вҹЁвҲҶ2xвҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁвҲҶ2yвҹ©
(27)

where the average вҹЁ...вҹ© is over the lattice sites. Notice that this
quantity only contributes when there is a nematicity and will
vanish for purely extended s-wave and d-wave component of
bond or cooper pair density.
In order to describe our results in the subsequent sections,
our strategy is the following. First, we extract the optimal
wavevector by comparing the variational ground state energy
of the self-consistent BdG solutions at each doping.
Sub-
sequently, we utilize the optimal self-consistent solution to
study the variation of different order parameters with doping.
Finally, we also show the local features of the optimal solu-
tions for a few dopings.

III.
RESULTS

Our calculations are done on a two-dimensional square lat-
tice unit-cell of linear dimension 40a0 to 60a0. The lattice
size was tuned withing this range to keep the lattice commen-
surate with the period of modulations. We found that the self-
consistency becomes easier if we accommodate even number


4

FIG. 1. Compares the ground state energy of the self-consistent so-
lutions with different wavevectors for a few dopings. The thick lines
are the guide to the eyes. The dotted lines display the EGS for the
uniform and the nematic states. (a) For Оҙ = 0.075 there is clearly
a minima for О» = 4. As the doping rises to Оҙ = 0.1, the opti-
mal modulation wavelength increases to О» = 5. The wavelength
keeps increasing further with reduced doping, becoming О» = 8 for
Оҙ = 0.125. At Оҙ = 0.14, the nematic state becomes the optimal
ground state. The inset of (f) demonstrates the decrease of optimal
wavevector with doping.

of full periodic density wave oscillations within the unit-cell.
For instance, for a system with period of 8a0, we use a system
size of 48a0Г—48a0. We have also checked that our qualitative
results are independent of the system size.

A.
Optimal modulation wavevector with doping

We begin our analysis by studying the ground state en-
ergy for different self-consistent solutions of the BdG equa-
tions. Initially, we start with a trail state with a single mod-
ulation wavevector at Q = (1/О»)2ПҖ/a0 for the pairing am-
plitude, bond and charge density and try to achieve self-
consistency. For each case, we achieve self-consistent solu-
tions for the desired wavevector; we calculate the ground state
energy EGS = вҹЁHвҹ©MF, which is presented in Fig. (1) for dif-
ferent wavevectors and for several dopings. The minimum of
EGS(Q) gives us the optimal solution at each doping level.
We also present the estimate of the EGS for the uniform and

the nematic orders (Q = 0) with the dashed lines. The ne-
matic order breaks the C4-rotational symmetry of the square
lattice, although it is spatially uniform.
Therefore, this is
the charge (and pairing) nematic state where the x and the y-
component of the bond (and pairing) density are different(See
Sec (III C 3) for details).

FIG. 2. Presents the evolution of different order parameters with
doping. (a) Shows the evolution of the amplitude of oscillations for
the different quantities at the optimal ground state. The blue lines
exhibit the oscillation amplitude for the local density at the optimal
wavevector. Similarly, the orange and green curves show the evolu-
tion of finite-momentum amplitude for extended s-wave and d-wave
bond density. Moreover, the same for the superconducting pairing
in extended s-wave and d-wave channels is presented in red and vi-
olet traces. The lines are the guide to the eyes. All these spatially
modulated orders vanish near the Оҙ вүҲ 0.14. (b) Displays the mean
d-wave superconducting pairing in the blue trace, compared with the
case where no charge or bond density orders are allowed вҲҶ0
d in cyan.
The average вҲҶd significantly reduces in the regions where the charge
and bond orders are stable. Moreover, we show the renormalized d-
wave pairing ЛңвҲҶd, which also reduces in the regime where charge and
pairing oscillations are dominant i.e., Оҙ < 0.16. (c) Presents the ne-
maticity in the ПҮ and вҲҶ with red and black traces respectively. The
nematicity vanishes around the doping Оҙ = 0.16.

At low-doping, the evolution of EGS has a minima at О» =
4, as seen in Fig. (1a) and Fig. (1b). The purely nematic and
the uniform states also have much higher energy than the opti-
mal solution. As the doping is increased to Оҙ = 0.1, the energy
for a system with density waves of primarily Q = (1/5)2ПҖ/a0
minimizes the system. The optimal modulation wavevector
shortens further to Q0 = 1/6 вҲ’ 1/8 in r.l.u. with increasing
doping as seen in Fig. (1d) and Fig. (1e). The decreasing
optimal wavevector with doping is also presented in the in-
set of Fig. (1f). Increasing the doping further makes the ne-
matic state energitically favorable than the spatially modulat-
ing ones, as shown in Fig. (1f). For Оҙ > 0.16, only the uniform


5

SC states are sustained.
Interestingly, EGS for the doping range Оҙ
=
0.1 вҲ’
0.14 reveal that states with different wavevectors are quasi-
degenerate as marked by the shallowing minima. Such ener-
getically close-lying orders open up the possibility of a state
with an admixture of different wavevectors. This can lead to
an incommensuration of the density wave [55, 56]. We will
show in the subsequent sections, that although we start with a
single wavevector, higher harmonics of the same wavevector
appears in the self-consistent solutions.
Finally, we note that the demise of the modulated orders
with doping takes an intriguing pathway. The sharp minima at
a particular wavevector at low-dopings indicate that the mod-
ulated state with the optimal Q is stable. However, around
Оҙ = 0.14 as shown in Fig. (1f), the modulated states with
different wavevectors as well as the nematic and the uniform
SC states strikingly become quasi-degenerate . In this regime,
minute energy differences can tilt the balance of these orders
locally. Beyond Оҙ > 0.16, only the uniform dвҲ’wave super-
conducting self-consistent solutions are obtained, indicating
the demise of modulated and nematic phases.

B.
Variation of order parameters with doping

Above variational analysis identifies the modulated charge
patterns in the ground state, but now we proceed to explore
the strength of the corresponding spatially modulated orders.
In Fig. (2a), we show the strength of different modulation am-
plitude at the dominant wavevector defined using Eq. (21-25).
Interestingly, over the range of doping, the finite momen-
tum components of BDW, CDW, and PDW orders are sig-
nificant for Оҙ < 0.14 as shown in Fig. (2a). However, the
d-wave BDW order is the dominant almost over the whole
doping range studied. Focusing, on the modulation amplitude
for dSC pairing, вҲҶQ
d , we observe a non-monotonic behavior
with doping. For low doping, the d-wave SC pairing mod-
ulations are weaker than other energy scales. However, вҲҶQ
d
increase rapidly Оҙ = 0.1. Similarly, there remains a signifi-
cant extended s-wave pairing modulation at all dopings below
Оҙ = 0.14. We emphasize that the wavevector of the modu-
lated orders reduces around this doping as established in the
Sec. (III A). Recently, STM experiments observed signatures
of unidirectional PDW state with Q = (1/8)2ПҖ/a0 coexisting
with uniform superconducting order in underdoped BSSCO at
zero magnetic fields [24, 25].
We have also presented the mean d-wave SC pairing am-
plitude in Fig. (2b) and compared it with the situation when
all the modulated orders are suppressed in вҲҶ0
d. In the regime
where the spatially varying states exist, the average вҲҶd re-
duces significantly from the uniform case. The renormalized
d-wave pairing amplitude ЛңвҲҶd also diminishes due to the inter-
play with the density wave orders.
We also find the signatures of nematicity throughout the
doping range Оҙ < 0.16, which is indicated by the non-zero
NвҲҶ and NПҮ in Fig. (2c). The mean bond density and the
Cooper pair density is different along the x and y-directions,
thus breaking the C4 rotational symmetry of the square lattice.

For the present calculation, the nematic order coexists only
with uniform dSC order in the doping range Оҙ = 0.14 вҲ’ 0.16.
However, it also coexists with all spatially modulating orders
in the doping range Оҙ = 0.06 вҲ’ 0.14 as shown in Fig. (2).

C.
Spatial profile for the optimal solution

In this subsection, we explore the spatial structure of the op-
timal solution at a few doping levels. STM experiments rou-
tinely map the spatial variation of diverse orders. Therefore,
we start by concentrating on the low-doping regime where we
find a unidirectional BDW, PDW, and CDW state with a peri-
odic modulation of four lattice spacing.

1.
CDW, BDW and PDW state with Q = (1/4, 0)

The Fig. (3a) presents the bond density ПҮij in the color plot.
As mentioned before, we consider unidirectional modulated
states, and therefore, the bond order only modulates along the
x-direction while it is uniform along the y-direction. Inter-
estingly, the ПҮij at each site displays different x and y com-
ponents as shown in Fig. (3a), leading to a charge nematicity
coexisting with the density wave orders.
Next, we extract the d-wave and the extended s-wave com-
ponents of the self-consistent Fock shift using Eq.(19) and
Eq. (20). Both the ПҮd and ПҮs modulates in space with a period
of four lattice spacings. We also present the variation of the
local density ПҒi in the inset of Fig. (3c). We observe spatial
modulation of the local density, although it has a much rapid
variation instead of regular behavior over a single period.
Fig. (3c) exhibits the Fourier transform of bond and charge
density as calculated from Eq. (21-23). Our goal is to cap-
ture the dominant oscillations for each component of bond and
charge modulations. Hence, we removed the mean to elimi-
nate the peak coming from the uniform values of these quan-
tities. The principal peak for the d-wave BDW and s-wave
BDW is observed at the expected value of Q = (1/4)2ПҖ/a0,
and both ЛңПҮs(Q) and ЛңПҮd(Q) have the same strength at this dop-
ing. Moreover, there is no other additional peak for both ЛңПҮd(q)
andЛңПҮs(q). The amplitude of the CDW oscillation is much
weaker than the BDW ones. Also, there is a sub-dominant
peak at Q = (1/2)2ПҖ/a0, arising from higher-order harmon-
ics of the local density oscillation.
We present the SC pairing вҲҶij on bonds in Fig. (3d) and
the extracted d-wave and extended s-wave in Fig. (3e). Notice
that for a uniform tJ model, the expectation value for the SC
pairing with a d-wave form-factor is finite, but the same for
extended s-wave vanishes [50, 51]. Therefore, the вҲҶs pairing
modulation transpires around zero, whereas pairing modula-
tion of the вҲҶd occurs around a non-zero mean value [57]. A
PDW state is cooper pairing modulations such that the aver-
age pairing vanishes. For the usual pairing modulation due to
the interplay of charge or bond density wave order, the mean
pairing is significantly larger than the modulation amplitude.
Therefore, we observe a PDW oscillation for the extended s-
wave pairing, whereas a normal pairing modulation in the d-


6

FIG. 3. Spatial profile for the optimal self-consistent solution at Оҙ = 0.075. Here the periodicity of unidirectional oscillation is 4a0. (a) Shows
the bond density ПҮij = пҝҪ

ПғвҹЁcвҖ 
iПғcjПғвҹ©, where i, j are nearest neighbouring sites. (b) The d-wave and extended s-wave components of the ПҮ are
extracted in (b). Both clearly show pure oscillations with the periodicity of four lattice spacings. The inset of (c) shows the spatial profile for
the local density, which also oscillates. (c) Exhibits the Fourier transform of these quantities. The dominant wavevector for all the oscillations
is at Q = (1/4)2ПҖ/a0 as expected. (d) Shows the similar bond plots for local SC pairing вҲҶij. (e) Shows the corresponding d-wave and the
extended s-wave component of SC pairing. (f) Illustrates the Fourier transform for the oscillating part of вҲҶd and вҲҶs. The pairing modulations
also manifest a dominant peak at Q = (1/4)2ПҖ/a0 at this dopings.

wave channel. While the component of extended s-wave pair-
ing is essentially absent in the uniform superconductor, the
presence of the modulated charge orders brings extended s-
wave pairing modulation into life. The Fourier transform for
the pairing gives an equally strong pairing modulation ampli-
tude for both the form factor with no subdominant peak, as
presented in Fig. (3d).

2.
CDW, BDW and PDW state with Q = (1/8, 0)

For Оҙ = 0.125, the primary wavevector of the modulated
orders in our microscopic model reduces to Q = (1/8)2ПҖ/a0.
Fig. (4a) shows the bond density and Fig. (4b) the d-wave and
sвҖІ-wave component of the same. The modulation of the bond
density is not smooth over the period and therefore accom-
modates higher harmonics. This is also true for the density
modulations presented as an inset of Fig. (4c). The presence
of higher harmonics of oscillations is verified by the strong
subdominant peaks of the Fourier transform of the BDW and
CDW orders as exhibited in Fig. (4c). Interestingly, the d-
wave BDW becomes the dominant form factor at q = 0.125 in

reciprocal lattice unit (rlu). However, the ЛңПҮs has an intriguing
evolution. For the extended s-wave BDW modulations, the
dominant peak shifts at q = (1/4)2ПҖ/a0, which is at q = 2Q.
Similarly,
the SC pairing amplitude is presented in
Fig. (4d), and the extended s-wave and d-wave components
are presented in Fig. (4e). The pairing modulation is smoother
contrasted to the BDW or CDW oscillations. In Fig. (4f) the
Fourier transform of вҲҶd and вҲҶs confirms the dominant order-
ing at q = (1/8)2ПҖ/a0. The secondary peaks are also much
weaker than the principal ones.

3.
Nematic state

Finally, for Оҙ = 0.14, the optimal self-consistent solution
supports a Q = 0 nematic state. Fig. (5a) shows the bond
density amplitude. The color difference indicates the breaking
of the rotational symmetry of the square lattice. However,
there are no modulations of the bond density either along the
x or y-directions. Moreover, the lack of spatially modulated
order is confirmed by the SC pairing in Fig. (5b) and the local
density in Fig. (5c).


7

FIG. 4.
Spatial profile for the optimal self-consistent solution at Оҙ = 0.125. Here the periodicity of unidirectional oscillation is 8a0. (a)
Shows the bond density ПҮij, where i, j are nearest neighboring sites. (b) The d-wave and extended s-wave components of the ПҮ are extracted
in (b). Both show some jerky oscillations with the periodicity of eight lattice spacings. The inset of (c) shows the spatial profile for the local
density, which oscillates. (c) Exhibits the Fourier transform of the quantities mentioned above The dominant wavevector for ПҮd and ПҮПҒ are at
Q = (1/8)2ПҖ/a0, whereas the same for ПҮs is at Q = (1/4)2ПҖ/a0 However, several peaks at the multiples of the ordering wavevector, implies
that density modulation is not regular over a period at this doping. (d) Shows the similar bond plots for local SC pairing вҲҶij. (e) Shows the
corresponding d-wave and the extended s-wave component of SC pairing. (f) Displays the Fourier transform for the oscillating part of вҲҶd and
вҲҶs. The pairing modulations also exhibit a dominant peak at Q = (1/8)2ПҖ/a0 at this dopings.

IV.
DISCUSSIONS

We study the t вҲ’ tвҖІ вҲ’ J model with additional nearest-
neighbor repulsion and find modulating bond density wave
states coexisting with charge and pairing modulated states in
the underdoped regime. The modulated states have lower en-
ergy than the uniform d-wave superconducting state in the
doping range Оҙ = 0.06 вҲ’ 0.14. The optimal wavevector for
all the modulated quantities is commensurate with the lat-
tice with higher harmonics of oscillations. Over the doping
range Оҙ = 0.06 вҲ’ 0.16, there remains a significant nematicity
such that the C4-rotational symmetry is broken. Moreover, for
Оҙ = 0.14 вҲ’ 0.16, the system supports a purely nematic state
without any translation symmetry breaking. Finally, beyond
this doping, only a uniform dвҲ’wave superconducting order is
stabilized. In the following subsections, we discuss how this
work compares with other results in the literature in the con-
text of the cuprates.

A.
Role of strong correlation in stabilizing modulated orders

We attempted to study the modulated states by relaxing the
strong correlation constraint by setting the Gutzwiller factors
to unity. In the past, studies have been performed for d-wave
SC in the tJ model, and this procedure is known as Inhomo-
geneous Mean Field Theory (IMT) [50, 51]. In sharp con-
trast to the strongly correlated results presented in this pa-
per, we failed to stabilize any modulated solutions across the
parameter regime studied. Of course, an absence of modu-
lated self-consistent solutions might be due to a lack of ex-
haustive search or a bad initial guess of the order parameters.
However, any initial trail state with modulated charge, pair-
ing, and bond densities flowed strictly towards a uniform d-
wave SC solution. Furthermore, the ease of achieving modu-
lated self-consistent solutions for multiple wavevectors over a
wide doping range in the highly correlated regime indicates a
lack of modulated states in the absence of a strong correlation.
The propensity to form modulated orders near the half-filling
where the interactions are stronger also hints at the same pos-
sibility. Recent explorations of the pair density of states in the


8

FIG. 5. Shows the spatial dependence for the optimal self-consistent
solution at Оҙ = 0.14. Although the optimal self-consistent solu-
tion has no modulation in this parameter regime, it breaks the C4-
rotational symmetry of the square lattice leading to a charge nematic
state. (a) Shows the bond density ПҮij, which is different for the
x-bonds and y-bonds. Similarly, the local SC pairing is not purely
d-wave as shown in (b) as expected in the uniform tJ-model. Inter-
estingly, there is no spatial variation of these quantities or the local
density as presented in (c).

tJвҲ’ model also observed a lack of modulated orders when the
Gutzwiller factors are set to unity [58].

B.
Evolution of optimal wavevector with doping

In the t вҲ’ tвҖІ вҲ’ J model with additional nearest-neighbor
repulsion, the optimal modulation wavevector reduces with
increasing doping. For doping around Оҙ = 0.06вҲ’0.09 the op-
timal wavevector is around Q = (1/4)2ПҖ/a0. As the doping
is increased further, the periodicity increases to 8a0 around
Оҙ = 0.125 as shown in the inset of Fig. (1f). Generally, in the
cuprates, the wavevectors also diminish with increased hole
doping [12, 13] except in La-based material [14вҖ“16]. How-
ever, in La2CuO4 the additional spin density wave play a vi-
tal role in dictating the modulation wavevector [59, 60]. It
would be interesting to discern the role of magnetic orders on
the modulation wavevector in the future.
Additionally, in cuprates the wavevector varies from
Q = 0.33 вҲ’ 0.2 (2ПҖ/a0) leading to a periodicity of 3 вҲ’ 5 lat-
tice spacing up to Оҙ = 0.2. However, this contrasts with theo-
retical calculations that often predict longer modulation wave-
length in the tJ-model and the associated Hubbard model at

large U [35]. The evolution of the ground state energy in
Fig. (1) hints towards an explanation of this apparent anomaly.
Notice that below Оҙ < 0.1, the difference between the EGS at
the optimal wavevector with other wavevector is significant.
Note that we only studied the commensurate wavelengths
with the lattice spacings. However, the energy difference be-
tween the states with different wavelengths becomes minute,
ОҙE вҲј 0.001t as doping increases beyond Оҙ > 0.1. Since
these states are near degenerate, various fluctuations absent in
our study can modify the delicate balance of energy. Conse-
quently, the state with a smaller wavelength can become the
ground state.
Aditionally, there can be another important consequnece for
near-degeneracy of modulated states with different wavevec-
tors as shown in Fig. (1c)-Fig. (1f). This can possibly sup-
port a state with an adimixture of different wavevectors. Fur-
thermore, the irregular evolution of the ПҮd and ПҮs over a pe-
riod in Fig. (4b) also hints towards the incipient incommen-
suration.
Such patterns generates strong higher harmonics
in the Fourier transform of the BDW order in Fig. (4c). A
splitting or broadening of the primary peak of the ЛңПҮ(q) indi-
cates an incommensuration of any density wave pattern. Here,
strong higher harmonics with the presence of nearby quasi-
degenerate states can drive a multi-peak incommensuration
around Оҙ вүҲ 0.125.

C.
Nearest neigbor repulsion term in the tJ-model

The t вҲ’ J model and its вҖңparentвҖқ вҖ“ Hubbard model with
large on-site repulsion U are generally considered the minimal
model for cuprate superconductors. However, the interactions
are not entirely screened in realistic materials to be completely
local. A residual nearest-neighbor repulsion is estimated to be
one order of magnitude smaller than the on-site repulsion in
cuprates [61вҖ“63]. Such interactions are often neglected due to
their reduced magnitude. However, they become crucial when
the ground state without them shows near-degeneracy among
several broken symmetry states, as in the underdoped regime
of the t вҲ’ J model.
The modulated orders in the t вҲ’ tвҖІ вҲ’ J model have been
studied extensively in the past [38, 44, 58, 64]. These stud-
ies found different modulating bond, charge, and pair density
wave states energetically very close yet higher than the uni-
form superconducting ground state. Therefore, additional in-
gredients absent in the t вҲ’ tвҖІ вҲ’ J must be responsible for sta-
bilizing the spatially modulating density wave orders as the
ground state in cuprates. Ref. [44] suggests studying a tJ-
model with additional on-site repulsion stabilizing nematic
phases with superconductivity. There are other studies sug-
gesting that adding a nearest-neighbor repulsion term to prefer
the density wave orders as the ground state [40, 42]. In par-
ticular, the nearest neighbor repulsion is expected to be detri-
mental to the d-wave superconductivity and can thus stabilize
the nearby density waves orders as the ground state. Similar to
these studies, we also observed that a critical value of nearest
neighbor repulsion is essential to stabilize the density wave
orders [40, 42].


9

Furthermore, increasing the nearest neighbor repulsion
term keeping the other terms constant allows for the modu-
lated orders to survive up to higher dopings. We have con-
firmed that for W = 0.75t, the spatially modulated orders
remain the ground state up to Оҙ = 0.16 whereas the ground
state becomes purely nematic in Оҙ = 0.16 вҲ’ 0.19. The energy
difference between nematic and the uniform state remains sig-
nificantly more prominent for larger W leading to unambigu-
ous identification of the nematic regime.

D.
Pairing modulation

We observe modulations of the cooper pair density both in
the extended s-wave and the d-wave channel over the dop-
ing range Оҙ = 0.06 вҲ’ 0.14. A modulation of cooper pair-
ing can be a direct consequence of the coexistence with the
BDW order. On one hand, the modulation of the bond den-
sity leads to an oscillation of the local density of states which
dictates the propensity for developing local SC pair and drives
the modulation of the pairing. On the other hand, a more ex-
otic pair density wave is a state of spatially oscillating Cooper
pair such that the average pairing vanishes or is very small. In
our analysis, the вҲҶs shows a vanishingly small mean with a
robust modulation amplitude over the whole doping range as
presented in Fig. (3e) and Fig. (4e). On the other hand, the
d-wave SC pairing modulates around a finite non-zero value.
Consequently, this indicates a PDW with sвҖІ form factor coex-
isting with other modulated states over a wide doping range.
Recent experiments on BSSCO [24, 25] claims to observe
PDW modulations at QP = (1/8)2ПҖ/a0 of вҲј 6 meV coex-
isting with a uniform SC at вҲј 36 meV. The observed PDW
state has either extended s-wave or s-wave form factor. These
studies also observe CDW oscillations at QC = Qp and at
QC = 2QP . The model calculations around Оҙ = 0.125 reveal
a similar behavior вҖ“ an extended s-wave PDW undulation with
a non-zero mean d-wave superconductor. Furthermore, the
optimal self-consistent solution displays a PDW order q = Q
with the CDW orders at both q = Q and q = 2Q, very sim-
ilar to what we observe in Fig. (4c). It is encouraging that
our simplified model for modulated orders in strongly corre-
lated systems can capture some features of the experimental
signatures.

E.
Vestigial nematic order

Our model calculation reveals that a translationally invari-
ant nematic state stabilizes in the doping range Оҙ = 0.14 вҲ’
0.16. Note that the nematic state is a higher order compo-
nent of the superconducting and bond order parameter. If the
bond order ПҮ is written as a vector then the nematic order is
given by NПҮ = 1/2(вҹЁПҮвҖ ПғzПҮвҹ©, where Пғz is the z-component
of the Pauli matrix. In the nematic state the combined order
parameter is finite although the вҹЁПҮQ
x вҹ© = 0 and вҹЁПҮQ
y вҹ© = 0.
Consequently, nematic state breaks only a subset of the all
possible symmetry that can be broken in this regime leading
to a vestigial nematic state.

FIG. 6. Presents a schematic symmetry broken phases with doping
from our model calculations at zero temperature. The doping regime
presented below the broken line is beyond the scope of this study.
Below this doping we expect magenetic and other symmetries to be
broken. From the low to intermediate dopings, both the translation
symmetry, T and the C4 rotational symmetry is broken, leading to
the observation of the bond, charge, and pair density wave orders.
Beyond a doping level, only C4 rotational symmetry is broken, lead-
ing to a nematic state. Note that fewer symmetries are broken as the
doping is increased. Beyond critical doping, only translational and
rotational invariant d-wave SC remains robust. Uniform supercon-
ductors only break the particle number conservation symmetry. The
uniform d-wave SC remains robust over the whole doping regime
studied, only decaying at much higher doping.

Recently sublattice resolved electronic structure experi-
ments in cuprates [8] reveal a Q = 0 nematic state over the
doping range Оҙ = 0.06 вҲ’ 0.17. The vestigial nematic state
coexists with finite-Q d-wave charge order and a uniform d-
wave in the intermediate dopings. A pure nematic state with-
out any translational symmetry breaking is also found in the
doping range Оҙ = 0.15 вҲ’ 0.17. We note that our optimal solu-
tion also sustains a pure C4 rotational symmetry breaking or-
der around doping. Beyond this doping, only uniform d-wave
superconductivity stabilizes in our model calculation.

F.
Phase diagram

In Fig. (6), we provide a schematic map of different sym-
metry breaking orders based on our model calculations at zero
temperature. The doping regime presented below the broken
line is beyond the scope of this study. Uniform superconduc-
tors only break the particle number conservation symmetry.
At zero temperature, our model calculation suggests that uni-
form d-wave SC remains robust over the whole doping regime
studied, only decaying at much higher doping. In contrast,
the finite-Q density wave states become relevant only in the
lightly doped regime. The density wave order breaks both the
translation, T and the C4 rotational symmetry of the square
lattice. Note that Fig. (2b) shows that the mean d-wave pair-
ing amplitude reduces drastically in the regime where other
symmetries are broken. Consequently, the suppression of SC
pairing is expected from our calculations at T = 0. A similar
drop in superconducting correlations is observed in cuprates


10

around the hole-doping of 12%, where the amplitude of the
modulated orders is strong [65, 66].
Between the finite-Q orders and the uniform SC, there is
a regime where the rotational symmetry remains broken al-
though the translational invariance is restored. Such a state
is a vestigial nematic state which breaks a a smaller subset
of symmetries than the primary state of density wave orders.
The series of cascading broken symmetries as the doping re-
duces hints at the possible entanglement between multiple or-
ders near the highly correlated regime.
The charge density waves [67] and the associated vesti-
gial nematicity [6вҖ“8] are considered an essential ingredient of
the pseudogap state. Our study suggests that ground state of
cuprates in the underdoped regime indeed breaks certain sym-
metries generating various density wave states, which mani-
fests in experiments as the pseudogap state in cuprates at finite
temperature. Therefore, to capture the pseudogap state, it is

essential to analyze the effects of different fluctuations on all
different broken symmetry states. Furthermore, thermal and
quantum fluctuations can lead to spatial reorganization into
domains of finite-Q and Q = 0 orders [68вҖ“70]. Additionally,
the Mott insulator and magnetically ordered states can signif-
icantly alter the states at low doping. A rigorous treatment of
the magnetic orders with these broken symmetry states, along
with the effects of thermal fluctuations, remains to be explored
in the future.

V.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors thank Yvan Sidis, Maxence Grandadam, and
Debmalya Chakraborty for valuable discussions. This work
has received financial support from the ERC, under grant
agreement AdG694651-CHAMPAGNE.

[1] B. Keimer and J. Moore, Nature Physics 13, 1045 (2017).
[2] J. P. Sun, K. Matsuura, G. Z. Ye, Y. Mizukami, M. Shimozawa,
K. Matsubayashi, M. Yamashita, T. Watashige, S. Kasahara,
Y. Matsuda, J.-Q. Yan, B. C. Sales, Y. Uwatoko, J.-G. Cheng,
and T. Shibauchi, Nature Communications 7, 12146 (2016).

[3] E. Dagotto, Science 309, 257 (2005).
[4] D. Bounoua, L. Mangin-Thro, J. Jeong, R. Saint-Martin,
L. Pinsard-Gaudart, Y. Sidis, and P. Bourges, Communications
Physics 3, 1 (2020).

[5] E. Fradkin, S. A. Kivelson, and J. M. Tranquada, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 87, 457 (2015).

[6] R. M. Fernandes, P. P. Orth, and J. Schmalian, Annual Review
of Condensed Matter Physics 10, 133 (2019).

[7] L. Nie, G. Tarjus, and S. A. Kivelson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
111, 7980 (2014).

[8] S. Mukhopadhyay, R. Sharma, C. K. Kim, S. D. Edkins, M. H.
Hamidian, H. Eisaki, S.-i. Uchida, E.-A. Kim, M. J. Lawler,
A. P. Mackenzie, et al., Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 116, 13249 (2019).

[9] J. E. Hoffman, E. W. Hudson, K. M. Lang, V. Madhavan,
H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, and J. C. Davis, Science 295, 466 (2002).

[10] W. D. Wise, M. C. Boyer, K. Chatterjee, T. Kondo, T. Takeuchi,
H. Ikuta, Y. Wang, and E. W. Hudson, Nat. Phys. 4, 696 (2008).

[11] A. Frano, S. Blanco-Canosa, B. Keimer, and R. J. Birgeneau,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 32, 374005 (2020).

[12] R. Comin, A. Frano, M. M. Yee, Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki,
E. Schierle, E. Weschke, R. Sutarto, F. He, A. Soumya-
narayanan, Y. He, M. Le Tacon, I. S. Elfimov, J. E. Hoffman,
G. A. Sawatzky, B. Keimer, and A. Damascelli, Science 343,
390 (2014).

[13] E. H. da Silva Neto, P. Aynajian, A. Frano, R. Comin,
E. Schierle, E. Weschke, A. Gyenis, J. Wen, J. Schneeloch,
Z. Xu, S. Ono, G. Gu, M. Le Tacon, and A. Yazdani, Science
343, 393 (2014).

[14] J. Fink, E. Schierle, E. Weschke, J. Geck, D. Hawthorn,
V. Soltwisch, H. Wadati, H.-H. Wu, H. A. DВЁurr, N. Wizent,
B. BВЁuchner, and G. A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. B 79, 100502(R)
(2009).

[15] J. Fink, V. Soltwisch, J. Geck, E. Schierle, E. Weschke, and
B. BВЁuchner, Phys. Rev. B 83, 092503 (2011).

[16] M. HВЁucker, M. v. Zimmermann, G. D. Gu, Z. J. Xu, J. S. Wen,
G. Xu, H. J. Kang, A. Zheludev, and J. M. Tranquada, Phys.
Rev. B 83, 104506 (2011).

[17] E. M. Forgan, E. Blackburn, A. T. Holmes, A. K. R.
Briffa, J. Chang, L. Bouchenoire, S. D. Brown, R. Liang,
D. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, N. B. Christensen, M. V. Zimmermann,
M. HВЁucker,
and S. M. Hayden, Nature Communications 6,
10064 (2015).

[18] R. Comin, R. Sutarto, F. He, E. H. da Silva Neto, L. Chauviere,
A. Frano, R. Liang, W. N. Hardy, D. A. Bonn, Y. Yoshida,
H. Eisaki, A. J. Achkar, D. G. Hawthorn, B. Keimer, G. A.
Sawatzky, and A. Damascelli, Nature Materials 14, 796 (2015).

[19] R. Comin, R. Sutarto, E. H. da Silva Neto, L. Chauviere,
R. Liang, W. N. Hardy, D. A. Bonn, F. He, G. A. Sawatzky,
and A. Damascelli, Science 347, 1335 (2015).

[20] G. Campi, A. Bianconi, N. Poccia, G. Bianconi, L. Barba,
G. Arrighetti, D. Innocenti, J. Karpinski, N. D. Zhigadlo, S. M.
Kazakov, M. Burghammer, M. V. Zimmermann, M. Sprung,
and A. Ricci, Nature (London) 525, 359 (2015).

[21] Y. Kohsaka, C. Taylor, K. Fujita, A. Schmidt, C. Lupien,
T. Hanaguri, M. Azuma, M. Takano, H. Eisaki, H. Takagi,
S. Uchida, and J. C. Davis, Science 315, 1380 (2007).

[22] C. V. C. Parker, P. P. Aynajian, E. H. E. da Silva Neto, A. A.
Pushp, S. S. Ono, J. J. Wen, Z. Z. Xu, G. G. Gu, and A. A.
Yazdani, Nature 468, 677 (2010).

[23] M. K. Chan, N. Harrison, R. D. McDonald, B. J. Ramshaw,
K. A. Modic, N. BariЛҮsiВҙc, and M. Greven, Nature Communica-
tions 7, 12244 (2016).

[24] M. H. Hamidian, S. D. Edkins, S. H. Joo, A. Kostin, H. Eisaki,
S. Uchida, M. J. Lawler, E.-A. Kim, A. P. Mackenzie, K. Fujita,
J. Lee, and J. C. S. Davis, Nature 532, 343 (2016).

[25] Z. Du, H. Li, S. H. Joo, E. P. Donoway, J. Lee, J. S. Davis,
G. Gu, P. D. Johnson, and K. Fujita, Nature 580, 65 (2020).

[26] Z. Dai, T. Senthil, and P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 101, 064502
(2020).

[27] D. Chakraborty, M. Grandadam, M. H. Hamidian, J. C. S.
Davis, Y. Sidis, and C. PВҙepin, Phys. Rev. B 100, 224511 (2019).

[28] M. Grandadam, D. Chakraborty, and C. PВҙepin, Journal of Su-
perconductivity and Novel Magnetism 33, 2361 (2020).

[29] P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. X 4, 031017 (2014).


11

[30] X. Y. Xu, K. T. Law, and P. A. Lee, Physical review letters 122,
167001 (2019).

[31] E. Berg, E. Fradkin, and S. A. Kivelson, Physical review letters
105, 146403 (2010).

[32] C. Peng, Y.-F. Jiang, T. P. Devereaux,
and H.-C. Jiang, npj
Quantum Materials 6, 64 (2021).

[33] S. S. Dash and D. SВҙenВҙechal, Physical Review B 103, 045142
(2021).

[34] S. Sachdev and R. La Placa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 027202
(2013).

[35] B.-X. Zheng, C.-M. Chung, P. Corboz, G. Ehlers, M.-P. Qin,
R. M. Noack, H. Shi, S. R. White, S. Zhang,
and G. K.-L.
Chan, Science 358, 1155 (2017).

[36] A. Himeda, T. Kato, and M. Ogata, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 117001
(2002).

[37] P. Corboz, T. M. Rice, and M. Troyer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113,
046402 (2014).

[38] P. Choubey, W.-L. Tu, T.-K. Lee, and P. Hirschfeld, New Jour-
nal of Physics 19, 013028 (2017).

[39] P. Choubey, S. H. Joo, K. Fujita, Z. Du, S. Edkins, M. Hamid-
ian, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, A. Mackenzie, J. Lee, et al., Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 14805 (2020).

[40] A. Allais, J. Bauer, and S. Sachdev, Phys. Rev. B 90, 155114
(2014).

[41] A. Allais, J. Bauer, and S. Sachdev, Indian J. Phys. 88, 905
(2014).

[42] J. SpaЕӮek, M. Zegrodnik, and J. Kaczmarczyk, Physical Review
B 95, 024506 (2017).

[43] J. D. Sau and S. Sachdev, Physical Review B 89, 075129 (2014).
[44] M. Zegrodnik and J. SpaЕӮek, Phys. Rev. B 98, 155144 (2018).
[45] H. Zhao, Z. Ren, B. Rachmilowitz, J. Schneeloch, R. Zhong,
G. Gu, Z. Wang, and I. Zeljkovic, Nature materials 18, 103
(2019).

[46] K. Chao, J. Spalek, and A. Oles, Journal of Physics C: Solid
State Physics 10, L271 (1977).

[47] P. Fazekas, Lecture notes on electron correlation and mag-
netism, Vol. 5 (World scientific, 1999).

[48] N. Fukushima, Physical Review B 78, 115105 (2008).
[49] W.-H. Ko, C. P. Nave, and P. A. Lee, Physical Review B 76,
245113 (2007).

[50] D. Chakraborty and A. Ghosal, New Journal of Physics 16,
103018 (2014).

[51] A. Garg, M. Randeria, and N. Trivedi, Nature physics 4, 762
(2008).

[52] P.-G. De Gennes and P. A. Pincus, Superconductivity of metals
and alloys (CRC Press, 2018).

[53] A. Ghosal, M. Randeria, and N. Trivedi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,
3940 (1998).

[54] A. Ghosal, M. Randeria,
and N. Trivedi, Phys. Rev. B 65,
014501 (2001).

[55] M. Vershinin, Science 303, 1995 (2004).
[56] I. El Baggari, B. H. Savitzky, A. S. Admasu, J. Kim, S.-W.
Cheong, R. Hovden, and L. F. Kourkoutis, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 115, 1445 (2018).

[57] Note that the presence of the weak nematicity generates a small
value of mean вҲҶs.

[58] W.-L. Tu and T.-K. Lee, Scientific Reports 9, 1719 (2019).
[59] L. Nie, A. V. Maharaj, E. Fradkin, and S. A. Kivelson, Phys.
Rev. B 96, 085142 (2017).

[60] H. Miao, J. Lorenzana, G. Seibold, Y. Peng, A. Amorese,
F. Yakhou-Harris,
K. Kummer,
N. Brookes,
R. Konik,
V. Thampy, et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 114, 12430 (2017).

[61] A. Reymbaut, M. Charlebois, M. F. Asiani, L. Fratino,
P. SВҙemon, G. Sordi, and A.-M. Tremblay, Physical Review B
94, 155146 (2016).

[62] D. SВҙenВҙechal, A. G. R. Day, V. Bouliane, and A.-M. S. Trem-
blay, Phys. Rev. B 87, 075123 (2013).

[63] M. Jiang, U. R. HВЁahner, T. C. Schulthess, and T. A. Maier,
Physical Review B 97, 184507 (2018).

[64] K.-Y. Yang, W. Q. Chen, T. M. Rice, M. Sigrist,
and F.-C.
Zhang, New Journal of Physics 11, 055053 (2009).

[65] M. HВЁucker, N. B. Christensen, A. T. Holmes, E. Blackburn,
E. M. Forgan, R. Liang, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, O. Gutowski,
M. v. Zimmermann, S. M. Hayden, and J. Chang, Phys. Rev. B
90, 054514 (2014).

[66] S. Blanco-Canosa, A. Frano, E. Schierle, J. Porras, T. Loew,
M. Minola, M. Bluschke, E. Weschke, B. Keimer,
and
M. Le Tacon, Phys. Rev. B 90, 054513 (2014).

[67] B. Loret, N. Auvray, Y. Gallais, M. Cazayous, A. Forget,
D. Colson, M.-H. Julien, I. Paul, M. Civelli, and A. Sacuto,
Nature Physics 15, 771 (2019).

[68] S. Lee, J. Collini, S. X.-L. Sun, M. Mitrano, X. Guo, C. Eck-
berg, J. Paglione, E. Fradkin, and P. Abbamonte, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 127, 027602 (2021).

[69] A. Banerjee, A. Garg, and A. Ghosal, Phys. Rev. B 98, 104206
(2018).

[70] D. Agterberg and H. Tsunetsugu, Nature Physics 4, 639 (2008).


