1

Topologically Protected Ferroelectric Domain Wall Memory with Large Readout

Current

Wenda Yang, Guo Tian*, Hua Fan, Yue Zhao, Hongying Chen, Luyong Zhang, Yadong Wang,

Zhen Fan*, Zhipeng Hou, Deyang Chen, Jinwei Gao, Min Zeng, Xubing Lu, Minghui Qin,

Xingsen Gao*, and Jun-Ming Liu

Wenda Yang, Guo Tian, Hongying Chen, Luyong Zhang, Yadong Wang, Zhen Fan, Zhipeng

Hou, Deyang Chen, Jinwei Gao, Min Zeng, Xubing Lu, Minghui Qin, Xingsen Gao,Jun-Ming

Liu

Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Engineering and Quantum Materials,

Institute for Advanced Materials, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics

South China Normal University

Guangzhou 510006, China

Email: X. S. Gao, xingsengao@scnu.edu.cn; Z. Fan, fanzhen@m.scnu.edu.cn; G. Tian,

guotian@m.scnu.edu.cn

Hua Fan, Yue Zhao

The Department of Physics

Southern University of Science and Technology

Shenzhen 518000, China

Jun-Ming Liu

Laboratory of Solid-State Microstructures

Nanjing University

Nanjing 210093, China


2

Abstract

The discovery and precise manipulation of atomic-size conductive ferroelectric domain

defects, such as geometrically confined walls, offer new opportunities for a wide range of

prospective electronic devices, and the so-called walltronics is emerging consequently. Here

we demonstrate the highly stable and fatigue-resistant nonvolatile ferroelectric memory

device based on deterministic creation and erasure of conductive domain wall geometrically

confined inside a topological domain structure. By introducing a pair of delicately designed

co-axial electrodes onto the epitaxial BiFeO3 film, one can easily create quadrant center

topological polar domain structure. More importantly, a reversible switching of such center

topological domain structure between the convergent state with highly conductive confined

wall and the divergent state with insulating confined wall can be realized, hence resulting in

an apparent resistance change with a large On/Off ratio > 104 and a technically preferred

readout current (up to 40 nA). Owing to the topological robustness of the center domain

structure, the device exhibits the excellent restoration repeatability over 106 cycles and a long

retention over 12 days (> 106 s). This work demonstrates a good example for implementing

the exotic polar topologies in high-performance nanoscale devices, and would spur more

interest in exploring the rich emerging applications of these exotic topological states.

Keywords: confined ferroelectric domain wall, polar topological states, memory devices,

conductive atomic force microscopy.


3

Introduction

Ferroelectric domain walls, a sort of tunable atomic sharp homo-interfaces, have attracted

widespread attention as an arena for exploring a wide range of emerging physical properties

(e.g. enhanced conductivity, giant photo-voltages, and magnetoresistance) as well as immense

application potentials [1-8]. For instance, highly conductive charged domain walls (CDWs)

have been discovered in numerous initially insulating ferroelectric materials such as BiFeO3

(BFO) [9-10], BaTiO3 [11], Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 [12], LiNbO3 [13], and YMnO3 [14]. These

atomically sharp conductive channels can be created, eliminated, or displaced by external

stimuli, constituting the basis of various energy-efficient and configurable nanoelectronic

devices (i.e. domain-wall electronics) including nonvolatile memories [15-17] and memristors

[18] among others. Moreover, these wall devices possess an appealing potential to be scaled

down to ultra-small dimension mainly due to the atomic sharp nature of the conductive

domain walls [17].

Recent studies did show some prototypes of domain-wall electronic devices (e.g.

memories) based on the nonvolatile creation and erasure of CDWs and the nondestructive

current readout [15-18]. However, such devices usually face the obstacle of unstable

restoration process due to the difficulty in deterministic manipulation of the conduction

channels in domain walls [10]. For instance, a CDW unit might not appear at the same

location after an erasing and rewriting cycle, owing to the complexity of domain switching

[19]. Moreover, the conductivity of a CDW unit may be greatly modulated by local distortions

(e.g. bending) or defects, adding to the difficulty of deterministic control of domain wall

conduction states [20].


4

In recent years, there has been a fast development in discovering novel complex polar

topological objects (e.g. flux-closure, vortex, center states) that content conductive domain

walls, likely offering new opportunities for deterministic manipulation of the domain wall

conductions on the other hand [21-31]. For instance, the improved stability and switching

repeatability of conduction states for CDWs confined in center topological domains have been

found in well-prepared BFO nanoislands, benefiting from the effects of topological protection

and geometric confinement [28]. More recently, robust electrically programmable quasi-one-

dimension conduction channels were realized in the cores of center or vortex states confined

in the BFO nanoislands [29]. These observations well exemplified that topologically protected

and geometrically confined conductive wall units may be highly preferred candidates for

emergent memory devices with excellent controllability and stability.

Although the reported topological protected conducting channels confined in ferroelectric

nanoislands show promising potentials for high performance memories, it is still rather

challenging to develop practical solid-state devices with patterned electrodes based on these

small nanoislands. Therefore, an extensive application of these spatially confined and

controllable topological states and conducting channels for realistic operation becomes an

issue. Specifically, the long-term stability and high restoration repeatability in such devices

are yet to be demonstrated, and in fact many proposed conceptual devices in this category

face such obstacles to be practically utilized. On the other hand, a major but much less-

addressed technical issue is the low readout current level of such nanoisland-based devices.

Surprisingly, for many cases, such current is usually rather small (~1 nA), which is

insufficient to drive a high-speed readout circuit according to the Johnson–Nyquist limit [10,


5

32, 33]. Therefore, it is of great interest to develop an alternative strategy for overcoming or

avoiding these obstacles.

One of the best strategies, if applicable, would be to fabricate the devices directly from

the well-prepared thin films, allowing integration with advanced microelectronic technologies.

For example, one may design a set of electrode-patterned units within which a topologically

protected central domain with a well-defined conductive channel can be developed, exhibiting

the long-term stability, good restoration repeatability, and relatively large readout current.

Here, we demonstrate such a prototype domain-wall memory unit based on highly conductive

and confined quadrant center topological domain states. These structures are generated via a

delicately designed co-planer electrode geometry by means of simple microfabrication

methods from the well-prepared BFO thin films, as presented in the Methods section. The as-

generated center-type domains can be easily created and reversibly switched between the

divergent state that contains poorly conductive 71° tail-to-tail CDW (T-T CDW) and the

convergent state that contains highly conductive 71° head-to-head CDW (H-H CDW). Such a

memory unit demonstrates well repeatable resistive switching behavior with high On/Off ratio

(104), and in particular the head-to-head polarization configuration is well preserved without

interruption throughout the whole H-H CDW, leading to large readout current up to 40 nA, a

highly preferred value for reliable reading operation. Furthermore, owing to the topological

protection of both the T-T and H-H CDWs, the device exhibits the long retention (up to 106 s

under test) and high endurance (up to 2×106 cycles, the longest testing time), providing a new

pathway towards high-performance topologically protected domain wall memories that are

easily scaled-down and integrated.


6

Creation of quadrant topological domains

The epitaxial BFO thin films are deposited on the (001)-oriented SrTiO3 (STO) substrates

using pulsed laser deposition (PLD), and all the as-gown BFO films exhibit a mosaic domain

structure, which is a pre-requisite and will be further utilized for creating quadrant center

domains containing conductive DW (details of the preparation given in Methods). The

rhombohedral BFO phase and its epitaxy are demonstrated by the X-ray diffraction (XRD)

plus the reciprocal space mapping (RSM) (see Supplementary Figure. 1). To fabricate the

device, an Au layer is deposited on the BFO film surface via thermal evaporation circularly

shaped using the atomic force microscope (AFM) tip via the so-called AFM lithography to

scrap the Au film in the central region. Thus, an array of circularly exposed BFO regions

surrounded respectively by the circular Au electrodes is developed (seen in Figure. 1a). The

fabrication details can be referred to the Methods section and Supplementary Figure. 2. It

should be mentioned that the as-exposed BFO regions do exhibit piezoelectric properties as

good as the as-prepared thin films with the mosaic domains (see Supplementary Figure. 3).

Such well-fabricated circular pattern enables further creation of center topological

domains with the assistance of conductive AFM (C-AFM) tip. In sequence, by placing a

stationary C-AFM tip on the center of the circular exposed BFO region, the tip and the

surrounding Au electrode form the co-axial electrode-pair, which can generate radially

distributed electric field in the exposed BFO region (see Figure. 1b). This is expected to

radially align the in-plane ferroelectric polarization, so that a quadrant center-type topological

domain, as restricted by the BFO crystal symmetry, can be generated after the electric field


7

removal. It should be mentioned that such a center-type domain structure is highly robust

once it is generated at room temperature.

To determine the local domain structure of the circularly exposed region, the vector

piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) is conducted upon the sample rotation of 0° and 90°

(in fact at many angles) with respect to a reference axis, following previous method [27,29],

which can largely determine the projection of local polarization vectors along respectively the

[001], [010] and [100] axes of the BFO lattice. The out-of-plane (vertical) and in-plane

(lateral) PFM images shown in Figures. 1c and 1d illustrate the created center domain

structure and corresponding current maps probed by applying electric fields of   6.0 V

between the tip and the surrounding Au electrode. For details, the bright and dark contrasts in

the lateral PFM images indicate the opposite polarization components perpendicular to the

cantilever direction. Given that the BFO crystal symmetry allows only eight possible [111]

polarization directions, in combination with the PFM results, we can qualitatively reconstruct

the local distribution of polarization structure using a MATLAB program, as shown in the in-

plane projection of local polarization vector map (see the bottom row in Figures. 1c and 1d).

The in-plane vector map clearly indicates that an electric pulse of +6 V (applied on the Au

electrode) via the AFM tip is sufficient to create a quadrant center-convergent domain pattern

(with upward vertical polarization), wherein all the in-plane polarizations are pointing inward

to the center, and thus the cross-shaped head-to-head (H-H) charged domain wall (CDW) is

generated. In reverse, an electric pulse of -6 V can produce a quadrant center-divergent

domain, with the in-plane polarization pointing outward from the center. The cross-shaped

tail-to-tail (T-T) CDW is thus generated.


8

It is also interesting to see that an electric biasing can simultaneously switch the vertical

polarization of the exposed BFO region, as reflected by the contrast change in vertical PFM

phase image (see the third row in Fig. 1c and d). This vertical polarization switching can also

be demonstrated by the typical piezoresponse hysteresis loops, based on which the coercive

voltages of about  4.8 V are revealed, analogous to those of bare BFO film on a bottom

electrode (see Supplementary Figure. 4). The simultaneous reversal of both the in-plane and

vertical components indicates that the center domain switching is a completely 180o reversible

switching, which is more likely a collective switching behavior that is a character of the

topologically-protected domain structure.

Subsequently, the local electric current profile can be mapped using the C-AFM mode

under a sampling bias of 2.5 V. For the initial state with mosaic domain pattern, the exposed

BFO surface exhibits very low conductive current (< 1 pA, close to the noise level), in

contrast to the highly conductive current obtained on the electrode region (see Fig. S5). After

applying a bias of +6.0 V to form a center-convergent domain, one can clearly see the

apparent hallmark of the cross-shaped high conductive current pattern originating from the H-

H CDW in the center-convergent state (see both Figure. 1c and Supplementary Figure. 5) [33].

Conversely, for the center-divergent domain triggered by - 6.0 V bias voltage, the cross-

shaped current pattern disappears in the corresponding C-AFM map, as the T-T CDW shows

very low conductivity that is comparable to domain interior. The reversible switching between

the different domain wall conduction states shows very good repeatability, which is also likely

the consequence of the topological protection property.

This observation conforms well with previous observation of conductive center domain


9

state in BFO nanoislands [19, 28], while the total conduction current level in this work is one

order larger in magnitude (>10 nA) compared with those observed in nanoislands (~1 nA)

[28]. Such large conduction with the H-H CDW can be interpreted by the accumulation of

charge carriers at the CDW with unbalanced net bound charges, which can greatly enhance

the electric potential and thus attract electrons to screen the positive net bound charges. The

bound charges can also bend the energy band inside the CDWs, which lowers the conduction

band below the Fermi level, thus consequent to the metallic conducting behavior and

significant enhancement in conductivity [9, 11]. This metallic conduction behavior can be

further confirmed by the current-temperature (I-T) curves measured in CDWs (see

Supplementary Figure. 6). It is seen that the current reduces with rising temperature,

confirming the metallic conduction behavior [9, 16]. Unlike the conventional CDW that can

be easily distorted by local perturbation, thus losing part of their conductivity [20], the

topologically protected CDW is rather stable with very few distortions, which is favorite for

maintaining their high conductivity.

Resistive switching properties

Based on the distinguished conductance switching between the convergent and divergent

center states, one can propose a prototype of nonvolatile domain-wall memory device, and its

configuration and operation can be given schematically in Figure. 2a. It is noted that the C-

AFM tip is fixed at the center of exposed BFO region and serves as a central electrode, and

the bias voltage is applied on the surrounding circular Au electrode. The characteristic of such

DW memory is analogous to a highly repeatable resistive switching behavior, which can be


10

well demonstrated by a quasi-static current-voltage (I-V) measurement at a sweeping bias

range within ±7 V for 1,000 switching cycles. As shown in Figure. 2b, all the I-V curves

exhibit rather symmetric hysteretic behavior. One can see that once the bias voltage increases

to ~ 4.5 V, the readout current suddenly jumps from a low level (<1 pA) to a rather high level

(~ 40 nA), and then increases linearly with further increasing bias. The sudden jump in the

conductive current synchronizes well with the formation of highly conductive center-

convergent state, consistent with the observation shown in Figure. 1c. The onset voltages (set

and reset voltages) coincide with the coercive voltages shown in Supplementary Figure. 4.

After the formation of center-convergent state with H-H CDWs, the conductive current

increases linearly likely due to the metallic nature of the H-H CDW, as confirmed by the

temperature-dependent C-AFM measurement mentioned above. The as-such created metallic

channel can maintain its conductivity as the bias sweeps towards negative voltage, suggesting

its non-volatility. It is also noted in the low bias range (within ± 2 V), the current level

becomes very small and the I-V curve no longer follows the linear behavior probably due to

the presence of an interfacial insulating gap or wedge domain state close to electrodes [9,11].

Such interfacial insulating state is also analogous to a bipolar selector for the resistance

random access memory cell, which is promising for suppressing the unwanted sneak current

paths in a crossbar-array integrated electroresistance memory [34].

Besides, the resistance switching behavior as illustrated from the I-V curve gives rise to a

large On/Off ratio of more than four orders in magnitude at a relatively low readout voltage

(2.5 V). The nonvolatile data readout is also indicated by performing minor I-V curves at

sweeping bias range of ±3.0 V, indicating a large On/Off resistance ratio over 104 (see Figure.


11

2c). More interestingly, the device exhibits highly repeatable I-V characteristics. One can see

that the hysteretic I-V curves follow almost the same trace of the first cycle after 1,000 cycles.

From the cycling data (see Figure. 2a), we can extract the relative distribution of readout

current (Log(I)) for both LRS and HRS recorded at a reading bias of 2.5V, as well as those of

set and reset voltages, as shown Figure. 2d. It is seen that all the above four parameters

exhibit very narrow distribution range, confirming the ultrahigh repeatability for data

restoration of the device. This also well exemplified the high repeatability for the conduction

state switching of CDWs confined in center topological domains, indicating the important

role of the topological protection effect, an advantageous feature for the high-performance

nonvolatile memory with nondestructive current readout.

Furthermore, the effect of lateral dimension of devices on the resistive switching

properties is also examined, as shown in Supplementary Figure. 7. Similar resistive switching

behavior (i.e. I-V curves) can be observed for different characteristic dimensions (i.e. the

diameters of the exposed BFO regions) ranging from 200 nm to 500 nm, as reflected by the

sharp resistance change that corresponds to the switching between convergent and divergent

center states (see Figure. 2e). More interestingly, the dimension shrinkage can lead to an

apparent reduction in onset resistance switching voltage (set voltage) as well as an increase in

readout current at a fixed reading bias (Vr), e.g. the readout current in LRS increases from 8

nA for lateral size 500 nm to 15 nA for 200 nm at a Vr of 2.5 V, and increases from 17 nA for

500 nm to 40 nA for 200 nm at a Vr of 4.0 V, almost following an exponential law (see Figure.

2f). In practical device, these large reading current levels are essential for a high signal to

noise level and for driving a fast operation [32, 33]. The above observation also indicates that


12

with the dimension downscaling, the performance of devices can be further improved

(enhancement in readout current and reduction in set voltage). It was theoretically predicted

that the quadrant center domain can remain stable at an ultra-small dimension (~16 nm) [28],

implying the huge potential of such device for developing ultrahigh density memory while

maintaining their good device switching characteristics.

Performances of domain wall memory device

To further understand the memory performance of the as-generated device, we examine

the memory switching window, retention, endurance, and fast switching dynamics of a

randomly selected device, as shown in Figure. 3. Repeated testing of other devices shows the

similar consequence while quantitative difference may exist. The memory switching

hysteresis for this selected device can be found in Figure. 3a, and the data are collected using

a sequence of electric pulses, and the resulting conductive states are readout under a fixed Vr

of 2.5 V. The readout current loop exhibits a rather square hysteresis with abrupt jumps at

around ±4.5 V, showing a well-established memory window that is analogous to its

corresponding piezoresponse hysteresis loop.

Besides, the stability of the memory device is further confirmed by the retention testing,

as shown in Figure. 3b, and the data show very stable conductive states for both the LRS and

HRS over long retention duration up to 106 s (i.e.12 days, the longest testing time of this work

and much longer duration is expectable). The high stability is further verified by a high

temperature retention test, which demonstrates that topological domain structures and the

corresponding resistance states can maintain rather good stability at a temperature of 150°C


13

for 104 seconds except some slight variations in HRS (see Figure. 3c and Supplementary

Figure. 6a). These observations indicate the long-time stability of the device, an advantageous

feature for device application, and also further confirm that the topological protection

property plays an importance role in stabilizing the domain-wall conductions states, ensuring

the good data retention against thermal perturbations.

Another important aspect of memory performance is endurance property, which reflects

the repeatability of data restoration operation. As illustrated in Figure. 3d, the device is

subjected to a set of reversible switching voltage (VS) pulses (±6.0 V with pulse width of 100

μs) for up to 2×106 cycles, and the conductive levels of LRS and HRS are recorded at several

intervals. It is found that the device can maintain its well-established resistance switching

functionality during the fatigue testing, wherein the readout current of LRS and HRS show

very small variation in sequence up to 2×106 cycles switching cycles (see Figure. 3d and

Supplementary Figure. 8), indicating a good fatigue resistant behavior. This agrees well with

the high repeatability of the I-V curves shown in Fig. 2, beneficial from the topological

protection property.

To provide a more comprehensive understanding of the memory performance, it is

essential to understand the switching dynamic behaviors of the conduction states. Figure. 3e

shows the fast-switching dynamics under varying electric pulses VS, wherein a constant Vr ~

2.5 V is used to read out the different resistance states (see Methods). One can see that along

with the resistance state switches from HRS to LRS, an abrupt jump of readout current occurs

at a characteristic time (t0), which cannot not conform the typical Kolmogorov-Avrami-

Ishibashi (KAI) relation [35]. As VS increases, t0 shows a quick reduction. The extracted t0 –


14

1/VS curve is shown with semilogarithmic form in Figure. 3f, which can well fit to the Merz

law of t0 = τ0exp[(Ea/E)μ] [36,37], wherein Ea is activation field determined to be 22.4 MV

cm-1, and µ is a corrected component of 1. It is noted that the abrupt transition from HRS to

LRS is persisted as the VS decreases from 9 V to 6 V, which is unlike typical polarization

switching behavior often showing a gradual switching process at low applied voltage. We

therefore conjecture that the switching of the topological center state is more like a collective

behavior and the whole domain state switches suddenly to another state once the driven bias

is sufficient to overcome the energy barrier, leading to the abrupt readout current change with

very few intermediate states.

Individually writing and reading data bit in a device array

Moreover, the ability of controlled writing and erasing operation in a 3×3 device array is

demonstrated in Figure. 4a. It is seen that the exposed BFO regions in all the devices show

uniform low conductivity at the initial state, which can also be considered as HRS. After

applying a bias voltage of +6 V on eight selected devices (except one for reference), one can

clearly see that the cross-shaped current patterns appear in the selected BFO regions in the C-

AFM image, reflecting the formation of center-convergent domains and LRS. After that, five

of the written memory units framed by the black dashed line are erased by applying a bias of -

6.0 V. The cross-shaped current disappears in all the five devices, suggesting the conversion

from LRS to HRS and the formation of low conductive T-T CDWs. The corresponding PFM

images for the devices after being subjected to different bias voltages are shown in

Supplementary Figure. 9, which verify the manipulation of center type domain states in


15

respective devices, in accordance well with the change of conduction states. The above results

well demonstrate the capability of individual data addressing, programmable writing and

reading, as well as good uniformity of the devices, which make them promising for

implementation in memory devices with nondestructive current readout.

In practical memory devices, these functionalities should be implemented with the use of

bit lines and word lines. We therefore proposed a conceptual crossbar structure of memory

devices as illustrated in Figure. 4b. The single memory unit consists of a central

electrode/circular BFO area/surrounding electrode structure whereby the two electrodes are

respectively attached to bit and word lines. Such device architecture with a high integration

density enables the data writing and reading operations for any randomly selected individual

device unit from its corresponding set of word and bit lines. To elaborate the feasibility this

scheme, we also fabricated an array of ring-shaped electrodes with word lines by using

electron beam lithography (EBL) technique (see Methods), which further demonstrates the

ability of individual data writing and reading (see Figure. 4c & Supplementary Figure. 10).

More interestingly, this structure can be expediently extended to a three-dimensional (3D)

stacking structure. As shown in Figure. 4d, the central electrodes of the memory units now

penetrate the two-dimensional crossbar device layers, acting as the vertical pile lines to realize

vertical (Z-axis) data addressing. Such 3D stacking structure can further enhance the data

storage density, which creates a new pathway for developing ultrahigh density memories

based on the topological protected conductive domain wall devices.

The above results reflect promising potential for developing high density topological

protected domain wall memories that exhibit fatigue resistance, and long-term retention as


16

well as low energy consumption properties. Besides, the device array structure is also

compatible with large area fabrication technique. For instance, we have successfully

fabricated large-area of device array via a nanosphere lithography technique, and the as

fabricated devices also show similar memory functionalities as mentioned above (see

Supplementary Figure. 11). These beneficial features also provide a paradigm for developing

new concept nano-electronic device based on the programmable functional topological

domains, which may spur more efforts to explore the immense application potentials in

ferroelectric topologies and eventually fulfilled the field of domain wall electronics or

topological electronics.

Conclusion

In summary, we have successfully fabricated the well-designed and high performance

memory devices based on conductive domain walls confined in center topological domains

produced in high-quality epitaxial BFO film. By using a pair of delicately designed co-axial

electrodes, one can deterministically create and reversibly switch the center topological

domains, leading to a sharp switch between distinct domain wall conduction states. This can

be implemented in nonvolatile memory devices that allow nondestructive current readout of

different domain wall conduction states, with a large On/Off resistance ratio over 104 and a

high readout current. Moreover, owing to the topological protection nature of center domains,

the devices exhibit a long retention time of 106 s and a high fatigue resistance of millions of

switching cycles. The devices also show the compatibility to high density integration crossbar

array, which provides a new paradigm for developing topological electronic devices.


17

References

1.
G. Catalan, J. Seidel, R. Ramesh, J. F. Scott, Rev. Mod. Phys. 2012, 84, 119.

2.
G. F. Nataf, M. Guennou, J. M. Gregg, D. Meier, J. Hlinka, E. K. H. Salje, J. Kreisel, Nat.

Rev. Phys. 2020, 2, 634.

3.
J. Seidel, R. K. Vasuevan, N. Valanoor, Adv. Electron. Mater. 2016, 2, 1500292.

4.
L. Li, L. Xie, X. -Q. Pan, Rep. Prog. Phys. 2019, 82, 126502.

5.
P. S. Bednyakov, B. I. Sturman, T. Sluka, A. K. Tagantsev, P. V. Yudin, Npj Comput.

Mater. 2018, 4, 65.

6.
J. Seidel, L. W. Martin, Q. He, Q. Zhan, Y.-H. Chu, A. Rother, M. E. Hawkridge, P.

Maksymovych, P. Yu, M. Gajek, N. Balke, S. V. Kalinin, S. Gemming, F. Wang, G.

Catalan, J. F. Scott, N. A. Spaldin, J. Orenstein, R. Ramesh, Nat. Mater. 2009, 8, 229.

7.
J. Seidel, D. Fu, S.-Y. Yang, E. Alarco´n-Llado´, J. Q. Wu, R. Ramesh, J. W. Ager III,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107, 126805.

8.
Q. He, C.-H. Yeh, J.-C. Yang, G. Singh-Bhalla, C.-W. Liang, P.-W. Chiu, G. Catalan, L.

W. Martin, Y.-H. Chu, J. F. Scott, R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 067203.

9.
A. Crassous, T. Sluka, A. K. Tagantsev, N. Setter. Nat. Nanotech. 2015, 10, 614.

10. J. Jiang, L. B. Zi, H. C. Zhi, H. Long, D. W. Zhang, Q. H. Zhang, A. S. Jin, H. P. Min, J. F.

Scott, C. S. Hwang, A.-Q. Jiang, Nat. Mater. 2018, 17, 49.

11. T. Sluka, A. K. Tagantsev, P. Bednyakov, N Setter, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 1808.

12. J. Guyonnet, I. Gaponenko, S. Gariglio, P. Paruch, Adv. Mater. 2011, 23, 5377.

13. M. Schroder, A. Haußmann, A. Thiessen, E. Soergel, T. Woike, L. M. Eng, Adv. Funct.

Mater. 2012, 22, 3936.

14. W. D. Wu, Y. Horibe, N. Lee, S.-W. Cheong, J. R. Guest, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108,

077203.

15. P. Sharma, Q. Zhang, D. Sando, C. H. Lei, Y. Y Liu, J. Y. Li, V. Nagarajan, J. Seidel, Sci.

Adv. 2017, 3, e1700512.


18

16. G. Tian, W. D. Yang, X. Song, D. F. Zheng, L. Y. Zhang, C. Chen, P. L. Li, H. Fan, J. X.

Yao, D. Y. Chen, Z. Fan, Z. P. Hou, Z. Zhang, S. J. Wu, M, Zeng, X. S. Gao, J. -M. Liu,

Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1807276.

17. A. Q. Jiang, W. P. Geng, P. Lv, J.-W. Hong, J. Jiang, C. Wang, X. J. Cai, J. W. Lian, Y.

Zhang, R. Huang, W. Z. David, J. F. Scott, C. S. Hwang, Nat. Mater. 2020, 19, 1188.

18. J. P. V. McConville, H. D. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Tan, C. Cochard, M. Conroy, K. Moore, A.

Harvey, U. Bangert. L.-Q. Chen, A. Gruverman, J. M. Gregg, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020. 30,

2000109.

19. D. Y. Chen, Z. H. Chen, Q. He, J. D. Clarkson C. R. Serrao, A. K. Yadav, M. E.

Nowakowski, Z. Fan, L. You, X. S. Gao, D. C. Zeng L. Chen, A. Y. Borisevich, S.

Salahuddin, J. -M. Liu, J. Bokor, Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 486.

20. R. K. Vasudevan, A. N. Morozovska，E. A. Eliseev，J. Britson，J. C. Yang，Y. H. Chu，

P. Maksymovych，L. Q. Chen，V. Nagarajan，S. V. Kalinin, Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 5524.

21. G. Tian, W. D. Yang, D. Y. Chen, Z. Fan, Z. P. Hou, M. Alexe, X. S. Gao, Nat. Sci. Rev.

2019, 6, 684.

22. J. Seidel, Nat. Mater. 2019, 18, 188.

23. S. Q. Chen, S. Yuan, Z. P. Hou, Y. L. Tang. J. P. Zhang, T. Wang, K. Li, W. W. Zhao, X. J.

Liu, L. Chen, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 2000857.

24. Y. L. Tang, Y. L. Zhu, X. L. Ma, A. Y. Borisevich, A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, W. Y.

Wang, Y. J. Wang, Y. B. Xu, Z. D. Zhang, S. J. Pennycook, Science. 2015, 348, 547.

25. A. K. Yadav, C. T. Nelson, S. L. Hsu, Z. Hong, J. D. Clarkson, C. M. Schleputz, A. R.

Damodaran, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, L. R. Dedon, D. Chen, A, Vishwanath, A. M. Minor,

L. Q. Chen, J. F. Scott, L. W. Martin, R. Ramesh, Nature. 2016, 530, 198.

26. S. Das, Y. L. Tang, Z. Hong, M. A. P. Goncalves, M. R. McCarter, C. Klewe, K. X.

Nguyen, F. Gomez-Ortiz, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, V. A. Stoica, S.-L. Hsu, B. Wang, C.

Ophus, J. F. Liu, C. T. Nelson, S. Saremi, B. Prasad, A. B. Mei, D. G. Schlom, J. Íñiguez,

P. García-Fernández, D. A. Muller, L. Q. Chen, J. Junquera, L. W. Martin, R. Ramesh,

Nature. 2019, 568, 368.

27. Z. W. Li, Y. J. Wang, G. Tian, P. L. Li, L. N. Zhao, F. Y. Zhang, J. X. Yao, H. Fan, X.


19

Song, D. Y. Chen, Z. Fan, M. H. Qin, M. Zeng, Z. Zhang, X. B. Lu, S. J. Hu, C. H. Lei, Q.

F. Zhu, J. Y. Li, X. S. Gao, J. -M. Liu, Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1700919.

28. J. Ma, J. Ma, Q. H. Zhang, R. C. Peng, J. Wang, C. Liu, M. Wang, N. Li, M. F. Ghen, X.

X. Cheng, P. Gao, L. Gu, L. -Q. Chen, P. Yu, J. X. Zhang, C. -W. Nan, Nat. Nanotech.

2018, 13, 947.

29. W. D. Yang, G. Tian, Y. Zhang, F. Xue, D. F. Zheng, L. Y. Zhang, Y. D. Wang, C. Chen, Z.

Fan, Z. P. Hou, D. Y. Chen, J. W. Gao, M. Zeng, M. H. Qin, L. -Q. Chen, X. S. Gao, J. -M.

Liu, Nat. Common. 2021, 12, 1306.

30. W. Peng, J. Mun, Q. Xie, J. S. Chen, L. f. Wang, M. Kim, T. W. Noh, npj Quantum

Mater. 2021, 6, 48.

31. J. Kim, M. You, K. E. Kim, K. Chu, C. -H. Yang, npj Quantum Mater. 2019, 4, 29.

32. J. B. Johnson, Phys. Rev. 1928, 32, 97.

33. H. Nyquist, Phys. Rev. 1928, 32, 110.

34. E. Linn, R. Rosezin, Carsten. Kuegeler, R. Waser, Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 403.

35. Y. W. So, D. J. Kim, T. W. Noh, J.-G. Yoon, T. K. Song, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2005, 86,

092905.

36. W. J. Merz, Phys. Rev. 1954, 95, 690.

37. T. Tybell, P. Paruch, T. Giamarchi J.-M. Triscone, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89, 097601.


20

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the National Key

Research
and
Development
Programs
of
China
(Grant
Nos.
2016YFA0201002,

2016YFA0300101), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 11674108,

51272078,
52002134),
the
Science
and
Technology
Program
of
Guangzhou
(No.

2019050001), the project for Basic and Applied Basic research Foundation of Guangdong

Province (No.2019A1515110707), the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province

(No. 2016A030308019), the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong

Province (No. 2019KQNCX028), and the Natural Science Foundation of South China Normal

University (No. 19KJ01).

Author contributions

X. S. Gao conceived and designed the experiments. W. D. Yang conducted the main

experiments. G. Tian, H. Fan, Y. Zhao and H. Y. Chen contributed to the sample fabrication

and XRD measurements. W. D. Yang carried out the AFM, PFM, C-AFM measurements. G.

Tian, D. Y. Chen, Z. Fan, Z. P. Hou, J. W. Gao contributed to the data interpretation. X. S. Gao,

and J.-M. Liu conducted the data interpretation and co-wrote the article. All authors discussed

the results and commented on the manuscript.

Competing interests


21

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Data availability

The data sets that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding

authors on reasonable request.

Methods

Fabrication of the devices. The BiFeO3 thin film was deposited on the (001)-oriented SrTiO3

substrate by pulsed laser deposition (PLD) using a KrF excimer laser (wavelength λ = 248 nm)

at a substrate temperature of 660 ℃ in an oxygen ambient of 6 Pa. The laser pulse energy was

300 mJ with a repetition rate of 8 Hz. Then an Au layer with thickness of 10 nm was

deposited on the BFO film surface via thermal evaporation. To fabricate the device, the AFM

tip was used to scratch away a circular shaped Au region with a constant tip pressure of 40 μN

and velocity of 1 μm s-1, as schematic illustrated in Supplementary Figure. S2. Consequently,

a circular exposed region of BFO film surrounded by the Au electrode is formed. Moreover,

such device can also be fabricated via an electron beam lithography (EBL) on a layer of

polymethyl methacrylate resist, which is followed by the deposition of Au layer and a final

lift-off process.

Microstructural characterizations. The epitaxial structures of BFO film were characterized

by X-ray diffraction (PANalytical X′Pert PRO), including -2 scanning and reciprocal

space mapping (RSM) along the (203) diffraction spot. The topography images were taken by


22

atomic force microscopy (AFM) (Cypher, Asylum Research).

PFM and C-AFM characterizations. The ferroelectric domain structures of the devices

were characterized by piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) (Cypher, Asylum Research)

using conductive PFM probes (Arrow EFM, Nanoworld). The local piezoresponse loop

measurements were carried out by fixing the PFM probe on a randomly selected BFO region

and then applying a triangle square waveform accompanied with a small ac driving voltage

from the probe. Using vector PFM mode, one can simultaneously map the vertical and lateral

piezoresponse signals of the exposed BFO area. To determine the domain structures, both the

vertical and lateral PFM images were recorded at 0° and 90° sample rotation angles. The

current distribution maps were characterized by conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM)

using conductive probes (HA_HR_DCP, TipNano).

Electrical characterization. The I-V curves were measured using a precise current meter

(Keithley 6430) in voltage-sweep mode, which was connected to the conductive AFM tip that

was fixed on the center of the exposed BFO region serving as a stationary electrode. The

memory performance tests were conducted via C-AFM mode, wherein a sequence of electric

pulses with triangularly variational amplitudes were applied on the Au layer to trigger the

domain switching with a pulse width of 5 ms. Immediately after each pulse, the conduction

state was read by using a fixed read voltage (Vr) of 2.5 V. For the endurance testing, we

applied reversible electric pulses (with square pulse width of 100 μs, and maximum voltage

6.0 V) for up to 2×106 switching cycles. To determine the resistive switching time, we applied

square electric pulses (Vs) for varying durations by using a pulse generator (Agilent 33250A),


23

and then record the conduction state by a precision current meter (Keithley 6430) at a read

bias of 2.5V after each pulse, and the switching time was determined as the pulse duration

during which the resistive change from HRS to LRS is completed. It is also noted that, to

access the small device, both the pulse generator and precision current meter were connected

with the conductive AFM tip.


24

Figures

Figure. 1 Creation of quadrant center topological domains. a The schematic diagram of

the device structure. It is noted the bias voltage were applied on the Au electrode and the tip

was grounded in all the figures. b The schematic illustrations of radial electric fields on

circular exposed BFO region generated by applying electric bias between the tip and Au

electrodes. c,d The created quadrant center convergent and divergent domain states along with

their corresponding domain wall conduction states: vector PFM images and corresponding in-

plane polarization vector maps, as well as CAFM maps for both center convergent (c) and

divergent states (d), which are obtained after applying tip biases of +6 V and -6 V, respectively.

To construct the in-plane vector maps, lateral PFM amplitude (L-Amp) and phase (L-Pha)

were recorded for sample rotation at 0o and 90o.


25

Figure. 2 Resistance switching behaviors of the devices. a Schematic working principle

based on creation and erasure of conductive domain wall states. b Quasi-static I-V curves for

1,000 consequent switching cycles at a smaller bias range of ±7 V. Inset shows a semi-

logarithmic I-V curve. c I-V curves at a smaller bias range of ±3 V for both HRS and LRS. d

Distributions of log(current) for both LRS/HRS and switching voltages (set and reset voltages:

Vset and Vreset) derived from the statistics on 103 consecutive I-V cycles (shown in a). e, f

Resistive switching characteristics for different device dimension (i.e. diameters of the

circular exposed BFO regions): I-V hysteresis curves for devices with different characteristic

device dimension from 200 nm to 500 nm (e), and length dependent readout currents (for two

different Vr) and switching voltages (set voltage) extracted from the I-V curves (f).


26

Figure. 3 Performance of the devices. a The readout current versus pulse voltage obtained

after applying different write pulses (at a fix reading bias of 2.5 V), indicating the memory

switching window. b,c The retention properties for LRS and HRS at room temperature of

25 ℃ (b) and at an elevated temperature of 150 ℃ (c). d Endurance properties for both LRS

and HRS over 2×106 switching cycles. e Evolutions of readout current with respect to pulse

duration under different pulse voltages. f Relationship between switching time and applied

pulse voltage extracted from (e), indicating a minimum switching time of 120 ns at a pulse

voltage of 9.0 V.


27

Figure. 4 Writing and erasing of individual data bit in a device array and schematic

conceptual crossbar integrated devices. a Individually writing and erasing of data bit in a

3×3 device array. Here the Au layer is grounded, and the AFM tip acts as a movable electrode

to address the individual device with ±6.0 V bias voltage. b A conceptual crossbar-integrated

domain wall memory device. c Example of a device array connected by word lines fabricated

by EBL technique, which shows the capability of individually data writing and erasing

process. d Conceptual three-dimensional integrated memory device with stacking structure,

wherein the central electrodes are connected by the pile lines.


28

Supplementary Information

Topologically protected ferroelectric domain wall memory with large readout current

Wenda Yang,1 Guo Tian,1,* Hua Fan,2 Yue Zhao2, Hongying Chen,1 Luyong Zhang,1 Yadong

Wang,1 Zhen Fan,1,* Zhipeng Hou,1 Deyang Chen,1 Jinwei Gao,1 Min Zeng,1 Xubing Lu,

Minghui Qin,1 Xingsen Gao,1* and Jun-Ming Liu1,3

*Corresponding authors:

X. S. Gao, xingsengao@scnu.edu.cn,

Z. Fan, fanzhen@m.scnu.edu.cn,

G. Tian, guotian@m.scnu.edu.cn

Fig. S1 Structure characteristics of BFO / STO thin film. (a) X-ray diffraction (XRD) θ -

2θ scan and (b) (203) Reciprocal space mapping (RSM) of the BFO thin film grown on the

(001) STO substrate. The XRD θ - 2θ diffraction pattern exhibits only (00l) diffraction peaks

of BFO and STO, excluding the existence of impurity phases. Besides, the diffraction pattern

of BFO in the (203) RSM map show two spots, indicating that the BFO unit cell shows

slightly monoclinic tilt. Based on XRD and RSM results, the lattice constants of BFO are

determined as a = b ~ 3.905 nm and c ~ 4.07 nm.


29

Fig. S2 Fabrication of circular exposed BFO region via AFM lithography. (a) The AFM

topological image of as-grown Au/BFO/STO film. (b) Schematic diagram shows the

lithography process for fabricating circular exposed BFO area, by scratching away the Au

region with a moving AFM tip that moved in a spiral trajectory with a tip pressure of 40 μN.

The resolution of the created exposed BFO area was limited by both the size of the AFM tip

and the precision of the tip motion, which show a rather high resolution within 20 nm. (c)

AFM morphology of the circular exposed BFO region. (d) Surface height profile along the

dashed line extracted from the AFM image in Fig. S2c, showing that the exposed BFO area

had a diameter of about 350 nm. The height difference between the exposed BFO area and the

surrounding Au covered area (except edge region) was 12 nm, which is exactly the thickness

of Au layer.


30

Fig. S3 Domain structure and conductivity of exposed BFO area. (a) Topography of the

Au/BFO/STO heterostructure where the right half of the Au layer was scraped off by the AFM

tip, leaving an exposed BFO area. The smooth surface morphology reflects that the scraping

process caused neglectable damage to the BFO layer. (b) Corresponding C-AFM images

under a sample bias of 2.5 V. The Au covered region exhibits high conductive current

compared with that of the exposed BFO area. (c-f) PFM images of the sample, including

vertical PFM phase (V-Pha) and amplitude (V-Amp) images (c, d), lateral PFM phase (L-Pha)

and amplitude (L-Amp) images (e, f). The lateral PFM images of the exposed region indicate

the mosaic domain pattern of as-grown BFO film underneath the Au layer.


31

Fig. S4 Piezoresponse hysteresis loops of the exposed BFO region. (a) The square phase-

voltage hysteresis loop, and (b) The butterfly-like amplitude-voltage loop. The measured

hysteresis loops of the exposed BFO area (including both phase-voltage hysteresis and

butterfly-like amplitude- oltage loop) are similar to those of BFO film with bottom electrodes.

One can clearly see that the coercive voltage is about ±4.8 V.

Fig. S5 Center domain structure creation and reversible switching triggered by pulse

voltages of ±6.0 V. From left column to right column shows the domain structure for initial


32

state, and those obtained after applying pulse voltages of +6 V, -6 V, +6 V and -6 V

sequentially. From top line to bottom lines presents lateral PFM phase images recorded at

sample rotations of 0� and 90� and corresponding C-AFM images, as well as reconstructed

piezoresponse vector map. One can clearly see that after being subjected to bias voltage of

+6.0 V, the initially non-conductive mosaic domain structure converts to a center-convergent

state with conductive H-H CDWs as reflected by the cross-shaped current pattern in C-AFM

images. Applying -6 V and +6 V can reversibly switch the center-type domains between a

convergent state (with conductive H-H CDWs) and a divergent state (with much less

conductive T-T CDWs), leading to a resistive switching behavior.

A. Conduction mechanism of the H-H CDWs

To gain further insight into the conduction mechanism of H-H CDWs, we conducted a

temperature-dependent C-AFM measurement. As shown in Fig. S6a, the currents in H-H

CDWs exhibit gradual decrease with temperature increasing from 25 °C to 150 °C. Besides,

despite the current decay, the cross-shaped current pattern can still be observed up to 150 °C.

The currents can be fully restored to the initial values when the sample is cooled back to

25 °C, indicating the good stability of the topological domain structure against high

temperature. From the temperature-dependent C-AFM images, we extracted the current

profiles shown in Fig. S6b, and accordingly plotted the current-temperature (I-T) curve (see

Fig. S6c). The H-H CDWs exhibit a negative temperature coefficient of current, which fits to

the model of metallic conduction relation: I ~ I0(1 + a(T - T0))-1,demonstrating the metallic

nature of H-H CDWs [1,2]. The metallic conducting behavior can be understood by the

charge accumulation. Inside the H-H CDWs, the high-density positive bound charges need to


33

be screened by negative charges. When applying the tip bias, the injected electrons can be

attracted by H-H CDWs to compensate for the positive bound charges, thus generating a local

conductive path.

Fig. S6 Temperature dependent conduction behaviors for the H-H CDWs. (a) The C-

AFM images of the center-convergent domain state recorded at different temperatures. (b)

Extracted current profiles from the C-AFM images along the dashed line recorded at different

temperatures. (c) Temperature dependent conductive current (I-T) curve for the center-

convergent domain state, which can fits well to the well-known metallic conductance relation

I ~ I0(1 + a(T - T0)-1).

B. The effect of device dimension on read-out current

We examined the effect of characteristic dimension of device (i.e. diameter of the

exposed BFO region) on the read-out current. As shown in Fig. S7, the devices with length of


34

200 nm, 350 nm and 500 nm respectively show similar resistive switching behavior, as

reflected by appear and disappear of the hallmark of the cross-shaped conducting paths in C-

AFM images before and after application of +6.0 V tip bias. From the current profiles

extracted form corresponding C-AFM images, the readout current at a fixed reading bias of

2.5 V shows an appearance increase with length shrinkage. Predictably, benefiting from the

advances of fabrication techniques, further size shrinkage is expected to improve the

performance in both storage density and On/Off ratio.

Fig. S7 Read-out currents in LRS for the devices with different characteristic dimension.

(a,b) The CAFM maps indicating reversely switching between center convergent (a) and

divergent (b) states for different characteristic dimension of 200 nm, 350nm and 500nm

respectively. All of them exhibit switchable conductive levels between HRS and LRS

switched by tip bias of ±6.0 V. (c) Extracted current profiles from the C-AFM images in (a

and b) as a function of characteristic dimension for the LRS read-out current.

C. The fatigue properties with elongated switching cycles


35

We examined the fatigue properties of the device via resistance switching testing with

switching cycles up to 106 (Fig. S8). For this, a conductive tip was fixed on the device center

and applied periodic electric pulses (with square pulse width of 100 μs, and maximum voltage

±6.0 V) up to 2×106 cycles and then collected the piezoresponse loops and current maps at

different intervals. As shown in Fig. S8, after suffering 2×106 switching cycles, the device

retains the ability of reversible switching between LRS and HRS, despite a small loss of read-

out current for LRS.

Fig. S8 Fatigue behaviors of the device: C-AFM maps illustrating the evolution of domain

wall conduction states for both LRS and HRS after being subjected to different switching

cycles.

D. Individual writing and erasing of data bit in a device array

The ability of independent addressing is demonstrated by individually achieving

controllable conductive manipulation of single device in a 3×3 array. Nine BFO disks with

uniform diameter of 350 nm were fabricated by the AFM lithography and each of them can be


36

regarded as an independent memory unit when the movable AFM tip situates at its center. As

shown in Fig. S9, the pristine BFO disks exhibit initially mosaic domain structure.

Subsequently, eight units were successively excited by -6.0 V tip bias to enter center-

convergent state (the last one maintains its initial state to act as a reference). One can clearly

see the half-bright and half-dark contrast in both 0° and 90° PFM phase images of the

modulated units, indicating the formation of center-convergent domain structure. Then five of

the written units enclosed by the red line were subjected to +6.0 V tip bias, resulting in the

conversion of domain structure to the center-divergent type, as demonstrated by the totally

reversed contrast in PFM images. Note that the independent unit manipulation can be further

realized by word lines and bit lines, satisfying the basic requirement of non-destructive

readout memory devices.

Fig. S9 Individual creation and switching of center-type topological domain in a device


37

array. Both 0° and 90° PFM phase images of written data bits in a 3×3 units array, after being

subjected to -6.0 V and +6.0 V tip voltages.

E. Device array fabricated by electron beam lithography (EBL)

To prove the conceptual device structure toward practical application, we fabricated an

array of devices connected by word lines by using electron beam lithography (EBL) technique

(see Fig. S10a). The diameter of the exposed BFO region inside each unit is about 300 nm.

The C-AFM image shown in Fig. S10b indicates good conductivity of the Au layer (word

lines). When the word lines are grounded, the AFM tip can individually address the different

devices. The domain structures and corresponding conductive states switched by tip bias of

±6.0 V are shown in Fig. S10c, demonstrating good functionalities of devices similar to those

fabricated by AFM lithography.

Fig. S10 An array of device units with word lines fabricated by using electron beam

lithography technique. (a) Topography of the devices arrays. The circular electrodes as well


38

as the word lines are fabricated via electrode beam lithography (EBL) technique. (b) C-AFM

image for a selected device which shows high conductive current of the electrode. (c) The

writing and erasing of an individual device illustrated by CAFM and PFM images.

F. Fabrication of device array via a nanosphere assisted lithography

In addition, the device structure can be well compatible with different fabrication

techniques. Shown as an example in Fig. S11, we prepared a large area device array via

nanosphere lithography with polystyrene sphere (PS) arrays as templates. The detailed

fabrication process is shown by the schematic in Fig. S11a. Firstly, the well-packed

monolayer PS spheres were transferred onto the BFO film surface. which were subsequently

subjected to size shrinkages by oxygen plasma to develop discrete ordered array. Then the Au

layer with thickness of 10 nm was covered to the film surface through thermal evaporation

and finally the PS mask was wiped off by chloroformic solution, leaving the exposed BFO

disks surrounded by Au layer. The morphology of fabricated BFO disks is shown in Fig. S11b.

The diameter of such BFO disks is about 300 nm, while can be further scaled-down to smaller

dimension. The device functionality is demonstrated in Fig. S11c, which is analogue to that of

the device shown in the manuscript.


39

Fig. S11 Fabrication of large-area BFO device array. (a) Schematic fabrication process for

the nanosphere lithography method. (b) The topography of a fabricated device. (c) The

domain structure and conduction patterns indicating the reversible switching of center

topological states and their corresponding conduction patterns.

References:

1.
Yang, W. D. et al. Quasi-one-dimensional metallic conduction channels in exotic

ferroelectric topological defects. Nat. Common. 12, 1306 (2021).

2.
Crassous, A., Sluka, T., Tagantsev, A. K. & Setter, N. Polarization charge as a

reconfigurable quasi-dopant in ferroelectric thin films. Nat. Nanotech. 10, 614-618

(2015).


