1

Filamentary superconductivity of resistively-switched strontium titanate

K. Szot1,2, C. Rodenbücher3,*, K. Rogacki4, G. Bihlmayer5,6, W. Speier6 , K. Roleder1, F. Krok7, 
H. Keller8, A. Simon9 and A. Bussmann-Holder9

1 A. Chełkowski Institute of Physics, University of Silesia, 41-500 Chorzów, Poland
2 aixACCT Systems GmbH, 52068 Aachen, Germany
3 Institute of Energy and Climate Research (IEK-14), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, 52425 Jülich, Germany
4 Institute of Low Temperature and Structure Research, PAS, 50-050 Wrocław, Poland
5 Peter Grünberg Institute (PGI-1), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, 52425 Jülich, Germany
6 JARA-FIT and Peter Grünberg Institute (PGI-SO), Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52425 Jülich, Germany
7 M. Smoluchowski Institute of Physics, Jagiellonian University, 30-348 Kraków, Poland
8 Physik-Institut der Universität Zürich, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland
9 Max-Planck-Institute for Solid State Research, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany

Correspondence to c.rodenbuecher@fz-juelich.de

Abstract

SrTiO3, although a wide gap insulator, has long been known to become metallic and 
superconducting at extremely low doping levels. This has given rise to questions concerning 
the coexistence or interdependence of metallicity, superconductivity, and the material’s polar 
properties. This issue becomes especially intriguing in conjunction with the observation that 
filamentary metallicity can be induced by means of resistive switching at conditions well below 
relevant doping levels for homogeneous metallicity. In this study, we demonstrate that resistive 
switching can also be employed to generate superconductivity at the superconducting transition 
temperature of Tc ≈ 0.2 K in SrTiO3. By combining local characterization of the conductivity 
with theoretical analysis, we propose that the superconducting properties are associated with 
the electro-formation of columnar-like bundles with a diameter of 40–50 nm, consisting of 
metallic filaments surrounded by polar regions. We provide a theoretical model identifying the 
coexistence of metallic and polar regions as a prerequisite for the filamentary-like 
superconductivity observed.

Introduction

The electrical manipulation of nanoscale transport phenomena has enabled the 

development of resistive switching devices with enormous application potential for 

microelectronics, e.g., neuromorphic computing1. The first important step in the fabrication of 

a resistively-switchable structure is the formation of filaments by means of electro-reduction/-

degradation2–4. This local introduction of inhomogeneity by oxygen vacancies enables to 

engineer the properties, from insulating, to semiconducting or metallic, by controlling the size 

and distribution of the nanofilaments. For an SrTiO3 (STO) single crystal, a model material for

transition metal perovskite oxides, the evolution of filaments in  conjunction with


2

electroforming does not occur randomly in the matrix, but is predetermined by the existence of 

a dislocation network in the surface region5. The extraordinary crystallographic geometry6,

electronic defect structure7, flexoelectric or ferroelectric polarization8, magnetic properties9,

and local chemical composition10 of the dislocation cores combined with the invariance of the 

Burgers vector11, induce the channeling of the current flow along the dislocation network within 

the non-conducting/dielectric matrix of STO. Experimentally, it has been proven by local-

conductivity atomic force microscopy (LC-AFM) that the electrochemical or thermal 

deoxidation of STO crystals is restricted to dislocation cores3,12,13. This observation is consistent 

with the theoretical calculation of the formation enthalpy of oxygen vacancies close to 

dislocations, which is significantly lower than in the matrix14. As a result of the preferential 

removal of oxygen, the regions close to the dislocation cores are enriched by oxygen vacancies 

leading to a local phase transformation towards TiOx suboxides providing excess d1 electrons, 

which are necessary for metallic conductivity15. In this manner, the idea of generating 

conducting nanowires along dislocations in insulating materials16 can be easily realized; in our 

case, however, by means of electrically-induced self-doping. Through thermographic studies of 

crystalline samples with artificially-introduced bands of extended defects connecting the 

cathode with the anode, the preferential current channeling along the predefined dislocation 

network during electro-reduction has been experimentally-illustrated5. It has been shown that 

transformation into the metallic state occurs at temperatures of 300–500 °C, which is too low 

to permit the thermal removal of oxygen3. Nevertheless, an effusion of oxygen during electro-

reduction has been detected via mass spectrometry15,17. Accordingly, such an electro-

deoxidation effect changes the chemical composition of the oxide locally, as has already been 

observed in various metal oxides18–21. During electro-formation, oxygen ions move within the 

electric field from the cathode towards the anode22. Hence, the evolution of metallic filaments 

starts at the cathode, shifting a virtual cathode through the crystal until a galvanic shortcut is 

achieved. It must be noted that such a short-circuit should not be mistakenly associated with a 

macroscopic transition of the “whole crystal” into a metal23.

Superconductivity in STO has been well known since many years, and has been induced 

by (nominally) homogeneous doping using extrinsic donors or self-doping by oxygen vacancies 

upon thermal reduction24–26, by modulating the charge carrier density via transistor-like 

configurations27, by generating two-dimensional electron gases, e.g., in LaAlO3/SrTiO3

structures or on modified STO surfaces28,29, as well as by exploiting interface effects, e.g., in 

FeSe/STO structures30. Early on, the superconductivity in STO has been associated with the 

long wave length transverse soft optic (the ferroelectric) mode. With the discovery of 


3

superconductivity at even lower doping levels, this viewpoint has again been adopted, in 

addition to novel approaches that have been suggested that are beyond BCS theory. Here, we 

demonstrate that electro-formation can be employed to generate metallic filaments, which are 

clustered in bundles with diameters of 40–50 nm. The regions between the filaments, the 

embedding matrix, are polar in character. Electro-reduced STO is therefore a highly 

inhomogeneous material with coexisting charge-rich and charge-poor regions, i.e., metallicity 

with insulating properties being intimately entangled.  

Results

Electro-reduction

Figure 1 Microscopic view on the electro-reduction of STO. a) Schematic view of the 
experimental situation for electro-reduction of STO with cross-sectional LC-AFM maps 
obtained after cleaving the crystal in the anode and cathode regions (with magnification, 
mag.); b) micrograph of the distribution of dislocations in the cathode region revealed by the 
etch-pits technique; c) I/V measurements obtained by LC-AFM on a bundle of filaments and 
in the bulk region; d) average current as a function of the distance to the surface as calculated 
from the LC-AFM maps close to the anode (A) and in two positions close to the cathode (C1, 
C2).

An STO (100) single crystal was subjected to electro-reduction under vacuum conditions 

(I = 10 mA, t = 2 h, p = 10-7–10-8 mbar, T = 350 °C; for details, see the supplementary 


4

information). After the macroscopic resistance of the sample had dropped by many orders of 

magnitude, indicating metallic properties, the crystal was investigated by means of LC-AFM 

and optical microscopy, as shown in Figure 1. The LC-AFM maps obtained in the cathode 

region after cleaving the crystal (Figure 1a) and the optical micrograph of the exits of 

dislocations as revealed by etch-pits technique (Figure 1b) reveal the inhomogeneous 

distribution of filamentary structures following electro-reduction. Close to the cathode, a higher 

concentration of electro-reduced filaments was present than in the vicinity of the anode due to

the electro-migration of the oxygen ions in the electrical field gradient. The LC-AFM maps

exhibit a hierarchical character of the conducting filaments in the surface region, similar to the 

filaments in the surface region of thermally-reduced crystals, thus supporting the idea that 

dislocations predefine the shape of the filamentary network. In all regions of the sample, well-

conducting filaments only existed in the last few tens of micrometers of the surface region,

whereas the cross-sectional LC-AFM maps of the bulk do not show conducting filaments, and 

so evidence that the bulk of the crystal remains insulating. The lack of electrical conductivity 

can also be identified for the matrix region between the filaments if the distance between the 

filaments is larger than a few nanometers. This is indicated by I/V measurements obtained by 

contacting either a filament or matrix with the LC-AFM tip (Figure 1c). The results for the 

filaments exhibit a linear current–voltage dependence (which is curved in the logarithmic 

representation), whereas the current in the bulk region was below the detection limit. To 

illustrate the depth dependence of the conductivity, the mean current flow at the cathode (C1 

and C2) and anode (A) is presented in Figure 1d. Each point of the curves was calculated by 

integrating the current of an “LC-AFM strip” with an area of 5 × 1 µm2, starting from the 

surface to the strip at a distance of 19 µm below the surface. Close to the surface, the averaged 

current was highest, and then dropped significantly within a few micrometers, revealing the 

“skin-like character” of the electric transport, with the electro-formed surface region carrying 

the lion’s share of the total macroscopic current. Using a grain analysis, the dimension of the 

conducting spots in the LC-AFM maps was determined to be approximately 45 nm. 

A strong agglomeration of filaments into orthogonal bands in the [100] direction was 

present near the cathode as can be seen as stripe-like structures, both in the etch-pits and the 

LC-AFM maps of Figure 1. The LC-AFM maps indicate that the filaments do not occur as 

single filaments isolated from each other, but form filament bundles. In fact, the LC-AFM maps 

indicate that the filaments do not occur as single filaments isolated from each other but form 

filament bundles. This bundling effect was also observed in thermally-reduced crystals13, but is 

much more pronounced for electro-reduced crystals. In order to investigate the arrangement of 


5

the filaments in more detail, the conducting spots were measured in a higher magnification. 

Therefore, a region with a high density of dislocations close to the cathode was identified using 

the etch-pits technique, as is shown in Figure 2a. An arrangement of the etch-pits marking the 

exits of the dislocations in the [100] direction, perpendicular to the cathode, was observed, 

which confirmed the agglomeration of filaments in the form of a linear band. In order to 

investigate the distribution of the filaments within the band, LC-AFM maps were made for the 

surface close to the cathode (Figure 2b). The current map shows that the filaments were not 

statistically distributed within the bands, but were instead clustered in bundles. From the 

magnified LC-AFM maps (Figure 2c, 2d) it can be seen that the bundles with a radius of 40–

45 nm had a discrete conductivity character and consisted of nanofilaments with radii of 

approximately 2 nm (Figure 2e). Using the simple statistics obtained for a few bundles (Figure 

2c), the average number of nanofilaments per bundle was estimated to be 200–300. Figure 2d 

shows that between the highly conducting spots marking the nanofilaments, an increased 

conductivity can also be observed, which is one-to-two orders of magnitude lower than in the 

center of the filaments, but still significantly higher than in the insulating matrix. For most of 

the nanofilaments in a bundle, the distance to the neighboring nanofilament was less than 3–

4 nm, suggesting that the nanofilaments act as collective electron sources that dope the region 

between themselves. In contrast to this, the conductivity between a nanofilament and matrix at 

the edge of a bundle is three orders of magnitude smaller, within only 1 nm (Figure 2e). This is 

in agreement with the DFT calculations of TiO2 that predict a highly confined spatial spread of 

the electron density near an oxygen vacancy-rich filament31. In order to gain more insight into

the structure of the nanofilaments themselves, one nanofilament was mapped using LC-AFM 

with atomic resolution (Figure 2f), which displayed a direct correlation to the dislocations. 

Close to the exit of a dislocation, whose position could be identified by analyzing the course of 

the atomic rows, the local conductivity reached a maximum. This behavior supports the 

hypothesis that the dislocation core is slightly reduced, or in our case electro-reduced by the 

local removal of oxygen, which is equivalent to strong local doping. Moreover, the temperature 

dependence of the conductivity of the selected sets of bundles measured by LC-AFM (Figure 

2g) exhibits an increasing resistance and thus metallic behavior, which is typical, e.g., for low 

TiOx phases. In summary, the high-resolution LC-AFM investigation reveals that the 

conducting spots that were seen in Figure 1 and 2 are, in fact, bundles of highly conductive 

nanofilaments with a self-doped region between them, and can be considered “thick nanoscopic 

wires”.


6

Figure 2 Detailed analysis of the dimension of the filaments. a) Microscopic inspection of 
the etch pit distribution marking dislocations in a band along the <100> direction; b) in-plane 
LC-AFM map obtained near the cathode (Usample = -0.01 V); c) magnification of b) with 
filament bundles of  40-50 nm marked by a black dashed line; d) LC-AFM map showing the 
discrete structure of conductivity in a typical bundle. The very good conducting filaments 
and weaker conducting regions of the matrix are visible between the closely located filaments 
in the bundle; e–f) LC-AFM maps of a nanofilament obtained with atomic resolution; and g) 
temperature dependence of the resistance, measured by placing the LC-AFM tip above a 
nanofilament.

Simulation of the electronic structure

In order to shed some light on the nature of metallic filaments forming in an insulating 

perovskite matrix, we performed DFT calculations (for computational details see Al-Zubi et 

al.32) of extended defects, as is shown in Figure a. A one-dimensional, stoichiometric defect 

creates an “inner surface” where an oxygen vacancy (VO) leads to the formation of a defect state 

at the bottom of the conduction band. As the formation energy of VO is lower at an (inner) 

surface than in the bulk33, the accumulation of such defects at inner surfaces is likely. In 

addition, tendencies for the clustering of these defects have been reported34. The charge density 

of the defect states is primarily located on the nearby Ti ion (the blue DOS curve in Figure a) 

and in the region between the atomic spheres (red line). In Figure b, we estimated the charge 

density locally by integrating the induced defect charges in the Ti atomic spheres of the 

individual unit cells (red bars). A charge density of the order of 5 × 1020 electrons per cm3

extends into the region between two such extended defects (columns 1 and 6). In the matrix, 


7

this defect charge density decays quickly, but in a bundle of one-dimensional defects, larger 

conductive areas can form. 

We investigated how these local charges influence the local, static polarizations as the 

formation of polar regions will be essential for superconductivity. To estimate this quantity, we 

employed a simple ionic model based on the formal charges and the positions of O (rO) and Sr 

(rSr) relative to Ti ions, calculating PTi= ∑(rSr/4-rO). These polarizations are indicated by 

yellow arrows in the inset of Figure a and their norm is summarized in Figure b (black bars). 

We compare them to the polarization of a stoichiometric extended defect without VO (grey bars). 

As is apparent, a small electronic density (below 5 x 1020) does not quench the local 

polarizations (of course, some reconstruction also results from the presence of the additional 

defect), and larger densities (position B1 and B2) can lead to some local reduction of PTi.

Measurements of the superconducting properties

Having induced a network of bundled-conducting nanofilaments in the surface region of 

STO by electro-reduction, we analyzed the superconducting properties via low-temperature 

conductivity measurements in a magnetic field. For comparison, we also investigated a 

Figure 3 DFT simulation of neighboring one-dimensional extended defects in STO. a)
Illustration of the electronic structure. The relaxed structure is shown in the inset with oxygen 
atoms marked in red and Ti atoms in blue. The vacancy-induced states are visible in the density 
of states (DOS) at the bottom of the conduction band. The total DOS is shown in black, the 
local DOS on the Ti atoms adjacent to the vacancy in blue and the interstitial DOS (between 
the atomic spheres) in red. A cut through the induced charge density is shown in the inset 
underlying the atomic structure. Bright areas indicate a high electronic density (see thermometer 
inset). Large local polarizations are indicated by yellow arrows. b) Polarization (black) and 
defect-induced charge densities (red) in STO near the extended defect. The vertical and 
horizontal positions of the Ti atoms are labeled with (A,B) and (1,…,6), respectively, and are 
visualized in the inset of (a). For comparison, the size of the local polarizations in an extended 
defect without the oxygen vacancy are indicated by the gray bars.


8

Figure 4 Resistance measurements of the thermally- and electro-reduced STO samples.
a) Resistance, R/l, vs. temperature for the thermally- (th-reduced) and electro-reduced (e-
reduced) STO samples with the same cross-sectional area, where l is the distance between the 
voltage leads; b) R/Rn0.25K ratio for the thermally- and electro-reduced STO samples below 
the superconducting transition temperature Tc (Rn0.25K is the value of R in the normal state at 
0.25 K). Note that in the electro-reduced STO sample, Tc is considerably larger than that for 
the thermally-reduced one; c) resistance, R/l, vs. temperature for the thermally-reduced STO 
sample measured in different magnetic fields at a current of I = 0.1 mA; d) resistance, R/l, vs. 
temperature for the electro-reduced STO sample measured in different magnetic fields at a 
current of I = 0.1 mA; e) upper critical field, Hc2, vs. temperature for the electro-reduced STO 
sample. The results were obtained using the data displayed in d) with the criterion 0.5ΔR (open 
triangles) and 0.9ΔR (closed triangles), where ΔR is the change in the resistance at the 
transition to the superconducting state – the dashed lines show the fitting of the experimental 
results to the equation Hc2(T) = Hc2(0)(1-t2)/(1+t2) where t=T/Tc; f) resistance, R/l, vs. 
temperature for the electro-reduced STO sample measured in different magnetic fields and at 
two measuring currents: I = 0.05 mA (open symbols) and I = 0.1 mA (closed symbols) for 
comparison.


9

crystal, in which a network of nanofilaments was generated by means of pure thermal annealing 

and thus was not as pronounced and bundled as for the electro-reduced one13. As our previous

study demonstrated that the progression of deoxidation could differ in crystals from different 

manufacturers, we utilized samples from the same crystal to ensure comparability. For the 

thermally- and electro-reduced STO samples described above, the temperature dependencies of 

the resistance were measured, and the results are shown in Figure 4a. The resistance was divided 

by the distance between voltage contacts, R/l, such that for samples with the same cross-section, 

the linear resistance characterizing a given material was obtained. As is evident from Figure 4a, 

R/l decreases with temperature designating metallic properties. The resistance of the electro-

reduced sample was significantly lower than that of the thermally-reduced one, indicating that 

the increasing density of metallic nanofilaments in the electro-reduced sample correlates with

the macroscopic resistance of the sample. This confirms that the metallic properties of 

deoxidized STO are, as we demonstrated, determined by the nanofilaments.

In the temperature regime below 0.25 K, both samples exhibit a sudden drop in the 

resistance, which is characteristic of superconductivity. This is shown in Figure 4b, where the 

resistance R normalized to the normal-state resistance Rn0.25K at 0.25 K is presented in the 

temperature region of the transition temperature, Tc. The superconducting transition 

temperature for the electro-reduced sample (Tc ≈ 0.2 K), is more than a factor of 2 larger than 

that for the thermally-reduced sample (Tc ≈ 0.09 K), suggesting that superconductivity in the 

electro-reduced sample is caused by the bundled nanofilaments, and can be enhanced by their

increased density. An increase in Tc with the volume of the superconducting phase has been 

observed for “nano-sized” materials, e.g., in In and Pb nanoparticles35 and Mo-Ge nanowires36, 

with sizes comparable to the diameters of the nanofilaments (2–5 nm) and filamentary bundles 

(40–50 nm) found in our samples. Moreover, the resistance of the electro-reduced sample 

reveals a pronounced hump around 0.15 K (Figure 4b). A similar behavior of the resistance was 

reported for the ideal inhomogeneous nanofilamentary superconductor, Na2-δMo6Se637. Note 

that in the superconducting state, none of the samples exhibited zero resistance, which serves 

as another strong argument for non-percolative filamentary superconductivity (spatially-

separated, phase-coherent superconducting regions) in deoxidized STO37.

The behavior of R/l(T) in a magnetic field for the thermally- and electro-reduced STO 

sample is shown in Figure 4c and d, respectively. The results prove the superconducting nature 

of the transition to a lower resistance state and allow the temperature dependences of the upper 

critical field, Hc2(T) to be determined. Criteria 0.5R and 0.9R were used, where R is the 

change in resistance upon entering the superconducting state. Figure 4e shows the Hc2(T) results 


10

for the electro-reduced sample, with fitting of the experimental data to equation Hc2(T) = 

Hc2(0)(1-t2)/(1+t2), where Hc2(0) is the value of the critical field at T = 0, t = T/Tc, and Tc is the 

superconducting transition temperature at H = 0. Depending on the criterion, 0.5R or 0.9R, 

the coherence lengths 0  (T=0) = [0/2Hc2(0)]0.5 ≈ 49 nm and 39 nm were obtained from 

the values Hc2(0) = 1.4 kOe and 2.2 kOe, respectively, extracted from the fitted Hc2(T) 

dependences. These 0 values are similar to those extracted from the linear extrapolation of 

Hc2(T) to Hc2(0) from the last experimental point in the high fields, namely 47 nm and 35 nm 

(Hc2(0) ≈ 1.50 and 2.73 kOe, for the 0.5R and 0.9R criteria, respectively), which are lower 

limits for 0.

In order to test which of the criteria (0.5R or 0.9R) provides more correct Hc2(T) values, 

the magnetic field dependence of R(T) for the electro-reduced STO sample was analyzed using

two different measurement currents (0.05 mA and 0.1 mA). The results are shown in Figure 4f. 

For both currents, the transition to the superconducting state occurred at the same temperature,

but for I = 0.1 mA, the transition was significantly broader than for I = 0.05 mA, indicating an 

influence from the vortex dynamics on the transition. In order to minimize this effect, the more 

appropriate 0.9R criterion was used to extract Hc2 and 0 from the resistance data for the 

electro-reduced STO sample, yielding Hc2(0) ≈ 2.2 kOe , 0 ≈ 39 nm, and Tc ≈ 0.20 K. A 

coherence length of ξ0 ≈ 40–50 nm is typical for conventional low-temperature bulk

superconductors, such as e.g. Hg, Nb or In. Moreover, the value of 0  40 nm approximately 

corresponds to the diameter of the filament bundles, 40–50 nm, as obtained from the LC-AFM 

studies (see Figure 2), supporting our assertion that superconductivity, as well as the metallicity 

of STO, is filamentary in nature and restricted to the deoxidized cores of dislocations.

Theoretical description of superconductivity

Before discussing our model of the superconductivity of the electroformed filament 

bundles, we consider the conditions that are necessary to induce superconductivity in (self-) 

doped STO in general. Theoretically, the polarizability model38–40 and DFT calculations have 

been employed to confirm the heterogeneous character of doped STO. The polarizability model 

is based on the nonlinear polarizability of the oxygen ion, i.e., O2-, which is unstable as a free 

ion. In a crystal, the 2p6 state is stabilized by the surrounding ions through dynamic covalency, 

i.e., by sharing an electron with its surrounding neighbors. This implies that the introduction of 

additional electrons, as in doped or electro-degraded STO, only affects the Ti ions and causes


11

their d1 configuration. In view of the additional charge on Ti, the surrounding O2- ions move 

away from it and cause locally strongly distorted regions. The essential task for both approaches

is, however, to demonstrate the coexistence of a polar matrix with regions that have a different 

chemical composition and crystallographic structure. By concentrating on the dynamic 

properties of STO and knowing their development with carrier concentration n, the STO-related 

double-well potential has been self-consistently extracted and has been shown to change its 

character from double- to single-well with n, where nc defines the border line for this change23. 

As for n > nc, the superconductivity vanishes and a truly homogeneous metallic state is realized,

we only concentrate on the region n < nc. 

The essential phonons in the STO are the lowest lying soft transverse optic and acoustic 

modes. Anomalies in these two branches have been shown to be signatures of the formation of 

local polar nano-regions41. By calculating the phonon group velocities for the two considered 

branches42, these become very apparent and yield the momentum at which the local, spatially-

confined soft modes occur, namely the point where the scattering between the two modes is the 

strongest43. The corresponding squared polar optic mode frequency 𝜔𝑇𝑂

2 (𝑞) is displayed in 

Figure 5a as a function of carrier concentration n, temperature T and momentum q.  

Figure 5 Lattice dynamics analysis of STO. a) Temperature and momentum q dependence 
of the squared soft optic mode frequency 𝜔𝑇𝑂

2
of the STO for different carrier concentrations 

as indicated by the color code in the figure; b) temperature dependence of the local dipole 
moment p for different carrier concentrations; and c) dependence of the dipole moment p on 
the carrier concentration n for T = 0 K.  


12

As is obvious from the figure, this local polar mode softens with decreasing temperature 

and simultaneously moves to lower momentum values but never reaches the homogeneous 

q = 0 limit. In addition, the softening is reduced with increasing carrier concentration and its 

momentum space spread decreases indicating the growing spatial confinement and thus 

shrinking of these polar nano-domains. In contrast to a long wavelength “true” soft mode, it is 

nonlinearly dependent on temperature below ≈150 K. As 𝜔𝑇𝑂

2 (𝑞) ≈

1

𝜀0, the dielectric 

permittivity ε0 is extracted from it, and is approximately 40 % smaller than the long wavelength 

limit, but still exhibits an appreciable temperature dependence, which is typical for an almost 

ferroelectric compound.

From the calculated thermal average of the displacement-displacement correlation 

function, a local dipole moment has been derived that shrinks with decreasing temperature and 

increasing carrier concentration (Figure 5b). The zero temperature limit as a function of the 

carrier concentration is shown in Figure 5c. As expected, it rapidly decreases with increasing 

carrier concentration and approaches a constant value for small densities, thus clearly 

supporting the polar character of the matrix. The carrier concentration range is compatible with 

our estimates from the DFT calculations shown above.

Figure 6 Schematic picture of the dislocation-based filamentary superconductivity in 
electro-reduced STO. a) Arrangement of bundled metallic dislocations according to LC-
AFM and etch-pit studies; b) LC-AFM line profile across the dislocation cores, revealing that 
they have an extremely high conductivity, whereas the region between the neighboring 
dislocation cores exhibits lower but still measurable conductivity; c) LC-AFM line profile in 
the region without electro-reduced dislocations revealing insulating behavior with a current 


13

The above analysis demonstrates that in the metallic and superconducting low carrier 

density limit of STO, metallicity is not globally present but only appears in filaments that

coexist with elastically- and polar-distorted domains where the latter shrink in size with 

increasing carrier density. These have fully vanished beyond a critical carrier density to provide

space for a homogeneous metal where superconductivity is absent. The electronic band 

structure can be interpreted in terms of localized polaronic bands attributed to the matrix,

whereas Fermi liquid-type behavior must be present in the filaments. With increasing carrier 

density, the localized band adopts dispersion from the itinerant one, and is analogous to a steep 

band/flat band scenario44 in which superconductivity is a consequence of interband interactions.

Discussion

We have shown that the electro-reduction of STO at moderate temperatures (T < 400 ºC) 

induces superconductivity with a Tc ≈ 0.20 K, which is significantly higher than that of 

thermally-reduced STO (Tc ≈ 0.09 K). The global removal of oxygen is extremely low and only 

limited to the cores of the dislocations, where oxygen vacancies are preferentially generated. In 

this way, bundled metallic filaments form along of the dislocation network, which short-circuit 

the dielectric matrix and induce macroscopically detectable metallic behavior. Thus, this 

finding explains why the very low global carrier densities observed in STO can give rise to 

conductivity and even superconductivity.

The metallic dislocation cores exhibit similar properties to TiO nanowires, and are

undoubtedly the carrier of the metallic conductivity above Tc, but cannot alone be responsible 

for the superconductivity. The radius of the filaments (about 2 nm) is smaller than the necessary 

coherence length found in TiO thin films (about 20 nm)45 and smaller than the coherence length 

determined for our electro-reduced crystal by the upper critical field and LC-AFM 

measurements (40–50 nm). 

Therefore, we assume that superconductivity is related to a collective phenomenon 

involving the metallic cores of dislocations and the polar nano-regions between them. As 

schematically illustrated in Figure 6, we assume that the d-electrons in the metallic dislocations

can be coupled by the polar properties of the STO matrix. This behavior is consistent with the 

results of the DFT simulations, which indicate that a static polarization in the STO matrix beside

in the range of the noise of the current-voltage converter; and d) illustration of the proposed 
coupling mechanism of pairs of d1 (and, possibly, d2) electrons in metallic dislocations
mediated by a polar nano-region between.


14

a metallic filament is present, although the electrons provided by the filament lightly dope the 

surrounding matrix. The possibility of generating a polarization in nanoregions at such a doping 

level was confirmed by lattice dynamic calculations. In other words, the proximity of the 

metallic filaments does not eliminate the polar character of the STO matrix.

We propose that the interaction of the polar regions of the STO with the d1 and d2

electronic states in different filaments of a bundle constitutes the pairing glue of the Cooper 

electrons. The determined coherence length perfectly correlates with the average radius of the 

bundles formed by electro-degradation.  As the bundling tendency of the nanofilaments in the 

electro-degraded crystals is higher than in the thermally-reduced ones, their superconducting 

properties are also more pronounced, as evidenced by their higher Tc.

Methods

A detailed description of the applied methods is provided in the supplementary information.

References

1.
Yang, J. J., Strukov, D. B. & Stewart, D. R. Memristive devices for computing. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 8, 13–24 (2013).

2.
Waser, R., Dittmann, R., Staikov, G. & Szot, K. Redox-Based Resistive Switching 

Memories - Nanoionic Mechanisms, Prospects, and Challenges. Adv. Mater. 21, 2632–

2663 (2009).

3.
Szot, K., Speier, W., Bihlmayer, G. & Waser, R. Switching the electrical resistance of 

individual dislocations in single-crystalline SrTiO3. Nat. Mater. 5, 312–320 (2006).

4.
Du, H. et al. Nanosized Conducting Filaments Formed by Atomic-Scale Defects in 

Redox-Based Resistive Switching Memories. Chem. Mater. 29, 3164–3173 (2017).

5.
Rodenbücher, C. et al. Current channeling along extended defects during electroreduction 

of SrTiO3. Sci. Rep. 9, 2502 (2019).

6.
Jia, C. L., Thust, A. & Urban, K. Atomic-scale analysis of the oxygen configuration at a 

SrTiO3 dislocation core. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 225506 (2005).


15

7.
Buban, J. P. et al. Structural variability of edge dislocations in a SrTiO3 low-angle [001] 

tilt grain boundary. J. Mater. Res. 24, 2191–2199 (2009).

8.
Gao, P. et al. Atomic-Scale Measurement of Flexoelectric Polarization at SrTiO3

Dislocations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 267601 (2018).

9.
Shimada, T. et al. Ferroic dislocations in paraelectric SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. B 103, L060101 

(2021).

10. Du, H., Jia, C.-L. & Mayer, J. Local crystallographic shear structures in a [201] extended 

mixed dislocations of SrTiO3 unraveled by atomic-scale imaging using transmission 

electron microscopy and spectroscopy. Faraday Discuss. 213, 245–258 (2019).

11. Hirth, J. P. & Lothe, J. Theory of Dislocations. (Krieger Pub Co, 1992).

12. Rodenbücher, C. et al. Mapping the conducting channels formed along extended defects 

in SrTiO3 by means of scanning near-field optical microscopy. Sci. Rep. 10, 17763 

(2020).

13. Wrana, D., Rodenbücher, C., Bełza, W., Szot, K. & Krok, F. In situ study of redox 

processes on the surface of SrTiO3 single crystals. Appl. Surf. Sci. 432, 46–52 (2018).

14. Marrocchelli, D., Sun, L. & Yildiz, B. Dislocations in SrTiO3: Easy To Reduce but Not so 

Fast for Oxygen Transport. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 4735–4748 (2015).

15. Szot, K. et al. Influence of Dislocations in Transition Metal Oxides on Selected Physical 

and Chemical Properties. Crystals 8, 241 (2018).

16. Nakamura, A., Matsunaga, K., Tohma, J., Yamamoto, T. & Ikuhara, Y. Conducting 

nanowires in insulating ceramics. Nat. Mater. 2, 453–456 (2003).

17. Szot, K., Speier, W., Carius, R., Zastrow, U. & Beyer, W. Localized Metallic 

Conductivity and Self-Healing during Thermal Reduction of SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 

075508 (2002).


16

18. Okabe, T. H., Nakamura, M., Oishi, T. & Ono, K. Electrochemical deoxidation of 

titanium. Metall. Mater. Trans. B 24, 449–455 (1993).

19. Bursill, L. A., Peng, J. & Fan, X. Structure and reactivity of atomic surfaces of barium 

titanate under electron irradiation. Ferroelectrics 97, 71–84 (1989).

20. Szade, J., Psiuk, B., Pilch, M., Waser, R. & Szot, K. Self-neutralization via 

electroreduction in photoemission from SrTiO3 single crystals. Appl. Phys. A 97, 449–454 

(2009).

21. Rodenbücher, C. et al. Electrically controlled transformation of memristive titanates into 

mesoporous titanium oxides via incongruent sublimation. Sci. Rep. 8, 3774 (2018).

22. Wojtyniak, M. et al. Electro-degradation and resistive switching of Fe-doped SrTiO3

single crystal. J. Appl. Phys. 113, 083713 (2013).

23. Bussmann-Holder, A. et al. Unconventional Co-Existence of Insulating Nano-Regions 

and Conducting Filaments in Reduced SrTiO3: Mode Softening, Local Piezoelectricity, 

and Metallicity. Crystals 10, 437 (2020).

24. Koonce, C. S., Cohen, M. L., Schooley, J. F., Hosler, W. R. & Pfeiffer, E. R. 

Superconducting Transition Temperatures of Semiconducting SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. 163, 

380–390 (1967).

25. Schooley, J. F., Hosler, W. R. & Cohen, M. L. Superconductivity in Semiconducting 

SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 474–475 (1964).

26. Binnig, G., Baratoff, A., Hoenig, H. E. & Bednorz, J. G. Two-Band Superconductivity in 

Nb-Doped SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 45, 1352–1355 (1980).

27. Ueno, K. et al. Electric-field-induced superconductivity in an insulator. Nat. Mater. 7, 

855–858 (2008).

28. Reyren, N. et al. Superconducting interfaces between insulating oxides. Science 317, 

1196–1199 (2007).


17

29. Meevasana, W. et al. Creation and control of a two-dimensional electron liquid at the bare 

SrTiO3 surface. Nat. Mater. 10, 114–118 (2011).

30. Ge, J. F. et al. Superconductivity above 100 K in single-layer FeSe films on doped 

SrTiO3. Nat. Mater. 14, 285–289 (2015).

31. Rodenbücher, C. et al. Local surface conductivity of transition metal oxides mapped with 

true atomic resolution. Nanoscale 10, 11498–11505 (2018).

32. Al-Zubi, A., Bihlmayer, G. & Blügel, S. Electronic Structure of Oxygen-Deficient SrTiO3

and Sr2TiO4. Crystals 9, 580 (2019).

33. Alexandrov, V. E., Kotomin, E. A., Maier, J. & Evarestov, R. A. First-principles study of 

bulk and surface oxygen vacancies in SrTiO3 crystal. Eur. Phys. J. B 72, 53–57 (2009).

34. Cuong, D. D. et al. Oxygen Vacancy Clustering and Electron Localization in Oxygen-

Deficient SrTiO3: LDA+U Study. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 115503 (2007).

35. Li, W.-H. et al. Enhancement of superconductivity by the small size effect in In 

nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. B 72, 214516 (2005).

36. Bezryadin, A., Lau, C. N. & Tinkham, M. Quantum suppression of superconductivity in 

ultrathin nanowires. Nature 404, 971–974 (2000).

37. Ansermet, D. et al. Reentrant Phase Coherence in Superconducting Nanowire 

Composites. ACS Nano 10, 515–523 (2016).

38. Migoni, R., Bilz, H. & Bäuerle, D. Origin of Raman Scattering and Ferroelectricity in 

Oxidic Perovskites. Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 1155–1158 (1976).

39. Bilz, H., Benedek, G. & Bussmann-Holder, A. Theory of ferroelectricity: The 

polarizability model. Phys. Rev. B 35, 4840–4849 (1987).

40. Bussmann-Holder, A. The polarizability model for ferroelectricity in perovskite oxides. J. 

Phys. Condens. Matter 24, 273202 (2012).


18

41. Roleder, K., Bussmann-Holder, A., Górny, M., Szot, K. & Glazer, A. M. Precursor 

dynamics to the structural instability in SrTiO3. Phase Transit. 85, 939–948 (2012).

42. Bussmann-Holder, A. A simple recipe to calculate the thermal conductivity of 

anharmonic crystals: the case of SrTiO3. Ferroelectrics 553, 26–35 (2019).

43. Bussmann-Holder, A. & Bishop, A. R. Intrinsic inhomogeneity as origin of incomplete 

ferroelectricity. EPL Europhys. Lett. 76, 945 (2006).

44. Bussmann-Holder, A., Keller, H., Simon, A. & Bianconi, A. Multi-Band 

Superconductivity and the Steep Band/Flat Band Scenario. Condens. Matter 4, 91 (2019).

45. Li, F. et al. Single-crystalline epitaxial TiO film: A metal and superconductor, similar to 

Ti metal. Sci. Adv. 7, eabd4248 (2021).

Acknowledgements

We are thankful to C. Wood for proofreading the manuscript and to C. Korte for fruitful 

discussions. F.K. acknowledges the support of the Polish National Science Center (UMO-

2018/29/B/ST5/01406).

Author contributions

K.S. prepared the samples and performed the LC-AFM measurements. K.Rog. conducted the 

experimental superconductivity analysis. A.B.-H. and H.K. performed the lattice dynamics 

analysis and G.B. the DFT simulations. K.S., K.Rog., G.B., W.S., C.R., K.Rol., F.K., H.K, and 

A.B-H. developed the model and wrote the manuscript with input from all of the coauthors.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.


19

Supplementary information to

Filamentary superconductivity of resistively-switched strontium titanate

K. Szot, C. Rodenbücher, K. Rogacki, G. Bihlmayer, W. Speier, K. Roleder, F. Krok, H. Keller, 
A. Simon and A. Bussmann-Holder

Electro-reduction of SrTiO3 crystals 

Sample preparation

Strontium titanate crystals (100) were purchased from CrysTec (Berlin, Germany). Samples 

with typical dimensions of 10 x 3 mm2 and thicknesses of 0.5–1 mm were prepared by means 

of wire saw cutting. The samples were then cleaned in an ultrasonic bath in acetone, deionized 

water, and ethanol. The electrical connections were established using thin Pt wires in a 4-probe

configuration1 and, additionally, the contact sample/wires was pasted with conducting Pt 

suspension. Pre-heating in a vacuum at 200–300 °C for 0.5 h was employed for the removal of 

the organic solution of the Pt paste and water occluded on the surface of the sample.

Electro-reduction apparatus

Details of the aixDCA apparatus (aixACCT, Aachen, Germany), which was used for resistance 

measurements of the sample, are provided in Rodenbücher et al.1. The pressure in the vacuum 

chamber during the reduction process was p < 10-7 mbar (the partial pressure of the oxygen was 

2–3 orders of magnitude smaller than the base pressure). The sample was annealed to 350 °C 

and a voltage of 200 V, and a current compliance of 10 mA was applied. During the electro-

reduction process, the potential drop between the inner electrodes was monitored 

electrometrically. In this manner, the total resistance of the sample (S), as well as the resistances 

of the bulk (B), anode region (A), and cathode region (C) were measured. For comparison, we 

also performed electro-reduction measurements in stepwise constant current mode with 

different currents of up to 10 mA leading to a higher initial voltage. For a polarization voltage 

higher than 200 V, the high ohmic input (Hi) of the electrometer (Keithley 6514, Keithley, 

Solon, USA) was connected to a voltage divider (1:100) consisting of high-impedance resistors 

(1011 Ω/109 Ω +/- 1%). In all of the electro-reduction experiments, the current measurement was 

performed with a Keithley 6430 subfemtoampere source (Keithley, Solon, USA). 


20

Electro-reduction experiment

The typical progression of the electro-reduction at a constant polarization voltage as a function 

of time is displayed in Figure S1a. The evolution of the resistance in stepwise constant current 

mode is shown in Figure S1b. In this mode, the current was increased in steps from 1 nA to 

1 mA. As a criterion for switching to the next current step, a threshold voltage of 1 V was 

selected. Although the resistance decreased nearly continuously in constant voltage mode, the 

decrease in the resistance when using the stepwise constant current mode reached the maximum 

progression when the current was switched to 0.1, 1, 10 mA. It can be observed that in a 

relatively short time period, the resistance in all regions near the cathode, in the bulk, and near 

the anode was reduced by orders of magnitude. It should be noted that the time-dependent

resistance changes during electro-reduction for different samples (e.g., from other suppliers or 

different batches) can exhibit fully dissimilar behavior, despite the same experimental 

parameters being present. This “undefined behavior” relates to the influence of different growth 

conditions and sample preparation (e.g., polishing methods) on the properties of the crystals 

and, in particular, on the electrical transport phenomena (for details, see Szot et al.2). In order 

to analyze the ex-corporation of oxygen during electro-reduction, we simultaneously measured

the effusion of oxygen using a quadrupole mass spectrometer2. The mass spectrometric analysis 

revealed that during electro-reduction in stepwise constant current mode, an outflow of oxygen 

from the sample of the order of 1015/cm3 was present. The oxygen outflow reached its maximum 

in the first stage of electro-reduction when the current was progressively increased. 

Nevertheless, after a few minutes, the oxygen concentration in the chamber decreased to the 

level it had been prior to the commencement of the electro-reduction. The extremely low 

oxygen concentration of only 1015/cm3 that accompanied the electro-reduction process was 

calculated assuming that the oxygen vacancies were homogeneously generated in bulk. 

However, the electro-reduction of SrTiO3 crystals was found to be fully inhomogeneous (see 

Figure 1 in the main manuscript) and restricted only to the dislocation cores arranged in a

hierarchical network in the surface region. For such a selective de-oxidation generating a three-

dimensional network of filaments, the actual local defect concentration in the reduced 

dislocation core was dramatically higher and can be assumed to be in the range of 1020-21/cm3. 

Although electro-reduction can result in a decrease in the sample’s original resistivity by 6–7 

orders of magnitude (cf. Figure S1), this large drop in resistivity does not mean that the entire 

sample was converted into a metallic state. Therefore, the resistance dependence as a function 

of the temperature was analyzed after electro-reduction, as is shown in Figure S2. Two different 


21

electro-reduced crystals were compared. Figure S2a reveals a case, in which conversion to the 

metallic state upon electro-reduction in step-wise constant current mode (I = 1 nA - 10 mA,

T = 320 °C, vacuum) only occurred in the bulk and the near-cathode region, as identified by the 

increasing resistance with temperature. Still, the near-anode region exhibited a behavior typical 

for a semiconductor. The investigation of the second sample, which was electro-reduced in 

constant voltage mode (U = 300 V, Icomp = 10 mA, T = 300 °C, vacuum) revealed metallicity in 

all regions (Figure S2b). This indicates that metallic filaments formed in the entire surface layer, 

guaranteeing that sufficient current can flow through the sample, even at low temperatures. 

Hence, this sample was selected for the superconductivity investigation.

Figure S1 Progression of the electro-reduction of SrTiO3 (100) crystals (T = 350 °C, 

vacuum) for two polarization modes. a) Constant voltage (200 V); b) stepwise constant 

current: 0↔11s:10-9A, 11↔48s:10-8A, 48↔160s:10-7A, 160↔6928s:10-6A, 6928↔8905s:10-

5A, 8905↔14820s:10-4A, 14820↔71258s:10-3A, and 71258↔end:10-2A. The letters above the 

curves are abbreviations for: S-whole sample, B-bulk, A-region close to the anode, and C-

region close to the cathode.

Despite the clear indication that the low-temperature (350 °C) electro-reduction under vacuum 

relates to the electrically-induced de-oxidation of the core of the filaments, it may be asked 

whether the thermal treatment by Joule heating under vacuum conditions can also contribute to 

the decrease in macroscopic resistance. Through measurement, we determined that during 

electro-reduction with 10 mA, the increase in the sample’s resistance due to Joule heating was 

well below 100 ºC3. Therefore, we checked the influence of thermal conditions on the potential 

self-doping of our crystals. A pristine crystal was heated in air to 380 °C. Then, the chamber 

was evacuated and the temperature was maintained for four hours before the sample was cooled 


22

to room temperature.  Figure S3 shows that the resistance measured versus the temperatures 

exhibited nearly identical semiconducting behavior during heating in air and cooling in a 

vacuum proving that no significant thermal reduction occurred at this temperature.

Figure S2 The temperature-dependence of the electrical resistance for different regions of 

the electro-reduced crystal. a) Metallic transformation of the region close to the anode only 

and b) full transformation of the entire sample into a metallic state (the notation S, B, A, C is 

the same as in Fig. 1).

Figure S3 Temperature-dependence of the resistance of SrTiO3 crystals during heating in 
air and subsequent cooling under vacuum conditions. At the maximal temperature of 
approximately 400 ºC, the sample was annealed for 4 h under vacuum conditions.   

LC-AFM investigation of the electrical conductivity on the nanoscale

Following electro-reduction, the samples were cooled to room temperature under vacuum 

conditions, but their transfer from the preparation chamber to the cryostat was undertaken ex-


23

situ. Although this transfer was performed at room temperature, the freshly-prepared sample 

was exposed to the ambient atmosphere. To ensure comparability, the LC-AFM analysis was 

also performed after exposing the sample to ambient conditions (Figure 2 in the main text). The 

measurements themselves were performed under vacuum conditions at 10-5 mbar using a JSPM

4210 setup (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). For the LC-AFM mapping of the electrical conductivity on 

the crystals’ cross-sections (Figure 1 in the main text), the samples were cleaved in situ. In order 

to prevent post-oxidation of the freshly-cleaved surfaces, the cleavage process, and finally, the 

measurement, was carried out under vacuum conditions with the partial pressure of the oxygen 

reduced to 10-15–10-17 mbar by the addition of H2 to the chamber at a total pressure of 10-6 mbar.

For the LC-AFM investigation, conducting Pt/Ir-coated tips (PPP-ContPt, Nanosensors, 

Neuchâtel, Switzerland) were used and biased with a few millivolts.  

The LC-AFM maps were analyzed using the WinSPM software (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). In order 

to reduce the noise level of the atomically-resolved conductivity maps, only a software low-

pass filter was used (without FFT transformation), noting that on all of the LC-AFM maps with 

atomic resolution, the distribution of atoms was visible by the naked eye. In order to ensure that 

true atomic resolution was acheived, the LC-AFM data were only examined when the position 

of atoms (in the same region) was the same for several scans.

Self-doping of SrTiO3 crystals caused by thermal reduction

Thus far, superconductivity in stoichiometric SrTiO3 has only been explored for thermally-

reduced crystals. Hence, for the analysis of the superconducting properties of electrodegraded 

crystals, we were obliged, per se, to compare the properties of electrodegraded crystals with 

thermally-prepared ones. To avoid an influence of the sample preparation process due, e.g., to

different growth parameters, polishing methods and concentrations of impurities on the 

progression of both the reduction and electrodegradation processes, the experiments were 

performed on samples prepared from the same crystal.

For the thermally-induced self-doping of the crystal, we chose an annealing temperature of 

about 800 ºC and a pressure of 10-7 mbar. In contrast to an uncontrolled reduction process, as 

would be caused by placing the crystals in the hot area of the furnace in the vacuum chamber

and waiting until equilibrium was reached, we analyzed the progression of thermal reduction 

by monitoring the resistance as a function of the reduction time (Figure S4-left) as described 

by Rodenbücher et al.1. It can be seen that the resistance initially decreases and then increases 

again as a result of self-healing4. The presence of the minimum on the curve R(t)Tconst,pconst


24

(marked with an arrow) clearly shows that it is necessary to stop the reduction after a certain

time in order to obtain the maximum reduction or maximum concentration of self-doped 

carriers. It is surprising that this thermal reduction, which transformed the sample into a metallic 

state (see Figure S4, right) and finally into a superconducting crystal (Figure 3 in the main text), 

only results in 1014/cm3 oxygen atoms leaving the entire sample2,4.

Figure S4 Progression of the thermal reduction of an SrTiO3 crystal at 800 °C in a vacuum 

for different regions of the samples. a) Resistance as a function of reduction time (S-whole 

sample, B-bulk, and I1-I2-Interfaces close to electrodes). The position of the white arrow marks 

the optimal reduction state (R) induced in the crystal. The prolonged reduction does not allow 

for the reaching of the equilibrium of the defects, but leads to the self-healing process (S-H); in 

the depicted process, the resistance increases by a factor of > 5 (after a long reduction time) 

relative to the maximum reduction state reached after only a few minutes4. b) thermal 

dependence of the resistivity of a thermally reduced crystal revealing that the reduction process 

results in the conversion of all regions in the crystals into the metallic state.

Hence, the macroscopically-determined increase in resistivity cannot be interpreted as the effect 

of self-doping of the entire crystal, but is an effect of the selective removal of oxygen from the 

dislocation network in the surface region2,5,6. In this regard, thermal reduction and 

electrodegradation are similar, as both processes occur, in principle, in the hierarchical network 

in dislocations. Of course, based on the point defect chemistry for the reduced ternary oxides at 

low oxygen activity (here, the vacuum) levels, it can be assumed that “classical doping” of the 

matrix should occur. It is assumed that the two-fold positive charge of oxygen vacancies is 

compensated by electrons under reducing conditions, thus turning the matrix into an n-type 


25

semiconductor. As the LCAFM measurement of the electrical conductivity of the matrix (e.g., 

between filaments and in the bulk7,8) in thermally-reduced crystals exhibits no decrease in 

resistivity, we can conclude that such a potential homogeneous doping with electrons is not 

relevant for the nano- and macroscopic transition to the metallic state. The matrix of thermally-

reduced crystals is just as isolating as in the case of stoichiometric crystals9. In-situ 4-tip STM

investigations6 show that the thermal reduction that occurs in the surface layer only provides a 

further proof of the inhomogeneity of the thermal reduction. The same conclusion regarding

the dominant role of the surface layer can be reached by analyzing data from so-called resistivity 

tomography (see Figure S5). Using the micro-Valdes four-point technique, we analyzed the 

contribution of the different regions to the total resistance of the optimally-reduced crystal after 

the subsequent removal of the layer with a thickness of a few μm. It can be clearly seen that 

resistance in the top layer is the lowest, which indicates that the last 10–20 μm of the reduced 

crystals channel the current flow. We reached a similar conclusion after analyzing from the LC-

AFM maps the integrated contribution of filaments in the surface region of 10–20 µm in 

thickness in thermally-reduced (see 2) and electro-reduced crystals (see Figure 1c in the main

manuscript).  

Figure S5 Resistance tomography obtained with the micro-Valdes method for thermally-

reduced SrTiO3 crystals. a) Resistance of the reduced crystal with the original surface (d =

0.5 mm). After the successive removal of 10 µm-thick layers, the resistance decreased by three 

orders of magnitude for b), and five orders of magnitude for c). After further grinding of the 

sample by 20 µm (each d) and e)), the resistance of the rest of the reduced crystal (representing 

the bulk resistance) was seven orders of magnitude higher than for the crystals in the upper part 

of the surface region. Note that the crystals for the topographic measurement were optimally-

reduced (i.e., the reduction state reached its maximum in the crystals).


26

Superconducting properties measurements

Electrical resistance measurements were performed for rectangular samples with dimensions of 

1.0 x 3.1 x 10 mm3, using the physical properties measurement system (PPMS Model 7100, 

Quantum Design, San Diego, USA) equipped with a 14 T superconducting magnet. The four-

point technique was used to measure the long-term resistance, R, with a suitably high level of

accuracy. Current leads (silver wires with a diameter of 0.1 mm) were glued with silver epoxy 

to the end faces of the samples in order to obtain a homogenous current distribution in the 

central area where voltage leads; silver wires with a diameter of 0.05 mm were glued at a 

distance of l ≈ 5 mm, which varied slightly for individual samples. The obtained contacts had a 

resistance below 1 Ω for current leads and 20–50 Ω for voltage leads (~ 0.5 mm-wide silver-

epoxy strips) and were stable over time. For the resistance measurements, the electric transport 

option (ETO) was used with an AC current of 18–21 Hz frequency and amplitude of 0.05–0.2 

mA. For these conditions, the resistance in the normal state was frequency- and amplitude-

independent. The resistance in the magnetic field was measured at increasing temperatures for 

a fixed field (magnet persistent mode) or, at increasing and decreasing fields, for fixed 

temperatures. The temperature was changed at a rate of 0.02 K/min, for which no significant 

R(T) hysteresis was observed for the up and down sweeps.

DFT simulation

We performed density functional theory calculations in the generalized gradient 

approximation10, employing the full potential linearized augmented planewave method11. In 

order to correct the band gap of SrTiO3, we used a Hubbard U correction, as proposed in12. For 

the simulation of the extended defect, three unit cells of SrTiO3 were removed from a 6 x 5 x 1 

supercell with an additional oxygen vacancy in the lower left of the defect (see the inset of 

Figure 3a in the main text). The defect-induced states were energetically located at the bottom 

of the conduction band to estimate their spatial distribution and the charge density was 

integrated into the atomic sphere of 1.9 Å around the Ti sites (the red bars in Figure 3b). The 

local polarizations in each unit cell (the yellow arrows in Figure 3a and black bars in Figure 3b) 

were calculated from formal charges of +2 and –2 for Sr and O, respectively, and their relaxed 

positions in the Ti-centered unit cell.


27

Supplementary References

1.
Rodenbücher, C., Korte, C., Schmitz-Kempen, T., Bette, S. & Szot, K. A physical method for 

investigating defect chemistry in solid metal oxides. APL Mater. 9, 011106 (2021).

2.
Szot, K. et al. Influence of Dislocations in Transition Metal Oxides on Selected Physical and 

Chemical Properties. Crystals 8, 241 (2018).

3.
Rodenbücher, C. et al. Current channeling along extended defects during electroreduction of 

SrTiO3. Sci. Rep. 9, 2502 (2019).

4.
Szot, K., Speier, W., Carius, R., Zastrow, U. & Beyer, W. Localized Metallic Conductivity and 

Self-Healing during Thermal Reduction of SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 075508 (2002).

5.
Rodenbücher, C., Wojtyniak, M. & Szot, K. Conductive AFM for Nanoscale Analysis of High-k 

Dielectric Metal Oxides. in Electrical Atomic Force Microscopy for Nanoelectronics (ed. Celano, 

U.) 29–70 (Springer International Publishing, 2019). doi:10.1007/978-3-030-15612-1_2.

6.
Leis, A. et al. In-situ four-tip STM investigation of the transition from 2D to 3D charge transport 

in SrTiO3. Sci. Rep. 9, 2476 (2019).

7.
Szot, K., Speier, W., Bihlmayer, G. & Waser, R. Switching the electrical resistance of individual 

dislocations in single-crystalline SrTiO3. Nat. Mater. 5, 312–320 (2006).

8.
Waser, R., Dittmann, R., Staikov, G. & Szot, K. Redox-Based Resistive Switching Memories -

Nanoionic Mechanisms, Prospects, and Challenges. Adv. Mater. 21, 2632–2663 (2009).

9.
Rodenbücher, C. et al. The Electronic Properties of Extended Defects in SrTiO3—A Case Study 

of a Real Bicrystal Boundary. Crystals 10, 665 (2020).

10. Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865–3868 (1996).

11. Wimmer, E., Krakauer, H., Weinert, M. & Freeman, A. J. Full-potential self-consistent linearized-

augmented-plane-wave method for calculating the electronic structure of molecules and surfaces: 

O2 molecule. Phys. Rev. B 24, 864–875 (1981).

12. Al-Zubi, A., Bihlmayer, G. & Blügel, S. Electronic Structure of Oxygen-Deficient SrTiO3 and 

Sr2TiO4. Crystals 9, 580 (2019).


