1 / 63

Intelligent Meta-Imagers: From Compressed to Learned 

Sensing

Chloé Saigre-Tardif1,2,*, Rashid Faqiri1,3,*, Hanting Zhao4, Lianlin Li4, and Philipp del Hougne1,†

1 Univ Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France

2 INSA Rennes, CNRS, IETR - UMR 6164, F-35000, Rennes, France

3 The Blackett Laboratory, Department of Physics, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK

4 State Key Laboratory of Advanced Optical Communication Systems and Networks, Department of 

Electronics, Peking University, 100871 Beijing, China.

* These authors contributed equally. 

† Correspondence to philipp.del-hougne@univ-rennes1.fr.


2 / 63

Abstract

Computational meta-imagers synergize metamaterial hardware with advanced signal 

processing approaches such as compressed sensing. Recent advances in artificial 

intelligence (AI) are gradually reshaping the landscape of meta-imaging. Most recent 

works use AI for data analysis, but some also use it to program the physical meta-hardware. 

The role of “intelligence” in the measurement process and its implications for critical 

metrics like latency are often not immediately clear. Here, we comprehensively review the 

evolution of computational meta-imaging from the earliest frequency-diverse compressive 

systems to modern programmable intelligent meta-imagers. We introduce a clear taxonomy 

in terms of the flow of task-relevant information that has direct links to information theory: 

compressive meta-imagers indiscriminately acquire all scene information in a task-

agnostic measurement process that aims at a near-isometric embedding; intelligent meta-

imagers highlight task-relevant information in a task-aware measurement process that is 

purposefully non-isometric. The measurement process of intelligent meta-imagers is thus 

simultaneously an analog wave processor that implements a first task-specific inference 

step “over-the-air”. We provide explicit design tutorials for the integration of 

programmable meta-atoms as trainable physical weights into an intelligent end-to-end 

sensing pipeline. This merging of the physical world of metamaterial engineering and the 

digital world of AI enables the remarkable latency gains of intelligent meta-imagers. We 

further outline emerging opportunities for cognitive meta-imagers with reverberation-

enhanced resolution and we point out how the meta-imaging community can reap recent 

advances in the vibrant field of metamaterial wave processors to reach the holy grail of 

low-energy ultra-fast all-analog intelligent meta-sensors.


3 / 63

CONTENTS

1. Introduction

2. Compressive Meta-Imagers

2.1 Fundamentals
2.2 Implementations

2.2.1 Frequency-Diverse Pseudo-Random Patterns
2.2.2 Configuration-Diverse Pseudo-Random Patterns
2.2.3 Orthogonal Patterns
2.2.4 Principle Scene Components

2.3 Image Reconstruction Algorithms

3. Intelligent Meta-Imagers

3.1 Autonomous Region-of-Interest Identification and Analysis
3.2 Information Flow and Operation Principle
3.3 Implementations

3.3.1 Forward Model
3.3.2 Digital Neural Network Architecture
3.3.3 Training Data
3.3.4 Back-Propagation Under Quantization Constraints
3.3.5 Noise

4. Future Directions

4.1 Cognitive Meta-Imagers
4.2 Meta-Programmable Reverberation-Coded Apertures
4.3 All-Analog Sensing Pipelines

4.3.1 Bulk Metamaterial Block
4.3.2 Waveguide Mesh
4.3.3 Cascaded Diffractive Layers
4.3.4 Complex Scattering System

5. Conclusions

References


4 / 63

1. Introduction

Electromagnetic (EM) computational meta-imagers are poised to become the backbone of 

emerging cyber-physical systems that drive important societal developments in security, 

autonomous mobility, smart health care and touchless human-machine interaction. Modern 

meta-imagers combine the virtue of low-cost metamaterial hardware with the speed and 

agility needed for task-specific in situ instantaneous sensing and monitoring. Their 

programmability has been the key to drastic latency improvements by enabling task-aware 

“intelligent” measurements that pre-select useful information. In this Review, we retrace 

the evolution of computational meta-imagers from early frequency-diverse compressive-

sensing approaches to state-of-the-art programmable learned-sensing techniques. By 

following the flow of information through the sensing pipeline, we explain this evolution 

in terms of the elimination of redundant and irrelevant information at the earliest possible 

stage: the measurement. These developments evidence the power of merging the physical 

world of metamaterial engineering with the digital world of artificial intelligence (AI), and 

we conclude by looking forward toward all-analog cognitive meta-imagers with 

unprecedented resolution.

Our modern society increasingly develops needs for remote probing of people’s 

location, arming, activity, body language and even their physiological state. Ideally, this 

intelligent surveillance can be realized (i) remotely, (ii) without requiring the subjects to 

cooperate (e.g., by carrying tags), (iii) without dependence on the subjects’ skin color or 

clothing, (iv) without dependence on scene lighting or fog, (v) without ionizing radiation, 

and (vi) with minimal visual privacy infringements. EM waves are predestined to fulfill 

these requirements. Some progress toward wireless surveillance has been achieved by 

exploiting the channel state information of existing WiFi infrastructure1–5, but in general 

the degrees of freedom of such setups, and hence their ability to probe the scene, are quite 

limited. Therefore, most wireless surveillance systems rely on antenna arrays, often in 

combination with wideband signals6–14. However, such archetypical implementations of 


5 / 63

the required EM sensor aperture are costly in the case of antenna arrays15 or slow in the 

case of mechanically scanned synthetic apertures16. 

Metamaterial hardware has enabled alternative low-cost aperture architectures, 

referred to as “meta-imagers”. These coded metamaterial apertures multiplex scene 

information across diverse measurement modes, offered by the metamaterial’s degrees of 

freedom, onto a single (or few) detector(s); however, these meta-imagers rely on 

computationally highly expensive inverse-scattering solvers to reconstruct a scene image. 

To expedite the entire sensing process, on the one hand, the deployed methodologies for

data analysis have been refined. In particular, the realization that the ultimate goal is almost 

always not a visual representation of the scene but an answer to a specific task has led to 

the reconstruction-free interpretation of raw measured data. On the other hand, the 

emergence of programmable metamaterials has recently enabled the sculpting of intelligent 

scene illumination modes that select, hand-in-hand with the subsequent data processing 

algorithm, task-relevant information. Thereby, both the number of measurements as well 

as the digital processing burden are simultaneously minimized, yielding a double 

advantage in terms of latency as well as improvements on other relevant metrics like data 

storage and power consumption. State-of-the-art EM meta-imagers now enable intelligent,

high-fidelity, low-cost and real-time sensing and monitoring that can be adapted in situ to 

task and scene – in line with the requirements of the targeted applications in security, 

autonomous mobility, smart health care and touchless human-machine interaction.

In this Review, we present a comprehensive and easy-to-follow taxonomy of 

influential meta-imagers that focusses on the flow of information through the sensing 

pipeline and offers a clear criterion to distinguish between compressive and intelligent 

meta-imagers. None of the four review papers17–20 related to meta-imaging in the recent 

literature offer these insights; in fact, they do not cover intelligent meta-imagers in which 

AI defines the physical configuration of the programmable meta-imager at all. Section 2 of 

our paper is dedicated to compressive meta-imagers which aim at an indiscriminatory near-


6 / 63

isometric embedding of all scene information in a latent space. After covering the 

fundamentals of computational imaging modalities, we classify compressive meta-imagers 

in terms of the utilized scene illumination principle and the deployed metamaterial 

hardware. Section 3 introduces the modern twist of meta-imaging based on learned sensing: 

intelligent meta-imagers that discriminate between task-relevant and task-irrelevant 

information in a purposefully non-isometric measurement process. We explain different 

approaches for the integration of programmable meta-atoms as physical weights into 

hybrid analog-digital end-to-end learned-sensing pipelines, and we benchmark the 

performance of such intelligent meta-imagers in terms of latency against the conventional 

compressive scene illumination paradigms from section 2. Finally, in section 4, we lay out 

future avenues for research on intelligent meta-imagers. We discuss (i) how futuristic meta-

imagers may be endowed with cognitive features, (ii) how they can leverage indoor 

reverberation for unprecedented resolution, and (iii) how conceptual links to the field of 

analog computing with metamaterials can be pushed toward achieving ultra-fast low-power 

all-analog implementations of meta-imagers on easily integrable metamaterial platforms. 

2. Compressive Meta-Imagers

2.1 Fundamentals. Imaging and sensing can be broadly defined as the characterization 

of a scene based on how it scatters waves. The important steps of a conventional generic 

sensing pipeline are outlined in Figure 1. During the measurement process, the scene S is 

illuminated with waves and some of the scattered waves are measured, yielding the 

measurement data D. The latter is then used to reconstruct an image of the scene, which is 

finally interpreted to answer the specific task that motivated the entire sensing process. We

will return to the importance of realizing that usually the entire sensing process is 

conducted to answer a specific task, rather than to obtain a high-fidelity visual image of 

the scene for human consumption, below. To start, however, we take a closer look at the 

measurement process. The scene is usually assumed to be in free space such that all 


7 / 63

scattering of the incident waves is due to the scene, and, moreover, multiple scattering 

within the scene is typically neglected. These assumptions are known as the first Born 

approximation, and imply that the measurement process is a linear mapping of the 

(vectorized) scene S via a sensing matrix H into the measured data vector D:

𝐷 = 𝐇𝑆 + 𝑁,
(1)

where the vector N denotes detector noise21. The sensing matrix H contains the (vectorized) 

measurement modes that probe the scene and multiplex the scene information onto the 

detector(s). Throughout this paper, we use the term “scene illuminations” to refer to these 

measurement modes which are the dot product of the (vectorized) transmitted and received 

electric fields at the scene voxels21. Meta-imagers deploy metamaterial hardware on the 

transmitting and/or receiving side, and due to reciprocity, no distinction between 

metamaterial transmitter and metamaterial receiver is needed.

The nature of the sensing matrix H depends on the choice of scene illumination 

patterns. Conventional imagers establish a one-to-one mapping between scene voxels and 

image pixels, such that the structure of H is often as simple as that of an identity matrix, 

implying that image reconstruction from the measured data is trivial. In these conventional 

approaches, the scene is scanned with diffraction-limited spots, as illustrated in Figure 1. 

Important contributions from the metamaterial community in the realm of conventional 

imaging include ideas to enhance the image resolution, usually by capturing evanescent 

waves, such as the perfect lens22, the super-lens23, or the hyper-lens24; these developments 

are outside the scope of the present Review since they involve manipulations in close 

proximity of the scene – which is not compatible with the requirement for non-invasive 

remote sensing and monitoring of the EM imaging applications we cover here. Interested 

readers may refer to a recent review in Ref.18 for more details.

Computational imaging25, in contrast to conventional imaging, multiplexes the scene 

across different masks of a coded aperture onto a single (or few) detector(s)26,27, as 

illustrated in Figure 1. In the simplest implementation, each mask has a random pattern. 


8 / 63

Each measurement thus contains contributions from all scene voxels, weighted by the 

utilized mask, such that the sensing matrix H is highly complicated. Such computational 

“single-pixel cameras”26,28 alleviate the very high hardware cost of the dense 

reconfigurable antenna arrays required to implement an EM scannable focal spot in 

conventional EM imaging. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of multiplexed measurements 

is also advantageous because reflections from a large portion of the scene (as opposed to a 

single voxel) are collected in each measurement. However, “single-pixel cameras” face the 

computational challenge of reconstructing the scene based on the multiplexed 

measurements.

Most natural scenes are sparse, either directly in real space or in a transform domain, 

or in terms of their gradients29, or in blocks30, or in other representations31,32. Compressive 

imagers, a subset of computational imagers, take advantage of this inherent sparsity and 

faithfully reconstruct the scene with an underdetermined sensing matrix (using fewer 

measurements than scene voxels)33. Wave propagation during the measurement process 

acts as an analog (physical) compressor of the scene information. Equation 1 describes this 

compression as a linear embedding of the probed scene in a lower-dimensional space. 

Ideally, the compression process does not distort the relative distances between any two 

points such that the loss of information due to the compression is minimal. Formally, this 

idea of a distance-preserving transformation is known as isometry in signal processing 

theory where a central result is the restricted isometry property34,35: if the sensing matrix 

satisfies this property for a given level of input signal sparsity, then such inputs can be 

reconstructed stably despite the sensing matrix being underdetermined. The spirit of this 

theorem is that even though the sensing matrix may not be isometric, it can behave as if it 

was nearly isometric when acting on sparse vectors. In particular, random matrices have 

been shown to satisfy this property36, at least when the problem dimensions are sufficiently 

high. This result is of high importance to identify physical platforms capable of 

implementing suitable sensing matrices.


9 / 63

Along these lines, the relevance of metamaterial engineering to the field of EM 

computational imaging emerges since 201337: the degrees of freedom offered by 

metamaterial hardware can be conveniently leveraged to implement the required coded-

aperture masks. We provide a comprehensive overview of the diverse proposals of

compressive meta-imagers in the following subsection. We carefully sort these works in 

terms of the utilized scene illumination strategy (which is the key factor in terms of the 

flow of information through the sensing pipeline) and the underlying metamaterial 

hardware class. Initially, computational meta-imagers relied on spectral diversity; with the 

advent of programmable metamaterials, they increasingly use configurational diversity 

instead. Toward the end of the next subsection, we will see how the metamaterial’s 

programmability can be leveraged to synthesize scene illumination patterns. Subsection 

2.2 partially overlaps with Refs.18,19 that recently reviewed compressive meta-imagers, but 

Refs.18,19 cover neither our taxonomy in terms of scene illumination strategy nor in its 

entirety the breadth of metamaterial hardware implementations that we discuss.

This synthesis ability prepares the ground for the subsequent section on intelligent 

meta-imagers. Hardware programmability is ultimately the basis for merging the physical 

world of metamaterial engineering with the digital world of AI in the context of 

computational imaging. The crucial difference between compressive and intelligent meta-

imagers lies in how the programmability is used. While compressive meta-imagers seek a 

sensing matrix that acts as isometric projection of the probed scene in order to faithfully 

compress all scene information, an intelligent meta-imager seeks a non-isometric 

projection that compresses and simultaneously distorts in a purposeful manner to facilitate 

answering the specific task. The physical layer thus performs “intelligent” task-specific 

analog signal processing in the latter but not in the former case. Note that in this Review 

we reserve the attribute “intelligent” for meta-imagers in which the AI impacts the physical 

measurement process which is not the case if AI intervenes purely for post-measurement 

data analysis. 


10 / 63

Figure 1. Conceptual basis of a conventional, computational and compressive imager.

The generic sensing pipeline consists of three steps. First, information about the scene S is encoded on 

the physical layer via measurements in data D. Under the common Born approximation, this is a linear 

mapping via the sensing matrix H. Second, an image of the scene is reconstructed from the data on the 

digital layer. Third, the image is interpreted to answer the specific task that motivated the entire sensing 

process. A conventional imager uses diffraction-limited spots as measurement modes, such that the 

reconstruction step is trivial because H is an identity matrix. In contrast, a computational imager uses 

diverse scene illumination patterns as measurement modes, resulting in a non-trivial sensing matrix and 

image reconstruction. If the scene is sparse, image reconstruction can be achieved with an 

underdetermined sensing matrix, known as compressive imaging. The bottom left schematics are 

adapted with permission from Science 339, 310 (2013).37 Copyright 2013 American Association for the 

Advancement of Science.


11 / 63

2.2 Implementations. Our taxonomy of compressive meta-imagers begins by asking a 

high-level question: what is the nature of the resulting scene illumination patterns? The 

most common case is that they are pseudo-random. We use the term “pseudo-random” 

instead of “random” on purpose because in most physical realization of random patterns 

some deterministic component that is not randomly stirred in different realizations remains, 

such that the patterns do not follow ideal random distributions (see, for instance, Refs.38,39).

A first class of pseudo-random patterns leverages spectral diversity: by sweeping the 

frequency, the scene illumination patterns can drastically vary but the scene reflectivity 

remains roughly constant. This broadband operation implies substantial hardware and 

spectrum allotment cost, which is alleviated in the second class of pseudo-random patterns 

based on configurational diversity. In this second class, the scene is illuminated at a single 

frequency with different patterns by electronically reconfiguring some scattering elements 

of the aperture. Either way, pseudo-random patterns have by definition a finite overlap, 

even if they were perfectly random, such that subsequent measurements inevitably acquire 

to some extent redundant information. The acquisition of redundant information can be 

prevented by using orthogonal scene illumination patterns. This second category of scene 

illuminations can be implemented if the hardware is programmable. Orthogonal patterns

can be based on any basis other than the canonical one because in the canonical basis (H=I) 

the imager is not compressive. A well-known orthogonal basis is the Hadamard basis, but 

orthogonal patterns can also use any other basis. Specifically, the latter implies that upon 

visual inspection, orthogonal patterns cannot always be distinguished from pseudo-random 

patterns. Their orthogonality can be confirmed by computing the singular value 

decomposition of the sensing matrix, which is perfectly flat as opposed to downward 

sloping for orthogonal as opposed to pseudo-random patterns. Alternatively, the overlap of 

any pair of scene illumination patterns can be computed and should be zero as opposed to 

finite. The third category is a special case of orthogonal patterns for which the base is that 

of principle scene components. The latter can be obtained via a principle component 

analysis (PCA)40 of a library of representative scenes. Unlike pseudo-random or orthogonal 


12 / 63

patterns, principle scene components are thus specific to the scene and not generic. 

Principle scene components are optimally efficient for a near-isometric embedding – and 

hence by definition agnostic to the specific task.

Before diving into metamaterial implementations of these scene illumination strategies, 

we summarize in the first row of Figure 2 representative conventional implementations of 

these ideas for compressive scene illuminations. Conventionally, pseudo-random patterns 

are implemented with configurational diversity, as seen in Figure 2a for a single-pixel 

terahertz camera41. In the optical regime where detector arrays (e.g. CCDs) are standard 

inexpensive equipment, compressive imagers leveraging spatial diversity have also been 

reported: light reflected from a scene can be multiplexed across a random scattering 

medium onto an array of detectors42. Using an array of individually controllable antennas, 

principle scene components can be synthesized, a numerical study of which is seen in 

Figure 2b43.

2.2.1 Frequency-Diverse Pseudo-Random Patterns. − The very first meta-imager is 

seen in Figure 2c37. It consists of a 1D waveguide that is patterned with metamaterial 

elements (referred to as meta-atoms). The latter are resonant cELC elements44,45 such that 

the guided wave couples to the meta-atoms and thereby leaks out of the waveguide into the 

far field, where it illuminates the scene. In order to illuminate the scene with a random 

(speckle-like) pattern that varies as a function of frequency (see Figure 2c), the geometrical 

properties (and thereby the resonances) of the meta-atoms differ along the 1D waveguide. 

This leaky 1D waveguide constitutes a frequency-diverse meta-imager capable of 

generating pseudo-random illumination patterns. The amount of reasonably different 

pseudo-random scene illuminations that can be accessed within a given frequency interval 

depends on the sharpness of the meta-atoms’ resonances. However, the latter cannot be 

increased arbitrarily, in particular because such an increase is accompanied by a decrease 

in energy radiated into the scene.

Considerable improvements in the frequency diversity were subsequently unlocked by 

moving from a 1D leaky waveguide to an overmoded 3D leaky chaotic cavity46 (see Figure 


13 / 63

2e). The latter supports a high density of modes, and a perforated cavity surface allows 

waves to leak out into the scene. Because chaotic cavities completely mix polarizations, at 

a given frequency the scene illumination’s various polarization components are very

different, a feature that enables polarimetric computational meta-imaging47. 3D leaky 

chaotic cavities have moreover been used for computational imaging of (primary) sources 

as opposed to reflecting objects (secondary source): in Ref.48 to image thermal sources, and 

in Ref.49 for direction of arrival (DoA) estimation. The improved diversity of 3D leaky 

chaotic cavities comes at the price of a bulkier device, however, and later a compromise 

between the two previously discussed options was found: a quasi-2D leaky chaotic cavity. 

The latter is shown in Figure 2h and is electrically large in two dimensions whereas its 

third dimension is much smaller than the wavelength (hence “quasi-2D”); one surface 

contains sub-wavelength slots through which waves leak out into the scene. Based on this 

compact meta-imager hardware, a remarkable system-level implementation capable of 

imaging human-sized scenes was developed in Ref.50. Successful operation of this 

multistatic system involving 24 transmitting and 72 receiving frequency-diverse 2D leaky 

chaotic cavities requires elaborate careful calibration procedures, as detailed in Ref.50.

Instead of sequentially switching through all possible transmitter-receiver combinations, 

the system can also be operated in a massive-MIMO mode with simultaneous, mutually 

orthogonal coded transmit signals51. The hardware simplicity of leaky 3D and 2D cavities 

is attractive especially for operation at higher frequencies (50-65 GHz in Ref.52 and 75-110 

GHz in Ref.53) where implementing the configurational diversity discussed in subsequent 

sections is more challenging than at microwave frequencies.

So far, we have seen three examples in which the feed was inside the frequency-diverse 

metamaterial structure. Another approach, seen in Figure 2j, is to use an ultrathin 

metasurface that transmits/reflects a wave generated by a distant horn antenna to the scene. 

An obvious inconvenience here, in contrast to the previously outlined techniques, appears 

to be the lack of compactness if metasurface, horn antenna, and the distance between the 

two are considered. In Ref.54 this distance was in fact desired because the metasurface was 


14 / 63

placed in close proximity to the scene in order to couple evanescent waves to the far field. 

A similar approach has also been implemented in the optical regime55. In the ultrasound 

regime, a metasurface transmit-array was used as frequency-diverse coded aperture for 

compressive imaging56. We will see later-on with respect to our interest in remote EM 

sensing and monitoring that the compactness concern vanishes when stray ambient waves 

(e.g., WiFi) are recycled by the metasurface for EM imaging. 

As last example of frequency-diverse meta-imagers, we look in Figure 2m at 

disordered bulk collections of resonators, sometimes referred to as “resonant 

metalenses”57–59. This technique has been mainly explored in acoustics to place the receiver 

inside such a frequency-diverse system for multi-speaker listening57,60, or to place the 

system very close to the scene to couple evanescent waves to the far-field58. The concept 

has also been extended to elastic vibrations61.

2.2.2 Configuration-Diverse Pseudo-Random Patterns. – Now, instead of relying on 

different frequencies yielding distinct scattering responses, we consider meta-imagers 

whose scattering responses can be electronically reconfigured, thereby enabling access to 

a series of pseudo-random scene illuminations despite single-frequency operation. The 

latter is advantageous in terms of hardware cost and spectrum allotment considerations. 

The concept of programmable metamaterials62–65 enabled this milestone in meta-imager 

hardware. Indeed, programmability was the key hardware improvement and all subsequent 

improvements on meta-imagers that we discuss in the next subsections and sections mainly 

relate to reaping the benefits of this programmability as “intelligently” as possible. Note 

that single-frequency operation does not necessarily result in a complete loss of range 

resolution19: the well-known link between bandwidth and range resolution66 is only 

applicable in the absence of obliquely incident illumination. Many compressive meta-

imagers operate at distances from the scene that are small enough such that waves are also 

incident at oblique angles67, and sometimes the meta-imager is even moved which 

improves the range resolution further68. Once we go beyond the assumption of a scene 

surrounded by free space under which we are operating thus far, we will see in subsection


15 / 63

4.2 that even deeply sub-wavelength resolution with single-frequency measurements is 

possible inside complex scattering enclosures69 – without any access to evanescent waves.

The first configuration-diverse programmable meta-imager70 emerged only two years 

after the first frequency-diverse meta-imager37, and similarly relies on a 1D leaky 

waveguide, as seen in Figure 2d. Here, each meta-atom is loaded with an individually 

addressable PIN-diode. Leakage of the guided wave via the meta-atom into the far field 

can be switched on or off by controlling the bias voltage of the PIN diode. Different “coding 

patterns” of the programmable meta-atoms thereby realize distinct pseudo-random scene 

illumination patterns at a single frequency, as seen in Figure 2d. While this first 

programmable meta-imager endowed its radiating elements with programmability, it is also 

possible to endow the interior of the scattering system with programmability. This route 

was chosen to implement a programmable 3D leaky chaotic cavity71: its interior boundaries 

are partially covered with a programmable metasurface reflect-array72 but the cavity’s 

radiating slots are static. The reflection properties of each programmable meta-atom can 

be individually tuned via the bias voltage of a varactor diode. By modifying the scattering 

inside the cavity using its programmable boundaries, the pseudo-random wave forms that 

leak out into the far field are altered. More compact leaky 2D chaotic cavities can, of course, 

also be endowed with programmability of their radiating elements73 (see Figure 2i) or their 

interior scattering system74. Such programmable leaky chaotic cavities retain, of course, 

their frequency diversity seen in Figure 2h but their programmability-enabled single-

frequency operation frees up frequency resources that can now be deployed to image 

frequency-dependent scenes; for instance, the programmable 2D leaky chaotic cavity from 

Figure 2i was used to image a scene containing multiple incoherent sources with both 

spatial and spectral resolution75.

In Figure 2f we saw the use of a programmable reflect-array metasurface inside a 

chaotic cavity to tune the system’s scattering properties. Programmable metasurface 

transmit- or reflect-arrays can also be deployed in free space in conjunction with a carefully 

aligned horn antenna to generate pseudo-random wave forms for scene illumination76, as 


16 / 63

seen in Figure 2k. While this setup may be considered bulky, as pointed out previously, we 

will see below that it becomes very attractive when combined with stray ambient waves.

2.2.3 Orthogonal Patterns. – Up to now, we covered influential examples of 

compressive meta-imagers that use pseudo-random scene illuminations. The partial 

redundancy resulting from the finite overlap of subsequent measurements based on a series 

of pseudo-random patterns motivates the optimization of the measurement modes, and 

thereby the sensing matrix, toward the use of orthogonal patterns. Numerical studies 

showed that the diversity of the sensing matrix can be improved by optimizing the position 

of antennas within a conventional antenna array77,78, or by optimizing the design of metallic 

or dielectric “compressive reflector antennas”79–81, the deployment mode of the latter being 

similar to previously discussed metasurface reflect-arrays (Figure 2j). Similarly, 

experiments with programmable metasurface reflect-arrays recently optimized the coding 

pattern sequence to improve measurement diversity82,83. All these works minimize mutual 

coherence84–86, that is, they try to flatten the singular value spectrum of the sensing matrix. 

Usually, they do not achieve perfectly flat singular value spectra, such that some degree of 

redundancy remains in subsequent measurements. Some of these works make an 

interesting link between compressive sensing and information theory, by interpreting the 

sensing matrix as MIMO channel matrix and evoking the generalized Shannon capacity87–

89. In that perspective, it is important to note that the information capacity depends on both 

channel diversity and SNR. It is therefore in general not possible to optimize the capacity 

without fixing a value of SNR. Specifically, a direct correlation between channel diversity 

and channel capacity in such an optimization procedure can only hold under the assumption 

that the channel path losses do not change during the optimization. This assumption is 

tacitly made when normalizing the sensing matrix columns. Incidentally, a conceptually 

related work on wireless communication in a metasurface-programmable rich-scattering 

environment implemented perfectly orthogonal channels and observed that the path losses 

were on average not affected by the optimization procedure90. 


17 / 63

Reports on perfectly orthogonal sensing matrices are rare in the compressive meta-

imager literature. An influential work, shown in Figure 2l, demonstrated a programmable 

metasurface reflect-array in the terahertz regime91. The working principle of its constituent 

pixel relies on a dynamic metamaterial absorber that can be individually tuned with an 

applied bias voltage. For instance, various patterns from the Hadamard basis can be

implement, yielding a series of orthogonal scene illumination patterns without any 

acquisition of redundant information.

Perfectly orthogonal scene illuminations were also implemented with a programmable 

3D leaky chaotic cavity92, as seen in Figure 2g. The setup resembles that from Figure 2f, 

except that the programmable boundary of the cavity is not used in random configurations. 

Instead, the coding sequence is judiciously tailored such that the resulting sensing matrix 

becomes perfectly orthogonal. Here, the basis is not a well-known basis like the Hadamard 

basis, and upon visual inspection, the sensing matrix may appear random. However, the 

overlap between its columns is zero, and its singular value spectrum is perfectly flat. 

Therefore, using this tailored coding sequences enables one to conduct a series of 

compressive measurements without any redundancy. Identifying the appropriate coding 

sequence is non-trivial: due to the complexity of the scattering inside the chaotic cavity, no 

analytical forward model exists that describes the impact of the coding pattern on the scene 

illumination. An additional complication is that the optimal configurations of different 

meta-atoms are correlated due to the reverberation inside the cavity. Ref.92 iteratively 

optimized the configuration in a trial-and-error approach. 

Before closing this subsection, we note that the arguments for the benefits of 

orthogonal patterns over pseudo-random patterns in terms of redundancy are valid on 

average when many completely different scenes are imaged. For one specific scene, or one 

specific class of scenes, some orthogonal bases perform better than others; the basis that 

performs best for a given scene class are its principle scene components which we discuss 

next.


18 / 63

2.2.4 Principle Scene Components. – A special case of orthogonal patterns are

principle scene components. Originally pioneered in optical systems93–95, the idea is to 

analyze a dataset of representative scenes in order to identify a basis in which a typical 

scene can be expressed as linear superposition of a small number of “principle” patterns. 

PCA can be understood as designing the sensing matrix to satisfy the restricted isometry 

property on the specific dataset of representative scenes96. In a scene-agnostic dictionary 

like the Hadamard basis, some entries may be of very limited use in a given imaging 

scenario. In contrast, deploying principle scene components expedites the measurement 

process because the same information can be measured with fewer scene illumination 

patterns. The trade-off between latency and loss of generality occurs for the first time here 

and will accompany us throughout the rest of this Review. In many realistic applications 

the loss of generality does not pose a problem given that they seek to address specific tasks 

as seen in Figure 1.

A numerical study applied the idea of using principle scene components of human 

postures as illumination patterns to EM imaging with an array of tunable antennas43. An 

experimental implementation of EM meta-imaging with principle scene components of 

human postures was recently reported based on a 2-bit programmable reflect-array 

metasurface97. To identify a suitable sequence of coding patterns, Ref.97 relied on an 

analytical forward model that describes the programmable metasurface as an array of point-

like dipoles whose induced currents depend on the underlying coding pattern, and applied 

a modified Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm98. Moreover, Ref.97 implemented a reconstruction-

free analysis of the measurement data in order to classify the human posture on display in 

the scene. This idea of skipping the image reconstruction will surface again in the next 

section.


19 / 63

Figure 2. Overview of compressive meta-imagers in terms of scene illumination strategy 
and metamaterial hardware implementation. Compressive scene illuminations can leverage 
pseudo-random patterns, generated either with spectral diversity (first column) or configurational 
diversity (second column), orthogonal patterns (third column), or principle scene components (forth 
column). Orthogonal patterns can be based on a well-known basis (e.g., the Hadamard basis) or any 
other basis. The hardware implementation of these scene illuminations can follow conventional 
strategies (first row) or using metamaterial devices. The latter can involve leaky 1D waveguides (second 
row), leaky 3D chaotic cavities (third row), leaky 2D chaotic cavities (forth row), reflect- or transmit-


20 / 63

arrays (fifth row), or disordered resonator collections (sixth row). (Copyrights: a, Reproduced from 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 121105 (2008),41 with the permission of AIP Publishing. b, Adapted with 
permission from IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 14, 1039 (2015).43 Copyright 2015 Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers. c, Adapted with permission from Science 339, 310 (2013).37

Copyright 2013 American Association for the Advancement of Science.of Science. d, Adapted with 
permission from J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 33, 1098 (2016).99 Copyright 2016 The Optical Society. e, 
Reproduced from Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 194104 (2015),46 with the permission of AIP Publishing. f, 
Reproduced with permission from Phys. Rev. Applied 6, 054019 (2016).71 Copyright 2016 American 
2016 American Physical Society. g, Reproduced with permission from Phys. Rev. Applied 13, 041004 
(2020).92 Copyright 2016 American 2020 American Physical Society. h, Gollub, J. N. et al., Sci. Rep.
7, 42650 (2017);50 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. i, Main: Diebold, 
A. V. et al., Optica 7, 527 (2020);75 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.
Top right corner: Reproduced with permission from IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 69, 2151 (2020).73

Copyright 2020 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. j, Wang, L. et al., Sci. Rep. 6, 26959 
(2016);54 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license). k, Li, Y. B. et al., Sci. Rep.
6, 23731 (2016);76 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license). l, Adapted with 
permission from Nat. Photonics 8, 605 (2014).91 Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. m, Li, L. et al., Nat. 
Commun. 10, 1082 (2019);97 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license). n, 
Reproduced with permission from Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 10595 (2015).57 Copyright 2015
National Academy of Sciences.)

2.3 Image Reconstruction Algorithms. Before closing the section on compressive 

meta-imagers, we briefly review popular image reconstruction algorithms. As pointed out 

in Figure 1, conventional sensing pipelines seek to obtain a visual image of the scene 

suitable for human consumption before analyzing this image to answer the specific sensing 

task. Such image reconstruction is inherently more difficult than inference from raw 

measurements to answer the specific task, implying that unnecessarily many measurements 

and large computational resources are needed95. We will elaborate on the benefits of 

reconstruction-free inference in the next section on intelligent meta-imagers. 

Under the first Born approximation, the inverse scattering problem in computational 

imaging essentially requires the inversion of the sensing matrix H in order to determine an 

estimate of the scene: 𝑆̃ ≈ 𝐇−1𝐷 . Many standard pseudo-inversion techniques such as 

Tikhonov regularization100 exist in order to perform this inversion in the presence of noise. 

Higher reconstruction qualities are often achieved with iterative techniques such as the 


21 / 63

Generalized 
Minimal 
RESidual 
method 
(GMRES)101
or 
Two-step 
Iterative 

Shrinkage/Thresholding (TwIST)102, at the cost of a higher computation and data storage 

burden. Recently, Ref.103 demonstrated that processing time and memory consumption of 

the previously outlined reconstruction techniques can be improved through truncation of 

insignificant principal components of the sensing matrix via a PCA analysis of the latter; 

this technique is not to be confused with the use of PCA to identify principle scene 

components as illumination patterns in the previous subsection 2.2.443,97. Another attempt 

at faster processing showed that compressive meta-imaging is compatible with fast range 

migration algorithms originating from synthetic-aperture-radar (SAR) imaging104–106 that 

take advantage of efficient fast Fourier transforms107–109. Compressive meta-imaging can 

also be applied to SAR, that is imaging with a moving meta-imager. To that end, the 

functionality of well-known SAR modalities (spotlight and stripmap illumination) can be 

achieved through pattern synthesis with programmable meta-imagers, but stripmap 

illumination was also implemented with pseudo-random patterns110. 

In terms of hardware cost, it is often advantageous to rely on intensity-only 

measurements, especially at higher frequencies or in specific applications like bistatic 

space-born SAR111: phaseless acquisition removes the need for phase synchronization 

between transmitter and receiver112, minimizes the requirements for phase stability of the 

local oscillator, and limits effects of calibration errors. One solution to deal with phaseless 

data is to apply phase-retrieval techniques113,114, as was done in the context of compressive 

meta-imagers in Refs.115–117. An alternative to phase retrieval techniques is found in 

computational “ghost imaging”118–120 which correlates the intensity measurements with the 

intensity of the scene illumination patterns. This technique has been successfully applied 

to compressive meta-imagers in Refs.121–123 and also served as the basis of an optical 

encryption scheme in combination with helicity-dependent meta-holograms124. A phaseless 

computational imaging method that has not yet been applied to compressive meta-imaging 

is ptychography125 which generates a high-resolution image from a series of low-resolution 

intensity measurements with structured scene illumination.


22 / 63

More recently, various machine learning and deep learning algorithms have been 

applied in computational imaging126–130 and inverse scattering131,132, including some cases 

of compressive meta-imagers97,133,58,82,134,83,135. Their potential benefits include fast online 

inference on tasks that are difficult or impossible to formulate analytically, at the cost of 

expensive offline training accompanied by a need for a large training dataset. With 

reference to the sensing pipeline from Figure 1, such AI tools have been used in 

compressive meta-imagers at the image reconstruction stage in Ref.133,58,83 and to interpret 

the resulting image in order to answer the specific task in Refs.97,58,135,83. Moreover, AI 

tools have been used in Refs.82,97,134 to interpret raw data obtained with compressive meta-

imagers without reconstructing an image; we will return to this concept of reconstruction-

free inference in more detail in section 3.2. However, as pointed out previously, none of 

these cases fully reaps the benefits of novel AI tools in order to optimize the physical

measurement process, which is why we do not refer to these works as “intelligent” meta-

imagers in this Review.

3. Intelligent Meta-Imagers

All of the compressive meta-imagers covered in the previous section illuminate the scene 

without taking into account the ultimate purpose of the sensing procedure. In other words, 

the measurements are agnostic to the task. In this section, we turn our attention to 

“intelligent” meta-imagers which sculpt the scene illumination in accordance with the 

specific sensing task. The role of AI in these systems is hence not restricted to digital data 

processing but actively influences the physical measurement process. We refer to a meta-

imager as “intelligent” if AI controls the configuration of its programmable meta-hardware 

such that the measurement process becomes task-aware and thus purposefully non-

isometric. We thereby witness how the physical world of metamaterial engineering and the 

digital world of AI merge in the context of imaging and sensing. In related fields, “self-


23 / 63

adaptive” intelligent metasurfaces have recently been studied for dynamic beam steering136

and dynamic cloaking137. 

To begin, we cover the autonomous identification and analysis of a region-of-interest 

(ROI) within the scene. Next, we analyze the flow of information through the sensing 

pipeline and highlight the fundamental difference between compressive and intelligent 

meta-imagers: the latter discriminate between task-relevant and task-irrelevant information 

already during the measurement process. In other words, while compressive meta-imagers 

seek an isometric projection to faithfully compress all scene information, intelligent meta-

imagers process the scene information on the physical layer with respect to the specific 

task by purposefully distorting the distances between points in a non-isometric projection. 

Then, we detail how the underlying “learned sensing” strategy can be implemented in 

practice by covering two recent implementations from the literature.

3.1 Autonomous Region-of-Interest Identification and Analysis. In advanced 

EM imaging and sensing tasks it is oftentimes helpful to identify the region of interest (ROI) 

within a very large scene (compared to the wavelength). On the one hand, the analysis can 

therefore be restricted to the ROI as opposed to the entire scene. In Ref.50, the meta-imager 

was coupled with an optical light sensor (Kinect); this sensor fusion enabled an automatic 

identification of the ROI which was used to limit the microwave-image reconstruction 

burden. However, the ROI identification did not influence the frequency-diverse pseudo-

random scene illumination patterns such that we regard this example as a compressive 

rather than intelligent meta-imager.

On the other hand, ROI identification can also be important to enable subsequent 

illumination of this area of particular interest in the scene for analysis with improved 

resolution or SNR. In the context of optical ghost imaging, in Refs.138–140, a simple

algorithm identifies a ROI (based on its high spatial frequency content138,139 or motion140) 

and subsequently chooses illumination patterns to analyze the ROI with higher resolution. 

In these examples, ROI identification and illumination pattern synthesis are performed 


24 / 63

analytically without resorting to AI tools and the ultimate goal is image reconstruction 

rather than answering a specific sensing task. In the context of microwave meta-imaging, 

in Ref.133, first, a convolutional neural network performs image reconstruction based on 

measurements obtained with pseudo-random configurational diversity; second, based on 

the reconstructed image from the first step, another neural network identifies the hand and 

chest areas of the imaged person; third, given the inferred spatial position of these ROIs, 

the programmable meta-imager synthesizes illumination patterns to focus on the ROIs; 

forth, a third neural network interprets the measured data from this second series of 

measurements, for instance, to infer details about the displayed hand gesture. In this 

complex sequence of sensing tasks, illustrated in Figure 3, AI determined the configuration 

of the programmable meta-imager in the second series of measurements; by focusing on 

the ROIs, significant SNR enhancements for tackling the specific task were achieved. This 

work thus constitutes a first example of an intelligent meta-imager, even though its 

performance could be further improved by using intelligent as opposed to pseudo-random 

illumination patterns during the first measurement step. We discuss how intelligent patterns 

can be implement in subsection 3.3.

Another important feature in Ref.133 is related to its hardware: the programmable meta-

imager is based on a programmable metasurface reflect-array. Other works with such 

hardware (see Figure 2j,k,m)54,76,82,83,97 relied on illumination with a carefully aligned horn 

antenna, resulting in an overall bulky setup. In contrast, Ref.133 demonstrates the above-

outlined functionalities also if stray ambient WiFi waves serve as (uncontrolled) source of 

illumination. This result paves the way toward mounting programmable metasurfaces on 

walls and opportunistically using ambient radiowaves for advanced sensing tasks. Not only 

does this approach resolve the bulkiness concern, but it also recycles waves instead of 

emitting additional ones.


25 / 63

Figure 3. Machine-learning-controlled meta-imager autonomously identifies regions of 

interest and performs multiple complex tasks. First, the scene is imaged using pseudo-random 

patterns and a neural network for image reconstruction. Second, the image is analyzed to identify regions 

of interest for analyzing hand signs and breathing. Third, the metasurface configuration is adapted to 

focus sequentially on the identified regions of interest. Forth, the acquired data is processed, in some 

cases using a neural network, to answer the tasks at hand. The panels are adapted with permission from 

Li, L. et al., Light Sci. Appl. 8, 97 (2019);133 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) 

license.

3.2 Information Flow and Operation Principle. To prepare the ground for the 

concept of intelligent computational meta-imaging, we start by retaking the sensing 

pipeline from Figure 1 in Figure 4a in order to analyze the flow of information through the 

sensing pipeline in terms of its relevance to the specific sensing task. The conventional 

sensing pipeline deployed in compressive meta-imagers (Figure 4a) drags task-irrelevant 

information from the scene into the data (because the measurements are task-agnostic) and 

further into the reconstructed image (because the image reconstruction is also task-


26 / 63

agnostic). The task-relevant information is separated from the task-irrelevant information 

only at the very last stage of image interpretation. Dragging irrelevant information through 

the sensing pipeline results in numerous inconveniences related to the need for more 

measurements and a larger dataset to be processed. As a result, latency is unnecessarily 

poor, as are other metrics like power consumption, data storage, radiation exposure and 

computational-power requirements. An intelligent sensing pipeline would discriminate 

between relevant and irrelevant information at the earliest possible stage (the measurement) 

and skip the image reconstruction step, as sketched in Figure 4b. Thereby, the measurement 

process of intelligent meta-imagers is simultaneously an analog wave processor that 

implements a first task-specific inference step. Consequently, no clear distinction between 

measurement and interpretation is possible in the case of intelligent meta-imagers.

Figure 4. Flow of (ir)relevant information through the sensing pipeline. a, A conventional 

sensing pipeline is based on a task-agnostic measurement process and drags irrelevant information (red) 

from the scene through the data to the image, only discriminating between relevant and irrelevant at the 

very last stage. b, In contrast, an intelligent sensing pipeline selects only relevant information already 


27 / 63

during the physical measurement process. In an intelligent sensing pipeline, the measurement process 

is therefore simultaneously a first analog inference step. Moreover, it skips image reconstruction and 

directly interprets the data to answer the task at hand.

A first improvement, purely on the digital layer, is thus an idea that we already 

encountered in a few examples: reconstruction-free interpretation of raw data95,141,142. The 

latter logically follows from the realization that in the vast majority of sensing scenarios, 

the ultimate goal is to answer a specific task rather than to obtain a visual image of the 

scene suitable for human consumption. Most such inference tasks are inherently simpler 

than image reconstruction, fundamentally, because not all scene information is relevant to 

them. In terms of the flow of (ir)relevant information through the sensing pipeline, the 

discrimination between relevant and irrelevant thus happens directly after the measurement 

process. More formally, the reason why inference is possible directly in the compressed 

latent domain is that, according to the Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma, the degree of 

correlation between two signals is approximately the same after compression95,143. Some 

recent works on compressive meta-imagers follow the idea of reconstruction-free inference

and deploy neural networks to directly interpret the raw measurement data with respect to 

the specific sensing task82,97,134. However, purely reconstruction-free sensing still acquires 

irrelevant information in a task-agnostic measurement process; hence the physical layer in 

these cases lacks intelligent task-awareness and we regard them as examples of

compressive rather than intelligent meta-imagers.

A generic intelligent sensing pipeline, as seen in Figure 4b, goes significantly beyond 

reconstruction-free inference: a task-aware measurement process discriminates between 

relevant and irrelevant scene information already during the measurement. An intelligent 

measurement is not a faithful analog compressor of all scene information. Instead, it 

promotes features relevant to the task at hand and simultaneously suppresses irrelevant 

features. The sensing matrix should thus act as a physical discriminator between relevant 

and irrelevant information.


28 / 63

A related idea has been well understood in the signal processing community for more 

than two decades. A common problem there is robust face recognition based on a digital 

photographic image despite variations in lighting and facial expression. To that end, the 

image is linearly projected into a lower-dimensional subspace. One possible projection is

based on PCA: such a PCA-based projection reduces the dimensionality almost without 

distorting the relative distance between points, implying that unwanted variations due to 

lighting and facial expressions are retained. PCA projections maximize the total scatter 

across the entire dataset because they are unaware of which class different examples belong 

to. Therefore, while being optimal for data compression, PCA patterns are not optimal for 

discrimination between classes as needed for inference. Alternatively, the projections can 

be based on a Fisher’s linear discriminant analysis (LDA)144 which maximizes the distance 

between points belonging to different classes while minimizing the distance between points 

belonging to the same classes145. In other words, unwanted variations are discounted in 

such an LDA-based projection. Of course, the success of LDA over PCA requires a 

sufficiently large and representative training dataset146. In signal processing theory, both 

PCA and LDA are covered by the broad term “dictionary learning”147,148, a terminology 

that blurs the distinction between near-isometric and purposefully non-isometric linear 

embeddings. For this reason, we avoid using the term “dictionary learning” in the present 

paper. While the described signal processing problem of face recognition introduces the 

interest of purposefully non-isometric task-specific linear embeddings145,149,150, it differs 

from our application in EM sensing in two ways. First, and most importantly, the task-

aware projection happens on the digital layer as part of the data analysis whereas in our

EM sensing applications it should be implemented on the physical layer as part of the 

measurement process via intelligent scene illumination patterns. Second, the outcome of 

the projection, that is the measured data in our case, is further processed in our EM sensing 

pipeline by a neural network involving non-linear operations.

More recently, such task-specific projections have been implemented physically

in optics using, for instance, digital micromirror devices, to illuminate the scene95,151. With 


29 / 63

the proliferation of AI and deep learning tools, it has become clear that if a neural network 

is used to analyze the measured data, one may as well include the programmable 

measurement hardware as additional first layer in the neural network. This results in a 

hybrid analog-digital end-to-end sensing pipeline containing both trainable physical

weights and trainable digital weights that can be jointly optimized. Thereby, the 

optimization of the physical weights takes into account the specific task, irrespective of 

how complex and non-linear the digital processing part is. Early works applied this idea 

to optimizing the color multiplexing pattern of a camera to reconstruct a full color image152

and the illumination arrangement of a microscope to detect malaria-infected cells153.

Similar approaches were subsequently studied in many works in the optical domain154–166,

in the ultrasonic domain167, as well as for meta-imaging in the EM domain168,169. The same 

idea of learned sensing has recently also been proposed generically as data-driven 

computational sensor design without any concrete implementation in Ref.170. 

In general, in all these works there is no guarantee that the identified optimized 

physical layer is globally optimal, as in most optimization problems. However, experience 

with EM intelligent meta-imagers168,169 typically shows that different optimization runs 

yield different local optima of roughly similar quality (see, for instance, Figure 6a below). 

Some ideas to get closer to the global optimum have been explored in the context of 

nanophotonic inverse design171. Provably optimal coherent illumination patterns have, to 

date, only been identified for (i) binary decision problems172, or (ii) precisely estimating 

small (perturbative) variations in the value of one continuous parameter173. In the former 

case, it is clear from linear algebra that the optimal wavefront to discriminate between two 

system configurations is the first eigenstate of (Δ𝑇)†(Δ𝑇) , where Δ𝑇 is the difference 

between the transmission matrices for the two configurations to be distinguished and † 

denotes the conjugate transpose. In the latter case, the same approach is applied in the limit 

of small perturbations of one parameter 𝜃 around some fixed value 𝜃̅ , such that 

illumination with the first eigenstate of (∂𝜃𝑇)†(∂𝜃𝑇) maximizes the impact of changes in 

𝜃 on the output field, as long as 𝜃 remains in the vicinity of 𝜃̅. Interestingly, these operator-


30 / 63

based approaches are valid irrespective of whether the scene is in free space or embedded 

in a complex scattering environment; however, whether it is possible to scale up such 

operator-based approaches to non-perturbative variations of many parameters remains an 

open question.

Figure 5. Operational principle of learned-sensing intelligent meta-imagers. a, Concept: 

an end-to-end sensing pipeline contains trainable physical weights (programmable meta-atoms) and 

trainable digital weights (neural network nodes). The figure is adapted with permission from del Hougne, 

P. From compressed sensing to learned sensing with metasurface imagers. in Proc. Passive and Active 

Millimeter-Wave Imaging XXIV (eds. Robertson, D. A. & Wikner, D. A.) (SPIE, 2021).174 Copyright 

2021 SPIE – the international society for optics and photonics. b, The learned integrated sensing 

pipeline maps the scene, a function of the sought-after latent variable 𝑋, to an estimate of 𝑋 via a 

physical and a subsequent digital layer. The configurations {𝐶𝑖} of the programmable meta-atoms 

during the measurement process and the weights 𝜙 of the digital layer are jointly trained. c, Taxonomy 

of scene illumination strategies in terms of the a priori knowledge taken into account: only the learned 

patterns are task-aware. The figure is reproduced with permission from del Hougne, P. et al., Adv. Sci.

7, 1901913 (2019);168 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.


31 / 63

Figure 5a summarizes the general concept of intelligent meta-imaging for a setup with 

metamaterial receiving hardware. The scene scatters a wave towards the metamaterial-

based detector. The detection process involves scattering of the wave both by 

programmable meta-atoms (illustrated as diode-tunable split-ring resonators in the figure) 

and other fixed scatterers. The information flow then seamlessly continues on the digital  

layer, where the information scatters through programmable digital nodes until the final 

layer outputs an answer to the specific task. The hybrid end-to-end pipeline thus contains 

both physical and digital programmable weights that can be trained jointly.

In terms of information flow, the entire pipeline can be understood as an approximation 

of the identify function, as seen in Figure 5b. The sought-after information 𝑋, for instance, 

the class of a hand gesture, is encoded in the scene reflectivity 𝑆 = 𝑓𝑠𝑐(𝑋) via some 

function 𝑓𝑠𝑐. The learned integrated sensing pipeline (LISP) consists of the physical layer 

parametrized by the coding sequence {𝐶𝑖} of the programmable meta-atoms and the digital 

layer parametrized by digital trainable weights 𝜙. The LISP’s output is an estimate 𝑋̃ of 

the sought-after information 𝑋 . This mapping of 𝑋 to itself is reminiscent of an auto-

encoder (see Ch. 14 in Ref.175) except that it lacks the common architectural symmetry of 

auto-encoders and, most importantly, that the encoding step is implemented physically 

through wave propagation – as opposed to digitally in the well-known all-digital auto-

encoders176. Moreover, the objective is a different one: we seek to jointly optimize 

measurement and processing to answer a specific task whereas conventional auto-encoders 

are used in data analysis for dimensionality reduction and/or denoising177.

The use of a single end-to-end pipeline implies that the physical weights are 

programmed in a way that considers not only a priori knowledge about the scene as in 

principle scene components (subsection 2.2.4) but additionally a priori knowledge about 

the task and potential measurement constraints. This is yet another way to understand why 

learned patterns outperform compressive patterns (pseudo-random, orthogonal, principal 

scene components), in line with the previous argument in terms of eliminating irrelevant 

information already during the measurement process through purposefully non-isometric 


32 / 63

projections. Wave propagation on the physical layer thus performs task-specific analog 

signal processing in the case of intelligent meta-imagers: relevant information is 

highlighted and compressed. In contrast, compressive meta-imagers merely compress all 

information without performing any selection of salient features. 

The use of learned illumination patterns does not imply any additional overhead during 

runtime because, similarly to all compressive illumination techniques, a fixed series of 

patterns is used that is determined before runtime. Similarly to the use of orthogonal 

patterns and principle scene components, the use of learned patterns requires a one-off 

preparatory step before runtime to determine these patterns. Learning an intelligent fixed 

sequence of illumination patterns requires the availability of sufficient labelled training 

data; note that identifying a series of principle scene components also requires training data

albeit there is no need for labels. The need for labelled training data arises whenever AI is 

used, be it only for data interpretation based on compressive measurements as in 

Refs.97,133,58,82,134,83,135, or for jointly learning intelligent illumination patterns and a 

matching digital layer as in Refs.168,169.

3.3 Implementations. To illustrate how the concept of intelligent meta-imaging can be 

implemented in practice, we now closely look at the two existing examples from the 

literature168,169. The first demonstration of an intelligent learned-sensing meta-imager was 

a numerical study in which transmitter and receiver each take the form of a dynamic 

metasurface transceiver (similar to Figure 2i), aiming to recognize a metallic digit in free 

space – see Figure 6a168. Subsequently, the first experimental implementation of learned 

sensing with meta-imagers was reported – see Figure 6b – where the scene is illuminated 

with waves generated by a horn antenna and reflected off a programmable metasurface 

reflect-array, aiming to recognize a human posture169.

Both implementations of learned-sensing intelligent meta-imagers achieved 

remarkable latency improvements compared to the compressive sensing approaches from 

section 2. In particular, Ref.168 benchmarked the average achievable classification accuracy


33 / 63

as a function of the number of utilized scene illumination patterns against compressive 

meta-imaging paradigms. Obviously, the lower the number of utilized scene illumination 

patterns, the better is the system latency. Orthogonal patterns are seen on the right in Figure 

6a to yield a very small advantage over pseudo-random patterns as the number of utilized 

scene illuminations increases, because redundancy in subsequent measurements is 

eliminated. Principal scene components yield a more notable improvement over orthogonal 

patterns, because they are optimal to compress the expected scene information. However, 

note that the synthesis of orthogonal patterns and principle scene components is in general 

not perfectly implemented with constrained hardware. Learned patterns yield a remarkably 

clear accuracy improvement over all three compressive sensing benchmarks, especially for 

low-latency systems in which the number of scene illuminations is very limited. This 

superior performance can be attributed to the fact that learned patterns take into account 

the specific task and measurement hardware constraints (see also Figure 5c). Note that 

using non-random patterns (orthogonal patterns, principle scene components, learned 

patterns) does not imply an additional computational or latency cost at runtime because 

these non-random patterns are determined offline in a preparatory step before runtime.


34 / 63

Figure 6. Implementations of intelligent meta-imagers. a, Numerical demonstration of an 

intelligent meta-imager used to recognize metallic objects. The meta-device is based on a 2D leaky 

waveguide. Its classification accuracy clearly outperforms the three state-of-the-art compressed sensing 

benchmarks (see Figure 2), especially when the number of patterns is limited (low latency). The panels 

are adapted with permission from del Hougne, P. et al., Adv. Sci. 7, 1901913 (2019);168 licensed under 

a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. b, Experimental demonstration of an intelligent 

meta-imager used to recognize human gestures. The meta-device is based on a programmable reflect-

array metasurface illuminated by a horn antenna. Similar latency improvements are observed. The 

panels are adapted with permission from Li, H.-Y. et al., Patterns 1, 100006 (2020);169 licensed under 

a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.

In the following, we break down the five major challenges in realizing a learned-

sensing pipeline with programmable metamaterial hardware, and we detail the distinct 

ways in which Refs.168,169 have mastered them.


35 / 63

3.3.1 Forward Model. – The first step toward assembling a learned-sensing pipeline, 

as seen in Figure 5b, is to establish a forward model 𝑓𝑓𝑤𝑚(𝑓𝑠𝑐(𝑋), {𝐶𝑖}) of the physical 

layer that maps a given scene 𝑓𝑠𝑐(𝑋) to the measured data 𝐷 as a function of the chosen 

sequence of coding patterns {𝐶𝑖} for the programmable meta-atoms. This forward model 

must be differentiable so that, once combined with the subsequent digital layers, the hybrid 

neural network can be trained through error back-propagation. In some cases, it is feasible 

to conceive an analytical forward model. For instance, in Ref.168 an efficient compact 

description of the radiating sub-wavelength meta-atoms as dipoles is used that takes into 

account coupling effects178.
Analytical models based on such discrete-dipole 

approximations have successfully been verified for stacked 1D leaky waveguides with 

programmable radiators in experiments179, as well as for 2D metasurface transceivers in 

full-wave simulations and experiments180,181. Simple analytical models of programmable 

metasurface reflect-arrays also yielded good experimental results, for instance, in Refs.97,98. 

In other cases, however, an analytical description of the forward model may be too 

cumbersome, non-differentiable or unfeasible to obtain. An example of the latter would be 

hardware such as the 3D leaky programmable chaotic cavities71 from Figure 2f. In such 

cases, a neural network can be trained to approximate the physical forward function 𝑓𝑓𝑤𝑚, 

as was done in Ref.169. In that case, an auxiliary neural network that maps 𝑓𝑠𝑐(𝑋) and {𝐶𝑖}

to 𝐷 is trained and, once trained, its internal weights are kept fixed. A learned forward 

model is guaranteed to be differentiable. Once a forward model, be it of analytical or 

learned nature, has been obtained, it can be integrated into the hybrid sensing pipeline from 

Figure 5b.

3.3.2 Digital Neural Network Architecture. – The use of convolutional architectures 

is very popular153,133,169 because in the field of computer vision they displayed an excellent 

ability to identify local correlations in data. However, unlike computer vision problems, 

we are dealing with multiplexed data such that one may hypothesize that local features are 

actually encoded in long-range correlations. Therefore, surprisingly simple fully connected 

layers are often a good choice for the digital neural network69,168,182–184.


36 / 63

3.3.3 Training Data. – The next step is to accumulate enough data to train the end-to-

end hybrid neural network seen in Figure 5b, containing both physical and digital layer. 

For supervised learning, usually a reasonably large number of labelled examples is required. 

In our case, this corresponds to pairs of a scene 𝑓𝑠𝑐(𝑋) and its corresponding label 𝑋. For 

instance, if we are interested in classifying hand gestures, 𝑓𝑠𝑐(𝑋) would be a map of scene 

reflectivity and 𝑋 would identify the corresponding hand gesture. The approach taken by 

Refs.133,169 relied on a commercial digital optical camera, integrated with the programmable 

metasurface, that can rapidly capture a large amount of labelled optical images of, for 

instance, hand gestures. After background removal and binarization, these visual images 

were assumed to approximately correspond to the scene reflectivity in the microwave 

regime. Another approach could be to rely on synthesized data from simulations that 

faithfully resemble the experiment. The hybrid neural network could be initially trained on 

the synthesized data and subsequently be fine-tuned with data from a few experimental 

microwave measurements. This approach is known as transfer learning. Finally, we point 

out that various data augmentation techniques also exist in the deep learning literature that 

may help to diversify small datasets.

3.3.4 Back-Propagation Under Quantization Constraints. – Finally, it is time to 

jointly train the physical and digital weights. Many efficient algorithms for error back-

propagation185–187,175, such as Adam188, are openly accessible. However, usually the 

programmability of the physical weights is quantized rather than continuous, in most cases 

restricted to one bit. This quantization appears at first sight incompatible with the need for 

continuous tunability to implement error back-propagation. Fortunately, there are various 

tricks to combine the quantization constraints of programmable meta-atoms with error 

back-propagation:

(i)
The so-called “temperature parameter” trick used in Ref.168 was introduced in 

Ref.152 in order to gradually drive the distribution of a given physical parameter 

𝑛 from continuous to discrete. Let 𝑁 = [𝑛1, 𝑛2, … , 𝑛𝑝] be a vector collection 


37 / 63

all 𝑝 possible discrete values of 𝑛, 𝑊 = [𝑤1, 𝑤2, … , 𝑤𝑝] an auxiliary weight 

vector of equal size, and 𝛽 a scale factor that increases with the number of 

iterations. The variable of interest 𝑛 can then be expressed as 𝑛 = ∑
𝑤𝑗

′𝑛𝑗

𝑝
𝑗=1
, 

where 𝑊′ = 𝑓SoftMax(𝛽|𝑊|) . As 𝛽 → ∞ , 𝑛 will take one of the allowed 

discrete values.

(ii)
The so-called randomized simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation 

(r-SPSA) algorithm used in Ref.169 originates from petroleum engineering189

and tests at every iteration whether flipping the state of a randomly selected 

subset of meta-atoms improves the optimization metric.

(iii)
A further possibility is the use of projected gradient descent190 which treats the 

physical weights as continuous but projects them onto the allowed discrete 

values after every 𝑘th iteration.

3.3.5 Noise. – The literature on meta-imaging usually tacitly assumes operation in the 

high-SNR regime where the impact of detector noise is negligible. Whereas the 

compressive patterns from section 2 are determined irrespective of measurement 

constraints, learned patterns are expected to vary with SNR. Specifically, in the very low 

SNR regime, one may expect different learned patterns that, for instance, highlight the 

subset of salient features that can be measured with a higher signal strength than others.

Applications of intelligent meta-imagers in the low-SNR regime have to date not been 

explored but may be relevant to space applications with low photon counts191 as well as to 

indoor applications recycling weak stray ambient WiFi waves (e.g., Ref.133). Incidentally, 

Ref.133 performed focusing in the second step to improve the signal strength reflected from 

the ROI, however, the choice to focus waves on the ROI, as opposed to using some other 

possibly non-intuitive pattern, was made by the human operator rather than AI.


38 / 63

4. Future Directions

At this stage, the reader may wonder: what is next? Do the learned-sensing intelligent meta-

imagers from the previous section fully reap the benefits of AI and programmable 

metamaterials? Our answer is: no, there is room for improvement! The previously reviewed 

evolution from compressive to intelligent meta-imagers has already enabled remarkable 

latency improvements but several milestones toward the holy grail of an ultrahigh-

resolution cognitive all-analog meta-imager remain. First, we anticipate that future meta-

imagers will be endowed with a cognitive feature, allowing them to adapt their 

programmable metamaterial layer on-the-fly to the information that they measure. Second, 

we anticipate significant resolution improvements, potentially well below the diffraction 

limit, by realizing and reaping the benefits of operation in closed reverberant environments 

as opposed to free space, which is a natural setting for many applications anyway. Third, 

we anticipate that the entire digital part of the hybrid sensing pipeline from Figure 5a will

be implemented with wave-based analog signal processing in the native (microwave) signal 

domain, yielding substantial improvements in speed and energy consumption. We detail 

these three future directions in the following. 

4.1 Cognitive Meta-Imagers. One way to understand the remarkable latency 

improvements of intelligent meta-imagers over compressive meta-imagers is related to the 

fact that they make use of seemingly all available a priori knowledge on scene, 

measurement constraints, and task, as seen in Figure 5c. Such intelligent meta-imagers 

operate with a fixed learned sequence of coding patterns (and hence scene illumination 

patterns). In principle, a flexible sequence of coding patterns in which each pattern is 

adapted based on the information measured with previous patterns in the sequence offers 

the possibility to make use of an additional source of a priori knowledge: the information 

contained in the data measured with the previous patterns in the current coding sequency. 

For instance, if the goal is to distinguish between five hand gestures, after a few 

measurements it may already be clear that with overwhelming probability the hand gesture 


39 / 63

must be one of two, and it would be more efficient to then use scene illuminations that 

discriminate specifically between the remaining two candidates. In fact, the number of 

measurements itself would become flexible and the cognitive meta-imager would decide 

itself at what point it has collected enough information to answer the specific task with 

high accuracy. 

Incidentally, this approach is chosen by nature, for instance, in the way in which 

humans selectively focus their visual attention on different parts of the visual space in 

subsequent glimpses, and has inspired reinforcement learning methods in computer 

vision192. Precursors of cognitive (self-adaptive) computational imaging are ideas related 

to autonomous ROI identification and analysis from section 3.1. For example, in the area 

of optical ghost imaging, acquisition algorithms were proposed that sequentially focus their 

attention on areas with high spatial frequency content138,139 or motion140 and that decide 

themselves when enough measurements have been taken; however, these examples were 

still aimed at image reconstruction as opposed to answering a specific sensing task for 

which the optimal illumination patterns cannot be determined intuitively. A first attempt at 

implementing task-specific cognitive imaging was recently reported in optical microscopy 

where a biological sample is illuminated with a programmable LED array in order to detect 

malaria193 – see Figure 7. Transposing this cognitive imaging paradigm to programmable 

metamaterial hardware will herald the era of cognitive metamaterials which are capable of 

self-learning how they should be configured194. 

The conditions under which the cognitive meta-imaging framework discussed in this 

subsection may outperform the learned meta-imaging paradigm (Section 3) remain to be 

determined in future work. Cognitive meta-imaging involves feedback during runtime 

which implies additional overhead that could reduce or eliminate potential advantages. In 

contrast, the learned meta-imaging paradigm from Section 3 does not involve any 

additional overhead during runtime because it uses a fixed sequence of illumination 

patterns that were learned for the specific task beforehand in a one-off preparatory step.


40 / 63

Figure 7. Cognitive imaging. Instead of using a fixed series of learned patterns, the imager adapts 

each pattern based on the information measured with previous patterns in the sequence. The concept is 

illustrated for an optical microscope in which an LED array self-adaptively illuminates a biological 

sample to detect malaria. The figure is adapted with permission from Chaware, A. et al. Towards an 

Intelligent Microscope: Adaptively Learned Illumination for Optimal Sample Classification. in Proc. 

ICASSP 9284 (IEEE, 2020).193 Copyright 2020 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.

4.2 Meta-Programmable Reverberation-Coded Apertures. Besides latency, 

another roadblock for current EM meta-imager applications is resolution: the wavelength 

of WiFi waves, for instance, is comparable to the size of a human hand whose gesture may 

have to be determined based on recycled WiFi waves (as in Ref.133). We have previously 

pointed out that range resolution is limited by the utilized bandwidth only if no waves are 

incident at oblique angles19, resolving the apparent paradox of achieving range resolution 

with single-frequency measurements in Refs.67,68,195. Pushing this idea further, one may 

wonder what resolution is achievable when the entire scene is enclosed by reflecting walls, 

resulting in secondary waves impinging on the scene from all possible angles. In this 

subsection, we discuss this special type of coded aperture, the reverberation-coded aperture 

(RCA)69, and explain why it is capable of compressing deeply sub-wavelength scene 

information without access to evanescent waves. RCAs can leverage spectral or 

configurational diversity, similar to conventional coded apertures in Figure 2. Upgrading 

intelligent meta-imagers to RCA hardware may be as simple as moving them from 


41 / 63

contrived anechoic test chambers to real-life indoor environments. In fact, many practical 

scenarios already operate inside enclosed reverberant environments, usually without 

realizing the implications thereof regarding the achievable resolution. Examples include 

indoor localization196–199,183,200
and imaging201, biomedical breast imaging inside 

(reconfigurable) metallic enclosures202, impact localization with elastic waves propagating 

on solid surfaces203,204, or photo-acoustic imaging inside an acoustically reverberant 

cavity205. Many applications of EM meta-imaging indeed involve operation in indoor 

environments which naturally act as RCAs, many of which will soon be endowed with 

programmability as part of next-generation wireless communication paradigms206,207,200. 

While the scene is outside of a conventional coded aperture that relies on the spectral 

or configurational diversity of a leaky chaotic cavity, in an RCA the scene is inside the 

cavity – see Figure 8a-c. This apparently small difference has large consequences: the wave 

interacts with the scene not once but countless times such that it develops a much stronger 

sensitivity to sub-wavelength scene details69. It is instructive to think of the RCA as a 

“generalized interferometer”. Indeed, it is well known that the interferometric sensitivity, 

for instance for a high-finesse Fabry-Perot cavity208, is typically deeply sub-wavelength –

without any access to evanescent waves nor any link to wave focusing. While basic optical 

interferometers are essentially one-dimensional devices, RCAs generalize this sensitivity 

to two or three dimensions, making the interferometric sensitivity exploitable for 

complicated sensing tasks. Of course, the first Born approximation is not satisfied in an 

RCA but since we seek reconstruction-free inference, the raw multiplexed data can be 

directly interpreted by a neural network.


42 / 63

Figure 8. Meta-Programmable Reverberation-Coded Aperture. Significant resolution 

improvements can be achieved by placing the scene inside a complex enclosure such that reverberating 

waves develop a much higher sensitivity to sub-wavelength scene details than in free space. a,

Traditional coded-aperture concept (similar to Figure 2a). b, Coded aperture implemented based on 

spectral diversity of a leaky chaotic cavity (similar to Figure 2e). c, Reverberation-coded aperture (RCA)

based on spectral diversity: scene and wave sources are inside – as opposed to outside – of the leaky 

chaotic cavity. d, Experimental implementation of a configuration-diverse RCA for a prototypical 

object-localization task. The panels are reproduced with permission from del Hougne, M. et al., Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 127, 043903 (2021);69 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.

The achievable sensing resolution inside an RCA is not determined by the wavelength 

but can be directly related to the dwell time209 of waves inside the cavity (before being 

absorbed) via three distinct RCA mechanisms69: (i) enhanced signal strength, (ii) enhanced 

measurement diversity, and (iii) enhanced intrinsic sensitivity of the field to any 

perturbation such as the scene210. These links between dwell time and achievable resolution 

were explored in Ref.69 in the context of a prototypical object localization task (essentially 

equivalent to imaging an extremely sparse scene), numerically in spectrally-diverse RCAs 

and experimentally in configurationally-diverse RCAs. A related observation was 

subsequently also reported in Ref.211 which numerically studied systems without any 

absorption: if the average dwell time is constant, so is the average precision with which a 


43 / 63

particle’s property can be estimated, as long as the scattering regime is ballistic or diffusive 

(but not Anderson localized). The physics of the underlying RCA mechanisms extends of 

course to more complex tasks, such as the recognition of sub-wavelength object shapes or 

materials inside an RCA without any manipulation in the extreme proximity of the scene. 

In this spirit, the results from Ref.212 can be understood as the successful reconstruction 

using a spectrally-diverse RCA of random 2D images whose smallest feature size is a sixth 

of the wavelength; these images were encoded into the configuration of a programmable 

metasurface in Ref.212. In general, besides dwell time and SNR, non-physical parameters 

like the available a priori knowledge and the choice of data analysis algorithm also strongly 

influence the achievable resolution. Not relying on evanescent waves makes RCAs 

compatible with the remote sensing requirements of the EM sensing applications we 

consider – in sharp contrast to the rather invasive examples of computational meta-imagers 

that reported sub-wavelength resolution by placing meta-hardware in the extreme vicinity 

of the scene to capture evanescent waves54,55,58.

Looking forward, an open question is whether self-oscillatory wave fields213

outperform linear ones for sensing with RCAs. A further challenge is the generation of 

sufficient training data for the neural network. Because the complicated irregular geometry

of a chaotic cavity is unsuitable for simulation, a promising way forward appears to be an 

electronically reconfigurable test scene to rapidly acquire many examples, as in Ref.212. 

Finally, configuration-diverse RCAs as in Ref.69 have so far only been used with random 

coding patterns, and thus pseudo-random scene illumination; one may expect further 

performance improvements if learned instead of pseudo-random coding patterns are 

used176.

4.3 All-Analog Sensing Pipelines. We have previously established in section 3 that 

an intelligent meta-imager performs task-specific analog signal processing “over-the-air” 

during the measurement process. This naturally leads to the following question: Could the 

entire sensing pipeline, including the digital part seen in Figure 5a, be implemented in an 


44 / 63

all-analog fashion? This question is in line with a timely research track on metamaterial 

wave processors214 that has emerged completely independently from computational meta-

imaging. The underlying idea there is that any wave system can be understood as a 

mathematical operator acting on the input wavefront, and by suitably tailoring the system 

one can hope to implement a desired mathematical operation. The promises held by wave-

based analog signal processing relate mainly to improving speed and energy efficiency of 

specific-purpose computing in comparison to the use of a general-purpose digital electronic 

processor. For example, a simple lens is an entirely passive device that performs a Fourier 

transform at the speed of light propagation. Speed and energy consumption are obviously 

also of high relevance to the EM imaging and sensing applications we are addressing.

Our vision of all-analog sensing pipelines hence consists in coupling the intelligent 

data acquisition discussed in section 3 with analog (as opposed to digital) data processing. 

In the context of computational meta-imaging, an analog wave processor should satisfy the 

following criteria to constitute a candidate technology that may replace the current digital 

layers seen in Figure 5a (typically an artificial neural network, ANN):

1. Programmability: Being able to tune the operation performed by the analog 

processor is essential for 

(i)
switching dynamically between functionalities, e.g., when the meta-imager 

is to be deployed for a different task, 

(ii)
adapting to environmental changes, e.g., to update the ANN in response to 

changes in the scene (appearance of parasitic scatterers) or measurement 

hardware (failure of a programmable meta-atom), and 

(iii)
transfer learning, e.g., when the ANN is coarsely trained with synthetic data 

and then fine-tuned in situ. 

2. Non-Linearity: Non-linear activation functions are a crucial ingredient of ANNs 

that enables them to tackle highly complex sensing tasks that cannot be solved with 

linear processing. 

3. Integrability: The analog wave processor should be easy to integrate into a realistic 


45 / 63

sensing scenario; specifically, it should not require the addition of excessively 

bulky components.

4. Operation in Native Signal Domain: To avoid slow and energy-inefficient 

conversions of the captured microwave signals between their native domain and 

other analog domains (optics, acoustics, electronics, …) or the digital domain, the 

entire wave processor should operate in the microwave domain without any such 

conversions.

In the following, we summarize the four leading strategies in the recent context of analog 

metamaterial wave processors that partially meet the above requirements. On an abstract 

level, these four different approaches, illustrated in the four rows of Figure 9, all conceive 

scattering systems that mix the incoming signals in a desired manner.

4.3.1 Bulk Metamaterial Block. – The first examples of metamaterial wave processors 

were carefully designed static metamaterial blocks with a desired linear transfer 

function215,216. While the addition of programmable features to such metamaterial blocks 

has not been reported to date, the use of materials with intensity-dependent non-linear 

response has received some attention, albeit only in simulation217. Miniaturization to enable 

integrability has been the key motivation of early works on metamaterial wave 

processors215 that had optical implementations as ultimate application in mind. However, 

experimental devices fabricated for the microwave domain216, the native signal domain we 

are interested in for EM sensing applications, remain quite bulky.

4.3.2 Waveguide Mesh. – Linear programmable transformations have recently 

successfully been implemented in guided optics using meshes of programmable Mach-

Zehnder interferometers218–221, building on earlier work that combined free-space 

propagation with beamsplitters222. The addition of non-linear components such as 

amplifiers to such meshes received attention in the microwave domain very recently223. 

However, such microwave waveguide meshes remain to date quite bulky.

4.3.3 Cascaded Diffractive Layers. – Wave propagation through a series of carefully 

fabricated diffractive layers, often referred to as “diffractive deep neural network”, was 


46 / 63

recently shown to enable the implementation of a desired linear transformation in the 

terahertz domain224. It is important to note that as long as the diffractive layers are linear, 

adding more layers enhances the ability to implement precisely the desired linear 

operation225 but does not add “depth” in the machine-learning sense of the word175,187

because ultimately the system still performs a linear matrix-vector multiplication226. Very

recently, Ref.227 implemented a cascade of programmable linear diffractive layers in the 

microwave domain. To date, such programmable diffractive layers have not yet been 

endowed with non-linear features that would be needed for complicated processing tasks. 

While the compatibility of the concept with CMOS technology for operation at near-

infrared frequencies has been demonstrated for static linear systems228,229, the integrability 

of cascaded diffractive layers at microwave frequencies appears in general difficult due to 

their inherent bulkiness and reliance on free-space propagation227,230.

Most recent works on cascaded diffractive layers can in fact be understood as all-

analog sensing pipelines. However, they use task-agnostic instead of intelligent scene 

illumination, rely on bulky setups and their processing is to date limited to a linear (and in 

most cases static) projection. Nonetheless, linear processing is sufficient for “simple” 

classification tasks such as MNIST digit recognition, and ensembles of linear diffractive 

networks can yield improved performance on “harder” tasks231. In most examples, an 

image is encoded into a wavefront which impinges on the cascaded diffractive layers. The 

intensities in various sections of the output wavefront are integrated and act as spatial class 

scores that directly indicate the class of the object displayed in the impinging wavefront.

In Ref.232, the input information is encoded spectrally instead of spatially and sorted into 

spatial classes. In Ref.233, spectral instead of spatial object classes are used. Different 

frequencies illuminate an approximately non-dispersive scene, and the scattered

wavefronts interact with the carefully designed dispersive diffractive layers such that the 

frequency-dependent signal on a single-pixel detector classifies the scene. The intensities 

in various frequency intervals act as spectral class scores that directly indicate the object 

class.


47 / 63

4.3.4 Complex Scattering System. – An electrically large irregularly shaped scattering 

enclosure randomly scrambles incident waves. However, equipped with programmable 

meta-atoms, its scattering properties can be judiciously tuned such that it performs a 

programmable linear transformation234,235. Ideas for adding non-linearities include the use 

of diode-loaded ports236 and input-signal-dependent time-modulation237. The bulkiness of 

3D volumetric scattering enclosures appears at first sight a major obstacle to integrability. 

However, on the one hand, integrability can be accomplished by utilizing flat quasi-2D 

programmable chaotic cavities73,74. On the other hand, an alternative approach to achieve 

integrability is to endow an existing enclosure whose primary functionality is completely 

unrelated (e.g., a metallic toolbox, a microwave oven, an indoor environment, etc.) with a 

second signal-processing functionality such that no bulky enclosure has to be added to a 

given operation scenario234,235. Instead, any already existing enclosure can be leveraged in 

situ by mounting an ultrathin programmable metasurface on its wall. These ideas enable 

all-analog processing in the native microwave domain as in Ref.235, whereas conversions

between analog and digital are still an essential part of the proposed schemes in 

Refs.234,236,237.


48 / 63

Figure 9. Metamaterial Wave Processor Paradigms. First row: bulk metamaterial block (panels 

adapted with permission from Refs.215–217). Second row: waveguide mesh (panels adapted from 

Refs.222,221,223). Third row: cascaded diffractive layers (panels adapted with permission from 

Refs.224,227,228,233). Forth row: complex scattering system (panels adapted with permission from Refs.234–

237). (Copyrights: a, Reproduced with permission from Science 343, 160 (2014).215 Copyright 2014 

American Association for the Advancement of Science. b, Reproduced with permission from Science

363, 1333 (2019).216 Copyright 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science. c, Hughes, 

T. W. et al., Sci. Adv. 5, eaay6946 (2019);217 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) 

license. d, Reproduced with permission from Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 58 (1994).222 Copyright 1994 

American Physical Society. e, Reproduced with permission from Nat. Photonics 11, 441 (2017).221

Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. f, Reproduced with permission from Tzarouchis, D. C. et al. Design 

and implementation of tunable RF modules for reconfigurable metastructures that perform mathematical 

computations. in Proc. URSI GASS (2021).223 Copyright 2021 Institute of Electrical and Electronics 

Engineers. g, Reproduced with permission from Science 361, 1004 (2018).224 Copyright 2018American 


49 / 63

Association for the Advancement of Science. h, Luo, Y. et al., Light Sci. Appl. 8, 1112 (2019);233

licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. i, Liu, C. et al., doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-

90701/v1;227 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. j, Goi, E. et al., Light 

Sci. Appl. 10, 40 (2021);228 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. k, del 

Hougne P. et al., Phys. Rev. X 8, 041037 (2018);234 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC 

BY) license. l, Reproduced with permission from Sol, J. et al., arXiv:2108.06178.235 Copyright 2021

The Authors (arXiv perpetual non-exclusive license). m, Ma, S. et al., doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-

783820/v1;236 licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license. n, Reproduced with 

permission from Momeni, A. et al., arXiv:2107.08564.237 Copyright 2021 The Authors (arXiv perpetual 

non-exclusive license).)

5. Conclusions

To summarize, in this Review we retraced the development of computational meta-imagers 

from the earliest frequency-diverse compressive systems to modern programmable 

intelligent systems. Compressive meta-imagers (section 2) seek to indiscriminately acquire 

all scene information with a sensing matrix that represents a near-isometric linear 

embedding of the scene based on pseudo-random patterns, orthogonal patterns or principal 

scene components. In contrast, intelligent meta-imagers (section 3) discriminate between 

task-relevant and task-irrelevant information during the physical measurement process by 

using learned patterns that are purposefully non-isometric in a way that highlights salient 

features for the specific task at hand. The acquisition of more task-relevant information per 

measurement reduces the number of necessary measurements to answer the specific task 

as well as the processing burden, thereby leading to remarkable improvements in latency.

Intelligent meta-imagers rely on programmable metamaterial hardware. While this 

hardware has been around since 2014, only recently it was realized that programmable 

meta-atoms can be integrated as trainable physical weights into a hybrid analog-digital end-

to-end sensing pipeline. The latter enables joint training of physical and digital weights, 


50 / 63

thereby endowing the physical metamaterial layer with task-awareness. Intelligent 

programmable meta-atoms thereby simultaneously sort and compress scene information, 

that is, they perform task-specific analog signal processing “over-the-air”. 

In section 4, we looked forward to the next three major developments that we expect 

in the field: first, the introduction of cognitive meta-imagers that optimize their settings 

themselves on-the-fly; second, the integration of the deployment environment’s intrinsic 

scattering and reverberation to achieve remote deeply sub-wavelength resolution; third, the 

replacement of the currently digital layers with analog metamaterial wave processors that 

are programmable, non-linear, integrable and operate in the native (microwave) signal 

domain. Another important avenue for future research relates to the fusion of intelligent 

meta-imaging concepts with existing wireless communication infrastructure. Thereby, the 

latter can be endowed with a second sensing functionality. Compared to existing wireless 

surveillance systems based on WiFi infrastructure1–5, the available degrees of freedom for 

advanced sensing will increase by several orders of magnitude through the combination 

with intelligent meta-hardware. Thereby, the required sensing tasks for situational 

awareness can be performed by recycling existing EM waves and transceivers, avoiding 

the hardware and spectrum allotment cost of antenna networks dedicated to sensing6–14. A 

further opportunity lies in the integration of information from non-EM sensors (optical, 

mechanical, …) into the intelligent sensing pipeline. Current intelligent meta-imagers 

target EM sensing and monitoring applications that will enable remote situational 

awareness, which is highly demanded in security, health care, mobility, and human-

machine interaction. We also faithfully expect that many meta-imagers based on other 

wave phenomena (acoustic, elastic, terahertz, …) can be endowed with programmability 

where not yet available (e.g., Refs.238,239 for acoustics) and subsequently upgraded to the 

modern intelligent meta-imager paradigm that we have reviewed.


51 / 63

Acknowledgements

The authors thank their international collaborators on various aspects of the presented 

review for stimulating discussions.

Additional Information

Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

Data Availability: Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were 

created or analyzed in this study.


52 / 63

References

1. Jiang, W. et al. Towards Environment Independent Device Free Human Activity Recognition. in Proc. 

MobiCom 289–304 (ACM, 2018).

2. Wang, H. et al. RT-Fall: A Real-Time and Contactless Fall Detection System with Commodity WiFi 

Devices. IEEE Trans. on Mobile Comput. 16, 511–526 (2017).

3. Zhang, J. et al. CrossSense: Towards Cross-Site and Large-Scale WiFi Sensing. in Proc. MobiCom

305–320 (ACM, 2018).

4. Vasisht, D., Kumar, S. & Katabi, D. Decimeter-Level Localization with a Single WiFi Access Point. 

in Proc. USENIX 165–178 (USENIX, 2016).

5. Xu, Q., Chen, Y., Wang, B. & Liu, K. J. R. Radio Biometrics: Human Recognition Through a Wall. 

IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 12, 1141–1155 (2017).

6. Patwari, N. & Wilson, J. RF Sensor Networks for Device-Free Localization: Measurements, Models, 

and Algorithms. Proc. IEEE 98, 1961–1973 (2010).

7. Amin, M. G., Zhang, Y. D., Ahmad, F. & Ho, K. C. D. Radar Signal Processing for Elderly Fall 

Detection: The future for in-home monitoring. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 33, 71–80 (2016).

8. Adib, F., Hsu, C.-Y., Mao, H., Katabi, D. & Durand, F. Capturing the human figure through a wall. 

ACM Trans. Graph. 34, 1–13 (2015).

9. Lien, J. et al. Soli: ubiquitous gesture sensing with millimeter wave radar. ACM Trans. Graph. 35, 

1–19 (2016).

10.Zhao, M., Adib, F. & Katabi, D. Emotion recognition using wireless signals. in Proc. MobiCom 95–

108 (ACM, 2016).

11.Hsu, C.-Y. et al. Zero-Effort In-Home Sleep and Insomnia Monitoring using Radio Signals. in Proc. 

IMWUT vol. 1 1–18 (ACM, 2017).

12.Zhao, M. et al. RF-based 3D skeletons. in Proc. SIGCOMM 267–281 (ACM, 2018).
13.Yue, S., He, H., Wang, H., Rahul, H. & Katabi, D. Extracting Multi-Person Respiration from 

Entangled RF Signals. in Proc. IMWUT vol. 2 1–22 (ACM, 2018).

14.Zhao, M. et al. Through-Wall Human Pose Estimation Using Radio Signals. in Proc. CVPR 7356–

7365 (IEEE, 2018).

15.Fenn, A. J., Temme, D. H., Delaney, W. P. & Courtney, W. E. The Development of Phased-Array 

Radar Technology. Lincoln Lab. J. 12, 20 (2000).

16.Brown, W. M. Synthetic Aperture Radar. IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 3, 217 (1967).
17.Li, L. et al. A Survey on the Low-Dimensional-Model-based Electromagnetic Imaging. Found. 

Trends Signal Process. 12, 107–199 (2018).

18.Li, W., Qi, J. & Sihvola, A. Meta‐Imaging: from Non‐Computational to Computational. Adv. Opt. 

Mater. 8, 2001000 (2020).

19.Imani, M. F. et al. Review of Metasurface Antennas for Computational Microwave Imaging. IEEE 

Trans. Antennas Propag. 68, 1860–1875 (2020).

20.Padilla, W. J. & Averitt, R. D. Imaging with metamaterials. Nat. Rev. Phys. (2021).
21.Lipworth, G. et al. Comprehensive simulation platform for a metamaterial imaging system. Appl. 

Opt. 54, 9343 (2015).

22.Pendry, J. B. Negative Refraction Makes a Perfect Lens. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 3966–3969 (2000).


53 / 63

23.Fang, N. Sub-Diffraction-Limited Optical Imaging with a Silver Superlens. Science 308, 534–537 

(2005).

24.Liu, Z., Lee, H., Xiong, Y., Sun, C. & Zhang, X. Far-Field Optical Hyperlens Magnifying Sub-

Diffraction-Limited Objects. Science 315, 1686–1686 (2007).

25.Mait, J. N., Euliss, G. W. & Athale, R. A. Computational imaging. Adv. Opt. Photon. 10, 409 (2018).
26.Duarte, M. F. et al. Single-pixel imaging via compressive sampling. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 25, 

83–91 (2008).

27.Patel, V. M., Mait, J. N., Prather, D. W. & Hedden, A. S. Computational Millimeter Wave Imaging: 

Problems, progress, and prospects. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 33, 109–118 (2016).

28.Edgar, M. P., Gibson, G. M. & Padgett, M. J. Principles and prospects for single-pixel imaging. Nat. 

Photonics 13, 13–20 (2019).

29.Needell, D. & Ward, R. Stable Image Reconstruction Using Total Variation Minimization. SIAM J. 

Imaging Sci. 6, 1035-1058 (2013).

30.Eldar, Y. C., Kuppinger, P. & Bolcskei, H. Block-Sparse Signals: Uncertainty Relations and Efficient

Recovery. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 58, 3042–3054 (2010).

31.Baraniuk, R. G. & Wakin, M. B. Random Projections of Smooth Manifolds. Found. Comput. Math.

9, 51–77 (2009).

32.Candès, E. J. & Recht, B. Exact Matrix Completion via Convex Optimization. Found. Comput. Math.

9, 717–772 (2009).

33.Baraniuk, R. G. Compressive Sensing [Lecture Notes]. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 24, 118–121 

(2007).

34.Candes, E. J. & Tao, T. Decoding by Linear Programming. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory 51, 4203–

4215 (2005).

35.Candès, E. J., Romberg, J. K. & Tao, T. Stable signal recovery from incomplete and inaccurate 

measurements. Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 59, 1207–1223 (2006).

36.Baraniuk, R., Davenport, M., DeVore, R. & Wakin, M. A Simple Proof of the Restricted Isometry 

Property for Random Matrices. Constr. Approx. 28, 253–263 (2008).

37.Hunt, J. et al. Metamaterial Apertures for Computational Imaging. Science 339, 310–313 (2013).
38.Cozza, A. A Skeptic’s View of Unstirred Components. Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Electromagn. Compat.

174–179 (2011).

39.del Hougne, P., Savin, D. V., Legrand, O. & Kuhl, U. Implementing nonuniversal features with a 

random matrix theory approach: Application to space-to-configuration multiplexing. Phys. Rev. E
102, 010201 (2020).

40.Jolliffe, I. Principal Component Analysis. (Springer, 2011).
41.Chan, W. L. et al. A single-pixel terahertz imaging system based on compressed sensing. Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 93, 121105 (2008).

42.Liutkus, A. et al. Imaging With Nature: Compressive Imaging Using a Multiply Scattering Medium. 

Sci. Rep. 4, 5552 (2015).

43.Liang, M., Li, Y., Meng, H., Neifeld, M. A. & Xin, H. Reconfigurable Array Design to Realize 

Principal Component Analysis (PCA)-Based Microwave Compressive Sensing Imaging System. 
IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 14, 1039–1042 (2015).

44.Baena, J. D. et al. Equivalent-circuit models for split-ring resonators and complementary split-ring 


54 / 63

resonators coupled to planar transmission lines. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. 53, 1451–
1461 (2005).

45.Liu, R. et al. Gradient index circuit by waveguided metamaterials. Appl. Phys. Lett. 94, 073506 

(2009).

46.Fromenteze, T. et al. Computational imaging using a mode-mixing cavity at microwave frequencies. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 194104 (2015).

47.Fromenteze, T. et al. Computational polarimetric microwave imaging. Opt. Express 25, 27488 (2017).
48.Tondo Yoya, A. C., Fuchs, B. & Davy, M. Computational passive imaging of thermal sources with a 

leaky chaotic cavity. Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 193501 (2017).

49.Abbasi, M. A. B., Fusco, V. F., Yurduseven, O. & Fromenteze, T. Frequency-diverse multimode 

millimetre-wave constant-ϵr lens-loaded cavity. Sci. Rep. 10, 22145 (2020).

50.Gollub, J. N. et al. Large Metasurface Aperture for Millimeter Wave Computational Imaging at the 

Human-Scale. Sci. Rep. 7, 42650 (2017).

51.Pedross-Engel, A. et al. Orthogonal Coded Active Illumination for Millimeter Wave, Massive-

MIMO Computational Imaging With Metasurface Antennas. IEEE Trans. Comput. Imaging 4, 184–
193 (2018).

52.Jouade, A., Lafond, O., Ferro-Famil, L., Himdi, M. & Meric, S. Passive Compressive Device in an 

MIMO Configuration at Millimeter Waves. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 66, 5558–5568 (2018).

53.Zvolensky, T., Gowda, V. R., Gollub, J., Marks, D. L. & Smith, D. R. W-Band Sparse Imaging System 

Using Frequency Diverse Cavity-Fed Metasurface Antennas. IEEE Access 6, 73659–73668 (2018).

54.Wang, L., Li, L., Li, Y., Zhang, H. C. & Cui, T. J. Single-shot and single-sensor high/super-resolution 

microwave imaging based on metasurface. Sci. Rep. 6, 26959 (2016).

55.Ma, Q., Hu, H., Huang, E. & Liu, Z. Super-resolution imaging by metamaterial-based compressive 

spatial-to-spectral transformation. Nanoscale 9, 18268–18274 (2017).

56.Kruizinga, P. et al. Compressive 3D ultrasound imaging using a single sensor. Sci. Adv. 3, e1701423 

(2017).

57.Xie, Y. et al. Single-sensor multispeaker listening with acoustic metamaterials. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 

USA 112, 10595–10598 (2015).

58.Orazbayev, B. & Fleury, R. Far-Field Subwavelength Acoustic Imaging by Deep Learning. Phys. 

Rev. X 10, 031029 (2020).

59.Lemoult, F., Lerosey, G., de Rosny, J. & Fink, M. Resonant Metalenses for Breaking the Diffraction 

Barrier. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 203901 (2010).

60.Jiang, T., He, Q. & Peng, Z.-K. Proposal for the Realization of a Single-Detector Acoustic Camera 

Using a Space-Coiling Anisotropic Metamaterial. Phys. Rev. Applied 11, 034013 (2019).

61.Jiang, T., Li, C., He, Q. & Peng, Z.-K. Randomized resonant metamaterials for single-sensor 

identification of elastic vibrations. Nat. Commun. 11, 2353 (2020).

62.Sievenpiper, D. et al. A tunable impedance surface performing as a reconfigurable beam steering 

reflector. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 50, 384–390 (2002).

63.Holloway, C. L., Mohamed, M. A., Kuester, E. F. & Dienstfrey, A. Reflection and Transmission 

Properties of a Metafilm: With an Application to a Controllable Surface Composed of Resonant 
Particles. IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat. 47, 853–865 (2005).

64.Cui, T. J., Qi, M. Q., Wan, X., Zhao, J. & Cheng, Q. Coding metamaterials, digital metamaterials and 


55 / 63

programmable metamaterials. Light Sci. Appl. 3, e218–e218 (2014).

65.Kaina, N., Dupré, M., Fink, M. & Lerosey, G. Hybridized resonances to design tunable binary phase 

metasurface unit cells. Opt. Express 22, 18881 (2014).

66.Soumekh, M. Synthetic Aperture Radar Signal Processing. (Wiley, 1999).
67.Sleasman, T. et al. Single-frequency microwave imaging with dynamic metasurface apertures. J. Opt. 

Soc. Am. B 34, 1713 (2017).

68.Boyarsky, M. et al. Single-frequency 3D synthetic aperture imaging with dynamic metasurface 

antennas. Appl. Opt. 57, 4123–4134 (2018).

69.del Hougne, M., Gigan, S. & del Hougne, P. Deeply Subwavelength Localization with 

Reverberation-Coded Aperture. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 043903 (2021).

70.Sleasman, T., F. Imani, M., Gollub, J. N. & Smith, D. R. Dynamic metamaterial aperture for 

microwave imaging. Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 204104 (2015).

71.Sleasman, T., Imani, M. F., Gollub, J. N. & Smith, D. R. Microwave Imaging Using a Disordered 

Cavity with a Dynamically Tunable Impedance Surface. Phys. Rev. Applied 6, 054019 (2016).

72.Dupré, M., del Hougne, P., Fink, M., Lemoult, F. & Lerosey, G. Wave-Field Shaping in Cavities: 

Waves Trapped in a Box with Controllable Boundaries. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 017701 (2015).

73.Sleasman, T. et al. Implementation and characterization of a two-dimensional printed circuit dynamic 

metasurface aperture for computational microwave imaging. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 69, 
2151 (2020).

74.Hossain, T. M., Fathnan, A. A., Miroshnichenko, A. E. & Powell, D. A. Boundary-tunable Dynamic 

Metasurface Antenna for Computational Imaging. in Proc. Metamaterials Congress 2021 (2021).

75.Diebold, A. V., Imani, M. F., Fromenteze, T., Marks, D. L. & Smith, D. R. Passive microwave spectral 

imaging with dynamic metasurface apertures. Optica 7, 527 (2020).

76.Li, Y. B. et al. Transmission-Type 2-Bit Programmable Metasurface for Single-Sensor and Single-

Frequency Microwave Imaging. Sci. Rep. 6, 23731 (2016).

77.Obermeier, R. & Martinez-Lorenzo, J. A. Sensing Matrix Design via Mutual Coherence 

Minimization for Electromagnetic Compressive Imaging Applications. IEEE Trans. Comput. 
Imaging 3, 217–229 (2017).

78.Obermeier, R. & Martinez-Lorenzo, J. A. Sensing Matrix Design via Capacity Maximization for 

Block Compressive Sensing Applications. IEEE Trans. Comput. Imaging 5, 27–36 (2019).

79.Obermeier, R. & Martinez-Lorenzo, J. A. Model-Based Optimization of Compressive Antennas for 

High-Sensing-Capacity Applications. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 16, 1123–1126 (2017).

80.Molaei, A., Heredia-Juesas, J., Ghazi, G., Vlahakis, J. & Martinez-Lorenzo, J. A. Digitized 

Metamaterial Absorber-Based Compressive Reflector Antenna for High Sensing Capacity Imaging. 
IEEE Access 7, 1160–1173 (2019).

81.Obermeier, R. & Martinez-Lorenzo, J. A. Generalized Optimization of High-Capacity Compressive 

Imaging Systems. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 68, 3135–3144 (2020).

82.Hu, J. et al. Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface Based RF Sensing: Design, Optimization, and 

Implementation. IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun. 38, 2700–2716 (2020).

83.Hu, J. et al. HoloSketch: Wireless Semantic Segmentation by Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces. 

arXiv:2108.06456 (2021).

84.Elad, M. Optimized Projections for Compressed Sensing. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 55, 5695–


56 / 63

5702 (2007).

85.Li, G., Zhu, Z., Yang, D., Chang, L. & Bai, H. On Projection Matrix Optimization for Compressive 

Sensing Systems. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 61, 2887–2898 (2013).

86.Satat, G., Tancik, M. & Raskar, R. Lensless Imaging With Compressive Ultrafast Sensing. IEEE 

Trans. Comput. Imaging 3, 398–407 (2017).

87.Shannon, C. E. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27, 379–423 (1948).
88.Foschini, G. J. & Gans, M. J. On limits of wireless communications in a fading environment when 

using multiple antennas. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 6, 311–335 (1998).

89.Telatar, E. Capacity of Multi-antenna Gaussian Channels: Capacity of Multi-antenna Gaussian 

Channels. Eur. Trans. Telecomm. 10, 585–595 (1999).

90.del Hougne, P., Fink, M. & Lerosey, G. Optimally diverse communication channels in disordered 

environments with tuned randomness. Nat. Electron. 2, 36–41 (2019).

91.Watts, C. M. et al. Terahertz compressive imaging with metamaterial spatial light modulators. Nat. 

Photonics 8, 605–609 (2014).

92.del Hougne, P., Davy, M. & Kuhl, U. Optimal Multiplexing of Spatially Encoded Information across 

Custom-Tailored Configurations of a Metasurface-Tunable Chaotic Cavity. Phys. Rev. Applied 13, 
041004 (2020).

93.Neifeld, M. A. & Shankar, P. Feature-specific imaging. Appl. Opt. 42, 3379 (2003).
94.Pal, H. S., Ganotra, D. & Neifeld, M. A. Face recognition by using feature-specific imaging. Appl. 

Opt. 44, 3784 (2005).

95.Sankaranarayanan, A. C., Herman, M. A., Turaga, P. & Kelly, K. F. Enhanced Compressive Imaging 

Using Model-Based Acquisition: Smarter sampling by incorporating domain knowledge. IEEE 
Signal Process. Mag. 33, 81–94 (2016).

96.Hegde, C., Sankaranarayanan, A. C., Yin, W. & Baraniuk, R. G. NuMax: A Convex Approach for 

Learning Near-Isometric Linear Embeddings. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 63, 6109–6121 (2015).

97.Li, L. et al. Machine-learning reprogrammable metasurface imager. Nat. Commun. 10, 1082 (2019).
98.Li, L. et al. Electromagnetic reprogrammable coding-metasurface holograms. Nat. Commun. 8, 197 

(2017).

99.Sleasman, T., Boyarsky, M., Imani, M. F., Gollub, J. N. & Smith, D. R. Design considerations for a 

dynamic metamaterial aperture for computational imaging at microwave frequencies. J. Opt. Soc. 
Am. B 33, 1098 (2016).

100. Tikhonov, A. N. On the solution of ill-posed problems and the method of regularization. Soviet 

Math. Dokl. 4, 1035–1038 (1963).

101. Saad, Y. & Schultz, M. H. GMRES: A Generalized Minimal Residual Algorithm for Solving 

Nonsymmetric Linear Systems. SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 7, 856–869 (1986).

102. Bioucas-Dias, J. M. & Figueiredo, M. A. T. A New TwIST: Two-Step Iterative 

Shrinkage/Thresholding Algorithms for Image Restoration. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 16, 2992–
3004 (2007).

103. Fromentèze, T., Yurduseven, O., del Hougne, P. & Smith, D. R. Lowering latency and processing 

burden in computational imaging through dimensionality reduction of the sensing matrix. Sci. Rep.
11, 3545 (2021).

104. Guillaso, S., Reigber, A., Ferro-Famil, L. & Pottier, E. Range Resolution Improvement of Airborne 


57 / 63

SAR Images. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 3, 135–139 (2006).

105. Zhuge, X. & Yarovoy, A. G. Three-Dimensional Near-Field MIMO Array Imaging Using Range 

Migration Techniques. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 21, 3026–3033 (2012).

106. Lopez-Sanchez, J. M. & Fortuny-Guasch, J. 3-D radar imaging using range migration techniques. 

IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 48, 728–737 (2000).

107. Fromenteze, T., Kpre, E. L., Carsenat, D., Decroze, C. & Sakamoto, T. Single-Shot Compressive 

Multiple-Inputs Multiple-Outputs Radar Imaging Using a Two-Port Passive Device. IEEE Access 4, 
1050–1060 (2016).

108. Pulido-Mancera, L. et al. Application of range migration algorithms to imaging with a dynamic 

metasurface antenna. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 33, 2082 (2016).

109. Diebold, A. V. et al. Generalized range migration algorithm for synthetic aperture radar image 

reconstruction of metasurface antenna measurements. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 34, 2610 (2017).

110. Sleasman, T. et al. Experimental Synthetic Aperture Radar With Dynamic Metasurfaces. IEEE 

Trans. Antennas Propag. 65, 6864–6877 (2017).

111. Laviada, J., Arboleya-Arboleya, A., Alvarez-Lopez, Y., Garcia-Gonzalez, C. & Las-Heras, F. 

Phaseless Synthetic Aperture Radar With Efficient Sampling for Broadband Near-Field Imaging: 
Theory and Validation. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 63, 573–584 (2015).

112. Yang Yang & Blum, R. S. Phase Synchronization for Coherent MIMO Radar: Algorithms and Their 

Analysis. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 59, 5538–5557 (2011).

113. Fienup, J. R. Phase retrieval algorithms: a comparison. Appl. Opt. 21, 2758 (1982).
114. Candès, E. J., Eldar, Y. C., Strohmer, T. & Voroninski, V. Phase Retrieval via Matrix Completion. 

SIAM Rev. 57, 225–251 (2015).

115. Fromenteze, T., Liu, X., Boyarsky, M., Gollub, J. & Smith, D. R. Phaseless computational imaging 

with a radiating metasurface. Opt. Express 24, 16760 (2016).

116. Yurduseven, O., Fromenteze, T., Marks, D. L., Gollub, J. N. & Smith, D. R. Frequency-Diverse 

Computational Microwave Phaseless Imaging. IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett. 1–1 (2017).

117. Yurduseven, O., Fromenteze, T. & Smith, D. R. Relaxation of Alignment Errors and Phase 

Calibration in Computational Frequency-Diverse Imaging using Phase Retrieval. IEEE Access 6, 
14884–14894 (2018).

118. Shapiro, J. H. Computational ghost imaging. Phys. Rev. A 78, 061802 (2008).
119. Bromberg, Y., Katz, O. & Silberberg, Y. Ghost imaging with a single detector. Phys. Rev. A 79, 

053840 (2009).

120. Katz, O., Bromberg, Y. & Silberberg, Y. Compressive ghost imaging. Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 131110 

(2009).

121. Diebold, A. V., Imani, M. F., Sleasman, T. & Smith, D. R. Phaseless computational ghost imaging 

at microwave frequencies using a dynamic metasurface aperture. Appl. Opt. 57, 2142 (2018).

122. Diebold, A. V., Imani, M. F., Sleasman, T. & Smith, D. R. Phaseless coherent and incoherent 

microwave ghost imaging with dynamic metasurface apertures. Optica 5, 1529 (2018).

123. F. Imani, M. & Smith, D. R. Temporal microwave ghost imaging using a reconfigurable disordered 

cavity. Appl. Phys. Lett. 116, 054102 (2020).

124. Liu, H.-C. et al. Single-pixel computational ghost imaging with helicity-dependent metasurface 

hologram. Sci. Adv. 3, e1701477 (2017).


58 / 63

125. Zheng, G., Horstmeyer, R. & Yang, C. Wide-field, high-resolution Fourier ptychographic 

microscopy. Nat. Photonics 7, 739–745 (2013).

126. Satat, G., Tancik, M., Gupta, O., Heshmat, B. & Raskar, R. Object classification through scattering 

media with deep learning on time resolved measurement. Opt. Express 25, 17466 (2017).

127. Sinha, A., Lee, J., Li, S. & Barbastathis, G. Lensless computational imaging through deep learning. 

Optica 4, 1117 (2017).

128. Borhani, N., Kakkava, E., Moser, C. & Psaltis, D. Learning to see through multimode fibers. Optica

5, 960 (2018).

129. Li, Y., Xue, Y. & Tian, L. Deep speckle correlation: a deep learning approach toward scalable 

imaging through scattering media. Optica 5, 1181 (2018).

130. Barbastathis, G., Ozcan, A. & Situ, G. On the use of deep learning for computational imaging. 

Optica 6, 921 (2019).

131. Li, L., Wang, L. G. & Teixeira, F. L. Performance Analysis and Dynamic Evolution of Deep 

Convolutional Neural Network for Electromagnetic Inverse Scattering. IEEE Antennas Wirel. 
Propag. Lett. 18, 2259–2263 (2019).

132. Li, L. et al. DeepNIS: Deep Neural Network for Nonlinear Electromagnetic Inverse Scattering. 

IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 67, 1819–1825 (2019).

133. Li, L. et al. Intelligent metasurface imager and recognizer. Light Sci. Appl. 8, 97 (2019).
134. Lan, G. et al. MetaSense: Boosting RF Sensing Accuracy using Dynamic Metasurface Antenna. 

IEEE Internet Things J. 1–1 (2021).

135. Sharma, R. et al. Coded-Aperture Computational Millimeter-Wave Image Classifier Using 

Convolutional Neural Network. IEEE Access 9, 119830–119844 (2021).

136. Ma, Q. et al. Smart metasurface with self-adaptively reprogrammable functions. Light Sci. Appl. 8, 

98 (2019).

137. Qian, C. et al. Deep-learning-enabled self-adaptive microwave cloak without human intervention. 

Nat. Photonics 14, 383–390 (2020).

138. Aβmann, M. & Bayer, M. Compressive adaptive computational ghost imaging. Sci Rep 3, 1545 

(2013).

139. Averbuch, A., Dekel, S. & Deutsch, S. Adaptive Compressed Image Sensing Using Dictionaries. 

SIAM J. Imaging Sci. 5, 57–89 (2012).

140. Phillips, D. B. et al.Adaptive foveated single-pixel imaging with dynamic supersampling. Sci. Adv.

3, e1601782 (2017).

141. Davenport, M. A. et al. The smashed filter for compressive classification and target recognition. in 

Proc. Comput. Imaging V (eds. Bouman, C. A., Miller, E. L. & Pollak, I.) vol. 6498 64980H (SPIE, 
2007).

142. Kulkarni, K. & Turaga, P. Reconstruction-Free Action Inference from Compressive Imagers. IEEE 

Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 38, 772–784 (2016).

143. Johnson, W. B. & Lindenstrauss, J. Extensions of Lipschitz mappings into a Hilbert space. in 

Contemporary Mathematics (eds. Beals, R., Beck, A., Bellow, A. & Hajian, A.) vol. 26 189–206 
(American Mathematical Society, 1984).

144. Fisher, R. A. The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems. Ann. Eugen. 7, 179–188 

(1936).


59 / 63

145. Belhumeur, P. N., Hespanha, J. P. & Kriegman, D. J. Eigenfaces vs. Fisherfaces: Recognition Using 

Class Specific Linear Projection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 19, 10 (1997).

146. Martinez, A. M. & Kak, A. C. PCA versus LDA. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell. 23, 

228–233 (2001).

147. Wright, J. et al. Sparse Representation for Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. Proc. IEEE

98, 1031–1044 (2010).

148. Tosic, I. & Frossard, P. Dictionary Learning. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 28, 27–38 (2011).
149. Torkkola, K. Feature Extraction by Non-Parametric Mutual Information Maximization. J. Mach. 

Learn. Res. 3, 1415–1438 (2003).

150. Mairal, J., Bach, F. & Ponce, J. Task-Driven Dictionary Learning. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. 

Intell. 34, 791–804 (2012).

151. Li, Y., Hegde, C., Sankaranarayanan, A. C., Baraniuk, R. & Kelly, K. F. Compressive image 

acquisition and classification via secant projections. J. Opt. 17, 065701 (2015).

152. Chakrabarti, A. Learning Sensor Multiplexing Design through Back-propagation. in Proc. NIPS

3081–3089 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2016).

153. Horstmeyer, R., Chen, R. Y., Kappes, B. & Judkewitz, B. Convolutional neural networks that teach 

microscopes how to image. arXiv:1709.07223 (2017).

154. Chang, J., Sitzmann, V., Dun, X., Heidrich, W. & Wetzstein, G. Hybrid optical-electronic 

convolutional neural networks with optimized diffractive optics for image classification. Sci. Rep. 8, 
12324 (2018).

155. Robey, A. & Ganapati, V. Optimal physical preprocessing for example-based super-resolution. Opt. 

Express 26, 31333 (2018).

156. Elmalem, S., Giryes, R. & Marom, E. Learned phase coded aperture for the benefit of depth of 

field extension. Opt. Express 26, 15316 (2018).

157. Sitzmann, V. et al. End-to-end optimization of optics and image processing for achromatic 

extended depth of field and super-resolution imaging. ACM Trans. Graph. 37, 1–13 (2018).

158. Diederich, B., Wartmann, R., Schadwinkel, H. & Heintzmann, R. Using machine-learning to 

optimize phase contrast in a low-cost cellphone microscope. PLoS ONE 13, e0192937 (2018).

159. Muthumbi, A. et al. Learned sensing: jointly optimized microscope hardware for accurate image 

classification. Biomed. Opt. Express 10, 6351 (2019).

160. Kellman, M. R., Bostan, E., Repina, N. A. & Waller, L. Physics-Based Learned Design: Optimized 

Coded-Illumination for Quantitative Phase Imaging. IEEE Trans. Comput. Imaging 5, 344–353 
(2019).

161. Hershko, E., Weiss, L. E., Michaeli, T. & Shechtman, Y. Multicolor localization microscopy and 

point-spread-function engineering by deep learning. Opt. Express 27, 6158 (2019).

162. Nehme, E. et al. DeepSTORM3D: dense 3D localization microscopy and PSF design by deep 

learning. Nat. Methods 17, 734–740 (2020).

163. Kim, K., Konda, P. C., Cooke, C. L., Appel, R. & Horstmeyer, R. Multi-element microscope 

optimization by a learned sensing network with composite physical layers. Opt. Lett. 45, 5684 (2020).

164. Metzler, C. A., Ikoma, H., Peng, Y. & Wetzstein, G. Deep Optics for Single-Shot High-Dynamic-

Range Imaging. in Proc. CVPR 1372–1382 (IEEE, 2020).

165. Lin, Z. et al. End-to-end nanophotonic inverse design for imaging and polarimetry. Nanophotonics


60 / 63

10, 1177–1187 (2021).

166. Nehme, E. et al. Learning Optimal Wavefront Shaping for Multi-Channel Imaging. IEEE Trans. 

Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 43, 2179–2192 (2021).

167. Vedula, S. et al. Learning beamforming in ultrasound imaging. in Proc. Mach. Learn. Res. vol. 102 

493–511 (2019).

168. del Hougne, P., Imani, M. F., Diebold, A. V., Horstmeyer, R. & Smith, D. R. Learned Integrated 

Sensing Pipeline: Reconfigurable Metasurface Transceivers as Trainable Physical Layer in an 
Artificial Neural Network. Adv. Sci. 7, 1901913 (2019).

169. Li, H.-Y. et al. Intelligent Electromagnetic Sensing with Learnable Data Acquisition and 

Processing. Patterns 1, 100006 (2020).

170. Ballard, Z., Brown, C., Madni, A. M. & Ozcan, A. Machine learning and computation-enabled 

intelligent sensor design. Nat. Mach. Intell. 3, 556–565 (2021).

171. Jiang, J. & Fan, J. A. Global Optimization of Dielectric Metasurfaces Using a Physics-Driven 

Neural Network. Nano Lett. 19, 5366–5372 (2019).

172. Bouchet, D., Rachbauer, L. M., Rotter, S., Mosk, A. P. & Bossy, E. Optimal Control of Coherent 

Light Scattering for Binary Decision Problems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 253902 (2021).

173. Bouchet, D., Rotter, S. & Mosk, A. P. Maximum information states for coherent scattering 

measurements. Nat. Phys. 17, 564-568 (2021).

174. del Hougne, P. From compressed sensing to learned sensing with metasurface imagers. in Proc. 

Passive and Active Millimeter-Wave Imaging XXIV (eds. Robertson, D. A. & Wikner, D. A.) 11 (SPIE, 
2021).

175. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y. & Courville, A. Deep Learning. (MIT Press, 2016).
176. del Hougne, P. RIS-Based Radio Localization in Rich Scattering Environments: Harnessing Multi-

Path with ANN Decoders. in Proc. SPAWC (2021).

177. Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Bengio, Y. & Manzagol, P.-A. Extracting and composing robust features 

with denoising autoencoders. in Proc. ICML 1096–1103 (ACM, 2008).

178. Pulido-Mancera, L., Imani, M. F., Bowen, P. T., Kundtz, N. & Smith, D. R. Analytical Modeling 

of a Two-Dimensional Waveguide-Fed Metasurface. arXiv:1807.11592 (2018).

179. Boyarsky, M., Sleasman, T., Imani, M. F., Gollub, J. N. & Smith, D. R. Electronically steered 

metasurface antenna. Sci. Rep. 11, 4693 (2021).

180. Yoo, I., Imani, M. F., Pulido-Mancera, L., Sleasman, T. & Smith, D. R. Analytic Model of a Coax-

Fed Planar Cavity-Backed Metasurface Antenna for Pattern Synthesis. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.
67, 5853–5866 (2019).

181. Yoo, I. & Smith, D. R. Analytic Model of Coax-Fed Printed Metasurfaces and Analysis of Antenna 

Parameters. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 68, 2950–2964 (2020).

182. Zheng, Y., Huang, J., Chen, T. & Zhou, W. Processing global and local features in convolutional 

neural network (CNN) and primate visual systems. in Proc. SPIE Comm. Sci. Sens. Imag. (SPIE, 
2018).

183. del Hougne, P. Robust position sensing with wave fingerprints in dynamic complex propagation 

environments. Phys. Rev. Research 2, 043224 (2020).

184. Zhu, C. et al. Image reconstruction through a multimode fiber with a simple neural network 

architecture. Sci. Rep. 11, 896 (2021).


61 / 63

185. LeCun, Y. Une procédure d’apprentissage pour Réseau à seuil assymétrique. in Proc. Cognitiva 85 

[in French] 599–604 (1985).

186. Rumelhart, D. E., Hintont, G. E. & Williams, R. J. Learning representations by back-propagating 

errors. Nature 323, 533 (1986).

187. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–444 (2015).
188. Kingma, D. P. & Ba, J. L. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv:1412.6980 (2014).
189. Li, L., Jafarpour, B. & Mohammad-Khaninezhad, M. R. A simultaneous perturbation stochastic 

approximation algorithm for coupled well placement and control optimization under geologic 
uncertainty. Comput. Geosci. 17, 167–188 (2013).

190. Khobahi, S., Shlezinger, N., Soltanalian, M. & Eldar, Y. C. LoRD-Net: Unfolded Deep Detection 

Network with Low-Resolution Receivers. arXiv:2102.02993 (2021).

191. Goy, A., Arthur, K., Li, S. & Barbastathis, G. Low Photon Count Phase Retrieval Using Deep 

Learning. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 243902 (2018).

192. Mnih, V., Heess, N., Graves, A. & Kavukcuoglu, K. Recurrent models of visual attention. in Proc. 

NIPS 2204–2212 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2014).

193. Chaware, A., Cooke, C. L., Kim, K. & Horstmeyer, R. Towards an Intelligent Microscope: 

Adaptively Learned Illumination for Optimal Sample Classification. in Proc. ICASSP 9284–9288 
(IEEE, 2020).

194. Cui, T. J. et al. Information Metamaterial Systems. iScience 23, 101403 (2020).
195. Ruan, H. & Li, L. Imaging Resolution Analysis of Single-Frequency and Single-Sensor 

Programmable Microwave Imager. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 68, 7727–7732 (2020).

196. Jin, Y., O’Donoughue, N. & Moura, J. M. F. Position location by time reversal in communication 

networks. in Proc. ICASSP 3001–3004 (IEEE, 2008).

197. Sen, S., Radunovic, B., Choudhury, R. R. & Minka, T. You are facing the Mona Lisa: spot 

localization using PHY layer information. in Proc. MobiSys 183 (ACM, 2012).

198. Wu, Z.-H., Han, Y., Chen, Y. & Liu, K. J. R. A Time-Reversal Paradigm for Indoor Positioning 

System. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 64, 1331–1339 (2015).

199. del Hougne, P., Imani, M. F., Fink, M., Smith, D. R. & Lerosey, G. Precise Localization of Multiple 

Noncooperative Objects in a Disordered Cavity by Wave Front Shaping. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 063901 
(2018).

200. Alexandropoulos, G. C., Shlezinger, N. & del Hougne, P. Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces for 

Rich Scattering Wireless Communications: Recent Experiments, Challenges, and Opportunities. 
IEEE Commun. Mag. 59, 28–34 (2021).

201.Turpin, A. et al. 3D Imaging from Multipath Temporal Echoes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 174301 (2021).
202. Asefi, M. & LoVetri, J. Use of Field-Perturbing Elements to Increase Nonredundant Data for 

Microwave Imaging Systems. IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Techn. 65, 3172–3179 (2017).

203. Ing, R. K., Quieffin, N., Catheline, S. & Fink, M. In solid localization of finger impacts using 

acoustic time-reversal process. Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 204104 (2005).

204. Jiang, T., Liao, X., Huang, H., Peng, Z.-K. & He, Q. Scattering-coded elastic meta-boundary. 

arXiv:2110.00136 (2021).

205. Brown, M. D., Zhang, E. Z., Treeby, B. E., Beard, P. C. & Cox, B. T. Reverberant cavity 

photoacoustic imaging. Optica 6, 821 (2019).


62 / 63

206. Subrt, L. & Pechac, P. Intelligent walls as autonomous parts of smart indoor environments. IET 

Commun. 6, 1004 (2012).

207. Renzo, M. D. et al. Smart radio environments empowered by reconfigurable AI meta-surfaces: an 

idea whose time has come. J. Wireless Com. Network 2019, 129 (2019).

208. Arcizet, O. et al. High-Sensitivity Optical Monitoring of a Micromechanical Resonator with a 

Quantum-Limited Optomechanical Sensor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 133601 (2006).

209. Rotter, S. & Gigan, S. Light fields in complex media: Mesoscopic scattering meets wave control. 

Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 015005 (2017).

210. Brouwer, P. W., Frahm, K. M. & Beenakker, C. W. J. Quantum Mechanical Time-Delay Matrix in 

Chaotic Scattering. Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4737–4740 (1997).

211. Horodynski, M., Bouchet, D., Kühmayer, M. & Rotter, S. Invariance Property of the Fisher 

Information in Scattering Media. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 233201 (2021).

212. Frazier, B. W., Antonsen, T. M., Anlage, S. M. & Ott, E. Deep Wavefront Shaping: Intelligent 

Control of Complex Scattering Responses with a Programmable Metasurface. arXiv:2103.13500
(2021).

213. Cohen, S. D., de S. Cavalcante, H. L. D. & Gauthier, D. J. Subwavelength Position Sensing Using 

Nonlinear Feedback and Wave Chaos. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 254103 (2011).

214. Zangeneh-Nejad, F., Sounas, D. L., Alù, A. & Fleury, R. Analogue computing with metamaterials. 

Nat. Rev. Mater. 6, 207–225 (2021).

215. Silva, A. et al. Performing Mathematical Operations with Metamaterials. Science 343, 160–163 

(2014).

216. Mohammadi Estakhri, N., Edwards, B. & Engheta, N. Inverse-designed metastructures that solve 

equations. Science 363, 1333–1338 (2019).

217. Hughes, T. W., Williamson, I. A. D., Minkov, M. & Fan, S. Wave physics as an analog recurrent 

neural network. Sci. Adv. 5, eaay6946 (2019).

218. Miller, D. A. B. Self-configuring universal linear optical component [Invited]. Photonics Res. 1, 1 

(2013).

219. Carolan, J. et al. Universal linear optics. Science 349, 711–716 (2015).
220. Ribeiro, A., Ruocco, A., Vanacker, L. & Bogaerts, W. Demonstration of a 4 × 4-port universal linear 

circuit. Optica 3, 1348 (2016).

221. Shen, Y. et al. Deep learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits. Nat. Photonics 11, 441–446 

(2017).

222. Reck, M., Zeilinger, A., Bernstein, H. J. & Bertani, P. Experimental realization of any discrete 

unitary operator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 58–61 (1994).

223. Tzarouchis, D. C., Edwards, B., Mencagli, M. J. & Engheta, N. Design and implementation of 

tunable RF modules for reconfigurable metastructures that perform mathematical computations. in 
Proc. URSI GASS (2021).

224. Lin, X. et al. All-optical machine learning using diffractive deep neural networks. Science 361, 

1004–1008 (2018).

225. Kulce, O., Mengu, D., Rivenson, Y. & Ozcan, A. All-optical information-processing capacity of 

diffractive surfaces. Light Sci. Appl. 10, 25 (2021).

226. Wei, H., Huang, G., Wei, X., Sun, Y. & Wang, H. Comment on ‘All-optical machine learning using 


63 / 63

diffractive deep neural networks’. arXiv:1809.08360 (2018).

227. Liu, C. et al. Programmable artificial intelligence machine for wave sensing and communications. 

(2020) doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-90701/v1.

228. Goi, E. et al. Nanoprinted high-neuron-density optical linear perceptrons performing near-infrared 

inference on a CMOS chip. Light Sci. Appl. 10, 40 (2021).

229. Wang, Z., Chang, L., Wang, F., Li, T. & Gu, T. Integrated photonic metasystem for image 

classifications at telecommunication wavelength. (2021) doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-481200/v1.

230. Qian, C. et al. Performing optical logic operations by a diffractive neural network. Light Sci. Appl.

9, 59 (2020).

231. Rahman, M. S. S., Li, J., Mengu, D., Rivenson, Y. & Ozcan, A. Ensemble learning of diffractive 

optical networks. Light Sci. Appl. 10, 14 (2021).

232. Luo, Y. et al. Design of task-specific optical systems using broadband diffractive neural networks. 

Light Sci. Appl. 8, 112 (2019).

233. Li, J. et al. Spectrally encoded single-pixel machine vision using diffractive networks. Sci. Adv. 7, 

eabd7690 (2021).

234. del Hougne, P. & Lerosey, G. Leveraging Chaos for Wave-Based Analog Computation: 

Demonstration with Indoor Wireless Communication Signals. Phys. Rev. X 8, 041037 (2018).

235. Sol, J., Smith, D. R. & del Hougne, P. Meta-Programmable Analog Differentiator. 

arXiv:2108.06178 (2021).

236. Ma, S., Antonsen, T., Anlage, S. & Ott, E. Short-wavelength Reverberant Wave Systems for 

Enhanced Reservoir Computing. (2021) doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-783820/v1.

237. Momeni, A. & Fleury, R. Wave-based extreme deep learning based on non-linear time-Floquet 

entanglement. arXiv:2107.08564 (2021).

238. Ma, G., Fan, X., Sheng, P. & Fink, M. Shaping reverberating sound fields with an actively tunable 

metasurface. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 6638–6643 (2018).

239. Tian, Z. et al. Programmable Acoustic Metasurfaces. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1808489 (2019).


