> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <

© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, including 
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works for resale or 
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

1

Abstract— As transistor features shrink beyond the 2 nm node, 

studying and designing for atomic scale effects become essential. 
Being able to combine conventional CMOS with new atomic scale 
fabrication routes capable of creating 2D patterns of highly doped 
phosphorus layers with atomic precision has implications for the 
future of digital electronics. This work establishes the accelerated 
lifetime tests of such doped layers, showing that these materials 
survive high current (>3.0 MA/cm2) and 300C for greater than 70 
days and are still electrically conductive. The doped layers 
compare well to failures in traditional metal layers like aluminum 
and copper where mean time to failure at these temperatures and 
current densities would occur within hours. It also establishes that 
these materials are more stable than metal features, paving the 
way toward their integration with operational CMOS.

Index Terms—Atomic Precision Advanced Manufacturing, 

Doping, Lifetime Estimation, Integrated Circuit Interconnection, 
Moore’s Law

I. INTRODUCTION

evices such as FinFETs and gate all around transistors
have reached diminutive sizes where key length scales 

span a countable number of atoms, posing new challenges. For 
example, effects like tunneling can be sensitive to detailed 
atomic arrangements, and variations in the number and position 
of dopants can play an outsized role.  In this context, a platform 
that enables integration of atomically precise devices with 
CMOS technologies can perform an important pathfinding 
function – to identify future opportunities and limitations. 

Atomic precision advanced manufacturing (APAM) is a 

method to add electrically active dopants to silicon by
leveraging the chemical contrast between a clean and reactive 
bare silicon surface, compared to a passive hydrogen terminated 
silicon surface. The APAM process, detailed in Fig. 1, is used 
to add dopants to the silicon surface at densities much greater 
than the solid solubility limit – a fundamentally different way 
to add dopants to silicon compared to implanting and high 
temperature activation of dopants. The chemically attached 
phosphorus dopants form a 2D sheet of dopants, also called a 
delta layer, and can be patterned (Fig. 1d) with a variety of 

Date submitted for review 10/21/2021. Sandia National Laboratories is a 

multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology & 
Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Honeywell International Inc., for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National 
Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525.

C. Halsey (chalsey@sandia.gov), J. Depoy (jesdepo@sandia.gov), D. 

Campbell (dmlope@sandia.gov), E. Anderson (emander@sandia.gov), S. 

methods and at different length scales, from macroscale 
patterning using photolithography [1] down to atomic precision 
by patterning the hydrogen termination with a scanning 
tunneling microscope (STM) [2]. Thus, APAM provides 
atomically precise placement of dopants both laterally and out-
of-plane, enabling fabrication of ultrashallow junctions.

Initially pioneered to create atomic-scale quantum devices 

operating only at cryogenic temperatures [2-5], APAM has 
recently been developed as a manufacturing platform to explore 
the future of digital electronics in silicon by working toward the 
integration of delta layer material into CMOS devices [6, 7].
This is an appealing platform, as APAM can build dopant 
devices in silicon at the absolute limit of fabrication – the 
atomic scale – and can evaluate novel devices at length scales 
that are increasingly becoming relevant in modern CMOS 
FinFET geometries. More immediately, the high density of 
active dopants may be used to improve contact resistance in 
future CMOS technology nodes. Room temperature operation 
of an APAM device has recently been demonstrated, which is a 
necessary prerequisite to any practical application [8].

However, several technical hurdles need to be overcome 

before APAM can be seamlessly integrated into CMOS. The 
first is driving the APAM fabrication thermal budget down to 
be compatible with standard CMOS budgets. Historically, 
APAM devices are created at high temperatures (>1200C) 
driven by the need to produce pristine silicon surfaces, but 
recent advances have driven the APAM fabrication temperature 
down toward <850C which are more compatible with CMOS 
fabrication [9], and opens the door to integration of APAM into 
existing CMOS devices.

Schmucker (swschmu@sandia.gov), J. Ivie (jaivie@sandia.gov), X. Gao 
(xngao@sandia.gov), D. Scrymgeour (dscrymg@sandia.gov), and S. Misra 
(smisra@sandia.gov) are with Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM 
87123 USA.  D. R. Ward contributed while at Sandia National Laboratories 
(danrward@gmail.com).

Accelerated Lifetime Testing and Analysis of 

Delta-doped Silicon Test Structures

Connor Halsey1, Jessica Depoy1, DeAnna M. Campbell1, Daniel R. Ward, Evan M. Anderson
1, Scott W. Schmucker1, Jeffrey A. Ivie1, Xujiao Gao1, David A. Scrymgeour1, and Shashank 

Misra1

D


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <

© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, including 
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works for resale or 
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

2

Fig. 1. The APAM process starting from passivated single crystal silicon in (a) 
that is cleaned via high temperature flash (~850) to remove oxide and 
contaminants to produce a clean starting surface (b), then passivated with 
hydrogen in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) (c), then patterned to expose bare Si (d), 
reacted with molecular species to form activated dopants (e) and finally capped 
by epitaxial Si in (f).

The second hurdle to APAM and CMOS integration is to 

understand the compatibility of the delta layer with CMOS 
architectures at relevant operational temperature and current 
conditions, which is the focus of this work. Back end of line 
compatibility has already been demonstrated by functional 
devices with a high-k dielectric/metal gate stack [10, 11]. In this 
paper, we report on our exploration of the compatibility of 
APAM with CMOS by conducting accelerated lifetime testing 
of APAM delta layer material at relevant current densities and 
show that delta layer material specifically is more robust than 
standard metal features in current CMOS devices, paving the 
way forward for APAM and CMOS integration.

II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND METHODS

A. Device Details

We chose an ASTM specified electromigration test structure

[12] as our testing platform, as shown in Fig. 2(a). This four-
terminal 
structure 
is 
typically 
used 
for 
metal-based 

electromigration testing, and thus is well suited to causing quick
device failures from highly concentrated current densities. Four 
terminals are present in this test structure, two of which are used 
for applying a forcing current, and the other two for sensing the 
induced voltage drop. We used all standard dimensions from 
the ASTM guidelines except for the line widths We used 
linewidths of 5μm, 10μm and 20μm to serve as good analogs
for more typical APAM structure geometries, with an 800μm 
long channel. These devices are placed adjacent to each other 
on a single silicon die.

Two varieties of the test structure layout were fabricated and 

tested. One version utilized a phosphorus ion implant in p-type 
silicon (referred to as P devices), and the second version utilized 
a phosphorus delta layer (referred to as P: devices). These two 
versions will allow a comparison between a conventional ion 
implant phosphorus layer to the ultra-dense, ultra-thin APAM 
material.

A series of both P and P: devices were prepared. The P 

devices’ starting material was prepared by implanting a uniform 
phosphorus layer at 5 keV, 1e13 atoms/cm2 dose with the 
implant centered around 0.03 μm deep into a wafer, which was 
then diced to produce implanted P device starting chips. The
P: starting material was produced by an abbreviated APAM 
process to terminate the entire surface with phosphorus layer by 
skipping the hydrogen termination and patterning steps in Fig. 
1(c-d).  First individual 5 x 9 mm float zone silicon (100) chips 
were placed in a UHV environment, flash cleaning the surface 
at high temperatures (>850C) to remove oxide and 
contaminants [Fig. 1(b)] and then exposing it to phosphine bled 
into the chamber at low pressures [Fig. 1(e)], which after a 15 
min incorporation anneal at 300°C results in the creation of the 
highly doped phosphorus delta layer over the entire silicon 

surface. This P: 2D layer is then encapsulated by coating with 
epitaxial silicon with a process designed to minimize the 
diffusion of the P:. Silicon epitaxy was performed with a 
deposition rate of 0.5 nm/min. First, 2 nm of silicon were 
deposited via silicon arch evaporation without heating the 
substrate to form what is known as a locking layer to reduce 
subsequent phosphorus segregation [13]. The sample was then 
rapidly annealed in the vacuum chamber at up to 600°C for 15 
seconds to recrystallize the locking layer. Next, the sample was 
brought to approximately 250°C for capping with an additional 
30 nm of epitaxial silicon for devices or 50 nm for SIMS 
samples (to minimize surface effects) before removal from 
vacuum. This epitaxial cap is not perfect and has associated 
disorder and contamination but is compatible with device 
creation.

The delta layer has a dopant concentration of 2e14 cm-2 [6, 

14]. The implant and delta layer phosphorus distribution in the 
channel region of the device shown in Fig. 2(a) of equivalent 
samples was measured using secondary-ion mass spectrometry 
(SIMS) and shown in Figure 3. Since SIMS tends to broaden 
out the distribution due to forward scattering by the sputtering 
ions, we also indicate the “ideal” delta layer concentration of 
5e20 cm3 with an effective thickness of 4 nm, which is fitted to 
coincide with the peak P distribution in the SIMS data. The 
actual distribution of the delta layer will be between the ideal 
and SIMS measured distribution. The near surface data (<20nm
deep), indicated by the vertical black dashed line, suffers from 
measurement artifacts and is not reliable.

Both types of chips then went through standard photo-

lithography and ICP dry etch to define the mesa structure shown 
in dark gray regions of Fig. 2(a) with a cross section shown in 
Fig. 2(h). After etching, the aluminum bond pads were 
deposited which covered both the mesa structures and filling in 
etched hole contacts, shown in Fig. 2(b-e), to connect to the 
delta/implant layer with a large pad to allow wire bonding. 

Fig. 2. (a) an overview of the robustness testing geometry with the dark grey 
regions indicating the mesa etch forming the conductive channel. Starting 
with a silicon chip with either a uniform delta layer or implant layer is then 
masked (c,g) and etched (d,h) to reveal the dark grey structure in (a). Contacts 
are made by depositing aluminum bond pads that contact the layers by filling 
contacts holes shown in cross section in (e). The vertical dashed lines refer to 
either the aluminum contact area created in (b)-(e) or the mesa etch created in 
(f)-(h).


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <

© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, including 
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works for resale or 
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

3

Fig. 3. Measured and ideal phosphorus concentration in the channel region of 
the P and P: layer lifetime device testers. The vertical black dashed line 
indicates the start of useful SIMS data.

Each sample was placed into a high-temperature tolerant 

ceramic package and affixed with a high-temperature silver 
paste. Electrical contact was made between the device and 
package with 1-mil thick gold bond wires. The packages were 
left without a cover to facilitate easy removal after testing. 

A zero-insertion-force (ZIF) socket was used inside the oven 

to allow quick device changes. Solder was completely avoided 
in all connections due to the high oven temperature. Instead, 
crimp and friction fit connectors were used where needed. A 
port at the rear of the oven allowed all connections to pass 
through. Fig. 4 shows the testing setup inside the oven.

B. Device Test Conditions

The samples were brought to 300°C and allowed to equalize 

before biasing the drive terminal terminals. We drove each 
channel at a fixed current level of 30 mA, 60 mA, and 90 mA, 
for the 5μm, 10μm, and 20μm respectively.  Driving the wider 
20μm channel at high current caused failures in the bond wires 
within a few hours.  Assuming a 200 nm thickness for the P and 
P: layers, the approximate minimum current density is 3.0 
MA/cm2 for the 5μm and 10μm channel width, and 2.25 
MA/cm2 for the 20μm width.

We utilized Keithley 2401 source-measure units in a 

constant-current mode to provide the electrical stress current for 
the test devices. Each unit was set up for remote control over a 
GPIB interface. Control and logging of the test setup was 
provided through a custom LabVIEW program which logged 
oven temperature, drive current, and the resulting voltage in the 
device under test at 30 second intervals for the duration of the 
test. The testers are designed to fail due to open-circuit or a 
percent-increase in resistance in the test line. In all tests, we ran 
the test features until the devices opened. When the devices 
begin to fail, the controllers attempt to drive the appropriate 
current by increasing the drive voltage up to a maximum of 20 
V, at which point the device was considered open.

Fig. 4. Interior view of the testing chamber. ZIF sockets are elevated from 
oven grates using aluminum stands. Electrical connections between the ZIF 
socket and wire are made with crimp connections. 

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Results Overview

We found that the narrower APAM P: and implanted P

devices can survive the high current densities for several weeks 
at 300ºC as shown in Fig. 5. The time to failure for the 
implanted devices ranged from a few hours for the 20 m
device to over 70 days for the 5 m device. At the end of this 
tests, all three implanted phosphorus samples failed, while only 
1 of the delta layer devices failed by the end of the testing at 
day 76. The failures seen were an instantaneous change to an 
open circuit in all cases. Except for the 5 m implanted channel, 
shown in red in Fig. 5(a), most samples showed steady 
resistance values until the devices failed. We attribute this 
variable behavior to likely a combination of electromigration of 
material in the bond wire and to Kirkendall voiding at the Au/Al 
interface [15] which caused variable resistance bouncing 
between a higher value and lower base line value until the 
device eventually failed.

After cooling to room-temperature, we resistance tested 

each structure to confirm the failures as seen by the software. 

Fig. 5. Lifetime test data at 300ºC showing the resistance of the test structures 
as a function of time for (a) the P samples and (b) the P: samples. Circles 
indicate the test structure developing an open circuit.


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <

© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, including 
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works for resale or 
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

4

B. Failure Analysis

After completion of accelerated lifetime tests, room 

temperature electrical probing and electron microscopy 
indicated that degradation of the metal bond pads and metal 
wires rather than the doped silicon was the cause of device 
failure. The physical die was separated from the ceramic 
packages and placed on a manual probe station to determine 
whether an electrical path was still present between contacts. 
We utilized four-terminal resistance measurements to look for 
continuity in the test structures. Measuring an as-fabricated 
untested P: sample as a control, the different robustness test 
structures have resistances of 30 k for the 20 m width up to 
90 k for the 5 m width between the bond pads of the device.
The measured resistances between bond pads of different 
robustness testers on the same silicon die (e.g. between the bond 
pads of the 5 m and 20 m testers) measure >125 k
indicating that the robustness structures are electrically 
connected through the die silicon as expected.

We measured electrical continuity in all the post-failure

devices, both P: and implant P samples, indicating that the 
failures were not in the line test structures themselves, but rather 
the bond wires. Across all the individual resistances of the test 
structures tested (3 implanted P, 3 P: delta layers) the post test 
resistance values varied between 45k and 220 k in 
seemingly arbitrary ways. These variations are likely due to the 
competing influence of electromigration and drift of metal 
species into the region below the bond pads, which improved 
the contacts, and simultaneous degradation of the contact pads 
due to oxidation and disappearing aluminum, which increased 
the resistance values. Similarly, contact between bond pads of
different robustness testers also varied with most resistance 
values >100 k.

We examined the failed devices using scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM) in a Helios G4 PFIB from Thermo Fisher
Scientific. All SEM images were collected using 5 kV 
accelerating voltages and imaging current of 0.8 nA. Shown in 
Fig. 6(a) is a representative region of the bond pad with the
bond wire still connected. We observed the electromigration of 
the gold bond wires shown in the “bamboo” wire structure 
shown in the section of the wire on the left of Fig. 6(a). We can 
also see significant gold transfer to the bond pads, shown in the 
bright dendritic areas around the bottom of the bond pads, 
confirmed as gold with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDS) (not shown). This indicates that the failures measured 
during the accelerated testing is exclusively in the bond wires, 
and not in that delta layers or implanted sections considering 
both electrical continuity data and observed bond wire damage.

Fig. 6. (a) SEM image of delta layer bond pad. The necking down pattern in 
the bond wire indicates electromigration. Oxidation and gold transfer to the 
bond pad are also apparent. The box in upper right highlights the etched hole 
contact area. (b) A close up EDS map of the etched hole contact region in a 
different area than (a) showing the disappearance of the aluminum.

The bond pads showed regions of missing aluminum likely 

indicating beginning the intermixing of the aluminum bond pad 
and underlying silicon which occurs at temperatures >200C 
[16]. This is shown in Fig. 6(b), where regions of the aluminum 
have disappeared. There was no evidence of any phosphorus
accumulation on the surface.

C. Modeling Results

After determining that failure was confined to the bond wires

and that the line testers were still conductive, we modeled the 
high temperature current paths in both device types to confirm 
that the current at elevated temperatures was flowing through 
the P and P: instead of through the underlying silicon. 

A simplified cross sectional 2D model was developed for 

both device types to determine where current was flowing in the 
vertical direction is shown in Fig. 7(a), as well as the finite 
element current map near the contact. Sandia’s own open-
source semiconductor device modeling code suite, Charon, was 
used in these simulations [17, 18]. Within the simulation, we 
used a constant bias across the model up to 0.5 V at various 
temperatures up to 300C to determine the current paths 
through 
the 
sample. 
We 
simulated 
the 
phosphorus

concentration as taken from the SIMS data as shown in Fig. 3, 
but ignoring the unreliable surface data <20nm indicated by the 
dashed black line. The handle silicon doping was 1e16 cm-3

acceptor doping [11], while the doping of the epitaxial cap in 
the P: samples was 5e18 cm-3. The device with an implanted P 
layer was simulated using a triangular mesh with the smallest 
mesh size of 7nm, since the doping profile (Fig. 3) is smooth 
allowing for relatively big mesh size. The devices with a P:
layer (using either the SIMS doping profile or the ideal profile) 
were simulated using rectangular mesh with a very small mesh 


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <

© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, including 
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works for resale or 
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

5

size of 0.01 nm at the delta layer along the direction 
perpendicular to the delta layer due to high doping and strong 
electric field there. The temperature dependence of the silicon
mobility was handled by the Arora material model [19].

It’s noted that the channel in the actual devices is 800 m 

long. In the simulation, in order to adequately resolve the highly 
doped delta layer, very small mesh size was needed, so it was 
impractical to simulate the entire 800 m length. Instead, we 
chose to simulate a 2-m long device between the contacts and
use the simulated current to determine a resistance for the 2-m
channel. We then scaled the simulated resistance by 400 to 
compare with the full 800-m channel in the experiment. The 
measured experimental currents on these devices are on the 
order of 10 mA at 0.5 V bias. Without any calibration work, our 
scaled simulated current ranges from about 5 mA for the P 
implant to 30 mA for the P: SIMs at 0.5 V, which is on the 
same order as the measured value, giving us confidence our 
model matches physical reality.

Figure 7(b) shows the current density as a function of sample 

depth along the vertical line indicated in Fig. 7(a). The 
simulations show that in both cases the current is tightly 
confined near the surface. For the three cases, 95% of the 
current is confined within 142 nm of the surface for the implant,
within 58 nm for the ideal P:, and 88 nm for of the SIMS P:.
Using these confinement values, the current density in the 
implant P layer is 3.2 MA/cm2 for the 5µm and 10m and 4.2 
MA/cm2 for the 20 µm channel. For the P: layer, the current 
density is estimated between 5.1 and 7.8  MA/cm2 for the 20m 
channel, and between 6.8 and 10.3 MA/cm2 for the 5 m and 
10 m channel using the ideal and SIMS confinement values.
These values exceed the current capacity of copper (~1 
MA/cm2) at the same temperature (300°C) [20], and possibly 
competitive 
with 
multilayer 
CVD-grown 
graphene 

interconnects with maximum room temperature breakdown 
values of ~40 MA/cm2 [21].

This simulation work confirms that at elevated temperatures 

the current is confined to the phosphorus layers in all samples, 
indicating that our experimental conclusions that the APAM 
P: is more robust than the metal features in CMOS and there 
are no barriers to future CMOS integration are valid.

Fig. 7. (a) The cross sectional 2D model showing the finite element mesh and 
(b) the simulated current flow in a vertical slice through the channel area
shown by the vertical line in (a) for the P layer in the implanted, SIMS, and
ideal P: layers showing the current density as a function of distance into the 
silicon. Current is largely confined to the layer regions and is negligible 
through the deep substrate. Unreliable SIMS data <20nm deep indicated by 
the dashed black line was ignored.

IV. CONCLUSION

In this work, we use accelerated lifetime tests of P: delta-

layer APAM devices at high temperature and current and 
establish that these delta-layer materials are robust and 
compatible with CMOS and that there are no fundamental 
barriers related to lifetime compatibility to having APAM 
elements integrated into operational CMOS. We showed that
the failures were not the phosphorus layers, but instead in the 
metal wire bond interconnects used to package the device. We 
verified through simulation that the current at 300C is flowing 
exclusively through both the P: and P implant layer, validating 
the experimental results. Additionally, the current densities and 
stressing temperatures used are well in excess of what would be 
seen under normal operation in CMOS. These experiments 
show that the APAM delta layer structures are more robust than 
the wire bonds used to make device contacts, clearing any 
lifetime issues as a barrier to the practicality of combining 
APAM into CMOS devices. Current ongoing work is 
attempting to add APAM to CMOS in a temperature compatible 
way to preserve both CMOS and APAM function in the final 
integrated device.

References:

1.
Katzenmeyer, A.M., et al., Photothermal alternative 
to device fabrication using atomic precision advanced 
manufacturing 
techniques.
Journal 
of 
Micro-

Nanopatterning Materials and Metrology-Jm3, 2021. 
20(1).


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <

© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, including 
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works for resale or 
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

6

2.
Ruess, F.J., et al., Realization of atomically controlled 
dopant devices in silicon. Small, 2007. 3(4): p. 563-
567.

3.
Fuechsle, M., et al., A single-atom transistor. Nature 
Nanotechnology, 2012. 7(4): p. 242-246.

4.
Weber, B., et al., Ohm’s Law Survives to the Atomic 
Scale. Science, 2012. 335(6064): p. 64.

5.
He, Y., et al., A two-qubit gate between phosphorus 
donor electrons in silicon. Nature, 2019. 571(7765): p. 
371-375.

6.
Ward, D.R., et al., Atomic Precision Advanced 
Manufacturing for Digital Electronics. Electronic 
Device Failure Analysis, 2020. 22(1): p. 4-10.

7.
Skeren, T., et al., CMOS platform for atomic-scale 
device fabrication. Nanotechnology, 2018. 29(43): p. 
435302.

8.
Gao, X., et al. Modeling Assisted Room Temperature 
Operation 
of 
Atomic 
Precision 
Advanced 

Manufacturing Devices. in 2020 International 
Conference 
on 
Simulation 
of 
Semiconductor 

Processes and Devices (SISPAD). 2020.

9.
Ward, D.R., et al., All-optical lithography process for 
contacting nanometer precision donor devices.
Applied Physics Letters, 2017. 111(19).

10.
Anderson, E.M., et al., Low thermal budget high-
k/metal surface gate for buried donor-based devices.
Journal of Physics: Materials, 2020. 3(3): p. 035002.

11.
Lu, T.M., et al. Path Towards a Vertical TFET 
Enabled 
by 
Atomic 
Precision 
Advanced 

Manufacturing. in 2021 Silicon Nanoelectronics 
Workshop (SNW). 2021.

12.
ASTM F1259-89 ,Guide for Design of Flat, Straight-
Line Test Structures for Detecting Metallization Open-
Circuit or Resistance-Increase Failure Due to 
Electromigration. 1989.

13.
Keizer, J.G., et al., Suppressing Segregation in Highly 
Phosphorus Doped Silicon Monolayers. ACS Nano, 
2015. 9(12): p. 12537-12541.

14.
Oberbeck, L., et al., Encapsulation of phosphorus 
dopants in silicon for the fabrication of a quantum 
computer. Applied Physics Letters, 2002. 81(17): p. 
3197-3199.

15.
Bushmire, D., Resistance Increases in Gold Aluminum 
Interconnects with Time and Temperature. IEEE 
Transactions on Parts, Hybrids, and Packaging, 1977. 
13(2): p. 152-156.

16.
Murray, J.L. and A.J. McAlister, The Al-Si 
(Aluminum-Silicon) system. Bulletin of Alloy Phase 
Diagrams, 1984. 5(1): p. 74.

17.
Gao, X., et al., Three-Dimensional Fully-Coupled 
Electrical and Thermal Transport Model of Dynamic 
Switching in Oxide Memristors. ECS Transactions, 
2015. 69(5): p. 183-193.

18.
Gao, X., B. Kerr, and A. Huang, Analytic band-to-trap 
tunneling 
model 
including 
band 
offset 
for 

heterojunction devices. Journal of Applied Physics, 
2019. 125(5): p. 054503.

19.
Arora, N.D., J.R. Hauser, and D.J. Roulston, Electron 
and hole mobilities in silicon as a function of 

concentration and temperature. IEEE Transactions on 
Electron Devices, 1982. 29(2): p. 292-295.

20.
Wang, P.C. and R.G. Filippi, Electromigration 
threshold in copper interconnects. Applied Physics 
Letters, 2001. 78(23): p. 3598-3600.

21.
Lee, K., A.P. Chandrakasan, and J. Kong, Breakdown 
Current Density of CVD-Grown Multilayer Graphene 
Interconnects. IEEE Electron Device Letters, 2011. 
32(4): p. 557-559.


