Five-second coherence of a single spin with single-shot readout in silicon carbide 

 
Christopher P. Anderson1,2†, Elena O. Glen1†, Cyrus Zeledon1, Alexandre Bourassa1, Yu Jin3, Yizhi Zhu1, 
Christian Vorwerk1, Alexander L. Crook1,2, Hiroshi Abe4, Jawad Ul-Hassan5, Takeshi Ohshima4, Nguyen 
T. Son5, Giulia Galli1,3,6, David D. Awschalom1,2,6,* 

 

1Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. 

2Department of Physics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. 

3Department of Chemistry, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. 

4National Institutes for Quantum Science and Technology, 1233 Watanuki, Takasaki, Gunma 370-1292, Japan. 

5Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linköping University, SE-581 83 Linköping, Sweden. 

6Center for Molecular Engineering and Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA. 

† These authors contributed equally to this work. 

*email:awsch@uchicago.edu 

 
 
 
Abstract 
An outstanding hurdle for defect spin qubits in silicon carbide (SiC) is single-shot readout—a 
deterministic measurement of the quantum state. Here, we demonstrate single-shot readout of 
single defects in SiC via spin-to-charge conversion, whereby the defect’s spin state is mapped onto 
a long-lived charge state. With this technique, we achieve over 80% readout fidelity without pre- 
or post-selection, resulting in a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) that enables us to measure long 
spin coherence times. Combined with pulsed dynamical decoupling sequences in an isotopically 
purified host material, we report single-spin T2>5 s, over two orders of magnitude greater than 
previously reported in this system. The mapping of these coherent spin states onto single charges 
unlocks both single-shot readout for scalable quantum nodes and opportunities for electrical 
readout via integration with semiconductor devices. 
 


Introduction 
Solid-state defect spins hold promise for use in quantum information processing, sensing, and 
communication because of their unique combination of long coherence times (1–4), a spin-photon 
interface (5, 6), and the availability of nuclear registers for use as robust quantum memories (7, 8). 
The neutral divacancy (VV0) in SiC boasts these features with the added advantages of the SiC 
material platform, including wafer-scale commercial availability, CMOS compatibility, and the 
ability to fabricate hybrid photonic (9, 10), electrical (11), and mechanical devices (12, 13). 
 
Typically, for optically-active defects spins, single-shot readout is performed through spin-
dependent fluorescence probed with narrow-line lasers resonant with the defect’s optical cycling 
transitions (14). However, this method suffers from spin-flip errors due to non-unity branching 
ratios in the defect’s optical excited state (5). As a result, only a finite number of spin-correlated 
photons are scattered before destroying the state. Combined with poor collection efficiencies, the 
number of measured photons per shot is usually low (N<<1) unless photonic devices are used to 
enhance emission and collection. As such, a key hurdle for the divacancy system to date has been 
the ability to perform single-shot readout of the defect’s spin state (15). This single-shot readout 
unlocks the ability to perform the entanglement distribution (16) and quantum error correction (17) 
needed to make quantum networks a reality, and provides an increased signal-to-noise ratio for 
quantum sensing.   
 
Another avenue towards single-shot readout is spin-to-charge conversion (SCC), which maps the 
defect spin state onto a robust, long-lived charge state. For isolated single defect spins, SCC is an 
all-optical technique that has been used to achieve high-fidelity single-shot readout, but has thus 
far been limited to demonstrations using the NV- center in diamond (18, 19). In this work, we 
demonstrate the first ever implementation of SCC for VV0 in SiC by performing spin-selective 
ionization followed by all-optical single-shot readout of the charge state. Using this technique, we 
can determine an initially prepared spin state with over 80% fidelity. We note that in this work, 
we do not pre- or post-select the charge state or resonance condition, a common strategy used to 
artificially boost fidelity at the cost of success rate (14, 18, 19). Critically, we also achieve this 
readout in the absence of photonic enhancement, demonstrating the value of SCC to other systems 
where nanofabrication remains a challenge, or where detector technologies may be limited. 
Additionally, we deepen our understanding of the SCC process for the VV0 defect with ab initio 
DFT calculations that clarify the charge-transition process, which combined with theoretical 
modelling, assist with further optimization of this type of readout. 
 
The high-fidelity and single-shot readout provided by the SCC technique enable us to perform 
experiments that otherwise would be infeasible due to low SNR, such as when the time per 
experimental ‘shot’ becomes prohibitively long. With this advantage, we employ the SCC 
technique to probe the unexplored limits of the spin lifetime and coherence time for VV0. These 
times fundamentally determine the divacancy’s performance in future quantum architectures by 
limiting metrics such as quantum memory times and sensitivity for ac sensing schemes (20–22). 
Here, we first establish an experimentally-limited lower bound on the spin T1 time of at least 103 
seconds for VV0, over two orders of magnitude longer than previously reported (7). In this 
isotopically purified sample, we combine the reduction of the defect’s noisy nuclear environment 
with the use of dynamical decoupling sequences to preserve coherence (23, 24). As a result, we 
measure a T2 time of 5.3±1.3 seconds, over three orders of magnitude greater than the natural 


Hahn-echo T2 time (3). These metrics establish VV0 as a premier system with coherence times that 
exceed previous reports for electron spin qubits in both natural and highly isotopically purified 
silicon (25, 26), diamond (27, 28), and SiC (2, 29). 
 
The results presented in this work develop SiC-based systems as a promising platform for quantum 
technologies, where both deterministic readout of the spin state and long coherence times are 
necessary for heralded entanglement generation, high gate fidelities, and the development of 
network components such as quantum repeaters. This work also opens avenues that utilize the 
CMOS compatibility of SiC for the integration of electron spin-based systems in classical electrical 
devices that are sensitive to single charges. 
 
Results  

Optical and charge transitions of the divacancy in SiC 

The neutral divacancy in 4H-SiC is a deep-level defect consisting of a carbon and silicon vacancy 
pair. The dangling bonds from atoms neighboring these vacancies form a spin-triplet ground state 
(30) with spin sublevels that can be polarized and read out with laser light and manipulated with 
microwaves (Fig. 1A). In this work, we use laser light resonant with the Ex and E1,2 spin-selective 
optical transitions (‘resonant excitation’), corresponding to the 
 and 
 spin sublevels 
(5), respectively (Fig. 1B). The divacancy spin state can be efficiently initialized to 
 via 
excitation of the E1,2 transition, which depletes the 
 population through optical pumping 
and also non-radiatively polarizes into 
 via a spin-singlet intersystem crossing (31, 32). In 
past work, spin-photon readout is performed by collecting photoluminescence (PL) scattered when 
pumping on one of the more cycling resonant optical lines, such as the Ex transition. However, 
when pumping on a single optical transition, spin-flips from the excited state (31) cause a 
depopulation that prevents indefinite optical readout. The finite number of photons emitted before 
destroying the state ultimately limits the fidelity of the spin-photon readout technique. 
  
As an alternative to readout via the spin-photon interface, the divacancy hosts robust charge states 
(33) that can also be manipulated and read out using laser light (11, 34, 35). In this work, we use 
the fact that non-neutral states of the divacancy do not appreciably photoluminesce under resonant 
excitation that is tuned to the neutral state’s zero-phonon line (ZPL). When the optical lines 
corresponding to both 
 and 
 of VV0 are simultaneously pumped (‘charge readout’), 
the emitted PL does not reflect the spin state but rather if the defect is in the neutral state or not, 
provided the lasers are on resonance. Thus, a reduction in PL distinguishes ‘dark’ ionized states 
from the ‘bright’ neutral state (Fig. 1C), as the optical lines are stable in this sample. For the VV0 

in SiC, this dark state has been established as the negatively charged divacancy (VV-) (11, 34–36). 
Crucially, probing the divacancy charge state with this light is not energetic enough to convert VV- 

to VV0 and vice versa via a direct one-photon process (Fig. 1A). The result is that non-destructive 
measurement of the charge state of the defect is possible with high fidelity. In this work, we also 
rely on deterministic preparation of the defect into the neutral charge state. Previous reports have 
shown that laser light above 1.3 eV resets the charge state from VV- to VV0,  and that light around 
705 nm (1.76 eV) is extremely efficient in charge initializing the divacancy to its neutral state 
(VV0) (11). However, the fidelity of this process has remained unexplored to date. 
 
 
 


 

Fig. 1. Control and readout of spin and charge states of the divacancy. (A) Optical and charge transitions of the 
divacancy. Excitation of the Ex and E1,2 spin-selective optical transitions is performed using ~1131 nm light 
(yellow). Spin flips (Γ𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓) prevent indefinite readout of the spin state with laser pumping. Microwave manipulation 
(MW) is used to induce ground state spin-sublevel transitions. SCC is performed by excitation of the Ex transition 
followed by an ejection of a hole by the 1151 nm ionization laser (green). The dashed line represents the VV0 
excited state. The 705 nm light (red) resets the divacancy from VV- to VV0. The individual lasers used for SCC and 
charge resetting do not have enough energy to induce other charge transitions via a one-photon process (denoted by 
a ‘X’). (B) Photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectrum of a single divacancy reveals its six spin-selective optical 
transitions at T=5 K, B=18 G with continuous microwave driving of the 
 ↔ 
 transition. Detuning is 
relative to a center laser frequency of 265.1408 THz and the transverse strain splitting is 9.78 GHz. (C) Mapping of 
the spin state onto the charge state. Pumping of the Ex transition allows for ionization of 
 with the 1151 nm 
laser. The SCC step is followed by charge readout via pumping of both the Ex and E1,2 transitions. Detection of PL 
signifies that the divacancy is in its bright, neutral (dark, ionized) state, and therefore was prepared to 
 (
). (D) Typical experimental pulse sequence. After the charge and spin initialization, and MW manipulation of 
the spin state, single-shot readout of the spin state is performed with SCC followed by readout of the charge state.  
 
 
Mapping of the spin state onto the charge state (SCC) via a spin-selective two-photon ionization 
process provides us with an avenue towards performing high-fidelity, deterministic measurement 
of the spin state via readout of the charge state. Here, we access the defect’s excited state in a one-
photon, spin-selective manner using a narrow-line laser tuned to one of the resolved optical 
transitions (Fig. 1A, 1B). A second ‘ionization laser’ (1151 nm) takes the defect from its excited 
state to the ionized state (VV-) via a one-photon process by ejecting a hole (37). We select the 
ionization laser wavelength based on the results of DFT calculations we perform for the VV0 
charge transition energies, which for the (0/-) transition is calculated to be 2.09 eV, in good 
agreement with previous work (30, 37). The ionization laser (1151 nm) is red-detuned from the 
defect’s ZPL (1131 nm) so as not to excite any optical transitions, while still providing enough 
energy to ionize the defect from the excited state, as the combined energy of these photons (2.17 


eV) enables the 2.09 eV (0/-) charge transition (33, 37) to occur (Fig. 1A). Specifically, we go 
beyond this estimate based on the charge transition levels and directly compute using DFT the 
energy required to go from the VV0 optical excited state to the VV- state with a hole at the valence-
band maximum. Our DFT calculations show that photoionization from the excited state requires 
~1.03 eV, an energy that is slightly less than the calculated ZPL of 1.196 eV, in good agreement 
with experimental results (Supplementary Materials). This means that we can use a narrow, low-
power resonant laser tuned to a single optical transition to provide spin-selectivity alongside a 
high-power, red-detuned ionization tone to induce, in total, a two-photon, spin-dependent 
ionization of the defect.  
 
Once we have spin-selectively mapped the spin onto the defect’s charge state with the SCC step, 
we can then perform single-shot readout of the charge state by addressing the defect with both Ex 
and E1,2 resonant light and collecting PL (Fig. 1C). Thus, we are equipped with a full suite of 
techniques to initialize the charge and spin state on-demand, manipulate the spin with microwave 
pulses, convert the spin state to a charge state, and perform charge readout with these lasers and 
controls (Fig. 1D). 
 

Charge control and readout 

We first demonstrate the robustness of the divacancy charge state and our ability to perform single-
shot, high-fidelity optical readout of this state. We characterize the longevity of the VV0 charge 
state with a sequence consisting of a 705 nm charge initialization pulse, a variable delay, and an 
optical charge readout from which we extract a charge lifetime τch =6.9±0.9 s (Fig. 2A) 
(Supplementary Materials). The finite duration of the charge lifetime when the defect is not under 
illumination is likely due to diffusion of charges from nearby shallow nitrogen donors, as the 
material is slightly n-type (Materials and Methods). The charge lifetime is a critical timescale that 
dictates the longest permissible time during an experiment where the neutral defect, and therefore 
the spin, remains stable. Thus, the charge lifetime ultimately limits the qubit’s lifetime and is a 
stringent cutoff for sensing and memory applications. Fortunately, previous work has shown much 
longer charge lifetimes (34), where future tuning of the Fermi level or balance of deep traps in the 
material may extend our measured timescale by many orders of magnitude. Interestingly, this 
charge instability is also linked to our ability to optically ionize the defect on-demand, representing 
a tradeoff to be optimized in future materials design. Our measured charge lifetime, however, is 
still many orders of magnitude longer than the saturated spin-flip lifetime, which we measure to 
be 3.3±0.1 𝜇𝜇𝜇𝜇 (Supplementary Materials), resulting in a longer possible readout window and more 
scattered photons before destroying the state.  
 
We next demonstrate our ability to perform single-shot readout of the charge state. First, we either 
charge-initialize to the bright state using a long, 705 nm laser pulse or spin-agnostically initialize 
to the dark state using an ‘ionization pulse’ where both Ex and E1,2 resonant lasers and the 1151 
nm ionization laser are simultaneously turned on. This preparation into either the bright or dark 
charge state is followed by optical charge readout. Fig. 2B displays the number distribution of 
photons collected during the charge readout step for both the prepared bright and dark initial state. 
We calculate that for preparation into the bright (dark) state the mean photon number is N=100±1 
(N=1.3±1.1) (Supplementary Materials). We determine that for a cutoff of N=4 photons, the 
fidelity, Fcharge (38) is maximized at 98.7±1.3% (Supplementary Materials), representing the total 
fidelity of our ability to prepare and readout the defect’s charge state in a single shot. Despite the 


absence of solid-immersion lenses and other photonically enhancing structures, we achieve a high 
number of photons per shot. The non-unity fidelity likely arises from imperfect charge state 
preparation due to optical excitation of nearby traps, as we discuss in the following sections. The 
high single-shot photon number and the near-unity fidelity of the charge readout technique 
exemplify its advantage over traditional spin-photon readout.  
 
Fig. 2C shows the projected number of photons per-shot during these charge readout windows 
using various resonant laser powers. With increased laser power, more photons are scattered per 
second, but additional two-photon ionization occurs, reducing the time during which the charge 
state can be read. On the other hand, if the laser power is too low, very few photons per second are 
scattered but readout time is still limited by the charge lifetime and the readout window cannot be 
arbitrarily extended. As a result, there is an optimal choice of laser power to maximize the readout, 
which in our case results in over 1500 photons per-shot at ~1 µW. This behavior is understood 
with a simple predictive model (Supplementary Materials). The high number of scattered photons 
means that single-shot readout of the charge state is possible even with extremely low collection 
efficiency or in systems with much lower quantum yield.  
 
 

 

 

Fig. 2. Single-shot readout of the divacancy charge state. (A) Charge readout PL signal dependence on delay time 

between the charge initialization and readout follows an exponential decay 
   where 
 is the charge lifetime. 
We find that 
 is 6.9(0.9) seconds. (B) Log-scale histogram of photon number distributions collected during a 
charge readout for preparation into the neutral ‘bright’ state and ionized ‘dark’ state. We use a 20 ms readout 
window with 4.05 W combined resonant laser power, selected to maximize the readout fidelity. For a cutoff of 
N=4 photons, the single-shot readout fidelity of the charge state is 98.7(1.3)%. The false positive rate p0|1 = 1.17% 
and false negative rate p1|0 =1.26%. (C) Extracted photons per shot from observed PL rate and charge state decay for 
various combined resonant laser powers. The maximal extracted photons per shot is N=1529(117). The line is a fit 
from a model (Supplementary Materials). All data is taken at B=18 G and T=5 K. All reported errors represent 1 SE 
from the fit and all error bars represent 1 SD of the raw data.  


Having established our ability to perform high-fidelity single-shot readout of the charge state, we 
next characterize the various charge transition processes induced by the lasers used in our 
experiments. We first characterize the rate at which we initialize the divacancy to the neutral state 
with the 705 nm charge repump laser. After preparing the defect in the dark charge state, a time-
varying charge initialization pulse is applied to reset the defect to the neutral, bright state. Using a 
charge readout, we measure the recovery rate of the bright state as a function of the 705 nm laser 
power (Fig. 3A). The charge repump rate is 993±17 MHz/W, consistent with the one-photon 
repumping rate described in (11).   
 
We next characterize the ionization rate solely from the resonant lasers and ionization laser, 
respectively, by initializing into the bright state and measuring the charge state after a variable 
length laser pulse. The exponentially-fit ionization rates for various powers of the resonant lasers 
are displayed in Fig. 3B. The ionization rate is initially quadratic and then increases linearly as 
10.6±0.9 MHz/W, signaling saturation of the optical transition (Supplementary Materials). At the 
relevant resonant laser powers in our experiment, we observe ionization rates around 100 Hz. On 
the other hand, ionization from solely the 1151 nm laser increases linearly with power as 95.7±3.7 
kHz/W (Fig. 3C). Ideally, the 1151 nm laser by itself should cause no ionization, where here a 
small residual rate likely arises from excitation of nearby traps, freeing carriers that alter the 
defect’s charge state.  
 
Finally, we characterize our ability to ionize the defect once it is in its optical excited state, which 
is the prerequisite for spin-dependent ionization. After charge initializing to the bright state, we 
spin-agnostically ionize the defect using a variable length pulse where both the Ex and E1,2 resonant 
lasers and the 1151 nm ionization laser are on at the same time. For these experiments, the resonant 
power is kept such that the defect optical transition is saturated. The decay rate of the signal from 
charge readout is displayed for various ionization powers in Fig. 3D, where the saturating behavior 
can be understood through the effect of stimulated emission, discussed later (Supplementary 
Materials).  
Importantly, the spin-agnostic ionization rates (order MHz) are nearly three orders of magnitude 
greater than the unwanted ionization rate from only the 1151 nm laser (order kHz) or only the 
resonant lasers (order 100 Hz). This confirms that for experiments where both resonant excitation 
and the 1151 nm ionization laser are used, the dominant source of ionization is a two-photon 
process where one photon induces a resonant, ground to excited state transition of the defect and 
a second photon from the ionization laser subsequently converts the defect to its negative charge 
state.  
 


 

 

Fig. 3 Optical charge reset and ionization processes. (A) Power dependence of the charge reset rate using the 705 
nm laser. The reset rate is linear (red line fit) with power as 993±17 Hz/µW (B) Ionization rate dependence on 
combined resonant laser power (Ex and E1,2 lines). The solid line is a fit using a saturating two-photon ionization 
model (Supplementary Materials). (C) Ionization rate dependence on 1151 nm laser alone. The ionization rate is 
linear with power (solid line fit) as 95.7±3.7 kHz/W. (D) Spin-agnostic ionization rate dependence on the 1151 nm 
laser ionization power. The resonant laser excitation is beyond saturation at 15 µW. The solid blue line is a fit from 
our model including the effect of stimulated emission (Supplementary Materials). All data is taken at B= 18 G and 
T= 5 K. All reported errors represent 1 SE from the fit and all error bars represent 1 SD of the raw data. 
 
 
 


Spin-to-charge control  

Given that we can perform high-fidelity, single-shot readout of the divacancy charge state, and 
that we can ionize the defect with a combination of resonant and red-detuned laser light, we can 
selectively map the divacancy spin state onto its charge state to achieve single-shot readout of the 
spin state. Specifically, after charge initialization to VV0 and spin initialization to 
, we spin-
selectively photo-ionize the 
 state to VV- by simultaneous excitation of the Ex optical 
transition (
 character) while applying the 1151 nm ionization laser. The defect can be 
protected from this spin-selective ionization by rotating into 
 via the application of a 
microwave  pulse so that the laser no longer optically excites it. Thus, a spin initialized to 
 
does not undergo ionization and remains in VV0, forming the basis of spin contrast for the SCC 
process. Importantly, SCC is performed using the Ex transition due to its high cyclicity, which 
increases the number of times the excited state can be populated before a spin-flip occurs. Spin-
flips cause destruction of the spin state (33) and prevent ionization from occurring, therefore 
reducing the fidelity of the conversion process (Supplementary Materials). Thus, a key aspect of 
the SCC process is ensuring the rate of spin-selective ionization exceeds the rate of spin-flip errors.  
 
After SCC, we perform single-shot readout of the charge state. The charge readout signal for states 
prepared to 
 and 
 as the SCC pulse duration is swept is shown in Fig. 4A. After the 
SCC contrast reaches a maximum, the contrast decreases with increased spin-selective ionization 
pulse durations due to a reduction in PL from states prepared into 
. This decreasing PL is 
caused by non-spin selective ionization, but has a rate of decay that exceeds the ionization rate 
from only the 1151 nm laser (Fig. 3C). Therefore, we attribute this non-spin selective ionization 
to other mechanisms such as weak excitation of the 
 optical transitions by the Ex laser, or 
heating effects induced by the high-power ionization laser that cause additional orbital or spin 
mixing. 
 
We next characterize the end-to-end fidelity of the combined initialization, SCC, and readout 
process by examining the resulting single-shot photon number distribution. Fig. 3B shows 
histograms of the photon statistics for states prepared into 
  and  
. We extract a 
maximum end-to-end SCC fidelity of FSCC=80.8±0.6% (Supplementary Materials). When 
corrected for the charge initialization and charge readout fidelity, we obtain a SCC conversion 
fidelity of FSCC’=FSCC/Fcharge=81.6%, revealing that the main source of infidelity is the SCC 
conversion process and not the charge readout. We eliminate infidelity arising from errors in spin 
manipulation and selectivity of the spin-photon interface, due to our observation of over 99% Rabi 
contrast in fluorescence readout, consistent with previous reports (7). This fidelity is greater than 
the SCC contrast (Fig. 4A) due to non-zero background counts and appreciable ionization during 
the readout window. We track the SCC end-to-end fidelity (FSCC) while sweeping the SCC pulse 
duration (Fig. 4C) and find that fidelity is maximized for a pulse duration of approximately ~2 µs. 
We note that in Fig. 4B, there is significant population distribution above and below the N=2 
single-shot cutoff for both spin preparations, corresponding to a false positive rate p0|1=27% and 
false negative rate p1|0=11%, for 
 and 
, respectively (Supplementary Materials). This 
indicates that incomplete ionization of 
 is the dominant source of infidelity in our SCC 
process, which we discuss below. 
 


 

 
Fig. 4. Single-shot readout of the spin state with spin-to-charge conversion. (A) Charge readout signal following 
SCC step for preparation into 
 and 
. The maximum fitted contrast is 68.2(0.4)% at an ionization 
laser power of 71 mW and a SCC pulse duration of tion = 1.39 µs, using 14.95 µW of resonant power. (B) Charge 
readout photon number distribution after SCC step for preparation into 
 and 
. The end-to-end 
process fidelity is 80.8(0.6)% for a cutoff of N=2 photons. (C) Dependence of SCC fidelity on SCC pulse duration. 
(D) Dependence of SCC contrast with 1151 nm ionization laser power. The contrast follows a saturation behavior 
(red line fit, Supplementary Materials). (E) Calculated stimulated emission rate dependence on 1151 nm ionization 
laser power. The stimulated emission rate increases linearly as 13.3 MHz/W (yellow line fit). All data is taken at 
B=18 G and T=5 K. All reported errors represent 1 SE from the fit and all error bars represent 1 SD of the raw data.  
 
 
Although we increase the ionization laser power to maximize SCC contrast and fidelity, we 
observe that the SCC contrast (CSCC) unexpectedly saturates with power (Fig. 4D), limiting our 
single-shot readout fidelity. We attribute this saturation behavior to stimulated emission from the 
excited state induced by the 1151 nm ionization laser (39). Stimulated emission induces an excited 
to ground state transition of the defect, effectively increasing the spin-flip rate and decreasing the 
occupation time in the excited state. This results in a reduced chance of ionization via SCC before 
a spin-flip occurs. We model the dynamics of the SCC process using a set of differential equations 
to describe the various rates of ionization and spin-flips in our system (Supplementary Materials). 
Using the measured spin-agnostic ionization rate (Fig. 3D), the spin-flip rate, and the time 
evolution of Fig. 4A, our model predicts a maximum SCC fidelity of about 72%, which is 
consistent with our experimental findings. We also find that stimulated emission results in the 
saturation behavior of Fig. 3D and Fig. 4D, and are able to extract the stimulated emission rate in 
Fig. 4E (Supplementary Materials).  
 
Importantly, we find that the simple ratio of the ionization cross section from the excited state to 
the stimulated emission cross section (𝜎𝜎𝑓𝑓/𝜎𝜎𝑠𝑠) determines the resulting fidelity of SCC, where larger 
ratios are desirable. We directly calculate this metric with DFT, which indicates that the ratio is 
only optimal for a narrow energy window below the ZPL energy and above the energy of the first 


vibronic peak in the emission sideband (Fig. S4B, S4D).  Our theoretical results also show that the 
cross sections and the ratio 𝜎𝜎𝑓𝑓/𝜎𝜎𝑠𝑠 do not change as a function of the light polarization when the 
incident light is parallel to the 3-fold rotation axis (C3v) of the defect (Fig S5A, S5B). Surprisingly, 
however, a significant increase in the ratio 𝜎𝜎𝑓𝑓/𝜎𝜎𝑠𝑠 may be obtained by using polarized light 
perpendicular to the defect axis (Supplementary Materials). This suggests that a change in the 
ionization laser geometry and polarization may drastically increase the SCC fidelity. These 
investigations into the limitations of SCC due to stimulated emission through DFT and modelling 
create a set of guidelines and considerations for designing qubits and optimizing these types of 
spin-to-charge experiments.  
 

Extending coherence with dynamical decoupling  

Having demonstrated the ability to spin-selectively ionize the defect, we take advantage of the 
single-shot readout afforded by the SCC technique and perform measurements that reveal the 
exceptionally long spin coherence time of the defect’s spin state. We first perform T1 relaxation 
measurements using SCC readout (Fig. 5A). Although the charge state has appreciable decay on 
these timescales, we normalize our measurements such that we can extract the pure spin relaxation 
time. Despite no obvious spin T1 decay in Fig. 5A, we investigate the T1 time using a 
square 
goodness of fit test and place a lower bound of 103 seconds on the T1 time with 95% confidence 
(Supplementary Materials). This minute-scale lower bound eliminates T1 spin relaxation as a 
concern for this system, and is on par with the longest reported times for the NV- center in diamond 
(27) 
 
In natural SiC, spin decoherence is dominated by magnetic fluctuations from flip-flop interactions 
between 29Si and 13C possessing I=½ nuclear spin (1). The sample studied here was isotopically 
engineered to reduce the occurrence of nuclear flip-flops and extend the coherence time (7) 
(Materials and Methods). In this work, we further extend this spin coherence by applying 
dynamical decoupling sequences (23). Fig. 5B displays the coherence for sequences consisting of 
N = 1 to N=16384  pulses, measured with single-shot readout. With the combination of isotopic 
purification and dynamical decoupling, we measure a maximum T2 time of 5.3±1.3 seconds, an 
improvement of over two orders of magnitude over the previously reported extended coherences 
in the divacancy system (2). 
 
The dependence of coherence (T2) with pulse number (N) (Fig. 5C) can be modeled as T2~Nψ where 
ψ varies with the frequency cutoff, shape, and roll-off behavior of sources of dephasing in the 
system (40).  We find that the scaling of coherence for low pulse numbers has ψ=0.92±0.01 and 
at high pulse numbers ψ=0.75±0.01 (Fig. 5C). This may suggest that dephasing is dominated by 
two separate noise sources, each with differing associated frequency cutoffs that dominate in 
different regimes (41). The existence of these two competing noise sources is supported by 
previous work on the same isotopically purified sample that suggests both a fast paramagnetic and 
slow nuclear spin bath play a role in dephasing (7), though certain broad Lorentzian baths may 
exhibit a similar ψ ~1 (40) to ψ ~ 2/3 crossover (28). Another possibility is that our experiments 
become dominated by control errors at high pulse number and do not protect the state as 
effectively, as we observe the contrast decreasing in this regime.  


 

 

Fig. 5. Ultralong spin coherence and lifetime for a single divacancy. (A) T1 spin relaxation time of divacancy 
using single-shot readout. Using a goodness of fit test with a 95% confidence interval, we estimate that T1 ≥103 
seconds (Supplementary Materials). The fit (solid line) is for a T1 of 103 seconds. (B) T2 decay curves measured 
after applying dynamical decoupling pulses sequences of increasing pulse number, N.  We avoid ESEEM 
oscillations by enforcing pulse spacing requirements as in Ref. (27), eliminating sharp dips, and smoothing to find 

the coherence function envelope. The envelope is fit to a stretched exponential function 
 where n is a stretch 
factor. (C) Extension of T2 coherence time with total decoupling pulse number. We fit in log space the low (blue) 
and high (red) pulse number regimes as T2 ~ Nψ. All data is taken at B=18 G and T=5 K. All reported errors 
represent 1 SE from the fit and all error bars represent 1 SD of the raw data.  


Even after over 104 pulses, the measured coherence time does not saturate. Given the long T1 
times, we expect coherence times greater than five seconds to be possible with even longer 
decoupling sequences (Materials and Methods). The combination of dynamical decoupling and 
isotopic purification in this work results in coherences that exceed state-of-the-art single spin 
measurements in other competing systems (27). These ultralong coherences offer many 
advantages for SiC-based quantum technologies. For example, in ac sensing protocols, long 
coherence times extend the phase accumulation period and increase sensitivity to weak signals. 
Additionally, the reduction of memory storage errors that come with long coherence times is 
vital for the development of quantum repeaters, which are a necessary component for future 
quantum networks.  
 
Discussion  
The all-optical spin-to-charge conversion technique demonstrated here can be extended to other 
emitters where single-shot readout is needed (42–44), particularly in platforms where the photonic 
devices typically used to boost collection efficiency can degrade charge and optical qualities, or 
where detector or emitter quantum efficiency is low. Additionally, coherence protection combined 
with the high-fidelity readout provided by the SCC technique brings the SiC material platform to 
the forefront for use in sensing and communication protocols that require both deterministic 
readout and quantum state preservation.  
 
Looking forward, use of auxiliary microwave drives (19) to recover leakage of population from 
the qubit states, optimization of the ionization laser wavelength to maximize 𝜎𝜎𝑓𝑓/𝜎𝜎𝑠𝑠, and further 
extension of the charge state stability via growth techniques may present pathways to improving 
the SCC technique. Our DFT calculations additionally suggest that a significant reduction in 
undesirable stimulated emission can be achieved by employing polarized light with incidence 
orthogonal to the defect axis, while still effectively ionizing the defect. We note, however, that the 
stimulated emission from defects is also of fundamental interest for future developments of lasers 
and new kinds of sensors (45). Furthermore, the charge itself may lead to new sensing 
opportunities (46), while the use of electrical depletion can reduce some of the remaining noise in 
the system to further increase coherence (11, 47, 48).  
 
Integration of SCC with the optical tuning capabilities offered by SiC devices, such as p-i-n diodes 
(11), could be used to construct highly scalable, tunable SiC quantum nodes for future 
entanglement schemes. More generally, the SCC technique unlocks a new generation of quantum 
devices with single charge sensitivity, where divacancy-embedded classical semiconductor 
structures such as MOSFETs, diodes, and APDs could be used to bridge the gap between quantum 
and classical electronic devices.  
 
 
 


Materials and Methods 

Experimental details 

Measurements are performed at T = 5 K in closed-cycle Montana Cryostat with a 0.85 NA near-
infrared objective. All measurements are performed at low field of around ~18 Gauss on a single 
hh divacancy in 4H-SiC. We use two Toptica DLC PRO lasers for narrow-line laser control of the 
defects. The 1151 nm ionization laser is a QPhotonics QFLD-1160-300S temperature tunable laser 
diode. PL is detected with a Quantum Opus superconducting nanowire single photon detector. 
Photon counting and time tagging experiments use a PicoQuant Picoharp 300 Time-Correlated 
Single Photon Counting (TCSPC) system. Spin initialization is achieved by pumping on the E1,2 
transitions, while the Ex transition serves as the cycling transition for readout and spin-to-charge 
conversion. When performing SCC, to mitigate the effects of this non-selective ionization, we 
saturate the defect with resonant laser excitation to maximize the chances of desirable spin-
selective ionization during the SCC step before a charge conversion error occurs. Additionally, for 
subsequent experiments we utilize the highest possible ionization laser power of 71 mW to 
increase the likelihood of ionization during the SCC step. Driving of transitions between the 
 
and 
 spin sublevels is performed using 1.357 GHz microwaves applied through Ti/Au 
striplines patterned on the sample surface. Microwave extinction and filtering is an important 
parameter 
to 
increase 
coherence 
and 
lifetime. 
We 
use a 800 
MHz highpass filter 
after amplification, and switch the microwave pulses on and off with a ZASWA-2-50DR+ both 
before and after amplification. Further extinction is achieved utilizing the IQ modulation of the 
source, which also provides phase control of the microwave pulses. We use this phase control to 
perform the XY-8 pulse sequences for dynamical decoupling which reduces sensitivity to pulse 
imperfections and drift. For all spin control experiments, we use π pulses with a length of 
approximately 1-2 µs. We stop our experiments at pulse number N=16384 for CPMG due to 
compounding pulse infidelity that reduces contrast and because our measured coherence 
approaches the charge lifetime for this defect. In Fig. 5B, the coherence function is normalized 
such that the contrast reduction and the finite charge lifetime do not affect the fitted coherences. 
For the coherence measurements, two fiber-coupled AOMs (AA Opto-electronic MT250-IR6-Fio-
SMO) are used in series on the resonant lasers to achieve high extinction. Pulsing of the red charge 
reset tone (705 nm) and the 1151 nm ionization laser is achieved with direct modulation of the 
laser diode with a Thorlabs CLD1015 diode control unit. Extinction from this modulation is high, 
where we note the finite charge lifetime is not affected by extra extinction of the 705 nm laser in 
the off state. All parameters in the text have errors reported at one standard error (SE). 
 

Isotopically purified sample 

The sample consists of epitaxial 4H-SiC grown by chemical vapor deposition on a 4° off-axis n-
type 4H-SiC. The layer thickness is ~90 µm, and uses isotopically purified Si and C precursor 
gasses as in reference (7). Secondary ion mass spectroscopy reveals purities of 99.85% 28Si and 
99.98% 12C. C-V measurements show slightly n-type behavior with a carrier concentration of 
6 × 1013 cm−3. Single defects are created using a 1 × 1013 cm−2 dose of 2-MeV relativistic 
electrons. Subsequent annealing at 810 °C in Ar gas results in isolated single VV0.  We note that 
this slight n-type behavior causes VV0 to be unstable under illumination, where the negative charge 
states are favored. This is key, however, to our ability to ionize the VV0 effectively. The available 
carriers from these dopants provide the necessary charges to continually source and redistribute 
charges for these processes. SCC naturally requires charge unstable defects. 
 


Computational details 

We carried out hybrid DFT calculations to determine the excitation energies of the VV0 defect and 
the charge transition energy to the VV- defect. All calculations were performed using the dielectric-
dependent hybrid (DDH) functional (49) and the Quantum Espresso code (50). We used a 5x5x2 
G-centered supercell, SG15 ONCV pseudopotentials (51) and a plane-wave basis set with a kinetic 
energy cut-off of 80 Ry. In the case of charged defects, we applied corrections to the total energy 
as derived in (52). We computed the optical matrix elements pertaining to the ionization and 
stimulated emission cross sections using a G-centered supercell with 1296 atomic sites and the 
PBE functional (53). Electron-phonon spectral functions were computed using the generating 
function approach within the displaced harmonic approximation (39, 54, 55). The phonon modes 
of the defective solid were obtained using a 5x5x2 supercell generated with the PHONONPY (56) 
package and extrapolated to larger sizes (16x16x5 supercell). Additional details are reported in the 
Supplementary Materials. 

References 
1.  
H. Seo, A. L. Falk, P. v Klimov, K. C. Miao, G. Galli, D. D. Awschalom, Quantum decoherence dynamics 
of divacancy spins in silicon carbide. Nature Communications. 7, 12935 (2016). 

2.  
K. C. Miao, J. P. Blanton, C. P. Anderson, A. Bourassa, A. L. Crook, G. Wolfowicz, H. Abe, T. Ohshima, 
D. D. Awschalom, Universal coherence protection in a solid-state spin qubit. Science. 369, 1493–1497 
(2020). 

3.  
D. J. Christle, A. L. Falk, P. Andrich, P. v. Klimov, J. U. Hassan, N. T. Son, E. Janzén, T. Ohshima, D. D. 
Awschalom, Isolated electron spins in silicon carbide with millisecond coherence times. Nature Materials. 
14, 160–163 (2015). 

4.  
S. Kanai, F. J. Heremans, H. Seo, G. Wolfowicz, C. P. Anderson, S. E. Sullivan, G. Galli, D. D. 
Awschalom, H. Ohno, Generalized scaling of spin qubit coherence in over 12,000 host materials (2021) 
(available at http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.02986). 

5.  
D. J. Christle, P. v. Klimov, C. F. de las Casas, K. Szász, V. Ivády, V. Jokubavicius, J. U. Hassan, M. 
Syväjärvi, W. F. Koehl, T. Ohshima, N. T. Son, E. Janzén, ádám Gali, D. D. Awschalom, Isolated spin 
qubits in SiC with a high-fidelity infrared spin-to-photon interface. Physical Review X. 7, 1–12 (2017). 

6.  
K. C. Miao, A. Bourassa, C. P. Anderson, S. J. Whiteley, A. L. Crook, S. L. Bayliss, G. Wolfowicz, G. 
Thiering, P. Udvarhelyi, V. Ivády, H. Abe, T. Ohshima, Á. Gali, D. D. Awschalom, Electrically driven 
optical interferometry with spins in silicon carbide. Science Advances. 5, eaay0527 (2019). 

7.  
A. Bourassa, C. P. Anderson, K. C. Miao, M. Onizhuk, H. Ma, A. L. Crook, H. Abe, J. Ul-Hassan, T. 
Ohshima, N. T. Son, G. Galli, D. D. Awschalom, Entanglement and control of single nuclear spins in 
isotopically engineered silicon carbide. Nature Materials. 19, 1319–1325 (2020). 

8.  
G. Wolfowicz, F. J. Heremans, C. P. Anderson, S. Kanai, H. Seo, A. Gali, G. Galli, D. D. Awschalom, 
Quantum guidelines for solid-state spin defects. Nature Reviews Materials (2021), doi:10.1038/s41578-021-
00306-y. 

9.  
A. L. Crook, C. P. Anderson, K. C. Miao, A. Bourassa, H. Lee, S. L. Bayliss, D. O. Bracher, X. Zhang, H. 
Abe, T. Ohshima, E. L. Hu, D. D. Awschalom, Purcell Enhancement of a Single Silicon Carbide Color 
Center with Coherent Spin Control. Nano Letters. 20, 3427–3434 (2020). 

10.  
D. M. Lukin, C. Dory, M. A. Guidry, K. Y. Yang, S. D. Mishra, R. Trivedi, M. Radulaski, S. Sun, D. 
Vercruysse, G. H. Ahn, J. Vučković, 4H-silicon-carbide-on-insulator for integrated quantum and nonlinear 
photonics. Nature Photonics. 14, 330–334 (2020). 

11.  
C. P. Anderson, A. Bourassa, K. C. Miao, G. Wolfowicz, P. J. Mintun, A. L. Crook, H. Abe, J. U. Hassan, 
N. T. Son, T. Ohshima, D. D. Awschalom, Electrical and optical control of single spins integrated in 
scalable semiconductor devices. Science. 366, 1225–1230 (2019). 

12.  
S. J. Whiteley, G. Wolfowicz, C. P. Anderson, A. Bourassa, H. Ma, M. Ye, G. Koolstra, K. J. Satzinger, M. 
v. Holt, F. J. Heremans, A. N. Cleland, D. I. Schuster, G. Galli, D. D. Awschalom, Spin–phonon interactions 
in silicon carbide addressed by Gaussian acoustics. Nature Physics. 15, 490–495 (2019). 

13.  
S. J. Whiteley, F. J. Heremans, G. Wolfowicz, D. D. Awschalom, M. v. Holt, Correlating dynamic strain and 
photoluminescence of solid-state defects with stroboscopic x-ray diffraction microscopy. Nature 
Communications. 10, 5–10 (2019). 


14.  
L. Robledo, L. Childress, H. Bernien, B. Hensen, P. F. A. Alkemade, R. Hanson, High-fidelity projective 
read-out of a solid-state spin quantum register. Nature. 477, 574–578 (2011). 

15.  
N. T. Son, C. P. Anderson, A. Bourassa, K. C. Miao, C. Babin, M. Widmann, M. Niethammer, J. Ul Hassan, 
N. Morioka, I. G. Ivanov, F. Kaiser, J. Wrachtrup, D. D. Awschalom, Developing silicon carbide for 
quantum spintronics. Applied Physics Letters. 116, 190501 (2020). 

16.  
H. Bernien, B. Hensen, W. Pfaff, G. Koolstra, M. S. Blok, L. Robledo, T. H. Taminiau, M. Markham, D. J. 
Twitchen, L. Childress, R. Hanson, Heralded entanglement between solid-state qubits separated by three 
metres. Nature. 497, 86–90 (2013). 

17.  
J. Cramer, N. Kalb, M. A. Rol, B. Hensen, M. S. Blok, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, R. Hanson, T. H. 
Taminiau, Repeated quantum error correction on a continuously encoded qubit by real-time feedback. 
Nature Communications. 7, 1–7 (2016). 

18.  
D. M. Irber, F. Poggiali, F. Kong, M. Kieschnick, T. Lühmann, D. Kwiatkowski, J. Meijer, J. Du, F. Shi, F. 
Reinhard, Robust all-optical single-shot readout of nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond. Nature 
Communications. 12 (2021), doi:10.1038/s41467-020-20755-3. 

19.  
Q. Zhang, Y. Guo, W. Ji, M. Wang, J. Yin, F. Kong, Y. Lin, C. Yin, F. Shi, Y. Wang, J. Du, High-fidelity 
single-shot readout of single electron spin in diamond with spin-to-charge conversion. Nature 
Communications. 12, 1–6 (2021). 

20.  
J. R. Maze, P. L. Stanwix, J. S. Hodges, S. Hong, J. M. Taylor, P. Cappellaro, L. Jiang, M. V. G. Dutt, E. 
Togan, A. S. Zibrov, A. Yacoby, R. L. Walsworth, M. D. Lukin, Nanoscale magnetic sensing with an 
individual electronic spin in diamond. Nature. 455, 644–647 (2008). 

21.  
J. M. Taylor, P. Cappellaro, L. Childress, L. Jiang, D. Budker, P. R. Hemmer, A. Yacoby, R. Walsworth, M. 
D. Lukin, High-sensitivity diamond magnetometer with nanoscale resolution. Nature Physics. 4, 810–816 
(2008). 

22.  
C. L. Degen, F. Reinhard, P. Cappellaro, Quantum sensing. Reviews of Modern Physics. 89, 1–39 (2017). 

23.  
T. Gullion, D. B. Baker, M. S. Conradi, New, compensated Carr-Purcell sequences. Journal of Magnetic 
Resonance (1969). 89, 479–484 (1990). 

24.  
H. Y. Carr, E. M. Purcell, Effects of Diffusion on Free Precession in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
Experiments. Phys. Rev. 94, 630–638 (1954). 

25.  
J. T. Muhonen, J. P. Dehollain, A. Laucht, F. E. Hudson, R. Kalra, T. Sekiguchi, K. M. Itoh, D. N. 
Jamieson, J. C. McCallum, A. S. Dzurak, A. Morello, Storing quantum information for 30 seconds in a 
nanoelectronic device. Nature Nanotechnology. 9, 986–991 (2014). 

26.  
A. M. Tyryshkin, S. Tojo, J. J. L. Morton, H. Riemann, N. v Abrosimov, P. Becker, H.-J. Pohl, T. Schenkel, 
M. L. W. Thewalt, K. M. Itoh, S. A. Lyon, Electron spin coherence exceeding seconds in high-purity 
silicon. Nature Materials. 11, 143–147 (2012). 

27.  
M. H. Abobeih, J. Cramer, M. A. Bakker, N. Kalb, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, T. H. Taminiau, One-
second coherence for a single electron spin coupled to a multi-qubit nuclear-spin environment. Nature 
Communications. 9, 1–8 (2018). 

28.  
N. Bar-Gill, L. M. Pham, A. Jarmola, D. Budker, R. L. Walsworth, Solid-state electronic spin coherence 
time approaching one second. Nature Communications. 4 (2013), doi:10.1038/ncomms2771. 

29.  
D. Simin, H. Kraus, A. Sperlich, T. Ohshima, G. v. Astakhov, V. Dyakonov, Locking of electron spin 
coherence above 20 ms in natural silicon carbide. Physical Review B. 95, 161201 (2017). 

30.  
N. T. Son, P. Carlsson, J. ul Hassan, E. Janzén, T. Umeda, J. Isoya, A. Gali, M. Bockstedte, N. Morishita, T. 
Ohshima, H. Itoh, Divacancy in 4H-SiC. Physical Review Letters. 96, 055501 (2006). 

31.  
P. Tamarat, N. B. Manson, J. P. Harrison, R. L. McMurtrie, A. Nizovtsev, C. Santori, R. G. Beausoleil, P. 
Neumann, T. Gaebel, F. Jelezko, P. Hemmer, J. Wrachtrup, Spin-flip and spin-conserving optical transitions 
of the nitrogen-vacancy centre in diamond. New Journal of Physics. 10 (2008), doi:10.1088/1367-
2630/10/4/045004. 

32.  
N. B. Manson, J. P. Harrison, M. J. Sellars, Nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond: Model of the electronic 
structure and associated dynamics. Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and Materials Physics. 74, 1–11 
(2006). 

33.  
L. Gordon, A. Janotti, C. G. van de Walle, Defects as qubits in 3C- and 4H-SiC. Physical Review B - 
Condensed Matter and Materials Physics. 92, 1–5 (2015). 

34.  
G. Wolfowicz, C. P. Anderson, A. L. Yeats, S. J. Whiteley, J. Niklas, O. G. Poluektov, F. J. Heremans, D. 
D. Awschalom, Optical charge state control of spin defects in 4H-SiC. Nature Communications. 8, 1876 
(2017). 


35.  
D. A. Golter, C. W. Lai, Optical switching of defect charge states in 4H-SiC. Scientific Reports. 7, 1–5 
(2017). 

36.  
B. Magnusson, N. T. Son, A. Csóré, A. Gällström, T. Ohshima, A. Gali, I. G. Ivanov, Excitation properties 
of the divacancy in $4H$-SiC. Phys. Rev. B. 98, 195202 (2018). 

37.  
M. Bockstedte, F. Schütz, T. Garratt, V. Ivády, A. Gali, Ab initio description of highly correlated states in 
defects for realizing quantum bits. npj Quantum Materials. 3, 31 (2018). 

38.  
D. A. Hopper, H. J. Shulevitz, L. C. Bassett, Spin Readout Techniques of the Nitrogen-Vacancy Center in 
Diamond. Micromachines. 9 (2018), doi:10.3390/mi9090437. 

39.  
L. Razinkovas, M. Maciaszek, F. Reinhard, M. W. Doherty, A. Alkauskas, Photoionization of negatively 
charged NV centers in diamond: theory and ab initio calculations (2021) (available at 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2104.09144). 

40.  
M. J. Biercuk, H. Bluhm, Phenomenological study of decoherence in solid-state spin qubits due to nuclear 
spin diffusion. Physical Review B. 83, 235316 (2011). 

41.  
J. Medford, Ł. Cywiński, C. Barthel, C. M. Marcus, M. P. Hanson, A. C. Gossard, Scaling of Dynamical 
Decoupling for Spin Qubits. Physical Review Letters. 108, 086802 (2012). 

42.  
G. Wolfowicz, C. P. Anderson, B. Diler, O. G. Poluektov, F. J. Heremans, D. D. Awschalom, Vanadium 
spin qubits as telecom quantum emitters in silicon carbide. Science Advances. 6, eaaz1192 (2020). 

43.  
B. Diler, S. J. Whiteley, C. P. Anderson, G. Wolfowicz, M. E. Wesson, E. S. Bielejec, F. Joseph Heremans, 
D. D. Awschalom, Coherent control and high-fidelity readout of chromium ions in commercial silicon 
carbide. npj Quantum Information. 6, 11 (2020). 

44.  
R. Nagy, M. Niethammer, M. Widmann, Y.-C. Chen, P. Udvarhelyi, C. Bonato, J. U. Hassan, R. Karhu, I. 
G. Ivanov, N. T. Son, J. R. Maze, T. Ohshima, Ö. O. Soykal, Á. Gali, S.-Y. Lee, F. Kaiser, J. Wrachtrup, 
High-fidelity spin and optical control of single silicon-vacancy centres in silicon carbide. Nature 
Communications. 10, 1954 (2019). 

45.  
J. Jeske, D. W. M. Lau, X. Vidal, L. P. McGuinness, P. Reineck, B. C. Johnson, M. W. Doherty, J. C. 
McCallum, S. Onoda, F. Jelezko, T. Ohshima, T. Volz, J. H. Cole, B. C. Gibson, A. D. Greentree, 
Stimulated emission from nitrogen-vacancy centres in diamond. Nature Communications. 8, 14000 (2017). 

46.  
G. Wolfowicz, C. P. Anderson, S. J. Whiteley, D. D. Awschalom, Heterodyne detection of radio-frequency 
electric fields using point defects in silicon carbide. Applied Physics Letters. 115 (2019), 
doi:10.1063/1.5108913. 

47.  
D. R. Candido, M. E. Flatté, Suppression of the optical linewidth and spin decoherence of a quantum spin 
center in a p-n diode (2020) (available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.13289). 

48.  
K. Ghosh, H. Ma, M. Onizhuk, V. Gavini, G. Galli, Spin–spin interactions in defects in solids from mixed 
all-electron and pseudopotential first-principles calculations. npj Computational Materials. 7, 123 (2021). 

49.  
J. H. Skone, M. Govoni, G. Galli, Self-consistent hybrid functional for condensed systems. Physical Review 
B. 89, 195112 (2014). 

50.  
P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. 
Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. 
Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. 
Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, 
R. M. Wentzcovitch, QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source software project for quantum 
simulations of materials. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter. 21, 395502 (2009). 

51.  
M. Schlipf, F. Gygi, Optimization algorithm for the generation of ONCV pseudopotentials. Computer 
Physics Communications. 196, 36–44 (2015). 

52.  
C. Freysoldt, J. Neugebauer, C. G. van de Walle, Fully Ab Initio Finite-Size Corrections for Charged-Defect 
Supercell Calculations. Physical Review Letters. 102, 016402 (2009). 

53.  
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple. Physical Review 
Letters. 77, 3865–3868 (1996). 

54.  
Y. Jin, M. Govoni, G. Wolfowicz, S. E. Sullivan, F. J. Heremans, D. D. Awschalom, G. Galli, 
Photoluminescence spectra of point defects in semiconductors: Validation of first-principles calculations. 
Phys. Rev. Materials. 5, 84603 (2021). 

55.  
L. Razinkovas, M. W. Doherty, N. B. Manson, C. G. de Walle, A. Alkauskas, Vibrational and vibronic 
structure of isolated point defects: The nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond. Phys. Rev. B. 104, 45303 
(2021). 

56.  
A. Togo, I. Tanaka, First principles phonon calculations in materials science. Scripta Materialia. 108, 1–5 
(2015). 


57.  
H.-Y. Chen, M. Palummo, D. Sangalli, M. Bernardi, Theory and Ab Initio Computation of the Anisotropic 
Light Emission in Monolayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. Nano Lett. 18, 3839–3843 (2018). 

58.  
P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. 
Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, N. Colonna, I. Carnimeo, A. D. Corso, S. de Gironcoli, P. Delugas, R. A. DiStasio, 
A. Ferretti, A. Floris, G. Fratesi, G. Fugallo, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, F. Giustino, T. Gorni, J. Jia, M. 
Kawamura, H.-Y. Ko, A. Kokalj, E. Küçükbenli, M. Lazzeri, M. Marsili, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, N. L. 
Nguyen, H.-V. Nguyen, A. Otero-de-la-Roza, L. Paulatto, S. Poncé, D. Rocca, R. Sabatini, B. Santra, M. 
Schlipf, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, I. Timrov, T. Thonhauser, P. Umari, N. Vast, X. Wu, S. Baroni, 
Advanced capabilities for materials modelling with Quantum ESPRESSO. J. Phys. Condens. Matter. 29, 
465901 (2017). 

59. 
P. Giannozzi, O. Baseggio, P. Bonfà, D. Brunato, R. Car, I. Carnimeo, C. Cavazzoni, S. de Gironcoli, P. 
Delugas, F. F. Ruffino, A. Ferretti, N. Marzari, I. Timrov, A. Urru, S. Baroni, Quantum ESPRESSO toward 
the exascale. J. Chem. Phys. 152, 154105 (2020). 

60. 
L. Patrick, W. J. Choyke, Static Dielectric Constant of SiC. Phys. Rev. B. 2, 15 (1970). 

61. 
Y. Goldberg, M. Levinshtein, S. Rumyantsev, Properties of Advanced Semiconductor Materials: GaN, AIN, 
InN, BN, SiC, SiGe (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2001). 

62. 
M. Govoni, G. Galli, Large Scale GW Calculations. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 11, 2680–2696 (2015). 

 
Acknowledgments 
We thank Grant T. Smith, and Benjamin S. Soloway for helpful discussions. This work made use 
of the UChicago MRSEC (NSF DMR-1420709) and Pritzker Nanofabrication Facility, which 
receives support from the SHyNE, a node of the NSF’s National Nanotechnology Coordinated 
Infrastructure (NSF ECCS-1542205). C.P.A., E.O.G., A.B., A.L.C. and D.D.A. were supported 
by grant nos. AFOSR FA9550-19-1-0358, DARPA D18AC00015KK1932 and ONR N00014-
17-1-3026. C.P.A., E.O.G., and D.D.A. were partially supported by the U.S. Department of 
Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Science and Engineering Division. C.Z. was 
supported by Boeing through the Chicago Quantum Exchange. T.O. and H.A. were supported by 
JPS KAKENHI (grant nos. 21H04553 and 20H00355). J.U.H was supported by the Swedish 
Research Council (Grant No. 20200544). J.U.H. and N.T.S. were also supported by the EU 
H2020 FETOPEN project QuanTELCO (grant no. 862721) and the Knut and Alice Wallenberg 
Foundation (grant no. KAW 2018.0071). Computational work was supported by grant no. 
AFOSR FA9550-19-1-0358 and made use of computational resources provided by the 
University of Chicago’s Research Computing Center. This work is supported by the U.S. 
Department of Energy Office of Science National Quantum Information Science Research 
Centers. 
 
Author contributions 
C.P.A., E.O.G., and A.B. conceived the experiments. C.P.A., E.O.G., and C.Z. performed the 
measurements. C.P.A. and E.O.G. analyzed the data. C.P.A. fabricated the devices. A.L.C. 
assisted in device fabrication. A.B. developed the experimental setup. Y.J. and Y.Z. performed 
DFT calculations for the energetics and cross-sections. C.V. implemented the calculation of 
optical matrix elements and assisted with DFT calculations. H.A. and T.O. performed the 
electron irradiation. J.U.H. and N.T.S. designed and grew the isotopically purified SiC samples. 
G. G. advised on the computational work. D.D.A. advised on all efforts. All authors contributed 
to manuscript preparation.  
 
Data and materials availability 
All data are available in the main text or the supplementary materials. Additional data related to 
this paper may be requested from the authors.   


