The Persistence of Memory in Solid-State Ionic Conduction 

Probed by Nonlinear Optics 

Andrey D. Poletayev1,2,3,*, Matthias C. Hoffmann4, James A. Dawson5,6, Samuel W. 

Teitelbaum1,7,8, Mariano Trigo1,7, M. Saiful Islam3,9 , Aaron M. Lindenberg1,2,7,* 

 

Predicting practical rates of ion transport from atomistic descriptors enables the 
rational design of materials, devices, and processes, which is especially critical to 
developing low-carbon energy technologies such as rechargeable batteries1–3. The 
correlated mechanisms of ionic conduction4,5, variation of conductivity with 
timescale6–8 and confinement9,10, and ambiguity in the vibrational origin of 
translation, the attempt frequency11,12, call for a direct atomic probe of the most 
fundamental steps of ionic diffusion: ion hops. However, such hops are rare-event 
large-amplitude translations, and are challenging to excite and detect. Here we use 
single-cycle terahertz pumps to impulsively trigger ionic hopping in battery solid 
electrolytes. This is visualized by an induced transient birefringence enabling direct 
probing of anisotropy in ionic hopping on the picosecond timescale. The relaxation of 
the transient signal measures the decay of orientational memory, and the production 
of entropy in diffusion. We extend experimental results using in silico transient 
birefringence to identify attempt frequencies for ion hopping. Using nonlinear optical 
methods, we probe ion transport at its fastest limit, distinguish correlated conduction 
mechanisms from a true random walk at the atomic scale, and demonstrate the 
connection between activated transport and the thermodynamics of information. 

 

Models of Ion Transport 
Fast-ion conduction in the solid state commands particular attention due to its importance 
in energy technologies, such as solid state batteries1,2. Linking the mechanistic features of 
ion conduction at the atomic level to the collective descriptors of macroscopic transport 
within a multi-scale model, or as measured in a device, yields opportunities to design novel 
processes and applications3,9,13. However, the links are often not well characterized in part 
because nanoscale ionic conductivity is dispersive and non-ergodic6,7. 
 
Macroscopic solid-state ionic conduction is considered a random-walk process composed of 
rapid translations between lattice sites. These fundamental steps of diffusion and conduction 
are called ion hops (Figure 1a). Hops originate randomly with an attempt frequency ν0, and 
succeed with a probability determined by the Gibbs free energy of a transition state6,11,12,14. 
Random-walk models15,16 treat every step (hop) as uncorrelated from the preceding ones: 

 

1 Stanford Institute for Materials and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, USA 
2 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA 
3 Department of Materials, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 
4 Linac Coherent Light Source, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, USA 
5 Chemistry – School of Natural and Environmental Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK 
6 Centre for Energy, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK 
7 Stanford PULSE Institute, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA 
8 Present Address: Department of Physics, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA 

9 Department of Chemistry, University of Bath, Bath, UK 
* Correspondence to andrey.poletayev@gmail.com, aaronl@stanford.edu. 


all memory is lost with every hop. From the standpoint of information theory17, the full 
entropy of conduction is evolved at every hop. 
 
By contrast, models of correlated transport allow for the macroscopic process of conduction 
to consist of multiple interconnected steps. Examples include memory kernels in generalized 
master equations18,19, Burnett-order nonlinear hydrodynamics8,10, or kinetic competition6,20. 
In such models, the state of the material at time zero (Figure 1b, green) influences transport 
dynamics over some non-negligible timescale (e.g., t1 in Figure 1b). The information entropy 
of transport is expressed as a mutual entropy between configurations a time lag t1 apart. This 
quantity increases (equivalently, mutual information decreases) until the full entropy of 
transport is produced. Only at longer timescales (e.g., at t2 in Figure 1b) can transport 
parameters such as the diffusion coefficient and ionic conductivity be constant-valued, as in 
a random-walk process. Indeed, picosecond to nanosecond studies of ion conductors11,21,22 
yield reduced activation energies, suggesting that the processes being probed at those 
frequencies may be incomplete with respect to overall conduction due to the persistence of 
such memory.  
 
Understanding correlation effects in transport remains necessary to predict practical 
performance of ionic conductors from the atoms up3,13, and to exploit nonlinear nanoscale 
transport phenomena9 in devices. Here, we study the correspondence between the 
thermodynamics of ion transport and those of information23,24. Such a mechanistic 
investigation requires the ability to (1) impulsively trigger ion hops3 on the short timescale 
of 1/ν0, typically ≤ 1 ps, and (2) track their outcomes over potentially much longer times7,8. 
Such a combination is inaccessible to current techniques11, and even the vibrational nature 
of ν0 remains under debate2,25,26. Furthermore, since ion hops, unlike those of electronic 
carriers, are stochastic and lack spectral resonance signatures, single-pulse reciprocal-space 
or Fourier-transform probes are insufficient for probing them. Instead, correlations in 
nanoscale transport7–10 could be probed using time-domain nonlinear optical pump-probe 
methods such as transient birefringence27–29 via their sensitivity to polarization. However, 
pump-probe studies of ionic dynamics have so far focused on coherent displacements of 
bound vibrational modes or order parameters30,31, where many ions undergo coherent sub-
angstrom motions, rather than rare large-amplitude displacements (typically 2-3 Å) such as 
ionic hops.  
 
Probing Correlated Hopping 
We probe orientational correlations between ionic hops using a nonlinear optical method 
sensitive to ionic velocities (Figure 1c). We trigger ionic hops with an impulsive single-
optical-cycle pump (Figure 1d) and measure the anisotropy in the directions of subsequent 
hops (Figure 1ef) as transient birefringence. The ionic response is pumped impulsively using 
single-cycle terahertz pulses with center frequency ≈0.7 THz32,33, and transient birefringence 
is probed in transmission mode (Extended Data Figure 1). The general solution for electric 
fields E in the sample at position z along the pulse paths at pump-probe delay t1 is34,35 

𝐸!"#$%(𝑧, 𝑡) − 𝐸(𝑧, 𝑡) ∝ 𝜕

𝜕𝑡 *𝑃(𝑧, 𝑡 + 𝑡&)𝐸!"#$%(𝑧, 𝑡)- 

Here, the polarization P arises from coherent displacements of vibrational modes or bound 
dipoles Qi, plus an additional component from the history of hopping rates H: 


𝑃(𝑡 + 𝑡&) = / 𝑄'(𝑡 + 𝑡&)

'

+ 1
𝐻(𝜏)𝑑𝜏

()(!

*+

 

The integral is zero until the pump drives ionic hops in a preferential direction (Figure 1d). 
Because the emitted signal at t1 is proportional to the time derivative of the polarization, it 
arises from ionic velocities, to which hopping rates H(t1) contribute. In the terahertz-pumped 
Kerr effect (TKE) geometry, the anisotropy of velocities and hopping rates is measured 
specifically (Figure 1c). This corresponds to a time-dependent preference for hopping along 
the direction defined by the terahertz pump versus in an orthogonal direction. The relaxation 
of hopping anisotropy corresponds to the loss of memory of the pump-driven impulse by the 
conducting ions during the temperature-activated solid-state diffusion process. If 
conduction occurs via a random walk, then hopping immediately returns to isotropy, and no 
relaxation should be observable. Additionally, the modes Qi that couple appreciably to H 
contribute to attempt frequencies ν0.   
 

 

Figure 1 | Probing Ionic Transport in 𝛽-aluminas. a. Mobile metal ions (purple) hop (arrows) 
between energetically distinct lattice sites with two- and six-fold coordination by oxygen ions (black). 
The same lattice sites are depicted schematically in d-f. b. At time t0 = 0 (green) there is perfect 
knowledge of the state of the system. At time t1 > 0 some correlations persist. By time t2 >> 0 all 
correlations and memory are lost, and the full entropy of transport is produced as for a random walk 
(dotted line). c. Transient birefringence experiment in 𝛽-aluminas: At time t0 = 0 (green) the 
terahertz pump triggers ion hops along its electric field vector, as shown in d. At time t1 > 0, the 
subsequent hops retain a correlation with the impulse at t0: back-hopping is predominant, as shown 
in e, which yields a birefringence signal (c, red). The anisotropic distribution of hopping directions 
at t1 is probed as a contribution to the anisotropy in ionic velocities (c, pink). The pump energy fully 
thermalizes by time t2 when the hopping directions reach isotropy (f). 

Time

Kerr signal

t0 = 0

t1

t2

c

isotropic

v⟂

v||

anisotropic

v⟂

v||

isotropic

v⟂

v||

d
pump t0 = 0

b

Time

Information

Entropy

t0 = 0

t1

t2

random walk

probe

t1 > 0

e

probe

t2 >> 0

f

a


 
Picosecond Hopping Dynamics in β-aluminas 
We first use the fast ionic conductors β-aluminas (M1+2xAl11O17+x, where x≈0.1, and the 
mobile ion M+ = Na+, K+, Ag+) as model systems. In β-aluminas, ion conduction occurs over 
two non-equivalent lattice sites (Figure 1a), and correlations persist over timescales 
corresponding to multiple (≥2) consecutive hops7. The vibrational modes of the mobile ions 
fall between 0.7-3.0 THz, depending on the mobile ion36,37. To match the direction of ionic 
hopping, the pump electric field E is perpendicular to the crystalline c axis and parallel to the 
two-dimensional conduction planes. Figure 2a shows the time traces of the terahertz-
pumped transient birefringence in β-aluminas at 300 K. All samples show both oscillatory 
and non-oscillatory responses at 300 K and 620 K (Extended Data Figure 1). Such 
incoherent, non-oscillatory relaxation has been previously observed in liquids27,29,38,39 and 
solids40, but attributed to overdamped rotations or librations, which are absent in β-
aluminas. While the magnitude of the birefringence response scales with the square of the 
pump field (Figure S3), as expected for a Kerr effect signal, we do not observe any spectral 
changes with increasing pump fluence in either TKE or terahertz transmission experiments 
(Figures S3, S5), indicating that we are probing a response intrinsic to the material, and not 
a threshold-dependent response only relevant at high fields41. The non-oscillatory relaxation 
is substantially slower than any vibrational components. Therefore, we also rule out 
nonlinear phonon coupling42,43. Otherwise, the vibrational components of the TKE signals 
(Figure 2b) are consistent with established far-infrared and Raman modes37 of mobile ions. 
 

 

Figure 2 | Terahertz Kerr effect (TKE) in 𝛽-alumina ion conductors. (a) Time-domain traces of 
transient birefringence in 𝛽-alumina ion conductors: Na+ (orange), K+ (purple), Ag+ (dark red), and 
electro-optic sampling trace of the pump field (green), smoothed with a 30-fs Gaussian window. The 
shaded regions correspond to ±1 s.e. of the mean signal at each time delay. The labeled feature at 
8.4 ps is the rotational coherence of atmospheric nitrogen44 within a Rayleigh length (> 500 µm) of 
the samples (≤ 30 µm thick). (b) Fourier transform power spectra (points) of the signals in (a), and 
smoothed with a Gaussian filter of 0.1 THz st. dev. (lines), with peaks highlighted by arrows. 
 
We investigate the possible connection between temperature-activated hopping conduction 
and the picosecond TKE relaxation by varying the temperature of the samples. In all 
materials, the signals from thinner (<30 µm) vs thicker (100-300 µm) samples match after 
the short-time oscillations dephase (Extended Data Figure 2). The subsequent non-

!!

a
b


oscillatory relaxation represents a bulk material response. We analyze a thick sample of K+ β-
alumina (Figure 3a) here to highlight this long-time signal. We model the response as the 
sum of an instantaneous response arising from intrinsic nonlinearity and a mismatch in 
optical constants between the pump and probe frequencies45,46 (Supplementary Notes 1-2, 
and Extended Data Figures 3-5), and single-exponential decay, shown together as dashed 
lines. The slow non-oscillatory component is absent in the non-resonant optical Kerr 
response (Extended Data Figure 6), and the residuals of the TKE fit (Extended Data 
Figure 7a) show the same frequency, ≈2 THz, as the non-resonant signal. Together, this 
suggests that both pumps (THz and optical) excite coherent ionic vibrations, but the 
terahertz pump excites an additional response that decays incoherently. For K+ β-alumina, 
this non-oscillatory relaxation accelerates from ≈10 ps at 300 K to ≈4 ps at 620 K 
(Figure 3b), with an activation energy of ≈45 meV. In ambient atmosphere, the apparent time 
constants are slightly slower due to the overlaid signal from atmospheric water vapor27 
(Figure S1), which is slower than the sample response and is not temperature-activated.  
 

 

Figure 3 | Temperature dependence of the long-lived TKE in K+ 𝛽-alumina. (a) Time-domain 
traces of transient birefringence in K+ 𝛽-alumina, measured in ambient atmosphere (solid lines), 
normalized and offset for clarity. The shaded regions correspond to ±1 s.e. of the mean signal. Colored 
dashed lines are fits to the sum of single-exponent relaxation and an instantaneous polarization. The 
labeled feature at 8.4 picoseconds is the rotational coherence of atmospheric nitrogen. (b) Time 
constants of single-exponential fits to the long-lived TKE component in ambient atmosphere (filled 
symbols) and dry atmosphere (empty symbols). Error bars are ±1 s.e. of least-squares fitting. The 
dashed line at an activation energy of 45 meV is a guide to the eye. (c) Molecular dynamics simulation 
showing normalized anisotropy of hopping under applied electric field mimicking the experimental 
terahertz pump at 300 K (blue) and 600 K (pink). Black dashed line: square of the simulated electric 
field.  
 
Eliminating several other plausible assignments, we propose that the liquid-like picosecond-
timescale component of the TKE response arises from the incoherent hopping of mobile ions. 

a

!!

45 meV

b

c

2-6 ps average:
300 K: 290 ± 40 hops μm-3
600 K: 60 ± 100 hops μm-3


We use large-scale molecular dynamics simulations with a pulsed electrical field27,47,48 
mimicking the experimental THz pump in frequency and magnitude to verify this hypothesis. 
Following the simulated terahertz pump, the anisotropy of hopping rates is calculated from 
the times and crystallographic directions of all hops (Figure 3c). The pump selectively 
accelerates mobile ions (Supplementary Note 4) and drives hopping along its electric field. 
In K+ β-alumina at 300 K, the anisotropy of hopping is distinguishable from zero until ≥6 ps 
after the peak applied field (Figure 3c, blue), but relaxes to zero by ≈3-4 ps at 600 K, in 
agreement with experiment. The simulated relaxation of the hopping anisotropy is only 
slightly faster than the experimental TKE relaxation. We conclude that the liquid-like 
picosecond-timescale TKE response in β-aluminas is indeed a signature of anisotropy in the 
hopping of mobile ions caused by the pump, the decay of which is heat-activated with an 
energy of ≈40-50 meV in K+ β-alumina (Figure 3b).  

 

Correlations and Memory in Ion Hopping 
We now discuss the physical meaning of the TKE signal. The contribution of hopping to the 
TKE signal for any time delay scales with the hopping rate H, weighed by the hop directions 
relative to the pump’s electric field. Hopping rates both parallel (+v||) and antiparallel (-v||) 
to the pump contribute positively to the TKE signal, whereas hopping orthogonal to the 
pump contributes negatively as ±v^ (Figure 1c). The existence of the slow TKE signal signifies 
a mismatch between v|| and v^, and implies that directions of consecutive hops are correlated. 
This is consistent with previous simulations6,7: following pump-driven hops at t0 (Figure 1d), 
the mobile ions have a preference to hop backwards (correlation factors f, fI << 1 using solid-
state ionics nomenclature15,16), which randomizes only slowly. TKE measures the decay of 
this preference and verifies that the atomistic mechanism of ion transport in β-aluminas 
differs from a random walk.  
 
The hopping component of the TKE signal is temperature-activated, but the activation is 
much smaller than for low-frequency conductivity (≈45 meV in Figure 3b vs >200 meV49). 
However, any hop in isolation is not timescale-dependent. The difference between hopping 
at picosecond versus macroscopic timescales is not within individual hops, but in the mutual 
information between successive hops (Supplementary Note 5), conceptually similar to a 
viscoelastic effect. Small activation energies measured with TKE are consistent with the slow 
loss of  such correlation via production of entropy (Figure 1b), being the origin of increasing 
measured activation energies toward macroscopic timescales22. At picosecond timescales, as 
probed here, even though hopping is triggered, correlations persist throughout the 
measurement, and only partial activation is measurable. Conversely, the full activation for 
macroscopic conduction is measured only at timescales sufficient for the decay of all 
correlations.  
 
Random-Walk Ion Conduction in K+ β”-alumina 
All β-aluminas exhibit the picosecond “tail” in the TKE response, and the hopping remains 
correlated for longer than the TKE response is measurable7. This is expected due to the 
presence of non-equivalent lattice sites (Figure 1). To verify the above interpretation, we 
next seek a control system where ion transport could proceed via a true atomistic random 
walk. In such a system, any TKE “tail” could be expected to vanish rapidly. In the closely 
analogous β”-aluminas (M1.67Al10.67Li0.33O17, where the mobile ion M+ = Na+, K+, Ag+) all lattice 


sites for ion hopping are equivalent (Figure 4a, inset). The β”-aluminas are expected to have 
true random-walk conduction at elevated temperature, but not at 300 K7. In the TKE 
response of K+ β”-alumina, we observe a long-lived non-oscillatory relaxation at 300 K 
(Figure 4a), as in the β-aluminas. At 620 K, this component is absent, and a more field-
following response is observed, which suggests the absence of long-time correlations, and a 
more field-following response overall. In agreement with experiment, the simulated 
anisotropy of hopping following a 0.7-THz pump exhibits a long-lived relaxation at 300 K, 
but not at 600 K (Figure 4b). The simulation reproduces the most important feature of 
experimental TKE: a picosecond-timescale anisotropy of hopping at 300 K that disappears 
by 600 K. The experiment and simulation are consistent with the expected change of 
transport mechanism: correlated at 300 K changing to a true random walk by 600 K7. We 
conclude that the non-oscillatory picosecond-timescale relaxation of the terahertz Kerr 
effect indeed probes the decay of orientational memory in ionic hopping at the level of 
individual ionic hops. 
 
 


Attempt Frequencies for Ion Hopping 
Finally, we use the TKE measurements and simulations of K+ β”-alumina to identify the 
vibrational origin of ionic hops: the attempt frequency ν0. To cause an anisotropy in hopping, 
a pump field must excite the vibrational modes Qi that couple directly to hopping, and trigger 
hopping aligned with the applied field. This must happen before thermalization, or else 
pump-driven heating enhances hopping rates in all directions isotropically. Having 
established the correspondence of the experimental TKE and simulated anisotropy of ionic 
hopping, we use further molecular dynamics simulations as in silico TKE at pump frequencies 
presently inaccessible to us experimentally. We simulate the anisotropy of hopping in K+ β”-
alumina following a 2.5-THz pulse that overlaps with the strong infrared-active vibration of 
the K+ ions in the conduction plane at 3.0 THz (Figure 4c, orange). Despite the material 
absorbing nearly the same amount of energy from simulated 0.7-THz and 2.5-THz pulses 
(Figure S6), and despite the 3.0-THz vibration being coherently driven by the 2.5-THz pulse 
(Figure S7), the 0.7-THz pulse creates a ≈20x stronger anisotropy of hopping than the 2.5-

Figure 4 | Terahertz Kerr effect in K+ 𝛽”-
alumina. (a) Normalized time-domain 
transient 
birefringence 
in 
thin 

polycrystalline K+ 𝛽”-alumina at 300 K 
(blue) and 620 K (pink). The shaded 
regions are ±1 s.e. of the mean. Inset: in 𝛽”-
aluminas 
mobile 
ions 
(purple) 
hop 

(arrows) 
between 
equivalent 
four-

coordinate sites. (b) Normalized simulated 
anisotropy 
of 
hopping 
directions 
in 

polycrystalline 
K+ 
𝛽”-alumina 
under 

applied electric field centered at 0.7 THz 
mimicking the experimental pump, 300 K 
(blue) and 600 K (pink). Black dashed line: 
square of the simulated pump electric field. 
Inset zooms in on the post-pump times: 
simulated hopping anisotropy at 300 K is 
nonzero for ≥5 ps. (c) Simulated anisotropy 
of hopping in polycrystalline K+ 𝛽”-alumina 
at 300 K under applied electric fields 
centered at 0.7 THz (teal), and 2.5 THz 
(orange). Inset: Simulated in-plane optical 
K+ conductivity of K+ 𝛽”-alumina in the 
terahertz region (blue). Peaks at ≈1, 3, and 
≈5 THz are in agreement with literature50. 
Shaded: spectra of simulated pumps with 
center 
frequencies 
0.7 
THz 
(teal) 

mimicking the experimental pump (ab), 
and 2.5 THz (orange). 

a

b

1
5
2
3
4

0

0.05

c

1
5
2
3
4

Frequency, THz

Amplitude, a.u.


THz pulse (Figure 4c). This suggests that the pulse at ≈1 THz couples directly to hops, 
whereas the 2.5-THz pulse heats the material isotropically. We conclude that the attempt 
frequency in K+ β”-alumina is ≈1 THz. The excitation of this vibration is evident in the 
experimental TKE response (Figure 4a, Extended Data Figure 7b). The attempt frequencies 
in β-aluminas can be similarly identified once the distinct dynamics of bound defect clusters 
and non-equivalent lattice sites are dis-aggregated (Supplementary Note 6). For example, in 
Na β-alumina the simulated attempt frequencies are ≈1.2 THz for the dominant ion-pair 
hopping mechanism, and ≈2.3 THz for rare single-ion hopping. The latter corresponds to the 
known vibration37 commonly taken as the attempt frequency41 and verified here with THz 
transmission (2.1 THz, Figure S5, and Supplementary Note 6). Instead, the 1.2-THz vibration, 
highlighted by neutron scattering36, drives most hopping at 300K, despite constituting a 
minor part of the vibrational density of states for the mobile ion.  

 

Conclusions 
In summary, we have used impulsive near-resonant terahertz excitation to trigger ionic 
hopping in solid-state ionic conductors. Picosecond transient birefringence arises from 
correlations in the hopping of mobile ions. Therefore we establish TKE, a nonlinear optical 
measurement, as a direct probe of path dependence in ionic transport7,8. TKE highlights both 
the vibrational origination of ionic conduction, and the the slow loss of memory during 
diffusion. Ionic conductivity and its activation reach their low-frequency limits only at 
timescales sufficiently long to scramble all memory within the system.  The transport of ions 
can be characterized by a random walk only at timescales longer than the persistence of 
correlations - but such a phenomenological random walk may not correspond to a true 
atomistic one. In other words, macroscopic measurements cannot be interpreted in terms of 
atomistic quantities without accounting for such correlations. By distinguishing rapid ion 
hops from the persistent correlations connecting them, our work demonstrates the 
correspondence between thermodynamics and information for thermally activated mass 
transport. 
 
In addition to probing the mechanisms of ionic conduction, the correlation effects we 
highlight are of importance for transport under strong driving forces, at short timescales, 
and in confined dimensions9,10, such as in switching applications3. This study provides a 
framework for the use of nonlinear optical techniques to probe the atomistic mechanisms of 
non-equilibrium transport phenomena, which will be highly valuable in the development of 
energy technologies such as solid state batteries, and in the related fields of nanofluidics, 
engineering phase transformations, and neuromorphic computing.  

 

Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, 
Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering (contract DE-AC02-76SF00515). MSI and JAD 
gratefully acknowledge the EPSRC Programme Grant “Enabling next generation lithium 
batteries” (EP/M009521/1). JAD gratefully acknowledges the EPSRC (EP/V013130/1), 
Research England (Newcastle University Centre for Energy QR Strategic Priorities Fund) and 
Newcastle University (Newcastle Academic Track (NUAcT) Fellowship) for funding. We are 
indebted to Prof. Osamu Kamishima (Setsunan University) for sharing single-crystalline 
samples of Na β-alumina with us. 


 
Author Contributions  
The probing of ionic transport with nonlinear techniques was proposed by AML, MT, SWT, 
and ADP. Simulations incorporating the terahertz pump were proposed by AML, JAD, and 
MSI. ADP and MCH performed the terahertz Kerr effect and transmission measurements. 
ADP, SWT, and MT performed the optical Kerr effect measurements. ADP analyzed the 
experimental data. ADP performed and analyzed the molecular dynamics simulations with 
advice from JAD and MSI. AML advised and supervised the work. All authors contributed to 
the writing of the manuscript.  
 
 


 

Extended Data Figure 1 | Terahertz Kerr effect (TKE) in 𝛽-aluminas at elevated 
temperature. (a) Schematic of the transient birefringence experiment: terahertz pump 
(green) perturbs mobile ions (purple) in the ionic conductor. The 800 nm probe pulse (pink) 
delayed by a time Δt is split with a quarter wave plate and a Wollaston prism. The 
polarization rotation of the probe pulse is detected with a pair of Si photodiodes in a 
balanced detection scheme. (b) Polarizations of the pump and probe pulses relative to each 
other and the 𝛽-alumina crystals. (c) Time-domain traces of transient birefringence in thin 
single crystals of 𝛽-aluminas at 620 K: Na+ (orange), K+ (purple), Ag+ (dark red), and electro-
optic sampling trace of the pump field (green). The shaded regions correspond to ±1 s.e. of 
the mean signal at each time delay. (d) Fourier transform power spectra (points) of the 
signals in (c), and smoothed with a Gaussian filter of 0.1 THz st. dev. (lines), with peaks 
highlighted by arrows. 
 
 

b

c
d

ETHz

E800nm

45°

k || crystal c axis
ETHz ⟂ crystal c
E800nm ⟂ crystal c

PD1

PD2
Wollaston

prism

probe

pump

!/4

$-alumina

a


 

Extended Data Figure 2 | TKE in 𝛽-aluminas with varying sample thickness. TKE signals 
for thick (≥100 µm) and thin (≤30 µm) crystals of Na (ab), K (cd), and Ag (ef) 𝛽-alumina, 
normalized to their values at a pump-probe delay time when short-time oscillatory signal 
components have decayed. For all materials at 300 K (ace) and 620 K (bdf) the longer-time 
relaxation of the signals overlap: their kinetics are independent of sample thickness. Since 
the TKE signal is phase accumulated over the sample thickness, thicker samples yield lower-
noise signals at long time delays. 
 
 

a
b

c
d

e
f


 

 

Extended Data Figure 3 | Fitting TKE signals of Na 𝛽-alumina. Each signal (blue in aceg) 
was measured in a purged atmosphere and modeled as the sum of an instantaneous 
component (orange) and a single-exponential relaxation (green) with a long-time constant 
(Supplementary Notes 1 and 2). For the thin sample (e-h), the strength of the instantaneous 
component was small. The strong vibrational component in the thick-sample signal (a-d) 
precluded unambiguous fitting at short times, so the exponential component was fit to the 
long-time part of the signal. The residuals (dark red) are oscillatory. Their Fourier 
transforms (bdfh), plotted with 0.1-THz Gaussian-filter smoothing, show main frequency 
components at 1.8 and 3.0 THz in agreement with non-resonant OKE (3.0 THz, Extended 
Data Figure 6), literature, and simulation (1.7 THz, Figure S7).  
 
 

a
c

e
g

b

f

d

h


 

Extended Data Figure 4 | Fitting TKE signals of K 𝛽-alumina. Each signal (blue in aceg) 
was measured in a purged atmosphere and modeled as the sum of an instantaneous 
component (orange) and a single-exponential relaxation (green) with a long-time constant 
(Supplementary Notes 1 and 2). For the thin sample (e-h), the instantaneous component was 
non-negligible, and at 300 K a weakly determined second exponential was identifiable. The 
residuals (dark red) are oscillatory and most interpretable in the signals from the thin 
sample (e-h). Their Fourier transforms (bdfh), plotted with 0.1-THz Gaussian-filter 
smoothing, show main frequency components at ≈1.2, ≈2.0, and ≈2.7 THz in agreement with 
non-resonant OKE (2.0 THz, Extended Data Figure 6), literature, and simulation (1.3 THz and 
1.9 THz, Figure S7). 
 
 

a
c

e
g

b

f

d

h


 

Extended Data Figure 5 | Fitting TKE signals of Ag 𝛽-alumina. Each signal (blue in aceg) 
was measured in a purged atmosphere and modeled as the sum of an instantaneous 
component (orange) and a single-exponential relaxation (green) (Supplementary Notes 1 
and 2). For the thin sample (e-h), the instantaneous component was negligible. The Fourier 
transforms (bdfh) of residuals (dark red), plotted with 0.1-THz Gaussian-filter smoothing, 
show a frequency component at ≈1.2 THz in agreement with literature (infrared-active mode 
at 1.0-1.2 THz) and simulation (1.0 THz, Figure S7). The signal is very similar between the 
thick and thin samples (Extended Data Figure 2), consistent with it arising from a thin layer 
of the material and consistent with strong absorption (Supplementary Note 3). 
 
 

a
c

e
g

b

f

d

h


 

Extended Data Figure 6 | Non-resonant optical Kerr effect in 𝛽-aluminas. Schematic of 
the experimental configuration (a) and signals from thick Na (orange), K (purple), and Ag 
(dark red) 𝛽-alumina crystals (b) at positive time delays following a strong coherent artifact 
at zero time delay. The frequency components are extracted from linear prediction fitting 
results (Methods) shown as black dashed lines.  
 
 
 

Wollaston

prism

probe

pump

!/4

$-alumina
PD1

PD2

a

7.8 THz, 3.0 THz

2.0 THz, 2.3 THz

0.7 THz, 3.0 THz

b


 

Extended Data Figure 7 | Fourier Transforms of TKE Signals in K+ 𝛽- and 𝛽”-alumina. 
(a) Fourier transforms of oscillatory residuals in TKE signals of thick crystals of K 𝛽-alumina 
measured in ambient atmosphere (Figure 3a). (b) Fourier transforms of the TKE signals of 
thin polycrystalline K+ 𝛽”-alumina (Figure 4a).  
 
 
 

a
b


References  
1. 
Famprikis, T., Canepa, P., Dawson, J. A., Islam, M. S. & Masquelier, C. Fundamentals of 
inorganic solid-state electrolytes for batteries. Nat. Mater. 18, 1278 (2019). 

2. 
Ohno, S. et al. Materials design of ionic conductors for solid state batteries. Prog. 
Energy 2, 022001 (2020). 

3. 
Sood, A. et al. Electrochemical ion insertion from the atomic to the device scale. Nat. 
Rev. Mater. 6, 847–867 (2021). 

4. 
He, X., Zhu, Y. & Mo, Y. Origin of fast ion diffusion in super-ionic conductors. Nat. 
Commun. 8, 15893 (2017). 

5. 
Bachman, J. C. et al. Inorganic Solid-State Electrolytes for Lithium Batteries: 
Mechanisms and Properties Governing Ion Conduction. Chem. Rev. 116, 140–162 
(2016). 

6. 
Funke, K., Cramer, C. & Wilmer, D. Concept of mismatch and relaxation for self-
diffusion and conduction in ionic materials with disordered structures. in Diffusion in 
Condensed Matter 857–893 (Springer-Verlag, 2005). doi:10.1007/3-540-30970-5_21. 

7. 
Poletayev, A. D., Dawson, J. A., Islam, M. S. & Lindenberg, A. M. Defect-Driven 
Anomalous Transport in Fast-Ion Conducting Solid Electrolytes. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.08761 (2021). 

8. 
Song, S. et al. Transport dynamics of complex fluids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 12733–
12742 (2019). 

9. 
Kavokine, N., Netz, R. R. & Bocquet, L. Fluids at the Nanoscale: From Continuum to 
Subcontinuum Transport. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 53, 377–410 (2021). 

10. 
Agarwal, R. K., Yun, K. Y. & Balakrishnan, R. Beyond Navier-Stokes: Burnett equations 
for flows in the continuum-transition regime. Phys. Fluids 13, 3061–3085 (2001). 

11. 
Gao, Y. et al. Classical and Emerging Characterization Techniques for Investigation of 
Ion Transport Mechanisms in Crystalline Fast Ionic Conductors. Chem. Rev. 120, 
5954–6008 (2020). 

12. 
Muy, S., Schlem, R., Shao-Horn, Y. & Zeier, W. G. Phonon–Ion Interactions: Designing 
Ion Mobility Based on Lattice Dynamics. Adv. Energy Mater. 11, 2002787 (2021). 

13. 
Franco, A. A. et al. Boosting Rechargeable Batteries R&D by Multiscale Modeling: 
Myth or Reality? Chem. Rev. 119, 4569–4627 (2019). 

14. 
Maier, J. Physical Chemistry of Ionic Materials: Ions and Electrons in Solids. John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd vol. 1 (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2004). 

15. 
Murch, G. E. The Haven Ratio In Fast Ionic Conductors. Solid State Ionics 7, 177–198 
(1982). 

16. 
Vargas-Barbosa, N. M. & Roling, B. Dynamic Ion Correlations in Solid and Liquid 
Electrolytes: How Do They Affect Charge and Mass Transport? ChemElectroChem 7, 
367–385 (2020). 

17. 
Cover, T. M. & Thomas, J. A. Elements of Information Theory. (Wiley, 2005). 
doi:10.1002/047174882X. 

18. 
Coffey, W. T. & Kalmykov, Y. P. The Langevin Equation. World Scientific Series in 
Contemporary Chemical Physics vol. 28 (2017). 

19. 
Klafter, J. & Sokolov, I. M. First Steps in Random Walks. (Oxford University Press, 
2011). doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199234868.001.0001. 

20. 
Habasaki, J., Leon, C. & Ngai, K. L. Electrical response of ionic conductors. in Dynamics 
of Glassy, Crystalline and Liquid Ionic Conductors 89–250 (Springer Verlag, 2017). 


doi:10.1007/978-3-319-42391-3_4. 

21. 
Funke, K. & Banhatti, R. D. Conductivity spectroscopy covering 17 decades on the 
frequency scale. Solid State Ionics 176, 1971–1978 (2005). 

22. 
Kamishima, O. et al. Temperature dependence of low-lying phonon dephasing by 
ultrafast spectroscopy (optical Kerr effect) in Ag β-alumina and Tl β-alumina. J. Phys. 
Condens. Matter 19, 456215 (2007). 

23. 
Parrondo, J. M. R., Horowitz, J. M. & Sagawa, T. Thermodynamics of information. Nat. 
Phys. 11, 131–139 (2015). 

24. 
Ciliberto, S. Experiments in Stochastic Thermodynamics: Short History and 
Perspectives. Phys. Rev. X 7, 16–21 (2017). 

25. 
Krauskopf, T. et al. Comparing the Descriptors for Investigating the Influence of 
Lattice Dynamics on Ionic Transport Using the Superionic Conductor Na 3 PS 4-x Se 
x. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 14464–14473 (2018). 

26. 
Muy, S. et al. Tuning mobility and stability of lithium ion conductors based on lattice 
dynamics. Energy Environ. Sci. 11, 850–859 (2018). 

27. 
Elgabarty, H. et al. Energy transfer within the hydrogen bonding network of water 
following resonant terahertz excitation. Sci. Adv. 6, 1–15 (2020). 

28. 
Zalden, P. et al. Molecular polarizability anisotropy of liquid water revealed by 
terahertz-induced transient orientation. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–7 (2018). 

29. 
Hoffmann, M. C., Brandt, N. C., Hwang, H. Y., Yeh, K.-L. & Nelson, K. A. Terahertz Kerr 
effect. Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 1–4 (2009). 

30. 
de la Torre, A. et al. Colloquium : Nonthermal pathways to ultrafast control in 
quantum materials. Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, (2021). 

31. 
Mankowsky, R., Först, M. & Cavalleri, A. Non-equilibrium control of complex solids by 
nonlinear phononics. Reports Prog. Phys. 79, 064503 (2016). 

32. 
Hebling, J., Yeh, K.-L., Hoffmann, M. C. & Nelson, K. A. High-power THz generation, 
THz nonlinear optics, and THz nonlinear spectroscopy. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum 
Electron. 14, 345–353 (2008). 

33. 
Hoffmann, M. C. & Fülöp, J. A. Intense ultrashort terahertz pulses: Generation and 
applications. J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 44, (2011). 

34. 
Yan, Y. X., Gamble, E. B. & Nelson, K. A. Impulsive stimulated scattering: General 
importance in femtosecond laser pulse interactions with matter, and spectroscopic 
applications. J. Chem. Phys. 83, 5391–5399 (1985). 

35. 
Merlin, R. Generating Coherent THz Phonons with Light Pulses. Solid State Commun. 
102, 207–220 (1997). 

36. 
McWhan, D. B., Shapiro, S. M., Remeika, J. P. & Shirane, G. Neutron-scattering studies 
on beta-alumina. J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 8, L487 (1975). 

37. 
Lucazeau, G. Infrared, Raman and neutron scattering studies of β- and β″-alumina: a 
static and dynamical structure analysis. Solid State Ionics 8, 1–25 (1983). 

38. 
Sajadi, M., Wolf, M. & Kampfrath, T. Transient birefringence of liquids induced by 
terahertz electric-field torque on permanent molecular dipoles. Nat. Commun. 8, 1–8 
(2017). 

39. 
Allodi, M. A., Finneran, I. A. & Blake, G. A. Nonlinear terahertz coherent excitation of 
vibrational modes of liquids. J. Chem. Phys. 143, (2015). 

40. 
Zhu, H. et al. Screening in crystalline liquids protects energetic carriers in hybrid 
perovskites. Science (80-. ). 353, 1409–1413 (2016). 


41. 
Minami, Y. et al. Macroscopic Ionic Flow in a Superionic Conductor Na+ β-Alumina 
Driven by Single-Cycle Terahertz Pulses. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 147401 (2020). 

42. 
Neugebauer, M. J. et al.  Comparison of coherent phonon generation by electronic and 
ionic Raman scattering in   LaAlO 3   . Phys. Rev. Res. 3, 13126 (2021). 

43. 
Först, M. et al. Nonlinear phononics as an ultrafast route to lattice control. Nat. Phys. 
7, 854–856 (2011). 

44. 
Fleischer, S., Zhou, Y., Field, R. W. & Nelson, K. A. Molecular orientation and alignment 
by intense single-cycle THz pulses. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 1–5 (2011). 

45. 
Sajadi, M., Wolf, M. & Kampfrath, T. Terahertz-field-induced optical birefringence in 
common window and substrate materials. Opt. Express 23, 28985 (2015). 

46. 
Maehrlein, S. F. et al. Decoding ultrafast polarization responses in lead halide 
perovskites by the two-dimensional optical Kerr effect. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118, 
e2022268118 (2021). 

47. 
Mishra, P. K., Vendrell, O. & Santra, R. Ultrafast Energy Transfer from Solvent to 
Solute Induced by Subpicosecond Highly Intense THz Pulses. J. Phys. Chem. B 119, 
8080–8086 (2015). 

48. 
Mishra, P. K., Bettaque, V., Vendrell, O., Santra, R. & Welsch, R. Prospects of Using 
High-Intensity THz Pulses to Induce Ultrafast Temperature-Jumps in Liquid Water. J. 
Phys. Chem. A 122, 5211–5222 (2018). 

49. 
Whittingham, M. S. & Huggins, R. A. Electrochemical preparation and 
characterization of alkali metal tungsten bronzes, MxWO3. in Proceedings of the 5th 
materials research symposium sponsored by the Institute for Materials Research, 
National Bureau of Standards (eds. Roth, R. S. & Schneider S.J. Jr) 51–62 (1972). 

50. 
Hayes, W., Hopper, G. F. & Pratt, F. L. Ionic conductivity of potassium β" alumina in 
the very far infrared. J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 15, L675–L680 (1982). 

 


The Persistence of Memory in Ionic Conduction Probed by Nonlinear 

Optics: Supplementary Information 

 
Methods 
Supplementary Note 1: Terahertz Kerr Effect (TKE) 
Supplementary Note 2: TKE Control Measurements 
Supplementary Note 3: Optical Conductivity from Terahertz Transmission 
Supplementary Note 4: Terahertz Pumps in Molecular Dynamics 
Supplementary Note 5: Logical and Thermodynamic Reversibility 
Supplementary Note 6: Attempt Frequencies in Na β-alumina 
 
Figures S1-S11 
Supplementary References 1-81 

Methods 
 
Sample Preparation 
Single crystals of Na b-alumina were graciously shared with us by Prof. Osamu Kamishima. They 
were ion-exchanged to Ag and K in molten nitrates until no mass change was detectable, at least 
3 days. For Ag, the process had to be repeated. For K, mixed nitrate compositions were used first 
to avoid mechanical damage from the thermodynamically favorable ion exchange. The c lattice 
constants for the Na, Ag, and K b-alumina samples were 22.53, 22.49, and 22.73 Å, respectively. 
Polycrystalline K b”-alumina was purchased from Ionotec Ltd as a pellet. To produce thin samples 
(≈5-30 µm), single crystals and the polycrystalline material were hand-polished using a T-tool, 
and then dried. Double-side polished sapphire (0001) was purchased from MTI Corp.  
 
Terahertz Kerr Effect (TKE) 
The output of a Ti:sapphire oscillator (Coherent Micra) is amplified (Coherent Spitfire) to ≈4.2 mJ 
at 1 kHz, and pulse width optimized to maximize the peak terahertz field at the sample, ≈150 fs 
full width at half maximum. 99% of the output is used to generate terahertz pulses (≈6 µJ) via 
optical rectification in lithium niobate using the tilted pulse front method1,2. The terahertz pulse 
is focused on the sample using a pair of off-axis parabolic (OAP) mirrors. Peak field amplitudes at 
the sample position were ≈700 kV/cm in ambient atmosphere, and ≈600 kV/cm in purged 
(≤0.1% RH) atmosphere. 1% of the amplifier output is used for the probe pulse, polarized at 45 
degrees from the pump pulse, overlapped with the pump at the sample position, and passed 
through a quarter-wave plate and a Wollaston prism. The birefringence of the transmitted probe 
is measured with two photodiodes in a balanced detection scheme. The terahertz waveform at 
the sample position is measured with a free-standing uniaxially poled mixture of an electro-optic 
dye and amorphous polycarbonate polymer3,4, and the peak field strength measured by electro-
optic sampling in GaP(110). The time delay between pump and probe pulses is varied with a 
mechanical delay stage. For temperature control and measurements at elevated temperature, a 


transmission-mode heating stage (Linkam) was used without windows to eliminate their 
contributions to transient birefringence. The transient birefringence of ambient and purged air 
(Supplementary Note 2) was measured by aligning to a thin sample and removing the sample. 
The majority of experimental data is adapted from ADP’s doctoral dissertation5. 
 
Terahertz Transmission 
Thin (≤ 30 µm) samples are mounted on thin metallic pinholes of diameter 1 mm, fully covering 
the pinhole. The terahertz pulse transmitted through the sample is focused with a second pair of 
OAP mirrors and sampled with the free-standing film of an electro-optic dye and amorphous 
polycarbonate polymer3,4. A time delay sweep of an empty pinhole is measured following every 
time delay sweep measuring the sample. Optical conductivity was fit to the time-domain spectra 
assuming a slab geometry6,7 using a nonlinear fitting procedure initialized with  ñ=2+0.5j as the 
complex refractive index. This yielded stable fitting without the single-pass assumption. 
 
Optical Kerr Effect (OKE) 
The output of a Ti:sapphire oscillator (Coherent Micra) was amplified (Coherent RegA) at 100 kHz 
to ≈1 µJ and compressed to ≈50 fs FWHM (the width of the coherent artifact in OKE). The pump 
and probe pulses were overlapped on the sample so that probe E ^ c for single crystals, and pump 
≈15 degrees off. The transmitted probe was detected using a pair of Si photodetectors in a 
balanced detection scheme. Frequencies of oscillatory components in the OKE signals were fit 
using linear prediction fitting8 optimizing for least-squares error over the start and end points, 
which serve as hyperparameters. 
 
Steady-State Molecular Dynamics (MD) 
Steady-state classical MD simulations were carried out using LAMMPS9 using Buckingham 
pairwise potentials with Coulombic interactions as described previously10. The vibrational density 
of states was calculated from the velocity autocorrelation functions for the mobile ions, and the 
optical conductivity from the velocity autocorrelation function for the center of mass of the 
mobile ions11.  
 
Molecular Dynamics with Terahertz Pumping 
An impulsive electrical field was included in the molecular dynamics simulations to mimic the 
experimental terahertz pulse12–15. Peak field E = 300 kV/cm polarized parallel to the conduction 
plane was used to account for ≈50% front-surface reflection. Charge-compensating defects were 
placed in the scaled-up simulations using the same procedure as described previously10. To 
sample hopping events, 800 randomized iterations per temperature point, with 4896 mobile ions 
each, were used for b-aluminas. For K b”-alumina, the simulations contained 5940 mobile ions 
each. Each iteration started with an anneal to 1000 K to randomize starting positions of the 
mobile ions, and a short equilibration at the simulation temperature in the NVT ensemble. The 
electric field was applied in the NVE ensemble, and the simulations propagated for 15 ps, enough 
for mobile ions and the host lattice to come to the same temperature. For K b”-alumina, 
polycrystal orientations to match the experimentally available sample were averaged by 
changing the polarization of the simulated field over 12 angles in increments of 30 degrees. No 


significant dependence on the pump polarization within the conduction plane was observed in 
simulations of b-aluminas. The hopping statistics were extracted from all simulations and 
analyzed as described previously10. The direction of each hopping event was taken as the vector 
connecting the start and end crystallographic sites of the hop. The anisotropy of hopping was 
calculated by weighing the hopping directions by (cos q)2 - á(cos q)2ñ, with q the angle between 
the simulated pump field and the hop direction, and á(cos q)2ñ = 0.5 in two dimensions.  

Supplementary Note 1: Terahertz Kerr Effect 
 
The 2D terahertz Kerr effect measurement is a c(3) measurement that relies on the third-order 
response function16,17: 

𝑅!"#$

(&) (𝑡((, 𝑡′) = (𝑖

ℏ+

)

𝑡𝑟-𝛼!"(𝑡′′ + 𝑡′)0𝜇#(𝑡()[𝜇$(0), 𝜌]67 

Here, the transition dipole moment operator µ and polarizability operator a act on the 
equilibrium density matrix r describing the thermal population of vibrational states. The pump 
pulses arrive at times 0 and t’. The 800nm probe pulse at t’’+t’ is assumed to be short. Because 
we use one pump pulse, our experiment represents a line cut through the (t’, t’’) space 
corresponding to t’=0. The third-order polarization in the sample is given by the integral over 
pathways: 

𝑃!(𝑡) = 9 9 𝑑𝑡(𝑑𝑡((𝐸*+,-.,"(𝑡)𝐸012,#(𝑡 − 𝑡′′)𝐸012,$(𝑡 − 𝑡( − 𝑡′′) 

This formalism includes all possible excitation pathways via either bound vibrational states, 
virtual states (Raman), or “thermal bath” states16,17. The generated field is the time derivative of 
the overall ionic and electronic polarization18–20:  

𝐸*+,-.(𝑧, 𝑡) − 𝐸(𝑧, 𝑡) ∝ 𝜕

𝜕𝑡 @𝑃(𝑧, 𝑡 + 𝑡′′)𝐸*+,-.(𝑧, 𝑡)A 

Models of coherently excited vibrational responses utilize an oscillatory form of the generated 
polarization corresponding to a bound vibrational state, including possible anharmonic potential 
energy surfaces20,21, anharmonic couplings to other vibrations16,22, or couplings to a thermal 
bath15,23. For such an oscillating polarization, the detected change in the probe field at any time 
is proportional to the velocity of the oscillator. However, this formalism does not impose a 
coherence requirement or a functional form on the trajectory of the charged species interacting 
with the pump and probe fields. In principle, this treatment should be valid for Debye relaxation15 
or an ensemble of coupled double-well oscillators coupled to a thermal bath and stochastically 
switching their positions. Here, the ionic polarization P arises from coherent displacements of 
vibrational modes or bound dipoles Qi, plus an additional incoherent component representing 
hopping rates H. The detected third-order signal is proportional to the transient anisotropy of 
the hopping rate, measured as a function of the pump-probe time delay. The pump-probe time 
delay is t’’ in the above formalism. The different regimes of sample responses are discussed in 
the main text and Figure 1 for short time delays t’’=t1, when hopping is correlated, and longer 
time delays t’’=t2, when hopping reaches the random walk limit.  
 


The probe signal is summed across the thickness L of the sample. For mismatched group velocities 
between the pump and probe pulses, and for t’’< L/Dvg, where Dvg is the mismatch of the group 
velocities of the pump and probe pulses20,24–26, the probe overtakes the pump within the sample, 
and samples the instantaneous electronic polarization in addition to the ionic responses. For a 
terahertz pump and 800 nm probe in a sample mostly composed of alumina, refractive indices 
are taken as nprobe≈1.76, and npump≈3.0824,27, i.e. the probe propagates faster than the pump 
inside the sample. Ignoring the absorption of the pump pulse, and for the probe pulse assumed 
short, the strength of this instantaneous electronic-origin signal is proportional to the thickness 
of the sample convoluted with the square of the pump field and the nonlinear refractive index of 
the sample24. In fitting the TKE signals of b-aluminas and K b”-alumina, this component is referred 
to as the “instantaneous component”.  
 
Supplementary Note 2: TKE Control Measurements 
 

 

Figure S1 | Terahertz Kerr effect (TKE) in control samples. (a) TKE signal of ambient air (blue), 
and linear prediction fitting of oscillatory components (orange). (b) TKE signals of ambient air at 
300 K (blue), purged air at 300 K (ochre), and ambient and purged air at 620 K (green and pink, 
respectively). The cited temperature is the temperature of the heating stage, with the pump and 
probe pulses passing through an opening in it. (c) TKE of 0.5 mm thick sapphire at 300 K (blue) 
and 620 K (pink). (d) TKE of 0.1 mm thick sapphire at 300 K (blue) and 620 K (pink). In (b-d), the 
shaded regions represent ±1 s.e. of the mean.  

a
b

c
d


 
Figure S1 shows TKE measurements of ambient air and sapphire samples. The TKE of ambient air 
shows a signal with components matching the absorption lines of water vapor at ≈0.76 THz and 
≈1.1 THz28. This signal decreases by ≈half when the absolute temperature is ≈doubled 
(Figure S1b), and disappears entirely when the volume of pump-probe spatial overlap is purged 
with dry nitrogen, independent of temperature (Figure S1b). We therefore assign this signal to 
the rotational coherences of gas-phase atmospheric water. The strength of the rotational 
coherence of atmospheric nitrogen at ≈8.4 ps (Figures 2a and 3a, main text) also decreases by 
approximately half, relative to the remainder of the signal, which remains approximately 
constant in magnitude, upon heating from 300 K to 620 K. This is consistent with previous 
measurements of rotational coherences in gas-phase molecules29.  
  

 

Figure S2 | TKE signal from 0.5-mm sapphire (0001) at 300 K. The TKE signal (blue) is fit to the 
sum of an instantaneous component (orange) and a long-time component that appears 
simultaneously. The residual is plotted in red. The rotational coherence of atmospheric nitrogen 
is at ≈11.4 ps with the peak pump field at ≈3 ps.  
 
The TKE signals from sapphire samples (Figure S1cd) measured in purged atmosphere are 
temperature-independent. The sapphire signal is modeled (Figure S2) as a combination of an 
instantaneous component (Supplementary Note 1 and Ref. 24) and a long-time component that 
is absent in the 0.1-mm sample (Figure S1d). Since the long-time components (“tails”) in the TKE 
signals of β-aluminas are, unlike for sapphire, thickness-independent, but ion- and temperature-
dependent, their origin must be distinct from that of the long-time sapphire signal. A more exact 
model of the sapphire signals remains possible, but the simpler one suffices here to distinguish 
it from the responses of β-aluminas.  
 


 

Figure S3 | Pump field dependence of TKE signals. Time-domain TKE signals as functions of wire-
grid polarizers (WGP) angle for 0.5-mm sapphire (a), ≈0.4-mm Ag β-alumina (c), and ≈0.4-mm Na 
β-alumina (e). The pump field is maximum at the zero degrees position of the WGP, and the pump 
is fully blocked at 90 degrees. The peak-to-peak signals for sapphire (b), Ag β-alumina (d), and Na 
β-alumina (f) with fits (orange) to a noise level (dotted) and the intensity of the THz pump field.  
 
All TKE signals scale with the peak intensity of the THz pump field (Figure S3). Whenever they 
are measurable, the kinetics of the relaxation are independent of the pump field strength. 

a
b

c

e

d

f


 

 

Figure S4 | Stability of the TKE signal in Na β-alumina. TKE in a thin sample of Na β-alumina, 
measured four times (#1 through #4 chronologically) over ≈4 days with other measurements in 
between. There was a pause between the third and fourth measurements. Here, the peak pump 
field is applied at 1.5 ps.  
 
The TKE signals in β-aluminas show deviations at short time delays upon prolonged (several days) 
measurements (Figure S4), which can be reversed by stopping measurements. The 
measurements presented in the main text are taken when such effects are minimized, e.g., on 
fresh samples. The changes over the course of each measurement, up to ≈12 hours, are small, 
and the long-time-delay components of the signals are unaffected. 
 
Supplementary Note 3: Optical Conductivity from Terahertz Transmission 
 

 

Figure S5 | Optical conductivity of β-aluminas in the far infrared. Real part of the optical 
conductivity s, calculated from terahertz transmission through single-crystalline Ag (a, dark red), 
K (b, purple), and Na (c, orange) β-aluminas. The thicknesses of samples used are noted in the 
legends. The relative uncertainties in the absolute values due to the choice of starting fit guess 
are ≤50%. For each, the transmission measurements were performed at ≥500 kV/cm (denoted as 
100% E field, solid lines) and a quarter of that (denoted as 25% E field, dashed lines). In all cases, 
the polarization of the pump field was parallel to the conduction planes of the crystals. Below 
≈0.7 THz, and above ≈2.8 THz, the transmission was weak and conductivity calculations noisy. 
 

b
c
a


The complex refractive index ñ(w) was fit to the transmission at each frequency6,7,30. For a free-
standing slab of thickness L, the transmission T(w) relative to a pinhole reference is given as: 

𝑇(𝜔) =
4𝑛F(𝜔)

(𝑛F(𝜔) + 1)) expK𝑖𝑘𝐿(𝑛F(𝜔) − 1)N 

Here, k is the wavenumber equal to w/c. This nonlinear equation was solved for ñ(w) at each 
frequency provided an initial guess ñ0(w); the values shown in Figure S5 use ñ0 = 2+0.5i. The 
relative uncertainty due to choices of ñ0 is ≤50%, but the solver is robust to small uncertainties 
in other inputs, such as possible variation or e.g. 20% error in the sample thickness. This method 
also avoids the simplifying single-pass assumption, which may not apply at all frequencies due to 
strong variation in absorption across the pump spectrum. 
  
The optical conductivities of β-aluminas show features and absolute magnitudes consistent with 
literature spectra of melt-grown crystals31: ≈0.8 THz in Ag β-alumina, 2.1 THz in Na β-alumina, 
and several modes between 1.5, 2.0, and 2.7 THz in K β-alumina. More importantly, for all 
conditions and all samples the calculated refractive index and conductivity are independent of 
the terahertz field for the same initial ñ0 used to solve the nonlinear equation. Unlike in recent 
work32, no field-strength-dependent shifting or bleaching of any features are observed over 
multiple measurements of each sample.  
 
Supplementary Note 4: Terahertz Pumps in Molecular Dynamics 
 
The selective excitation of mobile-ion motions in β-aluminas is verified with simulations including 
the pump field. During the simulated terahertz pump pulse, the temperature of the mobile ions, 
computed by LAMMPS using the kinetic energy of the ions, rises rapidly (Figure S6ac). After the 
pulse is turned off, the temperature of the mobile ions begins to decrease, and the temperature 
of the host lattice species increases. For all materials, the terahertz pulses selectively deposit 
energy into the mobile ions, which then thermalize with the lattice on a picosecond timescale. 
The timescale of this thermalization is longer than that of the relaxation of anisotropy in hopping, 
highlighting the selectivity of the nonlinear optical measurement to the directional alignment of 
ionic hopping.  
 
The excitation of vibrational modes by the pump pulse, in addition to hopping, is verified by 
tracking the displacements of the center of mass of the mobile ions, projected onto the direction 
of the field, and referenced to the host-lattice displacement33. Simplifying the ensembles of 
mobile ions and the host lattice to two point charges, the emitted field from coherent oscillations 
excited by the pump should be proportional to the velocity of the relative center-of-mass 
motions. This yields several material-specific vibrations(Figure S7) with frequencies typically 
within 10-20% of known literature infrared- and Raman-active vibrations31,34–40. For example, 
simulated vibrations are 0.6 and 1.0 THz in Ag β-alumina, and 1.7 THz in Na β-alumina. For 
simulated K β-alumina, the vibration at ≈1.3 THz is only excited at 300 K, while the vibration at 
≈2.0 THz is excited at both 300 K and 600 K, in agreement with the TKE experiment (main text 
Figure 2b). For a classical simulation that does not account for partial covalency, this is excellent 
agreement. The simulated coherent displacements of the mobile-ion center of mass are between 


5-15 picometers during the application of the pulse, in line with terahertz-frequency pump-probe 
studies in solid-state materials20,21,41.  
 

 

Figure S6 | Heating of β”- and β-aluminas by simulated terahertz pulses. (a,b) Simulated 
temperature rise in K β”-alumina: mobile ions (a) and the host lattice (b) with electric field pulses 
at 0.7 THz (teal) and 2.5 THz (orange). (c,d) Simulated temperature rise in Na β-alumina: mobile 
ions (c) and the host lattice (d) with electric field pulses at 0.7 THz (teal) and 2.5 THz (orange). 
The shaded areas are ±1 s.e. of the mean. 
 

 

Figure S7 | Simulated excitation of coherent motions of mobile ions by terahertz pumps. 
Velocities of the center-of-mass of all mobile ions (a,c,e,g), and their Fourier transforms (b,d,f,h). 
Dashed black lines in the Fourier transform figures are spectra of the applied pump pulses. 
Highlighted vibrations: 0.6 and 1.0 THz in Ag β-alumina (a,b), 1.3 and 2.0 THz in K β-alumina (c,d), 
1.7 THz in Na β-alumina (e,f), and 3.0 THz in K β”-alumina (g,h). 
 
The in silico TKE of β-aluminas is dis-aggregated by the chemical environment of the mobile ions: 
(a) ions bound in a defect cluster, and (b) ions that are free to diffuse. The cluster consists of four 
mobile ions on six crystallographic lattice sites around an oxygen interstitial10,42,43. These ions 

a
b

c
d

c
d
a
b

g
h
e
f


shift between the sites within the cluster. The hopping components of in silico TKE of Na β-
alumina (Figure S8) are similar at short time delays (Figure S8bc) – but only the un-bound ions 
yield anisotropic hopping past 1 ps (Figure S8b). This response is also weakly thermally activated. 

 

Figure S8 | Temperature dependence of the simulated hopping anisotropy in Na β-alumina. 
(ab) all mobile ions, (cd) mobile ions away from defects, i.e. “free”, and (ef) mobile ions within 
defect clusters. The shaded areas are ±1 s.e. of the mean. 
 
The temperature-independence of the hopping anisotropy response due to cluster-bound ions 
complicates the interpretation of experimental TKE measurements of Na and Ag β-aluminas 
(Figure 1cd). Additionally, the relaxation time constants are faster than in K β-alumina (Extended 
Data Figures 3-5). By analogy with high-frequency NMR relaxation44,45, the temperature 
activation of the back-hopping in Na and Ag β-aluminas is expected to be weaker than in K β-
alumina. We focus on the K β-alumina signals because they possess stronger activation, more 
distinguishable time constants, and simpler interpretation due to the lack of a simulated 
response from the defect clusters in that material. At the same time, the agreement between the 
classical molecular dynamics simulation of K β-alumina and the low-frequency conductivity is the 
worst of all β-aluminas10. We believe this is due to the inability of the simulation to accurately 
describe the two-coordinate K environment at the anti-Beevers-Ross sites, which leads to an 
overestimation of activation energy and overall lower conductivity. This is consistent with the 

all ions

ions at defects

free ions

a
b

c
d

e
f


pumped molecular dynamics simulations also under-estimating the lifetimes of ions in high-
energy sites, and predicting a faster than experimental relaxation (Figure 3). However, the 
qualitative experiment-simulation agreement spans the existence, temperature-, frequency- and 
material-dependences. A more quantitative correspondence between simulation and 
experiment will require ab initio methods.  
 
Supplementary Note 5: Logical and Thermodynamic Reversibility 
 

 

Figure S9 | Dissipation of Pump Energy to Drive Transport. a, Ions are driven from site B to a 
different site A, and return without coupling to transport. b, Ions are driven as in a, and some 
hop on to an equivalent site B’, partially completing a step of transport. c, Ions are driven from 
site B to an equivalent site A, completing a step of random-walk transport; subsequent hops to B 
or B’ are random. 
 
Here, we draw a brief analogy to concepts and experiments in stochastic thermodynamics. The 
parallels between memory, correlations, and the thermodynamics of information have been 
formulated in multiple frameworks, and we direct the reader to several reviews46–49. In Figure S9, 
we highlight three scenarios for the dissipation of terahertz pump energy that drives ionic 
hopping with varying degree of coupling to transport. 
 
In the first case, the pump drives hopping between two lattice sites (illustrated as B ® A, 
Figure S9a). However, the subsequent hopping only returns the ions to their original sites via 
reverse hops. In this case, no diffusion happens. The macroscopic experiment constitutes an 
ensemble average over many realizations of driving a particle within a double-well potential 
coupled to a thermal bath. The pump performs work on the system to drive this process in finite 
time and surmount kinetic barriers and possibly the thermodynamic energy difference between 
the sites. In the second step, the system completes the reverse process: the energy imparted by 
the pump is thermalized to the bath. The sequence B ® A ® B comprises a thermodynamic cycle 
between two states. However, the ensemble measurement of the bulk sample is not equivalent 
to an average over individual ionic paths that is necessary to apply Crooks’ theorem50–52 or the 
Jarzynski equality52–54. While our experiment probes the rates of hopping following the pump, 

B

A

pump

t0 = 0

probe

t1 > 0

Generalized Coordinate

Signal = 

+

–

Signal = 

+

–

≅ 0

Incomplete Diffusion
Complete Diffusion

B

A

B’

diffusion

probe

t1 > 0

pump

t0 = 0

B’

B

A

diffusion

probe

t1 > 0

pump

t0 = 0

No Transport

a
b
c


and not the work done by the system, the broad and non-resonant nature of this distribution is 
consistent with a distribution of work values.  
 
In the second case (Figure S9b), the system relaxes via two competing pathways, A ® B as above, 
and A ® B’ to a site B’ that is crystallographically equivalent to B but in a neighboring unit cell of 
the crystal. This introduces coupling between sites as potential-energy wells, and allows for the 
pump to ultimately drive net displacement and diffusion. Since B and B’ are constructed as 
crystallographically equivalent, the path B ® A ® B’ constitutes diffusion (Figure S9b), 
analogous to the turn of a ratchet. To measure work, sites B and B’ must be distinguished, such 
by imposing ion-permeable electrical contacts.  
 
Assuming ideal contacts, the paths B ® A ® B and B ® A ® B’ differ in the net current 
extractable from the pump pulse: only the latter yields a net displacement of ions and therefore 
current. While both pathways thermalize the pump pulse when averaged over the sample 
(thermodynamic irreversibility), the degree of freedom that characterizes net work (B vs B’) is 
modified only for a fraction of the ions, with the success rate of the pathway B ® A ® B’. This 
parallels the incomplete erasure of a memory bit if the work input is too low55–57 and suggests 
that higher pump fields may drive B ® A ® B’ directly. The B ® A ® B’ pathway mediates logical 
irreversibility: following the experiment, an ion that started at B’ and did not move is 
indistinguishable from one that started at B and underwent a net displacement. By contrast, ions 
driven to site A by the pump are, for a time, distinguishable from the other ions at A: they are 
more likely to hop in a particular direction (namely, back to B) rather than randomly. In other 
words, for an ion at A, position alone is insufficient to determine subsequent dynamics. This 
insufficiency establishes a correlated hopping mechanism and distinguishes transport in this case 
from a random walk. The correlation between subsequent hopping and the pump-driven B ® A 
hop is information that dissipates over time.  
 
The TKE experiment measures velocities, not positions, and alone does not quantify the numbers 
of ions that follow the two paths, only their difference. In absence of ion-permeable contacts, 
and with the diameter of the pump pulse (≈0.5 mm) larger than that of the probe (<0.1 mm), the 
long-range restoring force that eventually reverses B’ to B is slow and not measurable with TKE. 
Therefore TKE does not directly quantify the success rate for information erasure. We rely on 
molecular dynamics simulations and on the β’’-alumina experiment (Figure 4) to distinguish the 
β-alumina experiments, represented by the case of Figure S9b, from the fully reversible 
Figure S9a. This is done by verifying that some pump-driven hops indeed contribute to the 
B ® A ® B’ pathway.  
 
The third case (Figure S9c) holds if lattice sites are equivalent, and ordering is absent. Then one 
hop, e.g., B ® A in Figure S9c, can constitute the complete diffusion process, if velocity or mean-
square-displacement correlations do not carry additional information and decay on the timescale 
of the pump pulse. This is the case for in K β’’-alumina at 600 K, which can be represented by a 
random walk. In this case, the probabilities of the pathways B ® A ® B and B ® A ® B’ (in 
Figure S9c) are the same following the pump pulse as without it, the pump-driven hops are 


sufficient for diffusion, and no long-time TKE signal is possible. Unlike in Figure S9b, here the ions 
undergoing pump-driven hops B ® A are already indistinguishable from those that started at A. 
In this case, pump-driven hops constitute DC-limit current if perfect contacts were available to 
measure it. 
 
As the β- and β’’-aluminas have been the classical model systems of solid-state ionics, a variety 
of high-frequency measurements of electrical58–60, optical61–65, scattering40,66,67, and spin44,45,68–

70 responses have been carried out. These have been partially systematized by Kamishima63: the 
activation energy increases with decreasing frequency. Our simulations10 and experiments (this 
work) highlight a corresponding timescale-dependence of the correlations in ionic hopping: the 
complete process of conduction  is measured only at timescales slower than the persistence of 
such correlations. Our measurements here suggest that this effect is not due to distributions of 
frozen potential-energy barriers in a dilute-carrier system, but to the intrinsically fluctuating 
stochastic dynamics of ion motions in a non-dilute, interacting one.  
 
Supplementary Note 6: Attempt Frequencies in Na β-alumina 
 
Here, we seek to understand the fundamental initiation of ion transport, the attempt frequency 
ν0 for ionic hopping. In the random-walk framework (full entropy produced with every hop), ν0 is 
not an atomistic vibration, but an effective quantity with dimensions of frequency relating to the 
vibrational states at the saddle point of a generalized potential energy surface71–73, which 
together with the difficulty of measurement has led to the use of averages over the density of 
states for its proxies74–77. However, even for a material with a simple power spectrum, the 
vibrational modes Qi may couple to hopping rates H unequally (main text and Figure 4c). The 
response of β-aluminas to electrical fields driving hops is more complex than that of K β”-alumina 
(Figure 4c) due to the presence of defect clusters and non-equivalent crystallographic sites 
(Figure 1a). We first analyze steady-state simulations, followed by in silico TKE molecular 
dynamics second. We focus on the hops into the high-energy anti-Beevers-Ross (aBR) sites from 
the low-energy Beevers-Ross (BR) sites. As chemical doping furthermore creates distinct chemical 
environments for the mobile ions, here we simulate the compositional Na1+2xAl11O17+x series for 
Na2O doping x=0,0.01,0.1, where the practical material corresponds to x≈0.1. 
 
For a molecular dynamics simulation, we partition the trajectories of mobile ions (typically, 
100 ns for steady-state simulations) into hopping events, defined as the time point when an ion 
migrates between crystallographic lattice sites, and the residence times between them. A 
residence time is defined as the period of time that an ion spends at a lattice site following a hop 
into that site10. Here, we quantify the distributions of hopping residence times in the short-time, 
picosecond regime. If an ion is found to preferentially commit a hop for some (short) residence 
times corresponding to a multiple of some well-defined period, then such a period is empirically 
the inverse of the attempt frequency for hopping. Similarly, for any crystallographic site within 
the material, the times that elapse between an ion leaving it, and a new ion entering the site, 
“filling times” for short, can be analyzed with this statistical method.  
 


 

Figure S10 | Attempt frequencies for Na β-alumina from MD simulations. (a) Distributions of 
times that anti-Beevers-Ross sites spend empty following a Na ion hopping away, simulated at 
600 K for x=0,0.01,0.1 in stoichiometries Na1+2xAl11O17+x (blue, orange, and green, respectively). 
(b) Fourier transforms of the distributions in (a), smoothed with a Gaussian filter of 0.1 THz st. 
dev. Arrows highlight peaks at 2.3 THz and 1.3 THz corresponding to the short-time structure of 
the distributions in (a). (c) Na vibrational density of states and (d) real part of the optical 
conductivity for the three simulated stoichiometries of Na β-alumina, with arrows highlighting 
the same frequencies as in (b). (e) Model of the three internal states for mobile ions in Na β-
alumina: solo as in the defect-free (x=0) material, part of an mobile-ion pair, and part of a defect 
cluster. The first two states possess distinct attempt frequencies for hopping, 2.3 THz and 
1.3 THz, respectively, whereas the defect cluster is non-diffusing.  
 
For the defect-free material, x=0, distributions of “filling times” for high-energy aBR sites 
(Figure S10a, blue) show preferential hops into the sites at periods of time corresponding to 
2.3 THz (Figure S10b, blue), which is a minuscule yet distinct part of the Na vibrational density of 
states (Figure S10c, blue) and the main feature of the infrared conductivity (Figure S10d, blue). 
We conclude that 2.3 THz is the attempt frequency for BR ® aBR hopping in absence of 
neighboring Na ions already in aBR sites. This matches the experimentally measured infrared-
active vibration at 2.0-2.1 THz (Supplementary Note 3). Adding even a single defect cluster per 
100 formula units (x=0.01) increases the rates of hopping and already changes the frequency 
makeup of the hopping attempts towards lower frequencies (Figure S10b, orange). The 
additional Na ion locates on the high-energy sites, and necessarily perturbs the energetics of its 
neighbors, resulting in interstitialcy diffusion78 that originates with perturbed, softer attempt 
frequencies due to the repulsion between mobile ions. For the practical simulated stoichiometry, 
x=0.1, the distribution of site filling times shows a longer period at short times (Figure S10a, 
green), which corresponds to the practical attempt frequency of 1.3 THz. This vibration is the 
attempt frequency for interstitialcy knock-on hopping in the practical Na β-alumina, with the 

solo ion state
!0,s = 2.3 THz

defect cluster

ion pair state
!0,p = 1.3 THz

slow 

(ps-ns)

fast

a
b

c
d

e


simulated frequency corresponding to one measurable with inelastic neutron scattering at 1.2 
THz66. The simulated vibrations at 1.3 and 2.3 THz (1.2 THz and 2.1 THz experimentally), are 
attempt frequencies for hopping from two distinct states (Figure S10e) via two mechanisms: 
interstitialcy ion-pair and solo, respectively. While both are present in the real material, most 
transport occurs via the interstitialcy pathway. 
 
Both vibrations are distinct from the LO phonon mode at 3.0 THz detectable by TKE (Figure 2), 
OKE (Extended Data Figure 6), and neutron scattering66. The LO phonon was previously thought 
to correlate to hopping and activation energy79–81. The 1.3 THz attempt frequency corresponds 
to the interstitialcy nearest-neighbor mobile-ion pair, i.e., a defect created by chemical doping, 
whereas the 2.3 THz frequency is the attempt frequency for BR ® aBR hopping in absence of 
nearby Na ions already in aBR sites (Figure S10e). This softening of the attempt frequency with 
doping demonstrates the role of repulsions between mobile ions in driving ionic conductivity. 
Indeed, chemical doping alters not only the concentrations of the active species, but also the very 
energetics of each hop. Finally, the practical attempt frequency of 1.3 THz comprises only a minor 
part of both the Na vibrational density of states (Figure S10c) and simulated Na optical 
conductivity (Figure S10d). By contrast, the optical phonon at 3.0 THz does not contribute to 
hopping, the same way that higher-frequency modes in K β”-alumina also do not contribute (main 
text, Figure 4c). Overall, our statistical analysis enables a detailed examination of the vibrational 
contributions to hopping beyond average descriptors such as the mobile-ion phonon band 
center76,77. 
 


 

Figure S11 | Simulated anisotropy of hopping in Na β-alumina at 300 K. Time traces with the 
peak applied fields at zero time (ace), and Fourier transforms of the hopping anisotropy (bdf). 
Two pump pulses are compared: 0.7 THz (teal) repeated from Figure S8, and 2.5 THz (orange). 
The full response (ab) is dis-aggregated to the response of unbound ions (cd) and ions bound 
within defect clusters (ef). The shaded areas are ±1 s.e. of the mean.  
 
We now simulate an in silico TKE experiment for Na β-alumina, at the practical stoichiometry 
x=0.1 and 300 K. Given two distinct mechanisms of hopping (Figure S10e) with two attempt 
frequencies, each could yield hopping when pumped. As for K β”-alumina (main text Figure 4c), 
pump field frequencies of 0.7 THz and 2.5 THz are simulated at peak fields 300 kV/cm inside the 
material. The simulated 2.5-THz pulse raises the temperature of the system by ≈4.5 K, 10x more 
than the 0.7 THz pulse at ≈0.45K (Figure S6cd). The hopping anisotropy in response to the 
simulated pumps (Figure S11) depends strongly both on the pumping frequency and on the 
location of the mobile ion (cluster-bound vs free). The response of free ions to the simulated 2.5-
THz pulse is distinct from zero, but relatively weak given the strong absorption via the 2.3 THz 
mode. This is consistent with the solo hopping mechanism with the 2.3-THz attempt frequency 
providing only a minor contribution in the practical material. Finally, the overall hopping 
anisotropy response is strongly convoluted by defect clusters (Figure S11c). Overall, our 
simulation shows that TKE results should be interpreted with care for materials with multiple 

all ions

ions at defects

free ions

a
b

c
d

e
f


possible hopping mechanisms and internal states. Knowledge of the local environments of 
mobile ions is required to rigorously characterize the possible attempt frequencies in ionic 
conductors. We focus on the K β”-alumina in the main text for simplicity. 
 
Supplementary References 
1. 
Hebling, J., Yeh, K.-L., Hoffmann, M. C. & Nelson, K. A. High-power THz generation, THz 
nonlinear optics, and THz nonlinear spectroscopy. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 14, 
345–353 (2008). 

2. 
Hoffmann, M. C. Nonlinear Terahertz Spectroscopy. in Terahertz Spectroscopy and 
Imaging vol. 171 355–388 (Springer-Verlag, 2012). 

3. 
Zheng, X., Sinyukov, A. & Hayden, L. M. Broadband and gap-free response of a terahertz 
system based on a poled polymer emitter-sensor pair. Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 87–89 (2005). 

4. 
McLaughlin, C. V., Zheng, X. & Hayden, L. M. Comparison of parallel-plate and in-plane 
poled polymer films for terahertz sensing. Appl. Opt. 46, 6283–6290 (2007). 

5. 
Poletayev, A. D. Ion Conduction By The Picosecond: Optical Probes and Correlations. 
(Stanford University, 2020). 

6. 
Neu, J. & Schmuttenmaer, C. A. Tutorial: An introduction to terahertz time domain 
spectroscopy (THz-TDS). J. Appl. Phys. 124, (2018). 

7. 
Morimoto, T. et al. Microscopic ion migration in solid electrolytes revealed by 
terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. Nat. Commun. 10, (2019). 

8. 
Barkhuijsen, H., de Beer, R., Bovée, W. M. M. J. & van Ormondt, D. Retrieval of 
frequencies, amplitudes, damping factors, and phases from time-domain signals using a 
linear least-squares procedure. J. Magn. Reson. 61, 465–481 (1985). 

9. 
Plimpton, S. Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics. J. Comput. 
Phys. 117, 1–19 (1995). 

10. 
Poletayev, A. D., Dawson, J. A., Islam, M. S. & Lindenberg, A. M. Defect-Driven 
Anomalous Transport in Fast-Ion Conducting Solid Electrolytes. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.08761 (2021). 

11. 
Edvardsson, S., Ojamae, L. & Thomas, J. O. A study of vibrational modes in Na+ beta -
alumina by molecular dynamics simulation. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 6, 1319–1332 
(1994). 

12. 
Mishra, P. K., Vendrell, O. & Santra, R. Ultrafast Energy Transfer from Solvent to Solute 
Induced by Subpicosecond Highly Intense THz Pulses. J. Phys. Chem. B 119, 8080–8086 
(2015). 

13. 
Mishra, P. K., Bettaque, V., Vendrell, O., Santra, R. & Welsch, R. Prospects of Using High-
Intensity THz Pulses to Induce Ultrafast Temperature-Jumps in Liquid Water. J. Phys. 
Chem. A 122, 5211–5222 (2018). 

14. 
Zalden, P. et al. Molecular polarizability anisotropy of liquid water revealed by terahertz-
induced transient orientation. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–7 (2018). 

15. 
Elgabarty, H. et al. Energy transfer within the hydrogen bonding network of water 
following resonant terahertz excitation. Sci. Adv. 6, 1–15 (2020). 

16. 
Finneran, I. A. et al. 2D THz-THz-Raman Photon-Echo Spectroscopy of Molecular 
Vibrations in Liquid Bromoform. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 8, 4640–4644 (2017). 

17. 
Finneran, I. A. et al. Coherent two-dimensional terahertz-terahertz-Raman spectroscopy. 


Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113, 6857–6861 (2016). 

18. 
Savolainen, J., Ahmed, S. & Hamm, P. Two-dimensional Raman-terahertz spectroscopy of 
water. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 20402–20407 (2013). 

19. 
Ciardi, G., Berger, A., Hamm, P. & Shalit, A. Signatures of Intra- And Intermolecular 
Vibrational Coupling in Halogenated Liquids Revealed by Two-Dimensional Raman-
Terahertz Spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 10, 4463–4468 (2019). 

20. 
Von Hoegen, A., Mankowsky, R., Fechner, M., Först, M. & Cavalleri, A. Probing the 
interatomic potential of solids with strong-field nonlinear phononics. Nature 555, 79–82 
(2018). 

21. 
Kozina, M. et al. Terahertz-driven phonon upconversion in SrTiO3. Nat. Phys. 15, 387–
392 (2019). 

22. 
Kryvohuz, M. & Mukamel, S. Multidimensional measures of response and fluctuations in 
stochastic dynamical systems. Phys. Rev. A - At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 86, 1–12 (2012). 

23. 
Ikeda, T., Ito, H. & Tanimura, Y. Analysis of 2D THz-Raman spectroscopy using a non-
Markovian Brownian oscillator model with nonlinear system-bath interactions. J. Chem. 
Phys. 142, (2015). 

24. 
Sajadi, M., Wolf, M. & Kampfrath, T. Terahertz-field-induced optical birefringence in 
common window and substrate materials. Opt. Express 23, 28985 (2015). 

25. 
Maehrlein, S. F. et al. Decoding ultrafast polarization responses in lead halide perovskites 
by the two-dimensional optical Kerr effect. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118, e2022268118 
(2021). 

26. 
Huber, L., Maehrlein, S. F., Wang, F., Liu, Y. & Zhu, X. Y. The ultrafast Kerr effect in 
anisotropic and dispersive media. J. Chem. Phys. 154, (2021). 

27. 
Grischkowsky, D., Keiding, S. S., van Exter, M. & Fattinger, C. Far-infrared time-domain 
spectroscopy with terahertz beams of dielectrics and semiconductors. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 
7, 2006 (1990). 

28. 
van Exter, M., Fattinger, C. & Grischkowsky, D. Terahertz time-domain spectroscopy of 
water vapor. Opt. Lett. 14, 1128 (1989). 

29. 
Fleischer, S., Zhou, Y., Field, R. W. & Nelson, K. A. Molecular orientation and alignment by 
intense single-cycle THz pulses. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 1–5 (2011). 

30. 
Spies, J. A. et al. Terahertz Spectroscopy of Emerging Materials. J. Phys. Chem. C 124, 
22335–22346 (2020). 

31. 
Allen, S. J., Cooper, A. S., Derosa, F., Remeika, J. P. & Ulasi, S. K. Far-infrared absorption 
and ionic conductivity of Na, Ag, Rb, and K β-alumina. Phys. Rev. B 17, 4031–4042 (1978). 

32. 
Minami, Y. et al. Macroscopic Ionic Flow in a Superionic Conductor Na+ β-Alumina Driven 
by Single-Cycle Terahertz Pulses. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 147401 (2020). 

33. 
Marcolongo, A. & Marzari, N. Ionic correlations and failure of Nernst-Einstein relation in 
solid-state electrolytes. Phys. Rev. Mater. 1, 1–4 (2017). 

34. 
Colomban, P., Mercier, R. & Lucazeau, G. Vibrational study of and conduction mechanism 
in β alumina. II. Nonstoichiometric β alumina. J. Chem. Phys. 75, 1388–1399 (1981). 

35. 
Colomban, P. & Lucazeau, G. βʺ-and ion-rich β-alumina: Comparison of vibrational 
spectra and conductivity parameters. Solid State Ionics 2, 277–288 (1981). 

36. 
Hao, C. H., Chase, L. L. & Mahan, G. D. Raman scattering in beta-alumina. Phys. Rev. B 13, 
4306–4313 (1976). 


37. 
Chase, L. L., Hao, C. H. & Mahan, G. D. Raman scattering from sodium and silver in β-
alumina. Solid State Commun. 18, 401–403 (1976). 

38. 
Klein, P. B., Schafer, D. E. & Strom, U. Cation interstitial pair modes in the vibrational 
spectra of mixed β-aluminas. Phys. Rev. B 18, 4411–4421 (1978). 

39. 
Barker, A. S., Ditzenberger, J. A. & Remeika, J. P. Lattice vibrations and ion transport 
spectra in β-alumina. I. Infrared spectra. Phys. Rev. B 14, 386–394 (1976). 

40. 
Lucazeau, G. Infrared, Raman and neutron scattering studies of β- and βʺ-alumina: a 
static and dynamical structure analysis. Solid State Ionics 8, 1–25 (1983). 

41. 
Neugebauer, M. J. et al.  Comparison of coherent phonon generation by electronic and 
ionic Raman scattering in   LaAlO 3   . Phys. Rev. Res. 3, 13126 (2021). 

42. 
Wolf, D. On the mechanism of diffusion in sodium beta alumina. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 40, 
757–773 (1979). 

43. 
Zendejas, M. A. & Thomas, J. O. Conduction mechanisms in solid electrolytes: Na+ beta-
alumina. Phys. Scr. 1990, 235–244 (1990). 

44. 
Walstedt, R. E., Dupree, R., Remeika, J. P. & Rodriguez, A. Na23 nuclear relaxation in Na 
β-alumina: Barrier-height distributions and the diffusion process. Phys. Rev. B 15, 3442–
3454 (1977). 

45. 
Iwai, Y., Kamishima, O., Kuwata, N., Kawamura, J. & Hattori, T. 109Ag NMR and 
relaxation mechanism in single crystal Ag β-alumina. Solid State Ionics 179, 862–866 
(2008). 

46. 
Parrondo, J. M. R., Horowitz, J. M. & Sagawa, T. Thermodynamics of information. Nat. 
Phys. 11, 131–139 (2015). 

47. 
Jarzynski, C. Equalities and Inequalities: Irreversibility and the Second Law of 
Thermodynamics at the Nanoscale. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 2, 329–351 (2011). 

48. 
Ciliberto, S. Experiments in Stochastic Thermodynamics: Short History and Perspectives. 
Phys. Rev. X 7, 16–21 (2017). 

49. 
Ciliberto, S. & Lutz, E. The Physics of Information: From Maxwell to Landauer. in Energy 
Limits in Computation 155–175 (Springer International Publishing, 2019). 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-93458-7_5. 

50. 
Crooks, G. E. Nonequilibrium measurements of free energy differences for 
microscopically reversible Markovian systems. J. Stat. Phys. 90, 1481–1487 (1998). 

51. 
Collin, D. et al. Verification of the Crooks fluctuation theorem and recovery of RNA 
folding free energies. Nature 437, 231–234 (2005). 

52. 
Liphardt, J., Dumont, S., Smith, S. B., Tinoco, I. & Bustamante, C. Equilibrium information 
from nonequilibrium measurements in an experimental test of Jarzynski’s equality. 
Science (80-. ). 296, 1832–1835 (2002). 

53. 
Jarzynski, C. Nonequilibrium equality for free energy differences. Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 
2690–2693 (1997). 

54. 
Jarzynski, C. Equilibrium free-energy differences from nonequilibrium measurements: A 
master-equation approach. Phys. Rev. E 56, 5018–5035 (1997). 

55. 
Bérut, A. et al. Experimental verification of Landauer’s principle linking information and 
thermodynamics. Nature 483, 187–189 (2012). 

56. 
Gavrilov, M., Chétrite, R. & Bechhoefer, J. Direct measurement of weakly nonequilibrium 
system entropy is consistent with Gibbs–Shannon form. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114, 


11097–11102 (2017). 

57. 
Gavrilov, M. & Bechhoefer, J. Erasure without work in an asymmetric double-well 
potential. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 29–32 (2016). 

58. 
Barker, A. S., Ditzenberger, J. A. & Remeika, J. P. Lattice vibrations and ion transport 
spectra in β-alumina. II. Microwave spectra. Phys. Rev. B 14, 4254–4265 (1976). 

59. 
Hoppe, R., Kloidt, T. & Funke, K. Frequency-Dependent Conductivities of RbAg4I5 and Na-
βʺ-Alumina from Radio to FIR Frequencies. Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft für Phys. 
Chemie 95, 1025–1028 (1991). 

60. 
Kamishima, O., Iwai, Y. & Kawamura, J. Small power-law dependence of ionic 
conductivity and diffusional dimensionality in β-alumina. Solid State Ionics 281, 89–95 
(2015). 

61. 
Suemoto, T. & Ishigame, M. Quasielastic Light Scattering in superionic β-alumina. Phys. 
Rev. B 32, 4126 (1985). 

62. 
Kawaharada, I., Hattori, T., Ishigame, M. & Shin, S. Quasielastic light scattering in Na1-
xAgxβ-aluminas. Solid State Ionics 69, 79–84 (1994). 

63. 
Kamishima, O. et al. Temperature dependence of low-lying phonon dephasing by 
ultrafast spectroscopy (optical Kerr effect) in Ag β-alumina and Tl β-alumina. J. Phys. 
Condens. Matter 19, 456215 (2007). 

64. 
Allen, S. J. & Remeika, J. P. Direct measurement of the attempt frequency for ion 
diffusion in Ag and Na β-alumina. Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 1478–1481 (1974). 

65. 
Hayes, W. Light scattering by superionic conductors. in Light Scattering in Solids III. Topics 
in Applied Physics. vol. 51 93–120 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1982). 

66. 
McWhan, D. B., Shapiro, S. M., Remeika, J. P. & Shirane, G. Neutron-scattering studies on 
beta-alumina. J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 8, L487 (1975). 

67. 
Lucazeau, G., Dohy, D., Fanjat, N. & Dianoux, A. J. Study of the dynamics of a single 
crystal of Na+β-Al2O3 by neutron scattering. Solid State Ionics 28–30, 1611–1616 (1988). 

68. 
Bjorkstam, J. L. & Villa, M. NMR studies of superionic β-aluminas. J. Phys. 42, 345–351 
(1981). 

69. 
Bjorkstam, J. L., Villa, M. & Farrington, G. C. Temperature dependence of the Na+ 
distribution in β-aluminas. Solid State Ionics 5, 153–156 (1981). 

70. 
Greenbaum, S. G. & Strom, U. Low-temperature nuclear spin relaxation in β-aluminas. 
Solid State Commun. 46, 437–440 (1983). 

71. 
Vineyard, G. H. Frequency factors and isotope effects in solid state rate processes. J. 
Phys. Chem. Solids 3, 121–127 (1957). 

72. 
Kadkhodaei, S. & Davariashtiyani, A. Phonon-assisted diffusion in bcc phase of titanium 
and zirconium from first principles. Phys. Rev. Mater. 4, 043802 (2020). 

73. 
de Klerk, N. J. J., van der Maas, E. & Wagemaker, M. Analysis of Diffusion in Solid-State 
Electrolytes through MD Simulations, Improvement of the Li-Ion Conductivity in β-Li 3 PS 
4 as an Example. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 1, 3230–3242 (2018). 

74. 
Ohno, S. et al. Materials design of ionic conductors for solid state batteries. Prog. Energy 
2, 022001 (2020). 

75. 
Muy, S., Schlem, R., Shao-Horn, Y. & Zeier, W. G. Phonon–Ion Interactions: Designing Ion 
Mobility Based on Lattice Dynamics. Adv. Energy Mater. 11, 2002787 (2021). 

76. 
Krauskopf, T. et al. Comparing the Descriptors for Investigating the Influence of Lattice 


Dynamics on Ionic Transport Using the Superionic Conductor Na 3 PS 4-x Se x. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 140, 14464–14473 (2018). 

77. 
Muy, S. et al. Tuning mobility and stability of lithium ion conductors based on lattice 
dynamics. Energy Environ. Sci. 11, 850–859 (2018). 

78. 
Morgan, B. J. & Madden, P. A. Relationships between atomic diffusion mechanisms and 
ensemble transport coefficients in crystalline polymorphs. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 4–6 
(2014). 

79. 
Wakamura, K. Roles of phonon amplitude and low-energy optical phonons on superionic 
conduction. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 56, 11593–11599 (1997). 

80. 
Wakamura, K. Origin of the low-energy mode in superionic conductors. Phys. Rev. B - 
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 59, 3560–3568 (1999). 

81. 
Bachman, J. C. et al. Inorganic Solid-State Electrolytes for Lithium Batteries: Mechanisms 
and Properties Governing Ion Conduction. Chem. Rev. 116, 140–162 (2016). 

 


