Dynamic instability of individual carbon nanotube growth 

revealed by in situ homodyne polarization microscopy

Authors: Vladimir Pimonov1, Huy-Nam Tran1, Léonard Monniello1, Saïd Tahir1, Thierry 

Michel1, Renaud Podor2, Michaël Odorico2, Christophe Bichara,3 Vincent Jourdain1*

Affiliations:

1 Laboratoire Charles Coulomb (L2C), UMR 5221 CNRS-Université de Montpellier, Place 

Bataillon, Montpellier, FR-34095, France.

2 ICSM, Univ Montpellier, CEA, CNRS, ENSCM, Bagnols sur Cèze, FR-30207 Cedex, France.

3 Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, Centre Interdisciplinaire de Nanoscience de Marseille, Marseille, 

FR-13288 Cedex 09, France

*Correspondence to: vincent.jourdain@umontpellier.

Keywords: carbon nanotubes, growth, CVD, instability, polarization microscopy, in situ.

Abstract:

Understanding the kinetic selectivity of carbon nanotube growth at the scale of individual 

nanotubes is essential for the development of high chiral selectivity growth methods. Here we 

demonstrate that homodyne polarization microscopy can be used for high-throughput imaging of 

long individual carbon nanotubes under real growth conditions (at ambient pressure, on a 

substrate), and with sub-second time resolution. Our in situ observations on hundreds of individual 

nanotubes reveal that about half of them grow at a constant rate all along their lifetime while the 

other half exhibits stochastic changes in growth rates, and switches between growth, pause and 


shrinkage. Statistical analysis shows that the growth rate of a given nanotube essentially varies 

between two values, with similar average ratio (~1.7) regardless of whether the rate change is 

accompanied by a change in chirality. These switches indicate that the nanotube edge or the 

catalyst nanoparticle fluctuates between different configurations during growth.

Main:

With their high carrier mobility, low capacitance and high chemical stability, carbon 

nanotubes (CNTs) are theoretically ideal for building highly-scaled transistors delivering large 

drive currents at low energy consumption 1. The standard method for growing CNTs is catalytic 

chemical vapor deposition (C-CVD) in which nanoparticles (e.g., Fe, Ni) catalyze the 

decomposition of a gaseous carbon precursor and the assembly of carbon atoms in a one-

dimensional tubular crystal 2. A key issue is that CNT samples are commonly made of different 

chiralities having different metallic (M) or semiconducting (SC) type and bandgap energies 3. 

Remarkable advances in the selective growth of CNTs with specific metallicity or chirality have 

been empirically made during the last years 4–8. However, the origin of this selectivity is still a 

matter of controversy, thus hindering the rational development of more selective strategies. In 

particular, the understanding of the processes governing CNT growth kinetics and their 

dependence on chirality and extrinsic factors (e.g., catalyst, gas species) is still very limited. 

For CNT ensembles, experimental measurements generally display an exponential decay of 

the growth rate 9–12. Puretzky et al. proposed a kinetic model explaining this by a progressive 

encapsulation of the catalyst by a carbonaceous layer 13. Yakobson et al. proposed different models 

predicting a constant growth rate but with different chirality dependence: proportional to the chiral 

angle  14, maximum for  close to 19.1° 15, or largest for near-armchair CNTs 16. Regarding 


experiments on individual CNTs, in situ field emission microscopy by Marchand et al. 17 revealed 

instances of nanotube growths at constant overall rate but made of discrete steps of nanotube 

rotation. Using in situ Raman spectroscopy, Rao et al. 18 observed self-exhausting growth kinetics 

and that the (initial) growth rate was proportional to chiral angle for a set of 9 individual nanotubes. 

In 2018, Otsuka et al. 19 reported an isotope-encoding method with lower time resolution (tens of 

seconds) but higher throughput (44 nanotubes) which, on the contrary, evidenced a constant 

growth rate until sudden termination. In situ TEM, although very suitable for studying the structure 

and dynamics of the catalyst particle, is inappropriate for kinetic measurements under real growth 

conditions due to electron irradiation, low pressure and small field and depth of view.

Here we report high-throughput in situ imaging of hundreds of individual CNTs under real 

growth conditions (at atmospheric pressure, on a substrate) using homodyne polarization 

microscopy 20,21. After describing the method, we demonstrate its performances in terms of 

sensitivity, temporal resolution, field of view and data throughput, and describe the different types 

of observed behaviors. We then analyze the CNT growth kinetics, starting by the cases displaying 

one constant growth rate, before moving to the unexpected cases displaying stochastic transitions 

between different growth rates, and between growth and shrinkage. 

Our experimental setup, inspired by the works of Lefebvre et al. 22 and Liu et al. 20, is 

schematized in Figure 1. It exploits the optical anisotropy of CNTs to amplify their optical signal 

relative to that of the substrate, by polarization extinction and by homodyne interference with the 

field reflected by the substrate 21. Due to phase effects, the contrast is proportional to the nanotube 

optical absorption. Experimental details about the setup are given in Supporting Information (SI). 

We chose iron nanoparticles with ethanol as carbon precursor, one of the most studied systems. 

ST-cut quartz substrates were used to grow long CNTs aligned along the [100] axis by lattice-


oriented growth. We optimized the catalyst concentration to have a sufficiently low density of 

aligned nanotubes (as assessed by SEM and AFM) to reduce the risk of bundling. 

Figure 1. Principle of the in situ optical imaging of individual CNTs during growth by homodyne 

polarization microscopy. A supercontinuum white light (400-700 nm) is used to illuminate the inside of a 

miniaturized CVD cell using a long-distance objective. A ST-cut quartz substrate with a polished wedge 

(to prevent backside reflection), optical marks and catalyst stripes is used to grow long CNTs (typically 1-

100 µm) parallel to its [100] axis. Two polarizers in cross configuration are used to extract the optical signal 


of the CNTs growing at an angle of ~ 45° with respect to the polarizers. The signal is further amplified by 

homodyning with the reflected field and spatially recorded with a high-speed camera.

To improve the video analysis, we have developed a method of rolling-frame correction 

where each frame is corrected by the frame recorded at a chosen delay δ before, typically between 

5 and 20 s. As shown in Fig. 2A and Movie S1, the rolling-frame correction strongly improves the 

nanotube contrast while highlighting the evolutions during the interval δ. After rolling-frame 

correction, newly grown CNT sections appear as dark segments whose length divided by δ 

provides the instantaneous growth rate. It can thus be seen that some nanotubes keep the same 

growth rate, while others abruptly switch from one constant rate to another constant rate, until 

sudden termination in both cases. Fig. 2B shows SEM pictures recorded at the same position after 

the synthesis under SEM conditions allowing either all CNTs (right) or only metallic CNTs (left) 

to be observed (SEM details are given in SI). As illustrated in Movie S2, we performed a detailed 

AFM characterization which allowed to observe all nanotubes whatever their electronic type and 

showed in more than 95 % of cases a one-to-one correspondence (in position and length) between 

the nanotubes observed in AFM and those observed in the in situ video after rolling-frame 

correction. As detailed in SI (figure S1), this value is in good agreement with the theoretical 

percentage of CNTs having at least one optical resonance in the experimental range of 400-700 

nm. The rolling-frame correction allows resolving the elongation of each individual nanotube as a 

distinct segment even in the case where CNTs would grow successively at a close position (i.e. at 

less than 1 µm from each other, which is the spatial resolution of our optical setup) as shown in 

Movie S1.


Fig. 2. In situ imaging of CNT growth. (A) Video snapshots of the same growth sequence without (left) 

and with (right) rolling-frame correction (delay δ of 10 s): with rolling-frame correction, newly grown CNT 

sections appear as dark segments, newly etched CNT sections as bright segments and changes of chirality 


appear as two consecutive segments with varying contrasts but equal lengths. (B) SEM pictures recorded 

at the same position after the end of the growth (growth duration: 300 s) under SEM conditions allowing 

either all CNTs (right) or only metallic CNTs (left) to be observed: comparing SEM pictures and rolling-

frame-corrected videos shows that almost all nanotubes in the field of view are individually observed during 

growth.

Chirality changes can also be clearly observed after rolling-frame correction: as visible in 

Fig. 2A and movies S1-S5, they are manifested by two consecutive segments with the same length 

(thus the same rate) moving synchronously. These features indicate a nanotube made of two 

segments of different chirality that slides on the substrate. The first segment is always dark while 

the next one can be dark or bright depending on the change in optical absorption. Note that these 

features demonstrate a base-growth mechanism (i.e. the catalyst particle remains fixed while the 

CNT slides on the monocrystalline substrate) in agreement with previous observations on the same 

system 19. Stochastic switches between growth and shrinkage, which are manifested by a switch 

in both the direction and contrast of a segment, can also be observed.

Of the nearly 700 individual CNTs we have observed, none showed an exponential decrease 

in growth rate. However, summing the kinetic curves of a large number of individual CNTs does 

bring a close-to-exponential decay for the average growth rate (Fig. S5). In analogy with 

radioactive decay, an exponential decay is actually expected when summing the behaviors of 

individual objects growing with the same constant probability of deactivation. Based on our 

observations and in agreement with Otsuka et al. 19, we conclude that the close-to-exponential 

decay observed for nanotube ensembles is not a feature of individual CNTs but a consequence of 

the large distribution of lifetimes. 


We first focus on the cases displaying a constant growth rate, as illustrated in Fig. 3A,B. 

With the Fe/ethanol system, about half of CNTs displayed this behavior. Statistical analysis of 189 

such cases evidenced that, under constant growth conditions, both growth rates and lifetimes can 

vary by up to a factor 30 between CNTs. As shown in Figure 3C, an anti-correlation between 

growth rate and lifetime is observed: CNTs with a higher growth rate tend to have a shorter 

lifetime. This indicates that, under these conditions, deactivation is driven like growth by carbon 

supply, probably through catalyst encapsulation or defect incorporation.


Figure 3. Nanotube growths at constant rate (representing about half of cases in our standard

conditions: T = 850°C, PEtOH = 1600 Pa). (A) Video snapshots (with rolling-frame correction and delay δ 

of 5 s) of a CNT growth with constant rate and corresponding SEM picture after growth. (B) Representative 

kinetic curves (length versus time) of CNTs grown at constant rate. (C) Distribution of lifetime versus

growth rate values. (D) Distributions of growth rates and lifetimes for M-CNTs, SC-CNTs and all CNTs

showing no statistical difference in growth rate, lifetime or length between M- and SC-CNTs in the here 

used conditions.

The M/SC type of these CNTs can be assigned from their SEM contrast (high for M-CNTs, 

low for SC-CNTs 23), a method already used by Zhu et al. 8 that we further validated by Raman G-

band analyses as detailed in SI. This combined SEM-Raman characterization evidenced 75 % of 

CNTs fulfilling all the signatures of individual SWCNTs grown on quartz. The other 25 % of cases 

were assigned as probably not individual SWCNTs but double-walled CNTs (DWCNTs) or two 

SWCNTs grown at close positions (< 1 µm). In contrast with the report that SC-CNTs grow an 

order of magnitude faster than M-CNTs 8, our measurements did not reveal any statistical 

difference in growth rate, lifetime or length between M- and SC-CNTs (Fig. 3D). Faster growth 

of SC-CNTs should therefore not be considered as a universal behavior but to depend on the 

conditions: e.g. kite-growth, methane and mostly DWCNTs in 8 versus lattice-growth, ethanol and 

mostly SWCNTs in this work.

We now turn to the cases displaying dynamic instability, that is stochastic transitions 

between different growth rates, and between growth and shrinkage, which represented more than 

half of CNTs during our observations. We first checked that these changes were not caused by 

uncontrolled fluctuations of the CVD conditions: first, the temperature was well stabilized before 

introducing ethanol and remained stable at +/-1 °C during experiments; second, the Ar/ethanol 


mixture was equilibrated in a parallel line before being switched into the CVD cell; third, despite 

an initial increase due to ethanol decomposition, the H2O concentration remained stable until the 

end of the experiment. Most importantly, based on the analysis of a hundred in situ videos, the 

transitions occur without any correlation, spatial or temporal, between CNTs (see Movies S3-5). 

Most transitions in growth rate (about 75 %, i.e. 201 out of 266) occur without a change in 

contrast in both in situ optical imaging and ex situ SEM (Fig. 4A,B). We performed a multi-

wavelength Raman study which confirmed that the resonant Raman features (laser resonance 

energy, RBM position, G-band shape) along these CNTs remain unchanged for the vast majority 

of them (86 %, i.e. 37 out of 43 Raman-resonant CNTs) despite the rate change (Figure S6): this 

indicates that, in the vast majority of such cases, the rate changes occur without a change in 

chirality. In contrast, about 25% of rate change events (65 out of 266) were correlated with a 

change in optical contrast, that is to a change in chirality (Fig. 4C,D). Such chirality changes were 

always corroborated by a change in resonant Raman features (Figure S7), and, in the case of a 

M/SC transition, by a change in SEM contrast (Fig. 4C), at the expected position along the 

nanotube.


Fig. 4. Stochastic switches of growth rates (representing more than half of cases in our standard 

conditions: T = 850°C, PEtOH = 1600 Pa). (A, B) Changes of growth rate with no change of CNT structure: 

(A) video snapshots and corresponding SEM picture; (B) examples of kinetic curves (for easier viewing, 

each curve has been given its own time axis with the same color code). (C, D) Changes of growth rate 


correlated with a change of CNT structure as evidenced by the changes in optical absorption, SEM contrast 

and Raman resonance: (C) video snapshots and corresponding SEM picture taken after growth; (D) kinetic 

curves displaying a change in growth rate correlated with a change from a first chirality (blue points) to a 

second one (orange points). Both videos were corrected with the rolling-frame correction (δ = 10 s). (E) 

Correlation plot of the growth rates before and after change (N is the number of cases) displaying two 

elongated clouds with an average proportionality factor of 1.7 for both rate increase and decrease events.

(F) Distributions of the growth rate ratio rafter/rbefore with and without structure change, and for all cases. (G) 

Distribution of growth rates for (11,8) SWCNTs displaying a multimodal shape despite the constant 

chirality and growth conditions.

The correlation plot of the growth rates before and after change for 266 transitions is shown 

in Figure 4E. The graph reveals two distinct elongated clouds, one for rate increases and one for 

rate decreases. Both clouds evidence the same proportionality factor of about 1.7 (or 1/1.7 = 0.6) 

between consecutive rates: this indicates that the two clouds correspond to transitions between the 

same rate levels but in opposite directions. Importantly, the same correlation is observed with or 

without chirality change (orange and green points, respectively). In both cases, most transitions 

(201 out of 266, i.e. 76 %) correspond to a growth rate increase, which also supports that the same 

mechanism is at play with and without chirality change. Figure 4F precisely shows the distribution 

of the ratio of growth rates after and before change (rafter/rbefore): two distinct massifs can be seen 

at rafter/rbefore = 1.7 and 0.6 (i.e. 1/1.7) for growth rate increases and decreases, respectively. Note 

that the statistical resolution does not allow excluding a possible substructure in each massif (Fig. 

S8). 

To study the influence of chirality, we performed a Raman characterization on 230 individual 

CNTs (corresponding to a total of 350 CNT segments) displaying a rate change or not. This 


allowed us to assign 41 CNTs or CNT segments to (11,8) SWCNTs thanks to their appropriate 

position in the Kataura plot and high occurrence in our samples (Fig. S4). As shown in Figure 4G, 

the growth rate distribution of (11,8) SWCNTs is clearly not monomodal, in contradiction with 

current theories: it displays two main peaks at about 0.25 µm/s and 0.5 µm /s, with a possible 

substructure in the second peak. This provides a direct evidence that, even at constant chirality and 

under constant conditions, CNTs do not display a single growth rate but a few discrete rates.

Strikingly, Koyano et al. reported a similar factor of 1.7 for the growth rates of individual CNTs 

before and after an interruption with Ar/H2/H2O 24: as shown in Fig. 4E, the data of Koyano et al.

fit well within our larger set of data. This suggests a similar mechanism despite different 

experimental conditions.

We finally move to CNTs displaying stochastic switches between growth and shrinkage as 

illustrated in Fig. 5A. Shrinkage has a noticeable impact on the yield since approximately 18% of 

CNTs exhibited at least one switch between growth and shrinkage under the studied conditions. 

From the cases displaying chirality change followed by shrinkage, it can be deduced that the 

shrinkage proceeds by carbon etching at the interface with the catalyst particle (Movie S6). During 

our experiments, etching appears to be caused by ethanol or its sub-products (e.g. H2O) since we 

observed that shrinkage stopped when interrupting the ethanol supply. Background traces of H2O 

and O2, which are commonly present during CNT growth by CVD (~10 ppm O2 and ~50 ppm H2O 

in our experiments), may also play a role. Despite the growth rate fluctuations, the data suggest a 

positive correlation between growth and etching rates (figure S9). As visible in Fig. 5B,C, there is 

often a pause between growth and shrinkage. Pauses from a few seconds to 150 s can also be 

observed between two sequences of growth or shrinkage. We cannot exclude that these pauses 

correspond to extremely slow rates outside the reach of our spatial resolution (~1 µm). A few 


extreme cases even displayed several reversible switches between growth, pause, and shrinkage 

(Figure 5C), thus confirming the stochastic nature of the switches.

Fig. 5. Stochastic switches between growth and shrinkage: about 18 % of CNTs displayed at least one 

such switch in our standard conditions. (A) Video snapshots (with rolling-frame correction with a delay 

δ of 10 s) illustrating a switch from growth to shrinkage (which are manifested by a switch in both the 

direction and contrast of a CNT segment), and corresponding SEM picture after growth. (B,C) Examples 

of kinetic curves with one switch (B) or several switches (C) between growth and shrinkage.

We now discuss the possible mechanisms behind the dynamic instabilities revealed by our 

observations. We note that these instabilities bear analogies with similar phenomena displayed by 

other nanoscale systems, such as the dynamic instability of microtubule growth 25,26 or the catalytic 

growth of nanowires for which oscillations of the growth interface 27, catalyst jumping between 

different facets 28 and fluctuations in growth rates 29 have been reported. We have already ruled 

out local fluctuations in pressure or feedstock composition as a possible cause of these instabilities 

since the behaviors of neighboring nanotubes are uncorrelated. Catalyst ripening affects the 

catalyst particle sizes during CNT growth 30 but cannot induce reversible switches between discrete 

states due to its continuous and irreversible nature. Having eliminated other hypotheses, the 

explanation must be related to structural or configurational switches of the nanotube edge or 


catalyst nanoparticle. The growth rate of 3D and 2D crystals depends on the crystal facets or edges, 

but the structure of the nanotube edge during growth and how it depends on chirality, catalyst and 

growth conditions are unknown. In line with the role of edge entropy to stabilize chiral CNTs 31, 

an attractive hypothesis for growth rate switches is that CNT edges switch between different stable 

configurations (e.g. with mostly armchair sites or mostly zigzag sites). In such a hypothesis, the 

switching frequency and the proportionality factor between slow and fast rates should depend on 

nanotube chirality. Fluctuations of the crystalline orientation of the catalyst nanoparticle, which 

are commonly observed by in situ TEM 32–37, may also play a role. 

However, these hypotheses cannot explain switches between growth and shrinkage which 

require a change in carbon chemical potential at the nanotube-catalyst interface. In this case, 

assuming that catalyst nanoparticle switches between two phases with different catalytic activities 

for precursor decomposition (e.g., between metal and carbide) could provide an explanation. In 

situ XPS 38 and TEM 39 during CNT growth have actually shown that catalyst nanoparticles can 

adopt different crystal phases with different catalytic activity (e.g., Fe-α, Fe-γ, Fe3C, Fe5C2 in the 

case of iron). Sharma et al. notably reported deactivation events correlated with phase changes 

from Fe3C to Fe5C2 39 or from Co2C to Co3C 34. Since the stability of these phases depends on 

carbon concentration, phase transitions may be caused by an imbalance between carbon supply 

and consumption. 

To assess these hypotheses, we tested nickel, which does not form stable carbides, instead 

of iron. We did observe rate change events with Ni (Movie S7), although with a lower frequency 

than with Fe, but we did not observe shrinkage events. This supports that switches between growth 

and shrinkage are specific to catalysts displaying different possible phases during growth, like iron. 

In contrast, rate changes appear as a more general behavior potentially related to configurational 


switches of the nanotube edge. Further experimental and theoretical investigations are needed to 

elucidate the origin of these instabilities.

Our observations of a large number of individual CNTs under real growth conditions reveal 

processes more complex than described by current models. In particular, they contradict the 

standard assumption of a unique growth rate for a given chirality. New growth models should be 

built to account for the growth rate instabilities revealed by our observations. The fact that the 

highest selectivity values are obtained with solid-state catalysts might indicate that their actual role 

is to limit these fluctuations and stabilize the growth rate. The understanding and control of these 

instabilities therefore seem paramount for the rational design of highly selective CNT growth 

methods. Interestingly, instabilities between growth, chirality change and shrinkage may offer 

opportunities of chirality selection based on a dynamic exploration of the chirality space over 

multiple cycles. Finally, we emphasize that in situ homodyne polarization microscopy is not 

limited to CNTs but can be applied to many nanostructures (0D, 1D or 2D) in different 

environments (vacuum, gas or liquid) as long as the nanostructures (or their edges) scatter light 

with sufficient efficiency and polarization change.


List of Supporting information:

Materials and Methods: catalyst preparation, CNT growth, in situ optical microscopy, video 

processing and analysis, classification of CNT growth kinetics, CNT characterization.

Figures S1-S10

Movie S1: comparison between videos of the same growth sequence with and without rolling-

frame correction

Movie S2: comparison between in situ video and post-growth AFM and SEM images

Movies S3-5: additional examples of in situ videos with rolling-frame correction

Movie S6: examples of cases displaying a chirality change followed by shrinkage

Movie S7: examples of sudden changes of growth rates with Ni as catalyst

References

(1) 
Aly, M. M. S.; Gao, M.; Hills, G.; Lee, C. S.; Pitner, G.; Shulaker, M. M.; Wu, T. F.; 

Asheghi, M.; Bokor, J.; Franchetti, F.; Goodson, K. E.; Kozyrakis, C.; Markov, I.; 

Olukotun, K.; Pileggi, L.; Pop, E.; Rabaey, J.; Ré, C.; Wong, H. S. P.; Mitra, S. Energy-

Efficient Abundant-Data Computing: The N3XT 1,000. Computer (Long. Beach. Calif).

2015, 48 (12), 24–33. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4913279.

(2) 
Jourdain, V.; Bichara, C. Current Understanding of the Growth of Carbon Nanotubes in 

Catalytic Chemical Vapour Deposition. Carbon 2013, 58, 2–39.


(3) 
Peng, L.-M.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, S. Carbon Nanotube Electronics: Recent Advances. Mater. 

Today 2014, 17 (9), 433–442. 

https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2014.07.008.

(4) 
Wang, J.; Jin, X.; Liu, Z.; Yu, G.; Ji, Q.; Wei, H.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, K.; Li, D.; Yuan, Z. 

Growing Highly Pure Semiconducting Carbon Nanotubes by Electrotwisting the Helicity. 

Nat. Catal. 2018, 1 (5), 326.

(5) 
Zhang, S.; Kang, L.; Wang, X.; Tong, L.; Yang, L.; Wang, Z.; Qi, K.; Deng, S.; Li, Q.; 

Bai, X.; Ding, F.; Zhang, J. Arrays of Horizontal Carbon Nanotubes of Controlled 

Chirality Grown Using Designed Catalysts. Nature 2017, 543 (7644), 234–238.

(6) 
Yang, F.; Wang, X.; Zhang, D.; Yang, J.; LuoDa; Xu, Z.; Wei, J.; Wang, J.-Q.; Xu, Z.; 

Peng, F.; Li, X.; Li, R.; Li, Y.; Li, M.; Bai, X.; Ding, F.; Li, Y. Chirality-Specific Growth 

of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes on Solid Alloy Catalysts. Nature 2014, 510 (7506), 

522–524.

(7) 
Harutyunyan, A. R.; Chen, G.; Paronyan, T. M.; Pigos, E. M.; Kuznetsov, O. A.; 

Hewaparakrama, K.; Kim, S. M.; Zakharov, D.; Stach, E. A.; Sumanasekera, G. U. 

Preferential Growth of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with Metallic Conductivity. 

Science 2009, 326 (5949), 116–120.

(8) 
Zhu, Z.; Wei, N.; Cheng, W.; Shen, B.; Sun, S.; Gao, J.; Wen, Q.; Zhang, R.; Xu, J.; 

Wang, Y.; Wei, F. Rate-Selected Growth of Ultrapure Semiconducting Carbon Nanotube 

Arrays. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10 (1), 1–8.

(9) 
Picher, M.; Anglaret, E.; Arenal, R.; Jourdain, V. Self-Deactivation of Single-Walled 

Carbon Nanotube Growth Studied by in Situ Raman Measurements. Nano Lett. 2009, 9


(2), 542–547.

(10) Finnie, P.; Li-Pook-Than, A.; Lefebvre, J. The Dynamics of the Nucleation, Growth and 

Termination of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes from in Situ Raman Spectroscopy 

during Chemical Vapor Deposition. Nano Res. 2009, 2, 783–792.

(11) Futaba, D. N.; Hata, K.; Yamada, T.; Mizuno, K.; Yumura, M.; Iijima, S. Kinetics of 

Water-Assisted Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Synthesis Revealed by a Time-Evolution 

Analysis. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95, 56104.

(12) Einarsson, E.; Murakami, Y.; Kadowaki, M.; Maruyama, S. Growth Dynamics of 

Vertically Aligned Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes from in Situ Measurements. Carbon

2008, 46, 923–930.

(13) Puretzky, A. A.; Geohegan, D. B.; Jesse, S.; Ivanov, I. N.; Eres, G. In Situ Measurements 

and Modeling of Carbon Nanotube Array Growth Kinetics during Chemical Vapor 

Deposition. Appl. Phys. A, Mater. Sci. Process. 2005, 81 (2), 223–240.

(14) Ding, F.; Harutyunyan, A. R.; Yakobson, B. I. Dislocation Theory of Chirality-Controlled 

Nanotube Growth. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2009, 106 (8), 2506.

(15) Artyukhov, V. I.; Penev, E. S.; Yakobson, B. I. Why Nanotubes Grow Chiral. Nat. 

Commun. 2014, 5, 4892.

(16) Penev, E. S.; Bets, K. V; Gupta, N.; Yakobson, B. I. Transient Kinetic Selectivity in 

Nanotubes Growth on Solid Co–w Catalyst. Nano Lett. 2018, 18 (8), 5288–5293.

(17) Marchand, M.; Journet, C.; Guillot, D.; Benoit, J.-M.; Yakobson, B. I.; Purcell, S. T. 

Growing a Carbon Nanotube Atom by Atom: “And yet It Does Turn”. Nano Lett. 2009, 9

(8), 2961–2966. https://doi.org/10.1021/nl901380u.


(18) Rao, R.; Liptak, D.; Cherukuri, T.; Yakobson, B. I.; Maruyama, B. In Situ Evidence for 

Chirality-Dependent Growth Rates of Individual Carbon Nanotubes. Nat. Mater. 2012, 11

(3), 213–216.

(19) Otsuka, K.; Yamamoto, S.; Inoue, T.; Koyano, B.; Ukai, H.; Yoshikawa, R.; Xiang, R.; 

Chiashi, S.; Maruyama, S. Digital Isotope Coding to Trace the Growth Process of 

Individual Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. ACS Nano 2018, 12 (4), 3994–4001.

(20) Liu, K.; Hong, X.; Zhou, Q.; Jin, C.; Li, J.; Zhou, W.; Liu, J.; Wang, E.; Zettl, A.; Wang, 

F. High-Throughput Optical Imaging and Spectroscopy of Individual Carbon Nanotubes 

in Devices. Nat Nano 2013, 8 (12), 917–922. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2013.227http://www.nature.com/nnano/journal/v8/n12/abs/

nnano.2013.227.html#supplementary-information.

(21) Monniello, L.; Tran, H.-N.; Vialla, R.; Prévot, G.; Tahir, S.; Michel, T.; Jourdain, V. 

Comprehensive Model of the Optical Spectra of Carbon Nanotubes on a Substrate by 

Polarized Microscopy. Phys. Rev. B 2019, 99 (11), 115431.

(22) Lefebvre, J.; Finnie, P. Polarized Light Microscopy and Spectroscopy of Individual 

Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. Nano Res. 2011, 4 (8), 788. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-011-0135-8.

(23) Li, D.; Zhang, J.; He, Y.; Qin, Y.; Wei, Y.; Liu, P.; Zhang, L.; Wang, J.; Li, Q.; Fan, S.; 

Jiang, K. Scanning Electron Microscopy Imaging of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes on 

Substrates. Nano Res. 2017, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-017-1505-7.

(24) Koyano, B.; Inoue, T.; Yamamoto, S.; Otsuka, K.; Xiang, R.; Chiashi, S.; Maruyama, S. 

Regrowth and Catalytic Etching of Individual Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Studied 


by Isotope Labeling and Growth Interruption. Carbon 2019, 155, 635.

(25) Dogterom, M.; Leibler, S. Physical Aspects of the Growth and Regulation of Microtubule 

Structures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 70 (9), 1347.

(26) Mitchison, T.; Kirschner, M. Dynamic Instability of Microtubule Growth. Nature 1984, 

312 (5991), 237–242. https://doi.org/10.1038/312237a0.

(27) Oh, S. H.; Chisholm, M. F.; Kauffmann, Y.; Kaplan, W. D.; Luo, W.; Rühle, M.; Scheu, 

C. Oscillatory Mass Transport in Vapor-Liquid-Solid Growth of Sapphire Nanowires. 

Science 2010, 330 (6003), 489–493.

(28) Schwarz, K. W.; Tersoff, J.; Kodambaka, S.; Ross, F. M. Jumping-Catalyst Dynamics in 

Nanowire Growth. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 113 (5), 55501.

(29) Chou, Y.-C.; Hillerich, K.; Tersoff, J.; Reuter, M. C.; Dick, K. A.; Ross, F. M. Atomic-

Scale Variability and Control of III-V Nanowire Growth Kinetics. Science 2014, 343

(6168), 281–284.

(30) Navas, H.; Picher, M.; Andrieux-Ledier, A.; Fossard, F.; Michel, T.; Kozawa, A.; 

Maruyama, T.; Anglaret, E.; Loiseau, A.; Jourdain, V. Unveiling the Evolutions of 

Nanotube Diameter Distribution during the Growth of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. 

ACS Nano 2017, 11 (3), 3081–3088. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.7b00077.

(31) Magnin, Y.; Amara, H.; Ducastelle, F.; Loiseau, A.; Bichara, C. Entropy-Driven Stability 

of Chiral Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. Science 2018, 362 (6411), 212–215. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat6228.

(32) Zhang, L.; He, M.; Hansen, T. W.; Kling, J.; Jiang, H.; Kauppinen, E. I.; Loiseau, A.; 

Wagner, J. B. Growth Termination and Multiple Nucleation of Single-Wall Carbon 


Nanotubes Evidenced by in Situ Transmission Electron Microscopy. ACS Nano 2017, 11

(5), 4483–4493. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6b05941.

(33) Huang, X.; Farra, R.; Schlögl, R.; Willinger, M.-G. Growth and Termination Dynamics of 

Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes at Near Ambient Pressure: An in Situ Transmission 

Electron Microscopy Study. Nano Lett. 2019, 19 (8), 5380–5387. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b01888.

(34) Chao, H.-Y.; Jiang, H.; Ospina-Acevedo, F.; Balbuena, P. B.; Kauppinen, E. I.; Cumings, 

J.; Sharma, R. A Structure and Activity Relationship for Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube 

Growth Confirmed by in Situ Observations and Modeling. Nanoscale 2020, 12 (42), 

21923–21931.

(35) Yoshida, H.; Takeda, S.; Uchiyama, T.; Kohno, H.; Homma, Y. Atomic-Scale in-Situ 

Observation of Carbon Nanotube Growth from Solid State Iron Carbide Nanoparticles. 

Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (7), 2082–2086.

(36) Yoshida, H.; Shimizu, T.; Uchiyama, T.; Kohno, H.; Homma, Y.; Takeda, S. Atomic-

Scale Analysis on the Role of Molybdenum in Iron-Catalyzed Carbon Nanotube Growth. 

Nano Lett. 2009, 9 (11), 3810–3815.

(37) Yoshida, H.; Kohno, H.; Takeda, S. In Situ Structural Analysis of Crystalline Fe-Mo-C 

Nanoparticle Catalysts during the Growth of Carbon Nanotubes. Micron 2012, 43 (11), 

1176–1180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micron.2012.04.008.

(38) Wirth, C. T.; Bayer, B. C.; Gamalski, A. D.; Esconjauregui, S.; Weatherup, R. S.; Ducati, 

C.; Baehtz, C.; Robertson, J.; Hofmann, S. The Phase of Iron Catalyst Nanoparticles 

during Carbon Nanotube Growth. Chem. Mater. 2012, 24 (24), 4633–4640. 


https://doi.org/10.1021/cm301402g.

(39) Mazzucco, S.; Wang, Y.; Tanase, M.; Picher, M.; Li, K.; Wu, Z.; Irle, S.; Sharma, R. 

Direct Evidence of Active and Inactive Phases of Fe Catalyst Nanoparticles for Carbon 

Nanotube Formation. J. Catal. 2014, 319, 54–60.

Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge the support of the Agence Nationale de la 

Recherche (grant ANR-20-CE09-0007-01). This project has received financial support 

from the CNRS through the MITI interdisciplinary programs. This material is based upon 

work supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number 

FA9550-17-1-0027. VJ acknowledges the support of the Institut Universitaire de France.

Author contributions: V.J. designed and coordinated the research. T.M. and L.M. conceived and 

built the optical setup. H.N.T. developed the methods for in situ optical imaging during 

CNT growth. S.T. prepared the catalyst samples and performed SEM characterization. V.P. 

performed the in situ optical imaging and the Raman characterization, developed the 

protocols of data treatment and analyzed the experimental data. M.O. and R.P. performed 

the AFM characterization. C.B. contributed to the data analysis and the manuscript writing. 

V.P. and V.J. co-wrote the manuscript. All authors contributed to critical discussions of the 

manuscript.


