 

 
1

A correlation between energy gap, critical current density and 

relaxation of a superconductor   

 

Harald Reiss# 

Department of Physics 

University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg, FRG 

harald.reiss@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de 

 

Abstract 

Superconductors like other solids cannot relax instantaneously from excited states to 
thermodynamic equilibrium. In this paper, relaxation from thermal excitations is 
investigated, like after absorption of radiation or, under conductor movement, release 
and transformation of mechanical tension to thermal energy. Relaxation proceeds 
within finite periods of time the length of which increases the more strongly the closer 
the superconductor temperature has already approached its critical value. Properties 
of many-particle systems (as explained, by an analogy to nuclear physics), basic 
thermodynamic 
considerations 
(temperature 
uniquely 
defined 
under 
solely 

equilibrium condition) and standard, multi-component heat transfer principles (solid 
conduction plus radiation in thin films) are applied as tools to prove this expectation. 
Energy gap, superconductor critical current density and critical temperature, as a 
result, are tightly related to relaxation rates and relaxation times of the 
superconductor electron system. By numerical simulations, an attempt is made to 
find a quantitative correlation of these properties in a thin film superconductor.   
 
Keywords 
Superconductor; critical current density and temperature; phase transition; relaxation; 
correlation  
 

1 
Overview: Superconductor critical parameters and relaxation  

This paper presents an attempt to correlate superconductor critical 

current density and critical temperature with relaxation of its electron 

system. Focus is on relaxation from thermally excited states. These may 

result from absorption of radiation or, under conductor movement, 

release and transformation of mechanical to thermal energy. The 

reported numerical investigations shall describe how long it takes a 

disturbed superconductor to relax to thermodynamic equilibrium. 

 

# Associate (Außerplanmäßiger) Professor 


 

 
2

Critical current density becomes zero if, under such disturbances, 

density of charge carriers (electron pairs) becomes too small to support 

zero-loss current transport. The relaxation (re-organisation) rate of the 

disturbed electron system might not be able to compensate decay of 

electron pairs to single electrons. Accordingly, critical current density 

should be correlated with relaxation rate and relaxation time of the 

electron system.  

 

The same applies to critical temperature. As will be shown, if relaxation 

time after a disturbance is too long, or even might diverge, critical 

temperature cannot uniquely be defined within reasonable experimental 

or simulation periods of time. 

 

The literature reports a large number of magnetic relaxation 

measurements to determine pinning potentials in Nb3Sn, in the BSCCO 

family and in MgB2/Fe superconductors. Instead, focus in the present 

paper is on decay of the excited electron system. Relaxation of this 

system becomes most interesting when, under a thermal disturbance, 

the 
superconductor 
has 
already 
approached 
very 
closely 
its 

superconducting to normal conducting phase transition. Superconductor 

stability against quench thus is an aspect of the relaxation problem. 

 

In the first, formal part of this paper, therefore, superconductor 

temperature excursion under a disturbance is revisited in more detail. 

The presented investigations do not duplicate previous papers [1 - 3]; in 

particular, superconductor stability is not in the foreground of these 

investigations. The simulations instead shall safely identify uncertainties 

of results that might touch or hide the possibly existing correlation 

between critical parameters and superconductor relaxation. 


 

 
3

In the second part, justification of the said, tentative correlation shall be 

confirmed by quantitative results.  

 

In comparison to numerous studies of magnetization, its relaxation and 

the pinning potentials, it appears this discussion, relaxation rate and 

relaxation time of the disturbed electron system, has not thoroughly been 

analyzed in the physical and engineering literature.  

 

This paper is a new edition of the everlasting, general question: What 

can we really know about superconductor properties? This paper is 

focused on one just one, yet strongly important aspect of this problem. 

For this purpose, the reported investigations are applied to a coated (2G) 

YBaCuO 123, thin film superconductor (Figure 1), for it is this 

superconductor the knowledge of its materials and transport properties is 

superior against other superconductors.  

 

2 
Temperature excursion under a disturbance 

To provide a safe basis for investigating the said, possibly existing  

correlation, criteria and constraints to obtain reliable numerical results by 

simulation of temperature excursion in a superconductor have to be 

provided. 

 

2.1 Formal calculation of JCrit 

Critical current density, JCrit, depends on temperature, 

 

JCrit(T,B) = JCrit(T)/[B0 + B(t)]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1a) 

 

using 

 


 

 
4

JCrit(T) = JCrit0 ( 1 - T/TCrit)n 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1b) 

 

In a coil, B(t) in Eq. (1a) describes magnetic induction, like from 

neighbouring windings (B0 is a constant). 

 

2.2 Decision on the exponent n 

As far as possible, the exponent n in Eq. (1b) has to be chosen with 

respect to materials and current transport properties. A decision on the 

value of the exponent can be made if, when using Eq. (1a,b) in numerical 

simulations, convergence of the simulated temperature fields has been 

achieved.   

 

Eq. (1b) is derived from Ginzburg-Landau (GL) theory, as reported in Eq. 

(4-35) of [4]. This result follows from ∂Js/∂vs = 0, to find the maximum of 

Js, a super-current (and with vs the velocity of its constituents). In Eq. (4-

36) of this reference, Js is identified as the critical current, JCrit.  

 

This result of the Ginzburg-Landau equation for JCrit applies to a 

continuum by assuming the amplitude of the order parameter is uniform 

in the sample; in thin films, it cannot vary over thickness. Accordingly, we 

find its applicability to metals and alloys in Sect. 5.6 of [5], at temperature 

near critical temperature. 

 

But the Ginzburg-Landau theory does not take into account anisotropic 

materials and transport properties of type II, hard superconductors and 

thus might not be applicable in these cases. Yet Clem et al [6] explained 

that Eq. (1b) was applicable for calculation of critical current density near 

critical temperature in a granular superconductor (NbN; the authors 

assume an array of Josephson couplings between grains). More 


 

 
5

applications of Eq. (1b) were reported in several papers [7] to [9] that 

describe current transport even in granular or thin film, high-temperature 

superconductors. 

 

We cannot safely apply Eq. (1b) with inclusion of an exponential 

damping factor, JCrit (T,B) = JCrit(T=0,B) (1 - T/TCrit) exp(-T/TCrit), as was 

suggested in [10] for investigation of coated superconductors. While this 

would fit the architecture of the superconductor investigated in the 

present paper (Figure 1), application of the exponential term would 

cause serious convergence problems, and JCrit(T) is reduced too 

strongly. 

 

The traditional Eq. (1b), without an exponential term, therefore has been 

applied in the present simulations, using the interval 0.5 ≤ n ≤ 2, to look 

for divergences, and after a variety of test calculations, we finally 

returned to the Ginzburg-Landau value n = 3/2. 

 

2.3 
Decision on TCrit 

For calculation of the critical current density, JCrit(T) = JCrit0 ( 1 - T/TCrit)n, 

first the difference ΔT = T - TCrit between superconductor temperature, T, 

and critical temperature, TCrit, has to be determined. Second, JCrit 

contains TCrit by the ratio T/TCrit. In both cases, for ΔT and for T/TCrit, a 

decision has to be made which value of TCrit has to be applied in the 

simulations. At first sight, this is an unexpected question, but we will 

show that it has strong impacts on calculated temperature excursions. 

 

As a result of the calculations, the most probable, realistic approach is to 

apply in T - TCrit and T/TCrit local values of both conductor temperature  


 

 
6

and of critical temperature. Instead of the standard ΔT = T - TCrit0 and 

ratio T/TCrit0 (using uniform TCrit0 = 92 K), we have applied    

 

ΔT(x,y,t) = T(x,y,t) - TCrit(x,y,t) 
  
 
(2a) 

JCrit[T(x,y,t)] = JCrit0 [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit(x,y,t)]n 
  
 
(2b) 

provided T(x,y,t) < TCrit(x,y,t)] at co-ordinates (x,y) in the conductor cross 

section.  

 

This differentiation is not just academic, and the temperature fields 

should be simulated as exact as  possible.    

 

Safety in prediction of temperature excursions with time, of critical 

current density (and, trivially, also of stability functions and thus on onset 

of a quench) rely on how exact the sharp condition T ≤ TCrit can be 

verified, which means it relies on the uniqueness by which temperature 

fields, T(x,y,t) and critical temperature, TCrit(x,y,t), both as local values, 

can be determined. Emphasis in this paper is on "local".   

   

2.4 
Non-uniformity of temperature resulting from statistical  

 
parameter variations 

Under disturbances, and in particular in situations close to the 

superconducting/normal conducting phase transition, there is hardly a 

uniform distribution of temperature and of critical and transport current in 

the superconductor cross section or volume, compare the results 

reported in [1 - 3]. 

 

Non-uniformity is expected from a variety of potential, materials and 

physical origins. First, there are materials deficiencies resulting from 

materials 
preparation 
(deposition, 
handling, 
conductor 
winding), 


 

 
7

application and operation of a superconductor device. Non-local 

materials properties on a microscopic scale go back to local deviations 

from perfect stoichiometry, inclusion of foreign atoms, weak links in the 

grained BSCCO superconductor family, voids, cracks, mechanical 

tensions arising from conductor movement under Lorentz forces. There 

is also non-local, magnetic induction induced by currents in neighbouring 

thin films or filaments, and there are non-local heat transfer mechanisms 

like scattering of radiation in thin films and non-local solid/liquid 

interactions at the interface to the coolant. 

 

 Trivially, as far as the set of available simulation parameters is 

concerned, non-uniformity of the temperature fields and excursions with 

time may arise also from experimental errors during measurements of 

TCrit and of the other critical variables of the superconductor.  

 

The simulations of the coated, (2G) YBaCuO 123 thin film 

superconductor like in previous paper apply statistical variations ΔTCrit, 

ΔJCrit and ΔBCrit (the upper critical magnetic field). In the present paper, 

as an additional aspect, also a statistical uncertainty of the thermal 

diffusivity of the superconductor material is considered. 

 

 As an optimistic, provisional estimate, a spacing ΔTCrit < ± 1 K and 

likewise variations ΔJCrit0 and ΔBCrit20 are assumed as within 1 percent 

and  ± 5 Tesla, respectively, in the simulations. The variations ΔTCrit, 

ΔJCrit0 within these given, maximum uncertainty intervals are shown in 

Figure 2. In reality, uncertainties of JCrit and BCrit may be much larger than 

the assumed ΔJCrit = ±1 percent and ΔBCrit20 = ± 5 T; the calculations 

presented here shall demonstrate the principal impact of these 

uncertainties on  calculated results, see later, Figure 5b.  


 

 
8

Though experimental methods meanwhile have significantly been refined 

by increasingly sharp detection criteria (like electrical field constraints 

below 10-6 V/cm in transport measurements of TCrit), the extension by 

which experimental results really deviate from expected (true) values has 

remained an open question. What we mostly find in the literature are  

error bars resulting from estimates applied to final experimental results. 

A statistical approach applied in the most early stage of the simulations, 

like the one presented in the present paper, is a better solution.  

 

Random variations of the thermal conductivity, within ± 5 per cent and 

first results showing their impact on centroid element temperature are 

described in the Appendix, Figure 10 (it would be extremely difficult to 

achieve experimental uncertainty of less than five percent in the 

conductivity or thermal diffusivity of thin films).  

 

Simulations using non-uniform superconductor critical parameters is 

contrary to all traditional, numerical calculations of temperature fields 

under disturbances (and also to all standard stability calculations). 

 

But the most interesting question is whether critical temperature of a 

superconductor can uniquely be defined at all. Existence of a uniquely 

defined TCrit depends on the thermodynamic state of the superconductor 

electron system1. Trivially, any uncertainty of TCrit would concern the 

differences ΔT(x,y,t) and the ratios T(x,y,t)/TCrit(x,y,t)] when calculating 

JCrit[T(x,y,t)] by Eq. (2b). 

 

1 Critical temperature like critical current density is a property of solely the electron 
system. It is an interesting question which temperature is measured, electron or 
phonon temperature, when sensors attached to a superconductor solid or thin film, or 
remotely by radiation detectors. It is not clear that both temperatures would be 
identical, compare Sect. 4.3 in [11] for results obtained with different 
superconductors. 


 

 
9

2.5 Uncertainty of TCrit from relaxation time 

Relaxation of the superconductor electron system from a disturbance is 

expected to follow an exponential decay law. 

 

Let ς(t) denote an excitation like a sudden temperature increase following 

e. g. absorption of a radiative pulse. The excitation disturbs the dynamic 

equilibrium between statistical but permanent, single electron (quasi-

particle) generation and their recombination to electron pairs. The 

excitation decays proportional to exp(- t/τ), with τ the relaxation time, 

traditionally assumed as constant. But it is not clear that τ is really 

constant; the density, nS(T), of electron pairs strongly depends on 

temperature that in turn, under a disturbance, is a function of  time, t.  

 

The point is: Relaxation cannot be completed instantaneously. Trivially, 

relaxation time is correlated with relaxation rates. Spontaneously, one 

would assume that relaxation time increases the stronger, the smaller 

the relaxation rate (the longer it takes the superconductor to relax to a 

new thermodynamic equilibrium). Regardless how relaxation rates are 

calculated, like in [11], see below, or from Eq. (8) of [12], the rates 

converge to zero when temperature approaches critical temperature of 

the superconductor. 

 

An approach how to calculate relaxation time, τ, and its dependence on 

temperature has been suggested by the recently reported,  "microscopic 

stability model" [11] Its details shall not be repeated here, a short 

description can be found in [17] when the model was applied to a (2G) 

thin film superconductor. But its consequences have to be taken into 

account when inspecting the said relaxation problem. 

 


 

 
10

In short, the model [11] is a multi-physics approach using four formal 

analogues to describe the temporal aspect of the re-organisation of the 

total electron system after a disturbance. Relaxation not only means 

recombination of a limited number of single electrons (the decay 

products from a disturbance) to electron pairs but re-organisation of the 

total electron body, i. e. all electrons in dynamic equilibrium with electron 

pairs of the superconductor. The method accordingly includes 

 

(a) Calculation of “coefficients of fractional parentage” (cfp's), a concept 

applied in atomic and nuclear physics; here, this concept describes the 

total number of electron states involved in the re-organisation of the total 

electron body and, after completion of the relaxation, allows to calculate 

the total time needed to arrive at the new, thermodynamic equilibrium,  

(b) a “time of flight”-concept with a mediating Boson. In nuclear physics, 

the Yukawa-model, as one of possible analogues, a pion, π, mediates 

coupling (binding) of two nucleons, like the n and p in a Deuteron. 

(c) the Pauli selection rule, and (d) the uncertainty principle. 

   

In comparison to this model, derivation of the superconducting electron 

density, nS(T)/n0 = 1 - (T/TCrit)4, Eq. 8 of [12], with n0 the total number of 

electrons at T = 0, from Eqs. (2) to (7) of the same reference, neglects 

the dynamic aspects  (statistical, quasi-particle generation and 

corresponding recombination processes) of the problem. Yet comparison 

of the curves "relaxation rate vs. temperature" obtained from both [11] 

and [12] shows at least qualitative agreement (yellow and green 

diamonds in the Appendix, Figure 12a).Differences result just from 

assumptions on numerical values of electron density, nS(T). 

 


 

 
11

Both the direct, multi-step method described in [11] and, with some 

additional assumptions, the possibly heuristic Eq. (8) of [12], not only 

allow calculation of relaxation rates and relaxation time. A far-reaching 

conclusion from relaxation time obtained in [11] (here reproduced with 

Figure 12b, again in the Appendix of the present paper) can also be 

drawn about existence of critical temperature, to be understood as a 

unambiguously defined, thermodynamic  quantity. 

 

If TCrit exists, it can be understood as being either 

 a rough description of a thermodynamic non-equilibrium electron 

state (this is a standard but only approximate interpretation), which 

means, from purely thermodynamic standpoints, TCrit cannot be 

explained as a thermodynamic temperature of uniquely defined 

value,  

 or TCrit correlates, as a thermodynamic equilibrium variable, with a 

corresponding, 
completed 
(which 
means, 
really 
existing) 

equilibrium electron state. The prediction from [11] (and could be 

drawn also from Eq. (8) in [12]) is that in this case the new 

equilibrium electron state cannot be reached within finite process 

or simulation time.  

 

The situation is schematically described in Figure 3. Relaxation time 

increases the more the closer the electron system approaches the phase 

transition because the more electrons have to be re-organised to 

electron pairs to obtain the new equilibrium. 

 

This conclusion is not in conflict with Buckel and Kleiner [13], Chap. 4, p. 

262: The authors say that "in conventional superconductors the 

concentration of unpaired  electrons decreases  exponentially with 


 

 
12

decreasing temperature, and hence the probability that an unpaired 

electron finds a suitable partner for recombination to form a Cooper pair 

also decreases." This is not in conflict with the prediction from [11] 

because the situation described  in [13] is strongly different. 

 

In the present case, under increasing temperature, the number of single 

electrons increases (quasi-particles as thermally, not permanent, 

statistically initiated decay products). Starting from an original dynamic 

equilibrium state at a temperature, T, followed by a disturbance at this 

temperature, increasingly more single particles have to recombined to 

pairs in order to generate, by reorganisation of the total number, NTotal, 

the new dynamic equilibrium, at the new equilibrium temperature, T'. 

There, again a statistical, un-displaced dynamic equilibrium between  

generation and recombination processes would be obtained when 

relaxation is completed. Conservation of energy requests T' > T; this 

temperature increase, from T to T', concerns all electrons (the total 

electron body). The increased number, NTotal(T'), of electrons to be 

reorganised accordingly increases relaxation time (while, reversely, 

relaxation time decreases with decreasing temperature). It is the 

fractional parentage principle that causes the enormous increase of τ 

observed near TCrit in Figure 12b. 

 

Instead, the explanation [13] and the original papers by Gray et al. [14, 

15] do not refer to a temperature increase from absorption of  a radiation 

pulse or from other thermal disturbances that would affect the total body 

of electrons. Contrary to the situation described in [11], they describe 

injection experiments to create an additional number ΔN of quasi-

particles above the "core" (N) of bound electrons in the undisturbed 

superconductor. The excursion with time of the number ΔN, the 


 

 
13

relaxation time, τ, is described by equations of the type ∂ΔN/∂t = A + B, 

with sources, A, and sinks , B. The contribution A contains the injection 

rate, B comprises different types of quasi-particle losses resulting from e. 

g. escape processes and by interaction with lattice phonons. These 

equations do not take into account the whole electron body (N) but only 

the additional, injected number ΔN of particles. It is thus not the total 

body of electrons that has to be re-organised in this model under 

observation of the fractional parentage principle. 

 

The relaxation time reported in [14, 15] therefore is strongly different 

from the predictions made in [11]. The model [11] does not contradict but 

simply cannot be applied to the injection experiments [14, 15], and, 

reversely, the relaxation time obtained from quasi-particle injection has 

little relevance for relaxation of from thermal excitation. 

 

As a consequence, even if it in a warm-up experiment the temperature of 

the electron system might become infinitely close to the traditional TCrit, 

re-organisation of the corresponding, total electron state still is not 

completed and thus cannot be understood as a thermodynamic 

equilibrium. Critical temperature, as a thermodynamic equilibrium  

quantity, accordingly is not uniquely defined. 

 

If temperature evolution in a superconductor is not uniform, the phase 

transition at critical temperature can be completed neither spatial 

uniformly nor will this final state be attained simultaneously in the 

superconductor cross section or volume.   

 

The consequence to be taken from [11] concerning non-existence of a 

uniquely defined TCrit is absolutely contrary to standard understanding of 


 

 
14

critical temperature (traditionally, TCrit is, so to speak, under "monumental 

protection"). Instead, electron states near the phase transition, and thus 

near (traditional) critical temperature, are hidden from direct experimental 

observation and from the results obtainable in simulations. 

 

Critical temperature, if understood as a sharply defined quantity, 

therefore is a fiction, it remains out of sight during finite (experimental or 

simulated) periods of time. Rather, it is not at TCrit that simulations can be 

performed but in a time interval within which events and their distance 

from the phase transition can be studied. 

 

The conclusion from [11] also specifies a note that Annett [16], p. 52, 

added to the left column of his book. There we have "The word 

superconductor is used only to mean a material with a definite phase 

transition and critical temperature." (correction by the present author: 

"definite" probably means "completed"). Yes, but the phase transition, 

here the completion of relaxation after a disturbance, takes finite, 

possibly diverging time. Critical temperature is the dynamic equilibrium of 

the electron state when no more disturbances, besides the statistical 

fluctuations in dynamic equilibrium, have to be compensated. Critical  

temperature thus may become out of sight within reasonable time scales 

in standard experiments or in computer simulations. 

 

This conclusion is not new physics but results from properties of many-

particle systems (an analogy to nuclear physics), basic thermodynamic 

considerations (temperature uniquely defined under thermodynamic 

equilibrium) and from standard, multi-component heat transfer principles 

(solid conduction plus radiation in thin films). 

   


 

 
15

Consequences from this conclusion not only concern experiments and 

simulations but might concern also levitation: Levitation height might not 

converge within reasonable periods of time to a final, equilibrium vertical 

co-ordinate. Even more important, but obviously inevitable under 

reasonably 
limited 
experimental 
efforts, 
results 
of 
standard 

measurements of critical current density might not reflect perfect 

equilibrium conditions.  

 

All results reported in the following Figures therefore are provisional in 

the sense that, strictly speaking, simulations can safely be performed 

only if a convergence limes of a series TCrit really would exist.  

 

3 
Simulation Scheme 

The following relations between critical current density and relaxation 

time, τ, or relaxation rate, ζ,  

 

dJCrit/dτ   ~  JCrit, or 
 
(3a) 

dJCrit/dζ   ~  JCrit 
 
(3b) 

  

are strongly non-linear, solutions can be found only in numerical 

simulations, and they can be quantified only if JCrit, τ and ζ depend on a 

common variable, which here is temperature. The simulated temperature 

excursions with time shall contribute to quantitative solutions of Eq. 

(3a,b).   

 

If inspected under the item "simulation time", the overall procedure 

yielding relaxation rates and relaxation time in dependence of (and 

correlated with) critical current density is schematically explained in 

Figure 3. 


 

 
16

  3.1    Overall procedure 

We start with simulations of transient temperature fields, T(x,y,t), 

developing from initial values, T(x,y,t0), in  a superconductor coil. The coil 

integrates 100 turns prepared from a coated, (2G) YBaCuO 123 thin film 

superconductor (Figure 1). Details of conductor architecture are 

described in [17] and will not be repeated here. The transient 

temperature distributions under disturbances in this paper are obtained 

from 2D solutions of Fourier's differential equation obtained by means of 

the Finite Element (FE) method using a standard, commercially available 

FE code. 

 

This start of the simulations is chosen because temperature, like 

magnetic field, is a thermodynamic variable that deserves primary 

attention, while current is not. We do not apply a multi-physics approach  

like H- or T/A formulations that beyond doubt are suitable for large-scale 

superconductor applications, see [18] and references cited therein, in 

particular the review by Shen B, Grilli F, and Coombs T (August 2019). 

 

Instead, what is needed in the present paper, with respect to the said, 

possibly existing correlation, requests electromagnetic/thermal coupling 

without homogenization but with modelling the physics on microscopic 

scales. We have to consider, in each of the Finite Elements, the 

Meissner effect, weak links and viscous, thermally assisted flux flow 

resistivity and flux creep if the superconductor is very close to critical 

temperature and contact resistances between super- and normal 

conducting layers - how else could non-uniformity of the temperature 

distributions be considered. We do not apply constant temperature 

approximations but describe the local interplay of temperature-, field- and 

current-dependent variables with the transient temperature fields.  


 

 
17

Standard Finite Element codes provide multi-physics element options 

(like the electric field, heat transfer, structural mechanics couplings by 

the FE code Ansys). But it is not clear that convergence can safely be 

achieved if the superconducting/normal phase transition, with its 

complicated consequences for the other superconductor variables, would 

be involved in the solutions obtained from standard FE codes. 

 

Therefore, we first calculate the solution, T(x,y,t), by application of the FE 

code to highly differentiated, geometrical and materials boundary 

conditions. From this solution, all physical variables that depend on 

temperature are calculated. In successive load-steps, the Finite Element 

integration 
is 
restarted 
with 
the 
new 
variables; 
Bi-directional 

interconnection between electric/magnetic and thermal interplay is 

realised by this sequential procedure. The convergence problem is 

reduced to that of solely the temperature field, yet the procedure requires 

considerable computational efforts. 

 

 The FE procedure for this purpose is embedded in a comprehensive, 

"master scheme". This scheme, a flow chart that is extended against the 

previously published Figure 12 of [19], is shown in the Appendix of the 

present paper, Figure 11a). Step by step repetitions of the proper Finite 

Element integration cycles are intersected by intermediate, analytic 

calculations of electrical and magnetic variables (penetration of magnetic 

field, Meissner effect, local resistances, local critical and transport 

current distribution and local losses like flux flow, Ohmic or inductive).   

 

The FE procedure during its many repetitions allows to introduce 

corrections (adjustments) to physically reasonable values like the 77 K 


 

 
18

coolant temperature constraint in case of divergences. This is realised 

without restarts of the simulations. 

 

3.2 
Selection of the number of simulated turns 

Another serious problem arises from the number of turns that can be 

simulated to yield high spatial and temporal resolution, without 

application of any continuous, spatially averaged structures. The number 

of simulated turns for this purpose has to be limited. 

 

In the present simulations, the procedure has been applied to only the 

five uppermost turns of the coil. Accordingly, a thermal boundary 

condition near the interface between turns 96 and 95  has to be specified 

appropriately. 

 

If y96 denotes vertical position at half the thickness of the Hastelloy block,  

the condition T(y96) Ξ 77 K (temperature of the coolant) would not be 

realistic because temperature of turn 95 is much larger, at least in case 

of a fault current. Any values T(y96) > 77 K at this position could only be 

estimated, but estimates shall be avoided. 

 

In order to solve this problem, the plane y96 = const in the present 

calculations has been defined as plane of vertical symmetry, with 

temperature of turn 96 reflecting temperature of turn 95 which in turn is 

close to temperature of turns 94 and so on. This is because all turns are 

tightly, by strong, solid/solid contacts, coupled to each other. Physically, 

deviations from symmetry can arise only close near the upper boundary 

of the coil with its solid/liquid contact. At this co-ordinate, temperature of 

turn 100 physically (with respect to thermal transport) does not reflect 

temperature of turn 92 while it numerically does. 


 

 
19

This deviation from reality is acceptable because, physically, there are 

many intermediate layers between turns 92 and 96, and these are 

expected to thermally insulate turn 96 from the turns below (needless to 

say, the turns are also electrically insulated against each other).   

 

Numerically, symmetry is specified by leaving the boundary condition 

open at the co-ordinate y96, a measure that is frequently applied in 

numerical (Finite Differences or Element) calculations.   

 

For the upper five turns (96 to 100) of the coil, the FE model applies 

between 65 000 and 198 000 Finite Elements (Ansys 16, plane55 with 4 

nodes). From these, the proper superconductor thin films in each turn 

occupy between 5 000 and 15 000 elements. 

 

 3.3 Compensation of convergence problems 

We have compensated 2D interfacial layers (IFL) between the thin SC, 

Ag and MgO-films (that otherwise might be approximated with shell 

elements) by assuming regular, 2D thin films of very small thickness. 

 

In the total winding cross sections, film thicknesses are between 40 nm 

(interfacial layers) and 100 μm (stabilizer). With a width of the windings 

of about 6 mm, and in particular with respect to details of the previously 

suggested flux flow cell model [1], the element aspect ratio might 

become larger than limits set by the Finite Element method, but this was 

avoided by limiting the horizontal element width by increasing the 

number of elements in each turn. The cell model [1] simply replaces well-

known standard relations for solid state, normal conduction resistivity, 

ρNC, by a conducting network incorporating weak-links to estimate flux 


 

 
20

flow resistivity, ρFF = ρNC,eff B/BCrit,2, from the effective electrical resistivity, 

ρNC,eff, of this network.   

 

Divergences like T < 77 K, or thermal run-away to extremely high 

temperature, were observed in only rare situations during the iteration 

cycles. These were located outside the proper superconductor cross 

section (compare Figure 11c in the Appendix) and could result from too 

large a time step, too small an element volume in the numerical 

procedure or from inappropriate convergence criteria. 

 

Control of stagnation temperature confirmed the FE mesh was correctly 

designed in the present simulations. 

 

Multiple repetitions of the FE calculation steps, as indicated in Figure 

11a,b, are unconventional, but this scheme is justified in view of the non-

linearity of almost all input variables and parameters, in particular near 

the phase transition. Against standard, Finite Differences or multi-physics 

Finite Element procedures, control of convergence by this concept 

seems to be strongly improved. 

 

3.4 
Thermal and radiative parameters 

Like in the previous papers [1 - 3], the simulations apply temperature-

dependent thermal conductivity and specific heat of all materials, see 

[17] (manuscript and Table 1); these values and the anisotropy of 

YBaCuO 123 material are based on experiments, either reported in the 

literature or result from co-operations of the present author with J. 

Fricke's group in experiments performed at Wuerzburg University. 

 


 

 
21

Radiative transfer in thin films has been modelled as a conduction 

process since the films are non-transparent to mid-IR radiation [20]. The 

extinction and scattering properties have been calculated from 

application of rigorous scattering theory and of the Drude-Lorentz model 

to estimate the complex refractive indices as a function of temperature, 

see the results obtained in the mid-IR spectral range for refractive index, 

extinction coefficients and Albedo shown in Figures 12 to 15 of [20]. 

 

More details of the general simulation procedure (meshing, integration 

time steps, heat transfer to coolant, depairing current density) have been 

reported in Sects. 2 and 3 of [21], there for the (1G) BSCCO 2223 multi-

filamentary superconductor. 

 

4 
Transient temperature excursions 

Figure 4a confirms previous results that temperature distribution within 

the thin superconductor film is not uniform, with approximately a linear 

temperature gradient within the 2μm thin YBaCuO 123 film. Figure 4a is 

a detail of the present results and confirms non-uniform temperature 

distributions like those reported in previous papers [1 - 3]. 

 

Non-uniformity of the temperature distribution is also confirmed by the 

standard deviations from mean value of the curves in Figure 4b (turns 96 

and 100 of the coil). In the outer turns (here turn 100, lower diagram), 

almost no difference (within their standard deviations) can be detected if 

calculations are performed with or without the random variations of TCrit, 

JCrit and BCrit1,2.   

 

Because of the non-uniform temperature distribution, local zero and 

Ohmic resistances during finite time intervals exist in parallel, even in 


 

 
22

turn 100. Also local flux flow resistances, between 77 ≤ T(x,y,t) ≤ 

TCrit(x,y,t) then exist if local transport exceeds local critical current density 

at these positions. For T < TCrit, it is thus nominal current, flux flow 

resistance and corresponding losses (and the random fluctuations of the 

critical parameters) that are responsible for the local increase of T(x,y,t) 

> 77 K, the start value of the simulations, seen in Figure 4b (and later, 

upper diagram of Figure 11c).   

 

We have applied the ratio of transport to critical current, ITransp/ICrit = 1. 

While this defines the overall transport current ratio in the conductor 

cross section, it does not exclude any local overrun of local critical 

current density, JCrit(x,y,t), by the transport current density, under its 

random variations ΔJCrit(x,y,t).  

 

Since distribution of flux flow and Ohmic resistances may be different at 

each longitudinal (z) co-ordinate of a thin film or filamentary 

superconductor, transport current may percolate through length of the 

conductor. Its distribution at different z-co-ordinates then does not reflect 

profiles of laminar liquid flow.  

 

Random, local variations of TCrit0 and JCrit0 obviously are sufficient to 

induce, without any fault current, just with transport current equal to 

nominal current, non-uniform temperature distributions. The results, here 

obtained under parameter sensitivity testing, confirm the findings 

reported in Figures 4 to 7 of [17]. Without the random variations of TCrit, 

JCrit and BCrit, and if  density of transport current is below critical current 

density, the temperature distributions would be flat and would not show 

any temperature run-away to catastrophic divergence. 

 


 

 
23

 By the very large number of elements, trivially the average of the 

random distributions of JCrit0, TCrit0 and BCrit20 almost perfectly coincides 

with their physical (standard) values. However, the problem is that a 

certain number of local values of JCrit, TCrit and BCrit2 possibly might 

diverge from the uncertainty (percentage) range in Figure 2. A specific 

value TCrit(x,y,t) < T(x,y,t) then would be responsible for development of a 

hot spot at the temporal position (x,y,t) even if the stability function, Φ(t) 

remains below Φ(t)  = 1 (explanation of Φ(t) and an example is given in 

Figure 9a,b in the Appendix).    

    

The superconductor literature speaks of quench as an event during 

which its total magnetic and mechanical tension energy is suddenly 

released to the total volume. It does not seem inappropriate to apply the 

term "quench" to also local, sudden transformations of magnetic and 

mechanical to thermal energy: The mechanisms of this transformation is, 

on a macroscopic scale, the same as their macroscopic counterpart; 

roughly speaking, they proceed on just different spatial and time scales. 

But a local quench in many situations may well be the origin of a 

subsequent, total and catastrophic quench that would cover the total 

superconductor volume.  

 

Like in [1 - 3, 11, 17, 19 - 21], the calculations are not design 

calculations. The numerical experiments instead investigate basic 

superconductor problems using the Finite Element procedure, and like in 

[3], Monte Carlo simulations, and radiative transfer calculations in thin 

films, as a tool to explore, as far as possible, the physics behind quench. 

The investigations rather demonstrate potentials and also limitations of 

numerical methods in the field of superconductivity. Yet the simulations 


 

 
24

and the reported results might allow conclusions for materials 

development, see the second part of this paper. 

 

Computational efforts are enormous. Simulations shown in Figures 4a,b, 

5a,b and 11c, over a period of below 5 ms, on a standard PC, with 4-

core processor PC and 16 GB workspace under Windows 7, frequently 

took more than 24 hrs. This mainly results from the large number of 

IF…THEN…ELSE-steps to be executed separately in each of numerous 

FE elements, within each under a large number of calculation steps and 

iteration cycles (Figure 11a,b) and with respect to all potentially open 

superconductor, zero, flux flow or Ohmic resistance states. 

   

 

4.1 
Centroid temperature under parameter variation 

In Figure 5a, dependence of the centroid temperature, T(x,y,t), on 

variations of the exponent n in Eq. (1b) is reported. The observed 

temporal structures of T(x,y,t) at t = 4.1 and t > 4.2 ms in the centroid 

element at first sight indicate onset of a first and of a second (apparent), 

local temperature run-away. It becomes "real" not before we enter during 

the iterations the convergence circles indicating the periods (load steps) 

within which convergence of temperature is achieved. That  in both 

cases the local temperature increase might indicate also a total quench, 

in at least one turn, is confirmed in Figure 5b (lower diagram) and, in the 

Appendix, in Figure 9a-c by the calculated stability functions and heat 

fluxes.  

 

The impact of the exponent n in JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit(x,y,t0) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n 

on local (again centroid) temperature is explained by JCrit(T) = JCrit0 ( 1 - 

T/TCrit)n, Eq. (1b), that can be interpreted in two ways: 

 


 

 
25

(1) the larger exponent, n = 1.5, decreases JCrit rather strongly while for 

all n < 1, JCrit increases because [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)] < 1 for all T(x,y,t) 

below TCrit. At constant T(x,y,t), and if n = 1.5, superconductor 

temperature thus becomes more vulnerable to occurrence of flux flow 

losses. Flux flow losses (if transport current density exceeds JCrit) then 

occur with increasing probability, and T(x,y,t), because of these very 

losses, becomes larger for n = 1.5, in comparison to n = 0.5. 

 

(2) under given JCrit(T), JCrit0 and exponent n, Eq. (1b) after elementary 

transformations yields 

 

T = (1 -  [JCrit(T)/JCrit0] 1/n )TCrit  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 

 

for temperature, T, calculated for different JCrit(T) and exponents  n, see 

Figure 6. For given JCrit(T), temperature T increases if n decreases. This 

explains the results shown in Figure 5a,b: The smaller the exponent n, 

the larger the conductor temperature.  

 

This is not in contradiction to item (1) that predicts at constant T, that 

critical current density JCrit(T) (not temperature, T) increases (and thus 

flux flow loss decreases) if n decreases. 

 

Figure 5b shows the joint impact of variations ΔTCrit0 and ΔJCrit0 when the 

random values given in Figure 2 and of ΔBCrit20 are reduced by a divisor 

(here between 5 and 100) applied to the originally assumed uncertainties 

of these parameters. In the top turn 100, the mean temperature near 

TCritt0 (lower diagram of Figure 5b) increases by about 1.7 K. 

Optimistically, this is about the experimental uncertainty of a traditional 

TCrit measurement itself when it is obtained from transport measurements 


 

 
26

(with sharp electrical field criteria). In the inner turns, the impact is even 

larger than in turn 100. 

 

In conclusion from this Section, uncertainties in materials and transport 

properties of the superconductor cannot be neglected, not  in the present 

simulations (and also not in any stability analysis). Simulations of 

superconductor transient temperature excursion have to apply 

 

 ΔT(x,y,t) = T(x,y,t) - TCrit(x,y,t), 
  
 
  

 JCrit[T(x,y,t)] = JCrit0 [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit(x,y,t)]n, 

 

in both cases with local TCrit(x,y,t), instead of the simple comparison T vs. 

TCrit0 and instead of uniform TCrit0 = 92 K. 

 

More details showing the impact of variations of the exponent n and of 

TCrit (uniform or spatial resolved) are shown in the Appendix, Figure 9a,b 

(the impact on the stability function). 

 

It is interesting to note that the (first) steep increase of centroid and 

mean temperatures of the turns (Figures 4b and 5a,b) at about t = 4.1 ms 

after start of the disturbance (and correspondingly also of the stability 

function), all correlate with onset of divergence of the numerical 

calculation scheme. The same correlation can be seen from the sudden 

increase of the number of FE equilibrium integrations to obtain 

convergence when in Figure 1 of [19] the multi-filamentary (1G) 

superconductor BSCCO 2223 was investigated. 

 

The question now is: How often will JCrit(x,y,t), TCrit(x,y,t) and BCrit2(x,y,t) , 

at a given simulation time, really fall into the uncertainty intervals of 


 

 
27

Figure 2 or into other intervals around the mean values of the critical 

parameters? The following discussion is focused on TCrit(x,y,t). 

 

4.2 
Frequency by which TCrit(x,y,t) falls into uncertainty intervals 

 
around TCrit0 

In Figure 7, we control the number of element temperatures falling into 

deviation intervals δT from critical temperature. Results are calculated for 

either the deviation δT from TCrit0 = 92 K (TCrit0 uniform, solid diamonds) 

or from TCrit(x,y,t), solid triangles (the latter are those of Figure 2, lower 

diagram). Clear differences are seen only for simulation time t < 4.16 ms. 

The calculations are performed using the anisotropy ratio, Dab/Dc = 5, of 

the thermal diffusivity and the exponent n = 1.5 in JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit(x,y,t=0) 

[1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n. When instead using n = 0.5, the results are almost 

identical. 

 

The results show that the statistical frequency distribution of deviations 

between local element temperature from critical temperature in only rare 

cases is below 0.01 K. In this case, differentiation would be of little 

importance for the present simulations since the frequency of these 

deviation accounts for only 0.14 percent of the total. But deviations of 

0.1, 1 and 10 K at t = 4.1 ms amount to about 1.3, 12.3 and 86.3 percent, 

respectively. The impact exerted by δT = 1 K on the results, by its 

approximately 12 percent contribution, is already substantial.   

 

 

 

 

 


 

 
28

5 
Second part of the paper: Correlation of critical current 

 
density with relaxation 

5.1  The link provided by temperature 

The investigation as before is focused on situations near the phase 

transition. Element temperature serves for calculation of the critical 

current density (Eq. 1a,b), without field dependence.  

 

The fields T(x,y,t) and JCrit(x,y,t) so far rely on solely results of the Finite 

Element (FE) simulations, with application of the relation JCrit(x,y,t) = 

JCrit(x,y,t = 0) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n using n = 1.5 as the exponent and Eq. 

(2a) for temperature difference ΔT and ratio T/TCrit in Eq. (2b).   

   

In any electrical conductor, the relationship between current density, J, 

and the density, nq, of involved charge carriers, by conservation of 

charge, is 

 

 J = nq v q  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 

 

with v the velocity of the charge carriers and q the moving electric 

charge. Eq. (5) applies to stationary current flow. It uniquely couples 

charge density, nq, with current density, J. The density, nq, has to be 

provided from a model or from experiments. 

  

In superconductors, transport or screening currents all flow with critical 

current density, J = JCrit, at a temperature, T,    

 

JCrit(T) = JCrit,0 ( 1 - T/TCrit)n 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (6a) 

  = nS(T) vFermi 2e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 (6b)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

 
29

The temperature fields, T(x,y,t), are mapped onto the field of critical 

temperatures to yield the fields JCrit(x,y,t).  

 

Density of the charge carriers, nS(T), in the superconductor YBaCuO 123 

has been calculated in Figure 8a of [19]. We have used Eq. (6a,b) in this 

Figure to calculate the minimum density of electron pairs (charge 

carriers), nS(T), necessary to support a given critical current density. The 

results were safely below the available nS(T) obtained from application of 

the microscopic stability model [11].   

 

Density, nS(T), of charge carriers and critical current density according to  

Eq. (6a,b) are coupled to each other. The same applies to their finite 

variations, ΔnS(T) and ΔJCrit, both within Eq. (6b), and thus applies to also 

their ratio ΔJCrit(T)/ΔnS(T), at given ΔJCrit. In the following, with the decay 

rate ζ = ΔnS(T)/Δt, ratios ΔJCrit/Δζ of the variations ΔJCrit(T) and ΔnS(T) 

shall be calculated from the transient temperature fields obtained in the 

first part of this paper. The decay  rate ζ = ΔnS(T)/Δt) becomes very small 

(see Figure 13 in the Appendix). 

 

Figure 8a (blue diamonds in the upper diagram) shows ratio ΔJCrit/Δζ of 

the (finite) ΔJCrit and Δζ (not of the variables JCrit and ζ), in dependence of 

JCrit. The ratio in the following is considered as a continuum variable, i. e. 

as an approximation to dΔJCrit/dΔζ = f(JCrit). When this curve is integrated, 

it yields the variation dJCrit of JCrit (not the proper JCrit itself) under given 

relaxation rates, dζ, and at given JCrit, see next Subsection.     

 

Variations of JCrit according to Figure 8a (upper diagram) depend strongly 

on variations of the relaxation rate: The smaller JCrit (i. e. at temperature 

close to TCrit), the more increases the derivative dΔJCrit/dΔζ, and the more 


 

 
30

sensitive will JCrit react to variations of the decay rate. Obtaining large 

dΔJCrit/dΔζ, therefore, under this specific aspect, could be of practical, 

possibly also of theoretical interest.   

 

Coupling between JCrit with also materials properties in type I and type II 

superconductors simply is a matter of fact. A key to increase JCrit thus 

might be found not only from progress in materials development (like 

increase of flux pinning, reduction of weak-links) but also if a correlation 

(in its exact sense, see next Subsection) could be identified between 

relaxation rates and materials properties.   

 

Critical (and transport) current density of thin film superconductors is not, 

or only weakly, limited by grain boundaries, in contrast to grain structure 

and corresponding weak link behaviour of the BSCCO superconductor 

family. What then can be done, from materials transport property 

aspects, to accelerate relaxation rates? 

 

5.2 
A correlation between relaxation and materials properties? 

Correlation has to be differentiated from causality and from simple 

coupling. 

Coupling is a weak, not necessarily quantifiable relation between two or 

more objects, events or variables. Correlation indicates strength by 

which two or more of these are coupled to each other. Coupling might be 

statistical. 

If an event 1 leads to a change of the properties (or simply of co-

ordinates) of an event 2, and if this change depends solely on the 

interaction of event 2 with event 1 (not by others), and if the interaction 

can be detected and is quantifiable (and possibly reversible like in a 


 

 
31

resonance), we speak of causality. Causality is stronger than correlation. 

Correlation trivially includes coupling.   

An indicative relation, in the strict mathematical sense, exists between 

conductor temperature and critical current density of a superconductor. 

The relation neither is surjective nor is it bijective. Increase of conductor 

temperature from all experience reduces critical current density, which 

means both variables are correlated under uni-directional causality. 

Causality in this case is not bijective (is not reversible). 

Consider Figures 12a,b and 13: The larger the conductor temperature 

(the smaller the remaining difference to critical temperature), the larger 

are decay rates, and, based on [11], the longer takes it the system to 

relax to a new thermodynamic equilibrium. Accordingly, temperature, 

decay rates and relaxation time apparently are correlated, directly or 

inversely (though again not reversibly).  By analogy, can we explain the 

apparently existing relations described in Figure 8a between critical 

current density and relaxation as correlations and, in particular, as also 

of causal order? 

The curves and arrows in Figure 8b, while they suggest that correlations 

would exist, perhaps could alternatively be explained on just numerical 

grounds; in reality, the correlations could be spurious (or even nonsense 

correlations). Also calculation of correlation coefficients would not prove 

physical correlations (and thus causal order) among the variables 

because these coefficients would have to be based on the same 

numerical data.  

To answer the above question "causality or not?", it has to be checked 

whether the apparent correlations are uni- or bi-directional and can be 


 

 
32

explained from the physics behind. Can we, from the physics behind, 

verify that the arrows 1 to 4 in Figure 8b indicate causal relations?  

Compare again the blue diamonds in Figure 8a (upper diagram). The 

smaller the critical current density, which means, the higher the 

conductor temperature, the larger is dΔJCrit/dΔζ [(A/m2)/m-3 s-1) = A m s], 

the derivative of the variations of critical current density and relaxation 

rate, ζ, of the thin film YBaCuO 123 superconductor. During warm-up, 

this means that the ratio ΔJCrit/dΔζ increases with increasing simulation 

time (or duration of an experiment), as follows from integration of Eq. 

(3b), i. e. of the curve dΔJCrit/dΔζ, 

 

ln(ΔJCrit) = ∫ dΔζ + C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(7a) 

  

under the condition Δζ(JCrit) = 0 at JCrit = JCrit0 = const (almost zero decay 

or recombination rates that compensate each other). This yields 

 

ΔJCrit = ΔJCrit0 exp(-Δζ)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(7b) 

 

Variation of critical current density, coupled by the exponential factor, 

exp(-Δζ) in Eq. (7b), to the decay rate, decreases strongly if the 

relaxation rate, Δζ, increases. On the other hand, variation of the 

relaxation rate is very small if temperature is close to the phase 

transition, compare Figure 13 in the Appendix. If the system continuously 

creates new, intermediate dynamic equilibrium states, decay rates in this 

Figure are equal to relaxation rates. This means: Near the phase 

transition, variations of the decay rate, like a variation exp(-20) ≤ Δζ [m-3 

s-1]  ≤ exp(-1) results in a variation of approximately 2 10-9 ≤ ΔJCrit/ΔJCrit0 ≤ 

0.37. Over the total period, variations of critical current density and of 

relaxation rates obviously are weakly correlated numerically. 


 

 
33

 

By analogy, conclusions in the same way can be drawn from the 

derivative dΔJCrit/dΔτ of critical current density with relaxation time, τ (the 

red diamonds in Figure 8a, upper diagram). But because of the plus-

sign, the integral of dΔJCrit/dΔτ would diverge too strongly to allow 

conclusions on how critical current density could be increased by 

variation of relaxation time within reasonable duration of experiments or 

numerical simulations (the question is  how relaxation time can directly 

be tailored at all).   

 

But finite, possibly tailored decay rates, Δζ [(A/m2)/m-3 s-1) could be 

helpful to protect JCrit from decrease under disturbances (large 

dΔJCrit/dΔζ may "heal" deficiencies). This is because the top and bottom 

diagrams in Figure 8a explain that, as mentioned, at temperature close 

to critical temperature, and this is the interval of most interest, the (small) 

critical current density reacts more sensitive to the (large) variations of 

dΔJCrit/dΔζ. 
Conversely, 
at 
temperature 
far 
away 
from 
the 

superconducting/normal conducting phase transition (which means, at 

large JCrit), the variation dΔJCrit/dΔζ is comparatively small, 

 

The above question how to increase dΔJCrit/dΔζ at temperature close to 

the phase transition has to be answered with respect to solely the proper 

superconductor material. 

 

In type I superconductors, for application of Eq. (1b) with the Ginzburg-

Landau exponent n, it is the de-pairing or pair-breaking current density 

up to which the said correlations may be investigated (this means, as 

long as the kinetic energy of the super-current carriers does not exceed 

condensation energy to the superconducting state). 


 

 
34

 

In type II superconductors, it is in addition 

(i) the critical current density, at the transition from zero to flux flow 

resistance (magnetic flux quanta leaving their pinning sites) and 

(ii) decoupling by layers or other aggregates of non-super-conducting 

material between neighbouring superconductor thin films that both limit 

the range of applicability of Eq. (1b).  

 

No doubt, perfect crystallography and stoichiometry are the first 

requisites to be fulfilled (a single crystal would be an optimum sample). 

But when this is fulfilled, what then would be suitable to promote the 

rates dΔJCrit/dΔζ?  

 

The model [11] and its application to calculate relaxation rates within the 

same range (items i and ii) could give an answer: Since relaxation rate is 

inversely proportional to relaxation time (compare Figures 12a,b and 13), 

it is relaxation time that has to be decreased in order to increase 

dΔJCrit/dΔζ. Apart from constraints set by “coefficients of fractional 

parentage” and the "time of flight" concept, which both are just formalistic 

issues, it is essentially the density of electron pair states, nS, and its 

temperature dependence that both enter into the calculations of 

relaxation time in this model. 

 

Smaller (than usually applied values) dnS/dt, according to the calculation 

steps in [11], would contribute to reduction of relaxation time, which 

means future materials development might increase dΔJCrit/dΔζ provided 

magnitude and temperature dependence of the energy gap in the 

superconductor could be modified.  

 


 

 
35

Figure 8a, lower diagram, and Figure 8b show that dΔJCrit/dΔζ sensitively 

depends on the energy gap, ΔE(T). In the calculations, its temperature 

dependence is modelled using the expression ΔE(t) = 1.73 ΔE0 (1 - 

T/TCrit)0.5 for T/TCrit →1 (Eq. 2-54 of [4]). The calculations in the upper 

diagram of Figure 8a apply ΔE0 = 60 meV. In the bottom diagram, the 

impact of ΔE0 on dΔJCrit/dΔζ, in the interval 50 ≤ ΔE0 ≤ 70 meV, is very 

strong (near JCrit = 108 A/m2, dΔJCrit/dΔζ increases by about a factor of 

four when ΔE0 is increased from 50 to 60 meV). 

 

Accordingly, size of the energy gap is correlated with dΔJCrit/dΔζ, still 

from solely numerically arguments. Are the variables also causally 

ordered? The model [11] explains relaxation time as resulting from a two-

step process within two successive time intervals, compare Sects. 3.2.1 

and 3.2.2 of this reference. Because of the Pauli exclusion principle (and 

in view of the Racah coefficients), calculation of total lifetime, τ, has to 

proceed in a step-wise, sequential manner by the following steps (a) and 

(b): 

 

(a) Decay widths Гij for two arbitrary particles i and j, that determine, by 

correlation, an “intrinsic lifetime”, τ1 = (h/2π)/Гij, of the non-equilibrium 

state, to be taken for re-combination of particles i and j out of a very large 

number, N. It requires a tiny, finite time interval needed first to initiate the 

proper condensation or recombination event to a pair. “Correlation”, in 

the sense used in this model, strictly speaking means exchange of 

“information” between two quantum states; in reality, and from analogy in 

nuclear physics (with a pion mediating n,p-coupling), it is the exchange 

of phonons that mediate binding interaction between single particles, like 

the pion does in the Deuteron. 

 


 

 
36

(b) Contributions τ2 = (h/2π)/ΔE(T) resulting from the uncertainty principle 

(h indicates Planck's constant), for the proper condensation or 

recombination, energy dependent event, once the particles i and j are 

identified in step (a) (note that this condition specifies the qualitative 

assumptions made in [13]). 

 

Decreasing size of the energy gap, ΔE(T), which happens under 

increase of temperature, increases relaxation time, roughly τ = τ1 + τ2. 

Since relaxation time, τ, is inversely proportional to relaxation rate, ζ, 

decreasing ΔE(T), under increasing temperature, decreases relaxation 

rates. As mentioned, seen from the  physics behind, the higher the 

temperature, provided T < TCrit, the more decay electrons have to be re-

organised to pairs in a new equilibrium by the two steps (a) and (b).  

 

The larger the energy gap, the more will excitations (decay of electron 

pairs) be blocked, and the more is an entrance channel opened for 

increased zero-loss current transport. Single (decay) electrons cannot 

contribute, current transport by single electrons is resistive. Therefore, 

the larger the energy gap, at given constant temperature, the larger 

critical current density (red diamonds in Figure 8b).  

 

Accordingly, since the energy gap, ΔE(T), physically (arrow 2 in Figure 

8b) correlates with critical current density, both variables, ΔE(T) and JCrit 

(T), are definitely (because causally) correlated. This result is of practical 

use since modifications of ΔE0 can easier be realized and controlled (IR-

absorption, ultra-sonic or tunnelling experiments) than modifications of 

relaxation rates. 

Yet, via arrow 3, the energy gap is causally correlated with relaxation 

rate, and relaxation rate, via arrow 4, causally correlates with critical 


 

 
37

current density. Large relaxation rates quickly provide electron pairs to 

"repair" (support) critical current density. Another uni-directional, causal 

relation (the reverse of arrow 4, after a 180 degrees turn) is not true. 

In summary, arrow 4 indicates, as the final result of this paper, the 

causally, but uni-directionally oriented correlation between relaxation rate 

and critical current density. 

 

Neutron and heavy ion irradiation are well-known tools to provide 

effective pinning centres (tracks or point defects). Irradiation increases 

critical current density, causes variations of irreversibility line and 

variations of the value of the energy gap. The same can be achieved, 

again a well-known procedure, with tiny concentrations of paramagnetic 

impurities (however, gapless superconductivity, yet with strong pair 

correlations, cannot be explained by the curves in Figure 8a,b). 

 

Another potential concerns the relation between de-pairing critical 

current density, Jd, and coherence length, ξ. In high temperature 

superconductor materials,  ξ is very small. Since  Jd ~ 1/ξ, a correlation 

could exist, via JCrit ~ ΔE (at constant temperature), between also 

relaxation rate and coherence length. 

 

Materials development thus might perhaps be improved if these 

apparently existing correlations and their potentials could be exploited. 

Search for new superconductor materials, from the correlations listed 

above, with tailored energy gap could significantly increase critical 

current density or, reversely, allow to determine relaxation rates arising 

from thermal disturbances by measuring critical current density.   

  

 


 

 
38

6 
Summary 

Near the superconducting/normal conducting phase transition, quench, if 

any, starts locally. This is the consequence of non-uniform temperature 

fields, T(x,y,t), that result from disturbances and from inhomogeneity of 

materials and transport properties. For the same reason, quench neither 

starts at exactly the same time nor at the same position within of the 

conductor cross section. 

 

Temperature dependence of JCrit on the exponent n in JCrit(x,y,t) = 

JCrit(x,y,t = 0) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n is important for calculation of temperature 

excursions and for prediction of a quench. Convergence tests have 

confirmed that safely the exponent should apply the Ginzburg-Landau 

value n = 1.5. 

 

Critical superconductor parameters JCrit, TCrit and lower and upper critical 

fields, BCrit1,2, all have to be understood as local values. Local 

temperature differences, T(x,y,t) 
- 
TCrit(x,y,t), and local ratios, 

T(x,y,t)/TCrit(x,y,t) in modelling critical current density, have to be applied 

instead of  simple (standard) differences T - TCrit0 and ratios T/TCrit0. This 

decision is important for success when investigating the said correlations 

and for stability calculations. 

 

During warm-up, critical temperature exists only as a convergence limes 

of a series of equilibrium superconductor states and corresponding 

equilibrium temperatures, which all are increasingly distant on the time 

scale. The limes cannot be obtained in standard experiments or 

simulations if a disturbance at temperature already close to the 

superconducting/normal 
conducting 
phase 
transition. 
Critical 


 

 
39

temperature, if understood as a sharply, with zero tolerance defined 

quantity, accordingly is a fiction. 

Relaxation rates, critical current density and the energy gap of 

superconductors are physically correlated. In particular, arrow 4 in Figure 

8b indicates, as the final result of this paper, a causal but uni-

directionally oriented correlation between relaxation rate and critical 

current density. This result might open a guide line for materials 

development to increase critical current density or, reversely, provide 

relaxation rates from measured critical current density. 

 

Experiments to verify these predictions would be difficult to perform. But 

this is not new physics. The results reported in this paper simply reflect 

aspects of many-particle physics, analogies from nuclear physics and 

standard methods of multi-component heat transfer in superconductor 

thin films. 

  

Thank you for your patience. This paper results from my lectures 

"Applied Superconductivity" given in the Department of Physics at the 

Unversity of Wuerzburg., Germany. 

 

Comments and nominations of potential referees are highly welcome.  

 

 7  
References 

 1 
Reiss H, Finite element simulation of temperature and current 

 
distribution in a superconductor, and a cell model for flux flow 

 
resistivity – Interim results, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 29 (2016) 

 
1405 – 1422 


 

 
40

 2 
Reiss H, Stability of a (2G) Coated, Thin Film YBaCuO 123 

 
Superconductor - Intermediate Summary, J. Supercond. Nov.

 
Magn. (2020), https://doi.org/10.1007/s10948-020-05590-3 

 3 
Reiss H, An Attempt to Improve Understanding of the Physics 

 
behind 
Superconductor 
Phase 
Transitions 
and 
Stability, 

 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.05944 (2021), accepted for publication in 

 
Cryogenics (2021) 

4 
Tinkham M, Introduction to superconductivity, Robert E. Krieger 

 
Publ. Co., Malarbar, Florida, reprinted edition (1980) 

5 
de Gennes P G, Superconductivity of metals and alloys, W. A. 

 
Benjamin, Inc., New York (1966) 

6 
Clem J R, Bumble B, Raider S I, Gallagher W J, Shih Y C, 

 
Ambegaokar-Baratoff--Ginzburg-Landau crossover effects on the 

 
critical current density of granular superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 

 
35 (1987) 6637 - 6642 

  

7  
Djupmyr M, The role of temperature for the critical current 

 
density in high-temperature superconductors  and heterostructures, 

 
Doctoral Thesis, University of Stuttgart, Germany (2008) 

 

8 
Janos K., Kus P, Temperature dependence of the critical current 

 
density in Y-Ba-Cu-O thin films, Czech. Journal of Physics 40, 335 

 
– 340 (1990) 

 

9     García-Fornaris I,  Planas A., Muné P, Jardim R, Govea-Alcaide E, 

 
Temperature Dependence of the Intergranular Critical Current 

 
Density in Uniaxially Pressed Bi1.65Pb0.35Sr2Ca2Cu3O10+δ 


 

 
41

 
Samples,  Journal of Superconductivity and Novel Magnetism 23 

 
(2010) 1511 – 1516 

 

 10 
Senatore C, Barth Chr, Bonura M, Kulich M, Mondonico G, Field 

 
and temperature scaling 
of 
the 
critical 
current 
density 
in 

 
commercial 
REBCO 
coated 
conductors, 
Superconductor 

 
Science and Technology 29 (2016) 014002. 10.1088/0953-

 
2048/29/1/014002 

 11 
Reiss H, A microscopic model of superconductor stability, J. 

 
Supercond. Nov. Magn. 26 (2013) 593 - 617 

 

 12 
Phelan P E, Flik M I, Tien C L, Radiative properties of 

 
superconducting Y-Ba-Cu-O thin films, Journal of Heat Transfer, 

 
Transacts. ASME 113 (1991) 487 – 493 

  

 13 
Buckel W, Kleiner R, Superconductivity, Fundamentals and 

 
Applications, Wiley-VCH Verlag, 2nd Ed. Transl. of the 6th German 

 
Ed. by R. Huebener (2004) 

 
 

 14 
Gray K E, Long K R, Adkins C J, Measurements of the liftime of 

 
excitations  in superconducting aluminium, The Philosophical 

 
Magazine 20\50164\5 (1969) 273 - 278 

 

 15 
Gray K E, Steady state measurements of the quasiparticle lifetime 

 
in superconducting aluminium, J. Phys. F: Metal Phys. (1971, Vol. 

 
1) 290 - 308 

 


 

 
42

 16 
Annett J, Superconductivity, Superfluids and Condensates, Oxford 

 
Master Series in Condensed Matter Physics, Oxford University 

 
Press  (2004) 

 

 17 
Reiss H, Stability considerations using a microscopic stability 

 
model applied to a 2G thin film coated superconductor, J. 

 
Supercond. Nov. Magn. 31 (2018) 959 - 979 

 

 18 
Juarez E, Trillaud D, Zermeño V, Grilli F, Advanced 

 
electromagnetic modeling of large-scale high temperature 

 
superconductor systems based on H and T-A formulations. 

 
Superconductor Science and Technology. 34 (2021), 

 
10.1088/1361-6668/abde87 

 

 19 
Reiss H, The Additive Approximation for Heat Transfer and for 

 
Stability Calculations in a Multi-filamentary Superconductor - Part 

 
B,  J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 33 (2020) 629 – 660 

 

 20 
Reiss H, Radiative Transfer, non-Transparency, stability  against 

 
quench in superconductors and their correlations, J. Supercond. 

 
Nov.  Magn. 32 (2019) 1529 -1569 

 

 21  Reiss H, Inhomogeneous temperature fields, current distribution, 

 
stability and heat transfer in superconductor 1G multi-filaments,  

 
J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 29 (2016) 1449 - 1465 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 
43

 Appendix 

(1) Results obtained from calculation of the stability function, 

 

0 ≤ Φ(t) = 1 - ∫ JCrit[T(x,y,t), B(x,y,t)] dA/ ∫JCrit[T(x,y,t0),B(x,y,t0)] dA  ≤ 1  
 
(8) 

 

are shown in Figure 9a,b. The Figure demonstrates the impact of 

variations TCrit uniform against TCrit = TCrit(x,y,t) and, in more detail, of the 

exponent n in JCrit(T) = JCrit0 (1 - T/TCrit)n. The stability function is 

explained in more detail in [1 - 3]. 

 

(2) The Finite Element (FE) to solve Fourier's differential equation in the 

present, very complicated conductor geometry, is embedded in a 

comprehensive, "master scheme" (see the flow chart, Figure 11a). It 

applies a multiple-step method that incorporates combinations of 

repeated, step by step applications of the proper FE cycles with 

intermediate, analytic calculations of electrical and magnetic variables. 

 

In few, exceptional cases, local T < 77 K were observed at positions 

outside the proper superconductor cross sections of the five turns, like in 

Figure 11c. There a "cold spot" appears within the impregnation material. 

But the results, within the repetitions of the FE iteration cycles, are 

adjusted to the minimum temperature, T = 77.0000 K, and iterations 

could be continued without restarts of the FE program. This correction 

had no observable impacts on the obtained temperature field T(x,y,t) 

within the (proper) superconductor thin films. 


 

 
44

Figures 

 

 
 
Figure 1 Simulation scheme of coil and of conductor geometry (detail of Figure 1 of 
[17], here showing turns 96 and 97 of a coil; schematic, not to scale). The coil (in total 
100 turns) is prepared from a coated, YBaCuO 123, thin film superconductor. 
Crystallographic c-axis of the YBaCuO-layers is parallel to y-axis of the co-ordinate 
system. Conductor architecture and dimensions are standard. Superconductor (SC) 
layer thickness (red sections) is 2 μm, width 6 mm; thickness and width of the Ag 
elements (lilac) is the same, width of the interfacial layers (IFL, light green) is 40 nm 
(the IFL are included to simulate surface roughness and diffusion of  species 
between the SC and its neighbouring Ag- and MgO-layers, respectively). Dimensions 
of the other conductor components are given in Table 1 of [17]. The thick, dashed-
dotted line at the bottom of this diagram indicates the artificial axis of vertical 
symmetry introduced for support of the Finite Element part of the simulations, 
compare text for explanation.   
 


 

 
45

2,96E+10

2,97E+10

2,98E+10

2,99E+10

3,00E+10

3,01E+10

3,02E+10

3,03E+10

3,04E+10

5800
6000
6200
6400
6600
6800
7000
7200

Element number

JCrit (x,y) (K)

JCrit0

+S

-S

+2S

-2S

 

 
 

 

 
Figure 2 Random variations ΔJCrit0 of critical current density (upper diagram) and of 
ΔTCrit0 of critical temperature (below). The variations ΔJCrit0 are within 1 percent 
around the mean (thin film) value JCrit0 = 3 1010 A/m2 of YBaCuO 123 in zero 
magnetic field and at T = 77 K, the variations ΔTCrit0  are within 1 K around the mean 
value TCrit0 = 92 K in zero magnetic field. In the lower diagram, the inset shows 
element temperatures in the immediate neighbourhood of the centroid of turn 96 
(orange rectangle). Solid green and red lines indicate mean values, blue and red, 
dashed-dotted lines are mean-square deviations. In both diagrams, random 
variations and their mean-square deviations are the start point for subsequent, 
overall variations of these parameters in that multiples of these are used in the 
simulations (Figure 5b).   
 
 
 
 


 

 
46

 

 
 
Figure 3 Simulation procedure explaing the excursion of relaxation time (horizontal 
axis), with simulation time and, correspondingly, temperature (schematic). During 
warm-up under a disturbance, temperature increases, T = T(t), that generates an 
increasing number, n(t), of electrons (resulting from decayed electron pairs). 
Relaxation time, τ, to arrive at a new equilibrium state, thus increases. Length of the 
horizontal bars thus reflects increase of τ, as a function of simulation time. The red 
curve illustrates the following chain of dependencies (or origins of events): dT(t0)/dt > 
0 (warm up) → dn(T(t0)/dt > 0 (non-equilibrium) → relaxation → τ1 → dnS(T(t1)/dt = 0 
(equilibrium state reached) → next simulation step dT(t2)/dt > 0, and to be continued.   
 


 

 
47

 
 

 
 

 

 
Figure 4a  Temperature distribution (strongly magnified detail) in the 2 μm, thin film 
superconductor (SC) and its interfacial layers in turn 96 when convergence is 
achieved. Results are shown near the right end of the conductor. The approximately 
constant temperature gradient within the SC layer (six nearly equally spaced 
intervals) demonstrates linear increase of temperature at t = 4.1 ms simulation time. 
Thickness of the interfacial layers Ag/SC and SC/MgO is 1 μm. Non-zero thickness of 
these layers serves for modelling surfaces roughness in the Finite Element part of the 
simulations using plane, 4-node (not shell) elements.  


 

 
48

 

 

 

 
Figure 4b Mean element temperature (solid diamonds) in turns 96 and 100, with an 
apparent temperature run-away beginning at t = 3.5 ms and the previously explained 
(compare [1 - 3]) "saw-tooth" convergence behaviour of T(x,y,t). The large black 
"convergence circles" identify converged conductor temperature when it is finally 
obtained under the multiple iterations (see the explanations to Figure 11a,b in the 
Appendix). Thin solid circles denote standard deviations. The simulations apply the 
anisotropy ratio, Dab/Dc = 10, of the thermal diffusivity, D, in crystallographic ab-plane 
and c-axis direction of the superconductor. In the expression for the critical current 
density, JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit(x,y,t0) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n, the exponent n is 1.5. The Figure 
shows a first temperature run-away (a local quench). 
Upper diagram: Results calculated without fault current. Calculations include random 
variations of TCrit, JCrit and BCrit1,2. Because of increasing divergences, the simulations 
are stopped at t > 4.15 ms shortly after start of the second local quench. 
Lower diagram: Results obtained with inclusion of the fault current. In the outer turns 
(here turn 100), almost no difference within the standard deviations can be detected 
if calculations are performed with or without the random variations of TCrit, JCrit and 
BCrit1,2.   
  


 

 
49

  

  

 
 
Figure 5a Superconductor element temperature (centroid of turn 96) of the YBaCuO 
123 thin film superconductor vs. simulation time. The Figure explains temperature 
excursion and its convergence in Figure 5a,b of [17] and Figure 13b (part 2 and 3) of 
[2]. The arrows indicate results obtained during the iterations (sub-steps, i) within a 
particular load step, j, before convergence is finally achieved (these are the black 
convergence circles). The saw-tooth behaviour of conductor temperature beginning 
at t = 4.1 and 4.2 ms is shown for different values of the exponent n in the relation for  
the YBaCuO 123 thin film superconductor JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit(x,y,t0) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n, 
for constant anisotropy ratio, Dab/Dc = 5, of the thermal diffusivity, D, ITransp/ICrit = 1 (no 
fault, just nominal transport current). Results are calculated with the random 
variations ΔJCrit0, ΔTCrit0 and ΔBCrit20 (Figure 2) of the critical parameters. That the 
local temperature run-away at t = 4.1 ms (and also at t = 4.2 ms) in reality predicts a 
total quench becomes clear in Figure 5b, lower diagram. Differences resulting from 
the exponents n are significant (but the stability function, trivially, is not affected since 
T > TCrit).  
  


 

 
50

 

75

80

85

90

95

100

105

3,475
3,4875
3,5
3,5125
3,525
3,5375
3,55

Simulation time (ms)

Temperature mean value (K)

TCrit = 92 K

91.505

92.612

Divisor D

1

5

10
100

 

 
 

75

85

95

105

115

125

135

145

3,8
3,85
3,9
3,95
4
4,05
4,1
4,15
4,2

Simulation time (ms)

Mean element temperature (K)

TCrit = 92 K
105.719

107.408

Divisor D

1
5

10
100

 

 
 
Figure 5b Impact initiated by variations ΔTCrit0, ΔJCrit0 and ΔBCrit20 on mean element 
temperature in turn 100; results are shown at the beginning of the iterations (upper 
diagram) and within the convergence circle (below). To demonstrate the impact, the 
values ΔTCrit0 and ΔJCrit0 of Figure 2 and the ΔBCrit20 are divided by a divisor 1 ≤ D ≤ 
100. Temperature T(x,y,t) increases the larger the divisor (the smaller the uncertainty 
ΔTCrit0, ΔJCrit0 and ΔBCrit20). Near TCrit (above), the total effect on the mean of T(x,y,t) 
in turn 100 amounts to about 1.1 K, in the convergence circle (diagram below) it 
increases to about 1.7 K. In turn 96, the effect tends to larger values, but this is 
subject to the boundary condition to turns 95 and below.  


 

 
51

 

76

78

80

82

84

86

88

90

92

0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5

Exponent n

Temperature (K)

JCrit (1010 A/m2)
1

1.5

2

2.5

3

 

 
Figure 6 Dependency of conductor temperature on the exponent n in JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit0(x,y,t) 
[1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n. The Figure yields conductor temperature, T, if Eq. (1b) is solved for 
given 
JCrit 
and 
given 
exponent 
n, 
which 
yields 
Eq. 
(4).


 

 
52

1

10

100

1000

10000

100000

0,00408
0,0041
0,00412
0,00414
0,00416
0,00418
0,0042
0,00422

Simulation time (s)

Frequency

Delta-T

0.01

0.1

1

10

 

Figure 7 Statistical frequency distribution obtained under from either [T(x,y,t) - TCrit,0] 
< δT (diamonds) or from [T(x,y,t) - TCrit(x,y,t)] < δT (triangles) within limits (constants) 
δT = 0.01, 0.1, 1 and 10 K. Results are calculated from the temperature distributions 
in turn 96 for the anisotropy ratio, Dab/Dc = 5, and for the exponent n = 1.5 in 
JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit(x,y,t = 0) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n. No fault, just nominal current, and with 
ITransp/ICrit = 1.   
 
   


 

 
53

 

1,0E-12

1,0E-09

1,0E-06

1,0E-03

1,0E+00

1,0E+03

1,0E+06

1,0E+09

1,0E+12

1,0E+15

1,0E+18

1,0E+06
1,0E+07
1,0E+08
1,0E+09
1,0E+10
1,0E+11

JCrit (A/m2)

dΔJCrit/dΔζ [10-18 A m s]

 dΔJCrit/dΔτ [106 A/(m2 s)]

 

 
 

 

Figure 8a Upper diagram: Differential critical current density, JCrit, per relaxation time, 
τ and per relaxation rate, ζ, calculated with ΔE0 = 60 meV. Below: dΔJCrit/dΔζ 
calculated with different ΔE0; in both diagrams, results are plotted vs. JCrit.  


 

 
54

 

 

 
 

Figure 8b Relaxation time τ, relaxation rate ζ, difference ΔT = TCrit - T(t) and JCrit vs. 
energy gap ΔE(T) near critical temperature. The τ- and ζ-curves are calculated from 
[11] and JCrit from Eq. (1b) using n = 3/2. Arrows indicate quantitative correlations and 
causal relations (the latter are uni-directional) 1: temperature (here the difference ΔT) 
→ energy gap (causal), 2: energy gap → JCrit (causal), 3 (in parallel to 2): energy gap 
→ relaxation rate (causal), 4: relaxation rate → JCrit. Accordingly, arrow 4 indicates, 
as the final result of this paper, the causally but uni-directionally oriented correlation 
between relaxation rate and critical current density. 


 

 
55

Figures in the Appendix 
 
 
 
  

0

0,1

0,2

0,3

0,4

0,5

0,6

0,7

0,8

0,9

1

4,095
4,1
4,105
4,11
4,115
4,12

Simulation time (ms)

Stability function

Exponent n in (1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)n

1

0.5

1

1.5

0.5

 

 
Figure 9a Stability function, Φ(t), of the YBaCuO 123 thin film superconductor (detail 
near t = 4.1 ms) taking into account elements of turn 96 (dark-brown diamonds). By 
its steep increase of Φ(t) at t = 4.1 ms, the Figure clearly identifies the onset of a first 
quench. No fault current, just nominal transport current, ITransp/ICrit = 1. The 
calculations apply different values n of the exponent in the relation JCrit(x,y,t) = 
JCrit0(x,y,t0) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n. In this Figure, critical current density JCrit0 is considered 
as uniform, JCrit0 = 3 1010 A/m2 at 77 K in all elements, but of course, JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit0 
(1 - T/TCrit)n, and without the other statistical fluctuations. Resistive current limiting is 
provided, apparently almost completely, by turn 96 (light-green and dark-brown 
diamonds). At t > 4.115 ms, zero loss transport current would decrease by about 30 
percent when instead of n = 1 (light-green) the value of the exponent n is reduced to 
0.5 (dark-brown diamonds). 
 
 
 
  
 
 


 

 
56

0

0,1

0,2

0,3

0,4

0,5

0,6

0,7

0,8

0,9

1

4,075
4,0875
4,1
4,1125
4,125
4,1375
4,15

Simulation time (ms)

Stability function

Exponent n

1.5 
Mai

0.5

 

 
Figure 9b Stability function, Φ(t), of the YBaCuO 123 thin film superconductor (detail 
near t = 4.1 ms) of the YBaCuO 123 thin film superconductor (all elements of turn 
96). The Figure compares results obtained with application of TCrit = TCrit0 uniform and 
TCrit = TCrit(x,y,t). No fault, just nominal transport current. Like in Figure 9a, onset of 
the quench is clearly identified from the sudden increase of Φ(t) at t = 4.1 ms. Results 
are obtained with values n = 1.5 (solid diamonds) and 0.5 (open circles) of the 
exponent in the relation JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit(x,y,t) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n, for constant ratio 
Dab/Dc = 5 of the thermal diffusivity and for ITransp/ICrit = 1. Critical current density JCrit0 
is uniform, JCrit0 = 3 1010 A/m2 at 77 K in all elements. For the decision whether the 
superconductor is in zero loss, flux flow or Ohmic states, the calculation compares 
T(x,y,t) with locally different values TCrit(x,y,t) under variations within the maximum 
spacing ΔTCrit0 (the values in Figure 2). Red, blue and green symbols denote results 
obtained with differences and ratios (i) T(x,y,t) - TCrit0 and T(x,y,t)/TCrit0, (ii) T(x,y,t) - 
TCrit(x,y,t) and T(x,y,t)/TCrit0 and (iii), T(x,y,t) - TCrit(x,y,t) and T(x,y,t)/TCrit(x,y,t), 
respectively; the differences in Φ(t) are greater if n = 0.5. At values of Φ > 0.7, zero 
loss transport current would decrease by about 20 percent when instead of n = 1.5 
the value n = 0.5 is applied. Differences among results obtained with options (i) to (iii) 
at t > 4.14 ms (open circles), though below 15 percent, cannot be neglected, which 
means item (iii) has to be considered for reliable stability calculations. 
 


 

 
57

1,0E-08

1,0E-05

1,0E-02

1,0E+01

1,0E+04

1,0E+07

1,0E+10

1,0E+13

1,0E+16

0
1
2
3
4
5

Simulation time (s)

Conduction heat flux (W/m2)

 

 
 
Figure 9c Conduction heat flux at the interface between the superconducting centroid 
element to neighbouring films in turn 96. Solid red and blue diamonds indicate 
vertical, light and dark red-green diamonds horizontal heat flux. Results have been 
obtained with the exponent n = 1.5 in JCrit(x,y,t) = JCrit(x,y,t) [1 - T(x,y,t)/TCrit)]n, for 
constant ratio Dab/Dc = 5 of the thermal diffusivity and for ITransp/ICrit = 1. 


 

 
58

70

80

90

100

110

120

130

4
4,0625
4,125
4,1875
4,25
4,3125

Time (ms)

Element temperature (K)

96

96

 

 
 
 
Figure 10 Impact on centroid element temperature in turn 96 if thermal conductivity, 
λab(T) and λc(T), in the crystallographic ab-plane and c-axis direction of the 
superconductor in turn 98 are randomly scattered (light-green diamonds). Scattering 
is by ± 10 percent around the temperature dependent, mean value. Anisotropy of  
λab(T) and λc(T) is 10. The blue diamonds are copied from Figure 5a. 


 

 
59

 

 
Figure 11a Flow chart (the previously introduced "master" scheme) showing two 
iteration cycles (i, j) and one time loop (tj) of the numerical simulation: Light-green 
circles and indices, i: Sub-steps, the proper Finite Element (FE) calculations; Light-
yellow indices, j: Load steps involving FE and, within the blue rectangles, critical 
current, magnetic field and resistance (flux flow, Ohmic) calculations; Dark-yellow 
indices, t: Time loop, lines of a matrix M (equation numbers shown in the rectangles) 
reflect their definition in Section 6 of [3]. The blue rectangles with sub-step numbers i 
= 1, 2, 3,...N are defined as 1: First FE step, j, with data input of start values of 
temperature distribution, specific resistances, critical parameters of J, B and of initial 
(uniform) transport current distribution or of single, isolated radiation heat pulses, 
respectively; 2: Results obtained after the first FE step (i), if converged, for the same 
parameters in the same load-step, j; calculation of TCrit, BCrit, JCrit; 3: Calculation of 


 

 
60

resistance network and of transport current distribution (if applicable), all to be used 
as data input into the next FE calculation (sub-step i + 1), within the same load step, 
j; 4: Results like in 2; Sub-steps 5, 6,...N: Results like in 3 or 4; convergence yes or 
no ? If "no", return to 1 (iteration i = 1, in the same load step, j). If "yes" go to next 
load step j + 1, continue with 1. The number N of FE cycles (green circles) might 
strongly increase computation time. Length of simulation time, t ≤ tmax, within each of 
the individual intervals, with tmax indicating the maximum time of a corresponding 
particular interval, is selected according to the different transit times, source 
functions, different radiation propagation mechanisms, different ratios of solid 
conduction and radiation, and to different wavelengths. By the time-loop, t, Figure 
11a is an extension of Figure 12 of [19]. Like Figure 11a,b, Figures 12a,b and 13 
(below) are shown here solely for convenience of the readers. By citations of the 
originals, they do not constitute self-plagiarism and, by the references made to [3] 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.05944 (2021), do not violate transfer of copy-right assigned 
to the paper JCRY103325 submitted to Cryogenics (still in the production stage). 
 
Figure reprinted by permission from Springer Nature and Copyright Clearance Center 
under License No 519 117 151 0983 from Journal of Superconductivity and Novel 
Magnetism (Aug 23, 2019): Harald Reiss, The Additive Approximation for Heat 
Transfer and for Stability Calculations in a Multi-Filamentary Superconductor - Part B 
(Figure 12). 
 
 


 

 
61

 
 

 

 

 

 
  
Figure 11b Solution scheme (above) used in the numerical simulations including the 
Finite Element (FE) procedure integrated in the master scheme (Figure 11a, 
schematic, not to scale; compare text). Copied from Figures 14b,c of [3], the upper 
diagram shows the "saw-tooth" behaviour of conductor temperature during the 
iterations and the convergence circle. For incident radiation pulses, a Monte Carlo 
simulation is performed in the interval Δt1. Solution of Fourier’s differential equation, 
to calculate excursion with time of conductor temperature, T(t) proceeds in the 
interval Δt2; we have Δt1 << Δt1. The dashed blue curve (above) schematically 
indicates conductor temperature, T(t), or any temperature-dependent parameter like 
specific resistance or specific heat or thermal conductivity and may also indicate 
results of the analytical calculations (like JCrit or the stability function) in the master 
scheme. 
Convergence 
temperature 
(or, 
accordingly, 
convergence 
of 
the 


 

 
62

temperature-dependent parameters) is indicated by the large, solid black circles, at 
the end of each of the load steps, j. The diagram below, as an example, shows 
convergence of local element temperatures after an isolated but periodic thermal 
excitation by heat pulses incident on a YBaCuO 123 filament. Results refer to 
positions X from the centre of the circular filament. Convergence behaviour of the 
temperature resembles the saw tooth-like behaviour. The large red circle indicates 
convergence temperature (the convergence cycles in Figures 4b and 5a,b of the 
present paper) after a number NIt (a...k) of iterations (compare Figure 11a) within the 
load steps, j (the load steps in this diagram are identified by computation time). At 
time t > 0.01 s, the saw tooth-like convergence behaviour can no longer be resolved, 
because of the logarithmic plot.   
 
Figure reprinted by permission from Springer Nature and Copyright Clearance Center 
under License No 519 187 106 7998 from Journal of Superconductivity and Novel 
Magnetism (Aug 23, 2019): Harald Reiss, The Additive Approximation for Heat 
Transfer and for Stability Calculations in a Multi-Filamentary Superconductor - Part B 
(Figure 14). 
 
 


 

 
63

 

 

 

 

 
 
Figure 11c Nodal temperature distribution between turns 96 and 100 (above). 
Temperature, here shown at t = 4.27 ms, has increased against t = 4.2 ms. No fault, 
just nominal transport current, ITransp/ICrit = 1. Below, the strongly magnified section 
shows temperature distribution at the left end of the superconductor thin film in turn 
96 with a "Cold spot" arising during the iterations. The inset in this Figure identifies 
materials and their positions within the conductor cross section around turn 96: 1 
Stabilizer Cu, 2 PbSnAg-solder, 3 metallization Ag, followed by interfacial layer 
Ag/SC, superconductor (SC) thin film, interfacial layer SC/Buffer layer, 4 buffer layer 
MgO, 5 Hastelloy. The results indicate increasing convergence problems: The lower 
temperature limit decreases to 76.2988 instead of 77.0000 K, but this cold spot (here 
the two, dark-blue regions) is located outside the proper superconductor thin film 
cross sections. Within the repeated FE iteration cycles, temperature of the cold spot 
is adjusted to the exact 77.000 K without interruption and restart of the FE simulation.  


 

 
64

1E-12

1E-10

1E-08

1E-06

0,0001

0,01

1

90
90,5
91
91,5
92
92,5
93

Temperature (K)

Relative density nS(T)/nS(T=4K)

91.99999 K

91.9999 K
YBaCuO

TCrit = 92 K

Microscopic
stability model

Minimum nS0(T)/nS(T)

 to support JCrit(T)

Analytical

 

 
 

Figure 12a Relative density (the order parameter), fS = nS(T)/nS(T=4K), in 
dependence of temperature, calculated for the thin film, YBaCuO 123 
superconductor (dark-blue diamonds). Dark-yellow diamonds indicate the minimum 
relative density of electron pairs that would be necessary to generate a critical current 
density of 3 1010 A/m2 (YBaCuO) at 77 K, in zero magnetic field. The diagram 
compares predictions of the microscopic stability model with analytical results (light-
green) calculated from Eq. (8) in [12]. The Figure is copied from Figure 1a of [3] (is 
re-plotted for convenience of the reader). 
 
Figure reprinted by permission from Springer Nature and Copyright Clearance Center 
under License No 519 187 135 5046 from Journal of Superconductivity and Novel 
Magnetism (Aug 23, 2019): Harald Reiss, The Additive Approximation for Heat 
Transfer and for Stability Calculations in a Multi-Filamentary Superconductor - Part B 
(Figure 8a). 


 

 
65

1,0E-14

1,0E-12

1,0E-10

1,0E-08

1,0E-06

1,0E-04

1,0E-02

1,0E+00

1,0E+02

82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96

Element temperature (K)

Relaxation time (s)

Turn number

96
100

Length of (process) time intervals (s)

1e-6

50e-6

96

96
96
96

Relaxation model

 

 

Figure 12b Relaxation time of the superconductor electron system after a disturbance 
(here the sudden increase of transport current in the windings to a large multiple of 
the nominal value); results are given vs. element temperature. All solid, dark-brown, 
circles in this Figure are recalculated and extended against the curve (dark-green 
diamonds) in Figure 1b of [3] to element temperatures still closer approaching to TCrit. 
Computation time becomes enormous. For just the uppermost data point, at 91.999 
K, on a standard, 4-core PC with 3.4 GHz and 16 GB workspace, the calculation 
under Windows 7 took more than two days (running without any interruption). The 
Figure is re-plotted for convenience of the reader. 
 
Figure reprinted by permission from Springer Nature and Copyright Clearance Center 
under License No 519 188 008 6792 from Journal of Superconductivity and Novel 
Magnetism (Aug 23, 2019): Harald Reiss, The Additive Approximation for Heat 
Transfer and for Stability Calculations in a Multi-Filamentary Superconductor - Part B 
(Figure 11). 
 
 


 

 
66

1,0E+14

1,0E+18

1,0E+22

1,0E+26

1,0E+30

1,0E+34

1,0E+38

90
90,5
91
91,5
92
92,5

Temperature (K)

Decay rate (1/(m3 s))

initial

mean

Screening factor 0.01

TCrit = 92 K

 

 
 
Figure 13 Initial and mean decay or relaxation rates (per unit volume) of thermally 
excited electron states calculated using a screening factor, χ = 0.01, to the Coulomb 
potential, in a virtual conductor volume, VC, of the superconductor YBaCuO 123 (see 
[11] for detailed explanations). If the system continuously creates new (intermediate), 
dynamic equilibrium states, decay rates in this Figure are equal to relaxation rates. 
The area below the curves corresponds to the ordered phase (electrons condensed 
to electron pairs) that is separated, from the thermally disordered phase (electrons 
from decayed electron pairs), by the classical critical, finite temperature boundary 
(here the dashed dark-blue and light-green lines). The Figure is copied from Figure 
3b of [11].  
 
Figure reprinted by permission from Springer Nature and Copyright Clearance Center 
under License No 519 188 024 8390 from Journal of Superconductivity and Novel 
Magnetism (Aug 23, 2019): Harald Reiss, The Additive Approximation for Heat 
Transfer and for Stability Calculations in a Multi-Filamentary Superconductor - Part B 
(Figure 9b). 
 
 

 

  

 

 


