A capacitive flexible tactile sensor

Dandan Yuan, Haoxin Shu*, Yulong Bao, Bin Xu*, Huan Wang

Jiangxi Province Key Laboratory of Precision Drive & Control, Nanchang Institute of 

Technology, Nanchang 330099, China

xubin84115@163.com

Abstract

In this paper, a capacitive flexible tactile sensor was designed to measure the pressure of 

objects based on MEMS technology. This sensor is a structure of a 4x4 array, with metal Ag as 

the capacitive electrode, which forms the tactile sensing unit of the sensor. The structure of 

capacitive flexible tactile sensor was designed and an experimental platform was established to 

test the performance. The tests show that when the thickness of the intermediate layer is 2 mm 

and the density is medium, the sensor’s sensitivity is the best while the time of both the response 

and the rebound is fast. 

Keywords: tactile sensors, flexible, MEMS, capacitive, pressure testing

1. Introduction

With the rapid development of society, a research hotspot field of robotics 

acttracts more and more attention. The flexible tactile sensor is self-evidently 
more and more important to a robot in terms of sensing the pressure of external 
objects Many scholars at home and abroad have conducted researches and 
achieved some results. HU XiaoHui et al [1] developed a flexible capacitive tactile 
array sensor with the microneedle structure in the robotics field. This device has 
better flexibility because PDMS microneedle layer is sandwiched between the 
upper and lower electrodes. M.-Y. Cheng et al [2] designed a capacitive touch array
sensor which is composed of a PDMS structure and a flexible printing plate with 
electrodes. It effectively reduces the complexity of the capacitor structure of each 
sensing element. In 2019, Jie Qiu and others prepared a flexible capacitive tactile 
sensor with fast response, low detection limit, and high sensitivity [3]. However, 
because the response and rebound time of a flexible tactile sensor is also an 
important performance metric, a capacitive flexible tactile sensor with this structure 
is proposed in this paper. According to the working principle, tactile sensors can be 


divided into piezoresistive type [4], piezoelectric type [5], capacitive type [6-7], 
optical sensor[8], magnetic sensor[9], etc. Capacitive tactile sensors have received 
wide attention and have been extensively used benefiting from their good linear 
response, wide dynamic range, and favorible durability [10]. This study has made 
three kinds of intermediate medium layers with different thickness and density. The 
best one is obtained by the sensitivity test. 

2. Structure Design

The overall three-dimensional structure of the new capacitive flexible tactile 

sensor is shown in Figure 1. The sensor is a structure of a 5-layer device, including 
a contact layer, an upper electrode plate and an upper electrode, an intermediate 
dielectric layer, a lower electrode plate and a lower electrode. 

Figure 1. Structure diagram of capacitive flexible tactile sensors

The designed capacitive flexible tactile sensor uses PDMS film as the contact 

layer. PDMS is a kind of polymer organic silicide. It is able to withstand multiple 
touch and press, effectively protects the capacitive flexible tactile sensor from 
damage, and improves the durability of multiple touch and press. The upper and 
lower plates are made of PI material. It is a flexible polymer material that has good 
heat resistance, it has good corrosion resistance, excellent electrical insulation,
good chemical stability and so on. The upper and lower electrodes are made of 
metal Ag, an excellent sensor electrode material which has low activity, good 
thermal conductivity and electrical conductivity. Ag is soft, ductile and not easily 
corroded by chemicals. The intermediate medium layer is made of PU material 
(polyurethane filter sponge) whose main body is a mesh structure. So it has 


excellent air permeability, good flexibility, and is durable, environmentally friendly 
and low-priced.

The overall size of the upper and lower electrode layers is a square of 

24mm×24mm, and the electrodes are made into a 4×4 sensor array. The upper and 
lower electrodes are staggered horizontally and vertically, and each intersecting 
place constitutes a sensing unit, so there are 16 independent sensing units in total.
The structure of the electrode layer is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2. Electrode layer structure diagram

3. Preparation Process

The fabrication process of a capacitive flexible tactile sensor is shown in 

Figure 3. It shows the process flow of the four layers using PI flexible substrate 
MEMS technology.

(a)Silicon wafer is used as the bottom plate with a PI tape pasted on it. Then,

it is cleaned in sequence with acetone, anhydrous ethanol and deionized water.
After the cleaning, it is put on the heating platform for drying.

(b) A layer of positive photoresist is uniformly sprayed on the surface of PI 

film. The negative film is fixed on the disc by vacuum pump. When the negative 
film is rotating at a high speed, the photoresist is evenly distributed on the negative 
film by the glue throwing machine.

(c) The photoetching process is carried out by a photoetching machine. The 

photoetching machine exposes the photoresist through an ultraviolet light source 
and puts the exposed film into the developer. The photoresist in the exposed area is 
etched away and the photoetching pattern is fully displayed. Then it is rinsed in 


deionized water and then taken out for natural air drying.

(d) The sample is sputtered with a high vacuum triple target magnetron coater.

The vacuum is pumped to 10-4Pa, the flow rate controlled to 80, and the power 
controlled to 100 W. After sputtered with Cr target for three minutes and then with 
Ag target for 30 minutes, the sample is cooled and taken out.

(e) The purpose of stripping process is to remove the remaining photoresist,

so that the electrode pattern can be displayed. After the remaining photoresist and 
Ag attached to the photoresist are removed with acetone, the Ag electrode remained. 

Figure 3. Electrode layer process flow 

4. Experiment and Analysis

The experimental platform of the capacitive tactile sensor is shown in Figure 

4(a). It consists of the LCR digital bridge tester and digital display push-pull tester. 
The capacitive flexible tactile sensor is fixed on a circular plate so that its circular 
contact is just above the contact element. A certain pressure is applied through 
moving the push-pull gauge vertically downward by hand cranking. The physical 
picture of the device is shown in Figure 4(b).

Figure 4. (a) Experimental Platform (b) Fabricated flexible tactile sensors 


In this paper, we have made three kinds of PU materials for the intermediate 

dielectric layer. They are ones of 2mm thick and medium density, 3mm thick and
medium density, and 3mm thick and high density respectively. Because a single 
different parameter need to be set for comparison, we compare the experimental 
results of different intermediate dielectric layers with medium density and high 
density with the thickness of 3mm PU. Figure 5(a) shows the test results of two 
capacitive flexible tactile sensors. The results show that for the same thickness of 
3mm, the initial value of high density is 0.53pf, the sensitivity 12.58% / N, the 
initial value of medium density 1.45pf, and the sensitivity 15.98% / n. In 
comparison with the experimental results of the same medium density, 2mm thick 
and 3mm thick, as shown in Figure 5(b), for the same medium density, the initial 
value of 2mm thickness is 1.4pF and the sensitivity is 22.62%/N. Therefore, 
through the comparison of three different types of capacitive tactile sensors, the 
sensitivity of the sensor is the highest when the thickness of the intermediate 
dielectric layer is 2mm and the density is medium density.

Figure 5. (a) 3mm medium and high-density capacitance value comparison (b) 2mm and 3mm 

medium-density thickness capacitance comparison

When the applied pressure reaches 6N and the intermediate dielectric layer is 

2mm thick, which indicates that the capacitive sensor of this model has reached the 
maximum range. The sensitivity of the capacitive sensor can be expressed as:

K=

∆C/C0

∆N
（1）

Through date analysis, when the applied pressure is 6N, the sensor with 3mm high 
density has the lowest sensitivity of 12.58% / N, and the sensor with 2mm medium 
density has the highest sensitivity of 22.62% / N.

The response time and rebound time of the capacitive touch sensor to the 


pressure signal are also very important in application, which can reflect the 
performance of the capacitive touch sensor. In this paper, response time and 
rebound time of a 2mm medium-density capacitive tactile sensor are tested. The 
pressure of 1N, 2N, 3N, 4N is applied in sequence to a tactile unit for 2s, and the 
time for releasing the pressure at intervals is 3s and a set of data is taken every 0.1s. 
The experimental results are shown in Figure 6. It can be seen from the figure that 
the response time of the capacitive touch sensor is 0.1s, and the rebound time is 
0.3s. Therefore, the response time of the capacitive touch sensor is faster.

Figure 6. Capacitive tactile sensor response time and rebound time

5. Conclusion

In this paper, a capacitive flexible tactile sensor is fabricated by MEMS 

technology. Three sensors with different intermediate dielectric layers has been
designed for comparison. It studies the relationship between the sensitivity and the 
thickness and density parameters of capacitive flexible tactile sensors, as well as 
the range, response time and rebound time. After many experimental tests, it can 
be seen that the comprehensive performance of the intermediate medium layer with 
thickness of 2mm and medium density is the best.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by Science Foundation of the department of 

education of Jiangxi province (GJJ180938, GJJ170987, GJJ180936). Open project 
of Shanxi Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robot(SKLIRKF2017004).


References

[1] HU XiaoHui,ZHANG Xu,LIU Ming,CHEN YuanFang,LI Peng,PEI WeiHua,ZHANG 

Chun,CHEN HongDa.A flexible capacitive tactile sensor array with micro structure for 

robotic application[J].Science China

(Information Sciences),2014,57(12):41-46.

[2] Cheng M Y, Liao B T, Huang X H, et al. A flexible tactile sensing array based on novel 

capacitance mechanism[C]//TRANSDUCERS 2009-2009 International Solid-State Sensors, 

Actuators and Microsystems Conference. IEEE, 2009: 2182-2185.

[3] Qiu J, Guo X, Chu R, et al. Rapid-Response, Low Detection Limit, and High-Sensitivity 

Capacitive Flexible Tactile Sensor Based on Three-Dimensional Porous Dielectric Layer for 

Wearable Electronic Skin[J]. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2019, 11(43): 40716-

40725.

[4] Fu Y M, Chou M C, Cheng Y T, et al. An inkjet printed piezoresistive back-to-back graphene 

tactile sensor for endosurgical palpation applications[C]//2017 IEEE 30th International 

Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS). IEEE, 2017: 612-615.

[5] Liu W, Yu P, Gu C, et al. Fingertip piezoelectric tactile sensor array for roughness encoding 

under varying scanning velocity[J]. IEEE Sensors Journal, 2017, 17(21): 6867-6879.

[6] Hu X H, Zhang X, Liu M, et al. A flexible capacitive tactile sensor array with micro structure 

for robotic application[J]. Science China Information Sciences, 2014, 57(12): 1-6.

[7] Sun C T, Lin Y C, Hsieh C J, et al. A linear-response CMOS-MEMS capacitive tactile 

sensor[C]//SENSORS, 2012 IEEE. IEEE, 2012: 1-4.

[8] Jiang Q, Xiang L. Design and experimental research on small-structures of tactile sensor 

array unit based on fiber Bragg grating[J]. IEEE Sensors Journal, 2017, 17(7): 2048-2054.

[9]Volkova T I, Böhm V, Naletova V A, et al. A ferrofluid based artificial tactile sensor with 

magnetic field control[J]. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 2017, 431: 277-

280.

[10]Zou L, Ge C, Wang Z J, et al. Novel tactile sensor technology and smart tactile sensing 

systems: A review[J]. Sensors, 2017, 17(11): 2653.


