Giant oscillatory Gilbert damping in 

superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor junctions

Authors

Yunyan Yao1,2†, Ranran Cai1,2†, Tao Yu3, Yang Ma1,2, Wenyu Xing1,2, Yuan Ji1,2, Xin-Cheng 

Xie1,2,4,5, See-Hun Yang6*, and Wei Han1,2*

Affiliations

1International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 
100871, China.

2Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China.

3Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter, 22761 Hamburg, Germany

4CAS Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China

5Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, P. R. China

6IBM Research - Almaden, San Jose, California 95120, USA

†These authors contributed equally to the work

*Correspondence to: weihan@pku.edu.cn (W.H.); seeyang@us.ibm.com (S.H.Y.).

Abstract

Interfaces between materials with differently ordered phases present unique opportunities for 

exotic physical properties, especially the interplay between ferromagnetism and superconductivity 

in the ferromagnet/superconductor heterostructures. The investigation of zero- and π-junctions has 

been of particular interest for both fundamental physical science and emerging technologies. Here, 

we report the experimental observation of giant oscillatory Gilbert damping in the superconducting 

Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions with respect to the NiFe thickness. This observation suggests an 

unconventional spin pumping and relaxation via zero-energy Andreev bound states that exist only

in the Nb/NiFe/Nb π-junctions, but not in the Nb/NiFe/Nb zero-junctions. Our findings could be 

important for further exploring the exotic physical properties of ferromagnet/superconductor 

heterostructures, and potential applications of ferromagnet π-junctions in quantum computing, 

such as half-quantum flux qubits.


2

One 
sentence 
summary: 
Giant 
oscillatory 
Gilbert 
damping 
is 
observed 
in 

superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor junctions with varying the ferromagnet thickness.

Introduction

The interplay between ferromagnetism and superconductivity has induced many exotic and 

exciting physical properties in ferromagnet (FM)/superconductor (SC) heterostructures (1-3). Of 

particular interest is the unconventional π-phase ground state SC/FM/SC junction that might be 

realized for certain FM thicknesses arising from the quantum intermixing of the wave functions 

between spin-singlet Cooper pairs in SC and spin-polarized electrons in FM (1, 3, 4). At the FM/SC 

interface, a Cooper pair moving into the FM will have a finite center-of-mass momentum, resulting 

in the oscillation of the real part of superconducting order parameter (Re {Ψ}) with respect to the 

FM thickness (Fig. 1A) (1, 5, 6). Depending on the FM thicknesses, the Cooper pair wavefunctions 

in the two superconductors on either side of the FM can have a phase difference from zero or π, 

forming so-called zero-junctions with positive Josephson coupling (Fig. 1B) or π-junctions with

the negative Josephson coupling (Fig. 1C). The FM π-junctions can be used for quantum 

computing applications (7, 8), as half quantum flux qubits (9). Due to the scientific and technical 

importance, the research on the FM π-junctions has been active for the last two decades (6, 10-13). 

Previous experimental studies have demonstrated the switching between zero- and π-junctions in 

SC/FM/SC structures by varying the temperature and the FM thickness (11, 14-17). These reports 

mainly focus on the electrical properties of the FM zero- and π-junctions. Recently, dynamic spin 

injection into SCs has attracted considerable interest both the experimentally (18-21) and

theoretically (22-26). However, the spin-dependent properties in FM zero- and π-junctions have 

not been explored yet. The investigation of the spin-dependent properties requires the spin current 

probes, such as the dynamical spin pumping (27). Furthemore, for the application of the FM π-

junctions in quantum computing technologies (9), the magnetization/spin dynamic properties are 

extremely important to be studied.

Here, we report the experimental observation of giant oscillatory Gilbert damping in the 

superconducting Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions with respect to the NiFe thickness, which can be 


3

qualitatively explained by the different spin pumping efficiency via the Andreev bound states 

(ABS) of Nb/NiFe/Nb zero- and π-junctions. Using a minimal model based on the ABS, we show 

that an unconventional spin pumping into the zero-energy ABS penetrated into SCs could occurs

only for the π-junctions, which can lead to the oscillatory Gilbert damping as a function of the 

NiFe thickness.

Results

Figures 1D and 1E show the schematics of the spin pumping, magnetization dynamics, and 

enhanced Gilbert damping in the SC/FM/SC zero- and π-junctions. Spin pumping refers to the 

spin-polarized current injection to non-magnetic materials from a FM with precessing 

magnetization around its ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) conditions (28, 29). In FM and its 

heterostructures, the Gilbert damping ( ) characterizes the magnetization dynamics, as described 

by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert formula with an additional Slonczewski-torque term (30-32):

𝑑𝒎
𝑑𝑡 = −𝛾𝒎 × 𝑯𝒆𝒇𝒇 + 𝛼𝒎 × 𝑑𝒎

𝑑𝑡 +
𝛾

𝑀𝑠𝑉 ( ℏ

4𝜋 𝑔↑↓𝒎 × 𝑑𝒎

𝑑𝑡 )
(1)

where 𝒎 = 𝑴/|𝑴| is the magnetization unit vector, 𝛾 is the gyromagnetic ratio, 𝑯𝒆𝒇𝒇 is the total 

effective magnetic field, 𝑀𝑠 = |𝑴| is the saturation magnetization, and 𝑔↑↓ is the interface spin  

mixing conductance. The pumped spin current from FM into SCs can be expressed by Js =

ℏ

4𝜋𝑔↑↓𝒎 ×

𝑑𝒎

𝑑𝑡 (29). The spin pumping into the SCs give rise to an enhanced Gilbert damping 

constant that is proportional to the spin pumping current (αsp~ Js) (29). Fig. 1E illustrates the 

pumped spin current mediated by the zero-energy ABS inside the superconducting gap in π-

junctions, which will be discussed later in details. While for a zero-junction, the pumped spin 

current is mediated by the ABS near the superconducting gap (Fig. 1D). The ABS can be formed 

within the FM layer and then extended into the interface of SCs with the superconducting coherent 

length scale (33, 34). 

The SC/FM/SC junctions consist of a NiFe (Ni80Fe20) layer (thickness: ~ 5 - 20 nm) 

sandwiched by two Nb layers (thickness: 100 nm) grown by magnetron sputtering (see Methods 

and fig. S1). To maximize the integrity of samples for a systematic study, more than tens of 

samples are grown in each run via rotation mask technique in a sputtering system, which is the 

same as in the previous study of the oscillatory exchange coupling in magnetic multilayer 


4

structures (35). The Gilbert damping and spin pumping are measured by the ferromagnetic 

resonance (FMR) technique (see Methods for details).

Above the TC of Nb, spin pumping in the Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions leads to the spin accumulation 

in Nb near the interface, which can be described by the spin-dependent chemical potentials, as 

illustrated in Fig. 2A. The Gilbert damping of NiFe in the Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions is determined 

from the microwave frequency-dependent FMR spectra (fig. S2). A typical FMR curve with the 

Lorentzian fitting is shown in Fig. 2B, from which the half linewidth (ΔH) can be obtained. The 

Gilbert damping can be extracted from the best linear-fitting curve of ΔH vs. f (Fig. 2C). Figure 

2D shows the NiFe thickness dependence of the Gilbert damping in the Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions 

measured at T = 10, 15, and 20 K, respectively. Interestingly, an oscillating feature of the Gilbert 

damping is observed as a function of 𝑑NiFe in the region of 𝑑NiFe < ~15 nm. This oscillating 

behavior can be attributed to the quantum-interference effect of angular momentum transfer 

between the local precessing magnetic moment and conduction electrons in thin NiFe that was 

theoretically predicted by Mills (36), but has not been experimentally reported yet. Above TC, the 

continuous energy bands of Nb, similar to the normal metal in the Mills theory, overlap with both 

spin-up and spin-down bands of NiFe at the interface, thus allowing the conducting electrons in 

NiFe to flip between the spin-down and spin-up states. As illustrated in the inset of Fig. 2D, one 

spin-down electron scatters with the local magnetic moment and then flips to the spin-up 

polarization, giving rise to the angular momentum transfer between the spin-polarized electrons 

and the magnetic moment. Besides the change of angular momentum, the momentum of the 

electron also changes (∆𝑘), due to different Fermi vectors for spin-up (𝑘𝐹↑) and spin-down (𝑘𝐹↓) 

electrons with exchange splitting (Fig. 2A). When the NiFe layer is thin enough to become 

comparable with 

1

∆𝑘, quantum-interference effect of the spin-polarized electrons shows up, which 

gives rise to the oscillating spin-transfer torque to the NiFe. When the NiFe thickness is 

2𝑛𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓] (n is an integer), the matching of the quantum levels between the spin-up and 

spin-down electrons in NiFe induces smaller Gilbert damping. On the other hand, when the NiFe 

thickness is (2n + 1)𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓], a larger Gilbert damping is induced. Consequently, the 

Gilbert damping in the Nb/NiFe/Nb structures oscillates with a period of 2𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓]

(Supplementary Materials S1). Experimentally, an oscillating period (λ) of ~ 1.8 nm is identified 


5

(see the red dashed arrow in Fig. 2D). At T = 50 K, the oscillating feature disappears since the 

quantum-interference effect is smeared by thermal excitations (fig. S3).

Next, we investigate the spin pumping and spin transfer torque of the Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions 

in the superconducting states below TC with a superconducting gap (Fig. 3A). TC in the 

Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions is obtained from typical four-probe resistance measurement as a function 

of the temperature. A typical temperature-dependent resistance curve measured on the Nb/NiFe 

(12 nm)/Nb junction is shown in Fig. 3b, indicating the TC of ~ 8.6 K. As dNiFe changes, TC of the 

Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions exhibits little variation between ~ 8.4 and ~ 8.9 K (fig. S4). Similar to the 

normal states of Nb, the Gilbert damping below TC is also obtained from the best linear-fitting 

result of the half linewidth vs. frequency (fig. S5). During the FMR measurement, TC varies a little 

(< 1 K) (Fig. S6). As the temperature decreases, 𝛼 decreases abruptly from ~ 0.012 to ~ 0.0036 

across the TC (fig. 3C), which indicates the decrease of spin current injected into Nb due to the 

formation of superconducting gap below TC. This observation is consistent with previous reports 

on spin pumping into SCs where the spin current is mediated by Bogoliubov quasiparticles (18, 

19, 37). As the temperature decreases far below the TC, the quasiparticle population dramatically 

decreases, leading to reduced spin pumping and Gilbert damping.

Remarkably, the oscillating amplitude of the Gilbert damping of the Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions as 

a function of the NiFe thickness is dramatically enhanced as the temperature decreases into the 

superconducting states of Nb (Fig. 3D). At T = 4 K, the oscillating magnitude of the Gilbert 

damping constant is ~ 0.005 for the first three oscillations, which is comparable to the background 

value of ~ 0.006. The obtained Gilbert damping values are not affected by thermal cycles, and the 

large oscillating feature has been confirmed on a different set of samples. Such a giant oscillation 

of the Gilbert damping cannot be explained by spin pumping of Bogoliubov quasiparticle-

mediated spin current in SCs. Since as the temperature decreases, the population of the Bogoliubov

quasiparticles monotonically and rapidly decreases with an increase of the SC gap, which would 

lead to lower Gilbert damping and also smaller oscillation compared to the normal states. Note 

that the oscillating period of the Gilbert damping at T = 4 K is the same as that at T = 10 K that is 

supposed to be 2𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓] due to the quantum interference effect. Such oscillating period of 

2𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓] is the also same as that of the zero- and π-phase ground states transitions in FM 

Josephson devices, which is equal to the coherence length in NiFe film of 2𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓] in the 


6

ballistic regime (1, 11, 17), and √ℏ𝐷𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 ∕ 𝐸𝑒𝑥 in the diffusive regime (𝐷𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 is the diffusion 

coefficient, and 𝐸𝑒𝑥 is the exchange energy). The observed oscillating period of ~ 1.8 nm in our 

study is similar to the zero - 𝜋 oscillating period measured in the NiFe Josephson junctions in the 

diffusive regime reported previously (11, 17). 

The Gilbert damping difference (∆𝛼) between the zero- and 𝜋-junctions is extracted as a 

function of NiFe thickness, as shown in Fig. 4A. We assume the larger Gilbert damping for the 𝜋-

junctions and smaller values for the zero-junctions, which will be discussed later in details. The 

thickness-dependent Gilbert damping of the zero- and 𝜋-junctions are expected to both behave as 

α ~ 1 ⁄ dNiFe (29). Hence, we can treat them separately, as illustrated by the guide lines in the inset 

of Fig. 4A, and ∆𝛼 is obtained by subtracting the fitted 1/d curve for the expected zero-junctions

(black dashed line). Clearly, there is a pronounced oscillating feature of ∆𝛼 for the Nb/NiFe/Nb 

junctions with NiFe thickness from ~ 5 nm to ~ 11 nm. When the NiFe thickness is above ~ 11 

nm, the oscillating feature of the Gilbert damping is largely suppressed compared to thinner NiFe 

junctions. This feature might be associated with the strong Josephson coupling for thin NiFe 

junctions and the exponential decaying of the Josephson coupling as the NiFe thickness increases 

(11, 17). To confirm this, the Josephson junctions are fabricated using the shadow mask technique, 

and a Josephson coupling is observed from the Nb/NiFe (5 nm and 10 nm)/Nb junctions 

(Supplementary Materials and fig. S7).

Discussion

Let us discuss the physical mechanism that induces the giant oscillating Gilbert damping in the 

following. Apart from the spin pumping via ABS discussed above (Fig. 1D and 1E), the spin 

current in SCs can also be mediated by Bogoliubov quasiparticles (fig. S8A) (18, 19, 22, 23, 38), 

spin-triplet pairs (fig. S8B) (3). Regarding Bogoliubov quasiparticles, they populate around the 

edge of superconducting gap at elevated temperatures close to TC (39). As shown both theoretical 

and experimental studies, the enhanced Gilbert damping in the SC/FM/SC heterostructures 

happens around TC (18, 19, 22, 23, 38). As the temperature decreases down to 0.5 TC, the 

Bogoliubov quasiparticles are mostly frozen out, for which the spin pumping is forbidden that will 

no longer contribute to the enhanced Gilbert damping. Hence, the Bogoliubov quasiparticles are 

very unlikely to account for our experimental results. Regarding the spin-triplet pairs, it has been 

shown in previous studies that the spin-triplet current under FMR conditions and spin triplet 


7

correlations would be different for zero- and 𝜋-junctions (4, 38, 40, 41), which might result in 

different Gilbert damping theoretically. However, in our study, there are not spin sinks adjacent to 

the Nb layers, thus not allowing the spin-triplet Cooper pairs to be relaxed in the Nb. This is 

different from previous report on the Pt/SC/FM/SC/Pt heterostructures(20), where the Pt is used 

as the spin sink. Experimentally, as the temperature below TC, the Gilbert damping exhibits a 

monotonic decrease for the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures (Fig. 3C), which is different from the 

enhanced Gilbert damping due to spin-triplet pairs (20). Furthermore, no Josephson current in the 

Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures is observed in Nb/NiFe (30 nm)/Nb junction (fig. S7), which

indicates the absence of long-range spin-triplet Josephson coupling. Both these experimental 

results indicate that the contribution from the spin-triplet pairs is not significant to the enhanced 

Gilbert damping in the superconducting Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions.

To our best understanding, the most reasonable mechanism is the spin pumping via the ABS, 

which can qualitatively
describe our experimental observation. Previous studies have 

demonstrated that the energy of ABS inside the superconducting gap depends on the

superconducting-phase (42, 43). For the FMR measurement under open-circuited conditions, the 

inversion symmetry of the current-phase (𝜑) relationships is preserved (43-45). For 𝜋-junctions, 

there is a 𝜋-phase shift in the current-phase relationship curves compared to zero-junctions, i.e., 

the properties of 𝜑 = 0 of a 𝜋-junction is the same as those of 𝜑 = 𝜋 of a zero-junction. Since this 

𝜋-phase shift is already taken into account by the FM exchange field, the ABS energy of the 𝜋-

junctions can be obtained at 𝜑 = 0 in the ground states, which is similar to that of 𝜑 = 𝜋 of zero-

junctions. 

For 𝜋-junctions, ABS is located around the zero-energy inside of the superconducting gap (Fig. 

1D). The ABS could penetrate into the superconducting Nb films with scale of superconducting 

coherent length (~ 30 nm), which is evanescent to dissipate the spin angular momentum (25, 26, 

44). As shown in Fig. 4B, the transfer efficiency of spin angular momentum via the zero-energy 

ABS can lead to an enhanced Gilbert damping. Whileas, for zero-junctions, the distribution of the 

ABS is near the edge of the superconducting gap (Fig. 1C), thus, the spin pumping efficiency is 

suppressed due to the reduced population of the ABS at low temperatures (Fig. 4C). Furthermore, 

the oscillatory energy levels of the ABS between the zero- and 𝜋-junctions is also consistent with 

the density of states (DOS) oscillating in superconductors between the zero- and 𝜋-junctions (1, 6, 


8

38, 44, 46). In consequence, as the NiFe thickness increases, the oscillatory spin pumping 

efficiency via ABS at the FM/SC interface (or DOS in SCs) gives rise to the oscillatory Gilbert 

damping. We have proposed a simplified model for the case of ideal transparency of electrons 

(Supplementary Materials S2 and fig. S9). For the less transparency cases, i.e., in diffusive regime,

(42, 43), the energy levels of the ABS in 𝜋-junctions locates away from zero-energy, but they are 

still much smaller than those of the ABS in zero-junctions. Actually, the similar oscillating 

behaviors of ABS (or DOS) can be preserved in the diffusive regime (6, 46). Hence, an oscillating 

spin pumping efficiency would also be expected in the diffusive regime, which could lead to the 

oscillating Gilbert damping observed in our experiment. To fully understand the experimental 

observation of the oscillatory Gilbert damping and the detailed spin relaxation process in the 

diffusive regime, further theoretical studies are needed.

Furthermore, the control samples of bilayer Nb/NiFe heterostructures do not exhibit the large 

oscillatory feature for the Gilbert damping as the NiFe thickness varies at T = 4 K (fig. S10), which 

further presents the important role of phase difference across NiFe in the large the oscillatory 

Gilbert damping observed in the trilayer Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures. 

In conclusion, giant oscillatory Gilbert damping is observed in the superconducting 

Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions with respect to the NiFe thickness. To our best knowledge, neither the 

Bogoliubov quasiparticles, nor the spin-triplet pairs are relevant to this observation. The most 

possible explanation for such giant oscillatory Gilbert damping could be related to the different 

ABS energy levels and the DOS at the NiFe/SC interface in zero- and π- junctions. To fully 

understand these results, further theoretical studies are needed. Looking forward, our experimental 

results might pave the way for controlling the magnetization dynamics by the superconducting 

phase in a FM Josephson junction in the SQUID setup, and could be important potential 

applications of ferromagnet π-junctions in quantum computing, such as half-quantum flux qubits.

Materials and Methods

Materials growth

The SC/FM/SC heterostructures consisting of Nb (100 nm) and Ni80Fe20 (NiFe; ~ 5 - 20 nm) were 

grown on thermally oxidized Si substrates in a d.c. magnetron sputtering system with a base 

pressure of ∼1×10−8 torr. To systematically vary the NiFe thickness that is crucial for the quantum-


9

size effect, we adopted the rotating multi-platter technique that allows us to grow dozens of 

Nb/NiFe/Nb samples in each run (35). The thickness of the Nb layer is fixed to be ~100 nm that is 

much larger than the spin diffusion length of Nb (20, 47). After the growth, a thin Al2O3 layer (~ 

10 nm) was deposited in situ as a capping layer to avoid sample degradation against air/water 

exposure. The crystalline properties of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures were characterized by X-ray 

diffraction (fig. S1A) and high-resolution cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (fig. 

S1B) using a 200-kV JEOL 2010F field-emission microscope. The NiFe thickness is determined 

by the growth rate that is calibrated by TEM measurement, where the uncertainty of the NiFe 

thickness is obtained to be smaller than ~ 0.8 nm (fig. S1B). The resistivity of the NiFe layers 

(thickness: 5 - 20 nm) is ranging from 60 to 35 μΩ·cm, which corresponds to the mean free path 

between 2.3 and 3.9 nm.

Ferromagnetic resonance measurement. 

The spin pumping of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures was characterized via FMR using the coplanar 

wave guide technique connected with a vector network analyzer (VNA; Agilent E5071C) in the 

variable temperature insert of a Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS; Quantum 

Design) (19). The FMR spectra were characterized by measuring the amplitudes of forward 

complex transmission coefficients (S21) as the in-plane magnetic field decreases from 4000 to 0 

Oe under the microwave power of 1 mW. The typical FMR results measured on the Nb/NiFe (12 

nm)/Nb heterostructures are shown in the fig. S2A (T = 10 K) and fig. S5A (T = 4 K). Weaker 

FMR signals are observed in the superconducting states compared to the normal states. 

The half linewidth (∆𝐻) can be obtained by the Lorentz fitting of the magnetic field-dependent 

FMR signal following the relationship (figs. S2B and S4B):

𝑆21 ∝ 𝑆0

(∆𝐻)2

(∆𝐻)2 + (𝑯 − 𝑯𝒓𝒆𝒔)2
(3)

where 𝑆0 is the coefficient for the transmitted microwave power, 𝑯 is the external in-plane 

magnetic field, and 𝑯𝒓𝒆𝒔 is the resonance magnetic field. The Gilbert damping constant (α) can be 

obtained from the slope of the best linear-fitting results of the ∆𝐻 vs. the microwave frequency (f)

(48-51):


10

∆𝐻 = ∆𝐻0 + (2𝜋𝛼

𝛾 ) 𝑓
(4)

where ∆𝐻0 is the zero-frequency line broadening that is related to the inhomogeneous properties, 

and  𝛾 is the gyromagnetic ratio. From the best linearly fits of the ∆𝐻 vs. f results measured on the 

typical Nb/Py (12 nm)/Nb sample (red lines in figs. S2C and S5C), 𝛼 is determined to be 0.012 

and 0.0054 at T = 10 and 4 K, respectively. A larger zero-frequency line broadening ∆𝐻0 is 

observed for the superconducting state compared to the normal state of Nb/Py/Nb heterostructures, 

which could be attributed to Meissner screening effect and the formation of trapped magnetic 

fluxes in Nb (51). The thickness dependent ∆𝐻0 is shown in fig. S11C, and no obviously 

oscillatory behaviors are observed.

The effective magnetization and the gyromagnetic ratio can be fitted via the in-plane Kittel 

formula (51):

𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑠 =

𝛾

2𝜋 √(𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 + ℎ)(𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 + ℎ + 4𝜋𝑀𝑒𝑓𝑓),                                      (5)

where 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑠 and 𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 are the resonant microwave frequency and magnetic field respectively,

4𝜋𝑀𝑒𝑓𝑓 is the effective saturated magnetization, and ℎ is the shifted magnetic field induced by 

superconducting proximity effect. The thickness-dependent gyromagnetic ratio and effective 

magnetization can be found in fig. S11A and fig. S11B. Both parameters do not exhibit any 

oscillatory features as the Gilbert damping does (Fig. 4A), which demonstrates that the oscillatory 

Gilbert damping is not caused by any unintentional experimental error.

Superconducting transition temperature measurement.

The superconducting transition temperature (TC) of the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures was 

determined via the zero-resistance temperature measured by four-probe method in a PPMS using 

standard a.c. lock-in technique at a low frequency of 7 Hz. The TC of Nb (100 nm)/NiFe/Nb (100 

nm) heterostructures exhibits little variation as a function of the NiFe thickness (fig. S4). It is 

noticed that the FMR measurement can affect the TC a little (< 1 K), as shown in fig. S6. 


11

Supplementary Materials

Supplementary Materials and Methods

fig. S1. The crystalline properties of the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures.

fig. S2. Gilbert damping measurement of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures at T = 10 K.

fig. S3. NiFe thickness dependence of Gilbert damping at T = 50 K.

fig. S4. NiFe thickness dependence of TC for the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures.

fig. S5. Measurement of the Gilbert damping of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures at T = 4 K.

fig. S6. The effect of FMR measurement on the TC of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures.

fig. S7. The measurement of Josephson coupling in Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions.

fig. S8. Illustration of magnetization dynamics and spin pumping in the SC/FM/SC 
heterostructures due to Bogoliubov quasiparticles and equal spin-triplet Cooper pairs.

fig. S9. Calculation of the enhanced Gilbert damping due to spin pumping via the ABS at T = 4 K.

fig. S10. Gilbert damping of control sample of bilayer Nb/NiFe junctions.

fig. S11.
Thickness dependence of
gyromagnetic ratio, effective magnetization and 

inhomogeneous half-linewidth.

References and Notes:

1.
A. I. Buzdin, Proximity effects in superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures. Rev. Mod. 
Phys. 77, 935-976 (2005).

2.
F. S. Bergeret, A. F. Volkov, K. B. Efetov, Odd triplet superconductivity and related 
phenomena in superconductor-ferromagnet structures. Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1321-1373 
(2005)..

3.
J. Linder, J. W. A. Robinson, Superconducting spintronics. Nat. Phys. 11, 307-315 (2015).

4.
M. Eschrig, J. Kopu, J. C. Cuevas, G. Schön, Theory of Half-Metal/Superconductor 
Heterostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 137003 (2003).

5.
A. I. Buzdin, L. N. Bulaevskii, S. V. Panyukov, Critical-current oscillations as a function 
of the exchange field and thickness of the ferromagnetic metal (F) in an SFS Josephson 
junction. JETP Lett. 35, 178-180 (1982).

6.
T. Kontos, M. Aprili, J. Lesueur, X. Grison, Inhomogeneous Superconductivity Induced in 
a Ferromagnet by Proximity Effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 304-307 (2001).

7.
L. B. Ioffe, V. B. Geshkenbein, M. V. Feigel'man, A. L. Fauchère, G. Blatter, 
Environmentally decoupled sds -wave Josephson junctions for quantum computing. Nature
398, 679 (1999).

8.
J. E. Mooij, T. P. Orlando, L. Levitov, L. Tian, C. H. van der Wal, S. Lloyd, Josephson 
Persistent-Current Qubit. Science 285, 1036 (1999).

9.
T. Yamashita, K. Tanikawa, S. Takahashi, S. Maekawa, Superconducting π Qubit with a 
Ferromagnetic Josephson Junction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 097001 (2005).


12

10.
T. Kontos, M. Aprili, J. Lesueur, F. Genêt, B. Stephanidis, R. Boursier, Josephson Junction 
through a Thin Ferromagnetic Layer: Negative Coupling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 137007 
(2002).

11.
J. W. A. Robinson, S. Piano, G. Burnell, C. Bell, M. G. Blamire, Critical Current 
Oscillations in Strong Ferromagnetic π Junctions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 177003 (2006).

12.
M. Weides, M. Kemmler, H. Kohlstedt, R. Waser, D. Koelle, R. Kleiner, E. Goldobin, 0 − 
π Josephson Tunnel Junctions with Ferromagnetic Barrier. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 247001 
(2006).

13.
C. Bell, R. Loloee, G. Burnell, M. G. Blamire, Characteristics of strong ferromagnetic 
Josephson junctions with epitaxial barriers. Phys. Rev. B 71, 180501 (2005).

14.
V. V. Ryazanov, V. A. Oboznov, A. Y. Rusanov, A. V. Veretennikov, A. A. Golubov, J. 
Aarts, Coupling of Two Superconductors through a Ferromagnet: Evidence for a π Junction. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2427-2430 (2001).

15.
Y. Blum, A. Tsukernik, M. Karpovski, A. Palevski, Oscillations of the Superconducting 
Critical Current in Nb-Cu-Ni-Cu-Nb Junctions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 187004 (2002).

16.
V. Shelukhin, A. Tsukernik, M. Karpovski, Y. Blum, K. B. Efetov, A. F. Volkov, T. 
Champel, M. Eschrig, T. Löfwander, G. Schön, A. Palevski, Observation of periodic π-
phase shifts in ferromagnet-superconductor multilayers. Phys. Rev. B 73, 174506 (2006).

17.
J. W. A. Robinson, S. Piano, G. Burnell, C. Bell, M. G. Blamire, Zero to π transition in 
superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor junctions. Phys. Rev. B 76, 094522 (2007).

18.
C. Bell, S. Milikisyants, M. Huber, J. Aarts, Spin Dynamics in a Superconductor-
Ferromagnet Proximity System. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 047002 (2008).

19.
Y. Yao, Q. Song, Y. Takamura, J. P. Cascales, W. Yuan, Y. Ma, Y. Yun, X. C. Xie, J. S. 
Moodera, W. Han, Probe of spin dynamics in superconducting NbN thin films via spin 
pumping. Phys. Rev. B 97, 224414 (2018).

20.
K.-R. Jeon, C. Ciccarelli, A. J. Ferguson, H. Kurebayashi, L. F. Cohen, X. Montiel, M. 
Eschrig, J. W. A. Robinson, M. G. Blamire, Enhanced spin pumping into superconductors 
provides evidence for superconducting pure spin currents. Nat. Mater. 17, 499–503 (2018).

21.
M. Müller, L. Liensberger, L. Flacke, H. Huebl, A. Kamra, W. Belzig, R. Gross, M. Weiler, 
M. Althammer, Temperature-Dependent Spin Transport and Current-Induced Torques in 
Superconductor-Ferromagnet Heterostructures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 087201 (2021).

22.
J. P. Morten, A. Brataas, G. E. W. Bauer, W. Belzig, Y. Tserkovnyak, Proximity-effect–
assisted decay of spin currents in superconductors. Europhys. Lett. 84, 57008 (2008).

23.
M. Inoue, M. Ichioka, H. Adachi, Spin pumping into superconductors: A new probe of spin 
dynamics in a superconducting thin film. Phys. Rev. B 96, 024414 (2017).

24.
T. Kato, Y. Ohnuma, M. Matsuo, J. Rech, T. Jonckheere, T. Martin, Microscopic theory 
of spin transport at the interface between a superconductor and a ferromagnetic insulator. 
Phys. Rev. B 99, 144411 (2019).

25.
M. A. Silaev, Large enhancement of spin pumping due to the surface bound states in normal 
metal--superconductor structures. Phys. Rev. B 102, 180502 (2020).

26.
M. T. Ahari, Y. Tserkovnyak, Superconductivity-enhanced spin pumping: The role of 
Andreev bound-state resonances. Phys. Rev. B 103, L100406 (2021).

27.
W. Han, S. Maekawa, X.-C. Xie, Spin current as a probe of quantum materials. Nat. Mater.
19, 139–152 (2020).


13

28.
R. H. Silsbee, A. Janossy, P. Monod, Coupling between ferromagnetic and conduction-
spin-resonance modes at a ferromagnetic\normal-metal interface. Phys. Rev. B 19, 4382-
4399 (1979).

29.
Y. Tserkovnyak, A. Brataas, G. E. W. Bauer, B. I. Halperin, Nonlocal magnetization 
dynamics in ferromagnetic heterostructures. Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1375-1421 (2005).

30.
L. Landau, E. Lifshitz, On the theory of the dispersion of magnetic permeability in 
ferromagnetic bodies. Phys. Z. Sowjetunion 8, 153 (1935).

31.
T. L. Gilbert, A phenomenological theory of damping in ferromagnetic materials. 
Magnetics, IEEE Transactions on 40, 3443-3449 (2004).

32.
J. C. Slonczewski, Current-driven excitation of magnetic multilayers. J. Magn. Magn. 
Mater. 159, L1-L7 (1996).

33.
J. A. Sauls, Andreev bound states and their signatures. Philos. Trans. Royal Soc. A 376, 
20180140 (2018).

34.
M. Eschrig, Theory of Andreev bound states in S-F-S junctions and S-F proximity devices. 
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 376, 20150149 (2018).

35.
S. S. P. Parkin, N. More, K. P. Roche, Oscillations in exchange coupling and 
magnetoresistance in metallic superlattice structures: Co/Ru, Co/Cr, and Fe/Cr. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 64, 2304-2307 (1990).

36.
D. L. Mills, Ferromagnetic resonance relaxation in ultrathin metal films: The role of the 
conduction electrons. Phys. Rev. B 68, 014419 (2003).

37.
T. Wakamura, H. Akaike, Y. Omori, Y. Niimi, S. Takahashi, A. Fujimaki, S. Maekawa, Y. 
Otani, Quasiparticle-mediated spin Hall effect in a superconductor. Nat. Mater. 14, 675-
678 (2015).

38.
C. Holmqvist, S. Teber, M. Fogelström, Nonequilibrium effects in a Josephson junction 
coupled to a precessing spin. Phys. Rev. B 83, 104521 (2011).

39.
M. Tinkham, Introduction to superconductivity.  (Dover Publications, New York, USA, 
2004).

40.
M. Eschrig, T. Löfwander, Triplet supercurrents in clean and disordered half-metallic 
ferromagnets. Nat. Phys. 4, 138 (2008).

41.
M. Houzet, Ferromagnetic Josephson Junction with Precessing Magnetization. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 101, 057009 (2008).

42.
C. W. J. Beenakker, Universal limit of critical-current fluctuations in mesoscopic 
Josephson junctions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3836-3839 (1991).

43.
A. A. Golubov, M. Y. Kupriyanov, E. Il’ichev, The current-phase relation in Josephson 
junctions. Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 411-469 (2004).

44.
H. Sellier, C. Baraduc, F. Lefloch, R. Calemczuk, Half-Integer Shapiro Steps at the -
Crossover of a Ferromagnetic Josephson Junction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 257005 (2004).

45.
E. Strambini, A. Iorio, O. Durante, R. Citro, C. Sanz-Fernández, C. Guarcello, I. V. Tokatly, 
A. Braggio, M. Rocci, N. Ligato, V. Zannier, L. Sorba, F. S. Bergeret, F. Giazotto, A 
Josephson phase battery. Nat. Nanotech. 15, 656-660 (2020).

46.
M. Zareyan, W. Belzig, Y. V. Nazarov, Oscillations of Andreev States in Clean 
Ferromagnetic Films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 308-311 (2001).

47.
T. Wakamura, N. Hasegawa, K. Ohnishi, Y. Niimi, Y. Otani, Spin Injection into a 
Superconductor with Strong Spin-Orbit Coupling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 036602 (2014).


14

48.
C. Chappert, K. L. Dang, P. Beauvillain, H. Hurdequint, D. Renard, Ferromagnetic 
resonance studies of very thin cobalt films on a gold substrate. Phys. Rev. B 34, 3192-3197 
(1986).

49.
W. Platow, A. N. Anisimov, G. L. Dunifer, M. Farle, K. Baberschke, Correlations between 
ferromagnetic-resonance linewidths and sample quality in the study of metallic ultrathin 
films. Phys. Rev. B 58, 5611-5621 (1998).

50.
Y. Zhao, Q. Song, S.-H. Yang, T. Su, W. Yuan, S. S. P. Parkin, J. Shi, W. Han, 
Experimental Investigation of Temperature-Dependent Gilbert Damping in Permalloy 
Thin Films. Scientific Reports 6, 22890 (2016).

51.
K.-R. Jeon, C. Ciccarelli, H. Kurebayashi, L. F. Cohen, X. Montiel, M. Eschrig, T. Wagner, 
S. Komori, A. Srivastava, J. W. A. Robinson, M. G. Blamire, Effect of Meissner Screening 
and Trapped Magnetic Flux on Magnetization Dynamics in Thick Nb/Ni80Fe20/Nb 
Trilayers. Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 014061 (2019).

52.
Y. Tserkovnyak, A. Brataas, G. E. W. Bauer, Enhanced Gilbert Damping in Thin 
Ferromagnetic Films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 117601 (2002).

53.
H. J. Skadsem, A. Brataas, J. Martinek, Y. Tserkovnyak, Ferromagnetic resonance and 
voltage-induced transport in normal metal-ferromagnet-superconductor trilayers. Phys. 
Rev. B 84, 104420 (2011).

54.
T. Yu, G. E. W. Bauer, Noncontact Spin Pumping by Microwave Evanescent Fields. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 124, 236801 (2020).

55.
A. F. Andreev, The Thermal Conductivity of the Intermediate State in Superconductors. 
JETP 19, 1228 (1964).

56.
P. Townsend, J. Sutton, Investigation by Electron Tunneling of the Superconducting 
Energy Gaps in Nb, Ta, Sn, and Pb. Phys. Rev. 128, 591-595 (1962).

57.
A. V. Pronin, M. Dressel, A. Pimenov, A. Loidl, I. V. Roshchin, L. H. Greene, Direct 
observation of the superconducting energy gap developing in the conductivity spectra of 
niobium. Phys. Rev. B 57, 14416-14421 (1998).

58.
D. G. C. Jones, Quantum Transport. Introduction to Nanoscience, by Y.V. Nazarov and 
Y.M. Blanter. Contemporary Physics 51, 379-380 (2010).

59.
Y. V. Nazarov, Limits of universality in disordered conductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 134-
137 (1994).

60.
T. T. Heikkilä, J. Särkkä, F. K. Wilhelm, Supercurrent-carrying density of states in 
diffusive mesoscopic Josephson weak links. Phys. Rev. B 66, 184513 (2002).

61.
J. Bass, W. P. Pratt, Spin-diffusion lengths in metals and alloys, and spin-flipping at 
metal/metal interfaces: an experimentalist’s critical review. J. Phys. Condens. Matter. 19, 
183201 (2007).

62.
A. A. Bannykh, J. Pfeiffer, V. S. Stolyarov, I. E. Batov, V. V. Ryazanov, M. Weides, 
Josephson tunnel junctions with a strong ferromagnetic interlayer. Phys. Rev. B 79, 054501 
(2009).


15

Acknowledgments

General: We acknowledge the fruitful discussion with Sadamichi Maekawa, Ziqiang Qiu, 
Zhe Yuan, Ke Xia, Young Sun, and Kei Yamamoto. Y.Y., R.C., Y.M., W.X., Y.J., X.C.X., 
and W.H. acknowledge the financial support from National Basic Research Programs of 
China (No. 2019YFA0308401), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 
11974025), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (No. 1192009), and the Strategic Priority 
Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. XDB28000000). T.Y. is 
financially supported by DFG Emmy Noether program (SE 2558/2-1). 

Author contributions: W.H. conceived and supervised the project. Y.Y. and R.C. 
performed the ferromagnetic resonance measurements. Y.Y. and Y.M. performed X-ray 
diffraction measurements. T.Y. performed the theoretical calculations. S.H.Y. synthesized 
the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures. Y.Y. and W.H. wrote the manuscript with the 
contribution from all authors. All the authors discussed the results.

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

Data Availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in 
the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.


16

Fig. 1. Illustration of magnetization dynamics and spin pumping in the SC/FM/SC 

heterostructures. (A) The oscillatory real part of the superconducting order parameter (Re{Ψ}, 

green curve) penetrated into FM leads to the zero-state and 𝜋-state. (B) The symmetric order 

parameter in the zero-junctions. (C) The anti-symmetric order parameter in the 𝜋-junctions. (D-E) 

Spin pumping via the ABS in SCs in the zero- and 𝜋-junctions. M and 𝛼FM are the magnetization 

and Gilbert damping of the FM layer itself, and 𝛼sp is the enhanced Gilbert damping, which arises 

from the spin dissipation in SC layers during the spin pumping process.


17

Fig. 2. Oscillatory Gilbert damping of the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures above TC. (A) The 

illustration of spin pumping into the normal states of Nb layers and the electronic band structure 

of NiFe with different spin-up and spin-down Fermi vectors (𝑘F↑ and 𝑘F↓) due to the exchange 

splitting (2𝐸𝑒𝑥). The spin pumping gives rise to the spin accumulation in the Nb layers, indicated 

by the spin-split chemical potential (𝜇↑ and 𝜇↓). (B) A typical FMR curve measured with f = 12 

GHz (black circles) and the Lorentzian fitting curve (red line) measured on Nb/Py (12 nm)/Nb.

ΔH is the half linewidth at the half maximum of FMR signal. (C) The determination of the Gilbert 


18

damping from ΔH vs. f. The red line represents the best linear-fitting curve. (D) The oscillatory 

Gilbert damping as a function of NiFe thickness (dNiFe) measured at T = 10, 15, and 20 K, 

respectively. The experimental oscillating period (𝜆) is marked by the red dashed arrow. The inset: 

Illustration of the quantum-interference effect of the angular momentum transfer between the local 

magnetic moment and the spin-polarized electrons. When the NiFe thickness decreases to scale of 

1

∆𝑘, the quantum-interference effect starts to be significant in the angular momentum transfer and

spin pumping into the Nb layers.


19

Fig. 3. Giant oscillatory Gilbert damping in Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures below TC. (A) The 

illustration of electronic band structures of Nb in the normal and superconducting states. (B) The 

determination of TC via zero-resistance temperature measured on the typical Nb/NiFe (12 nm)/Nb 

heterostructures. (C) Temperature dependence of Gilbert damping of the typical Nb/NiFe (12 

nm)/Nb heterostructures. (D) The oscillatory Gilbert damping as a function of the NiFe thickness 

in the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures measured at T = 10, 7, 5, and 4 K, respectively. The oscillating 

feature below TC (T = 4 and 5 K) is dramatically enhanced compared to that above TC (T = 10 K).


20

Fig. 4. Physical mechanism of the giant oscillatory Gilbert damping in Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions. 

(A) The NiFe thickness dependence of the Gilbert damping difference ( ∆α ) between the

Nb/NiFe/Nb π- and zero-junctions at T = 4 K. Inset: The Gilbert damping of zero- and π-junctions. 

The solid balls represent the experimental data, the blue and black dash lines are the guide lines 

for π- and zero-junctions, respectively. For both guide lines, the damping is expected to behave as 

α ~ 1 ⁄ dNiFe. (B-C) Illustration of the spin pumping via the ABS and the enhanced Gilbert damping 

for Nb/NiFe/Nb π- and zero-junctions, respectively. The red thick-arrows indicate the pumping 

and relaxation of the spin current in SCs.


21

Supplementary Materials for

Giant oscillatory Gilbert damping in 

superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor junctions 

Authors

Yunyan Yao1,2†, Ranran Cai1,2†, Tao Yu3, Yang Ma1,2, Wenyu Xing1,2, Yuan Ji1,2, Xin-Cheng 

Xie1,2,4,5, See-Hun Yang6*, and Wei Han1,2*

This SM file includes:

⚫
Supplementary Materials and Methods

⚫
fig. S1. The crystalline properties of the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures.

⚫
fig. S2. Gilbert damping measurement of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures at T = 10 K.

⚫
fig. S3. NiFe thickness dependence of Gilbert damping at T = 50 K.

⚫
fig. S4. NiFe thickness dependence of TC for the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures.

⚫
fig. S5. Measurement of the Gilbert damping of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures at T = 4 K.

⚫
fig. S6. The effect of FMR measurement on the TC of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures.

⚫
fig. S7. The measurement of Josephson coupling in Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions.

⚫
fig. S8. Illustration of magnetization dynamics and spin pumping in the SC/FM/SC 

heterostructures due to Bogoliubov quasiparticles and equal spin-triplet Cooper pairs. 

⚫
fig. S9. Calculation of the enhanced Gilbert damping due to spin pumping via the ABS at 

T = 4 K.

⚫
fig. S10. Gilbert damping of control sample of bilayer Nb/NiFe junctions.

⚫
fig. S11. Thickness dependence of gyromagnetic ratio, effective magnetization and 

inhomogeneous half-linewidth.


22

Supplementary Materials and Methods

Section 1: Model of oscillating Gilbert damping above TC. 

The oscillatory Gilbert damping in normal metal (NM)/ferromagnet (FM)/NM 

heterostructures arising from quantum interference effect is analyzed based on previous theory by 

Mills (36). Within the linear response theory, the enhanced Gilbert damping is related to the 

dynamical spin susceptibility (𝜒−+(𝛺)) of conduction electrons in a FM,

𝛼sp = 𝐽2𝑀𝑠𝑉

2𝑁2ℏ3𝛾 Λ2
(S1)

where Λ2 = Im (

𝑑𝜒−+(𝛺)

𝑑𝛺
|
Ω=0). Using one dimensional model, we obtain

Λ2 = 1

𝜋2 ∫ 𝑑𝑥𝑑𝑥′Im[𝐺↑(𝑥, 𝑥′, 𝜖F)]Im[𝐺↓(𝑥, 𝑥′, 𝜖F)]

FM

(S2)

where 𝐺𝜎(𝑥, 𝑥′, 𝜖F) is the Green’s function for conduction electrons with 𝜎-spin at the Fermi 

energy (𝜖F). In a FM, 𝐺𝜎(𝑥, 𝑥′, 𝜖F) is related to the exchange energy.

[− ℏ2

2𝑚

𝑑

𝑑𝑥2 − 𝜖 ± 𝐸ex] 𝐺𝜎(𝑥, 𝑥′, 𝜖F) = 𝛿(𝑥 − 𝑥′)
(S3)

For the FM film with a thickness dFM in − dFM/2 < x < dFM/2, the Green’s function satisfies the 

relation 

𝐺𝜎(𝑥, 𝑥′, 𝜖F) = 𝐺𝜎(𝑥′, 𝑥, 𝜖F) = 𝐺𝜎(−𝑥, −𝑥′, 𝜖F)
(S4)

Hence, the imaginary part of the Green’s function could be expressed by

Im[𝐺𝜎(𝑥, 𝑥′, 𝜖F)] = −π{𝑁F𝜎cos [𝑘F𝜎(𝑥−𝑥′)] + 𝑁F𝜎

′ cos [𝑘F𝜎(𝑥+𝑥′)]}
(S5)

where 𝑘F𝜎 = √

2𝑚

ℏ2 (𝜖F ∓ 𝐸ex) is the Fermi wave-vector in the FM, 𝑁F𝜎 and 𝑁F𝜎

′
are equivalent to 

the density of states and the modulation amplitude of the local density of states, respectively. For 

the same position of x, the local density of states is equal to

𝑁𝜎(𝑥, 𝜖F) = 𝑁F𝜎+𝑁F𝜎

′ cos [2𝑘F𝜎𝑥]
(S6)

Since 𝐸ex is much smaller compared to 𝜖F, the spatial modulation of the local density of states is 

negligible. The combination of equations (S2) and (S5) leads to

Λ2 = ∫
𝑑𝑥𝑑𝑥′
𝑑FM 2
⁄

−𝑑FM 2
⁄
{𝑁F↑ cos[𝑘F↑(𝑥−𝑥′)]} ∗ {𝑁F↓ cos[𝑘F↓(𝑥−𝑥′)]}
(S7)


23

= 2𝑁F↑𝑁F↓ {
1

(𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓)2 sin2 [𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓

2
𝑑FM] +
1

(𝑘F↑ + 𝑘F↓)2 sin2 [𝑘F↑ + 𝑘F↓

2
𝑑FM]}

Clearly, the enhanced Gilbert damping is expected to oscillate as a function of the FM

thickness with two periods of 2𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓] and 2𝜋/[𝑘F↑ + 𝑘F↓]. For real FM materials, such as

NiFe with (𝑘F↑ + 𝑘F↓) ≫ (𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓), the second term in the equation (S7) could be negligible,

leaving only one oscillating period of 2𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓]. When the FM thickness is equal to

2𝑛𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓], a lower Gilbert damping is obtained. On the other hands with FM thickness of

(2𝑛 + 1)𝜋/[𝑘F↑ − 𝑘F↓], a larger Gilbert damping is obtained.

Section 2: Calculation of the enhanced Gilbert damping in Nb/NiFe/Nb by spin pumping via

Andreev bound states (ABS).

As the reciprocal process of the spin transfer torque, conventional spin pumping is achieved 

by the magnetization torques provided by the driven quasiparticle carriers (29, 52-54), which are 

the electrons in the normal metals. In SC/FM heterostructures, however, the quasiparticle carriers 

can be either Bogoliubov quasiparticles or ABS (42), which lie above and within the 

superconducting gaps, respectively. Therefore, it is desirable to formulate and estimate the 

contribution to the spin pumping via the ABS (55), when the temperature is much smaller than the 

superconducting critical temperature.

Without loss of generality, we start the analysis from a left-propagating electron of energy 𝜀

and spin 𝜎 = {↑, ↓} = {+, −,}. When the Zeeman splitting J is much smaller than the Fermi energy 

EF, it has momentum

𝑘𝜎 = 𝑘𝐹 + (𝜀 + 𝜎𝐽)/(ℏ𝜈𝐹),             
(S8)

where 𝜈𝐹 is the Fermi velocity of the electron. When one electron goes from the FM to the SCs, it 

is reflected as a hole by the Andreev reflection at the right FM/SC interface; this hole has a phase 

shift χ = − arccos(𝜀/Δ) with respect to the electron (56), where Δ is the superconducting gap. 

Similarly, when a hole goes from the metal to the superconductor at the left FM/SC interface, an 

electron can be reflected. With a proper energy, the Andreev reflections can form a closed path, as 

a result of which the ABS forms. This requires that the phase accumulated in the reflections 

satisfies the Sommerfeld quantization condition, i.e. in the ballistic regime,


24

𝜀𝐿

ℏ𝜈𝐹 + 𝜎

𝐽𝑑NiFe

ℏ𝜈𝐹 − arccos (

𝜀

∆) = 𝑛𝜋 +

𝜑

2,                            
(S9)

where 𝜑 is the phase difference between the two superconductors, dNiFe is the thickness of the FM 

layer and n is an integer. Since ℏ𝜈𝐹/∆ ≥ 100 nm with 𝜈𝐹 = 2.2 × 105 m/s and ∆ = 1 meV at T = 4 

K in our experiment (17, 57, 58), dNiFe < 19 nm << ℏ𝜈𝐹/∆ such that the first term in Eq. (S9) can 

be safely disregarded. For the FMR measurements with open-circuited configuration, the junctions 

always stay in the ground states (43-45). For 𝜋-junctions, there is a 𝜋-phase shift in the current-

phase relationship curves compared to zero-junctions, i.e., the properties of 𝜑 = 0 of a 𝜋-junction 

is the same as those of 𝜑 = 𝜋 of a zero-junction. Since this 𝜋-phase shift is already taken into 

account by the FM exchange field, the ABS energy of the 𝜋-junctions can be obtained at 𝜑 = 0 in 

the ground states, which is similar to that of 𝜑 = 𝜋 of zero-junctions. Hence, the energy of the ABS 

can be described by 
ε0 = ±∆cos (

𝐽𝑑NiFe

ℏ𝜈𝐹 ) for ideal case with perfect transparency of 

electrons/holes. 

In reality, the interfacial scattering and transport conditions (ballistic or diffusive regimes) of 

FM could affect the energy of the ABS. Following previous studies (42, 59), a transmission 

coefficient (D) could be introduced to describe this issue, which is close to unity in the ballistic 

regime but can also be large in the diffusive regime with an ideal transparency at the interface (43, 

60, 61). In this work, we focus on the ideal cases with perfect transparency of electrons/holes. The 

energy of the ABS oscillates from the edge of the superconducting gap to the zero-energy with 

respect to the FM thickness (fig. S9A).

The pumped spin current reads (29, 52-54),

𝐉𝑠(𝑡) =

ℏ

4𝜋 𝑔eff

↑↓ 𝒎 ×

𝑑𝒎

𝑑𝑡 ,                                           
(S10)

where m is the magnetization unit vector, and we define the effective mixing spin conductivity 

𝑔eff

↑↓ at the finite temperature via the zero-temperature one 𝑔↑↓ by (53, 55)

𝑔eff

↑↓ = 𝑛0 ∫ 𝑑𝜀

𝑑𝑓(𝜀)

𝑑𝜀 Re[𝑔↑↓(𝜀)].                                              (S11)

Here, n0 is the number of the conduction channel that roughly corresponds the conduction electron 

density at the interface and 𝑓(𝜀) = 1/{exp [𝜀/(𝑘𝐵𝑇)] + 1} is the Fermi-Dirac distribution of 

electron at the temperature T. Importantly, in the ballistic limit Re[𝑔↑↓(𝜀)] = 1 when 𝜀 = 𝜀0; it 


25

has width ∆𝜀 depending on the FM thickness dNiFe in the ballistic regime or the mean free path 𝑙𝑚

in the diffusive regime. By the uncertainty principle, ∆𝜀∆𝑡 = 2𝜋ℏ, where ∆𝑡 = 𝑙𝑚/𝜈𝐹 is the 

propagation time of the electron in the junction, leading to  ∆𝜀 ~ 2𝜋ℏ𝜈𝐹/𝑙𝑚 . By further 

considering the degeneracy due to spin (×2) and the existence of two interfaces (×2), we thus can 

estimate

𝑔eff

↑↓ ~ 8𝜋𝑛0

ℏ𝜈𝐹
𝑙𝑚

𝑑𝑓(𝜀0)

𝑑𝜀 .                                                         (S12)

The pumped spin current carries the angular momentum away from the precessing magnetization 

and hence cause an enhanced Gilbert damping, which is described by 

𝛿𝛼 = 2𝛾

ℏ2𝜈𝐹

𝑀𝑠𝑙𝑚𝑑NiFe

𝑑𝑓(𝜀0)

𝑑𝜀
,                                                      (S13)

where 𝛾 is electron gyromagnetic ratio and 𝑀𝑠 is the saturated magnetization of the ferromagnet.

We are now ready to estimate the contribution of ABS to the Gilbert damping at T = 4 K with 

varying transmission coefficient. We take 𝑛0 =0.5 × 1016 m−2 following Ref. 44, 𝑙𝑚~ 3 nm, 𝜈𝐹= 

2.2 × 105 m/s, J = 400 meV and 𝜇0𝑀𝑠 ≈ 1 𝑇 from previous experimental results (17). With 

superconducting gaps ∆ ≈ 1 meV at T = 4 K for Nb (57, 58), Fig.S8A plots the normalized energy 

of ABS by the superconducting gap at T = 4 K as a function of dNiFe for the ideal transparency case.

The oscillation of the Gilbert damping can be resolved by using the FM exchange field-induced 

phase shift of 

𝐽𝑑NiFe

ℏ𝜈𝐹
(fig. S9B). For simplicity, we have disregarded the possible thickness 

dependence of the superconducting gaps and magnetizations. To be noted, our theoretical 

estimation is based on a simplified model that assumes D = 1. For the diffusive regime or the case 

of non-perfect transparency of electrons at the interface (42, 43), similar oscillating behaviors of 

ABS (or DOS) in the SCs can also be preserved. For example, the oscillating ABS (or DOS) in the 

SCs have been shown to exist in the diffusive regime theoretically (6, 46), and indeed, the zero to 

𝜋 transitions have been experimentally observed in both the ballistic and diffusive regimes from 

the supercurrent measurements (11, 17). To fully understand the experimental observation of the 

oscillatory Gilbert damping in the diffusive regime, further theoretical studies are needed.


26

Section 3: Measurement of the Josephson coupling in Nb/NiFe/Nb. 

The Nb/NiFe/Nb Josephson devices are fabricated using the shadow mask techniques during 

the films growth. As shown in figs. S7A and S7B, the Josephson devices have a junction area (A) 

of ~ 80 μm × 80 μm, and the other areas are electrically isolated by a 100 nm AlOx layer. The 

Josephson current is measured by standard a.c. lock-in technique. The normalized differential 

resistances (dV/dI) measured on the Nb/NiFe (5 nm)/Nb junction at various temperatures are 

shown in fig. S7C. The critical current (Ic) is defined as point where the differential resistance 

increases above the value for the zero-bias current. The normal resistance (Rn) is determined to be 

the saturated value of the normal states of the Josephson coupling measurement. The measured 

area-resistance product (RnA) of ~ 5 × 10−10 Ω𝑚2 is higher than that reported in metallic 

Josephson junction (17, 61), and comparable to that of FM Josephson junction with a thin tunnel 

barrier (62). This behavior indicates that there is more likely a thin NiFeOx layer (indicated by Fig. 

S8B) in the junction formed during the AlOx growth step in the presence of oxygen gas. As the 

temperature increases, Ic and the characteristic voltage (IcRn) decrease (figs. S7C and S7D). Clear 

Josephson currents are observed on the Nb/NiFe (5 nm)/Nb junction and Nb/NiFe (10 nm)/Nb 

junction (figs. S7E and S78F). And the estimated SC gap energy is ~ 0.9 meV at T = 2 K (1, 43), 

which is comparable to the value of ~1.36 meV at T = 0 K estimated from TC of ~ 8.5 K (fig. S4). 

On the other hand, no Josephson current could be observed in the Nb/NiFe (30 nm)/Nb junction 

(figs. S7E and S7F). The absence of Josephson current in Nb/NiFe (30 nm)/Nb junction indicates 

that there is no long-range spin-triplet Josephson coupling in the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures in 

our experiment. 


27

fig. S1. The crystalline properties of the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures. (A) The θ-2θ X-ray 

diffraction results measured on the typical Nb/NiFe (12 nm)/Nb sample, where Nb (110) and NiFe 

(111) peaks are observed. (B) High-resolution transmission electron micrographs measured on the 

typical Nb/NiFe (12 nm)/Nb sample. The dashed lines show the interfaces between Nb and NiFe 

layers. The red bars indicate the deviation of NiFe at the interface.


28

fig. S2. Gilbert damping measurement of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures at T = 10 K. (A) The 

typical FMR spectra as a function of magnetic field with microwave frequency (f) of 10, 12, 14, 

16, and 18 GHz, respectively. (B) The typical FMR spectrum measured with f = 12 GHz (black 

circles) and the Lorentz fitting curve (red line). ΔH is the half linewidth of the FMR signal. (C)

The determination of the Gilbert damping from ΔH vs. f. The red line indicates the best linear-

fitting curve. These results are obtained on the typical Nb/Py (12 nm)/Nb sample.


29

fig. S3. NiFe thickness dependence of Gilbert damping at T = 50 K. 


30

fig. S4. NiFe thickness dependence of TC for the Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures. The TC is 

determined from the zero-resistance temperature via four-probe resistance measurement. 


31

fig. S5. Measurement of the Gilbert damping of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures at T = 4 K. (A) 

The typical FMR spectra as a function of magnetic field with microwave frequency (f) of 10, 12, 

14, 16, and 18 GHz, respectively. (B) The typical FMR spectrum measured with f = 12 GHz (black 

circles) and the Lorentz fitting curve (red line). ΔH is the half linewidth of the FMR signal. (C)

The determination of the Gilbert damping from ΔH vs. f. The red line indicates the best linear-

fitting curve. These results are obtained on the typical Nb/Py (12 nm)/Nb sample.


32

fig. S6. The effect of FMR measurement on the TC of Nb/NiFe/Nb heterostructures. The four-

probe resistances vs. temperature are probed from the typical Nb/NiFe (12 nm)/Nb sample 

with/without the presence of the in-plane magnetic field and microwave power.


33

fig. S7. The measurement of Josephson coupling in Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions. (A) The optical 

image of a typical Nb/NiFe/Nb Josephson device and schematic of the electrical measurement 

geometry. (B) The cross-section of the Josephson devices with a junction area of ~ 80 μm × 80 

μm. At the junction, a thin oxide layer of NiFeOx is mostly liked formed on the top surface of NiFe 

during the growth of AlOx in the presence of oxygen. (C) The normalized differential resistance 

(dV/dI) as a function of the bias current measured on the Nb/NiFe (5 nm)/Nb junction from T = 2 

to 6 K. (D) The temperature dependence of the characteristic voltage (IcRn) of the Nb/NiFe (5 

nm)/Nb Josephson junction. (E) The normalized differential resistance as a function of the bias

current of the Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions (dNiFe = 5, 10 and 30 nm) at T = 2 K. (F) The NiFe thickness 

dependence of the characteristic voltages at T = 2 K.


34

fig. S8. Illustration of magnetization dynamics and spin pumping in the SC/FM/SC 

heterostructures due to Bogoliubov quasiparticles (A) and equal spin-triplet Cooper pairs 

(B). The dark and light balls represent the electron-like and hole-like quasiparticles respectively. 

The red and blue arrows indicate the spin up and spin down respectively.


35

fig. S9.  Calculation of the enhanced Gilbert damping due to spin pumping via the ABS at T

= 4 K. (A) The normalized energy of ABS by the superconducting gap at T = 4 K as a function of 

dNiFe for the ideal transparency case. (B) The enhanced Gilbert damping via ABS as a function of 

dNiFe. 


36

fig. S10. Gilbert damping of control sample of bilayer Nb/NiFe junctions. (A) Gilbert damping 

of bilayer Nb/NiFe junctions at T = 4, 5, and 10 K. (B) Comparison of the Gilbert damping of 

bilayer Nb/NiFe and trilayer Nb/NiFe/Nb junctions at T = 4 K.


37

fig. S11. Thickness dependence of gyromagnetic ratio (and g factor) (A), effective 

magnetization (B) and inhomogeneous half-linewidth (C). The blue, black, green and red 

dotted-lines represent to temperature of T = 10, 7, 5 and 4 K, respectively.


