Ultrahigh-Q on-chip silicon-germanium microresonators 

RYAN SCHILLING*, CHI XIONG, SWETHA KAMLAPURKAR, ABRAM FALK, NATHAN MARCHACK, 
STEPHEN BEDELL, RICHARD HAIGHT, CHRISTOPHER SCERBO, HANHEE PAIK, AND JASON S. ORCUTT 

IBM Quantum, T.J. Watson Research Center, 1101 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA  
*ryan.schilling@ibm.com 

We demonstrate fully crystalline, single-mode ultrahigh 
quality factor integrated microresonators comprising 
epitaxially grown Si0.86Ge0.14 waveguide cores with silicon 
claddings. These waveguides support resonances with 
internal Q > 𝟏𝟎𝟖 for both polarization modes, a nearly 
order-of-magnitude improvement over that seen in prior 
integrated Si photonics platforms. The maximum Q is 
𝟏. 𝟕𝟏 ± 𝟎. 𝟎𝟔 × 𝟏𝟎𝟖 for the transverse magnetic (TM) 
polarization mode, corresponding to a loss of 𝟎. 𝟑𝟗 ±
𝟎. 𝟎𝟐  dB/m. Together with silicon’s strong Kerr 
nonlinearity and low losses in the optical, microwave and 
acoustic regimes, our results could lead to the Si1-xGex/Si 
architecture unlocking important new avenues for Kerr 
frequency 
combs, 
optomechanics, 
and 
quantum 

transduction.           

 

 

 

Whispering gallery mode resonators, which use 

continuously curved loops to guide electromagnetic waves 
by total internal reflection, have been extensively studied for 
more than half a century due to their ability to support very 
high quality (Q) factors. The highest Q resonators have been 
fabricated with macroscopic machining techniques, such as 
manually polishing Si  [1] and melting silica fibers into 
spheres [2], resulting in Q > 10" in both cases. An extensive 
effort is now underway to microfabricate resonators that can 
match or even exceed these Q values. Indeed, in amorphous 
systems recent progress has significantly narrowed the gap 
between the quality of macroscopic and microfabrication 
processes. The best results for integrated silica resonators use 
wet etching to achieve Q = 2.1 × 10#  [3]. Recent  progress 
in silicon nitride devices has utilized high temperature 
annealing to demonstrate Q = 4.2 × 10#   [4]. However, 
there remains a large gap in the performance of Si resonators. 
Despite much effort invested in silicon photonics, the best Q 
achieved in silicon resonators has been Q = 2.2 × 10$ and 
requires a silica top cladding [5].  

The many benefits of integrated optical resonators, 

including their capability of forming more complicated 
optical circuits and their compatibility with proximate 
electrodes, has led to their use in many applications  [6–11]. 
Typically, these applications also demand high intrinsic Q 
factors, such as for Kerr combs [12] and microwave-optical 
quantum transducers [13]. Silicon is particularly well suited 

 

Fig. 1. 
(a) SEM of Si0.86Ge0.14 resonator core surrounded by epitaxial 

silicon. The corresponding dimensions of the waveguide and cladding 
layer with overlaid finite element model of TE mode electric field are 
illustrated in (b).   

to many of these applications due to its high refractive index, 
strong Kerr nonlinearity, broad infrared transparency, low 
acoustic loss, low microwave loss and compatibility with 
CMOS fabrication techniques. For that reason, there is broad 
interest in improving the performance of on-chip silicon 
resonators. By significantly improving the Q factors of 
silicon-based integrated photonic resonators in this work, we 
are taking a major step in bridging the disparity in optical 
loss between microfabricated amorphous dielectric and 
crystalline silicon systems. 

Our fully monocrystalline and epitaxial waveguide 

platform comprises a low mole-fraction silicon-germanium 
core that is fully clad by silicon. Optical losses due to pinned 
surfaces resulting in free carrier and/or defect state 
absorption are eliminated by extending the single-crystalline 
region throughout the region occupied by the optical mode. 
Furthermore, scattering losses are minimized by the low 
index contrast of our SixGe1-x waveguide relative to its Si 
cladding (an order of magnitude lower than that of Si relative 
to SiO2).  

Although SixGe1-x  waveguides have attracted attention 

for linear and nonlinear applications [14,15], the best 
propagation loss in a SixGe1-x waveguide at telecom  


 

Fig. 2. Characterization setup used to measure transmission spectra around 
resonance at both through and drop ports. The input waveguide is seen at 
the right side lensed fiber and the through port is seen at the left side lensed 
fiber (drop port is above). The ring resonator is highlighted in yellow. 

wavelengths was reported to be 65 dB/m in Si0.9Ge0.1 
waveguides [16]. In contrast, our optimization of waveguide 
loss focuses on maintaining a fully strained SixGe1-x layer, 
which is achieved through experimental determination of the 
maximum metastable thickness, as well as minimizing 
thermal shock during and thermal budget during the epitaxial 
silicon cladding growth. In addition, we focus on minimizing 
processing contamination that can lead to interface defects. 
We are thus able to achieve a loss rate of 0.39 ± 0.02 dB/m. 
With a fully strained SixGe1-x waveguide core and epitaxial 
silicon cladding, the core/cladding index contrast can be 
optimized, and defect-state absorption minimized. 

Our waveguides are defined in epitaxial Si0.86Ge0.14 

layers grown on high resistivity Cz-Si wafers. An important 
performance parameter is the Si0.86Ge0.14 thickness. If it is too 
thin, radiation loss will affect the performance. On the other 
hand, when Si0.86Ge0.14 is grown beyond the Matthews-
Blakeslee critical thickness  [17,18], plastic relaxation 
emerges that can degrade the strain and create defects. Thus, 
our target thickness for Si0.86Ge0.14  is near the expected 
metastable critical thickness observed in prior work [19]. 
The grown layers are determined to be fully strained within 
the precision of X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis and then 
more precisely evaluated with defect-selective etching (see 
S5). Waveguides are then defined in the Si0.86Ge0.14 by 
optical lithography followed by inductively coupled plasma 
(ICP) etching. The surface is then cleaned, and an epitaxial 
silicon cladding layer is grown on top, with a controlled ramp 
rate and minimum growth temperature to reduce relaxation 
of the Si0.86Ge0.14. A dichlorosilane (DCS) precursor is 
chosen for the epitaxial silicon top cladding to prevent 

keyholing in narrow waveguide gaps, which arises due to 
crystallographic orientation-dependent growth rates [20]. 
Careful control over the growth conditions is critical in order 
to maintain strain in the metastable films (see S5). The chips 
are then either cleaved or diced from the wafer to expose the 
waveguide facets. All devices studied in this work employ a 
ring resonator with a radius of 4.8 mm, coupled to two 
(through/drop) waveguides with the same coupling gap.  

Characterization is carried out using the setup shown in 

Fig. 2. A lensed fiber on a precision stage couples light into 
the input waveguide, and a second lensed fiber collects the 
light either at the through or drop ports. Three wideband 
tunable diode lasers are used to collect the transmission port 
data (Figs. 3 and 4) over the range of 1300 nm to 1640 nm. 
For each measurement, the laser is tuned to the resonance 
wavelength of interest and a function generator is used to 
modulate the laser cavity length in order to perform a narrow 
continuous sweep across the resonance. Light is split off 
from the input fiber to a fiber loop cavity with a calibrated 
free-spectral range (FSR), which serves as a frequency 
reference for the narrow scan. Light is also split off to a pair 
of crossed polarizers that allows for tracking of the input 
polarization. An example of this type of scan is shown in Fig. 
3(b), where the input polarization has been tuned to the TM 
mode. Here, the through and drop port data have been fitted  

 

Fig. 3. 
(a) Extracted free-spectral ranges for both polarizations as a 

function of wavelength (one standard deviation error bars). Solid lines show 
a quadratic fit to the data. (b) Zoom-in and fitting to the through and drop 
port data to determine intrinsic loss rate of the TM mode at 1450 nm. 


in order to extract the internal Q of the ring resonator itself. 
In this case an internal Q = 1.71 ± 0.06 × 10# is measured 
for the TM mode at 1450 nm (see S3 for Q extraction). This 
characterization was carried out for modes across a broad 
spectral range, for TM and TE polarizations (Fig. 4(a) and 
(b)). For both, Q was maximized near 1450 nm, with a trend 
of decreasing Q at both shorter and longer wavelengths. The 
increasing loss at shorter wavelengths is attributed to the 
expected effect of band edge absorption. At longer 
wavelengths, the dominant loss mechanism for the TE mode 
is radiation deriving from to the bending of the waveguide – 
an effect known as radiation loss. The TM mode, which 
exhibits a higher refractive index due to the birefringence of 
strained SixGe1-x, is not radiation loss-limited.  

The radiation loss model plotted in Fig. 4(b) utilizes a 

single fitting parameter, which is the Si0.86Ge0.14 refractive 
index, 𝑛%&'(  (see S4). The geometry of the modelled 
waveguide is fixed by the measured parameters of the 
physical waveguide. The fitted result for the in-plane (TE) 
index, infers 𝑛%&'(,*+ = 1.013𝑛%& . The close agreement 
between data and radiation loss-limited scaling in the L-band 
strongly suggests this is the dominant loss mechanism.  

The birefringence between TE and TM polarizations in 

our system is inferred from the differing free-spectral ranges 
(FSR) shown in figure 3(a), combined with numerical mode 
simulation (see S4). The TM index is determined to be 
𝑛%&'(,*, = 1.023𝑛%&. These results agree fairly well with the 
result 𝑛%&'( = 1.0115𝑛%& that was obtained through 
ellipsometry (S1), using an isotropic model for the refractive 
index. We determine that nSiGe = 1.015nSi is sufficient for the 
radiation loss-limit to exceed the Qs measured in Fig. 4(a). 

A previous study of the polarization dependent refractive 

index for pseudomorphic SixGe1-x waveguides grown on Si 
also observed an anisotropy between the out-of-plane and in-
plane indices  [21]. This work, based on experimentally 
tracing out the mode profiles, inferred an index difference of 
𝛿𝑛*, − 𝛿𝑛*+ = (0.21 ± 0.07)𝑥, for strained Si1-xGex films.  

For Si0.86Ge0.14 studied in this work, the index difference 

is experimentally determined from quadratic fits to the 
polarization dependent FSRs. Taking the difference of the 
quadratic fits, allows us to establish the birefringence in 
terms of the ratio of effective group indices, 𝑛- (//,*,/
𝑛- (//,*+  (see Fig. S7). Using the value for 𝑛%&'(,*+ 
determined from the radiation loss model and a finite 
difference eigenmode (FDE) solver to translate between real 
and effective index, 𝑛%&'(,*, is determined (see Fig. S8). The 
result gives a birefringent index difference of 𝛿𝑛*, −
𝛿𝑛*+ = 0.24𝑥, in close agreement with prior literature. 

As can be seen in Fig 4(b), the agreement between 

experiment and radiation-limited Q does not hold at 
wavelengths below 1500 nm for the TE mode. In fact, at 
1450 nm, the limit to Q imposed by curvature-derived 
radiation is nearly an order of magnitude higher than 
experiment. As discussed, the TM data is not radiation- 
limited at any measured wavelength. Therefore, neither loss  

 

Fig. 4.   Provides a comparison of experimentally measured optical Q as 
a function of wavelength, for (a) TM and (b) TE polarizations in a single 
mode microresonator (open circles, with one standard deviation error bars). 
Overlaid with a solid red line for TE, is a radiation loss model utilizing the 
Si0.86Ge0.14 refractive index as a single fitting parameter.  

mechanism -- neither band edge absorption nor radiation loss 
– is setting the Q limit in the E- and S-bands. Although the 
mechanism is not identified here, a likely candidate is 
scattering at the etched Si0.86Ge0.14 / Si interface. At longer 
wavelengths the Q may be degraded as a result of strong 
coupling to the bus waveguides leading to hybridization. 

One of the main features of the radiation loss regime is 

the extreme sensitivity of Q to material and design 
parameters. For instance, in our regime, the calculated 
radiation-limited Q improves by three orders of magnitude 
by doubling R from 4.8 mm to 9.6 mm. Alternatively, 
increasing the Si0.86Ge0.14 thickness from 500 nm to 600 nm 
would result in an order of magnitude lower radiative loss in 
the C-band.  

We have demonstrated an ultrahigh quality factor on-

chip 
silicon-germanium 
microresonator 
system 
with 

unprecedented low loss rates. It uses a novel fully crystalline 
design based on the low refractive index contrast between Si 
and Si0.86Ge0.14 to minimize interface scattering losses. 
Relative to the prior state-of-the-art in silicon ring 
resonators  [5], our results improve waveguide loss by  
nearly an order of magnitude. Moreover, there is clear space 


to improve substantially on these current results by 
optimizing the SixGe1-x growth process and exploring other 
Ge mole fractions. Currently, our Q values are nearly on par 
with the best on-chip, waveguide coupled microresonators, 
which are formed by wet etching of silica  [3]. Moreover, our 
system has the added advantage of being single mode, 
allowing precise and reproducible control over dimensions 
by dry etching, being solid and thus immune to mechanical 
vibrations, and being hermitically sealed from the 
environment by way of an encapsulating silicon layer.  

The SixGe1-x system is also particularly well suited to 

build microwave-optical transducers for quantum state 
transfer   [22] In addition to the low optical losses 
demonstrated here, this epitaxial system has very low 
microwave losses, as has been recently demonstrated by the 
fabrication of transmon qubits with > 100 us coherence times 
on similar substrates [23]. Moreover, it is also expected that 
the low acoustic loss of silicon is expected to make this a 
favorable 
direction 
for 
optomechanics-based 

transducers [24,25]. Beyond transducers, the favorable 
properties of a platform with extraordinarily low losses in the 
optical, microwave, and acoustic regimes should enable 
figure of merit improvements for a wide variety of 
applications, including compact spectrometers, precision 
mass sensors and optically generated microwave sources. 

Acknowledgments 

We acknowledge funding under the Army Research 

Office / Laboratory for Physical Sciences Cross-Quantum 
Technology Systems Contract Number W911NF-18-1-0022. 
The authors wish to acknowledge support in device 
fabrication from the IBM Microelectronics Research 
Laboratory and IBM Central Scientific Services. 

References 

1.   A. E. Shitikov, I. A. Bilenko, N. M. Kondratiev, V. E. Lobanov, A. 

Markosyan, and M. L. Gorodetsky, "Billion Q-factor in silicon 
WGM resonators," Optica 5, 1525 (2018). 

2.   L. Collot, V. Lefèvre-Seguin, M. Brune, J. M. Raimond, and S. 

Haroche, "Very High- Q Whispering-Gallery Mode Resonances 
Observed on Fused Silica Microspheres," Europhys. Lett. EPL 23, 
327–334 (1993). 

3.   K. Y. Yang, D. Y. Oh, S. H. Lee, Q.-F. Yang, X. Yi, B. Shen, H. 

Wang, and K. Vahala, "Bridging ultrahigh- Q devices and photonic 
circuits," Nat. Photonics 12, 297–302 (2018). 

4.   M. W. Puckett, K. Liu, N. Chauhan, Q. Zhao, N. Jin, H. Cheng, J. 

Wu, R. O. Behunin, P. T. Rakich, K. D. Nelson, and D. J. 
Blumenthal, "422 Million intrinsic quality factor planar integrated 
all-waveguide resonator with sub-MHz linewidth," Nat. Commun. 
12, 934 (2021). 

5.   A. Biberman, M. J. Shaw, E. Timurdogan, J. B. Wright, and M. R. 

Watts, "Ultralow-loss silicon ring resonators," Opt. Lett. 37, 4236–
4238 (2012). 

6.   K. J. Vahala, "Optical microcavities," Nature 424, 839–846 (2003). 
7.   W. Liang, V. S. Ilchenko, A. A. Savchenkov, E. Dale, D. Eliyahu, A. 

B. Matsko, and L. Maleki, "Resonant microphotonic gyroscope," 
Optica 4, 114–117 (2017). 

8.   A. B. Matsko, D. V. Strekalov, and N. Yu, "Sensitivity of terahertz 

photonic receivers," Phys. Rev. A 77, 043812 (2008). 

9.   W. Liang, D. Eliyahu, V. S. Ilchenko, A. A. Savchenkov, A. B. 

Matsko, D. Seidel, and L. Maleki, "High spectral purity Kerr 

frequency comb radio frequency photonic oscillator," Nat. 
Commun. 6, 7957 (2015). 

10.   B. Min, T. J. Kippenberg, L. Yang, K. J. Vahala, J. Kalkman, and A. 

Polman, "Erbium-implanted high-$Q$ silica toroidal microcavity 
laser on a silicon chip," Phys. Rev. A 70, 033803 (2004). 

11.   Q. Xu, B. Schmidt, S. Pradhan, and M. Lipson, "Micrometre-scale 

silicon electro-optic modulator," Nature 435, 325–327 (2005). 

12.   T. J. Kippenberg, R. Holzwarth, and S. A. Diddams, "Microresonator-

Based Optical Frequency Combs," Science 332, 555–559 (2011). 

13.   M. Tsang, "Cavity quantum electro-optics," Phys. Rev. A 81, 063837 

(2010). 

14.   R. Claps, V. Raghunathan, O. Boyraz, P. Koonath, D. Dimitropoulos, 

and B. Jalali, "Raman amplification and lasing in SiGe 
waveguides," Opt. Express 13, 2459–2466 (2005). 

15.   J. M. Ramirez, Q. Liu, V. Vakarin, J. Frigerio, A. Ballabio, X. L. 

Roux, D. Bouville, L. Vivien, G. Isella, and D. Marris-Morini, 
"Graded SiGe waveguides with broadband low-loss propagation in 
the mid infrared," Opt. Express 26, 870–877 (2018). 

16.   K. Hammani, M. A. Ettabib, A. Bogris, A. Kapsalis, D. Syvridis, M. 

Brun, P. Labeye, S. Nicoletti, D. J. Richardson, and P. Petropoulos, 
"Optical properties of silicon germanium waveguides at 
telecommunication wavelengths," Opt. Express 21, 16690–16701 
(2013). 

17.   J. W. Matthews and A. E. Blakeslee, "Defects in epitaxial multilayers: 

III. Preparation of almost perfect multilayers," J. Cryst. Growth 32, 
265–273 (1976). 

18.   R. People and J. C. Bean, "Calculation of critical layer thickness 

versus lattice mismatch for GexSi1−x/Si strained‐layer 
heterostructures," Appl. Phys. Lett. 47, 322–324 (1985). 

19.   J. M. Hartmann, A. Abbadie, and S. Favier, "Critical Thickness for 

Plastic Relaxation of Sige on Si(001) Revisited," J. Appl. Phys. 
110, 083529 (2011). 

20.   L. Vescan, K. Grimm, and C. Dieker, "Facet investigation in selective 

epitaxial growth of Si and SiGe on (001) Si for optoelectronic 
devices," J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. 
Process. Meas. Phenom. 16, 1549–1554 (1998). 

21.   M. Robillard, P. E. Jessop, D. M. Bruce, S. Janz, R. L. Williams, S. 

Mailhot, H. Lafontaine, S. J. Kovacic, and J. J. Ojha, "Strain-
induced birefringence in Si1−xGex optical waveguides," J Vac Sci 
Technol B 16, 5 (1998). 

22.   J. Orcutt, H. Paik, L. Bishop, C. Xiong, R. Schilling, and A. Falk, 

"Engineering electro-optics in SiGe/Si waveguides for quantum 
transduction," Quantum Sci. Technol. 5, 034006 (2020). 

23.   Sandberg, Martin, Brink, Markus, Adiga, Vivekananda, Chavez-

Garcia, Jose, Chow, Jerry M., Paik, Hanhee, and Orcutt, Jason, 
"Low temperature measurement of SiGe properties for 
superconducting quantum circuits," in Bulletin of the American 
Physical Society (American Physical Society, 2019), Vol. Volume 
64, Number 2. 

24.   M. Mirhosseini, A. Sipahigil, M. Kalaee, and O. Painter, "Quantum 

transduction of optical photons from a superconducting qubit," 
Nature 588, 599–603 (2020). 

25.   G. S. MacCabe, H. Ren, J. Luo, J. D. Cohen, H. Zhou, A. Sipahigil, 

M. Mirhosseini, and O. Painter, "Phononic bandgap nano-acoustic 
cavity with ultralong phonon lifetime," ArXiv190104129 Cond-
Mat Physicsquant-Ph (2019). 

26.   M. Heiblum and J. Harris, "Analysis of curved optical waveguides by 

conformal transformation," IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 11, 75–83 
(1975). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Supplement 
 
 

1. Device Fabrication 

Epitaxial Si0.86Ge0.14 layers with a thickness of 500 nm 

with a 20 nm capping silicon layer were grown on (100) 
high-resistivity 200 mm Si substrates, by reduced-pressure 
chemical vapor deposition chamber (RP-CVD) with silane 
and germane precursors. Next, the lithographic mask stack 
was established using the following steps: low-pressure 
chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) of 100 nm silicon 
dioxide (SiO2) at 400°C, followed by spin coating of 200 nm 
organic planarizing layer (OPL), 35 nm silicon-containing 
antireflective coating (SiARC) and 70 nm of photoresist 
(PR). The waveguide pattern was defined in the PR layer by 
exposure to an ArF 193 nm wavelength excimer laser 
followed by development in an n-butyl acetate solution. Dry 
etching of the SiARC, OPL and SiO2 mask layers was 
conducted in an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) chamber, 
followed by a strip process to remove residual OPL in a 
downstream microwave (MW) plasma chamber, and ending 
with Si0.86Ge0.14 etching in the ICP chamber. Wafers were 
transferred between the ICP and MW reactors without 
breaking vacuum. The SiO2 mask was removed from the 
etched Si0.86Ge0.14 waveguides using a 10% dilute hydrogen 
fluoride (DHF) solution, followed by piranha solution (5:1 
H2SO4 : H2O2) to remove any organic remnants. Following 
this, 8 µm of epitaxial silicon was grown over the 
waveguides at 800°C using dichlorosilane as precursor with 
a controlled temperature ramp from 450°C, at a rate of 1°C/s.  
 

2. Ellipsometry of SiGe 

In order to experimentally measure nSiGe, we used a J.A. 

Woolam variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometer (Fig. S2). 
Specifically, we measured films comprising 500 nm 
(nominally) of epitaxially grown Si0.86Ge0.14 capped by 8 µm 
of Si. The resulting measured amplitude ratio (tan Y) and 
phase difference (Δ(°)) show doubly periodic oscillations, 
which derives from reflections at the Si0.86Ge0.14 – Si 
interfaces and the top surface of the chip.  

In addition to the fitting parameters A and B, we also 

allowed the film thicknesses to be fitting parameters. We 
used the Woolam CompleteEASE software to model the 
results. With the Woolam-provided Si index of refraction 
being nSi-JAW, we modelled the stack as having the following 
layers: 

Layer 1, Silicon: n = nSi-JAW 
Layer 2, Si0.86Ge0.14: n = nSi-JAW + A, where A is a 

l-independent fitting parameter 

Layer 3, epitaxial Si: n = nSi-JAW + B, where B is a l-
independent fitting parameter 
Layer 4, native SiO2: h = nSiO2-JAW  

 

Fig. S1. Ellipsometry data for Si0.86Ge0.14, showing (a) the measured 
amplitude ratio (b) and phase difference with models overlaid. 

We find that for our Si0.86Ge0.14 films at l = 1550 nm, 

𝑛%&'( = 1.0115𝑛%&. This is in fairly good agreement with the 
𝑛%&'(,*+ = 1.013𝑛%&  fitted through our radiation loss 
calculations. 

 

 

Fig. S2.  (a) Ellipsometry setup and film stack that was measured and 
modelled. (b) The fitted result nSi0.86Ge0.14, with nSi-JAW also plotted as a 
comparison. 

 
 
 


3. Q Extraction  

This section describes the analysis used to determine the 

intrinsic Q of the ring resonators studied in this work. The 
rings are symmetrically coupled to two waveguides, in an 
add-drop configuration, as shown in Fig. S3.  

 

Fig. S3.  Add-drop configuration for coupling to a ring resonator.  

One waveguide serves to couple light from the CW laser 

source into the ring, via the input port. The degree to which 
input light is split, between the through port and ring, at the 
coupling region is defined by the cross-coupling parameter, 
𝑘0, and self-coupling parameter, 𝑟0, respectively. We assume 
that no loss occurs at the coupling region, such that the sum 
of the power splitting ratios is unity, 𝑟0

1 + 𝑘0

1 = 1. Likewise, 

for the add-drop waveguide 𝑟1

1 + 𝑘1

1 = 1. This configuration 

is analogous to a Fabry-Perot interferometer, where the 
electric field at the through port can be defined in terms of 
the input field as follows:  
 

𝐸23456-3 = D𝑟0 + 𝑟1𝑘0𝑘1𝑎𝑒&7(4!"9:!")

1 − 𝑟0𝑟1𝑎𝑒&7
G 𝐸&<=62 

 
where 𝑎 represents the round-trip loss in the ring and 𝜙 is the 
round-trip phase shift. Similarly, the field intensity at the 
drop port is given by: 
 

𝐸>45= = I𝑘0𝑘1√𝑎𝑒&7/1

1 − 𝑟0𝑟1𝑎𝑒&7K 𝐸&<=62 

 

In order to extract the round-trip loss and cross-coupling 

parameters experimentally, we must re-write these equations 
in terms of the light intensity measured at the through and 
drop ports. We normalize to the input field and because of 
the symmetric coupling arrangement can simplify the 
analysis by assuming that 𝑟0 = 𝑟1 = 𝑟. This leads to the 
following expressions:   

 

𝑇23456-3 = M

𝐸23456-3
𝐸&<=62

M

1

= 𝑟1

1𝑎1 − 2𝑟0𝑟1𝑎𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙 + 𝑟0

1

1 − 2𝑟0𝑟1𝑎𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙 + (𝑟0𝑟1𝑎)1 

𝑟0 = 𝑟1 = 𝑟
QQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQ⃗ 𝑟1(𝑎1 − 2𝑎𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙 + 1)

1 − 2𝑟1𝑎𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙 + 𝑟@𝑎1 

 

𝑇>45= = M

𝐸>45=
𝐸&<=62

M

1

=
(1 − 𝑟0

1)(1 − 𝑟1

1)𝑎

1 − 2𝑟0𝑟1𝑎𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙 + (𝑟0𝑟1𝑎)1 

𝑟0 = 𝑟1 = 𝑟
QQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQQ⃗
(1 − 𝑟1)1𝑎

1 − 2𝑟1𝑎𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜙 + 𝑟@𝑎1 

 

The intrinsic quality factor can then be defined in terms of 
the ring resonator length, 𝐿 = 2𝜋𝑅, group refractive index, 
𝑛-, and the resonance wavelength, 𝜆4(A: 

 

𝑄&<24&<A&B =
𝜋𝑛-𝐿√𝑎

𝜆4(A(1 − 𝑎) 

 
The measurement proceeds by scanning a tunable diode laser 
over a small frequency range, around a resonance of interest 
and recording the photodiode signal from one of the output 
ports, using an oscilloscope. Part of the light is split off and 
passed through a fiber loop cavity. This process is done for 
both the through and drop ports. The resulting data set for a 
single wavelength is shown in Fig. S4. Calibration of the  

 

Fig. S4.  Unprocessed oscilloscope traces, showing the drop/through port 
(blue) and frequency reference (red) measurements.  


 

fiber loop cavity was performed using an Agilent 81600B 
tunable laser source, with a build-in wavelength meter. The 
free-spectral range was found to be 97.6 MHz at 1450 nm.  

For each measurement, the photodetector background 

level is also measured and subtracted from the trace, which 
is then normalized. The resonance peaks of the frequency 
reference are located and used to transform the data into 
frequency domain. It is then converted into phase domain 
using the known ring radius and effective refractive index. 
The equations above for 𝑇23456-3 and 𝑇>45= are fitted using 
a trust-region-reflective nonlinear least-squares solver, to 
simultaneously minimize the residuals of both functions. An 
example of the fitted data is shown in Fig. 3. This 
measurement is repeated ten times at each wavelength to 
establish a mean value and error bounds.  

 

Fig. S5.  Total (black) and coupling (red) Q-factors for the (a) TM and (b) 
TE polarizations of the exemplar sample studied in this work (open circles, 
with one standard deviation error bars).   

It is instructive to consider the relationship between Qtotal 

and Qcoupling, as plotted in Fig. S5, where Qcoupling is the Q 
limit imposed by losses to the waveguides. For both 
polarizations it can be observed that where the two Q values 
tend towards convergence, error bounds on the fitted Qintrinsic 
(Fig. 4) become largest. This is due to near complete 
extinction on the through port. In this regime the internal Q 
estimate is highly sensitive to detector and polarization 
noise, and this results in a larger degree of uncertainty. At 

shorter wavelengths stronger field confinement in the core 
results in external loss to the waveguides becoming less 
significant. At the same time, Qintrinsic is also reduced at these 
wavelengths, as Si0.86Ge0.14 band edge absorption increases. 
At the shortest wavelengths measured we expect absorptive 
losses to become dominant. At the longest wavelengths, for 
the TE mode, coupling loss to the waveguides increases but 
radiative loss from the ring increases much more rapidly. 
However, in the range around 1450 nm it appears that there 
is an optimal trade-off between radiation and absorption loss 
mechanisms. In this regime, coupling losses dominate, 
leading to a large discrepancy between the intrinsic and total 
Q factors. This is the range where the TE mode’s estimated 
Qintrinsic has the highest uncertainty.  However, that is not the 
case for the TM mode, which has weaker coupling to the 
waveguides and thus a higher Qcoupling. For the TM 
polarization, it is at wavelengths beyond 1500 nm that 
Qcoupling becomes commensurate with Qtotal and the fitting 
results become most uncertain.  

 

4. SiGe Refractive Index Anisotropy 

A refractive index contrast between Si0.86Ge0.14 and Si of 

1.31% for the TE mode is determined from the radiation loss 
fit on the L-band data in figure 4(b). In order to model the 
radiation loss, we use a conformal mapping procedure  [26], 
whereby the stepwise flat index profile of a curved 
waveguide is mapped to a graded index of a straight 
waveguide. Calculating the loss rate in the latter amounts to 
a one- dimensional tunneling problem and can then be 
mapped back to the former. The result is an almost entirely 
analytic solution for the radiation-limited Q. The one 
component of this calculation that needs to be calculated 
numerically is the effective index of the optical modes. To 
do this calculation, we use the Lumerical MODE 2D finite 
difference eigenmode (FDE) solver. 

 

Fig. S7.  Complementary plot to main figure 3(a), showing the 
polarization-dependent difference in effective group index, inferred from 
the ratio of FSRs, as a function of wavelength. The red line plots this 
relation, taken from the ratio of quadratic fits to the FSR data in figure 3(a).  


The same radiation loss model predicts that a refractive 

index anisotropy of 0.2% is sufficient to put radiation loss-
limited Qs in excess of the L-band data for the TM 
polarization in figure 4(a). The experimentally determined 
birefringent anisotropy of 0.99% confirms that the TM 
polarization mode is not radiation loss-limited in the range 
studied in this paper. 

In order to determine the birefringence of the Si0.86Ge0.14, 

the ratio of effective group indices, 𝑛- (//,*,/𝛿𝑛- (//,*+ , 
was determined experimentally (Fig. S7). Using an FDE 
solver to determine the relation between 𝑛- (// and 𝑛%&'( /
𝑛%& allowed for the material birefringence to be extracted. 
The birefringent index difference was found to be 𝛿𝑛*, −
𝛿𝑛*+ = 0.24𝑥 , with 𝑛%&'(,*+ = 1.013𝑛%& determined from 
the radiation loss model fit to the L-band TE 𝑄&<24&<A&B data. 
Using literature values for Si dispersion, the dispersion plot 
in Fig. S8 was produced.  

 

Fig. S8.  Birefringent dispersion of Si0.86Ge0.14 determined from radiation 
loss fit to the TE 𝑄!"#$!"%!& data and polarization-dependent FSR data.    

 

5. Epitaxy of SiGe and Si 

The Si0.86Ge0.14 films utilized in this paper were grown to 

be as thick as possible, while remaining pseudomorphic. 
Specifically, we aimed to increase the layer thickness until 
the point where plastic relaxation begins to occur but does 
not yet lead to a significant reduction in the layer strain. 
Beyond this point, relaxation of the Si0.86Ge0.14 leads to 
reduction in the refractive index and thus reduced 
confinement of the optical mode.  

Before growth commences it is necessary to prepare the 

Si surface by removing the native oxide layer (typically 
several nm in thickness). This is accomplished by an in-situ 
H2 bake at 1050 °C. This leads to the reduction of the oxide 
layer, resulting in a clean Si surface ready for epitaxy. The 
chamber temperature is then reduced to approximately 650 
°C, for Si0.86Ge0.14 growth. 
During growth, when the Si0.86Ge0.14 becomes sufficiently 
thick, the stress induced by the lattice mismatch between Si 

and Si0.86Ge0.14 can lead to dislocation propagation. These 
dislocations move through the crystal along the <111> 
planes, which relieves some of the layer strain. On (100) 
wafers, this appears as surface cross-hatching where the 
density of the lines and magnitude of the topography 
increases as the layer thickness increases. The nucleation of 
dislocations tends to originate from defects at the Si/ 
Si0.86Ge0.14 growth interface, predominantly at the edge of the 
wafer. Therefore, the density of cross-hatching will tend to 
be largest at the edge and to decrease towards the center. 
They can be easily identified by highlighting with a defect 
selective etch chemistry, such as Secco ((K2Cr2O7-
H2O)/HF). This approach is shown in Fig. S9, where a region 
near the edge of the wafer and a region at the center are 
compared. Near the edge a high density of cross-hatching 
lines are visible but at the center only a single line is visible. 
Also visible in the  images are the dislocation cores that 
thread to the surface of the crystal and appear as pits after 
defect etching. These can also be identified using atomic 
force microscopy or laser scattering techniques. 

Although the cross-hatching line density may be high 

near the wafer edge, this is not a concern for our process as  

 

 

 

Fig. S9.  Surface cross-hatching, and individual dislocation cores, seen on 
a Si0.86Ge0.14 layer grown on a 200 mm wafer, (a) near the edge and (b) at 
the center, after defect etching. 


the waveguide etch effectively isolates these defective 
regions from more pristine areas closer to the center. So, in 
optimizing our growth conditions we focus on the center 
region of the wafer in order to maximize the Si0.86Ge0.14 
thickness.  
 


