1

Wavelength-Controlled Photocurrent Polarity

Switching in BP-MoS2 Heterostructure

Himani Jawa,† Sayantan Ghosh,† Abin Varghese,†,‡ Srilagna Sahoo,† and

Saurabh Lodha∗,†

†Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400076

‡Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria,

Australia 3800

E-mail: slodha@ee.iitb.ac.in

Abstract

Layered two-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) semiconductors and their 

heterostructures have been shown to exhibit positive photoconductance (PPC) in many 

studies. A few recent reports have demonstrated negative photoconductance (NPC) as 

well that can enable broadband photodetection besides multi-level optoelectronic logic 

and memory. Controllable and reversible switching between PPC and NPC is a key 

requirement for these applications. This report demonstrates visible-to-near infrared 

wavelength-driven NPC and PPC, along with reversible switching between the two, in an 

air stable, high mobility, broadband black phosphorus (BP) field effect transistor (FET) 

covered with a few layer MoS2 flake. The crossover switching wavelength can be tuned by 

varying the MoS2 bandgap through its flake thickness and the NPC and PPC 

photoresponsivities can be modulated using electrostatic gating as well as laser power. 

Recombination-driven NPC and PPC allows for reversible switching at reasonable time 

scales of a few seconds. Further, gate voltage-dependent negative persistent 

photoconductance enables synaptic behavior that is well-suited for optosynaptic 

applications.


2

Introduction

Heterostructures based on layered van der Waals (vdW) materials have recently gained

significant interest owing to the realization of a variety of optical1–8 and electrical9,10 

phenomena. Stacking different 2D materials offers various advantages such as a wide optical 

detection range, enhanced photoresponse due to ease of carrier separation, clean interfaces 

due to the absence of dangling bonds and defects resulting from lattice mismatch. This makes 

them an excellent choice for photodetection applications. Generally, the device architecture 

and choice of 2D materials in these heterostructures have been shown to enhance the 

positive photoconductance1,11–14 (PPC) for application areas such as photodetectors15 or 

optical memories.16,17 However, some recent studies have also shown the possibility of 

realizing negative photoconductance18–23 (NPC) in 2D material-based devices.

The observation of negative photoconductance along with PPC in photodetectors can 

enable broadband photoresponse with enhanced spectral resolution24 due to their ability to 

segregate different wavelengths with distinct conductance states. Furthermore, the 

availability of additional states (PPC and NPC) expands the application scope of 2D materials 

to multi-bit logic and memory devices. However, the ability to switch reversibly and 

controllably between NPC and PPC is a critical and unexplored requirement for the 

realization of logic, memory and optical communication technologies.18 In addition, NPC, as 

observed in 2D materials-based devices,25,26 could be related to trap centers,27 interaction 

with adsorbates,28 the bolometric effect29 or dependent on gate bias.20 The first three 

mechanisms increase carrier scattering in the device resulting in mobility degradation and 

negative photocurrent. Interface/adsorbate/bulk trap-related mechanisms are difficult to 

control since it is not trivial to engineer trap densities, distributions and time constants, 

whereas gate voltage-dependent NPC and PPC adds to the overall power consumption. 

Recently NPC has been reported in a WS2/rGO hybrid structure under infrared light as a 

result of recombination between photogenerated electrons in WS2 with holes in rGO.19 NPC 


3

has also been reported in an ReS2/hBN/MoS2 heterostructure floating gate device with 

excellent memory properties.18 These recent reports suggest new avenues for realizing NPC 

and controlled NPC-PPC switching based on heterostructures using 2D materials.

In this work, we demonstrate wavelength-driven (visible-to-near infrared) NPC and PPC, 

along with reversible switching between the two, in an air-stable BP FET covered with a few 

layer MoS2 flake. BP is chosen for its high hole mobility and broad spectral response (visible 

as well as NIR) and MoS2 is chosen for its air-stability, optical bandgap tunability and spectral 

response in the visible range. The NPC is a consequence of light absorption in the MoS2 flake, 

which results in photocarrier generation. Photogenerated holes are captured by intrinsic 

traps in MoS2 whereas the photogenerated electrons diffuse towards the BP/MoS2 

heterointerface to recombine with holes in the BP channel leading to a reduction in the net 

device current under illumination. As the wavelength is increased beyond the absorption 

edge of the MoS2 flake, the phototransistor exhibits PPC solely based on the positive 

photoresponse of the BP flake. The critical wavelength for the crossover between NPC and 

PPC can be tuned through an appropriate choice of the MoS2 flake thickness that determines 

its bandgap and absorption edge. The wavelength-driven NPC-PPC switching is reversible 

over multiple wavelength cycles, with rise and fall times of a few seconds, and the negative 

and positive photoresponsivities in the visible and NIR regimes can be tuned using 

electrostatic gating or laser power. Hence, a broad and tunable spectral response with 

distinct NPC and PPC regimes, that can be reversibly switched between using wavelength

cycling, has been realized in a BP/MoS2 heterostructure phototransistor. The presence of 

gate voltage-dependent negative persistent photoconductance makes this device promising 

for optosynaptic applications as well.


4

Results and discussion

Device Fabrication and Electrical Characterisation

Figure 1: Device schematic, fabrication and characterization. (a) Schematic of BP/MoS2 
phototransistor (b) Optical microscope image showing BP/MoS2 phototransistor with 
source/drain metal contacts sandwiched between BP and MoS2 layers. hBN flake on the top 
precludes any ambient effects. (c) Raman spectra acquired for the BP/MoS2 phototransistor 
(d) AFM scan for BP and MoS2 flakes (e) Output characteristics of the phototransistor 
showing ohmic contacts and low gate modulation.

BP flakes were mechanically exfoliated on a 90 nm SiO2/Si substrate using scotch tape. 

Source/drain contacts were then formed on the few layer BP flake using electron beam 

lithography (EBL) and metal deposition (Cr/Au ∼ 5/40 nm). An additional contact was 

fabricated adjacent to the source/drain contacts of the BP FET. Next, MoS2 flakes were 

mechanically exfoliated onto a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp and large, thin flakes 

were transferred on to the FET to ensure complete coverage of the BP flake and the extra 

contact. Further, contacts were formed on the MoS2 flake using EBL and metal deposition 

(Cr/Au ∼ 5/40 nm). Table S1 shows a set of 10 such devices with their respective BP and 

MoS2 flake thicknesses. Figure 1a shows a schematic of the BP/MoS2 phototransistor (device 


5

1). An optical microscope image of the fabricated device is shown in Figure 1b with the 

phototransistor covered with an hBN flake (∼ 10 nm) to preclude any trapping effects from 

adsorbates on the electrical and optical characterisation of the phototransistor. The contacts, 

labelled in the figure are as follows: contacts 1 and 2 sandwiched between BP and MoS2 flakes 

for BP/MoS2 phototransistor, contacts 2 and 3 being formed below the MoS2 flake in order to 

quantitatively segregate its contribution in the phototransistor, and contacts 4 and 5 formed 

on top of the MoS2 flake to understand its individual optical behavior. To check the 

crystallinity of the flakes after fabrication, Raman scans for individual materials as well as 

the overlap region were done. As shown in Figure 1c, Raman peaks at 384 and 405.56 cm−1 

correspond to E2g (in-plane vibration) and A1g (out-of-plane vibration) modes for MoS2 

whereas peaks at 363.1, 439.7 and 467.5 cm−1 indicate the A1g, B2g and A2g peaks for the BP 

flake. The characteristic peaks for both materials being distinctly present in the overlap 

region confirms the crystalline nature of the exfoliated flakes. Further, thickness of BP and 

MoS2 flakes obtained using atomic force microscopy (AFM) are shown in Figure 1d. 

Individual field effect transistor performances were studied for the BP and MoS2 FETs. 

Their transfer and output characteristics are shown in Figure S1 of the Supporting 

Information. The BP FET, with a hole mobility of 338 cm2/V-sec (calculated at maximum 

transconductance) shows slight gate modulation in transfer characteristics (ID-VG), shown in 

Figure S1a, with a high positive threshold voltage (> 5 V). On the other hand, the MoS2 FET, 

measured between contacts 4 and 5, shows good gate tunability of ID (shown in Figure S1c) 

with an electron mobility of ∼11 cm2/V-sec. The output characteristics of the MoS2 FET with 

contacts below (contacts 2 and 3) and above the flake (contacts 4 and 5) highlight their ohmic 

behavior with the currents being slightly higher for contacts 4 and 5 made above the flake, 

as shown in Figure S1b and S1d. The output (ID-VD) characteristics of the phototransistor, as 

shown in Figure 1e, indicate a major contribution to the current from the BP flake (∼ µAs) as 

compared to a few nAs from the MoS2 flake with low gate modulation.


6

Figure 2: Wavelength-dependent photoconductance and related band diagrams. (a) 
Responsivity versus time for the BP/MoS2 phototransistor showing negative responsivity for 
λ < 750 nm and positive responsivity for λ > 750 nm at VG = 0 V and VD = 0.1 V (b) 
Photoswitching with on and off time being 5 sec at VG = 0 V and VD = 0.1 V for different 
wavelengths. (c) BP-MoS2 energy band alignment at VG = 0 V for (i) equilibrium conditions, 
(ii) under visible light, where both BP and MoS2 absorb light resulting in interlayer 
recombination and hence, negative photocurrent, and (iii) for NIR illumination, which is 
absorbed only by the BP flake and hence, positive photocurrent is observed.

Optoelectronic Characterisation of the BP/MoS2 Phototransistor

Photoresponse of the BP/MoS2 heterostructure was obtained under 690-900 nm laser 

illumination. The light was incident on the phototransistor for 30 seconds and then turned 

off. The photoresponsivity (R) was calculated using the equation: R = Iph/Pin, where Iph =Ilight 

- Idark with Ilight and Idark being the currents with and without illumination and Pin is the 

incident optical power. As shown in Figure 2a, responsivity is negative for wavelengths (λ) 

upto 720 nm and positive beyond 750 nm for gate (VG) and drain (VD) voltages of 0 and 0.1 

V respectively. The negative R can be explained from the band alignment of the BP and MoS2 

flakes in the transverse direction (along gate-SiO2-BP-MoS2). Under equilibrium, BP/MoS2 

forms a type-II heterostructure with a band alignment as shown in Figure 2c(i). Both BP and 


7

MoS2 absorb visible light (λ < 750 nm) illuminated on the overlap region, with MoS2 

absorbing more than BP, thereby leading to generation of electron-hole pairs. The 

photogenerated holes in MoS2 get captured by the shallow intrinsic traps distributed near its 

valence band30 giving rise to excess electron concentration. These excess electrons diffuse 

towards BP due to the concentration gradient set up by a lower concentration in BP, leading 

to interlayer recombination with the high hole concentration of BP (Fig. 2c(ii)). This results 

in a reduction in free hole concentration in BP giving rise to a negative photocurrent or 

responsivity (as seen in Figure 2a), since BP is the main photoconducting layer in this BP-

MoS2 stack. As the wavelength is increased beyond 750 nm, a positive Iph is observed which 

can be attributed to (i) negligible optical response from the thin MoS2 flake limited by its 

bandgap and (ii) photogenerated carriers in the smaller bandgap (0.3 eV) BP flake. The 

optical response of the MoS2 FET (contacts 4 and 5) to 690 and 720 nm incident light is 

shown in Figure S2a of Supporting Information. MoS2 does not respond to illumination 

beyond 720 nm due to its bandgap and therefore, the crossover wavelength λt, defined as the 

wavelength at which the Iph transitions from negative to positive values, is limited by the 

bandgap of MoS2. Figure 2b and S3a of Supporting Information show the transition from 

negative to positive responsivity and photocurrent when the phototransistor was 

illuminated under different wavelengths with the laser being switched on and off every 5 

seconds for each λ.

Gate Voltage and Laser Power Dependent Photocurrent Modulation: The in-

terlayer recombination occurring at the BP/MoS2 interface under visible light, as discussed 

above, depends on (i) the electron concentration of MoS2 (nM) and (ii) hole concentration of 

BP (pBP). These carrier concentrations are modulated by the applied gate bias 

electrostatically and optically and light intensity respectively. Also, the hole concentration in 

BP is affected by the trapping and detrapping at the BP/SiO2 interface which varies with

applied gate bias.31 This results in a dual effect of VG on the carrier concentrations and hence,


8

VG (V)
Wavelength (nm)

Figure 3: Gate voltage, laser power and wavelength dependence of temporal response 
and photocurrent. (a) Variation of photocurrent as a function of gate voltage under 690 nm 
illumination (b) Energy band diagrams at points 1 and 2 of figure (a) (c) Fall time (τF ) vs VG 
for 690 and 840 nm illumination indicates faster operation under NIR (d) Responsivity (R) 
and τF as a function of wavelength. Negative responsivity and higher fall times correspond to 
the optical sensing of MoS2 in the phototransistor.

on the interlayer carrier recombination. Under illumination for varying VG, the Iph (dependent 

on carrier recombination) will be maximum where the effective electron and holes 

concentrations in MoS2 and BP respectively will be nearly equal (as shown in Figure S4). The 

Iph will gradually reduce with VG on both sides of the maximum point due to reduction in 

either holes or electrons at positive and negative VG respectively, since the recombination is 

limited by the minority carrier concentration. This results in a U-shaped photocurrent plot

(Iph vs VG at Pin1 in Figure S4b).

Figure 3a shows the variation in photocurrent with gate voltage for varying incident 

power of 690 nm illumination. The photocurrent magnitude shows a slight increase with 


9

increasing gate voltage at low laser powers, a U-shaped variation at intermediate powers 

(e.g. at 0.187 µW, similar to the theoretical expectation illustrated in Figure S4b) and a more 

pronounced change (decrease) in its value at higher optical powers. At lower optical power, 

most of the electron-hole pair generation takes place in MoS2. Given the trapping of 

photogenerated holes in MoS2 and a high hole concentration in BP, the interlayer 

recombination is limited by the MoS2 electron concentration (nM < pBP). The electron 

concentration in MoS2 increases with increase in gate voltage (as the device transitions from 

subthreshold to ON state, as shown in Figure S1c of Supporting Information). Hence, a 

slightly higher interlayer recombination at positive VG leads to slightly higher Iph as shown by 

the band diagram for point 1 in Figure 3b. At lower optical powers, we observe only the left 

(increasing) Iph branch of the U-shaped curve at Pin1 in Figure S4b. As the optical intensity is 

increased, nM increases due to an increase in the photogenerated carriers in MoS2. This leads 

to interlayer recombination being limited by pBP , which gets affected by the trapping and 

detrapping of holes at the BP/SiO2 interface.31 As VG is reduced from positive to negative 

values, the traps at the BP/SiO2 interface above the Fermi level (EF ) of BP get filled with holes, 

going from neutral to positively charged. This results in the reduction of free hole carrier 

concentration in BP as well as of the effective negative gate bias, similar to the left-shift in 

the U-shaped curve at higher optical power Pin2 of Figure S4b. In order to compensate for this 

reduction in hole concentration, a more negative VG is required and hence, maximum 

photocurrent is shifted towards negative VG, as shown at point 2 in Figure 3b. In the case of 

higher optical powers, we observe only the right (decreasing) branch of the U-shaped Iph 

curve at Pin2 in Figure S4b.

When the phototransistor is illuminated with 780 nm laser (NIR), a positive photocurrent 

is observed, as shown in Figures S3b and S3c of Supporting Information for varying optical 

power and gate voltage respectively. This positive Iph increases as the input incident power 

increases due to an increase in the photogenerated carrier concentrations in the BP flake, as 

shown in Figure S3b of Supporting Information. The photocurrent also increases as the gate 


10

voltage is increased from negative to positive values. This can be explained by increased 

concentration of photogenerated free carriers at positive VG as compared to negative VG with 

the maximum photocurrent occurring at maximum transconductance value.32 This is due to 

dominant photogating effect at the maximum transconductance operating point. Since the 

BP FET is in the accumulation region for the given VG range, the Iph increases with increase in 

VG.

Temporal Photoresponse: Next, temporal measurements were carried out in order to 

understand the variation in the speed of the device for negative and positive photocurrent 

regimes. As shown in Figure 3c, the fall time (τF ) remains nearly constant over gate voltage 

for both 690 (visible) and 840 nm (NIR) illumination. However, we observe that (i) τF is lower 

in the positive Iph regime i.e. under 840 nm illumination compared to 690 nm and (ii) there 

is a second time constant at VG = -2 V (∼ 1.5 x 103 sec) which arises from hole trapping in the 

MoS2 flake (discussed later in this paper). Under 690 nm illumination, free carriers in both 

flakes (pBP and nM) are responsible for photoconduction and negative Iph. The slow response 

of the MoS2 flake (as can be observed from the slow recovery of the MoS2 FET after the laser 

is switched off, shown in Figure S2a of Supporting Information) due to long detrapping time 

of the photogenerated holes results in increased lifetime of the photogenerated electrons 

thereby leading to a large τF .33 However, under 840 nm illumination, the positive Iph arises 

only from the photogenerated carriers of BP thereby resulting in relatively faster optical 

operation or lower fall time. This can also be observed in Figure 2b where the photocurrent 

Iph (or photoresponsivity, R) increases in magnitude with each optical cycle under visible 

light as it is limited by the time constant of the carriers in the MoS2 flake, however a steady 

on and off cycles are observed for NIR illumination due to fast hole detrapping time constant

in the BP flake. Figure 3d shows variation in τF and R with wavelength. For λ < 750 nm, τF is 

higher (∼ 55 sec) due to MoS2-limited dark current recovery. For λ beyond 750 nm, lower 

fall times are observed due to higher mobility in the BP flake and faster detrapping time for 

trapped photocarriers from shallow traps in BP bulk.32


11

Figure 4: MoS2 thickness dependent NPC and PPC crossover wavelength- Photocurrent 
and responsivity as a function of input laser power for (a) device 1 (MoS2 thickness of ∼3 
nm) and (b) device 2 (MoS2 thickness of 11 nm) under 690 and 840 nm illumination. Negative 
photocurrent in visible and NIR corroborates absorption of light by both MoS2 and BP flakes. 
(c) Band alignment in BP and MoS2 with varying thickness of MoS2 flake. (d) MoS2 thickness 
vs crossover wavelength, λt (wavelength at which the photocurrent transitions from negative 
to positive values).

MoS2 Thickness Dependent Negative Photocurrent

The negative photocurrent depends on the free carrier concentrations of BP and MoS2 flakes 

that can be modulated in magnitude (photoresponsivity) and spectral range by the gate 

voltage and the optical absorption range of the MoS2 flake respectively. Given that light 

absorption by the MoS2 flake results in generation of photocarriers that diffuse towards BP 

resulting in interlayer recombination and hence, negative Iph, the optical spectral response 

of MoS2 determines the crossover wavelength from NPC to PPC for the phototransistor. The 

spectral response of MoS2 is limited by its bandgap which varies with the thickness of the 

flake and therefore, the crossover wavelength increases for the first few nanometers of the


12

MoS2 flake as the bandgap decreases with increasing thickness, till the bandgap becomes 

constant (∼ 1.2 eV) for a few layer MoS2 flake. Figure 4a-c shows the optical response and 

corresponding band diagrams for two phototransistors with ∼3 nm and 11 nm thick MoS2 

flakes. Device 1 (flake thickness ∼3 nm) shows negative (positive) Iph and R for 690 nm (780 

nm) as its λt is approximately 750 nm (∼ 1.65 eV) which is close to the bandgap of the MoS2 

flake. On the other hand, the 11 nm thick MoS2 flake in device 2 has a bandgap of ∼1.2 eV. 

Hence, it exhibits a negative optical response to both 690 and 840 nm illumination since its 

λt is greater than 1000 nm (which is difficult to demonstrate given the limitation of our 

measurement setup). As the flake thickness of MoS2 increases further, the diffusion of 

electrons from the top surface (high optical absorption region) of the MoS2 flake towards BP 

becomes less favorable. This leads to negligible interlayer recombination resulting in a direct 

flow of electrons from conduction band of MoS2 to the contacts. This leads to a positive Iph for 

visible and NIR illumination, as shown in Figure S5 (device 3). It should be noted that a few 

layer BP flake is selected for these phototransistors with a reasonable Ion/Ioff and a fixed 

bandgap of ∼ 0.3 eV. Figure 4d shows the variation of crossover wavelength with MoS2 

thickness for multiple devices indicating that as the MoS2 flake thickness increases, λt 

increases till it saturates for few layer flakes.

Applications

The BP/MoS2 device architecture gives the advantage of switching the photocurrent from 

negative to positive values within a time scale of a few seconds as the wavelength switches 

from 700 to 750 nm, as shown in Figure 5a. Photocurrent switching characteristics of two 

additional devices are shown in Figure S6. This transition can be used in a wavelength

dependent multi-bit coding scheme as it helps in differentiating change in current due to 

different wavelengths of light thereby increasing the accuracy of light recognition. Further, 

this device also demonstrates negative persistent photoconductance, where the 

photocurrent reaches a maximum negative value under illumination and when the light is 


13

Figure 
5: 
Wavelength-based 
photoswitching 
and 
negative 
persistent 

photoconductance (a) Wavelength-based photocurrent switching at VG = 0 V and VD = 0.1 V 
(b) Negative persistent photoconductance at VG = -2 V and VD = 0.1 V with the inset showing 
a double exponential-based fitting of the normalised photocurrent.

withdrawn, it holds on to a negative current value (lower than the maximum but not the 

same as the dark current) for a long period of time. Figure 5b shows negative persistent 

photoconductance of device 1 for VG = -2 V with the normalised photocurrent Y (shown in 

Fig 5b inset) following a double exponential function: Y = A1exp(−t/τ1)+A2exp(−t/τ2).34 Here 

t is time, A1 and A2 are constants and τ1 and τ2 are fast and slow decay time constants 

respectively. The faster time constant, τ1 = 23 sec symbolises rapid relaxation of the device’s 

photocurrent in response to light withdrawal, whereas the slower time constant τ2 =1.5 x 103

sec arises from hole trapping in MoS2 on visible light illumination which results in slower 

decay in current. This behavior is similar to the long-term potentiation observed in synaptic 

devices. Similar behavior for another device (device 6) along with all its other optical 

measurements is shown in Figure S7.

Conclusions

This work demonstrates wavelength-dependent photoconductance polarity and reversible 

NPC-PPC switching in a BP/MoS2 phototransistor. Table 1 compares the key optical 

characteristics of various architectures and devices using 2D materials that demonstrate 

negative photoconductance along with the BP/MoS2 phototransistor reported in this work. 


14

The NPC is a result of recombination between photogenerated electrons in MoS2 with holes 

in the BP flake. The NPC-to-PPC crossover wavelength is tunable with the thickness of the 

MoS2 flake. MoS2 thickness modulates its bandgap and optical absorption range thereby 

resulting in NPC (PPC) for wavelengths within (beyond) the absorption range. The device 

offers dual fold application: first, different photoelectric response to different wavelengths, 

owing to the presence of both NPC and PPC in the same device, expands its application 

prospects to broadband photoelectric sensing and second, the presence of negative 

persistent photoconductance at negative gate voltage offers a promising avenue for opto-

controlled synaptic applications.

Experimental Procedure

The BP transistors were fabricated using a degenerately doped p-type Si substrate with 280 

nm thermally grown SiO2. BP flakes were mechanically exfoliated using scotch tape and 

transferred onto the substrate. The flakes were then identified using an optical microscope 

and source/drain contacts (along with an additional adjacent contact) were patterned by 

electron beam lithography (Raith 150-Two) using poly(methyl methacrylate) resist. 

Source/drain metal (Cr/Au -5/40 nm) was deposited using sputtering followed by lift-off. 

Further, MoS2 flakes were mechanically exfoliated from the molybdenite crystal using 

polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and were transferred on the fabricated BP FET using a pick-

and-transfer process using a micromanipulator setup. The contacts on MoS2 were fabricated 

using e-beam lithography and metal deposition. The final device image was taken using a 

Olympus BX-63 microscope and the SEM imaging was done using Raith 150-Two. ULVAC-

PHI/PHI5000 Versa ProbeII focus X-ray photoelectron spectrometer was used for XPS 

measurements and Horiba HR 800 Raman spectroscopy system with a 532 nm laser was 

used for Raman imaging. Before optical characterization, the device was placed on a PCB 

with large gold contact pads. The device contact pads were wire bonded using gold wire to 


Table 1: Comparison of this work with previous studies demonstrating negative photoconductance.

Ref
Material
Spectral

response

(nm)

NPC
and
PPC

NPC ↔ PPC
modulator

Mechanism
NPC-to-PPC switching
Application

Modulator
Reversible

29
BP
830
only NPC
NIR
bolometric 

effect

--
--
--

35
MoS2
NIR
only NPC
Monolayer

MoS2

trion

formation

--
--
--

36
MoS2
454, 519,
625, 980
and 1550

both
NIR
bolometric   

effect

--
--
--

18
ReS2/hBN

/MoS2

520, 637,
830 and

1310

both
VG and λ
charge trapping
--
--
Photoelectronic

memory

19 WS2/RGO
808
only NPC
NIR
recombination
--
--
--

20
BP/

SnS0.5Se1.5

365 and

894.6

both
VG
charge trapping
--
--
--

21
Gr/BP
655, 785 
and 980

both
VG
electron
trapping

--
--
--

22
MoSe2/Gr
450 to
1000

both
VG
charge transfer
--
--
--

23
Gr/MoS2
635
both
VG
charge transfer
--
--
--

37
MoTe2/Gr
975
both
laser power
charge transfer
laser power
Yes
--

This
work

BP/MoS2
690 to 900
both
λ ∼ MoS2
bandgap

recombination
λ
Yes
Photoelectronic

memory


the large PCB contact pads. The optoelectronic measurements were done in ambient 

conditions under a BX-63 Olympus microscope using a Keysight B1500A semiconductor 

device analyzer using an NKT laser with a wavelength range of 690 to 900 nm. Switching of 

laser power was done using input of square pulses of 10 V peak-to-peak to the laser power 

controller unit from an Agilent 33220A function generator. The laser was incident on the 

device through the objective lens of the BX-63 Olympus microscope.

Acknowledgement

The authors acknowledge Indian Institute of Technology Bombay Nanofabrication Facility 

(IITBNF) for the device fabrication and characterization. The authors thank Kartikey Thakar 

for wire bonding the samples. H.J. acknowledges Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme from Ministry of 

Electronics and Information Technology (Meity), Govt. of India. A.V. thanks IITB-Monash 

Research Academy for the doctoral fellowship and S.L. acknowledges the Department of 

Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India through its SwarnaJayanti fellowship scheme 

(Grant number - DST/SJF/ETA-01/2016-17) for funding support.

Supporting Information Available

The supporting information consists of table with data set of 10 devices, transfer and output 

characteristics of BP and MoS2 FETs (device 1), optical characteristics of MoS2 FET (device 

1), optical characteristics of multiple phototransistors (device 1, device 3, device 4, device 5 

and device 6).

References

(1)
Varghese, A.; Saha, D.; Thakar, K.; Jindal, V.; Ghosh, S.; Medhekar, N. V.; Ghosh, S.; Lodha, 

S. Near-direct bandgap WSe2/ReS2 type-II pn heterojunction for enhanced ultrafast 


photodetection and high-performance photovoltaics. Nano letters 2020, 20, 1707–

1717.

(2)
Yang, Z.; Liao, L.; Gong, F.; Wang, F.; Wang, Z.; Liu, X.; Xiao, X.; Hu, W.; He, J.; Duan, X. 

WSe2/GeSe heterojunction photodiode with giant gate tunability. Nano Energy 2018, 

49, 103–108.

(3)
Deng, Y.; Luo, Z.; Conrad, N. J.; Liu, H.; Gong, Y.; Najmaei, S.; Ajayan, P. M.; Lou, J.; Xu, X.; 

Ye, P. D. Black phosphorus–monolayer MoS2 van der Waals heterojunction p-n diode. 

ACS nano 2014, 8, 8292–8299.

(4)
Lee, C.-H.; Lee, G.-H.; Van Der Zande, A. M.; Chen, W.; Li, Y.; Han, M.; Cui, X.; Arefe, G.; 

Nuckolls, C.; Heinz, T. F., et al. Atomically thin p-n junctions with van der Waals 

heterointerfaces. Nature nanotechnology 2014, 9, 676–681.

(5)
Cheng, R.; Li, D.; Zhou, H.; Wang, C.; Yin, A.; Jiang, S.; Liu, Y.; Chen, Y.; Huang, Y.; Duan, X. 

Electroluminescence and photocurrent generation from atomically sharp WSe2/MoS2 

heterojunction p-n diodes. Nano letters 2014, 14, 5590–5597.

(6)
Chen, Y.; Wang, X.; Wu, G.; Wang, Z.; Fang, H.; Lin, T.; Sun, S.; Shen, H.; Hu, W.; Wang, J., 

et al. High-performance photovoltaic detector based on MoTe2/MoS2 van der Waals 

heterostructure. Small 2018, 14, 1703293.

(7)
Jo, S.-H.; Lee, H. W.; Shim, J.; Heo, K.; Kim, M.; Song, Y. J.; Park, J.-H. Highly Efficient 

Infrared Photodetection in a Gate-Controllable Van der Waals Heterojunction with 

Staggered Bandgap Alignment. Advanced Science 2018, 5, 1700423.

(8)
Saha, D.; Varghese, A.; Lodha, S. Atomistic Modeling of van der Waals Heterostructures 

with Group-6 and Group-7 Monolayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenides for Near 

Infrared/Short-wave Infrared Photodetection. ACS Applied Nano Materials 2019, 3,

820–829.


(9)
Geim, A. K.; Grigorieva, I. V. Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature 2013, 499, 419–

425.

(10) Novoselov, K.; Mishchenko, o. A.; Carvalho, o. A.; Neto, A. C. 2D materials and van der 

Waals heterostructures. Science 2016, 353.

(11) Murali, K.; Abraham, N.; Das, S.; Kallatt, S.; Majumdar, K. Highly sensitive, fast graphene 

photodetector with responsivity > 106 A/W using a floating quantum well gate. ACS 

applied materials & interfaces 2019, 11, 30010–30018.

(12) Shin, G. H.; Park, C.; Lee, K. J.; Jin, H. J.; Choi, S.-Y. Ultrasensitive phototransistor based 

on WSe2-MoS2 van der Waals heterojunction. Nano Letters 2020, 20, 5741–5748.

(13) Thakar, K.; Mukherjee, B.; Grover, S.; Kaushik, N.; Deshmukh, M.; Lodha, S. Multilayer 

ReS2 photodetectors with gate tunability for high responsivity and high-speed 

applications. ACS applied materials & interfaces 2018, 10, 36512–36522.

(14) Ghosh, S.; Varghese, A.; Thakar, K.; Dhara, S.; Lodha, S. Enhanced responsivity and 

detectivity of fast WSe2 phototransistor using electrostatically tunable in-plane lateral 

pn homojunction. Nature communications 2021, 12, 1–9.

(15) Qiu, Q.; Huang, Z. Photodetectors of 2D Materials from Ultraviolet to Terahertz Waves. 

Advanced Materials 2021, 33, 2008126.

(16) Wang, Q.; Wen, Y.; Cai, K.; Cheng, R.; Yin, L.; Zhang, Y.; Li, J.; Wang, Z.; Wang, F.; Wang, F., 

et al. Nonvolatile infrared memory in MoS2/PbS van der Waals heterostructures. 

Science advances 2018, 4, eaap7916.

(17) Sun, Y.; Ding, Y.; Xie, D.; Sun, M.; Xu, J.; Yang, P.; Zhang, Y.; Ren, T. Reconfigurable optical 

memory based on MoS2/QDs mixed-dimensional van der Waals heterostructure. 2D 

Materials 2021, 8, 025021.


(18) Wang, Y.; Liu, E.; Gao, A.; Cao, T.; Long, M.; Pan, C.; Zhang, L.; Zeng, J.; Wang, C.; Hu, W., 

et al. Negative photoconductance in van der Waals heterostructure-based floating gate 

phototransistor. ACS nano 2018, 12, 9513–9520.

(19) Ratha, S.; Simbeck, A. J.; Late, D. J.; Nayak, S. K.; Rout, C. S. Negative infrared 

photocurrent response in layered WS2/reduced graphene oxide hybrids. Applied 

Physics Letters 2014, 105, 243502.

(20) Luo, X.; Wang, B.; Lv, W.; Wang, Y.; Lv, W.; Wei, Z.; Lu, Y.; Liu, Z.; Lu, Z.; Xiong, R., et al. 

Multifunctional photodetectors based on nanolayered black Phosphorus/SnS0.5Se1.5 

heterostructures. ACS Applied Nano Materials 2019, 2, 3548– 3555.

(21) Xu, J.; Song, Y. J.; Park, J.-H.; Lee, S. Graphene/black phosphorus heterostructured 

photodetector. Solid-State Electronics 2018, 144, 86–89.

(22) Liu, B.; You, C.; Zhao, C.; Shen, G.; Liu, Y.; Li, Y.; Yan, H.; Zhang, Y. High responsivity and 

near-infrared photodetector based on graphene/MoSe2 heterostructure. Chinese 

Optics Letters 2019, 17, 020002.

(23) Roy, K.; Padmanabhan, M.; Goswami, S.; Sai, T. P.; Ramalingam, G.; Raghavan, S.; Ghosh, 

A. Graphene–MoS2 hybrid structures for multifunctional photoresponsive memory 

devices. Nature nanotechnology 2013, 8, 826–830.

(24) Jin, H.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, L.; Wan, R.; Zou, Z.; Li, H.; Gao, Y. Positive and negative 

photoconductivity 
characteristics 
in 
CsPbBr3/graphene 
heterojunction. 

Nanotechnology 2020, 32, 085202.

(25) Cui, B.; Xing, Y.; Han, J.; Lv, W.; Lv, W.; Lei, T.; Zhang, Y.; Ma, H.; Zeng, Z.; Zhang, B. 

Negative photoconductivity in low-dimensional materials. Chinese Physics B 2021, 30, 

028507.


(26) Kim, B. H.; Kwon, S. H.; Gu, H. H.; Yoon, Y. J. Negative photoconductivity of WS2 

nanosheets decorated with Au nanoparticles via electron-beam irradiation. Physica E: 

Low-dimensional Systems and Nanostructures 2019, 106, 45–49.

(27) Xiao, X.; Li, J.; Wu, J.; Lu, D.; Tang, C. Negative photoconductivity observed in 

polycrystalline monolayer molybdenum disulfide prepared by chemical vapor 

deposition. Applied Physics A 2019, 125, 1–7.

(28) Biswas, C.; Gunes, F.; Loc, D. D.; Lim, S. C.; Jeong, M. S.; Pribat, D.; Lee, Y. H. Negative and 

positive persistent photoconductance in graphene. Nano letters 2011, 11, 4682–4687.

(29) Miao, J.; Song, B.; Li, Q.; Cai, L.; Zhang, S.; Hu, W.; Dong, L.; Wang, C. Photothermal effect 

induced negative photoconductivity and high responsivity in flexible black phosphorus 

transistors. ACS nano 2017, 11, 6048–6056.

(30) Kufer, D.; Konstantatos, G. Highly sensitive, encapsulated MoS2 photodetector with gate 

controllable gain and speed. Nano letters 2015, 15, 7307–7313.

(31) Goyal, N.; Mahapatra, S.; Lodha, S. Ultrafast Characterization of Hole Trapping Near 

Black Phosphorus–SiO2 Interface During NBTI Stress in 2-D BP p-FETs. IEEE 

Transactions on Electron Devices 2019, 66, 4572–4577.

(32) Guo, Q.; Pospischil, A.; Bhuiyan, M.; Jiang, H.; Tian, H.; Farmer, D.; Deng, B.; Li, C.; Han, S.-

J.; Wang, H., et al. Black phosphorus mid-infrared photodetectors with high gain. Nano 

letters 2016, 16, 4648–4655.

(33) Zhao, Q.; Wang, W.; Carrascoso-Plana, F.; Jie, W.; Wang, T.; Castellanos-Gomez, A.; 

Frisenda, R. The role of traps in the photocurrent generation mechanism in thin InSe 

photodetectors. Materials Horizons 2020, 7, 252–262.


(34) Islam, M. M.; Dev, D.; Krishnaprasad, A.; Tetard, L.; Roy, T. Optoelectronic synapse using 

monolayer MoS2 field effect transistors. Scientific reports 2020, 10, 1–9.

(35) Lui, C.; Frenzel, A.; Pilon, D.; Lee, Y.-H.; Ling, X.; Akselrod, G.; Kong, J.; Gedik, N. Trion-

induced negative photoconductivity in monolayer MoS2. Physical review letters 2014, 

113, 166801.

(36) Wu, J.-Y.; Chun, Y. T.; Li, S.; Zhang, T.; Wang, J.; Shrestha, P. K.; Chu, D. Broadband MoS2 

Field-Effect Phototransistors: Ultrasensitive Visible-Light Photoresponse and Negative 

Infrared Photoresponse. Advanced Materials 2018, 30, 1705880.

(37) Kim, H. J.; Lee, K. J.; Park, J.; Shin, G. H.; Park, H.; Yu, K.; Choi, S.-Y. Photoconductivity 

Switching in MoTe2/Graphene Heterostructure by Trap-Assisted Photogating. ACS 

Applied Materials & Interfaces 2020, 12, 38563–38569.


Supporting Information

Wavelength-Controlled Photocurrent Polarity 

Switching in BP-MoS2 Heterostructure

Himani Jawa,† Sayantan Ghosh,† Abin Varghese,†,‡ Srilagna Sahoo,† and

Saurabh Lodha∗,†

†Department of Electrical Engineering, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra 400076

‡Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria,

Australia 3800

E-mail: slodha@ee.iitb.ac.in


Details of the Fabricated BP-MoS2 Phototransistors

Table S1: MoS2 and BP thicknesses for the various phototransistors fabricated in this study.

Device
MoS2 thickness (nm)
BP thickness (nm)
NPC and PPC

1
∼3
21
both

2
11
few layer
only NPC

3
14
8
only PPC

4
∼2.5
∼9
both

5
∼3
∼33
both

6
∼3.5
15
both

7
8
3
only NPC

8
9
∼30
only NPC

9
∼ 2.5
few layer
both

10
4
few layer
both


Transfer and Output Characteristics of BP and MoS2 FETs

Figure S1: (a) Transfer characteristics of the BP FET (b) Output characteristics of the MoS2 
FET between contacts 2 and 3 (contacts are below the MoS2 flake) (c) Transfer and (d) output 
characteristics of the MoS2 FET between contacts 4 and 5 (contacts fabricated on top of the 
MoS2 flake).


Optical Characteristics of the MoS2 FET

Figure S2: (a) Optical response of the MoS2 FET under 690 and 720 nm illumination at VG = 0 
V and VD = 1 V (b) Transfer characteristics of the MoS2 FET for varying incident laser power 
of 690 nm at VD = 0.1 V showing photogating effect due to trapped photogenerated holes.

Optical Characteristics of the BP-MoS2 Phototransistor

Figure S3: (a) Photoswitching of device 1 for wavelengths ranging from 690 to 900 nm at VG 
= 0 V and VD = 0.1 V (b) Photocurrent vs incident laser power and (c) Variation of 
photocurrent with gate voltage under 780 nm illumination.


Model for Photocurrent Modulation with Gate Voltage and Laser Power

Under 690 nm illumination, nM (dotted blue curve) and pBP (dotted red curve), as shown in 

Figure S4a, are the total electron and hole concentrations at laser power Pin1 that can be 

modulated with VG. Carrier recombination, which determines the Iph, depends on both nM and 

pBP resulting in a U-shaped curve (green curve). As the laser power is increased to Pin2, under 

ideal conditions, nM×pBP increases, given the increase in the photogenerated carriers (shown 

by the black curve in Figure S4a). However, due to trapping at the BP/SiO2 interface, the hole 

concentration is limited in BP (although photogenerated electrons are available in MoS2). 

This results in the left shift of the nM×pBP plot and hence, the Iph, with the maximum occurring 

at negative VG as shown by the pink curve.

Figure S4: Model for (a) carrier concentration and (b) photocurrent variation in BP/MoS2 
phototransistor with gate voltage and optical power.


Band Alignment and Optical Characteristics of Device 3

Figure S5: (a) Band alignment between BP and MoS2 for a thick MoS2 flake. (b) Optical image 
of device 3. (c) Photocurrent response of device 3 under different wavelengths showing a 
positive photocurrent irrespective of the wavelength.

Photoswitching Characteristics of Device 4 and 5

Figure S6: Wavelength-based photoswitching of (a) Device 4 and (b) Device 5.


Optical Characteristics of Device 6

Figure S7: (a) Optical image of device 6 (b) Photoswitching with on and off time being 5 sec 
at VG = 0 V and VD = 0.1 V for different wavelengths. (c) Transfer characteristics of BP/MoS2 
device with the inset showing the transfer characteristics of the BP FET (d) Variation in 
photocurrent as a function of gate voltage under 690 nm illumination (e) Negative persistent 
photoconductance at VG = -1 V and VD = 0.1 V with the inset showing a double exponential-
based fitting of the normalised photocurrent.


