 
1

Ion sensitivity of hygroscopic insulator field effect transistors   
 
Joshua N. Arthur*a,b and Soniya D. Yambem*a,b 

a. School of Chemistry and Physics, Faculty of Science, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia 
b. Centre for Materials Science, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia 
E-mail: joshua.arthur@hdr.qut.edu.au; soniya.yambem@qut.edu.au  
 
Given the many and varied roles of ions in living organisms, biocompatible organic ion sensors are a matter of considerable interest. In 
this work, simple, low-voltage, solid-state hygroscopic insulator field effect transistors (HIFETs) have been tested to characterise their 
ion-sensitive properties. Two biologically relevant salt solutions, sodium chloride (NaCl) and potassium chloride (KCl), were tested. To 
assess pH sensitivity, solutions of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were also tested. The salts and acidic solutions 
caused similar, concentration-dependent changes in HIFET performance from 10 mM to 1 M, consistent with an increase in ion 
concentration in the hygroscopic insulator, increasing device capacitance. By contrast, basic solutions caused an overall decrease in device 
performance, consistent with a net removal of ions due to acid-base reactions between the insulator and the analyte. These results show 
that HIFETs exhibit promising sensitivity to a range of ions, and can therefore serve as platforms for future ion-selective devices. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Ions play a wide variety of fundamental roles in biological 
systems. Ion fluxes are extensively involved in vital processes 
such as cellular signalling, cell volume regulation, and muscle 
contraction, regulated by selective ion channels and ion 
pumps in cell walls.1 Potassium (K+) and sodium (Na+) ions, 
for example, are involved in nerve impulses and neuron 
activity. Other biologically relevant ions include protons 
(H+), calcium (Ca2+) and chloride (Cl-).1, 2 Given the vital role 
of ions in the human body, sensors capable of detecting ion 
concentration have been researched extensively for health 
monitoring and biointerfacing applications.3 Organic thin 
film transistors (OTFTs), having excellent biocompatibility 
and signal amplifying properties, are devices particularly 
suitable for this purpose.4, 5 
 
OTFT-based ion and pH sensors have been demonstrated 
using a variety of architectures and sensing mechanisms. This 
includes organic field effect transistors (OFETs),6, 7 organic 
electrolyte-gated field effect transistors (EGOFETs),8, 9 and 
organic electrochemical transistors (OECTs).10, 11 Another 
class of OTFT with promising characteristics for sensing 
applications is the hygroscopic insulator field effect transistor 
(HIFET). HIFETs are simple, solution-processible, all solid-
state, low-voltage transistors that utilise the properties of a 
hygroscopic insulator: poly(4-vinylphenol) (PVP). In its dry, 
pristine state, PVP is used as an insulator material in 
OFETs.12, 13 When permitted to absorb moisture, the weakly 
acidic phenol groups of PVP ionise, resulting in mobile 
cations (H+). Thus, the hygroscopic layer functions as a solid-
state electrolyte, facilitating the low-voltage operation of the 
device.14, 15 Using the hydrophobic poly(3-hexylthiophene-
2,5-diyl) (P3HT) as the active layer, the working mechanism 
is similar to an EGOFET, where ions accumulate as electrical 
double layers at the PVP/P3HT interface rather than 
penetrate and electrochemically dope the active layer.15 
HIFETs can be used as sensors by utilising a permeable top 
gate electrode, allowing analytes to penetrate and interact 
with the device. The solid-state architecture permits a self-
containment and simplicity in fabrication that is difficult to 

achieve with electrolyte-based OTFTs, while maintaining the 
advantages of low-voltage operation. We previously have 
studied HIFET sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and 
proposed that the primary sensing mechanism is the 
diffusion of the analyte through the gate and PVP layers, and 
the oxidation of the active layer.16-19 There are as yet no 
detailed studies on the sensitivity of HIFETs to ions.  
 
In this work, we investigate the ion sensitivity of HIFETs using 
aqueous solutions of sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium chloride 
(KCl), hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH). 
We study the response of the HIFET drain-source current (Ids) to 
the deposition of these ionic solutions onto the gate electrode of 
the device and examine the effect on the figures of merit of the 
transistor. This study reveals the broad sensitivity of HIFETs to 
a range of ionic solutions and provides a vital foundation for 
future work toward optimising and functionalising ion sensitive 
and ion selective HIFETs. 
 
Experimental Section 
 
Detailed methods for HIFET fabrication are provided in previous 
works.17, 19 In brief, glass slides pre-pattered with indium tin oxide 
(ITO) source and drain electrodes (Xin Yan Technology Ltd.) 
were used as the substrate. The channel between the electrodes 
was 50 μm long and 3 mm wide, for a W/L ratio of 60. 
Approximately 
50 
nm 
films 
of 
regioregular 
poly(3-

hexylthiophene) (P3HT) (Rieke Metals, LLC, RMI-001EE) were 
spin coated as the active layer, followed by approximately 700 nm 
films of PVP (Sigma-Aldrich, 436224) as the hygroscopic 
insulator. Finally, crosslinked freestanding films of poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) 
doped 
with 
poly(styrene 

sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (Heraeus, Clevios PH 1000) were 
attached to the devices by first depositing 2 μL of 0.1% (3-
glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane (GOPS) solution in deionised 
water as an adhesion promotor, and lowering the film into place. 
 
The freestanding PEDOT:PSS gates were crosslinked using 
1% divinyl sulfone (Sigma-Aldrich, V3700), along with 
additives 4-dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, 
44198) and ethylene glycol (0.1% and 5.8%, respectively). 


 
2

The PEDOT:PSS solution was deposited into PTFE wells (8 
uL per gate) and heated at 70°C for 30 minutes to dry, 
forming freestanding films.  
 
To test the sensitivity to different ions, 1 M solutions of 
NaCl, KCl, HCl and NaOH were prepared. HCl was diluted 
from a 32% stock solution (Ajax Finechem, AJA256). NaOH 
was prepared in deionized water from pellets (Chem-Supply, 
SA178). Additional concentrations were prepared by diluting 
successively with deionized water.  
 
HIFET characterisation was carried out using a Keysight 
B1500A semiconductor analyzer. Transient Ids sensing 
responses were recorded by depositing 5 μL of analyte onto 
the gate electrode above the channel between source and 
drain electrodes, while applying a constant Vg of -0.3 V and 
a Vds of -1 V. Forward and reverse transfer sweeps were 
recorded before and after deposition of the analyte. Gate 
voltage (Vg) was swept at an average rate of ~60 mV s-1. 
Figures of merit were determined from the reverse transfer 
sweep. Methods for calculating figures of merit are given in 
previous reports.19 All figures shown in the report represent 
averages of typically 5-6 individual HIFETs tested under the 
same conditions.  
 
Results and discussion  
 
HIFET characteristics 
 
In common with previous reports,14, 20 the HIFETs 
fabricated for this study utilise a top-gate bottom-contact 
device architecture, illustrated in cross-section in Figure 1A. 
The active semiconductor layer is P3HT, and the gate 
electrode is a water-stable and ion-permeable film 
PEDOT:PSS, 
crosslinked 
using 
divinyl 
sulfone. 

Representative output and transfer characteristics, for 
HIFETs in a pristine condition, are given in Figure 1B and 
Figure 1C. Performance is comparable to previously 
reports.17-19 HIFETs operate within a gate voltage (Vg) range 
of +1 V to -1 V. The large positive threshold voltage (VT) is 
a result of the polarity of the PVP, which induces charge 
carriers in the P3HT.15 By applying a positive Vg, cations 
from the PVP are caused to accumulate at the P3HT/PVP 
interface, counteracting the polarity effect and de-doping the 
channel to reach an “off” state.      
 
Transient Ids modulations  
 
In an OTFT sensor, the analyte must interact with the device 
in such a way as to cause a detectable change in its electrical 
characteristics. The most direct means to probe the 
characteristics of an OTFT is to monitor the change in Ids 
over time, under fixed voltages. In Figure 2, we show the 
transient change in Ids in HIFETs upon the deposition of 5 
μL of different ionic analytes onto the gate electrode. We plot 
the percent change in Ids relative to the Ids measured 
immediately before deposition of the analyte, at t=0 seconds 
(100×ΔIds/Ids(t=0)). During the experiment, we fix the 

drain-source voltage (Vds) and Vg at -1 V and -0.3 V, 
respectively. This corresponds to the saturation regime, with 
a moderately doped (already ‘on’) channel, which we find 
maximises the Ids modulation (see Figure 5). To 
quantitatively evaluate these results, we extract the maximum 
Ids modulation reached within the first 200 seconds of 
exposure to the analyte, as well as a sensing parameter β, 
defined in Equation 1. The β parameter represents the 
quantity of charge that passes through the channel (𝑄 =
∫ 𝐼 𝑑𝑡) that is gained due to the analyte. This is given as a 
fraction of the charge that would have passed through the 
channel had Ids(t=0) remained constant.  
 
 

A

Vg

P3HT

PVP

ITO
ITO

PEDOT:PSS

Vds

Glass substrate

B

C

-0.4 V

-0.2 V

0.0 V

0.2 V
0.4 V
0.6 V

Fig. 1 (A) HIFET cross-sectional layer structure. (B) Representative 
HIFET output characteristics, measured at various gate voltages 
(indicated beside each curve). (C) Representative HIFET transfer 
characteristics, showing forward and reverse sweeps (Vds = -1 V).    


 
3

 

G
H

β

NaOH
HCl

NaOH
HCl

A

1 M
100 mM
10 mM
0 mM

B

1 M
100 mM
10 mM

0 mM
1 mM

C
D

β

NaCl
KCl

NaCl
KCl

pH 0
pH 1
pH 2

pH 7
pH 3

E
F

pH 14
pH 13
pH 12

pH 7
pH 11

Fig. 2 The transient change in Ids upon deposition of (A) NaCl solutions, and (B) KCl solutions, of different concentrations. Trials from 
representative devices are shown (see Figure S1 and Figure S3 for full data). The response to deionised water (0 mM) is shown as a dotted 
line. For both NaCl and KCl, the average (C) maximum Ids modulation, and (D) sensing parameter β, are shown. Error bars indicate the 
standard deviation. (E) and (F) show the transient change in Ids upon deposition of HCl (pH 0-3) and NaOH (pH 11-14) solutions. 
Deionised water is listed as pH 7. Trials from representative devices are shown (see Figure S4 and Figure S5 for full data). (G) and (H) plot 
the maximum Ids modulation, and sensing parameter β, for the full range of pH values tested. 


 
4

𝛽 =

∫
#$%&&[#!"(%)'#!"(()]*%
#$&

∫
#$%&& #!"(()
#$&
*%
   
            1 

 
Figure 2A and 2B show representative Ids responses to NaCl 
and KCl, respectively. These are chosen from multiple trials 
on different devices, which are provided in full in Figure S1 
and S3 in the supporting information. Average maximum 
modulations and β parameters are given in Figure 2C and 2D. 
The response to deionised water (0 mM) is included to show 
the “background” signal due to the effect of hydration on the 
device. HIFETs exhibit a strong concentration-dependant 
response to both NaCl and KCl solutions. For 1 M solutions, 
Ids increases by over 100%. A positive modulation reflects an 
increase in the magnitude of the hole current between source 
and drain, and hence increased charge in the P3HT channel.  
The transient Ids is slow to reach a maximum, and proceeds 
in two stages, the first being smaller and faster. The response 
time is related to the initial hydration state of the device. 
Where the device is pre-hydrated with deionised water prior 
to testing, the Ids modulation is more rapid, while reaching a 
similar maximum (see Figure S2).  
 

Overall, the sensitivity of HIFETs to both salts is similar, 
indicating that HIFETs are sensitive to both Na+ and K+. 
Average modulations for KCl are generally slightly smaller, 
but the smaller response is also evident in the background 
signal to due to hydration. This suggests there was a 
difference in the initial state of hydration in both batches of 
devices (fabricated and tested separately), which can be 
expected to vary with ambient room humidity. At 10 mM and 
below, modulations begin to become indistinguishable from 
the background response due to hydration.  
 
Modulation in Ids for HCl and NaOH solutions is plotted in 
Figure 2E to 2F. Concentrations of HCl and NaOH are given 
in terms of calculated pH, where pH 0 corresponds to 1 M 
HCl, and pH 14 to 1 M NaOH. Deionised water, indicating 
the background hydration effect, is plotted as pH 7. There is 
a positive Ids modulation in response to highly acidic 
solutions (Figure 2E) and a negative modulation in response 
to strongly basic solutions (Figure 2F). The sensitivity to HCl 
corresponds closely to NaCl and KCl. Average modulations 
are generally larger and faster, likely again related to the initial 
hydration state of the transistors, but also possibly reflecting 
the increased mobility of the smaller cation (H+).21 However, 
the sensitivity limit is similar, where HCl solutions of pH 2 
(10 mM) are difficult to distinguish from the background 
response to hydration. The negative modulations observed 
for strongly basic NaOH solutions (pH 13 and 14) indicate a 
different mechanism from the other analytes tested; the 
analyte having the effect of decreasing charge in the channel. 
Like the other analytes, the modulation becomes difficult to 
distinguish from the effect of water at 10 mM (pH 12). 
 
 
 
 

Effect of salts on HIFET figures of merit 
 

To gain deeper insight into the effect of ions on HIFET 
performance and the underlying mechanisms, changes in key 
figures of merit after deposition of the analyte were 
examined. Figure 3 plots the average ON/OFF ratio, 
threshold voltage (VT), transconductance (gm), and the 
product of mobility and capacitance (μsat×C), extracted from 
the transfer characteristics of HIFETs before and after 
depositing KCl solutions of different concentrations. 
Additional figures of merit for KCl and the same for NaCl 
are given in the supporting information (see Figure S6 and 
Figure S7). 
 
The ON/OFF ratio is the ratio of the maximum to minimum 
Ids recorded in the transfer curve. The maximum Ids, or the 
‘ON’ current occurs at Vg = -1 V, while the minimum or 
‘OFF’ current occurs around Vg = +0.8 V. In Figure 3A, the 
ON/OFF ratio increases with increasing KCl concentration. 
At 1 M, the change is dramatic: the average ON/OFF ratio 
increasing from 90±10 to 310±50. This is largely the result 
of increased ON currents (Figure S6A), while OFF currents 
were not significantly changed (Figure S6B). Similar 
behaviour is observed for NaCl, showing significant increase 
in ON currents with analyte concentration (Figure S7A), but 
more variation in the OFF currents (Figure S7B) led to less 
concentration-dependence in the ON/OFF ratio (Figure 
S7C). Overall, this behaviour reflects an improvement in the 
ability of the transistor to accumulate charge in its ON state 
as ion concentration increases. This effect is reflected clearly 
in the other figures of merit. 
 
Threshold 
voltage 
is 
strongly 
dependant 
on 
ion 

concentration (Figure 3B). We determine threshold voltage 
by the conventional method derived from the gradual 
channel approximation.22 Ideally, VT represents the Vg at 
which mobile charge begins to accumulate in the channel, or 
from the opposite perspective, the Vg at which the mobile 
charge is first depleted. As ion concentration increases, VT 
shifts significantly from around +0.5 V toward 0 V. This 
shows that additional ions inside the HIFET help the device 
to more efficiently (at smaller Vg) deplete the channel.   
 
From Figure 3C, the transconductance (gm) is also strongly 
dependent on ion concentration, which is directly related to 
the shift in VT. In Figure 3C, we plot the maximum gm/W, 
defined as the maximum of the derivative of the transfer 
sweep (gm = ∂Ids/∂Vg) normalised by channel width (W = 3 
mm). This characterises how well a change in Vg can control 
charge density in the channel and modulate Ids. Hence, for a 
greater transconductance, a larger Ids can be achieved in the 
‘ON’ state, increasing the ON/OFF ratio, and a smaller 
positive Vg is needed to deplete mobile charge from the 
channel, shifting VT.  
 
Figure 3D shows the product of saturation mobility (μsat) and 
capacitance (C), calculated using the Equation 2, which is 
derived from the gradual channel approximation.23 Here, L 


 
5

and W are the channel length and width , respectively, and 

the value 𝜕*𝐼*+/𝜕𝑉, is approximated as the gradient of a line 

fitted to the plot of *𝐼*+ vs Vg. This parameter, μsat×C, 
increases with ion concentration, and reflects the same 
phenomenon as gm. The increase in μsat×C is most likely due 
to an increase in total device capacitance with ion 
concentration, as the hole mobility, μsat, of the P3HT is 
unlikely to be affected by ion concentration. An increase in 
capacitance with ion concentration is consistent with the 
Gouy-Chapman-Stern model, which describes the double 
layer capacitance at an electrode/electrolyte boundary as 
proportional to the square root of the ionic strength of the 
electrolyte (ionic strength is equivalent to concentration for 
KCl and NaCl).24  This relationship roughly agrees with the 
trend shown in Figure 3C. Experimentally, the double layer 
capacitance of a P3HT-based EGOFET has been shown to 
vary in this way with the KCl concentration of the 
electrolyte.24 Thus, it is likely that the primary mechanism for 
Ids modulation in response to KCl and NaCl is an increase in 
the total capacitance of the HIFET. Ions from the solution 
deposited onto the gate electrode diffuse through the 
permeable PEDOT:PSS gate and enter the PVP layer, adding 
to the existing ions and increasing the total ionic strength. 
This is fundamentally different to the H2O2 sensing 
mechanism, explored in our previous works.18, 19 There, 
H2O2 directly oxidises the P3HT channel, decreasing 
ON/OFF ratio (due to increased OFF currents), increasing 
rather than reducing VT, and having no effect on μsat×C.19  

 

𝜇+-% × 𝐶 =

./

0 0

12#!"

13' 1      
         2 

 
It is noteworthy that the figures of merit, particularly μsat×C, 
of HIFET sensors are highly sensitive to ion concentration, 
with good consistency between trials (as indicated by the 
small standard deviations). Unlike the modulations and β 
parameters extracted from the transient Ids response (Figure 
2E and Figure 2F), μsat×C can clearly distinguish between the 
effect of deionised water and 10 mM KCl or NaCl. Even at 
1 mM, μsat×C is clearly different to water, though the 
standard deviations overlap. This places HIFET ion sensors 
in a biologically relevant sensitivity range. In human blood 
serum, for example, a range of 3.5-5.5 mM for K+ and 135-
145 mM for Na+ is considered normal, and serious disease is 
indicated by levels outside these ranges.25, 26 
 
Effect of pH on HIFET figures of merit 

 
Key figures of merit for HIFETs before and after deposition 
of HCl and NaOH solutions of varied pH are shown in 
Figure 4. HCl solutions from 1 M to 1 mM are plotted as 
pH 0 to 3, and NaOH solutions from 1 mM to 1 M are 
plotted as pH 11 to 14. As the acidic and basic solutions were 
tested in separate batches, there is a separate statistic for pH 
7 (deionised water) corresponding to each.  
 

0
1
10
100
1000

Analyte concentration (mM)

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

VT (V)

0
1
10
100
1000

Analyte concentration (mM)

0

100

200

300

400

ON/OFF ratio

A
B

C
D

After
Before

After
Before

After
Before

After
Before

Fig. 3 Average figures of merit for HIFETs in the saturation regime before and after deposition with KCl solutions of different 
concentrations. (A) ON/OFF ratio. (B) Threshold voltage (VT). (C) Maximum transconductance (gm). (D) Product of saturation 
mobility (μsat) and capacitance (C). Other major figures of merit for KCl are given in Figure S5. Figures of merit for NaCl are given in 
Figure S6.


 
6

The effect of acidic, HCl solutions, is comparable to the 
effect of NaCl and KCl. The ON/OFF ratio increases with 
HCl concentration (Figure 4A), VT shifts towards 0 V (Figure 
4B), and both gm (Figure 4C) and μsat×C (Figure 4D) 
increase. At pH 0 (1 M), HCl consistently causes slightly 
larger changes than 1M NaCl or KCl, but there are otherwise 
no indicators of distinct behaviour owing to the H+ ion. It is 
likely that the capacitance mechanism proposed above also 
accounts for the sensitivity to low pH. We also note that, like 
the salt solutions, μsat×C is more sensitive to pH than 
statistics derived from the transient Ids modulation. HCl 
solutions of pH 2 are distinguishable from pH 3 and pH 7.    
 
The effect of basic, NaOH solutions, clearly exhibits a 
different underlying mechanism. NaOH solutions of pH 13 
and 14 significantly decrease the ON/OFF ratio. An 
examination of the ON and OFF currents (see Figure S8A 
and S8B) shows that this is a result of both a decrease in ON 
current and increase in OFF current. VT shifts in the negative 
direction with increasing pH, and at the same time there is a 
decrease in both gm and μsat×C. These results are consistent 
with an overall decrease in capacitance in response to highly 
basic solutions. Before deposition of an analyte, the 
capacitance of the pristine HIFET is due to the 
concentration of mobile H+ and corresponding anions 
within the layer, owing to the presence of moisture and the 
weakly acidic properties of the phenol groups along the PVP 
polymer chains. We propose that deposition of NaOH 
solutions results in an influx of OH- ions that would rapidly 
neutralise available H+, producing H2O, and Na+ would react 

with the ionised phenol groups (phenoxide) to form sodium 
phenoxide.27 The result would be fewer ions in the PVP layer 
to participate in the formation of electrical double layers, and 
hence lower capacitance and device performance.  
 
Our results demonstrate that HIFETs, as fabricated here, are 
only sensitive to the extreme ends of the pH scale. At low 
analyte concentrations, from pH 3-12, the effect on HIFET 
figures of merit is not distinguishable from that of deionised 
water. This means that the sensitivity of HIFETs to other 
ions will not be significantly affected by normal background 
pH levels in the solution (for example, blood has pH level 
range of 7.35 to 7.45).28 Additionally, HIFETs will have an 
application in sensing extreme levels of pH (for example, 
human gastric acid is between pH 1 and 2.5).29  
 
Effect of Vg on the Ids modulation  

 

Figure 5 shows the effect of Vg on the transient Ids 
modulations upon deposition of 1 M NaCl, while Vds = -1 V. 
In our earlier study of HIFET H2O2 sensitivity, we noted an 
apparent relationship between the size of the Ids modulation 
and the initial charge density of the channel. That is, where 
device voltages caused an initially low charge density, the Ids 
modulation was larger.19 This is not the case for ionic 
analytes. Instead, maximum modulations grow with 
increasingly negative Vg up to -0.3 V. This is consistent with 
the mechanism we have described. A more negative Vg 
ensures that an increase in capacitance will increase the 

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14

Analyte pH

0

100

200

300

400

ON/OFF ratio

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14

Analyte pH

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

VT (V)

A
B

C
D

After
Before

After
Before

After
Before

After
Before

Fig. 4 Average figures of merit for HIFETs in the saturation regime before and after deposition with HCl and NaOH solutions of 
different pH. (A) ON/OFF ratio. (B) Threshold voltage (VT). (C) Maximum transconductance (gm). (D) Product of saturation mobility 
(μsat) and capacitance (C). Other major figures of merit for HCl and NaOH are given in Figure S7.


 
7

doping in the channel. At -0.6 V, we observe that Ids decays 
rapidly over time. This behaviour was observed in the H2O2 
sensitivity study.19 This consistent pattern of instability in the 
transient Ids at larger, negative Vg, may point to underlying 
non-ideal properties of the transistor. We note that the 
gradient of the transfer curve (Figure 1C) is significantly 
reduced in this region, indicating the same limitation.  
 
Conclusion 
 
We have demonstrated HIFETs to be sensitive to a range of 
ionic solutions, NaCl, KCl, HCl, and NaOH, indicating a 
broad range of possible applications. Modulations in Ids and 
key figures of merit are highly dependent on concentration 
as well as the nature of the ionic solution (acidic or basic) and 
we have discussed the mechanisms of these changes. We 
proposed that the positive modulation in Ids for ionic 
solutions is due to the diffusion of the ions into the 
hygroscopic insulator, PVP, increasing the total capacitance 
of the device. The negative effect of NaOH on Ids is 
consistent with acid-base reactions between NaOH and the 
phenol groups of PVP, reducing the net ion concentration 
and device capacitance. Among the key figures of merit 
μsat×C, is more sensitive to concentration and can detect as 
low as 1mM concentration for KCl.  
 
In summary, HIFETs are platform devices with great 
potential to become effective ion sensors, by both improving 
sensitivity and achieving specific ion selectivity. In the future, 
the HIFETs can be made ion selective by incorporating ion-
selective membranes30, 31 above the gate electrode.  There are 
also number of available means to achieve improved 
sensitivity. As noted, pre-hydrating the device can increase 
the response time of the Ids modulation. In many biological 
applications, the device will be operated in a consistently 
hydrated environment, so achieving a consistent background 
state is unlikely to be a significant issue. Maintaining the 
device in a fully hydrated state prior to exposure to the 
analyte will also eliminate the background response to water. 

On the basis of the proposed ion sensing mechanism, we also 
suggest that decreasing the initial capacitance of the device 
may help to improve the sensitivity at low ion 
concentrations. For example, pre-treating the PVP film to 
reduce the initial mobile H+ concentration. Further, overall 
device capacitance could also be modified by altering the gate 
electrode. We have previously observed that μsat×C is highly 
dependent on conductance of the electrode.32 Therefore, 
HIFETs offer great potential for ion sensing applications and 
our work will be foundational for future developments in this 
area.  
 
Author Contributions 
J. N. A. and S.D.Y. planned and designed the experiments. 
J.N.A carried out the experiments and drafted the manuscript. S. 
D. Y. reviewed the manuscript and supervised the project.  
 
Conflicts of interest 
There are no conflicts to declare. 
 
Acknowledgements 
J. N. A. is supported through Australian Government 
Research Training Program Scholarships. Device fabrication 
and testing was performed at the Central Analytical Research 
Facility (CARF) and supported by Faculty of Science.  
 
References 
 
1. 
B. Corry, Mol. Biosyst., 2006, 2, 527-535. 

2. 
E. Soto, A. Ortega-Ramírez and R. Vega, Frontiers in 
Cellular Neuroscience, 2018, 12. 

3. 
G. Li and D. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 3423-
3436. 

4. 
J. Rivnay, R. Owens and G. G. Malliaras, Chem. 
Mater., 2013, 26, 679-685. 

5. 
D. T. Simon, E. O. Gabrielsson, K. Tybrandt and 
M. Berggren, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 13009-13041. 

6. 
J. Seo, M. Song, J. Jeong, S. Nam, I. Heo, S.-Y. Park, 
I.-K. Kang, J.-H. Lee, H. Kim and Y. Kim, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23862-23867. 

7. 
H.-C. Wu, W.-Y. Lee, C.-J. Lin and W.-C. Chen, 
Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 542-552. 

8. 
K. Schmoltner, J. Kofler, A. Klug and E. J. W. List-
Kratochvil, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6895-6899. 

9. 
J. Kofler, K. Schmoltner, A. Klug and E. J. W. List-
Kratochvil, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 193305. 

10. 
P. Lin, F. Yan and H. L. W. Chan, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1637-1641. 

11. 
G. Scheiblin, R. Coppard, R. M. Owens, P. Mailley 
and G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 
1600141. 

12. 
S. Mototani, S. Ochiai, X. Wang, K. Kojima, A. 
Ohashi and T. Mizutani, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 
496-500. 

13. 
F.-Y. Yang, K.-J. Chang, M.-Y. Hsu and C.-C. Liu, 
J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5927-5932. 

+0.3 V

0.0 V
-0.3 V
-0.6 V

Fig. 5 The transient change in Ids upon deposition of 1 M NaCl 
solutions, while applying different Vg (+0.3 V, 0.0 V, -0.3 V, -0.6 V). 
Vds is fixed at -1 V in all trials. Trials from representative devices are 
shown (see Figure S8 for full data).


 
8

14. 
H. G. O. Sandberg, T. G. Bäcklund, R. Österbacka 
and H. Stubb, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1112-1115. 

15. 
T. G. Bäcklund, R. Österbacka, H. Stubb, J. 
Bobacka and A. Ivaska, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 
074504. 

16. 
S. D. Yambem, S. Burns, J. N. Arthur, J. Timm, M. 
A. Woodruff, A. K. Pandey and R. Marschall, RSC 
Adv., 2019, 9, 7278-7284. 

17. 
J. N. Arthur, C. M. Cole, A. K. Pandey and S. D. 
Yambem, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 8169-8178. 

18. 
J. N. Arthur, A. K. Pandey, J.-M. Nunzi and S. D. 
Yambem, unpublished work. 

19. 
J. N. Arthur and S. D. Yambem, unpublished work. 

20. 
S. D. Yambem, J. Timm, M. Weiss, A. K. Pandey 
and R. Marschall, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 
1700316. 

21. 
J. R. Varcoe, P. Atanassov, D. R. Dekel, A. M. 
Herring, M. A. Hickner, P. A. Kohl, A. R. Kucernak, 
W. E. Mustain, K. Nijmeijer, K. Scott, T. Xu and L. 
Zhuang, Energy & Environmental Science, 2014, 7, 
3135-3191. 

22. 
J. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Rev., 2007, 
107, 1296-1323. 

23. 
P. Kevin, M. A. Malik, P. O'Brien, J. Cameron, R. 
G. D. Taylor, N. J. Findlay, A. R. Inigo and P. J. 
Skabara, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5109-5115. 

24. 
K. Melzer, M. Brändlein, B. Popescu, D. Popescu, 
P. Lugli and G. Scarpa, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 174, 
399-411. 

25. 
R. M. Reynolds, P. L. Padfield and J. R. Seckl, BMJ, 
2006, 332, 702-705. 

26. 
A. Rastegar, in Clinical Methods: The History, Physical, 
and Laboratory Examinations, eds. H. K. Walker, W. 
D. Hall and J. W. Hurst, Butterworths, Boston, 3rd 
edn., 1990, ch. 195. 

27. 
Y. Yu, T. He, A. Wu, Q. Pei, A. Karkamkar, T. 
Autrey and P. Chen, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 
3102-3107. 

28. 
M. S. Rajawat, S. S. Rathore and M. Choudhary, Int. 
Surg. J., 2016, 3, 905-907. 

29. 
D. F. Evans, G. Pye, R. Bramley, A. G. Clark, T. J. 
Dyson and J. D. Hardcastle, Gut, 1988, 29, 1035-
1041. 

30. 
M. Sessolo, J. Rivnay, E. Bandiello, G. G. Malliaras 
and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4803-4807. 

31. 
J. Kofler, K. Schmoltner, A. Klug and E. J. W. List-
Kratochvil, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 193305. 

32. 
J. N. Arthur, M. U. Chaudhry, M. A. Woodruff, A. 
K. Pandey and S. D. Yambem, Adv. Electron. Mater., 
2020, DOI: 10.1002/aelm.201901079, 1901079. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 


1

SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Ion sensitivity of hygroscopic insulator field effect transistors

Joshua N. Arthur,a,b Soniya D. Yambema,b

aSchool of Chemistry and Physics, Faculty of Science, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, 
QLD 4000, Australia
bCentre for Materials Science, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia

Figure S1: The transient change in Ids upon deposition of NaCl solutions, showing trials for 
individual devices in different colours. (A) 1 M, (B) 100 mM, (C) 10 mM, and (D) 0 mM 
(deionised water). 

Figure S2: The transient change in Ids upon deposition of 1 M NaCl solution, onto a HIFET 
pre-hydrated with 8 μL of deionised water >2 hours prior to testing. Trials for individual devices 
shown in different colours. 

A
B

C
D


2

Figure S3: The transient change in Ids upon deposition of KCl solutions, showing trials for 
individual devices in different colours. (A) 1 M, (B) 100 mM, (C) 10 mM, (D) 1 mM, and (E) 0 
mM (deionised water).  

A
B

C
D

E


3

Figure S4: The transient change in Ids upon deposition of HCl solutions, showing trials for 
individual devices in different colours. (A) pH 0, (B) pH 1, (C) pH 2, (D) pH 3, and (E) pH 7
(deionised water).  

A
B

C
D

E


4

Figure S5: The transient change in Ids upon deposition of NaOH solutions, showing trials for 
individual devices in different colours. (A) pH 14, (B) pH 13, (C) pH 12, (D) pH 11, and (E) pH 
7 (deionised water).  

A
B

C
D

E


5

Figure S6: Average figures of merit for HIFETs in the saturation regime before and after 
deposition with KCl solutions of different concentrations. (A) ON current (maximum Ids in 
transfer sweep). (B) OFF current (minimum Ids in transfer sweep). (C) ON/OFF ratio. (D) 
Estimated threshold voltage (VT). (E) Product of saturation mobility (μsat) and capacitance (C). 
(F) Maximum transconductance (gm). (G) Gate current (Ig) in OFF state (minimum Ids). (H)
Gate current (Ig) in ON state (maximum Ids). An abbreviated version of this figure is given as 
Figure 3 in the main text. 

 
 
  
   
    

                          

 

   

   

   

   

            

 
 
  
   
    

                          

 

   

   

   

      

A
B

C
D

E
F

G
H

After
Before


6

Figure S7: Average figures of merit for HIFETs in the saturation regime before and after 
deposition with NaCl solutions of different concentrations. (A) ON current (maximum Ids in 
transfer sweep). (B) OFF current (minimum Ids in transfer sweep). (C) ON/OFF ratio. (D)
Estimated threshold voltage (VT). (E) Product of saturation mobility (μsat) and capacitance (C). 
(F) Maximum transconductance (gm). (G) Gate current (Ig) in OFF state (minimum Ids). (H)
Gate current (Ig) in ON state (maximum Ids). 

 
  
   
    

                          

 

   

   

   

            

 
  
   
    

                          

   

   

   

   

   

   

      

A
B

C
D

E
F

G
H


7

Figure S8: Average figures of merit for HIFETs in the saturation regime before and after 
deposition with HCl and NaOH solutions of different concentrations. (A) ON current (maximum 
Ids in transfer sweep). (B) OFF current (minimum Ids in transfer sweep). (C) ON/OFF ratio. (D) 
Estimated threshold voltage (VT). (E) Product of saturation mobility (μsat) and capacitance (C). 
(F) Maximum transconductance (gm). (G) Gate current (Ig) in OFF state (minimum Ids). (H)
Gate current (Ig) in ON state (maximum Ids). 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  

          

 

   

   

   

   

            

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  

          

    

    

 

   

   

   

      

A
B

C
D

E
F

G
H


8

Figure S9: The transient change in Ids upon deposition of 1 M NaCl solutions at different Vg, 
showing trials for individual devices in different colours. (A) Vg = +0.3 V, (B) Vg = 0 V, (C) Vg
= -0.3 V, and (D) Vg = -0.6 V. 

A
B

C
D


