Square MaxwellвҖҷs fish-eye lens for broadband achromatic

super-resolution imaging

Jue Li(жқҺзҸҸ)1,2 ,Yangyang Zhou(е‘ЁжқЁйҳі)1,2,* ,and Huanyang ChenпјҲйҷҲз„•йҳіпјү1,2, **

1Institute of Electromagnetics and Acoustics and Department of Physics, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China

2Fujian Engineering Research Center for EDA, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Wave Science and Detection 

Technology, Xiamen Key Laboratory of Multiphysics Electronic Information, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China

* corresponding anthor: zhouyangyang@stu.xmu.edu.cn

**corresponding anthor: kenyon@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract: Broadband super-resolution imaging is important in optical field. To achieve super-resolution imaging, various lenses from superlens to 
solid immersion lens have been designed and fabricated in recent years. However, the imaging is unsatisfactory due to low work efficiency and narrow 
band. In this work, we propose a solid immersion square MaxwellвҖҷs fish-eye lens which realizes broadband (7-16GHz) achromatic super-resolution 
imaging with full width at half maximum around 0.2О» based on transformation optics at microwave frequencies. In addition, a super-resolution 
information transmission channel is also designed to realize long-distance multi-source super-resolution information transmission based on the super-
resolution lens. With the development of 3D printing technology, the solid immersion MaxwellвҖҷs fish-eye lens is expected to be fabricated in high 
frequency band.
Keywords: solid immersion square Maxwell's fish-eye lens; super-resolution imaging; conformal mapping.

1.Introduction

Microscopy is a significant tool for research 

about life science and natural science. The resolution 

of conventional lens system is constrained above one-

half wavelength, due to the diffraction limit that 

evanescent waves carrying tiny information of an 

object decay in the far-filed. Many efforts have been 

made to overcome the diffraction limit, one important 

step is the proposed perfect lens in 2000 [1]. The 

perfect lens can achieve perfect imaging by negative

refractive materials to restore amplitude of all 

evanescent waves and phase of all propagating waves 

at the imaging plane. Following this idea, a series of 

superlenses [2-4] was designed from microwave to 

optical band [5, 6]. Later on, hyperlens as far-field 

magnified super-resolution lens was proposed by 

hyperbolic dispersion materials, which can transform 

evanescent waves into far-field propagating waves. 

Utilizing alternative metal and dielectric materials, 

one-dimensional 
hyperlens[7], 
two-dimensional 

hyperlens [8] have been designed and fabricated. 

However, for superlens and hyperlens, it is difficult 

to push forward to applications and relative 

experimental works were rarely reported in recent 

years due to the challenge of fabrication and the big 

loss
from plasmonic resonance mechanism and 

impedance mismatching between the object and lens.

On the other hand, utilizing total internal 

reflection (TIR) happening at the interface to excite 

evanescent waves, solid immersion lens (SIL) [9, 10]

were suggested to overcome the diffraction limit for 

super-resolution imaging. They have been studied 

widely through the application of high refractive-

index (RI) solid material and specific geometric 

optical design 
[11-13]. With the development of 

materials sciences, different types of SILs were 

design and fabricated from conventional structures 

to novel metamaterials structures [14-16]. However, a 

major drawback of SILs is their narrow band imaging 

capability due to aberration. 

Recently, absolute instruments with a gradient 

RI (GRIN) profile [17-24] have been developed rapidly 

for 
their 
excellent 
capability 
to 
control 
the 

propagation of electromagnetic waves 
[25-30] and 

especially geometrical perfect imaging. Among these 

absolute instruments, MaxwellвҖҷs fish-eye lens (MFEL) 

[31] has attracted a great of attention due to its 

property of geometrical perfect imaging optics and 

big numerical aperture (NA). Many applications, 

based on the MFELs, were designed and fabricated 


from microwave frequency to optical frequency [32]. 

Significantly, 
combining 
the 
solid 
immersion 

mechanism with geometrical perfect imaging of 

MFEL, a solid immersion MFEL as a near-field 

super-resolution lens [33, 34] has been designed and 

fabricated for super-resolution imaging at microwave

frequencies. However, due to imaging along the lensвҖҷs 

curved surface, there is imaging distortion which 

limits the structure shape of the imaging object for 

further applications.      

In 
this 
work, 
we 
utilize 
a 
power 
tool 

transformation optics 
[35-37]
to
design a solid 

immersion square MFEL, which realizes super-

resolution imaging and overcomes the disadvantage 

of the solid immersion circular MFEL. This paves the 

way to further application about solid immersion 

MFEL. 
Utilizing 
a 
Schwartz-Christoffel 
(SC) 

mapping [38], the solid immersion circular MFEL is 

transformed into a solid immersion square MFEL to 

achieve a wide-band (7-16GHz) high-resolution 

imaging effect with FWHM around 0.2О». By 

commercial software COMSOL multiphysics, we 

numerically calculate the functionalities of the lens 

and prove the excellent imaging ability of high 

resolution and wideband for the proposed solid 

immersion square MFEL.

2.Square MFEL for high-resolution

Let us recall a MFEL with a GRIN distribution 

that can realize perfect imaging. Assuming a MFEL 

located in virtual space (рқ‘Ө space), it RI distribution 

can be expressed as follows [39]пјҡ

0

2

2

1

w

w

n
n

r
R

=

пғҰ
пғ¶
+ пғ§
пғ·
пғЁ
пғё

(1)

where 
wr
is the distance from the center of the lens.

R is the radius of the lens,
2n0
denotes the RI at the 

center of MFEL, and 
0n
represents the ambient RI. 

Fig. 1(c) shows the RI distribution of MFEL where 

the lens radius is 1(the unit is arbitrary), and 
0n
is 

set to 1. The MFEL can realize aberration-free 

imaging from point to point in the lens [22]. It also can 

achieve super-resolution imaging in wave optics via 

introducing a solid immersion mechanism 
[34]. 

Although super-resolution imaging can be achieved 

through solid immersion MFEL, its application scope 

is limited due to the curved boundary of the lens, 

leading to distortion of the imaging. To extend the 

application prospects of the solid immersion MFELs, 

the curved edge of the MFEL is considered to be 

changed into a straight edge according to the theory 

of conformal mapping. Such design of a solid 

immersion square MFEL is obtained based on the 

solid immersion circular MFEL by utilizing a SC 

mapping [38] as follows:

пҒӣ
пҒқ

2

3/2

2

1
( )
1

2
2
(1
) 2

1
2

q z

i
z
i
sn
пҒ°

= вҲ’

пғҰ
пғ¶

пғ§
пғ·
+
вҲ’
пғ§
пғ·

пғ§
пғ·
пғҰ
пғ¶
пҒҮ вҲ’
пғ§
пғ·
пғ§
пғ·
пғЁ
пғё
пғЁ
пғё

(2)

( )
( )

( )
q z
i
q
q z
i
пҒ·
вҲ’
=
+

(3)

where 
(
)
sn
пҒӘ m
represents the Jacobian elliptic 

function with the modulus of the ellipse m and пҒҮ
is the gamma function. 

According to Eq. (2), we choose a transformation 

from the upper half-plane (coordinates q ) to the 

square in physical space (coordinates z ). Another 

conformal mapping, which is from the unit disk 

(coordinates w ) to the upper half-plane (coordinates 

q ) can be implemented based on Eq. (3). 

Consequently, a SC transformation from the unit 

disk to the square can be accomplished by taking the 

two equations together, which is the conformal 

mapping from a circular MFEL onto the square 

MFEL. The transformation relationship can be easily 

seen in Figs. 1(a)-(b), where the orthogonal mesh in 

the constant radial and azimuthal coordinates ( r
пҒұ
вҲ’

directions) within a unit disk in Fig. 1(a) is 

transformed into the orthogonal mesh inside the 

square in Fig. 1(b) by the SC mapping. Thus, the 


transformed RI distribution in physical space can be 

obtained as follows: 

z
w

dw
n
n
dz
=
(4)

Here, the RI distribution of the square MEFL is 

calculated by Eq. (4) based on a circular MFEL with 

0
1
n = ,  as shown in Fig. 1(d). According to the theory 

of TO, it can be inferred that the solid immersion 

square MFEL can also achieve super-resolution 

imaging which is similar to the solid immersion 

circular MFEL.

Fig. 1. (a) Coordination mapping in virtual space ( w coordinate). (b) Coordination mapping in physical space ( z coordinate). 
(c) The RI distribution of MFEL in virtual space ( w coordinate). (d) The RI distribution of the square MFEL according to SC 
mapping in physical space ( z coordinate).

To analysis the influence of the TIR mechanism 

for super-resolution effect in the solid immersion 

square MFEL, the value 
0n
is artificially changed 

from 1 to 3.1 at an interval of 0.7 to explore the 

relationship between the value of 
0n
and the 

imaging effect of the square MFEL as shown in Figs. 

2(a)-(d). The focusing effect of the square MFEL with 

0n
of 1, 1.7, 2.4, and 3.1 at the frequency of 15GHz 

is simulated by method of full-wave numerical 

simulation respectively. A point source (or a line 

current source for transverse electric polarization of 
light) is placed at 
x = вҲ’100
mm, 
y = 0
mm (the center 

of the square MFEL is at the origin) as an extinction 

source. In the figure, there is a sub-wavelength light 

spot at the corresponding point of the square MFEL 

respectively. The white dotted line represents the 

observation position of the imaging point (
x =101
mm, 

100
100
y = вҲ’
mm), which is not at the boundary of 

the square MFEL but in the air near the boundary of 

the lens. The red curve is the normalized electric field 

intensity of the imaging point, and the corresponding 

FWHM is calculated. It can be observed from Figs. 

2(a)-(d) that with the increasing of the value of 

parameter 
0n , the TIR phenomenon at the interface 

between the square MFEL and the air is gradually 

enhanced. Therefore, the evanescent wave is excited 

by the TIR mechanism at the interface of lens/air, 

and the values of the corresponding FWHM at the 

imaging point gradually decrease from 0.34 пҒ¬ to 0.16

пҒ¬ , which is much less than the diffraction limit. This 

manifests that the solid immersed square MFEL also 

has excellent super-resolution imaging capabilities 

and can achieve the same effect as the solid 

immersion circular MFEL. The relative electric field 

patterns are shown in Figs. 2(e)-(h) which also well 

explain the good imaging performance of the square 

MFEL due to the almost completely axisymmetric 

field distribution. Consequently, through the above 

analysis, it is noted that with the increase of 
0n , the 

super-resolution imaging effect of the square MFEL 

gradually improved by the TIR mechanism.


Fig. 2. Imaging performance of the square MFEL with different 
0n . (a)-(d) The related electric field intensity distribution 

and the corresponding FWHM of the square MFEL at 15GHz with 
0n
of 1, 1.7, 2.4 and 3.1, respectively. (e)-(h) The relative 

electric field 
Ez
distributions respectively.

Next, we will discuss the frequency response of 

the super-resolution effect in the square MFEL. A 

square MFEL with 
0
n = 2.4
is selected for analyzing 

the broadband imaging performance of the solid 

immersion square MFEL at different frequencies 

from 7GHz to 16GHz. A point source is placed at 

x = вҲ’100
mm and 
y = 0
mm to excite cylindrical 

transverse electric (TE) wave. The imaging effects of 

the solid immersion square MEFLs at different 

frequencies are observed at 
x =101
mm and 

100
100
y = вҲ’
mm (located at the air background). 

Figs. 3(a)-(d) illustrate the electric field intensity 

E2
and the corresponding FWHM of the solid 

immersion square MFELs at frequencies of 7GHz, 

10GHz, 13GHz, and 16GHz, respectively. It can be 

seen that the corresponding FWHMs at frequencies 

of 7GHz, 10GHz, 13GHz, and 16GHz are all less than 

0.25О», which is far below the diffraction limit. From 

the figures, it is noted that part of super-resolution 

imaging is located at the air background and a slight 

resonance emerges in the lens compressing the 

resolution. At the same time, Figs. 3(e)-(h) show the 

corresponding electric field distribution patterns. 

From the above analysis, it is found that the solid 

immersion square MFEL can achieve super-

resolution imaging at most frequencies. However, the 

super-resolution imaging is invalid at other specific 

frequencies due to the destruction from stable 

whispering gallery mode (WGM) [34], which is a 

resonance mode due to continuous TIR of the 

impedance mismatching at the interface of lens/air. 

To circumvent the disadvantage of WGM, an optimal 

design, transforming a circular MFEL into a quasi-

square MFEL utilizing the SC mapping, is proposed 

as shown in Figs. S1(d)-(f) (more details see the 

Supplement 1 for supporting content). From the 

figures, it is seen that WGM is eliminated by 

transforming the circular MFEL into quasi-square 

MFEL. The simulated results show that the solid 

immersion quasi-square MFEL can achieve better 

super-resolution 
imaging 
than 
that 
of 
solid 

immersion square MFEL at frequencies of 8GHz, 

10GHz, and 12GHz, respectively. 


Fig. 3. Broadband imaging effect of solid immersion square MFEL at different frequencies. (a)-(d) The electric field intensity 
and the corresponding FWHM of the solid immersion square MFEL at frequencies of 7GHz, 10GHz, 13GHz, and 16GHz, 
respectively. (e)-(h) The corresponding real part of electric field distribution respectively.

Furthermore, to better illustrate the super-

resolution effect of solid immersion MFELs, the 

imaging performances of a solid immersion square 

MFEL with 
0
n = 2.4
and a square conventional 

MFEL with 
0
n =1
are compared with two exciting 

point sources placed with a distance of spacing 
/ 3
пҒ¬

at the frequencies of 8GHz, 9GHz, 11GHz, and 

12GHz respectively, as shown in Fig. 4. The relative 

distribution curve of electric field intensity in the air 

is calculated, and the imaging quality of square 

MFELs for two different 
0n
is analyzed. Figs. 4(e)-

(h) reveal that the square conventional MFELs with 

0
n =1
fail to resolve the two points spacing less than 

a one-half wavelength and only one focal point is 

presented from the electric field intensity curve (red 

curve) at the frequencies of 8GHz, 9GHz, 11GHz, and 

12GHz respectively. In other words, two image points 

cannot 
be 
distinguished, 
indicating 
that 
the 

resolution of square conventional MFELs with 
0
1
n =

is not enough. Oppositely, the square MFELs whit 

0
n = 2.4
can resolve the two image points at the 

frequencies of 8GHz, 9GHz, 11GHz, and 12GHz 

respectively, as shown in Figs. 4(a)-(d). The relative 

electric field intensity curve at the imaging plane 

also reveals that the solid immersion square MFEL 

with 
0
n = 2.4
have a super-resolution imaging 

ability to resolve the two identical point sources in a 

deep subwavelength distance. Although the WGM 

effect is stronger and the electric field intensity curve 

at the imaging position shows obvious resonance 

fluctuation, it slightly affects the resolution imaging 

effect of solid immersion square MFEL at the 

frequency is 11GHz, as shown in Fig. 4(c). Similarly, 

Figs. 4(a, b, d) show the electric field distribution at 

the corresponding frequencies of 9 GHz, 11 GHz and 

12 GHz, respectively. From the figures, it shows that 

solid immersion square MFELs with 
0
n = 2.4
have a 

very good ability of super-resolution imaging by 

capturing large wave-number evanescent wave 

components at the imaging plane to improve the 

resolution. Consequently, the solid immersion square 
MFELs with 
0
n = 2.4
overcome the diffraction limit 

to achieve super-resolution.


Fig. 4. (a)-(d) The imaging performance of solid immersion square MFELs with 
0
n = 2.4
at the frequencies of 8GHz, 9GHz, 

11GHz and 12GHz, respectively. (e)-(g) The imaging performance of conventional square MFELs with 
0
n =1
at the 

frequencies of 8GHz, 9 GHz, 11 GHz and 12GHz, respectively.

Finally, we discuss the further application about 

solid immersion square MFEL. The solid immersion 

square MFEL is cascaded to form a super-resolution 

information transmission channel for potential 

optical communication, as shown in Fig. 5. Three 

identical solid immersion square MFELs with 

0
n = 2.4
are arranged into a row to build up a 

transmission channel with an air gap of 0.6mm 

between each solid immersion square MFELs. A pair 

of point sources are placed at 
x = вҲ’100
mm with a 

distance of 
пҒ¬ / 3
to excite TE waves at the frequency 

of 12GHz. The red curve describes the electric field 

intensity
at 
different 
imaging 
planes 
with 

100
100
y = вҲ’
mm. The size of the air gap in the 

transmission channel composed of solid immersion 

square MFELs is determined by referring to the 

numerical calculated results as shown in Fig. S2 (see 

Supplement 2 in Supplemental Document). When 

only one point source is placed in front of the super-

resolution 
information 
transmission 
channel, 

through the observation of the imaging performance 

of three solid immersion square MFELs, it can be 

easily found that the information transmission effect 

and super-resolution performance of the designed 

super-resolution information transmission channel is 

relatively good when the air gap spacing is 0.6mm as 

shown Fig.S2 (see Supplement 2 in Supplemental 

Document). Generally, when the image point is far 

away from the source point, the resolution effect will 

become worse. However, according to the electric 

field intensity distribution in Fig. 5, it can be seen 

that even if the distance between the imaging point 

and source point is increased, the solid immersion 

square MFELs can still overcome the diffraction 

limit within a certain range and maintain a good 

ability of super-resolution imaging. The evanescent 

wave component with large wave number can be 

collected at the imaging plane to improve the 

resolution. Based on the solid immersion square 

MFELвҖҷs super-resolution effect, we design the 

channel for super-resolution imaging information 

transmission with larger capacity, which has a good 

prospect of optical communication applications.


Fig. 5. The electric field distribution of super-resolution information channel cascaded by three identical solid immersion 
MFELs with a 0.6mm air gap at 12 GHz.

3.Conclusion

In summary, the circular solid immersion MFEL 

is transformed into a solid immersion square MFEL 

using a SC mapping. The solid immersion square 

MFEL maintains the super-resolution imaging 

characteristics of the original circular MFEL, and at 

the same time can overcome the disadvantage of 

curve surface, which may pave the way to further 

application such as real-time imaging, vivo imaging 

and 
photolithography. 
Through 
simulated 

calculations, the designed square MFEL can achieve 

super-resolution imaging at most
frequencies. 

Moreover, the cascading solid immersion square 

MFELs can effectively transmit super-resolution 

information and have a good prospect of optical 

communication applications. With the development 

of 3D printing technology [40, 41], the solid immersion 

MFEL is expected to be fabricated in high frequency 

band, such as THz, IR, or even visible frequencies.

Acknowledgements

National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(Grant No. 92050102); National Key Research and 

Development 
Program 
of 
China 
(Grant
No. 

2020YFA0710100); 
National 
Natural 
Science 

Foundation 
of 
China 
(Grant 
No. 
11874311); 

Fundamental Research Funds for the Central 

Universities (Grant No. 20720200074).

References

1.J. B. Pendry, "Negative Refraction Makes a Perfect 

Lens," Physical Review Letters 85, 3966 (2000).

2.N. Fa Ng, H. Lee, S. Cheng, and X. Zhang, "Sub-

Diffraction-Limited 
Optical 
Imaging 
with a 
Silver 

Superlens," Science 308, 534 (2005).

3.T. Taubner, D. Korobkin, Y. Urzhumov, G. Shvets, 

and R. Hillenbrand, "Near-field microscopy through a SiC 
superlens," Science 313, 1595 (2006).

4.I. I. Smolyaninov, Y. J. Hung, and C. C. Davis, 

"Magnifying Superlens in the Visible Frequency Range," 
Science 315, 1699 (2007).

5.X. Zhang and Z. Liu, "Superlenses to overcome the 

diffraction limit," Nature Materials 7, 435 (2008).

6.T. Huang, L. Yin, J. Zhao, C. Du, and P. Liu, 

"Amplifying Evanescent Waves by Dispersion-Induced 
Plasmons: Defying the Materials Limitation of the 
Superlens," ACS Photonics 7, 2173 (2020).

7.Z. Liu, H. Lee, Y. Xiong, C. Sun, and X. Zhang, "Far-

Field Optical Hyperlens Magnifying Sub-Diffraction-
Limited Objects," Science 315, 1686 (2007).

8.J. Rho, Z. Ye, Y. Xiong, X. Yin, Z. Liu, H. Choi, G. 

Bartal, and X. Zhang, "Spherical hyperlens for two-
dimensional 
sub-diffractional 
imaging 
at 
visible 

frequencies," Nature Communications 1, 143 (2010).

9.D. A. Fletcher, K. B. Crozier, K. W. Guarini, S. C. 

Minne, G. S. Kino, C. F. Quate, and K. E. Goodson, 
"Microfabricated silicon solid immersion lens," Journal of 
Microelectromechanical Systems 10, 450 (2001).

10.F. M. Huang, N. Zheludev, Y. Chen, and F. Javier 

Garcia de Abajo, "Focusing of light by a nanohole array," 
Applied Physics Letters 90, 091119 (2007).

11.D. R. Mason, M. V. Jouravlev, and K. S. Kim, 

"Enhanced resolution beyond the Abbe diffraction limit 
with wavelength-scale solid immersion lenses," Optics 
Letters 35, 2007 (2010).

12.M. S. Kim, T. Scharf, M. T. Haq, W. Nakagawa, and 

H. P. Herzig, "Subwavelength-size solid immersion lens," 
Optics Letters 36, 3930 (2011).


13.A. Bogucki, ЕҒ. Zinkiewicz, M. Grzeszczyk, W. 

Pacuski, K. Nogajewski, T. Kazimierczuk, A. Rodek, J. 
SuffczyЕ„ski, K. Watanabe, and T. Taniguchi, "Ultra-long-
working-distance spectroscopy of single nanostructures 
with aspherical solid immersion microlenses," Light: 
Science & Applications 9, 1 (2020).

14.H. Zhu, W. Fan, S. Zhou, M. Chen, and L. Wu, 

"Polymer Colloidal Sphere-Based Hybrid Solid Immersion 
Lens for Optical Super-Resolution Imaging," ACS Nano 10,
9755 (2016).

15.F. Wen, B. Yan, Z. Wang, and L. Wu, "Three-

dimensional all-dielectric metamaterial solid immersion 
lens for subwavelength imaging at visible frequencies," 
Science Advances 2, e1600901 (2016).

16.A. Novitsky, T. RepГӨn, R. Malureanu, O. Takayama, 

E. Shkondin, and A. V. Lavrinenko, "Search for 
superresolution in a metamaterial solid immersion lens," 
Physical Review A 99, 023835 (2019).

17.R. K. Luneburg, Mathematical theory of optics

(University of California press, 1964).

18.A. L. Mikaelian and A. M. Prokhorov, "V Self-

Focusing Media With Variable Index Of Refraction," 
Progress in Optics 17, 279 (1980).

19.N. Kundtz and D. R. Smith, "Extreme-angle 

broadband metamaterial lens," Nature Materials 9, 129 
(2010).

20.U. Leonhardt and T. G. Philbin, "Perfect imaging 

with positive refraction in three dimensions," Physical 
Review A 81, 011804(R) (2010).

21.H. F. Ma and T. J. Cui, "Three-dimensional 

broadband and broad-angle transformation-optics lens," 
Nature Communications 1, 124 (2010).

22.T. Tyc, L. HerzГЎnovГЎ, M. Е arbort, and K. Bering, 

"Absolute instruments and perfect imaging in geometrical 
optics," New Journal of Physics 13, 11504 (2011).

23.Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, M. Zheng, X. Dong, X. Duan, and 

Z. Zhao, "ThreeвҖҗdimensional Luneburg lens at optical 
frequencies," Laser & Photonics Reviews 10, 665 (2016).

24.S. Tao, Y. Zhou, and H. Chen, "Maxwell's fish-eye 

lenses under Schwartz-Christoffel mappings," Physical 
Review A 99, 013837 (2019).

25.Q. Wu, J. P. Turpin, and D. H. Werner, "Integrated 

photonic systems based on transformation optics enabled 
gradient index devices," Light Science & Applications 1,
e38 (2012).

26.S. Li, Y. Zhou, J. Dong, X. Zhang, E. Cassan, J. Hou, 

C. Yang, S. Chen, D. Gao, and H. Chen, "Universal 
multimode waveguide crossing based on transformation 
optics," Optica 5, 1549 (2018).

27.M. G. Scopelliti and M. Chamanzar, "Ultrasonically 

sculpted virtual relay lens for in situ microimaging," Light: 
Science & Applications 8, 65 (2019).

28.C. He, J. Chang, Q. Hu, J. Wang, J. Antonello, H. 

He, S. Liu, J. Lin, B. Dai, D. S. Elson, P. Xi, H. Ma, and M. 
J. Booth, "Complex vectorial optics through gradient index 
lens cascades," Nature Communications 10, 4264 (2019).

29.A. Forbes, "Common elements for uncommon light: 

vector beams with GRIN lenses," Light: Science & 
Applications 8, 111 (2019).

30Y. Zhang, Y. He, H. Wang, L. Sun, and Y. Su, "Ultra-

Broadband 
Mode 
Size 
Converter 
Using 
On-Chip 

Metamaterial-Based Luneburg Lens," ACS Photonics 8,
202 (2020).

31.J. C. Maxwell, "Solutions of problems," Cambridge 

Dublin Math. J. 8, 188 (1854).

32.X. Wang, H. Chen, H. Liu, L. Xu, C. Sheng, and S. 

Zhu, "Self-Focusing and the Talbot Effect in Conformal 
Transformation Optics," Physical Review Letters 119,
033902 (2017).

33.J. Chen, X. Yuan, M. Chen, X. Cheng, A. Zhang, G. 

Peng, W. Song, and D. Fang, "Highly Efficient Gradient 
Solid Immersion Lens with Large Numerical Aperture for 
Broadband Achromatic Deep Subwavelength Focusing and 
Magnified Far Field," Advanced Optical Materials,
2100509 (2021).

34.Y. Zhou, Z. Hao, P. Zhao, and H. Chen, "Super-

resolution imaging in absolute instruments," arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2107, 01632 (2021).

35.J. B. Pendry, D. Schurig, and D. R. Smith, 

"Controlling electromagnetic fields," Science 312, 1780 
(2006).

36U. Leonhardt, "Optical Conformal Mapping," 

Science 312, 1777 (2006).

37.H. Chen, C. T. Chan, and P. Sheng, "Transformation 

optics and metamaterials," Nature Materials 9, 387 (2010).

38.M. Schmiele, V. S. Varma, C. Rockstuhl, and F. 

Lederer, "Designing optical elements from isotropic 
materials by using transformation optics," Physical Review 
A 81, 033837 (2010).

39.U. Leonhardt and T. G. Philbin, Geometry and light : 

the science of invisibility (Courier Corporation, 2010).

40.C. R. Ocier, C. A. Richards, D. A. Bacon-Brown, Q. 

Ding, R. Kumar, T. J. Garcia, J. van de Groep, J.-H. Song, 
A. J. Cyphersmith, A. Rhode, A. N. Perry, A. J. Littlefield, 
J. Zhu, D. Xie, H. Gao, J. F. Messinger, M. L. Brongersma, 
K. C. Toussaint, L. L. Goddard, and P. V. Braun, "Direct 
laser writing of volumetric gradient index lenses and 
waveguides," Light: Science & Applications 9, 1 (2020).

41.R. Dylla-Spears, T. D. Yee, K. Sasan, D. Nguyen, N. 

A. Dudukovic, J. M. Ortega, M. A. Johnson, O. D. Herrera,
F. J. Ryerson, and L. L. Wong, "3D printed gradient index 
glass optics," Science Advances 6, 7 (2020).


Square MaxwellвҖҷs fish-eye lens for broadband achromatic super-resolution 

imagingпјҡsupplemental document

Supplement 1: Optimimal design of square MaxwellвҖҷs fish-

eye lens

In this section, we will propose a new quasi-

square MaxwellвҖҷs fish-eye lens (MFEL) design to 
solve the problem that the resolution of an original 
square MFEL is affected by whispering gallery mode 
(WGM) resonance, which is easily generated due to 
the four corners. To optimize the design and improve 
the resolution of solid immersion MFEL, the circular 
MFEL is transformed into quasi-square MFEL by a 
method of SC mapping, as shown in Fig. S1(d). The 
quasi-square MFEL avoids the disadvantage caused 
by the right angle of a square MFEL, mainly through 
bending the four angles from straight to curved. Next, 
we 
will 
numerically 
calculate 
the 
imaging 

performance of the quasi-square MFEL and square 
MFEL with 
n0 =2.4
by COMSOL Multiphysics, where 

a point source is placed at 
x = вҲ’100
mm and
y = 0
mm 

as an exciting source. Figs. S1(d)-(f) show the electric 

field intensity and the corresponding FWHM of the 
solid immersion quasi-square MFEL at frequencies of 
8GHz, 10GHz and 12GHz respectively. To better 
illustrate the optimized imaging effect, the electric 
field intensity and the corresponding FWHM of the 
solid immersion square MFEL at frequencies of 8GHz, 
10GHz and 12GHz are also shown in Figs. S1(a)-(c). 
By comparing the electric field intensity distribution 
Figs. S1(a)-(c) and (b)-(f), it can be found that the solid 
immersion quasi-square MFEL significantly avoids 
distribution of the WGM resonance, and only 
symmetrical 
focusing 
imaging 
is 
performed. 

Consequently, the solid immersion quasi-square 
MFEL surmounts the disadvantage and achieves 
better resolution than that of the solid immersion 
square MFEL. It is proved that the quasi-square 
MFELs have further optimized the super-resolution 
effect. 

Fig. S1. (a)-(f) The electric field intensity distribution and the corresponding FWHM of the solid immersion square MFEL 

and solid immersion quasi-square MFEL at frequencies of 8GHz, 10GHz and 12GHz, respectively.


Supplement 2: Numerical analysis of the super-resolution 

information transmission channel composed of the solid 

immersion square MFELs

To 
design 
a 
super-resolution 
information 

transmission channel with a better transmission 

performance, the influence of the air gap between the 

components (solid immersed square MFELs) of the 

super-resolution information transmission channel 

on the transmission channel is discussed and 

numerical analysis is carried out by using the full-

wave simulation method in this section. Three solid 

immersion square MFELs is arranged in a row to 

make up a super-resolution information transmission 

channel, and the spacing d
(air slot) between each 

square MFELs is taken as a variable, as shown in Fig. 

S2(a). Here the air gap between each solid immersion 

square MFELs is the same, which is equal to d . In 

the figure, the red dotted line is the observation 
position of the imaging point (
100
100
y = вҲ’
mm), 

which is in the middle of the gap of lens A, B and C 

respectively. It is the same distance from the imaging 

boundary of each lenses. The red dots represent a 

point source which is placed at 
x = вҲ’100
mm and 

y = 0
mm to excite the TE cylindrical wave at 

frequency of 12GHz. According to the super-

resolution 
information 
transmission 
channel 

structure diagram composed of three solid immersion 

square MFELs as shown in Fig. S2(a), the relative 

FWHM value is obtained by calculating the electric 

field intensity distribution along the red dotted line of 

each square MFELs with the spacing d increasing as 

shown in Figs. S2(b)-(d). It is clearly observed that the 

variation curve of FWHM value at each solid 

immersion 
square 
MFELs 
imaging 
position 

concerning air gap spacing d
from 0mm to 1.8mm is 

calculated respectively. Fig. S2(b) indicates the 

relative value FWHM of solid immersion square 

MFEL A increases slowly with the increase of air gap 

d , which are basically all below 0.18 пҒ¬ . This is 

because the coupling between solid immersion square 

MFELs decreases with the increase of air gap d , 

thus, when the air gap d
is large, the FWHM of lens 

A is mainly influenced by total internal reflection 

(TIR) which is closer to the value of a single solid 

immersion square MFEL. In Fig. S2(c), it can be seen 

that the relative value FWHM of the solid immersed 

square MFEL B reveal a similar "s"-shape change 

trend when the air gap d increases, that is, the 

FWHM curve increases firstly and then decline, 

immediately it rises again, which is affected by the 

coupling effect between square MFELs and the TIR 

mechanism. The FWHMвҖҷs variation trend of solid 

immersed square MFEL C concerning air gap d
is 

similar to that of lens B.

Through the comprehensive observation of Figs. 

S2(b)-(d), it can be found that when d is 0 and 0.6mm, 

the total transmission effect of the super-resolution 

information transmission channel is relatively good. 

At the same time, when the air gap is 0.6mm, the 

channel not only has better information transmission 

capabilities, but also has super-resolution capabilities.  

Thus, when the optimal spacing d
is 0.6mm, a 

super-resolution information transmission channel

composed of three solid immersion square MFELs is 

designed. The corresponding FWHM obtained for 

three solid immersion square MFEL of A, B and C is 

less than 0.18 пҒ¬ , which is less than the diffraction 

limit. In the main text, Fig. 5 shows the electric field 

intensity 
of 
the 
designed 
super-resolution 

information transmission channel excited by the two 

point sources. This design has a good optical 

applications prospect, not only can realize the multi-

points source resolution information transmission, 

but also has the advantage of long-distance 

transmission.


Fig. S2. (a) A super-resolution information transmission channel. (b) The curve of FWHM value corresponding to the solid 
immersion square MFEL A with air spacing d . (c) The curve of FWHM value corresponding to the solid immersion square 

MFEL B concerning air spacing d . (d) The curve of FWHM value corresponding to the solid immersion square MFEL C 

concerning air spacing d .


