1

Abstract— Free-space optics (FSO) is an attractive technology 

to meet the ever-growing demand for wireless bandwidth in next 
generation networks. To increase the spectral efficiency of FSO 
links, transmission over spatial division multiplexing (SDM) can 
be exploited, where orthogonal light beams have to be shaped 
according to suitable amplitude, phase, and polarization profiles.
In this work, we show that a programmable photonic circuits, 
consisting of a silicon photonic mesh of tunable Mach-Zehnder 
Interferometers (MZIs) can be used as an adaptive multibeam 
receiver for a FSO communication link. The circuit can self-
configure to simultaneously receive and separate, with negligible 
mutual crosstalk, signals carried by orthogonal FSO beams 
sharing the same wavelength and polarization. This feature is 
demonstrated on signal pairs either arriving at the receiver from 
orthogonal directions (direction-diversity) or being shaped 
according to different orthogonal spatial modes (mode-diversity), 
even in the presence of some mixing during propagation. The 
performance of programmable mesh as an adaptive multibeam  
receiver is assessed by means of data channel transmission at 10 
Gbit/s a wavelength of 1550 nm, but the optical bandwidth of the 
receiver (> 40 nm) allows its use at much higher data rates as well 
as 
in 
wavelength-division multiplexing 
(WDM) 
–
SDM 

communication links. 

Index Terms— adaptive optics, free space optics, mode division 

multiplexing, programmable photonics, reconfigurable photonic 
integrated circuits, silicon photonics

I. INTRODUCTION

he concepts of space diversity and space multiplexing are  
well established in communications systems and are widely 

employed in microwave wireless systems to implement high 
capacity multiple input - multiple output (MIMO) links. In the 
optical domain, space division multiplexing (SDM) has been 
known for several decades [1], but only recently it has started 
to be seriously considered as a strategy to face the capacity 
crunch of optical fibers [2]. Fiber optic SDM systems exploit 
multicore or few-mode fibers to increase the spectral efficiency 
(in terms of bit/Hz/s) of the transmitted signal, but the price to 

be paid at the receiver is the need for coherent detection assisted 
by electronic digital signal processing (DSP). Such a DSP 
should run at the bit rate to recover the signal integrity by 
undoing the mode mixing occurred during fiber propagation. To 
reduce the power consumption and the speed limitation of the 
DSP, several solutions have been proposed to perform all-
optical demultiplexing and unmixing of the optical modes at the 
receiver [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]

The same evolution that fiber optic communications had

experienced towards SDM systems is now happening in free 
space optics (FSO). FSO communications is attracting renewed 
and ever-increasing interest because it is a potential solution to 
meet the growing demand for wireless bandwidth and the low 
latency requirements of Internet of Things (IoT) technologies 
in next generation networks [8]. As in the case of fiber optic
communications, SDM in FSO requires the use of orthogonal 
sets
of 
beams
(or 
modes), 
and 
several 
pioneering 

demonstrations have been achieved by using orbital angular 
momentum (OAM) modes [9] [10], Bessel beams [11], and 
Laguerre-Gauss modes [12]. To generate a number of 
orthogonal beam configurations, and to demultiplex them at the 
receiver, the light beams have to be shaped according to suitable 
amplitude, phase, and polarization profiles [13]. Traditionally, 
these operations are performed by using bulk optics, such as 
classical lenses and diffractive elements. To have more 
flexibility and reconfigurability in beam manipulation, spatial 
light modulators (SLMs) are also available [14]; however, they 
have some limitations, such as a relatively low speed (a few 
hundred Hz), the possibility of modifying only the phase of 
light (only a few examples with amplitude control [15], with 
efficiency penalties) and the need for computationally heavy 
calibration techniques.

A powerful alternative technology for the manipulation of 

the FSO beams is offered by programmable photonic integrated 
circuits (PICs). These circuits are general-purpose meshes of 
tunable integrated interferometers, arranged either in feed-

Multibeam Free Space Optics Receiver Enabled 

by a Programmable Photonic Mesh

Maziyar Milanizadeh1, SeyedMohammad SeyedinNavadeh1, Francesco Zanetto1, Vittorio Grimaldi1, 
Christian De Vita1, Charalambos Klitis2, Marc Sorel2, Giorgio Ferrari1, David A.B. Miller3, Andrea 
Melloni1, Francesco Morichetti1

(1) Department of Electronics, Information and Bioengineering, University Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci, 
32, 20133, Milano, Italy
(2) School of Engineering University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G12 8QQ, U.K 
(3) Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, Spilker Building, Stanford, CA 94305, USA

email: francesco.motichetti@polimi.it

T


2

forward or recursive topologies, which can implement arbitrary
linear transformations [16]. Because of their remarkable 
flexibility, they have been already used in many different 
applications, including reconfigurable filters [17], unmixing of 
guided modes [4], vector-matrix multiplication and computing 
[18], quantum information processing [19] and neural networks
[20], [21]. Recently, we employed a silicon photonic mesh of 
Mach-Zehnder interferometers (MZIs) in a FSO system to 
control the complex field radiated and captured by an array of 
optical antennas, demonstrating several functionalities like the 
generation of perfectly shaped beams with nonperfect optical 
antennas, imaging through a diffusive medium, and the 
identification of an unknown obstacles. Significantly, the MZI 
mesh can self-configure and self-control through simple 
automated control strategies without the need for global 
multivariable optimization techniques. 

In this work, we show that a programmable mesh of MZIs

can implement an adaptive multibeam receiver for a FSO 
communication link. The circuit can self-configure to 
simultaneously receive signals carried by spatially overlapped 
FSO beams sharing the same wavelength and polarization, 
provided that they are orthogonal in some way. Several 
examples are provided demonstrating that arbitrary pairs of 
orthogonal beams, sharing the same wavelength and 
polarization, can be separated with negligible mutual crosstalk; 
these examples include beams arriving from orthogonal 

directions (direction-diversity) as well as beams arriving from 
the same direction but shaped according to different orthogonal 
spatial modes (mode-diversity), and even when the two beams 
have undergone some mixing during propagation. 

II. MULTIBEAM FREE SPACE OPTICS RECEIVER

The programmable photonic circuit employed in this work 
consists of an integrated mesh of tunable beam splitters, which 
are 
realized 
by 
means 
of 
balanced 
Mach-Zehnder 

interferometers (MZIs). The topology of the circuit is shown in 
the schematic of Fig. 1(a) which includes N = 2 rows of 
cascaded MZIs [22]. On left side of the mesh, a 2D array of M
optical antennas (M = 9 in this particular device) is employed 
as an input/output interface between free-space optical beams 
and the guided modes of an array of single-mode optical 
waveguides. As discussed in Sec. III, in this work the optical 
antennas are implemented by using standard grating couplers 
typically used to couple the light with optical fibers; however, 
the presented results can be extended to integrated meshes 
terminated with arbitrary optical antennas, whose individual 
radiation diagram can be optimized for specific applications. 
On the right side of the mesh, two of the output waveguides,
WGn (n = 1, 2), are used as output ports; the remaining 7 
waveguide outputs are available for monitoring purposes.

An M×N diagonal mesh can perform arbitrary linear 

transformations from an M-dimensional vector space to an N-

Figure 1: Multi-beam FSO Receiver. (a) Schematic of a 9×2 diagonal mesh comprising two rows of tunable MZIs and implementing a two-beam FSO receiver. 
The 2D optical antenna array is used to couple free space beams into the silicon waveguides, while the output ports WG1 and WG2 are used to couple the light out 
to a pair of optical fibers. (b) Microscope picture of the fabricated silicon chip. (c) Detail of the 2D optical antenna array made of 3×3 grating couplers in a square 
configuration. (d) Measured far-field pattern radiated by the 2D optical antenna array when all the grating couplers are excited with same amplitude and phase. 
Multiple diffraction orders (grating lobes) are visible within the 5° x 9° angular beamwidth of the radiation pattern of the elementary grating coupler. (e) Detail of 
a thermally tunable beam coupler with a transparent monitor detector integrated at the output port. (f) Photograph of the photonic chip assembled on an PCB 
integrating the electronics for driving the thermal tuners and for the read-out of the on-chip detectors.

First MZI Row
Second MZI Row

Optical 
Antenna

Array

Output 

WGs

First MZI Row
Second MZI Row

Optical Antenna Array

Thermal tuners

Thermally controlled MZI

Transparent detector

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(d)

WG2

WG1

WG2

WG1

(e)
9 deg

5 deg

(f)

Photograph of the PCB

Electronic ASIC

Photonic chip

Turning mirror


3

dimensional vector space [23] [24] . In this work this feature is
exploited to implement a multibeam receiver for free-space 
optical beams. When an optical beam impinges from free space 
onto the photonic chip, the light is sampled by the 2D array of 
M optical antennas and is coupled by the single-mode 
waveguides to the input of the programmable mesh. The light 
intensity in these M waveguides can be coherently summed by 
configuring the first row of MZIs in such a way that the light in 
a first beam is entirely extracted out of WG1 with no residual 
power transmitted at the other output ports [22]. One can then 
simultaneously shine a second free-space optical beam,
orthogonal to the first one, onto the 2D antenna array; this 
second beam can share the same wavelength and polarization 
as the first beam. As discussed in detail
below, the 

orthogonality between the two beams can be the result of 
different arrival direction (see Sec. IV) or different spatial 
shape, typically referred to as mode orthogonality (see Sec. V). 
When the second beam is shone onto the photonic chip, its 
intensity is spatially sampled by the 2D antenna array and co-
propagates with the first beam in the same M single-mode 
waveguides, thus being apparently indistinguishable inside 
each waveguide. However, due to the original orthogonality of 
the two free-space beams, no portion of the second beam is 
transmitted to WG1 output port. The second row of MZIs stages
can be used to coherently reconstruct the power of the second 
beam in the output port WG2. Generalizing the concept to a 
mesh with M input waveguides and N rows of MZIs, we can 
conclude that such a device can couple, reconstruct and separate 
N orthogonal free-space beams, which are spatially sampled by 
M optical antennas, and transmit them to N single mode output 
waveguides, with arbitrary sorting order and no mutual optical 
crosstalk. This is the basic concept of the multibeam FSO 
receiver developed in this work. 

If the propagation of the light is reversed, the mesh can 

operate as a multibeam transmitter [25], enabling us to map the 
light intensity carried by N single mode waveguides into N
orthogonal free space beams. By tuning the integrated MZIs, 
both the amplitude and the phase of the light radiated by each 
element of the 2D optical antenna array can be controlled. In 
this way the shape and the direction of the far field beam can be 
modified. Note, incidentally, that these approaches change 
amplitudes by re-routing the light, not by absorbing or 
otherwise attenuating the beam, so there is no fundamental loss 
as relative amplitudes are adjusted. The number M and the
positions of the optical antennas set the effective spatial basis 
set [24] for the generation and collection of the free-space 
beams, and M sets the number of degrees of freedom that we 
have for beam manipulation [26]. Even though in this work we 
restrict the analysis to the use of the programmable mesh as a 
multibeam receiver, backward propagation is exploited to 
understand better the behavior of the device under the 
conditions that optimize its performance. 

III. CHIP DESIGN AND FABRICATION

The programmable mesh of Fig. 1(a) was designed for 
operation in the 1550 nm wavelength range and was fabricated 
on a standard 220 nm SiP platform (AMF foundry). Fig 1(b) 

shows a top-view microscope picture of the entire chip, which
has a footprint of 5.8 mm × 1.3 mm. All the waveguides of the 
circuit are single-mode channel waveguides with a width of 500 
nm. As shown in the detail of Fig. 1(c), the 2D optical antenna 
array is made of M = 9 identical grating couplers, which are all 
aligned in the same direction and are arranged in a 3×3 square 
configuration. The grating couplers are designed to operate on 
transverse-electric (TE) polarized light. The emission angle 
with respect to the normal to the chip surface is 12°, while the 
radiation diagram has an angular beam width of 5° × 9° [26].
The center-to-center spacing between the grating couplers of 
the 2D optical antenna array is 49 m (corresponding to about 
32λ), this leading to the presence of several diffraction orders 
(grating lobes) in the far-field radiation pattern with minimum 
spacing of about 1.7°. For example, Fig. 1(d) shows the 
collimated far-field intensity profile (generated by a 50 mm 
Fourier transforming lens) and measured with a near-IR camera 
for a uniformly excited array (i.e., when all the elements radiate
a light beam with same intensity and phase).

The nine waveguides connecting the grating couplers to the 

mesh share the same optical length in order to minimize the 
wavelength dependence of the multipath interferometer
implemented by the mesh so the circuit can have the widest 
possible wavelength range of operation. All the 15 MZIs of the 
mesh (8 MZIs in the first row, 7 MZIs in the second row) are 
identical and are controlled by means of thermal tuners [see Fig. 
1(e)]. Each MZI has two 3 dB directional couplers which are 
implemented by two 40 μm long waveguides spaced by 300 nm. 
Two thermal tuners made of TiN metal strips (2 μm x 80 μm) 
are integrated in each MZI stage (one in the lower input 
waveguide, one in the waveguide of the upper internal 
interferometer arm); these enable the control, respectively, of 
the relative phase shift between the optical fields at the output 
ports of the MZI and the amplitude split ratio of the MZI. 
Transparent photodetectors [27] are used to locally monitor the 
switching state of each MZI to implement automatic tuning and 
stabilization procedures. 

The photonic chip was mounted on an electronic printed 

circuit board (PCB) [see Fig. 1(f)], housing also the drivers for
the thermal tuners and the electronics (ASIC) for the read-out
of the on-chip detectors [28]. The mesh self-configures and 
self-stabilizes by means of automated procedures, exploiting 
dithering signals for the thermal tuners [29] and thermal 
crosstalk mitigation strategies [30] [31]. Two parallel control 
systems were implemented for the control and calibration of 
each MZI row of the mesh independently. A turning mirror is 
positioned on top of the chip to steer the vertically emitted beam
by the 2D array of grating couplers to the horizontal plane to 
facilitate the coupling with the free-space optical setup 
employed in the experiments presented in the following 
sections. Unless otherwise specified, all the experiments 
reported in the following sections are performed at a 
wavelength of 1550 nm.  


4

IV. DIRECTION-DIVERSITY RECEIVER 

As a first example application, we show that the programmable 
mesh can operate as a direction-diversity receiver, that is, a 
multibeam receiver capable of individually detecting beams 
that simultaneously arrive from different directions. This 
concept is demonstrated here by considering the case of N = 2 
beams, but this functionality can be generalized to N beams 
arriving from N directions utilizing a mesh with N rows of 
MZIs. As shown in the scheme of Fig. 2(a), two free-space 
beams with identical gaussian shape, wavelength (1550 nm) 
and polarization
status
(TE
polarization,
to match the 

polarization sensitivity of the grating couplers) are shone from 
two different directions onto the 2D optical antenna array of the 
mesh. This implies that, in this case, orthogonality is given only 
by the direction of arrival of the beams, which is obtained by 
different position of the two transmitters, and we conveniently 
label the two beams as TX1 and TX2. The aim of this 
experiment is to demonstrate that the mesh can effectively 

separate the two beams TX1 and TX2 at the two output ports 
WG1 and WG2 (or vice versa) with negligible residual 
crosstalk.

Figure 2(b) shows a schematic of the experimental setup used 

to test the direction-diversity receiver. The free space optical 
beams are transmitted by two identical fiber coupled 
collimators (TX1 and TX2) that generate two gaussian beams 
with a waist of 1.12 mm. These two beams are imaged to the 
two ports of a 50/50 beam splitter (BS1) via a 4f system 
consisting of bi-convex lens with a focal length f3 = 250 mm. 
Deliberately, the two beams are not overlapping in the 
beamsplitter plane (2.1 mm spacing), though they arrive 
overlapped at mesh inputs from different directions with a 
relative angle of 1.25°. The lens system between BS1 and the 
photonic chip is used to match the shape and size of the gaussian 
beams in center of BS1 to the collimated far field of the 2D
optical antenna array. The system includes a pair of bi-convex 
lenses (f1 = 50 mm) that are used in Fourier transforming 
condition to create the collimated far field of the 2D optical 
antenna array in the plane P1, at the distance of 10 cm from the 
photonic chip, and the image plane of the 2D array at plane P2
(20 cm away). Another bi-convex lens (f2 = 75 mm) creates the 
required matching condition on BS1 at a distance of 350 mm 
from the chip. So, direction diversity implies that in the “far-
field” planes (P1 and P3) the two gaussian beams are not 
spatially overlapped; however, in the 2D array plane on the chip 
surface (as well as in the image plane P1) they are overlapped. 

The beam impinging on the 2D optical antenna array from 

each source can be individually coupled to the desired output 
waveguide (WG1 or WG2) of the mesh through automatic 
tuning and stabilization algorithms applied to each row of the 
mesh [4], [29]. The mesh is self-configured by exploiting a
local feedback control of each MZI, which is achieved by 
nulling the power of the beam at the monitor detectors in each 
row [see Fig. 1(a)] [26]. Although both beams co-propagate 
inside the waveguides of the mesh, they can be identified by the 
detectors provided that they are marked with suitable labels 
(pilot tones) superimposed as a shallow amplitude modulation
at two different frequencies. In this experiment 500 Hz and 
1kHz were chosen for this purpose. Upon tuning the rows of the 
mesh to extract each transmitted beam, identical optical powers
from two collimators are measured at WG ports 1 and 2, which
is reported as 0 dB normalized insertion loss in bar chart of Fig. 
2(c). Notably, more than 25 dB optical crosstalk suppression, 
meaning TX1 in WG2 and TX2 in WG1, is measured and 
reported in the same bar chart. If we swap the mode sorting 
status, meaning coupling TX2 to WG1 and TX1 to WG2, the 
same level of optical isolation is observed.

To better understand the behavior of the mesh in the tuned 

state, we reversed the direction of the light propagation by 
injecting the light into WG1 and WG2 ports and measuring the
far field pattern radiated by the 2D optical antenna array when 
the mesh is configured in the case of Fig. 2(c). The 2D far field 
profile shown in Fig. 2(d) is acquired using a near-infrared 
(NIR) camera focused on the plane P1 after a 92/8 beam splitter
(BS2). For clarity, we restrict the view to one period of the 
radiation pattern, which is zoomed in around the main lobe. 

Figure 2: Direction-diversity receiver. (a) Schematic representation of two free 
space beams (TX1 and TX2), sharing the same wavelength and state of 
polarization, and arriving at the receiver from different directions. (b) 
Experimental setup employed for the demonstration of the direction-diversity
receiver. (c) Bar chart showing the normalized insertion loss of the beams TX1 
and TX2 at the output waveguides WG1 and WG2. (d) Backward far-field 
intensity pattern radiated by the 2D optical antenna array when the mesh is 
configured to couple beam TX1 to WG1 (d1) and beam TX2 to WG2 (d2); (e) 
measured eye diagrams of two intensity modulated 10 Gbit/s OOK signals 
transmitted by using the two beams TX1 and TX2: (e1) when the mesh is not 
configured, the eye diagrams of TX1 and TX2 are severely overlapped; while 
after the mesh configuration both eyes, TX1 at port WG1 (e2) and TX2 at port 
WG2 (e3) are clearly open with neither evident distortion nor intersymbol 
interference.

(d)

(e)

Tuning Off

e1
e3
e2

(a)

TX 1

TX 2

TX 1

TX 2

WG2
WG1

d1
d2

WG1 in → TX1
WG2 in → TX2

Tuning On

(b)

TX2 → WG2 out
TX1 → WG1 out

   

   

 

   

 

 

 
 

TX1

Normalized 

transmission [dB]

(c)

TX2
WG1

WG2

Programmable 

mesh
BS1
50/50

Control 

Electronics

NIR

Camera

BS2
92/8 

TX1

TX2

WG out

TX2

TX1

WG in


5

Panels 2(d1) and (d2) refer to the far-field radiated by the 2D 
optical antenna array when the light is injected from WG1
(transmission back to TX1) and from WG2 from (transmission 
back to TX2), respectively. It can be appreciated that in each 
case the position of the main lobe (highlighted by the dashed 
lines and indicating the direction of maximum radiation)
coincides with the position of the null in the other case, which 
is consistent with the high rejection between the two beams
shown in Fig. 2(c).

Such a low crosstalk level enables us to use the integrated 

mesh as a direction-diversity receiver in a FSO communication 
system, where the optical beams are employed to transmit two 
independent data channels. To this aim, the two beams TX1 and 
TX2 were used as carrier wavelengths for the transmission of 
independently modulated 10 Gbit/s on-off keying signals. The 
results of the transmission experiment are shown in Fig. 2(e).
When the mesh is not set up in any particular way [panel (e1)], 
that is when the thermal tuners of the MZIs are at arbitrary 
working points, the two data channels are randomly overlapped 
at output port WG1 and the measured eye diagram is 
completely closed. A similar result is observed at output port 
WG2 (not shown). In contrast, open eye diagrams are recorded 
when the mesh is tuned to extract the signal TX1 at output port 
WG1 (e2) and the signal TX2 at output port WG2 (e3); both eye 
diagrams then show no degradation with respect to the 
reference eye diagram of the individual channels.

V. MODE-DIVERSITY RECEIVER

In principle, the coupling, separation and sorting of free-space 
beams can be operated by the programmable mesh on any set 
of orthogonal beams. As a second example, we consider two 
free-space beams, sharing the same wavelength (1550 nm) and 
state of polarization (TE), and coming from the same direction, 
yet being shaped according to different orthogonal spatial 
modes. In this case, the programable mesh receiving these two
beams operates as a multibeam mode-diversity receiver. This 
situation is schematically shown in Fig. 3(a), where two free-
space beams, labelled as Mode1 and Mode 2, simultaneously 
impinge on the 2D optical antenna array; the mesh is configured  
to separate them at the two output ports WG1 and WG2 (or vice 
versa). In the experiment described in the following, Mode 1 
and Mode 2 refer to the fundamental Hermite-Gaussian mode 
HG00 and a higher order HG10-like mode, respectively.

In order to generate the two spatially overlapped orthogonal 

beams, the setup of Fig. 2(b) is slightly modified as shown in 
Fig. 3(b). In front of the fiber collimator TX2 a phase mask 
(Silica thin layer etched) is positioned that introduces a 0-π 
phase jump across the beam. As a result, the gaussian beam at 
the output of the fiber collimator (HG00) is transformed to a 
higher-order HG10-like mode. (It is not exactly a mode HG10
because the amplitude pattern does not have exactly that form; 
rather, a sudden -phase shift is introduced between one side of 
the beam and the other on the vertical axis of the beam, giving 
a “two-bumped” beam with the same symmetry and phase 
behavior as an HG10 mode.) The second difference in the setup
is that the positions of the two fiber collimators are optimized 

in such a way that the two modes are spatially overlapped in the 
far field planes (P1 and P3) and arrive on the 2D antenna array 
with the same direction.

Adopting the same automated procedure described in Sec. IV 

for configuration of the circuit, the first MZI row of the mesh is 
lined up to maximize the coupling from one of the two modes 
(for instance Mode 1) to the output port WG1, which leads to 
nulling of the other mode (Mode 2) at this port. The bar chart 
of Fig. 3(c) shows the relative transmission of the two modes
measured at both output ports after the configuration of the 
mesh. An intensity ratio of more than 30 dB between the 
extracted mode and the rejected mode is observed at both ports. 

Figure 3: Mode-diversity receiver. (a) Schematic representation of two free-
space modes (Mode 1 and Mode 2), sharing the same wavelength and state of 
polarization, and arriving at the receiver from the same direction. (b) 
Experimental setup employed for the demonstration of the mode-diversity 
receiver. In the reported experiment, Mode 1 and Mode 2 correspond to mode 
HG00 and mode HG10-like, respectively. (c) Bar chart showing the 
normalized insertion loss of the Mode 1 and Mode 2 at the output waveguides 
WG1 and WG2. (d)  Backward far-field intensity pattern radiated by the 2D 
optical antenna array when the mesh is configured to couple Mode 2 to WG1 
(d1), Mode 1 to WG2 (d2), Mode 1 to WG1 (d3) and Mode 2 to WG2 (d2); (e) 
measured eye diagrams of two intensity modulated 10 Gbit/s OOK signals 
transmitted by using Mode 1 and Mode 2 for the mesh configurations 
considered in (d). (f) BER measurements of 10 Gbit/s OOK channels 
simultaneously transmitted in free space on spatially overlapped modes (Mode 
1 and Mode 2) and separated by the mesh. Blue and red squares indicate the 
reference BER measured when only one data channel is switched on. 
Negligible OSNR penalty is observed for any data channels sorted out by the 
mesh. (g) Wavelength dependence of the mutual mode rejection at the output 
ports of the mesh.  

(b)

(a)

Mode 1

Mode 2

Mode 1

Mode 2

WG2

WG1

d3
d4
d1
d2
(d)

e3
e3
e1
e2
(e)

WG1 in → Mode 2
WG2 in → Mode 1
WG1 in → Mode 1
WG2 in → Mode 2

Mode 2 → WG1 out 
Mode 1 → WG2 out
Mode 1 → WG1 out 
Mode 2 → WG2 out

(g)
(f)

Mode 2 rejection
at WG2 (d2)

Mode 1 rejection
at WG1 (d1)

   

   

 

   

 

 

 
 

(c)

WG1

WG2

Normalized 

transmission  [dB]

Programmable 

mesh
BS1
50/50

Control 

Electronics

NIR

Camera

BS2
92/8 

WG out

WG in

Mode 1

Mode 2

Mode2

Mode 1

0


6

If mode sorting is swapped, that is if Mode 2 is coupled to WG1 
and Mode 1 is coupled to WG2, the same level of isolation 
(more than 30 dB) is obtained.

By reversing the propagation direction of the light, the far-

field profile of the beam generated by the 2D optical antenna 
array can be we observed for the various different 
configurations of the mesh. All the possible cases handled by 
the two-diagonal mesh are reported in Fig. 3(d) as measured by 
the NIR camera imaging the far-field plane P1. For instance, let 
us consider the situation where the first MZI row of the mesh is 
configured in forward propagation to couple Mode 1 to output 
port WG1; in the reversed direction – that is, when WG1 is used 
as an input port – the far field radiated back by the 2D optical 
antenna array is well shaped as the fundamental HG00 mode
[panel (d1)]. In addition, if the second MZI row is configured to 
couple Mode 2 to WG2, the far field radiated back when WG2
is used as an input port is shaped like the HG10-like mode
[panel (d2)]. Panels d3 and d4 show the far-field pattern for the 
opposite coupling scenario. Notably, in all these cases the mesh 
automatically self-configures by simply minimizing the power 
of the relevant mode at each stage of the MZI rows, without any 
prior knowledge of the incoming beam shapes.

The performance of programmable mesh as a multibeam 

mode-diversity receiver was assessed by means of data channel 
transmission. Two intensity-modulated 10 Gbit/s OOK data 
streams were transmitted on the spatial
and direction

overlapped modes (HG00 and HG10-like) at the same carrier 
wavelength of 1550 nm and the same polarization state. The eye 
diagrams of the received signals, after the separation performed 
by the mesh, are shown in Fig. 3(e) for all the mesh 
configurations shown in Fig. 3(d). No degradation due to the
residual mutual optical crosstalk from the interfering 
orthogonal mode can be observed. As a quantitative assessment 
of the effectiveness of the mode separation performed by the 
mesh, the bit error rate (BER) of the received channels was 
measured versus the optical signal to noise ratio (OSNR). The 
noise power in the OSNR is evaluated across a bandwidth equal 
to the bandwidth of the signal. Figure 3(f) shows the BER 
curves measured on the received data channels encoded onto 
the modes HG00 (Mode1) and HG10-like (Mode2). As
reference curves, we measured the BER of the two modes 
(HG00 blue squares, HG10 red squares) when they are 
individually transmitted through the mesh to output port WG1 
in the absence of the other mode. The other curves show the 
BER measured when both data channels are switched on and 
the modes are sorted out at the output ports WG1 and WG2 in 
all the four possible configurations. Thanks to the high optical 
crosstalk rejection between the separated modes, no significant
OSNR penalty is observed in all the considered cases.

We also evaluated the wavelength range across which the 

mesh can guarantee a high isolation in the separation of the two
modes. To this end, the carrier wavelength of the two modes 
was swept across a 35-nm-wide range from 1535 nm to 1570 
nm. The width of this range is mainly limited by the 
wavelength-selective response of the grating couplers of the 2D 
optical antenna array. In the results reported in Fig. 3(f), for 
every wavelength considered, the mesh was configured to 

extract Mode 2 at output port WG1 and Mode 1 at output port 
WG2; these are the cases considered in the eye diagrams of 
panels (d3) and (d3) for the central wavelength of 1550 nm. The 
red curve shows that the intensity rejection of Mode 1 at port 
WG2 is higher than 30 dB across the entire wavelength range. 
Rejection is somewhat lower for Mode 2 at port WG1, yet is 
still higher than 20 dB across 35 nm.

VI. MODE-MIXED RECEIVER

In this section we extend the concept of the mode-diversity 
receiver presented in Sec. V to other examples of spatially 
overlapped beam pairs that can be disentangled by the 
programmable mesh. In particular, we show that the mesh can 
still separate two orthogonal free-space beams even after they 
have propagated spatially overlapped through a mode mixing 
obstacle or a free-space path perturbation. Mathematically, this 
means that the linear transformation performed by the mode 
mixer, which maps the original orthogonal modes to another 
pair of orthogonal beams, can be inverted by the mesh.

Referring to the experimental setup of Fig. 3(b), in the far-

field plane P1 the fundamental mode HG00 (Mode 1) and the 
higher-order HG10-like mode (Mode 2) are spatially 
overlapped. If the phase mask in front of collimator TX2 is 
rotated -45 degrees, the axis of the Mode 2 in P1 will be rotated
accordingly, as shown in the schematic of Fig. 4(a). Now, we 
introduce in the plane P1 (instead of BS2) a 0-π phase mask 
which is rotated by 45 degrees with respect to the vertical axis. 
After passing through this mask, the fundamental mode HG00

Figure 4: Mode separation after an arbitrary mode-mixing. (a) Schematic 
representation of two free space beams (Beam A and Beam B) that arrive on 
the receiver after an unknown linear transformation performed by a randomly 
oriented phase mask acting on two orthogonal modes (Mode 1 is HG00 and 
Mode 2 is 45-deg rotated HG10-like). (b) The shape of Beam A and Beam B 
can be identified by observing the backward far-field intensity pattern radiated 
by the 2D optical antenna array when the mesh is configured to couple Beam 
A to WG1 (d1) and Beam B to WG2; (c) BER measurements of 10 Gbit/s OOK 
channels simultaneously transmitted on the overlapped Beams A and B and 
separated by the mesh. Blue and red squares indicate the reference BER of 
individually transmitted channels.

(d)

(a)

Mode 1

Mode 4

0



45°
Mode 3

Mode 2

P1

(b)
b1
b2

(c)
c1
c2

WG 1 in → Mode 3
WG2 in → Mode 4

Mode 3 → WG1 out 
Mode 4 → WG2 out


7

is converted to a 45-deg rotated HG10-like mode (Mode 3),
while the higher-order mode HG10-like mode (-45-deg rotated) 
is transformed to a 45-deg rotated HG11-like (Mode 4). In other 
words, the phase masks perform a linear transformation 
between pairs of orthogonal modes, that is a mode conversion.
From the point of view of the mesh, the operation needed to be 
performed to separate these new modes at the output ports WG1 
and WG2 is conceptually identical to the one discussed in Sec. 
V. In fact, no a-priori information on the shape of the incoming 
beams is required and the self-configuring procedure to line up 
the MZI rows is exactly the same. Figure 4(b)-(d) show the 
results that are achieved when the mesh is tuned to extract Mode
3 at output port WG1 and Mode 4 at output port WG2. From 
the intensity ratio of the extracted modes at each out port, we 
observe more than 30 dB mutual isolation. Figures 4(b1) and 
(b2) show the NIR camera acquisition of the far-field patterns
that are radiated back by the mesh when the light is injected 
from port WG1 and WG2, respectively. A very good matching 
with the shape of the HG10-like mode and of the HG11-like 
mode (both rotated by 45 degree) is found. The good mode 
separation is confirmed when the mesh is used as a two-beam
mode-diversity receiver in a data transmission link, where each 
mode carries a 10 Gbit/s intensity modulated OOK signal. 
Neither distortion nor inter-symbol interference effects are 
visible in the received eye diagrams of Fig. 4(c1)-(c2), which 
refer respectively to the data channel transmitted on Mode 3 
extracted at output port WG1 and to the data channel 
transmitted on Mode 4 extracted at output port WG2. Figure

4(d) shows the BER curves versus OSNR measured on the data 
channels separated by the mode-diversity receiver. With respect 
to the reference curves, given by the BER curves of Mode 3
(blue squares) and Mode 4 (red squares) when they are 
individually transmitted in the absence of the other mode, no 
OSNR penalty is observed when both data channels are 
transmitted and they are sorted out by the mesh at the output 
ports WG1 and WG2. These results validate the effectiveness 
of the mesh to separate generic pairs of orthogonal modes 
emerging from a free-space mode converter.

As a final example, we show that the same functionality can 

be performed by the mesh even on orthogonal beams that do 
not belong to any mode family. To prove this concept, let us 
consider the case of Fig. 5(a) where the 0- phase mask 
positioned in plane P1 of the experimental setup of Fig. 2(a) is 
rotated at an arbitrary angle. Presuming that the phase mask 
does not introduce any relevant loss, it produces an arbitrary 
mixing of the incoming modes, resulting in the generation of 
two beams, namely Beam A and beam B, that are still 
orthogonal, which no longer resemble any of the modes of the 
HG family (though they are still describable as some linear 
combination of HG-like modes). The shape of these beams is 
not known if the axis of the phase mask is unknown. 
Nonetheless, the configuration of the mesh to separate them can 
be operated as discussed in the previous examples without any 
a-priori information on the incoming beams. Figure 5(b) shows
indeed that the mutual isolation between Beam A and Beam B 
is higher than 28 dB when they are separated at WG1 and WG2.
If we want to know the shape of the two beams A and B, we can 
reverse the direction of propagation, injecting the light at ports 
WG1 and WG2 and looking at the far-field radiated by the 2D 
optical antenna array with the NIR camera. The field profiles of 
Beam A and Beam B are shown in Figs. 5(c1) and 5(c2) and, as 
expected, they exhibit an arbitrary shape that does not match 
any of the tabulated optical free space modes. Nonetheless, they 
are still orthogonal and they can be separated with extremely 
low mutual crosstalk, as confirmed by the BER measurements 
shown in Fig. 5(d).
Such modes are consistent with the general description of 
communications modes or mode-converter basis sets for 
arbitrary optical systems [24]; such modes need not correspond 
to any standard families, and need not be the same at transmitter 
and receiver, yet they still can have the key orthogonality 
properties of modes and independent communication channels.

VII. CONCLUSION

In this work, we reported on an integrated adaptive multibeam 
receiver for FSO communications that is realized by means of 
a programmable silicon photonic mesh of thermally tunable 
MZIs. A 9x2 mesh (M = 9 input optical antennas, N = 2 output 
waveguides) was used to simultaneously establish two 
communication channels that are associated with spatially 
overlapped FSO beams sharing the same wavelength and 
polarization. The photonic circuit can be operated as either a 
direction-diversity receiver or a mode-diversity receiver, and 
can effectively separate pairs of orthogonal beams even after 

Figure 5: Mode separation after a controllable mode-mixing. (a) Schematic 
representation of two free-space modes (Mode 3 and Mode 4) that arrive on 
the receiver after a mode conversion performed by a 45-deg rotated phase 
mask.  In the reported experiment, Mode 3 and Mode 4 correspond to 45-deg 
rotated HG10-like and HG11-like modes, respectively. (d)  Backward far-field 
intensity pattern radiated by the 2D optical antenna array when the mesh is 
configured to couple Mode 3 to WG1 (d1) and Mode 4 to WG2; (e) BER 
measurements of 10 Gbit/s OOK channels simultaneously transmitted in the 
free space on spatially overlapped modes (Mode 3 and Mode 4) and separated 
by the mesh. Blue and red squares indicate the reference BER of individually 
transmitted channels. 

(b)
(c)
(b)
(c)
b1

b2

WG 1 in → Beam A

WG2 in → Beam B

(a)

0



q°

Mode 1

Beam B

Beam A

Mode 2


8

they have undergone mode mixing. In all the cases considered, 
the beams are separated and arbitrarily sorted at the two output 
ports with negligible mutual crosstalk (< -25 dB), allowing the 
use of the receiver in SDM systems, as demonstrated by data 
channel transmission at 10 Gbit/s. The optical bandwidth of the 
receiver, spanning across the extended telecom C-band (1530 
nm – 1570 nm) allows its use in high data-rate systems as well 
as in wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) – SDM 
communication links.

The automated control strategies used for the configuration 

of the MZI mesh, exploiting the implementation of local
feedback loops in each MZI stage, enable scalability of the 
proposed architecture to circuits with a larger number of optical
antennas, as well as to MZI meshes with a larger number of 
rows, which can handle more orthogonal beams. Moreover, the 
adaptive nature of the receiver would also allow the possibility 
of compensating for dynamic changes in the FSO link, caused 
by, for instance, moving obstacles or turbulence, so as to 
maintain the optimum communication link. Applications are 
also envisioned to more advanced FSO processing, including 
wave-front sensing, phase front mapping and reconstruction, 
beaming through scattering media and chip-to-chip FSO 
communications. 

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by the European Commission 

through the H2020 project SuperPixels (grant 829116). DABM 
acknowledges support from the Air Force Office of Scientific 
Research (AFOSR) under award number FA9550-17-1-0002. 
Part of this work was carried out at Polifab, the micro- and 
nanofabrication 
facility 
of 
Politecnico 
di 
Milano 

(https://www.polifab.polimi.it/). We thank Marco Sampietro 
for his support in the realization of the control electronics and 
Giorgia Benci for her contribution to the measurements 
reported in this work. 

IX.
REFERENCES

[1] B. S. and P. Facq, "Mode division multiplexing in optical fibers," Appl. 

Opt., vol. 21, pp. 1950-1955, 1982. 

[2] D. Richardson, J. Fini and L. Nelson, "Space-division multiplexing in 

optical fibres.," Nature Photon , vol. 7, p. 354–362, 2013. 

[3] N. K. F. Fontaine, C. R. Doerr, M. A. Mestre, R. Ryf, P. Winzer, L. 

Buhl, Y. Sun, X. Jiang and R. Lingle, "Space-division multiplexing and 
all-optical MIMO demultiplexing using a photonic integrated circuit," 
in Optical Fiber Communication Conference, OSA Technical Digest 
(Optical Society of America, 2012). 

[4] A. Annoni, E. Guglielmi, M. Carminati, G. Ferrari, M. Sampietro, D. 

Miller, A. Melloni and F. Morichetti, "Unscrambling light -
Automatically undoing strong mixing between modes," Light: Science 
& Applications, vol. 6, p. e17110, 2017. 

[5] T. Watanabe, B. I. Bitachon, Y. Fedoryshyn, B. Baeuerle, P. Ma and a. 

J. Leuthold, "Coherent few mode demultiplexer realized as a 2D grating 
coupler array in silicon," Optics Express, vol. 28, pp. 36009-36019, 
2020. 

[6] D. Melati, A. Alippi, A. Annoni and N. M. A. Peserico, "Integrated all-

optical MIMO demultiplexer for mode- and wavelength-division-
multiplexed transmission,," Opt. Lett., vol. 42, pp. 342-345, 2017. 

[7] Doerr and C. R., "Proposed Architecture for MIMO Optical 

Demultiplexing Using Photonic Integration," IEEE Photonics 
Technology Letters, vol. 23, no. 21, pp. 1573-1575, 2011. 

[8] V. Dhasarathan, M. Singh and J. Malhotra, "Development of high-

speed FSO transmission link for the implementation of 5G and Internet 
of Things," Wireless Networks, vol. 26, p. 2403–2412, 2020. 

[9] G. Gibson, M. J. Courtial, P. M. J. Padgett, M. Vasnetsov, V. Pas’ko, S. 

M. Barnett and S. Franke-Arnold, "Free-space information transfer 
using light beams carrying orbital angular momentum," Opt. Express, 
vol. 12, p. 5448–5456, 2004. 

[10] N. Bozinivic, Y. Yue, Y. Ren, M. Tur, P. Kristensn, H. Huang, A. E. 

Willner and S. Ramachandran, "Terabit- scale orbital angular 
momentum mode division multiplexing in fibers," Science, vol. 340, 
pp. 1545-1548, 2013. 

[11] A. Trichili, T. Mhlanga, Y. Ismail, F. S. Roux, M. M., Z. M. and A. 

Forbes, "Detection of bessel beams with digital axicons," Optics 
Express, vol. 22, no. 14, p. 553–560, 2012. 

[12] G. Xie, Y. Ren, Y. Yan, H. Huang, N. Ahmed, L. Li, Z. Zhao, C. Bao, 

M. Tur, S. Ashrafi and A. E. Willner, "Experimental demonstration of a 
200-gbit/s free-space optical link by multiplexing laguerre–gaussian 
beams with different radial indices," Optics Letters, vol. 41, no. 15, pp. 
3447-3450, 2016. 

[13] M. Cox, N. Mphuthi, I. Nape, N. Mashaba, L. Cheng and A. Forbes, 

"Structured Light in Turbulence," IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in 
Quantum Electronics, vol. 27, pp. 1-21, 2021. 

[14] S.-Q. Li, X. Xu, R. Maruthiyodan Veetil, V. Valuckas, R. Paniagua-

Domínguez and A. I. Kuznetsov, "Phase-only transmissive spatial light 
modulator based on tunable dielectric metasurface," Science, vol. 364, 
pp. 1087-1090, 2019. 

[15] J. Park, B. G. Jeong, S. I. Kim, D. Lee, J. Kim, C. Shin, C. B. Lee, T. 

Otsuka, J. Kyoung, S. Kim, K.-Y. Yang, Y.-Y. Park, J. Lee, I. Hwang, 
J. Jang and S. Song, "All-solid-state spatial light modulator with 
independent phase and amplitude control for three-dimensional LiDAR 
applications," Nature nanotechnology, vol. 16, pp. 69-76, 2021. 

[16] W. Bogaerts, D. Pérez, J. Capmany, D. Miller, J. Poon, D. Englund, F. 

Morichetti and A. Melloni, "Programmable photonic circuits," Nature, 
vol. 586, pp. 207-216, 2020. 

[17] D. Pérez, I. Gasulla and J. Capmany, "Toward Programmable 

Microwave Photonics Processors," Journal of Lightwave Technology, 
vol. 36, pp. 519-532, 2018. 

[18] B. Shastri, A. F. d. L. T. Tait, W. H. P. Pernice, Bhaskaran H., C. D. 

Wright and P. P. R., “Photonics for artificial intelligence and 
neuromorphic computing”, Nat. Photonics, vol. 15, p. 102–114, 2021. 

[19] Harris, N. a. Steinbrecher, G. a. Prabhu, M. a. Lahini, Y. a. Mower, J. a. 

Bunandar, D. a. Chen, C. a. Wong, F. a. Baehr-Jones, T. a. Hochberg, 
M. a. Lloyd, S. a. Englund and Dirk, "Quantum transport simulations in 
a programmable nanophotonic processor," Nature Photonics, 2017. 

[20] Y. Shen, N. C. Harris, S. Skirlo, M. Prabhu, T. Baehr-Jones, M. 

Hochberg, X. Sun, S. Zhao, H. Larochelle, D. Englund and e. al., "Deep 
learning with coherent nanophotonic circuits," Nature Photonics, vol. 
11, pp. 441-446, 2017. 

[21] X. Sui, Q. Wu, J. Liu, C. Q. and G. G., "A Review of Optical Neural 

Networks," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 70773-70783, 2020. 

[22] D. A. B. Miller, "Self-aligning universal beam coupler," Opt. Express , 

vol. 21, pp. 6360-6370, 2013. 

[23] D. A. B. Miller, "Self-configuring universal linear optical component," 

Photon. Res., vol. 1, pp. 1-15, 2013. 

[24] D. A. B. Miller, "Waves, modes, communications, and optics: a 

tutorial,," Adv. Opt. Photon, vol. 11, pp. 679-825, 2019. 

[25] D. A. B. Miller, "Analyzing and generating multimode optical fields 

using self-configuring networks," Optica, vol. 7, pp. 794-801, 2020. 

[26] M. Milanizadeh, F. Toso, G. Ferrari, T. Jonuzi, D. A. B. Miller, A. 

Melloni and F. Morichetti, "Coherent self-control of free-space optical 
beams with integrated silicon photonic meshes," Photon. Res., vol. 9, 
pp. 2196-2204, 2021. 

[27] S. Grillanda, M. Carminati, F. Morichetti, P. Ciccarella, A. Annoni, G. 

Ferrari, M. Strain, M. Sorel, M. Sampietro and A. Melloni, "Non-


9

invasive monitoring and control in silicon photonics using CMOS 
integrated electronics," Optica, vol. 1, pp. 129-136, 2014. 

[28] F. Zanetto, E. Guglielmi, F. Toso, R. Gaudiano, F. Caruso, M. 

Sampietro and G. Ferrari, "Wide dynamic range multichannel lock-In 
amplifier for contactless optical sensors with sub-pS resolution," IEEE 
Solid-State Circuits Letters, vol. 3, pp. 246-249, 2020. 

[29] F. Zanetto, V. Grimaldi, F. Toso, E. Guglielmi, M. Milanizadeh, D. 

Aguiar, M. Moralis‐Pegios, S. Pitris, T. M. F. Alexoudi, A. Melloni and 
M. Sampietro, "Dithering‐based real‐time control of cascaded silicon 
photonic devices by means of non‐invasive detectors," IET 
Optoelectronics, vol. 15, pp. 111-120, 2021. 

[30] M. Milanizadeh, D. Aguiar, A. Melloni and F. Morichetti, "Canceling 

Thermal Cross-Talk Effects in Photonic Integrated Circuits," J. 
Lightwave Technol., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 1325-1332, 2019. 

[31] M. Milanizadeh, S. Ahmadi, M. Petrini, D. Aguiar, R. Mazzanti, F. 

Zanetto, E. Guglielmi, M. Sampietro, F. Morichetti and A. Melloni, 
"Control and Calibration Recipes for Photonic Integrated Circuits," 
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 26, no. 5, 
pp. 1-10, 2020. 


