Ultrafast tunable lasers using lithium niobate integrated photonics

Viacheslav Snigirev,1, ∗ Annina Riedhauser,2, ∗ Grigory Lihachev,1, ∗ Johann Riemensberger,1

Rui Ning Wang,1 Charles M¨ohl,2 Mikhail Churaev,1 Anat Siddharth,1 Guanhao Huang,1 Youri Popoff,2, 3

Ute Drechsler,2 Daniele Caimi,2 Simon H¨onl,2 Junqiu Liu,1 Paul Seidler,2, † and Tobias J. Kippenberg1, ‡

1Institute of Physics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
2IBM Research Europe, Zurich, S¨aumerstrasse 4, CH-8803 R¨uschlikon, Switzerland
3Integrated Systems Laboratory, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich (ETH Z¨urich), CH-8092 Z¨urich, Switzerland

Recent advances in the processing of thin-film
lithium niobate (LiNbO3) on insulator (LNOI)
have enabled low-loss photonic integrated circuits
[1, 2], modulators with improved half-wave volt-
age [3, 4], electro-optic frequency combs [5] and
novel on-chip electro-optic devices, with appli-
cations ranging from 5G telecommunication [6]
and microwave photonics [7] to microwave-to-
optical quantum interfaces [8, 9].
Lithium nio-
bate integrated photonic circuits could equally
be the basis of integrated frequency-agile lasers
with narrow linewidth. Pioneering work on pol-
ished lithium niobate crystal resonators [10–12]
has led to the development of electrically tun-
able narrow-linewidth lasers [13].
Here we re-
port low-noise frequency-agile lasers based on
lithium niobate integrated photonics and demon-
strate their use for coherent laser ranging. This
is achieved through heterogeneous integration of
ultra-low-loss silicon nitride (Si3N4) photonic cir-
cuits [14] with thin-film lithium niobate via direct
wafer bonding. The hybrid platform features low
propagation loss of 8.5 dB/m enabling narrow-
linewidth lasing (intrinsic linewidth of 3 kHz)
by self-injection locking to a III–V semiconduc-
tor laser diode.
The hybrid mode of the res-
onator allows electro-optical laser frequency tun-
ing at a speed of 12 petahertz/s (12 × 1015 Hz/s)
with high linearity, low hysteresis and while re-
taining narrow linewidth.
Using this hybrid in-
tegrated laser, we perform a proof-of-concept
frequency-modulated continuous-wave (FMCW)
LiDAR ranging experiment, with a resolution of
15 cm. By fully leveraging the high electro-optic
coefficient of lithium niobate, with further im-
provements in photonic integrated circuits design,
these devices can operate with CMOS-compatible
voltages, or achieve millimetre-scale distance res-
olution.
Endowing low loss silicon nitride inte-
grated photonics with lithium niobate, gives a
platform with wide transparency window, that
can be used to realize ultrafast tunable lasers
from the visible to the mid-infrared, with applica-
tions ranging from optical coherence tomography
(OCT) and LiDAR to environmental sensing.
Lithium niobate is an attractive material for electro-
optic devices, and has been widely used for many
decades. It exhibits a transparency window from ultravi-

olet to mid-infrared wavelengths and has a large Pockels
coefficient [15, 16], which is key for efficient, low-voltage,
and high-speed modulation. Integrated photonics based
on materials exhibiting the Pockels effect — such as AlN
[17] and GaP [18] — have been demonstrated before, but
only recently for lithium niobate [19, 20]. Following the
commercial availability of lithium niobate on insulator
via wafer bonding and smart-cut, there has also been sub-
stantial progress in the etching of low-loss lithium niobate
waveguides, culminating in linear optical loss of 2.7 dB/m
and ring resonators with intrinsic Q-factor of 10×106 [1].
The majority of works have utilized argon ion beam etch-
ing to manufacture ridge waveguide structures, which en-
abled modulators operating at CMOS voltages [3], high-
efficiency QPSK modulators [21], as well as electro-optic
frequency combs [5]. In addition, the platform has pro-
vided a route to creating interfaces using cavity electro-
optics that efficiently couple microwave to optical fields
[8, 9]. Further potential applications include the creation
of synthetic dimensions for topological photonics [22]. In
addition to direct etching, recently also heterogeneous in-
tegration [23, 24] of lithium niobate chiplets onto silicon
nitride [25] or silicon (Si) [26] integrated photonic circuits
has been demonstrated.
Beyond application for electro-optical modulators, an
integrated photonics platform with a large Pockels co-
efficient and low propagation loss fulfils all the re-
quirements for realizing integrated frequency-agile laser
sources, which feature fast, linear and mode-hop-free
tuning. Specifically, such frequency-agile electro-optical
lasers can be realized by self-injection locking of a III–V
diode laser to an high-Q optical cavity [27]. This tech-
nique, in conjunction with low-loss integrated photonic
resonators, has already enabled compact chip-scale lasers
with Lorentzian linewidth on the order of one hertz us-
ing silicon nitride [28]. Yet to date, no integrated hybrid
lasers based on materials displaying Pockels effect have
been demonstrated. In contrast to thermal or piezoelec-
trical [29, 30] tuning of optical microresonators, electro-
optical materials can enable ultra-fast optical tuning with
theoretically tens of GHz intracavity modulation band-
width. Integrated electro-optical materials can therefore
be used to realize a host of laser structures, such as
widely tunable Vernier lasers [31] or fast, mode-hop-free
and continuously tunable lasers for a multitude of appli-
cations that include coherent LiDAR [32–34], trace-gas
spectroscopy [35, 36], and optical coherence tomography
(OCT) [37].

arXiv:2112.02036v3  [physics.optics]  11 Aug 2022


2

Here, we demonstrate for the first time a self-injection-
locked narrow-linewidth frequency-agile laser based on
a lithium niobate integrated photonic circuit.
This
is achieved on a heterogeneous integrated lithium nio-
bate platform combining low-loss silicon nitride photonic
waveguides with lithium niobate by wafer-scale bonding
[38]. Damascene silicon nitride waveguides feature tight
confinement, ultra-low propagation loss (<1 dB/m), and
high-power handling [14].
They can be manufactured
with high yield on a wafer scale and are already avail-
able from a commercial foundry. Additional advantages
of the silicon nitride waveguide platform include low gain
of Raman and Brillouin nonlinearities [39, 40] and radia-
tion hardness [41]. Our heterogeneous integrated lithium
niobate on Damascene silicon nitride (LNOD) platform
enables high-Q resonances (loaded linewidth 100 MHz),
provides a high yield of bonded devices, and exhibits low
(compared to ridge LNOI) insertion loss (3.9 dB per facet
[38]). Combining the unique properties of both platforms
enables self-injection locking with laser frequency noise
reduction of 20 dB, a fundamental linewidth of 3 kHz,
and frequency-agility with a flat actuation bandwidth up
to 100 MHz. Using this hybrid integrated laser source, we
perform FMCW LiDAR experiments in lab environment
with resolution of 15 cm.

RESULTS

Heterogeneous integration of lithium niobate on
silicon nitride. Our fabrication method combines the
processes of photonic Damascene waveguide fabrication
with wafer-scale bonding [42, 43] to enable electro-optic
modulation on passive, ultralow-loss silicon nitride PICs,
as schematically depicted in Fig. 1(a). Our process starts
with the fabrication of a patterned and planarized silicon
nitride substrate using the photonic Damascene process
[14, 44]. Deep-ultraviolet (DUV) stepper lithography is
used to pattern waveguides and microresonators on a sili-
con substrate with 4 µm thick thermal wet silicon dioxide
(SiO2). The pattern is then dry-etched into the silicon
dioxide layer to form the waveguide preform, followed
by a high-temperature reflow of the waveguide preform
[45] to reduce surface roughness. Stoichiometric silicon
nitride is deposited by low-pressure chemical vapour de-
position (LPCVD) on the patterned substrate, filling the
preform and forming the waveguide cores. Chemical me-
chanical polishing (CMP) is used to remove excess sili-
con nitride and to planarize the wafer top surface. Sub-
sequently the entire substrate is thermally annealed at
1,200◦C to drive out the residual hydrogen contained
in the silicon nitride. A silicon dioxide interlayer is de-
posited on the substrate, followed by densification. The
interlayer is then polished to reduce the remaining to-
pography and set the desired thickness. A root-mean-
square roughness of less than 0.4 nm over an area of a
few square micrometres and of only a few nanometres
over an area of several hundred micrometres are neces-

sary for bonding. Next, a few-nanometre-thick alumina
layer is deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD) on
both the donor (LNOI) and the acceptor (Damascene)
wafers before contact bonding and donor-wafer removal.
Tungsten (W) electrodes are then manufactured by sput-
tering and reactive ion etching. At this point, the areas
of the coupling facets and the tapered sections of the
silicon nitride waveguides are cleared from lithium nio-
bate by physical etching with argon ions, so that light
can first couple into the tapered waveguides with mini-
mal coupling losses, before transitioning to the area with
lithium niobate bonded on top. Finally, chip release is
performed by chip-facet definition by deep silicon dioxide
and silicon etching, followed by chip separation through
backside silicon lapping.
Fig. 1(b) depicts a scanning
electron microscope (SEM) cross section of the heteroge-
neous LNOD waveguide.
Laser self-injection locking. Laser self-injection lock-
ing is initiated by butt-coupling of an InP distributed-
feedback (DFB) diode laser to the LNOD chip (Fig. 1
(c,d)) and tuning the laser current to match the output
frequency to the resonance frequency of the LNOD res-
onator. The optical backreflection on surface or volumet-
ric inhomogeneities inside the microresonator provides
spectrally narrowband feedback to the laser diode by
coupling clock- and counterclockwise propagating modes.
Light in the counterclockwise mode radiates back to the
laser bearing the power fraction given by the reflection
coefficient R, which depends on the interaction strength
of the modes and the resonator coupling efficiency [46].
The laser diode is forced to oscillate at the frequency of
the cavity resonance in the self-injection-locked regime.
Assuming that the frequency noise of the laser is white,
the frequency noise suppression ratio is [27]:

δω

δωfree
≈ Q2
DFB
Q2
1

16R(1 + α2g),
(1)

where δωfree is the linewidth of the free-running DFB
laser; δω is the linewidth of self-injection-locked DFB
laser; QDFB and Q = ω/κ are the quality factors of the
laser diode cavity and of the microresonator mode, re-
spectively (with κ = κex + κ0, where κ0 and κex are the
intrinsic cavity decay rate and bus–waveguide coupling
rate); and αg is the phase-amplitude coupling factor [47].
Self-injection locking occurs within a finite frequency in-
terval around the cavity resonance. The locking band-
width ∆ωlock is given, assuming large intermodal inter-
action strength and high coupling efficiency, by:

∆ωlock ≈
�

R(1 + α2g)
ω

QDFB
(2)

In order to strongly reduce the laser linewidth and
increase the frequency locking range, a high-Q resonance
and strong reflection are desirable. The device used in
our experiments features a 102-GHz free spectral range
(FSR) and a resonance linewidth of 100 MHz (see Fig.


3

Figure 1.
Heterogenous Si3N4-LiNbO3 low-loss photonic integrated platform for fast tunable self-injection-
locked lasers. (a) Schematic illustration of lithium niobate on Damascene (LNOD) platform fabrication by heterogeneous
integration of a 2” thin-film lithium niobate wafer onto a 4” silicon nitride Damascene wafer, with cross-sections of both wafers.
(b) False-colour SEM image of an LNOD waveguide cross-section (the original SEM image data is shown in Supplementary
Figure 1). The structures in yellow are the tungsten electrodes (W). The inset shows a finite-difference time-domain (FDTD)
simulation of the spatial distribution of the hybrid TE-mode electric-field amplitude that was selected for the device design. (c)
Schematic illustration of the self-injection locking principle: laser wavelength tuning is achieved by applying a voltage signal
(e.g., a linear ramp) on the tungsten electrodes. (d) Photo of the setup with a DFB laser butt-coupled to an LNOD chip. A
pair of probes touch the electrodes for electro-optic modulation, and a lensed fibre collects the output radiation.

2(a,b)) operated close to critical coupling. The intrinsic
loss of the microresonator indicates a linear propagation
loss of our LNOD waveguide platform of 8.5 dB/m.
The power reflection of the device reaches 3% (see Fig.
2(a) and Supplementary Figure 2 for full spectrum)
and features both the narrowband reflection of the
microresonator and wideband sinusoidal modulation by
spurious reflections from the chip facet, as well as and
the transitions between the inverse tapers the LNOD
waveguide.
Despite the weak back-reflection contrast,
injection locking is observed due to the narrow linewidth
of the optical resonance.
The self-injection-locked
DFB emission spectrum (Fig. 2(c)) indicates a lasing
wavelength of 1555.4 nm with a side-mode-suppression
ratio of 50 dB. To characterize self-injection locking,
a heterodyne beat note of the unlocked and locked
DFB laser with a reference laser (Toptica CTL) is
generated on a fast photodiode and processed using an
electrical spectrum analyzer (Fig. 2(d)). We observe the
narrowing of the beat note upon locking of the DFB
laser (see Fig. 2(e)). When sweeping the DFB current,
we found the regions where there is almost no change of
the laser frequency, because of the self-injection locking
(see Fig. 2(f)). To reveal the locking bandwidth, we set
the DFB current inside the locked state, and scanned
the cavity resonance by applying a triangular voltage
chirp to the electrodes (Fig. 2(g)).
The self-injection
locking is achieved within a frequency span of around
1 GHz; however, linear tuning is observed only within
a 600-MHz band, due to the low back-reflection of

the LNOD microresonator.
Next, we measured the
frequency noise single-sideband spectral density Sff(f)
of the DFB diode laser in the free-running and self-
injection-locked regimes (see Methods for details and
Figure 2(h) for results). The laser self-injection locking
suppresses the frequency noise by at least 20 dB across
all frequency offsets.
We find the intersection point
of the frequency noise curve and the beta-line [48] at
30 kHz (Fig. 2(h) orange and dashed red).
The full
width at half maximum linewidth, which is calculated
by integration of the frequency noise from the beta-line
to the inverse integration time, is 56 kHz at 0.1 ms
integration time, 262 kHz at 1 ms, and 1.1 MHz at
100 ms. The laser frequency noise reaches a horizontal
plateau (white noise floor) of 103 Hz2/Hz at 3 MHz
offset, which corresponds to an intrinsic laser linewidth
of 3.14 kHz.

Frequency-agile laser tuning.
In order to measure
the voltage-to-frequency response of the LNOD microres-
onator, the signal from a network analyser was applied to
the electrodes and the laser frequency (Toptica CTL) was
fixed on the slope of the cavity resonance. This measure-
ment reveals an important advantage of the LNOD plat-
form: the modulation response function for the 102 GHz
FSR microresonator is flat up to 100 MHz (see Fig. 3(a)).
To demonstrate the frequency agility of the laser and the
response of the laser frequency to a large-amplitude volt-
age modulation, the DFB laser was self-injection-locked
to the cavity resonance and a triangular voltage signal


4

Figure 2. DFB laser performance characterization. (a) Transmission (blue) and reflection (orange) spectra of an LNOD
102-GHz FSR resonator (see Supplementary Figure 2 for full data set).
(b) The histogram shows the distribution of the
resonance linewidth of 593 resonances of the 102-GHz FSR device with a median linewidth of ≈ 100 MHz, corresponding to a
quality factor of 1.9 × 106 (κ0 is the intrinsic cavity decay rate). (c) Optical spectrum of the free-running DFB laser diode.
(d) Experimental setup for linewidth measurements with the hybrid integrated laser using the heterodyne beat-note method.
(e) Comparison of the laser linewidth for the free-running DFB case and the case where the DFB is self-injection-locked to
an LNOD microresonator. (f) Time–frequency map of the beat note showing the laser frequency change on linear modulation
of the diode current. The white dashed lines mark the boundaries of the self-injection locking bandwidth, where almost no
laser-frequency change is observed. (g) Time–frequency map of the beat note showing the laser-frequency change on linear
tuning of the cavity resonance by applying voltage to the electrodes. The DFB current remained fixed in the self-injection
locking range. (h) Frequency noise spectra of the free-running DFB (blue) and the DFB self-injection-locked to the 102-GHz
FSR LNOD resonator (orange). The evaluated thermo-refractive noise limit and the β-line are given for reference (orange
dash-dotted and red dashed lines, respectively).

with and modulation frequencies ranging from 1 kHz
to 10 MHz was applied.
No signal pre-distortion [49]
or active feedback [50] were applied to the driving sig-
nal.
The applied voltage modulates the refractive in-
dex of lithium niobate via the Pockels effect and shifts
the cavity resonance, forcing the laser to follow the res-
onance as long as it remains within the overall locking
range [51, 52].
To reveal the time-varying frequency-
tuning characteristics for large signal modulation in the
self-injection-locked state, the heterodyne beat note of
the hybrid integrated laser with the reference laser was
recorded on a fast photodiode. Frequency excursions re-

mained on the level of 500 MHz, independently of the
modulation frequency, whereas the nonlinearity tended
to increase with increased the modulation frequency. The
minimum nonlinearity of 1% of the frequency excursion
is observed at a 100 kHz tuning rate. The upper row in
Fig. 3(c) presents the processed laser-frequency spectro-
grams, which are calculated by time-segmented Fourier
transformation, and the bottom row shows correspond-
ing residuals after a perfect triangular modulation is fit to
the data. Figure 3(b) shows the laser frequency excursion
and the root-mean-squared deviation of the measured
profiles from a perfect triangular frequency modulation


5

Figure 3. Self-injection-locked DFB electro-optic frequency tuning. (a) Measured response of the electro-optic mod-
ulation for the LNOD device utilizing tungsten electrodes. (b) Frequency excursion (blue) and the absolute deviation of the
measured tuning profile from a perfect triangular ramp (orange). The deviation was calculated as the difference between the
experimental data and the least-squares fitting. (c) Upper row: time–frequency spectrograms of heterodyne beat note for
modulation frequencies 1 kHz – 10 MHz. Lower row: the deviation of the experimental tuning data from the least-squares
fit for the same modulation frequencies. (d) Voltage profile applied to the electrodes from an arbitrary waveform generator,
resembling the EPFL logo. (e) Measured laser heterodyne beat note showing laser-frequency evolution in the form of the EPFL
logo at 450 THz/s tuning rate.

determined by curve fitting. Additional data on tuning
efficiency and hysteresis are shown in Supplementary Fig-
ures 3 and 4. The demonstrated frequency-modulation
rate of 600 MHz in 50 ns equates to 12 PHz/s.

Although highly linear ramp frequency modulation is
essential for FMCW LiDAR application [53], the fre-
quency can be modulated in an arbitrary manner while
preserving of the high tuning rate.
To illustrate this,
we programmed an arbitrary waveform generator to re-
produce the logo of EPFL (see Fig. 3(d)) and applied
the signal to the LNOD device. The laser frequency was
again determined by heterodyne beat note with the refer-
ence laser, and the result of the time–frequency analysis
is depicted in Fig. 3(e).

Optical coherent ranging demonstration. In order
to demonstrate the application potential of our laser, we
perform a proof-of-concept optical ranging experiment
inside a lab environment. The FMCW LiDAR method
[54] consists of a linear frequency modulation of the laser
source and delayed homodyne detection with the opti-
cal signal reflected from the target.
The experimental

setup is depicted in Fig.4(a) (see the Methods section
for a detailed description). The laser beam is scanned
across the target scene by means of two galvo-mirrors
with triangular driving signals. We used a polystyrene
donut-like object and a metal sidewall of a rack enclosure
as the target. Both objects were located approximately
3 metres away from the collimator. A photograph of the
target scene and the beam-scanning pattern are depicted
in Supplementary Figure 5. The beat note between the
signal reflected from the target and the local oscillator
is detected with a balanced photodiode and recorded by
an oscilloscope. Zero-padded short-time Fourier transfor-
mation is then applied to the collected oscillogram data
to retrieve the beat note spectrum evolution over 128k
time slices. The time–frequency spectrograms obtained
for both target and the reference Mach–Zehnder interfer-
ometer (MZI) are shown in the Supplementary Figure 6.
The MZI was used for distance calibration (we retrieve
the resolution of 15 cm) only and no signal pre-distortion
or active feedback was applied. Figure 4(b) shows three
different timeframes with beat notes of the local oscil-


6

Figure 4. Coherent electro-optic LiDAR demonstration. (a) Schematics of the experimental setup for coherent optical
ranging. The output signal of the tunable laser source with a linear frequency chirp is split into two channels for the delayed
homodyne detection. The signal in the first channel is amplified and, by means of mechanical beam-steering, scans the target.
The signal in the second channel is mixed with the fraction of the power of the first channel that was scattered by the target. The
beat note power evolution is recorded by an oscilloscope. AFG, arbitrary function generator; DSO, digital storage oscilloscope;
EDFA, erbium-doped fibre amplifier; CIRC, optical circulator; BPD, balanced photodiode; COL, collimator. (b) Examples
of the delayed homodyne beat note corresponding to signals from the collimator (blue line), the donut (orange line), the wall
(green line) with the respective values of the signal-to-noise ratio. (c) Histogram showing the distribution of the calculated
values of distance to the target. The two peaks correspond to the reflections from the donut and the wall. Both peaks are
fitted with a double-Gaussian function with fitting parameters, the mean distance and standard deviation, indicated. (d,e)
Point-cloud representation of the measured target scene.

lator with the reflections from the wall, the donut and
the collimator, and their respective signal-to-noise val-
ues. Last, the centre frequencies of the beat note spec-
tra were identified and mapped into the distance domain
using the MZI length as a reference. The resulting dis-
tribution of the distance values is plotted as a histogram
in Fig. 4(c), showing two peaks representing the donut
(at 2.1 m) and the wall (at 2.8 m). The double-Gaussian

fit reveals the statistical distribution of distance values
for both objects (see Fig. 4(c)). The point cloud of the
3D optical ranging is inferred from the distance data and
the voltage-to-angle conversion of the galvo-mirror con-
troller; it is shown in Fig. 4(d) and (e), where the point
colour encodes the distance from the collimator.


7

CONCLUSION

In summary, we have demonstrated a novel heteroge-
neous platform for electro-optical photonic circuits using
heterogeneous integration of photonic Damascene silicon
nitride and thin-film lithium niobate with good fibre-to-
chip coupling (3.9 dB per facet) and linear propagation
losses as low as 8.5 dB/m. We have further demonstrated
optical microresonators with 100 MHz loaded linewidth,
wideband uniform bus–waveguide coupling and flat mod-
ulation response up to 100 MHz. Using the combination
of ultra-low-loss silicon nitride photonic circuits, and en-
dowing them with lithium niobate electro-optical modu-
lation enables to create hybrid integrated injection locked
lasers with simultaneously narrow linewidth and fast on
chip tuning of 12 PHz/second.
This laser source en-
ables frequency-modulated continuous-wave optical rang-
ing without the need for signal pre-distortion or active
feedback, with a resolution of around 15 cm. With im-
provements in PIC design, such as a reduction of the in-
terlayer silicon dioxide thickness and electrode-position
optimization, we believe that our platform will form the
basis of very fast tunable lasers with 10-ns level switching
time, mode-hop-free tuning over tens of GHz, and fun-
damental linewidths below 100 Hz and km-level coher-
ence length. Beyond integrated lasers, the platform can
also be used to realise other devices, such as photonic
switching networks for photonic computing [55] or bo-
son sampling [56], as well as integrated transceivers that
combine hybrid integrated narrow linewidth lasers with
lithium-niobate-based integrated IQ-modulators.
The
wide transparency window of both lithium niobate [15]
and silicon nitride [57, 58], moreover, allows such fre-
quency agility to be extended to other wavelength ranges
such as the mid-infrared or the visible, providing a plat-
form for fast tunable lasers for applications ranging from
optical coherence tomography [37] to trace gas sensing
[59].

METHODS

Device fabrication.
First, we produce a photonic Damascene
silicon nitride integrated circuit. We start with a 4” silicon (Si)
wafer with 4 µm thermal oxide (SiO2) that we then process as
follows [60]: deep-ultra-violet (DUV) stepper photolithography for
preform patterning, preform dry etching, preform reflow process,
low-pressure chemical vapour deposition (LPCVD) of silicon ni-
tride (Si3N4), and chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP). An SiO2-
interlayer is then deposited and subsequently polished with CMP.
Prior to bonding, a few-nanometre-thick alumina layer is deposited
on the donor (LNOI) and the acceptor wafer (Damascene). After
that, both wafers are brought in contact and annealed for several
hours at 250◦C. The silicon on the backside of the donor wafer is
grinded and what is left after this step is removed with tetram-
ethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) wet etching. The thermal ox-
ide is wet etched with buffered hydrofluoric acid (BHF). A layer
of tungsten (W) is sputtered on the lithium niobate surface, and
the electrode pattern is transferred in this layer via fluoride-based
reactive ion etching (RIE). Finally, lithium niobate is etched to
open the chip facets areas in order to improve the input coupling

of the device on the chips by means of argon ion beam etching. The
subsequent chip release is performed in three steps: dry etching of
chips boundaries in silicon dioxide with fluorine-based chemistry,
further etching of silicon carrier by the Bosch process, and backside
wafer grinding.
Laser frequency noise measurements. We performed hetero-
dyne beat note spectroscopy [61] beating the reference external
cavity diode laser (Toptica CTL) with the hybrid integrated DFB
diode laser to reveal the frequency noise of the latter. The beat
note of the two signals was detected on a photodiode, and its elec-
trical output was then sent to an electrical spectrum analyser (Ro-
hde & Schwarz FSW43). The recorded data for the in-phase and
quadrature components of the beat note were processed by Welch’s
method [62] to retrieve the single sided phase noise power spectral
density (PSD) Sφφ that was converted to frequency noise Sff us-
ing: Sff = f2 · Sφφ. To calculate the laser linewidth, we integrate
the frequency noise spectra from the intersection of the PSD with
the beta-line Sf(f) = 8 ln 2 · f/π2 down to the integration time of
measurement [48]. The area under the curve A is then recalculated
to provide the full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) measure of the
linewidth using: FWHM =
√

8 ln 2 · A. Because a rigorous defini-
tion of the optical linewidth does depend on the integration time of
the measurement we evaluate the FWHM linewidth as 56 kHz at
0.1 ms integration time, 262 kHz at 1 ms, and 1.1 MHz at 100 ms.
The phase noise of the reference laser is determined by another
beatnote measurement with a commercial ultrastable laser (Menlo
ORS).
Thermo-refractive noise simulations.
The frequency stabil-
ity of the 102-GHz-FSR LNOD devices is primarily limited by
the material refractive index fluctuations due to the relatively
large material temperature fluctuations at resonator scale (thermo-
refractive noise).
To quantify the noise level in our system, we
follow the approach based on the Fluctuation-Dissipation theo-
rem (FDT), described in Ref.
[63–65], that was originally given
by Levin and successfully applied to the thermal noise analysis
of LIGO’s mirrors.
Since FDT relates fluctuations of a system
to how the system dissipates energy, we simulate the noise levels
with finite element method by testing how the system dissipates
in response to a probe force. Since the fractional thermo-refractive
noise
δω
ω
=
�
d⃗rq(⃗r)δT(⃗r) of our device is a weighted average of
the temperature fluctuations δT(⃗r) determined by the optical field
distribution ⃗e(⃗r), in order to find out its magnitude at a particu-
lar Fourier frequency f, we apply a sinusoidal entropy oscillation
(energy-conjugated with temperature) at this frequency, with the
same weight q(⃗r) mimicking the field distribution, to our system in
the simulation. The corresponding power dissipated Wdiss in the
system is retrieved from the simulation and is used to calculate the
thermo-refractive noise power spectral density S δω

ω (f) at this par-

ticular frequency using FDT. The device field distribution and the
heat propagation simulated in the described steps are performed
on COMSOL Multiphysics.
Coherent ranging experiment. The laser diode is edge-coupled
to the LNOD chip with 200-nm-thick tungsten electrodes deposited
along the silicon nitride waveguide on lithium niobate. The laser
frequency tuning is achieved by locking the laser to a cavity res-
onance, fixing the DFB current, and tuning the cavity resonance
via Pockels effect by a voltage applied to the electrodes.
Trian-
gular ramp signal from AWG with 0.5 Vpp amplitude and 100
kHz frequency is further amplified up to 25 Vpp by a high-voltage
amplifier (Falco Systems) with 5 MHz bandwidth. No additional
pre- or post- processing (linearization) was utilized for the laser
frequency ramp for the coherent ranging experiment. We used the
cavity resonance corresponding to 179 mA DFB current. To cali-
brate the frequency excursion, the 5 % fraction of the optical signal
was sent to a reference Mach-Zehnder (MZI) fibre interferometer.
The MZI optical length of 13.18 m was found out by an indepen-
dent measurement involving a tunable diode laser scan calibrated
by a frequency comb. Taking the measured MZI optical length and
beatnote frequency values, the distance resolution of 15 cm is in-
ferred. 95 % of light is split into two paths: the local oscillator path


8

(10 %) and the target path (90 %). The signal in the target path
is amplified by an EDFA (Calmar) up to 4 mW and directed to the
collimator with the 8-mm aperture set to match the target distance
range of 3 m. We use the galvo scanner (Thorlabs GVS112) for the
beam steering. Two mirrors were controlled by linear ramp signals
of 3 Hz and 60 Hz rates with the amplitude and offset values chosen
to ensure that the scanning pattern fully covers the target scene.
The data for the point cloud was collected within the total time
interval of 1.3 s. The frame rate was limited by the galvo scanning
speed and the Doppler broadening that is imparted by the rapidly
tilting mirrors.
Scene reconstruction and signal data processing. The data
collected in the FMCW LiDAR experiment were subject to dig-
ital signal processing steps in order to locate the scene elements
in space.
First, the zero-padded short-time Fourier transforms
(STFT) of the beat note oscillograms from the target and the refer-
ence MZI were evaluated. The Blackman-Harris window function
was used with the window size set to one period of the frequency
modulated signal. Second, the obtained time-frequency maps were
used to search at any given time frame the frequency values corre-
sponding to the beat note peak. This set was filtered so that only
the data points with beat note amplitudes above 1.3 were consid-
ered for further analysis. We then subtract the distance from the
laser to the collimator so that the point cloud distance is given with
respect to the collimator aperture position. Finally, the frequency
data were converted to the distance domain, using MZI length as a
reference, and the Cartesian components of each point were com-
puted from the voltage profile applied to the galvo-mirrors.
Electro-optic S21 response measurement. A 300 µW contin-
uous wave (CW) light (1550 nm) from an external cavity diode
laser (Toptica CTL) is coupled to the device using a lensed fibre.
The input laser is biased at the slope of the optical resonance. A
-5 dBm RF electrical signal is applied from port 1 of the network

analyzer to the electrodes of the device under test, and the light
intensity modulation is detected by a 12 GHz photodiode (New
Focus 1544), which is sent back to port 2 of the network analyzer.

Authors Contributions: V.S. and G.L. performed experiments
with the help of J.R. and A.S..
R.N.W., A.R., C.M., and J.L.
developed the processes and fabricated the samples with assistance
from S.H.. M.C. designed the lithography masks and performed
PIC simulations. U.D., Y.P., A.R., R.N.W., and J.L. performed
the CMP for bonding. D.C. performed the wafer bonding. V.S.,
G.L., and J.R. analysed the data. V.S. and G.H. performed thermo-
refractive noise limit simulations.
V.S., G.L., J.R., and T.J.K.
wrote the manuscript with input from A.R., A.S., and P.S. P.S.
and T.J.K. supervised the project.
Funding Information: This work was supported by Contract
HR0011-20-2-0046 (NOVEL) from the Defense Advanced Re-
search Projects Agency (DARPA), Microsystems Technology Office
(MTO), and by funding from the European Union Horizon 2020
Research and Innovation Program under the Marie Sklodowska-
Curie grant agreement No. 722923 (OMT) and No. 812818 (MI-
CROCOMB), and under the FET-Proactive grant agreement No.
732894 (HOT). It was also supported by funding from the Swiss
National Science Foundation under grant agreement No. 176563
(BRIDGE) and No. 186364 (QuantEOM).
Acknowledgments: The samples were fabricated in the EPFL
center of MicroNanoTechnology (CMi) and the Binnig and Rohrer
Nanotechnology Center (BRNC) at IBM Research. We thank the
Cleanroom Operations Team of the BRNC, especially Diana Davila
Pineda and Ronald Grundbacher for their help and support.
Data Availability: The code and data used to produce the plots
within this work will be released on the repository Zenodo upon
publication of this preprint.

∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† pfs@zurich.ibm.com
‡ tobias.kippenberg@epfl.ch

[1] M. Zhang, C. Wang, R. Cheng, A. Shams-Ansari, and
M. Lonˇcar, Optica 4, 1536 (2017).

[2] I. Krasnokutska, J.-L. J. Tambasco, X. Li, and A. Pe-
ruzzo, Opt. Express 26, 897 (2018).

[3] C. Wang, M. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Bertrand, A. Shams-
Ansari, S. Chandrasekhar, P. Winzer, and M. Lonˇcar,
Nature 562, 101 (2018).

[4] M. He, M. Xu, Y. Ren, J. Jian, Z. Ruan, Y. Xu, S. Gao,
S. Sun, X. Wen, L. Zhou, L. Liu, C. Guo, H. Chen, S. Yu,
L. Liu, and X. Cai, Nature Photonics 13, 359 (2019).

[5] M. Zhang, B. Buscaino, C. Wang, A. Shams-Ansari,
C. Reimer, R. Zhu, J. M. Kahn, and M. Lonˇcar, Nature
568, 373 (2019).

[6] Y. Yang, R. Lu, L. Gao, and S. Gong, Journal of Micro-
electromechanical Systems 28, 575 (2019).

[7] D. Marpaung, J. Yao, and J. Capmany, Nature photonics
13, 80 (2019).

[8] N. J. Lambert, A. Rueda, F. Sedlmeir, and H. G. L.
Schwefel, Advanced Quantum Technologies 3, 1900077
(2020).

[9] C. Javerzac-Galy, K. Plekhanov, N. R. Bernier, L. D.
Toth, A. K. Feofanov, and T. J. Kippenberg, Phys. Rev.
A 94, 053815 (2016).

[10] V. S. Ilchenko, A. A. Savchenkov, A. B. Matsko, and
L. Maleki, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 043903 (2004).

[11] A. Savchenkov, V. Ilchenko, A. Matsko, and L. Maleki,

IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 17, 136 (2005).

[12] M. Soltani, V. Ilchenko, A. Matsko, A. Savchenkov,
J. Schlafer, C. Ryan, and L. Maleki, Opt. Lett. 41, 4375
(2016).

[13] E. Dale, W. Liang, D. Eliyahu, A. A. Savchenkov, V. S.
Ilchenko, A. B. Matsko, D. Seidel, and L. Maleki, in
Imaging and Applied Optics 2014 (Optical Society of
America, 2014) p. JTu2C.3.

[14] J. Liu, G. Huang, R. N. Wang, J. He, A. S. Raja, T. Liu,
N. J. Engelsen, and T. J. Kippenberg, Nature Commu-
nications 12, 2236 (2021).

[15] H. Jhans, J. M. Honig, and C. N. R. Rao, Journal of
Physics C: Solid State Physics 19, 3649 (1986).

[16] R. S. Weis and T. K. Gaylord, Applied Physics A 37, 191
(1985).

[17] C. Xiong, W. H. P. Pernice, and H. X. Tang, Nano Letters
12, 3562 (2012).

[18] D. J. Wilson, K. Schneider, S. H¨onl, M. Anderson,
Y. Baumgartner, L. Czornomaz, T. J. Kippenberg, and
P. Seidler, Nature Photonics 14, 57 (2020).

[19] C.
Wang,
M.
J.
Burek,
Z.
Lin,
H.
A.
Atikian,
V. Venkataraman, I.-C. Huang, P. Stark, and M. Lonˇcar,
Opt. Express 22, 30924 (2014).

[20] J. Wang, F. Bo, S. Wan, W. Li, F. Gao, J. Li, G. Zhang,
and J. Xu, Opt. Express 23, 23072 (2015).

[21] M. Xu, M. He, H. Zhang, J. Jian, Y. Pan, X. Liu,
L. Chen, X. Meng, H. Chen, Z. Li, X. Xiao, S. Yu, S. Yu,
and X. Cai, Nature Communications 11, 3911 (2020).


9

[22] Y. Hu, C. Reimer, A. Shams-Ansari, M. Zhang, and
M. Loncar, Optica 7, 1189 (2020).

[23] T. Komljenovic, D. Huang, P. Pintus, M. A. Tran, M. L.
Davenport, and J. E. Bowers, Proceedings of the IEEE
106, 2246 (2018).

[24] A. Pl¨oßl and G. Kr¨auter, Materials Science and Engi-
neering: R: Reports 25, 1 (1999).

[25] L. Chang, M. H. P. Pfeiffer, N. Volet, M. Zervas, J. D.
Peters, C. L. Manganelli, E. J. Stanton, Y. Li, T. J. Kip-
penberg, and J. E. Bowers, Opt. Lett. 42, 803 (2017).

[26] P. O. Weigel,
M. Savanier,
C. T. DeRose,
A. T.
Pomerene, A. L. Starbuck, A. L. Lentine, V. Stenger,
and S. Mookherjea, Scientific Reports 6, 22301 (2016).

[27] N. M. Kondratiev, V. E. Lobanov, A. V. Cherenkov, A. S.
Voloshin, N. G. Pavlov, S. Koptyaev, and M. L. Gorodet-
sky, Opt. Express 25, 28167 (2017).

[28] W. Jin, Q.-F. Yang, L. Chang, B. Shen, H. Wang, M. A.
Leal, L. Wu, M. Gao, A. Feshali, M. Paniccia, K. J. Va-
hala, and J. E. Bowers, Nature Photonics 15, 346 (2021).

[29] H. Tian, J. Liu, B. Dong, J. C. Skehan, M. Zervas, T. J.
Kippenberg, and S. A. Bhave, Nature Communications
11, 3073 (2020).

[30] N. Hosseini, R. Dekker, M. Hoekman, M. Dekkers, J. Bos,
A. Leinse, and R. Heideman, Opt. Express 23, 14018
(2015).

[31] Y. Fan, J. P. Epping, R. M. Oldenbeuving, C. G. H.
Roeloffzen, M. Hoekman, R. Dekker, R. G. Heideman,
P. J. M. van der Slot, and K. Boller, IEEE Photonics
Journal 8, 1 (2016).

[32] H. Bostick, IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 3, 232
(1967).

[33] A.
Martin,
D.
Dodane,
L.
Leviandier,
D.
Dolfi,
A. Naughton, P. O’Brien, T. Spuessens, R. Baets, G. Lep-
age, P. Verheyen, P. D. Heyn, P. Absil, P. Feneyrou, and
J. Bourderionnet, Journal of Lightwave Technology 36,
4640 (2018).

[34] C. Rogers,
A. Y. Piggott,
D. J. Thomson,
R. F.
Wiser, I. E. Opris, S. A. Fortune, A. J. Compston,
A. Gondarenko, F. Meng, X. Chen, G. T. Reed, and
R. Nicolaescu, Nature 590, 256 (2021).

[35] G. Millot, S. Pitois, M. Yan, T. Hovhannisyan, A. Ben-
dahmane, T. W. H¨ansch, and N. Picqu´e, Nature Photon-
ics 10, 27 (2016).

[36] I. Debecker, A. K. Mohamed, and D. Romanini, Opt.
Express 13, 2906 (2005).

[37] X. Ji, X. Yao, Y. Gan, A. Mohanty, M. A. Tadayon,
C. P. Hendon, and M. Lipson, APL Photonics 4, 090803
(2019).

[38] M. Churaev, A. Riedhauser, R. N. Wang, M. A. An-
derson, C. M¨ohl, V. Snigirev, T. Bl´esin, A. Siddharth,
Y. Popoff, D. Caimi, S. H¨onl, J. Riemensberger, J. Liu,
P. Seidler, and T. J. Kippenberg, in review (2021).

[39] M. Karpov, H. Guo, A. Kordts, V. Brasch, M. H. P.
Pfeiffer, M. Zervas, M. Geiselmann, and T. J. Kippen-
berg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 103902 (2016).

[40] F. Gyger, J. Liu, F. Yang, J. He, A. S. Raja, R. N. Wang,
S. A. Bhave, T. J. Kippenberg, and L. Th´evenaz, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 124, 013902 (2020).

[41] V. Brasch, Q.-F. Chen, S. Schiller, and T. J. Kippenberg,

Opt. Express 22, 30786 (2014).

[42] T. Komljenovic, M. Davenport, J. Hulme, A. Y. Liu,
C. T. Santis, A. Spott, S. Srinivasan, E. J. Stanton,
C. Zhang, and J. E. Bowers, Journal of Lightwave Tech-
nology 34, 20 (2016).

[43] L. Chang, M. H. P. Pfeiffer, N. Volet, M. Zervas, J. D.
Peters, C. L. Manganelli, E. J. Stanton, Y. Li, T. J. Kip-
penberg, and J. E. Bowers, Opt. Lett. 42, 803 (2017).

[44] M. H. P. Pfeiffer, C. Herkommer, J. Liu, T. Morais,
M. Zervas, M. Geiselmann, and T. J. Kippenberg, IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 24, 1
(2018).

[45] M. H. P. Pfeiffer, J. Liu, A. S. Raja, T. Morais, B. Gha-
diani, and T. J. Kippenberg, Optica 5, 884 (2018).

[46] M. L. Gorodetsky, A. D. Pryamikov, and V. S. Ilchenko,
JOSA B 17, 1051 (2000).

[47] C. Henry, IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 18, 259
(1982).

[48] G. D. Domenico, S. Schilt, and P. Thomann, Appl. Opt.
49, 4801 (2010).

[49] X. Zhang, J. Pouls, and M. C. Wu, Opt. Express 27, 9965
(2019).

[50] P. A. Roos, R. R. Reibel, T. Berg, B. Kaylor, Z. W.
Barber, and W. R. Babbitt, Opt. Lett. 34, 3692 (2009).

[51] V. S. Ilchenko, E. Dale, W. Liang, J. Byrd, D. Eliyahu,
A. A. Savchenkov,
A. B. Matsko,
D. Seidel, and
L. Maleki, in Laser Resonators and Beam Control XIII ,
Vol. 7913, edited by A. V. Kudryashov, A. H. Paxton,
and V. S. Ilchenko, International Society for Optics and
Photonics (SPIE, 2011) pp. 295 – 303.

[52] G. Lihachev,
J. Riemensberger,
W. Weng,
J. Liu,
H. Tian,
A. Siddharth,
V. Snigirev,
R. N. Wang,
J. He, S. A. Bhave, and T. J. Kippenberg, Ultralow-
noise frequency-agile photonic integrated lasers (2021),
arXiv:2104.02990 [physics.optics].

[53] D. Uttam and B. Culshaw, Journal of Lightwave Tech-
nology 3, 971 (1985).

[54] B. Behroozpour, P. A. M. Sandborn, M. C. Wu, and B. E.
Boser, IEEE Communications Magazine 55, 135 (2017).

[55] B. L. Drake, R. P. Bocker, M. E. Lasher, R. H. Patterson,
and W. J. Miceli, Optical Engineering 25, 38 (1986).

[56] S. J. B., M. B. J., H. P. C., K. W. Steven, J. Xian-
Min, B. Marco, D. Animesh, T.-P. Nicholas, L. N. K.,
K. Dmytro, G. J. C., S. B. J., S. P. G. R., and W. I. A.,
Science 339, 798 (2013).

[57] T. J. Morin, L. Chang, W. Jin, C. Li, J. Guo, H. Park,
M. A. Tran, T. Komljenovic, and J. E. Bowers, Optica
8, 755 (2021).

[58] H. Guo, C. Herkommer, A. Billat, D. Grassani, C. Zhang,
M. H. P. Pfeiffer, W. Weng, C.-S. Br`es, and T. J. Kip-
penberg, Nature Photonics 12, 330 (2018).

[59] G.-W. Truong, K. O. Douglass, S. E. Maxwell, R. D. van
Zee, D. F. Plusquellic, J. T. Hodges, and D. A. Long,
Nature Photonics 7, 532 (2013).

[60] M. H. P. Pfeiffer, C. Herkommer, J. Liu, T. Morais,
M. Zervas, M. Geiselmann, and T. J. Kippenberg, IEEE
Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 24, 1
(2018).

[61] T. Duthel, G. Clarici, C. R. S. Fludger, J. C. Geyer,
C. Schulien, and S. Wiese, IEEE Photonics Technology
Letters 21, 1568 (2009).

[62] P. Welch, IEEE Transactions on Audio and Electroacous-
tics 15, 70 (1967).

[63] Y. Levin, Phys. Rev. D 57, 659 (1998).
[64] N. Kondratiev and M. Gorodetsky, Physics Letters A
382, 2265 (2018).

[65] G. Huang, E. Lucas, J. Liu, A. S. Raja, G. Lihachev,
M. L. Gorodetsky, N. J. Engelsen, and T. J. Kippenberg,
Phys. Rev. A 99, 061801 (2019).


10

Supplementary Information to:
Ultrafast tunable lasers using lithium niobate integrated photonics

Viacheslav Snigirev1,∗, Annina Riedhauser2,∗, Grigory Lihachev1,∗, Johann Riemensberger1, Rui Ning Wang1,
Charles M¨ohl2, Anat Siddharth1, Guanhao Huang1, Youri Popoff2,3, Ute Drechsler2, Daniele Caimi2, Simon H¨onl2,
Junqiu Liu1, Paul Seidler2, and Tobias J. Kippenberg1

1 Institute of Physics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
2 IBM Research Europe, Zurich, S¨aumerstrasse 4, CH-8803 R¨uschlikon, Switzerland
3 Integrated Systems Laboratory, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Z¨urich (ETH Z¨urich), CH-8092 Z¨urich, Switzerland
∗ These authors contributed equally to this work

Figure 5. Scanning electron microscopy image of a LNOD waveguide. Original, unprocessed SEM data used to prepare
Fig.1b of the main text.

Figure 6. Transmission and reflection of a 102-GHz FRS LNOD microring resonator. (Top) Transmission spectrum:
almost all the presented mode resonances are critically coupled. (Bottom) Reflection spectrum. (full measurements span).


11

Figure 7. Hysteresis evaluation for the DFB laser diode frequency tuning. The first row represents the heterodyne
beatnote evolution for the repetition frequency values of 1 kHz, 10 kHz, 100 kHz and 1MHz, and its fit with a perfect triangular
ramp. The second row is the same data, but mirrored with respect to a horizontal axis of 0 MHz. In the third row, there is the
next transformation step when the data is moved on a half a period to the left, so that what has been an up-slide in the first
row becomes down-slide in the third and vice versa. In the last row, adding the data patterns of the first and the third row and
subtracting the mean value from the sum, one observes the hysteresis-induced deviations between the up-slide and down-slide
fragment of the ramps.

Figure 8. Tuning efficiency of LNOD samples. (Left) Applying a triangular ramp voltage waveform to LNOD device’s
electrodes with selected values of the modulation frequency (10 kHz, 100 kHz and 1 MHz) and gradually increasing the signal
peak-to-peak amplitude, one observes linear growth of the DFB frequency excursion. (Right) To retrieve the tuning efficiency
values [MHz/V], the linear model fit of the data can be performed in the voltages diapason where the excursion is smaller than
the locking bandwidth limit of ∼1 GHz (results are given as the inset plot).


12

Figure 9. FMCW LiDAR setup. (a) The photo of the setup for coherent optical ranging experiments containing the target
- a polystyrene donut mounted on the stage and an instrument box wall behind - and the scanning pattern of the galvo-mirrors
embracing all of the target elements. (b),(c) The voltage signal profiles applied to the the two galvo-mirrors enabling two
angular degrees of freedom - φ and θ - for scanning, and their fits with a perfect triangular ramp. (d) The actual data of
scanning pattern and its reconstruction after the fitting the angular coordinates.

Figure 10. Short time Fourier transform of the delayed homodyne beat note oscillogram. (Left) Time-frequency
map calculated for the target response. (Right) The same as in (Left), but for the reference Mach-Zehnder interferometer.


