Ultra-wideband electrostrictive mechanical 
antenna 

Jianchun Xu1†, Zhao Li1,2†, Xuchao Pan3†, Xi Wen3, Jinqing Cao1, Wen Gong4,

Shaolong Yang1, Ming Lei1★, Fangzhou Yao5★ and Ke Bi1★

1State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communications, School of

Electronic Engineering, School of Science, Beijing University of Posts and 

Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China. 
2State Key Laboratory of New Ceramics and Fine Processing, School of Materials Science 

and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 
3School of Mechanical Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 

210094, China. 
4Research Center of Advanced Functional Ceramic Materials, Wuzhen Laboratory, Jiaxing, 

314500, China.
5Center of Advanced Ceramic Materials and Devices, Yangtze Delta Region Institute of 

Tsinghua University, Zhejiang 314006, China.

†These authors contributed equally to this work. 

★e-mail: mlei@bupt.edu.cn; yaofangzhou@tsinghua-zj.edu.cn; bike@bupt.edu.cn. 


1

Conventional mechanical antennas provide a strategy in long-wave communication 
with a surprisingly compact size below 1/1,000 of the wavelength. However, the 
narrow bandwidth and weak field intensity seriously hamper its practical 
applications. Here, we present a mechanical antenna based on the electrostrictive 
effect of PMN-PT-based relaxor ferroelectric ceramic to improve radiation capacity
and achieve ultra-wideband characteristics (10 kHz - 1 MHz, the relative bandwidth 
is beyond 196%). Determined by the different underlying mechanism, the 
mechanical antenna based on the electrostrictive effect exhibits excellent
communication properties from traditional mechanical antennas. The functions of 
signal coding, transmitting, receiving, and decoding were experimentally 
demonstrated. This approach offers a promising way of constructing mechanical 
antennas for long-wave communication. 

Electromagnetic radiation at very low frequency (VLF, 3 - 30 kHz) exhibits relatively 

low propagation loss, enabling remote communication1,2. Electrically small antennas 

are of both practical and fundamental importance in portable wireless devices due to 

the advantage of miniaturization3. According to Chu limit, the minimum radiation 

quality factor of an electrically small antenna is limited by its size4. Due to the large 

reactance, these antennas generally have narrow bandwidth. Various shapes, high-

contrast materials, metamaterials, and lumped components have been employed for 

improving their bandwidth and radiation resistance5,6. However, even the electrically 

small antennas have a large physical size. They also need an additional impedance 

matching network in the VLF band, which is not beneficial for practical applications in 

long-wave communication. Recently, a new mechanical antenna was proposed and 

attracted extensive attentions7,8.

Mechanical antenna based on mechanical motion is a miniaturization antenna, its 

physical size can be smaller than 1/1,000 of the operating wavelength. Conventional 

electrically small antennas rely on oscillating charges to radiate electromagnetic (EM) 

waves, while mechanical antennas are driven by acoustic self-resonance to generate the 


2

mechanical motion of charge or magnetic dipole moment oscillations, thus generating 

time-varying EM field9. Because of its self-resonance at acoustic wavelength, such 

mechanical antennas can eliminate the need for a bulky, external impedance-matching 

network. According to the latest reports, piezoelectric materials, such as quartz, single 

crystal lithium niobate (LN), and lead zirconate titanate (PZT), have been successfully

used to generate acoustic resonance for radiating EM waves in VLF band10. However, 

their polarized state is difficult to maintain in the extreme working environment of high 

temperature and high pressure. In addition, mechanical antennas based on piezoelectric 

materials usually have a narrow bandwidth due to their high quality factor11-13. For 

example, an LN piezoelectric electric dipole presented for high radiation efficiency can 

only operate near 35.5 kHz14. In many civil fields and military areas, wideband is 

urgently desired to provide several important advantages including high date rate, 

resistances to interference, covert transmission, and so on. Such advantages enable a 

wide range of applications of communications, radar, imaging, and positioning, which

obviously cannot be offered by the narrow band. It is therefore important to propose a 

new radiation mechanism for wideband mechanical antennas. 

Here, we present a set of strategy and design concept to expand the bandwidth of 

mechanical antenna. Based on the electrostrictive effect of dielectric material, ceramic

cylindrical resonator is expected to radiate EM waves under a periodic electric field. 

The detailed discussion about the difference between the electrostrictive effect and the 


3

inverse piezoelectric effect in mechanical antennas application can be found in 

Supplementary Information. The operating mechanism and ultra-band characteristics 

distinguish our work from the previously reported strategies. In this work, mechanical 

antennas based on the electrostrictive effect were fabricated using 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT 

relaxor ferroelectric ceramics. The ceramics cylindrical resonator showed superior 

property to radiate EM waves under a moderate periodic electric field. The feasibility 

of this design scheme was verified by demonstration experiments of the basic 

communication functions, i.e., signal modulation, transmission, and receiving within 

an ultra-band. It’s believed that the characteristics of ultra-band and high radiation 

efficiency of this mechanical antenna must accelerate its practical process in long-wave 

communication. 

Results

For a mechanical antenna, the signals are directly fed into the resonator without external 

matching network (Fig. 1a). According to the simulated and measured impedance 

curves (Fig. 1b) of the mechanical antenna with poled 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT material, the 

traditional mechanical antenna based on inverse piezoelectric effect will only work at 

220 kHz. Operating at this frequency, the mechanical antenna obtains the maximum

mechanical motion, thus radiating stronger EM waves compared with other frequencies. 

This characteristic results in a narrow resonant peak in the wireless transmission 

spectrum, which makes the traditional mechanical antenna seem like a narrowband 


4

antenna and may decrease the stability of communication systems. Another physical 

mechanism similar to the inverse piezoelectric effect, i.e., electrostrictive effect, needs 

a lower requirement of crystallographic symmetry and the working condition. For some 

ferroelectric materials with a large dielectric constant, the electrostrictive strain can 

even reach the same or higher order of magnitude as the piezoelectric strain15,16.

Therefore, the electrostrictive mechanical antenna is proposed to enhance the 

bandwidth, radiation intensity, and stability. 

Fig. 1| Characterization of the ceramic material. a, Schematic diagram of the 
piezoelectric mechanical antenna and its b, impedance curves. c, Temperature 
dependence of dielectric permittivity εr of 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic. d, Unipolar 
strain of 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic measured at different frequencies under 
3 kV/mm. 


5

A 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic chip with a thickness of 3 mm and a diameter of 

8 mm is selected as the cylindrical resonator of the proposed mechanical antenna. 

2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramics were prepared by solid-state sintering, the detailed process 

can be found in the Methods and elsewhere17,18. From the X-ray diffraction (XRD) and 

the X-ray energy-dispersion spectroscopy (EDS) results (Fig. S1 and Fig. S2), the 

ceramic sample possesses a typical perovskite phase structure and a homogeneous 

chemical distribution. As shown in Fig. 1c, 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic has a diffused 

phase transition around 90℃, which is one of the characteristics of relaxor 

ferroelectricity19. Meanwhile, it has a large ɛr between room temperature and Tc, about 

5,000 - 38,000 that is nearly an order of magnitude higher than PZT-based ceramics20. 

From the unipolar strain curves of 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic shown in Fig. 1d, the

low hysteresis further verifies its ferroelectricity21.

Mechanism of electrostriction based on the inverse piezoelectric effect and the 

electrostriction effect can be briefly described in Fig. 2a. The electrostrictive effect and 

the inverse piezoelectric effect are often confused because they produce similar 

physical phenomena. Actually, these two effects are distinct in nature and independent 

of each other. The origin of the inverse piezoelectric effect is the reorientation of the 

intrinsic dipole moment under an external electric field, while for the electrostrictive 

effect, it’s the elastic displacement of ions under an applied electric field22,23. Different 

from piezoelectric strain, electrostrictive strain has no hysteresis with electric field and 


6

is not susceptible to temperature.24 Under an external periodic electric field, ceramics 

expand longitudinally due to the electrostrictive effect, which leads to the periodic 

change of electric field intensity in the space and radiates electromagnetic waves 

consequently. A classical disordered slush-like domain morphology was observed from 

the PFM result (Fig. 2b), reflecting its significant relaxor ferroelectric property25,26. The 

SEM result
(Fig. 2c)
shows
2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic possesses a dense 

microstructure with an average grain size between 5 - 8 m. 

Fig. 2| Mechanism analysis. a, Simplified illustration of the inverse piezoelectric 
effect and electrostrictive effect. b, In-plane piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) 
amplitude and phase images of 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic. c, Scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM) images of the fracture surface of 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic. 


7

The major mechanism of the mechanical antenna in this study is detailedly 

discussed in the Supplementary Information. We believe that the electrostrictive strain 

of 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic is the main physical mechanism of its use as a cylindrical 

resonator in this study. Because of its different physical mechanism, the proposed 

mechanical antenna based on the electrostrictive effect shows excellent transmission 

characteristics from the traditional mechanical antennas, which will be discussed in 

detail below. 

Fig. 3| Bandwidth measurements. Received wireless spectrum of the proposed 
antenna in the ranges of a,10 - 90 kHz, b, 50 - 550 kHz, and c, 550 - 1050 kHz. d, Peak 
power curve. 

For the frequencies below 10 kHz, the pink noise is stronger than the signal 

intensity and is greatly influenced by temperature. Thus, the performance of the 


8

mechanical antenna in the frequency range less than 10 kHz is not be taken into account. 

Using the max hold function and segmental measurement method, the continuous peak 

power curve in the range of 10 kHz - 1 MHz was measured. For the clear exhibition, 

the measured wireless spectrums with different frequencies equally distributed in all 

the bands were shown as examples. The displacement rate of the ions in the material 

increases with the frequency of feed signals under the unsaturation condition, thus 

enhancing the radiation intensity of the proposed antenna (Fig. 3a). In the range of 

50 - 550 kHz, the received peak power reaches and stays beyond -40 dBm (Fig. 3b), 

which is different from the traditional piezoelectric mechanical antennas that illustrate 

a narrow resonant peak near the acoustic resonant frequency. In the higher frequency 

band of 550 kHz - 1 MHz, the received power maintains a high level and shows a slight 

decrement trend (Fig. 3c). In these bands, the measured wireless spectrum (Fig. 3d) of 

the proposed mechanical antenna obtains beyond -70 dBm peak power which can be 

obviously distinguished with the environmental noises. These bands thus can be used 

as operating frequency bands in the communication systems. Actually, the measurement 

range is limited by the bandwidth (20 Hz - 1 MHz) of receiving antenna used in our 

experiment. As expected from the trend of the measured wireless spectrum curve shown 

in Fig. 3d, the operating frequencies in fact include higher frequency band. 

Discussion 

To investigate the influence of polarization state on the radiation performance, the 


9

proposed mechanical antenna with poled material was fabricated, and the relative 

measurements were also performed. It should be mentioned that all 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT 

ceramics used in the proposed mechanical antenna have the same parameters in 

composition and preparation process except for the polarization. In this condition, the 

measured results (Fig. S3) of the received wireless spectrum and peak power curve 

show coincidence with the unpoled prototype. As well as the same trend and amplitude, 

this mechanical antenna also exhibits ultra-wideband characteristics. These 

performances demonstrate that the EM radiations of these mechanical antennas are 

basically unaffected by the polarization state of the materials. Therefore, the mechanical 

antenna with unpoled material will be used in the following experiments. 

Fig. 4| Signal modulation. a, Schematic of ASK modulation. b, Received signals. 


10

Signal modulation is a crucial part of practical communication systems. In our 

experimental system, a lock-in amplifier (LIA) is employed to measure the received 

signals under a normal noise environment. Here, amplitude shift keying (ASK) 

modulation scheme is used in signal processes. The frequency of input signals is 

modulated and amplified by an arbitrary function generator (AFG) and a power 

amplifier, respectively. By setting the repeat times and waveform sequence, 50% duty 

cycle ASK signals are generated (Fig. 4a). Here, the frequency of the carrier signals is 

limited by the operating frequency band of the proposed mechanical antenna, and 

information transmission rate is determined by the source signals’ cycle that is 

associated with the sampling rate of the AFG and the responding rate of the LIA. The 

generated feed signals are directly input the positive and negative electrodes of the 

electrostrictive mechanical antenna without any external circuit. In the receiving 

terminal, the LIA with the same reference frequency as the carrier signals measures the 

amplitude, components, and phase of the received signals (Fig. 4b). Because of the 50% 

duty ratio of the source signals, the measured signals show a square waveform that 

represents a series of binary information. The relatively constant amplitude illustrates 

the stability of information transmission and low error rate. All these measured results 

demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed electrostrictive mechanical antenna in long-

wave communication systems. 

Because of the weak radiation field intensity, unable to remote transmission is an 


11

unsolved problem in current mechanical antenna design. To verify the ultra-wideband 

performance and remote transmission capacity of the proposed mechanical antenna, a 

wireless communication system is designed as shown in Fig. 5a. In low frequency 

communications, magnetic loop antenna is often used as the receiver to measure the 

magnetic flux density. Therefore, a loop antenna connected with an LIA is employed to 

measure the field intensity of the EM waves transmitted from the mechanical antenna 

in our experiment system. With this communication system, the capability of the 

proposed mechanical antennas in transmission distance is measured (Fig. 5b). 

According to the equivalent model of the dipole current, the magnetic flux density 

follows an inverse square relation with the distance between the transmitting antenna 

and the receiver. Great attenuation occurs in the vicinity near the transmitter, while the 

attenuation in the far-field is close to zero (the measured results of poled materials are 

shown in Fig. S4). The transmission distance experiments operating at 20 kHz, 200 kHz, 

and 1 MHz are individually performed. Compared with low frequency signals, the EM 

waves at the frequency of 1 MHz obtain greater transmission loss in the free space. At 

the frequency of 20 kHz, the mechanical antenna works under the unsaturation 

condition and big noise environment. Therefore, the proposed antenna operating at 

200 kHz has the greatest radiation capacity. These trends are coincident with the 

measured spectrum (Fig. 3). 


12

Fig. 5| Remote transmission measurements. a, Measurement system set-up. b, 
Magnetic flux density of the radiated EM waves versus distance. c, Received signals at 
distances of 0.6 m and 14 m. 

Using the above ASK modulation at the operating frequency of 200 kHz, the 

different binary information of repeated ‘110’ are transmitted to examine the ability of 

coding and decoding. According to the identification degree of the decoded signals, it 

can be found that the mechanical antenna has limit measured distance of 14 m under 


13

our experimental conditions (Fig. 5c). Moreover, the magnetic flux density at the 

distance of 14 m can reach the order of pT. With the help of highly precise devices and 

signal processes, the transmission distance will be greatly increased. Based on the 

relationship between the magnetic flux density and transmission distance, a fitting 

equation is employed to predict the magnetic flux density at greater distances. The 

fitting equation can be described as y = A/(x2), where x represents the transmission 

distance, A is the fitting parameter. Take the measured data at 200 kHz as an example

(Fig. S5), the predicted magnetic flux density at 1 km is 8.67 fT which is efficient 

measure intensity for modern wireless communications. The predicted values at the 

other two frequencies (20 kHz and 1 MHz) are greater than 0.5 fT at the distance of 

1 km. These results verify the characteristics of the proposed electrostrictive 

mechanical antenna in ultra-wideband and remote transmission, which provides the 

hardware base for long-wave communication.

In summary, we have designed an electrostrictive mechanical antenna for compact 

size, ultra-wide operating band, and high radiation intensity. Unlike traditional 

mechanical antennas which are based on inverse piezoelectric effect, the proposed 

mechanical antenna is mainly derived from the electrostrictive effect. Moreover, a 

wireless communication system was established to verify the practical performance of 

the proposed antenna in coding, transmitting, receiving, and decoding. Our experiment 

system successfully realized VLF wireless communication at the distance of 14 m. 


14

Besides, the fitting equation of magnetic flux density predicts the remote transmission 

ability (beyond 1 km) of the proposed mechanical antenna. Our design will contribute 

to the development of long-wave antennas that may greatly reduce the volume of VLF 

communication systems. 

Methods 

Materials preparation. Pb0.9625Sm0.025[(Mg1/3Nb2/3)0.71Ti0.29]O3 (2.5Sm-PMN-29PT) 

ceramics were fabricated by using the conventional solid-state reaction method. Firstly, 

the MgNb2O6 powders were prepared at 1,000 ℃ for 6 h by using raw materials MgO 

(99.9%) and Nb2O5 (99.9%). Then, the Pb3O4 (99%), MgNb2O6, TiO2 (98%), and 

Sm2O3 (99.5%) powders were mixed by the planetary ball milling in ethanol for 24 h. 

The mixture was dried and calcined at 800 °C for 2 h and the synthesized powder was 

subjected to another round of ball milling. Before being pressed into pellets of 10 mm 

in diameter and 3.5 mm in thickness under 60 MPa, the obtained slurry was dried and 

mixed with an appropriate amount of PVA binder. Later, the PVA binder was burnout 

at 550 °C for 6 h. Finally, the green pellets were sintered in an alumina crucible at a 

temperature of 1200 °C for 3 h, buried in sacrificial powder.

Material characterization. The phase structure of 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramics was

determined by a using high-resolution X-ray diffractometer (XRD, D/max-2500V; 

Rigaku, Japan) with Cu Kα radiation. The surface morphology of ceramic samples was 

examined by using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Merlin VP 


15

compact Zeiss, Germany). A commercial atomic force microscope (MFP-3D, Asylum 

Research, USA) with the piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) module was used to 

investigate the local ferroelectric/piezoelectric behavior of ceramic samples. Before 

electrical testing, both surfaces of the polished ceramic samples were painted with silver 

paste and then fired at 600 °C for 30 min to form electrodes. Strain S(E) hysteresis loop 

was measured by using a ferroelectric tester (aixACCT TF Analyzer 1000, Germany). 

Temperature-dependent permittivity and dielectric loss were measured by using an 

impedance analyzer (TH2827, Changzhou Tonghui Electronic Co, China), which is 

coupled with a temperature-regulated sample chamber.

Simulations. Electromagnetic simulations were carried out with COMSOL 

Multiphysics, and the relative results are shown in Fig. 1a,b. Physics interfaces of 

piezoelectricity (solid) and electrical circuit were used to simulate the electromagnetic

properties in the frequency domain. To simplify the calculations, the axisymmetric 

space dimension is adopted. A terminal boundary with the type of circuit, connecting to 

an external voltage source in the electrical circuit interface, was set to provide feed 

signals for the antenna. Impedance curve and stress distributions were obtained by 

adding relative plot groups. 

Modulation measurement. In the experiment system, a proposed mechanical antenna 

and a magnetic loop antenna (SAS-565L, A.H. Systems) were used as transmitter and 

receiver, respectively. The mechanical antenna was driven by 20 kHz/200 kHz/1 MHz 


16

signals input directly from a power amplifier (ATA-214, Aigtek) which is connected to 

an AFG (AFG 31000 Series, Tektronix). The ASK modulation was performed by the 

control of the AFG with a peak voltage of 2.5 V. The signals from the AFG will obtain 

100 times gain by using the power amplifier. In receiving terminal, an LIA (SR865A, 

Stanford Research Systems) with the same reference frequency as feed signals was 

implemented to extract the signals from extremely noisy environment. Limited by the 

measurement precision of the LIA, the periodic of sources signals should not be too 

small. For spectrum measurements, the LIA was replaced with a spectrum analyzer 

(N9320B, Keysight) in the experiment system. 

References 

1
Marshall, R. A., Wallace, T. & Turbe, M. Finite-difference modeling of very-low-
frequency propagation in the earth-ionosphere waveguide. IEEE Trans. Antennas 
Propag. 65, 7185-7197 (2017). 

2
Hua, M. et al. Very-Low-Frequency transmitters bifurcate energetic electron belt 
in near-earth space. Nat. Commun. 11, 4847 (2020). 

3
Adams, J. J. & Bernhard, J. T. A modal approach to tuning and bandwidth 
enhancement of an electrically small antenna. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 59, 
1085-1092 (2011). 

4
Chu, L. J. Physical limitations of omni‐directional antennas. J. Appl. Phys. 19, 
1163-1175 (1948). 

5
Stuart, H. R. & Pidwerbetsky, A. Electrically small antenna elements using 
negative permittivity resonators. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 54, 1644-1653 
(2006). 

6
Ziolkowski, R. W. & Erentok, A. Metamaterial-based efficient electrically small 
antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 54, 2113-2130 (2006).

7
Chen, H. H. et al. Ultra-compact mechanical antennas. Appl. Phys. Lett. 117, 
170501 (2020). 

8
Xu, J. C. et al. Metamaterial mechanical antenna for very low frequency wireless 
communication. Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater. 4, https://doi.org/10.1007/s42114-


17

021-00278-1 (2021). 

9
Bickford, J. A. et al. Performance of electrically small conventional and 
mechanical antennas. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 67, 2209-2223 (2019). 

10
Dong, C. Z. et al. A portable very low frequency (VLF) communication system 
based on acoustically actuated magnetoelectric antennas. IEEE Antennas Wirel. 
Propag. Lett. 19, 398-402 (2020). 

11
Yao, Z., Wang, Y. E., Keller, S. & Carman, G. P. Bulk acoustic wave-mediated 
multiferroic antennas: Architecture and performance bound. IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag. 63, 3335-3344 (2015). 

12
Nan, T. X. et al. Acoustically actuated ultra-compact NEMS magnetoelectric 
antennas. Nat. Commun. 8, 296 (2017). 

13
Hassanien, A. E., Breen, M., Li, M. H. & Gong, S. Acoustically driven 
electromagnetic radiating elements. Sci. Rep. 10, 17006 (2020). 

14
Kemp, M. A. et al. A high Q piezoelectric resonator as a portable VLF transmitter. 
Nat. Commun. 10, 1715 (2019). 

15
Cross, L. E., Jang, S. J., Newnham, R. E., Nomura, S. & Uchino, K. Large 
electrostrictive effects in relaxor ferroelectrics. Ferroelectrics 23, 187-191 (1980). 

16
Park, S. E. & Shrout, T. R. Ultrahigh strain and piezoelectric behavior in relaxor 
based ferroelectric single crystals. J. Appl. Phys. 82, 1804-1811 (1997).

17
Swartz, S. L. & Shrout, T. R. Fabrication of perovskite lead magnesium niobate. 
Mater. Res. Bull. 17, 1245-1250 (1982). 

18
Li, F. et al. Ultrahigh piezoelectricity in ferroelectric ceramics by design. Nat. 
Mater. 17, 349-354 (2018). 

19
Schrettle, F., Krohns, S., Lunkenheimer, P., Brabers, V. A. M. & Loidl, A. Relaxor 
ferroelectricity and the freezing of short-range polar order in magnetite. Phys. Rev. 
B 83, 195109 (2011). 

20
Wu, L., Wei, C. C., Wu, T. S. & Teng, C. C. Dielectric properties of modified PZT 
ceramics. J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 16, 2803-2812 (1983). 

21
Lu, X. et al. Structure evolution and exceptionally ultra-low hysteresis unipolar 
electric field-induced strain in (1−x)NaNbO3-xBaTiO3 lead-free ferroelectrics. 
Ceram. Int. 44, 5492-5499 (2018). 

22 Sundar, V. & Newnham, R. E. Electrostriction and polarization. Ferroelectrics 135, 

431-446 (1992). 

23
Newnham, R. E., Sundar, V., Yimnirun, R., Su, J. & Zhang, Q. M. Electrostriction: 
Nonlinear electromechanical coupling in solid dielectrics. J. Phys. Chem. B 101, 
10141-10150 (1997). 

24
Chen, B. et al. Large electrostrictive response in lead halide perovskites. Nat. 
Mater. 17, 1020-1026 (2018). 

25
Takenaka, H., Grinberg, I., Liu, S. & Rappe, A. M. Slush-like polar structures in 
single-crystal relaxors. Nature 546, 391-395 (2017). 

26
Kumar, A. et al. Atomic-resolution electron microscopy of nanoscale local 


18

structure in lead-based relaxor ferroelectrics. Nat. Mater. 20, 62–67 (2021). 


19

Supporting Information

Supplementary Note 1. Selection of materials 

Typical ferroelectric materials, such as lead zirconate titanate (PZT) 

and lithium Niobate (LN), exhibit a sharp dielectric peak at the 

ferroelectric-paraelectric phase transition temperature (i.e., Curie 

temperature Tc). Below this temperature, the material has an inverse 

piezoelectric effect, while the inverse piezoelectric effect disappears above 

this temperature. It’s known that much heat will be accumulated during the 

piezoelectric materials work at a periodic electric field, especially at high 

frequency. Therefore, the mechanical antennas based on the inverse 

piezoelectric effect of ferroelectric materials may not suitable for long-term 

operation under high-frequency fields. Moreover, piezoelectric materials 

such as PZT and LN are not ideal materials for mechanical antennas due to 

the hysteresis effect of field-induced strain. For typical ferroelectric 

materials, ferroelectric domain switching makes a decisive contribution to 

the total strain, which leads to the hysteresis effect of the field-induced 

strain meanwhile. Generally, the more flexible the ferroelectric domain 

switch, the more serious the hysteresis effect will be. 

Different from the typical ferroelectric materials, relaxor ferroelectric 

materials have a diffused phase transition, thus its dielectric constant can 


20

maintain a high value over a wide temperature range near the phase 

transition temperature. When the temperature is constant, the strain SE

caused by the electrostrictive effect and the polarization intensity P can be 

represented as 

2
2

r
0
(
)
SE
QP
Q
  E


(S1)

where Q is the electrostriction coefficient, E is the applied electric 

intensity, ɛr and ɛ0 are relative dielectric constant and dielectric constant of 

vacuum respectively. Therefore, the relaxor ferroelectric materials tend to 

obtain a large electrostrictive strain near the phase transition temperature 

since they have a huge and stable ɛr at this temperature range. Furthermore, 

the electrostrictive strain has no hysteresis effect and do not affected by the

Tc, because this strain does not come from the ferroelectric domain 

switching and the asymmetry of lattice. PMN-PT is a classical relaxor 

ferroelectric material, and its Tc is lower than the room temperature. By 

doping with 2.5 mol% Sm, Li et al enhanced the Tc of PMN-29PT ceramic 

to 80 – 90 ℃ and obtained a huge d33 (1,400 – 1,500 pC/N) and ɛr (13,000) 

around room temperature1. The typical relaxor ferroelectric property and 

the excellent dielectric property make 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramics a 

potential candidate for mechanical antennas based on electrostrictive effect. 


21

Supplementary Note 2. Discussion on mechanism 

As mentioned above, the electrostrictive strain SE is proportional to 

the square of ɛr. Therefore, the electrostrictive strain in relaxor ferroelectric 

materials can reach the same order of magnitude as the piezoelectric strain, 

which has been widely studied in previous works2,3. Generally, it’s believed 

that the piezoelectric effect and the electrostrictive effect contribute 

simultaneously to the total field-induced strain in relaxor ferroelectric 

material below the Tc, while the piezoelectric strain will gradually vanish 

when temperature is close to the Tc. Moreover, the piezoelectric strain 

consists of two parts, i.e., lattice distortion and domain wall switching. The 

threshold electric field required for domain wall switching is in the kV/mm 

scale, thus the piezoelectric strain at low electric field mainly comes from 

the lattice distortion. For this part of the piezoelectric strain, the intrinstic 

contribution is linearly related to the electric field. 

In this work, 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic exhibited significant relaxor 

ferroelectric property, as demonstrated in Fig. 1c,d, and 2b. During the 

experiment, the temperature of the material was enhanced to close to the 

Tc under an applied high-frequency electric field above MHz, but its 

transmission performance kept constant. In addition, the maximum 

amplitude of the applied electric field in this experiment is 250 V, which is 


22

much lower than the threshold electric field of the ferroelectric domain 

switching. Based on these findings, we believe that the electrostrictive 

effect is the main mechanism of the mechanical antenna proposed in this 

study. 

Supplementary Figures 

Supplementary Figure S1| X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of 2.5Sm-

PMN-29PT ceramic. A high-resolution X-ray diffractometer (XRD,

D/max-2500V; Rigaku, Japan) with Cu Kα radiation was utilized to 

determine its phase structure. A typical perovskite phase was observed and 

the characteristic diffraction peaks indicate a rhombohedral phase structure, 

which corresponds with the previous work1. 


23

Supplementary Figure S2| Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) 

results of the 2.5Sm-PMN-29PT ceramic cross-section. Distributions of 

elements were examined by using field-emission scanning electron 

microscopy (FE-SEM, Merlin VP compact Zeiss, Germany). All elements 

are homogeneously distributed, and no element enrichment is observed. 


24

Supplementary Figure S3| Bandwidth of the proposed mechanical 

antenna with poled materials. a, Received wireless spectrum of the 

proposed antenna in the ranges of 10 - 90 kHz, b, 50 - 550 kHz, and c, 

550 - 1050 kHz. d, Peak power curve. 


25

Supplementary Figure S4| Remote transmission measurements of the 

mechanical antenna with poled materials. a, Magnetic flux density of 

the radiated EM waves versus distance. b, Received signals at distances 

of 0.6 m and 14 m. 


26

Supplementary Figure S5| Predictions of the magnetic flux density at 

further distances. Magnetic flux density fitting curves of the proposed 

mechanical antennas with poled and unpoled materials at a, b 20 kHz, c, d

200 kHz, and e, f 1 MHz. According to the fitting equations, the magnetic 

flux density in the distance can be predicted. For instance, the predicted 


27

values at 1 km away from the proposed antenna with unpoled material are 

respectively 1.88 fT, 8.67 fT, and 0.58 fT at 20 kHz, 200 kHz, and 1 MHz. 

These values are in a testable range under current receiving technology, 

which demonstrates the remote transmission ability of the proposed ultra-

band electrostrictive mechanical antenna within the bandwidth.

References

1
Li, F. et al. Ultrahigh piezoelectricity in ferroelectric ceramics by design. Nat. 

Mater. 17, 349-354 (2018).
2
Cross, L. E., Jang, S. J., Newnham, R. E., Nomura, S. & Uchino, K. Large 

electrostrictive effects in relaxor ferroelectrics. Ferroelectrics 23, 187-191 (1980).
3
Park, S. E. & Shrout, T. R. Ultrahigh strain and piezoelectric behavior in 

relaxor based ferroelectric single crystals. J. Appl. Phys. 82, 1804-1811 (1997).


