1

Amorphous Selenium Mie Resonators for Infrared Meta-Optics

Danveer Singh1†, Michal Poplinger1†, Avraham Twitto1, Rafi Snitkoff1, Pilkhaz Nanikashvili1, Ori Azolay1, Adi Levi1, Chen 

Stern1, Gili Cohen Taguri2, Asaf Albo1,2, Doron Naveh1,2* and Tomer Lewi1,2* 

1Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel
2Institute for Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Bar-Ilan University Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Corresponding authors:  tomer.lewi@biu.ac.il; doron.naveh@biu.ac.il

Abstract

Applying direct growth and deposition of optical surfaces holds great promise for the advancement of 

future nanophotonic technologies. Here, we report on a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique for 

depositing amorphous selenium (a-Se) spheres by desorption of selenium from Bi2Se3 and re-adsorption 

on the substrate. We utilize this process to grow scalable, large area Se spheres on several substrates and 

characterize their Mie-resonant response in the mid-infrared (MIR) spectral range. We demonstrate size-

tunable Mie resonances spanning the 2-16 µm spectral range, for single isolated resonators and large area 

ensembles, respectively. We further demonstrate strong absorption dips of up to 90% in ensembles of 

particles in a broad MIR range. Finally, we show that ultra-high-Q resonances arise in the case where Se 

Mie-resonators are coupled to low-loss epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) substrates. These findings demonstrate 

the enabling potential of amorphous Selenium as a versatile and tunable nanophotonic material that may 

open up avenues for on-chip MIR spectroscopy, chemical sensing, spectral imaging and large area 

metasurface fabrication.

Keywords: Mie-resonators, nanoparticles, selenium, meta-optics, CVD growth, epsilon-near-zero, high-

quality-factor resonances

1. Introduction

Subwavelength Mie resonators are key for achieving light manipulation with low losses and have shown 

great promise as enabling components of meta-optics and nanophotonic technologies [1,2]. Benefiting 

from a rich optical response of multipolar magnetic and electric resonances, high-index Mie resonators 

have enabled new classes of low-loss transmissive nanophotonic devices and metasurface functionalities 

such as metalenses [3–7], beam deflectors [8–10], holograms [11–13], enhanced nonlinear optical 

processes [14,15], efficient nanoantennas [1,16], antireflection coatings [17], enhancement of circular 

dichroism [18], to name a few. Low-loss dielectric nanoparticles form the basic unit cells for high 

efficiency metasurfaces and have played a pivotal role in nanoantennas 
[1,2,16], photo-

detectors [19,20], nano lasers [21], antireflective coatings [22], thermal emitters [23], nanosphere 


2

lithography [24], optical forces [25] among others. Silicon nanoparticles have attracted most 

attention [2] due to the maturity of fabrication and processing techniques along with CMOS compatibility 

and electronic integration. However, other materials are required for operation in different spectral ranges 

(visible, longwave infrared) [3,26], active functionality [27–30] or integration with other material 

systems [31]. Chalcogenide materials emerge as promising candidates to fill this gap, owing to their 

extraordinary properties such as high permittivity [32,33], anomalous thermo-optic effects [32], phase 

transitions [34–36], photo-darkening [37], and lasing [31] , which can be harnessed for advanced 

photonic technologies. Among the chalcogenides, Selenium (Se) is a highly transparent semiconductor 

across the entire infrared range and exhibits some extraordinary electrical and optical properties such as 

high photoconductivity, large birefringence, anisotropic thermo-conductivity, high piezoelectric and 

thermo-electrical response [38,39]. Se also exhibits negligible optical losses at wavelengths longer than 

~ 600nm, where the real part of its refractive index is non-dispersive [40]. So far, studies on Se 

nanoparticles have focused on the visible and near-infrared ranges [18], including synthetic routes to 

nanowires [39], nanospheres, and spherical particle colloids  [41,42]. 

Here, we demonstrate for the first time, desorption of selenium from Bi2Se3 and re-adsorption on the 

substrate, resulting in condensation of amorphous selenium (a-Se) spheres. While CVD processes 

involving solid precursors are well studied, this is the first example of combined dissociation and 

sublimation of the precursor, leading to unique morphological and structural condensation mediated by 

thermal and compositional equilibrium. We study the Mie-resonant characteristics of a-Se in various 

morphologies and demonstrate Mie-resonances spanning the entire 2-16 µm MIR range. Using single-

particle infrared spectroscopy, we demonstrate size-tunable magnetic and electric resonances in truncated 

spherical particles, culminating in strong absorption (90%) resonance dips in ensembles of resonant 

particles. Finally, we show Mie resonance pinning effect in Se resonators placed on an epsilon-near-zero 

(ENZ) substrate. In the vicinity of the ENZ wavelength, high-Q resonances (Q~40) emerge with the 

resonance position independent of the resonator size. These findings demonstrate the potential of Se Mie-

resonators as a versatile low-loss building block for infrared applications.  

2. Results and Discussion

Spherical a-Se deposits were achieved by CVD-like growth on various substrates, including Si with 90nm 

oxide layer, C-plane sapphire, and (100) Si, with typical substrate sizes of 1 - 2 cm2 (see supporting 

information for full fabrication details). The growth process is schematically illustrated in Figure 1 (see 

also a scaled drawing, Figure S1). The growth was performed in low-pressure quartz tube with Bi2Se3 

as the starting precursor for the synthesis. The substrates on which a-Se was grown were placed at 


3

different distances from the precursor Bi2Se3. The temperature at the precursor position was 540 and 750 

℃, where in all temperatures the preferred sublimation of Se resulted with a deposition of a-Se spheres, 

with some minor influence on the morphology (sphere size and density). At fixed N2 carrier gas flow 

conditions (3 sccm), the temperature of the substrate and its distance from the Bi2Se3 source are dominant 

and a-Se spheres were grown at the temperatures of 450 and 540℃. The substrate temperature and its 

distance from the Bi2Se3 source are controlled by the temperature at the centre of the furnace (see 

supporting information for details). As substrate temperatures increases, the sphere diameter increases 

and so is the spacing between spheres. The vaporization of Bi2Se3 is known to have a kinetically-

dependent composition [43], where initially the selenium sublimation dominates the process –

corresponding to the reaction 2𝐵𝑖2𝑆𝑒3(𝑠) → 𝐵𝑖4𝑆𝑒5(𝑠) + 1 2
⁄ 𝑆𝑒2(𝑔) with ∆𝐻° = 104-114 kJ [44]. 

Interestingly, the deposition of selenium on our substrate is a result of two consecutive phase transitions 

where the first is into liquid phase (red-marked temperatures in Figure 1b). The vapor condensation rate 

on the substrate and surface tension of the drop dictates the drop diameter. An additional phase transition, 

driven by the solute of Bi2Se3 and Bi vapor – resulting in freezing of the liquid solution corresponding 

to the observed ~98% Se (Figure 1b) [45]. Qualitatively, the size and density of grown solid spheres 

also depend on flux of Se vapor that is controlled by the N2 flow relative to the precursor to substrate 

distance and is a scalable method for coating large areas with amorphous Se (a-Se) in spherical 

morphology, with control over the average size of the spheres.

Figure 1: CVD growth process (a) Schematic illustration of the a-Se sphere formation by desorption of selenium from Bi2Se3
and re-adsorption on the substrate. (b) Binary phase diagram of Bi-Se showing the liquid Se (pink area) and the boundary 
with solid solution (green area).


4

In the following, we describe the inspection of the grown a-Se as optical resonators in the MIR. First, the 

fabricated Se spheres were characterized for their morphology, elemental composition, and amorphous 

phase. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) survey of sub-micron and micron sized spheres were 

observed to analyze the morphology of the particles, as shown in Figures 2(a, b). SEM micrographs at 

normal and various tilting angles reveal that the CVD grown resonators are spherical in shape and 

truncated at the substrate interface, with diameter distribution between 0.6µm and 5µm and aspect ratio 

of height to diameter (h/D) of ~0.8. SEM survey (a few millimeters is size) shows particle of relative 

homogeneous size distribution (Figure 2a). More details and discussion about size distribution are given 

in the supporting information (Figure S2). Figure 2(d) presents a representative energy dispersive X-

ray (EDAX) spectroscopy, performed on a single Se sphere on a Sapphire substrate, shown in Figure 

2(b). The average composition of ~98% Se in the compound is in good agreement with the expected 

percentage (Figure 1b) and indicates the formation of Selenium resonators. Additional to the 

composition, the amorphous phase of Bi:Se solid solution was inferred from x-ray diffraction (XRD) on 

macroscopic (10 × 10 𝑚𝑚) samples as presented in Figure 2(c), showing only the peaks of the sapphire 

substrate (see supporting information for more details). 

Figure 2: (a, b) SEM images of CVD grown sub-micron and micron sized resonators, respectively. (c, d) X-ray diffraction 
(XRD) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDAX) spectroscopy, respectively. (e) Raman spectrum as collected from a single sphere
taken at 633 nm excitation. 


5

Single-particle Raman spectrum shown in Figure 2(e) further supports the formation of amorphous 

phase. The Raman peak at 251.46cm-1 is a signature of the stretching of Se-Se mode in the amorphous 

state [40] [46]. 

Representative single-particle spectra of an isolated Se resonator are presented in Figure 3(a) (inset 

shows SEM side-view of the resonator at 55o angle). Figure 3(c) illustrates the configuration of the 

optical setup used for the experimental measurement of single-particle Fourier Transform Infrared 

(FTIR) spectroscopy in reflection mode. The setup includes an FTIR (Nicolet, iS50R) spectrometer 

coupled to an infrared microscope (Nicolet, Continuum Infrared Microscope). The experimental 

multipolar Mie scattering spectral response shown is Figure 3a exhibits magnetic dipole (MD), magnetic 

quadrupole (MQ) and electric quadrupole (EQ) resonance modes, as revealed from FDTD numerical 

calculation (Figure 3a, red curve) and from the corresponding electric and magnetic field distributions 

(Figure 4 a-f). The multipolar scattering response and Mie coefficient decomposition of a perfect 

spherical resonator of the same diameter, calculated using analytical Mie theory, is presented in Figure 

3b. Interestingly, both the truncated (Figure 3a) and perfect spheres (Figure 3b) spectra show that the 

ED resonance is suppressed in the total scattering response (black curve Figure 3b). This is due to the 

intermediate refractive index value of Se (n=2.65) [47] which results in a significant overlap between the 

MD and ED mode at the ED resonance wavelength. We note that the spectra of the truncated sphere on 

the SiO2/Si substrate is slightly red-shifted with respect to the sphere in homogeneous medium (air), with 

some broadening of resonances which mostly arise from substrate effects [16]. However, the most 

prominent effect of the substrate is the suppression of the scattering efficiency of the MD mode, resulting 

in a scattering response dominated by the MQ resonance.    


6

Figure 3: Infrared spectra of single Se Mie resonator. (a) Experimentally measured (red) and FDTD numerically calculated 
(black) infrared spectra of single truncated Se resonator with diameter d= 3.3µm on SiO2/Si substrate (side-view of resonator 
at 55o angle, shown in inset), respectively. In the FDTD calculations, we used refractive index value of n=2.65 for the a-Se 
resonator [47] (b) The total calculated Mie scattering spectra (black) of a perfect spherical resonator with d= 3.3µm in air,
along with multipolar decomposition of the Mie coefficients (colored lines) of the MD, ED, MQ, EQ, MH, EH (MH=magnetic 
hexapole, EH=electric hexapole) modes. (c) Illustration of the experimental optical setup configuration.

Figure 4: Multipolar electric and magnetic field distributions of a single truncated Se resonator with diameter d= 3.3µm on 
SiO2/Si substrate, presented in Figure 3. (a, b, c) represent the electric field distribution at the MD (9.9 µm), MQ (7.4 µm), 
and EQ (5.98 µm) resonances, respectively, in the x-z plane. (d, e, f) represents the corresponding magnetic field distribution 
at the same resonance wavelengths.

The ability to engineer Mie resonance wavelengths with size is fundamental and is necessary for any 

application. Figure 5a and 5b present numerically calculated FDTD and experimentally measured 

spectra of particles of variable diameters (with fixed aspect ratio of h/D ~ 0.8), respectively, exhibiting 

size-dependent multipolar Mie resonances spanning the 2-12 µm spectral range. All FDTD simulations 

were modeled based on exact size and morphology of the meta-atoms which were extracted from SEM 

imaging at various tilting angles.


7

Figure 5: Size-dependent tuning of Mie resonances in Se resonators. (a) Simulated FDTD scattering spectra of the 
experimentally measured particles shown in (b). (b) Experimentally measured spectra of variable sized particles. Inset shows 
corresponding SEM images. The sharp dips in the experimental spectra at ~4.2µm are due to CO2 absorption in the 
atmosphere. The black dashed lines in (a,b) are guides to the eye indicating the red-shift of the MD and MQ resonance modes. 
(c) Extracted size-dependent resonance wavelength shifts of the MD and MQ modes, respectively.  

The black dashed line in Figures 5a and 5b represents a guide to the eye for the MD and MQ resonance 

red-shifts as resonator diameter is increased. Figure 5(c) shows the size-dependent FDTD calculated and 

experimentally extracted MD and MQ resonance wavelength shifts. The experientially observed linear 

dependence of wavelength with size is in excellent agreement with FDTD predictions and was also 

observed for Se resonators on various other substrates (e.g. sapphire, Au, Si). 

Implementations of size-tunable dielectric Mie resonators in devices and metasurfaces ultimately require 

easy, scalable, and large-area fabrication methods. For instance, typical Mie resonator-based 

metasurfaces and devices are fabricated with conventional top-down semiconductor processing 

techniques. On the other hand, bottom-up chemical synthesis of Mie resonators could provide alternative 

applications such as, e.g., coatings and paints or self-assembled 3D metamaterials. Next, we demonstrate 

size-tunable MIR scattering (absorbed in the substrate) resonances of large area ensembles of Se meta-

atoms, which can be exploited for large area antireflection coatings, spectral filtering, and photo-

detection technology. 

The potential of large area CVD grown Se Mie resonators is demonstrated in Figure 6. The ensemble 

measurements presented in Figure 6a (ensembles with averaged particle radii of r=1.75µm and r=620nm, 

respectively) show strong extinction resonances in both experimentally measured spectra and FDTD 

calculations. Measured and calculated spectra match very well for both ensembles of particles, with the 

spectral response being dominated by the MQ resonance of the individual particles. In Figure 6b, we 

compare ensemble reflection spectra of widely separated particles and aggregates of particles, which are 


8

densely distributed. These measurements reveal whether the scattering response of individual particles 

that dominate ensembles of isolated particles, are altered in dense aggregates of particles. The spectra 

exhibit strong extinction resonances (forward scattering into the substrate) of up to 90%, covering a broad 

MIR spectrum. The spectra of ensembles with widely separated particles (r=620nm and r=1.75µm, blue 

and black curves) show 50% reflection modulation at the 3µm and 7.1µm resonance dips, respectively, 

while the dense ensemble shows up to 90% extinction into the substrate. The dashed black lines mark 

the location of the MQ resonance modes of individual particles which dominate the scattering spectra for 

both ensembles. The homogeneity of the ensembles is manifested by the invariance of the resonance 

location for both widely separated and dense particle ensembles. These findings are also in line with 

previous studies that have demonstrated the strong robustness of Mie-resonators to position and spatial 

disorder [48]. It should be noted that Se is highly transparent across the whole infrared spectral 

range [47]; hence the observed extinction resonances are not due to ohmic-losses, but merely radiation 

losses manifested by the forward scattering of Mie resonances predominantly into the substrate.  

Figure 6: Extinction spectra of Se Mie resonator ensembles (a) Experimental (solid line) and FDTD ensemble spectra (dashed 
lines) with averaged radii of r=620nm (blue) and r=1.75µm (black), respectively. (b)  The measured reflection infrared spectra 
of widely separated and densely packed ensembles of the same averaged size particles r=620nm (solid blue, dashed blue) and 
r=1.75µm (solid red, dashed red), respectively. Side-inset shows the optical image of the ensembles. Scale bar is 10µm. The 
particle densities of ensembles of micron size resonators (r=1.75µm) were n=0.03 µm-2 (widely separated) and n=0.108 µm-2

(densely packed), where for ensembles of sub-micron size resonators (r=620nm), densities were n=0.127 µm-2 (separated) 
and n=0.33 µm-2 (densely pack), respectively.

The broadening of the extinction peaks can be attributed to inter-particle cross-talk and is further 

discussed in the supplementary information (S4). Overall, this typical characteristic spectral response, as 

presented in Figure 6, is repeatable for ensembles having the same average radii. The expected scattering 


9

spectra will change significantly only for higher order modes, where narrow-linewidth resonances are 

more sensitive to size/shape variations. These measurements demonstrate the enabling potential of large 

area Se Mie-resonators in detection, light conversion, thermophotovoltaic cells and energy harnessing 

applications across the entire infrared range.

Coupling metasurface resonators to ENZ materials has been previously explored due to the unique optical 

properties arising in the vicinity of a vanishingly small permittivity, including dynamically tunable 

metasurfaces and wavefront control [49,50] large nonlinearity [51], magnetic field concentration [52]

and radiation pattern control [53] to name a few. In the following, we show that the quality factor (Q) 

of Se resonators can be significantly enhanced when coupled to low-loss ENZ substrates. We 

demonstrate this by coupling Se resonators to a sapphire substrate, as illustrated in Figure 7.  Large area 

Se Mie resonators were CVD-grown on a c-cut sapphire substrate (see supporting information for 

details). Sapphire exhibits a uniaxial optical character and is transparent from deep-UV up to the 

beginning of the reststrahlen band (~0.12 eV) where longitudinal optical (LO) and transverse optical 

(TO) modes induce an ENZ region. The permittivity of Sapphire (ordinary axis) is plotted in Figure 7c. 

The ENZ region at~11 µm is followed by a spectral range of negative permittivity with low losses, which 

can be used to excite surface phonon polaritons (SPhPs) [54–56] [53]. The sapphire ENZ value at 

11.01µm wavelength (Ɛ = 0.001 + i0.135), is marked by black dashed line in Figure 7(c). The low 

imaginary value indicates that the substrate exhibits low losses at the ENZ wavelength. Reflection 

infrared spectrum of single isolated Se meta-atom of diameter d=3.49µm (aspect ratio h/d=0.75, inset 

shows SEM image) on a sapphire substrate along with FDTD calculation are shown in Figure 7(a). The 

green curve represents FDTD scattering spectrum of an identical sized Se resonator surrounded by air (Ɛ 

= 1). Compared to the resonator in air, the Se resonator placed on sapphire exhibits a large red shift. This 

red shift is due to the negative permittivity of the sapphire substrate at these wavelengths, inducing an 

interaction with mirror image in the Se particle, thus red shifting the resonances to longer 

wavelengths [32,57]. The two main features in the experimental spectra of Figure 7(a) are on-resonance 

high-Q spectral peaks of MD mode (Q ~ 8.8) and a localized surface phonon resonance (Q ~ 38) observed 

at 11.3µm and 14.8µm, respectively (black curve). These values represent a 5-fold increase in quality 

factors compared to the same resonators on Si substrates. Numerically calculated spectra of the same 

single particle (red curve in Figure 7a) reveal very similar quality factors of Q~10.2 at λ=11.4µm and 

Q~43 at λ=15.4µm for the two resonances, respectively.


10

Figure 7:  Spectral properties of Se resonators on low-loss ENZ substrate. (a) Experimental (black) and numerically calculated 
FDTD (red) spectra of an isolated single Se resonator (d=3.49µm) on a sapphire substrate. The FDTD calculated spectra of 
the same Se resonator without the substrate (i.e. in air), is also shown (green curve). Inset shows SEM image of the particle 
at 55 deg tilt (scale bar is 2µm). (b) Single particle spectra of three different sized resonators on sapphire, exhibiting sized-
independent resonances at the ENZ wavelength (λ~11.1µm). The ENZ wavelength is marked by a black dashed line 
manifesting the pinning effect of the resonance. Insert shows SEM images of the particles. The scale bar is 3µm in (a). (c) 
The real and imaginary parts of permittivity of sapphire calculated from [58]. The ENZ wavelength is marked by a black 
dashed line. (d, e) Electric and magnetic field distributions at the two spectral features shown in (b). (d) Electric and magnetic 
field distributions of an MD mode at λ=11.1µm (e) Electric and magnetic field distribution at λ=15.4µm

Figure 7(b) presents the spectra of three particles of variable sizes (d=3.49µm, 3.73 µm, d=4.67µm, 

respectively). The MD resonance peak in all three particles is size-independent and pinned at λ=11.1µm 

(dashed line in Figure 7b). This value is determined by the location of the ENZ in the sapphire and not 

by the resonator size. This ‘pinning’ effect of resonance wavelength to the ENZ value can be attributed 

to the effective index (neff) of the local environment [50], which is significantly dominated by ENZ of 

the  substrate. Such an effect has been previously observed mainly in plasmonic resonators [53]. MD 

resonance Q-factors as high as QMD ~19.8 are observed for the d=3.73 µm particle. These MD Q-factors 

values are higher than previously reported Q-factors in individual meta-atoms in the MIR range, obtained 

from Si (QMD~7) [16] , Ge (QMD~7) [16] or even from high index PbTe (n~5.7) resonators (QMD~10.8)

[32].


11

The long wavelength peak (at λ~15µm) of the spectra is due to a localized surface phonon mode. This 

resonance is slightly red shifted as size increases and is also influenced by the rapid change in the 

permittivity at these long wavelengths. This resonance is also characterized by narrow linewidths with 

quality factors reaching Q~43. 

To further investigate these spectral features, we used FDTD numerical calculations to study the field 

distributions. Figures 7d and 7e represent the electric (i) and magnetic (ii) field distributions of these 

two resonances at 11.1µm and 14.8µm, respectively. The resonance at ~ 11.1µm is driven by the ENZ 

region. Since the resonator is placed on a vanishingly small permittivity, the MD-like mode is 

concentrated at the top of the resonator and at the resonator-air interface where the denser permittivity 

(air, ε=1) exists, and hence the local density of optical states is higher. Furthermore, the low permittivity 

of the substrate is also responsible for the predominantly backscattered radiation towards the denser 

medium (air). At longer wavelengths however (λ>12µm), the negative permittivity of the Sapphire 

substrate can support surface phonon modes. Indeed, as can be seen in Figure 7e, the spectral feature at 

14.8µm is a localized surface phonon mode where the fields are concentrated at the resonator-substrate 

interface. The high Q-factor of this resonance mode (Q~43) is enabled by the relatively low imaginary 

part of the permittivity in the sapphire substrate. Further analysis also demonstrates that the Se resonator 

effectively couples the free space radiation of the incoming beam to confined SPhP oscillations at λ=11.9 

(where ε = ̵ 1, see supporting information Figure S5). Altogether this platform achieves extremely high-

Q values in single resonators with a moderate refractive index (n=2.65).

3. Conclusion

We have demonstrated a novel growth method for a-Se spherical particles on various substrates, and their 

optical characterization as Mie-resonators. Numerical and experimental observations reveal that the 

multipolar Mie scattering infrared spectra is dominated by the MD and MQ resonance modes. We 

demonstrate size-engineered resonances that span the entire MIR range, culminating in strong extinction 

resonance dips of up to 90% in ensembles of resonant particles. Finally, we demonstrate that high-Q 

resonances (Q~40) arise when the resonators are placed on low-loss ENZ substrates. These findings 

highlight the potential and versatility of a-Se Mie resonators and suggest new possibilities for 

applications such as Mie-resonant paints, coatings, on-chip chemical and biological sensing, spectral 

imaging and photodetection technology with Selenium resonators.


12

Supporting information

CVD Growth process for a-Se resonators, optical setup, experimental procedures and data acquisition, 

3D FDTD simulation methods, electric and magnetic field distribution for a-Se resonators on Si and SiO2

substrates, FDTD spectra for ensembles of different particle densities, electric field distribution of 

resonators on ENZ and the excitation of SPhP oscillations

Acknowledgement

TL would like to thank the Israel Science Foundation for funding this work under grant No. 2110/19; DN 

would like to thank the European Research Council for the generous funding of this work under the 

H2020 FET OPEN grant No. 801389.

Conflict of Interest: 

Authors declares no conflict of interest

References

1. 
S. Jahani and Z. Jacob, "All-dielectric metamaterials," Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 23–36 (2016).

2. 
A. I. Kuznetsov, A. E. Miroshnichenko, M. L. Brongersma, Y. S. Kivshar, and B. Luk’yanchuk, 
"Optically resonant dielectric nanostructures," Science (80-. ). 354, aag2472 (2016).

3. 
M. Khorasaninejad, W. T. Chen, R. C. Devlin, J. Oh, A. Y. Zhu, and F. Capasso, "Metalenses at 
visible wavelengths: Diffraction-limited focusing and subwavelength resolution imaging," 
Science (80-. ). 352, 1190–1194 (2016).

4. 
F. Aieta, M. A. Kats, P. Genevet, and F. Capasso, "Multiwavelength achromatic metasurfaces by 
dispersive phase compensation," Science (80-. ). 347, 1342–1345 (2015).

5. 
E. Arbabi, A. Arbabi, S. M. Kamali, Y. Horie, and A. Faraon, "Controlling the sign of chromatic 
dispersion in diffractive optics with dielectric metasurfaces," Optica 4, 625 (2017).

6. 
S. Wang, P. C. Wu, V.-C. Su, Y.-C. Lai, M.-K. Chen, H. Y. Kuo, B. H. Chen, Y. H. Chen, T.-T. 
Huang, J.-H. Wang, R.-M. Lin, C.-H. Kuan, T. Li, Z. Wang, S. Zhu, and D. P. Tsai, "A broadband 
achromatic metalens in the visible," Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 227–232 (2018).

7. 
W. T. Chen, A. Y. Zhu, V. Sanjeev, M. Khorasaninejad, Z. Shi, E. Lee, and F. Capasso, "A 
broadband achromatic metalens for focusing and imaging in the visible," Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 
220–226 (2018).

8. 
D. Lin, P. Fan, E. Hasman, and M. L. Brongersma, "Dielectric gradient metasurface optical 
elements," Science (80-. ). 345, 298–302 (2014).

9. 
A. Arbabi, E. Arbabi, Y. Horie, S. M. Kamali, and A. Faraon, "Planar metasurface retroreflector," 
Nat. Photonics 11, 415–420 (2017).

10. 
D. Sell, J. Yang, S. Doshay, K. Zhang, and J. A. Fan, "Visible Light Metasurfaces Based on 
Single-Crystal Silicon," ACS Photonics 3, 1919–1925 (2016).


13

11. 
R. C. Devlin, M. Khorasaninejad, W. T. Chen, J. Oh, and F. Capasso, "Broadband high-efficiency 
dielectric metasurfaces for the visible spectrum," Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 10473–10478 (2016).

12. 
Z. Li, I. Kim, L. Zhang, M. Q. Mehmood, M. S. Anwar, M. Saleem, D. Lee, K. T. Nam, S. Zhang, 
B. Luk’yanchuk, Y. Wang, G. Zheng, J. Rho, and C.-W. Qiu, "Dielectric Meta-Holograms 
Enabled with Dual Magnetic Resonances in Visible Light," ACS Nano 11, 9382–9389 (2017).

13. 
Z. Xie, T. Lei, G. Si, X. Wang, J. Lin, C. Min, and X. Yuan, "Meta-Holograms with Full 
Parameter Control of Wavefront over a 1000 nm Bandwidth," ACS Photonics 4, 2158–2164 
(2017).

14. 
S. Liu, M. B. Sinclair, S. Saravi, G. A. Keeler, Y. Yang, J. Reno, G. M. Peake, F. Setzpfandt, I. 
Staude, T. Pertsch, and I. Brener, "Resonantly Enhanced Second-Harmonic Generation Using III–
V Semiconductor All-Dielectric Metasurfaces," Nano Lett. 16, 5426–5432 (2016).

15. 
N. Karl, P. P. Vabishchevich, M. R. Shcherbakov, S. Liu, M. B. Sinclair, G. Shvets, and I. Brener, 
"Frequency Conversion in a Time-Variant Dielectric Metasurface," Nano Lett. 20, 7052–7058 
(2020).

16. 
T. Lewi, P. P. Iyer, N. A. Butakov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, and J. A. Schuller, "Widely Tunable 
Infrared Antennas Using Free Carrier Refraction," Nano Lett. 15, 8188–8193 (2015).

17. 
P. Spinelli, M. A. Verschuuren, and A. Polman, "Broadband omnidirectional antireflection 
coating based on subwavelength surface Mie resonators," Nat. Commun. 3, 692 (2012).

18. 
D. Vestler, A. Ben-Moshe, and G. Markovich, "Enhancement of Circular Dichroism of a Chiral 
Material by Dielectric Nanospheres," J. Phys. Chem. C 123, 5017–5022 (2019).

19. 
M. Garín, R. Fenollosa, R. Alcubilla, L. Shi, L. F. Marsal, and F. Meseguer, "All-silicon spherical-
Mie-resonator photodiode with spectral response in the infrared region," Nat. Commun. 5, 3440 
(2014).

20. 
L. Cao, J.-S. Park, P. Fan, B. Clemens, and M. L. Brongersma, "Resonant Germanium 
Nanoantenna Photodetectors," Nano Lett. 10, 1229–1233 (2010).

21. 
V. Mylnikov, S. T. Ha, Z. Pan, V. Valuckas, R. Paniagua-Domínguez, H. V. Demir, and A. I. 
Kuznetsov, "Lasing Action in Single Subwavelength Particles Supporting Supercavity Modes," 
ACS Nano 14, 7338–7346 (2020).

22. 
K. V. Baryshnikova, M. I. Petrov, V. E. Babicheva, and P. A. Belov, "Plasmonic and silicon 
spherical nanoparticle antireflective coatings," Sci. Rep. 6, 22136 (2016).

23. 
J. A. Schuller, T. Taubner, and M. L. Brongersma, "Optical antenna thermal emitters," Nat. 
Photonics (2009).

24. 
Y. Zhou, H. Zheng, I. I. Kravchenko, and J. Valentine, "Flat optics for image differentiation," 
Nat. Photonics 14, 316–323 (2020).

25. 
A. Andres-Arroyo, B. Gupta, F. Wang, J. J. Gooding, and P. J. Reece, "Optical Manipulation and 
Spectroscopy of Silicon Nanoparticles Exhibiting Dielectric Resonances," Nano Lett. (2016).

26. 
P. P. Iyer, R. A. DeCrescent, Y. Mohtashami, G. Lheureux, N. A. Butakov, A. Alhassan, C. 
Weisbuch, S. Nakamura, S. P. DenBaars, and J. A. Schuller, "Unidirectional luminescence from 
InGaN/GaN quantum-well metasurfaces," Nat. Photonics 14, 543–548 (2020).


14

27. 
M. R. Shcherbakov, S. Liu, V. V. Zubyuk, A. Vaskin, P. P. Vabishchevich, G. Keeler, T. Pertsch, 
T. V. Dolgova, I. Staude, I. Brener, and A. A. Fedyanin, "Ultrafast all-optical tuning of direct-gap 
semiconductor metasurfaces," Nat. Commun. 8, 17 (2017).

28. 
N. A. Butakov, M. W. Knight, T. Lewi, P. P. Iyer, D. Higgs, H. T. Chorsi, J. Trastoy, J. Del Valle 
Granda, I. Valmianski, C. Urban, Y. Kalcheim, P. Y. Wang, P. W. C. Hon, I. K. Schuller, and J. 
A. Schuller, "Broadband Electrically Tunable Dielectric Resonators Using Metal–Insulator 
Transitions," ACS Photonics 5, 4056–4060 (2018).

29. 
G. K. Shirmanesh, R. Sokhoyan, P. C. Wu, and H. A. Atwater, "Electro-optically Tunable 
Multifunctional Metasurfaces," ACS Nano 14, 6912–6920 (2020).

30. 
T. Lewi, N. A. Butakov, H. A. Evans, M. W. Knight, P. P. Iyer, D. Higgs, H. Chorsi, J. Trastoy, 
J. D. V. Granda, I. Valmianski, C. Urban, Y. Kalcheim, P. Y. Wang, P. W. C. Hon, I. K. Schuller, 
and J. A. Schuller, "Thermally Reconfigurable Meta-Optics," IEEE Photonics J. (2019).

31. 
M. Wu, S. T. Ha, S. Shendre, E. G. Durmusoglu, W.-K. Koh, D. R. Abujetas, J. A. Sánchez-Gil, 
R. Paniagua-Domínguez, H. V. Demir, and A. I. Kuznetsov, "Room-Temperature Lasing in 
Colloidal Nanoplatelets via Mie-Resonant Bound States in the Continuum," Nano Lett. 20, 6005–
6011 (2020).

32. 
T. Lewi, H. A. Evans, N. A. Butakov, and J. A. Schuller, "Ultrawide Thermo-optic Tuning of 
PbTe Meta-Atoms," Nano Lett. 17, 3940–3945 (2017).

33. 
L. Zhang, J. Ding, H. Zheng, S. An, H. Lin, B. Zheng, Q. Du, G. Yin, J. Michon, Y. Zhang, Z. 
Fang, M. Y. Shalaginov, L. Deng, T. Gu, H. Zhang, and J. Hu, "Ultra-thin high-efficiency mid-
infrared transmissive Huygens meta-optics," Nat. Commun. 9, 1481 (2018).

34. 
Q. Wang, E. T. F. Rogers, B. Gholipour, C.-M. Wang, G. Yuan, J. Teng, and N. I. Zheludev, 
"Optically reconfigurable metasurfaces and photonic devices based on phase change materials," 
Nat. Photonics 10, 60–65 (2016).

35. 
A. Leitis, A. Heßler, S. Wahl, M. Wuttig, T. Taubner, A. Tittl, and H. Altug, "All‐Dielectric 
Programmable Huygens’ Metasurfaces," Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 1910259 (2020).

36. 
Y. Zhang, J. B. Chou, J. Li, H. Li, Q. Du, A. Yadav, S. Zhou, M. Y. Shalaginov, Z. Fang, H. 
Zhong, C. Roberts, P. Robinson, B. Bohlin, C. Ríos, H. Lin, M. Kang, T. Gu, J. Warner, V. 
Liberman, K. Richardson, and J. Hu, "Broadband transparent optical phase change materials for 
high-performance nonvolatile photonics," Nat. Commun. 10, 4279 (2019).

37. 
Q. Zhang, W. Liu, L. Liu, L. Xu, Y. Xu, and G. Chen, "Large and opposite changes of the third-
order optical nonlinearities of chalcogenide glasses by femtosecond and continuous-wave laser 
irradiation," Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 181917 (2007).

38. 
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim, and H. Yan, "One-
Dimensional Nanostructures: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications," Adv. Mater. 15, 
353–389 (2003).

39. 
B. Gates, B. Mayers, B. Cattle, and Y. Xia, "Synthesis and Characterization of Uniform 
Nanowires of Trigonal Selenium," Adv. Funct. Mater. 12, 219 (2002).

40. 
M. H. Saleh, M. M. A.-G. Jafar, B. N. Bulos, and T. M. F. Al-Daraghmeh, "Determination of 
Optical Properties of Undoped Amorphous Selenium (a-Se) Films by Dielectric Modeling of Their 
Normal-Incidence Transmittance Spectra," Appl. Phys. Res. (2014).


15

41. 
Y. D. Cho, J. H. Huh, K. Kim, and S. Lee, "Scalable, Highly Uniform, and Robust Colloidal Mie 
Resonators for All-Dielectric Soft Meta-Optics," Adv. Opt. Mater. (2019).

42. 
U. Jeong and Y. Xia, "Synthesis and Crystallization of Monodisperse Spherical Colloids of 
Amorphous Selenium," Adv. Mater. 17, 102–106 (2005).

43. 
R. F. Porter and C. W. Spencer, "Stabilities of the Gaseous Molecules, BiSe, BiTe, and SbTe," J. 
Chem. Phys. 32, 943–944 (1960).

44. 
M. Lucia Cafare, V. Plácente, and G. Bardl, "Vaporization Study of Solid (Bi2Se3)," J. Chem. 
Eng. Data 29, 78–80 (1984).

45. 
H. Okamoto, "The Bi-Se (Bismuth-Selenium) System," J. Phase Equilibria 15, 195–201 (1994).

46. 
A. H. Goldan, C. Li, S. J. Pennycook, J. Schneider, A. Blom, and W. Zhao, "Molecular structure 
of vapor-deposited amorphous selenium," J. Appl. Phys. (2016).

47. 
M. N. Polyanskiy, ", “Refractive index database,” https://refractiveindex.info. Accessed on 2020-
10-19," .

48. 
C. Liu, M. V. Rybin, P. Mao, S. Zhang, and Y. Kivshar, "Disorder-Immune Photonics Based on 
Mie-Resonant Dielectric Metamaterials," Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 163901 (2019).

49. 
A. Howes, W. Wang, I. Kravchenko, and J. Valentine, "Dynamic transmission control based on 
all-dielectric Huygens metasurfaces," Optica 5, 787 (2018).

50. 
P. P. Iyer, M. Pendharkar, C. J. Palmstrøm, and J. A. Schuller, "Ultrawide thermal free-carrier 
tuning of dielectric antennas coupled to epsilon-near-zero substrates," Nat. Commun. (2017).

51. 
M. Z. Alam, S. A. Schulz, J. Upham, I. De Leon, and R. W. Boyd, "Large optical nonlinearity of 
nanoantennas coupled to an epsilon-near-zero material," Nat. Photonics 12, 79–83 (2018).

52. 
I. Liberal, Y. Li, and N. Engheta, "Magnetic field concentration assisted by epsilon-near-zero 
media," Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 375, 20160059 (2017).

53. 
J. Kim, A. Dutta, G. V. Naik, A. J. Giles, F. J. Bezares, C. T. Ellis, J. G. Tischler, A. M. Mahmoud, 
H. Caglayan, O. J. Glembocki, A. V. Kildishev, J. D. Caldwell, A. Boltasseva, and N. Engheta, 
"Role of epsilon-near-zero substrates in the optical response of plasmonic antennas," Optica 3, 
339 (2016).

54. 
S. Campione, I. Kim, D. de Ceglia, G. A. Keeler, and T. S. Luk, "Experimental verification of 
epsilon-near-zero plasmon polariton modes in degenerately doped semiconductor nanolayers," 
Opt. Express 24, 18782 (2016).

55. 
M. Schubert and T. Tiwald, "Infrared dielectric anisotropy and phonon modes of sapphire," Phys. 
Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. (2000).

56. 
A. S. Barker, "Infrared lattice vibrations and dielectric dispersion in corundum," Phys. Rev. 
(1963).

57. 
E. Xifré-Pérez, L. Shi, U. Tuzer, R. Fenollosa, F. Ramiro-Manzano, R. Quidant, and F. Meseguer, 
"Mirror-image-induced magnetic modes," ACS Nano (2013).

58. 
" 
M. 
N. 
Polyanskiy, 
"Refractive 
index 
database, 
"https://refractiveindex.info 

/shelf=main&book=Al2O3&page=Querry-o. Accessed on 2020-09-29," .


16

Supporting Information

Amorphous Selenium Mie Resonators for Infrared Meta-Optics

Danveer Singh1†, Michal Poplinger1†, Avraham Twitto1, Rafi Snitkoff1, Pilkhaz Nanikashvili1, Ori Azolay1, Adi Levi1, Chen 

Stern1, Gili Cohen Taguri2, Asaf Albo1,2, Doron Naveh1,2* and Tomer Lewi1,2* 

1Faculty of Engineering, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel
2Institute for Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Bar-Ilan University Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel

† These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Corresponding authors:  tomer.lewi@biu.ac.il; doron.naveh@biu.ac.il

1. CVD Growth process for amorphous Se resonators

1.1 Substrate pre-clean process: Amorphous Se resonators were grown on three different types of 

substrates: on Sapphire [0001], Si/SiO2 (with 90 nm thin film of SiO2) and Si. Before starting the CVD 

growth process, the surfaces of the substrate were gone through the following pre-deposition cleaning

steps. First, samples were immersed in an ultrasonic bath with acetone and isopropyl alcohol solvents for 

5 minutes to remove contaminants. Afterwards, the samples were cleaned in NMP (N-Methyl-2-

Pyrrolidone) at 80oC for 15 min. To remove organic leftovers on the surface of the substrate, the 

substrates were treated in a sulfuric peroxide solution (H2SO4:H2O2) in a ratio of 3:1 at 90oC for 15 min, 

followed by washing in deionized water.  The substrates were then entered into an oxygen plasma for 5 

minutes at a power of 150W.

1.2 CVD process

The synthesis of amorphous Se was carried out by the CVD method in a tube furnace (Carbolite MTF 

12/25/250) in a quartz tube of 2.16cm inner diameter. The second and smaller concentric quartz trimmed 

tube with a diameter of 1.57cm and total tube length of 30 cm was inserted into the larger tube (Figure 

S1). In the smaller tube, the precursor was placed in a quartz boat. The starting precursor for the CVD 

synthesis was Bi2Se3 (Alfa Aesar – 99.999%) and it was placed at varying positions relative to the center 

of the furnace: (i) the temperature of both the Bi2Se3 source and substrate were kept at 540 ℃; (ii) the 

source was kept at 750 ℃ and the substrate at 450 ℃. In both cases the sublimation of Se was manifested 

by re-condensation of a-Se. However, the condensation of condition (i) manifested in large and sparse 

spheres, while at condition (ii) the a-Se deposition resulted with the morphology of Figures 1, 2 of the 

main text. Figure S1 displays the experimental setup.  


17

S1: The experimental setup of a-Se CVD: (i) both substrate and source kept at 540 ºC; (ii) source at 750 ºC and substrate at 
450 ºC. The heat zone of the furnace (25 cm long) is insulated with a 2.5 cm ceramic from both its sides.

The substrates on which amorphous Se was grown were placed on top of the slot with the surface oriented 

towards the downside (face down).

S2: Size distribution analysis. (a) represents the SEM image of CVD grown Se resonators with different particle sizes. (b) 
indicates the histogram of particle’s size distribution. 

The grown resonators have size distribution ranging from 0.6µm to 5µm. Figure S2(a) shows SEM 

image of a typical area containing Se resonators with relatively uniform size distribution (mean size 

0.76±0.12µm) indicated in the histogram S2(b). The size distribution was calculated using ImageJ 

software. 


18

2. Optical setup

In our experiments, we used a setup consisting of a FTIR spectrometer (Nicolet, iS50R) coupled to an 

infrared microscope (Nicolet, Continuum Infrared Microscope). Spectra were acquired with reflection 

measurements, where infrared radiation was focused on the sample by a 20x Cassegrain objective with 

NA=0.5, defining a beam spot size of ≈250µm. The reflected light was collected by the same 20x 

objective. A variable knife-edge square aperture located in the image plane was used to define the signal 

collection area and only the signal originating from that area was directed to the MCT detector. For 

ensemble measurements, we used aperture size of 30µm X 30µm, whereas for single particle 

measurements the aperture size was optimized to maximize the signal to noise ratio (typically it was 

20µm x 20µm). All FTIR spectra were gathered as Psample/Pbackground, where Psample is collected from an 

area with the particles present and Pbackground is collected from an adjacent area with no particles present.

3. 3D FDTD Simulation Methods

We have used a commercial three-dimensional FDTD software, Lumerical’s Solutions [1] to calculate 

the scattering spectra of single isolated Se meta-atoms, as well as ensembles of particles, placed on 

Al2O3/Si/SiO2 substrates. We have used a non-uniform three-dimensional square-shaped mesh with a 

minimum size of 0.2nm and a uniform 20nm overriding mesh. This configuration was used to obtain 

higher resolution at the sharp geometrical discontinuities present at the sides and in-between the particle 

and substrate. A perfectly matching layer (PML) was used to eliminate the unwanted reflections at the 

boundaries and was placed sufficiently far from the particle (around 10um) on each side. To model the 

substrate materials, we have used frequency-dependent dielectric optical constants of Si and SiO2 from 

Palik [2] and the optical constants of Al2O3 from [3]. In the simulation, the Total-Field Scattered-Field 

(TFSF) source was used to illuminate the resonators. The observation of scattering spectrum and the 

magnitude of electric and magnetic near fields was calculated using two-dimensional monitors that are 

placed in the middle of the particle. 

For the numerical calculations, we used the refractive index (n) value of Se n = 2.65 for all the 

wavelengths from 2µm to 16µm [3]. The particle size and shape were extracted from SEM images at 

various tilting angles.

4. Electric and magnetic field distribution for a-Se resonators on Si and SiO2 substrates

FDTD simulation were performed to investigate the electric and magnetic field distributions at the Mie 

resonance wavelengths with two different substrates. The large local density of optical states (LDOS) of 


19

the Si substrate, pulls the optical modes of the truncated sphere downwards to the interface with SiO2/Si 

Substrate. However, beyond the leakage to the substrate, the field distributions are quite similar. The 

effect of the SiO2 is negligible and similar field plots are obtained for a pure Si substrate. 

S3: Electric and magnetic field distribution of Se particle (d=3.3µm) placed on the Si substrates, and in homogenous medium 
(air), respectively.


20

5. FDTD spectra for ensembles of different particle densities
6.

S4. The scattering spectra of three different configurations of ensembles of Se resonators. The broadening of spectrum can be 
observed as the particles are closely packed with each other. 

We simulate various ensemble configurations, similar to the experimentally observed ensembles 

presented in Figure 6 of the main text. In this context, the scattering spectrum was analyzed for the 

various ensemble configurations which varied from widely dispersed to tightly packed particle 

ensembles. Two main trends are observed in the spectra: i) Denser ensembles scatter light more 

efficiently- a result of the larger area covered with resonators. ii) The spectra of denser ensembles are 

broadened which can be attributed to the inter particle cross-talk.


21

7. Electric field distribution of resonators on ENZ and the excitation of SPhP oscillations 

S5: Analysis of electric field distribution at λ=11.9µm of Se resonator on sapphire as shown in Figure 7 of main text. At 
λ=11.9µm, the real part of the substrate permittivity is ε = ̵ 1. (a) represents the electric field distribution in x-z plane at 
λ=11.9um. When ε = ̵ 1, the system supports the excitation of surface phonon polaritons (SPhP). The field is confined outside 
and at the geometrical discontinuity of resonator and substrate, with some surface oscillations pointing outwards, as can be 
seen in (b). (b) zoom-in on the square dashed area indicated in (a). (c) represents the electric field distribution at the 14.8 µm 
resonance, where the maximum field is confined within the resonator, as can be seen in the zoom-in area indicated by the 
dashed square. (d) Zoom-in on the square dashed area marked in (c).

References

1.
http://www. lumerical. com. FDTD Solutions, Lumerical Solutions, Inc.

2.
J. Geist, in Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids III, edited by E. D. Palik (Academic Press, New York, 1998), 

p. 519.

3.
M. N. Polyanskiy, ", “Refractive index database,” https://refractiveindex.info. Accessed on 2020-10-19," .


