1 

INTRODUCTION 

As applications of color centers to precision sensing 

and quantum information processing continue to grow (1), 
the charge state of a point defect — ultimately defining its 
spin and optical properties — has emerged as a valuable 
experimental handle. A nice illustration is the case of the 
nitrogen vacancy (NV) center in diamond, where the 
interplay between spin, photon emission, and charge state 
has been exploited to demonstrate optical ionization 
conditional on its starting spin state (2). Since the charge 
state is more resilient to optical illumination than the spin, 
this “spin-to-charge conversion” (SCC) strategy has, in 
turn, been used to boost spin detection sensitivity beyond 
that possible via standard optical readout ( 3-8 ) or to 
demonstrate long-term spin-state storage robust to laser 
excitation (9,10).  

Continuous green illumination of an NV leads to 

cyclic ionization and recharging, thus allowing us to think 
of the point defect as a local “charge pump” injecting free 
carriers into the conduction and valence bands as it 
consecutively changes its charge state from negative to 
neutral and vice versa ( 11 ). Because the number of 
diffusing carriers can be correlated to the defect’s spin 
state via SCC, this process has been exploited to 
demonstrate electrical spin readout down to individual 
NVs (12).  

Carrier recapture far from the injection site is typically 

marked by a drastic, long-lived change in the spin and 

photon emission properties of the trapping defect, meaning 
that, even in the absence of collecting electrodes, defect-
assisted carrier generation and capture can serve as a 
practical tool, this time to shed light on the microscopic 
composition of the host crystal. Indeed, experiments 
articulating local laser excitation of NVs followed by non-
local fluorescence imaging reveal the formation of well-
defined charge state patterns whose response as a function 
of the excitation laser duration, intensity, and wavelength 
reveals valuable information on the dynamics of carrier 
transport and capture (13-15), including the formation of 
space charge potentials (16). Most recently, these ideas 
were extended to the limiting case where the free carrier 
source and/or target trap are formed by individual point 
defects ( 17 , 18 ), a geometry that can potentially be 
exploited to establish a quantum bus between remote 
qubits (19).   

Here we shift the attention back from the carrier 

capturing defect to the carrier source, which we indirectly 
image by monitoring the charge state of a probe NV center 
as we vary the point of laser excitation. Starting with a pair 
of NVs a few microns apart, we first show single-charge 
emitters can be revealed individually, a result we attain by 
working with suitably engineered “islands” formed by few 
(or single) NVs. We subsequently extend this approach to 
image more complex color center sets comprising both 
nitrogen- and silicon-vacancy (SiV) centers, and show 
that, unlike the former, the latter do not serve as efficient 
charge sources under optical excitation in the visible. In 

Imaging dark charge emitters in diamond via carrier-to-photon conversion 
 
Artur Lozovoi1, Gyorgy Vizkelethy3, Edward Bielejec3, and Carlos A. Meriles1,2.† 

 

1Dept. of Physics, CUNY-City College of New York, New York, NY 10031, USA. 
2CUNY-Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016, USA. 
3Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, USA. 
†Corresponding author. E-mail: cmeriles@ccny.cuny.edu 
 
 
 ABSTRACT: The application of color centers in wide-bandgap semiconductors to nanoscale sensing and 
quantum information processing largely rests on our knowledge of the surrounding crystalline lattice, often 
obscured by the countless classes of point defects the material can host. Here we monitor the fluorescence from 
a negatively charged nitrogen-vacancy (NV-) center in diamond as we illuminate its vicinity. Cyclic charge state 
conversion of neighboring point defects sensitive to the excitation beam leads to a position-dependent stream 
of photo-generated carriers whose capture by the probe NV- leads to a fluorescence change. This “charge-to-
photon” conversion scheme allows us to image other individual point defects surrounding the probe NV, 
including non-fluorescent “single-charge emitters” that would otherwise remain unnoticed. Given the ubiquity 
of color center photo-chromism, this strategy may likely find extensions to material systems other than 
diamond.  
 
KEYWORDS: Diamond, nitrogen-vacancy centers, color centers, optical microscopy, charge dynamics, carrier 
capture.  


2 

the process, we uncover the presence of yet-unseen charge 
emitting sites, which we tentatively associate with non-
fluorescent vacancy-based complexes.  
 
RESULTS 
Wavelength-dependent carrier transport between 
individual color centers 

The sample we study in the present experiments has 

been described in detail before (17). Briefly, we use a 
focused (~1 µm diameter) high-energy accelerator to 
implant N or Si ions in an electronic grade diamond crystal 
(DDK) with a starting nitrogen concentration of ≲ 5 ppb; 
the beam energy in either case (20 MeV for N and 45 MeV 
for Si) corresponds to a depth of ~10 µm, sufficient to rule 
out potential surface effects in our observations. We use 
variable ion beam fluences to create islands with different 
color center content: For nitrogen, the range goes from 
1×108 ions/cm2 (roughly corresponding to ~2 ions per 
implantation site) to 5×1011 ions/cm2, whereas for silicon 
we used greater fluences of up to 5×1013 ions/cm2 so as to 
compensate for the lower SiV conversion efficiency 
( 20 - 23 ). Upon implantation, we followed a known 
annealing protocol (24) to simultaneously convert nitrogen 
and silicon atoms into NV and SiV centers. All laser 
excitation and confocal fluorescence measurements are 
carried out using a custom-made, multi-color microscope 
operating under ambient conditions (10,17).  

The experiments in Fig. 1 lay out our approach: In this 

first example, we focus on a region of the crystal featuring 
a grid of single (or near-single) NVs produced by low-

fluence N+ implantation (1×108 ions/cm2), and choose two 
neighboring sites ~4.5 µm apart, each containing 
individual NVs, which we initialize (with 75% probability 
(11) ) in the negatively charged state via green (520 nm) 
laser excitation. In Fig. 1b we park the green beam in one 
of the NVs — the free carrier “source” — for a variable 
time interval 𝑡% to induce multiple stochastic cycles of 
charge state conversion from negative to neutral and back 
(11). Each cycle leads to the injection of a conduction band 
electron (after NV- ionization) and a valence band hole 
(upon NV0 recombination). Exposed to a stream of freely 
diffusing carriers, the negatively-charged probe NV 
ultimately converts to neutral as it captures a hole. Note 
that despite the coexistence of carriers with opposite signs, 
Coulombic attraction between the probe NV and the 
incoming hole makes the NV- to NV0 transformation 
highly one-directional since the converse, though possible, 
is orders-of-magnitude less likely (13,17).  

Since red illumination excites NV- but not NV0 (whose 

zero-phonon line amounts to 575 nm), the dynamics at 
play markedly changes if we use a 632 nm laser during the 
park (Fig. 1c). Red light quickly ionizes the source NV — 
observed as an immediate fluorescence bleach — with the 
result that virtually no hole injection takes place; 
correspondingly, we see no decay in the fluorescence of 
the probe, whose charge state remains unchanged 
throughout the laser park duration.  

When combined, the experiments in Fig. 1 can be seen 

as a change in the fluorescence of the probe contingent on 
the physical properties of the source, emitting carriers or 

Figure 1. Carrier transport between individual NV centers. (a) (Main) Confocal fluorescence image under 520 nm excitation 
of an NV center pair approximately 4.5 µm apart. (Upper inserts) Photon autocorrelation curves for each NV; dips below 0.5 
confirm the individual nature of each color center. (b) (Top) Experimental protocol. Zig-zags indicate scanning at 520 nm (green) 
or 594 nm (orange) while the solid rectangle indicates a 520 nm, 1 mW park at the source NV. (Bottom) Observed 
photoluminescence (PL) at the source and probe NVs as a function of parking time 𝑡%. The probe NV fluorescence gradually 
decays as the integrated hole capture probability increases with 𝑡% and conversion from NV- to NV0 becomes more likely. (c) 
Same as in (b) except that we park a 632 nm, 1.5 mW laser at the source NV (solid red block). In this case, the source NV quickly 
ionizes under red illumination hence preventing additional carrier generation; correspondingly, the charge state of the probe NV 
remains unperturbed. In (b) and (c), the green (orange) laser power during initialization (readout) is 1 mW (7 µW). 


3 

not depending on the excitation wavelength. This 
correspondence can thus be recast as a “charge-to-photon 
conversion” (CPC) scheme, which, in principle, can be 
exploited to expose photo-activated “charge emitters”. To 
demonstrate the idea, we return to the pair of NVs 
highlighted in Fig. 1 and generalize the measurement 
protocol to record the probe NV fluorescence for a variable 
position of the laser park site, a strategy we hereafter refer 
to as “CPC imaging”.   

Fig. 2 summarizes the results for a fixed park duration 

𝑡%

& = 1  s, which we choose so as to optimize the 

necessary tradeoff between the probe fluorescence contrast 
and the image acquisition time. Since in this case the 
source NV is also a photon emitter, we can use standard 
confocal microscopy as a reference. Fig. 2b compares the 
results between direct fluorescence readout and CPC 
imaging of the same single NV using a 520 nm laser 
throughout the confocal scan or variable position park. We 
find a one-to-one correspondence, namely, the probe NV 
fluorescence drops at the location of the source NV but 
remains unchanged everywhere else. By contrast, we 
detect no trace of the charge emitter if we move the park 
laser wavelength from 520 nm to 632 nm (Fig. 2c); this 
observation is consistent with the rapid ionization of the 
source NV under prolonged red excitation, as already seen 
in Fig. 1.  

Given the probabilistic nature of the underlying 

process and the relatively low hole capture cross sections 

of neutral or positively charged defects (17), CPC imaging 
can be extended from single charge emitters to groups 
containing several. This is shown in Fig. 2d where we 
implement our strategy in an island with multiple NVs; 
comparison between the CPC and confocal images — both 
obtained under 520 nm excitation — shows a nearly 
perfect correspondence between the NV locations and 
charge emitting sites.   

Imaging non-fluorescent charge emitters 

To benchmark our approach in yet more general 

scenarios, we carried out experiments in a different region 
of the same diamond crystal, this time in areas implanted 
with 45 MeV Si ions (also corresponding to a ~10 µm 
depth). The fluorescence image of Fig. 3a — obtained 
upon a 632 nm confocal scan — displays the area of 
interest, namely, a segment within a ~40 µm diameter 
circle of implanted Si ions. The presence of negatively 
charged SiVs is unambiguous, as demonstrated by the 737 
nm zero-phonon line in the accompanying fluorescence 
spectrum (left of Fig. 3a).  

Interestingly, 520 nm confocal microscopy also 

reveals a broader strip of NV centers spreading to the sides 
of the Si implanted area (Fig. 3b). We interpret this 
observation as a byproduct of Si implantation, whose 
relatively large size leads to multiple vacancies per ion 
(approximately 3 to 4 times more than nitrogen, as 
calculated by Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter 
(SRIM) simulations, not shown here for brevity). We 

Figure 2. Imaging an individual charge emitter via charge-to-photon conversion. (a) Working with the NV pair of Fig. 1a, 
we generalize the protocols in Figs. 1b and 1c to monitor the probe NV fluorescence after a laser park at a variable position around 
the source NV; at each point, the park time is fixed at a value 𝑡%

(&)chosen to optimize the image contrast and acquisition time. (b) 

(Top) CPC image of the source NV using the protocol in Fig. 1b for a park duration 𝑡%

(&) = 1 s using 520 nm, 1 mW excitation 

(green bolt). (Bottom) Direct confocal image of the source NV upon a green scan. (c) Same as in (b) but using a 632 nm beam 
throughout the CPC and confocal scans (top and bottom images, respectively); the red laser power and park duration during CPC 
are 1 s and 3.5 mW. (d) (Lower panel) Confocal image under 520 nm illumination of an NV “island” comprising several NVs; the 
white circle encloses the probe NV. (Upper panel) CPC image (green laser park, 1 mW, 3 s per point) of the area enclosed in the 
lower panel. We observe a good correspondence between the NV and charge emitter positions in the confocal and CPC images. 
The CPC pixel size is 140 nm in (b) and (d), and 200 nm in (c); CPC images have been smoothed out for clarity. 


4 

surmise that vacancies — whose mobility is relatively high 
— diffuse during the annealing stage to form NV centers 
upon association with intrinsic substitutional nitrogen. The 
concentration of these “collateral” NVs — roughly 1 ppb 
as deduced from an average over confocal images across 
the implanted ring — is consistent with the above picture 
if we take into account the high conversion efficiency of 
substitutional nitrogen in bulk diamond (25) (of order 
50%). 

Given the large fluence we chose for Si implantation 

(5×1013 ions/cm2, orders of magnitude greater than for 
nitrogen, see above), it is hard to imagine NVs are the only 
byproduct. Fig. 3c provides initial evidence in this 
direction: Here we rely on a fringe NV (white circle in 
Figs. 3a and 3b) to CPC-image a segment of the implanted 
ring containing both silicon- and nitrogen-vacancy centers. 
We use strong 632 nm illumination during the park — 
which quickly leads to NV- ionization with (virtually) no 
hole generation — implying that NV centers in the imaged 
area remain invisible. We identify, nonetheless, multiple 
sites where the probe NV fluorescence bleaches, in the 
process exposing the presence of red-laser-driven pockets 
of charge emitters. Comparison with the confocal 
fluorescence image resulting from red excitation — 
selectively sensitive to SiV-, middle panel in Fig. 3c — 
suggests that carriers do not stem from negatively charged 
SiVs. Photo-induced transformations cycling the charge 

state between SiV0 and SiV-  — presumably yielding low 
levels of fluorescence — are still plausible, but since we 
also identify this class of charge emitters in areas of the 
crystal presumably devoid of silicon (see below), we deem 
this possibility unlikely. Further, by examining a 520-nm 
confocal microscopy image of the same region (lower 
panel in Fig. 3c), we find these charge emitters are mostly 
located at sites with no NV fluorescence (hence allowing 
us to rule out unaccounted mechanisms of NV charge 
emission under red illumination).  

These observations are revealing in several ways: 

Silicon-vacancy centers are known to exist in multiple 
charge states (26-29) — ranging from SiV2- to SiV+ — but 
since their photochromism is poorly understood it is not a 
priori clear whether their charge state cycles under red 
excitation (particularly because red light can excite both 
SiV- and SiV0). On the other hand, the mismatch between 
the CPC and confocal images — both for SiVs and NVs 
— hints at a distinct type of point defect, cycling its charge 
under red excitation without generating fluorescence. We 
are not aware of prior experiments able to selectively 
reveal similar fluorescence-free, light-driven charge 
emitters with diffraction limited resolution. 

The results in Fig. 4 confirm and further these ideas: 

In this case, we move the field of view to an area close to 
(but away from) the Si implants (Figs. 4a and 4b). 
Confocal microscopy under 632 nm excitation shows that 

Figure 3. CPC imaging of Si-implanted areas. (a) (Main) Confocal image of a Si-implanted region of the diamond crystal under 
632 nm excitation (Left insert) Representative fluorescence spectrum in the bright region of the image; the peak at 737 nm reveals 
the presence of SiV-. (b) Same as above but for 520 nm excitation. “Collateral” NV- centers form around the implanted area. The 
white circle in the lower left corner highlights the probe NV. (c) CPC image from a red park (1 s, 4.5 mW per point) and confocal 
images under red and green excitation of the enclosed area in (a) and (b) (respectively, top, middle, and lower panels). We find 
pockets of charge emitters that do not correlate with the positions of SiV- (or NV-).  


5 

this section of the crystal is virtually devoid of 
fluorescence (Fig. 4d). CPC imaging, however, shows a 
completely different landscape, suggesting dark carrier 
emitters are widespread; note that, as in Fig. 3c, there is no 
correlation with the NV sites (see 520-nm confocal 
microscopy in Fig. 4e), once again ruling out this color 
center as the carrier-source under red light.  

Without attempting an in-depth examination of the 

type of emitter at play — beyond the scope of this article 
— CPC detection can provide some initial clues: This is 
shown in Fig. 5 where we park the laser beam at a site 
known to host a charge emitter but with no SiV or NV 
fluorescence, and monitor a probe NV 7 µm away as a 
function of time for different red laser intensities.  From 
the linear relation between the NV fluorescence bleach rate 
and the applied laser power (see left-hand panels in Figs. 
5a and 5b), we infer that ionization and recharging of the 
source charge emitter is a one-photon process, somewhat 
reminiscent of that inferred from observations in other 
chemical-vapor-deposition diamonds (30). Interestingly, 
we find almost no change in the probe NV fluorescence 
upon a green laser park at the same site (right-hand panels 
in Figs. 5a and 5b), indicating the charge state cycling 
stops at shorter wavelengths. Note that while less intuitive, 
this behavior is also seen in other emitters such as the NV 

(whose charge state interconversion becomes inefficient 
when illuminated with blue light (11) ). 

Although the information presently at hand is 

insufficient to ascertain the microscopic nature of these 
dark emitters, the observation of collateral, Si-
implantation-induced NVs suggests the concomitant 
formation of vacancy-related complexes, some of which 
we can already examine in light of the above constraints. 
Concrete illustrations are the V (31) and N2V (32-34) 
centers,  the latter arguably stemming from the binding of 
a vacancy with a pair of adjacent substitutional nitrogens 
(the symbol V denotes a diamond vacancy). Both defect 
types are known to exhibit photochromism (35) between 
the negative and neutral charge states, but interconversion 
under red illumination seems unlikely due to the 
unfavorable energy scales at play (V- and N2V- show zero-
phonon lines at 394 and 503 nm, respectively). Given the 
many alternative possibilities, however, additional work 
will be needed to more closely examine other candidate 
photochromic defects — such as complexes integrating 
nitrogens and protons (36-40) — which cannot be ruled 
out yet.  

DISCUSSION 

In summary, using an NV center as a charge probe we 

demonstrated the ability to image individual or small 
groups of NVs microns away via changes in the probe 
fluorescence stemming from the capture of photo-
generated holes. Applying this approach to areas of the 
diamond crystal previously implanted with Si ions, we 

Figure 4. Imaging dark charge emitters. (a,b) Confocal 
images under red and green excitation, respectively. The 
white circle indicates the position of the probe NV. (c) CPC 
image of the enclosed area in (a) under a red laser park. 
(d,e) Confocal images of the same area under red and green 
excitation, respectively.  

Figure 5. Non-fluorescent charge emitter response at 
different wavelengths. (a) Probe NV photo-luminescence as 
a function of the park power on a dark charge emitter 7 µm 
away. In these experiments, we apply the protocol in Fig. 1c 
(red park, left) or Fig. 1b (green park, right) for various laser 
powers. Solid lines are exponential fits. (b) Probe NV photo-
ionization rate as a function of the applied park laser power 
using red or green excitation (left- and right-hand panels, 
respectively). Solid lines are linear fits.  


6 

found that SiV centers do not undergo photochromism 
under red excitation. These same observations, however, 
revealed the presence of previously unseen pockets of non-
fluorescent point defects presumably undergoing charge 
state cycles of ionization and recombination under red 
illumination (but not green). The physical nature of these 
charge emitters is presently unclear though the use of CPC 
detection already imposes some constraints on future 
models. In this vein, we see CPC as a technique akin to 
photo-luminescence excitation spectroscopy (PLE), both 
reporting on the integrated number of quantum particles — 
charge carriers or photons — produced by a source under 
illumination of a given color. Correspondingly, extending 
the above results to systematically monitor the system 
response as a function of the excitation wavelength would 
amount to spectrally fingerprinting the carrier emitter. The 
latter, in turn, could be exploited to separate different 
classes of point defects very much as in PLE. 

Given the ubiquity of photochromism and carrier 

capture, it is reasonable to assume the present approach 
will also find use in the investigation of other 
semiconductor platforms of interest. An immediate 
example is the case of silicon carbide, known to host color 
centers whose charge properties are similar to those found 
in diamond (41-43). Another complementary direction is 
the combined application of sub-diffraction techniques 
such as STED (44,45) so as to ionize and image carrier 
capture with higher spatial resolution, down to ~10 nm. 
Whether or not this enhanced form of CPC can be applied 
to 
monitor 
photo-activated 
charge 
transport 
in 

macromolecules 
is 
an 
intriguing 
question 
worth 

investigating in further detail. Lastly, while short-range 
carrier capture is likely to render photo-current detection 
considerably less efficient (particularly if the collecting 
electrodes are ~10 µm apart or more), the use of external 
fields might prove nonetheless rewarding as a strategy to 
shed light on carrier propagation and/or alter its capture 
probability.  

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

We carry out all experiments using a multi-color 

confocal microscope with an oil-immersion objective 
(NA=1.3) adapted to focus all incoming beams and collect 
the sample photo-luminescence. Green (520 nm), red (632 
nm), and orange (594 nm) lasers are coupled into a single-
mode fiber in order to ensure a similar beam intensity 
profile and best possible overlap of the excitation volumes. 
A combination of long-pass, short-pass, and band-pass 
optical filters is used when separating the photo-

1 G. Wolfowicz, F.J. Heremans, C.P. Anderson, S. Kanai, H. 
Seo, A. Gali, G. Galli, D.D. Awschalom, “Quantum guidelines 
for solid-state spin defects”, Nat. Rev. Mater. (2021).  

luminescence from SiV- and NV-. We readout the NV 
charge state by scanning an area around the probe NV with 
a low-power (7 µW) 594nm orange excitation beam, and 
then integrate the photo-luminescence from the pixels 
corresponding to the position of the probe NV. By slightly 
increasing the integrated area of the scan, we can account 
for potential instabilities in the sample position, which 
otherwise would have compromised the contrast in the 
single-point-illumination readout.  

At high red laser power and/or short distances 

between the target area and the probe NV, it is possible to 
bleach the probe NV- photo-luminescence due to 
ionization caused by the red beam tail and by scattered red 
light. This hinders the bleaching caused by hole capture 
and is therefore unwanted in the CPC protocol. We 
circumvent this effect by recording reference bleaching 
curves where the target is at the same distance from the 
probe NV but in a section of the crystal with no charge 
emitters. CPC-compatible conditions are those where no 
bleaching is observed (the case in all our experiments).  
 
Acknowledgements: We acknowledge fruitful discussion with 
Yun-Heng Chen and Marcus Doherty. Funding. A.L. and 
C.A.M acknowledge support from the National Science 
Foundation 
through 
grant 
NSF-1914945. 
The 
authors 

acknowledge the facilities and research infrastructure support of 
the NSF CREST-IDEALS, NSF grant number HRD-1547830. 
Ion implantation work to generate the NV and SiV centers was 
performed, 
in 
part, 
at 
the 
Center 
for 
Integrated 

Nanotechnologies, an Office of Science User Facility operated 
for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science. 
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-mission laboratory 
managed and operated by National Technology & Engineering 
Solutions of Sandia, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of 
Honeywell International Inc., for the U.S. Department of 
Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under 
contract DE-NA0003525.This paper describes objective 
technical results and analysis. Any subjective views or opinions 
that might be expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent 
the views of the DOE or the United States Government. Author 
contributions:  A.L. and C.A.M. conceived the experiment. 
G.V. and E.B. carried out the ion implantation and A.L. 
conducted the optical microscopy experiments. C.A.M. 
supervised the overall research effort and wrote the manuscript 
with input from all authors. Competing interests: All authors 
declare that they have no competing interests. Data and 
materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the 
conclusions in the paper are present in the article. Additional 
data related to this paper may be requested from the authors. All 
correspondence and request for materials should be addressed to 
C.A.M. (cmeriles@ccny.cuny.edu). 

2 B.J. Shields, Q.P. Unterreithmeier, N.P. de Leon, H. Park, 
M.D. Lukin, “Efficient Readout of a Single Spin State in 
Diamond via Spin-to-Charge Conversion”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 

 
 
 
REFERENCES 


7 

 
136402 (2015). 

3 D.A. Hopper, R.R. Grote, A.L. Exarhos, L.C. Bassett, “Near-
infrared-assisted charge control and spin readout of the nitrogen-
vacancy center in diamond”, Phys. Rev. B 94, 241201 (2016). 

4 D.A. Hopper, R.R. Grote, S.M. Parks, L.C. Bassett, “Amplified 
sensitivity of nitrogen-vacancy spins in nanodiamonds using all-
optical charge readout”, ACS Nano 12, 4678 (2018). 

5 H. Jayakumar, S. Dhomkar, J. Henshaw, C.A. Meriles, “Spin 
readout via spin-to-charge conversion in bulk diamond nitrogen-
vacancy ensembles”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 122404 (2018). 

6 A. Ariyaratne , D. Bluvstein , B.A. Myers, A.C. Bleszynski 
Jayich, “Nanoscale electrical conductivity imaging using a 
nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond”, Nat. Commun. 9, 2406 
(2018).  

7 D.M. Irber, F. Poggiali, F. Kong, M. Kieschnick, T. Lühmann, 
D. Kwiatkowski, J. Meijer, J. Du, F. Shi, F. Reinhard, “Robust 
all-optical single-shot readout of nitrogen-vacancy centers in 
diamond”, Nat. Commun. 12, 532 (2021).  

8 Q. Zhang, Y. Guo, W. Ji, M. Wang, J. Yin, F. Kong, Y. Lin, C. 
Yin, F. Shi, Y. Wang, J. Du, “High-fidelity single-shot readout 
of single electron spin in diamond with spin-to-charge 
conversion”, Nat.  Commun. 12, 1529 (2021).  

9 S. Dhomkar, J. Henshaw, H. Jayakumar, C.A. Meriles, “Long-
term data storage in diamond”, Science Adv. 2, e1600911 (2016). 

10 H. Jayakumar, A. Lozovoi, D. Daw, C.A. Meriles, “Long-term 
spin state storage using ancilla charge memories”, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 125, 236601 (2020). 

11  N. Aslam, G. Waldherr, P. Neumann, F. Jelezko, J. 
Wrachtrup, “Photo-induced ionization dynamics of the nitrogen 
vacancy defect in diamond investigated by single-shot charge 
state detection”, New J. Phys. 15, 013064 (2013). 

12 P. Siyushev, M. Nesladek, E. Bourgeois, M. Gulka, J. Hruby, 
T. Yamamoto, M. Trupke, T. Teraji, J. Isoya, F. Jelezko, 
“Photoelectrical imaging and coherent spin-state readout of 
single nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond”, Science 363, 728 
(2019).  

13 S. Dhomkar, P. Zangara, J. Henshaw, C.A. Meriles, “On-
demand generation of neutral and negatively-charged silicon-
vacancy centers in diamond”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 117401 
(2018). 

14 H. Jayakumar, J. Henshaw, S. Dhomkar, D. Pagliero, A. 
Laraoui, N.B. Manson, R. Albu, M.W. Doherty, C.A. Meriles, 
“Optical patterning of trapped charge in nitrogen-doped 
diamond”, Nature Commun.7, 12660 (2016). 

15 J. Choi, S. Choi, G. Kucsko, P.C. Maurer, B.J. Shields, H. 
Sumiya, S. Onoda, J. Isoya, E. Demler, F. Jelezko, N.Y. Yao, 
M.D. Lukin, “Depolarization dynamics in a strongly interacting 
solid-state spin ensemble”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 093601(2017). 

16 A. Lozovoi, H. Jayakumar, D. Daw, A. Lakra, C.A. Meriles, 
“Probing metastable space-charge potentials in a wide bandgap 
semiconductor”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 256602 (2020). 

17  A. Lozovoi, H. Jayakumar, D. Daw, G. Vizkelethy, E. 
Bielejec, J. Flick, M.W. Doherty, C.A. Meriles, “Optical 
activation and detection of charge transport between individual 
color centers in room-temperature diamond”, Nat. Electron., in 
press. 

18 A. Gardill, I. Kemeny, M.C. Cambria, Y. Li, H.T. Dinani, A. 
Norambuena, J.R. Maze, V. Lordi, S. Kolkowitz, “Probing 
charge carrier dynamics in diamond with a single color center”, 
Nano Lett., published online (2021) .  

19 M.W. Doherty, C.A. Meriles, A. Alkauskas, H. Fedder, M.J. 
Sellars, N.B. Manson, “Towards a room-temperature spin 
quantum bus in diamond via optical spin injection, transport and 
detection”, Phys. Rev. X 6, 041035 (2016). 

20 S. Lagomarsino, A.M. Flatae, S. Sciortino, F. Gorelli, M. 
Santoro, F. Tantussi, F. De Angelis, N. Gelli, F. Taccetti, L. 
Giuntini, M. Agio “Optical properties of silicon-vacancy color 
centers in diamond created by ion implantation and post-
annealing”, Diam. Relat. Mater. 84, 196 (2018). 

21 S. Lagomarsino, A.M. Flatae, H. Kambalathmana, F. Sledz, L. 
Hunold, N. Soltani, P. Reuschel, S. Sciortino, N. Gelli, M. 
Massi, C. Czelusniak, L. Giuntini, M. Agio, “Creation of silicon-
vacancy color centers in diamond by ion implantation”, Front. 
Phys. 8, 626 (2021). 

22 R.E. Evans, A. Sipahigil, D.D. Sukachev, A.S. Zibrov, M.D. 
Lukin, “Narrow-linewidth homogeneous optical emitters in 
diamond nanostructures via silicon ion implantation”, Phys. Rev. 
Appl. 5, 044010 (2016). 

23 T. Schröder, M.E. Trusheim, M. Walsh, L. Li, J. Zheng, M. 
Schukraft, A. Sipahigil, R.E. Evans, D.D. Sukachev, C.T. 
Nguyen, J.L. Pacheco, R.M. Camacho, E.S. Bielejec, M.D. 
Lukin, D. Englund “Scalable focused ion beam creation of 
nearly lifetime-limited single quantum emitters in diamond 
nanostructures”, Nat. Commun. 8, 15376 (2017). 

24 Y. Chu, N.P. de Leon, B.J. Shields, B. Hausmann, R. Evans, 
E. Togan, M.J. Burek, M. Markham, A. Stacey, A.S. Zibrov, A. 
Yacoby, D.J. Twitchen, M. Loncar, H. Park, P. Maletinsky, 
M.D. Lukin, “Coherent optical transitions in implanted nitrogen 
vacancy centers”, Nano Lett. 14, 1982 (2014). 

25 S. Pezzagna, B. Naydenov, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, J. Meijer, 
“Creation efficiency of nitrogen-vacancy centres in diamond”, 
New J. Phys. 12, 065017 (2010).  

26  A.M. Edmonds, M.E. Newton, P.M. Martineau, D.J. 
Twitchen, S.D. Williams, “Electron paramagnetic resonance 
studies of silicon-related defects in diamond”, Phys. Rev. B 77, 
245205 (2008).  

27 U.F.S. D’haenens-Johansson, A.M. Edmonds, B.L. Green, 
M.E. Newton, G. Davies, P.M. Martineau, R.U.A. Khan, D.J. 
Twitchen “Optical properties of the neutral silicon split-vacancy 
center in diamond”, Phys. Rev. B 84, 245208 (2011).  

28 B.G. Breeze, C.J. Meara, X.X. Wu, C.P. Michaels, R. Gupta, 
P.L. Diggle, M.W. Dale, B.L. Cann, T. Ardon, U.F.S. 
D'Haenens-Johansson, I. Friel, M.J. Rayson, P.R. Briddon, J.P. 
Goss, M.E. Newton, B.L. Green, “Doubly charged silicon 
vacancy center, Si-N complexes, and photochromism in N and 
Si codoped diamond”,  Phys. Rev. B 101, 184115 (2020).  

29 A. Gali, J.R Maze, “Ab initio study of the split silicon-vacancy 
defect in diamond: Electronic structure and related properties”,  
Phys. Rev. B 88, 235205 (2013). 

30 A. Lozovoi, D. Daw, H. Jayakumar, C.A. Meriles, “Dark 
defect charge dynamics in bulk chemical-vapor-deposition-
grown diamonds probed via nitrogen vacancy centers”, Phys. 
Rev. Mater. 4, 053602 (2020). 


8 

 

31 J.E. Lowther, “Excited states of the vacancy in diamond”, 
Phys. Rev. B 48, 11592 (1993). 

32 S.C. Lawson, G. Davies, A.T. Collins, A. Mainwood, “The 
“H2” optical transition in diamond: The effects of uniaxial stress 
perturbations, temperature and isotopic substitution”, J. Phys.: 
Condens. Matter 4, 3439 (1992). 

33 G. Davies, M.H. Nazare, M.F. Hamer, “The H3 (2.463 eV) 
vibronic band in diamond: uniaxial stress effects and the 
breakdown of mirror symmetry”, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 
351, 245 (1976). 

34 C-K. Lin, H-C. Chang, M. Hayashi, S.H. Lin, “Excitation 
properties of the H3 defect center in diamond: A theoretical 
study”, Chem. Phys.  Lett. 475, 68 (2009). 

35  Y. Mitat, Y. Nisidat, K. Suitot, A. Onoderat, S. Yazu, 
“Photochromism of H2 and H3 centres in synthetic type Ib 
diamonds”, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2, 8567 (1990). 

36 M.N.R. Ashfold, J.P. Goss, B.L. Green, P.W. May, M.E. 
Newton, C.V. Peaker, “Nitrogen in diamond”, Chem. Rev. 120, 
5745 (2020).  

37 J.P. Goss, P.R. Briddon, R. Jones, S. Sque, “The vacancy-
nitrogen-hydrogen complex in diamond: A potential deep centre 
in chemical vapour deposited material”, J. Phys. Cond. Matter 
15, 2903 (2003). 

38 C.V. Peaker, J.P. Goss, P.R. Briddon, A.B. Horsfall, M.J. 
Rayson, “The vacancy–hydrogen defect in diamond: A 
computational study”, Phys. Stat. Solidi A 212, 2431 (2015). 

39 C. Glover, M.E. Newton, P. Martineau, D.J. Twitchen, J.M. 
Baker, “Hydrogen incorporation in diamond: the nitrogen-
vacancy-hydrogen complex”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 185507 
(2003). 

40 C. Glover, M. E. Newton, P. M. Martineau, S. Quinn, D. J. 
Twitchen, “Hydrogen Incorporation in diamond: The vacancy-
hydrogen complex”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 135502 (2004). 

41 G. Wolfowicz, C.P. Anderson, A.L. Yeats, S.J. Whiteley, J. 
Niklas, 
O.G. 
Poluektov, 
F.J. 
Heremans, 
D.D. 

Awschalom, “Optical charge state control of spin defects in 4H-
SiC”, Nat. Commun. 8, 1876 (2017). 

42 D.A. Golter, C.W. Lai, “Optical switching of defect charge 
states in 4H-SiC”, Sci Rep. 7, 13406 (2017). 

43  M. Widmann, M. Niethammer, D.Y. Fedyanin, I.A. 
Khramtsov, T. Rendler, I.D. Booker, J.U. Hassan, N. Morioka, 
Y-C. Chen, I.G. Ivanov, N.T. Son, T. Ohshima, M. Bockstedte, 
A. Gali, C. Bonato, S-Y. Lee, J. Wrachtrup, “Electrical charge 
state manipulation of single silicon vacancies in a silicon carbide 
quantum optoelectronic device”, Nano Lett. 19, 7173 (2019).  

44 E. Rittweger, K. Young Han, S.E. Irvine, C. Eggeling, S.W. 
Hell, “STED microscopy reveals crystal colour centres with 
nanometric resolution”, Nat. Photonics 3, 144 (2009). 

45 K.Y. Han, S.K. Kim, C. Eggeling, S.W. Hell, Metastable dark 
states enable ground state depletion microscopy of nitrogen 
vacancy centers in diamond with diffraction-unlimited 
resolution”, Nano Lett. 10, 3199 (2010). 


