Research paper 

Magnetically driven in-plane modulation of the 3D orientation of vertical 

ferromagnetic flakes. 

 

Hortense Le Ferrand1*, Andres F. Arrieta2 

 

1H. Le Ferrand  

School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Nanyang 

Technological University, 639798 Singapore 

 

2A. F. Arrieta 

School of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, 585 Purdue Mall, West 

Lafayette, IN 47907, United States 

 

E-mail: hortense@ntu.edu.sg 

 

Keywords: magnetic fields, colloid orientation, 2D particles, microstructure, 

composite 

 

Abstract (200 w)  

External magnetic fields are known to attract and orient magnetically responsive 

colloidal particles. In the case of 2D microplatelets, rotating magnetic fields are 

typically used to orient them parallel to each other in a brick-and-mortar fashion. 

Thanks to this microstructure, the resulting composites achieve enhanced mechanical 

and functional properties. However, parts with complex geometry require their 


microstructure to be specifically tuned and controlled locally in 3D. Although the 

tunability of the microstructure along the vertical direction has already been 

demonstrated using magnetic orientation combined with sequential or continuous 

casting, controlling the particle orientation in the horizontal plane in a fast and effective 

fashion remains challenging. Here, we propose to use rotating magnetic arrays to 

control the in-plane orientation of ferromagnetic Nickel flakes distributed in uncured 

polymeric matrices. We experimentally studied the orientation of the flakes in response 

to magnets rotating at various frequencies and precessing angles. Then, we used 

COMSOL to model the magnetic field from rotating magnetic arrays and predicted the 

resulting in-plane orientations. To validate the approach, we created composites with 

locally oriented flakes. This work could initiate reverse-engineering methods to design 

the microstructure in composite materials with intricate geometrical shapes for 

structural or functional applications. 

 

1| Introduction  

Submitting colloidal particles to external magnetic fields is of interest for 

studying interparticle interactions,1 colloidal assembly and patterning,2,3 as well as for 

applications such as in health and medicine and robotics.4–6 More specifically to plate-

like particles, also called microplatelets or flakes, controlling their orientation in 

polymeric matrices is one path to fabricating composites with enhanced mechanical 

properties and adding functionalities, such as complex shaping and morphing 

abilities.7–10 Ferromagnetic particles, such as from iron, cobalt, or nickel, can be 

oriented and arranged into chains depending on their concentration, the strength of the 

magnetic field applied, and their dipole-dipole interactions.11,12 Polymeric composites 

with anisotropic orientation of ferromagnetic particles were found to exhibit increased 


mechanical properties, electrical and thermal conductivities along the reinforcement 

direction, as well as piezoresistivity, electromagnetic shielding, and transparency.13–16 

Although homogeneously orientated composites have their advantage, locally 

controlling the microstructure over large areas in composites offer substantial potential 

for engineering hierarchical materials with local properties, for example for touch 

screens and smart sensors or actuators.17–19 Also, local microstructure in geometric 

shapes could help attaining unusual macroscopic properties, such as bioinspired 

complex crack paths,20 auxeticity,21 or shape morphing.22 However, it remains 

challenging to purposely control the local orientation of 2D particles in 3D space in 

composite materials. 

Plate-like microparticles are defined in space by two angles Φ! and θ! (Figure 

1A). During composite forming, suspended magnetically-responsive microparticles 

with a sufficient magnetic susceptibility difference with the liquid polymeric matrix 

orient upon the application of a magnetic field.23 In the case of ferromagnetic, 

paramagnetic or diamagnetic flakes, static magnetic fields control the angle θ! (Figure 

1B). To simultaneously set Φ!  and θ! , magnetic fields rotating above a critical 

frequency have been applied on diamagnetic platelets coated with a ferromagnetic 

material (Figure 1C).24–26 Indeed, magnetically responsive anisotropic particles of 

microscale dimensions tend to follow the directions of high magnetic fields strength to 

minimize their magnetic energy. As a result, the particles are found to rotate 

synchronously with the rotating magnetic field. When the rotation frequency of the 

magnetic field exceeds a critical value, the motion becomes asynchronous due to the 

unfavourable damping by the viscous drag. This results in particles aligning biaxially 

in the plane of rotation of the magnet.24 The critical frequency 𝜔" of the magnetic field 

rotation depends on the anisotropy in magnetic susceptibility Δ𝜒 = 𝜒∥ − 𝜒$ of the 


particles, with 𝜒∥ the susceptibility along the diameter and 𝜒$ along the thickness, the 

viscosity 𝜂 of the surrounding liquid, the magnetic field strength 𝐵%, and the Perrin 

friction factor 

&

&!:27 

𝜔" =

'(∙*!"

+,∙-∙.!∙

$
$!

.                                                                                  (equation 1)  

Using rotating permanent magnets, translating solenoids, or solenoids set-ups with on 

and off periodic control, magnetically responsive flakes have been oriented horizontally 

and biaxially in so-called brick-and-mortar arrangements (Φ! = 𝑐𝑠𝑡 and θ! = 0° for 

all particles) as well as vertically and biaxially ( Φ! = 𝑐𝑠𝑡  and θ! = 90°  for all 

particles) over large areas and in curable polymeric matrices.28,29 Tuning the orientation 

of the rotating angle of the magnetic field at defined angles has been used to create 

similar biaxial orientations at set θ!  angles and fixed Φ!  (Figure 1C).30 Such 

capability has been utilized to create multilayer composites with set angles θ! in each 

layer.20,31 These materials are promising for mechanical dampening.32 However, locally 

tuning the angles Φ! within each layer using magnetic fields is still to be achieved. 

Realizing it would greatly enhance the geometric design capabilities of reinforced 

composites. 

 

Figure 1: Orientation of magnetically responsive microparticles under magnetic 

fields. (A) Schematics representing a platelet described in the (x-y-z) frame by the two 

angles θ!  and Φ! . (B) Schematics representing platelet orientation under static 


magnetic fields oriented at θ*! fixed. The resulting angles Φ!% vary for platelets 𝑖 =

1,2, …. (C) Schematics representing biaxial platelet orientation under magnetic fields 

rotating in a plane inclined at an angle θ*! and at an angle Φ*!in the (x-y) plane. 

 

Several methods have been explored to realize in-plane modulation of 

microplatelet’s orientation in liquid matrices, such as acoustophoresis,33 virtual 

magnetic molds,8,34,35 and combinations of 3D printing with magnetic fields.36,37 

Acoustophoresis and virtual magnetic moulds are not practical for the fabrication of 

composites materials as they require very low viscosity, and 3D printing is still a timely 

and costly method for large surface areas. One alternative approach potentially reducing 

processing complexity could be to take advantage of the naturally-occurring 

modulations of the magnetic field distribution around permanent magnets of diverse 

shapes or arranged into arrays.38,39 It has been shown previously that magnetically 

responsive microplatelets could remain vertically orientated under a rotating magnet, 

while presenting curved orientations in the horizontal plane in regions located at the 

edge of the magnet.40 This feature has been used to tune the curvature of morphing 

composite bilayers with a leaf-shape geometry.40,41 Better control of the in-plane 

orientation of vertical particles (the angle Φ! ) could thus enable more complex 

composite morphing shapes, or allow geometrical designs with specific, local 

reinforcement.  

In this paper, we explored the orientation control of ferromagnetic nickel flakes 

experimentally and carry out simple simulations to predict their orientations in selected 

patterns. The orientation of the Ni flakes was achieved in liquid polymeric matrices 

which could be turned into a composite after curing. First, we observed the response of 

the ferromagnetic flakes under vertically rotating magnetic fields. Then, we 


characterized their response under fields rotating at various precessing angles. Using 

theoretical and experimental results, we simulated the field lines around the magnets to 

predict the platelets orientations in the horizontal plane and verified our prediction with 

magnets of simple geometries. Finally, we built arrays of magnets to achieve unusual 

radial and circular in-plane orientations of vertical Ni flakes. The results presented show 

a simple and scalable approach to set the in-plane orientations of vertical ferromagnetic 

flakes in composites. Such in-plane local variation of the microstructure could enable 

more geometrical design capabilities. This could be used to create materials adapted to 

complex external loadings, or with complex deformations or functional response for 

smart applications. 

 

2| Experimental 

2.1| Materials 

Nickel flakes (fine leafing) of diameter 15.8 ± 0.7 µm and thickness 0.58 ± 0.01 µm 

were obtained from Alfa Aesar, USA. These flakes have non-uniform shapes and an 

average aspect ratio length over thickness of 27 (Figure 2). The size distributions were 

obtained from electron micrographs and analysed using Image J and MATLAB. Epoxy 

was obtained from Hunstmann, Belgium: resin Araldite GY250, hardener Aradur 917 

CH and catalyst DY070. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), Sylgard 184 was purchased 

from Dow Chemicals, USA. Neodymium magnets were used purchased from 

Supermagnete, Switzerland. 

 


 

Figure 2: (A) Electron micrograph of the Ni flakes. (B) and (C) are the distributions of 

flakes diameters and thicknesses, respectively. 

 

2.2| Nickel-epoxy composites preparation.  

Nickel-epoxy composites were prepared by dispersing 1 vol% of nickel flakes into the 

epoxy mixture containing 53.5 wt% of the resin, 45.7 wt% of the hardener and 0.8 wt% 

of the catalyst. The mixture was mixed with an overhead stirrer until homogeneous and 

degassed under vacuum. The casting was done in a Teflon mould placed over a non-

magnetic hot plate set at 180 °C for 4 hours to cure the composite during the magnetic 

alignment.  

 

2.3| Nickel-PDMS composites preparation.  

Nickel-PDMS composites were prepared by mixing the PDMS solution at a ratio resin 

to hardener of 10 to 1 and adding 0.01 vol% of Nickel flakes. A low concentration in 

Ni powder was used to retain the transparency of the composites after curing. The Ni-

PDMS mixture was spread onto an aluminium block and placed under the magnetic 

setup and above a non-magnetic hot plate set at 120°C for 30 minutes to cure the matrix. 

For the Ni-PDMS composites used for the determination of the critical frequency, no 

temperature was applied to avoid curing and to maintain the viscosity constant. 


 

2.4| Magnetic setups.  

For the magnetically oriented epoxy specimens, the magnet used had dimensions of 

5*5*1.5 cm3 and was placed at around 10 cm from the top of the sample. This led to a 

magnetic field strength at the position of the sample of around 3 mT. A rotating 

magnetic field was achieved by attaching the magnet to a stirrer rotating at a frequency 

above 1 Hz. The magnetic field was maintained during the entire curing time of the 

samples. For the magnetically oriented PDMS specimens, the utilized magnets had 

dimensions of 0.5*0.5*0.5 cm3 and were mounted onto other stirrers in similar 

configurations during the entire curing of the composite, at 1.5 cm to the surface of the 

sample. The magnetic field strength at the position of the sample was also of around 3 

mT. 

 

2.5| Characterization methods.  

Electron micrographs of the raw powder and of the cross-sections of epoxy composites 

were taken using a scanning electron microscope (Leo 1530, Zeiss, Germany), after 

sputtering with Pt. The epoxy composites were brittle and could be fractured for the 

direct observation of the cross-section. For observations in the plane, the samples were 

polished using sandpaper. The orientation angles of the flakes were measured using the 

Image J software (NIH, USA). The PDMS composites were observed by optical 

methods thanks to their transparency using a common digital camera. The critical 

alignment frequencies under magnets rotating with precessing angles were assessed by 

recording videos of the mixture under the alignment setup. When the flakes are rotating, 

a colour change could be seen at the surface of the sample, accompanied by waves (see 

SI movie S1). Flakes rotating asynchronously with the rotating magnetic fields appear 


to be still in the sample’s surface (see SI movie S2). The determination of the critical 

frequencies was done by increasing the frequency every 5 minutes until no more surface 

change was visible. Indeed, the expected time to have alignment of the nickel flakes 

under 3 mT was calculated to be of 3.3 s for the epoxy matrix and of 0.9 s for the PDMS 

using the following equation and the values in Table 1:  

𝑡 =

/0"∙ $

$!-((&'2+)

.!(&'
" *!"
,                                                                                  (equation 2) 

with 𝜇% the magnetic susceptibility of vacuum, 

&

&! the Perrin friction factor, 𝜒!4 the 

magnetic susceptibility of the particles.36 

 

Table 1: Values of experimental parameters. 

Parameter 
Symbol 
Value 
Unit 

Flake diameter 
2 ∙ 𝑏
15.8 
µm 

Flake thickness 
2 ∙ 𝑎
0.58 
µm 

Aspect ratio 
𝑝
27 
- 

Perrin friction factor 
!

!!  
12.1 
- 

Magnetic field strength 
𝐵"
2388 
A/m 

Magnetic susceptibility 
𝜒#$
600 
- 

Viscosity (epoxy) 
𝜂
13.3 
kg/m.s 

Viscosity (PDMS) 
𝜂
3.5 
kg/m.s 

 

2.6| Simulations.  

Magnetic fields around permanent magnets were simulated using COMSOL 

Multiphysics, Version 4.4. The geometries of the magnets were drawn, and the 

neodymium material was added to the materials library using a relative permeability of 


1.05. The material around the magnet was set as air (relative permeability of 1). The 

magnetic fields were computed using the AC/DC module with magnetic fields, no 

currents interface. The boundary conditions were set such as: 

- 
The magnetic field was tangential to the boundary on planes of symmetry. 

- 
The magnetic field was perpendicular to the boundary on planes of 

antisymmetry. 

The magnetic field at the surface of the magnet was set at a value of 199’000 kA/m = 

2500 Oe, corresponding to the 250 mT measured at the surface of the magnets. The 

simulation yields the magnetic flux density vectors and streamlines as output, which 

were plotted in 3D around static permanent magnets. To obtain the projection of the 

field lines in sample located in a plane at a distance d to the magnet, a time-space 

transformation was applied (Figure 3). This transformation consisted in summing the 

vectors at each point of space positioned on a circle around the magnet: instead of fixing 

the point of space and rotating the magnet, we fixed the magnet and rotated the point 

of interest. 

 

Figure 3: Schematics representing the time-space transformation applied. 

 

3| Results and discussion 


3.1| Response of Ni flakes under vertically rotating magnetic fields ( 𝛉𝑩𝟎 =

𝟗𝟎°, 𝚽𝑩𝟎 variable) and (𝛉𝑩𝟎 = 𝟗𝟎°, 𝚽𝑩𝟎 = 𝒄𝒔𝒕). 

Although rotating magnetic fields have been largely applied to orient 

magnetically responsive para or diamagnetic anisotropic platelets,24–26,28,42 the response 

of ferromagnetic flakes to dynamic fields has been overlooked. Therefore, the response 

of Ni flakes to vertical static and rotating magnetic fields was first observed in epoxy 

composites containing ca. 1 vol% of flakes (Figure 4).  

The magnetic fields strength applied were low, below 3 mT, to avoid the formation of 

large magnetic gradients and the attraction of the Ni flakes to the magnet. Under static 

vertical magnetic fields (𝜃*! = 90°), the Ni flakes align uniaxially (𝜃! = 90°, variable 

Φ!) (Figure 4A). To determine the critical frequency 𝜔" of the rotating field to obtain 

vertical biaxial alignment of the flakes (𝜃! = 90°, Φ!= cst for all particles), the theory 

for biaxial alignment of superparamagnetic platelets under dynamic rotation fields was 

applied to ferromagnetic Ni flakes.24 Since the magnetic susceptibilities parallel and 

perpendicularly to the long axis 𝜒∥ and 𝜒$of the flakes are not known, the flakes were 

assimilated to diamagnetic particles with a thick paramagnetic shell.  The critical 

frequency 𝜔"  was then estimated using the values presented in Table 1 and the 

following formula: 

𝜔" =

.!(&'
" *!"

+6 $

$!-((&'2+),                                                                                       (equation 3) 

with 𝜇% the magnetic susceptibility of vacuum, 

&

&! the Perrin friction factor, 𝜒!4 the 

magnetic susceptibility of the particles, and 𝐵% the magnetic field strength. With this 

approximation, a critical frequency of 0.23 Hz was determined for our epoxy matrix, 

and of 0.9 for PDMS. Applying a vertical magnetic field (𝜃*! = 90°, Φ*! = 90°) 

rotating above 1 Hz, vertical biaxial orientation of the flakes was also observed (𝜃! =


90°, Φ! = 90°) (Figure 4B). However, in contrast to superparamagnetic platelets, the 

ferromagnetic flakes also formed long chains that oriented along the field lines (Φ! =

90°) due to their dipole-dipole interactions.12,43 We could observe this chain formation 

optically in dilute Ni-PDMS transparent films. Chain formation is ubiquitous for 

ferromagnetic powders exposed to magnetic fields and depends upon filler 

concentration and magnetic field.11 The absence of clear chain formation under static 

magnetic fields might be related to the high viscosity of the matrix and its curing, which 

did not allow sufficient time for the flakes to translate and self-assemble. However, 

under rotating fields the flakes rotate and can act as local micromixers, reducing the 

local viscosity of the matrix.44 Also, the rotation of the flakes in the (x-y) plane (angle 

Φ!) made the observation more difficult since the chains would have formed along the 

vertical direction.  

In addition to the orientation of the flakes under the vertical magnets, we inspected the 

flake orientations variation along the axis 𝑦, where 𝑦 = 0 corresponds to the center of 

the rotating magnet (Figure 4C). The angles θ! of the flakes decreased as y increased 

until the edge of the magnet at 𝑦 = 2.5 cm. The flakes are thus sensitive to the field 

streamlines orientations. 


 

Figure 4: Response of Ni flakes to vertical magnetic fields. (A) Electron micrographs 

of Ni-epoxy composites showing uniaxial orientation under static vertical magnetic 

field. The blue arrows indicate some Ni flakes. (B) Micrograph (left) and optical image 

(right) of epoxy and PDMS composites, respectively, showing biaxial orientation and 

chain formation of the Ni flakes under rotating vertical magnetic field. (C) Juxtaposed 

micrographs of the cross section of a large epoxy composite prepared under rotating 

vertical magnetic field (𝜃*! = 90°, Φ*! = 90°) centered at 𝑥 = 0 and 𝑦 = 0. Inserts 

are close-up view. Graph of the particle angle 𝜃! as a function of their position along 𝑦 

for 𝑥 = 0. 

 

3.2| Response of Ni flakes under magnetic fields rotating with a precessing angle 

(𝜽𝑩𝟎 = 𝟗𝟎° − 𝜶, 𝚽𝑩𝟎 = 𝒄𝒔𝒕). 

 
To further study the response of the Ni flakes to rotating magnetic fields, a 

precessing angle 𝛼 was added to the rotating magnet. The in-plane orientations of the 


flakes Φ! in transparent PDMS composites were characterized optically (Figure 5). In 

this configuration, the magnetic field rotates at angles 𝜃*! = 90° − 𝛼 (Figure 5A). 

Previous works on ellipsoid magnetic particles under precessing magnetic fields have 

reported that biaxial alignment could also be achieved, at a critical frequency that 

decreased with the precessing angle.27 Recording videos of the liquid PDMS-Ni 

mixtures under the precessing magnetic fields, the critical frequency for the alignment 

could be determined by optical visualization. The experimental results show good 

agreement with the expected prediction from ref27, with the observation of an 

asynchronous regime where the particles align biaxially above a set frequency that 

decreases with the precessing angle (Figure 5B,C). The critical frequency was almost 

multiplied by 3 at low angles. This is higher than what has been reported elsewhere, 

where the frequency doubled only.27 One reason could be that by tilting the magnet 

without moving its rotation axis or the sample, the magnetic field at the place of 

observation also increases. Indeed, the magnetic field strength is usually higher at the 

edge of the magnets. A high magnetic field strength leads to a higher magnetic response 

of the particles. 

The response of Ni flakes to vertical magnetic fields rotating with a precessing angle 

was thus vertical orientation and biaxial alignment (𝜃! = 90°, Φ! = 90°) for all 

precessing angles except 90° (Figure 5D). The flakes aligned in the plane along the 

field lines of the magnet. At 𝛼 = 90°, the magnetic field is horizontal at the position 

of the sample, below the magnet. This resulted in an increase in transparency of the 

composite sample and the absence of visible chains (Figure 5E). This visual 

appearance was attributed to the horizontal orientation of the flakes in the plane. Indeed, 

the field lines are rotating in-plane.  


 
Under rotating vertical magnetic fields, the ferromagnetic flakes align parallel 

to the plane of rotation described by the magnetic field. To obtain various orientations 

Φ!7, with i each individual flake, within the (x-y) plane of the sample, it is therefore 

necessary to have rotating magnetic fields with locally oriented field lines. 

 

Figure 5: Nickel flake response to precessing vertical magnetic fields. (A) 

Schematics for a magnet rotating with a precessing angle α. (B) Optical images in the 

(x-y) plane of the sample centred below the magnet showing the line formation and 

alignment of the Ni flakes within the PDMS matrix. (C) Critical frequency as a function 

of the magnetic field angle 𝜃*!. (D) Schematics of the flake orientation with the rotating 

magnetic field. (E) Optical image of the Ni-PDMS composite sample under a 

precessing angle 𝛼 = 90° (𝜃*! = 0). 

 

3.3| In-plane modulation of Ni flakes orientation under rotating magnets 

(𝜽𝑩𝟎 = 𝟗𝟎°, 𝚽𝑩𝟎 = locally varying). 


To modulate the in-plane angle of the flakes while remaining vertical, we looked 

at their orientation away from the centre of the magnet, where the field lines are oriented 

along various directions. First, we selected a square and a spherical magnet and used 

COMSOL to obtain the magnetic streamlines around the magnets. Then, we applied a 

time-space transformation to mimic the rotating field and obtain the map of Φ*! in the 

(x-y) plane of the sample (Figure 6). The vertical orientation of the flakes is assured by 

having the magnet positioned and rotating above the samples. However, tilting of the 

flakes could happen at the edge of the magnet due to decreased magnetic force. Ni-

PDMS composites were then prepared under the same magnetic setups rotating at a 

frequency higher than 3 Hz to ensure the asynchronous biaxial alignment of the Ni 

flakes (Figure 6A,B). The experimental specimen exhibited similar flake orientations 

as predicted by the model. Magnetic field gradients in the sample could give rise to 

variations in flakes concentration. Although the model is simplistic and its resolution is 

not yet high enough to match the exact orientation at the microscale, it gives a 

qualitative view of the expected orientations of the flakes in-plane. We used similar 

approach to generate other types of patterns using more complex magnetic arrays 

(Figure 7). Small square permanent magnets were assembled to generate more complex 

magnetic streamlines. The assembly of the magnets was inspired from that of Halbach 

arrays and others. The intention was to obtain unusual flake orientation in-plane, such 

as radial and circular (Figure 7A,B), extended to large areas (Figure 7C), and with 

local patterns (Figure 7D). Although there are variations in platelets concentrations, 

the composite films with various in-plane flake orientations were obtained. 

A more refined model of the magnetic fields and of the flake response to it 

would push the approach proposed here to a next level. For this, modelling based on 

the constitutive equations of magnetic fields and with finite element modelling methods 


could be envisaged.45,46 With such accurate modelling schemes, reverse engineering of 

flake orientations in 3D might be realized. The modelling could also include 

concentration gradients. Reverse-engineering could work in the following way: first, 

for a given in-plane desired alignment pattern, a magnetic field will be derived. The 

magnetic field will then be approximated by combinations of magnets or magnets with 

complex shapes. Then, the time-space transformation will be applied to visualize the 

in-plane orientation map. Finally, the prediction will be applied in experiments using 

the set magnetic set-up. 

 

 

Figure 6: Predicting the in-plane modulation of Ni flakes orientation under vertical 

rotating square (A) and spherical (B) magnets. Setup, simulation, time-space 

transformation, and experiment flow to predict and realize in-plane modulation of the 

Φ!. The axis of rotation of the magnets is highlighted in bold and the north and south 

pole in dark and light grey colour, respectively. The red lines around the magnets are 

the simulated magnetic streamlines, top view in (x-y) plane. The lines in the x-y plot 

are tilted at the local angles Φ! of the flakes. The experimental images are pictures of 

Ni-PDMS transparent samples after curing. The yellow lines are guides to the eye. 


 

 

Figure 7: Alignment patterns in Ni-PDMS obtained using rotating magnet arrays: 

(A) radial, (B) circular, (C) aligned, (D) combination of two perpendicular directions, 

and (E) locally curved orientations. 

 

5| Conclusions and outlook 

In this paper, we presented a practical approach to modulate the in-plane 

orientation of vertically oriented ferromagnetic Nickel flakes in polymer composites. 

The approach consists on distributing the flakes in uncured viscous polymeric matrices 

and to rotate arrays of magnets above the mixture while it is curing. The time for 

magnetic orientation depends on the flakes magnetic properties, the magnetic field 

strength, and the viscosity of the matrix and is typically varies from a few seconds to a 


few minutes.28,47 The curing method can thus be chosen according to allow for the 

magnetic orientation. After curing, the flakes retain their orientation. We also show that 

the in-plane orientation can be predicted from the rotating magnetic field streamlines. 

This feature is key to further develop a reverse-engineering approach to design complex 

in-plane orientations in composites according to geometrical, structural, or functional 

demands. To achieve this, computational modelling using finite element could be used.  

Following the flake orientation, the local variation of the particle concentration 

could also be explored using the same approach. Gradients in magnetic fields indeed 

lead to magnetophoresis and particle concentration in specific areas. Magnetophoresis 

and local concentration can be emphasized using particles with strong magnetic 

susceptibility, or on the contrary, can be reduced with particles with weak magnetic 

responsiveness. For example, paramagnetic particles or diamagnetic particles with a 

paramagnetic coating would be less prone to move under magnetic gradients of less 

than 100 mT, such as those used here. Furthermore, homogeneous distributions of 

flakes without the chain formation could be achieve using paramagnetic particles too. 

Indeed, they would have weaker dipole-dipole interactions. In the literature , numerous 

particle-reinforced composites with magnetic orientation employ paramagnetic 

particles that do not form chains even at high concentrations and small interparticle 

distance.29,48,49 Combining magnetic orientation and magnetic concentration in 3D 

composites would allow a large degree of design freedom. This is particularly 

interesting for the fabrication of composites with complex geometries or submitted to 

complex loadings.  

An illustrative application of this design capability could be for realizing 

bioinspired reinforced composites. Similarly to bone structures where the minerals are 

oriented and concentrated along the load-bearing directions,50–52 composites could have 


their internal microstructure set to withstand specific loadings. This would increase the 

performance and durability of lightweight materials. Another promising application for 

locally microstructured composites is for shape-adaptable and magnetically actuated 

materials for robotics or medicine.53–55 Bioinspired approaches enabling the distributed 

orientation of particles to control the local anisotropy have been demonstrated using 

fibres and 3D printing.56,57 Utilizing 2D platelets for such materials could increase their 

morphing capabilities. However, 2D particle orientations cannot be controlled in 3D 

printing unless combined with magnetic fields. Currently, magnetic 3D printing is time-

consuming because each little voxel has to be oriented independently.36,58 This method 

thus becomes challenging when applied to larger objects.59 The use of rotating magnets 

would solve this problem by being a facile, efficient, and scalable method. Finally, 

recent development with magnet printing could generate more complex and tuneable 

magnetic fields.60–62 

 

Associated content 

Movie S1 

Ni-PDMS composite under a rotating magnetic precessing at an angle of 𝜃*! = 45° 

and a frequency of 0.8 Hz, below the critical frequency for biaxial alignment. 

Movie S2 

Ni-PDMS composite under a rotating magnetic precessing at an angle of 𝜃*! = 45° 

and a frequency of 3.2 Hz, above the critical frequency for biaxial alignment. 

 

Notes 

The authors declare no competing financial interest. 

 


Acknowledgements 

The authors acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Education, Singapore 

under Grant No. 2019-T1-001-002.  

 

References 

1. 
Dagallier, C., Cardinaux, F., Dietsch, H. & Scheffold, F. Magnetic orientation 

of soft particles in a jammed solid. Soft Matter 8, 4067–4071 (2012). 

2. 
Kamal, M. A., Petukhov, A. V. & Pal, A. Path-Dependent Self-Assembly of 

Magnetic Anisotropic Colloidal Peanuts. J. Phys. Chem. B 124, 5754–5760 

(2020). 

3. 
Bharti, B., Kogler, F., Hall, C. K., Klapp, S. H. L. & Velev, O. D. 

Multidirectional colloidal assembly in concurrent electric and magnetic fields. 

Soft Matter 12, 7747–7758 (2016). 

4. 
Löwen, H. Colloidal soft matter under external control. J. Phys. Condens. 

Matter 13, 415–432 (2001). 

5. 
Heinrich, D. et al. Effects of magnetic field gradients on the aggregation 

dynamics of colloidal magnetic nanoparticles. Soft Matter 11, 7606–7616 

(2015). 

6. 
Zhang, J. et al. Liquid Crystal Elastomer-Based Magnetic Composite Films for 

Reconfigurable Shape-Morphing Soft Miniature Machines. Adv. Mater. 33, 1–9 

(2021). 

7. 
Lin, Z. et al. Magnetic alignment of hexagonal boron nitride platelets in 

polymer matrix: Toward high performance anisotropic polymer composites for 

electronic encapsulation. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 5, 7633–7640 (2013). 

8. 
Le Ferrand, H. et al. Magnetic assembly of transparent and conducting 


graphene-based functional composites. Nat. Commun. 7, 1–9 (2016). 

9. 
Le Ferrand, H. Magnetic slip casting for dense and textured ceramics: A review 

of current achievements and issues. J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. 41, 24–37 (2021). 

10. 
Le Ferrand, H., Studart, A. R. & Arrieta, A. F. Filtered Mechanosensing Using 

Snapping Composites with Embedded Mechano-Electrical Transduction. ACS 

Nano 13, 4752–4760 (2019). 

11. 
Borin, D. Targeted patterning of magnetic microparticles in a polymer 

composite. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 378, 2–16 (2020). 

12. 
Jang, S. H., Park, Y. L. & Yin, H. Influence of coalescence on the anisotropic 

mechanical and electrical properties of nickel powder/polydimethylsiloxane 

composites. Materials (Basel). 9, 1–11 (2016). 

13. 
Chen, Y. et al. Large-scale R2R fabrication of piezoresistive films (Ni/PDMS) 

with enhanced through thickness electrical and thermal properties by applying 

a magnetic field. RSC Adv. 5, 92071–92079 (2015). 

14. 
Park, K., Jin, S. & Kim, G. Transparent window film with embedded nano-

shades for thermoregulation. Constr. Build. Mater. 269, 121280 (2021). 

15. 
Göktürk, H. S., Fiske, T. J. & Kalyon, D. M. Effects of particle shape and size 

distributions on the electrical and magnetic properties of nickel/polyethylene 

composites. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 50, 1891–1901 (1993). 

16. 
Sancaktar, E. & Dilsiz, N. Anisotropic alignment of nickel particles in a 

magnetic field for electronically conductive adhesives applications. J. Adhes. 

Sci. Technol. 11, 155–166 (1997). 

17. 
Stassi, S. et al. Smart piezoresistive tunnelling composite for flexible robotic 

sensing skin. Smart Mater. Struct. 22, 125039 (2013). 

18. 
Kedambaimoole, V. et al. PDMS encapsulated graphene-nickel composite film 


as flexible tactile sensor. Proc. IEEE Sensors 2017-Decem, 1–3 (2017). 

19. 
Niu, S. et al. Tunable piezoresistivity of low percolation threshold micro-nickel 

wires/PDMS conductive composite regulated by magnetic field. J. Mater. 

Chem. C 9, 5908–5919 (2021). 

20. 
Le Ferrand, H., Bouville, F., Niebel, T. P. & Studart, A. R. Magnetically 

assisted slip casting of bioinspired heterogeneous composites. Nat. Mater. 14, 

1172–1179 (2015). 

21. 
Zheng, G. Q. et al. Spin-echo NMR in pulsed high magnetic fields up to 48 T. 

J. Phys. Soc. Japan 78, 274–292 (2009). 

22. 
Erb, R. M., Sander, J. S., Grisch, R. & Studart, A. R. Self-shaping composites 

with programmable bioinspired microstructures. Nat. Commun. 4, 1–8 (2013). 

23. 
Coey, J. M. D. Magnetism and Magnetic Materials. (Cambridge University 

Press, 2010). doi:DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511845000. 

24. 
Erb, R. M., Segmehl, J., Charilaou, M., Löffler, J. F. & Studart, A. R. Non-

linear alignment dynamics in suspensions of platelets under rotating magnetic 

fields. Soft Matter 8, 7604–7609 (2012). 

25. 
Liu, C., Cai, J., Gong, D., Zhang, W. & Zhang, D. Fabrication and uniform 

alignment of nickel-coated diatomite flakes by rotating magnetic fields. J. 

Magn. Magn. Mater. 484, 472–477 (2019). 

26. 
Lin, F., Niu, C., Hu, J., Wang, Z. & Bao, J. Graphene Diamagnetism. 

Levitation, transport, rotation, and orientation alignment of graphene flakes in a 

magnetic field. IEEE Nanotechnol. Mag. 1, 14–22 (2020). 

27. 
Tierno, P., Claret, J., Sagués, F. & Cãbers, A. Overdamped dynamics of 

paramagnetic ellipsoids in a precessing magnetic field. Phys. Rev. E - Stat. 

Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 79, 1–6 (2009). 


28. 
Erb, R. M., Segmehl, J., Schaffner, M. & Studart, A. R. Temporal response of 

magnetically labeled platelets under dynamic magnetic fields. Soft Matter 9, 

498–505 (2013). 

29. 
Libanori, R., Erb, R. M. & Studart, A. R. Mechanics of platelet-reinforced 

composites assembled using mechanical and magnetic stimuli. ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces 5, 10794–10805 (2013). 

30. 
Hortense Le Ferrand, Bouville, F. & Studart, A. Design of textured multi-

layered structures via magnetically assisted slip casting. Soft Matter 1–20 

(2019) doi:10.1039/c9sm00390h. 

31. 
Le Ferrand, H. & Bouville, F. Processing of dense bioinspired ceramics with 

deliberate microstructure. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 102, 7253–7263 (2019). 

32. 
Le Ferrand, H. Modeling the effect of microstructure on elastic wave 

propagation in platelet-reinforced composites and ceramics. Compos. Struct. 

224, 111105 (2019). 

33. 
Garbin, A. et al. Acoustophoresis of disk-shaped microparticles: A numerical 

and experimental study of acoustic radiation forces and torques. J. Acoust. Soc. 

Am. 138, 2759 (2015). 

34. 
Demirörs, A. F., Courty, D., Libanori, R. & Studart, A. R. Periodically 

microstructured composite films made by electric- and magnetic-directed 

colloidal assembly. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113, 4623–4628 (2016). 

35. 
Yang, Z., Wei, J., Gizynski, K., Song, M. G. & Grzybowski, B. A. 

Interference-like patterns of static magnetic fields imprinted into 

polymer/nanoparticle composites. Nat. Commun. 8, 1–8 (2017). 

36. 
Kokkinis, D., Schaffner, M. & Studart, A. R. Multimaterial magnetically 

assisted 3D printing of composite materials. Nat. Commun. 45, 333–338 


(2015). 

37. 
Martin, J. J., Fiore, B. E. & Erb, R. M. Designing bioinspired composite 

reinforcement architectures via 3D magnetic printing. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–7 

(2015). 

38. 
Camacho, J. M. & Sosa, V. alternative method to calculate the magnetic field 

of permanent magnets with azimuthal symmetry. Rev. Mex. física E 59, 8–17 

(2013). 

39. 
Liu, G., Hou, S., Xu, X. & Xiao, W. Design of a new 1d halbach magnet array 

with good sinusoidal magnetic field by analyzing the curved surface. Sensors 

21, 1–17 (2021). 

40. 
Schmied, J. U., Le Ferrand, H., Ermanni, P., Studart, A. R. & Arrieta, A. F. 

Programmable snapping composites with bio-inspired architecture. 

Bioinspiration and Biomimetics 12, 026012 (2017). 

41. 
Riley, K. S., Le Ferrand, H. & Arrieta, A. F. Modeling of snapping composite 

shells with magnetically aligned bio-inspired reinforcements. Smart Mater. 

Struct. 27, 114003 (2018). 

42. 
Zhang, J. & Wang, C. Study of rotation of ellipsoidal particles in combined 

simple shear flow and magnetic fields. Proc. 2017 COMSOL Conf. Bost. 1–6 

(2017). 

43. 
Lisjak, D. & Mertelj, A. Anisotropic magnetic nanoparticles: A review of their 

properties, syntheses and potential applications. Prog. Mater. Sci. 95, 286–328 

(2018). 

44. 
Biswal, S. L. & Gast, A. P. Micromixing with linked chains of paramagnetic 

particles. Anal. Chem. 76, 6448–6455 (2004). 

45. 
Lee, K. M. & Son, H. Distributed multipole model for design of permanent-


magnet-based actuators. IEEE Trans. Magn. 43, 3904–3913 (2007). 

46. 
Wahlstrom, N., Kok, M., Schon, T. & Gusafsson, F. Modeling magnetic fields 

using Gaussian processes. IEEE 1, 3522–3526 (2013). 

47. 
Behera, R. P., Muhammad, S. B. S., Jiaxuan, M. H. & Le Ferrand, H. Porous 

textured ceramics with controlled grain size and orientation. J. Eur. Ceram. 

Soc. 41, 617 (2021). 

48. 
Lin, F. et al. Orientation Control of Graphene Flakes by Magnetic Field: Broad 

Device Applications of Macroscopically Aligned Graphene. Adv. Mater. 29, 1–

6 (2017). 

49. 
Erb, R. M., Libanori, R., Rothfuchs, N. & Studart, A. R. Composites reinforced 

in three dimensions by using low magnetic fields. Science (80-. ). 335, 199–204 

(2012). 

50. 
Yaraghi, N. A. & Kisailus, D. Biomimetic Structural Materials: Inspiration 

from Design and Assembly. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 69, 23–57 (2018). 

51. 
Le Ferrand, H. & Athanasiou, C. E. A Materials Perspective on the Design of 

Damage-Resilient Bone Implants Through Additive/Advanced Manufacturing. 

Jom 72, 1195–1210 (2020). 

52. 
Ghazlan, A. et al. Inspiration from Nature’s body armours – A review of 

biological and bioinspired composites. Compos. Part B Eng. 205, 108513 

(2021). 

53. 
Abrougui, M. M., Srasra, E., Lopez-Lopez, M. T. & Duran, J. D. G. Rheology 

of magnetic colloids containing clusters of particle platelets and polymer 

nanofibres. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 378, 20190255 

(2020). 

54. 
Wu, S. et al. Symmetry-Breaking Actuation Mechanism for Soft Robotics and 


Active Metamaterials. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 41649–41658 (2019). 

55. 
Borin, D., Stepanov, G. & Dohmen, E. On anisotropic mechanical properties of 

heterogeneous magnetic polymeric composites. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. 

Phys. Eng. Sci. 377, 20180212 (2019). 

56. 
Sydney Gladman, A., Matsumoto, E. A., Nuzzo, R. G., Mahadevan, L. & 

Lewis, J. A. Biomimetic 4D printing. Nat. Mater. 15, 413–418 (2016). 

57. 
Ma, S. Q. et al. Recent progress in 4D printing of stimuli-responsive polymeric 

materials. Sci. China Technol. Sci. 63, 532–544 (2020). 

58. 
Martin, J. J., Fiore, B. E. & Erb, R. M. Designing bioinspired composite 

reinforcement architectures via 3D magnetic printing. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–7 

(2015). 

59. 
Pereira, T., Leme, C. L. A. P., Marschner, S. & Rusinkiewicz, S. Printing 

anisotropic appearance with magnetic flakes. ACM Trans. Graph. 36, 1–10 

(2017). 

60. 
Huber, C. et al. Topology optimized and 3D printed polymer-bonded 

permanent magnets for a predefined external field. J. Appl. Phys. 122, 053904 

(2017). 

61. 
Huber, C. et al. 3D print of polymer bonded rare-earth magnets, and 3D 

magnetic field scanning with an end-user 3D printer. Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 

162401 (2016). 

62. 
Domingo-Roca, R., Jackson, J. C. & Windmill, J. F. C. 3D-printing polymer-

based permanent magnets. Mater. Des. 153, 120–128 (2018). 

 


