Hyperspectral nanoscale mapping of hybrid
perovskite photophysics at the single grain level

Ethan J. Taylor,† Vasudevan Iyer,‡ Bibek S. Dhami,† Clay Klein,¶ Benjamin J.
Lawrie,∗,‡ and Kannatassen Appavoo∗,†

†Department of Physics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham AL
‡Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge TN
¶Department of Physics, Clarion University, Clarion PA
§Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge
TN

E-mail: lawriebj@ornl.gov; appavoo@uab.edu
Phone: +001(205) 934-0340

Abstract

Hybrid
organic-inorganic
perovskites
have
drawn significant interest for applications in
optoelectronics over the last few years.
De-
spite rapid progress in understanding the pho-
tophysics of perovskite, there remains a need
for improved understanding of the effect of mi-
crostructure on perovskite emission. Here, we
combine unsupervised machine learning and
cathodoluminescence microscopy of a proto-
typical hybrid perovskite film to decode pho-
tophysical processes that are otherwise lost
with conventional Gaussian image processing.
Hyperspectral maps are decoded with non-
negative matrix factorization, revealing compo-
nents relating to primary band-edge emission,
photon recycling, and defect emission. A blind-
spectral non-negative matrix factorization pro-
cedure provides additional understanding of
changes in an intermediate perovskite phase
under electron beam exposure and illustrates
how traditional Gaussian techniques may hide
relevant emission features that are critical to
the development of environmentally robust per-
ovskite devices.

Introduction

Over the last decade, hybrid organic-inorganic
perovskites have garnered widespread interest
for applications in photovoltaics,1–6 sensing,7–9

and neuromorphic computing10,11 because of
their impressive electronic properties that in-
clude a high absorption coefficient, band-gap
tunability, low exciton binding energy, and long
carrier lifetimes and diffusion lengths.
De-
spite the potential of hybrid perovskite devices,
improved long-term stability and phase engi-
neering will be essential to continue progress.
Improved understanding and control of intra-
grain structure has become critical to optimiz-
ing charge carrier dynamics to satisfy specific
device requirements. Indeed, the exact role that
grain boundaries play, beneficial12,13 or detri-
mental,14,15 is yet to be fully understood.
Various microscopy and spectroscopy tech-
niques have been employed to characterize
the effect of grain structure and morphol-
ogy on charge carrier dynamics and transport.
For example, transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) has been used to characterize how lead-
related defects are formed and how they are
localizes at boundaries.16 TEM has also been
used to characterize a temperature-dependent
phase transition from tetragonal MAPbI3 to

1

arXiv:2201.06546v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  17 Jan 2022


trigonal PbI2,17 with some recent work point-
ing towards humidity as a driving factor in
how grain boundaries influence film degrada-
tion.18 Furthermore, various emission spectro-
scopies have been used to map the excited-
state energetics and dynamics in grain interi-
ors and grain boundaries through intensity and
lifetime measurements.19–21 Other methods in-
cluding atomic force microscopy, confocal mi-
croscopy, electron backscatter diffraction, and
computational techniques have been used to
better understand the effect of grain boundaries
on the optoelectronic properties of perovskite
thin films.21–27 Cathodoluminescence (CL) mi-
croscopy now serves as a powerful tool for high
resolution mapping of hybrid perovskite photo-
physics,28 but the electron beam is not a com-
pletely non-perturbative probe. Large electron
beam energies and currents can locally heat
and decompose perovskite films, resulting in
increased PbI2 luminescence and in the emer-
gence of an unstable intermediate perovskite
phase that emits light at higher energy than the
primary perovskite band-edge emission.28,29

In this Letter, we employ CL microscopy and
machine-learning techniques to provide insights
into the photophysical properties of a single
grain of a prototypical MAPbI3 perovskite with
a spatial resolution of better than 10 nm. The
raw CL spectrum images highlight the complex
spectral variation within the grain interior and
at its boundary. Secondary electrons are mea-
sured concurrently with the CL in order to pro-
vide correlated maps of the grain morphology
and the perovskite photophysics. We also sys-
tematically vary the electron beam energy in
order to probe both depth-dependent effects30

and beam induced perovskite decomposition.29

The raw CL spectrum images are analyzed us-
ing non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)
techniques that allows us to map spectral com-
ponents across the grain.
This unsupervised
analysis highlights how degradation, as probed
by PbI2 formation, is more likely to occur near
grain boundaries. Increasing the beam energy
initially increases the amount of damage at the
boundaries of the grain, though additional in-
creases in beam energy and current result in
damage to the center of the grain. Furthermore,

we also show how primary band-edge emis-
sion is distributed within the body of the grain
and how the morphology of the thin film dic-
tates nanometer scale regions where photon re-
cycling takes place. A secondary characteriza-
tion technique using Gaussian-restricted NMF
shows that, in contrast to recent reports,19 the
“disordered” phase for these perovskites ap-
pears to be uncorrelated with the PbI2 grain
boundary behaviour.

Cathodoluminescence
Mi-
croscopy

Cathodoluminescence
microscopy
is
now
a
workhorse tool for the characterization of
nanophotonic materials. When a high-energy
converged electron beam interacts with a sam-
ple, the transmitted, secondary, and backscat-
tered electrons are routinely used to character-
ize the sample morphology. The CL signal can
provide a clear nanoscale picture of the energet-
ics and dynamics of excited states in materials;
it complements electron-energy loss spectro-
scopies (EELS) because EELS measures the
energy lost by the electron beam as it interacts
with matter while CL characterizes the photons
emitted by matter after electron excitation. CL
microscopy is often delineated into coherent
and incoherent CL.31 Coherent CL, so named
because the emitted photons have a defined
phase relationship with the electron excitation,
results from incident electrons polarizing mate-
rial at material interfaces; it is frequently used
to probe the local density of states of nanopho-
tonic and plasmonic media.32–35 Incoherent CL
measures the spontaneous emission of excited
states after the electron beam deposits energy
in matter, and so is a powerful tool for mea-
suring the nanoscale energetics and dynamics
of defects and excitons in heterogeneous mate-
rials.14,28,29,36–40

Here, as shown schematically in Figure 1(a),
we probe the incoherent CL generated by a
perovskite thin film using a FEI Quattro en-
vironmental SEM with a Delmic Sparc CL col-
lection module that utilizes a parabolic mirror
to collect the CL generated by the film after

2


Figure 1: (a) Schematic of CL setup. The electron beam enters through a hole in a parabolic
collection mirror before impacting the sample. The resulting photons are collected and directed
through a focusing path before being spectrally dispersed onto a CCD. (b) Optical absorption, PL
and CL at the center of a grain. (c) SEM images of sample collected with 5 kV accelerating voltage
with a horizontal field of view of 63 µm. (d-e) CL intensity maps at 758 nm and 545 nm respectively.

3


electron beam excitation.
An electron beam
with beam energy of 5-20 kV passes through a
small hole in the parabolic mirror before excit-
ing the sample with a spot size of order 1 nm.
The parabolic mirror then collects the result-
ing emission and directs it through a focusing
lens into an Andor Kymera spectrograph. An
Everhart-Thornley detector is used to measure
the secondary electron (SE) signal concurrently
with the CL signal. An SE map of a prototypi-
cal grain is shown in Figure 1(c) for 5 kV beam
energy. Normalized optical absorption, photo-
luminescence(PL) and CL from the center of a
grain are shown in Figure 1(b) and CL maps
at 758 nm and 545 nm are shown in Figure 1(d)
and (e) respectively. All CL measurements were
performed with a beam current of 110 pA. The 5
kV measurement utilized a 1 s acquisition time
per spectrum and the 10 kV and 20 kV mea-
surements utilized 100 ms acquisition times per
spectrum.

Unmixing
spectral
compo-
nents

NMF is a powerful tool for spectral unmix-
ing that separates overlapping signals in hyper-
spectral images. Here, we use an unsupervised
“blind-spectral” NMF where the only physical
constraint is that the spectral components must
be non-negative41,42 and a Gaussian-restricted
NMF that adds additional constraints to the
NMF decomposition based on initial Bayesian
inference fitting methods.
All NMF decom-
positions were performed using the scikit-learn
Python package.

Gaussian NMF

Previous reports of perovskite CL microscopies
have relied on either maps of the CL intensity
within given wavelength bins29 or least-squares
Gaussian fits.43,44 The former can be a viable
solution when the number of detected photons
is too small to fit the CL spectra with high
confidence. The latter can be computationally
expensive, and it requires prior knowledge of
the functional form of the CL spectrum, but it

is sufficient for many applications.
Here, we
use a Bayesian inference fitting method45 to
fit three Gaussian modes to the average spec-
tral response for each accelerating voltage and
then perform a restricted NMF procedure us-
ing these fitted Gaussians as fixed row vectors
in the encoding matrix while optimizing the
weight matrix. The results of this Bayesian re-
stricted NMF decomposition for a prototypical
perovskite-grain CL spectrum image are shown
in Figure 2 for beam energies of 5, 10, and
20 kV. The images were acquired for the same
grain beginning with the low energy electron
beam and progressing to higher energy.

Blind-Spectral NMF

When performing blind-spectral NMF, we must
first determine the appropriate number of com-
ponents to include in the decomposition. Here,
the explained variance ratio(EVR) was calcu-
lated for each accelerating voltage as shown in
Figure 3. Because three components account
for over 97 % of the variance in the data, no ad-
ditional components were deemed necessary for
the Blind-Spectral NMF calculations.
Figure 4 shows the results of the blind-
spectral NMF for the same perovskite grain
for the same three beam energies. As above,
the spectral components shown in Figure 4(d)
correspond to the spatial maps in Figure 4(a-
c). Looking just at the low energy 5 kV excita-
tion, we see the NMF has decomposed the CL
into three primary components, two localized in
the grain interior and one at the grain bound-
ary. As the accelerating voltage increases, cor-
responding to a greater depth of excitation30

and increased damage,29 the weights of these
contributions vary.

Discussion

The SEM images in Figure 2(a) reveal a uni-
form grain structure for a grain of size ∼ 50 µm,
characteristic of MAPbI3 perovskite grains with
a strong separation between grain interior and
boundary.
The grain structure is consistent
with the proposed Voronoi growth detailed

4


Figure 2: Gaussian restricted NMF for three different beam energies. (a) shows the corresponding
SEM images collected simultaneously with CL. (b-d) Weight vectors with corresponding color for
encoding matrix shown in (e).
Captures (b) transitory damage states and primary band-edge
emission, (c) primary band-edge emission and photon recycling, and (d) PbI2 emission suggestive
of perovskite decomposition.

5


Figure 3: NMF explained variance ratio (EVR)
for 1-5 components. Three components account
for over 97 % of the variance.

in past studies,46 but as excitation depth in-
creases, more intra-grain structures become vis-
ible. The CL spectrum images are well corre-
lated with this intra-grain structure, so we ar-
gue that the crystallization process inside the
grain strongly influences the emission parame-
ters. However, because increased beam energy
yields both increased electron-beam interaction
volumes and increased damage, it is critical to
minimize the electron-beam dose in order to fa-
cilitate depth dependent probes without caus-
ing excess damage.
At 5 kV, the electron beam probes the top
100 nm of the film,28 and we see that the
primary band-edge emission contribution out-
weighs the photon recycling contribution in Fig-
ures 2 and 4. This aligns with understanding
of the photon recycling process, as the amount
of available material to contribute to the pro-
cess is smaller and primary band-edge emis-
sion dominates across the surface of the grain
in a uniform manner as shown in the spatial
map. The photon recycling contribution is most
prominent at the center of the grain and lacks
any contribution at the grain boundary. The
electron-beam conditions for the data reported
here were intentionally chosen to minimize PbI2
damage, and the beam-induced damage is visi-
bly minimized and localized to the grain bound-
ary at 5 kV. At 10 kV, the weight of the two
primary emission peak contributions flip, with
the contribution assigned to photon recycling

becoming the most prominent as a higher per-
centage of energy is deposited deeper within the
grain.
The contribution from primary band-
edge emission localizes more along the interior
of the grain in the spatial map and the pho-
ton recycling contribution remains strongest in
the center of the grain.
The PbI2 contribu-
tion grows slightly but remains localized at the
boundary of the grain. At 20 kV, the grain is
now being damaged by the electron beam to
a much larger degree. The primary band-edge
contribution remains unchanged and is local-
ized along the grain interior, with only slight
variations due to the micro-structuring of the
grain itself.
Photon recycling can be seen to
be entirely localized within the center of the
grain. The intermediate degradation phase is
substantially enhanced at 20 kV. This is con-
sistent with past studies of the progression of
damage in perovskite grains,28,29 but it is cap-
tured here without distorting the contributions
from relevant grain interior emission processes.
Because the Gaussian-restricted NMF decom-
position shown in Figure 2 is constrained by
Gaussian priors, it suppresses some spatial
structure that is present in the raw hyperspec-
tral CL maps. The same issue is present in the
literature where frequentist Gaussian fits have
been used to analyze CL spectrum images.43,44

The PbI2 CL (shown in Figure 2d) and the
primary band-edge and photon recycling CL
(shown in Figure 2c) remain well spatially re-
solved, but the CL from the intermediate per-
ovskite phase (shown in Figure 2b) is poorly
resolved because of the inappropriate choice of
priors.
The blind spectral NMF shown in Figure
4 exhibits substantial similarities with the
Gaussian-restricted NMF. However, the ab-
sence of Gaussian constraints allows for more
complex spectral components to emerge in Fig-
ure 4(d) and for spatial structure that is present
in the raw CL hyperspectral data but sup-
pressed by the Gaussian-NMF to emerge in Fig-
ure 4(a-c). While the Gaussian constraints con-
volved the primary band-edge and photon recy-
cling CL into a single Gaussian component, the
blind spectral NMF shown in Figure 4 clearly
delineates the primary band-edge emission in

6


Figure 4: Blind-Spectral NMF of hybrid perovskite CL with varying beam energy.
(a) NMF
component corresponding to primary band-edge emission, (b) photon recycling, and (c) defect and
intermediate phase emission.
The normalized spectral components corresponding to the image
decompositions are shown in (d).

(a) from the photon recycling CL in (b). More-
over, the blind spectral NMF combines the PbI2
defect CL and the intermediate phase CL into
a single non-Gaussian spectral component illus-
trated in Figure 4(c). Because the three compo-
nents used here yield a greater than 97% EVR,
it is reasonable to conclude that the PbI2 defect
CL and the intermediate phase CL are in fact
spatially correlated with one another because
of an increased likelihood of defect formation
at grain boundaries.
This is consistent with
the limited literature that has explored beam-
induced damage in hybrid perovskites.28,29

Conclusion

In this study, we investigated the electron-
beam energy-dependent hyperspectral CL of an
MAPbI3 perovskite grain with a spatial resolu-
tion of 10nm using a combination of Gaussian-
constrained NMF and blind-spectral NMF. We
highlighted four prominent components of the
spectrum images, including the primary band-

edge perovskite CL, photon recycling CL, an
intermediate phase associated with localized
beam induced heating, and a fully decomposed
PbI2 CL. While CL microscopy has become
a well-used tool for probing perovskite films,
the use of blind-spectral NMF allowed us to
learn more about nanoscale perovskite photo-
physics, and, critically, to demonstrate a clear
correlation between the intermediate perovskite
phase and decomposed PbI2 CL near grain
boundaries. Indeed, this method allowed us to
map the growth of the intermediate phase as
a function of damage from the electron beam.
This highlights the importance of understand-
ing the optical properties of perovskite films
near grain boundaries.
Because the interme-
diate perovskite phase is chemically unstable,
increased focus on understanding and minimiz-
ing the emergence of this intermediate phase
will be critical to the development of environ-
mentally robust perovskite devices.

Acknowledgement Support for this project
was provided by NASA EPSCoR RID (award

7


number 80NSSC19M0051) and UAB startup
funds.
Cathodoluminescence microscopy was
conducted at the Center for Nanophase Mate-
rials Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Sci-
ence User Facility. BSD acknowledges financial
support from the Alabama Graduate Research
Scholars Program (GRSP) funded through the
Alabama Commission for Higher Education
and administered by the Alabama EPSCoR. We
thank Dr. Sergei Kalinin for insightful discus-
sion about data analysis.

References

(1) Misra,
R.
K.;
Aharon,
S.;
Li,
B.;
Mogilyansky, D.; Visoly-Fisher, I.; Et-
gar, L.; Katz, E. A. Temperature-and
component-dependent degradation of per-
ovskite photovoltaic materials under con-
centrated sunlight. The Journal of Physi-
cal Chemistry Letters 2015, 6, 326–330.

(2) Yuan, Y.; Chae, J.; Shao, Y.; Wang, Q.;
Xiao, Z.; Centrone, A.; Huang, J. Pho-
tovoltaic switching mechanism in lat-
eral
structure
hybrid
perovskite
solar
cells. Advanced Energy Materials 2015, 5,
1500615.

(3) Al-Dainy, G. A.; Bourdo, S. E.; Saini, V.;
Berry, B. C.; Biris, A. S. Hybrid Per-
ovskite Photovoltaic Devices: Properties,
Architecture, and Fabrication Methods.
Energy Technology 2017, 5, 373–401.

(4) Dualeh, A.; Gao, P.; Seok, S. I.; Nazeerud-
din, M. K.;
Gr¨atzel, M. Thermal be-
havior of methylammonium lead-trihalide
perovskite photovoltaic light harvesters.
Chemistry of Materials 2014, 26, 6160–
6164.

(5) Williams, S. T.; Rajagopal, A.; Chueh, C.-
C.; Jen, A. K.-Y. Current challenges and
prospective research for upscaling hybrid
perovskite photovoltaics. The Journal of
Physical Chemistry Letters 2016, 7, 811–
819.

(6) Niu, G.; Guo, X.; Wang, L. Review of re-
cent progress in chemical stability of per-
ovskite solar cells. Journal of Materials
Chemistry A 2015, 3, 8970–8980.

(7) Kakavelakis,
G.;
Gagaoudakis,
E.;
Petridis,
K.;
Petromichelaki,
V.;
Bi-
nas, V.;
Kiriakidis, G.;
Kymakis, E.
Solution processed CH3NH3PbI3–x Cl
x perovskite based self-powered ozone
sensing element operated at room tem-
perature. ACS Sensors 2018, 3, 135–142.

(8) Xu, W.; Li, F.; Cai, Z.; Wang, Y.; Luo, F.;
Chen, X. An ultrasensitive and reversible
fluorescence sensor of humidity using per-
ovskite CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3. Journal of Ma-
terials Chemistry C 2016, 4, 9651–9655.

(9) Yang, X.; Ma, L.-F.; Yan, D. Facile syn-
thesis of 1D organic–inorganic perovskite
micro-belts with high water stability for
sensing and photonic applications. Chem-
ical Science 2019, 10, 4567–4572.

(10) Lin, G.; Lin, Y.; Cui, R.; Huang, H.;
Guo, X.; Li, C.; Dong, J.; Guo, X.; Sun, B.
An organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite
logic gate for better computing. Journal
of Materials Chemistry C 2015, 3, 10793–
10798.

(11) Xiao, Z.; Huang, J. Energy-efficient hy-
brid perovskite memristors and synap-
tic devices. Advanced Electronic Materials
2016, 2, 1600100.

(12) Li, J.; Ma, J.-Y.; Ge, Q.-Q.; Hu, J.-S.;
Wang, D.; Wan, L.-J. Microscopic Investi-
gation of Grain Boundaries in Organolead
Halide Perovskite Solar Cells. ACS Ap-
plied Materials & Interfaces 2015, 7.

(13) Yun, J. S.; Ho-Baillie, A.; Huang, S.;
Woo, S.; Heo, Y.; Seidel, J.; Huang, F.;
Bing, C.; Green, M. The Benefit of Grain
Boundaries in Organic-Inorganic Halide
Planar Perovskite Solar Cells. The Jour-
nal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2015,
6.

8


(14) Du, Y.; Cai, H.; Wen, H.; Wu, Y.; Li, Z.;
Xu, J.; Huang, L.; Ni, J.; Li, J.; Zhang, J.
Revealing the unfavorable role of superflu-
ous CH3NH3PbI3 grain boundary traps in
perovskite solar cells on carrier collection.
RSC Adv. 2016, 6, 83264–83272.

(15) Doherty, T. A. S. et al. Performance-
limiting nanoscale trap clusters at grain
junctions in halide perovskites. Nature
2020, 580, 360–366.

(16) Alberti, A.; Bongiorno, C.; Smecca, E.;
Deretzis, I.; Magna, A.; Spinella, C. Pb
clustering and PbI 2 nanofragmentation
during methylammonium lead iodide per-
ovskite degradation. Nature Communica-
tions 2019, 10, 2196.

(17) Fan, Z.; Xiao, H.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, Z.;
Lin,
Z.;
Cheng,
H.-C.;
Lee,
S.-J.;
Wang, G.; Feng, Z.; Goddard, W. A.;
Huang, Y.;
Duan, X.
Layer-by-Layer
Degradation of Methylammonium Lead
Tri-iodide Perovskite Microplates. Joule
2017, 1, 548–562.

(18) Wang, Q.; Chen, B.; Liu, Y.; Deng, Y.;
Bai, Y.; Dong, Q.; Hwang, I. Scaling be-
havior of moisture-induced grain degrada-
tion in polycrystalline hybrid perovskite
thin films. Energy and Environmental Sci-
ence 2017, 10, 516–522.

(19) Mamun, A. A.;
Ava, T.;
Jeong, H.;
Jeong, m. s.; Namkoong, G. Deconvoluted
PL approach to probe charge carrier dy-
namics of grain interior and grain bound-
ary of perovskite film for perovskite solar
cell application. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2017, 19.

(20) Grancini,
G.;
D’Innocenzo,
V.;
Dohner, E.; Martino, N.; Srimath Kan-
dada,
A.;
Mosconi,
E.;
Angelis,
F.;
Karunadasa, H.; Hoke, E.; Petrozza, A.
CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Single Crystals:
Surface Photophysics and its Interaction
with the Environment. Chem. Sci. 2015,
6.

(21) Adhyaksa, G.; Brittman, S.; Abolins, H.;
Lof, A.;
Li, X.;
Keelor, J.;
Luo, Y.;
Duevski, T.; Heeren, R.; Ellis, S.; Fen-
ning,
D.;
Garnett,
E.
Understanding
Detrimental and Beneficial Grain Bound-
ary Effects in Halide Perovskites. Ad-
vanced Materials 2018, 30, 1804792.

(22) Shao, Y.; Fang, Y.; Li, T.; Wang, Q.;
Dong, Q.; Deng, Y.; Yuan, Y.; Wei, H.;
Wang, M.; Gruverman, A.; Shield, J.;
Hwang, I. Grain Boundary Dominated
Ion Migration in Polycrystalline Organic-
Inorganic Halide Perovskite Films. Energy
Environ. Sci. 2016, 9.

(23) Song, J.; Zhou, Y.; Padture, N.; Huey, B.
Anomalous 3D nanoscale photoconduc-
tion in hybrid perovskite semiconductors
revealed by tomographic atomic force mi-
croscopy. Nature Communications 2020,
11.

(24) deQuilettes, D.; Vorpahl, S.; Stranks, S.;
Nagaoka, H.;
Eperon, G.;
Ziffer, M.;
Snaith, H.;
Ginger, D. Impact of mi-
crostructure on local carrier lifetime in
perovskite solar cells. Science 2015, 348.

(25) Long, R.; Liu, J.; Prezhdo, O. Unravel-
ling the Effects of Grain Boundary and
Chemical Doping on Electron-Hole Re-
combination in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite
by Time-Domain Atomistic Simulation.
Journal of the American Chemical Society
2016, 138.

(26) Sherkar, T.; Momblona, C.; Gil-Escrig, L.;
´Avila,
J.;
Sessolo,
M.;
Bolink,
H.;
Koster, L. Recombination in Perovskite
Solar Cells: Significance of Grain Bound-
aries, Interface Traps and Defect Ions.
ACS Energy Letters 2017, 2.

(27) Park, J.-S.; Calbo, J.; Jung, Y.-K.; Whal-
ley, L.; Walsh, A. Accumulation of Deep
Traps at Grain Boundaries in Halide Per-
ovskites. ACS Energy Letters 2019,

(28) Guthrey,
H.;
Moseley,
J.
A
Review
and Perspective on Cathodoluminescence

9


Analysis of Halide Perovskites. Advanced
Energy Materials 2020, 10, 1903840.

(29) Xiao, C.;
Li, Z.;
Guthrey, H.;
Mose-
ley, J.; Yang, Y.; Wozny, S.; Moutinho, H.;
To,
B.;
Berry,
J.
J.;
Gorman,
B.,
et
al.
Mechanisms
of
electron-beam-
induced damage in perovskite thin films
revealed by cathodoluminescence spec-
troscopy. The Journal of Physical Chem-
istry C 2015, 119, 26904–26911.

(30) Bischak,
C.
G.;
Sanehira,
E.
M.;
Precht, J. T.;
Luther, J. M.;
Gins-
berg, N. S. Heterogeneous charge carrier
dynamics
in
organic–inorganic
hybrid
materials:
nanoscale lateral and depth-
dependent
variation
of
recombination
rates in methylammonium lead halide
perovskite thin films. Nano Letters 2015,
15, 4799–4807.

(31) Brenny, B.; Coenen, T.; Polman, A. Quan-
tifying coherent and incoherent cathodo-
luminescence in semiconductors and met-
als. Journal of Applied Physics 2014, 115,
244307.

(32) Schefold, J.; Meuret, S.; Schilder, N.; Co-
enen, T.; Agrawal, H.; Garnett, E. C.;
Polman, A. Spatial resolution of coherent
cathodoluminescence super-resolution mi-
croscopy. ACS Photonics 2019, 6, 1067–
1072.

(33) Schilder,
N.
J.;
Agrawal,
H.;
Gar-
nett, E. C.; Polman, A. Phase-resolved
surface plasmon scattering probed by
cathodoluminescence
holography.
ACS
Photonics 2020, 7, 1476–1482.

(34) Hachtel,
J.
A.;
Cho,
S.-Y.;
David-
son,
R.
B.;
Feldman,
M.
A.;
Chisholm,
M.
F.;
Haglund,
R.
F.;
Idrobo,
J.
C.;
Pantelides,
S.
T.;
Lawrie, B. J. Spatially and spectrally
resolved orbital angular momentum inter-
actions in plasmonic vortex generators.
Light: Science & Applications 2019, 8,
1–9.

(35) Hachtel, J. A.; Davidson, R. B.; Kova-
lik, E. R.; Retterer, S. T.; Lupini, A. R.;
Haglund, R. F.;
Lawrie, B. J.;
Pan-
telides, S. T. Polarization-and wavelength-
resolved near-field imaging of complex
plasmonic
modes
in
Archimedean
nanospirals. Optics Letters
2018,
43,
927–930.

(36) Li, W.;
Rothmann, M. U.;
Liu, A.;
Wang, Z.;
Zhang, Y.;
Pascoe, A. R.;
Lu, J.; Jiang, L.; Chen, Y.; Huang, F.;
Peng, Y.; Bao, Q.; Etheridge, J.; Bach, U.;
Cheng, Y.-B. Phase segregation enhanced
ion movement in efficient inorganic CsP-
bIBr2 solar cells. Advanced Energy Mate-
rials 2017, 7, 1700946.

(37) Massasa, E. H.;
Strassberg, R.;
Vur-
gaft, A.;
Kauffmann, Y.;
Cohen, N.;
Bekenstein, Y. Thin Layer Buckling in
Perovskite CsPbBr3 Nanobelts. Nano Let-
ters 2021, 21, 5564–5571.

(38) Feldman, M. A.;
Dumitrescu, E. F.;
Bridges, D.;
Chisholm, M. F.;
David-
son, R. B.; Evans, P. G.; Hachtel, J. A.;
Hu, A.; Pooser, R. C.; Haglund, R. F.;
Lawrie, B. J. Colossal photon bunching
in quasiparticle-mediated nanodiamond
cathodoluminescence. Physical Review B
2018, 97, 081404.

(39) Iyer, V.;
Phang, Y. S.;
Butler, A.;
Chen, J.; Lerner, B.; Argyropoulos, C.;
Hoang, T.; Lawrie, B. Near-field imag-
ing of plasmonic nanopatch antennas with
integrated semiconductor quantum dots.
APL Photonics 2021, 6, 106103.

(40) Bischak, C. G.;
Hetherington, C. L.;
Wu, H.; Aloni, S.; Ogletree, D. F.; Lim-
mer, D. T.; Ginsberg, N. S. Origin of re-
versible photoinduced phase separation in
hybrid perovskites. Nano Letters 2017,
17, 1028–1033.

(41) Lee, D.; Seung, H. Learning the Parts of
Objects by Non-Negative Matrix Factor-
ization. Nature 1999, 401, 788–91.

10


(42) Montcuquet, A.-S.; Herve, L.; Garcia, F.
P. N. Y.; Dinten, J.-M.; Mars, J. I. Non-
negative matrix factorization:
a blind
spectra separation method for in vivo
fluorescent optical imaging. Journal of
biomedical optics 2010, 15, 056009.

(43) Ummadisingu,
A.;
Mishra,
A.;
Ku-
bicki, D. J.; LaGrange, T.; Duˇcinskas, A.;
Siczek, M.;
Bury, W.;
Mili´c, J. V.;
Gr¨atzel, M.;
Emsley, L. Multi-Length
Scale Structure of 2D/3D Dion–Jacobson
Hybrid Perovskites Based on an Aro-
matic Diammonium Spacer. Small 2021,
2104287.

(44) Jagadamma, L. K.; Edwards, P. R.; Mar-
tin, R. W.; Ruseckas, A.; Samuel, I. D.
Nanoscale heterogeneity in CsPbBr3 and
CsPbBr3: KI perovskite films revealed by
cathodoluminescence hyperspectral imag-
ing. ACS Applied Energy Materials 2021,
4, 2707–2715.

(45) Pai, Y.-Y.;
Marvinney, C. E.;
Feld-
man, M. A.; Lerner, B.; Phang, Y. S.;
Xiao, K.; Yan, J.; Liang, L.; Lapano, J.;
Brahlek, M.;
Lawrie, B. Magnetostric-
tion of α-RuCl3 Flakes in the Zigzag
Phase. The Journal of Physical Chemistry
C 2021, 125, 25687.

(46) Hu, H.; Singh, M.; Wan, X.; Tang, J.;
Chu, C. W.; Li, G. Nucleation and crys-
tal growth control for scalable solution-
processed organic-inorganic hybrid per-
ovskite solar cells. Journal of Materials
Chemistry A 2019, 8, 1578.

11


