1

Quantification of the helical morphology of chiral Au nanorods

Wouter Heyvaert1, Adrián Pedrazo-Tardajos1, Ajinkya Kadu1, Nathalie Claes1, Guillermo González-
Rubio2,3, Luis M. Liz-Marzán2,4,5, Wiebke Albrecht1,6*, Sara Bals1*

1 EMAT and NANOlab Center of Excellence, University of Antwerp, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium

2 CIC biomaGUNE, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), 20014 Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain

3 Physical Chemistry Department, University of Konstanz, Universitätsstraße 10, Box 714, 78457 Konstanz, Germany.

4 Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Bioingeniería Biomateriales, y Nanomedicina (CIBER-BBN), 20014 
Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain

5 Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, 48009 Bilbao, Spain

6 Center for Nanophotonics, AMOLF, Science Park 104, 1098 XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Electron Tomography, Chirality, Helicity, Au nanoparticles

ABSTRACT: Chirality in inorganic nanoparticles and nanostructures has gained increasing scientific interest, because of the 
possibility to tune their ability to interact differently with left- and right-handed circularly polarized light. In some cases, the optical 
activity is hypothesized to originate from a chiral morphology of the nanomaterial. However, quantifying the degree of chirality in 
objects with sizes of tens of nanometers is far from straightforward. Electron tomography offers the possibility to faithfully retrieve 
the three-dimensional morphology of nanomaterials, but only a qualitative interpretation of the morphology of chiral nanoparticles 
has been possible so far. We introduce herein a methodology that enables us to quantify the helicity of complex chiral nanomaterials,
based on the geometrical properties of a helix. We demonstrate that an analysis at the single particle level can provide significant 
insights into the origin of chiroptical properties. 

Chiral features in metal nanoparticles (NP) result in chiroptical 
properties,
of interest to many applications, such as 

enantioselective catalysis or separation, chiral sensing, drug 
delivery, and the creation of circularly polarized light (CPL).1-8

These applications arise from the different interactions of chiral 
plasmonic NPs with left- and right-handed CPL. Therefore, 
much effort has been put into the development of NPs with 
complex structures and morphologies.9-17 The properties of such 
samples are usually characterized by measuring their circular 
dichroism (CD), which quantifies the interaction of an 
ensemble of particles with CPL.18 Under certain conditions, 
such measurements can also be performed for single 
nanoparticles, which may help accounting for heterogeneity in 
morphology and optical response.19-21 Multiple factors can be at 
the origin of the recorded CD signal, such as a chiral 
morphology, chiral features in the crystalline structure, or the 
presence of chiral molecules at or near the surface of the chiral 
NPs.1,7,22-25 To obtain NPs with tailored chiroptical properties, it 
is thus important to understand the connection between the CD 
signal and the NP morphology.
Electron microscopy is a suitable technique to investigate the 
structure of single chiral NPs. However, neither scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) nor (scanning) transmission 
electron microscopy ((S)TEM) can faithfully reveal the 
complete 3D structure of the NPs.14,26,27 A promising alternative 
is electron tomography (ET), a technique that allows the 

reconstruction of the 3D structure of nanomaterials from a tilt 
series of 2D STEM projection images. ET has been applied to 
visualize the 3D structure of chiral Au NPs in great detail.10,28,29

For relatively simple structures, one can manually measure 
characteristics such as the helical pitch. Unfortunately, more 
complex structures, such as the chiral Au nanorods (NR) 
introduced by González-Rubio et al., are more difficult to 
quantify on the basis of a purely visual inspection.10 Using the 
3D Fourier transform (FT) of high-quality 3D reconstructions, 
González-Rubio et al. could identify chiral features on their 
NRs. However, this approach could not provide a quantitative 
measure of the NP chirality, or even clearly resolve their 
handedness.10

The Hausdorff chirality measure has already been used to 
quantify chirality.30 This method is based on minimizing the 
“Hausdorff distance” between the molecule and its mirror 
image, where a molecule is represented by a set of points in 3D 
space and each point represents a single atom. The chirality 
measure is defined as the ratio between the minimum Hausdorff 
distance and the diameter of the set of points. Since the number 
of points required to accurately represent a NP quickly rises for 
complex shapes, optimization becomes exceedingly time
demanding. Moreover, the Hausdorff chirality measure can 
quantify the degree of chirality of a given system, but is unable 
to distinguish between left- and right-handed chirality. Other 
methods have also been proposed to identify mirror symmetry, 


2

but they are all specifically designed for molecular structures 
and/or face the same problem of computational requirements
and inability to detect handedness.22,31-34 Recently, the chirality 
of elongated nanocrystals was analyzed by dividing the crystal 
into thin layers.35 The orientation of each layer was determined 
using principal component analysis and the difference in 
orientation between subsequent layers was used as a measure of 
chirality. This is a viable approach, but it requires that the 
orientation of the layers in the object can be determined, which 
is not always possible. Therefore, we are still missing a reliable
method that can objectively quantify morphological chirality in
single NPs, based on ET. Such a method would be extremely 

useful 
to 
gain the 
necessary 
insights 
on 
structural 

enhancements, that can eventually be used to improve the 
chiroptical activity of NPs.
We present herein a method to quantitatively investigate the 
helicity of single NPs, based on ET reconstructions. The 
methodology is used to identify helical features in the NP 
morphology and to extract parameters such as the inclination 
angle of such features. This approach will thus enable a
quantitative investigation of the connection between NP shape
and features in the corresponding CD spectrum, eventually 
leading to the optimization of chiral NPs.

Figure 1. Illustration of the base geometries used in our method: (a) a helix around the z-axis with radius ρ and inclination angle α; (b) a 
discrete voxel grid in Cartesian coordinates, where each cube is a voxel; and (c) a discrete voxel grid in cylindrical coordinates, where the 
voxels are no longer cubes, but trapezoidal prisms. An orthoslice at constant z and a cylindrical section at constant ρ are highlighted in red 
in (b) and (c), respectively.

Methodology

An object is chiral when its mirror image cannot be translated 
or rotated to completely overlap with the original shape.36

Helicity, on the other hand, is more vaguely defined as the 
extent to which a structure resembles or contains helices or 
helix-like features. Helical shapes are always chiral but 
additionally present features that are easier to interpret, such as 
a well-defined handedness and helical pitch or inclination 
angle. Since most synthesis efforts towards chiral nanoparticles
make use of helical growth, we designed a method to quantify 
helicity rather than chirality, even though chirality is the more 
general characteristic. Our method is specifically designed for
the analysis of chiral NRs, which present attractive 
properties.10,14,25,29 In a pioneering example, González-Rubio et 
al. were able to synthesize Au NRs with tunable chiroptical 
properties.10 Beyond the initial qualitative interpretation of ET 
reconstructions for such particles, our method allows extracting
quantitative 
information 
on
chirality. 
Although 
our 

methodology was designed for NRs, only few assumptions on 
the input data were made. The method is thus relevant to most 
types of helical (nano)structures, as exemplified below.
The basis of our method is strongly connected to the properties 
of a helix, corresponding to: (i) a central axis, (ii) the distance ρ 
between the helix and its central axis, and (iii) the angle of 
inclination α (Figure 1a). A helical shape can be described as a 
superposition of (parts of) individual helices, such that 
quantifying the helicity of an object can be simplified into 
detecting a sum of helices. We furthermore assume that the 

central axis is the same for all helices within a given shape and 
that it can be identified manually. The central axis for NRs will 
be parallel to its longitudinal symmetry axis and will pass 
through its center of mass.
As a first step, the ET reconstruction of the object of interest is 
oriented such that the central axis becomes the z-axis of the 
defined coordinate system. Our method then searches for the 
presence of helices, for each combination of 𝜌 and 𝛼. In a 
cylindrical coordinate system, helices around the z-axis 
correspond to straight lines. Since an ET reconstruction is
represented on a discrete voxel grid in Cartesian coordinates, as 
illustrated in Figure 1b, it should therefore be converted into a 
discrete voxel grid in cylindrical coordinates by linear 
interpolation (Figure 1c). This allows us to separately 
investigate concentric cylindrical 2D sections at constant 𝜌, 
such as the red section in Figure 1c.
To illustrate the different steps of our method, we created a 3D 
model of a rod with a right-handed helical shell, shown in 
Figure 2a. The model consists of an achiral cylindrical core with 
radius 𝜌𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 64 voxels and height ℎ = 256 voxels. Wrapped 
around this core is a chiral shell comprising two helices (blue 
and red in Figure 2a), each wrapping the core 2.5 times and 
extending to a radius 𝜌𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 = 96 voxels.
Two different cylindrical sections through the model are shown 
in Figures 2b,c. The presence of helices in our model translates
into diagonal lines in the cylindrical sections. For each 
cylindrical section (at different radii 𝜌) we can then compute 
the so-called directionality, to identify the preferred orientation 


3

of the diagonal lines. The directionality can be extracted from 
the gradient of the cylindrical section, which gives the direction 
of greatest change in intensity and the rate of change in intensity 
in each pixel of the cylindrical section.37 The direction of the 
gradient is therefore orthogonal to the orientation of diagonal 
features in the cylindrical sections. The relative presence, or 
strength, of diagonal features in one cylindrical section can be 
quantified from the magnitude of the gradient. As such, one can 
create a histogram with inclination angles on the horizontal axis
and the relative presence of features with each inclination angle 
on the vertical axis. Such a histogram can be filled by adding 
the magnitude of the gradient in each pixel to the histogram bin 
corresponding to the inclination angle in that pixel, as shown in 
Figure 2d and 2e for the two selected cylindrical sections. This 
process is visualized in more detail in Figure S1. The process is 
repeated for every cylindrical section and the results are 
recombined into a 2D histogram to extract the directionality 
𝐷(𝜌, 𝛼) of the 3D shape, expressed in units [𝐷] = [𝜌]−1[𝛼]−1

(Figure 2f). The directionality is normalized such that the sum 
over the complete 2D histogram equals one (see section 1 in the 
SI for more details).
The result for our model shows two strong peaks, highlighted 
by a green and an orange rectangle in Figure 2f. A vertical peak 
is present at 𝛼 = 0° (green), which stems from the top and 
bottom edges of the particle. Another peak, ranging from 𝛼 =
14° at 𝜌 = 𝜌𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 to 𝛼 = 10° at 𝜌 = 𝜌𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 (orange), corresponds 
to the helical shell in the model. The inclination angle for the 
directionality is defined in the range [−90°, 90°]. A helix is thus 
left-handed for 𝛼 ∈] − 90°, 0°[, right-handed if 𝛼 ∈]0°, 90°[, 
and not helical when 𝛼 equals 0° or 90°, which corresponds to 
horizontal or vertical features respectively. The peak marked in 
green is not helical, whereas the peak marked in orange is only 
present at positive inclination angles. We therefore conclude 
that the shell is right-handed helical. It should be noted that the 
orange peak is slightly curved, indicating different inclination 
angles 𝛼 at different radii 𝜌. Indeed, in the simulated helical rod,
the helices wrap around the core with a period of 102 voxels in 
the z-direction. Consequently, different inclination angles are 
required at different radii, as visible in Figure 2a.
For more complex shapes such as those investigated by 
González-Rubio et al., it becomes more challenging to interpret 
directionality plots, which are expected to contain different 
contributions at both positive and negative inclination angles.10

To enable an objective interpretation, we define a helicity 
function 𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼), as the difference between right- and left-
handed bins in the directionality 𝐷(𝜌, 𝛼):

𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼) = 𝐷(𝜌, 𝛼) − 𝐷(𝜌, −𝛼)

for 𝛼 ∈ [0°, 90°]. Consequently, the helicity function will be 
positive if there are more right-handed features with parameters 
𝜌 and 𝛼, or negative if there are more left-handed features. If 
the number of left- and right-handed features are equal, the 
helicity function will be zero. The helicity function for our 
model is shown in Figure 2g. A strong positive (right-handed) 
signal is present at the same inclination angles as earlier
observed for the peak marked in orange in Figure 2f. Since 𝛼 =
0° corresponds to non-helical features, the peak marked in 
green is not present in the helicity function because 𝐷(𝜌, 0°) =
𝐷(𝜌, −0°).

Figure 2. A simulated helix (a) with two of its cylindrical sections 
at 𝜌 = 70 voxels (b) and 𝜌 = 85 voxels (c), the scalebars are 100 
voxels wide. The model consists of an achiral core (yellow) 
enveloped by two helices (blue and red). The directionality for the 
two cylindrical sections is shown in (d) and (e) respectively, and 
the directionality of all cylindrical sections is combined in (f) to 
obtain the directionality of the 3D simulated helix in cylindrical 
coordinates. Two main features in (f) are marked by green and 
orange rectangles, and the orange region is enlarged in the inset. (g) 
Helicity function 𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼) and zoomed view (inset) of the peak 
corresponding to the helical shell of the model. Note that the line is 
not vertical due to the different angles involved in the model helix.

A single parameter that indicates the total helicity of a given NP 
can be useful to compare the degree of helicity for different 
NPs. Such a measure can be obtained by calculating the integral 
of the helicity function, which reduces to a sum if the helicity 
function is discrete:

𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = ∑ ∑𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼)Δ𝜌Δ𝛼

𝛼
𝜌

With 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 ∈ [−1,1]
due to the normalization of the 

directionality (see SI for more details). Positive values indicate 


4

right-handed helicity, negative values indicate left-handed 
helicity, and values close to zero indicate no overall helicity
(even though certain parts of a NP may show helicity, this can 
be compensated by other areas within the same NP). More 
details on the calculation of 𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼) and 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 are presented in 
section 2 of the SI, where the computational efficiency of the
method is also discussed (Figure S2).

Experimental results
Au NRs. To illustrate the use of our method, we investigated 
3D reconstructions of Au NRs synthesized by micelle-
templated seeded growth on achiral Au NRs.10 A chiral shell 
was grown on the seeds using cetyl-trimethylammonium 
chloride (CTAC) as a surfactant, combined with either (R)-
BINAMINE for right-handed chiral NRs or (S)-BINAMINE for 
left-handed chiral NRs. BINAMINE (1,1′-binaphthyl-2,2′-
diamine) is a derivative of BINOL (1,1′-bi(2-naphthol)) and 
acts as a chiral co-surfactant to create helical micelles.38 Using 
this approach, chiral Au NRs of different dimensions can be
prepared, which may slowly reshape over time because of a 
limited thermodynamic stability. Therefore, the thiolated amino 
acid cysteine was used as a stabilizing agent to prevent 
reshaping. The reader is referred to the paper by González-
Rubio et al. for complete details on synthesis and ET
procedures.10 Here, we selected five different NRs, as listed in 
Table 1. Two of the selected particles (R1 and R2) were 
obtained from the same sample,
prepared with (R)-

BINAMINE/CTAC; two other NRs (S1 and S2) were from a 
sample prepared with (S)-BINAMINE/CTAC. The synthesis 
conditions for these particles were the same, except for the 
specific BINAMINE enantiomer. A fifth particle (R3) was 
prepared with (R)-BINAMINE/CTAC, but under conditions 
resulting in a thinner chiral shell. More details on the synthesis 
are provided in section 3 of the SI.
3D 
renderings 
of 
the
corresponding
tomography 

reconstructions are shown in Figure 3 (see also orthoslices in 
Figure S3). Due to their thickness and the limited depth of field 
of the electron probe, only the front half of the particles could 
be reconstructed at a sufficient resolution for further 
quantitative analysis.39 In Figure 3, the NRs are oriented to 

display their front halves and complete 3D rendering movies are 
provided as part of the SI. Interestingly, our method provides 
the opportunity to calculate the helicity function for selected 
parts of the reconstruction. We therefore selected those parts of 
the reconstructions that showed sufficient resolution for further 
analysis. This approach will not introduce bias since the 
particles are randomly oriented on the TEM grid. Since the tips 
of the chiral Au NRs are dominated by randomly oriented 
wrinkles, they were manually removed before calculating the 
helicity 
functions 
𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼)
and 
the 
total 
helicity

𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙, presented in Figure 3. The results including the tips are 
shown in Figure S4 and it is clear that the presence of random 
wrinkles indeed affect the results.
The 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 values, calculated for the particles synthesized using 
(R)-BINAMINE/CTAC (R1, R2 and R3) are all positive, as 
expected for a right-handed helical structure, whereas those 
obtained using the (S)-enantiomer (S1 and S2) are left-handed 
helical (negative 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙). This result confirms the claim by 
González-Rubio et al. that the handedness of chiral NRs can be 
controlled through rational selection of the corresponding 
enantiomer during synthesis.10 Moreover, the absolute value of 
𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 is similar for R1, R2 and S2, as expected because they 
resulted from similar synthesis conditions. On the contrary, a 
much lower 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 value was obtained for S1, which is likely 
due to a significant variability in the chirality of different NRs
from the same sample batch, as also shown experimentally.20,21

In this particular system, the helicity of the particles originates 
from helical wrinkles in the shell. As discussed by González-
Rubio et al., the wrinkles have inclination angles ranging from
𝛼 = 0° to 𝛼 = 45°.10 The plots of the helicity function 𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼)
confirm these conclusions and furthermore reveal that the larger 
particles (R1, R2, S1 and S2) contain mostly inclination angles 
between 𝛼 = 0° and 𝛼 = 25°, with most of the helicity being 
concentrated around 𝛼 = 10°. On the contrary, the wrinkles for
the smaller particle (R3) feature higher inclination angles,
between 𝛼 = 20° and 𝛼 = 50°. Although additional data are 
required to confirm this trend, the results indicate that the 
average angle of inclination strongly depends on the thickness 
of the chiral shell.

Table 1. Experimental details of five selected NRs used to test the method. All NRs comprise a central achiral Au NR, on which a 
chiral Au shell was grown using surfactant micelle templating, using either (R)-BINAMINE/CTAC or (S)-BINAMINE/CTAC
mixtures.

Particle
Micelle
Seed diameter 
[nm]

Seed height 
[nm]

Diameter [nm]
Height [nm]
Expected 
handedness

R1
(R)-BINAMINE
46
139
127
216
Right-handed

R2
(R)-BINAMINE
48
143
131
223
Right-handed

S1
(S)-BINAMINE
46
131
135
212
Left-handed

S2
(S)-BINAMINE
42
132
124
208
Left-handed

R3
(R)-BINAMINE
43
131
81
177
Right-handed


5

Figure 3. Isosurface visualization of the 3D ET reconstructions of five chiral Au NRs, described in Table 1 (left image in each panel), along 
with a plot of the corresponding helicity function 𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼) (right image in each panel); The total helicity 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 is also indicated for each Au 
NR. The scale bars are 50 nm.

From our analysis, it also appears that thinner chiral shells 
display a lower fraction with chiral signature. This observation 
is also reflected by 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙, which is significantly lower for R3,
as compared to R1 and R2. These preliminary results agree with 
the average optical anisotropy factors measured experimentally 
for right-handed chiral NRs.10 A maximum of 𝑔𝐶𝐷,𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 0.12
at a wavelength of 700 nm was recorded for the sample 
containing particle R3, whereas for the sample containing R1 
and R2 a maximum anisotropy factor of 𝑔𝐶𝐷,𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 0.18 was 
obtained at a wavelength of 1100 nm. As a comparison with 
well-defined chiral NRs, we additionally applied our 
methodology to two different particles discussed in ref. 10. The 
first has a qualitatively different helicity function 𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼), but 
is still right-handed helical, while the second particle has poorly
defined chirality (Figure S5 and section 4 in the SI), which 

correctly results in a much lower 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 value than for the 
nanorods discussed in Figure 3.
Visualization of helical features. A purely visual inspection of 
the NRs indicates that they contain both left- and right-handed 
features, regardless of their overall handedness. It is 
consequently useful to identify the helicity of subregions in the 
particle. We therefore created 3D helicity maps to identify 
which features contribute most to the overall helicity. To build 
these maps, we calculated the helicity measure for small 
windows around each voxel in the particle in cylindrical 
coordinates and then assigned the calculated total helicity 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙
to each voxel (Figure S6). The main drawback of this approach 
is that the window size must be manually selected. After 
comparing different window sizes, as discussed in section 5 of 
the SI and Figure S7, we concluded that a window size of 
32 × 32 voxels is the optimal choice for this particular case.


6

Figure 4. 3D color-coded volume renderings of the helicity maps for the particles described in Table 1. Red indicates right-handed helical 
features and blue indicates left-handedness. The scale bar (valid for all images) represents 50 nm.

Figure 4 shows the helicity maps for the NRs listed in Table 1. 
Orthoslices through these maps (Figure S8) and animated 
helicity maps are provided in the SI. As expected, all chiral NRs 
contained both right- and left-handed features. However, 
arguably more right-handed features than left-handed features 
can be observed in globally right-handed rods and vice versa. 
These results are of interest to further understand the origin of 
the chiral features and to eventually optimize the synthesis 
toward NRs with enhanced optical chirality.
Complex helical nanostructures. Although our methodology 
has been specifically designed for the analysis of helical NRs,
the limited number of assumptions allow us to apply the 
approach to other helical systems, as long as a well-defined 
helical axis can be identified. E.g., we analyzed the helicity of 
self-assembled Au NRs around amyloid fibrils (Figure 5).40
Such fibrils are formed by spontaneous aggregation of amyloid 
proteins and are known to be related to various neuro-
degenerative diseases. Since these fibers display a (double-
)helical morphology, they could be used as a template for the 
helical organization of Au NRs. Under such arrangement, the 
coupling of plasmonic effects from Au NRs results in optical 
activity that can be recorded as circular dichroism (CD). Kumar 
et al. proposed the use of CD signals from helically assembled 
Au NRs to selectively detect the presence of the fibrils.
Characterization of one such self-assembled Au NR double-
helical fibril by cryo-ET provided a 3D reconstruction that 
could be analyzed by the proposed method. Figure 5 shows that
the well-defined helicity of the system resulted in a value of 
𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = −0.28, which is closer to a perfect left-handed helical 
object than the NRs investigated above. The helicity function 
𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼) (Figure 5c) indeed shows a strong left-handed helical 
signal at high inclination angles, between 𝛼 = 60° and 𝛼 =
85°. From the position of the peak in the helicity function,
between 𝜌 = 10 nm and 𝜌 = 20 nm, we conclude that the 
nanoparticles are organized within this range of radii from the 
helical axis. In contrast to the findings for the helical NRs, the 
helicity map (Figure 5b) indicates that all regions of the cluster 
contribute to the left-handed helicity, with limited traces of 
right-handedness that originate from a few misaligned NRs.

Figure 5. Quantitative analysis of the helicity of a helical 
arrangement of Au NRs around an amyloid fibril. An isosurface 
rendering of the NRs is shown in (a), the helicity map is shown in 
(b) as a semi-transparent 3D color-coded volume rendering, where 
red indicates right-handed helicity and blue indicates left-handed 
helicity. The helicity function 𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼) and total helicity 𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 are 
given in (c). The scale bar  is 100 nm.

Discussion and outlook
Our method, for which a Python package (HeliQ) was created,
41 is complementary to ensemble measurements and yields a
wealth of information at the single particle level. However, a 
few limitations must be overcome to make the approach widely 
applicable to any type of system. First, the helical axis must be 
identified manually, which currently restricts the use of our 
method to NRs, nanowires, and similar elongated structures. 
This became apparent when analyzing the NRs in Figure 3, 
where the seemingly random orientations of the wrinkles at the 
tips of the NRs were found to introduce artefacts in the results. 
Namely, one could hypothesize that the wrinkles at the tips are 
also helical, but with a different helical axis. A future possibility
might be to use a 3D gradient to (locally) detect the helical axis.
Another limitation lies in the current normalization of the 
directionality. If only few features are present in a cylindrical 
section (i.e., if it has a nearly uniform intensity), then the 


7

normalization factor will be small, which artificially increases 
the intensity in the helicity function 𝐻(𝜌, 𝛼). An example of this 
behavior is shown in the achiral NR in Figure S5. As discussed 
in the SI, this mainly forms a problem for non-helical axially
symmetric particles. A different normalization factor could be 
the solution for this problem. Nonetheless, the total helicity 
𝐻𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 accurately identifies the second particle in Figure S5 as 
achiral. Taking the current limitations into account, future 
modifications of our methodology will likely make it generally
applicable to any shape.

Conclusion
We introduced a method for the quantitative analysis of
morphological helicity, which has been exemplarily applied to
ET reconstructions of chiral Au nanorods. The approach is 
based on the geometrical properties of a helix and results in a 
two-dimensional helicity function 𝑯(𝝆,𝜶), which can be 
interpreted as the decomposition of a given shape into a 
combination of helices. The helicity function provides spatially 
resolved information about the presence of helical features, as 
well as their inclination angles. A numerical parameter, the total 
helicity 𝑯𝒕𝒐𝒕𝒂𝒍 obtained as the integral over the full helicity 
function, gives an overall indication of the helical degree of a 
given particle. Analyses of ET reconstructions of chiral Au NRs 
agree with previous observations, while additionally providing
more quantitative parameters, such as the angle of inclination 
of helical features. This information may eventually help 
understand the effect of various synthesis parameters. The more 
general applicability of the approach was demonstrated through 
the analysis of a helical nanostructure composed of Au NRs 
clustered around a fibrillar protein template; a high degree of 
helicity throughout the entire super-helical nanostructure was 
confirmed, 
in 
agreement 
with 
previous 
experimental 

measurements.

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS 
Publications website.

Additional images, synthesis and computational details (PDF)

Supporting movies visualizing the connection between particle 
morphology and helicity maps (MP4)

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Authors
*E-mail: Sara.Bals@uantwerpen.be.
*E-mail: W.Albrecht@amolf.nl.

Author Contributions
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. 
All authors have given approval to the final version of the 
manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

S. B. and A. P.-T. gratefully acknowledge funding by the European 
Research 
Council 
(ERC 
Consolidator 
Grant 
#815128-

REALNANO). L. M. L.-M. acknowledges funding from the 
Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación through grant # 
PID2020-117779RB-I00 and the Maria de Maeztu Units of 

Excellence Program from the Spanish State Research Agency 
(Grant No. MDM-2017-0720). G. G.-R. thanks the Spanish 
Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación for FPI (BES-2014-
068972) fellowship.

REFERENCES

[1]
G. Zheng, J. He, V. Kumar, S. Wang, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-
Juste, L. M. Liz-Marzán, K.-Y. Wong, Chemical Society 
Reviews. 2021, 50, 3738-3754.

[2]
H. Lv, Z. Mou, C. Zhou, S. Wang, X. He, Z. Han, S. Teng, 
Nanotechnology. 2021, 32, 315203.

[3]
N. Shukla, M. A. Bartel, A. J. Gellman, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 
132 (25), 8575-8580.

[4]
C. Gautier, T. Bürgi, ChemPhysChem. 2009, 10 (3), 483-492.

[5]
S. Roy, M. A. Pericàs, Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry. 2009, 
13, 2669-2677.

[6]
S. Link, G. V. Hartland, J. Phys. Chem. C. 2021, 125 (19), 10175-
10178.

[7]
T. Bürgi, CHIMIA International Journal for Chemistry. 2011, 65 
(3), 157-167.

[8]
S. Zhoa, L. Shoa, J. Wang, H.-Q. Lin, W. Zang, Photon. Res. 
2021, 9 (4), 484-493.

[9]
H.-E. Lee, H.-Y. Ahn, J. Mun, Y. Y. Lee, M. Kim, N. H. Cho, K. 
Chang, W. S. Kim, J. Rho, K. T. Nam, Nature. 2018, 556, 360-
365.

[10] G. González-Rubio, J. Mosquera, V. Kumar, A. Pedrazo-

Tardajos, P. Llombart, D. M. Solís, I. Lobato, E. G. Noya, A. 
Guerrero-Martínez, J. M. Taboada, F. Obelleiro, L. G. 
Macdowell, S. Bals, L. M. Liz-Marzán, Science. 2020, 368 
(6498), 1472-1477.

[11] K. Sobczak, S. Turczyniak-Surdacka, W. Lewandowski, M. 

Baginski, M. Tupikowska, G. González-Rubio, M. Wójcik, A. 
Carlsson, M. Donten, Microscopy and Microanalysis. 2021, 1-5.

[12] M. Esposito, V. Tasco, F. Todisco, M. Cuscunà, A. Benedetti, D. 

Sanvitto, A. Passaseo, Nature Communications. 2015, 6, 6484.

[13] G. Furusawa, T. Kan, Micromachines. 2020, 11 (7), 641.
[14] J. Chen, X. Gao, Q. Zheng, J. Liu, D. Meng, H. Li, R. Cai, H. Fan, 

Y. Ji, X. Wu, ACS Nano. 2021, 15 (9), 15114-15122.

[15] L. Zhang, T. Wang, Z. Shen, M. Liu, Advanced Materials. 2016, 

28 (6), 1044-1059.

[16] B. Frank, X. Yin, M. Schäferling, J. Zhao, S. M. Hein, P. V. 

Braun, H. Giessen, ACS Nano. 2013, 7 (7), 6321-6329.

[17] A. Londoño-Calderon, D. J. Willliams, M. M. Schneider, B. H. 

Savitzky, C. Ophus, S. Ma, H. Zhu, M. T. Pettes, Nanoscale. 
2021, 13, 9606-9614.

[18] E. I. Solomon, A. B. P. Lever, Inorganic Electronic Structure and 

Spectroscopy, Volume 1, Wiley 2006.

[19] P. Spaeth, S. Adhikari, L. Le, T. Jollans, S. Pud, W. Albrecht, T. 

Bauer, M. Caldarola, L. Kuipers, M. Orrit, Nano Lett. 2019, 19 
(12), 8934-8940.

[20] J. Karst, N. H. Cho, H. Kim, H.-E. Lee, K. T. Nam, H. Giessen, 

M. Hentschel, ACS Nano. 2019, 13 (8), 8659-8668.

[21] K. W. Smith, H. Zhao, A. Sánchez-Iglesias, M. Grzelczak, Y. 

Wang, W.-S. Chang, P. Nordlander, L. M. Liz-Marzán, S. Link, 
ACS Nano. 2016, 10 (6), 6180-6188.

[22] P. Gutsche, X. Garcia-Santiago, P.-I. Schneider, K. M. McPeak, 

M. Niet-Vesperinas, S. Burger, Symmetry. 2020, 12 (1), 158.

[23] B. K. Canfield, S. Kujala, K. Laiho, K. Jefimovs, J. Turunen, M. 

Keuranen, Opt. Express. 2006, 14 (2), 950-955.

[24] B. M. Maoz, Y. Chaikin, A. B. Tesler, O. B. Elli, Z. Fan, A. O. 

Govorov, G. Markovic, Nano Lett. 2013,  13 (3), 1203-1209.

[25] A. Nemati, S. Shadpour, L. Querciagrossa, L. Li, T. Mori, M. 

Gao, C. Zannoni, T. Hegmann, Nature Communications. 2018, 9, 
3908.

[26] N. H. Cho, G. H. Byun, Y.-C. Lim, S. W. Im, H. Kim, H.-E. Lee, 

H.-Y. Ahn, K. T. Nam, ACS Nano, 2020, 14 (3), 3595-3602.

[27] H.-E. Lee, R. M. Kim, H.-Y. Ahn, Y. Y. Lee, G. H. Byun, S. W. 

Im, J. Mun, J. Rho, K. T. Nam, Nature Communications. 2020, 
11, 263.


8

[28] M. Weyland, P. A. Midgley, Materials Today. 2004, 7 (12), 32-

40.

[29] A. Ben-Moshe, S. G. Wolf, M. B. Sadan, L. Houben, Z. Fan, A. 

O. Govorov, G. Markovich, Nature Communications. 2014, 5, 
4302.

[30] E. O. Yewande, M. P. Neal, R. Low, Molecular Physics. 2009, 

107 (3), 281-291.

[31] J. Podolak, P. Shilane, A. Golovinskiy, S. Rusinkiewicz, T. 

Funkhouser, ACM Transitions on Graphics. 2006, 25 (3), 549-
559.

[32] M. Kazhdan, B. Chazelle, D. Dobkin, T. Funkhouser, S. 

Rusinkiewicz, Algorithmica. 2004, 38, 201-225.

[33] H. Kamberaj, M. A. Osipov, R. J. Low, M. P. Neal, Molecular 

Physics. 2004, 102 (5), 431-446.

[34] M. A. Osipov, B. T. Pickup, D. A. Dunmur, Molecular Physics. 

1995, 84 (6), 1193-1206.

[35] L. Bai, T. Kämäräinen, W. Xiang, J. Majoinen, J. Seitsonen, R. 

Grande, S. Huan, L. Liu, Y. Fan, O. J. Rojas, ACS Nano. 2020, 
14, 6921-6930.

[36] W. T. Kelvin, The Molecular Tactics of a Crystal, University of 

California Libraries, 1894.

[37] J.-Y. 
Tinevez, 
C. 
Rueden, 
Directionality, 

https://imagej.net/plugins/directionality, accessed: December, 
2021.

[38] T. H. Ito, A. G. Salles, J. P. Priebe, P. C. M. L. Miranda, N. H. 

Morgon, D. Danino, G. Mancini, E. Sabadini, Langmuir. 2016, 32 
(33), 8461-8466.

[39] T. Altantzis, D. Wang, A. Kadu, A. van Blaaderen, S. Bals, J. 

Phys. Chem. C. 2021, 125 (47), 26240-26246.

[40] J. Kumar, H. Eraña, E. López-Martínez, N. Claes, V. F. Martín, 

D. M. Solís, S. Bals, A. L. Cortajarena, J. Castilla, L. M. Liz-
Marzán, PNAS. 2018, 115 (13), 3225-3230.

[41] W. Heyvaert, S. Bals, W. Albrecht. HeliQ. Zenodo. 2022,

Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5873546


