Unveiling the interaction mechanisms of electron and X-ray radiation with halide

perovskite semiconductors using scanning nano-probe diffraction

Jordi Ferrer Orri,1,2 Tiarnan A.S. Doherty,1 Duncan Johnstone,2 Sean M. Collins,3 Hugh

Simons,4 Paul A. Midgley,2 Caterina Ducati,2,* and Samuel D. Stranks1,5,*

1Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

2Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

3School of Chemical and Process Engineering & School of Chemistry, University of Leeds,

Leeds, UK.

4Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark.

5Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge,

Cambridge, UK.

*Corresponding authors: cd251@cam.ac.uk, sds65@cam.ac.uk

Keywords: lead halide perovskites; nano-probe diffraction; scanning electron diffraction;

nano X-ray diffraction; high-energy beam damage

1


The interaction of high-energy electrons and X-ray photons with soft semiconductors

such as halide perovskites is essential for the characterisation and understanding of

these optoelectronic materials. Using nano-probe diffraction techniques, which can

investigate physical properties on the nanoscale, we perform studies of the interaction of

electron and X-ray radiation with state-of-the-art (FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3

hybrid halide perovskite films (FA, formamidinium; MA, methylammonium). We track

the changes in the local crystal structure as a function of fluence using scanning electron

diffraction and synchrotron nano X-ray diffraction techniques. We identify perovskite

grains from which additional reflections, corresponding to PbBr2, appear as a

crystalline
degradation
phase
after
fluences
of ~200 e-Å-2. These changes are

concomitant with the formation of small PbI2 crystallites at the adjacent high-angle

grain boundaries, with the formation of pinholes, and with a phase transition from

tetragonal to cubic. A similar degradation pathway is caused by photon irradiation in

nano-X-ray diffraction, suggesting common underlying mechanisms. Our approach

explores the radiation limits of these materials and provides a description of the

degradation pathways on the nanoscale. Addressing high-angle grain boundaries will be

critical for the further improvement of halide polycrystalline film stability, especially

for applications vulnerable to high-energy radiation such as space photovoltaics.

2


1. Introduction

Halide perovskite materials exhibit promising characteristics for optoelectronics applications.

These materials can be fabricated through facile processing techniques and yield high

performance devices, albeit with large compositional and structural heterogeneities at

multiple length scales.[1] Heterogeneity, particularly on the nano- and microscale, is key to

understanding some of the critical questions on performance and stability.[1–3] Scanning

nanoprobe characterisation techniques, such as scanning electron diffraction (SED) or

nanoprobe X-ray diffraction (nXRD), are particularly advantageous as they can access both

the relevant nano- and microscales.[4,5]

Both techniques use focused radiation, which interacts with the material and can impact its

structure and chemistry, especially for materials with complex stoichiometries such as hybrid

halide perovskites that mix organic and inorganic ions. These hybrid halide perovskites are

uniquely promising light-weight candidates for space photovoltaic applications, with reports

showing excellent radiation hardness under extreme space conditions of proton and electron

exposure.[6–8] Large fluxes of high-energy particles, such as trapped electrons in orbit

extending up to 1 MeV energies, can trigger defect generation and degradation of these

materials, in similar ways to the degradation induced during characterisation techniques.[9,10]

Based on studies reporting radiation damage of hybrid perovskite being dependent on the

total dose rather than on the dose rate,[11,12] microscopy techniques such as SED and nXRD

may be used to mimic large total radiation exposures whilst characterizing defect generation

and degradation in vacuum.

Understanding the interaction of the high-energy probe with the samples is critical for

acquisition, data analysis, and detector applications. For example, the interaction of focused

electron beams with halide perovskites has been reviewed and can be quantified with critical

radiation values. These critical values are defined as particle fluences (in units of particles

Å-2) representing the rate of characteristic irreversible structural changes under particle

exposure.[12–14] For halide perovskites, for example, higher acceleration voltages increase

these critical values by reducing the cross-section for beam-specimen interaction, while the

use of cryogenic temperatures induces rapid amorphisation and reduces these values.[11,14]

Rothmann et al. used transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to quantify structural changes

in methylammonium lead iodide films (MAPbI3) at fluences as low as 100 e-Å-2,[11] in which

loss of the organic moieties results in lattice contraction and the formation of a supercell,

3


further described by Chen et al. as MAPbI2.5, ultimately degrading into PbI2.[15,16] The

appearance of an intermediate phase of degradation agrees with similar studies by scanning

electron microscopy techniques.[17–19] Alberti et al. also reported the detrimental effect of

having excess Pb-related defects during fabrication, which aggregate and feed degradation at

grain boundaries upon electron irradiation.[20] However, Pb0 formation is usually observed as

a degradation product of fully-inorganic compositions, such as CsPbI3, upon electron

irradiation. This is because the inorganic cation is less prone to be reduced than its organic

counterparts or than the Pb cation.[21,22]

Moving beyond the workhorse hybrid MAPbI3 composition, Rothmann et al. recently

reported high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images of

evaporated formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3) thin films, reporting the appearance of

additional reflections at low fluences of 200 e- Å-2, the loss of the perovskite phase at 600 e-

Å-2, and the eventual formation of PbI2 grown on the lattice-expanded degraded phase of

FAPbI3 after 1,000 e-Å-2.[23]

The effect of scanning X-ray probes on halide perovskites, on the other hand, has been less

studied than for electron microscopy.[5] The critical fluences for MAPbI3/MAPbBr3

derivatives vary for different microscopy techniques. The nano X-ray beam-induced current

signal is highly sensitive to defects and was rapidly affected at the lowest fluences of 103

photons Å-2.[24] Nano X-ray diffraction (nXRD) and fluorescence (nXRF) were found to

withstand 10x higher exposures, since these signals are more intense, generated by larger

volumes, and easier to record.[25,26] Li et al. reported similar critical fluences of 102 and 104

photons Å-2 for MAPbBr3 and CsPbBr3 single crystals, respectively, yet the appearance of

additional phases was not reported at these fluences.[25] Other studies have reported

comparable XRD signal decays due to loss of crystallinity after long X-ray exposures.[27]

These studies, specifically identifying the effect of synchrotron scanning probes on the

material, are not to be confused with the plethora of laboratory XRD reports elucidating the

degradation products of halide perovskites at millimeter scale due to external factors such as

light, air, temperature or passivating agents.[28–30]

While the majority of the work related to beam damage has been performed on MAPbI3,

state-of-the-art halide perovskites are FA-rich mixed-cation mixed-halide compositions,

especially those relevant for tandem and space photovoltaic applications.[31,32] Such

compositions exhibit distinct chemical and structural degradation pathways, yet no

comprehensive studies on such systems have been reported to date. Rigorously establishing

4


the radiation effects on these more complex compositions to allow elucidation of global

mechanisms, as well as obtaining insight into the role of grain boundaries and complicated

junctions, is of immense interest.

Here we use two advanced nanoprobe diffraction techniques, SED and nXRD, to understand

the respective interaction of 200 keV electrons and 20 keV X-rays with the local

nanostructure of solution-processed halide perovskite films of triple-cation composition

(FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3.[33] By using low-dose diffraction microscopy, we can

spatially resolve the diffraction information on the nanoscale as a function of radiation

exposure. The use of finely tunable acquisition conditions allows us to track the

compositional and structural evolution of degradation processes of hybrid perovskite films, as

well as their spatial origin. We show that change is predominantly observed at specific sites

in the polycrystalline film which are more defective and evolve towards new structures over

time, such as PbI2 and PbBr2 formation. Specifically, high-angle grain boundaries in the

polycrystalline structure trigger such changes to the nanostructure. These studies establish

critical radiation values and interaction mechanisms of electron and X-ray radiation for

mixed-cation mixed-halide perovskites, allowing the elucidation of global mechanisms for

degradation, as well as stability windows in both measurement and application of these

radiation types.

5


2. Results and Discussion

Figure 1: Visualizing grain boundary types and their evolution under low electron

exposure using scanning electron diffraction (SED) on (FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3

halide perovskite films. a) Schematic of the perovskite grain showing the areas of interest

from which diffraction patterns are extracted (in Arabic numerals), and three interfaces

between crystallographic domains indicated by dashed lines (in Greek numerals): (i) grain

bending across region 2 and 3, (ii) a twin grain boundary at
plane between region 3
(02‾1)

and 4, and (iii) high-angle grain boundary interphasing two grains at different zone axes

between region 1 and 3. The beam-parking position is labeled with a cross. b) Evolution of

vBF images of a perovskite film for up to 120 e- Å-2 fluence. c) The resulting averaged

diffraction pattern for four different areas at the 1st frame (12 e- Å-2) and d) at the 10th frame

(120 e- Å-2). Regions denoted with numerals in (a) correspond to the diffraction in (b) and (c).

All intensity scale bars correspond to the normalized vBF and the diffraction intensity.

6


Thin films of (FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 were solution-processed following optimized

protocols for device fabrication compatible with silicon nitride (SiN) grids, ensuring

reproducible and comparable results to high-performance devices prepared on standard

substrates,[34]
while
also
enabling
the
use
of
transmission
microscopy
techniques.

5-dimensional datasets of the films were acquired by combining a time series (t) of SED

frames. Each SED frame was acquired over the same region of the sample (x,y), wherein

each scanned position contains an electron diffraction pattern (kx, ky). Between each frame,

the electron beam was digitally driven to a controlled beam-parking position within the field

of view before being blanked, labeled with a cross in Figure 1. Visible beam-induced

accelerated changes are observed in the vicinity of the beam-parking position, within a radius

of approximately ~90 nm, equivalent to the radius of the interaction volume (see Figure S1).

The circular area around the beam parking position is disregarded, using the rest of the scan

area for this study, only irradiated during beam rastering.

The rich diffraction-based multidimensional dataset enables the investigation of the effects of

cumulative electron beam exposure on the nanoscale. Repeated scans were acquired at total

fluences from 12 e- Å-2 (1 frame) up to 900 e- Å-2 (75 frames), at which point the diffraction

from the halide perovskite film had substantially degraded. Figure 1 shows the evolution of

the local nanoscale diffraction of a representative perovskite grain at low electron exposure,

up to a cumulative fluence of 120 e- Å-2 corresponding to the first 10 frames. The term grain

is used here as the apparent area delimited by morphological grain boundary features

observed in the electron microscope.[35,36] For each diffraction pattern, electrons at low

scattering angle (the direct beam) are collected at the origin, which is surrounded by a series

of diffraction peaks corresponding to scattering vectors near or at the Bragg condition. We

create virtual bright-field images (vBF) of the scanned region by mapping the intensity of the

direct beam below a virtual aperture of radius 4·10-3 Å−1 (semi-angle of detector of 2.39

mrad), as a function of the probe position. Virtual dark-field images (vDF) can be created by

mapping the intensity of selected scattered signals, corresponding to a fixed virtual aperture

size and position in reciprocal space within 1.18 Å−1 range (70.3 mrad, see Figure S2). The

vBF images mostly contain information from the non-scattered beam and low-angle inelastic

scattering, resulting in relatively lower intensities when the sample is at a strongly diffracting

orientation or where it is thicker.

The grain labeled in Figure 1a exhibits intense diffraction as their orientations match a

low-angle zone axis, and is thus selected for detailed study. The vBF images in Figure 1b

7


reveal the polycrystalline nature of the perovskite film, as well as heterogeneity in the

diffraction contrast within each grain. These variations in contrast are a result of chemical and

structural heterogeneity on the nanoscale.[1,37] To illustrate the difference between individual

grains, diffraction patterns are obtained by summing pixels within the grain at the center of

the region of interest, denoted by Arabic numerals in Figure 1a. The diffraction patterns at the

near-pristine state are shown in Figure 1c, acquired at the lowest electron fluence of 12 e-Å-2

(first frame).

All diffraction patterns can be indexed to a tetragonal perovskite structure in the P4/mbm

space group with lattice parameters of
9.00 and
6.36 Å,[38] each near the
𝑎 = 𝑏 =
𝑐 =
[100]

zone axis with slightly different crystal tilt relative to the electron beam (see Figure S3-5 for

simulated diffraction pattern matching experimental diffraction). At least three different

crystal orientations can be observed within this grain in this scattering geometry. The

interfaces between crystallographic domains can be identified in the virtual images and

labeled by dashed lines and Greek numerals in the schematic (also see Figure S6). Grain

bending due to the soft perovskite lattice is observed in (i), across the upper and the lower

parts of the central grain in Figure 1b (region 2 and 3, respectively). The difference between

their diffraction patterns can be attributed to small in-plane crystal tilt of ~2° (see Figure S7).

When sudden changes in crystal orientation are observed, different types of grain boundaries

can be identified.[39] In (ii) a twin boundary, a special case of a large angle grain boundary for

which there is no atomic misfit, is observed between the regions 3 and 4 in Figure 1b.

Detailed analysis of the diffraction pattern shows the lattice being mirrored across the (021)

plane, marked with a dashed line. \distinctly, the grain boundaries around the central grain are

(iii) high-angle, as inferred from orientation analysis on the adjacent grains being near the

zone axis instead (see Figure 1b-c region 1, for the diffraction pattern of an adjacent
[111]

grain). The nature of these two types of grain boundary is discussed in more detail later.

The evolution of the diffraction patterns in Figure 1, after 120 e- Å-2 of accumulated fluence

(10 frames), reveals that the strong diffraction contrast seen in the vBF images rapidly

becomes more homogeneous. The diffraction patterns at the 1st and 10th frames show a small

relative tilt of the order of a few degrees towards alignment to the
zone axis. We
[100]

attribute these tilts to microstructural changes on the nanoscale, noting that bending of the

support membrane cannot be excluded. This tilting is visible in the regions labeled as 3 and 4

in Figure 1c, showing more evenly distributed diffraction spots near the center of the beam

after 10 scans. These tilts are not observed in the region labeled as 2, where the diffraction

8


pattern, originally off the zone axis by a larger tilt, cannot rotate towards the zone axis. These

observations suggest that changes in the perovskite microstructure may already start at

extremely low electron exposure of tens of e- Å-2, sufficient to provide enough energy to

modify the pristine grain orientation (see Figure S7 for a more detailed evolution at low

fluences of these diffraction patterns). Similar changes in the tilt of grains, commonly seen in

thin polycrystalline films deposited on TEM substrates, are observed from the diffraction

patterns in most of the grains in the scanned region, as well as in other SED experiments

taken from other halide perovskite films of the same composition (see Figure S8).

Figure 2: Probing the emergence of lead halide species on the nanostructure of

(FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 halide perovskite films at high electron exposure using

SED. a) Schematic of the perovskite grain showing the areas of interest from which PbI2 and

PbBr2 species is observed and from which diffraction patterns are extracted, labeled as 1 and

2, respectively. b)The vBF images at the 20th and 40th frame. c) For each frame, a normalized

diffraction pattern from the labeled region is shown. Some additional diffraction spots,

marked with white arrows, are observed: the extra reflections in the region 1 can be indexed

to PbBr2 near the
zone axis, and the extra reflections in the region 2 can be indexed to
[111]

PbI2 near the
zone axis. d) Simulated patterns for the perovskite (Pvk), the PbBr2 and
[100]

the PbI2 phases in white, green and red, respectively. The diffraction patterns computed using

CrystalMaker
match
those
seen
experimentally.

9


We now consider further electron exposure by taking cumulative fluences up to 240 e-Å-2, as

shown in Figure 2a. The evolution of vBF contrast beyond 240 e- Å-2 fluence suggests the

formation of pinholes at the high-angle grain boundaries (Figure 2b). Degradation at the grain

boundaries can be attributed to the loss of chemical species and lattice contraction due to the

transformation from pristine perovskite to lead halide degradation products (see Figure S9 for

the histograms of the Pb-Pb distances for the perovskite structure, and some of the lead halide

structures with shorter Pb-Pb distances). Similar observations have been reported in TEM

mode.[11] Overall, there is a constant decrease in the total intensity of the vBF images by

~25% that occurs uniformly across the whole scanned area over 240 e- Å-2 (20 frames), seen

in Figure 1b. Further electron exposure results in roughening of the grain and a decrease of

the total scattering intensity by ~50% after 480 e- Å-2 (40 scans), seen in Figure 2b. We note

that such a large change in the vBF intensity cannot be attributed to fluctuations of the

electron emission gun alone (Figure S10). The loss of intensity of the direct beam could be

attributed to the sample thickening by deposition of an amorphous carbon layer on the surface

(see the supplementary information, SI), and to possible densification of the perovskite

structure by amorphisation or the loss of the lighter elements such as the organic cations.

These changes would increase scattering, as seen in the virtual images created from the

annularly integrated vDF (Figure S10).

We now inspect how the diffraction patterns near the
zone axis, taken from the central
[100]

grain, change in Figure 2c. Weak Bragg reflections emerge from region 1 in the grain in

Figure 2a after 240 e- Å-2 (20 frames). These additional reflections, marked with white

arrows, cannot be indexed to the pristine perovskite structure at
0.23, 0.34 and 0.47 Å-1.
𝑘 =

Close assessment reveals that the patterns from this region are indexable to PbBr2 at the [111]

zone axis within a 0.01 Å-1 error, as shown in Figure 2d. This suggests the presence of these

lead halide species epitaxially growing on the perovskite grain. We ruled out the possibility of

this being due to superlattice reflections from the orthorhombic Pnma space group structure

at the
zone axis, since the reflections are not located at the expected ½
positions
[001]
(ℎ𝑘𝑙)

(see indexation in Figure S3).[15,40]

In contrast, a diffraction pattern taken from region 2 in Figure 2a after 480 e-Å-2 exposure (40

frames) shows diffuse diffraction, attributed to the amorphous SiN substrate or amorphisation

of the perovskite crystal. Weak diffraction reflections at
0.26, 0.24 and 0.26 Å-1 are also
𝑘 =

visible. These reflections are indexable to the
,
and
peaks of PbI2 at the
011 010
(011)
[100]

zone axis within 0.01 Å-1 error, as shown in Figure 2d.PbI2 can form by stacking PbI2 layers

10


in many possible ways, resulting in different polytypes.[41] We note the reflections observed

here suggest the formation of the 4H polytype, in contrast to other polytypes such as 2H or

6H reported in other studies.[20,23] Despite some ambiguity in classifying the exact PbI2

polytype in literature, these phases are remarkably similar and the formation of small

precipitates of PbI2 is unambiguously observed (see indexation in Figure S5).[41]

11


Figure 3:
Mapping
the
evolution
of
the
degradation
species
in
a

(FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 film. a) The diffraction patterns at the 40th frame, taken

from region 1 in Figure 2 for the perovskite and PbBr2 series, and from region 2 in Figure 2

for PbI2. For each diffraction pattern, a dark-field virtual aperture is selected. b) vDF images

of the respective virtual apertures placed at: the
perovskite reflection (orange), the
(002‾)

PbBr2 reflection observed within the grains (green), and the
PbI2 reflection
(221)
(011)

localized at the high-angle grain boundary (red). The color scale range is set to 30% to better

show the small changes in intensity. All vDF images are superimposed on top of the

respective vBF images. c) Intensity profiles taken from the perovskite
, the PbBr2
(002‾)

, and the PbI2
reflections. The 1/e intensity threshold is shown with a dashed
(221)
(011)

line.

12


To further understand the evolution of phases in Figure 2, we use SED to spatially map the

crystallographic changes. Figure 3 shows the evolution of the vDF images created for the

perovskite
reflection, the
PbBr2 reflection, and the
PbI2 reflection
(002‾)
(211)
(011)

(Figure 3a). While the vDF image intensity for the perovskite diffraction peak fades upon

exposure, the vDF images of the additional reflections can spatially pinpoint the origin of

these changes (Figure 3b). The lead halides appear to be spatially anticorrelated: epitaxial

4H-PbI2 precipitates grow at the grain boundary and the PbBr2 reflections appear at the

opposite side of the boundary within the perovskite grain. At extreme cumulative fluences of

>480 e- Å-2 (40 frames), most diffraction from crystalline species has faded, so the vDF

images are dominated by diffuse scattering and noise. Some additional vDF images of PbI2

precipitates forming at the grain boundaries are identified in Figure S11 and S12, though we

note that any PbI2 trace crystallites that are too small may be undetectable in SED. The PbI2

features are extremely local, only detectable across a few scanned pixels (~5-30 nm).

These changes are local to the bottom-left corner of the grain, suggesting that lead halides

nucleate non-uniformly across the grain. Degradation does not appear to originate from the

twin boundaries, consistent with theoretical predictions, whereby the octahedron face-sharing

present at the twin boundary stabilizes the twins.[42,43] Therefore, not all defects affect

degradation in the same way.

Intensity profiles for the perovskite
, the
PbBr2, and the
PbI2 reflections
(002‾)
(211)
(011)

are plotted in Figure 3c. These profiles suggest that the critical fluence for this mixed cation

composition, the fluence at which the original diffraction intensity has reached ~1/e relative

to its initial value, is ~200 e- Å-2. At this critical fluence, the lead halide phases start to

emerge. The critical fluence reported here is in close agreement with those by Rothmann et

al. for the pure FAPbI3 composition.[23] We investigated other grains from adjacent regions,

all of which exhibited similar progressive grain amorphisation with an equivalent critical

fluence (see Figure S13).

13


Figure 4: The grain boundaries in a (FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 film affect the

degradation pathway. a) Evolution of vBF images of various grains and its surrounding

grains after up to 480 e- Å-2 fluence, showing stark changes in the morphology. b) Schematic

of multiple perovskite grains from which PbI2 and PbBr2 species are observed. The regions

from which diffraction patterns are extracted are labeled as 1 and 2. c) Diffraction patterns for

two high-angle grain boundaries: in region 1 a grain boundary exhibiting the reflections only

attributed to the perovskite phase of the grains at either side of the boundary, and in region 2

a grain boundary also exhibiting additional reflections and diffuse scattering, typical of

amorphous defective phases. d) Schematic of the degradation mechanisms and factors

identified
during
degradation
at
high
fluences,
in
cross-section
view.

The nature of the grain boundaries affect the degradation pathway. High-angle grain

boundaries, labeled as 1 and 2 in Figure 4, are associated with the nucleation and growth of

pinholes. Not all grain boundaries exhibit pinhole formation to the same extent, exemplified

by region 2 being more altered than region 1 (Figure 4a). The initial diffraction pattern at this

region reveals region 2 to show not only reflections attributed to the perovskite adjacent

grains, but also additional reflections and diffuse scattering. Although these additional

reflections, already visible in the first frame, are difficult to index, they suggest the presence

14


of defects.[44] These defective high-angle boundaries can trigger faster degradation and larger

morphological variations than less defective boundaries (region 1).

In the schematic in Figure 4e, we propose a degradation mechanism whereby iodine

segregation towards the grain boundary leaves bromine rich areas within the perovskite

grains, which form PbBr2 at the surface to balance the iodine deficiency. Both PbI2 and PbBr2

are more thermodynamically stable and have higher thermal conductivity than the parent

hybrid perovskite. The transformation dissipates energy and heat more effectively. These

processes happen in conjunction with the loss of the more volatile I2 and organic moieties.

These changes result in a tetragonal to cubic phase transition, the formation of small PbI2

crystallites at the grain boundaries with pinholes, and the redeposition of some organics as a

thin amorphous organic film on the surface of the specimen.

A grain near the
zone axis, which exhibits superlattice reflections attributed to the BX6
[001]

corner-sharing octahedra tilted away from perfect cubic symmetry towards the tetragonal

perovskite phase,[38] shows a progressive loss of these superstructure reflections (see Figure

S14). These changes upon electron exposure suggest a gradual transformation from tetragonal

to cubic structure, expected with the loss of the organic cations and in agreement with the

proposed degradation mechanism.

In this SED experiment the beam parking position was set at the center of the image frame, as

shown in Figure 3b, causing overexposure within the field of view. This may cause additional

damage to the grain under beam parking and its boundaries, and trigger faster degradation.

However, similar degradation pathways are observed in grains that are not adjacent to the

beam parking position. For example, we see additional PbBr2 reflections emerging after a

fluence of ~252 e- Å-2 from another grain oriented near
(Figure S11 and S12).
[100]

15


Figure 5:
Probing
the
evolution
of
the
local
structure
of
a
region
in
a

(FA0.79MA0.15Cs0.06)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 halide perovskite film under X-ray exposure using

nXRD. a) Radially integrated nXRD evolution of a perovskite film over accumulated

illumination over an area of 4 μm2. Peaks are indexed to the P4/mbm perovskite phase. Peak

marked as (*) cannot be indexed to perovskite and corresponds mainly to the degradation

phases. To analyze the weak reflections lost during radial integration, 2D nXRD diffraction

patterns are shown in b), with some areas of interest denoted by numerals. c) The zoomed-in

evolution of nXRD in 2D elucidates crystal tilting in region 1, the weak appearance of (002)

4H-PbI2 in region 2, and the appearance of
PbBr2 reflections in region 3. These
(211)

findings are similar to the changes observed in SED.

Finally, we perform analogous scanning probe synchrotron nXRD measurements to acquire a

similar 5D dataset by combining a time series stack of multiple nXRD frames. Such

16


acquisition allows us to study the interaction of highly converged 20 keV X-rays on

nominally equivalent triple cation composition perovskite films as previously presented for

electrons. The use of nXRD allows for close comparison with SED because it similarly

involves scanning over a localized region of interest. Unlike SED, this technique cannot

access subgrain features under these conditions, as the X-ray beam diameter is ~150 nm.

Figure 5a shows the spatially averaged 1D diffraction patterns across a scanned area of ~4

μm2 for X-ray photon fluences up to 7,750 photons Å-2.

The main diffraction peaks are indexed to the same tetragonal P4/mbm perovskite phase as in

SED. Some crystallographic plane reflections are more prevalent and decay more slowly,

which can be linked to the crystal structure.
,
,
and
planes are the
(110) (220) (130)
(222)

brightest reflections. The diffraction intensity at these planes is strongly affected by the loss

of the halogen atoms from the unit cell since these planes cut mainly across halide positions

(see the simulation in Figure S15). In contrast,
,
and
planes diffract less
(111) (021)
(131)

strongly, and their relative intensity is more affected by the loss of the organic cations since

all contain A+X ion sublattices. In fact, the
and
planes exhibit the slowest decay
(220)
(130)

rate (see Figure S15), suggesting the rapid loss of the organic cation followed by the slower

loss of the halides. The loss of I and Br can be further analyzed from the nXRF, acquired

simultaneously to the nXRD data, in which the ILa signal systematically drops before the Br Ka

signal (see Figure S16), suggesting I2 to be more volatile than Br2.[45]

The
,
and
plane reflections brighten after 2-4 frames (~1,400-2,800
(110) (220)
(130)

photons Å-2). A closer examination of these reflections in the 2D patterns (Figure 5c, region

1) reveals the appearance of additional Bragg reflections of the crystal planes, attributed to

the crystals tilting closer to the zone axis, similar to the SED findings in Figure 1 albeit in

nXRD we are sampling multiple grains.

Some weak and broad reflections appear after 5 frames (4,650 photons Å-2) in the range

Å-1 (Figure 5a, marked with *). These reflections are not indexable to the
~0. 436 ± 0. 003

perovskite structure and can be used to arbitrarily determine the X-ray critical exposure of

hybrid perovskite systems. This critical exposure value is one order of magnitude higher than

previously reported values for MAPbBr3 single crystals (102 photons Å-2), at which point the

scattering image had changed by more than 10%, but it is lower than for CsPbBr3 single

crystals (104 photons Å-2).[25] We also performed the same synchrotron diffraction degradation

experiments using a static 17.2 keV X-ray box-beam with a wider illumination area of ~1

μm2 (see Figure S17). The non-localized nature of the exposure required 2-3 orders of

17


magnitude higher fluence (~5·106 photons Å-2) to acquire similar diffraction information and

produce a similar degradation pattern as for nXRD.

The reflection at ~
Å-1 matches the
4H-PbI2 plane, but also matches
0. 436 ± 0. 003
(110)

phases like PbBr2 or poly-phases. A closer examination of the 2D diffraction patterns reveals

extremely weak additional reflections appearing, indexable to both
(002) 4H-PbI2 and
(211)

PbBr2 (Figure 5c region 2 and 3, respectively). As these reflections are lost during radial

integration, it is critical to analyze the full 2D data sets (see more examples in Figure S18).

Our combined results offer an understanding of the changes induced by the interaction of

electrons and X-rays with soft perovskite semiconductors. Each diffraction technique used

offers some advantages over the other. nXRD provides excellent resolution in reciprocal

space, but lower resolution in real space. X-ray based techniques are extremely useful to

discern crystal structures with similar features. Since many of the degradation changes occur

on the nanoscale, nXRD in general is unable to spatially resolve such changes.

In contrast, SED offers excellent spatial resolution and allows mapping of crystallographic

changes at the nanometer scale. However, in SED, points in reciprocal space are broadened

by a shape factor and spread out forming disks, due to the use of thin samples and a finite

convergence semi-angle, respectively. Multiple of these diffraction discs are intersected by

the lower curvature of the Ewald sphere, compared to X-rays, limiting the resolution in

reciprocal space of SED. Due to the similarity between pristine and intermediate perovskite

degradation phases such as the 2H, 4H and 6H polytypes,[28] SED is not able to

unambiguously assign similar structures. Moreover, due to the constrained acquisition

geometry, not all grains produce interpretable SED patterns near a low-order zone axis.

Further studies using precession electron diffraction, which offers more complete integration

of the diffraction space, could overcome the latter constraint if performed under low

fluences.[46]

The different nature of electrons and photons result in distinctive interactions with the

specimen. For example, when electrons propagate through a material, they undergo elastic

Bragg scattering and inelastic scattering. For a 200 kV beam, each inelastically scattered

electron transfers ~27 eV per scattering event to the specimen (see Table S1). This results in

knock-on damage, radiolytic damage, and local heating.[13] For a 200-nm thick film of the

perovskite composition studied here at 200 keV, we estimate the probability of inelastic

scattering to be twice that of no inelastic scattering (calculated with the Poisson model in the

SI).[47] The ratio of elastic versus inelastic cross-sections is inversely proportional to atomic

18


number (proportional to
for electrons of hundreds of keV).[47] For the triple cation
19 · 𝑍
−1

perovskite composition, similar elastic and inelastic scattering probabilities are expected,

based on the effective atomic number (Z= 36.4). However, carbon atoms will contribute more

to, and be more affected by, inelastic scattering than iodine or bromine, by a factor of 8 and 6,

respectively. This is consistent with the damage mechanism proposed, in which the organic

cations are the weaker species, and the halides restructure chemically to more stable

intermediates. The effect of the inelastic cross-sections can be reduced by using thinner

specimens or higher acceleration voltages, both of which will reduce the accessible

diffraction information. A fine balance between these parameters is key. For the X-ray

photons of tens of keV, the perovskite film is virtually transparent (see calculations in the SI).

However, inelastic scattering is also always present in XRD, with a ratio of inelastic to elastic

scattering cross-sections also inversely proportional to atomic number by
for 20
50 · 𝑍
−1.7

keV photons. These ratios highlight the higher need to account for photon beam damage

when X-rays are used on hybrid materials, especially for prolonged exposures (see

estimations in the SI and Figure S19).

Similar mechanisms of interaction and damage can be seen with both electron and X-ray

probes. Grains tend to tilt by a few degrees towards the zone axis after the first frames of

acquisition (~100 e- Å-2 and ~1,400-2,800 photons Å-2). We attribute these changes to

microstructural changes on the nanoscale, yet beam-assisted annealing of the pre-strained

films on the SiN support membrane cannot be excluded. These findings are important as they

place constraints on the use of such techniques for elucidating the pristine microstructure of

halide perovskites. Radiation exposure also leads to loss of crystallinity in the grains and

degradation of the perovskite structure, with a critical fluence of <200 e- Å-2 and <5,000

photons Å-2 for SED and nXRD, respectively. The degradation mechanism proposed in this

work is in agreement with the HR-STEM work on FAPbI3 evaporated films by Rothmann et

al., in which PbI2 precipitates epitaxially grow from the perovskite.[23] However, we observe

crucial differences given by the more complex perovskite composition used in this study, in

which simultaneous formation of PbBr2 is also observed at the grains, likely aided by higher I

volatility compared to Br. These findings can be extended to the radiation damage from a

high-energy X-ray nanobeam, which also results in the emergence of lead halide species upon

loss of the organic moieties across the whole scanned area (Figure S16). In fact, the presence

of the organic cation species at the A position has been proposed to trigger degradation

processes towards PbI2 as opposed to the Pb0, mostly only seen from inorganic compositions,

19


as the organics can undergo radiolysis more easily than the Pb2+ cation upon electron and

X-ray illumination.[22,48]

The degradation mechanism proposed here contrasts with the degradation pathways observed

from light-soaking. Photocarriers produced during light soaking can trigger the formation of

I2 via redox-mediated reactions, leaving metallic Pb0 and pinholes behind. Such changes are

proposed to be seeded from crystallographic and compositional impurities.[44] Light soaking

can also trigger Cs segregation,[49] which is not observed in the nXRF mapping during

high-energy X-ray exposure in this report (see Figure S16). The use of high-energy beams

results in the study of faster degradation pathways of perovskites from its pristine state, rather

than the study of early-stage degradation from impurities caused by the distinctively

lower-fluence visible light. We note that large charge carrier densities are estimated to be

created during acquisition, ranging around 1016 to 1019 e--h+-pairs cm-3 for SED, and 1019

e--h+-pairs cm-3 for nXRD (see estimations in the SI). Such large localized hot carriers can

trigger radicals, multiparticle recombination and thermalisation processes on top of the

knock-on damage, radiolytic damage, and local heating caused by the high-energy particle

beam. Therefore, such high carrier concentrations can promote degradation of the perovskite

in ways distinct from those encountered under illumination at 1 sun (1014 to 1016 carriers cm-3,

mostly generated at band edge), likely aiding in the radiolysis of the organic cations in the

perovskite.[48]

The radiation hardness described here suggests good resilience of these materials to

degradation from electron radiation in space. Assuming radiation damage of hybrid

perovskite being dependent on the total dose rather than on the dose rate,[11,12] the critical

fluence for electrons would be accumulated after around ~2,000 years in the Earth orbit or

~200 years at harsher orbits like Jupiter (see Figure S20). We note the differences between

electron radiation in microscopes and space, such as the energy spectrum of space radiation

extending up to 1 MeV energies, and the generally lower radiation fluxes in orbit.[6,9]

Combined with the reported excellent proton radiation hardness,[6,8] this study once more

places halide perovskites as promising candidates for space photovoltaic applications. Further

studies should also include the effect of cryogenic temperatures on the degradation of halide

perovskites.

20


3. Conclusion

Our conclusions have implications for understanding the changes on the nanoscale of halide

perovskites upon interaction with high-energy radiation, in particular electrons and X-rays.

We have identified local changes on the nanostructure at extremely low radiation exposure,

leading to changes in the orientation of the grains. At high radiation exposure, degradation of

the perovskite phase involves iodine migration, producing decomposition to lead halide

species. PbBr2 reflections appear within perovskite grains that exhibit PbI2 crystallites

growing at their grain boundaries. Specifically, regions showing high-angle defective grain

boundaries are important for degradation. Passivation and growth strategies targeting the

removal of such high-angle defective grain boundaries will be critical for the further

mitigation of halide perovskite instabilities, especially for applications vulnerable to

high-energy radiation. Finally, the findings reported here provide a further understanding of

the exposure limits of high-energy electron and photon beams, being <200 e- Å-2 at 200 keV

and <5,000 photons Å-2 at 20 keV, respectively. These critical radiation exposures are crucial

for any characterisation technique studying the nanoscale of halide perovskites and, more

generally soft semiconductors, as well as to further understand the challenges that perovskite

solar cells still face for space applications.

4. Methods

Sample preparation: All procedures were followed inside an inert N2-gas glovebox. The

perovskite precursors solutions were prepared by first dissolving FAI (1.0 M) and MABr (0.2

M), PbI2 (1.1 M), and PbBr2 (0.22 M) in a mixture of anhydrous DMF and DMSO (4:1 v:v).

A solution of CsI (1.5 M in DMSO) was then added to the precursor solution as 5% of the

total volume, yielding a (FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskite precursor. Lead halide

precursors were supplied by TCI, organic compounds were supplied by Greatcell Solar, CsI

and solvents were supplied by Sigma.

To fabricate thin electron-transparent specimens for SED, the perovskite solution was diluted

in anhydrous DMF: DMSO 4:1 (v:v) in a 2:1 ratio of diluent to precursor solution, and

spin-coated on SiN TEM grids with a 30-nm thick low-stress amorphous Si3N4 membrane

window (NT025X, Norcada). Spin-coating was followed in two steps at 2,000 and 6,000 rpm

21


for 10 s and 35 s respectively, with 20 μl of chlorobenzene added 30 s before the end of the

second step. The films were then annealed at 100 °C for 1 h, yielding films of ~200 nm.

To fabricate thin films for the nXRD studies, the same protocol was used to prepare an almost

identical perovskite precursor solution of (FA0.79MA0.15Cs0.06)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3. The precursor

was then spin-coated on X-ray transparent windows (Norcada, NX7100C), following the

same protocol as for the SED samples, and then annealed, yielding films of ~500-600 nm.

SED: During SED microscopy, a 2D electron diffraction pattern is measured at every probe

position of an electron beam in STEM mode. SED data was acquired on the JEOL

ARM300CF E02 instrument at ePSIC (Diamond Light Source, Didcot-Oxford, UK). A

monolithic Merlin/Medipix direct electron detector with 4 back-contacts was used to acquire

fast low-dose SED. These direct electron detectors allow for better SNR under lower doses

due to the superior quantum efficiency compared to traditional CCD. The detector was set to

6-bit, to maintain the targeted electron fluence and fast acquisition readout rate. In the initial

frames of the acquisition, some diffraction patterns exhibited saturation at the direct beam

position, due to the bit-depth limitations of the direct electron detector imposed by the fast

low-dose acquisition conditions. Such saturated pixels are occasional but visible as the

brightest pixels in Figure 1b. The beam blanking after each frame was performed manually,

always at the same controlled localized position and after a reaction time of ~500 ms. An

acceleration voltage of 200 keV, nanobeam alignment (convergence angle ~1 mrad), electron

probe ~5 nm, probe current ~3.59 pA, scan dwell time 1 ms, and camera length 20 cm.

Post-processing of SED diffraction data was done using pyXem 0.12 (an open-source Python

library based on HyperSpy-based for crystallographic electron microscopy).[50]

We refer to virtual bright-field images (vBF) as the images reconstructed from taking the

intensity integrated solely from the direct beam as a function of probe position, thus only

containing information from the electrons recorded at zero scattering angle. Contrarily,

virtual dark-field images (vDF) are reconstructed from only taking the intensity from a

Bragg-diffracted spot from the 2D diffraction pattern as a function of probe position, thus

containing information solely on electrons scattered to specific Bragg angles. All virtual

apertures for vBF mapping were set to 4·10-3 Å−1 (2.4 mrad of semi-angle of detector), and

for vDF were set to 2-4·10-3 Å−1 at diffraction semi-angles ranging between 0 and 70 mrad.

All diffraction patterns were distortion corrected and calibrated with an Au cross grating. The

drift in the beam position of the non-scattered beam was corrected and centered for all frames

22


using cross-correlation with a subpixel factor of 10. To display diffraction planes that match

real-space features, all diffraction patterns shown in the main text were rotation corrected

using a MoO3 calibration sample. Dead pixels and detector junctions were masked. No

sample drift correction was necessary. Finally, the background noise in all diffraction patterns

was filtered, setting a threshold of detector pixels with single counts to zero.

nXRD: Scanning nano-XRD data was acquired at the synchrotron beamline I14 of the

Diamond Light Source (Didcot-Oxford, UK). 2D diffraction patterns were recorded at each

stage position as the specimen was moved through the X-ray beam. An array of 3 Medipix

2048 x 512-pixel arrays in transmission mode (Excalibur 3M) was used to acquire diffraction

data. To examine the effect of repeated maps on the same region of a film, a scan loop was

measured within a 5 x 5 µm region until most of the diffraction spots were no longer visible.

A 20 keV monochromatic X-ray beam (λ = 0.619 nm) was used, focused to ~150 nm.

Samples were mounted onto the I14 standard sample holder and measured under a local flow

of dry N2 to suppress perovskite degradation that is accelerated by moisture and oxygen. 2D

sum patterns across the scanned region were used without processing. 1D patterns were

radially integrated using the Data Analysis WorkbeNch (DAWN) with a CeO2 calibration

standard and a mask to remove dead pixels and detector edges.[51] The 1D sum pattern for

each frame was cropped from 0.6 Å-1 onwards and Origin Pro was used to subtract a baseline

found from 20 baseline anchor points found via the 2nd derivatives and connected by line

interpolation. Simultaneous X-ray fluorescence (nXRF) data was acquired with a 4 element

Si drift detector. The nXRF maps were aligned using the AuLa peaks and the summed signals

across the scanned area were found for PbLa, ILa, and Br Ka.

All diffraction patterns in this work are reported in ‘ordinary’ wavevectors (
). Note
𝑘 = 1/𝑑

that these units differ from the “angular” wavevectors definition (
) by a factor of
𝑞 = 2π/𝑑

, which is often used in X-ray crystallography literature.
2π

Crystal structure library: All diffraction patterns from this work can be closely indexed to a

pseudo-cubic/tetragonal perovskite unit cell (P4/mbm) with lattice parameters of 𝑎 = 𝑏 =

9.00 and
6.36 Å. Despite the stoichiometry of the sample being the complex
𝑐 =

(FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskite composition, it can be approximated as a simpler

unit cell made from the predominant ion at each site (C, Pb and I) and with manually scaled

lattice parameters to fit the experimental observations. Any variations that would occur in

23


diffraction patterns between the simpler model used here and the more complex structure are

minor and hard to discern in the reciprocal-space resolution of our SED technique (under

acquisition conditions one pixel in the detector is 0.0046 Å−1).

A series of different plausible degradation crystal structures were also considered, to attempt

the indexation of some of the additional reflections appearing after radiation exposure. In

general, the hexagonal 4H-PbI2 crystal phase (P63mc, lattice parameters of
4.56
𝑎 = 𝑏 =

and
13.96 Å, COD ID: 9009140) and the orthorhombic PbBr2 crystal phase (Pnam, COD
𝑐 =

ID: 1530324, lattice parameters of
80.6,
6.54 and
4.73 Å) were found to match
𝑎 =
𝑏 =
𝑐 =

the diffraction patterns discussed in this work. The structure files were retrieved from the

crystallography open database.[52,53] However, other plausible degradation phases were also

considered but did not match experimental data, such as perovskite intermediate polytypes,

which are more extensively described in the SI, or the other 2H- and 6H-PbI2 polytypes

reported by others as a degradation product.[20,23] However, despite some ambiguity on the

specific PbI2 polytype across literature, since these phases are remarkably similar,[41] the

formation of small precipitates of PbI2 is observed.

All diffraction simulations were performed using Single Crystal 4 (CrystalMaker Software

Limited), adjusting the simulation parameters to resemble the experimental data (200 keV,

detector spot size 0.025 Å-1, saturation 10, gamma 2). Simulation files in ‘.scdx’ format can

be found in the Supporting Data.

Supporting Information

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.

Acknowledgements

J.F.O and C.D. acknowledge funding from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research

Council (EPSRC) Nano Doctoral Training Centre (EP/L015978/1). T.A.S.D. acknowledges

funding from a National University of Ireland Travelling Studentship. J.F.O., T.A.S.D., and

S.D.S. acknowledge the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s

Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (HYPERION, grant agreement no.

756962). S.D.S. acknowledges support from the Royal Society and Tata Group (UF150033).

The authors acknowledge funding from the EPSRC (EP/R023980/1), and from the EPSRC

Centre for Advanced Materials for Integrated Energy Systems (CAM-IES, EP/P007767/1).

24


SED studies were supported by the access to e02 at ePSIC (MG25250) and nXRD studies

were supported by access to the I14 beamline (SP-20420). Mohsen Danaie and Julia Parker

are acknowledged for their support during the acquisition and calibration of the SED and

nXRD data, respectively.

Author contributions:

J.F.O. analyzed and interpreted SED, nXRD, and sXRD data. T.A.S.D. prepared samples and

acquired the microscopy datasets and assisted with the interpretation of the data. D.N.J. and

S.M.C. aided in the acquisition and interpretation of SED data. P.A.M. supervised D.N.J. and

aided in the interpretation of SED data. H.S. assisted in the data acquisition of data. S.D.S

supervised J.F.O. and T.A.S.D. and provided input on data interpretations. C.D. supervised

J.F.O. and provided input on data interpretations. J.F.O. wrote the manuscript with input from

all authors.

Conflicting interests

S.D.S. is a co-founder of Swift Solar, Inc.

Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

Revized: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

25


References

[1]
E. M. Tennyson, T. A. S. Doherty, S. D. Stranks, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2019, 4, 573.
[2]
C. A. R. Perini, T. A. S. Doherty, S. D. Stranks, J.-P. Correa-Baena, R. L. Z. Hoye, Joule
2021, 5, 1024.
[3]
J. F. Galisteo-López, M. E. Calvo, H. Míguez, Adv. Opt. Mater. 2021, 2100133.
[4]
A. S. Eggeman, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. B Struct. Sci. Cryst. Eng. Mater. 2019, 75, 475.
[5]
M. Kodur, R. E. Kumar, Y. Luo, D. N. Cakan, X. Li, M. Stuckelberger, D. P. Fenning,
Adv. Energy Mater. 2020, 1903170.
[6]
Y. Tu, J. Wu, G. Xu, X. Yang, R. Cai, Q. Gong, R. Zhu, W. Huang, Adv. Mater. n.d., n/a,
2006545.
[7]
Y. Murakami, F. Ishiwari, K. Okamoto, T. Kozawa, A. Saeki, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces 2021, DOI 10.1021/acsami.1c04439.
[8]
F. Lang, M. Jošt, J. Bundesmann, A. Denker, S. Albrecht, G. Landi, H.-C. Neitzert, J.
Rappich, N. H. Nickel, Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12, 1634.
[9]
T. Markvart, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 1990, 1, 1.
[10] Sé. Bourdarie, M. Xapsos, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 2008, 55, 1810.
[11] M. U. Rothmann, W. Li, Y. Zhu, A. Liu, Z. Ku, U. Bach, J. Etheridge, Y. B. Cheng, Adv.
Mater. 2018, 30, 1.
[12] J. Ran, O. O. Dyck, X. Wang, B. Yang, D. B. Geohegan, K. Xiao, Adv. Energy Mater.
2020, n/a, 1903191.
[13] S. Chen, P. Gao, J. Appl. Phys. 2020, 128, 010901.
[14] S. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, Z. Mi, J. Zhang, J. Cao, J. Feng, G. Zhang, J. Qi, J. Li, P.
Gao, Sci. Bull. 2020, DOI 10.1016/j.scib.2020.05.020.
[15] S. Chen, X. Zhang, J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, G. Kong, Q. Li, N. Li, Y. Yu, N. Xu, J. Zhang, K.
Liu, Q. Zhao, J. Cao, J. Feng, X. Li, J. Qi, D. Yu, J. Li, P. Gao, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9,
1.
[16] S. Chen, C. Wu, B. Han, Z. Liu, Z. Mi, W. Hao, J. Zhao, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, K. Liu, J.
Qi, J. Cao, J. Feng, D. Yu, J. Li, P. Gao, Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 5516.
[17] C. Xiao, Z. Li, H. Guthrey, J. Moseley, Y. Yang, S. Wozny, H. Moutinho, B. To, J. J.
Berry, B. Gorman, Y. Yan, K. Zhu, M. Al-Jassim, J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 26904.
[18] N. Klein-Kedem, D. Cahen, G. Hodes, Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 347.
[19] A. R. Milosavljević, W. Huang, S. Sadhu, S. Ptasinska, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55,
10083.
[20] A. Alberti, C. Bongiorno, E. Smecca, I. Deretzis, A. La Magna, C. Spinella, Nat.
Commun. 2019, 10, 2196.
[21] Z. Dang, J. Shamsi, F. Palazon, M. Imran, Q. A. Akkerman, S. Park, G. Bertoni, M.
Prato, R. Brescia, L. Manna, ACS Nano 2017, 11, 2124.
[22] X.-G. Zhou, C.-Q. Yang, X. Sang, W. Li, L. Wang, Z.-W. Yin, J.-R. Han, Y. Li, X. Ke,
Z.-Y. Hu, Y.-B. Cheng, G. Van Tendeloo, J. Phys. Chem. C 2021, 125, 10786.
[23] M. U. Rothmann, J. S. Kim, J. Borchert, K. B. Lohmann, C. M. O’Leary, A. A. Sheader,
L. Clark, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston, P. D. Nellist, L. M. Herz, Science 2020, 370, DOI
10.1126/science.abb5940.
[24] M. Stuckelberger, T. Nietzold, G. N. Hall, B. West, J. Werner, B. Niesen, C. Ballif, V.
Rose, D. P. Fenning, M. I. Bertoni, IEEE J. Photovolt. 2017, 7, 590.
[25] X. Li, Y. Luo, M. V. Holt, Z. Cai, D. P. Fenning, Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 2778.
[26] Y. Luo, S. Gamliel, S. Nijem, S. Aharon, M. Holt, B. Stripe, V. Rose, M. I. Bertoni, L.
Etgar, D. P. Fenning, Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 6536.
[27] R. L. Z. Hoye, P. Schulz, L. T. Schelhas, A. M. Holder, K. H. Stone, J. D. Perkins, D.
Vigil-Fowler, S. Siol, D. O. Scanlon, A. Zakutayev, A. Walsh, I. C. Smith, B. C. Melot,

26


R. C. Kurchin, Y. Wang, J. Shi, F. C. Marques, J. J. Berry, W. Tumas, S. Lany, V.
Stevanović, M. F. Toney, T. Buonassisi, Chem. Mater. 2017, 29, 1964.
[28] P. Gratia, I. Zimmermann, P. Schouwink, J.-H. Yum, J.-N. Audinot, K. Sivula, T. Wirtz,
M. K. Nazeeruddin, ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 2686.
[29] H. X. Dang, K. Wang, M. Ghasemi, M.-C. Tang, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin, E. Dauzon,
D. Barrit, J. Peng, D.-M. Smilgies, S. De Wolf, A. Amassian, Joule 2019, 3, 1746.
[30] P. E. Marchezi, E. M. Therézio, R. Szostak, H. C. Loureiro, K. Bruening, A.
Gold-Parker, M. A. Melo, C. J. Tassone, H. C. Tolentino, M. F. Toney, J. Mater. Chem.
A 2020, 8, 9302.
[31] A. Al-Ashouri, E. Köhnen, B. Li, A. Magomedov, H. Hempel, P. Caprioglio, J. A.
Márquez, A. B. M. Vilches, E. Kasparavicius, J. A. Smith, N. Phung, D. Menzel, M.
Grischek, L. Kegelmann, D. Skroblin, C. Gollwitzer, T. Malinauskas, M. Jošt, G. Matič,
B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, M. Topič, L. Korte, A. Abate, B. Stannowski, D. Neher, M.
Stolterfoht, T. Unold, V. Getautis, S. Albrecht, Science 2020, 370, 1300.
[32] T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Pazoki, M. Saliba, K. Schenk, M. Grätzel, A.
Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci. 2016, 9, 1706.
[33] M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin,
S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci.
2016, 9, 1989.
[34] T. A. S. Doherty, A. J. Winchester, S. Macpherson, D. N. Johnstone, V. Pareek, E. M.
Tennyson, S. Kosar, F. U. Kosasih, M. Anaya, M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi,
E. L. Wong, J. Madéo, Y.-H. Chiang, J.-S. Park, Y.-K. Jung, C. E. Petoukhoff, G.
Divitini, M. K. L. Man, C. Ducati, A. Walsh, P. A. Midgley, K. M. Dani, S. D. Stranks,
Nature 2020, 580, 360.
[35] S. Jariwala, H. Sun, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, A. Lof, L. A. Muscarella, B. Ehrler, E. C.
Garnett, D. S. Ginger, Joule 2019, 3, 3048.
[36] W. Li, S. K. Yadavalli, D. Lizarazo-Ferro, M. Chen, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture, R. Zia, ACS
Energy Lett. 2018, 3, 2669.
[37] T. W. Jones, A. Osherov, M. Alsari, M. Sponseller, B. C. Duck, Y.-K. Jung, C. Settens,
F. Niroui, R. Brenes, C. V. Stan, Y. Li, M. Abdi-Jalebi, N. Tamura, J. E. Macdonald, M.
Burghammer, R. H. Friend, V. Bulović, A. Walsh, G. J. Wilson, S. Lilliu, S. D. Stranks,
Energy Env. Sci 2019, 12, 596.
[38] T. A. S. Doherty, S. Nagane, D. J. Kubicki, Y.-K. Jung, D. N. Johnstone, A. N. Iqbal, D.
Guo, K. Frohna, M. Danaie, E. M. Tennyson, S. Macpherson, A. Abfalterer, M. Anaya,
Y.-H. Chiang, P. Crout, F. S. Ruggeri, S. M. Collins, C. P. Grey, A. Walsh, P. A.
Midgley, S. D. Stranks, Science 2021, 374, 1598.
[39] I. A. Ovid’ko, C. S. Pande, R. A. Masumura, in Nanomater. Handb., CRC Press, Boca
Raton, 2006, pp. 531–552.
[40] A. M. Glazer, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. B 1972, 28, 3384.
[41] P. A. Beckmann, Cryst. Res. Technol. 2010, 45, 455.
[42] K. P. McKenna, ACS Energy Lett. 2018, 3, 2663.
[43] W. Li, M. U. Rothmann, Y. Zhu, W. Chen, C. Yang, Y. Yuan, Y. Y. Choo, X. Wen, Y.-B.
Cheng, U. Bach, J. Etheridge, Nat. Energy 2021, 6, 624.
[44] S. Macpherson, T. A. S. Doherty, A. J. Winchester, S. Kosar, D. N. Johnstone, Y.-H.
Chiang, K. Galkowski, M. Anaya, K. Frohna, A. N. Iqbal, B. Roose, Z.
Andaji-Garmaroudi, P. A. Midgley, K. M. Dani, S. D. Stranks, arXiv:2107.09549 2021.
[45] Y.-H. Seo, J. H. Kim, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Chung, S.-I. Na, Nano Energy 2020, 77,
105164.
[46] P. A. Midgley, A. S. Eggeman, IUCrJ 2015, 2, 126.

27


[47] R. F. Egerton, Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy in the Electron Microscope, Springer
US, 2011.
[48] S. Svanström, A. G. Fernández, T. Sloboda, T. J. Jacobsson, H. Rensmo, U. B. Cappel,
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2021, DOI 10.1039/D1CP01443A.
[49] N. Li, Y. Luo, Z. Chen, X. Niu, X. Zhang, J. Lu, R. Kumar, J. Jiang, H. Liu, X. Guo, B.
Lai, G. Brocks, Q. Chen, S. Tao, D. P. Fenning, H. Zhou, Joule 2020, 4, 1743.
[50] Duncan N. Johnstone, Phillip Crout, Simon Høgås, Ben Martineau, Joonatan Laulainen,
Stef Smeets, Sean Collins, Endre Jacobsen, Jędrzej Morzy, Eric Prestat, Tiarnan
Doherty, Tomas Ostasevicius, Håkon Wiik Ånes, Tina Bergh, Rob Tovey, Eirik Opheim,
Pyxem/Diffsims: Diffsims 0.2.3, Zenodo, 2020.
[51] M. Basham, J. Filik, M. T. Wharmby, P. C. Y. Chang, B. El Kassaby, M. Gerring, J.
Aishima, K. Levik, B. C. A. Pulford, I. Sikharulidze, D. Sneddon, M. Webber, S. S.
Dhesi, F. Maccherozzi, O. Svensson, S. Brockhauser, G. Náray, A. W. Ashton, J.
Synchrotron Radiat. 2015, 22, 853.
[52] J. Zemann, Acta Crystallogr. 1965, 18, 139.
[53] M. Lumbreras, J. Protas, S. Jebbari, G. J. Dirksen, J. Schoonman, Solid State Ion. 1986,
20, 295.

28


 

S1 
 

 

 

Supporting Information  

 

 

Unveiling the interaction mechanisms of electron and X-ray radiation with halide 
perovskite semiconductors using scanning nano-probe diffraction 
 

Jordi Ferrer Orri,1,2 Tiarnan A.S. Doherty,1 Duncan Johnstone,2 Sean M. Collins,3 Hugh 
Simons,4 Paul A. Midgley,2 Cate Ducati,2,* and Samuel D. Stranks1,5,* 

 

1Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
2Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 
3School of Chemical and Process Engineering & School of Chemistry, University of Leeds, Leeds, 
UK. 
4Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark. 
5Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
*Corresponding authors: cd251@cam.ac.uk, sds65@cam.ac.uk  
 

 

Contents 
 
Extended methods ............................................................................................................................. 2 

Calibration of flux and fluence .......................................................................................................... 3 

Electron diffraction simulation and indexation ................................................................................... 6 

Grain tilting in-plane ......................................................................................................................... 8 

Degradation crystal structure library ................................................................................................ 11 

Discussion on the direct beam intensity ........................................................................................... 13 

Degradation effect on the crystallographic octahedral tilt ................................................................. 18 

Supplementary X-ray diffraction data and simulation ....................................................................... 19 

Discussion on elastic and inelastic scattering ................................................................................... 22 

Charge carrier concentration estimation ........................................................................................... 25 

Simulation of electron radiation in orbit ........................................................................................... 26 

References....................................................................................................................................... 27 

 
 
 


 

S2 
 

Extended methods 

Static XRD sample fabrication: To fabricate the samples for the static XRD studies, glass coverslips 

(18 mm x 18 mm, 0.13-0.17 mm thickness, Academy) were cleaned in acetone and isopropanol (10 

minutes each) in an ultrasonic bath. The substrates were treated for 10 minutes in an oxygen plasma 

cleaner immediately before the spin-coating procedure and annealing thereafter. The same protocols as 

for the nXRD sample preparation were followed, yielding films of ~500-600 nm thickness. 

Static XRD: Static synchrotron XRD data was acquired at the European Synchrotron Radiation Source 

(ESRF, Grenoble, France). A 17.2 keV monochromatic X-ray beam (λ = 0.729 Å) was focused to a 

‘box beam’ significantly larger than the individual grain size (~150nm), approximated as 1 µm2, 

ensuring that there was a uniform flux intensity across the beam, and that a large number of grain 

orientations were sampled. The diffracted X-ray signal mas collected by a FReLON CCD camera placed 

0.188 m from the sample. A sample was irradiated, forming a 2D diffraction pattern, and then an image 

was acquired every 0.5 s (with a dwell time between frames of 1.14 s) until the diffraction spots were 

no longer visible. The incoming flux was indirectly measured using an ion chamber with N2 gas and 

with a picometer current detector. 

From the 2D detector images, the Python Fast Azimuthal Integration tool (pyFAI) was used to 

azimuthally integrate to 1D XRD patterns.[1] The standard detector geometry distortion file from the 

ESRF was used to calibrate the radial integration, which was adjusted to match the tetragonal P4mbm 

perovskite phase (see Figure S9a). Finally, since the beam flux exhibited some fluctuations during the 

acquisition, each frame was rescaled accordingly to the normalised incoming flux and was background 

subtracted by fitting a linear background taken from the mean intensity values in the range before the 

first measured peak (0.10-0.15 Å-1). 

 
 


 

S3 
 

Calibration of flux and fluence 

Note on definitions: Flux: Number of particles per unit time (takes into account the beam source, such 

as e− per second, photons per second…). Fluence: Number of particles per unit area, also known as flux 

density (takes into account the beam size as well, such as e−Å-2, photons m-2…). Dose: Amount of 

energy absorbed per unit mass (takes into account the sample-beam interaction, calculated in joules per 

kg or Grays (Gy)). Oftentimes, these definitions in the electron microscopy field are not referring to the 

standard particle Physics definitions. Fluence is often referred as “dose”. This is because modelling the 

electron-beam-sample interaction is not trivial and requires many assumptions. Most electron 

microscopy literature states “dose” as e−Å-2, as fluence. 

This is in contrast to the X-ray microscopy field, which uses the standard definitions, and doses are 

always stated in Gray units. Note that sometimes administered dose is reported instead of the absorbed 

dose, value which does not take into account the sample-beam interaction. 

Here, we report fluence for all techniques in units of particle (e- or photon) per square ångström. 

SED: The fluence for the SED experiment was calculated from the measured probe current during data 

acquisition. A probe current of 3.59 pA is equivalent to a flux of 2 × 107 e- s-1. All SED maps were 

acquired at a 1 ms dwell time using a Gaussian-shaped beam which can be approximated to a circular 

beam of ~5 nm diameter, slightly overestimating dose. These acquisition parameters result in a fluence 

of ~12 e- Å-2. 

The simulation software CASINO v2.51, which simulates Monte Carlo electron trajectory in solids, 

was used to simulate the stochastic interaction volume for the electron beam.[2] This model is used 

because of the polycrystalline orientation nature of perovskite samples, and the total sample thickness. 

In such samples, the electron beam is likely to spread more significantly than in a well aligned single 

crystal, thus using the Monte Carlo method is more suitable than multi-slice or Bloch-wave simulation 

methods. Figure S1 shows the trajectory of 105 electrons for a beam of radius 5 nm, for the default 

simulation parameters. The sample was modeled as 2 layers: a halide perovskite of 200 nm thickness 

and density 4.16g/cm3, and a 30 nm Si3N4 layer. An interaction volume of ~90 nm radius contains the 

majority of the trajectories. 

Conventional scan controls in STEM incorporate a left-to-right and row-by-row raster pattern requiring 

a ‘flyback’ time for stabilizing, prior to sequential row scanning. Moreover, beam blanking typically 

has a finite rise time. Given these issues, unavoidable in common STEM setups, we specifically parked 

the beam in a controlled position within the field of view, labelled with a cross in Fig. 1 in the main 

text. To understand the effect of beam parking, the excess irradiation fluence can be estimated. Beam 

blanking after each scan was done manually. Based on Human Reaction Time studies,[3] the average 

reaction time to click a button (task required to manually blank the beam at the end of a scan) is 273 

ms, around 1/4th of a second. Assuming the reaction time during acquisition was no longer than 500 


 

S4 
 

ms, the overexposure during acquisition of the beam parking position is 500 ms per scan. Given the 1 

ms dwell time during scanning, the overexposure at the parking position is ~x500 larger. Such 

overexposure is localised within the circular beam of ~5 nm diameter, yet its effects extend around the 

~90 nm radius interaction volume. 

 

Figure S1- Simulated electron beam trajectories using CASINO v2.51 at 200 keV for a layered sample containing a 
perovskite and SiN layers. 

nXRD: Flux is defined as photons per second. In the nXRD experiment, flux was indirectly measured 

using a calibrator diode (Si). The diode outputs a flux value in Amperes (A) per s, but has a 

responsibility factor. Taking as the diode responsibility conversion factor 0.108 ± 0.0005 A/W (from 

calibrations in the DIAMOND centre), the flux can be converted to photon power in Watts (W). 

The rate of photons at a particular wavelength and power can be then calculated by using the equation 

for photon energy, 𝐸 = ℎ𝑐/λ (where h is Planck's constant and λ = 0.619 nm from the beam energy of 

20 keV), yielding a flux (photons per second). 

However, the diode measurements will be slightly lower than the flux values on the sample, as the diode 

was placed within 200 mm away from the sample holder. X-ray attenuation by the air can be estimated 

using the mass attenuation coefficient of dry air for a 20 keV beam from the NIST database, as μ/ρ = 

1.7 × 10−2 cm2/g.[4] Assuming a mass density of air of approximately 1.2 kg/m3, an attenuation factor 

of 2 × 10−5 cm-1 is found. Using the Beer-Lambert law 𝐼/𝐼0  = 𝑒−𝜇𝑥, we can estimate the X-ray 

attenuation across the 200 mm to be of 0.05%, therefore negligible. 

The diode current measurement was 1.13 × 10−7 A, which can be converted to a photon power of 1.1 ×

106 W. Without the need to account for the flux attenuation by the air, a final flux value of 3 × 109 

photons/s is calculated for each frame. Fluence (flux density) is defined as photons per unit area, and 

can be calculated from the X-ray beam size (which matches the rastered pixel size of the detector of 

150 nm) and the dwell time per pixel (0.5 s), yielding a fluence of 775 photons Å-2 for each frame. 

 

 


 

S5 
 

 

 

 

Figure S2- Regions in the diffraction space from which a) vBF, b) vDF and c) total scattering images are taken to create the 
evolution movies attached in the SI. d) Schematic of the acquisition setup for the SED and nXRD system, in which the sample 
is moved through a static beam. For SED, the incoming beam is moving and the sample is static, whereas for nXRD the beam 
is static and the sample is moved. 𝛼 is the semi-convergence angle and 𝜃 is the semi-angle of detection for the diffraction. For 
SED, the semi-convergence angle is 1 mrad. The range of the semi-angle of detection can be estimated: for a camera length 
of 2 ∙ 10−1 𝑚 and a pixel radius ranging from 0.04 (9 pixels in the detector) to 1.2 Å-1 (256 pixels in the detector) for the vBF 
images in the main text and the vDF images in the SI, respectively. Given that the pixel size in the Merlin/Medipix detector is 

55 μm, the 𝜃 ranges between 2 to 70 mrad (calculated using 𝑡𝑎𝑛−1(
|𝑘⃗ | 𝑖𝑛 𝑑𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟 𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑙 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ

𝐶𝐿: 𝑐𝑎𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑎 𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑡ℎ
). 

 
 


 

S6 
 

Electron diffraction simulation and indexation 

 

Figure S3- Indexation of the additional reflections seen in (a) the experimental data within the large tetragonal P4mbm 
perovskite-phase grains. Simulation of crystal diffraction patterns using SingleCrystal 4 for (b) the tetragonal perovskite 
phase, not showing any of the additional reflections, (b) orthorhombic FAPbI3 phase, showing additional reflections which do 
not match the experimentally observed ones. These extra reflections at ½(ℎ𝑘𝑙) originate from the tetragonal to the 
orthorhombic phase transition, which results in the tilting of the BX6 corner-sharing octahedral. (d) The simulation of PbBr2 
at the [111] zone axis closely matches the additional reflections in the experimental data set. (d) Any of the other plausible 
degradation phases, such as the FAPbI3 delta phase shown as an example, did not match either. 


 

S7 
 

 

Figure S4- Indexation of one of the adjacent grains from Fig 1b-c (in blue). (a) The experimental data, with some reflections 
marked as 1-3 which are indexable to the tetragonal perovskite phase at the [111] zone axis. (b) Simulation of crystal 
diffraction patterns using SingleCrystal 4, closely matching the experimentally observed reflections. (c) Estimation of the angle 
between the [100] and the [111] zone axes for a tetragonal unit cell of a=b=9.00 and c=6.36 Å-1, estimating a high-angle 
grain boundary of ~ 60 degrees. 

 

 

Figure S5- Indexation of the additional reflections seen at (a) the experimental data at the grain boundaries, with some 
reflections marked as 1-3 which are not indexable to the tetragonal perovskite phase. Simulation of crystal diffraction patterns 
using SingleCrystal 4 for (b) the 4H-PbI2 degradation phase, closely matching the experimentally observed reflections at [-
100] zone axis. In contrast, other phases did not match such reflections, as illustrated by (c) for the PbBr2 simulation, in which 
reflections do not match. The additional reflections marked as (*) in orange correspond the the pristine FAPbI3 phase, as the 
vDF image shows. 


 

S8 
 

 

Figure S6- Schematic of the types of grain boundaries. While atoms in the bulk phase form equilibrium crystal lattices at a 
minimum free energy of an infinite crystal, atoms at grain boundaries are arranged in a more disordered manner, imposed by 
arrangement restrictions from the adjacent crystal lattices. Different types of grain boundaries can be formed: (a) low-angle 
boundaries, (b) high-angle boundaries, (c) non-equilibrium grain boundaries containing high density of defects and (d) 
amorphous grain boundaries. Adapted from CRC Press.[5] 

 

Grain tilting in-plane 

The degree of the grain tilting in-plane can be estimated by fitting a Ewald circle passing though the 

brightest diffraction reflections and using Bragg’s diffraction law: 

𝜃~ sin−1(
𝜆

2 ∙ 𝑟−1) Equation S1 

Where r is the radius of the fitted circle (in the same units as the wavelength) and 𝜆 = 2.5 𝑝𝑚 is the 

wavelength of the electron beam. For some grains of interest, were initially off zone axis are estimated 

in Figure S7. The angles at which the same grains are after 40 frames are also shown, mainly titled to 

zone axis [100] for the tetragonal phase. This titling is very slight, from 1-5 degrees, sufficient to allow 

these grains to relax to zone axis. The study of most of the indexable grains in the scanned region reveals 

that all grains show some degree of rotation if their initial state is not at zone axis. vDF images of these 

grain tilting are also shown in Figure S13. 

Similar comparable results on other halide perovskite samples are observed. Figure S8 shows tilting 

observed in a SED crystallographic dataset of another triple cation double halide perovskite 

polycrystalline film composition grown on a SiN TEM grid. However, this SED experiment was 

acquired using a 300 keV JEOL ARM300F high-resolution STEM using a Merlin/Medipix direct 

detector with a single back contact (em19793-2 session, ePSIC, Diamond Light Source, UK). The 

observations in tilting of the original diffraction patterns upon initial radiation exposure are comparable 

to those reported in the main manuscript, making these observations representative across different 

films of same composition and across TEM acceleration voltages at 200-300 keV. 

 


 

S9 
 

 

Figure S7- a) In-plane grain tilting across the scanned region, most grains showing tilting towards the zone axis. b) Grain 
tilting quantification based on Bragg’s equation for the orange and red regions (same grain) and c) the quantification of the 
tilt change over electron exposure. d) Extension to Fig. 1b and 1c in the main text, showing the evolution of the diffraction 
patterns at low cumulative fluence. 


 

S10 
 

 

Figure S8- a) In-plane grain tilting observed after little electron exposure, quantified based on Bragg’s equation. b) Grain 
tiling across the whole scanned region, showing grains tilting towards the zone axis and other grains off zone axis. This SED 
crystallographic dataset was taken from a different halide perovskite film of same composition grown on a SiN TEM grid. It 
was acquired at 300 keV using a JEOL ARM300F high-resolution STEM with a Merlin/Medipix direct detector with a single 
back contact. 


 

S11 
 

Degradation crystal structure library 

Apart from the pristine tetragonal P4/mbm unit cell (Figure S9a), a series of different plausible 

degradation crystal structures were also considered in this study, to attempt the indexation of some of 

the additional reflections appearing after radiation exposure. Some of these phases are polytypes, or 

polymorphs which have identical close-packed planes but with different stacking sequences. Thus they 

can be classified by the Ramsdell notation, where the letter denotes the crystal system of the compound 

(C for cubic, H for hexagonal) and the number denotes the total number of layers contained in a unit 

cell. For the lead halides, the 4H-PbI2 hexagonal (P63mc, lattice parameters of 𝑎 = 𝑏 =4.56 and 

𝑐 =13.96 Å, COD ID: 9009140) and the PbBr2 orthorhombic (Pnam, COD ID: 1530324, lattice 

parameters of 𝑎 =80.6, 𝑏 =6.54 and 𝑐 =4.73 Å) were used. These structure files were retrieved from 

the crystallography open database (COD) from the following references and are shown in Figure 

S9b.[6,7] Other degradation phases were also attempted, such as the intermediate polytype phases, 

reported by Gratia et al.,[8] which combine sequences of hexagonal and cubic closed-packed AX3 stacks 

that result in a framework of face-sharing and corner-sharing BX6 octahedra. They are called the 4H 

and 6H polytypes and are crystal structures that interface the photoactive α-phase (3R) with the yellow 

δ-phase (2H). However, the presence of these phases was inconclusive in this study. 

Finally, to simulate the orthorhombic phase that would emerge from the additional degree of rotation 

in the BX6 octahedra,[9] the tetragonal FAPbI3 unit cell was taken as a model and tilted by a few degrees 

to obtain an orthorhombic FAPbI3 (Pnma) unit cell with lattice parameters 𝑎 =8.99, 𝑏 =12.72 

and 𝑐 =8.99 Å as an approximation. 

All diffraction simulation was performed using Single Crystal 4 (CrystalMaker Software Limited) 

adjusting the simulation parameters to resemble experimental data. Simulation files in “.scdx” format 

can be found in the Supporting Data. 


 

S12 
 

 

Figure S9- Schematics of some of the crystal structure files used for the simulation and indexing of experimental diffraction 
patterns. (a) Schematic of how the tetragonal P4mbm perovskite unit cell is built from the BX6 octahedra. b) Histograms and 
c) the unit cells at the a, b and c directions for the perovskite, the PbBr2 and the 4H-PbI2 phases. 

 
 


 

S13 
 

Discussion on the direct beam intensity 

The datasets reported in this work were acquired continuously over the course of more than 3 hours. A 

non-linear darkening of the direct beam over the series of scans is observed, with the direct beam 

intensity of the final scan being 6x lower intensity than the initial intensity (see Figure S10a-b). Such 

effect could be explained by a series of factor: 

Changes in the emission values of the electron gun are unlikely to account for such large drop of 

intensity. Performance tests after flashing the electron emission gun at 300 keV in STEM mode were 

completed at ePSIC. While the emission current, measured after the gun accelerators and before the 

condenser apertures, reduced by ~20% after 3 hours, the probe current, measured using a Faraday cup 

after the whole column, exhibited stable constant beam currents until after 7 hours (see Figure S10c). 

Moreover, other SED data was acquired under the same beam conditions after the last frame reported 

in this work, with direct beam currents saturating the central pixels of the camera. These findings 

suggest the emission current of the electron gun did not change significantly during the acquisition time.  

Saturation at the direct beam position can occur due to the bit-depth limitations of the Medipix chip 

when operating at readout times (1 ms) necessary for accessing low electron fluence at the sample. At 

the initial scanned frame, some diffraction patterns exhibit saturation at the direct beam and some of 

the diffracted spots. Over continuous scanning, the detected central beam intensity decreases, no longer 

exhibiting saturation at the direct beam. With the creation of pinholes in the sample, some areas in the 

scanned region would be expected to show saturation (0-63 counts per pixel at 64-bit depth). 

Nevertheless, this is not observed, so saturation does not affect the diffracted reflections in this study. 

We can obtain the time evolution of the direct beam intensity and shape profile from a region from 

which no saturation is observed at any of the frames. The direct beam intensity decay can be seen in 

Figure S10. 

Sample thickening due to deposition of carbon contamination can increase sample thickness and thus 

reduce the detected direct beam intensity. To estimate the thickness of amorphous carbon required to 

attenuate the electron direct beam by ~50% of the initial intensity, the Poison inelastic scattering model 

can be used as described below (see Eq. S2 and S3). Under the experimental conditions used in this 

work and with a 𝑍𝑒𝑓𝑓 of 6 atomic units, a conservative thickness approximation of ~190 nm would be 

required for P0 to be reduced by 50%. These estimations use the over-simplistic Poison inelastic model 

and should be taken as qualitative explanations only, suggesting that carbon contamination is 

significant. 


 

S14 
 

 

Figure S10- a) Line profile of the direct beam over exposure evolution. Inset on the left shows the grain from which 
diffraction was taken. Inset on the right shows the line from which the intensity profile are extracted from. b) Integrated 
intensity evolution over frame number taken from integrating the diffraction intensity using the virtual apertures shown in 
Figure S2.. c) Emission stability performance test of the emission electron gun over 7 hours at 300 kV (acceleration 1 3.49 
kV, acceleration 2 5.00 kV, initial emission 16.1 µA) after high and low flashing in STEM mode (9 cm camera length, CL 
aperture 2 (30 µm) and IL3 changed to 835F in FLC mode to make a small beam to fit the Faraday cup). The emission value 
drops due to the beam profile changing at higher angles, which is not detected down-stream on Faraday cup. Data acquired 
by Mohsen Danaie (ePSIC). 


 

S15 
 

 

Figure S11- Supporting figure to Fig. 3 in the main text. Additional examples of (blue and green) PbI2 formation at the grain 
boundary, (orange) hole formation, showing diffuse scattering and absence of Bragg peaks other than the ones from the 
adjacent grains, (red) a series of small grains indexable to the tetragonal P4mbm perovskite structure but at different crystal 
rotations (similar to the perovskite multi-grain identified in Fig. 3 in the main text). In (purple) and (pink) an additional 
example of the initial state of two adjacent grain boundaries across the large perovskite grain showing a clean and a defective 
boundary, respectively. An additional example of a tetragonal perovskite grain showing additional PbBr2 reflections 
appearing heterogeneously across the grain is shown in (grey) and (gold). 


 

S16 
 

 

Figure S12- Supporting figure to Fig. 4 in the main text, showing the evolution of vDF images as a function of electron 
exposure. Additional examples for tetragonal perovskite peaks and additional reflections appearing after the first scan. 

 
 


 

S17 
 

 

Figure S13- vDF images of the grain tilting observed within the 2 main grains of interest and the progressive amorphisation 
of the perovskite grain. Such rotations are also seen in the adjacent grains. 

 

 
 


 

S18 
 

Degradation effect on the crystallographic octahedral tilt 

A grain oriented down near the [001] zone axis is found at a region far away from the centre where 

beam parking is located. Figure S14a shows the location of the grain, its mean diffraction pattern and 

the simulation of the [001] zone axis. At this zone axis, superstructure reflections are visible (see orange 

circle), attributed to the corner-sharing BX6 octahedron tilt from the tetragonal perovskite phase. These 

superstructure reflections eventually disappear, as the sample is exposed to higher fluence and damaged 

(see white arrows in Figure S14b-c). The faster loss of superstructure reflections in comparison to the 

loss of the main bright reflections may suggest the loss of the tetragonal distortion trending towards a 

more cubic structure. Since the tetragonal distortion arises from cation alloying,[10] the loss of the more 

volatile MA and or FA cations is likely to tend towards a cubic structure. These results are consistent 

with the reported degradation pathway described in this work. These results also offer more evidence 

that such degradation pathway is also observed at regions away from where beam parking is happening. 

 

Figure S14- SED evolution of a grain at the [001] zone axis of a halide perovskite film. a) The grain location is away from the 
beam-parking position, as shown in the vBF image at the 1st frame (left). The mean diffraction pattern from the orange circle 
region is shown at the centre and the simulated diffraction pattern at the [001] zone axis at the right, especially showing weak 
reflections in orange. b) The evolution of the mean diffraction pattern over increased fluence. White arrows show the 
disappearance of the weak additional reflections due to octahedral tilt. d) Comparison between intensity profiles taken from 
the (220) and the (320) tetragonal diffraction spots. 


 

S19 
 

Supplementary X-ray diffraction data and simulation 

 

Figure S15- Simulation of the effect of the occupation of a) the A-cation (FA) and c) the X-halide anion (I) on the 1D diffraction 
patterns. On the left, schematics of the specific crystallographic planes which are most affected by the change of occupancy 
in b) A-cation and d) the X-halide, and how they relate to the elements on those respective planes. e) Degradation rate of the 
integrated peaks for the nXRD mean diffraction patterns in Fig. 5 in the main text. In orange the slowest decaying crystal 
planes. 


 

S20 
 

 

Figure S16- Supplementary nXRD data. a) nXRF summed intensity over the scanned area against X-ray fluence for the Pb 
and halides. b) vDF images taken from solely the intensity of the appearing peak (*) shown in Fig. 5 in the main text, showing 
the appearance of such peak homogeneously across the whole scanned area. c) nXRF map of the Cs distribution over X-ray 
fluence (normalised by the PbLa peak). No Cs segregation is observed. The peak CsLb1 was selected, as the brighter CsLa 
overlaps with the ILb1 peak. 

 

Additional synchrotron X-ray diffraction experiment (staticXRD): Calibration of fluence. The 

photon flux in the static box-beam XRD experiment was indirectly measured by the current passing 

through an ion chamber during each image acquisition. The current flux fluctuated between 3.8 − 4.5 ×

10−13 𝐴, at a mean value of 4.3 × 10−13 𝐴. These measurements are electrons detected from the 

ionization of the gas in the chamber. Five basic interactions can occur when X-rays penetrate a material, 

the main ones being photoelectric, Compton and Rayleigh scattering. In order to get the flux in photons 

per second, an estimation of the flux required to create the readout electron ion pair formation in N2 gas 

flow (within the ionization chamber). The tabulated cross sections for photoelectric, Compton and 

Rayleigh effects on the specific N2 gas and 17.2 keV beam energy are: crayleigh, ccompton, cphoto = 2.3634, 

3.5412, 15.0215 respectively. Assuming the photoelectric effect is the dominant one (approximately 

true for beam energies below 30 keV),[11] all the electron ion pairs measured in the gas chamber are only 

produced by the photoelectric effect, which is 71.78 % of the total scattering cross sections. These 

assumptions estimate a flux fluctuation between 6.3 − 7.5 × 1011 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑠−1, at a mean flux of 7.2 ×

1011 𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜𝑛𝑠 𝑠−1. Fluence (flux density) can be estimated from the X-ray beam size of ~1 µm2 and 

the dwell time per frame of 1.64 s, yielding a mean fluence of 12,000 photons Å-2 for each frame.  

Figure S17 shows the radially integrated static XRD evolution of a halide perovskite film, of same 

composition as reported in the text, over accumulated illumination for this static beam experiment. The 

peak degradation follows similar patterns as seen in Fig. 5a in the main text, yet degradation of the main 


 

S21 
 

peaks is only discernible at 2-3 order of magnitude higher fluence than for the nXRD experiment, due 

to the larger size of the X-ray beam. 

 

Figure S17- Radially integrated static XRD evolution of a halide perovskite film over accumulated illumination indexed to the 
tetragonal perovskite phase. The calibration of the scattering vector is within an error of +- 0.05 A. The peak degradation 
follows similar patterns as seen in Fig. 5a in the main text but at 2-3 order of magnitude higher fluence due to the larger size 
of the X-ray beam. 

 

Figure S18- Supplementary figure to Fig. 5 in the main text. a) Mean 2D nXRD detector image, with some areas of interest. 
b) Evolution of the features seen in the raw 2D detector over fluence, showing crystal tilting and the appearance of additional 
reflections indexable to both PbI2 and PbBr2. 

 
 


 

S22 
 

Discussion on elastic and inelastic scattering 

Poisson model for inelastic scattering of electrons: Electrons are known to scatter inelastically with 

increasing probability for increasing sample thickness. In this study, electron transparent samples of 

~200 nm were used. This thickness can lead to significant inelastic scattering. An estimation of the 

inelastic mean free path on the basis of the dipole formula can be found from the definitions from 

Egerton:[12] 

𝜆 =
106𝐹( 𝐸0
𝐸𝑚)

ln(2𝛽𝐸0
𝐸𝑚 )   (S2) 

With F: tabulated relativistic factor at 200 keV, 𝐸0: the bandgap, 𝛽: the convergence angle, and 𝐸𝑚: the 

mean 
energy 
loss 
energy, 
which 
can 
be 
estimated 
using 
𝐸𝑚~7.6 𝑍𝑒𝑓𝑓
0.36. 
For 
the 

(FA0.79MA0.16Cs0.05)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskite composition, 𝑍𝑒𝑓𝑓 is 36.4 atomic units. For 𝛽 = 1 mrad 

at 200 keV, a mean free path 𝜆 is found of 177 nm. 

At 𝑡 = 200nm, the possibility of inelastic scattering can be estimated using Poisson’s law: 

𝑃𝑛 = ( 1

𝑛!) (𝑡

𝜆)
𝑛
exp (−
𝑡

𝜆) (S3) 

Where n is the number of scattering events. These estimations yield probabilities of: 

Table S1 – Probability of no, single and multiple inelastic scattering. 

No inelastic scattering 
P0 = 32% 

Single scattering 
P1 = 37% 

Double scattering 
P2 = 21% 

Triple scattering 
P3 = 8% 

 

Therefore, from the moment the electrons interact with the sample and from all elastic scattering events, 

a significant percentage of electrons can scatter inelastically multiple times transferring energy to the 

sample. 

 
 


 

S23 
 

Elastic and inelastic cross section ratio for electrons: A derivation of the estimation of the inelastic 

to elastic mean free path can be found from the definitions from Egerton.[12] The following parameters 

were approximated: collection angle 𝑏 =10 mrad (does not affect the ratio between the cross sections), 

and the following sample specific parameters were used: 𝑍𝑒𝑓𝑓 is 36.4 atomic units, mean energy loss 

27.2 eV, and atomic density of ~7 nm-3. 

Figure S19a shows the log-log plot of the ratio between the inelastic to elastic scattering cross sections 

for electrons against the atomic number. The relation is linear in the log-log scale, not affected 

substantially by acceleration voltage from 80 to 200 keV. From these approximations a relationship 

between the cross section ratios (
𝜎𝑖
𝜎𝑒) and the atomic number (𝑍) is found: 

𝐸𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑠 →
𝜎𝑖
𝜎𝑒 ∝ 19 ∙ 𝑍−1(S4) 

Elastic and inelastic cross section ratio for X-rays: The elastic and inelastic cross sections for high-

energy photons are retrieved from the XCOM Photon Cross Sections Database.[13] This web database 

provides calculated photon cross sections for scattering cross sections, as well as photoelectric 

absorption, pair production, total attenuation coefficients. The database includes any element (𝑍 ≤ 100) 

at energies from 1 keV to 100 GeV. A custom-made script was used to retrieve all relevant data at the 

relevant energies used in this study. Coherent cross sections were used as elastic scattering cross 

sections and incoherent as inelastic ones.  

Figure S19b shows the log-log plot of the ratio between the incoherent to coherent (referred as inelastic 

to elastic) scattering cross sections for photons against the atomic number. The relation is linear in the 

log-log scale. From these values at 20 keV, a relationship between the cross section ratios (
𝜎𝑖
𝜎𝑒) and the 

atomic number (𝑍) is found: 

20 𝑘𝑒𝑉 𝑃ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜𝑛𝑠 →
𝜎𝑖
𝜎𝑒 ∝ 50 ∙ 𝑍−1.7(S5) 

 


 

S24 
 

 

Figure S19 – Inelastic to elastic scattering cross section ratios for a) electrons and b) photons at different energies. In blue, 
at the comparable energy of 80 keV. In orange, at the acceleration energies used for the data acquisition of this work. 

 
 


 

S25 
 

Charge carrier concentration estimation 

The illumination of any semiconductor with radiation can produce the excitation of charge carriers 

(electron and hole pairs) from the valence to the conduction band. These charge carriers can diffuse 

across the grains, of mean size around ~100 nm. The carriers decay after a certain lifetime, shown to be 

of the order of hundreds of nanoseconds from photoluminescence studies of similar compositions,[14] 

but much shorter lived (<1 nm) from comparable cathodoluminescence studies.[15] Moreover, high-

energy beams tend to induce high densities of charge carriers, triggering Auger processes which result 

in even shorter lifetimes.[14] These findings suggest that the acquisition dwell time used here (1 ms and 

0.5 s for SED and nXRD, respectively) is significantly longer than the charge carrier lifetimes, avoiding 

any accumulation of carriers from pixel-to-pixel scanned. 

The charge carrier density produced by both the electron and the X-ray beam can be estimated as 

follows. 

SED: Electron diffraction data was acquired at 200 keV and at 12 e- Å-2 per frame. Since the electron 

beam has a significantly larger energy than the band gap of the material (~1.653 eV) and since 

measurements are taken in transmittance mode, only the mean energy-loss energy from inelastic 

scattering is considered capable of creating charge carriers. For the acquisition conditions of the SED 

experiments (200 keV, 1 mrad collection angle, effective atomic mass effective Z = 36.4, 200 nm 

sample thickness), this inelastic scattering mean energy loss is ~27.2 eV (refer to Equation S2: 𝜆 =

106𝐹( 𝐸0
𝐸𝑚)

ln(2𝛽𝐸0
𝐸𝑚 )   (S2 ). The inelastic scattering probability of single, double and triple scattering is of ~66%. 

Therefore, making the simplistic assumption that only 8 e- Å-2 of the incoming fluence will scatter 

inelastically, each electron can approximately excite ∼𝐸0 / 3𝐸𝑔  ≈ 6 e-−h+ pairs.[16] To estimate the 

lower and upper bounds of the charge carrier density, we assume a diffusion area ranging from the size 

of the beam (~5 nm diameter) up to the size of the mean grain size (~100 nm). Assuming also a mean 

interaction depth of 200 nm, due to the thin nature of the specimen for TEM studies, an interaction 

volume of (

5 𝑡𝑜 100

2
)2 ∙ 𝜋 𝑛𝑚2 × 200 𝑛𝑚 = 10−15 𝑡𝑜 10−18𝑐𝑚3 is estimated for each electron. 

Therefore, the charge carrier density of the localised excitation is 3 × 1015 𝑡𝑜 1 × 1018 e-−h+-pairs cm−3 

per incoming electron. This translates to a constant local excitation of 𝟏𝟎𝟏𝟔 𝒕𝒐 𝟏𝟎𝟏𝟗 e-−h+ pairs cm−3 

per frame. 

nXRD: Diffraction data was acquired at 20 keV and at 775 photons Å-2, as calibrated in the previous 

section in the SI. In order to estimate the material transmittance at 20 keV, the pyMca 5.5.4 tool was 

used,[17] assuming a density of 4.16 g cm-3,[18] a film thickness of 600 nm and the film composition 

described in the methods. With an estimated transmittance coefficient of μ = 0.984, a total fluence of 

12.4 photons Å-2 will interact with the sample. We assume as an overestimation that each of the 20 keV 

photon can produce ∼𝐸0 / 𝐸𝑔  ≈ 104 e-−h+ pairs. To estimate the lower and upper bounds of the charge 


 

S26 
 

carrier density, we assume a diffusion area ranging from the size of the beam (~150 nm diameter) down 

to the size of the mean grain size (~100 nm). From the interaction of 600 nm, the thickness of the 

specimen, an interaction volume of (
100 𝑡𝑜 150

2
)2 ∙ 𝜋 𝑛𝑚2 × 600 𝑛𝑚 = 10−14 𝑡𝑜 10−15𝑐𝑚3 is 

estimated for each photon, resulting in an overestimated localised excitation of 1 𝑡𝑜 3 × 1018 e-−h+-

pairs cm−3 per photon, or 𝟏𝟎𝟏𝟗e-−h+ pairs cm−3 per frame.  

Again, these amount of charge carrier densities should be taken as over-simplistic approximations. 

However, the charge carrier densities from the two different techniques are in a similar order of 

magnitude, higher than the charge carrier densities of these materials under 1 sun illumination 

(1014 𝑡𝑜 1016 e-−h+-pairs cm−3). 

Simulation of electron radiation in orbit 

The electron spectra from the safer orbit near the planet Earth, and the harsher orbit in Jupiter were 

simulated using SPENVIS.[19] The fluence of the electron spectrum at 200 keV energy for both orbits 

was used as input to relate the fluence thresholds found in this study to space applications, as shown in 

Figure S20. The fluxes were calculated from the default orbits generated by SPENVISfor each planet 

and the default models for electrons for each planet (AE-8 MAX and D&G83 for the Earth and Jupiter, 

respectively). With a total flux of about 3 × 10−9 e- Å-2 s-1 at 200 keV in the Earth orbit, a fluence of 

200 e- Å-2 would be accumulated after around 7 × 1010 𝑠 ≈ 2000 years. The same fluence threshold 

would be reached earlier at the harsher Jupiter orbit after only ~200 years (with a total flux of ~10−8 

e- Å-2 s-1). Despite the simplicity of these estimates, the resilience of these materials to degradation from 

electron radiation is promising for space PV applications as the radiation fluence used in microscopy 

are significantly larger than the radiation in space by several orders of magnitude. 


 

S27 
 

 

Figure S20- Fluence of the electron spectrum radiation in orbits in the Earth (black) and in Jupiter (red), as simulated using 
SPENVIS.[19] This spectrum was used to relate the fluence from the experimental results of this work to space PV 
applications. As a dashed vertical line, the acceleration voltage used for the SED acquisition. 

References 

[1] 
J. Kieffer, D. Karkoulis, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2013, 425, 202012. 

[2] 
D. Drouin, A. R. Couture, D. Joly, X. Tastet, V. Aimez, R. Gauvin, Scanning 2007, 29, 92. 

[3] 
“Reaction Time Test,” can be found under https://www.humanbenchmark.com/tests/reactiontime, n.d. 

[4] 
J. H. Hubbell, S. M. Seltzer, 2004. 

[5] 
I. A. Ovid’ko, C. S. Pande, R. A. Masumura, in Nanomater. Handb., CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2006, pp. 531–552. 

[6] 
J. Zemann, Acta Crystallogr. 1965, 18, 139. 

[7] 
M. Lumbreras, J. Protas, S. Jebbari, G. J. Dirksen, J. Schoonman, Solid State Ion. 1986, 20, 295. 

[8] 
P. Gratia, I. Zimmermann, P. Schouwink, J.-H. Yum, J.-N. Audinot, K. Sivula, T. Wirtz, M. K. Nazeeruddin, ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 
2, 2686. 

[9] 
A. M. Glazer, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. B 1972, 28, 3384. 

[10] 
T. A. S. Doherty, S. Nagane, D. J. Kubicki, Y.-K. Jung, D. N. Johnstone, A. N. Iqbal, D. Guo, K. Frohna, M. Danaie, E. M. Tennyson, 
S. Macpherson, A. Abfalterer, M. Anaya, Y.-H. Chiang, P. Crout, F. S. Ruggeri, S. M. Collins, C. P. Grey, A. Walsh, P. A. Midgley, 
S. D. Stranks, Science 2021, 374, 1598. 

[11] 
H. E. Martz, C. M. Logan, D. J. Schneberk, P. J. Shull, X-Ray Imaging: Fundamentals, Industrial Techniques and Applications, CRC 
Press, 2016. 

[12] 
R. F. Egerton, Electron Energy-Loss Spectroscopy in the Electron Microscope, Springer US, 2011. 

[13] 
M. J. Berger, J. H. Hubbell, S. M. Seltzer, J. Chang, J. S. Coursey, R. Sukumar, D. S. Zucker, K. Olsen, 2010. 

[14] 
L. M. Herz, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2016, 67, 65. 

[15] 
J. Ferrer Orri, E. M. Tennyson, G. Kusch, G. Divitini, S. Macpherson, R. A. Oliver, C. Ducati, S. D. Stranks, Nano Express 2021, 2, 
024002. 

[16] 
B. G. Yacobi, D. B. Holt, J. Appl. Phys. 1986, 59, DOI 10.1063/1.336491. 

[17] 
V. A. Solé, E. Papillon, M. Cotte, Ph. Walter, J. Susini, Spectrochim. Acta Part B At. Spectrosc. 2007, 62, 63. 

[18] 
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel, T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A 2013, 1, 5628. 

[19] 
S. Calders, E. De Donder, M. Kruglanski, N. Messios, SPENVIS - Space Environment Information System, European Space Agency, 
2019. 

 


