1

Intensity Modulated Photocurrent Microspectrosopy for Next Generation Photovoltaics

Jamie. S. Laird 1*, Sandheep Ravishankar 2, A. N. Jumabekov 3, Kevin Rietwyk 3, Wenxin Mao 3, Udo 

Bach 3 and Trevor Smith 1

1. Centre of Excellence in Excitons, School of Chemistry, University of Melbourne, 

Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia, e-mail: jslaird@unimelb.edu.au

2. IEK-5 Photovoltaik, Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52425 Jülich, Germany

3. Centre of Excellence in Excitons, Chemical Engineering, Monash University

Keywords: intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS), laser beam induced 

current (LBIC), perovskite solar cell (PSC), metal halide perovskite (MHP), photocurrent 

mapping, power conversion efficiency (PCE)

Abstract

In this report, we describe a large-area Laser Beam Induced Current (LBIC) microscope that 
has been adapted to perform Intensity Modulated Photocurrent Spectroscopy in an imaging 
mode. Microscopy-based IMPS method provides spatial resolution of the frequency response 
of the solar cell, allowing correlation of the optoelectronic response with a particular interface, 
bulk material, specific transport layer or transport parameter. We apply this system to study 
degradation effects in PSCs and find that IMPS imaging can differentiate areas based on their 
markedly different frequency response; the low frequency response can be used to show 
degradation in the ambipolar diffusion length whilst the high frequency response is 
determined by degradation in the local series resistance. In the mid-frequency image contrast 
appears to be from interfacial recombination related to halide ions.

1. Introduction

In recent years, metal halide perovskites have attracted enormous attention as they 

absorb broadly across the solar spectrum and are easily processed into photovoltaic structures 

using low-cost and low-temperature solution processing. [1] Although champion organic-

inorganic perovskite solar cells (PSCs) display photoconversion efficiencies approaching 

commercial viability [2,3] they are still inherently unstable under in-operando conditions 

encountered in the field. Device stability is a key metric and a major concern for large scale 

applications. [4,5] The complex response of perovskite cells to a range of stimuli including 

light [6,7], moisture [8,9], oxygen [5], temperature, and electric field [10], means qualifying their 

use over extended periods requires an extensive set of measurements to unravel the complex 

interplay between the various physical mechanisms determining the overall power conversion 


2

efficiency (PCE). [11] Composition and structural heterogeneity in perovskites is also complex 

and the resultant interfaces with electron and hole transport layers are a particular concern for 

stability. [12]

Within this context, small-perturbation techniques such as impedance spectroscopy 

(IS) and Intensity-modulated photocurrent and photovoltage spectroscopies (IMPS and IMVS 

respectively) are powerful methods to characterize PSCs and their degradation pathways. [13]

The so-called Q response measured by these methods can be related to an equivalent circuit 

with the underlying physical processes being lumped as passive electrical components 

(resistances and capacitances). However, the complex behaviour of perovskite devices and 

their degradation pathways under ambient conditions leads to a strong spatial heterogeneity in 

the device response. Indeed, this spatial heterogeneity and its dependence on ambient 

conditions and cell structure may partially explain stark differences in IMPS measurements 

reported in the literature. Laser Beam Induced Current (LBIC) mapping of OPV’s [14–16] and 

perovskite cells clearly illustrates a strong heterogeneity across a wide range of planar [17–19]

and structures devices [20][21] Whilst some of these devices are expected to display large 

heterogeneity related to structure, it appears that degradation in planar structures with initially 

near uniform PCE generates a high degree of heterogeneity that exacerbates with time. For 

example, Song et al. used LBIC microscopy in an airtight environmental box to follow the 

heterogenous degradation and its reversibility in a MAPbI3 (or MAPI) cell under humid 

conditions. [22] Likewise, noise micro-spectroscopy of degraded MAPI cells also display a 

similar strong heterogeneity in cell response over extensive regions of a device. Yao et al. also 

carried out LBIC imaging of a complete cell under controlled exposure and noted interface 

degradation, particularly around the device edge. [23]

It stands to reason that making bulk IMPS measurements on such heterogeneous 

systems is not ideal as the measured transfer function Q represents an ensemble average over 

a sum of spatially variable resistances, not all necessarily the same type. Coupling LBIC 

microscopy and IMPS seems a particularly powerful union for correlating the locally resolved 

PCE with a specific interface or transport resistance as typically done with conventional IMPS. 

Being able to probe and measure the spatial variation of the transfer function across the active 

area enables a more complete characterization and potential refinement of equivalent circuits 

used. Furthermore, combining LBIC and IMPS in-situ and in-operando should provide an 

unprecedented ability to investigate PSC stability and degradation under controlled conditions 

as the ability of IMPS to discriminate between properties of interfaces, absorber, and ionic 


3

motion points towards monitoring these quantities spatially as the dynamics of the device 

evolve. The method may prove critical in better understanding and tracking the decomposition 

of perovskite cells subjected to a variety of stimuli. In this work we introduce IMPS 

microscopy and use it to study the spatial dependence of moisture related degradation in a 

back-contact device and illustrate how moisture ingress from the cell periphery readily 

degrades device performance. It is important to point out that this article’s primary aim is to 

introduce the method; latter papers will focus on its application to the stability of PSCs.

2. Background Theory

2.1. Intensity-modulated photocurrent spectroscopy

Frequency domain techniques such as impedance spectroscopy (IS) and intensity-

modulated photocurrent or photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS)
[13,24,25] rely on 

measuring the response of a device to a small AC perturbation whilst biased at some DC level 

typical of its operation. IMPS measures the modulated current response 𝑗ẽ to an applied 

modulated small perturbation of light intensity (expressed as a current density 𝑗ϕ
̃ ) as 

displayed in Figure 1. The modulation is then varied over a range of frequencies resulting in a 

dispersion relationship or transfer function Q given by: (14) 

𝑄(𝜔) = 𝑗ẽ 𝑗ϕ̃
⁄
.
(1)

The IMPS measurement yields information on the differential external quantum efficiency 

(𝐸𝑄𝐸PV−diff) of the device through the low frequency limit of the transfer function, given by: 

𝑄(0) = 𝑑𝑗̅e 𝑑𝑗̅ϕ
⁄
,
(2)

where 𝑗̅

e and 𝑗̅

ϕ are the steady-state photocurrent and photon current, respectively. [26] Note 

that IMPS can be carried out at any given steady-state condition with any voltage or light 

intensity. For IMPS, the experimentally measured AC transfer function of the device 𝑄(𝜔) is 

a unit-less complex variable given by:

𝑄(𝜔) = 𝑄′(𝜔) + 𝑖𝑄"(𝜔).
(3)

Since there is no active gain in these devices, Q ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 being the condition 

for complete extraction of generated electron-hole pairs.


4

Figure 1. Definition of the IMPS transfer function – ratio of the measured AC current 
response 𝑗ẽ at various frequencies due to a small perturbation in photon flux Φ̃ expressed as a 

current density 𝑗ϕ
̃, from a given steady state (quantities with overbar). Taken with permission 

from (14).

IMPS can reveal multiple processes over a broad frequency range, resulting in 

numerous arcs and loops on a Nyquist plot. By scanning modulation frequency , one can 

decouple kinetics attributed to inherent physical mechanisms by essentially compressing the 

dynamic range of the measured photocurrent to the associated sub-circuit of the equivalent 

circuit. In a sense, device components are seen to behave with an “optoelectrical inertia” 

which responds to a particular frequency band.

The analysis of IMPS spectra of solar cells is usually carried out by either of two 

methods. The first method employs the use of equivalent circuit (EC) modelling to predict the 

IMPS response in terms of passive electrical elements (resistances, capacitances, and 

inductors).[24–26] The advantage of this method is both its simplicity and ease of fitting to EC 

models whilst allowing extrapolation with other frequency domain techniques to obtain high 

reliability in the fitted parameters. [26] However, this method is limited to cases where there is 

no electric field within the absorber, and where there is no significant gradient in carrier 

concentration within the absorbing layer i.e., the diffusion length 𝐿 ≫ 𝑑 (the layer thickness). 

It also requires a well-established EC, which is still under debate for PSCs. The second 

method, and the one employed here, uses the solution of the diffusion-recombination model to 

obtain characteristic parameters of transport and recombination. [24] This method was applied 


5

extensively to study dye-sensitized solar cells [25] and has recently been applied to perovskite 

solar cells. [27]

2.2. Diffusion-recombination transfer function

Following the process described by Peter et al. [28] and Bisquert et al [29], one can 

establish an analytical model for the transfer function Q by solving the continuity equation for 

electronic carrier flow within a cell of thickness, d. With the perovskite material assumed to 

be approximately intrinsic in nature, carrier transport is ambipolar and the device is in high-

level injection conditions (𝑛̅ = 𝑝̅ , where 𝑛̅ and 𝑝̅ are the steady-state electron and hole 

concentrations). The continuity equation for electrons in steady state (overbar) is given by:

𝜕𝑛̅

𝜕𝑡 =

1

𝑞

𝜕𝑗̅

𝜕𝑧 + 𝐺̅ − 𝑈̅,
(4)

where z is the depth into the absorber and 𝐺̅ (cm-3s-1) and 𝑈̅ (cm-3s-1) are the generation and 

recombination rates respectively and 𝑗̅ is the electron current density. The generation term for 

the perturbing light source with photon current density 𝑗𝛷̅ is given by the Beer-Lambert law:

𝐺̅ =

𝑗Φ
̅̅̅̅

𝑞 𝛼𝑒−𝛼𝑧.
(5)

where 𝛼 is the absorption coefficient. The recombination term is governed by Shockley-Read-

Hall (SRH) recombination which is simply:

𝑈̅ =

𝑛̅𝑝̅−𝑛i

2

𝑛̅𝜏p+𝑝̅𝜏n

,
(6)

where 𝑛i is the intrinsic carrier concentration and 𝜏n and 𝜏p are the electron and hole lifetimes 

respectively [30]. For the typical high-level injection regime studied here, we have 𝑛̅ = 𝑝̅ ≫ 𝑛i, 

which yields:

𝑈̅ =

𝑛̅

𝜏p+𝜏n

.
(7)

Substituting equations (5), (6) and (7) in equation (4) and applying a small perturbation in 

photon current (tilde indicates modulated AC quantities), we obtain:


6

Light generated carriers also determine the bulk recombination rate: under high injection the 

minority carrier lifetime tends to be dominated by radiative bimolecular recombination which 

decreases with injection reducing carrier lifetime and diffusion length by corollary. [31][32] For 

diffusion dominated devices such as the back-contact architecture, the electron current density 

J depends on diffusive flux 𝐽 = −𝐷

𝜕𝑛

𝜕𝑧 away from the surface illumination point as dictated by 

Fick’s law.

𝑑𝑛̃

𝑑𝑡 = 𝐷

𝑑2𝑛̃

𝑑𝑧2 +

𝑗Φ
̃

𝑞 𝛼𝑒−𝛼𝑧 −

𝑛̃

𝜏eff.
(8)

where the effective lifetime 𝜏eff = 𝜏n + 𝜏p. The above equation can be analytically solved in 

the frequency domain using the following boundary conditions:

𝜕𝑛̃(𝑥=0)

𝜕𝑧
= 0 (perfectly blocking contact)
(9)

𝑛̃(𝑑) = 0
(perfectly extracting contact)
(10)

The transfer function as derived by Peter [28], Bisquert et al. [33] and Bou et al.[27] is given by: 

𝑄(𝜔) =

1−𝑒−𝛼𝑑(
𝑝

𝛼𝐿amb sinh( 𝑝𝑑

𝐿amb)+cosh( 𝑝𝑑

𝐿amb))

(1−(
𝑝

𝛼𝐿amb)

2

)cosh( 𝑝𝑑

𝐿amb)

(15)

where 𝑝 = √1 + 𝑖

𝜔

𝜔rec and 𝜔𝑟𝑒𝑐 = 𝜏eff−1, 𝜔d = 𝐷amb 𝑑2
⁄
is the frequency of diffusion and 

𝜔𝑎 = 𝐷𝑛𝛼2is the frequency of absorption (18.23). The parameter d is the absorber thickness, 

 is the absorption coefficient at wavelength  and Damb is the ambipolar diffusivity related to 

the ambipolar diffusion length 𝐿ambvia 𝐿amb = √𝐷amb𝜏eff . For the case where the RC time 

constant of the cell limits the measurement bandwidth, the adjusted transfer function is 

simply:

𝑄𝑚(𝜔) = 𝑄(𝜔) ∙ 𝐴(𝜔) (16)

where the attenuation function A is that of an RC network given by (20): 

𝐴(𝜔) =

1

1+𝑖𝜔𝑅𝑠𝐶𝑔 .
(17)

In the low-frequency limit 𝜔 → 0 where attenuation 𝐴 → 1 , the transfer function approaches:


7

𝑄(𝜔 → 0) =

1−𝑒−𝛼𝑑( 1

𝛼𝐿𝑎 sinh( 𝑑

𝐿𝑎)+cosh( 𝑑

𝐿𝑎))

(1−( 1

𝛼𝐿𝑎)

2

)cosh( 𝑑

𝐿𝑎)
.
(18)

Fitting a spline to the function  𝑄(𝜔 → 0) as shown in Appendix 3.3 allows one to construct a 

look-up table to convert low frequency Q’ images into maps of 𝐿amb. This assumes the 

absence of other low-frequency processes such as ionic movement as discussed in the results 

section.

2.2.1. Modelling Spectra

Using the above model, a series of simulations were performed to observe the spectral 

shapes generated for varying absorption, transport, and recombination frequencies ( 𝜔𝑎,𝜔𝑑

and 𝜔rec respectively). Optical absorption parameters including extinction coefficients k for 

thin film MAPbI3 were taken from Leguy et al. [34] The first set of calculations examines the 

influence of Lamb (𝜔𝑑) and  (𝜔𝑎) on Q for a fixed absorber thickness of 0.5m (derived from 

cross-sectional SEM measurements introduced later). Results of simulations are displayed in 

Figures 2 and Figure 1S. As reported by Pockett et al. [35,36] and Bou et al [27,37], an arc is 

formed with increasing frequency with Q eventually moving into the 2nd quadrant beyond 

some critical high frequency (𝜔𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡) which increases with decreasing  (increasing  or 

decreasing 𝜔𝑎) for all diffusion lengths. For  > 650 nm or so, Q does not enter the 2nd

quadrant since 1/ is comparable to or even greater than d. Similar behaviour is seen with 

decreasing 𝐿𝑎𝑚𝑏 (or 𝜔𝑑) except that |𝑄| decreases as less charge is extracted (EQE reduces). 

At longer wavelengths close to 700 nm Q curves display the Warburg impedance represented 

by a straight 45o degree line to zero. [33] Values for 𝜔𝑟𝑒𝑐, 𝜔𝑑 and 𝜔𝑎 as defined by equations 

in the previous section, are given on each curve. Figure represents the same data with Q’ and 

Q” plotted versus frequency. Note the difficulty in assigning a dominant process to the peak 

of the arc when no single frequency (𝜔𝑑 or 𝜔rec) sits at the peak.


8

Now examine the influence of attenuation when the RsCg time constant 𝜏𝑅𝐶 is similar 

to or less than diffusion transport and recombination speeds. This scenario is highly relevant 

to data collected here as discussed later. Figure 2S summarises results for the case of 𝜏𝑅𝐶= 25 

s (typical Rs values are between 1-5 Ωcm2 and Cg ~ 10-7 Fcm-2 for a 300 nm-thick PSC) with 

a diffusion length of 20 m, 1.0 m and 0.25 m corresponding to diffusion frequencies d

greater than 50 MHz, 160 kHz and 10 kHz, respectively. The spectra are very similar 

irrespective of the magnitude of 𝐿𝑎𝑚𝑏 ,making it difficult to separate RC effects from 

diffusion-recombination behaviour. For longer diffusion lengths, the RC time constant 

dominates the Q-plot and as d increases, the level of excursion into the 2nd and 3rd quadrant 

reduces with the 3rd quadrant contribution disappearing faster than the 2nd. Only short 

diffusion lengths display a dip into the 3rd quadrant as seen in Figure 2S(b) where some 

information can potentially be extracted from Q-plots if RsCg can be independently measured 

and fitted out. Furthermore, we note that IMPS measurement systems possess upper limits to 

the measurement frequency of between 200-300 kHz, making it more difficult to rely on the 

validity of the high frequency data. In general, the high-frequency IMPS response of thin-film 

PSCs is typically RC limited (geometric capacitance is charged through a series resistance) 

and does not normally reveal information about recombination and/or transport processes [36]. 

Under these conditions however, IMPS imaging should allow mapping of series resistance, 

itself an extremely useful parameter for photovoltaics. 


9

Figure 2. Nyquist Q plots versus  from 350 nm (black) to 750 nm (blue) for diffusion lengths 
ranging from 1 m to 0.25 m with a 0.5 m thick absorbing layer. Also shown are the 
respective values of 𝜔𝑟𝑒𝑐, 𝜔𝑑 and 𝜔𝑎. Shown in the top right figure is the direction of the Q
curve as 𝜔 → 0.

2.3. IMPS Imaging and Laser Beam Induced Current Microscopy

Performing IMPS microscopy relies on adapting already existing methods such as 

Laser or Optical Beam Induced Current (LBIC) microscopy. LBIC and OBIC are both widely 

employed throughout the semiconductor industry [38–44] The PV mapper illustrated here differs 

from a typical LBIC setup in that it measures a photoimpedance vector at each pixel. Unlike 

LBIC, which typically uses a DC or even pulsed beam [43], here the illumination 𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑡) has 

two terms as shown in equation (9). The first term 𝐼𝑜is widefield illumination of the sample 

typically set to ~1 sun and 𝛿(𝑥, 𝑦) is the beam spot profile scanned across the device with a 


10

rate dependent on the time for demodulation at each frequency, f. The overall equation for the 

intensity at any point in time is 

𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑡) = 𝐼𝑜 + 𝛿(𝑥, 𝑦) sin(2𝜋𝑓)) (9)

The background illumination 𝐼𝑜which light biases the device is another point where this 

technique differs from typical LBIC. A simple diagram for the IMPS imaging setup is given 

in Figure 3 and consists of a large area galvanometer scanner for cells up to ~10×10 cm. A 

large area format was chosen for this work as the aim is to eventually scan larger cells to 

investigate scaling issues. However, the same setup is also being installed on a confocal 

microscope for high resolution studies. In addition, it includes a temperature stage (not used 

here) and a J-V measurement system. Software for the system includes the capability to batch 

jobs to fully automate parameter space investigations. For example, IMPS image versus 

frequency as a function of time with JV (light and dark) can be collected after each frequency.

Figure 3. A simplified schematic of the LBIC system used for IMPS imaging of perovskite 
cells. The system is arranged in the vertical configuration shown with the laser source (532 
nm) being scanned across the solar cell using a galvanometric scanning mirror prior to which 
the beam power is measured. Contacts to transport layers can be made with micromanipulator 
probes (left and right). The differential current is preamplifier and fed into a lock-in-amplifier. 
The same lock-in provide a reference modulation signal which controls the laser output. A 
temperature stage also exists but is not used here. A reflectivity probe can also collect an 
image of the surface for alignment and dust inspection etc.


11

3. Experimental

3.1 Data Collected on Back Contact Sample

A brief example of the methods application to a novel back contact PSC is given with 

an emphasis on the technique’s imaging aspects. With traditional sandwich structures 

approaching their PCE limits, new architectures are required to further improve the PCE of 

perovskite solar cells. [45] The back contact cell has the typical sandwich structure replaced by 

alternately interdigitated contacts. The architecture of the cell compared to a standard p-i-n or 

inverted structure is shown in Figure 4 (a-c). Note the cell does have an encapsulation around 

the periphery to prolong its lifetime with respect to moisture. A previously reported SEM 

imaging of the device cross-section indicated an electrode gap of 2 um, ~200 nm thick fingers 

and an approximate 500 nm thick MAPbI3 absorber layer is also shown in Figure 4 (d).

Details on fabrication including the use of ZnO and NiOx as the electron selective layer (ESL) 

and hole selective layer (HSL), respectively are detailed by Jumabekov et al. [20]. The typical 

PCE for this architecture is around 3.5%. 

The main advantage of this architecture for IMPS measurements is that top 

illumination ensures electrons and holes diffuse vertically through the 500 nm thick absorber 

for collection at their respective contacts which are spaced laterally spaced 2 µm apart. This 

gap and electrode orientation ensures the RC attenuation frequency (𝜔att = 1/𝑅s𝐶g) of a 

fresh device remains high enough to not significantly influence the measured spectra 

(between 125 Hz and 25 kHz). This is not the case for a degraded device as shown later. J-V

measurements on a fresh device indicated an open circuit voltage of ~0.95 V at a light bias of 

~1 sun. Measurements of Voc versus time on a similar batch of samples indicate the open-

circuit voltage stabilises within several seconds of DC illumination even after the onset of 

degradation. Using the same device, a 532 nm beam with relatively low power (~200 W) 

was raster scanned across the cell and an IMPS image recorded at 1 kHz as shown in Figure 5. 

Low powers were employed to keep the signal perturbation as small as possible and to avoid 

other phases appearing. Barbe et al. noted the generation of PbI2 islands in a MAPI device for 

irradiation powers in the mW regime [46]. The same study reported a slight increase in 

photocurrent for low power irradiations like that performed here. 

It is worth noting the caveat of rapid large area scanning is the loss in spatial 

resolution to around 10 m or so for the system devised here. The broader laser profile used 


12

here ensures a near uniform e-h pair generation profile across the electrode gap. Image z-

values are Q values determined by the lock-in response and that of a calibrated Si 

photodetector (A/W) (30 µA/mW at 532 nm).

Figure 4. Architectural schematic of the back-contact device (b) compared to its predecessor 
designs (a) and (c). (d) Laser absorption causes a sharp distribution of carriers near the surface 
of the device since 1/ << d at ~532 nm. Carriers diffuse towards the electrode structure and 
are separated once they feel any drift field between the electrodes which remains highly 
localized due to perovskites high dielectric constant. Bottom SEM image taken with 
permission from Jumabekov et al. [20], Royal Society of Chemistry.

Figure 5. A 5×5 mm top illumination IMPS map taken at 1 kHz on the fresh cell with a Voc of 
~0.95 V.


13

The device was then stored in the dark in a low humidity cabinet for about 2 weeks 

after which it was mounted on the LBIC microscope with humidity around 50% for ~2 weeks.

According to Song et al. the hydration of the MAPI layer is probably irreversible for this 

length of exposure [22]. Measurements of Voc versus time on a similar batch of samples 

indicate the open-circuit voltage stabilizes within several seconds of DC illumination even 

after degradation dropped it to less than ½ its original value. A series of 5×5mm scans with 

modulation frequency varied from 125 Hz to 25 kHz was then performed with the resultant 

images displayed in Figure 6. What is immediately apparent is that heterogeneity in the 

degraded response occurs over a range of length scales well beyond that of the electrode 

patterning and up to a significant fraction of cell dimension clearly highlighting the need for 

large area mapping. Note the Q > 1 values at low frequency ( <1 kHz) are related to 10-20% 

error in the extrapolated laser power. They do not affect interpretation or measurements at 

higher frequencies.

4. Results and Discussion

4.1 Results

Analysis of IMPS images generally follows similar principles to bulk IMPS spectra 

where data is plotted on a complex Q plane and results in several arcs, generally in the upper 

1st or 2nd quadrant. [13] Here however, we extend that analysis by extracting information from 

either the entire cell or specific regions of interest (ROI). The response of the entire cell is 

given in Figure 7 and surprisingly covers all 4 quadrants starting in the 3rd quadrant at 125 Hz 

and moving counter clockwise with increasing modulation into the 1st and finally 2nd

quadrant at high frequency. 


14

Figure 6. |𝑄| images taken on the back-contact cell from 125Hz to 25 kHz after 1-2 weeks 
exposure to ambient conditions (~50% humidity). The large square shown at 250 Hz is the the 
shape for data representing the entire cell shown in Figure 7. The shapes shown at 25 kHz are 
used for local extractions in bright and dark areas. Note the dark contours displayed in the 3-5 
kHz frequency band.


15

Figure 7. (Left) -Q” vs Q plots versus frequency from 125 Hz to 5 kHz for the entire device 
(excluding surrounding area as shown by dotted square in Figure 6). (Right) Same plot 
continued from 10 kHz to 25 kHz. Unlike bulk IMPS, here single frequencies display entire 
arc distributions.

Each frequency displays a unique arc-like distribution spanning a large range in |𝑄| and phase 

values related predominantly the frequency dependence of the underlying physical 

mechanism. Under these conditions, it clearly makes more sense to use a ROI to section 

frequency analysis into specific regions to better understand the behaviour of the local

transfer function 𝑄𝑥𝑦(𝜔). For this purpose, we define numerous bright (high |𝑄|) and dark 

(low |𝑄|) regions representative of the heterogeneity in the cell response for frequencies 

above 2 kHz. A polygon and circle represent the typical bright response whereas a triangle, 

rectangle and oval represent the dark, with the tringle having the strongest negative behaviour 

as seen from the 25 kHz image in the top section of Figure 11. Below 1 kHz, the images tend 

to display large negative photocurrents (Q’ is negative) and significantly higher levels of 

noise related to ionic polarization as illustrated by the 125 Hz image.


16

Figure 8: (Left) Q response in the rectangle/oval dark region has a loop which starts in the 4th

quadrant at low frequency, moves through a peak between 2 and 3 kHz and then moves 
strongly into the 3rd quadrant. After this it follows a similar behavior as the bright region and 
finishes in the 2nd quadrant. Note the cubic spline over emphasizes the loopback. (Right) Q
response in the polygon/circle regions follows are more typical IMPS curve, starting in the 4th

quadrant below 1 kHz before moving into the 1st and finishing in the 2nd quadrant. 

Note the response starts in the 4th quadrant at frequencies below 1 kHz and ends in 2rd or 3rd

quadrant at high frequencies > 10 kHz. Large responses in the 3rd quadrant at mid frequencies 

seem related to “dark” regions bounded by the dark contours seen in the 4-5 kHz range.

Shown in the 25 kHz image are the assorted shapes representing areas (bright and dark) where 

further extractions were made and displayed in Figure 8. On the right side are loops extracted 

from the polygon/circle whereas the left side displays results from the rectangle/oval (the 

triangle displays similar features). The bright and dark regions show the same general trends 

as IMPS in thin-film PSCs, where an arc is observed in the Q plane, with larger Q’ values and 

hence higher photocurrents at lower frequencies, while the Q’ value and hence photocurrent 

drops at higher frequencies. However, the Q plots in the dark areas are noticably different 

with large excusions into the 3rd quadrant before returing to the 2nd quadrant. Plots of Q’ and -

Q” versus frequency for the same regions are shown in Figure 9. Finally, Figure 10,11

display the Q’xy images and the total Q’ histograms as a function of frequency. The dashed lines 

in all Q plots are spline fits to the separate Q’() and Q”() plots projected back onto the Nyquist 

plane. These results are discussed in the next section.


17

Figure 9: (Left) 25 kHz |𝑄| image showing three regions from which arcs were extracted as 
shown in the right plot. Two of the regions (polygon and circle) are high points in this image 
whilst the third is a dark region (triangle). Included below in in the -Q” vs Q’ plot is the 1kHz 
data which seems to indicate a second feature or arc towards the LF regime as expected. The 
oval region on the far right of the DUT consistently displays higher values but seems to have 
a similar arc radius and peak frequency around 3.5 kHz (Bottom) Q’ and Q” versus frequency 
for the bottom square and right oval regions in the figure. The distribution within the shape is 
a red circle whereas its average is cyan. A cubic spline fit to the data is used to extract the 
peak frequency and time constant, . As shown in (a) and (c) respectively,  values for both 
regions are similar (0.278 and 0.281ms).


18

Figure 10. Q’ images spanning 1 kHz to 25 kHz illustrating the gradual change into negative 
photocurrent territory starting around the edges at 3 kHz.

Figure 11. Total Q’ log scale histograms spanning 1 kHz to 25 kHz illustrating a general 
move into negative photocurrent territory starting around the edges at 3 kHz. The blue line 
displays the zero point in each spectrum. Between 3-5 kHz the negative currents are very 
large (3rd quadrant) and similar in magnitude to the positive contributions. Beyond this they 
decrease in amplitude as they move into the 2nd quadrant. The signal is completely negative 
above 15 kHz.


19

4.2 Discussion

Large heterogeneities in the degraded cell response seem to stem from the outer rims 

and move into the device proper which seems consistent with the fact that MAPbI3 being 

hydroscopic absorbs moisture from the device periphery once the encapsulation fails. Initially 

let us focus on the low-frequency response where diffusion length maps can be estimated. The 

more complex higher frequency response is then discussed for the bright (high |𝑄|) and dark 

(low |𝑄|) regions represented by the assorted shapes shown in Figure 6. Note that whilst we

term regions bright and dark, this does not refer to a high or low PCE but simply a positive or 

negative intensity for a specific frequency or band. A direct map of PCE is more likely to 

resemble the diffusion map. Note this discussion is designed to illustrate the advantages of an 

imaging IMPS and more detailed discussion will ensue in time as the technique is refined with 

respect to some of the complex behaviour outlined below. Some complications in the method 

and interpretation of results such as non-uniform beam excitation and light induced 

degradation are briefly discussed in Section 4 of the SI.

As outlined in Section 2.2, it is possible to extract a map of the ambipolar diffusion

length using the low-frequency limit of 𝑄(𝜔) where the attenuation factor approaches unity. 

However, IMPS models presented earlier are based on carrier transport and do not account for 

ionic motion which is known to dictate the very low frequency response due to their large 

effective masses[47]. Compared to other dynamical processes, ion migration can be an 

extremely slow process typically occurring from ms to seconds [48,49] Calculating diffusion 

maps must therefore chose a frequency which is fast enough to avoid ionic movement but 

slow enough to avoid RC attenuation. In this context, image noise represents a useful proxy 

for detecting the transition frequency above which ionic movement does not dominate the 

response. Here, image noise was found to markedly increase below 1 kHz as seen by the 

photocurrent horizontal striations in Figure 6. Using the measured absorber thickness of 0.5 

m and absorption length 1/ of 0.105 m (at 532 nm), the 1 kHz image was therefore 

converted to a map of ambipolar diffusion length and displayed in Figure 12. The top half of 

the device has clearly degraded faster than the bottom with all shapes given in Figure 6

exhibiting degraded Lamb compared to the relatively undamaged region near the lower right

edge. It is difficult to postulate as to why the bottom right edge seems relatively protected 

except to speculate that encapsulation did not fail in this region like it did in the rest.


20

To the right of the figure is a histogram plot indicating the total scan (black) as well as a 

representative portion of the background (BACK) which is green. A square around the cell is 

blue. The assorted ROIs defined in Figure 7 are represented by the polygon plot (red). We 

find a significant variation of the diffusion length between 400-800 nm, indicating a 

significant variation of the spatial collection efficiency, which can be a severe limiting factor 

to the overall PCE of the cell upon widefield illumination. The pre-degradation value in this 

material ranges from ~1-1.5m [20].

Figure 12. Map of ambipolar diffusion lrength generated from the 1kHz Q’ map. The devce 
reponse as seen from the cell histogram (blue) ranges from ~400 nm in the dark regions such 
as the polygon (red) region used earlier through to 800 nm in the bottom right. The 
background signal provides a false measurement from the noise threshold of around 100 nm 
up to around 300nm or so as seen by the green plot. 

Now consider the mid-to-high frequency data beyond 2 kHz. As seen in Figure 9, data 

extracted from polygon and circle exhibit a loop that crosses into the 2nd quadrant at around 

𝜔𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 =10 kHz or so. The shape of the loop appears less semi-circular towards the low 

frequency end probably due to remnant ionic polarization. However, the data does produce an 

arc with a peak in Q’ with corresponding  ranging from 0.27 to 0.39 ms. If diffusion did 

dominate the arc, the resultant d would be orders of magnitude lower than expected unless

Lamb was extremely small or the lifetime eff unrealistically long (𝜔d = (𝐿amb √𝜏eff𝑑
⁄
)2). 

However, whilst Lamb values have decreased from their pre-degradation values, the decrease is 

not nearly large enough to explain this discrepancy. For example, a cell thickness of 0.5 m 

and d of 3.6 kHz would result in a diffusion coefficient of 9×10-6 cm2/s, which is orders of 

magnitude smaller than those recently reported in the literature. [50]. Rather, examining the 

simulations for RC attenuation presented in Figure 2S immediately confirms these 


21

measurements to be heavily attenuated as expected for a large area device (higher capacitance 

𝐶𝑔 )
and a series resistance Rs which generally increases with degradation due to 

compositional change (higher resistivity). Using the model outlined earlier with the median 

Lamb of ~0.5 m in the polygon region, Q’ and -Q” plots versus  were calculated for  = 532 

nm and eff = 25 ns. The RC time constant was altered to give a peak in -Q” equal to 3.6 kHz

(experimental value) with the plots generated given in Figure 13. Both the amplitudes as well 

as frequencies of the peak position (kHz) and 𝜔𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 all agree to within 10% of the measured 

values suggesting this regions response is indeed limited by its series resistance. Furthermore, 

this agreement does tend to place confidence in the Lamb values extracted earlier.

However, as noted in the 𝑄𝑥𝑦
′ (𝜔) images of Figure 10, not all regions behave similarly with 

areas like the triangle region displaying more complex behaviour or a much higher series 

resistance. Generally, however, the higher frequency images tend to be similar and can be 

seen as proxy maps of inverse series resistance and could be scaled into resistance if Cg is 

known (not done here). Dark regions represent higher series resistance and vice versa for 

bright regions.

Figure 13. -Q” and Q’ versus  simulations using the experimental parameters and measured 
POLY value of Lamb = 0.5 m. 𝑅𝑠𝐶𝑔 was set to give -Q” peak at 3.6 kHz. The plots agree to 
within 10% of the POLY shape extractions.

With 𝜔𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑡 being dependent on diffusion length, one would expect its heterogeneity across the 

device to explain why some regions become negative at lower frequencies as shown in Figure 

10,11. However, whilst the first region to become negative in the 3rd quadrant is around the 

edge at 3 kHz where Lamb has been drastically lowered, the high Lamb region near the bottom 

right is inconsistent with a dependence on Lamb. Furthermore, the polygon region which 

displays a lower Lamb than its surrounding, remains positive whilst the area around it becomes 


22

negative at 10 kHz. It would seem the effects of series resistance (lower in the polygon) and 

ambipolar diffusion length (lower in the polygon) are competing to determine contrast at mid 

to high frequencies.

Clearly the most troublesome data to explain is the presence of a bimodal distribution in 

negative values. The first distribution occurring from 3-5 kHz are predominantly in the 3rd

quadrant and have large amplitudes as seen in Figures 7,8 and 11. The second distribution 

has much smaller values and seems associated with transitions into the 2nd quadrant at 

frequencies beyond 5 kHz or so. This second distribution is expected at higher frequencies as 

predicted by IMPS models. Indeed, said model predicts movement into the 3rd quadrant would 

occur at much higher frequencies than those applied here and would result in a miniscule |𝑄|

(see Figure 2 for example). The exact nature of the first distribution linked to the degradation 

related dark contours including those around the edge in Figure 6 remains a mystery. An 

example Q curve for such a dark region is typified by the curve in the rectangle ROI seen in 

Figure 8 (left). The large excursion into the 3rd quadrant is unlikely to be related to ionic 

movement and appears confined to very specific regions of the device. Indeed, they appear to 

follow almost corrosive like pathways emanating from the device periphery starting at 3 kHz. 

Based on the shapes of these contours, it is tempting to assign them to interfacial 

recombination related to defect ingression from oxidative attack as done by Yao et al.[51]

Interfacial recombination has been shown to result in large negative spikes in Transient 

Photocurrent and Photovoltage measurements [52] and successfully correlated with ionic 

distributions (not movement) near an interface. The presence of ions near an interface alters 

the potential landscape giving rise to valleys which cause large photocurrents to initially flow 

in opposite directions [53] which could explain the very large phase shifts. In fresh devices,

these negative responses reduce with increased light soaking according to Yao et al. Although, 

most interfaces in this device are along the electrode distribution, these interfaces are 

relatively protected by the relatively large distances to the device periphery where oxidative 

attack begins. Once an attack has been seeded it stands to reason that these points of ingress 

become focal points of further attack. Furthermore, heterogenous compositional change and 

phase segregation over larger scales would lead to interfaces with much lower surface 

recombination velocities by comparison and larger recombination rates (low 𝜏𝑒𝑓𝑓). 


23

5. Conclusion

In summary, we have presented a novel new implementation of IMPS imaging which we 

envisage becoming a versatile method for investigating degradation and stability in next 

generation photovoltaic cells. The potential of the method to spatially resolving the IMPS 

response has been explored on a moisture degraded back-contact perovskite solar cell. 

Ambipolar diffusion maps at low frequency and corrosive like morphology in the IMPS maps 

at higher frequencies illustrate the level of heterogeneity that bulk IMPS would simply 

average over. Series resistance is shown to limit the high frequency response thereby 

providing proxy maps for its variation across a device. Possible interfacial recombination 

linked to halide ions was conjectured to cause large negative photocurrents along the 

corrosive pathways although more work is necessary to prove this point. In summary, the 

technique is able to separate the various components leading to cell degradation thereby 

providing a unique tool for better understanding cell degradation at scales of important for 

commercial applications.

6. Acknowledgements

Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

The table of contents entry should be 50–60 words long and should be written in the present 

tense. The text should be different from the abstract text.

7. References

[1]
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai, T. Miyasaka, J Am Chem Soc 2009, 131, 6050.

[2]
H. J. Snaith, Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2013, 4, 3623.

[3]
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie, H. J. Snaith, Nature Photonics 2014, 8, 506.

[4]
S. Castro-Hermosa, S. K. Yadav, L. Vesce, A. Guidobaldi, A. Reale, A. di Carlo, T. M. 
Brown, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 2017, 50, DOI 10.1088/1361-
6463/50/3/033001.

[5]
T. A. Berhe, W. N. Su, C. H. Chen, C. J. Pan, J. H. Cheng, H. M. Chen, M. C. Tsai, L. 
Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale, B. J. Hwang, Energy and Environmental Science 2016, 9, DOI 
10.1039/c5ee02733k.


24

[6]
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. 
Wheeler, J. R. Durrant Ab, S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci 2016, 9, 1655.

[7]
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Qiu, Journal of Materials Chemistry A
2014, 2, DOI 10.1039/c3ta13606j.

[8]
A. K. Mishra, R. K. Shukla ⇑, n.d., DOI 10.1016/j.matpr.2020.04.872.

[9]
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, 
M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo, P. R. F. Barnes, 
Chemistry of Materials 2015, 27, DOI 10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b00660.

[10]
S. Bae, S. Kim, S. W. Lee, K. J. Cho, S. Park, S. Lee, Y. Kang, H. S. Lee, D. Kim, 
Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2016, 7, DOI 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b01176.

[11]
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens, M. D. McGehee, Chemical Reviews 2019, 
119, DOI 10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00336.

[12]
E. M. Tennyson, T. A. S Doherty, S. D. Stranks, n.d., DOI 10.1038/s41578-019-0125-
0.

[13]
S. Ravishankar, A. Riquelme, S. K. Sarkar, M. Garcia-Batlle, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. 
Bisquert, Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2019, 123, DOI 10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b07434.

[14]
T. A. Bull, L. S. C. Pingree, S. A. Jenekhe, D. S. Ginger, C. K. Luscombe, ACS Nano
2009, 3, DOI 10.1021/nn800878c.

[15]
F. C. Krebs, R. Søndergaard, M. Jørgensen, Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells
2011, 95, 1348.

[16]
R. Rösch, D. M. Tanenbaum, M. Jørgensen, M. Seeland, M. Bärenklau, M. Hermenau, 
E. Voroshazi, M. T. Lloyd, Y. Galagan, B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel, M. Hösel, H. F. 
Dam, S. A. Gevorgyan, S. Kudret, W. Maes, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, R. Andriessen, 
G. Teran-Escobar, M. Lira-Cantu, A. Rivaton, G. Y. Uzunoǧlu, D. Germack, B. 
Andreasen, M. v. Madsen, K. Norrman, H. Hoppe, F. C. Krebs, Energy and 
Environmental Science 2012, 5, DOI 10.1039/c2ee03508a.

[17] S. Mastroianni, F. D. Heinz, J. Im, W. Veurman, M. Padilla, M. C. Schubert, U. Würfel, 

M. Grätzel, N. Park, A. C. Hinsch, Nanoscale 2015, 7, DOI 10.1039/c5nr05308k.

[18]
G. E. Eperon, D. Moerman, D. S. Ginger, 2016, DOI 10.1021/acsnano.6b05825.

[19]
D. Yamashita, T. Handa, T. Ihara, H. Tahara, A. Shimazaki, A. Wakamiya, Y. 
Kanemitsu, 2016, DOI 10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b01231.

[20]
A. N. Jumabekov, E. della Gaspera, Z. Q. Xu, A. S. R. Chesman, J. van Embden, S. A. 
Bonke, Q. Bao, D. Vak, U. Bach, Journal of Materials Chemistry C 2016, 4, 3125.

[21]
X. Lin, S. R. Raga, A. S. R. Chesman, Q. Ou, L. Jiang, Q. Bao, J. Lu, Y. B. Cheng, U. 
Bach, Nano Energy 2020, 67, DOI 10.1016/j.nanoen.2019.104223.

[22]
Z. Song, A. Abate, S. C. Watthage, G. K. Liyanage, A. B. Phillips, U. Steiner, M. 
Graetzel, M. J. Heben, Advanced Energy Materials 2016, 6, DOI 
10.1002/aenm.201600846.

[23]
Y. Yao, G. Wang, F. Wu, D. Liu, C. Lin, X. Rao, R. Wu, G. Zhou, Q. Song, RSC 
Advances 2017, 7, DOI 10.1039/c7ra06423c.

[24]
L. Dloczik, O. Ileperuma, I. Lauermann, L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev, G. Redmond, 
N. J. Shaw, I. Uhlendorf, Journal of Physical Chemistry B 1997, 101, DOI 
10.1021/jp972466i.

[25]
J. Halme, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2011, 13, DOI 10.1039/c1cp21134j.

[26]
S. Ravishankar, C. Aranda, S. Sanchez, J. Bisquert, M. Saliba, G. Garcia-Belmonte, 
Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2019, 123, DOI 10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b01187.

[27]
A. Bou, H. Ā Boliņš, A. Ashoka, H. Cruanyes, A. Guerrero, F. Deschler, J. Bisquert, 
ACS Energy Letters 2021, 6, DOI 10.1021/acsenergylett.1c00871.

[28]
L. M. Peter, Chemical Reviews 1990, 90, DOI 10.1021/cr00103a005.

[29]
J. Bisquert, M. Janssen, Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2021, 12, DOI 
10.1021/acs.jpclett.1c02065.


25

[30]
S. M. Sze, K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd Edition.; John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc.; NJ 2007, 164.

[31]
S. D. Stranks, V. M. Burlakov, T. Leijtens, J. M. Ball, A. Goriely, H. J. Snaith, 
Physical Review Applied 2014, 2, 1.

[32]
Y. Chen, H. T. Yi, X. Wu, R. Haroldson, Y. N. Gartstein, Y. I. Rodionov, K. S. 
Tikhonov, A. Zakhidov, X. Y. Zhu, V. Podzorov, Nature Communications 2016, 7, 
DOI 10.1038/ncomms12253.

[33]
J. Bisquert, Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2002, 106, DOI 10.1021/jp011941g.

[34]
A. M. A. Leguy, P. Azarhoosh, M. I. Alonso, M. Campoy-Quiles, O. J. Weber, J. Yao, 
D. Bryant, M. T. Weller, J. Nelson, A. Walsh, M. van Schilfgaarde, P. R. F. Barnes, 
Nanoscale 2016, 8, DOI 10.1039/c5nr05435d.

[35]
A. Pockett, M. Spence, S. K. Thomas, D. Raptis, T. Watson, M. J. Carnie, Solar RRL
2021, 5, DOI 10.1002/SOLR.202100159.

[36]
A. Pockett, G. E. Eperon, T. Peltola, H. J. Snaith, A. Walker, L. M. Peter, P. J. 
Cameron, Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2015, 119, DOI 10.1021/jp510837q.

[37]
A. Bou, A. Pockett, D. Raptis, T. Watson, M. J. Carnie, J. Bisquert, Journal of Physical 
Chemistry Letters 2020, 11, DOI 10.1021/acs.jpclett.0c02459.

[38]
J. Carstensen, G. Popkirov, J. Bahr, H. Föll, in Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 
2003, pp. 599–611.

[39]
J. R. Sites, T. J. Nagle, in Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists 
Conference, 2005, pp. 199–204.

[40]
B. Moralejo, M. A. González, J. Jiménez, V. Parra, O. Martínez, J. Gutiérrez, O. 
Charro, Journal of Electronic Materials 2010, 39, 663.

[41]
P. Vorasayan, T. R. Betts, R. Gottschalg, Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells 2011, 
95, 111.

[42]
M. Acciarri, S. Binetti, A. Racz, S. Pizzini, G. Agostinelli, in Solar Energy Materials 
and Solar Cells, 2002, pp. 417–424.

[43]
J. S. Laird, Y. Chen, L. Scheick, T. Vo, A. Johnston, Review of Scientific Instruments
2008, 79, 1.

[44] J. S. Laird, B. C. Johnson, C. G. Ryan, Measurement Science and Technology 2012, 23, 

085401.

[45]
G. D. Tainter, M. T. Hörantner, L. M. Pazos-Outón, R. D. Lamboll, H. Āboliņš, T. 
Leijtens, S. Mahesh, R. H. Friend, H. J. Snaith, H. J. Joyce, F. Deschler, Joule 2019, 3, 
1301.

[46]
J. Barbé, M. Newman, S. Lilliu, V. Kumar, H. K. H. Lee, C. Charbonneau, C. 
Rodenburg, D. Lidzey, W. C. Tsoi, Journal of Materials Chemistry A 2018, 6, DOI 
10.1039/c8ta09536a.

[47]
S. Ravishankar, C. Aranda, P. P. Boix, J. A. Anta, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, 
Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2018, 9, DOI 10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b01245.

[48]
R. S. Sanchez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, J. W. Lee, N. G. Park, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero, J. 
Bisquert, Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2014, 5, DOI 10.1021/jz5011187.

[49]
R. Gottesman, E. Haltzi, L. Gouda, S. Tirosh, Y. Bouhadana, A. Zaban, E. Mosconi, F. 
de Angelis, Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2014, 5, DOI 10.1021/jz501373f.

[50] W. Li, M. S. R. Huang, S. K. Yadavalli, J. D. Lizarazo Ferro, Y. Zhou, A. Zaslavsky, N. 

P. Padture, R. Zia, ACS Photonics 2019, 6, DOI 10.1021/acsphotonics.9b00778.

[51]
Y. Yao, G. Wang, F. Wu, D. Liu, C. Lin, X. Rao, R. Wu, G. Zhou, Q. Song, RSC Adv.
2017, 7, 42973.

[52]
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O’Regan, P. R. F. Barnes, 
Nature Communications 2016, 7, DOI 10.1038/ncomms13831.


26

[53]
R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, P. Calado, X. Li, S. J. C. Irvine, M. D. 
McGehee, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, Energy and Environmental Science 2017, 
10, DOI 10.1039/c6ee02914k.

[54]
R. Guo, M. v. Khenkin, G. E. Arnaoutakis, N. A. Samoylova, J. Barbé, H. K. H. Lee, 
W. C. Tsoi, E. A. Katz, Solar RRL 2020, 4, DOI 10.1002/solr.201900270.

[55]
R. K. Misra, S. Aharon, B. Li, D. Mogilyansky, I. Visoly-Fisher, L. Etgar, E. A. Katz, 
Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2015, 6, DOI 10.1021/jz502642b.


27

Supporting Information 

1. Simulations

Figure 1S: Q” and Q’ plots versus frequency as a function of Lamb from 1m to 0.25m. With 
decreasing diffusion length, the frequency at which Q’ crosses into the 2nd quadrant (negative 
photocurrent) decreases from several hundred kHz to just over 10 kHz. The crossover into the 
3rd quadrant for Q” occurs at much higher frequencies but also reduces with decreasing Lamb. 
Note the frequencies are angular.


28

Figure 2S. (a) Q plots including RC attenuation for three cases where 𝜔𝑑=10 kHz (Lamb =0.25 
m), 160 kHz (Lamb =1 m) and >50 MHz (L=20 m). The RC frequency 𝜔𝑅𝐶 is fixed at 40 
kHz (𝜏𝑅𝐶=  s). Blue and green symbols indicate the 𝜔𝑅𝐶 and 𝜔𝑑 respectively which have 
been grouped together within red ovals for the -Q” versus Q plots. (b) and (c) are -Q” and Q
versus frequency. Note a sits under d for Lamb =20 m.

2 Extraction of Diffusion Length


29

Figure 5S: Analysis GUI for photocurrent mapping (IMPS mode) illustrating both the

3
Complications

There are several complications in IMPS microscopy that could impact both measurement 

and interpretation compared to bulk IMPS. These are listed below.

3.1 Non-Uniform Beam Excitation

The largest uncertainties surrounding this method arise from the non-uniform nature of the 

modulated probing beam which presents several potential issues related to charge extraction 

diverging from simple 1D solutions. The IMPS transfer function discussed earlier has been 

derived assuming 1D minority carrier transport which hugely oversimplifies the underlying 

physics for a focused beam. Whilst minority carrier current is assumed to flow vertically 

through the device for uniform excitation across a cell, for a highly non-uniform or focused 

laser spot, the excitation will also result in a large lateral photovoltage due to lateral diffusion 

caused by large gradients in free carriers. This lateral diffusion would be expected to be larger 

than the vertical component if the light is weakly absorbing. The effect would be an apparent 

reduction in the diffusivity. Secondly, the DC illumination set by the IMPS measurement 


30

directly sets the recombination regime and minority carrier lifetimes as the AC component 

should be a small perturbation on this level. However, imaging with focused beams 

necessarily drives local injection levels considerably higher meaning lifetime will be 

marginally reduced for the bimolecular regime. [32]

3.2 Light Induced Degradation

MAPbI3 based PSCs are known to degrade more rapidly for multi-sun concentrated 

sunlight, especially at higher temperatures. [54][55] Although the focused spot power density is 

orders higher than the 1 SUN DC background, (0.2 mW into ~100 um2), the beam is rapidly 

scanned (1-5 mm/s) across the cell ensuring temperature build up is minimal and certainly 

well below that for phase transitions. As such it is not entirely clear as to how much 

accelerated aging does occur and ideally it would be non-existent if the aim was to follow or 

disentangle degradation pathways. Clearly, a systematic study of cell degradation versus light 

soaking is required to ascertain its overall influence and whether IMPS imaging is non-

invasive in nature.


