1

Imaging Ferroelectrics: Charge Gradient 
Microscopy (CGM) versus Potential
Gradient Microscopy (PGM)

Jesi R. Maguire1, Hamza Waseem1, Raymond G. P. McQuaid1, Amit Kumar1, J. Marty Gregg1 and 
Charlotte Cochard2

1 School of Mathematics and Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast BT7 1NN, United Kingdom

2 School of Science and Engineering, University of Dundee, Nethergate, Dundee DD1 4HN, United 
Kingdom

Abstract

In 2014, Charge Gradient Microscopy (CGM) was first reported as a new scanning probe imaging 

mode, particularly well-suited for the characterisation of ferroelectrics. The implementation of the 

technique is straightforward; it involves monitoring currents that spontaneously develop between a 

passive conducting atomic force microscopy tip and Earth, as the tip is scanned across the specimen 

surface. However, details on the fundamental origin of contrast and what images mean, in terms of 

associated ferroelectric microstructures, are not yet fully understood. Here, by comparing 

information from CGM and Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM), obtained from the same sets of 

ferroelectric domains (in both lithium niobate and barium titanate), we show that CGM reasonably 

reflects the spatial derivative of the measured surface potential. This is conceptually different from

measuring local gradients in the surface bound-charge density or in any associated screening 

charges: after all, we see clear CGM signals, even when polarisation is entirely in-plane. We 

therefore suggest that CGM in ferroelectrics might be more accurately called Potential Gradient 

Microscopy (PGM). Intriguingly, in all cases examined, the measured surface potential (determined 

both through KPFM and by integrating the CGM signal) is of the opposite sign to that intuitively 

expected for a completely clean ferroelectric in vacuum. This is commonly observed and presumed 

due to a charge accumulation on the ferroelectric surface which is not easily removed.


2

1. Introduction

Historically, technological developments in microscopy have been extremely important for

underpinning new insights into the nature and behaviour of ferroelectric materials. Over the last few 

decades, this has perhaps been most strikingly illustrated by the way in which aberration-corrected

transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has facilitated picometre resolution images of local dipole 

vectors. Flux-closure [1], vortex [2] and even skyrmion structures [3] have been stunningly revealed. 

Combining TEM with focused ion beam (FIB) microscope patterning has also allowed the response of 

ferroelectric domain patterns to nanoscale morphology to be firmly established [4,5]. The 

importance of advances in scanning probe microscopy (SPM) should also be fully recognised: 

piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) and its precursors have revolutionised the way in which 

ferroelectric domain microstructures can be mapped [6-9] and their dynamics studied [10-14];

conducting atomic force microscopy (cAFM) has been the breakthrough tool for unequivocally 

showing that domain walls can have profoundly different transport characteristics from the domains 

that they surround [15-20]; in addition, scanning nitrogen-vacancy magnetometry has exquisitely

revealed spin cycloid microstructures in multiferroics [21] and has even been suggested as a future

technique for examining local transient magnetic fields, expected during ferroelectric domain wall 

motion [22].

One of the most recently discovered SPM imaging modes, relevant for ferroelectric 

characterisation (first reported by Hong et al. [23] in 2014), is Charge Gradient Microscopy (CGM).

Practically, CGM involves scanning a conducting atomic force microscopy tip (usually solid platinum),

in contact mode at a relatively high set-point, so that a firm connection between tip and sample is 

maintained. Imaging is passive, in the sense that no deliberate external electrical signal is supplied. 

Instead, any currents that spontaneously develop between the tip and Earth are simply measured 

and recorded as a function of tip position. A key observation is that, while the magnitude of local 

current spikes may be increased by increasing the scan speed during imaging, the total integrated 

charge (flowing to or from Earth) is independent of the rate of tip motion relative to the sample 

surface. Contrast is therefore associated with the way in which the local tip-sample electrostatic 

interactions lead to changes in the charge state at the tip; such changes can be developed quickly 

(generating larger currents) or slowly (generating smaller currents), depending on the scanning rate 

used. As noted in Hong et al.’s original paper, CGM gives strong signals from c+/c- 180o domain walls 

on z-cut periodically poled lithium niobate surfaces, where obvious spatial gradients in bound charge

densities (and in any associated screening charge densities) should be expected [23,24]. Hence the 

name given to the imaging mode. The exact nature of the interactions between the tip and the 

ferroelectric surface that give rise to changes in the tip charge state, relative to Earth, are still a 


3

matter of some debate and the role of charged surface adsorbates seems to be particularly unclear

[23, 25].

In this paper, we do not make comment on the detail of the interaction between the tip and 

the screening charge. Instead, we show that the integration of the CGM current, as a function of tip 

position, maps well to the experimentally determined spatial variation in the electrostatic potential,

measured directly using Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM), for a number of different domain 

configurations: c+/c- 180o domains in periodically poled z-cut lithium niobate (with polarisation 

vectors perpendicular to the imaged surface), head-to-head 180o domains in x-cut lithium niobate 

(with polarisation vectors parallel to the imaged surface) and a-c domains in {100} polished barium 

titanate (with polarisation alternately oriented parallel and perpendicular to the imaged surface).

Results suggest that, while the CGM technique undoubtedly monitors changes in the charge state of 

the conducting tip, this charge state appears to be more directly related to spatial variations in the 

surface potential of the ferroelectric than to spatial variations of the surface bound charge density 

(or the density of any associated screening charges) occurring directly under the tip. In this sense 

CGM should be viewed as effectively imaging potential gradients, rather than charge gradients, on 

the ferroelectric surface.

2. Results and Discussion

Initially, we established Charge Gradient Microscopy (CGM) images, similar to those obtained by 

Hong et al. [23], on z-cut periodically poled lithium niobate single crystals. Confirming their original 

observations [23], the correlation between the spatial occurrence of currents and the domain walls 

separating 180o domains (measured by PFM) was found to be obvious (figure 1, panels a, c and e). 

However, CGM contrast on engineered head-to-head domain walls in x-cut lithium niobate, where 

the polarisation is almost entirely parallel to the imaged surface, was seen to be dramatically

different (figure 1, panels b, d and f). Instead of current peaks at the domain walls, where the spatial 

orientation of polarisation changes, here the dominant response was that the current was almost 

constant within each domain but changed sign as the polarisation orientation reversed (seen clearly 

in the colour contrast in figure 1 panel d). In detail, a peak at the wall was also present (figure 1 

panel f); we attribute this to a slight miscut angle, introduced by our inexact surface polishing, which 

created a small component of polarisation out of the plane, which reverses sense across the domain 

wall.

These observations on lithium niobate (both z and x-cut) mirror those seen previously by 

Guy et al. [26], where the link between CGM current and the change, or gradient, in surface 

potential (rather than the change in uncompensated bound charge at the surface) was first 


4

suspected. In Guy et al., local potential variations were, however, solely informed by finite element 

numerical simulations (Comsol multiphysics models). Here, we generate more meaningful insight by 

comparing CGM information with experimentally determined surface potentials, measured directly 

using Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM). 

KPFM imaging of ferroelectric surfaces in ambient conditions is a challenge, as surface 

adsorbates, which screen the local potential, accumulate over a timescale of between seconds and 

minutes. The KPFM images shown in figure 2 (panels c and d) were obtained directly after the 

domains had been imaged in contact mode (panels a and b) to clean the surface, by physically

scraping most of such adsorbates away. Correlations between the potential contrast and the domain 

contrast are obvious. More subtle insight is, however, revealed by turning the slow-scan axis, in both 

CGM and KPFM imaging modes, off and accumulating signal from repeated scans along the same 

line-trace, to increase the signal-to-noise ratio in the data. In figure 3, aggregated KPFM line scans,

taken perpendicular to the surface-trace of domain walls, for both c+/c- domains in z-cut lithium 

niobate (figure 3a) and in-plane head-to-head domains in x-cut lithium niobate (figure 3b), are 

presented. Rather than comparing these data to the raw CGM traces, they are instead compared to 

the spatial integrals of the CGM currents (figure 3, panels c and d). For c+/c- domains, both the 

KPFM surface potential and the integrated CGM currents show peaks above domains with 

downwards orientations of polarisation and troughs above those with upwards oriented polarisation

(figure 3 panels a and c). Equally, for the head-to-head in-plane domains, KPFM reveals a strong “V”-

shaped function, with the potential being at a minimum close to the wall (figure 3b). The same kind 

of “V” is seen for the spatial integration of the CGM currents, taken from the same microstructural 

region (figure 3d). While the match is not perfect, similarity in the form of these functions is clearly 

evident. We are therefore left with the following observation:

𝑉 ≡ ∫ 𝑑𝑉

𝑑𝑥 𝑑𝑥 = 𝑘 ∫ 𝐼CGM𝑑𝑥
𝐞𝐪𝐮𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧 𝟏

𝑥2

𝑥1

𝑥2

𝑥1

where 𝑥 is the position along the line-scan, 𝑉 is the local surface potential measured by KPFM in a 

small region (pixel) bounded by points 𝑥1 and 𝑥2, and 𝐼CGM is the locally measured CGM current; k is 

a proportionality constant dependent on the microscope setup. The implication from equation 1 is 

that the CGM current is equivalent to the gradient in the surface potential along the scanning 

direction:

𝐼CGM ∝ 𝑑𝑉

𝑑𝑥


5

To test this notion further, CGM and KPFM information was obtained for another set of 

domains, with both in-plane and out-of-plane polarisation present: a-c stripe domains in

{100}pseudocubic polished single crystal BaTiO3. The typical surface domain microstructure can be seen 

in the PFM maps presented in figure 4a. While the CGM maps (figure 4b) show stripe-like features 

which clearly correlate with the PFM microstructure, there is unexpected complexity apparent in the 

contrast. This is explicitly demonstrated in the multiple pass CGM line-scan (slow-scan axis turned 

off) shown in figure 4c, taken perpendicular to the surface trace of the domain walls: multiple

current maxima and minima can be seen within each a-c domain period. When the CGM current

response is averaged over a number of a-c periods (see supplementary information) and then 

spatially integrated, an “idealised” version of what the surface potential might look like can be 

inferred, assuming that equation 1 and its implications are true (figure 4d).

The associated directly measured potential (using KPFM) for the same microstructural 

region, is shown in figure 4e. These data have also been averaged for a and c-domains separately

and the resultant functions “stitched” together (see supplementary information). At first sight, the 

potential profiles implied by the integrated CGM and directly measured KPFM look rather different

in this case. However, by close examination of the form of the functions, within the same 

microstructural subregions, similarities can be identified: the regions contained within the yellow 

boxes in both figure panels (part of the a-domain) show distinct sharp potential minima; within the 

green boxes (the c-domain), two maxima and a minimum are seen in both plots; and the purple 

boxes (another part of the a-domain) illustrate transition regions, in which the potential generally 

increases as the a-domain is traversed. It therefore still seems possible that the integrated CGM and 

the KPFM both represent maps of the same ferroelectric surface potential (albeit imperfectly).

An aspect of the experimental work that should also be discussed concerns the signs of the 

CGM current, inferred surface potential determined by spatial integration of the CGM, and the 

directly measured surface potential. In figure 5, we have used finite element simulation (Comsol 

Mutiphyiscs) to calculate the surface potential of lithium niobate for both c+/c- domains in the z-cut 

crystal and for the in-plane head-to-head domain wall region in the x-cut crystal, in the absence of 

any screening. In the former case, domains with polarisation pointing out-of-the-plane have positive 

surface potentials, while those pointing into the plane have negative surface potentials. This is 

exactly opposite to the KPFM potential map shown in figure 2c (and line scan in figure 3a) and to the 

integrated CGM profile shown in figure 3c. Correspondingly, the calculated potential gradient (figure 

5b and c) is negative moving from an “up” polarised state to a “down” one, whereas the 

corresponding measured CGM current (figure 1e) is positive. For the head-to-head domain wall 

region in the x-cut lithium niobate, the calculated potential (figure 5d and f) is a triangular function 


6

that is maximised at the wall, whereas in integrated CGM and in directly measured KPFM

measurements (figure 3b and d), the triangular function is inverted (with a minimum at the wall).

The associated CGM currents are also opposite in sign to those of the calculated potential gradients

(compare figure 1d and f to figure 5e and f). In short, while the CGM and KPFM information is largely 

self-consistent, all information is opposite in sign to that expected from modelling.

We had previously considered it likely that a factor of “-1” could be generated in the CGM 

data because of the internal circuitry of the scanning probe microscope, effectively monitoring 

currents from Earth to the tip, rather than the other way around [26] (the same was also seen by 

Hong et al. [23]). However, the KPFM data should not also suffer from this artefact. Indeed, we have 

tested the KPFM in our scanning probe microscope, by monitoring the potential above a thin film 

electrode connected to a voltage source, and it was found to be entirely accurate. We must 

therefore conclude that the measured surface potential (spatially integrated CGM and KPFM) is 

genuinely opposite in sign to that expected in the absence of screening. In fact, this is commonly 

observed in the published literature [27-30] and in ambient imaging should, perhaps, be fully 

expected.

3. Conclusion

By using scanning probe microscopy to examine different ferroelectric domain patterns, we present 

evidence that currents measured by Charge Gradient Microscopy (CGM) are generated by gradients 

in electrostatic surface potential, rather than gradients in surface bound charge or screening charge 

densities. This is best illustrated when the spatial integration of the CGM current is compared to the

surface potential measured directly by Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM). This conclusion 

makes the interpretation of CGM information relatively straightforward, as it simply offers an 

alternative to KPFM for determining the surface potential in materials. A possible advantage of the 

technique is that the strong tip-sample contact needed for CGM measurements means that surface 

potentials can be accessed even in environments where rapid accumulation of screening adsorbates 

would normally occur which would obscure KPFM contrast – the CGM scanning continually scrapes 

most of these adsorbates away.

4. Experimental Methods

Charge Gradient Microscopy: 

Charge gradient microscopy experiments were performed using an Asylum MFP-3D Infinity AFM 

system in the current-sensing mode (ORCA). The technique involves rastering a grounded conductive 

probe (25Pt300B from Rocky Mountain Nanotechnology) across the surface of a grounded sample at 


7

high scan speeds (~0.5mm/s) with a high deflection setpoint or tip pressure (18V, ~2µN force), while 

passively measuring any current that flows. The sign of the current flow depends on the scanning 

direction of the probe and reflects local changes in the electrostatic potential on the surface of the 

sample. Offset currents induced by the experimental set-up were removed for each sample. 

Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy:

KPFM experiments were performed using the same AFM system. In these studies, a Pt/Ir-coated Si 

probe with a resonance frequency of ~70 kHz (Nanosensors, PPP-EFM) was used. KPFM is a two-pass 

technique, in which the surface topography is mapped during the first pass via conventional tapping 

mode, before withdrawing to a fixed height above the surface (20nm for our experiments) for the 

second pass. During this second pass, a d.c bias is applied to the probe such that it matches the 

contact potential difference between the probe and sample surface. This is done by nullifying the 

vibration of the probe, which is initially driven by the electrostatic force induced on the AFM probe, 

giving a true measurement of the local surface potential.

Piezoresponse Force Microscopy: 

Piezoresponse Force Microscopy experiments were performed with solid Pt probes (25Pt300B from 

Rocky Mountain Nanotechnology) using the MFP’s internal lock-in amplifier. Imaging was carried out 

near resonance, with a frequency of ~100kHz for observing out of plane domains and ~200kHz for in 

plane domains. AC biases between 1-5V were used for these measurements.

Validation of the domain structure was carried out using a Veeco Dimension 3100 AFM system

(equipped with Nanoscope IIIa controller) in conjunction with an EG&G 7265 lock-in amplifier. For 

these experiments, Pt/Ir-coated Si probes (Nanosensors, PPP-EFM) were used and measurements 

were undertaken away from resonance at 20kHz with applied AC biases between 1-5V. Rotating the 

crystal orientation allowed for the relative polarisation orientations to be unequivocally determined 

using vector PFM (combination of vertical and lateral PFM).

Modelling of electrostatic potential from finite element modelling

Comsol Multiphysics 5.4 was used to model the static electrostatic potential at the surface of 

dielectric materials with a spontaneous polarisation. The exterior boundary conditions are consistent 

with what would happen in vacuum, while the interior boundaries are set for the continuity of the 

dielectric displacements. The mesh used consisted of tetrahedra with the largest dimension smaller 

than 1 μm and routinely one to two orders of magnitude lower. Simulations were stopped when 

convergence lower than 0.001 was obtained. The geometry was set to reproduce fairly the 

experimental geometry: a parallelepiped with width 10 μm, thickness 500 μm and length between 


8

20-40 μm depending on the domain patterns. The thickness was chosen to be similar to the 

experimental thickness, the width is irrelevant because of the symmetry of the experiment and the 

length of each domains was chosen to match experiments.

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge funding to support the research presented from the Engineering and 

Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) in the UK and from the Department for Employment 

(DfE) in Northern Ireland. RGPMcQ also acknowledges support from a UKRI Future Leaders 

Fellowship (MR/T043172/1).

References

[1]
Y. L. Tang, Y. L. Zhu, X. L. Ma, A. Y Borisevich, A. N. Morozovska, E. A.Eliseev, W. Y. Wang, Y. J. 
Wang, Y. B. Xu, Z. D. Zhang and S. J. Pennycook, Observation of a periodic array of flux closure 
quadrants in strained ferroelectric PbTiO3 films, Science 348 547 (2015)

[2] 
A. K. Yadav, C. T. Nelson, S. L. Hsu, Z. Hong, J. D. Clarkson, C. M. Schlepütz, A. R. Damodaran, 
P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, L. R. Dedon, D. Chen, A. Vishwanath, A. M. Minor, L. Q. Chen, J. F. 
Scott, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Observation of polar vortices in oxide superlattices, 
Nature 530 198 (2016)

[3]
S. Das, Y. L. Tang, Z. Hong, M. A. P. Gonçalves, M. R. McCarter, C. Klewe, K. X. Nguyen, F. 
Gómez-Ortiz, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, V. A. Stoica, S.-L. Hsu, B. Wang, C. Ophus, J. F. Liu, C. T. 
Nelson, S. Saremi, B. Prasad, A. B. Mei, D. G. Schlom, J. Íñiguez, P. García-Fernández, D. A. 
Muller, L. Q. Chen, J. Junquera, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Observation of room-
temperature polar skyrmions, Nature 568 368 (2019)

[4]
A. Schilling, D. Byrne, G. Catalan, K. G. Webber, Y. A. Genenko, G. S. Wu, J. F. Scott and J. M. 
Gregg, Domains in Ferroelectric Nanodots, Nano Lett. 9 3359 (2009)

[5]
A. Schilling, R. M. Bowman, G. Catalan, J. F. Scott, and J. M. Gregg, Morphological Control of 
Polar Orientation in Single-Crystal Ferroelectric Nanowires, Nano Lett. 7 3787 (2007)

[6]
P. Güthner and K. Dransfeld, Local poling of ferroelectric polymers by scanning force 
microscopy, Appl. Phys. Lett. 61 1137 (1992)

[7]
M. Abplanalp, L. M. Eng and P. Gunter, Mapping the domain distribution at ferroelectric 
surfaces by scanning force microscopy, Applied Physics A – Mater. Sci. & Processing 66 S231 
(1998)

[8]
S. V. Kalinin and D. A. Bonnell, Imaging mechanism of piezoresponse force microscopy of 
ferroelectric surfaces, Phys. Rev. B 65 125408 (2002)

[9]
M. Alexe and A. Gruverman (eds) Ferroelectrics at Nanoscale: Scanning Probe Microscopy 
Approach (Springer, New York, 2004)

[10]
A. Gruverman, D. Wu and J. F. Scott, Piezoresponse force microscopy studies of switching 
behavior of ferroelectric capacitors on a 100-ns time scale. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 097601 (2008)

[11] 
Y. Kim, H. Han, W. Lee, S. Baik, D. Hesse, M. Alexe, Nano Lett. 10 1266 (2010)


9

[12]
Pankaj Sharma, Raymond G. P. McQuaid, Leo J. McGilly, J. Marty Gregg and Alexei 
Gruverman, Nanoscale Dynamics of Superdomain Boundaries in Single‐Crystal BaTiO3
Lamellae, Adv. Mater. 25 1323 (2013)

[13]
J. R. Whyte et al. Ferroelectric domain wall injection. Adv. Mater. 26 293 (2014)

[14]
J. R. Whyte and J. M. Gregg, A diode for ferroelectric domain-wall motion. Nat. Commun. 6
7361 (2015)

[15] 
J. Seidel, L. W. Martin, Q. He, Q. Zhan, Y.-H. Chu, A. Rother, M. E. Hawkridge, P. 
Maksymovych, P. Yu, M. Gajek, N. Balke, S. V. Kalinin, S. Gemming, F. Wang, G. Catalan, J. F. 
Scott, N. A. Spaldin, J. Orenstein and R. Ramesh, Conduction at domain walls in oxide 
multiferroics, Nat. Mater. 8 229 (2009) 

[16] 
J. Guyonnet, Iaroslav Gaponenko, Stefano Gariglio and Patrycja Paruch, Conduction at 
Domain Walls in Insulating Pb(Zr0.2Ti0.8)O3 Thin Films, Adv. Mater. 23 5377 (2011)

[17] 
Mathias Schröder, Alexander Haußmann, Andreas Thiessen, Elisabeth Soergel, Theo Woike, 
Lukas M. Eng, Conducting Domain Walls in Lithium Niobate Single Crystals, Adv. Func. Mater.
22 3936 (2012)

[18] 
D. Meier, J. Seidel, A. Cano, K. Delaney, Y. Kumagai, M. Mostovoy, N. A. Spaldin, R. Ramesh 
and M. Fiebig, Anisotropic conductance at improper ferroelectric domain walls, Nat. Mater.
11 284 (2012)

[19] 
R. G. P. McQuaid, Michael P. Campbell, Roger W. Whatmore, Amit Kumar and J. Marty Gregg, 
Injection and controlled motion of conducting domain walls in improper ferroelectric Cu-Cl 
boracite, Nat. Commun. 8 15105 (2017)

[20] 
Yoon Seok Oh, Xuan Luo, Fei-Ting Huang, Yazhong Wang and Sang-Wook Cheong,
Experimental demonstration of hybrid improper ferroelectricity and the presence of 
abundant charged walls in (Ca,Sr)3Ti2O7 crystals, Nat. Mater. 14 407 (2015)

[21]
I. Gross, W. Akhtar, V. Garcia, L. J. Martinez, S. Chouaieb, K. Garcia, C. Carrétéro, A. 
Barthélémy, P. Appel, P. Maletinsky, J.-V. Kim, J. Y. Chauleau, N. Jaouen, M. Viret, M. Bibes, S. 
Fusil, and V. Jacques, Real-space imaging of non-collinear antiferromagnetic order with a 
single-spin magnetometer, Nature 549 252 (2017)

[22]
Dominik M. Juraschek , Quintin N. Meier, Morgan Trassin, Susan E. Trolier-McKinstry,
Christian L. Degen and Nicola A. Spaldin, Dynamical Magnetic Field Accompanying the Motion 
of Ferroelectric Domain Walls, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123 127601 (2019)

[23]
Seungbum Hong, Sheng Tong, Woon Ik Park, Yoshiomi Hiranaga, Yasuo Cho, and Andreas 
Roelofs, Charge gradient microscopy, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111 6566 (2014)

[24]
J. Marty Gregg and Amit Kumar, Trawling for complements, Nature 510 481 (2014)

[25] 
Y. Y. Choi, S. Tong, S. Ducharme, A. Roelofs and S. Hong, Charge collection kinetics on 
ferroelectric polymer surface using charge gradient microscopy. Sci. Rep. 6 1 (2016)

[26]
Joseph G. M. Guy, Charlotte Cochard, Pablo Aguado-Puente, Elisabeth Soergel, Roger W. 
Whatmore, Michele Conroy, Kalani Moore, Eileen Courtney, Alan Harvey, Ursel Bangert, Amit 
Kumar, Raymond G. P. McQuaid and J. Marty Gregg, Anomalous Motion of Charged Domain 
Walls and Associated Negative Capacitance in Copper–Chlorine Boracite, Adv. Mater. 33, 
(2021)

[27]
X. Q. Chen, H. Yamada, T. Horiuchi, K. Matsushige, S. Watanabe, M. Kawai and P. S. Weiss, 
Surface potential of ferroelectric thin films investigated by scanning probe microscopy, J. Vac.


10

Sci. & Tech. B 17, 1930 (1999)

[28]
Neus Domingo, Iaroslav Gaponenko, Kumara Cordero-Edwards, Nicolas Stucki, Virginia Pérez-
Dieste, Carlos Escudero, Elzbieta Pach, Albert Verdaguer and  Patrycja Paruch, Surface 
charged species and electrochemistry of ferroelectric thin films, Nanoscale 11 17920 (2019)

[30]
Yunseok Kim, Changdeuck Bae, Kyunghee Ryu, Hyoungsoo Ko, Yong Kwan Kim, Seungbum 
Hong, and Hyunjung Shin, Origin of surface potential change during ferroelectric switching in 
epitaxial PbTiO3 thin films studied by scanning force microscopy, Appl. Phys. Lett. 94, 032907 
(2009)


11

Figures:

Figure 1: Charge Gradient Microscopy (CGM) of domains in lithium niobate (LNO). Piezoresponse force 

microscopy (PFM) phase maps of (a) c+/c- domains, with polarisation approximately perpendicular to the 

surface, in z-cut periodically poled LNO (vertical PFM) and (b) head-to-head charged domain wall region, 

with polarisation approximately parallel to the surface, in x-cut LNO (lateral PFM). Corresponding CGM 

map for (c) c+/c- domains and (d) head-to-head charged domain wall region. All images are shown at the 

same magnification and the scale bar in (a) is 6µm long. Line trace information (e, f), taken approximately 

perpendicular to the surface traces of the domain walls, showing CGM data (orange), summed over 

multiple scan lines with the slow scan axis disabled, along with PFM phase variations (to help identify the 

positions of domain walls). 


12

Figure 2: Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) of the lithium niobate domains. PFM phase maps 

for (a) c+/c- domains, with polarisation approximately perpendicular to the surface, in z-cut 

periodically poled LNO (vertical PFM) and (b) head-to-head charged domain wall region, with 

polarisation approximately parallel to the surface, in x-cut LNO (lateral PFM), along with associated 

surface potential maps, measured using KPFM (c, d). Images are all at the same magnification and 

the scale bar (in (a)) is 4.7µm long. 


13

Figure 3: Line traces comparing the measured surface potential with the spatial integration of the CGM 

current. KPFM surface potential variations associated with (a) c+/c- domains in z-cut periodically poled 

LNO and (b) the head-to-head charged domain wall region in x-cut LNO, along with corresponding plots 

generated by integrating the CGM currents with respect to distance along the scan direction (c and d).

Similarities between the measured potential and the integrated CGM current are obvious. Background 

colours represent different domain orientations with local polarisation directions as indicated by arrows. 

Data presented have been obtained from scans in which the slow scan axis has been disabled, such that 

information is continuously collected for a single scan line and averaged.


14

Figure 4: Relationship between the CGM current and surface potential for a more complex set of 

domain variants (a/c domains in barium titanate). (a) PFM phase image (scale bar also applies to (b) and 

measures 6µm). (b) CGM current map and (c) the corresponding CGM line trace (data from a line scan 

with the slow scan axis disabled) with PFM phase information overlayed. Data from each a and c domain 

region was averaged and then the functions stitched together to produce and idealised version of (d) the 

integrated CGM current and (e) the measured surface potential. While these functions clearly differ, 

comparisons of the forms of the functions within specific microstructural subregions (identified by the 

highlighted coloured boxes) suggest that they might both be imperfectly measuring the same thing.


15

a

b

c

d

e

f

Figure 5: Finite element simulation of the surface potential and associated gradients for LNO. (a,d) 

colour maps of the surface potential V, (b,e) colour maps of the positional derivative of the surface 

potential

𝑑𝑉
𝑑𝑥 and (c,f) comparison of the line profiles along x of the surface potential V (blue) and spatial 

derivative

𝑑𝑉
𝑑𝑥 (dotted orange). The spatial derivatives of the potential scale with the measured CGM but 

are inverted in sign.


