Anomalous metals: From “failed superconductor” to “failed insulator”

Xinyang Zhang,1, 2 Alexander Palevski,3 and Aharon Kapitulnik1, 2, 4

1Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
2Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
3School of Physics and Astronomy, Raymond and Beverly Sackler,
Faculty of Exact Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel
4Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
(Dated: January 24, 2022)

Resistivity saturation is found on both superconducting and insulating sides of an “avoided”
magnetic-field-tuned superconductor-to-insulator transition (H-SIT) in a two-dimensional In/InOx
composite, where the anomalous metallic behaviors cut off conductivity or resistivity divergence in
the zero-temperature limit. The granular morphology of the material implies a system of Josephson
junctions (JJ) with a broad distribution of Josephson coupling EJ and charging energy EC, with a
H-SIT determined by the competition between EJ and EC. By virtue of self-duality across the true
H-SIT, we invoke macroscopic quantum tunneling effects to explain the temperature-independent
resistance where the “failed superconductor” side is a consequence of phase fluctuations and the
“failed insulator” side results from charge fluctuations. While true self-duality is lost in the avoided
transition, its vestiges are argued to persist, owing to the incipient duality of the percolative nature
of the dissipative path in the underlying random JJ system.

INTRODUCTION

An increasing number of recent experiments on dis-
ordered superconducting films, initially searching for a
superconductor-to-insulator transition (SIT), end up in-
stead with an “avoided” transition, where scaling about
a putative zero-temperature quantum critical point fails
in the limit T → 0, giving way to a phase characterized
by a resistance that levels off to a constant value inde-
pendent of temperature [1–8]. This “anomalous metal-
lic state” (AMS) seems to exhibit electronic properties
that cannot be understood on the basis of the standard
paradigms for transport in disordered two-dimensional
(2d) metals (for a recent review see [9]). While extensive
efforts have been devoted to understanding AMS on the
superconducting side, termed a “failed superconductor,”
[9] and its transition to a “true” superconducting state
[10], the complementary leveling of resistance on the insu-
lating side of the same avoided SIT is often overlooked.
Here, an initial resistivity divergence trend for T → 0
is replaced with distinct saturation, exhibiting resistivity
values that can be orders of magnitude higher than quan-
tum of resistance for Cooper pairs RQ = h/e2 ∼ 6.45 kΩ.
This ubiquitous behavior of a “failed insulator” can be
found in studies of ultrathin granular metal films [11],
amorphous metal-insulator films [3, 12], and Josephson
junction (JJ) arrays [13].

In this letter we propose a unified phenomenology
for the emergence of anomalous metallic states from an
avoided SIT in disordered superconducting films. Focus-
ing on the magnetic-field tuned SIT (H-SIT) in strongly
granular system of In-on-InOx composites, we show that
vestiges of the self-duality observed in a true H-SIT
[14, 15] are still pronounced in the AMS on both sides
of the avoided-H-SIT [8], including the resistance satura-

tion. Bearing in mind that from its nature, the critical
point of any SIT yields an anomalous metal, we propose
that the broadening of the metallic phase on both sides of
the H-SIT has the same origin modulo the dual relation
between phase of the order parameter (or vortices) and
charge (both cooper-pairs and single electrons). Specifi-
cally, we argue that the low-temperature resistance can
be interpreted as a sum of a temperature-dependent ac-
tivation term and a temperature-independent term asso-
ciated with quantum fluctuations leading to macroscopic
quantum tunneling (MQT) of the phase and/or the
charge. On the superconducting side, a superconductor-
to-quantum-metal transition (SQMT) appears with the
destruction of global phase coherence [9, 16, 17], while
on the insulating side quantum charge fluctuations pre-
vent the establishment of a Coulomb-blockade-driven in-
sulating state [13, 18, 19] driving a quantum-metal-to-
insulator transition (QMIT).

The robustness of the anomalous metallic phase in
the In/InOx system [8] further enforces these expanded
observations, while strongly contending interpretations
solely based on non-equilibrium effects and response to
external effects of the electronic system [20] (see also
“Methods” section). At the same time, the temperature-
independent term associated with MQT depends deli-
cately on the details of the distribution of grains and
junctions, which may be controlled by external effects
leading to different saturation value of the resistance,
emphasizing its non-universal value in the anomalous
metal regime.
This in turn leads us to propose the
phase-diagram of Fig. 1 and suggest a unified under-
standing of anomalous metallic states in disordered su-
perconducting films. Excluding the regime where pairs
are no longer present, this phase diagram has strong re-
semblance to that of two-dimensional electron gas about

arXiv:2201.08801v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  21 Jan 2022


2

half-filled Landau levels [21].

FIG. 1.
Zero-temperature phase diagram of a 2d granu-
lar superconductor with two controlling parameters. In the
present study X1=magnetic field and X2=inter-grain cou-
pling. Shaded area represents the region in parameter space
where anomalous metal appears. Thick solid line represents
a true H-SIT (Ref. [15]) while the other solid lines represent
the transition from a superconductor to a quantum anoma-
lous metal (SQMT) and from quantum anomalous metal to
an insulator (QMIT). Dashed line represents crossover from
a Bose-dominated system, where superconducting In islands
provide the source of pairing, to a normal-electrons insula-
tor. Dash-dotted line represents the crossover from phase to
charge dominated quantum anomalous metal state. Each full
circle represents a quantum critical point for a particular re-
alization of the control parameters, while an open circle is a
crossover point.

Whether samples are inherently inhomogeneous such
as arrays of Josephson-junctions (JJ), or morphologically
uniform such as amorphous films, superconducting pair-
ing interaction tends to “amplify” mesoscopic fluctua-
tions of the disorder and its associated Coulomb interac-
tion, resulting in an effective granular morphology [22–
25]. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the su-
perconducting transition in 2d disordered metallic films
is dominated by phase fluctuations [16, 17, 26] and the
material can be modeled as superconducting grains em-
bedded in a tunable intergrain coupling matrix. While
local pair amplitude fluctuations depend on the grain size
[27], global superconductivity is achieved via the estab-
lishment of a percolating path of phase coherence [28–31]
through Josephson coupling of pairs of adjacent grains.
For a given pair {ij}, Eij
J is a function of the local gaps
∆i and ∆j and the intergrain normal-state resistance Rij
n .
However, the granular nature of 2d disordered films also
requires that we consider the capacitance (both inter-
grain and self) involved and the associated charging en-
ergy Eij
C which is a function of the local density at the
grains ni and nj, and the dielectric constant of the in-

tergrain material χij
n . An insulating phase is the result
of Coulomb blockade which prevent Cooper-pairs tun-
neling between adjacent grains. For a granular film with
typical Josephson energy EJ and charging energy EC,
the ratio γ ≡ EJ/EC determines the occurrence of SIT
[19, 32, 33]. Besides the initial film morphology, other
external parameters such as an applied magnetic field or
carrier density modulation through an applied gate can
be used to control γ.

METHODS

InOx/In granular composites were grown by electron-
beam evaporation of In2O3 in oxygen partial pressure,
followed by that of In under high vacuum. Consecutive
in situ depositions of the two components result in clean
interface that is crucial for optimal interface coupling.
The uniform underlying amorphous InOx is specifically
prepared to be weakly insulating to mediate couplings
among the In grains and nearby proximitized regions.
Details of the sample preparation process were provided
in Ref. [8]. Here we emphasize the granular morphology
of the system as shown in Fig. 2. This will be a key to
our understanding of the data.

FIG. 2.
Morphology of the In/InOx system: a) Scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) micrograph of the In/InOx sam-
ple.
Bright grains are metallic indium islands, while dark
background is a uniform underlying layer of weakly-insulating
amorphous InOx. Note the broad distribution of grain sizes
including the interstitial ones. Scale bar at lower right corner
indicates 1µm. b) Distribution of grain size. Note the two
broad peaks at ∼ 0.03µm and ∼ 0.5µm.

Resistivity measurements were carried out using stan-
dard four-point lock-in measurement on a patterned hall-
bar sample. Current excitation was provided by reference
ac voltage source in series with a 1 GΩ resistor that is
much more resistive than any measured sample resistance
in this study. The current intensity ranged from 0.1 nA
to 1 nA while the frequency varied between 0.7–7 Hz
depending on sample resistance. Linear response to ex-
citation current was confirmed at the highest resistance.


3

Temperature ramps were sufficiently slow compared to
the prolonged time constant.
In our dilution refrigerator, all measurement wires were
filtered at both room temperature and mixing chamber
temperature (T ≳ 10 mK) using commercial in-line pi-
filters and cryogenic filters, achieving over 100 dB at-
tenuation throughout 100 MHz–5 GHz range.
Sample
phonon temperature was measured by a calibrated on-
chip RuO2 thermometer subject to the same mounting
and wiring as the sample. Data is not considered in our
analysis when sample temperature differs more than 10%
from mixing chamber temperature. The refrigerator was
operating at the highest cooling power with an extra cir-
culation pump running, despite at the cost of a higher
base (mixing chamber) temperature.

RESULTS

In Fig. 3, we plot temperature dependence of resistiv-
ity in different perpendicular magnetic fields across three
annealing stages S0, S1, and S2 of the same initial sam-
ple. Low-temperature annealing (< 50 ◦C) is well-known
[34] to irreversibly reduce sample resistance yet maintain
an amorphous nature of the underlying InOx, thus alter-
ing the dielectric response in the insulating matrix that
couples superconducting grains. We restrict the range of
magnetic field in this analysis to under 600 Oe to ensure
robust superconductivity within the single grain [15].

FIG. 3. Resistivity vs. temperature in varying magnetic field
for three successive annealing stages. Dotted lines in S0 con-
nects cooling data < 0.7 K with a field sweep at 1.1 K.

Annealing stage S0 shows the most salient signatures
of resistivity saturation on the insulating side of an
“avoided” SIT. In zero field as temperature is lowered,
resistivity decreases and saturates at around 6.2 kΩ/□
as a failed superconductor. A magnetic field as low as

30 Oe flips temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR)
to negative as in an insulator.
However, the resistiv-
ity divergence gives way to saturation at around 0.2 K,
eventually settling at a finite value as T → 0. In higher
fields the features are qualitatively similar, until at 600
Oe where resistivity strongly diverges and no saturation
is found above our base temperature. In a broad range of
magnetic field, we identify an insulator where resistivity
fails to diverge as T → 0, dubbed as a “failed insulator.”
In contrast, annealing stage S1 or S2 develops a su-
perconducting ground state in zero field, where the Tc is
just below our base temperature for S0 while Tc ≈ 0.4 K
for S1. Nevertheless, in low field ≲ 400 Oe, the ground
state is a failed superconductor and has been discussed
extensively [8]. For S1 at 400 Oe, the system is right on
the insulating side of the transition, yet the resistivity
is saturating as T → 0 despite an upturn at ∼ 0.2 K.
In higher field ≳ 400 Oe for both S1 and S2, resistiv-
ity saturation is substantially reduced and the tempera-
ture dependence can be fitted by a logarithmic divergence
with a large pre-factor [8]. Such logarithmic divergence
is in stark contrast with the saturated resistivity in S0.
Resistivity of insulators typically have exponential (hop-
ping) or weak, granularity-induced divergence persisting
to zero-temperature, meaning their curvature d2ρ/dT 2

remains positive as T → 0. However, in S0 the resistiv-
ity divergence is cutoff by a saturation, marked by a sign
change in the curvature in the temperature dependence
at around 0.2 K (see Fig. 4(a)).
To quantitatively analyze the evolution of resistivity
behavior as a function of magnetic field on the insulat-
ing side, we adopt an empirical functional form Eq. 1,
which satisfactorily fits S0 data as shown in Fig. 4(a).
This empirical law was previously employed [13] to de-
scribe an analogous conductivity saturation in insulating
JJ arrays. The saturation was modeled as a consequence
of a temperature-independent quantum fluctuation term
σQF , in addition to thermally-activated tunneling con-
ductivity on the insulating side with activation energy
EaI and a proportionality constant σ0. In writing this
equation we assume hall conductivity is zero:

ρ = [σQF + σ0 · exp(−EaI/kBT)]−1
(1)

Fig. 4(a) shows an overlay of the extracted quantum
fluctuation contribution σQF (left axis) and activation
temperature Ea/kB (right axis) as a function of mag-
netic field. Since σQF is intimately related to the satura-
tion, it decreases as field increases until around 600 Oe,
where the divergence is restored and the saturation dis-
appears. Meanwhile, the activation temperature starts
off at around 0.3 K, peaks at just below 0.6 K near 300
Oe, and subsequently decreases before leveling off at high
fields. Since the overall tendency for an insulating behav-
ior is governed by the charging energy, we may estimate
EaI ≈ αEC, where α ≈ 1/⟨z⟩ and ⟨z⟩ ≈ 6 is the aver-
age coordination number of the random array of indium


4

grains of average size ∼ 0.1 µm [8]. Taking a dielectric
constant of ∼ 10 for the InOx, and average distance be-
tween grains of ∼ 10 nm, we obtain EaI in the range that
we find experimentally in Fig. 4(a). The corresponding
(σQF )−1 increases in the high field limit to order of ∼ 1
MΩ, emphasizing the fact that this saturated resistance
is much larger than the quantum of resistance RQ.

FIG. 4. a) Temperature independent term σQF (left axis - •)
and activation temperature Ea/kB (right axis) extracted from
the fits. Also shown are the zeros (light red) in the curvatures
of ρ(T). Inset: Temperature dependence of resistivity in S0
fitted by empirical law Eq. 1. b) Temperature independent
term ρ−1
QF (■) or σQF (♦) (left axis) and activation tempera-
ture Ea/kB (right axis) extracted from the fits. Inset: Tem-
perature dependence of resistivity in S1 fitted by empirical
laws Eq. 2. for H ≤ H∗ and Eq. 1. for H ≥ H∗. Also shown
is Cooper pair quantum of resistance RQ = h/4e2 ∼ 6.5 kΩ/□
as the red separatrix. Dotted and dashed lines are guidance
to the eye.

To quantitatively analyze resistivity saturation on the
superconducting side, we adopt a similar empirical law
by exchanging the role of resistivity ρ and conductivity
σ, justified as a manifestation of charge-phase correspon-
dence (or particle-vortex duality) near either a direct SIT
or an “avoided” SIT – a crossover between failed super-
conductors and failed insulators [8, 14].

ρ = ρQF + ρ0 · exp(−EaS/kBT)
(2)

where ρQF is an analogous temperature-independent con-
tribution to resistivity and EaS is activation energy on

the superconducting side. Fits of this form to resistiv-
ity of S1 are shown in Fig. 4(b), where Eq. 1 is used for
H ≥ 350 Oe and Eq. 2 for H ≤ 300 Oe. The left y-axis
shows ρ−1
QF from low field and σQF from high field in the
same plot. Quantum fluctuation contribution ρQF grows
(or equivalently, ρ−1
QF shrinks) upon increasing field, while
quantum fluctuation contribution σQF shrinks in higher
fields. The field dependence for both branches are power
laws with ρ−1
QF ∝ H−0.45 and σQF ∝ H−4.7. Activation
temperature on the low field side is around 1.5 K and
gradually decreasing, until a sharp drop at H∗ ∼ 300 Oe
where the sample switches to insulating behavior. Be-
sides a factor of ∼4 lower activation temperature, its
qualitative trend in field is consistent with those in S0.
The dome-shaped presence of ρQF and σQF suggests
that quantum fluctuations play important roles in both
regimes of anomalous metallic phase.

DISCUSSION

The evolution of zero-temperature behaviors of resis-
tivity in S0 and S1 leads us to a holistic understand-
ing of the T = 0 phase diagram in Fig. 1. We identify
the blue trace (SQMT) as a magnetic-field-tuned quan-
tum superconductor–anomalous-metal transition (solid
line), followed by a transition to an insulating ground
state (solid line).
The anomalous metallic regime can
be further divided into failed-superconductor and failed-
insulator regimes, separated by an “avoided” SIT (dash-
dot line) representing a wide crossover regime. We also
identify the green trace as an annealing-tuned failed-
insulator–failed-superconductor transition (QMIC), sim-
ilar to the magnetic-field controlled scenario despite a
fundamental difference in the nature of these two con-
trol parameters.
As an example, universal anomalous
metallic behaviors under different tuning parameter was
recently discussed in Ref. [35].
Finally, a direct SIT
that is typically found in homogeneous films or granu-
lar materials with stronger coupling is shown as the red
trace (SIT), while transition to a disordered 2D metal-
lic phase appears when Cooper-pairs are broken (dashed
line). Within our granular system of In/InOx compos-
ite, a true H-SIT [15] can be tuned to unveil an avoided
H-SIT, which was previously shown to exhibit vestiges of
self duality around the putative quantum critical point
[8]. The analysis presented in the previous section ex-
plores the duality idea in a wider temperature range
which includes the resistance saturation associated with
the AMS, thus provides further insight into the possible
origin of this enigmatic phase. The fact that the data
shows a continuous evolution from an AMS with very low
sheet resistance to one with very large sheet resistance
that far exceeds even the fermion quantum of resistance,
h/e2, suggests that the superconducting grains and the
intergrain tunneling play the key role in determining the


5

saturation value, that is, (σQF )−1 in Eqn. 1 smoothly
connects to ρQF in Eqn. 2.
Focusing on Fig. 4(b), it
shows that the separating saturation resistance between
the two regimes is ∼ 6.5 kΩ/□ at the field of H∗ ≈ 300
Oe where the curves change character as a result of the
avoided H-SIT. The drop in activation energy between
|Ea|H≲H∗ and |Ea|H≫H∗ is a factor of 4. Since H∗ marks
an avoided transition where we expect EJ ∼ EC, then
we conclude that EaI saturates to 1

4EC as was previously
observed for ordered arrays of JJ [13, 36]. This further
suggests that for H ≫ H∗ the saturation is associated
with charge fluctuations. Examination of the samples in
the reverse direction of annealing (S2 to S1 to S0), we sug-
gest that we observe a smooth crossover of macroscopic
quantum effect from a regime dominated by Josephson
coupling to a regime dominated by Coulomb interaction,
which for each realization of coupling (annealing) and
magnetic field could be attributed to a single junction
behavior in the respective regime.
Starting from a single resistively-shunted-JJ with
EJ ≫ EC, for a small bias current a phase difference is
established along the junction resulting in a zero-voltage
supercurrent. However, at very low temperatures where
activation is exponentially small, quantum fluctuations
of the phase induce quantum tunneling of the phase vari-
able [37] and thus a finite voltage [38, 39]. With increas-
ing charging energy, and in the limit EJ ≪ EC, a dual
situation is expected, where the electric charge on the
junction capacitance, which conjugates to the junction’s
phase, results in Coulomb blockade and thus an insulat-
ing state. For a small bias voltage, quantum fluctuations
of the charge may give rise to a coherent current of cooper
pairs and to dissipation due to single electron tunneling
[40]. The latter is also a macroscopic quantum effect due
to the participation of the collective electron system in
the process [41, 42].
To rationalize the analogy with a single resistively-
shunted-JJ we follow Fisher [43] assuming that junctions
in the EJ ≫ EC regime (Samples S2 and S1) are re-
sistively shunted with a wide distribution of shunt resis-
tors. While in general the idea of a normal conductance
channel was challenged in the limit of T ≪ Tc for an or-
dered array of JJs [44], we believe that it is natural to
expect normal regions in a random array of grains such
as in our In/InOx composite, especially in the presence
of magnetic field [8, 15]. Using an Ambegaokar, Halperin
and Langer approach [45], we assume that there exists a
set of junctions which are coupled to shunt resistors large
enough to allow phase slips and are connected to form an
infinite network that spans the system. By the nature of
the effect where the phase slips span the size of the sam-
ple for a magnetic field HSM ≪ H∗
c , we can map it on
a random-resistor network (RRN) percolation problem,
which at very low temperature, for a given tuning pa-
rameter (here the magnetic field) is self-organized to be
at criticality. A well known result for percolation theory

is that the resistance above percolation is bounded from
below by the total resistance of the so-called “singly con-
nected bonds” [46–48], that is, the bonds that if cut will
disrupt the integrity of the infinite network. Near criti-
cality, for a system of size L, the average conductance is
given by ⟨G⟩ = Ld−1⟨g1⟩, where d is the dimensionality
and g1 is the linear conductance of the chain of singly con-
nected bonds estimated here as ⟨g1⟩ ∼ 1/Lrs, where rs
is the limiting shunt resistance [49]. In two-dimensions,
the value of the saturated resistivity within this RRN-
percolation model is easily estimated as ρs ≈ ⟨G⟩−1 ≈ rs.
Thus, the regime of anomalous metal is a consequence of
MQT through junctions characterized by rs ≪ RQ.
Turning to the more insulating samples (S0, and high-
field S1), the intergrain mediating InOx layer is insulating
enough (single junction resistance ≫ RQ), to prevent an
infinite cluster of percolating phase-coherent supercon-
ducting grains. In this regime, the small grains, which
appear interstitially between the larger superconducting
islands, become the bottleneck for continuous conduction
due to their large charging energy satisfying EC ≫ EJ.
This situation is amplified with increasing magnetic field
where more of the weaker junctions between large su-
perconducting islands lose phase coherence. At the same
time, a true insulating state as a consequence of Coulomb
blockade may fail because of MQT of charge [13, 42].
This dual behavior to the phase-MQT suggests to extend
the percolation description according to Ambegaokar,
Halperin and Langer results [45] to the insulating side
where a saturated resistivity is expected with limiting
junction shunt resistance rs ≫ RQ and EC ≫ EJ.
The phase-charge duality is further understood by the
intrinsic duality of the RRN of the randomly distributed
shunt resistances underlying the JJ array. Indeed, there
is an exact relation between the bulk effective conductiv-
ity of a 2D continuing composite made of two isotropic
components and that of the dual composite [48, 50–53].
For a rectangular array of JJ representing bonds with re-
sistances {ri} and conductances {gi} (where gD
i = 1/gi ≡
ri), the dual total conductance GD
x (gD
1 , gD
2 ....gD
N) along
x-direction is related to the conductance along the y-
direction Gy(g1, g2, ...gN) ≡ Ry(r1, r2, ...rN) as: GD
x =
1/Gy. The same average behavior is expected for the ran-
dom system, which is manifested in our random In/InOx
composite [48, 50, 51]: ⟨GD
x ⟩ = ⟨Ry⟩. The charge-phase
correspondence maps onto the RRN duality and further
reinforces the vestiges of duality that originate from the
H-SIT as previously suggested by Shimshoni et al., [22].
A further consequence of the above model is the re-
alization of the fragility of the superconducting or in-
sulating states from which the failed superconductor
and failed insulator emerge. Besides the annealing and
magnetic field, any perturbation applied to the system
strongly affects the distribution of junctions properties,
thus leading to a shift in the potential barrier for the
MQT process resulting in a shift of the saturated re-


6

sistance.
For example, external radiation can work to
enhance the quantum fluctuations and thus AMS will
emerge with larger saturated resistance as T → 0 [20], or
reduce them thus pin the superconducting state [8]. Sim-
ilarly, a ground plane near a sample can provide another
dissipation channel to pin the superconducting state, as
well as alter the charging energies to modify the satura-
tion on the insulating side, both effects were observed in
JJ arrays [54] and in highly disordered films [55].

In summary, we identify two regimes in anomalous
metallic phase – a “failed superconductor” and a “failed
insulator,” as clearly suggested by resistivity saturation
on both sides of an “avoided” SIT. The close connec-
tion between our granular composite and Josephson junc-
tion arrays is revealed by a set of empirical fit to the
temperature dependence of resistivity. Quantum fluctu-
ations of phase drive the transition from superconductor
to anomalous metal when superconductors fail to estab-
lish global phase coherence, while quantum fluctuations
of charge number drive the transition from insulator to
anomalous metal when charge localization gives way to
dissipative transport. A duality picture is strongly jus-
tified in our discussions by interchanging the roles of N
and φ and corroborated by the resemblance of transport
behaviors when exchanging the roles of ρ and σ.

Acknowledgements: We acknowledge discussions with
Steven Kivelson, Sri Raghu, Boris Spivak, and Yacov
Kantor.
Work at Stanford University was supported
by the National Science Foundation Grant NSF-DMR-
1808385. Work at Tel-Aviv University was supported by
the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation (Grant No.
2014098). We thank Sejoon Lim for assistance with SEM.
Part of this work was performed at the Stanford Nano
Shared Facilities (SNSF), supported by the National Sci-
ence Foundation under award ECCS-1542152.

[1] D. Ephron, A. Yazdani, A. Kapitulnik, and M. R.
Beasley, Observation of quantum dissipation in the vor-
tex state of a highly disordered superconducting thin
film, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 1529 (1996).

[2] C. D. Chen, P. Delsing, D. B. Haviland, Y. Harada,
and T. Claeson, Flux flow and vortex tunneling in two-
dimensional arrays of small josephson junctions, Phys.
Rev. B 54, 9449 (1996).

[3] N. Mason and A. Kapitulnik, Dissipation effects on the
superconductor-insulator transition in 2d superconduc-
tors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 5341 (1999).

[4] N. P. Breznay and A. Kapitulnik, Particle-hole symme-
try reveals failed superconductivity in the metallic phase
of two-dimensional superconducting films, Science Ad-
vances 3, e1700612 (2017).

[5] C. G. L. Bøttcher, F. Nichele, M. Kjaergaard, H. J.
Suominen, J. Shabani, C. J. Palmstrøm, and C. M. Mar-
cus, Superconducting, insulating and anomalous metal-
lic regimes in a gated two-dimensional semiconductor-

superconductor array, Nature Physics 14, 1138 (2018).

[6] Z. Chen, A. G. Swartz, H. Yoon, H. Inoue, T. A.
Merz, D. Lu, Y. Xie, H. Yuan, Y. Hikita, S. Raghu,
and H. Y. Hwang, Carrier density and disorder tuned
superconductor-metal transition in a two-dimensional
electron system, Nature Communications 9, 4008 (2018).

[7] C. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Feng, Q. He, J. Sun,
Y. Tang, C. Wu, J. Xiong, W. Zhang, X. Lin, H. Yao,
H. Liu, G. Fernandes, J. Xu, J. M. Valles, J. Wang,
and Y. Li, Intermediate bosonic metallic state in the
superconductor-insulator transition, Science 366, 6472
(2019).

[8] X. Zhang, B. Hen, A. Palevski, and A. Kapitulnik,
Robust anomalous metallic states and vestiges of self-
duality in two-dimensional granular In-InOx composites,
npj Quantum Mater. 6, 30 (2021).

[9] A. Kapitulnik, S. A. Kivelson, and B. Spivak, Collo-
quium: Anomalous metals: Failed superconductors, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 91, 011002 (2019).

[10] N. Mason and A. Kapitulnik, True superconductivity
in a two-dimensional superconducting-insulating system,
Phys. Rev. B 64, 060504(R) (2001).

[11] H. M. Jaeger, D. B. Haviland, A. M. Goldman, and B. G.
Orr, Threshold for superconductivity in ultrathin amor-
phous gallium films, Phys. Rev. B 34, 4920 (1986).

[12] F. Cou¨edo, O. Crauste, A. A. Drillien, V. Humbert,
L. Berg´e, C. A. Marrache-Kikuchi, and L. Dumoulin, Dis-
sipative phases across the superconductor-to-insulator
transition, Scientific Reports 6, 35834 (2016).

[13] P. Delsing, C. D. Chen, D. B. Haviland, Y. Harada, and
T. Claeson, Charge solitons and quantum suctuations
in two-dimensional arrays of small josephson junctions,
Phys. Rev. B 50, 3959 (1994).

[14] N. P. Breznay, M. A. Steiner, S. A. Kivelson, and A. Ka-
pitulnik, Self-duality and a hall-insulator phase near the
superconductor-to-insulator transition in indium-oxide
films, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 280 (2016).

[15] B.
Hen,
X.
Zhang,
V.
Shelukhin,
A.
Kapitulnik,
and A. Palevski, Superconductor-insulator transition in
two-dimensional indium-indium-oxide composite, Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118,
e2015970118 (2021).

[16] B.
Spivak,
A.
Zyuzin,
and
M.
Hruska,
Quantum
superconductor-metal
transition,
Phys.
Rev.
B
64,
132502 (2001).

[17] B. Spivak, P. Oreto, and S. A. Kivelson, Theory of quan-
tum metal to superconductor transitions in highly con-
ducting systems, Phys. Rev. B 77, 214523 (2008).

[18] D. V. Averin and K. K. Likharev, Coulomb blockade
of single-electron tunneling, and coherent oscillations
in small tunnel junctions, Journal of Low Temperature
Physics 62, 345 (1986).

[19] R. Fazio and G. Sch¨on, Charge and vortex dynamics in
arrays of tunnel junctions, Phys. Rev. B 43, 5307 (1991).

[20] I. Tamir, A. Benyamini, E. J. Telford, F. Gorniaczyk,
A. Doron, T. Levinson, D. Wang, F. Gay, B. Sac´ep´e,
J. Hone, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. R. Dean, A. N.
Pasupathy, and D. Shahar, Sensitivity of the supercon-
ducting state in thin films, Science Advances 5, eaau3826
(2019).

[21] M. Mulligan and S. Raghu, Composite fermions and the
field-tuned superconductor-insulator transition, Phys.
Rev. B 93, 205116 (2016).

[22] E. Shimshoni, A. Auerbach, and A. Kapitulnik, Trans-


7

port through quantum melts, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3352
(1998).

[23] A. Ghosal, M. Randeria, and N. Trivedi, Role of spa-
tial amplitude fluctuations in highly disordered s-wave
superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3940 (1998).

[24] M. A. Skvortsov and M. V. Feigel’man, Superconductiv-
ity in disordered thin films: Giant mesoscopic fluctua-
tions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 057002 (2005).

[25] Y. Dubi,
Y. Meir, and Y. Avishai, Nature of the
superconductor-insulator transition in disordered super-
conductors, Nature 449, 876 (2007).

[26] M.
V.
Feigel’man
and
A.
I.
Larkin,
Quantum
superconductor-metal
transition
in
a
2d
proximity-
coupled array, Chemical Physics 235, 107 (1998).

[27] B. M¨uhlschlegel, D. J. Scalapino, and R. Denton, Ther-
modynamic properties of small superconducting parti-
cles, Phys. Rev. B 6, 1767 (1972).

[28] O. Entin-Wohlman, A. Kapitulnik, and Y. Shapira, De-
pendence of Tc on the normal-state resistivity in granular
superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 24, 6464 (1981).

[29] L. B. Ioffe and A. I. Larkin, Properties of superconduc-
tors with a smeared transition temperature, Zh. ´Eksp.
Teor. Fiz. 81, 707 (1981), [Sov. Phys. JETP 54, 378
(1981)].

[30] Y. Imry and M. Strongin, Destruction of superconductiv-
ity in granular and highly disordered metals, Phys. Rev.
B 24, 6353 (1981).

[31] L. Merchant, J. Ostrick, R. P. Barber, and R. C.
Dynes, Crossover from phase fluctuation to amplitude-
dominated superconductivity:
A model system, Phys.
Rev. B 63, 134508 (2001).

[32] B. Abeles, Effect of charging energy on superconductivity
in granular metal films, Phys. Rev. B 15, 2828 (1977).

[33] K. B. Efetov, Phase transition in granulated supercon-
ductors, Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 78, 2017 (1980), [Sov. Phys.
JETP 51, 1015 (1980)].

[34] D. Kowal and Z. Ovadyahu, Disorder induced granularity
in an amorphous superconductor, Solid State Commun.
90, 783 (1994).

[35] Z. Chen, B. Y. Wang, A. G. Swartz, H. Yoon, Y. Hikita,
S. Raghu, and H. Y. Hwang, Universal behavior of the
bosonic metallic ground state in a two-dimensional su-
perconductor, npj Quantum Mater. 6, 15 (2021).

[36] T. S. Tighe, M. T. Tuominen, J. M. Hergenrother, and
M. Tinkham, Measurements of charge soliton motion in
two-dimensional arrays of ultrasmall josephson junctions,
Phys. Rev. B 47, 1145 (1993).

[37] A. Caldeira and A. Leggett, Quantum tunnelling in a
dissipative system, Annals of Physics 149, 374 (1983).

[38] D. B. Schwartz, B. Sen, C. N. Archie, and J. E. Lukens,
Quantitative study of the effect of the environment on
macroscopic quantum tunneling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55,
1547 (1985).

[39] J. M. Martinis, M. H. Devoret, and J. Clarke, Experi-
mental tests for the quantum behavior of a macroscopic
degree of freedom: The phase difference across a joseph-
son junction, Phys. Rev. B 35, 4682 (1987).

[40] G. Sch¨on and A. Zaikin, Quantum coherent effects, phase
transitions, and the dissipative dynamics of ultra small
tunnel junctions, Physics Reports 198, 237 (1990).

[41] M. Iansiti, A. T. Johnson, W. F. Smith, H. Rogalla, C. J.
Lobb, and M. Tinkham, Charging energy and phase delo-
calization in single very small josephson tunnel junctions,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 489 (1987).

[42] L. J. Geerligs, D. V. Averin, and J. E. Mooij, Observation
of macroscopic quantum tunneling through the coulomb
energy barrier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 3037 (1990).

[43] M. P. A. Fisher, Quantum phase slips and superconduc-
tivity in granular films, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 885 (1986).

[44] S. Chakravarty, S. Kivelson, G. T. Zimanyi, and B. I.
Halperin, Effect of quasiparticle tunneling on quantum-
phase fluctuations and the onset of superconductivity in
granular films, Phys. Rev. B 35, 7256 (1987).

[45] V. Ambegaokar, B. I. Halperin, and J. S. Langer, Hop-
ping conductivity in disordered systems, Phys. Rev. B 4,
2612 (1971).

[46] A. Coniglio, Thermal phase transition of the dilute s-
state potts and n-vector models at the percolation thresh-
old, Phys. Rev. Lett. 46, 250 (1981).

[47] A. Coniglio, Thermal phase transition of the dilute s-
state potts and n-vector models at the percolation thresh-
old, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 15, 3829 (1982).

[48] D. C. Wright, D. J. Bergman, and Y. Kantor, Resistance
fluctuations in random resistor networks above and below
the percolation threshold, Phys. Rev. B 33, 396 (1986).

[49] A. L. Efros and B. I. Shklovskii, Electronic Properties
of Doped Semiconductors (Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,
1984).

[50] J. B. Keller, A theorem on the conductivity of a com-
posite medium, Journal of Mathematical Physics 5, 548
(1964).

[51] A. Dykhne, Phase transition in granulated superconduc-
tors, Zh. ´Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 59, 110 (1970), [Sov. Phys.
JETP 32, 63 (1971)].

[52] K. S. Mendelson, A theorem on the effective conductivity
of a two-dimensional heterogeneous medium, J. of Appl.
Phys. 46, 4740 (1975).

[53] J. P. Straley, Critical exponents for the conductivity of
random resistor lattices, Phys. Rev. B 15, 5733 (1977).

[54] A. J. Rimberg, T. R. Ho, i. m. c. Kurdak, J. Clarke,
K. L. Campman, and A. C. Gossard, Dissipation-driven
superconductor-insulator transition in a two-dimensional
josephson-junction array, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2632
(1997).

[55] N. Mason and A. Kapitulnik, Superconductor-insulator
transition in a capacitively coupled dissipative environ-
ment, Phys. Rev. B 65, 220505(R) (2002).

[56] A. Kapitulnik and G. Deutscher, Comments on computer
investigations of micrographs of metal films near their
continuity threshold, Thin Solid Films 113, 79 (1984).


8

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Anomalous metals: From “failed superconductor” to “failed insulator”

Xinyang Zhang,1,2 Alexander Palevski,3 and Aharon Kapitulnik,1,2,4

1Geballe Laboratory for Advanced Materials, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
2Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
3School of Physics and Astronomy, Raymond and Beverly Sackler, Faculty of Exact Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv
6997801, Israel
4Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

GRAIN SIZE DISTRIBUTION ANALYSIS

FIG. S1. Grain clustering analysis on scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image. (Left) The raw SEM micrograph.
(Middle) Processed image in which white color represents grain occupation. (Right) Clustering outcome using scipy and opencv
package in Python. The entire image is 6 µm wide. Each pixel corresponds to 6 nm.

Figure S1 shows the same SEM micrograph as shown in Figure 2(a) in main text. The illuminated grains are
randomly distributed indium (In) islands while a uniform amorphous indium oxide (InOx) thin film underlies the
grains. Because of the non-wetting characteristic of In on InOx, the grains form shapes of droplets, including larger
ones on the order of ∼ µm and small interstitial ones that are ∼ nm in diameter. Therefore, the appearances of grains


9

in this SEM picture is affected by the angle of illumination, and thus the dark side of the grains may be hard for
image processing algorithm to identify.
Nevertheless, the edges of the grains have sufficient contrast to be delineated manually. While it is straightforward
to distinguish the larger grains, the smaller interstitial ones are often blurred and not well contrasted from the
background. Furthermore, since the diameter of the smallest grains are approaching image resolution, a grain that
is smaller than a few pixel squared may not be picked up at all. As a consequence, we emphasize a lower cut-off in
the distribution of measured grain equivalent diameter as shown in Figure 2(b) in main text. A similar approach was
previously used to analyze percolation characteristics in inhomogeneous Pb deposited on amorphous Ge [56].
All isolated grains are identified using clustering algorithm in “scipy” package in Python. All pixels that belong
to an isolated grain are collected with the same label and the location of each grain’s centroid and the respective
equivalent diameter can also be easily found. With this analysis, all geometric information in this picture regarding
the random distribution of In grains is collected. Further analysis may reveal the distribution of intergrain distance,
spacing, or coordination numbers of the grains, etc. These information may be useful in studying intergrain coupling
or tunneling processes in the system.

LOW-FIELD MAGNETORESISTANCE

FIG. S2. Magneto-resistance and its fluctuation in S0, S1, and S2. (Left) Magnetoresistance (MR) between H = ±100
Oe. Note the difference in scale for S1 and S2. Dashed lines are power-law fits that remove general trend of the MR. (Right)
Power spectral density as a function of Fourier component of magnetic field fluctuation. “f3dB” denotes the cut-off frequency
of our lock-in amplifier’s low pass filter in this measurement.

Figure S2 shows a comparison of MR between three annealing stages S0, S1, and S2. Dashed lines are fits to the
MR using power law form ρxx = ρ0+A·|H|p. In additional to an overall positive MR, the fluctuations may result from
persistent current loops connected by inter-grain Josephson coupling. In certain cases, loops of a prominent size may
appear in the Fourier spectrum with a peak at a certain frequency. However, in our system due to the randomness,
current loops of all sizes may contribute and the resulting spectrum is that of a white noise, i.e. without apparent
frequency dependence. Here, we see general spectra of white noise after taking the -24 dB/octave lock-in low-pass
filter cut-off at ∼ 0.8 Oe−1 into account. For S0, the peaks at around 1.3 Oe−1 and 3 Oe−1 may originate from
current loops of 2 or 3 µm in size defined as ℓB =
�

Φ0/2πH, corresponding to the large islands. Φ0 = 2.07 T · m2

denotes a flux quantum.
For S1 and S2, the spectra show no prominent peaks suggesting current loops of all
sizes contribute to frequency-independent spectra.
This is consistent with expectation as superconductivity is
more robust in S1 and S2, where a low-field is not sufficient to cut off a majority of the Josephson couplings.
The absolute values of the spectral density, however, may not matter since they depend on sensitivity settings of
lock-in amplifier as S0, S1, and S2 have vastly different resistance values. Where periodicity is inherent in the mor-
phology of the superconducting islands array, a periodic MR oscillations are clearly observed as in Ref. [5] and Ref. [7].


10

DIFFERENTIAL RESISTIVITY dV/dI

FIG. S3. Differential resistivity dV/dI in different regimes. dV/dI versus dc bias current Idc in superconducting, failed
superconducting, and failed insulating regimes, as controlled by magnetic field.

Figure S3 shows differential resistivity dV/dI measured at fixed dc bias current for different magnetic field. In this
case, an applied magnetic field tunes the system from superconducting to failed superconducting to failed insulating
phases. The critical current in superconducting phase is immediately suppressed upon a low applied field of 30 Oe. In
the failed superconducting phase, dV/dI has a v-shape, with its value approaching the normal state value at higher
currents. The v-shape gradually evolve to a zero-bias peak, where the system enters failed insulating phase. The
peak grows rapidly as field increases and eventually diminishes when local superconductivity amplitude is suppressed
at high field. Such I-V characteristics are also observed as a feature of anomalous metal in ordered array of JJ as in
Ref. [5].


