Page | 1

Broadband Microwave Spectroscopy for Two-Dimensional 
Material Systems

Antonio L. Levy* and Neil M. Zimmerman

Physical Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology 

(NIST), Gaithersburg, Maryland, 20899-8171, USA

I.
Abstract

In recent years, interesting materials have emerged which are only available as µm-

scale flakes, and whose novel physics might be better understood through broadband 

microwave spectroscopy; examples include twisted bilayer graphene [1], 2D materials  

in which many-body phases are observed [2], and artificial lattices for analog quantum 

simulations [3]. Most previous techniques are unfortunately not sensitive for flakes 

below mm lateral sizes.  We propose a simple technique which does not require 

sophisticated sample preparation nor Ohmic contact and show through theory and 

simulations that one will be able to qualitatively measure spectral features of interest, 

and quantitatively measure the frequency-dependent complex conductivity.

II.
Introduction

In recent years, two-dimensional materials, such as twisted bilayer graphene [1], 2D 

materials  in which many-body phases are observed [2], and artificial lattices [4, 3], have 

emerged; the novel physics of these materials might be better understood through broadband 

microwave spectroscopy [5, 6, 7]. Also, understanding the physics behind the novel phenomena 

exhibited by these material systems may prove necessary to realizing applications based on 

them. One difficulty with such measurements is that often the thin films can only be grown in 

small flakes, of order 1 µm in lateral size; this work proposes a new broadband measurement 

which can be conveniently applied to such small flakes and does not require Ohmic contact.

Broadband conductivity spectroscopy has helped demystify the physics of some thin film 

materials. Such a system’s conductivity spectrum depends strongly on its energy level spectrum,

and thus is a direct reflection of the ground state and excited state physics. Previously, broadband 

microwave spectroscopy has been used to study novel physics of thin film materials which can 


Page | 2

be grown in large mm-scale flakes, such as charge density wave ground states of 2D electron 

systems [5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13], multiferroics [14], superconductor [6], metal-insulator transitions 

[15] , and other correlated systems [7].  In analogy, microwave spectroscopy could also provide 

critical insights into material systems with novel physics that are harder to experimentally access, 

such as thin films with flake sizes1restricted to about 10 µm; an example of particular interest to 

our group is analog quantum simulators (AQS) with spins in semiconductors [3].

There are several existing techniques for GHz broadband spectroscopy. Please see Table 

III for comparison of the previous techniques to our technique.

This paper presents a new technique for performing broadband microwave spectroscopy on 

flakes with lateral sizes as small as one µm (could be even smaller using lithography with finer 

resolution) and nm-sized thicknesses. The crucial aspect is a coplanar waveguide (CPW) with a 

series gap in the signal line over the flake. This series gap concentrates the sensitivity of the 

macroscopic device into the area of the flake; as a result, the macroscopic transmission in a 

transmission line (of length meters, going through various magnetic field, temperature, etc.) is 

dominated by the ac conductance of the flake.  After introducing the technique, we present 

simulations for a candidate system (twisted bilayer graphene), and thus demonstrate a simulated

ability to deduce the ac conductance (including interesting frequency dependence due to the 

superconducting gap) while including real-world irreproducibility.

III.
The Proposed Technique

Definition
Stage of Experiment

1 We note that, throughout this paper, our use of the word “flake” includes samples which are 
not exfoliated but which, because of other fabrication limitations, cannot be made larger than 
10 m in lateral size


Page | 3

ZCPW
Characteristic impedance

Z(ω)
Sample impedance (Fig. 2)

t(ω)
Transmission (Eq. 3)

V1
Amplitude of AC voltage

Zgap
impedance from the combination of 
CCouple, 

CSeries, and 𝑍(𝜔)

CSeries
Series capacitance (Fig. 2)

CCouple
Coupling capacitance (Fig. 2)

CSH
Shunt capacitance (Fig. A1)

tsimZ (ω)
Simulated transmission with material
Z() and non-ideal wiring

Simulated Measurement

tsim∞ (ω)
Simulated transmission with insulator (
Z(ω)=∞) and non-ideal wiring

Simulated Control

twir-a (ω), twir-b (ω)
Measured transmission in wiring

α
Constant near unity

σ1, σ2
Real and imaginary parts of sample 2-D 
conductivity (units sq/)

t∞
Similar to 
tsim∞ (ω), but with ideal wiring

tR (ω)
Sample transmission relative to control
Both

texpflake (ω)
Experimental transmission with material
Z() and non-ideal wiring

Experimental Measurement

texpcontrol (ω)
Experimental transmission with sample in 
insulating regime and non-ideal wiring

Experimental Control

Table 1 Definitions of symbols.  “Stage of experiment” refers to either i) “Measurement” with 
sample Z(ω)or ii) “Control” with Z(ω) = ∞.


Page | 4

The basic idea (see Fig. 1) is to fabricate a CPW with a series gap in the signal line over the 

flake of interest. The crucial item here is that the gap in the signal line means that 

transmission is dominated by the conductivity of the thin-film flake; because of this, we will 

show that modest changes in the conductivity of the thin film effect large changes in the 

transmitted signal. This technique will allow groups to sensitively and easily measure 

conductivity spectra for a wide variety of materials without requiring obscure or specialized 

fabrication or measurement techniques. Once fabricated, one would conveniently measure 

the transmission characteristic using standard Vector Network Analyzer methods.

The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 2, including the characteristic impedance ZCPW. As 

mentioned above, we emphasize that the desired large signal arises in the parameter regime 

where conduction from left to right is dominated by 1/Z(ω) , the ac conductance of the flake of 

interest. In Appendix A, we give a full derivation of Equations, and also include a discussion of 

Figure 1 The proposed experimental setup for the technique. The gap in the CPW (grey ground plane and 
grey signal line) signal line would be located directly over the thin-film flake (black), which would be 
separated from the CPW by a dielectric; VNA is a network analyzer. Dimensions are illustrative, chosen to 
ensure ease of fabrication (requiring only photo-lithography as opposed to techniques such as electron-
beam lithography) and impedance matching with 50 Ω cables.  The crucial theme: the gap in the signal 
line means that transmission is dominated by the conductivity of the thin-film flake.


Page | 5

the fact that the change in geometry near the gap does not significantly perturb the current flow 

nor the value of transmission t().We now present a brief derivation of the relationship between 

the t() and the thin film’s ac conductance.  This derivation just uses continuity of current, and 

voltage drops across impedances.  To start, assuming the gap is much smaller than the 

wavelength of the microwave signal, continuity of current yields [in this derivation, we do not 

carry along the explicit frequency dependence of t()]:

1 = 𝑟 + 𝑡
Equation (1)

Similarly, combining this with voltage drops yields:

𝑉1(1 + 𝑟) = 𝑉1 𝑡 +

𝑉1

𝑍𝐶𝑃𝑊 𝑡𝑍𝑔𝑎𝑝 = 𝑉1 𝑡 +

𝑉1

𝑍𝐶𝑃𝑊

𝑖𝜔𝐶𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 +
1

2

𝑖𝜔𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒

+𝑍(𝜔)

𝑡
Equation (2) 

Here, V1 is the amplitude of the incoming signal at frequency , 𝑟 and 𝑡 are the reflection and 

transmission coefficients, respectively, and Zgap is the impedance from the combination of Ccouple, 

Cseries and Z(). If the system were resistively coupled to the signal lines instead, we would replace

1

𝑖𝜔𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒 by a contact resistance in Equation (2). Combining the above equations yields:

Figure 2 Circuit diagram.  ZCPW is the characteristic impedance of the transmission 
line, CSeries is the direct capacitance (in the absence of the conducting flake) 
across the gap, CCouple is the (vertical) capacitance due to the overlap between 
the signal line and the flake, Z() is the complex conductance of the flake; 
typically, CCouple≫CSeries


Page | 6

t() =

2[
1

2

𝑖𝜔𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒

+𝑍(𝜔)+𝑖𝜔𝐶𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠]

2[
1

2

𝑖𝜔𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒

+𝑍(𝜔)+𝑖𝜔𝐶𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠]+
1

𝑍𝐶𝑃𝑊

Equation (3)

Finally, a VNA (vector network analyzer) typically reports magnitude and phase of 𝑡(𝜔).

We can note some simple, appealing limits for Equation (3): i) In the limit of a continuous 

(vanishingly small gap) CPW (where the series capacitance dominates the conduction, and where 

|1/(iωCSeries )|≪ZCPW, t(ω)  1; this is appealing because it shows that a continuous CPW has ideal 

transmission.  ii) in the opposite limit where the conduction is dominated by the flake |1/(iωCSeries

)|≫|Z(ω)|≫|1/(iωCCouple)|,ZCPW, we obtain t(ω) (2ZCPW)/Z(ω)≪1, showing that the transmission 

and its frequency dependence allow deduction of the flake ac conductance. We note that, for 

the parameters in Table II, all three conditions in limit ii) can be satisfied for |Z(ω)| varying by a 

range of a factor of 25; for instance, at 1 GHz, all three conditions are satisfied if 

|Z(ω)|∈[7,150]kΩ (please see Fig. 4 for a graphical elucidation of parameter range).

Parameter
Value or limit
Source
Z (2  108 Hz)

CSeries
500 aF
Simulation
(see 

Appendix)

3 X 106 

CCouple
50 fF
Simulation
(see 

Appendix)

3 X 104 

CSH
(see Fig. A1 and 

discussion in Appendix)

Less than 1 fF
Bounds 
on 

simulation
(see 

Appendix)

greater than 2 X 

106 

Flake size
7 m X 7 m
[1]

Insulating layer thickness
30 nm


Page | 7

Table II: Values or bound on useful parameters, obtained using the dimensions in Figure 1, 

including the approximate impedance at 100 MHz.  Please see the Appendix for details.

Simulated Spectral Measurements 

We now discuss simulations for broadband measurements of superconducting twisted bilayer 

graphene encapsulated in h-BN on a Si substrate [1] with the setup depicted in Figure 1 (the 

graphene is represented by the black rectangle). We chose this material because i) the 

superconducting transition temperature of about 0.5 K means that there is interesting frequency 

dependence near 10 GHz, ii) the microwave spectrum has not been previously measured, and iii) 

the superconducting and insulating states of such sample offer a convenient in-situ way to 

perform a control experiment, i.e., to measure with non-zero flake conductance and then with 

essentially zero flake conductance (these two stages are referred to in Table I as “Measurement” 

and “Control”). However, as we discuss later, we note that the typical superconducting complex 

conductivity (pure imaginary below the gap frequency) leads to some complications which are 

not present in most materials of interest.

We will now show simulations, with the ultimate goal of demonstrating the ability to 

deduce, from a simple GHz transmission measurement, i) qualitative spectral features such as 

resonant states in an AQS structure or a superconducting gap and ii) quantitative information of 

the complex conductivity of a m-scale flake (Figure 3 (d)) while including real-world non-

idealities in wiring.  We also show the large difference between the situations of flake 

conductivity present versus absent (insets in Figures 3 (b) and (c)); we will refer to the flake 

absent (i.e., zero conductivity) as the “control” experiment.  The large difference demonstrates 

both i) the inherent ability to observe resonant features such as those in AQS samples, and ii) the 

large signal-to-noise ratio inherent in our technique.

The proposed experiment depends on taking transmission spectra of the twisted bilayer 

graphene with small |Z ()|, and then large |Z ()| as a control measurement (i.e., under zero 


Page | 8

magnetic field and then under a magnetic field large enough to make the twisted bilayer 

graphene non-superconducting). 

Figure 3 shows simulations using our proposed technique to characterize 

superconducting twisted bilayer graphene, using the dimensions in Figure 1; please note that the 

dimensions are illustrative; our technique is applicable over a wide range of sizes. We assume 

appropriate sizes and thicknesses as in Table II; amongst other conditions, this gives a large 

enough Ccouple to allow us to satisfy conditions ii) above.

We start with the real and imaginary parts of the complex two-dimensional conductivity 

spectra (𝜎1 and 𝜎2, respectively, with units of sq/) in Fig. 3(a), as calculated using the Mattis-

Bardeen theory [16] for an ideal superconductor. The calculation is based on superconducting 

gap energy 2Δ=3.5kBTC≌0.09 meV for TC = 300 mK, and non-superconducting (pure real) 

conductivity σn=4×10-4 Ω-1; we obtained both values from transport measurements taken on 

twisted bilayer graphene with a twist angle of 𝟏. 𝟏𝟔° [1]. We note that the conductivity has the 

classic features for a superconductor: i) σ2→∞at low frequency, and ii) the dissipation 1/σ1

becomes finite above the frequency Δ/h. Please see Appendix for details.

We then simulate the measured complex transmission tsimZ(ω) and tsim∞ (), for the 

conducting and insulating cases [Table I “Measurement” and “Control] (Figures 3 (b) and (c) show 

the complex magnitude and phase).  In these two graphs, the insets show the “raw” simulations, 

and the main parts show the normalized ratio tsimZ () / tsim ().  These two simulations allow us 

to take into account the effects of non-ideal wiring, and using the ratio allows us to minimize 

those effects.  Taking into account non-ideal wiring through two different wiring transmission 

functions twir-a () and twir-b () (please see Appendix for details), we have used 

Z(ω)=α/(σ1-iσ2)

tsimZ (ω)=t(ω) twir-a (ω) and tsim∞(ω)=t∞ (ω) twir-b (ω)

where α is a constant of order one to estimate the number of squares in the flake (we use 

3 m/7 m), t is defined by Eq’n 3 using the parameters in Table II, and t∞=t|(Z(ω)=∞). In this way, 


Page | 9

in the main parts of Figures 3b and 3c we have used the protocol of flake stage and then control 

stage to minimize the effects of non-ideal wiring:

𝑡𝑅(𝜔) ≡

𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑚

𝑍
(𝜔)

𝑡𝑠𝑖𝑚

∞
(𝜔) =

𝑡(𝜔)

𝑡∞ [

𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑟−𝑎(𝜔)

𝑡𝑤𝑖𝑟−𝑏(𝜔)]
Equation (4)

where we note that using the ratio (twir-a () / twir-b()) allows us to remove the effects of 

most of the non-ideal wiring transmission and has only the irreproducible parts of the 

transmission.

We note that Figures 3(b) and 3(c) demonstrate clearly the two claims made at the 

beginning of this section: Transmission measurements will allow us to immediately observe 

resonant features, and there is a large difference in magnitude and phase between the 

measurement with the flake and without (conductivity turned off). In particular, please note the 

easily-detectible resonance at about 20 GHz in Fig. 3c, due to the superconducting transition; it 

is this type of frequency feature for which we have devised our technique. We also note, as 

mentioned earlier, that the atypical complex conductivity of a superconductor means that 

magnitude of t does not show the spectral feature [the peak at about 14 GHz in Fig. 3b is an 

artifact arising from the pure imaginary value of Z(w), which leads to the series impedance of 

Ccouple and Z() going through zero]; this is because near 20 GHz, || is dominated by 2 which 

does not exhibit a large spectral feature at the gap, and thus t  2 ZCPW / Z() does not exhibit a 

large spectral feature. In contrast, we have verified (not shown) that for a more typical pure real 

conductivity (for example, a single Drude resonance), both |t()| and arg(t()) show the spectral 

feature of the resonance.  

We now go beyond demonstrating the ability to qualitatively see spectral structure, and 

demonstrate how accurately we can deduce the complex conductivity of a m-scale flake. In

Figure 3(d) we have simulated reverting the simulated transmission data t(), which incorporates

real-world non-idealities (twir-a () and twir-b), to recover quantitative complex conductivity data 

(please see Appendix for details). In the following prescription, we explain both i) how we 

simulated results for Figure 3(d), and ii) how we propose to use a parallel prescription for 

experimental data (for which one would start with data equivalent to that in Figures 3b and 3c).  


Page | 10

We start with the ratio defined in Equation 4, and extend it to include either the simulation or 

the proposed protocol in the actual experiment:

tR (ω)≡ tsimZ (ω)/(tsim∞ (ω) )=t(ω)/t∞ [twir-a(ω) /twir-b(ω)]
OR   tR(ω)=texpflake (ω)/texpcontrol (ω)

Next, we calculate the effective

teff (ω) ≡ tR (ω) t∞=t(ω)[(twir-a(ω))/(twir-b(ω))] OR   teff (ω)≡ tR (ω) t∞=texpflake(ω)/(texpcontrol (ω)) t∞

where the first possibility was used to generate Figure 3(d), and in the second possibility we 

would use the conducting and control data in the experiment, and where the parameter values 

in t = t|Z() =  came from Table II for the simulations in Figure 3(d), but for the experiment would 

come from either i) estimates using device geometry or ii) as deduced from low-frequency data 

(please see Appendix).  Finally, we have

𝜎(𝜔) = 𝛼 [(

𝑡𝑅(𝜔)

2
𝑍𝐶𝑃𝑊(1 − 𝑡𝑅(𝜔)) − 𝑖𝜔𝐶𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠)

−1

−

2

𝑖𝜔𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒]

−1

Equation (5)

Using this prescription, we note in Figure 3d the excellent sensitivity, and the ability to 

deduce the true complex conductivity [note the excellent agreement between Figures 3 (a) and

3 (d)]. We note that we lose sensitivity to Z() at low frequencies, where Ccouple dominates.

Finally, for quantitative comparison to the “Shunt in CPW” technique in Table III, please see 

Appendix B for simulation results with the same flake dimensions.  In this case, the analogous 

signal sizes are about 1 dB and /20.

We can now consider the optimum regime for our technique.  In order for this 

prescription to work, we need the impedance in the gap of the CPW to be dominated by the flake 

impedance (condition ii above); this sets limits on the flake impedance which are functions of 

frequency.  In Fig. 4, we show these frequency-dependent limits for the parameters in Table II.

Finally, having shown the qualitative and quantitative advantages and limitations of our 

proposed technique, we can now show in a condensed fashion the comparison with previous 

techniques – please see Table III.


Page | 11

Figure 3: Expected transmission signal for superconducting twisted bilayer graphene, and 

reversion to obtain complex conductivity.  a) Complex conductivity obtained from Mattis-

Bardeen theory (see Appendix); b) magnitude and c) phase (main part) predicted normalized 

transmission signals – note that the spectral features arising from the superconducting gap would 

be represented as a large feature in the phase, demonstrating the qualitative strength of the 

proposed technique.  Please also note that these simulations include effects of non-ideal wiring.

b) magnitude and c) phase (insets) show the un-normalized spectra, where the effects of non-

ideal wiring are manifestly obvious. d) Demonstration of ability to revert data back to complex 


Page | 12

conductivity, using the prescription in Equations 5 in the main text; the excellent agreement 

between panels a) and d) demonstrate the quantitative strength of the proposed technique.

Table III: Comparison of different broadband microwave techniques.

Technique
Advantage(s)
Disadvantage(s)
Reference(s)

Free-space
No fabrication
Can’t measure m-scale
[14]

Shunt in CPW
Can’t measure m-scale;  may 

require insulator on top of film.

[10]

AC Transport
Convenient fabrication
Can’t measure m-scale nor 

above 5 MHz
[17]

Dielectric 

properties of 

biological cells

Convenient fabrication.
Was only applied to measuring 

frequency-independent R and C, 

not Z(); requires insulator on 

top of film.

[18]

AFM 
wave 

spectroscopy

Good spatial resolution and 

signal sensitivity (about 1 dB); 

can measure m-scale flakes.

Requires AFM.  Quite slow due to 

need to move between each 

frequency.

[19]

Gapped CPW 

(present 

technique)

Convenient fabrication; 
wide 

range of thin film resistivities; 

can get quantitative frequency 

dependence 
with 
excellent 

sensitivity (1 dB or less)

Requires insulator on top of film; 

requires location with respect to 

flake(s).


Page | 13

Figure 4: Phase space of high (green) and low (red) sensitivity using conditions ii) 

discussed above.  As discussed in the text, the range of sensitive measurements would be 

extended by at least a factor of ten in |Z()| if we use fabrication techniques with better 

resolution than optical lithography.

IV.
Experimental considerations

One could improve the sensitivity of the new measurement technique to less conducting 

and/or smaller flakes (well below a few m) by using fabrication techniques with better spatial 

resolution. In particular, since in general the sensitivity is limited by the condition 

|Z()|  |1/(iCseries)|, and since the value of Cseries is roughly proportional to the width of the 

CPW, fabricating a device whose width and gap are n times smaller can increase the maximum 

detectable resistivity by n. We could easily achieve a factor of ten larger range of |Z()| by using 

electron-beam lithography for the central portion of the series-gapped CPW. 

In addition, as mentioned above, making reliable Ohmic contact to 2-D materials with 

lateral sizes of order mm is often challenging [20]; we note that it is even more challenging to 


Page | 14

make such contacts with high-quality transmission line characteristics (e.g., avoiding large 

impedance mismatch in vias).  In contrast, with our proposed technique, we have obviated the 

need for such contacts.  

Challenges are also present: The first is driven by the need to have a control (i.e., 

insulating) measurement for comparison.  We have chosen graphene as a candidate material in 

part because the superconducting transition provides a very convenient control.  However, for 

twisted bilayer graphene in particular, we may need to implement a buried gate to achieve 

superconductivity [1], or we might apply gate voltages on the CPW centerline.  For other 

candidate materials, it may be necessary to run a control experiment with a separate chip in the 

same cryostat cooldown, or perhaps even in different cooldowns; we note that in the simulations 

in Fig. 3, we used an irreproducibility in the wiring transmission which is appropriate for a single 

cooldown with controllable Z(), but probably smaller than that which we could expect for 

different cooldowns.

In addition, we note that in some cases the finite real conductivity 1 will be a 

complicating factor.  In particular, the effective RC delay in the bottom plate of the capacitor 

Ccouple could possibly distort the reversion to ().  We have analyzed the case of a distributed 

RC network [21], and found that the distortion is minimal (of order 10 %) in the optimum range 

of Figure 4.  We plan on presenting the details of this in a future publication.

Also, we note that the magnitude of the total transmission (including real-world insertion 

loss) as shown in Fig. 3b is quite small.  We note that i) much of the insertion loss occurs in the 

wiring before the sample, so that a larger input power will help; ii) it may be necessary to use 

low-temperature amplifiers (a common technique).

Another challenge is presented by the sparsity of flake coverage in many two-dimensional 

materials (often of order 1 % relative areal density).  In such case, one will need to take care to 

either/both i) orient the CPW and gap with respect to predetermined flake locations or ii) 

fabricate many gapped CPW’s in order to have a good statistical chance to overlap flake(s).  We 

note that choice ii) would also naturally provide the desired control device on the same chip.


Page | 15

Finally, we hope to extend the usefulness of this technique by making wafer-scale buried

gapped CPW’s before deposition/exfoliation/deposition of the flakes of interest, a la’ the work 

of [1].

V.
Conclusions

We have proposed a technique for performing sensitive broadband microwave conductivity 

spectroscopy on materials only available as micron-scale flakes, using a coplanar waveguide with 

a series gap above the material of interest. We have shown through theory and simulations that

the conductivity of the flake effects large changes in the amplitude and phase of the transmitted 

signal, and can allow us to qualitatively measure important spectral features. By including real-

world non-idealities, we have also shown that the new technique can be used to accurately 

measure broadband spectral conductivity, even if the spectral reproducibility of measurements 

is limited. We note the relative advantages and disadvantages summarized in Table III.

More broadly, this setup could be used to measure the conductivity spectrum of many two-

dimensional materials of interest, even when the lateral size is limited to m scale, ranging from 

metallic systems to pinned modes of charge density waves to AQS structures [1, 9]. These results 

are also striking for the range of resistivity for which the transmitted signal is sensitive, which is 

large enough to characterize such diverse systems as pinning modes from insulating electron 

solids [5, 9] and the free carrier response in highly conducting systems like twisted bilayer 

graphene.

VI.
Acknowledgements

The authors would like to offer special thanks to Josh Pomeroy of NIST for numerous 

insightful conversations and logistical and technical assistance with the low-temperature 

transmission measurements. We would also like to thank Zac Barcikowski, Richard Silver,

Pradeep Namboodiri, Ranjit Kashid, Richard Silver, Nikolai Zhitenev, and Michael Stewart (all of 

NIST) for insightful conversations, and for technical training and assistance throughout this 

process.


Page | 16

AUTHOR DECLARATIONS

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

DATA AVAILABILITY

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras and P. Jarillo-Herrero, 

"Unconventional superconductivity in magic-angle graphene superlattices," Nature, vol. 556, no. 
7699, pp. 43-50, 2018. 

[2] S. Chen, R. Ribeiro-Palau, K. Yang, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, M. O. Goerbig and C. R. Dean, "Competing 

Fractional Quantum Hall and Electron Solid Phases in Graphene," Physical Review Letters, vol. 122, 
no. 2, p. 026802, 2019. 

[3] J. Salfi, J. A. Mol, R. Rahman, G. Klimeck, M. Y. Simmons, L. C. L. Hollenberg and S. Rogge, 

"Quantum simulation of the Hubbard model with dopant atoms in silicon," Nature 
communications, vol. 7, pp. 1-6, 2016. 

[4] S. Wang, D. Scarabelli, L. Du, Y. Y. Kuznetsova, L. N. Pfeiffer, K. W. West, G. C. Gardner, M. J. 

Manfra, V. Pellegrini, S. J. Wind and A. Pinczuk, "Observation of Dirac bands in artificial graphene 
in small-period nanopatterned GaAs quantum wells," Nature nanotechnology, vol. 13, pp. 29-33, 
2018. 

[5] G. Sambandamurthy, R. M. Lewis, H. Zhu and Y. P. Chen, "Observation of Pinnig Mode of Stripe 

Phases of 2D systems in High Landau Levels," Physical Review Letters, vol. 100, p. 256801, 2008. 

[6] K. Steinberg, M. Scheffler and M. Dressel, "Quasiparticle response of superconducting aluminum 

to electromagnetic radiation," Phsical Review B, vol. 77, no. 21, p. 214517, 2008. 

[7] D. N. Basov, R. D. Averitt, D. v. Marel, M. Dressel and K. Haule, "Electrodynamics of correlated 

electron materials," Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 83, no. 2, pp. 471-541, 2011. 

[8] A. T. Hatke, Y. Liu, L. W. Engel, L. N. Pfeiffer, K. W. West, K. W. Baldwin and M. Shayegan, 

"MIcrowave spectroscopic observation of a Wigner solid within the \nu=1/2 fractional quantum 
Hall effect," Physical Review B, vol. 95, p. 045417, 2017. 


Page | 17

[9] R. M. Lewis, P. D. Ye, L. W. Engel, D. C. Tsui, L. N. Pfeiffer and K. W. West, "Microwave Resonance 

of the Bubble Phases in 1/4 and 3/4 Filled High Landau Levels," Physical Review Letters, vol. 89, p. 
136804, 2002. 

[10] L. W. Engel, C. C. Li, D. Shahar, D. C. Tsui and M. Shayegan, "Microwave resonances in low-filling 

insulating phase of two-dimensional electron system," Solid State Communications, vol. 104, no. 3, 
pp. 167-171, 1997. 

[11] E. Y. Andrei, G. Deville, D. C. Glattli, F. I. B. Williams, E. Paris and B. Etienne, "Observation of a 

Magnetically Induced Wigner Solid," Physical Review Letters, vol. 62, no. 26, pp. 2765-2768, 1988. 

[12] C. C. Li, J. Yoon, L. W. Engel, D. Shahar, D. C. Tsui and M. Shayegan, "Microwave resonance and 

weak pinning in two-dimensional hole systems at high magnetic fields," Physical Review B, vol. 61, 
no. 16, pp. 61-62, 2000. 

[13] Y. P. Chen, R. M. Lewis, L. W. Engel, D. C. Tsui, P. D. Ye, Z. H. Wang, L. N. Pfeiffer and K. W. West, 

"Evidence for Two Different Solid Phases of Two-Dimensional Electrons in High Magnetic Fields," 
Physcal Review Letters, vol. 93, no. 20, p. 206805, 2004. 

[14] Y. Oamura, S. Seki, S. Bordács, Á. Butykai, V. Tsurkan, I. Kézsmárki and Y. Tokura, "Microwave 

Directional Dichroism Resonant with Spin Excitations in the Polar Ferromagnet GaV_4 S_8," 
Physical Review Letters, vol. 122, p. 057202, 2019. 

[15] H. L. Lee, J. P. Carini, D. V. Baxter and G. Grüner, "Temperature-Frequency Scaling in Amorphous 

Niobium-Silicon near the Metal-Insulator," Physical Review Letters, vol. 80, no. 19, pp. 4261-4264, 
1998. 

[16] D. C. Mattis and J. Bardeen, "Theory of the Anomalous Skin Effect in Normal and Superconducting 

Metals," Physical Review, vol. 111, no. 2, pp. 412-417, 1958. 

[17] V. T. Dolgopolov, S. I. Dorozhkin and A. A. Shashkin, "Magnetoresistance of inversion and 

accumulation layers in MOS structures on p Si (100)," Solid state communications, vol. 50, no. 3, 
pp. 273--277, 1984. 

[18] X. Ma, X. Du, C. R. Multari, Y. Ning, C. Palego, X. Luo, V. Gholizadeh, X. Cheng and J. Hwang, 

"Broadband Single-Cell Detection with a Coplanar Series Gap," in 2015 86th ARFTG Microwave 
Measurement Conference, 2015. 

[19] A. Tselev, S. M. Anlage, Z. Ma and J. Melngailis, "Broadband dielectric microwave microscopy on 

micron length scales," Review of scientific instruments, vol. 78, p. 044701, 2007. 

[20] S. W. Schmucker, P. N. Namboodiri, R. Kashid, X. Wang, B. Hu, J. E. Wyrick, A. F. Myers, J. D. 

Schumacher, R. M. Silver and M. D. Stewart, "Low-Resistance, High-Yield Electrical Contacts to 
Atom Scale Si:P Devices Using Palladium Silicide}," Physical Review Applied, vol. 11, no. 3, p. 
034071, 2019. 


Page | 18

[21] V. Dolgopolov, C. Mazure, A. Zrenner and F. Koch, "Surface conductivity measurements by a 

capacitive coupling technique," Journal of applied physics, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 4280--4283, 1984. 

[22] Disclaimer: this product is named only for reference; products, NIST does not endorse any 

commercial. 

[23] J. Durán, C. Martel, G. Prigent and O. Pascal, "Efficient characterization of a CPW series capacitor in 

Ku Band," in 2015 9th European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), 2015, pp. 1-4.

[24] S. Gu, X. Zhou, T. Lin, H. Happy and T. Lasri, "Broadband non-contact characterization of epitaxial 

graphene by near-field microwave microscopy," Nanotechnology, vol. 28, p. 335702, 2017. 

[25] G. S. Jenkins, D. C. Schmadel, A. B. Sushkov, H. D. Drew, M. Bichler, G. Koblmueller, M. Brahlek, N. 

Bansal and S. Oh, "Dirac cone shift of a passivated topological Bi2Se3 interface state," Physical 
Review B, vol. 87, no. 15, p. 155126, 2013. 

[26] M. Beck, M. Klammer, S. Lang, P. Leiderer, V. V. Kabanov, G. N. Gol'tsman and J. Desmar, "Energy-

Gap Dynamics of Superconducting NbN Thin Films Studied by Time-Resolved Terahertz 
Spectroscopy," Physical Review Letters, vol. 107, no. 17, p. 177007, 2011. 

Appendix A: Derivations of Equations in the Main Text

This appendix provides a derivation of Equations 1-3 in the main text; we simply use 

continuity of current, and voltage drops across impedances.  We define current polarity as 

positive when moving to the right.

Figure A1: The same circuit as Figure 1, with the addition of the explicit ZCPW and nodes “L” and 
“R”.


Page | 19

1) Perfect transmission lines and definition of r and t

We start by considering the portions of Figure A1 that correspond to perfect transmission lines 
(node “L” and everything to the left of it, node “R” and everything to the right of it); anywhere 
in this area, by definition of the characteristic impedance ZCPW, we have I = ± V / ZCPW, where the 
negative sign corresponds to waves moving to the left (reflected). The signal to the left of node 
“L” consists of an incident and reflected wave. The signal to the right of node “R” consists 
entirely of a transmitted wave. The relationships between the voltages and currents of these 
signals are governed by the telegrapher’s equations (current continuity and voltage drops 
across impedances).

We now consider the reflection and transmission coefficients 𝑟 and 𝑡, respectively. At 

node “L”, the incoming, reflected and transmitted voltages are given by V1 ei(t – kz) , rV1 ei(t + kz), 

and tV1 ei(t – kz); here, V1 is the amplitude of the incoming wave, 𝑧 is the position along the 

circuit, and k=ω/c √(εEff μEff ), where εEff (μEff) is the effective relative permittivity (magnetic 

permeability) of the CPW. From this point on, since the wavelength at GHz frequencies is much 

larger than the gap size, all voltages are given by amplitudes only.  Thus, the total voltage at 

node “L” is (1 + r) V1.  In addition, using the definition of characteristic impedance ZCPW, given 

above, the current at node “L” (in particular, in the horizontal branch to the left of “L”) is (1-r) 

V1/ZCPW. Similarly, at node “R”, the voltage and current are given by tV1 and tV1/ZCPW, 

respectively. 

2) Consideration of CSH

We now consider CSH; The presence of the gap perturbs the relationship between I and 

V from that of the characteristic impedance, due to electric field lines that no longer propagate 

at right angles between the signal line and the ground of the CPW; we will show in this 

Appendix that, for the frequency and impedance regime of interest (the green area in Figure 4), 

this perturbation has a negligibly small effect.

The presence of non-zero CSH results in current flow through the impedance Zgap as 

follows: 


Page | 20

Node “L”: Igap = (1 - r) V1 / ZCPW - (1 + r) V1 (i  CLSH) 
Equation (A1)

Node “R”: Igap = t V1 / ZCPW + t V1 (i  CRSH)
Equation (A2)

Here, Igap is the current flowing in the horizontal branch to the right of “L” and to the left 

of “R”; also, Zgap is the series-parallel combination of Ccouple, Cseries, and Z(), which from the 

values in Table II and Figure 4 is less than about 1 M.  

Note that, from the values in Table II, at any frequency below 100 GHz, 1 / ZCPW >> 

CLSH,  CRSH and thus we can immediately see from Eq’n A2 that CRSH is negligible.  It turns out 

that, at node “L” to first order in  CLSH ZCPW, CLSH is also negligible.  A simple way to see that is 

to observe that to first order, the non-reflected part of the wave (1 – r) ≌2  CLSH

ZCPW +  ZCPW  Zgap gets larger as CLSH, and thus the loss of current running through CLSH (the 

negative second term in Eq. A1) is exactly balanced by an increase in the non-reflected current 

at “L”; finally, the first-order estimate ( CSH ZCPW  ) yields t ≌  ZCPW  Zgap, which is the 

same estimate derived from Eq’n 3 in the main text.  For the rest of this Appendix, and in the 

main text, we thus suppress any further discussion of CSH.

3) Telegrapher equations (current continuity and voltage drops)

Using repeatedly the suppression of CSH, current continuity requires that the current 

entering node “L” be equal to the current exiting node “R”:

(1 − 𝑟)
𝑉1

𝑍𝐶𝑃𝑊 =

𝑡𝑉1

𝑍𝐶𝑃𝑊
Equation (A3)

This is equivalent to Equation (1) in the main text. 

Considering voltage drops, we have

VL = VR + Igap Zgap, 

where VL and VR are the voltages at the two nodes and with 1 / Zgap = 1 / (2 / i  Ccouple + Z()) + 

i  Cseries.  Substituting from the above, we have 

(1+r)=t+(t/ZCPW )Zgap
Equation (A4)


Page | 21

This is Equation (2) in the main text, after substituting for Zgap.  Finally, by combining current 

continuity and voltage drops, we can solve for either r or t:

t = 2 / (2 + Zgap / ZCPW) = (2 / Zgap) / (2 / Zgap + 1 / ZCPW)
Equation (A5)

This is equivalent to Equation (3) in the main text.

Appendix B: Transmission for Technique Entitled “Shunt in CPW”

Similar to Appendix A, in this Appendix we present the transmission for a previous 

technique: a flake below a CPW without any gap, to provide a comparison to the new 

technique. 

Figure B1: circuit diagram for “Shunt in CPW” technique

Very briefly, by following the same procedure as in Appendix A, we obtain from current 

continuity

1/ZCPW -r 1/ZCPW =t 1/ZCPW +t/(Z(ω)+2/(iωCCouple ))
Equation (B1)

and from voltage drops

V1+rV1=tV1
Equation (B2)

Combining Equations (B1) and (B2):

t=2/(2+ZCPW/(Z(ω)+2/(iωCCouple )))
Equation (B3)

From this, we can see very clearly the crucial difference: since Ccouple is now in parallel with ZCPW

(rather than in series as in the main text and Appendix A), and for a small flake with lateral area 


Page | 22

of order (1 m)2, we have 1 /(Ccouple)>~ 2 k >> ZCPW.  Thus, for this “shunt in CPW” technique, 

the flake has very little effect on the transmission (t  1).  We can also see this in Fig B2, where 

the signal sizes are much smaller than in Figure 4.

For comparison, we can show the simulated (ideal wiring) sensitivity achievable with the 

“shunt in CPW” for a wide range of flake conductances (Figure B2 a and b) and with the gapped 

CPW (c and d). Note the much larger response than for the previous shunt technique.

Appendix C:  Simulations of Values/Uncertainties for Capacitances; how to deduce two 

capacitances from data; results of deduced complex conductivity using uncertainties

Part I: Simulations of Capacitance Values


Page | 23

We simulated capacitance values for the structure in Figure 1 using COMSOL [22] with Cseries

calculated in the absence of a flake beneath the CPW gap.  The hardest parameter to deduce is 

CSH, because it represents the modification in the capacitance between signal line and ground 

due to the removal of the metal in the gap.  In order to put an upper bound on this parameter, 

we simulated the capacitance between signal line and ground plane in two structures with 

length 250 m: i) A continuous CPW, and ii) a CPW with a gap of length 3 m; all other 

dimensions were the same as in Figure 1.  We then made an upper bound for CSH using two 

simple approaches: i) With an approximate capacitance per unit length of 45 fF / 250 m, we 

obtain an approximate capacitance for signal line of length 3 m of about 0.54 fF; ii) the values 

obtained (of order 40 fF) differed by slightly less than 0.5 fF. Thus, we have used a conservative 

upper bound of 1 fF in Table II and in the main text.

Part II: Deduction of Ccouple and Cseries from geometry and from experimental data, and 

Uncertainties 

As mentioned in the main text, we could simply estimate Ccouple and Cseries from the geometry; 

as shown in Part III of this Appendix, a 10 % uncertainty in this estimate corresponds to about a 

10 % uncertainty in .

We can also estimate Ccouple and Cseries from the experimental data; the starting point is to 

assume that we are able to do the experiments, i.e., that we are in the high-sensitivity (green) 

parameter range in Figure 4.

Cseries: We use the conditions corresponding to the control experiment, where the flake is 

insulating or absent, so that the transmission is dominated by Cseries: Z()  (Cseries )>> ZCPW; 

this condition holds for the frequency range 100 MHz × (3 M / Z())  f << 100 GHz.  Using 

Eq’n 3 and including the measured non-idealities twir() in the wiring, we can derive in this limit 

that 

Fig. B2 Amplitude (a) and phase (b) of transmission spectra for for 2D 7 μm×7 μm flakes at a 
variety of 2D resistivities using “shunt in CPW” method.  Amplitude (c) and phase (d) of 
transmission spectra for the configuration shown in Fig. 1 (gapped CPW). All parameters are 
from Table I.  Note the much larger sizes of signals in the gapped CPW technique; 


Page | 24

t() ≌ 2 i  Cseries ZCPW twir()
Equation (C1)

Thus, to deduce Cseries, we propose to i) verify that t() / twir()  , and then ii) use the slope 

and the measured non-ideality twir() (total insertion loss)  to get the value of Cseries,.

Ccouple: We use the high-conducting state of the flake at low frequency, so that the impedance 

of Ccouple dominates the transmission: 2 / Ccouple >> Z(), ZCPW, along with the assumption that 

Ccouple >> Cseries.  This is, in essence, in the lower red region of Fig. 4.  The first assumption sets a 

frequency limit of f << 100 MHz (60 k / Z()) using the values in Table II.

Again from Eq’n 3 and including the non-idealities, it is straightforward to derive 

t() = i  Ccouple ZCPW twir(), 
Equation (C2)

and thus we can easily deduce Ccouple; we propose to i) verify that t() / twir()  , and then ii) 

use the slope and the measured non-ideality twir() (total insertion loss)  to get the value of 

Ccouple.

Part III: Estimation of Uncertainties in experimental values of Ccouple and Cseries

Using propagation of errors from Equations C1 and C2, we can derive, e.g., 

 Ccouple / Ccouple = [( t / t)2 + (   )2 + ( ZCPW / ZCPW)2 + ( twir() / twir())]2]1/2.  In this 

value, we estimate that the dominant contribution is from the statistical uncertainty in 

comparing twir() from two different measurements; from Figure D1, we can see that this 

uncertainty in the non-ideality of the wiring is less than 10 %. Thus, our estimate in the relative 

uncertainties of the experimentally deduced values of both Ccouple and Cseries are 10 %.

Part IV: Effect of uncertainties in deduced capacitance values on complex conductivity

As stated in the previous section, we estimate the relative uncertainty in the deduced values of 

𝐶𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 and 𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒 to be 10%. To explore the effects of uncertainty in 𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒 and 𝐶𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 on the 

deduced 𝜎(𝜔), we took the simulated experimental results in Figs. 3b and 3c, and deduced 

𝜎(𝜔) values with Equations 3 and 10, using 𝐶𝑆𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑠 and 𝐶𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒 that deviated from their 

“actual” values by ± 10%. The results are shown in Fig. D1 alongside the “correct” values, 


Page | 25

shown in the dashed black curves. Simply put, the relative uncertainties in the deduced 

conductivity values are the same as the relative uncertainties in the capacitance values.

Figure C1: Deduced values of imaginary and real parts of complex conductivity, taking into

account 10 % uncertainties in the deduced capacitances.  Note that the relative deviation in 

() is the same (10 %).

Appendix D:  Details of Simulations in Figure 3

Part I: Non-ideal Insertion Loss in Wiring

In order to have a realistic simulation of the ability to deduce the complex, frequency-

dependent Z() in Figure 3, we need to include the non-ideal insertion loss in the wiring; this 

includes both overall nonzero insertion loss, low-pass filtering due to cable resistance and 

capacitance, and in addition the inevitable resonances. Figure D1 shows the transmission for 

two repeated measurements, where the difference is in disconnecting and reconnecting the 

room-temperature cable assemblies. These measurements were taken on a continuous (not 


Page | 26

gapped) CPW on a Si substrate, with wire bonds from contact pads on the Si to a PCB.  The PCB 

was mounted in a 4 K cryostat.  The total length of wiring both inside and outside the cryostat 

was about 6 m, with two connections.  We can see that the irreproducibility is about 0.5 dB and 

a few degrees, which is sufficiently small to allow the measurements outlined in the main text.

Part II: Mattis-Bardeen formulae for 1 and 2

As mentioned in the main text, the conductivity spectrum of the superconducting state of 

twisted bilayer graphene was simulated using the values from Ref. [1] in the Mattis-Bardeen 

equation [16]. 

𝜎1 (𝜔)

𝜎𝑁
= 2 ∫

[𝑓(𝐸)−𝑓(𝐸+ℏ𝜔)]𝑔(𝐸)

ℏ𝜔

∞
𝜖0
𝑑𝐸 + ∫

[1−2𝑓(𝐸+ℏ𝜔)]𝑔(𝐸)

ℏ𝜔
𝑑𝐸

−𝜖0
𝜖0−ℏ𝜔
Equation (E1)

Fig. D1 The phase (a) and amplitude (b) of transmission spectra measured for a continuous 
CPW on a Si substrate placed in a dry 4He cryostat, “A” and “B” denote measurements before 
and after the connections between the VNA ports and the ports leading to the cryostat were 
disconnected and reconnected. The difference in phase and amplitude of the transmission 
spectra  are shown in (c) and (d), respectively. 


Page | 27

𝜎2 (𝜔)

𝜎𝑁
=

1

ℏ𝜔 ∫

[1−2𝑓(𝐸+ℏ𝜔)](𝐸2+𝜖02+ℏ𝜔𝐸)

[𝜖02−𝐸02]

1
2[(𝐸+ℏ𝜔)2−𝜖02]

1
2
𝑑𝐸

𝜖0
𝑀𝑎𝑥(𝜖0−ℏ𝜔,−𝜖0)
Equation (E2) 

where 𝑔(𝐸) =

𝐸2+𝜖02+ℏ𝜔𝐸

[𝐸02−𝜖02]

1
2[(𝐸+ℏ𝜔)2−𝜖02]

1
2, 𝜖0is half the energy of the superconducting gap, 𝜎𝑁 is the 

conductivity of the normal metallic state, and f(x) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution function. Note 

that these equations use the convention μ=0. 


