1

Diffractive all-optical computing for quantitative phase imaging

Deniz Mengua,b,c and Aydogan Ozcan*a,b,c

aDepartment of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of California Los Angeles 

(UCLA), California, USA 

bDepartment of Bioengineering, University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), California, USA 

cCalifornia NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), 

California, USA 

*E-mail: ozcan@ucla.edu  

Abstract

Quantitative phase imaging (QPI) is a label-free computational imaging technique that provides
optical path length information of specimens. In modern implementations, the quantitative phase 
image of an object is reconstructed digitally through numerical methods running in a computer, 
often using iterative algorithms. Here, we demonstrate a diffractive QPI network that can 
synthesize the quantitative phase image of an object by converting the input phase information of 
a scene into intensity variations at the output plane. A diffractive QPI network is a specialized all-
optical processor designed to perform a quantitative phase-to-intensity transformation through
passive diffractive surfaces that are spatially engineered using deep learning and image data.
Forming a compact, all-optical network that axially extends only ~200-300λ, where λ is the 
illumination wavelength, this framework can replace traditional QPI systems and related digital
computational burden with a set of passive transmissive layers. All-optical diffractive QPI
networks can potentially enable power-efficient, high frame-rate and compact phase imaging
systems that might be useful for various applications, including, e.g., on-chip microscopy and 
sensing.


2

Introduction

Optical imaging of weakly scattering phase objects has been of significant interest for decades, 

resulting in numerous applications in different fields. For example, the optical examination of cells 

and tissue samples is frequently used in biological research and medical applications, including 

disease diagnosis. However, in terms of their optical properties, isolated cells and thin tissue

sections (before staining) can be classified as weakly scattering, transparent objects [1]. Hence, 

when they interact with the incident light in an optical imaging system, the amount of light 

scattered due to the spatial inhomogeneity of the refractive index is much smaller than the light 

directly passing through, resulting in a poor image contrast at the output intensity pattern. One way 

to circumvent this limitation is to convert such phase objects into amplitude-modulated samples 

using chemical stains or tags [2]. In fact, for over a century, histopathology practice has relied on 

the staining of biological samples for medical diagnosis to bring contrast to various features of the 

specimen. While these methods generally provide high-contrast imaging (sometimes with 

molecular specificity), they are tedious and costly to perform, often involving toxic chemicals and 

lengthy manual staining procedures. Moreover, the use of exogenous stains might cause changes 

in the physiology of living cells and tissue, creating practical limitations in various biological 

applications [3].

The phase contrast imaging principle, invented by Frits Zernike, represents a breakthrough

(leading to the 1953 Nobel Prize in Physics) on imaging the intrinsic optical phase delay induced 

by transparent, phase objects without using exogenous agents [4]. Nomarski’s differential 

interference contrast (DIC) microscopy is another method frequently used to investigate phase 

objects without staining [5]. While both phase contrast imaging and DIC microscopy can offer 

sensitivity to nanoscale optical path length variations, they reveal the phase information of the 

specimen in a qualitative manner. On the other hand, quantification and mapping of a sample’s 

phase shift information with high sensitivity and resolution allows for various biomedical 

applications [6–8]. To address this broad need, quantitative phase imaging (QPI) has emerged as 

a powerful, label-free approach for optical examination of, e.g., morphology and spatiotemporal 

dynamics of transparent specimens [3]. The last decades have witnessed the development of 

numerous digital QPI methods, e.g., Fourier Phase Microscopy (FPM) [9], Hilbert Phase 

Microscopy (HPM) [10], Digital Holographic Microscopy (DHM) [11–16], Quadriwave Lateral 


3

Shearing Interferometer (QLSI) [17] and many others [18–27]. This transformative progress in

QPI methods has fostered various applications in, e.g., pathology [12], cell migration 

dynamics [6,28] and growth [29], immunology [30] and cancer prognosis [31–34], among 

others [35–42].

A QPI system, in general, consists of an optical imaging instrument based on conventional 

components such as lenses, beamsplitters, as well as a computer to run the image reconstruction 

algorithm that recovers the object phase function from the recorded interferometric measurements.

In recent years, QPI methods have also benefited from the ongoing advances in machine learning 

and GPU-based computing to improve their digital reconstruction speed and spatiotemporal 

throughput [43–48]. For example, it has been shown that feedforward deep neural networks can 

be used for solving challenging inverse problems in QPI systems, including, e.g., phase 

retrieval [49,50], pixel super-resolution [51] and extension of the depth-of-field [52]. 

In this work, we report the numerical design of diffractive optical networks [53] to replace digital 

image reconstruction algorithms used in QPI systems with a series of passive optical modulation 

surfaces that are spatially engineered using deep learning. The presented QPI diffractive networks

(Fig. 1) have a compact footprint that axially spans ~240λ and are designed using deep learning to 

encode the optical path length induced by a given input phase object into an output intensity 

distribution that all-optically reveals the corresponding QPI information of the sample. Through 

numerical simulations, we show that these QPI diffractive network designs can generalize not only 

to unseen, new phase images that statistically resemble the training image dataset, but also 

generalize to entirely new datasets with different object features.

It is important to emphasize that these QPI diffractive networks do not perform phase recovery 

from an intensity measurement or a hologram. In fact, the input information is the phase object

itself, and the QPI network is trained to convert this phase information of the input scene into an 

intensity distribution at the output plane; this way, the normalized output intensity image directly 

reveals the quantitative phase image of the sample in radians. 

The diffractive QPI designs reported in this work represent proof-of-concept demonstrations of a 

new phase imaging concept, and we believe that such diffractive computational phase imagers can 

find various applications in on-chip microscopy and sensing due to their compact footprint, all-


4

optical computation speed and low-power operation.  

Results

Revealing the optical phase delay induced by an input object by converting or encoding the sample 

information into an optical intensity pattern at the output plane is a relatively old and well-known

technique [4]. Unlike analog phase contrast imaging methods that allow qualitative investigation

of the samples, modern QPI systems numerically retrieve the spatial map of the optical phase delay 

induced by the sample. However, the fundamental idea of encoding the phase information of the

object function into the output intensity pattern prevails. For instance, coherent QPI methods use 

optical hardware, commonly based on conventional optical components such as lenses and 

beamsplitters, to generate interference between a reference wave and the object wave over an 

image sensor-array, creating fringe patterns that implicitly describe the phase function of the input 

sample. These QPI systems also rely on a phase recovery step implemented in a computer that 

decodes the object phase information by digitally processing the recorded optical intensity

pattern(s), often using iterative algorithms.

To create an all-optical QPI solution without any digital phase reconstruction algorithm, we 

designed diffractive networks [53–55] that transform the phase information of the input sample 

into an output intensity pattern, quantitatively revealing the object phase distribution through an 

intensity recording. Figure 1 illustrates the schematic of a 5-layer diffractive network that was 

trained to all-optically synthesize the QPI signal of a given input phase object (see Methods section 

for training details). This system can precisely quantify and map the optical path length variations

at the input, and unlike the modern QPI systems, it does not rely on a computationally intensive 

phase reconstruction algorithm or a digital computer.

For a proof-of-concept demonstration, here we considered the design of diffractive QPI networks 

with unit magnification, such that the input object features in the phase space have the same scale 

as the output intensity features behind the diffractive network. Since the value of the output optical 

intensity will depend on external physical factors such as, e.g., the power of the illumination source

and the quantum efficiency of the image sensor-array, we used a background region (see Methods 

section) that surrounds the unit magnification output image to obtain a reference mean intensity. 


5

This mean signal intensity value at this background region is used to normalize the output intensity 

of the diffractive network’s image to reveal the quantitative phase information of the sample in 

radians, i.e., 𝐼𝑄𝑃𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) [rad]. Therefore, at the output plane of the diffractive QPI network, we 

defined an output signal area that is slightly larger than the input sample field-of-view, where the 

edges are used to reveal the intensity normalization factor, which makes our diffractive QPI 

designs invariant to changes in the illumination beam intensity or the diffraction efficiency of the 

imaging system, correctly revealing 𝐼𝑄𝑃𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦), matching the quantitative phase information of the 

input object in radians. 

Figure 2a shows the phase-only diffractive layers constituting a diffractive QPI network that is 

trained using deep learning. In our proof-of-concept numerical experiments, we opted to train and 

test our diffractive network designs on well-known image datasets to better benchmark the 

resulting QPI capabilities. Given a normalized greyscale image from a target dataset, 𝜙(𝑥, 𝑦), the 

corresponding function of a phase object at the input plane can be written as 𝑒𝑗𝛼𝜋𝜙(𝑥,𝑦) where

|𝜙(𝑥, 𝑦)| ≤ 1. The parameter 𝛼 determines the range of the phase shift induced by the input object. 

The diffractive optical network shown in Fig. 2a was trained based on 𝜙(𝑥, 𝑦) taken from the Tiny-

Imagenet dataset [56] and the parameter, 𝛼, was set to be 1 for both training and testing, i.e., 𝛼𝑡𝑟 =

𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 1. Figure 2b illustrates the QPI signals, 𝐼𝑄𝑃𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦), for exemplary test samples from the 

Tiny-imagenet dataset, never seen by the diffractive network in the training phase, along with the 

corresponding ground truth images, 𝜙(𝑥, 𝑦). We quantified the success of the QPI signal synthesis 

performed by the presented diffractive network using the Structural Similarity Index Measure 

(SSIM) [57] and the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR). The diffractive network shown in Fig. 2a 

provides an SSIM of 0.824±0.050 (mean ± std) and a PSNR of 26.43dB±2.69 over the entire 10K 

test samples of the Tiny-Imagenet.

Although our diffractive QPI network design can successfully transform the phase information of 

the samples into quantitative optical intensity information, providing a competitive QPI 

performance without the need for any digital phase recovery algorithm, one might argue that the 

underlying phase-to-intensity transformation performed by the diffractive network is data-specific. 

To shed more light on this, we investigated the generalization capabilities of our diffractive 

network design by further testing its QPI performance over phase-encoded samples from two 

completely different image datasets, i.e., CIFAR-10 and Fashion-MNIST, that were not used in 


6

the training phase. As shown in Figs. 2c-d, the SSIM and PSNR values achieved by the presented 

diffractive QPI network for quantitative phase imaging of CIFAR-10 (and Fashion-MNIST) 

images are 0.917±0.041 (and 0.596±0.116) and 31.98dB±3.15 (and 26.94dB±1.5), respectively. 

Interestingly, the QPI signal synthesis quality turned out to be higher for CIFAR-10 images 

compared to the performance of the same diffractive network on the Tiny-Imagenet test samples,

even though CIFAR-10 has an entirely different set of objects and spatial features (which were 

never used during the training phase). This could be partially attributed to the difference in the 

original size of the Tiny-Imagenet (64×64-pixel) and CIFAR-10 (32×32-pixel) images. 

Considering that the physical dimensions of the input field-of-view in our network configuration 

is 42.4λ×42.4λ, the size of the smallest spatial feature becomes

42.4𝜆

64 = 0.6625𝜆 and 2 × 0.6625𝜆

for Tiny-Imagenet and CIFAR-10 datasets, respectively; this makes CIFAR-10 test samples 

relatively easier to image through the diffractive QPI network.

Next, we numerically quantified the smallest resolvable linewidth and the related phase sensitivity 

of our diffractive QPI network design using binary phase gratings as test objects (see Fig. 3). Such 

resolution test targets were not used as part of the training, which only included the Tiny-Imagenet 

dataset. The presented diffractive network performs QPI with diffractive layers of size 106λ×106λ 

that are placed 40λ apart from each other and the input/output fields-of-view (see Fig. 1). This 

physical configuration reveals that the numerical aperture (NA) of our diffractive network is

sin (𝑡𝑎𝑛−1 (

106𝜆

2×40𝜆)) = ~0.8, which corresponds to a diffraction-limited resolvable linewidth of 

0.625𝜆. Our numerical analysis in Fig. 3a showed that the smallest resolvable linewidth with our 

diffractive QPI design was ~0.67𝜆, when the input gratings were 0-π encoded, closely matching 

the resolvable feature size determined by the NA of our system; also note that the effective feature 

size of the training samples from Tiny-Imagenet is 0.6625𝜆. This analysis means that our training 

phase was successful in approximating a general-purpose quantitative phase imager despite using 

relatively lower resolution training images, coming close to the theoretical diffraction limit

imposed by the physical structure of the diffractive QPI network.

The input phase contrast is another crucial factor affecting the resolution of QPI achieved by our 

diffractive network design. To shed more light on this, we numerically tested our diffractive QPI

network on binary gratings with two different linewidths, 0.67𝜆 and 0.75𝜆, at varying levels of 


7

input phase contrast, as shown in Fig. 3b. Based on the resulting diffractive QPI signals illustrated 

in Figs. 3a-b, the 0.67𝜆 linewidth grating remains resolvable until the input phase contrast falls 

below 0.25π. The last column of Fig. 3b suggests that when the contrast parameter (𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡) is taken 

to be 0.1, the noise level in the QPI signal generated by the diffractive network increases to a level 

where the 0.67𝜆 linewidth grating cannot be resolved anymore. On the other hand, 0.75𝜆 linewidth

grating remains to be partially resolvable despite the noisy background, even at 0-0.1π phase 

contrast (i.e., 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 0.1).

We also conducted a similar analysis on the effect of the input phase contrast over the quality of 

QPI performed by the presented diffractive network. By setting the phase contrast parameter 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡

to 9 different values between 0.1 and 2.0 for all three image datasets (Tiny-Imagenet, CIFAR-10 

and Fashion-MNIST), we quantified the resulting SSIM and PSNR values for the reconstructed 

images at the output plane of the diffractive QPI network. Figures 4a-c illustrate the mean and 

standard deviations of the SSIM and PSNR metrics as a function of 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 for all three image 

datasets. A close examination of Figs. 4a-c reveals that both SSIM and PSNR peaks at 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 1, 

which matches the phase encoding range used during the training phase, i.e., 𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 1. To 

the left of these peaks, where 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡< 𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 1, there is a slight degradation in the performance of

the presented diffractive QPI network, mainly due to the increasing demand in phase sensitivity at 

the resulting image, 𝐼𝑄𝑃𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦). With 𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 1 and 8-bit quantization of input signals, the phase step 

size that the diffractive QPI network was trained with was

𝜋

256 = 0.0123 radians; however, when 

𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 deviates from the training, for instance 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 0.5, then the smallest phase step size that the 

diffractive network is tasked to sense becomes

0.5𝜋

256 = 0.0062 radians. In other words, the 

diffractive network must be 2× more phase sensitive compared to the level it was trained for,

causing some degradation in the SSIM and PSNR values as shown in Figs. 4a-c for 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡<𝛼𝑡𝑟 =

1.

On the other hand, when the input phase encoding exceeds the [0, π] range used during the training

phase, the degradation in diffractive QPI signal quality is more severe. As 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 approaches to 2.0, 

the errors and artifacts created by the presented diffractive network in computing the QPI signal

increase. Interestingly, at 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 1.99, the forward optical transformation of the diffractive QPI 

network starts to act as an edge detector. A straightforward solution to mitigate this performance 


8

degradation is to train the diffractive network with 𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 2.0 − 𝜖, where 𝜖 is a small number, 

meaning that during the training phase, the dynamic range of the phase values at the input plane

will be within [0, 2π). Supplementary Fig. S1 illustrates an example of this for a 5-layer diffractive 

QPI network that was trained with 𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 1.99. This new diffractive network has the same physical 

layout and architecture as the previous one shown in Fig. 2. The only difference between the two 

diffractive QPI networks is the phase range covered by the input samples used during their training

(𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 1.0 vs. 𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 1.99). Since the design evolution of this new diffractive QPI network is 

driven by input samples covering the entire [0, 2π) phase range, in the case of 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 1.99, 

it provides a much better QPI performance compared to the diffractive network shown in Fig. 2.

This improved diffractive QPI performance can also be visually observed by comparing the images 

shown in Fig. 4 and Supplementary Fig. S1 under the 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 1.99 column.

Discussion

A vital feature of the presented diffractive QPI networks is that their operation is invariant to 

changes in the input beam intensity or the power efficiency of the diffractive detection system; by 

using the mean intensity value surrounding the output image field-of-view as a normalization 

factor, the resulting diffractive image intensity 𝐼𝑄𝑃𝐼(𝑥, 𝑦) reports the phase distribution of the input 

object in radians. Moreover, the presented diffractive optical networks are composed of passive

layers, and therefore perform QPI without any external power source other than the illumination

light. It is true that the training stage of a diffractive QPI network takes a significant amount of 

time (e.g., ~40 hours) and consumes some energy for training-related computing. But this is a one-

time training effort, and in the image inference stage, there is no power consumption per object

(except for the illumination), and the reconstructed image reveals the quantitative phase

information of the object at the speed of light propagation through a passive network, without the 

need for a graphics processing unit (GPU) or a computer. One should think of a diffractive 

network’s design, training
and fabrication
phase (a one-time effort) similar to the 

design/fabrication/assembly phase of a digital processor or a GPU that we use in our computers.

The output power efficiency of the presented QPI networks is mainly affected by two factors:

diffraction efficiency of the resulting network and material absorption. In this study, we assumed 


9

the optical material of diffractive surfaces has a negligible loss for the wavelength of operation, 

similar to the properties of optical glasses, e.g., BK-7, in the visible part of the spectrum. For 

example, the diffractive QPI network reported in Fig. 2 achieves ~2.9% mean diffraction efficiency 

for the entire 10K test set of Tiny-Imagenet. It is important to note that during the training of this 

diffractive QPI network, the training cost/loss function was purely based on decreasing the QPI

errors at the output plane, and there was no other loss term or regularizer to enforce a more power-

efficient operation. In fact, by including an additional loss term for regulating the balance between 

the QPI performance and diffraction efficiency (see Methods section), we demonstrated that it is

possible to design more efficient diffractive QPI networks with a minimal compromise on the

output image quality; see Fig. 5, where all the diffractive network designs share the same physical

layout shown in Fig. 1. For example, a more efficient diffractive QPI network design with 6.31% 

power efficiency at the output plane offers QPI signal quality with an SSIM of 0.815±0.0491. 

Compared to the original diffractive QPI network design that solely focuses on output image 

quality, the SSIM value of this new diffractive network has a negligible decrease while its 

diffraction efficiency at the output plane is improved by more than 2-fold. Further shifting the 

focus of the QPI network training towards improved power efficiency can result in a solution that 

can synthesize QPI signals with >11% output diffraction efficiency, also achieving an SSIM of 

0.771±0.0507 (see Fig. 5).

Another crucial parameter in a diffractive network design is the number of diffractive layers within 

the system; Supplementary Figure S2 illustrates the results of our analysis on the relationship 

between the diffractive QPI performance and the number of diffractive layers within the system.

It has previously been shown through both theoretical and empirical evidence that deeper 

diffractive optical networks can compute an arbitrary complex-valued linear transformation with 

lower approximation errors, and they demonstrate higher generalization capacity for all-optical

statistical inference tasks [58,59]. Supplementary Figure S2 confirms the same behavior: improved 

QPI performance is achieved by increasing the number of diffractive layers, 𝐾. When 𝐾=1, the 

trained diffractive network fails to compute the QPI signal for a given input phase object, as

evident from the extremely low SSIM values and the exemplary images shown in Fig. S2b. On top 

of that, the diffraction efficiency is also very low, ~1%, with a single-layer diffractive network 

configuration (𝐾=1). With 𝐾=2 trainable diffractive surfaces, the diffraction efficiency stays very 

low, while the QPI signal quality improves. When we have 𝐾=3 diffractive layers in our QPI 


10

network design, we observe a significant improvement in both the diffraction efficiency and the 

output SSIM compared to 𝐾=1 or 2. Beyond 𝐾=3, the structural quality of the output QPI signal 

keeps improving as we add more layers to the diffractive network architecture. However, this 

improvement does not translate into better diffraction efficiency as the training loss function does 

not include a power efficiency penalty term. Earlier results reported in Fig. 5 clearly show the 

impact of adding such a regularizer term in the training loss function for improving the diffraction 

efficiency of the QPI network, reaching >11% power efficiency with a minor sacrifice in the 

structural fidelity of the output images.

In summary, the presented diffractive QPI networks convert the phase information of an input

object into an intensity distribution at the output plane in a way that the normalized output intensity 

reveals the phase distribution of the object in radians. Being resilient to input light intensity 

variations and power efficiency changes in the diffractive set-up, this QPI network can replace the 

bulky lens-based optical instrumentation and the computationally intensive reconstruction 

algorithms employed in QPI systems, potentially offering high-throughput, low-latency, compact 

and power-efficient QPI platforms which might fuel new applications in on-chip microscopy and 

sensing. Fabrication and assembly of such diffractive QPI systems operating in the visible and near 

IR wavelengths can be achieved using two-photon polymerization-based 3D printing methods as 

well as optical lithography tools [60–62]. 

Methods

Optical Forward Model of Diffractive QPI Networks

The optical wave propagation in air, between successive diffractive layers, was formulated based 

on the Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction equation. According to this formulation, the free-space 

propagation inside a homogeneous and isotropic medium is modeled as a shift-invariant linear 

system with the impulse response,

𝑤(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝑧

𝑟2 ( 1

2𝜋𝑟 + 𝑛

𝑗𝜆) exp(𝑗2𝜋𝑛𝑟

𝜆
)
1


11

where 𝑟 = √𝑥2 + 𝑦2 + 𝑧2. In Eq. 1, the parameters 𝑛 and 𝜆 denote the refractive index of the 

medium (𝑛 = 1 for air), and the wavelength of the illumination light, respectively. Accordingly, a

diffractive neuron, 𝑖, located at (𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖) on 𝑘𝑡ℎ layer can be considered as the source of a 

secondary wave, 𝑢𝑖

𝑘(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧),

where the summation in Eq. 2 represents the field generated over the diffractive neuron located at 

(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖) by the neurons on the previous, (𝑘 − 1)𝑡ℎ, layer. From Eq. 1, the function 𝑤𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧)

in Eq. 2 can be written as,

with 𝑟 = √(𝑥 − 𝑥𝑖)2 + (𝑦 − 𝑦𝑖)2 + (𝑧 − 𝑧𝑖)2. The multiplicative term 𝑡(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖) in Eq. 2

denotes the transmittance coefficient of the neuron, 𝑖, which, in its general form, can be written as, 

𝑡(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖) = 𝑎𝑖 exp(𝑗𝜃𝑖). Depending on the diffractive layer fabrication method and the related 

optical materials, both 𝑎𝑖 and 𝜃𝑖 might be a function of other physical parameters, e.g., material 

thickness in 3D printed diffractive layers and driving voltage levels in spatial light modulators. In 

earlier works on diffractive networks [53,54,63,64], it has been shown that it is possible to directly

train such physical parameters through deep learning. On the other hand, a more generic way of 

optimizing a diffractive network is to define the amplitude 𝑎𝑖 and 𝜃𝑖 as learnable parameters. In 

this study, we constrained our analysis to phase-only diffractive surfaces where the amplitude 

coefficients, 𝑎𝑖, were all taken as 1 during the entire training. Thus, the only learnable parameters 

of the presented diffractive networks are the phase shifts applied by the diffractive features, 𝜃𝑖.

For all the diffractive networks that we trained, the initial value of all 𝜃𝑖s was set to be 0, i.e., the 

initial state of a diffractive network (before the training kicks in) is equal to the free-space

propagation of the input light field onto the output plane. 

The design of diffractive QPI networks 

During our deep learning-based diffractive network training, we sampled the 2D space with a 

period of 0.53λ, which is also equal to the size of each diffractive feature (‘neuron’) on the 

diffractive surfaces. Although we described the forward optical model over continuous functions 

𝑢𝑖

𝑘(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝑤𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧)𝑡(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖) ∑ 𝑢𝑞

𝑘−1(𝑥𝑖, 𝑦𝑖, 𝑧𝑖)

𝑁

𝑞=1

2.

𝑤𝑖(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) = 𝑧 − 𝑧𝑖

𝑟2
( 1
2𝜋𝑟 + 𝑛

𝑗𝜆) exp(𝑗2𝜋𝑛𝑟

𝜆
)
3,


12

in the previous subsection, training of the presented diffractive networks was performed using

digital computers. Hence, we denote the input and output signals using their discrete counterparts 

for the remaining part of this sub-section with a spatial sampling period of 0.53λ in both directions

(x and y). In the physical layout of the presented diffractive optical networks, the size of the input 

field-of-view was set to be 42.4λ×42.4λ, which corresponds to 80×80 2D vectors defining the 

phase distributions of input objects. With 𝑰[𝑚, 𝑛] denoting an image of size 𝑀 × 𝑁 from a dataset, 

we applied 2D linear interpolation to compute the 2D vector 𝝓[𝑞, 𝑝] of size 80×80. Note that the 

values of 𝑀 and 𝑁 depend on the used image dataset. Specifically, for Tiny-Imagenet 𝑀 = 𝑁 =

64, while for CIFAR-10 and Fashion-MNIST datasets, 𝑀 = 𝑁 = 32 and 𝑀 = 𝑁 = 28, 

respectively. The scattering function within the input field-of-view of the diffractive networks was

defined as a pure phase function (see Fig. 1) in the form of 𝑒𝑗𝛼𝜋𝝓[𝑞,𝑝]. 

The physical dimensions of each diffractive layer were set to be 106λ on both x and y axes, i.e., 

each diffractive layer contains 200×200 = 40K neurons. For instance, the 5-layer diffractive 

network shown in Fig. 2 has 0.2 million neurons, and hence 0.2 million trainable parameters, 𝜃𝑖,

𝑖 = 1,2, . . . ,0.2 × 106. In our forward optical model, we set all the distances between (1) the first

diffractive layer and the input field-of-view, (2) two successive diffractive layers, and (3) the last 

diffractive layer and the output plane, as 40λ resulting in an NA of ~0.8. With the size of each 

diffractive feature/neuron taken as 0.53λ, the diffraction cone angle of the secondary wave 

emanating from each neuron ensures optical communication between all the neurons on two 

successive surfaces (axially separated by 40λ), while also enabling a highly compact diffractive 

QPI network design. For instance, the total axial distance from the input field-of-view to the output 

plane of a 5-layer diffractive QPI network shown in Fig. 1 is only ~240λ. 

The size of the QPI signal area at the output plane including the reference/background region was

set to be 43.56λ×43.56λ, i.e., the reference region extends on both directions on x and y axes by 

0.53λ, (43.56λ=42.4λ+2×0.53λ). If we denote the background optical intensity over this reference 

region as 𝑰𝑹[𝑟] and the optical intensity within the QPI signal region as 𝑰𝑺[𝑞, 𝑝], then according to 

our forward model, 𝑰𝑸𝑷𝑰[𝑞, 𝑝] is found by,

𝑰𝑸𝑷𝑰[𝑞, 𝑝] = 𝑰𝑺[𝑞, 𝑝]

𝐵
,
4


13

where 𝐵 =

1

𝑁𝑅 ∑
𝑁𝑅 𝑰𝑹[𝑟]
𝑟=1
is the mean background intensity value, 𝑁𝑅 denotes the number of 

discretized intensity samples within the reference region. According to Eq. 4, for a given input 

object/sample, the final diffractive QPI signal, 𝑰𝑸𝑷𝑰[𝑞, 𝑝] reports the output phase image in radians. 

To guide the evolution of the diffractive layers according to the QPI signal in Eq. 4, at each 

iteration of the deep learning-based training of the presented diffractive QPI networks, we updated

the phase parameters, 𝜃𝑖, using the following normalized mean-squared-error [65],

where, 𝑁𝑠 is the total number of discretized samples representing the QPI signal area, i.e., 𝑁𝑠 =

80 × 80. The vectors 𝒐 and 𝒐′ are 1D counterparts of the associated 2D discrete signals, 𝒐[𝑞, 𝑝]

and 𝒐′[𝑞, 𝑝], computed based on lexicographically ordered vectorization operator. They denote the 

ground-truth phase signal of the input object and the diffractive intensity signal synthesized by the 

QPI network at a given iteration, respectively. Both the ground truth vector, 𝒐, and 𝒐′ cover the 

output sample field-of-view and the reference signal region surrounding it, hence their size is equal 

to 𝑁𝑅 + 𝑁𝑆 = 82 × 82. The 2D vector 𝒐[𝑞, 𝑝] is defined based on the input vector 𝝓[𝑞, 𝑝]. First,

we equalize the size of the two vectors by padding the 80 × 80 vector 𝝓[𝑞, 𝑝] to the size 82 × 82.

The values over the padded region are equal to 

1

𝛼𝜋. This padded vector was then scaled with the 

multiplicative constant 𝛼𝜋 such that the 80 × 80 part in the middle represents the argument of the 

phase function 𝑒𝑗𝛼𝜋𝝓[𝑞,𝑝]. The reference signal region surrounding this 80 × 80 part has all ones, 

implying that the mean intensity over this area will correspond to 1 rad. By computing the loss 

function in Eq. 5 based on a ground-truth vector that also includes the desired reference signal 

intensity, we implicitly enforce/train the diffractive QPI network to synthesize a uniformly 

distributed intensity over the reference signal area, although this is not a requirement for the QPI 

networks’ operation. 

The multiplicative term, 𝜎, in Eq. 5 is a normalization constant that was defined as [65],

ℒ =
1

𝑁𝑅 + 𝑁𝑆

∑ |𝒐[𝑙] − 𝜎𝒐′[𝑙]|𝟐

𝑁𝑅+𝑁𝑆

𝑙=1

,
5

𝜎 =

1

𝑁𝑅 + 𝑁𝑆 ∑
𝑁𝑅+𝑁𝑆 𝒐[𝑙]𝒐′∗[𝑙]
𝑙=1

1

𝑁𝑅 + 𝑁𝑆 ∑
𝑁𝑅+𝑁𝑆|𝒐′[𝑙]|𝟐
𝑙=1

,
6


14

The structural loss function, ℒ, in Eq. 5 drives the QPI quality, and it was the only loss term used 

during the training of the diffractive networks shown in Fig. 2, Supplementary Figs. S1 and S2. 

The training of the diffractive network designs with output diffraction efficiencies of ≥ 2.9% 

shown in Fig. 5, on the other hand, use a linear mix of the structural loss in Eq. 5 and an additional

loss term penalizing poor power efficiency, i.e., ℒ′ = ℒ + 𝛾ℒ𝑝. The functional form of the power

efficiency-related penalty ℒ𝑝 was defined as,

where 𝜂 stands for the percentage of power efficiency,

with 𝑃1 denoting the optical power incident on the 1st diffractive layer and 𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡 = ∑
𝑁𝑅+𝑁𝑆|𝒐′[𝑙]|𝟐
𝑙=1
.

The coefficient 𝛾 is a multiplicative constant that determines the weight of the power efficiency-

related term in the total loss, ℒ′. The value of 𝛾 directly affects the diffraction efficiency of the 

resulting diffractive QPI network design. Specifically, for the diffractive network shown in Fig. 2, 

it was set to be 0. On the other hand, when 𝛾 was taken as 0.1, 0.4 and 5.0, the corresponding 

diffractive QPI network designs achieved 6.31%, 8.17% and 11.05% diffraction efficiency (𝜂), 

respectively (see Fig. 5).

Implementation Details of Diffractive QPI Network Training

The deep learning-based diffractive QPI network training was implemented in Python (v3.7.7) and 

TensorFlow (v1.15.0, Google Inc.). For the gradient-based optimization, we used the Adam 

optimizer with its momentum parameter 𝛽1 set to 0.5 [66]. The learning rate was taken as 0.01 for 

all the presented diffractive QPI networks. With the batch size equal to 75, we trained all the 

diffractive networks for 200 epochs, which takes ~40 hours using a computer with a GeForce GTX 

1080 Ti GPU (Nvidia Inc.) and Intel® Core ™ i7-8700 Central Processing Unit (CPU, Intel Inc.) 

with 64 GB of RAM, running Windows 10 operating system (Microsoft). To avoid any aliasing in 

the representation of the free-space impulse response depicted in Eq. 1, the dimensions of the 

simulation window were taken as 1024×1024.

The PSNR image metric was calculated as follows:

ℒ𝑝 = 𝑒−𝜂,
7

𝜂 = 𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡

𝑃1

× 100,
8


15

For SSIM calculations, we used the built-in function in Tensorflow, i.e., tf.image.ssim, where the 

two inputs were 𝛼𝜋𝝓[𝑞, 𝑝] and 𝑰𝑸𝑷𝑰[𝑞, 𝑝], representing the ground-truth image and the QPI signal 

synthesized by the diffractive network, respectively. The input parameter “max_val” was set to be 

𝛼𝜋 in these SSIM calculations.

References

1. V. V. Tuchin and others, "Tissue optics," in (Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers 

(SPIE), 2015).

2. A. Diaspro, Optical Fluorescence Microscopy: From the Spectral to the Nano Dimension (Springer 

Science & Business Media, 2010).

3. G. Popescu, Quantitative Phase Imaging of Cells and Tissues, McGraw-Hill Biophotonics (McGraw-

Hill, 2011).

4. F. Zernike, "How I Discovered Phase Contrast," Science 121, 345–349 (1955).
5. W. Lang, Nomarski Differential Interference-Contrast Microscopy (Carl Zeiss, 1982).
6. N. T. Shaked, M. T. Rinehart, and A. Wax, "Dual-interference-channel quantitative-phase microscopy 

of live cell dynamics," Opt. Lett. 34, 767 (2009).

7. P. Memmolo, M. Iannone, M. Ventre, P. A. Netti, A. Finizio, M. Paturzo, and P. Ferraro, "On the 

holographic 3D tracking of in vitro cells characterized by a highly-morphological change," Opt. 
Express 20, 28485 (2012).

8. H. Park, S. Lee, M. Ji, K. Kim, Y. Son, S. Jang, and Y. Park, "Measuring cell surface area and 

deformability of individual human red blood cells over blood storage using quantitative phase 
imaging," Sci Rep 6, 34257 (2016).

9. G. Popescu, L. P. Deflores, J. C. Vaughan, K. Badizadegan, H. Iwai, R. R. Dasari, and M. S. Feld, 

"Fourier phase microscopy for investigation of biological structures and dynamics," Opt. Lett. 29, 
2503 (2004).

10. T. Ikeda, G. Popescu, R. R. Dasari, and M. S. Feld, "Hilbert phase microscopy for investigating fast 

dynamics in transparent systems," Opt. Lett. 30, 1165 (2005).

11. P. Marquet, B. Rappaz, P. J. Magistretti, E. Cuche, Y. Emery, T. Colomb, and C. Depeursinge, "Digital 

holographic microscopy: a noninvasive contrast imaging technique allowing quantitative 
visualization of living cells with subwavelength axial accuracy," Opt. Lett. 30, 468 (2005).

12. A. Greenbaum, Y. Zhang, A. Feizi, P.-L. Chung, W. Luo, S. R. Kandukuri, and A. Ozcan, "Wide-field 

computational imaging of pathology slides using lens-free on-chip microscopy," Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 
(2014).

13. E. Cuche, F. Bevilacqua, and C. Depeursinge, "Digital holography for quantitative phase-contrast 

imaging," Opt. Lett. 24, 291 (1999).

𝑃𝑆𝑁𝑅 = 20𝑙𝑜𝑔10

(

 
𝛼𝜋

√|𝛼𝜋𝝓[𝑞, 𝑝] − 𝑰𝑸𝑷𝑰[𝑞, 𝑝]|

𝟐
)

 ,
9


16

14. A. Greenbaum, W. Luo, T.-W. Su, Z. Göröcs, L. Xue, S. O. Isikman, A. F. Coskun, O. Mudanyali, and A. 

Ozcan, "Imaging without lenses: achievements and remaining challenges of wide-field on-chip 
microscopy," Nat Methods 9, 889–895 (2012).

15. A. Matlock and L. Tian, "High-throughput, volumetric quantitative phase imaging with multiplexed 

intensity diffraction tomography," Biomed. Opt. Express 10, 6432 (2019).

16. A. Doblas, E. Sánchez-Ortiga, M. Martínez-Corral, G. Saavedra, P. Andrés, and J. Garcia-Sucerquia, 

"Shift-variant digital holographic microscopy: inaccuracies in quantitative phase imaging," Opt. Lett. 
38, 1352 (2013).

17. P. Bon, G. Maucort, B. Wattellier, and S. Monneret, "Quadriwave lateral shearing interferometry for 

quantitative phase microscopy of living cells," Opt. Express 17, 13080 (2009).

18. Z. Wang, L. Millet, M. Mir, H. Ding, S. Unarunotai, J. Rogers, M. U. Gillette, and G. Popescu, "Spatial 

light interference microscopy (SLIM)," 11 (2011).

19. T. H. Nguyen, M. E. Kandel, M. Rubessa, M. B. Wheeler, and G. Popescu, "Gradient light interference 

microscopy for 3D imaging of unlabeled specimens," Nat Commun 8, 210 (2017).

20. H. Majeed, L. Ma, Y. J. Lee, M. Kandel, E. Min, W. Jung, C. Best-Popescu, and G. Popescu, "Magnified 

Image Spatial Spectrum (MISS) microscopy for nanometer and millisecond scale label-free imaging," 
Opt. Express 26, 5423 (2018).

21. A. Vijayakumar, Y. Kashter, R. Kelner, and J. Rosen, "Coded aperture correlation holography–a new 

type of incoherent digital holograms," Opt. Express 24, 12430 (2016).

22. L. Tian and L. Waller, "3D intensity and phase imaging from light field measurements in an LED array 

microscope," Optica 2, 104 (2015).

23. L. Tian, X. Li, K. Ramchandran, and L. Waller, "Multiplexed coded illumination for Fourier 

Ptychography with an LED array microscope," Biomed. Opt. Express, BOE 5, 2376–2389 (2014).

24. J. Lim, A. B. Ayoub, E. E. Antoine, and D. Psaltis, "High-fidelity optical diffraction tomography of 

multiple scattering samples," Light: Science & Applications 8, (2019).

25. R. Kelner and J. Rosen, "Spatially incoherent single channel digital Fourier holography," Opt. Lett. 37, 

3723 (2012).

26. K. Lee and Y. Park, "Exploiting the speckle-correlation scattering matrix for a compact reference-free 

holographic image sensor," Nat Commun 7, 13359 (2016).

27. Y. Cotte, F. Toy, P. Jourdain, N. Pavillon, D. Boss, P. Magistretti, P. Marquet, and C. Depeursinge, 

"Marker-free phase nanoscopy," Nature Photon 7, 113–117 (2013).

28. G. Popescu, K. Badizadegan, R. R. Dasari, and M. S. Feld, "Observation of dynamic subdomains in red 

blood cells," J. Biomed. Opt. 11, 040503 (2006).

29. G. Popescu, Y. Park, N. Lue, C. Best-Popescu, L. Deflores, R. R. Dasari, M. S. Feld, and K. Badizadegan, 

"Optical imaging of cell mass and growth dynamics," American Journal of Physiology-Cell Physiology 
295, C538–C544 (2008).

30. S. Mitchell, K. Roy, T. A. Zangle, and A. Hoffmann, "Nongenetic origins of cell-to-cell variability in B 

lymphocyte proliferation," Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 115, E2888–E2897 (2018).

31. S. Uttam, H. V. Pham, J. LaFace, B. Leibowitz, J. Yu, R. E. Brand, D. J. Hartman, and Y. Liu, "Early 

Prediction of Cancer Progression by Depth-Resolved Nanoscale Mapping of Nuclear Architecture 
from Unstained Tissue Specimens," Cancer Res 75, 4718–4727 (2015).

32. D. Roitshtain, L. Wolbromsky, E. Bal, H. Greenspan, L. L. Satterwhite, and N. T. Shaked, "Quantitative 

phase microscopy spatial signatures of cancer cells," Cytometry 91, 482–493 (2017).

33. E. Watanabe, T. Hoshiba, and B. Javidi, "High-precision microscopic phase imaging without phase 

unwrapping for cancer cell identification," Opt. Lett. 38, 1319 (2013).

34. M. Rubin, O. Stein, N. A. Turko, Y. Nygate, D. Roitshtain, L. Karako, I. Barnea, R. Giryes, and N. T. 

Shaked, "TOP-GAN: Stain-free cancer cell classification using deep learning with a small training 
set," Medical Image Analysis 57, 176–185 (2019).


17

35. N. T. Shaked, Y. Zhu, N. Badie, N. Bursac, and A. Wax, "Reflective interferometric chamber for 

quantitative phase imaging of biological sample dynamics," J. Biomed. Opt. 15, 030503 (2010).

36. N. T. Shaked, Y. Zhu, M. T. Rinehart, and A. Wax, "Two-step-only phase-shifting interferometry with 

optimized detector bandwidth for microscopy of live cells," Opt. Express 17, 15585 (2009).

37. A. Doblas, E. Roche, F. J. Ampudia-Blasco, M. Martínez-Corral, G. Saavedra, and J. Garcia-Sucerquia, 

"Diabetes screening by telecentric digital holographic microscopy: DIABETES SCREENING BY 
TELECENTRIC DHM," Journal of Microscopy 261, 285–290 (2016).

38. B. Javidi, A. Markman, S. Rawat, T. O’Connor, A. Anand, and B. Andemariam, "Sickle cell disease 

diagnosis based on spatio-temporal cell dynamics analysis using 3D printed shearing digital 
holographic microscopy," Opt. Express 26, 13614 (2018).

39. I. Moon and B. Javidi, "Three-dimensional identification of stem cells by computational holographic 

imaging," J. R. Soc. Interface. 4, 305–313 (2007).

40. Y. Park, M. Diez-Silva, G. Popescu, G. Lykotrafitis, W. Choi, M. S. Feld, and S. Suresh, "Refractive 

index maps and membrane dynamics of human red blood cells parasitized by Plasmodium 
falciparum," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, 13730–13735 (2008).

41. Y. Jo, S. Park, J. Jung, J. Yoon, H. Joo, M. Kim, S.-J. Kang, M. C. Choi, S. Y. Lee, and Y. Park, 

"Holographic deep learning for rapid optical screening of anthrax spores," SCIENCE ADVANCES 10 
(2017).

42. G. A. Dunn and D. Zicha, "Dynamics of fibroblast spreading," Journal of Cell Science 108, 1239–1249 

(1995).

43. H. Qiao and J. Wu, "GPU-based deep convolutional neural network for tomographic phase 

microscopy with ℓ1 fitting and regularization," J. Biomed. Opt. 23, 1 (2018).

44. G. Barbastathis, A. Ozcan, and G. Situ, "On the use of deep learning for computational imaging," 

Optica 6, 921 (2019).

45. D. Shen, G. Wu, and H.-I. Suk, "Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis," Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 

19, 221–248 (2017).

46. S. Jiang, K. Guo, J. Liao, and G. Zheng, "Solving Fourier ptychographic imaging problems via neural 

network modeling and TensorFlow," Biomed. Opt. Express 9, 3306 (2018).

47. T. Nguyen, Y. Xue, Y. Li, L. Tian, and G. Nehmetallah, "Convolutional neural network for Fourier 

ptychography video reconstruction: learning temporal dynamics from spatial ensembles," 24 (n.d.).

48. A. Esteva, B. Kuprel, R. A. Novoa, J. Ko, S. M. Swetter, H. M. Blau, and S. Thrun, "Dermatologist-level 

classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks," Nature 542, 115–118 (2017).

49. Y. Rivenson, Y. Zhang, H. Günaydın, D. Teng, and A. Ozcan, "Phase recovery and holographic image 

reconstruction using deep learning in neural networks," Light Sci Appl 7, 17141–17141 (2018).

50. Y. Rivenson, Y. Wu, and A. Ozcan, "Deep learning in holography and coherent imaging," Light: 

Science & Applications 8, 1–8 (2019).

51. T. Liu, K. de Haan, Y. Rivenson, Z. Wei, X. Zeng, Y. Zhang, and A. Ozcan, "Deep learning-based super-

resolution in coherent imaging systems," Sci Rep 9, 3926 (2019).

52. Y. Wu, Y. Rivenson, Y. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Günaydin, X. Lin, and A. Ozcan, "Extended depth-of-field in 

holographic imaging using deep-learning-based autofocusing and phase recovery," Optica 5, 704 
(2018).

53. X. Lin, Y. Rivenson, N. T. Yardimci, M. Veli, Y. Luo, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, "All-optical machine 

learning using diffractive deep neural networks," Science 361, 1004–1008 (2018).

54. J. Li, D. Mengu, N. T. Yardimci, Y. Luo, X. Li, M. Veli, Y. Rivenson, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, "Spectrally 

encoded single-pixel machine vision using diffractive networks," Science Advances 7, eabd7690 
(2021).


18

55. D. Mengu, Y. Luo, Y. Rivenson, and A. Ozcan, "Analysis of Diffractive Optical Neural Networks and 

Their Integration With Electronic Neural Networks," IEEE J. Select. Topics Quantum Electron. 26, 1–
14 (2020).

56. P. Chrabaszcz, I. Loshchilov, and F. Hutter, "A Downsampled Variant of ImageNet as an Alternative 

to the CIFAR datasets," arXiv:1707.08819 [cs] (2017).

57. Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, "Image quality assessment: from error 

visibility to structural similarity," IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 13, 600–612 (2004).

58. O. Kulce, D. Mengu, Y. Rivenson, and A. Ozcan, "All-optical synthesis of an arbitrary linear 

transformation using diffractive surfaces," Light Sci Appl 10, 196 (2021).

59. O. Kulce, D. Mengu, Y. Rivenson, and A. Ozcan, "All-optical information-processing capacity of 

diffractive surfaces," Light: Science & Applications 10, 25 (2021).

60. E. Goi, X. Chen, Q. Zhang, B. P. Cumming, S. Schoenhardt, H. Luan, and M. Gu, "Nanoprinted high-

neuron-density optical linear perceptrons performing near-infrared inference on a CMOS chip," 
Light Sci Appl 10, 40 (2021).

61. X. Luo, Y. Hu, X. Li, X. Ou, J. Lai, and N. Liu, "Metasurface-Enabled On-Chip Multiplexed Diffractive 

Neural Networks in the Visible," 21 (n.d.).

62. H. Chen, J. Feng, M. Jiang, Y. Wang, J. Lin, J. Tan, and P. Jin, "Diffractive Deep Neural Networks at 

Visible Wavelengths," Engineering 7, 1483–1491 (2021).

63. Y. Luo, D. Mengu, N. T. Yardimci, Y. Rivenson, M. Veli, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, "Design of task-

specific optical systems using broadband diffractive neural networks," Light Sci Appl 8, 112 (2019).

64. D. Mengu, Y. Zhao, N. T. Yardimci, Y. Rivenson, M. Jarrahi, and A. Ozcan, "Misalignment resilient 

diffractive optical networks," Nanophotonics 9, 4207–4219 (2020).

65. M. A. Seldowitz, J. P. Allebach, and D. W. Sweeney, "Synthesis of digital holograms by direct binary 

search," Applied Optics 26, 2788 (1987).

66. D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, "Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization," arXiv:1412.6980 [cs] (2017).


19

Figures

Figure 1. Schematic of a diffractive QPI network that converts the optical phase information of an input 
object into a normalized intensity image, revealing the QPI information in radians without the use of a 
computer or a digital image reconstruction algorithm. Optical layout of the presented 5-layer diffractive QPI 
network, where the total distance between the input and output fields-of-view is 240λ. 


20

Figure 2. Generalization capability of diffractive QPI networks. a, The phase profiles of the diffractive 
layers forming the diffractive QPI network trained using phase-encoded images from Tiny-Imagenet dataset, 
𝜙(𝑥, 𝑦). b, Exemplary input object images and the corresponding output QPI signals for the test images, never 
seen by the network during training, taken from the Tiny-Imagenet. Dashed green box indicates that the test
images, although not seen by the diffractive network before, belong to the same dataset used in the training. c-
d, Same as b, except that the test images are taken from CIFAR-10 and Fashion-MNIST. Dashed red boxes 
indicate that these test images are from entirely new datasets compared to the Tiny-Imagenet used in the training. 
The SSIM (PSNR) values achieved by the presented diffractive network are 0.824±0.050 (26.43dB±2.69), 
0.917±0.041 (31.98dB±3.15) and 0.596±0.116 (26.94dB±1.5) for the test images from Tiny-Imagenet, CIFAR-
10 and Fashion-MNIST datasets, respectively. 


21

Figure 3. Spatial resolution and phase sensitivity analysis for the diffractive QPI network shown in Fig. 2. a, 
Input phase image and the corresponding output diffractive QPI signal for binary, 0-π phase encoded grating 
objects. The diffractive QPI network can resolve features as small as ~0.67λ. b, Analysis of the relationship
between the input phase contrast and the resolvable feature size. The diffractive QPI network can resolve 0.67λ
linewidth for a phase encoding range that is larger than 0.25π. Below this phase contrast, the resolution slowly 
degrades; for example, at 0-0.1π phase encoding, the background noise shadows the QPI signal of the grating 
with a linewidth of 0.67λ, while a larger linewidth (0.73λ) grating is still partially resolvable. 


22

Figure 1. Schematic of a diffractive optical network that can synthesize the QPI signal describing the optical 
path length delay introduced by an input phase object. Optical layout of the presented 5-layer diffractive 
optical networks that maps the phase delay describing the scattering function of the input object into the 
corresponding intensity signal at the output plane. The diffractive optical network processes the incoming 
object waves to synthesize the output intensity signal which, following a trivial normalization step in Eq. 4, 
reveals the QPI signal in radians. According to the depicted physical layout, the total distance between the 
input and output fields-of-view is only 240λ. 

Figure 4. The impact of input phase range on the diffractive QPI signal quality. a, A schematic of the 
diffractive QPI network that was trained with 𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 1.0, meaning that the training images had [0 : π] phase 
range. b, Pairs of ground-truth input phase images (top rows) and the diffractive QPI signal (bottom rows) for 
different images taken from Tiny-Imagenet (top), CIFAR-10 (middle) and Fashion-MNIST (bottom), at 
different levels of phase encoding ranges dictated by (from left-to-right) 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 2, 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 1.75, 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 1.5, 
𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 1.25, 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 𝛼𝑡𝑟 = 1.0, 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 0.75, 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 0.5, 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 0.25, 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 0.1. c, The SSIM and PSNR 
values of the diffractive QPI signals with respect to the ground-truth images as a function of 𝛼𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡.


23

Figure 5. Diffractive QPI signal quality and the power efficiency trade-off. We report 4 different diffractive
QPI network models trained using [0 : π] phase-encoded samples from the Tiny-Imagenet dataset. The SSIM on 
the y-axis reflects the mean value computed over the entire 10K test images of the Tiny-Imagenet dataset. The 
diffractive QPI network that provides the highest SSIM is the network shown in Fig. 2, which was trained solely 
based on the structural loss function (Eq. 5) totally ignoring the diffraction efficiency of the resulting solution. 
The loss function used for the training of the other 3 diffractive QPI networks includes a linear superposition of
the structural loss function (Eq. 5) and the diffraction efficiency penalty term depicted in Eq. 7. The 
multiplicative constant 𝛾 which determines the weight of the diffraction efficiency penalty was taken as 0.1, 0.4 
and 5.0 for these 3 diffractive QPI networks, providing an output diffraction efficiency of 6.31% , 8.17% and 
11.05%, respectively. 


