DASP: Defect and Dopant ab-initio Simulation Package

Menglin Huang1, Zhengneng Zheng1, Zhenxing Dai1, Xinjing Guo1, Shanshan Wang1, Lilai Jiang1, 
Jinchen Wei1, and Shiyou Chen1,*

1Key Laboratory of Computational Physical Sciences (MOE), and State Key Laboratory of ASIC 
and System, School of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China

*chensy@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract

In order to perform automated calculations of defect and dopant properties in semiconductors 

and insulators, we developed a software package, Defect and Dopant ab-initio Simulation Package 
(DASP), which is composed of four modules for calculating: (i) elemental chemical potentials, (ii) 
defect (dopant) formation energies and transition energy levels, (iii) defect and carrier densities 
and (iv) carrier dynamics properties of high-density defects. DASP uses the materials genome 
database for quick determination of competing secondary phases and calculation of the energy 
above convex hull when calculating the elemental chemical potential that stabilizes compound 
semiconductors, so it can perform high-throughput prediction of thermodynamic stability of 
multinary compounds. DASP calls the ab-initio softwares to perform the total energy, structural 
relaxation and electronic structure calculations of the defect supercells with different structure 
configurations and charge states, based on which the defect formation energies and transition 
energy levels are calculated and the corrections for electrostatic potential alignment and image 
charge interaction can be included. Then DASP can calculate the equilibrium densities of defects 
and electron and hole carriers as well as the Fermi level in semiconductors under different chemical 
potential conditions and different growth/working temperature. For high-density defects, DASP 
can calculate the carrier dynamics properties such as the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum, defect-
related radiative and non-radiative carrier capture cross sections, and recombination lifetime of 
non-equilibrium carriers. DASP is expected to act as an automatic and reliable toolbox for 
calculating the defect and dopant properties, which can be compared to or used to interpret the 
experimental characterization results of defects using electrical and optical techniques such as PL 
and deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS). Here we will introduce its unique functions 
including the maximumly-cubic supercell generation, distorted defect structure searching and 
wavefunction initialization which can reduce computational cost and improve accuracy, and also
show three examples about its applications in undoped GaN, C-doped GaN and quasi-one-
dimensional SbSeI. 


1. Introduction

Intrinsic point defects are indispensable in crystals at a finite temperature and can have important 

influences on the fundamental properties of crystalline materials.[1, 2] Extrinsic elements are 

usually introduced into the crystalline lattice as dopants intentionally or as impurities 

unintentionally, which provides an extrinsic freedom for manipulating the properties of crystalline 

materials. The influences of defects and dopants (impurities) in semiconductors are more 

significant than those in metals or structural materials, because the applications of semiconductors 

in functional electronic and optoelectronic devices care more about the electrical and optical 

properties, which can be significantly changed even when a small amount of defects and dopants 

exist in the lattice, e.g., defects or dopants with a density of 1015-1018 cm-3 (1 defect or dopant 

among 104-107 atoms) can change the electrical and optical properties of semiconductors

dramatically. For the simple elemental semiconductors such as Si and Ge, the number of intrinsic 

point defects is usually small,[3] so extrinsic doping is required for producing electron or hole 

carriers and thus achieving n-type or p-type electrical conductivity. For binary, ternary, quaternary 

or even multinary compound semiconductors, the number of possible point defects can be large, 

so their defect/dopant physics can be more complicated and thus more flexible, e.g., their electrical 

conductivity may be tuned through controlling the formation of different point defects.[4]

Considering the important influences of defects (dopants) on semiconductor properties and the 

complexity of the defect/dopant physics in new, multinary or low-symmetry semiconductors, the 

studies on defects and dopants are fundamental to the development of semiconductor physics and 

applications.

Many experimental techniques have been developed for the characterization of defects and 

dopants in semiconductors, such as the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum, positron annihilation 

spectroscopy
(PAS), electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) and deep-level transient 

spectroscopy (DLTS).[5] These techniques usually just give the measured spectra from which the 

defect and dopant properties such as the density, energy levels and carrier capture cross sections 

can be obtained through fitting the spectra according to a certain physical model. However, what 

kind of defects and dopants determine the experimental spectra (including the fitted properties of 

defects and dopants) is usually speculated according to the analysis on the properties of the 

possible defects and dopants, which is semi-empirical and imposes a limit to the accurate and 


quantitative defect and dopant engineering. For instance, if the origin defects of the deep-level 

recombination centers in optoelectronic semiconductors are not clear, it is impossible to suppress 

their formation and increase the minority carrier lifetime by accurately controlling the growth 

conditions.

Since 1990s, significant progresses have been made in the ab-initio (first-principles) calculation 

of defect and dopant properties based on the density functional theory (DFT) and the supercell 

model.[6-8] The calculated formation energies, charge-state transition energy levels and carrier 

capture cross sections of defects and dopants have been widely used for revealing the microscopic

origin of the experimental PL, PAS, EPR and DLTS spectra, and guiding the fabrication of high-

quality materials and high-performance devices.[9-11] However, there are still unsolved issues

that may cause considerable errors in the calculated defect/dopant properties or even 

misunderstanding of the defect/dopant physics. (i) The approximations to exchange-correlation 

functionals cause the underestimation of the band gap and the incorrect location and occupation 

of the defect/dopant levels in the band gap,[12] which can result in errors in the calculated 

formation energy and transition level. Such errors are serious for the local density approximation 

(LDA)[13] and generalized gradient approximation (GGA)[14], so several correction schemes 

were proposed.[7, 15-18] Recently, the hybrid functional calculations were shown to predict more 

reasonable band gaps for many semiconductors, so the errors in the calculated defect properties 

are also corrected largely (not perfectly, because the hybrid functional may give incorrect 

localization of defect states and also depends on the empirical exact exchange ratio parameter).[19-

21] (ii) The calculation of defect/dopant formation energies and densities requires the 

determination of the allowed chemical potential ranges for all the component and dopant elements. 

For ternary, quaternary and multinary compound semiconductors, there probably exist a large 

number of secondary phases competing against the host material, which may all limit the stable

range of elemental chemical potentials. Therefore, if some important secondary phases are not 

considered in the determination of elemental chemical potentials, the calculations of defect/dopant

formation energies and densities and even the stability of the compound can be wrong. (iii) For 

low-symmetry and multinary compound semiconductors, the possible defect/dopant types can be 

many and various. For each type of defect/dopant, there may be multiple non-equivalent sites and 

structural configurations, which can change for different charge states. If some important defect-

types/sites/configurations/charge-states are not considered, the calculated results are incomplete


and inaccurate. (iv) The finite supercell size corrections, such as the corrections for the electrostatic

potential alignment and image charge interaction,[12, 22, 23] are still controversial. Especially, 

different correction schemes can give rise to different results. (v) In most of the studies, only 

defect/dopant formation energies and transition levels were calculated, but the exact values of 

equilibrium defect densities, carrier densities and Fermi level are not calculated. Without the direct 

calculation of the defect densities, one may have misunderstandings on the influences of a certain 

defect, because all the defects (dopants) are correlated by the carrier densities and Fermi level, and 

the defect correlation may give rise to unexpected and anti-chemical-intuition changes in the defect 

densities.[24]

To solve those problems in a standard and comprehensive way, we developed a software 

package, Defect and Dopant ab-initio Simulation Package (DASP), which can perform automated 

calculations of defect and dopant properties based on the supercell model and ab-initio DFT 

calculations. Using the software, the defect formation energies, charge-state transition energy 

levels, carrier capture cross sections and even the PL spectrum can be calculated based on the 

atomic structure, total energy, electronic structure, phonon spectrum and electron-phonon coupling 

matrix calculated by the ab-initio DFT softwares using different approximations to exchange-

correlation functionals. All the possible competing secondary compounds in the materials genome 

database are considered for the accurate calculation of the thermodynamic stability and elemental 

chemical potential ranges of compound semiconductors. Various defect types, atomic sites, 

structure configurations and charge states can be considered, and the corrections for the 

electrostatic potential alignment and image charge interaction can be included automatically. With 

all the defects and dopants considered, the equilibrium defect densities, carrier densities and Fermi 

level can be calculated for the samples grown under different chemical potential conditions and 

different temperature. For high-density defects and dopants, their carrier dynamics properties can 

also be calculated, despite the heavier computational cost. Therefore, DASP is developed to be a 

toolbox for the automated theoretical prediction of defect and dopant properties in semiconductors.


2. Software Framework and Modules

2.1 Software Framework

DASP is composed of four modules: Thermodynamic Stability Calculation (TSC), Defect 

Energy Calculation (DEC), Defect Density Calculation (DDC), and Carrier Dynamics Calculation 

(CDC), as plotted in Fig. 1.

Figure 1. The framework of the DASP software, which is composed of four modules, TSC, DEC, 
DDC and CDC. The major functions of the four modules are shown in the boxes.

The detailed workflow of DASP is plotted schematically in Fig. 2, in which the green part shows 

the DEC module, the blue part shows the TSC module, the purple part shows the DDC module 

and the red part shows the CDC module. The only necessary input is the crystal structure file of 

the semiconductor. The intermediate and final output files include:

(i) TSC: the chemical potential range of component elements that stabilizes the compound 

semiconductor (which is also a descriptor of the thermodynamic stability of the compound) and 

the allowed highest chemical potential of the dopant elements; 

(ii) DEC: the formation energies of defects and dopants in different charge states, as functions 

of the elemental chemical potentials and Fermi level (electronic chemical potentials), from which 

the charge-state transition energy levels can be derived;


(iii) the equilibrium-state Fermi level, densities of electron and hole carriers, and densities of 

the defects and dopants in different charge states, as functions of the elemental chemical potentials 

at growth temperature and working (measuring) temperature;

(iv) the carrier capture cross sections, the radiative and non-radiative carrier recombination rates

and lifetime, and the PL spectra.

Among the four modules, the most fundamental one is DEC, whose core function is for 

calculating the defect/dopant formation energy using the supercell model and ab-initio DFT 

calculations. In the supercell model, the formation energy of a point defect α in the charge state q

can be calculated as,[25, 26]

∆𝐸𝑓(𝛼, 𝑞) = 𝐸(𝛼, 𝑞) − 𝐸(𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘) − ∑ 𝑛𝑖(𝜇𝑖 + 𝐸𝑖)
𝑖
+ 𝑞(𝐸𝐹 + 𝜀𝑉𝐵𝑀) + 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟
(1),

where 𝐸(𝛼, 𝑞) and 𝐸(𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘) are the total energies of the supercells with and without a defect 

(dopant), 𝜇𝑖 is the elemental chemical potential referenced to the total energy 𝐸𝑖 of the pure 

solid/gas elementary phase, 𝐸𝐹 is the Fermi level referenced to the eigenvalue of the valence band 

maximum (VBM) level of the bulk supercell. 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟 is the correction that accounts for the spurious 

interaction caused by finite supercell size and periodic boundary conditions.

In the following, we will briefly introduce the four modules:

TSC Module: As shown in Eq. (1), the defect (dopant) formation energy and thus the defect 

density are functions of the elemental chemical potentials, so the calculation of defect properties 

requires the elemental chemical potentials as inputs. The TSC (Thermodynamic Stability 

Calculation) module is for calculating the chemical potential ranges through considering the 

influences of all the competing secondary compounds that can limit the thermodynamic phase 

stability of the host compound semiconductor. In order to make the consideration of secondary 

compounds as complete as possible, the material genome database (Materials Project[27]) is used 

to search for the competing secondary compounds. Through combining the formation energy 

information of all the secondary compounds with the calculated formation energy of the host 

compound (equivalent inputs are used for DFT calculations), the critical secondary compounds 

that limit the stable chemical potential region can be determined quickly.


Figure 2. The flowchart of DASP. Different colors represent the four modules. The dashed lines 
show the calculations that need to call external ab-initio DFT softwares.


DEC Module: The DEC (Defect Energy Calculation) module can generate the maximumly-

cubic supercell structures of the host semiconductor, based on which the defect and dopant 

supercell structures can be generated with all the possible defect/dopant types, atomic sites and 

structural configurations considered. Then ab-initio softwares, such as Vienna Ab-Initio

Simulation Package (VASP)[28] and Quantum ESPRESSO (QE)[29], will be called to perform 

atomic structural relaxation, total energy and electronic structure calculations for the defect/dopant 

supercells. First the neutral charge state is calculated and then different charge states will be 

generated according to the defect/dopant levels in the band gap and calculated. Then the formation 

energies of defects and dopants in different charge states can be calculated using Eq. (1). The 

chemical potentials outputted by TSC are used as 𝜇𝑖. The correction term 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟 that accounts for 

the spurious interaction caused by finite supercell size and periodic boundary conditions can also 

be calculated automatically based on the output of ab-initio calculations. The charge-state 

transition energy levels are then calculated to be the Fermi level 𝐸𝐹 at which the formation energies 

of a defect in two charge states q and q’ are equal, ∆𝐸𝑓(𝛼, 𝑞)=∆𝐸𝑓(𝛼, 𝑞′).

DDC Module: Based on the results of TSC and DEC, the DDC (Defect Density Calculation)

module solves the charge-neutrality equation self-consistently to determine the equilibrium

defect/dopant densities, Fermi level, and carrier densities, as shown by the purple part of Fig. 2. 

For a given chemical potential condition, the formation energies of defects and dopants in different 

charge states are treated as input for a two-step self-consistent calculation, which solves the charge-

neutrality condition equations at high growth temperature and low working (measuring) 

temperature to determine the Fermi level of the semiconductor samples. Then the equilibrium

densities of defects and dopants and the densities of electron and hole carriers can be calculated 

under the given chemical potential condition. Through changing the chemical potentials, the 

defect/dopant and carrier densities can be calculated as functions of the chemical potential 

conditions, which can be used for the defect/dopant engineering based on the growth condition

control. 

CDC Module: For the high-density defects or dopants identified by DDC module, the CDC 

(Carrier Dynamics Calculation) module can calculate their excited-state carrier dynamics 

properties. The transition energy levels from the DEC module and the Fermi level from the DDC 

module will be used to screen for the transitions between the defect levels and the VBM or 


conduction band minimum (CBM) level which may produce the PL peaks or cause the fast non-

radiative recombination of carriers. Then the phonon spectrum of the defect/dopant supercell, 

electron-phonon coupling matrix and transition dipole moments between the defect/dopant states 

and VBM or CBM states will be calculated, based on which the radiative and non-radiative 

transition rates (carrier capture cross sections) and the lineshape of photoluminescence spectra

induced by defects and dopants can be calculated. Such calculations may be performed based on 

the single-phonon-mode one-dimensional configuration coordinate diagram[30] or the all-phonon-

modes three-dimensional schemes[31]. Combining the calculated transition rates and the

equilibrium defect and carrier densities, the CDC module may also calculate the Shockley-Read-

Hall recombination rates and the non-equilibrium carrier lifetime.

2.2 Thermodynamic Stability Calculation Module

The formation of defects or the doping of extrinsic elements in semiconductor lattice involves 

the exchange of atoms between the semiconductor lattice and the external environment, so the 

formation energies of defects and dopants in Eq. (1) depend on the elemental chemical potentials, 

which describe the abundance of the elements (partial pressure for the gas elements) in the 

environment. Although the abundance of a certain element can be controlled by changing the 

environment, the changes of the elemental chemical potentials are actually not unlimited, because 

they should satisfy a series of thermodynamic conditions to make the pure-phase crystalline 

semiconductor stable. Here we take the quaternary compound semiconductor Cu2ZnSnS4 as an 

example to show how to determine its stable elemental chemical potential range. 

Firstly, at the equilibrium state of the compound Cu2ZnSnS4, the weighted sum of the chemical 

potentials of its component elements should be equal to the formation energy of the compound, 

2𝜇𝐶𝑢 + 𝜇𝑍𝑛 + 𝜇𝑆𝑛 + 4𝜇𝑆 = Δ𝐻𝑓(𝐶𝑢2𝑍𝑛𝑆𝑛𝑆4)
(2),

where Δ𝐻𝑓(Cu2ZnSnS4) is the compound formation energy of Cu2ZnSnS4 relative to the Cu, Zn, 

Sn and S elemental phases. That means the chemical equilibrium state is arrived for the reaction 

2Cu + Zn + Sn + 4S → 𝐶𝑢2𝑍𝑛𝑆𝑛𝑆4, so the product compound Cu2ZnSnS4 is stable.

Secondly, to make the synthesized sample be pure-phase Cu2ZnSnS4 , the formation or 

coexistence of the competing secondary phases, such as the binary and ternary compounds CuS, 


Cu2S, ZnS, SnS, SnS2 and Cu2SnS3, and the elemental phases Cu, Zn, Sn, S, should be avoided. 

Therefore, the weighted sum of the chemical potentials of their component elements should be 

lower than their corresponding formation energies (the formation energies of elemental phases are 

0), as described by the following inequations,

𝜇𝐶𝑢 + 𝜇𝑆 < 𝛥𝐻𝑓(𝐶𝑢𝑆),

2𝜇𝐶𝑢 + 𝜇𝑆 < 𝛥𝐻𝑓(𝐶𝑢2𝑆),

𝜇𝑍𝑛 + 𝜇𝑆 < 𝛥𝐻𝑓(𝑍𝑛𝑆),

𝜇𝑆𝑛 + 𝜇𝑆 < 𝛥𝐻𝑓(𝑆𝑛𝑆),

𝜇𝑆𝑛 + 2𝜇𝑆 < 𝛥𝐻𝑓(𝑆𝑛𝑆2),

2𝜇𝐶𝑢 + 𝜇𝑆𝑛 + 3𝜇𝑆 < 𝛥𝐻𝑓(𝐶𝑢2𝑆𝑛𝑆3),

𝜇𝐶𝑢 < 0,

𝜇𝑍𝑛 < 0,

𝜇𝑆𝑛 < 0,

𝜇𝑆 < 0
(3).

The allowed chemical potential range of Cu, Zn, Sn and S that stabilizes the pure-phase 

Cu2ZnSnS4 is limited by these equations and inequations. If the formation energies of the host and 

all the competing compounds are known, the ranges can be calculated and plotted in the chemical 

potential space, as shown in Ref. [4]. One example about SbSeI is also shown in Section 3.2.

The four elements Cu, Zn, Sn and S can form many binary, ternary and quaternary compounds, 

which can all act as the competing secondary phases of Cu2ZnSnS4. In principle, for the accurate 

calculation of the chemical potential range, one should take account of all the possible competing

compounds, whose number can be large, especially for quaternary or multinary compounds. In 

DASP, the TSC (Thermodynamic Stability Calculation) module provides an automated solution 

for the quick screening of the critical competing phases and thus the accurate calculation of the 

chemical potential range. With the chemical formula of the compound, TSC will visit the materials 

genome database, such as Materials Project (MP) database[27], to search for all the compounds 

that are composed of the component elements, and then download the total energy, formation 


energy and DFT calculation input files of these compounds. Meanwhile, TSC will also perform 

ab-initio DFT calculation for the formation energy of the host compound with the input consistent 

with the MP database. With the formation energies of the host compound and all the competing 

compounds, TSC can solve the thermodynamic constraint equations and inequations to determine 

the stable chemical potential region and the critical competing compounds that limit the stable 

region directly. For the host and the critical competing compounds, TSC can further calculate their 

formation energies with higher accuracy and different functionals, to ensure that the calculated

range of the chemical potentials are accurate. Usually these critical competing compounds are also 

those determining the energy above the convex hull, which shows the thermodynamic stability of 

the compound with respect to the phase separation into other competing compounds, so TSC can 

also be used for high-throughput and accurate calculation of the energy above convex hull and 

thermodynamic stability of compounds.

2.3 Defect Energy Calculation Module

2.3.1 Maximumly-Cubic Supercell Generation

In the real semiconductor lattices, the densities of defects and dopants are usually much lower 

than the densities of atoms, e.g., there is only one defect or dopant among 104-107 atoms for defects 

or dopants with a density of 1015-1018 cm-3. Therefore, the distance between two defects or dopants 

is usually very large. However, in the periodic supercell model, the distances between the defect 

and the periodic image defects in the neighboring supercell are actually not very large since the 

supercell has only several hundred atoms. Therefore, the supercell model causes unphysical 

interaction between defects or dopants, which may induce errors in the calculated defect properties. 

To reduce the errors caused by the finite supercell size and achieve better supercell size 

convergence, DASP always tends to generate the supercells that are nearly cubic, so that the defect-

defect (dopant-dopant) distance is maximized and the unphysical interaction is minimized. As 

illustrated in Fig. 3, for the two supercells with the same volume (same number of atoms), the 

smallest defect-defect distance in the nearly-cubic supercell should be larger than that in the 

supercell derived from direct expansion of primitive cell. In the nearly-cubic supercell, the smallest 

defect-defect distance should be along the (100), (010) or (001) direction, and the smallest 

distances along the three directions are similar. However, in the supercell derived from direct 


expansion of primitive cell, the smallest defect-defect distance may be along the (110) or (111) 

directions, and the distance can be smaller than the distance along the (100), (010) or (001) 

direction if the supercell basis vectors are not orthogonal and one of their angles is larger than 120°. 

Besides the advantage in maximizing the defect-defect distance, the nearly-cubic supercell also 

leads to the orthogonality of the reciprocal lattices, which may accelerate the ab-initio calculation 

and achieve better convergence.

Figure 3. The supercell generated by simple expansion of primitive cell and the maximumly-cubic 
supercell generated by DASP.

The generation of the nearly-cubic supercell in DASP is through the maximumly-cubic supercell 

generation function, which firstly transforms the primitive cell into the nearly-orthogonal supercell

and then expands it to get the nearly-cubic supercell which maximizes the cubic degree of the 

supercell with a given number of atoms.

To search for the nearly-orthogonal supercell, we developed a traversal searching method 

through trying different conversion matrices that can transform the lattice vectors of the primitive 

cell to the nearly-orthogonal lattice vectors. The conversion matrix should be non-singular because 

the lattice vectors are not coplanar. In addition, only swapping the lattice vectors will not change 


the shape of the cell, so there is no need to consider the exchange operation during the 

transformation. Therefore, the matrix satisfies the LU decomposition condition, and can be written 

as, 

𝐶 = (

𝑐11
𝑐12
𝑐13

𝑐21
𝑐22
𝑐23

𝑐31
𝑐32
𝑐33

) = 𝐿𝑈 = (

1
0
0

𝑙21
1
0

𝑙31
𝑙32
1

) (

𝑢11
𝑢12
𝑢13

0
𝑢22
𝑢23

0
0
𝑢33

)
(4),

where 𝑢11, 𝑢22, 𝑢33 in the upper triangular matrix 𝑈 describe the expansion operations, which are 

the repeating numbers along the three lattice vectors of the primitive cell. 𝑙21, 𝑙31, 𝑙32 in the lower 

triangular matrix 𝐿 and 𝑢12 , 𝑢13 , 𝑢23 in the upper triangular matrix 𝑈 describe the linear 

combination operations. By traversing different conversion matrices, we can get different nearly-

orthogonal cells. Taking into account both the computational cost and accuracy, we only traverse 

the conversion matrices that meet the following conditions,

𝑐𝑖𝑗 = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, ±4 (𝑖, 𝑗 = 1, 2, 3), 𝑢𝑘𝑘 = 1, 2, 3, 4 (𝑘 = 1, 2, 3)
(5),

where 𝑐𝑖𝑗 is the element in the conversion matrix 𝐶, 𝑢𝑘𝑘 is the diagonal element in the upper 

triangular matrix 𝑈. 

With the nearly-orthogonal supercell, we can just expand it directly to get nearly-cubic supercell. 

The cubic degree is described by the ratio 

Vsupercell

Vcube , where Vsupercell is the volume of the supercell, 

Vcube is the volume of the cube that can envelop the whole supercell. If the degree is 1, the shape 

of the supercell is ideally cubic. Considering the computational cost, the number (𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚) of atoms 

in the supercell is limited, e.g., 200-1000 atoms. Although very large 𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚 can give very cubic 

supercell and thus tend to increase the cubic degree to 1, the cubic degree does not necessarily 

increase monotonically as 𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚 increases from 100 to 1000. Therefore, when selecting a 

supercell for defect calculation, DASP considers both the cubic degree and 𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚 in order to 

maximize the defect-defect distance under the constraint of the limited 𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚. An empirical 

quantity β is defined to balance the two factors and used as the criterion for choosing supercells,

𝛽 =

Vsupercell

Vcube
+ 0.001 𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚
(6).

The maximumly-cubic supercell is generated by DASP through maximizing the quantity β in a 

given range of 𝑁𝑎𝑡𝑜𝑚.


2.3.2 Distorted Defect Structure Searching

After the supercell is generated, DASP can generate structures of defects and dopants in the 

primitive-cell region of the supercell. The common defect types will be considered automatically. 

For example, the intrinsic defects of the quaternary compound Cu2ZnSnS4 that DASP considered 

include the Cu, Zn, Sn and S vacancies (VCu, VZn, VSn and VS), interstitials (Cui, Zni, Sni, Si) and 

antisites (CuZn, CuSn, CuS, ZnCu, ZnSn, ZnS, SnCu, SnZn, SnS, SCu, SZn, SSn). Meanwhile, for the low-

energy donor and acceptor defects, they can form donor-acceptor compensated defect complexes, 

which can also be considered by DASP. 

For low-symmetry semiconductors, the structure may have several non-equivalent atomic sites 

for one element, and the same-type defects on non-equivalent sites may have different properties. 

When generating vacancy, interstitial and antisite defects, DASP will consider all non-equivalent 

sites. For interstitial defects, DASP will search for the largest void region in the structure and 

meanwhile consider the Coulomb repulsion to determine the possible interstitial sites of cations 

and anions. For low-energy interstitial defects, DASP will also generate 10-20 different 

configurations randomly in the primitive-cell region of the supercell (different interstitial sites are 

ensured to be not close to each other).

For low-energy vacancy and antisite defects, there may be other distorted or metastable structure 

configurations, such as the DX centers[32] which originate from large structural distortion of the 

antisite donor defects but act as acceptors after distortion. These distorted or metastable defects 

have been shown to have important impact on the electrical properties of semiconductors.[33-35]

They can be obtained by imposing a structural perturbation to the locally relaxed structure of the 

defect in the charge state q, because the perturbation may overcome the structural transition barrier 

to arrive at a new distorted structure.


Figure 4. For a vacancy or antisite defect, the initial configuration (a) can be generated directly 
from the host lattice, and then structural perturbations are added, including (b) random 
displacements and (c) random distribution of the atoms within the sphere around the defect.

DASP adds two types of structural perturbations: (i) displacing the atoms within a sphere around 

the defect by less than 0.5 Å randomly, as shown in Fig. 4(b); (ii) randomly distributing all the 

atoms within the sphere, as shown in Fig. 4(c). The default value of the sphere radius is set to 3 Å, 

but will be automatically increased to ensure at least 4 atoms in the sphere. The total number of 

the structures generated with the perturbation will be in the range of 10-20, but some of them may 

become identical after structural relaxation. Such kind of structural perturbations are in fact for 

achieving a global structural relaxation for the defect.

2.3.3 Charge State Selection of Ionized Defects

Ionized defects in different charge states are fundamental to the basic understanding of defect 

physics, but there are still several open questions during the calculation of the properties of charged 

defects. The first one is how to determine the range of defect charge q for an ionized defect. In the 

past, the octet rule was often selected as a criterion to judge the charge range of a defect, which 

simply adopts the nominal charge of the single element. For instance, the sulfur vacancy should 

take 0, 1+, 2+ charges according to the simple octet rule, however, in non-conventional 

semiconductors such as MoS2, neither 1+ nor 2+ state of the sulfur vacancy is  stable while the 1–

charge state exists.[36]


To solve this problem, the estimation procedure of the charge range implemented in DASP is 

based on the calculated eigenvalues of the neutral defects at Γ point. Therefore, in the first step of 

DEC module, DASP will generate the structures of point defects in their neutral state, and then 

call ab-initio software to perform atomic relaxations and static self-consistent calculations. Once 

all the calculations are done, the eigenvalues of bulk and all the neutral defects will be extracted.

The hybrid functional (such as HSE) is recommended for the static self-consistent calculations to 

obtain the more reasonable band gap and more reasonable location of the defect levels. As shown 

in Fig. 5, for defect A, if an occupied and an unoccupied level are found within the band gap

between the VBM and CBM levels of the bulk, these two levels will be taken as defect levels and 

the defect A in 1+ and 1– charges will be calculated subsequently. Following this scheme, when 

three occupied levels and three unoccupied levels are found in the bulk band gap, the defect C in 

[3+, 2+, 1+, 1–, 2–, 3–] charge states will all be calculated.

Figure 5. The determination of the charge states of the ionized defect according to the calculated 
eigenvalues of the defect levels within the bulk band gap, extracted from the ab-initio calculation 
for the neutral defect.

2.3.4 Electrostatic Potential Alignment

In Eq. (1), the eigenvalue of bulk VBM is used as the reference of the Fermi level, i.e., EF=0 

means the Fermi level is located at VBM. However, the eigenvalues in the calculation of bulk and 

defect supercells can be compared only when the electrostatic potentials of the two periodic 

supercells are aligned.[12] This can be accomplished either by aligning the electrostatic potential 


far from the defect (e.g., the potential written in the LOCPOT file of VASP), or by aligning the 

deep core level of the farthest atom from the defect. The alignment term can be written as,

∆𝑉𝑞/𝑏 = 𝑉(𝛼, 𝑞)|𝑓𝑎𝑟 − 𝑉(𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘)|𝑓𝑎𝑟
(7).

The correction of potential alignment to the formation energy of a defect in the charge state q is 

𝑞∆𝑉𝑞/𝑏, and is automatically included in the term 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟.

2.3.5 Image Charge Correction

The spurious Coulomb interaction between charged defect and its periodic images, as well as 

charged defect and the neutralizing background charge should be corrected from the calculated 

formation energies of ionized charged defects, which are called image charge corrections. DASP 

can currently perform the corrections according to two schemes. The first one is the Lany-Zunger 

scheme,[12] which can be represented by,

∆𝐸𝐿𝑍 = [1 − 𝑐𝑠ℎ(1 − 1/𝜀)]

𝑞2𝛼

2𝜀𝐿
(8),

where α is the Madelung constant, ε is the static dielectric constant, and L is the linear supercell 

dimension. Since DASP will always tend to generate a nearly-cubic supercell, the default value of 

𝑐𝑠ℎ is set to –1/3.[12, 22] Based on these definitions, the total correction term 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟 appears in Eq. 

(1) can be separated into,

𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟 = 𝑞∆𝑉𝑞/𝑏 + ∆𝐸𝐿𝑍
(9).

DASP also provides an interface with the code sxdefectalign written by Freysoldt, which 

implements the Freysoldt-Neugebauer-Van de Walle (FNV) scheme[23] for charged defect 

correction. Different from the original paper that uses the planar average of the electrostatic 

potential to obtain the potential offset, we here use the atomic site potential instead, as Kumagai 

and Oba proposed.[37] In this scheme, the correction 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟 can be written as,

𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟 = 𝐸𝑙𝑎𝑡 − 𝑞(∆𝑉𝑞/𝑏 − 𝑉𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙)
(10),

where 𝐸𝑙𝑎𝑡 is the Madelung energy and 𝑉𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙 is the potential obtained from the chosen model 

(such as Gaussian) charge density. Note that in the FNV scheme, the potential alignment defined 

in 2.3.4 is already included.


The two correction schemes mentioned above may be not valid for the charged defects in low-

dimensional layered semiconductors, such as those in monolayer MoS2 or WSe2. A series of new 

correction schemes have been successfully developed in the past decade for the charged defect 

correction in layered semiconductors,[38-43] which will be implemented in the future version of 

DASP.

2.3.6 Defect Wavefunction Initialization

The formation of a defect or dopant causes the change of the electronic wavefunction and the 

redistribution of charge density in the semiconductor lattice, which produces new electronic states 

(defect states) in the band gap. Although the wavefunction and charge density near the defect site 

can be changed dramatically, the area far from the defect should be weakly influenced. Therefore, 

for different defects or dopants in different charge states, the wavefunction and charge density in 

the region far from the defect site should be similar to those of the defect-free supercell. Since the 

self-consistent calculations of the wavefunction and charge density will be repeated hundreds of 

times, it will save a large amount of computational cost if we take advantage of the slightly changed 

wavefunction and charge density in the region far from the defect site to reduce the number of self-

consistent calculation steps.

In DASP, the initial charge density of the neutral defect/dopant supercell is generated based on 

the converged wavefunction and charge density of the bulk host supercell, i.e., the charge density 

in the region far from the defect site is the same as that of the bulk host, while the charge density

in the sphere around the defect is generated by a superposition of atomic charge densities and the 

charge density in the interface region is smoothed and rescaled according to the number of valence 

electrons of the defect supercell. Then the self-consistent calculations are performed to obtain the 

converged charge density and wavefunction of the neutral defect/dopant supercell. For the charged 

defect/dopant, its initial charge density is generated based on the converged wavefunction and 

charge density of the neutral defect through changing the occupation number of the defect states. 

With the initial charge density, the ab-initio self-consistent calculations can reach convergence 

with much less steps. The saving of computational cost can be more significant when large 

supercells are used.


2.4 Defect Density Calculation Module

Under thermodynamic equilibrium, the density of a defect α in the charge state q is determined

by its formation energy according to,[25, 44]

𝑛(𝛼, 𝑞) = 𝑁𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑔𝑞𝑒(−∆𝐸𝑓/𝑘𝐵𝑇)
(11),

where Nsites is the density of the possible defect sites, gq is the charge-dependent degeneracy factor, 

ΔEf is the defect formation energy at the given Fermi level and elemental chemical potentials as 

described by Eq. (1). All the ionized defects in the charge state q≠0 produce carriers. The 

positively charged donor defects with q>0 produce electron carriers, and their summed charge is 

∑
𝛼;𝑞>0[𝑞 ∗ 𝑛(𝛼, 𝑞)]
; while the negatively charged acceptor defects with q<0 produce hole carriers, 

and their summed charge is ∑
𝛼;𝑞<0[𝑞 ∗ 𝑛(𝛼, 𝑞)]
. The final densities of electron and hole carriers 

are contributed by both the thermal excitation and the ionization of all these defects (dopants). The 

equilibrium-state Fermi level can be calculated through solving the charge neutrality equation,

𝑛0 + ∑
𝛼;𝑞<0[𝑞 ∗ 𝑛(𝛼, 𝑞)]
= 𝑝0 + ∑
𝛼;𝑞>0[𝑞 ∗ 𝑛(𝛼, 𝑞)]
(12),

where ∑
𝛼;𝑞<0[𝑞 ∗ 𝑛(𝛼, 𝑞)]
and ∑
𝛼;𝑞>0[𝑞 ∗ 𝑛(𝛼, 𝑞)]
are the summed charges of negatively charged 

defects and positively charged defects, weighted by the charge q. n0 and p0 are free carrier densities, 

which can be defined as,

𝑛0 = ∫
𝑔𝐶(𝐸)𝑓(𝐸)𝑑𝐸

+∞
𝜀𝐶𝐵𝑀
(13),

𝑝0 = ∫
𝑔𝑉(𝐸)(1 − 𝑓(𝐸))𝑑𝐸

𝜀𝑉𝐵𝑀
−∞
(14),

where 𝑔𝐶(𝐸) and 𝑔𝑉(𝐸) are the density of states (DOS) for the conduction and valence bands, 

respectively, and 𝑓(𝐸) is the Fermi-Dirac occupation function. 𝑔𝐶(𝐸) and 𝑔𝑉(𝐸) can be

calculated from both the parabolic band approximation and the exact integration of the ab-initio

calculated band structure. The default setting in DASP is from the parabolic band approximation 

which requires the calculation of electron and hole effective masses, but it can be changed to the 

exact DOS from ab-initio calculations.

The semiconductors are usually grown or synthesized at a high temperature and then go through 

a rapid annealing process to a lower working (measuring) temperature. Therefore, the defects are 

usually formed at the high temperature and then the densities of different charge states will


redistribute during the rapid annealing. The DDC module is developed in accordance with such 

fabrication process,[44-46] as shown schematically in Fig. 2. Eq. (12) is firstly solved at a high

growth temperature, and then the Fermi level and the densities of each defect in different charge 

state q can be obtained at the high temperature. Afterwards, Eq. (12) is solved again at the lower 

measuring temperature, but now the densities of defects in different charge states do not follow 

Eq. (11). In the second step, the density summation for each defect over all charge states is fixed

at the value calculated in the first step, and the density of each charge state will undergo a 

redistribution according to the Fermi-Dirac occupation. Then a new Fermi level can be obtained 

at the measuring temperature, and the redistributed defect densities and carrier densities can be 

calculated.

The calculation of defect and carrier densities using DDC module in DASP is quite easy. After 

finishing the calculation of TSC and DEC, DDC can be calculated based on the output files of TSC 

and DEC. The defect (dopant) densities, carrier densities and Fermi level can be plotted or saved 

as functions of the elemental chemical potentials and growth/measuring temperatures.

2.5 Carrier Dynamics Calculation Module

After calculating the defect densities using DDC module, one may identify a portion of high 

density defects (dopants), which may be critical to the optical and electrical properties of the host 

semiconductor. For those important defects, we implement in the CDC module three functions for 

studying the excited-state carrier dynamics properties based on the phonon spectrum and electron-

phonon coupling calculation: (i) photoluminescence (PL) lineshape of defects; (ii) radiative carrier 

capture coefficient of defects; (iii) phonon-assisted nonradiative carrier capture coefficient (cross 

section) of defects. In the following, we will mainly introduce how to calculate the PL lineshape, 

while the details of the calculation on carrier capture will not be discussed here. More details can 

be found in Ref. [30, 31].


Figure 6. (a) Hole capture process by the donor defect D that changes the charge state from neutral 
to +1. (b) Configuration coordinate diagram of hole capture process. The potential curves are
aligned to ensure the zero-phonon line energy equals to the (0/+) transition energy.

The photoluminescence can be caused by the transition of carriers between the defect state and 

the VBM or CBM state, as shown in Fig. 6(a). Its intensity at finite temperature is mainly 

determined by the transition dipole moment between two states and the lineshape function, which 

is written by,[47, 48]

𝐼(ℏ𝜔) =

𝑒2𝑛𝑟𝜔3

3𝜀0𝜋𝑐3ℏ |⟨𝜓𝑖|𝒓̂|𝜓𝑓⟩|

2 ∑
𝑚 𝑝𝑚
∑ |⟨𝜒𝑖𝑚|𝜒𝑓𝑛⟩|

2𝛿(𝐸𝑍𝑃𝐿 + ℏ𝜔𝑖𝑚 − ℏ𝜔𝑓𝑛 − ℏ𝜔)
𝑛
(15),

where e is the elementary charge, nr is the refractive index of the bulk material, ɛ0 is the vacuum 

permittivity, ћω is the corresponding energy of the emitted photon. ⟨𝜓𝑖|𝒓̂|𝜓𝑓⟩ is the transition 

dipole moment between the band edge state and defect state calculated at Γ point; pm is the 

Boltzmann occupation of the initial vibrational state m changing with temperature; χim and χfn are 

the vibrational wavefunctions of the initial and final states, and ћωim and ћωfn are the corresponding 

eigenvalues. EZPL is corresponding to the charge-state transition level calculated in DEC module.

At T=0 K, all the charge carriers fall into the lowest-energy vibrational mode of initial state (m=0), 

since there is no thermal activation for excited-state carriers. As a result, one can simply omit the 

summation over m in Eq. (15) to obtain the result for T=0 K.


In order to evaluate the overlap integral in Eq. (15), one-dimensional configuration coordinate 

diagram is used with an example given in Fig. 6(b), which adopts a single effective phonon mode 

to represent all 3N phonons in the system.[49] This phonon mode can be depicted by the distortion 

of the defects between two charge states; the structural difference ΔQ in the configuration 

coordinate can be given by,[50]

Δ𝑄 = √∑ 𝑚𝛼(𝐑𝑖𝛼 − 𝐑𝑓𝛼)2
𝛼
(16),

where Riα and Rfα are the Cartesian coordinates of the atom α in initial and final supercell structures, 

and mα is its mass. Using configuration coordinate diagram, the effective phonon frequencies 𝜔𝑖𝑚

and 𝜔𝑓𝑛 can be obtained by fitting the potential energy surfaces, and the integral can also be 

numerically calculated.

Configuration coordinate diagram is also useful for further calculating the radiative and 

nonradiative carrier capture coefficient of such process, which requires the exact calculation of 

transition dipole moment and electron-phonon coupling matrix element. In the current version, 

DASP only supports the one-dimensional static coupling method for calculating nonradiative 

carrier capture;[30] while the original static coupling theory including all 3N phonon modes will 

be implemented in the future version.[31, 51]

3. Calculation Examples

In the following, we will show three examples about the application of DASP in the calculation

the defect and dopant properties of semiconductors, including the intrinsic point defect properties 

of the benchmark system GaN, the intrinsic point defect properties of the low-symmetry quasi-

one-dimensional SbSeI, and the PL spectrum of C-doped GaN.

3.1 Intrinsic Defects of GaN

GaN is a well-studied wide-band-gap semiconductor whose intrinsic defects have been studied 

by many groups since 1990s, so it is a good benchmark system for testing our DASP software. In 

Fig. 7, we show the calculated formation energies of vacancies, antisites and interstitials in GaN 


as functions of Fermi level, which are well consistent with the published results calculated using 

the hybrid functional.[52-54]

Figure 7. Formation energies of point defects in GaN as functions of Fermi level under (a) Ga-rich 
and (b) N-rich conditions.[54, 55]

The formation energies of these point defects in neutral states are relatively high in GaN, no 

matter under Ga-rich or N-rich condition. Among them, the donor defect, N vacancy VN, has the 

lowest formation energy, but it still cannot produce a high density of electron carriers or good n-

type conductivity and shift the Fermi level to close to the CBM level, even under the Ga-rich 

condition. Therefore, the formation of intrinsic point defects should not produce good n-type 

conductivity in GaN. For VN, the DASP calculations based on the spin-polarized and hybrid 

functional ab-initio calculations show a (+/3+) transition level lying 0.4 eV above the VBM, and 

a (0/+) level close to the CBM. The (+/3+) transition level was usually not found in the early 

calculations based on the LDA or GGA to the exchange correlation functional,[8, 56] but was 

found in the recent hybrid functional calculations.[52-54]


3.2 Intrinsic Defects of SbSeI

Antimony selenoiodide (SbSeI) has a quasi-one-dimensional structure, as shown in Fig. 8(a), 

which is similar to that of Sb2Se3.[24] Its band structure is shown in Fig. 8(b), and has an indirect 

band gap of 1.79 eV. Its VBM is composed of the hybridized states of Sb-5s, Se-4p and I-5p, while 

the CBM is mainly Sb-5p. Using the TSC module, two secondary compounds, SbI3 and Sb2Se3, 

are found to determine the allowed range of the Sb, Se and I elemental chemical potentials, together 

with the elemental phases of Sb, Se and I. Fig. 8(c, d) presents the 3D and projected-2D phase 

stability diagrams in the elemental chemical potential space based on the results of the TSC 

calculations. The ternary compound SbSeI is stable only in the orange region surrounded by the 

competing phases Sb2Se3, SbI3, Sb and Se. The four boundary points, A, B, C and D, are selected 

as the chemical potential conditions for the following DEC and DDC calculations.

Figure 8. (a) Crystal structure (b) band structure and density of states of SbSeI. (c) 3D and (d) 
projected-2D plot of phase stability diagram of SbSeI in the chemical potential space.


Fig. 9 shows the calculated formation energies of defects in SbSeI as functions of Fermi level

for the four chemical potential conditions, A, B, C and D. The densities of these defects and carriers 

are also calculated using the DDC module and the results for the high-density defects are plotted 

in Fig. 10(a) as functions of the elemental chemical potential. Meanwhile, the change of Fermi 

level and carrier densities with the elemental chemical potential conditions is also plotted in Fig. 

10(a).

Figure 9. Formation energies of point defects in SbSeI as functions of Fermi level under the 
chemical potential conditions (a) A, (b) B, (c) C, and (d) D. 

It is obvious in Fig. 9 that there are many intrinsic defects with formation energies lower than 2 

eV, so the formation of defects should be energetically easy in the quasi-one-dimensional lattice 


of SbSeI. Among them, the antisite defects between two anions, SeI and ISe, should be the dominant 

defects with the lowest energy and highest density. SeI is an acceptor with a (0/–) level at 0.34 eV 

above VBM, which is not deep. ISe is a donor with a (0/+) level at 0.17 eV below CBM, which is 

relatively shallow. Fig. 10(b, c) plots the squared wavefunction of the SeI and ISe defect states, 

which show that the defect states are actually localized, although their corresponding transition 

levels are shallow, indicating the supercell size is sufficient for describing these defects in SbSeI.

Besides them, there are also several other defects with formation energies lower than 1 eV and 

deep transition levels in the band gap, e.g., SeSb and VI, which are both amphoteric with deep (0/+) 

and (0/–) transition levels.

Although the two dominant defects, the SeI acceptor and the ISe donor, have quite high density 

(1017-1018 cm-3) and relatively shallow transition levels (should produce high density of electron 

and hole carriers), the final equilibrium density of carriers is not high due to the donor-acceptor 

compensation. Therefore, the Fermi level of the SbSeI sample with high densities of defects is 

always located near the middle of the band gap, i.e., at least 0.4 eV far from the CBM or VBM 

level as shown in Fig. 11(a), and the electrical conductivity can only be weakly n-type or weakly 

p-type, regardless of the elemental chemical potential.

Figure 10. (a) The densities of defects in different charge states, electron and hole carrier densities
and Fermi level as functions of the elemental chemical potentials. (b, c) The norm-squared 
wavefunctions of the neutral SeI and ISe defect states. (d) The charge-state transition levels of all 
defects in SbSeI.


In contrast with the shallow SeI and ISe whose densities are always high, the densities of deep-

level defects SeSb and VI change significantly as the elemental chemical potentials change. When 

the chemical potential points are close to the A-D line, the density of VI is very high; when the 

points are close to B-C, its density decreases to lower than 1015 cm-3. For SeSb, its density is very 

high when the chemical potential point is near the C point, but decreases quickly as the point moves

away from the C point. These results suggest that the chemical potential should be controlled at 

the intermediate region of the B-C path, in order to suppress the formation of deep-level defects

such as SeSb and VI. 

As we can see, Figs. (8-10) give a good example about the application of DASP for calculating

the elemental chemical potential region that stabilizes the compound semiconductors, then the 

formation energies and transition energy levels of all intrinsic point defects, and finally the 

densities of defects and electron/hole carriers. For new semiconductors, the similar calculations 

should be performed to have a complete picture about their defect and dopant properties.

3.3 PL Spectrum of C-Doped GaN

The PL spectrum is a widely used optical characterization method of defects in semiconductors. 

Usually the origin of the PL peaks is attributed to different defects according to the energy 

differences between the defect level and band edge levels. However, such kind of attribution is 

questionable, especially when there are several defects whose energy levels are nearly degenerate. 

DASP can calculate the PL lineshape of different defects, which provide an extra criterion for the 

identification of the defect origin of PL peaks.

Here we show an example about the calculated PL lineshape of the CN dopant in GaN. Using 

DEC module, we find CN has a (0/+) transition level of 0.39 eV, and a (0/–) transition level of 1.07 

eV above the VBM level, which agree with the calculations of Lyons et al.[57]. Therefore, the 

photo-excited electron carrier can be captured by the (0/–) level of CN through a radiative transition, 

from the initial state of neutral CN (CN0) with an electron on the CBM to the final state of negatively 

charged CN (CN–) with the electron on the (0/–) defect level. This transition is plotted in the

configuration coordinate diagram in Fig. 11(b). The direct optical transition level is calculated to 

be 2.11 eV. The PL lineshape of the transition calculated using the CDC module is plotted in Fig. 


11(c), which is in good agreement with experimental measurement and previous calculated 

result.[50]

Figure 11. (a) The location of (0/–) transition level of CN in the band gap of GaN. (b) Configuration 
coordinate diagram of the radiative transition of an electron from the CBM level to the (0/–) level 
of CN. (c) Calculated PL lineshape of CN at T=300 K.

Further CDC calculation shows the radiative carrier capture coefficient Cn is 1.7×10–13 cm3∙s–1, 

slightly larger than the previous calculated result of 0.7×10–13 cm3∙s–1.[58] The main reason is 

attributed to the larger momentum matrix element that we calculated, which is |pif|2=0.06 a.u. 

between the initial and final states.

4. Conclusions

We developed a software DASP composed of four modules, TSC, DEC, DDC and CDC, for the 

automated calculation of defect and dopant properties in the crystalline semiconductors 

(insulators). DASP just needs the input of the crystal structure file of the semiconductor, then it 

can visit the materials genome database and call the ab-initio DFT software such as VASP to 

calculate the defect and dopant properties, including, (i) the chemical potential range of component 

elements that stabilizes the compound semiconductor (a descriptor of the thermodynamic stability 

of the compound) and the highest allowed chemical potential of dopant elements; (ii) the formation 

energies of defects and dopants in different charge states, as functions of elemental chemical 

potentials and Fermi level, and their charge-state transition energy levels; (iii) the equilibrium


densities of defects and dopants, Fermi level, densities of electron and hole carriers, as functions 

of elemental chemical potentials at growth and working temperature; and (iv) the carrier capture 

cross sections, radiative and non-radiative carrier recombination rate and lifetime, and the PL 

spectra. DASP is designed to be an automatic toolbox for the theoretical calculation studies on

defects and dopants in semiconductors, and can be used not only for interpreting the electrical and 

optical characterization experiments of defects and dopants, but also for the quantitative defect and 

dopant engineering in functional semiconductor devices.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank Profs. Su-Huai Wei, Xin-Gao Gong, Aron Walsh, Lin-Wang Wang and Yu-Ning Wu, 

and Drs. Zhen-Kun Yuan, Ji-Qiang Li, Zenghua Cai and Tao Zhang for their long-term 

collaboration and very helpful discussion.

References

[1] Sokrates T. Pantelides, The electronic structure of impurities and other point defects in 

semiconductors, Reviews of Modern Physics 50, 797-858 (1978).

[2] Ji Sang Park, Sunghyun Kim, Zijuan Xie, Aron Walsh, Point defect engineering in thin-film 

solar cells, Nature Reviews Materials 3, 194-210 (2018).

[3] R. Ramprasad, H. Zhu, Patrick Rinke, Matthias Scheffler, New Perspective on Formation 

Energies and Energy Levels of Point Defects in Nonmetals, Physical Review Letters 108, 066404 
(2012).

[4] Shiyou Chen, Aron Walsh, Xin-Gao Gong, Su-Huai Wei, Classification of Lattice Defects 

in the Kesterite Cu2ZnSnS4 and Cu2ZnSnSe4 Earth-Abundant Solar Cell Absorbers, Advanced 
Materials 25, 1522-1539 (2013).

[5] Audrius Alkauskas, Matthew D. McCluskey, Chris G. Van de Walle, Tutorial: Defects in 

semiconductors—Combining experiment and theory, Journal of Applied Physics 119, 181101 
(2016).

[6] S. B. Zhang, John E. Northrup, Chemical potential dependence of defect formation energies 

in GaAs: Application to Ga self-diffusion, Physical Review Letters 67, 2339-2342 (1991).

[7] S. B. Zhang, Su-Huai Wei, Alex Zunger, H. Katayama-Yoshida, Defect physics of the 

CuInSe2 chalcopyrite semiconductor, Physical Review B 57, 9642-9656 (1998).


[8] Jörg Neugebauer, Chris G. Van de Walle, Atomic geometry and electronic structure of native 

defects in GaN, Physical Review B 50, 8067-8070 (1994).

[9] Chris G. Van de Walle, Jörg Neugebauer, First-principles calculations for defects and 

impurities: Applications to III-nitrides, Journal of Applied Physics 95, 3851-3879 (2004).

[10] Ji-Hui Yang, Wan-Jian Yin, Ji-Sang Park, Jie Ma, Su-Huai Wei, Review on first-principles 

study of defect properties of CdTe as a solar cell absorber, Semiconductor Science and Technology 
31, 083002 (2016).

[11] Wan-Jian Yin, Tingting Shi, Yanfa Yan, Unusual defect physics in CH3NH3PbI3 

perovskite solar cell absorber, Applied Physics Letters 104, 063903 (2014).

[12] Stephan Lany, Alex Zunger, Assessment of correction methods for the band-gap problem 

and for finite-size effects in supercell defect calculations: Case studies for ZnO and GaAs, Physical 
Review B 78, 235104 (2008).

[13] D. M. Ceperley, B. J. Alder, Ground state of the electron gas by a stochastic method, 

Physical Review Letters 45, 566-569 (1980).

[14] John P. Perdew, Kieron Burke, Matthias Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation 

Made Simple, Physical Review Letters 77, 3865-3868 (1996).

[15] David Segev, Anderson Janotti, Chris G. Van de Walle, Self-consistent band-gap 

corrections in density functional theory using modified pseudopotentials, Physical Review B 75, 
035201 (2007).

[16] Audrius Alkauskas, Peter Broqvist, Alfredo Pasquarello, Defect Energy Levels in Density 

Functional Calculations: Alignment and Band Gap Problem, Physical Review Letters 101, 046405 
(2008).

[17] Adisak Boonchun, Walter R. L. Lambrecht, Critical evaluation of the LDA + U approach 

for band gap corrections in point defect calculations: The oxygen vacancy in ZnO case study, 
physica status solidi (b) 248, 1043-1051 (2011).

[18] R. Saniz, Y. Xu, M. Matsubara, M. N. Amini, H. Dixit, D. Lamoen, B. Partoens, A 

simplified approach to the band gap correction of defect formation energies: Al, Ga, and In-doped 
ZnO, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 74, 45-50 (2013).

[19] Peter Deák, Bálint Aradi, Thomas Frauenheim, Erik Janzén, Adam Gali, Accurate defect 

levels obtained from the HSE06 range-separated hybrid functional, Physical Review B 81, 153203 
(2010).

[20] Audrius Alkauskas, Peter Broqvist, Alfredo Pasquarello, Defect levels through hybrid 

density functionals: Insights and applications, physica status solidi (b) 248, 775-789 (2011).

[21] Hannu-Pekka Komsa, Alfredo Pasquarello, Assessing the accuracy of hybrid functionals 

in the determination of defect levels: Application to the As antisite in GaAs, Physical Review B 
84, 075207 (2011).

[22] Stephan Lany, Alex Zunger, Accurate prediction of defect properties in density functional 

supercell calculations, Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering 17, 084002 
(2009).


[23] Christoph Freysoldt, Jörg Neugebauer, Chris G. Van de Walle, Fully Ab Initio Finite-Size 

Corrections for Charged-Defect Supercell Calculations, Physical Review Letters 102, 016402 
(2009).

[24] Menglin Huang, Zenghua Cai, Shanshan Wang, Xin-Gao Gong, Su-Huai Wei, Shiyou Chen, 

More Se Vacancies in Sb2Se3 under Se-Rich Conditions: An Abnormal Behavior Induced by 
Defect-Correlation in Compensated Compound Semiconductors, Small 17, 2102429 (2021).

[25] Christoph Freysoldt, Blazej Grabowski, Tilmann Hickel, Jörg Neugebauer, Georg Kresse, 

Anderson Janotti, Chris G. Van de Walle, First-principles calculations for point defects in solids, 
Reviews of Modern Physics 86, 253-305 (2014).

[26] Su-Huai Wei, Overcoming the doping bottleneck in semiconductors, Comput. Mater. Sci. 

30, 337-348 (2004).

[27] Anubhav Jain, Shyue Ping Ong, Geoffroy Hautier, Wei Chen, William Davidson Richards, 

Stephen Dacek, Shreyas Cholia, Dan Gunter, David Skinner, Gerbrand Ceder, Kristin A. Persson, 
Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials 
innovation, APL Materials 1, 011002 (2013).

[28] G. Kresse, J. Furthmüller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations 

using a plane-wave basis set, Physical Review B 54, 11169-11186 (1996).

[29] Paolo Giannozzi, Stefano Baroni, Nicola Bonini, Matteo Calandra, Roberto Car, Carlo 

Cavazzoni, Davide Ceresoli, Guido L. Chiarotti, Matteo Cococcioni, Ismaila Dabo, Andrea Dal 
Corso, Stefano de Gironcoli, Stefano Fabris, Guido Fratesi, Ralph Gebauer, Uwe Gerstmann, 
Christos Gougoussis, Anton Kokalj, Michele Lazzeri, Layla Martin-Samos, Nicola Marzari, 
Francesco Mauri, Riccardo Mazzarello, Stefano Paolini, Alfredo Pasquarello, Lorenzo Paulatto, 
Carlo Sbraccia, Sandro Scandolo, Gabriele Sclauzero, Ari P. Seitsonen, Alexander Smogunov, 
Paolo Umari, Renata M. Wentzcovitch, QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source 
software project for quantum simulations of materials, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21, 
395502 (2009).

[30] Audrius Alkauskas, Qimin Yan, Chris G. Van de Walle, First-principles theory of 

nonradiative carrier capture via multiphonon emission, Physical Review B 90, 075202 (2014).

[31] Lin Shi, Ke Xu, Lin-Wang Wang, Comparative study of ab initio nonradiative 

recombination rate calculations under different formalisms, Physical Review B 91, 205315 (2015).

[32] Chris G. Van de Walle, DX-center formation in wurtzite and zinc-blende AlxGa1-xN, 

Physical Review B 57, R2033-R2036 (1998).

[33] C. H. Park, S. B. Zhang, Su-Huai Wei, Origin of p-type doping difficulty in ZnO: The 

impurity perspective, Physical Review B 66, 073202 (2002).

[34] Jingbo Li, Su-Huai Wei, Lin-Wang Wang, Stability of the DX- Center in GaAs Quantum 

Dots, Physical Review Letters 94, 185501 (2005).

[35] Jin-Ling Li, Jingxiu Yang, Tom Wu, Su-Huai Wei, Formation of DY center as n-type 

limiting defects in octahedral semiconductors: the case of Bi-doped hybrid halide perovskites, 
Journal of Materials Chemistry C 7, 4230-4234 (2019).

[36] Hannu-Pekka Komsa, Arkady V. Krasheninnikov, Native defects in bulk and monolayer 

MoS2 from first principles, Physical Review B 91, 125304 (2015).


[37] Yu Kumagai, Fumiyasu Oba, Electrostatics-based finite-size corrections for first-principles 

point defect calculations, Physical Review B 89, 195205 (2014).

[38] Dan Wang, Dong Han, Xian-Bin Li, Sheng-Yi Xie, Nian-Ke Chen, Wei Quan Tian, 

Damien West, Hong-Bo Sun, S.  B Zhang, Determination of Formation and Ionization Energies of 
Charged Defects in Two-Dimensional Materials, Physical Review Letters 114, 196801 (2015).

[39] Hannu-Pekka Komsa, Alfredo Pasquarello, Finite-Size Supercell Correction for Charged 

Defects at Surfaces and Interfaces, Physical Review Letters 110, 095505 (2013).

[40] Yu-Ning Wu, X. G. Zhang, Sokrates T. Pantelides, Fundamental Resolution of Difficulties 

in the Theory of Charged Point Defects in Semiconductors, Physical Review Letters 119, 105501 
(2017).

[41] Jin Xiao, Kaike Yang, Dan Guo, Tao Shen, Hui-Xiong Deng, Shu-Shen Li, Jun-Wei Luo, 

Su-Huai Wei, Realistic dimension-independent approach for charged-defect calculations in 
semiconductors, Physical Review B 101, 165306 (2020).

[42] Guo-Jun Zhu, Ji-Hui Yang, Xin-Gao Gong, Self-consistently determining structures of 

charged defects and defect ionization energies in low-dimensional semiconductors, Physical 
Review B 102, 035202 (2020).

[43] Christoph Freysoldt, Jörg Neugebauer, First-principles calculations for charged defects at 

surfaces, interfaces, and two-dimensional materials in the presence of electric fields, Physical 
Review B 97, 205425 (2018).

[44] Jie Ma, Su-Huai Wei, T. A. Gessert, Ken K. Chin, Carrier density and compensation in 

semiconductors with multiple dopants and multiple transition energy levels: Case of Cu impurities 
in CdTe, Physical Review B 83, 245207 (2011).

[45] Ji-Hui Yang, Ji-Sang Park, Joongoo Kang, Wyatt Metzger, Teresa Barnes, Su-Huai Wei, 

Tuning the Fermi level beyond the equilibrium doping limit through quenching: The case of CdTe, 
Physical Review B 90, 245202 (2014).

[46] Jinchen Wei, Lilai Jiang, Menglin Huang, Yuning Wu, Shiyou Chen, Intrinsic Defect Limit 

to the Growth of Orthorhombic HfO2 and (Hf,Zr)O2 with Strong Ferroelectricity: First-Principles 
Insights, Advanced Functional Materials 31, 2104913 (2021).

[47] Arthur Marshall Stoneham, Theory of defects in solids: electronic structure of defects in 

insulators and semiconductors, Oxford University Press (2001).

[48] Menglin Huang, Shan-Shan Wang, Yu-Ning Wu, Shiyou Chen, Defect Physics of Ternary 

Semiconductor ZnGeP2 with a High Density of Anion-Cation Antisites: A First-Principles Study, 
Physical Review Applied 15, (2021).

[49] F. Schanovsky, W. Gös, T. Grasser, Multiphonon hole trapping from first principles, 

Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 29, 01A201 (2011).

[50] Audrius Alkauskas, John L. Lyons, Daniel Steiauf, Chris G. Van de Walle, First-Principles 

Calculations of Luminescence Spectrum Line Shapes for Defects in Semiconductors: The Example 
of GaN and ZnO, Physical Review Letters 109, 267401 (2012).


[51] Lele Cai, Shanshan Wang, Menglin Huang, Yu-Ning Wu, Shiyou Chen, First-principles 

identification of deep energy levels of sulfur impurities in silicon and their carrier capture cross 
sections, Journal of Physics D-Applied Physics 54, 335103 (2021).

[52] I.  C Diallo, D.  O Demchenko, Native Point Defects in GaN: A Hybrid-Functional Study, 

Physical Review Applied 6, 064002 (2016).

[53] Giacomo Miceli, Alfredo Pasquarello, Energetics of native point defects in GaN: A density-

functional study, Microelectronic Engineering 147, 51-54 (2015).

[54] John L. Lyons, Chris G. Van de Walle, Computationally predicted energies and properties 

of defects in GaN, npj Computational Materials 3, 12 (2017).

[55] He Li, Menglin Huang, Shiyou Chen, First-principles exploration of defect-pairs in GaN, 

Journal of Semiconductors 41, 032104 (2020).

[56] T. Mattila, R. M. Nieminen, Point-defect complexes and broadband luminescence in GaN 

and AlN, Physical Review B 55, 9571-9576 (1997).

[57] J. L. Lyons, A. Janotti, C. G. Van de Walle, Effects of carbon on the electrical and optical 

properties of InN, GaN, and AlN, Physical Review B 89, 035204 (2014).

[58] Cyrus E. Dreyer, Audrius Alkauskas, John L. Lyons, Chris G. Van de Walle, Radiative 

capture rates at deep defects from electronic structure calculations, Physical Review B 102, 085305 
(2020).


