1 

 

Correlative Raman Imaging and Scanning Electron Microscopy: 

the Role of Single Ga Islands in Surface - Enhanced Raman 

Spectroscopy of Graphene 

 

 

Jakub Piastek (1,2), Jindřich Mach*(1,2), Stanislav Bardy (2), Zoltán Édes(1,2), Jaroslav Maniš(1)  

Vojtěch Čalkovský(1), Miroslav Bartošík(1,2,3), Martin Konečný(1,2), Jiří Spousta, and omáš 

Šikola (1,2) 

(1) CEITEC BUT, Brno University of Technology, Technická 3058/10, 616 00 Brno, 

Czech Republic 

(2) Institute of Physical Engineering, Brno University of Technology, Technická 2, 616 69 

Brno, Czech Republic 

(3) Department of Physics and Materials Engineering, Faculty of Technology, Tomas Bata 

University in Zlín, 760 01, Czech Republic 

 

KEYWORDS: Graphene, Ga, deposition, SERS, Raman spectroscopy, RISE, SEM 

ABSTRACT: 

Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is a perspective non-destructive analytic 

technique enabling detection of individual nanoobjects, even single-molecules.  . In the paper, 

we have studied the morphology of Ga islands deposited on CVD graphene by ultrahigh vacuum 

(UHV) evaporation and local optical response of this system by the correlative Raman Imaging 

and Scanning Electron Microscopy (RISE). Contrary to the previous papers, where  


2 

 

only an integral  Raman response from  the whole ununiformed Ga NPs ensembles on graphene  

was investigated,  the RISE technique  has enabled us to detect graphene Raman peaks 

enhanced by single Ga islands and particularly to correlate the Raman signal with the shape and 

size of these single particles. In this way and by a support of numerical simulations, we have proved a 

plasmonic nature of the Raman signal enhancement  related to localized surface plasmon resonances 

(LSPR). 

 It has been found that this enhancement is island-size dependent and shows a maximum for 

medium-sized Ga islands. A reasonable agreement between the simulations of the plasmon 

enhancement of electric fields in the vicinity of Ga islands and the experimental intensities of 

corresponding Raman peaks proved the plasmonic origin of the observed effect known as the 

Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy.  

 

 Enhanced near fields of localized surface plasmons in metal nanostructures form a basis of a wide-

spread non-destructive analytic method known as Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) 

enabling high sensitive detection down to single molecular level 1–3.  

The Raman scattering itself has a very low cross section (≈ 10-28 cm2.sr-1) and thus provides limited 

sensitivity and applicability. Nevertheless, it has been successfully utilized for characterization and 

analysis of two-dimensional graphene structures by means of three most distinctive characteristic peaks 

(G, D, 2D). These peaks give us significant information about the quality, thickness, electronic structure 

and induced stress of graphene. The G peak ( ~ 1585 cm-1) is associated with a degenerate in-plane mode 

E2g, at the Γ point in the Brillouin zone, and is the only band coming from the normal first order Raman 

scattering process in graphene 4. Therefore, its intensity is a characteristic feature and can be used for 

the specification of the strain induced by an external force on graphene 5. The D peak (~ 1345 cm-1) 

appears when defects in graphene are present. The 2D peak (~ 2670 cm-1) comes from a double 

resonance. This mechanism includes two phonons near the K point that is strongly dependent on the 

electronic and atomic structure of graphene6. The Raman signal enhancement from graphene can be 


3 

 

realized by the choice of a suitable substrate - for example, a commonly utilized substrate SiO2 (280 

nm)/Si enhances the signal up to 30 times  due to an interference-enhanced Raman scattering (IERS) 

effect 7. As it has been shown in the former studies, SERS on a graphene sheath can be also realized by 

employing metal nanostructures.  In this case, metals as Au, Ag and Cu are very often used to achieve 

a significant enhancement. However, this enhancement is mostly accompanied by a high noise, 

particularly caused by fluorescence which is generally much bigger than the Raman scattering (the 

fluorescence cross section reaches approx. 10-16 cm2.sr-1). Moreover, using these metals a significant 

instability is observed due to the catalytic effects ongoing on metal surfaces 8–11. In contrast, it has been 

found that graphene is capable of quenching fluorescence of molecules, thus facilitating detection of the 

Raman signal. It is possible to prepare hybrid systems acting as efficient SERS substrates combining 

graphene unique properties with plasmonic active metals 12. Contrary to Au and Ag, Ga is not a 

catalytically active metal and, in addition, it is covered by a stable oxide layer 13. Similarly to a SiO2 

shell of some metal nanoparticles 6, such a layer might result in a more profound SERS signal. The 

SERS effect at a Ga/graphene interface has been already reported in 14. In that paper, the SERS platform 

was formed by graphene and Ga nanoparticles (NPs)    deposited at RT. It has been shown that the 

enhancement factor (defined as the Raman intensity for Ga NPs on graphene divided by Raman intensity 

for pristine graphene) for the G- and 2D peaks grows with the increasing nanoparticle size up to the 

value 200.  However, in this work only an integral Raman response from the whole Ga NPs ensembles 

on graphene  was investigated.  The distribution of the size of Ga nanoparticles was not uniformed and 

this size was characterized by mean values of NPs radius. The graphene – Ga samples possessing only 

three different mean values of NPs radius (8 nm, 35 nm, and 50 nm) were investigated. Hence, the direct 

relationship between the Raman intensity and the size of individual nanoparticles was not available. 

Thus the explanation of the Raman signal enhancement by the effect of localized surface plasmon 

resonances in Ga NPs was not supported by a more detailed analysis and was rather speculative.  

In our work, we directly tackle this challenge by the application of correlative Raman Imaging and 

Scanning Electron microscopy (RISE) to Ga islands grown on a graphene/SiO2 substrate at different 

substrate temperatures (RT-500 oC). By this method, we have correlated the Raman signal collected 


4 

 

from the areas of single Ga islands with the shape and size of these particles. In this way and by a support 

of numerical simulations, we have proved a plasmonic nature of the Raman signal enhancement  related 

to localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR). 

  

It is worth mentioning that gallium on graphene is a proper testing system for investigation of SERS, 

since  Ga atoms weakly bind to graphene and do not perturb  to a great extent its electronic structure 

15,16. Thus, there is no strong hybridization between Pz orbitals of graphene and valence electrons of Ga 

17 which should contribute to better stability and interpretation of the Raman signal enhancement.  

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Morphology of Ga layers on graphene 

Deposition of Ga atoms on CVD single domain graphene flakes was carried out at different substrate 

temperatures. The goal was to prepare samples with Ga islands - droplets on graphene possessing a 

sufficient mutual separation and enabling thus to take the Raman signal from single Ga islands. SEM 

images of the samples after Ga deposition are shown in Fig.1. To provide direct comparison, there are 

simultaneously shown two different types of surfaces on each sample - a single domain graphene flake 

and a bare SiO2 area. The highest concentartion of Ga islands is observed on the sample prepared by Ga 

deposition at the substrate temperature T = 25oC both for graphene and SiO2 surfaces, see Fig.1a. The 

Ga islands form droplets of a spherical shape, most likely truncated in their lower part by the substrate 

(for simplicity we will call them sphere-like islands). The Ga island size and their separation grow with 

an increasing substrate temperature due to higher thermal energy of Ga atoms and thus more intense 

Ostwald ripening resulting in formation of bigger Ga islands at the expense of smaller ones. Such a 

behavior can be observed for the samples prepared at the substrate temperature T = 200oC in Fig.1b. A 

further increase of temperature above 200oC leads to the formation of two types of Ga islands – in 

addition to gallium sphere-like islands, also gallium flat islands appear, as can be seen in Fig. 1c, where 

a SEM image of the sample surface prepared at a temperature of 300oC is shown. The flat islands are 

lower and usually much wider (several hundreds of nanometers) than the Ga spheres-like islands (see 


5 

 

Fig. S1 in Supplementary Information). In the SEM images they appear gray because they are thinner 

and therefore provide a lower yield of secondary electrons. The results of energy-dispersive X-ray 

spectroscopy (EDX) measurements proved that both the sphere-like and flat-like islands consist of 

gallium. 

 

Fig 1. SEM images of Ga islands grown on graphene single domain flakes transferred on the SiO2 layer at a) 

25oC, b) 200oC, c) 300oC, and d) 500oC. Deposition rate - 0.2 ML/min, deposition time - 60 minutes.  

 

The mechanism of the Ga flat island growth is not exactly known to us yet. One can deduce these two 

distinct types of structures could appear due to local inhomogeneities of graphene – lattice distortions 

and impurities which probably arise after the graphene transfer on the SiO2 layer. They might locally 

change the wetting properties of the surface which could lead to the change of formation of Ga islands.  

At 500oC and higher temperatures, gallium islands disappeared as all the impinging gallium atoms 

desorbed from the surface (see Fig.1 d). 

2.2 Correlative microscopy of Ga islands - Raman Imaging and SEM (RISE) 


6 

 

Gallium islands grown at 350oC substrate temperature were visible even by optical microscopy (Fig.2a). 

In accordance with our findings described above, it was possible to distinguish two types of structures – 

sphere-like and flat islands, visible by SEM as the bright spots in b) and c). The flat islands having 

mostly larger diameters and approximately half of the spheres heights. The profiles of typical spheres-

like and flat island measured by AFM are in Fig.2 d).  

 

Fig. 2. Images of large Ga islands deposited on a graphene single domain flake for 60 min at 350oC: a) bright 

field optical image, b)-c) SEM images, d) AFM-height profiles of a sphere and disk of Ga.  

The sample with large Ga islands grown at 350oC was investigated by the correlative Raman imaging 

and SEM (RISE) technique. The surface distribution – map of the G peak (1585 cm -1) intensities is 

shown in Fig. 3a. It covers an area of 5 x 5 m2, and consists of 50 by 50 pixels. SEM scans of the 

mapped area were taken before and after the Raman measurements to be sure Ga islands were left 

intact. As can be seen from the correlation of the Raman map and SEM image, the investigated area 

contains SiO2 in the top left corner and the rest is part of the graphene flake covered with Ga islands 

(Fig. 3c). Further, considering the typical extracted spectra shown in Fig. 3b, one can claim there are 

sites on the sample where all the D, G and 2D peaks of the Raman spectrum were enhanced. By 


7 

 

correlating the Raman map with the SEM image acquired at the same place, we were able to identify 

these sites as Ga islands (Fig.3 c).  Almost all the Ga islands (both spheres and disks) but two (encircled 

in correlated Fig. 3c) contribute to the enhancement of the Raman signal. Interestingly, disks enhance 

this signal much stronger than the spheres. 

 

Fig.3. a) Raman map of the G peak (1585 cm- 1) intensity for a sample with large Ga islands on graphene. 

b) Raman spectra extracted from the corresponding sites of the Raman map marked by colored squares in a). c)  

RISE allows us to correlate the SEM image with the Raman map and thus to identify which surface features 

contribute to the strong Raman signal.  

The correlated RISE image in Fig.4 shows how the enhancement of the Raman G peak (1585 cm- 1) 

intensity varies from island to island and depends on the island size. The Raman map covers a sample 

area of 7.5 x7.5 m2 with the same pixel density as in Fig. 3a) and more than fifty Ga islands in it.  

 


8 

 

 

   Fig.4. Raman map (1585 cm- 1 G peak enhancement) correlated with SEM images.  The pixel number 

and integration time per spectrum is 75 x 75 px2, and 0.5 s, respectively.  

The Raman signal enhancement has been defined as the ratio of the gallium peak intensity measured at 

a specific point of Ga island-  single-layer graphene (SLG) structure  to the minimum intensity obtained 

from this structure  between Ga islands. As the peak intensity measure, the height of graphene peaks has 

been considered. A clear, almost five-fold enhancement in the vicinity of Ga islands has been observed.  

Compared to the enhancement reported in 18 (200 x), this value seems to be quite small. However, in 

our case the Raman signal enhancement given just by a single island was measured and the laser beam 

diameter was at least 300 nm large. It means that the laser was illuminating a much bigger area then that 

one of a single island, and so the most of the signal was collected just from graphene surface. On top of 

that, in 14  a dense coverage of graphene surface by Ga particles was used. Hence, all together, these two 

values are not directly comparable.     

One can hypothesize the enhancement of the Raman signal by Ga islands is caused by plasmon effects. 

The incident laser beam generates local surface plasmons (LSP) in Ga islands which leads upon 

resonance to a big enhancement of electromagnetic near-field in their vicinity 18. As a result, the intensity 


9 

 

of the Raman signal from the sample area with such a spatially localized intense electric field, called 

“hot spot” is increased, the effect known as Surface Raman Spectroscopy (SERS).    

To prove this hypothesis and shed more light on our results, we carried out numerical simulations of 

electric field enhancement by Ga islands using a finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) software 

(Lumerical). An electromagnetic pulse (plain-waves package) was directed at a model sample with a Ga 

hemisphere on its top, as depicted in Fig.5. The model sample consisted of a semi-infinite Si substrate 

consequently covered with a 280 nm SiO2 thin film, SLG of an effective thickness of 0.335 nm, and a 

Ga hemisphere of different radii ranging from 30 to 120 nm. A dielectric function of Ga was taken from 

the experimental work published in 19. The simulated electric field enhancement, related to the electric 

field value of the incident electromagnetic wave of particular wavelength, is shown as a function of the 

wavelength of the incident light for different Ga hemisphere radii in Fig.5. The value of the enhanced 

electric field was read at the point nearby the hemisphere marked by the red cross and called the 

detection spot in the figure. 

 

Fig.5. Simulated electromagnetic electric field enhancement in the vicinity of a Ga hemisphere of different radii 

as a function of the incident light wavelength. The green area in the graph is a spectral window around a wavelength 

of 532 nm (corresponding to the laser applied in Raman spectroscopy) and used for evaluation of the electric 

field enhancement. On the right, schematic of the simulation model. The detection point is 10 nm to the right and 

5 nm upwards from the Ga/graphene contact point. Simulated by the FDTD Lumerical software. 


10 

 

It is generally assumed that the Raman scattering enhancement scales with the fourth power of the 

electric field enhancement factor. This assumption is roughly valid if the frequency shifts of Raman 

peaks from the excitation laser frequency are smaller than the half-width of plasmon resonant peaks of 

metallic structures 19. As in our case the maximum shift is less than 90 nm (excitation laser – 532 nm,  

2D peak - 620 nm) and the half-width of the resonant peaks is 150 nm and more (see Fig. 5), this 

condition is valid and we can accept this assumption.    

The fourth power of the electric field enhancement corresponding to a narrow spectral range around the 

Raman excitation laser wavelength (532 nm) is plotted in Fig. 6 together with experimentally measured 

intensities of D, G and 2D peaks for different Ga sphere radii. Here, the sphere radius represents both 

the sphere radius of Ga islands determined by SEM and also the radii of Ga hemispheres used in the 

model. The electric field enhancement was normalized with respect to its maximum, the Raman peak 

intensities to an average maximum of the Raman peaks calculated in the island radius interval 60 nm – 

80 nm. Despite the fact that the real sphere-like Ga islands are covered with a Ga2O3 layer and 

approximately modelled with ideal Ga hemispheres, the coincidence between the profiles of Raman 

peak intensities and electric field enhancement is evident. 

To be sure that the signal enhancement is not just given by the effect of Fabry-Perot resonances 

(multiple-reflection interference) in our multilayer system, we have also carried out numerical 

simulations (Lumerical) of the signal reflected from a  Ga/SiO2/Si layered model (graphene layer was 

neglected)  as the function of the Ga layer thickness. As can be seen in Fig. S2, no clear dependence on 

the Ga layer thickness has been observed for any wavelength which is quite different from the Raman 

signal dependence on the Ga island radius shown in Fig. 6.  


11 

 

 

Fig.6. Comparison of the measured Raman peak (D, G, 2D) intensities with simulations of the electric field 

enhancement for different Ga island radii. The red curve connecting the simulated data is drawn for guiding the 

eye only. 

Hence, these results confirm that the Raman peak enhancement is attributed to plasmon electric field 

enhancement across and in the vicinity of Ga islands. 

Finally, to demonstrate the capability of the correlative RISE, the maps of the Raman peak (G, 2D) shifts 

measured over the sample area are shown in Fig. 7. One can see the blue shifts of the Raman peaks 

across Ga islands and in their vicinity. The variations in Raman shifts for bare graphene can be for 

instance explained by an effect of doping 20 or by strain 21.  In 22 a Raman spectrum taken at the center 

of the bilayer graphene bubble is strongly blue-shifted compared to the Raman spectrum measured on 

the substrate. One can imaging Ga islands introduce the strain into graphene, similarly to these bubbles, 

and thus induce blue Raman shifts. This hypothesis is supported by our observations revealing that in 

the vicinity of Ga islands graphene partially detaches from the substrate due to an interplay of surface 

tension components at the Ga island perimeter (see Fig, S3). However, we do not want to speculate on 

these reasons in this paper and leave the exact explanation to further publications.     


12 

 

 

Fig.7. Raman shifts of the G and 2D peaks measured across the sample area. 

CONCLUSION 

 Ga islands were deposited at different substrate temperatures on CVD graphene transferred on a Si(100) 

substrate with a 280 nm-thick SiO2 layer. Depending on these temperatures, Ga islands of distinct 

diameters (40 – 300 nm), shape (spheres, disks), and spacing (up to 1 m) were grown.  Such a system 

exhibited graphene Raman peaks enhanced by individual Ga islands. Utilizing the correlative Raman 

imaging and SEM (RISE), it was found that this enhancement was island-size dependent and showed a 

maximum for medium-sized Ga islands. To prove the plasmonic nature of this effect, the enhancement 

of electric fields in the vicinity of Ga islands caused by localized surface plasmon resonances in these 

islands was simulated.  A reasonable agreement between these simulations and the experimental 


13 

 

intensities of Raman peaks confirms the plasmonic origin of the observed effect known as the Surface 

Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy.   

 

METHODS 

Single domain graphene flakes were grown by a standard low pressure CVD method 23 on a Cu substrate 

acting as a catalyst.  In the first step of graphene growth, the reactor chamber with a copper substrate 

was pumped down to a base pressure of 10-3 Pa. Subsequently, it was filled with a hydrogen at a flow 

of 4 sccm and a pressure of 10 Pa, and the sample was annealed at T = 1000 oC. Then a H2/CH4 mixture 

was introduced into the furnace for 30 minutes at a flow of 40 sccm and a total pressure of 70 Pa to 

initiate graphene growth. 

The graphene flakes were then transferred on a non-conductive SiO2 (280nm) layer covering a p-doped 

Si(100) substrate (resistivity of 1.5×10-3 Ωcm, provided by ON Semiconductor) using a PMMA-assisted 

wet transfer method [11]. After loading the sample into an UHV chamber with a base pressure of p = 

3×10-8 Pa, the sample was annealed at T = 300°C for 24 hours to clean the graphene surface prior Ga 

deposition. The temperature was measured with an optical pyrometer (emissivity = 0.7). The annealing 

removes atmospheric adsorbates and PMMA residues which results in a decrease of graphene roughness. 

Ga atoms of thermal energy were evaporated by an effusion cell (Omicron EMF 3) from a PBN boat 

inside a Mo crucible. The Ga atom flux was kept at a constant value of 5.2x1016 atoms per hour (0.2 

ML/min.).  After the deposition, the samples were characterized in situ by XPS and ex situ by AFM, 

and then by the correlative microscopy combining scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Raman 

spectroscopy. The correlative Raman imaging and scanning electron microscopy (RISE) was carried out 

in a complex micro-spectroscopic setup  (Tescan – RISE) equipped with a SEM (Lyra, Tescan),  

µRaman spectrometer  providing a spatial resolution of 360 nm (Witec), and a piezoelectric stage (PI) 

enabling  to position a sample in nanometer steps. The integration time for taking spectra at each point 

of the maps was 0.1 s, and the spot diameter and power of a 532 nm laser was 1 m and 7mW, 


14 

 

respectively. The objective (100 X) with a numerical aperture and working distance of 0.75 and 4 mm, 

respectively was used.   

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

We acknowledge the support by the Czech Science Foundation (Grant No.*20-28573S* ), European 

Commission (H2020-Twininning project No. 810626 – SINNCE, M-ERA NET HYSUCAP/TACR-

TH71020004),*BUT* – specific research No.*FSI-S-20-648*5, and Ministry of Education, Youth 

and Sports of the Czech Republic (CzechNanoLab Research Infrastructure – LM2018110). 
 

LITERATURE 

1. 
Nie, S. & Emory, S. R. Probing single molecules and single nanoparticles by surface-enhanced 

Raman scattering. Science (80-. ). 275, 1102–1106 (1997). 

2. 
Kneipp, K. et al. Single Molecule Detection Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering 

(SERS). Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1667–1670 (1997). 

3. 
Camden, J. P., Dieringer, J. A., Zhao, J. & Van Duyne, R. P. Controlled plasmonic 

nanostructures for surface-enhanced spectroscopy and sensing. Acc. Chem. Res. 41, 1653–1661 

(2008). 

4. 
Tuinstra, F. & Koenig, J. L. Raman Spectrum of Graphite. J. Chem. Phys. 53, 1126–1130 

(1970). 

5. 
Dresselhaus, M. S., Jorio, A., Hofmann, M., Dresselhaus, G. & Saito, R. Perspectives on 

carbon nanotubes and graphene Raman spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 10, 751–758 (2010). 

6. 
Malard, L. M., Pimenta, M. A., Dresselhaus, G. & Dresselhaus, M. S. Raman spectroscopy in 

graphene. Phys. Rep. 473, 51–87 (2009). 

7. 
Wang, Y. Y., Ni, Z. H., Shen, Z. X., Wang, H. M. & Wu, Y. H. Interference enhancement of 

Raman signal of graphene. Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 043121–3 (2008). 

8. 
Xu, W. et al. Graphene-veiled gold substrate for surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy. Adv. 


15 

 

Mater. 25, 928–933 (2013). 

9. 
Zhao, Y. et al. Enhanced SERS stability of R6G molecules with monolayer graphene. J. Phys. 

Chem. C 118, 11827–11832 (2014). 

10. 
Yin, G. et al. Highly Sensitive and Stable SERS Substrate Fabricated by Co-sputtering and 

Atomic Layer Deposition. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 14, 1–7 (2019). 

11. 
Li, J. F. & Tian, Z. Q. Shell-Isolated Nanoparticle-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SHINERS). 

Front. Surface-Enhanced Raman Scatt. Single Nanoparticles Single Cells 464, 163–192 

(2014). 

12. 
Dalfovo, M. C. et al. Synergy between graphene and au nanoparticles (heterojunction) towards 

quenching, improving raman signal, and UV light sensing. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 6, 

6384–6391 (2014). 

13. 
Čechal, J. et al. Characterization of oxidized gallium droplets on silicon surface: An ellipsoidal 

droplet shape model for angle resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis. Thin Solid 

Films 517, 1928–1934 (2009). 

14. 
Losurdo, M. et al. Demonstrating the capability of the high-performance plasmonic gallium-

graphene couple. ACS Nano 8, 3031–3041 (2014). 

15. 
Chan, K. T., Neaton, J. B. & Cohen, M. L. First-principles study of metal adatom adsorption on 

graphene. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. (2008). 

doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.77.235430 

16. 
Mach, J. et al. Electronic transport properties of graphene doped by gallium. Nanotechnology 

28, 415203–10 (2017). 

17. 
Khomyakov, P. A. et al. First-principles study of the interaction and charge transfer between 

graphene and metals. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 79, 1–12 (2009). 

18. 
Maier, S. A. Plasmonics: Fundamentals and Applications. (Springer US, 2007). doi:10.1007/0-

387-37825-1 


16 

 

19. 
Novotny, L. & Hecht, B. Chapter 1: Introduction. Principles of Nano-Optics (Cambridge 

University Press, 2006). 

20. 
Das, A. et al. Monitoring dopants by Raman scattering in an electrochemically top-gated 

graphene transistor. Nat. Nanotechnol. 3, 210–215 (2008). 

21. 
Mohiuddin, T. M. G. et al. Uniaxial strain in graphene by Raman spectroscopy: G peak 

splitting, Grüneisen parameters, and sample orientation. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. 

Phys. 79, 1–8 (2009). 

22. 
Zabel, J. et al. Raman spectroscopy of graphene and bilayer under biaxial strain: Bubbles and 

balloons. Nano Lett. 12, 617–621 (2012). 

23. 
Procházka, P. et al. Ultrasmooth metallic foils for growth of high quality graphene by chemical 

vapor deposition. Nanotechnology 25, 185601 (2014). 

 


17 

 

Supplementary Information  

 

Fig. S1 SEM image showing two types of Ga nanostructures on graphene (tilted 80°).  

 

Fig. S2 Simulation of normalized reflection from a Ga/SiO2/Si layered model (see the inset) as a 

function of the incident light wavelength for various thicknesses of the top Ga layer. There is no clear 

dependence on this thickness for any wavelength, including the laser one ( = 532 nm, see the dashed 

vertical line).  


18 

 

 

 

Fig. S3 SEM image indicating a detachment of graphene from the substrate in the vicinity of Ga 

islands.  

 

 
 
 
 

 


