Tailoring epitaxial growth and magnetism in La1-xSrxMnO3 / SrTiO3 heterostructures via 
temperature-driven defect engineering

Alan Molinari,1,2,* Saleh Gorji,2,3 Jan Michalička,4 Christian Kübel,2,3,5 Horst Hahn,2,3 Robert 
Kruk2,§

1IBM Research Europe – Zurich, Säumerstrasse 4, 8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland

2Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 
1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany

3KIT-TUD-Joint Research Laboratory Nanomaterials, Technical University Darmstadt, Otto-
Berndt-Str. 3, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany

4CEITEC Nano Research Infrastructure, Brno University of Technology, Purkyňova 123, 612 00 
Brno, Czech Republic

5Karlsruhe Nano Micro Facility, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-
Platz 1, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany

*E-mail: molinarialan86@gmail.com
§E-mail: robert.kruk@kit.edu

Keywords: LSMO, epitaxial growth, magnetism, oxygen deficiencies, impurities, defect 
engineering, dead layer


ABSTRACT

Among the class of strongly-correlated oxides, La1-xSrxMnO3 – a half metallic ferromagnet with a 

Curie temperature above room temperature – has sparked a huge interest as a functional 

building block for memory storage and spintronic applications. In this respect, defect engineering 

has been in the focus of a long-standing quest for fabricating LSMO thin films with highest quality 

in terms of both structural and magnetic properties. Here, we discuss the correlation between 

structural defects, such as oxygen vacancies and impurity islands, and magnetism in 

La0.74Sr0.26MnO3/SrTiO3 (LSMO/STO) epitaxial heterostructures by systematic control of the 

growth temperature and post-deposition annealing conditions.

Upon increasing the growth temperature within the 500 – 700 ˚C range, the epitaxial LSMO films 

experience a progressive improvement in oxygen stoichiometry, leading to enhanced magnetic 

characteristics. Concurrently, however, the use of a high growth temperature triggers the 

diffusion of impurities from the bulk of STO, which cause the creation of off-stoichiometric, 

dendritic-like SrMoOx islands at the film/substrate interface. As a valuable workaround, post-

deposition annealing of the LSMO films grown at a relatively-low temperature of about 500 ˚C

permits to obtain high-quality epitaxy, atomically-flat surface as well as a sharp magnetic 

transition above room temperature and robust ferromagnetism. Furthermore, under such 

optimized fabrication conditions possible scenarios for the formation of the magnetic dead layer 

as a function of LSMO film thickness are discussed. Our findings offer effective routes to finely 

tailor the complex interplay between structural and magnetic properties of LSMO thin films via 

temperature-controlled defect engineering. 


INTRODUCTION

La1-xSrxMnO3 (LSMO) is a mixed-valence manganese oxide known for exhibiting a robust inherent 

coupling between lattice, charge and spin degrees of freedom.1–6 Such intrinsic correlation lies at 

the origin of an intriguing interplay between magnetic and electric properties, which is 

manifested in a variety of physical phenomena, including colossal magnetoresistance, half 

metallicity, metal-to-insulator and para-to-ferromagnetic transitions in proximity to room 

temperature. This unique combination of physical properties has denoted LSMO as one of the

most attractive constitutive elements of novel functional devices such as spin valves,7–9 magnetic 

field sensors,10 magnetoelectric11–17 and memristive memories18–21.

Aiming at harnessing the magnetic properties of LSMO for potential technological applications, 

particular efforts have been devoted to explore the complex relation between microstructure 

and magnetism,22–31 particularly for the compound with a strontium content x ≈ 0.3, for it displays 

the highest Curie temperature of the whole class of strongly-correlated manganese oxides. In 

first approximation, magnetism in LSMO can be explained in terms of the competition between 

double- and superexchange interactions,1,32 which are strictly dependent on the bond angle and 

length occurring along Mn-O-Mn chains, and on the oxidation state of the Mn ions (i.e., either 3+

or 4+).

A well-established strategy to manipulate magnetism in LSMO is to vary the degree of distortion 

of its perovskite structure, and thus bond lengths and angles, by adjusting the magnitude and 

kind (compressive vs. tensile) of epitaxial strain using lattice-compatible single-crystal substrates, 

e.g. SrTiO3 (STO), LaAlO3 (LAO), (La0.3Sr0.7)(Al0.65Ta0.35)O3 (LSAT), NdGaO3 (NGO) and MgO.22,23,33–

35


Apart from epitaxial strain, the magnetic exchange interactions in LSMO can be substantially 

affected by the presence of structural defects, since they are responsible for altering the 

perovskite structure of LSMO and its local chemical environment.23,24,30,31,36,37 For instance, 

considering the local microstructure of the LSMO lattice, the aftermath of a single oxygen vacancy

is (i) to disrupt an exchange interaction and so also the hopping of charge carriers along a Mn-O-

Mn chain, (ii) to modify the local oxidation state of Mn ions due to doping with two holes, and 

(iii) to distort the bond lengths and angles of the oxygen octahedron surrounding a Mn ion, thus 

modifying the respective crystal field.1,32 Structural defects in LSMO are also considered as one 

of the principal causes for the occurrence of the so-called magnetic dead layer (MDL),37–40 which 

is commonly invoked to explain the lower values of Curie temperature and magnetic moment 

attained in thin and ultrathin films as compared to bulk LSMO.

From another perspective, structural defects are also of great importance when the purpose is 

to combine LSMO with other functional materials. Indeed, in several circumstances LSMO is 

implemented as a magnetic and/or conducting seed layer in combination with dielectric or

ferroelectric materials, such as BFO, BTO or PZT.16,20,41,42 Therefore, an atomically smooth surface 

is a prerequisite for achieving high quality epitaxial heterostructures. The presence of a large 

interface roughness, for instance due to non-stoichiometric islands on the LSMO surface, can 

jeopardize the overall quality of the heterostructure and produce negative side effects, such as 

reduced interfacial coupling, leakage current or inefficient spin/charge injection.41,43,44

For these reasons, defect engineering based on the judicious control of the fabrication conditions

represents a pivotal aspect for mitigating the detrimental effects of defects on the structural and 

magnetic properties of LSMO thin films. Owing to the vast space of growth parameters and their 


non-trivial interplay, identifying the optimum experimental conditions to attain state-of-the-art

LSMO films can pose a formidable task. A well-known approach is to study the influence of 

various oxygen pressures during film growth, particularly with the aim of optimizing the oxygen 

stoichiometry.23,24,30,31,45 Another crucial parameter, whose relation with the used oxygen 

pressure is often not investigated in depth, is represented by the growth temperature Tgr, which 

regulates several aspects of defect engineering, including the film oxidation rate, the migration

and nucleation of elemental species on the sample surface and the film/substrate elemental 

interdiffusion.46,47 Besides, following film growth, post-deposition annealing under conditions of 

high temperature and oxygen pressure is an additional tool, which allows to optimize the oxygen 

stoichiometry and to promote surface reconstruction.26

In this work, we examine the role of Tgr and post-deposition annealing to finely tailor the 

structural and magnetic properties of LSMO/STO epitaxial heterostructures. The use of a high Tgr

of about 700 ˚C fosters film oxidation, which is reflected by improved magnetic properties; 

nonetheless, it also provokes the formation of islands at the LSMO/STO interface due to 

impurities diffusion from bulk STO. A compromise to achieve optimum structural and magnetic 

characteristics is found upon employing a relatively-low Tgr ≈ 500 ˚C followed by post-deposition 

annealing treatment. Eventually, we propose a critical discussion on the formation of the MDL in 

LSMO as a function of film thickness in case of films grown under optimized conditions. 

EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

LSMO thin films were deposited onto (001)-oriented STO substrates by rf-magnetron sputtering

(Createc Fischer GmbH). An unconventional characteristic of the used sputtering chamber is the 


large target-substrate separation of about 30 cm, which permits to find an optimum balance 

between film homogeneity, deposition rate and suppression of oxygen ion bombardment.23 In 

the present study both epi-polished and chemically-treated (see Supplementary Information) 

STO substrates have been put to test; in both cases LSMO films with similar quality were 

obtained. 

LSMO films with a thickness in the range of 3 – 15 nm were deposited from a commercial 

sputtering target with chemical composition La0.65Sr0.35MnO3, using a fixed pressure of 0.018 

mbar in a 3/2 mixture of Ar/O2, which corresponds to an oxygen partial pressure of 0.007 mbar. 

The sputtering power was set to 4.4 W/cm2, which led to a deposition rate of about 0.044 Å/s. 

The growth temperature was varied between 500 – 700 ˚C. After the growth process, the 

LSMO/STO samples were cooled down to room temperature at a rate of 10 K/min in pure oxygen 

atmosphere of 0.08 mbar. Post-deposition annealing was carried out by exposing the as-grown

LSMO films to 900 ˚C for 1 hour in air inside a tube furnace.

The LSMO films have been comprehensively characterized with a variety of experimental 

techniques. Rutherford Backscattering Spectroscopy was carried out on a LSMO film grown on 

MgO substrate in order to avoid the overlap of Sr signals and revealed a strontium content of 

about Sr = 0.26.48 The offset between LSMO target and film concentration is ascribed to the 

different mean free path of elemental La and Sr species during the sputtering process. For the 

resulting LSMO stoichiometry, the calculated interfacial misfit with STO substrate is 𝜀 = (𝑎𝑆𝑇𝑂 −

𝑎𝐿𝑆𝑀𝑂)/𝑎𝐿𝑆𝑀𝑂 ≈ 0.45%, where 𝑎𝐿𝑆𝑀𝑂 = 3.888 Å and 𝑎𝑆𝑇𝑂 = 3.905 Å are respectively the

lattice constants of bulk pseudocubic LSMO and bulk STO. X-ray reflectometry was used to 

measure the LSMO film thickness, whereas high-resolution X-ray diffraction (HRXRD) in θ-2θ


geometry was carried out to determine the structural quality of the LSMO films along the growth 

direction. The surface roughness of the LSMO thin films was analyzed via tapping-mode atomic 

force microscopy (AFM). Local information about the film microstructure and composition was 

evaluated by scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) using a FEI Themis 60-300 cubed

equipped with a Super-X energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) detector. The representative LSMO cross 

sections were prepared by focused ion beam (FIB) milling using a FEI Strata 400S.

The magnetic properties of LSMO films were investigated by superconducting quantum 

interference device (SQUID) magnetometry. The magnetic transition temperature of LSMO films 

was analyzed by carrying out field-cooled measurements in the 2 – 350 K temperature range at 

a fixed magnetic field of 100 Oe applied parallel to the in-plane film direction. Magnetization 

saturation and coercivity have been evaluated by performing magnetic hysteresis loops up to a 

magnetic field of ± 9 T at a temperature of 10 K. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The structural investigation by means of HRXRD reveals that all LSMO films with a thickness of 

about 13 nm deposited onto STO substrate in the 500 – 700 ˚C temperature range are epitaxial

and <001>–oriented along the out-of-plane direction (see Fig. 1). The presence of pronounced 

Laue oscillations in proximity of the (002) LSMO reflection indicates the coherent stacking of the 

LSMO unit cells along the growth direction, thus confirming a high degree of epitaxial quality. 

The main influence of Tgr is to induce a systematic shift of the HRXRD peaks of LSMO. For Tgr ≈

500 – 550 ˚C the LSMO and STO peaks almost overlap, whereas upon increasing the Tgr up to 700 

˚C the LSMO reflections systematically shift towards higher angles (see Fig. 1 top), corresponding 


to a decrease in the out-of-plane lattice parameter of LSMO from about 3.90 Å to 3.86 Å. It is 

established that the LSMO unit cell undergoes an expansion along the c-axis in the presence of 

oxygen-deficiencies.23,49 Therefore, the progressive shrinkage of the LSMO unit cell at higher

values of Tgr provides a clear indication of the improvement of the oxygen stoichiometry in the 

LSMO films. This observation is confirmed by the results of the in-depth magnetic 

characterization described in the following.

The abundant presence of oxygen deficient sites at low deposition temperatures is further 

corroborated by analyzing the effect of post-deposition annealing at 900 ˚C for 1 hour in air on 

the as-grown samples. In this case, the HRXRD peaks of all LSMO films, which still feature neat 

Laue fringes, shift towards a common 2θ value, corresponding to an out-of-plane lattice 

parameter of about 3.86 Å (see Fig. 1 bottom). This outcome strongly indicates that a post-

deposition annealing treatment permits to adjust the oxygen stoichiometry of all LSMO films in 

a comparable manner regardless of the initial Tgr. 

The crystalline quality of the LSMO films was also inspected by studying the rocking curves (ω-

scans) of the LSMO (002) reflections (see Supplementary Fig. 1). The full-width at half maximum 

(FWHM) of the ω-scans is 0.1° and 0.06˚ for the annealed films grown at 540 ˚C and 700 ˚C, which 

are among the best values reported in the literature.23,49,50 The low values for the peak width of 

the rocking curves suggest only a minor misalignment of the LSMO crystalline planes with respect 

to the STO substrate orientation. Information about the in-plane epitaxial relation between film 

and substrate have been accessed via two-dimensional reciprocal space maps of asymmetric 

(204) XRD reflections, which reveal a nearly ideal, fully strained growth of LSMO onto STO (see 

Supplementary Fig. 1). Besides, after carrying out a φ-scan, it is concluded that the LSMO unit 


cells arrange in a coherent tetragonal stack onto STO for the conditions of four-fold symmetry

are fulfilled (see Supplementary Fig. 1).

The surface morphology of the post-annealed LSMO films grown at various temperatures was 

investigated by atomic force microscopy (see Fig. 2). For values of Tgr < 600 ˚C the LSMO surface

is characterized by atomically flat terraces with a height of one or half unit cell steps over large 

areas of several µm2 and a corresponding root mean square (RMS) roughness lower than 0.2 nm. 

The presence of flat terraces is the result of surface reconstruction after post-deposition 

annealing, since the as-grown films are atomically smooth, but do not have step-like features 

(see Supplementary Fig. 2). Notably, above a critical temperature of Tgr ≈ 600 ˚C, islands are 

formed on the LSMO surface, which cause an increased surface roughness, though flat terraces 

are still visible. An increased surface roughness with increasing Tgr has also been observed in 

pulsed laser deposited LSMO films.51 It is worth to note that at Tgr ≈ 650 ˚C, the islands have an 

average diameter of about 100 – 200 nm and are randomly distributed on the LSMO surface. 

Differently, at Tgr ≈ 700 ˚C the LSMO surface presents large dendritic-like islands with a lateral 

size of about 1 µm separated by wide portions of the LSMO surface with atomically-smooth, step-

like terraces. This behavior suggests that Tgr acts as a driving force to promote initially islands 

formation (for Tgr > 600 ˚C) and then islands coalescence (for Tgr > 650 ˚C).

Apparently, one may argue that such islands are composed of chemically-spurious species, that 

diffuse and merge at the top surface of the LSMO film. Previous studies already proposed that 

non-stoichiometric islands form on the uppermost layers of LSMO due to adatom

inhomogeneities that do not overcome a critical island size44 or due to strontium segregation 

driven by a buildup of oxygen vacancy-strontium interactions near the LSMO surface regions.52


However, a local inspection of the structural and chemical features by a combination of STEM 

and EDX methods of an island formed at Tgr ≈ 700 ˚C unveils a different scenario for the process 

of island formation in our LSMO/STO heterostructures (see Fig. 3).

On the one hand, the region of the heterostructure far from the surface island present a smooth 

top surface and cube-on-cube epitaxy of LSMO onto STO (see right side of Fig. 3), thus 

corroborating the high crystalline quality and fully-strained growth already identified by the 

HRXRD study. On the other hand, STEM analysis in the proximity of a surface island clearly 

evidences the presence of a grain formed near to the film/substrate interface rather than on top 

of the LSMO film (see left side of Fig. 3). A closer inspection of the film/substrate interface reveals 

that the spurious grain is not directly in contact with the STO substrate, but lies onto a few unit 

cells of LSMO. Most strikingly, despite the interfacial grain the heterostructure maintains a 

coherent epitaxial growth with the underlying STO substrate, including the LSMO film on top.  

Concerning the chemical composition, EDX analysis reveals that the interfacial grain is composed 

of a SrMoOx phase with a nearly 1-to-1 Sr/Mo ratio, whereas the other regions of the 

heterostructure correspond to LSMO and STO.

The combination of STEM and EDX surveys indicate that the nucleation of SrMoOx grains occurs 

during the growth process of LSMO film as a consequence of temperature-driven diffusion of 

impurities from bulk STO. We note that the role of defect chemistry and the importance of 

background impurities in undoped STO are still under intensive evaluation.53–55 In a plausible 

scenario, during the initial stages of film deposition, the interfacial islands are small enough to 

permit the formation of a few coherent and continuous layers of LSMO onto STO substrate. As 

the deposition advances, more and more impurities diffuse from the STO substrate and provoke 


the expansion of the interfacial grains, which are progressively covered by the growing LSMO 

film. Concerning the evolution of the spurious grains as a function of different growth 

temperatures, we note from the AFM analysis that they do not have a preferential spatial 

distribution up to Tgr ≈ 650 ˚C (see Fig. 2c). However, higher temperatures of Tgr ≈ 700 ˚C (see Fig. 

2d) promote a higher mobility of Sr and Mo species, thus resulting in the nucleation and 

coalescence of extensive SrMoOx grains at the LSMO/STO interface.

The fact that Tgr acts as a driving force for the formation of the interfacial grains is further proven 

by the following test:  after simply exposing an original STO substrate to a high temperature of 

about 700 ˚C in the reducing atmosphere of the sputtering chamber (without LSMO deposition), 

dendritic-like islands form on its surface (see Supplementary Fig. 3). Furthermore, we note that 

previous works already reported on the creation of Sr-rich islands on the STO surface due to Sr-

diffusion from the bulk under high temperature conditions.56–58 Additional results of STEM and 

EDX analyses of the interfacial grains formed in LSMO/STO heterostructures are provided in 

Supplementary Figures 4 – 8. 

We shall now discuss the influence of Tgr and post-deposition annealing on the magnetic 

properties of epitaxial LSMO thin films with a thickness of about 13 nm (Fig. 4). The magnetic 

field-cooled M(T) curves of the as-grown LSMO films display a progressive increase in Curie 

temperature Tc from 110 K to 270 K upon increasing Tgr from 500 to 700 °C (Fig. 4a top); the 

derivatives of the M(T) curves present a FWHM of about 48 K, thus indicating a rather smeared 

out para-to-ferromagnetic transition (Fig. 4a bottom). Concurrently, the saturation 

magnetization Ms reveals a systematic increase from 1.4 µB/u.c. to 3.3 µB/u.c (Fig. 4b). The 

improvement in Tc and Ms at higher growth temperatures supports the idea of a strong reduction


of the amount of oxygen vacancies in LSMO, thus corroborating the results of the XRD analysis 

discussed above. 

After carrying out post-deposition annealing on the as-grown LSMO films, all samples exhibit 

similar magnetic characteristics with an increased Tc ≈ 320 K, a sharper magnetic transition

(FWHM of dM/dT ≈ 25 K) and Ms above 3 µB/u.c. Notably, after post-deposition annealing the 

LSMO film grown at the lowest temperature of 500 °C undergoes a massive jump in Tc of about 

200 K and the value of Ms more than doubles. Although all samples were exposed to the same 

post-deposition annealing protocol, the LSMO film grown at 700 °C reaches the highest Ms of 

about 3.5 µB/u.c.. On the one hand this is possibly related to a more uniform and complete 

oxidation achieved throughout the whole LSMO film thickness at a high Tgr of 700 °C ; on the 

other hand the use of a high Tgr of 700 °C may favor the formation of straightest Mn-O-Mn bonds,

as supported by the sharpest values of rocking curve obtained in the XRD analysis (see 

Supplementary Fig. 1). Besides, it can also be concluded that the SrMoOx islands formed at the 

film/substrate interface due to temperature-driven bulk diffusion from STO do not dramatically

affect magnetism in LSMO, if not on a local scale. 

It is worth noticing that all LSMO films present a lower value of 𝑀𝑆 as compared to bulk LSMO 

(𝑀𝐵𝑢𝑙𝑘 = (4 − 𝑥)𝜇𝐵 ≈ 3.74 𝜇𝐵/𝑢. 𝑐. for a Sr content of x = 0.26). In literature this behavior is 

generally explained in terms of a magnetic dead layer (MDL) formed in LSMO thin films due to a 

variety of possible factors, comprising magneto-electronic phase separation,38,59,60 substrate/film 

elemental interdiffusion,37,61,62 oxygen vacancies,40,45,63 or preferential occupation of the out-of-

plane Mn 3d eg (3z2 – r2) at the expense of the in-plane 3d eg (x2 – y2) band.64,65


In order to infer more details about the origin of the MDL, we have compared the M(T) curves 

and the hysteresis loops (see Fig. ) of LSMO films with various thicknesses grown under the same 

optimized conditions, i.e., deposition at Tgr ≈ 540 °C followed by post-deposition annealing

treatment. Looking at three representative LSMO film thicknesses, 12, 4.5, 3 nm, a systematic 

decrease in Tc ≈ 311, 284, 222 K, and MS ≈ 2.7, 1.9, 1.6 µB/u.c., as well as an increase in HC ≈ 30, 

52, 96 Oe have been observed. To a first approximation, one can estimate the thickness of the 

MDL formed in each LSMO film by considering the deviation of MS with respect to the bulk value 

𝑀𝐵𝑢𝑙𝑘 ≈ 3.74 𝜇𝐵. The analysis points out an MDL thickness of about 3.3 nm, 2.1 nm and 1.7 nm 

for the 12, 4.5 and 3 nm LSMO films. We also note that the absolute value of the MDL is not 

constant, but becomes smaller upon decreasing the LSMO thickness. Besides, the relative portion 

of the LSMO film volume being affected by the MDL increases noticeably from 27,5 % to 46 % 

and 70% for the 12, 4.5 and 3 nm LSMO films. This suggests that a variety of factors may 

concurrently contribute to the formation of the MDL as a function of film thickness.

First, we observe that all LSMO films with a thickness below 12 nm present a pronounced kink 

with an upturn in the M(T) curves at about 105 K, which corresponds to the antiferrodistortive 

phase transition of the STO substrate.66 The robust magnetoelastic coupling originated at the 

film/substrate interface supports the conclusion of fully-strained epitaxial growth of LSMO. 

Therefore, the reduced degree of strain relaxation within the LSMO films and the high-quality of 

the fabricated heterostructures with cube-on-cube epitaxy suggest that possible effects related 

to the distortion of the perovskite unit cell of LSMO, e.g. affecting Mn-O-Mn bond lengths and 

angles, shall not predominantly contribute to the formation of the MDL in our samples. 


One possible aspect to consider is that during post-deposition annealing treatment the initial 

oxidation front formed at the LSMO surface may hamper the diffusion of further oxygen species 

towards the vacancy sites located deeper in the LSMO film. According to this scenario, ultrathin 

LSMO films undergo a more uniform and complete oxidation as compared to thicker LSMO films, 

thus explaining the smaller value of MDL encountered upon decreasing film thickness. 

Concurrently, however, ultrathin LSMO films may be more sensitive to local interfacial effects, 

such as film/substrate elemental interdiffusion and the nature of the termination layers on the 

LSMO film surface, such as missing Mn-O-Mn bonds or modification of the oxidation state of Mn 

ions. Although interfacial effects may play a role in the MDL formation, they are expected to 

mostly affect the value of magnetization Ms rather than the magnetic transition temperature Tc

of the whole LSMO film. Indeed, it is anticipated that at least a few LSMO unit cells shall remain 

unaffected by interfacial effects and contribute to the onset of ferromagnetism via conventional 

double exchange interactions even in case of an ultrathin LSMO film with a thickness of 3 nm. 

Nonetheless, the fact that Tc does not seem to be simply related to a smeared out para-to-

ferromagnetic transition, but rather to a clear shift towards lower temperatures as the thickness 

is progressively decreased, strongly suggests that additional factors must be taken into account.

As supported by previous studies,38,67 the decrease in both Ms and Tc observed in thin and 

ultrathin LSMO films is compatible with the phenomenon of magneto-electronic phase 

separation. In this scenario, intrinsic inhomogeneities within the LSMO lattice cause the 

coexistence of ferromagnetic/metallic and non-ferromagnetic/insulating phases. It was proposed 

that such instabilities can be promoted by the reduction of charge carriers at the interface 

between ferromagnetic/metallic (such as LSMO) and insulating (such as STO) regions.59 The 


occurrence of magneto-electronic phase separation is also backed by the results of coupling 

coefficients obtained in electric-field tuning experiments of similar LSMO films gated with 

ferroelectrics39 and ionic liquids.15,48 In the light of these observations, we conclude that 

magneto-electronic phase separation is plausibly a major contributor for the formation of the 

MDL in thin and ultrathin LSMO films grown onto STO substrate.

CONCLUSIONS

In this work, the structural and magnetic properties of LSMO thin films grown onto (001)-oriented 

STO substrates have been investigated as a function of Tgr (500 – 700 ˚C) and post-deposition 

annealing. The as-grown films deposited at Tgr < 540 ˚C are atomically flat, however the abundant 

presence of oxygen deficiencies causes a reduced TC and MS. The increase of the Tgr up to 700 ˚C

leads to an enhanced oxygen incorporation, and thus also to a systematic improvement of the 

magnetic properties. In spite of that, at the same time the use of a high Tgr fosters the creation

of spurious, dendritic-like islands at the film/substrate interface owing to the diffusion of bulk 

Mo and Sr impurities from the STO substrate. The preservation of the LSMO film epitaxy as well 

as the localized character of the SrMoOx grains suggest that such kind of defects shall not affect 

the magnetic properties of LSMO on a macroscopic scale. Still, they may cause deleterious effects 

when the purpose is to realize more complex heterostructures relying on the use of LSMO as an 

atomically-flat underlayer. 

High-temperature post-deposition annealing of the as-grown films at 900 ˚C for 1 h in air has the 

twofold effect of promoting surface reconstruction and improving the oxygen stoichiometry. 

Combining the results of XRD, AFM and SQUID analyses, the best compromise in terms of 


crystalline quality, surface smoothness and robustness of the magnetic properties is attained 

when employing a relatively-low Tgr ≈ 500 – 540 °C followed by post-deposition annealing. Under 

such optimized growth conditions, various insights are inferred on possible factors contributing 

to the formation of the MDL in thin and ultrathin LSMO films, including interfacial effects, 

gradient in film oxidation and magneto-electronic phase separation. 

In conclusion, our study evaluates functional strategies for manipulating the structural and 

magnetic properties of epitaxial LSMO thin films via temperature-driven defect engineering,

hence promoting their exploitation as effective building blocks for magnetoelectric and 

spintronic applications.

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge Philipp Leufke and Ralf Witte for support in the fabrication and 

characterization of LSMO films. This project has received funding from the European Union’s 

Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant 

agreement No 898113 (InNaTo) and from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under 

project numbers LE 3519/1-2, and MU 333/2-2 and as part of the DFG Research Group 2093 

(Memristive elements for neural systems) under project CH 1492/1-1. Saleh Gorji acknowledges 

his PhD scholarship by the DAAD. The authors acknowledge the support of the Karlsruhe Nano 

Micro Facility (KNMF) for the usage of various experimental facilities and CzechNanoLab Research 

Infrastructure supported by MEYS CR (LM2018110) for TEM measurements.


References

1 E. Dagotto, T. Hotta, and A. Moreo, Phys. Rep. 344, 1 (2001).

2 Y. Tokura and Y. Tomioka, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 200, 1 (1999).

3 K. Dörr, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 39, (2006).

4 O. Chmaissem, B. Dabrowski, S. Kolesnik, J. Mais, J. Jorgensen, and S. Short, Phys. Rev. B 67, 1 

(2003).

5 B. Dabrowski, X. Xiong, Z. Bukowski, R. Dybzinski, P.W. Klamut, J.E. Siewenie, O. Chmaissem, J. 

Shaffer, C.W. Kimball, J.D. Jorgensen, and S. Short, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 

60, 7006 (1999).

6 J. Hemberger, A. Krimmel, T. Kurz, H.A. Krug von Nidda, V.Y. Ivanov, A.A. Mukhin, A.M. 

Balbashov, and A. Loidl, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 66, 1 (2002).

7 Y. Ogimoto, M. Izumi, A. Sawa, T. Manako, H. Sato, H. Akoh, M. Kawasaki, and Y. Tokura, 

Japanese J. Appl. Physics, Part 2 Lett. 42, 0 (2003).

8 Y. Yin, Y. Yin, X. Jiang, M.A. Koten, J.E. Shield, X. Chen, Y. Yun, A.T. N’Diaye, X. Hong, and X. Xu, 

Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 1 (2020).

9 F.Y. Bruno, M.N. Grisolia, C. Visani, S. Valencia, M. Varela, R. Abrudan, J. Tornos, A. Rivera-

Calzada, A.A. Ünal, S.J. Pennycook, Z. Sefrioui, C. Leon, J.E. Villegas, J. Santamaria, A. 

Barthélémy, and M. Bibes, Nat. Commun. 6, 6306 (2015).

10 O. Rousseau, S. Flament, B. Guillet, M.L.C. Sing, and L. Méchin, Proceedings 1, 635 (2017).


11 D. Pesquera, E. Khestanova, M. Ghidini, S. Zhang, A.P. Rooney, F. Maccherozzi, P. Riego, S. 

Farokhipoor, J. Kim, X. Moya, M.E. Vickers, N.A. Stelmashenko, S.J. Haigh, S.S. Dhesi, and N.D. 

Mathur, Nat. Commun. 11, 3190 (2020).

12 S.M. Wu, S.A. Cybart, P. Yu, M.D. Rossell, J.X. Zhang, R. Ramesh, and R.C. Dynes, Nat. Mater. 

9, 756 (2010).

13 A. Quindeau, I. Fina, X. Marti, G. Apachitei, P. Ferrer, C. Nicklin, E. Pippel, D. Hesse, and M. 

Alexe, Sci. Rep. 5, 1 (2015).

14 A. Molinari, H. Hahn, and R. Kruk, Adv. Mater. 31, (2019).

15 A. Molinari, H. Hahn, and R. Kruk, Adv. Mater. 30, 1703908 (2018).

16 D. Yi, P. Yu, Y.C. Chen, H.H. Lee, Q. He, Y.H. Chu, and R. Ramesh, Adv. Mater. 31, 1 (2019).

17 C. Jin, Y. Zhu, W. Han, Q. Liu, S. Hu, Y. Ji, Z. Xu, S. Hu, M. Ye, and L. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 117, 

252902 (2020).

18 N. Zurauskiene, R. Lukose, S. Balevicius, V. Stankevic, S. Kersulis, V. Plausinaitiene, M. Vagner, 

and R. Navickas, IEEE Magn. Lett. 10, 1 (2019).

19 C. Moreno, C. Munuera, X. Obradors, and C. Ocal, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 3, 722 (2012).

20 A. Molinari, R. Witte, K.K. Neelisetty, S. Gorji, C. Kübel, I. Münch, F. Wöhler, L. Hahn, S. 

Hengsbach, K. Bade, H. Hahn, and R. Kruk, Adv. Mater. 32, 1907541 (2020).

21 L. Wang, C. Yang, J. Wen, S. Gai, and Y. Peng, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Electron. 26, 4618 (2015).


22 H. Boschker, M. Huijben,  a Vailionis, J. Verbeeck, S. van Aert, M. Luysberg, S. Bals, G. van 

Tendeloo, E.P. Houwman, G. Koster, D.H. a Blank, and G. Rijnders, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 44, 

205001 (2011).

23 P.M. Leufke, A.K. Mishra, A. Beck, D. Wang, C. Kübel, R. Kruk, and H. Hahn, Thin Solid Films 

520, 5521 (2012).

24 D. Rasic, R. Sachan, N.K. Temizer, J. Prater, and J. Narayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 

21001 (2018).

25 U.K. Sinha, B. Das, and P. Padhan, Nanoscale Adv. 2, 2792 (2020).

26 L. Cao, O. Petracic, P. Zakalek, A. Weber, U. Rücker, J. Schubert, A. Koutsioubas, S. Mattauch, 

and T. Brückel, Adv. Mater. 31, 1 (2019).

27 B. Paudel, B. Zhang, Y. Sharma, K.T. Kang, H. Nakotte, H. Wang, and A. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 

117, (2020).

28 S.K. Chaluvadi, F. Ajejas, P. Orgiani, S. Lebargy, A. Minj, S. Flament, J. Camarero, P. Perna, and 

L. Méchin, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 53, (2020).

29 P. Zhou, Y. Qi, C. Yang, Z. Mei, A. Ye, K. Liang, Z. Ma, Z. Xia, and T. Zhang, AIP Adv. 6, (2016).

30 K. Wang, M.H. Tang, Y. Xiong, G. Li, Y.G. Xiao, W.L. Zhang, Z.P. Wang, Z. Li, and J. He, RSC Adv. 

7, 31327 (2017).

31 S. Kumari, N. Mottaghi, C.Y. Huang, R. Trappen, G. Bhandari, S. Yousefi, G. Cabrera, M.S. 

Seehra, and M.B. Holcomb, Sci. Rep. 10, 1 (2020).


32 J.M.D. Coey, M. Viret, and S. von Molnár, Adv. Phys. 58, 571 (2009).

33 a. M. Haghiri-Gosnet, J. Wolfman, B. Mercey, C. Simon, P. Lecoeur, M. Korzenski, M. Hervieu, 

R. Desfeux, and G. Baldinozzi, J. Appl. Phys. 88, 4257 (2000).

34 Y. Takamura, R. V. Chopdekar, E. Arenholz, and Y. Suzuki, Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 162504 (2008).

35 M. Mathews, E.P. Houwman, H. Boschker, G. Rijnders, and D.H. a. Blank, J. Appl. Phys. 107, 

013904 (2010).

36 X. Wang, C. Jin, P. Wang, X. Pang, W. Zheng, D. Zheng, Z. Li, R. Zheng, and H. Bai, Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 115, (2019).

37 R. Herger, P.R. Willmott, C.M. Schlepütz, M. Björck, S. a. Pauli, D. Martoccia, B.D. Patterson, 

D. Kumah, R. Clarke, Y. Yacoby, and M. Döbeli, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 77, 

1 (2008).

38 M. Huijben, L.W. Martin, Y.-H. Chu, M.B. Holcomb, P. Yu, G. Rijnders, D.H. a. Blank, and R. 

Ramesh, Phys. Rev. B 78, 22 (2008).

39 P.M. Leufke, R. Kruk, R. a. Brand, and H. Hahn, Phys. Rev. B 87, 094416 (2013).

40 M. Angeloni, G. Balestrino, N.G. Boggio, P.G. Medaglia, P. Orgiani, and A. Tebano, J. Appl. 

Phys. 96, 6387 (2004).

41 P.M. Leufke, R. Kruk, D. Wang, C. Kübel, and H. Hahn, AIP Adv. 2, 032184 (2012).

42 S. Valencia,  a. Crassous, L. Bocher, V. Garcia, X. Moya, R.O. Cherifi, C. Deranlot, K. 

Bouzehouane, S. Fusil,  a. Zobelli,  a. Gloter, N.D. Mathur,  a. Gaupp, R. Abrudan, F. Radu,  a. 


Barthélémy, and M. Bibes, Nat. Mater. 10, 753 (2011).

43 C. Thiele, K. Dörr, O. Bilani, J. Rödel, and L. Schultz, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. 

Phys. 75, 054408 (2007).

44 A. Gambardella, P. Graziosi, I. Bergenti, M. Prezioso, D. Pullini, S. Milita, F. Biscarini, and V.A. 

Dediu, Sci. Rep. 4, 1 (2014).

45 R. Trappen, A.J. Grutter, C.Y. Huang, A. Penn, N. Mottaghi, S. Yousefi, A. Haertter, S. Kumari, J. 

Lebeau, B.J. Kirby, and M.B. Holcomb, J. Appl. Phys. 126, (2019).

46 L.W. Martin, Y.-H. Chu, and R. Ramesh, Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports 68, 89 (2010).

47 M. Brahlek, A. Sen Gupta, J. Lapano, J. Roth, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, R. Haislmaier, and R. Engel‐

Herbert, Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1702772 (2018).

48 A. Molinari, P.M. Leufke, C. Reitz, S. Dasgupta, R. Witte, R. Kruk, and H. Hahn, Nat. Commun. 

8, 15339 (2017).

49 T. Petrisor, M.S. Gabor, A. Boulle, C. Bellouard, C. Tiusan, O. Pana, and T. Petrisor, J. Appl. 

Phys. 109, 123913 (2011).

50 C. Aruta, G. Balestrino,  a. Tebano, G. Ghiringhelli, and N.B. Brookes, Eur. Lett. 80, 37003 

(2007).

51 S. Majumdar, H. Huhtinen, H.S. Majumdar, R. Laiho, and R. Österbacka, J. Appl. Phys. 104, 

033910 (2008).

52 T.T. Fister, D.D. Fong, J. a. Eastman, P.M. Baldo, M.J. Highland, P.H. Fuoss, K.R. 


Balasubramaniam, J.C. Meador, and P. a. Salvador, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 151904 (2008).

53 P.C. Bowes, J.N. Baker, J.S. Harris, B.D. Behrhorst, and D.L. Irving, Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 

022902 (2018).

54 T. Shi, Y. Chen, and X. Guo, Prog. Mater. Sci. 80, 77 (2016).

55 M. Siebenhofer, F. Baiutti, J. de Dios Sirvent, T.M. Huber, A. Viernstein, S. Smetaczek, C. 

Herzig, M.O. Liedke, M. Butterling, A. Wagner, E. Hirschmann, A. Limbeck, A. Tarancon, J. Fleig, 

and M. Kubicek, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc. (2021).

56 K. Szot, W. Speier, U. Breuer, R. Meyer, J. Szade, and R. Waser, Surf. Sci. 460, 112 (2000).

57 K. Szot and W. Speier, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 60, 5909 (1999).

58 Y. Liang and D.A. Bonnell, Surf. Sci. 310, 128 (1994).

59 L. Brey, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 75, 8 (2007).

60 M. Bibes, L. Balcells, S. Valencia, J. Fontcuberta, M. Wojcik, E. Jedryka, and S. Nadolski, Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 87, 67210 (2001).

61 J. Simon, T. Walther, W. Mader, J. Klein, D. Reisinger, L. Alff, and R. Gross, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 

3882 (2004).

62 J.Z. Sun, D.W. Abraham, R. a. Rao, and C.B. Eom, Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 3017 (1999).

63 L. Li, Z. Liao, Z. Diao, R. Jin, E.W. Plummer, J. Guo, and J. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Mater. 1, 034405 

(2017).


64 A. Tebano, A. Orsini, P.G. Medaglia, D. Di Castro, G. Balestrino, B. Freelon, A. Bostwick, Y.J. 

Chang, G. Gaines, E. Rotenberg, and N.L. Saini, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 82, 

1 (2010).

65 a. Tebano, C. Aruta, S. Sanna, P.G. Medaglia, G. Balestrino,  a. a. Sidorenko, R. De Renzi, G. 

Ghiringhelli, L. Braicovich, V. Bisogni, and N.B. Brookes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 2 (2008).

66 D.A. Mota, Y. Romaguera Barcelay, A.M.R. Senos, C.M. Fernandes, P.B. Tavares, I.T. Gomes, P. 

Sá, L. Fernandes, B.G. Almeida, F. Figueiras, P. Mirzadeh Vaghefi, V.S. Amaral, A. Almeida, J. 

Pérez De La Cruz, and J. Agostinho Moreira, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 47, (2014).

67 T. Becker, C. Streng, Y. Luo, V. Moshnyaga, B. Damaschke, N. Shannon, and K. Samwer, Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 89, 21 (2002).


Figure 1: HRXRD scans of LSMO films with a thickness of about 13 nm deposited onto <001>-oriented STO substrate at various 
growth temperatures (top) and after post-deposition annealing (bottom). The presence of Laue fringes in the LSMO (002) 
reflections indicates a high-quality coherent stacking of LSMO unit cells on STO. The systematic shift towards higher angles of the 
LSMO reflections at higher growth temperatures (top) or after post-deposition annealing (bottom), as indicated by the asterisk 
symbol, is attributed to a reduction of the amount of oxygen deficiencies.  


Figure 2: AFM images of the LSMO films grown at various temperatures after carrying out post-deposition annealing treatment. 
The surface morphology presents atomically flat terraces over large areas. Islands are formed on the LSMO surface at 
temperatures beyond 600 ˚C.


Figure 3: STEM-EDX characterization of a representative LSMO/STO cross section of a sample grown at 700 ˚C. A SrMoOx grain is 
present in the proximity of the film/substrate interface. The interfacial nature of the spurious grain indicates that its formation is 
related to the diffusion of Mo- and Sr- impurities from the bulk of the STO substrate. Despite the interfacial grain, LSMO epitaxy 
with cube-on-cube arrangement of the LSMO unit cells is preserved in the whole investigated area. The scale bar corresponds to
10 nm. 


Figure 4: Magnetization and respective derivative curves as a function of temperature of LSMO films grown at different growth 
temperatures (filled symbols) and after post-deposition annealing (empty symbols) under application of a magnetic field of 100 
Oe parallel to the in-plane film direction (a). Magnetic hysteresis loops carried out at 10 K (b). The systematic increase in magnetic 
moment and Curie temperature upon increasing the growth temperature, or after carrying out post-deposition annealing, is 
attributed to an improvement of the oxygen stoichiometry in LSMO.


Figure 5: Magnetic field-cooled curves (a) and hysteresis loops at 10 K (b) of LSMO films with various thicknesses. The increase in 
magnetic moment of LSMO observable in the field-cooled curves at about 100 K is triggered by the structural phase transition of 
the STO substrate. Upon reducing the film thickness, LSMO reveals a systematic reduction of Curie temperature and magnetic 
moment as well as an increase in coercivity.


SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Supplementary Figure 1: Rocking curves of LSMO (002) reflections for annealed films grown at 

540 and 700 ˚C (a). The broader rocking curve attained in the LSMO films grown at lower 

temperature suggests a slightly larger misalignment of the LSMO crystalline planes with respect 

to the STO substrate orientation. Two-dimensional reciprocal space map of the asymmetric (204) 

XRD reflection of an annealed LSMO film grown at 540 ˚C (b). LSMO grows fully-strained on STO, 

with an in-plane lattice parameter of about 3.90 Å. φ-scan of the asymmetric (204) reflection (c). 

The repeated occurrence of LSMO reflections every 90˚ is consistent with four-fold symmetry of 

the tetragonal unit cell of LSMO.


Supplementary Figure 2: Atomic force micrographs of (a) as-prepared (Tgr ≈ 620 ˚C) and post-

annealed LSMO films. The formation of atomically-flat terraces after carrying out annealing

reveals the occurrence of LSMO surface reconstruction.

Supplementary Figure 3: (a) Atomic force micrograph of a STO substrate after exposure to a 

temperature of 700 ˚C inside the sputtering chamber (no LSMO deposition). (b) Surface 

morphology of a LSMO sample grown at 700 ˚C. The presence of dendritic-like islands in both 

cases evidences the fact that a high temperature promotes the diffusion of impurities from bulk 

STO.  


Supplementary Figure 4: Low-magnification STEM image showing a cross section of a LSMO/STO 

heterostructure grown at 700 °C. Several grains are present at the film/substrate interface.  

Further analysis of Area “A” and Area “B” is provided in the following. 

Pt

LSMO

STO
Interfacial grains

Area “A”
Area “B”


Supplementary Figure 5: STEM and EDX analyses of Area “A”. The EDX maps reveal that the 

grain at the film/substrate interface is composed of a SrMoOx phase. The Sr/Mo ratio is close to 

1-to-1 and constant within the particle. 

Supplementary Figure 6: STEM and EDX analyses of Area “B”. In this case the interfacial grain is 

characterized by two distinguished phases: a Mn-rich phase (left side) and a SrMoOx phase (right 

side). This indicates that additional mechanisms of grain nucleation and growth, rather than just 

diffusion of bulk impurities, shall occur in LSMO/STO heterostructures. 


Supplementary Figure 7: STEM image close to “Area B” (a). Region with cube-on-cube 

arrangement of the LSMO unit cells onto STO and a sharp film/substrate interface (b). Region in 

proximity of a surface island with a different phase formed at the LSMO/STO interface; notably 

LSMO epitaxy is still preserved (c).


Supplementary Figure 8: High-magnification STEM image and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) 

analysis of a LSMO/STO cross section in proximity of an interfacial grain.  The nearly perfect match 

between FFT#2 and FFT#3 demonstrates that the LSMO film retains the epitaxial relation with 

the STO substrate, despite the presence of an interfacial grain with a different lattice orientation 

(FFT#1). The satellite spots observed in FFT#4 are possibly related to Moire’ fringes. 


Treatment of epi-polished STO substrates 

The following steps describe the procedure for the preparation of TiO2 single-terminated STO 

substrates, based on the work of Kareev et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 93 (2008):

1. Ultrasonic cleaning of the original epi-polished STO substrate in deionized water at 70 °C 

for 25 min. The purpose is the formation of SrOH complexes on the STO surface.

2. Ultrasonic cleaning in HCl:HNO3 (3:1) at room temperature for 12 min. The acid 

selectively etches and removes the SrOH present at the STO surface, leaving a TiO2 

terminated surface.

3. Rinsing of the STO substrates in DI water, followed by ultrasonic cleaning for 5 min in 

acetone and then 5 min in methanol at room temperature. These steps are necessary for 

removing any residuals of acidic contamination.

4. Annealing for 30 min at 1000 °C in air. This is fundamental in order to achieve atomically

flat terraces with 1 u.c. steps (chemical etching alone is generally not enough).


