1

Tunable Chirality-dependent Nonlinear Electrical 

Responses in 2D Tellurium

Chang Niu1,2†, Gang Qiu1,2†, Yixiu Wang3, Pukun Tan1,2, Mingyi Wang3, Jie Jian4, 

Haiyan Wang4, Wenzhuo Wu3 and Peide D. Ye1,2*

1Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, 

West Lafayette, IN 47907, United States.

2Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, United 

States.

3School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, United 

States.

4School of Materials Science and Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 

Indiana 47907, United States.

†These authors contributed equally to this work: Chang Niu, Gang Qiu.

*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P. D. Y. 

(yep@purdue.edu)


2

Abstract:

Tellurium (Te) is an elemental semiconductor with a simple chiral crystal 

structure. Te in a two-dimensional (2D) form synthesized by solution-based method 

shows excellent electrical, optical, and thermal properties. In this work, the chirality 

of hydrothermally grown 2D Te is identified and analyzed by hot sulfuric acid etching 

and high-angle tilted high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy. The 

gate-tunable nonlinear electrical responses, including the nonreciprocal electrical 

transport in the longitudinal direction and the nonlinear planar Hall effect in the 

transverse direction, are observed in 2D Te under a magnetic field. Moreover, the 

nonlinear electrical responses have opposite signs in left- and right-handed 2D Te due 

to the opposite spin polarizations ensured by the chiral symmetry. The fundamental 

relationship between the spin-orbit coupling and the crystal symmetry in two 

enantiomers provides a viable platform for realizing chirality-based electronic

devices by introducing the chirality degree of freedom into electron transport.

Keywords: Chirality, Nonlinear transport, 2D Tellurium, Spin Texture, Gate-

tunability


3

Chirality, a fundamental geometric property, emerges as an important topic in many

areas, including physics, chemistry, and biology. In condensed matter physics, the chiral 

crystal structure couples with the electrons1–4 by introducing a new chirality degree of 

freedom into the transport. Nonlinear electrical effects5,6 induced by the broken inversion 

symmetry are suitable for detecting novel chirality-dependent phenomena in non-magnetic 

strong spin-orbit coupling materials with two opposite chiral crystal structures related by 

mirror symmetry, providing an opportunity for realizing chirality-based electronic devices.

Tellurium (Te) is an elemental narrow band gap semiconductor with a simple chiral 

crystal structure. Covalently bonded Te atomic chains form a trigonal crystal lattice 

through van der Waals interaction, as shown in Figure 1a. Te has been known to have a 

chiral crystal structure since 1924.7 The two enantiomers related by mirror symmetry fall 

into two different space groups P3121 (right-handed) and P3221 (left-handed). The highest 

occupied state and the lowest unoccupied state are located around the corners of the 

Brillouin zone H and H’ point (Figure 1b). The strong spin-orbital coupling (SOC)8 splits 

the conduction band and forms a Weyl node at H (H’) point.9–11 Due to the low symmetry 

of the chiral crystal structure and the Weyl-type SOC,4 Te has a nontrivial radial spin 

texture where the spin polarization is parallel to the 𝑘 direction in the conduction band.9,12-

14 The radial spin texture is different from that in topological insulator surface states and 

Rashba semiconductors, as shown in Figure S1. In the valence band,15 the camelback 

structure also inherits a spin texture with spin polarization nearly parallel to the 𝑘𝑧

direction (helical chain direction). The energy dispersion of the two enantiomers is the 

same as shown in Figure 1c. However, because of the mirror symmetry, the spin 

polarization (indicated by the arrows)16 and the monopole charge of the Weyl nodes are 

opposite.3 The chirality-dependent nonlinear electrical responses will arise when applying 

an external magnetic field which breaks the time-reversal symmetry and serves as a 

perturbation to the spin-splitting bands. Two-dimensional (2D) Te grown by the


4

hydrothermal method17 has attracted lots of attention recently due to its attractive 

electrical,18 thermal,19 and optical20 properties. However, the chirality-related properties of 

hydrothermally grown 2D Te remain unexplored.

In this paper, we report the first systematic study of the gate-controlled chirality-

dependent second-order nonlinear electrical responses under a magnetic field originating 

from the broken chiral symmetry of the crystal structure, including the nonreciprocal 

electrical transport (longitudinal direction) and the nonlinear planar Hall effect (transverse 

direction) in 2D Te. The chirality of the hydrothermally grown 2D Te is also studied by 

hot sulfuric acid etching and further confirmed by high-resolution scanning transmission 

electron microscopy (HR-STEM) images taken under the high-angle annular dark field 

(HAADF) mode and high-angle tilt condition. Our results provide a coherent approach to 

study the chirality-induced physical properties in 2D Te and other chiral materials. 

The device structure of 2D Te field-effect transistors (FETs) used for nonlinear 

electrical measurement is shown in Figure 1d. The carrier concentration can be 

electrostatically tuned using 90 nm SiO2 as the back gate. An ac excitation 𝐼 is applied in 

the Te atomic chain direction with a frequency of 𝜔. The first-order (𝜔) and second-order 

(2𝜔) longitudinal (𝑉𝑧𝑧) and transverse (𝑉𝑧𝑥) voltage drops are measured. 

Results and Discussion

Gate-tunable nonreciprocal electrical transport in 2D Te.

Nonreciprocal phenomena21–27 describe the directional transport of particles, for 

example, electrons in p-n junctions and photons in chiral materials (naturally optical 

activity).28 The electrical magnetochiral anisotropy (eMChA)
29 is a nonlinear 

nonreciprocal electrical response in non-centrosymmetric material systems. Chiral crystals 

in a magnetic field should exhibit nonreciprocal transport,30 in which the currents moving 


5

in +𝑘 and – 𝑘 direction are different because of the broken inversion and time-reversal 

symmetry. This unidirectional magnetoresistance is described by31

𝑅𝑙,𝑟(𝐵, 𝐼) = 𝑅0(1 + 𝛽𝐵2 + 𝛾𝑙,𝑟𝐵𝐼)
(1)

where the second term 𝛽𝐵2 represents the usual magnetoresistance, the third term 𝛾𝑙,𝑟𝐵𝐼

is the nonreciprocal contribution, and 𝛾𝑙,𝑟 describes the strength of the eMChA in a left-

and right-handed material. The tensor nature of eMChA is revealed in Te bulk material32

due to the low symmetry of the crystal structure and the coupling between helical Te chains. 

It remains in 2D Te films also. Because of the 2D nature of the Te flakes, the carrier density

and carrier type are tunable by applying a gate voltage. The nonreciprocal transport caused 

by the Weyl-type SOC-induced radial spin texture in the conduction band differs from that

reported in the p-type bulk Te.32

We measured the four-terminal magnetoresistance of 2D Te along 𝑧 direction by 

applying the magnetic field in the 𝑦 direction (Figure 2a). The phase-sensitive 

measurement was used to obtain the resistance difference (𝛥𝑅 ≡ 𝑅(𝐵, 𝐼) − 𝑅(𝐵, −𝐼))

between currents moving in +𝐼 and – 𝐼 direction. An ac excitation current 𝐼𝜔 was injected 

into the device from the drain electrode. The voltage difference 𝑉𝑧𝑧

𝜔 between A and B 

electrodes and its second harmonic 𝑉𝑧𝑧

2𝜔 were measured as illustrated in Figure 2a. The 

normalized resistance difference 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 which is linear in magnetic field 𝐵 and current 𝐼 can 

be calculated using 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 = 2𝛾𝑙,𝑟𝐵𝐼 =

4𝑉𝑧𝑧
2𝜔

𝑉𝑧𝑧
𝜔
(2)

Because the nonreciprocal transport is odd in B, we took the difference between the results 

for +𝐵 and – 𝐵 to eliminate the influence of other effects, for example, the asymmetry of 

the device structure.


6

The nonreciprocal electrical transport in a 2D Te FET is measured at the temperature 

of 100 mK. The magnetic field dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 at different currents is shown in Figure

2a. Figure 2b shows the slope 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅𝐵 (black square data points) calculated from the linear 

fitting of the data in Figure 2a. The good linear relationship between 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 and 𝐵 (𝐼) consists 

with the eMChA described by equation (2). The density-dependent eMChA of 2D Te is 

measured by applying the back gate voltage. Two different measurement configurations 

(Figure 2c inset) are used to characterize the unidirectional magnetoresistance. When the 

current is reversed, the opposite value of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 further confirms the observation of the eMChA 

in 2D Te. The slope 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅𝐵 decreases with the increasing gate voltage as shown in Figure 2d. 

Similar current, magnetic field, and gate voltage dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 were observed in p-type 

2D Te flakes shown in Figure S2 and S3. Our measurements indicate that the 

nonreciprocal transport is large when the carrier density is relatively low (Fermi level 

around band edge). The eMChA is first demonstrated in the Bismuth helix,29 a macrocosm 

experiment in one dimension. Te has the simplest chiral structure (three atoms in one period)

on the atomic scale; as a result, the eMChA is expanded to three-dimension space when

the external magnetic field couples the electron bands. The gate-tunable eMChA in 2D Te 

originates from the strong three-dimensional (3D) spin-orbit coupling in the inversion 

asymmetric Te crystal.10 The radial spin texture is strong at the band edges.9 The 

nonreciprocal response attenuates quickly after the Fermi level is tuned away from the 

camelback structure or the Weyl nodes, indicating that the spin polarization configuration 

of the band plays an important role in the nonreciprocal transport.33 The angular-dependent 

nonreciprocal electrical transport in n-type 2D Te is measured in two different planes (𝑥-𝑦

plane and 𝑧-𝑦 plane, where the 𝑥-axis is the two-fold rotation axis, and the 𝑧-axis is the 

three-fold screw axis) shown in Figure 2e. The data points are fitted well with cosine 

function, indicating the nonreciprocal transport in 2D Te is large when the magnetic field 


7

is along the 𝑦-direction, which is asymmetry. We observed a small (2 × 10−6 𝑇−1) and 

near zero nonreciprocal current when the magnetic field is applied along 𝑥- and 𝑧-direction, 

respectively, as shown in Figure S4. The band evolution under a magnetic field is sensitive 

to the crystal orientation, implying the crystal symmetry enforced by 3D spin-orbit 

coupling bands in Te. It is not easy to realize in other materials beyond 2D Te by directly 

comparing the topological trivial band (valence band) and the topological non-trivial band 

(conduction band) in the same sample with tunable gating and Fermi level. We noticed that 

the amplitude of the nonreciprocal electrical transport in n-type 2D Te is about one or two

orders of magnitude larger than the amplitude in p-type 2D Te. The enhancement of 

nonreciprocal transport in n-type Te might be related to the topological nature of the Te 

conduction band and the band evolution under the magnetic field. The conduction band of 

Te has large Berry curvature because of the Weyl node. The valence band has no band 

crossing or Weyl node near valence band maximum. The theoretical studies of the 

relationship between chiral anomaly and nonreciprocal transport were reported.34

Nonlinear planar Hall effect in 2D Te.

Besides the nonreciprocal electrical response in the longitudinal direction, we also 

observed the nonlinear planar Hall effect 35,36 in 2D Te by measuring the Hall signal (𝑉𝑧𝑥)

between C and B electrodes under an in-plane (𝑥-𝑧 plane) magnetic field, as shown in 

Figure 3a. An ac excitation current 𝐼𝜔 was injected into the device along the atomic chain 

direction. The second-order Hall signal 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 depending on the magnetic field angle 𝛼 with 

the longitudinal current is generated. It follows a cosine angular dependence and has a 

period of 360° at a fixed magnetic field 𝐵 and current 𝐼. The |𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔| has the largest value 

when the magnetic field and current direction are orthogonal (𝛼 = ±90°) and becomes 

zero when the magnetic field and current direction are parallel to each other (𝛼 = 0° 𝑜𝑟 −

180°). The nonlinear planar Hall effect observed in 2D Te differs from that in topological 

insulators,35 which reaches the maximum when the magnetic field is antiparallel to the 


8

current direction and vanishes when the magnetic field is orthogonal to the current direction. 

Because in 2D Te, the spin-polarization is parallel to the electron momentum direction

(Figure 1c). In contrast, the spin-polarization at the surface of the topological insulators is 

perpendicular to the electron momentum direction. The nonlinear planar Hall signal also

fits the two-fold rotation ( 𝐶2

𝑥 ) symmetry requirement,36 which is  𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔(𝛼 = 0°) =

𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔(𝛼 = 180°) = 0 . 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 complies with 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔(+𝐵) = −𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔(−𝐵) in the different 

polarization of a magnetic field, as shown in Figure S5. In order to exclude other artificial 

components, the second-harmonic planar Hall data is obtained by taking the average 

between positive and negative magnetic fields (𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔(𝐵) = 1/2(𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔(+𝐵) − 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔(−𝐵))). 

The amplitude of the nonlinear planar Hall effect 𝛥𝑉𝑦𝑥

2𝜔 is extracted from the cosine fitting 

using 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 = 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛼). The potential capacitance coupling effect is excluded by 

changing the frequency of the input ac excitation (Figure S6), which shows no significant

change from 7 Hz to 87 Hz. 

The external magnetic field perturbs the Te conduction band and breaks the time-

reversal symmetry, which is essential in generating the second-order Hall signal. With the 

increasing strength of the magnetic field 𝐵, 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 also increased (Figure 3a). The extracted 

amplitude of the second-harmonic planar Hall signal 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 is plotted as a function of the 

magnetic field 𝐵, as shown in Figure 3b, indicating the linear dependence between 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔

and B. Figure 3c shows the current-dependent nonlinear planar Hall effect. Solid lines are 

curves fitting with 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 = 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝛼). The extracted normalized second-order Hall 

signal 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔/𝐼 is linearly dependent on the current 𝐼 (Figure 3d), indicating the nonlinear 

characteristic of the planar Hall effect, while the first-order ordinary Hall effect (𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

𝜔/𝐼)

is constant. The magnetic field and current dependence of the nonlinear planar Hall effect 

are tunable and consistent at different carrier densities (back gate voltages 𝑉𝑏𝑔) shown in 

Figure 3b, 3d, and S7. According to the analysis of the experimental data above, the 

nonlinear planar Hall effect follows:


9

𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 𝑙,𝑟(𝐵, 𝐼) = 𝜒𝑙,𝑟𝐵𝐼2
(3)

where 𝜒𝑙,𝑟 describes the strength of the nonlinear planar Hall effect, which can be 

calculated from the linear fit in Figure 3b and 3d. The effect is explained by the asymmetry

spin-splitting Te conduction band along 𝑘𝑥 direction under the magnetic field, as illustrated 

in Figure 3e. When the magnetic field is turned on, the conduction band will distort due to 

the interaction between spin-polarized bands and the external magnetic field.31 Therefore, 

a strong carrier density dependence of 𝜒𝑙,𝑟 is expected in 2D Te. The gate-dependent 𝜒𝑟 is 

shown in Figure 3e. Three different regions are observed. The effect is strong at low carrier 

density (region Ⅰ) due to the large asymmetry of the spin-splitting bands. With the 

increasing electron density, the nonlinear planar Hall effect changes sign (region Ⅱ) 

because of the different strengths and the opposite contribution to the nonlinear planar Hall 

effect of the Weyl Fermions in the inner Fermi surface. The film becomes conducting at 

high carrier density (region Ⅲ), and |𝜒𝑟| decreases. The density-dependent nonlinear 

planar Hall effect is the total response of the spin-orbit interaction and the Weyl Fermions.

The top gate is used for tuning the electron density by setting the bake gate voltage at a 

relatively high value (𝑉𝑏𝑔 = 33 𝑉) to ensure the ohmic contact. Similar back gate voltage 

dependence of the nonlinear planar Hall effect is shown in Figure S8.

The chirality of hydrothermally grown 2D Te.

As shown in Figure 4a and 4b the chirality of the covalently bonded Te atomic 

chains determine the chirality of the 2D Te crystal. Left- or right-handed Te can be 

determined using the shape of asymmetric etch pits produced by hot sulfuric acid etching 

on the cleaved (101̅0) surface of bulk Tellurium.37–39 The chirality of Te not only affects 

the etching process but also affects the radial spin texture of  electrons.12,40-43 The opposite 

outward and inward radial spin textures are expected in left- and right-handed Te crystals.


10

Here, the chirality of hydrothermally grown 2D Te flakes is investigated using hot 

sulfuric acid etching (see methods for details). Well-defined asymmetry etch pits are found 

on the etched 2D Te flakes with two different shapes that are mirror images of each other 

shown in Figure 4c and 4d, indicating the presence of both left- and right-handed 2D Te 

crystals. The dimension of the etch pits in 2D Te is usually 2-8 μm, which can be easily 

identified by the scanning electron microscope (SEM) and the standard optical microscope 

(Figure S9-11). The angles (𝛼 = 36.9°, 𝛽 = 90.0°, 𝛾 = 126.9° and 𝜃 = 106.2°) can be 

calculated from the lattice constants (Figure S12). The 𝑧 direction (helical chain direction) 

of 2D Te can be known through the direction of the longest side of the etch pits, in 

agreement with the previous report. The observation of the etch pits in hydrothermally 

grown 2D Te provides an ideal platform for the study of asymmetric chiral growth under 

different initial chiral imbalance conditions and growth environments.44

Different chirality is also found in 2D Te using HR-STEM imaging under HAADF 

mode (also called Z-contrast) in addition to etched pits. In order to determine the chirality, 

at least two sets of STEM images from different zone axes are required to holographically 

reconstruct the atom arrangement in 3D space. STEM images were first taken with incident 

electron beam along out-of-plane direction ([1010] axis) to ensure the crystal orientation

(configuration is shown in Figure 4e). The STEM images of two crystals with different 

chirality (Figure 4f and 4g) show identical top views which can be perfectly replicated by

the projection of three-fold screw helices (blue balls, see Supporting Video 1). A second 

set of STEM images was taken along [1120] direction by rotating the samples along 

[0001] axis for 30º counterclockwise, as shown in Figure 4h. It is noted that now the 

STEM images along [1120] axis of two crystals (Figure 4i and 4j) are distinctive and 

linked by mirror symmetry. Furthermore, 3D atomic model is used to simulate the 30º 

rotational transformation of Te crystals for both left- and right-handedness, as shown in 

Figure 4i and 4j (also in Supporting Video 2 and 3). Hence, by analyzing two sets of 


11

STEM images along different zone axes, the opposite chirality was confirmed. By the 

combination of high angle tilted HR-STEM and etched pits, the chirality of the 2D Te films 

can be conclusively determined.

Chirality-dependent nonlinear electrical responses in 2D Te.

In this session, we demonstrated the connection between the chiral crystal structure 

and the nonlinear electrical responses in 2D Te. As shown in Figure 1c, the 𝐷3 symmetry 

of Te requires no net spin polarization in 𝑘 space. With the introduction of a magnetic field, 

the time-reversal symmetry is additionally broken, leading to the formation of asymmetric 

electronic bands ( 𝐸↑(+𝑘) ≠ 𝐸↓(−𝑘)) around the Fermi level, resulting in nonlinear 

electrical responses, where the spin current is partially converted into a charge current. The 

eMChA and the nonlinear planar Hall effect will both have opposite signs in left- and right-

handed materials (𝛾𝑙 = −𝛾𝑟 and 𝜒𝑙 = −𝜒𝑟), required by the parity reversal symmetry. The 

asymmetric band evolution under a magnetic field is also responsible for the gate-tunable 

nonlinear transport in 2D Te.

Figure 5a and 5b show the nonreciprocal electrical transport in the left- and right-

handed 2D Te, respectively. The unidirectional magnetoresistance is characterized by the 

linear dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 with the increasing magnetic field. When the current flows in +𝐼

(−𝐼) direction, the opposite sign of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 in left- and right-handed 2D Te indicates the 

opposite spin-orbit coupling induced by the chiral crystal structure. 5 different devices are 

measured including 3 right-handed 2D Te and 2 left-handed 2D Te, showing the same 

electrical measurement results (Figure S13 and S14).

The chirality-dependent nonlinear planar Hall effect is also observed in 2D Te. 

Figure 5c and 5d show the carrier density dependence of 𝜒𝑙,𝑟 in the left- and right-handed 

2D Te. The insets show the second-order Hall voltage 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 as a function of the angle 𝛼. 

The planar Hall effect is measured under the same experiment setup in different Te flakes. 


12

Figure S15 lists all four possible magnetic field and chirality configurations. The magnetic 

field 𝐵 direction is always parallel (antiparallel) to the second-order Hall voltage direction 

in right- and left-handed 2D Te at low carrier density (region Ⅰ). Three different devices

were measured, including two right-handed 2D Te flakes and one left-handed 2D Te flake. 

It is worth emphasizing that in Te, the electron spin is polarized along the current 

direction, which is different from that in Rashba spin-orbit coupling system45 and 2D 

transition metal dichalcogenides,46 providing another type of spin-charge configuration for 

the possible application in spintronic devices. The opposite gate-tunable second-order 

nonlinear responses between left- and right-handed 2D Te introduce another chirality 

degree of freedom in to the electron transport, making 2D Te a suitable candidate for 

chirality-based frequency doubling and rectification nonlinear electronic devices.47

In this paper, we identified the chirality of the hydrothermally grown 2D Te using 

the asymmetric etch pits, and high-angle tilted HR-STEM imaging technique. The 

observed gate-tunable chirality-dependent nonlinear electrical responses, including 

nonreciprocal electrical transport and nonlinear planar Hall effect in 2D Te, prove the 

fundamental relationship between the spin-orbit coupling and chiral crystal symmetry. Our 

work provides a new route using magneto-transport to investigate the chirality-dependent 

physical and topological properties in 2D Te and other chiral materials.

Materials and Methods

Hydrothermal growth of 2D Te flakes. 0.09 g of Na2TeO3 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.5 g of 

polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) (Sigma-Aldrich) were dissolved in 33 ml double-distilled 

water. 3.33 ml of aqueous ammonia solution (25-28%, w/w%) and 1.67 ml of hydrazine 

hydrate (80%, w/w%) were added to the solution under magnetic stirring to form a 

homogeneous solution. The mixture was sealed in a 50 ml Teflon-lined stainless steel 


13

autoclave and heated at 180 °C for 30 hours before naturally cooling down to room 

temperature. 

Sulfuric acid etching of 2D Te flakes.

The synthesized 2D Te flakes were transferred onto a 90 nm SiO2/Si substrate to ensure 

the etching direction. 2D Te flakes were cleaned following a DI water rinse and standard 

solvent cleaning process (acetone, methanol, and isopropanol). 2D Te flakes were etched 

in hot concentrated sulfuric acid at 100 °C for 5 min. The scanning electron microscope 

(SEM) images were taken by a Thermo Scientific Apreo S SEM system at 5 kV.

High resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HR-STEM)

TEM, selected area diffraction, and HAADF-STEM analysis were performed with FEI 

TALOS F200x. This microscope was operated with an acceleration voltage of 200 kV. A 

high angle tilt holder was used to allow the large angle tilting required for this work.

Device fabrication. Te flakes were transferred onto a 90 nm SiO2/Si substrate. The four-

terminal and Hall-bar devices were patterned using electron beam lithography, and metal 

contacts were deposited by electron beam evaporation. 20/60 nm Ti/Au and 20/60 nm 

Ni/Au were used as an electrical contact for p-type and n-type 2D Te contact, respectively.

20 nm ALD Al2O3 grown at 200 °C using (CH3)3Al (TMA) and H2O as precursors were 

used to dope the 2D Te from p-type to n-type. 

Low 
temperature 
magneto-transport 
measurements. 
The 
magneto-transport 

measurements were performed in a Triton 300 (Oxford Instruments) dilution fridge system 

with 12 T superconducting coils at a temperature down to 50 mK. A portion of the 

measurement which requires magnetic field rotation was performed in an 18 T 

superconducting magnet system (SCM2) in the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory 

in Tallahassee, Florida. The electrical data were acquired by standard small signal AC 

measurement technique using SR830 and SR860 lock-in amplifiers (Stanford Research).


14

References

(1) 
Fang, C.; Lu, L.; Liu, J.; Fu, L. Topological Semimetals with Helicoid Surface States. 

Nat. Phys. 2016, 12 (10), 936–941. 

(2) 
Sanchez, D. S.; Belopolski, I.; Cochran, T. A.; Xu, X.; Yin, J. X.; Chang, G.; Xie, 

W.; Manna, K.; Süß, V.; Huang, C. Y.; et al. Topological Chiral Crystals with 

Helicoid-Arc Quantum States. Nature 2019, 567 (7749), 500–505. 

(3) 
Schröter, N. B. M.; Stolz, S.; Manna, K.; De Juan, F.; Vergniory, M. G.; Krieger, J. 

A.; Pei, D.; Schmitt, T.; Dudin, P.; Kim, T. K.; et al. Observation and Control of 

Maximal Chern Numbers in a Chiral Topological Semimetal. Science 2020, 369

(6500), 179–183. 

(4) 
Chang, G.; Wieder, B. J.; Schindler, F.; Sanchez, D. S.; Belopolski, I.; Huang, S. M.; 

Singh, B.; Wu, D.; Chang, T. R.; Neupert, T.; et al. Topological Quantum Properties 

of Chiral Crystals. Nat. Mater. 2018, 17, 978-985. 

(5) 
Ma, Q.; Xu, S. Y.; Shen, H.; MacNeill, D.; Fatemi, V.; Chang, T. R.; Mier Valdivia, 

A. M.; Wu, S.; Du, Z.; Hsu, C. H.; et al. Observation of the Nonlinear Hall Effect 

under Time-Reversal-Symmetric Conditions. Nature 2019, 565 (7739), 337–342. 

(6) 
Kang, K.; Li, T.; Sohn, E.; Shan, J.; Mak, K. F. Nonlinear Anomalous Hall Effect in 

Few-Layer WTe2. Nat. Mater. 2019, 18 (4), 324–328. 

(7) 
Bradley, A. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal 

of Science Series 6 L. The Crystal Structures of the Rhombohedral Forms of 

Selenium and Tellurium. Phil. Mag. 1924, 48, 477–496. 

(8) 
Niu, C.; Qiu, G.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Si, M.; Wu, W.; Ye, P. D. Gate-Tunable 

Strong Spin-Orbit Interaction in Two-Dimensional Tellurium Probed by Weak 

Antilocalization. Phys. Rev. B 2020, 101 (20), 205414. 


15

(9) 
Hirayama, M.; Okugawa, R.; Ishibashi, S.; Murakami, S.; Miyake, T. Weyl Node and 

Spin Texture in Trigonal Tellurium and Selenium. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 206401. 

(10) Tsirkin, S. S.; Puente, P. A.; Souza, I. Gyrotropic Effects in Trigonal Tellurium 

Studied from First Principles. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97 (3), 035158. 

(11) Qiu, G.; Niu, C.; Wang, Y.; Si, M.; Zhang, Z.; Wu, W.; Ye, P. D. Quantum Hall 

Effect of Weyl Fermions in N-Type Semiconducting Tellurene. Nat. Nanotechnol.

2020, 15 (7), 585–591. 

(12) Gatti, G.; Gosálbez-Martínez, D.; Tsirkin, S. S.; Fanciulli, M.; Puppin, M.; 

Polishchuk, S.; Moser, S.; Testa, L.; Martino, E.; Roth, S.; et al. Radial Spin Texture 

of the Weyl Fermions in Chiral Tellurium. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125 (21), 216402.

(13) Sakano, M.; Hirayama, M.; Takahashi, T.; Akebi, S.; Nakayama, M.; Kuroda, K.; 

Taguchi, K.; Yoshikawa, T.; Miyamoto, K.; Okuda, T.; et al. Radial Spin Texture in 

Elemental Tellurium with Chiral Crystal Structure. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 124 (13), 

136404.

(14) Niu, C.; Huang, S.; Ghosh, N.; Tan, P.; Wang, M.; Wu, W.; Xu, X.; Ye, P.D. Tunable 

Circular Photogalvanic and Photovoltaic Effect in 2D Tellurium with Different 

Chirality. Nano Lett. 2023, 23 (8), 3599-3606.

(15) Doi, T.; Nakao, K.; Kamimura, H. The Valence Band Structure of Tellurium. I. The 

K·p Perturbation Method. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 1970, 28, 36-43. 

(16) Calavalle, F.; Suárez-Rodríguez, M.; Martín-García, B.; Johansson, A.; Vaz, D. C.; 

Yang, H.; Maznichenko, I. V.; Ostanin, S.; Mateo-Alonso, A.; Chuvilin, A.; et al. 

Gate-Tuneable and Chirality-Dependent Charge-to-Spin Conversion in Tellurium 

Nanowires. Nat. Mater. 2022, 21 (5), 526–532. 

(17) Wang, Y.; Qiu, G.; Wang, R.; Huang, S.; Wang, Q.; Liu, Y.; Du, Y.; Goddard, W. 


16

A.; Kim, M. J.; Xu, X.; et al. Field-Effect Transistors Made from Solution-Grown 

Two-Dimensional Tellurene. Nat. Electron. 2018, 1 (4), 228–236. 

(18) Niu, C.; Qiu, G.; Wang, Y.; Si, M.; Wu, W.; Ye, P. D. Bilayer Quantum Hall States 

in an N-Type Wide Tellurium Quantum Well. Nano Lett. 2021, 21 (18), 7527–7533. 

(19) Huang, S.; Segovia, M.; Yang, X.; Koh, Y. R.; Wang, Y.; Ye, P. D.; Wu, W.; 

Shakouri, A.; Ruan, X.; Xu, X. Anisotropic Thermal Conductivity in 2D Tellurium. 

2D Mater. 2020, 7 (1), 015008. 

(20) Amani, M.; Tan, C.; Zhang, G.; Zhao, C.; Bullock, J.; Song, X.; Kim, H.; Shrestha, 

V. R.; Gao, Y.; Crozier, K. B.; et al. Solution-Synthesized High-Mobility Tellurium 

Nanoflakes for Short-Wave Infrared Photodetectors. ACS Nano 2018, 12 (7), 7253–

7263. 

(21) Rikken, G. L. J. A.; Strohm, C.; Wyder, P. Observation of Magnetoelectric 

Directional Anisotropy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89 (13), 133005.

(22) Rikken, G. L. J. A.; Raupach, E. Letters to Nature Observation of Magneto-Chiral 

Dichroism. Nature 1997, 390, 493-494.

(23) Tokura, Y.; Nagaosa, N. Nonreciprocal Responses from Non-Centrosymmetric 

Quantum Materials. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 3740. 

(24) Krstic, V.; Roth, S.; Burghard, M.; Kern, K.; Rikken, G. L. J. A. Magneto-Chiral 

Anisotropy in Charge Transport through Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. J. Chem. 

Phys. 2002, 117 (24), 11315–11319. 

(25) Pop, F.; Auban-Senzier, P.; Canadell, E.; Rikken, G. L. J. A.; Avarvari, N. Electrical 

Magnetochiral Anisotropy in a Bulk Chiral Molecular Conductor. Nat. Commun.

2014, 5 (1), 3757. 

(26) Qin, F.; Shi, W.; Ideue, T.; Yoshida, M.; Zak, A.; Tenne, R.; Kikitsu, T.; Inoue, D.; 


17

Hashizume, D.; Iwasa, Y. Superconductivity in a Chiral Nanotube. Nat. Commun.

2017, 8, 14465.

(27) Lan, S.; Liu, X.; Wang, S.; Zhu, H.; Liu, Y.; Gong, C.; Yang, S.; Shi, J.; Wang, Y.; 

Zhang, X. Observation of strong excitonic magneto-chiral anisotropy in twisted 

bilayer van der Waals crystals. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12 (1), 2088.

(28) Buckingham, A. D.; Stiles, P. J. On the Theory of Natural Optical Activity. Acc. 

Chem. Res. 1974, 7 (8), 258–264. 

(29) Rikken, G. L. J. A.; Fölling, J.; Wyder, P. Electrical Magnetochiral Anisotropy. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 2001, 87 (23), 236602. 

(30) Yokouchi, T.; Kanazawa, N.; Kikkawa, A.; Morikawa, D.; Shibata, K.; Arima, T.; 

Taguchi, Y.; Kagawa, F.; Tokura, Y. Electrical Magnetochiral Effect Induced by 

Chiral Spin Fluctuations. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 866. 

(31) Ideue, T.; Hamamoto, K.; Koshikawa, S.; Ezawa, M.; Shimizu, S.; Kaneko, Y.; 

Tokura, Y.; Nagaosa, N.; Iwasa, Y. Bulk Rectification Effect in a Polar 

Semiconductor. Nat. Phys. 2017, 13 (6), 578–583. 

(32) Rikken, G. L. J. A.; Avarvari, N. Strong Electrical Magnetochiral Anisotropy in 

Tellurium. Phys. Rev. B 2019, 99 (24), 245153. 

(33) Hirobe, D.; Nabei, Y.; Yamamoto, H.M. Chirality-induced intrinsic charge 

rectification in a tellurium-based field-effect transistor. Phys. Rev. B 2022, 106 (22), 

L220403.

(34) Morimoto, T.; Nagaosa, N. Chiral Anomaly and Giant Magnetochiral Anisotropy in 

Noncentrosymmetric Weyl Semimetals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 117 (14), 146603. 

(35) He, P.; Zhang, S. S. L.; Zhu, D.; Shi, S.; Heinonen, O. G.; Vignale, G.; Yang, H. 

Nonlinear Planar Hall Effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 123 (1), 16801. 


18

(36) Huang, Y.-X.; Feng, X.; Wang, H.; Xiao, C.; Yang, S. A. Intrinsic Nonlinear Planar 

Hall Effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2023, 130 (12), 126303.

(37) Blakemore, J. S.; Schultz, J. W.; Nomura, K. C. Some Effects Occurring in 

Dislocated Tellurium. J. Appl. Phys. 1960, 31 (12), 2226–2231. 

(38) Blakemore, J. S.; Nomura, K. C. Enantiomorphous Character of Etch Pits in 

Tellurium. J. Appl. Phys. 1961, 32 (4), 745–746. 

(39) Koma, A.; Tanaka, S. Etch Pits and Crystal Structure of Tellurium. Phys. Status 

Solidi 1970, 40 (1), 239–248. 

(40) Furukawa, T.; Shimokawa, Y.; Kobayashi, K.; Itou, T. Observation of Current-

Induced Bulk Magnetization in Elemental Tellurium. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 954.

(41) Furukawa, T.; Watanabe, Y.; Ogasawara, N.; Kobayashi, K.; Itou, T. Current-

Induced Magnetization Caused by Crystal Chirality in Nonmagnetic Elemental 

Tellurium. Phys. Rev. Res. 2021, 3 (2), 023111. 

(42) Dong, Z.; Ma, Y. Atomic-Level Handedness Determination of Chiral Crystals Using 

Aberration-Corrected Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy. Nat. Commun.

2020, 11 (1), 1588. 

(43) Ben-Moshe, A.; da Silva, A.; Müller, A.; Abu-Odeh, A.; Harrison, P.; Waelder, J.; 

Niroui, F.; Ophus, C.; Minor, A. M.; Asta, M.; et al. The Chain of Chirality Transfer 

in Tellurium Nanocrystals. Science 2021, 372 (6543), 729–733. 

(44) Osuna-Esteban, S.; Zorzano, M. P.; Menor-Salván, C.; Ruiz-Bermejo, M.; 

Veintemillas-Verdaguer, S. Asymmetric Chiral Growth of Micron-Size NaClO3 

Crystals in Water Aerosols. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100 (14), 146102. 

(45) Murakawa, H.; Bahramy, M.S.; Tokunaga, M.; Kohama, Y.; Bell, C.; Kaneko, Y.; 

Nagaosa, N.; Hwang, H.Y.; Tokura, Y. Detection of Berry’s Phase in a Bulk Rashba 


19

Semiconductor. Science 2013, 342, 1490-1493.

(46) Movva, H. C. P.; Fallahazad, B.; Kim, K.; Larentis, S.; Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K.; 

Banerjee, S. K.; Tutuc, E. Density-Dependent Quantum Hall States and Zeeman 

Splitting in Monolayer and Bilayer WSe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118, 247701.

(47) He, P.; Koon, G.K.W.; Isobe, H.; Tan, J.Y.; Hu, J.; Neto, A.H.C.; Fu, L.; Yang, H. 

Graphene moiré superlattices with giant quantum nonlinearity of chiral Bloch 

electrons. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2022, 17 (4), 378-383.

Acknowledgements 

P.D.Y. was supported by Army Research Office under grant No. W911NF-15-1-0574. 

W.W. acknowledges the School of Industrial Engineering at Purdue University for the Ravi 

and Eleanor Talwar Rising Star Professorship support. W.W. and P.D.Y. were also 

supported by NSF under grant No. CMMI-1762698. J.J. and H.W. acknowledge the 

support from the US National Science Foundation for the microscopy work (DMR-

1809520 and ECCS-1902644). A portion of this work was performed at the National High 

Magnetic Field Laboratory, which is supported by the National Science Foundation 

Cooperative Agreement No. DMR-1644779 and the State of Florida. C.N. and P.T. 

acknowledge technical support from National High Magnetic Field Laboratory staff D. 

Graf, G. Jones, L. Jiao, and A. Suslov.

Author Contributions

P.D.Y. conceived the idea and supervised experiments. C.N. fabricated the devices. C.N. 

and P.T. performed the magneto-transport measurements. Y.W., M.W. and W.W. 

synthesized the material. G.Q., J.J. and H.W. carried out the TEM/STEM measurements

and image analysis. C.N. and G.Q. did the sulfuric acid etching of 2D Te. C.N. and G.Q. 


20

analyzed the data. P.D.Y., C.N. and G.Q. wrote the manuscript and all the authors 

commented on it. 

Competing Financial Interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Data Availability

All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the 

Supplementary Materials.

Supplementary Materials

Additional details for nonreciprocal electrical transport in p-type 2D Te, etch pits of left-

handed and right-handed 2D Te, nonreciprocal electrical transport in different chirality 2D 

Te, frequency-dependent nonlinear planar Hall effect, schematics of left- and right-handed 

Te crystal structures are in the Supplementary Materials.

Supplementary Notes 1-4.

Supplementary Figures S1-S15.

Supporting Video 1-3. 

Corresponding Author

* Peide D. Ye (E-mail: yep@purdue.edu)


21

Figures

Figure 1. Chiral crystal and band structure of Te. (a) Crystal structure of a left-handed 

Te crystal (P3221) and a right-handed Te crystal (P3121). (b) The first Brillouin zone of Te. 

The conduction band minimum and valence band maximum are located at H and H’ point. 

(c) The electron band structure of chiral Te near the Fermi level. Two enantiomers have 

the same energy dispersion. However, due to the mirror symmetry, the spin texture and the 

monopole charge of the Weyl nodes are opposite in left- and right-handed Te. (d)

Schematic of the nonlinear electrical transport measurement setup. 𝐼 is the input ac 

excitation along the chiral atomic chain direction with a frequency of 𝜔. 𝑉𝑧𝑧 and 𝑉𝑧𝑥 are the 

measured first and second harmonic voltage signals in the longitudinal and transverse 

directions. The thickness of 2D Te is about 20 nm. The typical length and width of the Hall 

bar structure is 20 μm and 15 μm, respectively.


22

Figure 2. Nonreciprocal electrical transport in 2D Te. (a) Magnetic field B dependence 

of normalized resistance difference

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 at different current 𝐼 . Inset: schematic of the 

measurement setup. The magnetic field 𝐵 is applied in the out-of-plane direction. (b) The 

current 𝐼 dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅𝐵 extracted using the linear fitting of the data from (a) The red 

line is the linear fitting of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅𝐵. (c) Magnetic field B dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 at different gate 

voltages (carrier density). Inset: the sketch of the measurement setup. The current was sent 

from D to S. The voltage was measured between A and B electrodes. (d) The gate voltage 

dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅𝐵 extracted using the linear fitting of the data from (c). (e) The angular-

dependent nonreciprocal transport in 2D Te in two planes: x-y plane (black) and z-y plane 

(red). The solid lines are curves fitting by 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜑) and 𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜃). Inset: schematic of the 

magnetic field 𝐵 direction.


23

Figure 3. Nonlinear planar Hall effect in 2D Te. (a) The second harmonic transverse 

voltage 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 as a function of the magnetic field angle α at different magnetic field B. The 

solid lines are curves fitting by 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔sin(𝛼). Inset: schematic of the measurement setup.

The magnetic field direction is in-plane. (b) The amplitude of the second harmonic 

transverse voltage 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 at different magnetic field and back gate voltages. The solid lines 

are linear fitting of 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔. (c) The second harmonic transverse voltage 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 as a function 

of the magnetic field angle α at different current I. The solid lines are curves fitting by 

𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔sin(𝛼). (d) The normalized amplitude of the second harmonic transverse voltage 

𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔/𝐼 at different current and back gate voltages. The solid lines are linear fitting of 

𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔/𝐼. (e) The top gate voltage dependence of 𝜒𝑟. Inset: the energy dispersion of right-

handed Te conduction band along 𝑘𝑥 direction under a magnetic field.


24

Figure 4. The chirality of 2D Te. (a, b) Schematic of the covalently bonded one-

dimensional chiral atomic chains with left- and right-handed configuration. (c, d) SEM 

image of the etch pits in a left-handed 2D Te flake and a right-handed 2D Te flake. (e-j)

High resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HR-STEM) images of Te 

flakes with opposite chirality. (e) Configurations of STEM images for (1010) facets. (f, g)

Top view STEM images of left-handed and right-handed Te flakes, respectively. Inset: 

identical top views of both left handed- and right-handed Te atomic model. (h)

Configurations of STEM images for (1120) facets. (i, j) STEM images of (1120) facets 

for left-handed and right-handed Te flakes, respectively. Two images now show distinctive 

patterns as replicated by rotating both left- and right-handed models along [0001] axis for 

30º counterclockwise.


25

Figure 5. Chirality-dependent nonlinear electrical transport in 2D Te. (a, b) The 

nonreciprocal electrical transport in left- and right-handed 2D Te. Inset: the SEM images 

of the etch pits and the measurement current direction using the shape of the asymmetry 

etch pits as reference. (c, d) The nonlinear planar Hall effect in left- and right-handed 2D 

Te. Inset: the second harmonic transverse voltages as a function of the magnetic field angle 

𝛼. The red lines are curves fitting by 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔sin(𝛼). Both nonreciprocal electrical transport 

and nonlinear planar Hall effect show opposite signs in 2D Te with different chirality.


26

TOC Graphic:


Supporting Information for:

Tunable Chirality-dependent Nonlinear Electrical 

Responses in 2D Tellurium

Chang Niu1,2†, Gang Qiu1,2†, Yixiu Wang3, Pukun Tan1,2, Mingyi Wang3, Jie Jian4,

Haiyan Wang4, Wenzhuo Wu3 and Peide D. Ye1,2*

1Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, 

West Lafayette, IN 47907, United States.

2Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, United 

States.

3School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, United 

States.

4School of Materials Science and Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 

Indiana 47907, United States.

†These authors contributed equally to this work: Chang Niu, Gang Qiu.

*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to P. D. Y. 

(yep@purdue.edu)


This file includes:

Supplementary Notes:

1. Phase-sensitive measurement of nonlinear electrical responses.

2. Nonreciprocal electrical transport in p-type 2D Te

3. Etch pits of 2D Te

4. Nonreciprocal electrical transport in Te with different chirality

Supplementary Figures:

Figure S1. Spin texture in different materials.

Figure S2. Nonreciprocal electrical transport in p-type 2D Te.

Figure S3. Temperature dependence of the nonreciprocal electrical transport.

Figure S4. Angular-dependent longitudinal nonreciprocal transport with an in-plane 
magnetic field.

Figure S5. Nonlinear planar Hall effect in positive and negative magnetic field.

Figure S6. Frequency-dependent nonlinear planar Hall effect.

Figure S7. Magnetic field and current dependence of the nonlinear planar Hall effect.

Figure S8. Back gate voltage dependence of the nonlinear planar Hall effect.

Figure S9. Optical images of the etch pits in 2D Te flakes.

Figure S10. SEM pictures of the etch pits in left-handed 2D Te single crystals.

Figure S11. SEM pictures of the etch pits in right-handed 2D Te single crystals.

Figure S12. Origin of the etch pits in 2D Te.

Figure S13. Additional nonreciprocal electrical transport data on left-handed 2D Te.

Figure S14. Additional nonreciprocal electrical transport data on right-handed 2D Te.

Figure S15. Chirality-dependent nonlinear planar Hall effect in 2D Te.


Other Supplementary Materials for this manuscript include the following:

Supplementary videos:

Supplementary Video 1. Te chains with opposite chirality can potentially have the same 

top view.

Supplementary Video 2. Front view of Te with opposite chirality under the same 

transformation of rotating along [0001] axis by 30° counterclockwise.

Supplementary Video 3. Top view of Te with opposite chirality under the same 

transformation as in Supplementary Video 2. The final top view matches STEM image in 

Figure 4i and 4j.


Supplementary Notes:

1. Phase-sensitive measurement of nonlinear electrical responses.

A phase-sensitive measurement is used in the detection of both nonreciprocal 

electrical transport in the longitudinal direction and the nonlinear planar Hall effect in the 

transvers direction using the lock-in technique. 

In nonreciprocal electrical transport measurement, the ac current with the frequency 

of 𝜔 can be expressed by 𝐼𝜔 = 𝐼0sin(𝜔𝑡) . The unidirectional magnetoresistance is 

described by 𝑅𝑙,𝑟(𝐵, 𝐼) = 𝑅0(1 + 𝛽𝐵2 + 𝛾𝑙,𝑟𝐵𝐼). The nonlinear voltage components can 

be expressed by 𝑉𝑥𝑥

2𝜔(𝑡) = 𝛾𝑙,𝑟𝑅0𝐵𝐼0

2sin2(𝜔𝑡) =

1

2 𝛾𝑙,𝑟𝑅0𝐵𝐼0

2(1 + sin(2𝜔𝑡 −

𝜋

2)). In the 

experiment, the y-component of the second-harmonic voltage drop detected by the lock-in 

is expressed as 𝑉𝑧𝑧

2𝜔 =

1

2 𝛾𝑙,𝑟𝑅0𝐵𝐼0

2 because of the cosine dependence. The ordinary 

magneto-resistance follows: 𝑉𝑧𝑧

𝜔(𝑡) = 𝑅0(1 + 𝛽𝐵2)𝐼0sin(𝜔𝑡). In the experiment, the x-

component of the first-harmonic voltage drop detected by the lock-in is expressed as 𝑉𝑧𝑧

𝜔 =

𝑅0(1 + 𝛽𝐵2)𝐼0. If 𝛽 is small, according to the definition of the resistance difference 

between positive and negative current can be written as:

𝛥𝑅
𝑅 = 2𝛾𝑙,𝑟𝐵𝐼 = 4𝑉𝑧𝑧

2𝜔

𝑉𝑧𝑧𝜔

where 𝛥𝑅 ≡ 𝑅(𝐵, 𝐼) − 𝑅(𝐵, −𝐼).

In nonlinear planar Hall effect, the ac current with the frequency of 𝜔 can be 

expressed by 𝐼𝜔 = 𝐼0sin(𝜔𝑡). The nonlinear planar Hall effect is expressed as: 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔(𝑡) =

𝑅𝑧𝑥𝐼0

2sin2(𝜔𝑡) =

1

2 𝑅𝑧𝑥𝐼0

2(1 + sin(2𝜔𝑡 −

𝜋

2)). In the experiment, the y-component of the 

second-harmonic voltage drop detected by the lock-in is expressed as 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 =

1

2 𝑅𝑧𝑥𝐼0

2

because of the cosine dependence.


Frequency-dependent of the nonlinear responses are measured shown in Figure S4a

and S4b. The device is measured under same current, magnetic field and gate voltages. The 

frequency of the current applied is changed from 7 Hz to 87 Hz. No significant change is 

found, indicating a good ohmic response from the 2D Te device. We exclude the potential 

effects due to the capacitance in the measurement setup and the device contact, which is 

sensitive to the current frequency. Furthermore, the x-component and y-component are 

measured at the same time shown in Figure S4c. As discussed previously, the nonlinear 

planar Hall signal should be cosine dependence ( 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔(𝑡) =

1

2 𝑅𝑧𝑥𝐼0

2(1 + sin(2𝜔𝑡 −

𝜋

2)), 

which is the y-component of the measured second-harmonic voltage drop 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔. The y-

component has a strong dependence on the magnetic field angle 𝛼 while the x-component 

has no dependence on 𝛼 and is close to zero. Thus, we conclude that the nonlinear response 

detected by the phase-sensitive lock-in technique originates from the chiral 2D Te crystal. 

2. Nonreciprocal electrical transport in p-type 2D Te 

90 nm SiO2 is used to control the carrier density in p-type 2D Te. The electrical 

magnetochiral anisotropy is also observed in the valence band of Te (Figure S1). Same 

magnetic field, gate voltage, and current dependence are observed in p-type 2D Te. The 

amplitude of the nonreciprocal electrical response in n-type 2D Te is about one order of 

magnitude larger than the amplitude of p-type 2D Te. The enhancement of the 

nonreciprocal electrical response in n-type Te is related to the Weyl point located at the 

conduction band edge. 

Figure S2 shows the Temperature dependence of the nonreciprocal electrical 

transport in p-type 2D from 100 mK to 22 K. The amplitude of nonreciprocal response is 

decreased with the temperature increasing.

3. Etch pits of 2D Te


Figure S7 shows the optical images of the etch pits in 2D Te flakes. The etch pits 

are shown in red solid lines. SEM images of the etch pits in left-handed (Figure S8) and 

right-handed (Figure S9) 2D Te flakes.

The angles in the etch pits can be calculated using the lattice constants of Te. Figure

S10 shows a simple model for the etch pits in a right-handed Te crystal. The angles can be 

described as:

tan(𝛼) = 𝑎

𝑐 , 𝛽 = 90°, 𝛾 = 90° + 𝛼, 𝜃 = 180° − 2𝛼

After etching, the shapes of two sides become mirror symmetric (Figure S10) which has 

the identical angles as in etched pits, suggesting that two sides of the flake are also mirror 

symmetric and hence, possess opposite chirality.

4. Nonreciprocal electrical transport in Te with different chirality

The opposite nonreciprocal electrical transport between different chirality is further 

tested and analyzed in multiple samples. All the devices measured have the same response. 

Please see Figure S11 and S12 for additional electrical measurement.


Supplementary Figures:

Figure S1 Spin texture in different materials. (a) Spin texture of Weyl-type SOC in 

chiral crystals such as Te conduction band (spin-polarization parallel to the electron 

momentum direction). (b) Spin texture of Rashba SOC in semiconductors (spin-

polarization perpendicular to the electron momentum direction, two Fermi surfaces have 

opposite spin-polarization). (c) Spin texture in topological insulator surface states (spin-

polarization perpendicular to the electron momentum direction).


Figure S2. Nonreciprocal electrical transport in p-type 2D Te. (a) Magnetic field 𝐵

dependence of normalized resistance difference 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 at different current 𝐼. (b) The current 𝐼

dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅𝐵 extracted using the linear fitting of the data from (a) The red line is the 

linear fitting of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅𝐵. (c) Magnetic field 𝐵 dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 at different gate voltages (carrier 

density). Inset: the sketch of the measurement setup. The current was sent from D to S. The 

voltage was measured between A and B electrodes. (d) The gate voltage dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅𝐵

extracted using the linear fitting of the data from (c).


Figure S3. Temperature dependence of the nonreciprocal electrical transport. (a)

Temperature dependence of the nonreciprocal electrical transport in a p-type 2D Te FET. 

(b) Temperature dependence of 

𝛥𝑅

𝑅𝐵 extracted using the linear fitting of the data from (a).


Figure S4. Angular-dependent longitudinal nonreciprocal transport with an in-plane 

magnetic field. (a) Schematic of the in-plane magnetic field measurement setup. (b) First-

order (black) and second-order (red) angular-dependent magnetoresistance. Small 

nonreciprocal current is observed when the magnetic field is perpendicular to the current. 

No nonreciprocal transport is observed when the magnetic field is parallel to the current. 


Figure S5. Nonlinear planar Hall effect in positive and negative magnetic field.

Nonlinear planar Hall signal (𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔) with positive and negative magnetic field. 


Figure S6. Frequency-dependent nonlinear planar Hall effect. (a) Angular-dependent

nonlinear planar Hall signal (𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔) at different lock-in frequencies. (b) The amplitude of 

nonlinear planar Hall effect 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 extracted from (a). The signals show no significant 

frequency dependence. (c) The x-component and y-component of the second-harmonic 

transverse voltage drop 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 measured by lock-in at the frequency of 7 Hz.


Figure S7. Magnetic field and current dependence of the nonlinear planar Hall effect.

The second harmonic transverse voltage 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 as a function of the magnetic field angle 𝛼 at 

different magnetic field 𝐵 (a, 𝑉𝑏𝑔 = 18 𝑉, b, 𝑉𝑏𝑔 = 24 𝑉, c, 𝑉𝑏𝑔 = 36 𝑉) and current 𝐼 (d, 

𝑉𝑏𝑔 = 36 𝑉). The solid lines are curves fitting by 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔sin(𝛼). The extract nonlinear 

planar Hall amplitude 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 is shown in Figure 3.


Figure S8. Back gate voltage dependence of the nonlinear planar Hall effect. (a) The 

second harmonic transverse voltage 𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 as a function of the magnetic field angle 𝛼 at 

different back gate voltages (𝑉𝑏𝑔). The solid lines are curves fitting by 𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔sin(𝛼). (b) 

Back gate voltage 𝑉𝑏𝑔 dependence of the second harmonic transverse voltage amplitude 

𝛥𝑉𝑧𝑥

2𝜔 extracted from (a).

Figure S9. Optical images of the etch pits in 2D Te flakes.


Figure S10. SEM pictures of the etch pits in left-handed 2D Te single crystals.

Figure S11. SEM pictures of the etch pits in right-handed 2D Te single crystals.


Figure S12. Origin of the etch pits in 2D Te. (a) The shape of etch pits (red dash lines) 

engraved on right-handed Te (1010) facet. The etch pits are opposite in a left-handed 

tellurium flake. (b) Typical etch pits for a right-handed Te. (c) 2D Te flakes after sulfuric 

etching showing outline shapes similar to etching pits.


Figure S13. Additional nonreciprocal electrical transport data on left-handed 2D Te.

Figure S14. Additional nonreciprocal electrical transport data on right-handed 2D 

Te.


Figure S15. Chirality-dependent nonlinear planar Hall effect in 2D Te. The conduction 

band structure of left- (a, b) and right- (c, d) handed Te along 𝑘𝑥 under different magnetic 

field directions. The red arrows indicate the generated second-order planar Hall current 

direction. Because of the spin-polarization (spin texture) reverse in left- and right-handed 

Te, the second-order planar Hall current is parallel (antiparallel) to the magnetic field 

direction in right- (left-) handed 2D Te.


