FeSe and the missing electron pocket problem

Luke C. Rhodes,1 Matthias Eschrig,2 Timur K. Kim,3 and Matthew D. Watson3

1School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews KY16 9SS, United Kingdom
2Institute of Physics, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Strasse 6, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
3Diamond Light Source, Harwell Campus, Didcot, OX11 0DE, United Kingdom
(Dated: January 28, 2022)

The nature and origin of electronic nematicity remains a significant challenge in our understanding of the
iron-based superconductors. This is particularly evident in the iron chalcogenide, FeSe, where it is currently
unclear how the experimentally determined Fermi surface near the M point evolves from having two electron
pockets in the tetragonal state, to exhibiting just a single electron pocket in the nematic state. This has posed a
major theoretical challenge, which has become known as the missing electron pocket problem of FeSe, and is of
central importance if we wish to uncover the secrets behind nematicity and superconductivity in the wider iron-
based superconductors. Here, we review the recent experimental work uncovering this nematic Fermi surface of
FeSe from both ARPES and STM measurements, as well as current theoretical attempts to explain this missing
electron pocket of FeSe, with a particular focus on the emerging importance of incorporating the dxy orbital into
theoretical descriptions of the nematic state. Furthermore, we will discuss the consequence this missing electron
pocket has on the theoretical understanding of superconductivity in this system and present several remaining
open questions and avenues for future research.

I. INTRODUCTION

One of the reasons for the huge interest in FeSe over the
past decade has been the sense that it holds the key to the
wider understanding of the whole Fe-based superconductor
family [1–3]. With its minimalistic crystal structure and allur-
ingly simple band structure in the tetragonal phase, alongside
the prevalence of high-quality single crystals, it seemed like
the ideal test bed to examine in detail the themes that were
emerging in the field: strong orbital-dependent correlations
[4–6], spin fluctuation pairing [7, 8], and most pertinently for
this review, the so-called nematic phase [9–11], where C4 ro-
tational symmetry is spontaneously broken below 90 K.
The measurement of the momentum-dependence of the su-
perconducting gap in FeSe, between 2016 and 2018, was
a particular experimental triumph.
The data from both
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) [12] and multiple
angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) mea-
surements [13–17] revealed a clear conclusion: the gap struc-
ture is extremely anisotropic, and broadly follows the dyz
orbital weight around the Fermi surface. While a twofold-
symmetric gap is of course symmetry-allowed in an or-
thorhombic system, the fact that such a strong anisotropy was
observed implied that the nematic state must also induce a
profound anistropic effect on the Fermi surface of FeSe. How-
ever due to significant uncertainty as to the correct description
of the low-temperature electronic structure, multiple theoret-
ical explanations for the anisotropic gap structure were pro-
posed [12, 16, 18–21].
A critical question required to understand this anisotropic
superconducting gap is how does the nematic state influence
the the low temperature Fermi surface and electronic structure
of FeSe? Given that we have a second-order phase transition
[22], and that the lattice distortion |a−b|

(a+b) is only ∼0.2%, the
natural assumption, from an ab-initio perspective [23], would
be that nematicity should only weakly distort the established

Fermi surface of the high-temperature tetragonal phase, which
ARPES measurements have shown contains two hole pockets
and two electron pockets [23–30]. Yet ARPES measurements
in the nematic state have revealed sizeable band shifts, of the
order of 10-50 meV [30], much larger that what would be pre-
dicted from ab-initio calculations [23].

Unfortunately, the precise identification of specific parts
of the band structure, the nematic energy scales and even
the Fermi surface of FeSe has been complicated by the for-
mation of orthorhombic domains upon entering the nematic
state. In an orthorhombic crystal, conventional ARPES exper-
iments measure a superposition of two perpendicularly orien-
tated crystallographic domains, which doubles the number of
bands observed in the experimental data and creates ambiguity
about which bands arise from which domain. For this reason,
a recent focal point of research has involved overcoming this
technical challenge of orthorhombic domains, for example by
applying uniaxial strain [25, 31–37] or using NanoARPES
[38] or scanning tunneling microscopy [12, 39–41]. The con-
clusion from these measurements have been unanimous, and
have revealed that within the nematic state the Fermi surface
of FeSe consists of one hole pocket and one electron pocket.

This finding, however, is very surprising and presents a fun-
damental theoretical conundrum that is at the heart of under-
standing the nematic and superconducting properties of FeSe.
The bands that generate the two electron pockets observed in
the tetragonal state form saddle points at the high symmetry
M point close to the Fermi level. It is therefore not trivial to
deform or shift these saddle points to lift one of these electron
pockets away from the Fermi level upon entering the nematic
state. This current theoretical challenge has become known as
the ”missing electron pocket problem” of FeSe and resolving
this problem promises deeper insight into the nematic state,
and a wider understanding of superconductivity in the iron-
based superconductors.

In this review we will overview the recent experimental

arXiv:2201.11702v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  27 Jan 2022


2

e-

a

b

Tc
Temperature

Tetragonal
Nematic
Ts

Lattice constant

F
E

H
G

J
I

e-

e-

B

C
D

dxz
dyz
dxy

Γ/Ζ
Μ/Α

A

e-

e-

e-

FIG. 1. Summary of the Fermi surface of FeSe and photoemission measurements of a single electron pocket. (A) Crystal structure of
FeSe, Fe (black), Se (grey). (B) Sketch of the temperature evolution of the the lattice constants in FeSe, as described in Ref. [42], highlighting
the evolution from a tetragonal (dark grey surface) to orthorhombic system with differently orientated domains (red and blue striped surface).
(C) Sketch of the experimentally determined Fermi surface of FeSe in the tetragonal state and (D) in the nematic state. (E-J) Summary of
the Fermi surface of FeSe measured around the M/A point via different photoemission techniques. (E) Measurement in the tetragonal state
(100 K, LV hv = 56 eV [29]) showing two electron pockets, (F) ARPES Measurement in the nematic state (10 K, LV, hv = 56 eV [29])
arising from a superposition of two orthorhombic domain orientations (red and blue regions), referred to as a ”twinned” measurement. (G,H)
ARPES measurement of a detwinned crystal in the nematic state (10 K, hv = 56 eV [31], where strain is applied either along the a or b
crystallographic axis and predominately probes a single domain orientation. (I,J) NanoARPES measurement using a photon beamspot of
< 1 µm (30 K, hv = 56 eV [38]) in individual orthorhombic domains.

and theoretical work uncovering the Fermi surface of FeSe
in the nematic state and tackling the missing electron pocket
problem. In section 2 we will briefly introduce the exper-
imental electronic structure of FeSe in the tetragonal state,
to use as the foundation for understanding the nematic elec-
tronic structure. In section 3 we will discuss the recent ex-
perimental data uncovering the electronic structure in the ne-
matic state, in particular focusing on measurements which
overcome the technical problems associated with orthorhom-
bic crystals, including ARPES measurements under uniax-
ial strain, NanoARPES measurements and Scanning tunnel-
ing microscopy (STM) measurements. In Section 4 we will
review the latest theoretical attempts to resolve this missing
electron pocket problem, highlighting the necessity of consid-
ering the dxy orbital in the phenomenological description of
the nematic state. And in section 5 we will discuss the con-
sequence the updated Fermi surface has on the understanding
of the superconducting properties of FeSe. A summary of the
electronic structure and missing electron pocket problem of
FeSe is presented in Fig. 1.

II. ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE IN THE TETRAGONAL
STATE

From both a theoretical and experimental point of view, the
electronic structure of the tetragonal state is relatively well un-
derstood. Prior to the onset of nematicity at Ts = 90 K, FeSe
exhibits tetragonal symmetry with a P4/nmm crystal struc-
ture [42]. This structure consists of layers of Fe atoms, in a
2D square lattice configuration, bridged by staggered out-of-
plane Se atoms, giving rise to a crystallographic unit cell con-
taining two Fe atoms and two Se atoms. The two Fe atoms
are related by a glide-mirror symmetry, which can theoreti-
cally half the number of bands and allows for an unfolding to
a 1-Fe Brillouin zone used by some authors [43], but here we
use the 2-Fe unit cell notation for comparison with ARPES
measurements.
The low energy electronic properties are governed by the
partially-filled 3dxz, 3dyz and 3dxy orbitals of the two Fe
atoms, which in momentum space gives rise to three hole
bands around the Γ point and two symmetry-protected sad-
dle point van-Hove singularities around the M point [44] as
shown in Fig. 2(a).


3

 Binding Energy  (meV)

150

100

50 

0  

 Binding Energy  (meV)

-0.5

0

0.5

1
B

 k  (Å-1)

-0.4 -0.2
0
0.2
0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4

 k  (Å-1)

-1.0
-0.5
0
0.5
1.0

 k  (Å-1)
 k  (Å-1)

C
D

A
h1

h2

h3

vH1

vH2

Γ/Ζ
Μ/Α

0

dxz
dyz
dxy

Energy

FIG. 2. Electronic structure in the tetragonal state of FeSe. (A)
Sketch of the low-energy band structure of a typical P4/nmm Fe-
based superconductor along the Γ − M (kz = 0) or Z − A (kz = π)
high symmetry points. The colours indicate the dominant orbital
character of the bands. (B) Fermi surface in the tetragonal state mea-
sured at 100 K close to kz = π (hν = 56 eV). (C) Cut along the
Z − A direction (equivalent to Γ − M but at kz = π) direction
for the hole bands around the Z point for the same photon energy
(hν = 56 eV). (D) Cut along the Z − A direction for the electron
bands around the A point. Figures adapted from [26, 29].

Of the three hole bands, two exist as a C4 symmetric pair
exhibiting predominantly dxz and dyz orbital weight (labelled
h1 and h2 in Fig.2(a)) and the third is dominated by dxy orbital
character (h3). h1 and h2 would be energy degenerate at the
high symmetry point, however spin orbit coupling lifts this de-
generacy [45]. As for the van-Hove singularities around the M
point, one is a saddle point connecting bands of majority dxz
and dyz weight (vH1) and the other is a saddle point connect-
ing two dxy dominated bands (vH2). This general structure is
broadly applicable to all P4/nmm Fe-based superconductors

(e.g. Fe(Te,Se,S), LiFeAs, NaFeAs, LaFeAsO), with some
modifications for the 122 family due to the I-centering of the
lattice.
The experimentally measured Fermi surface of FeSe at 100
K (or more precisely, a map of the experimental spectral func-
tion at the chemical potential) at approximately kz = π is
shown in Fig. 2(b), revealing a two-hole pocket and two elec-
tron pocket Fermi surface. Measurements around the center of
the Brillouin zone show that both h1 and h2 cross the chem-
ical potential at 100 K, as shown in Fig. 2(c). Their band
maximas are separated by ∼20 meV due to spin-orbit cou-
pling [45–47]. At kz = 0 these bands have a maxima at ap-
proximately h2 = −13 meV and and h1 = +7 meV [46],
and at kz = π (shown in Fig. 2(c)) the bands have maxima
of approximately h2 = +5 meV and h1 = +30 meV. The
second smaller hole pocket of FeSe is thus only present at
finite kz, which highlights an important property of this sys-
tem. Even though FeSe has a “quasi-2D” structure, i.e the
energy shift of the bands as a function of kz is only on the
order of 20 meV, this energy scale is actually on the same or-
der of magnitude as the total Fermi energy of this system, and
therefore is non-negligible in quantitative descriptions of the
physical properties of FeSe. We note in passing that, due to
the small Fermi energy of this system, the electronic struc-
ture is subject to substantial temperature-dependence of the
chemical potential, and the appearance of the “Fermi surface”
changes substantially between 100 and 300 K [48], although
without any change of the symmetry.
The third dxy hole band, h3, is observed to be much flat-
ter and cross both h1 and h2 at an energy of approximately
-50 meV. In most ARPES data sets, this band has a much
lower intensity than the h1 and h2 bands, which is a conse-
quence of photoemission-based matrix element effects, which
ensures the intensity of photoelectrons originating from dxy
states with momentum near |k| = 0 will be suppressed [49].
Nevertheless, h3 can be identified most clearly near where it
hybridises with h1 and h2, and thus acquires some dxz and
dyz orbital weight as shown in Fig. 2(c).
Near the corner of the Brillouin zone, both the dxy domi-
nated electron band, connected to vH2, and the dxz/dyz elec-
tron band, connecting to vH1, are observed to cross the Fermi
level. Here the outer four-fold symmetric electron pocket is
dominated by dxy orbital character while the inner pocket is
dominated by dxz and dyz orbital weight [50]. As this is a
compensated system, the total Fermi volume of these electron
pockets should be equal to that of the hole pockets [26].
These two sets of electron bands connect to the sad-
dle points which have an energy of approximately vH1 =
−20 meV and vH2 = −40 meV at the high symmetry point.
The exact position of these stationary points, however, are
masked by the presence of self-energy interactions which give
rise to a broadening of the electronic states around the M
point. This broadening is also captured in theoretical simu-
lations involving spin and charge fluctuations [51].
The ARPES data presented in Fig. 2 is taken from our own
works [26, 29], however multiple data sets are available in


4

the literature and are all consistent with the interpretation pre-
sented here [23–25, 27, 30, 52]. Indeed, the electronic struc-
ture must be constrained by the symmetry based arguments of
Fig. 2(a) [44, 50, 53] and each of the bands observed in the
measurements can be mapped to corresponding bands calcu-
lated from ab-initio techniques such as density functional the-
ory (DFT) [23, 26, 50] of the paramagnetic tetragonal phase.
There are, however, serious quantitative issues with DFT-
based calculations, which severely limit its use in describing
the low energy properties of FeSe. First, DFT-based calcu-
lations overestimate the bandwidth of the Fe 3d-bands by a
factor of ∼3[26]. This is a generic finding across all Fe-based
superconductors [54], and derives from the fact that electronic
correlations are inadequately treated in DFT. It has been often
argued that the correlation effects are orbital-dependent and
particularly strong for the dxy orbital [26, 54, 55]. More ad-
vanced theoretical simulations, such as DFT + DMFT [56]
and QSGW + DMFT [51], have had some success in captur-
ing the global electronic structure on the eV scale [56, 57],
finding strongly incoherent spectral weight at 1-3 eV below
EF and sharp quasiparticles only in the near vicinity of EF .
However ab-initio efforts still usually overestimate the size
of the hole and electron Fermi surfaces, which are much
smaller in experiment [26, 56]. Most DFT-based simulations
additionally predict that the dxy hole band also crosses the
Fermi level, suggesting a three hole pocket and two electron
pocket Fermi surface [26, 50]. Finally, typical DFT-based cal-
culations also suggest that a stripe or staggered-stripe anti-
ferromagnetic ground state is the most stable configuration
[54, 58], when in reality FeSe remains paramagnetic (albeit
with strong antiferromagnetic fluctuations [59–61]). Current
research is attempting to resolve this discrepancy from a pure
ab-initio perspective. Wang. et. al. [61] were able to re-
produce the band structure around the Gamma point using a
a polymorphus network of local structural distortions. The
use of hybrid exchange correlation functionals and Hubbard-
Hund correlations have recently been shown to also produce a
substantial improvement on the tetragonal structure [62].
Due to the current limitations in ab-initio modelling how-
ever, a substantial amount of work has gone into devel-
oping quantitatively accurate tight binding models of FeSe
[8, 48, 50, 63, 64]. These models bypass the limitations in
our current ab-initio theories, allowing for an accurate, al-
beit phenomenological, description of the single-particle elec-
tronic structure to be defined, which we can compare with ex-
perimental measurements. Several hopping parameters sets
have been developed, which have been obtained by directly
comparing the numerical band dispersion with experimental
ARPES data in the tetragonal state [18, 48, 63, 64]. These
models have been shown to reproduce the single-particle elec-
tronic properties of tetragonal FeSe much better than conven-
tional DFT-based approaches [48, 50, 63]. In particular these
models accurately capture the small Fermi energy of FeSe,
which has been shown to lead to strong chemical potential
renormalising effects as a function of temperature and nematic
ordering [30, 48, 65–67]. By construction, such models allow

for a quantitative description of the band positions of the hole
and electron bands such that a comparison of the electronic
structure in the nematic state can take place.

III. EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FOR A MISSING
ELECTRON POCKET IN THE NEMATIC STATE

We now focus on the electronic structure in the nematic
state.
Here experimental measurements encounter a major
challenge. The nematic state is accompanied by a tetragonal
to orthorhombic structural transition, at which point multiple
orthorhombic domains form in the crystal. It has been identi-
fied that these domains are typically on the order of 1-5 µm in
size [38, 68–70], which is much smaller than the cross section
of the photon beam used in most high resolution synchrotron-
based ARPES measurements (> 50µm [71]), as sketched in
Fig. 3(a). Most of the initial photoemission data of FeSe in the
nematic phase was collected on “twinned” crystals. In such
measurements, the band dispersion measured along the ex-
perimental kx axis contains contributions from domains with
the orthorhombic a axis both along, or perpendicular to, this
direction, i.e. one measures a superposition of the spectral
function arising from both domains. This creates an apparent
C4 symmetry in the measurements even at low temperatures
(in the sense that the measured spectra are invariant under 90
degree rotation of the sample; the as-measured spectra are not
generally fourfold-symmetric due to the ARPES matrix ele-
ments [72, 73]). This can lead to ambiguity about which band
arises from which domain.

ARPES measurements on twinned crystals

Multiple ARPES measurements on twinned crystals of
FeSe have been reported [16, 17, 23–29, 52, 65, 74] and have
been extensively reviewed [1, 10, 30, 75]. We present a rep-
resentative Fermi surface obtained from a twinned crystal in
Fig. 3(b) from Ref. [29]. The hole pockets appear as two
overlapping ellipses. Meanwhile, at the corner of the Bril-
louin zone, measurements reveal two electron pockets, which
have been pinched in to produce what looks like two overlap-
ping “peanuts”.
The challenge now lies in identifying which of these pock-
ets, comes from which domain. The two hole pockets can be
easily understood as one ellipse from each orthorhombic do-
main. Measurements of the band dispersion around the hole
pocket reveal that the inner hole band (h2) undergoes a Lif-
shitz transition as a function of temperature and resides below
the Fermi level at 10 K, whilst the outer hole band (h1) elon-
gates into an elliptical shape. As all three hole bands can be
tracked as a function of temperature from the tetragonal to
nematic state, there is little ambiguity about the shape of the
hole pocket Fermi surface at low temperatures. However, it
is not possible to identify the orientation of the elliptical hole
pocket from a single domain, i.e to identify whether it elon-


5

gates along the orthorhombic a or b axis simply from these
twinned measurements.
For the electron pocket, however, the understanding was
less clear, and historically several distinct band structures have
been interpreted from nearly identical data sets [16, 17, 26,
27, 29]. As can be seen in Fig. 3(c), two electron pockets
can be observed which look like overlapping “peanuts” in the
twinned data. As the tetragonal state also exhibits two elec-
tron pockets, this may not appear that surprising. Indeed one
interpretation was that the two oval shaped electron pockets
in the tetragonal state simply pinched in at the sides, due to
raising the binding energy of vH1 [23, 29]. In other words,
the electron pockets could retain approximate fourfold sym-
metry around the M point, and the pockets from each domain
simply overlapped in twinned data sets [17]. However, other
interpretations, particularly those attempting to understand the
nematic band shifts from theoretical grounds, believed that
the nematic state should have two differently shaped elec-
tron pockets [26, 27]. It was also equally plausible, exper-
imentally at least, that only one electron pocket existed per
domain [16, 25, 56]. Distinguishing between these scenarios
was particularly challenging due to the broadness of the spec-
tral weight around the M point in the tetragonal state (see Fig.
2(d)), which made a precise interpretation of the temperature
evolution of the two van-Hove singularities ambiguous.

ARPES measurements on detwinned crystals

Compared to the measurements on twinned data, a much
more preferable method to study the Fermi surface of FeSe
would be to experimentally overcome the limitation imposed
by these orthorhombic domains, and directly measure the
electronic structure from a single crystallographic orientation.
There are two strategies to overcome the twinning issue faced
by ARPES measurements. Either 1) generate a sample with
macroscopic ordering of the orthorhombic domains on length
scales larger than the photon beam cross section, or 2) make
the photon beam much smaller than the size of an orthorhom-
bic domain. It has been known from earlier work on the 122
family of Fe-based superconductors that upon the application
of “uniaxial” strain along the Fe-Fe direction, it becomes en-
ergetically favourable for a majority of the orthorhombic do-
mains to align along that axis [76]. While the resulting do-
main population is unlikely to be 100% pure, measurements
on strained, or “detwinned”, samples, as sketched in Fig. 3(d),
allows one to distinguish between the intense spectral weight
arising from the majority domain and the weak spectral weight
arising from the 90 degree rotated minority domain.
The first ARPES measurements on uniaxial strained sam-
ples of FeSe were performed in 2014 by Shimojima et. al.
[25], where it was shown that the single hole pocket was
elongated along the ky axis. Later, in 2017, Watson et. al.
[31] was additionally able to resolve the detail of the electron
pockets, as shown in Fig. 3(e). These measurements on de-
twinned crystals confirmed that the Fermi surface consisted

of one elliptical hole-pocket, as expected from interpretation
of the twinned measurements, but additionally revealed only
one electron-pocket around the M point. This is shown in
Fig. 3(f), where the majority of the spectral weight intensity
now comes from one domain, and only a weak residual inten-
sity comes from the minority domain. Unlike in the tetrag-
onal state, at low temperatures, the electronic band structure
around the M point produces sharp quasiparticle bands, a sad-
dle point can be observed at −5 meV, which is electron like
along the minor length of the electron pocket (as shown in Fig
3(g)), but hole-like when rotated by 90 degrees (Fig. 3(j)).
Additionally, along the major length of the electron pocket, a
deeper electron band and saddle point at ∼ −60 meV can be
observed that is dominated by dxy orbital weight. This gap
between the upper and lower saddle points, is approximately
50 meV, and has been previously quoted as a “nematic energy
scale” [26, 32, 36]. However, as we will discuss in the theoret-
ical section below, the exact energy scale of nematic shifts and
splittings is slightly more complex and requires a linear com-
bination of order parameters of different energy scales [64].
This finding of only a single electron pocket at the Fermi
level was not the expected theoretical result [63], but never-
theless has now been reproduced by Yi et. al [32] (Fig. 3(h,k))
and Huh et. al. [33] (Fig. 3(i,l)). Further measurements on
sulphur doped FeSe1−xSx crystals under uniaxial strain by
Cai et. al. [34, 35] have also reported very similar Fermi sur-
faces.

Temperature dependent detwinned ARPES measurements

A natural question when studying the evolution of the elec-
tronic structure of FeSe from the tetragonal to nematic state is
to ask how do ARPES measurements evolve as a function of
temperature. Many data sets on twinned samples exist (as dis-
cussed e.g by Coldea and Watson [30]), and recently Yi et. al.
and [32], Huh et. al. [33] have presented temperature depen-
dent measurements on detwinned samples of FeSe. Similarly
Cai et. al. [35] have reported temperature dependent mea-
surements on detwinned samples of 9% doped FeSe1−xSx.
In twinnned crystals, the temperature dependence of the
hole bands leaves little room for ambiguity, and can be neatly
tracked as a function of temperature [56]. However the bands
around the M point are a bit more ambiguous, due to the broad
spectral feature of the M point in the tetragonal state (as shown
in Fig. 2(d)). Whilst this broad spectral feature is observed to
split as a function of temperature, precisely tracking the vHs
from high to low temperatures requires a degree of interpreta-
tion and peak fitting, with multiple papers suggesting different
evolution of the spectral weight [23, 27, 29, 55, 77].
Unfortunately, the additional complication of uniaxial
strain in detwinned measurements makes temperature depen-
dent analysis technically even more challenging. By chang-
ing the temperature of your system, you inevitably alter the
amount of strain applied to the sample due to thermal ex-
pansion of the rig, which in turn may alter the relative pop-


6

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1st domain

2nd domain

1
1.2
1.4

−0.2

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

a

strain

i

 kY  (Å−1)

 kX (Å−1)

1st domain

2nd domain

1
1.2
1.4

−0.2

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2 i

 kY  (Å−1)

 kX (Å−1)

Watson et. al. (2017)
Huh et. al. (2020)

A
B
C

D
E
F

G
H
I

J
K
L

Yi et. al. (2019)

 kY  (Å−1)
 kY  (Å−1)

1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
 kX (Å−1)

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
 kX (Å−1)

FIG. 3. Summary of ARPES measurements on detwinned crystals of FeSe (A) sketch of a photoemission setup on a twinned crystal,
showing equal coverage of both red and blue orthorhombic domains. (B) Fermi surface measured from a measurement on a twinned crystal
(hν=56 eV). Taken from Watson et. al. [31] (C) Close up of the electron pocket near the A point from Watson et. al. [29] (hν=56 eV).
(D-F) Equivalent sketch and measurement for a detwinned crystal of FeSe, which probes a majority of orthorhombic domains aligned in one
direction. (G) Band dispersion of a detwinned crystal centered at the electron pocket. The insert shows the band path, from Watson et. al.
[31]. h) Second derivative band dispersions of a detwinned crystal along the same path as (G) but extended from Z to A, taken from Yi. et. al.
[32]. i) Band dispersion of a detwinned crystal along the same path as (G) from Huh. et. al. [33]. (J-L) Equivalent measurements but taken
along the length of the electron pocket. (H,K) reproduced from Ref. [32] under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
(I,J) reproduced from Ref. [33] under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.


7

ulation of orthorhombic domains you are probing, and more-
over the energetics of domain formation may be temperature-
dependent.
Cai et. al. [35], observed that as a function of decreasing
temperature, the spectral weight of the second electron pocket
simply decreases, which could be explained as a change in or-
thorhombic domain populations originating from a Fermi sur-
face consisting of just one electron pocket per domain. How-
ever, Cai et. al. argue that this is not the case and that the
spectral weight loss is intrinsic to the nematic state [35].
On the other hand, Yi et. al. [32] and Huh. et. al. [33] argue
that they observe a band shifting above the Fermi level in their
temperature dependent measurements. A temperature band
shift would be independent of orthorhombic domain popula-
tion, however it should also have been detected within twinned
ARPES measurements, which so far has not been reported.
We conclude by noting that temperature-dependent ARPES
measurements of the electron pocket are very challenging to
perform, firstly because of the issue with orthorhombic do-
mains, and secondly due to the intrinsic broadness of the
van hove singularities measured by ARPES. One approach to
overcome this limitation would be to systematically study the
evolution of the low temperature electronic structure across
the series of isoelectronic sulphur substituted FeSe1−xSx
crystals, extending the existing measurements on twinned
samples [52, 74]. This will require future experimental in-
vestigation.

NanoARPES

There are experimental complications with performing
ARPES measurements on uniaxially strained crystals, which
may leave doubt as to the validity of the conclusions presented
above. First, it is hard to fully exclude if the application of uni-
axial strain has actually perturbed the underlying electronic
structure of the crystal you are measuring. For example in the
tetragonal material Sr2RuO4, uniaxial strain on the order of
1% shifts the position of the vHs by nearly 20 meV [79]. In
order to fully support the conclusions from these ARPES mea-
surements on detwinned crystals, complementary techniques
must be employed and their results compared. To this end,
nanoARPES has also been performed on crystals of FeSe. In
these technically demanding measurements, the photon beam
is focused to sub-micrometer spatial resolution using a focus-
ing optic close to the sample [80]. The reduction of the spot
size comes at the cost of dramatically reducing the photon
flux, and thus the energy and angular resolutions are typically
relaxed (compared to the earlier high-resolution results pre-
sented) in order to have a reasonable signal of photoelectrons.
Nevertheless, the technique has been improved over the past
10 years to allow for energy resolution better than 20 meV
[81]. This sub-micrometer spot size is smaller than a single
orthorhombic domain, allowing for a spatial map of the sam-
ple from which the two orthorhombic domains can be distin-
guished by analysing their differing ARPES spectra, shown

as red and blue stripes in Fig. 4(a,b). Measurements of the
Fermi surface and band dispersion around the electron pocket
in both domains (Fig. 4(c-f)) reveal an electronic structure
totally consistent with that extracted from the ARPES mea-
surements under uniaxial strain. In summary, the nanoARPES
results fully support the conclusion of a Fermi surface in the
nematic state consisting of a single hole pocket and a single
electron pocket.

STM measurements

An entirely independent method to study the momentum
resolved electronic structure within a single domain is to use
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). STM utilises quantum
tunnelling, between the surface of a material and an atomi-
cally sharp tip, to study the electronic structure on the sub-
nanometer scale. Information about the electronic structure
can then be extracted in two ways. The first is by studying
the differential conductance (dI/dV ) to obtain a quantity pro-
portional to the local density of states of the system. The sec-
ond is to measure quasiparticle interference (QPI), to measure
the perturbations to the local density of states generated by
the presence of defects such as impurities or atomic vacan-
cies. The wavelength associated with this perturbation con-
tains direct information about the allowed momentum depen-
dent scattering vectors associated with an electronic structure
at a constant energy via q = k − k′.
Multiple STM measurements have been reported for FeSe,
and information regarding the nematic [12, 39, 41] and su-
perconducting state [12, 39, 40, 82] have been determined,
tetragonal state information has also been obtained from stud-
ies of isoelectronic sulphur doped crystals [40]. These mea-
surements all contain a plethora of information regarding the
local structure of the surface of FeSe, as well as information
on defects [83, 84]. Here, however, we focus on what the
STM measurements can tell us about the low energy elec-
tronic structure in the nematic state, and whether this is con-
sistent with the ARPES measurements discussed above. Al-
though measuring QPI is an indirect method to measuring the
electronic structure of a material, it is particularly powerful
in determining band minimas and maximas, especially above
the Fermi level, as well identifying whether bands have hole
or electron scattering characteristics within a certain energy
range.
The scattering vector vs energy dispersion along the qx and
qy directions, taken from Ref.
[40], are presented in Fig.

4(h,i). In agreement with other data sets [39, 41], several hole-
like scattering vectors can be observed predominately along
the qx axis, with a narrower hole-like dispersion along the qy
direction. Also along the qy axis, one very clear electron-
like scattering vector can be detected, which has a minima at
∼ −5 meV, and has been identified as a scattering vector that
connects the dyz parts of the electron pocket in FeSe (Fig.
4(g) [39–41, 78]. No corresponding electron-like dispersion
can be observed along the qx direction, which should be the


8

A
b

-0.5
0
0.5
1

-0.5
0
0.5
1

0.2

0

-0.2

1
1.2
1.4

1
1.2
1.4

0.2

0

-0.2

 k   (Å-1)
X

 k  (Å-1)
Y

k  (Å-1)
X

k  (Å-1)
Y

 k   (Å-1)
Y

k  (Å-1)
Y

F
E-E  (eV)

-0.15

-0.05

E-E   (eV)

-0.15

-0.05

F F

0    

-0.1 

-0.1 

0    

B

C
D

E
F

k

-40

-20

0

20

40

-40

-20

0

20

40

Energy (meV)

L

 0.1
-0.1
0.0

0

50

-50

25

-25

Energy (meV)

 0.1
-0.1
0.0
qx  (Å-1) 
qy  (Å-1) 

H
I

K
J

G

FIG. 4. Electronic structure within a single domain without the application of uniaxial strain. (A) Sketch of a NanoARPES measurement,
where the beam is focused to have a cross section < 1µm. (B) Experimental spatial map of FeSe where the colour corresponds to the
orthorhombic domains of FeSe, reproduced from Ref. [38]. (C,D) Fermi surface around the electron pocket (hν = 56 eV, 30 K) and Ay − Z
cut taken within a single orthorhombic domain [38]. (E,F) Fermi surface around the electron pocket and Ay − Z cut taken in an adjacent
orthorhombic domain [38]. (G) Sketch of the Fermi surface scattering vectors inferred from STM measurements, as suggested by Ref. [40].
(H,I) STM measurements of the QPI scattering dispersions as a function of energy along the qx and qy high symmetry axes respectively,
reproduced from Ref. [40]. (J,K) Simulated QPI scattering dispersion from a model of FeSe which described the band structure shown in Fig.
3, from Ref. [78]. (G-I) are reproduced under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

case in a two electron pocket scenario where all bands scatter
equally. This was therefore interpreted as further evidence,
from an independent technique to ARPES, that the Fermi sur-
face of FeSe only consists of one hole pocket and one electron
pocket, as sketched in Fig. 4(g).

We note that due to the indirect nature of QPI measure-
ments, there is a degree of interpretation and uncertainty about
the assignment of the electronic states and often it is neces-
sary to directly simulate the QPI dispersion from a theoretical
assumption of the electronic structure and compare the agree-
ment. Due to the intrinsic broadness of the experimentally
measured scattering vectors, this can lead to differing conclu-
sions based on initial assumptions. For example, Kostin et. al.
[41], assuming that two electron pockets must be present at the
Fermi level, interpreted a weak spectral feature as evidence for
a second electron pocket, with a greatly reduced scattering in-
tensity. Whereas Rhodes et. al. [78], assuming that only one

electron pocket was present at the Fermi level, interpreted this
weak feature as an artifact of the Feenstra function, used in
the experimental processing [85]. Importantly however, both
theoretical simulations agree that a Fermi surface consisting
of one hole pocket and two electron pockets can not indepen-
dently reproduce the observed data without some additional
form of anisotropy, which implies that ARPES and STM are
probing the same underlying electronic structure. We present
the numerical simulations from Ref. [78] in Fig. 4(j,k).

As an aside, it is interesting to note that the hole band max-
ima in 4(h) extends to +25 meV [40]. It is known from ARPES
that only one hole-like scattering vector at this energy can ex-
ist, and specifically must be generated by the kz = π states
[30].
This reveals that QPI measurements are sensitive to
states with different kz. From arguments about the group ve-
locity of electrons scattering off of defects [86, 87], and the
short range nature of quantum tunneling, it actually implies


9

that QPI measurements will exhibit a kz-selectivity rule [78],
such that all stationary points along the kz axis will contribute
to scattering vectors that will be detected by STM measure-
ments, this has recently been realised in the fully 3D system,
PbS [88].

Points of contention

While we have so far presented a unified picture of the elec-
tronic structure of FeSe and have focused on points where
broad agreement is found in the recent literature, historically
there have been many points of disagreement surrounding the
identification of bands and the nature of the Fermi surface,
and there remain some points of contention.
Regarding the hole pockets, an outlying report is a recent
claim from laser-ARPES measurements that there is addi-
tional splitting, most prominently resulting in two hole pock-
ets at the Fermi level instead of one [89]. The implication is
that the Kramers degeneracy of the bands is lifted, i.e. that ei-
ther time-reversal or inversion symmetry is broken. However,
it is worth noting that at low photon energies used the kz is not
well-defined as the final states are not free electron-like, and
the two Fermi contours identified appear to be fairly close to
the known Fermi contours at kz = 0 and kz = π. Moreover,
synchrotron-ARPES measurements with equally high energy
resolution and better angular resolution (due to better defini-
tion of kz) do not identify any additional splitting either in
the Γ or Z planes [16], and neither has any comparable split-
ting been observed for the electron pockets. Finally, there
is no supporting evidence for time-reversal symmetry break-
ing from other techniques. Thus it remains our view that the
Kramers degeneracy holds for all states and that there is only
one hole pocket crossing EF, which is significantly warped
along the kz axis.
Regarding the electron pockets, while several groups have
now coalesced around the one electron pocket scenario, it
has previously been claimed that the ARPES data on twinned
crystals is consistent with four features in the EDC at the M
point [23] such that there are two electron pockets per domain,
with each domain contributing a pair of crossed peanuts with
slightly differing shapes [17]. This scenario is perhaps the
most natural, as it is based on DFT predictions, and comes
down to somewhat technical questions of whether asymmet-
ric lineshapes at the M point contain one or two peaks, and
whether the proposed small splittings can be resolved. Some
of this groups data on twinned samples does indeed seem to
show a splitting, which at face value would support their sce-
nario. However, neither our group nor other groups have ob-
served these claimed features and peak splittings in compara-
ble data on twinned samples. Moreover, the detwinned data
shows a complete absence of any spectral weight aside from
the peanut along the a direction, in multiple experimental ge-
ometries, which cannot easily be explained away by matrix
element effects in ARPES (and similarly in QPI). We encour-
age all groups to continue to push for higher resolution data

which could finally settle the controversy, especially on de-
twinned samples.

IV.THEORETICAL EXPLANATIONS FOR THE MISSING
ELECTRON POCKET

As we have discussed, the low energy electronic structure
of the tetragonal state of FeSe can be qualitatively understood
just from symmetry based arguments regarding the crystal
structure and the dxz, dyz and dxy orbitals of the Fe atoms.
This band structure can be explained both from the framework
of tight-binding modelling [8, 48, 50, 63] as well as DFT-
based simulations. All of this implies that, although a true
quantitative explanation describing the renormalisation of the
band structure from correlation effects may be missing, our
understanding of the single-particle physics is complete.
Within the nematic state, however, this is not the case.
Following the previous logic, it would be assumed that the
orthorhombic distortion produces a negligible change to the
electronic structure, such that two hole pockets and two elec-
tron pockets should be present in the nematic state, which as
the experimental data has revealed is clearly not the case. It
is for this reason that the nematic state is believed to be of
electronic or magnetic origin, yet the microscopic details still
remain unclear. To address this, there has been a great deal
of focus on trying to model how the nematic state evolves the
electronic structure of a tetragonal-based model of FeSe, such
as that shown in Fig. 5(a-c) originally presented in Ref. [64].
Specifically, theoretical research has attempted to develop a
nematic order parameter which

• Lowers the symmetry from C4 to C2 whilst still pre-
serving mirror symmetry.

• Generates an elliptical hole pocket dominated by dxz
orbital weight.

• Removes one of the two electron pockets from the
Fermi surface.

Historically, the first attempt to describe such a mechanism
assumed that the C4 symmetry breaking was governed by a
lifting of the energy degeneracy of the dxz and dyz orbitals
[90].

Φ1(nxz − nyz),
(1)

where nxz/yz = c†
A,xz/yzcA,xz/yz + c†
B,xz/yzcB,xz/yz is
the number operator for the xz or yz orbital respectively on
atom A and B in a two atom unit cell model of FeSe, and Φ1
is a scalar value used to describe the magnitude of the nematic
order, which can in principle be fit to experiment.
This term, referred to in the literature as ferro-orbital order-
ing, is the simplest form of C4 symmetry breaking possible
in this system. It acts in a momentum independent fashion to


10

A
40

0

-40

-80

-120

Energy (meV)

B
C

-0.4

40

0

-40

-80

-120

Energy (meV)

- .0 2
0
.0 2
0.4 -0.4
- .0 2
0
.0 2
0.4

G
H
I

D
E
F

+
+

-0.4
- .0 2
0
.0 2
0.4 -0.4
- .0 2
0
.0 2
0.4

Tetragonal

FIG. 5. Limitations of dxz/dyz nematic ordering and origin of the missing electron pocket problem. (A,B,C) Fermi surface and band
dispersions around the Z and A point, for a tetragonal state model of the electronic structure from ref. [64] in quantitative agreement with
ARPES measurements. (D,E,F) The individual effect of the three symmetry breaking dxz/yz nematic order terms on the Fermi surface of the
tetragonal state model. (D) Ferro orbital order (Φ1 = 26 meV) (E) d-wave bond order (Φ2 = −26 meV) (F) Extended s-wave bond order
(Φ3=15 meV). (G,H,I) Fermi surface and band dispersions around the Z and A point, using a combination of Φ1, Φ2 and Φ3 as is often used
in the literature. No matter what linear combination of these order parameters are used, a Fermi surface in agreement with the experimental
data can not be produced.

raise the binding energy of the dxz bands and lower the bind-
ing energy of the dyz band, similar to a Jahn-teller distortion
[91]. In this scenario, the electronic structure would evolve to
produce a Fermi surface as shown in Fig 5(d), which despite
producing the correct elliptical hole pocket, does not generate
the one-electron-pocket Fermi surface determined from exper-
iment.
Following the train of thought that the phenomenology of
the nematic state may be captured by a degeneracy breaking
of the dxz and dyz states, it was also noted that there are two
additional B1g symmetry breaking terms that can be defined
and are equally valid in the nematic state [53, 63]

Φ2(n′
xz + n′
yz)(cos(kx) − cos(ky))
(2)

Φ3(n′
xz − n′
yz)(cos(kx) + cos(ky))
(3)

Here, n′
xz/yz = c†
A,xz/yzcB,xz/yz + c†
B,xz/yzcA,xz/yz de-
scribes a hopping from an xz or yz orbital on atom A (B)
to a xz or yz orbital on atom B (A). These two terms, re-
ferred to as d-wave nematic bond order (Φ2) and extended-s
wave bond order (Φ3) respectively, in combination with the
ferro orbital order (Φ1) are the only possible nematic order
parameters that can be defined for the dxz and dyz orbitals up
to nearest neighbour hopping [53], and have been extensively
used in previous theoretical descriptions of the nematic state
of FeSe [12, 15, 16, 20, 21, 29, 41, 77, 78, 92–99]. The in-
dividual consequences of these order parameters are shown in
Fig. 5(e) and 5(f).


11

However, despite this vast amount of literature assuming
these three dxz/dyz nematic order parameters as the starting
point for theoretical analysis, there lies one big problem. No
matter what values of Φ1, Φ2 and Φ3 are chosen, a Fermi sur-
face consisting of one hole pocket and a single electron pocket
can not be produced, at least not starting from a quantitatively
accurate ARPES-based model of FeSe in the tetragonal state
[64]. The best attempts to describe the ARPES data within
this limitation result in a Fermi surface consisting of the cor-
rect elliptical hole pocket, a first electron pocket, of correct
shape and size, and a second large electron pocket, dominated
by dxy orbital character, as shown in Fig 5(g-i).
There is no experimental evidence for this large second
electron pocket in the nematic state, and this discrepancy be-
tween theory and experiment has posed a major challenge for
our theoretical understanding of nematicity. This is the cen-
tral origin of the missing electron pocket problem. It has now
become clear that a theory of nematicity only involving the
physics captured in Eq. (1)-(3), i.e nematicity derived solely
from dxz and dyz orbital ordering, is insufficient to reproduce
our experimental measurements, and additional explanations
for this discrepancy have had to be developed.

Orbital selective quasiparticle weights

The earliest attempt to explain this discrepancy came from
attempts to understand local spin fluctuations in tetrago-
nal FeSe, such as those incorporated by DFT + dynamic
mean field theory (DMFT). Within this framework it has
been shown that the self-consistently determined quasiparti-
cle weight (Z) of the dxy orbital was significantly smaller than
the quasiparticle weight of the dxz/yz orbitals [51, 54, 100],
approximately half. As the spectral function intensity mea-
sured by ARPES is directly proportional to the quasiparti-
cle weight, the contribution of dxy dominated bands should
be significantly reduced, compared to the dxz and dyz domi-
nated bands in ARPES measurements. It was thus argued that
ARPES measurements may not be able to observe the dxy or-
bital, and thus would not detect the second dxy dominated
electron pocket in the nematic state, e.g in Ref. [77], shown
in Fig 6(a,b).
This argument however has not been supported by exper-
imental measurements. Both in the tetragonal and nematic
state, bands of dxy orbital character have been identified, par-
ticularly around the M point [30]. And although it is true
that the dxy orbital appears to exhibit a larger effective mass
renormalisation than the dxz and dyz orbitals [26], this extra
renormalisation appears to not be enough to mask dxy spectral
weight from ARPES-based measurements.
A similar, more phenomenological, approach was later em-
ployed by Kreisel et. al. [18] and popularised by Sprau et.
al. [12]. Here the values of the nematic order parameters
(Φ1 −Φ3) were adjusted such that two similar shaped electron
pockets were generated (Fig. 6(d)), one dominated by dxz or-
bital weight and one dominated by dyz orbital weight, with the

tips retaining significant dxy orbital character. Specifically,
starting from an ARPES-based tetragonal model of FeSe [18]
values of Φ1 = 9.6 meV, Φ2 = −8.9 meV and Φ3 = 0 meV
were used. It was then assumed that the nematic state could
exhibit a significant reduction in the dxz quasiparticle weight
compared to the dyz weight and, following the same argument
as before, hidden from ARPES measurements of the spectral
function. This is shown in Fig. 6(e). Following this logic,
Sprau et. al. attempted to determine which values of Z by
fitting them to experimental measurements of the angular de-
pendence of the superconducting gap (discussed in Section 5)
and the quasiparticle weight values chosen were Zxy = 0.1
Zxz =0.2 and Zyz =0.8, which in a later study was refined
to Zxy = 0.073, Zxz = 0.16 and Zyz = 0.86 [41]. In or-
der to reproduce experimental data, it was also necessary to
strongly suppress the quasiparticle weight of the dxy orbital,
which as a consequence effectively fully suppressed one of
the two electron pockets at the Fermi level. Slave-spin cal-
culations, starting from a DFT-based tight binding model and
varying the contributions of Φ1−Φ3 have also been performed
and found that similar anisotropic ratios of the quasiparticle
weights can be obtained [21], as shown in Fig. 6(c). A review
of the slave-spin approach can be found in Ref. [94].

This formalism of ”orbital selective quasiparticle weights”,
i.e suppressing the contribution of electronic states with dxz
and dxy orbital character in the nematic state, has received the
most traction out of the potential theories of the missing elec-
tron pocket of FeSe. It has been claimed to be in agreement
with STM and QPI measurements of the electronic structure
[41], the superconducting gap properties [12], the spin sus-
ceptibility measured by inelastic neutron scattering [60], µSR
measurements of spin relaxations [97] and thermodynamic
based-measurements [95]. A recent review on the topic can
be found in Ref. [1].

In our view, however, the success of this approach is due
to accurately generating a Fermi surface of FeSe that has the
correct one hole pocket and one electron pocket structure, and
not necessarily due to the underlying assumptions behind the
ansatz of highly anisotropic quasiparticle weights. Indeed, a
change in spectral weight, on the order of magnitude as pro-
posed by this theory, is something that should be directly ob-
servable with ARPES based measurements. In the tetrago-
nal state, the quasiparticle weight of the dxz and dyz orbitals
must be equivalent by symmetry, and thus, under this assump-
tion, there would be a strong sudden suppression of the dxz
dominated bands upon entering the nematic state. This is not
what is observed in experimental measurements, bands of dxz
dominated weight are detected at all temperatures within the
nematic state, with no obvious reduction to the spectral inten-
sity [14–17, 27, 37]. Additionally, alternate explanations of
the STM data and superconducting gap data, that do not rely
on the assumption of orbital-selective quasiparticle weights,
have been presented [16, 19, 40, 78].


12

E-type order parameters

More recent attempts to explain the missing electron pocket
have gone back to studying the single-particle physics of
FeSe. A recent DFT + U calculation by Long et. al. [101],
involving symmetry preconditioned wavefunctions, found a
lower energy configuration of FeSe by breaking the E sym-
metry via a multipole nematic order, as shown in Fig 6(f).
This has been further studied by Yamada et.
al.
[102].
This symmetry breaking essentially generates a tetragonal to
monolclinic distortion by generating an overlap between a dxy
orbital and either dxz or dyz orbital, which as a bi-product
also breaks C4 symmetry. This consequentially generates a
hybridisation between the dxy dominated electron band and
either the dxz or dyz dominated electron band and was shown
to produce a one-electron pocket Fermi surface within a cer-
tain parameter regime.
A stable E-type nematic order parameter was equally iden-
tified, within a tight-binding framework using parameters ex-
tracted from LDA-based calculations, by Steffensen et. al.
[103]. Here it was shown that including nearest-neighbour
Coloumbic repulsion, the self consistently calculated mean-
field nematic order parameter that had the largest magnitude
was an inter-orbital term hybridising the dxz and dxy orbitals
(or dyz and dxy). This order parameter was equally able to
generate a one-electron pocket Fermi surface, via a similar hy-
bridisation mechanism as the DFT-based calculation as shown
in Fig. 6(g,h).
This appears to suggest that long-range Coulomb repulsion
can stabilise a C4 symmetry breaking ground state in FeSe.
However, in this scenario, the E-type order parameter would
also reduce the crystal symmetry of FeSe from tetragonal to
monoclinic.
Currently, the experimental evidence suggest-
ing a tetragonal to monoclinic structural distortion in FeSe is
lacking. However, upon > 85% Te doping of the Se sites,
a tetragonal to monoclinic transition has been realised [104].
This could hint that the known monoclinic structure of FeTe
is actually stabilised by electron interactions [105], however
whether this mechanism can describe the physics of FeSe will
require further experimental investigation.

non-local dxy nematic order parameter

When considering the relevant dxz, dyz and dxy orbitals of
tetragonal FeSe within a tight binding framework, there are
only four order parameters that can be defined which break
the B1g rotational symmetry of the material within a single
unit cell. The first three, described in Eq. (1) - (3), involve
breaking the degeneracy of the dxz and dyz orbitals. How-
ever, a fourth equally valid order parameter involving the dxy
orbital can also be defined as,

Φ4(n′
xy)(cos(kx) − cos(ky)).
(4)

This term acts as a hopping anisotropy for nearest neigh-
bour dxy orbitals, in a similar manner as (2) for the dxz and
dyz orbitals. It was initially defined by Fernandes et. al. [53],
however in subsequent works it was assumed that this dxy ne-
matic term would be much smaller, or negligible, compared
to Eq. (1) - (3) [53]. Renormalisation group theory [106–108]
additionally found, that whilst Eq. (4) was symmetry allowed,
nematic symmetry breaking only had stable RG flow in either
the dxz/dyz channel or the dxy channel, implying that finite
Φ1 − Φ3 and Φ4 would not both be present simultaneously
[106]. However a weakly unstable trajectory suggested that
this may not be the case [107].
In Ref. [64] Rhodes et. al. looked at the qualitative ef-
fect Φ4 has on the electronic structure. They showed that a
one-electron pocket Fermi surface could be generated from a
ARPES-based tight binding model of FeSe solely using the
Φ4 term, as shown in Fig. 6(i). It was shown that Φ4 has the
effect of breaking the degeneracy of the dxy vHs (vH2 in Fig.
2(a)), which if made large enough (∼50 meV) would induce
a Lifshitz transition of the dxy band, and thus reduce the total
number of electron pockets crossing the Fermi level to one.
This is shown in Fig. 6(k). in combination with Φ1 to Φ3, the
addition of Φ4 made it possible to generate a Fermi surface in
agreement with the ARPES measurements, as shown in Fig.
6(j). A recent study has also found this order to be consistent
with specific heat measurements [109].
However, in order to get quantitative agreement with the
Fermi surface and low-energy electronic structure using Eq.
(1) - (4), it was observed that the the splitting of the dxy van-
Hove singularity must be asymmetric. Specifically, ARPES
measurements as a function of temperature find that the lower
part of the dxy vHs around the M point remains approximately
at the same energy [27, 29, 32]. This is not captured by the
Φ4 term that assumes a symmetric splitting of the bands. To
account for this, Rhodes et. al. [64] included a dxy-specific
Hartree shift, a constant energy shift of the dxy orbital at the
M point, that although allowed by symmetry, did not have
an obvious origin. Additionally, in order to generate a Lif-
shitz transition of the electron pocket, and obtain quantita-
tive agreement with experimental data as a function of tem-
perature both dxy terms, Φ4 and the Hartree shift, had to be
significantly larger than the the dxz/dyz terms (Φ1 − Φ3).
Specifically, in order to reproduce the ARPES measurements
Φ1+Φ3 = 15 meV, Φ1+Φ2 = −26 meV and Φ4 = ∆Hartree
= 45 meV [64]. It is also worth noting that the mean-field
analysis by Steffensen et. al. [103] equally found that the Φ4
nematic order parameter should be finite, but found it to be of
approximately equal magnitude as Φ1-Φ3 rather than twice as
large, as suggested by Rhodes et. al. [64].

Importance of the dxy orbital in theories of nematicity

Each theory proposed to describe the low-energy electronic
structure of the nematic state of FeSe has it’s relative strengths
and weaknesses. Nevertheless a common theme in these dif-


13

A

B

Christensen 
et. al. (2020)
C Yu et. al. (2018)
F
Long et. al. (2020)
G Steffensen et. al. (2021)

H
Steffensen et. al. (2021)
D

Kreisel et. al. (2017)

E

I
Rhodes et. al. (2021)

10
30
90
110
50
70
Temperature (K)

-20

-60

0

-40

20

Energy (meV)

xz
yz
xy

lK
Rhodes et. al. (2021)
J
Rhodes et. al. (2021)

+

+
+

FIG. 6. Theoretical attempts to resolve the missing electron pocket problem. (A) Fermi surface of the electron pockets in the nematic state
proposed by Christensen et. al. [77]. The spectral function is argued to have an increased decoherence of dxy weight, which is argued would
not be observed by experiment and is simulated in (B). (C) Slave-spin calculations from Yu et. al. [21], revealing the possibility of highly
anisotropic quasiparticle weights with local Coulomb repulsion. (D,E) Spectral function of the 1-Fe unit cell tight binding model from Kreisel
et. al. [18], with and without orbital-selective quasiparticle weights, highlighting the possible suppression of the second electron pocket
via incoherent dxz and dxy spectral weight. f) Band dispersion of FeSe obtained from a DFT+U calculation with symmetry preconditioned
wavefunctions from Long et. al. [101], highlighting the band hybridisation obtained if an E-type nematic order parameter is considered. (G)
Fermi surface of the 1-Fe unit cell model from Steffensen et. al. [103] taking into account a self consistently obtained E-type nematic order
parameter. (H) Band dispersion from the model used by Steffensen et. al.[103] showing a band hybridisation of the dxz (red) and dxy (blue)
bands around the Y point (1-Fe unit cell), gapping out the second electron pocket. (I) Fermi surface obtained from the 2-Fe unit cell tetragonal
model from Fig. 5(a) assuming dominant dxy nematic ordering, as suggested by Rhodes et. al.[64]. (J) Equivalent Fermi surface including all
four symmetry allowed nematic order parameters of FeSe and a symmetry allowed Hartree shift. (L) Mean-field temperature evolution of the
electronic states at the high symmetry M point, highlighting a Lifshitz transition of the dxy band and removal of the second electron pocket as
proposed by Rhodes. et. al. [64]. (A,B) Reproduced from Ref. [77] under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. (C)
Reproduced from Ref. [21] with permission from the American Physical Society. (D,E) Reproduced from Ref. [18] with permission from the
American Physical Society. (F) Reproduced from Ref. [101] under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

ferent attempts has begun to emerge. In all methods used to
theoretically remove an electron pocket from the Fermi level,
it has been necessary to modify the dxy orbital in some way.
Whether that’s suppressing its contribution via quasiparticle
weights, gapping out the dxy band via hybridisation, or rigidly

shifting the dxy band above the Fermi level. What we can
gleam from this analysis therefore, is that we should view the
nematic state in a new light, not originating from a specific or-
bital ordering mechanism of dxz and dyz states, but rather as
a symmetry breaking phenomena which couples to every or-


14

bital at the Fermi level. Further theoretical investigations are
required in order to elucidate the origin of the nematic state.
The importance of the dxy orbital has also been recently noted
from NMR measurements [110] and angular dependent mag-
netoresistance [111].

V. CONSEQUENCES FOR THE SUPERCONDUCTING GAP
SYMMETRY

One of the most striking properties of FeSe is it’s highly
tuneable superconducting transition temperature, ranging
from 8 K in bulk crystals [42], 36.7 K under pressure [112],
and up to 65 K when a monolayer is placed on SrTiO3 [113],
and hence the nature of superconductivity in FeSe is an im-
portant question that attracted a lot of attention.
From an experimental point of view, the momentum depen-
dence of the superconducting gap of bulk FeSe, has been ex-
tensively determined from ARPES [13–17], STM [12, 40, 82],
Spectific heat [114, 115] and muSR measurements [97], with
surprisingly near unanimous agreement as to the angular de-
pendence of the gap structure around both the hole and elec-
tron pocket. This achievement provided the perfect oppor-
tunity to directly compare theories of superconductivity with
experimental measurements.
In this section, we will review the experimental data of the
momentum dependence of the superconducting gap, particu-
larly from ARPES measurements, and discuss the theoretical
consequence the updated Fermi surface topology has on the
theoretical understanding of superconductivity in FeSe.

Experimental measurements of the superconducting gap

The key findings from the multiple ARPES and QPI mea-
surements are presented in Fig. 7. For the gap situated on
the hole pocket, a highly two-fold anisotropic momentum de-
pendence of the gap was measured, as shown from QPI anal-
ysis by Sprau et. al. in Fig. 7(a). The angular dependence
of the hole pocket using ARPES was first reported in 2016
by Xu et. al. [13] on 7% sulphur doped FeSe measured at
6.3 K, as shown in Fig. 7(f). It was found that the angu-
lar dependence at both kz = 0 (using a photon energy of
hν = 37 eV) and kz = π (hν = 21 eV) produced near identi-
cal momentum distributions. This sulphur doped system has a
very similar electronic structure to undoped FeSe, albeit with
a slightly reduced nematic transition temperature [116] and
slightly higher superconducting transition temperature (9.8 K
[13]). Later, in 2018, Liu et. al. [15] and Hashimoto et. al.
[14] used laser ARPES, with hν = 6.994 eV, on FeSe at 1.6 K
and observed the same highly anistropic angular dependence
of the gap at the hole pocket, as shown in Fig. 7(b,c). By us-
ing such a low photon energy and temperature these authors
ensured the greatest possible energy resolution for resolving
the gap of the hole pocket. However the trade-off here is that
information about states with large angular momentum, e.g

the electron pockets, as well as the kz-dependence of the hole
pocket, can not be obtained. Kushnirenko et. al. [17], as
well as Rhodes et. al. [16], were able to resolve the three di-
mensional gap structure of both the hole and electron pockets
using synchrotron radiation, as shown in Fig. 7(d,e). In these
manuscripts, it was again confirmed that the gap structure of
the hole pocket at both kz = 0 and kz = π exhibited the same
highly anisotropic two-fold angular dependence of the gap as
determined in the Sulphur doped sample of Xu. et. al. [13].
Kushnirenko et. al. claimed that the superconducting gap that
was larger at kz = π and smaller at kz = 0, however Rhodes
et. al. suggested the opposite: the gap was observed to be
larger at kz = 0 and smaller at kz = π. We note that in or-
der to reach the kz = 0 hole pocket, a higher photon energy
of 37 eV is required, which makes the measurement of the
gap at the Γ point exceedingly challenging, and the measure-
ments are at the cutting edge of what is currently achievable
by synchrotron-based ARPES measurements.
Hashimoto et. al. additionally claimed that the gap struc-
ture produced a different behaviour with and without the
presence of uniaxial strain. Without strain, they observed a
cos(8θ) behaviour [14], which when accidentally detwinned
via uniaxial strain, yielded a gap structure that is consistent
with the other measurements. So far this cos(8θ) dependence
of the gap has not been reproduced.
As for the electron pocket, the angular dependence of
the gap from QPI measurements is presented in Fig. 7(g).
Revealing a particularly constant gap magnitude across the
length of the ellipse, which quickly decays towards zero at
the tips of the pocket. This is where the orbital character of
the pocket transforms from predominantly dyz weight to dxy
weight. ARPES measurements by Kushnirenko et. al [17],
and Rhodes et. al. [16], were also able to resolve the an-
gular dependence of the superconducting gap at the electron
pocket. ARPES measurements along the minor length of the
electron pocket, above and below Tc, are shown in Fig. 7(h,i).
Thanks to the orbital sensitivity of ARPES-based measure-
ments, Rhodes et. al. found a direct correlation between the
intensity of dyz orbital weight and the size of the supercon-
ducting gap, establishing a direct link between orbital charac-
ter and gap magnitude. Kushnirenko et. al. [17] also observed
that the rate that the gap decreased as a function of momentum
was slightly different for intermediate kz values (Fig. 7(m).
This extremely aniostropic gap structure for both the hole
and electron pocket raises a question as to whether FeSe is
a nodal or nodeless superconductor, which could have a pro-
found effect on our understanding of the gap symmetry in this
system. For example, neglecting the electron pocket, it was
argued by Hashimoto et. al. that a nodal gap structure of
the hole pocket would be consistent with p-wave supercon-
ductivity [14] (This is not consistent once the gap structure
of the electron pocket is additionally taken into account). It
is not possible to clearly distinguish between a nodal gap or
a very small gap in ARPES measurements, due to the lim-
itations of energy resolution arising from thermal broaden-
ing and the choice of photon energy. Alternate techniques,


15

B

E

j

F

d

A
C

D

J

 k  (Å
)
3.7 K

-0.08
-0.04
0
0.04
0.08
15

10

5

0

15

10

5

0

10.5 K

-0.08
-0.04
0
0.04

K

Sprau et. al. (2017)
Liu et. al. (2018)

Rhodes et. al. (2018)
Kushnirenko et. al. (2018)

Hashimoto et. al. (2018)

Xu et. al. (2016)

Sprau et. al. (2017)
Rhodes et. al. (2018)
Rhodes et. al. (2018)

Rhodes et. al. (2018)
Kushnirenko et. al. (2018)

G
H
I

FIG. 7. Experimental measurements of the superconducting gap of FeSe. (A) Angular dependence of the gap around the hole pocket as
extracted from BQPI measurements from Sprau et. al. [12]. (B) Angular dependence of the gap around the hole pocket as extracted from
Laser ARPES measurements from Liu et. al. [15]. (C) Angular dependence of the gap around the hole pocket from Hashimoto et. al. [14].
Red dots are data from a twinned sample, whereas green data was measured on an accidentally strained sample. (D) Band dispersion of the
kz = 0 hole band (hν = 37 eV) from Rhodes et. al. [16] taken along the direction where the hole band gap is largest, above and below Tc. (E)
Equivalent band dispersion of the kz = π hole band (hν = 21 eV) below Tc from Kushnirenko et. al. [17]. (F) Angular dependence of the
hole band of FeSe0.93S0.07 from Xu et. al. [13], showing equivalent momentum dependence as the undoped sample. (G) Angular dependence
of the gap around the electron pocket as extracted from BQPI measurements from Sprau et. al. [12]. (H,I) Band dispersion along the minor
length of the electron pocket above and below Tc, along the high symmetry axis from Rhodes et. al.[16]. (J) Comparison of the gap magnitude
(Leading Edge Gap - LEG) and the intensity of the spectral weight from Linear Vertical polarised light as a function of kx, which is directly
correlated to the amplitude of dyz orbital weight. The gap is observed to decrease with decreasing dyz weight. Taken from Rhodes et. al.
[16]. (K) Sketch of the angular dependence of the electron pocket at kz = 0 (bottom) kz = π

2 (middle) and kz = π (top) from Kushirenko
et. al. [17]. (A,G) Reproduced from Ref. [12] with permission from the AAAS. (B) Reproduced from Ref [15] under the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License. (C) b) Reproduced from Ref [14] under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
(F) Reproduced from Ref. [13] with permission from the American Physical Society. (E,K) Reproduced from Ref. [17] with permission from
the American Physical Society.


16

such as STM and specific heat measurements, do have suffi-
cient energy and thermal resolution to tackle this issue, but
here STM measurements of the density of states by Sprau
et. al. [12] suggest a fully gapped, nodeless, superconduct-
ing ground state, whereas specific heat measurements have
argued that the measured data is consistent with a nodal super-
conducting gap [114]. It is still unclear whether FeSe exhibits
nodes or very small superconducting gaps, however as we will
discuss below, theoretical arguments appear to suggest that if
any nodes do exist, they would be accidental in nature.

Theoretical understanding of the superconducting gap

The most striking result from the experimentally deter-
mined gap structure of FeSe, is the clear realisation that the
size of the superconducting gap at the Fermi level is corre-
lated with the magnitude of dyz orbital weight. This tells us
that the superconducting pairing mechanism is sensitive to or-
bital character, and is evidence for superconductivity medi-
ated by Coulomb interactions, such as via a spin-fluctuation
mechanism of superconductivity.
Although the idea that spin fluctuations govern the Cooper
pairing in the iron-based superconductors, was originally pro-
posed back when superconductivity in these materials were
first discovered [7], the evidence for this has often been in-
ferred from gap symmetry arguments, such as a sign-changing
s± order parameter [12], or from the general argument that
FeSe is close to a magnetic instability. FeSe, being such a
clean system, has enabled a direct comparison between theo-
retical simulations and experimental data.
Indeed many theoretical simulations of the angular depen-
dence of the superconducting gap in FeSe have been per-
formed [12, 16, 18–21, 64, 103]. However, as the formation
of Cooper pairs are directly sensitive to the states at the Fermi
level, the starting model used to describe FeSe is very impor-
tant. Numerical simulations have shown that models of FeSe
which do not account for the missing electron pocket of the
nematic state, i.e a model Fermi surface which describes two
electron pockets around the M point, can not reproduce the
experimentally observed gap structure [12, 16, 19, 20].
Initially, this was a confusing result, but with hindsight it is
not that surprising. The presence of an extra electron pocket
in the simulations would naturally influence the superconduct-
ing pairing. Due to the local nature of Coulomb repulsion, the
pairing between electrons in real space will be largest for elec-
trons located on the same atom in the same orbital. It follows
from this argument, that the pairing of electrons in momentum
space would be favoured if a spin scattering process occurs
which couples electronic states of the same orbital character.
In the nematic state of FeSe, spin-fluctuations are strongest
when connecting the hole and electron pocket [60, 117, 118].
In a one-electron pocket scenario, the only common orbital
content between the two pockets are the dyz orbital weight, as
shown in Fig. 8(a-d), and thus this would dominate the super-
conducting gap magnitude. This would not be the case in a

two-electron pocket scenario, where scattering with dxz elec-
trons between the hole and electron pocket would also con-
tribute.
It has now been shown that irregardless of the theoretical
mechanism employed to remove this second electron pocket
from the superconducting calculation, whether that’s orbital
selective quasiparticle weights [12, 18, 21], orbital selective
spin fluctuations [19], E-type nematic ordering [103], a non-
local dxy nematic order parameter [64] or simply ignoring it
from simulations of the superconducting pairing outright [16]
(as shown in Fig. 8), the correct momentum dependence of
the gap structure can be naturally captured assuming weak-
coupling spin fluctuation mediated pairing.
This is a remarkable finding, not only does it further support
the theory of spin-fluctuation mediated superconductivity in
the iron-based superconductors, but it provides another inde-
pendent piece of evidence for a single electron pocket around
the M point in the nematic state of FeSe. This result highlights
the incredible importance of correctly accounting for the miss-
ing electron pocket in the nematic state, as without it we can
not begin to understand the superconducting properties of this
material.

DISCUSSION

This review has been wholly focused on what at first glance
might appear to be an esoteric point of discussion, namely, the
characterisation and modelling of the Fermi surface of FeSe in
the nematic state. However, we propose that after the hun-
dreds of papers and many years of debate and controversy
on the subject, that there are very important conclusions to
be drawn, which have wider implications for our understand-
ing of both nematic ordering and superconductivity across the
wider family of Fe-based superconductors.
The first conclusions surround nematic ordering, where the
results establish

• That nematic ordering affects all bands at the Fermi
level, with the dxy derived bands playing as significant
a role as the dxz and dyz derived bands.

• That nematic order manifests in the band struc-
ture through a combination of all allowed symmetry-
breaking terms, primarily anisotropic hopping terms,
and cannot be exclusively treated by on-site orbital or-
dering.

• That nematic ordering does not cause a minor pertur-
bation of the electronic structure, but can lift an entire
electron pocket away from the Fermi level.

We believe that these conclusions should be widely applica-
ble across other Fe-based superconductors. While these con-
clusions do not yet constitute a self-consistent microscopic
mechanism of nematic order, they do present strong con-
straints to any proposed microscopic models.


17

-2

-1

0

1

2

∆ k (meV)

3

0
90
180
270
360
θ

0

90

θ

0
90

-0.13

0.13

0.0

ky (Å-1)

-0.13

0.13

0.0

ky (Å-1)

k  (Å-1)
-0.13
0.13
0.0

|a(k)|2

0

1

0
90
180
270
360
θ

|a(k)|2

0

1

θ

x 

A
B

C
D

E

FIG. 8. Theoretical simulation of the momentum dependence of the superconducting gap from Rhodes et. al. [16]. Here, a Fermi surface
consisting of one hole pocket a single electron pocket were considered and a spin fluctuation pairing mechanism was assumed. (A,B) Fermi
surface of the hole pocket and angular dependence of the orbital content of the hole pocket. (C,D) Fermi surface of the one electron pocket and
angular dependence of the orbital content of the electron pocket. The colour labels are red - dxz, green dyz and blue dxy. (E) Simulated angular
dependence of the superconducting gap for the hole pocket (red) and electron pocket (blue), revealing a direct correlation with the dyz weight
shown in (B) and (D). The crosses and dots are experimental data extracted from STM [12] and ARPES [16] measurements respectively.

The second set of conclusions relate to the superconductiv-
ity:

• The superconducting gap of FeSe is remarkably
anisotropic.

• The fact that the gap follows the dyz orbital character
is strong experimental evidence that the pairing mecha-
nism is sensitive to local orbital degrees of freedom, i.e.
for spin-fluctuation pairing.

• The superconducting gap of FeSe can be naturally
reproduced by spin-fluctuation calculations assuming
only one electron pocket at the Fermi level.

There has long been a consensus that the superconductivity
in the Fe-based systems is mediated by spin-fluctuation pair-
ing, but we argue that FeSe provides some of the most direct
experimental support for this. As long as one starts with the
one-electron pocket Fermi surface, the further details of the
calculation are not critical, because in this scenario the only
orbital component which is present on both the hole and elec-
tron pockets is the dyz character, and so this channel domi-
nates the structure of the gap. The success of this result justi-
fies the use of similar spin-fluctuation pairing calculations on
other Fe-based superconductors, although we emphasize the
importance of starting with an experimentally accurate Fermi
surface.
Importantly this insight has only been unlocked once we
understand that the true Fermi surface of FeSe consists of
one hole pocket and a single electron pocket, rather than one
hole pocket and two electron pockets as was initially believed.
However, despite us emphasizing how the one electron pocket

scenario is key to the understanding of the unusual proper-
ties of FeSe, we believe it is still an open question as to what
mechanism really drives this modification of the electronic
structure. The models of describing the electronic structure
in the nematic state have grown more accurate and more so-
phisticated, yet there is a lack of intuition about what is the
real driving force for the evolution of the electronic structure
that we observe. In our opinion it remains a delicate and im-
portant open question, but solving it in the case of FeSe could
unlock a wider understanding of nematicity in the iron-based
superconductors.
Additionally, whilst the experimental challenge imposed
by measuring the electronic structure of orthorhombic crys-
tals has always been present, the focus on an answer to the
origin of nematicity in FeSe has particularly emphasised the
continued development of detwinning methods in ARPES
[25, 31–37, 81, 119], as well as showcasing the potential of
NanoARPES for strongly correlated materials with local do-
main structures [64, 81].

OUTLOOK AND CONCLUSION

With an outlook to the future, there are still multiple open
questions regarding the missing electron pocket problem, ne-
maticity and superconductivity in FeSe. Firstly, can we ex-
perimentally identify the exact conditions when one of the
electron pockets in the tetragaonal state appears or disappears
from the Fermi level? So far, this has remained slightly am-
biguous, with some experiments claiming a gradual disap-
pearance of the electron pocket [34] and others claiming a


18

Lifshitz transition around 70 K [32, 33, 64].
Another open question is how the missing electron pocket
scenario can be reconciled with the QPI measurements as
a function of sulphur doping [40] or Tellurium doping [2],
each providing an isoelectronic tuning parameter to control
the evolution of the Fermi surface. The systematic evolution
of the Fermi surface has been studied by Quantum Oscilla-
tions [120], however due to the tiny size of the Fermi energy
in this system, the unambiguous assignment of the quantum
oscillation frequencies is challenging [64]. Equally, twinned
ARPES measurements on sulphur doped FeSe have already
been performed [52, 74], as well as several studies on de-
twinned crystals for 9% sulphur doping [34, 35]. So far it
is unclear when the missing electron pocket reappears, and so
further measurements of detwinned FeSe1−xSx are desirable,
although by 18% the system is tetragonal once more and two
electron pockets are certainly observed [74].
Finally, an important avenue of research is how does the
momentum-dependence of the superconducting gap change as
nematicity is supressed, e.g as a function of sulphur doping.
The momentum dependence of the superconducting gap for
undoped FeSe has now been extensively characterised, and
theoretical predictions of how the gap should evolve as ne-
maticity is suppressed have been proposed [64]. This much
needed experimental data would again place important con-
straints on our theories of nematicity and superconductivity in
these systems.
As the study of the Fe-based superconductors has matured
since they exploded onto the scene in 2008, the emphasis has
shifted from basic characterisation of a wide variety of su-
perconducting families, to detailed examination of particular
cases. FeSe has been the subject of particularly focused at-
tention, and the effort has been worthwhile, with two remark-
able results emerging: the one electron pocket Fermi surface,
and the highly anisotropic superconducting gap structure. We
have argued that these two, taken together, provide strong ev-
idence for spin-fluctuation pairing in FeSe, which is presum-
ably applicable to the wider family of Fe-based superconduc-
tors. However, the extent to which the one electron pocket
phenomenology may be applicable to the nematic phase of
other material systems is a large open question; as well as
FeSe1−xSx and FeSe1−xTex, we propose NaFeAs [119] as a
candidate worthy of re-examination. Thus as this review of
FeSe concludes, we propose it is time to take the experimen-
tal and theoretical tools developed for case of FeSe, and apply
them with renewed vigour to the wider field of Fe-based su-
perconductors.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare that the research was conducted in
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

All authors contributed to the development of this review
article.

FUNDING

LCR acknowledges funding from the royal commission for
the exhibition for the 1851.

[1] A. Kreisel, P. J. Hirschfeld, and B. M. Andersen, “On the Re-
markable Superconductivity of FeSe and Its Close Cousins,”
Symmetry 12, 1402 (2020).

[2] T. Shibauchi, T. Hanaguri, and Y. Matsuda, “Exotic Supercon-
ducting States in FeSe-based Materials,” Journal of the Physi-
cal Society of Japan 89, 102002 (2020).

[3] R. M. Fernandes, A. I. Coldea, H. Ding, I. R. Fisher, P. J.
Hirschfeld, and G. Kotliar, “Iron pnictides and chalcogenides:
a newparadigm for superconductivity,” Nature 601, 35–44
(2022).

[4] A. Georges, L. de’ Medici, and J. Mravlje, “Strong Corre-
lations from Hunds Coupling,” Annual Review of Condensed
Matter Physics 4, 137–178 (2013).

[5] L de’ Medici, G. Giovannetti, and M. Capone, “Selective Mott
Physics as a Key to Iron Superconductors,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
112, 177001 (2014).

[6] N. Lanat`a, H. U. R. Strand, G. Giovannetti, B. Hellsing, L. de’
Medici, and M. Capone, “Orbital selectivity in Hund’s metals:
The iron chalcogenides,” Phys. Rev. B 87, 045122 (2013).

[7] I. I. Mazin, D. J. Singh, M. D. Johannes, and M. H. Du, “Un-
conventional Superconductivity with a Sign Reversal in the
Order Parameter of LaFeAsO1−xFx,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 101,
057003 (2008).

[8] S. Graser, T. A. Maier, P. J. Hirschfeld, and D. J. Scalapino,
“Near-degeneracy of several pairing channels in multiorbital
models for the Fe pnictides,” New J. Phys. 11, 025016 (2009).

[9] R. M. Fernandes, A. V. Chubukov, and J. Schmalian, “What
drives nematic order in iron-based superconductors?” Nat.
Phys. 10, 97–104 (2014).

[10] A. E. Bhmer and A. Kreisel, “Nematicity, magnetism and
superconductivity in FeSe,” J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 30,
023001 (2017).

[11] A. I. Coldea, “Electronic Nematic States Tuned by Isoelec-
tronic Substitution in Bulk FeSe1−xSx,” Frontiers in Physics
8, 528 (2021).

[12] P. O. Sprau, A. Kostin, A. Kreisel, A. E. B¨ohmer, V. Taufour,
P. C. Canfield, S. Mukherjee, P. J. Hirschfeld, B. M. Ander-
sen, and J. C. S´eamus Davis, “Discovery of Orbital-Selective
Cooper Pairing in FeSe,” Science 357, 75–80 (2017).

[13] H. C. Xu, X. H. Niu, D. F. Xu, J. Jiang, Q. Yao, Q. Y. Chen,
Q. Song, M. Abdel-Hafiez, D. A. Chareev, A. N. Vasiliev,
Q. S. Wang, H. L. Wo, J. Zhao, R. Peng, and D. L. Feng,
“Highly Anisotropic and Twofold Symmetric Superconduct-
ing Gap in Nematically Ordered FeSe0.93S0.07,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 117, 157003 (2016).

[14] T. Hashimoto, Y. Ota, H. Q. Yamamoto, Y. Suzuki, T. Shi-
mojima, S. Watanabe, C. Chen, S. Kasahara, Y. Matsuda,
T. Shibauchi, K. Okazaki, and S. Shin, “Superconducting gap


19

anisotropy sensitive to nematic domains in FeSe,” Nat. Com-
mun. 9, 282 (2018).

[15] D. Liu, C. Li, J. Huang, B. Lei, L. Wang, X. Wu, B. Shen,
Q. Gao, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Xu, A. Liang, J. Liu,
P. Ai, L. Zhao, S. He, L. Yu, G. Liu, Y. Mao, X. Dong, X. Jia,
F. Zhang, S. Zhang, F. Yang, Z. Wang, Q. Peng, Y. Shi, J. Hu,
T. Xiang, X. Chen, Z. Xu, C. Chen, and X. J. Zhou, “Orbital
Origin of Extremely Anisotropic Superconducting Gap in Ne-
matic Phase of FeSe Superconductor,” Phys. Rev. X 8, 031033
(2018).

[16] L. C. Rhodes, M. D. Watson, A. A. Haghighirad, D. V. Ev-
tushinsky, M. Eschrig, and T. K. Kim, “Scaling of the super-
conducting gap with orbital character in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B
98, 180503 (2018).

[17] Y. S. Kushnirenko, A. V. Fedorov, E. Haubold, S. Thiru-
pathaiah, T. Wolf, S. Aswartham, I. Morozov, T. K. Kim,
B. B¨uchner, and S. V. Borisenko, “Three-dimensional super-
conducting gap in FeSe from angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev. B 97, 180501 (2018).

[18] A. Kreisel, B. M. Andersen, P. O. Sprau, A. Kostin,
J. C. S´eamus Davis,
and P. J. Hirschfeld, “Orbital selec-
tive pairing and gap structures of iron-based superconductors,”
Phys. Rev. B 95, 174504 (2017).

[19] L. Benfatto, B. Valenzuela, and L. Fanfarillo, “Nematic pair-
ing from orbital-selective spin fluctuations in FeSe,” npj Quan-
tum Materials 3, 56 (2018).

[20] J. Kang, R. M. Fernandes, and A. Chubukov, “Superconduc-
tivity in fese: The role of nematic order,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 120,
267001 (2018).

[21] R. Yu, J-X. Zhu, and Q. Si, “Orbital Selectivity Enhanced by
Nematic Order in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 227003 (2018).

[22] A. E. B¨ohmer, F. Hardy, F. Eilers, D. Ernst, P. Adelmann,
P. Schweiss, T. Wolf,
and C. Meingast, “Lack of cou-
pling between superconductivity and orthorhombic distortion
in stoichiometric single-crystalline FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 87,
180505(R) (2013).

[23] A. Fedorov, A. Yaresko, T. K. Kim, E. Kushnirenko,
E. Haubold, T. Wolf, M. Hoesch, A. Grueneis, B. Buechner,
and S. V. Borisenko, “Effect of nematic ordering on electronic
structure of FeSe,” Sci. Rep. 6, 36834 (2016).

[24] K. Nakayama, Y. Miyata, G. N. Phan, T. Sato, Y. Tanabe,
T. Urata, K. Tanigaki, and T. Takahashi, “Reconstruction of
band structure induced by electronic nematicity in an FeSe su-
perconductor,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 237001 (2014).

[25] T. Shimojima,
Y. Suzuki,
T. Sonobe,
A. Nakamura,
M. Sakano, J. Omachi, K. Yoshioka, M. Kuwata-Gonokami,
K. Ono, H. Kumigashira, A. E. B¨ohmer, F. Hardy, T. Wolf,
C. Meingast, H. V. L¨ohneysen, H. Ikeda,
and K. Ishizaka,
“Lifting of xz / yz orbital degeneracy at the structural transi-
tion in detwinned FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 121111(R) (2014).

[26] M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, A. A. Haghighirad, N. R. Davies,
A. McCollam, A. Narayanan, S. F. Blake, Y. L. Chen, S. Ghan-
nadzadeh, A. J. Schofield, M. Hoesch, C. Meingast, T. Wolf,
and A. I. Coldea, “Emergence of the nematic electronic state
in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 91, 155106 (2015).

[27] L. Fanfarillo, J. Mansart, P. Toulemonde, H. Cercellier,
P. Le F`evre, F. Bertran, B. Valenzuela, L. Benfatto,
and
V. Brouet, “Orbital-dependent Fermi surface shrinking as a
fingerprint of nematicity in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 94, 155138
(2016).

[28] J. Maletz, V. B. Zabolotnyy, D. V. Evtushinsky, S. Thiru-
pathaiah, A. U. B. Wolter, L. Harnagea, A. N. Yaresko,
A. N. Vasiliev, D. A. Chareev, A. E. B¨ohmer, F. Hardy,
T. Wolf, C. Meingast, E. D. L. Rienks, B. B¨uchner,
and

S. V. Borisenko, “Unusual band renormalization in the sim-
plest iron-based superconductor FeSe1−x,” Phys. Rev. B 89,
220506 (2014).

[29] M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, L. C. Rhodes, M. Eschrig,
M. Hoesch, A. A. Haghighirad, and A. I. Coldea, “Evidence
for unidirectional nematic bond ordering in FeSe,” Phys. Rev.
B 94, 201107 (2016).

[30] A. I. Coldea and M. D. Watson, “The Key Ingredients of the
Electronic Structure of FeSe,” Annual Review of Condensed
Matter Physics 9, 125–146 (2018).

[31] M. D. Watson, A. A. Haghighirad, L. C. Rhodes, M. Hoesch,
and T. K. Kim, “Electronic anisotropies revealed by detwinned
angle-resolved photo-emission spectroscopy measurements of
FeSe,” New J. Phys. 19, 103021 (2017).

[32] M. Yi, H. Pfau, Y. Zhang, Y. He, H. Wu, T. Chen, Z. R. Ye,
M. Hashimoto, R. Yu, Q. Si, D.-H. Lee, Pengcheng Dai, Z.-
X. Shen, D. H. Lu, and R. J. Birgeneau, “Nematic Energy
Scale and the Missing Electron Pocket in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. X
9, 041049 (2019).

[33] S. S. Huh, J. J. Seo, B. S. Kim, S. H. Cho, J. K. Jung, S. Kim,
Y. Y. Koh, C. I. Kwon, J. S. Kim, W. S. Kyung, J. D. Den-
linger, Y. H. Kim, B. N. Chae, N. D. Kim, Y. K Kim, and
C. Kim, “Absence of Y-pocket in 1-Fe Brillouin zone and re-
versed orbital occupation imbalance in FeSe,” Commun. Phys.
3, 52 (2020).

[34] C. Cai, T. T. Han, Z. G. Wang, L. Chen, Y. D. Wang, Z. M.
Xin, M. W. Ma, Yuan Li,
and Y. Zhang, “Momentum-
resolved measurement of electronic nematic susceptibility in
the FeSe0.9S0.1 superconductor,” Phys. Rev. B 101, 180501
(2020).

[35] C. Cai, T. T. Han, Z. G. Wang, L. Chen, Y. D. Wang, Z. M.
Xin, M. W. Ma, Yuan Li, and Y. Zhang, “Anomalous spectral
weight transfer in the nematic state of iron-selenide supercon-
ductor,” Chin. Phys. B 29, 077401 (2020).

[36] H. Pfau, S. D. Chen, M. Yi, M. Hashimoto, C. R. Rotundu,
J. C. Palmstrom, T. Chen, P.-C. Dai, J. Straquadine, A. Hris-
tov, R. J. Birgeneau, I. R. Fisher, D. Lu, and Z.-X. Shen, “Mo-
mentum Dependence of the Nematic Order Parameter in Iron-
Based Superconductors,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 066402 (2019).

[37] H. Pfau, M. Yi, M. Hashimoto, T. Chen, P.-C. Dai, Z.-X. Shen,
S.-K. Mo, and D. Lu, “Quasiparticle coherence in the nematic
state of FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 104, L241101 (2021).

[38] L. C. Rhodes, M. D. Watson, A. A. Haghighirad, D. V. Ev-
tushinsky,
and T. K. Kim, “Revealing the single electron
pocket of FeSe in a single orthorhombic domain,” Phys. Rev.
B 101, 235128 (2020).

[39] S. Kasahara, T. Watashige, T. Hanaguri, Y. Kohsaka, T. Ya-
mashita, Y. Shimoyama, Y. Mizukami, R. Endo, H. Ikeda,
K. Aoyama, T. Terashima, S. Uji, T. Wolf, H. von L¨ohneysen,
T. Shibauchi, and Y. Matsuda, “Field-induced superconduct-
ing phase of FeSe in the BCS-BEC cross-over,” Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, 16309–16313
(2014).

[40] T. Hanaguri, K. Iwaya, Y. Kohsaka, T. Machida, T. Watashige,
S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, and Y. Matsuda, “Two distinct su-
perconducting pairing states divided by the nematic end point
in FeSe1−xSx,” Science Advances 4, eaar6419 (2018).

[41] A. Kostin, P. O. Sprau, A. Kreisel, Y-X. Chong, A. E.
B¨ohmer, P. C. Canfield, P. J. Hirschfeld, B. M. Andersen, and
J. C. S´eamus Davis, “Imaging orbital-selective quasiparticles
in the Hund’s metal state of FeSe,” Nat. Mater. 17, 869–874
(2018).

[42] S.
Margadonna,
Y.
Takabayashi,
M.
McDonald,
K. Kasperkiewicz, Y. Mizuguchi, Y. Takano, A. Fitch,


20

E. Suard,
and K. Prassides, “Crystal Structure of the new
FeSe1−x Superconductor,” Chem. Commun. 4, 5607–5609
(2008).

[43] O.K. Andersen and L. Boeri, “On the multi-orbital band struc-
ture and itinerant magnetism of iron-based superconductors,”
Annalen der Physik 523, 8–50 (2011).

[44] P. M. Eugenio and O. Vafek, “Classification of symmetry de-
rived pairing at the M point in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 98, 014503
(2018).

[45] S. V. Borisenko, D. V. Evtushinsky, Z.-H. Liu, I. Morozov,
R. Kappenberger, S. Wurmehl, B. B¨uchner, A. N. Yaresko,
T. K. Kim, M. Hoesch, T. Wolf, and N. D. Zhigadlo, “Direct
observation of spin–orbit coupling in iron-based superconduc-
tors,” Nature Physics 12, 311–317 (2016).

[46] M. D. Watson, A. A. Haghighirad, H. Takita, W. Mansuer,
H. Iwasawa, E. F. Schwier, A. Ino, and M. Hoesch, “Shifts and
Splittings of the Hole Bands in the Nematic Phase of FeSe,”
Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 86, 053703 (2017).

[47] R. P. Day, G. Levy, M. Michiardi, B. Zwartsenberg, M. Zonno,
F. Ji, E. Razzoli, F. Boschini, S. Chi, R. Liang, P. K. Das,
I. Vobornik, J. Fujii, W. N. Hardy, D. A. Bonn, I. S. Elfimov,
and A. Damascelli, “Influence of Spin-Orbit Coupling in Iron-
Based Superconductors,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 076401 (2018).

[48] L. C. Rhodes, M. D. Watson, A. A. Haghighirad, M. Eschrig,
and T. K. Kim, “Strongly enhanced temperature dependence
of the chemical potential in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 95, 195111
(2017).

[49] Y. Zhang, C. He, Z. R. Ye, J. Jiang, F. Chen, M. Xu, Q. Q.
Ge, B. P. Xie, J. Wei, M. Aeschlimann, X. Y. Cui, M. Shi,
J. P. Hu, and D. L. Feng, “Symmetry breaking via orbital-
dependent reconstruction of electronic structure in detwinned
NaFeAs,” Phys. Rev. B 85, 085121 (2012).

[50] H. Eschrig and K. Koepernik, “Tight-binding models for the
iron-based superconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 80, 104503 (2009).

[51] S. Acharya, D. Pashov, F. Jamet, and M. van Schilfgaarde,
“Electronic Origin of Tc in Bulk and Monolayer FeSe,” Sym-
metry 13 (2021), 10.3390/sym13020169.

[52] M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, A. A. Haghighirad, S. F. Blake,
N. R. Davies, M. Hoesch, T. Wolf, and A. I. Coldea, “Suppres-
sion of orbital ordering by chemical pressure in FeSe1−xSx,”
Phys. Rev. B 92, 121108 (2015).

[53] R. M. Fernandes and O. Vafek, “Distinguishing spin-orbit cou-
pling and nematic order in the electronic spectrum of iron-
based superconductors,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 214514 (2014).

[54] Z. P. Yin, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, “Kinetic frustration and
the nature of the magnetic and paramagnetic states in iron
pnictides and ironchalcogenides,” Nature Materials 10, 932–
935 (2011).

[55] M. Yi, Z.-K. Liu, Y. Zhang, R. Yu, J.-X. Zhu, J. J. Lee, R. G.
Moore, F. T. Schmitt, W. Li, S. C. Riggs, J.-H. Chu, B. Lv,
J. Hu, M. Hashimoto, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, Z. Q. Mao, C. W.
Chu, I. R. Fisher, Q. Si, Z.-X. Shen, and D. H. Lu, “Observa-
tion of universal strong orbital-dependent correlation effects in
iron chalcogenides,” Nature Communications 6, 7777 (2015).

[56] M. D. Watson, S. Backes, A. A. Haghighirad, M. Hoesch,
T. K. Kim, A. I. Coldea,
and R. Valent´ı, “Formation of
Hubbard-like bands as a fingerprint of strong electron-electron
interactions in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 95, 081106 (2017).

[57] D. V. Evtushinsky, M. Aichhorn, Y. Sassa, Z.-H. Liu,
J. Maletz, T. Wolf, A. N. Yaresko, S. Biermann, S. V.
Borisenko,
and B. Buchner, “Direct observation of disper-
sive lower Hubbard band in iron-based superconductor FeSe,”
arXiv:1612.02313 (2017).

[58] J. K. Glasbrenner, I. I. Mazin, Harald O. Jeschke, P. J.
Hirschfeld, R. M. Fernandes, and R. Valent´ı, “Effect of mag-
netic frustration on nematicity and superconductivity in iron
chalcogenides,” Nature Physics 11, 953–958 (2015).

[59] M. He, L. Wang, F. Hardy, L. Xu, T. Wolf, P. Adelmann,
and C. Meingast, “Evidence for short-range magnetic order
in the nematic phase of FeSe from anisotropic in-plane mag-
netostriction and susceptibility measurements,” Phys. Rev. B
97, 104107 (2018).

[60] T. Chen, Y. Chen, A. Kreisel, X. Lu, A. Schneidewind, Y. Qiu,
J. T. Park, T. G. Perring, J. R. Stewart, H. Cao, R. Zhang, Y. Li,
Y. Rong, Y. Wei, B. M. Andersen, P. J. Hirschfeld, C. Bro-
holm, and P. Dai, “Anisotropic spin fluctuations in detwinned
FeSe,” Nature Materials 18, 709–716 (2019).

[61] Z. Wang, X-G. Zhao, R. Koch, S. J. L. Billinge,
and
A. Zunger, “Understanding electronic peculiarities in tetrag-
onal FeSe as local structural symmetry breaking,” Phys. Rev.
B 102, 235121 (2020).

[62] T. Gorni, P. Villar Arribi, M. Casula, and L. de’ Medici, “Ac-
curate modeling of fese with screened fock exchange and hund
metal correlations,” Phys. Rev. B 104, 014507 (2021).

[63] S. Mukherjee, A. Kreisel, P.J. Hirschfeld, and B. M. Ander-
sen, “Model of Electronic Structure and Superconductivity in
Orbitally Ordered FeSe,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 026402 (2015).

[64] L. C. Rhodes, J. B¨oker, M. A. M¨uller, M. Eschrig, and I. M.
Eremin, “Non-local dxy nematicity and the missing electron
pocket in FeSe,” npj Quantum Materials 6, 45 (2021).

[65] Y. S. Kushnirenko, A. A. Kordyuk, A. V. Fedorov, E. Haubold,
T. Wolf, B. B¨uchner, and S. V. Borisenko, “Anomalous tem-
perature evolution of the electronic structure of FeSe,” Phys.
Rev. B 96, 100504 (2017).

[66] Y. V. Pustovit, V. V. Bezguba, and A. A. Kordyuk, “Temper-
ature Dependence of the Electronic Structure of FeSe,” Met-
allofiz. Noveishie Tekhnol. 39, 709–718 (2017).

[67] Y.. V. Pustovit, V. Brouet, D. A. Chareev, and A. A. Kordyuk,
“Temperature Evolution of Charge Carrier Density in the Cen-
tre of the Brillouin Zone of Fe(Se,Te) Superconductor,” Met-
allofiz. Noveishie Tekhnol. 40, 139–146 (2018).

[68] E. F. Schwier, H. Takita, W. Mansur, A. Ino, M. Hoesch, M. D.
Watson, A. A. Haghighirad, and K. Shimada, “Applications
for ultimate spatial resolution in LASER based µ - ARPES: A
FeSe case study,” AIP Conference Proceedings 2054, 040017
(2019).

[69] T. Shimojima, Y. Motoyui, T. Taniuchi, C. Bareille, S. Onari,
H. Kontani, M. Nakajima, S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, Y. Mat-
suda,
and S. Shin, “Discovery of mesoscopic nematicity
wave in iron-based superconductors,” Science 373, 1122–
1125 (2021).

[70] M. A. Tanatar, A. E. B¨ohmer, E. I. Timmons, M. Sch¨utt,
G. Drachuck, V. Taufour, K. Kothapalli, A. Kreyssig, S. L.
Bud’ko, P. C. Canfield, R. M. Fernandes, and R. Prozorov,
“Origin of the Resistivity Anisotropy in the Nematic Phase of
FeSe,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 127001 (2016).

[71] M. Hoesch, T. K. Kim, P. Dudin, H. Wang, S. Scott, P. Harris,
S. Patel, M. Matthews, D. Hawkins, S. G. Alcock, T. Richter,
J. J. Mudd, M. Basham, L. Pratt, P. Leicester, E. C. Longhi,
A. Tamai, and F. Baumberger, “A facility for the analysis of
the electronic structures of solids and their surfaces by syn-
chrotron radiation photoelectron spectroscopy,” Rev. Sci. In-
strum. 88, 013106 (2017).

[72] V. Brouet, M. Fuglsang Jensen, P-H. Lin, A. T-I., P. Le F`evre,
F. Bertran, C-H. Lin, W. Ku, A. Forget, and D. Colson, “Im-
pact of the two Fe unit cell on the electronic structure mea-
sured by ARPES in iron pnictides,” Phys. Rev. B 86, 075123


21

(2012).

[73] R. P. Day, B. Zwartsenberg, I. S. Elfimov,
and A. Damas-
celli, “Computational framework chinook for angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy,” npj Quantum Materials 4, 54
(2019).

[74] P. Reiss, M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, A. A. Haghighirad, D. N.
Woodruff, M. Bruma, S. J. Clarke, and A. I. Coldea, “Sup-
pression of electronic correlations by chemical pressure from
FeSe to FeS,” Phys. Rev. B 96, 121103 (2017).

[75] Y.. V. Pustovit and A. A. Kordyuk, “Metamorphoses of elec-
tronic structure of FeSe-based superconductors,” Low Tem-
perature Physics 42, 995–1007 (2016).

[76] I. R. Fisher, L. Degiorgi, and Z. X. Shen, “In-plane electronic
anisotropy of underdoped ‘122’ Fe-arsenide superconductors
revealed by measurements of detwinned single crystals,” Rep.
Prog. Phys. 74, 124506 (2011).

[77] M. H. Christensen, R. M. Fernandes, and A. V. Chubukov,
“Orbital transmutation and the electronic spectrum of FeSe in
the nematic phase,” Phys. Rev. Research 2, 013015 (2020).

[78] L. C. Rhodes, M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, and M. Eschrig, “kz
Selective Scattering within Quasiparticle Interference Mea-
surements of FeSe,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 216404 (2019).

[79] V. Sunko, E. Abarca Morales, I. Markovi´c, M. E. Barber,
D. Milosavljevi´c, F. Mazzola, D. A. Sokolov, N. Kikugawa,
C. Cacho, P. Dudin, H. Rosner, C. W. Hicks, P. D. C. King,
and A. P. Mackenzie, “Direct observation of a uniaxial stress-
driven Lifshitz transition in Sr2RuO4,” npj Quantum Materials
4, 46 (2019).

[80] H. Iwasawa, “High-resolution angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy and microscopy,” Electronic Structure 2, 043001
(2020).

[81] M. D. Watson, P. Dudin, L. C. Rhodes, D. V. Evtushin-
sky, H. Iwasawa, S. Aswartham, S. Wurmehl, B. B¨uchner,
M. Hoesch, and T. K. Kim, “Probing the reconstructed Fermi
surface of antiferromagnetic BaFe2As2 in one domain,” npj
Quantum Materials 4, 36 (2019).

[82] L. Jiao, C-L. Huang, S R¨oßler, C. Koz, U. K. R¨oßler,
U. Schwarz,
and S. Wirth, “Superconducting gap structure
of fese,” Scientific Reports 7, 44024 (2017).

[83] P. Choubey, T. Berlijn, A. Kreisel, C. Cao,
and P. J.
Hirschfeld, “Visualization of atomic-scale phenomena in su-
perconductors: Application to FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 90, 134520
(2014).

[84] K. Bu, B. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Fei, Y. Zheng, F. Ai, Z. Wu,
Q. Wang, H. Wo, J. Zhao, C. Jin, and Y. Yin, “Study of intrin-
sic defect states of FeSe with scanning tunneling microscopy,”
Phys. Rev. B 100, 155127 (2019).

[85] A. J. Macdonald, Y-S. Tremblay-Johnston, S. Grothe, S. Chi,
P. Dosanjh, S. Johnston, and S. A. Burke, “Dispersing artifacts
in FT-STS: a comparison of set point effects across acquisition
modes,” Nanotechnology 27, 414004 (2016).

[86] A. Weismann, M. Wenderoth, S. Lounis, P. Zahn, N. Quaas,
R. G. Ulbrich, P. H. Dederichs,
and S. Blgel, “Seeing the
Fermi Surface in Real Space by Nanoscale Electron Focus-
ing,” Science 323, 1190–1193 (2009).

[87] S. Lounis, P. Zahn, A. Weismann, M. Wenderoth, R. G. Ul-
brich, I. Mertig, P. H. Dederichs, and S. Bl¨ugel, “Theory of
real space imaging of Fermi surface parts,” Phys. Rev. B 83,
035427 (2011).

[88] C. A. Marques, M. S. Bahramy, C. Trainer, I. Markovi´c, M. D.
Watson, F. Mazzola, A. Rajan, T. D. Raub, P. D. C. King, and
P. Wahl, “Tomographic mapping of the hidden dimension in
quasi-particle interference,” Nat. Comm. 12, 6739 (2021).

[89] C. Li, X. Wu, L. Wang, D. Liu, Y. Cai, Y. Wang, Q. Gao,
C. Song, J. Huang, C. Dong, J. Liu, P. Ai, H. Luo, C-H.
Yin, G. Liu, Y. Huang, Q. Wang, X. Jia, F. Zhang, S. Zhang,
F. Yang, Z. Wang, Q. Peng, Z. Xu, Y. Shi, J. Hu, T. Xiang,
L. Zhao, and X. J. Zhou, “Spectroscopic Evidence for an Ad-
ditional Symmetry Breaking in the Nematic State of FeSe Su-
perconductor,” Phys. Rev. X 10, 031033 (2020).

[90] C-C. Lee, W-G. Yin, and W. Ku, “Ferro-Orbital Order and
Strong Magnetic Anisotropy in the Parent Compounds of Iron-
Pnictide Superconductors ,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 267001
(2009).

[91] B. Pradhan, P. K. Parida, and S. Sahoo, “Superconductivity
and Jahn-Teller Distortion in s±-Wave Iron-Based Supercon-
ductors,” Brazilian Journal of Physics 51, 393–400 (2021).

[92] A. Kreisel, S. Mukherjee, P. J. Hirschfeld, and Brian M. An-
dersen, “Spin excitations in a model of FeSe with orbital or-
dering,” Phys. Rev. B 92, 224515 (2015).

[93] A. Kreisel, B. M. Andersen, and P. J. Hirschfeld, “Itinerant
approach to magnetic neutron scattering of FeSe: Effect of
orbital selectivity,” Phys. Rev. B 98, 214518 (2018).

[94] R. Yu, H. Hu, E. M. Nica, J-X. Zhu, and Q. Si, “Orbital Se-
lectivity in Electron Correlations and Superconducting Pair-
ing of Iron-Based Superconductors,” Frontiers in Physics 9,
92 (2021).

[95] H. Cercellier, P. Rodi`ere, P. Toulemonde, C. Marcenat, and
T. Klein, “Influence of the quasiparticle spectral weight in
FeSe on spectroscopic, magnetic, and thermodynamic prop-
erties,” Phys. Rev. B 100, 104516 (2019).

[96] K. Jiang, J. Hu, H. Ding, and Z. Wang, “Interatomic Coulomb
interaction and electron nematic bond order in FeSe,” Phys.
Rev. B 93, 115138 (2016).

[97] P. K. Biswas, A. Kreisel, Q. Wang, D. T. Adroja, A. D. Hillier,
J. Zhao, R. Khasanov, J-C. Orain, A. Amato, and E. Moren-
zoni, “Evidence of nodal gap structure in the basal plane of the
FeSe superconductor,” Phys. Rev. B 98, 180501 (2018).

[98] R-Q. Xing, L. Classen, and A. V. Chubukov, “Orbital order in
FeSe: The case for vertex renormalization,” Phys. Rev. B 98,
041108 (2018).

[99] J. Kang, A. V. Chubukov,
and R. M. Fernandes, “Time-
reversal symmetry-breaking nematic superconductivity in
FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 98, 064508 (2018).

[100] S. Mandal, P. Zhang, S. Ismail-Beigi, and K. Haule, “How
Correlated is the FeSe/SrTiO3 System?” Phys. Rev. Lett.
119, 067004 (2017).

[101] X. Long, S. Zhang, F. Wang, and Z. Liu, “A first-principle
perspective on electronic nematicity in FeSe,” npj Quantum
Materials 5, 50 (2020).

[102] T. Yamada and T. Tohyama, “Multipolar nematic state of
nonmagnetic FeSe based on DFT + U,” Phys. Rev. B 104,
L161110 (2021).

[103] D Steffensen, A. Kreisel, P. J. Hirschfeld, and B. M. Ander-
sen, “Interorbital nematicity and the origin of a single electron
Fermi pocket in FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 103, 054505 (2021).

[104] E. E. Rodriguez,
C. Stock,
P. Zajdel,
K. L. Krycka,
C. F. Majkrzak, P. Zavalij,
and M. A. Green, “Magnetic-
crystallographic phase diagram of the superconducting parent
compound Fe1+xTe,” Phys. Rev. B 84, 064403 (2011).

[105] C. Trainer, C-M. Yim, C. Heil, F. Giustino, D. Croitori,
V. Tsurkan, A. Loidl, E. E. Rodriguez, C. Stock, and P. Wahl,
“Manipulating surface magnetic order in iron telluride,” Sci-
ence Advances 5, eaav3478 (2019).

[106] A. V. Chubukov, M. Khodas, and R. M. Fernandes, “Mag-
netism, Superconductivity, and Spontaneous Orbital Order in
Iron-Based Superconductors: Which Comes First and Why?”


22

Phys. Rev. X 6, 041045 (2016).

[107] R.-Q. Xing, L. Classen, M. Khodas,
and A. V. Chubukov,
“Competing instabilities, orbital ordering, and splitting of
band degeneracies from a parquet renormalization group anal-
ysis of a four-pocket model for iron-based superconductors:
Application to FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 95, 085108 (2017).

[108] L. Classen, R.-Q. Xing, M. Khodas,
and A. V. Chubukov,
“Interplay between Magnetism, Superconductivity, and Or-
bital Order in 5-Pocket Model for Iron-Based Superconduc-
tors: Parquet Renormalization Group Study,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
118, 037001 (2017).

[109] K. R. Islam, J. B¨oker, I. M. Eremin, and A. V. Chubukov,
“Specific heat and gap structure of a nematic superconductor:
Application to FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 104, 094522 (2021).

[110] J. Li, B. Lei, D. Zhao, L. P. Nie, D. W. Song, L. X. Zheng,
S. J. Li, B. L. Kang, X. G. Luo, T. Wu,
and X. H. Chen,
“Spin-Orbital-Intertwined Nematic State in FeSe,” Phys. Rev.
X 10, 011034 (2020).

[111] S. Liu,
J. Yuan,
S. Ma,
Z. Lu,
Y. Zhang,
M. Ma,
H. Zhang, K. Jin, L. Yu, F. Zhou, X. Dong,
and Z. Zhao,
“Magnetic-Field-Induced Spin Nematicity in FeSe1−xSx and
FeSe1−yTey Superconductor Systems,” Chinese Phys. Lett.
38, 087401 (2021).

[112] S. Medvedev, T. M. McQueen, I. A. Troyan, T. Palasyuk, M. I.
Eremets, R. J. Cava, S. Naghavi, F. Casper, V. Ksenofontov,
G. Wortmann, and C. Felser, “Electronic and magnetic phase
diagram of β-Fe1.01Se with superconductivity at 36.7K un-
derpressure,” Nat. Mater. 8, 630–633 (2009).

[113] D. Huang and J. E. Hoffman, “Monolayer FeSe on SrTiO3,”

Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 8, 311–336 (2017).

[114] F. Hardy, M. He, L. Wang, T. Wolf, P. Schweiss, M. Merz,
M. Barth, P. Adelmann, R. Eder, A. A. Haghighirad,
and
C. Meingast, “Calorimetric evidence of nodal gaps in the ne-
matic superconductor FeSe,” Phys. Rev. B 99, 035157 (2019).

[115] Y. Sun, S. Kittaka, S. Nakamura, T. Sakakibara, K. Irie,
T. Nomoto, K. Machida, J. Chen, and T. Tamegai, “Gap struc-

ture of FeSe determined by angle-resolved specific heat mea-
surements in applied rotating magnetic field,” Phys. Rev. B 96,
220505 (2017).

[116] K. Matsuura, Y. Mizukami, Y. Arai, Y. Sugimura, N. Mae-
jima, A. Machida, T. Watanuki, T. Fukuda, T. Yajima, Z. Hiroi,
K. Y. Yip, Y. C. Chan, Q. Niu, S. Hosoi, K. Ishida, K. Mukasa,
S. Kasahara, J.-G. Cheng, S. K. Goh, Y. Matsuda, Y. Uwatoko,
and T. Shibauchi, “Maximizing Tc by tuning nematicity and
magnetism in FeSe1−xSx superconductors,” Nature Commu-
nications 8, 1143 (2017).

[117] Q. Wang, Y. Shen, B. Pan, X. Zhang, K. Ikeuchi, K. Iida,
A. D. Christianson, H. C. Walker, D. T. Adroja, M. Abdel-
Hafiez, Xiaojia Chen, D. A. Chareev, A. N. Vasiliev,
and
J. Zhao, “Magnetic ground state of FeSe,” Nat. Comm. 7,
12182 (2016).

[118] Q. Wang, Y. Shen, B. Pan, Y. Hao, M. Ma, F. Zhou, P. Stef-
fens, K. Schmalzl, T. R. Forrest, M. Abdel-Hafiez, Xiaojia
Chen, D. A. Chareev, A. N. Vasiliev, P. Bourges, Y. Sidis,
H. Cao, and J. Zhao, “Strong interplay between stripe spin
fluctuations, nematicity and superconductivity in FeSe,” Nat.
Mater. 15, 159–163 (2016).

[119] M. D. Watson, S. Aswartham, L. C. Rhodes, B. Parrett,
H. Iwasawa, M. Hoesch, I. Morozov, B. B¨uchner, and T. K.
Kim, “Three-dimensional electronic structure of the nematic
and antiferromagnetic phases of NaFeAs from detwinned
angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev. B 97,
035134 (2018).

[120] A. I. Coldea, S. F. Blake, S. Kasahara, A. A. Haghighirad,
M. D. Watson, W. Knafo, E-S. Choi, A. McCollam, P. Reiss,
T. Yamashita, M. Bruma, S. C. Speller, Y. Matsuda, T. Wolf,
T. Shibauchi,
and A. J. Schofield, “Evolution of the low-
temperature Fermi surface of superconducting FeSe1−xSx
across a nematic phase transition,” npj Quantum Materials 4,
2 (2019).


