Evaluation of the Thermal Stability of TiW/Cu Heterojunctions Using a
Combined SXPS and HAXPES Approach
C. Kalha,1 M. Reisinger,2 P. K. Thakur,3 T. -L. Lee,3 S. Venkatesan,4 M. Isaacs,5, 1 R. G. Palgrave,1 J. Zechner,2

M. Nelhiebel,2 and A. Regoutz1, a)

1)Department of Chemistry, University College London, 20 Gordon Street, London, WC1H 0AJ,
United Kingdom.
2)Kompetenzzentrum Automobil- und Industrie-Elektronik GmbH, Europastraße 8, 9524 Villach,
Austria.
3)Diamond Light Source Ltd., Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX1 3QR,
United Kingdom.
4)Infineon Technologies AG, Am Campeon 1-15, 85579 Neubiberg, Germany.
5)Harwell XPS, Research Complex at Harwell (RCaH), Didcot, OX11 0FA

(Dated: 21 January 2022)

Power semiconductor device architectures require the inclusion of a diffusion barrier to suppress, or at best prevent
the interdiffusion between the copper metallisation interconnects and the surrounding silicon substructure. The binary
pseudo-alloy of titanium-tungsten (TiW), with >70 at.% W, is a well established copper diffusion barrier but is prone to
degradation via the out-diffusion of titanium when exposed to high temperatures (≥400°C). Here, the thermal stability
of physical vapour deposited (PVD) TiW/Cu bilayer thin films in Si/SiO2(50 nm)/TiW(300 nm)/Cu(25 nm) stacks
were characterised in response to annealing at 400°C for 0.5 h and 5 h, using a combination of soft and hard X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (SXPS and HAXPES) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Results show that
annealing promoted the segregation of titanium out of the TiW and interdiffusion into the copper metallisation. Titanium
was shown be driven toward the free copper surface, accumulating there and forming a titanium oxide overlayer upon
exposure to air. Annealing for longer timescales promoted a greater out-diffusion of titanium and a thicker oxide layer
to grow on the copper surface. However, interface measurements suggest that the diffusion is not significant enough to
compromise the barrier integrity and the TiW/Cu interface remains stable even after 5 h of annealing.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Power semiconductor device technologies are at the core
of the power-train and battery-management systems in hybrid
and electric vehicles.1–3 With the continuing global efforts
to popularise the electrification of the automotive industry,
there is incentive towards developing devices with smaller
feature sizes, improved reliability, and higher power capacity.
These targets are being realised through the replacement of
aluminium topside metallisation connections in these devices
with copper. Copper (Cu), compared to aluminium (Al) is
shown to exhibit improved thermal and electrical conductivity,
superior electromigration resistance, low resistivity, and
enhanced lifetime.4,5

However, the application of copper metallisations has been
under intense investigation due to the material’s tendency to
drift into silicon substructures at relatively low temperatures,6

forming deep level traps and intermetallic silicide compounds,
both of which severely impact the reliability of the device.7–9

To overcome this limitation, a diffusion barrier (DB) is
implemented between the metallisation and silicon, designed
to suppress the diffusion of copper, reducing the likelihood of
the Cu-Si interaction.
The binary pseudo-alloy of titanium-tungsten (TiW) has
long been considered a viable copper diffusion barrier
candidate and has a well-established history. TiW was first
proposed by Cunningham et al.
as a means of improving

a)Electronic mail: a.regoutz@ucl.ac.uk

the corrosion resistance and metallurgical properties of
metal-Au systems in integrated circuits.10 They highlighted
that titanium (Ti) has a 10 at.% solubility limit in tungsten (W)
at temperatures below 600°C, and therefore should excess of
this concentration be present, a pseudo-alloy of TiW can be
created, where the excess titanium is not dissolved or alloyed
with the tungsten, and is therefore able to impart desirable
characteristics (i.e.
adhesion and corrosion resistance).
A
TiW film consisting of 10-30 at.% Ti has been shown to
offer an increased barrier failure temperature compared to a
single tungsten or titanium barrier.11,12 Since the introduction
of TiW and its associated benefits, TiW has been applied
between various metal contacts and metallisation layers, all
with moderate to good success.13–29 However, these studies
predominately focus on determining the conditions that are
required for the barrier to fail (i.e. temperature and duration),
with less emphasis on defining the mechanism that promotes
the failure or studying the chemical states across the critical
diffusion barrier/metallisation interface.

Thermal exposure during production or service has shown
to initiate and propagate the segregation of titanium out of
the barrier, and the subsequent diffusion into the adjacent
metallisation, given sufficient time.29 This migration of
titanium is assumed to occur via defect sites, such as grain
boundaries.18 Depletion of titanium is thought to encourage
inter-layer delamination, but also allow for copper to bypass
the TiW system and interact with the underlying silicon
substructure.
Moreover, at high temperatures intermetallic
compounds can form, leading to the consumption of the TiW
barrier and subsequently allowing for the Cu-Si interaction.22

arXiv:2201.08074v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  20 Jan 2022


2

Therefore, the performance of these devices is heavily
constrained by the reliability of these metallisation layers,
and therefore it is imperative to improve the understanding
of these systems when subjected to high temperatures for
prolonged timescales.
In order to obtain a greater insight into the thermal
stability of the TiW/Cu system, we employ a combination
of soft and hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (SXPS
and HAXPES) to study the chemical states and electronic
structure across post-deposition annealed Si/SiO2/TiW/Cu
thin film stacks.
HAXPES extends the probing depth of
conventional SXPS by utilising a higher photon energy, thus
turning the technique from surface- to bulk-sensitive.30,31

Additionally, the films were annealed for varying timescales
to simulate the different thermal budgets experienced by
a real device during the many heat treatments within the
manufacturing stages.
The combination of SXPS and
HAXPES provides the opportunity to gain information from
two depth perspectives and so offers a non-destructive
approach for characterising the buried TiW/Cu interface in its
true state. Complimentary transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS)
is employed in an effort to better map out the titanium
diffusion process and assess any changes to the microstructure
in response to annealing.
Additionally, laboratory-based
SXPS was utilised to conduct depth profile measurements
and quantify the elemental distribution across the bilayer,
complimenting the synchrotron XPS measurements.

II.
METHODOLOGY

Un-patterned Si(100)/SiO2(50 nm)/TiW(300 nm)/Cu(25 nm)
thin film stacks were manufactured using a standard industrial
process. Both the TiW and copper films were deposited via
DC magnetron physical vapour deposition (PVD) using an
argon (Ar) discharge. Both TiW and Cu deposition stages
were conducted in the same deposition chamber and without
a vacuum break. The deposition chamber operated under a
base pressure of 10-8-10-7 mbar. The TiW film was deposited
using a composite TiW sputter target containing 30 at.%
Ti concentration.
A detailed description of the deposition
process used can be found in Refs.28,32.
Samples were
directly annealed to 400°C using a 10°C/s heating rate and
held there for two timescales - 0.5 and 5 h. Annealing was
conducted in an inert forming gas atmosphere (95% N2,
5% H2). To provide a reference, the annealed samples are
compared to an as-deposited (AD) sample (i.e. no anneal).
400°C was selected as the target annealing temperature as it
is a common temperature experienced by a device during the
manufacturing stages.28

Synchrotron-based SXPS and HAXPES measurements
were conducted at beamline I09 at the Diamond Light Source,
UK, employing 1587.4 eV (1.6 keV) and 5927.4 eV (5.9 keV)
photon excitation energies, respectively.33 The maximum
inelastic mean free path (λ) for copper at 1.6 keV and
5.9 keV is 2.2 nm and 6.4 nm, respectively (calculated using
QUASES34). Following the assumption that the signal decay

of a core level is exponential, the probing depth can be
estimated as 95% of the signal (i.e. 3λ).
Therefore, the
probing depth is estimated to be 6.6 nm for SXPS and 19.2 nm
for HAXPES. The 1.6 keV photon energy was selected using a
plane-grating monochromator with a grating of 400 lines/mm.
The HAXPES 5.9 keV photon energy was selected using a
liquid nitrogen cooled Si(111) double crystal monochromator
and an additional Si(004) channel cut post monochromator.
The end station is equipped with a high-voltage VG Scienta
EW4000 electron analyzer, which has an angular acceptance
of ±28°. Measurements were conducted at a base pressure of
≈3.5x10-10 mbar, and carried out in grazing incidence and
near normal emission geometry.
Even with HAXPES, the
25 nm metallisation overlayer is too thick for photoelectrons
from the TiW layer to escape.
Therefore, careful in-situ
thinning (but not removal) of the copper was carried out
using a de-focused Ar+ ion sputter beam. Ar+ sputtering was
conducted step-wise, with a total of four iterations carried
out before the copper was suitably thinned while ensuring
the TiW/Cu interface was not compromised.
The argon
gun operated at a 1 keV energy and 5×10-5 mbar pressure,
providing a current of 10.5 µA. Survey, key core level, and
valence band spectra were collected at the centre of the sputter
crater with both SXPS and HAXPES. A pass energy of 100 eV
was used to acquire the valence band spectra, and 70 eV
for survey and core levels for both SXPS and HAXPES
measurements.
The experimental resolution when using a
pass energy of 70 eV was found to be 390 meV and 240 meV
for the 1.6 keV and 5.9 keV photon energies, respectively,
as determined from measuring one standard deviation either
side of the Fermi edge of a gold polycrystalline foil (16/84%
method). The binding energy scale of core level spectra was
calibrated to the HAXPES recorded Cu 2p3/2 BE position
measured at the TiW/Cu interface.

SXPS
elemental
depth
profiles
across
the
copper
metallisation were conducted using a Kratos Axis Supra
laboratory-based instrument (EPSRC National Facility for
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy,
Harwell,
UK). The
instrument uses a monochromatic Al Kα (1486.7 eV) X-ray
source, and operated with a 15 mA emission current, 12 kV
anode voltage (180 W), 700×300 µm2 elliptical spot size,
and a base pressure of 1.2×10-8 mbar. Depth profiles were
carried out using a focused 500 eV Ar+ ion gun beam, with an
11 mA emission current, rastering over a 3×3 mm2 area. A
total of 15 etch (or sputter) steps were taken for all samples,
with an etching interval of 700 s.
Survey, key core level
and valence band spectra were acquired at the centre of the
sputter crater after each etch step, using a pass energy of
160, 20 and 10 eV, respectively. Charge neutralisation was
achieved using an electron flood gun with a filament current
of 0.38 A, charge balance of 2 V, and a filament bias of
4.2 eV. The instrument was calibrated to the binding energy
position of Au 4f 7/2 (83.95 eV). The instrumental resolution
was determined to be 290 meV at 10 eV pass energy. The
collected depth profile data was quantified through peak-fit
analysis using the CasaXPS software package,35 which
implements a F 1s Kratos-modified Scofield photoionisation
cross section database.


3

In order to investigate the microstructural changes and the
Ti diffusion process, an as-deposited and a 5 h annealed
sample were analysed using a state-of-the-art FEI Titan
(G3) Cubed Themis 60-300 kV TEM (with probe and Cs
corrector). The instrument is equipped with a X-FEG source
and CMOS-based FEI CETA 16-megapixel camera. Images
were acquired using a 300 kV accelerating voltage. Energy
dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) maps were obtained with
Super-X EDX System with four windowless Silicon Drift
Detector (SSD) of 120 mm2.
The microstructural images
were acquired via conventional TEM mode and the elemental
distribution maps of Cu, Ti, W and O signals were recorded
using Scanning TEM (STEM) mode.
TEM lamellas are
prepared using Helios NanoLab 450 – FEI focused ion beam
in-situ lift out technique.

III.
RESULTS

A.
Copper Surface

The microstructure of the TiW/Cu bilayer was first explored
with bright-field TEM to ascertain whether the interface is
stable during annealing. Cross sectional images of the 5 h
annealed sample are displayed in Fig. 1, and images of
the as-deposited sample can be viewed in Supplementary
Information I. The as-deposited sample shows evidence that
the TiW consists of a columnar grain boundary structure.
Typically an as-deposited grain structure of a thin film alloy
either resembles a “frozen” structure of fine precipitates or can
evolve during deposition and form columnar grain boundaries
with much larger grain sizes, both of which are dependent on
the temperature conditions during deposition.36 This structure
becomes more distinct in the 5 h annealed sample, as
shown in the bright-field TEM image in Fig. 1(a) and the
high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) image in Fig. 1(b),
with the latter emphasising this observation.
This agrees
well with past studies and is ubiquitous with sputter-deposited
TiW films.32,37 The fact that minimal changes occur to the
microstructure with annealing suggests that the TiW barrier
and the TiW/Cu interface are stable after annealing for
prolonged timescales.
However, the primary mode of degradation of this system
is the out-diffusion of Ti and this is difficult to observe in
the TEM images. To address this as-received samples were
characterised using synchrotron-based SXPS (hν = 1.6 keV).
The collected survey spectra are displayed in Supplementary
Information II, and show, as expected, a dominant copper
signal, with minor signals from oxygen, carbon and nitrogen
due to exposure to the ambient environment. Additionally, in
the annealed samples only, a subtle titanium signal appears
in the survey spectra, confirming that at 400°C, titanium
diffuses out of the barrier layer, through the metallisation and
accumulates at the copper surface. To address this further,
high-resolution Cu 2p3/2 and Ti 2p core level spectra collected
with SXPS for each sample are displayed in Fig. 2.
The Cu 2p3/2 core level spectra displayed in Fig. 2(a)
appear near-identical for all samples, with a binding energy

FIG. 1. Cross-sectional microstructural images taken with TEM for
the 5 h annealed sample, including (a) bright-field TEM image and
(b) an enlarged HAADF image of the interface.

(BE) position of 932.5 eV, attributed to copper metal.
A
low intensity satellite structure between 943 and 948 eV is
detected, labelled with the notation S1.
This satellite is
attributed to the presence of a thin native Cu(I) oxide (Cu2O)
layer on the copper metal surface and is generated due to
the charge transfer between the ligand and metal antibonding
orbitals of Cu2O.38,39 As the spectral lines of Cu2O and
copper metal overlap in the main photoionisation peak, it is
difficult to isolate the contributions from peak fit analysis,
however, this is not of interest to this study and from the core
level alone the chemical state can be safely assumed to be
primarily metallic copper with some Cu(I) oxide.40–43

The Ti 2p core level spectra are displayed in Fig. 2(b).
The spectra show that after annealing for as little as
0.5 h at 400°C titanium is observed at the surface having
diffused across the 25 nm-thick copper metallisation.
In
contrast, the as-deposited sample shows no indication of
titanium diffusion, confirming that the diffusion mechanism
is thermally initiated. This result falls inline with previous
studies that also observe the upward diffusion of titanium
from TiW into a metallisation overlayer in response to thermal
treatments.15,16,18,22,28,29 Souli et al. report that Ti diffusion in
TiW is initiated and facilitated not only by the thermal stress
during annealing but also the resultant residual stress in the
TiW layer during annealing. The authors observed that during
annealing Si/TiW (100 nm, 15.8 at.% Ti)/Cu (1.5 µn) stacks
to 673 K, the residual stress within the TiW layer decreases,


4

FIG. 2. Key core levels collected with SXPS at the copper surface
for all as-received samples, with (a) displaying the Cu 2p3/2 and (b)
the Ti 2p core level spectra. Data was normalised to the area of the
Cu 2p3/2 signal intensity, with the Ti 2p spectra four times magnified
relative to the Cu 2p3/2 spectra to aid with viewing the data.

lowering the activation energy needed for diffusion.6

Between the 0.5 and 5 h annealed samples, a 65% increase
in the total Ti 2p signal intensity was observed, meaning
that a thicker titanium overlayer is present.
The signal
increase is not linear in relation to annealing duration as a

ten-fold increase in intensity would be expected between the
0.5 h and 5 h annealed samples. A similar finding was put
forward by Olowolafe et al.
for a PVD sputtered TiW/Al
bilayer.18 They conducted RBS depth profile measurements
on Si/SiO2/Ti22W78/Al and Si/SiO2/Ti22W78/Al(2 at.% Cu)
stacks, annealing them between 450°C and 530°C for up to
4.5 h and reported the out-diffusion of Ti from the TiW layer
and the subsequent Ti accumulation on the Al and Al(Cu)
surface. Olowolafe et al. showed that the Ti accumulation
was proportional to the square root of time representing a
diffusion-limited growth. Moreover, the authors were able to
determine that the activation energy of the diffusion process in
their system was 2.4 eV, which they state is in keeping with the
assumption that Ti proceeds to migrate through aluminium via
grain boundary diffusion. As only two annealing timescales
were tested in our study, it is difficult to confirm (a) the
exact relationship between annealing duration and titanium
accumulation and (b) the kinetic regime of diffusion.

The BE position of the main Ti 2p peaks (458.5 and
464.2 eV) and the spin orbit splitting (SOS) distance of the
doublet peaks (5.7 eV) suggest that the primary contribution
in both SXPS and HAXPES spectra is from the Ti(IV)
oxidation state.44–47 Additionally, the lower BE side of the
main doublet peaks display a small shoulder attributed to the
presence of the Ti(III) oxide state.45,47 The BE position of the
Ti 2p core lines of titanium metal are at approximately 454
and 460 eV,48 and are absent from the core level spectra. This
confirms that the surface accumulated titanium has completely
converted to its oxide state. It is assumed that after annealing
and while the sample is confined in the deposition chamber
under vacuum, diffused titanium is present at the copper
surface in its metallic form and, when the sample is exposed
to air, it oxidises.

The out-diffusion of Ti and accumulation at the Cu surface
is further corroborated with EDS. Fig. 3 displays the results
from EDS elemental mapping of Cu and Ti on the TEM
cross section images (the complete set of EDS maps can be
viewed in Supplementary Information III). Fig. 3(b) shows
that for the as-deposited sample, the titanium is well-confined
to the TiW diffusion barrier, however, after annealing for 5 h,
titanium is observed on the copper surface (Fig. 3(d)), aligning
with the results from SXPS. This confirms the out-diffusion
of Ti and that this degradation mode is prominent in this
TiW(300 nm)/Cu(25 nm) system.
Additionally, from the
EDS maps copper is not observed to diffuse downward after
annealing for 5 h, suggesting that the interface and the TiW
barrier is stable under the conditions tested. These images
show a well-defined interface, but cannot provide information
on the chemical state at or across the interface. This prompted
measurements using a combination of SXPS and HAXPES
to non-destructively probe the TiW/Cu interface, as well as a
SXPS depth profile to obtain an elemental distribution map
across the TiW/Cu layers, and assess the chemical stability of
this interface.


5

FIG. 3. TEM images and overlaid EDS maps for the AD (top row) and 5 h annealed (bottom row) samples. The left column shows the Cu
maps, whereas the right column shows the Ti maps.

B.
Across the Metallisation

Quantification
with
either
SXPS
or
HAXPES
at
synchrotron facilities is challenging due to the lack of
critical parameters necessary to obtain reliable quantification,
such as relative atomic sensitivity factors (RASFs) and a
precise characterisation of the transmission function of the
analyser. However, for laboratory-based SXPS systems these
critical parameters are known. Therefore, to quantitatively
determine the distribution of titanium across the metallisation
and the depletion within the bulk TiW, a depth profile was
conducted using a Kratos Axis Supra laboratory-based SXPS
instrument.
The depth profile was conducted via in-situ Ar+ sputtering,
whereby the copper capping layer was gradually removed
until the TiW was reached.
Fig. 4 displays the survey
spectra collected after each sputter cycle, highlighting the
removal of the copper overlayer and the subsequent increase
in intensity of the Ti and W signals. To provide quantitative
elemental information, the collected core level spectra after
each sputter cycle were peak fitted, with the areas corrected
using the appropriate RASFs to determine a relative atomic
percentage ratio between Cu, W, and Ti across the bilayer
(see Supplementary Information IV for further information
regarding the peak fit analysis).
Peak fit analysis of the W 4f core level is particularly
challenging due to the close proximity of the W 4f core
lines to the W 5p3/2 core line.49 In the present case another
complication that needs addressing is the overlap of the Ti 3p
core level located at 32.6 eV for titanium metal with the
W 4f 5/2 core level peak.50 In this system, the composition
is heavily tungsten dominated and one would expect a
considerably lower Ti 3p peak intensity relative to the W 4f
peaks. Moreover, the W 4f 7/2 photoionisation cross section at
the Al Kα excitation energy is an order of magnitude greater
than the Ti 3p cross section.51–53 In terms of line shapes, the
Ti 3p3/2 core line has a theoretical life time width of 1.2 eV
according to measurements by Campbell et al., therefore,

if the peak was present in a significant intensity it should
be observable as the W 4f peaks have a full width at half
maximum (FWHM) of approximately 0.5 eV.54 Lastly, the
W 4f core level collected within the bulk of the TiW (i.e.
last etch cycle), displayed in Supplementary Information IV,
shows no indication of a prominent Ti 3p core line piercing
the W 4f 5/2 core line or affecting its line shape. Therefore,
if the Ti 3p core line was present with significant intensity
it should affect the asymmetry and tailing of the W 4f 5/2
peak. This is not the case, with the line shape of the W 4f
doublet peaks appearing very similar.
Extensive peak fit
analysis was conducted on the core level region and it was
determined that if the W 4f doublet peaks are constrained to
have the same FWHM and line shape, the resultant area ratio
is 0.75, matching with the expected ratio as determined from
the degeneracy of the f spin states. Therefore the Ti 3p core
line is negligible with respect to the W 4f intensity and does
not interfere with the W 4f region. Consequently it does not
need not be considered in peak-fit analysis for quantification.

The elemental distribution profiles of the metals present for
all samples are displayed in Fig. 5. The complete depth profile
containing the O and C signals can be found in Supplementary
Information V. The profiles displayed in Fig. 5 show very little
difference between the as-deposited and annealed samples,
with the Cu and TiW signals well separated in agreement
with the results from the TEM/EDS measurements. At the
copper surface of the 5 h annealed sample, prior to etching
(i.e. etch 0), the atomic ratio of Ti:Cu is 4.01:95.99, lowering
to 1.29:98.71 after the first etch cycle, and 0.04:99.96 after
the second cycle before Ti being undetected in the third
cycle, indicating that the titanium distribution is skewed to
the surface and not uniformly distributed in the copper bulk.
Titanium accumulated at the copper surface is able to undergo
complete oxidation as the concentration is relatively small
and so is not at risk of saturation, which is why no metallic
features are retained in the as-received Ti 2p core level spectra
in Fig. 2(b).

The depth profiles suggest that the interface does not


6

FIG. 4. Survey spectra collected after each etch cycle on the 0.5 h annealed sample, going from the as-received measurement “Etch 0” (top) to
the last etch cycle “Etch 15” (bottom). The red line indicates the point at which the atomic percentage ratio of W:Cu first becomes W majority
and so is termed the “interface”. The valence band spectra provide a good measure for the depth profile, with the three key valence band spectra
presented on the right-hand side. The valence band collected after (a) the initial etch cycle (Etch 1), (b) the 7th etch cycle (i.e. “interface”),
and (c) the final etch cycle in the TiW (Etch 15), which can be considered a bulk TiW measurement. Clear changes occur in the valence band
as we go from a metallic Cu rich to metallic TiW rich system.

FIG. 5. Elemental depth profiles collected for all samples. Etch 0
refers to measurements on the as-received sample, prior to etching.

broaden or migrate significantly with annealing, confirming
its stability upon thermal treatment at 400°C for prolonged
timescales.
The point of cross-over between the Cu and
W signals changes only subtly and the slight variations
observed are attributed to different sputter removal rates
and the thickness of the adventitious carbon overlayer for
each sample.
Annealing at 400°C will affect the crystal
structure and density of the copper film due to extensive
recrystallisation, affecting the sputter removal rate.36

The average Ti:W ratio (determined by comparing the
RASFs corrected total Ti 2p area and W 4f area) across the
last five etch steps (etch cycle 11-15) of the depth profile
(i.e. bulk TiW) across all samples is close to 10:90.
The
error associated with the Ti:W values is ±0.4 at.% due
to the complexity of peak fitting the core lines, making
the individual values (9.5:90.5, 9.6:90.4, and 10.0:90.0
for the as-deposited, 0.5 h and 5 h samples) essentially
indistinguishable. As the out-diffusion of Ti is minimal the
small loss of Ti cannot be robustly observed in the bulk TiW.
This further confirms the stability of the diffusion barrier at
400°C, aligning well with past TiW/Cu studies.22,23,29

As mentioned in Section II, a target consisting of 30 at.%
Ti was used for the deposition of the TiW. However, the
quantified concentration of the resultant film determined from
SXPS clearly deviates from this as detailed above. Others
have reported similar discrepancies when depositing TiW in
Ar discharges,28,29,55 and attribute these to the inherent issue
of sputter depositing two metals with very different atomic
weights, with titanium deposited and then preferentially
sputtered by backscattered Ar+ ions, increasing the tungsten
concentration. Bergstrom et al. show that depositing TiW in
xenon (Xe) rather than Ar provides a film composition equal
to that of the target as the heavier mass of Xe compared to Ar
eliminates backscattering.55.

The reason for the good stability of the TiW diffusion
barrier in response to annealing may be attributed to the Ti:W
ratio present. Cunningham et al. state a solubility limit of Ti in
W of 10 at.% at 600°C and from the depth profiles values close
to 10 at.% Ti are found in the present samples.10 Therefore, it
is not expected that any significant amount of more mobile,
excess titanium is present, but rather that almost all Ti is in a
stable solid solution with W. This can explain the low level of
out-diffusion observed.


7

C.
TiW/Cu Interface

1.
Core Levels

Only two reported detailed studies have explored the
TiW layer using XPS, the first from Alay et al., who
focused on conducting an extensive chemical and structural
characterisation of TiW films using not just XPS but also
X-ray diffraction (XRD), RBS, electron probe microanalysis
(EPMA), and AES,56 and the second being recent work
by the authors of the present work exploring the effects of
both post-deposition annealing and titanium concentration on
the oxidation behaviour of TiW.57 However, in both cases
the TiW was exposed to the ambient environment, thereby
forming a native and extensive surface oxide layer, not
representative of the true device state. Several studies using
AES have been conducted on TiW/Al18,58 and TiW/Cu12,22

bilayer samples, however, all rely on using in-situ sputtering
to obtain elemental distribution depth profiles across the
heterostructure.
Although, depth profiling has the clear
advantage of providing elemental quantification, which is the
reason we have also employed it in the previous section, the
destructive nature of the sputtering process compromises the
assessment of the chemical states across the material. This is
particularly prevalent for metal oxide systems whereby upon
sputtering, the oxides are typically reduced into a continuum
of lower oxide and metal states. Of most interest to industry
is the assessment of the TiW and TiW/Cu interface in its
true state, which formed the main motivation to thin the
copper overlayer in-situ and study the preserved interface with
synchrotron-based SXPS (hν = 1.6 keV) and the unaffected
bulk TiW with synchrotron-based HAXPES (hν = 5.9 keV),
exploiting the higher probing depth of HAXPES.
Survey spectra collected with both synchrotron-based
SXPS and HAXPES at the TiW/Cu interface after the in-situ
thinning of the copper can be found in Supplementary
Information VI. The SXPS and HAXPES recorded survey
spectra display Cu, Ti, W and O signals, whereas the signal
from carbon is very small and is only identifiable in the SXP
spectra. The key core levels measured with both techniques at
the TiW/Cu interface are displayed and compared in Fig. 6,
with the BE positions of the Ti 2p3/2 and W 4f 7/2 core
level peaks listed in Tab. I. The IMFP of W 4f electrons in
copper metal calculated using the TPP-2M formula is 2.2 and
6.3 nm, when using the 1.6 and 5.9 keV photon energies,
respectively.
Based on the statements made in Section II,
the probing depth of the W 4f electrons in copper metal is
approximately 6.5 and 19.0 nm (i.e.
3λ), with SXPS and
HAXPES, respectively. Considering a strong tungsten signal
is observable with SXPS, the maximum copper thickness after
in-situ thinning is estimated to be 6.5 nm.
The Cu 2p3/2 core level spectra collected with both
SXPS and HAXPES are displayed in Fig. 6(a) and (e),
respectively.
Copper is clearly detected with significant
intensity confirming that the interface has not been reached
and the TiW is not exposed in the analysis chamber, but rather
the copper has been thinned sufficiently to allow for SXPS
measurements across the TiW/Cu interface and HAXPES

TABLE I. BE positions of the Ti 2p3/2 and W 4f 7/2 core lines taken
from SXPS and HAXPES measurements. The errors associated with
the BE values are ±195 meV for the SXPS and ±120 meV for
the HAXPES measurements, respectively, based on their individual
energy resolution.

SXPS / eV
HAXPES / eV

Sample
Ti 2p3/2
W 4f 7/2
Ti 2p3/2
W 4f 7/2

AD
453.6
31.0
453.6
30.9
0.5 h
453.7
30.9
453.6
30.9
5 h
453.5
30.8
453.6
30.9

measurements into the bulk TiW. The spectra display no
satellite features toward the higher BE side of the main
photoelectron peak and the Cu 2p3/2 peak position is located
at 932.5 eV, confirming that copper is in its metallic state.
Additionally, no BE shifts or changes to the line shape
(i.e. asymmetry or FWHM) occur with annealing, suggesting
that no reaction between the copper and TiW occurs. The
Cu 2p3/2 signal intensity varies between samples relative to
the W 4f main signal intensity. The AD and 0.5 h annealed
sample spectra show similar Cu 2p3/2 intensities, whereas
for the 5 h sample spectrum the Cu 2p3/2 signal intensity is
approximately 50% greater. The differences in the remaining
copper thickness across the samples is attributed to the
repeatability of the sputtering process as well as differences
in sample composition and density.
Fig. 6(b) and (f) display the W 4f/5p3/2 core level region
measured with SXPS and HAXPES, respectively.
With
increasing photon energy the intensity of the W 5p3/2
peak increases relative to the W 4f peak intensities as
a consequence of the differences in decay rate of the
photoionisation cross sections between the two orbitals
when moving from the soft to the hard X-ray regime
(see Supplementary Information VII for the photoionisation
cross section decay profiles as a function of photon kinetic
energy).31 The BE positions and asymmetric line shape of
the W 4f core level in both the soft and hard XP spectra
correlate well with tungsten in its metallic state.59,60 However,
the binding energy position of the W 4f 7/2 and W 4f 5/2 are
located on average at 30.9 eV and 33.0 eV, respectively, which
are approximately 0.5 eV lower compared to pure metallic
tungsten.49 This negative shift in BE position away from
the pure tungsten metal BE position can be attributed to an
alloying effect in the presence of titanium.
Similar shifts
have also been observed for Ti-Ni,61 Ti-Cu62 and Ti-Pd63

alloys when varying the alloying concentration and are a
consequence of unique electronic environments that develop
when two metals are alloyed together.
Subtle spectral changes are observed in the SXPS W 4f
spectra, highlighted in the difference plot, whereas the
changes in the HAXPES spectra are much smaller. Fig. 6(b)
shows that with increasing annealing duration the BE position
of the W 4f peaks shifts to lower energies, with a -0.2 eV
shift observed between the AD and 5 h annealed sample.
Moreover, the line shape of the core level appears to change
between each sample, with the AD and 0.5 h samples showing


8

FIG. 6. Core level spectra collected at the TiW/Cu interface (after the in-situ thinning of the Cu) with SXPS (top row) and HAXPES (bottom
row), including from left to right, Cu 2p3/2, W 4f, Ti 2p, and O 1s. Spectra were normalised to the maximum intensity of the measured W 4f 7/2
core level after the removal of a constant linear background. The O 1s core level y-axis was scaled to match the signal-to-noise ratio of the
Ti 2p core level. Above the W 4f and Ti 2p core level spectra are difference plots showing the difference in signal intensity of the AD and 0.5 h
anneal sample relative to the 5 h anneal sample. The difference plots are plotted on the same relative intensity y-axis scale for each core level.

similar shapes, but the spectrum of the 5 h sample displays a
lower intensity of the valley region between the W 4f doublet
(see Supplementary Information VIII for a relative BE scale
plot of these spectra, further emphasising these differences).
Given that the depth profiles discussed in the previous
section show no significant change in the TiW concentration
with annealing, the observed spectral differences cannot be
explained on the basis of changes in the Ti:W ratio. Instead,
these spectral differences are evidence of subtle changes to
the chemical states across the interface, namely the formation
of W-O environments. The SXP O 1s spectra displayed in
Fig. 6(d) show that relative to the W 4f core line intensity, the
5 h sample has the lowest oxygen intensity. The main peak
intensity of the O 1s core line is at approximately 530.0 eV,
in agreement with a metal oxide (M-O) environment.64 This
can explain the observed differences in the SXPS W 4f
spectrum.
The AD and 0.5 h annealed samples show the

highest level of oxygen, which in turn leads to a positive
shift in the BE position of the W 4f peaks and change in
line shape, both of which represent the formation of a local
chemical environment of W-O bonds.57 However, due to the
low concentration of oxygen, a full, extended bulk interfacial
oxide layer cannot form, evidenced by the lack of distinct
chemically shifted core level peaks. As mentioned earlier,
the Ti 3p core line for metallic titanium is expected to be
positioned at 32.6 eV, overlapping with the W 4f 5/2 core line,
and so is marked with a guide-line in Fig. 6, however, given
that it has been established that the intensity of this peak
is negligible with respect to the W 4f peaks, the observed
changes in line shapes can only be attributed to the presence
of an interfacial oxide and not the presence of the Ti 3p peak.
Lastly, it is difficult to comment on whether annealing has
an effect on this interfacial oxide as the copper overlayer
thickness between the samples varies but it can be confirmed


9

that regardless of the annealing duration, metal-oxide states
are present at the TiW/Cu interface.
The origin of the inclusion of oxygen into this system and
its accumulation at the interface will be further discussed
in Section IV B. However, to summarise, it is assumed that
given that the deposition process occurs under high vacuum,
residual concentrations of oxygen will be present. Therefore,
prior to the deposition of copper, the TiW face will be exposed
to the chamber environment gettering oxygen and leading to
the development of M-O environments. Due to the presence of
titanium, oxidation of the TiW interface even at low residual
oxygen concentrations is favourable as titanium has excellent
gettering properties,65 and a high chemical affinity towards
oxygen.57,66

The SXPS Ti 2p core level spectra are displayed in
Fig. 6(c). The spectra display core line peaks with asymmetric
tails and at average BE positions of 453.7 eV (Ti 2p3/2)
and 459.9 eV (Ti 2p1/2), giving a SOS distance of 6.2 eV,
confirming that titanium within the TiW is present in its
metallic state.61,62,67 The reported binding energy positions of
pure titanium metal in the literature are less well-defined and
more varied than those of tungsten metal, making it difficult
to truly confirm if the Ti 2p core level of TiW also deviates
from the BE position of pure metallic titanium, similar to the
observation of the W 4f shifts, alluding to an alloying effect.
Bertóti et al. compiled literature values of the Ti 2p3/2 core
level peak of titanium metal citing a range of 453.9-454.3 eV
and reporting a 453.8±0.2 eV value from their own work.48

Therefore, based on this, it appears that the BE positions of
the Ti 2p core level peaks measured for our TiW system also
show a slight negative shift relative to the pure metal, similar
to the W 4f binding energy shifts. Aside from BE shifts, the
Ti 2p SXPS spectra also show variations in signal intensity
but this is most likely due to the remaining copper thickness
differences between samples.
The HAXPES Ti 2p core level displayed in Fig. 6(g) show
no change in the signal intensity or peak position as a function
of annealing duration. Compared to the SXPS spectrum, the
background is considerably higher in the Ti 2p3/2 region. This
is due to the plasmon from the close lying W 4p3/2 peak
and the intensity of this plasmon is enhanced with HAXPES
due to photoionisation-cross section effects.
Additionally,
differences in line shapes between the SXPS and HAXPES
recorded Ti 2p spectra are observed, especially on the higher
BE side of the Ti 2p3/2 between 454.5-458.5 eV (a comparison
of the SXPS and HAXPES core levels after the subtraction of
a background, highlighting this spectral change is included
in Supplementary Information IX). The change in intensity
across this region clearly exceeds the difference in energy
resolution between the SXPS and HAXPES experiments,
suggesting that this is intrinsic to the sample interface and
an indication of differences in chemical states, rather than
a consequence of energy resolution.
Carley et al.
share
a similar observation during oxygen absorption experiments
on titanium and other metal foils using XPS.68 The authors
determined that under low oxygen exposure conditions the
main peak BE positions remained consistent with metallic
species.
However, with increasing oxygen exposure, a

noticeable “filling in” of the region between doublet peaks
or an increased tail height toward higher binding energies
(i.e. above the Ti 2p1/2 core line) was observed, correlating
to the formation and development of Ti-O environments at the
TiW/Cu interface.68–70 Therefore, much like the W 4f spectra,
the Ti 2p spectra give evidence of the formation of a Ti-O
environment at the interface.
The O 1s spectra collected with HAXPES, displayed in
Fig. 6(h) are considerably lower in intensity compared to
the SXPS collected spectra, suggesting that the bulk TiW
contains trace quantities of oxygen, whereas the concentration
of oxygen at the interface is far greater.
It is well known
that the photoionisation cross section (and therefore signal
intensity) of core levels decay with increasing photon energy,
with each core level having different decay rates.31 However,
comparing the Scofield photoionisation cross sections of the
Ti 2p3/2 and O 1s (see Supplementary Information VII), it
is obvious that their decay rates are similar.
Furthermore,
when comparing the W 4f 7/2 cross section to the O 1s an
overlap is observed at 3.6 keV, with the O 1s cross section
exceeding the W 4f 7/2 when using a 5.9 keV photon energy.
Therefore, we can be confident that the observed low intensity
of the HAXPES recorded O 1s spectrum is in fact due to
the small concentration of oxygen in the bulk rather than a
photoionisation cross section effect.
The W 4f and Ti 2p
spectra collected with HAXPES also reflect this observation
as they show almost negligible changes in the line shape and
BE positions across the samples and do not appear to have the
same hallmarks of M-O formation as observed with SXPS.
Overall, it is clear that by comparing the SXPS and
HAXPES W 4f and Ti 2p spectra, an interfacial oxide
consisting of a local co-ordination of Ti-O and W-O states
are present at the TiW/Cu interface but not a bulk oxide
layer.
This assumption is further corroborated by the fact
that titanium is observed to diffuse during annealing and,
if the interface was fully oxidised, titanium oxide would
be precipitated and immobile to diffuse through the copper
metallisation.

2.
Electronic Structure

The electronic structure of occupied states across the
TiW/Cu interface can be probed through collection of the
valence band (VB) spectra. The VB is the highest measurable
kinetic energy region (lowest BE region) in XPS, and
therefore electrons originating from the VB have the largest
IMFP and the signal is representative of the maximum probing
depth.
Fig. 7 displays the VB spectra collected with both SXPS
and HAXPES across the TiW/Cu interface after the in-situ
thinning of the copper. A stark difference is observed between
the valence band spectra collected with soft and hard X-rays.
The main features are labelled with Roman numerals (I-V).
These features are located at approximately 0.2 eV (I), 1.6 eV
(II), 2.5 eV (III), 3.8 eV (IV) and, 4.7 eV (V). Due to the
difference in probing depth of SXPS relative to HAXPES, the
soft X-ray collected valence band is more heavily influenced


10

FIG. 7. Valence band spectra acquired at the TiW/Cu interface after
in-situ thinning of the copper metallisation for all samples, collected
with two photon excitation energies - 1.6 keV (SXPS) and 5.9 keV
(HAXPES). Two guide lines are given at 1.9 and 3.2 eV marking
key line shape changes between the SXPS and HAXPES measured
valence band spectra. Spectra are normalised to their respective areas
and aligned to their intrinsic Fermi edge (EF).

by the remaining copper metallisation and closely resembles
the valence band of copper reported by others.71,72 In contrast,
the HAXPES measurements probe predominately the bulk
TiW and closely resemble the VB of tungsten metal.49,60

The SXP spectra show differences between the samples.
The gradient of the region between 0-2 eV appears to fluctuate
between the samples.
However, no systematic shift is
observed. Whereas, the intensity of feature III (attributed to
mainly Cu 3d states) appears identical for the AD and 0.5 h
annealed sample, but increases for the 5 h sample.
These
differences are attributed to the differences in remaining
Cu overlayer thickness between the samples after in-situ
sputtering, which will influence the the ratio of Cu and W
states in the VB, affecting the VB shape.
The HAXPES spectra show negligible change with
increasing annealing duration.
The titanium diffusion
mechanism and changes to the concentration within the bulk
of the TiW is too small to warrant significant change in
the VB, reflecting the core level spectra. Additionally, the
one-electron photoionisation cross section of Ti 3d at 5.9 keV
is 3.1×10-25 cm2, compared to 5.1×10-23 cm2 for the W 5d
orbital and given the significantly higher concentration of
tungsten in the TiW layer, the tungsten overshadows the
contributions of titanium to the VB. Therefore, even if
the depletion was significant, it would be difficult to infer
this from VB spectra.51,53 The lack of change in electronic

structure across the TiW bulk further corroborates the findings
from the depth profiles and HAXPES core level analysis.
According to Tanaka et al.
the changing of the alloying
concentration of a binary alloy will affect the electronic
structure of the alloy, consequently leading to significant
changes in the line shape (i.e. asymmetry) and BE position of
the core levels of the two metal components.63 However, the
HAXPES recorded Ti 2p and W 4f core levels show an almost
negligible change in the line shape and BE position, and the
depth profile results show that the depletion of Ti from the
bulk TiW after annealing is not significant. Therefore, these
observations explain why the HAXPES recorded VB shows
negligible change between the as-deposited and annealed
samples.

IV.
DISCUSSION

A.
Intermetallic Compound Formation

Several studies have explored the metallurgical stability
of Ti/Cu and TiW/Cu systems during thermal treatments,
tracking the temperature of failure and assessing any
occurring chemical reactions.12,29,73–76 According to the
Ti-Cu phase diagram,77,78 Ti and Cu exhibit trace-solubilities
in one another, with titanium showing a maximum solubility
in copper of approximately 8 at.% at 855°C, otherwise they
are subject to forming intermetallic phases.
Murray et
al. do not report phase transitions below 500°C,77 whereas
Okomoto et al.
provide an updated phase diagram going
down to 200°C suggesting intermetallic Cu-Ti phases can
form below 500°C.78.
Copper
and
tungsten
are
completely
immiscible,79

therefore, in TiW/Cu systems the only potential reactions are
Cu-Ti reactions at the interface. However, from the core level
analysis at the interface no BE shifts or changes in line-shape
occur that would suggest the formation of such a compound.
If a reaction was to occur one would expect to observe a
significant change when comparing the AD sample, where the
Ti-Cu reaction should not occur and the 5 h annealed sample,
where the conditions favour intermetallic phase formation.
Cocke et al. report that for Ti36Cu64 alloys, the Ti 2p3/2 core
level should shift by +0.5 eV relative to the pure titanium
metal core level BE, whereas the Cu 2p3/2 peak should shift
by -0.2 eV relative to the pure copper metal core level BE
position.62 In the present case, a negative shift in BE of the
Ti 2p core line with annealing is observed, which as discussed
earlier, falls more in-line with the changes to the O 1s core
line and the development of Ti-O states, and no BE shift or
even FWHM change in the Cu 2p3/2 core line is notable.
In Ti/Cu systems,
several studies have detected the
formation of intermetallic compounds during annealing as
low as 350°C.12,73,74 In such systems, copper and titanium
interdiffusion proceeded, leading to the consumption of
titanium and the growth of the TiCu3 phase at the expense
of TiCu.73,74 This ultimately led to the demise of titanium
as a suitable power semiconductor diffusion barrier candidate
on its own.
However, in terms of TiW/Cu studies, the


11

formation of Cu-Ti intermetallic phases at temperatures
below 500°C is not readily observed.
Olowolafe et
al.
studied Si/SiO2/TiW(50 nm)/Cu(100 nm)/TiW(50 nm)
multi-layer stacks. The structures were annealed at 500°C
for 1-2 h and from AES and XRD measurements, no
sign of interdiffusion or intermetallic compound formation
was observed.12 Similarly, Wang et al.
report no reaction
or CuTi formation between Cu and TiW up to 875°C
after 30s of rapid thermal annealing (RTA), although at
temperatures above 800°C slight titanium interdiffusion into
copper was observed.22 However, in this case the RTA
may be too quick to allow for a significant reaction or
sufficient titanium diffusion and therefore is unlikely to be
comparable to our study. Fugger et al. explored annealing
TiW(50 nm)/Cu(1000 nm) systems at 400°C for 8 h, and
observe no Cu-Ti intermetallic phase formation.29 Based on
these studies and the TEM/SXPS/HAXPES data presented
in this work, it is clear that the TiW/Cu interface is stable
during annealing at 400°C for as long as 5 h and no Cu-Ti
intermetallic compounds form.

B.
Interfacial Oxide Formation

From the acquired SXPS data at the interface, it is clear
that there is an accumulation of oxygen at the interface
leading to the formation of a thin interfacial layer of Ti-O
and W-O states. Given that the TiW interface is not subjected
to excessively high temperatures and the concentration of
oxygen is insufficient to form an extended bulk oxide, it is
expected that the TiW oxidation behaviour will not follow
the parabolic law outlined by the classic Wagner theory
but rather obey the Cabrera-Mott theory which is applicable
low temperature oxidation and the formation of thin oxide
films.62,80 The surface reaction at the interface will occur
step-wise, first with the atomic dissociation of oxygen and
physisorption to the TiW surface, followed by chemisorption
into the lattice and the subsequent migration of oxygen ions
through the metal surface after which a metal/metal oxide
and metal/oxide/gas interface forms.
The growth of the
oxide layer then proceeds via the movement of ions and
electrons/holes across the oxide layer. The theory states that
the metal ion diffusion across the developing metal oxide
layer is governed by the electric field generated between the
adsorbed oxygen on the surface and the underlying metal,
which leads to a very fast initial rate of oxidation before a
slowing down.80

In a binary alloy like TiW, the metal component with
the largest enthalpy of formation for its oxide will oxidise
first (i.e. titanium) and be the dominant component to
diffuse across the metal oxide layer.57 The second metal
(i.e. tungsten) will oxidise only,
if the temperature is
sufficiently high or the oxygen partial pressure is high enough
to induce oxidation. From the O 1s spectra alone it is difficult
to confirm the ratio of titanium to tungsten oxides as the
chemical shift between the two is difficult to resolve (TiO2
= 529.7 eV and WO3 = 530.2 eV).64 However, from the
SXPS core levels, the Ti 2p spectra show the most change

in line shape relative to the bulk “metallic” HAXPES spectra,
suggesting preferential oxidation of the Ti does occur.
It is difficult to confirm the exact origin of the oxygen
that has accumulated at the TiW interface, but three potential
routes can be identified:
(a) the diffusion of oxygen
through the 25 nm-thick copper layer (whether that be
during deposition, annealing or when the sample is removed
from the deposition chamber) and/or (b) the gettering of
residual oxygen within the deposition chamber by the bare
TiW surface prior to the deposition of copper and/or (c)
oxygen within the copper deposit accumulating at the TiW
interface. Considering route (a), the SXPS measurements on
the as-received samples show that significant oxidation of the
copper surface does not occur as only a native Cu(I) oxide
is present rather than Cu(II) oxide. Leon et al. conducted
polarised reflectometry measurements on sputter deposited
32 nm-thick copper films exposed to room temperature
(300 K), ambient pressure conditions (0.1 MPa), and a relative
humidity of 87 % after 1 and 253 days of exposure. From their
measurements, the native oxide thickness was extracted to be
1.81 nm after 1 day, growing to 6.59 nm after 253 days.81 This
suggests that the oxygen diffusion path length in sputtered
deposited copper is less than 10 nm when under standard
conditions. Therefore, based on this it can be ruled out that
the interfacial TiW oxide develops via the room temperature
diffusion of oxygen through the 25 nm copper layer when
the sample is exposed to air. Alternatively, residual oxygen
is expected to be present in the deposition chamber as it
operates only under high vacuum conditions (10-8-10-7 mbar).
The oxidation of copper is known to enhance with higher
temperatures82 and annealing timescales,83 and therefore
oxygen may be able to diffuse through the copper, towards
the TiW interface during annealing. However, in this case
significant differences in the chemical state of the copper
surface and TiW interface would be expected between the AD
and 5 h annealed sample. However, this is not the case, ruling
out this pathway.
Alternatively, TiW may getter residual oxygen within the
deposition chamber following route (b). As assumed above,
residual quantities of oxygen are expected in the deposition
chamber. Therefore, when the TiW is deposited its surface
will be exposed to this atmosphere prior to the deposition
of copper, providing the perfect opportunity for oxygen to
accumulate at the TiW/Cu interface and partially oxidise. The
third potential route, (c), involves the accumulation of oxygen
from within the copper deposit at the TiW/Cu interface.
The complete depth profiles displayed in Supplementary
Information V show oxygen is present within the copper
layer. This can be attributed to the purity of the target and
sputtering conditions as residual oxygen in the chamber may
be incorporated into the copper film. Therefore, the source
of oxygen at the TiW/Cu interface may be due to residual
oxygen at the base of the copper film being drawn to the TiW
interface. Overall, routes (b) and (c) appear most likely and
the source of oxygen can be assumed to be largely from the
deposition chamber environment.
The inclusion of oxygen at the interface may be of benefit to
the system and improve the stability of the TiW/Cu interface


12

and effectiveness of the TiW barrier. Oparowski et al. showed
that the performance of TiW diffusion barriers against Au or
Al interdiffusion could be improved by varying the sputter
gas composition during deposition.84 Depositing TiW in a
95:5 Ar:O gas mixture compared to a pure Ar gas mixture
was shown to increase the barrier breakdown temperature
from 300 to 400°C, however, the average adhesion structure
was shown to be significantly compromised with the addition
of oxygen to the gas mixture.
This was attributed to
the formation of TiO2 and WO3 at the interface prior to
metallisation deposition.
Wang et al.
explored this further by studying a
Si/Ti27W73/Cu sample configuration with and without a
venting break between the TiW and Cu deposition steps. The
venting break involved opening the deposition chamber and
exposing the TiW face to air for 30 minutes.22 The authors
showed that the vented samples possessed a higher TiW
breakdown temperature of 875°C compared to 825°C for the
no vent sample. The explanation for this improvement is that
exposure to air leads to a “decoration” of oxides at the TiW
grain boundaries, reducing the mobility of titanium out of the
barrier and subsequently retarding the interdiffusion of Si or
metal atoms through the TiW and/or suppressing the reaction
of TiW with either the Si or metal interfaces, both of which
improve the barrier performance.
Therefore, the presence
of oxide species at the interface in the present samples may
explain the stability of the diffusion barrier.

V.
CONCLUSIONS

This work probes the chemical states present in both TiW
and Cu as well as across their interface for the first time.
The Ti concentration close to the solubility limit in W as
well as the unintentional presence of oxide species at the
interface can explain the exceptional stability of the TiW
diffusion barriers. The combined use of SXPS and HAXPES
coupled with depth-profiling allows the exploration of the
depth dependence of elemental distributions and chemical
states, enabling the characterisation of the titanium diffusion
mechanism that occurs during annealing.
Titanium diffuses out of the barrier and accumulates at
the copper surface when annealed at 400°C, with prolonged
annealing timescales resulting in a greater out-diffusion of
titanium from the TiW. Accumulated titanium at the copper
surface undergoes oxidation to the predominately Ti(IV)
oxide state with a small contribution from Ti(III) states.
Annealing at 400°C for 0.5 h and 5 h did not lead to the
failure of the TiW barrier, indicated by the lack of Cu-Si
and Cu-Ti intermetallic formation. Furthermore, TEM images
show that after 5 h of annealing the TiW remains stable and
copper is not observed to diffuse downward but is rather
constrained above the TiW. HAXPES measurements were
able to characterise the TiW layer in its true state, showing
that the TiW is representative of a binary metal alloy system,
with trace quantities of oxygen attributed to the gettering of
residual oxygen by the TiW face prior to the deposition of
copper.
SXPS measurements across the interface detected

low concentrations of metal-oxygen states (W-O and Ti-O),
suggesting that a thin interfacial oxide forms between the TiW
and Cu layers. Despite the depletion of titanium from the
barrier layer, the electronic structure of bulk TiW does not
change with annealing, suggesting that the extent of titanium
depletion is too small to have any observable influence.
Results obtained for the specific metallisation technology
explored in this work, exemplify the usefulness of the
employed characterisation protocol to study not only the
spacial distributions of elements, but importantly the chemical
states present. In addition, the in-situ partial decapping of
the Cu overlayer makes it possible to study the true state of
the interface in-situ.
This approach holds promise for the
exploration of other metallisation schemes and their buried
interfaces, where similar open questions regarding stability
and breakdown remain.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

The Supplementary Information contains TEM images
collected for the as-deposited sample, the complete EDS
dataset including W and Cu signals for both the as-deposited
and 5 h anneal samples, survey spectra collected with
synchrotron-based SXPS and HAXPES, peak-fit analysis of
the Ti 2p core level spectra collected at the copper surface
of as-received samples, the complete SXPS depth profile
including the C and O signals, photoionisation cross section
profiles for the core levels analysed across the measured
photon energy range and additional figures aiding with the
assessment of the core level spectra collected at the interface.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

CK acknowledges the support from the Department
of Chemistry, UCL. AR acknowledges the support from
the Analytical Chemistry Trust Fund for her CAMS-UK
Fellowship.
These experiments were conducted with the
support of the Diamond Light Source, beamline I09 (proposal
SI24248).
The authors would like to thank Dave McCue,
I09 beamline technician, for his support of the experiments.
The SXPS depth profile measurements were performed at the
EPSRC National Facility for XPS (“HarwellXPS”) operated
by Cardiff University and UCL, under Contract No. PR16195.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The majority of the data that supports the findings of this
study are available within the article and its Supplementary
Material.

DISCLOSURES

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


13

VI.
REFERENCES

1Z. J. Shen and I. Omura, Proceedings of the IEEE 95, 778 (2007).
2T. V. Do, K. Li, J. P. Trovão, and L. Boulon, in 2020 IEEE Vehicle Power
and Propulsion Conference (VPPC) (2020) pp. 1–6.
3G. Iannaccone, C. Sbrana, I. Morelli,
and S. Strangio, IEEE Access 9,
139446 (2021).
4K. K. H. Wong, S. Kaja, and P. W. DeHaven, IBM Journal of Research and
Development 42, 587–596 (1998).
5T. Behrens, in 2013 15th European Conference on Power Electronics and
Applications (EPE) (2013) pp. 1–10.
6I. Souli, V. L. Terziyska, J. Keckes, W. Robl, J. Zechner, and C. Mitterer,
Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B 35, 022201 (2017).
7L. Stolt, F. D’Heurle, and J. Harper, Thin Solid Films 200, 147 (1991).
8Y. Shacham-Diamand, A. Dedhia, D. Hoffstetter,
and W. G. Oldham,
Journal of The Electrochemical Society 140, 2427 (1993).
9R. Sachdeva, A. A. Istratov, and E. R. Weber, Applied Physics Letters 79,
2937 (2001).
10J. A. Cunningham, C. R. Fuller, and C. T. Haywood, IEEE Transactions on
Reliability R-19, 182 (1970).
11B. W. Shen, G. C. Smith, J. M. Anthony,
and R. J. Matyi, Journal
of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectronics Processing and
Phenomena 4, 1369 (1986).
12J. Olowolafe, C. Mogab, and R. Gregory, Thin Solid Films 227, 37 (1993).
13H. M. Day, A. Christou, and A. C. Macpherson, Journal of Vacuum Science
and Technology 14, 939 (1977).
14M.-A. Nicolet, Thin Solid Films 52, 415 (1978).
15P. Ghate, J. Blair, C. Fuller, and G. McGuire, Thin Solid Films 53, 117
(1978).
16C. Canali, G. Celotti, F. Fantini, and E. Zanoni, Thin Solid Films 88, 9
(1982).
17S. E. Babcock and K. N. Tu, Journal of Applied Physics 53, 6898 (1982).
18J. O. Olowolafe, C. J. Palmstro/m, E. G. Colgan, and J. W. Mayer, Journal
of Applied Physics 58, 3440 (1985).
19S. E. Babcock and K. N. Tu, Journal of Applied Physics 59, 1599 (1986).
20H. Krautz, C. Wenzel, K. Bornkessel, and G. Blasek, Physica Status Solidi
(a) 110, K77 (1988).
21A. Ashkenazi, Y. Komen, and I. Lerner, Applied Surface Science 65-66,
746 (1993).
22S. Wang, S. Suthar, C. Hoeflich,
and B. J. Burrow, Journal of Applied
Physics 73, 2301 (1993).
23J.-C. Chiou, K.-C. Juang, and M.-C. Chen, Journal of The Electrochemical
Society 142, 2326 (1995).
24C. S. Chang, T. B. Wu, C. K. Huang, W. C. Shih, and L. L. Chao, Japanese
Journal of Applied Physics 39, 6413 (2000).
25S. Bhagat, H. Han, and T. Alford, Thin Solid Films 515, 1998 (2006).
26S. Petrovi´c, D. Peruško, B. Gakovi´c, M. Mitri´c, J. Kovaˇc, A. Zalar,
V. Milinovi´c, I. Bogdanovi´c-Radovi´c,
and M. Milosavljevi´c, Surface
and Coatings Technology 204, 2099 (2010), proceedings of the European
Materials Research Socierty (E-MRS)Spring Meeting 2009.
27Q. Wang and S. Liang, Vacuum 85, 979 (2011).
28M.
Plappert,
O.
Humbel,
A.
Koprowski,
and
M.
Nowottnick,
Microelectronics Reliability 52, 1993 (2012).
29M. Fugger, M. Plappert, C. Schäffer, O. Humbel, H. Hutter, H. Danninger,
and M. Nowottnick, Microelectronics Reliability 54, 2487 (2014).
30J. Woicik, Hard X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (HAXPES) (Springer,
2016).
31C. Kalha, N. K. Fernando, P. Bhatt, F. Johansson, A. Linblad, H. Rensmo,
L. Z. Mendina, R. Lindblad, S. Siol, L. Jeurgens, C. Cancellieri,
K. Rossnagel, K. Medjanik, G. Schoenhense, M. Simon, alex Gray,
S. Nemsak, P. Lömker, C. Schlueter, and A. Regoutz, Journal of Physics:
Condensed Matter (2021).
32F. Saghaeian, J. Keckes, S. Woehlert, M. Rosenthal, M. Reisinger, and
J. Todt, Thin Solid Films 691, 137576 (2019).
33T.-L. Lee and D. A. Duncan, Synchrotron Radiation News 31, 16 (2018).
34S. Tanuma, C. J. Powell, and D. R. Penn, Surface and Interface Analysis
21, 165 (1994).
35J. Walton, P. Wincott, N. Fairley,
and A. Carrick, Peak Fitting with
CasaXPS: A Casa Pocket Book (Accolyte Science, United Kingdom, 2010).

36J. M. E. Harper and K. P. Rodbell, Journal of Vacuum Science &
Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures Processing,
Measurement, and Phenomena 15, 763 (1997).
37A. Dirks, R. Wolters, and A. Nellissen, Thin Solid Films 193-194, 201
(1990).
38K. Karlsson, O. Gunnarsson, and O. Jepsen, Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 4, 2801 (1992).
39G. Schön, Surface Science 35, 96 (1973).
40V. K. Kaushik, Spectrochimica Acta Part B: Atomic Spectroscopy 44, 581
(1989).
41A. C. Miller and G. W. Simmons, Surface Science Spectra 2, 55 (1993).
42R. P. Vasquez, Surface Science Spectra 5, 257 (1998).
43D. Tahir and S. Tougaard, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 24,
175002 (2012).
44S. Sen, J. Riga, and J. Verbist, Chemical Physics Letters 39, 560 (1976).
45C. N. Sayers and N. R. Armstrong, Surface Science 77, 301 (1978).
46U. Diebold and T. E. Madey, Surface Science Spectra 4, 227 (1996).
47R. L. Kurtz and V. E. Henrich, Surface Science Spectra 5, 179 (1998).
48I. Bertóti, M. Mohai, J. Sullivan, and S. Saied, Applied Surface Science
84, 357 (1995).
49C. Kalha, L. E. Ratcliff, J. J. G. Moreno, S. Mohr, M. Mantsinen, N. K.
Fernando, P. K. Thakur, T.-L. Lee, H.-H. Tseng, T. S. Nunney, J. M. Kahk,
J. Lischner, and A. Regoutz, arXiv (2021), 2109.04761.
50J. Barth, F. Gerken, and C. Kunz, Phys. Rev. B 31, 2022 (1985).
51J. H. Scofield, Theoretical Photoionization Cross Sections from 1 to 1500
keV, Tech. Rep. (Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, 1973).
52A. J Jackson, A. M Ganose, A. Regoutz, R. G. Egdell, and D. O Scanlon,
Journal of Open Source Software 3, 773 (2018).
53C. Kalha, N. Fernando,
and A. Regoutz, “Digitisation of Scofield
Photoionisation Cross Section Tabulated Data,” (2020).
54J. L. Campbell and T. Papp, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables 77, 1
(2001).
55D. B. Bergstrom, I. Petrov, and J. E. Greene, Journal of Applied Physics
82, 2312 (1997).
56J. L. Alay, H. Bender, G. Brijs, A. Demesmaeker, and W. Vandervorst,
Surface and Interface Analysis 17, 373 (1991).
57C. Kalha, S. Bichelmaier, N. K. Fernando, J. V. Berens, P. K. Thakur,
T.-L. Lee, J. J. Gutiérrez Moreno, S. Mohr, L. E. Ratcliff, M. Reisinger,
J. Zechner, M. Nelhiebel, and A. Regoutz, Journal of Applied Physics 129,
195302 (2021).
58R. Furlan, J. Van der Spiegel,
and J. W. Swart, Journal of the
Electrochemical Society 138, 2377 (1991).
59T. L. Barr, The Journal of Physical Chemistry 82, 1801 (1978).
60M. Engelhard and D. Baer, Surface Science Spectra 7, 1 (2000).
61B. Senkovskiy, D. Usachov, A. Fedorov, O. Vilkov, A. Shelyakov,
and
V. Adamchuk, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 537, 190 (2012).
62D. Cocke, T. Hess, T. Mebrahtu, D. Mencer, and D. Naugle, Solid State
Ionics 43, 119 (1990).
63K. Tanaka, M. Ushida, K. Sumiyama,
and Y. Nakamura, Journal of
Non-Crystalline Solids 117-118, 429 (1990), proceedings of the Seventh
International Conference on Liquid and Amorphous Metals.
64V. Dimitrov and T. Komatsu, Journal of Solid State Chemistry 163, 100
(2002).
65J. E. Beggs, IRE Transactions on Electron Devices 3, 93 (1956).
66Z. Liu and G. Welsch, Metallurgical Transactions A 19, 1121 (1988).
67S. Doniach and M. Šunji´c, Journal of Physics C Solid State Physics 3, 285
(1969).
68A. F. Carley, P. R. Chalker, J. C. Riviere, and M. W. Roberts, J. Chem. Soc.,
Faraday Trans. 1 83, 351 (1987).
69C. Puglia,
A. Nilsson,
B. Hernnäs,
O. Karis,
P. Bennich,
and
N. Mårtensson, Surface Science 342, 119 (1995).
70M. Kuznetsov, J. Zhuravlev,
and V. Gubanov, Journal of Electron
Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 58, 169 (1992).
71S. Hüfner, G. K. Wertheim, and J. H. Wernick, Phys. Rev. B 8, 4511 (1973).
72A. C. Miller and G. W. Simmons, Surface Science Spectra 2, 55 (1993).
73J. L. Liotard, D. Gupta, P. A. Psaras, and P. S. Ho, Journal of Applied
Physics 57, 1895 (1985).
74J. Li, J. W. Strane, S. W. Russell, S. Q. Hong, J. W. Mayer, T. K. Marais,
C. C. Theron, and R. Pretorius, Journal of Applied Physics 72, 2810 (1992).


14

75M. Takeyama, A. Noya, K. Sakanishi, H. Seki, and K. Sasaki, Japanese
Journal of Applied Physics 35, 4027 (1996).
76H. Ramarotafika and G. Lemperiere, in European Workshop Materials for
Advanced Metallization, (1997) pp. 122–123.
77J. L. Murray, Bulletin of Alloy Phase Diagrams 4, 81 (1983).
78H. Okamoto, Journal of Phase Equilibria 23, 549 (2002).
79F. Vüllers and R. Spolenak, Acta Materialia 99, 213 (2015).
80K. Fujita, D. Ando, M. Uchikoshi, K. Mimura, and M. Isshiki, Applied
Surface Science 276, 347 (2013).

81J. J. Diaz Leon, D. M. Fryauf, R. D. Cormia, M.-X. M. Zhang, K. Samuels,
R. S. Williams, and N. P. Kobayashi, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
8, 22337 (2016).
82T. N. Rhodin, Journal of the American Chemical Society 72, 5102 (1950).
83J. Stiedl, S. Green, T. Chassé, and K. Rebner, Applied Spectroscopy 73, 59
(2019).
84J. Oparowski, R. Sisson, and R. Biederman, Thin Solid Films 153, 313
(1987).


Evaluation of the Thermal Stability of TiW/Cu Heterojunctions Using a
Combined SXPS and HAXPES Approach: Supplementary Information
C. Kalha,1 M. Reisinger,2 P. K. Thakur,3 T. -L. Lee,3 S. Venkatesan,4 M. Isaacs,5, 1 R. G. Palgrave,1 J. Zechner,2

M. Nelhiebel,2 and A. Regoutz1, a)

1)Department of Chemistry, University College London, 20 Gordon Street, London, WC1H 0AJ,
United Kingdom.
2)Kompetenzzentrum Automobil- und Industrie-Elektronik GmbH, Europastraße 8, 9524 Villach,
Austria.
3)Diamond Light Source Ltd., Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX1 3QR,
United Kingdom.
4)Infineon Technologies AG, Am Campeon 1-15, 85579 Neubiberg, Germany.
5)Harwell XPS, Research Complex at Harwell (RCaH), Didcot, OX11 0FA

(Dated: 21 January 2022)

a)Electronic mail: a.regoutz@ucl.ac.uk

arXiv:2201.08074v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  20 Jan 2022


2

CONTENTS

I. As-deposited TEM images
3

II. Survey Spectra Collected at Copper Surface
4

III. Complete EDS maps
5

IV. Peak Fit Analysis of Depth Profile Data
6

V. Complete Depth Profile
8

VI. Survey Spectra Collected at TiW/Cu Interface with Synchrotron SXPS and HAXPES Measurements
9

VII. Photoionisation Cross Sections of the Key Core Level Spectra
10

VIII. Normalisation of Interface SXPS data
11

IX. Ti 2p difference plots collected at the TiW/Cu Interface
12

X. References
13


3

I.
AS-DEPOSITED TEM IMAGES

Fig. 1 displays high-resolution TEM cross-sectional images collected on an as-deposited (AD) Si/SiO2/TiW(300 nm)/Cu(25 nm)
sample.

FIG. 1. TEM images of the AD sample, including (a) a bright-field TEM image and (b) HAADF image.


4

II.
SURVEY SPECTRA COLLECTED AT COPPER SURFACE

Fig. 2 displays the as-received sample survey spectra collected using synchrotron-based SXPS (hν = 1.6 keV). All observed
core and Auger lines are indicated.

FIG. 2. Synchrotron-based SXPS survey spectra collected on the as-received samples (i.e. no etch). Spectra are vertically offset and normalised
to the maximum intensity peak to aid with comparison.


5

III.
COMPLETE EDS MAPS

Fig. 3 and Fig 4 display the complete set of EDS maps taken on cross sections of the AD and 5 h anneal samples, respectively.

FIG. 3. EDS elemental maps taken on a cross-sectional image of the AD sample, including a (a) HAADF image, and (b) Cu, (c) W, (d) Ti, and
(e) O EDS maps.

FIG. 4. EDS elemental maps taken on a cross-sectional image of the 5 h annealed sample, including include a (a) HAADF image, and (b) Cu,
(c) W, (d) Ti, and (e) O EDS maps.


6

IV.
PEAK FIT ANALYSIS OF DEPTH PROFILE DATA

Peak fit analysis of the depth profile data was conducted in CasaXPS, implementing a Shirley-type background and applying
the RASFs taken from the Kratos-modified Scofield photoionisation cross section database (values used are listed in Table I).
When fitting the W 4f core level region, the asymmetric LA function was used for the 4f doublet peaks and a GL(30) function
for the 5p3/2 peak. An example of this fit is displayed in Fig. 5. Constraining the 4f doublet to have the same line shape and
FWHM resulted in a good fit with the area ratio determined to be 0.75, matching the expected degeneracy ratio. This suggests
that the Ti 3p intensity is too small and can be omitted from the peak fit analysis. If it was present in any significant capacity one
would expect the 4f area ratio to deviate from 0.75 and/or the use of two peaks would lead to a poor fit.

FIG. 5. Example of the W 4f core level peak fit, including (a) the raw spectrum obtained on the the last etch cycle of the depth profile for the
5 h annealed sample and (b) the resultant peak fit.

TABLE I. F 1s Kratos library relative atomic sensitivity factors

Core level RASF
Cu 2p3/2
3.547
O 1s
0.78
Ti 2p
2.00
C 1s
0.278
W 4d
4.42
W 4f
3.52

To truly rule out the possibility that the Ti 3p interferes with the W 4f region we measured these spectra on titanium and
tungsten metal foils, respectively. Fig. 6 displays these core levels along with the Ti 2p. Fig. 6(a) displays the expected intensity
of the three core levels if a 1:1 Ti:W ratio was studied. To obtain these spectra, the Ti 2p and W 4f core levels were normalised
to their respective areas and then their intensity was corrected by applying appropriate RASFs. The Ti 3p core level was first
normalised to the total area of the Ti 2p region (after the subtraction of a Shirley-type background) and then corrected for
intensity with the appropriate RASFs. Based on this, the Ti 3p core level intensity relative to the W 4f is already very small.
Taking into account that the ratio of Ti:W for these systems was expected to be approximately 20:80 gives Fig. 6(b). This shows
that the Ti 3p is now indistinguishable, and appears to be truly unlikely of interfering with the W 4f core level.


7

FIG. 6. Ti 2p, Ti 3p and W 4f reference spectra collected on Ti and W polycrystalline metal foils, measured after in-situ sputtering using a
Thermo K-Alpha laboratory SXPS instrument. The core levels are scaled to resemble the intensities if a (a) 1:1 Ti:W ratio was present and (b)
a 0.2:0.8 Ti:W ratio was present.


8

V.
COMPLETE DEPTH PROFILE

Fig. 7 displays the complete depth profile, including O and C signals, collected using the laboratory-based SXPS instrument.

FIG. 7. Complete elemental depth profiles collected for the (a) as-deposited, (b) 0.5 h annealed and (c) 5 h annealed samples. Quantification
from Etch 0 (i.e. as-recieved) is not included due to the high level of adventitious carbon.


9

VI.
SURVEY SPECTRA COLLECTED AT TIW/CU INTERFACE WITH SYNCHROTRON SXPS AND HAXPES
MEASUREMENTS

Fig. 8 displays the survey spectra collected using SXPS (hν = 1.6 keV) and HAXPES (hν = 5.9 keV) at the TiW/Cu interface
after the in-situ thinning of the copper metallisation. All observed core and Auger lines are indicated.

FIG. 8. Synchrotron-based SXPS (top) and HAXPES (bottom) survey spectra collected at the TiW/Cu interface after in-situ thinning. Spectra
are vertically offset and normalised to the maximum intensity peak to aid with comparison.


10

VII.
PHOTOIONISATION CROSS SECTIONS OF THE KEY CORE LEVEL SPECTRA

FIG. 9. Total electron photoionisation cross sections of O 1s, Ti 2p3/2, Cu 2p3/2, W 4f 7/2 and W 5p3/2 orbitals.1,2 Guide lines for the 1.6 keV
and 5.9 keV photon energies used in this work are included.


11

VIII.
NORMALISATION OF INTERFACE SXPS DATA

Fig. 10 displays the SXPS W 4f and Ti 2p core level spectra collected at the TiW/Cu interface after in the in-situ thinning of
the copper but these spectra are plotted on a relative binding energy (BE) scale and normalised to their maximum intensity, to
aid with observing the changes in spectral line shapes between the samples.

FIG. 10. SXPS (hν = 1.6 keV) core level spectra collected at the TiW/Cu interface after the in-situ thinning of the copper capping layer,
including the (a) W 4f and (b) Ti 2p core levels. Spectra are plotted on a relative BE scale and are normalised to their maximum intensity.


12

IX.
TI 2P DIFFERENCE PLOTS COLLECTED AT THE TIW/CU INTERFACE

Fig. 11 shows the direct comparison of the SXPS and HAXPES recorded Ti 2p spectra collected at the TiW/Cu interface,
using a spectral subtraction method to aid with unravelling this complex difference. Peak fitting is difficult in this situation due
to the asymmetric nature of the main metallic peak and the spin-orbit spitting effects arising from the p orbital. The subtraction
of the HAXPES core line from the SXPS core line reveals an increase in intensity between the doublet peaks.

FIG. 11. Comparison of the Ti 2p spectra collected with SXPS (hν = 1.6 keV) and HAXPES (hν = 5.9 keV). Spectra were normalised to their
maximum intensity after the removal of a non-linear curve background. The spectra were additionally aligned so that the lower BE side of
the Ti 2p3/2 peak of both spectra were aligned. Difference plots calculated by subtracting the two spectra are displayed above each spectra.
Comparison of the collected spectra for the (a) as-deposited, (b) 0.5 h anneal and (c) 5 h samples.


13

X.
REFERENCES

1J. H. Scofield, Theoretical Photoionization Cross Sections from 1 to 1500 keV, Tech. Rep. (Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, 1973).
2C. Kalha, N. Fernando, and A. Regoutz, “Digitisation of Scofield Photoionisation Cross Section Tabulated Data,” (2020).


