1

Spin Seebeck effect in iron oxide thin films: Effects of phase transition, phase 

coexistence, and surface magnetism

Amit Chanda1,*, Derick DeTellem1, Yen Thi Hai Pham1, Jenae E. Shoup1, Anh Tuan Duong2, 

Raja Das2, Sunglae Cho3, Dmitri V. Voronine1, M. Tuan Trinh1, Dario A. Arena1, Sarath 

Witanachchi1, Hariharan Srikanth1,*, and Manh-Huong Phan1,*

1 Department of Physics, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, USA

2 Faculty of Materials Science and Engineering, Phenikaa University, Yen Nghia, Ha-Dong 

District, Hanoi, 12116, Viet Nam

3 Department of Physics and Energy Harvest-Storage Research Center, University of Ulsan, 

Ulsan 680-749, Republic of Korea

Abstract

Understanding impacts of phase transition, phase coexistence, and surface magnetism on the 

longitudinal spin Seebeck effect (LSSE) in a magnetic system is essential to manipulate the spin 

to charge current conversion efficiency for spincaloritronic applications. We aim to elucidate these 

effects by performing a comprehensive study of the temperature dependence of LSSE in biphase 

iron oxide (BPIO = -Fe2O3 + Fe3O4) thin films grown on Si (100) and Al2O3 (111) substrates. A 

combination of temperature-dependent anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) and electrical resistivity 

measurements show that the contribution of ANE from the BPIO layer is negligible compared to 

the intrinsic LSSE in the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure even at room temperature. Below the Verwey 

transition of the Fe3O4 phase, the total signal across BPIO/Pt is dominated by the LSSE. Noticeable 

changes in the intrinsic LSSE signal for both Si/BPIO/Pt and Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructures 

around the Verwey transition of the Fe3O4 phase and the antiferromagnetic (AFM) Morin transition


2

of the -Fe2O3 phase are observed. The LSSE signal for Si/BPIO/Pt is found to be almost two 

times greater than that for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt, an opposite trend is observed for the saturation 

magnetization though. Magnetic force microscopy reveals the higher density of surface magnetic 

moments of the Si/BPIO film compared to the Al2O3/BPIO film, which underscores a dominant

role of interfacial magnetism on the LSSE signal and thereby explains the larger LSSE for 

Si/BPIO/Pt.

KEYWORDS: Iron oxide thin film; Magnetism; Spin Seebeck effect; Inverse spin Hall Effect; 

Spincaloritronics; Anomalous Nernst effect

*Corresponding authors: achanda@usf.edu (A.C.); sharihar@usf.edu (H.S.); phanm@usf.edu

(M.H.P.)


3

1. INTRODUCTION

The past few years have witnessed a rapid growth in the field of generation and 

manipulation of pure spin currents for cutting edge spintronic applications.1 The propagation of 

pure spin currents in a magnetic insulator (MI) in its magnetically saturated state takes place via 

collective excitation of the polarized spins which is also known as magnon.2 Magnon spin current 

in a MI is beneficial over charge current in an ordinary ferromagnetic metal/semiconductor since

(1) magnon spin current does not cause energy dissipation due to ohmic losses as electronic 

degrees of freedom become frozen, and (2) the spin diffusion length of magnon driven spin 

currents is much larger than that of charge currents.3 From a green, efficient-energy harvesting

perspective, thermally excited spin transport, also known as the spin Seebeck effect (SSE)4,

appears to be an effective way of generating incoherent magnon excitations in the THz regime5. 

The longitudinal spin Seebeck effect (LSSE) refers to the generation of a magnon spin current in 

a MI parallel to the direction of the applied temperature gradient.5 These thermally generated 

magnons accumulate at the cold side of the thermal gradient6, 7. When a thin layer of heavy a metal 

(HM) with strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC), e.g., platinum (Pt) is placed in close contact with the 

MI, the accumulated magnons at the interface between the MI and the HM layer drives pure spin 

current into the HM layer which is then converted into charge current via the inverse spin Hall 

effect (ISHE);8 the generated electric voltage measured transverse to both the applied magnetic 

field direction and the temperature gradient is called the LSSE signal. The bilayer structure 

consisting of ferrimagnetic insulator Y3Fe5O12 (YIG) and Pt is known as the hallmark system for 

LSSE.9-13 Apart from insulating iron garnets,14 insulating spinel ferrites e.g., CoFe2O4,15 have also 

emerged as another promising class of magnetic insulators for LSSE. Over the years, research has 

shown that the observation of LSSE is not only restricted to magnetic insulators, including 


4

ferrimagnetic and antiferromagnetic insulators9, 16, but it has also been observed in ferromagnetic 

metals,4 half-metallic ferromagnets, e.g., mixed valent manganites17 and ferromagnetic 

semiconductors, e.g., GaMnAs18. However, for a bilayer made of ferromagnetic metal or, 

semiconductor and Pt, the measured LSSE voltage is usually contaminated by the spin polarized 

charge current driven by the temperature gradient across the ferromagnetic layer due to the 

anomalous Nernst effect (ANE),19 as well as the proximity induced ANE in the Pt layer20. A 

quantitative disentanglement of these spurious signals is therefore necessary in order to extract the 

intrinsic LSSE contribution.19 Other effects such as electronically/magnetically coupled structural 

phase transition,21 phase coexistence,22, 23 and surface magnetization12, 13, 24-26 on the SSE have also 

been reported in various systems, but are yet to be understood. It is therefore essential to find a 

magnetic system within which the effects can be investigated systematically.

Magnetite (Fe3O4) is a unique half-metallic magnetic material27 for LSSE investigations 

because of its famous Verwey transition (≈ 120 K) at which the system undergoes a transformation 

from the high temperature conducting state to the low temperature insulating state. Ramos et al.

have extensively investigated the LSSE in epitaxial Fe3O4/Pt bilayers,28, 29 as well as in [Fe3O4/Pt]n

multilayers,30 and identified the ANE-free intrinsic LSSE contribution below the Verwey 

transition. They showed that both the magnetic proximity-induced ANE and the inherent ANE 

contribution of the magnetic layer were strongly suppressed in the Pt layer, and that the LSSE 

played a dominant role for the Fe3O4/Pt bilayer and [Fe3O4/Pt]n multilayers. However, there is a 

need for a quantitative disentanglement of the inherent LSSE, the ANE of the magnetic layer, and 

the proximity-induced ANE in the Pt layer to understand the temperature evolution of the intrinsic

LSSE of Fe3O4/Pt in the vicinity of the Verwey transition. While the conductivity mismatch 


5

between the Fe3O4 and Pt layers has been shown to affect the intrinsic LSSE in Fe3O4/Pt, a clear

understanding of the role of interfacial magnetism or surface magnetization of the Fe3O4 layer on 

the LSSE signal is lacking. Using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), Condon et al. observed 

surface reconstruction of a reduced Fe3O4 and revealed biphase ordering of the surface consisting 

of superlattices of Fe3O4 and Fe1-xO islands.31, 32 Later, Lanier et al.33 evidenced the coexistence 

of ferrimagnetic (FM) Fe3O4 and antiferromagnetic (AFM) -Fe2O3 islands instead of the Fe1-xO 

phase on the -Fe2O3 surface. Most interestingly, Genuzio et al.34 observed transformation of the 

Fe3O4 phase into -Fe2O3 phase in Fe3O4 thin films grown on Pt and Ag substrates by annealing 

them not only in O2 environment but also in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV). The Fe3O4 → -Fe2O3

conversion in UHV which was observed only for the films grown on Pt substrate, is driven by the 

diffusion of Fe from the surface into the bulk of the film indicating the important role of the 

substrate on the formation of the bi-phase. These studies raise an interesting, fundamental question 

regarding the effect of phase coexistence (FM Fe3O4 and AFM -Fe2O3 phases) on the thermally 

driven spin transport in such iron oxide systems, which was not examined in the previous studies28-

30, 35.

In this context, we have chosen a biphase iron oxide (BPIO = -Fe2O3 + Fe3O4) film as a 

model system for probing effects of the phase transition and phase coexistence on the LSSE over 

a wide temperature range of 10 – 300 K. For studying the effect of surface magnetization, we

measured LSSE in iron oxide thin films grown on two different substrates, Si (100) and Al2O3 

(111), using molecular beam epitaxy. A combination of temperature-dependent ANE and electrical 

resistivity measurements on the BPIO layer shows the negligible contribution of the ANE from 

the BPIO layer as compared to the intrinsic LSSE signal in the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure even at 


6

room temperature. Below the Verwey transition, the total signal across BPIO/Pt is dominated by

the LSSE. The Si/BPIO/Pt and Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructures show noticeable changes in the 

LSSE signal around the Verwey transition of the Fe3O4 phase and the AFM Morin transition36-38

of the -Fe2O3 phase, highlighting the important effects of the phase transition and coexistence. 

The LSSE signal for Si/BPIO/Pt is found to be almost two times higher than that for 

Al2O3/BPIO/Pt, due to the higher density of surface magnetic moments of the Si/BPIO film 

compared to the Al2O3/BPIO film. These findings underscore the dominating role of interfacial 

magnetism of the FM layer on the LSSE signal in FM/HM bilayers.

2. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1(a) shows the XRD patterns of the iron oxide films grown on Si (100) and Al2O3 

(111) substrates. In addition to the cubic Fe3O4 phase39, 40, the peaks associated with a secondary 

-Fe3O4 phase41-43 are clearly visible in the XRD patterns for both Si/Fe3O4 and Al2O3/Fe3O4films.

The Raman spectra of both the iron oxide films also show characteristic peaks for both Fe3O4 and 

α-Fe2O3 phases (Figure 1(b)). For the Al2O3/Fe3O4 film, the α-Fe2O3 phase is characterized by six

strong peaks at 229 cm-1 (A1g), 244 cm-1 (Eg), 291 cm-1 (Eg), 406 cm-1 (Eg), 499 cm-1 (A1g), and 606 

cm-1 (Eg), and the Fe3O4 phase is characterized by two strong peaks at 535 cm-1 and 665 cm-1.44-48

For the Si/Fe3O4 film, the 499 cm-1 (A1g) and 535 cm-1 peaks associated with α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4

phases, respectively are masked by the strong Si (520 cm-1) peak. However, the remaining peaks 

associated with both the α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 phases are visible for the Si/Fe3O4 film. Some of the 

Eg peaks associated with α-Fe2O3 are blue shifted possibly because of the strong Si-background.

These results indicate that both Si/Fe3O4 and Al2O3/Fe3O4 films are not single phase but consist of 

two different phases of iron oxide. We designate the “Si/Fe3O4” and “Al2O3/Fe3O4” films as 


7

“Si/BPIO” and “Al2O3/BPIO” films, respectively throughout the manuscript, where BPIO

represents a combination of Fe3O4 and -Fe3O4 phases. Figure 1(c) and (d) demonstrate the surface 

morphology of the Al2O3/BPIO and Si/BPIO films, respectively, characterized by the FESEM. It 

is evident that the crystallites are smaller in size (average size ~ 100 nm) and more closely packed 

for the Si/ BPIO film in comparison to the Al2O3/BPIO film. From the cross-sectional FESEM 

image of the Si/BPIO film (Figure 1(e)), the interfacial boundary between the BPIO film and Si 

substrate is clearly distinguishable. We performed the cross-sectional FESEM for all the four edges 

of the Si/BPIO bilayer structure and confirmed that the thickness of the BPIO layer is ≈ 80 ± 5 nm 

indicating the uniform growth of the BPIO film on the Si (100) substrate.

LSSE measurements on the Si/BPIO/Pt and Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructures were 

performed. Figure 2(a) illustrates a schematic sketch of the LSSE measurement on the Si/BPIO/Pt 

heterostructure. An out-of-plane temperature gradient was applied along the +z-direction that 

generates a temperature difference, T = +10 K between the top (cold) and bottom (hot) surfaces 

of the heterostructure. An in-plane voltage was developed along the y-direction (Vy) in the Pt layer 

due to the ISHE, while scanning the external in-plane magnetic field applied along the x-direction. 

According to the bulk magnon theory, the concurrent presence of a temperature gradient (𝛁𝑻
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ ) and 

an in-plane dc magnetic field develops a spatial gradient of magnon accumulation in the magnetic 

layer (BPIO, for our case).6, 7, 49-51 These accumulated magnons close to the BPIO/Pt interface are 

responsible for the transverse spin current pumping into the Pt layer.7, 49, 51 The density of spin 

current (𝑱𝑺
⃗⃗⃗ ) at the Si/BPIO interface is related to the applied temperature gradient (𝛁𝑻
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ ) through 

the relation, 𝑱𝑺
⃗⃗⃗ ∝ −𝑄𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸𝛁𝑻
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ ; where, 𝑄𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 is the spin Seebeck coefficient.7, 52 This spin current 

enters the Pt layer and gets converted into charge current, 𝑱𝑪
⃗⃗⃗ = (

4𝜋𝑒

ℎ ) 𝜃𝑆𝐻

𝑃𝑡(𝑱𝑺
⃗⃗⃗ × 𝝈
⃗⃗⃗ ); where, 𝜃𝑆𝐻

𝑃𝑡


8

is the spin Hall angle of Pt and 𝝈⃗⃗ is the spin-polarization vector.53 The corresponding spin Seebeck

voltage can be expressed as,7, 54

𝑉𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 = 𝑅𝑦𝐿𝑦𝜆𝑃𝑡 (

4𝜋𝑒

ℎ ) 𝜃𝑆𝐻

𝑃𝑡 𝐽𝑆 tanh (

𝑡𝑃𝑡
2𝜆𝑃𝑡),
(1)

where, 𝑒, ℏ, 𝑅𝑦, 𝐿𝑦, 𝜆𝑃𝑡, and 𝑡𝑃𝑡 are the electronic charge, the reduced Planck’s constant, the 

resistance between the contact probes on the Pt layer, the distance between the contact leads, the 

spin diffusion length, and the thickness of the Pt layer, respectively.

Since Fe3O4 is a half-metallic ferromagnet with a high Curie temperature (TC ~ 850 K), it 

has high spin polarization of conduction electrons at room temperature. So, in presence of the out-

of-plane temperature gradient and in-plane magnetic field, a transverse spin-polarized current is 

generated in the BPIO layer by the ANE; this gives rise to an extra voltage contribution (𝑉𝐹𝑀

𝐴𝑁𝐸) to 

the total signal measured across the top Pt layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure.19 Under the 

application of a temperature gradient 𝛁𝑻
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ , the ANE voltage generated in a magnetic conductor with 

magnetization 𝑴
⃗⃗⃗ is described by the cross product of 𝑴
⃗⃗⃗ and 𝛁𝑻
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ as,55

𝑬𝑨𝑵𝑬
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ ∝ 𝑄𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝜇0𝑴
⃗⃗⃗ × 𝛁𝑻
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ )
(2)

where, 𝑬𝑨𝑵𝑬
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ is the electric field generated by ANE and 𝑄𝐴𝑁𝐸 is the anomalous Nernst coefficient. 

Moreover, there is an additional voltage contribution (𝑉𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑥

𝐴𝑁𝐸) due to the magnetic proximity-

induced ANE in the non-magnetic Pt layer.19, 56 Thus for the configuration illustrated in Figure

2(a) with Pt on top, the LSSE voltage is entangled with the ANE contribution from the magnetic 

BPIO layer and the proximity induced ANE in the Pt layer. However, both the ANE voltages: 

𝑉𝐹𝑀

𝐴𝑁𝐸 and 𝑉𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑥

𝐴𝑁𝐸 are strongly suppressed due to the placement of the 5 nm thick top Pt layer.28

Now, let us discuss about the contribution from the magnetic proximity-induced LSSE in the Pt 


9

layer. Because of the magnetic proximity, only few layers of Pt (with thickness, 𝑑𝑃𝑡

𝑚𝑎𝑔) close to 

the BPIO/Pt interface are magnetized, whereas the remaining layers (with thickness, 𝑑𝑃𝑡

𝑁𝑀) are 

unmagnetized. In presence of the temperature gradient, vertical spin currents are generated inside 

the magnetized Pt layer.28 This spin current induces an additional in-plane charge current to the 

magnetic Pt/nonmagnetic Pt interface via the ISHE, contributing to the total signal with the voltage 

component, 𝑉𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑥,𝑃𝑡

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸
. Therefore, the total voltage measured across the Pt layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt 

heterostructure in the presence of the out-of-plane temperature gradient and in-plane applied 

magnetic field can be written as 𝑉𝑦𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 = 𝑉𝑦𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 + 𝑉𝐹𝑀, 𝑆𝑢𝑝

𝐴𝑁𝐸
+ 𝑉𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑥, 𝑆𝑢𝑝

𝐴𝑁𝐸
+ 𝑉𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑥,𝑃𝑡

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸
, where 

𝑉𝐹𝑀, 𝑆𝑢𝑝

𝐴𝑁𝐸
and 𝑉𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑥, 𝑆𝑢𝑝

𝐴𝑁𝐸
are the suppressed ANE voltages due to the BPIO layer and the 

proximity-induced ANE voltage in the non-magnetic Pt layer. Bougiatioti et al. demonstrated that 

the magnetic proximity induced ANE signal in the non-magnetic Pt layer is significant for Ni33Fe67

(metallic)/Pt bilayer but negligible for NiFe2Ox (semiconducting)/Pt and becomes zero for NiFe2O4 

(insulating)/Pt.19 Since Fe3O4 is semiconducting at room temperature (with resistivity ~10-2 Ω cm)

and becomes insulating below the Verwey transition, the contribution of the proximity-induced 

ANE in the Pt layer can be neglected (previous report28 shows that 

𝑉𝐹𝑀, 𝑆𝑢𝑝

𝐴𝑁𝐸

∆𝑇
≈ 7.5 nV/K at T = 300 

K considering fully magnetized one monolayer of Pt) in our case throughout the measured 

temperature range. Moreover, it is known that the LSSE voltage reduces with decreasing thickness 

of the magnetic layer.10 Since 𝑑𝑃𝑡

𝑚𝑎𝑔 is very small, the magnetic proximity-induced LSSE 

contribution of the Pt layer, 𝑉𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑥,𝑃𝑡

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸
is negligible. Therefore, the total voltage measured across the 

Pt layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure becomes 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 = 𝑉𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 + 𝑉𝐹𝑀, 𝑆𝑢𝑝

𝐴𝑁𝐸
. We show the 

magnetic field dependence of the total voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) across the Pt layer of the 

Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure at selected temperatures between T = 295 and 75 K in Figure 2(b). The 


10

maximum field range was limited to 0H = ± 0.3 T and the temperature difference between the hot 

and cold plates was fixed at T = +10 K for all the measurements. The 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) curves 

clearly show well-defined hysteresis loops at all temperatures.

To decouple the intrinsic LSSE contribution from the ANE contaminations, ANE 

measurements were separately performed on the Si/BPIO bilayer structure. Figure 2(c) shows a 

schematic illustration of the ANE measurement on the Si/BPIO bilayer, using the same 

experimental conditions as the LSSE measurement on the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure. We show 

the magnetic field dependence of the ANE voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) at selected temperatures between T

= 295 and 75 K in Figure 2(d). Like the 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) curves, 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) curves also exhibit well-

defined hysteresis loops. In Figure 2(e), we compared the 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) and 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) isotherms 

at T = 295 for. It is evident that the signal is strongly enhanced by ~ 2 times upon the placement 

of the Pt layer on the BPIO layer. In Figure 2(f), we compared the 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) and 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻)

isotherms at T = 105 K, which is below the Verwey transition. Surprisingly, the (ANE+LSSE) 

signal is ~10 times higher than the ANE signal, which underscores a crucial role of electrical 

resistivity of the BPIO film in controlling the intrinsic LSSE signal. As already mentioned, the 

ANE signal is suppressed by the placement of the Pt layer on top of the BPIO layer. Considering 

a parallel circuit arrangement of the BPIO and Pt layers, the degree of suppression of the ANE 

signal is usually expressed as the ratio of the electrical conductance of the BPIO layer 

(𝐺𝛼−𝐹𝑒2𝑂3+𝐹𝑒3𝑂4 = 𝐺BPIO) and the Pt layer (𝐺𝑃𝑡). The suppressed ANE voltage across the Pt layer 

of the Si/BPIO /Pt heterostructure can thus be expressed as19, 28

𝑉𝐹𝑀, 𝑆𝑢𝑝

𝐴𝑁𝐸
= (

𝑓

1+𝑓) 𝑉𝐹𝑀

𝐴𝑁𝐸
(3)


11

where 𝑓 =

𝐺BPIO

𝐺𝑃𝑡 =

𝜌𝑃𝑡

𝜌BPIO ∙

𝑡BPIO

𝑡𝑃𝑡 . Here, 𝜌BPIO and 𝜌𝑃𝑡 are the electrical resistivity of the BPIOand 

Pt layers, and 𝑡BPIO and 𝑡𝑃𝑡 are the thickness of the BPIO and Pt layers, respectively. We measured 

the temperature dependence of resistivity of both 80 nm BPIO and 5 nm Pt layers separately (see 

the left inset of Figure 3(e)). At room temperature, 𝜌BPIO(≈ 10-2  cm) is three orders of magnitude 

higher than 𝜌𝑃𝑡 (≈ 10-5  cm). Hence, 

𝐺BPIO

𝐺𝑃𝑡
≪ 1 , indicating 𝑉𝐹𝑀, 𝑆𝑢𝑝

𝐴𝑁𝐸
≪ 𝑉𝐹𝑀

𝐴𝑁𝐸 . Thus, the 

observed signal across the Pt layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure is mostly dominated by the 

contribution from the intrinsic LSSE of the BPIO layer. Because of the semiconducting nature of 

the BPIO film (

𝜕𝜌BPIO

𝜕𝑇
< 0), 𝜌BPIO increases with lowering temperature, whereas 𝜌𝑃𝑡 (

𝜕𝜌𝑃𝑡

𝜕𝑇 > 0)

decreases. Hence, the correction factor (

𝑓

1+𝑓) also decreases with decreasing temperature (see the 

right inset of Figure 3(e)), indicating a stronger contribution of the intrinsic LSSE of the 

BPIO layer at low temperatures. Using the temperature dependence of the correction factor, we 

determined the intrinsic LSSE voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 = 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 − 𝑉𝐹𝑀, 𝑆𝑢𝑝

𝐴𝑁𝐸
of the Si/BPIO/Pt 

heterostructure at different temperatures. Figure 3(a) depicts the magnetic field dependence of the 

LSSE voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) at selected temperatures between T = 295 and 75 K. A well-defined 

hysteresis loop is evident for 𝑉𝑦

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) isotherms at all temperatures.

Figure 3(c) shows the temperature dependence of the background-corrected voltages, 𝑉𝑖 =

𝑉𝑦𝑖(𝜇0𝐻=+ 0.3 𝑇 )−𝑉𝑦𝑖(𝜇0𝐻=− 0.3 𝑇 )

2
for the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure; where the index i refers to the 

ANE voltage, total voltage (ANE + LSSE), and intrinsic LSSE voltage. It is evident that 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸

is almost 2 times higher than 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸throughout the measured temperature range and both 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸 and 

𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 decrease slowly with decreasing temperature up to TA = 200 K below which both of 


12

them undergo a sudden drop at T = 185 K. 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 increases slowly below T = 185 K and shows

a broad maximum around TV = 120 K below which it decreases rapidly. On the other hand, a 

careful observation reveals that 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸 slightly increases below T = 175 K and shows a weak 

maximum around T = 145 K but drops drastically with further lowering the temperature. As 

previously anticipated, the effective ANE contribution across the Pt layer is negligible and hence 

the intrinsic LSSE of the BPIO layer plays the dominating role. Therefore, a small difference in 

magnitude is observed between 𝑉𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 and 𝑉𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸+𝐴𝑁𝐸 throughout the measured temperature range,

and the difference is insignificant below TV = 120 K. Nevertheless, the temperature dependence of 

𝑉𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 follows the same trend as 𝑉𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸+𝐴𝑁𝐸. The broad maximum in 𝑉𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 can be explained from 

the temperature dependence of the magnitude of spin polarization, 𝝈
⃗⃗⃗ . Previous study on the Fermi 

edge spin polarization in Fe3O4 has shown that the magnitude of 𝝈
⃗⃗⃗ increases with decreasing 

temperature due to gradual opening of the energy gap between the minority t2g spin states and the 

majority eg spin states at the Fermi level and attains its maximum value near TV but decreases with 

further lowering temperature.57 Since ISHE-induced charge current in the Pt layer is proportional 

to the cross product (𝑱𝑺
⃗⃗⃗ × 𝝈
⃗⃗⃗ ),53 the LSSE voltage also shows a broad maximum around TV and 

decreases below TV.

To correlate the temperature profile of thermo-spin transport in Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure

with magnetic properties of the BPIO layer, we investigated the temperature dependence of 

magnetization M(T) of Si/BPIO in zero-field cooled (ZFC) and field-cooled (FC) mode (see Figure

3(d)) measured under an in-plane magnetic field of 0H = 0.1 T. Both ZFC and FC M(T) curves 

exhibit a pronounced downturn around TV ~ 120 K (determined from the maximum in the dM/dT

curve), which is identified as the Verwey transition of the Fe3O4 phase. In addition, with decreasing 


13

temperature from 300 K, there is a slow decrease in the magnetization below T ≈ 250 K in the 

ZFC M(T), which is followed by a faster decrease below TA ≈ 200 K and a pronounced dip at TD ~ 

185 K. This feature is identified as the Morin transition from the high temperature weakly FM to 

the low temperature AFM ordering of the -Fe2O3 phase.36-38, 58, 59 Typically, the Morin transition 

is sharp with the critical temperature of 𝑇𝑁

𝛼−𝐹𝑒2𝑂3 ≈ 250 𝐾 and the magnetization-dip is usually 

observed above 200 K. However, in our case, the transition is rather broad and the magnetization-

dip occurs around TD = 185 K. It is reported that the Morin transition strongly depends on the -

Fe2O3 film thickness and it shifts to lower temperatures with decreasing thickness.59 We believe 

that our system is phase separated into multiple micro- or, nanoscale regions of α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4

with different sizes and hence different 𝑇𝑁

𝛼−𝐹𝑒2𝑂3 associated with the α-Fe2O3 phases. Such a 

distribution of 𝑇𝑁

𝛼−𝐹𝑒2𝑂3 can broaden the average macroscopic Morin transition of the α-Fe2O3 

phase. Hence, the significant decrease in the temperature profiles of both 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸 and 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸

below TA = 200 K and the pronounced dip-like feature at TD = 185 K are associated with the 

decrease in magnetization originated from the AFM Morin transition of the α-Fe2O3 phase.

In order to understand whether the α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 phases are exchange coupled in our 

films, we performed exchange bias (EB) measurements. The magnetic field dependent 

magnetization, M(H), measurements were performed on the Si/BPIO film at T = 10 K after the 

sample was cooled from 300 K in the presence (FC) or in the absence (ZFC) of an in-plane 

magnetic field of 0H = ±1 T (see Figure 3(b)). We have observed a small but prominent shift in 

the FC M(H) loops towards the negative (positive) H-axis for the cooling field 0H = +1 T (-1 T)

(for clarity, see an inset of Figure 3(b)), indicating the presence of an EB effect. Considering that 

the M(H) loop intersects the positive and negative H-axis at H+ and H-, respectively, the EB field 


14

can be defined as, 𝐻𝐸𝐵 = |

𝐻++𝐻−

2
|. For the FC M(H) curves at 10 K, 𝐻𝐸𝐵 = 55 Oe (62 Oe) for the 

cooling field 0H = +1 T (-1 T). Such a small EB field indicates weak interfacial exchange coupling 

between the α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 phases and educates the existence of a region of disordered spins 

separating these two phases.60, 61 In addition to the shift along the H-axis, the FC M(H) loops also 

exhibit small vertical shifts with respect to the ZFC M(H) loop, which is possibly related to the 

weak pinning of the disordered spins at the AFM α-Fe2O3/FM Fe3O4 interface60, 62-64 which became 

frozen at low temperatures when the sample was cooled down in zero magnetic field. Since the

EB and pinning effects decrease significantly with increasing temperature,65 these effects could be

negligibly small in our temperature region of interest (75 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K) for the thermal spin

transport measurements. The main panel of Figure 3(e) exhibits the temperature dependence of 

electrical resistivity () of Si/BPIO, which clearly shows a significant increase in the  value below 

the Verwey transition (TV ~ 120 K) indicating a gradual transformation from the metallic to 

insulating phase ( ≈ 5 m cm for 120 K ≤ T ≤300 K, whereas  ≈ 15 m cm for 50 K ≤ T ≤ 

120 K). However, it is evident that (T) does not show a rapid increase below TV, which is a 

signature feature for the metal-insulator transition of Fe3O4 but increases gradually. Earlier studies 

indicate that (T) for α-Fe2O3 does not show any steep increase around TV ~ 120 K upon lowering 

temperature but increases gradually with decreasing temperature.66 Since the electrical resistivity 

of the α-Fe2O3 phase is higher than that of the Fe3O4 phase, the metal-to-insulator transition at TV

associated with the Fe3O4 phase is masked by the contribution of the α-Fe2O3 phase. Hence, the 

(T) behavior for our Si/iron oxide film agrees with the coexistence of Fe3O4 and α-Fe2O3 phases. 

Thus, the dominating contribution of the intrinsic LSSE for our Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure below 

the Verwey transition is consistent with both the magnetization and electrical transport results.


15

Most importantly, the LSSE voltage has contributions from both the Fe3O4 and α-Fe2O3 phases, 

which highlights the effect of phase coexistence on the LSSE signal.

Figure 4(a)-(c) compare the magnetic field dependence of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻), 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) and 

𝑉𝑦

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻), respectively on the left-y scale (symbol) and corresponding magnetization isotherms, 

M(H) on the right y-scale (solid line) at T = 295 K for the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure. It is evident 

that the hysteresis loops for 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻), 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) and 𝑉𝑦

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) closely match with that of 

the M(H) curves reflecting the intrinsic origin of both LSSE and ANE signals above the Verwey 

transition. In other words, the thermo-spin transport observed in our Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure is 

controlled by the magnetic properties of the BPIO film. In order to confirm the intrinsic origin of 

the thermo-spin transport properties below the Verwey transition, we also demonstrate the 

𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻), 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) and 𝑉𝑦

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) isotherms on the left-y scale (symbol) and corresponding 

M(H) curves on the right y-scale (solid line) at T = 75 K in Figure 4(d)-(f), respectively. Similar 

to T = 295 K, the 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻), 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) and 𝑉𝑦

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) curves clearly mimic the hysteresis 

loop of the corresponding M(H) curve, which unambiguously dictates that the thermo-spin 

transport properties of our Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure are governed by the intrinsic magnetic 

properties of the BPIO film below the Verwey transition as well.

We have also performed LSSE measurements for different thermal gradient intervals, T. 

Figure 5(a) shows the magnetic field dependence of the total voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) across the Pt 

layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure for different values of T between +5 and +15 K while

keeping the sample temperature fixed at T = 295 K. A significant increase in the 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 value 

with increasing temperature gradient is noted. To have a better understanding, we have shown the 


16

two-dimensional surface plots of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) isotherms for unipolar field scan: +0Hsat → -

0Hsat (0Hsat is the magnetic field required magnetically saturate the BPIO film) in Figure 5(b),

which clearly demonstrates an enhancement in the (ANE+LSSE) signal with increasing T. In

Figure 5(c), we plot the background-corrected value of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝜇0𝐻 = 0.3 𝑇) , defined 

as 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 =

𝑉𝑦𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝜇0𝐻=+ 0.3 𝑇 )−𝑉𝑦𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝜇0𝐻=− 0.3 𝑇 )

2
as a function of T, which clearly 

demonstrates a linear behavior. Since we have already established that the contribution of ANE 

across the Pt layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure is negligible even at room temperature, such 

a linear T-dependence of 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 reflects the linear T-dependence of the intrinsic LSSE 

signal originated from the thermally driven magnons in the BPIO layer, which is expected.

To further understand the role of the mixed phases (Fe3O4 + α-Fe2O3 phase) on the LSSE

signal, we performed thermo-spin transport measurements on iron oxide films grown on Al2O3 

substrates, namely, the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure. Figure 6(a) shows a schematic sketch of 

the LSSE measurement on the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure. For this configuration, as already 

discussed, the intrinsic LSSE voltage is entangled with the ANE contribution from the BPIO layer. 

We demonstrate the magnetic field dependence of the total voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) measured 

across the Pt layer of the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure at selected temperatures between T = 295 

and 75 K in Figure 6(b). Since we have already established that the ANE signal is largely 

suppressed in the Pt layer, we can say that the measured voltage across the Pt layer in the 

Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure is dominated by the intrinsic LSSE contribution. In Figure 6(c) and 

(d), we compare the two-dimensional surface plots of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) isotherms for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt

and Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructures for unipolar field scan: +0Hsat → -0Hsat. It is clear that, (i) 


17

similar to the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure, the total voltage signal undergoes major changes around 

TA ~200 K, TD = 185 K and TV = 120 K for the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure, (ii) the 

𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) hysteresis loops for the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure is narrower than that for the 

Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure, and (iii) the magnitude  𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) signal for the Si/BPIO/Pt 

heterostructure is twice of that for the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure.

Figure 6(e) demonstrates the magnetic field dependence of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) on the left-y 

scale (symbol) and corresponding magnetization isotherms, M(H) on the right y-scale (solid line) 

at T = 295 K for the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure. Like the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure, the 

hysteresis loop of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) also matches closely with that of the M(H) curve indicating a 

strong correlation between the thermo-spin transport in our Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure and the

magnetic properties of the BPIO film. In Figure 6(f) compares the temperature dependence of the 

background-corrected voltage normalized with respect to the distance between the contact leads 

(Ly) on the Pt layer,

𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸

𝐿𝑦
=

𝑉𝑦𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝜇0𝐻=+ 0.3 𝑇 )−𝑉𝑦𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝜇0𝐻=− 0.3 𝑇 )

2𝐿𝑦
at 𝜇0𝐻 =

0.3 𝑇 for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt and Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructures. It is evident that 

𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸

𝐿𝑦
(𝑇) for both 

the heterostructures follows nearly the same trend; upon decreasing the temperature from T = 300 

K, 𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸 for both the heterostructures decreases considerably below TA ~200 K, then shows 

a pronounced dip at TD = 185 K, and then a broad maximum around TV = 120 K followed by a 

drastic decrease in the voltage signal at low temperatures. However, 

𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸

𝐿𝑦
for Si/BPIO/Pt is 

nearly 2 times higher than that for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt throughout the measured temperature range. To 

correlate the temperature profile of thermo-spin transport in Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure with 

magnetic properties of the BPIO layer, we have also investigated ZFC and FC M(T) for the


18

Al2O3/BPIO measured under the application of an in-plane magnetic field 0H = 0.1 T (see Figure

6(g)). Similar to the Si/BPIO film, both ZFC and FC M(T) curves for Al2O3/BPIO exhibit a 

pronounced downturn around the Verwey transition, TV ~ 120 K. Moreover, the ZFC M(T) also 

exhibits a pronounced dip around TD = 185 K, indicating the coexistence of the FM α-Fe3O4 and

AFM α-Fe2O3 phases. Note that the saturation magnetization of the Al2O3/BPIO film is almost 

two-times higher than that of the Si/BPIO film, whereas the LSSE signal for Si/BPIO/Pt is nearly 

twice of that for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt. Such a discrepancy highlights that the thermal spin injection 

across the BPIO/Pt junction is dominated by the interfacial magnetic properties (or surface 

magnetization of the BPIO layer) rather than the bulk magnetic properties.13, 24, 25, 67, 68 Although 

the AFM α-Fe2O3 phase is present in both Si/BPIO and Al2O3/BPIO films, the higher value of 

LSSE voltage observed in Si/BPIO/Pt as compared to Al2O3/BPIO/Pt is possibly due to the higher 

value of surface magnetization, i.e., the higher density of surface spins of the BPIO layer for the 

Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure, which highlights the important role of the substrate in manipulating 

the surface spin density and hence the thermal spin injection across the BPIO/Pt interface.

To elucidate this, we have studied the surface magnetic domain structures of the Fe3O4

films grown on Si and Al2O3 substrates, using the AFM/MFM technique. Figure 7(a) and (c) show 

the AFM images of the Si/BPIO and Al2O3/BPIO films, respectively. The height contrast profiles 

clearly reflect that the BPIO films grown on Si (100) substrate have less surface roughness than 

those grown on Al2O3 (111) substrate. The MFM images reveal the surface magnetic domain 

structures of the Si/BPIO (Figure 7(b)) and Al2O3/BPIO films (Figure 7(d)), respectively. Irregular 

domains are clearly noticeable for the Si/BPIO surface, whereas those are obscure for the 

Al2O3/BPIO film. The superimposition of MFM (Figure 7(c)) over AFM (Figure 7(d)) images of 


19

the Al2O3/BPIO film reveals that the phase shift obtained in the lift mode scan closely follows the 

footprint of the topography scan. In other words, the uneven topographical surface, rather than the 

surface magnetic moments, mainly contributes to the phase difference in the magnetic probe 

oscillations. The significant discrepancy between the magnetic domain structures of the Si/BPIO

and Al2O3/BPIO films suggests the higher density of surface magnetic moments (or the higher 

surface magnetization) on the Si/BPIO film as compared to the Al2O3/BPIO film. It is the higher 

interfacial spins density that amplifies spin current injection across the BPIO/Pt interface giving 

rise to the enhanced LSSE in the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure, as compared to the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt

heterostructure. 25, 67, 68

Now, let us understand why the surface magnetization or the surface spin density is a 

deciding factor for the enhanced spin current injection but not the bulk saturation magnetization. 

As shown before, the ISHE-induced charge current in the Pt layer depends on the cross-

product (𝑱𝑺
⃗⃗⃗ × 𝝈
⃗⃗⃗ ). The spin polarization vector 𝝈
⃗⃗⃗ is proportional to the projection of the in-plane 

surface magnetization, 𝑴𝑺𝒖𝒓𝒇

𝑰𝑷
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ .67, 68 Hence, the ISHE-induced charge current in the Pt layer can be 

expressed as  𝑱𝑪
⃗⃗⃗ ∝ |𝑱𝑺
⃗⃗⃗ × 𝑴𝑺𝒖𝒓𝒇

𝑰𝑷
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ |, which clearly explains the higher LSSE signal observed in the 

Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure in comparison to the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure. To explicate

further, let us recall the magnetization dynamics of the magnetic layer (BPIO) in presence of a 

temperature gradient, 𝛁𝑻
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ and an applied magnetic field, 𝑯𝑫𝑪
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ . For such configuration, the 

stochastic Landau Lifshitz Gilbert (LLG) equation in the framework of the linear response theory 

of the LSSE can be expressed as69

𝜕𝑴
⃗⃗⃗ 

𝜕𝑡 = −𝛾𝑴
⃗⃗⃗ × (𝑯𝒆𝒇𝒇
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ + 𝒉⃗⃗ ) +

𝛼

𝑀𝑆 (𝑴
⃗⃗⃗ ×

𝜕𝑴
⃗⃗⃗ 

𝜕𝑡 ),
(4)


20

where 𝑯𝒆𝒇𝒇
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ is the effective magnetic field consisting of 𝑯𝑫𝑪
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ and anisotropy field, 𝒉⃗⃗ is the noise 

field which accounts for the thermal fluctuations;  and  are the gyromagnetic ratio and the 

Gilbert’s damping constant, respectively. As discussed before, the magnon spin current pumping 

from the magnetic layer (BPIO) into the Pt layer depends on the magnon accumulation close to 

the BPIO/Pt interface.7 However, the magnon accumulation in the magnetic film is controlled by 

a critical propagation length (𝜉) for the thermally generated magnons.10, 70 Only those magnons 

contribute to the LSSE signal that are excited at a distance 𝜉 from the BPIO/Pt interface, where, 𝜉

is the average magnon propagation length of the thermally excited magnons.10, 70 For magnetic 

materials with low saturation magnetization (MS), the second term (damping term) in Eqn. (4) 

becomes significant. Since 𝜉 is inversely proportional to , for a magnetic material with high spin 

wave damping, only the magnons which are close to the interface actively participate in spin 

current injection to the Pt layer.25 A recent study35 indicates that 𝜉 ≈ 19 nm at 300 K for Fe3O4 thin 

films which reduces to ≈ 13 nm at 50 K, both of which is sufficiently smaller than that of YIG thin 

films (𝜉~ 90-140 nm)10. Since our BPIO films possess multiple phases of iron oxides, the extrinsic 

contributions to  is expected to be more pronounced, which can lead to further lowering of the 𝜉

- value. Such low value of 𝜉 in our iron oxide thin films also implies that the surface magnetization 

plays leading role in controlling the LSSE signal in our BPIO films. Since (a) MS for the Si/BPIO

film is lower than the Al2O3/BPIO film, and (b) the surface spin density is higher for the Si/BPIO

film than the Al2O3/BPIO film, the spin current injection efficiency is higher for the Si/BPIO/Pt 

heterostructure compared to the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure, which fully supports our 

observation. Our study indicates that the thermally generated spin current injection across a 

FM/HM interface and consequently the LSSE signal strength can be significantly enhanced by 

manipulating surface spin density via appropriate substrate selection. We have demonstrated that 


21

the Si (100) substrate is a good choice for interfacial magnetism engineering across the FM/HM 

interface, which will pave the way for the development of cost-effective and energy-efficient 

spincaloritronic devices.

3. CONCLUSIONS

We have systematically investigated the temperature dependence of LSSE in biphase iron oxide

thin films grown on Si (100) and Al2O3 (111) substrates. We have demonstrated that the 

contribution of ANE from the BPIO layer is negligible compared to the intrinsic LSSE signal in 

the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure. Below the Verwey transition, the total signal across BPIO/Pt is 

dominated by the LSSE. We have observed the noticeable changes in the LSSE signal for both 

Si/BPIO/Pt and Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructures around the Verwey transition of the Fe3O4 phase 

and the AFM Morin transition of the α-Fe2O3 phase. Owing to the higher density of surface 

magnetic moments of the Si/BPIO film compared to the Al2O3/BPIO film, the LSSE signal for the 

Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure is almost two times higher than that for Al2O3/BPIO/Pt, despite that 

the saturation magnetization is ~2 times higher in the latter than in the former. These findings 

underscore the significant effects of phase transition, phase coexistence and surface magnetism on 

the LSSE signal in FM/HM bilayers.

4. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

Biphase iron oxide (BPIO) films of thickness ~ 80 nm were grown on Si (100) and Al2O3

(111) substrates of dimensions 5 x 5 x 0.5 mm3 using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) (VG 

Semicon, Inc.) technique. The substrates were initially cleaned with methanol before being loaded 

into the vacuum chamber. After pre-heating at 600℃ or 30 min in ultra-high vacuum (UHV), the 


22

substrates were cooled down to 400℃, and maintained at that temperature during the growth. Fe 

was evaporated from an effusion cell with the evaporation rate of 0.2 Å/s under oxygen pressure 

of 8.2 × 10−6 Torr. A thin Platinum (Pt) layer of thickness ~ 5 nm was deposited on the BPIO

films using DC sputtering. The crystal phase characterization of the BPIO thin films was 

performed using Bruker AXS powder X–ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu–Kα radiation at room 

temperature. A Horiba LabRAM HR Evolution Raman system equipped with a 532 nm diode-

laser with 0.15 mW power was used for the Raman spectrum acquisition. Field emission scanning 

electron microscopy (FESEM) was also carried out to observe microstructural variation in the 

films. The film thickness was measured by cross-sectional FESEM measurements. The in-plane 

(IP) static magnetic characterization of the samples was performed using a vibrating sample 

magnetometer (VSM) attached to the physical property measurement system (PPMS) (Quantum 

Design, Inc., USA). Electrical resistivity measurements of the films were performed using the DC 

transport option of the PPMS. Both atomic force microscopy (AFM) and magnetic force 

microscopy (MFM) images were obtained using a scanning probe microscopy (SPM) system 

(OmegaScope-R, AIST-NT), in tapping mode for sample surface topography and lift mode for 

magnetic domain observation. A MikcroMasch Co-Cr coated Si magnetic probe (225 x 27.5 x 3 

mm3, with tip radius < 60 nm) was used for the measurements. The force constant and the resonant 

frequency of the tip were ≈ 2.8 Nm-1 and 75 kHz, respectively. The AFM/MFM images are of 

~300 px x 300 px and scanning rate was 0.5 Hz.

The LSSE and ANE on the films were measured within the temperature range 75 K ≤ T ≤

295 K and magnetic fields up to 0H = 0.3 T using a custom designed set up by making use of a 

universal sample puck for the PPMS. Both these measurements were performed using the 


23

longitudinal configuration. The heterostructures were sandwiched between two copper plates (hot 

and cold). The bare surface of each of the copper plates was covered with a thin layer of Kapton 

tape to electrically isolate the sample from the copper plates. To maintain a constant temperature 

difference between these two plates, temperatures of both these plates were controlled by the PID 

control technique using two temperature controllers. The cold (top) plate was thermally anchored 

to the PPMS puck base (heat bath) via Molybdenum screws and the hot (bottom) plate was 

thermally separated from the PPMS puck base by a thick Teflon block to maintain a temperature 

difference of ~ 10 K between the PPMS puck base and the hot plate. A temperature gradient was

applied along the +z-direction using two Pt 100 RTD sensors (used as resistive heaters) attached 

to both these plates that generates a temperature difference of T = 10 ±0.005 K between these 

two plates. A calibrated Si-diode sensor was attached to each of these plates which were used as 

thermometers that precisely recorded the temperatures 𝑇ℎ𝑜𝑡 and 𝑇𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑 corresponding to 

temperatures of the hot and cold plates, respectively. The sample temperature was estimated as the 

average temperature, 𝑇𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 =

𝑇ℎ𝑜𝑡+𝑇𝑐𝑜𝑙𝑑

2
. Cryogenic N-grease was applied to both the surfaces 

of the hot and cold plates to maintain good thermal connectivity with the sample surface. To 

maintain the same thermal contact conditions, the same amount of N-grease between the sample 

and the hot/cold plates was applied for all the samples. The ISHE voltage (Vy) across the Pt layer 

of the Si/BPIO/Pt and Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructures was measured along the y direction using a 

Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeter, while sweeping a DC magnetic field applied along the x direction 

by the superconducting magnet of the PPMS. After setting the PPMS base temperature and the 

temperatures of the hot and cold plates to the desired values, temperature difference between these 

two plates were monitored using the LabVIEW and the magnetic field dependent LSSE/ANE 

measurements were started only when a stable temperature difference was attained.


24

Author Contributions

M.H.P., A.C., A.T.D., and R.D. initiated the concept. A.C. designed and conducted magnetic and 

spin-thermo-transport experiments, analyzed the data, and wrote the first draft. D.D. and A.C. 

performed and analyzed SEM, XRD, and Raman data. Y.T.H.P., M.T.T., and D.V.V. performed 

and analyzed MFM data. J.E.S. and D.A.A. deposited Pt on the BPIO films. A.T.D., R.D., and 

S.L.C. grew the BPIO films. All authors participated in discussions and finalizing the manuscript. 

M.H.P. led the project.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Research at the University of South Florida was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, 

Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under Award 

No. DE-FG02-07ER46438.


25

Figure 1. (a) Room temperature X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the biphase iron oxide (BPIO) 
film grown on Si (100) and Al2O3 (111) substrates; peaks associated with the Fe3O4 and α-Fe2O3 
phases are evident, the orange circles represent peaks associated with the Al2O3 (111) substrate, 
(b) Raman spectra of the biphase iron oxide (BPIO) films grown on Si (100) and Al2O3 (111) 
substrates consisting of strong peaks associated with the Fe3O4 and α-Fe2O3 phases, (c) and (d) 
FESEM images of the film surfaces of Si/BPIO and Al2O3/BPIO films, respectively. (e) Cross-
sectional SEM image of the Si/BPIO film confirming that the average film thickness is ≈ 80 nm.


26

Figure 2. (a) and (c) Schematic illustrations of the longitudinal spin Seebeck effect (LSSE) and 
anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) measurements on the Si/BPIO/Pt and Si/BPIO heterostructures; 
(b) and (d) magnetic field dependence of the total voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) measured across the Pt 

layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt heterostructure and ANE voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) measured across the bilayer 

Si/BPIO, respectively, at selected temperatures between T = 295 and 75 K for applied temperature 
gradient T = +10 K. Comparison of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) and 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) are shown at (e) T = 295 K 

(above the Verwey transition) and (f) T = 105 K (below the Verwey transition) for T = +10 K.


27

Figure 3. (a) Magnetic field dependence of the ANE-free LSSE voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) of Si/BPIO/Pt 

heterostructure at selected temperatures between T = 295 and 75 K; (b) main panel: magnetic field 
dependence of magnetization, M(H) of Si/BPIO bilayer measured after cooling the film in zero 
field (ZFC) as well as in 0H = +1 T and 0H = -1 T magnetic fields and inset shows the expanded 
view indicating small exchange bias effect. (c) Temperature dependence of the background-

corrected voltages at 0H = 0.3 T, 𝑉𝑖 =

𝑉𝑦𝑖(𝜇0𝐻=+ 0.3 𝑇 )−𝑉𝑦𝑖(𝜇0𝐻=− 0.3 𝑇 )

2
; where the index i = ANE 

voltage, total voltage (ANE + LSSE), and intrinsic LSSE voltage. (d) Temperature dependence of 
the ZFC and FC magnetizations of Si/BPIOmeasured in a magnetic field of 0H = 0.1; inset shows 
temperature dependence of the dM/dT curve showing prominent maximum at the Verwey 
transition, TV ~ 120 K. (e) Temperature dependence of electrical resistivity, (T) of Si/BPIO
bilayer; left inset shows comparison of (T) for Si/BPIOand Si/Pt(5nm) bilayers and the right inset 
shows the temperature dependence of the ANE correction factor (

𝑓

1+𝑓).


28

Figure 4. Comparison of the magnetic field dependence of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) , 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸(𝐻) and 

𝑉𝑦

𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻), respectively on the left-y scale (symbol) and corresponding magnetization isotherms, 

M(H) on the right y-scale (solid line) at (a)-(c) T = 295 K and (d)-(f) T = 75 K, respectively for the 
film Si/BPIO.


29

Figure 5. (a) Magnetic field dependence of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) across the Pt layer of the Si/BPIO/Pt 

heterostructure at different temperature gradient intervals between T = +5 and +15 K while 
keeping the sample temperature fixed at T = 295 K. (b) Two-dimensional surface plots of 
𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) isotherms for unipolar field scan: +0Hsat →
-0Hsat for the Si/BPIO/Pt 

heterostructure, (c) the background-corrected voltage  𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝜇0𝐻 = 0.3 T) as a function T, 

which clearly demonstrates a linear behavior.


30

Figure 6. (a) Schematic sketch of the LSSE measurement performed the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt 
heterostructures; (b) magnetic field dependence of the total voltage, 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) measured 

across the Pt layer of the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt heterostructure at selected temperatures between T = 295 
and 75 K for applied temperature gradient T = +10 K; Comparison of the two-dimensional surface 
plots of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) for the Al2O3/BPIO/Pt (c) and the Si/BPIO/Pt (d) heterostructures for 

unipolar field scan: +0Hsat → -0Hsat. (e) Comparison of 𝑉𝑦

𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝐻) on the left-y scale 

(symbol) and corresponding M(H) hysteresis loop for Al2O3/BPIO on the right y-scale (solid line) 
at T = 295 K. (f) Temperature dependence of the background-corrected voltage normalized with 
respect to the distance between the contact leads (Ly) on the Pt layer,

𝑉𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸

𝐿𝑦
=

𝑉𝑦𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝜇0𝐻=+ 0.3 T )−𝑉𝑦𝐴𝑁𝐸+𝐿𝑆𝑆𝐸(𝜇0𝐻=− 0.3 T )

2𝐿𝑦
for the  Al2O3/BPIO/Pt and the Si/BPIO/Pt 

heterostructures; (g) Temperature dependence of the ZFC and FC M(T) for the Al2O3/BPIO bilayer 
film.


31

Figure 7. (a) and (c) AFM images and, (b) and (d) MFM images of the Si/BPIO and Al2O3/BPIO
films, respectively.


32

References

1.
Chumak, A. V.;  Vasyuchka, V. I.;  Serga, A. A.; Hillebrands, B., Magnon spintronics. Nature 

Physics 2015, 11 (6), 453-461.
2.
Adachi, H.;  Uchida, K.-i.;  Saitoh, E.; Maekawa, S., Theory of the spin Seebeck effect. Rep. Prog. 

Phys. 2013, 76 (3), 036501.
3.
Kajiwara, Y.;  Harii, K.;  Takahashi, S.;  Ohe, J.-i.;  Uchida, K.;  Mizuguchi, M.;  Umezawa, H.;  

Kawai, H.;  Ando, K.; Takanashi, K., Transmission of electrical signals by spin-wave interconversion in a 
magnetic insulator. Nature 2010, 464 (7286), 262-266.
4.
Uchida, K.;  Takahashi, S.;  Harii, K.;  Ieda, J.;  Koshibae, W.;  Ando, K.;  Maekawa, S.; Saitoh, 

E., Observation of the spin Seebeck effect. Nature 2008, 455 (7214), 778-781.
5.
Bauer, G. E.;  Saitoh, E.; Van Wees, B. J., Spin caloritronics. Nature materials 2012, 11 (5), 391-

399.
6.
Rezende, S.;  Rodríguez-Suárez, R.;  Cunha, R.;  Ortiz, J. L.; Azevedo, A., Bulk magnon spin 

current theory for the longitudinal spin Seebeck effect. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 2016,
400, 171-177.
7.
Rezende, S.;  Rodríguez-Suárez, R.;  Cunha, R.;  Rodrigues, A.;  Machado, F.;  Guerra, G. F.;  

Ortiz, J. L.; Azevedo, A., Magnon spin-current theory for the longitudinal spin-Seebeck effect. Physical 
Review B 2014, 89 (1), 014416.
8.
Sinova, J.;  Valenzuela, S. O.;  Wunderlich, J.;  Back, C.; Jungwirth, T., Spin hall effects. Rev. Mod. 

Phys. 2015, 87 (4), 1213.
9.
Uchida, K.-i.;  Adachi, H.;  Ota, T.;  Nakayama, H.;  Maekawa, S.; Saitoh, E., Observation of 

longitudinal spin-Seebeck effect in magnetic insulators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 97 (17), 172505.
10.
Kehlberger, A.;  Ritzmann, U.;  Hinzke, D.;  Guo, E.-J.;  Cramer, J.;  Jakob, G.;  Onbasli, M. C.;  

Kim, D. H.;  Ross, C. A.; Jungfleisch, M. B., Length scale of the spin Seebeck effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015,
115 (9), 096602.
11.
Uchida, K.-i.;  Kikkawa, T.;  Miura, A.;  Shiomi, J.; Saitoh, E., Quantitative temperature 

dependence of longitudinal spin Seebeck effect at high temperatures. Physical Review X 2014, 4 (4), 
041023.
12.
Guo, E.-J.;  Cramer, J.;  Kehlberger, A.;  Ferguson, C. A.;  MacLaren, D. A.;  Jakob, G.; Kläui, M., 

Influence of thickness and interface on the low-temperature enhancement of the spin Seebeck effect in YIG 
films. Physical Review X 2016, 6 (3), 031012.
13.
Kalappattil, V.;  Das, R.;  Phan, M.-H.; Srikanth, H., Roles of bulk and surface magnetic anisotropy 

on the longitudinal spin Seebeck effect of Pt/YIG. Scientific reports 2017, 7 (1), 1-7.
14.
Chanda, A.;  Holzmann, C.;  Schulz, N.;  Seyd, J.;  Albrecht, M.;  Phan, M. H.; Srikanth, H., Scaling 

of the thermally induced sign inversion of longitudinal spin Seebeck effect in a compensated ferrimagnet: 
Role of magnetic anisotropy. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 2109170.
15.
Niizeki, T.;  Kikkawa, T.;  Uchida, K.-i.;  Oka, M.;  Suzuki, K. Z.;  Yanagihara, H.;  Kita, E.; Saitoh, 

E., Observation of longitudinal spin-Seebeck effect in cobalt-ferrite epitaxial thin films. AIP Advances 
2015, 5 (5), 053603.
16.
Seki, S.;  Ideue, T.;  Kubota, M.;  Kozuka, Y.;  Takagi, R.;  Nakamura, M.;  Kaneko, Y.;  Kawasaki, 

M.; Tokura, Y., Thermal generation of spin current in an antiferromagnet. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 115 (26), 
266601.
17.
Wu, B.;  Luo, G.;  Lin, J.; Huang, S., Longitudinal spin Seebeck effect in a half-metallic L a 0.7 S 

r 0.3 Mn O 3 film. Physical Review B 2017, 96 (6), 060402.
18.
Jaworski, C.;  Yang, J.;  Mack, S.;  Awschalom, D.;  Heremans, J.; Myers, R., Observation of the 

spin-Seebeck effect in a ferromagnetic semiconductor. Nature materials 2010, 9 (11), 898-903.
19.
Bougiatioti, P.;  Klewe, C.;  Meier, D.;  Manos, O.;  Kuschel, O.;  Wollschläger, J.;  Bouchenoire, 

L.;  Brown, S. D.;  Schmalhorst, J.-M.; Reiss, G., Quantitative disentanglement of the spin Seebeck, 
proximity-induced, and ferromagnetic-induced anomalous Nernst effect in normal-metal–ferromagnet 
bilayers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119 (22), 227205.


33

20.
Huang, S.-Y.;  Fan, X.;  Qu, D.;  Chen, Y.;  Wang, W.;  Wu, J.;  Chen, T.;  Xiao, J.; Chien, C., 

Transport magnetic proximity effects in platinum. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109 (10), 107204.
21.
Mallick, K.;  Wagh, A. A.;  Ionescu, A.;  Barnes, C. H.; Kumar, P. A., Role of spin mixing 

conductance in determining thermal spin pumping near the ferromagnetic phase transition in EuO 1− x and 
La2NiMnO6. Physical Review B 2019, 100 (22), 224403.
22.
Akopyan, A.;  Prasai, N.;  Trump, B.;  Marcus, G.;  McQueen, T.; Cohn, J., Spin Seebeck effect in 

Cu2OSeO3: Test of bulk magnon spin current theory. Physical Review B 2020, 101 (10), 100407.
23.
Das, A.;  Phanindra, V. E.;  Watson, A.; Banerjee, T., Coexistence of different magnetic ordering 

in thin films of SrMnO3 studied by spin transport. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2021, 118 (5), 052407.
24.
Aqeel, A.;  Vera-Marun, I. J.;  van Wees, B. J.; Palstra, T., Surface sensitivity of the spin Seebeck 

effect. J. Appl. Phys. 2014, 116 (15), 153705.
25.
Arboleda, J. D.;  Arnache Olmos, O.;  Aguirre, M. H.;  Ramos, R.;  Anadon, A.; Ibarra, M. R., Spin 

Seebeck effect in a weak ferromagnet. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016, 108 (23), 232401.
26.
Niimura, T.;  Kurokawa, Y.;  Horiike, S.;  Li, H.;  Hanamoto, H.;  Weber, R.;  Berger, A.; Yuasa, 

H., Influence of interface layer insertion on the spin Seebeck effect and the spin Hall magnetoresistance of 
Y3Fe5O12/Pt bilayer systems. Physical Review B 2020, 102 (9), 094411.
27.
Jain, S.;  Adeyeye, A.; Dai, D., Magnetic properties of half-metallic Fe3O4 films. J. Appl. Phys. 

2004, 95 (11), 7237-7239.
28.
Ramos, R.;  Kikkawa, T.;  Uchida, K.;  Adachi, H.;  Lucas, I.;  Aguirre, M.;  Algarabel, P.;  

Morellón, L.;  Maekawa, S.; Saitoh, E., Observation of the spin Seebeck effect in epitaxial Fe3O4 thin 
films. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 102 (7), 072413.
29.
Ramos, R.;  Anadón, A.;  Lucas, I.;  Uchida, K.;  Algarabel, P.;  Morellón, L.;  Aguirre, M.;  Saitoh, 

E.; Ibarra, M., Thermoelectric performance of spin Seebeck effect in Fe3O4/Pt-based thin film 
heterostructures. APL Materials 2016, 4 (10), 104802.
30.
Ramos, R.;  Kikkawa, T.;  Aguirre, M.;  Lucas, I.;  Anadón, A.;  Oyake, T.;  Uchida, K.;  Adachi, 

H.;  Shiomi, J.; Algarabel, P., Unconventional scaling and significant enhancement of the spin Seebeck 
effect in multilayers. Physical Review B 2015, 92 (22), 220407.
31.
Condon, N.;  Leibsle, F.;  Lennie, A.;  Murray, P.;  Vaughan, D.; Thornton, G., Biphase ordering 

of iron oxide surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 75 (10), 1961.
32.
Condon, N.;  Leibsle, F.;  Parker, T.;  Lennie, A.;  Vaughan, D.; Thornton, G., Biphase ordering on 

Fe3O4 (111). Physical Review B 1997, 55 (23), 15885.
33.
Lanier, C. H.;  Chiaramonti, A. N.;  Marks, L. D.; Poeppelmeier, K. R., The Fe3O4 origin of the 

“Biphase” reconstruction on α-Fe2O3 (0 0 0 1). Surface science 2009, 603 (16), 2574-2579.
34.
Genuzio, F.;  Sala, A.;  Schmidt, T.;  Menzel, D.; Freund, H.-J., Interconversion of α-Fe2O3 and 

Fe3O4 thin films: mechanisms, morphology, and evidence for unexpected substrate participation. The 
Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2014, 118 (50), 29068-29076.
35.
Venkat, G.;  Cox, C.;  Voneshen, D.;  Caruana, A.;  Piovano, A.;  Cropper, M.; Morrison, K., 

Magnon diffusion lengths in bulk and thin film Fe3O4 for spin Seebeck applications. Physical Review 
Materials 2020, 4 (7), 075402.
36.
Pastor, J.;  Pérez-Landazábal, J.;  Gómez-Polo, C.;  Recarte, V.;  Larumbe, S.;  Santamarta, R.;  

Fernandes Silva, M.;  Gómez Pineda, E.;  Winkler Hechenleitner, A.; Lima, M., Entropy change linked to 
the magnetic field induced Morin transition in Hematite nanoparticles. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 100 (6), 
063102.
37.
Pérez-Landazábal, J.;  Gómez-Polo, C.;  Recarte, V.;  Larumbe, S.;  Sánchez-Alarcos, V.;  Silva, 

M. F.;  Pineda, E. G.;  Hechenleitner, A. W.;  Lima, M.; Rodriguez-Velamazán, J. In Morin transition in 
Hematite nanoparticles analyzed by neutron diffraction, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, IOP 
Publishing: 2015; p 012003.
38.
Schroeer, D.; Nininger Jr, R., Morin transition in α-Fe2O3 microcyrstals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1967, 19

(11), 632.
39.
Reddy, N. N. K.;  Godavarthi, S.;  Kumar, K. M.;  Kummara, V. K.;  Vattikuti, S. P.;  Akkera, H. 

S.;  Bitla, Y.;  Jilani, S.; Manjunath, V., Evaluation of temperature dependent electrical transport parameters 


34

in Fe3O4/SiO2/n-Si metal–insulator-semiconductor (MIS) type Schottky barrier heterojunction in a wide 
temperature range. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics 2019, 30 (9), 8955-8966.
40.
Kumar, A.;  Pandya, D. K.; Chaudhary, S., Electric field assisted sputtering of Fe3O4 thin films 

and reduction in anti-phase boundaries. J. Appl. Phys. 2012, 112 (7), 073909.
41.
Han, R.;  Li, W.;  Pan, W.;  Zhu, M.;  Zhou, D.; Li, F.-s., 1D magnetic materials of Fe3O4 and Fe 

with high performance of microwave absorption fabricated by electrospinning method. Scientific reports 
2014, 4 (1), 1-5.
42.
Gandha, K.;  Mohapatra, J.;  Hossain, M. K.;  Elkins, K.;  Poudyal, N.;  Rajeshwar, K.; Liu, J. P., 

Mesoporous iron oxide nanowires: synthesis, magnetic and photocatalytic properties. RSC advances 2016,
6 (93), 90537-90546.
43.
Das, R.;  Witanachchi, C.;  Nemati, Z.;  Kalappattil, V.;  Rodrigo, I.;  García, J. Á.;  Garaio, E.;  

Alonso, J.;  Lam, V. D.; Le, A.-T., Magnetic vortex and hyperthermia suppression in multigrain iron oxide 
nanorings. Applied Sciences 2020, 10 (3), 787.
44.
Wang, L.;  Lu, X.;  Han, C.;  Lu, R.;  Yang, S.; Song, X., Electrospun hollow cage-like α-Fe2O3

microspheres: synthesis, formation mechanism, and morphology-preserved conversion to Fe 
nanostructures. CrystEngComm 2014, 16 (46), 10618-10623.
45.
Hanesch, M., Raman spectroscopy of iron oxides and (oxy) hydroxides at low laser power and 

possible applications in environmental magnetic studies. Geophysical Journal International 2009, 177 (3), 
941-948.
46.
Kumar, P.;  No-Lee, H.; Kumar, R., Synthesis of phase pure iron oxide polymorphs thin films and 

their enhanced magnetic properties. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics 2014, 25 (10), 
4553-4561.
47.
Lu, J.-f.; Tsai, C.-J., Hydrothermal phase transformation of hematite to magnetite. Nanoscale 

research letters 2014, 9 (1), 1-8.
48.
De Faria, D. L.;  Venâncio Silva, S.; De Oliveira, M., Raman microspectroscopy of some iron 

oxides and oxyhydroxides. Journal of Raman spectroscopy 1997, 28 (11), 873-878.
49.
Zhang, S. S.-L.; Zhang, S., Magnon mediated electric current drag across a ferromagnetic insulator 

layer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109 (9), 096603.
50.
Heide, C., Spin currents in magnetic films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2001, 87 (19), 197201.

51.
Zhang, S. S.-L.; Zhang, S., Spin convertance at magnetic interfaces. Physical Review B 2012, 86

(21), 214424.
52.
Xiao, J.;  Bauer, G. E.;  Uchida, K.-c.;  Saitoh, E.; Maekawa, S., Theory of magnon-driven spin 

Seebeck effect. Physical Review B 2010, 81 (21), 214418.
53.
Saitoh, E.;  Ueda, M.; Miyajima, H.; Tatara, G., Conversion of spin current into charge current at 

room temperature: Inverse spin-Hall effect. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 88 (18), 182509.
54.
Arana, M.;  Gamino, M.;  Silva, E.;  Barthem, V.;  Givord, D.;  Azevedo, A.; Rezende, S., Spin to 

charge current conversion by the inverse spin Hall effect in the metallic antiferromagnet M n 2 Au at room 
temperature. Physical Review B 2018, 98 (14), 144431.
55.
Slachter, A.;  Bakker, F. L.; van Wees, B. J., Anomalous Nernst and anisotropic magnetoresistive 

heating in a lateral spin valve. Physical Review B 2011, 84 (2), 020412.
56.
Kikkawa, T.;  Uchida, K.;  Shiomi, Y.;  Qiu, Z.;  Hou, D.;  Tian, D.;  Nakayama, H.;  Jin, X.-F.; 

Saitoh, E., Longitudinal spin Seebeck effect free from the proximity Nernst effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013,
110 (6), 067207.
57.
Tobin, J. G.;  Morton, S. A.;  Yu, S. W.;  Waddill, G. D.;  Schuller, I. K.; Chambers, S. A., Spin 

resolved photoelectron spectroscopy of Fe3O4: the case against half-metallicity. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 
2007, 19 (31), 315218.
58.
Lebrun, R.;  Ross, A.;  Gomonay, O.;  Baltz, V.;  Ebels, U.;  Barra, A.-L.;  Qaiumzadeh, A.;  Brataas, 

A.;  Sinova, J.; Kläui, M., Long-distance spin-transport across the Morin phase transition up to room 
temperature in ultra-low damping single crystals of the antiferromagnet α-Fe2O3. Nature communications 
2020, 11 (1), 1-7.


35

59.
Shimomura, N.;  Pati, S. P.;  Sato, Y.;  Nozaki, T.;  Shibata, T.;  Mibu, K.; Sahashi, M., Morin 

transition temperature in (0001)-oriented α-Fe2O3 thin film and effect of Ir doping. J. Appl. Phys. 2015, 117
(17), 17C736.
60.
Ong, Q. K.;  Wei, A.; Lin, X.-M., Exchange bias in Fe/Fe3O4 core-shell magnetic nanoparticles 

mediated by frozen interfacial spins. Physical Review B 2009, 80 (13), 134418.
61.
Schuller, I. K.;  Morales, R.;  Batlle, X.;  Nowak, U.; Güntherodt, G., Role of the antiferromagnetic 

bulk spins in exchange bias. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 2016, 416, 2-9.
62.
Phan, M.-H.;  Alonso, J.;  Khurshid, H.;  Lampen-Kelley, P.; Chandra, S.;  Stojak Repa, K.;  

Nemati, Z.;  Das, R.;  Iglesias, Ó.; Srikanth, H., Exchange bias effects in iron oxide-based nanoparticle 
systems. Nanomaterials 2016, 6 (11), 221.
63.
Padhan, P.; Prellier, W., Effect of electric/magnetic field on pinned/biased moments at the 

interfaces of magnetic superlattices. J. Appl. Phys. 2005, 98 (8), 083906.
64.
Yang, W.;  Zhu, W.;  Zhou, H.;  Ling, L.;  Choi, E.;  Lee, M.;  Losovyj, Y.;  Lu, C.-K.; Zhang, S., 

Robust pinning of magnetic moments in pyrochlore iridates. Physical Review B 2017, 96 (9), 094437.
65.
Huang, P.-H.;  Huang, H.-H.; Lai, C.-H., Coexistence of exchange-bias fields and vertical 

magnetization shifts in Zn Co O∕ Ni O system. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2007, 90 (6), 062509.
66.
Kumar, V.;  Chahal, S.;  Singh, D.;  Kumar, A.;  Kumar, P.; Asokan, K. In Annealing effect on the 

structural and dielectric properties of hematite nanoparticles, AIP Conf. Proc., AIP Publishing LLC: 2018; 
p 030245.
67.
Uchida, K.-i.;  Ohe, J.-i.;  Kikkawa, T.;  Daimon, S.;  Hou, D.;  Qiu, Z.; Saitoh, E., Intrinsic surface 

magnetic anisotropy in Y3Fe5O12 as the origin of low-magnetic-field behavior of the spin Seebeck effect. 
Physical Review B 2015, 92 (1), 014415.
68.
Lee, W.-Y.;  Kang, M.-S.;  Kim, G.-S.;  Park, N.-W.;  Choi, K.-Y.;  Le, C. T.;  Rashid, M. U.;  

Saitoh, E.;  Kim, Y. S.; Lee, S.-K., Role of Ferromagnetic Monolayer WSe2 Flakes in the Pt/Y3Fe5O12
Bilayer Structure in the Longitudinal Spin Seebeck Effect. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 2021, 13
(13), 15783-15790.
69.
Chotorlishvili, L.;  Toklikishvili, Z.;  Dugaev, V.;  Barnaś, J.;  Trimper, S.; Berakdar, J., Fokker-

Planck approach to the theory of the magnon-driven spin Seebeck effect. Physical Review B 2013, 88 (14), 
144429.
70.
Ritzmann, U.; Hinzke, D.; Nowak, U., Propagation of thermally induced magnonic spin currents. 

Physical Review B 2014, 89 (2), 024409.


36

Table of Contents

Our new observations of noticeable changes in the longitudinal spin Seebeck voltage around the 
Verwey transition of the Fe3O4 phase and the Morin transition of the -Fe2O3 phase in a biphase 
iron oxide (BPIO = -Fe2O3 + Fe3O4) film demonstrate the important effects of phase transition 
and coexistence on thermo-spin-transport in BPIO/Pt.


