Superconductivity in cuprates governed by topological constraints

Yves Noat,1 Alain Mauger,2 and William Sacks2

1Institut des Nanosciences de Paris, CNRS, UMR 7588
Sorbonne UniversitВҙe, FacultВҙe des Sciences et IngВҙenierie, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France
2Institut de MinВҙeralogie, de Physique des MatВҙeriaux et de Cosmochimie, CNRS, UMR 7590,
Sorbonne UniversitВҙe, FacultВҙe des Sciences et IngВҙenierie, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France
(Dated: 1er mars 2022)

The remarkable universality of the cuprate Tc dome suggests a very fundamental unifying prin-
ciple. Moreover, the superconducting gap is known to persist above Tc in the pseudogap phase of
all cuprates. So, contrary to BCS, the gap cannot be the order parameter of the transition.
In this work, we show that both the Tc-dome and the pseudogap line T вҲ—(p) arise from a unique and
identifiable principle : the interaction of localized вҖҳpaironsвҖҷ on an antiferromagnetic square lattice.
The topological constraints on such preformed pairons give rise to both the Tc dome and the pairing
energy simultaneously. It also provides a natural explanation for the critical doping points of the
phase diagram.
The model matches perfectly both the T вҲ— and Tc experimental lines, with only one adjustable
parameter.

PACS numbers: 74.72.h,74.20.Mn,74.20.Fg

Introduction

Despite more than thirty years of intense research and
many advances, a general understanding of the physics of
cuprates is still lacking. Indeed, most of the key questions
remain to be answered or clarified :

i) What is the pairing mechanism ?

ii) What is the nature of the SC condensation ?

iii) What is the nature of the pseudogap phase and its
connection with the SC state ?

iv) What is the physical origin of the critical doping
points ?

Superconductivity emerges in cuprates from doping an
antiferromagnetic (AF) Mott insulator, leading to a com-
plex phase diagram as shown in Fig. 1. The latter displays
three important lines : the superconducting dome Tc(p),
the pseudogap line T вҲ—(p) and the characteristic tempe-
rature of magnetic correlations Tmax(p).

Despite the very large variety of compounds belonging
to the cuprate family, there is a striking universality in
the phase diagram. In addition, as already noted by Tahir
et al. [1], the doping values characterizing the Tc-dome
(pmin, the onset doping for superconductivity, popt the
top of the dome or optimal doping and pmax the end of
the dome) seem to be universal values, which are practi-
cally independent of the material.

All these experimental facts strongly suggest that su-
perconductivity in cuprates is essentially governed by to-
pological constraints imposed on the system of holes by
the 2d antiferromagnetic square lattice.

Figure 1. (Color online) Essential phase diagram of cuprates
(see [2] for details) with the three characteristic temperature
lines : the critical temperature Tc(p), the pseudogap line T вҲ—(p)
and the characteristic temperature of magnetic correlations,
Tmax(p).

Magnetic properties

Contrary to conventional superconductors which are
mostly вҖҳgoodвҖҷ metals, parent compounds of SC cuprates
are antiferromagnetic Mott insulators, characterized by
the temperature of long-range magnetic ordering TNВҙeel(p).
Electron or hole doping strongly modifies the electronic
and magnetic properties. First, the NВҙeel temperature de-
creases rapidly with doping and finally vanishes for a
small value p вүҲ0.015 [3]. Then, above pmin =0.05, the
system becomes metallic and exhibits superconducting
properties below the critical temperature Tc.
Measurements of the magnetic susceptibility ПҮ(T)

arXiv:2202.12952v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  25 Feb 2022


2

Figure 2. (Color online) Phase diagram in the pairon-
simplon viewpoint. In the underdoped regime, a simple pic-
ture emerges : simplons (right panel, a) exist below the line
Tmax(p) while incoherent pairons (right panel, b) exist be-
low the pseudogap line T вҲ—(p). Finally, pairons condense be-
low Tc(p) in the coherent SC state. Three key doping points
are illustrated : pmin, the onset doping of superconductivity,
pmax, the end of the Tc-dome, and pc вҲј0.2 the extrapolated
value of the line Tmax(p) at T = 0.

[4вҖ“8]
have
shown
that
the
characteristic
tempe-
rature
of
magnetic
correlations,
Tmax(defined
as
the peak in the magnetic susceptibility as a func-
tion
of
temperature)
decreases
with
doping.
In
a
previous
work
[2],
we
have
shown
that
a
si-
milar
behavior
is
observed
in
the
four
different
compounds
(La2вҲ’xSrxCuO4,
Bi2Sr2Ca1вҲ’xYxCu2O8,
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+y, YBa2Cu3O6+y) : Tmax(p) decreases
linearly with p over a wide range and then saturates in
the overdoped regime. In addition, the extrapolation of
the linear behavior to zero temperature gives a critical
doping pc вҲј0.2.
The linear behavior of Tmax(p) with hole density can
be qualitatively understood by considering that each hole
вҖҳsuppressesвҖҷ the four nearest neighbors spins. We call this
dressed hole a вҖҳsimplonвҖҷ, which is an effective particle
defined as a hole with 4 associated neighboring sites, thus
giving 4+1 вҖҳspinlessвҖҷ sites (see Fig. 2, right panel). A
simple density argument leads to the linear law

kBTmax вүғ J(1 вҲ’ 5p)
(1)

where J is the magnetic exchange energy. The critical
doping value pc =0.2, where Tmax vanishes, corresponds
to the compact simplon lattice (Fig. 3), with a superlat-
tice constant d =
вҲҡ

5. Interestingly, this doping value is
very close to the one which has been identified either as
the end of the pseudogap [9] or a quantum critical point
(QCP) [10].

Figure 3. (Color online) The compact simplon lattice (yel-
low square) with superlattice constant d =
вҲҡ

5, corresponds
to the вҖҳcriticalвҖҷ doping value pc =0.2. The two sublattices
of equivalent simplons (A or B, green square) have a lattice
constant d0 =
вҲҡ

10, giving the doping value p =0.1. The do-
ping pmin =0.05 corresponds to a simplon on the corner of
the red (non-centered) square. We use a0 units throughout.

Two types of simplons, A and B, can be distinguished
depending on the spin state of the four electrons sur-
rounding a hole. The unit cell of the square sublattice of
equivalent simplons A (or B) has a side d =
вҲҡ

10, corres-
ponding to a density p =0.1 (see Fig. 3). The percolation
point of equivalent simplons on such a sublattice is the
previous density divided by two, i.e. p =0.05. This is very
close to the experimental value of pmin, the onset doping
for superconductivity. Metallicity could arises preferen-
tially due to the coupling of equivalent simplons (A or
B), which can interact provided their distance is smaller
than d0 вүҲ
вҲҡ

20.

Pairing in cuprates

In conventional superconductors, a bound state of elec-
trons can form in the electron sea as a result of phonon
exchange. Cooper pairs [11] are delocalized objects which
are well described in k-space as pairs of opposite wave
vectors and spins,
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪвғ—k вҶ‘ вҲ’вғ—k вҶ“
пҝҪ
.

We proposed in Ref. [12] that the pairing mechanism
in cuprate belongs to a completely different class. The
magnetic ordering of the NВҙeel state is destroyed by hole
doping but survives on the local scale. As shown by Bir-
geneau et al. by neutron measurements in Ref. [13], the
antiferromagnetic coherence length varies roughly as the
average distance between hole ОҫAF вҲј a/вҲҡp. In our model
[12, 14], below the characteristic temperature T вҲ—, two ad-
jacent holes tend to form a bound state due to this local
AF environment, with a binding energy on the order of
J, as confirmed by early numerical calculations with the
Hubbard or t-J hamiltonian [15вҖ“19]. Thus, a new kind of
pair exists in cuprates, pairs of holes or вҖҳpaironsвҖҷ in their
local AF environment, in real space on a typical length


3

Figure 4. (Color online) Upper panel : Schematic of the pai-
ron lattice for three different doping values corresponding to
a) underdoped regime, b) optimal doping, c) maximum do-
ping (compact pairon lattice).

ОҫAF . The existence of pairons is supported by the detailed
angular dependence of the gap function [14] measured by
Angular Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy (ARPES)
[20, 21].
Electrons within the AF coherence length contribute
to the pairing energy of the two holes. As the doping in-
creases, the AF coherence length decreases as вҲј 1/вҲҡp. A
pairon can exist provided two adjacent holes are surroun-
ded by at least a ring of six electrons. The pairons thus
occupy a minimum of 8 sites (2 holes plus six electrons)
on the square lattice in the local AF environnement.
This topological constraint imposes a maximum do-
ping value corresponding to the compact pairon lattice
(see Fig. 4), which is obtained for p=1/4. This value is
remarkably close to the observed pmax =0.27 at the dome
limit. Actually, experimental facts indicate that pairons
can still exist for a slightly larger doping value 0.25+Оҙ,
up to pmax =0.27. The reason for this small excess is
unknown and requires further thought, but the experi-
mental value corresponds to an additional 1/6 hole per
pairon ring (Оҙ = x/8 = 1/48 вүҲ0.02). Nevertheless, the
compact pairon lattice provides a satisfactory topologi-
cal interpretation.
As previously mentioned, the distance between pairons
is of the order of the spin correlation length ОҫAF . The
hypothesis that only sites within the correlation length
contribute to the pairon binding energy implies that the
binding energy, or equivalently the temperature of pairon
formation T вҲ—, varies linearly as a function of doping [12] :

T вҲ— вҲқ (1 вҲ’ 4p).
(2)

This linear law is accurately confirmed by ARPES [22, 23]
and tunneling measurements [24, 25].

Both the Tmax(p) and T вҲ—(p) lines are thus given by
similar topological arguments based on two fundamental
quantum objects, simplons and pairons.

Superconducting condensation

In conventional superconductors, the gap вҲҶ(T) is the
order parameter [26]. At finite temperature, the SC state
is gradually destroyed by means of quasiparticle fermio-
nic excitations : the pair-breaking mechanism. Conse-
quently, the gap вҲҶ(T) decreases with increasing tempera-
ture and finally vanishes at the critical temperature Tc.
These considerations are captured by the BCS relation
[26] : 1.7kBTc = вҲҶ(0).
The situation must be different in cuprates since, as
well demonstrated unequivocally by tunneling spectro-
scopy [27, 28] and ARPES [23, 29] measurements, the gap
clearly does not vanish at Tc and a pseudogap remains
up to the higher temperature T вҲ—. The conventional BCS
relation is therefore no longer valid. What is then the
order parameter in cuprates ?
In several articles [12, 30], we have proposed that, un-
like conventional SC, condensation in cuprates arises be-
cause of pairon-pairon interactions. Moreover, the fun-
damental excitations of the condensate are pairon ex-
citations governed by Bose statistics [31, 32]. A simple
picture emerges (see Fig. 2) : Tmax corresponds to the
characteristic temperature of magnetic correlations be-
low which simplons are formed. Below T вҲ— pairons are
formed, corresponding to the pseudogap state where they
remain incoherent. Finally, below Tc, pairons condense in
the coherent SC state.
Therefore, in our model, the total energy ESC of the
superconducting state (per pair) is unconventional and
reads [32] :

ESC = вҲ’вҲҶp вҲ’ ОІc
(3)

where вҲҶp is the zero-temperature binding energy and ОІc
is the condensation energy responsible for long range or-
der. The latter can be precisely extracted from the expe-
rimental quasiparticle spectra [30, 33]. Contrary to BCS,
since вҲҶp is constant across Tc, it is ОІc that determines
the critical temperature and not the gap [30], with the
result :

ОІc вүғ 2.2kBTc
(4)

We now show that this condensation energy ОІc, i.e. the
energy difference between the non SC pseudogap state
EP G = вҲ’вҲҶp and the SC state ESC, results from quan-
tifying the amount of pairon disorder. In this view, the
characteristic disorder in the PG state is uniquely de-
termined by the topological constraints of the 2d square
lattice.


4

Figure 5. (Color online) Statistics of the number of pairons
Ni in a square of size d0 = 5 containing N0 =25 possible sites.
Left panel : Mean value вҹЁNiвҹ© and variance Пғ2 = пҝҪ
N 2
i
пҝҪ
вҲ’вҹЁNiвҹ©2.
plotted as a function of nominal pairon density pвҖІ. Middle
panel : Histogram H(Ni) of the number of pairons Ni for
pвҖІ =0.22, chosen as an example. Right panel : Pairons ran-
domly distributed on the pairon lattice for pвҖІ =0.22.

To proceed, akin to a lattice gas approach, let us consi-
der pairons on an equivalent square lattice of density pвҖІ :
pвҖІ =1 corresponds to the compact pairon lattice (p =0.27
on the Cu0 square lattice) and pвҖІ =0 to the onset doping
at which the average distance between pairons is small
enough (d < d0) so that they interact (p =.05 on the
Cu0 square lattice). Pairons are then randomly distribu-
ted on this lattice (Fig. 5), under the hypothesis where
all sites are equivalent. We calculate the number of pai-
rons, Ni, inside a square of side d0 (with N0 = d0
2 sites)
, where d0 is the maximum interacting distance between
pairons. From the distribution of вҹЁNiвҹ©, we calculate the
statistical averages, the mean value вҹЁNiвҹ© and the variance
Пғ2 =
пҝҪ
N 2
i
пҝҪ
вҲ’ вҹЁNiвҹ©2.
As expected for a problem depending only on the suc-
cess pвҖІ or failure 1вҲ’pвҖІ to find a pairon on a given site, we
obtain for Ni a binomial distribution. As a result, вҹЁNiвҹ©
follows a straight line as a function of pвҖІ, with some jit-
ter, while the variance Пғ2 = N0pвҖІ(1вҲ’pвҖІ) displays a dome
shape. In fact, for a fixed N0 and a random distribution,
Пғ2 characterizes the maximum disorder of the localized
pairons on the square lattice.
The condensation energy can be understood using the
Following gendanken experiment. When the interaction
between pairons is switched off, we obtain the incoherent
PG state, the вҖҳpairon glassвҖҷ, of energy EP G, where there
is by definition no correlation between pairons. In this
state, no long-range SC order exists and the disorder is
described by the above binomial distribution.
When the interaction is turned back on (provided their
typical distance d is smaller than d0), all pairons are in
the ordered SC ground state, with energy EP G вҲ’ ОІc. In
this zero temperature transformation, the virtual work
W needed to disorder the system is ОІc :

W = EP G вҲ’ ESC = ОІc
(5)

Since the disorder is characterised by the variance of the
distribution, one should have W вҲқ Пғ2. Thus, we obtain

ОІc вҲқ Пғ2/N0 = pвҖІ(1 вҲ’ pвҖІ).
(6)

Figure 6. (Color online) (a) Antinodal gap (in units of
вҲҶ/2.2kB) (b) pseudogap temperature T вҲ—, both measured by
ARPES [23, 34] and (c) experimental superconducting tem-
perature Tc (from Ref. [9]) , compared to the binomial law
(red lines) with only one adjustable parameter О». From the
fit of the data we find the value О» =400K.

In this view, the condensation is a new type of disorder to
order transition, independent of the other degrees of free-
dom. In spite of the complex excitations, Bose excitations
and quasiparticle fermionic excitations, and magnetic de-
grees of freedom, the underlying topological constraints
define the fundamental mechanism.

Pseudogap and superconductivity

We now focus on the interplay between the pseudogap
and the superconducting phase in cuprate. The pseudo-
gap line is given by T вҲ— вҲқ (1 вҲ’ 4p), which translates to
вҲј (1вҲ’pвҖІ) in the pairon sublattice, and that the condensa-
tion energy is ОІc вҲј pвҖІ(1вҲ’pвҖІ). Furthermore, the statistical
calculation described above leads the two relations :

T вҲ— = О» (1 вҲ’ pвҖІ)

Tc = О» pвҖІ(1 вҲ’ pвҖІ)
(7)

where О» has the dimension of temperature. The true
doping value is given by the linear tranformation p =
pmin + (pmax вҲ’ pmin) Г— pвҖІ.
To proceed, we now compare in Fig. 6 the calculated T вҲ—

and Tc to the experimental values, measured by ARPES
[34] and resistivity [9] respectively. With only one adjus-
table parameter О», the agreement between theory and
experiments is remarkable. We find the value О» =400K,
which is comparable to J/2, or the NВҙeel temperature
when extrapolated to p = 0.
The binomial law provides a simple explanation for
the maximum Tc obtainable, which occurs at half-filling,
pвҖІ = 1/2. Indeed, at this concentration the fluctuation
amplitude, measured by Пғ2, is a maximum. At this op-
timum concentration, we see the topological constraint


5

that T вҲ— is exactly twice Tc.
These fundamental relations illustrate that the pseu-
dogap and superconductivity are completely linked and
arise from the same physical phenomenon, for the entire
doping range. The geometry of the dome and the tangent
line are not arbitrary but determined by the statistics of
pairons randomly distributed on a square lattice. A direct
consequence is that both T вҲ— and Tc are proportional to
the same energy scale, which we identify as the magnetic
exchange energy J.

Conclusion

In this article, we propose that key aspects of the phase
diagram of cuprates are governed by the topological pro-
perties of the doped antiferromagnetic insulator on a
square lattice. Bound pairs of holes are formed due to
the local antiferromagnetic environnement and condense
in the superconducting state in a disorder to order tran-
sition. The condensation is driven by a new mechanism
and is directly related to the amount of disorder in the
non SC pseudogap state. Thus the simple binomial pairon
distribution explains the Tc-dome as well as the pseudo-
gap line. We show that the cuprate SC state, a spatially
correlated quantum state of pairons, is intimately connec-
ted to the disordered pseudogap state вҖ“ in our view they
appear as indissociable phenomena.

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge many fruitful dis-
cussions with H. Eisaki and S. Ishida (AIST, Tsukuba,
Japan) and M. Nohara (University of Hiroshima, Japan).

[1] Jamil Tahir-Kheli and William A. Goddard III, Universal
Properties of Cuprate Superconductors : Tc Phase Dia-
gram, Room-Temperature Thermopower, Neutron Spin
Resonance, and STM Incommensurability Explained in
Terms of Chiral Plaquette Pairing, J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
1, 1290вҖ“1295 (2010).

[2] Y. Noat, A. Mauger, M. Nohara, H. Eisaki, W. Sacks,
Cuprates phase diagram deduced from magnetic suscep-
tibility : what is the вҖҷtrueвҖҷ pseudogap line ?, article sub-
mitted to Solid State communications (2022).

[3] B. Keimer, N. Belk, R. J. Birgeneau, A. Cassanho, C. Y.
Chen, M. Greven, M. A. Kastner, A. Aharony, Y. Endoh,
R. W. Erwin, and G. Shirane, Magnetic excitations in
pure, lightly doped, and weakly metallic La2CuO4, Phys.
Rev. B 46, 14034 (1992).

[4] David C. Johnston, Magnetic Susceptibility Scaling in
La2вҲ’xSrxCuO4вҲ’y, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 957 (1989).

[5] J. B. Torrance, A. Bezinge, A. I. Nazzal, T. C. Huang,
S. S. P. Parkin, D. T. Keane, S. J. LaPlaca, P. M.

Horn, and G. A. Held, Properties that change as super-
conductivity disappears at high-doping concentrations in
La2вҲ’xSrxCuO4, Phys. Rev. B 40, 8872 (1989).

[6] R. Yoshizaki, N. Ishikawa, H. Sawada, E. Kita, A. Tasaki,
Magnetic susceptibility of normal state and superconduc-
tivity of La2вҲ’xSrxCuO4, Physica C 166, 417 (1990).

[7] M.Oda, T.Nakano, Y.Kamada, M.Ido, Electronic states
of doped holes and magnetic properties in La2?xMxCuO4
(M = Sr, Ba), Physica C 183, 234 (1991).

[8] T. Nakano, M. Oda, C. Manabe, N. Momono, Y. Miura,
and M. Ido, Magnetic properties and electronic conduc-
tion of superconducting La2вҲ’xSrxCuO4, Phys. Rev. B
49, 16000 (1994).

[9] J. L. Tallon and J.W. Loram, The doping dependence of
T вҲ— - what is the real high-Tc phase diagram ?, Physica C
349, 53 (2001).

[10] C. Proust and L. Taillefer, Annual Review of Condensed
Matter Physics 10, 409 (2019).

[11] Leon N. Cooper, Bound electron pairs in a degenerate
Fermi gas, Physical Review 104, 1189-1190 (1956).

[12] W. Sacks, A. Mauger and Y. Noat, Cooper pairs without
glue in high-Tc superconductors : A universal phase dia-
gram, Euro. Phys. Lett 119, 17001 (2017).

[13] R. J. Birgeneau, D. R. Gabbe, H. P. Jenssen, M. A.
Kastner, P. J. Picone, T. R. Thurston, G. Shirane, Y.
Endoh, M. Sato, K. Yamada, Y. Hidaka, M. Oda, Y. En-
omoto, M. Suzuki, and T. Murakami, Antiferromagnetic
spin correlations in insulating, metallic, and supercon-
ducting La2вҲ’xSrxCuO4, Phys. Rev. B 38, 6614 (1988).

[14] Y. Noat, A. Mauger and W. Sacks, Single origin of the
nodal and antinodal gaps in cuprates, Euro. Phys. Lett
126, 67001 (2019).

[15] Efthimios Kaxiras and Efstratios Manousakis, Hole dy-
namics in the two-dimensional strong-coupling Hubbard
Hamiltonian, Phys. Rev. B 38, 866(R) (1988).

[16] J.
BonЛҮca,
P.
PrelovЛҮsek,
and
I.
Sega,
Exact-
diagonalization study of the effective model for holes
in the planar antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B 39, 7074
(1989).

[17] J. A. Riera and A. P. Young, Binding of holes in one-
band models of oxide superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 39,
9697(R) (1989).

[18] Y. Hasegawa and D. Poilblanc, Hole dynamics in the t-J
model : An exact diagonalization study, Phys. Rev. B 40,
9035 (1989).

[19] Didier Poilblanc, JosВҙe Riera and Elbio Dagotto, d-wave
bound state of holes in an antiferromagnet, Phys. Rev.
B 49, 12318 (1994).

[20] K. Terashima, H. Matsui, T. Sato, T. Takahashi, M.
Kofu, and K. Hirota, Anomalous Momentum Dependence
of the Superconducting Coherence Peak and Its Relation
to the Pseudogap of La1.85Sr0.15CuO4, Phys. Rev. Lett.
99, 017003 (2007).

[21] H. Anzai, A. Ino, M. Arita, H. Namatame, M. Taniguchi,
M. Ishikado, K. Fujita, S. Ishida and S. Uchida, Relation
between the nodal and antinodal gap and critical tempe-
rature in superconducting Bi2212, Nature Communica-
tions 4, 1815 (2013).

[22] S. HВЁufner, M. A. Hossain, A Damascelli, and G. A. Sa-
watzky,Two gaps make a high-temperature superconduc-
tor ?, Rep. Prog. Phys., 71, 062501 (2008).

[23] Makoto Hashimoto, Inna M. Vishik, Rui-Hua He, Tho-
mas P. Devereaux and Zhi-Xun Shen, Energy gaps
in high-transition-temperature cuprate superconductors,


6

Nature Physics 10, 483 (2014).

[24] Tohru Nakano, Naoki Momono, Migaku Oda, and Ma-
sayuki Ido, Correlation between the Doping Dependences
of Superconducting Gap Magnitude 2вҲҶ0 and Pseudogap
Temperature T вҲ— in HighвҖ“Tc Cuprates, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn.
67, 2622 (1998).

[25] Гҳ. Fischer, M. Kugler, I. Maggio-Aprile, C. Berthod and
C. Renner, Scanning tunneling spectroscopy of the cu-
prates, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 353 (2007).

[26] J. Bardeen, L. Cooper, J. Schrieffer, Theory of Supercon-
ductivity, Phys. Rev. 108 1175 (1957).

[27] Ch. Renner,B. Revaz, J.-Y. Genoud, K. Kadowaki,and
Гҳ. Fischer, Pseudogap precursor of the superconducting
gap in under- and overdoped Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 80 149 (1998).

[28] R. Sekine, S. J. Denholme, A. Tsukada, S. Kawashima,
M. Minematsu,T. Inose, S. Mikusu, K. Tokiwa, T. Wa-
tanabe, and N. Miyakawa, Characteristic features of
the mode energy estimated from tunneling conductance
on TlBa2Ca2Cu3O8.5+Оҙ, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 85, 024702
(2016).

[29] H. Ding, T. Yokoya, J. C. Campuzano, T. Takahashi, M.
Randeria, M. R. Norman, T. Mochiku, K. Kadowaki and
J. Giapintzakis, Spectroscopic evidence for a pseudogap

in the normal state of underdoped highвҖ“Tc superconduc-
tors, Nature 382, 51 (1996).

[30] W. Sacks, A. Mauger, Y. Noat, Pair вҖ“ pair interactions
as a mechanism for high-Tc superconductivity, Super-
conduct. Sci. Technol., 28 105014 (2015).

[31] W. Sacks, A. Mauger and Y. Noat, Origin of the Fermi
arcs in cuprates : a dual role of quasiparticle and pair
excitations, Journal of Physics : Condensed Matter, 30,
475703 (2018).

[32] Y. Noat, A. Mauger, M. Nohara, H. Eisaki, W. Sacks ,
How вҖҳpaironsвҖҷ are revealed in the electronic specific heat
of cuprates, Solid State Communications 323, 114109
(2021).

[33] W.
Sacks,
T.
Cren,
D.
Roditchev,
and
B.
DouВёcot,Quasiparticle
spectrum
of
the
cuprate
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ : Possible connection to the phase
diagram, Phys. Rev. B 74, 174517 (2006).

[34] I. M. Vishik, M. Hashimoto, R.-H. He, W.-S. Lee, F.
Schmitt, D. Lu, R. G. Moore, C. Zhang, W. Meevasana,
T. Sasagawa, S. Uchida, Kazuhiro Fujita, S. Ishida, M.
Ishikado, Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, Z. Hussain, T. P. De-
vereaux, and Z.-X. Shen, Phase competition in trisected
superconducting dome, PNAS 109, 18332 (2012).


