1

Observation of Gigahertz Topological Valley Hall Effect in Nanoelectromechanical 

Phononic Crystals

Qicheng Zhang1, †, Daehun Lee2, †, Lu Zheng2, Xuejian Ma2, Shawn I. Meyer2, Li He1, Han Ye3, 

Ze Gong4, Bo Zhen1, Keji Lai2,*, A. T. Charlie Johnson1,4*

1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA

2 Department of Physics, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA

3 State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communications, Beijing 

University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China

4 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA

† These authors contributed equally to this work
* E-mails: kejilai@physics.utexas.edu; cjohnson@physics.upenn.edu

Abstract

Topological phononics offers numerous opportunities in manipulating elastic waves that can 

propagate in solids without being backscattered. Due to the lack of nanoscale imaging tools that 

aid the system design, however, acoustic topological metamaterials have been mostly 

demonstrated in macroscale systems operating at low (kilohertz to megahertz) frequencies. Here, 

we report the realization of gigahertz topological valley Hall effect in nanoelectromechanical AlN 

membranes. Propagation of elastic wave through phononic crystals is directly visualized by 

microwave microscopy with unprecedented sensitivity and spatial resolution. The valley Hall edge 

states, protected by band topology, are vividly seen in both real- and momentum-space. The robust 

valley-polarized transport is evident from the wave transmission across local disorder and around 

sharp corners, as well as the power distribution into multiple edge channels. Our work paves the 

way to exploit topological physics in integrated acousto-electronic systems for classical and 

quantum information processing in the microwave regime.


2

The hallmark of topological phases of matter is the existence of nontrivial boundary states, 

which are protected by the global property of bulk energy bands and thus robust against local 

perturbations1-3. While originally developed for electron waves in condensed matter systems, 

topological band theory soon expanded into other wave systems, leading to the rapid advance of 

topological mechanics4,5, photonics6,7, and phononics8,9 in the past decade. In particular, transport 

through edge channels in topological phononic systems is protected from backscattering due to 

structural disorders, fabrication imperfections, and environmental changes10-20. As a result, the 

pursuit of artificial elastic structures with novel band topology is not only intellectually attractive 

but also technologically relevant, especially in configurations that are suitable for integrated circuit 

applications.

The realization of a topological phase of matter requires coordinated efforts in theoretical 

calculation, experimental implementation, and systematic characterization. In electronic materials, 

this is achieved through first-principles calculations, material synthesis, macroscopic transport, 

momentum-space (k-space) mapping, and microscopic imaging2. The same design principle also 

applies to acoustic metamaterials8,9,21, whose elastic moduli or mass densities vary periodically on 

a scale comparable to the acoustic wavelength. To date, studies of topological phononic crystals 

PnCs have been limited to relatively low frequencies. In the kHz range, the sonic design can be 

implemented by periodic arrangement of centimeter-scale meta-molecules (rods, rings, prisms…), 

and the local pressure field of the sound wave is measured by a microphone13-15,18. For structures 

operating in the MHz regime, the local displacement field of the elastic wave is usually detected 

by a scanning laser interferometer16,17,19,20. In contrast, topological PnCs are much less explored in 

the Ultra High Frequency (UHF, 0.3 – 3 GHz) and Super High Frequency (SHF, 3 – 30 GHz) 

bands that are of crucial importance for wireless communication22, sensing technology23, and 

universal quantum interconnects24. One major hurdle lies in the difficulty to probe phononic 

structures fabricated on monolithic substrates. Given the micrometer-scale GHz acoustic 

wavelength in solids, optical vibrometers16,17,19,20 with diffraction-limited spatial resolution (~ 1 

m) are not generally applicable in the UHF/SHF regime. The development of a nanoscale 

acoustoelectric probing technology is therefore highly desirable for the advance of GHz 

topological phononics.


3

In this work, we report the realization of gigahertz topological valley Hall insulators and 

the observation of robust valley-polarized edge states in suspended AlN phononic crystals. Using 

a newly developed technique of transmission-mode microwave impedance microscopy 

(TMIM)25,26, we visualize the wave pattern across gapped and gapless PnCs on microfabricated 

freestanding membranes. Edge transport channels are vividly seen at the interface between two 

domains with opposite valley Chern numbers and the band dispersion is consistent with reciprocal-

space analysis using fast Fourier transform (FFT). We show that the edge transport is robust against 

local disorder at the domain wall and sharp corners in Z-shaped channels, highlighting its 

topological protection against backscattering events. Topology-protected wave steering is also 

achieved in a beam-splitter design. Our results represent the first successful demonstration of 

topologically nontrivial phases in integrated phononic circuits with an operation frequency in the 

microwave regime, which is promising for both classical information technology and quantum 

computation systems.

Fig. 1 | Phononic crystal design and calculated band structures. a, Schematic of the 
metamaterial design. The white regions are etched away from a freestanding AlN 
membrane. The rhombus indicates the unit cell, which consists of two equilateral triangles 
and connecting bridges. Parameters in the figure are a0 = 4.9 m, r0 = 2 m, h = 0.36 m, 
and r = +100 nm. Only r is varied among different samples. b, Left to right: Simulated 
band structures with r = −100 nm, 0 nm, and 100 nm. The topological bands relevant to 
this work are highlighted. Dirac dispersion is observed in the middle structure with r = 0. 
The valley Chern numbers near the band extrema are labeled for the gapped structures. c, 
Eigenfrequencies at the top/bottom band edges of interest as a function of r. The black 
dot denotes the band closing point and valley Hall phase transition at r = 0. The insets 
depict the eigenmodes of piezoelectric potential within a unit cell at the band extrema for
r =  100 nm.


4

The topological nanoelectromechanical structure implemented in this work is based on the 

phononic analogue of the valley Hall effect (VHE)27. Valley pseudospin28 labels the degenerate 

energy extrema in momentum space, whose topological nature stems from the nontrivial Berry 

curvature localized at these extremal points of the acoustic band structure. As depicted in Fig. 1a, 

snowflake-like29,30 regions are etched away from a freestanding AlN membrane31,32. The rhombic 

primitive cell consists of two sublattice sites (equilateral triangles, radii of circumcircles r0  r) 

and linking bridges. Fig. 1b shows the calculated band structures using finite-element modeling 

(see Methods). The dependence of eigenfrequencies as a function of various dimensions of this 

snowflake pattern is shown in Supplementary Information S1. When r = 0, the structure can be 

viewed as an acoustic analogue of graphene, with C6v symmetry (sixfold rotations about the 

snowflake center and mirror symmetry about the vertical planes containing a basis vector of the 

honeycomb lattice), resulting in time-reversal-symmetry-protected Dirac dispersion near the K and 

K points of the Brillouin zone. For r  0, the symmetry of the PnC reduces to C3v, and the broken 

inversion symmetry lifts the degeneracy at the Dirac point14,15,18,20,33-35. Fig. 1c shows the r-

dependent bandgaps, as well as the piezoelectricity induced electrical potential profiles at the band 

edges for r =  100 nm. The topological phase transition across r = 0 can be captured by an 

effective kp Hamiltonian14:

𝐻𝐾(𝐾′) = 𝑣𝐷(𝜅𝑥𝜎𝑥 + 𝜅𝑦𝜎𝑦 + 𝑚𝑣𝐷𝜎𝑧),
(1)

where 𝑣D is the Dirac velocity, 𝜅𝑥,𝑦,𝑧 the momentum deviation from the K (K) point, 𝜎𝑥,𝑦,𝑧 the 

Pauli matrices, and 𝑚 the mass term introduced by the broken inversion symmetry. This massive 

Dirac Hamiltonian produces nontrivial Berry curvatures at the two valleys, each can be integrated 

into a topological charge, i.e., a valley Chern number CK(K) = ½ sgn(m).14 Here sgn(m) refers to 

the sign of m. It should be noted that because of the large momentum separation between the 

inequivalent K and K valleys, intervalley scattering is often significantly suppressed. As is seen 

below, the quantization of CK(K), arising from mass inversion and the assumption of inhibited 

intervalley scattering, plays crucial roles in the emergence of gapless VHE edge states.


5

Fig. 2 | Characterization of gapless and gapped phononic crystals. a, Left: Picture of 
the phononic device fabricated on a suspended AlN membrane. Right: Schematic of the 
TMIM setup and the acoustic device with input/output IDTs shown in gray. b, 
Transmission coefficient as a function of excitation frequency for the gapless device with 
r = 0 nm and c, gapped device with r = 100 nm. The IDT passband is shaded in blue in 
both plots. The corresponding TMIM images at f = 1.045 GHz are shown in d and e, 
respectively. f, TMIM image inside the gapless PnC in (d), plotted in a different false-color 
map. The lower image shows simulated piezoelectric potential profile for the same field of 
view.  Scale bars are 40 m in (a), 20 m in (d, e) and 5 µm in (f).

The design of our PnC is geometric in nature and fully compatible with standard 

nanofabrication processes31,32. The inset of Fig. 2a shows the nanoelectromechanical device 

fabricated on a freestanding 800-nm-thick c-axis polycrystalline AlN film. Future experiments 

could incorporate Sc-doped AlN thin films36 that will further improve the electromechanical 

coupling. We emphasize that, in comparison with a prior work16, the relatively thick and stiff film 

and the small dimension of the triangular artificial atoms are crucial for the realization of GHz 

characteristic frequencies. The PnC is patterned by electron-beam lithography and plasma etching. 

The interdigital transducers (IDTs) used to excite acoustic waves in the film are formed by 

depositing 45-nm-thick Al on the piezoelectric AlN. Visualization of the GHz acoustic waves is 

performed by TMIM on an atomic-force microscope (AFM) platform25,26. All measurements are 


6

performed under ambient temperature and pressure. As illustrated in Fig. 2a, the acoustic wave is 

launched by the emitter IDT. The shielded cantilever probe37 behaves as a microwave receiver to 

pick up the ~ 1 GHz piezoelectric potential. Through the 50- impedance-match section, the signal 

is amplified and demodulated by an in-phase/quadrature (I/Q) mixer, using the same microwave 

source that drives the emitter IDT. The signals at the RF and LO ports of the mixer can be 

expressed as 𝑉RF ∝ 𝑒𝑖(𝜔𝑡−𝑘𝑥) and 𝑉LO ∝ 𝑒𝑖(𝜔𝑡+𝜃) , where 𝜔 is the angular frequency, 𝑘 the 

acoustic wave vector, and 𝜃 the mixer phase, respectively. The two output channels are therefore 

𝑉Ch1 ∝ Re(𝑉RF𝑉LO

∗ ) = cos(𝑘𝑥 + 𝜃) and 𝑉Ch2 ∝ Im(𝑉RF𝑉LO

∗ ) = − sin(𝑘𝑥 + 𝜃). The complex-

valued TMIM signal 𝑉Ch1 + 𝑖 ∗ 𝑉Ch2 provides a phase-sensitive measurement on the local 

displacement field of the elastic wave. For simplicity, we will only present one channel below 

unless otherwise specified. The unique properties of the TMIM setup include (1) high sensitivity 

(10 ~ 100 fm)38 superior to that of commercial laser-based scanning vibrometers (~ 1 pm)39, (2) 

outstanding spatial resolution (10 ~ 100 nm) well into the nanoscale, and (3) high operation 

frequency up to 10 GHz and beyond26, making it an ideal technique to study integrated UHF/SHF 

phononic metamaterials.

We begin by characterizing the gap opening due to broken space-inversion symmetry. As 

illustrated in Fig. 2a, the PnC region is tilted from the normal of the plane wave launched by the 

IDT. Conservation of momentum parallel to the PnC boundary14 requires that k|| = k0 sin , where 

k|| is the projection of K (or K) on the boundary, k0 the wavevector for the pattern-free AlN 

membrane, and  the tilt angle. As shown in Supplementary Information S2, this angular selection 

rule is satisfied at 1 = 23 (see Figs. 3 – 5) and 2 = 55 (see Fig. 2). In Figs. 2b and 2c, we plot 

the transmission spectra taken by a vector network analyzer on the gapless and gapped structures, 

respectively. Within the IDT passband (1.00 – 1.06 GHz), the transmission coefficient (S21) of the 

gapless PnC is substantially higher (~ 30 dB) than that of the gapped PnC. The residual wave 

transmission in the gapped PnC is consistent with tunneling across the finite-sized (50 m) crystal 

via an evanescent mode. The corresponding TMIM images at 1.045 GHz are shown in Figs. 2d 

and 2e. For the design with r = 0, the gapless nature is evident from the appearance of transmitted 

plane waves on the opposite side of the PnC. In contrast, for the gapped structure with r = 100 

nm, the PnC region in the TMIM image (Fig. 2e) only displays the snowflake patterns due to 

topographic crosstalk (Supplementary Information S3), and the transmitted wave on the far side 


7

of the PnC is much weaker than for the gapless system (Fig. 2d). In addition, Fig. 2f shows the 

TMIM image inside the gapless PnC and the potential profile simulated by finite-element modeling. 

The resemblance between the two images confirms that the TMIM indeed measures the 

piezoelectric surface potential, which is proportional to the acoustic displacement field on the AlN 

membrane.

Fig. 3 | Real-space imaging and momentum-space analysis of valley Hall edge states. 
a, SEM image near the interface (shaded in yellow) between two valley Hall insulators 
with r = +100 nm (top) and −100 nm (bottom). The two sublattice sites are marked as 
blue and red triangles for clarity. b, TMIM image of the topological VHE state taken at f = 
1.060 GHz. The arrow indicates that the elastic wave is launched from the right IDT and 
propagates in the −x-direction. c, Generic k-space map of the honeycomb lattice. The solid 
hexagon is the first Brillouin zone, with the high-symmetry points labeled in the map. The 
blue dots represent the reciprocal lattice sites. d, FFT amplitude map for the TMIM data at 
f = 1.060 GHz. The dashed hexagon is a guide for comparison with (c). The high-intensity 
line (denoted by the orange arrow) on the left side of the K point is associated with the 
VHE state. e, TMIM image and f, FFT map at f = 1.045 GHz. The VHE wave pattern 
exhibits a period of 3a0. g, TMIM image and h, FFT map at f = 1.010 GHz. The bulk states 


8

are visible in both the real-space and k-space (denoted by the gray arrow) data. In (d, f, h), 
orange arrows point to the VHE states. i, Measured FFT amplitude along KK from 1 GHz 
to 1.06 GHz. The blue, green and red curves are extracted from the profiles indicate by the 
horizontal lines of corresponding colors in (d, f, h). The peak positions of the edge and 
bulk states are marked by orange and gray dots, respectively. j, Simulated bands of the PnC 
projected in the kx direction, showing the VHE band running across the bulk gap. The 
horizontal lines indicate the three representative frequencies of corresponding colors in i. 
The VHE edge state is colored in orange. Scale bars are 5 m in (a), 20 m in (b, e, g), 
and 2  0.05 m-1 in (d, f, h). 

Having confirmed the symmetry-induced gap opening in our metamaterial design, we now 

move on to study the VHE edge states. Fig. 3a displays a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 

image around the interface separating two domains with r = +100 nm (top) and −100 nm (bottom). 

Since the difference in the topological charge between the two domains is quantized, i.e., |CK| = 

1, a chiral valley-Hall edge mode must exist at the boundary due to the bulk-edge correspondence14. 

Fig. 3b shows the real-space TMIM image at the upper bound of the IDT passband (f = 1.060 GHz), 

where a weak channel carrying elastic waves is observed (full data in Supplementary Information 

S4). The k-space information can be obtained by taking FFT of the signal 𝑉Ch1 + 𝑖 ∗ 𝑉Ch2. Using 

the extended Brillouin zone of the honeycomb lattice (Fig. 3c) as a guide, we can discern a faint 

high-intensity line on the left side of the K point (Fig. 3d). At f = 1.045 GHz (Fig. 3e), which 

coincides with the frequency at the K point in reciprocal space, the VHE edge state is fully resolved 

as the frequency is well within the IDT band. Correspondingly, the FFT map in Fig. 3f exhibits 

very strong intensity at the K point. According to the Bloch’s theorem40, the wavefunction of the 

edge state satisfies 𝜓𝑘⃗ (𝑟 ) = 𝑢𝑘⃗ (𝑟 )𝑒𝑖𝑘⃗ ∙𝑟 , where 𝑢𝑘⃗ (𝑟 ) is a function with the lattice periodicity. At 

the K point, where |kx| = 2/3a0, one should expect a period of 3a0 in the wavefunction, i.e., 

𝜓𝐾(𝑥 + 3𝑎0) = 𝜓𝐾(𝑥), which is indeed observed in Fig. 3e. We emphasize that the weak intensity 

at the K valley in Fig. 3f is not due to intervalley scattering. Rather, it is associated with the 

inevitable reflection due to the impedance mismatch at the junction between the PnC region and 

the unpatterned region, which leads to wave propagation in the opposite direction (Supplementary 

Information S5). At f = 1.010 GHz, the frequency lies inside the bulk band such that both bulk and 

edge states are present (Fig. 3g). The k-space map in Fig. 3h also shows a high-intensity line on 

the right side of the K point, which is associated with the VHE state, and some intensity around 

the K point, which indicates the appearance of bulk states.


9

The high-resolution FFT maps allow us to quantitatively compare the experimental data 

and the calculated band structure. In the real space, the VHE edge state is a gapless mode localized 

at the interface and travels along opposite directions near K and K valleys because of the opposite 

group velocity, manifesting the momentum-valley locking of the chiral edge states. The group 

velocity is characterized by the band dispersion as d/dk. In Fig. 3i, we display the FFT line 

profiles along the KK direction and highlight the three representative frequencies shown in Figs. 

3b-3h. The dispersion of both the bulk and topological edge states is clearly seen as we track the 

position of FFT peak intensity. This is in excellent agreement with the simulated curves in Fig. 3j, 

where the simulated bands projected in the kx direction are plotted. Here a single band appears 

around the K valley and runs monotonically across the bulk bandgap of 1.015 – 1.080 GHz. 

Fig. 4 | Robustness of valley Hall edge transport. a, Schematic of a local defect (three 
missing snowflakes) at the valley Hall interface. b, Left to right: TMIM-Ch1, -Ch2, and -
modulus images of the sample in (a). The disorder alters the phase but not the amplitude 
of the elastic wave traveling along the topological boundary. c, TMIM image of a Z-shaped 
VHE edge channel (schematic in the top-left inset). The lower-right inset shows the line 
profiles at three representative locations denoted in the image. The dashed lines are 
exponential fits (𝑒−𝑥 𝜉
⁄ ) to the envelope function of the TMIM amplitude. d, TMIM images 


10

of a Z-shaped pattern-free channel and e, a Z-shaped gapless channel embedded in gapped 
crystals. Schematics are shown to the left of the images. Substantial reflection and 
attenuation are evident for these topologically trivial interfaces. The false-color scale for 
all TMIM images is from −50 mV to 50 mV. All scale bars are 20 m.

Using the same topological design, we can also demonstrate the robustness of VHE edge 

state transport against structural imperfections. Fig. 4a illustrates the schematic of a different PnC 

sample with one defect (three missing snowflakes) at the domain boundary13. As seen in Fig. 4b, 

while the signal strengths in both channels are altered by the scatterer, the TMIM modulus 

(√𝑉Ch1

2
+ 𝑉Ch2

2 ) remains unchanged after crossing the local disorder. In other words, the scattering 

center modifies the phase but not the amplitude of the elastic wave propagating along the 

topological interface. Similarly, the topological protection of valley transport is also validated by 

transmission with negligible loss through sharp corners of a zigzag interface14, as illustrated in the 

inset of Fig. 4c. At the unit cell level, the relative position of the two valley Hall domains is 

invariant with respect to the interface. As a result, the forward-moving modes are always projected 

to the same valley and protected from backscattering by the band topology. As shown in the TMIM 

image (Fig. 4c), the incident elastic wave is guided into the domain wall and propagates freely 

through the two sharp turns. The absence of wave attenuation across the corners is evident from 

the TMIM signal profiles at three representative locations (lower right inset). The exponential 

decay (𝑒−𝑥 𝜉
⁄ ) of the wavefunction into gapped PnC regions indicates that the VHE state is indeed 

localized at the topological interface, with  ~ 6 m comparable to the lattice constant. For 

comparison, we design and measure two topologically trivial Z-shaped channels – one pattern-free 

waveguide (Fig. 4d) and one gapless waveguide (Fig. 4e) – within gapped PnCs. In both cases, the 

first 120-turn already introduces substantial reflection and strong disturbance to the incident wave. 

The attenuation after two bending corners is so significant that little energy is transmitted to the 

output port. The topological protection is thus crucial for guiding elastic waves with minimal loss 

in nanoelectromechanical systems.

Finally, we demonstrate the realization of a VHE-based topological beam splitter33,41. Fig. 

5a shows the TMIM modulus image as an elastic wave enters a meta-structure with four alternating 

valley Hall domains (schematic in the upper right inset). The incident wave splits into two branches 

separated by an angle of 120. On the other hand, the appearance of propagating wave along the 


11

straight route after the splitting would indicate that the wave is scattered to the other valley at the 

junction, which is prohibited by the VHE. In the experiment, wave transmission in the forward 

direction beyond the intersection is indeed negligible, with a suppression factor of over 40 dB. 

Interestingly, a careful examination of the crystal design (lower right inset of Fig. 5a) indicates 

that the upper branch is closer to the input line than the lower branch by 0.5a0. This subtle 

asymmetry is readily captured by the sensitive TMIM imaging. In Fig. 5b, we plot the square of 

TMIM modulus integrated over one wavelength (∫ (𝑉Ch1

2
+ 𝑉Ch2

2 )𝑑𝑥
𝑎0
), which is proportional to 

the acoustic power, for all four segments. The lower branch receives less (~ 40%) acoustic energy 

than the upper branch (~ 60%) from the incident wave, which is consistent with the uneven beam 

splitting inherent in the metamaterial design. 

Fig. 5 | Demonstration of topological beam splitting. a, TMIM-modulus image of a 
topological beam splitter based on four alternating domains (schematic in the up-right 
inset). The lower-right inset shows a close-up view around the intersection. The scale bar 
is 20 m. b, Square of TMIM-modulus signals integrated over one wavelength, which is 
proportional to the acoustic power, for the four paths labeled in (a). 

The GHz topological VHE demonstrated in this work may be exploited for integrated 

phononic circuits in the UHF/SHF regime. The acoustic beam splitter in Fig. 5a, for instance, can 

be used as power dividers or combiners. The zigzag VHE edge channels in Fig. 4c allows robust 


12

1D transport with small footprint, which is suitable for compact acoustic delay lines. Moreover, 

the valley-momentum locking property will enable us to implement valley filters. Here the gapless 

state (r = 0) is used as the background PnC, where the valley degree of freedom is well defined. 

In this “acoustic graphene”, both 𝐾 and 𝐾′ valley-polarized states can propagate in all directions 

allowed by the crystal symmetry. One can then construct a topological VHE region (similar to Fig. 

3a) to select a specific valley state. After certain circuit operations, the valley information can be 

read out by passing it through a second VHE region that has either the same or opposite valley 

polarity. All these circuit elements are promising candidates for classical and quantum information 

applications. 

In summary, we have designed and fabricated GHz nanoelectromechanical phononic 

crystals with topologically nontrivial structures. Using microwave impedance microscopy, we 

successfully visualize the elastic wave on patterned piezoelectric AlN membranes with 

unprecedented displacement sensitivity and spatial resolution. The topologically protected edge 

states between two gapped structures with opposite valley Chern numbers are demonstrated in 

both real-space imaging and momentum-space analysis. The valley Hall effect protected against 

backscattering is evident from the negligible loss through local disorders and sharp corners, as well 

as the power splitting into multiple edge channels. Our work provides an excellent framework to 

exploit integrated topological phononics for classical and quantum information processing in the 

microwave regime.

Methods

Device fabrication: We fabricated the phononic structures on 800 nm thick c-axis polycrystalline 

AlN films grown by magnetron sputtering on Si wafers. The phononic crystal was formed by 

electron beam lithography (EBL) and plasma etching of AlN using 660-nm-thick SiNx hard mask. 

Interdigital transducers (IDTs) were used to emit and receive phonons. The IDT fingers have an 

aperture width of 80 µm. The IDTs were fabricated by EBL and lift-off of 45-nm-thick 

aluminum. Finally, the AlN film was released from the Si substrate by a XeF2 etcher.

Finite-element modeling: The band structures and potential profiles are calculated using finite 

element methods in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4. We compute the 2D and 1D band structures along 

with potential profiles in the corresponding geometries with periodic boundary conditions. The 

“piezoelectric effect Multiphysics” is applied which couples the solid mechanics module and 


13

electrostatics module. The material properties used are slightly modified from reported AlN 

membrane properties42. Specifically, 𝑐11 = 𝑐22 = 375 GPa , 𝑐12 = 125 GPa , 𝑐13 = 𝑐23 =

120 GPa , 𝑐44 = 𝑐55 = 118 GPa , 𝑐66 = (𝑐11 − 𝑐12)/2 = 125 GPa , 𝑒31 = 𝑒32 = −0.58 C/m2 , 

𝑒33 = 1.55 C/m2, 𝑒15 = 𝑒24 = −0.48 C/m2, 𝜌 = 3180 kg/m3. 

Experimental setup: The transmission-mode microwave impedance microscopy (TMIM) is 

implemented on an atomic-force microscopy platform (ParkAFM, XE-70). The shielded cantilever 

probe (Model 5-300N) is commercially available from PrimeNano Inc. At ~ 1 GHz, the cantilever 

probe can be viewed as a lumped element with an effective capacitance of ~ 1 pF. An impedance-

match network is needed to route the tip to the 50- transmission lines, resulting in a measurement 

bandwidth of ~ 70 MHz. In the experiment, this band is tuned to match the passband of the IDT. 

The tip/impedance-match receiver has an effective input impedance |Zin| ~ 1 k at 1 GHz. Through 

a similar tip-sample coupling impedance Zt-s ~ 100 k, an input signal is picked up by the tip and 

then amplified and demodulated by the microwave electronics. Details of the TMIM experiment 

can be found in Ref. 25. All measurements are performed at room temperature. 

Data Availability.  All data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article 

and/or the SI Appendix. The raw data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 

request.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the NSF through the Laboratory for Research on the Structure of 

Matter, an NSF Materials Research Science & Engineering Center (MRSEC; DMR-1720530). The 

TMIM work was supported by NSF Division of Materials Research Award DMR-2004536 and 

Welch Foundation Grant F-1814. The data analysis was partially supported by the NSF through 

the Center for Dynamics and Control of Materials, an NSF MRSEC under Cooperative Agreement 

DMR-1720595. This work was carried out in part at the Singh Center for Nanotechnology, which 

is supported by the NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure Program under grant 

NNCI-2025608. The metamaterial design and simulation work was supported by the US Office of 

Naval Research (ONR) Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative (MURI) grant N00014-

20-1-2325 on Robust Photonic Materials with High-Order Topological Protection and grant 


14

N00014-21-1-2703. We would like to express our appreciation for useful discussions with Prof. 

Troy Olsson and Dr. Qian Niu. 

Author contributions

C.J. and K.L. conceived the project. Q.Z. fabricated the phononic devices and performed band-

structure simulations. D.L. and L.Z. performed the TMIM imaging and data analysis. X.M. and 

S.I.M. contributed to the TMIM data analysis. L.H., Z.G., H.Y., and B.Z. contributed to the 

phononic crystal design. Q.Z., D.L., and K.L. drafted the manuscript with contributions from all 

authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Data availability

The data sets generated during the current study, and/or analysed during the current study, are 

available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

References

1. Fu, L., Kane, C. L. & Mele E. J. Topological Insulators in Three Dimensions. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 98, 106803 (2007).

2. Hasan, M. Z. & Kane, C. L. Topological insulators. Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045 (2010).

3. Qi, X.-L. & Zhang, S.-C. Topological insulators and superconductors.  Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 

1057 (2011).

4. Süsstrunk, R. & Huber, S.D. Observation of phononic helical edge states in a mechanical 

topological insulator. Science 349, 47-50 (2015).

5. Nash, L. M., Kleckner, D., Read, A., Vitelli, V., Turner, A.M. & Irvine, W.T.M. 

Topological mechanics of gyroscopic metamaterials. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 14495-

14500 (2015).

6. Lu, L., Joannopoulos, J.D. & Soljačić, M. Topological photonics. Nat. Photon. 8, 821-829 

(2014).


15

7. Ozawa, T., Price, H.M., Amo, A., Goldman, N., Hafezi, M., Lu, L., Rechtsman, M.C., 

Schuster, D., Simon, J., Zilberberg, O. & Carusotto, I. Topological photonics. Rev. Mod. 

Phys. 91, 015006 (2019).

8. Ma, G., Xiao, M., & Chan, C.T. Topological phases in acoustic and mechanical systems. 

Nat. Rev. Phys. 1, 281 (2019).

9. Liu, Y., Chen, X. & Xu, Y. Topological Phononics: From Fundamental Models to Real 

Materials. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 1904784 (2020).

10. Khanikaev, A.B., Fleury, R., Mousavi, S.H. & Alu, A. Topologically robust sound 

propagation in an angular-momentum-biased graphene-like resonator lattice. Nat. Commun. 

6, 8260 (2015).

11. Mousavi, S.H., Khanikaev, A.B. & Wang, Z. Topologically protected elastic waves in 

phononic metamaterials. Nat. Commun. 6, 8682 (2015).

12. Yang, Z., Gao, F., Shi, X., Lin, X., Gao, Z., Chong, Y. & Zhang, B. Topological Acoustics. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 114301 (2015).

13. He, C., Ni, X., Ge, H., Sun, X.-C., Chen, Y.-B., Lu, M.-H., Liu, X.-P. & Chen, Y.-F. 

Acoustic topological insulator and robust one-way sound transport. Nat. Phys. 12, 1124-

1129 (2016).

14. Lu, J., Qiu, C., Ye, L., Fan, X., Ke, M., Zhang, F. & Liu, Z. Observation of topological 

valley transport of sound in sonic crystals. Nat. Phys. 13, 369-374 (2017).

15. Zhang, Z., Tian, Y., Cheng, Liu, X. & Christensen, J. Experimental verification of acoustic 

pseudospin multipoles in a symmetry-broken snowflakelike topological insulator. Phys. 

Rev. B 96, 241306(R) (2017).

16. Cha, J., Kim, K.W. & Daraio, C. Experimental realization of on-chip topological 

nanoelectromechanical metamaterials. Nature 564, 229-233 (2018).

17. Yan, M., Lu, J., Li, F., Deng, W., Huang, X., Ma, J. & Liu, Z. On-chip valley topological 

materials for elastic wave manipulation. Nat. Mater. 17, 993-998 (2018).

18. Han, X., Peng, Y.-G., Li, L., Hu, Y., Mei, C., Zhao, D.-G., Zhu, X.-F. & Wang, X. 

Experimental Demonstration of Acoustic Valley Hall Topological Insulators with the 

Robust Selection of C3v-Symmetric Scatterers. Phys. Rev. Appl. 12, 014046 (2019).


16

19. Yan, M., Deng, W., Huang, X., Wu, Y., Yang, Y., Lu, J., Li, F. & Liu, Z. Pseudomagnetic 

Fields Enabled Manipulation of On-Chip Elastic Waves. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 136401 

(2021).

20. Ma, J., Xi, X. & Sun, X. Experimental Demonstration of Dual-Band Nano-

Electromechanical Valley-Hall Topological Metamaterials. Adv. Mater. 33, 2006521 

(2021).

21. Cummer, S.A., Christensen, J. & Alu, A. Controlling sound with acoustic metamaterials. 

Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 16001 (2016).

22. K.-Y. Hashimoto, Surface acoustic wave devices in telecommunications: modelling and 

simulation (Springer, Berlin; New York, 2000).

23. D. Ballantine Jr, R. M. White, S. J. Martin, A. J. Ricco, E. Zellers, G. Frye, and H. Wohltjen, 

Acoustic wave sensors: theory, design and physico-chemical applications (Elsevier, 1996).

24. Chu, Y., Kharel, P., Renninger, W. H., Burkhart, L. D., Frunzio, L., Rakich, P. T. & 

Schoelkopf, R. J. Quantum acoustics with superconducting qubits. Science 358, 199-202 

(2017).

25. Zheng, L., Wu, D., Wu, X. & Lai, K. Visualization of Surface-Acoustic-Wave Potential by 

Transmission-Mode Microwave Impedance Microscopy. Phys. Rev. Appl. 9, 061002 

(2018).

26. Zheng, L., Shao, L., Loncar, M. & Lai, K. Imaging Acoustic Waves by Microwave 

Microscopy. IEEE Microwave Magazine 21, 60-71 (2020).

27. Mak, K. F., McGill, K. L., Park, J. & McEuen, P. L. The valley Hall effect in MoS2 

transistors. Science 344, 1489-1492 (2014).

28. Xu, X., Yao, W., Xiao, D. & Heinz, T.F. Spin and pseudospins in layered transition metal 

dichalcogenides. Nat. Phys. 10, 343–350 (2014).

29. Brendel, C., Peano, V., Painter, O.J. & Marquardt, F. Pseudomagnetic fields for sound at 

the nanoscale. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, E3390-E3395 (2017).

30. Brendel, C., Peano, V., Painter, O.J. & Marquardt, F. Snowflake phononic topological 

insulator at the nanoscale. Phys. Rev. B 97, 020102(R) (2018).

31. Gorisse, M., Benchabane, S., Teissier, G., Billard, C., Reinhardt, A., Laude, V., Defay, E. 

& Aid, M. Observation of band gaps in the gigahertz range and deaf bands in a hypersonic 

aluminum nitride phononic crystal slab. Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 234103 (2011).


17

32. Ghasemi Baboly, M., Alaie, S., Reinke, C.M., El-Kady, I. & Leseman, Z.C. Ultra-high 

frequency, high Q/volume micromechanical resonators in a planar AlN phononic crystal. 

J. Appl. Phys. 120, 034502 (2016).

33. Ye, L., Qiu, C., Lu, J., Wen, X., Shen, Y., Ke, M., Zhang, F. & Liu, Z. Observation of 

acoustic valley vortex states and valley-chirality locked beam splitting. Phys. Rev. B 95, 

174106 (2017).

34. Vila, J., Pal, R.K. & Ruzzene, M. Observation of topological valley modes in an elastic 

hexagonal lattice. Phys. Rev. B 96, 134307 (2017).

35. Wang, M., Ye, L., Christensen, J. & Liu, Z. Valley Physics in Non-Hermitian Artificial 

Acoustic Boron Nitride. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 246601 (2018).

36. Colombo, L., Kochhar, A., Xu, C., Piazza, G., Mishin, S., & Oshmyansky, Y. Investigation 

of 20% scandium-doped aluminum nitride films for MEMS laterally vibrating resonators. 

2017 
IEEE 
International 
Ultrasonics 
Symposium 
(IUS) 
DOI: 

10.1109/ULTSYM.2017.8092076.

37. Yang, Y., Lai, K., Tang, Q., Kundhikanjana, W., Kelly, M.A., Zhang, K., Shen, Z.-X. & 

Li, X. Batch-fabricated cantilever probes with electrical shielding for nanoscale dielectric 

and conductivity imaging. J. Micromech. Microeng. 22, 115040 (2012).

38. Lee, D., Liu, Q., Zheng, L., Ma, X., Li, H., Li, M. & Lai, K. Direct Visualization of 

Gigahertz Acoustic Wave Propagation in Suspended Phononic Circuits. Phys. Rev. Applied

16, 034047 (2021).

39. Application notes for commercial laser vibrometers, e.g., SmarAct Scanning Vibrometry

(https://www.smaract.com/PICOSCALE-Vibrometer) and Polytec UHF-120 

(https://www.polytec.com/fileadmin/website/vibrometry/pdf/OM_AN_VIB_U_003_UHF

_Scanning_E_42426.pdf)

40. Kittel, C. Introduction to Solid State Physics (John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 2005).

41. Wang, Z., Yang, Y., Li, H., Jia, H., Luo, J., Huang, J., Wang, Z., Jiang, B., Yang, N., Jin, 

G. & Yang, H. Multichannel Topological Transport in an Acoustic Valley Hall Insulator. 

Phys. Rev. Appl. 15, 024019 (2021).

42. Gerfers, F. Sputtered AlN Thin Films for Piezoelectric MEMS Devices - FBAR Resonators 

and Accelerometers. in (ed. Kohlstadt, P. M.) Ch. 17 (IntechOpen, 2010). 

doi:10.5772/6887.


