A Magnetoelectric Memory Device Based on Pseudo-Magnetization

Tingting Shen §* 1,3, Orchi Hassan§*2, Neil R. Dilley3, Supriyo Datta4, Kerem Y. Camsari5, Joerg 

Appenzeller3,4

1. Department of Physics and Astronomy, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United 

States

2. Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering and 

Technology, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh

3.  Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, United States

4. Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, 

Indiana 47907, United States

5. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa 

Barbara, CA, 93106, United States

§.   Authors contributed equally to the article

*E-mail: shentingphy@gmail.com; orchi@eee.buet.ac.bd

Abstract: We propose a new type of magnetoelectric memory device that stores magnetic easy-axis 
information or pseudo-magnetization, rather than a definite magnetization direction, in magnetoelectrically 
(ME) coupled heterostructures.  Theoretically, we show how a piezoelectric/ferromagnetic (PE/FM) 
combination can lead to non-volatility in pseudo-magnetization exhibiting overall ferroelectric-like 
behavior. The pseudo-magnetization can be manipulated by extremely low voltages especially when the 
FM is a low-barrier nanomagnet. Using a circuit model benchmarked against experiments, we determine 
the switching energy, delay, switching probability and retention time of the envisioned 1T/1C memory 
device in terms of magnetic and circuit parameters and discuss its thermal stability in terms of a key 
parameter called back-voltage vm which is an electrical measure of the strain-induced magnetic field. Taking 
advantage of ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) measurements, we experimentally extract values for vm in 
CoFeB films and circular nano-magnets deposited on Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)0.7Ti0.3O3 (PMN-PT) which agree well 
with the theoretical values. Our experimental findings indeed indicate the feasibility of the proposed novel 
device and confirm the assumed parameters in our modeling effort. 

Keywords: Magnetoelectric effect; Pseudo-Magnetization; Nanomagnet; Ferromagnetic Resonance 
(FMR); Back-Voltage; Memory

Introduction

Charge-to-spin conversion is an important topic in novel spintronics applications since it allows 
conventional circuit currents and voltages to be translated into magnetization information [1-7]. In recent 
years, voltage control of magnetism (VCM) has emerged as a promising alternative to current control of 
magnetism due to its potential for better energy efficiency [8-9]. The magnetoelectric (ME) effect [10-16], 
which can facilitate low energy dissipation in both, the magnetic WRITE and READ process [11-16] has 
attracted substantial research interest. Apart from a few VCM phenomena that allow a deterministic 180 
degrees switching of magnetism [17-18], VCM typically results in ±90 degrees switching of magnetization 
or a change in the easy-axis of the magnetization, necessitating additional assist mechanisms or complex 
pulsing schemes [18-23] to achieve deterministic switching. For example, in a (011)-cut PMN-PT/CoFeB 


heterostructure, with a DC voltage applied along the [011] direction, there would be an in-plane anisotropic 
strain induced due to the polarization re-orientation in PMN-PT which transfers to the CoFeB film and 
modifies its magnetic anisotropy. For sufficient large strain, the change in magnetic anisotropy would result 
in a 90º rotation of the magnetic easy axis. In our previous work, we have reported that in a PE/FM 
heterostructure, a magnetic easy axis expressed as a pseudo-magnetization μ ≡ mx2 – my2 can be used as a 
novel bit state in information processing. Here mx and my are the components of the magnetization along 
the x- and y- axis, respectively, and are normalized to unity (mx2+my2=1). A schematic diagram of bit state 
0 and 1 in such a device is shown in Table 1 of Ref [14]. 

As an application of the proposed ME structure in Ref [14], we envision a 1 transistor / 1 capacitor (1T/1C) 
memory architecture. Our modeling results indicate that such a combination can lead to a non-volatile 
controllable pseudo-magnetization μ [14,16] due to the interaction of magnetism and piezoelectricity. 
Through an equivalent circuit model [16] that has been benchmarked against experiments [15], we show 
that the pseudo-magnetization can be switched between two deterministic states (WRITE) and that it can 
be read out through the inverse effect (READ). Note that in most proposed structures, only the WRITE 
operation is performed using the ME effect, while READ operation is performed using MTJ structures [11-
13, 24], and only very few studies have focused on the READ through the inverse effect [14-16]. According 
to our theory and numerical simulations, the pseudo-magnetization can be manipulated by extremely low 
voltages, especially when the FM is designed as a low-barrier nano-magnet. The device exhibits 
ferroelectric-like behavior and can in principle operate at sub-ns speeds [16, 25], requiring <fJ of energy.
The non-volatility of pseudo-magnetization in such structures allows achieving years of retention time for 
experimentally demonstrated magnetic and circuit parameters. 

A key parameter that determines the performance of the proposed memory architecture is the so-called 
back-voltage constant vm that characterizes the coupling strength between the PE and FM layers. 
Experimentally, we have verified the WRITE operation in the above device concept and characterized vm
values using Ferromagnetic Resonance (FMR) measurements
in CoFeB/(011)-cut PMN-PT 

heterostructures as discussed below. 

By applying a DC voltage across the PMN-PT substrate, an anisotropic in-plane strain is induced, which 
transfers to the magnetic material. When the strain is large enough, the magnetic easy axis of the CoFeB 
layer rotates by ±90 degrees, which is the magnetic WRITE operation [11, 14]. In order to extract the 
voltage induced effective field using FMR measurements, we have derived a modified Kittel formula that 
includes a voltage induced stress term in the LLG equation. By first fitting experimental FMR data obtained 
in CoFeB thin films deposited on PMN-PT substrates with the modified formula, we have successfully 
extracted a strain-induced magnetic field Hs that modifies the magnetic easy-axis anisotropy. Moreover, the 
back-voltage constant vm that characterizes the coupling strength between the PE and FM layers [14, 16] 
has also been determined. Note that the extracted vm values using FMR are consistent with theoretical 
calculations, further validating our modified Kittel formula. Moreover, the experimentally determined 
back-voltage constant of several tens of mV is sufficiently large to support the 1T/1C memory concept 
proposed here. 

Last, since it is understood that the actual device design will involve patterned disk-like structures, we have 
also studied the FMR response in circular nano-magnet arrays. Both quantities, i.e. HS and vm, were found 
to be very similar to the ones obtained from CoFeB films. This finding is particularly relevant in that it i) 
highlights the validity of our modified Kittel formula irrespective of boundary conditions introduced by 
means of patterning (at least down to features of 200nm) and ii) that a sufficiently large response of the 
coupled PE/FM system is achievable for the desired device design of the 1T/1C memory cell.


Theoretical Discussion 

The easy-axis information (or pseudo-magnetization) itself can be a state variable that can be switched 
between two deterministic states (WRITE) and it can be read out through the inverse effect (READ) [15]. 
The principle of pseudo-magnetism is general and could find use in voltage-control of magnetic anisotropy 
devices [19], but we focus our theoretical and experimental discussion here on ME heterostructures based 
on a combination of materials with piezoelectric/ ferromagnetic (PE/FM) heterostructures. One can define 
the energy expression associated with a PE/FM heterostructure as

E(𝑄, 𝜇)= 1

2C Q2 + Qvmμ − QVIN − (EA

2 ) μ 
(1)

where μ is the pseudo-magnetization that defines the easy-axis for the magnet μ = mx2 − my2 (Fig.1a), EA =
HKMsVol./2 is the magnetic anisotropy that defines an easy-axis for the magnet where HK denotes the 
anisotropy field , MS denotes the saturation magnetization and Vol. denotes the volume of the magnet , VIN
is the applied voltage and vm is the magnetoelectric (ME) back-voltage that couples the charge Q on the PE 
capacitor C with the pseudo-magnetization µ of the FM through the transferred strain. Qvm is the mutual 
coupling energy term which accounts for the piezoelectric and magnetostrictive effects in the coupled 
system.  For simplicity, we do not explicitly add a demagnetization term to the energy that would limit the 
out-of-plane magnetization components and do not change the basic physics of the ME effect, however, 
these terms are included in our simulations. In the coupled heterostructure, vm is given by a combination of 
the material parameters of the PE and FM, vm = BdtFM/2ɛ [15-16] where, B is the magnetoelastic constant 
of the magnet, d is the net piezoelectric coefficient of the PE layer, ϵ is its dielectric permittivity, and tFM is 
the thickness of the magnet. In our proposed device, we considered a ferroelectric relaxor, (011)-cut PMN-
PT as the electroactive layer, due to its anisotropic piezo-strain resulting in a large piezoelectric constant 
and large electrostriction. Note that in the present context, we are interested in the piezoelectric properties 
of PMN-PT to create a large enough magnetoelastic response in the FM. A parallel plate capacitance of the 
structure is considered to be C = εA/t, where A is the area of the circular electrodes and t is the separation 
between the plates which is considered to be equal to the PE thickness tPE, as generally tPE ≫ tFM.

The fundamental operation principle can be understood from the energy equation. For a given VIN, charge 
is formed on the capacitor which creates a mutual energy ‘Qvm’, which in turn induces a preferred easy axis 
in the magnet (x-axis or y-axis) with the magnetization lying in that axis, without a preference for a direction.
Since electronic charge dynamics is typically much faster than magnetization dynamics [26], one can define 
the charge from the energy expression as Q = C(VIN- vm μ). Consider the case when VIN = 0 for a low barrier 
magnet (EA ~ 0). In this case the energy, E(Q,µ) = (1/2C)(Q + Cvmμ)2 − (1/2)Cvm2μ2 is minimized when 
μ=±1 and Q = -Cvmμ. So effectively, the energy barrier between the pseudo-magnetization states is 1/2Cvm2.
Therefore, even when VIN=0, as long as 1/2Cvm2 ≫kT (where k is Boltzmann constant and T is temperature), 
μ can get spontaneously polarized and induces an internal charge Q = -Cvmμ, much like a standard 
ferroelectric or a ferromagnet. Self-consistent solution of the energy equation for this minimum energy 
condition shows this phenomenon (Fig.1b, c). The width of the pseudo-magnetization vs. voltage hysteretic 
loop is independent of the capacitance of the structure and depends only on the magnetoelectric voltage vm
but the actual switching voltage depends on C through the anisotropy energy associated with the magnet, 
𝐸𝐴. The loop is symmetric about the point EA/Cvm. It is important to note that although the charge on the 
load capacitor CL may leak out after writing, the pseudo-magnetization information is still preserved in the 
cell much like the situation in ferroelectric random-access-memories (FeRAM).


Fig.1. [Simulation] (a) Circuit schematic for the characterization of an ME heterostructure structure. 
Information is stored in the magnetic easy axis direction (± x or ±y) which is denoted as pseudo-
magnetization, μ. (b) Change of μ due to the applied voltage V across the structure and (c) the resulting 
charge versus voltage characteristics in the circuit, which shows a dependence similar to conventional 
ferroelectrics. Both (b) and (c) are symmetric about V = EA/Cvm (dashed vertical line). The two inset 
drawings in (b) show the unit cell and spontaneous ferroelectric polarizations of (001)-cut PMN-PT 
corresponding to ‘1’ and ‘0’ states. In state ‘1’, there is a compressive strain in the y-axis, i.e. [100] direction 
and a tensile strain in the x-axis, i.e. [01-1] direction. In state ‘0’, there is a tensile strain in the y-axis and 
a compressive strain in the x-axis. Please refer to the analysis of Fig.1 in [24] for more details.

The key parameter that defines the performance of this type of devices is a stress-induced modification to 
the effective field of the magnet. We define this effective magnetic field as Hs, which is controlled by the 
magnetoelectric back-voltage vm [16]. The READ-WRITE voltages and the retention time of the memory 
device are a direct function of this parameter. Throughout this work, we assume that the strain from the PE 
to the FM is completely transferred without any loss. We base this assumption on earlier theoretical 
calculations [16] that match experimentally observed vm values in similar material systems [15]. When 
comparing with experiments, this assumption may need to be carefully analyzed in specific cases [27-28].


Next, we will describe a prototypical 1T/1C memory cell that encodes pseudo-magnetization and show its 
READ and WRITE operation through an equivalent circuit model [16] that is benchmarked against 
experiments [15].  We will also show that the non-volatility in pseudo-magnetization in such structures can 
reach to ~years of retention time for experimentally demonstrated magnetic and circuit parameters. 

Fig.2. [Simulation] (a) Magnetoelectric 1T/1C memory cell. (b) Shows our equivalent circuit model 
obtained from the energy model, where the stochastic Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (s-LLG) equation and the 
circuit equations are solved self-consistently [16]. (c) Simulation parameters used for the ME circuit, based 
on experimental demonstrations [15]. (d) WRITE and (e) READ Operation of the memory cell mimics the 
scheme of FeRAM operation.

The proposed memory device combines the advantages of ferroelectric memory devices, such as energy-
efficiency and high speed with those of magnetic memory such as non-volatility and high density. We 
envision a 1T/1C memory architecture, much like the DRAM architecture [29-30], where one end of the 
PE/FM capacitor is connected to the bit-line (BL) through a pass transistor and the other end is connected 
to a plate line (PL). The cell access is provided by the word-line (WL) as shown in Fig.2a. From SPICE 
simulations of the circuit model [16] (Fig.2b) we show the WRITE and READ operation of the memory 


cell. The simulation parameters are illustrated in Fig.2c. To write a ‘0’ the BL is charged to ‘2vm’, PL is 
kept grounded and then the transistor is turned on through the WL to complete the writing process. To write 
a ‘1’ a similar procedure is employed where the BL is charged to ‘-2vm’ instead. Fig.2d shows the writing 
process. Even after the charge on the load capacitor leaks, the internal state of the cell can be retained for a 
long time as long as Cvm2/2kT≫1.  Therefore, for reading the state a read pulse needs to be applied. The 
BL is first pre-charged to ‘0V’ then the access transistor is turned on which creates a capacitive divider 
circuit between PL and ground. When a positive read pulse is applied to PL, the voltage is divided between 
the ME capacitor and the bit-line capacitance (CBL) depending on their relative values and the state of the 
ME device. A sense amplifier can then be used to detect these voltages. As Fig. 2e indicates, this reading 
process is destructive so data must be rewritten once read, similar to what is typically observed in FeRAM
devices [31]. In the simulations in Fig.2, we chose parameters for the ME circuit, which are based on 
experimentally reported material parameters [14-15] and reasonable device dimensions. We also chose the 
bit-line parasitic capacitance to be equal to the PE capacitance (CBL=C) for simplicity.

Fig.3. [Simulation] (a) The stability of pseudo-magnetization states can be measured from equilibrium 
fluctuations. (b) The effective stability (Δ) of μ can be attributed to an effective stress anisotropy field (Hs) 
that it feels, which depends on the back-voltage vm and the capacitance value C [32].
The SPICE 

simulations assume operation at room temperature, T=300K and material parameters for the device 
structure are the same as Fig.2. The thermal barrier is extracted from 1000 samples for different vm values 
at C=100aF.

The energy barrier that determines the stability of pseudo-magnetization can be related to its equilibrium 
fluctuations (Fig.3a). By the equipartition theorem [32], the RMS value of fluctuations can be related to the 
energy barrier of the magnet by: Δ = kT/(2(1−μ2RMS)), where μRMS is the RMS value of the pseudo-
magnetization, μ=mx2-my2. Alternatively, the equilibrium fluctuations can be obtained from the Boltzmann 
law [16] which yields practically identical results above Δ=10kT. Fig.3b shows the extracted thermal barrier 
from 1000 samples, for different magnetoelectric voltages for a constant capacitance C. The results agree 
well with an analytically derived value of Cvm2/2. An important aspect for a non-volatile memory is the 
retention time r and the industry standard requires r >10 years for memory applications, which translates 
to a magnetic stability factor of >40 kT [27-28]. Figure 3b indicates that our proposed structure can achieve 
effective thermal stability values >40kT for experimentally demonstrated parameters of this work and 


others [15] for reasonable capacitance values. The information thus can be robustly retained for years until 
it is read-out, unlike DRAMs or FeRAMs which need periodic refreshment even if the information is not 
being read. 

Fig.4. [Simulation] Switching probability of pseudo-magnetization is calculated from 1500 samples for 
different magnetoelectric back-voltage amplitudes (from 0.5vm to 2vm) and pulse widths for the applied 
write pulse. The magnetic parameters used for the simulation are: Ms= 106A/m, Vol=6.2x10-25m3, and 
𝛼=0.1. The simulations are done at room temperature, T=300K. Sub-ns switching speeds (τ) can be attained 
due to high stress fields (Hs=CVIN vm /MsVol.) in nanomagnets. The stars represent switching probability 
for a 10kT magnet and all other solid lines are for 0kT magnets (EA=0). Note that for the 10kT magnets, an 
additional EA/C vm voltage needs to be applied to enable switching in the same manner as a 0kT magnet 
consistent with the characteristics explained by Eq.(1) and demonstrated in Fig.1. 

Additionally, we estimate switching energies and the time associated with the write operation. The results 
are shown in Fig.4. The switching time of pseudo-magnetization is related to the magnet dynamics. The 
voltage generated stress can be expressed as an effective magnetic field Hs ≈ (Qvm/MsVol) ≈ 
(CVINvm/MsVol). This effective magnetic field can be used to estimate the typical switching time of 
magnetization where τ~ 1 αγHs
⁄
that can result in a few ns switching speeds for typical parameters [34-35],

which is similar to typical MRAM structures [33, 36]. Here, α is the Gilbert damping co-efficient and γ is 
the gyromagnetic ratio. Fig. 4 demonstrates sub-ns switching speeds at room temperature considering 
α=0.1, which was chosen for faster simulation purposes, for typical values of α~0.01, switching speeds in 
the few ns range are expected. As the ME heterostructure is a fully capacitive system the write energy 
approximated by CVIN2/2 can also be very low. Considering a structure with low barrier magnets coupled 
with an aggressively scaled PE layer and ignoring parasitic and other non-idealities, this number can be 
optimistically in the ~aJ range for our experimentally guided parameters, which is orders of magnitude 
smaller than typically reported fJ-pJ write energy ranges of STT-MRAM structures [33,37].

Experimental Results

Our proposed memory device is inspired by the recent demonstrations of electrical read-out of the 
magnetoelectric effect [14-15]. A key parameter that determines the performance of our device is the 
magnetoelectric back voltage vm which depends on the stress-induced magnetic field Hs in the 
heterostructure. Material combinations that will demonstrate large vm and maintain the vm after pattering to 


nanodots are desired. To verify the fundamental device concept and characterize PE/FM structures to 
extract vm values, we employ ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) in CoFeB films and nanodots. In the 
following sections, we introduce how to extract vm values from our fabricated device structures. 

A. Write Operation in CoFeB Films and Modified Kittel Equation

Fig.5. [Experimental data] (a) Configuration of ferromagnetic resonance measurement with HDC applied in 
the [100] direction when an external DC voltage VDC is applied across the PE/FM heterostructure. The 
dashed lines show schematically the piezo-response of PMN-PT under a sufficiently positive DC voltage. 
(b) Magnetic Hysteresis loops M(H) of the stack measured in different directions for VDC = 0V in a SQUID 
magnetometer. The stack structure of the sample is shown in the inset. (c) FMR spectrum as a function of 
RF frequencies when HDC is 0.0015T, 0.003T, 0.008T and 0.015T respectively. HDC is applied along the 
[100] direction. (d) The dependence of RF field frequency and the resonance fields of the sample with HDC
applied in the [100] and [01-1] directions with VDC = 0V. Lines are fitting results using Kittel equation.

FMR is an effective way to characterize voltage induced magnetization modulation in PE/FM 
heterostructures [38-50]. Experimentally, we have deposited CoFeB films on (011)-cut PMN-PT substrates
and characterized the WRITE operation discussed above using voltage dependent FMR measurements. The 
stack structure is Ta(5nm)/CoFeB(20nm)/Ta(20nm)/PMN- PT(300μm)/Ti(10nm)/ Au(100nm) as shown in 
the inset of Fig.5(b).  Fig.5(a) shows the experimental set-up of FMR measured along the [100] direction 
of PMN-PT with an external voltage VDC applied across the PE/FM heterostructure. The dashed lines show 
that under a sufficiently positive DC voltage, the (011)-cut PMN-PT induces a tensile and a compressive 
strain in the [01-1] and [100] directions, respectively [14]. Due to mechanical coupling between the PE and 
FM layers, the biaxial strain in PMN-PT transfers to the CoFeB film and modifies its magnetic anisotropy. 

 agnetization (10  A/m)

 

   

 

    

  

            
           

           
           


The red and black curves in Fig.5(b) are magnetic hysteresis (MH) loops measured along different 
directions when VDC = 0V. The square-shaped MH loop and smaller magnetic saturation field in the red 
curve indicate that the CoFeB film favors the [100] direction as the easy axis. In this case, there exists a 
tensile strain in the [100] direction and a compressive strain in the [01-1] direction, which is induced by the 
pre-poled (011)-cut PMN-PT substrate [14]. More details on the piezo-response of PMN-PT under an 
external DC voltage and the resulting modulation of the CoFeB magnetization properties are described in 
Ref [14]. Fig.5(c) shows the FMR spectrum, i.e., the first derivative of the absorbed power measured by 
lock-in technique with a 0.0002T perturbing RF magnetic field hRF applied, as a function of the RF field 
frequency with different DC magnetic fields applied along the [100] direction when VDC = 0V. The 
experimental dependence of the resonance fields and the RF signal frequencies are illustrated by the 
symbols in Fig.5(d). The red and black colors correspond to the scenarios where measurements were 
performed with HDC applied along the [100] or [01-1] direction, respectively. By fitting the experimental 
data with the Kittel equation for easy and hard axis [51], 

𝑓𝐹𝑀𝑅_𝑋 = 𝛾

2𝜋 √(𝐻𝐷 + 𝐻𝑘 + |𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠|)(𝐻𝑘 + |𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠|)
(2a)

𝑓𝐹𝑀𝑅_𝑌 = 𝛾

2𝜋 √(𝐻𝐷 + |𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠|)(−𝐻𝑘 + |𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠|)
(2b)

where 𝐻𝐷 is the demagnetizing field for the thin film and  

𝛾
2𝜋 is the gyromagnetic ratio, the magnetic 

anisotropy  𝐻𝑘 was extracted to be 0.006T along both the [100] and [01-1] directions. 

Fig.6. [Experimental data] (a) The dependence of RF field frequency and resonance fields of a 
Ta(5nm)/CoFeB(20nm)/Ta(20nm)/PMN-PT(300μm)/Ti(10nm)/Au(100nm) sample for VDC = 0V and 
200V, respectively. The inset illustrates FMR spectra for VDC = 0V and 200V, respectively when the 
frequency of the RF field is 2GHz. (b) The dependence of RF field frequency and resonance fields of 
another sample without a 20nm Ta interlayer between CoFeB and PMN-PT for VDC = 0V and 200V, 
respectively. The symbols are experimental data, and the solid lines are simulation results calculated by the 
Eq.(4) and Eq.(5). In both data sets HDC // [100]. 


As discussed above, when DC voltages are applied, the magnetic anisotropy of CoFeB film is modulated 
by the strain induced in the PMN-PT film and the resonance frequency of FMR changes accordingly. The 
inset of Fig.6(a) illustrates the FMR spectra of a Ta(5nm)/CoFeB(20nm)/Ta(20nm)/PMN-
PT(300μm)/Ti(10nm)/Au(100nm) sample for VDC = 0V and 200V respectively with HDC applied along the 
[100] direction when the frequency of the RF field is 2GHz. Compared with the VDC = 0V case, when VDC
= 200V, the resonance field shifts to the right. This is because when VDC = 200V is applied, compressive 
strain is induced in the [100] direction and tensile strain is induced in the [01-1] direction due to the re-
orientation of the ferroelectric polarization in PMN-PT, which transfers to the CoFeB thin film and provides 
an in-plane magnetic anisotropic field that makes magnetization along the [100] direction harder. Thus, the 
resonance field in the [100] direction becomes larger and the FMR curves shift to the right. Note that for 
measurements at low frequencies along the hard axis (black data points) an additional peak in the FMR 
signal becomes observable due to a low field solution of the Kittel equation. It is a weak resonance because 
at low DC magnetic fields the magnetic resonance condition 𝐻𝑅𝐹 ⊥ 𝑀 is not fulfilled [38]. The 
experimental dependence of RF field frequency and resonance fields of this sample for VDC = 0V and 200V 
is summarized by the symbols shown in Fig.6(a). Symbols in Fig.6(b) display experimental results obtained 
on another sample without a 20nm Ta interlayer between CoFeB and PMN-PT, which exhibits a stronger 
coupling between the piezoelectric and the magnet. To characterize the voltage induced magnetization 
modulation, some previous reports fitted the experimental results with the Kittel equation and considered 
the shift of the FMR resonance field as a modulation of the magnetic anisotropy field [52]. However, with 
an external voltage applied, the Kittel equation must be properly modified to describe the FMR behavior in 
a PE/FM heterostructure, since a new energy term – the magnetoelastic energy - needs to be included in the 
calculation. In this case, for an in-plane magnet with an external magnetic field 𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 applied along its easy 
(x) axis, the total free energy is,

𝐸 = 𝑀𝑠𝑉𝑜𝑙. {𝐻𝑘

2 (1 − 𝑚𝑥2) + 𝐻𝐷

2 𝑚𝑧2 − 𝑄𝑣𝑚

𝑀𝑆𝑉𝑜𝑙.
⏟    

𝐻𝑆 2
⁄

(𝑚𝑥2 − 𝑚𝑦2) − 𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑚𝑥}
(3)

where 𝐻𝐷 is the demagnetization field, 𝐻𝑆 =

2𝑄𝑣𝑚
𝑀𝑆𝑉𝑜𝑙. is defined as the strain-induced magnetic field, 𝑄 is the 

charge on the PE capacitor, which is proportional with VDC, and  𝑣𝑚 is the magnetoelectric coefficient. By 
minimizing the free energy with respect to 𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠, when 𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 > −𝐻𝐾 − 2𝐻𝑆, 𝑚𝑥 → 1; when𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 < −𝐻𝐾 −

2𝐻𝑆,  𝑚𝑥 → −

𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠

2𝐻𝑆+𝐻𝐾. The positive and negative signs mean the direction of 𝐻𝑆 is along the 𝑥 and 𝑦 axis, 

respectively. 𝐻𝑆 → −∞ describes a stress field that is infinite along the 𝑦-axis. Under this limit, 𝑚𝑥 → 0, 
and the magnetization rotates from 𝑥 axis to the 𝑦 axis. When the external magnetic field is applied along 
the easy axis - [100] direction, the resonance frequency can be derived from the free energy of ferromagnets, 
and a modified Kittel Equation is obtained as: 

𝑓𝑋 = 𝛾

2𝜋 √(𝐻𝐷 + 𝐻𝑘 + |𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠| + 𝐻𝑆)(𝐻𝑘 + |𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠| + 2𝐻𝑆),
𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 > −𝐻𝐾 − 2𝐻𝑆,
(4)

𝑓𝑋 = 𝛾

2𝜋 √(𝐻𝐷 + 𝐻𝑘 + |𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠| + 𝐻𝑆)(𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠
2
− (𝐻𝑘 + 2𝐻𝑆)2)

𝐻𝑘 + 2𝐻𝑆

,
𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 ≤ −𝐻𝐾 − 2𝐻𝑆
(5)

More details on the derivations and comparison between Kittel and the modified Kittel equations are
discussed in the Supplementary Information. The solid lines in Fig.6 are fitting results with Eq.(4) and 
Eq.(5). When VDC = 0V, there is no charge on the PE capacitor, thus HS = 0. By fitting the experimental 


data for this case with Eq.(2), the magnetic anisotropic field Hk and demagnetization field HD can be 
obtained as Hk = 0.006T and HD = 0.8*4π  S, where MS = 1040 × 103A/m is extracted from the M-H curves 
for both samples with and without Ta interlayer. With the extracted Hk and HD, by fitting the experimental 
results for VDC = 200V case, the strain-induced magnetic field HS and magnetoelectric coefficient vm can 
be extracted. For the sample with a Ta interlayer, HS = -0.004T and vm = 20mV. For the sample without a 
Ta interlayer, HS = -0.0068T and vm = 34mV. Note that, this is very close to the vm=35mV extracted value 
reported in Ref [15]. The extracted vm -values in Ref [14] are however much lower than the ones reported 
here, which may have been a result of some signal loss due to the external circuitry used in Ref [14]. The 
strain induced magnetic field HS is smaller than the one reported in Ref.[11], we believe this is caused by 
the non-ideal interface coupling and non-ideal interface quality between CoFeB and PMN-PT as discussed 
in our previous work [14].

The corresponding effective stability (Δ) of μ for these two cases – CoFeB film with and without Ta 
interlayer along with the one reported in Ref [15] are shown in Fig.3(b). Fig.3(b) indicates that the stability 
of the memory device can be tuned to be in the desired range of 30-80kT Ref [8] for both cases for 
capacitances in the range of a few hundreds of aF. Note that vm for the sample with a Ta interlayer is smaller,
probably due to the imperfect mechanical coupling between the PE and FM layers [53]. Also note that the 
two branches of the data at VDC=200V in Fig.6(b) (black lines) were fitted using the same set of parameters 
with Eq.(4) and (5) respectively, which further underlines the validity of the modified Kittel equations. 

B. Write Operation in CoFeB Nanodots


Fig.7. [[Experimental data]]. (a) SEM image of CoFeB nanodots on a PMN-PT substrate. The diameter of 
the CoFeB dots is 200nm. (b) Schematic of a Ta(5nm)/CoFeB(20nm)/Au(15nm)/Ti(5nm)/PMN-
PT(300μm)/Ti(10nm)/ Au(100nm) sample and the measurement configuration. The top 20nm CoFeB with 
5nm Ta capping layer were patterned into circular pillars. (c) Material stack of the nanodots sample. (d) 
The dependence of the RF field frequency and the resonance fields when VDC = 0V and 200V with HDC
applied in the [100] direction and (e) the [01-1] direction, respectively. The inset of (d) illustrates the FMR 
spectra for VDC = 0V and 200V, respectively when the frequency of the RF field is 8GHz as HDC // [100]. 
The symbols are experimental data and the solid lines are simulation data according to the modified Kittel 
Equations (4) and (5). Note that (d) and (e) were measured from a nanodots array, the number of nanodots 
is ~2.4×107 .

Furthermore, we also fabricated CoFeB nano-magnets on PMN-PT substrates with a structure similar to 
the one proposed in Fig.1 to verify the WRITE operation. A representative SEM image of 200nm circular 
nanomagnets is shown in Fig.7(a). Fig.7(b) shows the schematic of the sample structure and the 
measurement configuration. The material stack of the nanodots sample is shown in Fig.7(c). Fig.7(d) 
displays the dependence of the RF field frequency and the resonance fields for VDC = 0 and 200V with HDC
applied in the [100] direction. The dependence of the FMR signals on the DC magnetic field is illustrated 
in the inset when the frequency of the RF field is 8GHz. Note that the magnetic anisotropic field of circular 
nano-magnets Hk ~ 0. We have used a negligible Hk in our model, having a small energy barrier (), through 
a finite Hk would not appreciably change our conclusions, since for small , magnet behavior is essentially 
unchanged [25]. 

Also, when VDC = 0V, HS = 0. By fitting the experimental results when VDC = 0V with Eq.(2), the 
demagnetization field HD was extracted to be 0. 5*4π S. Next, knowing HD, by fitting the experimental 
results for VDC = 200V with Eq.(4), HS and vm were extracted to be -0.0042T and 21mV respectively. Fig.7(e) 
shows FMR results of the same sample measured with HDC applied in the [01-1] direction. In this case, 
when VDC = 0V, the experimental results are the same as the one obtained for the [100] direction. With the 
same HD extracted from Fig.7(d), the experimental results were fitted when VDC = 200V with the equation:

𝑓𝑌 = 𝛾

2𝜋 √(−𝐻𝐾 + 𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 + 2𝐻𝑆)(𝐻𝑟𝑒𝑠 + 𝐻𝐷 + 𝐻𝑆)
(6)

Eq.(6) is derived (see the Supplementary Information) from the total magnetic free energy term described 
in Eq.(3) when a magnetic field is applied along the hard (y) axis which is defined here by the PMN-PT 
crystal. For perfectly circular magnets where 𝐻𝑘~0, Eq.(4) and (6) are essentially the same and in the 
absence of the stress-induced field HS, the equations reduce to the Kittel equations, Eq. (2a,b). HS and vm
were extracted to be 0.0036T and 18mV respectively which are very close to the numbers extracted for the 
[100] direction. The small discrepancy in the magnitudes of extracted HS and vm along these two directions 
is likely a result of the fabricated nanodots were not perfectly circular which cause its magnetic anisotropy 
field is not exactly 0 when VDC=0V. Note that there is a Ti(5nm)/Au(15nm) interlayer between the PMN-
PT substrate and CoFeB nano-magnets and the extracted HS and vm quantities are very similar to the ones 
obtained in CoFeB films when there is a 20nm Ta interlayer between the PE and FM layers which further 
supports the validity of our modified Kittel formula. Note that Fig.3(b) had indicated that the coupled 
capacitance value can be adjusted to get the desired stability for any vm value, but in reality, we would not 
want the back-voltage vm value to be too small as this is the voltage that facilitates the reading operation. 
Our results indicate that even after patterning and having an interlayer between the CoFeB/PMN-PT stack, 
the heterostructure was able to retain large enough vm to facilitate READ-WRITE operation for our 
envisioned memory device.


Conclusion

In conclusion, we have proposed a novel magnetoelectric memory device based on a pseudo-magnetization 
in a PE/FM heterostructure. The use of low-barrier nano-magnets as the FM layer and read-out through the 
magnetoelectric back-voltage can potentially enable the device to operate with an energy-delay of hundreds 
of aJ to ps, combining attractive features of magnetic and ferroelectric memory technologies, such as high-
density and non-volatility. The emergent ferroelectricity from an FM/PE heterostructure will lead to 
interesting new physics. The experimental results indicate that FMR is an effective way to characterize the 
magnetic WRITE operation. To quantify the strain induced magnetic field, we have derived a modified 
Kittel formula by including a magnetoelastic energy in the magnetic free energy. According to our analysis, 
the magnetoelastic coefficient vm between CoFeB and PMN-PT is in the tens of mV range which is 
significant for proper device operation, since it is the output voltage and has to be above the noise level.
We believe that vm >20mV is a desirable target, since stable states can be achieved with the use of capacitors
in the hundreds of aF range, consistent with typical capacitance values in modern 14nm transistors. 
Furthermore, according to our results, the presence of an interlayer between the PE and FM layer does not 
degrade the vm value too much and pattering also did not degrade vm. The theoretical and experimental work 
presented here indicates that the proposed novel ME memory device is feasible and relevant for the 
development of future energy efficient spintronics devices. 

Methods

CoFeB nano-magnets were fabricated on one side of the poled (011)-cut PMN-PT substrate using e-beam 
lithography, metal deposition and a conventional lift-off process. Both CoFeB nano-magnets and CoFeB 
films were deposited in a multisource magnetron sputtering system with a base pressure of 3*10-8Torr 
followed by a 5nm Ta deposition in the same system. Ti/Au layers were deposited in an e-beam evaporation 
system. Ferromagnetic resonance measurements were performed using a NanOsc CryoFMR probe in a 
Quantum Design DynaCool PPMS. It is a coplanar waveguide type of broadband FMR spectrometer. 
Magnetization hysteresis loop measurements were performed in a Quantum Design MPMS-3 SQUID 
magnetometer.

Supplementary Information: Derivation of the modified Kittel Equation used in text.

Author’s Contributions

T.S. and O.H. contributed equally to this work. T.S worked on the device fabrication, characterization, and 
data analysis; O.H. and K.Y.C. worked on the theoretical formulations and simulations; S.D. worked on the 
theoretical formulations, N.D. worked on the experimental measurements; J.A. analyzed the data and 
oversaw the planning and execution of the project; T.S. and O.H. wrote the manuscript.

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge useful discussions with Sunil A. Bhave. This work was supported in part by 
the Center for Probabilistic Spin Logic for Low-Energy Boolean and Non-Boolean Computing (CAPSL), 
one of the Nanoelectronic Computing Research (nCORE) Centers as task 2759.003 and 2759.004, a 
Semiconductor Research Corporation (SRC) program sponsored by the NSF through CCF 1739635. The 
authors thank the staff at the Birck Nanotechnology center for their technical support.

Data Availability statement

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request.


Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interest.

References

1.
Camsari, Kerem Y., Punyashloka Debashis, Vaibhav Ostwal, Ahmed Zeeshan Pervaiz, Tingting 

Shen, Zhihong Chen, Supriyo Datta, and Joerg Appenzeller. "From Charge to Spin and Spin to 

Charge: Stochastic Magnets for Probabilistic Switching." Proceedings of the IEEE (2020).

2.
Liu, Luqiao, Chi-Feng Pai, Y. Li, H. W. Tseng, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman. "Spin-torque 

switching with the giant spin Hall effect of tantalum." Science 336, no. 6081, 555-558 (2012).

3.
Pai, Chi-Feng, Luqiao Liu, Y. Li, H. W. Tseng, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman. "Spin transfer 

torque devices utilizing the giant spin Hall effect of tungsten." Applied Physics Letters 101, no. 12 

122404 (2012).

4.
Seki, Takeshi, Yu Hasegawa, Seiji Mitani, Saburo Takahashi, Hiroshi Imamura, Sadamichi 

Maekawa, Junsaku Nitta, and Koki Takanashi. "Giant spin Hall effect in perpendicularly spin-

polarized FePt/Au devices." Nature materials 7, no. 2, 125-129 (2008).

5.
Li, Xiang, Kevin Fitzell, Di Wu, C. Ty Karaba, Abraham Buditama, Guoqiang Yu, Kin L. Wong 

et al. "Enhancement of voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy through precise control of Mg 

insertion thickness at CoFeB| MgO interface." Applied Physics Letters 110, no. 5, 052401 (2017).

6.
Hu, Jia-Mian, Ce-Wen Nan, and Long-Qing Chen. "Size-dependent electric voltage controlled 

magnetic anisotropy in multiferroic heterostructures: Interface-charge and strain comediated 

magnetoelectric coupling." Physical Review B 83, no. 13, 134408 (2011).

7.
Xu, Meng, Mingen Li, Pravin Khanal, Ali Habiboglu, Blake Insana, Yuzan Xiong, Thomas 

Peterson et al. "Voltage-Controlled Antiferromagnetism in Magnetic Tunnel Junctions." Physical 

Review Letters 124, no. 18, 187701 (2020).

8.
S. Manipatruni, D. E. Nikonov and I. A. Young, "Beyond CMOS computing with spin and 

polarization," Nature Physics, pp. 338-343 (2018).


9.
Sun, Nian X., and Gopalan Srinivasan. "Voltage control of magnetism in multiferroic 

heterostructures and devices." In Spin, vol. 2, no. 03, p. 1240004. World Scientific Publishing 

Company (2012).

10. Nan, Ce-Wen. "Magnetoelectric effect in composites of piezoelectric and piezomagnetic phases." 

Physical Review B 50, no. 9 6082 (1994).

11. Li, Peisen, Aitian Chen, Dalai Li, Yonggang Zhao, Sen Zhang, Lifeng Yang, Yan Liu, Meihong 

Zhu, Huiyun Zhang, and Xiufeng Han. "Electric field manipulation of magnetization rotation and 

tunneling magnetoresistance of magnetic tunnel junctions at room temperature." Advanced 

materials 26, no. 25, 4320-4325 (2014).

12. Khan, Asif, Dmitri E. Nikonov, Sasikanth Manipatruni, Tahir Ghani, and Ian A. Young. "Voltage 

induced magnetostrictive switching of nanomagnets: Strain assisted strain transfer torque random 

access memory." Applied Physics Letters 104, no. 26, 262407 (2014).

13. Zhao, Zhengyang, Mahdi Jamali, Noel D'Souza, Delin Zhang, Supriyo Bandyopadhyay, Jayasimha 

Atulasimha, and Jian-Ping Wang. "Giant voltage manipulation of MgO-based magnetic tunnel 

junctions via localized anisotropic strain: A potential pathway to ultra-energy-efficient memory 

technology." Applied Physics Letters 109, no. 9, 092403 (2016).

14. Shen, Tingting, Vaibhav Ostwal, Kerem Y. Camsari, and Joerg Appenzeller. "Demonstration of a 

pseudo-magnetization based simultaneous write and read operation in a Co 60 Fe 20 B 20/Pb (Mg 

1/3 Nb 2/3) 0.7 Ti 0.3 O 3 heterostructure." Scientific reports 10, no. 1, 1-9 (2020).

15. Klimov, Alexey, Nicolas Tiercelin, Yannick Dusch, Stefano Giordano, Théo Mathurin, Philippe 

Pernod, Vladimir Preobrazhensky, Anton Churbanov, and Sergei Nikitov. "Magnetoelectric write 

and read operations in a stress-mediated multiferroic memory cell." Applied Physics Letters 110, 

no. 22, 222401 (2017).

16. Camsari, Kerem Y., Rafatul Faria, Orchi Hassan, Brian M. Sutton, and Supriyo Datta. "Equivalent 

circuit for magnetoelectric read and write operations." Physical Review Applied 9, no. 4, 044020

(2018).


17. J. T. Heron, J. L. Bosse, Q. He, Y. Gao, M. Trassin, L. Ye and R. Ramesh, "Deterministic switching 

of ferromagnetism at room temperature using an electric field," Nature, vol. 516(7531), pp. 370-

373 (2014).

18. Wang, Qianchang, Xu Li, Cheng-Yen Liang, Anthony Barra, John Domann, Chris Lynch, Abdon 

Sepulveda, and Greg Carman. "Strain-mediated 180 switching in CoFeB and Terfenol-D nanodots 

with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy." Applied Physics Letters 110, no. 10, 102903 (2017).

19. P. K. Amiri, J. G. Alzate, X. Q. Cai, F. Ebrahimi, Q. Hu, K. Wong and K. L. Wang, "Electric-field-

controlled magnetoelectric RAM: progress, challenges, and scaling," IEEE Transactions on 

Magnetics, vol. 51(11), pp. 1-7 (2015).

20. K. Roy, S. Bandyopadhyay and J. Atulasimha, "Binary switching in a ‘symmetric’potential 

landscape," Scientific Reports, pp. 1-8 (2013).

21. Biswas, Ayan Kumar, Hasnain Ahmad, Jayasimha Atulasimha, and Supriyo Bandyopadhyay. 

"Experimental demonstration of complete 180 reversal of magnetization in isolated co 

nanomagnets on a pmn–pt substrate with voltage generated strain." Nano letters 17, no. 6, 3478-

3484 (2017).

22. Zhang, Sen, Yonggang Zhao, Xia Xiao, Yizheng Wu, Syed Rizwan, Lifeng Yang, Peisen Li et al. 

"Giant electrical modulation of magnetization in Co40Fe40B20/Pb (Mg1/3Nb2/3) 0.7 Ti0. 3O3 

(011) heterostructure." Scientific reports 4, no. 1 (2014): 1-7.

23. Pathak, Pankaj, and Dhiman Mallick. "Size-Dependent Magnetization Switching in 

Magnetoelectric Heterostructures for Self-Biased MRAM Applications." IEEE Transactions on 

Electron Devices 68, no. 9 (2021): 4418-4424.

24. Wu, T., Bur, A., Wong, K., Zhao, P., Lynch, C.S., Amiri, P.K., Wang, K.L. and Carman, G.P., 

“Electrical control of reversible and permanent magnetization reorientation for magnetoelectric 

memory devices.” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 98, no. 2 , 2 2504 (2011)


25. Hassan, Orchi, Rafatul Faria, Kerem Yunus Camsari, Jonathan Z. Sun, and Supriyo Datta. "Low-

barrier magnet design for efficient hardware binary stochastic neurons." IEEE Magnetics Letters 

10, 1-5 (2019).

26. Zhang, S., and Z. Li. "Roles of nonequilibrium conduction electrons on the magnetization dynamics 

of ferromagnets." Physical review letters 93, no. 12, 127204 (2004).

27. Wang, Y., Wang, L., Xia, J., Lai, Z., Tian, G., Zhang, X., Hou, Z., Gao, X., Mi, W., Feng, C. and 

Zeng,  ., “Electric-field-driven non-volatile multi-state switching of individual skyrmions in a 

multiferroic heterostructure.” Nature communications, vol 11, no. 1, 1-8 (2020).

28. Pathak, P. and Mallick, D., 2022. Straintronic Nanomagnetic Logic Using Self-Biased Dipole 

Coupled Elliptical Nanomagnets.” IEEE Transactions on  agnetics, vol. 58, no. 10, 1-6(2022).

29. N. H. E. Weste and D. Harris. “C OS VLSI Design A Circuits and Systems Perspective.” Pearson 

Addison-Wesley, 2005.

30. Wang, D. T. “ odern DRA   emory Systems: Performance Analysis and a High Performance, 

Power-Constrained DRAM Scheduling
Algorithm.” PhD thesis, Univ.  aryland (2005); 

https://user.eng.umd.edu/~blj/papers/thesis-PhD-wang--DRAM.pdf

31. Sheikholeslami, A., and Gulak, P. G. “A survey of circuit innovations in ferroelectric random-

access memories”. Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 88(5), pp.   7-689 (2000).

32. Behin-Aein, Behtash, Deepanjan Datta, Sayeef Salahuddin, and Supriyo Datta. "Proposal for an 

all-spin logic device with built-in memory." Nature nanotechnology 5, no. 4, 266-270 (2010).

33. Yu, S., and Chen, PY, “ Emerging memory technologies: Recent trends and prospects.” IEEE 

Solid-State Circuits Magazine, vol. 8, no. 2, 43-56 (2016).

34. Behin-Aein, Behtash, Sayeef Salahuddin, and Supriyo Datta. "Switching energy of ferromagnetic 

logic bits." IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology 8, no. 4, 505-514 (2009).

35. Bukharaev, Anastas Akhmetovich, Anatolii K. Zvezdin, Aleksandr P. Pyatakov, and Yuri K.

Fetisov. "Straintronics: a new trend in micro-and nanoelectronics and materials science." Physics-

Uspekhi 61, no. 12, 1175 (2018).


36. Kent, Andrew D., and Daniel C. Worledge. "A new spin on magnetic memories." Nature 

nanotechnology 10, no. 3, 187-191 (2015).

37. Wong, H-S. Philip, and Sayeef Salahuddin. "Memory leads the way to better computing." Nature 

nanotechnology 10, no. 3 (2015): 191-194.

38. Farle, Michael. "Ferromagnetic resonance of ultrathin metallic layers." Reports on progress in 

physics 61, no. 7, 755 (1998).

39. Yu, Guoqiang, Zhenxing Wang, Maryam Abolfath-Beygi, Congli He, Xiang Li, Kin L. Wong, Paul 

Nordeen et al. "Strain-induced modulation of perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in 

Ta/CoFeB/MgO structures investigated by ferromagnetic resonance." Applied Physics Letters 106, 

no. 7, 072402 (2015).

40. Phuoc, Nguyen N., and C. K. Ong. "Control of Ferromagnetic Resonance Frequency and Frequency 

Linewidth by Electrical Fields in FeCo/[Pb (Mg 1/3 Nb 2/3) O 3] 0.68-[PbTiO 3] 0.32 (011) 

Heterostructures." Journal of Electronic Materials 45, no. 10, 4999-5005 (2016).

41. Liu, Ming, Ziyao Zhou, Tianxiang Nan, Brandon M. Howe, Gail J. Brown, and Nian X. Sun. 

"Voltage tuning of ferromagnetic resonance with bistable magnetization switching in energy‐

efficient magnetoelectric composites." Advanced Materials 25, no. 10, 1435-1439 (2013).

42. Nan, Tianxiang, Ziyao Zhou, Ming Liu, Xi Yang, Yuan Gao, Badih A. Assaf, Hwaider Lin et al. 

"Quantification of strain and charge co-mediated magnetoelectric coupling on ultra-thin 

Permalloy/PMN-PT interface." Scientific reports 4, 3688 (2014).

43. Zhou, Ziyao, Morgan Trassin, Ya Gao, Yuan Gao, Diana Qiu, Khalid Ashraf, Tianxiang Nan et al. 

"Probing electric field control of magnetism using ferromagnetic resonance." Nature

communications 6, no. 1, 1-7 (2015).

44. Li, Ning, Ming Liu, Ziyao Zhou, Nian X. Sun, D. V. B. Murthy, Gopalan Srinivasan, Tonya M. 

Klein, Vladimir M. Petrov, and Arunava Gupta. "Electrostatic tuning of ferromagnetic resonance 


and magnetoelectric interactions in ferrite-piezoelectric heterostructures grown by chemical vapor 

deposition." Applied Physics Letters 99, no. 19, 192502 (2011).

45. Liu, Ming, Shandong Li, Ziyao Zhou, Shawn Beguhn, Jing Lou, Feng Xu, Tian Jian Lu, and Nian 

X. Sun. "Electrically induced enormous magnetic anisotropy in Terfenol-D/lead zinc niobate-lead 

titanate multiferroic heterostructures." Journal of Applied Physics 112, no. 6, 063917 (2012).

46. Zhou, Ziyao, Brandon M. Howe, Ming Liu, Tianxiang Nan, Xing Chen, Krishnamurthy 

Mahalingam, Nian X. Sun, and Gail J. Brown. "Interfacial charge-mediated non-volatile 

magnetoelectric coupling in Co 0.3 Fe 0.7/Ba 0.6 Sr 0.4 TiO 3/Nb: SrTiO 3 multiferroic 

heterostructures." Scientific Reports 5, 7740 (2015).

47. Zhou, Z., T. X. Nan, Y. Gao, X. Yang, S. Beguhn, M. Li, Y. Lu et al. "Quantifying thickness-

dependent charge mediated magnetoelectric coupling in magnetic/dielectric thin film 

heterostructures." Applied Physics Letters 103, no. 23, 232906 (2013).

48. Zhao, Shishun, Lei Wang, Ziyao Zhou, Chunlei Li, Guohua Dong, Le Zhang, Bin Peng et al. "Ionic 

liquid gating control of spin reorientation transition and switching of perpendicular magnetic 

anisotropy." Advanced Materials 30, no. 30, 1801639 (2018).

49. Zighem, Fatih, Anouar El Bahoui, Johan Moulin, Damien Faurie, Mohamed Belmeguenai, Silvana 

Mercone, and Halim Haddadi. "Micro-strip ferromagnetic resonance study of strain-induced 

anisotropy in amorphous FeCuNbSiB film on flexible substrate." Journal of Applied Physics 116, 

no. 12, 123903 (2014).

50. Zighem, Fatih, Damien Faurie, Silvana Mercone, Mohamed Belmeguenai, and Halim Haddadi. 

"Voltage-induced strain control of the magnetic anisotropy in a Ni thin film on flexible substrate." 

Journal of Applied Physics 114, no. 7, 073902 (2013).

51. Kohmoto, 
Osamu. 
"Effective 
demagnetizing 
factors 
in 
ferromagnetic 
resonance 

equations." Journal of magnetism and magnetic materials 262, no. 2 (2003): 280-288.

52. Zhou, Z., O. Obi, T. X. Nan, S. Beguhn, J. Lou, X. Yang, Y. Gao et al. "Low-temperature spin 

spray deposited ferrite/piezoelectric thin film magnetoelectric heterostructures with strong 


magnetoelectric coupling." Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics 25, no. 3, 1188-

1192 (2014).

53. Srinivasan, G., E. T. Rasmussen, and R. Hayes. "Magnetoelectric effects in ferrite-lead zirconate 

titanate layered composites: The influence of zinc substitution in ferrites." Physical Review B 67, 

no. 1, 014418 (2003).


