1

Scalable switched slab coupler based optical phased
array on silicon nitride

P. Mu˜noz, D. Pastor, L.A. Bru, G. Mic´o, J. Ben´ıtez, D.J. Goodwill and E. Bernier

Abstract—A two-dimensional optical-phased array is demon-
strated by using a multiple-input star coupler, compatible with
FMCW LiDAR. Previous approach using a single-input design
achieves two-dimensional beam-steering by relying on a tunable
laser source, taking advantage of grating coupler radiation angle
wavelength dependance and variation of the waveguide refractive
index. While implementing a convenient way to distribute power
in a single step, star coupler architecture is inefficient in terms of
employed waveguide length and thus, optical loss and footprint.
Multi-input approach partially alleviates this by condensing
several single-input devices into one, permitting to reduce the
footprint proportionally to the employed number of inputs. We
fabricated in silicon nitride technology a proof of concept steerer
with beam waist 0.36◦ ×0.175◦ addressing a field of view of 15◦

×2.8◦. A new design iteration is also reported with and 0.24◦

×0.16◦ beam waist and 15◦ ×11.2◦ field of view. Implications of
this optical-phased array chips from a LiDAR system perspective
are also presented.

Index Terms—photonic integrated circuit, optical phase array,
LiDAR, FM-CW, silicon nitride

I. INTRODUCTION
C
OMPACT and functional light detection and ranging
(LiDAR) system requires a working combination of laser,
beam-steering system, detector and digital signal processing
(DSP) [1]. Hybrid integration in photonic integrated circuits
(PIC) is a promising platform as it permits to integrate
active devices such as lasers and photo-detectors, as well
as integrated electronic circuits, along with optical waveg-
uides. In this context, solid-state optical phased arrays (OPA)
beam-steering have been extensively demonstrated to have
advantages over mechanical scanners, including chip-scale
dimensions, reliability, low-cost manufacturing and adaptive
field-of-view and sweep rate [2]. On the other hand, there are
two main system level approaches to implement LiDAR: time-
of-flight (ToF) and frequency-modulated continuous wave
(FMCW). The former requires the use of multi-spatial-mode
lasers, incompatible with single-mode integrated waveguides.
In FMCW, single spatial mode lasers are employed and, more
specifically at λ = 1550 nm, has advantages in terms of
signal isolation, minimizing interference with other LiDAR,
presenting better rejection to sunlight and achieving longer
ranges when compared to ToF.
In this paper we present and experimentally demonstrate
a OPA PIC architecture compatible with FMCW. The ar-

Manuscript created October, 2021; G. Mic´o, L.A. Bru, J. Ben´ıtez, D.
Pastor and P. Mu˜noz are with the Photonic Research Labs, Institute for
Telecommunication and Multimedia Applications and UPVfab, Universitat
Polit`ecnica de Val`encia.
D.J. Goodwill and E. Bernier are with Huawei Canada Co., Ltd. - 303 Terry
Fox Drive, Ottawa, ON K2K 3J1, Canada.
Corresponding author P. Mu˜noz, pascual.munoz@upv.es

chitecture can randomly address a scene, by combining the
operation of a tunable laser and a switch matrix selector. The
fundamental OPA block is based on a slab coupler and a
waveguide array equipped with grating couplers (SC-OPA),
similar to the one proposed in [3]. Nonetheless, our SC-OPA
uses a plurality of inputs to the slab coupler, that can be
selected by a switch matrix. This results into a SC-OPA block
more compact, for a given wavelength tuning range, than the
one using a single input. The reduced footprint is key since
several SC-OPAs are required on the same PIC, each covering
a different part of the scene, as it will be detailed later. Hence,
an additional switching stage is employed to address different
SC-OPA blocks.
In the literature, several implementation of solid-state OPAs
can be found, that resort to tunable lasers and switch matrices.
The beam steering dimension exploiting wavelength tuning
and diffraction effect on gratings is typically 0.08◦/nm on
silicon nitride and 0.14◦/nm on silicon on insulator [4], [5].
Other implementations make use of strong dispersive photonic
crystals, surrounding the grating structure, and increase the
angular dispersion up to 1◦/nm performing 30◦ steering range
for a modest 20 nm laser wavelength tuning range [5].
Other groups have reported switched architectures applied
to a free-space propagation region [6], but in this case the
diffraction region is large area focusing grating, instead of an
OPA. The underlying input switching on this implementation
allows to control horizontal scanning, while in the switched
SC-OPA we propose, the waveguide array and tunable laser
do also play a role. Furthermore, the architecture in [6] does
not seem scalable to a large number of steering directions.
The same wavelength tuning controlled double H and V
sweep concept has been proposed also in [7]. In this case,
however, a serpentine waveguide structure with embedded
grating couplers is presented. While it results into a very
compact layout, it comes with a series of design limitations.
The grating coupler separation is then limited by the serpentine
waveguide bend radius, and therefore the maximum achievable
horizontal field of view is limited. Furthermore, due to the fact
the signal must sequentially pass through the entire structure,
the design of the gratings is critical as they need to be very
weak, thus low perturbation structures are required.
The footprint and architecture scaling when the number of
radiating elements in the OPA increases are root concerns of
the different proposals. Bogaerts et. [8] present a systematic
analysis of footprint and scaling where pure structures such
as serpentine, tree structure or slab couplers can be conve-
niently combined to reduce their size while maintaining the
performance. In [8] an approximation is also presented in
which a set of evenly spaced OPA units of smaller size are

arXiv:2203.16956v1  [physics.optics]  31 Mar 2022


2

combined by means of a distribution network without phase
changes (minimum size) to achieve a greater total equivalent
area. However this comes at the expense of some penalties
in terms of main to secondary lobe ratio, and the emission
directions allowed are discrete.
Our paper is structured as follows. Next section presents
the rationale behind our work, from the specification to the
technology selection and proposed architecture. In section III,
two of our multi-input SC-OPA designs are elaborated. Sec-
tion IV provides the results of the technology validation
and building block performance. Next, section V reports on
the experimental setup, methods and test results of the two
aforementioned designs. The connection between the PIC and
LiDAR system level implications is developed in section VI.
Finally the conclusion is given in section VII.

II. SPECIFICATION, TECHNOLOGY AND ARCHITECTURE

A. Specification

The purpose of our research was to determine the best
combination of a scalable chip architecture and photonic
integration technology, incorporating an OPA, that ultimately
would lead to meet a set of specifications. The sought OPA
scanner should cover a 2D scene spanning a field of view
(FOV) of ±15◦ in both the horizontal (H) and vertical (V)
directions, with a resolution of 0.1◦. Additionally, the scanner
should feature random access to parts of the scene, with the
lower power consuming approach. From a system perspective,
the resulting architecture should be compatible with FMCW
LiDAR. Last but not least, when resorting to off-chip devices,
they should be state of the art, and co-integrable with the OPA
in the mid-term.
One on-chip key block, as in many other proposals in the lit-
erature, is the grating coupler (GC) as radiating element. These
radiate light on different directions for different wavelengths.
Thus, with a tunable laser (TL), one of the two dimensions in
the FOV, in our case V, can be addressed. Consequently, the
phased-array is constructed, in the H dimension, by placing
a number of ideally identical GCs, NGC, spaced dGC from
each other. The scan in H can then resorts to different
mechanisms that have implications in the power distribution
network to the GCs. We soon discarded architectures based on
meander or serpentine waveguides such as [7] mainly for two
reasons: footprint when increasing NGC and beam quality in
H, due to the difficulties in precisely setting in a wavelength
independent manner the relative power and phase in such
distribution network. This naturally lead to a layout based
on a slab coupler. Next, the optical length from each tap to
the corresponding GC, ∆L, can be either equalized or set
to a controlled difference. The first approach ideally sets the
light in all GCs with the same optical phase, and then one
should resort to tuning individually each path from the slab
coupler to the GCs. Once more this does not scale up well with
NGC, more when considering power consuming tuners such as
thermo-optic phase shifters, which furthermore have a limited
operating speed of a few tens of kHz (that is ultimate related
to the system frame rate for a given number of points in the
acquired scene). An architecture with path length increment

∆L ̸= 0 such as the one proposed in [3] scans in both H and
V with the TL. However, bringing upfront the requirement to
use state of the start devices, e.g. a TL with wavelength scan
range, ∆λT L in the optical C-band of 35 nm, results in very
long path length increments.
In summary, all the above points to a large number of
elements / area OPA with a considerable number of optical
paths and anticipated long lengths.

B. Technology

Thus, among the most common monolithic photonic inte-
gration technologies, we selected silicon nitride that features
the lowest propagation loss. Among the platforms available
[9], we employed the technology by Ligentec [10]. Once the
technology is selected, there are several additional implications
for the blocks used to construct the OPA.
Firstly we considered the GC implementation in such
platform. As reported in [11]–[13], long and weak GCs are
required, constructed with waveguides having a lateral etch.
Our simulations, confirmed experimentally as we describe later
in the paper, indicated that the GC divergence was in the range
of 0.08◦/nm. For ∆λT L that results into a FOVV =2.8◦, far
from the target set above. The conclusion at this point leads
to a switched architecture, in which OPAs having GCs with
different period are used, as we will show later on. Each would
cover a given part of the FOV in V, and we term them vertical
blocks (VB).
Secondly, increasing the FOV in H is accomplished by
placing the GCs close enough. The GC relative spacing needs
to follow dGC = 1.9λ to ultimately meet the 30◦ FOVH set at
the start. The angular separation of the OPA diffraction orders
in H is inversely proportional to dGC. This is totally analog
the the concept of free spectral range (FSR) in an arrayed
waveguide grating (AWG), as described in [14]. Thus, one
concern when aiming at increasing FOVH was the optical
coupling of long closely spaced GCs running in parallel, that
we investigated by means of test structures as we show later
on.
Thirdly, and as a consequence of the first remark above,
stitching VBs by placing different GC design OPAs has
footprint implications: the larger the footprint for each OPA
is, the lower number of VBs in a given chip area will be. The
OPA radiating elements block footprint is bounded to the GC
length, LGC, times the (NGC − 1)dGC. However we cannot
neglect the footprint of the distribution network, that is the
array of waveguides from the slab coupler to the GC set. These
have a relative length increment of ∆L as introduced above.
In the simplest case, in which one of the diffraction orders
in H is shifted the full FOVH by sweeping the wavelength
of the TL an amount of ∆λ, the length increment needs
to satisfy ∆L = λ2/(ng∆λ), where ng is the waveguide
group index. As shown in Fig. 1(a), a single line would be
drawn by the steerer through a complete H FOV and the
VB FOV. It is possible to have more than one diffraction
order scanning in H within the same VB FOV. In that case,
∆L = λ2/(ng(∆λ/Ncycles)), where Ncycles is the number
of diffraction orders drawing lines within the VB FOV. For


3

𝐿𝐺𝐶

𝑁𝐺𝐶 − 1 𝑑𝐺𝐶

Multi-input

H
V

Single input

H
V

(a)
(b)

Output 

array plane

GC plane

Star

coupler

2 1
3

8

(…)

Single input

Multiple
inputs (P)

1

2

3

8
2

3

8

Array waveguides

(𝑁𝐺𝐶)

Fig. 1. (a) Single-input star coupler OPA, for which there is a single diagonal scanned field line that replicates for different orders in V. (b) Multi-input star
coupler OPA, same device with multiple inputs, providing a P times denser scanned field.

the single input SC-OPA being now described, the number of
lines drawn is equal to cycles Nlines = Ncycles. As example,
with Nlines = 2, and the laser swept the same ∆λ than before,
a first diffraction order would draw a line covering the full H
FOV and half of the VB FOV, and a second diffraction order
would then come into the block to cover the second half of the
VB FOV, with a new line spanning the complete H FOV, as
depicted in Fig. 1(b). In conclusion, populating the VB with
more lines, so as to increase the resolution in V, results into
an increased footprint (large ∆L). With ∆λ=35 nm, 0.1◦ V
beam width and 2.8◦ VB FOV densely populated results into
Nlines = 28 = 2.8◦ /0.1◦, which leads to ∆L=915.24 µm. In
connection with the H direction, the beam width requirement
is 0.1◦ as well. This is related to (NGC − 1)dGC = 1 mm
and FOV H is inversely proportional to dGC as mentioned
above. For the FOV H of 30◦, dGC = 1.9λ = 2.94 µm. Then
NGC ≃ 340, so the length difference between the shortest
and longest waveguide would be approximately 31 cm. This
is just for a single OPA covering a VB FOV of just 2.8◦.
Placing some of these in parallel within the typical fabrication
reticle of lithography steppers, it’s extremely challenging if not
impossible.

C. Architecture

Faced to this roadblock, in fourth place we explored an
additional degree of freedom within the SC-OPA device. All
the above refers to a device using a single input to the SC.
The SC far-field phase for light coming from different SC
inputs can differ by a constant amount. It can be designed
and controlled so as to span a range of 2π for P inputs.
Consider then a SC-OPA with P inputs, whose positions
are engineered in such a way that the SC far-field phase at
a given wavelength, for two adjacent inputs, differs 2π/P.
For a fixed (not scanning) wavelength, the spot produced in
the scene, will be shifted in H an amount FOVH/P when

switching between consecutive inputs, while staying in the
same V position within the VB. This is depicted in Fig. 1(b).
When sweeping, the trajectories will not overlap, but interlace
among them as shown as well in the same picture. However,
the most remarkable outcome is that for the multi-input SC-
OPA, the length increment can be re-written as:

∆L =
λ2

ng
∆λ

Ncycles
.
(1)

with Ncycles = Nlines/P. As numerical example to compare
with the previously presented, consider a multi-input SC-OPA
with P=14 to draw the same 28 lines (Ncycles = 2 diffraction
orders). Then the required ∆L for the same TL tuning range of
35 nm would be 65.37 µm. For each input, 2 lines are drawn
in the FOV. The H position shift due the the SC relative phase
for the inputs, ensures the next 2 lines for the next input do
not overlap in the FOV. When considering the ultimate target
of H beam width and FOV, the length difference between the
shortest and longest waveguide would be now reduced by the
same factor P, that is 2.2 cm, comparatively a less daunting
challenge.
Last but not least, the slab coupler (SC) element feature
power distribution with ideally equalized phase at the start
of all the paths to the GCs. For silicon nitride, as compared
to very low index contrast silica on silicon technology, the
arrangement of the SC outputs is done as in [15].
In summary, the proposed switched architecture, with inter-
laced scene scan, features smaller footprint for the OPA, as
compared with a single input device. Details on the footprint
advantage, including the switching matrices, are elaborated in
section V.

III. DESIGN AND FABRICATION

As indicated in the previous section, we resorted to the
silicon nitride AN800 platform by Ligentec, whose details


4

can be found in [10]. In short, a 0.8 µm thick silicon nitride
embedded in silica is the guiding layer. Besides this basic
function, a heater module and a deep trench module were
used as well. In our designs, the basic waveguide is of
Wwg = 0.8 µm width.

A. Grating couplers
With this waveguide cross-section, we firstly addressed the
design of the long GCs. We resorted to a single etch step for
the silicon nitride layer, thus the gratings were patterned as lat-
eral corrugations of a regular waveguide. This way, the GC pe-
riod is comprised of two sections of different widths, Wa,b =
Wwg±∆wGC. In order to cover several VBs as outlined in the
previous section, GCs with different period length, ΛGC were
designed as well. A design of experiments (DoE) from previ-
ous building block (BB) development runs comprised gratings
of periods of [842.39, 872.23, 904.32, 938.85, 976.07] nm for
target angles from -5.0◦ to +5.0◦ in steps of 2.5◦ (with
0◦ being normal to the chip plane). The lateral etch was
in [15, 30, 45, 60] nm. Uniform and apodized versions of
these GCs were explored. The apodization profile (etch-depth
variation along the GC length) is numerically determined for
the near field to have Gaussian shape with minimum truncation
that guarantee a given Main to Secondary Lobe Ratio (MSLR)
in the vertical direction, while maximizing energy transfer
from the waveguide to free-space.

B. Slab coupler
Secondly, the design of the slab coupler was faced following
the findings in [15]. The authors therein demonstrated im-
proved AWG imaging performance by placing the waveguides
at the output of the SC at a constant distance over the tangent
line to the SC circle, rather than at a constant angle over
that circle as traditionally done with low index (silica on
silicon) integration technologies. For our multi-input SC, we
determined the location of the input waveguides by iterative
simulation of the expected far-field horizontal pointing angle
as follows: 1) we set the focal length (SC length) and output
waveguide (OW) separation as described in [15] that minimize
the non-linear phase distortion along the NGC outputs when
lateral inputs on the SC are employed; 2) for each input waveg-
uide, its proper position along the input arc is determined
simulating the amplitude and phase profiles projected over the
output waveguides, and from these values the expected far-
field beam pointing angle. In a short number of fast iterations
the positions of the P input waveguides are determined to
point towards the desired horizontal FOV angles. In our casem,
these are P directions separated FOVH/P. Steps 1 and 2 can be
repeated modifying the focal Length, the number of OWs and
OW separation, in order to adjust key features in the far-field,
such as the beam width and the Main to Secondary Lobe Ratio
(MSLR). Both are related with the shape and the overall SC
far-field truncation to be allowed [14].

C. Switch unit cell
In third place we designed the unit switch cell, based on
a balanced Mach-Zehnder Inteferometer (MZI). This builds

upon a previously designed 2x2 MMI available in the process
design kit (PDK) for the AN800 Ligentec technology. Two
thermo-optic heaters were used, one per MZI arm. Anticipat-
ing to the well-know thermal cross-talk effect for neighboring
heaters, we did also use the deep trench module. Our switch
cell layout has three of these trenches, one placed in the
symmetry axis of the MZI, between the two arms, and two
other at the opposite side of each arm.

D. Optical phased array
With regards to the OPA design combining the BBs above,
we have previously reported as proof-of-concept (PoC) [16]
a single VB multi-input SC-OPA with no switching on-chip,
some of its characteristics reproduced hereby for completeness
and ease of comparison with the new design reported in the
present paper. The previous design was for a H×V FOV of
15◦ ×2.8◦, using a TL with ∆λT L = 35 nm, and a beam
size is 0.36◦ ×0.18◦. The GC separation was dGC = 6 µm.
together with the NGC = 39 GC emitters, and apodized GCs
of LGC = 1 mm. These result into an OPA aperture of (H×V)
234 µm x 1 mm. Last but not least, the design features 2
horizontal lines within the VB FOV per device input, that is
Nlines = 16 and P = 8 and therefore by using Eq. 1, ∆L =
65.4 µm. We labeled this design as SC0.
In this paper we additionally report on a new design
iteration, labeled SC1, with some of the features changed,
and fabricated in a different run than SC0. The H emission
area was doubled by increasing the number of emitters to 78,
while keeping dGC = 6 µm, with the purpose of reducing
the beam width in H. We kept the same target H×V FOV of
15◦ ×2.8◦. The V resolution was set to 0.23◦, which then
requires Nlines = 12 and P = 12, so ∆L = 32.7 µm.
However, we just laid out 8 of the 12 inputs, aiming at a
more compact switch matrix stage (with number of lines a
power of 2). Consequently, and as shown later, parts of the
FOV are not covered, but there is not a fundamental limitation
as we demonstrated and show hereby for the SC0 design. In
addition, one aspect was to keep the longest path difference
equal in both the SC0 and SC1 designs, which is met by
halving ∆L while doubling NGC. The motivation behind was
to investigate the addition of more radiators, in terms of the
phase distortions added, but with the same path length. Phase
errors stem from non-uniform fabrication of the waveguides,
mainly due to variations in waveguide material composition
and waveguide thickness (deposition effects) and waveguide
sidewall roughness (lithography and etching effects). Design
improvements such as waveguide up/down taper in the straight
sections of the waveguides are common place, such as in
[7]. Large scale OPAs in silicon nitride are also reported
with 4×4 mm2 [17] and 4x3 mm2 [18] showing the current
technology limits for phase coherence on waveguide arrays.
Four SC1 OPA designs, each with GCs having a different
period, were include within the same chip, together with the
switching matrix stages to select individual inputs among the
ones for each OPA, and to switch among VBs. The layout is
shown in Fig. 6(a) later on.
In conclusion, two SC-OPA designs are considered, termed
SC0 and SC1. They differ in the number of radiating elements


5

TABLE I
TECHNOLOGY FIGURES OF MERIT

Building block
Symbol
Unit
Value

I/O taper
IOT E
dB
0.87-0.93

IOT M
dB
add 3 to TE

Straight waveguide
αT E,sw
dB/cm
0.183

neff,T E
-
1.717-1.719

αT M
dB/cm
0.165

neff,T M
-
n.a

ng,T E
-
2.08-2.12

ng,T M
-
2.08-2.12

Bent waveguide
αT E,bw
dB/cm
0.876

∆β
1/µm
1.1e-3

κP
1/µm
3.75e-4

Spiral waveguide
αT E,sp
dB/cm
0.52

αT M,sp
dB/cm
0.40

Optical coupler
KT E,50:50
-
48.3:51.7

KT M,50:50
-
47.2:52.8

KT E,85:15
-
82.1:17.9

Grating coupler
Type
-
Uniform

Angle
deg
0

αGC−T E
dB/mm
-2.15

αGC−T M
dB/mm
-7.04

Thermal tuner
Ip
mA
(T) 41.91 // (NT) 44.55

tr
ms
(NT) 38

BW
kHz
(NT) 9.2

XNT
%
12%

XT
%
2.5%

(two times for SC1), that is the OPA aperture, and conse-
quently the target beam width in the horizontal FOV. Another
key difference is the number of horizontal lines per VB, which
for SC0 is 2, while for SC1 is 1, implying ∆L is half for the
latter, so the length difference between the shortest and longest
path to the GCs is the same for both designs.

IV. TECHNOLOGY AND BUILDING BLOCK
CHARACTERIZATION

Firstly we addressed on the technology performance. The
results are given in Table I. The results are presented for TE
and TM, despite our device design and experimental validation
in section V is only for TE. However, some of the unwanted
features observed in the performance are to be attributed to
TE-TM interaction. The input and output (I/O) tapers insertion
loss are characterized by coupling light to a set of straight
waveguides equipped with such tapers, relative to the setup
with no chip between microscope objectives. The polarization
filters in the in/out coupling stages of the setup were set to TE
or as needed. For sets of waveguides, we found the insertion
loss in the range of 0.87 to 0.93 dB for TE, and extra 3 dB
for TM.
The features for the straight waveguides (width 0.8 µm,
height 0.8 µm) were derived from multiple test structures.
As core test structure (TS) for both the basic properties of
waveguides and multi-mode interference (MMI) couplers, we
used an unbalanced MZI with arms having sufficient length
difference to resolve the optical losses. The design follows
our previously reported approach in [19], where the technique
based on optical frequency domain interferometry (OFDI)
measurements permits to obtain the waveguide propagation
losses, and the results are given within the same Table I. The
group index was derived from the spectral trace of unbalanced
MZIs (where the length increments were only on straight

waveguide pieces). Finally the effective index (for TE) from
the center wavelength of the transmission response from a
test GC emitting at 0◦, that was recorded on an OSA. The
bent waveguide (for the same cross-section and bend radius
of 150 µm) features were derived from a ring-resonator TS,
constructed with 50:50 MMIs. The OFDI response (set of
pulses with decreasing intensity) was fitted, the loss for the
straight parts and MMI splitting ratio deducted, and thus
the one for the bends derived. The coupling between the
TE and TM mode, following the model in [20], was also
extracted from the OFDI response, where after some re-
circulations TM pulses arose in between TE pulses locations.
Spiral waveguides, of length 5 cm, and waveguide spacing of
20 µm, with a 33% of bends of the same radius, were used as
to cross-check the derived magnitudes for straights and bends
from other structures.
Unbalanced MZIs were used as TS to asses on the thermal
tuner efficiency. This TS had thermal tuners immediately
on top of the arm waveguides. Then, for one of the arms,
additional tuners were laid out at multiple distances of 10 µm.
On the other hand, a similar layout was used for the other arm,
but one out of two heaters well replaced by deep trenches,
that is the arm heater was separated by 30 µm of the next
heater, with a deep trench between them. The spectral shift
of the MZI was measured for a current range of 0-60 mA,
for every heater of the described above. More specifically,
for the lateral displaced heater at 30 µm without trench the
relative spectral shift was 12% respect to the direct heater. In
the same geometrical, but with a trench at 15 µm (middle
point) we measured a relative displacement of 2.5%. The
MZI switches use thermal tuners, with current to shift π
of 41.91 mA for those equipped heat isolation trenches, as
detailed in Table I. Electrical test structures having same pads
dimensions, and incremental track lengths (of same cross-
section than the actual heaters) were measured. From these,
the heater resistance was estimated to be 34 Ohm, and thus
the power consumption for a π phase shift was inferred to be
≈60 mW.
With the OFDI setup, we did also retrieved the reflecto-
metric time domain response and obtained the decay rate of
energy for the GCs, as shown in Fig. 2. The results were -
2.15 and -7.04 dB/mm for TE and TM respectively, for the
GC having design parameters Λ = 904 nm and lateral etch
depth of 60 nm.
Finally, some TSs were used to explore the coupling
strength of GCs running in parallel. These comprised pairs of
GCs placed at distances from 1.2 to 3.0 µm. We found that the
cross-over length of such directional coupler-like structure, for
the GCs at 3.0 µm distance was above 88 cm, that is negligible
coupling for GCs of 1 mm at the designed dGC = 6 µm.

V. OPA CHIP CHARACTERIZATION

A. Approach

Our different OPA proposals were experimentally tested
in the laboratory after refining designs, fabrication processes
and several BBs. As described in the previous sections, two
were the main devices so as to prove the interlaced scanning


6

TE mode
TM mode

Linear fit

2.15 dB/mm

Fig. 2. (top panel) TE and TM mode OFDI reflectometry traces for grating
couplers. (bottom panel) zoom-in view in the grating location for the TE
mode.

Fig. 3. OPA chip characterization setup

patterns: designs SC0 and SC1. For this, we assemble the
experimental setup shown in Fig. 3.
We performed edge coupling by using microscope objec-
tives as mechanism for feeding light into the PIC. In order
to control the input polarization, polarization controllers are
employed previous to the microscope objectives, filtering TM
mode and letting TE mode be coupled. In the case of design
SC0, as the scan is performed with a purely passive method
(we directly access the SC input ports), the PIC is deposited
on top of a copper chuck which holds the die through a
vacuum channel. For the SC1 design, the scanning pattern
is accomplished by controlling the switching matrix to select
the operating VB and the corresponding input to the SC. Thus,
this PIC was assembled in an aluminium PCB, where wire-
bond connectors link the DC pads contained in the PIC with
the pads contained in the PCB. Moreover, as heat dissipation

is crucial in this case, the PCB is fixed on top of an aluminium
chuck and a heat radiator. To control the temperature changes
happening in real time in the PIC, a ceramic thermistor is
also included and routed to the PCB terminals. The thermal
management is performed by means of a thermal electric
controller (TEC), which maintains a constant temperature
through the characterization process using a Peltier cell. In
other hand, a proper arrangement must be done to capture
the light beam generated by the OPA. We employed a infra-
red (IR) CCD 2D array placed 14 cm over the PIC for
the acquisition of the beam profiles with enough definition
(≈10 pixels along the main beam). This distance is just
slightly larger than the far-field distance for the apertures
considered, but via simulations we confirmed this have no
substantial effects. Next, in a second arrangement, and in
order to capture the complete FOV, we resorted to a mirror
and projection screen. For this, a 90◦ gold protected mirror
(96 % reflectance) is allocated above the PIC (4cm) and a
viewing screen is mounted and adjusted in height to collect
the beam reflected. At the other end of the setup, the InGaAs
CCD array (Hamamatsu C12741-03, 14 bit resolution, 42 dB
dynamic range), is mounted with an IR objective and prepared
to capture the viewing screen. Processing includes dark frame
subtraction to eliminate laboratory ambient light, and gamma
correction. After the adjustment and characterization of this
setup, the area covered with the InGaAs camera was 22.5◦ H x
17◦ V. The difference between the horizontal and vertical axis
is due to the detector array of the InGaAs camera (640x512
pixels). This range is enough to properly capture the scanning
patterns created by designs SC0 and SC1.
In the case of design SC1, the switching matrix must
be electrically powered up. For this, two FFSD 40-pin flat
cables are connected to both sides of the PCB and to an
interconnection 40 points electrical box, where several DC
lines can be easily switched to activate different heaters from
the switching matrix. Finally, the electrical interconnection
box is connected through an interface to a couple of 10-
channel, 300 mA current sources provided by LuzWaveLabs.
This current sources are especially designed for PIC testing,
able to provided 16 bits of resolution, high stability and
excellent noise performance. For their control, several Python
and MATLAB scripts were generated.
The primary objective then is to capture the scanning pattern
of the OPAs using the experimental setup previously described.
In the case of SC0, it contains a single VB where the multi-
input SC has 8 inputs which were accessed individually from
the chip facet. For the SC1 design, the 4 VBs can be selected
by a 2x4 switching matrix followed by a 2x8 for each of the
VBs. Thus, the first task to generate the OPA scanning pattern
is to calibrate the different switching matrices. It is worth
mentioning that the tuning of each phase shifter contained
in the MZIs (just one of the two arms was tuned) was done
by performing a current sweep of 0-60 mA, range in which
a π phase shift is seen. This information was obtained by
previous BB individual characterization. For each VB light
is edge coupled to the upper 2x2 MZI of its corresponding
switching matrix. Note that in both designs, SC0 and SC1, the
not needed MZI inputs at all stages of the switching matrix


7

OPA

1 mm

8 inputs

Star coupler

39 array waveguides

200 mm

Fig. 4.
Multi-input star coupler fabricated device microscope picture.

are routed independently to the die facets on purpose, so they
can be employed in the switching matrix calibration phase.
In short, once light is applied to one of the sparse 2x2 MZI
input we can observed using the camera both radiated spots,
and tuning the phase shifter light can be redirected to just one
of the spots (i.e. one inputs of the SC). This step is repeated for
the each sparse 2x2 MZI input. This task has been developed
manually. Nevertheless, the process can be easily adapted to
be performed through image recognition and automated edge
coupling.

After the experimental setup preparation and the switching
matrix calibration, the OPA interlaced scanning patterns can
be properly tested. In the case of design SC0, light is edge
coupled to the desired VB through the outer 2x2 MZI from
the switching matrix. Similarly, in the case of design SC1,
light is edge coupled to the VB selector, located in the left
lower part of the die (see Fig. 6). Next, the 90º gold mirror
is positioned and adjusted on top of the die. After this, the
OPA beam is visible in the viewing screen allowing a fine
tuning and maximization of the edge coupling by using a
tuneable laser and a manual polarization controller. Once TEC
controller is set to a temperature of 25◦ and the ambient light
compensation frames are captured each stage of the switching
matrix is properly set to drive light to the first input of the SC,
generating a light beam in the viewing screen and capturing
the video frames as wavelength is swept using the tuneable
laser. The process is repeated adjusting the switching matrix
to drive each SC input and restarting the wavelength swept.
Once the VB has been completed, the electrical connections
from the interconnection box need to be arranged to feed the
next VB. In the case of design SC1, the VB selector is properly
modified. Similarly, the switching matrix of the VB is prepared
to drive light to the first input of the SC and the measurement
is repeated as previously described. After the recording of the
interlaced scan patterns generated by the OPAs, the videos are
processed and results are extracted using our own MATLAB
routines.

B. Experimental results

We firstly expand the results for our SC0 chip, previously
reported in [16]. A picture of the SC0 chips is given in Fig. 4.
Light from the TL is horizontally coupled to each of the 8
inputs, which are routed to the chip facet. The TL scan range
was in this case 50 nm (1525 to 1575 nm), larger than the
35 nm to cover the FOV. The overall capture strategy entails
video recordings, and allows each video frame to be linked to
a given wavelength of the sweep. The projection of the OPA
spots on the screen was then recorded, and each video was
off-line processed. After capturing videos for each input, we
first integrate by collapsing all the frames into one image by
holding the maxima. This gives a clear representation of the
beam trace as it is represented in Fig. 5(a). At the beginning
of the scan, the beam is placed in the upper left corner. As
wavelength is swept, as it is observed the beam traces the
expected diagonal path composed by the faster movement
in H due to linear incremental phase changing in the array,
combined with V one because of the GC dispersion. The
next OPA diffraction order lobe appears in the field when
15◦ in H are steered, repeats the travel twice, and ends at
the bottom. Same dynamics are observed for every input, but
progressively displaced a fraction in the V dimension. This
offset corresponds exactly to a 2π/8 phase jump, so that all
the input traces in the same order interlace homogeneously
the space between two orders of the same input, as expected,
to fill the entire scan field. In fact, there are observed two
groups of 8 lines for ∆λ = 35 nm, covering the 2.8◦ intended
for the vertical block. This result can be better observed in
Fig. 5(b). There is observed some no ideal behaviour though.
Along their trajectories, which are not exactly linear, beam
widths vary and significant intensity fading is observed.
Individual frame captured beams are fitted to a 2D Gaussian
model, so the H and V widths are retrieved by computing
its full width at half maximum (FWHM). We observed beam
quality was degraded when capturing from the projection
screen, as compared with direct beams captured with the IR
cam on top of the chip. The beams from the projection screen
exhibited glitches and peaks, we attributed to stray photons
both from the screen and other light sources in the lab. These
degrading artifacts were not observed for the IR cam on top of
the chip. Consequently, we acquired beams following the same
TL scan and video record procedure directly seen from the
chip in the IR cam, at the cost of a reduced FOV. In Fig. 7(a),
all beam frame slices are represented together for H and V, at
left and right, respectively. The beam width is estimated from
the Gaussian fittings (excluding frames with beams having
peak intensity below 20% of the IR cam dynamic range)
and matches with the design, 0.36◦ ×0.175◦. The average
beam wander is below one beam width though. For H, we
observe the presence of a region at -1◦ from the beam centers
where artifacts in between -10 and -30 dB from the peak
maximum appear. By observing Fig. 5(a) at 1◦ from the beam
trail, the presence of the side artifact is present in a small
part of the FOV. This might be attributed to TE-TM mode
interaction in the waveguides, similar to what [21] reports for
AWGs. The peak intensity fluctuations can also be observed


8

Fig. 5.
SC0 chip device results. (top 8 small plots) Video frame-integrated plots of the scan field for the 8 inputs, showing the oblique line pattern for each
case. (bottom large plot) Measured peak intensity positions, showing the multi-input interlacing (inputs 1–8, in pink–grey color) that fills the scan field.

in Fig. 5(a) for H and V. These phenomena can be attributed
to coherent interference with chip intra-reflections: as it is
well-known, diffraction in GCs have emission downwards
that, when reflecting on the different die layer interfaces,
interferes coherently with upwards emission, forming Fabry-
Perot cavities. The buried oxide interface with silicon substrate
produces a slow envelope, and the Si-air implies a larger cavity
and thus, a faster variation. The observed variation periods are
corroborated by simulation. This problem might be fixed by
including anti-reflection coating, or a more complex dual layer
unidirectional GC [12], which removes most of GC downward
emission.
The layout and picture of the SC1 chips are given in Fig. 6.
The inputs for each VB OPA are accessed through a switch
matrix. A first switch matrix stage allows to select among the
different VB OPAs. The beam trajectories for the SC1 chip are
given in Fig. 8. It shows the beam positions for the 4 OPAs
each addressing a single VB, comprising a total V FOV of
4 x 2.8◦, for the TL tuning range of 35 nm. Each VB has
been framed by a rectangle within the picture. Notice parts
of the FOV are not covered with the present chip, as already
discussed in the design section.
The power of the main peak ultimately determines the
detection range and the power in the side lobes is wasted.
This is discussed in section VI later on. The main lobe power
emission efficiency (percentage of power with respect to the
input power of the chip) is given in Table III. The variation
range in the whole wavelength tuning range, coming both from
intrinsic (wavelength-dependent emission, waveguide width

far field effects) or extrinsic (substrate reflection interference
effect) can be well appreciated in Fig. 7 and are discussed
in the following. The SC1 beams were already included in
Fig. 7(b) for comparison with SC0. As expected by design,
the H beam width is smaller for the SC1 design, since the
OPA aperture was doubled. To be precise, the FWHM widths
are 0.24◦ x 0.16◦ (H x V). The V FWHM for both the
SC0 and SC1 designs is very similar, as can also be seen
visually comparing Fig. 7, since the same GC design was
used. The slight differences in the main beam features can
also be attributed to the fact SC0 and SC1 were fabricated
in different runs at different times. The SC1 V beams exhibit
a strong side feature at -0.4◦ from the main lobe, present in
most of the max-hold plots (not provided). Compared to the H
beam slice where the side lobes appear at different locations,
the V side lobe is at a fixed one. Furthermore the latter does
not have a fixed intensity. As it can be observed, the overlay of
beams fills-up an intensity range from -30 to -3 dB. It might
indicate a rapid intensity variation within a short wavelength
interval, compatible with some interferometric process from
contributions having similar amplitude, in a long cavity created
by spurious reflections. As mentioned, noticeable artifacts
appear as well in the SC1 H beam, within the same intensity
range from peak than for SC0. A thorough investigation on
this was not the scope of the proof of concept stage of our
research, but we are inclined to believe it’s a combination of
TE-TM interaction, as we indicated for the SC0 chip, and on-
chip reflections.
The experiments were performed operating the switch ma-


9

Fig. 6.
SC1 chip layout (top), color legend: purple (waveguides), green
(grating couplers), brown (metal tracks). Picture of the PCB mounted chip
(bottom).

trix and the tunable laser. After calibration, the switch matrix
bias current required for every state were be stored, and we
observed fully reproducible matrix configuration along the
experiments. For the results shown, the TL was continuously
tuned for every matrix selected SC-OPA input. However there
architecture can sport further scanning schemes, some of them
we outline hereby.

• Random access: the TL wavelength range and switch
matrix state can be arbitrary. Thus, parts of the scene can
be accessed, i.e. addressing those areas in the FOV where
targets have been identified (e.g. fast moving targets)
while neglecting others (static or slower moving targets).

• Adjustable resolution: since the switch matrix state can be
arbitrary, two adjacent SC inputs could be enabled at the
same time. Two spots would be created simultaneously
(i.e. two of the lines shown in the trajectories figures
scanning parallel in time), which would represent and
effective reduction of the spatial resolution. Time wise,
with respect of LiDAR system integration time (see
section ahead) the scan rate could be halved to preserve
the same SNR, owing to the fact the optical power in this
situation would is split in two beams, instead of one.

• Object framing: two far inputs, e.g. input 1 and 8 could
be enabled simultaneously. This way, an outline of a
large object, duly identified by processing algorithms in
a regular higher resolution spatial scan.

Fig. 7. Beam frame H (left) and V (right) slices for the SC0 (top) and SC1
(bottom) chips.

Fig. 8. SC1 chip device results. Measured peak intensity positions, showing
the multi-input interlacing (inputs 1–8, in pink–grey color).

In summary, the architecture allows for addressing parts
of the scene randomly, with different spatial resolutions.
Considerations on the laser and switch matrix set and reset
times should be addressed, but are out the scope of this paper.
In terms of footprint, the switch matrix (SM) stage, in its
most simple structure without resorting to special layouts for
the MZIs, scales in length as the number of required stages.


10

That is, if P is the number of inputs to one of our SC-OPAs,
the SW stage length will be LSM = LMZI log2(P), and the
height (or width) will be WSM = WMZIP/2. Thus, the total
area , where the factor 1/2 stems from the tree-like structure.
In our design, this amounts for 5.14x0.4 mm2 (see Fig. 6),
which is 2 mm2 area. On other hand, the SC-OPA without
switching, that gives the same scene line density, has to scan
P times faster for a wavelength sweep ∆λT L. Consequently,
the path length increment between adjacent paths from the
SC to the grating couplers, ∆L , must be multiplied by a
factor P. In general, if we consider a rectangular layout for the
array of waveguides between the SC and the grating couplers,
the footprint scales ∝ ∆L2. Thus, a length increase factor of
P for ∆L results into an increase of P 2 in the used area.
In our design, the area used by the arrayed waveguides is
approximately 1 mm2 (see Figs. 4 and 6). Hence, resorting to a
non-switched version of the SC-OPA would result into 64 mm2

of area used, as compared to our SC-OPA with P = 8. In
conclusion, the switched architecture presents a footprint ratio
advantage, as compared to the non-switched one, of (1+2)/64
approximately. This ratio is enlarged for larger P, since the
1 mm2 corresponds to the OPA, and 2 mm2 to the SM 2x8.

VI. LIDAR SYSTEM PERSPECTIVE

A. ToF versus FMCW

Optical beam steering approach and the ranging technique
employed can have crossed implications that we summarize in
this section. First of all just recall the main differences between
the two main approaches for the range determination. Time
of flight (ToF) is a incoherent technique so direct detection
(DD) is employed. A train of optical pulses is emitted and
a broad area receiver based on broad aperture optics focus
the incoming beam to the detector plane (broad area or
and array of detectors). Finally, the range of the target is
obtained by evaluation of the time delay between emitted and
received pulse sequence electronically. The Frequency Mod-
ulation Continuous Wave (FMCW) technique uses coherent
detection. The transmitter emits continuously in power, but
modulated in optical frequency with a symmetrical saw-tooth
shape [22] [23]. A portion of the generated FMCW signal
is applied to the detector (as local oscillator, LO) jointly
with the target received signal. The range information will
emerge as a beating RF tone between 0 Hz up to the peak to
peak optical frequency modulation employed ∆f. The FMCW
technique is attracting a lot of interest due to these advantages:
a) High sensitivity owing to the coherent detection, where
almost quantum shot noise limit can be reached; b) interfering
signals from other vehicles or from the sun radiation are highly
eliminated; c) relative velocity of moving targets respect to the
LiDAR can be retrieved because of the Doppler effect from
the obtained RF tones due to double ramp saw-tooth design.
The target velocity information is being envisioned as a key
parameter on the decision taking algorithms for autonomous
driving and other LiDAR applications.
In general FMCW presents a number of advantages versus
ToF, but it has an intrinsic requirement that is the coherent
beating on the detector of the two combined signals, LO and

received signal from target. This in turn can pose restrictions
on the practical structure for the TRx/RCx pair. In this sense,
on ToF-LiDAR the transmitter and receiver can be separated
devices with optimised designs and just located together with
only electronic interconnections with the control system. How-
ever, in FMCW the LO signal from the transmitter must be
driven to the detector for the beating. In free space optics based
LiDARs employing large area detectors, or detector arrays, this
could be a complex issue taking into account that incoming
signals can reach the receiver from a broad field of view (FOV)
and the efficient control of the LO and signal overlapping at
the detector would require complex solutions. According with
this intrinsic requirement, a natural approach is to employ the
same optical device for the beam steering for transmission and
reception, separating the two propagation directions by means
of non-reciprocal components as optical circulators. Those are
very mature for the case of discrete optical fiber components,
but present very promising evolution as integrated components
[24].

B. Beam steering strategies and ranging techniques

This section presents some of the implications between
scanning strategies and distance detection techniques. First of
all we must recall an intrinsic limitation relative to the speed
of light. The round trip time for each meter in free space is
approximately 6.66 ns. Depending on the application it will
determine the minimum ”waiting time” (WT) (time between
the ranging signals have been emitted and they comeback to
the LiDAR receiver). As example, for autonomous driving
where the maximum ranges can be > 200 m waiting time can
reach WT = 1.33 µs. Additionally to WT, a key parameter
is the ”processing time” (τp). This quantity includes all the
treatments over the detected photo current, such as filtering,
sampling, Fourier transforming depending of the employed ap-
proach, and thresholding. All these procedures can be carried
out in analogue or digital manner (or as a combination). In
an optimum design case, we could assume full advantage of
the the complete τp is taken for the ”signal integration” or in
other words for the noise reduction. This is the case for the
electrical noise bandwidth Be on the Signal to Noise Ratio
(SNR) models where Be = 1/τp. Values for τp will depend
on the maximum range, source power and component losses
(we develop them later on) but for AD applications it can range
> 1 − 2 µs. Notice at this point that WT + τp is imposing a
limitation on the frame rate. For example, a 300x300 complete
image will be limited to a 3.7 frames/s assuming an optimistic
WT +τp = 3 µs. Additionally to WT and the processing time,
the establishment and stabilization times must be considered
in each LiDAR image point for both steering process (i.e.
switching matrix control or MEMs activation time, etc), and
also for the ranging signal generation (i.e. FMCW saw-tooth
generation and linear frequency control system [25]). Several
techniques exist for the linearization of a continuously tunable
laser. The interested reader may resort to [26] and references
therein. This evidences a strong requirement for parallel pro-
cessing in high-performance LiDAR, where multiple system
functions must be carried out in parallel (i.e. beam steering


11

along with proper FMCW frequency generation) in order to
shorten the total per point time.
After the previous general considerations we can conclude
the beam steering approach and the signals employed for the
ranging/speed determination, including their optimum rela-
tionships, will determine the final LiDAR features. Thus, we
dedicate the rest of the section to explore these relations for
the proposed architecture, assuming the use of FMCW ranging
signals.
A classical approach is the point to point switching. It
implies a sequence of steps: 1) Beam steering and stabilization
time. It encompass two actions, the wavelength tuning to
perform both the H and V steering into the Vertical Block
(VB) and the switching matrix to select the proper VB, 2)
The FMCW generation consisting in the saw-tooth frequency
modulation with ∆f excursion and 2T period. The theoretical
limit for the spatial ranging resolution is only related with ∆f
as ∆R = c/2∆f with c the speed of light. As a reference, in
autonomous driving resolutions below 15 cm are demanded,
that correspond with ∆f > 1 GHz. The coarse wavelength
tuning for beam steering, and the fine linear optical frequency
sweep, are carried out and optimised in a separated way,
resulting in greater time consumption for the entire process.
Furthermore, there is a unavoidable cross-relationship between
FMCW signals and wavelength tuning steering systems, which
is the beam deviation according to the frequency modulation
of the saw-tooth signal itself. In these cases, it must be ensured
that the angle variation induced by FMCW signal is smaller
than the desired beam divergence (or alternatively image point
separation). As previously described vertical dispersion on
GC was (∂θ/∂λ)V =0.08◦/nm but horizontal dispersion due
to the delay line section previous the OPA is (∂φ/∂λ)H =
NlinesFOVH/P∆λ, being for Nlines = 4 and P = 1 a value
of (4x15◦/35nm)=1.71◦/nm.
Notice that in this case, the maximum FMCW frequency
excursion ∆f is 7.2GHz (case when H beam deflection equals
the desired H divergence of 0.1 degree). It is important to
note that this maximum feasible excursion decreases as the
number of lines into the VB increases. For example for P = 1
and Nlines = 28 (compatible with the vertical density of 0.1
degrees along 2.8◦), the maximum ∆f is 1 GHz (close to
a range resolution of 15 cm as previously indicated). In this
sense, the proposed switched architecture once again plays
to our advantage by decoupling the Nlines concept from the
Ncycles through the product Nlines = P × Ncycles, increasing
the possible FMCW excursion by a factor × P.
An alternative approach employs the laser sweep to ac-
complish both the beam steering and the FMCW ranging
process simultaneously, in a continuous way [27]. Fig. 9.
shows schematically the steering trajectories inside a vertical
block and their optical frequency correspondence, to illustrate
the connection between steering and FMCW process and their
interdependence. In order to simplify the representation, and to
make easier the explanation, we take an specific combinations
of P = 4 (number of input ports to the OPA slab coupler
(SC)), and Ncycles = 8 (the number of drawn lines along the
VB when one complete wavelength scan is accomplished).
Notice that 32 oblique lines will fill in full the vertical block

Line 1

t

𝑃𝑃 = 4, 𝑁𝑁𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐 = 8

∆𝑓𝑓(𝑡𝑡)

𝐹𝐹

𝑇𝑇

𝑁𝑁𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐

Line 2

Line 8

Line 7

Port 1

t

∆𝑓𝑓(𝑡𝑡)

𝐹𝐹

𝑇𝑇

Port 1
Port 2
Port 3
Port 4

Positive & negative 

slopes each port 

(c)

(a)
(b)

Fig. 9. Steering trajectories inside a Vertical Block and their optical frequency
correspondence. a) Interleaved trajectories. Lines of port 1 are indicated. b)
Single ramp per input port. c) Double ramp for relative velocity determination

field, leading to 2.8/32 = 0.088 vertical interline space.
Different colors are employed for each SC input, showing the
line steering interleaving into the VB, and their correspondent
frequency variation. In the standard FMCW technique, both
positive and negative frequency slopes must be employed,
in order to retrieve the magnitude, and the direction of the
target, relative velocity without ambiguity. To achieve this, two
consecutive frequency scans with positive and negative slopes
must be completed per each input port as depicted in Fig. 9(c).
We define the TV B as the available time to scan a complete
VB. The frame time will be Tframe = TV BNV B, the time to
scan all the lines at each SC input will be Tport = TV B/P
and finally T in Fig. 9 T = TV B/2P the single ramp time. As
explained up to this point, the single point classical FMCW
approach has been expanded into a continuum swept extended
to a certain frequency range (F) that is shared along the
whole set of image points covered in each SC port input.
In practice, this continuous swept is effectively sliced after
detection by the signal processor in a set of ”time beams”,
according with the specified angular resolution and/or beam
divergence (div). This way, the number of ”time beams” into
the single time ramp T can be formulated as MF MCW =
γ(NcyclesFOVH)/div, with FOVH the horizontal field of
view and γ an over-slicing parameter γ >= 1. Once MF MCW
is set, the effective optical frequency excursion is obtained
as ∆feff = F/MF MCW , and from this the expected range
resolution ∆R = c/2∆feff together with the maximum RF
tones that should be detected and processed RFtone = ∆feff.
Table II summarises the relevant system results for a frame rate
equal to 10 Hz, NV B = 10 (FOVV = 2.8o×NV B) leading to
TV B = 10 ms, F = 35 nm × (100GHz/0.8nm), FOVH = 30o

and beam divergence div = 0.1◦.

Notice that linearized frequency sweep must be accom-
plished along the whole range F during the time T (see
Table II), which is a challenge for the tunable source as the
number of ports (P) increase. Probably the future availability
of rapidly tunable hybrid integrated laser sources in ranges of
some tens of nanometers [28], [29] will determine the viability
of the FMCW continuous scanning technique in applications
with a wide FOV and fast full image rates.


12

TABLE II
MAIN LIDAR FEATURES VS P AND NCYCLES

P
Ncycles
T(µs)
MFMCW
∆feff(GHz)
∆R(m)

1
32
10000
9600
0.29
0.51

2
16
5000
4800
0.58
0.26

4
8
2500
2400
1.11
0.13

8
4
1250
1200
2.33
0.064

16
2
625
600
4.66
0.032

Laser

50%

OPA

A
B

50%

OPA Losses (dB)

Range (m)

Fig. 10. Maximum range for the system parameters. Curves for P0 = 100 ,
200 and 300 mW.

TABLE III
SYSTEM PASSIVE COMPONENTS AND ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENT

Device
Losses(dB)
Improved(dB)

Fiber/Chip Coupling
0.5
0.4

2x4 VB selector(2 stages)
0.46x2x2=1.84
0.2x2x2=0.8

2x8 SC input sel.(3 stages)
0.46x2x3=2.76
0.2x2x3=1.2

SC insert losses
4
2

OPA gratings efficiency
3 / 0.5
3 / 0.5

Grating Apodization
3
0.5

Propagation losses
0.3
0.15

TOTAL OPA (LAB)
15.4 / 12.9
8.05 / 5.55

C. Power budget and LiDAR range

A good approximation to determine the LiDAR achievable
range is usually based on a shot noise dominant approxima-
tion. We will assume the laser source provides a linewidth
less than a few tens of kHz, so that beating noise can be
neglected against the inherent level of shot noise. The FMCW
technique works in a coherent detection regime, applying a
relatively high optical power coming directly from the FMCW
source that acts as the local oscillator, in order to obtain the
RF tone after beating with the received signal. Usually in
these cases the thermal noise can be considered below the
shot noise, and neglected as well. The inset in Fig. 10 shows
a basic LiDAR arrangement with transmission and reception
in the same device. We assume a 2×2 (50%) splitter to divide
the FMCW signal to the OPA path and to the detectors path
(local oscillator signal). Also a 2×2 (50%) splitter is employed
as combiner before the differential detector pair. The powers
considered in Fig. 10 are similar to those in [18], where
400 mW, from which 100 mW were diverted to a Ge-on-Si
photo-detector, and used for ranging over 100 m.
In order to summarize the results of maximum achievable
range for the FMCW-LiDAR, we will focus on Fig. 10, where
the maximum range (m) is represented against the total optical

losses on the OPA (only one direction in between A and B
in the scheme). The parameters adopted for the calculation
are: ”processing time” τp = 2 µs, receiver aperture area in
which the electromagnetic field is picked up onto the LiDAR
A = 1cm2, the reflectance of the target is 10% and detectors
quantum efficiency η = 0.8. No absorption in the media
is considered, being the back propagation losses determined
by the fractional area between the receiving aperture area
(A) over the isotropic reflected field on target as lprop =
10log10(A/4πLtarget
2) Finally, it is necessary to set the
probability of target detection PD=90% and the probability of
false alarm PFA< 10−4. PD is the probability of detection in
presence of the target, and PFA is the probability of detection
when no target is in the image. PFA occurs when the shot noise
level exceeds the established electronic detection threshold on
the detected RF tones. At the same time the threshold level
is settled once the noise power is estimated (dominated by
shot in our case) and according to the established maximum
admissible PFA. Note that an average of 25 false alarm events
will occur in a single second according to the pixels rate of
250 Mpixel/s (1/(2τp)), which may be surprising, but it must
be borne in mind that this is the first level of processing and
that other higher processing levels can rule out many of these
random events [30] [31].
The maximum range results are shown, for three values of
optical power injected by the laser source P0=100, 200 and
300 mW. Clearly, the available laser power and OPA losses
are extremely demanding parameters over the maximum range,
so that, even assuming an optimistic value of 6 dB for the OPA
losses, distances of 26 meters are obtained for 100 mW, which
can be increased to approximately to 43 m for 300 mW.
OPA losses LAB are summarized in a detailed manner in
Table III. The second column shows the results extracted from
measurements along the technology and BB characterization
runs. The third column presents an estimate of the achievable
loss values, assuming a foreseeable evolution and improve-
ment of the technological processes. Apart from the well-
known losses in the switch matrices (in total 5 stages of MZIs
are counted), we can summarize some of the other sources
of losses and their possible improvement: 1) Slab Coupler
losses are dominated by the Gaussian profile truncation and the
efficiency on field coupling to the output guides [32]. 2) OPA
grating efficiency is mainly related with 50% loss of power
due to the bottom radiation on symmetrical designs. Vertical
symmetry breaking approaches [12] can reduce the expected
loss up to few tenths of a dB. 3) The apodized design of
the GC is essential in reducing the Main to Secondary Lobe
Ratio up to expected goal on designs (MSLR > 30dB).
In addition, its final length and the apodization profile also
determine the width of the far-field beam divergence goal
(div = 0.1o). For these values, the total required length for the
Gaussian near-field profile was 1005.5 nm. The next step was
to define the local perturbation along the GC that produces
the expected near-field profile taking in mind that the signal
applied propagating along the GC is being reduced progres-
sively (due to waveguide losses and mainly radiated fraction of
the light) and therefore the perturbation depth profile, de(z),
will be a distorted version of the initial Gaussian goal. This


13

can be easily done by recursive numerical calculations up
to obtain the optimum de(z). Notice that, once MSLR and
div are set, for a given maximum achievable perturbation
depth (demax) the optimum design provides a maximum ratio
of total radiated power respect to the applied one (value on
Table II as grating apodization). In our design demax was set to
115 nm that corresponds with a maximum αGC−T E=8 dB/mm
local power decaying due grating radiation, leading to a total
grating apodization losses of 2.34 dB when the complete
profile is evaluated. This grating apodization losses can be
reduced by increasing the maximum achievable αGC−T E
through increasing demax and/or the mode profile overlapping
with the waveguide perturbed cross-section. Moreover, longer
devices allow the reduction of the angular divergence (div)
but also the losses. As an example, a 2 mm long GC with
equivalent apodization profile and same demax as designed
would result into a 0.83 dB losses. 4) Propagation loss
measured was 0.183 dB/cm and reports [33] show results as
good as 0.055 dB/cm, considering interconnection waveguides
represent a total length of 1.5 cm.
Starting from the indicated base system, it is interesting to
have simple relationships that allow for evaluating the impact
on the maximum achievable range by simple calculations.
More specifically, each dB increase or decrease in OPA losses
affects the range by a factor ×0.81 or ×(1/0.81) respectively,
while in optical power P0 each dB impacts by a factor ×1.11
or ×(1/1.11). Finally, a ×2 increase in the OPA aperture A
results in a ×1.358 range increase, while in the case of the
process time T a factor ×2 produces an improvement in the
range of ×1.433.

D. Switch matrix cross-talk impact
The MZI based limited extinction for the 1xP SM preceed-
ing the SC-OPA, can lead to the emission of P-1 spurious
beams evenly spaced in the horizontal FOV by FOVH/P, with
intensities -20 dB (worst case, and the closest to the main
radiated beam). -23 dB for 2 beams, -26 dB for 4 beams, and
so on.
In transmit / receive mode, the optical signals (main beam
and spurious) go through the OPA and SM twice, hence
the cross-talk ratio is a factor of x2. In the worst case, the
cross-talk of a spurious to the main beam would then be -
40 dB. Considering this worst case, two different ranging and
detection scenarios may arise:
1) Same distance to target than to spurious direction. In
that case, after beating with the LO FMCW signal, two
RF tones of the same frequency are obtained, which
add in photocurrent. The amplitude for the interferer in
photocurrent will be 100 times lower (beat term square
root,
√

104) thus with negligible effect over the main
beam signal.
2) Spurious beam comes from an object located closer or
further from the main beam target. In this case, after
the detector, there are 2 RF tones, main and spurious,
but with different RF frequency. Thus, they can be
distinguished and separated by processing the received
signals. Even though, their value will be very low as
explained in the following.

Laser

OPAs

1x8 Vertical 
Block selector

1x8 SC 
Input
selector

Incremental 
Path length
area
Grating 
Array

𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

(1)

(2)

(3)

Fig. 11. Optical amplification. Three OA locations are considered. linter are
the one pass losses in between the OA and the reciber input.

The worst case of the two outlined in the last point above,
would be when the spurious beam comes from an object
closer (Lsp) and with reflectivity higher, to the main beam
target (ρsp). The power ratio between spurious and main beam
can be written as: Xt(dB) = −40 + 10 log10(ρsp/ρmain) +
20 log10(Lmain/Lsp). The first term accounts for the different
reflectivity, and the second from the different range (see
propagation loss equation in the manuscript).
As
numerical
example,
for
ρsp/ρmain=10
and
Lmain/Lsp=10, Xt = −10 dB (10 in natural units). In
that case, the spurious would be detected with an amplitude
level of
�

(10)=3.16 but a frequency 10 times lower.
In conclusion, simple mechanisms could be established for
the processing of the detected signal, that would allow to
discard tones below a given threshold from the main beam
tone. In any case, those resulting from a SM with cross-talk
-20 dB, can be neglected.

E. Power amplification

We consider here the benefits of using optical amplifiers
(OA) embedded into the specific points of the LiDAR ar-
chitecture. We begin placing the OA just before the signal
input port of the differential detector in the typically called
pre-amplifier configuration (case on Fig. 11 location (1)). As
can be envisioned this approach results into the addition of
a new noise term coming from beating noise between the
local oscillator (LO) and the amplified spontaneous emis-
sion noise (ASE) from OA. This noise term is given by
σ2LO−ASE
=
2η2e2PLONBe where η is the detectors
quantum efficiency, e is the electron charge, PLO is the LO
power at the detector input, Be the electrical bandwidth and
N = nsp(G − 1) with nsp the OA population inversion
factor and G the gain. On the other hand, the shot noise
term is σ2shot = 2e(ηe/hν)PLOBe and comparing the two
expressions we have σ2LO−ASE/σ2shot = ηnsp(G − 1). We
can see that pre-amplier configuration leads to a dominant LO-
ASE term approximately G times the shot noise, preventing
any hypothetical benefit assumed from optical gain.
Lets consider now a more general configuration where
the OA is located far from the detector input, so that a
certain quantity of optical losses are in between (case on


14

Fig. 11 locations (2) and (3))). We employ linter < 1 to
insert this into the formulation, so the noise ratio remains
as σ2LO−ASE/σ2shot = ηnsp(G − 1)linter. We can define
a signal to noise ratio at the receiver output in the two cases:
a) limited by shot noise (no OA): SNR0 = S0/σ2shot and b)
Employing OA:SNR = S0Gm/(σ2shot + σ2LO−ASE) and
finally the ratio between them that provides the net gain
benefit: Gnet = SNR/SNR0 = Gm/(1+ηnsp(G−1)linter).
Notice that we have assumed in this generalised approach
that the OA can be localised in different places along the
LiDAR architecture, where the signal bi-directionality must
me guaranty (cases 2 and 3). In these cases the optical gain
is assumed equal in the two directions, and the double pass
benefit over the signal is taken into account by the m = 2
parameter on the formulas.
We will illustrate the OA net gain benefits in three different
locations along the LiDAR architecture. For all the cases we
take a modest gain G=4 (6 dB), NF = 2nsp and η = 0.8. 1)
AO just before detectors (location (1) in Fig. 11) so linter = 1
(no intermediate losses) and the net gain is Gnet = 0.81 (-
1dB). 2) The amplifier is in position (2) in Fig. 11, in between
the ideal 2×2 splitter acting as duplexor and the OPAs. In this
case linter = 1/2 (3dB) and just evaluating the net gain with
m = 2 we obtain Gnet = 6.66 (+8.23dB). 3) 8 amplifiers are
located at each output of the Vertical Block switching matrix
where the switching matrix is supposed to have in total 3 dB
excess losses. In this case we apply linter = 1/4 and the net
gain is Gnet = 13.33 (+11.24 dB). Notice that each 2 dB
obtained in Gnet must be counted as an effective reduction of
1 dB in the OPA losses, leading to an increase of ×(1/0.81)
in range. In the previous cases of positions 2 and 3, the range
increase should be ×2.34 and ×3.27.
In summary, amplification on chip is anticipated as a must.
Furthermore, a distributed set of amplifiers with modest gain
are outlined as the optimum in terms of signal to noise ratio.

VII. CONCLUSION

A fully passive two-dimensional OPA based on wavelength
sweeping and consisting of a multi-input star coupler has
been proposed and demonstrated in silicon nitride technology.
Existing slab coupler OPA permits to distribute optical power
between the numerous radiating elements in a single step
and creating a Gaussian profile in the H direction. Our novel
proposal uses P inputs at the entrance of the slab coupler,
that allows to relax the up-scaling problem with the star
coupler approach, permitting to reduce both footprint and
optical power losses in a P factor with respect to the single-
input approach. Expanded results for a previously reported
proof-of-concept device have been reported, featuring a H×V
FOV of 15◦ ×2.8◦, and a beam size of 0.36◦ ×0.175◦, for
wavelength sweep of ∆λ = 35 nm, as expected by design.
A new design incorporating on-chip switch matrix stages to
select among four different vertical blocks, features H×V
FOV of 15◦ ×11.2◦, and a beam size of 0.24◦ ×0.167◦.
The architecture can be operated as progressive scene scanner,
but it can also feature random scene access with selectable
resolution.

From a LiDAR system perspective, we have shown the
proposed OPA is compatible with FMCW LiDAR, taking
advantage of the tunable laser wavelength sweep. Moreover
the switched architecture has the ability to reduce by a P
factor the horizontal angular dispersion, for a given line
density, which in turn reduces the impact of the FMCW
signals on the steering deviation. Additionally, the relationship
between FMCW frequency tuning in continuous mode with the
interlaced steering trajectories has been described in detail,
as well as the implication of the double slope use for the
target relative speed determination. Dependency relationships
between the steering architecture parameters P and Ncycles
and system parameters of interest, such as the number of
FMCW points, the equivalent per point frequency excursion
and the range resolution have been discussed.
The power balance and distance limitations have been de-
scribed, providing quick-use scaling rules that can be quickly
used for the evaluation of maximum-range with respect to
losses. A breakdown of the current losses and paths for im-
provements have been provided for the proposed architecture
and technology. Finally the use of optical gain inside the
LiDAR structure is theoretically evaluated, in what we believe
may represent a path of disruptive change toward a new
generation of LiDAR systems that will build upon hybrid
photonic integration.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We acknowledge Ligentec, the silicon nitride technology
platform company responsible for the fabrication of the chip
measured in this work. Equipment and infrastructure funding
by GVA/IDIFEDER/2018/031.

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Zhu, S. Zeng, and L. Zhu, “Optical beam steering by using
tunable, narrow-linewidth butt-coupled hybrid lasers in a silicon nitride
photonics platform,” Photon. Res., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 375–380, Mar
2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.osapublishing.org/prj/abstract.
cfm?URI=prj-8-3-375
[2] Y. Guo, Y. Guo, C. Li, H. Zhang, X. Zhou, and L. Zhang,
“Integrated optical phased arrays for beam forming and steering,”
Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 9, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/11/9/4017
[3] K. Van Acoleyen, W. Bogaerts, and R. Baets, “Two-dimensional dis-
persive off-chip beam scanner fabricated on silicon-on-insulator,” IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 23, no. 17, pp. 1270–1272, Sep. 2011.
[4] C. R. Doerr, L. Chen, Y.-K. Chen, and L. L. Buhl, “Wide bandwidth
silicon nitride grating coupler,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters,
vol. 22, no. 19, pp. 1461–1463, 2010.
[5] H. Ito, Y. Kusunoki, J. Maeda, D. Akiyama, N. Kodama, H. Abe,
R. Tetsuya, and T. Baba, “Wide beam steering by slow-light waveguide
gratings and a prism lens,” Optica, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 47–52, 2020.
[6] C. Doerr, L. Chen, L. Chen, and D. Ton, “Linear 2d beam steering with a
large focusing grating via focal point movement and wavelength,” IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 33, no. 17, pp. 935–938, 2021.
[7] N. Dostart, B. Zhang, A. Khilo, M. Brand, K. Al Qubaisi, D. Onural,
D. Feldkhun, K. H. Wagner, and M. A. Popovi´c, “Serpentine optical
phased arrays for scalable integrated photonic lidar beam steering,”
Optica, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 726–733, 2020.
[8] W. Bogaerts, S. Dwivedi, R. Jansen, X. Rottenberg, and M. S. Dahlem,
“A 2d pixelated optical beam scanner controlled by the laser wave-
length,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2020.


15

[9] P. Mu˜noz, G. Mic´o, L. A. Bru, D. Pastor, D. P´erez, J. D. Dom´enech,
J. Fern´andez, R. Ba˜nos, B. Gargallo, R. Alemany, A. M. S´anchez, J. M.
Cirera, R. Mas, and C. Dom´ınguez, “Silicon nitride photonic integra-
tion platforms for visible, near-infrared and mid-infrared applications,”
Sensors, vol. 17, no. 9, p. 2088, 2017.
[10] P. Mu˜noz, P. W. L. van Dijk, D. Geuzebroek, M. Geiselmann,
C. Dom´ınguez, A. Stassen, J. D. Dom´enech, M. Zervas, A. Leinse,
C. G. H. Roeloffzen, B. Gargallo, R. Ba˜nos, J. Fern´andez, G. M.
Cabanes, L. A. Bru, and D. Pastor, “Foundry developments toward
silicon nitride photonics from visible to the mid-infrared,” IEEE Journal
of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 1–13, Sep.
2019.
[11] T. Kim, P. Bhargava, C. V. Poulton, J. Notaros, A. Yaacobi, E. Timur-
dogan, C. Baiocco, N. Fahrenkopf, S. Kruger, T. Ngai et al., “A single-
chip optical phased array in a wafer-scale silicon photonics/cmos 3d-
integration platform,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 54,
no. 11, pp. 3061–3074, 2019.
[12] M. Raval, C. V. Poulton, and M. R. Watts, “Unidirectional waveguide
grating antennas with uniform emission for optical phased arrays,” Opt.
Lett., vol. 42, no. 13, pp. 2563–2566, Jul 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://ol.osa.org/abstract.cfm?URI=ol-42-13-2563
[13] C.
V.
Poulton,
A.
Yaacobi,
Z.
Su,
M.
J.
Byrd,
and
M.
R.
Watts, “Optical phased array with small spot size, high steering
range and grouped cascaded phase shifters,” in Advanced Photonics
2016 (IPR, NOMA, Sensors, Networks, SPPCom, SOF).
Optical
Society of America, 2016, p. IW1B.2. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.osapublishing.org/abstract.cfm?URI=IPRSN-2016-IW1B.2
[14] P. Munoz, D. Pastor, and J. Capmany, “Modeling and design of arrayed
waveguide gratings,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 661–674, April 2002.
[15] J. Zou, Z. Le, J. Hu, and J.-J. He, “Performance improvement
for silicon-based arrayed waveguide grating router,” Opt. Express,
vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 9963–9973, May 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-25-9-9963
[16] P. Mu˜noz, D. Pastor, J. Ben´ıtez, G. Mic´o, L. A. Bru, D. J.
Goodwill,
and
E.
Bernier,
“Optical-phased
array
beam-steering
using multi-input slab coupler in silicon nitride waveguides,” in
Optical Fiber Communication Conference (OFC) 2021.
Optical
Society of America, 2021, p. W1D.4. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.osapublishing.org/abstract.cfm?URI=OFC-2021-W1D.4
[17] C. V. Poulton, M. J. Byrd, M. Raval, Z. Su, N. Li, E. Timurdogan,
D. Coolbaugh, D. Vermeulen, and M. R. Watts, “Large-scale silicon
nitride nanophotonic phased arrays at infrared and visible wavelengths,”
Opt. Lett., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 21–24, Jan 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://opg.optica.org/ol/abstract.cfm?URI=ol-42-1-21
[18] Y. Li, B. Chen, Q. Na, Q. Xie, M. Tao, L. Zhang, Z. Zhi, Y. Li, X. Liu,
X. Luo, G. Lo, F. Gao, X. Li, and J. Song, “Wide-steering-angle high-
resolution optical phased array,” Photon. Res., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 2511–
2518, Dec 2021.
[19] L. A. Bru, D. Pastor, and P. Mu˜noz, “On the characterization of
integrated power splitters and waveguide losses using optical frequency
domain interferometry,” in 21st European Conference on Integrated
Optics (ECIO), Ghent, 24–26 April 2019, p. W.Po1.25.
[20] F. Morichetti, A. Melloni, and M. Martinelli, “Effects of polarization
rotation in optical ring-resonator-based devices,” Journal of lightwave
technology, vol. 24, no. 1, p. 573, 2006.
[21] E. Kleijn, P. J. Williams, N. D. Whitbread, M. J. Wale, M. K.
Smit, and X. J. Leijtens, “Sidelobes in the response of arrayed
waveguide gratings caused by polarization rotation,” Opt. Express,
vol. 20, no. 20, pp. 22 660–22 668, Sep 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.osapublishing.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-20-20-22660
[22] C. V. Poulton, A. Yaacobi, D. B. Cole, M. J. Byrd, M. Raval,
D. Vermeulen, and M. R. Watts, “Coherent solid-state lidar with silicon
photonic optical phased arrays,” Optics letters, vol. 42, no. 20, pp. 4091–
4094, 2017.
[23] D. Pierrottet, F. Amzajerdian, L. Petway, B. Barnes, G. Lockard, and
M. Rubio, “Linear fmcw laser radar for precision range and vector
velocity measurements,” MRS Online Proceedings Library (OPL), vol.
1076, 2008.
[24] L. Bi, J. Hu, P. Jiang, D. H. Kim, G. F. Dionne, L. C. Kimerling, and
C. Ross, “On-chip optical isolation in monolithically integrated non-
reciprocal optical resonators,” Nature Photonics, vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 758–
762, 2011.
[25] C. J. Karlsson and F. ˚A. Olsson, “Linearization of the frequency sweep
of a frequency-modulated continuous-wave semiconductor laser radar
and the resulting ranging performance,” Applied optics, vol. 38, no. 15,
pp. 3376–3386, 1999.

[26] X.
Zhang,
J.
Pouls,
and
M.
C.
Wu,
“Laser
frequency
sweep
linearization by iterative learning pre-distortion for fmcw lidar,” Opt.
Express, vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 9965–9974, Apr 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-27-7-9965
[27] M. Okano and C. Chong, “Swept source lidar: simultaneous fmcw
ranging and nonmechanical beam steering with a wideband swept
source,” Opt. Express, vol. 28, no. 16, pp. 23 898–23 915, Aug
2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.opticsexpress.org/abstract.cfm?
URI=oe-28-16-23898
[28] K.-J. Boller, A. van Rees, Y. Fan, J. Mak, R. E. M. Lammerink,
C. A. A. Franken, P. J. M. van der Slot, D. A. I. Marpaung, C. Fallnich,
J. P. Epping, R. M. Oldenbeuving, D. Geskus, R. Dekker, I. Visscher,
R. Grootjans, C. G. H. Roeloffzen, M. Hoekman, E. J. Klein, A. Leinse,
and R. G. Heideman, “Hybrid integrated semiconductor lasers with
silicon nitride feedback circuits,” Photonics, vol. 7, no. 1, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2304-6732/7/1/4
[29] M. A. Tran, D. Huang, and J. E. Bowers, “Tutorial on narrow linewidth
tunable semiconductor lasers using si/iii-v heterogeneous integration,”
APL Photonics, vol. 4, no. 11, p. 111101, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5124254
[30] M. A. Richards, J. Scheer, W. A. Holm, and W. L. Melvin, “Principles
of modern radar,” 2010.
[31] M. I. Skolnik, Introduction to radar systems.
McGraw-hill Singapore,
2001.
[32] P. Munoz, D. Pastor, J. Capmany, and S. Sales, “Analytical and numerical
analysis of phase and amplitude errors in the performance of arrayed
waveguide gratings,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum
Electronics, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 1130–1141, Nov 2002.
[33] M. H. P. Pfeiffer, C. Herkommer, J. Liu, T. Morais, M. Zervas,
M. Geiselmann, and T. J. Kippenberg, “Photonic damascene process for
low-loss, high-confinement silicon nitride waveguides,” IEEE Journal of
selected topics in quantum electronics, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1–11, 2018.


16

Pascual Mu˜noz (S’98, M’04, SM’13) was born in
Valencia, Spain on February 7th, 1975. He received
the Ingeniero de Telecomunicaci´on degree from Uni-
versitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia (UPV) in 1998. In
1999 he served as 1st Lieutenant in the Spanish
Airforce, while working as IT consultant for AIME
Instituto Tecnol´ogico. He received a Ph.D. degree in
photonics from UPV in 2003. He is currently Full
Professor at the Departamento de Comunicaciones,
and researcher at the Institute for Telecommunica-
tions and Multimedia Applications (ITEAM), both
at UPV. Dr. Mu˜noz runs a consolidated research line, started in 2005, on
prototyping Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs) in a technology agnostic
fashion, where PICs are designed in the best suited technology (Silicon-On-
Insulator, Indium Phosphide, Silica on Silicon, Silicon Nitride amongst other)
for each application. He has been involved in several European Commission
funded projects, being coordinator for integration on InP within the NoE
IST-EPIXNET. He has published over 50 papers in international refereed
journals and over 80 conference contributions. He is a member of the
Technical Programme Committees of the European Conference on Optical
Communications (ECOC) and the European Conference on Integrated Optics
(ECIO). Dr. Mu˜noz received the VPI Speed Up Photonics Award in 2002 for
innovative Fourier optics AWG with multimode interference (MMI) couplers
modeling, by Virtual Photonics Incorporated and IEEE Communications
Magazine. He was also granted the IEEE/LEOS Graduate Student Fellowship
Program in 2002. He received the extraordinary doctorate prize from UPV in
2006. From his research line, he co-founded the UPV spin-off company VLC
Photonics in 2011, where the PIC design know-how, expertise and tools have
been transferred, and he served as CEO from 2011 to 2013. Dr. Mu˜noz is a
Senior Member of the IEEE and a Senior Member of the OSA.

Daniel Pastor was born in Elda, Spain, in 1969.
His research career at photonics technologies started
at 1993 when joined the Optical Communication
Group as researcher and the Communication Depart-
ment at Universitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia (UPV)
as lecturer and PhD student. From 1994 to 1998 he
was a lecturer at the Telecommunications Engineer-
ing Faculty and he became an Associate Professor
in 1999. He obtained a PhD in Electrical Engi-
neering and Telecommunications by the Universitat
Polit`ecnica de Val`encia, Spain in 1996, with Thesis
topic “Redes de Difracci´on sobre Fibra ´Optica para Procesado de Se˜nales
Fot´onicas”. He is co-author of more than 225 papers in journals and inter-
national conferences in the fields of Optical Delay Line Filters, Fiber Bragg
Gratings, Microwave Photonics, WDM and SCM lightwave systems, Optical
Fiber Sensors, Silicon Nitride integrated devices for telecom and sensing,
and advanced characterization techniques as Optical Frequency Domain
Reflectrometry. His current technical interests include Photonic Integrated
Circuits for telecom, LiDAR and chemical and bio-sensing applications.

Luis A. Bru was born in Elche, Spain, in 1988.
He received the B.Sc degree in Physics in 2012,
and the M.Sc degree in Advanced Physics (specialty
on Photonics) in 2013, both at the Universitat de
Val`encia (UV), Valencia, Spain. He is currently
a post-doc researcher at Photonics Research Labs
(PRL), Universitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia (UPV),
where he has been enrolled from 2015 to date. In
2022, he received a Ph.D. degree in Photonics, where
Optical Frequency Domain Interferometry (OFDI)
technique is explored in the context of photonic
integrated circuits. With more than 25 co-authored publications in scientific
journals and conferences, he has been involved in research projects including
PIC topics such as silicon nitride integrated devices, integrated LiDAR, or
hybrid photonic integration. Beyond, his research interests expand also to
quantum mechanics and quantum information, having kept a collaboration
with nonlinear and quantum optics research group at UV from 2013 to 2017.

Gloria Mic´o graduated with a Bachelor of Physics
in 2011 at the University of Valencia (UV). She
obtained her M.Sc. in Photonics from the Poly-
technic University of Catalonia in 2013, developing
her Master thesis on biophotonics at Institute of
Photonics Sciences (ICFO). During 2015-2020 she
developed her Ph.D. thesis focused on the design
and characterization of photonic integrated spectro-
scopic sensors and their applications at Photonics
Research Lab (PRL) at the Universitat Polit`ecnica de
Val`encia (UPV). Since 2019, she has been working
on projects for private companies related to LIDAR technology. Nowadays,
she is working at UPVfab as facility manager.

Jesus Ben´ıtez obtained his Bachelor’s degree in
Telecommunications Engineering from the Univer-
sitat Polit`ecnica de Val`encia (UPV) in 2015. In
the same year, he joined the Photonics Research
Labs (PRL) from UPV as a P.hD. student. During
2015-2019, he developed his P.hD. in Microwave
Photonics applied to Low Coherence Interferometry.
From 2019-2021 he has been collaborating in private
funded projects related to photonic integrated cir-
cuits (PIC) as a post-doctoral researcher. Currently,
he is performing lab operations, testing and system
validation in iPronics Programmable Photonics. His interests cover PIC
characterization and microwave photonics.

Dominic Goodwill received the Ph.D.degree in
physics from Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh,
U.K., in 1991.He has been a Senior Principal En-
gineering the Advanced Photonics Team of Huawei
Canada since 2012. He is focused on data center
and transport applications of silicon photonics, and
optical technologies for 5G wireless networks. From
2004 to 2011, he was an applications software archi-
tect for Nortel and Genband corporations, creating IP
television solutions, and real-time serverapplications
deployed to millions of consumers. From 1997 to
2004,he led Nortel’s optical interconnects technology team, creating free-
space optics and a world-first 10GigE DWDM photonic switched Metro
network. He led the fiber optics standard for the Infiniband trade association.
He was chair for IEEE Optical Interconnects conference, and a program
committee member for Optical Fiber Communication conference. Previously,
at Heriot-Watt University and University of Colorado, he researched III-V
semiconductors and polymers for optical computing and interconnect. He has
more than40 issued patents

PLACE
PHOTO
HERE

Eric Bernier


