Ultrafast Melting of Superconductivity in an Iron-Based Superconductor

D. Nevola,1, ∗ N. Zaki,1 J.M. Tranquada,1 W.-G. Yin,1 G.D. Gu,1 Q. Li,1, 2 and P. D. Johnson1, †

1Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department,
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794-3800, USA
(Dated: September 20, 2022)

Intense debate has recently arisen regarding the photoinduced changes to the iron-chalcogenide
superconductors, including the enhancement of superconductivity and a metastable state. Here, by
employing high energy resolution, we directly observe the melting of superconductivity on ultrafast
timescales. We demonstrate a distinctly nonequilibrium response on short timescales, where the
gap fills in prior to the destruction of the superconducting peak, followed by a metastable response.
We propose that the former is due to pair phase decoherence and speculate that the latter is due to
the increase in double stripe correlations that are known to compete with superconductivity. Our
results add to exciting new developments on the iron-based superconductors, indicating that the
photoinduced metastable state possibly competes with superconductivity.

INTRODUCTION

The superconducting iron chalcogenides have recently
generated considerable attention with the recognition
that they bring together superconductivity, topology and
magnetism in a single material[1–3].
Superconductiv-
ity and topology offer the possibility of topological su-
perconductivity which in turn presents a platform for
hosting Majorana Fermions, potentially important in
qubit technology[4].
Magnetism and topology on the
other hand offer a platform for the Quantum Anoma-
lous Hall Effect (QAHE). However, superconductivity
and the QAHE represent competing states[5], and it is
therefore important that an understanding is obtained of
the different phenomena driving the system one way or
the other. The FeSe1−xTex (FST) phase diagram is com-
plex with the system displaying superconductivity for x
= 0 and antiferromagnetism for x = 1. At around x =
0.5 and higher the possibility of a topological state exist-
ing on the surface has also been predicted[6]. The chiral
nature of the latter topological surface state (TSS) has
been demonstrated using spin polarized photoemission
in one study[1] and incident circularly polarized light in
another[2]. It has also been shown that for x > 0.5 fer-
romagnetism develops in the surface region with the su-
perconducting transition[7]. The associated time reversal
symmetry breaking (TRSB) results in a gap at the Dirac
point in the TSS[3].
There have also been a number of studies of this ma-
terial using time-resolved pump-probe techniques where
the system is pumped out of equilibrium and the path-
way back to equilibrium provides further insights into the
complex interactions that take place between the elec-
trons and collective modes[8–13].
Such techniques also have been applied to the cuprate
superconductors for Fermi surface wave vectors rang-
ing from the nodal direction to the anti-nodal direction.
In general, these studies show a return to equilibrium
via different stages. First the non-equilibrium state de-

cays via e-e interactions on time scales of the order of
100 femtoseconds, establishing a state with a “pseudo-
equilibrium” Fermi-Dirac distribution[14–21]. At longer
time-scales, of the order of picoseconds, energy is sub-
sequently transferred to the lattice via electron-phonon
interactions. Studies have also concluded that with IR
excitation, the superconducting gap fills in, rather than
closing, due to loss of coherence of the superconduct-
ing condensate near the node[18, 22], while more ex-
otic behavior due to Mott physics may be present at the
antinode[23, 24].
Pump-probe studies of the Fe-chalcogenide supercon-
ductors show a different behavior.
These systems still
show the fast electron-electron equilibration but then the
material appears to enter a metastable phase that ex-
ists on the order of nanoseconds or longer[12, 13, 25].
The nature of this metastable behavior has been the
topic of considerable discussion.
Photoemission stud-
ies have speculated about various behaviors, ranging
from light-induced superconductivity[12] to light-induced
nematicity[25]. The concept of light-induced or enhanced
superconductivity appears to follow the pioneering stud-
ies on this subject in a number of materials by Cavalleri
and coworkers[26–29]. By the very nature of the experi-
mental probes, these studies have tended to focus on high
timing resolution. In the present study we take a dif-
ferent approach. Acknowledging that the light induced
state is metastable and therefore long lived, we reduce
the timing resolution and push for high energy resolution
in the probe beam. Such an approach offers immediate
and important new insights into the metastable state.
Not only can we now for the first time identify the co-
herent peak associated with the bulk superconductivity
in a time-resolved study of this material, but we clearly
demonstrate from its transient behavior that the incident
infrared (IR) pulse kills the superconductivity and that
it does not recover in the time scale associated with the
metastable phase.
In systems with closely competing quantum states, it

Typeset by REVTEX

arXiv:2203.00678v2  [cond-mat.supr-con]  17 Sep 2022


2

is known that an incident IR pulse can push the system
from one state to another. In the FST materials, it is
well established that two different spin or magnetic con-
figurations exist. The low temperature superconducting
phase is characterized by spin correlations of the single-
stripe type[30].
At slightly higher temperatures above
40 K the material adopts double-stripe spin correlations
that do not support superconductivity[31]. Equilibrium
studies have suggested that this second phase is closely
related to the electron coupling with the A1g phonon
mode, which is the out-of-plane oscillation of the chalco-
gen atoms[32].
Interestingly, the out-of-plane chalco-
gen position has been theoretically tied to the magnetic
phase, supporting the significant role of the electron-
A1g phonon coupling in determining the magnetic ground
state[33, 34]. Similarly, out-of-equilibrium studies have
shown that the pump-induced, metastable state is dis-
tinctly related to the A1g phonon mode, eventually lead-
ing to a renormalized chalcogen position[11, 13].
This
renormalized position shows an increased c-axis lattice
constant, consistent with increasing the value of x on
the FeSe1−xTex phase diagram[31]. It is then naturally
expected that this metastable state will lead to an asso-
ciated modification of the superconducting and magnetic
behavior. In the present study we find that supercon-
ductivity is not supported in this metastable phase, and
therefore postulate that it reflects a transition from the
superconducting single-stripe phase to the double-stripe
non-superconducting state, driven by photoinduced or-
bital fluctuations.

METHODS

Single crystals were grown by the unidirectional solid-
ification method. The superconducting properties of the
single crystals studied here were previously characterized
by magnetization measurements, having a superconduct-
ing transition temperature, Tc of 14.5 K[3].
The
time-resolved
ARPES
was
performed
at
Brookhaven National Laboratory using a SES-2002
analyzer.
The probe pulse was generated using the
output of a Coherent Vitara-T/RegA 9050 setup, which
consists of 70 fs long, 800 nm pulses at 250 kHz. A cas-
cade of nonlinear process was then used to produce the
fourth harmonic (200 nm). The fourth harmonic pulses
were finally passed through a monochromator before
entering the vacuum chamber. The 800 nm fundamental
pulses were used to pump the system. The energy and
time resolutions were 6.6 meV and 500 fs, respectively.
Space charge effects were carefully monitored before each
experiment. The temperature-dependent measurements
were acquired first at 5 K, then by increasing to 15 K,
and finally reproduced again at 5 K on the sample spot,
in order to ensure that the effect was reproducible over
a full temperature cycle. The results in this paper have

Figure 1.
Band structure of FeSe0.45Te0.55.
(a) and (b)
schematically show the band structures near the Γ point above
and below Tc, respectively, and are based off of the results in
References [1–3]
. The bands in blue and red represent bulk and surface
contributions. The green box is representative of the angular
window probed by the experiment. Static ARPES, probed
with p-polarized light at 15 K (c) and 5 K (d). Energy
distribution curves centered at k = 0 (e) and k = 0.03 ˚A (f).
The momentum integration windows were 0.03˚A−1 and
0.02˚A−1 for (e) and (f). Red and blue EDC’s represent
those at 15 K and 5 K, respectively. The data in (e) and (f)
has been smoothed for clarity.

been repeated on multiple cleaves.

The fits in Fig. 3c consisted of the sum of two exponen-
tially modified Gaussians (EMG’s), which is the analyt-
ical form for an exponential convolved with a Gaussian.
The decay time of the longer one was fixed to be 1 ns
in order to mimic the constant offset, and the width of
the Gaussian corresponds to the time resolution.
The
fits in Fig. 3d consisted of the sum of an error function
and EMG, where the widths in both correspond to the
resolution and were fixed to be the same.


3

BAND STRUCTURE

We start by reviewing the changes to the band struc-
ture near the Γ point though the superconducting tran-
sition, schematically shown in Fig. 1a,b (for a more
comprehensive understanding of the band structure, the
reader is directed to Refs.[1–3], from which the schemat-
ics in Figures 1a,b are based). We focus mainly on the
three bands closest to the zone center, which is com-
prised of two bulk bands and a topological surface state.
Above Tc, the outer-most bulk band forms a hole pocket
that crosses EF near ±0.15 ˚A−1[35]. At the zone cen-
ter is another hole-like band that reaches its maximum
∼
16 meV below EF [1–3]. These bulk bands are typ-
ically referred to as the α2 and α1 bands, respectively.
The topological surface state emerges from the top of
the α1 band to form a small, electron-like pocket[1–3].
Recent efforts have demonstrated that the band inver-
sion leading to the TSS results from the combination
of spin-orbit effects in the Te atoms and hybridization
from the Fe dxz/yz and Te pz orbitals[6, 36]. Theoreti-
cal efforts to reproduce the ground state band structure
highlight the role of strong electronic correlations that we
believe play a vital role in the metastable behavior ob-
served in time-angle resolved photoelectron spectroscopy
(trARPES), as will be discussed in more detail later. For
example, in one study, density functional theory requires
a strong renormalization to reproduce the experimentally
observed energy scales[36], while another study directly
shows that the inclusion of magnetic correlations over-
comes this discrepancy[35].

The system undergoes several changes upon cooling
through the superconducting transition (Fig. 1b). First,
superconducting gaps open up in both the bulk and sur-
face Fermi pockets, with values of 2∆ ∼ 4 and 3.6 meV
respectively[1, 37].
Additionally, a weakly dispersive
superconducting peak (SP) develops in the vicinity of
EF [37–39]. At the same time, a 5 meV gap opens at the
Dirac point in the TSS and has been used to associate
the onset of superconductivity with the formation of fer-
romagnetic order[3]. The polarization-dependent matrix
elements have proved a useful method for enhancing or
suppressing these bands. For example, s-polarized light
enhances the α1 band and the TSS, whereas p-polarized
light enhances the α2 band and the SP[3, 40].
As we
will argue later, such a strong polarization dependence
of the SP may reflect its sensitivity to orbital fluctu-
ations, which can be strongly altered by even a weak
photoexcitation. For the present study, we probe with
p-polarized light because we are interested in the pump-
induced changes to superconductivity.

RESULTS

Next, we demonstrate the high energy resolution of
the trARPES experimental configuration by showing the
static ARPES results above and below Tc respectively
(Figs. 1c,d). The low energy scales associated with the
bands of interest emphasize the requirement for such res-
olution. Above Tc, the α1 band is clearly visible. How-
ever, we note that the α2 band is outside of our momen-
tum window, which is shown schematically by the green
rectangles in Fig. 1a,b. We also observe the TSS as a
weak intensity plateau extending from the top of the α1
band. This is more clearly seen in the energy distribution
curve (EDC) through the Γ point in Fig. 1e, where the
green arrow indicates the Dirac point. Above the Dirac
point at 15 K, the plateau corresponding to the TSS is
visible.
As alluded to earlier and discussed elsewhere,
below TC two gaps appear in the spectral response, one
at the chemical potential associated with superconduc-
tivity and one at the Dirac point reflecting TRSB. We
are unable to clearly resolve the topological gap because
a better momentum resolution is required than available
in the present study. The superconducting gap is seen by
observing the shift of the leading edge midpoints, shown
by the black ticks in figure 1e,f, by 2.5 meV[3].
The
formation of the superconducting gap results in the de-
velopment of a peak just below the Fermi level. Finally,
there is a subtle shift towards higher binding energy of
the α1 band that occurs in conjunction with the forma-
tion of the gap at the Dirac point (Fig. 1e). All of these
changes are also made evident when applying the Lucy-
Richardson deconvolution algorithm [41][see Supplemen-
tal]. Having established the ability to resolve the low-
energy effects associated with superconductivity, we now
turn to the pump-induced modifications to the supercon-
ducting band structure.

Figure 2a shows the k-integrated changes to the band
structure below Tc upon pumping with an infrared laser
pulse. Two features are observed that are absent when
pumped above Tc (Fig.2b): 1) an intensity increase just
above EF and 2) a sharp intensity drop just below EF .
As these changes are not observed above the supercon-
ducting transition, they must be associated with super-
conductivity. Examination of the momentum-integrated
EDC’s in Fig. 2c shows that these intensity changes cor-
respond to the filling of the superconducting gap, and
destruction of the SP, respectively. These changes are
consistent with the static results in Fig. 1 and indicate
that superconductivity is melted on ultrafast timescales.
Identifying the mechanisms responsible for this phe-
nomenon, as well as its recovery, is a novel pathway to-
wards understanding iron-based superconductivity. We
now turn to the time dependence for further insight into
these processes.

Figure 2d shows that after the initial melting of super-


4

Figure 2.
Photoinduced changes to the k-integrated band
structure below (a) and above (b) Tc at an incident pump
fluence of 1.2 µJ/cm2.
Red and blue indicate an intensity
increase and decrease respectively.
(c) Energy distribution
curves at various delay times.
(d) Intensity dynamics just
above and below EF out to long delay times. The data was
averaged over a 7 meV energy range. For clarity, the data be-
low EF was offset and normalized to match the change above
EF .

conductivity, the changes persist up to > 100 ps without
showing any clear sign of recovery. However, we note that
slight deviations from a constant offset after the first few
picoseconds can be attributed to noise, slight drift of the
pump beam, or acoustic oscillations that have been ob-
served to occur on these timescales[8]. This is also seen
when comparing the k-integrated EDC’s at 9 ps to that
at 100 ps in Fig. 2c. Indeed, similar long time behav-
ior has been observed in other optical experiments that
have used similar pump fluences to the ones used in this
work[8]. This lack of decay on ∼100 ps timescales is in-
triguing when considering the metastable behavior that
has attracted recent interest[12, 13, 25]. Importantly, the
main difference between those studies and the present
one is the pump fluence used (much lower in the present
case).
Furthermore, the linear fluence dependence of
the metastable changes with no threshold establishes
this long-lived behavior as a derivative of the ground
state, meaning that its existence owes to the interactions
present in the ground state[11].
Thus, the decay bot-
tleneck that is ultimately responsible for the metastable
behavior must still be present at the low fluences used
in this work. We believe that the reduction of supercon-
ductivity is a property of the pump-induced electronic
redistribution, and the long-lived behavior results from
the same mechanism as the well-reported metastability
in FST when pumped at higher fluence[11–13, 25]. How-
ever, it is also expected that pumping a superconductor
at T < Tc naturally leads to the melting of superconduc-
tivity on picosecond timescales due to equilibrium heat-
ing from the incident laser pulse. The dynamics that we

Figure 3. Fluence-dependent dynamics at short delay times.
(a) EDC’s before (blue) and after (red) the pump pulse at
4 µJ/cm2.
(b) Same as (a), but with a pump fluence of
2 µJ/cm2. The dashed black line is the red curve in (a) for
comparison. Dynamics of the momentum integrated, differ-
ence images just above (c) and below (d) EF that correspond
to the superconducting gap and quasiparticle peak, respec-
tively. Solid lines correspond to fits.

observe at shorter delays do not show the expected pi-
cosecond recovery typically associated with lattice heat-
ing and must therefore correspond to time-dependent
changes to the spectral function, A(k, ω, t).
We consider the results for two different fluences. Fig-
ure 3 shows the dynamics at shorter delays for two dif-
ferent pump fluences. At the higher fluence of 4 µJ/cm2,
the superconducting peak is destroyed, as shown by the
difference between the EDC’s at negative and positive de-
lay times recorded away from the zone center (Fig, 3a).
However, most of the reduction is achieved with the lower
fluence of 2 µJ/cm2 (Fig. 3c), which is made clear when
comparing the off Γ EDC at +5 ps (red curve) to the
same EDC at 4 µJ/cm2 (dashed black curve). Compar-
ing the amplitudes at +5 ps for the two fluences allows
us to estimate the complete disappearance of the SP at
a critical fluence of 3 µJ/cm2 (assuming a linear depen-
dence on fluence).
Figures 3c,d, show the intensity dynamics at the indi-
cated fluences above and below EF , respectively. Care-
ful analysis of the dynamical data reveals rapid changes
equal to the resolution, followed by fluence-dependent
picosecond dynamics. The initial change in signal is at-
tributed to a combination of the direct transitions asso-
ciated with the pump, and subsequent electron-electron
interactions that are expected to be reasonably strong in
the iron-based superconductors. Although we are only
able to determine an upper bound to this timescale to
be 500 fs due to our resolution, reflectivity studies have
shown that these initial changes occur within 100 fs[8, 9].
At the higher fluence, the positive signal (orange mark-
ers in Fig. 3c) shows a partial recovery on a timescale of


5

Figure 4. (a)Time dependent energy profiles through the data
in figure 2a at delay times of 0.5 ps, 9 ps and 100 ps. The
pump fluence used was 1.2 µJ/cm2. (b) Modeled difference
curves as described in the text. The red curve includes only
a finite Γp and the green curve includes both a finite Γp and
decreased spectral function amplitude, as further described in
the supplementary information.

3 ± 1.5 ps, while the negative signal (orange markers in
Fig. 3d) shows an initial change equal to the resolution
followed by no observable recovery. We interpret the 3 ps
timescale as the dissipation of heat into the lattice. How-
ever, that this same timescale is not observed in the lower
fluence means that this energy dissipation corresponds to
excess heat after superconducting order has been melted.
Similarly, temperature dependent reflectivity studies on
FST show a similar picosecond timescale that disappears
near Tc[8, 9].
The dynamics of the SP (Figure 3d) tell a slightly dif-
ferent story. Both fluences probed show no observed re-
covery on picosecond timescales. With the higher fluence,
it would be expected that we would not observe the reap-
pearance of the SP if there is excess energy after melting
superconductivity. This can also be understood in the
context of the two-temperature model with a final lattice
temperature greater than Tc[42]. If the melting of super-
conductivity was thermal, we would observe a recovery
of the SP on a ∼ 3 ps timescale, similar to that above.
Furthermore, it would be obvious since the SP is the

brightest feature in the difference spectrum in figure 2a,
and is particularly sensitive to the temperature in equi-
librium. Bonavolanta et al. also determined the temper-
ature to only increase by a maximum of 3 K when using
a fluence several times those used in this work, making a
thermal heating explanation unlikely[9]. Closer examina-
tion of the lower fluence data reveals an initial decrease
equal to the resolution followed by a further decrease on
a timescale of 0.8 ± 0.5 ps. This second timescale sug-
gests that another scattering mechanism is involved in
the melting of superconductivity as will be discussed in
the next section.
Additionally, since we remain below
Tc and observe no recovery of the condensate within the
100 ps measurement window, we conclude that the melt-
ing of superconductivity is metastable.
To further emphasize the behavior at short delays, we
display the difference EDCs (figure 4a), which are energy
profiles through the data in figure 2a. For the intensity
loss, we see an evolution in going from the shortest delay
at 0.5 ps to 9 ps. However, for the intensity gain, we do
not see the same evolution. After the maximum inten-
sity change is reached within the first 0.5 ps, it remains
constant to within the noise. This means that at short
delays, the filling of the gap occurs first on timescales of
< 500 fs.

DISCUSSION

The most obvious implication of the results in this
work is to demonstrate that superconductivity is melted
on ultrafast timescales and does not return within
the measured time window.
This direct demonstra-
tion contradicts the conclusions in two recent works
that have suggested enhanced superconductivity due to
photoexcitation[12, 43]. One is an all-optical study that
suggests a temporary, picosecond, enhancement[43], and
another is a trARPES study with lower energy resolution
that associates superconductivity with the metastable
state[12].
Interestingly, the former study does clearly
demonstrate nonequilibrium behavior at short delays.
Isoyama et al.
found an increase in both the real
and imaginary parts to the conductivity within the
first 1-2 ps, contradicting equilibrium measurements that
showed an increase and decrease in the real and imagi-
nary parts to the optical conductivity, respectively, with
increasing temperature[43]. Additionally, these changes
occur on an energy scale < 2 meV, less than the su-
perconducting gap, 2∆, and the same magnitude of the
observed leading edge midpoint shift(see Supplemental).
One possible interpretation is an increase in the size of
the condensate, as they suggested, but this would mani-
fest as an increased spectral weight within the supercon-
ducting peaks on either side of the Fermi level, which
we do not observe.
Alternatively, we propose the de-
struction of phase coherence among the Cooper pairs


6

caused by their scattering with nonequilibrium bosonic
excitations[22]. This mechanism may explain both the
increases to the real[44] and imaginary[45] parts of the
optical conductivity. It can be modeled by the inclusion
of a finite pair scattering rate in the self energy that de-
scribes a superconductor[22, 46, 47]:

Σ(ω) = −iΓs +
∆2

ω + iΓp
.
(1)

Here, ω is the energy, ∆ is the gap amplitude, Γs is
the single particle scattering rate, and Γp is the pair
scattering rate, indicative of pair scattering with phase
fluctuations[22].
An increase in Γp increases the spec-
tral weight inside the gap, and was recently found to
describe the nonequilibrium changes to the near-nodal
spectral function in an optimally doped cuprate[22].
To provide a more quantitative picture, we modeled
the difference curves by using the self-energy in equa-
tion 1 (see Supplemental for more details). First, we show
the experimental data at three delay times in figure 4a
(the data correspond to energy profiles at the specified
delay times selected from the data in figure 2a). The am-
plitudes of the positive and negative signals are nearly
identical in the 0.5 ps (resolution limited) data, while
the negative signal grows on a picosecond timescale, and
remains constant for > 100 ps. As shown in figure 4b,
including a finite Γp, while keeping all other parameters
constant, is enough to reproduce the experimental data
at 0.5 ps. The data at longer delays was reproduced by
reducing the amplitude of the spectral function, which
we think resembles the breaking of Cooper pairs. That
we are able to reproduce the curve shape at 0.5 ps by
including the pair scattering rate, which is a nonequilib-
rium parameter, supports our hypothesis that the pump
induces phase fluctuations caused by electronic correla-
tions.
The photoinduced changes that we observed contain
three timescales that offer further insight into the micro-
scopic mechanisms responsible for the ultrafast melting
of superconductivity. First, the gap filling occurs within
our resolution. This suggests that the phase fluctuations
are of electronic origin. The fluctuations may be caused
by the scattering of Cooper pairs with nonequilibrium
bosons[22]. We speculate that these bosons are of the
form of magnetic excitations. Second, the persistent de-
crease in the SP occurs on a picosecond timescale, We
attribute this to the breaking of pairs by optical phonons
that are generated upon the decay of high energy quasi-
particles. A similar, temperature dependent, timescale
was observed in time-resolved reflectivity[9] and was also
ascribed to phonons. The final timescale is the recovery
of the superconducting features, which are longer than
our temporal window, indicating that the changes men-
tioned above are metastable. The key question is why

they are metastable, for which we offer two possible ex-
planations that are based off of our observed timescales.
It is reasonable to assume that the mechanisms respon-
sible for melting superconductivity also play a role in its
recovery. As mentioned above, we observe electronic and
phononic timescales that contribute to the melting of su-
perconductivity.
The first explanation is that pairs are reformed by the
absorption of low energy (acoustic) phonons, which can
occur on nanosecond timescales. Indeed, this was used to
explain the recovery of superconductivity after photoex-
citation in the BCS superconductor MgB2, which has
similar gap sizes to the present material[48]. However,
two main issues with this explanation are that (1) even
in the case of MgB2, some recombination is observed on a
100 ps timescale, and (2) it neglects the role of electronic
and magnetic correlations that are known to play a key
role in mediating iron-based superconductivity[31].
The second possibility is that the pairs are prevented
from recombining because of the disruption to the cor-
relations caused by the electronic redistribution. For ex-
ample, direct excitations can occur at different locations
throughout the Brillouin zone.
The natural pathways
for relaxation may cause most holes to relax to the Γ
point, and most electrons to the M point in the Bril-
louin zone. This redistribution of particles modifies the
correlations that are key to mediating iron-based super-
conductivity. Though it is difficult to narrow down the
specific correlations that would be impacted, examin-
ing the changes that occur at higher excitation densities,
where the changes are more apparent, may offer further
insight. Thus, we turn to recent works that have iden-
tified a photoinduced metastable state in FST for clues.
Properties of this metastable state include the renormal-
izations of the band structure and chalcogen positions
that resemble the ground state effects of increasing the
Te concentration[11, 13, 25]. We therefore hypothesize
that the photoinduced changes to the correlations are
similar to those in higher Te concentrations.
At higher Te concentrations,
the correlations fa-
vor double stripe magnetism.
Additionally,
these
magnetic
correlations
are
known
to
compete
with
superconductivity[31]. We therefore hypothesize that the
photoexcitation causes an orbital redistribution that fa-
vors double stripe magnetic correlations, which act to
melt superconductivity.
Indeed, the sensitivity of su-
perconductivity to the orbital redistribution is supported
by electron diffraction work on Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2 that
directly images the orbital configuration[49], as well as
the strong polarization-dependent matrix elements of the
SP observed in ARPES[2, 3] and scanning tunneling
microscopy[50] because they demonstrate the strong or-
bital dependence of the superconducting bands. Addi-
tionally, theoretical studies have demonstrated how the
subtle balance among the band filling, the nearest and
next-nearest superexchange interactions, and the Hund’s


7

coupling strength, which may be particularly sensitive
to a pump-induced orbital redistribution, determine the
magnetic ground state[33, 34].

CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we directly show, for the first time, the
pump-induced changes to the electronic band structure
of FST below Tc.
Our observations show a reduction
of two features that are directly associated with super-
conductivity, namely the superconducting peak and gap.
We observe changes both on electronic and picosecond
timescales, and find that they are metastable, lasting
for > 100 ps. Close examination of the initial changes
to the band structure are indicative of nonequilibrium
behavior that shows the filling of the superconducting
gap occurring before the reduction of the SP. We hy-
pothesize that the orbital fluctuations directly induced
by the pump-induced electronic redistribution are linked
to double stripe magnetic correlations known to compete
with superconductivity. A better theoretical understand-
ing of the precise electronic excitations and relaxation
pathways would be crucial in understanding the changes
to the orbital occupancy that results from the pump.
Furthermore, experiments aimed at directly imaging the
photoinduced orbital and magnetic changes, as well as
trARPES with high energy resolution extending out to
the edge of the Brillouin zone, would be needed in or-
der to corroborate this picture, and may ultimately yield
clues to understanding the interactions that lead to iron-
based superconductivity.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We acknowledge Chris Homes, Mengkun Liu, and Ab-
hay Narayan Pasupathy for insightful discussions. Work
at Brookhaven National Laboratory was supported by
the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Of-
fice of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-
SC0012704.

∗ nevola@bnl.gov
† pdj@bnl.gov

[1] P.
Zhang,
K.
Yaji,
T.
Hashimoto,
Y.
Ota,
T. Kondo,
K. Okazaki,
Z. Wang,
J. Wen,
G. D.
Gu, H. Ding,
and S. Shin, Science 360, 182 (2018),
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aan4596.

[2] J. D. Rameau, N. Zaki, G. D. Gu, P. D. Johnson, and
M. Weinert, Phys. Rev. B 99, 205117 (2019).

[3] N. Zaki,
G. Gu,
A. Tsvelik,
C. Wu,
and P. D.
Johnson,
Proceedings
of
the
National
Academy
of
Sciences
118
(2021),
10.1073/pnas.2007241118,
https://www.pnas.org/content/118/3/e2007241118.full.pdf.

[4] D. Wang, L. Kong, P. Fan, H. Chen, S. Zhu, W. Liu,
L. Cao, Y. Sun, S. Du, J. Schneeloch, R. Zhong, G. Gu,
L. Fu, H. Ding, and H.-J. Gao, Science 362, 333 (2018),
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.aao1797.

[5] X. Wu, S. B. Chung, C. Liu, and E.-A. Kim, Phys. Rev.
Research 3, 013066 (2021).

[6] G. Xu, B. Lian, P. Tang, X.-L. Qi,
and S.-C. Zhang,
Physical review letters 117, 047001 (2016).

[7] N. J. McLaughlin, H. Wang, M. Huang, E. Lee-Wong,
L. Hu, H. Lu, G. Q. Yan, G. Gu, C. Wu, Y.-Z. You,
and C. R. Du, Nano Letters 21, 7277 (2021), pMID:
34415171, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.1c02424.

[8] C. W. Luo, I. H. Wu, P. C. Cheng, J.-Y. Lin, K. H. Wu,
T. M. Uen, J. Y. Juang, T. Kobayashi, D. A. Chareev,
O. S. Volkova, and A. N. Vasiliev, Physical Review Let-
ters 108, 257006 (2012).

[9] C. Bonavolont`a, L. Parlato, G. P. Pepe, C. de Lisio,
M. Valentino, E. Bellingeri, I. Pallecchi, M. Putti, and
C. Ferdeghini, Superconductor Science and Technology
26, 075018 (2013).

[10] S. Yang, J. A. Sobota, D. Leuenberger, A. F. Kemper,
J. J. Lee, F. T. Schmitt, W. Li, R. G. Moore, P. S. Kirch-
mann, and Z.-X. Shen, Nano letters 15, 4150 (2015).

[11] S. Gerber, S.-L. Yang, D. Zhu, H. Soifer, J. A. Sobota,
S. Rebec, J. J. Lee, T. Jia, B. Moritz, C. Jia, A. Gau-
thier, Y. Li, D. Leuenberger, Y. Zhang, L. Chaix, W. Li,
H. Jang, J.-S. Lee, M. Yi, G. L. Dakovski, S. Song, J. M.
Glownia, S. Nelson, K. W. Kim, Y.-D. Chuang, Z. Hus-
sain, R. G. Moore, T. P. Devereaux, W.-S. Lee, P. S.
Kirchmann, and Z.-X. Shen, Science 357, 71 (2017).

[12] T. Suzuki, T. Someya, T. Hashimoto, S. Michimae,
M. Watanabe, M. Fujisawa, T. Kanai, N. Ishii, J. Itatani,
S. Kasahara, Y. Matsuda, T. Shibauchi, K. Okazaki, and
S. Shin, Communications Physics 2, 115 (2019).

[13] L. X. Yang, G. Rohde, Y. J. Chen, W. J. Shi, Z. K.
Liu, F. Chen, Y. L. Chen, K. Rossnagel, and M. Bauer,
Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenom-
ena 250, 147085 (2021).

[14] L. Perfetti, P. A. Loukakos, M. Lisowski, U. Bovensiepen,
H. Eisaki,
and M. Wolf, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 197001
(2007).

[15] R. Cort´es, L. Rettig, Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, M. Wolf, and
U. Bovensiepen, Physical Review Letters 107, 097002
(2011).

[16] C. L. Smallwood, J. P. Hinton, C. Jozwiak, W. Zhang,
J. D. Koralek, H. Eisaki, D.-H. Lee, J. Orenstein,
and
A. Lanzara, Science 336, 1137 (2012).

[17] S. Parham, H. Li, T. J. Nummy, J. A. Waugh, X. Q.
Zhou, J. Griffith, J. Schneeloch, R. D. Zhong, G. D. Gu,
and D. S. Dessau, Phys. Rev. X 7, 041013 (2017).

[18] C. Piovera, Z. Zhang, M. d’Astuto, A. Taleb-Ibrahimi,
E. Papalazarou, M. Marsi, Z. Li, H. Raffy, and L. Per-
fetti, Physical Review B 91, 224509 (2015).

[19] J. Rameau, S. Freutel, L. Rettig, I. Avigo, M. Ligges,
Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki, J. Schneeloch, R. Zhong, Z. Xu,
et al., Physical Review B 89, 115115 (2014).

[20] T. Konstantinova, J. D. Rameau, A. H. Reid, O. Ab-
durazakov, L. Wu, R. Li, X. Shen, G. Gu, Y. Huang,
L. Rettig, et al., Science advances 4, eaap7427 (2018).

[21] J. Rameau, S. Freutel, A. Kemper, M. A. Sentef, J. Freer-
icks, I. Avigo, M. Ligges, L. Rettig, Y. Yoshida, H. Eisaki,
J. Schneeloch, R. Zhong, Z. Xu, G. Gu, P. Johnson, and
U. Bovensiepen, Nature communications 7, 1 (2016).


8

[22] F. Boschini, E. H. da Silva Neto, E. Razzoli, M. Zonno,
S. Peli, R. P. Day, M. Michiardi, M. Schneider, B. Zwart-
senberg, P. Nigge, R. D. Zhong, J. Schneeloch, G. D. Gu,
S. Zhdanovich, A. K. Mills, G. Levy, D. J. Jones, C. Gi-
annetti,
and A. Damascelli, Nature Materials 17, 416
(2018).

[23] G. L. Dakovski, T. Durakiewicz, J.-X. Zhu, P. S. Risebor-
ough, G. Gu, S. M. Gilbertson, A. Taylor,
and G. Ro-
driguez, Structural Dynamics 2, 054501 (2015).

[24] F. Cilento, G. Manzoni, A. Sterzi, S. Peli, A. Ronchi,
A. Crepaldi,
F. Boschini,
C. Cacho,
R. Chapman,
E. Springate, H. Eisaki, M. Greven, M. Berciu, A. F.
Kemper, A. Damascelli, M. Capone, C. Giannetti, and
F. Parmigiani, Science Advances 4, eaar1998 (2018),
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.aar1998.

[25] L.
Fanfarillo,
D.
Kopi´c,
A.
Sterzi,
G.
Manzoni,
A. Crepaldi, D. T. Payne, W. Bronsch, V. Tsurkan,
D. Croitori, J. Deisenhofer, F. Parmigiani, M. Capone,
and F. Cilento, Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Re-
lated Phenomena 250, 147090 (2021).

[26] R. Mankowsky, A. Subedi, M. F¨orst, S. O. Mariager,
M. Chollet, H. Lemke, J. S. Robinson, J. M. Glownia,
M. P. Minitti, A. Frano, et al., Nature 516, 71 (2014).

[27] M. Mitrano, A. Cantaluppi, D. Nicoletti, S. Kaiser,
A. Perucchi, S. Lupi, P. Di Pietro, D. Pontiroli, M. Ricc`o,
S. R. Clark, et al., Nature 530, 461 (2016).

[28] R. Mankowsky, M. Fechner, M. F¨orst, A. von Hoegen,
J. Porras, T. Loew, G. Dakovski, M. Seaberg, S. M¨oller,
G. Coslovich, et al., Structural Dynamics 4, 044007
(2017).

[29] M. Budden, T. Gebert, M. Buzzi, G. Jotzu, E. Wang,
T. Matsuyama, G. Meier, Y. Laplace, D. Pontiroli,
M. Ricc`o, et al., Nature Physics 17, 611 (2021).

[30] Y. Li, N. Zaki, V. O. Garlea, A. T. Savici, D. Fobes,
Z. Xu, F. Camino, C. Petrovic, G. Gu, P. D. Johnson,
J. M. Tranquada, and I. A. Zaliznyak, Nature Materials
20, 1221 (2021).

[31] J. M. Tranquada, G. Xu,
and I. A. Zaliznyak, Journal
of Physics: Condensed Matter 32, 374003 (2020).

[32] Z. K. Liu, R.-H. He, D. H. Lu, M. Yi, Y. L. Chen,
M. Hashimoto, R. G. Moore, S.-K. Mo, E. A. Nowadnick,
J. Hu, T. J. Liu, Z. Q. Mao, T. P. Devereaux, Z. Hussain,
and Z.-X. Shen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 037003 (2013).

[33] W.-G. Yin, C.-C. Lee, and W. Ku, Physical review let-
ters 105, 107004 (2010).

[34] W.-G. Yin, C.-C. Lee, and W. Ku, Superconductor Sci-
ence and Technology 25, 084007 (2012).

[35] P. D. Johnson, H.-B. Yang, J. D. Rameau, G. D. Gu, Z.-
H. Pan, T. Valla, M. Weinert, and A. V. Fedorov, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 114, 167001 (2015).

[36] H. Lohani, T. Hazra, A. Ribak, Y. Nitzav, H. Fu, B. Yan,
M. Randeria, and A. Kanigel, Physical Review B 101,
245146 (2020).

[37] K. Okazaki, Y. Ito, Y. Ota, Y. Kotani, T. Shimo-
jima, T. Kiss, S. Watanabe, C.-T. Chen, S. Niitaka,
T. Hanaguri, H. Takagi, A. Chainani, and S. Shin, Sci-
entific Reports 4, 4109 (2014).

[38] Y. Lubashevsky, E. Lahoud, K. Chashka, D. Podolsky,
and A. Kanigel, Nature Physics 8, 309 (2012).

[39] T. Hashimoto, Y. Ota, A. Tsuzuki, T. Nagashima,
A. Fukushima, S. Kasahara, Y. Matsuda, K. Matsuura,
Y. Mizukami, T. Shibauchi, S. Shin,
and K. Okazaki,
Science Advances 6, eabb9052 (2020).

[40] S. Rinott, K. B. Chashka, A. Ribak, E. D. L. Rienks,
A. Taleb-Ibrahimi, P. L. Fevre, F. Bertran, M. Randeria,
and A. Kanigel, Science Advances 3, e1602372 (2017).

[41] J. Rameau, H.-B. Yang,
and P. Johnson, Journal of
Electron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 181, 35
(2010), proceedings of International Workshop on Strong
Correlations and Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spec-
troscopy 2009.

[42] P. B. Allen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 1460 (1987).
[43] K. Isoyama,
N. Yoshikawa,
K. Katsumi,
J. Wong,
N. Shikama, Y. Sakishita, F. Nabeshima, A. Maeda, and
R. Shimano, Communications Physics 4, 1 (2021).

[44] X. Xi, J. Hwang, C. Martin, D. Tanner,
and G. Carr,
Physical review letters 105, 257006 (2010).

[45] Y. Lemonik and A. Mitra, Physical Review B 98, 214514
(2018).

[46] H.-J. Kwon and A. T. Dorsey, Physical Review B 59,
6438 (1999).

[47] M. Franz and A. Millis, Physical Review B 58, 14572
(1998).

[48] J. Demsar, R. Averitt, A. Taylor, V. Kabanov, W. Kang,
H. Kim, E. Choi, and S. Lee, Physical review letters 91,
267002 (2003).

[49] C. Ma, L. Wu, W.-G. Yin, H. Yang, H. Shi, Z. Wang,
J. Li, C. Homes,
and Y. Zhu, Physical review letters
112, 077001 (2014).

[50] U. R. Singh, S. C. White, S. Schmaus, V. Tsurkan,
A. Loidl, J. Deisenhofer, and P. Wahl, Science Advances
1, e1500206 (2015).


