Enhanced thermo-optical response by means of 
anapole excitation 

JAVIER GONZÁLEZ-COLSA1, JUAN D. OLARTE-PLATA2, FERNANDO BRESME2, 
PABLO ALBELLA1,* 

1Group of Optics, Department of Applied Physics, University of Cantabria, 39005, Santander, Spain. 
2Department of Chemistry, Molecular Sciences Research Hub, Imperial College London, W12 0BZ UK. 

Corresponding Author 

*pablo.albella@unican.es 

High refractive index dielectric nanostructures offer a versatile platform to control light-matter interaction at the 
nanoscale as they can easily support electric and magnetic modes with low losses. An additional property that 
makes them extraordinary is that they can support low radiative modes, so-called anapole modes. In this work, 
we propose a spectrally tunable anapole nanoheater based on the use of a dielectric anapole resonator able to 
amplify ten-fold the thermal response of a plasmonic nanoheater. This would allow the use of lower light 
intensities to achieve striking heating effects.  As proof of concept, we perform a detailed study of the thermo-
plasmonic response of a gold nanoring used as heating source and a silicon disk, designed to support anapole 
modes, located in its center acting as anapolar resonator. Furthermore, we utilize the anapole excitation to easily 
shift the thermal response of these structures from SWIR to the NIR range.  

 

KEYWORS: Thermoplasmonics, anapole, nanoheater, thermal conductivity, anapole nanoheater. 

All-dielectric nanostructures based on high refractive index (HRI) materials offer the 
possibility to efficiently confine and manipulate light at the nanoscale. [1–3]. The wide variety 
of possible optical modes across the visible (VIS)[4], near-infrared (NIR)[5] and mid-infrared 
(MIR)[6] have been exploited in a wide variety of applications[7], such as electric and magnetic 
hotspot generation[8], strong metal/dielectric coupling[9], Purcell enhancement[10], highly 
directional scattering[11] or resonant absorption among others. Conversely, plasmonic 
nanoparticles present high resistive losses enabling a rapid and remarkable temperature 
increment of their surroundings. This effect is enhanced at the plasmonic resonance which is 
determined by the free-electron charge-density features (Frölich condition), the particle shape 
and size. The sudden electron-density oscillations lead to an electric field enhancement that 
decays rapidly with the distance to the particle surface. These physical effects have been 
exploited in a wide range of applications such as sensing [12,13], SERS, SEIRA or photoinduced 
heating [14–19] including photothermal therapies (PTT) [20–22]. However, when the 
nanostructures become of the order of the excitation wavelength, the description of their 
electromagnetic response requires three multipolar series: the magnetic, electric, and toroidal 
[23,24]. A toroidal dipole in combination with an electric one can produce a non-radiating 


charge current configuration known as dynamic anapole [25–29]. This state appears for a 
particular wavelength where the fields radiated by the toroidal and electric dipoles cancel each 
other via destructive interference. An ideal anapole excitation does not emit or absorb, and 
consequently it cannot be detected in the far field. However, it results in a strong electric field 
enhancement. This enhancement has been used to develop and improve optical techniques 
such as Raman scattering[30], refractive index sensing [31,32], narrowband absorption[33] 
or even optothermal enhancement via lossy dielectrics [34–36]. The study of anapole mode 
excitations has attracted interest recently, with current efforts directed to boost its efficiency 
beyond the near-field limit. This enhanced efficiency can be achieved with single all dielectric 
ring-disk structures. However, to the best of our knowledge previous studies have disregarded 
the heating potential of metal-dielectric structures assisted by anapole modes, only focusing 
on the self-induced heating due to the low intrinsic absorption in HRI materials[34], that 
require excitation power densities that go beyond the conventional ones (up to 24 mW/m2).  
In this work, we propose a spectrally tunable anapole nanoheater able to amplify ten-fold the 
thermal response of a plasmonic nanoheater based on the use of a dielectric anapole resonator. 
This would allow the use of lower light intensities to achieve striking heating effects. To show 
this proof of concept, we consider a gold nanoring structure, as heating source. This 
nanoparticle geometry provides enhanced heating [20]. Then, we locate the HRI dielectric 
disk, designed to support anapole modes in its center. The thermal amplifying mechanism 
emerges from the excitation of the anapole mode that develops inside the nanoring which 
confines the electric field for times longer that it would be possible in absence of the anapole 
mode [29]. The plasmonic ring surrounding the anapole resonator absorbs this local electric 
field, consequently suffering a strong amplification of its resistive losses and its conversion 
into heat.  We also present a simple approach to achieve high temperatures in the NIR, a 
spectral region of particular interest in biomedical applications.  
 

We have used COMSOL Multiphysics to perform all the calculations in combination with 

numerical FDTD (Finite Difference Time Domain). The heat transport calculations were 
performed in two steps [37,38]. The first consists on solving the electromagnetic problem to 
obtain the volumetric distribution of the resistive losses, that is, we solve the Maxwell 
equations with the RF COMSOL suite. To do so, we have illuminated the hybrid system with 
linearly polarized light, considering a free tetrahedral mesh with element sizes controlled by 
the excitation wavelength to guarantee a high element density and reliable curvatures when 
needed. On the other hand, to consider the heat dissipation, we used a heat flux node across 
the outer boundaries, considering a heat transfer coefficient, dependent on the geometry and 
the ambient conditions. We have considered conduction as the main transfer mechanism as 
we are considering small structures in a stationary fluid. We also neglect the effect of the 
interfacial thermal conductance since this parameter would increase the inner temperature 
without changing the external one, thus, heating up the fluid similarly[39]. All the thermal 
properties involved in this study (density, specific heat and thermal conductivity) were taken 
from the COMSOL Multiphysics material database. Figure 1a depicts a schematic of the anapole 
excitation produced within a silicon disk of 340 nm radius when illuminated at a wavelength 
≈ 1300 nm [40]. It can be observed how the electric field lines follow the toroidal geometry 
shown in the upper inset. The electric field circulation produces the distinct anapole pattern 
(shown in the lower inset) that can be characterized by a sudden drop in the scattering spectra 
accompanied by a lack of absorption.  


 

Figure 1: a). Scattering (solid line) and absorption (dotted line) cross sections for silicon (blue) 

and gallium arsenide (orange) disks with 𝑅=340 nm and ℎ=155 nm [40]. Anapole mode electric field 
distribution (schematically represented in the inset). b) Comparison of the spectral temperature 
increment distribution for the isolated gold ring and the optimized anapole generators (outlined in 
the upper inset where 𝑑 dielectric-metallic distance, 𝑅 the disk radius, 𝑙 the ring length and ℎ the 
height) defined by 𝑑=0 nm, 𝑅=340 nm, 𝑙=290 nm and ℎ=155 nm. The incident power density is 
fixed at 0.1 mW/m2.  
 
The HRI disk scattering and absorption cross section spectra are shown in Figure 1a. Here, a 
spectral drop in the scattering cross section can be clearly seen for both materials together 
with null in the absorption cross section. This fact, together with the electric field spatial 
distribution (shown in Figure S1) evidences the excitation of a strong anapole mode. 
Furthermore, their cross sections reveal that the anapole mode spectrally differs for Si and 
GaAs disks, being the response on the case of silicon redshifted with respect to the gallium 
arsenide. This is a consequence of their slightly different optical constants. Besides that, 
materials like Si or GaAs have a very low imaginary part of the refractive index in the near and 
MID infrared translating into a negligible absorption. Figure 1b illustrates the analyzed hybrid 
nanostructure built by a metallic nanoring (made of gold) and the HRI disks shown in figure 
1a (two different materials are explored, Si and GaAs). The optimal structure is found by a 
careful electromagnetic optimization of the ring parameters leading to ring defined by 𝑙 = 290 
nm, 𝑑= 0 nm and ℎ = 155 nm (see Figure S2-3 of the supplementary document for more 
information). Although fabrication may be challenging, complex structures can be made by 
high-resolution techniques such as e-beam lithography[41], sequential lithographic 
deposition/etchings for each material [42] and Critical Energy Electron Beam 
Lithography[43]. The results show that the ring parameters mainly influence the ability of the 
nanomaterial to reach high temperatures, since the resistive loss is enhanced as gold 
approaches the HRI resonator. Thus, the optimal heating response is reached for full contact 
between both materials 𝑑 = 0 𝑛𝑚. In Figure 1b the thermal spectral response of the optimal 
hybrid system is also compared with an isolated ring showing that the ring thermal response 
is about 10 times lower than the hybrid one. It can be explained by the anapole excitation 
which boosts the ring electromagnetic response acting as the electromagnetic resonator. This 
enhanced electric field induces a more intense Joule effect leading to an increment of the 
resistive losses. In particular, the temperature increment is amplified about 10 times for the Si 


and more than 9 for GaAs resonators for an intensity of 0.1 mW/m2. The low absorption in 
the disk resonator is a key parameter, since highly absorptive materials reduce the anapole 
effectivity affecting the resistive losses in the gold ring. This translates in a shorter response 
and in a weaker heating. We have analyzed the dependence of the nanomaterial heating with 
its geometry, and used this information to guide the design of optimum anapole nanomaterials, 
targeting their heating performance. 
 

 

Figure 2: Spectral thermal response of the optimal hybrid ring/disk resonator calculated for different 
disk radii for silicon (a) and gallium arsenide (b). The ring length and height are fixed to 𝑑=0 nm 
and ℎ=155 nm respectively.  c) Transient thermal state for the isolated silicon disk (blue), ring (red) 
and the hybrid structure (yellow). 
 
As shown in Figure 2a)-b), the disk radius gives rise to remarkable changes in the thermal 
spectrum of both, Si and GaAs resonators.  The anapole mode is redshifted for larger radii, 
as expected. This supports the notion that a hybrid disk/ring resonator can be easily tuned 
within the NIR, where a ring-shaped gold nanostructure of the same size is unable to 
resonate[44,45]. Notice that the double spectral resonances merge as radius approaches 300 
nm. Figure 2c) shows the transient thermal state calculated within the structure for the 
isolated ring and disk compared with the hybrid unit cell. The temporal evolution is 
negligible in the case of the isolated silicon disk. It can be understood since silicon does not 
present losses within the NIR. Despite the ring-shaped and hybrid structures present 
remarkable differences in temperature, it can be seen that they reach the stationary state for 
similar periods of around 5 microseconds approximately. We have presented above a 
comprehensive study of the hybrid disk-ring performance as a heating unit. We now explore 
its behavior when a substrate is present. To do so, we consider the configuration defined by 
𝑅=340 nm, 𝑙=290 nm, 𝑑=0 nm and ℎ=155 nm. Commonly used substrates with contrasting 
thermal properties have been considered to demonstrate the huge impact that the thermal 
conductivity has on the photothermal capabilities of the proposed structure. We have 
selected alumina, silica and PDMS as examples of high, middle and low thermal 
conductivities with 24 W/mK, 1.3 W/mK and 0.15 W/mK respectively. In Figure 3a, the 
scheme of the hybrid structure on a substrate of thermal conductivity 𝑘 can be seen. We 
consider a power density of 0.1 mW/m2 and linearly polarized light to excite the hybrid 
structure at normal incidence. In Figure 3b, the spectral thermal response of the three 
substrates is obtained. All curves show the spectral resonance at similar wavelengths as the 
considered materials have similar optical properties. However, they present radically 
opposed thermal responses as a consequence of their thermal conductivity contrast. A well-
defined trend can be extracted from the maximum temperature increment. 


 
5

 

Figure 3. Thermal behavior of the proposed structure on different conductive substrates. a) 

Scheme of the hybrid structure on a substrate of thermal conductivity 𝑘 illuminated at normal 
incidence with a power density of 0.1 mW/m2. b) Temperature increment spectra for the three 
considered materials, i.e., alumina (blue), silica (red) and PDMS (yellow). Temperature increment 
spatial distribution for a substrate of alumina (d), silica (e) and PDMS (f). 

As the substrate thermal conductivity grows, the temperature decreases. The temperature 
is also smaller with respect to the isolated hybrid structure as air has a much lower thermal 
conductivity. Thus, the PDMS substrate shows the best performance allowing for 
temperature increments of about 80 K. Following Figures c)-e), the alumina substrate 
features a negligible heating effect and the silica substrate is a 90% less effective than the 
PDMS one. This result can be understood by considering the high conductivity of substrates, 
and how the heat flows preferentially through the higher thermal conductivity materials, so 
that the stationary temperature increment is reduced significantly. Conversely, low thermal 
conductivity materials inhibit heat flow leading to a higher increase of the nanomaterial 
temperature in the stationary state.  
 
In summary, we have demonstrated that anapole excitation can serve as an easy mechanism 
to boost the heating effect in ring-shaped gold structures. Additionally, their thermal 
response can be tuned to the NIR, where they are not able to resonate a priori. Its thermal 
performance was analyzed by placing them on different thermal conductivity substrates 
(alumina, silica and PDMD), obtaining temperature increments ten-fold that of single gold 


 
6

rings. We believe that the reliable implementation of our proof of concept can motive the 
development of novel strategies to reach efficient nanoheating structures and temperature-
controlled platforms that will be of general interest to the thermoplasmonic community.  
 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 

Supporting Information. Additional computational details, materials, descriptions, 
including the optimization of the proposed anopole nanoheater. 
 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

Authors would like to thank Prof C. R. Crick for the interesting and valuable discussions. We 
gratefully acknowledge financial support from Spanish national project INMUNOTERMO 
(No. PGC2018-096649-B-I), the UK Leverhulme Turst (Grant No. RPG-2018-384). J. G-C. 
thanks the Ministry of science of Spain for his FPI grant and P.A. acknowledges funding for a 
Ramon y Cajal Fellowship (Grant No. RYC-2016-20831). 
 
 
REFERENCES 

1.  
A. B. Evlyukhin, C. Reinhardt, A. Seidel, B. S. Luk’Yanchuk, and B. N. Chichkov, "Optical 
response features of Si-nanoparticle arrays," Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and 
Materials Physics 82(4), 1–12 (2010). 

2.  
A. García-Etxarri, R. Gómez-Medina, L. S. Froufe-Pérez, C. López, L. Chantada, F. 
Scheffold, J. Aizpurua, M. Nieto-Vesperinas, and J. J. Sáenz, "Strong magnetic response of 
submicron Silicon particles in the infrared," Optics Express 19(6), 4815 (2011). 

3.  
A. I. Kuznetsov, A. E. Miroshnichenko, Y. H. Fu, J. Zhang, and B. Lukyanchukl, "Magnetic 
light," Scientific Reports 2, 1–6 (2012). 

4.  
A. I. Barreda, J. M. Saiz, F. González, F. Moreno, and P. Albella, "Recent advances in high 
refractive index dielectric nanoantennas: Basics and applications," AIP Advances 9(4), 
(2019). 

5.  
O. Yavas, M. Svedendahl, P. Dobosz, V. Sanz, and R. Quidant, "On-a-chip Biosensing 
Based on All-Dielectric Nanoresonators," Nano Letters 17(7), 4421–4426 (2017). 


 
7

6.  
Y. Chang, D. Hasan, B. Dong, J. Wei, Y. Ma, G. Zhou, K. W. Ang, and C. Lee, "All-
Dielectric Surface-Enhanced Infrared Absorption-Based Gas Sensor Using Guided 
Resonance," ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces 10(44), 38272–38279 (2018). 

7.  
Á. Barreda, F. Vitale, A. E. Minovich, C. Ronning, and I. Staude, "Applications of Hybrid 
Metal‐Dielectric Nanostructures: State of the Art," Advanced Photonics Research 2100286 
(2022). 

8.  
P. Albella, M. A. Poyli, M. K. Schmidt, S. A. Maier, F. Moreno, J. J. Sáenz, and J. Aizpurua, 
"Low-loss electric and magnetic field-enhanced spectroscopy with subwavelength silicon 
dimers," Journal of Physical Chemistry C 117(26), 13573–13584 (2013). 

9.  
M. Decker, T. Pertsch, and I. Staude, "Strong coupling in hybrid metal-dielectric 
nanoresonators," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, 
Physical and Engineering Sciences 375(2090), (2017). 

10.  
Y. Yang, O. D. Miller, T. Christensen, J. D. Joannopoulos, and M. Soljačić, "Low-Loss 
Plasmonic Dielectric Nanoresonators," Nano Letters 17(5), 3238–3245 (2017). 

11.  
I. Staude, A. E. Miroshnichenko, M. Decker, N. T. Fofang, S. Liu, E. Gonzales, J. 
Dominguez, T. S. Luk, D. N. Neshev, I. Brener, and Y. Kivshar, "Tailoring directional 
scattering through magnetic and electric resonances in subwavelength silicon nanodisks," 
ACS Nano 7(9), 7824–7832 (2013). 

12.  
A. Neely, C. Perry, B. Varisli, A. K. Singh, T. Arbneshi, D. Senapati, J. R. Kalluri, and P. 
C. Ray, "Ultrasensitive and Highly Selective Detection of Alzheimer’s Disease Biomarker 
Using Two-Photon Rayleigh Scattering Properties of Gold Nanoparticle," ACS nano 3(9), 
2834–2840 (2009). 

13.  
A. Oyelere, "Gold nanoparticles: From nanomedicine to nanosensing," Nanotechnology, 
Science and Applications Volume 1, 45–66 (2008). 

14.  
G. Baffou, Thermoplasmonics (Cambridge University, 2018). 

15.  
A. O. Govorov, W. Zhang, T. Skeini, H. Richardson, J. Lee, and N. A. Kotov, "Gold 
nanoparticle ensembles as heaters and actuators: Melting and collective plasmon 
resonances," Nanoscale Research Letters 1(1), 84–90 (2006). 

16.  
G. Baffou, R. Quidant, and F. J. García De Abajo, "Nanoscale control of optical heating in 
complex plasmonic systems," ACS Nano 4(2), 709–716 (2010). 

17.  
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, "Generating heat with metal nanoparticles," Nano 
Today 2(1), 30–38 (2007). 

18.  
N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W. S. Chang, S. Link, and P. Nordlander, "Plasmons in strongly coupled 
metallic nanostructures," Chemical Reviews 111(6), 3913–3961 (2011). 

19.  
L. Jauffred, A. Samadi, H. Klingberg, P. M. Bendix, and L. B. Oddershede, "Plasmonic 
Heating of Nanostructures," Chemical Reviews 119(13), 8087–8130 (2019). 


 
8

20.  
J. González-Colsa, G. Serrera, J. Saiz, D. Ortiz, F. Gonzalez, F. Bresme, F. Moreno, and P. 
Albella, "Gold nanodoughnut as an outstanding nanoheater for photothermal applications," 
Optics Express 30(1), 125–137 (2021). 

21.  
G. Baffou, F. Cichos, and R. Quidant, "Applications and challenges of thermoplasmonics," 
Nature Materials 19(9), 946–958 (2020). 

22.  
C. Ayala-Orozco, C. Urban, M. W. Knight, A. S. Urban, O. Neumann, S. W. Bishnoi, S. 
Mukherjee, A. M. Goodman, H. Charron, T. Mitchell, M. Shea, R. Roy, S. Nanda, R. Schiff, 
N. J. Halas, and A. Joshi, "Au nanomatryoshkas as efficient near-infrared photothermal 
transducers for cancer treatment: Benchmarking against nanoshells," ACS Nano 8(6), 
6372–6381 (2014). 

23.  
W. Liu, J. Shi, B. Lei, H. Hu, and A. E. Miroshnichenko, "Efficient excitation and tuning 
of toroidal dipoles within individual homogenous nanoparticles," Optics Express 23(19), 
24738 (2015). 

24.  
K. v. Baryshnikova, D. A. Smirnova, B. S. Luk’yanchuk, and Y. S. Kivshar, "Optical 
Anapoles: Concepts and Applications," Advanced Optical Materials 7(14), (2019). 

25.  
G. N. Afanasievtx and Y. P. Stepanovskys, The Electromagnetic Field of Elementary Time-
Dependent Toroidal Sources (1995), 28. 

26.  
V. A. Fedotov, A. v. Rogacheva, V. Savinov, D. P. Tsai, and N. I. Zheludev, "Resonant 
transparency and non-trivial non-radiating excitations in toroidal metamaterials," Scientific 
Reports 3, (2013). 

27.  
B. Lukyanchuk, R. Paniagua-Domínguez, A. I. Kuznetsov, A. E. Miroshnichenko, and Y. 
S. Kivshar, "Suppression of scattering for small dielectric particles: Anapole mode and 
invisibility," in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical 
and Engineering Sciences (Royal Society, 2017), 375(2090). 

28.  
A. E. Miroshnichenko, A. B. Evlyukhin, Y. F. Yu, R. M. Bakker, A. Chipouline, A. I. 
Kuznetsov, B. Luk’yanchuk, B. N. Chichkov, and Y. S. Kivshar, "Nonradiating anapole 
modes in dielectric nanoparticles," Nature Communications 6, (2015). 

29.  
V. Savinov, N. Papasimakis, D. P. Tsai, and N. I. Zheludev, "Optical anapoles," 
Communications Physics 2(1), (2019). 

30.  
D. G. Baranov, R. Verre, P. Karpinski, and M. Käll, "Anapole-Enhanced Intrinsic Raman 
Scattering from Silicon Nanodisks," ACS Photonics 5(7), 2730–2736 (2018). 

31.  
J. F. Algorri, D. C. Zografopoulos, A. Ferraro, B. García-Cámara, R. Vergaz, R. Beccherelli, 
and J. M. Sánchez-Pena, "Anapole modes in hollow nanocuboid dielectric metasurfaces for 
refractometric sensing," Nanomaterials 9(1), (2019). 

32.  
L. Sabri, Q. Huang, J.-N. Liu, and B. T. Cunningham, "Design of anapole mode 
electromagnetic field enhancement structures for biosensing applications," Optics Express 
27(5), 7196 (2019). 


 
9

33.  
C. Y. Yang, J. H. Yang, Z. Y. Yang, Z. X. Zhou, M. G. Sun, V. E. Babicheva, and K. P. 
Chen, "Nonradiating Silicon Nanoantenna Metasurfaces as Narrowband Absorbers," ACS 
Photonics 5(7), 2596–2601 (2018). 

34.  
T. v. Tsoulos and G. Tagliabue, "Self-induced thermo-optical effects in silicon and 
germanium dielectric nanoresonators," Nanophotonics 9(12), 3849–3861 (2020). 

35.  
T. Zhang, Y. Che, K. Chen, J. Xu, Y. Xu, T. Wen, G. Lu, X. Liu, B. Wang, X. Xu, Y. S. 
Duh, Y. L. Tang, J. Han, Y. Cao, B. O. Guan, S. W. Chu, and X. Li, "Anapole mediated 
giant photothermal nonlinearity in nanostructured silicon," Nature Communications 11(1), 
(2020). 

36.  
Y. H. Deng, Z. J. Yang, M. L. Hu, X. J. Du, and J. He, "Boosting an anapole mode response 
through electromagnetic interactions beyond near-field limit in individual all-dielectric 
disk-ring nanostructures," New Journal of Physics 23(2), (2021). 

37.  
L. Khosravi Khorashad, L. v. Besteiro, Z. Wang, J. Valentine, and A. O. Govorov, 
"Localization of Excess Temperature Using Plasmonic Hot Spots in Metal Nanostructures: 
Combining Nano-Optical Antennas with the Fano Effect," Journal of Physical Chemistry C 
120(24), 13215–13226 (2016). 

38.  
A. Rakovich, P. Albella, and S. A. Maier, "Plasmonic control of radiative properties of 
semiconductor quantum dots coupled to plasmonic ring cavities," ACS Nano 9(3), 2648–
2658 (2015). 

39.  
G. Baffou and H. Rigneault, "Femtosecond-pulsed optical heating of gold nanoparticles," 
Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and Materials Physics 84(3), (2011). 

40.  
T. Shibanuma, G. Grinblat, P. Albella, and S. A. Maier, "Efficient Third Harmonic 
Generation from Metal-Dielectric Hybrid Nanoantennas," Nano Letters 17(4), 2647–2651 
(2017). 

41.  
M. Horák, K. Bukvišová, V. Švarc, J. Jaskowiec, V. Křápek, and T. Šikola, "Comparative 
study of plasmonic antennas fabricated by electron beam and focused ion beam 
lithography," Scientific Reports 8(1), (2018). 

42.  
X. Wang, J. Xu, X. Quan, Y. Li, Y. Wang, and X. Cheng, "Fast fabrication of silicon 
nanopillar array using electron beam lithography with two-layer exposure method," 
Microelectronic Engineering 227, (2020). 

43.  
J. Joo, B. Y. Chow, and J. M. Jacobson, "Nanoscale patterning on insulating substrates by 
critical energy electron beam lithography," Nano Letters 6(9), 2021–2025 (2006). 

44.  
J. Aizpurua, P. Hanarp, D. S. Sutherland, M. Käll, G. W. Bryant, and F. J. García de Abajo, 
"Optical Properties of Gold Nanorings," Physical Review Letters 90(5), 4 (2003). 

45.  
N. Large, J. Aizpurua, V. K. Lin, S. L. Teo, R. Marty, S. Tripathy, and A. Mlayah, 
Plasmonic Properties of Gold Ring-Disk Nano-Resonators: Fine Shape Details Matter 
(2011). 


 
10

  

Supplementary document 

 

 

Figure S1. Electric field distributions of the resultant anapole mode excitation in silicon and 
gallium arsenide disks at 𝜆 =1400 nm and 𝜆 =1366 nm. The disk is immersed in air and has a 
height ℎ = 155 nm and a radius 𝑅 = 340 nm. 

 

Figure S1 shows the electric field distribution of the anapole modes induced within a silicon 
and gallium arsenide disks excited at a wavelength of 1400 nm and 1366 nm respectively. 
The resonance wavelength is slightly different due to the refractive index contrast between 
both materials. Thus, both systems show similar electric field pattern and lines that match 
with the expected ones for an anapole mode excitation.  

 


 
11

 

Figure S2. Scattering and absorption cross section of a hybrid silicon-gold disk/ring 
structure for a set of ring lengths (𝑙) from 50 to 290 nm for 𝑑 = 0 𝑛𝑚 (a, b), 𝑑 = 50 𝑛𝑚 (c, 
d), 𝑑 = 100 𝑛𝑚 (e, f) and 𝑑 = 150 𝑛𝑚 (g, h), respectively. 


 
12

In Figure S2 the behavior of the hybrid silicon/gold structure absorption and scattering cross 
section can be seen. In general, the scattering (Figure a, c, e, g) increases for thicker gold rings 
as expected, however, the spectral resonance remains constant. The 𝑙 parameter also boosts 
the absorption due to the gold volume increment. Focusing on the absorption (Figure b, d, f, 
h), the most influential geometrical parameter is the metal-dielectric distance. As 𝑑 goes to 
zero the absorption increases which is translated in a thermal performance improvement. 
This can be explained in terms of the anapole resonance. When the anapole is generated 
inside the disk, an evanescent field is created in the near field so that, the nearer the gold is 
to the dielectric interface, the stronger the evanescent field influence becomes. This leads to 
a resistive loss enhancement in the metal. It is also noticed a moderate blueshift because of 
the ring main radius reduction.  Thus, in sight of Figure S2, the optimal disk-ring 
configuration in terms of light to heat conversion is 𝑑 = 0 𝑛𝑚 and 𝑙 = 290 𝑛𝑚. 
 

 

 


 
13

 

Figure S3. Scattering and absorption cross section of a hybrid gallium arsenide-gold 
disk/ring structure for a set of ring lengths (𝑙) from 50 to 290 nm for 𝑑 = 0 𝑛𝑚 (a, b), 𝑑 =
50 𝑛𝑚 (c, d), 𝑑 = 100 𝑛𝑚 (e, f) and 𝑑 = 150 𝑛𝑚 (g, h) respectively. 


 
14

 

In Figure S3 the behavior of the hybrid gallium arsenide/gold structure absorption and 
scattering cross section can be seen. It shows a similar behavior to the Figure S2 so that the 
same conclusions are extracted. Thus, the optimal disk-ring configuration in terms of light to 
heat conversion is also 𝑑 = 0 𝑛𝑚 and 𝑙 = 290 𝑛𝑚. 
 


