1

Identifying structure-absorption relationships and predicting absorption strength of non-

fullerene acceptors for organic photovoltaics

Jun Yan,a,# Xabier Rodríguez-Martínez,*,b,c,# Drew Pearce,a Hana Douglas,a Danai Bili,a

Mohammed Azzouzi,a Flurin Eisner,a Alise Virbule,a Elham Rezasoltani,a Valentina Belova,c

Bernhard Dörling, c Sheridan Few, a,f Anna A. Szumska, a Xueyan Hou,a Guichuan Zhang,d Hin-

Lap Yip,d,e Mariano Campoy-Quiles *,c and Jenny Nelson*,a

# J.Y. and X.R.-M. contributed equally to this work.

a Department of Physics, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, London, United Kingdom

Email: jenny.nelson@imperial.ac.uk

b Electronic and Photonic Materials (EFM), Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology

(IFM), Linköping University, Linköping, SE 581 83 Sweden

Email: xabier.rodriguez.martinez@liu.se

c Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Barcelona, ICMAB-CSIC, Campus UAB, Bellaterra 

08193, Spain

Email: mcampoy@icmab.es

d Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of 

Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 

510640, P. R. China

e Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee 

Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong

f Sustainability Research Institute, School of Earth and Environment, University of Leeds, 

Leeds, LS2 9JT


2

Keywords: small-molecule acceptors, organic solar cells, absorption coefficient, machine-

learning, density functional theory

Abstract

Non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) are excellent light harvesters, yet the origin of such high 

optical extinction is not well understood. In this work, we investigate the absorption strength of 

NFAs by building a database of time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) 

calculations of ~500 -conjugated molecules. The calculations are first validated by comparison 

with experimental measurements on liquid and solid state using common fullerene and non-

fullerene acceptors. We find that the molar extinction coefficient (𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥) shows reasonable

agreement between calculation in vacuum and experiment for molecules in solution, 

highlighting the effectiveness of TDDFT for predicting optical properties of organic -

conjugated molecules. We then perform a statistical analysis based on molecular descriptors to 

identify which features are important in defining the absorption strength. This allows us to 

identify structural features that are correlated with high absorption strength in NFAs and could 

be used to guide molecular design: highly absorbing NFAs should possess a planar, linear, and 

fully conjugated molecular backbone with highly polarisable heteroatoms. We then exploit a 

random decision forest to draw predictions for 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 using a computational framework based 

on extended tight-binding Hamiltonians, which shows reasonable predicting accuracy with 

lower computational cost than TDDFT. This work provides a general understanding of the 

relationship between molecular structure and absorption strength in -conjugated organic 

molecules, including NFAs, while introducing predictive machine-learning models of low 

computational cost.


3

Broader context

The synthetic versatility of organic -conjugated semiconductors converts them onto the ideal 

candidates for rational molecular design based on high-throughput screening techniques.

Significant advances had been made by trial and error with new but increasingly diverse 

moieties and materials, primarily using non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs). These have raised the 

efficiency of organic photovoltaics (OPVs) above 19% in single junctions, to a large extent 

owing to their high absorption strength. However, the reasons for that remain elusive, thus

preventing the molecular tailoring of NFAs with further enhanced light harvesting capabilities

that enable breakthrough OPV efficiencies in the years to come. Here we exploit time-

dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) calculations performed on NFA molecules and 

-conjugated oligomers to investigate what drives their absorption strength higher. The 

statistical analysis of thousands of molecular descriptors reveals that molecular linearity, 

planarity, polarizability, and number of -conjugated carbon atoms correlate strongly with the 

absorption strength, hence forming a structure-absorption strength relationship that is further 

exploited to introduce design rules for highly absorbing NFAs. We identify frequent moieties 

(i.e. molecular fragments) and combinations thereof to drive absorption strength higher in novel 

NFAs. To speed up the screening of NFA molecular candidates at lower computational cost, 

we propose exploiting a state-of-the-art machine-learning (ML) model in combination with 

extended tight-binding Hamiltonians to predict the absorption strength of -conjugated organic 

molecules. This work contributes to an improved understanding of the absorption strength of 

-conjugated organic molecules while helping the OPV community to design highly absorbing 

NFAs that maximize the light harvesting capabilities in the green energy market.


4

TOC:

We combine experiments with density functional theory calculations, statistical analysis, and 

machine-learning to reveal the structure-absorption strength relationship and predict the 

absorption strength in organic non-fullerene acceptors. 


5

1. Introduction

Organic photovoltaic (OPV) energy conversion is a promising option among next generation 

renewable and sustainable energy technologies for a low-carbon energy future.1–3 OPV has 

shown promising potential for various applications, such as indoor photovoltaics (PV),4–6 semi-

transparent solar windows,7,8 PV greenhouses,9 and off-grid power supply.10 Recent OPV 

devices based on non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs) have demonstrated power conversion 

efficiencies (PCEs) exceeding 19%,11,12 much closer to the efficiencies observed in inorganic 

semiconductor PV technologies such as crystalline silicon and perovskite solar cells, and far 

higher than values thought attainable in OPV when using fullerene derivatives as the electron-

acceptors.13 The startling progress led by NFAs can be attributed to various advantages over 

fullerene derivatives, such as band-gap tunability, sharp absorption onset, high emission, high 

absorption, and low energy losses.14–16 Among these advantages, the absorption strength of 

state-of-the-art NFAs is particularly outstanding, as exemplified in Figure 1c (a detailed list of 

chemical names and nomenclatures is provided in Supplementary Note 1).17 For instance, Y6 

shows a maximum extinction coefficient ( 𝜅𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) over 1.5 in the visible part of the 

electromagnetic spectrum, as compared to less than 0.75 for fullerene derivatives (PC61BM 

and PC71BM). High extinction coefficient increases the chance of high quantum efficiency and 

photogenerated current density, and makes it possible to fabricate highly absorbing OPV films 

with just a few tens of nanometre-thick photoactive layers. In comparison with workhorse 

fullerene acceptors, OPV devices based on highly absorbing NFAs could be made comparably 

thinner than the former, which exponentially raises the output power per weight (i.e. the specific 

weight in W g-1) of OPV devices18 and might be an effective route toward lower production 

costs (as less material could employed to achieve an equivalent PCE) and even increase device 

thermal stability19. Moreover, through detailed balance between photon absorption and 

emission,20,21 high absorption strength in principle should lead to high emission from the NFAs, 

while strong NFA emission is believed to be a key reason for NFA-based OPVs to possess low 

nonradiative voltage losses.22–26 Despite the clear advantage of strong photo-absorption of 

NFAs over fullerene derivatives, the phenomenon has attracted much less attention than other 

properties of NFAs.22–24,27–30 The features empirically and theoretically proposed31,32 to lead to 

strong absorption in -conjugated polymers are molecular stiffness, linearity, extended -

conjugation and large molecular size. It is therefore of interest to establish whether the same 

features are associated with strong absorption in NFAs, while seeking design rules for high

absorption in future high-performance NFAs.


6

Excited state calculations based on quantum chemistry methods, such as time-dependent 

density functional theory (TDDFT),8,31,33–35 Hartree-Fock method,36 ab initio Monte Carlo 

method,37 second order Møllier-Plesset theory (MP2),38 and coupled cluster method,39 have 

been applied to predict the electronic and optical properties of molecules. Among them, TDDFT

is the most widely applied method for excited state calculations, and has shown reasonable 

accuracy in calculating and predicting the trends in absorption strength of organic 

molecules,31,33 as also demonstrated in this work. However, the rapid scaling of computation 

time with molecular size has been the real obstacle limiting the applicability of TDDFT for 

excited state calculations on molecules with hundreds of atoms. Given the size and diverse 

structure of modern NFAs, faster and more efficient methods are therefore needed to establish 

the relationship between excited-state and molecular properties in NFAs.

The emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) has made it possible to study quantitative 

structure–property relationships (QSPRs) in molecules with massively improved computational 

efficiency. As the most popular branch of AI, machine-learning (ML) has attracted much 

attention in materials science over the last decade, and has been widely applied for material 

property prediction and material discovery.40–43 Recently, ML has also gained popularity in 

OPV scenarios,44,45,54,46–53 yet existing ML studies related to OPVs have been primarily focused 

either on the energetics44,45,55–58 or directly on PCE,44,49,59–66 with little attention paid to the 

absorption strength of the photoactive materials.67,68 Moreover, there are no ML studies 

explicitly focused on the absorption strength of NFAs beyond the identification of moieties of 

frequent appearance in highly absorbing molecules.44 However, QSPR and ML models have 

been successfully applied to investigate the absorption strength of fluorophores or dyes 

typically employed in bioimaging, showing encouraging results.32,69,70 Therefore, it is appealing 

to apply ML methods in combination with QSPR models to investigate the origin of the large 

absorption strength in state-of-the-art NFAs.

Here, we present an experimental, TDDFT, QSPR, statistical and ML study of the absorption 

strength of NFAs to identify the key chemical and structural features that lead to high optical 

absorption in state-of-the-art NFAs. We exploit a database of nearly 500 unique organic 

molecules (or 3500 calculations) generated using DFT and TDDFT over several years. We 

obtain good quantitative agreement between TDDFT calculations of absorption strength and 

experimental values for state-of-the-art NFAs and fullerenes, which supports the use of TDDFT

results for further statistical and QSPR modelling. Accordingly, we extract molecular 

information from the DFT-optimized geometries by computing nearly 6000 molecular 


7

descriptors and first looking for correlations with the absorption strength. The strongest 

correlations are found between experimentally measured maximum molar extinction coefficient 

(𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥) and two main molecular descriptors from calculations: 1,p and C2SP2, which describe 

the size of the molecule in the direction of maximal atomic polarizability, and the number of 

sp2 hybridized carbon atoms that are bound to two other carbons (C2), respectively. These 

quantities can be related to a few key material features leading to high absorption strength: 

linearity, planarity, and extension of the -conjugation in the form of fused and closed-ring 

moieties, in good agreement with previous ML reports on fluorophores and dyes.32 We further 

identify several moieties and paired combinations thereof that are frequently found in highly 

absorbing NFAs, corresponding to thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (TT), thiophene (T), 2-(5,6-difluoro-

3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (2FIC), 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-

1-ylidene)malononitrile (IC) and indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (IDT). These form a 

catalogue of molecular design rules to further enhance the absorption strength of next-

generation NFAs. We then train and test an ensemble learning method, namely a random 

decision forest (RF), to predict εd,max and provide further information about the most important 

features in the modelling of absorption strength in NFAs. Finally, we explore the possibility to 

predict 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 while using a cheaper molecular geometry optimization method based on 

semiempirical extended tight-binding (xTB) Hamiltonians instead of the expensive DFT 

approach. We do so by training a RF with our TDDFT database and proving its predictive 

properties in terms of 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 when interpolated using xTB-optimized geometries. This 

approach shows application potential in high-throughput screening studies in combination with 

generative molecular models.

2. Results and discussion

2.1. Experimental validation of calculated absorption strength using TDDFT

Quantifying how well the TDDFT derived excited state properties agree with the experimental 

measurements in terms of absorption strength is of utmost importance to validate our theoretical 

calculations and support further conclusions extracted thereof. Accordingly, we first evaluate 

the agreement between TDDFT calculations and experimental data in terms of the absorption 

strength. We compare the absorption strength of a broad catalogue (~10 molecules) of NFA 

molecules and widely-studied fullerene derivatives (PC61BM and PC71BM, with their 

molecular structures shown in Figure 1a) as obtained from TDDFT calculations, with a variety 

of optical measurements in both solution and solid state. The measured refractive index (𝑛) and 


8

extinction coefficient (𝜅) of those molecules in thin film obtained using our variable-angle 

spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) measurements are shown in Figure 1b and c. Solution state 

data shown in Figure 1d and e are collected from a variety of literature references as detailed 

in the Supporting database.

As a metric for absorption strength, we initially consider several candidates such as the 

oscillator strength (𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐), the absorption coefficient (𝛼) or the imaginary part of the dielectric 

function (𝜀2). In this work, we eventually focus on the maximum molar extinction coefficient 

(𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥, M-1 cm-1) of NFAs as it shows the best agreement between experimental and theoretical 

data, as we demonstrate below. 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 constitutes a typical experimental measurement in 

solution that can also be accessed from myriad literature references. Note that the usual

calculations based on single molecules using TDDFT cannot account for solid state effects as 

they are performed for isolated molecules in vacuum or surrounded by an isotropic medium 

(such as a solvent using the polarizable-continuum-solvent-model, PCM, Figure S1). The 

derivation of the theoretical 𝜀𝑑 is provided in the Methods section, which results in a 

mathematical expression for 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 as

𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 10 𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝑒) 𝑁𝐴

2𝜋𝑒ℏ

3𝜖0𝑚0𝑛𝑟𝑐 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥

1

𝜎√2𝜋 ,
(Equation 1)

Where 𝑁𝐴 is the Avogadro constant, 𝑒 the elementary charge, ℏ the reduced Planck constant, 

𝜖0 the vacuum permittivity, 𝑚0 the electron mas, 𝑛𝑟 is the refractive index in solution (assumed 

to be 1.3 of a common organic solvent throughout this study), and c the speed of light. 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥

is the oscillator strength of the strongest transition among the calculated states within the 

visible-IR part of the spectrum, and 𝐸𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the energy of that transition. The brightest 

transition is very often the lowest-energy transition in commonly used -conjugated 

molecules.31 We note here that the delta function in Eq. (S13) is replaced with a gaussian 

distribution function with a peak intensity of 

1

𝜎√2𝜋, where 𝜎 is the gaussian width and assumed 

to be 0.1 eV for a common organic pi-conjugated molecule.

The experimental 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 from solution can be obtained using the optical density (OD) 

measurements performed using UV-visible spectroscopy, via

𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 =

𝑂𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥

𝜌𝑑
,
(Equation 2)


9

where 𝑂𝐷𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the maximum optical density, 𝜌 is the molar concentration (M), and d the light 

path length of the cuvette (cm). Similarly, the experimental 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 from film can be estimated 

assuming a mass concentration 𝜌𝑀 in the film of 1000 g L-1 (as a typical value for conjugated 

polymers and small molecules),31 either from the maximum absorption coefficient 𝛼𝑐𝑚,𝑚𝑎𝑥

(cm-1) or extinction coefficient (𝜅𝑚𝑎𝑥) (Figure 1c), via

𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝑒) 𝛼𝑐𝑚,𝑚𝑎𝑥

𝑀𝑤
𝜌𝑀 = 𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝑒) 4𝜋𝜅𝑚𝑎𝑥

𝜆𝑚𝑎𝑥

𝑀𝑤
𝜌𝑀,
(Equation 3)

where 𝑀𝑤 is the molecular weight in g mol-1, and 𝜆𝑚𝑎𝑥 the wavelength at 𝜅𝑚𝑎𝑥 in centimetre.


10

Figure 1. a) Molecular structures of typical organic acceptors, including PC61BM, PC71BM, 

O-IDFBR, O-IDTBR, ITIC, IT-4F, IDIC, IEICO, IEICO-4F, Y5, Y6, and Y7. b) Refractive 

index and c) extinction coefficient of a larger set of typical organic acceptor thin films measured 

using VASE. d) Experimental 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in solution versus calculated 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in vacuum using 


11

TDDFT of a set of ~80 π-conjugated molecules. e) Estimated experimental 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in film (solid 

state) versus that in solution using Eq. (3). Panel (d) contains a subset of well-known NFA 

molecules that are highlighted in colour. All TDDFT results in panel (d) were performed using 

the functional B3LYP and basis set 6-311+G(d,p), except for the ones (grey squares) taken from 

Ref. 71 that are based on the LRC-wPBEh functional and 6-311+G(d) basis set. We also note 

here that the side chains of molecules are replaced by H atoms or methyl groups in the 

calculations as they are computationally expensive and do not contribute to the -conjugation, 

hence electronic transitions.31 The experimental data of 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in film are converted from 

maximum values of extinction coefficients shown in panel (c) using Eq. (3), while solution data 

are collected from literature, noting that different values may be present for the same material 

as retrieved from different sources. Grey dashed lines indicate the perfect match between x and 

y axis. The data required for generating panels (d) and (e) in this figure are presented in the 

Supplementary Database.

Figure 1d presents the results of the comparison between experimental εd,max in solution and 

theoretical 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 calculated from single molecules using TDDFT in vacuum. A brief 

discussion of the solvent effect on the absorption strength and the reasons why we choose 

vacuum medium are provided in Figure S1. Despite the scattering of data points, we observe 

the occurrence of a monotonic relationship between solution and calculated 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 with a 

Pearson correlation coefficient (𝑟) of 0.77. Interestingly, such correlation is no longer observed 

when quantifying the absorption strength in terms of 𝛼𝑚𝑎𝑥 neither when adding further data 

points from literature on -conjugated fluorophores to our statistical analysis (Figure S2a, r =

0.30), which is believed to be caused by the differences in molecular weight; in that case, only 

𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 is found to follow a monotonic trend (Figure S2b). Some of the material assumptions 

on refractive index and density required to obtain 𝛼𝑚𝑎𝑥 values might be responsible for the 

observed mismatch. It is worth noting that, expectedly, the correlation between solid state (film)

and solution (𝑟 = 0.66, Figure 1e) or calculated 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑟 = 0.61, Figure S3) is not as good 

as that from solution data versus calculated 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑟 = 0.77, Figure 1d, neither for 𝛼𝑚𝑎𝑥 as 

shown in Figure S4). Such discrepancy is attributed to solid-state effects such as the 

aggregation effects,16 intermolecular orientation,72,73 and side chain interactions,74 which are 

not considered in single molecule excited state calculations.31 The observed trend that a highly 

absorbing material in solution will produce highly absorbing films is, nonetheless, generally 

valid and thus solution data is relevant for devices. Since the NFAs analysed here have a rather 

similar number of -electrons (n), the corresponding εd,max per -electron (Figure S5) shows 


12

a similar trend as that in Figure 1d, Figure 1e, and Figure S3. Despite the simplicity of single 

molecule excited state calculations, these data show that using TDDFT calculations of the 

excited state to deliver 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 can provide a reasonably good approximation to experimental 

measurements. Moreover, dealing with TDDFT calculations gives us room to correlate key 

molecular properties, such as molecular size and shape (aspect ratio), linearity, planarity, 

grafted side chain positions, or functional groups, to the absorption strength using molecular 

descriptors. These observations provide a foundation from molecular structures to identify the 

origin and further extend the high optical extinction of NFAs through chemical design rules, as 

we show in the upcoming sections.

2.2. Statistical analysis of the TDDFT absorption strength dataset

The experimental validation of the TDDFT calculations in NFAs supports the use of such 

results to build an extended database of optimized molecular geometries and excited state

properties. The dataset is built by collecting thousands of molecular geometries generated over 

the last years in our group, making up a total of 3515 calculations on small molecules and 

oligomers. The distribution of number of atoms in a molecule is shown in Figure S6 with a 

majority lying between 50 and 100 atoms. This database is sufficiently diverse to allow us to 

detect correlations and chemical/structural design rules that could explain and/or further 

enhance optical absorption in conjugated small molecules.

2.2.1. Correlation analysis of molecular descriptors

In the simplest statistical analysis of our TDDFT database, we look for correlations of the 

absorption strength with respect to a catalogue of molecular descriptors. First, as described in

Supplementary Note 2, we filter the pristine TDDFT database by identifying duplicate 

molecules (in terms of molecular weight) and selecting the lowest energy conformer (i.e., 

optimized geometries in the ground state) among them. As a result, the curated TDDFT 

database employed in this work consists of 479 -conjugated small molecules and oligomers

with a distribution of moieties shown in Figure S8.

Then, we introduce several target features related with absorption strength, starting from the 

maximum oscillator strength of any calculated transition (𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥 ); the maximum oscillator 

strength of any transition in the visible electromagnetic window (herein constrained between 

300-1200 nm or 1-4 eV for its relevance in solar energy harvesting applications) (𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑣𝑖𝑠); and 

the sum of oscillator strengths of all transitions in the visible window, 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠. These three 


13

features are also evaluated per 𝑛𝜋 for the molecule, i.e., 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥/𝑛𝜋, 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑣𝑖𝑠/𝑛𝜋 and 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠/𝑛𝜋. 

We then consider the maximum absorption coefficient (𝛼𝑚𝑎𝑥) obtained using Eq. (1) and Eq. 

(3); the maximum of the imaginary part of the dielectric function (𝜀2,𝑚𝑎𝑥);31 and 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥. Finally, 

we compute the spectral overlap between the OD (𝑑𝛼(𝐸), where 𝑑 is set to a typical film 

thickness value of 100 nm and 𝛼(𝐸) derives from the Gaussian-broadened spectrum of f in the 

visible spectral range taking a standard deviation of 0.1 eV) and the AM1.5G solar photon flux 

spectrum (ΦAM1.5G), namely 𝑓𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝 =

∫
𝛷𝐴𝑀1.5𝐺

4 𝑒𝑉
1 𝑒𝑉
(𝐸)𝑑𝛼(𝐸)𝑑𝐸

∫
𝛷𝐴𝑀1.5𝐺

4 𝑒𝑉
1 𝑒𝑉
(𝐸)𝑑𝐸
.

These features, together with their corresponding histograms (Figure S13) in terms of 

Spearman’s rank correlation coefficients (𝜌), are explained in more detail in Supplementary 

Note 2. Molecular descriptors are calculated using up to four different open-source packages75–

78 (Supplementary Note 2) to generate a (curated) collection of 3239 entries (including 40 

electronic descriptors derived from the TDDFT calculations, namely the energy of the 

molecular orbitals ranging from HOMO-19 to LUMO+19). Then, we scan for statistical 

correlations between those descriptors and all target features introduced above, from which we 

consider as highly correlated descriptors those showing   0.7 as threshold. However, since 

some descriptors are calculated in groups or families where weighting factors are varied among 

atomic masses, van der Waals volumes, electronegativities, ionization potentials or 

polarizabilities, we usually encounter sets of multicollinear descriptors that show very similar 

trends with respect to the target feature. Accordingly, to drop redundant (collinear) descriptors 

we classify them into clusters to select the most representative candidate of each bundle (i.e.,

cluster). This serves us to simplify the identification of characteristic and well-correlated 

descriptors families. The clustering algorithm applied to analyse multicollinear descriptors 

based on  and r values is further described in Supplementary Note 3.

After running the clusterization of descriptors on all target features, we identify strong 

correlations with molecular descriptors for 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠 and 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 (i.e., implicitly 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑣𝑖𝑠). 

For the remaining target variables (𝑓𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝, 𝛼𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝜀2,𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥/𝑛𝜋, 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑣𝑖𝑠/𝑛𝜋 and 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠/

𝑛𝜋), we do not identify molecular descriptors with  above the threshold value (0.7) and they 

are generally below 0.6 units, see Figure S13. The lack of correlation for 𝑓𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝 could be 

justified by the existence of a gas-to-solid shift in the corresponding absorption spectrum, which 

prevents proper matching of the Gaussian-broadened absorption features with the solar photon 

flux. Regarding 𝛼𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝜀2,𝑚𝑎𝑥, the estimation of these values from TDDFT calculations 

requires taking generalized assumptions on several materials properties (such as density or 


14

refractive index) that might be enough to disturb the underlying trends in our heterogeneous 

material database. For the quantities normalised by the number of pi electrons, i.e. 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥/𝑛𝜋, 

𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑣𝑖𝑠/𝑛𝜋 and 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠/𝑛𝜋, the weak correlation is expected since normalization tends to 

deviate from linear correlations depending on the straightness of the molecule.31 Due to the 

strong correlation between size of the molecule and oscillator strength as discussed below based 

on C2SP2, the normalised quantity is believed to be a secondary factor, therefore not clear 

correlations are observed. In the successful correlation cases (i.e. 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠 and 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥) and 

with the given thresholds of 0.7 units for  and r, we identify a single feature cluster lead by 

the 1,p descriptor in the case of 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 (Figure 2a). For 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠, a threshold  of 0.68 

reveals C2SP2 as a rather descriptive molecular feature (Figure 2b). Interestingly, C2SP2 is 

also found in the main cluster represented by 1,p in 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥, and we could not identify 

any strong correlations between the absorption strength (in any of its proposed metrics) and 

electronic descriptors (from HOMO-19 to LUMO+19 energy levels). Note that 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 values 

in excess of 2.5 × 105 M-1 cm-1 in Figure 2a and b are mostly attributed to artificially straight 

conjugated oligomers with >10 monomers contained in our database, for which the straightness, 

hence high 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥, are unlikely to be maintained in the experimental solid state scenario. In fact,

only the exemplary and asymmetric NFA known as BDTP-4F (inset of Figure 2a)79,80 surpasses 

that threshold with a record 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in our NFA dataset (2.7 × 105 M-1 cm-1, and 2.4 × 105 M-1

cm-1 measured in CHCl3 solution).79


15

Figure 2. (a) Correlation between 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥, as calculated from TDDFT, and 1,p as obtained in 

the database of 479 molecules. The DFT-optimized geometry of BDTP-4F is shown in the inset. 

(b) Correlation between 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 (and 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠 in the secondary axis) and C2SP2 in that same 

database. (c) DFT-optimized geometries of archetypal NFAs ordered by increased values of 

1,p from bottom to top (CBM < Y6 < IEICO-4F < NIBT). Dotted red lines tentatively indicate 

the overall curvature of the main conjugated backbone of the molecule. 1,p and C2SP2 describe 

the size of the molecule in the direction of maximal atomic polarizability, and the number of 

doubly bound carbon atoms (sp2 hybridized) bound to two other carbons (C2), respectively.

1,p is part of a bundle of three-dimensional molecular size and shape descriptors known as 

weighted holistic invariant molecular (WHIM) descriptors.81–83 These can be interpreted as a 

generalized search for the principal axes with respect to a defined atomic property.84 In this 

particular case, 1,p is obtained by performing a principal component analysis (PCA) on the 

centred atomic coordinates of the molecule using a covariance matrix (𝑠𝑗𝑘) that is weighted by 

the atomic polarizabilities (𝑝𝑖):

𝑠𝑗𝑘 =

∑
𝑝𝑖(𝑞𝑖𝑗−𝑞𝑗
̅̅̅)(𝑞𝑖𝑘−𝑞𝑘
̅̅̅̅)
𝐴
𝑖=1

∑
𝑝𝑖
𝐴
𝑖=1
,
(Equation 4)


16

where 𝑠𝑗𝑘 is the weighted covariance between the jth and kth atomic coordinates; 𝐴 is the total 

number of atoms; 𝑝𝑖 is the (tabulated) polarizability of the ith atom; 𝑞𝑖𝑗 and 𝑞𝑖𝑘 represent the 

jth and kth coordinate of the ith atom (𝑗, 𝑘 = 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧), respectively; and 𝑞̅ is their average 

value.84 After diagonalization of the polarizability-weighted covariance matrix, the first 

eigenvalue (1,p) quantifies the size of the molecule in the direction of maximal polarizability 

variance. Interestingly, the third eigenvalue (3,p) approaches zero in planar molecules as a 

result of absence of variance in the out-of-plane (z) direction.84 On the other hand, C2SP2, 

which is not in the WHIM group, accounts for the number of doubly bound carbon atoms (sp2

hybridized, SP2) bound to two other carbons (C2), thus constituting a two-dimensional 

descriptor of fast computation. The correlation between C2SP2 and absorption strength can be 

relatively easier to understand, as C2SP2 to some extent represents the size of the conjugated 

molecule. Enlarging the size of the molecule increases the total number of -electrons, which 

controls the total oscillator strength following the Thomas-Reiche-Kuhn rule. For the molecules 

that are extended along one direction, such as linear oligomers, increasing the size should 

enhance the oscillator strength of the first transition,31 i.e. the dominant one.

To further interpret these two magnitudes (1,p and C2SP2) as the main correlated descriptors 

with 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠 , we inspect the DFT-optimized geometries of archetypal NFAs 

(Figure 2c). The observed trend suggests that optical extinction monotonically increases with 

1,p (Figure 2a) in molecules having most of their polarizable atoms arranged along a main axis, 

i.e., linear molecules. While CBM shows large torsion angles mainly affecting the 2,1,3-

benzothiadiazole (BT) moieties (thus making the molecule non-planar and increasing 3,p, see 

Figure S14), Y6 shows a characteristic curved geometry that limits its 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 despite showing 

improved planarity. The NFA with the highest 1,p (NIBT) shows both linearity and planarity, 

with most of the more polarizable atoms (mainly C and S) lying along the principal polarizable 

axis of the molecule. Thus, in terms of molecular geometry, the absorption strength of NFAs 

could be further enhanced by distributing most of the atomic polarizability along a main axis 

while keeping good planarity and minimizing curvature. However, 1,p is not the sole molecular 

descriptor governing absorption strength, as BDTP-4F shows ca. 40% lower 1,p (0.75 nm2) yet 

ca. 40% higher 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 than NIBT (Figure 2a), which suggests that the molecular symmetry of 

NFAs could be another important factor affecting 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥. Our preliminary investigations on 

this issue indicate that molecular asymmetry, as quantified by the WHIM symmetry index 𝐺𝑢,

might drive absorption strength higher (Figure S15a), yet we require a larger NFA database

including more asymmetric molecules to further explore such an observation. Also, we 


17

acknowledge that this observation might be biased by the systematic omission of side chains in 

the TDDFT calculations. By comparing 1,p in a selection of small molecule acceptors 

geometrically optimized with and without side chains (Figure S16a), we observe that in most 

cases the addition of side chains either decreases 1,p slightly or keeps it invariant. Still, the 

positive correlation of 1,p with respect to 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 is maintained (Figure S16b). Furthermore, 

the presence of napthalene imide derivatives in the molecular structure of NIBT could be 

hindering further increase of the absorption strength with 1,p, as suggested by our statistical 

analysis of frequent moieties in the selection of good light harvesters (presented in the next 

section). On the other hand, an increase of 𝑛𝜋 in the molecule in the form of closed-ring 

conjugated moieties will systematically increase C2SP2 and accordingly 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠 . These 

findings support the previously known design rules in terms of molecular linearity and -

conjugation enabling large oscillator strength in organic small molecules and polymers, and are

consistent with a recent study on chromophores.32 In particular, trans- conjugated polymer 

stereoisomers are known to possess higher optical extinction due to their increased straightness 

and persistence length,31 which agrees with our observations on exemplary curved (Y6) and 

more linear (NIBT) NFAs.

The energy of the first optical transition (𝐸1) is also of practical importance in light harvesters 

such as NFAs as the lower energy part of the solar spectrum, down to ~1 eV, contains a higher 

photon flux density. Our results show the number of heteroatoms in the molecule as the most 

correlated feature with 𝐸1 ( = -0.72, Figure S17a) while forming a single feature cluster, yet

neither 1,p nor C2SP2 show strong correlations with 𝐸1. This fact prevents the introduction of 

molecular design rules targeted at E1 using 1,p or C2SP2. However, we acknowledge a negative 

correlation between 𝐸1 and 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥 among common NFAs that suggests further room for

absorption strength increase as 𝐸1 is reduced (Figure S18).

2.2.2. Chemical insights into highly absorbing molecules

Beyond molecular descriptors, we investigate the relationship between the choice of moieties 

and absorption strength to provide further material design rules for highly absorbing conjugated 

small molecules. Our objective is to identify overrepresented moieties in the subset of high-

absorbing molecules (which we arbitrarily define as those having 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥 > 2.5, thus setting a 

population of size p) with respect to the entire molecular dataset (population of size P). 

Accordingly, we identify the molecular motifs present in the molecules by comparing their 

structures (as derived from SMILES notation) with those of a previously built database of 


18

moieties (also SMILES-based). This database of moieties was partly inherited from a previous 

work44 and extended with further motifs present in our particular dataset (see Supplementary 

Note 4 and the spreadsheet included as Supplementary database). Afterwards, we consider that 

a discrete hypergeometric distribution is adequate to model our molecular dataset and the 

fragments found therein44 to calculate the corresponding Z-scores as 𝑍 = (𝑘 − 𝑘̅)/𝜎𝑘, where 𝑘

is the number of high-absorbing molecules containing certain moiety; 𝑘̅ is its expected value, 

defined as 𝑝𝐾/𝑃 where 𝐾 corresponds to the number of molecules in the entire dataset 

containing that same moiety; and 𝜎𝑘 = √𝑝𝐾(𝑃 − 𝐾)(𝑃 − 𝑝)/(𝑃2(𝑃 − 1)) is the standard 

deviation of the hypergeometric distribution. Z-scores will indicate (in units of 𝜎𝑘) which 

moieties are overrepresented or underrepresented in the subset of high-performing molecules 

with respect to the expected values when looking at the entire dataset. Our results (Figure 3) 

suggest that thieno[3,2-b]thiophene (TT), thiophene (T), 2-(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-

1H-inden-1-ylidene)malononitrile 
(2FIC), 
2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-

ylidene)malononitrile 
(IC),
indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene 
(IDT), 
2-methylene

malononitrile, cyanide, and aniline are particularly frequent in highly absorbing molecules.

Interestingly, four of those molecular fragments (TT, T, 2FIC and IC) are contained in the 

chemical structure of the workhorse NFA Y6 (Figure 2c). Contrarily, napthalene imide 

derivatives, as typically encountered in n-type small molecules and conjugated polymers; 

4H,8H-benzo[1,2-c:4,5-c']dithiophene-4,8-dione 
and 
benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b']dithiophene 

fragments are mostly underrepresented in the selection of high-performing light harvesters.

We further study the existing correlation between pairs of moieties to understand in which way 

the different molecular fragments should (or should not) be combined to retrieve highly-

absorbing molecules. Our analysis starts by creating molecular subsets determined by the 

presence of a given moiety, which acts as source node (coloured in black) in the network graph 

shown in Figure 3b. Within that subset, we identify the high-absorbing molecules (𝑓osc,max > 

2.5) and compute the Z-scores of their moieties (child nodes, coloured in grey in Figure 3b) 

with respect to the molecules of the entire molecular subset. As per the network shown in 

Figure 3b, the absolute Z-scores will determine the width of the edges connecting the nodes 

(moieties) and its sign the colour of the edge (green for positive Z-score [overrepresentation] 

and red for negative Z-score [underrepresentation]). Therefore, green and thick edges connect

pairs of molecules that are more frequently found in high-absorbing molecules whereas thick 

and red edges indicate combinations of moieties that lead to less absorbing molecules. In this 

analysis, we set up 8 different source nodes corresponding to the most overrepresented moieties 


19

observed in Figure 3a. As a result, Figure 3b can be interpreted as a catalogue of design rules 

relating pairs of moieties with high oscillator strength in -conjugated small molecules.

Figure 3. (a) Z-scores obtained from the discrete hypergeometric distribution of moieties in the 

highly-absorbing molecules (𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥 > 2.5) with respect to the entire molecular dataset, for 

moieties activated at least 10 times. The corresponding structures of identified moieties are 

shown. (b) Network graph of Z-scores relating pairs of moieties. Source nodes are coloured in 

black whereas child nodes are coloured in grey. The colour of the edges corresponds to the sign 

of the Z-score (green for positive, red for negative). The width of the edges scales with the 

absolute value of the Z-score.

2.3. Machine-learning modelling of the absorption strength

Besides providing useful chemical insights from a material design perspective, molecular 

descriptors can be exploited to feed regression models and draw predictions on certain target 

features, forming the so-called quantitative structure-property relationship (QSPR) and 

quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) models.81,82,84,85 In the present study, we 

train and test several ML models fed with molecular and electronic descriptors obtained from 

TDDFT calculations to predict the value of 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in conjugated small molecules and 

oligomers. Finally, we propose exploiting such ML model (trained with TDDFT data) to predict 

𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in molecules optimized using a semi-empirical quantum chemistry method, i.e. xTB.86

This renders possible thanks to the geometrical similarity of the TDDFT and xTB ground state 

conformers, which lead to similar (geometrical) descriptors values; and the calibration of their 


20

corresponding energy levels, as per the required inputs of the ML model herein employed. 

Therefore, further molecular candidates beyond the pristine dataset could be geometrically 

optimized using solely xTB Hamiltonians and their absorption strength predicted using such 

ML model. This approach effectively bypasses the use of TDDFT calculations when screening 

the absorption strength of novel molecules, which results in less demanding computations and 

higher throughput. The present ML workflow will open the possibility to accelerate the 

screening of high-performing molecular candidates with low-to-moderate computational 

requirements (further discussed in Supplementary Note 5).

2.3.1. Modelling 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 with random decision forests

From the analysis of descriptors shown in Section 2.2.1, we identified two main feature clusters 

represented by 1,p and C2SP2. We tentatively consider these two descriptors as independent 

variables in baseline models (such as 1-nearest neighbour and linear regression) targeted to

εd,𝑚𝑎𝑥. For the model training and testing, we split our pristine dataset onto two subsets, namely 

the training set (gathering 70% of the data, randomly selected) and the testing set (gathering the 

remaining 30% of the data). Such baseline models are picked according to a recently introduced 

catalogue of good practices in the ML field,87 to demonstrate the requirement of more advanced 

regressors (namely ML) in successful data modelling. The models are scored and quantitatively 

compared based on workhorse fitting metrics, such as their coefficient of determination (𝑅2);

their adjusted coefficient of determination (𝑅𝑎𝑑𝑗

2
, which adds penalties as the number of 

parameters increases, see Supplementary Note 2); and their Pearson correlation coefficient (r),

as retrieved in the training (fitting) and test sets. The inherent mathematical simplicity of the 

baseline models results in poor fitting scorings (Figure S19 and Table S1) yet they suggest that 

feature selection procedures could end up in higher-performing models.

Accordingly, we deploy a state-of-the-art ML method, namely a RF, to aid in both aspects: 

feature selection and building of 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 models of higher accuracy. RFs constitute one of the 

simplest and most widely applied ML methods in molecular screening and data mining 

studies.32,45,47,88 They are particularly appealing for their straightforward implementation 

through open-source Python libraries such as Scikit-Learn,89 and also for their inherent 

robustness against overfitting and fast optimization. RFs are formed by an ensemble of decision 

trees (estimators) that are executed in parallel and independently from each other. Decision 

trees serve to classify data by starting from a single root node that is subsequently divided into

child nodes, the latter being chosen randomly among the input features. At every node splitting 


21

step (i.e., decision making), the algorithm selects the pathway that minimizes the mean square 

error (MSE). Eventually, when every tree reaches its maximum extension (which is set 

arbitrarily via model hyperparameters), the predictions of all trees are averaged (ensembled), 

hence constituting the final predicted value of the RF. At this stage, myriad cross-validation 

(CV) techniques exist to evaluate the quality of the model and help in the tuning of 

hyperparameters. CV methods can estimate the ML model performance, evaluate potential 

over- or underfitting, and quantify how accurate the model is on drawing predictions on unseen 

data. In this work, we adopt two common cross-validation schemes, namely a repeated holdout 

CV; and a leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV). On the one hand, in a repeated holdout 

CV the pristine dataset is randomly split onto two distinct subsets, namely the training (here 

gathering 70% of the data) and testing (the remaining fraction of data, i.e. 30%) subsets. The 

model is trained and tested on the respective subsets, and the corresponding statistical metrics 

(R2, r, MSE, etc.) annotated. Eventually, the process is repeated k times (10-fold in this work), 

and all metrics are averaged to evaluate the ML model performance (its CV score). On the other 

hand, in a LOOCV the holdout process is taken to the extreme as the testing subset consists of 

a single data point while the remaining data is used in the training step. The process runs 

recursively for all data, thus eventually all data points are used for training and testing in the 

LOOCV protocol. Yet being computationally expensive, a LOOCV results in a more accurate 

estimate of model performance.

Table S1 includes the performance of an out-of-the-box RF model trained and cross-validated 

using 300 trees (estimators). Exemplary comparisons between the two previous baseline models 

(1-nearest neighbor and linear regression) and the out-of-the-box RF model are found in Figure 

S19. The RF models indicate that scoring functions (𝑅2, 𝑟) well above 0.6-0.8 are feasible upon 

careful feature selection and further optimization of the RF regressor. Feature selection in RFs 

is usually performed by filtering variables based on their feature importance, which is a metric 

that accounts for how much a feature decreases the weighted variance in the node splitting steps 

of the decision trees. This property enables feature ranking to then apply myriad algorithms to 

filter out the least important variables as seen by the RF regressor. In this work, we perform a 

recursive feature elimination (RFE) procedure to the initial library of 3239 descriptors as 

described in Supplementary Note 2. In a RFE protocol, a significant fraction of the initial 

population of features is dropped in successive training steps of the RF ensemble. Features are 

dropped based on their corresponding feature importance until reaching an arbitrarily low 

number of input variables, hence simplifying the original model. Our RFE analysis shows that 

a threshold average 𝑅2 of 0.70 is achieved using a 12-variable model (R2 = 0.70  0.05, r = 


22

0.84  0.03), which outperforms the RF model presented earlier while including a drastic 

reduction in the number of variables (from 3239 to 12). The sweet spot in model accuracy and 

number of degrees of freedom is found for the 10-variable model, which shows the maximum 

average 𝑅𝑎𝑑𝑗

2
(0.67  0.06).

Notably, a threshold 𝑅2 of 0.60 is already achieved training a 3-parameter RF model (𝑅2 =

0.63  0.06, 𝑅𝑎𝑑𝑗

2
= 0.62  0.06, 𝑟 = 0.80  0.03), which is particularly appealing given its 

simplicity. The resulting three-variable model includes one three-dimensional descriptor (1,v

or WHIM_45, as computed by the RDKit library, Figure 4a), one two-dimensional descriptor 

(CIC3, as computed by PaDEL software, Figure 4b) and one electronic descriptor, in this case 

the energy level of the second molecular orbital below the frontier HOMO (HOMO-2, Figure 

4c). 1,v refers to the first eigenvalue of the covariance matrix weighted by the atomic van der 

Waals volumes; thus, 1,v is included in the multicollinear feature cluster represented by 1,p

that we previously and statistically identified, showing nearly perfect correlation (r = 0.99) with 

1,p. Accordingly, 1,v can be exchanged by 1,p without loss of performance in the RF model. 

This finding confirms that the linearity of the molecule (either quantified in terms of 

polarizabilities or van der Waals volumes) plays a key role in determining its absorption 

strength in the form of 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 . On the other hand, CIC3 is a graph-based, third-order 

neighbourhood symmetry index84 which lacks a straightforward interpretation due to its 

mathematical complexity. We observe, however, that it linearly scales as log2 A, with A being 

the total number of vertices (atoms) in the graph (molecule)84 thus likely reflecting the size of 

-conjugation as per the characteristics of our dataset. The interpretation of HOMO-2 as an 

important descriptor is more challenging, and it is not possible to substitute it by a different 

descriptor without a noticeable drop in the model performance (excepting HOMO-1, which

shows r = 0.96). 

Interestingly, electronic descriptors (in particular) are required for the RF models to achieve 

their highest potential and scoring despite we have not observed strong correlations in our 

earlier statistical analysis. To probe it, we have performed the same RFE protocol yet skipping 

the set of electronic descriptors among the input features. Our results show that the top 

performing RF models (selecting 29 variables and getting 𝑅2 = 0.58  0.06, 𝑅𝑎𝑑𝑗

2
=

0.48  0.07, 𝑟 = 0.78  0.04; or selecting 9 variables to obtain 𝑅𝑎𝑑𝑗

2
= 0.52  0.06, see 

Figure S12) are yet behind the scorings recorded when the electronic descriptors are included 

in the list of features. Note that the performance without electronic descriptors is lower than the 


23

3-parameter model that includes HOMO-2 as descriptor, highlighting its positive effect on the 

performance of the RF regressor.

Figure 4. Correlation plots for 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 and the three most important descriptors retrieved by the 

RF model: (a) 1,v; (b) CIC3; and (c) HOMO-2. (d) Holdout cross-validation run of a RF 

ensemble to predict 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥. 70% of the data is randomly selected for training and the remaining 

fraction is used for testing; the process is repeated 10 times and the statistical metrics averaged. 

The RF model is trained with three molecular descriptors (1,v; CIC3; and HOMO-2) and a 

Morgan fingerprint vector of 64 bits. (e) Leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) of that same 

RF model using the optimized hyperparameter of 1200 estimators.

Molecular fingerprints have also been extensively exploited as input vectorial descriptors in 

statistical and ML models focused on feature prediction.44,90–92 Molecular fingerprints are 

usually represented as bit activation vectors of arbitrary length and degree of complexity, 

representing the absence or presence of certain molecular (bonding) pattern, moiety, functional 

group, or atom. In this work, we exploit the RDKit library to generate moiety fingerprints, 

MACCS keys, Morgan fingerprints, path-based or topological fingerprints, E-state fingerprints, 

and Coulomb vectors. These fingerprints are quickly computed and serve to complement and 

improve the learning process of the ML models employed herein.

a
b
c

d
e


24

To better analyse the influence of the different fingerprint vectors in improving the RF scoring, 

we trained and cross-validated the 3-parameter RF model previously found in combination with 

all fingerprint vectors generated. The results shown in Table S2 indicate that by adding a 

Morgan fingerprint vector of 64 bits to the initial set of input features the model performance 

can be substantially improved: 𝑅2 increases by 10% (relative), and r by another (relative) 5% 

(see Figure 4d). Therefore, Morgan fingerprints are particularly suitable to fine-tune the 

training and prediction accuracy of 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in RF models although lacking of a straightforward 

physical interpretation. Additional refinement of the RF hyperparameters results in further 

improved models. We performed this optimization through a randomized search (in 350 

iterations) of the hyperparameters controlling the number of estimators in the RF, the minimum 

number of samples per leaf node and the minimum number of samples required to split an 

internal node, which constitute the main adjustable hyperparameters of the RF algorithm. These 

results are shown in Table S3, together with the scoring obtained in a rigorous LOOCV of the 

optimized RF model (Figure 4e). As an alternative ensemble of decision trees, we have also 

tested and optimized an Extra Trees (ET) regressor in Scikit-Learn. Its performance is, however, 

very close to that attained in the workhorse RF regressor (Table S3 and Figure S20).

2.3.2. Bypassing TDDFT calculations through machine-learning and extended tight-binding

xTB Hamiltonians have recently emerged as semi-empirical and low computational cost 

quantum chemistry methods.86 These have a remarkable potential in molecular screening when 

implemented in multilevel workflows where xTB is exploited first to identify plausible 

candidates using a minimal fraction of computational resources, to then leave room for higher-

level DFT methods in selected candidates.86 In this work, we propose exploiting a ML model 

trained with DFT data to predict εd,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in molecular geometries optimized using xTB (Figure 

5a). This is expected to enable faster molecular screening and geometrical optimization steps, 

as both being entirely run using xTB Hamiltonians; followed by absorption strength (𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥) 

prediction in a TDDFT-trained RF model. Notably, our estimations show that the geometrical 

optimization step using GFN2-xTB is ca. 3000 times faster than using DFT with a hybrid 

functional (B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p)), as discussed in Supplementary Note 5 and Table S4. 

Nevertheless, the dissimilarity between xTB- and DFT-optimized molecular geometries might 

have a direct impact on the value of the (three-dimensional) molecular descriptors, and hence 

on the final accuracy of the interpolated ML model if some of those are included. Accordingly, 

we have first quantitatively compared both sets of molecular (non-electronic) descriptors by 


25

computing r in all of them and found that the median of their distributions is very close to unity 

in all cases (Figure S21). Based on this finding, we proceed by training the RF model with

TDDFT-derived descriptors and exploring how well the model interpolates when fed with xTB-

derived descriptors. Figure S22a shows a leave-one-out interpolation of a RF model trained 

using TDDFT data and interpolated on GFN2-xTB-optimized molecules, descriptors and 

energy levels.86,93,94 In this kind of model validation, all TDDFT data is used in the training step 

excepting that for a single molecule, for which we retrieve its corresponding xTB-optimized 

geometry and descriptors as the sole interpolation (testing) dataset; this procedure is 

subsequently repeated for all molecules. Thus, the model performance is assessed by comparing 

the actual TDDFT-derived 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 of the molecules (x-axis in Figure 5b) with that predicted by 

a RF model trained with TDDFT data and interpolated using xTB-derived descriptors (y-axis 

in Figure 5b). This is useful to evaluate whether such RF model fed with TDDFT data could 

be exploited to predict 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in unseen molecules that are geometrically optimized through 

xTB Hamiltonians.

Our first model takes as inputs the three molecular descriptors found previously to be the most 

important features in the RF model together with their corresponding (64-bit) Morgan 

fingerprints. The scoring of the LOOCV in this preliminary model (𝑅2 = 0.53, 𝑟 = 0.74) is 

limited due to the existence of a mismatch between the absolute energy levels retrieved by either 

DFT (B3LYP) or GFN2-xTB methods (Figure S22b). Thus, the RF model trained on TDDFT 

data needs proper calibration of the energy levels obtained through GFN2-xTB, which we 

perform using either a linear regression, a support vector regressor (SVR) or an additional RF 

model (Figure S22c). By applying such calibration on the HOMO-2 energy levels, we obtain 

the champion RF model (𝑅2 = 0.61, 𝑟 = 0.78) shown in Figure 5b using three molecular 

descriptors and a 64-bit Morgan fingerprint vector. Hence, Figure 5b shows that molecular 

databases of xTB-optimized geometries could be exploited in combination with TDDFT-

trained ML models to predict the absorption strength ( 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) at significantly lower 

computational cost and with reasonable accuracy. The statistical analysis and ML modelling 

framework introduced here is thus expected to show large potential in the high-throughput 

screening of highly absorbing molecular candidates in combination with generative models 

(autoencoders and neural networks) as part of future work in the group.


26

Figure 5. (a) ML workflow used in this work to draw 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 predictions. A RF model is trained 

on TDDFT data and interpolated (validated) on xTB geometries, including also their 

corresponding molecular descriptors. To improve the accuracy of the model, energy levels 

obtained using the GFN2–xTB Hamiltonian require calibration with TDDFT values (Figure 

S22). (b) Leave-one-out interpolation of the resulting RF model using three input molecular 

descriptors (including calibrated energy levels) and a 64-bit Morgan fingerprint vector.

3. Conclusion

We have demonstrated that TDDFT calculations agree reasonably well with the experimental 

maximum molar extinction coefficient (𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥) in solution state by exploiting a database of 

TDDFT-optimized small molecular acceptors (NFAs) and donor oligomers collected over the 

years. This finding supports further analysis of the molecular dataset to identify structure-

absorption relationships by means of statistical and machine-learning (ML) methods. Through 

the exploration of molecular descriptors, we identify two features that are strongly correlated 

with εd,𝑚𝑎𝑥, namely the linearity and planarity of the molecule in the direction of maximum 

atomic polarizability variance; and the number of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms bonded to two 

other carbons included in the molecule. These further suggest design rules that a highly 

absorbing NFA should possess a fully conjugated, planar and linear molecular backbone with 

more polarisable heteroatoms. We further identify that moieties such as thieno[3,2-b]thiophene 

(TT), thiophene (T), 2-(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-ylidene)malononitrile 

(2FIC), 2-(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-ylidene)malononitrile (IC) and indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-

b′]dithiophene (IDT) appear more frequently in molecules with the highest absorption strength. 

Finally, we demonstrate the feasibility of random decision forests (RFs) trained with a few (3) 


27

molecular descriptors and 64-bit Morgan fingerprint vectors to predict 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in molecular 

geometries optimized by a computationally less demanding method such as extended tight-

binding (xTB). This approach shows the ability to bypass thorough TDDFT calculations, thus 

facilitating high-throughput screening of absorption strength in conjugated molecules in 

combination with generative molecular models.

4. Experimental and theoretical methods

Excited state calculation database and experimental εd,max database: TDDFT results in this 

study are based on the functional B3LYP and were performed by present and past group 

members in Prof. Jenny Nelson’s group at Imperial College London, making up more than 3500 

entries (corresponding to 479 unique molecules). The majority of experimental solid state thin 

film εd,max values for NFAs shown in Figure 1a, b and c were measured using variable-angle 

spectroscopic ellipsometry (VASE) for the present study. Neat films were deposited from 

solution by either spin- or blade-coating on glass substrates at distinct thicknesses (typically 

ranging from 30 to 150 nm). Ellipsometry data were acquired at three to five angles of incidence

(55º-75º) using a Sopralab GES-5E rotating polarizer spectroscopic ellipsometer (SEMILAB) 

coupled to a charge-coupled device (CCD) detector. Experimental solution εd,max were mostly 

collected from literature with a majority of data taken from Ref. 95, and Y5, Y6, and Y7 

measured using UV-visible spectroscopy. The complete database and sources are presented in 

the Supplementary Database.

Theoretical description of molar extinction coefficient (𝜀𝑑): To calculate the molar extinction 

coefficient 𝜀𝑑, let us start with defining the absorption coefficient 𝛼 in a quantum picture (we 

stay with SI units for the moment). The absorption coefficient for transition from state 1 to state 

2 can be defined as 20,96

𝑑𝐼

𝑑𝑥 = −𝛼12𝐼,
(Equation S1)

where 𝐼 is light intensity, determined by the energy density of an electromagnetic wave via

𝐼 =

1

2 𝑛𝑐𝜖0|𝛦0|2,
(Equation S2)

where 𝑛 is the refractive index, 𝜖0 vacuum permittivity, 𝑐 the speed of light, and 𝐸0 the 

amplitude of the electric field. For an electromagnetic wave, the rate of intensity attenuation 

𝑑𝐼

𝑑𝑥


28

is equal to the rate of loss of energy density from the field −

𝑑𝑈

𝑑𝑡, and the latter is the product of 

transition rate 𝛤12 and transition energy ℏ𝜔12, and we have

𝑑𝐼

𝑑𝑥 = −𝑁𝛤12ℏ𝜔12,
(Equation S3)

where 𝑁 is the volume density of molecules and ℏ the reduced Planck constant. Substituting 

for 

𝑑𝐼

𝑑𝑥 and I in the definition of 𝛼12 we get

𝛼12 =

2𝑁ℏ𝜔12𝛤12
𝑛𝑐𝜖0|𝛦0|2
(Equation S4)

The transition rate 𝛤12 can be defined by Fermi’s Golden Rule and the perturbing Hamiltonian 

given by 𝐻 = 𝑑12𝜠𝟎 using dipole approximation, where 𝑑12 is the transition dipole moment of 

the transition. Considering randomly oriented transition dipoles relative to the direction of the 

exciting electromagnetic field, we have

𝛤12 =

2𝜋

3ℏ 𝑑12

2 |𝛦0|2𝛿(ℏ𝜔 − 𝐸2 + 𝐸1)
(Equation S5)

Using 𝐸2 − 𝐸1 = ℏ𝜔12, we get

𝛼12 =

4𝜋𝑁𝜔12
3𝑛𝑐𝜖0ℏ 𝑑12

2 𝛿(𝜔 − 𝜔12)
(Equation S6)

From an arbitrary transition from state i to state j, we can express above equation using oscillator 

strength of the transition (𝑓𝑖𝑗):

𝛼𝑖𝑗 =

2𝜋𝑁𝑒2

3𝜖0𝑚0𝑛𝑐 𝑓𝑖𝑗𝛿(𝜔 − 𝜔𝑖𝑗),
(Equation S7)

where 𝑒 is the elementary charge, and 𝑓𝑖𝑗 =

2𝑚0𝜔12

𝑒2ℏ
𝑑𝑖𝑗

2 . Integrating over all transitions, we have

𝛼(𝜔) =

2𝜋𝑁𝑒2

3𝜖0𝑚0𝑛𝑐 ∑ 𝑓𝑖𝑗𝛿(𝜔 − 𝜔𝑖𝑗)
𝑖𝑗
(Equation S8)

To correlate the absorption coefficient (𝛼) with the molar extinction coefficient (𝜀𝑑), we need 

the definition of optical density (𝑂𝐷) and optical depth (𝛼𝑑). Light is attenuated by passing 

through a depth 𝑑 of material such that 

𝐼(𝑑) = 𝐼0𝑒−𝛼𝑑 = 𝐼010−𝑂𝐷
(Equation S9)


29

And optical density, or called sometimes absorbance is defined as

𝑂𝐷 = 𝜌𝜀𝑑𝑑,
(Equation S10)

where 𝜌 is concentration in molar (M or mol L-1), and 𝑑 is sample length in cm. Consequently, 

we have 

𝜀𝑑 =

𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝑒)

𝜌
𝛼𝑐𝑚 =

𝛼𝑐𝑚

2.303𝜌,
(Equation S11)

noting that we now write the absorption coefficient per cm to distinguish from the expression 

for 𝛼 above, which we did assuming SI units, hence 𝛼𝑐𝑚 =

𝛼

100. 𝜌 is moles of molecules per 

dm3. We now have

𝜀𝑑(𝜔) = 10 𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝑒) 𝑁𝐴

2𝜋𝑒2

3𝜖0𝑚0𝑛𝑐 ∑ 𝑓𝑖𝑗𝛿(𝜔 − 𝜔𝑖𝑗)
𝑖𝑗
(Equation S12)

Let us recast this in terms of photon energy 𝐸 in eV, i.e. 𝐸 =

ℏ𝜔

𝑒 , rather than angular frequency, 

so it is easier to consider the magnitude, and finally we have 𝜀𝑑 in the unit of M-1 cm-1.

𝜀𝑑(𝐸) = 10 𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝑒) 𝑁𝐴

2𝜋𝑒ℏ

3𝜖0𝑚0𝑛𝑐 ∑ 𝑓𝑖𝑗𝛿(𝐸 − 𝐸𝑖𝑗)
𝑖𝑗
(Equation S13)

This allows us to compute the theoretical 𝜀𝑑 using the calculated oscillator strength at different 

transitions. And the common method to calculate the oscillator strength is time-dependent-

density-functional-theory (aka TDDFT).

Converting complex refractive index from solid state ellipsometry measurements to 𝜀𝑑: Using 

ellipsometry measurements from film (solid state), we can extract the complex refractive index, 

𝜂

𝜂 = 𝑛 + 𝑖𝜅
(Equation S14)

Where 𝑛 is the refractive index, and 𝜅 the extinction coefficient. The absorption coefficient 

(𝛼𝑐𝑚) is then determined by

𝛼𝑐𝑚 =

4𝜋𝜅

𝜆𝑐𝑚
(Equation S15)

Where 𝜆𝑐𝑚 is the wavelength in centimetre. Using Equation S11, and the relationship between 

molar concentration 𝜌 and mass concentration 𝜌𝑀, i.e., 𝜌 =

𝜌𝑀
𝑀𝑤, we have


30

𝜀𝑑 = 𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝑒) 𝛼𝑐𝑚

𝑀𝑤
𝜌𝑀 = 𝑙𝑜𝑔10(𝑒) 4𝜋𝜅

𝜆𝑐𝑚

𝑀𝑤
𝜌𝑀
(Equation S16)

Where 𝑀𝑤 is the molecular weight, g mol-1, and 𝜌𝑀 has the unit of g L-1, and is typically 

assumed to be 1000 g L-1.


31

Author contributions

J.Y. and X.R.-M. contributed equally to this work and drafted the paper. J.Y. performed DFT 

and TDDFT calculations, absorption strength analysis, and data collection. X.R.-M. performed 

the statistical analysis and machine-learning study. D.P., H.D., D.B., M.A., A.V., S.F., A.A.S., 

and X.H. shared their DFT/TDDFT calculation results. F.E. prepared thin films of NFAs for 

VASE measurements. X.R.-M., V.B., and B.D. did VASE measurements. E.R. did UV-vis 

measurements of Y5, Y6, and Y7 in solution. G.Z. and H.-L.Y. provided Y5, Y6, and Y7. All 

authors gave critical review on this work. J.N. and M.C.-Q. supervised this work.

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts to declare.

Acknowledgements

J.N., J.Y., D.P., M.A., F.E., and E.R. thank the European Research Council for support under 

the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (Grant Agreement No. 

742708 and No. 648901). The authors at ICMAB acknowledge financial support from the 

Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation through the Severo Ochoa” Program for Centers 

of Excellence in R&D (No. CEX2019-000917-S), and project PGC2018-095411-B-I00. E.R. 

is grateful to the Fonds de Recherche du Quebec-Nature et technologies (FRQNT) for a 

postdoctoral fellowship and acknowledges financial support from the European Cooperation in 

Science and Technology. M.A. thanks the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 

(EPSRC) for support via doctoral studentships. F.E. thanks the Engineering and Physical 

Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) for support via the Post-Doctoral Prize Fellowship. X.R.-

M. acknowledges Prof. Olle Inganäs and the Knut and Allice Wallenberg Foundation for 

funding of his current postdoctoral position. H.-L. Yip thanks the support from Guangdong 

Major Project of Basic and Applied Basic Research (2019B030302007). The TOC figure and 

Figure 5a in the manuscript include freely available resources from Flaticon.com. J.Y. thank 

Xiaodan Ge for her support.


32

References

1
J. Nelson, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 462–470.

2
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161.

3
A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 10–28.

4
M. Mainville and M. Leclerc, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1186–1197.

5
H. K. H. Lee, J. Wu, J. Barbé, S. M. Jain, S. Wood, E. M. Speller, Z. Li, F. A. Castro, 

J. R. Durrant and W. C. Tsoi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5618–5626.

6
Y. Cui, Y. Wang, J. Bergqvist, H. Yao, Y. Xu, B. Gao, C. Yang, S. Zhang, O. Inganäs, 

F. Gao and J. Hou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 768–775.

7
Y. Li, J. D. Lin, X. Che, Y. Qu, F. Liu, L. S. Liao and S. R. Forrest, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 

2017, 139, 17114–17119.

8
S. Difley and T. Van Voorhis, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 594–601.

9
C. J. M. Emmott, J. A. Röhr, Mariano Campoy-Quiles, Thomas Kirchartz, 

Antonio Urbina, N. J. Ekins-Daukes and Jenny Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 

1317–1328.

10
C. J. M. Emmott, D. Moia, P. Sandwell, N. Ekins-Daukes, M. Hösel, L. Lukoschek, C. 

Amarasinghe, F. C. Krebs and J. Nelson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 149, 

284–293.

11
Y. Cui, Y. Xu, H. Yao, P. Bi, L. Hong, J. Zhang, Y. Zu, T. Zhang, J. Qin, J. Ren, Z. 

Chen, C. He, X. Hao, Z. Wei and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2102420.

12
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. 

Yang, X. Zhang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275.

13
J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Yang, K. Jiang, H. Lin, H. Ade, W. Ma and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 

2016, 1, 15027.

14
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142.

15
Y. Wang, J. Lee, X. Hou, C. Labanti, J. Yan, E. Mazzolini, A. Parhar, J. Nelson, J. Kim 


33

and Z. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003002.

16
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119–128.

17
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, 

P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–

1151.

18
M. Kaltenbrunner, M. S. White, E. D. Głowacki, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, N. S. 

Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Commun. 2012 31, 2012, 3, 1–7.

19
W. Yang, W. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Sun, J. Guo, H. Li, M. Shi, J. Guo, Y. Wu, T. Wang, 

G. Lu, C. J. Brabec, Y. Li and J. Min, Joule, 2021, 5, 1209–1230.

20
J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells, Imperial College Press, 2003.

21
U. Rau, Phys. Rev. B, 2007, 76, 085303.

22
M. Azzouzi, J. Yan, T. Kirchartz, K. Liu, J. Wang, H. Wu and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. X, 

2018, 8, 031055.

23
F. D. Eisner, M. Azzouzi, Z. Fei, X. Hou, T. D. Anthopoulos, T. J. S. Dennis, M. 

Heeney and J. Nelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6362–6374.

24
J. Yan, E. Rezasoltani, M. Azzouzi, F. Eisner and J. Nelson, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 

3642.

25
A. Classen, C. L. Chochos, L. Lüer, V. G. Gregoriou, J. Wortmann, A. Osvet, K. 

Forberich, I. McCulloch, T. Heumüller and C. J. Brabec, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 711–

719.

26
X.-K. Chen, D. Qian, Y. Wang, T. Kirchartz, W. Tress, H. Yao, J. Yuan, M. Hülsbeck, 

M. Zhang, Y. Zou, Y. Sun, Y. Li, J. Hou, O. Inganäs, V. Coropceanu, J.-L. Bredas and 

F. Gao, Nat. Energy 2021 68, 2021, 6, 799–806.

27
J. Benduhn, K. Tvingstedt, F. Piersimoni, S. Ullbrich, Y. Fan, M. Tropiano, K. A. A. 

McGarry, O. Zeika, M. K. K. Riede, C. J. J. Douglas, S. Barlow, S. R. R. Marder, D. 

Neher, D. Spoltore and K. Vandewal, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17053.

28
X.-K. Chen, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5295.


34

29
X.-K. Chen, D. Qian, Y. Wang, T. Kirchartz, W. Tress, H. Yao, J. Yuan, M. Hülsbeck, 

M. Zhang, Y. Zou, Y. Sun, Y. Li, J. Hou, O. Inganäs, V. Coropceanu, J.-L. Bredas and 

F. Gao, Nat. Energy, , DOI:10.1038/s41560-021-00843-4.

30
D. Qian, Z. Zheng, H. Yao, W. Tress, T. R. Hopper, S. S. Chen, S. Li, J. Liu, S. S. 

Chen, J. Zhang, X.-K. K. Liu, B. Gao, L. Ouyang, Y. Jin, G. Pozina, I. A. Buyanova, 

W. M. Chen, O. Inganäs, V. Coropceanu, J.-L. L. Bredas, H. Yan, J. Hou, F. Zhang, A. 

A. Bakulin and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 703–709.

31
M. S. Vezie, S. Few, I. Meager, G. Pieridou, B. Dörling, R. S. Ashraf, A. R. Goñi, H. 

Bronstein, I. McCulloch, S. C. Hayes, M. Campoy-Quiles and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 

2016, 15, 746–753.

32
B. Kang, C. Seok and J. Lee, J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2020, 60, 5984–5994.

33
S. Few, J. M. Frost, J. Kirkpatrick and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8253–

8261.

34
Y. Yi, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1479.

35
T. Liu and A. Troisi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2406–2415.

36
J. C. Slater, Phys. Rev., 1951, 81, 385.

37
B. L. Hammond, W. A. Lester and P. J. Reynolds, Monte Carlo Methods in Ab Initio 

Quantum Chemistry, WORLD SCIENTIFIC, 1994, vol. 1.

38
R. A. Friesner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2005, 102, 6648–6653.

39
Y. Shao, L. F. Molnar, Y. Jung, J. Kussmann, C. Ochsenfeld, S. T. Brown, A. T. B. 

Gilbert, L. V. Slipchenko, S. V. Levchenko, D. P. O’Neill, R. A. DiStasio Jr, R. C. 

Lochan, T. Wang, G. J. O. Beran, N. A. Besley, J. M. Herbert, C. Yeh Lin, T. Van 

Voorhis, S. Hung Chien, A. Sodt, R. P. Steele, V. A. Rassolov, P. E. Maslen, P. P. 

Korambath, R. D. Adamson, B. Austin, J. Baker, E. F. C. Byrd, H. Dachsel, R. J. 

Doerksen, A. Dreuw, B. D. Dunietz, A. D. Dutoi, T. R. Furlani, S. R. Gwaltney, A. 

Heyden, S. Hirata, C.-P. Hsu, G. Kedziora, R. Z. Khalliulin, P. Klunzinger, A. M. Lee, 

M. S. Lee, W. Liang, I. Lotan, N. Nair, B. Peters, E. I. Proynov, P. A. Pieniazek, Y. 

Min Rhee, J. Ritchie, E. Rosta, C. David Sherrill, A. C. Simmonett, J. E. Subotnik, H. 

Lee Woodcock III, W. Zhang, A. T. Bell, A. K. Chakraborty, D. M. Chipman, F. J. 


35

Keil, A. Warshel, W. J. Hehre, H. F. Schaefer III, J. Kong, A. I. Krylov, P. M. W. Gill 

and M. Head-Gordon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3172–3191.

40
P. Raccuglia, K. C. Elbert, P. D. F. Adler, C. Falk, M. B. Wenny, A. Mollo, M. Zeller, 

S. A. Friedler, J. Schrier and A. J. Norquist, Nat. 2016 5337601, 2016, 533, 73–76.

41
K. T. Butler, D. W. Davies, H. Cartwright, O. Isayev and A. Walsh, Nat. 2018 

5597715, 2018, 559, 547–555.

42
J. Westermayr and P. Marquetand, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 9873–9926.

43
F. Häse, L. M. Roch, P. Friederich and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–

11.

44
S. A. Lopez, B. Sanchez-Lengeling, J. de Goes Soares and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Joule, 

2017, 1, 857–870.

45
H. Sahu, W. Rao, A. Troisi and H. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., , 

DOI:10.1002/aenm.201801032.

46
N. Majeed, M. Saladina, M. Krompiec, S. Greedy, C. Deibel and R. C. I. MacKenzie, 

Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1907259, 1907259.

47
X. Rodríguez-Martínez, E. Pascual-San-José, Z. Fei, M. Heeney, R. Guimerà and M. 

Campoy-Quiles, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 986–994.

48
X. Rodríguez-Martínez, E. Pascual-San-José and M. Campoy-Quiles, Energy Environ. 

Sci., 2021, 14, 3301–3322.

49
K. Kranthiraja and A. Saeki, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–11.

50
E. O. Pyzer-Knapp, C. Suh, R. Gómez-Bombarelli, J. Aguilera-Iparraguirre and A. 

Aspuru-Guzik, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 195–216.

51
J. Hachmann, R. Olivares-amaya, S. Atahan-evrenk, C. Amador-bedolla, R. S. 

Sanchez-carrera, A. Gold-parker, L. Vogt, A. M. Brockway and A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. 

Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2241–2251.

52
A. Mahmood, J.-L. Wang, Asif Mahmood and Jin-Liang Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 

2021, 14, 90–105.


36

53
P. Malhotra, S. Biswas, F.-C. Chen and G. D. Sharma, Sol. Energy, 2021, 228, 175–

186.

54
W. K. Tatum, D. Torrejon, A. B. Resing, J. W. Onorato and C. K. Luscombe, Comput. 

Mater. Sci., 2021, 197, 110599.

55
A. Kuzmich, D. Padula, H. Ma and A. Troisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 395–401.

56
I. Y. Kanal, S. G. Owens, J. S. Bechtel and G. R. Hutchison, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 

2013, 4, 1613–1623.

57
L. Wilbraham, E. Berardo, L. Turcani, K. E. Jelfs and M. A. Zwijnenburg, J. Chem. 

Inf. Model., 2018, 58, 2450–2459.

58
E. O. Pyzer-Knapp, K. Li and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6495–

6502.

59
J. Hachmann, R. Olivares-Amaya, A. Jinich, A. L. Appleton, M. A. Blood-Forsythe, L. 

R. Seress, C. Román-Salgado, K. Trepte, S. Atahan-Evrenk, S. Er, S. Shrestha, R. 

Mondal, A. Sokolov, Z. Bao and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 698–

704.

60
N. Bérubé, V. Gosselin, J. Gaudreau and M. Côté, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7964–

7972.

61
S. Nagasawa, E. Al-Naamani and A. Saeki, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2639–2646.

62
Y. Huang, J. Zhang, E. S. Jiang, Y. Oya, A. Saeki, G. Kikugawa, T. Okabe, T. Okabe, 

F. S. Ohuchi and F. S. Ohuchi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 12871–12882.

63
W. Sun, M. Li, Y. Li, Z. Wu, Y. Sun, S. Lu, Z. Xiao, B. Zhao and K. Sun, Adv. Theory 

Simulations, 2019, 2, 1–9.

64
R. Olivares-Amaya, C. Amador-Bedolla, J. Hachmann, S. Atahan-Evrenk, R. S. 

Sánchez-Carrera, L. Vogt and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4849–

4861.

65
H. Sahu, F. Yang, X. Ye, J. Ma, W. Fang and H. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 

17480–17488.


37

66
D. Padula, J. D. D. Simpson and A. Troisi, Mater. Horizons, 2019, 6, 343–349.

67
L. Simine, T. C. Allen and P. J. Rossky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2020, 117, 13945–

13948.

68
J. F. Joung, M. Han, J. Hwang, M. Jeong, D. H. Choi and S. Park, JACS Au, 2021, 1, 

427–438.

69
S. Ye, W. Hu, X. Li, J. Zhang, K. Zhong, G. Zhang, Y. Luo, S. Mukamel and J. Jiang, 

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2019, 116, 201821044.

70
C. Nantasenamat, C. Isarankura-Na-Ayudhya, N. Tansila, T. Naenna and V. 

Prachayasittikul, J. Comput. Chem., 2007, 28, 1275–1289.

71
E. J. Beard, G. Sivaraman, Á. Vázquez-Mayagoitia, V. Vishwanath and J. M. Cole, Sci. 

Data, 2019, 6, 307.

72
S. Varghese and S. Das, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 863–873.

73
C. L. Donley, J. Zaumseil, J. W. Andreasen, M. M. Nielsen, H. Sirringhaus, R. H. 

Friend and J. S. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12890–12899.

74
P. J. Brown, D. S. Thomas, A. Köhler, J. S. Wilson, J.-S. S. Kim, C. M. Ramsdale, H. 

Sirringhaus and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B, 2003, 67, 064203.

75
C. W. Yap, J. Comput. Chem., 2011, 32, 1466–1474.

76
D.-S. Cao, Q.-S. Xu, Q.-N. Hu and Y.-Z. Liang, Bioinformatics, 2013, 29, 1092–1094.

77
H. Moriwaki, Y.-S. Tian, N. Kawashita and T. Takagi, J. Cheminform., 2018, 10, 4.

78
RDKit: Open-Source Cheminformatics Software.

79
Z. Luo, R. Ma, Y. Xiao, T. Liu, H. Sun, M. Su, Q. Guo, G. Li, W. Gao, Y. Chen, Y. 

Zou, X. Guo, M. Zhang, X. Lu, H. Yan and C. Yang, Small, 2020, 16, 2001942.

80
M. Y. Mehboob, M. Adnan, R. Hussain and Z. Irshad, Synth. Met., 2021, 277, 116800.

81
R. Todeschini, M. Lasagni and E. Marengo, J. Chemom., 1994, 8, 263–272.

82
R. Todeschini and P. Gramatica, in 3D QSAR in Drug Design, Kluwer Academic 


38

Publishers, Dordrecht, pp. 355–380.

83
R. Todeschini and P. Gramatica, Quant. Struct. Relationships, 1997, 16, 113–119.

84
R. Todeschini and V. Consonni, Molecular Descriptors for Chemoinformatics, Wiley, 

Second Edi., 2009, vol. 41.

85
R. Todeschini and V. Consonni, Handbook of Molecular Descriptors, Wiley, 2000.

86
C. Bannwarth, E. Caldeweyher, S. Ehlert, A. Hansen, P. Pracht, J. Seibert, S. Spicher 

and S. Grimme, WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci., , DOI:10.1002/wcms.1493.

87
N. Artrith, K. T. Butler, F.-X. Coudert, S. Han, O. Isayev, A. Jain and A. Walsh, Nat. 

Chem., 2021, 13, 505–508.

88
M. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1900891.

89
F. Pedregosa, R. Weiss, M. Brucher, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. 

Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, 

A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot and É. Duchesnay, J. Mach. Learn. 

Res., 2011, 12, 2825–2830.

90
D. Rogers and M. Hahn, J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2010, 50, 742–754.

91
L. H. Hall and L. B. Kier, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci., 1995, 35, 1039–1045.

92
D. C. Elton, Z. Boukouvalas, M. S. Butrico, M. D. Fuge and P. W. Chung, Sci. Rep., 

2018, 8, 9059.

93
C. Bannwarth, S. Ehlert and S. Grimme, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2019, 15, 1652–

1671.

94
S. Grimme, C. Bannwarth and P. Shushkov, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2017, 13, 

1989–2009.

95
G. Forti, A. Nitti, P. Osw, G. Bianchi, R. Po and D. Pasini, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2020, 21, 

8085.

96
L. A. A. Pettersson, L. S. Roman and O. Inganäs, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 487–496.

97
S. Karuthedath, J. Gorenflot, Y. Firdaus, N. Chaturvedi, C. S. P. De Castro, G. T. 


39

Harrison, J. I. Khan, A. Markina, A. H. Balawi, T. A. Dela Peña, W. Liu, R.-Z. Liang, 

A. Sharma, S. H. K. Paleti, W. Zhang, Y. Lin, E. Alarousu, D. H. Anjum, P. M. 

Beaujuge, S. De Wolf, I. McCulloch, T. D. Anthopoulos, D. Baran, D. Andrienko and 

F. Laquai, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 378–384.

98
W. Wang, B. Zhao, Z. Cong, Y. Xie, H. Wu, Q. Liang, S. Liu, F. Liu, C. Gao, H. Wu 

and Y. Cao, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1499–1507.

99
S. Holliday, R. S. Ashraf, A. Wadsworth, D. Baran, S. A. Yousaf, C. B. Nielsen, C. H. 

Tan, S. D. Dimitrov, Z. Shang, N. Gasparini, M. Alamoudi, F. Laquai, C. J. Brabec, A. 

Salleo, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–11.

100
D. Baran, T. Kirchartz, S. Wheeler, S. Dimitrov, M. Abdelsamie, J. Gorman, R. S. 

Ashraf, S. Holliday, A. Wadsworth, N. Gasparini, P. Kaienburg, H. Yan, A. Amassian, 

C. J. Brabec, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3783–

3793.

101
N. A. Cooling, E. F. Barnes, F. Almyahi, K. Feron, M. F. Al-Mudhaffer, A. Al-Ahmad, 

B. Vaughan, T. R. Andersen, M. J. Griffith, A. S. Hart, A. G. Lyons, W. J. Belcher and 

P. C. Dastoor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10274–10281.

102
M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, W. J. H. Verhees, J. Knol, J. C. Hummelen, P. A. van Hal 

and R. A. J. Janssen, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3371–3375.

103
D. Baran, R. S. Ashraf, D. A. Hanifi, M. Abdelsamie, N. Gasparini, J. A. Röhr, S. 

Holliday, A. Wadsworth, S. Lockett, M. Neophytou, C. J. M. Emmott, J. Nelson, C. J. 

Brabec, A. Amassian, A. Salleo, T. Kirchartz, J. R. Durrant and I. McCulloch, Nat. 

Mater., 2017, 16, 363–369.

104
M. Li, Y. Liu, W. Ni, F. Liu, H. Feng, Y. Zhang, T. Liu, H. Zhang, X. Wan, B. Kan, Q. 

Zhang, T. P. Russell and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10409–10413.

105
N. Qiu, H. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Ke, H. Feng, B. Kan, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lu 

and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604964.

106
Z. Cong, B. Zhao, Z. Chen, W. Wang, H. Wu, J. Liu, J. Wang, L. Wang, W. Ma and C. 

Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16795–16803.

107
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 


40

2017, 139, 7148–7151.

108
C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virtanen, D. 

Cournapeau, E. Wieser, J. Taylor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer, 

M. H. van Kerkwijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. F. del Río, M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, P. 

Gérard-Marchant, K. Sheppard, T. Reddy, W. Weckesser, H. Abbasi, C. Gohlke and T. 

E. Oliphant, Nature, 2020, 585, 357–362.

109
P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. 

Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. J. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wilson, 

K. J. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. R. J. Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. J. Carey, 

İ. Polat, Y. Feng, E. W. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. 

Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, C. R. Harris, A. M. Archibald, A. H. Ribeiro, F. Pedregosa 

and P. van Mulbregt, Nat. Methods, 2020, 17, 261–272.

110
N. S. Raju, R. Bilgic, J. E. Edwards and P. F. Fleer, Appl. Psychol. Meas., 1997, 21, 

291–305.

111
G. Moreau, J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci., 1997, 37, 929–938.


41

Supporting Information

Identifying structure-absorption relationships and predicting absorption strength of non-

fullerene acceptors for organic photovoltaics

Jun Yan,a,# Xabier Rodríguez-Martínez,*,b,c,# Drew Pearce,a Hana Douglas,a Danai Bili,a

Mohammed Azzouzi,a Flurin Eisner,a Alise Virbule,a Elham Rezasoltani,a Valentina Belova,c

Bernhard Dörling, c Sheridan Few, a,f Anna A. Szumska, a Xueyan Hou,a Guichuan Zhang,d Hin-

Lap Yip,d,e Mariano Campoy-Quiles *,c and Jenny Nelson*,a

# J.Y. and X.R.-M. contributed equally to this work.

a Department of Physics, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, London, United Kingdom

Email: jenny.nelson@imperial.ac.uk

b Electronic and Photonic Materials (EFM), Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology 

(IFM), Linköping University, Linköping, SE 581 83 Sweden

Email: xabier.rodriguez.martinez@liu.se

c Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Barcelona, ICMAB-CSIC, Campus UAB, Bellaterra 

08193, Spain

Email: mcampoy@icmab.es

d Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of 

Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 

510640, P. R. China

e Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee 

Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong

f Sustainability Research Institute, School of Earth and Environment, University of Leeds, 

Leeds, LS2 9JT


42

Supplementary Note 1. Chemical names and nomenclature of the materials 

highlighted in this work.

PC61BM: [6,6]-Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester

PC71BM: [6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester

ICBA: 1′,1′′,4′,4′′-Tetrahydro-di[1,4]methanonaphthaleno[1,2:2′,3′,56,60:2′′,3′′][5,6]fullerene-

C60

Y5:
(2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((12,13-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-

dihydro[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4e]thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-g] 

thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-b]-indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-

1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile)

Y6:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((12,13-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-dihydro-

[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2",3’':4’,5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-

g]thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-

2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile

Y7:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((12,13-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-dihydro-

[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2",3’':4’,5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-

g]thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(5,6-dichloro-3-oxo-

2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile

Y11:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((6,12,13-tris(2-ethylhexyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-dihydro-6H-

thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-g]thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-

b][1,2,3]triazolo[4,5-e]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3-

dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile

Y12:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((12,13-bis(2-butyloctyl)-3,9-diundecyl-12,13-dihydro-

[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2",3’':4’,5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-

g]thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-

2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile

O-IDTBR:
(5Z,5'Z)-5,5'-(((4,4,9,9-tetrakis(n-octyl)-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-

b']dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole-7,4-diyl))bis(methaneylylidene))bis(3-

ethyl-2-thioxothiazolidin-4-one)


43

O-IDFBR:
(5Z,5'Z)-5,5'-(((6,6,12,12-tetraoctyl-6,12-dihydroindeno[1,2-b]fluorene-2,8-

diyl)bis(benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole-7,4-diyl))bis(methaneylylidene))bis(3-ethyl-2-

thioxothiazolidin-4-one)

EH-IDTBR: (5Z,5'Z)-5,5'-(((4,4,9,9-tetrakis(2-ethylhexyl)-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-

b']dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole-7,4-diyl))bis(methaneylylidene))bis(3-

ethyl-2-thioxothiazolidin-4-one)

IDIC:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((4,4,9,9-tetrahexyl-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b']dithiophene-

2,7-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-

diylidene))dimalononitrile

SN6IC-4F:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((thieno[3,2-

b]thieno[2''',3''':4'',5'']pyrrolo[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[2,3- d]pyrrole,4,9-dihydro-4,9-

di-1-octylnonyl-2,7-diyl)bis(methanylylidene))bis((5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3 
-dihydro-1H-

indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile

ITIC:
2,2'-[[6,6,12,12-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-6,12-dihydrodithieno[2,3-d:2',3'-d']-s-

indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b']dithiophene-2,8-diyl]bis[methylidyne(3-oxo-1H-indene-2,1(3H)-

diylidene)]]bis[propanedinitrile]

ITIC-C2C6:
2,2'-[[6,6,12,12-tetrakis(2-ethylhexyl)-6,12-dihydrodithieno[2,3-d:2',3'-d']-s-

indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b']dithiophene-2,8-diyl]bis[methylidyne(3-oxo-1H-indene-2,1(3H)-

diylidene)]]bis[propanedinitrile]

ITIC-C8:
2,2'-[[6,6,12,12-tetrakis(n-octyl)-6,12-dihydrodithieno[2,3-d:2',3'-d']-s-

indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b']dithiophene-2,8-diyl]bis[methylidyne(3-oxo-1H-indene-2,1(3H)-

diylidene)]]bis[propanedinitrile]

IT-4F:
9-Bis(2-methylene-((3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-6,7-difluoro)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-

tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2’,3’-d’]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b’]dithiophene

CBM:
2,2'-(7,7'-(9-(heptadecan-9-yl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diyl)bis(benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole-

7,4-diyl))bis(methan-1-yl-1-ylidene)dimalononitrile

FBR:
5,5
′
-[(9,9-Dioctyl-9H-fluorene-2,7-diyl)bis(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-7,4-

diylmethylidyne)]bis[3-ethyl-2-thioxo-4-thiazolidinone]


44

BTPM:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((12,13-diisobutyl-3,9-dimethyl-5,7,12,13-tetrahydro-

[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-

g]thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methaneylylidene))bis(6-methyl-3-oxo-

2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile

BTTPC:
2,2'-((6Z,6'Z)-((12,13-diisobutyl-3,9-dimethyl-5,7,12,13-tetrahydro-

[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-

g]thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-diyl)bis(methaneylylidene))bis(5-oxo-5,6-dihydro-

7H-indeno[5,6-b]thiophene-6,7-diylidene))dimalononitrile

BTDTP-4F:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((3,12-dimethyl-13,14-dihydro-12H-[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-

e]thieno[2'',3'':4',5']pyrrolo[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-

b]thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-g]indole-2,10-

diyl)bis(methaneylylidene))bis(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-

diylidene))dimalononitrile

BDTP-4F:
2,2'-(((1Z,1'Z)-(1,11-dimethyl-4,6,6c,10,11,11b,12,13-octahydro-2H-

[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2'',3'':4',5']pyrrolo[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-

b]thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-g]indole-2,9(1H)-diylidene)bis(methaneylylidene))bis(5,6-

difluoro-3-oxo-2,3,3a,6,7,7a-hexahydro-1H-indene-2-yl-1-ylidene))dimalononitrile

BTTPTP-2OYPD:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((13,14-diisobutyl-5,7,13,14-tetrahydro-

[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2''',3''':4'',5'']thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-

g]thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-

diyl)bis(methaneylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile 

BTPTTT-2OYPD:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((13,14-diisobutyl-5,7,13,14-tetrahydro-

[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-e]thieno[2''',3''':4'',5'']thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-

g]thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-

diyl)bis(methaneylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile

IEICO:
2,2 ′ -((2Z,2 ′ Z)-((5,5 ′ -(4,4,9,9-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-4,9-dihydros-

indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b
′
]dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(4-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)thiophene-5,2-

diyl))bis(methanylylidene))bis(3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-diylidene))dimalononitrile

IEICO-4F: 2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-(((4,4,9,9-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-4,9-dihydro-sindaceno[1,2-b:5,6-

b']dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(4-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)thiophene-5,2-


45

diyl))bis(methanylylidene))bis(5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-

diylidene))dimalononitrile

BTTPTP-4Cl:
2,2'-((2Z,2'Z)-((13,14-diisobutyl-5,7,13,14-tetrahydro-[1,2,5]thiadiazolo[3,4-

e]thieno[2''',3''':4'',5'']thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]pyrrolo[3,2-

g]thieno[2'',3'':4',5']thieno[2',3':4,5]thieno[3,2-b]indole-2,10-

diyl)bis(methaneylylidene))bis(5,6-dichloro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-indene-2,1-

diylidene))dimalononitrile

INPIC-4F:
[(Z)-2-({24-[(Z)-(1-Dicyanomethylidene-5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2-

indanylidene)methyl]-15,15,30,30-tetrakis(p-hexylphenyl)-12,27-dioctyl-5,8,20,23-tetrathia-

12,27-diazanonacyclo[16.12.0.03,16.04,14.06,13.07,11.019,29.021,28.022,26]triaconta-

1(18),2,4(14),6(13),7(11),9,16,19(29),21(28),22(26),24-undecaen-9-yl}methylidene)-5,6-

difluoro-3-oxo-1-indanylidene]propanedinitrile

o-IO1:
2-((Z)-2-((5-(7-(5-(((Z)-1-(dicyanomethylene)-5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-1,3-dihydro-2H-

inden-2-ylidene)methyl)-3-((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)thiophen-2-yl)-4,4,9,9-tetraoctyl-4,9-dihydro-

s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b']dithiophen-2-yl)-4-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)methylene)-5,6-

difluoro-3-oxo-2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-ylidene)malononitrile

TfIF-4FIC:
[(Z)-2-({26-[(Z)-(1-Dicyanomethylidene-5,6-difluoro-3-oxo-2-

indanylidene)methyl]-7,7,16,16,23,23,32,32-octaoctyl-11,27-

dithianonacyclo[17.13.0.03,17.04,15.06,13.08,12.020,31.022,29.024,28]dotriaconta-

1(19),2,4(15),5,8(12),9,13,17,20(31),21,24(28),25,29-tridecaen-10-yl}methylidene)-5,6-

difluoro-3-oxo-1-indanylidene]propanedinitrile

NIBT:
(7Z,7'Z)-7,7'-(((4,4,9,9-tetrakis(4-octylphenyl)-4,9-dihydro-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-

b']dithiophene-2,7-diyl)bis(benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole-7,4-diyl))bis(methaneylylidene))bis(2-

(2-ethylhexyl)-1H-indeno[6,7,1-def]isoquinoline-1,3,6(2H,7H)-trione)


46

Figure S1. Solvent effect on the maximum oscillator strength ( 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) in TDDFT 

calculations. (a) 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in Chlorobenzene (CB) versus in vacuum for 56 organic molecules 

including common NFAs. (b) 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in various organic solvents versus in vacuum for 7 

different organic molecules, O-IDFBR, O-IDTBR, IT-4F, ITIC, Y5, Y6, and Y7. Noting here 

that 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 ∝ 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥. TDDFT was performed under B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p) using Polarizable-

continuum-solvent-model (PCM). We can see that the choice of solvent does not affect 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥

much, and that a good linear correlation between solvent and vacuum 𝑓𝑜𝑠𝑐,𝑚𝑎𝑥 is obtained. This 

tells us that the same correlation between TDDFT and experiments will be maintained based 

on either vacuum environment or polarized medium, which allows us focus on TDDFT results 

from vacuum calculations only. This is a great benefit since most of the TDDFT calculations 

by the present and past group members were done in vacuum, allowing us to have a larger 

database.


47

Figure S2. (a) Correlation between the maximum of the absorption coefficient (𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) 

obtained in solution state with the TDDFT calculated values. (b) Same dataset yet plotted in 

terms of maximum molar extinction coefficient εd,max). A significant fraction of this dataset 

was collected from literature.95,97,106,107,98–105 When required, a refractive index of 1.5 and a 

solid density of 1000 g L-1 were considered for all materials.


48

Figure S3. Comparison of maximum molar extinction coefficient (𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) between film 

experiments and TDDFT calculations in vacuum (20 data points). The experimental data of 

𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 in film are either measured or collected from literature, noting that different values may 

be present for the same material as they were collected from different papers. Unit of 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 is 

M-1 cm-1. Grey dashed lines indicate the perfect match between x- and y-axis. The detailed data 

for generating this figure is presented in the Supplementary Database.

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

PC61BM

PC71BM

Y5

Y6

Y7

O-IDTBR

ITIC

IT-4F

O-IDFBR

O-IDTBR

ITIC

IT-4F

IEICO-4F

O-IDTBR

ITIC

IT-4F

CBM

FBR

IDIC

ed,max ´105 (TDDFT, vacuum)

ed,max ´105 (exp, film)

r = 0.61


49

Figure S4. (a) Maximum absorption coefficient (𝛼𝑚𝑎𝑥) in solution and film. Grey squares 

correspond to data obtained from literature.97,107 (b) Maximum absorption coefficient in film 

and as obtained in their corresponding TDDFT calculations. A few data points (labelled as lit.) 

correspond to values extracted from literature.97,107


50

Figure S5. Effect of the number of -electrons on the comparison between experimental

(solution and film) maximum molar extinction coefficients and TDDFT results for the NFAs 

studied. (a) Experimental εd,max/𝜋 in solution versus calculated εd,max/𝜋 using TDDFT, (b) 

experimental εd,max/𝜋
in film (solid state) versus that in solution; and (c) experimental 

εd,max/𝜋 in solid state film versus calculated εd,max/𝜋 using TDDFT. Unit of εd,max/𝜋 is M-

1 cm-1.

0.00
0.02
0.04

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.00
0.02
0.04

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.00
0.02
0.04

0.00

0.02

0.04

Y5

Y6
Y7

O-IDFBR

O-IDTBR

ITIC

IT4F

PC61BM

PC71BM

IEICO-4F

FBR
DITCF

FDITCF

ITIC

IT-4F

IEICO-4F

IDIC

O-IDTBR

IEICO

Y5 Y6

Y7

O-IDFBR

EH-IDTBR

O-IDTBR

ITIC

IT-4F

ICBA

PC61BM

PC71BM

IEICO
ITIC

IT4F

IEICO-4F
O-IDTBR

ITIC
IT-4F

FBR

IDIC

PC61BM

PC71BM

Y5

Y6

Y7

O-IDTBR

ITIC

IT-4F

O-IDFBR

O-IDTBR

ITIC

IT-4F

IEICO-4F

O-IDTBR

ITIC

IT-4F

CBM

FBR

IDIC

ed,max / ´105 (TDDFT, vacuum)

ed,max / ´105 (exp, solution)

r = 0.80

(a)
(b)
(c)

ed,max / ´105 (exp, solution)

ed,max / ´105 (exp, film)

r = 0.69

ed,max /´105 (TDDFT, vacuum)

ed,max /´105 (exp, film)

r = 0.60


51

Figure S6. Histogram of the number of atoms present in the molecules of our TDDFT (B3LYP) 

dataset. Blue bars correspond to the molecules found originally in the dataset (3515 entries). 

Orange bars represent the distribution of the number of atoms found in the 479 molecules 

selected based on lowest energy conformation criteria.


52

Supplementary Note 2. Description of the TDDFT database, statistical and machine-learning 

methods.

The pristine data source of this work consists of a database of 3515 molecules optimized via 

DFT using the B3LYP functional as implemented in Gaussian09 software package. The 

database gathers original calculations performed for this particular study on conjugated small 

molecules as well as others developed in-house during the past years, including diverse 

conjugated small molecules, fullerenes and conjugated (co-)oligomers in distinct conformations 

(i.e., cis-/trans-).31 Given the variety of input sources, the corresponding data cleaning 

procedure consists of: i) identifying duplicates based on molecular weight; and ii) picking the 

lowest energy molecular conformation among each set of duplicates. The filtering results in a 

final selection of 479 conjugated small molecules and oligomers optimized at the B3LYP level 

of theory. The resulting database gathers a variety of basis sets employed in the geometrical 

optimization step: 48% of the molecules were optimized using the 6-31G(d) set and 36% of 

them using the more computationally-expensive 6-311+G(d,p), see Figure S7. Furthermore, 

the chemical heterogeneity of the studied database is leaned toward known molecules and 

moieties of frequent use in high-performing solar energy harvesting applications, see Figure S8

and Figure S9. Side chains are systematically omitted or substituted by methyl groups in all 

calculations to reduce the computational cost.


53

Figure S7. Histogram of the basis set employed in the geometrical optimization of the 479 

molecules found in the curated DFT database.

Figure S8. Histogram of the moieties present in the DFT database of 479 conjugated small 

molecules and oligomers. Moieties labels correspond to the chemical structures shown in 

Supplementary Note 4.


54

Figure S9. The 10 most frequent moieties together with their corresponding ID number.

Molecular descriptors are computed using four different open-source software packages and 

Python libraries (such as NumPy),108 including 1D, 2D and 3D descriptors as retrieved from 

the corresponding DFT optimized geometries. The software bundle employed includes PaDEL

(1874 descriptors),75 PyChem (1094 descriptors),76 Mordred (1826 descriptors)77 and RDKit 

v2021.03.2. (1039 descriptors).78 As a result, we obtained an initial set of 5834 descriptors for 

each molecule, which decreased up to 3239 after curing (i.e. dropping of uninformative or 

constant descriptors and others containing infinite or NaN values). Note that the same descriptor 

might be computed by more than one software bundle, yet slight numerical disagreements may 

arise due to the different computation algorithms. For that reason, we do not filter out redundant 

descriptors and perform their subsequent statistical analysis using the entire available catalogue. 

Furthermore, we include electronic features retrieved from the DFT calculations such as the 

energy levels of the 20 occupied and unoccupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs and LUMOs) 

closer to the band gap; the electronic band gap energy itself, 𝐸𝑔𝑎𝑝; and the number of  electrons 

(n) in the molecule, which was determined using custom coding based on the RDKit library. 

The set of molecular fingerprints tested in this work is computed using RDKit and it includes 

customized coding for the moiety fingerprints and built-in functions for the computation of 

MACCS keys, Morgan fingerprints,90
path-based (topological) fingerprints, E-state 

fingerprints91 and Coulomb vectors.92

The target features in this study focus on the maximum oscillator strength (𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥) and other 

derived figures such as the maximum oscillator strength in the visible electromagnetic spectrum 

(𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑣𝑖𝑠, herein constrained between 300-1200 nm for its relevance in solar energy harvesting 


55

applications); the sum of 𝑓 in the visible window, 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑣𝑖𝑠; the spectral overlap between the 

Gaussian-broadened spectrum of fs in the visible (taking a standard deviation of 0.1 eV) and 

the AM1.5G solar irradiance spectrum, 𝑓𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑙𝑎𝑝; the maximum absorption coefficient (𝛼𝑚𝑎𝑥); 

the maximum of the imaginary part of the dielectric function (𝜀2,𝑚𝑎𝑥); and the maximum molar 

extinction coefficient, 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥, 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑣𝑖𝑠 and 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠 are also evaluated per number of  electrons 

in the molecule, i.e. 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥/𝑛𝜋, 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑣𝑖𝑠/𝑛𝜋 and 𝑓𝑠𝑢𝑚,𝑣𝑖𝑠/𝑛𝜋.

The statistical analysis of descriptors is deployed using the open-source library SciPy109

whereas the machine-learning (ML) models (k-nearest neighbours, linear regression, support 

vector regressor and random forests) are implemented in Scikit-Learn.89

Regarding the scoring of the ML models, 𝑅2 ranges from -∞ to unity, being 1 the best possible 

score and zero an indication of lack of predictive power (as it is always returning the expected 

value of the target function, i.e., its average value); 𝑅𝑎𝑑𝑗

2
is formulated as110

𝑅𝑎𝑑𝑗

2
= 1 − (1 − 𝑅2)
𝑛 − 1

𝑛 − 𝑝 − 1,

where 𝑝 is the number of variables and n the sample size. Thus, 𝑅𝑎𝑑𝑗

2
adds penalties if the model 

uses too many variables, which is a useful metric when studying feature selection procedures. 

Test sets comprise 30% of the available data and all models are 10-fold holdout cross-validated 

(unless otherwise stated, using a randomized 70%-30% splitting for the train and test sets, 

respectively).

The recursive feature elimination (RFE) procedure applied in this work starts by decreasing the 

number of input features to 32 (i.e., 1% of the starting descriptor population of 3239 descriptors) 

in six consecutive feature reduction steps, in which after performing successive 10-fold cross-

validations we drop 50% of the (averaged and least important) descriptors. Rather than 

observing a performance drop, the actual scoring of the RF ensemble improves as the number 

of features is reduced from 3239 ( 𝑅2 = 0.65  0.06, 𝑟 = 0.82  0.03 ) to 51 ( 𝑅2 =

0.70  0.05, 𝑟 = 0.85  0.02) variables in the last RFE iteration (Figure S10). After the last 

pruning step (51 variables), we select the 32 most important descriptors and perform a more 

thorough feature selection procedure by successively dropping (one-by-one) the least important 

descriptor (always keeping a 10-fold cross-validation scheme, see Figure S11).


56

Figure S10. Scoring of RF regressors as part of a recursive feature elimination (RFE) loop in 

which 50% of the least important descriptors are dropped at each step.

Figure S11. Scoring of 10-fold cross-validated RF regressors (300 estimators) trained and 

tested using different amounts of input descriptors as progressively indicated by the RFE 

algorithm. The top axis indicates, from left to right, the name of the variable that is added to the 

RF model, thus forming an ordered list of the most important descriptors found by the RF 

method.


57

Figure S12. Performance of RF regressors trained without including electronic descriptors, 

using 300 estimators and 10-fold cross-validation. (a) Scoring parameters of cross-validated 

models as part of the RFE algorithm. (b) Detailed scoring parameters of the last 32 models 

obtained by RFE.


58

Supplementary Note 3. Clusterization algorithm of multicollinear descriptors. 

The clusterization algorithm starts by taking the descriptor with the highest Spearman’s rank 

correlation coefficient () and computing the Pearson correlation coefficient (r) with respect to 

the remaining elements in the -ordered list of descriptors with   0.7. Descriptors from this 

list are dropped if r  0.7 and considered to be in the same cluster; those showing r  0.7 are 

candidates to form a different cluster. The process runs in a recursive-elimination manner until 

naturally leading to a selection of (typically) 1 to 5 descriptor clusters depending on the selected 

thresholds (0.6-0.7). These clusters gather the most statistically relevant and monotonic 

correlation trends with the target feature. Interestingly, by looking at the features stored in each 

of the clusters it is possible to replace some of the descriptors found originally by the algorithm 

by alternative figures of easier interpretation and/or larger physicochemical relevance.

Figure S13. Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (in absolute value) histograms for the 3239 

descriptors and the 10 different target features related with optical absorption and oscillator 

strength explored in this work.


59

Figure S14. Influence of the molecular planarity on the maximum molar extinction

coefficient. (a) The 1,p/3,p ratio correlates positively with ed,max as straighter (more linear) 

molecules show larger 1,p while enhanced molecular planarity lowers 3,p values (which 

approach zero as there is no variance out of the molecular plane). (b) The shape of the molecule 

quantified with 𝐾𝑝 shows that linear and planar molecules (i.e., 𝐾𝑝 closer to unity)84 enable 

larger 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 values. 𝐾𝑝 is defined as84

𝐾𝑝 =

∑
| 𝜆𝑚,𝑝
∑
𝑚 𝜆𝑚,𝑝
− 1

3|
𝑚

4/3
,

where 𝑚 = 1,2,3 and 0 ≤ 𝐾𝑝 ≤ 1.


60

Figure S15. Influence of molecular symmetry on absorption strength. (a) Quantification of 

the total molecular symmetry as per the definition of the WHIM symmetry descriptor 𝐺𝑢

(corresponding to the unweighted geometric mean of the directional symmetries, 𝐺𝑢 =

√𝛾1,𝑢 · 𝛾2,𝑢 · 𝛾3,𝑢
3
)84 shows that as the molecules lose their central symmetry (i.e., lower 𝐺𝑢

values), 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 can be further enhanced. (b) Conversely, the Moreau chirality index111 weighted 

by atomic coordinates of small molecular absorbers shows poor correlation with 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥.


61

Figure S16. Influence of the side chains on 1,p values. (a) Comparison of 1,p values for a 

selection of small molecule acceptors as computed from xTB including side chains (y axis) and 

DFT-optimized geometries with methyl-substituted side chains (x axis). (b) Maximum molar 

extinction coefficient (𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥) as a function of 1,p for small molecule acceptors optimized with 

(open circles) and without (filled circles) side chains.


62

Figure S17. (a) Correlation between E1 and the number of heteroatoms in the molecules. (b) 

Correlation between the molar extinction coefficient (𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥) and the number of heteroatoms. 

(c) Correlation between E1 and 1,p. (d) Correlation between E1 and C2SP2. All panels include 

the corresponding Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient ().

a
b

c
d


63

Figure S18. Relationship between the maximum oscillator strength and the energy of the first 

electronic transition in a set of TDDFT-optimized NFAs.


64

Table S1. Statistical performance of a manifold of 10-fold cross-validated baseline models

using 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥 as target feature.

Model
No. variables
R2
r

1-nearest neighbour

2
-0.18  0.41
0.50  0.05

3239
-0.10  0.37
0.47  0.09

Linear regression
2
0.37  0.10
0.61  0.09

Random forest w/300 estimators

2
0.23  0.17
0.59  0.06

3239
0.65  0.06
0.82  0.03


65

Figure S19. Correlation plots of three (exemplary) baseline models trained and tested on 𝜀𝑑,𝑚𝑎𝑥

using two input descriptors only: 1,p and C2SP2. (a) 1-nearest neighbour; (b) linear regression; 

and (c) out-of-the-box RF trained with 300 estimators.

a
b
c


66

Table S2. Performance of RF models trained and 10-fold cross-validated using 300 estimators, 

3 input molecular descriptors (1,v, CIC3 and HOMO-2) and different forms of molecular 

fingerprint vectors. In the case of Morgan fingerprints, we set the connectivity radius to 4 units, 

while for topological fingerprints the minimum and maximum path counts are set to 1 and 6

units, respectively. Their vector lengths are set to either 64 or 2048 bits to reflect different 

degrees of model complexity.

No. molecular descriptors
Fingerprint type
No. bits
Total no. inputs
R2
r

3
N/A
N/A
3
0.63  0.06
0.80  0.03

3
Moiety
159
162
0.63  0.06
0.81  0.04

3
MACCS
166
169
0.66  0.04
0.83  0.02

3
Morgan

64
67
0.70  0.05
0.84  0.03

2048
2051
0.69  0.05
0.84  0.03

3
Topology

64
67
0.68  0.04
0.83  0.02

2048
2051
0.69  0.05
0.84  0.03

3
E-state
79
82
0.66  0.04
0.82  0.02

3
Coulomb
320
323
0.56  0.07
0.77  0.04


67

Table S3. Scoring of the baseline and hyperparametrically optimized RF and ExtraTrees 

models, fed with 3 molecular descriptors and a Morgan fingerprint vector of 64 bits.

Model
No. 
estimators

No. samples per 
leaf

No. samples to 
split
Validation
R2
r

RF

(out-of-the-box)

300
1
2
10-fold CV
0.70  0.05
0.84  0.03

RF (optimized)
1200
1
2
10-fold CV 
0.70  0.05
0.85  0.03

RF (optimized)
1200
1
2
LOOCV
0.74
0.86

ExtraTrees

(out-of-the-box)

300
1
2
10-fold CV
0.69  0.05
0.85  0.02

ExtraTrees 
(optimized)
2000
1
2
10-fold CV
0.70  0.04
0.85  0.02

ExtraTrees 
(optimized)
2000
1
2
LOOCV
0.73
0.86


68

Figure S20. LOOCV of the optimized Extra Trees (ET) regressor fed with 3 molecular 

descriptors and a 64-bit vector as Morgan fingerprint.


69

Figure S21. Boxplots for the Pearson correlation coefficients between different sets of 

molecular descriptors retrieved from xTB and DFT (B3LYP) optimized geometries.


70

Figure S22. (a) Leave-one-out interpolation of a RF model trained using DFT data and tested 

on xTB-optimized molecules using 3 parameters (1,v and CIC3 recalculated from the xTB 

geometry, and the HOMO-2 energy level as computed in xTB) and a 64-bit vector as Morgan 

fingerprint. (b) Fitting of linear regression and support vector regressor (SVR) models for 

calibration of HOMO-2 energy levels as computed in xTB and DFT (B3LYP). The mismatch 

in the absolute values of HOMO-2 energy levels between DFT and xTB calculations prevents 

obtaining higher scorings in the RF models depicted in (a). (c) Correlation plot between 

HOMO-2 energy levels from DFT and the corresponding calibrated values as obtained by linear 

regression (blue), SVR (red) and RF (green) models. The dashed black line indicates perfect 

matching between DFT and calibrated values.

a
b
c


71

Supplementary Note 4. Detailed database of moieties used in this work.


72


73


74

Supplementary Note 5. Estimation of computation time required to make absorption strength 

predictions using xTB Hamiltonians (in combination with ML models) or rigorous TDDFT.

Table S4 provides a comparison in terms of the computation time required for the molecular 

geometry optimization step in the TDDFT and xTB approaches. We analysed 194 molecules 

from TDDFT calculations based on B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p) and 475 molecules (Figure S6) from 

xTB calculations based on GFN2–xTB to tentatively quantify the difference in computational

efficiency between both methods. Our analysis suggests that geometry optimization using 

GFN2–xTB is ca. 3000 times faster than TDDFT/B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p), even though GFN2–

xTB calculations were done on a conventional 12 CPUs laptop as opposed to the 32 CPUs 

dedicated cluster/workstation employed in the TDDFT calculations, thus highlighting the great 

advantage of using xTB over TDDFT.

Furthermore, we have estimated the time consumption for the absorption strength predictions 

using the established ML model in this work. The time required for the ML model training and 

LOOCV steps is below 10 minutes (12 CPUs), whereas the calculation of molecular descriptors 

(>5000 descriptors) for the full data set (479 molecules) takes no less than 180 minutes (12 

CPUs). Hence, for a molecule made up of 100 atoms, the whole absorption strength 

determination (i.e., from geometry optimization to εd,max prediction) effectively takes around 

200 minutes using xTB with ML; and 1345 minutes using solely TDDFT. Nevertheless, the 

advantage of the ML approach is more evident as interpolation in the trained model takes less 

than 1 second (per molecule) to compute, which enables at least four orders of magnitude faster 

molecular screening with respect to TDDFT (1345 minutes or 80700 seconds per molecule).

Table S4. Computation time required for molecular geometry optimization steps using 

TDDFT/B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p) and xTB/GFN2–xTB.

Approach
DFT/B3LYP/6-311+G(d,p)
xTB/GFN2–xTB

No. of molecules
194
475

No. of atoms
18022
37989

No. of CPUs
32
12

Time elapsed (mins)
206398.355
136

Time elapsed per atom (mins)
11.45257768
0.003579984


