1These authors contributed equally to this work.

2Email: phgcma@hkbu.edu.hk

Non-Hermitian Morphing of Topological Modes

Wei Wang1, Xulong Wang1, Guancong Ma2

Department of Physics, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, China

Topological modes (TMs) are usually localized at defects or boundaries of a much larger 

topological lattice1,2. Recent studies of non-Hermitian band theories unveiled the non-

Hermitian skin effect (NHSE), by which the bulk states collapse to the boundary as skin 

modes3–6. Here, we experimentally demonstrate that the NHSE can conversely affect 

wavefunctions of TMs by delocalizing them from the boundary. At a critical non-Hermitian 

parameter, the in-gap TMs even become completely extended in the entire bulk lattice, 

forming an “extended mode outside of a continuum.” These extended modes are still 

protected by bulk-band topology, making them robust against local disorders. The

delocalization effect is experimentally realized in active mechanical lattices in both one-

dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) topological lattices, as well as in a higher-order 

topological lattice. Furthermore, by the judicious engineering of the non-Hermiticity

distribution, the TMs can deform into a diversity of shapes. Our findings not only broaden 

and deepen the current understanding of the TMs and the NHSE but also open new grounds 

for topological applications.


2

Topological matters1 have generated long-lasting influence across many realms, as evidenced by 

the vibrant development in topological photonics7, acoustic and mechanical systems8. A hallmark 

of most topological matters is the existence of TMs localized at the boundaries or interface or 

defects in a specimen. Imbued with topological protections, many applications such as wave-

routing devices9–11, lasers12–15, quantum-optics devices16–18, can benefit from properties like

robustness or immunity to backscattering. However, because the existence of the TMs rests on 

bulk-band topology, any topological application must be built upon a bulk lattice, making them 

bulky in footprint and costly to fabricate. Here, we demonstrate a non-Hermitian solution to this

issue.

Non-Hermitian systems generally have a complex spectrum19, making them naturally suitable for 

describing open systems. An open system can exchange energy with the external environment, 

thereby permitting the presence of effects such as gain and loss, and nonreciprocity, giving rise to 

a kaleidoscope of novel phenomena20,21. In addition, the complex spectrum also entails topology

associated with the winding of eigenvalues22,23 and the exchange of eigenstates around 

singularities known as exceptional points24–28. Research tying non-Hermitian formalism to 

topological matters led to the discovery of the non-Hermitian skin effect (NHSE)3–6, by which the 

bulk states become skin modes localized at open boundaries. NHSE has been experimentally 

verified in wave systems29,30, photonics31, and by quantum walk32. Intriguingly, even in the 

presence of the NHSE, bulk modes restore a Bloch-wave-like extended profile at discrete energies

called Bloch points33,34. Recently, it was shown that the NHSE can affect the localization 

properties of the TMs in 1D open lattice29, and even render them delocalized35,36, yet experimental 

confirmation remains absent.

Here, we leverage NHSE to alter the wavefunctions of TMs. The theoretical grounds and proof-

of-principal experiments in an active mechanical lattice29,37 are introduced using a 1D non-

Hermitian topological system, in which the complete delocalization of a topological zero mode 

(TZM) is observed. The effect is extended to 2D topological lattices, wherein we demonstrate the 

morphing of 1D topological edge mode (TEM) and a 0D second-order topological corner mode 

(TCM) into diverse profiles by engineering the non-Hermiticity distribution. Although the TMs 

become extended under the NHSE, they remain spectrally isolated in the bandgap and their 


3

topological protections are intact, effectively making them “extended states outside of the

continuum” – an opposite of bound states in the continuum38. Our findings unshackle TMs from 

the boundary-localizing characteristics, which can benefit a wide variety of topological 

applications.

Delocalization of TZM by NHSE

We start with a 1D non-Hermitian Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (NH-SSH) chain, as shown in Fig. 1a. 

The bulk Hamiltonian is

𝐻(𝑘𝑥) = [
0
𝑣𝑥 + 𝑤𝑥𝑒−𝑖𝑘𝑥

𝑣𝑥 + (𝑤𝑥 + 𝛿𝑥)𝑒𝑖𝑘𝑥
0
],
(1)

where 𝑣𝑥 and 𝑤𝑥 are intracell and intercell hopping coefficients, and 𝛿𝑥 is nonreciprocal hopping, 

which is the origin of non-Hermiticity in the system. Here, 𝑣𝑥, 𝑤𝑥, 𝛿𝑥 ∈ ℝ and 𝑣𝑥 = −2.33, 𝑤𝑥 =

−0.38. The hopping values are retrieved from experimental data. When 𝛿𝑥 = 0, the system is 

Hermitian and both bulk bands are topologically trivial with a zero topological invariant (quantized 

Zak phase). When 𝛿𝑥 ≠ 0, the system is non-Hermitian, consequently, the energies 𝐸 ∈ ℂ form 

loops in the complex plane, as shown in Fig. 1b. This indicates the NHSE for the bulk modes under

an open boundary condition39,40. The NHSE is revealed by examining the wavefunctions of the 

bulk modes 𝜓𝑛. In Fig. 1c, we plot 𝜓̅ =

1

𝑁 ∑
|𝜓𝑛|2
𝑁
𝑛=1
, where 𝑁 = 60 is the total number of the 

states (also the site number). 𝜓̅ collapses towards the left and is vanishing in the bulk. To account 

for the NHSE, we use the non-Bloch band theory to compute the bulk topological invariants in a 

generalized Brillouin zone3. The topological transition point is at |𝑣𝑥| = √|𝑤𝑥(𝑤𝑥 + 𝛿𝑥)| (see 

Supplementary Information section I), so the NH-SSH chain remains topologically trivial in the 

presence of the NHSE.

We next build an interface with the NH-SSH and a Hermitian SSH (H-SSH) chains, as shown in 

Fig. 1d. The H-SSH chain has 59 sites and the intracell and intercell hoppings are 𝑤𝑥, 𝑣𝑥. It is 

connected to the NH-SSH chain by an interface hopping 𝑣𝑑. It is straightforward to check that the

bulk bands of the H-SSH chain have a quantized Zak phase of 𝜋, such that an in-gap TZM is 

localized at the interface. Chiral symmetry dictates that the TZM remains at zero energy regardless 

of 𝛿𝑥 (Fig. 1e). The persistence of the TZM against 𝛿𝑥 can also be shown by a similarity 


4

transformation that turns the system into a Hermitian one (see Supplementary Information section

I).

The TZM’s wavefunction is dependent of 𝛿𝑥, as shown in Fig. 1f. When |𝛿𝑥| is small, the TZM 

remains localized at the interface. As |𝛿𝑥| increases, the TZM gradually delocalizes in the NH-

SSH chain. And the TZM becomes an extended mode occupying the entire NH-SSH part at 𝛿𝑥 =

𝛿𝑥𝑐 = −1.95. This extended TZM remains in the middle of the bandgap. Further increase of |𝛿𝑥|

results in the TZM to re-localize at the left end of the NH-SSH chain and it dwells in the 

topologically trivial part of the system.

The NHSE is responsible for such change in the TZM’s wavefunction. The nonreciprocal hopping 

in the NH-SSH chain has the tendency to amplify the local magnitude towards the left side of the 

lattice, and it effectively counters the exponential decay of the TZM. This can be seen from the

characteristic equations in the NH-SSH part,

𝑤𝑥𝐵𝑗−1 + 𝑣𝑥𝐵𝑗 = 𝐸𝐴𝑗, 𝑣𝑥𝐴𝑗 + (𝑤𝑥 + 𝛿𝑥)𝐴𝑗+1 = 𝐸𝐵𝑗, 
(2)

where 𝐴𝑗 and 𝐵𝑗 respectively denote the wavefunction components at sublattice A and B of the 𝑗th

unit cell. Since 𝐸 = 0 for the TZM and all 𝐵𝑗 = 0 because of the bipartite property, the magnitude 

ratio is

𝜂 =

𝐴𝑗

𝐴𝑗+1 = −

𝑤𝑥+𝛿𝑥

𝑣𝑥 .
(3)

A decay-free extended TZM appears when |𝜂| = 1, which corresponds to 𝛿𝑥𝑐 = 𝑣𝑥 − 𝑤𝑥 (exact 

non-Bloch 𝒫𝒯 -symmetry41) or 𝛿𝑥𝑐 = −𝑣𝑥 − 𝑤𝑥 (broken non-Bloch 𝒫𝒯 -symmetry). 𝛿𝑥𝑐 also 

corresponds to the spectral topology transition point for the bulk bands under periodic boundary 

condition (see Supplementary Information section II). We choose the first 𝛿𝑥𝑐, which guarantees 

a real spectrum. Equation (3) also shows that the TZM re-localizes at the left end when |𝜂| > 1,

corresponding to |𝛿𝑥| > |𝛿𝑥𝑐|.

In Fig. 1f, the extended TZM has a spike at the interface, whose height is determined by the 

characteristic equation across the interface, i.e., 𝑣𝑥𝐴𝐼 + 𝑣𝑑𝐴𝐼+1 = 𝐸𝐵𝐼 , which gives 𝜖 =

|𝐴𝐼/𝐴𝐼+1| = |𝑣𝑑/𝑣𝑥|. This means that the magnitude of the extended TZM is tunable by 𝑣𝑑. The 

spike disappears at 𝜖 = 1 and the extended TZM becomes entirely flat (Fig. 1g).


5

Experimental observation of the delocalization effect

We experimentally validate the above findings in an active mechanical lattice29,37. The building

block is a rotational oscillator comprised of a brushless motor and two tensioned springs via a 

rotational arm (Fig. 2a), which plays the role of the on-site orbital. The oscillators are connected 

by tensioned springs to form a 1D lattice (Fig. 2b). Nonreciprocal hopping is realized by 

programmed external actuation of the motors. The systems parameters 𝑣𝑥, 𝑤𝑥, 𝛿𝑥, and on-site 

frequency are retrieved by the Green’s function method. (See more details in Methods and 

Supplementary Information section XII.)

Our experimental lattice consists of a 10-site NH-SSH chain and a 9-site H-SSH chain (Fig. 2b).

We excite the lattice at the interface by sending a signal covering 5 – 20 Hz to site-11. We first 

turn off the nonreciprocity and measure the bulk and interface responses (Fig. 2c). Two peaks 

separated by a bandgap (the teal curve) are observed in the response of site-8, which corresponds

to the two bulk bands and the bandgap. An additional peak is found at 12 Hz when measured at 

site-9 (the orange curve), which is due to the TZM. We have further measured the rotational 

response at all sites at 12 Hz. The result is a mode strongly localized at the interface (Fig. 2d, blue).

Next, we turn on the nonreciprocal hopping in the NH-SSH chain and measure its effect on the 

spatial profile of the TZM. In Fig. 2d, we observe that the localization length of the TZM increases

with |𝛿𝑥| in the NH-SSH chain. The TZM becomes nearly extended when 𝛿𝑥 = −1.88, which is 

close to 𝛿𝑥𝑐. The tendency to re-localize is also observed for 𝛿𝑥 = −2.45. By further tuning the 

spring at the interface to satisfy 𝜖 = 1, a nearly flat extended TZM is obtained (Fig. 2e). These 

experimental observations are in excellent agreement with the theoretical results. We also show 

the results in Supplementary Video 1.

The extended TM can also be realized in a single nontrivial NH-SSH chain, even in the presence 

of long-range hopping. Extended TM and extended bulk mode can even coexist (see 

Supplementary Information section II and section III).

Because the NHSE can emerge from a wide range of non-Hermitian systems, our findings offer a 

recipe for creating TMs beyond the well-known localized, boundary/interface dwelling profile. 


6

Next, we demonstrate such capability by generalizing the phenomenon to two different types of 

2D topological systems.

Morphing of TEM in a 2D stacked topological lattice

We build a 2D rectangular lattice by stacking the NH-SSH chain along the 𝑦-direction with an

interchain hopping 𝑣𝑦, as shown in Fig. 3a. The bulk Hamiltonian reads 

𝐻2𝐷(𝑘𝑥,𝑘𝑦) = [2𝑣𝑦 cos(𝑘𝑦)
𝑉

𝑉∗ + 𝛿𝑥
2𝑣𝑦 cos(𝑘𝑦)],
(4)

where 𝑉 = 𝑣𝑥 + 𝑤𝑥𝑒−𝑖𝑘𝑥 , and 𝑣𝑥 = −0.41, 𝑤𝑥 = −2.6, and 𝑣𝑦 = −0.1. The NH-SSH chain 

along 𝑥-direction is nontrivial because of √|𝑣𝑥(𝑣𝑥 + 𝛿𝑥)| < |𝑤𝑥|. The energy spectra of an open

lattice having 9 × 7 sites are plotted in Fig. 3c, d in which a cluster of TEMs are observed in the 

bandgap regardless of the values and distributions of 𝛿𝑥. When 𝛿𝑥 = 0, the TEMs are strongly 

localized at the left edge, as shown in Fig. 3e. We next turn on the NHSE by setting a nonreciprocal 

hopping 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐 = 𝑤𝑥 − 𝑣𝑥 = −2.19 in every unit cell. In Fig. 3f, we see that the TEMs are 

turned into an extended mode that occupies the entire lattice.

These effects are experimentally observed in the mechanical lattice. The photo in Fig. 3b shows a 

cropped section of the lattice. The rotational arms are modified into a cross shape for the ease of 

connecting the coupling springs. We use long-exposure photography to record the real-space 

profiles of the TEMs. To do so, two phosphorescent stickers are attached to each rotational arm 

(Fig. 3b). The lattice was placed in darkness and was driven at 12.5 Hz at the left edge. The 

oscillation traces two arcs under long exposure, where the angles swept by the arcs correspond to 

the oscillation amplitude. In Fig. 3j, the NHSE is turned off (𝛿𝑥 = 0) and only the oscillators on 

the left edge are vibrating, which is the TEMs’ response. In Fig. 3k, we set 𝛿𝑥 = −2.14 and 

observe that every unit cell is oscillating with a near-identical amplitude, indicating the 

delocalization of the TEMs. The measured profiles conform excellently with the tight-binding 

results (Fig. 3e, f).

By further engineering the distribution 𝛿𝑥 as functions of 𝑦, a wide variety of profiles for the TEMs

can be obtained. Three examples are presented in Fig. 3g-i. Here, the NHSE has different strengths 

in each NH-SSH chain, by which the response field is morphed into a pyramidal shape (Fig. 3g,


7

l), a triangle (Fig. 3h, m), and a V shape (Fig. 3i, n). These effects are further shown in 

Supplementary Video 2. Herein, 𝛿𝑥 for each chain is determined by considering the localization 

length. We first obtain the Hermitian TZM’s localization length 𝜉𝐻 = (ln|𝑤𝑥 𝑣𝑥
⁄
|)−1. The targeted 

localization length in the presence of 𝛿𝑥 is

𝜉𝑁𝐻 = [ln|𝑤𝑥 (𝑣𝑥 + 𝛿𝑥)
⁄
|]−1,
(5)

by which we can obtain 𝛿𝑥 = 𝑤𝑥(𝑒−1 𝜉𝑁𝐻
⁄
− 𝑒−1 𝜉𝐻
⁄
). The NHSE can also be produced in the 𝑦-

direction, by which the TEM can be further collapsed to a corner (Supplementary Fig. 10).

Morphing of TCM by higher-order NHSE (HO-NHSE)

The HO-NHSE is a recently discovered non-Hermitian phenomenon by which bulk states in a 

lattice collapse to 0D corner skin modes. Here, we conversely leverage the HO-NHSE to 

manipulate the TCM in the 2D topological quadrupole insulator. Figure 4a shows the unit cell, and 

the bulk Hamiltonian reads

𝐻𝑄(𝑘𝑥,𝑘𝑦) =

[
 
 
 
 
0
𝑅𝑥(𝑘𝑥)
𝑅𝑦(𝑘𝑦)
0

𝑀𝑥(𝑘𝑥)
0
0
−𝑅𝑦(𝑘𝑦)

𝑀𝑦(𝑘𝑦)
0
0
𝑅𝑥(𝑘𝑥)

0
−𝑀𝑦(𝑘𝑦)
𝑀𝑥(𝑘𝑥)
0
]
 
 
 
 

,
(6)

where 𝑅𝜇(𝑘𝜇) = 𝑣𝜇 + 𝑤𝜇𝑒−𝑖𝑘𝜇 and 𝑀𝜇(𝑘𝜇) = (𝑣𝜇 + 𝛿𝜇) + 𝑤𝜇𝑒𝑖𝑘𝜇 with 𝜇 = 𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑣𝑦 = −0.49, 

𝑤𝑦 = −2.12. Note that to generate HO-NHSE, nonreciprocal hopping terms are required for both 

𝑥 and 𝑦 directions. Here, the hopping terms, including the nonreciprocal ones, are arranged to 

preserve the 𝜋-flux within each four-site plaquette, thereby giving a quantized non-Hermitian 

generalization of quadrupole moment (see Supplementary Information section VII). Also, despite 

the presence of non-Hermiticity, equation (6) respects chiral symmetry: 𝛤𝐻𝑄𝛤−1 = −𝐻𝑄 with 

𝛤 = diag(1, −1, −1,1) . Hence the spectrum is always symmetric about zero energy – a 

characteristic that is carried over to the open lattice, as shown in Fig. 4d. Here, because the open

lattice has an odd number of sites, the system only has one TCM pinned at zero energy, appearing 

at the lower-left corner, as shown in Fig. 4e. Next, we engage the nonreciprocal hopping and 

examine how they affect the TCM. First, we only turn on 𝛿𝑥 and set it to 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐 = 𝑤𝑥 − 𝑣𝑥 =

−2.19 and keep 𝛿𝑦 = 0, so that the NHSE only exists along the 𝑥 direction. As a result, the TCM 

is delocalized along the lower edge of the lattice, effectively becoming an edge state. The 

wavefunction is shown in Fig. 4f. Similarly, the TCM can also delocalize along the left edge when 


8

𝛿𝑦 = 𝛿𝑦𝑐 = 𝑤𝑦 − 𝑣𝑦 = −1.63 and 𝛿𝑥 = 0 (not shown here). When nonreciprocal hoppings along 

both directions are nonzero and 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐, 𝛿𝑦 = 𝛿𝑦𝑐, the HO-NHSE takes place and morphs the 

TCM into an extended state occupying the entire lattice (Fig. 4g).

These effects are also experimentally realized. The unit cell is shown in Fig. 4b. Here, positive 

hopping terms are implemented by crossing the springs. The vibrational profiles of the TCM under 

different non-Hermitian conditions are shown in Fig. 4h-j. Excellent agreement with theoretical 

predictions is obtained. These results are also shown in Supplementary Video 3.

Discussion

There is an alternative understanding of the NHSE’s influences on the TMs when the nonreciprocal 

hopping is uniform: the 2D Hamiltonians [equations (4) and (6)] can be decomposed into 1D 

models. We also present a theoretical study on a Kagome lattice in Supplementary Information 

section X, which cannot be decomposed into lower-dimensional models. For these models, chiral 

symmetry or its generalized version is preserved, which ensures the TMs pinned to zero energy.

However, this is not a necessary condition. The delocalization can be achieved without chiral 

symmetry (see Supplementary Information section II).

The NHSE is known to collapse the bulk states towards open boundaries. Our work achieves the 

opposite by converting localized TMs into extended modes of unconventional shapes while 

preserving the topological characteristics (the robustness of the extended TMs is discussed in 

Supplementary Information section IV and section V). The morphing effect is reconfigurable by 

reprograming the nonreciprocity. The extended TMs have no Hermitian counterpart and the 

underlying physics is general. Our findings show that non-Hermiticity is a powerful new degree 

of freedom by which the wavefunction of TMs can be tailored to suit different needs. Because both 

topological matters and nonreciprocity have been extensively studied in photonics7,42 and 

acoustics8,43, the NHSE’s influences on TMs should be realizable in these systems. We expect the 

extended TMs to bring unprecedented opportunities for topological manipulations of waves and 

light, and can be the foundation for, e.g., a large-area single-mode topological laser and a coherent 

topological beam splitter (see Methods).


9

Methods

The mechanical lattice

Our experimental systems are lattices of coupled active rotational harmonic oscillators. The 

elementary building block is comprised of a brushless DC motor (LDPOWER 2804) with a 

rotational arm attached to it (Supplementary Fig. 14). In the 1D experiments, the arms are made 

of plastics and have a length of 129.5 mm. In 2D lattices, the cross-shaped arms are made of 

aluminum alloy and have a length of 129.5 mm and a width of 93.6 mm. In both cases, the arm 

has two large holes drilled on the ends, through which weights (e.g., bolts and nuts) can be inserted 

to tune the moment of inertia. The arm is attached with two identical anchoring springs with a 

spring constant of 31.35 N/m, which provides restoring torques. The resonant frequency of an 

isolated oscillator is thus determined by the spring constant and the moment of inertia. To form a 

lattice, multiple oscillators are coupled by additional tensioned springs connecting the arms of the 

neighboring units. The hopping magnitude is tunable either by choosing different spring constants

or by adjusting the connecting position on the arms (Supplementary Fig. 15). Naturally, stronger 

spring and (or) longer force-arm results in larger hopping magnitude. The sign of the hopping 

coefficients can also be chosen. Our analysis shows that the hopping sign is negative (positive) 

when two neighboring arms are connected by springs that are parallel (crossed). See 

Supplementary Information section XI for details.

The instantaneous angular displacement 𝜃(𝑡) of each oscillator is measured by a magnetic rotary 

position sensor (AMS AS5047P). To do so, we firmly attach a diametrically magnetized magnet 

to the shaft of the motor. The sensor is placed 2 mm below the magnet. The measured signals are 

digitalized by a microcontroller (Espressif ESP32) with a sample rate of 1 kHz and then transferred 

to a computer. The received signals are not only the measurement of local response but also used 

as feedback to generate nonreciprocal hopping.

Realization of nonreciprocal hopping

The motor can be actuated by a driver chip (STMicroelectronics L6234PD), which is programmed 

to generate a response torque based on the measured 𝜃(𝑡) from the neighboring site. Take the 

nonreciprocal hopping 𝛿𝑥 between site 𝐵𝐼−1 and site 𝐴𝐼 in Fig. 1d as an example (Supplementary 


10

Fig. 16). 𝜃𝐼

𝐴(𝑡) is monitored in real time and the motor of site 𝐵𝐼−1 is instructed to generate a 

torque 𝜏𝐼−1

𝐵 (𝑡) = 𝛼𝜃𝐼

𝐴(𝑡), where 𝛼 is a constant that tunes the nonreciprocity strength. Meanwhile, 

no active torque is applied to the motor of site 𝐴𝐼. Together with the coupling spring between the 

two sites that produce 𝑤𝑥, the net effect is the hopping from 𝐴𝐼 to 𝐵𝐼−1 being 𝑤𝑥 + 𝛿𝑥, while the 

hopping from 𝐵𝐼−1 to 𝐴𝐼 being 𝑤𝑥. The implementation of the nonreciprocal intracell hopping in 

2D topological lattices is achieved in a similar manner (Supplementary Figs. 17, 18).

Acknowledgments. The authors thank C. T. Chan, Zhao-Qing Zhang, Kun Ding, Ruo-Yang 

Zhang for discussions, and Qiyuan Wang for assisting with the experiments. This work was 

supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11922416), the Hong Kong 

Research Grants Council (12302420, 12300419).

Author contributions. W.W. developed the theory and performed numerical calculations. W.X. 

developed the experimental platform. W.W. and G.M. designed the experimental systems. W.W. 

and W.X. carried out the measurements. All authors analyzed the results. W.W. and G.M. wrote 

the manuscript. G.M. led the research.

Competing interests. The authors declare no competing interests.


11

References

1.
Haldane, F. D. M. Nobel Lecture: Topological quantum matter. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 040502 

(2017).

2.
Kosterlitz, J. M. Nobel Lecture: Topological defects and phase transitions. Rev. Mod. Phys.

89, 040501 (2017).

3.
Yao, S. & Wang, Z. Edge States and Topological Invariants of Non-Hermitian Systems. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 121, 086803 (2018).

4.
McDonald, A., Pereg-Barnea, T. & Clerk, A. A. Phase-Dependent Chiral Transport and 

Effective Non-Hermitian Dynamics in a Bosonic Kitaev-Majorana Chain. Phys. Rev. X 8, 

041031 (2018).

5.
Kunst, F. K., Edvardsson, E., Budich, J. C. & Bergholtz, E. J. Biorthogonal Bulk-Boundary 

Correspondence in Non-Hermitian Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 026808 (2018).

6.
Martinez Alvarez, V. M., Barrios Vargas, J. E. & Foa Torres, L. E. F. Non-Hermitian robust 

edge states in one dimension: Anomalous localization and eigenspace condensation at 

exceptional points. Phys. Rev. B 97, 121401 (2018).

7.
Ozawa, T. et al. Topological photonics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 91, 015006 (2019).

8.
Ma, G., Xiao, M. & Chan, C. T. Topological phases in acoustic and mechanical systems. Nat. 

Rev. Phys. 1, 281–294 (2019).

9.
Hafezi, M., Demler, E. A., Lukin, M. D. & Taylor, J. M. Robust optical delay lines with 

topological protection. Nat. Phys. 7, 907–912 (2011).

10. Xu, C., Chen, Z.-G., Zhang, G., Ma, G. & Wu, Y. Multi-dimensional wave steering with 

higher-order topological phononic crystal. Sci. Bull. 66, 1740–1745 (2021).

11. Hu, B. et al. Non-Hermitian topological whispering gallery. Nature 597, 655–659 (2021).

12. St-Jean, P. et al. Lasing in topological edge states of a one-dimensional lattice. Nat. Photonics

11, 651–656 (2017).

13. Harari, G. et al. Topological insulator laser: Theory. Science 359, eaar4003 (2018).

14. Bandres, M. A. et al. Topological insulator laser: Experiments. Science 359, eaar4005 (2018).

15. Zeng, Y. et al. Electrically pumped topological laser with valley edge modes. Nature 578, 

246–250 (2020).

16. Barik, S. et al. A topological quantum optics interface. Science 359, 666–668 (2018).


12

17. Blanco-Redondo, A., Bell, B., Oren, D., Eggleton, B. J. & Segev, M. Topological protection 

of biphoton states. Science 362, 568–571 (2018).

18. Mittal, S., Goldschmidt, E. A. & Hafezi, M. A topological source of quantum light. Nature

561, 502–506 (2018).

19. Bender, C. M. Making sense of non-Hermitian Hamiltonians. Rep. Prog. Phys. 70, 947–1018 

(2007).

20. Özdemir, Ş. K., Rotter, S., Nori, F. & Yang, L. Parity–time symmetry and exceptional points 

in photonics. Nat. Mater. 18, 783–798 (2019).

21. Miri, M.-A. & Alù, A. Exceptional points in optics and photonics. Science 363, eaar7709 

(2019).

22. Wang, K. et al. Generating arbitrary topological windings of a non-Hermitian band. Science

371, 1240–1245 (2021).

23. Wang, K., Dutt, A., Wojcik, C. C. & Fan, S. Topological complex-energy braiding of non-

Hermitian bands. Nature 598, 59–64 (2021).

24. Gao, T. et al. Observation of non-Hermitian degeneracies in a chaotic exciton-polariton 

billiard. Nature 526, 554–558 (2015).

25. Zhong, Q., Khajavikhan, M., Christodoulides, D. N. & El-Ganainy, R. Winding around non-

Hermitian singularities. Nat. Commun. 9, 4808 (2018).

26. Tang, W. et al. Exceptional nexus with a hybrid topological invariant. Science 370, 1077–1080 

(2020).

27. Tang, W., Ding, K. & Ma, G. Direct Measurement of Topological Properties of an Exceptional 

Parabola. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 034301 (2021).

28. Tang, W., Ding, K. & Ma, G. Experimental Realization of Non-Abelian Permutations in a 

Three-State Non-Hermitian System. Natl. Sci. Rev. nwac010 (2022).

29. Ghatak, A., Brandenbourger, M., van Wezel, J. & Coulais, C. Observation of non-Hermitian 

topology and its bulk–edge correspondence in an active mechanical metamaterial. Proc. Natl. 

Acad. Sci. 117, 29561–29568 (2020).

30. Zhang, L. et al. Acoustic non-Hermitian skin effect from twisted winding topology. Nat. 

Commun. 12, 6297 (2021).

31. Weidemann, S. et al. Topological funneling of light. Science 368, 311–314 (2020).


13

32.Xiao, L. et al. Non-Hermitian bulk–boundary correspondence in quantum dynamics. Nat. Phys.

16, 761–766 (2020).

33. Song, F., Yao, S. & Wang, Z. Non-Hermitian Topological Invariants in Real Space. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 123, 246801 (2019).

34. Longhi, S. Probing non-Hermitian skin effect and non-Bloch phase transitions. Phys. Rev. Res.

1, 023013 (2019).

35. Gao, P., Willatzen, M. & Christensen, J. Anomalous Topological Edge States in Non-

Hermitian Piezophononic Media. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 206402 (2020).

36. Zhu, W., Teo, W. X., Li, L. & Gong, J. Delocalization of topological edge states. Phys. Rev. 

B 103, 195414 (2021).

37. Brandenbourger, M., Locsin, X., Lerner, E. & Coulais, C. Non-reciprocal robotic 

metamaterials. Nat. Commun. 10, 4608 (2019).

38. Hsu, C. W., Zhen, B., Stone, A. D., Joannopoulos, J. D. & Soljačić, M. Bound states in the 

continuum. Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 16048 (2016).

39. Okuma, N., Kawabata, K., Shiozaki, K. & Sato, M. Topological Origin of Non-Hermitian Skin 

Effects. Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 086801 (2020).

40. Zhang, K., Yang, Z. & Fang, C. Correspondence between Winding Numbers and Skin Modes 

in Non-Hermitian Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 126402 (2020).

41. Xiao, L. et al. Observation of Non-Bloch Parity-Time Symmetry and Exceptional Points. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 126, 230402 (2021).

42. Sounas, D. L. & Alù, A. Non-reciprocal photonics based on time modulation. Nat. Photonics

11, 774–783 (2017).

43. Nassar, H. et al. Nonreciprocity in acoustic and elastic materials. Nat. Rev. Mater. 5, 667–685 

(2020).


14

Fig. 1 | Delocalization of TZM by NHSE. a, A 1D NH-SSH chain with nonreciprocal intercell 

hopping 𝑤𝑥 and 𝑤𝑥 + 𝛿𝑥. The blue box encloses the unit cell. b, Complex energy of the NH-SSH 

chain under periodic boundary condition and open boundary condition. The chain has 60 sites with 

𝑣𝑥 = −2.33, 𝑤𝑥 = −0.38, 𝛿𝑥 = −0.5. c, Spatial distribution 𝜓̅ of all the wavefunctions in an 

open chain shows the NHSE. d, An interface formed by a topologically trivial NH-SSH chain and 

a topological H-SSH chain. e, The energy spectra of the interface system shown in d and their 

dependence on 𝛿𝑥. Here, 𝑣𝑑 = −1.03. The red dots mark the TZM which is pinned at zero energy 

for all values of 𝛿𝑥. f, The real-space wavefunctions of the TZM for different 𝛿𝑥. It is seen that the 

increase of |𝛿𝑥| delocalizes the TZM until 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐 = −1.95, at which the TZM becomes fully 

extended in the NH-SSH chain. The TZM re-localizes at the left end of the system for even larger 

|𝛿𝑥|. g, When 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐, tuning 𝑣𝑑 can produce a constant-amplitude mode in the NH-SSH chain.


15

Fig. 2 | Experimental observation of the delocalization effect. a, The schematic drawing of an 

isolated rotational oscillator, which serves as on-site orbital in our experimental lattices. b, A photo 

of the 1D NH-SSH and H-SSH interface system. The white numbers label the sites. The TZM is 

excited at site-11, which is marked by the white arrow. The green and orange arrows are the 

measurement positions of the data shown in c. The left inset is a top-down view of the lattice. The 

coupling springs are colored for clarity. The blue box encloses one unit cell. c, Response spectra 

measured at site-8 and site-9 with excitation at site-11. The TZM response is seen in the orange 

curve (site-9). d, Measured oscillation amplitudes of the TZM for different values of 𝛿𝑥. The TZM 

is nearly extended at 𝛿𝑥 = −1.88. The excitation is at site-11 at 12 Hz. e, Measured oscillation

amplitude of the near-constant-amplitude TZM (𝑣𝑑 = 𝑣𝑥).


16

Fig. 3 | Morphing of TEM in a 2D stacked topological lattice. a, The schematic drawing of the 

2D stacked topological lattice. The blue box marks a unit cell. b, A photo of the experimental 

lattice realizing a. The coupling springs are colored for clarity. c, The energy spectra of a 9 × 7-

site lattice with different nonreciprocal hopping in the 𝑥-directions. Here, 𝑣𝑥 = −0.41, 𝑤𝑥 =

−2.6, and 𝑣𝑦 = −0.1. The TEMs are marked by the red box. d, The real part of the energy spectra 

of the open lattice with three different nonreciprocal hopping distributions. (Note that the energies 

are complex here.) e-i, The theoretical response fields with lattice excited at the left edge are 

plotted in 𝛿𝑥 = 0 (e), 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐 (f), and nonuniform distribution of 𝛿𝑥(𝑦) (g-i) as indicated by the 

overlaying curves. j-n, The long-exposure photos showing the oscillation profiles in the lattice

with harmonic excitation at 12.5 Hz at the left edge. The localized Hermitian TEM (j) becomes an 


17

extended mode over the entire lattice in k. It also deforms to pyramidal (l), triangular (m), and V

shape (n) by different 𝛿𝑥(𝑦). The grids in j-n mark the unit cells.


18

Fig. 4 | Morphing of TCM by HO-NHSE. a, The model of a non-Hermitian topological 

quadrupole insulator. b, A photo of the experimental lattice realizing a. c, The measured response 

spectra of the TCM at the lower-left corner of the Hermitian topological quadrupole insulator. The 

gray shaded region corresponds to the response of the bulk modes. d, The energy spectra of an 

open lattice consisting of 9 × 7 sites with 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑦 = 0 (orange), 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐, 𝛿𝑦 = 0 (teal), and 

𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐, 𝛿𝑦 = 𝛿𝑦𝑐 (blue). e-g, The wavefunctions of the TCM when 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑦 = 0 (e), 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐, 

𝛿𝑦 = 0 (f), and 𝛿𝑥 = 𝛿𝑥𝑐, 𝛿𝑦 = 𝛿𝑦𝑐 (g). h-j, The measured vibration fields corresponding to the 

TCM (h), the extension of the TCM along the lower edge (i), and into the 2D surface (j) under the 

harmonic excitation at 12.4 Hz at the corner. In i, j, 𝛿𝑥 = −2.18 and 𝛿𝑦 = −1.7. The grids in h-j

mark the unit cells.


