Generation of electron vortex beams with over 1000 orbital angular momentum quanta 
using a tuneable electrostatic spiral phase plate

A. H. Tavabi1*, P. Rosi2*, A. Roncaglia3, E. Rotunno2, M. Beleggia4, P-H Lu1, L. Belsito3, G. Pozzi4,
S. Frabboni2,4, P. Tiemeijer5, R. E. Dunin.Borkowski1, V. Grillo2

1.
Ernst Ruska-Centre for Microscopy and Spectroscopy with Electrons and Peter Grünberg Institute, 
Forschungszentrum Jülich, 52425 Jülich, Germany

2.
CNR-Nanoscience Institute, S3 center, 41125 Modena, Italy

3.
CNR-Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems, 40129 Bologna, Italy

4.
FIM Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41125 Modena, Italy

5.
Thermo Fisher Scientific, PO Box 80066, 5600 KA Eindhoven, The Netherlands

* Equal contributions

Abstract: We report the use of an electrostatic MEMS-based device to produce high quality electron 
vortex beams with more than 1000 quanta of orbital angular momentum (OAM). Diffraction and off-
axis electron holography experiments are used to show that the diameter of the vortex in the 
diffraction plane increases linearly with OAM, thereby allowing the angular momentum content of 
the vortex to be calibrated. The realization of electron vortex beams with even larger values of OAM
is currently limited by the breakdown voltage of the device. Potential solutions to overcome this 
problem are discussed.

Scientific breakthroughs often happen simultaneously. In 2010 and 2011, papers from several groups 
described electron vortex beams [1–4], marking the beginning of a revolution that has made 
electron microscopists aware of the benefits of measuring and controlling the orbital angular 
momentum (OAM) of the electron beam in an electron microscope [5–10].

Electron vortex beams are characterised by swirling phase distributions in the azimuthal direction.
They are eigenstates of the OAM operator projected onto the electron propagation direction. The 
number of complete phase turns, ℓ, is an integer that defines the OAM eigenstate. The expectation 
of the OAM on these states is <L> = ℓħ, where ħ is the reduced Planck constant. Unfortunately, the 
combination of lenses and multipoles that is available in a modern electron microscope is only 
sufficient to generate an approximate electron vortex beam, in part because of the requirement for 
an abrupt potential discontinuity [11]. Instead, the electron beam has to be shaped using purposely-
designed electron optical elements.

Based on analogies with light optics, research initially focused on the use of synthetic holograms, i.e.,
spatially patterned membranes that act on the amplitude and/or phase of the electron beam to 
produce a desired waveform [12–14]. Although this approach yielded innovative beams [15–18], the 


resulting electron optical beam-shaping devices suffer from limitations when compared with their 
counterparts in light optics, including a lack of tunability. As a result, micro-electromechanical 
systems (MEMS) technology has recently been used to fabricate tuneable phase plates that can be 
introduced in place of microscope apertures and controlled from outside the electron 
microscope [19,20]. One interesting idea is to fabricate a programmable phase plate from an array 
of Einzel lenses to create a discrete approximation of an arbitrary phase landscape [21,22]. Another
interesting application of MEMS phase plate technology is the realization of an “OAM sorter”, which
is also not possible using standard electron optical elements [19].

MEMS devices that have relatively simple architectures can be used to create tuneable vortex beams. 
One such device, which is referred to as a "chopsticks" device, takes the form of two parallel 
electrodes that are separated by a narrow gap and have electrical bias voltages applied to
them [23,24]. Since the charge distribution on the electrodes is similar to that on a series of parallel 
dipoles [24], analogies can be drawn with the Aharonov-Bohm effect and with the use of an axially-
magnetize needle [25]. As explained in a recent paper [26], every magnetic effect on an electron 
beam can be reproduced using a set of electrodes. The advantages of using electrostatic elements 
over magnetic materials include their greater flexibility and tunability, as well as the possibility to 
use highly compact electrostatic MEMS-based phase plates to introduce comparatively larger phase 
effects.

Here, we report the experimental realization of very large electron vortex beams, which are (to the 
best of our knowledge) the largest isolated electron vortex beams (without the additional diffraction 
orders that are produced by synthetic holograms) that have been created to date. Interest in the 
generation of such beams has been discussed in a recent paper that demonstrated an ℓ = 1000 
beam. [27] Potential applications range from magnetic transition radiation [28] to off-axis magnetic 
field measurement [29,30]. A recent paper by Krenn and Zeilinger [31] raised further interest in the 
use of such beams to achieve non-paraxial phenomena, such as spin-orbit effects, without the need
to increase the numerical aperture/convergence angle. Whereas spin-orbit coupling tends to 
disappear in the paraxial approximation, Ref. 31 proposes that it should increase with OAM, as it can 
is proportional to 𝐿̅ ∙ 𝑆̅. In the light optical domain, the largest OAM value that has been 
demonstrated is ℓ ~ 10000 [32]. For electrons and synthetic holograms, the record value is currently
ℓ ~ 1000 in the first diffraction order of the hologram [27]. A larger value of ℓ ~ 4000 was achieved in 
a weak higher diffraction order. However, it was then partially superimposed on other diffraction 
orders [8].

Here, a large-OAM vortex beam is realised by using an electrostatic device that introduces no 
absorption or parasitic intensity loss. Furthermore, loss of coherence is limited to the small region 
where the electrodes are placed and is therefore minor or negligible [22,33].

A scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the MEMS-based device, which is referred to here as
“MINEON” (MINiaturised Electron Optics for Nanobeams), is shown in Fig. 1. The device is fabricated 
using silicon-on-insulator technology with trench insulation. The most elevated parts are made from
conducting Si that is insulated from the substrate. In this way, the two-dimensional structure defines
the conduction path. The device comprises a series of contacts and electrodes around a central hole 
that is crossed by the electron beam. The most important components are parallel electrodes, which


have a separation of ~1 µm and are used to produce the vortex. The remaining electrodes are used 
to define the boundary conditions for the projected potential that determines the phase.

The MEMS device is inserted into the microscope in a sample holder or an aperture holder that has 8 
electrical contacts [19] and is connected to a generator outside the microscope, which is in turn
controlled by a Labview interface. The protruding electrodes (the “chopsticks”) are connected to two
of the eight contacts. Thick (30 µm) electrodes are used here, resulting in a larger phase effect and 
therefore a larger value of OAM. The other contacts are connected together through a resistive path,
so that the boundary reaches smoothly-varying potential values at different points. Such a smooth 
gradient would not be possible using only the 6 remaining contacts. The path includes labyrinth-like 
structures, which provide a sufficiently large resistance to avoid a high current that would break or 
melt the circuit. It should be noted that the use of controlled ohmic heating can also be used to 
reduce contamination during operation of the device.

The boundary conditions, which will be described in detail in a separate paper, are optimised for
small OAM applications. In the present work, the boundary electrodes are grounded. The effect of 
grounding these electrodes is small here, since a 10 µm aperture is used to limit the field of view, as 
shown in Fig. 2.

For realisation of the experiment, the MEMS device was placed in the sample plane in a Thermo
Fisher Titan transmission electron microscope operated at 300 kV. Large field of view off-axis 
electron holograms and “low magnification” diffraction patterns were then recorded with the 
objective lens off. Under these conditions, the objective aperture lies nearly in the same plane as the 
device and can be used as a limiting aperture. For off-axis electron holography, a Gatan K2 camera 
was used. Unfortunately, a vacuum reference wave could not be obtained from a field-free area. 
Instead, a minimally-perturbed vacuum reference wave was obtained from the region in front of the 
chopsticks, close to the grounded boundary. Simulation indicate that this still does not alter 
significantly the overall phase difference at the two sides of the “chopstics” and therefore the  
evaluation of <ℓ>.

Figure 2 shows a reconstructed electron optical phase image recorded using off-axis electron 
holography for bias voltages applied to a single “chopstick” of ±2 V (i.e., a voltage difference of 4 V). 
Based on such measurements, bias voltages of ±1 V correspond to an OAM of 67±7 ħ, while bias
voltages of ±2 V correspond to an OAM of 135±7 ħ. As a result of distortions, accurate phase 
quantification could only be carried using off-axis electron holography out on a vortex corresponding
to an OAM of fewer than a few hundred quanta. Furthermore, as a result of obstruction by the
chopsticks, the measurements of OAM contained relatively large uncertainties.

In order to infer the OAM values for larger quanta, when off-axis electron holography could not be 
used, it was confirmed that the apparent vortex size in focus is linearly proportional to the 
chopsticks bias. This behaviour was previously shown [10] for aperture-limited vortex beams and is 
expected theoretically based on the stationary phase approximation. In contrast, it does not hold,
for example, for Laguerre-Gauss beams, which are characterised by a beam size at focus that 

increases as √ℓ. By combining this linear relationship with the measurement obtained using off-axis 
electron holography in the low bias regime, the OAM values could be extrapolated to conditions that 


could not be accessed holographically. Figure 3 shows experimental images of vortices, which,
surprisingly, look alike apart from a scaling factor.

The maximum OAM value that could be reached in the present experiments was ℓ ≈1067 ħ at a 16 V 
bias voltage . An attempt to use a higher bias voltage of 18 V unfortunately caused device failure as a 
result of the electrostatic pull between the two electrodes of the chopsticks shorting the circuit and 
leading to electrode melting. The maximum voltage that can be applied to the chopsticks depends 
on the elasticity of the material and on the mutual capacitance of the device. Negative feedback 
beyond a threshold value of deformation and enhanced attraction between the electrodes 
ultimately makes collapse of the structure inevitable. The formula for the critical voltage is [34]

𝑈𝑚𝑎𝑥 = √

8 𝐾𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑑0

3

27 𝜀0𝐴𝑒𝑓𝑓 ,
(1)

where 𝑑0 is the initial separation of the electrodes, 𝜀0 is the vacuum permittivity and 𝐴𝑒𝑓𝑓 is the 
shared area between the electrodes, including a correction that depends on the details of the fields. 
In Eq. 1, the effective elastic constant is

𝐾𝑒𝑓𝑓 =

𝐸𝑏ℎ3

3𝑙3 ,
(2)

where E is the Young's modulus of the material and the other geometrical parameters are described 
in Fig. 1. Here, 𝐾𝑒𝑓𝑓 is modified by a factor 2 because the chopsticks comprises two equal electrodes 
facing each other. By using this formula and including a correction of 20% (see, e.g., [34]) in 𝐴𝑒𝑓𝑓, we 
obtain a value for 2𝑈𝑚𝑎𝑥 on the order of 33 V, i.e., a bias of +16.5 and -16.5 on each electrode, in 
close agreement with our experimental observations. Interestingly, Eq. 1 indicates that the critical 
voltage is reached almost irrespective of the thickness b of the electrodes in the electron 
propagation direction. This situation becomes apparent by substituting Eq 2 and the relationship
𝐴𝑒𝑓𝑓 ≈ 𝑏 𝑙 into Eq. 1. At the same time, the device thickness increases the phase scaling factor,
meaning that a thicker device can be used to provide larger quanta of OAM for the same value of 
applied bias voltage. This has not been possible so far for fabrication limitations.  

It should be noted that the linear dependence between vortex size and OAM can be explained using
stationary geometrical ray tracing as a result of the location of the chopsticks in the probe forming 
aperture. The aperture transfer function can be written in the form 𝐴(𝜌̅) = Π(𝜌)exp (𝑖ℓ𝜃𝜌), where 
𝜌̅ = 𝜌, 𝜃𝜌 are coordinates in the aperture plane and Π𝑅(𝜌) is a top hat function, which takes a value 
of 1 for 𝜌 < 𝜌𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 0 otherwise. The presence of the top hat function means that the generated 
wavefunction is necessarily bandwidth-limited. Considering geometrical propagation from each 
point P in the diffraction plane, each point in the aperture plane is mapped uniquely onto a point in 
the probe plane 𝑟̅ = 𝜆𝑓 ∇𝜌̅
̅̅̅𝜑|𝑃 , where 𝜆, 𝑓 are the wavelength and focal distance, respectively. In 

the probe plane, the vortex beam is a circle. As it is bandwidth-limited, the azimuthal phase gradient

is limited according to the expression

1
|𝑟|

𝜕𝜙
𝜕𝜃𝑟 =

𝜌𝑚𝑎𝑥

𝜆𝑓 . At the same time, according to the definition of

OAM,

𝜕𝜙
𝜕𝜃𝑟 = ℓ. Therefore, the size of the vortex increases linearly with ℓ. This dependence can be 

regarded as a limitation, as the most important  parameter in the search for spin non-paraxial effects
is the ratio between transverse and longitudinal momentum |p|, which is fixed. An increase in the


non-paraxial effects with ℓ can only be obtained if the size of the vortex is constant, independent of 
ℓ. This situation can be realised more closely if the chopsticks are positioned in a different plane 
from that of the limiting aperture and as close as possible to the probe plane, so that the additional 
momentum cannot produce too large an effect on propagation. This idea will be tested in a future
study.

In conclusion, a new MEMS-based device has been used to generate very large tuneable electron 
vortex beams in a transmission electron microscope with more than 1000 quanta of orbital angular 
momentum without the presence of additional beams. The generation of even larger values of 
orbital angular momentum is currently limited by breakdown of the device due to electrostatic 
forces. A strategy for increasing non-paraxial effects that can be used for studies of fundamental 
effects in microscopy has been presented.

Acknowledgments

We acknowledge the support of the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation 
Programme under Grant Agreement No. 101035013 MINEON (H2020-INNOVATION LAUNCHPAD).
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation 
Programme (Grant No. 823717, project “ESTEEM3”).


Fig. 1. (Left) SEM image of the “MINEON” MEMS device. The used of labyrinth-like structures
increases the electrical resistance and allows for reasonable current flow below 1 mA. (Right) 
Primary geometrical parameters of the “chopsticks”.

Fig. 2. (left) Off-axis electron holographic reconstruction of the electron optical phase distribution 
around the chopsticks with bias voltages applied to the electrodes of ±2 V. every line represents a 
phase increase by 2π (measured in radians). (right) Unwrapped phase of the same measurement. By 
extrapolation, it is possible to infer that the OAM value < ℓ > is approximately 137.


Fig. 3. Upper left: Configuration of the aperture and “chopstick” recorded in TEM mode. Subsequent
images: Vortex beams (recorded in the diffraction of the aperture) shown as a function of bias
voltage applied to one of the chopsticks (i.e., semi-difference between the two bias voltages).

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18

0

200

400

600

800

1000

0
133
267
400
533
667
800
933 1067 1200

 exp data
 linear fitting

 OAM quanta

diameter (a.u.)

Applied bias (V)

Fig. 4. Experimental measurements showing a linear relationship between the bias voltage applied 
to one of the chopsticks and the apparent diameter of the electron vortex beam. The upper scale 
shows the OAM value based on a calibration performed using off-axis electron holography.


Bibliography

[1]
K. Y. Bliokh, Y. P. Bliokh, S. Savel’ev, and F. Nori, Semiclassical Dynamics of Electron Wave 
Packet States with Phase Vortices, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 190404 (2007).

[2]
M. Uchida and A. Tonomura, Generation of Electron Beams Carrying Orbital Angular 
Momentum, Nature 464, 737 (2010).

[3]
J. Verbeeck, H. Tian, and P. Schattschneider, Production and Application of Electron Vortex 
Beams, Nature 467, 301 (2010).

[4]
B. J. McMorran, A. Agrawal, I. M. Anderson, A. A. Herzing, H. J. Lezec, J. J. McClelland, and J. 
Unguris, Electron Vortex Beams with High Quanta of Orbital Angular Momentum, Science (80-
. ). 331, 192 (2011).

[5]
R. Shiloh, P.-H. Lu, R. Remez, A. H. Tavabi, G. Pozzi, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, and A. Arie, 
Nanostructuring of Electron Beams, Phys. Scr. 94, 034004 (2019).

[6]
H. Larocque, I. Kaminer, V. Grillo, G. Leuchs, M. J. Padgett, R. W. Boyd, M. Segev, and E. 
Karimi, ‘Twisted’ Electrons, Contemp. Phys. 59, 126 (2018).

[7]
K. Y. Y. Bliokh, I. P. P. Ivanov, G. Guzzinati, L. Clark, R. Van Boxem, A. Béché, R. Juchtmans, M. 
A. A. Alonso, P. Schattschneider, F. Nori, and J. Verbeeck, Theory and Applications of Free-
Electron Vortex States, Phys. Rep. 690, 1 (2017).

[8]
B. J. McMorran, A. Agrawal, P. A. Ercius, V. Grillo, A. A. Herzing, T. R. Harvey, M. Linck, and J. S. 
Pierce, Origins and Demonstrations of Electrons with Orbital Angular Momentum, Philos. 
Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 375, 20150434 (2017).

[9]
J. Harris, V. Grillo, E. Mafakheri, G. C. Gazzadi, S. Frabboni, R. W. Boyd, and E. Karimi, 
Structured Quantum Waves, Nat. Phys. 11, 629 (2015).

[10]
S. M. Lloyd, M. Babiker, G. Thirunavukkarasu, and J. Yuan, Electron Vortices: Beams with 
Orbital Angular Momentum, Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 035004 (2017).

[11]
G. Guzzinati, L. Clark, A. Béché, R. Juchtmans, R. Van Boxem, M. Mazilu, and J. Verbeeck, 
Prospects for Versatile Phase Manipulation in the TEM: Beyond Aberration Correction, 
Ultramicroscopy 151, 85 (2015).

[12]
P. Rosi, F. Venturi, G. Medici, C. Menozzi, G. C. Gazzadi, E. Rotunno, S. Frabboni, R. Balboni, M. 
Rezaee, A. H. Tavabi, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, E. Karimi, and V. Grillo, Theoretical and Practical 
Aspects of the Design and Production of Synthetic Holograms for Transmission Electron 
Microscopy, J. Appl. Phys. 131, 031101 (2022).

[13]
C. W. Johnson, J. S. Pierce, R. C. Moraski, A. E. Turner, A. T. Greenberg, W. S. Parker, and B. J. 
McMorran, Exact Design of Complex Amplitude Holograms for Producing Arbitrary Scalar 
Fields, Opt. Express 28, 17334 (2020).

[14]
T. R Harvey, J. S Pierce, A. K Agrawal, P. Ercius, M. Linck, and B. J. McMorran, Efficient 
Diffractive Phase Optics for Electrons, New J. Phys. 16, 093039 (2014).

[15]
N. Voloch-Bloch, Y. Lereah, Y. Lilach, A. Gover, and A. Arie, Generation of Electron Airy Beams, 
Nature 494, 331 (2013).

[16]
V. Grillo, E. Karimi, G. C. Gazzadi, S. Frabboni, M. R. Dennis, and R. W. Boyd, Generation of 


Nondiffracting Electron Bessel Beams, Phys. Rev. X 4, 011013 (2014).

[17]
R. Shiloh, Y. Lereah, Y. Lilach, and A. Arie, Sculpturing the Electron Wave Function Using 
Nanoscale Phase Masks, Ultramicroscopy 144, 26 (2014).

[18]
V. Grillo, J. Harris, G. C. Gazzadi, R. Balboni, E. Mafakheri, M. R. Dennis, S. Frabboni, R. W. 
Boyd, and E. Karimi, Generation and Application of Bessel Beams in Electron Microscopy, 
Ultramicroscopy 166, 48 (2016).

[19]
A. H. Tavabi, P. Rosi, E. Rotunno, A. Roncaglia, L. Belsito, S. Frabboni, G. Pozzi, G. C. Gazzadi, 
P.-H. Lu, R. Nijland, M. Ghosh, P. Tiemeijer, E. Karimi, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, and V. Grillo, 
Experimental Demonstration of an Electrostatic Orbital Angular Momentum Sorter for 
Electron Beams, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 094802 (2021).

[20]
G. Pozzi, V. Grillo, P.-H. Lu, A. H. Tavabi, E. Karimi, and R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Design of 
Electrostatic Phase Elements for Sorting the Orbital Angular Momentum of Electrons, 
Ultramicroscopy 208, 112861 (2020).

[21]
P. Thakkar, V. A. Guzenko, P.-H. Lu, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, J. P. Abrahams, and S. Tsujino, 
Fabrication of Low Aspect Ratio Three-Element Boersch Phase Shifters for Voltage-Controlled 
Three Electron Beam Interference, J. Appl. Phys. 128, 134502 (2020).

[22]
J. Verbeeck, A. Béché, K. Müller-Caspary, G. Guzzinati, M. A. Luong, and M. Den Hertog, 
Demonstration of a 2 × 2 Programmable Phase Plate for Electrons, Ultramicroscopy 190, 58 
(2018).

[23]
A. H. Tavabi, H. Larocque, P.-H. Lu, M. Duchamp, V. Grillo, E. Karimi, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, 
and G. Pozzi, Generation of Electron Vortices Using Nonexact Electric Fields, Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 
013185 (2020).

[24]
G. Pozzi, P.-H. Lu, A. H. Tavabi, M. Duchamp, and R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Generation of 
Electron Vortex Beams Using Line Charges via the Electrostatic Aharonov-Bohm Effect, 
Ultramicroscopy 181, 191 (2017).

[25]
A. Béché, R. Van Boxem, G. Van Tendeloo, and J. Verbeeck, Magnetic Monopole Field Exposed 
by Electrons, Nat. Phys. 10, 26 (2014).

[26]
G. Pozzi, P. Rosi, A. H. Tavabi, E. Karimi, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, and V. Grillo, A Sorter for 
Electrons Based on Magnetic Elements, Ultramicroscopy 231, 113287 (2021).

[27]
E. Mafakheri, A. H. Tavabi, P.-H. Lu, R. Balboni, F. Venturi, C. Menozzi, G. C. Gazzadi, S. 
Frabboni, A. Sit, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, E. Karimi, and V. Grillo, Realization of Electron 
Vortices with Large Orbital Angular Momentum Using Miniature Holograms Fabricated by 
Electron Beam Lithography, Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 093113 (2017).

[28]
I. P. Ivanov and D. V. Karlovets, Detecting Transition Radiation from a Magnetic Moment, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 264801 (2013).

[29]
A. Edström, A. Lubk, and J. Rusz, Elastic Scattering of Electron Vortex Beams in Magnetic 
Matter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 127203 (2016).

[30]
V. Grillo, T. R. Harvey, F. Venturi, J. S. Pierce, R. Balboni, F. Bouchard, G. Carlo Gazzadi, S. 
Frabboni, A. H. Tavabi, Z.-A. Li, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, R. W. Boyd, B. J. McMorran, and E. 
Karimi, Observation of Nanoscale Magnetic Fields Using Twisted Electron Beams, Nat. 
Commun. 8, 689 (2017).


[31]
M. Krenn and A. Zeilinger, On Small Beams with Large Topological Charge: II. Photons, 
Electrons and Gravitational Waves, New J. Phys. 20, 063006 (2018).

[32]
R. Fickler, G. Campbell, B. Buchler, P. K. Lam, and A. Zeilinger, Quantum Entanglement of 
Angular Momentum States with Quantum Numbers up to 10,010, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 
13642 (2016).

[33]
S. Uhlemann, H. Müller, P. Hartel, J. Zach, and M. Haider, Thermal Magnetic Field Noise Limits 
Resolution in Transmission Electron Microscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 046101 (2013).

[34]
S. Pamidighantam, R. Puers, K. Baert, and H. A. C. Tilmans, Pull-in Voltage Analysis of 
Electrostatically Actuated Beam Structures with Fixed-Fixed and Fixed-Free End Conditions, J. 
Micromechanics Microengineering 12, 319 (2002).


