Nuclear-order-induced quantum criticality and heavy-fermion superconductivity at
ultra-low temperatures in YbRh2Si2

Erwin Schuberth,1 S. Wirth,2 and Frank Steglich2, 3, ∗

1Physics Department, Technical University of Munich, 80333 Munich, Germany
2Max-Planck-Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, N¨othnitzer Str. 40, 01187 Dresden, Germany
3Center for Correlated Matter, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, China
(Dated: April 28, 2022)

The tetragonal heavy-fermion metal YbRh2Si2 orders antiferromagnetically at TN = 70 mK and
exhibits an unconventional quantum critical point (QCP) of Kondo-destroying type at BN = 60 mT,
for the magnetic field applied within the basal (a, b) plane. Ultra-low-temperature magnetization
and heat-capacity measurements at very low fields indicate that the 4f-electronic antiferromagnetic
(AF) order is strongly suppressed by a nuclear-dominated hybrid order (‘A-phase’) at TA ≤ 2.3
mK, such that quantum critical fluctuations develop at B ≈ 0 [1]. This enables the onset of heavy-
fermion superconductivity (Tc = 2 mK) which appears to be suppressed by the primary AF order
at elevated temperatures. Measurements of the Meissner effect reveal bulk superconductivity, with
Tc decreasing under applied field to Tc < 1 mK at B > 20 mT. The observation of a weak but
distinct superconducting shielding signal at a temperature as high as 10 mK suggests the formation
of insulated random islands with emergent A-phase order and superconductivity. Upon cooling, the
shielding signal increases almost linearly in temperature, indicating a growth of the islands which
eventually percolate at T ≈ 6.5 mK. Recent electrical-resistivity results by [2] confirm the existence
of superconductivity in YbRh2Si2 at ultra-low temperatures.
The combination of the results of
[1] and [2] at ultra-low temperatures below BN, along with those previously established at higher
temperatures in the paramagnetic state, provide compelling evidence that the Kondo-destruction
quantum criticality robustly drives unconventional superconductivity.

I.
KONDO-DESTROYING, FIELD-INDUCED
QUANTUM CRITICAL POINT

Lanthanide-based intermetallic compounds showing
heavy-fermion phenomena are well understood within
the framework of the Kondo lattice [3].
The localized
open 4f-shells of such materials are characterized by
a distinct hierarchy of fundamental energy scales, the
local Coulomb repulsion and Hund’s rule energies, spin-
orbit coupling, crystal-field splitting, Kondo screening
including excited crystal-field states at an elevated
temperature, where the formation of hybridized 4f-bands
starts to be recognized in ARPES measurements [4]), as
well as Kondo screening of the lowest-lying crystal-field-
derived Kramers doublet (kBTK). As illustrated below,
the single-ion Kondo temperature TK was found to be
identical to Tcoh [5, 6] where spatial coherence among
4f-shells sets in as seen in transport measurements.
The onsite Kondo screening competes with the inter-
site magnetic Ruderman–Kittel–Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY)
interaction. While predominant Kondo screening results
in a paramagnetic heavy-fermion ground state, a domi-
nant RKKY interaction causes magnetic, most frequently
antiferromagnetic (AF), order. For a substantial number
of these heavy-fermion metals the Kondo screening turns
out to almost exactly cancel the RKKY interaction. In
this situation, a continuous transition may exist at T = 0
between the heavy-fermion and the AF phase.
This
continuous quantum phase transition or quantum critical

∗ steglich@cpfs.mpg.de

point (QCP) can be tuned by a non-thermal control
parameter, e.g., pressure or magnetic field [7–10].

YbRh2Si2 is a prototypical heavy-fermion metal [5, 11]
which orders antiferromagnetically at a N´eel temperature
TN
= 70 mK [12].
Because of a strong magnetic
anisotropy the critical field BN at which AF order
smoothly disappears is only 60 mT when the field is
applied within the basal tetragonal (a, b) plane, i.e.,
it is more than ten times lower compared to BN ∥ c
[13].
The staggered moment was shown to be very
small, µAF ≈ 0.002 µB [14]. Both the low-temperature
paramagnetic (B > BN) and AF phases (B < BN)
behave as heavy Fermi liquids [13] whereas a funnel-
shaped quantum critical regime in the B–T
phase
diagram (Fig. 1) with non-Fermi-liquid properties is
centered at the critical field BN. The AF phase transition
is of second order to the lowest temperature (20 mK)
accessible in magnetostriction measurements [15]; the
crossover between the paramagnetic Fermi liquid and
the non-Fermi-liquid phase turns out to be quite broad.
The sub-linear white T ∗(B) crossover line in Fig. 1 was
constructed by the midpoints of thermally broadened
jumps in both the longitudinal magneto-resistivity and
the isothermally measured initial normal Hall coefficient
[16, 17].
They agree satisfactorily with the locations
of distinct anomalies in the field dependence of both
the isothermal DC magnetization and magnetostriction
as well as in the temperature dependence of the AC
susceptibility measured at fixed magnetic field [15].
T ∗(B) indicates a crossover between a small Fermi
volume (‘small Fermi surface’) at low fields and a large
one at elevated fields. The crossover width (grey shaded

arXiv:2203.01617v3  [cond-mat.supr-con]  27 Apr 2022


2

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

 T*

YbRh2Si2

 TFL

 TN

T  (K)

B (T)

FL

AF

FIG. 1.
Temperature–magnetic field phase diagram of
YbRh2Si2 for B ⊥ c.
The symbols mark the results from
Hall and magnetoresistance measurements on two different
samples from which the Fermi surface crossover temperature
T ∗-line is estimated [17]. The grey scale visualizes the slope
of isothermal magnetoresistance. Orange and green dashed
lines indicate the N´eel temperature TN and the crossover
temperature TFL below which AF order and Fermi liquid
behavior are observed, respectively.
Red arrows indicate
B = 0, BN and 2BN, respectively. Figure adapted from [3].

region) turns out to be proportional to T.
The QCP
at BN(T = 0) is of an unconventional ‘local’ (instead
of itinerant) variety, which may be called a ‘partial
Mott’ or Kondo-destroying QCP. It is characterized
by a dynamical spin susceptibility with frequency-over-
temperature scaling and a fractional exponent in the
singular parts of both the frequency and temperature
dependences [18, 19] as observed by inelastic neutron
scattering on both UCu5−xPdx [20] and CeCu6−xAux
[21]. The latter material [22] as well as CeRhIn5 [23, 24]
are also prototypical heavy-fermion metals exhibiting a
local QCP.
Figure 2 displays the thermal evolution at low tem-
peratures of both the (Sommerfeld) coefficient of the
4f-derived part of the specific heat, γ = Cel/T
=
C4f/T (Fig. 2A), and the electrical resistivity measured
on an YbRh2Si2 single crystal with a low residual
resistivity of about 0.5 µΩcm (Fig. 2B), at B = 0,
BN and 2BN, respectively (see red arrows in Fig. 1).
The behavior of a heavy Fermi liquid in both the
AF and low-temperature paramagnetic phase is clearly
resolved by a huge constant γ-value (Fig. 2A) and
a pronounced T 2-dependence in ρ(T) (Fig. 2B). Very
peculiarly, the Fermi liquid in the AF phase (with
small Fermi surface as T → 0) is considerably heavier
than the Fermi liquid in the paramagnetic phase (with
large Fermi surface).
Approaching the QCP at B =
BN by cooling to below 0.3 K, one finds that γ(T)
diverges following a power-law dependence with a critical
exponent of ≈ −0.3 [25].
As shown in the inset of
Fig. 2A, γ(T) obeys a logarithmic T-dependence [25]

A
B

FIG. 2. (A) Sommerfeld coefficient of the electronic specific
heat and (B) electrical resistivity vs. temperature T at B =
0, BN and 2BN for a YbRh2Si2 single crystal with RRR =
150. Inset in A shows the Sommerfeld coefficient at BN = 60
mT between 0.1 K and room temperature. Reproduced from
[9].

at elevated temperature.
The incremental resistivity
measured at B = BN on a very clean single crystal
is strictly linear in T, ∆ρ(T) = ρ(T) − ρ0 = A′T,
at T < 0.1 K. Over a broad temperature range up to
T = 10 K, the resistivity semi-quantitatively follows a T-
linear dependence, although the ‘temperature-dependent
resistivity exponent’, defined as d ln(ρ−ρ0)/d ln T, shows
some variation that is clustered around 1 [26].
For a
single crystal with nominally 5% Ge substituted for Si
showing a five times larger residual resistivity, ∆ρ(T) =
A′T is more strictly observed all the way up to T = 10
K [25], which suggests a degree of disorder modulation
to this ‘strange-metal’ behavior.
If one restricts to a
relatively narrow temperature range, ∆ρ(T) has also
been fit with other exponents, A′′T α (α < 1); this
includes the case of α = 3/4 in the temperature window
0.4 K < T < 1 K for the high-quality crystal exploited
in Fig. 2B, as motivated by the theory of ‘critical
quasiparticles’ [27] (which, however, is inapt to explain
the measured asymptotic linear-in-T dependence of the
resistivity at the unconventional QCP in YbRh2Si2).
Most importantly, though, for all samples studied so far,
the asymptotic (T → 0) T-dependence of ρ(T) registered
at B = BN is found to be linear, see also [2]. The linear-
in-T coefficient, A′, can be converted to a linear-in-T
coefficient in the scattering rate, 1/τ, in a procedure
based on a Drude analysis: the latter is found to be much
smaller than what appears in a Planckian form when a
‘background’ heavy-fermion value is used for the effective
mass [2, 28].
One of the important techniques that provides new in-
sight into such correlation-driven phenomena is scanning
tunneling spectroscopy (STS) with its unique ability to
give local, atomically resolved information that relates
to the one-particle Green’s function [29]. However, one


3

A
B

FIG. 3. Tunneling conductance g(V, T, B) on Si-terminated YbRh2Si2. (A) Data obtained at different temperatures and B = 0.
g(V, T)-values are normalized at V = −80 mV and offset for clarity. The −6 meV-peak evolving at low T is marked by a red
arrow; the parabola background for peak analysis at T = 0.3 K is shown as a dashed line. Black dots indicate features resulting
from crystalline electric field splitting of the Yb 4f multiplet. Inset: Topography visualizing the excellent surface quality (area:
20 × 10 nm2, V = 100 mV, I = 0.6 nA). (B) Exemplary in-field data at T = 0.3 K and B = 9 T (∥ c). Inset: Data (markers)
after background subtraction with corresponding Gaussian fits (lines). A reduced width (full width at half maximum, dashed
lines) of the Gaussian at B = 1 T can be recognized. All figure parts adapted from [6].

of the prerequisites for successful STS measurements
is the preparation and perpetuation of clean sample
surfaces. Fortunately, YbRh2Si2 can be cleaved nicely
perpendicular to the c-axis in ultra-high vacuum (UHV)
and at low temperatures of about 20 K providing
atomically flat surface areas of often several hundreds
of nanometers in extent. Such surfaces not only evidence
the excellent sample quality (inset to Fig. 3A), they even
allow to analyze the defects to be mostly caused by Rh-
atoms on Si sites [30].
We here focus on predominantly encountered Si-
terminated surfaces. In case of such surfaces, the Kondo-
active Yb atoms are located in the fourth-to-topmost
layer which prevents a reduced screening of the Yb local
moments at the surface [31] and ensures a predominant
study of bulk properties by STS. The latter is clearly
evidenced by the observation of crystal field excitations
in the tunneling spectra [5] at energies in excellent
agreement with inelastic neutron scattering data [32]
(black dots in Fig. 3A). Moreover, Si-terminated surfaces
promote predominant tunneling into the conduction
band as compared to the 4f quasiparticle states and
thereby simplify the analysis of the obtained spectra
as co-tunneling can be neglected [5, 29].
In this
simplified picture, the successive formation of the single-
ion Kondo effect upon lowering the temperature results
primarily in a modification of the density of states
of the conduction band seen as a strong decrease of
the tunneling conductance g(V, T) for V small enough
to not break up the quasiparticles.
This process is
observed to commence at around 100 K and coincides
with the onset of local Kondo screening involving excited
crystalline electric field levels as concluded from entropy
estimates [25].
Upon cooling to below the single-ion
Kondo temperature TK ≃ 25 K the 4f electrons condense
into the Kramers doublet ground state and the Kondo

lattice develops. This is reflected in the STS data, Fig.
3A, by the strong development of a peak at around
−6 meV. Notably, the position in energy of this peak
does not depend on temperature.
The relation of this −6 meV-peak to the Kondo
lattice is supported by calculations: Results of a multi-
level finite-U non-crossing approximation [5] which does
not consider intersite Kondo correlations captures the
temperature evolution of the zero-bias conductance dip
remarkably well but provides no indication for a peak
at −6 meV. Conversely, renormalized band structure
calculations [33] which treats the fully renormalized
Kondo lattice ground state finds a partially developed
hybridization gap at slightly smaller energy in the
quasiparticle density of states (which is complementary
to the here measured density of states of the conduction
band within the Kondo regime).
Albeit this Kondo lattice peak sets in at around TK, i.e.
Tcoh ≈ TK as mentioned above, it only slowly increases
in height down to about 3 K ≈ 0.1 Tcoh, cf. tunneling
conductance at 5.5 K in Fig. 3A. This, along with a
further decrease of g(T) around zero bias, may explain
why single-ion descriptions can often be applied to tem-
peratures well below TK despite neglected lattice Kondo
effects [34, 35].
Only below about 3 K, the −6 meV-
peak gains considerably in height indicating dominant
lattice Kondo correlations at these low temperatures.
This is in line with magneto- [17] and thermal transport
[36] investigations.
In particular, the comparison of
the STS data with thermopower measurements indicates
the formation of a medium-heavy Fermi liquid down to
about 3 K while strong non-Fermi liquid behavior sets
in only below this temperature.
Apparently, quantum
criticality only sets in if there is sufficient buildup of
lattice Kondo correlations at low enough temperatures
[6]. A similar conclusion is suggested by resonant angle-


4

resolved photoemission spectroscopy on CeRhIn5 [37].
STS was also conducted at 0.3 K for magnetic fields
applied B ∥ c, see exemplary data for B = 9 T in
Fig. 3B. It should be noted that renormalized band
structure calculations [33] predict a smooth quasiparticle
disintegration up to well above 30 T in YbRh2Si2 while
AF order is already suppressed at B
≈ 0.6 T for
B ∥ c.
The position in energy of the Kondo lattice
signature peak at −6 meV is not influenced by applying
a magnetic field, further supporting its attribution.
After background subtraction it can be well fitted by a
Gaussian, cf. inset of Fig. 3B. The width of the Gaussian
fit is somewhat reduced at B = 1 T compared to peak
widths at zero field and at several Tesla. Here we note
that a field magnitude of 1 T is close to the T ∗-line (cf.
Fig. 1) for T = 0.3 K and B ∥ c. Therefore, the reduced
peak width at B = 1 T is consistent with a reduced
quasiparticle weight related to quantum criticality, see
also Fig. 4C. However, these STS data on their own
do not allow to distinguish between different scenarios
for quantum criticality and should be extended to lower
temperatures.
Consequently, the question concerning the nature
of the ‘local’ QCP in YbRh2Si2 and the associated
critical excitations remains.
To answer this question,
combined thermal and electrical transport investigations
on YbRh2Si2 single crystals were carried out down to
25 mK at zero field, close to BN and up to B = 1 T
(≫ BN) [38].
Subsequently, Pourret et al.
were able
to extend such measurements down to even 8 mK [39].
The main quantity to study in this context is the Lorenz
number L = ρκ/T, where ρ is the electrical resistivity
and κ the thermal conductivity. By defining the thermal
resistivity as w = L0T/κ, with L0 = (πkB)2/3e2 being
Sommerfeld’s constant, the Lorenz ratio L(T)/L0 can be
written as L/L0 = ρ/w. If the Wiedemann-Franz law
is valid (L(T → 0)/L0 = 1), which strictly holds for
elastic scattering only, the residual electrical and thermal
resistivities turn out to be identical: ρ0/w0 = 1.
Very different phenomena can cause a violation of this
law: (i) Fermionic excitations like spinons, i.e., charge-
neutral heat carriers, may lead to L(T → 0)/L0 > 1.
This was indeed concluded from measurements on, e.g.,
LiCuVO4 [40].
(ii) Alternatively, an enhanced w(T)
can lead to L/L0 < 1, as frequently observed at finite
temperature with dominating inelastic scatterings of the
charge carriers, like the ones from acoustic phonons. In
the zero-temperature limit, however, inelastic scatterings
have to disappear.
To our knowledge, before 2012
this latter kind of violation of the Wiedemann-Franz
law, L(T → 0)/L0 < 1, has never been convincingly
established. For example, for the quasi-two-dimensional
(2D) heavy-fermion metal CeCoIn5, where an AF QCP
was suspected [41, 42] but not identified, L(T)/L0 was
extrapolated to about 0.8 as T → 0 for c-axis transport
at B ≈ Bc2 ≈ 5 T, while it approaches L(T)/L0 ≈ 1 for
in-plane (⊥ c) transport [43]. This result was ascribed
to the action of anisotropic spin fluctuations, although

as T → 0, spin fluctuations as bosonic excitations must
disappear as well.
Subsequently, the observations by
Tanatar et al. could be consistently explained within the
framework of quasi-2D transport [44].
In the following, we describe the violation of the
Wiedemann-Franz law in YbRh2Si2 with the aid of Fig.
4, see also [45]. As shown in Fig. 4A at B = 0 and 0.07
T, L(T)/L0 ≈ 0.87 in an extended temperature window
(0.1 K < T < 0.5 K) [39]. In this T-range, the underlying
electrical and thermal resistivities depend linearly on T,
so that the electronic Lorenz ratio Lel/ L0 is temperature-
independent. While for ρ(T) the ‘strange-metal’ behavior
persists to the lowest accessible temperature, and most
likely to absolute zero, an additional bosonic contribution
κm(T) (by magnons at B = 0, resp. paramagnons at B =
0.07 T) is added to the electronic thermal conductivity
κel(T) at T ≤ 0.1 K which means that here, the total
thermal resistivity w(T) = [κel(T) + κm(T)]−1 drops,
and a distinct upturn develops in L(T)/L0, as clearly
seen in Fig. 4A. Because of its bosonic nature, this
additional term has to vanish as T → 0, whereby it
must pass over a maximum below the low-T limit of
the experiments (8 mK). The (constant) low-T value of
Lel/ L0 ≈ 0.87, displayed in Fig. 4A over an extended
temperature window, is also derived from the minimum
value of the L(B)/L0 isotherm for T
= 0.1 K, the
lowest temperature at which no interfering paramagnon
contribution to κ(T) exists (red data points in Fig. 4B).
These data were obtained with a different set up on a
different single crystal. We thus conclude that the ratio
ρ0/w0 = ρ0/wel,0 is reduced by about 10% compared
with unity, the value expected from the Wiedemann-
Franz law. Fig. 4B demonstrates that below 1 K, the
Lorenz ratio is generally less than unity which implies
predominating inelastic scattering processes, i.e., the
ordinary small-angle electron-electron and electron-spin
fluctuation scatterings.
As already mentioned, in this
low-temperature range, a broad minimum shows up in
the L(B)/L0 isotherms displayed in the figure, which
points to an additional inelastic scattering process. This
minimum is found to occur around the T ∗(B)-line and
to become narrower upon cooling. We therefore consider
it to represent the dynamical origin of local quantum
criticality in YbRh2Si2 by ascribing it to scatterings that
are associated with the transformation between a small
and a large Fermi surface, which coexist on either side of
T ∗(B) all the way down to the QCP (T = 0, B = BN).
As displayed in Fig. 4C, the quasiparticle weights on
both sides are smoothly vanishing as T → 0, whereby
the minimum in L(B)/L0 becomes a delta function,
resulting from fermionic quantum critical fluctuations
(which is a rare case, as in most scenarios quantum
critical fluctuations are of bosonic origin). Apparently,
these critical fluctuations are instrumental to enhance
the residual thermal resistivity by about 10% over its
electrical counterpart.
Several groups have reported very similar experimental
data compared with those by [38], but questioned the


5

QCP
B
0.0
0.1
0.2          0.3          0.4          0.5

T (K)

0.0
0.2
0.4      0.6        0.8        1.0

B (T)

1.0

0.96

0.92

0.88

0.84

0.8 

1.3

1.2

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.8

L / L0
L / L0 = ρ / w

A
C

B
D

FIG. 4. (A) Lorenz ratio L(T)/L0 vs T for an YbRh2Si2single crystal at B = 0 and at various finite fields B ⊥ c. Reproduced
with permission from [39], Copyright (2014) The Physical Society of Japan. (B) L(T)/L0 vs B (⊥ c) isotherms, T ≥ 0.1 K
(paramagnetic regime, purely electronic heat transport, no bosonic contribution to κ). Reproduced from [38]. (C) Schematic
sketch showing coexistence of small and large Fermi surfaces. Reproduced from [38]. (D) BN = 0.059 T. Black (small j):
no heating. B = 0, [ρ(T) − ρ01] = A1T 2; B = 0.2 T, [ρ(T) − ρ02] = A2T 2 (extrapolations to T = 0 shown in green) with
ρ01 > ρ02 (different carrier densities, small vs large FS). A1 > A2 (see Fig. 2B). B = 0.05 T (≤ BN) resp. B = 0.06 T (≥ BN),
[ρ(T) − ρ01] ≈ [ρ(T) − ρ02] ≈ A′T; red (large j): heating on the approach of the QCP due to additional inelastic scatterings
discussed in the text. Reproduced from [46].

interpretation sketched above. The key problem is the
correct treatment of the bosonic term κm(T). This term
was just ignored by [47, 48], i.e., here the measured
thermal conductivity was erroneously regarded as the
electronic contribution in the whole low-temperature
range of the experiments, down to 40 mK. On the other
hand, [49], who gave a detailed interpretation of the data
previously published by [39], consider κm(T) to set in at
a temperature as low as 30 mK, although the data [39]
clearly prove this to occur already at about 0.1 K (see
Fig. 4A). Therefore, on extrapolating the data to T = 0
from just above 30 mK where κm(T) dominates, they
miss the intrinsic value Lel(T → 0)/L0 ≈ 0.9 and instead
obtain accidently ≈ 0.97. This leads to their false claim
that the Wiedemann-Franz law holds in YbRh2Si2. A
violation of the Wiedemann-Franz law was subsequently
also reported for another heavy-fermion metal, YbAgGe
[50].

In Fig. 4D, the conclusions drawn from the heat-

conduction study discussed above are nicely confirmed
by results of measurements of the electrical resistivity
[51].
Close to the critical field BN = 59 mT and at
sufficiently low temperatures, the sample under investi-
gation becomes heated by a moderate current due to its
deteriorated heat conductivity. No heating is observed
when applying a low enough current. Away from BN, in
the AF phase at B = 0 as well as in the paramagnetic
phase at 0.1 and 0.2 T, the resistivity follows the Fermi
liquid-type T 2-dependence, independent of the size of
the here investigated currents.
Upon approaching BN
from either side, at the lowest accessible temperatures
‘strange-metal’ behavior, characteristic of the local QCP,
is observed at low current. If these linear T-dependences
of ρ(T) obtained at 2.4 µA are extrapolated to T = 0,
ρ(T) ends up at very different values of the residual
resistivity. In particular, the so extrapolated ρ0 values
match nicely with those obtained by extrapolating the
Fermi liquid-type T 2-dependences of ρ(T) found at B = 0


6

A
B
T (mK)

B =

10

9

8

7

6

5  

MDC /B  (10-6 m3 /mol)

MDC /B  

TA (Tc)

FIG. 5. Field-cooled (fc) DC magnetization MDC, normalized at 1.1 mT, in dependence on temperature T for magnetic field
B ⊥ c. After cooling the sample at the magnetic measuring field B to below 1 mK, the magnetization curve was taken on the
warmup of the nuclear stage. (A) B = 0.090 mT. (B) B ≤ 23 mT. Reproduced from [1].

and way above BN, respectively. We consider this jump
in ρ0 as a direct visualization of the abrupt change in
the charge-carrier density of YbRh2Si2 on field tuning
through the Kondo-destroying QCP.

II.
COMPETITION BETWEEN NUCLEAR AND
PRIMARY 4f -ELECTRONIC ORDER,
EMERGENCE OF HYBRID A-PHASE AND
SUPERCONDUCTIVITY

When YbRh2Si2 single crystals were investigated by
resistivity measurements at T > 10 mK, and specific-heat
as well as susceptibility measurements at T > 18 mK,
no superconductivity could be detected [25]. The most
natural explanation for this is that superconductivity
becomes suppressed by the AF order which forms at
TN = 70 mK. To find out whether superconductivity
in YbRh2Si2 shows up at T ≤ 10 mK, magnetization,
susceptibility and specific-heat measurements have been
carried out down to temperatures as low as 0.8 mK
by using a nuclear demagnetization cryostat providing
a base temperature of 400 µK [1].
Here, a total of 5
different single crystals was investigated.
In Fig. 5A,
the temperature dependence of the field-cooled (fc) DC-
magnetization, measured at a magnetic field of 0.09 mT,
reveals two phase-transition anomalies at TN ≈ 70 mK
and TA (Tc) ≈ 2 mK. While the peak at 70 mK illustrates
the AF 4f-electronic transition, the one at 2 mK marks
the transitions into both nuclear-dominated hybrid AF
order (‘A phase’) and heavy-fermion superconductivity,
as discussed below. A blow-up of the data near the 2
mK-peak at fields below 4 mT indicates that the onset
of hybrid order precedes that of superconductivity, with
TA −Tc being less than 0.1TA [1]. Fig. 5B illustrates how
these phase-transition anomalies evolve with increasing
magnetic field.
The position of the low-temperature

anomaly becomes gradually reduced until the latter
cannot be resolved anymore above 23 mT, whereas TN
is robust in this whole field range. Clearly resolved is
an increase in field-cooled magnetization, fc-MDC(T),
upon cooling to below about 20 mK, which indicates a
weakening of the staggered magnetization in the primary
AF phase. At T ≈ 10 mK, a significant decrease in the
absolute slope of fc-MDC(T) is observed.
Figure 6A displays the zero-field-cooled (zfc-) and fc-
MDC(T) curves taken up to B = 0.418 mT in a specially
shielded setup (different from the one used to obtain
the data of Fig. 5). The data registered at the lowest
field, B = 0.012 mT, illustrate how the experiment was
performed: one starts at T > 10 mK by cooling the
sample in zero field to the lowest temperature, T = 0.8
mK. Then, the field is applied and the zfc curve is
recorded on warming to above 10 mK. Cooling again
with field applied yields the fc curve. The zfc-MDC(T)
curve, which separates abruptly from the fc curve at T ≈
10 mK, indicates a shielding signal which is increasing
almost linearly upon cooling and assumes a value of not
more than 20% just above Tc = 2 mK. This is followed by
a sharp, pronounced drop at Tc and a robust diamagnetic
response at T ≤ 1 mK. These data are well reproduced
by the results of the AC susceptibility obtained under
nearly zero-field conditions, Fig. 6B. In the χAC(T) data
partial shielding below T ≈ 10 mK and the AF phase
transition at TN ≈ 70 mK are resolved as well.
We now turn to the peak in the fc-MDC(T) curve
at 2 mK which reveals a pronounced decline ∆M of
about 0.075 µB per Yb down to 0.8 mK (Fig 5A). As
will be discussed below, about 25% of this decline on
the low-T side of the 2 mK-peak should be attributed
to the onset of the nuclear-4f electronic hybrid ‘A-
phase’, leaving about 75% of this being due to the
Meissner effect. This corresponds to a Meissner volume
amounting to only about 2% of the full shielding


7

T (mK)

MDC /B  (10-6 m3 /mol)

0.01      
1    
10         100  
1    
10                  100  

T (mK)
A
B

AC

FIG. 6. (A) fc- and zfc-MDC(T) curves, normalized to 1.1 mT and offset for the sake of clarity, between 0.012 and 0.418 mT.
The data were taken in a special measuring cell which allowed for the compensation of the earth field to obtain a smallest
magnetic measuring field of 0.012 mT. Note that the vertical scale is larger by more than a factor of 5 compared to that in Fig.
5A. (B) Real part of the AC susceptibility χ′
AC(T) at B ≈ 0. Reproduced from [1].

signal which seems to be quite a small value; however,
owing to vortex pinning this is typical for bulk type-II
superconductors. After destroying the pinning centers by
powdering and subsequent annealing, the sample should
exhibit a substantially increased Meissner volume when
measured below the lower critical field Bc1, see, e.g.,
[52, 53].
As also inferred from Fig.
6A, the shielding
signal in zfc-MDC(T) has become extremely weak at a
field as low as 0.418 mT, cf. the discussion below. By
contrast, the jump in fc-MDC(T), ∆M, is robust, hinting
at the existence of bulk superconductivity with Tc ≥ 0.8
mK up to B ≤ 23 mT, see Fig. 5B.
The
coefficient
of
the
molar
spin
specific
heat,
δC(T)/T, obtained after subtracting a huge nuclear
quadrupolar contribution (for B = 0) from the raw data
taken at 2.4 mT, is shown below 6 mK in Fig. 7A. δC(T)
mainly consists of the contributions by the Yb-derived
nuclear spins (S = 1/2 for 171Yb ions with a natural
abundance of 14.3% as well as S = 5/2 for 173Yb ions
with 16.1% abundance).
Note that neither the 100Rh
nor the 29Si nuclear spins contribute to the specific heat
above T = 1 mK, because they assume their full Zeeman
entropies already below this temperature.
In addition
to the nuclear spin contributions, there is a small one
by the 4f-electronic spins, C4f(T). Since the effect of a
magnetic field on the nuclear quadrupole contribution
is only of higher order, one can use these δC(T)/T
data, subtracted by C4f(T)/T, to estimate the molar
Yb-derived nuclear spin entropy SI,Yb(T) (for B = 2.4
mT). Clearly seen in Fig. 7A is a huge, broadened phase-
transition anomaly of mean-field type. The latter can be
replaced, under conservation of entropy, by a jump which
yields a phase transition temperature of TA = 2 mK
(at B = 2.4 mT) and a jump height ∆C/TA of ≈ 1700
J/K2mol. This exceeds ∆C/Tc observed at the transition
temperature of typical heavy-fermion superconductors by
more than a factor of 1000 and indicates that the A-

phase transition is predominantly due to nuclear degrees
of freedom. Since an additional measurement at 59.6 mT
revealed TA to be shifted to below the lowest accessible
temperature of 0.8 mK, this TA-anomaly marks the
transition into a state of antiferromagnetically ordered
nuclear spins.
In the inset of Fig. 7A, δC(T)/T is
displayed on a largely expanded vertical scale between 6

1
2
3
4
5
6

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

0
5
10
15
20
25

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0
5
10
15
20

0.95

1.00

TA

B = 2.4 mT

δC / T (J / K

2mol)

T (mK)

B = 2.4 mT

TA

0
10
20

0

5

10

T (mK)

SI,Yb / Stot

T (mK)

A
           B

T (mK)

TB

FIG. 7.
(A) Molar spin specific heat of YbRh2Si2 in an
external magnetic field B = 2.4 mT plotted as δC/T vs T
at T < 6 mK. The data were obtained by the common heat-
pulse as well as the relaxation methods with the fc-MDC(T)
dependence of YbRh2Si2 used as an internal thermometer.
In the latter case, the heat capacity ˜C (including addenda
contributions) could be determined by the relaxation time
τ =
˜C Rth, with Rth being the thermal resistance of the
‘weak link’ (between sample and nuclear stage). For details,
see [1].
The inset shows the same quantity on a smaller
scale for T < 30 mK. (B) Yb-derived molar nuclear spin
entropy SI,Yb/Stot vs. T in units of Stot where Stot is its
value at sufficiently high T. Inset: Zoom into the same data
at T ≥ 4 mK to emphasize the jump at TB.


8

0     10    20    30     40     50     60     70     80    90  

B (mT)

1.8                 2

T (mK)

B (mT)

0.5

T  (mK)

400

200

100

40

20

10

4

2

1  

PM

AF

A + SC

B  c

YbRh2Si2

A + SC

FIG. 8.
Phase diagram of YbRh2Si2.
Dark blue dots and
line: boundary of the primary AF order. Light blue dots and
shaded area: partial superconducting shielding in previously
labelled ‘B-phase’, i.e., in insulated droplets of A-phase which
form below TB ≈ 16 mK, see text. Red data points: Position
of low-T peak in fc-MDC(B), see Fig. 5.
Green circle:
superconducting Tc at B = 0 from χAC(T), see Fig. 6B.
Yellow circles: superconducting Tc from zfc-MDC(T), Fig. 6A,
blown up in the inset to illustrate the huge absolute value of
the initial slope of Bc2(T) at Tc, |B′
c2| ≈ 25 T/K. Figure
adapted from [1].

– 23 mK, which now contains additional (in comparison
to [1]) data for T > 12 mK. At T ≥ 18 mK, where
all nuclear spin components are negligible, these data
agree well with previous results for C4f(T)/T [25], cf.
Fig. 2A. The anomaly visible at TB ≈ 16 mK can also be
recognized in Fig. 7B, where the temperature dependence
of the entropy of the Yb-derived nuclear spins, SI,Yb(T),
is displayed in units of its total (high-T) value, Stot. This
anomaly shall be discussed in more detail in the following
section.
The temperature-magnetic field phase diagram in Fig.
8 indicates the various low-T, low-B phases of YbRh2Si2,
i.e., the primary AF phase (blue dots and dashed line),
the so-called ‘B-phase’ (light blue shading), the A-phase
and superconductivity whose transition temperatures are
closely spaced and jointly displayed by the red dots,
designating the positions of the low-temperature peaks
in fc-MDC(T), see Fig. 5. The green symbol at B = 0
represents the superconducting phase transition observed
in χAC(T), and the yellow ones, partly hidden by the
former, denote the positions of the pronounced shielding
signals registered at very low fields by zfc-MDC(T) (Fig.
6A). These latter transition temperatures are plotted as
a function of field in the inset, yielding the absolute
initial slope of the upper critical field curve at T = Tc,
|dBc2(T)/dT| = |B′
c2| ≈ 25 T/K. An identical value was
obtained from the fc-MDC(T) data at very low fields [1].
The large magnitude of |B′
c2| is typical for heavy-fermion
superconductors, based upon the ordinary 4f-electronic
Kondo effect [54].
If the giant anomaly in δC(T)/T

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

(mYb)-1 (µB)

T (K)

B = 10.1 mT

FIG. 9. Curie Weiss fit, µB/mYb vs. temperature at B =
10.1 mT. For T → 0 a saturation moment msat = 1.24 µB is
estimated. The Weiss temperature θ ≈ −0.27 K agrees well
with the result reported by [25] and illustrates dominant AF
correlations at low temperature [57].

displayed in Fig. 7A manifested rather a superconducting
than a nuclear-ordering transition, one would deal with
super-heavy, almost localized, quasiparticles which were
originating in a ‘nuclear Kondo effect’ [55]. In this case,
the spins of the conduction electrons would rather screen
the Yb-derived nuclear than the 4f-electronic spins. This
scenario cannot be at play as it would result in an almost
infinite slope |B′
c2|.
One can derive the effective g-factor of the A-phase,
geff ≃ 0.051, from the ratio of the transition temperature
TA(B = 0) = 2.3 mK and the critical field BA(T →
0) ≃ 45 mT (Fig. 8).
Using the in-plane 4f-g-factor
of YbRh2Si2, g4f = 3.5 [56], one finds the A-phase
to represent hybrid AF order comprising a dominant
(≃ 98.5%) nuclear component and a tiny 4f-electronic
component of ≃ 1.5%, with a staggered moment of
mJ ≃ 0.018 µB.
This is obtained with the aid of the
(T → 0) saturation moment, 1.24 µB, as estimated from a
Curie-Weiss fit to the fc-magnetization data taken in the
paramagnetic regime at an external field of 10.1 mT, see
Fig. 9. The staggered moment mJ exceeds significantly
that of the primary AF phase, mAF ≈ 0.002 µB [14]
which may explain the ‘re-entrant AF order’ at very low
temperatures as reported by [58] based on measurements
of Nyquist noise.
We note that a pure nuclear phase
transition would not be resolved in our magnetization
measurements because of the very small nuclear moment.
Therefore, one can state that the 2 mK-peak in fc-
MDC(T) originates in the tiny 4f-component of the
hybrid A-phase (and additionally, to a larger part in the
Meissner signal of the superconducting transition), while
the huge anomaly in the specific-heat coefficient shown
in Fig. 7A is only due to the Yb-derived nuclear spin
states. We infer from the red data points shown in Fig.


9

resembles the shape drawn by the yellow color code (50% resis-
tance) in Fig. 3c. An initial rapid suppression of Tc is followed by
a much more gradual one, indicating that moving toward the
QCP boosts the superconductivity against the general trend of
field suppression associated with the Pauli- and/or orbital-
limiting effect of the magnetic field (for cartoons of this field
effect, see Supplementary Fig. 3). This is seen even more clearly in
the 90% resistance line (boundary of the pale shading in Fig. 4a)
that exhibits a local maximum at a magnetic field only slightly
below the QCP. This evidences that at least a component of the
superconductivity of YbRh2Si2 is promoted by the same quantum
critical fluctuations that are also responsible for the extreme
strange metal behavior—thus anchoring both phenomena to the
material’s QCP. The fact that there might indeed be two distinct
superconducting phases, one more readily suppressed by mag-
netic field and one that is less field sensitive, receives further
t f
th
h
di
f 174YbRh Si
t d
t

phases, a low-field one that we denote as phase I, and a field
induced one that we call phase II (Fig. 4b, see caption for th
meaning of the different symbols). Again, we also show the 90%
resistance line as the boundary of the pale shading. Using thi
criterion, phase I and II of 174YbRh2Si2 grow together into
single superconducting region, similar to what is observed fo
YbRh2Si2. Conversely, this adds evidence to the above-proposed
two-phase
interpretation
of
the
peculiarly
shaped
super
conducting region of YbRh2Si2 (see cartoons in Supplementar
Fig. 2). Despite the qualitative similarities between the phas
diagrams of YbRh2Si2 and 174YbRh2Si2, it is clear that quantita
tively, the superconductivity is much weaker in 174YbRh2Si2
Thus, whereas nuclear moments—present in YbRh2Si2 but absen
in 174YbRh2Si2—are not a necessary ingredient to create super
conductivity, they do considerably strengthen it.
In what follows we give a few simple estimates of character
i ti
f th
d
ti it i
YbRh Si
d 174YbRh Si (

Fig. 1 Temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity of YbRh2Si2 and 174YbRh2Si2. a, b Electrical resistivity ρ(T) below 150 mK, showing linear-in
T behavior above the Neel temperature TN, T2 behavior below it, and the onset of superconductivity at the lowest temperatures. c, d Electrical resistivit
below 12 mK, scaled to its normal-state resistivity ρN just above the transition, showing the superconducting transition at Tc, which we define as the
temperature where ρ(T) has dropped to ρN/2. Magnetic fields (applied within the tetragonal a-a plane) successively suppress Tc. The 10 and 30 mT curve
for 174YbRh2Si2 were extracted from isothermal field sweeps (Fig. 3b); all other curves were recorder as function of temperature.

Table 1 Characteristics of the investigated YbRh2Si2 and 174YbRh2Si2 single crystals.

Sample
Batch
RRR10 mK
ρ0 (μΩcm)
A (μΩcm/K2)
ρ0
0 (μΩcm)
A0 (μΩcm/K)
γ0 T
KW (J/molK2)

YbRh2Si2
63113_1
67
1.19
20.2
1.23
1.17
1.42
174YbRh2Si2
Lap0288
123
0.55
14.8
0.59
0.85
1.22

Both samples are from batches studied in detail previously17,32. Their residual resistance ratios RRR10 mK = R(300 K)/R(10 mK), as well as the zero-field Fermi liquid behavior ρ = ρ0 + AT2 below TN and
the non-Fermi liquid behavior ρ ¼ ρ0
0 þ A0T at the quantum critical field of 60 mT confirm high sample quality. To remove uncertainties in the geometric factors, we have assumed ρ(300 K) = 80
μΩcm15. The Sommerfeld coefficient in zero field γ0 T
KW, calculated from A via the universal Kadowaki–Woods ratio A/γ2 = 10−5 μΩcm(mol K)2/(mJ)2, is a good estimate of the non-quantum critical
contribution (see Supplementary Note 2: Estimates on Planckian dissipation).

NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24670-z
ARTICLE

FIG. 10. Electrical resistivity as a function of temperature for (A), (C) YbRh2Si2 and (B), (D) 174YbRh2Si2 at B = 0 and
various applied fields. Reproduced from [2] under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Copyright 2021,
The Authors, published by Springer Nature.

8 and the results of Fig. 5B that the existence range for
bulk superconductivity is most likely extended to fields in
excess of 23 mT where the values of Tc are below 0.8 mK.
Measurements of the electrical resistivity at ultra-
low temperatures are extremely difficult in view of the
unavoidable contact resistances which may easily heat
up the sample. Recently, Nguyen et al. were successful
in performing such measurements on YbRh2Si2 single
crystals down to 0.5 mK [2].
Figure 10 reproduces
their results on a pristine sample of YbRh2Si2 (A, C)
as well as on a single crystal with nominally 100 at%
of 174Yb ions which do not carry nuclear spins (denoted
as 174YbRh2Si2 in B, D). This latter sample had been
prepared and intensively studied by [59].
For both
single crystals the onset of the primary AF order at
TN = 70 mK is resolved, see Figs. 10A and B, as is
the superconducting transition with a (mid-point) Tc =
7.9 mK, following an onset at ≃ 9 mK, for the YbRh2Si2
crystal and an onset at about 5 mK for the 174YbRh2Si2
crystal (Figs. 10C and D). Within the resolution of the
experiments, the resistivity reaches ρ = 0 at about
6.5 mK for the former sample (Fig. 10C). In case of
the nominally nuclear-spin free 174YbRh2Si2 sample, the
onset of superconductivity at 5 mK is followed by a
broadened 75% decrease of ρ(T), which starts to decline

in a substantially steeper fashion at about 1 mK, without
reaching zero at the low-T limit of 0.5 mK, suggesting
ρ = 0 at around 0.3 – 0.4 mK (Fig. 10D). Under
external magnetic field the transitions are shifted to lower
temperatures. As shown in Fig. 10C, for the YbRh2Si2
sample, the transition is broadened at B = 11 mT,
and zero resistivity is achieved at T ≈ 2 mK. Even
at B = 60 mT a residual, very broad and incomplete
transition is recognized. The initial Tc(B) dependence
is found to be relatively steep, implying an absolute
initial slope of |B′
c2| ≃ 4.4 T/K. The field dependence
of Tc becomes flatter above B ≈ 11 mT. The finite-
field data for the 174YbRh2Si2 sample displayed in Fig.
10D show a field-induced reduction of the temperature
range of the broad initial decline in ρ(T). In addition,
the temperature of 0.3 – 0.4 mK at which ρ(T) is likely
to vanish, appears to be almost independent of field up
to B = 30 mT.
To put these new results in perspective, we wish to
note that resistive transitions (at Tc,ρ) commonly probe
percolative superconductivity, with ρ(T) reaching zero
when the first percolating path through the sample
is formed.
On the other hand, both χAC(T) (with
Tc,χ) and zfc-MDC(T) provide shielding signals due to
‘networks of screening currents’ in the sample surface.


10

The thermodynamic (bulk-) Tc is obtained through
transitions in the specific heat and/or the Meissner
effect as measured by fc-MDC(T) (with Tc,M).
For
inhomogeneous superconductors one frequently finds
Tc,ρ > Tc,χ > Tc,M.
In case of the Ce-based 115-
superconductors with anisotropic transport owing to
the delicate interplay of competition and coexistence
between superconductivity and AF order, an exotic type
of percolative (‘textured’) superconductivity has been
reported [60]. For CeIrIn5, the thermodynamic Tc probed
via specific heat is 0.4 K, while Tc,ρ = 1.2 K [61].
In the YbRh2Si2 sample, the onset of superconducti-
vity at very low fields is observed at almost the same
Tc,ρ ≈ 8 mK in measurements of both the electrical
resistivity [2] and Nyquist noise [58]. In this exceptional
case Tc,ρ, and even the onset temperature of the resistive
transition, is smaller than Tc,χ ≈ 10 mK. The resistivity
study yields an absolute initial slope of Bc2(T) at Tc,
|B′
c2| ≈ 4.4 T/K discussed above, which is much smaller
than the value 25 T/K based on zfc- and fc-MDC(T)
results, cf. the preceding Section II. In addition, the
thermodynamic superconducting transition displayed by
the low-temperature peak in fc-MDC(T) is corroborated
by abrupt and large shielding signals in both zfc-MDC(T)
and χAC(T), cf. Figs. 6A and B, respectively.
Concerning the 174YbRh2Si2sample, we believe that
(i) it contains a low,
but finite,
concentration of
residual Yb ions with nuclear spins which give rise to
a weakened hybrid A-phase order and, thus, weakened
superconductivity, and (ii) YbRh2Si2 free of nuclear spins
would not be a superconductor, at least near B = 0.
To check this, future studies of superconductivity of
YbRh2Si2 samples with enriched 174Yb isotope should
be assisted by high-precision mass spectrometry, which
is required to determine the amount of residual nuclear
spins.
A three-component Landau theory was applied in [1]
to explain the development of two subsequent AF phase
transitions at TN and TA. (Assuming two components,
one would obtain only one phase transition). This theo-
retical treatment was based on the empirical knowledge
that the 4f-electronic spin susceptibility χ4f(Q) is highly
anisotropic, exhibiting maxima at two wave vectors, QAF
and Q = 0, and giving rise to the primary AF order and
ferromagnetic correlations [62], respectively.
It is, therefore, natural to assume that a peak in
χ4f(Q) exists at yet another finite wave vector Q1,
different from QAF. Along Q1, the RKKY interaction
generates an order parameter ΦJ among the 4f-electronic
spins and simultaneously an order parameter ΦI among
the Yb-derived nuclear spins.
According to the size
of the effective g-factor discussed above, ΦI must be
much larger than ΦJ.
As ΦJ and ΦI exist at the
same wave vector Q1, they are coupled bilinearly via
−λ ΦJΦI, where the coupling parameter λ ≈ 25 mK
is related to the hyperfine coupling constant Ahf by
λ ∼ Ahf ≈ 100 T/µB.
As a result, one finds the
transition temperature of the nuclear-dominated hybrid

B

A

FIG. 11. Three component Landau theory: Phase transitions
at TAF and Thyb. (A) Sketch of the two phase transitions
associated with electronic and nuclear spin orders.
(Top
line) Without any hyperfine coupling (Ahf), the electronic
and nuclear spins are ordered at TAF and TI, respectively.
(Bottom line) With hyperfine coupling, TAF is not affected,
but a hybrid nuclear and electronic spin order is induced
at Thyb ≫ TI.
(B) Temperature evolution of the primary
electronic spin order parameter (mAF) and the superconduct-
ing order parameter ΨSC.
ΨSC is developed when mAF is
suppressed by the formation of hybrid nuclear and electronic
spin order directly below Thyb. Reproduced from [1].

A-phase Thyb ≈ λ2χ4f(Q1)/g2
4f ≈ 1 mK. Here, the
value of the bulk susceptibility was taken for that of
the unknown χ4f(Q1). In view of this uncertainty, the
agreement between the theoretical result for Thyb and
the experimental value TA = 2 mK is surprisingly good.
Within the afore-described Landau treatment it may be
assumed that the nuclear order parameter ΦI competes
with the primary 4f-electronic order parameter ΦAF
that was found to be detrimental to superconductivity.
Consequently, superconductivity sets in once the primary
order ΦAF is suppressed, cf. Figure 11.
As this Landau theory is a mean-field theory, it
does not treat short-range order.
However, unique
nuclear short-range order, as visualized by a significant
temperature dependence of the nuclear spin entropy (Fig.
7B), apparently exists up to at least 16 mK and generates
the nucleation of superconductivity at T
≃ 10 mK
(Fig. 6A). In reality, as was inferred from Fig. 5A, the
staggered magnetization of the primary AF phase, mAF,
starts to decrease already at 20 mK, rather than at
T = Thyb. As suggested in Fig. 11, mAF(T) continues
to decrease below Thyb and may well vanish as T → 0.
This means, the QCP is located at (or very close to)
zero external magnetic field. Interestingly, the transition
from the primary AF order to superconductivity is of first
order [1], similar to what was found for single-crystalline
A/S-type CeCu2Si2 [63].
In the following we summarize, and offer a—possibly
oversimplified—explanation of, the multitude of puzzling


11

results achieved by the previous magnetic and calorimet-
ric as well as the recent resistive measurements:

i. Superconductivity in YbRh2Si2 apparently exists
in a wide field range almost up to BA = 45 mT,
with the maximum Tc occurring at B = 0 [1].

ii. The T-dependence of fc-MDC(T) displayed in Fig.
5A demonstrates that the staggered moment, mAF,
of the primary order starts to decrease already at
about 20 mK, which is close to the temperature
associated with the strength of the local Yb
hyperfine interaction (25 mK). In addition,
a
significant T-dependence of the Yb-derived nuclear
spin entropy, SI,Yb(T), is observed up to TB ≈
16 mK, where a distinct anomaly is visible in Fig.
7.
The latter is associated with a rather sharp
removal of a tiny fraction of about 1.5% of Stot, the
full value of SI,Yb(T) at high temperatures. This
can be ascribed to a corresponding small fraction
of the Yb-derived nuclear spins which interact with
the mean hyperfine field induced by the 4f-electron
spins [1] to create random and insulated A-phase
regions which must be growing upon lowering the
temperature.

iii. The simultaneous onset of both a weak, but distinct
shielding signal (Fig. 6) and a pronounced decline
in the absolute slope of fc MDC(T) (Fig. 5A) at
T ≈ 10 mK are interpreted as manifesting the
nucleation of superconductivity.

iv. The network of superconducting islands turns out
to be extremely fragile as the shielding signal
is suppressed already by a very small external
magnetic field (Fig. 6A).

v. Upon further cooling, the resistivity reaches zero
at about 6.5 mK. This can be reconciled with
the above results in terms of the onset of su-
perconducting percolation as mentioned before.
The percolation initiates a considerably increasing
strength of A-phase short-range order as illustrated
by a pronounced increase of fc-MDC(T) below 5
mK (Fig. 5A) and corroborated by a significant
removal of the Yb-derived nuclear spin entropy
from its maximum value Stot (at T
> TB) by
26% on cooling the sample down to TA (Fig. 7B).
Remarkably, the shielding signal due to the network
of superconducting islands in the sample surface
does not exceed 20% when cooling from T ≈ 10 mK
to T ≥ TA, the temperature range previously called
‘B-phase’, cf. Fig. 8.

vi. At TA (= 2.3 mK as B → 0, see [1]), a second-
order phase transition into long-range A-phase
order takes place (Fig. 7A). The ordering of the
Yb nuclear spins reaches a level of more than 60%
already at 1.5 mK, see Fig. 7B. Nuclear-dominated
hybrid order at elevated magnetic fields has yet

to be confirmed by future measurements of the
specific heat. This should clarify whether the A-
phase exists up to BA ≃ 45 mT, as indicated
by the dotted red line in the phase diagram of
Fig. 8, or even up to the quantum critical field
BN = 60 mT, as suggested by the new resistivity
results of [2] (Fig. 10).
In the latter case, we
conjecture the existence of not just two QCPs at
B = BN (vanishing of the primary AF order due to
the applied magnetic field) and at B = 0 (due to
the competing A-phase). Rather, a phase boundary
TA(B) spanning the whole field range B < BN
would exist and most likely establish a quantum
critical line between these two QCPs.

vii. From the magnetization measurements [1], bulk
superconductivity emerges at Tc = 2 mK (Figs.
5A and 6A), slightly below TA. Future fc-MDC(T)
measurements on annealed powder samples below
the lower critical field Bc1 are needed to confirm
that bulk superconductivity indeed exists well
below Tc,ρ at magnetic fields up to B ≃ BA.

We should welcome future work by other groups to
cross-check the above reasoning.
The new resistivity study by [2] suggests the existence
of two separate superconducting regimes, at low and
elevated fields, respectively.
In view of the preceding
discussion, we cannot concur with the proposal by
Nguyen et al. that, at least in the low-field regime,
Cooper pairing in YbRh2Si2 is mediated by the critical
fluctuations of the field-induced QCP at BN: For, here
the primary AF order is apparently suppressed by the
competing nuclear order, allowing a quantum critical line
to be established. Therefore, it is natural to consider the
associated quantum critical fluctuations at very low fields
being the driving force for the formation of Cooper pairs.
The origin of the superconductivity at elevated fields
remains to be resolved.
If here,
the existence of
the nuclear-dominated hybrid A-phase can be proven
by future specific-heat experiments, the Cooper-pairing
mechanism emphasized above in the low-field regime will
most likely be operating as well. An alternative scenario
proposed by [2] neglects the competition between the
nuclear and primary 4f-electronic orders and instead
implies, as mentioned before, that the quantum critical
fluctuations associated with the field-induced QCP at
BN
= 60 mT bring about the formation of super-
conductivity.
As these critical fluctuations would be
strongly impeded by the pair-breaking applied magnetic
field, the competition between the field-induced quantum
criticality and the destructive action of the magnetic field
on the Cooper pairs causes a maximum Tc to occur well
below BN. [2] propose that superconductivity at elevated
fields may be of the spin-triplet variety. While this would
not have been a surprise had the quantum criticality
been of nearly ferromagnetic (and conventional) type
[64], how could spin-triplet pairing develop for Kondo-
destroying type AF quantum criticality as is the case


12

in YbRh2Si2?
Insights into this question have come
from theoretical studies near a Kondo-destroying QCP in
antiferromagnetically coupled Kondo models [65]: They
showed that significant Ising anisotropy, as it effectively
arises under an external magnetic field in the easy-plane
antiferromagnetically correlated YbRh2Si2, makes the
spin-triplet pairing competitive.

III.
PERSPECTIVE

The discovery of superconductivity in YbRh2Si2 at
ultra-low temperatures opens up new dimensions.
It
expands the horizon of ultra-low temperature physics
towards strongly correlated electronic matter in solids
and conversely, it determines a new area of heavy-fermion
physics by reaching down to ultra-low temperatures.
Up to now, heavy-fermion superconductivity has been
detected in more than fifty f-electron compounds. De-
spite the fact that, compared with PuCoGa5, exhibiting
the record-high Tc of 18.5 K [66], YbRh2Si2 shows a
transition temperature which is lower by almost four
decades, this may be called ‘high Tc’—in the sense that
Tc is limited by an enormously high ordering temperature
of nuclear spins. This nuclear order paves the way for the
superconductivity, not by actively helping in the Cooper-
pair formation, rather by destroying the 4f-electronic
order below TN = 70 mK, which appears to be extremely
hostile to superconductivity. The apparent competition
between the nuclear and the 4f-electronic orders results
in an AF QCP at, or very close to, B = 0. Most likely, the
latter—like its field-induced counterpart at B = BN—is
of the ‘local’ type, as inferred from the B = 0 results of
electrical and thermal transport as well as specific-heat
measurements in the paramagnetic state as presented in
Section I.
The ultra-low temperature work on YbRh2Si2 strongly

supports the notion that superconductivity robustly
develops in the vicinity of such a ‘partial-Mott’ QCP, as
has been theoretically derived in Kondo-lattice models
for a Kondo-destroying QCP [67] and experimentally
evidenced from de Haas-van Alphen studies in high
magnetic fields [23] and transport measurements [24]
on pressurized CeRhIn5.
Therefore, the results on
these two compounds provide the long-sought [68] link
between unconventional superconductivity in heavy-
fermion metals [69] and that occurring near a true Mott
metal-insulator transition, e.g., in the cuprates [70] and
organic charge-transfer salts [71].

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

All authors contributed substantially to the discussion
and revision of the manuscript.

FUNDING

S.W.
acknowledges
support
by
the
Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft through WI 1324/5-1.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare that the research was conducted in
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships
that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful for conversations with Manuel Brando,
Ang Cai, Lei Chen, Piers Coleman, Haoyu Hu, Stefan
Lausberg, Silke Paschen, John Saunders, Rong Yu and
in particular with Qimiao Si for his insightful comments.

[1] E. Schuberth, M. Tippmann, L. Steinke, S. Lausberg,
A. Steppke, M. Brando, C. Krellner, C. Geibel, R. Yu,
Q. Si, et al., Science 351, 485 (2016).

[2] D. H. Nguyen, A. Sidorenko, M. Taupin, G. Knebel,
G. Lapertot,
E. Schuberth,
and S. Paschen,
Nat.
Commun. 12, 4341 (2021).

[3] S. Wirth and F. Steglich, Nat. Rev. Mat. 1, 16051 (2016).
[4] Q. Y. Chen, D. F. Xu, X. H. Niu, J. Jiang, R. Peng, H. C.
Xu, C. H. P. Wen, Z. F. Ding, K. Huang, L. Shu, et al.,
Phys. Rev. B 96, 045107 (2017).

[5] S. Ernst, S. Kirchner, C. Krellner, C. Geibel, G. Zwick-
nagl, F. Steglich, and S. Wirth, Nature 474, 362 (2011).

[6] S. Seiro, L. Jiao, S. Kirchner, S. Hartmann, S. Friede-
mann, C. Krellner, C. Geibel, Q. Si, F. Steglich, and
S. Wirth, Nat. Commun. 9, 3324 (2018).

[7] G. R. Stewart, Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 797 (2001), ibid. 78,
743-753 (2006).

[8] H. von L¨ohneysen, A. Rosch, M. Vojta, and P. W¨olfle,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 1015 (2007).

[9] P. Gegenwart, F. Steglich, and Q. Si, Nature Phys. 4,
186 (2008).

[10] S. Sachdev,
Quantum phase transitions
(Cambridge
University Press, 2011).

[11] U. K¨ohler, N. Oeschler, F. Steglich, S. Maquilon, and
Z. Fisk, Phys. Rev. B 77, 104412 (2008).

[12] O. Trovarelli, C. Geibel, S. Mederle, C. Langhammer,
F. M. Grosche, P. Gegenwart, M. Lang, G. Sparn, and
F. Steglich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 626 (2000).

[13] P. Gegenwart, J. Custers, C. Geibel, K. Neumaier,
T. Tayama, K. Tenya, O. Trovarelli, and F. Steglich,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 056402 (2002).

[14] K. Ishida, D. E. MacLaughlin, B.-L. Young, K. Okamoto,
Y. Kawasaki, Y. Kitaoka, G. J. Nieuwenhuys, R. H.
Heffner, O. O. Bernal, W. Higemoto, et al., Phys. Rev.


13

B 68, 184401 (2003).

[15] P. Gegenwart, T. Westerkamp, C. Krellner, Y. Tokiwa,
S. Paschen, C. Geibel, F. Steglich, E. Abrahams, and
Q. Si, Science 315, 969 (2007).

[16] S. Paschen, T. L¨uhmann, S. Wirth, P. Gegenwart,
O. Trovarelli, C. Geibel, F. Steglich, P. Coleman, and
Q. Si, Nature 432, 881 (2004).

[17] S. Friedemann, N. Oeschler, S. Wirth, C. Krellner,
C. Geibel, F. Steglich, S. Paschen, S. Kirchner, and Q. Si,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 14547 (2010).

[18] Q. Si, S. Rabello, K. Ingersent, and J. L. Smith, Nature
413, 804 (2001).

[19] P. Coleman, C. P´epin, Q. Si, and R. Ramazashvili, J.
Phys.: Condens. Matter 13, R723 (2001).

[20] M. C. Aronson, R. Osborn, R. A. Robinson, J. W. Lynn,
R. Chau, C. L. Seaman, and M. B. Maple, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 75, 725 (1995).

[21] A. Schr¨oder, G. Aeppli, R. Coldea, M. Adams, O. Stock-
ert, H. von L¨ohneysen, E. Bucher, R. Ramazashvili, and
P. Coleman, Nature 407, 351 (2000).

[22] H. von L¨ohneysen, T. Pietrus, G. Portisch, H. G.
Schlager, A. Schr¨oder, M. Sieck, and T. Trappmann,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 3262 (1994).

[23] H. Shishido, R. Settai, H. Harima, and Y. ¯Onuki, J. Phys.
Soc. Jpn. 74, 1103 (2005).

[24] T. Park, F. Ronning, H. Q. Yuan, M. B. Salamon,
R. Movshovich, J. L. Sarrao, and J. D. Thompson,
Nature 440, 65 (2006).

[25] J. Custers, P. Gegenwart, H. Wilhelm, K. Neumaier,
Y. Tokiwa, O. Trovarelli, C. Geibel, F. Steglich, C. P´epin,
and P. Coleman, Nature 424, 524 (2003).

[26] T. Westerkamp,
Ph.D. thesis,
Technical University
Dresden, Germany (2009).

[27] P. W¨olfle and E. Abrahams, Phys. Rev. B 84, 041101(R)
(2011).

[28] M. Taupin and S. Paschen (2022), arXiv:2201.02820.
[29] S. Kirchner, S. Paschen, Q. Chen, S. Wirth, D. Feng,
J. D. Thompson, and Q. Si, Rev. Mod. Phys. 92, 011002
(2020).

[30] S. Wirth, S. Ernst, R. Cardoso-Gil, H. Borrmann,
S.
Seiro,
C.
Krellner,
C.
Geibel,
S.
Kirchner,
U. Burkhardt, Y. Grin, et al., J. Phys.: Condens. Matter
24, 294203 (2012).

[31] V. Alexandrov, P. Coleman, and O. Erten, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 114, 177202 (2015).

[32] O. Stockert, M. M. Koza, J. Ferstl, A. P. Murani,
C. Geibel, and F. Steglich, Physica B 378, 157 (2006).

[33] G. Zwicknagl, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 23, 094215
(2011).

[34] P. Coleman, P. W. Anderson, and T. V. Ramakrishnan,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 414 (1985).

[35] P. Sun and F. Steglich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 216408
(2013).

[36] S. Hartmann, N. Oeschler, C. Krellner,
C. Geibel,
S. Paschen, and F. Steglich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 096401
(2010).

[37] Q. Y. Chen, D. F. Xu, X. H. Niu, R. Peng, H. C. Xu,
C. H. P. Wen, X. Liu, L. Shu, S. Y. Tan, X. C. Lai, et al.,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 066403 (2018).

[38] H. Pfau, S. Hartmann, U. Stockert, P. Sun, S. Lausberg,
M. Brando, S. Friedemann, C. Krellner, C. Geibel,
S. Wirth, et al., Nature 484, 493 (2012).

[39] A.
Pourret,
D.
Aoki,
M.
Boukahil,
J.-P.
Brison,
W. Knafo, G. Knebel, S. Raymond, M. Taupin, Y. ¯Onuki,

and J. Flouquet, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 83, 061002 (2014).

[40] L. S. Parfen’eva, I. A. Smirnov, H. Misiorek, J. Mucha,
A. Jezowski, A. V. Prokof’ev, and W. Assmus, Phys.
Solid State 46, 357 (2004).

[41] S. Singh, C. Capan, M. Nicklas, M. Rams, A. Gladun, H.-
O. Lee, J. F. DiTusa, Z. Fisk, F. Steglich, and S. Wirth,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 057001 (2007).

[42] S. Zaum, K. Grube, R. Sch¨afer, E. D. Bauer, J. D.
Thompson, and H. von L¨ohneysen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106,
087003 (2011).

[43] M. A. Tanatar, J. Paglione, C. Petrovic, and L. Taillefer,
Science 316, 1320 (2007).

[44] M. F. Smith and R. H. McKenzie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101,
266403 (2008).

[45] M. Smidman, O. Stockert, J. Arndt, G. M. Pang, L. Jiao,
H. Q. Yuan, H. A. Vieyra, S. Kitagawa, K. Ishida,
K. Fujiwara, et al., Phil. Mag. 98, 2930 (2018).

[46] F. Steglich, H. Pfau, S. Lausberg, S. Hamann, P. Sun,
U. Stockert, M. Brando, S. Friedemann, C. Krellner,
C. Geibel, et al., J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 83, 061001 (2014).

[47] Y. Machida, K. Tomokuni, K. Izawa, G. Lapertot,
G. Knebel, J.-P. Brison, and J. Flouquet, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 110, 236402 (2013).

[48] J.-P. Reid, M. A. Tanatar, R. Daou, R. Hu, C. Petrovic,
and L. Taillefer, Phys. Rev. B 89, 045130 (2014).

[49] M. Taupin, G. Knebel, T. D. Matsuda, G. Lapertot,
Y. Machida, K. Izawa, J.-P. Brison, and J. Flouquet,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 046402 (2015).

[50] J. K. Dong, Y. Tokiwa, S. L. Bud’ko, P. C. Canfield, and
P. Gegenwart, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 176402 (2013).

[51] S. Lausberg, Ph.D. thesis, Technical University Dresden,
Germany (2013).

[52] F. Steglich, J. Aarts, C. Bredl, W. Lieke, D. Meschede,
W. Franz, and H. Sch¨afer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1892
(1979).

[53] U. Rauchschwalbe, W. Lieke, C. D. Bredl, F. Steglich,
J. Aarts, K. M. Martini, and A. C. Mota, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 49, 1448 (1982).

[54] W. Assmus, M. Herrmann, U. Rauchschwalbe, S. Riegel,
W. Lieke, H. Spille, S. Horn, G. Weber, F. Steglich, and
G. Cordier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 469 (1984).

[55] P. Coleman (2015), private communication.
[56] J. Sichelschmidt, V. A. Ivanshin, J. Ferstl, C. Geibel, and
F. Steglich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 156401 (2003).

[57] S. Hamann, J. Zhang, D. Jang, A. Hannaske, L. Steinke,
S. Lausberg,
L. Pedrero,
C. Klingner,
M. Baenitz,
F. Steglich, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 077202 (2019).

[58] J. Saunders (2018), invited Talk at 12th Intern. Conf.
on Materials and Mechanisms of Superconductivity (M2S
2018), Beijing, China.

[59] G. Knebel, R. Boursier, E. Hassinger, G. Lapertot, P. G.
Niklowitz, A. Pourret, B. Salce, J. P. Sanchez, I. Sheikin,
P. Bonville, et al., J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 75, 114709 (2006).

[60] T. Park, H. Lee, I. Martin, X. Lu, V. A. Sidorov,
K. Gofryk,
F. Ronning,
E. D. Bauer,
and J. D.
Thompson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 077003 (2012).

[61] C. Petrovic, R. Movshovich, M. Jaime, P. G. Pagliuso,
M. F. Hundley,
J. L. Sarrao,
Z. Fisk,
and J. D.
Thompson, Europhys. Lett. 53, 354 (2001).

[62] P. Gegenwart, J. Custers, Y. Tokiwa, C. Geibel, and
F. Steglich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 076402 (2005).

[63] O. Stockert, D. Andreica, A. Amato, H. S. Jeevan,
C. Geibel, and F. Steglich, Physica B 374-375, 167
(2006).


14

[64] Y. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Xu, W. Xie, and Y. f. Yang, Phys.
Rev. B 100, 085132 (2019).

[65] H.
Hu,
A.
Cai,
L.
Chen,
and
Q.
Si
(2021),
arXiv:2109.12794.

[66] J. L. Sarrao, L. A. Morales, J. D. Thompson, B. L.
Scott, G. R. Stewart, F. Wastin, J. Rebizant, P. Boulet,
E. Colineau, and G. H. Lander, Nature 420, 297 (2002).

[67] H. Hu,
A. Cai,
L. Chen,
L. Deng,
J. H. Pixley,
K. Ingersent, and Q. Si (2021), arXiv:2109.13224.

[68] M. B. Maple, E. D. Bauer, V. S. Zapf, and J. Wosnitza,
in The Physics of Superconductors, edited by K. H.

Bennemann and J. B. Ketterson (Springer,
Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2004), vol. II, pp. 555–730.

[69] C. Pfleiderer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 1551 (2009).
[70] P. A. Lee, N. Nagaosa, and X.-G. Wen, Rev. Mod. Phys.
78, 17 (2006).

[71] K. Kanoda, in The physics of organic superconductors
and conductors, edited by A. Lebed (Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008), pp. 623–642.


