1

Room-temperature printing of ultrathin Quasi-2D GaN semiconductor via liquid 

metal gallium surface confined nitridation reaction

Qian Li 1＃, Bang-Deng Du 1＃, Jian-Ye Gao 1,3 Bao-Yu Xing 4, Dian-Kai Wang 4, 

Ji-Fei Ye 4 & Jing Liu 1,2 *

1. Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 

Beijing 100190, P. R. China.

2. Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, 

Beijing 100084, P. R. China

3. School of Engineering Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 

Beijing 100190, P. R. China

4. State Key Laboratory of Laser Propulsion and Application, Space Engineering University, 

Beijing 101416, P. R. China

* Corresponding Author; E-mail addresses: J. Liu (jliu@mail.ipc.ac.cn)

＃Q. L. and B. D. D contributed equally to this work.

Abstract

Outstanding wide-bandgap semiconductor material such as gallium nitride (GaN) has been 

extensively utilized in power electronics, radiofrequency amplifiers, and harsh environment devices. 
Due to its quantum confinement effect in enabling desired deep-ultraviolet emission, excitonic 
impact, and electronic transport features, two-dimensional (2D) or ultrathin quasi-2D GaN 
semiconductors have been one of the most remarkable candidates for future growth of 
microelectronic devices. Here, for the first time, we reported a large area, wide bandgap, and room-
temperature quasi-2D GaN synthesis and printing strategy through introducing the plasma 
medicated liquid metal gallium surface-confined nitridation reaction mechanism. The developed 
direct fabrication and compositional process is consistent with various electronics manufacturing 
approaches and thus opens an easy going way for cost-effective growth of the third-generation 
semiconductor. In particular, the fully printed field-effect transistors relying on the GaN thus made 
show p-type switching with an on/off ratio greater than 105, maximum field-effect hole mobility of 
53 cm2 V−1 s−1, and a small sub-threshold swing. As it was demonstrated, the present method allows 
to produce at room temperature the GaN with thickness spanning from 1nm to nanometers. This 
basic method can be further extended, generalized, and utilized for making various electronic and 
photoelectronic devices in the coming time.

Keywords: GaN semiconductor; Surface confined nitridation reaction; Room temperature printing; 
Liquid Metal; Plasma processing; Thin film

1. Introduction

Semiconductor technology has been one of the most fundamental cores in developing the 

integrated circuit industry. Since witness of the bottleneck of the first two generations of 
semiconductors, 
the 
third-generation 
high-temperature 
wide-band-gap 
semiconductor 

nanomaterials such as gallium nitride (GaN)1, zinc oxide (ZnO), aluminum nitride (AlN)2, silicon 


2

carbide (SiC)3,4, and diamond etc., have become a focus in recent years. GaN nanomaterials are 
novel semiconductors owning many outstanding merits like high saturated electron mobility, 
radiation resistance, acid and alkali corrosion resistance, large thermal conductivity, and strong
breakdown field. In the GaN electronic devices, the inevitable electron transfer from the valence 
band to the conduction band can be suppressed through the wide energy bandgap. The ambient 
energy from strong electric fields, high temperature, and intense energy particles can activate the 
mentioned electron transfer5. Accordingly, the devices can retain their electrical features in various 
scenarios. For such reason, the GaN was regarded as one of the most attractive semiconductor 
materials due to its idealistic efficiency and stability6,7. Tremendous efforts have therefore been 
devoted to developing and analyzing the GaN materials throughout the world8–10.

Compared with the bulk GaN materials, various nanoscale effects of the low dimensional GaN 

materials can display better photoelectric, mechanical, thermal stability, as well as electrical11,12, 
and chemical features13. Apart from the fundamental physicochemical features of GaN, they also 
own the surface, small-size, and quantum-confinement impacts as one of the most exciting areas for 
future growth of microelectronic devices. However, until now it is still not easy to construct a low-
dimensional GaN. Only rather limited outstanding works are available. Syed et al. proposed a two-
step process to synthesis two-dimensional (2D) GaN nanosheets, the process includes obtaining 2D 
Ga2O3 by extrusion printing, and then converting Ga2O3 to GaN through ammonolysis in a tubular 
furnace14. Chen et al. reported the development of 2D GaN single crystals (about 4.1 nm) attained 
using a surface-confined nitridation reaction (SCNR) through the chemical vapor deposition 
(CVD)15. In 2016, Balushi et al. employed the migration-enhanced encapsulated growth method to 
construct 2D GaN monolayer nanosheets16. Unfortunately, the temperatures used in most of the 
process are above 500 ℃ that is inconsistent with various electronic industry operations. This is 
because the long run time of the deposition process can increase the cost and feasibility. Clearly, the 
construction and research technology of low-dimensional GaN materials and devices should be 
developed and enhanced to satisfy the appeals from so many practical needs. In this side, a low 
temperature preparation of large-area, high-quality and uniform GaN films will generate a 
significant impact on high thermal stability 2D integrated circuit industry designed for power 
electronics. However, so far, there is still no report on the room temperature preparation of ultrathin 
or 2D GaN films.

Herein, we proposed and demonstrated for the first time to print the ultrathin quasi-2D GaN 

films on SiO2/Si substrates through introducing a liquid metal-based synthesis and printing 
processes at room temperature. The basic principle relies on using nitrogen plasma to trigger 
nitriding of gallium droplets at room temperature, and then transferring them to the substrate through 
the proposed van der Waals (vdW) printing technology. The whole preparation process is rather easy 
going which is completely performed at room temperature and is consistent with the current 
electronics manufacturing processes. The proposed method can produce nanometer scaled thickness 
GaN film attained via individual or multiple prints. Moreover, we report excellent electronic 
performance of the printed ultrathin quasi-2D GaN. For illustration purpose, fully printed side-gated 
field-effect transistors (FETs) are fabricated, from which the quasi-2D GaN-FETs exhibit 
outstanding performance with a large current on/off ratio (> 105), high field-effect mobility (~53 
cm2 V−1 s−1), and tiny subthreshold slopes (~ 98 mV dec−1) with a high degree of reproducibility. 
This study suggests a reliable and straightforward room temperature large-scale manufacturing 
technique for printing quasi-2D GaN with outstanding working features, which opens significantly


3

practical potential for wafer-scale processes. It also paves the way for the application of GaN 
semiconductor in a new generation of all printed electronic devices, integrated circuits and more 
functional devices.

2. Results and Discussion

Liquid metal-based ultrathin quasi-2D GaN printing technology. Conventionally, quite a 

few processes have been available to prepare GaN films, such as metal organic chemical vapor 
deposition (MOCVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD), which are illustrated in Fig. 1a and b. 
The high preparation temperature (> 250 ℃) and toxic material (Ga(CH3)3) are main disadvantages 
of these processes to produce GaN at a large industrial scale. Recently, room temperature N2 plasma 
treatment as an emerging tool for green nitrogen fixation and surface modification of materials, have
been tried in the field of ammonia synthesis17, N doped in 2D materials18, plasma enhanced CVD 
depositing thin film, nitride layer formation on rigid materials, etc. The N2 plasma technology owns 
merits of low cost, high efficiency and pollution-free on nitriding treatment of material surfaces. 
With this in mind, here a simple and convenient process of GaN thin film prepared through N2
plasma irradiating clean liquid Ga surface is proposed. 

The scheme in Fig. 1c illustrates the mechanism of our introduced process of GaN formation. 

Such plasma nitriding process employs an unusual glow discharge involving high current and charge 
densities. A potential difference is generated by applying a DC voltage between the discharger 
(anode) and the liquid Ga (cathode), which ionizes the nitrogen to produce the glow discharge. 
Generally, atomic nitrogen (Natom), excited nitrogen molecules (N2*), activated nitrogen molecule 
ions (N2+) and electrons (e-) are main contents of nitrogen plasma gas17. In the plasma nitriding of 
gallium, the accelerated Natom, N2*, N2+ all can hit the surface of the liquid Ga with high kinetic 
energy, and react directly with Ga atom to form GaN molecule. In a word, producing GaN from 
intimate
reaction of nitrogen and liquid Ga in plasma can be represented as: 

GaN
Ga
N
2
2
plasma

2

 

 . Because the chemical reaction of nitrogen plasma is a 

thermodynamically stable excited state and ionic state, and the reaction activation energy is pretty
low, it is much easier to generate GaN by the reaction of nitrogen plasma with liquid Ga than that 
through
the 
traditional 
nitriding 
reaction 
(MOCVD) 

4

  950
above

3
3 3
3
a(CH )
CH
GaN
NH
G





℃
. 


4

Fig. 1 The schematic diagram of three GaN growth processes and temperatures. (a) Illustration 
of MOCVD locus to fabricate GaN, at temperature above 950 ℃. (b) Illustration of ALD locus to 
prepare GaN, at temperature above 250 ℃. (c) Illustration of nitrogen plasma-liquid Ga reaction 
locus to harvest GaN, at room temperature.

The schematic in Fig. 2a illustrates the preparation of ultrathin quasi-2D GaN on the surface 

of liquid Ga droplet using N2-plasma treatment technology at room temperature. The changes of 
fresh Ga droplet before and after nitrogen plasma treatment are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1. The 


5

schematic setup of the system to transform the liquid Ga to GaN is elucidated in Fig. 2b. The 
formation of GaN thin films was realized by nitrogen plasma triggering surface limited nitriding 
reaction. Gallium droplets with plasma treated surface were placed on SiO2/Si substrate and moved 
on the surface with the help of scraper, during the scraping process of liquid Ga, the surface nitride 
produced by plasma bombardment in nitrogen environment sticks to the substrate through van der 
Waals force and the clean Ga is exposed (Fig. 2c) (Detailed description of the process parameters 
will be given in the Methods.). The nitridation reaction and printing of Ga both are conducted at 
room temperature that is consistent with the current electronic device production processes. The 
covered substrate area can be expanded by choosing a larger droplet diameter and a longer travel 
distance of the scraper. The thickness of the film can be increased via expanding nitrogen plasma 
trigger time or frequent printing (Methods and Supplementary Fig. 2). Fig. 2(d) shows one touch 
print of the GaN film obtained from the surface of Ga droplets after being treated 10 min by nitrogen 
plasma. It revealed a large and continuous ultrathin GaN film reaching lateral dimensions more than 
many centimeters. Based on the atomic force microscopy (AFM), the thickness of the deposited 
GaN layer is measured as ~4 nm that is moderately larger than a single GaN unit cell (Fig. 2e). The 
printable GaN is slightly thicker than the single layer, indicating that the prepared GaN film is an 
ultrathin quasi-2D film. AFM also indicates that the printed GaN film’s surface roughness is 
analogous to that of the SiO2 substrate, demonstrating that the GaN film has minimum cracks, holes, 
folds, or bubbles, reflecting conformal and homogeneous attachment. 

It is noteworthy that the thickness of singly printed GaN film is below 1 nm (Supplementary 

Fig. 2 and Fig. 3a), when the nitrogen plasma trigger time is lower than 1 min. The harvested GaN 
film can be classified as 2D materials. However, cracks and holes can also be seen on obtained 2D 
GaN. Actually, the uniformity and continuity of printed GaN films are not always good enough, 
when the nitrogen plasma trigger time is lower than 5 min. It might be because the insufficient 
nitrogen plasma treatment is not favorable for the perfect growth of GaN films on the surface of Ga 
droplets. Therefore, the 4 nm GaN films obtained after 10 minutes of treatment is employed in 
subsequent microstructure observation, optical analysis, and electronic devices fabrication, etc.

The uniform thickness in broad regions and numerous samples supports the proposed Cabrera–

Mott growth mechanism, where concurrent nitrides are formed among the whole metal interface, 
resulting in self-limiting growth to an accurate thickness. The mentioned approach is highly 
reproducible for growing large-area GaN sheets because the process was reproduced more than 50 
times and always yielded identical, continuous, laterally extensive thin GaN films with reproducible 
features. The GaN film was initially printed on the SiO2/Si substrate, but further tests demonstrated 
that the formation of uniform centimeter-scale semiconductor films on various substrates could be 
reproduced through the printing technology (Supplementary Fig. 3), indicating that the presented 
construction approach is suitable to deposit GaN on several materials. Moreover, it should be 
pointed out that this method is also applicable to the fabrication of GaN heterostructures. In order 
to be compatible with silicon-based electronic technology, the ultrathin quasi-2D film printed on 
SiO2/Si surface should be employed for further description and device construction.

It should be noted that, Supplementary Fig. 4 presents the comparison of the temperatures and 

the thicknesses of GaN of our present printing technique with other classical techniques in the field 
of the preparation of ultrathin GaN in previous studies. Various processes have been introduced to 
the growth of GaN, such as metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), metal-organic 
vapour-phase epitaxy (MOVPE), hydride vapor phase epitaxy (HVPE), atomic layer deposition 


6

(ALD), plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PEALD), microwave plasma-assisted atomic 
layer deposition (MPALD), plasma-assisted atomic layer deposition (PA-ALD), plasma-assisted 
molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE), laser molecular beam epitaxy (LMBE), flow modulation epitaxy 
(FME), pulsed direct current (DC) sputtering and RF magnetron sputtered etc. The above processes 
basically require high temperature and vacuum conditions, which virtually increases the cost, and 
is not conducive to large-scale pervasive application, nor can it easily realize the fabrication of 
flexible devices, which seriously hinders the wide practices and research progress of the ultrathin 
GaN in flexible devices. Compared with the above technology, the room temperature GaN printing 
process based on liquid metal owns the advantages of simple and stable process, fast, large area, 
low cost, high efficiency, easy removal of excess metal, and the final sample surface is extremely 
clean.

Fig. 2 Schematic of the quasi-2D GaN synthesis and printing process. (a) Schematic illustration 
of formation of surface nitride layer on liquid metals Ga via nitrogen-plasma reaction mechanism. 
a: Ga featuring disordered atoms, b: Ga-N bond formation at the liquid Ga surface, c: GaN layer. (b) 


7

Setup for the self-constructed plasma system used for producing GaN from liquid metal Ga. (c) 
Schematic description of the vdW printing method of GaN film. The surface nitride of liquid Ga 
attaches to the substrate and leaves GaN on the surface. The figure on the right summarizes the 
crystal structure of GaN film. (d) An optical image of the printed GaN layer with some square 
millimeters in lateral size. (e) AFM image of a printed GaN layer on a SiO2/Si wafer. The inset 
presents a step height profile with a 4 nm thickness.

Properties of the ultrathin quasi-2D GaN. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) can be 

utilized to characterize the crystallographic features of the printed GaN. The GaN films were 
immediately moved to a TEM grid since it was printed. A high-resolution TEM micrograph 
(HRTEM) and selective area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the GaN are presented in Fig. 
3a and 3b, respectively, which confirms the crystallization of the printed GaN in the polymorph. 
The atomic spacing of 0.285 nm in the HRTEM image and the distance of the fringes at 0.248 nm 
correspond to the (100) and (101) planes of GaN. The collected lattice parameters show that the 
GaN sample are wurtzite structural. 

The GaN film’s phonon modes also change compared to those of the bulk19. Based on the 

Raman spectra presented in Fig. 3c, two peaks at 561.77 and 729.59 cm-1 appear in printed GaN, 
respectively, corresponding to characteristic E2 (high) located at 564.30 cm-1 and A1 (LO) located at 
730.34 cm-1 modes in the bulk phase. Moreover, the above distinction reflects the change in GaN’s 
phonons modes in quasi-2D limit. Obviously, the E2 (high) and A1 (LO) peaks of GaN film all show 
blue-shifted comparing to those of the bulk polycrystalline GaN. Generally speaking, the parameters 
influencing the Raman scattering include material size, order, internal stress and structural defects. 
The tensile (compressive) strain in GaN films will result in a blue (red) shift in the Raman 
spectroscopy of the GaN film. Chen et al. reported the E2 peak of 2D GaN is obviously blue-shifted 
compared with that of the bulk, due to the tensile-strain state in the 2D limit15. In the present work, 
the thickness of our printed GaN is 4 nm, which is close to the thickness of the reported 2D GaN15. 
The tensile- strain state may also exist in the prepared GaN film, as a consequence, the E2 peak and 
A1 peak all appear blue shift for the quasi-2D GaN film. The printed GaN film for Raman spectra 
test is on SiO2/Si substrate, it is no doubt that the Raman spectra of GaN is influenced by that of the 
SiO2/Si substrate. As a consequence, a large bulge exists in the Raman spectrum of the 2D GaN, 
while it is absent in the bulk GaN. 

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is utilized to attain the printed GaN’s chemical 

bonding states. Figures 3d and e present the spectra of Ga 2p and N 1s areas for the GaN, respectively. 
The doublet in the Ga 2p region corresponds to the 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 orbital of Ga, the characteristic 
gallium peak for Ga2O3 placed at ~20.4 eV was not seen, indicating Ga’s quantitative transformation. 
The principal broad N 1s peak centered at ~397.6 eV corresponds to the N 1s region compatible 
with the desired N 1s area presented in GaN. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping 
study of the resulting film composition was shown in Supplementary Fig. 5. The GaN films for 
scanning electron microscope (SEM) and EDS test was scraped from SiO2/Si substrate and 
transferred to the surface of the transparent PET tap, in order to avoid effect of abound Si on the 
results of GaN film’s EDS. The detected element C and O in EDS results come from PET tap, which 
is content of element C, O and H. During the process of scraping GaN films, the uniformity of GaN 
film is destroyed and some films were wrinkled, so the distribution of N and Ga in observed GaN 
films is uneven. But the atomic ratio of Ga:N is approximate to 1:1, proving that the obtained 


8

material is GaN. The attained XPS data and the other characterization techniques aforementioned 
above provide the outcome that all of our printed GaN have good consistency and can be used for 
further empirical electronic device fabrications.

Fig. 3 Description of the printed ultrathin quasi-2D GaN. (a) High-resolution TEM images of 
GaN directly laminated to a TEM grid. (b) Indexed chosen region’s diffraction pattern for GaN, 
demonstrating the polycrystalline structure of GaN. (c) Raman spectra for the bulk GaN and the 


9

GaN with a 4.0 nm thickness, which present the areas of the E2 and A1 model peaks for the sample. 
(d, e) XPS results of the GaN for the selected areas, (d) Ga 2p and (e) N 1s. The characteristic 
doublets for the Ga 2p area, 2p1/2, and 2p3/2, are located at ∼1144.8 and ∼1118.1 eV. The broad N 
1s peak located at ∼397.6 eV corresponds to the desired binding energy for nitrogen in GaN.

The obtained electronic band structure and density of states (DOS) of an individual unit cell of 

the printed ultrathin quasi-2D GaN are shown in Fig. 4a. Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package 
(VASP, version: 5.4.4) combined with the projector augmented wave (PAW) approach were utilized 
to accomplish the first-principles computations20–22. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional 
integrated with the DFT-D3 correction was employed to treat the exchange-functional. The plane 
wave’s cut-off energy was adjusted at 520 eV23. The Brillouin zone integration was accomplished 
with 15*15*6 Monkhorts-Pack point sampling to optimize the bulk GaN. The self-consistent 
computations can give a 10-4 eV convergence energy threshold. The optimal values of the 
equilibrium geometries and lattice constancies were obtained with maximum stress on all atoms in 
0.01 eV/Å. For the GaN (110) surface structure, we use the 7*7*1 K-points for structural 
optimization and self-consistent calculations. Because the PBE functional will underestimate the 
band gap of the semiconductor, we also use the hybrid functional method (HSE06)24 to calculate the 
band gap and DOS. Our density PBE functional analysis indicates that the GaN has a 1.51 eV direct 
bandgap. According to the HSE06 calculation, the printed GaN has a 3.32 eV direct bandgap. From 
Fig. 4b, the measured band gap derived from the UV-Vis absorption is 3.3 eV, which agrees well 
with the value derived from HSE06 calculation. By comparison, the calculated bandgap using 
energy density PBE functional analysis is smaller than the measurement result. Figure 4c shows a 
periodic slab of GaN with a non-polar (110) surface sliced from the wurtzite bulk phase. Generally 
speaking, the bandgap of GaN can be modulated up to 5 eV down to monolayer limit25, 26. Notably, 
the measured band gap of the printable GaN film (4 nm) is 3.3 eV, which is smaller than 3.5 eV of 
the reported 2D GaN film (1.3 nm)14. It is because the obtained ultrathin quasi-2D GaN is slightly 
thicker than 2D GaN. With the thickness increasing, the band gap of the ultrathin quasi-2D GaN 
decreases15, which is close to band gap of the bulk GaN.  


10

Fig. 4 Electronic band descriptions of the printed ultrathin quasi-2D GaN. (a) Calculated 
electronic DOS of printed GaN using PBE and HSE06 functional. (b) Tauc plot employed for 
ascertaining the electronic bandgap for GaN revealed a bandgap of 3.3 eV. (c) GaN (110) slab.

Application of printed ultrathin quasi-2D GaN in electronic devices. For experimental 

assessment of the electron transport features of the printed GaN and to investigate the potential for 
electronic devices, field-effect transistors (FETs) were constructed to assess the GaN for electronic 
device applications. Figure 5a shows the structure diagram of the transistor based on the printed 
GaN. We have adopted an individual side-gate design for all of the devices fabricated in this study, 
and detailed description of the fabrication process will be presented in the Methods section. Figure 
5b presents a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the device. Ag was used as gate 
electrodes and source–drain metal contacts, and FET channels were patterned with a width of Wch
= 1000 μm and the length of Lch = 25 μm. Electrical measurements were carried out for the printed 
side-gated GaN FET. Figure 5c presents the transfer (drain current, Ids, with respect to the gate 
voltage, Vgs) features of a representative GaN FET. Figure 5d presents the Ids with respect to the 
drain–source voltage (Vds) at various values of Vgs applied to the device. As presented in Fig. 5c and 
d, the printed GaN FET devices’ p-type switching feature with an on/off ratio is more than 105. The 
sub-threshold swing (SS) for the FET was 98 mV per decade, near the desired action. The average 
value of the room-temperature field-effect mobility (μ) was obtained as 53.1 cm2 V−1 s−1, with a 
mobility of 57 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the device with the best performance (The SS and mobility 


11

computations are presented in the Supplementary Note 6). A statistical analysis on the performance 
of many FET devices fabricated using the presently reported wafer-scale printing process was 
conducted. Electrical features of thirty printed GaN FETs were evaluated. The mean log ON/OFF 
current ratio, mobility, and SS were 5.31 ± 0.52, 53.1 ± 4.5 cm2 V−1 s−1, and 97.6 ± 2.42 mV dec-1

(Fig. 5e-g), respectively. A desired output was seen between various devices, considering that the 
mentioned devices were constructed in an academic laboratory. This uniformity yields confidence 
in employing the mentioned devices and methods in numerous applications like integrated circuits 
and active-matrix back-planes for displays. Moreover, the GaN-based FETs were significantly 
stable, having a high cyclability with a stable on/off ratio and stable on currents for more than 100 
switching cycles under ambient conditions (Supplementary Fig. 6).   

Fig. 5 The printed GaN field-effect transistor measurements. (a) Schematic of the device 
presenting a Si side-gated FET with silver source–drain electrodes. (b) The device’s SEM image of 
the device. The scale bar corresponds to 100 μm. (c) Corresponding Ids–Vgs curve at Vds = − 1 V, 
showing a high Ion/Ioff ratio more than 105, small subthreshold slope of SS = 98 mV dec−1, yielding 
a field-effect mobility of μ = 53.1 cm2 V−1 s−1. (d) Set of Ids–Vds output curves from an individual 
FET, showing a large on current density of > 0.3 mA. Histograms of the (e) Log of the ON/OFF 
current ratio, (f) Field-effect mobility and (g) Subthreshold slope (SS) for 30 FETs.

Notably, the observed field-effect mobility is greater compared to that of traditional high-

efficiency broad-bandgap GaN-based devices14, 27. However, it should be noted that most of the 


12

reported GaN FET devices adopted AlGaN/GaN heterojunction as carrier transport layer, and the 
devices have complex structures. Because the 2D electron gas (2DEG) at the interface of 
AlGaN/GaN heterostructure has very high electron mobility, the performance of AlGaN/GaN 
heterostructure FET is better than that of the device composed of GaN film only, the two kinds of 
devices can not be directly compared. Therefore, for further broader comparison, we compare the 
performance of GaN and other p-type and n-type FETs reported and the devices in this study, Fig. 
6 plots SS versus mobility for other FETs reported in the literature as well as the device from this 
study, the value of SS is comparable to that appeared in some of the best p-type and n-type oxide 
semiconductors like indium oxide, this highlights the fact that our approach offers a high current 
mobility while maintaining a small SS, which is mainly attributed to the high-quality electron-level 
GaN semiconductor. Besides, no detectable performance degradation was observed in the devices 
while working under ambient situations without encapsulation. This highlights that the printed GaN 
is of exceptional quality while indicating that additional enhancements can be achieved via the 
enhanced device construction. Future studies should concentrate on constructing the devices that 
can integrate separately addressable transistors into more complicated circuits. Potential approaches 
can involve using vdW heterostructures with dielectrics like hexagonal boron nitride or Ga2O3
combined with top gates28, 29. The mentioned device configurations can be employed to determine 
essential parameters like the pinch-off voltage that can be informative for incorporating future 
devices into functional circuits.

Fig. 6 Field-effect transistor measurements of printed GaN. (a) Plot of subthreshold slope versus 
field-effect mobility to compare representative FETs reported in the literature. Our device shows the 
highest mobility while maintaining a small SS. (b) Legend for previously reported FETs utilizing p-
type or n-type semiconductors for all plots.

3. Conclusions

Liquid metals have rather diverse unconventional functionalities. One of the essential value of 

such materials is that they can serve as a reactive and templating media simultaneously and thus to 
synthesis and print a wide range of 2D semiconductor materials with extensive practical values. In 
the present work, we demonstrated the successful room temperature printing of the high-quality 
ultrathin quasi-2D GaN films with a large scale via a plasma nitridation reaction and through 
transferring occurring in the liquid metal’s nitride skin constructed under this specific condition. 


13

Moreover, complete explanation and analysis have been performed on the electrical features of the 
printed GaN films with thickness spanning from 1nm to several nanometers, giving essential advice 
for further evolution of liquid metal printed high-performance semiconductors and indicating their 
considerable potential for future nanoelectronics. 

As example, we effectively presented the printed FET devices using GaN for the first time, 

depicting significant field-effect mobility and relatively small values of SS, and demonstrating an 
extremely steep subthreshold voltage switching behavior. This high-efficiency, simple, large-size, 
and cheap production process provides a new way for advancing GaN devices for power electronics 
applications. Moreover, the 2D or qusia-2D semiconductor can be produced as the favored material 
in printing different electronic devices due to the mentioned advantages. This sets up a new standard 
for subsequent electronics, sensors, and more practical devices. It also offers a pathway toward 
employing printed ultrathin 2D high-efficiency semiconductors to construct novel electronic 
devices using liquid metal-enabled techniques in the near future.  

4. Methods

Materials. Gallium with a purity of >99.99% was bought from Sigma Aldrich and utilized 

without additional refinement. The remaining materials were bought from usual suppliers and 
employed without refinement.

Formation of GaN on liquid gallium by nitridation reaction. In order to obtain  GaN films 

with high purity and low defects, the whole preparation and printing process were carried out in a 
glovebox in a pure N2 environment at a pressure of 1 atm ~ 3 atm. The O2 content in the glove box 
atmosphere is maintained below 3 ppm and the H2O content is controlled below 0.5 ppm. High 
purity Ga was melted and then placed in NaOH solution to remove the oxide scale on the surface. 
The clean liquid Ga was extracted to 10 ml by a syringe and place it on the surface of the low-
voltage electrode stainless steel plate of the plasma trigger device, and the stainless steel plate is 
grounded. In the environment of high purity N2, it can be seen that the surface of liquid Ga is bright 
without any oxide film. The stainless steel disk wrapped in transparent quartz of plasma high-
voltage electrode is suspended vertically above liquid Ga, and the distance between the disk and the 
surface of liquid Ga is 1mm. A voltage of 50 kV is applied between the two electrodes of the plasma 
trigger device through the voltage regulating device. At this time, the electric field strength of N2
breakdown is 5 × 107 V m-1, the output current is 16 A, and the uniform and dense GaN skin can be 
obtained on the liquid Ga surface after glow discharge treatment for a certain time.

Printing process of ultrathin quasi-2D GaN films. Wafers of 500 nm SiO2 on Si (SiO2/Si) 

were washed by the deionized (DI) water for 1 min, and then sonicated in acetone and isopropyl 
alcohol (IPA) for 10 min (25 °C) and blown dry with N2 gas. The 3 min of oxygen (O2) plasma 
(Emitech K-1050X) at 100 W was then applied to wafers under the low vacuum (0.6 Torr). The 
nitrided Ga droplets was placed on the SiO2/Si substrate and execute the complete printing program. 
The size of nitride film changes with the droplet diameter and the travel distance of the scraper. The 
nitride layer formed on the liquid Ga’s surface can be transformed and printed on the substrate 
through gently scraping the droplets from one end of the substrate to the other end with a scraper. 
An extra force within the extrusion phase can damage the nitride layer. By this extrusion printing 
method, high-quality GaN films with a transverse size greater than a few centimeters can be 
effectively printed on the substrate.

Mechanical and chemical cleaning process. In order to remove all liquid metal parts that 


14

remained on the sample, a facile mechanical ethanol cleaning method was employed. At first, about
100 ml of ethanol were taken in a beaker, and the beaker was heated on a heating plate to 100 °C. 
Then, the substrate with printed nitride film was immersed in hot ethanol with tweezers. In order to 
eliminate the metal residues, a swab tool was utilized for wiping the substrate immersed in ethanol. 
Due to a strong vdW adhesion between the nitride film and the bottom layer, the nitride film still 
sticks to the silicon oxide surface within the wiping proceeding. Besides, the weak adherence 
between the deposited nitride layer, the liquid metal, and the film could be quickly removed to 
maintain the film clean and intact. Moreover, a chemical process was employed to clean the samples 
for a complete elimination of the metal residue on the substrate. An Iodine/triiodide (I−/I3−) solution 
(100 mmol L−1 LiI and 5 mmol L−1 I2) was constructed in ethanol and then located on a hot plate to 
heat up to 50 ℃. In order to eliminate metallic inclusions, a substrate printed with the GaN film was 
immersed in a heated I−/I3− solution for a time interval. At last, the residual etchant was removed by 
cleaning the sample in deionized water. The liquid metal particles can be successfully eliminated 
using the mentioned two cleaning processes.

FET fabrication. In order to construct fully printed side-gated GaN FETs, firstly, part of the 

GaN/SiO2 region is etched with HF solution with concentration of 1mol L−1 for about 10 s. Then, 
the etching area was cleaned with ethanol, the clean Si of a certain area was obtained on the substrate. 
The Ag ink (Ag40X, UT Dots, Inc.) involved 40 wt % Ag nanoparticles, with about 20 nm particle 
diameters, dispersed in a solvent mixture of xylene and terpineol (9:1 by volume). The constructed 
ink was printed on the GaN films and SiO2/Si substrates. A scientific 3B inkjet printer from Prtronic 
was adopted to verify the inkjet printing details. The obtained sample was located on the inkjet 
printer’s panel at room temperature. A target image file was applied to the computer, which could 
be converted into a printable file through the software. Under computer control, source/drain 
electrodes and side-gate electrodes were subsequently patterned by printing Ag on the substrate. 
Finally, the printed samples were then sedimented at 120 °C in the air for 30 min in a furnace (MDL 
281, Fisher Scientific Co.) to improve the conductivity.

Characterization. The AFM images were employed by a Bruker Dimension Icon with 

“Scanasyst-air” AFM tips. A JEOL 2100F TEM/STEM (2011) system working at a 200 kV 
acceleration voltage involving a bright-field Gatan OneView 4k charge-coupled device (CCD) 
camera was utilized for both the low-resolution HRTEM imaging and SAED. A laser micro-Raman 
spectrometer (Renishaw in Via, 532 nm excitation wavelength) was adopted to accomplish the 
Raman spectroscopy. Moreover, the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopic (EDS) measurements 
were used to collect the elemental mapping of the as-prepared samples. A thermo Scientific K-alpha 
XPS spectrometer associated with monochromatic X-rays from an Al anode (hν=~1486.6 eV) was 
adopted to perform the XPS analysis. A UV–visible (UV–vis) absorbance spectrometer (Hitachi 
U3900 UV–vis spectrophotometer) was utilized to evaluate the film’s optical bandgaps. A Cascade 
Microtech Summit 12000 semiautomated probe station linked to a Keithley 4200 Semiconductor 
Device Analyzer was adopted to measure GaN FETs at room temperature.

Data availability

The data used to determine the data points shown within the plots presented in this paper, and 

other findings from this study, are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.


15

Acknowledgements

This work was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under 

Grants No. 51890893 and 91748206.

Author contributions

The project was designed and directed by J. L. who also wrote part of the manuscript. Q. L. 

and B. D. D. developed the synthesis and printing procedure for GaN while also conducting the 
structure and properties measurements. B. D. D., B. Y. X., D. K. W. and J. F. Y. designed nitrogen 
plasma and synthesized GaN on liquid metal Ga. Q. L. led the device fabrication with contributions 
from B. D. D. and J. Y. G., Q. L. and B. D. D. characterized the FET devices. Q. L analyzed the 
material and device characteristics and drafted the manuscript. All authors revised the manuscript.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

References
[1] Sanders, N., Bayerl, D., Shi, G., Mengle, K. A. & Kioupakis, E. Electronic and optical properties 

of two-dimensional GaN from first-principles. Nano Lett. 17, 7345–7349 (2017).

[2] Mansurov, V., Malina, T., Galitsyn, Yu. & Zhuravlev, K. Graphene-like AlN layer formation on 

(111) Si surface by ammonia molecular beam epitaxy. J. Cryst. Growth. 428, 93–97 (2015).

[3] Xu, L. et al. Rationally Designed 2D/2D SiC/g-C3N4 photocatalysts for hydrogen production. 

Catal. Sci. Technol. 9, 3896–3906 (2019).

[4] Li, Q., Xu, L., Luo, K. W., Wang, L. L. & Li, X. F. SiC/MoS2 layered heterostructures: Promising 

photocatalysts revealed by a first-principles study. Mat. Chem. Phys. 216, 64–71 (2018). 

[5] Khanna, S. M., Webb, J., Tang, H., Houdayer, A. J. & Carlone, C. 2 MeV proton radiation 

damage studies of gallium nitride films through low temperature photoluminescence 
spectroscopy measurements. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 47, 2322–2328 (2000).

[6] Luo, K. W., Xu, L., Wang, L. L., Li, Q. & Wang, Z. Ferromagnetism in zigzag GaN nanoribbons 

with tunable half-metallic gap. Comput. Mater. Sci. 117, 300–305, (2016).

[7] Zhu, Y., Li, H., Chen, T., Liu, D. & Zhou, Q. Investigation of the electronic and magnetic 

properties of low-dimensional FeCl2 derivatives by first-principles calculations. Vacuum 182, 
109694 (2020).

[8] Kolobov, A. V., Fons, P., Tominaga, J., Hyot, B. & André, B. Instability and spontaneous 

reconstruction of few-monolayer thick GaN graphitic structures. Nano Lett. 16, 4849–4856 
(2016).

[9] Nakamura, S. Nobel Lecture: Background story of the invention of efficient blue InGaN light 

emitting diodes. Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 1139 (2015).

[10] Xiao, W. -Z. et al. Ferromagnetic and metallic properties of the semihydrogenated GaN sheet. 

Phys. Status Solidi B 248, 1442–1445 (2011).

[11] Zhang, J., Sun, C. & Xu, K. Modulation of the electronic and magnetic properties of a GaN 

nanoribbon from dangling bonds. Sci. China Phys. Mech. Astron. 55, 631–638 (2012).

[12] Kandalam, A. K. et al. First principles study of polyatomic clusters of AlN, GaN, and InN. 1. 

Structure, stability, vibrations, and ionization. J. Phys. Chem. B 104, 4361–4367 (2020).

[13] Onen, A., Kecik, D., Durgun, E. & Ciraci, S. Onset of vertical bonds in new GaN multilayers: 


16

beyond van der Waals solids. Nanoscale 10, 21842–21850 (2018).

[14] Syed, N. et al. Wafer-sized ultrathin gallium and indium nitride nanosheets through the 

ammonolysis of liquid metal derived oxides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 104–108 (2019).

[15] Chen, Y. et al. Growth of 2D GaN single crystals on liquid metals. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140,

16392−16395 (2018).

[16] Balushi, Z. Y. Al. et al. Two-dimensional gallium nitride realized via graphene encapsulation. 

Nat Mater. 15, 1166–1171 (2016).

[17] Sakakura, T., Murakami, N., Takatsuji, Y., Morimoto, M. & Haruyama, T. Contribution of 

discharge excited atomic N, N2*, and N2+ to a plasma/liquid interfacial reaction as suggested 
by quantitative analysis. ChemPhysChem 20, 1467–1474 (2019).

[18] Le, K. et al. Controllably doping nitrogen into 1T/2H MoS2 heterostructure nanosheets for 

enhanced supercapacitive and electrocatalytic performance by low-power N2 plasma. ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 13, 44427–44439 (2021).

[19] Caldwell, J. D. et al. Atomic-scale photonic hybrids for mid-infrared and terahertz 

nanophotonics. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 9–15 (2016).

[20] Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations 

using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996).

[21] Paier, J., Marsman, M., Hummer, K. & Kresse, G. Screened hybrid density functionals applied 

to solids. J. Chem. Phys. 124, 154709 (2006).

[22] Blöchl, P. E. Projector augmented-wave method. Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953, (1994).
[23] Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The materials project: A materials genome approach to accelerating 

materials innovation. APL Materials 1, 011002 (2013).

[24] Heyd, J. & Scuseria, G. E. Hybrid functionals based on a screened Coulomb potential. J. Chem. 

Phys. 118, 8207–8215 (2003).

[25] Wang, W. et al. Lattice Structure and Bandgap Control of 2D GaN Grown on Graphene/Si 

Heterostructures. Small 15, 1802995 (2019).

[26] Al Balushi, Z. et al. Two-dimensional gallium nitride realized via graphene encapsulation. 

Nature Mater 15, 1166–1171 (2016).

[27] Zheng, Z. et al. Gallium nitride-based complementary logic integrated circuits. Nat Electron 4, 

595-603 (2021). 

[28] Wurdack, M. et al. Ultrathin Ga2O3 glass: A large-scale passivation and protection material for 

monolayer WS2. Adv. Mater. 33, 2005732 (2020).

[29] Lee, G.-H. et al. Highly stable, dual-gated MoS2 transistors encapsulated by hexagonal boron 

nitride with gate-controllable contact, resistance and threshold voltage. ACS Nano 9, 7019–7026 
(2015).

[30] Gupta, C. et al. Comparing electrical performance of GaN trench-gate MOSFETs with a-plane 

(1120) and m-plane (1100) sidewall channels. Appl. Phys. Express 9, 121001 (2016).

[31] Zhang, K., Sumiya, M., Liao, M., Koide, Y. & Sang, L. P-Channel InGaN/GaN heterostructure 

metal-oxide semiconductor field effect transistor based on polarization-induced two-
dimensional hole gas. Sci Rep 6, 23683 (2016).

[32] Liu, C., Khadar, R. A. & Matioli, E. GaN-on-Si Quasi-Vertical Power MOSFETs. IEEE 

Electron Device Lett 39, 71–74 (2018).

[33] Gupta, C. et al. OG-FET: An in-situ Oxide, GaN interlayer based vertical trench MOSFET. 

IEEE Electron Device Lett 37, 1601–1604 (2016).


17

[34] Xu, W. et al. P-type transparent amorphous oxide thin-film transistors using low-temperature 

solution-processed nickel oxide. J. Alloys Compd. 806, 40–51 (2019).

[35] Shan, F. et al. High-mobility p-type NiOx thin-film transistors processed at low temperatures 

with Al2O3 high-k dielectric. J. Mater. Chem. C. 4, 9438–9444 (2016).

[36] Hu, H., Zhu, J., Chen, M., Guo, T. & Li, F. Inkjet-printed p-type nickel oxide thin-film transistor. 

Appl. Surf. Sci. 441, 295–302 (2018).

[37] Liu, A. et al. In situ one-step synthesis of p-type copper oxide for low-temperature, solution 

processed thin-film transistors. J. Mater. Chem. C. 5, 2524–2530 (2017).

[38] Yim, S. et al. Lanthanum doping enabling high drain current modulation in a p-type tin 

monoxide thin-film transistor. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 47025–47036 (2019).

[39] Li, S. et al. Preparation and characterization of solution-processed nanocrystalline p-type 

CuAlO2 thin-film transistors. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13, 259 (2018).

[40] Nie, S. et al. Solution-processed ternary p-type CuCrO2 semiconductor thin films and their 

application in transistors. J. Mater. Chem. C. 6, 1393-1398 (2018).

[41] Ding, Y. et al. High-performance indium oxide thin-film transistors with aluminum oxide 

passivation. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 40, 1949-1952 (2019).

[42] Leppäniemi, J., Huttunen, O. -H., Majumdar, H. & Alastalo, A. Flexography-printed In2O3

semiconductor layers for high-mobility thin-film transistors on flexible plastic substrate. Adv. 
Mater. 27, 7168-7175 (2015).

[43] Lee, W. Y. et al. Densification control as a method of improving the ambient stability of solgel-

processed SnO2 thin-film transistors. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 40, 905-908 (2019).

[44] Zhang, L. et al. Structural, chemical, optical, and electrical evolution of solution-processed 

SnO2 films and their applications in thin-film transistors. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 53, 175106 
(2020).

[45] Liang, D. -D., Zhang, Y. -Q., Cho, H. J. & Ohta, H. Electric field thermopower modulation 

analyses of the operation mechanism of transparent amorphous SnO2 thin-film transistor. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 116, 143503 (2020).

[46] Saha, J. K. et al. Highly stable, nanocrystalline, ZnO thin-film transistor by spray pyrolysis 

using high-k dielectric. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 67, 1021-1026 (2020).

[47] Xu, W. et al. Low temperature solution-processed IGZO thin-film transistors. Appl. Surf. Sci. 

455, 554-560 (2018).

[48] Messalea, K. A. et al. Two-step synthesis of large-area 2D Bi2S3 nanosheets featuring high in-

plane anisotropy. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 7, 2001131 (2020).


18

Supplementary information

Supplementary Note 1: Schematic of GaN synthesis process and changes of fresh Ga droplet 
before and after subject to nitrogen plasma treatment

As is well known, liquid Ga would be rapidly oxidized when exposed to ambient air, due to its 

high reactivity with oxygen. During the process of nitriding treatment, the self-confined gallium 
oxide on Ga surface will inhabit nitrogen plasma from directly hitting and reacting with Ga, resulting 
in the inability to generate GaN. Therefore, in order to guarantee the GaN film growth on the surface 
of Ga droplets, the oxide films need to be removed by using NaOH. In this way, there is no gallium 
oxide formation on the surface of fresh Ga droplet in pure N2 atmosphere (Supplementary Fig. 1(b)), 
when it is placed on the low-voltage electrode (cathode) stainless steel plate of the plasma trigger 
device. After subject to 10 min nitrogen plasma treatment, a dense defined GaN film can be formed 
on the surface of Ga droplets in pure N2 atmosphere (Supplementary Fig. 1(c)).  

Supplementary Figure 1. Gas mediated fabrication of gallium base functional film. (a) Flowchart 
of defined GaN formation on liquid Gallium’s surface. (b) Fresh liquid Gallium droplets cleaned by 
NaOH in N2 atmosphere. (b) Gallium droplets with surface defined GaN after nitrogen plasma 
treatment in N2 atmosphere.


19

Supplementary Note 2: Printing output parameters in diverse thickness range

The present method has wide adaptability. Additional experiments were performed to clarify 

the effects of nitrogen plasma triggering time on the film thickness of 2D GaN semiconductor. 
Extended data from Supplementary Fig. 2 and Figure 1b shows that extending the treatment time 
before printing leads to no unlimited increase in sheet thickness of the 2D GaN. A higher surface 
coverage was obtained when a step by step coating procedure was adopted. Here the droplet allowed 
to nitride for a set time, is moved to the distance of one droplet diameter and then allowed to re-
nitride for the same period of time prior to being moved again. For this stepped roll-printing, the 
nitride time per step was found to have a certain effect on substrate coverage and lateral dimensions 
of the isolated sheets. When the droplets were rolled at relatively slower step-speeds, a substrate 
coverage exceeding 50% can be obtained. This raised interesting issues for the liquid metal gallium 
surface confined nitridation reaction mechanisms which had never been tackled before and 
tremendous chances are opened to pursue in the coming time.

Supplementary Figure 2. Synthesis technique characterization on the fabricated GaN film. The 
thickness of nitriding layer on the surface of liquid Ga against time shows no significant change of 
the sheet thickness when prolonging the nitriding time.


20

Supplementary Note 3: GaN with different substrates and printing layers

As shown in Supplementary Fig. 3(a), the GaN film with thickness lower than 1 nm can be 

harvested via solely printing nitrided Ga droplets, when the nitrogen plasma triggering time is set 
as 0.5 min. The obtained GaN film can be defined as 2D GaN. However, the uniformity and 
continuity of prepared 2D GaN are not always good enough, due to the existing of cracks and holes 
involved. From Supplementary Fig. 3(a), (b) and (c), we can see dense and uniform GaN films on 
various substrates via 4 nm thick GaN film being repeatedly printed five times. The thickness of 
these films is about 20 nm, indicating the proposed printing process can easily control the thickness 
of synthesized GaN film and is very practical for engineering purpose.

Supplementary Figure 3. Characterization of the printed GaN film. (a) AFM image of one touch 
print of the GaN film on a SiO2/Si wafer. (b), (c) and (d) AFM images of frequently printed GaN 
films on Si wafer, sapphire and quartz, respectively.


21

Supplementary Note 4: Comparison of the present printing process and other representative 
reported preparation process of GaN

At present, all preparation processes of GaN basically request high temperature and vacuum 

conditions, which meanwhile also increases the cost, is not conducive to large-scale industrial 
applications, and can not easily realize flexible devices, This may seriously hinder the 
industrialization and research progress of ultra-thin GaN in flexible devices. Compared with the 
existing technologies, the room temperature GaN printing process enabled from liquid metal 
displayed the advantages of simple and stable process, low cost and high efficiency (Supplementary 
Fig. 4). Due to the low process temperature (room temperature), it can be applied to the development 
of various GaN based flexible electronic and optoelectronic devices in the near future.

Supplementary Figure 4. Graphic comparison of present printing processes and GaN preparation 
technology in literature. New technology shows evident advantages.


22

Supplementary Note 5: Distribution of elements across the GaN film

The chemical composition of the film surface is analyzed by EDS energy spectrum, as shown 

in the Supplementary Fig. 5, which shows that four elements are detected. The detected element C 
and O in EDS results come from PET tap, which indicates the content of element C, O and H, 
respectively. The existence of Ga and N elements in the spectrum proves that the components of the 
printed film are Ga and N atoms. The atomic percentages of the two elements are 16.24% and 
18.37%, which is approximately the stoichiometric ratio of 1:1. It can thus be concluded that the 
sample prepared by this printing technology is pure GaN.

Supplementary Figure 5. Output of the printed GaN film. (a) SEM image of an ultrathin quasi-2D 
GaN sample. (b) The EDS mapping of Ga and N elements along to the GaN film harvested from the 
surface of nitrogen plasma triggered liquid Ga. (c) EDS spectra of the GaN by printing.


23

Supplementary Note 6: Field-effect mobility and sub-threshold swing (SS) calculation

In order to collect the carrier mobility for estimating the performance of printed FET and 

making a comparison with the reported GaN FETs, the field-effect mobilities were calculated using 
field-effect method, which is commonly used in former FETs.

In the present work, the field-effect mobilities of printed GaN-FET devices at ambient 

temperatures were calculated using this method, i.e.

ds

device

ds
ox
gs

dI
L

V C W dV


(S1)

Since the dielectric is 500 nm SiO2, the capacitance per unit area is calculated to be:

14

9
2
0

7

3.9 8.85 10
/
6.90 10
/
500 10

ox

ox

ox

F cm
C
F cm
t
cm

 














(S2)

where μdevice is the hole mobility, Ids and Vds refer to the drain-source current and voltage, 
respectively, Vgs is the gate voltage, L and W are the length and width of the channel, respectively.

When the gate bias voltage is lower than the threshold voltage, there will be leakage current 

flow on the semiconductor surface. Generally, this working region is called sub threshold region. In 
the subthreshold region, the drain current comes from the diffusion of carriers from source to drain 
rather than drift. The slope of the drain current curve depends on the capacitance of the gate insulator 
and the interface trap charge density. The reciprocal of the logarithmic slope of the source drain 
current to the gate voltage is called the subthreshold swing (SS), as follows:

(log
)

G

ds

V
SS
I


 

(S3)


24

Supplementary Note 7: Stability of GaN-FET device.

It is found that ultrathin quasi-2D GaN based FET is very stable, owns good recyclability, has 

consistent on / off ratio and stable on / off current in more than 100 switching cycles under 
environmental conditions (Supplementary Fig. 6). This highlights the excellent quality of the 
currently printed GaN, and also shows that further improvement can be achieved by improving the 
device design.

Supplementary Figure 6. Stability testing of a GaN field-effect transistor showing 100 On-Off 
cycles. No degradation in performance is observed. 


25

Supplementary References
[1] Chen, D. et al. Improved electro-optical and photoelectric performance of GaN-based micro-

LEDs with an atomic layer deposited AlN passivation layer. Opt. Express 29, 36559-36566 
(2021).

[2] Zhang, W. et al. Investigation of normally-off GaN-based p-channel and n-channel

heterojunction field-effect transistors for monolithic integration. Results Phys. 24, 104209 
(2021).

[3] Su, C. W., Wang, T. W., Wu, M. C., Ko, C. J. & Huang, J. B. Fabrication and characterization of 

GaN HEMTs grown on SiC substrates with different orientations. Solid State Electron. 179, 
107980 (2021).

[4] Shervin, S. et al. Flexible single-crystalline GaN substrate by direct deposition of III-N thin films 

on polycrystalline metal tape. J. Mater. Chem. C 9, 2243-2251 (2021).

[5] Saha, S. et al. Microstructural Characterization of GaN Grown on SiC. Microsc Microanal. 25, 

1383-1393 (2019).

[6] Yao, W. et al. Impact of Cone-Shape-Patterned Sapphire Substrate and Temperature on the 

Epitaxial Growth of p-GaN via MOCVD. Phys. Status Solidi A 216, 1900026 (2019).

[7] Chen, Y. et al. Growth of 2D GaN single crystals on liquid metals. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140,

16392−16395 (2018).

[8] Syed, N. et al. Wafer-sized ultrathin gallium and indium nitride nanosheets through the 

ammonolysis of liquid metal derived oxides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 104–108 (2019).

[9] Lee, L. Y. et al. Investigation of MOVPE-grown zincblende GaN nucleation layers on 3C-SiC/Si 

substrates. J. Cryst. Growth 524, 125167 (2019).

[10] Kim, H. Vertical Schottky Contacts to Bulk GaN Single Crystals and Current Transport 

Mechanisms: A Review. J. Electron. Mater. 50, 6688 (2021).

[11] Henning, A. et al. Aluminum Oxide at the Monolayer Limit via Oxidant-Free Plasma-Assisted 

Atomic Layer Deposition on GaN. Adv. Funct. Mater. 31, 2101441 (2021).

[12] Rouf, P. et al. Hexacoordinated Gallium (III) Triazenide Precursor for Epitaxial Gallium Nitride 

by Atomic Layer Deposition. Chem. Mater. 33, 3266-3275 (2021).

[13] Austin, A. J. et al. High-Temperature Atomic Layer Deposition of GaN on 1D Nanostructures. 

Nanomaterials 10, 2434 (2020). 

[14] Banerjee, S., Aarnink, A. A. I., Gravesteijn, D. J. & Kovalgin, A. Y. Thermal Atomic Layer 

Deposition of Polycrystalline Gallium Nitride. J. Phys. Chem. C 123, 23214-23225 (2019).

[15] Liu, S. et al. Baking and plasma pretreatment of sapphire surfaces as a way to facilitate the 

epitaxial plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition of GaN thin films. Appl. Phys. Lett. 116, 
211601 (2020).

[16] Song, Y. et al. Exploration of Monolayer MoS2 Template-Induced Growth of GaN Thin Films 

via Plasma-Enhanced Atomic Layer Deposition. Cryst. Growth Des. 21, 1778-1785 (2021).

[17] Qiu, P. et al. Plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition of gallium nitride thin films on fluorine-

doped tin oxide glass substrate for future photovoltaic application. Ceram. Int. 46, 5765-5772 
(2020)).

[18] He, Y. F. et al. Growth of Gallium Nitride Films on Multilayer Graphene Template Using 

Plasma‑Enhanced Atomic Layer Deposition. Acta Metall Sin-ENGL, 32, 1530-1536 (2019).

[19] Wei, H. et al. Plasma-enhanced atomic-layer-deposited gallium nitride as an electron transport 

layer for planar perovskite solar cells. J. Mater. Chem. A, 7, 25347–25354 (2019).


26

[20] Romo-GarcÍa, F. et al. Gallium nitride thin films by microwave plasma-assisted ALD. Opt. 

Mater. Express 9, 4187-4193 (2019).

[21] Gungor, N. & Alevli, M. Visible/infrared refractive index and phonon properties of GaN films 

grown on sapphire by hollow-cathode plasma-assisted atomic layer deposition. J Vac Sci 
Technol A 37, 050901 (2019).

[22] Sadaf, S. M. & Tang, H. Mapping the growth of p-type GaN layer under Ga-rich and N-rich 

conditions at low to high temperatures by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 117, 254104 (2020).

[23] Mauraya, A. K. et al. Structural and ultraviolet photo-detection properties of laser molecular 

beam epitaxy grown GaN layers using solid GaN and liquid Ga targets. Phys. Scr. 96, 085801 
(2021).

[24] Dewan, S., Tomar, M., Tandon, R. P. & Gupta, V. In-situ and post deposition analysis of laser 

MBE deposited GaN films at varying nitrogen gas flow. Vacuum 164, 72-76 (2019).

[25] Reilly, C. E. et al. Flow modulation metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy of GaN at temperatures 

below 600 ºC. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 35, 095014 (2020).

[26] Liu, W. S., Chang, Y. L. & Chen, H. Y. Growth of GaN thin film on amorphous glass substrate 

by direct-current pulse sputtering deposition technique. Coatings 9, 419 (2019).

[27] Mantarci, A. & Kundakci, M. Power-dependent physical properties of GaN thin films deposited 

on sapphire substrates by RF magnetron sputtering. Bull. Mater. Sci. 42, 196 (2019).

[28] Mantarcı, A. A Role of RF Power in Growth and Characterization of RF Magnetron Sputtered 

GaN/glass Thin Film. Emerg. Mater. Res. 8, 1-12 (2019).

[29] Mantarcı, A & Kundakçi, M. Physical properties of RF magnetron sputtered GaN/n‑Si thin film: 

impacts of RF power. Opt. Quant. Electron. 51, 81 (2019).


