 

Failure Mode Analysis in Microsecond UV Laser 

Annealing of Cu Thin Films 

 

Remi Demoulin                                

LAAS-CNRS 

Toulouse, France 
rdemoulin@laas.fr 

Richard Daubriac 

LAAS-CNRS 

Toulouse, France 
rdaubriac@laas.fr 

Louis Thuries 

Laser Systems & Solutions of 

Europe (LASSE) 

Gennevilliers, France 

louis.thuries@screen-lasse.com 

Emmanuel Scheid  

LAAS-CNRS 

Toulouse, France 
scheid@laas.fr 

 

Fabien Rozé                               

Laser Systems & Solutions of 

Europe (LASSE) 

Gennevilliers, France 

fabien.roze@screen-lasse.com 

 
 
 

Fuccio Cristiano 

LAAS-CNRS 

Toulouse, France 
cfuccio@laas.fr 

 
 
 
 

Toshiyuki Tabata 

Laser Systems & Solutions of 

Europe (LASSE) 

Gennvilliers, France 

toshiyuki.tabata@screen-

lasse.com 

 
 
 

Fulvio Mazzamuto 

Laser Systems & Solutions of 

Europe (LASSE) 

Gennevilliers, France 

fulvio.mazzamuto@screen-

lasse.com 

                 
 

Abstract—The need of surface-localized thermal processing is 

strongly increasing especially w.r.t three-dimensionally (3D) 
integrated electrical devices. UV laser annealing (UV-LA) 
technology well addresses this challenge. Particularly UV-LA can 
reduce resistivity by enlarging metallic grains in lines or thin 
films, irradiating only the interconnects for short timescales. 
However, the risk of failure in electrical performance must be 
correctly managed, and that of UV-LA has not been deeply 
studied yet. In this work microsecond-scale UV-LA is applied on 
a 
stack 
comparable 
to 
an 
interconnect 
structure 

(dielectric/Cu/Ta/SiO2/Si) in either melt or sub-melt regime for 
grain growth. The failure modes such as (i) Cu diffusion into 
SiO2, (ii) O incorporation into Cu, and (iii) intermixing between 
Cu and Ta are investigated.    

Keywords—laser anneal, BEOL, copper. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Recently, UV-LA has started to be applied in advanced 

interconnects so that the line resistivity can be reduced thanks 
to short-timescale high-temperature processing [1-2]. Efforts to 
study such processes is continuously rising because of rapidly 
growing interest from the industry on 3D-integrated electrical 
devices, where the applicable thermal budget may be further 
restricted.  

With UV-LA, two different regimes are possible: (I) melt 

and (II) sub-melt. The melt regime is interesting because it may 
allow huge grain growth from liquid metals. Indeed, we 
already demonstrated micrometer-scale grain growth in blanket 
Cu thin films [3]. If this regime can be properly applied in 
patterned lines without introducing any negative side effects 
such as structural destruction, metal oxidation, and surface 
roughness increase, quasi grain-boundary-free lines become 
possible, mitigating the exponential resistivity increase in 
narrow lines. On the other hand, the sub-melt regime, while 
producing a less pronounced resistivity gain w.r.t. to the melt 
regime, can considerably minimize the drawbacks that are 
detrimental for industrial perspective. In addition, the sub-melt 

process is the only option for metals alternative to Cu such as 
Ru [4], Mo [4], and binary alloys (NiAl [5]). For them, the 
melting point is too high to be reached in BEOL, even for a 
surface selective process such as UV-LA. Still, in the sub-melt 
regime, large Cu grain growth is achievable. Indeed, the mean 
grain size observed in 50-nm-thick Cu film could go up to 414 
nm after microsecond-scale sub-melt UV-LA [3], whereas it is 
typically about 100 nm after 600 °C furnace anneal [6-7].  

Nevertheless, the risk of failure in electrical performance 

must be correctly assessed also in the sub-melt regime. 
Possible failure modes are (i) Cu diffusion into SiO2, (ii) O 
incorporation into Cu, and (iii) intermixing between Cu and Ta. 
To investigate them, in this work, microsecond-scale UV-LA is 
applied to a stack of dielectric/Cu/Ta/SiO2/Si in either melt or 
sub-melt regime for grain growth. 

II. EXPERIMENTAL 

A 47-nm-thick sputtered-Cu was deposited on a 11 nm 

Ta/100 nm SiO2/Si stack. A 7-nm-thick Si-based dielectric 
capping layer was deposited by plasma deposition at 100 °C 
for 10 s. Microsecond-scale UV-LA was performed at room 
temperature (RT) under a N2 flow. Fig. 1 shows the simulated 
time-temperature profiles in Cu for the applied UV-LA 
conditions. Processes A and B kept the Cu layer in solid state, 
whereas Process C fully melted it. These conditions had a 
significant impact, particularly resulting in the reduction of 
sheet resistance (Fig. 2) compared to the non-annealed stack 
(0.60 ohm/sq): Process A gave 0.51 ohm/sq (-15%), B 0.50 
ohm/sq (-16%) and C 0.54 ohm/sq (-10%). The area-weighted 
mean grain size became larger after Process B (210 nm) than 
prior to UV-LA (70 nm) as reported before [3]. Five-times (x5) 
processing was also tested for Processes B and C to capture 
more clearly the possible degradation phenomena (Fig. 2). 
Each sample was analyzed by scanning TEM (STEM) using 
different 
techniques: 
High-Angle 
Annular 
Dark-Field 

(HAADF), Energy-Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), and 
Electron Back-Scattering Diffraction (EBSD).  

Accepted Paper for the IEEE International Interconnect Technology Conference (IITC) 2022 

 

© 2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for 

advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 


 

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

 
Firstly, Cu diffusion into SiO2 was investigated. Fig. 3 

shows the STEM-HAADF and EDX Cu-K mapping images 
taken after UV-LA. Process A shows no modification of the 
Cu layer. Process B clearly presents Cu diffusion into SiO2, 
which is reinforced by increasing the number of process steps 
to x5. Interestingly, Process “C x5”, corresponding to the melt 
regime (cf. Fig. 1) exhibits no Cu diffusion, although the 
applied thermal budget is higher than Process “B x5”. In fact, it 
has been shown that, during thermal process in the solid phase, 
Cu diffusion paths can be opened within the Ta layer at 
temperatures around 800 °C in the case of furnace anneals (a 
higher temperature might be required when shortening the 
process timescale) [8]. We speculate that the difference of the 
coefficient of thermal expansion between Cu (⁓20 × 10-6 /°C at 
0-1000 °C [9]) and Ta (⁓7 × 10-6 /°C at 27-2400 °C [10]) 
introduces a tensile strain in the Ta layer during the anneal, 
leading to its fracture when the mechanical fracture limit is 
exceeded. The high-resolution TEM observations reported in 
Ref. 8 also support such scenario. In contrast, when fully 
melting the Cu layer, tensile deformation of the Ta layer can no 
longer occur. No Cu is therefore expected to diffuse into the 
SiO2 layer, in agreement with the STEM-EDX observations. 
The diffusion barrier ability can be improved by partially (or 
fully) replacing Ta with TaN [11].    

 
Secondly, O incorporation into the Cu layer was 

investigated. Fig. 3 shows the STEM-HAADF and EDX O-K 
maps taken after UV-LA. The intensity of the O signal within 
the Cu layer appears to increase when increasing the sub-melt 
thermal budget, with a concentration gradient going from the 
bottom of the Cu layer up to the surface. In addition, an O 
segregation peak is observed at the Cu/Ta interface, which also 
increases with the sub-melt thermal budget. These observations 
clearly suggest that the underlying SiO2 layer is the source of 
the observed O, whose diffusion into the Cu layer is allowed 
by the mechanical rupture of the Ta layer. Indeed, in the case 
of Process “C x5”, Ta layer fracture does not occur, which 
avoids any O incorporation into the Cu layer, in agreement 
with the STEM-EDX observations (cf. Fig. 3). The O profile is 
comparable between Processes A and “C x5”. Based on the 
observed shape of the O EDX profile and other process related 
parameters (such as the process temperature or the thickness of 
the dielectric capping layer), all other possible sources of O can 
be excluded, including the annealing ambient, the capping 
layer itself or a possible residual O content in the as-deposited 
Cu layer.   

 
Thirdly, intermixing between the Cu and Ta layers was 

investigated. Fig. 4(a) shows the EDX Ta-M signal line scans 
taken after UV-LA across the whole structure. In fact, the Ta-
M X-ray energy is very close to the Si-K one. The two signals 
are therefore overlapped, however, due to the expected absence 
of Si in the Cu and Ta layers, the recorded signal in the top 60 
nm layer can be safely related to Ta, while the deeper part 
corresponds to the Si contained in the SiO2 layer and the Si 
substrate (the latter being used as a normalization reference). A 
zoomed view of the Ta layer region is presented in Fig. 4(b). 
Process A shows the as-deposited Ta thickness. For Processes 
B and “B x5”, a weak (but not negligible) Ta penetration into 
the copper layer is clearly observed, due to Cu/Ta 

interdiffusion in the solid phase, which increases with the 
thermal budget. For Process “B x5”, an “intermediate” Cu/Ta 
intermixing layer is also visible by TEM (Fig. 4(c)). In 
contrast, in the case of Process “C x5”, the diffusion of Ta into 
the Cu layer is accompanied by a strong degradation of the 
Ta/Cu interface (Fig. 4(d)), which is probably due to the 
enhanced diffusion of liquid Cu (the melting point is at 1084.6 
°C [12]) into the solid Ta layer (the melting point is at 3016.8 
°C [12]). We speculate that the increase of electron scattering 
associated to the degraded Cu/Ta interface is partially 
responsible for the observed increase of sheet resistance in this 
case (Fig. 2). Finally, Ta segregation in liquid Cu is expected to 
result in Ta accumulation at the surface at the end of the 
solidification process, in agreement with the strong surface Ta 
peak observed by EDX for Process “C x5” (Fig. 4(a)). This 
could also be an additional source of electron scattering and 
contribute to the increase of sheet resistance (Fig. 2).  

IV. CONCLUSION 

The 
dielectric/Cu/Ta/SiO2/Si 
structure 
processed 
by 

microsecond UV-LA was deeply investigated to assess the risk 
of failure in electronic performance. The results clearly showed 
that it is possible to achieve a resistivity improvement in the 
sub-melt regime (Process A) without any drawback such as the 
Cu diffusion into SiO2, the O diffusion from SiO2 to Cu, and 
the inter-diffusion or interface roughening occurring at the 
Cu/Ta interface. Replacing Ta with a more thermally stable 
material in contact with Cu will help to extend a UV-LA 
process window in Cu-based BEOL interconnects. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This project has received funding from the ECSEL Joint 

Undertaking (JU) under grant agreement No 875999. The JU 
receives support from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme and Netherlands, Belgium, 
Germany, France, Austria, Hungary, United Kingdom, 
Romania, Israel. The project has also received funding from 
the French PSPC project IT2-FR. 

 

          
               
 

REFERENCES 

[1] O. Gluschenkov et al., ECS Trans., 85(6), pp. 11-23 (2018). 
[2] D. Sil et al., IITC 2021, PS-2-08. 
[3] T. Tabata et al., IITC 2021, PS-1-05. 
[4] Z. Tokei, IEDM 2017, short course.  
[5] Jean-Philippe Soulié et al., IITC 2020, pp. 151-153. 
[6] T. Sun et al., Phys. Rev. B, 81(15), 155454 (2010). 
[7] J. S. Chawla et al., Phys. Rev. B, 84(23), 235423 (2011). 
[8] S. Li et al., Appl. Phys. Lett., 80(13), pp. 2296-2298 (2002). 
[9] J. Carvill, “Mechanical Engineer's Data Handbook,” p. 265 (1994). 
[10] A. G. Worthing, Phys. Rev. B, 26(1), pp. 190-201 (1926). 
[11] T. Oku et al., Appl. Surf. Sci., 99, pp. 265-272 (1996). 
[12] X. Liu et al., J. Phase Equilib. Diffus., 36, pp. 28–38 (2015)


 

 

 
Fig. 1. Time vs. Cu maximum temperature (Max T) and melting 
depth (MD) profiles obtained by process simulation for the 
applied UV-LA conditions. 

 

 
Fig. 3. STEM-HAADF, EDX Cu-K mapping, and EDX O-K 
mapping images taken for the applied UV-LA conditions. The O 
composition profiles are also shown on the EDX images. 

 

 

 
Fig. 4. (a) EDX Ta-M line scan profiles taken across 
the whole structure for the applied UV-LA 
conditions. It should be noted that the Si-K and Ta-M 
signals are overlapped. The signal intensity is 
roughly calibrated in Si and SiO2. (b) The same 
profiles but normalized by the peak representing Ta 
between Cu and SiO2, showing significant Ta 
diffusion into the bottom of the Cu layer after 
Process B x5 and C x5.  (c) (d) STEM-HAADF 
images taken for these UV-LA conditions, showing 
some contrast change within the Cu/Ta interface.   

 

 
Fig. 2. Sheet resistance of the non-annealed (shown by the dotted 
line at 0.60 ohm/sq) and UV-LA samples.  


