Correlation of Magnetism and Disordered

Shiba bands in Fe Monolayer Islands on

Nb(110)

Julia J. Goedecke,∗,† Lucas Schneider,† Yingqiao Ma,†,‡ Khai Ton That,†

Dongfei Wang,†,¶ Jens Wiebe,∗,† and Roland Wiesendanger†

†Department of Physics, University of Hamburg, D-20355 Hamburg, Germany

‡Present address: Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Key Laboratory

of Organic Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190,

China

¶Present address: CIC Nanogune, Tolosa Hiribidea, 76 E-20018 Donostia – San Sebastian

E-mail: julia.goedecke@physnet.uni-hamburg.de; jwiebe@physnet.uni-hamburg.de

Abstract

Two-dimensional (2D) magnet-superconductor hybrid systems are intensively stud-

ied due to their potential for the realization of 2D topological superconductors with

Majorana edge modes. It is theoretically predicted that this quantum state is ubiqui-

tous in spin-orbit coupled ferromagnetic or skyrmionic 2D spin-lattices in proximity to

an s-wave superconductor. However, recent examples suggest that the requirements for

topological superconductivity are complicated by the multi-orbital nature of the mag-

netic components and disorder effects. Here, we investigate Fe monolayer islands grown

on a surface of the s-wave superconductor with the largest gap of all elemental super-

conductors, Nb, with respect to magnetism and superconductivity using spin-resolved

1

arXiv:2204.12391v3  [cond-mat.supr-con]  5 May 2022


scanning tunneling spectrosopy. We find three types of Fe monolayer islands which dif-

fer by their reconstruction inducing disorder, the magnetism and the sub-gap electronic

states. All three types are ferromagnetic with different coercive fields indicating diverse

exchange and anisotropy energies. On all three islands, there is finite spectral weight

throughout the substrate’s energy gap at the expense of the coherence peak intensity,

indicating the formation of Shiba bands overlapping with the Fermi energy. The gap

filling and coherence peak reduction is strongest for the island with largest coercive

field. A strong lateral variation of the spectral weight of the Shiba bands signifies sub-

stantial disorder on the order of the substrate’s pairing energy with a length scale of

the period of the three different reconstructions. There are neither signs of topological

gaps within these bands nor of any kind of edge modes. Our work illustrates that a re-

constructed growth mode of magnetic layers on superconducting surfaces is detrimental

for the formation of 2D topological superconductivity.

Introduction

Two-dimensional (2D) chiral p-wave, or more generally topological, superconductors are pre-

dicted to host exotic dispersive 1D electron states on their edges, named Majorana edge

modes.1 Such systems recently attracted a lot of attention because of their potential for the

realization of concepts for fault tolerant quantum computation.2 One of the most prominent

proposals for the realization of such topological superconductors are Shiba-lattices, i.e. 2D

lattices of magnetic atoms, or thin magnetic layers, deposited on the surface of a conventional

s-wave superconductor which supplies strong spin-orbit coupling.3–6 Related concepts which

eliminate the need of strong spin-orbit coupling7 propose the utilization of non-collinear

spin structures,7–9 in particular Skyrmions10–13 or Skyrmion-like spin-structures14 coupled

to conventional s-wave superconductors.

Experimental investigations of 2D Shiba-lattices so far focused on magnetic transition

metal islands on superconducting crystals with a thin oxide decoupling layer,15 van-der-Waals

2


heterostructures,16,17 transition metal-silicon alloys buried below superconducting layers,18,19

spin-spirals20 or antiferromagnetic transition metal layers on elemental superconductors.21

The reported experimental evidences of topological superconductivity in some of these sys-

tems15–19 relied on the detection of zero bias resonances or an enhanced density of states

localized on the rim of the lattice. However, it was theoretically predicted that the Majorana

edge modes have a dispersion, which can be experimentally resolved.22 The realization of

Shiba-lattices directly on a surface of a metal usually enables atomic manipulation23,24 and,

thereby, would permit the building of more complex structures, as, e.g. 1D Shiba-chains at-

tached to 2D Shiba-lattices allowing for additional experiments in order to prove or disprove

the Majorana edge mode origin of enhanced densities of states.25

Yet, studies of transition metal layers in direct contact to elementary superconductors

did not show indications for topological superconductivity and dispersing Majorana edge

modes.15 For such lattices in direct contact to the superconductor, the realization of a SC

state in the ferromagnet by the proximity effect26–28 can be hampered by a strong inverse

proximity effect, which may reduce the magnetism29,30 and might also quench the supercon-

ductivity in the vicinity of the Shiba-lattice (see citations in28). Another important issue for

the development of 2D topological superconductivity is disorder. It has been shown theoret-

ically, that disorder can have strong effects on the topologically superconducting properties

of 1D31–34 and 2D35–37 Shiba-lattices. Considering potential disorder in the superconductor,

it has been shown for the case of a ferromagnetic spin chain (1D),34 that the topological

minigap is very sensitive to disorder, but the MM is surprisingly insensitive, as long as the

surrounding superconductor does not show signs of strong disorder. For the 2D case, e.g.

induced in a layer with a Rashba-type spin-orbit coupling sandwiched between a ferromagnet

and a superconductor,36 very weak potential disorder first decreases the Majorana bound

state localization length with increasing disorder strength. However, it increases again when

the disorder gets on the order of the pairing energy. This sensitivity can get even stronger

for correlated disorder37 and is particularly effective if the correlation length of the disorder

3


in the chemical potential is comparable with the coherence length of the superconductor.

Magnetic disorder was investigated for the 1D spin-chain system, e.g. induced by missing

magnetic atoms or variations in the Shiba couplings,33 and showed that the topological phase

is relatively sensitive to such kinds of disorder. For the 2D system,35 magnetic disorder ei-

ther in the form of a disordered magnetic coupling between a ferromagnetic lattice and the

electrons in the superconductor, for randomly oriented spins, or for randomly missing spins,

more strongly suppresses the topological phases as compared to potential disorder. Here, the

latter type of magnetic disorder leads to the strongest suppression of topological phases, but

correlated disorder has a weaker effect. On the other hand, magnetic disorder may also favor

topological phases in 2D Shiba-lattices, e.g. for very particular values of the chemical poten-

tial,35 for Moiré-lattices,17 or for a spin-glass state.38 Therefore, it is surprising, that disorder

effects in 1D39,40 or 2D Shiba-lattices17–19 have been barely touched on experimentally.

Here, we experimentally investigate ferromagnetic 2D Shiba-lattices of the transition

metal Fe grown directly ontop of the clean (110) surface of Nb, the elemental superconductor

with the largest energy gap. We find that the system realizes strongly disordered Shiba-bands

induced by ferromagnetic Fe monolayer reconstructions, and study these bands with respect

to indications for topological superconductivity.

Results and Discussion

Reconstructions of the Fe monolayer grown on clean Nb(110)

The growth of Fe on the (110) surface of Nb films deposited on various substrates has previ-

ously been intensely studied by RHEED, Auger-electron spectroscopy, LEED and STM.41,42

For room temperature deposition of very thin Fe films, which is also the case studied in

the current work, there are no signs of intermixing between Fe and Nb.41,42 Here, we grow

thin films of Fe on the clean oxygen-reconstruction-free (110) surface of a Nb single crystal

(Figure 1a,b) which is achieved by carefully flashing the crystal in ultra-high vacuum to

4


very high temperatures (see Methods). Note, that for previous studies, the substrate most

probably was still at least partly oxygen-reconstructed resulting in a different Fe structure

compared to the results we present here (see Supplementary Note 1 and Figure S1). After

RT evaporation of Fe with less than a monolayer (ML) coverage onto such clean Nb(110)

surfaces, three different reconstructions were observed on ML Fe islands (see Figure 1a)

with a typical height of 250 pm (Figures 3 and 4d below), referred to as type I, II and III

in the following. In addition, a few double-layered (DL) Fe islands (bright stripe) can be

found, which are elongated along the [001]-direction. All three Fe ML reconstructions are

found within single islands but also on separate islands. Figures 1b-e show atomically re-

solved STM images of the Nb(110) substrate and of the individual reconstructions. In the

following, we will always use the same color code in order to indicate the different types of

reconstruction in the Figures: blue for type I, orange for type II, and green for type III. In

Figure 1b, the atomic lattice of Nb(110) is visible and the surface unit cell is marked. For

comparison, this unit cell is added to the STM images of the three Fe ML reconstructions

in Figures 1c-e. The reconstructions I and III span a large number of substrate unit cells.

Type I (Figure 1c) consists of 1 to 2 nm long stripes with a larger apparent height arranged

on a roughly 8×16 superlattice (with respect to [001]×[1¯10]) separated by rather flat areas.

Type III (Figure 1e) consists of units that span 4 × 3 to 7 × 4 unit cells interrupted by

dislocation lines along [001]. The arrangemens of both of these reconstructions are strongly

influenced by the island’s shape. Reconstruction II spans only 4 unit cells and resembles a

(2 × 2) superlattice where every second row along [001] is missing. We refrain, here, from

the determination of the atomic structure within these three reconstructions which would

require a detailed comparison of the STM images to first principles calculations.

Spectra on the Nb(110) substrate show a distinct peak at V ≈ −450 mV (dashed line

in Figure 1f), which has previously been identified as the signature of the dz2-type surface

state of Nb(110),43 providing additional evidence that the Nb substrate is indeed largely

clean and free from oxygen. Its spectral signature is still present, yet strongly suppressed,

5


for the type I Fe ML reconstruction, but it is barely visible as a shoulder for the type II

reconstruction and completely suppressed for the type III reconstruction. Instead all Fe ML

reconstructions display a peak at V ≈ +400 mV (dashed line in Figure 1f) which is absent

on Nb(110). After the identification of the three types of Fe ML reconstructions grown on

the clean Nb(110) we continue with the investigation of their magnetic properties.

Spin orders of the Fe ML reconstructions

To investigate the magnetism of the three types of Fe MLs, spin-resolved scanning tunneling

spectroscopy (SP-STS) has been performed. Using a spin-polarized STM tip (see Methods),

spectra taken on different regions of the reconstructions for varying out-of-plane magnetic

fields within a bias range of V = ±1 V (Supplementary Note 2 and Figure S2) reveal the

particular bias voltages that have been used in the following in order to achieve maximum

spin-contrast in spin-resolved dI/dV maps. To emphasize the magnetic contrast over elec-

tronic contributions, asymmetry maps were calculated (see Methods, Eq. (1)). Examples

of such spin asymmetry maps for Bz1,2 = ±0.5 T taken from one of each type of the Fe

ML islands shown in Figure 2d can be seen in Figure 2a-c. It is apparent that the type

I ML exhibits the strongest spin contrast, followed by type II and type III. For type I, a

contrast reversal between flat and stripe regions can be observed, which we will discuss be-

low. Hysteresis loops extracted from out-of-plane magnetic field dependent dI/dV maps (see

Methods) by averaging over a certain region on top of each type of Fe ML island are shown

in Figure 2e. They reveal a butterfly shaped hysteresis for type I and type II with a strong

change in the spin-resolved signal, while there is hardly any change at first sight on the type

III Fe ML. Since, for these measurements, only a small amount of magnetic Fe material was

transferred onto the Nb tip (see Methods), it is expected that the tip is soft magnetic and

aligns parallel to the external magnetic field already at several hundreds of mT.44 This is

indeed evidenced by the hysteresis loops measured on type I and II islands. After an initial

increase in the dI/dV signal for the first few hundreds of mT up to Bz = ±0.5 T, a contrast

6


difference relative to Bz = 0 T can be seen for all island types I and II, regardless of their

size. In contrast, assuming a constant tip magnetization for this magnetic field regime would

imply that all islands switch their magnetization at a similar, very small coercive field, which

is highly unlikely. We, therefore, conclude that for |Bz| > 0.5 T, the tip magnetization points

down (up, w.l.o.g.) for negative (positive) magnetic field in Figure 2e. This is also schemat-

ically shown in Figure 2f. After this characterization of the tip magnetization, which is the

same for the measurements on all three ML types in Figure 2e, we can now interpret the rest

of the hysteresis loops, starting with the type I ML (Figure 2e, blue data). For this type,

dI/dV values were averaged over flat as well as stripe regions (see Supplementary Note 2

and Figure S2), with only the results over the flat regions shown here. For the downwards

sweep (along the direction of the horizontal arrow), the dI/dV signal first increases between

Bz = 0 T to Bz = −0.5 T due to the downwards reorientation of the tip magnetization, and

then stays constant until about -2T. Between -2T and -2.4T the dI/dV signal suddenly de-

creases. When the magnetic field is swept up again, the dI/dV signal first increases between

-0.5T and +0.5T due to the upwards reorientation of the tip magnetization, then stays con-

stant up to about +2T, and then suddenly decreases again between +2T and +2.4T. We

thus assign the changes in the dI/dV signal between ±2 T and ±2.4 T to the change in the

magnetization of the type I island (see the sketch in Figure 2f). Exactly the same behaviour

of the hysteresis loop is observed on the stripe regions, just with the inverted spin contrast

that was already implied by the spin asymmetry map in Figure 2a (see Supplementary Note 2

and Figure S2). We neither observe any indications for non-collinear spin-structures,45 nor

a shifting in the maximum spin contrast between the stripe and flat regions which would

imply unreasonably small domains (Supplementary Note 3 and Figure S3). Therefore, we

conclude that this type I reconstruction island has a single-domain out-of-plane ferromagnetic

spin-order with a coercive field of 2.2 T ± 0.2 T. The sign-changes in the spin-asymmetry

(Figure 2a) are most probably due to an inversion of the vacuum spin-polarization above the

stripes with respect to the flat regions (Supplementary Note 2 and Figure S2).46

7


The magnetization curve measured on the type II island (Figure 2e, orange data points)

shows qualitatively the same behaviour indicating a single domain out-of-plane ferromag-

netic spin order also in this case. However, here the coercive field is considerably smaller

(0.75 T ± 0.25 T). For the magnetization curve measured on the type III island, the dI/dV

signal stays largely constant for the entire magnetic field range, apart from some tiny signal

changes in the small field regime where the tip magnetization direction is reoriented. This

also holds true if we use bias voltages in the entire range between ±1 V (see Supplemen-

tary Note 2 and Figure S2). This result can lead to one of the three following implications:

Firstly, the magnetization of the type III Fe ML reconstruction could be quenched. This

can be excluded due to the residual spin contrast in the low magnetic field range and since

this type of ML induces Shiba states in the band gap of the superconducting substrate (see

below). Secondly, while the tip’s magnetization is out-of-plane for |Bz| > 0.5 T, a strong

in-plane magnetic anisotropy could force the Fe spins in the type III ML islands into the

direction perpendicular to the tip magnetization, thus yielding zero spin contrast. This sce-

nario can be excluded by Monte-Carlo simulations (see Supplementary Note 4 and Figure S4)

showing that, even for relatively strong in-plane magnetic anisotropies of a ferromagnetic

island, the maximum magnetic field would still yield an out-of-plane magnetization of 25%

of the saturation magnetization which could be experimentally detected,47 in conflict with

the measurements. Therefore, the most likely scenario would be that the type III ML has a

very low coercivity of < 0.4 T which is comparable to that of the tip.

In order to check the general validity of the above results for the different types of Fe

ML islands, we investigated several islands of each type also using different tips (see Supple-

mentary Note 5 and Table 1). They show, that the coercive fields do not vary considerably

with island sizes or shapes, but are largely determined by the type of the reconstruction,

i.e. dipolar interaction effects seem negligible. This can be rationalized by our Monte-Carlo

simulations (see Supplementary Note 4 and Figure S4).48,49 While this model simulates the

very simplified situation of a ferromagnetic island with homogeneous properties, instead

8


of a strongly reconstructed island where the magnetic properties will change from site to

site, it still enables to understand the general trends by mapping the lateral changes in the

magnetism in the different reconstructions to site-independent magnetic moments, onsite

magnetic anisotropies and nearest neighbor Heisenberg exchange interactions.
While we

assume that the magnetic moment of the Fe atoms in the three types of MLs are similar

(µ = 2.5µB), we vary the magnetic anisotropy constants (Kz, Kx = −0.05 . . . − 0.5 meV)

and exchange constant (J1 = 1 . . . 5 meV per bond) within reasonable constraints. These

simulations reveal that islands of the investigated sizes reverse their magnetization by do-

main wall nucleation and propagation. The simulated coercive field is largely proportional

to the square root of the product of anisotropy and exchange constants and can reproduce

the measured coercive fields. Considering the differences in the coercive fields (2.3 T for

type I, 0.7 T for type II, and < 0.4 T for type III) we conclude that the overall anisotropy

times exchange constants for the Fe atoms in the islands are decreasing by orders of mag-

nitude with a ratio of 5.3/0.49/ < 0.16 going from type I, over type II, to type III ML.

There might be, of course, additional effects of the different structural disorder of the three

types of reconstructions on the coercive field via inducing nucleation centers for the domain

walls. In the following, we will investigate the local properties of the Shiba bands which are

expected to form by hybridization of the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states of the Fe atoms in the

islands,3–5 and how they differ for the three types of MLs due to their different structural

and spin-dependent properties.

Disordered Shiba bands in the reconstructed Fe MLs

Spectroscopic line profiles taken with a superconducting tip from the Nb substrate across

one of each type of the Fe ML islands are shown in Figure 3a-c and the averaged spectra of

those line profiles ontop of the Fe MLs and on Nb are shown in Figure 3d. Since the tip has

an energy gap of ∆t = 1.00 meV, the energies of all observed features are shifted by 1 meV

relative to the Fermi energy EF (Methods). As we are interested in the states induced by the

9


Fe islands in the gap of the substrate, we focus on the energy range from ±∆t = ± 1 meV to

±(∆s + ∆t) = ± 2.40 meV. While the substrate coherence peaks at ±(∆s + ∆t) are strongly

suppressed ontop of all islands, there is an increase in spectral intensity all over the gap region

compared to the Nb substrate. We assign this spectral intensity to the Shiba bands, which

should form by hybridization of the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states of the individual Fe atoms in

the islands.3–5 Comparing the three types of MLs, there are pronounced differences in the

overall intensities of the Shiba bands and their lateral variations which we will investigate

in the following. While the coherence peak is increasingly suppressed going from the low

coercivity type III over type II to the high coercivity type I islands, the energy-averaged

intensity of the Shiba bands behaves opposite, i.e. it increases. This is also apparent from

two-dimensional maps over an area with several islands (see Figure 4a) of the spectral weight

at EF (Figure 4b) and at the coherence peak (Figure 4c), respectively. Importantly, for all

three ML types, the Shiba bands have significant intensities close to EF, suggesting that their

band widths are large enough to overlap with EF. But there is no indication of a gap opening

at EF (Figure 3). However, this behaviour is complicated by a strong lateral variation in the

spectral weight of the Shiba bands revealing shifts on the order of the substrate gap energy,

which also differs between the three island types. The lateral variation is weakest for the type

III ML and most pronounced for type I, and seems to have a correlation length comparable

to the periodicity of the respective reconstruction.
We assign these lateral variations to

disorder in the Shiba bands induced by the strong structural disorder of the different Fe ML

reconstructions. For the type I islands, a very strong and long range variation reveals nm

sized areas ontop of the islands with an intense spectral weight at ±∆t (see vertical white

line on the center of the island in the spectral line profile of Figure 3a), i.e. close to EF,

which are also visible in Figure 4b. These special features occur only in sufficiently wide flat

areas between the stripes when they have a minimum spacing of 3 nm (see white dot in the

center of the island marked on the red line on the STM image of Figure 3a). However, note

that the particle-hole asymmetry in the intensities of these features indicates, that they are

10


not related to a zero energy state, but probably to a trivial state which is bound close to EF

and localized by the disorder potential in the Shiba bands. Besides these different strengths

of the disorder potentials in the Shiba bands for the three Fe ML reconstructions, the other

main result of the current work is, that for all three types of ferromagnetic Fe MLs, there

are no clear indications for any edge states, in the entire energy region of the substrate gap.

Such edge states would be observed in the left and right regions of the spectral line profiles in

Figure 3a-c between the vertical white lines marking the edges of the islands. In particular,

there are no indications for any zero energy edge modes as can be seen in Figure 4b. As a

side remark, we mention here, that the islands display a negligible inverse proximity effect

on the Nb(110) substrate, which can be seen by the immediate recovery of the coherence

peak spectral intensity in less than a nm distance to all islands edges (Figure 4c,d), unlike

it was observed for other systems.20

Conclusions

In conclusion, our study unravels a correlation between different types of reconstruction-

induced structural disorder in ferromagnetic Fe ML islands on clean Nb(110) with their co-

ercive magnetic fields as well as with the spectral intensity and disorder in the Shiba bands

which they induce in the superconductor. We assign the effect of the difference in reconstruc-

tion on the coercive field to a change in the magnetic anisotropy and/or exchange constant

between the three different ML types. The different magnetic couplings in cooperation with

the different types of structural disorder in the three ferromagnetic spin-lattices naturally

explain a different disorder potential of their Shiba bands.
The latter is quite massive,

i.e. on the order of the superconducting energy gap for the spin-lattice with the strongest

anisotropy times exchange constants and longest correlation length of the reconstruction,

i.e. type I. Notably, the energetic position of YSR states has proven to be quite sensitive to

disorder in previous studies, e.g. crucially depends on the exact adsorption site,50 on the po-

sition relative to oxygen impurities51,52 or on the position relative to the charge density wave

11


in NbSe2.53 The increasing spectral intensity in the Shiba bands for increasing anisotropy

times exchange constants in the spin lattice naively seems intuitive, as in the classical model

of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov, an increase in the magnetic moment or exchange interaction to the

conduction electrons of the superconductor usually induces a shift of the Yu-Shiba-Rusinov

states of individual atoms from the coherence peak into the gap region.50,54 However, as this

shift continues, the spectral weight will move towards the coherence peaks on the other side

of EF, which would probably balance the former effect. In the spin-lattice, in addition to

these effects, an increasing exchange coupling between Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states will widen

the Shiba bands,23 and this exchange coupling most probably is also different for the three

ML types as it might be linked to the one that determines the coercivity. Most importantly,

our study reveals that there are neither indications for a gap at EF, nor of any edge states

for all three types of disordered ferromagnetic spin-lattices investigated here, neither at nor

off the Fermi energy. Naively thinking, the system might fulfill all requirements for topolog-

ical superconductivity, i.e. a ferromagnetic spin-lattice which realizes Shiba bands that are

overlapping with EF and very likely have a considerable spin-orbit interaction.55 However, as

shown in previous publications on 1D systems, the formation of topological edge modes can

be hindered by the interaction of multiple Shiba bands originating from the five 3d orbitals

of the Fe lattice.56,57 Additionally, in the reconstructed ML system investigated here, we

have experimentally proven a substantial disorder in the Shiba bands which can have both,

a potential and a magnetic origin. As outlined in the introduction, excluding very specific

and rare values of the chemical potential or specific types of disorder,17,35,38 the strong disor-

der on the order of the pairing energy present in the investigated lattices would destroy any

topological gap as well as topological edge modes.33,35,36 We, therefore, conclude that besides

a specific design of the multi-orbital Shiba bands in ferromagnetic layers in direct contact to

elemental superconductors,23 a pseudomorphic growth with the least amount of disorder is

probably best suited for the design of two-dimensional topological superconductivity and the

related Majorana edge modes. This yet adds another constraint and further narrows down

12


the number of experimental systems which are suitable for the realization of this intriguing

quantum state.

Methods

All measurements were obtained in two low-temperature ultra-high vacuum STM facilities,

one is a home-built system operating at 6.5 K,58 and the other is a commercially available

system with home-built UHV chambers operating at 4.5 K.59 The Nb(110) crystal was

cleaned by several cycles of Ar+ sputtering and high-temperature annealing using an electron

beam heater at a power of at least 510 W (see Supplementary Note 1), following the recipe

described by Odobesko et al.43 Immediately after the cleaning, 0.52 ML Fe was deposited

in-situ from an e-beam evaporator at a rate of about one ML per minute onto the Nb(110)

substrate held at room temperature (RT). STM-images were taken at constant tunnel current

I with a bias voltage V applied to the sample, for which the corresponding values are

given in the figure captions. dI/dV point spectra were obtained by stabilizing the tip at a

given point above the surface at stabilization current Istab = 500 pA and bias Vstab = 1 V,

switching off the feedback loop, and recording the differential tunneling conductance as a

function of sample bias V using standard Lock-In technique where the modulation voltage

Vmod = 10 mV of frequency f = 1.197 kHz is added to the bias voltage. Spectroscopic line

profiles and spectroscopic fields were taken by recording point spectra on one- and two-

dimensional grids, respectively, over the surface. In contrast, dI/dV maps were recorded in

constant-current mode in parallel to usual STM-images.

For the atomically resolved STM-images (Figure 1, T = 6.5 K) an electrochemically etched

tungsten tip was used. For the SP-STS measurements (Figure 2, T = 4.5 K), a mechanically

sharpened Nb bulk tip was gently dipped into an Fe island in order to obtain a spin-polarized

tip. After dipping, point spectroscopy on Nb(110) was performed to check for the presence of

sub-gap states within the tip’s superconducting gap, which indicate that magnetic material

13


has been successfully transferred to the tip.60–62 To emphasize the spin-resolved contrast,

which is not easily seen in the individual dI/dV maps (dI/dV )
Bz1
ij
or (dI/dV )
Bz2
ij
taken at

various magnetic fields Bz1 and Bz2, respectively, spin asymmetry maps were calculated by

asymij = (dI/dV )
Bz1
ij
− (dI/dV )
Bz2
ij

(dI/dV )
Bz1
ij
+ (dI/dV )
Bz2
ij
.
(1)

Furthermore, for the plot of the hysteresis loops in Fig 2 e, dI/dV maps were taken for

different out-of-plane applied magnetic fields varied in a loop sequence, as indicated. The

dI/dV values were normalized and averaged over a selected area of the different Fe island

types and then plotted versus the external Bz values. All other spin-averaged measurements

(Figures 3 and 4, T = 4.5 K) were performed with a pure Nb bulk tip, which increases the

energy resolution at elevated temperatures beyond the Fermi-Dirac limit.63,64 Therefore, the

corresponding dI/dV values reflecting features in the sample LDOS are shifted by the energy

of the tip gap ∆t. The latter can be determined for each tip by taking a point spectrum on

the substrate, see Figure 3d. The peaks of largest intensity appear at e · V = ±(∆s − ∆t) =

± 0.38 meV and ±(∆s + ∆t) = ± 2.38 meV. Thereby, we get the corresponding energy gaps

of ∆t = 1.00 meV and ∆s = 1.38 meV (at T = 4.5 K).

Acknowledgement

We thank Elena Y. Vedmedenko, Maciej Bazarnik, Eric Mascot as well as Roberto Lo

Conte for fruitful discussions. J.J.G. and R.W. gratefully acknowledge funding by the Eu-

ropean Union via the ERC Advanced Grant ADMIRE (No. 786020). L.S., D.W., J.W.

and R.W. acknowledge funding by the Cluster of Excellence ‘Advanced Imaging of Matter’

(EXC 2056—project ID 390715994) of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). K.T.T.,

Y.M., J.W. and R.W. acknowledge funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG,

German Research Foundation) – SFB-925 – project 170620586.

14


References

(1) Qi, X.-L.; Hughes, T. L.; Zhang, S.-C. Chiral topological superconductor from the

quantum Hall state. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 82, 184516.

(2) Kitaev, A. Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons. Annals of Physics 2003,

303, 2–30.

(3) Röntynen, J.; Ojanen, T. Topological Superconductivity and High Chern Numbers in

2D Ferromagnetic Shiba Lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 236803.

(4) Röntynen, J.; Ojanen, T. Chern mosaic: Topology of chiral superconductivity on fer-

romagnetic adatom lattices. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 93, 094521.

(5) Li, J.; Neupert, T.; Wang, Z.; Macdonald, A. H.; Yazdani, A.; Bernevig, B. A. Two-

dimensional chiral topological superconductivity in Shiba lattices. Nature Communica-

tions 2016, 7, 1–7.

(6) Rachel, S.; Mascot, E.; Cocklin, S.; Vojta, M.; Morr, D. K. Quantized charge transport

in chiral Majorana edge modes. Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96, 205131.

(7) Zlotnikov, A. O.; Shustin, M. S.; Fedoseev, A. D. Aspects of Topological Superconduc-

tivity in 2D Systems: Noncollinear Magnetism, Skyrmions, and Higher-order Topology.

Journal of Superconductivity and Novel Magnetism 2021, 34, 3053–3088.

(8) Nakosai, S.; Tanaka, Y.; Nagaosa, N. Two-dimensional p-wave superconducting states

with magnetic moments on a conventional s-wave superconductor. Phys. Rev. B 2013,

88, 180503.

(9) Chen, W.; Schnyder, A. P. Majorana edge states in superconductor-noncollinear magnet

interfaces. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92, 214502.

(10) Pershoguba, S. S.; Nakosai, S.; Balatsky, A. V. Skyrmion-induced bound states in a

superconductor. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 94, 064513.

15


(11) Yang, G.; Stano, P.; Klinovaja, J.; Loss, D. Majorana bound states in magnetic

skyrmions. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 93, 224505.

(12) Mohanta, N.; Okamoto, S.; Dagotto, E. Skyrmion control of Majorana states in planar

Josephson junctions. Communications Physics 2021, 4, 163.

(13) Mascot, E.; Bedow, J.; Graham, M.; Rachel, S.; Morr, D. K. Topological superconduc-

tivity in skyrmion lattices. npj Quantum Materials 2021, 6, 6.

(14) Garnier, M.; Mesaros, A.; Simon, P. Topological superconductivity with deformable

magnetic skyrmions. Communications Physics 2019, 2, 126.

(15) Palacio-Morales, A.; Mascot, E.; Cocklin, S.; Kim, H.; Rachel, S.; Morr, D. K.; Wiesen-

danger, R. Atomic-scale interface engineering of Majorana edge modes in a 2D magnet-

superconductor hybrid system. Science Advances 2019, 5, eaav6600.

(16) Kezilebieke, S.; Huda, M. N.; Vaňo, V.; Aapro, M.; Ganguli, S. C.; Silveira, O. J.;

Głodzik, S.; Foster, A. S.; Ojanen, T.; Liljeroth, P. Topological superconductivity in a

van der Waals heterostructure. Nature 2020, 588, 424–428.

(17) Kezilebieke, S.; Vaňo, V.; Huda, M. N.; Aapro, M.; Ganguli, S. C.; Liljeroth, P.;

Lado, J. L. Moiré-Enabled Topological Superconductivity. Nano Letters 2022, 22, 328–

333, PMID: 34978831.

(18) Ménard, G. C.; Guissart, S.; Brun, C.; Leriche, R. T.; Trif, M.; Debontridder, F.;

Demaille, D.; Roditchev, D.; Simon, P.; Cren, T. Two-dimensional topological super-

conductivity in Pb/Co/Si(111). Nature Communications 2017, 8, 2040.

(19) Ménard, G. C.; Mesaros, A.; Brun, C.; Debontridder, F.; Roditchev, D.; Simon, P.;

Cren, T. Isolated pairs of Majorana zero modes in a disordered superconducting lead

monolayer. Nature Communications 2019, 10, 2587.

16


(20) Mougel, L.; Buhl, P. M.; Li, Q.; Müller, A.; Yang, H.-H.; Verstraete, M.; Simon, P.;

Dupé, B.; Wulfhekel, W. The role of band matching in the proximity effect between a

superconductor and a normal metal. arXiv:2203.01393 2022,

(21) Lo Conte, R.; Bazarnik, M.; Palotás, K.; Rózsa, L.; Szunyogh, L.; Kubetzka, A.; von

Bergmann, K.; Wiesendanger, R. Coexistence of Antiferromagnetism and Supercon-

ductivity in Mn/Nb(110). Phys. Rev. B 2022, 105, L100406.

(22) Wang, Z.; Rodriguez, J. O.; Jiao, L.; Howard, S.; Graham, M.; Gu, G. D.; Hughes, T. L.;

Morr, D. K.; Madhavan, V. Evidence for dispersing 1D Majorana channels in an iron-

based superconductor. Science 2020, 367, 104–108.

(23) Schneider, L.; Beck, P.; Neuhaus-Steinmetz, J.; Rózsa, L.; Posske, T.; Wiebe, J.;

Wiesendanger, R. Precursors of Majorana modes and their length-dependent energy

oscillations probed at both ends of atomic Shiba chains. Nature Nanotechnology 2022,

17, 384–389.

(24) Küster, F.; Brinker, S.; Lounis, S.; Parkin, S. S. P.; Sessi, P. Long range and highly tun-

able interaction between local spins coupled to a superconducting condensate. Nature

Communications 2021, 12, 6722.

(25) Mascot, E.; Cocklin, S.; Rachel, S.; Morr, D. K. Dimensional tuning of Majorana

fermions and real space counting of the Chern number. Phys. Rev. B 2019, 100, 184510.

(26) Buzdin, A. I. Proximity effects in superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures. Rev.

Mod. Phys. 2005, 77, 935–976.

(27) Bergeret, F. S.; Volkov, A. F.; Efetov, K. B. Odd triplet superconductivity and related

phenomena in superconductor-ferromagnet structures. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2005, 77, 1321–

1373.

17


(28) Linder, J.; Yokoyama, T.; Sudbø, A. Theory of superconducting and magnetic proximity

effect in S/F structures with inhomogeneous magnetization textures and spin-active

interfaces. Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 054523.

(29) Mühge, T.;
Theis-Bröhl, K.;
Westerholt, K.;
Zabel, H.;
Garif’yanov, N. N.;

Goryunov, Y. V.; Garifullin, I. A.; Khaliullin, G. G. Influence of magnetism on su-

perconductivity in epitaxial Fe/Nb bilayer systems. Phys. Rev. B 1998, 57, 5071–5074.

(30) Mühge, T.; Goryunov, Y. V.; Theis-Bröhl, K.; Westerholt, K.; Zabel, H.; Gari-

fullin, I. A. Proximity effect in superconductor/ferromagnet layered system: Influence of

superconductivity on magnetic properties of Nb/Fe epitaxial bilayers. Applied Magnetic

Resonance 1998, 14, 567–582.

(31) Kim, Y.; Cheng, M.; Bauer, B.; Lutchyn, R. M.; Das Sarma, S. Helical order in one-

dimensional magnetic atom chains and possible emergence of Majorana bound states.

Phys. Rev. B 2014, 90, 060401.

(32) Hui, H.-Y.; Sau, J. D.; Das Sarma, S. Bulk disorder in the superconductor affects

proximity-induced topological superconductivity. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92, 174512.

(33) Westström, A.; Pöyhönen, K.; Ojanen, T. Topological superconductivity and anti-Shiba

states in disordered chains of magnetic adatoms. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 94, 104519.

(34) Awoga, O. A.; Björnson, K.; Black-Schaffer, A. M. Disorder robustness and protection

of Majorana bound states in ferromagnetic chains on conventional superconductors.

Phys. Rev. B 2017, 95, 184511.

(35) Mascot, E.; Agrahar, C.; Rachel, S.; Morr, D. K. Stability of disordered topological

superconducting phases in magnet-superconductor hybrid systems. Phys. Rev. B 2019,

100, 235102.

18


(36) Lu, Y.; Virtanen, P.; Heikkilä, T. T. Effect of disorder on Majorana localization in topo-

logical superconductors: A quasiclassical approach. Phys. Rev. B 2020, 102, 224510.

(37) Christian, C.; Dumitrescu, E. F.; Halász, G. B. Robustness of vortex-bound Majorana

zero modes against correlated disorder. Phys. Rev. B 2021, 104, L020505.

(38) Pöyhönen, K.; Sahlberg, I.; Westström, A.; Ojanen, T. Amorphous topological super-

conductivity in a Shiba glass. Nature Communications 2018, 9, 2103.

(39) Kamlapure, A.; Cornils, L.; Wiebe, J.; Wiesendanger, R. Engineering the spin couplings

in atomically crafted spin chains on an elemental superconductor. Nature Communica-

tions 2018, 9, 3253.

(40) Liebhaber, E.; Rütten, L. M.; Reecht, G.; Steiner, J. F.; Rohlf, S.; Rossnagel, K.; von

Oppen, F.; Franke, K. J. Quantum spins and hybridization in artificially-constructed

chains of magnetic adatoms on a superconductor. Nature Communications 2021, 13,

2160.

(41) Mougin, A.; Andrieu, S.; Dufour, C.; Dumesnil, K. Epitaxial growth of Fe on Nb(110).

Surface Science 2002, 518, 175–182.

(42) Wolf, C.; Köhler, U. Growth and intermixing of Nb on Fe(110) and Fe on Nb(110).

Thin Solid Films 2006, 500, 347–355.

(43) Odobesko, A. B.; Haldar, S.; Wilfert, S.; Hagen, J.; Jung, J.; Schmidt, N.; Sessi, P.;

Vogt, M.; Heinze, S.; Bode, M. Preparation and electronic properties of clean super-

conducting Nb(110) surfaces. Phys. Rev. B 2019, 99, 115437.

(44) Wiebe, J.; Zhou, L.; Wiesendanger, R. Atomic magnetism revealed by spin-resolved

scanning tunnelling spectroscopy. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 2011, 44,

464009.

19


(45) Bode, M.; Heide, M.; von Bergmann, K.; Ferriani, P.; Heinze, S.; Bihlmayer, G.; Ku-

betzka, A.; Pietzsch, O.; Blügel, S.; Wiesendanger, R. Chiral magnetic order at surfaces

driven by inversion asymmetry. Nature 2007, 447, 190–193.

(46) Zhou, L.; Meier, F.; Wiebe, J.; Wiesendanger, R. Inversion of spin polarization above

individual magnetic adatoms. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 82, 012409.

(47) Doi, K.; Minamitani, E.; Yamamoto, S.; Arafune, R.; Yoshida, Y.; Watanabe, S.;

Hasegawa, Y. Electronic and magnetic effects of a stacking fault in cobalt nanoscale

islands on the Ag(111) surface. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92, 064421.

(48) Hagemeister, J.; Iaia, D.; Vedmedenko, E. Y.; von Bergmann, K.; Kubetzka, A.;

Wiesendanger, R. Skyrmions at the Edge: Confinement Effects in Fe/Ir(111). Phys.

Rev. Lett. 2016, 117, 207202.

(49) Hagemeister,
J.
MONTECRYSTAL.
https://github.com/JHagemeister/

MonteCrystal, accessed 2020-01-12.

(50) Schneider, L.; Steinbrecher, M.; Rózsa, L.; Bouaziz, J.; Palotás, K.; dos Santos Dias, M.;

Lounis, S.; Wiebe, J.; Wiesendanger, R. Magnetism and in-gap states of 3d transition

metal atoms on superconducting Re. npj Quantum Materials 2019, 4, 42.

(51) Odobesko, A.; Di Sante, D.; Kowalski, A.; Wilfert, S.; Friedrich, F.; Thomale, R.;

Sangiovanni, G.; Bode, M. Observation of tunable single-atom Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states.

Physical Review B 2020, 102, 174504.

(52) Friedrich, F.; Boshuis, R.; Bode, M.; Odobesko, A. Coupling of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states

in one-dimensional chains of Fe atoms on Nb(110). Phys. Rev. B 2021, 103, 235437.

(53) Liebhaber, E.; Acero González, S.; Baba, R.; Reecht, G.; Heinrich, B. W.; Rohlf, S.;

Rossnagel, K.; von Oppen, F.; Franke, K. J. Yu–Shiba–Rusinov States in the Charge-

20


Density Modulated Superconductor NbSe2. Nano Letters 2020, 20, 339–344, PMID:

31842547.

(54) Küster, F.; Montero, A. M.; Guimarães, F. S. M.; Brinker, S.; Lounis, S.; Parkin, S.

S. P.; Sessi, P. Correlating Josephson supercurrents and Shiba states in quantum spins

unconventionally coupled to superconductors. Nature Communications 2021, 12, 1108.

(55) Beck, P.; Schneider, L.; Rózsa, L.; Palotás, K.; Lászlóffy, A.; Szunyogh, L.; Wiebe, J.;

Wiesendanger, R. Spin-orbit coupling induced splitting of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states in

antiferromagnetic dimers. Nature Communications 2021, 12, 2040.

(56) Schneider, L.; Beck, P.; Posske, T.; Crawford, D.; Mascot, E.; Rachel, S.; Wiesendan-

ger, R.; Wiebe, J. Topological Shiba bands in artificial spin chains on superconductors.

Nature Physics 2021, 17, 943–948.

(57) Küster, F.; Brinker, S.; Hess, R.; Loss, D.; Parkin, S.; Klinovaja, J.; Lounis, S.; Sessi, P.

Non-Majorana modes in diluted spin chains proximitized to a superconductor. 2021;

https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.05708.

(58) Wittneven, C.; Dombrowski, R.; Pan, S. H.; Wiesendanger, R. A low-temperature

ultrahigh-vacuum scanning tunneling microscope with rotatable magnetic field. Review

of Scientific Instruments 1997, 68, 3806–3810.

(59) Löptien, P.; Zhou, L.; Khajetoorians, A. A.; Wiebe, J.; Wiesendanger, R. Superconduc-

tivity of lanthanum revisited: enhanced critical temperature in the clean limit. Journal

of Physics: Condensed Matter 2014, 26, 425703.

(60) Huang, H.; Padurariu, C.; Senkpiel, J.; Drost, R.; Yeyati, A. L.; Cuevas, J. C.;

Kubala, B.; Ankerhold, J.; Kern, K.; Ast, C. R. Tunnelling dynamics between su-

perconducting bound states at the atomic limit. Nature Physics 2020, 16, 1227–1231.

21


(61) Schneider, L.; Beck, P.; Wiebe, J.; Wiesendanger, R. Atomic-scale spin-polarization

maps using functionalized superconducting probes. Science Advances
2021,
7,

eabd7302.

(62) Huang, H.; Senkpiel, J.; Padurariu, C.; Drost, R.; Villas, A.; Klees, R. L.; Yeyati, A. L.;

Cuevas, J. C.; Kubala, B.; Ankerhold, J.; Kern, K.; Ast, C. R. Spin-dependent tun-

neling between individual superconducting bound states. Phys. Rev. Research 2021, 3,

L032008.

(63) Pan, S. H.; Hudson, E. W.; Davis, J. C. Vacuum tunneling of superconducting quasi-

particles from atomically sharp scanning tunneling microscope tips. Applied Physics

Letters 1998, 73, 2992–2994.

(64) Ruby, M.; Heinrich, B. W.; Pascual, J. I.; Franke, K. J. Experimental Demonstration of

a Two-Band Superconducting State for Lead Using Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy.

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 157001.

22


Figure 1: (a) STM image of ML Fe islands having the three distinct reconstructions I, II,
III (V = −10 mV, I = 4 nA, T = 6.5 K). Furthermore, a DL Fe island can be identified
as a bright stripe. (b)-(e) Atomically resolved STM images of (b) the Nb(110) substrate
and (c-e) of the individual Fe ML reconstructions (T = 6.5 K; b: V = −10 mV, I = 5 nA;
c: V = −10 mV, I = 5 nA; d: V = −10 mV, I = 7 nA; e: V = −5 mV, I = 100 nA). (f)
Point spectra taken on the substrate and the respective Fe ML reconstructions as indicated.
Vertical blue dashed lines mark the Nb(110) surface state at negative bias and a state of the
Fe ML at positive bias (Vstab = 1 V, Vmod = 10 mV, Istab = 0.5 nA, T = 4.5 K).

23


Figure 2: (a)-(c) Spin asymmetry maps (Bz1 = −0.5 T, Bz2 = +0.5 T) of the different types
of Fe ML reconstructions shown in the STM-image in (d) taken with the same spin-polarized
STM tip (I = 1 nA, Vmod = 50 mV, V = 400 mV (a), V = 320 mV (b), V = 375 mV (c)).
The outline of the individual islands is marked using dashed lines with a color according to
the code. (e) Hysteresis loops of the same three islands, calculated from spin-resolved dI/dV
values at the indicated bias voltages averaged over selected areas of each of the different Fe
ML reconstructions. (f) Exemplary sketch of the determined magnetizations of the tip and
type I Fe ML island for different parts of the hysteresis loop as indicated by the according
numbers in (e). Note, that the magnetic field dependence of the tip magnetization is the
same for all three hysteresis loops.

24


Figure 3: (a)-(c) Left panels are STM-images of three Fe ML islands of each type of recon-
struction as indicated (I = 1 nA, V = −6 mV, T = 4.5 K). Right panels are spectroscopic
line profiles across each of the island types along the lines in the direction of the arrows
(Istab = 400 pA, Vmod = 0.1 mV, Vstab = 4 mV). The white dots on the arrows in the STM-
images correspond to the positions where the spectra inbetween the white vertical lines of
the spectroscopic line profiles have been taken. (d) Right panel: Spectra averaged ontop
of the three islands from the spectroscopic line profiles in (a) to (c). Left panel: Spectrum
averaged on an area of the bare Nb(110) surface. Gray or black dashed horizontal lines in
the spectra are at e · V = ±(∆t − ∆s), e · V = ±∆t and e · V = ±(∆t + ∆s).

25


Figure 4: (a) Overview STM image of an area with several Fe ML islands of all three types
including some of the islands investigated in Figure 2a-d. (b) Fermi energy and (c) Nb(110)
coherence peak spectral weights, respectively, taken from spectroscopic grids over the same
area recorded by following the tip height from (a) but with e · V = 1 meV = ∆t (b) and
e · V = 2.5 meV = ∆t + ∆s (c). (d) Line profiles of the height (top panel) and Nb(110)
coherence peak spectral weight (bottom) taken along identical lines across the type I island
shown in (a) and (c), respectively. (I = 200 pA, V = 6 mV, Vmod = 0.1 mV (a); V = 1.13 mV,
Vmod = 0.1 mV (b); V = 2.5 mV, Vmod = 0.1 mV (c)).

26


