Efficient, High-purity, Robust Sound Frequency Conversion 

with a Linear Metasurface

Chengbo Hu1*, Wei Wang1*, Jincheng Ni2*, Yujiang Ding1, Jingkai Weng1, Bin Liang1†, 

Cheng-Wei Qiu2† and Jianchun Cheng1†

1Key Laboratory of Modern Acoustics, MOE, Institute of Acoustics, Department of 

Physics, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 

University, Nanjing 210093, P. R. China

2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of 

Singapore, 117583 Singapore, Singapore.

KEYWORDS: rotational Doppler effect, high-efficiency frequency conversion, 

acoustic metasurface, acoustic orbital angular momentum and wavefront robustness.

*These three authors contributed equally to this work.

†To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: liangbin@nju.edu.cn (B. L.), 

chengwei.qiu@nus.edu.sg (C. Q.), or jccheng@nju.edu.cn (J. C.).


Abstract
The intrinsic limitation of the material nonlinearity inevitably results in the poor mode 
purity, conversion efficiency and real-time reconfigurability of the generated harmonic 
waves, both in optics and acoustics. Rotational Doppler effect provides us an intuitive 
paradigm to shifting the frequency in a linear system, which needs to be facilitated by 
a spiraling phase change upon the wave propagation. Here we numerically and 
experimentally present a rotating linear vortex metasurface and achieve close-to-unity
mode purity (above 95%) and conversion efficiency (above 65%) in audible sound 
frequency as low as 3000 Hz. The topological charge of the transmitted sound is almost 
immune from the rotational speed and transmissivity, demonstrating the mechanical 
robustness and stability in adjusting the high-performance frequency conversion in situ. 
These features enable us to cascade multiple vortex metasurfaces to further enlarge and 
diversify the extent of sound frequency conversion, which are experimentally verified. 
Our strategy takes a step further towards the freewheeling sound manipulation at 
acoustic frequency domain, and may have far-researching impacts in various acoustic 
communications, signal processing, and contactless detection.

Significance
Frequency conversion is of fundamental interest in wave physics and practical 
significance for diverse applications. However, high-efficiency conversion of low-
frequency waves cannot be achieved with the current mechanisms based on nonlinear 
medium or up/down-conversion materials. Here, we theoretically propose and 
experimentally demonstrate a mechanism that bypasses these limitations with a rotating 
metasurface. In particular, the resulting frequency-conversion device high-efficiently 
and precisely converts the incident wave of arbitrary wavefront into the desired acoustic 
vortex mode and enables device cascading to further amplification of frequency shift.  
Our strategy with unprecedented advantages of close-to-unity mode purity, high 
conversion efficiency, wavefront robustness and cascadability opens a route to 
freewheeling sound manipulation at frequency domain, with important applications in 
acoustics and many related fields.

Introduction
Frequency conversion is of fundamental interest in wave physics and conventionally 
realized by utilizing nonlinear, up/down-conversion materials in optics. The most 
intuitive way of frequency conversion for light is to use the nonlinear process in a strong 
laser electric field, in which the energy of fundamental wave will be partially converted 
to high-order harmonic waves (1). By Stokes/anti-Stokes process, photon down/up-
conversion materials can emit a lower/higher energy photon than the absorbed photons
(2, 3). Despite a rapid progress in the research field, wide applications of frequency 
conversion in optics are strongly limited because of their overall low efficiencies. In 
acoustics, inhomogeneity of medium such as pulsating bubbles can significantly 
enhance the equivalent nonlinearity parameter (4, 5). However, the intrinsic 
dependence of frequency and driving amplitude limits the efficiency of nonlinear 
frequency conversion and makes it impossible to produce only one harmonic wave for 


low-frequency and weak-amplitude sound. In linear regime, frequency conversion can 
also be observed on the basis of Doppler effect, which stems from the relative motion 
of wave source and receiver. This can be classified into two categories: 1) the 
translational Doppler effect which is caused by the translational motion of receiver or 
wave source and is extensively used for detecting an object’s moving velocity with light 
or acoustic wave (such as in speed detection), and 2) the rotational Doppler effect which 
happens when there is relative rotational motion of spiral wave front and receiver and 
leads to frequency shift that can be used to detect the rotation speed of objects. For 
electromagnetic waves, it was reported that the rotational Doppler effect arises from 
the photonic orbital angular momentum (OAM) by vortex beams (6). The vortex beams 
have a helical phase structure of exp(𝑖𝑙𝜙) proportional to the azimuthal angle 𝜙 with 
an unbounded integer 𝑙 referring to the topological charge (7-13). The OAM of light 
has grown into a significant research field, giving rise to many developments in optical 
sensing, micromanipulation, micro/nanofabrication, imaging and microscopy, and 
optical communications (14-18). In particular, vortex generator with tunable 
topological charges is a critical step in the realization of OAM modulation and 
multiplexing both in optical and acoustic communications (19-21). Generally, the 
vortex generators are designed for specific frequencies, implying that phase distortion 
or mode crosstalk would be inevitable after the operating frequency is finely altered. 
On the other hand, the OAM-frequency division multiplexing for multidimensional 
high-capacity information processing requires stable OAM modes at different 
frequencies, which is not yet accessible by static devices. The rotational Doppler 
frequency shift for photonic OAM can be given as Δω = 𝑙Ω in the scheme with the 
vortex beam detected by a transducer rotating around the beam axis (22-31). Also, the 
backscattering of light carrying OAM on a rough rotating surface has been shown to 
undergo a rotational Doppler frequency shift (31).

Due to the longitudinal nature of acoustic waves lacking spin angular momentum,
airborne sound carrying OAM can be generated by using active and passive devices (7, 
32, 33). In particular, the rotational Doppler frequency shift of sound has been observed 
acoustically, but needs an incident acoustic vortex beam and a spinning detector which 
would be difficult to implement in practice (34). To date, a high-efficiency and high-
purity frequency conversion of low-frequency sound in static medium still remains 
challenging.

In the present work, we theoretically propose and experimentally demonstrate a 
mechanism for overcoming the above limitations by a rotation system and a high-
transmittance acoustic metasurface that can load transmitted acoustic waves with an 
additional OAM. The phase-adjustable and high-transmittance units are periodically 
arranged along the azimuthal direction, forming a spiral phase distribution on the 
transmission surface with 𝑙 -order OAM with the plane wave incident at working 
frequency 𝑓0. A rotation system drives the metasurface to rotate steadily around the 
axis of symmetry at an angular velocity of Ω. In this case, the phase distribution on the 
transmission surface leads to the rotational Doppler effect and the transmitted wave can 


be converted to a new frequency expressed as 𝑓0 + 𝑙Ω/2π . Meanwhile, the high 
transmittance of the metasurface maintains in the rotation and keeps the conversion 
effective. We also demonstrate the robustness of the incident wavefront experimentally, 
meaning that high efficiency and frequency shift can be maintained regardless of the 
incident wavefront. This enables cascading of the frequency convertor for further 
enhancing the frequency shifts, which is also verified experimentally on frequency 
conversion and efficiency.

Results
Figure 1A and B illustrates a schematic of the frequency convertor based on the 
rotational Doppler effect. By a plane wave incidence at the working frequency, a 
transmitted acoustic vortex beam with an azimuthal phase distribution expressed as 𝑙𝜙
can be produced by the metasurface with a specific topological charge 𝑙 . The 
metasurface can twist the sound plane wave into a helical wavefront by adding phase 
factor of 𝑒𝑖𝑙𝜙, only changing the orientation of sound wavevector (Fig. 1A). Note that 
the frequency of the generated acoustic vortex is equal to the fundamental frequency. 
When we rotate the metasurface at a frequency Ω , the helical wavefront is further 
twisted or released with a phase factor of 𝑒𝑖𝑙Ω𝑡 in the original propagating distance 
(Fig. 1B). In this scenario, both the orientation and magnitude of sound wavevectors 
are changed, implying an acoustic frequency shift of Δ𝑓 = 𝑙Ω/2π . For a clear 
description, a rest frame is defined as (𝑟, 𝜙, 𝑧) in cylindrical coordinate, where 𝑟,𝜙
are the radial and azimuthal direction of the metasurface, and 𝑧 is identical to the 
incident direction of the acoustic wave, as shown in Fig. 1C. When relative motion 
between the acoustic wave and the metasurface appears in the azimuthal direction, the 
additional phase shift (𝑙𝜙) carried by the metasurface can generate the frequency shift
(𝑙Ω/2π ) of the transmitted sound wave through the rotation of the metasurface. 
Assuming that a plane wave is incident vertically on a rotating metasurface, the 
azimuthal phase distribution of the transmitted wave can be described as 𝑙𝜙′ in the 
rotational frame. Here the rotational frame referenced to the rest frame is described as
(𝑟′, 𝜙′, 𝑧′) in cylindrical coordinates, where 𝑟′ = 𝑟 ,𝜙′ = 𝜙 − 𝛺𝑡  and 𝑧′ = 𝑧 . The 
plane wave can be expressed as 𝑝𝑖 = 𝑒𝑖(𝜔𝑡−𝑘𝑧𝑧) and 𝑝𝑖′ = 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝜔𝑡−𝑘𝑧′𝑧′) in the rest
and the rotational frame, respectively, where 𝐴 is the amplitude of the plane wave. 
Considering the high transmittance of the metasurface, we adopt an ideal situation 
without scattering and loss that the transfer function of the metasurface can be 
expressed as 𝑒−𝑖𝑘𝑧𝑑𝑒𝑖𝑙𝜙, where 𝑑 is the thickness of the metasurface. The expression 
of the transmitted wave in the rotational frame can be derived as: 

𝑝𝑡′|𝑧′=𝑑 = 𝑝𝑖′|𝑧′=0𝑒−𝑖𝑘𝑧′𝑑𝑒𝑖𝑙𝜙′ = 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝜔𝑡−𝑘𝑧𝑑)𝑒𝑖𝑙𝜙′
(1)

where 𝑧′ = 0 and 𝑧′ = 𝑑 are the incident and transmission planes of the metasurface 

respectively. The transmitted wave in the rest frame can be expressed as: 

𝑝𝑡|𝑧=𝑑 = 𝑝𝑡′|𝑧′=𝑑 = 𝐴𝑒𝑖(𝜔−𝑙Ω)𝑡𝑒𝑖(𝑙𝜙−𝑘𝑧𝑑)
(2)

Hence, one readily derives the frequency of transmitted wave probed by a static 

microphone behind the rotating metasurface can be derived as 𝑓′ =

𝜔−𝑙Ω

2π , and a high 


efficiency frequency convertor can be obtained by a metasurface with a high 
transmittance. From Eqs. (1) and (2) one observes that the amplitude 𝐴 is independent 
of the frequency conversion, which implies the robustness of our mechanism to the 
incident wavefront as will be verified later.

Series numerical simulations have been carried out to demonstrate the performance of 
the designed Doppler frequency convertor. Figure 2 demonstrates the simulated Fourier 
spectra of the transmitted wave behind 2 and 3-order metasurface with different rotating 
rates, respectively. The working frequency of the 2nd and 3rd -order metasurface are 
3000 and 3100Hz, respectively. The Fourier spectra of the transmitted acoustic waves 
show that the numerical results are in good agreement with the theoretical prediction.
With the increase and decrease of rotation rates, the frequency of the transmitted waves
will shift according to 𝑓0 + 𝑙Ω/2π , which also agrees well with the experimental 
results in Fig. 1D. The amplitude of the main peaks in all spectra is similar to that of 
static case (Ω = 0), which shows that a high-efficiency conversion of the frequency can 
be easily achieved by a rotating metasurface that can produce a specific order acoustic 
vortex. Insets in Figures 2A and B demonstrate the amplitude and phase distribution of 
the transmitted acoustic waves at the cross-section 5.7 cm behind the metasurface with 
the rotational frequency equal to 0 Hz and 50 Hz, respectively. In the transmitted waves, 
only a small part of the acoustic energy remains in the fundamental component, and 
most of energy is converted into the harmonic component. The ratios of harmonic-
component intensity in transmitted wave to the total intensity of incident wave and 
transmitted wave are defined as the efficiency and purity of frequency conversion, 
respectively, which is above 65% and 95% in numerical simulation. Noting that the 
topological charge of the harmonic component in the transmitted wave is the same as 
that of the metasurface and will not be affected by the rotating speed, but the 
fundamental component still maintains the original topological charge of the incident 
wave. This means that only acoustic waves with additional phase modulation from 
metasurface could result in frequency conversion.

Next, we performed experiments to verify the results of the theoretical prediction and 
numerical simulations. Figure 3A demonstrates the experimental setup for frequency 
conversion produced by an acoustic metasurface with different topological charge 𝑙
and rotational frequency Ω/2π. Also, a measured phase distribution (Fig. 1D) at the 
cut-plane perpendicular to the axial direction 20 cm behind the metasurface illustrates 
an acoustic vortex (𝑙 = 2) with 60 Hz frequency shift. These all agree well with the 
results from the numerical simulation except for slight reduction in the efficiency of the 
frequency conversion which results from the influence of the scattered wave produced 
by the bearing bracket and other essential parts in the rotating transmission system, and 
indicate that the rotation of the metasurface does not destroy the vortex wavefront that 
the metasurface should have produced in static media. Also, the fundamental frequency 
component in the transmitted waves mainly results from the leakage of the fundamental 
waves caused by the slit between the waveguide and the rotating metasurface.
Nevertheless, according to the numerical simulations, above 95% purity can be 


achieved in the frequency convertor, which indicates that the conversion efficiency can 
be nearly perfect in our ideal model given the metasurface only changes the propagation 
phase while keeping a near-unity transmission efficiency. The measured efficiency is 
slightly lower than simulation due to the imperfect impedance match between air and 
the experimental samples and the scattering from the necessary fixing and transmission 
accessories.

Figures 3B and C demonstrate the Fourier spectra of the transmitted wave behind 2nd

and 3rd order metasurfaces with different rotating rates, respectively. The working 
frequencies of the 2nd and 3rd order metasurfaces are 3000 Hz and 2900 Hz, respectively. 
The Fourier spectra of the transmitted acoustic waves show that the theoretical 
prediction is in good agreement with the experimental results. In complete agreement 
with the results of the numerical simulations, the amplitude of the main peaks in all 
spectra is similar to that of static case (Ω = 0), which indicates that the experimental 
samples made from photopolymer can easily maintain high-purity and high-efficiency
frequency conversion through rotating mechanisms. The peaks referring to fundamental
frequency with small amplitude remain on the spectrum, which indicates that the energy 
of the fundamental waves almost completely converts to a new frequency through a 
simple rotating system. As the theoretical prediction mentioned, the frequency 
conversion is based on perfect spiral phase distribution or OAM mode, so that the 
harmonic component in the transmitted waves has perfect spiral phase distribution of 
OAM, which is verified numerically and experimentally in Figs. 2 and 1D. However, 
the fundamental component cannot obtain OAM from the metasurface and keeps the 
original wave front without spiral phase distribution, as shown in the insets of Fig. 2. 
Furthermore, owing to the additional spiral phase distribution of 𝑒𝑖𝑙𝜙 and efficiency 
of the frequency conversion, the convertor is potential to serve as a frequency-tunable 
OAM generator and more versatile wave manipulation, such as frequency modulator.

This efficient frequency convertor also has high robustness to incident wavefront. As a 
representative example, we use obstacles, such as plank, to block half of the frequency 
convertor, in which case the incident wavefront is no longer a plane wave and becomes 
a diffracted wave on the rim of acoustically-rigid plate, as shown in Fig. 4A. Behind 
the metasurface, a perfect acoustic vortex cannot be formed because of the absence of 
the acoustic waves transmitted from half of the blocked area, but the efficient frequency 
shift is still verified experimentally, as shown in Fig. 4B. Also, the frequency convertor 
still works under the incidence of the acoustic vortex waves. A static metasurface is 
utilized to produce specific order acoustic vortex wave, which further radiates on a 
rotating metasurface, as shown in Fig. 4C. The Fourier spectra of the transmitted wave
under different rotating rates shown in Fig. 4D prove the efficient conversion persists 
as we modify the rotating rates which only changes the shift of frequency, indicating 
that an efficient cascade scheme of the frequency convertor can be realized to amplify 
the frequency shift.

Figure 5A explains the mechanism of frequency conversion in such a system consisting 


of two cascading metasurfaces with topological charges chosen as 𝑙1 and 𝑙2
respectively, and what happens when an incident wave passes through these two layers. 
Each metasurface with its respective topological charge and rotating speed will give 
rise to an extra frequency shift 𝛥𝑓𝑖 to the transmitted wave passing through it and the 
frequency of the output beam will be converted into 𝑓0 + ∑ 𝛥𝑓𝑖

𝑁
𝑖
, where 𝑁 = 2 is the 

number of the metasurfaces and 𝛥𝑓𝑖 = Ω𝑖𝑙𝑖/2π with the subscript 𝑖 correspond to the 
sequence the metasurfaces in the cascade scheme. Illuminated by the incident acoustic 
wave with a frequency of 𝑓0 equal to the working frequency of the first metasurface 
𝑙1, the first frequency convertor twists the wave front of the incident plane wave into a 
vortex with topological charge equal to 𝑙1 and converts the frequency of the wave to 
𝑓0 + 𝛥𝑓1 . When the new frequency meets with the working frequency of the next 
metasurface 𝑙2, a further frequency conversion happens with the further frequency shift 
and additional topological charge equal to 𝛥𝑓2 and 𝑙2 . As shown in Fig. 5E, 
theoretical predictions and experimental measurements are in good agreement for 
different frequency manipulations by cascade scheme of the frequency convertor. The 
frequency of the acoustic wave passing through the first frequency convertor can be 
further manipulated in frequency domain. The topological charge and rotational angular 
velocity are tunable, which endows a lot of freedom for frequency manipulation. Figure
5C verifies the efficiency of the cascade scheme with different angular velocities of the 
second metasurface 𝑙2. There is almost no component for fundamental frequency in 
the spectrum of the transmitted waves in Fig. 5C, indicating a high purity conversion 
still maintained in the cascade scheme. Also, all the amplitude of the shifted frequencies 
at different angular velocities are similar that of the static one (Ω2 = 0 rad/𝑠), verifying 
the high efficiency of the cascading scheme. The high efficiency of the cascade scheme
is also illustrated in Fig. 5D despite of the incomplete matching between frequency of 
the incident wave and the working frequency of the next cascade frequency convertor 
resulting from the errors and limitations brought by the transmission system. 

Discussion and Conclusions
In summary, we present here the theoretical, numerical, and experimental work of the 
design of a frequency convertor and its cascade scheme for efficiently converting the 
frequency of the acoustic wave to a new frequency in rest frame. A rotating metasurface 
implementation is presented by a metasurface based on hybrid resonant unit cells in a 
waveguide driven by a servo motor. The designed frequency convertor and its cascade 
scheme are new approaches of manipulation of acoustic waves in frequency domain. 
After passing through the frequency convertor, the frequency of the incident acoustic 
waves can be efficiently converted to a new frequency with a specific additional OAM 
by a frequency shift which depends on the topological charge and the rotational angular 
velocity of the metasurface in the frequency convertor. Owing to the high efficiency, 
this frequency conversion mechanism can extend to a cascade scheme by cascading 
several frequency convertors to achieve a higher or lower frequency than the 
fundamental frequency. The cascade scheme has been verified efficiently by cascading 
two frequency convertors in experiments. In addition to the simple design, high 
efficiency and frequency shift capability, we still need to stress several important 


advantages of our mechanism: (1) It offers the flexibility of freely designing the unit 
cells in the rotating metasurface, given that the desired phase distribution as a 𝑙-order 
acoustic vortex at the transmitted plane can be achieved for the incident plane wave at 
working frequency. This significantly enhances the versatility and application potential 
of the frequency convertor (2) Robustness of the frequency convertor is verified 
experimentally which is important for its application in diverse scenarios with 
unpredictable incident wavefronts. (3) The capability of efficient amplifying the 
frequency shift via a cascade scheme provide a platform for investigating many 
phenomena resulting from rotational Doppler effect, such as reversal of orbital angular 
momentum arising from an extreme Doppler shift. (4) Such a rotating metasurface can 
efficiently generate acoustic vortex beams with stable topological charges at varying 
frequency. The OAM generators with tunable frequency will significantly impact the 
future acoustic communications. (5) The precise correspondence between frequency 
shift and rotating rates enables our design to measure the actual rotating rates of a 
rotating object. (6) Our design can be equivalent to a time-varying metamaterial, 
offering the possibility of finding more extensive applications in noise control, 
biomedical applications and ultrasound control, etc.

Methods
Figures 3A and 5B demonstrate the experimental systems for frequency convertor and 
the cascade scheme. A metasurface made of photopolymer is driven by a servo motor 
via a transmission shaft and tooth synchronous belt. The bearing system fixed to the 
vibration isolation platform is used to ensure smooth rotation of the shaft without axial 
slip. Acoustic waves generated from a compression driver with a horn are incident on 
the rotating metasurface, which is covered by a waveguide to better mimic a plane wave
and avoid the influence of the diffraction of the incident waves. The wedge made of 
sound-absorbing foam is placed at the end of waveguide to eliminate the undesired 
reflection. The radius of the metasurface used in the frequency convertor is 9.15 cm 
which is about 0.8 wavelength of the working frequency. All the metasurfaces are 
fabricated by 3D printing technology and fixed with the shaft through flanges. The 
design of the metasurfaces is demonstrated in Supplementary Materials. There are some 
unavoidable vibrations of the rotating metasurfaces caused by centrifugal action in the 
experiments so that the radius of the waveguide, set as 9.5 cm, needs to be slightly 
larger than that of the metasurfaces. The 0.25-in. Brüel and Kjær type-4961 
microphones were used to measure the sound pressure distribution behind the rotating 
metasurface in the waveguide. An additional microphone of the same type is used as 
the reference microphone in the measurement of the phase distribution of transmitted
waves. Servo motors provide the rotating power for the metasurfaces through the gears
and belts with the speed ratio of 1:1. In order to eliminate the error between the actual 
rotating speed and the number displayed on the servo motor controller, the speed in all 
experiments was calibrated by a tachometer whose error is less than 1/60 Hz.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 


2017YFA0303700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 
11634006, 11704284, 11374157, and 81127901), the National Research Foundation, 
Prime Minister’s Office, Singapore under Competitive Research Program Award NRF-
CRP22-2019-0006, the Innovation Special Zone of National Defense Science and 
Technology, High-Performance Computing Center of Collaborative Innovation Center 
of Advanced Microstructures, and a project funded by the Priority Academic Program 
Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.


References

1.
Boyd, Robert W. Nonlinear optics. Academic press, 2020.

2.
B. S. Richards, D. Hudry, D. Busko, A. Turshatov, I. A. Howard, Photon Upconversion for 

Photovoltaics and Photocatalysis: A Critical Review: Focus Review. Chem. Rev. 121, 9165-9195 

(2021).

3.
G. Gui, N. J. Brooks, H. C. Kapteyn, M. M. Murnane, C.-T. Liao, Second-harmonic generation and 

the conservation of spatiotemporal orbital angular momentum of light. Nat. Photon. 15, 608-613 

(2021).

4.
S. Y. Emelianov, M. F. Hamilton, Y. A. Ilinskii, E. A. Zabolotskaya, Nonlinear dynamics of a gas 

bubble in an incompressible elastic medium. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 115, 581-

588 (2004).

5.
B. Liang, X. Y. Zou, J. C. Cheng, Effective medium method for sound propagation in a soft medium 

containing air bubbles. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 124, 1419-1429 (2008).

6.
A. M. Yao, M. J. Padgett, Orbital angular momentum: origins, behavior and applications. Advances 

in Optics and Photonics 3, 161-204 (2011).

7.
X. Jiang et al., Broadband and stable acoustic vortex emitter with multi-arm coiling slits. Applied 

Physics Letters 108, 203501 (2016).

8.
L. Allen, M. W. Beijersbergen, R. J. C. Spreeuw, J. P. Woerdman, Orbital angular-momentum of light 

and the transformation of Laguerre-Gaussian laser modes. Phys. Rev. A 45, 8185-8189 (1992).

9.
J. Ni, C. Huang, L.-M. Zhou, M. Gu, Q. Song, Y. Kivshar, C.-W. Qiu, Multidimensional phase 

singularities in nanophotonics. Science 374, eabj0039 (2021).

10. M. J. Padgett, The mechanism for energy transfer in the rotational frequency shift of a light beam. 

Journal of Optics A: Pure and Applied Optics 6, S263-S265 (2004).

11. K. D. Skeldon, C. Wilson, M. Edgar, M. J. Padgett, An acoustic spanner and its associated rotational 

Doppler shift. New Journal of Physics 10, 013018 (2008).

12. C. E. M. Demore et al., Mechanical Evidence of the Orbital Angular Momentum to Energy Ratio of 

Vortex Beams. Physical Review Letters 108, 194301 (2012).

13. G. Li, T. Zentgraf, S. Zhang, Rotational Doppler effect in nonlinear optics. Nature Physics 12, 736-

740 (2016).

14. J. C. Ni et al., Gigantic vortical differential scattering as a monochromatic probe for multiscale chiral 

structures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 118, 

e2020055118 (2021).

15. D. G. Grier, A revolution in optical manipulation. Nature 424, 810-816 (2003).

16. J. C. Ni et al., Three-dimensional chiral microstructures fabricated by structured optical vortices in 

isotropic material. Light-Science & Applications 6, e17011 (2017).

17. K. I. Willig, S. O. Rizzoli, V. Westphal, R. Jahn, S. W. Hell, STED microscopy reveals that 

synaptotagmin remains clustered after synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Nature 440, 935-939 (2006).


18. J. Wang et al., Terabit free-space data transmission employing orbital angular momentum 

multiplexing. Nature Photonics 6, 488-496 (2012).

19. Z. F. Zhang et al., Tunable topological charge vortex microlaser. Science 368, 760-763 (2020).

20. C. Z. Shi, M. Dubois, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, High-speed acoustic communication by multiplexing 

orbital angular momentum. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 

America 114, 7250-7253 (2017).

21. X. Jiang, B. Liang, J. C. Cheng, C. W. Qiu, Twisted Acoustics: Metasurface-Enabled Multiplexing 

and Demultiplexing. Advanced Materials 30, 1800257 (2018).

22. B. Liu et al., Design and experimental demonstration of Doppler cloak from spatiotemporally 

modulated metamaterials based on rotational Doppler effect. Optics Express 28, 3745-3755 (2020).

23. H. Zhou, D. Fu, J. Dong, P. Zhang, X. Zhang, Theoretical analysis and experimental verification on 

optical rotational Doppler effect. Opt Express 24, 10050-10056 (2016).

24. P. Georgi, C. Schlickriede, G. Li, S. Zhang, T. Zentgraf, Rotational Doppler shift induced by spin-

orbit coupling of light at spinning metasurfaces. Optica 4, 1000-1005 (2017).

25. L. Allen, M. Babiker, W. L. Power, Azimuthal Doppler-Shift in Light-Beams with Orbital Angular-

Momentum. Optics Communications 112, 141-144 (1994).

26. S. Barreiro, J. W. Tabosa, H. Failache, A. Lezama, Spectroscopic observation of the rotational 

Doppler effect. Physical Review Letters 97, 113601 (2006).

27. J. Courtial, K. Dholakia, D. Robertson, L. Allen, M. Padgett, Measurement of the rotational 

frequency shift imparted to a rotating light beam possessing orbital angular momentum. Physical 

Review Letters 80, 3217 (1998).

28. I. Bialynicki-Birula, Z. Bialynicka-Birula, Rotational frequency shift. Physical Review Letters 78, 

2539 (1997).

29. J. Courtial, D. A. Robertson, K. Dholakia, L. Allen, M. J. Padgett, Rotational Frequency Shift of a 

Light Beam. Physical Review Letters 81, 4828-4830 (1998).

30. B. Liu, H. Chu, H. Giddens, R. Li, Y. Hao, Experimental Observation of Linear and Rotational 

Doppler Shifts from Several Designer Surfaces. Scientific Reports 9, 8971 (2019).

31. M. P. J. Lavery, F. C. Speirits, S. M. Barnett, M. J. Padgett, Detection of a Spinning Object Using 

Light's Orbital Angular Momentum. Science 341, 537-540 (2013).

32. X. Jiang, Y. Li, B. Liang, J. C. Cheng, L. Zhang, Convert Acoustic Resonances to Orbital Angular 

Momentum. Physical Review Letters 117, 034301 (2016).

33. Z. Guo et al., High-order acoustic vortex field generation based on a metasurface. Physical Review

E 100, 053315 (2019).

34. G. M. Gibson et al., Reversal of orbital angular momentum arising from an extreme Doppler shift. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115, 3800-3803 (2018).


Figure 1 | (A) Schematic of generation of acoustic vortex with topological charge 𝑙 = 2 by a still 
metasurface, where the sound wave is tuned to helical wavefront. (B) The rotation of metasurface 
can twist the wavefront, resulting in an acoustic frequency shift. (C) Schematic of the frequency 
convertor: frequency of the acoustic wave will be converted to a new frequency after passing 
through a specifically designed rotating metasurface. Inset: schematic of coordinate transformation. 
(D) Theoretical and perimental results of the frequency shift with different topological charge l and 
rotational frequency Ω/2𝜋. Inset: phase distribution of the harmonic frequency at the cross section 
5.7 cm behind the metasurface with 𝑙 = 2 and Ω/2𝜋 = 30 Hz. 


Figure 2 | (A) Numerical results of the frequency conversion under different rotating frequency 
with topological charge l equal to (A): 2 and (B): 3. Inset: amplitude and phase distribution of the 
harmonic and fundamental frequency at the cross section 5.7 cm behind the metasurface with 𝑙 =
2 and 3, Ω/2𝜋 = 50 Hz.


Figure 3 | (A) Experimental setup for frequency convertor. A metasurface driven by a servo motor 
is covered by an acoustic waveguide whose end is blocked by a wedge absorber and a microphone 
is placed 20 cm behind the metasurface. A bearing bracket is used to secure the drive shaft; (B, C) 
Experimental measurement of the frequency shift under different rotational frequency with 
topological charge equal to (B) 2 and (C) 3, respectively.


Figure 4 | (A) Schematic of frequency convertor with the metasurface half covered: the obstacles 
can be selected arbitrarily; (B) Experimental measurement of the frequency shift under different 
rotational frequency with topological charge equal to 2 and fundamental frequency equal to 3000 
Hz, corresponding to the experimental conditions shown in (A); (C) Schematic of rotational doppler 
frequency shift with spiral waves incident: a static metasurface is used as a spiral wave emitter; (D) 
Experimental measurement of the frequency shift under different rotational frequency with 
topological charge equal to 2 and fundamental frequency equal to 3000 Hz, corresponding to the 
experimental conditions shown in (C).


Figure 5 | (A) Schematic of cascade scheme of the frequency convertor: a metasurface with 
topological charge equal to 𝑙1 rotating at Ω1 is cascaded with another metasurface topological 
charge equal to 𝑙2 rotating at Ω2; (B) Schematic of experimental device for the cascade scheme in 
(A); (C) Experimental measurement of the cascaded frequency conversion under different rotational 
frequency Ω2 with Ω1 = 2π × 49.08 Hz, 𝑙1 = 2 and 𝑙2 = 2: the fundamental frequency and the 
working frequency of the metasurface 𝑙2 are equal to 2900 Hz and 3000 Hz, respectively; (D) 
Experimental measurement of the cascaded frequency conversion under different rotational 
frequency Ω2 with Ω1 = 2π × 49.08 Hz, 𝑙1 = 2 and 𝑙2 = 3: the fundamental frequency and the 
working frequency of the metasurface 𝑙2 are equal to 3000 Hz and 2900 Hz, respectively; (E) 
Theoretical prediction and experimental measurements of the cascaded frequency shift with 
different topological charges 𝑙𝑖
and rotational frequency
Ω𝑖/2π , 𝑖 = 1, 2 ;
Ω2/2π = 0

corresponds to the frequency shift from the metasurface 𝑙1 before cascading.


