1

The Validity Window of Space-Charge-Limited Current 

Measurements of Metal Halide Perovskite Devices

William R. Fisher1*, Philip Calado1, Jason A. Röhr2, Joel A. Smith3,4, Xingyuan Shi1, Onkar 
Game4, Jenny Nelson1, Piers R.F. Barnes1*. 

1Department of Physics and Centre for Processable Electronics, Imperial College London, 
South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ, UK

2Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Tandon School of Engineering, New 
York University, Brooklyn, New York 11201, USA

3Department of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK

4Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, S3 7RH, UK

*Communicating authors: w.fisher17@imperial.ac.uk, piers.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

Space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements are used to estimate charge carrier 
mobilities and electronic trap densities of semiconductors by analysing the current density-
voltage (JV) relationship for unipolar devices predicted by the Mott-Gurney (MG) law. 
However, the interpretation of SCLC measurements for metal-halide perovskites is
problematic due to mobile ionic defects which redistribute to screen electrostatic fields in 
devices during measurements. To overcome this, an SCLC measurement protocol was
recently suggested that minimises ionic charge redistribution by probing the current during
millisecond voltage pulses superimposed on a background bias. Here, we use drift-diffusion 
simulations with mobile ions to assess the validity of the MG law for analysing both the 
standard and new protocol JV measurements. We simulated idealised perovskite devices 
with differing mobile ion densities and compared them with simulations and measurements 
of devices with typical contact materials. We found the validity region for the MG law is
limited to perovskites with mobile ion densities lower than the device’s equilibrium charge 
carrier density (<1017 cm-3 for 400 nm thick methylammonium lead iodide films) and 
contacts with injection/extraction barriers ≤ 0.1 eV. The latter limitation can be partially 
overcome by increasing the device thickness, whereas the former limitation cannot. This
restricts the range of perovskite layer compositions and viable contact materials that can be 
reliably analysed with the MG law. Approaches such as estimating trap densities from the 
apparent voltage onset to trap-free SCLC regime should also be critically reviewed since 
they rely on the same potentially invalid assumptions as the MG law. Our results
demonstrate that extracting meaningful and accurate values for metal halide perovskite 
material properties from SCLC maybe challenging, or often not possible.


2

I.
INTRODUCTION

Metal halide perovskite materials are of considerable interest for applications including 
solar cells [1,2], photodetectors [3], light-emitting diodes [4], and memristors [5]. Given the 
wide variety of compositions possible amongst this material class, there is great interest in 
developing accessible methods to measure properties such as charge carrier mobility, 
charge carrier concentration and trap density as new perovskite variants are developed.

Superficially, one of the most common approaches to estimate these parameters is via 
space-charge-limited current (SCLC) measurements; analysis of current density vs voltage
(JV) measurements of two-terminal perovskite single-carrier devices. Besides the numerous 
factors that complicate the analysis of SCLC measurements of non-perovskite devices, such
as trap states [6,7], doping [8] and energetic disorder [9], the high density of mobile ionic 
charge in metal halide perovskites [10–12] further complicates the application of this 
measurement technique and the ensuing analysis. Adapting the SCLC measurement 
technique and/or analysis to account for these mobile ions to find electron and hole 
mobilities in perovskites would, therefore, be of great interest.

In principle, the JV curve of a semiconducting layer sandwiched between symmetrical and 
Ohmic contacts demonstrates SCLC beyond a voltage threshold, this SCLC region of the 
curve is known as the Mott-Gurney drift regime. JV curves are generally measured by 
stepping sequentially (sweeping) through an increasing or decreasing series of applied 
voltages, V, at some rate while recording the resulting current density between electrical 
contacts, J(V). SCLC analysis usually involves determining the log-log gradient of the 
measured JV curve as it varies with voltage, 𝑔(𝑉) = d𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝐽)/d𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑉), to identify the 
exponent of the power-law relationship 𝐽 ∝ 𝑉𝑔. Voltage regions where 𝑔(𝑉) ≈ 2 are 
identified and analysed using the Mott-Gurney (MG) law [13],

𝐽 =

9

8 𝜇𝜖𝑟𝜖0

𝑉2

𝐿3
[1]

to extract a charge carrier mobility, 𝜇, assuming the thickness of the perovskite layer, L, and 
the relative and vacuum permittivities, 𝜖𝑟 and 𝜖0, are known. Further modifications to this 
analytical framework account for the effects of electrode/semiconductor energy barriers, 
electronic trap states and regimes other than SCLC in the JV measurement [7,14–16]. For 
many devices, neglecting these contributions results in the incorrect interpretation of JV 
curves, namely identifying regions where 𝑔(𝑉) ≈ 2 as space-charge limited when they are 
not, and then applying the standard SCLC analysis (equation 1) to find 𝜇. 

However, the application of the MG law and its associated analyses on metal halide 
perovskite materials is further confounded the presence of high concentrations of mobile 
ionic defects within the crystal lattice. These ions redistribute in response to varying internal 
electric fields during measurements [10,17], changing the electrostatic profile in the device, 
and hence the observed JV curve. Although there are examples of SCLC-type analyses and 
other associated techniques being applied to metal halide devices in the literature, the 
presence of mobile ionic charge is likely to invalidate the interpretation and conclusions 
drawn from the data [18–22]. Recent works [23–25] challenged the validity of the 


3

application of the MG law and associated analyses to perovskite devices and suggested
experimental techniques to account for the effects of mobileions. Here we will investigate
and review the arguments presented in these publications.

In this article, we show that applying the MG law to JV measurements of mixed electronic-
ionic conducting materials such as metal halide perovskites is only valid under specific 
measurement conditions and when the electronic charge density is significantly greater than 
the mobile ionic charge density in the device at equilibrium (herein, ‘equilibrium’ is defined 
as the condition where no (net) energy or mass flows in or out of the defined system). For 
the typical class of materials and devices of interest to the perovskite community it is 
difficult to ensure these conditions are met, hence limiting the utility of the MG law and 
associated techniques in this context. We demonstrate these findings by presenting 
simulations of JV measurements of ‘ideal’ thin-film devices (which are not necessarily 
always possible to make) over a large voltage range (which is experimentally impractical) 
and by contrasting them to experimental results from real thin-film devices and
corresponding simulations of them. This is done for two SCLC measurement techniques: (i)
JV sweeps performed by incrementally stepping the applied voltage with time at a fixed rate
and (ii) the so-called “pulsed-voltage” method where voltages are applied in very short 
pulses, probing the device in a quasi-fixed state. Noting the discrepancy between the ideal 
simulations and the experimental results, an analysis revealing the validity regime for the 
MG law is provided. The effects of increasing perovskite layer thickness on these validity 
limits are also investigated. The consequences of this validity regime and the machanisms at 
play have important implications for any JV measurement of perovskite single-carrier 
devices.

II.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Ionic Contribution to the Electric Field Distribution

The derivation of the Mott-Gurney law requires two assumptions: i) that the spatial 
variation of the internal electric field is governed only by injected majority electronic charge
(the majority charge carrier here is holes) with no contribution from other charged species,
and ii) that the electronic current is dominated by drift. While the first assumption should be 
valid in an ideal device at reasonably high voltages, a high density of mobile ionic charge, 
which might be expected in metal halide perovskites, is likely to invalidate this assumption 
since we expect the ionic charge to dominate the electric field profile in a device. The 
electric field profile, E, can be determined from Gauss’ law which is related to the spatially 
varying distribution of charge. If the electronic charge in the perovskite is dominated by free 
holes of concentration, p, and the perovskite also contains a mobile cationic charge species
with concentration, c, compensated for by an equally and oppositely charged, uniformly 
distributed static anionic species, with concentration a, then at steady-state:

𝑑𝐸(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥
=

𝑞

𝜖𝑟𝜖0 [𝑝(𝑥) + 𝑐(𝑥) − 𝑎]
[2]


4

Where x refers to the position along the one dimensional space of the perovskite layer and 
q is the elementary charge. The corresponding steady state drift current density, J, through 
the device will be given by:

𝐽 = 𝑞𝜇𝑝𝑝(𝑥)𝐸(𝑥)
[3]

where 𝜇𝑝is the mobility of holes. Note that while ions contribute to the overall electric field 
driving the drift current, there is no direct contribution from mobile ions to the conductivity, 
i.e., 𝑞𝜇𝑝𝑝. We assume there are no other ionic interactions with the device interfaces (such 
as chemical reactions). Following the approach of Schottky and Prim [26], which analyses a 
case where no ionic charge is present, equations 2 and 3 would be combined by substitution 
and then integrated to derive the MG law. However, this method is no longer possible 
because the mobile ion density cannot be removed from the resulting equations or correctly 
accounted for without knowing its spatial distribution.

The MG law also assumes that JV measurements are made on semiconducting layers 
interfaced with Ohmic electrical contacts. Ohmic contacts maximise the concentration of 
electronic charge in the device at equilibrium and minimise any barriers to electronic charge 
injection, assuming all other variables (contact area, interfacial surface/dipole states etc.) 
are equal. We define an ideal Ohmic contact as one with no workfunction offset (𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 =
0 𝑒𝑉):

𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 = |𝐸𝐵𝐸 − 𝜙𝑚|
[4]

where EBE is either Ecor Ev, which are the conduction and valence band edge energies of the 
semiconductor, respectively, and 𝜙𝑚 is the workfunction of the metallic contact. The 
convention we use here is to discuss the smallest offset of the two according to the contact 
selectivity of carrier species in the unipolar devices. Variation of 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 impacts the charge 
carrier density in the device. In an out-of-thermal-equilibrium semiconductor with quasi-
fermi levels 𝐸𝐹𝑛and 𝐸𝐹𝑝 and with effective density of states 𝑁𝑐 and 𝑁𝑣 for electrons and 
holes respectively, the Blakemore approximation [27,28] gives:

𝑛 ≈ 𝑁𝑐

1

exp(−𝐸𝐹𝑛−𝐸𝑐

𝑘𝐵𝑇
)+0.27 and 𝑝 ≈ 𝑁𝑣

1

exp(−

𝐸𝑣−𝐸𝐹𝑝

𝑘𝐵𝑇
)+0.27
[5]

where kBT is the thermal energy. At the device interfaces 𝐸c − 𝐸𝐹𝑛 or 𝐸𝐹𝑝 − 𝐸𝑣 are equal to 
𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡. The Blakemore approximation is used instead of the Boltzmann approximation in 
this calculation of the charge carrier density because for small 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 (of less than a few 
kBT) Boltzmann statistics are no longer valid. The use of the Blakemore approximation is 
discussed in the Methods section and the entire approach of calculating the charge carrier 
density of semiconductor devices is discussed in the supplementary material where an 
upper-limit for charge carrier densities in perovskite devices is also estimated without such 
assumptions for the Blakemore distribution function. Throughout this work, one can view 
𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 as a proxy for majority charge carrier density with an inverse and exponential
relationship. As we will show later in (Section II, part D), if the contacts to the perovskite are


5

not perfectly Ohmic (i.e., when 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 > 0 𝑒𝑉) the MG law’s window of validity in the 
presence of mobile ions is further reduced.

B. JV Sweeps

To investigate the consequences of mobile ionic charge for the application of the MG law
and its associated analyses we present drift-diffusion simulations (using our modelling
package, Driftfusion [29]) of JV sweeps on thin-film metal/perovskite/metal devices. The 
contact energy levels were set such that holes were the majority charge carrier (see figure 
S1a-b), although the results are generalisable to electron-only devices. All device 
parameters and material constants for these ideal devices are presented in table SI. Figures
1a-c show results for the device depicted by the inset in figure 1a in which the 400 nm thick 
perovskite layer has mobile ions but no electronic trap states and has ideal Ohmic contacts
with 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 = 0 𝑒𝑉 between the metal contacts and the perovskite valence band. A 
voltage range of 0 to 500 V is applied to investigate the full range of device behaviour, albeit 
noting that a 500 V applied to a real-world device of this thickness would casue damage and
is not realistic in practice. 

The example simulated JV curves for forward (from 0 to 500 V) and reverse (from 500 to 0 
V) voltage sweeps at different scan rates in figure 1a show hysteresis caused by the mobile 
ionic charge. The lowest scan rate shows the least hysteresis, indicating that the ions have 
almost reached a quasi-static distribution for each voltage sampled independent of scan 
direction. At higher scan rates the ions have insufficient time to respond and thus screen the 
applied potential, resulting in more hysteresis. These curves also show a higher threshold
voltage at which the gradient of the JV curve increases from its initial low-bias slope during 
the forward scan. The corresponding g(V) values, as a function of forward scan voltage are
shown in figure 1b (in the reverse scan g(V) ≈ 1 for the fast scans and is similar to the 
forward scan at low scan rates). The regions of the g(V) curves that fall within the grey band 
in figure 1b are equivalent to 𝑔(𝑉) = 2 ± 0.2, this equates to 𝐽 ∝ 𝑉2 where the MG law 
may be applied while allowing for some experimental error. We analysed these regions 
using the MG equation (equation 1), to obtain the hole mobilities that would be inferred 
from SCLC measurements (figure 1c). This range of 𝑔(𝑉) values is chosen puposefully to 
represent a reasonable range of gradients for which a researcher might consider applying 
the Mott-Gurney law to analyse the JV curve due to experimental errors or insufficient data 
points/range. For comparison, the hole mobility defined in the simulations (20 cm2 V-1 s-1) is 
also shown (dashed red line). It is evident that mobility values inferred from the forward 
scans depend strongly on the scan rate, and that applying the MG law to a slow JV scan can 
overestimate the mobility by more than two orders of magnitude (~2000 cm2 V-1 s-1) due to 
a different distribution of ionic charge corresponding to each voltage. We conclude that 
these gradient regions could easily be misinterpreted as falling within the MG regime and 
regions that lie above the grey-shaded area in figure 1b, i.e. 𝑔(𝑉) > 2, could be 
misinterpreted as being due to charge-trapping effects [18,20,22]. At sufficiently high scan
rates we approach the limit where ionic charge is unable to respond to the rapidly changing 


6

field in the device (maroon curves in figures 1b and 1c), which corresponds to ionic charge 
that is effectively frozen in its initial distribution during the JV scan. In this state, the 
extracted mobility is close to the mobility set in the simulation. This suggests that if a device 
could be measured with the ions effectively frozen in their equilibrium distribution, then the 
MG law and other associated analysis might be meaningfully applied. In the following 
section we will investigate this hypothesis.

Fig. 1
Simulated JV sweeps and their analysis. (a) Example JV sweeps at three scan rates of 
a device represented in the inset with one mobile ionic species. (b) Calculated g(V) of 
the JV sweeps’ forward scans in panel (a) with additional scan rates presented, the 
grey box represents a region of 𝑔(𝑉) = 2 ± 0.2 where one may attempt to apply the 
MG law to calculate 𝜇 from experimental data. (c) The corresponding 𝜇 calculated 
using the MG law from the regions of the JV curve where 𝑔(𝑉) ≈ 2 in the grey box 
of panel (b). The simulation parameters are listed in the supplementary material in 
table SI.

We now consider experimentally measured JV curves of perovskite hole only devices. 
Figures 2a-c display results for a thin-film device of architecture shown in the inset of figure 
2a, with an approximate thickness of 400 nm for the perovskite layer. The chosen materials 
and processing techniques are those commonly used in relevant photovoltaic research, 
where additional thin selective transport layers are included to make the contacts closer to
Ohmic than they would otherwise be. Details of the device fabrication are presented in the 
methods section. The maximum applied voltage was limited to 1.5 V to minimise bias-
induced degradation. Figures 2d-f display the simulation results for a device approximately 
the same as the aforementioned experimental counterpart; the energetics and charge 
carrier densities from the simulation are shown in figures S1c-d. These results show an 
agreement of their general behaviours and trends with the experimental results in figures 
2a-c, despite some apparent discrepancies. Concerning these trends, the simulations show 
the same dependence of JV hysteresis on scan rate, they show a large peak in the g(V)
values and also show a similar estimation of the mobility, albeit all shifted to a lower voltage 
range. Meanwhile, there are differences between the simulations in figures 2d-f and the 
experimental results in figures 2a-c: the simulations give a slightly larger range of current 


7

densities and estimated mobilities over the JV sweep and the location of the g(V) peaks is at 
a lower voltage in the simulations. These differences are likely due to the omission of charge 
trapping and interfacial states in the simulations, which will be present in real devices, and 
the error on the values assigned to certain physical input parameters. The estimated
mobilites are 𝜇𝑝 ≈ 10−3 𝑐𝑚2𝑉−1𝑠−1 from the experiments (figure 2c) and 𝜇𝑝 ≈
10−2 𝑐𝑚2𝑉−1𝑠−1 from the simulations (figure 2f), we not the values are imprecise due to 
the large variance in g(V) throughout the scans. These values are orders of magnitude 
smaller than values of electronic carrier mobilities typically reported for MAPbI3 films in the 
literature (𝜇 ≈ 7.5 𝑐𝑚2𝑉−1𝑠−1 [30] or 𝜇 = 10 − 44 𝑐𝑚2𝑉−1𝑠−1 [31]). A recent 
communication by Xia et al. addressing the mobilities of lead-halide perovskites summarises 
reported electronic charge carrier mobilities in the literature, where the range of carrier 
mobility values for metal-halide perovskites given was between 𝜇 = 0.7 −
600 𝑐m2V−1s−1 [32]. Assuming the film morphology in this work is similar to those in the 
studies mentioned, this shows that our calculated mobilities substantially underestimate the 
actual mobilities. The general agreement between the full device simulations with the 
experiment implies that some of the non-ideal features of the experimental results (when 
compared to the results in figure 1) are likely due to the addition of selective transport 
layers and possibly due to 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 asymmetry, since these are the main differences between 
the simulated devices in figures 1a-c and 2d-f. 

Fig 2.
(a) JV sweep experimental results at two different scan rates of a device represented 
in the inset. (b) g(V) of the sweeps in panel (a). (c) 𝜇 calculated using the MG law and 
values from the sweeps in panel (a) with the region of interest highlighted by a
black-dashed box. The region of interest is a guide to the eye and does not have the 
same meaning as the grey region in figure 1b. (d-f) are the simulation results of a 
device representative of the device investigated in (a-c) using the same analysis 


8

techniques. The simulation parameters are listed in the supplementary material in 
table SII.

The ionic drift during the JV scans in figure 2 results in hysteresis and contributes to the 
substantial increases or decreases in current density at intermediate applied voltages. The 
changes in current due to ionic drift can be explained by the accumulation/depletion of ionic 
charge increasing or decreasing the electronic current flowing across the interface(s) with 
the direction and magnitude of this depending on the relative signs of the ionic and 
electronic charge carriers. This modulation of the electronic current by the 
accumulation/depletion of ions at the interface(s) might prevent SCLC conditions from 
arising within this chosen scan range. Additionally, the presence of hysteresis in these JV 
scans indicates the ionic charge is greatly influencing the electronic carriers’ spatial 
distribution (and thus, the internal electric field and the electronic current density), 
invalidating assumptions of the MG law and contributing to 𝑔(𝑉) ≫ 2. It is the 
redistribution of ionic charge, not the injected electronic charge, primarily determines the 
electric-field profile in the device. We note that extended-range JV curves (figures S2a and 
S2b) display asymmetry between positive and negative applied voltages, which is influenced 
(partially) by the energetics of the contacts being asymmetric. The asymmetry of the JV 
shown in figure S2a has been shown by Game et al. [33] to also be a function of ionic drift 
during the measurement. Figure S2b is measured using the pulsed voltage technique 
(described in Section C.) which removes the contribtion from drifting ionic charge during the 
measurement. The results still show asymmetry, although less than is shown in figure S2a, 
suggesting that contact asymmetry exsists in this device and does play a role in the device 
behaviour along with the mobile ionic charge. We, therefore, conclude that the large peak 
in the g(V) and the underestimated mobility values are due to some combination of 
asymmetric contacts, the ionic drift during the scans and the additional selective charge 
transport layers, the exact contributions of these factors are difficult to decouple. We doubt 
the underestimated mobility is due to the limited scan range used in the 
experiments/simulations due to the significant plateau in estimated 𝜇 at voltages > 1 𝑉 in 
figure 2f and the significant decrease in 𝑔(𝑉) at voltages > 1 𝑉 in figure 2b. From figure 2 it 
is clear that JV curves of non-ideal single carrier devices give results that should not be 
analysed using the MG law and, if they are analysed in this way, it is likely that a large 
under-estimate of the charge carrier mobility is obtained. 

Comparing the experimental and simulation results in figure 2 to the simulation of ideal 
devices in figure 1, reveals behaviour/trends in common: the direction of hysteresis in the JV 
curves is the same in both, and the location of the g(V) maximum in the forward scan is at a 
higher voltage when the scan rate is higher in both. We note that there are several 
differences between the results in figures 1 and 2: g(V) reaches very high values in the 
measured devices which was not reproduced in the simulations of the idealised device; the 
voltage at which the forward scan g(V) peaks is less scan-rate dependent than in the 
simulation of the ideal device, whilst there is a significant disparity in the magnitude of the 
current densities between the simulations and the experiments. These differences between 
figures 1a and 2a (when compared over a similar voltage range) particularly the latter, can 


9

be attributed to the existence of asymmetric contacts and selective transport layers. The 
limitations of available materials and processing techniques can clearly be seen.  

Given the strong effect from mobile ions during the JV measurements and simulations, on 
both in the magnitude and shape of the JV curves, and the differences in JV hysteresis at
different scan rates, it is clear that more sophisticated ways of measuring SCLC in 
perovskites must be employed. In the following section we investigate a recently developed 
pulsed voltage SCLC method and the limits of its applicability. An in-depth explanation of the 
technique is provided in the methods section.   

C. Pulsed Voltage Method

Recently, Duijnstee et al. published an approach for measuring JV curves without 
significantly altering the distribution of ions during the scan [24]. This technique involves 
applying a series of short voltage pulses typically of 10s to 100s ms, with each pulse 
separated by a return to a reference dc bias voltage (usually 0 V) for a long period of time (> 
300 s). The short pulse durations aim to ensure that the ion distribution does not have time 
to deviate from the reference distribution set at each dc measurement voltage. This method 
is adopted in this section and referred to as the “pulsed-voltage method”.

Figures 3a-c display simulation results where the ionic charge is frozen in its equilibrium
(i.e., no (net) energy or mass flowing in or out of the defined system) distribution during the 
scan (see the methods section for a detailed explanation of the meaning of the equilibrium 
condition) but is mobile during the equilibration process. In figure 3a, we only present the 
forward scans because the reverse scans are identical due to the lack of ion drift during the 
simulated JV scan. These results are significantly different to those presented in figure 1,
showing that the pulsed voltage method is significantly supressing the effect the ionic 
charge has on the JV curves. We do, however, see changes in the JV curves by varying the 
ion density: the magnitude of the currents observed, and g(V) are affected by the 
concentration of ionic charge. The extracted MG mobility (figure 3c) is also affected, 
although the values obtained for this ideal device are within ±50% of the set mobility (i.e., 
18-26 cm2 V-1 s-1 as compared to 20 cm2 V-1 s-1 as the numerical input). The effect of a static
equilibrium ion distribution on SCLC characterisation is best demonstrated in figure 3b - the 
devices containing higher ion densities hardly reach a 𝑔(𝑉) = 2 ± 0.2 within the voltage 
range investigated. These results indicate that devices with high ion densities may not be 
suitable for the application of the MG law, since their JV curves are significantly different to 
those with no ionic carriers, and they never reach the same 𝑔(𝑉) ≈ 2 as the case with no 
ionic carriers, even if the technique can produce reasonable estimates for the mobility.


10

Fig.3
Drift-diffusion simulations of JV curves with the mobile ionic charge frozen in its 
equilibrium position. (a) Simulated JV curves of the same device as in figure 1a with 
varying ion concentrations, we present only the forward scans because the reverse 
scans are identical due to the lack of ion motion. (b) Calculated g(V) of the JV curves’ 
in panel (a). (c) 𝜇 calculated using the MG law from the regions of  𝑔(𝑉) ≈ 2 in panel 
(b).

In figure 3a, as the input ion density increase, the current density increases at low voltages. 
The mobile (during equilibration) ionic charge allows for more electronic charge to exist in 
this single carrier device at (and near) equilibrium, the details of which will be addressed in 
future work. Figure 3b shows that in the intermediate voltage regime (up to ≈ 100 𝑉) the 
current-limiting processes are the same as in a device with no ions; however, because of the 
ionic charge, such space-charge limited current either occurs at different voltage onsets or is 
even obscured. At higher voltages (> 100 𝑉) in our simulations we observe that a 
combination of the charge-extraction coefficient at the electrodes (representing the 
interfacial resistance of a metallic electrode) and the electronic carrier saturation limit [16]
starts to limit the increase in current. Both effects could occur in an experiment if these high 
voltages could be achieved. For the higher ion densities at very high voltages this current 
limitation dominates the response before any SCLC effect (fully) emerges, as the latter are 
obscured by other processes. This supports the proposition that the MG law and other 
associated analyses are not valid for perovskites with high ion densities: this is even in the 
absence of electronic traps, injection barriers and with ions frozen in their equilibrium state.

The equilibrium distribution of the ionic charge has a significant effect on the simulated JV 
curves. As electronic charge redistributes to align the Fermi level in the perovskite layer with 
the contact workfunctions at the interfaces, the ionic charge redistributes too—it 
contributes significantly to the space-charge layers at the interface(s) in the same way as 
electronic charge; either by accumulating or depleting. This not only reduces the density of 
electronic charge at the interfaces when compared to a semiconductor with no mobile ionic 
charge, but also modifies the energetic landscape at the interfaces by locally increasing the 
charge density, reducing the space-charge layer thickness and, in turn, modifying the 
electric field in the space-charge region. The simulated electric field and electrostatic
potential profiles of devices at equilibrium and at 75 V during a JV scan with frozen ions are 
shown in figures S3 and S4 respectively. These show significant contribution of the ionic 
charge to the potential distribution and electric field distributions of the bulk and at the 
interface, even when the ions are spatially fixed during the simulated JV scan. 


11

Figures 4a-c show experimental results for the case where ionic charge is nominally frozen 
during the JV scan using the pulsed voltage technique. These measurements were carried 
out on the same device as in figure 2 and the data were obtained by a pulsed voltage 
method which is illustrated in the inset of panel 4a. The results from this pulsed voltage
method are substantially different to those of the JV sweeps shown in figures 2a-c: the ionic 
charge being ‘frozen’ has greatly reduced hysteresis (it may be that the small yet discernable
hysteresis seen in figure 4a is caused by the ionic charge not being entirely stationary for the 
short pulses and/or some experimental artefacts), yet we still see 𝑔(𝑉) > 2. In fact, 𝑔(𝑉)
extracted from the experimental data (as in figure 4b) is somewhat erratic and never 
consistently ≈ 2. For simplicity, we calculate the mobility over the entire voltage range of 
0.2-1.4 V, as shown in figure 4c. The calculated estimates of hole mobility are ~2 −
5 × 10−4 cm2V−1s−1, sitting orders of magnitudes lower than those reported in the 
literature, as with the mobilities determined from the JV sweeps (figure 2). This suggests 
that despite the alternative measurement technique (using pulsed voltages) this does not 
really make MG analysis applicable or effective for this class of thin-film devices, since the 
calculated mobility is wrong by orders of magnitude. We present reasons for this in the 
following. 

Fig.4
(a) Experimental JV results of the same device represented in figure 2a but using the 
pulsed voltage method depicted in the inset. Both forward (solid) and reverse
(dashed) scans are shown. (b) g(V) of the curves in panel (a). (c) 𝜇 calculated using 
the MG law and values from the curves in panel (a). (d-f) are the simulation results 
of a device representative of the device investigated in panels (a-c) using the same 
analysis techniques with an input 𝜇 = 20 𝑐𝑚2 𝑉−1 𝑠−1. The divergence between the 
forward and reverse scans at low voltages in panel (d) corresponds to capacitive 
charging/discharging with the frozen ions and is only visible at these very low total 


12

current densities. Corresponding simulation parameters are listed in the 
supplementary material in table SII.

Figures 4d-f show simulations of the experimental case presented in figures 4a-c. The
disparity in current density between simulation and experiment that is present in figure 2 is 
also seen here for the same reasons. Even though through most of the voltage range we see 
similar current densities, estimated mobilities and g(V) peak locations (1.1 - 1.2 V), the 
simulation shows a much higher g(V) at the peak (~9.5) than that of the experiments (~3), 
indicating that either the parameters of the simulation are not entirely representative of the 
real device or that the ionic charge is not completely frozen in the experiments, as it is in the 
simulations. The input mobility (20 cm2 V-1 s-1) and the mobilities (figure 4f) derived from the 
JV curve (figure 4d) are still orders of magnitude apart, showing that the MG law is 
ineffective at estimating the mobility of the majority charge carrier in this device and 
confirming the findings of the experimental results in figures 4a-c. In order to demonstrate 
that ionic charge, asymmetric contacts and the selective charge transport layers are still 
significantly affecting these results we carry out the same sets of simulations as in figures 
4d-f while varying the ion density and then as well as removing the selective charge 
transport layers. These results are shown in figures S5a-c and S6a-c respectively. With this 
further investigation we find that in the full devices the ionic charge density in the 
perovskite layer changes the size and location of the peak of g(V) (the effects of the built-in 
potential), reduces the current density and reduces the estimated mobility, even though the 
ionic charge is frozen during the JV scan. We also find that removing the selective transport 
layers only slightly increases the current density and estimated mobilities: the energetics of 
the metal contacts still matter and, therefore, the reasons for the non-ideal experimental 
results are indeed the combination of the ionic charge, the additional selective transport 
layers and the asymmetric contacts. 

Altogether, the simulation and experimental results in figure 4 further confirms that thin-
film devices of this type are not suitable for analysis with the MG law and even though using 
the pulsed voltage measurement technique makes a significant difference to the JV curve, it 
is not sufficient for allowing the MG law to be applicable. We conclude that ionic charge, 
even when frozen in its initial position in an ideal device, still has a large impact on the JV 
measurement of the device and the utility of the application of the MG law to it: the 
simulations show that as mobile ion densities increase, the low voltage Ohmic current is 
increased and the quadratic power law behaviour at high voltages is suppressed. We note 
that the effects of uniform, static doping on these devices, as described by Röhr and 
MacKenzie [8], show the same trends and are similar to, but not the same as, the effects
due to ions seen here. In cases where conventional electrical doping is present in the 
perovskite [34] in addition to the mobile ions explored here, the effects of each would occur 
simultaneously with the strongest of the two dominating the device behaviour. The 
experimental results suggest that thin-film devices and/or other devices without ideal, 
symmetrical, ohmic contacts (and especially with aditional selective transport layers) should 
not be characterised with the MG law, even if the ionic charge is static during the 
measurement by using the pulsed voltage method. We further propose that the original


13

analyses derived from the MG law that use the same set of assumptions should not be used
for analysing, for example, the so-called “trap-filled limit” [7].

While experimental results of the pulsed voltage method on a thin-film single-carrier device 
did not yield correct mobilities, the SCLC analysis of simulated JV curves for ideal devices 
with lower concentrations of ‘frozen’ mobile ions (figures 3a) yielded mobilities close to 
what was expected (the input mobilty). We will now investigate the validity region for SCLC 
measurements for which the application of the MG law could meaningfully be applied in the 
frozen ion regime. 

D. Is there a region of validity for SCLC measurements of metal halide

perovskites?

In order to determine a region of validity for using the MG law for analysing SCLC 
measurements, a parameter search is conducted: a series of simulations of the same ideal 
device shown previously where the contact workfunctions are varied symmetrically, i.e., the 
workfunctions of both contacts are always equal and while 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 is increased, and the 
ionic density is varied. As before, JV measurements from 0 to 500 V with the ionic charge 
frozen in their equilibrium distribution are simulated. The maximum g(V) in the JV is found
(depending on the simulated device this peak could occur anywhere in the range) and the 
voltage and current density at which this maximum occurs are used to calculate the mobility
using the MG law. For our simulation results, this process selects for the calculated mobility 
in the JV curve closest to the set mobility (20 cm2 V−1 s−1). If a region of the JV curve does 
not fall within 𝐽 ∝ 𝑉2±0.2, i.e., 1.8 < 𝑔(𝑉) < 2.2 (as depicted in figure 5a)), then this is 
contained in the red shaded box depicting a region falling outside 𝐽 ∝ 𝑉2 experimentally.
The values of 𝑔(𝑉) for this set of simulations are given in figure S7. The results are 
presented as a heat-map in figure 5a. Considering that these devices are ideal and should 
give close to perfect mobility values, these results show that a good estimate of the mobility 
can be obtained from the MG law for regions where 𝑔(𝑉) ≈ 2 for a device with no traps or 
interfacial states if the contacts are very close to perfectly Ohmic and where the ionic 
charge carrier density ≤ 1018 cm−3. We also find that ideally the ion density should be ≪
1018 cm−3, otherwise the region where 1.8 < 𝑔(𝑉) < 2.2 is very small and the contacts 
must be perfectly Ohmic. There is a trade-off between how perfectly Ohmic the contacts 
must be (the amount of 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡) and the ion density: if the 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 > 0.08 eV, the ion 
density must be < 5 × 1015 cm−3 for MG analysis to remain valid. We note that the exact 
values of the above quantities depend on the assigned density of states and effective mass 
of electrons and/or holes (which are values commonly used in the literature) but the trends 
will still persist even if the density of states changes significantly. If the device falls outside 
of these given limits, the JV curve will not reach the SCLC regime since g(V) never reaches 
the range 1.8 < 𝑔(𝑉) < 2.2 (even if the ions are frozen) and these devices cannot be 
meaningfully analysed using the MG law or other related analytical frameworks. 

We also extended investigations into studying thicker devices (1 μm and 100 μm) 
undergoing JV scans up to 1500 V (shown in figures S8a and S9a-c respectively) revealing


14

that the constraints on 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 can be stretched by having a thicker device; the region of 
validity in figure S8a is stretched in the y-axis when compared to figure 5a. Figures S9a-c 
investigate a device with 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 = 0.3 𝑒𝑉 and show no region of the curves with 1.8 <
𝑔(𝑉) < 2.2 (figure S8b) but the extracted mobilities at the maximum of g(V) (figure S8c) 
yield very accurate results, we note that the application of the MG law is not valid in these 
regions due to the lack of SCLC, even though the mobility estimate is accurate. Figure S10 
investigates devices of 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 = 0.2 𝑒𝑉 with varying thicknesses, confirming the 
observations from figures S8 and S9 that the large offset can yield SCLC regions but with 
very minimal changes to the validity region with respect to ion density (figure S10b). Figure 
S10 also confirms the observation from figure S9c that, curiously, the MG law can yield 
accurate 𝜇 estimates at 𝑔(𝑉) maxima (figure S10a) without any clear sign of SCLC, the cause 
of this observation is yet to be understood. Figure S10c does, however, reveal that very 
thick devices (> 10𝜇𝑚) may not be realistically measureable due to the very high voltage
required to reach the maximum value of 𝑔(𝑉) in the JV curves.

Based on the observation that the region of validity for SCLC measurements depends on 
𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 and the ion density, and by noting that 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 is related to electronic charge carrier 
density (equation 5), we conclude that the relative density of the ionic to electronic charge 
must be substantial. A refined limit of these relative densities is given below.

Fig. 5
Analysis of drift-diffusion simulations showing the limits of the application of MG 

analysis to perovskite devices of 400 nm thickness. (a) A heat map representing the accuracy 
of the calculated mobility using the MG law for a set of contact energies (workfunction 
offset) and a set of ion densities. The set mobility is 20 cm2V-1s-1. The region outside the 
colour map is represented in red shading. (b) Calculated mean electronic charge density for 
perovskite layers of different ion density at two points during a JV scan (0 V and 100 V). The 
black box with yellow shading represents a region where the current density and the 
internal electric field of the device is defined by electronic charge. This is true because the 
ion density does not have an appreciable effect on the electronic charge in the device at 0 V 
and 100 V. By examining the ion densities covered by the black box in (b) and noting the 
region of the same ion densities in figure (a) we can see an area of yellow/orange, indicating 
the value of mobility is the same as the input mobility (20 cm2 V-1 s-1). In this region of 
yellow/orange, we can see a set of parameters that gives the mobility calculated using the 


15

MG law that yields the correct result. This region is the part of the colour bar in 
yellow/orange highlighted by the black box. The boxes in panels a) and b) are showing cause 
and effect. This is a parameter set ideal for the application of the MG law. The blue circle in 
panel (b) shows the intersection of the calculated charge density at equilibrium with our 
suggested limit for MG law analysis: 𝑐̅ < 𝑛̅ (black dashed line).

The explanation of the observation of ion density limiting 𝑔(𝑉) in a device even when it is 
static during the JV scan is shown in figure 5b. Figure 5b presents the average electronic 
charge carrier density (𝑛̅/𝑞, where q is the electronic charge) in the perovskite layer of 400
nm thickness and is calculated using: 

𝑛̅ =

𝑞

𝐿 ∫ [𝑛(𝑥) + 𝑝(𝑥)] 𝑑𝑥

𝐿
0
[6]

The results are for points at 0 V and 100 V (to represent an arbitrary point along the JV 
curve) during the same set of JV simulations (results at 20 V are given in figure S11a). First 
we focus on the red and blue curves where the ion density is frozen. The subtraction of
these curves is equal to the charge injected into the device during the JV scan (results
showing the amount of injected charge explicitly are shown in figure S11b and S11c). As the
ion density increases in the perovskite, the electronic charge density at 0 V increases; the 
same happens to the electronic charge density at 100 V (and 20 V) until we reach the 
approximate limit where the ion density is comparable in size to the electronic charge 
carrier density at equilibrium (≈ 1017 𝑐𝑚−3 for both at 0 V). This limit is depicted by the 
vertical, dashed black line in figure 5b. At this limit the amount of injected charge starts to 
decrease as the high density of static ions at the interfaces limits charge injection: the 
subtraction of the red and blue traces decreases past this limit. This explains the apparent 
trade-off between workfunction offset and ion density in figure 5a. The electronic charge 
injection limitation by the ionic charge (figures S3 and S4 show the cause) begins at an even
lower ion density for devices with higher 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 because there is less electronic charge in 
the device at equilibrium. Upon analysing the magnitude of injected charge (shown in 
figures S11a and S11c) we note that the influence of the ionic charge on the injected charge 
begins before 𝑛̅ ≈ 𝑐̅, this allows a more refined limit to be placed. We, therefore, propose a 
theoretical guide/limit for MG analysis: the electronic charge density initially (at 0 V) in the 
perovskite must be approximately 5 times higher than the ionic charge density for the 
analysis to be applicable in the frozen ion measurement regime (5𝑐̅ < 𝑛̅). This guide/limit is 
likely to be conservative, but it ensures that the limit is generally true and independent of 
the density of states for electrons/holes. 

To demonstrate the implications of this claim, we can estimate an upper limit to the 
electron charge carrier density in a perovskite device with ideal Ohmic contacts at 
equilibrium and compare this to likely concentrations of ionic charge in perovskites. We take 
the density of free electrons expected when the Fermi level reaches the perovskite 
conduction band edge as this upper limit for the average concentration at equilibrium (n0). 
Details of this estimation are shown in the supplementary material. We obtain an
approximate upper limit of 𝑛0 ≤ 2 × 1018 𝑐𝑚−3 for MAPbI3. We note that the effective 
mass of holes in these materials is similar to or higher than that of electrons (0.29𝑚𝑒 [35])


16

which would give a higher upper limit for the equivalent hole device (a factor of ~1.5 times 
higher). As stated above, ion densities must be approximately 5 times lower than the 
device’s equilibrium electronic carrier concentration for the Mott-Gurney law to apply to an 
ideal device in the frozen ion regime, this gives an upper limit on ion density of 𝑐̅ <
4 × 1017 𝑐𝑚−3. The ion density would have to be lower than this for devices without ideal 
Ohmic contacts, since the 0 V electronic charge carrier density would be lower. To further 
demonstrate the 5𝑐̅ < 𝑛̅ limit, figure S8b shows that in cases of non-ideal Ohmic contacts, a 
thicker device and low ionic charge density, the electronic charge density is significantly 
higher than the ionic density where the MG law could be meaningfully applied.

The purple trace in figure 5b shows the electronic charge density for a JV scan where the 
ions are mobile. The scan rate is selected such that hysteresis at 100 V for high ion density 
devices is very large and is very high but is necessary for demonstrating these effects when 
applying such high voltages, this also shows that very fast scan rates do not necessarily 
achieve the same results as the pulsed voltage technique (red trace). Similar discrepancies 
between the red and purple traces can be found at much lower voltages with much lower 
scan rates (see figure 1a), this example demonstrates one of the ways in which the 
electronic charge density is greatly influenced by mobile ionic charge near the voltages 
analysed in figure 5a. In this example a very large amount of electronic charge injection is 
induced by the redistributing ionic charge. At other points in the JV scan (or at different scan 
rates) the magnitude of this influence changes and results in the hysteresis we see in figure 
1a.  This result, further to the results from figure 1, shows that the amount of injected 
electronic charge is very dependent on ion drift in devices with higher ion densities and that 
SCLC analysis should not be performed without frozen ions. The purple trace in figure 5b 
also shows that if the ion density in the 400 nm perovskite layer is very low (≤ 1015 𝑐𝑚−3 in 
this case) compared to the electronic charge density (by many orders of magnitude), there is 
little difference between a JV sweep and the pulsed voltage method, so a fast JV scan is an 
appropriate measurement technique.

We now comment on the constraints implied by our limit 5𝑐̅ < 𝑛̅. Such Ohmic contacts 
would be very hard to find because of MAPbI3’s 𝐸𝑐 ≈ −3.8 𝑒𝑉 and 𝐸𝑣 ≈ −5.4 𝑒𝑉. Examples 
of feasible metallic contacts for thin film devices are platinum and calcium. None of the 
metals commonly used for solar cell research are viable. As demonstrated earlier in the text, 
the constraints on 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 can be stretched by increasing device thickness and, therefore, 
gold and aluminium (giving 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 ≈ 0.3 𝑒𝑉) may work for very thick devices. 
Unfortunately, the thicker the device, the higher the voltage required to reach the MG 
regime (this is the example shown in figure S9 and evident in figure S10c ).

The density of mobile ionic charge in metal halide perovskites is quoted as high as 1018 −
1019 𝑐𝑚−3 in some theoretical models and experimental results [10–12,36–40] but in some 
other studies as low ≈ 1016 − 1017𝑐𝑚−3 [41–43] and sometimes even lower (≈
1013 𝑐𝑚−3) [25]. Determining mobile ion densities accurately is still challenging [44]. If this 
range of values is true, then it suggests that the validity of the MG law, which we have 
shown requires mobile ion density to be less than approximately 5 times equilibrium 


17

electronic density, may depend on layer morphology and perovskite composition. In many
cases, though, it will not be known whether this mobile ion density limit is satisfied.

Finally, we note that the estimated mobilities in large portions of the red shaded box of 
figure 5a are reasonable and even though these device simulations produced no regions of 
the JV curve where 𝑔(𝑉) ≈ 2, the mobility determined from the peak of the JV is still very 
close to the value entered in the simulations (20 cm2V-1s-1). The only region where the 
determined mobility significantly deviates from the correct value is where 𝑔(𝑉) approaches 
1.5 (these regions are shown in figure S5). This observation, along with the estimated 
mobilities in the very thick devices of figure S10a show that there is more research to be 
done to fully understand the details of these results.

III.
CONCLUSIONS

We conclude that even measurement techniques that do not allow the ionic charge to move 
and that only probe electronic responses to applied voltage do not guarantee the 
applicability of analytical SCLC theory to the results. In its equilibrium position, increasing 
the mobile ionic charge increases the amount of electronic charge in the device but 
decreases the amount of injected charge which results in the MG regime not being reached 
and/or the wrong mobilities being calculated. The ionic charge accumulates at the interfaces 
as part of the space-charge regions that are normally formed at equilibrium, increasing the 
space-charge density and decreasing the width of the space-charge regions. This alters the 
local electric field in the space-charge regions. We have identified the controlling factor 
impacting the MG law’s applicability as the relative densities of the ionic and electronic
charge in the device, namely the ionic charge density needs to be at least five times lower 
than the electronic charge density at equilibrium. If this condition is met by achieving 
sufficiently Ohmic contacts on a device with low ion densities (< 5 times electronic charge 
density), the ionic charge has little effect on any JV measurement so there is no need to 
modify the standard measurement procedure (with pulsed voltages, for example). The limits 
on contact energetics can be stretched by increasing perovskite layer thickness. 
Unfortunately, very thick devices (>> 1𝜇𝑚) require applied voltages with which it is
experimentally inaccessible to reach the MG regime. Other features in real devices, 
including trap statesand interfacial states, can affect SCLC measurements. The precise 
nature and origin of electronic trap states in metal halide perovskites are still unclear and 
varies significantly between perovskite compositions; thus trap states are currently not well 
accounted for when modelling perovskite devices and analysing measurements of them. It is 
also challenging to find electrode materials that lead to ideal Ohmic contacts and the 
density of ionic charge (particularly for polycrystalline thin films) is difficult to control and 
likely to be too high. We, therefore, suggest that it is difficult to make a single-carrier thin-
folm  perovskite device that can be analysed using the MG law and its associated analyses. 
We demonstrated this through our own set of experimental results and recommend that 
metal halide perovskite devices should only be analysed with the MG law and associated 
techniques when the mobile ion density and contact energetics (workfunction offset) fit 
within the limits outlined by this work.


18

Methods

Pulsed Voltage JV Measurement 

The measurement scheme is indicated in the inset of figure 2a which shows the device held 
at a pre-bias voltage, Vpre-bias, for a long time (in this work 𝑉𝑝𝑟𝑒−𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 = 0). Subsequently, a 
very short voltage pulse is applied, during which the current is measured, before returning 
to Vpre-bias. This process is repeated for a series of voltage pulses. The pulse duration (tpulse) 
was set to 500 𝜇s and the pre-bias time (tbias) to 600 s. To extract the current density due to 
each voltage pulse, a linear fit to the current density transient for 50 𝜇𝑠 < 𝑡𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 < 250 𝜇𝑠
was performed and, by extrapolation, a value for the instantaneous current density at 
𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒 = 0 𝑠 was found (see Figure S12). The series of probe voltages and the associated 
current densities are then plotted to create a JV curve. 

Drift-Diffusion Simulations

Device simulations are carried out using the open-source simulation code Driftfusion. This 
code allows for the simulation of semiconductors with electronic and ionic conduction. 
Details of the code, reasoning for the choices made in its construction and its capabilities 
can be found in Calado et al. [29].

Finding the device’s equilibrium condition – This process is outlined in Calado et al. [29] but 
is included here for clarity. The device starts with a set of initial conditions and runs through 
several steps to find the equilibrium solutions. The equilibrium solutions take the form of
the potential energy profile and the charge carrier densities as a function of position given 
no flow of energy or mass in or out of the defined system. For the ideal devices simulated in 
this work a linearly varying electrostatic potential, exponentially varying electronic carrier 
densities and a uniform density of anions and cations over the layer thickness are used for 
the initial conditions. These conditions ensure the boundary conditions are satisfied. 

For the entire device (multi-layered) simulations (in the figures 2d-f and figures 4d-f) the 
initial conditions are different in that the electronic carrier densities are set to the 
equilibrium densities of the individual layers (defined by the set fermi level/doping density). 
This ensures the boundary conditions are satisfied. The equilibrium solution process is the 
same as for single layer devices. 

Distribution function – A common distribution function used for drift-diffusion modelling of 
semiconducting devices is the Boltzmann approximation, which approximates Fermi-Dirac 
statistics, allowing for solutions for the charge carrier densities to be more easily obtained. 
This approximation is only valid when difference between the charge carrier’s energy and 
the Fermi level is ≫ 𝑘𝐵𝑇. In some of the devices in this work this is no longer the case, so 
the distribution function is changed to the Blakemore approximation [27,28] including the 
terms for diffusion enhancement and setting 𝛾 = 0.27.


19

Device Fabrication

ITO/PolyTPD/PFN-P2/MAPbI3/PTAA/Au/SiO2

All materials were purchased from Sigma Aldrich unless otherwise stated and used as 
received. ITO substrates were etched using Zn and 4 M HCl, and cleaned by sonication in 
dilute Hellmanex with boiling DI water for 15 minutes, rinsed with boiling DI water, 
sonicated in DI water, rinsed with acetone and sonicated in IPA. Substrates were dried with 
N2 and UV ozone cleaned for 15 minutes. All fabrication was in a N2 glovebox with 
continuous purging. PolyTPD (Ossila) solution (1.5 mg ml-1 in dichlorobenzene) was spin-
coated at 6000 rpm for 30 s (acceleration 2000 rpm s-1) followed by annealing at 100 °C for 
10 minutes. Next PFN-P2 (1-Material, 0.5 mg ml-1 in methanol) was coated at 5000 rpm for 
20 s (dynamic dispense). Acetonitrile:methylamine MAPbI3 solution was prepared following 
the procedure by Noel et al. [45], with methylamine gas flowed through a 0.5 M solution 
with a 1:1 molar ratio of MAI (Greatcell) and PbI2 (TCI) until dissolved. Films were spin-
coated at 2000 rpm and annealed at 100 °C for 15 minutes. PTAA solution (10 mg ml-1 in 
toluene) was prepared with additives (per ml) of 4 μl of tBP (4-tert-butylpyridine) and 7.5 μl 
of LiTFSI (from a 170 mg ml-1 stock solution in acetonitrile) and stirred overnight. The PTAA 
was then spin-coated at 4000 rpm (dynamic dispense). Devices were completed by 
thermally evaporating 80 nm of Au (CooksonGold) at 0.1 -1.2 Å s-1. Finally, SiO2 (K J Lesker) 
encapsulation was deposited by e-beam evaporation at 1 Å s-1 with a base pressure of 3E-6 
mbar. A 150 nm layer was deposited in two 75 nm steps to minimise substrate heating.

Acknowledgements

We thank Dr Davide Moia for his help with optimising circuit elements during the assembly 
of the experimental apparatus. We acknowledge funding from the UK Engineering and 
Physical Sciences Research Council (grants EP/M025020/1 , EP/R020574/1, EP/T028513/1, 
EP/R023581/1, EP/M014797/1).

References

[1]
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami, and H. J. Snaith, Efficient Hybrid Solar 
Cells Based on Meso-Superstructured Organometal Halide Perovskites, Science (80-. ). 338, 
(2012).

[2]
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, 
J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel, and N. G. Park, Lead Iodide Perovskite Sensitized All-Solid-
State Submicron Thin Film Mesoscopic Solar Cell with Efficiency Exceeding 9%, Sci. Rep. 2, 
(2012).

[3]
L. Dou, Y. M. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W. H. Chang, G. Li, and Y. Yang, Solution-Processed Hybrid 
Perovskite Photodetectors with High Detectivity, Nat. Commun. 5, (2014).

[4]
Y. Ling, Z. Yuan, Y. Tian, X. Wang, J. C. Wang, Y. Xin, K. Hanson, B. Ma, and H. Gao, Bright 
Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Organometal Halide Perovskite Nanoplatelets, Adv. Mater. 


20

28, (2016).

[5]
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman, and J. Huang, 
Giant Switchable Photovoltaic Effect in Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Devices, Nat. Mater. 
14, 193 (2014).

[6]
A. Rose, Space-Charge-Limited Currents in Solids, 1, (1955).

[7]
M. A. Lampert, Simplified Theory of Space-Charge-Limited Currents in an Insulator with Traps, 
Phys. Rev. 103, 1648 (1956).

[8]
J. A. Röhr and R. C. I. Mackenzie, Analytical Description of Mixed Ohmic and Space-Charge-
Limited Conduction in Single-Carrier Devices, J. Appl. Phys. 128, (2020).

[9]
P. Mark and W. Helfrich, Space-Charge-Limited Currents in Organic Crystals, J. Appl. Phys. 33, 
205 (1962).

[10]
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh, and M. S. Islam, Ionic Transport 
in Hybrid Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat. Commun. 6, 2 (2015).

[11]
A. Walsh, D. O. Scanlon, S. Chen, X. G. Gong, and S. H. Wei, Self-Regulation Mechanism for 
Charged Point Defects in Hybrid Halide Perovskites, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. (2015).

[12]
M. Sajedi Alvar, P. W. M. Blom, and G. J. A. H. Wetzelaer, Device Model for Methylammonium 
Lead Iodide Perovskite With Experimentally Validated Ion Dynamics, Adv. Electron. Mater. 
(2020).

[13]
N. F. Mott and R. W. Gurney, Electronic Processes in Ionic Crystals , 1st ed. (Oxford University 
Press, 1940).

[14]
R. H. Bube, Trap Density Determination by Space-Charge-Limited Currents, J. Appl. Phys. 33, 
1733 (1962).

[15]
J. Dacuña and A. Salleo, Modeling Space-Charge-Limited Currents in Organic Semiconductors: 
Extracting Trap Density and Mobility, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 84, 1 
(2011).

[16]
J. A. Röhr, D. Moia, S. A. Haque, T. Kirchartz, and J. Nelson, Exploring the Validity and 
Limitations of the Mott–Gurney Law for Charge-Carrier Mobility Determination of 
Semiconducting Thin-Films, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 30, 105901 (2018).

[17]
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, and M. Grätzel, 
Understanding the Rate-Dependent J-V Hysteresis, Slow Time Component, and Aging in 
CH3NH3PbI3perovskite Solar Cells: The Role of a Compensated Electric Field, Energy Environ. 
Sci. 8, 995 (2015).

[18]
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. 
Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent, 
and O. M. Bakr, Low Trap-State Density and Long Carrier Diffusion in Organolead Trihalide 
Perovskite Single Crystals, Science (80-. ). 347, 519 (2015).

[19]
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, 
L. Wang, Y. He, G. MacUlan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed, and O. M. Bakr, High-Quality 
Bulk Hybrid Perovskite Single Crystals within Minutes by Inverse Temperature Crystallization, 
Nat. Commun. 6, 1 (2015).

[20]
A. A. Zhumekenov, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, E. Alarousu, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. 
Dursun, X. H. Miao, A. L. Abdelhady, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed, and O. M. Bakr, 


21

Formamidinium Lead Halide Perovskite Crystals with Unprecedented Long Carrier Dynamics 
and Diffusion Length, ACS Energy Lett. 1, 32 (2016).

[21]
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao, and J. Huang, 5、Electron-Hole Diffusion 
Lengths > 175 m m in Solution-Grown CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 Single Crystals, Science (80-. ). 347, 967 
(2015).

[22]
G. Maculan, A. D. Sheikh, A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, B. Murali, E. 
Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu, and O. M. Bakr, CH3NH3PbCl3 Single Crystals: Inverse 
Temperature Crystallization and Visible-Blind UV-Photodetector, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 6, 3781 
(2015).

[23]
M. Sajedi Alvar, P. W. M. Blom, and G. J. A. H. Wetzelaer, Space-Charge-Limited Electron and 
Hole Currents in Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Perovskites, Nat. Commun. 11, (2020).

[24]
E. A. Duijnstee, J. M. Ball, V. M. Le Corre, L. J. A. Koster, H. J. Snaith, and J. Lim, Toward 
Understanding Space-Charge Limited Current Measurements on Metal Halide Perovskites, 
ACS Energy Lett. 376 (2020).

[25]
V. M. Le Corre, E. A. Duijnstee, O. El Tambouli, J. M. Ball, H. J. Snaith, J. Lim, and L. J. A. Koster, 
Revealing Charge Carrier Mobility and Defect Densities in Metal Halide Perovskites via Space-
Charge-Limited Current Measurements, ACS Energy Lett. 6, 1087 (2021).

[26]
W. Shockley and R. C. Prim, Space-Charge Limited Emission in Semiconductors, Phys. Rev. 90, 
753 (1953).

[27]
J. S. Blakemore, Approximations for Fermi-Dirac Integrals, Especially the Function F1 2(η) 
Used to Describe Electron Density in a Semiconductor, Solid State Electronics.

[28]
P. Farrell, M. Patriarca, J. Fuhrmann, and T. Koprucki, Comparison of Thermodynamically 
Consistent Charge Carrier Flux Discretizations for Fermi–Dirac and Gauss–Fermi Statistics, 
Opt. Quantum Electron. 50, (2018).

[29]
P. Calado, I. Gelmetti, B. Hilton, M. Azzouzi, J. Nelson, and P. R. F. Barnes, Driftfusion: An 
Open Source Code for Simulating Ordered Semiconductor Devices with Mixed Ionic-Electronic 
Conducting Materials in One-Dimension, arXiv.

[30]
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. 
Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J. P. Wolf, and V. Sundström, Organometal Halide 
Perovskite Solar Cell Materials Rationalized: Ultrafast Charge Generation, High and 
Microsecond-Long Balanced Mobilities, and Slow Recombination, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 
(2014).

[31]
O. Gunawan, S. R. Pae, D. M. Bishop, Y. Virgus, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. S. Lee, X. Shao, T. 
Todorov, D. B. Mitzi, and B. Shin, Carrier-Resolved Photo-Hall Effect, Nature 575, (2019).

[32]
C. Q. Xia, J. Peng, S. Poncé, J. B. Patel, A. D. Wright, T. W. Crothers, M. Uller Rothmann, J. 
Borchert, R. L. Milot, H. Kraus, Q. Lin, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz, and M. B. Johnston, Limits to 
Electrical Mobility in Lead-Halide Perovskite Semiconductors, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 12, (2021).

[33]
O. S. Game, G. J. Buchsbaum, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture, and A. I. Kingon, Ions Matter: Description 
of the Anomalous Electronic Behavior in Methylammonium Lead Halide Perovskite Devices, 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 27, (2017).

[34]
J. Euvrard, Y. Yan, and D. B. Mitzi, Electrical Doping in Halide Perovskites, Nature Reviews 
Materials.


22

[35]
G. Giorgi, J. I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa, and K. Yamashita, Small Photocarrier Effective Masses 
Featuring Ambipolar Transport in Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite: A Density 
Functional Analysis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 4, (2013).

[36]
P. Calado, A. M. Telford, D. Bryant, X. Li, J. Nelson, B. C. O’Regan, and P. R. F. Barnes, Evidence 
for Ion Migration in Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells with Minimal Hysteresis, Nat. Commun. 
(2016).

[37]
G. Richardson, S. E. J. O’Kane, R. G. Niemann, T. A. Peltola, J. M. Foster, P. J. Cameron, and A. 
B. Walker, Can Slow-Moving Ions Explain Hysteresis in the Current-Voltage Curves of 
Perovskite Solar Cells?, Energy Environ. Sci. 9, 1476 (2016).

[38]
N. E. Courtier, G. Richardson, and J. M. Foster, A Fast and Robust Numerical Scheme for 
Solving Models of Charge Carrier Transport and Ion Vacancy Motion in Perovskite Solar Cells, 
Appl. Math. Model. (2018).

[39]
R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, P. Calado, X. Li, S. J. C. Irvine, M. D. McGehee, P. R. 
F. Barnes, and B. C. O’Regan, Interpretation of Inverted Photocurrent Transients in Organic 
Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells: Proof of the Field Screening by Mobile Ions and 
Determination of the Space Charge Layer Widths, Energy Environ. Sci. 10, (2017).

[40]
L. Bertoluzzi, R. A. Belisle, K. A. Bush, R. Cheacharoen, M. D. McGehee, and B. C. O’Regan, In 
Situ Measurement of Electric-Field Screening in Hysteresis-Free 
PTAA/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/C60 Perovskite Solar Cells Gives an Ion Mobility of ∼3 × 
10-7 Cm2/(V s), 2 Orders of Magnitude Faster than Reported for Metal-Oxide-Contacted 
Perovskite Cells with Hysteresis, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, (2018).

[41]
S. A. L. Weber, I. M. Hermes, S. H. Turren-Cruz, C. Gort, V. W. Bergmann, L. Gilson, A. 
Hagfeldt, M. Graetzel, W. Tress, and R. Berger, How the Formation of Interfacial Charge 
Causes Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci. 11, (2018).

[42]
M. H. Futscher, J. M. Lee, L. McGovern, L. A. Muscarella, T. Wang, M. I. Haider, A. 
Fakharuddin, L. Schmidt-Mende, and B. Ehrler, Quantification of Ion Migration in 
CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells by Transient Capacitance Measurements, Mater. Horizons 
6, (2019).

[43]
S. T. Birkhold, J. T. Precht, H. Liu, R. Giridharagopal, G. E. Eperon, L. Schmidt-Mende, X. Li, and 
D. S. Ginger, Interplay of Mobile Ions and Injected Carriers Creates Recombination Centers in 
Metal Halide Perovskites under Bias, ACS Energy Lett. 3, (2018).

[44]
J. Siekmann, S. Ravishankar, and T. Kirchartz, Apparent Defect Densities in Halide Perovskite 
Thin Films and Single Crystals, ACS Energy Letters.

[45]
N. K. Noel, S. N. Habisreutinger, B. Wenger, M. T. Klug, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, R. J. 
Nicholas, D. T. Moore, and H. J. Snaith, A Low Viscosity, Low Boiling Point, Clean Solvent 
System for the Rapid Crystallisation of Highly Specular Perovskite Films, Energy Environ. Sci. 
10, (2017).

[46]
J. (University of L. McDougall and E. C. (University of L. Stoner, The Computation of Fermi-
Dirac Functions, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London 237, 67 (1938).


23

Supplementary Material

Fig. S1a-b Simulation results for the equilibrium solution of a device with symmetrical contacts with no 
workfunction offset at the valence-band (at -5.4eV) showing a) the energy levels and quasi-Fermi levels of the 
device and b) the charge carrier densities. 

Fig. S1c-d Simulation results for the equilibrium solution of the device investigated experimentally in this work 
a) the energy levels and quasi-Fermi levels of the device and b) the charge carrier densities.

Fig. S2 The experimentally determined JV curves from -1.5V to 1.5V of the thin-film device measured in 
figures 2 and 4. a) The JV sweep measured at 0.05 𝑉𝑠−1 in the order depicted by the numbered arrows
starting from 0 V. b) the JV curve measured buy the pulsed-voltage technique in the order depicted by the 
numbered arrows starting from 0V. The asymmetry in the current density magnitude in both figures between 
𝑉 > 0 and 𝑉 < 0 suggests that the device energetics are asymmetric. 


24

Fig. S3 The Electric field profile in the ideal device simulated in figure 3. a) the magnitude of the electric field is 
shown, allowing for a logarithmic scale to be used. The deice is equilibrium here. b) at 75V during a JV scan 
with the ionic charge frozen in its equilibrium distribution. The insets of both figures show a “zoom in” on the 
region close to the left-hand interface.  

Fig. S4 The Electrostatic potential profile in the ideal device simulated in figure 3. a) Electrostatic 
potential at equilibrium. b) the magnitude of the electrostatic potential is shown, allowing for a 
logarithmic scale to be used. Electrostatic potential is negative in for the whole device. The device is at 
75V during a JV scan with the ionic charge frozen in its equilibrium distribution. The insets of both figures 
show a “zoom in” on the region close to the left-hand interface.  


25

Fig. S5 Simulations on the device used to produce the experimental results in this work with the 
parameters displayed in SII but varying ion density with the ionic charge frozen in their equilibrium 
position. (a) shows the JV curves, (b) shows the 𝑔(𝑉) values and (c) shows the mobilities calculated using 
the MG law. A heavy dependence of the results on ion density is shown.

Fig. S6 Identical simulations to those in figure S5 except the selective charge transport regions have been 
removed. (a) shows the JV curves, (b) shows the 𝑔(𝑉) values and (c) shows the mobilities calculated 
using the MG law. The results are still dependent on ion density but the behaviour of the higher ion 
density scans is very different to those in figure S5 particularly in the low voltage region where the high 
ion density cases  have much lower current densities and g(V) values than their equivalent simulations in 
figure S5.  


26

Fig. S7 Analysis of a set of drift-diffusion simulations explaining the limits of the 
application of MG analysis to perovskite devices of thickness 400 nm showing the highest 
value of g(V) for each simulated JV curve for this set of devices. The red shaded box 
shows the region where 𝑔(𝑉) < 1.8.

Fig. S8 Analysis of a set of drift-diffusion simulations explaining the limits of the application of the MG 
law to perovskite devices of thickness 1𝜇𝑚. (a) A heat map representing the accuracy of the calculated 
mobility using the MG law for a set of contact energies (workfunction offset) and a set of ion densities. 
The set mobility is 20 cm2V-1s-1. The red shaded region represents the simulated JV curves where g(V)
never entered the selection zone for MG analysis. (b) The calculated mean electronic charge density for 
perovskite layers of different ion density at equilibrium at 0.11eV 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡. The blue line on figure (a) is 
where the calculations to produce figure (b) are made. The region highlighted by a black-dashed box 
filled in yellow in (b) falls under the limit 5𝑐̅ < 𝑛̅ and corresponds to the regions of the colour-map with 
mobilites withing the black-dashed box on the colour -scale in (a), this is where the MG law can be 
meaningfully applied.


27

Fig. S9 (a) JV simulations of a device with 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 = 0.3 𝑒𝑉 and thickness 100𝜇𝑚 where ion density 
is varied. (b) the g(V) values calculated from the JV curves in (a) – note that the blue curve is very 
close to the red curve and is obscured. (c) the mobility values calculated from the region in the black 
box of (b): the region where the peaks in g(V) occur. 


28

Fig. S10 Heat maps of results from JV simulations to 2000 V with ionic charge frozen in their 
equilibrium distribution of a device with 𝜙𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑡 = 0.2 𝑒𝑉 whilst varying the thickness of the 
active layer. (a) The mobility calculated using the MG law at the position of maximum g(V) in 
the JV curve. Note that the dark blue colour refers to a range of values from 𝜇 = 0.03 →
10 𝑐𝑚2𝑉−1𝑠−1, this was done such that the colour change is maximised near the mobility 
set in the simulations (𝜇 = 20𝑐𝑚2𝑉−1𝑠−1).  (b) the maximum value of 𝑔(𝑉) during the 
simulated JV curves, the values of 𝑔(𝑉) > 1.8 indicate a SCLC regime has been reached. (c) 
the voltage at which the maximum value of 𝑔(𝑉) occurred during the JV scan. 


29

Calculation for the estimation of the upper limit of charge carrier densities in 
single carrier perovskite devices:

Derivations of this form are very common in many semiconductor textbooks and lecture 
series, the derivation used here is some arbitrary combination of many of them. In a device 
with ideal ohmic contacts the work function energies of the contacts are aligned with the 
conduction band (electron affinity) or valence band (ionization potential) energies of the 

Fig. S11 (a) the injected electronic charge averaged across the device thickness at 100V 
during JV scans vs ion density. The specific limit for MG analysis of this device is shown by 
the black dashed line. (b) the mean total electronic charge density at equilibrium and at 
20V during JV scans, the blue circle represents the intersection of our suggested limit 
(black dashed line) and the charge density at equilibrium, for ion densities lower than at 
the blue circle, MG analysis will be valid. (c) the injected electronic charge averaged 
across the device thickness at 100 V during JV scans vs ion density. The specific limit for 
MG analysis of this device is shown by the black dashed line.

Fig S12. An example of current transients at four separate probe voltages (two negative and 
two positive). The dotted lines represent the linear fits to the data at times immediately after 
the capacitive response. The instantaneous current density is then inferred from the linear fit 
at t = 0 s.


30

semiconductor. Under these circumstances the maximum density of electrons or holes in 
the semiconductor can be estimated by finding the density when the Fermi level (EF) is at 
the conduction or valence band edge. The electron density in a semiconducting material can 
be calculated from the integral:

𝑛0 = ∫
𝑔(𝐸)𝐹(𝐸)𝑑𝐸

∞
𝐸𝑐
[7]

where Ec is the energy of the conduction band edge, g(E) is the density of states and F(E) is 
the occupancy factor as a function of energy E.  The equation for approximating the density 
of states near the conduction band edge of a semiconductor is also well known if the system 
is 3 dimensional and the dispersion relation is assumed to be parabolic: 

𝑔(𝐸) =

(𝑚∗)

3
2√2(𝐸−𝐸𝑐)

𝜋2ℏ3
[8]

where m* is the effective mass of the electron and ℏ is the reduced Planck’s constant. The 
occupancy factor is given by the Fermi-Dirac distribution (since Boltzmann statistics do not 
apply for (𝐸 − 𝐸𝐹) ≤ 𝑘𝐵𝑇),

𝐹(𝐸) =

1

1+𝑒

(𝐸−𝐸𝐹)

𝑘𝐵𝑇

[9]

where kBT is the thermal energy.  Equations [8] and [9] are substituted into [7] assuming EF = 
EC and rearranged to obtain an integral known as the Fermi-Dirac integral of order ½ (here 
𝐹1/2(𝜂𝐹)) giving,

𝑛0 = √2(𝑚∗𝑘𝐵𝑇)

3
2

𝜋2ℏ3
∫

𝜂

1
2

1+exp (𝜂−𝜂𝐹) 𝑑𝜂

∞
0
[10]

where the substitutions 𝜂 = (𝐸 − 𝐸𝑐)/𝑘𝐵𝑇 and 𝜂𝐹 = (𝐸𝐹 − 𝐸𝑐)/𝑘𝐵𝑇 have been made. For 
a device with ideal and symmetrical Ohmic contacts the equilibrium position of the Fermi 
level in the perovskite is at the conduction band edge meaning 𝜂𝐹 = 0 and 𝐹1/2(0). Values 
for the general function 𝐹1/2(𝑥) have been evaluated in [46] giving 𝐹1/2(0) = 0.678 (only 
quoted to 3dp here). Then taking 𝑚∗ ≈ 0.23𝑚𝑒 in a perovskite conduction band (assumed 
as MAPbI3 here) [35] where me is the rest mass of an electron. We obtain an upper limit of 
𝑛0 ≤ 2 × 1018𝑐𝑚−3.


31

Simulation Parameters

VARIABLE
MAPI
UNIT

Thickness
4x10-5
cm

Electron affinity
-3.8
eV

Ionization potential
-5.4
eV

Equilibrium Fermi energy
-4.6
eV

eDOS conduction band
1x1019
cm-3

eDOS valence band
1x1019
cm-3

Cation density
1x1018
cm-3

Anion density
1x1018
cm-3

Electron mobility
20
cm2 V-1 s-1

Hole mobility
20
cm2 V-1 s-1

Cation mobility
1x10-10
cm2 V-1 s-1

Anion mobility
0
cm2 V-1 s-1

Relative dielectric constant
23
-

Device Boundaries
Left hand boundary electron 
extraction coefficient

1x1010
cm s-1

Right hand boundary electron 
extraction coefficient

1x1010
cm s-1

Left hand boundary hole 
extraction coefficient

1x1010
cm s-1

Right hand boundary hole 
extraction coefficient

1x1010
cm s-1

ϕm,left
-5.4
eV

ϕm,right
-5.4
eV

Table SI. Key parameters for metal/perovskite/metal device simulation results presented in 
figures 1 and 3 in the main text.


32

Variable
MAPI
PolyTPD PTAA
Unit

Thickness
4x10-5
6x10-7
2x10-6
cm

Electron affinity
-3.8
-2.3
-2.3
eV

Ionization potential
-5.4
-5.2
-5.3
eV

Equilibrium Fermi energy
-4.6
-5
-5.1
eV

eDOS conduction band
1x1019
1x1019
1x1019
cm-3

eDOS valence band
1x1019
1x1019
1x1019
cm-3

Cation density
1x1018
-
-
cm-3

Anion density
1x1018
-
-
cm-3

Electron mobility
20
7.5x10-3
7.5x10-3
cm2 V-1 s-1

Hole mobility
20
7.5x10-3
7.5x10-3
cm2 V-1 s-1

Cation mobility
1x10-10
-
-
cm2 V-1 s-1

Anion mobility
0
-
-
cm2 V-1 s-1

Relative dielectric constant
23
3
3
-

Device Boundaries
Left hand boundary electron 
extraction coefficient

-
-
1x1010
cm s-1

Right hand boundary electron 
extraction coefficient

-
1x1010
-
cm s-1

Left hand boundary hole 
extraction coefficient

-
-
1x1010
cm s-1

Right hand boundary hole 
extraction coefficient

-
1x1010
-
cm s-1

𝜙𝑚,𝑙𝑒𝑓𝑡
-5.1
eV

𝜙𝑚,𝑟𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡
-4.5
eV

Table SII. Key parameters for Au/PTAA/perovskite/PolyTPD/ITO simulations presented in 
figures 2 and 4 in the main text.


