1

Direct visualization of ultrafast lattice ordering triggered

by an electron-hole plasma in 2D perovskites

Hao Zhang1,2, Wenbin Li1,2, Joseph Essman1, Claudio Quarti3,4, Isaac Metcalf5, Wei-Yi Chiang6, 
Siraj Sidhik1,5, Jin Hou5, Austin Fehr1, Andrew Attar7, Ming-Fu Lin7, Alexander Britz7, Xiaozhe 
Shen7, Stephan Link6, Xijie Wang7, Uwe Bergmann8,9, Mercouri G. Kanatzidis10,Claudine Katan3, 
Jacky Even11, Jean-Christophe Blancon1* and Aditya D. Mohite1*

1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas 
77005, USA.

2Applied Physics Program, Smalley‐Curl Institute, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, 
USA.

3Univ Rennes, ENSCR, INSA Rennes, CNRS, ISCR (Institut des Sciences Chimiques de 
Rennes) - UMR 6226, F-35000 Rennes, France.

4Laboratory for Chemistry of Novel Materials, Department of Chemistry, University of 
Mons, Place du Parc 20, 7000 Mons, Belgium

5Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, 
77005, USA.

6Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA.

7SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.

8PULSE Institute, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA

9Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA.

10Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

11Univ Rennes, CNRS, Institut FOTON (Fonctions Optiques pour les Technologies de 
l'Information), UMR 6082, CNRS, INSA de Rennes, 35708 Rennes, France.

*Correspondence: blanconjc@gmail.com and adm4@rice.edu

Direct visualization of ultrafast coupling between charge carriers and lattice degrees of 

freedom in photo-excited semiconductors has remained a long-standing challenge and is 

critical for understanding the light-induced physical behavior of materials under extreme 

non-equilibrium conditions. Here, by monitoring the evolution of the wave-vector resolved 

ultrafast electron diffraction intensity following above-bandgap photo-excitation, we obtain 

a direct visual of the structural dynamics in monocrystalline 2D perovskites. Analysis reveals 

a surprising, light-induced ultrafast lattice ordering resulting from a strong interaction 

between hot-carriers and the perovskite lattice, which induces an in-plane octahedra rotation, 

towards a more symmetric phase. Correlated ultrafast spectroscopy performed at the same 


2

carrier density as ultrafast electron diffraction reveals that the creation of a hot and dense 

electron-hole plasma triggers lattice ordering at short timescales by modulating the crystal 

cohesive energy. Finally, we show that the interaction between the carrier gas and the lattice

can be altered by tailoring the rigidity of the 2D perovskite by choosing the appropriate 

organic spacer layer.

Organic-inorganic (hybrid) two-dimensional (2D) halide perovskites are constructed by a 

superlattice of interlocking organic and inorganic nanometer-thick layers and have demonstrated 

unique and non-classical behaviors and are being extensively explored for a wide range of 

technologies such as photovoltaics, photodetectors, photocatalysts, light emitting diodes, lasers, 

and quantum emitters.1–9 The underlying design principles for each of these devices are strongly 

correlated to the exact details of how photoexcited or electronically injected charge carriers 

dissipate their energy via electron-phonon coupling. For example, it has been shown recently, that 

unusual electron-phonon coupling mechanisms are likely to promote emission of single photons 

or correlated photons pairs from perovskite quantum sources.10 There have been only handful 

experimental studies, which have employed ultrafast or temperature dependent optical 

spectroscopy to elucidate carrier dynamics in 2D perovskites. Room temperature coherent 

oscillations were observed from two-dimensional coherent excitation spectroscopy in 2D 

perovskites with aromatic barriers as organic barriers.11 These oscillations were attributed to a 

combination of a resonant effect within the exciton fine structure and to electron-phonon coupling 

with low–frequency optical modes. Recent work by Quan et al used optical pump-probe 

spectroscopy to show that vibrational relaxation dynamics in 2D perovskites formed from flexible 

alkyl-amines as organic barriers is fast and relatively independent of the lattice temperature, 

whereas  from aromatic amines is slower, and are temperature dependent.12 Moreover, Gong et al

has shown the crystal rigidity strongly affects the strength of electron-phonon coupling and

therefore promotes carrier trapping, leading to a fast non-radiative decay.5 These measurements 

show that presence of an organic cation in close proximity to the inorganic perovskite lattice 

strongly modulates the nature of electron-phonon interactions,5,11–18 and suggested that electron-

phonon scattering in 2D perovskites occur via, local dynamic disorder.6 These short-range carrier-

lattice interactions modulates the quantum-well thickness and octahedral tilts, leading to exciton 

self-trapping and broadband emission, thanks to the lattice softness, suggesting potential benefit 

of 2D perovskites in white-light applications. However, there exists no direct ultrafast structural 


3

measurement of 2D perovskites, which elucidates the underlying carrier-lattice interaction

mechanisms upon optical excitation. Moreover, the exact geometry and dynamics of these lattice 

distortions are unknown. This is largely due to the challenges in visualizing the carrier-lattice 

coupling and dynamics that result after optical excitation above the band-gap. 

Here we report the first direct measurement of structural dynamics in 2D perovskites 

obtained by monitoring the change in the ultrafast femtosecond electron diffraction (UED) after

optical excitation. This technique enables a time-resolved structural evolution of the 2D 

perovskites by tracking the changes in the diffraction pattern, thus providing a direct visualization 

of lattice response during carrier cooling. Detailed analysis of the Bragg peak intensities and 

temporal signatures reveals a non-classical light-induced lattice ordering at early times (≤1 ps), 

which is attributed to the light-induced in-plane rotation of the perovskite octahedra from a 

distorted toward a symmetrical phase. Complementary transient absorption measurements further 

reveal a high excitation regime (beyond Mott transition),19,20 where hot and dense electron-hole 

plasma strongly modulates the crystal cohesive energy,21 leading to an ultrafast lattice ordering. In 

parallel, a classical energy transfer to the whole phonon bath via thermal atomic displacements

was observed, which was attributed to the Debye-Waller effect. The Debye-Waller effect was 

associated with a slower rise time (~ 5ps) of the thermal dissipation (or lattice heating) leading to 

coherent acoustic oscillations over longer time. Concomitant with the Debye-Waller effect, we 

also observe an increase in the diffused scattering, which confirms the activation of thermal 

transfer to the phonon bath. Finally, we show that the mechanism and dynamics of the interaction 

between the charge carriers and the lattice are acutely tunable and sensitive to the rigidity of the 

2D perovskites dictated by the choice of the organic spacer layer. These findings reveal new and 

distinct carrier-lattice interactions and counterintuitive mechanisms in 2D perovskites, which have 

not been reported in classical materials such as Si, GaAs or even in 3D halide perovskites.22,23

UED experiment on 2D perovskites

The UED experiments are performed in a pump-probe setup in which sub-micron thick 2D hybrid 

perovskite single crystals are photoexcited with a 75-fs pulse laser and the structural dynamics are

probed with a pulsed electron beam with 150 fs temporal width after specific delay times (t) (Fig. 


4

1a). A diffraction image is acquired at each delay time after above-gap excitation (Fig. 1b), which 

reflects the instantaneous 2D perovskite crystal structure. Monitoring the characteristics of the

diffraction peaks (or Bragg peaks) on the image allows us to directly probe the dynamic changes 

in the lattice structure after light excitation. These changes directly reflect the carrier-lattice 

Fig. 1 | UED measurements on 4AMP-MAPb2I7 (DJ n=2) 2D perovskite. a, Schematics of 
UED apparatus. The directions of light pump and electron probe with respect to crystal 
orientation is illustrated. (inset) Optical microscopic top-view image of DJ n=2 single crystal.
The dashed yellow line idicates the transmission window for the electron beam. Scale bar is 
50µm. b, Electron diffraction pattern of DJ n=2 crystal at different pump-probe delay time: t = 
0 ps, 1 ps and 35 ps. c, Static diffraction pattern (t≤0) and indexing of Bragg planes (hk0). 
Diffraction peaks circled with white, brown, cyan, green, and yellow colors belong to {200}, 
{110}, {400}, {310}, and {220} Bragg peak families, respectively. The diffraction peaks 
{110} are partialled blocked by the direct beam filter (q<1Å-1). d, Crystal structure of DJ n=2 
viewing at [110] and [001] directions, showing intrinsic antiferro-distortion (in-plane 
octahedral rotations). The corresponding Bragg plane directions are displayed for {400}
(cyan),{310} (green) and {220} (yellow).


5

interactions during energy relaxation (cooling) of the high-energy photoexcited carriers (hot 

carriers) to the 2D perovskite semiconductors band-edge. We start with a phase-pure (homogenous 

perovskite layer thickness) 2D perovskite crystal of Dion-Jacobson 4AMP-MAPb2I7 (DJ n=2) with 

thickness of 270 nm (Fig. 1a and Fig. S1), which is excited with 3.1 eV light, i.e. 0.9 eV above its 

ground state optical transition24. The diffraction pattern of DJ n=2 at rest is consistent with the 

static crystal structure reported previously (Fig. 1c and 1d, and details in Fig. S2),24 which exhibits

antiferro-distortions (clockwise and anticlockwise octahedral rotations around the c axis) 

associated with an in-plane doubling of the unit cell (in-plane is defined by a and b axes).25,26 The 

diffraction pattern also indicates that the orientation of the crystal layers is parallel to the substrate 

(see Supplementary discussion 1 and Fig. S2), with both the light excitation and the probe electron 

beams impinging along the DJ n=2 stacking axis (c axis), as depicted in Fig. 1a. 

Fig. 2a shows the differential diffraction map indicating the change in the Bragg peak

intensities of the DJ n=2 crystal that occurs within a few picoseconds (t =2 ps, averaged within 

1~3ps) after light excitation with a fluence of 2 mJ/cm2 (corresponds to a carrier density of 

2.5×1013cm-2, see Supplementary discussion 2). In this map, the blue and red spots correspond, 

respectively, to a relative decrease and increase in the peak intensities after photoexcitation with 

respect to the sample at rest. A first visual inspection of this data reveals both an anisotropic 

response with respect to the in-plane directions in the 2D perovskite lattice and a monotonically 

decreasing of absolute intensity response with respect to the magnitude of the scattering vector |q|. 

The Bragg peaks that show a detectable increase in their intensity after light excitation are (400), 

(040), and (220) (Fig. 2a). The (220) belongs to the {hh0} family and corresponds to the d-spacing

of 3.2 Å (Pb-I bonds) along the octahedra diagonal (shown as the highlighted yellow rectangle in 

Fig. 2b), whereas the (400) and (040) Bragg peaks are in the {h00} family correlated with the d-

spacing of 2.25 Å (half of octahedron length) along the edge of the octahedra (a and b directions, 

shown as cyan in Fig. 2b). On the contrary, higher orders of these two Bragg families such as (800), 

(330) and (550)), as well as other directions with reasonable signal ((310), (530), (750) and (1020), 

all exhibit a decrease in their intensities after photoexcitation. Details of these Bragg peak traces 


6

Fig. 2 | Collective lattice ordering observed from UED response of DJ n=2 crystal. a,
Differential diffraction map at t=2 (±1) ps, acquired by subtracting the averaged response of 
1~3 ps after light excitation by the response at rest (t≤0 ps). The intensity change ΔI (increase 
and decrease) of each specific Bragg peak (hk0) is indicated by red and blue colors, 
respectively. The map is zoomed in to the first quadrant (0<qx, qy<6Å-1). b, Crystal structure
at rest showing intrinsic antiferro-distortion (top) and simulated structure reducing the 
distortion (bottom), with disorder parameter θ defined as half of the interlayer octahedral 
rotations. For clarity the organic cations are omitted. c, Simulated differential diffraction map 
between the two crystal structures in Fig. 2b, showing intensity change (ΔI) of each Bragg 
peak after reducing the disorder parameter θ. d, Angular-integrated differential diffraction
(filtering out diffuse scattering regions), comparing the experimental data (t=2 (±1) ps) (gray 
solid line and shadow), the expected Debye-Waller response (gray dashed line), and simulated 
signal acquired from Fig. 2c (black solid line). Note that the {110} peaks are partially filtered 
by the direct beam blocker (Fig. 1c).


7

are illustrated in Fig. S3. Furthermore, these transient intensity response scales monotonically 

with the pump fluence (1mJ/cm2, estimated carrier density 1.3×1013cm-3), as shown in Fig. S4 for 

the representative Bragg peaks.

We note that opposite to our results, classical semiconductors (such as Si and GaAs),

including inorganic 2D materials (for example, transition metal dichalcogenides such as MoS2 and 

MoSe2), exhibit in most cases a decrease in Bragg peak intensities after photoexcitation.22,27,28 In

layered 2D materials an increase of Bragg peaks has been reported, which results from a 

suppression of charge density waves leading to a change of crystal symmetry,29 however no 

evidence of charge density waves has been reported in halide perovskites. Additionally, large 

multiple scattering effects in monocrystalline samples can also spuriously induce unexpected 

increase of Bragg peak intensities upon photoexcitation.30 However, our estimation of extinction 

distance of DJ n=2 perovskite is much larger than its sample thickness, implying that the multiple 

scattering effects are not likely to occur for our 2D perovskites, especially under MeV electron 

beams, whose cross sections are much lower than KeV electrons (see Supplementary discussion 

3). In classical materials, the UED signal is attributed to a typical Debye-Waller response, which 

corresponds to an energy transfer from hot carriers to the low-frequency vibrational density of 

states, which scale as |q|2.22,31 Recent study on hybrid three-dimensional (3D) perovskites (MAPbI3) 

also suggests a Debye-Waller like response, where octahedral rotational disorder induces 

additional structural deformations.23 The counterintuitive and opposite behavior of light-induced 

ordering in some specific crystal directions in DJ n=2 crystals implies that there must exist another

competing mechanism, via which the photogenerated hot carriers strongly interact with the lattice 

resulting in transient structural change, instead of thermal activation of the phonon bath leading to 

lattice heating. The increase in the intensities of specific Bragg peaks, thereby counteracting the 

Debye-Waller effect at short time scale and enhancing the lattice ordering in specific directions. 

Mechanism of transient lattice ordering

Qualitative analysis of the diffraction peaks in Fig. 2a suggests that the light-induced 

transformation may be related to the in-plane lattice ordering along specific directions. Therefore, 

we hypothesize that this observed anisotropic lattice ordering originates from the reduction of 

antiferro-distortions, a specific type of structural deformation involving the rotations of octahedra, 

which are widely expected in perovskites materials.9,23,32 To quantify this distortion, we define the 


8

in-plane distortion angle θ as the half of the interlayer Pb-I bonds tilt (Fig. 2b), where 2θ is around 

24º for the intrinsic structural distortion.24 To further testify this hypothesis of octahedral rotations, 

we slightly reduced the distortion parameter θ to match the extent of Bragg peak increase in Fig. 

2a, and simulated the differential diffraction pattern with respect to the crystal structure in the dark 

(θ0 = 12º). Compared with the relative intensity changes at short time, the optimal angle tilt is 

found to be ~0.25º (details of simulation shown in Supplementary discussion 4 and Fig. S5), and 

the simulated differential diffraction map in Fig. 2c. Compared to the distorted crystal structure at

rest, the new structure reduces the adjacent octahedral tilt along the stacking axis (antiferro-

distortion), and better aligns the iodine atoms for both octahedral edge {h00} and diagonal 

directions {hh0}, especially the distance spacings of Pb-I bonds {220} and half of octahedral edge 

lengths {400} (yellow and cyan in Fig. 2b). This structural change intensifies the in-plane Bragg 

peaks including {400} and {200}, consistent with the experimental observation at short time (Fig. 

2a). Furthermore, we note that the expected intensity increase is not observed for the higher orders 

of the Bragg peaks in these two families, such as {800}, {330} and {550}, (Fig. 2a). We attribute 

this deviation to the combination of both the light-induced ordering and the Debye-Waller response.

However, because the Debye-Waller effect scales with a |q|2 dependence, it dominates and thus 

neutralizes the effect of ordering for the higher order Bragg peaks. We note that the response of 

{110} peaks are partially blocked by the direct electron beam filter, resulting a lower-than expected 

intensity increase in Fig. 2d. To quantitively compare these intensity changes, we also perform an 

angular integration at constant |q| of these differential diffraction images (t=2ps and the simulated 

one after ordering) (Fig. 2d). The experimental and simulated results are in fair agreement, 

especially in the low q-value region (1 Å-1 < |q| < 3 Å-1) where the Debye-Waller effect is weaker. 

Therefore, these observations support the hypothesis that the light-induced ordering in DJ n=2, is 

due to the collective lattice reorganization that reduces the octahedral rotations (Fig. 2b). As the 

in-plane octahedra antiferro-distortion of the perovskite lattice at rest is non-polar and the light-

induced atomic motions are essentially affecting the magnitude of the distortion (Fig. 2a), our 

results imply that carrier coupling to the related optical phonon mode is associated with a non-

polar deformation potential mechanism.6 This analysis is further confirmed by our calculations of 

vibrational modes, which reveals that antiferro-distortive phonon modes associated with the

octahedra rotations are predicted for the crystal structure at rest (Fig. S6). 


9

Next, in order to gain a deeper insight into the time evolution of the light-induced structural 

dynamics in 2D hybrid perovskites, we performed a full analysis (up to 100 ps) of the time-

dependent intensity changes of the diffraction images after optical excitation. The time traces of 

the two Bragg peaks {400} and {530} are displayed in Fig. 3a, where the {400} peaks exhibit a 

significant faster rise-time (~1ps, Fig. S3), revealing a diverse response in Bragg peak dynamics 

besides the intensity change. Furthermore, an overall increase of diffuse scatterings in-between the 

Bragg peaks spots is visualized, in the differential diffraction images as shown in Fig. 3b. 

Compared between short-time (t=2ps) and long-time delays (t=65ps), the regions in-between the 

Bragg peaks spots appear redder as most of the Bragg peaks intensifies toward a negative response.

The evolution of the integrated diffuse scattering intensities yields an average increase with ~0.5%

(Fig. S3), suggesting a broad energy transfer process to the phonon bath, along with the Debye 

Waller effect specified at Bragg peak locations.

To further quantify the different types of lattice dynamics, we fit each Bragg peak intensity 

curve with a single exponential function, yielding a rise-time constant τ and relative intensity 

change Δ = (I − I0)/I0, where I0 and I correspond to the diffraction intensity at rest and after delay 

time t, respectively. Here, the parameter Δ represents the total peak intensity change due to carrier-

lattice interactions and τ the time to achieve 1/e intensity change as shown in Fig. S7a and S7b, 

respectively. The maximum positive change (increase in intensity) is 4% and the negative change 

(decrease in intensity) is 12% (detailed plots in Fig. S3a). The time constant map shows a clear 

disparity between the dynamics from different Bragg peak groups. First, the Bragg peaks with

positively changing intensity for which the light-induced lattice ordering mechanism dominates

({400} and {040}), exhibit a very fast time constant of 1 ps or shorter, whereas the peaks with 

negative intensity response yield a longer time constant of the order of 5 ps. Similar time constants 

have also been reported in 3D perovskites and have been attributed to the Debye-Waller like 

response originating from the rotational disorder of the iodine atoms in the perovskite octahedra, 

leading exclusively to a decrease in peak intensities.23 A modification of our model including the 

Debye-Waller effect at long time scale is shown to give a better prediction of intensity changes at 

large q range than the lattice ordering effect (Fig. S8), confirming the existence of multiple energy 

transfer process in 2D perovskites. Second, both the intensity changes and time constants show a 

significant anisotropy with respect to directions in the DJ n=2 crystals, which reflects the lack of 

a tetragonal axis in the monoclinic centered structure (space group Cc n°9) of the crystals at rest 


10

Fig. 3 | Lattice (in-plane) and carrier response of DJ n=2 crystal under light excitation. 
a, Intensity dynamic plots of peak families {400} and {530}. b, 2D differential diffraction 
map averaged at t = 2ps (left half) and t = 65ps (right half), with blue for intensity decrease 
and red for increase. The dashed region indicates the area with the most increase of diffuse 
scatterings. c, Schematics of light-induced reduction of antiferro-distortion and thermally 
activated atomic displacement from Debye-Waller effect. d, Evolution of carrier temperatures 
(Tc) as a function of delay times at different excitation densities (1.1~8.4×1012 cm-2). e, 
Estimation of saturation densities (N2D) for DJ n=2 (red) and RP n=2 (blue) crystals at 
different temperatures. The saturation densities due to electron-hole plasma and exciton gas 
are shown in solid and dashed lines, respectively. 


11

because of the geometry and structure of the 4AMP cation. We also note that the intensity traces 

of some Bragg peaks such as {330} and {550} show a long recovery time (>30 ps, Fig. S3a), 

which could be related to other heat transfer mechanisms and phonon-phonon interactions.27

All these observations from UED suggest that there are multiple competing mechanisms at 

play, which attest to the different origins and time scales of carrier-lattice interactions, as illustrated

in Fig. 3d. We propose that the light-induced lattice ordering, which was attributed to the reduction 

of the in-plane lattice antiferro-distortion at ultrafast time scale (≤ 1 ps), and at longer timescales 

(~5 ps) a Debye-Waller like response. Here, the transient increase in the collective ordering in the 

DJ n=2 lattice may be viewed as an incomplete transformation towards a completely ordered phase.

Indeed, differential calorimetry measurements on DJ n=2 single crystals do not show any evidence 

of a temperature-induced phase transition above ambient temperature toward a perfectly ordered 

phase (Fig. S9). Besides, temperature dependent XRD exhibits no sign of phase transition, and 

rather results in a global decrease of the Bragg peak intensities due to a Debye-Waller effect and 

linear thermal expansion (Fig. S10). Additionally, the perfectly undistorted 2D perovskite 

reference phase has only been observed in the fully inorganic Cs-based Cs2PbI2Cl2 2D perovskite

at room temperature,33 which emphasize the importance of the anisotropy of the 4AMP organic 

cations in the structure for the lattice distortion in hybrid 2D perovskites. On the contrary,

undistorted phases are common for hybrid 3D perovskite compounds at room temperature and 

therefore any ultrafast light-induced ordering is lacking.34

Ultrafast carrier-lattice interactions triggered by dense electron-hole plasma

In order to gain a complete picture of energy transfer and understand the structural dynamics 

observed in UED measurements, we performed transient absorption (TA) measurements in the 

same temporal window with the similar excitation fluences as the UED experiments on DJ n=2 

crystal, (SI discussion 5 and Methods). By monitoring the transmission variations following 

above-band optical pump et 3.1eV, we estimated the evolution of effective temperature (Tc) of 

hot-carrier gas, by fitting the high-energy tail near the band edge with the Maxwell-Boltzmann 

distribution. (analysis details in supplementary discussion 5 and Fig. S11).35 The hot-carrier 

dynamics for various fluences are displayed in Fig. 3c. We observe a fast build-up time of initial 

carrier temperature within hundreds of femtoseconds, corresponding to carrier-carrier scattering 

before quasi-equilibrium distribution of hot-carriers. The carrier cooling time is estimated to be 


12

sub-ps to 1ps, which increases monotonically with excitation fluence. This carrier cooling time 

constant is consistent with previous reports on DJ perovskites poly-crystalline films ((4AMP) 

PbI4).36 The extracted hot-carrier cooling time was 1.1 ps at 8.4×1012cm-2, which also corresponds 

to the rise time of (400) Bragg peaks that exhibit lattice ordering, thus hinting at correlated 

processes that govern the structural change and the carrier dynamics measured using ultrafast 

spectroscopy.

To elucidate the microscopic origin of ultrafast lattice ordering, and how the role of 

photoexcited carriers in activating the reduction of antiferro-distortion, we performed an in-depth

analysis of the excitation regime (electron-hole pair plasma vs exciton gas) of DJ n=2 samples in 

UED. In order to achieve this, we followed the seminal analysis proposed by Schmitt-Rink, 

Chemla and Miller for excitonic non-linear optical effects in 2D semiconductors.19,20 First, at a 

fluence of 1 mJ/cm2 in UED experiment, a high electron-hole pair density of 1.3×1013 cm2 is 

generated. The effective temperature of initial carrier gas is estimated to be 4100K, extrapolated 

from the carrier temperature plotted in Fig. 3c. Next, we computed the saturation densities for 

excitonic responses in DJ n=2 perovskites, by taking into account the exciton binding energy and 

Bohr radius of 1s exciton resonance, and comparing these values with RP n=2 compound (see 

supplementary discussion 6).19,37 A summary of these saturation densities at different carrier 

temperatures is plotted in Fig. 3e. Here, the dashed horizontal lines correspond to the saturation 

due to the exciton gas (Mott transition), above which photoexcited carriers are not described by 

excitons but by a hot electron-hole plasma.19 The solid line draws the saturation by electron-hole 

plasma at low and high temperature ranges. As analyzed by Schmitt-Rink, Chemla and Miller, a 

cold exciton gas is more efficient in saturating the exciton resonance than a hot carrier plasma. The 

very high plasma pair density of 1.3×1013cm-2 (for 1 mJ/cm2 in the UED experiment) nonetheless 

exceeds the saturation densities for both hot carrier plasma and cold exciton gas regimes by one 

order of magnitude. Therefore, we conclude that the observed energy transfer at short time in the 

UED experiment is rather related to the coupling of a hot and dense carrier plasma to the lattice,

instead of exciton polaronic couplings as reported in other studies at low temperature and low 

excitation power.18

In the case of a dense electron-hole plasma, strong transient lattice distortions different 

from Debye-Waller effects can be induced in semiconductors. For example, transient strain pulses 


13

can be generated by supersonically propagating plasmas, traveling deep into crystal bulk beyond 

the speed of sound.38,39 Moreover, complex lattice organizations have been also recently observed, 

such as the suppression of the ferroelectric instability KaTO3,40 and the activation of the antiferro-

distorsive rotation of octahedra in SrTiO3.41 The last case, which was interpreted on the basis of a 

photodoping-induced modification of the structural soft-mode potential, might be closely related 

to our present study on 2D perovskites. Furthermore, it was shown that the ultrafast dynamics 

(~0.2 ps) of the observed antiferro-distortion in SrTiO3 is non-thermally driven by changes of the 

phonon potential.41 These results and analysis have enabled us to propose a complete picture 

involving carrier-lattice interactions in short time, where high-density injection of carriers 

generates a hot and dense electron-hole plasma. The electron-hole plasma that produces a strong 

modification of the lattice dielectric properties on one hand results in the screening of bound 

electron-hole (exciton) pair formation, and on the other hand modifies the interatomic force 

constants. This last mechanism of plasma-induced modulation of the interatomic force must be 

considered because halide perovskites are strongly ionic materials like SrTiO3. The resulting

modification of the crystal cohesive energy, manifests as a strong lattice reorganization with

antiferro-distortive rotation of octahedra in 2D DJ perovskites. In parallel, a more classical decay 

of the plasma energy occurs through electron-phonon interactions and observed in structural 

dynamics associated with a Debye-Waller effect. This classical process is mainly associated to an 

initial activation of optical phonons, that decay later toward acoustic phonons producing coherent 

acoustic oscillations (as shown in Fig. S11e).36

Role of organic cations and structural phases of 2D perovskites

Finally, in order to understand if the mechanism of light-induced transformation is generally 

applicable to the other 2D perovskites with different organic cations and structural phases, we 

perform UED experiments on three other hybrid 2D perovskites: 4AMP-MA2Pb3I10 (DJ n=3) 

exhibiting the same composition as DJ n=2 but a thicker perovskite layer, BA2MAPb2I7 (RP n=2) 

of Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) phase type with same perovskite layer as DJ n=2 but different spacer 

organic cations (with BA butylammonium), and BA2MA3Pb4I13 (RP n=4) with a different

perovskite layer and spacer organic cations. The structures of these 2D perovskites are illustrated 

in Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b, respectively. The experimental UED static diffraction pattern of DJ n=3 

(shown in Fig. S12) resembles that of DJ n=2, suggesting that changing the perovskite layer


14

thickness for the DJ 2D perovskites has a negligible effect on the in-plane diffraction pattern.24

From the response of DJ n=3 (shown in Fig. S13), we also observe similar intensity increase for

peak (040) and (004), as was observed for DJ n=2 (Fig. 2a). Furthermore, the rise time of these 

Fig. 4 | Comparison between different 2D perovskite structures with different organic
cations. Crystal structures of the a, DJ n=3 and b, RP n=2 and n=4 perovskites. c, Angular 
integrated differential diffraction plot (20~40ps) for the DJ n=2, DJ n=3, RP n=2 and RP n=4
perovskites. The yellow and cyan colors label the Bragg peaks showing positive responses in 
DJ systems. d, Histogram of rise-time constants of DJ n=2, DJ n=3 and RP n=4 structures.


15

Bragg peaks are at similar time scale of ~1ps (Fig. S14). These analysis of the DJ n=2 and n=3 

indicate that the phenomena of light-induced ordering at short time scales is generally applicable 

to the DJ type 2D perovskites. In contrast, the RP crystal no signature of fast rising peaks with 

positive intensity was observed (Fig. S14 to Fig. S16). The non-existence of light-induced ordering 

in RP phase could be attributed to the fact that the crystal structure is already highly ordered in RP 

perovskites for higher n-values (Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b).6

In order to quantify the different behaviors between the DJ and the RP phase 2D 

perovskites we evaluated the differential intensity and the time constant of the relevant Bragg 

peaks. First, we analyzed the differential intensity comparison between DJ n=2 and DJ n=3 as 

illustrated in Fig. 4c. Both DJ n=2 and n=3 exhibit similar behaviors. We observed an increase in 

the intensity of the in-plane Bragg peaks for DJ n=2 {400} and DJ n=3 {040}, and a decrease for 

the intermediate peaks {310}, {330}, {510} and {530}, consistent with the Debye-Waller effect. 

However, in sharp contrast to the DJ case, all the observed Bragg peaks in RP n=2 and n=4 yield

a global decrease in intensity. Furthermore, comparison of the histograms of the time constant 𝜏

for DJ n=2, DJ n=3, and RP n=4 (Fig. 4d, see also Fig. S17 for the corresponding scatter plots), 

shows a generally slower response (up to 15 ps) of RP perovskites as compared to the DJ crystals. 

As similarly observed in DJ n=2, an increased diffuse scattering at longer time scales (Fig. S13,

Fig. S15 and Fig. S16) indicates a thermal energy transfer to phonon populations, with similar time 

constant as the Debye-Waller decrease.

These results demonstrate that there is a fundamental difference in the mechanism of 

carrier-lattice coupling and structural dynamics between the DJ and RP 2D perovskite phases,

which implies that the competing mechanism of ultrafast lattice ordering during an antiferro-

distortive phase transformation is mitigated in the RP phase. As described in Fig. 4b, the diffraction 

patterns of RP n=2 and n=4 at rest are consistent with the static crystal structures reported 

previously, which exhibits almost no antiferro-distortions in plane,42 contrary to DJ n=2 and n=3

(Fig. 1d and 4a)24. Therefore, in the RP case the initial ordering step (Fig. 3d) is by-passed and the 

energy of the hot carriers is directly released to the lattice without the initial resonant energy 

transfer. We also note that the RP n=4 case is more consistent with the results on 3D MAPbI3, 

which only shows the Debye-Waller like effect with similar time scales (~ 10 ps).23 In addition, 

the slow response time in RP systems arises from the differences in the lattice softness between 


16

the BA and the DJ 2D perovskites. The BA molecules reduce the rigidity of the 2D lattice by 

comparison to the DJ case, leading to an enhancement of the lower-energy part of the vibrational 

density of states.43 It was indeed shown experimentally to enhance the deformation potential 

mechanism in BA compounds, leading to carrier trapping.5 This results is also consistent with a 

recent high-resolution resonant impulsive stimulated Raman spectroscopy,12 showing that the 

vibrational relaxation in monolayered bromide perovskites formed from flexible alkyl-amines as 

organic barriers is fast and relatively independent of the lattice temperature, while a resonant effect 

is observed for aromatic amines. These results comparing the nature of carrier lattice interaction 

in 2D perovskites with different organic spacer layers provides clear design principle in controlling 

of carrier dynamics in 2D perovskites-based devices. 

Thus, in summary, our work elucidates that the photoexcited carrier relaxation depends on 

a competition between: i) a fast lattice ordering induced by hot electron-hole plasma, which 

strongly modulates the crystal cohesive energy by reducing the lattice antiferro-distortions; and ii) 

more classical ones related to a decay toward the low-energy part of the vibrational density of 

states. The strongly contrasting behaviors observed by changing the interlayer cations and thereby 

the structural phase of 2D perovskites demonstrates that UED measurements can be further 

extended systematically to the study of different perovskite compounds, such as organic cations 

and halides, providing an ideal platform of controlling structure-energy dissipation channels in 

organic-inorganic materials relevant for a wide range of novel applications including hot-carrier 

photovoltaics and photocatalysis and ultrafast optical communication devices.

Methods

Materials

The materials used for 2D perovskites (DJ and RP) precursors were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, 

including methylamine hydrochloride (MACl), lead oxide (PbO), 4-aminomethyl piperidine 

(4AMP), butylamine (BA), Hypophosphorous acid (H3PO2), and hydroiodic (HI). Methylamine 

iodide (MAI) was purchased from Greatcell Solar.

Single crystal synthesis and transfer

Single Crystal Synthesis: BA n=2,4 perovskites solution was synthesized by adopting the 

previously reported procedure, using 0.4 times the scale.24 4AMP n=2,3 perovskites solution was 


17

synthesized by adopting the previously reported procedure, using 0.5 times the scale.42 Glass was 

used as the substrate for the 2D perovskite growth. Glass substrates were cut into 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm 

squares, then cleaned in soapy water, isopropanol, acetone by ultrasonication for 20 min each, and 

then were dried using an argon gun. The substrates were transferred into a UV-Ozone cleaner, and 

cleaned for 20 min. 10 μL of the diluted solution was deposited dropwise onto the glass surface, 

another glass was put on top to fully cover the bottom glass and dried overnight at 80 °C for BA 

and 75 °C for 4AMP. Thin single crystal grew spontaneously as the solvent evaporated. 

Crystal Exfoliation and Transfer: Large-flake single-crystal perovskites were mechanically 

exfoliated and then transferred onto 100 × 100μm TEM transmission window with silicon nitride 

membranes. All samples were prepared and sealed in Argon gas until UED measurements. A 

comparison of diffraction images between first and last scans suggests no new peaks showing, 

confirming no degradation during measurement period (Fig. S18).

Sample characterization

Optical absorbance: The optical absorbance of the single crystals was determined based on 

confocal microscopy, by focusing a broad-spectrum white light beam (Thorlabs SOLIS-3C) into a 

50um spot and measuring the transmission spectrum through a TEM window. The spectrum was

acquired using a spectrometer (Andor Kymera 328i) and CCD (Andor iDus 416).

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC): Differential scanning calorimetry was performed from 

room temperature to 150℃ with a ramp rate of 15℃/min. The heat capacity of the sample was 

calculated from the heat flow (W/g) and was calibrated using a sapphire sample as a reference.

Ultrafast electron diffraction (UED)

UED experiments were performed at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. Electrons were 

accelerated to 3.7 MeV by Klystron with ~150fs temporal width. Normal incident pulses were 

diffracted by the sample in transmission geometry on TEM transmission window, and diffracted 

intensities were captured by EMCCD.  The electron pules were synchronized with a laser beam 

(3.1eV, ~75fs) at the frequency of 180Hz, with temporal delay typically from -20ps to 100ps. The 

delay time was tuned by adjusting the relative path length difference using a delay stage. To reduce 

the confounding effect of mechanical shift and possible crystal structural change during time 

evolution (~hrs.), the sequence of stage locations was configured randomly during each scan. Each 


18

typical UED run contained 20~30 pump-probe scans and each diffraction image was averaged 

over ~ 8000 shots to reduce statistical fluctuations.

UED Bragg peaks indexing: The Bragg peaks of the measured samples (DJ n=2, DJ n=3, RP n=2

and RP n=4) were indexed by comparing the diffraction patterns with the simulated diffraction 

images calculated via SingleCrystal software (http://crystalmaker.com/singlecrystal/), using 

structure files (.cif) from Mao et al.24 These comparisons were shown in Fig. S2 (DJ n=2), Fig. 

S12 (DJ n=3), Fig. S19 (RP n=2) and Fig. S20 (RP n=4). 

UED data processing: A stack of diffraction maps at different time step was collected for each 

sample measurement. Each diffraction image was background-removed by CCD dark count and 

normalized by total diffraction intensity. To extract the time traces of relative intensity response 

of each Bragg peak (ΔI(t)/I0), we first integrated the intensity within ROI centered at each peak 

(0.2Å in diameter), and then normalized the intensity curve by averaging over negative delays 

(t<0). Time traces of each Bragg peaks were fitted globally by a single exponential curve:

Δ𝐼(𝑡)/𝐼0 = {

0
,
𝑡 < 𝑡0

Δ (exp (𝑡 − 𝑡0

𝜏
) − 1) , 𝑡 ≥ 𝑡0

Where Δ stands for intensity change (%), 𝜏 for time constant (ps), and t0 for time zero offset 

(calibrated by the response of bismuth crystal and fixed globally). Fitting results were plotted in 

Fig. S7 (DJ n=2) and Fig. S17 (DJ n=3 and RP n=4). Results of selected peak families of DJ n=2 

are displayed in Fig. S3. Error intervals of the fitting parameters Δ and 𝜏 were estimated from one 

standard deviation calculated from the square root of the covariance matrix diagonal. Fitting 

methods were based on least squares optimization performed by ‘curve_fitting’ function using

Python (version 3.7.4).

Transient absorption spectroscopy (TA)

Transient absorption (TA) experiments for 2D perovskites were done by using a 400 nm pump 

laser and a supercontinuum white light probe laser ranging from 450 to 750 nm. The pump laser 

was obtained from a 2nd harmonic generator (Ultrafast System) derived by a fundamental 60 fs-

pulsed laser (Coherent, Inc.) at 800 nm with a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The 1 kHz pump laser 

passed through a chopper to yield a 500 Hz frequency. The pump fluence was controlled within


19

0.1~0.75 mJ/cm2. The supercontinuum white light laser was generated by introducing the 

fundamental laser into a nonlinear crystal, CaF2 (Ultrafast System). Pump and probe laser pulses 

were temporally and spatially overlapped and focused on the 2D perovskites. 2D perovskites were 

performed in ambient air condition with DJ n=2 sample sealed in ~50nm thick PMMA.

Phonon simulation methods

Phonon modes simulation: these were based on periodic Density Functional Theory (DFT) 

calculations, performed within Linear Combination of Atomic Orbital (LCAO) formalism, as 

implemented in the CRYSTAL17 code.44 Electronic ground state was computed within the GGA 

approximation, employing the PBE exchange-correlation functional,45 along with double split 

basis set quality and core potentials for heavy Pb and I atoms. Dispersion D3 scheme was included 

to account for van-der Waals interactions,46 as these are expected to play an important role in the 

packing of the organic component. As it is not currently implemented in CRYSTAL17, Spin-Orbit-

Coupling (SOC) has been is neglected in the present calculations. Nevertheless, SOC is not 

expected to heavily affect the ion dynamics, with current computational set-up providing 

vibrational frequencies in nice agreement with experimental data, for the reference orthorhombic 

phase of the 3D methylammonium lead iodide perovskite.47

Calculations have been performed on the reference crystalline structure of the DJ n=2 system from 

Ref.24, adopting 2x4x4 sampling of the first Brillouin zone, in the Monkhorst-Pack scheme48 (with 

the less dense sampling associated to the longer plane-stacking direction). Crystalline structure 

was fully relaxed with only constraint related to the native space group symmetry (Cc n°9). The 

hessian was estimated at the  point of the Brillouin zone, via finite displacements,49 resulting in 

zero negative frequencies. Resulting normal modes were used as special coordinates along which 

to distort the crystal structure and to evaluate the change in the electron diffraction pattern, as 

exemplified in Fig. S6. 

Electron diffraction simulation: snapshots of the crystalline structure as distorted along all the 

computed normal modes were then provided as crystallographic information files (.cif) and used 

to simulate electron diffraction intensities using SingleCrystal software. The simulated 2D patterns 


20

and 1D azimuthally integrated plots were reconstructed by convolving the localized Bragg peaks 

with gaussian shape with FWHM of 0.17Å.   

Data availability

The authors declare that the main data supporting the findings of this study are available within 

the article and its Supplementary information. Extra data are available from the authors upon 

request. 

References

1.
Tsai, H. et al. High-efficiency two-dimensional Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite solar cells. 

Nature 536, 312–316 (2016).

2.
Li, L. et al. Tailored engineering of an unusual (C4H9NH3) 2 (CH3NH3) 2Pb3Br10 two-

dimensional multilayered perovskite ferroelectric for a high-performance photodetector. 

Angewandte Chemie 129, 12318–12322 (2017).

3.
Yuan, M. et al. Perovskite energy funnels for efficient light-emitting diodes. Nature 

Nanotechnology 11, 872–877 (2016).

4.
Qin, C. et al. Stable room-temperature continuous-wave lasing in quasi-2D perovskite films. 

Nature 585, 53–57 (2020).

5.
Gong, X. et al. Electron–phonon interaction in efficient perovskite blue emitters. Nature 

Materials 17, 550–556 (2018).

6.
Blancon, J.-C., Even, J., Stoumpos, C. C., Kanatzidis, M. G. & Mohite, A. D. Semiconductor 

physics of organic–inorganic 2D halide perovskites. Nature Nanotechnology 15, 969–985 

(2020).


21

7.
Kepenekian, M. et al. Concept of Lattice Mismatch and Emergence of Surface States in 

Two-dimensional Hybrid Perovskite Quantum Wells. Nano Lett. 18, 5603–5609 (2018).

8.
Blancon, J.-C. et al. Extremely efficient internal exciton dissociation through edge states in 

layered 2D perovskites. Science 355, 1288–1292 (2017).

9.
Smith, M. D., Jaffe, A., Dohner, E. R., Lindenberg, A. M. & Karunadasa, H. I. Structural 

origins of broadband emission from layered Pb–Br hybrid perovskites. Chem. Sci. 8, 4497–

4504 (2017).

10. Tamarat, P. et al. The dark exciton ground state promotes photon-pair emission in individual 

perovskite nanocrystals. Nat Commun 11, 6001 (2020).

11. Neutzner, S. et al. Exciton-polaron spectral structures in two-dimensional hybrid lead-halide 

perovskites. Phys. Rev. Materials 2, 064605 (2018).

12. Quan, L. N. et al. Vibrational relaxation dynamics in layered perovskite quantum wells. 

PNAS 118, (2021).

13. Guo, Z., Wu, X., Zhu, T., Zhu, X. & Huang, L. Electron–Phonon Scattering in Atomically 

Thin 2D Perovskites. ACS Nano 10, 9992–9998 (2016).

14. Jia, X. et al. Observation of enhanced hot phonon bottleneck effect in 2D perovskites. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 112, 143903 (2018).

15. Straus, D. B. et al. Direct Observation of Electron–Phonon Coupling and Slow Vibrational 

Relaxation in Organic–Inorganic Hybrid Perovskites. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 13798–13801 

(2016).

16. Ni, L. et al. Real-Time Observation of Exciton–Phonon Coupling Dynamics in Self-

Assembled Hybrid Perovskite Quantum Wells. ACS Nano 11, 10834–10843 (2017).


22

17. Guo, P. et al. Direct Observation of Bandgap Oscillations Induced by Optical Phonons in 

Hybrid Lead Iodide Perovskites. Advanced Functional Materials 30, 1907982 (2020).

18. Thouin, F. et al. Phonon coherences reveal the polaronic character of excitons in two-

dimensional lead halide perovskites. Nature Materials 18, 349–356 (2019).

19. Schmitt-Rink, S., Chemla, D. S. & Miller, D. A. B. Theory of transient excitonic optical 

nonlinearities in semiconductor quantum-well structures. Phys. Rev. B 32, 6601–6609 

(1985).

20. Chemla, D. S. & Miller, D. a. B. Room-temperature excitonic nonlinear-optical effects in 

semiconductor quantum-well structures. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, JOSAB 2, 1155–1173 (1985).

21. Stampfli, P. & Bennemann, K. H. Time dependence of the laser-induced femtosecond lattice 

instability of Si and GaAs: Role of longitudinal optical distortions. Phys. Rev. B 49, 7299–

7305 (1994).

22. Harb, M. et al. Carrier Relaxation and Lattice Heating Dynamics in Silicon Revealed by 

Femtosecond Electron Diffraction. J. Phys. Chem. B 110, 25308–25313 (2006).

23. Wu, X. et al. Light-induced picosecond rotational disordering of the inorganic sublattice in 

hybrid perovskites. Science Advances 3, e1602388 (2017).

24. Mao, L. et al. Hybrid Dion–Jacobson 2D Lead Iodide Perovskites. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 

3775–3783 (2018).

25. Kepenekian, M. et al. Rashba and Dresselhaus effects in hybrid organic–inorganic 

perovskites: from basics to devices. ACS nano 9, 11557–11567 (2015).

26. Even, J., Carignano, M. & Katan, C. Molecular disorder and translation/rotation coupling in 

the plastic crystal phase of hybrid perovskites. Nanoscale 8, 6222–6236 (2016).


23

27. Lin, M.-F. et al. Ultrafast non-radiative dynamics of atomically thin MoSe 2. Nature 

Communications 8, 1745 (2017).

28. Mannebach, E. M. et al. Dynamic Structural Response and Deformations of Monolayer 

MoS2 Visualized by Femtosecond Electron Diffraction. Nano Lett. 15, 6889–6895 (2015).

29. Erasmus, N. et al. Ultrafast Dynamics of Charge Density Waves in 

$4{H}_{b}\mathrm{\text{\ensuremath{-}}}{\mathrm{TaSe}}_{2}$ Probed by 

Femtosecond Electron Diffraction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 167402 (2012).

30. González Vallejo, I. et al. Observation of large multiple scattering effects in ultrafast 

electron diffraction on monocrystalline silicon. Phys. Rev. B 97, 054302 (2018).

31. Harb, M. et al. Phonon-phonon interactions in photoexcited graphite studied by ultrafast 

electron diffraction. Phys. Rev. B 93, 104104 (2016).

32. Cortecchia, D. et al. Broadband Emission in Two-Dimensional Hybrid Perovskites: The Role 

of Structural Deformation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 39–42 (2017).

33. Li, J. et al. Cs2PbI2Cl2, All-Inorganic Two-Dimensional Ruddlesden–Popper Mixed Halide 

Perovskite with Optoelectronic Response. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 11085–11090 (2018).

34. Stoumpos, C. C., Malliakas, C. D. & Kanatzidis, M. G. Semiconducting Tin and Lead Iodide 

Perovskites with Organic Cations: Phase Transitions, High Mobilities, and Near-Infrared 

Photoluminescent Properties. Inorg. Chem. 52, 9019–9038 (2013).

35. Yang, Y. et al. Observation of a hot-phonon bottleneck in lead-iodide perovskites. Nature 

Photonics 10, 53–59 (2016).

36. Yin, J. et al. Manipulation of hot carrier cooling dynamics in two-dimensional Dion–

Jacobson hybrid perovskites via Rashba band splitting. Nat Commun 12, 3995 (2021).


24

37. Blancon, J.-C. et al. Scaling law for excitons in 2D perovskite quantum wells. Nature 

Communications 9, 2254 (2018).

38. DeCamp, M. F. et al. Transient Strain Driven by a Dense Electron-Hole Plasma. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 91, 165502 (2003).

39. Young, E. S. K., Akimov, A. V., Campion, R. P., Kent, A. J. & Gusev, V. Picosecond strain 

pulses generated by a supersonically expanding electron-hole plasma in GaAs. Phys. Rev. B

86, 155207 (2012).

40. Krapivin, V. et al. Ultrafast Suppression of the Ferroelectric Instability in KTaO$_3$. 

(2022).

41. Porer, M. et al. Ultrafast Relaxation Dynamics of the Antiferrodistortive Phase in Ca Doped 

${\mathrm{SrTiO}}_{3}$. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 055701 (2018).

42. Stoumpos, C. C. et al. Ruddlesden–Popper Hybrid Lead Iodide Perovskite 2D Homologous 

Semiconductors. Chem. Mater. 28, 2852–2867 (2016).

43. Ghosh, D. et al. Charge carrier dynamics in two-dimensional hybrid perovskites: Dion–

Jacobson vs. Ruddlesden–Popper phases. Journal of Materials Chemistry A 8, 22009–22022 

(2020).

44. Dovesi, R. et al. Quantum-mechanical condensed matter simulations with CRYSTAL. 

WIREs Computational Molecular Science 8, e1360 (2018).

45. Jp, P., K, B. & M, E. Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple. Phys Rev Lett 77, 

3865–3868 (1996).

46. Grimme, S., Antony, J., Ehrlich, S. & Krieg, H. A consistent and accurate ab initio 

parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 elements H-

Pu. J. Chem. Phys. 132, 154104 (2010).


25

47. Ivanovska, T. et al. Vibrational Response of Methylammonium Lead Iodide: From Cation 

Dynamics to Phonon–Phonon Interactions. ChemSusChem 9, 2994–3004 (2016).

48. Monkhorst, H. J. & Pack, J. D. Special points for Brillouin-zone integrations. Phys. Rev. B

13, 5188–5192 (1976).

49. Pascale, F. et al. The calculation of the vibrational frequencies of crystalline compounds and 

its implementation in the CRYSTAL code. Journal of Computational Chemistry 25, 888–

897 (2004).

Acknowledgments: The work at Rice University was supported by start-up funds under the 

molecular nanotechnology initiative and also the DOE-EERE 2022-1652 program. J.E. 

acknowledges the financial support from the Institut Universitaire de France. Work at 

Northwestern was supported by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) under grant N00014-20-1-

2725.  The experiment was performed at SLAC MeV-UED facility, which is supported in part by 

the DOE BES SUF Division Accelerator & Detector R&D program, the LCLS Facility, and SLAC 

under contract Nos. DE-AC02-05-CH11231 and DE-AC02-76SF00515.

Author contributions: J.-C.B. and A.D.M. conceived and designed the experiment. J.H. and S.S.

synthesized the perovskite single crystals, and W.L. prepared samples with the help of J.H. and 

H.Z. H.Z. performed optical characterizations. W.L., H.Z., S.S. and A.F. performed the UED 

experiments with the help of. A.A, M.-F.L, A.B., X.Z. and XJ.W.. H.Z. performed data analysis 

under the help of J.E and I.M, with guidance from J.-C.B. Phonon modeling was carried out by. 

C.Q.. W.Y. performed TA measurements. J.-C. B. and A. D. M. wrote the manuscript with inputs 

from everyone. All authors read the manuscript and agree to its contents, and all data are reported 

in the main text and supplemental materials.

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.


26

Supplementary Information for

Direct visualization of ultrafast lattice ordering triggered 

by an electron-hole plasma in 2D perovskites

Hao Zhang1,2, Wenbin Li1,2, Joseph Essman1, Claudio Quarti3,4, Isaac Metcalf5, Wei-Yi Chiang6, 
Siraj Sidhik1,5, Jin Hou5, Austin Fehr1, Andrew Attar7, Ming-Fu Lin7, Alexander Britz7, Xiaozhe 
Shen7, Stephan Link6, Xijie Wang7, Uwe Bergmann8,9, Mercouri G. Kanatzidis10,Claudine Katan3, 
Jacky Even11, Jean-Christophe Blancon1* and Aditya D. Mohite1*

1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas 
77005, USA.

2Applied Physics Program, Smalley‐Curl Institute, Rice University, Houston, TX, 77005, 
USA.

3Univ Rennes, ENSCR, INSA Rennes, CNRS, ISCR (Institut des Sciences Chimiques de 
Rennes) - UMR 6226, F-35000 Rennes, France.

4Laboratory for Chemistry of Novel Materials, Department of Chemistry, University of 
Mons, Place du Parc 20, 7000 Mons, Belgium

5Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, 
77005, USA.

6Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA.

7SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.

8PULSE Institute, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA

9Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison, WI 53706 USA.

10Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

11Univ Rennes, CNRS, Institut FOTON (Fonctions Optiques pour les Technologies de 
l'Information), UMR 6082, CNRS, INSA de Rennes, 35708 Rennes, France.

*Correspondence: blanconjc@gmail.com and adm4@rice.edu

This PDF file includes: 

Supplementary discussions 1-8

Figs. S1 to S21
Table S1
References


27

Supplementary Discussions 1-8

Supplementary discussion 1. Crystal orientation of DJ n=2, DJ n=3, RP n=2 and RP n=4 crystals

The crystal orientation of each sample measured in UED was acquired by comparing the 

diffraction patterns with the simulated diffractions viewing at different directions.

For the DJ systems, the experimental patterns in Fig. S2b (DJ n=2) and Fig. S12b (DJ n=3) show 

great consistency with the simulated ones (Fig. S2a & Fig. S12a) viewed at stacking axis direction 

([001] for DJ n=2, and [100] for DJ n=3), confirming the horizontal orientation of the DJ crystals, 

where the perovskite crystal layers are parallel to the substrate. The azimuthally integrated plots

(Fig. S2c for DJ n=2, Fig. S12c for DJ n=3) also show good agreement in peak locations and 

convoluted intensities. The measured in-plane Bragg peaks can be properly indexed accordingly, 

including (hk0) for DJ n=2, and (0hk) for DJ n=3. The labeled peaks are shown in 2D patterns and 

azimuthally integrated plot.

For RP n=2 crystal, the simulated pattern along stacking axis [010] is shown in Fig. S19a, where 

all the peak locations agree with the experimental ones in Fig. S19b, confirming the major

orientation of the RP n=2 crystal is horizontal, same as DJ crystals discussed above. Additionally, 

concentric rings are observed between q=2 Å-1 and 3 Å-1, as observed in Fig. S19b, suggesting the 

existence of poly-crystalline like crystal structure with mixed orientations. The azimuthally 

integrated plots (Fig. S19c) show good agreement in peak locations and convoluted intensities, 

with additional unassigned peaks at q=2.6 Å-1 and 3.7 Å-1. We’ve excluded the possibility of PbI2

diffraction by comparing with the electron diffraction of PbI2 thin film.1 We attribute them to the   

possible perovskite diffraction from out-of-plane or mixed directions, or an unidentified phase of 

2D perovskites, and have excluded them from the discussion of  in-plane Bragg peaks responses 

of RP n=2 crystals.

For the RP n=4 crystal, the simulated pattern along stacking axis [010] is shown in Fig. S20e, with 

corresponding 1D azimuthally integrated plot in Fig. S20f. However, this pattern doesn’t match 

with the experimental one (Fig. S20a) based on the following observations: 1) more peaks are 

observed in static UED patterns, such as q=2.2Å-1 and 3.8 Å-1 as shown in Fig. S20f; 2) anisotropic 


28

intensity distribution along qx and qy directions, which is different with Fig. S20e with 4th fold 

symmetry. Therefore, we conclude the beam direction is not perfectly along the stacking axis as 

observed in DJ and RP n=2 crystals. As shown in Fig. S20c & Fig. S20d, we find that the [011] 

orientation gives the best match for RP n=4, with 7.8 degrees deviation from stacking axis [010], 

as sketched in Fig. S20b. As a result, some out-of-plane Bragg peaks can be detected as well, 

which may explain the anisotropic UED response between qx and qy directions, including the 

intensity change shown in Fig. S14 and the time constants shown in Fig. S15.

Supplementary discussion 2. Sample Thickness and Carrier Density Estimation

Crystal thickness determination: The thickness of the crystal was determined by comparing the 

absorbance spectrum with the estimated one calculated from absorption coefficient of 2D 

perovskites. Here we have referenced the absorption coefficient results obtained from ellipsometry 

by Song et al.2 Applying Beer-Lambert’s law and neglecting light scattering, the relation of crystal 

thickness 𝑑 and crystal absorbance is given by:

𝐼
𝐼0

= 10−𝑂𝐷 = 𝑒−𝛼 𝑑

(S2.1)

Where OD is the absorbance in optical density determined by transmission (𝐼/𝐼0), and 𝛼 is 

absorption coefficient. The comparison of experiment and simulated absorbance spectrum is 

depicted in Fig. S1.

Carrier density: The light-injected carrier density in quantum well is estimated by:

𝑛0 = Φ/(ℎ𝑣) 𝐴

𝑑/𝑙𝑤
(S2.2)

Where Φ stands for energy fluence of each pulse (mJ/cm2), ℎ𝑣 stands for excitation phonon energy

(3.1 eV), 𝐴 stands for absorbance of the sample, 𝑑 is the sample thickness, and 𝑙𝑤 is the width of 

quantum-well in 2D perovskites. Here, we’ve neglected the sample reflection and estimated the 

sample absorbance by transmission data in Fig. S1. As a result, the list of thickness and 

corresponding carrier densities of each measurement is shown in Table S1. 

Supplementary discussion 3. Possible reasons of lattice ordering in DJ perovskites.


29

A. Phase transition from thermal lattice heating. One of the possible mechanisms that induces 

the collective lattice ordering in DJ perovskites is the thermally induced phase transition 

from local lattice heating. To investigate the thermal response of DJ n=2 crystals, we first 

estimate the temperature jump induced by the laser pump, then using the differential 

scanning calorimetry (DSC) and temperature dependent XRD results to exclude the 

possible phase transition effect. 

a.
Estimation of temperature jump.

The local lattice temperature increase is estimated by total input pump energy and 

samples’ specific heat. For DJ n=2 crystals, a carrier density of 2.5×1013 cm-2

corresponds to a bulk carrier concentration of n=1.4×1020 cm-3, which induces total 

energy into the lattice: 

Δ𝐸 = 𝑛 × (𝐸𝑝𝑢𝑚𝑝 − 𝐸𝑔) = 1.4 × 1020 × (3.1 − 2.2) 𝑒𝑉𝑐𝑚−3

= 20.16 𝐽/𝑐𝑚3

(S3.1)

The mole of the DJ n=2 crystal is calculated from crystal structure (4 molecules per 

unit cell):

𝑚 = 1

𝑉𝑈𝐶

× 4

𝑁𝐴

= 2.53 × 10−3𝑚𝑜𝑙/𝑐𝑚3

(S3.2)

The specific heat of DJ n=2 at ~300K is estimated from DSC measurement, as 

shown in Fig. S9:

𝐶𝑝 = 0.54 𝐽 𝐾−1𝑔−1 = 728 𝐽 𝐾−1𝑚𝑜𝑙−1

(S3.3)

And the corresponding estimated temperature jump is: 

Δ𝑇 =
Δ𝐸

𝑚 ∗ 𝐶𝑝

~11𝐾
(S3.4)

b. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) results.


30

To investigate possible thermal phase transition induced by lattice heating, 

differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was performed from room temperature to 

150℃, as suggested in Fig. S9. From the DSC curve, no significant phase transition 

is observed. Based on over estimation of temperature increase induced by light (SI 

discussion 5), the local temperature increase in the crystal lattice is below the 15K 

and no possible phase transition is observed or reported in this range.3 Therefore, 

we conclude the collective lattice ordering in light-induced in ultrafast scale, 

instead of thermally induced caused by lattice heating.

c.
Temperature dependent XRD. 

Additionally, we performed temperature XRD from room temperature to 55°C, data 

shown in Fig. S10. As we can see, most of the Bragg peak intensities go through a 

slight decrease with increasing temperature due to the presence of Debye Waller

effect. 

Here we focus on the in-plane Bragg peaks, primarily related to the edges and 

diagonal of the perovskite octahedral, which is our main focus in-plane diffraction 

patterns in DJ n=2. Fig. S10 (b)(c)(d) plot the peak profile variation with respect to 

the sample at room temperature, zoomed at q- regions near (220) and (400) 

respectively. As we can see, both (220) and (400) peaks exhibit slight intensity 

decrease, which is contradictory with the UED response.

Besides the intensity variations from observed from temperature XRD, we also 

observed a global peak shifting (upto 0.15%, Fig. S10 (f)). A global shifting of 

Bragg peaks toward low-q values is generally expected from the thermal expansion. 

However, this behavior of Bragg peaks shifting is not resolved in the UED. We 

attribute the absence of thermal expansion signature in UED diffraction patterns to 

the low q resolution of the UED measurements (~0.17Å-1). 

B. Multiple scattering effect. Another possible mechanism would be the possible multiple 

scattering effect in single-crystalline samples, as reported by Vallejo et al using keV 

electron beams.4. In fact, as pointed out by Vallejo et al, the possibility of having multiple 

scattering will rely on a characteristic length known as the extinction distance (ξ𝐠) of the 


31

samples, which is strongly affected by the electron beam energy, crystal structure and 

elements of material (Williams & Carter 20085) as described by the following formula,

𝜉𝒈 = 𝜋𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝐵

𝜆𝐹𝒈
(S3.5)

Where 𝑉 is the volume of the unit cell, 𝜃𝐵 is Bragg angle, 𝜆 is electron wavelength, and 𝐹𝑔

is the structure factor at diffraction vector 𝒈.

The calculation of 𝑉, 𝜆, and 𝜃𝐵 is straightforward. For high energy electrons 𝜃𝐵 is fairly 

close to 0, since the electron wavelength 𝜆 is much smaller than lattice spacing (𝜃𝐵=0.5 

deg for Si (220) at 100keV) and therefore cos 𝜃𝐵~1. The 𝐹𝑔 is estimated by the summation 

of all the atomic scattering factors with different atomic locations within the unit cell 

(Williams & Carter 2008 5, Page 223):

𝐹𝑔 = 𝐹ℎ𝑘𝑙 = ∑ 𝑓𝑖

(𝑒)

𝑛

𝑖=1

𝑒−2𝜋𝑖(ℎ𝑥𝑖 +𝑘𝑦𝑖+𝑙𝑧𝑖)
(S3.6)

The atomic scattering factor is a function of scattering vector s (𝑠 = sin 𝜃 /𝜆). and a 

common approximation is fitted with the following formula6:

𝑓(𝑒)(𝑠) = ∑ 𝑎𝑗 exp(−𝑏𝑗𝑠2

𝑗

)

(S3.7)

The coefficients of 𝑎𝑗, 𝑏𝑗 for each atoms are listed in Table 1 in Peng et al6. For ionized 

atoms (such as Pb2+ and I- ), additional term is included7.

Based on the information above, we have estimated the extinction distance for Si under 

100keV and DJ n=2 perovskites under 3.7MeV, which are given by:

𝜉𝑺𝒊|(𝟐𝟐𝟎) = 𝜋𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝐵

𝜆𝐹𝒈

=
𝜋 ∗ 163.6Å3 ∗ 1

3.70𝑒 − 2Å ∗ 15.06 Å = 92 𝑛𝑚

𝜉𝑫𝑱𝟐|(𝟐𝟐𝟎) = 𝜋𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝐵

𝜆𝐹𝒈

=
𝜋 ∗ 2627Å3 ∗ 1

2.97𝑒 − 3Å ∗ 261.73 Å = 1062 𝑛𝑚
(S3.8)

The calculation of Si is close to the value reported in the literature (75.7 nm)5, giving a fair 

estimation. Compared to the sample thickness of ~270nm of DJ n=2 crystal, the extinction 

distance is ~4 times larger, therefore we believe the multiple scattering effects are not likely 

to happen in DJ n=2 perovskites.


32

Supplementary discussion 4. Estimation of antiferro-distortion in 2D perovskites 

Fig. S5 shows the simulated diffractions with intrinsic (Fig. S5a) and reduced antiferro-distortion

(Fig. S5b), as well as the corresponding crystal structures with different disordering parameter

viewed along stacking axis. The top (in-plane) view of 2D perovskite caused by intrinsic in-plane 

cell doubling is shown in the schematics in Fig. S5c. The tilted angle between adjacent octahedra 

(2θ=24º) is associated with antiferro-distortion, forming an initially doubled unit cell of ~8.8 Å 

(indicated in red squares), as opposed to the undistorted structure (θ=0º) where unit cell is of ~6.2

Å (labeled by green squares). To estimate the influence on crystal structure with reduced antiferro-

distortion, we’ve constructed a hypothetic structural phase (Fig. S5d), where interlayer octahedra 

are more aligned and simulated an electron diffraction pattern correspondingly (Fig. S5b). For a 

direct comparison between the symmetrized and the intrinsic antiferro-distorsive phase, a 

subtracted diffraction pattern is displayed in Fig. 2c. As we can see, the intensity variations are 

expected in specific Bragg planes, including {400} and {220} (bright red) increasing and {310} 

and {530} (blue). 

To estimate the light-induced rotation angle  Δθ = θ′ − θ0, we calculated the percentage of Bragg 

peak intensity variation as a function of tilting angle (Fig. S5e), and compare them with the 

experiment data at early time (t = 2ps). From the responses of {310}{400}, we estimated the 

optimal distortion parameter to be ~11.75º, as shown in the shadow region in Fig. S5e, 

corresponding to an octahedral tilt of Δθ = 0.25 º

Supplementary discussion 5. Transient absorption spectroscopy of DJ n=2 crystal and carrier 

temperature extraction.

The transient absorption (TA) measurements are performed on nearly identical 2D perovskite 

crystals (similar lateral size ~200um, thickness of ~300nm and composition (DJ n=2) as used for 

UED). We used an optical pump set at 3.1 eV (same as UED) with 0.1~0.75 mJ/cm2 (1.1×1012 cm-


33

2~8.4×1012 cm-2, corresponding to an excitation regime similar than in the UED measurements), 

followed by a white-light probe monitoring the transmission variations of the sample (see Method 

Section on Transient absorption spectroscopy). Therefore, for similar optical pump conditions, we 

had access to an optical probe in TA, yielding complementary information with respect to the 

structural ones provided by the UED experiment.  The results are displayed below in Fig. S11.

From our TA data, several major observations are summarized:

A. Strong bleaching of exciton states. Fig. S11 (c) shows a variation of absorbance spectrum 

at varies fluences. We’ve observed a significant bleaching of exciton peak at 2.18eV 

monotonically increasing with excitation densities upto 0.75 mJ/cm2. From our TA values 

extrapolated to a fluence of 1~2 mJ/cm2, we will expect an almost complete bleaching of 

the exciton resonance leading essentially to a hot electron-hole pair plasma just after the 

pump in the UED experiment.

B. Hot-carrier cooling dynamics. We estimated the evolution of effective carrier temperature 

the by fitting the high-energy tail near the band edge with the Maxwell-Boltzmann 

distribution Fig. S11 (b), which is a commonly used method to approximate the carrier 

temperature in semiconductors.8 As estimated in Fig. 3(c), the lifetime of hot-carriers from 

sub-ps to ~1 ps. The initial carrier temperature is fitted to be ~3700K for 0.75 mJ/cm2. We 

extrapolate this to be 4100K for a fluence of 1 mJ/cm2 in the UED experiment.  

These TA results suggest that hot carriers may be more dominant at this high excitation densities, 

where many-body interactions and other non-linear processes could play a crucial role, 

contradictory to the work of Thouin et al where excitonic regime is mainly discussed.9 This is also 

confirmed by the quantitate analysis defining the excitation regime and carrier saturation densities 

vs temperature which are shown below in discussion 6.

Supplementary discussion 6. Estimation of saturation densities in DJ n=2 and RP n=2 crystals

We’ve estimated the carrier temperature in 2D perovskites to be ~4100K for 1mJ/cm2. (Discussion 

5). The next step consists in computing the saturation densities for the excitonic resonances in the 

DJ n=2 compound. For that purpose, the binding energy and the Bohr radius of the 1S exciton 

resonance are considered.10 It is usually considered that the binding energy is reduced in DJ 


34

compounds by comparison to RP ones for the same n, but precise experimental data are not 

available for DJ n=2. We started from the known values available for RP n=2:11 E,b,RP=245meV 

for the binding energy and aB,RP=1.60 nm for the effective Bohr radius related to the diamagnetic 

shift. Next, the effect of the smaller interlayer spacing is estimated using the effective dielectric 

model of Ishihara et al12 Ɛ eff,RP=4.9 vs Ɛ eff,DJ=5.5, leading in turn to a reduction of the binding 

energy E b,DJ=204meV. The BSE model11 was then used to compute the diamagnetic shift and 

finally a B,RP=1.56 nm. A summary of saturation densities at different carrier temperate is plotted 

in Fig. 3e.

Supplementary discussion 7 Estimation of long-time Bragg peak response and light-induced 

atom RMS displacements 〈u2〉

Due to the deviation of Debye-Waller response (Fig. S21) of DJ n=2 crystal, the Bragg peaks 

intensity responses show competing effects between the conventional Debye-Waller effect and 

incipient anisotropic lattice ordering:

Itotal(q⃗ ) = [I0(q⃗ ) + ΔI(q⃗ , Δθ)] e−1

3Δ〈u2〉 q2

(S7.1)

Here I0(q⃗ ) stands for the diffraction intensities at rest. The total Bragg peak intensity response 

have two contributions: i) an initial ordering process represented in ΔI(q⃗ , Δθ), where Δθ is the 

change of distortion angle (shown in Fig. 2b), which is estimated in Supplementary discussion 4. 

ΔI(q⃗ , Δθ) is simulated based on reduction of andiferro-distortion and also shown in Fig. 2c. ii) 

classical thermal energy transfer involving all the Bragg peaks, represented in Debye-Waller effect 

as exponential term e−1

3 Δ〈u2〉 q2, where 〈u2〉 stands for atomic mean squared (RMS) displacement.

The competing effect of the two mechanisms is also indicated in Fig. S8, where considering only 

the first contribution (gray dashed line, Fig. S8(b)) will not give a good prediction at long delay 

time (40-80 ps) especially at higher q, while the combining effect of the two (black solid line) 

matches better with the experimental response. By comparing the simulated intensity change with 

the Bragg peak response at long time, the Debye-Waller factor is estimated to be ~1.6e-3 Å-2, 

corresponding to light-induced atom RMS displacement of ~ 0.07 Å at carrier density of 2.5×1013

cm-2.


35

Supplementary discussion 8. Time evolution of diffraction intensities through the UED run.

Fig. S18 shows the time evolution over ~2 hours during the UED run of DJ n=2 crystal. As shown 

in Fig. S18a, the total diffraction intensity doesn’t show a significant drop over ~2 hours, 

suggesting the crystal structure remains stable throughout the experiment. Fig. S18b shows the 

comparison of the electron diffractions between 0min and 120mins, where all the Bragg peaks 

remain existing, with a slight decrease of overall intensities. Additionally, no rings or new peaks 

were formed through the experiments (Fig. S18c and Fig. S18d), confirming that no evidence of 

possible sample degradation or damage is found.

Supplementary Figures S1 – S20

Fig. S1 | Optical absorbance spectra of DJ n=2 crystal. The measured absorbance is shown 

in blue line, with calculated absorbance (orange line) with crystal thickness of 270nm, 

estimated from the absorption coefficient as reported by Song et al.3


36

Fig. S2 | Simulated Diffraction Pattern & Indexing of DJ n=2 crystal. (a) Simulated 

Diffraction of DJ n=2 crystal, viewing from [001] direction. (b) Static Diffraction of DJ n=2, 

showing same q-range as the simulated one in Fig. S2a. All the Bragg peaks are well-identified.

(c) Angular-integrated diffraction of DJ n=2, showing both experimental (blue solid line) and 

simulated (orange dashed line) plots, as well as Indexing of Bragg peaks (hk0).


37

Fig. S3 | Time traces of selected Bragg peak families in DJ n=2 crystal. (a) Time traces of 

Bragg peaks intensities of {400} {310} {330} {1020} {550} {530} {800} and {750} for DJ 

n=2 crystal. Errors of time constants are estimated by one standard deviation errors from non-

linear least-squares fitting. (b) Dynamic plots of the total integrated diffuse scattering 

intensities between Bragg peaks. 


38

Fig. S4 | Fluence dependence for selected Bragg peaks in DJ n=2 crystal.

Time traces of Bragg peaks intensities of {310} {400} {330} {530} {800} {550} {750} and 

{1020} for DJ n=2 crystal under 2 laser fluences: 1mJ/cm2 (orange) and 2mJ/cm2 (blue). 


39

Fig. S5 | Simulated Diffraction Patterns with tuned antiferro-distortion. (a) Simulated 

Diffraction of DJ n=2 at rest with intrinsic antiferro-distortion (θ=12º ). (b) Simulated 

Diffraction of DJ n=2 with reduced antiferro-distortion ( θ =5 º ). (c)(d) Corresponding 

schematics of distorted (θ=12º) and less distorted phase (θ<12º), respectively. (e) Simulated 

logarithmic intensity change (-log(I/I0)) for selected Bragg peaks as a function of disorder 

parameter θ, shown for {220} {310} and {400} peaks (orange, green, and red solid lines), 

respectively. Compared with experimental data (DJ n=2, 2.6×1013 cm-2) at t=2ps (scattered 

points at right), the optimal change of disorder parameter is estimated to be Δθ ~ 0.25º (regime 

indicated in gray shadow).


40

Fig. S6 | Examples of calculated antiferro-distortive phonon modes candidates in DJ n=2 

crystal. (a)(c)(e) Schematic illumination of calculated normal modes (I, II and III respectively) 

acquired from phonon simulation (cations are neglected for visualization). The directions of the 

atomic displacements are indicated with red arrows, suggesting a modulation of antiferro-

distortions. (d)(e)(f) Simulated changes of electron diffraction plots for normal mode I, II and 

III respectively, estimated under room temperature (RT, blue solid line) and high temperature 

(HT, orange solid line) regimes. These simulated plots are compared with differential 

diffraction plot from UED experiment (1~3 ps, gray solid line), showing consistent peak 

increase at (220) and (400).


41

Fig. S7 | Scatter plots of fitted intensity change and time constants of DJ n=2 crystal. (a) 

Scatter plots of fitted intensity change (Δ (%)) of the Bragg peaks (hk0). Each Bragg peak (hk0) 

is averaged with (-h-k0) based on point symmetry. (b) Scatter plots of fitted time constant of 

the Bragg peaks, represented in both color scale and circle size (small and orange circles for 

short time, and large and pink circles for long time). ‘x’ markers stand for the Bragg peaks that 

cannot be well fit.


42

Fig. S8 | Simulation of total UED response of DJ n=2 crystal. (a) Simulated crystal structure 

(top view) for different simulation methods: lattice ordering by reducing distortion angle (top), 

and additional disorder involving all atoms (bottom). (b) Angular integrated differential 

diffraction plot, averaged between 40-80 ps (gray solid line and shadow), compared with the 

simulated response with only considering lattice ordering (gray dashed) and both ordering and 

Debye-Waller effect (black solid line). The experimental intensity around the (110) peak is 

partially blocked.


43

Fig. S9 | Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) of DJ n=2 crystal. (a) DSC curve of DJ 

n=2 single crystals from room temperature to 150℃. (b) Calculated specific heat capacity (Cp)

from DSC.


44

Fig. S10 | Temperature dependent XRD of DJ n=2 crystal. (a) Temperature dependent XRD 

from 30°C to 55°C. Simulated Bragg peak locations for DJ n=2 are indicated in vertical gray 

solid lines. (b)(c)(d) Zoomed-in XRD plots at in-plane peaks (220) (310) and (400) 

respectively, showing global shifting of peak locations (thermal expansion) and slight intensity 

decreases over temperature. (e) Analysis of relative intensity variation (I/I0) and (f) relative 

peaks shift (q/q0) for (220), (310) and (400) Bragg peaks.


45

Fig. S11 | Transient absorption spectroscopy for DJ n=2 crystal. (a) Pseudo color 

representation of transient absorbance (Δ OD) as function of delay time, under 0.75mJ/cm2. (b) 

Normalized TA spectra. The bleach amplitude at 2.18 eV is normalized to -1. High energy tails 

are fitted by Boltzmann distribution (black solid lines) to extract carrier temperature (shown in 

Fig. 3c). (c) Absolute absorption at various fluences, showing almost complete bleaching of 

exciton resonance. (d) Ultrafast bleaching (𝜏 ≤ 0.18 ps) of exciton resonance at 2.18 eV,

indicating fast ground state exciton bleaching after above-band excitation. (e) Observation of 

coherent acoustic phonon oscillations for DJ n=2 in the DW regime. The period of oscillations 

is roughly estimated to 45ps.


46

Fig. S12 | Simulated Diffraction Pattern & Indexing of DJ n=3 crystal.

(a) Simulated Diffraction of DJ n=3, viewing from [100] direction. (b) Static Diffraction of DJ 

n=3, showing same q-range as the simulated one in Fig. S12a. All the Bragg peaks are well-

identified. (c) Angular-integrated diffraction of DJ n=3, showing both experimental (blue solid 

line) and simulated (orange dashed line) plots, as well as Indexing of Bragg peaks (0hk).


47

Fig. S13 | Differential diffraction patterns of DJ n=3. (a) Differential diffraction pattern 

(20~40ps) for DJ n=3, showing similar response as DJ n=2, including the positively-changing 

peaks (040), (022) and (004). (b) Angular-integrated differential diffraction (20~40ps) for DJ 

n=3. (c) Differential diffraction pattern at 5ps (left) and 50ps (right). The increasing red colors 

in between the peaks correlate to the diffuse scattering intensities. (d) Time traces of the 

integrated diffuse scattering intensities integrated with the two squares in (c).


48

Fig. S14 | Comparison of time traces of selected Bragg peaks in 2D perovskites. (a) Time 

traces of DJ n=2 (400) (blue) and DJ n=3 (040) (orange) peak. Both peaks show a rapid increase 

in intensity. The rise-time constant fitted to be ~1.3 ps (DJ n=2, blue solid line) and ~0.9 ps (DJ 

n=3, orange solid line) respectively. (b) Time traces of RP n=2 (400) (green) and RP n=4 (400) 

(red) peak. Both peaks show a slower increase in intensity variations. 


49

Fig. S15 | Differential diffraction patterns of RP n=2. (a) Differential diffraction pattern 

(15~40ps) for RP n=2, showing different response than DJ samples where no peaks increasing 

observed. (b) Angular-integrated differential diffraction (15~40ps) for RP n=2. (c) Differential 

diffraction pattern at 2ps (left) and 65ps (right). The increasing red colors in between the peaks 

correlate to the diffuse scattering intensities. (d) Time traces of the integrated diffuse scattering 

intensities integrated in-between the two squares in (c) (dashed line).


50

Fig. S16 | Differential diffraction patterns of RP n=4. (a) Differential diffraction pattern 

(20~40ps) for RP n=4, showing different response than DJ samples where no peaks increasing 

observed. (b) Angular-integrated differential diffraction (20~40ps) for RP n=4. (c) Differential 

diffraction pattern at 5ps (left) and 65ps (right). The increasing red colors in between the peaks 

correlate to the diffuse scattering intensities. (d) Time traces of the integrated diffuse scattering 

intensities integrated with the two squares in (c).


51

Fig. S17 | Time response comparison of different samples. Scatter plots of time constants

(𝜏) of (a) DJ n=3 and (b) RP n=4 are shown. All the time constants are extracted from single 

exponential time fitting of Bragg peaks (averaged within each pair (hk0) and (-h-k 0)).


52

Fig. S18 | Time Evolution of diffraction intensity of DJ n=2 crystal. (a) Total electron 

diffraction intensity during UED measurements over 150mins. (b) Azimuth integrated plot of 

diffraction patterns taken at 0 min (blue) and 120mins (orange) after during the UED run. (c)(d)

Diffraction images of (c) first and (d) last scan. 


53

Fig. S19 | Simulated Diffraction Pattern & Indexing of RP n=2 crystal.

(a) Simulated Diffraction of DJ n=2, viewing from [010] direction. (b) Static Diffraction of RP 

n=2, showing same q-range as the simulated one in Fig. S19a. (c) Angular-integrated diffraction

of RP n=2, showing both experimental (blue solid line) and simulated (orange dashed line)

plots, as well as Indexing of Bragg peaks (0hk).


54

Fig. S20 | Simulated Diffraction Pattern & Indexing of RP n=4 crystal. (a) Static

Diffraction patterns of RP n=4. (b) Schematics of RP n=4 and indication of [011] direction (red 

arrows). (c) Simulated Diffraction of RP n=4 along [011] direction. (d) Angular-integrated 

diffraction of RP n=4 viewing at [011], showing both experimental (blue solid line) and 

simulated (orange dashed line) plots, as well as Indexing of Bragg peaks. (e) Simulated 

Diffraction of RP n=4 along [010] direction, showing a mismatch with experimental patterns. 

(f) Angular-integrated diffraction of RP n=4 viewing at [010], showing both experimental (blue 

solid line) and simulated (green dashed line) plots, as well as Indexing of Bragg peaks.


55

Fig. S21 | Logarithmic plot of Bragg peaks intensity as a function of q2 for DJ n=2. 

Logarithmic plot of Bragg peaks total relative intensity change (−log (I/I0)) DJ n=2 under

pump fluence energy of 2mJ/cm2. 


56

Supplementary Tables

Sample Name
DJ n=2
DJ n=3
RP n=2
RP n=4

Excitation Energy (eV)
3.1
3.1
3.1
3.1

Fluence (mJ/cm2):
2
2.2
0.45
2.5

Crystal thickness (nm):
270
450
200
380

OD (at 3.1eV):
2.2
2.5
2.5
2.5

Carrier density (cm-2)
2.5×1013
2.3×1013
8.9×1012
4.2×1013

Table. S1: Lists of crystal thickness, fluences and carrier densities. Sample thickness are 

estimated from the optical absorbance data in Fig. S1 for DJ n=2.


57

References

1.
Wu, X. et al. Light-induced picosecond rotational disordering of the inorganic sublattice in 

hybrid perovskites. Science Advances 3, e1602388 (2017).

2.
Song, B. et al. Determination of Dielectric Functions and Exciton Oscillator Strength of 

Two-Dimensional Hybrid Perovskites. ACS Materials Lett. 3, 148–159 (2021).

3.
Park, I.-H. et al. Self-Powered Photodetector Using Two-Dimensional Ferroelectric Dion–

Jacobson Hybrid Perovskites. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 18592–18598 (2020).

4.
González Vallejo, I. et al. Observation of large multiple scattering effects in ultrafast 

electron diffraction on monocrystalline silicon. Phys. Rev. B 97, 054302 (2018).

5.
Williams, D. B. & Carter, C. B. Transmission electron microscopy: a textbook for materials 

science. (Springer, 2008).

6.
Peng, L.-M., Ren, G., Dudarev, S. L. & Whelan, M. J. Robust Parameterization of Elastic 

and Absorptive Electron Atomic Scattering Factors. Acta Cryst A 52, 257–276 (1996).

7.
Peng, L.-M. Electron Scattering Factors of Ions and their Parameterization. Acta Cryst A 54, 

481–485 (1998).

8.
Yang, Y. et al. Observation of a hot-phonon bottleneck in lead-iodide perovskites. Nature 

Photonics 10, 53–59 (2016).

9.
Thouin, F. et al. Phonon coherences reveal the polaronic character of excitons in two-

dimensional lead halide perovskites. Nature Materials 18, 349–356 (2019).

10. Schmitt-Rink, S., Chemla, D. S. & Miller, D. A. B. Theory of transient excitonic optical 

nonlinearities in semiconductor quantum-well structures. Phys. Rev. B 32, 6601–6609 

(1985).


58

11. Blancon, J.-C. et al. Scaling law for excitons in 2D perovskite quantum wells. Nature 

Communications 9, 2254 (2018).

12. Ishihara, T., Takahashi, J. & Goto, T. Optical properties due to electronic transitions in two-

dimensional semiconductors 

(${\mathrm{C}}_{\mathit{n}}$${\mathrm{H}}_{2\mathit{n}+1}$${\mathrm{NH}}_{3}$

${)}_{2}$${\mathrm{PbI}}_{4}$. Phys. Rev. B 42, 11099–11107 (1990).


