A gate-programmable van der Waals metal-ferroelectric-semiconductor memory

Wanying Li,1,2∗ Yimeng Guo,1,2∗ Zhaoping Luo,1 Bo Han,3 Xuepeng Zhan,4 Kenji Watanabe,5 Takashi
Taniguchi,6 Jiezhi Chen,4 Peng Gao,3 Xiuyan Li,1 Chengxin Zhao,7,8† Zheng Vitto Han,9,10† Hanwen Wang1†

1Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang 110016, China
2School of Material Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, Anhui 230026, China
3International Center for Quantum Materials, and Electron Microscopy Laboratory,
School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
4School of Information Science and Engineering (ISE), Shandong University, Qingdao, P. R. China
5Research Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan
6International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics,
National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan
7Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China
8School of Nuclear Science and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
9Collaborative Innovation Center of Extreme Optics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China and
10State Key Laboratory of Quantum Optics and Quantum Optics Devices,
Institute of Opto-Electronics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China

Ferroelecticity, one of the keys to realize non-
volatile memories owing to the remanent elec-
tric polarization,
has been an emerging phe-
nomenon in the two-dimensional (2D) limit. Yet
the demonstrations of van der Waals (vdW) mem-
ories using 2D ferroelectric materials as an ingre-
dient are very limited.
Especially, gate-tunable
ferroelectric vdW memristive device, which holds
promises in future neuromorphic applications, re-
mains challenging.
Here, we show a prototype
gate-programmable memory by vertically assem-
bling graphite, CuInP2S6, and MoS2 layers into
a metal-ferroelectric-semiconductor architecture.
The resulted devices exhibit two-terminal switch-
able electro-resistance with on-off ratios exceed-
ing 105 and long-term retention, akin to a conven-
tional memristor but strongly coupled to the fer-
roelectric characteristics of the CuInP2S6 layer.
By controlling the top gate, Fermi level of MoS2
can be set inside (outside) of its band gap to
quench (enable) the memristive behaviour, yield-
ing a three-terminal gate programmable non-
volatile vdW memory.
Our findings pave the
way for the engineering of ferroelectric-mediated
memories in future implementations of nanoelec-
tronics.

The phenomenon of switchable electro-resistance be-
tween on and off states in a metal-insulator-metal (MIM)

* These authors contribute equally.
†Corresponding
to:
chengxin.zhao@impcas.ac.cn,
vitto.han@gmail.com, and hwwang15s@imr.ac.cn

junction, often facilitated by the formation/deformation
of conduction paths through filaments upon application
of voltages [1], has been an endeavour toward indus-
trial manufacturation of resistive random access mem-
ories (ReRAM, deemed also as memristors).
Conven-
tionally, such resistive switching behaviours are prefer-
ably realized in a two-terminal device in the tunnelling
regime, with the insulator in the MIM junction being
a high-k dielectric material [2]. Notably, by substitut-
ing the dielectric layer with ferroelectric or multi-ferroic
ones, a family of memristors can be established, with
their tunneling electro-resistance (TER) inheriting the
ferroic-characteristics and exhibiting enhanced tunabil-
ity of the tunneling barriers [3–9].

Recently, routes have been developed either to boost
the performance or to exploit distinct mechanisms of the
memristive devices [10, 11]. Among them, vdW devices
are of particular promises, as they can be interfaced free
of lattice-matching and compatible with a diversity of
functionalities [12, 13]. For example, it is demonstrated
that memristive behaviours can be observed in vdW de-
vices in both the tunnelling [14] and the diffusive regimes
[15, 16]. The latter scenarios can be realized with certain
mediations (such as ion-migration [15], grain boundaries
[16], and ionic-gate induced phase transition [17], while
the channels are often laterally arranged with lengths ex-
ceeding a few micron meters. The atomically thin lateral
semiconducting conduction channel thus enables further
gate tunablility [18], which leads to multiterminal mem-
transistors that mimic synaptic responses upon training
voltage pulses, holding promises in future neuromorphic
computing [19–22]. Besides, compared to lateral mem-
transistors, vertically assembled memtransistors are more
compatible for industrial production thanks to its rela-
tively small footprint [23]. To date, studies of vdW mem-
transistors however remain limited, and, especially, ver-
tically assembled gate-tunable ferroelectric vdW memris-

arXiv:2204.08216v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  18 Apr 2022


2

FIG. 1.
Characterizations of vdW M-FE-S heterojunctions.
(a) Art view of the vdW heterostructure vertically
assembled by bottom electrode, ferroelectric, semiconducting, and dielectric layers, respectively, with a Au layer as the top
gate. (b) HAADF-STEM image of the cross-section of a typical sample consisted of vdW layers of h-BN, MoS2, CuInP2S6,
graphite, in a sequence from top to down. (c) A zoomed-in view of the atomic structure of the interface of semiconducting
MoS2 and ferroelectric CuInP2S6. Scale bar is 10 nm. (d) Optical image of a typical sample in a planar view. Scale bar is 5
µm. (e) Raman spectroscopy of dotted regions marked in (d). (f) A typical pinched I-V curve obtained in a vdW M-FE-S
heterojunction, showing characteristic memristive behaviour.

tive device has been missing.

In this work, we utilize the vdW vertical assembly as a
platform to devise a prototype gate-programmable mem-
ory by stacking few-layers of graphene, CuInP2S6, and
MoS2 into a metal-ferroelectric-semiconductor (M-FE-S)
architecture, with the top semiconducting layer simulta-
neously equipped into a metal-oxide-semiconductor field
effect transistor (MOS-FET). The M-FE-S devices show
resistive switch with stability and on-off ratios reaching

105. Interestingly, the obtained memristive characteris-
tics can be enabled and disabled using the top gate at
room temperature, and can be killed by heating the sys-
tem above the ferroelectric transition Curie temperature
of CuInP2S6. We attribute this phenomenon to a ferro-
electric field effect at the FE-S interface. The proposed
three-terminal gate programmable non-volatile vdW M-
FE-S memory can, in principle, be trained into artificial
synapses, shedding light on the design of ferroelectric-


3

mediated memories in future nanoelectronics.

RESULTS

Fabrication and characterizations of M-FE-S
memristors.
A vdW vertical architecture illustrated
in Fig. 1a is adopted, to construct an M-FE-S junction
in the lower part and a MOS-FET in the upper part.
In this configuration, ferroelectic-semiconducting inter-
face as well as a gate tunable semiconducting channel
can be combined in one single device, which is essen-
tial for the realization of a gate-programmable M-FE-S
memory, as will be discussed in the following sections.
By adopting the dry-transfer method [24], multi-layered
vdW heterostructure described in Fig. 1a was fabricated
by stacking few-layers of graphene, CuInP2S6, MoS2, and
hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), with a graphite layer
(5-10 nm in thickness) serving as the bottom electrode
(see Supplementary Figure S1). Atomic resolution of the
cross section of a typical heterostructure can be seen in
the high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission
electron microscopy (HADDF-STEM) image in Fig. 1b,
with the corresponding zoomed-in view of the FE-S in-
terface shown in Fig.
1c.
It is seen that the layered
structure of CuInP2S6 and MoS2 are well defined, and
the FE-S interface is atomically sharp. Optical micro-
graph of a typical sample is shown in Fig.
1d, with
each constituent layer highlighted by different coloured
dashed lines. Electrodes and top gates were patterned
via standard lithography and electron-beam evaporation.
Raman spectroscopy of CuInP2S6 and MoS2 layers were
measured to confirm the phonon modes of each crystal,
as shown in Fig. 1e. It is seen that both of the two ma-
terials exhibit consistent Raman peaks as compared to
the previous reported results [25, 26]. It is noteworthy
that the anion and cation peaks can be found in the Ra-
man spectrum of CuInP2S6, indicating the existence of
ferroelectric dipole polarization at room temperature in
the flake. Indeed, Curie temperature TC of few layered
CuInP2S6 is around 315 K [27].
In order to effectively tune the carrier density of the
semiconducting layer (few-layered MoS2, for example),
the underneath ferroelectric layer has to be thick enough
to avoid leakage and to allow a well defined chemical
potential in the MoS2 layer. It is known that ferroelectric
tunnelling memory was reported recently [14], where a
4-nm-thick CuInP2S6 layer was used to form a simple
M-FE-M tunnel junction. However, as mentioned above,
such structure cannot be compatible with gate-tunability.
Therefore, CuInP2S6 flakes with thicknesses of 30 ∼ 50
nm were used to fabricate the M-FE-S junctions in the
current study to retain their dielectric properties.
We
now
characterize
the
two-terminal
electro-
resistance in the as-prepared M-FE-S junctions.
Dur-
ing the electrical measurements, the MoS2 layer was

FIG. 2. Ferroeletricity-assisted resistive switching be-
haviour in vdW M-FE-S heterojunctions.
(a) PFM
phase images for a typical CuInP2S6 flake (thickness t ∼
40 nm) with written box-in-box pattern with reverse DC
bias.Scale bar is 5 µm. (b) Out-of-plane amplitude (green)
and phase (blue) measurements obtained by PFM on a typ-
ical CuInP2S6 flake with t ∼ 40 nm. (c) Looped I-V char-
acteristics in a log-scale showing typical resistive switching
behaviour, as presented by the curve of open circles. Direc-
tions of the sweep are indicated by arrows, with four distinct
stages. The device is reset to HRS during stage IV at certain
positive Vds, and set to LRS during stage II at certain nega-
tive Vds. The device show absence of memristive performance
when heated above TC, as shown in the red curve.

kept grounded, while bias voltages were applied on the
graphite (or few-layered graphene, FLG) layer. As shown
in Fig.
1f, looped I-V characteristics of a representa-
tive device is plotted, with the sweep-directions indicated
by arrows. This pinched I-V loop is a typical resistive
switch curve, with four distinct stages. Specifically, the
device is switching between a high resistance state (HRS)


4

and a low resistance state (LRS) with a hysteresis that
is depending on the sweeping direction and maximum
polarization voltage. Multiple devices exhibit consistent
behaviour, as shown in Supplementary Figure S2. We
attribute this resistive behaviour to the formation of con-
duction paths in the CuInP2S6 layer, as the devices all
undergo an electro-forming process before they can serve
as memristors, shown in Supplementary Figures S3.

FIG.
3.
Performances
of
two-terminal
electro-
resistances in vdW M-FE-S heterojunction memris-
tors. (a) I-V curve for the same device in the ON and OFF
states. (b) Retention time of a typical device measured at
Vread = 0.5 V after applying a 100 µs voltage pulse of Vds=4.0
V (-4.0 V) to set the OFF (ON) state. (c) Statistics of HRS
and LRS states measured in more than 30 different samples.
Voltage pulses of 100 µs were used to set the OFF (ON) states.
Average ON/OFF ratio is estimated to be about 105.

Ferroelectric
characteristics
of
the
M-FE-S
memristor. In the following, we demonstrate that the
fabricated M-FE-S memristors are strongly affected by
the ferroelectric properties of the few-layered CuInP2S6.
Firstly, it’s worth mentioning that the electrical resis-
tance of the M-FE-S junctions might be dominated by the
Schottky barrier at the FE-S interface, which is carefully
discussed in the Supplementary information Figure S4.
Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) is used to char-
acterize the ferroelectricity of the CuInP2S6 flakes. As
shown in Fig. 2a, using a PFM tip with reverse DC bias
voltages, ferroelectric domain of a box-in-box pattern was
written and scanned in the PFM phase image, and the
pattern can be reserved for more than one year, as shown
in Supplementary Figure S5. Furthermore, out-of-plane
amplitude (green) and phase (blue) obtained on a typical
CuInP2S6 flake with t ∼ 40 nm are given in Fig. 2b, ex-
hibiting hysteresis loops with asymmetric coercivity fields
biased toward positive voltage. Such biased polarization-
switching fields are also seen in previous reports [27–29].
We notice that for Cr/CuInP2S6/FLG devices, there is
no distinct resistive switching behaviour in the diffusive
regime, as shown in Supplementary Figure S6. Besides,
negligble resistive switching behaviour is present in other
similar M-FE-M structures, e.g. Au/CuInP2S6/Au and
Cr/CuInP2S6/Au, indicating that the resistive switch-
ing behaviour is related to the FE-S interface, shown in
Supplementary Figure S7-8.
Interestingly, the switching voltages (about -1.0 V and
+2.5 V for each polarization directions) in CuInP2S6
in Fig. 2b are inherited by the resistive switching I-V
curve in the M-FE-S memristor with similar thickness
of CuInP2S6, as plotted in a log-scaled looped I-V in
Fig. 2c (as typical linear I-V data is shown in Fig. 1f).
Four distinct stages along with the sweeping-up and down
directions are indicated by arrows in Fig.
2c.
At the
vicinity of positive switching voltage (Vds) of the peizo-
electric loop in Fig. 2b, the M-FE-S memristor device
is “reset” to HRS during stage IV. On the contrary, the
device is “set” to LRS during stage II at the vicinity
of negative switching voltage. It is worthy note that the
voltage differences between “set” and “reset” coincidence
well with the differences between polarization-switching
voltages of CuInP2S6 [28], as shown in the Supplemen-
tary information Figure S9. Mechanism of the observed
ferroelectricity-assisted FE-S memristive behaviour can
be attributed to both the formation of conduction paths
in the CuInP2S6 layer, and a modulation of built-in fer-
roelectrical field at the FE-S interface and lead to an
effectively depleted states in the semiconducting layer,
leading to a tunable interfacial barrier induced by the
ferroelectric polarization [8].
Moreover, since the TC of the few-layered CuInP2S6
studied in this work is about 315 K, it is crucial to test the
M-FE-S memristors above TC. As expected, the resistive
switching of the same device is quenched when heated at


5

400 K, as shown in the red looped I-V curve in Fig. 2c.
Even when cooled to room temperature, no memristive
behaviour was observed, suggesting that the memristive
behaviour of the M-FE-S device is strongly coupled to
the ferroelectric nature of CuInP2S6, since ferroelectric
domains become randomly distributed when the system
is naturally cooled down from above TC. The resistive
switching thus may require a ferroelectric domain train-
ing process in the system, similar to the initial magneti-
zation process in some hard ferromagnets [30]. Indeed,
by re-doing the electro-forming process, the absence of
memristive performance can be recovered in those an-
nealed samples, as illustrated in Supplementary Figure
S10.
Performances
of
two-terminal
electro-
resistances in vdW M-FE-S memristors.
Figure
3a shows two-terminal I-V
curves between -0.4 and
0.4 V in the ON and OFF states. Both are nonlinear,
and consecutively tuned from negative to positive Vds
for each states, which differ from the grain-boundary
mediated resistive switching devices [16], but resembles
the behaviour of other TER memristors [31].
It is
noticed that the devices may be permanently damaged
due to dielectric breakdown at Vds higher than 6.0 V
(more details can be found in Supplementary Figure
S11).
Figure 3b shows resistance versus time of a two-
terminal M-FE-S device measured at Vread = 0.5 V after
applying a 100 µs voltage pulse of Vds=4.0 V (-4.0 V)
to set the OFF (ON) states. The devices show reten-
tion time which can be extrapolated to the time scale of
years, with the attenuation of ON/OFF ratio less than
one order of magnitude. By measuring HRS and LRS
states in more than 30 different samples (data collected
with setting-resetting voltage pulses of 100 µs with am-
plitudes of ±4.0 V) are shown in the statistics in Fig. 3c.
It is seen that good reproducibility can be obtained in all
tested samples, with an average ON/OFF ratio of about
105. It is noticed that among the measured M-FE-S sam-
ples, thicknesses of the ferroelectric and semiconducting
layers are in the range of 30 to 50 nm, and 5-15 nm,
respectively.
The variation of thicknesses among sam-
ples may be a cause of the fluctuation of ON/OFF ratios
observed in Fig. 3c.

DISCUSSION

To this stage, we have demonstrated the subpart of the
as-prepared vertical vdW heterojunction, i.e., the M-FE-
S junction that serves as a two-terminal memristor. Now
we come to the discussion of the MOS-FET equipped on
the top part of the heterojunction illustrated in Fig. 1a.
One of the key role of the architecture adopted here is
that the vdW semiconductor in the M-FE-S junction can
be gated to tune the carrier density (or, the Fermi level)

in itself, further affecting the memristive performance as
a consequence. As shown in Fig. 4a, field effect in the
MoS2 few-layers in a typical sample is confirmed. The
threshold voltage of the ON-state of the FET is about
-4 V, below which the MoS2 is tuned into gapped region
where no density of states is available. The general FET
behaviour of few-layered MoS2 crystals in this work is
in agreement with previously reported results [32]. It is
noticed that the threshold voltages of the ON-state of
MoS2 flakes with thickness around 10 nm are similar, as
shown in Supplementary information S12.
Three representative gate voltages were chosen to pin
the Fermi level of MoS2 at the position of inside the con-
duction band (C.B.), at the bottom of C.B., and in the
band gap (between C. B. and the valence band, V. B.),
as indicated by green, orange, and red cartoons along
with corresponding dots in the field effect curve in Fig.
4a.
Then the memory windows (i.e., resistance versus
pulse-voltage loop) of the M-FE-S were measured, with
Vg fixed at the above three different values. During the
measurement of memory windows, training pulses of po-
larization voltage VPole were fed in a sequence of each
pulse of VPole arranged in a triangle form with each pulse
spaced by a constant reading voltage Vread pulse of 1.0
V, illustrated in the inset of Fig. 4b. It is seen that,
by tuning the Vg, the memristive characteristics of the
device can be programmed into disabled-, intermediate-,
and enabled-states, as shown in Fig. 4b-d, respectively.
Taking the quenched (Fig. 4b) and restored (Fig. 4d)
memristive switching cases as examples, band alignments
of the metal-ferroelectric-semiconductor heterojunction
are illustrated in Fig. 4e and 4f, respectively, to address
the mechanism of the observed gate-programmable fea-
tures in the memristors.
When the Fermi level of the
semiconducting MoS2 layer is set into the gapped region,
the density of states are diminished between the chemi-
cal potential window of source and drain, thus the device
exhibits negligible conductance in general and the mem-
ristive behaviour is quenched, regardless of the direction
of ferroelectric polarizations in the M-FE-S structure,
shown in Fig. 4e. When the Fermi level of the semicon-
ducting MoS2 layer is set into the conduction band, the
electrons can be transported between source and drain,
leading to the restore or enable of the memristive perfor-
mance. In this scenario, the direction of ferroelectric po-
larizations in the M-FE-S structure will effectively form
a band bending and lead to a extra depletion in the MoS2
when the ferroelectric polarization is pointing against the
semiconducting layer, setting the system to the HRS, and
vice-versa [8]. The gate-programmable nature of the as-
prepared M-FE-S memories is key for future engineering
of such as artificial synapses and may trigger the exploit
of exotic functionalities based on ferroelectric 2D mate-
rials.
Furthermore, the picture of principle-of-work in
our devices can be further expanded into vertical vdW
heterojunctions with a broader family of 2D materials.


6

FIG. 4. Multi-level “ON” states of vdW M-FE-S gate-programmable memory at room temperature. (a) Field
effect curve of few-layered MoS2, measured on a typical MoS2 flake with similar thickness in the tested M-FE-S memristor.
Illustration of conduction and valence bands with the Fermi energy were given, for three typical states. EF denotes the Fermi
level. (b)-(d) The memory windows (i.e., Resistance versus pulse-voltage loop) measured at different Fermi energies of the MoS2
layer, set by the Vg. Traces of the training pulses of polarization voltage VPole is illustrated in the inset of (b). (e)-(f) Band
alignments of the metal-ferroelectric-semiconductor heterojunction. The memristive-disabled and memristive-enabled regimes
are realized by adjusting the Fermi energy MoS2 inside the gap, and in the electron side, respectively. In the scenario of (f),
the HRS and LRS are then achieved via the ferroelectric field effect at the FE-S interface of CuInP2S6/MoS2.

To conclude, we devised a conceptual vdW vertical ar-
chitecture with an M-FE-S junction in the lower part
and a MOS-FET in the upper part, experimentally con-
structed by sequentially stacking few-layers of graphene,
CuInP2S6, MoS2, and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)
from bottom to top.
In this manner, the conjugated
nanostructure can pack memristor and MOSFET into
one single device, as the fine-tuning of Fermi level in the
semiconducting layer can simultaneously affect the resis-
tive switching behaviour of the M-FE-S junction. When
performed as conventional two-terminal memristors, the

M-FE-S devices show resistive switch with on-off ratios
reaching 105 and state-of-the-art retention time for in-
formation storage. The obtained memristive character-
istics are strongly coupled to the ferroelectric nature of
CuInP2S6, and can be further programmed, using the top
gate at room temperature, into quenched- or enabled-
states. The resulted three-terminal gate programmable
non-volatile vdW M-FE-S memory is a potent platform
for the design of future ferroelectric-mediated vdW mem-
ories, which may find applications in such as neuromor-
phic computing.


7

METHODS

Sample fabrication. vdW few-layers of the M-FE-S
junctions were obtained by mechanically exfoliating high
quality bulk crystals. The vertical assembly of vdW lay-
ered compounds were fabricated using the dry-transfer
method in a nitrogen-filled glove box.
Electron beam
lithography was done using a Zeiss Sigma 300 SEM with
an Raith Elphy Quantum graphic writer. Top gates as
well as contacting electrodes were fabricated with an e-
beam evaporator, with typical thicknesses of Ti/Au ∼
5/50 nm.
TEM characterizations.
TEM characterizations
were carried out on a double aberration corrected FEI
Themis G2 60-300 electron microscope equipped with a
SuperX-EDS detector and operated at 300 kV. Cross sec-
tions of as-prepared devices were made using a focused
ion beam tool of FEI Helios PFIB CXe cut at 30 kV and
polished at 30 and 12 kV.
Morphology tests. A Bruker Dimension Icon AFM
was used for thicknesses and morphology tests, as well
as PFM characterizations. Optical images were collected
by a Nikon LV-ND100 microscope.
Electrical measurements.
The high precision of
current measurements of the devices were measured us-
ing a Cascade M150 probe station at room tempera-
ture, with an Angilent B1500A Semiconductor Device
Parameter Analyzer. Gate voltages on the as-prepared
multi-terminal memristors were fed by a Keithley 2400
source meter.
During measurements, the TMD layer
was kept grounded, while the Vds was applied on the
graphite bottom electrode. It is noticed that if the con-
figuration of source-drain is reversed, the I-V character-
istics will be reversed accordingly (Supplementary Figure
S13). For the memory window measurement in Fig. 4
in the main text, a pulse train constains varying pro-
gram pulse and constant read pulse (1.0 V) is adopted
by using the waveform generator fast measurment unit
(WGFMU).The program voltage ranges from from -4.5
V to 4.0 V at a step of 0.5 V.The pulse duration is 50 ms
and interval is 10 ms.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study will
be available at the open-access repository Zenodo (2022)
with a doi link, when accepted for publishing.

CODE AVAILABILITY

The computational codes that support the findings of
this study are available from the corresponding authors
upon reasonable request.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work is supported by the National Key R&D Pro-
gram of China (No. 2019YFA0307800) and the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant
Nos.
12004389, 12104462, 11974357, U1932151, and
11804386).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Z.H., H.W., and C.Z. conceived the experiment and
supervised the overall project.
W.L., Y.G., and H.W.
fabricated the devices and carried out electrical transport
measurements; K.W. and T.T. provided high quality h-
BN bulk crystals. H.W. and Z.H. analysed the data, with
W.L., Y.G., and C.Z. participated in. Z.L., X.L., B.H.,
and P.G. performed TEM characterizations.
X.Z. and
J.C. carried out resistance versus pulse-voltage loop mea-
surements. The manuscript was written by Z.H., H.W.,
and W.L. with discussion and inputs from all authors.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Competing interests: The authors declare no compet-
ing financial interests.

[1] Lanza, M. A Review on Resistive Switching in High-k
Dielectrics: A Nanoscale Point of View Using Conduc-
tive Atomic Force Microscope. Materials 7, 2155–2182
(2014).

[2] Shi, Y. et al. Electronic synapses made of layered two-
dimensional materials.
Nature Electronics 1, 458–465
(2018).

[3] Gajek, M. et al. Tunnel junctions with multiferroic bar-
riers. Nature Materials 6, 296–302 (2007).

[4] Chanthbouala, A. et al. Solid-state memories based on
ferroelectric tunnel junctions. Nature Nanotechnology 7,
101–104 (2012).

[5] Kim, D. J. et al. Ferroelectric tunnel memristor. Nano
Letters 12, 5697–5702 (2012).

[6] Chanthbouala, A. et al. A ferroelectric memristor. Nature
Materials 11, 860–864 (2012).

[7] Yin, Y. W. et al. Enhanced tunneling electroresistance
effect due to a ferroelectrically induced phase transition
at a magnetic complex oxide interface. Nature Materials
12, 397–402 (2013).

[8] Wen,
Z.,
Chen Li,
C.,
Wu,
D.,
Li,
A. & Ming,
N. Ferroelectric-field-effect-enhanced electroresistance in
metal/ferroelectric/semiconductor tunnel junctions. Na-
ture Materials 12, 617 (2013).

[9] Luo, Z. et al. High-precision and linear weight updates
by subnanosecond pulses in ferroelectric tunnel junction
for neuro-inspired computing. Nature Communications
13, 1–11 (2022).


8

[10] Zhu, X., Li, D., Liang, X. & Lu, W. D. Ionic modulation
and ionic coupling effects in MoS2 devices for neuromor-
phic computing. Nature Materials 18, 141–148 (2019).

[11] Huang, W. et al. Gate-Coupling-Enabled Robust Hys-
teresis for Nonvolatile Memory and Programmable Rec-
tifier in van der Waals Ferroelectric Heterojunctions. Ad-
vanced Materials 32, 1908040 (2020).

[12] Li, X. et al. Perspectives on exfoliated two-dimensional
spintronics.
Journal of Semiconductors 40, 081508
(2019).

[13] Dong, B., Yang, T. & Han, Z.
Flattening is flatter-
ing: The revolutionizing 2D electronic systems. Chinese
Physics B 29, 097307 (2020).

[14] Wu, J. et al. High tunnelling electroresistance in a fer-
roelectric van der Waals heterojunction via giant barrier
height modulation. Nature Electronics 3, 466–472 (2020).

[15] Wang, M. et al.
Robust memristors based on layered
two dimensional materials. Nature Electronics 1, 130–
136 (2018).

[16] Sangwan, V. K. et al. Gate-tunable memristive phenom-
ena mediated by grain boundaries in single-layer MoS2.
Nature Nanotechnology 10, 403 (2015).

[17] Huh, W. et al.
Synaptic Barristor Based on Phase-
Engineered 2D Heterostructures. Advanced Materials 30,
1801447 (2018).

[18] Wang, L. et al. Artificial Synapses Based on Multitermi-
nal Memtransistors for Neuromorphic Application. Ad-
vanced Functional Materials 29, 1901106 (2019).

[19] Huh, W., Lee, D., & Lee, C.-H. Memristors based on
2D materials as an Artificial Synapse for Neuromorphic
Electronics. Advanced Materials 32, 2002092 (2020).

[20] Sangwan, V. K. & Hersam, M. C. Neuromorphic nano-
electronic materials. Nature Nanotechnology 15, 517–528
(2020).

[21] Bessonov, A. A. et al. Layered memristive and memca-
pacitive switches for printable electronics. Nature Mate-
rials 14, 199–204 (2015).

[22] Sangwan, V. K. et al.
Multi-terminal memtransistors
from polycrystalline monolayer molybdenum disulfide.
Nature 554, 500–504 (2018).

[23] Wang, Z. et al. Resistive switching materials for infor-
mation processing. Nature Reviews Materials 5, 173–195
(2020).

[24] Wang, L. et al. One-dimensional electrical contact to a
two-dimensional material. Science 342, 614–617 (2013).

[25] Si, M., Liao, P.-Y., Qiu, G., Duan, Y. & Ye, P. D.
Ferroelectric field-effect transistors based on MoS2 and
CuInP2S6 two-dimensional van der Waals heterostruc-
ture. ACS Nano 12, 6700–6705 (2018).

[26] Li, H. et al. From bulk to monolayer MoS2: evolution
of raman scattering. Advanced Functional Materials 22,
1385–1390 (2012).

[27] Liu, F. et al.
Room-temperature ferroelectricity in
CuInP2S6 ultrathin flakes. Nature Communications 7,
12357 (2016).

[28] Chen, L. et al. Thickness dependence of domain size in
2D ferroelectric CuInP2S6 nanoflakes. AIP Advances 9,
115211 (2019).

[29] Brehm, J. A. et al.
Tunable quadruple-well ferroelec-
tric van der Waals crystals. Nature Materials 19, 43–48
(2020).

[30] Broadway, D. A. et al. Imaging domain reversal in an ul-
trathin van der Waals ferromagnet. Advanced Materials
32, 2003314 (2020).

[31] Kim, D. et al.
Ferroelectric tunnel memristor.
Nano
Letters 12, 5697–5702 (2012).

[32] Li, X.-X. et al. Gate-controlled reversible rectifying be-
haviour in tunnel contacted atomically-thin MoS2 tran-
sistor. Nature Communications 8, 1–7 (2017).


