AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

Spatially resolved mass flux measurements with 
dual comb spectroscopy

David Yun1,*, Ryan K. Cole1, Nathan A. Malarich1, Sean C. Coburn1, Nazanin Hoghooghi1, 
Jiwen Liu2, Jacob J. France3, Mark A. Hagenmaier4, Kristin M. Rice4, Jeffrey M. Donbar4, 
Gregory B. Rieker1,5

1Precision Laser Diagnostics Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
2Taitech Scientific Solutions Incorporated, Beavercreek, OH 45430
3Innovative Scientific Solutions Incorporated, Dayton, OH 45459
4U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH, 45433, USA
5email: greg.rieker@colorado.edu
*Corresponding author: david.yun@colorado.edu

Abstract: Providing an accurate, representative sample of mass flux across large open areas 
for atmospheric studies or the extreme conditions of a hypersonic engine is challenging for 
traditional intrusive or point-based sensors. Here, we demonstrate that laser absorption 
spectroscopy with mode-locked frequency combs can simultaneously measure all of the 
components of mass flux (velocity, temperature, pressure, and species mole fraction) with low 
uncertainty, spatial resolution corresponding to the laser line of sight, and no supplemental 
sensor readings. The low uncertainty is provided by the broad spectral bandwidth, high 
resolution, and extremely well-known and controlled frequency axis of stabilized, mode-locked 
frequency combs. We demonstrate these capabilities using dual frequency comb spectroscopy 
(DCS) in the isolator of a ground-test supersonic propulsion engine at Wright-Patterson Air 
Force Base. The mass flux measurements are consistent within 3.6% of the facility-level engine 
air supply values. A vertical scan of the laser beams in the isolator measures the spatially 
resolved mass flux, which is compared with computational fluid dynamics simulations. A 
rigorous uncertainty analysis demonstrates a instrument uncertainty of ~0.4%, and total 
uncertainty (including non-instrument sources) of ~7% for mass flux measurements. These 
measurements demonstrate DCS with mode-locked frequency combs as a low-uncertainty mass 
flux sensor for a variety of applications. 

1.
Introduction

Accurate measurements of gaseous mass flux, the total flow rate of molecules through a 

volume, are essential to many research fields. For example, species mass flux measurements 
have been used to study greenhouse gas emissions of cities and arctic environments [1–6], 
evapotranspiration of forests and agricultural sites [7–9], and atmospheric effects of 
wildfires [10,11]. Mass flux measurements are also useful for a host of engineering applications,
such as aeropropulsion research, where air mass flux is essential for analyzing inlet phenomena 
in hypersonic engines [12], determining flow enthalpies in arc-jet facilities [13], and 
characterizing impulse in rotating detonation engines [14]. However, direct measurements are 
extremely challenging in large-scale open environments and environments with extreme flow 
phenomena because it is difficult to accurately measure all of the components of mass flux 
(velocity and density, the latter being derived from temperature, pressure, and mixture 
composition). Here, we demonstrate non-intrusive, absolute measurements of mass flux in such 
environments with low uncertainty by leveraging the unique properties of stabilized, mode-
locked frequency combs. In particular, the extremely precise and well-known spacing between 
the optical ‘teeth’ of the comb creates a near-perfect ruler against which to measure the velocity-
dependent Doppler shift and the pressure-dependent widths of molecular absorption features.


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

The broad optical bandwidth of the combs enables measurement of a multitude of absorption 
features whose relative intensity collectively define the temperature of the gas. The optical 
bandwidth also enables accurate measurement of the gas composition, including the potential 
to resolve multiple gas species at once.

We use frequency combs to measure the mass flux in a direct-connect, ground-test, dual-

mode ramjet propulsion system at the Air Force Research Laboratory. Scramjets/ramjets are 
air-breathing engines which typically operate at speeds above Mach 5. While short duration 
scramjet flights have been demonstrated via programs such as X-51 [15] and HIFiRE Flight 
2 [16], achieving consistent operation requires improved understanding and optimization of 
engine designs. Specifically, complex flow patterns due to shock-boundary interactions around 
the supersonic inlet of flight vehicles (see Figure 1a) can lead to uncertainty in the inlet air mass 
flux. This in turn requires overdesign of flight surfaces and inlet properties to accommodate 
these uncertainties, at the expense of flight performance.

We determine the air mass flux with low uncertainty by measuring velocity, temperature, 

pressure, and species mole fraction through absorption spectroscopy of hundreds of water vapor
quantum transitions in the 6880 – 7186 cm-1 spectral region (1392 – 1453 nm) with ~46,000 
optical frequencies (comb teeth) of a stabilized all-fiber mode-locked dual frequency comb 
spectrometer. We take several measurements at varying flow conditions at the centerline of the 
dual-mode ramjet. This choice of facility allows for comparisons to both computational fluid 
dynamics (CFD) calculations and upstream facility flow rate measurements which are expected 
to have high accuracy as the facility is a closed, direct-connect system. Additionally, we 
perform a vertical scan at a single flow condition to within 1 mm from the wall to provide a 
mass flux spatial profile. The measured flow properties and resulting air mass flux results are 
compared to facility measurements and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) calculations
across a range of flow conditions. Through a detailed analysis, we estimate 0.4% instrument 
uncertainty in the measured mass flux. Additional systematic uncertainties bring the overall 
uncertainty to ~7%, largely due to uncertainty in the absorption model that is used to interpret 
the instrument measurements (and which can be improved in the future). 

This is the first demonstration of dual comb absorption spectroscopy (DCS)

measurements of air mass flux, and the first demonstration of DCS in a hypersonic 
aeropropulsion environment. Our results demonstrate the potential of broadband dual-comb 
spectroscopy for accurate, precise, and nonintrusive mass flux measurements in high-speed 
flows. While the DCS system used here is tailored for water-air mass flux and is thus based on 
H2O absorption in the near-infrared spectral region, the mode-locked frequency comb spectral 
range can be tailored to be applicable to other gas mixtures and encompass measurements of 
more species relevant to greenhouse gas monitoring and combustion [17–23]. Additionally, 
works such as [24–28] have demonstrated that DCS instrument measurements can be easily 
expanded to large areas and open environments, enabling mass flux measurements for large-
scale studies in environmental, atmospheric, and agricultural research. Recent work on chip-
sized frequency combs [29–31] and electro-optic frequency combs will further open mass flux 
measurement possibilities for DCS [32–34].


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

Fig. 1. DCS measurements in a dual-mode ramjet test engine. (a) The main components of a ramjet/scramjet are the 
inlet and isolator which compress the air via an oblique shock train, the combustor which injects and ignites fuel to 
heat the air, and a nozzle which expands and accelerates the air creating thrust. (b) Light from the frequency combs 

launch into the isolator at angle θ. Resulting light is caught onto multi-mode fiber and detected on a pair of fast 
photodetectors via a high-speed field-programmable gate array data acquisition system. Pitch and catch optics are 
placed on translation stages to allow for measurements at different heights. (c) DCS consist of two frequency combs 
whose repetition rates are read by a highly accurate clock and tightly controlled by a reference laser. Light from both 

combs is combined via a coupler and filtered to the H2O infrared absorption band.

2.
Dual frequency comb spectroscopy for air mass flux measurements

2.1
Optical mass flux measurement

Mass flux is the product of the velocity (𝑈) and density (𝜌) in a flow.

𝑚̇ = 𝜌𝑈
(1)

If we assume that the composition of the gas besides H2O (the molecular absorption target 

for the present measurement) is dry air, we can determine the density via the ideal gas law using 
temperature, pressure, and H2O mole fraction and ultimately calculate mass flux with the
following equation:


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

𝑚̇ = (𝜒𝐻2𝑂𝑀𝐻2𝑂 + (1 − 𝜒𝐻2𝑂)𝑀𝑎𝑖𝑟)𝑃𝑈

𝑅𝑇
(2)

Here MH2O and Mair are the molar masses of water and dry-air, and R is the gas constant. 

The rest of the terms: pressure (𝑃), temperature (𝑇), H2O mole fraction (𝜒𝐻2𝑂), and velocity 
(𝑈), can be extracted from laser absorption spectra measured with an appropriate optical
configuration and laser. 

Fig. 2. H2O absorption features at two different thermodynamic conditions: P = 0.3 atm, T = 250 K, 𝜒𝐻2𝑂 =

0.25, U = 0 m/s (blue) and P = 1.5 atm, T = 700 K, 𝜒𝐻2𝑂 = 0.05, U = 3000 m/s. Here, the Doppler shift is associated 

with a beam angle of 35° to the normal of the flow direction.

DCS (and laser absorption spectroscopy in general) measures laser absorption at 

frequencies resonant with the rovibrational quantum state transitions of a constituent molecule 
in a gas sample or flow. Figure 2 shows a small portion of the H2O absorption spectrum to 
demonstrate the large differences in the spectrum that are induced by different velocity, pressure, 
temperature, and species mole fraction. Flow velocity induces a Doppler shift in the absorption 
feature positions if the laser beam is angled upstream or downstream to the bulk gas flow [35]. 
In the present measurement, we configure the two beams in a crossed configuration with one 
beam angled upstream and the other downstream with equal angles (see Fig .1a). In this case, 
equal and opposite Doppler shifts are induced in the absorption spectra measured with each 
beam. The width of the absorption features is proportional to pressure. The magnitude of the 
absorption features is proportional to the species mole fraction. Finally, the relative intensities 
between the features in the spectrum are dependent on temperature because absorption 
transitions arise from quantum states with different lower state energies. Thus, pressure, species 
mole fraction, velocity, and temperature of the probed region of the flow can be determined by 
comparing the size, shape, and position of measured absorption features with an absorption 
model of the expected spectra for a given set of conditions.

2.2
Dual frequency comb spectroscopy

Mode-locked frequency comb lasers have emerged as powerful sources for absorption

spectroscopy [36,37], which can be used to simultaneously measure all of the components of 
mass flux. Frequency combs emit a train of optical pulses comprising multitudes of evenly 
spaced, discrete optical frequencies (referred to as “comb teeth”) across a broad spectral 
bandwidth. The optical frequencies of the comb teeth are related through Eq. 3:

𝑓𝑛 = 𝑛𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑝 + 𝑓0
(3)


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

where 𝑓0 is the carrier envelope offset frequency, 𝑛 is the comb tooth number, and 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑝 is the 
pulse repetition rate of the laser. Thus, the absolute frequency of each individual comb tooth is 
set with only two degrees of freedom (𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑝 and 𝑓0). These parameters can be precisely measured 
and controlled (as described below) to create a near-perfect optical ruler with which to measure 
the position, shape, and magnitude of absorption features.

A key challenge in spectroscopy with frequency combs is preserving the resolution and 

tight control of the fine comb tooth lines in the detection of the absorption information 
contained in the thousands of individual optical frequencies after they have traveled through 
the environment of interest. We address this challenge using dual comb spectroscopy (DCS),
in which two frequency combs are coherently locked to one another with slightly different comb 
tooth spacing. The comb tooth spacing is set so that successive pairs of teeth from the two 
combs have a unique frequency offset from each other that gives rise to a unique heterodyne 
beat signal at the difference frequency between the teeth. Thus when the combs are interfered 
on a photodetector, we down-convert pairs of comb teeth from their optical frequencies to 
corresponding heterodyne beat signals at easily detectable radio frequencies [38]. The 
attenuation of the comb teeth by absorption is reflected in the strength of the heterodyne beat 
signals, and thus the absorption spectrum can be read out on a tooth-by-tooth basis maintaining 
the frequency accuracy and precision of the combs themselves. The detection requires a single 
fast photodetector to capture the interference signal (the interferogram), which yields the laser 
transmission spectrum after applying a Fourier transform. Each interferogram is produced at a 
rate equal to the difference in 𝒇𝒓𝒆𝒑 between the two combs, allowing for rapid acquisition of
individual transmission spectra (1.4 kHz here). As noted later, many of these spectra can be 
averaged together to achieve high levels of precision due to the stable, coherent nature of the 
frequency combs.

The frequency combs used here are Erbium-doped, polarization-maintaining-fiber based 

frequency combs with a pulse repetition rate of 200 MHz [39]. Figure 1c shows an overview of 
the DCS configuration. The 𝑓0 of each frequency comb is controlled and stabilized using the 𝑓-
to-2𝑓 locking scheme [40–42]. In this approach, each comb is broadened across an octave of 
optical frequency space, and a high frequency tooth is frequency doubled and interfered with a
lower frequency tooth from the same comb. In this scheme, 𝑓0 is determined by the heterodyne 
beat frequency between the two interfered teeth which we stabilize at a specified RF frequency 
through feedback to the frequency comb oscillator pump current. Additionally, a tooth from 
each frequency comb is phase-locked to a common 2 kHz linewidth continuous wave (CW) 
reference laser. This establishes mutual coherence between the two comb sources, and provides 
the means to stabilize the second degree of freedom (𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑝) of each comb. Specifically, the 
heterodyne beat frequency between the CW laser and the tooth from each laser is measured 
with a frequency counter and stabilized through feedback to high-speed piezoelectric 
transducers glued to the fibers of each laser cavity. The repetition rate for each laser is also
continuously measured using a frequency counter, and we use slow feedback to the CW laser 
current (which controls the CW laser wavelength) to maintain stable 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑝 [43].

Using this stabilization approach, the quality of the optical ruler for measuring the 

absorption spectrum is set by the stability and accuracy of the frequency reference for the 
frequency counters, and the amount of drift in 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑝 allowed by the CW laser feedback. In this 
study the frequency reference is a simple ovenized quartz oscillator (Wenzel 501-27514-21) 
with a relative frequency accuracy of 1.5 ppm. The CW laser digital feedback loop allows a 
drift in 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑝 of less than 25 ppb. Thus, the frequency reference is the limiting factor in the 
ultimate accuracy of the comb tooth frequencies. Still, the 1.5 ppm relative accuracy of the 
frequency reference enables the spacing of the comb teeth to be known to within ~300 Hz 
(1.0 × 10−8 cm-1) at all times and the absolute position of teeth to within 300 MHz (0.011 cm-
1). This leads to low instrument uncertainty, as described later. If further accuracy is required 


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

the frequency reference can be replaced with a GPS-disciplined oscillator which has a relative 
accuracy of 10 ppt, and the feedback to the CW laser can be improved by switching to a high-
speed analog control feedback on the CW laser to stabilize 𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑝.

With the dual-comb spectrometer employed in this study, we achieve ~300 cm-1 optical 

bandwidth encompassing hundreds of H2O absorption features with a spectral point spacing of 
0.0067 cm-1. These mode-locked dual frequency comb spectroscopy performance metrics thus 
blend broad bandwidth with very high resolution and frequency referencing that far exceeds 
most traditional absorption techniques. For example, a TDLAS measurement with a 15 cm 
etalon reference would need real-time knowledge and control of the etalon length to 225 nm to 
achieve the frequency referencing performance of the dual comb. DCS also allows for fast 
acquisition. In this work, each spectrum is acquired in 0.7 ms, and the stability of the lasers 
allow for long averaging times to optimize SNR and precision as needed (in this case 60 s of 
data is averaged to reach <0.33% precision across all measurements).

2.3
Instrument uncertainty

The DCS performance characteristics relate directly to low instrument uncertainty for each 

of the measured components of mass flux. We define instrument uncertainty to be the 
fundamental limit of the measurement uncertainty imparted by the stability and accuracy of the 
DCS. For velocity measurements, the absolute frequency error of the frequency combs cancel 
in the crossed beam configuration (see Supplement 1 Sec. 1), and only uncertainty in the comb 
teeth spacing imparts an instrument uncertainty. As stated above, this is controlled to 0.00015%, 
and sets the lower limit of achievable uncertainty in the measurement of velocity. The 
uncertainty of the comb tooth spacing also defines the lower limit of the achievable instrument 
uncertainty for pressure measurements (which are based on the relative width of the measured 
absorption features). We found that for pressure, temperature, and species mole fraction
retrievals, uncertainty in the frequency axis also leads to additional error during the fit of the 
absorption model to the measurement due to correlation between the parameters (since all are 
retrieved simultaneously). As described in Supplement 1 Sec. 3.1 these uncertainties are still 
very low; 0.012% for pressure, 0.015% for species mole fraction, and 0.0042% for temperature. 

While difficult to quantify, the DCS bandwidth, resolution, and lack of instrument 

lineshape (distortion) also help reduce uncertainty in the measurement [44]. By incorporating 
many features, scatter in the absorption model error from feature to feature are averaged out. 
Additionally, the broad bandwidth increases robustness against optical interference effects such 
as etalons and ambiguities in laser intensity baseline which can distort feature intensity 
retrievals [45]. For temperature, incorporating a multitude of features from different lower state 
energies offers improved dynamic range and reduced uncertainty with respect to traditional 
tunable laser two-line thermometry [46]. 

Altogether, mode-locked DCS is therefore well-suited for mass flux measurements due to 

the low levels of uncertainty that are achievable through the quality of the optical spectrum 
reference, its broad bandwidth and high resolution, and point spacing accuracy. We describe 
later that background absorption, noise, absorption model error, laser angle uncertainty, and 
other systematic uncertainties outside of the DCS instrument itself increase the overall 
uncertainty. However, many of these systematic uncertainties can continue to be improved 
through changes to the optical setup and better absorption models.

3.
DCS experiment in a direct-connect dual-mode ramjet engine

We demonstrate dual comb mass flux sensing in a continuous-flow, direct-connect, 

supersonic combustion research facility at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [47]. The test 
article is a ground-test dual-mode ramjet. A dual-mode ramjet can operate in either ramjet or 
scramjet mode. Ramjets and scramjets are air-breathing engines which typically operate at 


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

speeds above Mach 5 and slow and compress air with a series of shock waves as opposed to the 
fans and turbomachinery common to lower-speed engines. Scramjets differ from ramjets in that 
air in the engine never slows below the speed of sound allowing for faster flight speeds. Figure 
1a shows a schematic of a dual-mode ramjet. During supersonic flight, air passes through 
shockwaves emanating from the leading edges of the aircraft. It then enters the inlet/isolator 
region and is further compressed by a series of shock waves that raises the pressure and 
temperature of the air, while reducing its velocity. Fuel is then mixed with the air and ignited 
in the combustor. The flow finally expands through a nozzle to provide thrust. Air mass flux 
through the engine is a critical parameter. Taken together with fuel flow rate and thrust, the 
overall performance of the engine can be assessed. It is a difficult parameter to measure, as 
intrusive diagnostics cause performance-changing perturbations in supersonic environments. It 
is also a difficult parameter to calculate for ‘free-jet’ ground-test facilities (where the test article 
is placed inside a supersonic wind tunnel), or flight engines, where there is high uncertainty 
regarding the air flow into versus around the engine.

The isolator of a direct-connect test facility is ideal for this initial demonstration because 

the mass flux can be determined with reasonable accuracy based on the test facility air flow 
measurements (all of the air flow from the facility compressors are directed through the test 
article in a direct-connect facility). The test article is 10.2 cm wide, 3.8 cm tall, and 61 cm long 
with optical access via 2.1-cm-thick quartz windows. See Supplement 1 Sec. 4 for a more 
detailed description of the dual-mode ramjet test model.

We place the dual-comb spectrometer in a control room adjacent to the test cell. A coupler 

combines light from each of the two combs and sends the combined light onto two separate
single-mode fiber paths. The light from each path then passes through free-space optical filters 
and back into single-mode fiber for transmission to the test cell. In the test cell, the light is 
collimated and passed through the isolator windows. We set both optical paths parallel to the 
bottom of the isolator. Using high precision rotation mounts we angle one beam in an upstream-
propagating direction and the other in a downstream-propagating direction (hereafter referred 
to as the upstream and downstream beam respectively) at angles of 35° and -35° (±0.25°, see 
Supplement 1, Sec. 3.3) respectively from the normal of the isolator windows, as shown in 
Figure 1b. After passing through the isolator, the light is focused into multimode optical fibers
via 1 cm diameter optics that are robust to the intense turbulence-induced beam steering that 
occurs through the test section. The transmit and receive optics rest on vertical translation stages 
that enable measurements at different heights in the isolator. The DCS signals are measured by 
photodetectors and recorded on two separate 250 MS/s digitizers, which are both clocked by 
the pulse repetition rate of one of the combs.

We obtain interferograms resulting in spectra between 6880 – 7186 cm-1 (1392 – 1453 nm) 

using 46,000 comb teeth (each with ~25 kHz linewidth) at a rate of 1.4 kHz (Figure 3). This 
region spans hundreds of observable H2O absorption features. Phase slip and timing jitter 
between interferograms due to small fluctuations in the fibers and optics after the light leaves 
the combs but before the two combs are combined are corrected in post-processing to allow 
for coherent averaging [48], which we do for 60 seconds for each measurement to maximize 
SNR and minimize statistical fit uncertainties. Figure 3a shows the transmission spectra from 
the highest velocity condition (run 5). We fit the averaged measured spectra using the 
Levenberg-Marquardt non-linear least-squares method with a modified free induction decay 
approach. The specifics of this technique is given in more detail in Ref. [45] as well as in 
Supplement 1 Sec. 2. Briefly, cepstral analysis largely separates the molecular response from 
baseline effects in the time domain. The portion of the signal that is dominated by the molecular 
response is fit with an absorption model to extract the best-fit parameters. The fits use speed-
dependent Voigt absorption models created from the high-temperature H2O absorption database 
developed by Schroeder et al. [49], which improves upon HITRAN2012 [50] especially for the 
high-temperature conditions present in the isolator. An example model generated at the best-fit 
conditions is compared with the data in Figure 3d. All open-air optical paths outside of the test 


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

engine are purged with dry air to reduce interfering background absorption from ambient water 
vapor. Remaining background absorption is measured before and after each ramjet run with 
cold dry air flowing through the isolator and subtracted from the operational run data as 
described in Supplement 1 Sec. 3.4.

The mass flux measurement is localized to the vertical and axial (streamwise) location of 

the crossed lasers. For the rectangular isolator duct, we can assume a symmetrical flow along 
the transverse axis meaning the crossed beams are able to represent a transverse-averaged slab 
with a 7 cm streamwise due to the angling of the lasers and a 1 mm height resolution 
corresponding to the beam diameter. In this study, we demonstrate spatially resolved 
measurements in the vertical direction by scanning the crossed beams vertically. The flow 
conditions tested here were designed to be simple (i.e. no distortion generator or isolator shock 
train), so that the DCS measurements could be readily compared with area-normalized facility 
mass flow rate measurements and CFD calculations. This resulted in minimal gradients along 
the axial direction of the isolator. Future measurements of more complex conditions could 
include translation of the laser beams in the axial direction to achieve a 2D measurement of the 
flowfield. 

Fig. 3. Measured spectra from run 5 with 60-second averaging. Panel a) shows the transmission spectrum from the 
downstream-propagating beam. Panel b) shows the corresponding absorbance spectra with laser intensity baseline 
and background absorbance removed. Panel c) shows the fitted residual (data-model) of.Panel d) which shows a 

zoom view of the absorbance spectrum corresponding to the green box in panel b) together with the fitted model and 

the upstream-propagating beam spectrum. 

4.
Results and CFD comparison

4.1.
Centerline measurements

In the first test configuration, we perform measurements at the centerline of the isolator

(19 mm from the bottom) while the facility parameters are varied to produce different velocity, 
temperature, and pressure conditions (tabulated in Supplement 1 Sec. 5). The DCS 
measurement results for velocity, temperature, pressure, 𝜒𝐻2𝑂, and the consequent total mass 
flux calculations are shown in Figure 4. 

The simple flow conditions in this study feature a uniform core flow with relatively small

boundary layers. Thus, a centerline measurement can be reasonably compared against area-
normalized facility mass flow rate measurements. We chose a direct-connect facility (where the 
entire mass flow of the facility compressors must pass through the engine) so that the 
compressor mass flux could serve as a direct comparison with the measurements. The facility 

6900
6950
7000
7050
7100
7150

Wavenumber (cm-1)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Absorbance

(b)

1400
1410
1420
1430
1440
1450

Wavelength (nm)

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

1

Transmission

(a)

6972
6972.5
6973

Wavenumber (cm-1)

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

Absorbance

(d)

Downstream Model Fit
Downstream Absorbance
Upstream Absorbance

1434.1
1434.2
1434.3

Wavelength (nm)

-0.05

0

0.05

Res.

(c)


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

mass flow rate measurements are taken with flow meters upstream of the isolator which are
expected to have low uncertainties. We normalize the flow rate with the isolator cross-sectional 
area to provide a facility-derived mass flux, which is shown in Figure 4. The measurements are 
within 0.1% to 3.6% of the facility-derived mass flux across all tests. As discussed later, we 
estimate the DCS mass flux uncertainty to be 7%. The mass flux measurements thus agree 
within their uncertainty to the facility values, suggesting that the uncertainty estimate is correct 
(if not conservative). 

The facility measurements only enable mass flux comparisons, so we use a 3D CFD flow 

solution for comparison with the other measured parameters (velocity, temperature, species 
mole fraction and pressure). The simulations are performed in CFD++ (Metacomp 
Technologies, Inc.) based on a full 3D Reynolds-Averaged Navier Stokes approach with the 
two-equation cubic 𝑘 − 𝜀 turbulence model and an isothermal wall condition. To compare the 
CFD and DCS values, we simulate a line-of-sight absorption measurement through the CFD at 
the same location as the real-world measurement [51]. We extract flow properties voxel-by-
voxel along a simulated beam path through the CFD to produce an integrated absorption that 
accounts for nonuniformities in flow parameters. CFD-derived flow values are then extracted 
from the simulated integrated spectra using the same fitting algorithm used to fit the DCS 
spectra. This process minimizes any differences between DCS and CFD values due to 
nonuniformity in the flow. The CFD-derived values for all of the measured parameters are 
shown in Figure 4. The CFD-derived parameters track the DCS-measured parameters. The 
CFD-derived velocities are within 2.6% of the DCS measured values. The CFD-derived 
temperature differs most from the DCS temperature at run 5 (4.8%) while differing less than 4% 
for other runs. The CFD-derived 𝜒H2O and pressure values exhibit the largest deviations from the 
DCS measured values, up to 6.1% and 7.3%, respectively. These differences result in a total 
difference between the CFD-derived and DCS-measured mass flux ranging between 3.1% and 
8.8%. We note that the CFD-derived values fall farther from the facility-measured mass flux 
than the DCS measurements for all conditions. We show in the next section that spatially 
resolved measurements are helpful in assessing how different CFD boundary conditions 
influence the ultimate CFD result, and can help improve the CFD results. 

Fig. 4. DCS measurements with uncertainties at the centerline of the isolator for different flow conditions. The 

DCS fit results (green circles) of velocity (a), pressure (b), temperature (c), χH2O(d), and total mass flux (e) are 

compared to CFD (red squares) with isothermal wall boundary conditions. Each panel has a corresponding residual
plot that shows the difference between DCS and CFD values, defined as (CFD-DCS)/DCS, with a shaded gray area 

denoting the DCS measurement uncertainty. Panel e) also shows a comparison to the facility-derived mass flux 

values (blue triangles).

4.2.
Vertical scan


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

In the second measurement configuration, we scan the crossed beams vertically from the 

centerline to within 1 mm of the bottom wall while the isolator flow is maintained at one 
condition. Figure 5 shows the measurement configuration. The measurements span 7 cm in the 
axial (streamwise) direction as the beams traverse the isolator at 𝜃 = 35°, −35°. The span along 
the vertical axis is limited to the beam width, which is ~1 mm. Thus the axial resolution is 7 cm 
and the vertical resolution is 1 mm. Narrower laser beam angles would improve the axial 
resolution at the expense of velocimetry precision (not accuracy). Figure 5 also shows the CFD-
predicted mass flux in the measurement region. One can see that the flow is mostly uniform in 
the axial direction and that the largest gradient occurs in the vertical direction near the wall. 
Therefore, we take measurements at 19 mm (centerline) and 9 mm to represent the core flow, 
and measurements at 3 mm, 2 mm, and 1 mm to profile the boundary layer near the floor (cowl)
of the isolator. 

Figure 6 shows the DCS vertical profile measurements of the different parameters and the 

mass flux. The measurements agree with expectations for the various parameters. Velocity is 
uniform in the core of the flow and decreases at the boundary layer, which is approximately 3-
5 mm thick at the bottom of the isolator at this location. Temperature increases near the wall, 
as expected for supersonic flows where slowing of the gas near the walls increases the static 
temperature of the gases. Pressure is relatively uniform across the isolator, which we expect for 
the simple flow conditions used for these experiments (no distortion generator to produce a 
pronounced oblique shock train in this region of the isolator). Remaining subtle variations in 
pressure could be due to weak shock disturbances in the flow. Finally, 𝜒H2O is relatively stable 
across the isolator, which is expected since water vapor is neither produced nor destroyed in 
the isolator or near the boundaries.

Figure 6 also incorporates the CFD-derived values of the various parameters. For these 

experiments, we provide two CFD calculations – one assuming an adiabatic boundary condition 
at the walls and one assuming an isothermal boundary condition at the walls. The difference 
between the CFD calculations is primarily visible at the boundary layer. All parameters from 
both CFD simulations are within 14% of the DCS-measured values. In general, the CFD 
simulation with adiabatic boundary conditions tends to agree better than the isothermal 
condition in the boundary layer. Similarly, the adiabatic air mass flux values have better 
agreement than the isothermal values in the boundary layer. Thus, spatially resolved DCS data 
can provide an important benchmark and means for tuning CFD in hypersonic flows. 

Fig. 5. DCS measurement configuration for the vertical scan experiments. As shown on the left side, measurements 
are taken at different heights across the isolator at constant flow condition by moving optics with a translation stage. 
Slices of the CFD-predicted mass flux are included at each height to show the expected gradients in the measurement 

region. The slices for heights 1 mm, 3 mm, and 9 mm are shown separately on the right for ease of viewing.


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

Fig. 6. DCS fit results (green circle) of velocity (a), pressure (b), temperature (c), and χH2O (d) and calculated 

total mass flux (e) compared to CFD for the vertical scan of the lower half of the isolator. Here, both CFD assuming 

isothermal boundary condition (red circle) is shown alongside CFD assuming adiabatic boundary condition (blue 

triangle). Differences between DCS and CFD, which is defined as (CFD-DCS)/DCS, is shown to the right of each of 

the DCS-CFD comparison plots with a grey shaded area indicating the DCS measurement uncertainty. The same 

color and marker code is used to differentiate which CFD is being compared to. The y-axis uncertainty bars for DCS 

measurements stem from the width of the laser beam.

5. Uncertainty analysis

The DCS instrument is capable of low uncertainty measurements of multiple flow 

parameters, as described earlier. However, it is important to consider all potential sources of 
uncertainty to estimate the total uncertainty of the measurements. We identify the sources of 
uncertainty to be the DCS instrument accuracy, DCS instrument precision, beam angle, 
background subtraction, and database. The contribution of each source is described in detail in 
Supplement 1 Sec. 3. Table 1 summarizes the uncertainties stemming from each of these 
sources for each of the parameters. 

The DCS instrument accuracy corresponds to uncertainty stemming from the DCS 

instrument itself (accuracy and stability of the frequency point spacing and the bandwidth of 
the system as discussed in Section 2). The DCS instrument precision is the scatter in results due 
to the noise in the spectrum at 60s of averaging time (absorbance noise ≈ 0.003). We find the 
scatter by calculating the Allan deviation as shown for velocity in Figure 7. The beam angle 
uncertainty of ±0.25° directly affects velocity as it is essential to relating the Doppler shift to 
velocity. It also introduces a small difference for other parameters due to a slight uncertainty in 
the laser pathlength through the flow. Uncertainties due to background subtraction arise from 
differences in background absorption measured before and after the study measurements. The 
absorption database adds uncertainty due to error in the absorption model parameters
(linestrength, pressure broadening and shift) that form the absorption models used to interpret 
the measured spectra. Finally, air mass flux uncertainty is calculated by combining the 
uncertainties for the individual parameters according to Eq. 2. 

Table 1. Uncertainty of DCS measurements in run 5

Source/Parameter
Velocity
Pressure
Temperature
𝜒H2O
Air Mass Flux

DCS Instrument Accuracy
0.00015%
0.012%
0.015%
0.0042%
0.02%

DCS Instrument Precision 
0.13%
0.22%
0.19%
0.32%
0.33%

Beam Angle
0.60%
0.06%
0.01%
0.04%
0.60%

Background Subtraction
0.52%
0.27%
0.66%
0.38%
0.88%


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

Database Error
0.0%
6.6%
1.2%
9.5%
6.9%

Total
0.8%
6.6%
1.4%
9.5%
7.0%

Fig. 7. Allan deviation for velocity from 1s to 60s. Left y-axis tick labels indicate the absolute deviation in m/s 

and the right y-axis tick labels indicate the relative precision for run 5. Allan deviations for temperature, pressure, and 

χH2O are included in Supplement 1 Sec. 3.2.

Non-DCS sources, especially the absorption database, contribute most of the total 

uncertainty. We can reasonably expect that uncertainty from non-DCS sources can be improved 
with better angle determination methods, more vigorous background water vapor purging 
methods, and database improvement. Thus, overall uncertainty in DCS mass flux measurements 
can be improved for future measurements.

Uncertainty directly from the DCS instrument (the DCS instrument accuracy and precision)

is only ~0.4% at 60s of averaging across all measurements. As the primary uncertainty 
contribution is from precision, this can be improved with longer averaging times, as the Allan 
deviation shown in Figure 7 is still declining at 60 seconds. Notably, the velocity precision is 
<2 m/s at 60 second averaging. Even at a shorter averaging time of 1 second, we achieve a 
precision of ~2% (25 m/s), indicating the potential for precise, time-resolved measurements. 

6. Discussion

Despite their importance to many atmospheric and industrial applications, direct 

measurements of mass flux are extremely challenging in large-scale open environments and 
environments with extreme flow phenomena because it is difficult to simultaneously and non-
intrusively measure all of the components of mass flux (i.e. velocity, temperature, pressure, and 
mixture composition). Here, we demonstrate non-intrusive, absolute measurements of mass 
flux in such environments by leveraging the unique properties of stabilized, mode-locked 
frequency combs. In particular, we demonstrate the measurement technique in a supersonic 
flow environment where the non-intrusive nature of the sensor survives the high temperatures 
and flow velocities, and the spatial resolution can help with the presence of variable pressure,
shock waves, and boundary layers. 

Other laser absorption techniques have been used for a variety of prior measurements in 

aerospace environments. TDLAS has been used to measure velocity, temperature, or other 
individual components of mass flux in shock tubes, wind tunnels, and ramjet test models with 
high resolution, fast acquisition data [49–58]. Lyle et al. [61] measured mass flow in a cold, 
subsonic turbofan aeroengine inlet using O2-absorption TDLAS. Assuming O2 mole fraction is 


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

fixed, the density of the air at cold temperatures is determined from absorption feature 
absorbance area using a room temperature calibration. Chang et al. [47] and Brown et al. [63]
made mass flux measurements in supersonic flows. These studies relied on pressure data from 
wall pressure transducers. Brown et al. [48] also measured the pressure with the laser sensor 
and found a 32% deviation in mass flux values when incorporating direct pressure 
measurements instead of the facility-measured pressure value. There are broadband techniques 
such as super-continuum lasers that allow for broad bandwidth and high acquisition speeds [64]. 
Studies from Werblinski et al. [65,66] demonstrated 10 kHz super-continuum measurements 
of pressure, temperature and water mole fraction in a rapid compression machine. However, 
the resolution of the fast supercontinuum measurements (~1 cm-1) is broad and not always well 
characterized compared to the small Doppler shifts (0.01-0.02 cm-1) and the absorption feature
widths (~0.1 cm-1 FWHM) at the conditions in this work. To the best of our knowledge, this is 
the first study to measure all of the components of mass flux in a supersonic environment with 
well characterized, low uncertainty. 

The ability to localize the pressure, temperature, mole fraction, velocity, and mass flux 

to the line-of-sight of the laser beam is promising for environments with spatially varying 
conditions, such as among the boundary layers and pressure shocks that occur in and around 
hypersonic vehicles. The vertical scan results presented in this paper demonstrate the capability 
of DCS to measure the spatial variation in the mass flux near the wall of the scramjet isolator. 
Future measurements could traverse oblique shock trains, incorporating local laser-based 
pressure measurements as done in this study rather than potentially non-representative facility
wall pressure measurements. 

The ability to scan a line-of-sight mass flux measurement through spatially varying 

conditions can be broadened to other open-area measurements of interest. For example, DCS 
has been demonstrated for long-distance measurements of trace gases [24,26,28]. The
technique shown here could be used to measure line-of-sight averaged mass flux conditions
downwind of trace gas sources, such as leaking oil and gas production basins, chemical plants, 
cities, or thawing permafrost. It could also be used with swept beam paths to provide area-
averaged mass flux conditions. The large area mass flux approach could have advantages over
extrapolating area-representative conditions from point-based flux sampling, such as eddy-
covariance [67,2,68] for comparisons where representation error is a concern
[69–71].

Additionally, laser array tomographic techniques [58,72] can be employed to potentially 
provide both spatial resolution and averaging of 2D areas.

Overall, this demonstration of DCS mass flux sensing with low uncertainty across a 

difficult suite of flow conditions suggest that DCS is an accurate and multi-faceted sensor with
applications across many different environments.

Funding. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (W31P4Q-15-1-0011); Air Force Office of Scientific 
Research (FA9550-17-1-0224, FA9550-20-1-0328); Air Force Research Laboratories (FA8650-20-2-2418)

Acknowledgments. We thank Amanda Makowiecki for advice performing spectroscopic fits using cepstral analysis 
and Robbie Wright for building the DCS system and for troubleshooting advice during the campaign. We thank Steve 
Enneking, Andrew Baron, Justin Stewart, and the facility operators who worked hard to ensure a smooth experimental 
campaign in Research Cell 18. This document has been cleared by the U.S. Air Force under clearance # AFRL-2022-
1066.

Disclosures. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Data availability. Data underlying the results presented in this paper are not publicly available at this time as the 
data contained in the paper has not yet been cleared for public release by the U.S. Air Force.

Supplemental document. See Supplement 1 for supporting content.


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

References

1. 
K. L. Mays, P. B. Shepson, B. H. Stirm, A. Karion, C. Sweeney, and K. R. Gurney, 
"Aircraft-Based Measurements of the Carbon Footprint of Indianapolis," Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 43, 7816–7823 (2009).

2. 
E. Velasco and M. Roth, "Cities as Net Sources of CO2: Review of Atmospheric CO2 
Exchange in Urban Environments Measured by Eddy Covariance Technique," Geogr.
Compass 4, 1238–1259 (2010).

3. 
T. Karl, M. Graus, M. Striednig, C. Lamprecht, A. Hammerle, G. Wohlfahrt, A. Held, L. 
von der Heyden, M. J. Deventer, A. Krismer, C. Haun, R. Feichter, and J. Lee, "Urban 
eddy covariance measurements reveal significant missing NOx emissions in Central 
Europe," Sci. Rep. 7, 2536 (2017).

4. 
H. Soegaard and C. Nordstroem, "Carbon dioxide exchange in a high-arctic fen estimated 
by eddy covariance measurements and modelling," Glob. Chang. Biol. 5, 547–562 (1999).

5. 
W. C. Oechel, G. L. Vourlitis, S. J. Hastings, R. C. Zulueta, L. Hinzman, and D. Kane, 
"Acclimation of ecosystem CO2 exchange in the Alaskan Arctic in response to decadal 
climate warming," Nature 406, 978–981 (2000).

6. 
C. Wille, L. Kutzbach, T. Sachs, D. Wagner, and E.-M. Pfeiffer, "Methane emission from 
Siberian arctic polygonal tundra: eddy covariance measurements and modeling," Glob.
Chang. Biol. 14, 1395–1408 (2008).

7. 
T. F. Keenan, D. Y. Hollinger, G. Bohrer, D. Dragoni, J. W. Munger, H. P. Schmid, and 
A. D. Richardson, "Increase in forest water-use efficiency as atmospheric carbon dioxide 
concentrations rise," Nature 499, 324–327 (2013).

8. 
S. Li, S. Kang, F. Li, and L. Zhang, "Evapotranspiration and crop coefficient of spring 
maize with plastic mulch using eddy covariance in northwest China," Agric. Water 
Manag. 95, 1214–1222 (2008).

9. 
S. S. Anapalli, D. K. Fisher, K. N. Reddy, P. Wagle, P. H. Gowda, and R. Sui, 
"Quantifying soybean evapotranspiration using an eddy covariance approach," Agric.
Water Manag. 209, 228–239 (2018).

10. 
C. B. Clements, B. E. Potter, S. Zhong, C. B. Clements, B. E. Potter, and S. Zhong, "In 
situ measurements of water vapor, heat, and CO2 fluxes within a prescribed grass fire," 
Int. J. Wildland Fire 15, 299–306 (2006).

11. 
Q. Sun, W. S. Meyer, G. R. Koerber, and P. Marschner, "Rapid recovery of net ecosystem 
production in a semi-arid woodland after a wildfire," Agric. For. Meteorol. 291, 108099 
(2020).

12. 
J. Teng and H. Yuan, "Variable geometry cowl sidewall for improving rectangular 
hypersonic inlet performance," Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 42, 128–135 (2015).

13. 
C. Park, G. A. Raiche, D. M. Driver, J. Olejniczak, I. Terrazas-Salinas, T. M. Hightower, 
and T. Sakai, "Comparison of Enthalpy Determination Methods for an Arc-Jet Facility," 
J. Thermophys. Heat Transf. 20, 672–679 (2006).

14. 
M. L. Fotia, J. Hoke, and F. Schauer, "Experimental Performance Scaling of Rotating 
Detonation Engines Operated on Gaseous Fuels," J. Propuls. Power 33, 1187–1196 
(2017).

15. 
J. Hank, J. Murphy, and R. Mutzman, "The X-51A Scramjet Engine Flight 
Demonstration Program," in 15th AIAA International Space Planes and Hypersonic 
Systems and Technologies Conference (2012) Paper 2008-2540.

16. 
K. R. Jackson, M. R. Gruber, and S. Buccellato, "Mach 6–8+ Hydrocarbon-Fueled 
Scramjet Flight Experiment: The HIFiRE Flight 2 Project," J. Propuls. Power 31, 36–53 
(2015).

17. 
M. Yu, Y. Okawachi, A. G. Griffith, N. Picqué, M. Lipson, and A. L. Gaeta, "Silicon-
chip-based mid-infrared dual-comb spectroscopy," Nat. Commun. 9, 1869 (2018).


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

18. 
K. Krzempek, D. Tomaszewska, A. Głuszek, T. Martynkien, P. Mergo, J. Sotor, A. 
Foltynowicz, and G. Soboń, "Stabilized all-fiber source for generation of tunable 
broadband fCEO-free mid-IR frequency comb in the 7 – 9 µm range," Opt. Express 27, 
37435 (2019).

19. 
M. A. Abbas, A. Khodabakhsh, Q. Pan, J. Mandon, S. M. Cristescu, and F. J. M. Harren, 
"Mid-infrared dual-comb spectroscopy with absolute frequency calibration using a 
passive optical reference," Opt. Express 27, 19282–19291 (2019).

20. 
G. Ycas, G. Ycas, F. R. Giorgetta, F. R. Giorgetta, J. T. Friedlein, D. Herman, D. Herman, 
K. C. Cossel, E. Baumann, E. Baumann, N. R. Newbury, and I. Coddington, "Compact 
mid-infrared dual-comb spectrometer for outdoor spectroscopy," Opt. Express 28, 
14740–14752 (2020).

21. 
A. Makowiecki, D. I. Herman, N. Hoghooghi, E. F. Strong, R. K. Cole, G. G. Ycas, F. R. 
Giorgetta, C. B. Lapointe, J. F. Glusman, J. W. Daily, P. E. Hamlington, N. R. Newbury, 
I. R. Coddington, and G. B. Rieker, "Mid-Infrared Dual Frequency Comb Spectroscopy 
for Combustion Analysis from 2.8 to 5 Microns," Proc. Combus. Inst. 38, (2020).

22. 
N. H. Pinkowski, Y. Ding, C. L. Strand, R. K. Hanson, R. Horvath, and M. Geiser, "Dual-
comb spectroscopy for high-temperature reaction kinetics," Meas. Sci. Technol. 31, 
055501 (2020).

23. 
D. M. B. Lesko, H. Timmers, S. Xing, A. Kowligy, A. J. Lind, and S. A. Diddams, "A 
six-octave optical frequency comb from a scalable few-cycle erbium fibre laser," Nat. 
Photonics 15, 281–286 (2021).

24. 
G. B. Rieker, F. R. Giorgetta, W. C. Swann, J. Kofler, A. M. Zolot, L. C. Sinclair, E. 
Baumann, C. Cromer, G. Petron, C. Sweeney, P. P. Tans, I. Coddington, and N. R. 
Newbury, "Frequency-comb-based remote sensing of greenhouse gases over kilometer 
air paths," Optica 1, 290–298 (2014).

25. 
S. Coburn, C. B. Alden, R. Wright, K. Cossel, E. Baumann, G.-W. Truong, F. Giorgetta, 
C. Sweeney, N. R. Newbury, K. Prasad, I. Coddington, and G. B. Rieker, "Regional trace-
gas source attribution using a field-deployed dual frequency comb spectrometer," 
Optica5, 320–327 (2018).

26. 
E. M. Waxman, K. C. Cossel, F. Giorgetta, G.-W. Truong, W. C. Swann, I. Coddington, 
and N. R. Newbury, "Estimating vehicle carbon dioxide emissions from Boulder, 
Colorado, using horizontal path-integrated column measurements," Atmos. Chem. Phys.
19, 4177–4192 (2019).

27. 
J. Liu, C. C. Teng, Y. Chen, C. L. Patrick, J. Westberg, J. Westberg, and G. Wysocki, 
"Field deployment of a multi-pass cell based mid-IR quantum cascade laser dual-comb 
spectrometer," in Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO) (2021), Paper 
AW2S.1

28. 
D. I. Herman, C. Weerasekara, L. C. Hutcherson, F. R. Giorgetta, K. C. Cossel, E. M. 
Waxman, G. M. Colacion, N. R. Newbury, S. M. Welch, B. D. DePaola, I. Coddington, 
E. A. Santos, and B. R. Washburn, "Precise multispecies agricultural gas flux determined 
using broadband open-path dual-comb spectroscopy," Sci. Adv. (2021).

29. 
A. G. Griffith, R. K. W. Lau, J. Cardenas, Y. Okawachi, A. Mohanty, R. Fain, Y. H. D. 
Lee, M. Yu, C. T. Phare, C. B. Poitras, A. L. Gaeta, and M. Lipson, "Silicon-chip mid-
infrared frequency comb generation," Nat. Commun. 6, 6299 (2015).

30. 
M. Suh, Q. Yang, K. Y. Yang, X. Yi, and K. J. Vahala, "Microresonator soliton dual-
comb spectroscopy" Science 354, 600–603 (2016).

31. 
V. Brasch, M. Geiselmann, T. Herr, G. Lihachev, M. H. P. Pfeiffer, M. L. Gorodetsky, 
and T. J. Kippenberg, "Photonic chip–based optical frequency comb using soliton 
Cherenkov radiation," Science 351, 357–360 (2016).

32. 
M. Yan, P.-L. Luo, K. Iwakuni, G. Millot, T. W. Hänsch, and N. Picqué, "Mid-infrared 
dual-comb spectroscopy with electro-optic modulators," Light. Sci. Appl. 6, 17076 
(2017).


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

33. 
P. Guay, J. Genest, and A. J. Fleisher, "Precision spectroscopy of H13CN using a free-
running, all-fiber dual electro-optic frequency comb system," Opt. Lett. 43, 1407–1410 
(2018).

34. 
D. A. Long, D. A. Long, B. J. Reschovsky, F. Zhou, Y. Bao, T. W. LeBrun, J. J. Gorman, 
and J. J. Gorman, "Electro-optic frequency combs for rapid interrogation in cavity 
optomechanics," Opt. Lett. 46, 645–648 (2021).

35. 
L. C. Philippe and R. K. Hanson, "Laser-absorption mass flux sensor for high-speed 
airflows," Opt. Lett. 16, 2002–2004 (1991).

36. 
N. R. Newbury, "Searching for applications with a fine-tooth comb," Nat. Photonics 5, 
186–188 (2011).

37. 
N. Picqué and T. W. Hänsch, "Frequency comb spectroscopy," Nat. Photonics 13, 146–
157 (2019).

38. 
I. Coddington, N. Newbury, and W. Swann, "Dual-comb spectroscopy," Optica, OPTICA 
3, 414–426 (2016).

39. 
L. C. Sinclair, I. Coddington, W. C. Swann, G. B. Rieker, A. Hati, K. Iwakuni, and N. R. 
Newbury, "Operation of an optically coherent frequency comb outside the metrology 
lab," Opt. Exp.22, 6996 (2014).

40. 
H. R. Telle, G. Steinmeyer, A. E. Dunlop, J. Stenger, D. H. Sutter, and U. Keller, 
"Carrier-envelope offset phase control: A novel concept for absolute optical frequency 
measurement and ultrashort pulse generation," Appl. Phys. B. 69, 327–332 (1999).

41. 
J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, Th. Udem, and T. W. Hänsch, "Measuring the frequency of 
light with mode-locked lasers," Opt. Commun. 172, 59–68 (1999).

42. 
F. W. Helbing, G. Steinmeyer, and U. Keller, "Carrier-envelope offset phase-locking 
with attosecond timing jitter," IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 
9, 1030–1040 (2003).

43. 
G.-W. Truong, E. M. Waxman, K. C. Cossel, E. Baumann, A. Klose, F. R. Giorgetta, W. 
C. Swann, N. R. Newbury, and I. Coddington, "Accurate frequency referencing for 
fieldable dual-comb spectroscopy," Opt. Express 24, 30495–30504 (2016).

44. 
E. M. Waxman, K. C. Cossel, G.-W. Truong, F. R. Giorgetta, W. C. Swann, S. Coburn, 
R. J. Wright, G. B. Rieker, I. Coddington, and N. R. Newbury, "Intercomparison of Open-
Path Trace Gas Measurements with Two Dual Frequency Comb Spectrometers," Atmos.
Meas. Tech. 10, 3295–3311 (2017).

45. 
R. K. Cole, A. S. Makowiecki, N. Hoghooghi, and G. B. Rieker, "Baseline-free 
Quantitative Absorption Spectroscopy Based on Cepstral Analysis," Opt. Express 27, 
(2019).

46. 
A. D. Draper, R. K. Cole, A. S. Makowiecki, J. Mohr, A. Zdanowicz, A. Marchese, N. 
Hoghooghi, and G. B. Rieker, "Broadband dual-frequency comb spectroscopy in a rapid 
compression machine," Opt. express 27, 10814–10825 (2019).

47. 
K.-C. Lin, K. Jackson, R. Behdadnia, T. A. Jackson, F. Ma, and V. Yang, "Acoustic 
Characterization of an Ethylene-Fueled Scramjet Combustor with a Cavity 
Flameholder," J. Propuls. Power 26, 1161–1170 (2010).

48. 
I. Coddington, W. Swann, and N. Newbury, "Coherent Multiheterodyne Spectroscopy 
Using Stabilized Optical Frequency Combs," Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, (2008).

49. 
P. J. Schroeder, D. J. Pfotenhauer, J. Yang, F. R. Giorgetta, W. C. Swann, I. Coddington, 
N. R. Newbury, and G. B. Rieker, "High temperature comparison of the HITRAN2012 
and HITEMP2010 water vapor absorption databases to frequency comb measurements," 
J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transf. 203, 194–205 (2017).

50. 
L. S. Rothman, I. E. Gordon, Y. Babikov, A. Barbe, D. Chris Benner, P. F. Bernath, M. 
Birk, L. Bizzocchi, V. Boudon, L. R. Brown, A. Campargue, K. Chance, E. A. Cohen, L. 
H. Coudert, V. M. Devi, B. J. Drouin, A. Fayt, J.-M. Flaud, R. R. Gamache, J. J. Harrison, 
J.-M. Hartmann, C. Hill, J. T. Hodges, D. Jacquemart, A. Jolly, J. Lamouroux, R. J. Le 
Roy, G. Li, D. A. Long, O. M. Lyulin, C. J. Mackie, S. T. Massie, S. Mikhailenko, H. S. 


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

P. Müller, O. V. Naumenko, A. V. Nikitin, J. Orphal, V. Perevalov, A. Perrin, E. R. 
Polovtseva, C. Richard, M. A. H. Smith, E. Starikova, K. Sung, S. Tashkun, J. Tennyson, 
G. C. Toon, Vl. G. Tyuterev, and G. Wagner, "The HITRAN2012 molecular 
spectroscopic database," J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 130, 4–50 (2013).

51. 
G. B. Rieker, J. B. Jeffries, and R. K. Hanson, "Calibration-free wavelength-modulation 
spectroscopy for measurements of gas temperature and concentration in harsh 
environments," Appl. Opt. 48, 5546–5560 (2009).

52. 
L. C. Philippe and R. K. Hanson, "Laser diode wavelength-modulation spectroscopy for 
simultaneous measurement of temperature, pressure, and velocity in shock-heated 
oxygen flows," Appl. Opt. 32, 6090–6103 (1993).

53. 
B. L. Upschulte, M. F. Miller, and M. G. Allen, "Diode Laser Sensor for Gasdynamic 
Measurements in a Model Scramjet Combustor," AIAA Journal 38, 1246–1252 (2000).

54. 
J. T. C. Liu, G. B. Rieker, J. B. Jeffries, M. R. Gruber, C. D. Carter, T. Mathur, and R. K. 
Hanson, "Near-infrared diode laser absorption diagnostic for temperature and water 
vapor in a scramjet combustor," Appl. Opt. 44, 6701–6711 (2005).

55. 
F. Li, X. Yu, H. Gu, Z. Li, Y. Zhao, L. Ma, L. Chen, and X. Chang, "Simultaneous 
measurements of multiple flow parameters for scramjet characterization using tunable 
diode-laser sensors," Appl. Opt. 50, 6697–6707 (2011).

56. 
G. B. Rieker, J. B. Jeffries, R. K. Hanson, T. Mathur, M. R. Gruber, and C. D. Carter, 
"Diode laser-based detection of combustor instabilities with application to a scramjet 
engine," Proc. Combus. Inst. 32, 831–838 (2009).

57. 
C. L. Strand and R. K. Hanson, "Quantification of Supersonic Impulse Flow Conditions 
via High-Bandwidth Wavelength Modulation Absorption Spectroscopy," AIAA Journal 
53, 2978–2987 (2015).

58. 
K. M. Busa, B. E. Rice, J. C. McDaniel, C. P. Goyne, R. D. Rockwell, J. A. Fulton, J. R. 
Edwards, and G. S. Diskin, "Scramjet Combustion Efficiency Measurement via 
Tomographic Absorption Spectroscopy and Particle Image Velocimetry," AIAA Journal 
54, 2463–2471 (2016).

59. 
Z. Xu, R. Kan, J. Ran, L. Yao, X. Fan, and J. Liu, "A Tunable Diode Laser Absorption 
Based Velocity Sensor for Local Field in Hypersonic Flows," in Light, Energy and the 
Environment (2016), Paper ETu2A.4.

60. 
J. Kurtz, M. Aizengendler, Y. Krishna, P. Walsh, and S. O’Byrne, "Rugged, Scramjet 
Inlet Temperature and Velocity Sensor: Design and Ground Test," AIAA Journal 54, 
399–407 (2016).

61. 
K. H. Lyle, J. B. Jeffries, R. K. Hanson, and M. Winter, "Diode-Laser Sensor for Air-
Mass Flux 2: Non-Uniform Flow Modeling and Aeroengine Tests," AIAA Journal 45,
2213–2223 (2007).

62. 
L. S. Chang, C. L. Strand, J. B. Jeffries, R. K. Hanson, G. S. Diskin, R. L. Gaffney, and 
D. P. Capriotti, "Supersonic Mass-Flux Measurements via Tunable Diode Laser 
Absorption and Nonuniform Flow Modeling," AIAA Journal 49, 2783–2791 (2011).

63. 
M. Brown, D. Barone, T. Barhorst, D. Eklund, M. Gruber, T. Mathur, and R. Milligan, 
"TDLAS-based Measurements of Temperature, Pressure, and Velocity in the Isolator of 
an Axisymmetric Scramjet," in 46th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion 
Conference (AIAA) (2010) Paper 2010-6989.

64. 
S. Dupont, Z. Qu, S.-S. Kiwanuka, L. E. Hooper, J. C. Knight, S. R. Keiding, and C. F. 
Kaminski, "Ultra-high repetition rate absorption spectroscopy with low noise 
supercontinuum radiation generated in an all-normal dispersion fibre," Laser Phys. Lett. 
11, 075601 (2014).

65. 
T. Werblinski, S. R. Engel, R. Engelbrecht, L. Zigan, and S. Will, "Temperature and 
multi-species measurements by supercontinuum absorption spectroscopy for IC engine 
applications," Opt. Express 21, 13656 (2013).


AFRL Clearance # AFRL-2022-1066

66. 
T. Werblinski, S. Kleindienst, R. Engelbrecht, L. Zigan, and S. Will, "Supercontinuum 
based absorption spectrometer for cycle-resolved multiparameter measurements in a 
rapid compression machine," Appl. Opt. 55, 4564–4574 (2016).

67. 
D. D. Baldocchi, "Assessing the eddy covariance technique for evaluating carbon dioxide 
exchange rates of ecosystems: past, present and future," Glob. Chang. Biol. 9, 479–492 
(2003).

68. 
M. Aubinet, T. Vesala, and D. Papale, Eddy Covariance: A Practical Guide to 
Measurement and Data Analysis (Springer Science & Business Media, 2012).

69. 
R. Oren, C.-I. Hsieh, P. Stoy, J. Albertson, H. R. Mccarthy, P. Harrell, and G. G. Katul, 
"Estimating the uncertainty in annual net ecosystem carbon exchange: spatial variation 
in turbulent fluxes and sampling errors in eddy-covariance measurements," Glob. Chang.
Biol. 12, 883–896 (2006).

70. 
T. Hill, M. Chocholek, and R. Clement, "The case for increasing the statistical power of 
eddy covariance ecosystem studies: why, where and how?," Glob. Chang. Biol. 23, 2154–
2165 (2017).

71. 
M. M. T. A. Pallandt, J. Kumar, M. Mauritz, E. A. G. Schuur, A.-M. Virkkala, G. Celis, 
F. M. Hoffman, and M. Göckede, "Representativeness assessment of the pan-Arctic eddy 
covariance site network and optimized future enhancements," Biogeosciences 19, 559–
583 (2022).

72. 
S. J. Grauer, A. M. Steinberg, K. M. Rice, J. M. Donbar, N. J. Bisek, J. J. France, and B. 
A. Ochs, "Bayesian Optimization of a TDLAS Array for Mass Capture Measurement," 
in AIAA Scitech 2021 Forum (2021) Paper 2021-0721.


