Tunable nano-plasmonic photodetectors

Patrick Pertsch, René Kullock, Vinzenz Gabriel, Luka Zurak
Monika Emmerling and Bert Hecht

NanoOptics & Biophotonics Group, Experimental Physics 5,
University of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
hecht@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de

May 2, 2022

Abstract

Visible and infrared photons can be detected with a broadband response via the internal photoeffect. By using
plasmonic nanostructures, i.e. nanoantennas, wavelength selectivity can be introduced to such detectors through
geometry-dependent resonances. Also, additional functionality, like electronic responsivity switching and polarization
detection have been realized. However, previous devices consisted of large arrays of nanostructures to achieve
detectable photocurrents.
Here we show that this concept can be scaled down to a single antenna level, resulting in detector dimensions
well below the resonance wavelength of the device. Our design consists of a single electrically-connected plasmonic
nanoantenna covered with a wide-bandgap semiconductor allowing broadband photodetection in the VIS/NIR
via injection of hot carriers. We demonstrate electrical switching of the color sensitivity as well as polarization
detection. Our results hold promise for the realization of ultra small, highly integratable photodetectors with
advanced functionality.

I.
Introduction

Active elements in modern integrated electronic circuits
have reached sizes of only a few tens of nanometers [1],
thanks to the short de Broglie wavelength of the conduc-
tion electrons. Optical elements, on the other hand, are
limited by diffraction effects, leading to much larger de-
vice sizes typically beyond the scale of the photon wave-
length [4, 11]. Yet it is desirable to integrate electronic
and photonic elements, since light is widely employed
as signal carrier in modern telecommunication applica-
tions [20]. This in particular includes photodetectors,
which convert optical into electrical signals. However,
shrinking photodetectors below the diffraction limit is
not easily possible without loss in efficiency. First of all,
reducing the thickness of the detector leads to decreasing
light absorption in its active material [11]. This espe-
cially applies for silicon, due to its indirect bandgap, but
also to other materials, like few-layer transition-metal
dichalcogenides, which are promising for modern pho-
tonic applications and narrow-band photodetectors, due
to their comparatively strong absorption at their exciton
transition energies [27, 19]. Secondly, if the lateral size is
reduced below the diffraction limit, the absorption in the
device will decrease due to the mismatch between the
detector cross section and the area of the incoming light

field. Finally, electrical connections have to be attached
to the active material, which can lead to shadowing of
the detection-area, further reducing the device efficiency
[8, 17].

All of these problems can be circumvented by employ-
ing electrically-connected plasmonic nanoantennas as
light collecting elements, since they provide significant
antenna gain, i.e. they channel light from an effective
cross section that is larger than their geometrical foot-
print [22]. This leads to more efficient utilization of the
incoming light even for small lateral sizes and at low
thicknesses. In addition, the metallic antenna itself can
be used as electrode, reducing the shadow effect imposed
by electrical connections [8]. Also, plasmonic nanoanten-
nas can be used directly as source of hot electrons and
holes that are created inside the antenna material upon
absorption of light [21]. By combining the antennas
with a semiconducting material, these hot carriers will
contribute to a photocurrent via the internal photoeffect
(IPE). This approach has been used for photodetectors
with a broadband response in the visible (VIS) and near
infrared (NIR) regime [6, 24, 28], independent of the
bandgap of the used semiconductor (SC), while the reso-
nant behavior of plasmonic nanoantennas has allowed to
selectively enhance the detection of a defined wavelength
range, which can be tuned via the antenna geometry

1

arXiv:2204.13978v1  [physics.optics]  29 Apr 2022


[12, 9, 16]. Moreover electronic responsivity switching
[28] and polarization detection [9, 16] have been reported
for plasmonic IPE detectors. However, to achieve rea-
sonable photocurrents, large arrays of nanostructures
had to be used so far [10].
Here we show that the IPE in a single nanoantenna de-
vice can be utilized for photodetection at the diffraction
limit by combining electrically connected gold nanoan-
tennas with titaniumoxide ( TiOx ) as semiconduct-
ing material. This material stack allows a broadband
VIS/NIR response while the antenna geometry deter-
mines the specific absorption wavelength. Further, we
are able to electrically select this wavelength and deter-
mine the polarization angle of linearly polarized photons
by employing different antenna geometries. Our results
are promising for ultra-small photodetectors with po-
tential application, e.g., in high-resolution laser beam
profiling.

II.
Results and discussion

In the simplest case, our device consist of a single dimer
antenna on a glass substrate, like shown in figure 1 a),
electrically connected via two wires and coated with a
semiconducting material to facilitate IPE. We structure
the antenna from a mono-crystalline gold flake [15] via
focused ion beam milling and conformally coat it with
TiOx in an atomic layer deposition process. The thick-
ness of the TiOx layer is chosen to fill the gap between
the two arms of the antenna.
Since the direct growth of TiOx on gold structures
led to ohmic contacts, we introduced a thin interfacial
layer of aluminumoxide (AlOx) for interface passivation,
which drastically lowers the dark current [7]. With this
additional layer we observe a Schottky-Barrier (SB) of
∼ 1.0 eV, determined from temperature dependent dark-
current measurements.
Figure 1 c) shows the energy band diagram of the
device with applied bias voltage UB.
This metal-
semiconductor-metal (MSM) structure features two SBs,
one at each antenna arm, leading to low dark current at
moderate bias (see SI).
Photocurrent measurements were performed with
excitation-wavelengths between 500-900 nm, which can-
not directly lift electrons above the bandgap within the
TiOx layer [3, 23]. However, hot carriers are excited
within the metallic antenna arms and may be injected
into the SC via the IPE [30]. Due to the separation
of holes and electrons at the SB, the electron flow is
directed outwards, so from gold to the SC, while the

a)

b)

c)

Figure 1:
Nanoantenna photodetector concept.
a)
Schematic representation of the device consisting of two
Au rods at the center, electrically connected via two
wires and coated with TiOx. b) Cross section through
the Au rods perpendicular to the substrate surface. c)
Energy-diagram of the metal-semiconductor-metal struc-
ture, under bias voltage UB, with the excitation of hot
carriers and the direction of the induced photocurrent
IP h.

2


electrons are subsequently collected by the other antenna
arm. Therefore, the photocurrent is a superposition of
the contributions from both antenna-arms, with oppos-
ing current polarity, leading to a zero net-current for
symmetric devices. But this symmetry can be broken
by applying a bias Voltage UB, resulting in a detectable
photocurrent.
To proof the capability of this design to create very
small photodetectors, we fabricated the symmetric dimer
antenna displayed in the scanning electron micrograph
(SEM) in figure 2 a) with a total length of 210 nm in-
cluding the TiOx layer. The size of the antenna is thus
smaller than half of the shortest wavelength used during
our measurements (500 nm).
The bright areas in the image correspond to the gold
of our antenna while the light gray areas represent the
TiOx coating. The dark rectangular frame around the
antenna is a trench resulting from the ion-milling pro-
cess and does not have a significant influence on our
measurements.
The photocurrent for this antenna was measured at
UB=1 V with tunable monochromatic light from a su-
percontinuum laser (see SI). The resulting spectrum
(s3 in figure 2 b) features a clear peak around 800 nm
that agrees well with the resonance wavelength in the
scattering measurement.
By changing the height and length of the antenna, the
resonance can be precisely controlled over a wide spectral
range, which is demonstrated by the four scattering
spectra, from different antennas, featuring distinct peaks
between 600-900 nm. Longer resonance wavelengths were
achieved by increasing the aspect ratio of the antenna
arms. The photocurrent peaks of all antennas coincide
with the scattering resonances, showing that the color-
selectivity of our detectors can be tuned via the antenna-
dimensions.
The electrical connection wire also features a reso-
nance in the scattering and photocurrent spectrum be-
low 600 nm. This contribution is similar for all discussed
antennas. For clarity, only the resonances of the dimers
are shown. A full photocurrent spectrum can be found
the in the SI.
The peaks in the photocurrent spectrum can be ex-
plained by the increased absorption at the plasmonic
resonance, which results in a high rate of hot carriers
around this spectral position [12]. This already shows
that the antenna has a large influence on the properties
of the detector. As a further consequence, the polariza-
tion pattern of the detector is defined by the antenna
geometry as well. This is evident from the polarization

dependent photoresponse depicted in figure 2 c), which
can be approximately described by cos(Φ)2, with Φ be-
ing the angle of polarization of the incident light relative
to the antenna axis (x-direction in figure 2 a). The
obtained two-lobed pattern, recorded at the resonance
wavelength of the antenna, is characteristic for a dipolar
antenna [22] and in agreement with previous reports
[12]. Note that the data was corrected for a decay of the
photocurrent over time. Details on this can be found in
the SI.

Besides the static tuning of the detector via the geom-
etry, our concept also allows a dynamic switching of the
color-response by applying a voltage. To this end, the
asymmetric antenna in figure 3 a) is employed, which
consist of two arms of different length, leading to two
resonances in the device. While the longer arm contribu-
tion is clearly visible in the scattering spectra in figure
3 b), the short arm resonance is hardly visible due to
its small size and the thus reduced scattering efficiency.
We therefore performed FEM simulations, to prove the
existence of the second resonance, taking the dimensions
from the SEM image for our model. As seen from the
displacement field plots in figure 3 c), the results indeed
show two modes, at 630 nm and 770 nm respectively,
with one antenna arm excited predominantly in either
case.

As mentioned before, the photocurrent of a symmetric
antenna is zero without applied bias voltage, which is
visible in the gray curve in figure 3 b). However, for
the case of the asymmetric dimer, both arms contribute
currents with non-equal amplitude, depending on the
excitation wavelength. For example at 630 nm, the short
arm contributes more hot carriers as it is on resonance
at this wavelength, while the long arm contributes more
current at 770 nm. This leads to a non-zero net pho-
tocurrent with opposite polarity at the two resonances
(see blue curve in the bottom plot of figure 3 b).

For comparison, we simulated the absorption in each
arm separately, denoted as σleft and σright, which is
proportional to the hot carrier generation inside the
respective arm. Therefore the difference ∆σ = σleft −
σright resembles the net-photocurrent at zero bias. For
comparability with the scattering, the absolute value
|∆σ| is added to the top plot in figure 3 b), while the sign
is color encoded. Although this simple model can predict
the spectral positions of the peaks, it neglects important
effects, like the wavelength dependent injection rate of
hot carriers [12] or the scattering of hot carriers inside the
metal [21]. To fully describe the photocurrent amplitude,
a more extensive model is necessary, which is beyond

3


a)
b)

c)

Figure 2: Antenna enhanced photocurrent. a) SEM image of a fabricated nanoantenna covered with TiOx. The
scale bar is 50 nm. b) Comparison between the normalized photocurrent (top) and the scattering (bottom) of four
antennas with different dimensions. c) Photocurrent as a function of the laser polarization angle at the resonance
wavelength of 790 nm. The antenna in a) is denoted as "s3" in the other plots.

the scope of this work.
To use the asymmetric antenna for dynamic color
switching, a bias voltage UB is applied. This induces a
potential barrier, which suppresses the hot carriers from
one of the two arms [26, 28], as depicted in figure 1 c),
reducing its contribution to the net current. This way,
the carriers originating from the other antenna arm, on
the higher electrical potential, are the main contributors
to the photocurrent, and consequently, this arm defines
the spectral response of the detector.
Therefore, by
switching the sign of UB, we can switch between the
two resonances of the asymmetric antenna, which clearly
changes the color response of the device (figure 3 d).
To completely suppress the photocurrent peak at a
specific wavelength, the applied bias needs to be chosen
carefully. The simulations in 3 c) show that at, say,
770 nm the excitation is spread over both arms, while

one is clearly dominant. So, while the main part of the
light is absorbed in the long arm, a small fraction is still
absorbed in the short arm. Consequently, at sufficiently
high bias, the short arm defines the photocurrent at
770 nm, although it is not at resonance, because the
long rod´s hot electrons are blocked by the potential
barrier. The optimal voltage, in our case UB = ±0.15 V ,
is therefore reached when the photocurrents of both
arms cancel out at one resonance (the unwanted one).
Choosing other values of UB can be used to tune the
relative amplitude of the photocurrent peaks.

We now show that our plasmonic photodetector con-
cept also allows to detect the polarization angle Φ of
linearly polarized light within a sub-diffractional device.
The polarization pattern in figure 2 c) already shows
that the photocurrent of the dimer antenna depends
on Φ, so, in principle, this can be used as a simple

4


UB

a)
b)

c)
d)

Figure 3: Electrical responsivity switching. a) SEM image of an asymmetric antenna. The scale bar is 50 nm. b)
Measured scattering and simulated absorption spectra (top), plotted is the difference of the absorption in both
antenna arms |∆σ|, and photocurrent at zero bias (bottom). The latter is compared to the zero bias current of the
symmetric antenna s3 from figure 2. c) Simulated displacement fields (magnitude) of an asymmetric antenna at
both resonances. The white lines denote the borders of the antenna and the TiOx layer. d) Electrical responsivity
switching of the normalized photocurrent under positive and negative bias.

polarization detector already. If the power P of the
incoming light is constant and the angular dependence
of the photocurrent IP h(Φ) is known, we can deduce the
polarization angle Φ by measuring IP h. However, for
the simple case of the dimer, IP h depends on Φ and P.
Thus, for variable P, the polarization angle cannot be
deduced from IP h alone.
To overcome this problem, the antenna design depicted
in figure 4 a) can be employed.
This cross antenna
consists of two dimers that are rotated by 90° with
respect to each other [2], while the current through
the antenna arms can be measured separately via the
connection wires. The currents through the two dimers

are denoted as IH and IV respectively (cf. figure 4 a).
The resulting polarization patterns at the resonance
wavelength are shown in figure 4 b). These two separate
patterns can be described well by IV = cos2(Φ+Φ0) and
IH = cos2(Φ + Φ0 + 90◦) = sin2(Φ + Φ0) respectively,
which indicates an independent excitation of both dimers.
The phase shift Φ0 results from the overall rotation of
the cross.
This independence is supported by FEM simulations
for the cross antenna: The displacement-field plots in
figure 4 c) were computed for two orthogonal polariza-
tion directions of the incoming light. In both cases the
excitation of the dimer perpendicular to the polarization

5


IV

IH

a)
b)

c)

Figure 4: Polarization detection. a) SEM image of a cross antenna and b) its photocurrent as a function of the laser
polarization angle. The scale bar is 50 nm. The currents IH,V through the horizontal and vertical connectors are
measured separately and then normalized to the total current IH + IV . c) Simulated displacement fields, at the
resonance wavelength of 800 nm, for two orthogonal, linear polarizations, along the two dimers of the cross antenna.

is negligible.

To measure Φ we now use both photocurrents IH and
IV , which again depend on the power of the incoming
light and its polarization angle.
However, the total
current through the cross Itot = IV + IH ∝ cos(Φ)2 +
sin(Φ)2 = 1 changes with power but does not depend
on the polarization angle. Thus, by normalizing IV,H
by Itot, we arrive at a quantity that does depend on the
polarization angle only, assuming that the amplitude of
both photocurrent-patterns is the same for both dimers.
Therefore, IP h(Φ, P) only needs to be measured once,
at a constant light power, substantially reducing the
necessary calibration effort for the cross antenna. As
an experimental proof, we measured the polarization
pattern for different powers of the excitation laser (see
SI) and observed no significant changes in the normalized
photocurrent, while the absolute values increased with

higher powers. This shows that the cross antenna can
be used as an intensity-invariant polarization detector.

Due to the four-fold symmetry, the cross antenna
cannot uniquely resolve the angle of polarization. But
this problem can be overcome by using an antenna with
three-fold symmetry, like shown in the SI. The antenna
presented there can resolve the polarization angle unam-
biguously, however at the cost of higher measurement
complexity.

The antennas discussed in this work were fabricated
to feature resonances in the range between 600-900 nm,
which was limited by our excitation source, towards long
wavelengths, and by the increasing absorption of gold
below 600 nm. But in principle this wavelength range can
be easily extended to the infrared by further increasing
the aspect ratio of the antennas [22], in theory up to
the SB height[12], which in our case is 1.0 eV. Plasmonic

6


photodetectors at blue wavelengths are also feasible by
employing different materials, like aluminum or silver
[13].
A bigger limitation, in terms of possible applications,
is the detection efficiency which is rather low compared
to standard photodetectors based on silicon. We calcu-
late the detection efficiency by dividing the photocurrent
by the total incoming power of our laser light, corrected
by the size of the laser spot and the antenna absorption
cross section. See SI for details. With this we estimate
an external quantum efficiency ηext ≈ 10−4 electrons
per photon.
To a certain degree this efficiency is influenced by
the thin AlOx layer, but since it is comparable to other
reports [12], the layer´s direct impact on ηext seems to
be rather insignificant, due to the small thickness of only
0.5 nm. More importantly, the injection of hot carriers
into the semiconductor is believed to be the biggest
limitation for plasmonic IPE detectors [21], although
covering the antenna with the SC should slightly increase
injection probability, compared to placing it on a flat
SC surface [14].
In the future, this injection might be improved by the
so-called "plasmon-induced interfacial charge-transfer
transition", which features internal quantum efficiency
of > 24% [29, 5, 18, 25]. Another approach to increase
the detection efficiency could be via an integrated gain
mechanism, like demonstrated for an IPE detector based
on MoS2 with a reported photogain of 105 [28].
In conclusion, we showed, that plasmonic IPE devices
can be scaled down to a single antenna level, enabling
detectors with sizes well below the wavelength of the
detected light. In addition we demonstrated that these
detectors can exhibit complex functionality like dynamic
color switching and polarization detection, while keep-
ing the small device footprint. This renders our concept
promising for small scale photodetectors, especially for
applications where high resolution demands are com-
bined with high light intensity, like, for example, the
profiling of focused laser beams.

References

[1] International roadmap for devices and systems -
more moore. Technical report, 2021.

[2] Paolo Biagioni, Matteo Savoini, Jer-Shing Huang,
Lamberto Duò, Marco Finazzi, and Bert Hecht.
Near-field polarization shaping by a near-resonant
plasmonic cross antenna. Physical Review B, 80(15),
2009.

[3] Robert C. Devlin, Mohammadreza Khorasaninejad,
Wei Ting Chen, Jaewon Oh, and Federico Capasso.
Broadband high-efficiency dielectric metasurfaces
for the visible spectrum. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 113(38):10473–10478, 2016.

[4] E. R. Fossum and D. B. Hondongwa. A review
of the pinned photodiode for CCD and CMOS im-
age sensors. IEEE Journal of the Electron Devices
Society, 2(3):33–43, 2014.

[5] Akihiro Furube, Luchao Du, Kohjiro Hara, Ryuzi
Katoh, and Masanori Tachiya. Ultrafast plasmon-
induced electron transfer from gold nanodots into
TiO 2 nanoparticles.
Journal of the American
Chemical Society, 129(48):14852–14853, 2007.

[6] Xu Dong Gao, Guang Tao Fei, Shao Hui Xu,
Bin Nian Zhong, Hao Miao Ouyang, Xin Hua Li,
and Li De Zhang. Porous ag/TiO2-schottky-diode
based plasmonic hot-electron photodetector with
high detectivity and fast response. Nanophotonics,
8(7):1247–1254, 2019.

[7] F. Pelayo García de Arquer, Agustín Mihi, and
Gerasimos Konstantatos.
Large-area plasmonic-
crystal–hot-electron-based photodetectors.
ACS
Photonics, 2(7):950–957, 2015.

[8] J. Hetterich, G. Bastian, N. A. Gippius, S. G.
Tikhodeev, G. von Plessen, and U. Lemmer. Op-
timized design of plasmonic MSM photodetector.
IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, 43(10):855–
859, 2007.

[9] Y. Hou, H. Liang, A. Tang, X. Du, and Z. Mei. Hot-
electron photocurrent detection of near-infrared
light based on ZnO.
Applied Physics Letters,
118(6):063501, 2021.

[10] Jian-An Huang and Lin-Bao Luo. Low-dimensional
plasmonic photodetectors: Recent progress and fu-
ture opportunities.
Advanced Optical Materials,
6(8):1701282, 2018.

[11] HyunChul Kim, Jongeun Park, Insung Joe, Doowon
Kwon, Joo Hyoung Kim, Dongsuk Cho, Taehun
Lee, Changkyu Lee, Haeyong Park, Soojin Hong,
Chongkwang Chang, Jingyun Kim, Hanjin Lim,
Youngsun Oh, Yitae Kim, Seungjoo Nah, Sangill
Jung, Jaekyu Lee, JungChak Ahn, Hyeongsun
Hong, Kyupil Lee, and Ho-Kyu Kang. A 1/2.65in
44mpixel CMOS image sensor with 0.7µm pixels

7


fabricated in advanced full-depth deep-trench isola-
tion technology. In 2020 IEEE International Solid-
State Circuits Conference - (ISSCC), pages 104–106,
2020.

[12] M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander, and N. J.
Halas. Photodetection with active optical antennas.
Science, 332(6030):702–704, 2011.

[13] Mark W. Knight, Nicholas S. King, Lifei Liu,
Henry O. Everitt, Peter Nordlander, and Naomi J.
Halas.
Aluminum for plasmonics.
ACS Nano,
8(1):834–840, 2014.

[14] Mark W. Knight, Yumin Wang, Alexander S. Urban,
Ali Sobhani, Bob Y. Zheng, Peter Nordlander, and
Naomi J. Halas. Embedding plasmonic nanostruc-
ture diodes enhances hot electron emission. Nano
Letters, 13(4):1687–1692, 2013.

[15] Enno Krauss, René Kullock, Xiaofei Wu, Pe-
ter Geisler, Nils Lundt, Martin Kamp, and Bert
Hecht. Controlled growth of high-aspect-ratio single-
crystalline gold platelets. Crystal Growth & Design,
18(3):1297–1302, 2018.

[16] Wei Li, J. Zachary Coppens, Lucas V. Besteiro,
Wenyi Wang, O. Alexander Govorov, and Jason
Valentine. Circularly polarized light detection with
hot electrons in chiral plasmonic metamaterials.
Nature Communications, page 7, 2015.

[17] Chu-Hsuan Lin and Chee Wee Liu.
Metal-
insulator-semiconductor photodetectors. Sensors,
10(10):8797–8826, 2010.

[18] Run Long and Oleg V Prezhdo. Instantaneous gen-
eration of charge-separated state on TiO2 surface
sensitized with plasmonic nanoparticles. Journal of
the American Chemical Society, 136(11):4343–4354,
2014.

[19] Kin Fai Mak and Jie Shan. Photonics and opto-
electronics of 2d semiconductor transition metal
dichalcogenides. Nature Photonics, 10(4):216–226,
2016.

[20] Fedor Mitschke. Fiber Optics: Physics and Tech-
nology. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2nd ed. 2016
edition, 2016.

[21] Prineha Narang, Ravishankar Sundararaman, and
Harry A. Atwater. Plasmonic hot carrier dynam-
ics in solid-state and chemical systems for energy
conversion. Nanophotonics, 5(1):96–111, 2016.

[22] Lukas Novotny and Bert Hecht. Principles of Nano-
Optics. Cambridge University Press, 2 edition, 2012.

[23] J. Pascual, J. Camassel, and H. Mathieu. Fine
structure in the intrinsic absorption edge of TiO2.
Physical Review B, 18(10):5606–5614, 1978.

[24] Giulia Tagliabue, Joseph S. DuChene, Adela Habib,
Ravishankar Sundararaman, and Harry A. Atwater.
Hot-hole versus hot-electron transport at cu/GaN
heterojunction interfaces. ACS Nano, 14(5):5788–
5797, 2020.

[25] Shijing Tan, Adam Argondizzo, Jindong Ren, Lim-
ing Liu, Jin Zhao, and Hrvoje Petek. Plasmonic
coupling at a metal/semiconductor interface. Na-
ture Photonics, 11(12):806–812, 2017.

[26] Fuming Wang and Nicholas A. Melosh.
Power-
independent wavelength determination by hot car-
rier collection in metal-insulator-metal devices. Na-
ture Communications, 4(1):1711, 2013.

[27] Qing Hua Wang, Kourosh Kalantar-Zadeh, Andras
Kis, Jonathan N. Coleman, and Michael S. Strano.
Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional
transition metal dichalcogenides. Nature Nanotech-
nology, 7(11):699–712, 2012.

[28] Wenyi Wang, Andrey Klots, Dhiraj Prasai, Yuanmu
Yang, Kirill I. Bolotin, and Jason Valentine. Hot
electron-based near-infrared photodetection using
bilayer MoS2.
Nano Letters, 15(11):7440–7444,
2015.

[29] K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. McBride, and T. Lian. Ef-
ficient hot-electron transfer by a plasmon-induced
interfacial charge-transfer transition.
Science,
349(6248):632–635, 2015.

[30] Bob Y. Zheng, Hangqi Zhao, Alejandro Manjavacas,
Michael McClain, Peter Nordlander, and Naomi J.
Halas. Distinguishing between plasmon-induced and
photoexcited carriers in a device geometry. Nature
Communications, 6(1):7797, 2015.

8


