1

Ferrocene as an iconic redox marker: from solution chemistry to 

molecular electronic devices

Gargee Roy1,#, Ritu Gupta2,#, Satya Ranjan Sahoo3,4, Sumit Saha3,4, Deepak Asthana1*, Prakash Chandra 

Mondal2*

1Department of Chemistry, Ashoka University, Sonipat, Haryana 131029, India

2Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh 208016, India  

3Materials Chemistry Department, CSIR-Institute of Minerals & Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha 

751013, India

4Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh 201002, India 

# These two authors equally contributed to this work

Corresponding author’s E-mail: pcmondal@iitk.ac.in (PCM), deepak.asthana@ashoka.edu.in (DA)

Abstract: Ferrocene, since its discovery in 1951, has been extensively exploited as a redox probe in a variety 

of processes ranging from solution chemistry, medicinal chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, surface 

chemistry to solid-state molecular electronic and spintronic circuit elements to unravel electrochemical 

charge-transfer dynamics. Ferrocene represents an extremely chemically and thermally stable, and highly 

reproducible redox probe that undergoes reversible one-electron oxidation and reduction occurring at the 

interfaces of electrode/ferrocene solution in response to applied anodic and cathodic potentials, respectively. 

It has been almost 70 years after its discovery and has become one of the most widely studied and model 

organometallic compounds not only for probing electrochemical charge-transfer process but also as molecular 

building blocks for the synthesis of chiral organometallic catalysts, potential drug candidates, polymeric 

compounds, electrochemical sensors, to name a few. Ferrocene and its derivatives have been a breakthrough 

in many aspects due to its versatile reactivity, fascinating chemical structures, unconventional metal-ligand 

coordination, and the magic number of electrons (18 e-). The present review discusses the recent progress 

made towards ferrocene-containing molecular systems exploited for redox reactions, surface attachment, spin-

dependent electrochemical process to probe spin polarization, photo-electrochemistry, and integration into 

prototype molecular electronic devices. Overall, the present reviews demonstrate a piece of collective 

information about the recent advancements made towards the ferrocene and its derivatives that have been 

utilized as iconic redox markers.

Keywords: Organometallic electrochemistry, Faradaic redox process, heterogeneous electron-transfer, fast 

kinetic, photo-driven redox chemistry, magnetic field-dependent electrochemistry.


2

1. Introduction: eccentric chemistry of ferrocene for the chemists

Fisher and Wilkinson received the Nobel prize in Chemistry for their pioneering work on ‘sandwich 

organometallic compounds’ back in 1973.[1] However, the journey of ferrocene chemistry was started 

independently by Kealy and Pauson and accidentally discovered ferrocene in 1951.[2,3] They attempted to 

synthesize ‘fulvalene’ via oxidative coupling reaction between cyclopentadienyl magnesium bromide and 

ferric chloride (FeCl3) in anhydrous ether. Instead, the reaction produced a thermally stable (up to 175oC), an 

orange-colored sandwiched compound which is known as ferrocene (C10H10Fe, Fc). However, at that time 

chemical structure and metal-ligand boning in ferrocene were little-known. The correct structure was first 

proposed by none other than G. Wilkinson in 1952.[4] The research team led by Wilkinson suggested that sp2-

hybridized carbon atoms in cyclopentadienyl anion ring might be capable of forming a symmetrical covalent 

bond with the d orbitals of Fe2+ resulting in a sandwich compound structure which was a great surprise to the 

chemistry community. Along with other analytical pieces of evidence, the infrared spectroscopy indicates the 

presence of only one type of C-H bond appears at 3050 cm-1. The sandwich structure was further confirmed 

by several other research groups and since then, ferrocene and its structure received huge attention.[5–8]

Depending on the potential energy, ferrocene can exist either lower energy staggered conformation (S-Fc, 

D5d) or high energy eclipsed conformation (E-Fc, D5h). Fig. 1 and 2 represent an orbital charge density and 

molecular orbital (MO) diagram and details discussions can be found in the literature.[9,10] From Fig.1, the 

metal-ligand (M-L, Fe-C) covalent bonding features can be observed in the ferrocene, and p-orbitals of 

cyclopentadienyl (Cp) form unconventional π-bonded interactions. In the Cp ring, the electron density of all 

five carbon atoms is delocalized. Ferrocene being reversibly redox-active which undergoes Fc to Fc+ (via one 

electron oxidation), rich coordination chemistry, and non-linear optical response has been extensively used to 

prepare stimuli-responsive molecular systems for various applications.[11–15] Interestingly, ferrocene also 

allows the ligand exchanges in which one of the Cp rings could be replaced with aromatic.[16] Ferrocene 

functions as an excellent bridge in setting electronic communications between two distant groups and used in 

ferrocene-peptide chemistry for investigating redox process.[17,18]

Ferrocene exhibits rich electrochemical behaviour that includes stable, and reversible Faradaic process, fast 

charge-transfer kinetic, oxidation to reduction current density is nearly unity (Ipa/Ipc ≈1), peak-to-peak 

difference, ΔEp is very close to ideal value (59 mV for 1e- transferred redox-process), well-defined half-wave 

redox signal, E1/2 at +0.31 V (SCE), similar diffusion coefficient for both oxidized and reduced species.[19]

First polarographic behaviour of metallocenes including ferrocene/ferrocenium was reported with respect to 

the saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode.[20] However, SCE creates liquid junction 

potential (LJP) between the electrode surface and the aqueous solvent which differ from solvent to solvent 

and geometry changes of the reference electrode. To avoid such LPJ formation, there was a pressing need for 

an internal redox standard which can provide reliable electrochemical redox process and the potential of the 

other redox-active systems can be expressed with respect to such internal redox marker. Considering its well-

known, distinct electrochemical process discussed above, ferrocene has been employed as an internal redox-


3

probes for calibrating potentiostat, reference electrodes, electrochemical stability of many redox-active 

species.[21–24] Besides, ferrocene has been used as a known electrochemical reference to deduce the energy 

levels of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) 

of either organic, organometallic, or coordination compounds.[25,26] Ferrocene has not only been used as 

standard redox-probe, but also used as blocking agent to quantify surface coverage, and quality of the 

molecular thin films grafted on different electrodes.[27] In the class of stimuli-responsive systems, redox-

active materials have attracted huge attention as the reversible oxidation/reduction process leads to alteration 

in electronic properties of the system and therefore extremely useful in devices in which the functionalities 

depend on electron acceptance/donation. In particular, optical changes in response to the redox activity make 

such systems ideal for electrochromic and optoelectronic applications. Thus, ferrocene is among one of the 

most attractive redox-markers that find diverse applications. In the present review, we will discuss the progress 

seen in the last five years mad with the ferrocene and its derivatives covering some recent aspects

schematically shown in Fig. 3. This review would facilitate novice and expert to have in-depth understanding 

of electrochemical process and recent advanced achieved with ferrocene which is considered as an iconic 

redox marker. 

Fig. 1. DFT calculated orbital charge densities of Fc in two different configurations, D5h and D5d. Reproduced with 
permission from Ref. [9]. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.


4

Fig. 2. Molecular orbital diagram of ferrocene. A total no. of 18 electrons is originated from Fe2+ (6 e-) and 
cyclopentadienyl ligands (6 e- from each). Reproduced with permission from Ref. [10]. Copyright 1999, American 
Chemical Society.


5

Fig. 3. Selective but recent domains achieved with ferrocene. Few of them are the key subject of the present Reviews. 

2. Redox behavior of ferrocene: roles of working electrodes, Fermi energy, and charge-

transfer mechanisms

In cyclic voltammetry (CV), we typically use a three-electrode set-up, working electrode (WE), reference 

electrode (RE), and counter electrode (CE). Working electrode carries all redox processes of our interests, 

mainly occurs at the electrode-electrolyte interface. Whereas reference electrode is used as a reference point 

with respect to we measure applied potential to the working electrode and counter electrode completes the 

circuit, i.e., current flows from working to counter electrode.[28] In all electrochemical studies, we are mainly 

concerned with all redox events and factors that affect these events. There are various factors that affect the 

redox process, such as types of working electrodes, Fermi energy (EF), electrolytes and concentration,

temperature and charge transport mechanism.[29] Every working electrode has a characteristic EF value; as a 

result, it has a different energy barrier for charge-transfer to happen. Now, consider an electrochemical setup 

where working, reference, and counter electrodes are immersed in an electrolyte solution containing ferrocene 

as a redox probe; when a potential difference is applied between working and reference electrodes, current 

flows in the external circuit due to the chemical reactions (redox) of ferrocene at electrode/electrolyte 

interface.[30] Fig. 4 depicts the energy profile diagram of redox events of ferrocene. In response to an applied 

positive potential (+V vs RE), EF of the working electrode is modulated to nearer to the HOMO of ferrocene, 

as a result there will be an energetically favourable situation and ferrocene will transfer one d-electron to the 

working electrode (dz2 to EF) forming ferrocenium, Fc (Fig. 4a). Similarly, the EF of the electrode can be 

enhanced by applying a negative potential (-V) and the releases electron back to the Fc, thus a reduction 

process happens. However, if the applied potential is too much negative, the ligand (Cp ring) gets reduced 

further. For the sake of simplicity, we would consider only Fe2+/3+ electrochemical process but not the ligand-

based electrochemical process. 


6

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of energy profile diagram of redox events of ferrocene at working electrode/electrolyte 
interface.

3. The solution-based electrochemical process in ferrocenes 

Ferrocene can easily be functionalized on one or both Cp rings with the same or different substituents. Such 

functionalization does not affect electrochemical reversibility, or structural motif but this does affect its redox 

potential. For instance, substituting ferrocene with an electron-withdrawing group increases the oxidation

potential, whereas electron-donating group decreases.[31,32] Several studies aim to prepare ferrocene 

derivatives for studying their electrochemical behavior and its discrepancy from the pristine ferrocene.[33]

Bennett et al. synthesized a series of conjugated alkenyl arene ferrocene and biferrocene derivatives using 

four different ligands (Fig. 5a), namely, 4-ethynylpyridine (a), 3-ethynylpyridine (b); 4-ethynylthioanisole (c) 

and 3-ethynylthioanisole (d), and systematically investigated their electrochemical property by cyclic 

voltammetry (CV) measurements.[34] The CV experiments were conducted in dichloromethane solutions 

using 0.1 M NnBu4PF6 as the supporting electrolyte. The CV results revealed that monoferrocene compounds 

showed the characteristic one-electron redox process like ferrocene, but the oxidation potential was shifted to 

more positive side than the standard ferrocene (Table 1 and Fig. 5b,c). It was attributed to the electron-

withdrawing effect of ethynylarene substituents that withdraws the electron density from the ferrocene system. 

This effect can be clearly seen in 1cc and 2c. Furthermore, the substituents in arene also affect the potential 

and the reversibility of the redox process by stabilizing the positive charge through the donation of electrons 

into the π-system. Both pyridyl- and thioanisole-based analogs showed a similar but opposite effect. It was 

observed that delocalization of positive charge was effective in the case of 4-thioanisole as compared to 3-

thioanisole, which clearly resembles with redox potential trends (1dd and 1cc), showing higher potential for 


7

3-thioanisole than 4-thioanisole. Similarly, 3-pyridyl showed more effective delocalization than that of 4-

pyridyl, and the analog containing both groups (1ab) showed intermediate potential. 

Fig. 5. (a) Different synthesized ferrocene derivatives used for electrochemical studies. (b) CVs of 1cc and (c) 2c were 
recorded in CH2Cl2/0.1 M [nBu4][PF6] recorded on a glassy carbon disc as the working electrode, Pt-wire as reference 
electrode. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [34]. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.

Table 1. Electrochemical parameters of 1 and 2 recorded at 100 mV s-1 in 0.1 M nBu4NPF6 in CH2Cl2 (all 
potentials are in mV units). Reproduced with permission from Ref. [34]. Copyright 2022, American Chemical 
Society.

[Fc]
Ep
Ec
E1/2
ΔE
ipa/ipc

1aa
336
264
300
72
1.23

1ab
319
249
284
70
1.06

1ac
247
182
215
65
1.08

1ad
284
213
249
71
1.11

1bb
296
209
253
87
1.05

1bc
246
172
209
74
1.02

1bd
268
188
228
80
0.89

1cc
196
130
163
66
0.93

1cd
196
130
163
66
0.86

1dd
237
173
205
64
1.00

2a
195
127
161
68
0.98

2c
135
69
102
66
0.94

A similar kind of studies were performed by Sauvage and coworker where they have synthesized a series of 

ferrocene-based compounds and their corresponding oxidized derivatives and evaluated their electrochemical 

properties by cyclic voltammetry (Fig. 6).[35] The CV plots revealed that by introducing simple electron 

donating groups like methyl or tert-butyl units on the Cp-rings, the redox potential was lowered as compared 

to pristine ferrocene. With the increase in number of methyl groups on Cp-rings, the redox potential was 

gradually decreased by ca. 100 mV (one methyl group per one Cp ring), that is, +0.302 V (vs SCE) for 

Me2Fc+/Me2Fc and +0.003 V for Me8Fc+/Me8Fc. Therefore, the Fe+III/Fe+II redox potentials were tuned from 

+0.403 V (ferrocene) down to −0.096 V (Me10Fc+/Me10Fc) vs SCE. 


8

Fig. 6. Cyclic voltammogram and redox potential of Fe(III)/Fe(II) redox couple of ferrocene derivatives. Reproduced 
with permission from Ref. [35] Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.

Monomeric zinc ferrocene carboxylate (Zn(FcCOO)(3,5-dmp)2Cl) complex also exhibited one-electron redox 

reaction with a half-potential, E1/2 at 442.5 mV, which was shifted towards more negative as compared to 

ferrocene, due to the electron-withdrawing nature of the carboxylate and the coordination bond between the 

carboxylate and Zn2+ ions.[36] The value of ΔEp was found to be 183 mV which indicated an one-electron 

reversible process. Moreover, a unique star-shaped ferrocene derivative, namely tetra[4-(4-ferrocenyl-1,2,3-

triazol-1-yl)butyl]ferrocene was reported, which displayed the electrochemical reversibility with ΔEp ≤ 0.08 

V (= Epa-Epc).[37] Increasing the number of Fc units in these derivatives had an increased effect on both 

oxidation and reduction potentials and Faradaic currents. Wang et al. functionalized BODIPY (3, 4, and 5) 

with bisferrocenyl ligand to study the impact of ferrocenyl substitution on the electronic properties of BODIPY

(Fig. 7).[38] 3 and 4 exhibited two distinguishably reversible one-electron oxidation peaks corresponding to 

two ferrocene units in these complexes. The oxidation potential was shifted towards more negative side as 

compared to the Fc/Fc+ redox couple due to σ-donation from boron unit. 5 exhibited one two-electron 

oxidation peak for two ferrocene units in the complex, which was attributed to the decreased electronic 

communication or electrostatic effect owing to the long distance between two ferrocene units resulting in from 

the alkyne bridge. The oxidation potential was shifted towards positive as compared to the 

ferrocene/ferrocenium couple due to the electron-withdrawing effect of the alkyne bridge.


9

Fig. 7. Cyclic and differential-pulse voltammetry of 3, 4, and 5. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [38]. Copyright 
2018, American Chemical Society.

4. Ferrocene as redox probe for spin-dependent electrochemical charge-transfer process

The effect of the magnetic field in electrochemistry is a well-celebrated topic.[39–44] Seminal theoretical 

and experimental work observed that magnetic field has altered the charge transfer process.[45–47] The 

magnetic field-dependence electrochemical reaction involving radical and radical pairs intermediates has also 

been recently studied.[48,49]
To study spin polarization (spin-selective charge propagation) in 

electrochemistry, ferromagnetic (FM) substrates such as Ni, Co, permalloy are used as working electrodes, 

which can be magnetized by placing a permanent magnet beneath them.[50–52] Due to the chirality-induced 

spin selectivity (CISS) effect, chiral molecules coated on magnetic substrates have also been employed to 

produce spin-selective charge carriers investigated by spin-dependent electrochemical measurements.[53–55]

In this respect, achiral ferrocene has been widely utilized as a redox probe to study the magnetic-field effect 

on electrochemical charge-transfer phenomena for deducing spin polarization (% of SP). Naaman and co-

workers
grafted a chiral polymer poly{[methyl N-(tert-butoxycarbonyl)-S-3-thienyl-L-cysteinate]-

cothiophene} (PCT-L) on ferromagnetic Ni substrates by electrochemical reduction.[56] Fig. 8a shows the 

schematic setup for spin-dependent electrochemical measurements, where PCT-L deposited Ni working 

electrode was magnetized by the underneath magnet of 0.5 T in UP or DOWN magnetization direction. Fig 

8b shows the cyclic voltammogram of achiral ferrocene in methanol with PCT-L deposited Ni working 

electrode as a function of a magnetic field directions. In the case of UP magnetization, current changes its sign 

from oxidation to reduction. However, in the case of the opposite direction of magnetization (DOWN), it does 

not vary its direction suggesting a high barrier for charge transfer from PCT-L deposited Ni electrode to Fc+ 

ion. Overall, researchers successfully demonstrated chiral PCT-L polymer as effective spin filter module

allowing only charge carriers with one particular spin as expected in the CISS effect. 

To demonstrate on-surface chiral recognition using the chiral polymer, researchers have further recorded

cyclic voltammograms on PCT-D and PCT-L coated Au using either the R or S chiral N,N -dimethyl- 1-

ferrocenyl-ethylamine as a redox probe. Due to the different chirality of the polymer, there was an 

enantioselective interaction between deposited polymer and chiral ferrocene redox probe. PCT-D interacted 


10

strongly with S chiral N,N -dimethyl- 1-ferrocenyl-ethylamine, whereas PCT-L showed strong interaction 

with R chiral N,N -dimethyl- 1-ferrocenyl-ethylamine (Fig. 9).

Fig. 8. (a) Schematic image of spin-dependent electrochemistry setup, where a permanent magnet was placed beneath 
PCT-L coated Ni working electrode. (b) Cyclic voltammogram recorded with PCT-L coated Ni electrode in achiral 
ferrocene as a function of magnetic field. Figures are reproduced with permission from Ref. [56]. Copyright 2015,
WILEY-VCH.

Fig. 9. Cyclic Voltammogram recorded with (a) PCT-D Au electrodes in R (black) or S (red) chiral N,N -dimethyl- 1-
ferrocenyl-ethylamine. (b) CV recorded with PCT-L Au electrodes in R (blue) or S (green) chiral N,N -dimethyl- 1-
ferrocenyl-ethylamine. Figure are reproduced with permission from Ref.[56] Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH.

Apart from spin-dependent electrochemistry, ferrocene has been employed as redox probe in studying 

electronic effect of various molecular thin films as well. In this aspect, Charlton et al. deposited nitro phenyl 

as modifier layers on ITO substrates by employing electrochemical reduction of di(4-nitrophenyl) iodonium 

tetrafluoroborate (DNP) via varying either concentration or number of scans (Fig. 10).[57] To investigate, 

electronic effect of modifier film, CV and EIS was performed using 0.5 mM ferrocene as a redox probe. In 

the case of NP modified ITO, peak current intensity and peak separation of ferrocene diminished compared to 

unmodified one due to passivating nature of the NP layer, which depended on DNP concentration and no. of 

the CV scans. Higher concentration (0.6 mM) and 10 CV scans resulted in grafting of more NP molecules, 

hence provided more passivation and diminished peak current intensity. EIS study also showed similar 

electron transfer behavior. Fig. 10c shows the Nyquist plot of modified and unmodified ITO in 0.5 mM and 5 

mM ferrocene as an electroactive probe. As the concentration increased from 0.2 mM to 0.6 mM, a greater 

number of NP molecules attached to ITO surface as a result charge transfer resistance (Rct) also increased, 

which was evaluated from bode plot (Fig. 10d). Li et al. functionalized glassy carbon (GC) substrate via 

electrochemical reduction of insitu generated diazonium from
4-(2,5-di-thiophen-2-yl-pyrrol-1-yl)-


11

phenylamine (SNS-An).[58] Ferrocene as redox probes was used to study the electrochemical behavior of 

SNS-An modified GC substrate (Fig. 11). Interestingly, SNS-An modified GC substrate showed a diode like 

behavior. In modified GC, an irreversible redox behavior of Fc observed. Compared to bare GC, in modified 

one, FC oxidation peak shifted to 0.2 V vs SCE due to deposited organic layer. It was found that layer behaved 

as insulating layer below low potential and at higher potential it functioned as conducting like a diode. Using 

similar diazonium chemistry, Gupta et al. modified ITO substrate with naphthyl molecular layers and studied 

electrochemical behavior of NAPH molecules using similar Fc as redox probe.[27] Compared to bare ITO, 

the NAPH modified ITO, Fc oxidation peak current density decreased with increase in surface coverage of 

NAPH molecules illustrating blocking behavior of NAPH films.

Fig. 10. (a) Schematic description of one electron reduction of di(4-nitrophenyl) iodonium tetrafluoroborate (DNP). (b) 
CVs of unmodified and NP modified ITO in 0.5 mM ferrocene solution. (c) Nyquist plot of unmodified and NP modified 
ITO in 0.5 mM (above) and 5 mM (bottom) ferrocene solution and (d) its corresponding bode plot in 0.5 mM ferrocene.
Figure b, c and d are reproduced with permission from Ref.[57]. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.

Fig. 11. (a) Schematic view of electrochemical grafting of diazonium of 4-(2,5-di-thiophen-2-yl-pyrrol-1-yl)-
phenylamine (SNS-An). (b) CVs of bare and modified GC in 1 mM ferrocene redox probe. Reproduced with permission 
from Ref. [58] Copyright 2020, MDPI.
5. On-surface electrochemistry of ferrocene derivatives

Ferrocene has been the subject of focal point to investigate on-surface electrochemistry which is mainly 

governed by diffusionless charge-transfer process. Many strategies have been utilized to make on-surface 

assemblies where Fc or its derivatives are attached. For instance, Darwish and co-workers reported  covalently 


12

bonded monolayers using S-Si interactions and successfully fabricated Fc-containing thin film in much milder 

conditions.[59] H-terminated Si was employed as a substrate and three different molecules (8-10) were used 

to form SAMs. CV studies of SAMs of 8 revealed approximately 0.32 molecule bound with every Si-atom at 

the surface of Si(111) (Fig. 12b), and the scan rate vs. current (J) plot show linear relationship indicating 

diffusion-less charge transfer process (Fig. 12c). They used both n- and p-type Si-surfaces for the 

functionalization and CV measurements which suggested unaffected surface coverage in both the cases (Fig. 

12b & d). The CV results of 8 SAMs recorded on p-type Si(111)-H surface are comparable with the surface 

coverage of SAMs on a Au(111) surface (Fig. 12e). However, CV data of SAMs 8 prepared on Si(100) (Fig. 

12f) showed only 33% surface coverage compared to SAMs 8 on Si(111). This unusual value was attributed 

to incomplete surface H atom replacement. Later, the same group exploited two molecules that contained 1,2-

dithiolane-3-pentanoic acid to form SAMs and compared the effectiveness of the process with a third 

molecule, which was first converted into a disulfide (Fig. 13).[60] Spontaneous grafting was performed by 

dipping Si-H electrode in the acetonitrile solution of 11 or 12.

Fig. 12. (a) Chemical structure of the compounds 8-10 used for SAMs formation. (b) CVs of SAMs 8 on p-type Si(111)-
H surface obtained at different scanning rates, and (c) linear plot of current vs scan rates. (d) CV of SAM 8 on a n-type 
Si(111)-H surface, (e) CV of SAM 8 on Au(111) surface, (f) CV of SAM 8 on H-terminated Si(100). Reproduced with 
permission from Ref. [59] Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.  


13

Fig. 13. (a) Scheme for preparation of SAMs 11 and 12 on Si surface. CVs of SAMs 11 on Si surface obtained by 
spontaneous grafting method (b), and electrochemical grafting (c). (d) current density vs. time plot obtained from 
electrochemically grafted SAMs 11 using potential 0.8 V (black line) and at 0.9 V (red line). Reproduced with 
permission from Ref. [60] Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.

To have a clearer view about presence of O2, an argon bubbled solution of 11 was used to see if SAMs 

formation takes place. Cyclic voltammograms support the fact that presence of oxygen is necessary. 

Conversion of thiol into disulfide basically reduced the monolayer formation time in ambient conditions from 

24 h to 1 h. A comparative study performed by preparing monolayer of 11 on Si and Au both revealed that to 

reach comparable surface monolayer coverage, Au needed 2 h more than the Si-surface. This study could be 

extremely helpful in preparation of protein functionalized Si-surfaces. SAMs on semiconducting surface such 

as on Si also functions as a protecting layer which stops the reoxidation process of freshly prepared Si-H 

surface. For this reason, after removal of the insulating oxide layer from Si-surface the SAMs formation needs 

to be established rapidly while maintaining the oxygen free condition. However, studies have shown that even 

in highly dense alkyne-based SAMs the coverage area is up to 60-65% and therefore nearly 35% area remains 

prone to reoxidation allowing growth of insulating oxide regions on the surface.[61,62] The same group 

investigated the effects of such unavoidable oxide growths on the Si-based SAMs and the charge transfer 

kinetics using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) (Fig. 14)[63] In their study, they followed two 

procedures. In one procedure ferrocene terminated SAM was maintained under ambient condition and charge 

transfer kinetics were correlated with the exposure time. In the second approach, the terminal alkyne 

functionalized SAM was first left in ambient conditions for a certain amount of time and then ferrocene group 

was introduced via a click reaction and then charge transfer kinetics was studied (Fig. 14b). Oxidation and 

reduction peak current comparisons for day 1 and for day 30 showed a decrease indicating a corresponding 


14

decrease in surface coverage area. The estimated surface coverage area was found to be nearly 37% less than 

day 1. Peak separation also increased from 50 mV to 140 mV in 30 days suggesting slower kinetics for electron 

transfer process. EIS measurements of S-2 revealed an increase in resistance with the increasing exposure 

time (Fig. 14c). Both measurements exhibit a decrease in surface coverage area with increasing exposure time. 

Fact that surface coverage area decrease is caused by oxidation and not due to ferrocene decomposition, was 

investigate by performing control experiment.

Fig. 14. (a) Schematic presentation of the SAMs H-terminated Si(111) substrates. (b) CV measurements on a SAMs S-
2 sample at day 1, 5, 15, and 30. (c) EIS measurement corresponding to sample exposed for different amount of time (1 
day-30 days). Reproduced with permission from Ref. [63] Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.

Fontanesi and co-workers prepared ferrocene  monolayers using -OH group of a Fc-derivative that was

covalently grafted on H-terminated Si(111) surface (Fig. 15).[64] CV measurements performed using Si-

surface functionalized with methanol-ferrocene (Me-Fc) and 1-iodoundecanoic acid-ferrocene (UA-Fc) 

revealed a quasi-reversible oxidation for grafted ferrocene. The calculated surface coverage for Si-Me-Fc 

monolayer (4.3 x 10-10 mol/cm2) indicated a nicely packed monolayer structure. Si-UA-Fc yielded similar CV 

characteristics; however, the reversibility was even less when compared to Si-Me-Fc.

Fig. 15. (a) Scheme for surface modification process of the H-terminated silicon substrates. (b) corresponding CVs. 
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [64] Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.


15

Taherinia prepared a range of ferrocene terminated SAMs on a gold surface by varying oligophenyleneimine 

spacers and investigated the interfacial electron transfer kinetics (Fig. 16).[65] The SAMs were obtained in a 

step-wise imination method. First the Au-substrate was soaked in ethanol solution of 4-aminothiophenol to 

get amin-terminated SAMs which was then reacted with a terphthalaldehyde solution in ethanol resulting in 

an imine product. In the next step this was further reacted with a diamine followed by another reaction with 

dialdehyde. The SAMs were employed in electrochemical measurements recorded in ionic liquid as an 

electrolyte and show an increase in peak separation upon addition of cyclohexyl group. This separation was 

not observed when 0.1 M Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile was used for the CV measurements which was attributed to 

the difference in SAMs and electrolyte interactions. With increasing temperature, the decrease in peak 

separation was observed in all SAMs. Plot of electron transfer rate (ln k°) against molecular length for SAMs 

of OPI 2_Fc, OPI 4_Fc and OPI 8_Fc show a linear trend indicating tunneling charge transport.

Fig. 16. Scheme showing ferrocene-terminated SAMs. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [65] Copyright 2020, 
American Chemical Society.

Functionalization of carbon electrodes is another area where ferrocene-based SAMs have been used.[66] In a 

typical procedure the glassy carbon electrode is modified with amine functional SAMs and then reacted with 

ferrocene-carboxylic acid in presence of coupling reagents EDC and NHS (Fig. 17a).[67] CV measurements 

showed that when dilution was 50 mol % the peaks became sharper compared to SAMs prepared with no 

diluent (Fig. 17b). This is probably due to possible intermolecular electron transfer between two close 

ferrocene units resulting in broadened peaks which could be avoided in diluted sample. Dilution beyond 50 

mol% results in decreased peak current densities due to the reduced surface coverage. The ferrocene 


16

interaction in undiluted sample was also obvious from the CV peak separation and the full width at half 

maximum values which were higher than those obtained on Au-surface. Ferrocene-SAMs having six and 

twelve CH2 group spacers and studied its effect on surface coverage. CV measurements exhibited similar peak 

separation, however, longer-chain SAMs followed slower electron transfer kinetics. It is known that carbon 

electrode surface is less defined than the Au and contains more defect sites. It was proposed that alkyl chains 

in SAMs may bend bringing ferrocene head to be in close contact with the defect sites. Also, a larger difference 

in spacer lengths between ferrocene linker and diluent would again cause ferrocene-ferrocene interactions 

leading to broadening of peaks. To clear these doubts, they prepared SAMs having same linker (C6 and C12) 

and diluent spacer (NH2(CH2)nOH, n=6 & 12). Comparative studies revealed that similar length diluents cause 

significant reduction in ferrocene attachments probably due to steric hindrance in amidation, and also results 

in much less non-Faradic current densities. Additionally, they prepared SAMs in which defect sites were 

blocked by electrodeposition of ZnO (Fig. 18).

Fig. 17. (a) Scheme showing carbon electrode modification using ferrocene derivative. (b), (c) CVs of ferrocene 
containing SAMs prepared in different conditions. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [67] Copyright 2021, 
American Chemical Society.

Fig. 18. (a) Diagram showing electron tunneling scheme in ferrocene SAMs on gold surface, (b) use of ZnO to block 
defect sites on carbon electrode, (c) charge transfer in absences of ZnO coating. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 
[67] Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 


17

Another interesting work describing the packing and molecular orientations in a ferrocene SAMs obtained by 

performing ‘click chemistry’ was reported by Escoubas and co-workers.[68] They have applied three different 

synthetic strategies to prepare the ferrocene SAMs. In one strategy they did one step direct deposition, in 

second and third, they used two-step process employing click reaction between alkyne and azide 

functionalities (Fig. 19). SAMs preparation by direct deposition was performed by soaking a fresh template 

stripped Au substrate in a 1 mM solution of ferrocene functionalized compounds. For the two-step procedure, 

first substrate was soaked for 20 h in 1 mM solution of mixed thiol (containing diluent octanethiol in 1:1 ratio) 

and then click reaction with ferrocene unit having alkyne or azide funcionalities was performed. CVs were

recorded in 1 M aqueous HClO4 and using Ag/AgCl reference electrode was used to characterize the various 

SAMs. The deconvolution analysis of the obtained voltammograms from SAMs 16 yielded peak areas Epa,I

and  Epa,II as 72% and 28% respectively, which were attributed to the two different arrangements of Fc units 

corresponding to standing-up phase and buried phase in the SAMs. Surface coverage area calculation showed


18

Fig. 19. Schematic diagram showing various synthetic strategies used to prepare of SAMs 16-25. Reproduced with 
permission from Ref. [68] Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.   

57% and 100% coverage values for SAM 16 and SAM 17, respectively. This difference can not arise due to 

the spacer nature (odd-even effect) as both molecules have odd number of carbon atoms in the chain. Authors 

proposed that the strain between S- and Fc units leads to bending of molecule which effectively reduced the 

available surface in SAMs 16, whereas, in SAMs 17 the spacer between triazole and Fc unit help in adjusting

the strain. Kim and co-workers observed electronic and interfacial structural changes in a Fc-SAMs prepared 

on Au.[69] To probe such an exciting phenomena, they clubbed XPS, UPS along with a conventional 3-

electrodes based electrochemical set-up for measuring thickness of the Fc-SAMs during the redox events (Fig. 

20). They elucidated that during an oxidation process, when Fc is converted to Fc+, due to strong electrostatic 

interactions between the oxidized redox probe and electrolyte (ClO4–), facilitate the SAMs to be nearly 

perpendicular on the underlying Au substrate. As a result, thickness of the Fc+-SAMs increases to 18.6 ± 0.2Å

as compared to the neutral Fc-SAMs which was at 18.6 ± 0.2Å. Besides, they experimentally deduced a change

in the dipole moment due to formation of strong ion-pairs (Fc+- ClO4–) by measuring the work function.

Fig. 20. (a-b) X-ray and UPS clubbed with electrochemical measurements set-up, (c) chemical structure of Fc-thiolated
SAMs, (d) schematic description of electrode/SAMs interfacial structural changes during electrochemical oxidation and 
reduction, (e) CVs recorded on Au/Fc SAMs at various scan rates. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [69]
Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.   

6. Photo-driven charge transfer

Systems in which charge transfer could be triggered by light absorption are of special interest. One of the 

major areas where such materials find application is the field of solar cells. Ferrocene-based complexes have 


19

been employed in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSC) and their ability as sensitizer in TiO2 based solar cells 

been investigated in past.[70–73] In the context of solar cells, titanium-oxo-clusters, a family of polynuclear 

titanium compounds, have seen growing interest towards their possible roles in improving the 

efficiency.[74,75] Number of strategies have been adopted to tailor the optical properties of titanium-oxo-

clusters among which the most frequently applied route is the synthesis of heterometallic TOCs which helps 

in reducing the band gap and shifting the absorption to visible light region.[76,77] Fan and co-workers realised 

that interesting changes in the optical properties of titanium-oxo-clusters could be obtained upon the 

introduction
of
ferrocene
moieties.[78]
They prepared
such clusters that are substituted with 

ferrocenecarboxylate [Ti6(µ3-O)6(OiPr)6(OOCFc)6] and compared it with structurally similar derivatives 

obtained by using 1-naptholate (NA) [Ti6(µ3-O)6(OiPr)6(NA)6] and 1-naphthylacetate (NAA) [Ti6(µ3-

O)6(OiPr)6(NAA)6], respectively (Fig. 21). UV-vis absorption spectra of naphthyl-functionalised clusters 

show absorption below 400 nm while ferrocene derivatised clusters exhibits absorption extending up to 600 

nm. Calculated band gaps were found to be 2.2, 3.2 and 3.3 eV for Fc, NA and NAA-functionalised cluster, 

respectively. The strikingly lower band gap of Fc-functionalised TOC was attributed to Fe (II) d-d transitions

and presence of some Fc-{Ti6} charge transfer. The CV of the Fc-functionalized cluster performed in 

dichloromethane using supporting electrolyte n-Bu4NPF6 showed a quasi-reversible redox behaviour with 

Epa=0.723 and Epc=0.616 V (Fig. 22a). Appearance of just one peak is indicative of the fact that the six Fc 

units are independent of each other and undergo a simultaneous oxidization process. In their study they found 

that the CV of the starting material ferrocenecarboxylic acid exhibited a completely irreversible oxidation 

peak at 0.78V. The contrast change in the redox reversibility of the Fc units in cluster compound indicated

that there is some electronic interaction between ferrocenecarboxylate ligand and the {Ti6} moiety. DFT 

calculations revealed that the two highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) have significant contribution

from the Fe 3d orbitals whereas the two lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) are located on the 

Titanium 3d orbitals of {Ti6} cluster. Photoelectrochemical properties of clusters showed anodic current 

suggesting n-type semiconduction in the clusters under study (Fig. 22b). While all the three tested clusters

exhibited a steady and reproducible photo current during many on/off cycles of Xenon light radiation, cluster 

functionalised with Fc units showed significantly better photocurrent implying efficient electron injection 

from excited states of Fc sensitizers. 

Dai group prepared a similar cluster functionalized with multiferroic units, [Ti6O6(OiPr)6(O2CFc)6] and 

compared its potential as electrochemical sensor for sugar reduction using generated photocurrent.[79] A 

structurally similar compounds that did not contain ferrocene [Ti6O6(OiPr)6(O2CiBu)6] was used as reference 

(Fig. 23a-b). The voltammograms reveal simultaneous oxidation of all the six Fc units showing a reversible 

redox potential with a half-wave redox potential at E1/2 = 0.62 V which is slightly larger than the value 

observed for free ferrocene (E1/2=0.558 V) (Fig. 23c). This difference might be attributed to the withdrawal


20

Fig. 21. Single crystal structure of titanium-oxo-clusters containing ferrocene moiety [Ti6(µ3-O)6(OiPr)6(OOCFc)6], 
and structurally similar [Ti6(µ3-O)6(OiPr)6(NA)6] and [Ti6(µ3-O)6(OiPr)6(NAA)6] lacking the redox unit. Reproduced 
with permission from Ref. [78] Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.

Fig. 22. (a) CV of Fc-functionalized cluster recorded at 100 mV/s. (b) photocurrent measurements for NA (black), NAA 
(blue) and Fc-functionalized clusters (red). Reproduced with permission from Ref. [78] Copyright 2017, Royal Society 
of Chemistry.

of electron density by Ti(IV) centre in the molecule. They observed that Faradaic current varied upon addition 

of glucose and noticed a significant current decrease with increasing time (Fig. 23d). Photocurrent response 

carried out in 0.1 ml L-1 sodium sulphate electrolyte solution under illumination from a 150-W xenon lamp 

revealed about three times higher photocurrent densities than non-Fc cluster. The sensitivity of Fc-

functionalised cluster for four saccharides glucose, fructose, maltose and sucrose was tested. A linear 

dependence in current density and added glucose was observed. While it is important to optimize the molecular 

designs and fabrication strategies that may improve the efficiency of any system, same time this is also of 

equal importance to know the things that must be avoided. Koivisto and co-workers studied the effect of 4,4-

difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacenes (BODIPY)-ferrocene dyads on DSSC and observed some 

unfavourable electron transfer in electron deficient BODIPY-ferrocene when in conjugation.[80] They 

prepared β-substituted Fc-BODIPY derivatives and performed the detailed investigation. UV-vis absorption 

studies showed much broader absorption band for Fc-functionalized BODIPY compound compared to system 

lacking a Fc unit. This feature is desirable in photovoltaic as it means absorption of a wide range of light 

spectrum and hence better efficiency of the device. However, cyclic voltametric investigations were 

discouraging. BODIPY cores in its inherent state exhibit pseudo reversible reduction but when it is 

functionalised with ferrocene the reversibility gets lost, irrespective of the meso-position substituent’s nature. 

Ferrocene-BODIPY dyads did exhibit one electron reversible oxidation. Observed instability in Fc-BODIPY 


21

is different from previous observations on similar system as in those cases Fc moiety was the cause, however, 

in present system it is BODIPY site that is decomposing. This study eliminates the existing doubts about Fc-

BODIPY dyads and indicates that the either conjugation between two redox sites should be broken or α-

position of BODIPY should be modified in order to elevate the energy of the LUMO and thereby stop the 

ground state electron transfer.

Fig. 23. (a) Solid state structure of ferrocene functionalized cluster, [Ti6O6(OiPr)6(O2CFc)6], (b) without ferrocene. (c & 
d) CVs of [Ti6O6(OiPr)6(O2CFc)6] in dichloromethane and upon addition of glucose (2 mg) at intervals of 1 minute. 
Reproduced with permission from Ref. [79] Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 

Sun and co-workers employed ferrocene as volatile solid additive and explored a new way to optimize the 

bulk heterojunction (BHJ) morphology in organic solar cells (OSC).[81] In general, during OSC device 

fabrications high boiling point solvent additives are used which removal becomes difficult and may cause 

unwanted variations in morphology affecting performance and reproducibility negatively. They observed one 

of the highest power conversion efficiencies (17.4%) and short circuit current density (Jsc) of 26.9 mA cm-2

with a ferrocene treated system. Interestingly, device without any additive showed PCE of 15.5% and one 

treated with CN- solution yielded 16.5%. The improvement in observed properties is probably due to better 

molecular crystallinity, higher transport and suppressed recombination in ferrocene processed device. Bera 

and co-worker prepared ferrocene-based donor-acceptor type ferrocenylcyanovinyl compound in a solvent-

free method with the idea to create a system that serves as dye and redox electrolyte (Fig. 24).[82] They 

fabricated an electrolyte-free DSSC and obtained an open circuit voltage of 0.84 V much higher than the value 

obtained with conventional DSSC which was used to measure photovoltaic properties using 100 mW/cm2


22

illumination is shown in Fig. 24b. The group observed short circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) of 0.41 mA/cm2

and 39 μA/cm2 for device having different chemical compositions. 

Fig. 24. (a) Chemical structure of studied ferrocene system, schematic diagram of prepared device, (b) J-V 
characteristics of the heterojunction solar cells under light. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [82] Copyright 2018, 
American Chemical Society. 

As beautifully described by the Lalevée and co-workers, photoredox catalysis in presence of near infrared 

(NIR) remains highly desirable but quite difficult to achieve due to relatively much lower energies of NIR 

photons.[83] They explored the possibility of using ferrocene derivative towards photopolymerization 

reaction. The idea was to use the photooxidation of Fe(II) in ferrocene and let excited iron to react with an 

iodonium salt (Ar2I+). Polymerization reactions revealed that under mild irradiation (405 nm) all the 

ferrocene/iodinium compounds Fe/Iod, Fe5/Iod, Fe3/Iod, Fe4/Iod show slow polymerisation and no activity 

could be observed for Fe6 & Fe7. However, when 2-diphenylphosphinobenzoic acid (2-dppba) was 

introduced, a huge jump in radical polymerization rate was observed. Fe(II)*/Ar2I+ couple was then used to 

initiate photopolymerization under 78 nm light. In NIR light, Fe4/Iod showed some activity whereas 

Fe7Me/Iod did not show any. Increasing the Fe(II) from 0.1wt% to 0.5 wt% in Fe4 system improved the 

efficiency significantly. Another big challenge that world is facing now is the extreme emission of greenhouse 

gases, predominantly comprising of carbon dioxide. A huge amount of research has been dedicated to address 

this alarming environmental issue. In this context, large number of photocatalysts that may reduce the CO2

into a reusable fuel has been investigated in past. Lan group explored the ferrocene-functionalised polyoxo-

titatnium clusters (PTCs) for photoreduction of CO2.[84] In order to modulate the absorption, charge transfer 

properties and to improve photocatalytic activity towards CO2 reduction, three derivatives Ti6, Ti8-Fcdc and 

Ti6-Fcdc having molecular formula as [Ti6(μ3-O)2(μ2-O)2(PPO)2(O2CCF3)2(μ2-OiPr)4(OiPr)6], [Ti8(μ3-

O)4(tea)2((Fcdc)2)4(OiPr)10].2HOiPr and [Ti6(μ3-O)2((Fcdc)2(μ2-SO4)2(μ2-OiPr)2(OiPr)10].2HOiPr  where, 

CF3COOH = trifluoroacetic acid, HOiPr = isopropanol, teaH3 = Triethanolamine, and Fcdc = 1,1-ferrocene

dicarboxylic acid (Fig. 25 a-c) were prepared. The incorporation of Fcdc group in the molecule extended the 


23

absorption band up to 600 nm in the visible region of light spectrum. The photocatalytic CO2 reduction 

activities of Ti6, Ti8-Fcdc and Ti6-Fcdc were evaluated under visible light illumination showing formation of

HCOO- as a function of time (Fig. 25d,e). A continuous increase in HCOO- concentration could be seen in 10

h of reaction time reaching up to 4.03, 17.03 and 35.00 μmol for Ti6, Ti8-Fcdc and Ti6-Fcdc, respectively. 

Higher activity and selectivity at photocatalytic reduction of CO2 of Ti8-Fcdc and Ti6-Fcdc over Ti6, is 

attributed to efficient charge transfer by Fcdc ligand. Among the two Fcdc derivatives studied here, Ti6-Fcdc

exhibited better photocatalytic performance than Ti8-Fcdc. Therefore, having ferrocene in the PTC system 

could effectively catalyse the CO2 reduction in water that too under visible light. Also, the catalytic 

performance exhibited by Ti6-Fcdc is highest among known PTC-based catalysts.

Fig. 25. (a-c) Solid state molecular structure of Ti6, Ti8-Fcdc and Ti6-Fcdc. (d & e) show the yield of HCOO- and (b) 
showing the photocurrent measurement of Ti6, Ti8−Fcdc, and Ti6−Fcdc under visible light irradiation. Reproduced with 
permission from Ref. [84] Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.

7. Ferrocenes in molecular electronics 

Over the last few years, the scientific community have developed an intricate understanding of the correlation 

between chemical and electronic parameters of molecular electronic devices.[85–88] These findings have 

boosted the research activity around molecular electronics which utilises a single molecule as an active part 

of the electronics circuit.[100–103] The main aim of molecular electronics is to reduce the size of the device 

to the molecular scale (few nm) thereby, increasing the packing density of the device. Single molecule 

junctions are comprised of three characteristic parts namely-anchor, electrode and a bridge.[92,93] Fast and 

reversible redox reactions involving the Fc/Fc+ couple makes it a suitable candidate in electronic 

devices.[94,95] Once active molecular unit is prepared, the next challenge that is faced is the fabrication of 


24

mechanically robust contacts that connects the molecule mostly in sandwiched configuration.[96] The most 

widely used electrode-molecule contacts have been based on the chemisorption of thiols on gold

electrode.[97–99] However, due to certain drawbacks such as lability of the S-Au bonds and changes in 

structure due to induced electric field, semiconducting platforms like Gallium-Arsenic and Silicon substrates

have also been used. [100,101] In a molecular or more precisely single molecule electronic device, the other 

components in the circuit also need to be molecular in nature. Therefore, molecular wires, which are generally 

made of conjugated polymers, are used to facilitate the charge transfer across the device. Interestingly, among 

the molecular wires category, alkane-based and polyphenylacetylene (OPE)-based wires have been the most 

widely studied systems.[102] However, two-dimensional OPE wires suffer from intermolecular π-π stacking 

problems.[103] Such interactions make conductance measurement for single wire difficult as it may lead to 

the attachment of multiple molecules within the molecular junction. In this context, ferrocene-based molecular 

wires having three-dimensional ferrocene unit are advantageous over OPE wires.[104]

Crivillers and co-workers have successfully incorporated ferrocene-derivative in molecular electronic 

junctions to investigate the photoisomerization of a styrene-based system in solution and on the surface.[105]

Inclusion of ferrocene unit helps in preventing photo-activated generation of phenanthrene and also provides 

platform for electrochemical characterization. They demonstrated that trans to cis transformation becomes 

much more efficient when molecule was attached on Au elctrode. The group isolated pure trans and cis forms 

of the molecule and prepared SAMs which were then independently studied in the form of 

EGaIn/Ga2O3/trans(or cis)ferrocene-SAM/Au (Fig. 26a-b). Current-voltage measurements showed about 1.3 

times higher current density for cis-SAMs over trans-SAMs (Fig. 26c). Observed difference in current 

densities might arise due to difference in molecular length and the dipole moments. In another set of 

experiments, isomerically pure cis- and trans -Fc SAMs were investigated by illuminating with suitable light. 

Trans-Fc-SAMs were irradiated using 340 nm wavelength light, and current density was measured before and 

after illuminating for 40 minutes (Fig. 27). It was observed that before irradiating the sample, maximum value 

(log|J|≈ 2.1)  corresponds to pure trans-Fc-SAMs, whereas, after irradiation the maximum value shifted to 

log|J|≈ 1.2 which corresponds to cis-Fc-SAMs with a trans- to cis- conversion was calculated to be around


25

82%. This study represents that electrochemical investigation could be applied to study photo-isomeric SAMs 

on the surface. 

Fig. 26. (a) Schematic diagram showing a ferrocene-SAMs MJs, (b) chemical structure of ferrocene containing 
molecule, (c) logJ-V plot for cis- and trans-Fc-SAMs MJs. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [105]Copyright 2022, 
Royal Society of Chemistry.

Fig. 27. (a-b) trans- to cis- conversion of Fc-SAMs (λ=340 nm, 40 minutes) and current density distribution, (c-d) cis-
to trans- conversion following irradiation for 40 minutes with a 254 nm wavelength light. Reproduced with permission 
from Ref. [105] Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.

Zhang and co-workers incorporated ferrocene into an organic skeleton an prepared an organometallic small 

molecule-based rewritable memory device (Fig. 28).[106] Ferrocene attached to a pyrene containing 

conjugated molecular platform (Py-Fc) exhibited a bistable switching operation with long retention time. The 

sweep-mode I-V measurements confirmed the FLASH binary propertied of the device. The switching time of 

the fabricated device was determined to be 20 μs and even after 103 cycles, no signs of fatigue was observed.

The device reproducibility was confirmed by testing fifty units that further confirmed the suitability of Py-Fc 

based device to be used for binary flash storage purposes. 


26

Fig. 28. (a) Depiction of the MOM-type OSMD structure, (b) I-V characterisations of the OSMDs. Reproduced with 
permission from Ref.[106], Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.

Grutter and co-workers used ferrocene (Fc) moiety attached to hexadecanethiol to describe nuclear 

quantization in electron transfer between single molecule and gold substrate by experimental and theoretical 

methods.[107] Electron transfer was measured using oscillating AFM technique keeping tip to molecule 

distance of about 10 nm to avoid any electron tunnelling. A popular way of constructing SAM-based molecular 

junctions is to seal the SAMs between two ultra-flat electrodes at top and bottom. This design makes the 

exploitation of intrinsic molecular property of SAMs inaccessible due to the presence of two bulk electrodes 

causing isolation of the SAMs from external environment. Duan and co-workers prepared a ferrocene-based 

SAMs tunnel junction using Au and single layer graphene electrodes (Fig. 29a).[108] The vertical tunnel 

junction thus created allowed in situ control over redox properties of ferrocene unit. Redox reactions of 

ferrocene groups present beneath the graphene layer could be controlled by applying suitable oxidant, 

reductant or electrochemical stimuli at the top. In case of oxidation of ferrocene units, the counter anions at 

graphene surface act to balance the charge. Fig. 29b shows the current density (Jd) Vs source-drain voltage 

(Vd) plots before and after addition of oxidizing agents (H2O2) and then after addition of reducing agent

(NaBH4). Addition of H2O2 causes curve to become more symmetrical and significant reduction in Jd values.

However, upon addition of reducing agent, the curve restores its shape to becoming almost identical to initial 

stage. This could be reversibly switched between oxidized and reduced states. 

Nijhuis and co-workers investigated the ferrocene/EGaIn-based molecular tunnel junctions to unravel 

information about energy level alignment. [109] In order to understand the nature of charge transport whether 

it is resonant tunnelling or off-resonant type, charge transport across this junction was measured using 

normalized differential conductance (NDC). In past few decades, inclusion of DNA in molecular electronics 

has attracted much attention. Xu and co-workers found that a molecular rectifier obtained by intercalating

coralyne in to a 11-base pair DNA duplex exhibited a rectifier ratio of about 15. [110] The basic assumption 

that DNA exists in stretched form in the device, made in most of the previous studies, have caused various

disagreements amongst the research community. In order to avoid such issues, related with order-disorder of 

the DNA, Nijhuis and co-workers investigated the charge transport properties in a disordered monolayers


27

Fig. 29. (a) Schematic depiction of Au/Fc-SAM/SLG junctions along with oxidation and reduction events. (b) current 
density vs source-drain voltage for the device upon treatment with both oxidising and reducing solutions. Reproduced 
with permission from Ref. [108], Copyright 2020, Elsevier.

containing single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and an ordered monolayers containing double stranded DNA 

(dsDNA).[111] Electrical properties of these DNA monolayers supported over Au-electrode and EGaIn 

electrode (Fig. 30). They prepared DNA containing 15, 20, 25 and 30 base pairs to have four kinds of samples 

with varying sequence lengths. The Au-linker-DNAn-Fc//GaOx/EGaIn junctions were then subjected to J(V) 

measurement to yield influence of the number of base pairs in the system (Fig. 30c-d). Further analysis of the 

obtained data revealed absence of any specific trend with increasing number of pairs in case of ssDNA, 

whereas, same fitting of the data for dsDNA-based junction showed an exponential decay. This discrepancy 

is attributed to the flexibility in ssDNA structure leading to folded structures and therefore length dependency 

remains unclear.

Fig. 30. (a) Au-ssDNA15-Fc//GaOx/EGaIn junction showing intra (red) and inter (black)hopping using curvy arrows.
(b) Au-dsDNA15-Fc//GaOx/EGaIn junction showing coherent tunnelling utilising a green arrow. (c-d) corresponding 
logJ-V plots. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [111], Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.


28

8. Conclusions and Future Perspective 

Ferrocene remained a structural puzzle for some time after its discovery in 1951. It took no time to realize the 

capabilities of this newly found aromatic system and indeed ferrocene was extensively studied for its catalytic 

activity along with its redox properties. Ferrocene being the first sandwiched-type structure, pioneered a new 

era of organometallic complexes known as “metallocenes”. Some of the ferrocene’s unique features such great 

stability in ambient conditions, benign nature and ease of functionalization made it to be used as a molecular 

scaffold to create new molecules for very diverse applications ranging from materials science to biomedical 

chemistry. In materials chemistry ferrocene is used a standard in electrochemical measurements. The excellent 

reversible redox propertied exhibited by ferrocene have made it as one of the most widely used building block 

in stimuli-responsive systems. Ferrocene combined with optically active systems results in interesting photo-

electric effects. Redox properties offered by ferrocene has also been used in preparing dye-sensitized solar 

cells and a large number of molecular electronics-based devices. In recent past, ferrocene has been studied for 

its medicinal properties as well. The range of applications and variety of materials that could be obtained using 

ferrocene is vast. It is very correct to say that ferrocene as a redox marker holds huge potentials in designing 

exciting new materials for future applications in devices and biomedicine. After almost seventy-five years of 

its discovery, research activity around ferrocene is still very active as can be seen from huge number of reports 

published every year. Ferrocene is a potent molecular building block and a prospective structural unit.

Acknowledgment 

GR would like to thank Ashoka University for her financial support and research funding. RG thanks IIT 

Kanpur for providing a Senior Research Fellowship. SRS would like to thank the University Grants 

Commission of India (UGC) for providing a Junior Research Fellowship. SS wishes to thank Prof. S. Basu, 

Director, CSIR-Institute of Minerals & Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, India, for in-house financial 

support (Grant number: CSIR-IMMT-OLP‐112) and requisite permissions. PCM acknowledges the 

Department of Science and Technology for a start-up research grant (SRG/2019/000391), and IIT Kanpur 

(IITK/CHM/2019044) for initiation and special grant support to establish the laboratory. Financial support by 

the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, Sanctioned NO.:01(3049)/21/EMR-II 

awarded to PCM is highly acknowledged. The authors wish to thank Dr. Priyajit Jash, a former post-doc with 

PCM group for designing TOC artwork.

References: 
[1]
www.nobelprize.org/prizes/chemistry/1973/press-release/, (n.d.).

[2]
T.J. KEALY, P.L. PAUSON, A New Type of Organo-Iron Compound, Nature. 168 (1951) 1039–
1040. https://doi.org/10.1038/1681039b0.

[3]
S.A. Miller, J.A. Tebboth, J.F. Tremaine, 114. Dicyclopentadienyliron, J. Chem. Soc. (1952) 632. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/jr9520000632.

[4]
G. Wilkinson, M. Rosenblum, M.C. Whiting, R.B. Woodward, THE STRUCTURE OF IRON BIS-
CYCLOPENTADIENYL, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 74 (1952) 2125–2126. 


29

https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01128a527.

[5]
E.O. Fischer, W. Pfab, Cyclopentadien-Metallkomplexe, ein neuer Typ metallorganischer 
Verbindungen, Zeitschrift Für Naturforsch. B. 7 (1952) 377–379. https://doi.org/10.1515/znb-1952-
0701.

[6]
J.D. DUNITZ, L.E. ORGEL, Bis-cyclopentadienyl Iron: a Molecular Sandwich, Nature. 171 (1953) 
121–122. https://doi.org/10.1038/171121a0.

[7]
P.F. Eiland, R. Pepinsky, X-RAY EXAMINATION OF IRON BISCYCLOPENTADIENYL, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 74 (1952) 4971–4971. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01139a527.

[8]
R.B. Woodward, M. Rosenblum, M.C. Whiting, A NEW AROMATIC SYSTEM, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
74 (1952) 3458–3459. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01133a543.

[9]
S. Islam, F. Wang, The d-electrons of Fe in ferrocene: the excess orbital energy spectrum (EOES), 
RSC Adv. 5 (2015) 11933–11941. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4RA14506B.

[10]
Y. Yamaguchi, C. Kutal, Efficient Photodissociation of Anions from Benzoyl-Functionalized 
Ferrocene Complexes, Inorg. Chem. 38 (1999) 4861–4867. https://doi.org/10.1021/ic990173t.

[11]
S.-G. Lee, H.-K. Lee, S.S. Lee, Y.K. Chung, Convenient Synthesis of Mixed Ferrocenes, 
Organometallics. 16 (1997) 304–306. https://doi.org/10.1021/om960517c.

[12]
R. Gómez Arrayás, J. Adrio, J.C. Carretero, Recent Applications of Chiral Ferrocene Ligands in 
Asymmetric Catalysis, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 45 (2006) 7674–7715. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200602482.

[13]
S.S. Braga, A.M.S. Silva, A New Age for Iron: Antitumoral Ferrocenes, Organometallics. 32 (2013) 
5626–5639. https://doi.org/10.1021/om400446y.

[14]
D. Schaarschmidt, H. Lang, Selective Syntheses of Planar-Chiral Ferrocenes, Organometallics. 32 
(2013) 5668–5704. https://doi.org/10.1021/om400564x.

[15]
A. Pal, S. Ranjan Bhatta, A. Thakur, Recent advances in the development of ferrocene based 
electroactive small molecules for cation recognition: A comprehensive review of the years 2010–
2020, Coord. Chem. Rev. 431 (2021) 213685. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2020.213685.

[16]
A.N. Nesmeyanov, N.A. Vol’kenau, I.N. Bolesova, The interaction of ferrocene and its derivatives 
with aromatic compounds, Tetrahedron Lett. 4 (1963) 1725–1729. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0040-
4039(01)90903-7.

[17]
Y.-T. Long, C.-Z. Li, T.C. Sutherland, M. Chahma, J.S. Lee, H.-B. Kraatz, A Comparison of 
Electron-Transfer Rates of Ferrocenoyl-Linked DNA, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003) 8724–8725. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja034684x.

[18]
B. Adhikari, H.-B. Kraatz, Redox-triggered changes in the self-assembly of a ferrocene–peptide 
conjugate, Chem. Commun. 50 (2014) 5551–5553. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3CC49268K.

[19]
R.R. Gagne, C.A. Koval, G.C. Lisensky, Ferrocene as an internal standard for electrochemical 
measurements, Inorg. Chem. 19 (1980) 2854–2855. https://doi.org/10.1021/ic50211a080.

[20]
J.A. Page, G. Wilkinson, The Polarographic Chemistry of Ferrocene, Ruthenocene and the Metal 
Hydrocarbon Ions, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 74 (1952) 6149–6150. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja01143a540.

[21]
M.I. Montenegro, D. Pletcher, The determination of the kinetics of electron transfer using fast sweep 
cyclic voltammetry at microdisc electrodes, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem. 200 (1986) 
371–374. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0728(86)90069-0.

[22]
M.C. Buzzeo, R.G. Evans, R.G. Compton, Non-haloaluminate room-temperature ionic liquids in 
electrochemistry - A review, ChemPhysChem. 5 (2004) 1106–1120. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.200301017.

[23]
M.C. Buzzeo, C. Hardacre, R.G. Compton, Extended electrochemical windows made accessible by 
room temperature ionic liquid/organic solvent electrolyte systems, ChemPhysChem. 7 (2006) 176–
180. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.200500361.

[24]
N. Fietkau, A.D. Clegg, R.G. Evans, C. Villagrán, C. Hardacre, R.G. Compton, Electrochemical Rate 
Constants in Room Temperature Ionic Liquids: The Oxidation of a Series of Ferrocene Derivatives, 
ChemPhysChem. 7 (2006) 1041–1045. https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.200500709.

[25]
A.J. Bard, L.R. Faulkner, ELECTROCHEMICAL METHODS: Fundamentals and Applications., 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2001. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.matsci.30.1.117.

[26]
A.L. Eckermann, D.J. Feld, J.A. Shaw, T.J. Meade, Electrochemistry of redox-active self-assembled 


30

monolayers, Coord. Chem. Rev. 254 (2010) 1769–1802. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccr.2009.12.023.

[27]
R. Gupta, P. Jash, A. Pritam, P.C. Mondal, Electrochemically Deposited Molecular Thin Films on 
Transparent Conductive Oxide substrate: Combined DC and AC Approaches for Characterization, 
Can. J. Chem. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1139/cjc-2021-0254.

[28]
N. Elgrishi, K.J. Rountree, B.D. McCarthy, E.S. Rountree, T.T. Eisenhart, J.L. Dempsey, A Practical 
Beginner’s Guide to Cyclic Voltammetry, J. Chem. Educ. 95 (2018) 197–206. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00361.

[29]
J.-C.P. Christine Lefrou, Pierre Fabry, Electrochemistry: The Basics, With Examples, 2012.

[30]
L.R.F. Allen J. Bard, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd Edition, 2000.

[31]
M.E. N.P.R.A. Silva, A.J.L. Pombeiro, J.J.R. Fraústo da Silva, R. Herrmann, N. Deus, R. E.Bozak, 
Redox potential and substituent effects in ferrocene derivatives: II, J. Organomet. Chem. 480 (1994) 
81–90. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-328X(94)87105-1.

[32]
S.M. Batterjee, M.I. Marzouk, M.E. Aazab, M.A. El-Hashash, The electrochemistry of some 
ferrocene derivatives: redox potential and substituent effects, Appl. Organomet. Chem. 17 (2003) 
291–297. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/aoc.414.

[33]
A. Paul, R. Borrelli, H. Bouyanfif, S. Gottis, F. Sauvage, Tunable Redox Potential, Optical Properties, 
and Enhanced Stability of Modified Ferrocene-Based Complexes, ACS Omega. 4 (2019) 14780–
14789. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.9b01341.

[34]
T.L.R. Bennett, L.A. Wilkinson, J.M.A. Lok, R.C.P. O’Toole, N.J. Long, Synthesis, 
Electrochemistry, and Optical Properties of Highly Conjugated Alkynyl-Ferrocenes and -
Biferrocenes, Organometallics. 40 (2021) 1156–1162. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.organomet.1c00098.

[35]
A. Paul, R. Borrelli, H. Bouyanfif, S. Gottis, F. Sauvage, Tunable Redox Potential, Optical Properties, 
and Enhanced Stability of Modified Ferrocene-Based Complexes, ACS Omega. 4 (2019) 14780–
14789. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.9b01341.

[36]
G. Champaka, K. Senthilkumar, E. David, S. Shanmugan, N. Palanisami, Monomeric zinc ferrocene 
carboxylate [Zn(FcCOO)(3,5-dmp)2Cl] derived from 3,5-dimethylpyrazole: structural, optical, 
electrochemical and antimicrobial studies, J. Mol. Struct. 1228 (2021) 129749. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2020.129749.

[37]
K. Rahimpour, R. Teimuri-Mofrad, Star-Shaped Ferrocene-Based 1,4-Disubstituted-1,2,3-Triazole 
Derivatives: Synthesis, Characterization, and Investigation of Linear Optical and Electrochemical 
Properties, Appl. Organomet. Chem. 34 (2020) e5943. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/aoc.5943.

[38]
K. Yuan, G. Yousefalizadeh, F. Saraci, T. Peng, I. Kozin, K.G. Stamplecoskie, S. Wang, Impact of 
Ferrocene Substitution on the Electronic Properties of BODIPY Derivatives and Analogues, Inorg. 
Chem. 57 (2018) 14698–14704. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b02476.

[39]
C. Fontanesi, Spin-dependent electrochemistry: A novel paradigm, Curr. Opin. Electrochem. 7 (2018) 
36–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coelec.2017.09.028.

[40]
A. Kumar, P. Mondal, C. Fontanesi, Chiral Magneto-Electrochemistry, Magnetochemistry. 4 (2018) 
36. https://doi.org/10.3390/magnetochemistry4030036.

[41]
P.C. Mondal, C. Fontanesi, D.H. Waldeck, R. Naaman, Spin-Dependent Transport through Chiral 
Molecules Studied by Spin-Dependent Electrochemistry, Acc. Chem. Res. 49 (2016) 2560–2568. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.6b00446.

[42]
P.C. Mondal, W. Mtangi, C. Fontanesi, Chiro-Spintronics: Spin-Dependent Electrochemistry and 
Water Splitting Using Chiral Molecular Films, Small Methods. 2 (2018) 1700313. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/smtd.201700313.

[43]
J. Romero, H. Prima‐Garcia, M. Varela, S.G. Miralles, V. Oestreicher, G. Abellán, E. Coronado, 
Giant Enhancement in the Supercapacitance of NiFe–Graphene Nanocomposites Induced by a 
Magnetic Field, Adv. Mater. 31 (2019) 1900189. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201900189.

[44]
C.F. Perkinson, M. Einzinger, J. Finley, M.G. Bawendi, M.A. Baldo, Magnetic‐Field‐Switchable 
Laser via Optical Pumping of Rubrene, Adv. Mater. 34 (2022) 2103870. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202103870.

[45]
G. Saravanan, S. Ozeki, Magnetic Field Control of Electron Tunneling Pathways in the Monolayer of 


31

(Ferrocenylmethyl)dodecyldimethylammonium Bromide on a Gold Electrode, J. Phys. Chem. B. 112 
(2008) 3–6. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp076663l.

[46]
L.M.A. Monzon, J.M.D. Coey, Magnetic fields in electrochemistry: The Kelvin force. A mini-review, 
Electrochem. Commun. 42 (2014) 42–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2014.02.005.

[47]
L.M.A. Monzon, J.M.D. Coey, Magnetic fields in electrochemistry: The Lorentz force. A mini-
review, Electrochem. Commun. 42 (2014) 38–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elecom.2014.02.006.

[48]
A.M. Scott, T. Miura, A.B. Ricks, Z.E.X. Dance, E.M. Giacobbe, M.T. Colvin, M.R. Wasielewski, 
Spin-selective charge transport pathways through p-oligophenylene-linked donor-bridge-acceptor 
molecules, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131 (2009) 17655–17666. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja907625k.

[49]
M.R. Wasielewski, Energy, charge, and spin transport in molecules and self-assembled nanostructures 
inspired by photosynthesis, J. Org. Chem. 71 (2006) 5051–5066. https://doi.org/10.1021/jo060225d.

[50]
P. Report, Spintronics: Fundamentals and Applications., (2008) 1–9.

[51]
A. Fert, F.N. van Dau, Spintronics, from giant magnetoresistance to magnetic skyrmions and 
topological insulators, ArXiv. (2019) 1–23.

[52]
C.M. Universitat, Molecular Spintronic Devices : from Molecular Spin Valves to Spin-OLEDs, 
(2017).

[53]
M. Kettner, B. Göhler, H. Zacharias, D. Mishra, V. Kiran, R. Naaman, C. Fontanesi, D.H. Waldeck, 
S. Sęk, J. Pawłowski, J. Juhaniewicz, Spin Filtering in Electron Transport Through Chiral 
Oligopeptides, J. Phys. Chem. C. 119 (2015) 14542–14547. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp509974z.

[54]
T.J. Zwang, S. Hürlimann, M.G. Hill, J.K. Barton, Helix-Dependent Spin Filtering through the DNA 
Duplex, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138 (2016) 15551–15554. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.6b10538.

[55]
R. Torres-Cavanillas, G. Escorcia-Ariza, I. Brotons-Alcázar, R. Sanchís-Gual, P.C. Mondal, L.E. 
Rosaleny, S. Giménez-Santamarina, M. Sessolo, M. Galbiati, S. Tatay, A. Gaita-Ariño, A. Forment-
Aliaga, S. Cardona-Serra, Reinforced Room temperature spin filtering in chiral paramagnetic 
metallopeptides, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142 (2019) 17572–17580. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.0c07531.

[56]
P.C. Mondal, N. Kantor-Uriel, S.P. Mathew, F. Tassinari, C. Fontanesi, R. Naaman, Chiral 
Conductive Polymers as Spin Filters, Adv. Mater. 27 (2015) 1924–1927. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201405249.

[57]
M.R. Charlton, K.J. Suhr, B.J. Holliday, K.J. Stevenson, Electrochemical modification of indium tin 
oxide using di(4-nitrophenyl) iodonium tetrafluoroborate, Langmuir. 31 (2015) 695–702. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/la503522c.

[58]
T.H. Le, V.Q. Nguyen, G. Trippe-Allard, J.-C. Lacroix, P. Martin, Dithienylpyrrole Electrografting 
on a Surface through the Electroreduction of Diazonium Salts, Electrochem. 1 (2020) 20–31. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/electrochem1010003.

[59]
C.R. Peiris, S. Ciampi, E.M. Dief, J. Zhang, P.J. Canfield, A.P. Le Brun, D.S. Kosov, J.R. Reimers, 
N. Darwish, Spontaneous S–Si bonding of alkanethiols to Si(111)–H: towards Si–molecule–Si 
circuits, Chem. Sci. 11 (2020) 5246–5256. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0SC01073A.

[60]
E.M. Dief, Y.B. Vogel, C.R. Peiris, A.P. Le Brun, V.R. Gonçales, S. Ciampi, J.R. Reimers, N. 
Darwish, Covalent Linkages of Molecules and Proteins to Si–H Surfaces Formed by Disulfide 
Reduction, Langmuir. 36 (2020) 14999–15009. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.0c02391.

[61]
L. Scheres, B. Rijksen, M. Giesbers, H. Zuilhof, Molecular Modeling of Alkyl and Alkenyl 
Monolayers on Hydrogen-Terminated Si(111), Langmuir. 27 (2011) 972–980. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/la104705b.

[62]
L. Scheres, M. Giesbers, H. Zuilhof, Organic Monolayers onto Oxide-Free Silicon with Improved 
Surface Coverage: Alkynes versus Alkenes, Langmuir. 26 (2010) 4790–4795. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/la9035503.

[63]
T. Li, E.M. Dief, X. Lyu, S. Rahpeima, S. Ciampi, N. Darwish, Nanoscale Silicon Oxide Reduces 
Electron Transfer Kinetics of Surface-Bound Ferrocene Monolayers on Silicon, J. Phys. Chem. C. 
125 (2021) 27763–27770. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.1c07788.

[64]
C. Fontanesi, E. Da Como, D. Vanossi, M. Montecchi, M. Cannio, P.C. Mondal, W. Giurlani, M. 
Innocenti, L. Pasquali, Redox-Active Ferrocene grafted on H-Terminated Si(111): Electrochemical 
Characterization of the Charge Transport Mechanism and Dynamics, Sci. Rep. 9 (2019) 8735. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-45448-w.


32

[65]
D. Taherinia, Investigation of the Interfacial Electron Transfer Kinetics in Ferrocene-Terminated 
Oligophenyleneimine Self-Assembled Monolayers, Langmuir. 36 (2020) 12572–12579. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.0c02105.

[66]
M. Cuartero, L. Chai, B. Zhang, R. De Marco, G.A. Crespo, Ferrocene self assembled monolayer as a 
redox mediator for triggering ion transfer across nanometer-sized membranes, Electrochim. Acta. 315 
(2019) 84–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2019.05.091.

[67]
R.P. Gautam, C.J. Barile, Preparation and Electron-Transfer Properties of Self-Assembled 
Monolayers of Ferrocene on Carbon Electrodes, J. Phys. Chem. C. 125 (2021) 8177–8184. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c11430.

[68]
V. Jangid, D. Brunel, E. Sanchez-Adaime, A.K. Bharwal, F. Dumur, D. Duché, M. Abel, M. Koudia, 
T. Buffeteau, C.A. Nijhuis, G. Berginc, C. Lebouin, L. Escoubas, Improving Orientation, Packing 
Density, and Molecular Arrangement in Self-Assembled Monolayers of Bianchoring Ferrocene-
Triazole Derivatives by “click” Chemistry, Langmuir. 38 (2022) 3585–3596. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.2c00215.

[69]
R.A. Wong, Y. Yokota, M. Wakisaka, J. Inukai, Y. Kim, Discerning the Redox-Dependent Electronic 
and Interfacial Structures in Electroactive Self-Assembled Monolayers, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140 
(2018) 13672–13679. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.8b05885.

[70]
M. Cariello, S. Ahn, K.-W. Park, S.-K. Chang, J. Hong, G. Cooke, An investigation of the role 
increasing π-conjugation has on the efficiency of dye-sensitized solar cells fabricated from ferrocene-
based dyes, RSC Adv. 6 (2016) 9132–9138. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5RA21565J.

[71]
T. Daeneke, A.J. Mozer, T.-H. Kwon, N.W. Duffy, A.B. Holmes, U. Bach, L. Spiccia, Dye 
regeneration and charge recombination in dye-sensitized solar cells with ferrocene derivatives as 
redox mediators, Energy Environ. Sci. 5 (2012) 7090–7099. https://doi.org/10.1039/C2EE21257A.

[72]
R. Chauhan, M. Trivedi, L. Bahadur, A. Kumar, Application of π-Extended Ferrocene with Varied 
Anchoring Groups as Photosensitizers in TiO2-Based Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSCs), Chem. –
An Asian J. 6 (2011) 1525–1532. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/asia.201000845.

[73]
S. Sönmezoğlu, R. Taş, S. Akın, M. Can, Polyaniline micro-rods based heterojunction solar cell: 
Structural and photovoltaic properties, Appl. Phys. Lett. 101 (2012) 253301. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4772019.

[74]
C. Sanchez, G.J. de A.A. Soler-Illia, F. Ribot, T. Lalot, C.R. Mayer, V. Cabuil, Designed Hybrid 
Organic−Inorganic Nanocomposites from Functional Nanobuilding Blocks, Chem. Mater. 13 (2001) 
3061–3083. https://doi.org/10.1021/cm011061e.

[75]
L. Rozes, C. Sanchez, Titanium oxo-clusters: precursors for a Lego-like construction of 
nanostructured hybrid materials, Chem. Soc. Rev. 40 (2011) 1006–1030.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C0CS00137F.

[76]
H.-C. Su, Y.-Y. Wu, J.-L. Hou, G.-L. Zhang, Q.-Y. Zhu, J. Dai, Dye molecule bonded titanium 
alkoxide: a possible new type of dye for sensitized solar cells, Chem. Commun. 52 (2016) 4072–
4075. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6CC00551A.

[77]
J.-X. Yin, P. Huo, S. Wang, J. Wu, Q.-Y. Zhu, J. Dai, A tetrathiafulvalene-grafted titanium-oxo-
cluster material: self-catalyzed crystal exfoliation and photocurrent response properties, J. Mater. 
Chem. C. 3 (2015) 409–415. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4TC02009J.

[78]
Y. Fan, Y. Cui, G.-D. Zou, R.-H. Duan, X. Zhang, Y.-X. Dong, H.-T. Lv, J.-T. Cao, Q.-S. Jing, A 
ferrocenecarboxylate-functionalized titanium-oxo-cluster: the ferrocene wheel as a sensitizer for 
photocurrent response, Dalt. Trans. 46 (2017) 8057–8064. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7DT01756A.

[79]
J.-L. Hou, W. Luo, Y. Guo, P. Zhang, S. Yang, Q.-Y. Zhu, J. Dai, Titanium Oxo Cluster with Six 
Peripheral Ferrocene Units and Its Photocurrent Response Properties for Saccharides, Inorg. Chem.
56 (2017) 6451–6458. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.inorgchem.7b00522.

[80]
B.A. Hussein, J.T. Huynh, P.L. Prieto, C.P. Barran, A.E. Arnold, O. V Sarycheva, A.J. Lough, B.D. 
Koivisto, Molecular lemmings: strategies to avoid when designing BODIPY ferrocene dyads for dye-
sensitized solar cell applications, Dalt. Trans. 47 (2018) 4916–4920. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C8DT00174J.

[81]
L. Ye, Y. Cai, C. Li, L. Zhu, J. Xu, K. Weng, K. Zhang, M. Huang, M. Zeng, T. Li, E. Zhou, S. Tan, 
X. Hao, Y. Yi, F. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Zhan, Y. Sun, Ferrocene as a highly volatile solid additive in non-


33

fullerene organic solar cells with enhanced photovoltaic performance, Energy Environ. Sci. 13 (2020) 
5117–5125. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0EE02426K.

[82]
A. Ghosh, S. Mishra, S. Giri, S.M. Mobin, A. Bera, S. Chatterjee, Electrolyte-Free Dye-Sensitized 
Solar Cell with High Open Circuit Voltage Using a Bifunctional Ferrocene-Based Cyanovinyl 
Molecule as Dye and Redox Couple, Organometallics. 37 (2018) 1999–2002. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.organomet.8b00104.

[83]
P. Garra, D. Brunel, G. Noirbent, B. Graff, F. Morlet-Savary, C. Dietlin, V.F. Sidorkin, F. Dumur, D. 
Duché, D. Gigmes, J.-P. Fouassier, J. Lalevée, Ferrocene-based (photo)redox polymerization under 
long wavelengths, Polym. Chem. 10 (2019) 1431–1441. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9PY00059C.

[84]
J.-J. Liu, N. Li, J.-W. Sun, J. Liu, L.-Z. Dong, S.-J. Yao, L. Zhang, Z.-F. Xin, J.-W. Shi, J.-X. Wang, 
S.-L. Li, Y.-Q. Lan, Ferrocene-Functionalized Polyoxo-Titanium Cluster for CO 2 Photoreduction, 
ACS Catal. 11 (2021) 4510–4519. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.0c04495.

[85]
A. Aviram, M.A. Ratner, MOLE +JLAR AriehAWR4M RECTIFIERS, Chem. Phys. Lett. 29 (1974) 
277–283.

[86]
N.S. HUSH, An Overview of the First Half-Century of Molecular Electronics, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 
1006 (2003) 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1292.016.

[87]
A.J. Bergren, R.L. McCreery, Analytical Chemistry in Molecular Electronics, Annu. Rev. Anal. 
Chem. 4 (2011) 173–195. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-anchem-061010-113847.

[88]
L.D. Wickramasinghe, S. Mazumder, S. Gonawala, M.M. Perera, H. Baydoun, B. Thapa, L. Li, L. 
Xie, G. Mao, Z. Zhou, H.B. Schlegel, C.N. Verani, The mechanisms of rectification in Au | molecule | 
Au devices based on Langmuir-Blodgett monolayers of Iron(III) and Copper(II) surfactants, Angew. 
Chemie - Int. Ed. 53 (2014) 14462–14467. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201408649.

[89]
T.A. Su, M. Neupane, M.L. Steigerwald, L. Venkataraman, C. Nuckolls, Chemical principles of 
single-molecule electronics, Nat. Rev. Mater. 1 (2016) 16002. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/natrevmats.2016.2.

[90]
R. Gupta, P. Jash, P.C. Mondal, Nanoscale molecular layers for memory devices: challenges and 
opportunities for commercialization, J. Mater. Chem. C. 9 (2021) 11497–11516. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D1TC01283E.

[91]
P. Jash, R.K. Parashar, C. Fontanesi, P.C. Mondal, The Importance of Electrical Impedance 
Spectroscopy and Equivalent Circuit Analysis on Nanoscale Molecular Electronic Devices, Adv. 
Funct. Mater. (2021) 2109956. https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202109956.

[92]
M.S. Inkpen, Z. –F Liu, H. Li, L.M. Campos, J.B. Neaton, L. Venkataraman, Non-chemisorbed gold–
sulfur binding prevails in self-assembled monolayers, Nat. Chem. 11 (2019) 351–358. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-019-0216-y.

[93]
A. Nitzan, Electron transmission through molecules and molecular interfaces, Annu. Rev. Phys. 
Chem. 52 (2001) 681–750. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.physchem.52.1.681.

[94]
K. Heinze, H. Lang, Ferrocene—Beauty and Function, Organometallics. 32 (2013) 5623–5625. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/om400962w.

[95]
A. Asyuda, S. Das, H. Lang, E. Zojer, M. Zharnikov, Bias‐Triggered Conductivity Switching and 
High Effective Rectification in Metallocene‐Based Molecular Junctions, Adv. Electron. Mater. (2022) 
2200296. https://doi.org/10.1002/aelm.202200296.

[96]
C. Jia, X. Guo, Molecule–electrode interfaces in molecular electronic devices, Chem. Soc. Rev. 42 
(2013) 5642. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3cs35527f.

[97]
L. Wang, Z.-L. Gong, S.-Y. Li, W. Hong, Y.-W. Zhong, D. Wang, L.-J. Wan, Molecular 
Conductance through a Quadruple-Hydrogen-Bond-Bridged Supramolecular Junction, Angew. 
Chemie Int. Ed. 55 (2016) 12393–12397. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201605622.

[98]
K.S. Wimbush, W.F. Reus, W.G. van der Wiel, D.N. Reinhoudt, G.M. Whitesides, C.A. Nijhuis, A.H. 
Velders, Control over Rectification in Supramolecular Tunneling Junctions, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 
49 (2010) 10176–10180. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201003286.

[99]
Y. Li, H. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Qiao, J. Ulstrup, H.Y. Chen, G. Zhou, N. Tao, Transition from 
stochastic events to deterministic ensemble average in electron transfer reactions revealed by single-
molecule conductance measurement, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 116 (2019) 3407–3412. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1814825116.


34

[100] R.L. McCreery, H. Yan, A.J. Bergren, A critical perspective on molecular electronic junctions: there 

is plenty of room in the middle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 15 (2013) 1065–1081. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C2CP43516K.

[101] A. Vezzoli, R.J. Brooke, N. Ferri, S.J. Higgins, W. Schwarzacher, R.J. Nichols, Single-Molecule 

Transport at a Rectifying GaAs Contact, Nano Lett. 17 (2017) 1109–1115. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b04663.

[102] X. Li, J. He, J. Hihath, B. Xu, S.M. Lindsay, N. Tao, Conductance of Single Alkanedithiols: 

Conduction Mechanism and Effect of Molecule−Electrode Contacts, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128 (2006) 
2135–2141. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja057316x.

[103] S. Martín, I. Grace, M.R. Bryce, C. Wang, R. Jitchati, A.S. Batsanov, S.J. Higgins, C.J. Lambert, R.J. 

Nichols, Identifying Diversity in Nanoscale Electrical Break Junctions, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132 (2010) 
9157–9164. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja103327f.

[104] X.-S. Zhou, L. Liu, P. Fortgang, A.-S. Lefevre, A. Serra-Muns, N. Raouafi, C. Amatore, B.-W. Mao, 

E. Maisonhaute, B. Schöllhorn, Do Molecular Conductances Correlate with Electrochemical Rate 
Constants? Experimental Insights, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133 (2011) 7509–7516. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja201042h.

[105] F. Bejarano, D. Gutiérrez, J. Catalán-Toledo, D. Roca-Sanjuán, J. Gierschner, J. Veciana, M. Mas-

Torrent, C. Rovira, N. Crivillers, Photoswitching activation of a ferrocenyl-stilbene analogue by its 
covalent grafting to gold, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. (2022). https://doi.org/10.1039/D1CP05012E.

[106] Y. Li, X. Zhu, Y. Li, M. Zhang, C. Ma, H. Li, J. Lu, Q. Zhang, Highly Robust Organometallic Small-

Molecule-Based Nonvolatile Resistive Memory Controlled by a Redox-Gated Switching Mechanism, 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 11 (2019) 40332–40338. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b13401.

[107] A. Roy-Gobeil, Y. Miyahara, K.H. Bevan, P. Grutter, Fully Quantized Electron Transfer Observed in 

a Single Redox Molecule at a Metal Interface, Nano Lett. 19 (2019) 6104–6108. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b02032.

[108] C. Jia, I.M. Grace, P. Wang, A. Almeshal, Z. Huang, Y. Wang, P. Chen, L. Wang, J. Zhou, Z. Feng, 

Z. Zhao, Y. Huang, C.J. Lambert, X. Duan, Redox Control of Charge Transport in Vertical Ferrocene 
Molecular Tunnel Junctions, Chem. 6 (2020) 1172–1182. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chempr.2020.02.018.

[109] N.K. Gupta, T. Schultz, S.K. Karuppannan, A. Vilan, N. Koch, C.A. Nijhuis, The energy level 

alignment of the ferrocene–EGaIn interface studied with photoelectron spectroscopy, Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 23 (2021) 13458–13467. https://doi.org/10.1039/D1CP01690C.

[110] C. Guo, K. Wang, E. Zerah-Harush, J. Hamill, B. Wang, Y. Dubi, B. Xu, Molecular rectifier 

composed of DNA with high rectification ratio enabled by intercalation, Nat. Chem. 8 (2016) 484–
490. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchem.2480.

[111] N.K. Gupta, E.A. Wilkinson, S.K. Karuppannan, L. Bailey, A. Vilan, Z. Zhang, D.-C. Qi, A. Tadich, 

E.M. Tuite, A.R. Pike, J.H.R. Tucker, C.A. Nijhuis, Role of Order in the Mechanism of Charge 
Transport across Single-Stranded and Double-Stranded DNA Monolayers in Tunnel Junctions, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 143 (2021) 20309–20319. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c09549.


