Higher harmonic resistance oscillations in micro-bridge superconducting Nb ring

Masashi Tokuda1*, Ryoya Nakamura1, Masaki Maeda1, and Yasuhiro Niimi1, 2**

1Graduate School of Science, Department of Physics, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-0043, Japan

2Center for Spintronics Research Network, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka 560-8531, Japan
*tokuda@meso.phys.sci.osaka-u.ac.jp, **niimi@phys.sci.osaka-u.ac.jp

We studied resistance oscillations in two types of superconducting mesoscopic Nb rings. In a simple 

superconducting ring device, a resistance oscillation with a period of the quantized magnetic flux ℎ 2𝑒
⁄
was clearly 

observed. On the other hand, in a micro-bridge ring device where two-narrow parts are embedded in parallel and 

work as superconductor-normal metal-superconductor junctions, higher harmonic resistance oscillations were 

obtained when the measurement current was well-tuned. We argue that such higher harmonic resistance 

oscillations can be detected even in the micro-bridge Nb superconducting ring device where the device size is much 

larger than the coherence length of Nb.

Mesoscopic superconducting devices provide 

an excellent platform for investigating phase-related

phenomena, owing to the macroscopic wave functions1).

In a Josephson junction where two superconductors 

are weakly connected via a very thin insulator, normal 

metal, or micro-bridge structure, a supercurrent flows

depending on the relative phase difference between the 

two superconductors without any voltage applied2-4). 

When two Josephson junctions are connected in 

parallel in a superconducting ring, the magnetic flux 

through the ring is quantized by 𝜙0 = ℎ 2𝑒
⁄
, where ℎ

is Planck’s constant and 𝑒 is the electric charge. This 

is 
well-known 
as
superconducting 
quantum 

interference device (SQUID) and has been utilized as a 

very sensitive magnetic field sensor5).

When the distance 𝑑 between two weak 

links is comparable or shorter than the coherence 

length
𝜉
of 
superconductor,
unique 
phase 

interference phenomena can be expected because of 

the interaction between the junctions via order 

parameter variations, quasiparticle diffusion6) and 

Andreev bound state7). For superconducting Al ring-

shaped devices with two normal metal junctions where 

𝑑
is comparable to 𝜉
of Al, second harmonic 

resistance oscillations with a period of ℎ 4𝑒
⁄
have 

been reported8). However, the detailed mechanism of 

such intriguing resistance oscillations has not been

elucidated yet. Even for devices with 𝑑 ≫ 𝜉 , similar 

higher harmonic patterns can be seen9,10), depending 

on the shunt resistance, capacitance,
and loop 

inductance 
in 
the 
superconducting 
ring-shaped 

devices3). From the viewpoint of application, such 

higher harmonic components have to be suppressed in 

order to realize the normal operation of SQUID11), but 

on the contrary, a high-performance magnetic sensor 

can be expected by controlling the higher harmonic 

components8). In this sense, further experimental and 

theoretical studies on harmonic oscillations in 

superconducting devices with 𝑑 ≫ 𝜉
and higher 

critical temperatures 𝑇c such as Nb are desirable.

In this work,
we
measured resistance 

oscillations in two types of superconducting Nb ring-

shaped devices, i.e., simple ring device and micro-

bridge ring device with two weak links. In both cases, a 

clear resistance oscillation with a period of ℎ 2𝑒
⁄
was 

observed. Only for the micro-bridge ring device, much 


more complicated resistance oscillations were detected.

From fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis, it turned 

out that up to the fourth harmonics were included in 

the resistance oscillations. Such higher harmonic 

resistance oscillations have never been reported in Nb 

superconducting ring-shaped devices where the 

perimeter is much larger than 𝜉 of Nb.

Two types of ring-shaped devices, i.e., simple

ring and micro-bridge ring devices, were fabricated

using Nb. We first patterned the two types of ring-

shaped devices on a SiO2/Si substrate coated with

polymethyl methacrylate resist, using electron beam 

lithography. The desired patterns were obtained by 

depositing Nb thin films by means of dc magnetron 

sputtering and removing the rest of the patterns with 

the lift-off technique.

Standard four-terminal measurements were 

performed with an ac lock-in amplifier except for dc 

current-voltage ( 𝐼 - 𝑉 ) measurements. Figure 1(a) 

shows the schematic drawing of the device structure 

and the measurement circuit. The samples were cooled 

down from room temperature to about 2 K using a 4He 

flow refrigerator. The external magnetic field was 

applied with an electromagnet and measured with a 

Hall sensor.

In Figs. 1(b) and 1(c), we show optical 

microscope images of the micro-bridge ring and simple

ring devices, respectively. In both cases, the thickness 

of the ring part is 𝑡 ≈ 30 nm, while the thickness of 

other parts (such as arms and electrodes in Fig. 1(a)) is

𝑡 ≈ 40 nm. These values were measured with an 

atomic force microscopy. Such a thickness difference 

Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of the device structure and measurement circuit. (b), (c) Optical microscope images of micro-

bridge ring device and simple ring device, respectively. The scale bars correspond to 1 μ m. (d) Temperature 

dependence of resistance for the two types of ring-shaped devices. The vertical axis is normalized by the resistance 

in the normal state 𝑅N at 8 K. (e) Thickness dependence of 𝑇c. The dashed line expresses a guide to the eye. 


can often be seen in devices fabricated by using 

magnetron sputtering and the lift-off technique. The 

micro-bridge ring device has two narrow parts in 

parallel, which behave as superconductor-normal 

metal-superconductor (SNS) junctions because the 

superconductivity of the narrow parts becomes weaker 

than the other parts. The width and the length of the 

narrowest part are 300 nm, while the width of the other 

parts and also the simple ring are kept at 600 nm. 

Typical resistance versus temperature curves 

for the two types of devices are shown in Fig. 1(d). Let 

us first focus on the critical temperatures 𝑇c of the two 

devices. In the present work, 𝑇c is defined as the 

temperature when the resistance of the ring becomes 

zero. Although 𝑇c of bulk Nb is about 9 K, 𝑇c of our Nb 

thin films strongly depends on the thickness, as 

reported in Refs. 12)-15). Figure 1(e) shows the 

thickness 𝑡 dependence of 𝑇c of our ring-shaped 

devices. Here 𝑡 is defined as the thinnest thickness in 

the ring part. Although 𝑇c is as low as 3 K for 𝑡 = 20

nm, it approaches 𝑇c of bulk Nb with increasing 𝑡 .

Such a thickness dependence of 𝑇c has been well-

established16,17) and reported not only in Nb but also in

other superconducting thin films18-21).

Now we come back to the temperature 

dependence of resistance for the two types of rings. The 

resistance is normalized by that in the normal state 𝑅N

at T = 8 K. It starts to drop at about 7.8 K, exhibits a 

sharp drop at 6.3 K, and becomes zero at 5.3 (simple

ring) and 4.3 K (micro-bridge ring). Such a multi-step 

transition in the 𝑅 vs 𝑇 curves would be due to the 

nonuniform superconducting transition temperature 

of the devices. As mentioned above, the thickness and 

width ( 𝑤 ) of the device are slightly different, 

depending on the segments, i.e, electrode, arm, and ring. 

The first resistance drop at 7.8 K corresponds to the 

superconducting transition of electrodes and pads 

( 𝑤 > 10 μm ). With decreasing temperature, the 

resistance gradually decreases due to the proximity 

effect penetrating from the Nb electrodes to the arms 

(𝑤 = 1 μm). The arms become superconducting at 6.3 

K, resulting in the sharp resistance drop. Thus, the 

residual 
resistance 
below 
this 
temperature 

corresponds to the resistance of the ring and the micro-

bridge part. The residual resistance vanishes as the 

temperature decreases further, but 𝑇c is obviously 

different between the two cases. The difference stems 

from the narrow parts in the micro-bridge device.

In order to see the resistance difference 

Fig. 2. Upper panel: Current-voltage (𝐼-𝑉) properties 

of simple ring and micro-bridge ring devices measured 

at 2.5 K. Lower panel: Differential resistances obtained 

from the 𝐼-𝑉curves. The vertical axis is normalized by 

the normal state resistance 𝑅N . ooth horizontal axes 

are normalized by the critical current 𝐼c defined as the 

current where the differential resistance takes the 

maximum.


between the simple ring and micro-bridge ring devices 

more clearly, we performed 𝐼-𝑉 measurements at 2.5 

K, as shown in the upper panel of Fig. 2. The horizontal 

axis is normalized by the critical current 𝐼c which is 

defined as the maximum point of the differential 

resistance obtained from the 𝐼-𝑉 curve shown in the 

lower panel of Fig. 2. The critical currents of the simple 

ring and micro-bridge ring devices are 0.25 and 0.2 mA, 

respectively. The smaller critical current of the micro-

bridge ring is reasonable because the micro-bridge ring 

has two weak links and the critical temperature is 

lower by 1 K, compared to that of the simple ring, as 

shown Fig. 1(d). The simple ring device shows a sharp 

transition with a hysteresis at 𝐼c . The hysteretic

behavior near 𝐼c originates from the heating effect. On 

the other hand, the transition observed in the micro-

bridge ring device is broader. This broad transition in 

the micro-bridge device
is due to the weak 

superconductivity at the narrow parts. Moreover, such 

an 𝐼-𝑉 characteristic with no hysteresis is peculiar to

a resistively shunted SQUID3). Therefore, the narrow 

parts in the micro-bridge ring device work as weak 

links, i.e., SNS junctions.

Next, we measured the magnetic field 

dependence of resistance with various measurement 

currents. Figures 3(a) and 3(b) show clear resistance 

oscillations observed in the micro-bridge ring and 

simple ring devices, respectively. The periods 𝐵0 are 

in good agreement with those estimated from 𝐵0 =

𝜙0 𝑆
⁄  , where 𝑆 is the surface of the ring. 𝐵0 ≈ 1 mT

for the micro-bridge ring device and 𝐵0 ≈ 1.5 mT for 

the simple ring device. When the measurement current

𝐼 is small enough compared to 𝐼c, the resistance keeps

zero because the superconductivity is robust. As 𝐼

approaches 𝐼c, the superconductivity becomes weaker 

and a finite resistance appears. As a result, the 

resistance oscillates, depending on the external 

magnetic field. While in the simple ring device, a 

standard resistance oscillation was observed at 𝐼 ≲ 𝐼c, 

more complicated resistance oscillations appeared in 

the micro-bridge ring device when 𝐼
was set to

0.93~0.94𝐼c. When 𝐼 ~ 0.97𝐼c, such complex resistance 

oscillations almost disappeared. We confirmed similar 

resistance oscillations for other two micro-bridge ring

devices.

Similar resistance oscillations in dc-SQUIDs

are explained by the resistively and capacitively 

shunted junction (RCSJ) model3). oased on the 

Fig. 3. Magnetic field dependence of resistance at 2.5 

K obtained with (a) micro-bridge ring device and (b)

simple ring device. The curves in (a) are shifted to the 

vertical direction for clarity. The vertical axes are 

normalized by the simple state resistance 𝑅N.


theoretical model in Refs. 22)-24), the phase of the 

resistance oscillation changes from 0 to 𝜙0 2
⁄
as the 

bias current is increased. This is caused by the LC 

resonance in the SQUID loop (L: inductance of the loop), 

which can be excited by a large bias current3). In the 

present experiments, however, such a crossover of the 

phase was not observed. Thus, the complex resistance 

oscillations observed in the micro-bridge ring cannot 

be fully explained by the above model.

To further evaluate the higher harmonic 

oscillations in Fig. 3(a), we performed FFT analysis. 

Figures 4(a) and 4(b) show FFT spectra obtained from 

the resistance oscillations in the micro-bridge ring and 

simple ring devices, respectively. All the FFT spectra

have a sharp peak at a frequency of 1 𝐵0
⁄
 , i.e.,

(ℎ 2𝑒
⁄
)−1. On the other hand, small satellite peaks can 

be seen in higher 1 𝐵
⁄
values. In order to focus on the 

satellite peaks, we show the small amplitude region in 

Figs. 4(c) and 4(d). Only for the micro-bridge ring 

device, a few higher harmonic terms were clearly 

obtained; especially, for 𝐼 = 0.93𝐼c , up to fourth (i.e.,

(ℎ 8𝑒
⁄
)−1) harmonic oscillations can be seen in the FFT 

Fig. 4: FFT spectra of the resistance oscillations obtained from (a) micro-bridge ring and (b) simple ring device.

The vertical axis is normalized by the peak height at 1/𝐵0. The horizontal axis is also normalized by the frequency 

corresponded to 1/𝐵0. The curves are shifted to the vertical direction for clarity. (c), (d) The closeup views of (a)

and (b) in the small amplitude region. 


spectrum. Although the higher harmonic components 

(ℎ 4𝑒
⁄
)−1 and (ℎ 6𝑒
⁄
)−1 were also observed in the 

simple ring when the bias current was smaller than 𝐼c

(see the blue curve in Fig. 4(d)), these originate from a 

square wave shape of the resistance oscillation 

between zero and finite values (see the blue curve in 

Fig. 3(b)). A similar situation is realized even in the 

micro-bridge device when the bias current is 0.92𝐼c: the 

FFT spectrum has peaks at (ℎ 4𝑒
⁄
)−1 and (ℎ 6𝑒
⁄
)−1

(see the blue curve in Fig. 4(c)). In this paper, we regard 

the higher harmonic components obtained from 

resistance oscillations including the zero resistance 

regime as the artificial one. The clear difference 

between the simple ring and micro-bridge ring devices 

can be seen in the current regime where the resistance 

does not reach zero, namely the light green curves in 

Figs. 3(a), 4(a), and 4(c). The resistance maxima 

appear not only at (𝑛 + 1 2
⁄ )𝜙0 but also at 𝑛𝜙0 , 

where 𝑛 is an integer. Such a complex oscillation 

pattern results in higher harmonics up to the fourth 

component and is qualitatively different from the one 

originating from the artificial reason mentioned above.

Since the superconductivity in the simple 

ring device is suddenly broken at 𝐼c (see Fig. 2), it is 

much more difficult to observe clear resistance 

oscillations than in the micro-bridge ring device. We 

tried to see resistance oscillations with higher 

harmonic terms even in the simple ring device by 

tuning the measurement current and also by using 

several different ring devices, but such higher harmonic 

oscillations have never been observed. In addition, to 

the 
best of our knowledge, higher harmonic 

components have not been reported in previous 

superconducting Nb ring devices25-30)

Harmonic oscillations with a frequency of 

(ℎ 4𝑒
⁄
)−1
were reported in Al-based ring-shaped

devices8,31,32) where the lateral size is comparable to 𝜉

of Al. According to Refs. 31) and 32), the second 

harmonic oscillations can be induced by a phase 

coupling between the two superconductors via 

quasiparticles 
and 
also
by
a 
confinement 
of 

quasiparticles to the ring through Andreev reflections. 

However, the above two effects become much less 

essential in the present device where the lateral size is 

much greater than the coherence length 𝜉 of Nb (~38 

nm33)). Since the distance 𝑑 between the two weak 

links is about 80 times longer than 𝜉 of Nb, the 

interaction between the two junctions mediated by 

Cooper pair7) or quasiparticle6,31,32) is not expected. At 

the moment, there is no theoretical expression on 

higher harmonic oscillations in a superconducting ring 

device where 𝜉 ≪ 𝑑 . Further theoretical researches

are required to elucidate the detailed picture of higher 

harmonic behavior, especially for the case of 𝜉 ≪ 𝑑.

In conclusion, we measured the magnetic 

field dependence of resistance in two types of ring-

shaped superconducting Nb devices. In a simple Nb 

ring device, a resistance oscillation with a period of 

ℎ 2𝑒
⁄
was observed. In a micro-bridge Nb ring device, 

on the other hand, higher harmonic resistance 

oscillations were detected only when the measurement 

current was well-tuned at around 𝐼c. oased on the FFT 

analysis, the higher harmonics can be seen up to the 

fourth harmonic component, i.e.,
(ℎ 8𝑒
⁄
)−1 . The 

second harmonic component (ℎ 4𝑒
⁄
)−1
has been 

reported so far in Al-based rings where the device size 

is comparable to 𝜉 of the superconducting Al. On the 

other hand, the present work has demonstrated that 

the higher harmonic resistance oscillations can be 

realized even when the distance between the two SNS 

junctions is much longer than 𝜉. This result would pave 

the way for deep understanding of the superconducting 

interference effect especially in devices with short 𝜉 , 

and would also be useful for a magnetic field sensor as 

mentioned in Ref. 8).


Acknowledgements

We thank S. Iwakiri and T. Ohta for fruitful

discussion. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI 

(Grant 
Numbers 
JP17K18756, 
JP20H02557, 

JP20J20229), 
JST 
FOREST 
(Grant 
Number 

JPMJFR2134), the Mazda Foundation, Shimadzu 

Science Foundation, Yazaki Memorial Foundation for 

Science and Technology, SCAT Foundation, and the 

Murata Science Foundation, and the Asahi glass 

foundation. 

1)
A. G. Aronov and Yu. V. Sharvin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 59, 

755 (1987).

2)
M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity 

(Dover Publications, New York, 2004).

3)
J. Clarke and A. oraginski, The SQUID Handbook: 

Vol.1 Fundamentals and technology of SQUIDs and 

SQUID Systems, (Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2004).

4)
A. A. Golubov, M. Yu. Kupriyanov, and E. Il’ichev, 

Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 411 (2004).

5)
C. Granata and A. Vettoliere, Phys. Rep. 614, 1 

(2016).

6)
J. o. Hansen and P. E. Lindelof, Rev. Mod. Phys. 56, 

431 (1984).

7)
J.-D. Pillet, V. oenzoni, J. Griesmar, J.-I. Smirr, and C. 

Ö . Girit, Nano Lett. 19, 7138 (2019).

8)
J. Wel, P. Cadden-Zimansky, and V. Chandrasekhar, 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 102502 (2008).

9)
H.-S. Kim, o.-K. Kim, Y. Yang, X. Peng, S.-G. Lee, D. 

Yu, and Y.-J. Doh, Appl Phys. Express 9, 023102 

(2016).

10) N.-H. Kim, o.-K. Kim, H.-S. Kim, and Y.-J. Doh, Prog. 

Supercond. Cryog. 18, 5 (2016).

11) W. Wu, T. Liang, Z. Lin, Y. Wang, G. Zhang, L. Ying, W. 

Peng, P. Li, W. Zhang, S. Shi, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. You, 

and Z. Wang, Physica C 591, 1353976 (2021).

12) Y. Asada and H. Nose, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 26, 347 

(1969).

13) J. H. Quateman, Phys. Rev. o 34, 1948 (1986).

14) M. S. M. Minhaj, S. Meepagala, J. T. Chen, and L. E. 

Wenger, Phys. Rev. o 49, 15235 (1994).

15) N. Pinto, S. J. Rezvani, A. Perali, L. Flammia, M. V. 

Milošović, M. Fretto, C. Cassiago, and N. D. Leo, Sci. 

Rep. 8, 4710 (2018).

16) S. I. Park and T. H. Geballe, Physica o+C 135, 108 

(1985).

17) S. Maekawa and H. Fukuyama, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 51, 

1380 (1981).

18) W. H. Tang, C. Y. Ng, C. Y. Yau, and J. Gao, Supercond. 

Sci. Technol. 13, 580 (2000).

19) M. M. Ö zer, J. R. Thompson, and H. H. Weitering, 

Nat. Phys. 2, 173 (2006).

20) Z. Wang, C. Liu, Y. Liu, and J. Wang, J. Phys.: Condens. 

Matter 29, 153001 (2017).

21) L. oao, Y. oi, X. Liu, X. Yang, T. Hao, S. Tian, Z. Wang, 

J. Li, and C. Gu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 022603 

(2018).

22) V. J. de Waal, P. Schrijner, and R. Llurba, J. Low. 

Temp. Phys. 54, 215 (1984).

23) Y. Wang, G. Zhang, S. Zhang, and X. Xie, Physica C 

579, 1353756 (2020).

24) Y. Wang, G. Zhang, S. Zhang, and X. Xie, IEEE Trans. 

Appl. Supercond. 30, 1601307 (2020).

25) A. G. P. Troeman, H. Derking, o. oorger, J. Pleikies, 

D. Veldhuis, and H. Hilgenkamp, Nano Lett. 7, 2152 

(2007).

26) R. F. Voss, R. o. Laibowitz, and A. N. oroers, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 37, 656 (1980).

27) C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, P. Walke, E. Esposito, C. 

Nappi, P. Silvestrini, o. Ruggiero, and M. Russo, J. 

Phys. : Conf. Ser. 234, 042010 (2010).

28) O. J. Sharon, A. Shaulov, J. oerger, A. Sharoni, and Y. 

Yeshurun, Sci. Rep. 6, 28320 (2016).

29) O. J. Sharon, A. Sharoni, J. oerger, A. Shaulov, and Y. 

Yeshurun, J. Phys. : Conf. Ser. 969, 012047 (2018).

30) O. Sharon, A. A. Shaulov, J. oerger, A. Sharoni, R. 


oerkovits, and Y. Yeshurun, Nano Lett. 18, 7851 

(2018).

31) V. T. Petrashov, V. N. Antonov, P. Delsing, and R. 

Claeson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 347 (1993).

32) V. T. Petrashov, V. N. Antonov, P. Delsing, and R. 

Claeson, Physica o 194-196, 1105 (1994).

33) C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics (Wiley,

New York, 2004).


