Volumetric-mapping-based inverse design of 3D architected materials and 
mobility control by topology reconstruction

Kai Xiao1, Xiang Zhou2*, Jaehyung Ju1*

1. UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, China

2. School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, 

China

Abstract: The recent development of modular origami structures has ushered in a new era for active 
metamaterials with multiple degrees of freedom (multi-DOF). Notably, no systematic inverse design 
approach for volumetric modular origami structures has been reported. Moreover, very few topologies 
of modular origami have been studied for the design of active metamaterials with multi-DOF. Herein, we 
develop an inverse design method and reconfigurable algorithm for constructing 3D active architected 
structures — we synthesize modular origami structures that can be volumetrically mapped to a target 3D 
shape. We can control the reconfigurability by reconstructing the topology of the architected structures. 
Our inverse design based on volumetric mapping with mobility control by topology reconstruction can be 
used to construct architected metamaterials with any 3D complex shape that are also transformable with 
multi-DOF. Our work opens a new path toward 3D reconfigurable structures based on volumetric inverse 
design. This work is significant for the design of 3D active metamaterials and 3D morphing devices for 
automotive, aerospace, and biomedical engineering applications.

Keywords:

architected materials, modular origami, volumetric mapping, topology reconstruction, reconfigurable 
structures, active metamaterials

Introduction 
With the advancement of conventional manufacturing in both additive [1] and subtractive [2] ways, the 
fabrication of complex 3D structures is being realized on nano [3-7], micro [8-12], meso [13-19], and large 
scales [20-22]. Researchers are even pushing the limit of complex 3D structural design to motion 
structures that can change their shapes from one to another states, tuning their physical properties in 
adapted and active ways to varying physical environments [23]. 

Many groups have employed origami and kirigami techniques, the ancient folding and cutting arts [24], 
given the potential of future intelligent reconfigurable structures. Starting from 2D flexible structures 
using a Miura-ori sheet [25], Waterbomb base [26], or Ron-Resch pattern [27], researchers have recently 
explored the design of 3D architected structures using modular origami. Stacking multiple origami sheets 
[28,29] and assembling foldable modules [15-16, 30-33] are the currently available methods to construct 


3D architected structures. Stacked Miura-ori [28] and Tachi–Miura polyhedron [30] are deployable with 
flat-foldability while a single origami sheet serves as a building block. Assembled structures with folding 
modules using prismatic polyhedrons [15-16,33], tubular bellows [31,34-35], and kirigami [32] have shown
the potential of isotropic design by spatial symmetry while displaying single and multiple degrees of 
freedom (DOFs) [15-16,33].

All these methods require the construction of a building block (unit cell) with crease patterns and spatial 
periodicity (tessellation). This bottom-up design approach is convenient for controlling the kinematic and 
kinetic properties of the overall 3D architected structures with only a unit-cell design. However, this 
bottom-up design approach has a critical limitation when constructing practical engineering and artistic 
structures, whose shapes are mostly 3D curvilinear (e.g., automotive and aerospace structures with
various curvatures), which require that the size and shape of the building blocks no longer be
homogeneous in the design domain. Notably, most rectangular or cubic engineering structures have 
curved edges for minimum stress concentration and safety. Because of the break in spatial periodicity in 
curvilinear geometries, the kinematic and kinetic properties of the unit cell tend to differ from the
properties of the tessellated structure, limiting the structural implementation of the architected origami 
materials.

Very few studies have explored a top-down approach to the design of 3D architected origami structures 
[36]. The existing inverse-design methods can only be applied to 2D curvilinear surfaces with origami and 
kirigami [37-44] and not to volumetric 3D spatial geometries. In the current work, we explore a top-down 
approach for the design of architected origami materials. Without tessellating a constant building block, 
our inverse design produces volumetric gradient cells mapped into complex curvilinear 3D geometries. 
Furthermore, we can provide mobility to the architected structures built in the curvilinear 3D space, 
yielding reconfigurable architected structures. Unlike the traditional bottom-up method, our top-down 
approach can generate volumetrically gradient cells for spheres, cones, twisted cylinders, toruses, and 
any combined curvilinear shapes with tunable mobility. Even though we focus on the non-periodic 
structural application of architected materials in this work, our method can be universally applied to 
conventional periodic structural design.

Our inverse design can be used for various 3D active morphing structures in automotive, aerospace, and 
biomedical engineering applications and 3D active metamaterials to tune both the dynamic properties
(acoustic and elastic wave) and static properties (directional stiffness).

Inverse design of nonperiodic structures
Figure 1 shows the procedure for the inverse design of architected materials with modular origami. Using 
a space-filling tessellation, we construct a reference template consisting of polyhedrons, as shown in 
Figure 1a. The reference template can consist of a single polyhedron or multiple polyhedrons. Next, we 
transform the reference template into a prescribed curvilinear geometry in Figure 1b, building a 
transformed template in Figure 1c. To construct the transformed template, we implement the optimum 
transport algorithm [45], obtaining deformed polyhedrons based on the minimum energy for deformation. 
Notably, the transformed template still has single or multiple combinations of deformed polyhedrons. 


Now, we spatially shrink the deformed polyhedrons of the transformed template while implementing a 
scaling constraint, as illustrated in Figure 1d:

𝑆𝑎1,𝑝 = 𝑆𝑏1,𝑝 = 𝑆𝑎2,𝑝 = 𝑆𝑏2,𝑝,
(1)

with the scaling ratios 𝑆𝑎𝑖,𝑝 =

|𝐚𝑖,𝑝−𝐀𝑝|

|𝐨𝑖−𝐀𝑝| and 𝑆𝑏𝑖,𝑝 =

|𝐛𝑖,𝑝−𝐁𝑝 |

⌈𝐨𝑖−𝐁𝑝⌉ (𝑖 = 1,2). 𝐨𝑖 is the centroid of the deformed 

𝑖-th polyhedrons in the transformed template. 𝐀𝑝 and 𝐁𝑝 belong to the edge of the 𝑝-th face shared by 
two adjacent polyhedrons in the transformed template. The scaling constraint in Equation (1) forces the 
direction of connection on the 𝑝-th face to be parallel after shrinking; i.e., 𝐚1,𝑝 − 𝐚2,𝑝 = 𝐛1,𝑝 − 𝐛2,𝑝, 
which is the critical condition for building a connection with adjacent polyhedron units. Our work is 
different from previous work [16], where the connecting direction was normal to the regular polyhedron; 
instead, we determine the connecting direction by bridging the centroids of the transformed templates.

We can also obtain the length of the connection 𝐿𝑝 between the adjacent polyhedron units after shrinking:

𝐿𝑝 = 𝑆𝑎1,𝑝|𝐨2 − 𝐨1|.
(2)

Next, we connect the shrunken polyhedrons by extruding prismatic tubes on each shared face inside the 
transformed template, as shown in Figure 1e. For the faces of the shrunken polyhedrons that initially lie 
on the boundary of the transformed template, for example, the boundary face indicated by nodes 
𝑏2,𝑝, 𝑐2,𝑚 and 𝑑2,𝑚, any extruding direction can be applied as long as there is no intersection of prismatic 
tubes, and the extrusion distance usually matches the boundary of the template. Finally, we generate a 
modular origami structure with a curvilinear shape.

The connected tubes serve as structural components, whereas the shrunken polyhedrons function as 
porous holes. The inverse-design method of the spatial architected materials can also be applied to planar 
cases, as illustrated in Figure 1g. Notably, our design method is universal, meaning that any combination 
of polyhedrons can be used to build a reference template whether the target geometry is a curvilinear 3D
shape or planar shape.


Figure 1. Procedure of the inverse design of architected materials with modular origami: (a) reference template with polyhedrons, 
(b) a target shape, (c) transformed template with deformed polyhedrons. The details of volumetric mapping from ‘a’ to ‘c’ are
provided in Section 1.1 “Optimal mass transport” of the Supplementary Information. (d) Shrunken polyhedron units highlighted in 
purple, (e) extrusion of prismatic tubes to connect adjacent polyhedron units, (f) an architected material of a sphere with modular 
origami, and (g) inverse design of a planar architected material with a different target shape.

We can build complex 3D architected materials using the inverse-design algorithm based on various 
spatial-filling tessellations for volumetric mapping into an arbitrary target shape, as illustrated in Figure 2. 
Figure 2a demonstrates the volumetric mapping of the reference template with a single polyhedron set 
(cube) to generate a spherical structure; additional examples of the inverse design with the volumetric 
mapping are provided in Supplementary Fig. 5. Notably, the initial polyhedron in the reference template 
is involved in the nonhomogeneous deformation during the construction of the transformed template. 
Moreover, we can apply the volumetric mapping to generate a concave template, as illustrated in Figure 
2b–2e.


Figure 2. Examples of inverse design of 3D architected materials with modular origami. The rightmost column shows the 3D-
printed prototypes (See Section 1.2 “Fabrication of physical model” in the Supplementary Information). Scale bar, 1 cm.


Construction of tunable motion
Although our inverse-design method generates arbitrary 3D curvilinear structures through volumetric 
mapping, it hardly produces reconfigurability. From a macroscopic perspective, the fully connected 
origami modules (i.e., the structural unit) produce spatial loops and constrain inter-and intra-modular 
motions, delivering immobility to motion structures [46]. From a microscopic perspective, the irregular 
polyhedron units in the transformed template result in limited mobility (see Supplementary Figure 2), 
which is analogous to a kinematic linkage with lengths of different links and limited mobility according to
Grashof theory [47].

To obtain 3D curvilinear structures with tunable motion, we developed a topology reconstruction method 
using a simple numerical algorithm. Adapting graph theory, we re-design the spatial loops of 3D curvilinear 
structures where neighboring modules are tightly connected. A graph consists of vertices and edges 
representing polyhedron units and tubular connections, respectively, among adjacent units. We 
selectively remove loops (cycles) from the graph at the connection of modules to provide mobility. We 
formulate the construction of the graph using a constrained optimization problem, solving it using a 
genetic algorithm tool in MATLAB; the objective of the algorithm is to identify graphs with a smaller 
number of basic cycles (𝑛𝑏𝑐) while retaining the structural integrity.

After screening the spatial loops, we reconstruct the microscopic topology of origami modules by selecting 
flexible ones from a library for each polyhedron unit of the transformed template. Note that the previous 
screening of spatial loops using graph theory does not cover a secondary connection by the geometry of 
modules. Combining the spatial loops with the selection of modules, we can generate 3D curvilinear 
structures with tunable motion (see details in Section 1.3, “The algorithm of enhancing reconfigurability” 
in the Supplementary Information.) 

Figure 3a illustrates the procedure to construct a reconfigurable structure. A 2 × 2 × 2 transformed 
template with a sphere comprises irregular tetrahedra and octahedra. We construct a fully connected 
graph for a sphere with 𝑛𝐷𝑂𝐹 = 0. Then, we reconstruct the nodes with fewer loops and select modules 
with nonzero mobility in Figure 3b, producing a deformable assembly with three DOFs (𝑛𝐷𝑂𝐹 = 3), as 
shown in Figure 3c and Supplementary Video 2. As demonstrated by the numerical simulation and 
experiments in Figure 3d, this new structure can change its shape from a sphere to other shapes via 
rotational motion at the hinges (see the transformation process in Supplementary Video 3). 

Figures 3e and 3f show the topology reconstruction procedure of transformed templates for other target 
shapes — a cone and hyperboloid. Notably, the cone and hyperboloid structures in Figures 3e and 3f have 
the same spatial connection topology and modules as the spherical motion structures in Figure 3d, 
producing the same 𝑛𝐷𝑂𝐹 and similar tunable motion (see Supplementary Video 4). Therefore, the 
tunable motion is controlled by the spatial connection and modules, not by the geometry of the 
transformed template.



Figure 3. Procedure to produce reconfigurability from transformed templates: (a.1) the transformed template in a spherical shape 
comprises irregular tetrahedra and octahedra; (a.2) construction of a fully connected graph with basic cycles: the number of basic 
cycles 𝑛𝑏𝑐 = 11; (a.3) an edge passing their symbolic nodes on two adjacent polyhedra for the graph; (a.4) faces of two adjacent 
shrunken polyhedrons and extrusion of tubes to form a connection; (a.5) the resulting assembly following the fully connected 
graph has zero DOFs; (a.6) a reconstructed graph with fewer basic cycles, where 𝑛𝑏𝑐 = 5; (a.7) two disconnected nodes; (a.8) two 
adjacent shrunken polyhedrons are disconnected; (a.9) a rigid module; (a.10) extruding process of the rigid module; (b.1) a 
polyhedron unit selected from the fully connected graph; (b.2) the same polyhedron unit from the graph with reduced 𝑛𝑏𝑐; (b.3) 
selection of a module with nonzero mobility from a library; (b.4) a disqualified rigid module with the same connectivity as (b.3); 
(c) a deformable assembly with 3 DOFs; (d) the transformation of the structure c where the DOFs are denoted by three dihedral 
angles with colored hinges. See details of the physical prototypes in Section 1.2 “Fabrication of physical model” in the 
Supplementary Information. (e–f) Templates in cone and hyperboloid shapes having the same graph as a.7 with basic cycle, where 
𝑛𝑏𝑐 = 5, producing a reconfigurable structure with the same DOFs (𝑛𝐷𝑂𝐹 = 3). Scale bar in d, 1 cm.

We implement a numerical algorithm to identify mobility as a form of independent dihedral angles to 
simulate the transformation within the configuration space. Following the assumption of the rigid plate 
and flexible hinges of the prismatic modular structures, we identify the independent angles from a 
linearized constraint matrix. We apply kinematic constraints to the structures during transformation: the
distance between two vertices on the edge remains constant, e.g., |𝐯1 − 𝐯2| = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡. The position 
vectors 𝐯1,𝐯2, 𝐯3, and 𝐯4 on the surface remain in a plane, e.g., (𝐯1 − 𝐯2) × (𝐯3 − 𝐯2) ∙ (𝐯4 − 𝐯1) = 𝟎
(see Supplementary Figure 4). Imposing the constraints on every vertex and linearizing them with a 
constraint matrix form 𝐉𝑣 , we obtain 𝐉𝑣 ∙ 𝑑𝐯 = 𝟎 [48], where 𝑑𝐯 is the infinitesimal displacement of 
vertices. We can also obtain the infinitesimal displacement of all the dihedral angles as 𝑑𝛟 = 𝐉ℎ ∙ 𝑑𝐯. In 
matrix form, the constraints can be expressed as

[𝐉𝑣
𝟎

𝐉ℎ
−𝟏] [𝑑𝐯

𝑑𝛟] = 𝟎.
(3)


By calculating the reduced row echelon form of 𝐉 (= [𝐉𝑣
𝟎

𝐉ℎ
−𝟏] ), we can determine the free variables in 

terms of 𝑑𝛟 , which can produce the motion of the structures. Section 1.4 “Kinematics” of the 
Supplementary Information provides further details.

To investigate the tunable range of mobility of 3D prismatic architected materials, we applied our 
algorithm to transformed templates with 28 uniform space-filling tessellations [49,50]; we limited the 
template to a maximum of 40 polyhedra. We searched 360 reconfigurable structures in each transformed 
template by constructing graphs with a specific range of 𝑛𝑏𝑐 ( 2 ≤ 𝑛𝑏𝑐 ≤ 12) and assembling different 
modules. The algorithm generated reconfigurability of a sphere motion structure for different 
transformed templates. For example, Figure 4 shows the reconfigurable structures constructed using the 
transformed templates #14 and #22, leading to DOFs ranging from 1 to 47 with varying deformation 
modes including shear and biaxial expansion (see other deformation modes of these examples in 
Supplementary Video 5). Our algorithm can be used to find the range of mobility of the motion structures 
by controlling the number of basic cycles 𝑛𝑏𝑐 of the graph, as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Architected materials with diverse reconfigurability. Left-hand side: a scatter plot showing 400 reconfigurable designs 
for specific templates (#22 and #14). Each point represents one transformed template; the points with the same 𝑛𝐷𝑂𝐹𝑠 and 𝑛𝑏𝑐
overlap in the plot. Right-hand side: selective reconfigurable structures with (a) shear deformation and (b) biaxial expansion.  


Discussion
3D curvilinear structures are ubiquitous in automotive, aerospace, and ocean engineering structures. To 
date, the design of architected materials has relied on the bottom-up design approach, using planar and 
orthogonal periodic tessellation of modules [23,51], which is convenient for structural design. However, 
this bottom-up approach has a critical limitation when constructing curvilinear 3D engineering and artistic 
structures, where the size and shape of the building blocks are no longer homogeneous in the design 
domain. The reconstruction of geometry and topology in this study provides a solution for the design of
3D modular origami for non-periodic and curvilinear 3D structures and their tunable motion. The 
geometric reconstruction by volumetric mapping of reference templates can be used to construct a stress-
free 3D curvilinear structure. The fully connected irregular polyhedron units produce spatial loops and 
constrain inter-and intra-modular motions, delivering a rigid yet stiff curvilinear structure. The topology 
reconstruction of primary and secondary connections can yield tunable motion with multi-DOF. The 
tunable motion is controlled by the topology of the spatial connection and modules, not by the geometry 
of the transformed template.

The inverse design of 2D origami structures can generate a curvilinear surface with local control of the 
variable curvature [37,43]. Because of the instability (local snapping) of the out-of-plane deformation 
during reconfiguration, relatively high local energy is needed for the transformation [37]. The bottom-up 
approach with periodic modular origami structures can be used to build a curved shape by filling building 
blocks inside the curvilinear space [15,36]. However, this approach cannot yield a smooth surface; it only 
provides discrete curves, whereas the geometric reconstruction in this work can produce a smooth 3D 
curvilinear structure. Notably, the 3D curvilinear structures still cannot provide the exact 3D motions we 
desire at the initial design level because the topology reconstruction in this work is not fully integrated 
with the inverse design, which can be explored further.

The geometric and topology reconstruction can expand the design space of 3D modular origami, opening 
a new avenue for the design of 3D active metamaterials. The spatial scaling of space-filled polyhedrons 
can be applied for both orthogonal and curvilinear coordinates, meaning that our inverse design method
is a universal approach that can be applied for both periodic and non-periodic structures. Our physical 
prototypes of 3D curvilinear structures fabricated by additive manufacturing validate the tunable motion, 
demonstrating untethered actuation by embedded hard magnets and moving external magnetic fields 
(see Supplementary Video 3 and 4). The noncontact actuation of motion structures demonstrates the 
potential of active metamaterials, morphing devices, and soft robots on the mesoscale. Advanced micro-
fabrication techniques such as two-photon lithography [7] and micro-stereolithography [11] can be 
applied to our reconfiguration systems on the microscale, e.g., for the design of battery electrodes [52]
and microelectronic mechanical systems [53].

Conclusion
In summary, we introduce a top-down design approach of modular origami structures to produce 3D 
curvilinear structures with tunable motion. The volumetric-mapping-based inverse design can be used to 
construct stress-free 3D curvilinear structures. Topology reconstruction (primary connection) of spatial 
connection and selection of modules (secondary connection) in the library can yield tunable motion with 


multi-DOF. Our geometry and topology reconstruction method of 3D curvilinear motion structures can be 
directly applied for i) 3D active metamaterials to achieve tunable acoustic and static properties on the 
nano-, micro-, and mesoscale and ii) 3D morphing devices with curvilinear shapes in automotive, 
aerospace, and biomedical engineering applications. Our top-down approach can expand the design space 
of modular origami to 3D non-periodic structures and 3D curvilinear geometries — spheres, cones, twisted 
cylinders, toruses, overcoming the limitation of planar and spatial tessellations for periodic structural 
design. Unlike 2D reconfigurable curvilinear origami structures, our 3D motion structures can be 
reconfigured into other shapes with multi-DOF and are frustration-free. This work will greatly advance the 
design of 3D architected materials with reconfigurability, shaking up traditional periodic tessellation-
based 3D metamaterial design.

Reference:
1
Zhang, Y., Zhang, F., Yan, Z., Ma, Q., Li, X., Huang, Y. & Rogers, J. A. Printing, folding and assembly 
methods for forming 3D mesostructures in advanced materials. Nature Reviews Materials 2, 1-17 
(2017).

2
Leong, T. G., Zarafshar, A. M. & Gracias, D. H. Three‐dimensional fabrication at small size 
scales. Small 6, 792-806 (2010).

3
Schmidt, O. G. & Eberl, K. Thin solid films roll up into nanotubes. Nature 410, 168-168 (2001).

4
Stellacci, F., Bauer, C. A., Meyer‐Friedrichsen, T., Wenseleers, W., Alain, V., Kuebler, S. M., Pond, 
S. J., Zhang, Y., Marder, S. R. & Perry, J. W. Laser and electron‐beam induced growth of 
nanoparticles for 2D and 3D metal patterning. Advanced Materials 14, 194-198 (2002).

5
Li, X. Strain induced semiconductor nanotubes: from formation process to device 
applications. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 41, 193001 (2008).

6
Shenoy, V. B. & Gracias, D. H. Self-folding thin-film materials: From nanopolyhedra to graphene 
origami. Mrs Bulletin 37, 847-854 (2012).

7
Vyatskikh, A., Delalande, S., Kudo, A., Zhang, X., Portela, C. M. & Greer, J. R. Additive 
manufacturing of 3D nano-architected metals. Nature communications 9, 1-8 (2018).

8
Pandey, S., Ewing, M., Kunas, A., Nguyen, N., Gracias, D. H. & Menon, G. Algorithmic design of 
self-folding polyhedra. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 19885-19890 
(2011).

9
Bassik, N., Stern, G. M. & Gracias, D. H. Microassembly based on hands free origami with 
bidirectional curvature. Applied physics letters 95, 091901 (2009).

10
Blees, M. K., Barnard, A. W., Rose, P. A., Roberts, S. P., McGill, K. L., Huang, P. Y., Ruyack, A. 
R., Kevek, J. W., Kobrin, B. & Muller, D. A. Graphene kirigami. Nature 524, 204-207 (2015).

11
Ling, C., Cernicchi, A., Gilchrist, M. D. & Cardiff, P. Mechanical behaviour of additively-
manufactured polymeric octet-truss lattice structures under quasi-static and dynamic 
compressive loading. Materials & Design 162, 106-118 (2019).

12
Lin, Z., Novelino, L. S., Wei, H., Alderete, N. A., Paulino, G. H., Espinosa, H. D. & Krishnaswamy, S. 
Folding 
at 
the 
Microscale: 
Enabling 
Multifunctional 
3D 
Origami‐Architected 

Metamaterials. Small 16, 2002229 (2020).

13
Hawkes, E., An, B., Benbernou, N. M., Tanaka, H., Kim, S., Demaine, E. D., Rus, D. & Wood, R. J. 
Programmable matter by folding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 12441-
12445 (2010).


14
Haghpanah, B., Salari‐Sharif, L., Pourrajab, P., Hopkins, J. & Valdevit, L. Multistable shape‐
reconfigurable architected materials. Advanced Materials 28, 7915-7920 (2016).

15
Overvelde, J. T., De Jong, T. A., Shevchenko, Y., Becerra, S. A., Whitesides, G. M., Weaver, J. C., 
Hoberman, C. & Bertoldi, K. A three-dimensional actuated origami-inspired transformable 
metamaterial with multiple degrees of freedom. Nature communications 7, 1-8 (2016).

16
Overvelde, J. T., Weaver, J. C., Hoberman, C. & Bertoldi, K. Rational design of reconfigurable 
prismatic architected materials. Nature 541, 347-352 (2017).

17
Zhao, Z., Kuang, X., Wu, J., Zhang, Q., Paulino, G. H., Qi, H. J. & Fang, D. 3D printing of complex 
origami assemblages for reconfigurable structures. Soft Matter 14, 8051-8059 (2018).

18
An, 
N., Domel, 
A. 
G., 
Zhou, 
J., 
Rafsanjani, 
A. 
& 
Bertoldi, 
K. 
Programmable 

hierarchical kirigami. Advanced Functional Materials 30, 1906711 (2020).

19
McClintock, H. D., Doshi, N., Iniguez‐Rabago, A., Weaver, J. C., Jafferis, N. T., Jayaram, K., Wood, 
R. J. & Overvelde, J. T. A Fabrication Strategy for Reconfigurable Millimeter‐Scale 
Metamaterials. Advanced Functional Materials 31, 2103428 (2021).

20
Zirbel, S. A., Lang, R. J., Thomson, M. W., Sigel, D. A., Walkemeyer, P. E., Trease, B. P., Magleby, S. 
P. & Howell, L. L. Accommodating thickness in origami-based deployable arrays. Journal of 
Mechanical Design 135 (2013).

21
Schenk, M., Viquerat, A. D., Seffen, K. A. & Guest, S. D. Review of inflatable booms for deployable 
space structures: packing and rigidization. Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets 51, 762-778 (2014).

22
Melancon, D., Gorissen, B., García-Mora, C. J., Hoberman, C. & Bertoldi, K. Multistable inflatable
origami structures at the metre scale. Nature 592, 545-550 (2021).

23
Bertoldi, K., Vitelli, V., Christensen, J. & Van Hecke, M. Flexible mechanical metamaterials. Nature 
Reviews Materials 2, 1-11 (2017).

24
Lang, R. J. Origami design secrets: mathematical methods for an ancient art. (CRC Press, 2012).

25
Miura, K. Method of packaging and deployment of large membranes in space. The Institute of 
Space and Astronautical Science report, 1-9 (1985).

26
Chen, Y., Feng, H., Ma, J., Peng, R. & You, Z. Symmetric waterbomb origami. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 472, 20150846 (2016).

27
Lv, C., Krishnaraju, D., Konjevod, G., Yu, H. & Jiang, H. Origami based mechanical 
metamaterials. Scientific reports 4, 1-6 (2014).

28
Schenk, M. & Guest, S. D. Geometry of Miura-folded metamaterials. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 110, 3276-3281 (2013).

29
Fang, H., Li, S., Ji, H. & Wang, K. Uncovering the deformation mechanisms of origami 
metamaterials by introducing generic degree-four vertices. Physical Review E 94, 043002 (2016).

30
Yasuda, H., Yein, T., Tachi, T., Miura, K. & Taya, M. Folding behavior of Tachi–Miura polyhedron 
bellows. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 469, 
20130351 (2013).

31
Filipov, E., Paulino, G. & Tachi, T. Origami tubes with reconfigurable polygonal cross-
sections. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 472, 
20150607 (2016).

32
Yang, N. & Silverberg, J. L. Decoupling local mechanics from large-scale structure in modular 
metamaterials. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, 3590-3595 (2017).

33
Iniguez-Rabago, A., Li, Y. & Overvelde, J. T. Exploring multistability in prismatic metamaterials 
through local actuation. Nature communications 10, 1-10 (2019).

34
Kamrava, S., Mousanezhad, D., Ebrahimi, H., Ghosh, R. & Vaziri, A. Origami-based cellular 
metamaterial with auxetic, bistable, and self-locking properties. Scientific reports 7, 1-9 (2017).

35
Yasuda, H. & Yang, J. Reentrant origami-based metamaterials with negative Poisson’s ratio 
and bistability. Physical review letters 114, 185502 (2015).


36
Li, Y. & Yin, J. Metamorphosis of three-dimensional kirigami-inspired reconfigurable and 
reprogrammable architected matter. Materials Today Physics 21, 100511 (2021).

37
Dudte, L. H., Vouga, E., Tachi, T. & Mahadevan, L. Programming curvature using origami 
tessellations. Nature materials 15, 583-588 (2016).

38
Dieleman, P., Vasmel, N., Waitukaitis, S. & van Hecke, M. Jigsaw puzzle design of pluripotent 
origami. Nature Physics 16, 63-68 (2020).

39
Callens, S. J. & Zadpoor, A. A. From flat sheets to curved geometries: Origami 
and kirigami approaches. Materials Today 21, 241-264 (2018).

40
Choi, G. P., Dudte, L. H. & Mahadevan, L. Programming shape using kirigami tessellations. Nature 
materials 18, 999-1004 (2019).

41
Chen, T., Panetta, J., Schnaubelt, M. & Pauly, M. Bistable auxetic surface structures. ACM 
Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 1-9 (2021).

42
Griniasty, I., Mostajeran, C. & Cohen, I. Multivalued Inverse Design: Multiple Surface Geometries 
from One Flat Sheet. Physical Review Letters 127, 128001 (2021).

43
Dudte, L. H., Choi, G. P. & Mahadevan, L. An additive algorithm for origami design. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 118 (2021).

44
Choi, G. P., Dudte, L. H. & Mahadevan, L. Compact reconfigurable kirigami. Physical Review 
Research 3, 043030 (2021).

45
Lévy, B. A numerical algorithm for L2 semi-discrete optimal transport in 3D. ESAIM: Mathematical 
Modelling and Numerical Analysis 49, 1693-1715 (2015).

46
Xiao, K., Zhou, X. & Ju, J. Effect of disconnection of deformable units on the mobility and stiffness 
of 3D prismatic modular origami structures using angular kinematics. Scientific reports 11, 1-12 
(2021).

47
Grashof, F. Theoretische maschinenlehre. Vol. 1 (L. Voss, 1875).

48
Laliberté, T. & Gosselin, C. Construction, mobility analysis and synthesis of polyhedra with 
articulated faces. Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics 6, 011007 (2014).

49
Grünbaum, B. Uniform tilings of 3-space. Geombinatorics 4, 49-56 (1994).

50
Deza, M. & Shtogrin, M. Uniform partitions of 3-space, their relatives and embedding. European 
Journal of Combinatorics 21, 807-814 (2000).

51
Li, S., Fang, H., Sadeghi, S., Bhovad, P. & Wang, K. W. Architected origami materials: How folding 
creates sophisticated mechanical properties. Advanced materials 31, 1805282 (2019).

52          Xu, C., Gallant, B. M., Wunderlich, P. U., Lohmann, T. & Greer, J. R. Three-dimensional Au 

microlattices as positive electrodes for Li–O2 batteries. ACS nano 9, 5876-5883 (2015).

53          Rogers, J., Huang, Y., Schmidt, O. G. & Gracias, D. H. Origami mems and nems. Mrs Bulletin 41, 

123-129 (2016).

Acknowledgements
J.J. acknowledges the support received from the Shanghai NSF (Award # 17ZR1414700) and the Research 
Incentive Program of Recruited Non-Chinese Foreign Faculty by Shanghai Jiao Tong University. We thank 
Y. Du for computational design of the prismatic materials with prescribed thickness; we also thank M. 
Huang, J. Sun, Y. Du, Y. Yu, and H. Wang for their assistance with the fabrication of the 3D-printed 
prototypes. 

Author contributions
K.X., X.Z., and J.J. proposed and designed the research; X.Z. and J.J. supervised the project; K.X. and X.Z. 
designed the numerical calculations; X.Z. and J.J. designed the physical models and experiments; K.X. 


performed the numerical calculations and experiments; K.X. and X.Z. wrote the initial draft; J.J. revised
the manuscript; all the authors reviewed the manuscript. 

Supplementary Information

Volumetric-mapping-based inverse design of 3D architected materials and 
mobility control by topology reconstruction

Kai Xiao1, Xiang Zhou2*, Jaehyung Ju1*

1. UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, China

2. School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai, 

China

1. Methods

1.1.
Optimal mass transport

To perform volumetric mapping between the reference template and target shapes, we used an open-
source software [54] (Graphite ver. 3, developed by Bruno Lévy), which conducts semi-discrete optimal 
transport [45]. As the input of the software, we prepared 3D object files of the boundaries of both the 
reference template and target shape using a custom-made MATLAB script. Then, we imported and 
volumetrically meshed the object files in the software and aligned the size and position of both meshes 
using a pre-processing tool in Graphite. Next, we set the density for sampling the mesh of the reference 
template to 400000 and transported the sampled mesh to fit the target shape. The software outputs a
transported sample, which records the positions of these 400000 nodes in both the initial geometry and 
target shape. However, our template usually has much fewer nodes; building the transformed template 
requires matching the nodes of the reference template with the sample in the initial shape, which is 
achieved using the knnsearch tool in MALTAB. By replacing the positions of the nodes of the reference 
template to their counterparts in the transported sample with the target shape, we obtained the 
transformed template. 


1.2.
Fabrication of physical model

We used two types of additive manufacturing techniques for prototyping: 1. multi-materials inkjet 
printing (MultiJet from 3D systems, ProJet MJP 5600) and 2. stereolithography (SLA) (formlabs, Form 3). 
To generate the input file for 3D printing, we wrote a MATLAB script that converts the thin-walled model 
(Supplementary Fig. 1a and 1e) into one with prescribed wall thickness (Supplementary Fig. 1b and 1f). 
For the MultiJet printing, the thicknesses of the plate 𝑡𝑝 and hinges 𝑡ℎ can be close (0.7𝑡𝑝 ≤ 𝑡ℎ ≤ 𝑡𝑝), as 

shown in Supplementary Fig. 1c, because we assigned a rigid polymer (VisiJet CR-CL with Young’s 
modulus 𝐸 ≈ 1.3 GPa) for the plate and a flexible one (VisiJet CE-BK with 𝐸 ≈ 0.3 MPa) for the hinges of 
the architected materials. For SLA, we set 0.05 𝑡𝑝 ≤ 𝑡ℎ ≤ 0.5 𝑡𝑝 and assigned a single soft material 
(Flexible 80A with 𝐸 ≈ 2.3 MPa) for the entire model. The printed physical models obtained using both 
approaches are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1d and 1h.

Supplementary Fig. 3. (a) spherical prismatic architected material based on cubic tessellation. It is zero-thickness. (b) Mesh file of 
(a). (c) Schematics of 𝑡𝑝 and 𝑡𝑔 . (d) Prototype based on MultiJet printing. (e) Spherical prismatic material with enhanced 
reconfigurability. (f) Mesh file of (e). (g) Schematics of 𝑡𝑝 and 𝑡𝑔. (h) Model based on SLA.


1.3.
Algorithm to enhance reconfigurability

Supplementary Fig. 2. Example of reduced mobility of the unit from the non-regular shape of the unit. (a) Cubic reference template, 
where each polyhedron has a regular and periodic shape, leading to assembled architected materials and unit with 𝐷𝑂𝐹 = 3. (b)
Transformed template, where each polyhedron has non-regular faces and a non-periodic shape, building the unit and assembly 
with reduced DOFs.

Algorithm to enhance mobility 

Supplementary Fig. 3 shows the flow of our algorithm to enhance the mobility of prismatic architected 
materials. As depicted in the figure, there are two inputs to our algorithm: the transformed template and 
the desired number of basic cycles (𝑛𝑏𝑐) for constructing the graph. The output is a reconfigurable 
prismatic material based on the resulting graph, where each origami module is reconfigurable. Between 
the inputs and output, there are three steps: 1. reconstruct a graph with a smaller number of basic cycles 
𝑛𝑏𝑐 to reduce the connections among units, 2. build a library consisting of reconfigurable modules at every 
node of the graph, and 3. assemble these modules without introducing extra cycles. The details of each 
step are discussed in the following sections. 


Supplementary Fig. 3. (a) Algorithm for finding a reconfigurable architected material with desired 𝑛𝑏𝑐. (b) Schematics showing 
the reconstruction of a graph. (c.1) Transformed template, (c.2) its reconstructed graph, and (c.3) connectivity relationship on a 
node. (d) Flexible origami modules based on polyhedra unit in (c.3). (e) Chart illustrating the concept of selecting modules for final 
assembly.

We input an initial graph with 𝑛 number of nodes and 𝑒 edges from the transformed template in procedure 1 and
formulated the reconstruction of the graph as a constrained optimization problem. The objective of this optimization 
problem was to identify a graph with desired 𝑛𝑏𝑐, which is usually smaller than the number of basic cycles 𝑛𝑏𝑐0 of


the initial graph. Then, we set the binary design parameter 𝑥1, 𝑥2, 𝑥3,… , 𝑥𝑒 ∈ {0,1} to represent the existence of
edges in the initial graph during the reconstruction. Therefore, assigning different values of 𝑥1, 𝑥2, 𝑥3, … , 𝑥𝑒
generates different graphs; for the initial graph, 𝑥1,𝑥2, 𝑥3, … , 𝑥𝑒 = 1. Moreover, the current number of basic cycles 
𝑢𝑏𝑐 of the graph during reconstruction is a function of 𝑥1, 𝑥2, 𝑥3, … , 𝑥𝑒, and we write the optimization problem as 

min
|𝑢𝑏𝑐(𝑥1, 𝑥2, 𝑥3, … , 𝑥𝑒) − 𝑛𝑏𝑐|
(𝑆1)

𝑠. 𝑡.
∑ 𝑥𝑖

𝑒

𝑖

> 0
(𝑆2)

2 ≤ 𝑉𝑖 ≤ 𝐶𝑖
for 𝑖 ∈ {1,2, … , 𝑛}
(𝑆3)

𝑁𝑐𝑐 − 1 = 0
(𝑆4)

𝑁𝑏𝑖𝑐 = 0
(𝑆5)

𝑁𝑡𝑟𝑖 = 0
(𝑆6)

The constraints shown in 𝑆2 to 𝑆6 are the structural requirements of the graph:

1.
The constraint in 𝑆2 ensures the existence of the graph. 

2.
The inequalities 𝑆3 constrain the amount of connection on each node, where 𝑉𝑖 is the connectivity, i.e.,
the number of edges connected to the 𝑖-th node in the graph, and 𝐶𝑖 is the connectivity of the 𝑖-th node in 
the initial graph; we set the lower bound of 𝑉𝑖 to 2 to ensure that the 𝑖-th node is stringed by a cycle. The 
constraints in 𝑆3 only apply to the nodes we want to preserve in the reconstructed graph. In other words,
we do not need to preserve all the nodes from the initial graph in the reconstructed graph. For the sake of 
completeness of the target shape, the nodes associated with the polyhedrons on the boundary of the 
transformed template are prior to preserve. 

3.
The constraint in Eq. 𝑆4 avoids identifying a disconnected graph. 𝑁𝑐𝑐 is the number of connected graph 
components in the reconstructed graph, which can be calculated using the built-in function conncomp in 
MATLAB.

4.
The constraint in Eq. 𝑆5 avoids the existence of biconnected components of a graph, where 𝑁𝑏𝑖𝑐 is the 
number of biconnected components, which can be calculated using the built-in function biconncomp in 
MATLAB.

5.
The constraint in Eq. 𝑆6 ensures that there are no triangular cycles consisting of only three nodes in the 
graph, as these triangular connections reduce the mobility. 

As a simple example of reconstructing a graph, Supplementary Fig. 3b shows the difference between the initial graph 
and reconstructed graph. In this case, the number of edges in the reconstructed graph is reduced because the 
number of basic cycles 𝑛𝑏𝑐 decreases to 2. Notably, the triangular cycle formed by edges 1, 3, and 4 is removed after
reconstruction, and the two basic cycles in Supplementary Fig. 3b.2 are connected but not in biconnected form 
because of the structural requirement from constraints 𝑆4, 𝑆5, and 𝑆6. In addition, the connectivity of node 𝑎 is 
reduced to 3 from 4.

The next step after reconstructing the graph is to build a library consisting of mobile origami modules for every node 
of the graph. In each library, the desired modules are mobile (i.e., 𝑛𝐷𝑂𝐹 > 0), satisfying the connectivity condition 
of the corresponding node, and have no solely connected prismatic tubes to avoid local motion. We find these 
modules by collecting possible partial extrusion configurations of the unit polyhedron. For example, Supplementary
Fig. 3d shows the candidate modules for the library of the node (Fig. 3c.3) with two connections in the template in 


Fig. 3c. Although all the modules shown in Supplementary Fig. 3d are flexible, two modules must be excluded. The 
one shown in Fig. 3d.5 has a solely connected prismatic tube, as highlighted by the red rectangle, leading to local 
DOFs for the reconfigurable system. In addition, the one in Fig. 3d.6 does not satisfy the connectivity. Therefore, the 
library of this node should include the modules shown in Fig. 3d.1–d.4.

We formulate the final procedure of assembling modules as another constrained optimization problem and solve it 
using the genetic algorithm tool ga in MATLAB. As indicated in Supplementary Fig. 3e, we want to select only one 
module from the library for each node and assemble them together without introducing extra cycles that are not 
indicated in the graph. To this end, we set the design parameters 𝑦1, 𝑦2, … , 𝑦𝑁, which represent the identification
index of modules for the nodes #1, #2, … , #𝑁 in the graph. Specifically, for the 𝑖-th node with total 𝐼𝑖 number of 
modules in the library, its design parameter 𝑦𝑖 ∈ {1,2,3,… , 𝐼𝑖 }. Furthermore, the objective is to minimize the 
number of extra cycles by varying 𝑦1, 𝑦2, … , 𝑦𝑁, i.e.,

min|𝑁𝑏𝑐(𝑦1, 𝑦2,… , 𝑦𝑁) − 𝑢𝑏𝑐|.
(𝑆7)

Here, 𝑁𝑏𝑐 is the current number of basic cycles in the graph associated with the assembly, and 𝑛𝑏𝑐 is the desired 
number of basic cycles. By doing so, we obtain the origami assembly having the same connecting topology as 
indicated in the graph.

1.4.
Kinematics 

Analysis of DOFs and identifying independent angles
To identify the DOFs of reconfigurable architected materials comprising rigid plates and hinges, we 
calculate the number of free variables associated with the linearized constraint matrix [48]. Specifically, 
we first triangulate each face of the structure to ensure the rigid plate constraints, for which an additional 
diagonal edge is generated on the face, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 4a. We then describe the length 
constraint on two vertices on the 𝑖-th edge as (𝐯𝑎𝑖 − 𝐯𝑏𝑖) ∙ (𝐯𝑎𝑖 − 𝐯𝑏𝑖) = 𝐿𝑖

2, for 𝑖 = 1,2,3, … , 𝐸, where 

𝐯𝑎𝑖 and 𝐯𝑏𝑖 are the position vectors of the two vertices, 𝐿𝑖 is the length of the 𝑖-th edge, and 𝐸 is the 
number of total edges. Next, we prescribe the constraints arising from flat faces such that all the vertices 

on the 𝑗-th face remain planar during the transformation, i.e., (𝐯4𝑗 − 𝐯2𝑗) ∙ [(𝐯1𝑗 − 𝐯2𝑗) × (𝐯3𝑗 − 𝐯2𝑗)] =

0 for 𝑗 = 1,2,3, … , 𝐹, where 𝐹 is the total number of faces. After linearizing the above two types of 
constraints and assembling them into a matrix 𝐉𝑣 , we obtain 𝐉𝑣 ∙ 𝑑𝐯 = 𝟎, where 𝑑𝐯 is a vector that 
includes the infinitesimal displacement of every vertex. Finally, the number of DOFs is obtained as 3 ∙ 𝑛𝑣 −
rank(𝐉𝑣) − 6, where 𝑛𝑣 is the total number of vertices in the structure, and the rank of 𝐉𝑣 indicates the 
number of independent constraints.


The transformation process of a multi-DOF reconfigurable structure can be simulated by folding the 
dihedral angles of the independent hinges. To find such independent hinges, we combine 𝑑𝛟 = 𝐉ℎ ∙ 𝑑𝐯, 
where 𝑑𝛟 is the infinitesimal change in all the hinge angles, with the equation 𝐉𝑣 ∙ 𝑑𝐯 = 𝟎, leading to 𝐉 ∙

[𝑑𝐯
𝑑𝛟] = 𝟎. Here, we have 𝐉 = [𝐉𝑣
𝟎

𝐉ℎ
−𝟏], as mentioned in the main text. Specifically, for 𝑑𝛟 = 𝐉ℎ ∙ 𝑑𝐯, the 

Jacobian matrix 𝐉ℎ has the following entries:

𝐽ℎ[𝑟,3∙(𝑛−1)+𝑗] = 𝜕𝜙𝑟

𝜕𝑣𝑗,𝑛

,
(𝑆8)

where 𝑗 = 1,2,3. 𝑑𝑣𝑗,𝑛 is the displacement of the 𝑛-th vertex along the 𝑗-th axis of a Cartesian coordinate, 
𝑟 = 1, … 𝑇. 𝑇 is the total number of selected hinges, and 𝑛 = 1,2,3 … , 𝑁. 𝑁 is the total number of vertices 
in the structure. A detailed derivation of 𝐉ℎ can be found elsewhere [16].

Next, we find the free column in the reduced row echelon form of 𝐉. The free column corresponds to free 

variables in [𝑑𝐯

𝑑𝛟]. In fact, all the free variables can be found in 𝑑𝛟, i.e., the independent angles. 

Supplementary Fig. 4. (a) Schematic of triangulated face of a prismatic unit. (b) Dihedral angle with associated vectors.

Transformation simulation
We obtain the transformed configurations of such reconfigurable architected materials using a numerical 
iterative method that applies a projection matrix to reduce numerical errors [55]. In each iteration, the 

input is a small increase [ 𝟎

𝑑𝛟0] in the actuating angles, and the output is a displacement vector [𝑑𝐯

𝑑𝛟]

satisfying the kinematics constraints. Between the input and output, there is 

[𝑑𝐯
𝑑𝛟] = −𝐉+𝐫 + [𝐈 − 𝐉+𝐉] [ 𝟎

𝑑𝛟0],
(S9)

where [𝐈 − 𝐉+𝐉] is the projection matrix, 𝐉+ is the pseudo-inverse of 𝐉, and 𝐈 is a unit matrix. The term 
−𝐉+𝐫 in Eq. S9 is for reducing the numerical error in each iteration with a residual vector 𝐫 =


[r𝑒1, r𝑒2, … , r𝑒𝐸, r𝑓1, r𝑓2, … , r𝑓𝐹]

𝑇 , where r𝑒𝑖 = (𝐯𝑎𝑖 − 𝐯𝑏𝑖) ∙ (𝐯𝑎𝑖 − 𝐯𝑏𝑖) − 𝐿𝑖

2 is the residual of the 

constraint of the 𝑖 -th edge, and r𝑓𝑗 = (𝐯𝑎𝑗 − 𝐯2𝑗) ∙ [(𝐯1𝑗 − 𝐯2𝑗) × (𝐯3𝑗 − 𝐯2𝑗)] is the residual of the 

constraint for the 𝑗-th face. 𝐫 = [𝟎] in the first iteration.

Non-overlapping requirement and configuration space
To avoid overlapping of the faces during the transformation, we limit the range of dihedral angles of every 
hinge to 0 ≤ 𝜙 ≤ 𝜋, where

𝜙 = 𝜋 − tan−1 (𝐩 ∙

(𝐧𝑎 × 𝐧𝑏)

𝐧𝑎 ∙ 𝐧𝑏

).
(S10)

Here, the face normals 𝐧𝑎 =

𝐩×𝐪𝑏
|𝐩|∙|𝐪𝑏| and 𝐧𝑏 =

𝐪𝑏×𝐩

|𝐪𝑏|∙|𝐩| , as illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 4b.  

While inputting the increase of actuating angles in Eq. S9 leads to a transformed shape of the architected 
materials, the inequality 0 ≤ 𝜙 ≤ 𝜋 must be checked for every hinge angle to determine if the non-
overlapping condition is satisfied. Finally, these valid transformations form the configuration space. 

Reference 
[54] Graphite: Main Page http://alice.loria.fr/software/graphite/doc/html/

[55] Tachi, T. Simulation of rigid origami. Origami 4, 175-187 (2009).


2. Supplementary results 

Prismatic architected structures based on 28 3D space-filling tessellations with spherical
target shape

Supplementary Fig. 5: Inverse design of architected materials based on deforming 28 uniform space-filling tessellation template 
with a spherical shape. 



Supplementary Fig. 5. (Continued)


Supplementary Fig. 5. (Continued)


Supplementary Fig. 5. (Continued)



Supplementary Fig. 5. (Continued)



Supplementary Fig. 5. (Continued)



Supplementary Fig. 5. (Continued)



Supplementary Fig. 5. (Continued)



Supplementary Fig. 5. (Continued)

Supplementary Fig. 5. (Continued)


