Single-molecule mid-IR detection 

through vibrationally-assisted luminescence

Rohit Chikkaraddy*1, Rakesh Arul1, Lukas A. Jakob1, and Jeremy J. Baumberg*1

1 NanoPhotonics Centre, Cavendish Laboratory, Department of Physics, JJ Thompson Avenue, University of 

Cambridge, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, United Kingdom

KEYWORDS: mid-infrared, single-molecule, vibrational chemistry, nanocavity, plasmonics, molecular assembly.

Abstract
Room temperature detection of molecular vibrations in the mid-infrared (MIR, 𝝀=3-30µm) has
numerous applications including real-time gas sensing, chemical reactivity, medical imaging,
astronomical surveys, and quantum communication1,2. However, MIR detection is severely 
hindered by thermal noise, hence current technologies rely on energy-intensive cooled 
semiconductor detectors (mercury cadmium telluride, MCT)3–5. One way to overcome this 
challenge is to upconvert the low-energy MIR light into high-energy visible wavelengths 
(𝝀=500-800nm) where detection of single photons is easily achieved using silicon
technologies6,7. This process suffers from weak cross sections and the mismatch between MIR 
and visible wavelengths, limiting its efficiency. Here, we exploit molecular emitters possessing
both MIR and visible transitions from molecular vibrations and electronic states, coupled 
through Frank–Condon factors. By assembling molecules into a nanoscale cavity and 
continuously optically pumping them below the electronic absorption band, we show the 
transduction of MIR light absorbed by the molecular vibrations. The upconverted signal is 
observed as enhanced high-energy luminescence. Combining Purcell-enhanced visible 
luminescence with enhanced rates of vibrational pumping gives transduction efficiencies
exceeding 10%. By down-scaling the cavity volume below 1nm3, we show MIR detection of
single-molecular bonds, inaccessible to any previous detector. 

Atomic bonds possess MIR resonances corresponding to vibrational transitions between states. 

While these are thermally populated at room temperature, electronic states with transition 
energies in the visible have negligible thermal occupation. Detection of visible light is efficient 
down to the single photon level, but detection of MIR photons remains challenging. However,
these states can interact together. Quantum systems in which such vibrations are coupled to 


electronic transitions have proved fertile for quantum manipulation, for instance using trapped 
ions which are entangled through their vibrational motions in a trap8. More recent efforts to 
create solid state quantum implementations have exploited quantum dots or defect centres 
embedded in micro-mechanical resonators as optomechanical elements9,10. Here we 
demonstrate their ultimate scaling-down to the sub-nm scale, by coupling electronic and 
vibrational transitions in molecular bonds, down to single dye molecules. We show that this 
provides a practical way to detect MIR light which is normally hindered by thermal noise11,
through upconverting the low energy photons to visible wavelengths. 

Demonstrations of MIR upconversion detection predominantly use parametric mixing in non-

linear crystals6, interferometric upconversion with entangled photon pairs12, or non-degenerate 
two-photon absorption13. These methods require high-intensity ultrafast pulsed lasers to drive 
the nonlinear susceptibilities. In optomechanical cavity-assisted wave-mixing, MIR detection is 
possible through specific vibrational bonds which are both infrared and Raman active14,15, but 
the Raman process is intrinsically low cross-section.

Figure 1: MIR vibrationally-assisted luminescence (MIR-VAL). (a) Electronic and vibrational absorption 
spectra of methylene blue (MB) molecule in solution. Arrows indicate NIR and MIR tuning. Inset shows
the supramolecular assembly of MB inside a cucurbit[7]uril (CB) host molecule. (b) Energy diagram of 
electronic and vibrational levels of MB molecule, indicating the NIR pump (red arrow) drives the electronic 
transition only in the presence of MIR (yellow arrow). (c) Silver-coated microsphere constructed on a thin 
metal foil (MSoF) along with alternative gold nanoparticle-on-foil (NPoF) construct. (d) Bright field optical 
image of an individual MSoF construct. (e) Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of individual MSoF 


cavity (solid grey), compared to simulated extinction of a NPoF cavity (dotted grey). (f) Simulated near-
field of MSoF cavity at 𝜆MIR=10µm.

Here we show MIR vibrationally-assisted luminescence (MIR-VAL) from molecular emitters. 

This scheme exploits the coupling between visible electronic transitions and the MIR vibrational 
transitions in a molecule. The electronic and vibrational absorption spectra of methylene blue 
(MB) molecules (Fig.1a) show characteristics of a typical dye molecule. The strong dipolar 
electronic transition of MB has dipole moment 3.8D at 665nm corresponding to |0⟩ → |0′⟩ from 
ground state to first singlet absorption16. The vibronically-mediated absorption |0⟩ → |1′⟩
appears as a shoulder peak at 620nm with strength governed by Franck-Condon coupling factors. 
When MB absorbs wavelengths shorter than 700nm, the electronically-excited molecule relaxes 
to the ground state via down-shifted photoluminescence (PL) emission at 680nm (|0′⟩ → |0⟩) and 
710nm (|0′⟩ → |1⟩) following Kasha’s rule17. 

In our MIR detection scheme, the molecule is now primed with continuous-wave (CW) pumping

(𝜆pump ≥750nm) at energies below the MB absorption band, so no PL is observed (Fig.1b). In the 
presence of MIR light, specific vibrational levels in each molecule become populated (|0⟩ →
|1𝑎⟩, |1𝑏⟩) while remaining in the ground electronic state. Here |1𝑎⟩, |1𝑏⟩ are different bond 
vibrations 𝑎, 𝑏 within the MB molecule. Once the vibrational states are populated, the absorption 
of the pump becomes allowed and drives the molecule from ground- to electronically-excited 
state. This transition now relaxes to the ground state giving PL at wavelengths shorter than the
pump, resulting in anti-Stokes photoluminescence (aS-PL, on the higher energy anti-Stokes side 
of the pump), forming the MIR transduced signal. Such vibrationally-assisted PL is analogous to 
optical spin read-out methods recently developed to record nuclear magnetic resonance of 
quantum systems at the nanoscale18,19.

At room temperature, vibrational decays (10-12s) are thousand-fold faster than electronic 

decays (10-9 s), limiting the normal transduction efficiency of isolated molecules to <10-7 for CW
pumping7. While aS-PL can be observed for intense pulsed excitation20,21 such requirements are 
not practical for compact MIR detectors. To overcome this, here the molecules are placed inside 
a deep-subwavelength optical cavity formed of nanogap-spaced metal walls which can provide 
million-fold up-conversion enhancements. The rate of light emission is Purcell enhanced (𝑃 ∝
1/𝑉) where 𝑉 is the cavity mode volume, while the rate of excitation is also amplified by the 
optical near-field intensity (𝐸2 ∝ 1/𝑉) at the location of the molecule, for field 𝐸 oriented along 
its transition dipole. An ideal optical cavity will thus have the smallest mode volume with strong
overlapping near-field intensities at both pump and MIR wavelengths. 

To construct such small nanocavities with double resonances tuned to visible/MIR and 

containing molecules precisely oriented along the optical field, we use bottom-up nano-
assembly. Monodisperse silver-coated glass microspheres (AgMS) are drop-cast onto a thin 
(10nm) foil of flat Au with molecular emitters sandwiched in the gap formed between them 


(Fig.1c). The resulting microsphere-on-foil (MSoF) system has a gap that is accurately controlled 
to sub-nm, is straightforward to characterize, easily and repeatably made, and is scalable to large 
areas22,23. The diameter of each AgMS (2𝑅=4µm) is tuned to achieve MIR resonance with the 
intense plasmonic peak centered around 8µm (extinction coefficient >10%, Fig.1e). The 
interaction between each AgMS and its image in the underlying foil forms an effective dimer with 
strong electromagnetic enhancements (𝐸2/𝐸0

2 > 105) perpendicular to the surface and ultralow 

mode volume (Fig.1f).

The molecular dye MB is assembled into the nanogaps using the host-guest chemistry of 

macrocyclic cucurbit[7]uril (CB) molecules. CB provides a hydrophobic environment which 
isolates individual MB molecules and improves their photostability24 (Fig.1a). The carbonyl 
portals at either end of the 0.9 nm-high CB bind to Au, scaffolding the MB dipole near-
perpendicular to the metal surfaces for optimal coupling to the electromagnetic near-field. We 
compare the MSoF with smaller diameter nanoparticle-on-mirror (NPoF) constructs (2𝑅=0.1µm, 
Fig.1c) which support a NIR resonance but only broad non-resonant MIR response (dotted grey 
line in Fig.1e). Previous studies that tuned CB-MB fill fractions show that there are, on average,
𝑛̅=40 MB molecules in the gap for 1% of CB filled with MB, after taking into account the different 
sizes of nanofacets24. No PL is observed when the MSoF gaps are empty of MB dyes.

Assembling MSoF nanocavities on thin (200 µm) silicon substrates allows MIR light to couple 

from the underside while simultaneously visible pumping from the top side (Fig.2a). For 
simultaneous control measurements and improved signal to noise, both MIR and pump are 
modulated at 300 kHz. The emitted light from the sample is collected from the top side and 
routed to a monochromator-mounted silicon detector array after rejecting the pump beam with 
dielectric filters. The observed spectrum to lower (Stokes) energy shows surface-enhanced 
resonant Raman scattering (SERRS) peaks of MB molecules assembled within the gap (Fig.2b). In 
the absence of MIR light, the decay of intensity on the anti-Stokes (higher energy) side is 
attributed to electronic Raman scattering (ERS) from the metal25. The SERRS peaks are observed 
only when the pump is focused directly onto the MSoF and not on the flat Au. In the presence of 
MIR light at 1623cm-1 the Stokes is unchanged, but on the anti-Stokes side we observe an 
upconverted PL with characteristic peak at 680nm corresponding to MB emission. For 𝜆pump
= 750nm the effective wavelength of summed photon energies 1/𝜆 = 1/𝜆pump+1/𝜆𝑀𝐼𝑅 = 669 nm 
excites the |0⟩ → |0′⟩ transition of MB. The MIR transducted aS-PL intensity is increased >180% 
above the background (Fig.2c) compared to without MIR light (Fig.2d).     


Figure 2: Transducted MIR in vibrationally-assisted luminescence. (a) MIR detection setup with pump
illuminating an individual MSoF cavity. Incident light modulated (dashed lines) using acousto-optic 
modulator (AOM) for pump, QCL laser for MIR. (b) Stokes and anti-Stokes emission from pump, with 
(orange) and without (grey) MIR light of average power 0.5µW/µm2, averaged over 10 scans on a single 
MSoF cavity. (c) Percentage difference in emitted signals transducted by MIR in (b). (d) Modulation of aS-
PL intensity switching the MIR beam on/off. (e) MIR transducted signal when tuning the pump from 
𝜆pump = 750nm (top) to 785nm (bottom) in 5 nm steps (arrows indicate 𝜆pump). Direct visible pumping at 
633nm shown for comparison (top, grey curve). (f) Spectrally-integrated transducted signal from (e) vs
𝜆pump for three different MSoF cavities, compared with absorption spectra of MB molecules in solution,
rigidly-shifted by 𝜔𝑀𝐼𝑅 (solid line).

As the pump wavelength is tuned from 750nm to 785nm (Fig.2e) while keeping the MIR 

wavelength at 6.16µm (1623cm-1), the observed vibrationally-assisted luminescence signal
decreases. This is because the summed photon energy now drops below the |0⟩ → |0′⟩ transition 
of MB. There is no change in the SERRS spectra on the Stokes side, confirming that MB dyes in 
the gap are not damaged. The spectrally-integrated transducted signal vs pump wavelength 
follows the shape of the absorption curve of MB in solution (Fig.2f), when rigidly shifted to lower 


energy by the MIR photon energy. This result is consistent for each MSoF nanocavity measured, 
confirming that the observed aS-PL is the direct effect of MIR transduction. The signal is strong 
enough to be now seen at room temperature and for CW pumping. Intriguing changes in aS-PL 
spectra arise for 𝜆pump > 765nm, corresponding to upconverted excitation below the |0⟩ → |0′⟩

energy. These changes depend on the precise MIR plasmon resonance in each MSoF 
(Supplementary information, Fig.S1 and Fig.S2), thus implicating plasmon enhancements.
Exciting the vibrations by MIR light induces nuclear displacements set by the Huang-Rhys 
factors26, controlling the overall transfer of energy from |1𝑏⟩ to |0′⟩. Here the MIR-VAL intensity
using 0.5µW/µm2 MIR (our highest MIR power) is >10% of that when directly exciting |0⟩ → |0′⟩
with a 633nm pump of the same pump power as used in MIR-VAL.

Figure 3: MIR detection efficiency and transducted single-molecule absorption. (a) aS-PL intensity when
tuning MIR photon energy (orange points) compared to FTIR measurements of MB in solution (grey). (b,c)
Power-dependent integrated aS-PL intensity for increasing (b) MIR and (c) pump average powers, using
MSoF (orange) and NPoF (yellow). Detection noise floor is 100 cts/s. (d,e) Repeated aS-PL and SERRS
spectra for single MSoF cavity with 0.5mW/µm2 pump at 750nm, top arrow shows MIR tuning. The 
transient picocavity event starts at 𝜏𝑃. 

To confirm that the MIR transducted signals originate from vibrations of the MB molecule, we 

tune the MIR energy from 1300 to 1630cm-1 keeping the pump fixed at 750nm and using an
individual MSoF cavity (Fig.3a). The percentage change in aS-PL intensity closely follows the 
vibrational absorption spectrum of MB molecules in solution obtained from conventional FTIR 
spectroscopy. Subtle differences are attributed to the effect of the plasmonic nano-gap
environment, compared to the normal ensemble solution spectra. The MIR transducted signal 
from 𝑛̅=40 molecules has >10:1 signal to noise with spectral resolution limited only by the 


linewidth of the quantum cascade laser (QCL) and step size used (4.2cm-1). This is impossible to 
achieve in conventional FTIR measurements, even through surface-enhanced infrared absorption 
(SEIRA30) with single MSoF cavities (Fig.1e). 

To demonstrate the generality of this aS-PL scheme, MSoF systems are similarly assembled

with rhodamine B molecules in the gap (Supplementary information, Fig.S3). The MSoF cavity is 
now pumped with 𝜆pump = 663nm, below the |0⟩ → |0′⟩ transition energy of rhodamine B. An 
even larger aS-PL intensity change is now observed of >40% for 0.5µW/µm2. MIR tuning 
experiments again confirm that the vibrational spectrum of rhodamine B controls the 
transduction, and again is subtly different from ensemble measurements (Supplementary 
information, Fig.S4). 

The current MIR detection limit is quantified through the observed power dependence

(Fig.3b,c). MIR transducted intensities are linear in both MIR and pump intensities, and linear 
with molecular concentration (𝑛̅) in the gap (Supplementary information, Fig.S5). MSoF cavities 
provide ten-fold better MIR-VAL efficiencies compared to NPoF cavities. This clearly 
demonstrates how MIR resonances enhance the coupling of MIR light to the vibrational 
transitions. The system can be suitably modelled with rate equations of a four-level system 
(Supplementary information, Fig.S6). While the Purcell-enhanced aS-PL from |0′⟩ → |0⟩ is 
incoherent (due to relaxation by intramolecular rotations and vibrations), the |0⟩ → |0′⟩
transition is coherently driven by the combination of MIR and pump light.

From the noise floor of 100 dark counts/s (which drops significantly when spectrally-integrating 

onto silicon detectors) we easily measure average MIR powers of 2.5nW/µm2 using 80µW/µm2

of pump for the MSoF cavities. This corresponds to a noise equivalent power (NEP) of 31nW/Hz1/2

which, accounting for the <0.1% MIR coupling efficiency, implies achievable NEP below 
30pW/Hz1/2, better than available thermopiles and close to state-of-the-art MCT cooled 
detectors. One source of noise is set by fluctuations in the ERS background emission due to the 
unstable gold nanostructure within the gap, and can be suppressed by increasing the separation
of 𝜆PL and 𝜆pump. Additional opportunities are to explore upconverted MIR from C-H bond 
vibrations at 𝜆MIR=3.3µm or overtones of water in the range 𝜆MIR=1-2µm.

The aS-PL transduction of MIR light has a unique advantage in the extremely fast rise time of 

detected PL. Using time-correlated single-photon lock-in methods27, this PL rise time is resolved 
< 100ns (Supplementary information, Fig.S5) which is currently limited by the QCL source rise
time. Theoretically, since the aS-PL is Purcell-accelerated, high pump rates should give <10ps
response implying >100GHz modulation speeds. A particular advantage is thus high frequency 
lock-in detection, to further reduce the noise floor. This stimulates the need for developing
matched low-cost high-bandwidth MIR sources28.

As a final demonstration that this MIR detector can observe single molecules, the pump is 

increased to 0.5mW/µm2. At this power, the light inside the nanocavity acts to transiently pull


single metal atom protrusions out of the facets. These generate a picocavity29 where light is extra 
confined around the adatom to volumes below 1nm3, and focused onto a single-molecule. Such 
transient events are observed as new vibrational lines in SERRS (Fig.3d,e after 𝜏𝑃), whose spectral 
fluctuations evidence their single-molecule origin29. The MIR energy is now tuned to one of these 
new vibrations (top arrow Fig.3e), and both the aS-PL and SERRS are simultaneously recorded. 
The aS-PL shows transient variations in intensity which exactly correlate in time with the 
picocavity events in SERRS, and give >200-fold PL enhancement over all the other dye molecules 
in the nanocavity outside this picocavity. This therefore evidences the first experimental evidence 
for MIR absorption of a single vibrational bond (SEIRA). Ongoing efforts to stabilize these 
picocavities will thus allow 𝜆MIR-swept MIR-VAL to extract full SEIRA spectra of single molecules, 
a long-term goal for plasmonics. 

In summary, we demonstrate a unique way to optically read-out molecular vibrations down to 

the single-molecule level. This method unambiguously shows vibration-mediated upconversion 
of MIR to visible light through antiStokes photoluminescence. The large detector bandwidth
(>GHz), room temperature (or other) operation, straightforward large-scale fabrication, and
broad MIR tuneability with potential for THz detection make this a highly promising scheme. 
Future experiments will explore MIR multiplexing, capability of using many types of dye 
molecules as well as solid-state emitters (such as PbS quantum dots), alternate types of MIR 
resonators, and LED pumping. This demonstration opens unique possibilities not just for 
molecular spectroscopy and sensing but has wide implications in quantum preparation of 
vibrational states for mode-selective chemistry and nano-optics.  

Materials and Methods

Sample preparation. To prepare the thin mirror, we deposit 10nm of Au onto clean Si 

membranes of 200µm thickness with a deposition rate of 0.5 Å/s (Moorfield nanoPVD-T15A
thermal evaporator). The Au-coated substrates are dipped into 0.1 mM MB-CB solution for 12h
resulting in a self-assembled monolayer of MB-CB on the gold. For Ag MSoF optical cavities, 4µm 
diameter silver-coated microspheres (Cospheric) dispersed in ethanol are deposited directly onto 
the MB-CB assembled Au-coated Si substrates. The deposition time is kept below 90s, resulting
in well-dispersed AgMSs. Lastly, the samples are rinsed thoroughly with ethanol to remove any 
unbound AgMSs.

Infrared microscopy. FTIR reflection spectra on individual MSoF cavities are recorded using a 

Shimadzu AIM-9000 FTIR microscope, equipped with liquid-nitrogen-cooled MCT detector and
Cassegrain 15X objective with 0.5 NA. The spectra are referenced to a clean gold mirror.


Experimental setup. All SERS and aS-PL spectroscopy measurements are performed in a

custom-built dual-channel microscope. A tunable CW TiS laser is used as the pump, which is 
spectrally filtered using an angle-tuned 785nm cleanup filter. The laser is focused into the sample
with a 0.9NA objective lens with 150µW/µm2 average power on the sample (where not otherwise 
noted). The back-scattered light is collected from the sample objective and is filtered with two 
angle-tuned notch filters before routing it to a Shamrock i303 spectrograph and a Newton EMCCD
(Andor). For imaging, the reflected light collected through the same objective lens is directed to 
a camera (Lumenera Infinity3-1).

For the MIR light source, a LaserTune IR source (Block) with wavelength range of 5.4 - 13μm is 

used (1635 - 780 cm-1) with a maximum average output of 500 µW (~2x4 mm beam, collimated)
with <5% duty cycle. The pump (MIR light) is co-aligned with the probe (visible light) using a 0.5
NA Cassegrain objective lens. The modulation of pump laser is synced with the QCL using an
acousto-optical-modulator and function generator. The sample is placed on a fully automated 
motorized stage (Prior Scientific H101) which is controlled with code written in Python.

For single-photon time-correlated measurements, arrival times of all photons at the detector 

(Micro Photon Devices PDM PD-100-CTD) and reference signals (MIR laser trigger) are 
continuously recorded by time-to-digital converters on a field-programmable gate array board. 
Comparing the photon timestamps with the reference signal allows recreating the periodic 
perturbation of the SERS signal by the MIR laser in time, integrated over millions of modulation 
cycles. This single-photon lock-in detection scheme is described in more detail elsewhere27.

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge support from European Research Council (ERC) under Horizon 2020 research 
and innovation programme PICOFORCE (Grant Agreement No. 883703), THOR (Grant Agreement 
No. 829067) and POSEIDON (Grant Agreement No. 861950). We acknowledge funding from the 
EPSRC (Cambridge NanoDTC EP/L015978/1, EP/L027151/1, EP/S022953/1, EP/P029426/1, and 
EP/R020965/1). R.C. acknowledges support from Trinity College, University of Cambridge. R.A. 
acknowledges support from the Rutherford Foundation of the Royal Society Te Apārangi of New 
Zealand, and the Winton Programme for the Physics of Sustainability.

Author Information

Corresponding Author


* Dr Rohit Chikkaraddy, rc621@cam.ac.uk
* Prof Jeremy J Baumberg, jjb12@cam.ac.uk

Author Contributions 

R.C and J.J.B conceived and designed the experiments. R.C. performed the experiments with 
input from R.A and L.A.J. R.A. carried out the FTIR and RhB measurements. R.C performed the 
simulation and the analytical modelling. R.C. and J.J.B. analysed the data. R.C. and J.J.B. wrote 
the manuscript with input from all authors.

Conflict of interest

The authors declare no competing financial interest, and that they have filed IP on this 
technology

Supporting Information. A Supporting Information document is also provided, with additional 
images and information. Source data can be found at https:// (to be provided on acceptance).

References

1.
Cheng, J.-X. & Xie, X. S. Vibrational spectroscopic imaging of living systems: An emerging 
platform for biology and medicine. Science 350, 6264 (2015).

2.
Roellig, T. L. et al. Mid-infrared detector development for the Origins Space Telescope. J. 
Astron. Telesc. Instrum. Syst. 6, 041503 (2020).

3.
Razeghi, M. & Nguyen, B.-M. Advances in mid-infrared detection and imaging: a key issues 
review. Rep. Prog. Phys. 77, 082401 (2014).

4.
Rogalski, A. Infrared detectors: an overview. Infrared Phys. Technol. 43, 187–210 (2002).

5.
Liu, C. et al. Silicon/2D-material photodetectors: from near-infrared to mid-infrared. Light Sci. 
Appl. 10, 123 (2021).

6.
Huang, K., Fang, J., Yan, M., Wu, E. & Zeng, H. Wide-field mid-infrared single-photon 
upconversion imaging. Nat. Commun. 13, 1077 (2022).

7.
Dam, J. S., Tidemand-Lichtenberg, P. & Pedersen, C. Room-temperature mid-infrared single-
photon spectral imaging. Nat. Photonics 6, 788–793 (2012).


8.
Staanum, P. F., Højbjerre, K., Skyt, P. S., Hansen, A. K. & Drewsen, M. Rotational laser cooling 
of vibrationally and translationally cold molecular ions. Nat. Phys. 6, 271–274 (2010).

9.
Munsch, M. et al. Resonant driving of a single photon emitter embedded in a mechanical 
oscillator. Nat. Commun. 8, 76 (2017).

10. Yeo, I. et al. Strain-mediated coupling in a quantum dot–mechanical oscillator hybrid system. 

Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 106–110 (2014).

11. Dorling, K. M. & Baker, M. J. Rapid FTIR chemical imaging: highlighting FPA detectors. Trends 

Biotechnol. 31, 437–438 (2013).

12. Kviatkovsky, I., Chrzanowski, H. M., Avery, E. G., Bartolomaeus, H. & Ramelow, S. Microscopy 

with undetected photons in the mid-infrared. Sci. Adv. 6, eabd0264 (2010).

13. Knez, D., Hanninen, A. M., Prince, R. C., Potma, E. O. & Fishman, D. A. Infrared chemical 

imaging through non-degenerate two-photon absorption in silicon-based cameras. Light Sci. 
Appl. 9, 125 (2020).

14. Chen, W. et al. Continuous-wave frequency upconversion with a molecular optomechanical 

nanocavity. Science 374, 1264–1267 (2021).

15. Xomalis, A. et al. Detecting mid-infrared light by molecular frequency upconversion in dual-

wavelength nanoantennas. Science 374, 1268–1271 (2021).

16. Gilani, A. G., Salmanpour, M. & Ghorbanpour, T. Solvatochromism, dichroism and excited 

state dipole moment of azure A and methylene blue. J. Mol. Liq. 179, 118–123 (2013).

17. Kasha, M. Characterization of electronic transitions in complex molecules. Discuss. Faraday 

Soc. 9, 14–19 (1950).

18. Mamin, H. J. et al. Nanoscale Nuclear Magnetic Resonance with a Nitrogen-Vacancy Spin 

Sensor. Science 339, 557–560 (2013).

19. Staudacher, T. et al. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy on a (5-Nanometer)3 Sample 

Volume. Science 339, 561–563 (2013).

20. Laubereau, A., Seilmeier, A. & Kaiser, W. A new technique to measure ultrashort vibrational 

relaxation times in liquid systems. Chem. Phys. Lett. 36, 232–237 (1975).

21. Whaley-Mayda, L., Guha, A., Penwell, S. B. & Tokmakoff, A. Fluorescence-Encoded Infrared 

Vibrational Spectroscopy with Single-Molecule Sensitivity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143, 3060–3064 
(2021).

22. Chikkaraddy, R. & Baumberg, J. J. Accessing Plasmonic Hotspots Using Nanoparticle-on-Foil 

Constructs. ACS Photonics 8, 2811–2817 (2021).


23. Chikkaraddy, R., Xomalis, A., Jakob, L. A. & Baumberg, J. J. Mid-infrared-perturbed molecular 

vibrational signatures in plasmonic nanocavities. Light Sci. Appl. 11, 19 (2022).

24. Chikkaraddy, R. et al. Single-molecule strong coupling at room temperature in plasmonic 

nanocavities. Nature 535, 127–130 (2016).

25. Mertens, J., Kleemann, M.-E., Chikkaraddy, R., Narang, P. & Baumberg, J. J. How Light Is 

Emitted by Plasmonic Metals. Nano Lett. 17, 2568–2574 (2017).

26. von Cosel, J. et al. Vibrationally resolved electronic spectra including vibrational           pre-

excitation: Theory and application to VIPER spectroscopy. J. Chem. Phys. 147, 164116 (2017).

27. Jakob, L. A. et al. Single photon multiclock lock-in detection by picosecond timestamping. 

Optica 8, 1646–1653 (2021).

28. Popa, D. et al. A highly stable, nanotube-enhanced, CMOS-MEMS thermal emitter for mid-IR 

gas sensing. Sci. Rep. 11, 22915 (2021).

29. Benz, F. et al. Single-molecule optomechanics in “picocavities”. Science 354, 726–729 (2016).

30. Neubrech, F., Huck, C., Weber, K., Pucci, A. & Giessen, H. Surface-Enhanced Infrared 

Spectroscopy Using Resonant Nanoantennas. Chem. Rev. 117, 5110–5145 (2017).


