AI powered, automated discovery of polymer membranes
for carbon capture

Ronaldo Giro1, Hsianghan Hsu2, Akihiro Kishimoto2, Toshiyuki Hama2, Rodrigo F. Neumann1,
Binquan Luan3, Seiji Takeda2, Lisa Hamada2 & Mathias B. Steiner1

1IBM Research, Av. Rep´ublica do Chile, 330, CEP 20031-170, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
2IBM Research, 7-7, Shin-Kawasaki, Saiwai-Ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, 212-0032, Japan.
3IBM Research, 1101 Kitchawan Rd PO Box 218 Yorktown Heights, NY 10598-0218, USA.

The generation of molecules with Artificial Intelligence (AI) is poised to revolutionize mate-
rials discovery. Potential applications range from development of potent drugs to efficient
carbon capture and separation technologies. However, existing computational frameworks
lack automated training data creation and physical performance validation at meso-scale
where complex properties of amorphous materials emerge. The methodological gaps have
so far limited AI design to small-molecule applications. Here, we report the first automated
discovery of complex materials through inverse molecular design which is informed by meso-
scale target features and process figures-of-merit. We have entered the new discovery regime
by computationally generating and validating hundreds of polymer candidates designed for
application in post-combustion carbon dioxide filtration. Specifically, we have validated each
discovery step, from training dataset creation, via graph-based generative design of opti-
mized monomer units, to molecular dynamics simulation of gas permeation through the poly-
mer membranes. For the latter, we have devised a Representative Elementary Volume (REV)
enabling permeability simulations at about 1,000x the volume of an individual, AI-generated
monomer, obtaining quantitative agreement. The discovery-to-validation time per polymer
candidate is on the order of 100 hours in a standard computing environment, offering a com-
putational screening alternative prior to lab validation.

So far, the discovery of new materials has been a time consuming and resource intensive
effort. The following trial-and-error approach is typically employed: identifying known materi-
als with properties similar to the new material’s target properties and then modifying or combining
them to achieve the desired outcome. The approach was driven by a specialist’s knowledge, labora-
tory experimentation, and it could take years to yield results. The computer revolution has brought
about powerful simulation techniques, such as the Density Functional Theory (DFT)1,2 method,
that are aiding materials discovery today. High-Throughput Computational Materials Screening
and Design (HCMSD) methods have enabled substantial speed-up of the process3–8. However, a
limitation of HCMSD is that it relies solely on time consuming ab-initio calculations of the occur-
ring physical and chemical processes4,5,7,8.

The emergence of repositories with large sets of experimental and simulation data has en-
abled the application of AI methods as a data-driven pathway to materials discovery9–12. AI based
materials design10,13–16 has a potential advantage over HCMSD: while still relying on materials

1

arXiv:2206.14634v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  28 Jul 2022


screening, it does not depend solely on ab-initio calculations. Recently, the Inverse Materials
Design (IMD) method17,18 has shown its potential: An algorithm creates optimized molecular
structures based on a pre-defined feature vector containing a set of materials target properties. To
complete the discovery process, the IMD output would have to undergo physical validation. For
polymer membranes, this validation is needed at meso-scale where the process-relevant properties
of amorphous materials emerge. At that scale, however, automated ab-initio simulation methods
for validating complex materials do not yet exist.

To exemplify the issue, let us consider the case of carbon dioxide separation in post-combustion
applications. From a process perspective, polymer membranes19–21 have certain advantages, among
them high tolerance for the challenging operating conditions and adaptability to the existing power
plant steam cycle. However, a polymer’s gas filtration performance cannot be derived from the
physical and chemical properties of the monomer constituents alone. Rather, it is determined by
the heterogeneous internal structure and complex morphology of the amorphous polymer. There-
fore, predicting and validating a membrane’s gas permeability remains a major challenge22.

Encouragingly, it was recently reported that machine learning applied to known polymer re-
peat units can predict gas separation performance of polymers that were not previously tested for
these properties23. However, the reported method did not offer the IMD benefits of generating
optimized monomer units and, therefore, cannot generate new polymer candidates. Also, it lacked
automated outcome validation of physical performance. In the following, we report a fully autom-
atized, in silico materials discovery workflow that overcomes those limitations. For demonstrating
the methodological advancements with regards to the discovery of small molecules, we have ap-
plied the workflow to the generative design and physical validation of homo-polymers optimized
for carbon dioxide filtration under industrial process conditions.

In Fig.1, we show the discovery workflow end-to-end, from training dataset preparation,
via AI generative design to physical validation by molecular dynamics simulation. Small or-
ganic molecules, or monomer units, that typically qualify as candidate building blocks for poly-
mer membranes, are often treated as graphs and can be converted to computer readable SMILES
format24. For training dataset preparation based on SMILES, we have extended a Quantitative
Structure–Property Relationships approach25 and made it available through our Polymer Property
Prediction (PPP) engine. For AI generative modeling, we have created an Inverse Materials De-
sign (IMD) engine26 which extracts molecular features with regression and performs graph-based
construction with SMILES input. Finally, the discovered monomers are physically validated at
meso-scale by means of automated Constant Pressure Difference Molecular Dynamics (CPDMD)
simulations22, a non-equilibrium method suited for predicting a polymer membrane’s gas filtra-
tion performance under realistic process conditions. The workflow is aligned with our discovery
approach in reference 27.

The training dataset preparation sequence is shown in the left box of Fig.1: polymer name

2


Dataset Preparation
AI Generative Design
Physical Validation

Technical Publications (Papers, Patents)

Polymer Data Table

Polymer Property Prediction

Feature Extraction

…

…

Monomer SMILES

*c(c1(C))cccc1c(cc2(C))c(C)cc2c(ccc3)c(C)c3*

Molecular Dynamics Simulation

Automated Polymer Generation

Monomer
Polymeric Chain

Annealed
Membrane
Packaged Chains

Molecule
Atom
Ring
Sub-structure

0,1,0,2,0
0,0,0,1
1,1,0,0,0,1,3

0,2,0,0,0
0,0,0,0
0,0,0,1,0,2,2

Grid Search

Target Properties

…

Limited Discrepancy
Search

Query
Database

Polymer Names
SMILES Codes

• PSO-F
• BTDA-BAPHF
• DMPSF
• …

• [*]Oc4ccc(Oc3c…
• FC(F)(F)C(c1cc…
• [*]Oc1ccc(cc1C…
• …

Tg> 490 K
Td, ½ > 590 K
PCO2 > 1000 Barrer

Graph-based Generation

Hyperparameter Optimization and Feature Selection

Regression Models

Feature Optimization

Topological variables

Geometrical variables

Structural descriptors

CO2
Membrane

*
*

*C(C(=O)C(Cl)=C([SiH3]...
*C1(C)CC(F)(C2(F)OC…

Figure 1: Automated, end-to-end computational discovery and physical validation of polymer membranes.

The workflow consists of training dataset preparation, AI based generative monomer design, and physical

validation of polymer membrane filtration with molecular dynamics simulations.

3


a

b

c

Figure 2: Dataset preparation with the Polymer Property Prediction (PPP) engine. (a) Example of half-

decomposition temperature Td,1/2 which is calculated according to Eq.1 (see Methods Section). For Td,1/2,

structure-property correlations were established with the first-order (bond) connectivity index 1χV , the num-

ber of hydrogen atoms NH and the number of vertices Nvertices in the hydrogen-suppressed graph represen-

tation of a polymer’s monomer25. (b) Example of a hydrogen-suppressed graph representation for poly(vinyl

butyral) built from the polymer name and the corresponding OPSIN SMILES string28. (i) Schematic repre-

sentation of poly(vinyl butyral); (ii) alternative representation with brackets not intersecting the bonds; (iii)

hydrogen-suppressed version of (ii) with the valence connectivity indices δV in the vertices and (iv) with the

bond indices βV in the edges, respectively (see Eqs.2 and 3 in the Methods Section). (c) Multi-dimensional

property distribution of the input dataset containing 1169 homo-polymers.

4


collection from existing data sources, polymer name conversion into the OPSIN SMILES strings28,
and polymer name mapping to suitable target polymer properties and their respective numerical
values. As high-quality lab data is often sparse or not available at all, we have used PPP for
calculating polymer properties based on topological variables, such as connectivity indices, com-
bined with geometrical variables and other structural descriptors25. In Fig.2, we illustrate the PPP
conception and outline as a representative example the prediction of the half-decomposition tem-
perature Td,1/2 (see Methods Section). In the example of poly(vinyl butyral) shown in Fig.2b, we
obtain Td,1/2 = 646 K which is in agreement with the experimental value of 645 K25. Similarly, we
have used PPP to predict the glass transition temperature Tg (in K) and CO2-permeability (in Bar-
rer) for all 1169 homo-polymers in our dataset shown in Fig.2c. These are suitable target properties
for informing generative design of new monomers to be validated in gas separation membranes at
process level.

The AI generative design sequence is shown in the middle box of Fig.1: feature extraction
and selection, regression model training, feature optimization, and graph-based structure gener-
ation. For automatically generating new monomers with pre-defined target properties, we have
represented each of the homo-polymers in the input dataset by its monomer in the form of a fea-
ture vector. As visualized in Fig.3a, each feature vector contains structural descriptors such as the
numbers of heavy atoms, rings, aromatic rings, substructures, and fingerprints.

For molecular property prediction, we have trained and cross-validated regression models
with respect to multiple sets of feature vectors and to each of the pre-defined target properties: half-
decomposition temperature Td,1/2, glass transition temperature Tg, and CO2-permeability PCO2 as
shown in Fig.3b.

Specifically, we have trained five regression models: Lasso Regression, Ridge Regression,
Elastic Net Regression, Random Forest Regression, Kernel Ridge Regression and Support Vector
Regression (SVR). For training each model, we have applied both hyperparameter optimization
and feature selection. For the Kernel Ridge and SVR models, respectively, we have developed
a new method that efficiently performs hyperparameter optimization and feature selection simul-
taneously (see the Method Section). For the other models, we have performed grid search for
optimizing hyperparameters while selecting features using the SelectFromModel class in Scikit-
learn 29. To maximize accuracy, we have selected the SVR model yielding the best cross validated
R2 score.

For generative design, we have then optimized the feature vectors through inversion of the
prediction model within the pre-defined target property ranges which were set to: 550 K < Td,1/2
< 700 K; 400 K < Tg < 600 K and 630 barrer < PCO2 < 4000 barrer. We have expanded the
optimized feature vectors to molecular structures through an advanced version of the Molecular-
Customized McKay’s Canonical Construction Path Algorithm26,41. The algorithm repeats cycles
of connecting structural fragments such as atoms, rings, and substructures, and cycles of feature

5


a

b
d
e

c

*C(C(=O)C(Cl)=C([SiH3])CNC)C(*)C(=O)C(Cl)=C([SiH3])CNC

*C1(C)CC(F)(C2(F)OC(C=C)CC(*)(C)O2)C1

*C1(C)CC(C=C)OC(F)(C2(F)CCC2(*)C)O1

original data set

Figure 3: AI generative modeling with the Inverse Materials Design (IMD) engine. (a) The structure of each

monomer in the input dataset is encoded as a feature vector. Here, the aring feature label stands for aromatic

ring and the numbers under each label indicate their respective occurrences. (b) Regression results for each

of the pre-defined target properties: PCO2, Tg, and Td,1/2. Blue circles: training data, red line: data fit. (c)

Feature vector representation with encoded molecular building blocks: atoms, rings, aromatic rings, sub-

structures, and fingerprints. Decoding the feature vector reveals a pyridine molecule for which the SMILES

representation is also shown. (d) Multi-dimensional property distribution of the generated dataset. (e) AI

generated monomers selected for physical validation in polymer representations via molecular dynamics

simulation. The SMILES representation of each monomer is shown under the respective unit.

6


screening. Our methodological advancements (see Method Section and Supplemental Information)
enable the application of graph-based generative design to complex molecular structures. In addi-
tion, the IMD allows for defining design rules with regards to structural constraints, the range of
the number of substructures, as well as fragment patterns. As a result, chemical subject matter ex-
pertise can inform the generative design process. In Fig.3c, we have visualized an example of how
the generative algorithm transforms a feature vector into a molecular structure. A feature vector
encodes structure-specific information for each molecular building block. The algorithm generates
a specific molecular expression of the feature vector based on a library of building blocks created
during the feature vector encoding process.

After completing the AI generative design sequence and screening our initial discovery re-
sults for target property range and discrepancies between predicted and calculated polymer prop-
erty values, we have obtained a set of 784 new monomer candidates shown in Fig.3d. In the
following, we will physically validate the most promising of the discovered monomers, visual-
ized in Fig.3e, in a polymer membrane configuration by means of automated molecular dynamics
simulation.

The automated molecular dynamics simulation sequence is shown in the right box of Fig.1:
creation of SMILES representation of the discovered monomer, creation of a polymer membrane
representation with the discovered monomer, and physical simulation of the gas filtration process
through the membrane. Prior to applying the above sequence to the newly generated monomers,
we have confirmed the suitability of the CPDMD method for physical validation of membrane per-
formance through extensive benchmark analyses with known polymers, (see Methods Section and
Supplemental Information). A fundamental question occurs with regards to the minimum volume
that adequately represents the properties of complex materials at mesoscopic scales. In the present
case of gas separation with polymer membranes, we have adopted the concept of Representative
Elementary Volume (REV), which is routinely used for characterising porous media32. REV can
be understood as the smallest material volume for which a physical property can be determined
such that it yields a value that is representative of the bulk. To illustrate this concept, we show in
Fig.4a cross sections through computational membrane representations exhibiting porosity varia-
tions. Depending on the region sampled, a material’s porosity can be smaller or larger than the
bulk average. If probed at or above REV-level, the porosity value matches the bulk average.

To probe REV with regards to our polymer permeability simulations, we have investigated
three representative polymers with relatively high permeability-values: TDA1-DMN, PIM-PI-EA
and IBPA shown in Fig.4b - bottom of figure from left to right. For each of the three polymers,
we have performed five independent CPDMD simulations using the simulation box set up shown
in Fig.1. By doubling the number of atoms in the simulation and keeping the membrane thickness
fixed at 6nm, the cross-sectional area also doubled, from around 50 nm2 to 100 nm2. By probing
larger areas and randomly sampling the amorphous polymeric chains making up the membrane, we
observe a trend in Fig.4b that the simulations with larger volume tend to approach the experimental
values.

7


REV

a
b

c
d

*

*

*

*

*

*

CO• Permeability (barrer)

Figure 4: Physical validation of AI discovered polymers with automatized Constant Pressure Difference

Molecular Dynamics (CPDMD) Simulations. (a) Cross-sectional view of a meso-scopic polymer mem-

brane representation. The volumes rendered in green color are void spaces visualized using 3V30,31. The

solid frame visualizes the Representative Elementary Volume (REV) concept; the dashed frame does not

adequately capture the membrane’s average porosity. (b) Representative monomers for determining the

polymer REV. The asterisks indicate the head and tail atoms, respectively. Carbon atoms: black; oxygen

atoms: red; nitrogen atoms: blue. CPDMD simulation results are shown as blue circles: 20,000 atoms; or-

ange triangles: 40,000 atoms. Experimental reference: red squares. (c) CO2 permeability of representative,

AI designed polymers. Red diamonds: AI model predictions; blue circles: CPDMD simulation results. (d)

CPDMD simulation of CO2 filtration dynamics. CO2-permeability: blue circles; number of CO2 molecules

permeated: black triangles. The line is a linear fit to the data. Number of CO2 molecules sorbed in the

membrane: black diamonds.The shaded area indicates the transient simulation regime.

8


After establishing both the automated CPDMD simulation protocol and the REV determina-
tion (see Methods Section and Supplemental Information), we have proceeded with the validation
of the three shortlisted new polymer candidates generated by IMD. Two similar monomers were
selected for investigating how head and tail positions influence the simulation results. For each
of the three polymers, we have performed five independent CPDMD simulations using the sim-
ulation box in Fig.1. As a key result of our investigation, we show in Fig.4c the simulated CO2
permeability values obtained for the polymer membrane representations of AI designed monomers.
We observe quantitative agreement, within the error bars, of AI predicted permeability values and
the CPDMD based physical validation results. To our knowledge, this is the first computational
performance validation of an AI discovered, complex material.

For analyzing the filtration dynamics, we show as a representative example for one of the
polymers in Fig.4d the simulated CO2 permeability along with the number of CO2-molecules per-
meated and sorbed, respectively, as function of simulation time. The corresponding CO2 density
profile evolution is shown in Supplemental Fig.S8. Initially, the CO2 molecules are located at
the left-hand side of the membrane, see simulation box in Figs.1, which is connected to the gas
feed chamber. As shown in Fig.4d, CO2 molecules are penetrating the membrane at 1 ns. The
membrane saturation level of roughly 100 CO2 molecules on average, corresponding to an average
density of 0.06 - 0.07 g/cm3, is reached at about 5ns. At 10 ns, the CO2 permeability has converged
towards the saturation value of 5000 barrer. After 30ns, the permeability fluctuations have disap-
peared and the membrane filtration has reached a steady state. The steady-state filtration regime is
characterized by the constant slope of permeated CO2 molecules as function of time from which
the permeability value can be extracted using eq. 6 (see Methods Section).

The main transport characteristics captured by the CPDMD simulations are (i) the interaction
between gas molecules and polymer membrane which determines solubility and, consequently, the
selectivity with regards to a specific gas molecule and (ii) the diffusion of gas molecules through
the void spaces between packaged polymer chains which determines the membrane’s permeability.
We note that while the thickness of manufactured polymer membranes are typically on the order
of micrometers, the much thinner simulated membrane predicts experimental permeability values
reasonably well, within the same order of magnitude. As expected, the accurate and repeatable
determination of gas permeability is limited experimentally as well as theoretically and large error
margins are an intrinsic characteristic associated with the properties of amorphous materials22.

Using a standard computational framework (one Intel Xeon E5-2667 CPU, one NVIDIA
Tesla K80 GPU), the overall computation time, from dataset preparation to AI generation to phys-
ical validation, is of the order of 200 hrs for polymeric membranes with higher permeabilities
(above 1000 barrer). A computational bottleneck currently exists for reaching gas saturation and
steady state filtration in lower-permeability membranes as shown in Supplemental Fig.S8.

Future extensions of this work would benefit from advanced representations of a membrane’s

9


morphology. One example would be to pack the monomers randomly in a virtual cubic box and
connect their head and tail atoms according to predefined probabilities - instead of packing the
polymer chains randomly. This would more closely resemble the actual polymer formation pro-
cess. In generative modeling, the extension to molecular structures with higher complexity and the
introduction of a user-defined objective function could open the pathway to the generation of poly-
mers with higher complexity, such as block co-polymers. We expect that adding target properties
for molecular selectivity to the optimization workflow and extending the generative algorithms to
the design of co-polymers will further improve discovery outcomes.

In summary, we have reported fully automated, end-to-end computational discovery of poly-
mer membranes for carbon dioxide separation. We have demonstrated each discovery step, from
automated training data and feature vector creation via generative inverse design of new monomers
to non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulation of gas filtration by the polymer membrane.
Molecular dynamics simulations successfully predict a polymer’s filtration dynamics and per-
meability if performed with a minimum representative volume of the complex material.
For
computationally designed polymers, we have obtained quantitative agreement between the CO2-
permeability predictions by means of the AI models and the molecular-dynamics based, physi-
cal process simulations. Our work opens a pathway for advancing AI generative design beyond
small-molecule applications and will substantially accelerate the discovery of complex materials
for scaled applications.

Methods

Polymer Property Calculation for Automated Training Dataset Generation For creating the
training dataset, we have collected representative homo-polymers names in IUPAC nomenclature
standard, from multiple polymer classes33. We have then converted their individual monomer unit
names to SMILES format (with their head and tail units tagged) using the Open Parser for Sys-
tematic IUPAC nomenclature - OPSIN28. Based on our analysis of the gas separation process, we
have selected three suitable figures-of-merits or target properties for polymer membranes: glass
transition temperature (Tg in K), half-decomposition temperature (Td,1/2 in K), and permeability
(P) for CO2 (in Barrer). Tg is the temperature above which segmental motions of polymer chains
occur such that they negatively affect a polymer membrane’s mechanical stability. Tg also de-
fines the transition limit between glassy and rubbery polymers (temperature below and above Tg,
respectively). Glassy polymers dominate the Roberson upper bound34,35 due to higher solubility
coefficient35, or, in other words, better selectivity. However, rubbery polymers have lower solu-
bility and higher diffusion coefficients35, i.e higher permeability and lower selectivity. Similarly,
Td,1/2 defined as the temperature at which the loss of weight during pyrolysis (at a constant rate of
temperature rise) reaches 50 percent of its final value should be reasonably high as it is a measure
for chemical stability. A high permeability for CO2 is desirable as a measure of the gas flux through
the membrane. However, it is limited by a trade-off with the membrane’s selectivity PCO2/PN2.
For creating the training dataset, we have collected literature data for PCO2 and combined it with
calculated data for Td,1/2 and Tg.

10


Calculation of Td,1/2:

Best structure-property correlations were established with first-order (bond) connectivity
index 1χV ; number of hydrogen atoms NH and number of vertices Nvertices in the hydrogen-
suppressed graph representation of a polymer’s monomer25. The functional relation for Td,1/2
was obtained through a linear regression against the best correlation descriptors:

Td,1/2 = 1000((7.17Nvertices − 2.31NH + 12.52 1χV )/Mm)
(1)

Fig.2b displays the calculation steps performed by the PPPE engine for poly(vinyl butyral).
Starting with the (i) hydrogen-suppressed graph representation of poly(vinyl butyral) monomer
and its (ii) alternative representation with the square brackets not intersecting the bonds, the (iii)
valence connectivity indices δV in the vertices and the (iv) bond indices βV in the edges are calcu-
lated according to eq.2 and 3, respectively:

δV =
ZV − NH
Z − ZV − 1
(2)

βV
ij = δV
i δV
j
(3)

where ZV is the number of valence electrons of an atom, NH is the number of hydrogen atoms
bonded to it, and Z is its atomic number. βV
ij is the product of δV at the two vertices (i and j) which
define a given edge or bond.

The first-order (bond) connectivity index 1χV of the entire molecule is defined through the
summation over the edges of the hydrogen-suppressed graph:

1χV =
�

edges

1
�

βV
(4)

By combining Eq.1 and Eq.4, counting the number of vertices and the hydrogen atoms and
calculating the molar mass of poly(vinyl butyral), we obtain Td,1/2=646K which is in agreement
with the experimental value of 645K25.

Hyperparameter Optimization and Limited Discrepancy Search The procedure referred to as
feature selection identifies a subset of features for achieving accurate predictions, rather than using
the entire set of the original features36. In other words, feature selection allows a machine learning
algorithm to learn a model in a lower-dimensional space. The dimensionality reduction typically
leads to computational performance enhancements.

11


Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) is also key for enhancing the model performance. There
are many HPO algorithms available in the literature, including grid search and Bayesian Optimiza-
tion, see for example, reference37. In theory, hyperparameter configurations are specific to a feature
set used to train a machine learning model. One set of hyperparameter configurations that works
well for one feature set might not be the best for another feature set. On the other hand, both feature
selection and HPO typically require intensive computation. For example, given N features, finding
an optimal feature requires (2N) possible feature sets. For M hyperparameters, each of which has
b configurations after its possible values are discretized, there are (bM) possible choices for the
hyperparameter configurations. An optimal feature set and hyperparameter configurations need to
be found out of (2NbM) combinations. In practice, feature selection and HPO are performed sep-
arately to reduce the computational overhead, e.g., perform HPO after feature selection selects an
optimized feature set with default hyperparameter configurations. However, this approach might
not represent a good combination of the feature set and hyperparameter configurations.

We have optimized an average (R2) score of the three-fold cross validation with 10 repeats.To
that end, we have developed a systematic local search algorithm that simultaneously performs fea-
ture selection and HPO for a non-linear machine learning model. This approach leads to an opti-
mized hyperparameter configuration specific to a selected feature set. To reduce the computational
overhead, our approach focuses only on small, promising search spaces where optimized solutions
are likely to occur. We discretize possible values for each hyperparameter and formulate feature
selection and HPO as a variable-value assignment task. This means that each variable corresponds
to another variable to which one value needs to be assigned. The variable for a feature is set to
either true or false, while the variable for each hyperparameter is set to one of the discretized
hyperparameter-values.

Our approach is based on limited discrepancy search (LDS)38,39. The idea behind LDS has
been studied in the artificial intelligence community and has a variety of applications such as26.
LDS starts with an initial solution, i.e., initial variable-value assignment, and keeps refining it until
a satisfactory solution is obtained.

Our current implementation calculates the initial solution passed to LDS as follows: It first
calculates optimized hyperparameter configurations based on grid search with the whole feature
set. With these hyperparameter configurations, it then computes the initial feature set based on
so-called Sequential Backward Selection (SBS)36. Our SBS implementation starts with the whole
feature set. It repeats a greedy elimination of one feature (without which a score is improved) until
no further improvement is obtained, .

The solution refinement step of LDS consists of a series of local search controlled by the
notion of discrepancy. Given the current best solution bs, LDS assumes that a better solution exists
in a search space whose solutions are similar to bs. In our implementation, the discrepancy for a
solution s is defined as the number of variables whose assigned values have differences between
bs and s. A smaller discrepancy indicates that s is more similar to bs.

12


LDS introduces a discrepancy threshold d and performs local search in an iterative manner.
After setting bs to the initial solution calculated by SBS, LDS performs depth-first search with d=1
and attempts to find a better solution than bs in a search space where solutions are located that
have a different value than bs only for one variable. If no better solution is found, LDS increments
d and performs local search with d=2. If no better solution is found again, LDS performs search
with d=3, and so on. If a better solution is found, LDS resets d=1 and bs to the better solution and
restarts a local search with d=1. LDS repeats these steps until the allocated time is used up or d
reaches a preset, maximum value.

There are several implementation choices for LDS to select a next variable for updating
its value. Before performing a new iteration of local search, our current implementation orders
variables in ascending order of the following formula: w1v(x) + w2u(x), where w1 and w2 are
constants, v(x) is the number of times variable x is selected in local search, and u(x) is the number
of times variable x fails to improve bs. This formula attempts to remain the values of the variables
unchanged that have contributed to improving a score as well as to prioritize the variables that have
not been explored sufficiently.For the purpose of this study, we have chosen w1=2 and w2=1.

In Supplemental Fig.S1, we show a comparison of regression results obtained with and with-
out the application of hyperparameter optimization.

Feature Vector Optimization Based on graph theory and atomic configurations, there exist mul-
tiple feature types which can be combined for application of machine learning models, among
them the number of heavy atoms, number of rings, substructures, fingerprints, Coulomb matrix,
dipole moment, potential energy and experimental conditions26.

By using Eq.5, we estimate feature vector values fv based on a target property value vp and
a regression model fp by minimizing the score of each feature vector v. More specifically, the
minimization is performed over the square error of the estimated value which is normalized by the
prediction variance σ2
p to which a penalty function is added to account for violations of structural
constraints. The violation of structural constraints is evaluated by means of the realizability of a
molecular structure connected by sub-structures in the corresponding feature vector:

fv = arg min
v∈In
{|vp − fp(v)|2

σ2
p
+ violation(v)}
(5)

Generative Molecular Design The Molecular-Customized McKay’s Canonical Construction Path
Algorithm creates molecular structures efficiently, exhaustively, and without isomorphic duplica-
tion, i.e., edge relations are preserved. A simplified version of the algorithm with an idealized
construction example is visualized in Fig.S2a. Based on the root molecule graph, one vertex is
extended from each orbit of the automorphism group. The graph is grown by performing a gener-
ation step to add a new vertex to extendable vertices of an existing graph, starting from an initial
single vertex. At each generation step, a canonical labeling step of the current graph is performed.

13


The labeling algorithm assigns ordinals to all the vertices of the isomorphic graphs, providing a
unique vertex addition or construction order for obtaining the graph. If a new vertex coincides with
the last vertex in the construction order, the generation step continues. Otherwise, the generation
step terminates - it is pruned - as its construction path generates a duplicate, isomorphic graph.
Note, that the vertex here corresponds to a molecular structure and that adding a new vertex means
adding an atom or a sub-structure in this application.

The advanced version of the generative algorithm 40,41 inherits user-customized design con-
strains such as, for example, expected or unexpected sub-structures in SMILES format, and the
inverse designed feature vectors such as, for example, the number of heavy atoms, rings, and oc-
currences of fragment structures, and then converts them into molecular structures. Constraint
functions capture design rules such as, for example, disallowing triple bonds between carbon
atoms, limiting the number of molecular rings in the structure to between 4 and 9, or includ-
ing preferential molecular substructures. For the purpose of this study, all constraints have been
merged with the extracted feature vectors and best regression models for subsequent iterations of
optimized structure generation.

An example with a ring of six atoms is shown in Supplemental Fig.S2b. In a first step,
the orbits of the automorphism group are obtained from the SMILES representation of a given
sub-structure. We then create the isomorphic equivalent graph by replacing the atom name with
the SMILES name and the minimum index number (indices 1 and 3). In this step, those vertices
without ”free hand” are eliminated which helps identifying the symmetry of the graph. For better
handling, the isomorphic equivalent graph is further simplified to a single vertex representation by
selecting vertices with minimum index number in each orbit, whereas other vertices are replaced
by dummy atoms. Finally, we obtain the orbits of the automorphism group and the minimum index
number of each orbit is selected to be an extending vertex of the sub-structure.

Supplemental Fig.S2c shows a construction example. During the generation of a molecular
structure as a colored graph (graph of various atoms) and by adding a vertex with a connecting edge
one by one, the algorithm minimizes the number of vertices in order to improve the performance of
the canonical labeling which is a bottleneck routine of the process. In the root graph, an extending
vertex which has a minimum label in an orbit of an automorphism is considered to be a single vertex
graph. In order to extend the vertices, it is replaced by an isomorphic equivalent representation.
The new vertex is extended and canonical labeling of the entire graph is performed. Once the
canonical construction path is validated, the original representation will be recovered. The new
structure will be tested against the pre-defined design constraints. The cycle repeats until it fulfills
pre-set requirements such as number of generated results with pre-defined target property values.

Computational Representation of Polymer Membrane For the physical validation of AI pre-
dicted CO2-permeability, we have created a method to automatically design a polymer membrane
representation which is suitable for molecular dynamics simulation, see right box in Fig.1. In a first
step, the SMILES strings of AI designed monomers are indexed to indicate the position of head
and tail atoms so they can be used as input for PySIMM42,43. We have then used the Force Field

14


Assisted Linear Self-Avoiding Random Walk application in PySIMM42 to build a linear polymer
chain with a maximum number of about 800 heavy atoms which are defined as atoms other than
hydrogen. This way, we have kept the length of the polymer chain rather constant, independent of
the monomer size. For describing the interactions between intra-chains and inter-chains atoms, we
have used the DREIDING force field44.

Once the chain building step is completed, PySIMM saves the LAMMPS45 topology file
with the associated force field parameters. Then, the polymer chains are packaged in a 3D box
using Packmol46. The 3D simulation box is periodic in x, y, z directions. We are aware of the
limited accuracy of applying force-field parameters generated automatically by PySIMM for poly-
mer modeling, and opls-aa parameters47 can be adopted for an improved accuracy. For defining
the membrane thickness, the z dimension of the box is set to 6 nm. The dimensions of the box in
x and y are defined by a multiplication factor of the polymer chain size. The number of polymer
chains is defined by the total number of atoms in the polymer membrane - 20,000 in the present
case. To keep the membrane thickness in z-direction fixed at 6nm, rigid walls are placed in the x,
y membrane planes. To avoid interactions between periodic images in z-direction, a vacuum layer
with a thickness of 5 nm is placed at each side of the polymer membrane.

The system then undergoes an equilibration process that consists of a nine-step compression-
relaxation sequence, similar to the approach in reference22: (1) energy minimization with isother-
mal and isochoric (NVT) MD simulation at 1 K for 100 ps, (2) NVT MD simulation at 300 K for
100 ps, (3) isothermal and isobaric (NPT) MD simulation at 300 K and 1 atm for 100 ps, (4) NPT
MD simulation at 300 K and from 1 atm to 3000 atm for 100 ps, (5) NPT MD simulation at 300 K
and 3000 atm for 300 ps, (6) NVT MD simulation at 800 K for 100 ps, (7) NVT MD simulation
at 300 K for 100 ps, (8) NPT MD simulation at 300 K and 1000 atm for 300 ps, the steps (6)-(8)
repeats 30 times, and (9) NPT MD simulation at 300 K and 1 atm for 10,000 ps.

To account for long-range electrostatic interactions, we have adopted the reciprocal space
Particle-Particle Particle-Mesh (PPPM) method. For all calculations, we have used 1 fs time steps
and a cutoff radius of 1.4 nm for van der Waals and Coulomb interactions, respectively. To control
temperature and pressure, we have used Nose-Hoover thermostats and barostats with a relaxation
time of 0.1 ps and 1 ps, respectively.

All MD simulations were carried out with the LAMMPS package45,48–50. For further infor-
mation regarding the effects of chosen force fields, chain lengths, membrane thicknesses and the
equilibration process protocol, see Supplementary Information Figures S4 and S5.

Automated Membrane Validation with Molecular Dynamics Simulation Two types of Molec-
ular Dynamics (MD) simulations methods have been used to investigate transport through mem-
branes: Equilibrium MD (EMD) and Non-Equilibrium MD (NEMD). NEMD is ideally suited to
represent an experimental membrane system in which an external driving force, such as a chemical
potential or pressure gradient, is applied to the membrane. Specifically, we have chosen CPDMD
to evaluate membrane based gas filtration22.

15


For benchmarking purpose, as shown in Supplemental Fig.S3, we have chosen representative
homo-polymers covering a broad CO2-permeability range. For six of these homo-polymers, we
have performed five independent CPDMD simulations each using the simulation box set up in
Fig.1. The results are shown in Supplemental Fig.S6. Overall, we obtain reasonable agreement
with literature values for BZ-CF3, IBPA, PIM-PI-EA and PEO, despite the large error bars for
BZ-CF3 and PEO. The simulated CO2-permeabilities of TDA1-DM and PI-5 are higher than the
literature values, however, one of the PI-5 samples is close to the experimental value. We note
that due to the amorphous nature of polymers, both experimental and simulations results typically
exhibit large error bars22.

To set up a CPDMD simulation, we have placed the membrane at the center of the simulation
box with a fixed, rigid wall at each side of the membrance, 10 nm away from its surface, as
shown in Fig.1. To avoid interactions with periodic images in z-direction, we have placed a 5
nm vacuum layer beyond each rigid wall. The carbon atoms in the 5 ˚A surface layer of the
membrane were fixed in z-direction by a harmonic potential with a force constant of 5.0 Kcal/mol
˚A2. Following22, we have estimated the number of CO2 molecules in the feed chamber using the
ideal gas law NCO2 = NApV/RT, where NA is the Avogadro’s constant, R is the gas constant, p
is the pressure set to 10 atm, T is the temperature set to 300 K, and V is the feed chamber volume,
see Fig.1. We have then performed NVT MD simulations at 300 K. Due to the pressure gradient,
CO2 molecules are absorbed within the membrane and, subsequently, transported to the permeate
side. To maintain the same initial pressure gradient of 10 atm, we have added CO2 molecules into
the feed chamber while removing the molecules at the permeate side to produce a pseudo vacuum.
We have run the addition/removal processes in cycles with a time interval of 200 ps following51.
We have used the DREIDING force field44 for describing the interactions between intra-chains
and inter-chains atoms. For CO2 molecules, we have used the rigid model TraPPE force field52.
For the CO2/polymer LJ interactions, we have applied the Lorentz–Berthelot mixing rules. All
MD simulations were performed with the LAMMPS package45,48–50 using the same parameters
described in the previous Methods subsection.

From the NCO2 − t slope, the permeability PCO2 can be estimated following

PCO2 = (∆NCO2/NA)l

A∆tp
(6)

where ∆NCO2 is the number of CO2 molecules permeated within time duration ∆t, NA is Avo-
gadro’s constant, l and A are the membrane thickness and area, respectively, and p is the partial
pressure - 10 atm in this case - in the feed chamber.

The termination criterion for CPDMD simulations is discussed in detail in the Supplementary
Information and shown in Supplemental Fig.S7. The evolution of the simulated CO2 density pro-
file across a polymer membrane is shown in Supplemental Fig.S8, complementing the simulation
results shown in Fig.4d for the same polymer.

16


Acknowledgements
We acknowledge discussion with and support by Manuela F. B. Rodriguez, Rong
Chang, Daiju Nakano and Bruno Flach (all IBM Research).

Correspondence
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to mathiast@br.ibm.com

Supplementary Information
Supplementary Information, including Supplementary Table 1 and Supple-
mentary Figures S1-S8, are available as a pdf-file

Code Availability - 1
The Polymer Property Prediction (PPP) Engine is available at

https://github.com/IBM/polymer_property_prediction

Code Availability - 2
The jupyter notebook for polymer property predictions based on SMILES input is
available - under doi:10.24435/materialscloud:ma-qn - at

https://archive.materialscloud.org/record/2022.99

Data Availability - 1
The training dataset containing polymer candidates in SMILES format is available -
under doi:10.24435/materialscloud:ma-qn - at

https://archive.materialscloud.org/record/2022.99

Data Availability - 2
The dataset containing AI discovered polymer candidates in SMILES format is
available - under doi:10.24435/materialscloud:ma-qn - at

https://archive.materialscloud.org/record/2022.99

17


SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Hyperparameter Optimization and Limited Discrepancy Search We provide supplementary
data, shown in Fig.S1, for supporting the discussion in the Methods Section of the main manuscript.

Generative Molecular Design We provide supplementary graphics material, shown in Fig.S2, for
supporting the discussion in the Methods Section of the main manuscript.

Constant Pressure Difference Molecular Dynamics Protocol In this section, we discuss a se-
ries of studies that we have conducted for establishing the computational protocol outlined in the
Methods Section of the main manuscript with regards to the Constant Pressure Difference Molec-
ular Dynamics (CPDMD) simulations. This includes the determination of the equilibration pro-
cess to obtain the morphology of the polymer membrane, the determination of the force field, the
length of polymeric chain and, finally, the thickness of polymer membrane. For our benchmark
studies we have chosen eight representative homo-polymers, shown in Fig.S3, covering a broad
CO2-permeability range .

In a first step, we have studied the effect of force field on CO2-permeability. The atomic
interactions in the polymer membranes are described by the following force fields: DREIDING44,
GAFF53 and GAFF254. For constructing the polymer membrane, we have adopted a procedure
referred to as ”annealing” which is shown in Table S1. We have built all polymer membranes
with a fixed chain length of 30 monomers. In Fig.S4, we show CPDMD simulation results for
membranes having a thickness of 6 nm and 8 nm, respectively. Overall, the CO2-permeability
does not depend on the choice of force fields or the polymeric membrane thickness. While the
CO2-permeability values obtained are similar for the polymers analyzed here, we observe some
variability due to the amorphous nature of polymer membranes which is more pronounced for the
thicker membranes. Based on the results, we chose the DREIDING force field because it allows
us to cover a broader range of polymers. For the purpose of the main study and to account for
computational resources, the membrane thickness was set to 6 nm.

In a second step, we have investigated the the equilibration process for obtaining the polymer
membrane and the chain length which is shown in Fig.S5. Specifically, we have considered two
different equilibration processes referred to as ”compression” and ”annealing” which are shown
in Table S1. The polymer chain length is limited by the number heavy atoms, i.e. atoms other
than hydrogen, and we have chosen the following values: 200, 500, and 800. In Fig.S5, we show
the CO2-permeabilities obtained for all polymers with the different chain lengths and equilibration
processes used. By comparing the data, we obtain best results in ”compression” equilibration with
a chain length of 800 heavy atoms.

To confirm the choice of parameters, we have performed for six of the homo-polymers shown
in Fig.S3 a set of five CPDMD simulations each. The results are shown in Fig.S6. Overall, we

18


obtain reasonable agreement with literature values for BZ-CF3, IBPA, PIM-PI-EA and PEO, de-
spite the large error bars for BZ-CF3 and PEO. The simulated CO2-permeabilities of TDA1-DM
and PI-5 are higher than the literature values, however, one of the PI-5 samples is close to the
experimental value. We note that due to the amorphous nature of polymers, both experimental and
simulations results typically exhibit large error bars22.

In a final step, we have determined the stop criterion for the CPDMD simulations. In Fig.S7a,
the vertical dashed lines indicate the times at which the polymer membranes reach the saturation
level and, therefore, steady-state filtration. In other words, the number of CO2 molecules inside the
membrane as a function of time reaches a plateau. Similarly, the permeability curves in Fig.S7b do
not show significant change past that point in time which means that the time to stop the simulation
is reached. To further exemplify the process, the evolution of the CO2 density profile across a
polymer membrane is shown in Fig.S8 for one of the top-three ranked polymers generated by the
AI method.

19


Table S1: Comparison of two equilibration processes for obtaining the polymer membrane morphology.

Figure S1: Comparison of regression results obtained with (upper panel) and without (lower panel) the

application of hyperparameter optimization.

20


b

c

a

Figure S2: (a) Schematic visualization of the Molecular-Customized McKay’s Canonical Construction Path

algorithm. Visual conceptions of the advanced versions of the Molecular-Customized McKay’s Canonical

Construction Path algorithm with (b) sub-structure representations and (c) molecular construction example,

respectively. Three level of sub-structures with graph representations are considered: single vertex repre-

sentation for canonical construction path check, isomorphic equivalent representation for extending vertex

check, and original representation for counting fragment occurrences.

21


BZ-O
BZ-CF3
IBPA
PIM-PI-EA

TDA1-DMN
PI-3
PI-5

PEO
*

*
*
*
*

*
*

*
*

*
*
*
*

*
*

*

Figure S3: Representative monomer units chosen for Constant Pressure Difference Molecular Dynamics

simulations of polymers. Experimental permeability values for benchmarking purpose were obtained from

the literature: BZ-O 21, BZ-CF321, IBPA55, PIM-PI-EA56, TDA1-DMN57, PI-321 , PI-521 and PEO21.

a
b

Figure S4: Effect of choice of force field on simulated CO2-permeability for polymer membranes having a

thickness of (a) 6nm and (b) 8 nm, respectively.

22


a
b

Figure S5: Effect of choice of polymer chain length and membrane equilibration process.
(a) CO2-

permeability for representative monomer units. (b) Simulated CO2-permeability versus experimental CO2

permeability for representative monomer units.

101

102

103

104

105

BZ-CF3

IBPA

PIM-PI-EA

TDA1-DM

PI-5

PEO

CO2 Permeability (barrer)

Exp.

Sample 1
Sample 2
Sample 3
Sample 4
Sample 5

AVG

Figure S6: Constant Pressure Difference Molecular Dynamics (CPDMD) benchmark. For each represen-

tative monomer, the simulated CO2-permeability values obtained for five polymer sample representations

are plotted as open squares. The average permeability values obtained for each polymer are plotted as red

squares. Experimental values obtained from the literature are plotted as solid squares: BZ-CF3 from 21,

IBPA55, PIM-PI-EA56, TDA1-DMN57, PI-521 and PEO21 .

23


a
b

Figure S7: Constant Pressure Difference Molecular Dynamics (CPDMD) simulations of polymer membrane

filtration. (a) Number of CO2 molecules inside the polymer membrane. (b) CO2-permeability of the polymer

membrane as function of time. The vertical dashed lines in (a) indicate the times at which the simulations

reach a steady state: 4 ns, 23 ns, and 28 ns for IBPA, BZ-CF3, and PEO, respectively. The vertical dashed

lines in (b) indicate the time at which the CO2-permeability reach steady state; 10 ns, 51 ns, and 58 ns for

IBPA, BZ-CF3 and PEO, respectively.

Figure S8: CO2 density profile across a polymer membrane simulated by using a representative, AI discov-

ered monomer unit.

24


References

1. Hohenberg, P. & Kohn, W. Inhomogeneous electron gas. Physical Review 136, B864–B871
(1964). URL https://doi.org/10.1103/physrev.136.b864.

2. Kohn, W. & Sham, L. J. Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation ef-
fects. Physical Review 140, A1133–A1138 (1965). URL https://doi.org/10.1103/
physrev.140.a1133.

3. Zhang, L., d’Avezac, M., Luo, J.-W. & Zunger, A.
Genomic design of strong direct-gap
optical transition in si/ge core/multishell nanowires. Nano Letters 12, 984–991 (2012). URL
https://doi.org/10.1021/nl2040892.

4. Jain, A. et al. A high-throughput infrastructure for density functional theory calculations.

Computational Materials Science 50, 2295–2310 (2011). URL https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.commatsci.2011.02.023.

5. Zhang, W., Sun, P. & Sun, S. A precise theoretical method for high- throughput screening
of novel organic electrode materials for li-ion batteries. Journal of Materiomics 3, 184–190
(2017). URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmat.2016.11.009.

6. Mounet, N. et al. Two-dimensional materials from high-throughput computational exfoliation
of experimentally known compounds. Nature Nanotechnology 13, 246–252 (2018). URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-017-0035-5.

7. Horton, M. K., Montoya, J. H., Liu, M. & Persson, K. A.
High-throughput prediction
of the ground-state collinear magnetic order of inorganic materials using density functional
theory.
npj Computational Materials 5 (2019).
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41524-019-0199-7.

8. Brunin, G., Ricci, F., Ha, V.-A., Rignanese, G.-M. & Hautier, G. Transparent conducting
materials discovery using high-throughput computing. npj Computational Materials 5 (2019).
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-019-0200-5.

9. Curtarolo, S. et al.
The high-throughput highway to computational materials design.

Nature Materials 12, 191–201 (2013). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat3568.

10. Ramprasad, R., Batra, R., Pilania, G., Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, A. & Kim, C. Machine learning
in materials informatics: recent applications and prospects. npj Computational Materials 3
(2017). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-017-0056-5.

11. Hafiz, H. et al. A high-throughput data analysis and materials discovery tool for strongly
correlated materials. npj Computational Materials 4 (2018). URL https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41524-018-0120-9.

25


12. Cai, J., Chu, X., Xu, K., Li, H. & Wei, J. Machine learning-driven new material discov-
ery. Nanoscale Advances 2, 3115–3130 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1039/
d0na00388c.

13. Liu, Y., Zhao, T., Ju, W. & Shi, S. Materials discovery and design using machine learn-
ing. Journal of Materiomics 3, 159–177 (2017). URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmat.2017.08.002.

14. Lu, W., Xiao, R., Yang, J., Li, H. & Zhang, W. Data mining-aided materials discovery and
optimization. Journal of Materiomics 3, 191–201 (2017). URL https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jmat.2017.08.003.

15. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, A. et al.
Scoping the polymer genome: A roadmap for ratio-
nal polymer dielectrics design and beyond.
Materials Today 21, 785–796 (2018).
URL
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2017.11.021.

16. Kim,
C.,
Chandrasekaran,
A.,
Huan,
T. D.,
Das,
D. & Ramprasad,
R.
Poly-
mer genome:
A data-powered polymer informatics platform for property predictions.

The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 122, 17575–17585 (2018).
URL https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b02913.

17. Kim, K. et al. Deep-learning-based inverse design model for intelligent discovery of organic
molecules. npj Computational Materials 4 (2018). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41524-018-0128-1.

18. Wu, S. et al. Machine-learning-assisted discovery of polymers with high thermal conductivity
using a molecular design algorithm. npj Computational Materials 5 (2019). URL https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41524-019-0203-2.

19. ichiro Noro, S. et al. Porous coordination polymers with ubiquitous and biocompatible metals
and a neutral bridging ligand. Nature Communications 6 (2015). URL https://doi.
org/10.1038/ncomms6851.

20. Firpo, G. et al. The role of surfaces in gas transport through polymer membranes. Polymers
11, 910 (2019). URL https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11050910.

21. Powell, C. E. & Qiao, G. G. Polymeric CO2/N2 gas separation membranes for the capture of
carbon dioxide from power plant flue gases. Journal of Membrane Science 279, 1–49 (2006).
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2005.12.062.

22. Kong, X. & Liu, J. An atomistic simulation study on POC/PIM mixed-matrix membranes
for gas separation.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 123, 15113–15121 (2019).
URL
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b03318.

23. Barnett, J. W. et al. Designing exceptional gas-separation polymer membranes using machine
learning. Science Advances 6, eaaz4301 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1126/
sciadv.aaz4301.

26


24. Weininger, D. Smiles, a chemical language and information system. 1. introduction to method-
ology and encoding rules. Journal of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences 1988, 31–
36 (1988). URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00057a005.

25. Bicerano, J. Prediction of Polymer Properties - Third Edition (Marcel Dekker Inc, New York,
2002).

26. Takeda, S. et al.
Molecular inverse-design platform for material industries.
In

Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(ACM, 2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403346.

27. Pyzer-Knapp, E., Pitera, J., Staar, P., Takeda, S., Laino, T., Sanders, D., Sexton, J., Smith, J.
& Curioni, A. Accelerating materials discovery using artificial intelligence, high performance
computing and robotics. npj Computational Materials 8,
(2022). URL https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41524-022-00765-z.

28. OPSIN - Open Parser for Systematic IUPAC nomenclature. https://opsin.ch.cam.
ac.uk. Accessed: 2021-08-03.

29. Pedregosa,
F.
et
al.
Scikit-learn:
Machine
learning
in
Python.

Journal of Machine Learning Research 12, 2825–2830 (2011).

30. Voss, N. R. & Gerstein, M. 3v: cavity, channel and cleft volume calculator and extractor.

Nucleic Acids Research 38, W555–W562 (2010). URL https://doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gkq395.

31. 3V: Voss Volume Voxelation (2020 (accessed November 16, 2021)). URL http://3vee.
molmovdb.org/.

32. Costanza-Robinson, M. S., Estabrook, B. D. & Fouhey, D. F.
Representative elementary
volume estimation for porosity, moisture saturation, and air-water interfacial areas in unsatu-
rated porous media: Data quality implications. Water Resources Research 47 (2011). URL
https://doi.org/10.1029/2010wr009655.

33. Polymer Database (PoLyInfo) (2020 (accessed October 1, 2020)).
URL https://
polymer.nims.go.jp/en/.

34. Robeson, L. M.
The upper bound revisited.
Journal of Membrane Science 320, 390–400
(2008). URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2008.04.030.

35. Robeson, L. M., Liu, Q., Freeman, B. D. & Paul, D. R.
Comparison of transport prop-
erties of rubbery and glassy polymers and the relevance to the upper bound relation-
ship. Journal of Membrane Science 476, 421–431 (2015). URL https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.memsci.2014.11.058.

27


36. Chandrashekar,
G.
&
Sahin,
F.
A
survey
on
feature
selection
methods.

Computers & Electrical Engineering 40, 16–28 (2014).
URL https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.compeleceng.2013.11.024.

37. Yang, L. & Shami, A. On hyperparameter optimization of machine learning algorithms: The-
ory and practice. Neurocomputing 415, 295–316 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.neucom.2020.07.061.

38. Harvey,
W.
D.
&
Ginsberg,
M.
L.
Limited
discrepancy
search.
In

Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI),
vol. 1, 607–615 (1995).

39. Korf,
R.
E.
Improved
limited
discrepancy
search.
In

Proceedings of the 13th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
vol.
1,
286–291 (1996).

40. Hama, T. Molecular struture generation with substructure representations (U.S. Patent Appli-
cation Publication US2020/0226804A1, Jul. 16, 2020).

41. Takeda, S. et al. Molecule generation experience: An open platform of material design for
public users (2021). URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.03044.

42. Fortunato, M. E. & Colina, C. M. pysimm: A python package for simulation of molecular
systems. SoftwareX 6, 7–12 (2017). URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.
2016.12.002.

43. Fortunato, M. E. & Colina, C. M. Pysimm. https://github.com/polysimtools/
pysimm. Accessed: 2021-08-03.

44. Mayo, S. L., Olafson, B. D. & Goddard, W. A. DREIDING: a generic force field for molecular
simulations.
The Journal of Physical Chemistry 94, 8897–8909 (1990).
URL https://
doi.org/10.1021/j100389a010.

45. Plimpton,
S.
Fast
parallel
algorithms
for
short-range
molecular
dynamics.

Journal of Computational Physics 117, 1–19 (1995).
URL https://doi.org/10.
1006/jcph.1995.1039.

46. Mart´ınez,
L.,
Andrade,
R.,
Birgin,
E.
G.
&
Mart´ınez,
J.
M.
PACKMOL:
A package for building initial configurations for molecular dynamics simulations.
Journal of Computational Chemistry 30, 2157–2164 (2009).
URL https://doi.org/
10.1002/jcc.21224.

47. Jorgensen, W. L., Maxwell, D. S. & Tirado-Rives, J.
Development and testing of the
OPLS all-atom force field on conformational energetics and properties of organic liquids.
Journal of the American Chemical Society 118, 11225–11236 (1996). URL https://doi.
org/10.1021/ja9621760.

28


48. W. M. Brown, S. J. P. A. N. T., P. Wang. Implementing molecular dynamics on hybrid high
performance computers - short range forces. Comp. Phys. Comm. 182, 898–911 (2011).

49. W. M. Brown, S. J. P. A. N. T., A. Kohlmeyer. Implementing molecular dynamics on hybrid
high performance computers - particle-particle particle-mesh. Comp. Phys. Comm. 183, 449–
459 (2012).

50. W. M. Brown, Y. M. Implementing molecular dynamics on hybrid high performance comput-
ers - three-body potentials. Comp. Phys. Comm. 184, 2785–2793 (2013).

51. Liu, J. & Jiang, J. Molecular design of microporous polymer membranes for the upgrading
of natural gas. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 123, 6607–6615 (2019). URL https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.8b12422.

52. Potoff, J. J. & Siepmann, J. I. Vapor–liquid equilibria of mixtures containing alkanes, carbon
dioxide, and nitrogen. AIChE Journal 47, 1676–1682 (2001). URL https://doi.org/
10.1002/aic.690470719.

53. Wang, J., Wolf, R. M., Caldwell, J. W., Kollman, P. A. & Case, D. A. Development and
testing of a general amber force field. Journal of Computational Chemistry 25, 1157–1174
(2004). URL https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.20035.

54. He, X., Man, V. H., Yang, W., Lee, T.-S. & Wang, J. A fast and high-quality charge model
for the next generation general AMBER force field. The Journal of Chemical Physics 153,
114502 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0019056.

55. Yampolskii, Y. Polymeric gas separation membranes. Macromolecules 45, 3298–3311 (2012).
URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ma300213b.

56. Rogan, Y. et al.
A highly permeable polyimide with enhanced selectivity for membrane
gas separations. J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 4874–4877 (2014). URL https://doi.org/10.
1039/c4ta00564c.

57. Ghanem, B., Alghunaimi, F., Ma, X., Alaslai, N. & Pinnau, I.
Synthesis and characteri-
zation of novel triptycene dianhydrides and polyimides of intrinsic microporosity based on
3,3’-dimethylnaphthidine. Polymer 101, 225–232 (2016). URL https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.polymer.2016.08.075.

29


