Cataloguing MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 van der Waals Heterostructures: An 

Exceptional Material Platform for Excitonic Solar Cell Applications

Che Chen Tho, Chenjiang Yu, Qin Tang, Qianqian Wang, Tong Su, Zhuoer Feng, Qingyun 

Wu, C. V. Nguyen, Wee-Liat Ong, Shi-Jun Liang, San-Dong Guo, Liemao Cao, Shengli 

Zhang, Shengyuan A. Yang, Lay Kee Ang, Guangzhao Wang*, Yee Sin Ang*

Che Chen Tho, Qianqian Wang, Tong Su, Zhuoer Feng, Dr. Qingyun Wu, Prof. Shengyuan 

A. Yang, Prof. Lay Kee Ang, Dr. Yee Sin Ang*

Science Mathematics and Technology Cluster, Singapore University of Technology and 

Design, 487372, Singapore

Email: yeesin_ang@sutd.edu.sg

Chenjiang Yu, Qing Tang, Prof. Guangzhao Wang*

School of Electronic Information Engineering, Key Laboratory of Extraordinary Bond 

Engineering and Advanced Materials Technology of Chongqing, Yangtze Normal University, 

Chongqing, China, 408100

E-mail: wangyan6930@yznu.edu.cn

Prof. C. V. Nguyen

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Le Quy Don Technical University, Ha 

Noi, Vietnam, 100000

Prof. Wee-Liat Ong

ZJU-UIUC Institute, College of Energy Engineering, Zhejiang University, Jiaxing, Haining, 

Zhejiang, China, 314400

State Key Laboratory of Clean Energy Utilization, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 

China, 310027

Prof. Shi-Jun Liang

Institute of Brain-Inspired Intelligence, National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, 

School of Physics, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 

University, Nanjing, China, 210093


Prof. San-Dong Guo

School of Electronic Engineering, Xi’an University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi’an, 

China, 710121

Prof. Liemao Cao

College of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Hengyang Normal University, Hengyang, 

China, 421002

Prof. Shengli Zhang

MIIT Key Laboratory of Advanced Display Materials and Devices, School of Materials

Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, 

210094

Keywords: density functional theory simulations, van der Waals heterostructures, 2D materials, 

excitonic solar cells, electrical contacts


Abstract

Two-dimensional (2D) materials van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs) provides a 

revolutionary route towards high-performance solar energy conversion devices beyond the

conventional silicon-based pn junction solar cells. Despite tremendous research progress

accomplished in recent years, the searches of vdWHs with exceptional excitonic solar cell 

conversion efficiency and optical properties remain an open theoretical and experimental quest. 

Here we show that the vdWH family composed of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers provides

a compelling material platform for developing high-performance ultrathin excitonic solar cells

and photonics devices. Using first-principle calculations, we construct and classify 51 types of 

MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4-based [(Mo,W)Si2N4] vdWHs composed of various metallic, 

semimetallic, semiconducting, insulating and topological 2D materials.
Intriguingly, 

MoSi2N4/(InSe, WSe2) are identified as Type-II vdWHs with exceptional excitonic solar cell 

power conversion efficiency reaching well over 20%, which are competitive to state-of-art 

silicon solar cells. The (Mo,W)Si2N4 vdWH family exhibits strong optical absorption in both 

the visible and ultraviolet regimes. Exceedingly large peak ultraviolet absorptions over 40%, 

approaching the maximum absorption limit of a free-standing 2D material, can be achieved in 

(Mo,W)Si2N4/α2-(Mo,W)Ge2P4 vdWHs. Our findings unravel the enormous potential of 

(Mo,W)Si2N4 vdWHs in designing ultimately compact excitonic solar cell device technology.


1. Introduction

Solar-to-electricity conversion offers a promising clean energy source to power a more 

sustainable technology landscape in the future. Despite the widespread deployment of 

conventional silicon-based solar cell, the continual improvement of the solar-to-electricity 

conversion efficiency remains a formidable challenge. Conventional crystalline silicon pn

junction solar cell is plagued by nonradiative recombination of photogenerated electron-hole 

pairs,1 which severely limits its solar-to-electricity conversion efficiency.2 Silicon solar cells

also entails the use of thicker layers to achieve longer optical path for better light absorption, 

which fundamentally limits their deployment in ultracompact and low-mass solar cell design.3

The search of novel nanomaterials and device architectures beyond the conventional silicon pn

junction solar cell remain an open research challenge that urgently needs to be addressed.

Excitonic solar cell has recently emerged as a compelling candidate for high-efficiency

solar-to-electricity conversion. In contrast to conventional semiconductor-based pn junction 

solar cell where light-to-electricity conversion occurs exclusively within the same bulk material, 

excitonic solar energy conversion is an interfacial effect that arises from the band discontinuity

across a heterojunction.4, 5 Unlike the pn junction solar cell in which a built-in potential is 

needed to separate the photogenerated electron-hole pairs in the bulk, electrons and hole are 

spontaneously dissociated onto the two sides of the interface in an excitonic solar cell. The

interfacial band alignment thus provides an exothermic pathway for exciton dissociation even 

though they do not possess sufficient energy to dissociate in the bulk. The huge chemical 

potential gradient created across the interface significantly increases the open-circuit voltage

beyond the built-in potential.6

Recent advances of two-dimensional (2D) materials and their van der Waals 

heterostructures (vdWHs)7-9 unravel an exciting route towards advanced excitonic solar cell

technology.10, 11 The vertical coupling of different 2D materials via weak van der Waals (vdW) 


forces results in ‘designer’ heterostructures with physical properties not easily found in the 

nature, thus enabling myriads of high-performance nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, photonics 

and neuromorphic devices to be realized.4, 5, 12-23 The optical absorption, band alignment and 

band gap of vdWHs can be custom made with ease. Together with the long exciton lifetime 

and the capability of efficient charge harvesting at ultrafast timescales13-15, vdWH has become 

a compelling and potentially disruptive platform for the development of ultimately compact 

excitonic solar cell technology.5, 24, 25 Designing high-performance vdWH excitonic solar cell 

is, however, a complex technological challenge both theoretically and experimentally.

Computationally, the design space of vdWHs is enormously large due to nearly unlimited 

material combinations and the continual discovery of new 2D materials. The maximum power 

conversion efficiency (PCE) of vdWHs is predicted to lie within the range of 10% to 20%, with 

only a minority of vdWHs20, 21, 26 (e.g. GaAs/InAs, HfSe2/GeO2 and BAs/BP) capable of 

achieving large PCE over 20%. Experimentally, the PCE of fabricated devices are only a small 

fraction of the theoretical limit10 due to material defects and carrier recombination losses.5

Furthermore, the experimentally realizable material combinations of vdWHs are constrained 

by the material synthesis and assembly processes.27, 28 The limited availability of high-PCE

vdWHs and the formidable challenges of fabricating high-quality vdWHs highlight the urgency 

and importance of continual computationally searching for high-PCE vdWH, so to further 

expand the ground for the experimental realization of high-performance excitonic solar cell 

technology. 

In this work, we show that the vdWH family composed of septuple-layered MoSi2N4

and WSi2N4 monolayers29 – the recently discovered archetypes of the emerging MA2Z4

monolayer family – offers a versatile material platform towards high-efficiency solar energy 

harvesting, optoelectronics and photonics applications. Using first-principle density functional 

theory (DFT) simulations, we constructed 51 types of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs and


characterized their electronic and optical properties. The vdWHs are systematically classified 

according to their contact types and band alignments.30 Remarkably, we found that

MoSi2N4/(ZnO, WGe2N4) and MoSi2N4/(InSe, WSe2) are Type-II vdWHs with PCE reaching 

well over 15% and 20% respectively, which are comparable to many state-of-art solar cells

composed of silicon and perovskite31 as well as vdWHs.20, 26 Furthermore, majority of the 51 

types vdWHs exhibit substantial optical absorption in the visible and ultraviolet (UV) spectrum. 

Nearly all vdWHs exhibit peak optical absorption in the UV regime, thus suggesting their 

potential in UV photonics applications. Our work unravels the enormous potential of 

(Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs in UV photonics, optoelectronics and solar energy harvesting

applications, and call for a more comprehensive computational and experimental search of 

vdWHs with exceptional physical properties in the expansive MA2Z4 material family.

2. Computational Methods

QuantumATK32 is used to construct the heterostructures with lattice mismatch of less than 

5%33, 34 between monolayers using supercell structure and applying the appropriate rotation. A 

vacuum layer of thickness ~25 Å is inserted between adjacent bilayer unit cell to eliminate the 

interactions from periodic images. We used the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP)35

for structural optimization, energy and charge calculation, and VASPKIT36 for optical 

properties calculation. For structural optimization and self-consistent field calculations, a 

Gamma-centered Brillouin zone k-point sampling grid of 11 x 11 x 1 with Monkhorst-Pack 

method is used. In the structural optimization step, the supercell volume is kept constant while 

the cell shape and ion positions are allowed to change. The break condition for each ionic 

relaxation loop is set to 10-3eV Å-1 such that the forces acting on the unit cell after convergence 

is less than this value and the break condition for each electronic relaxation loop is set to 10-6

eV. To take into account the weak van der Waals interactions between the monolayers, we 

adopted the DFT-D3 method with the Grimme scheme. We chose the generalized gradient 


approximation (GGA) with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) form for the exchange 

correlation functional in the calculations for all our heterostructures, since MoSi2N4 band gap

obtained from PBE (i.e. 1.73 eV and 1.78 eV)37, 38 is closer to the experimental value of 1.94 

eV,29 as compared to the Heyd-Scuseria-Ernzerhof hybrid functional form (HSE06) with

bandgap of 2.30 eV.29 Moreover, it has been demonstrated that the band alignment types – one 

of the key results of this work – predicted using PBE is in good agreement with that obtained 

using HSE06.30 The supercells of the vdWHs are shown in Figures S1-S6. The electronic band 

structures, plane-averaged electrostatic potential profiles, plane-averaged differential charge 

density profiles, dielectric constants, optical absorption spectra and the general calculation data 

of all 51 types of vdWHs are compiled and systematically presented in Figures S7-S13, S14-

S19, S20-S25, S26-S31, Tables S1 and S2 of the Supporting Information respectively. 

3. Results and Discussion

3.1 MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4: An Overview of their van der Waals Heterostructures

The discovery of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 open an exciting avenue towards the development of 

novel two-dimensional (2D) material device technology.29 Monolayer MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4

are synthetic 2D semiconductor with exceptional electrical mobilities that outperforms the 

widely studied MoS2 monolayer and hold great promises in nanoelectronics and sub-10-nm 

transistor applications.39-41
Structurally, MoSi2N4 is a septuple-layered composed of a 

transition metal nitride sub-monolayer (Mo-N) intercalated between two outer silicon-nitride 

(Si-N) sub-monolayers. Such intercalated architecture gives rise to a large family of six-

membered ring monolayers with septuple-atomic-layer structure, known as the MA2Z4

monolayer family.42 Intriguingly, the band edge states of MoSi2N4 are localized around the 

inner Mo-N sublayer and are protected by the outer Si-N sublayer37, 43 from external influences. 

Such unusual built-in atomic-layer protection mechanism renders MoSi2N4 as exceptional 

robust against environmental coupling effects and enables the formation of highly energy-


efficient Ohmic contact without severe degradation of its electronic properties.37 Recent studies 

have unravelled myriads of exceptional behaviours in MoSi2N4,44-47 including strong exciton-

phonon coupling at room temperature,48 strain-tunable optical response,49 tunable electronic 

properties via molecular doping,50 field-induced metal-semiconductor transition,44 large

piezoelectric coefficient,51 sizable thermoelectric figure of merit,45 strained enhanced solar 

energy absorption52 and ultrahigh thermal conductivities.53 Beyond MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4

monolayers, the family of MA2Z4 monolayers42 also exhibit enormously rich physical and 

chemical behaviours, including nontrivial topological phases,42 valley-contrasting physics,54-57

nonlinear optical response,58 hydrogen evolution catalytic performance,59 and superior 

electrocatalytic activity for energy storage application.60

Driven by the success of vdWH material engineering, MoSi2N4-based vdWHs have also 

been intensively studied recently. For example, MoSi2N4 interfaced with InSe,61 blue 

phosphorus,62 C2N,63 CrCl3,64 C3N4,65 MoS2,66 graphene,38 NbS2,38 GaN,67 ZnO,67 MoSe2,68

Cs3Bi2I9,69 MoGe2N4,70 MoGeSiN4,71 and MoSH72 have been computationally predicted to 

exhibit efficient photocatalytic water splitting,61-63 strain-tunable valley splitting effect,64

strong optical absorption in the visible light regime with strain and field-effect tunable band 

structures.38, 65-73 Nonetheless, the catalogue of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs remains largely 

incomplete thus far. 

As summarized in Figure 1, 51 types of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs are constructed 

in this work, which are composed of (Mo,W)Si2N4 monolayers in contact with seven classes 

of 2D materials [see Figure 1(A)]: (i) semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides 

(TMDC), such as MoS2 and WS2; (ii) Janus semiconducting TMDC, such as MoSSe and WSSe; 

(iii) metallic TMDC, such as NbS2 and 1T-MoS2; (iv) Honeycomb monolayers, such as the 

semimetallic graphene and insulating hBN; (v) Group III-IV monolayer of InSe; (vi) ultrathin 

topological Dirac semimetals of Na3Bi monolayer; and (vii) other members from the MA2Z4


family, such as 𝛼2-MoGe2P4, MoGe2N4, as well as the vdWH formed by the mutual stack of 

MoSi2N4/WSi2N4. In Figure 1(B), the 51 vdWHs are systematically categorized into six sub-

types, namely: (i) Metal/Semiconductor (MS) Ohmic contact (4 species); (ii) MS Schottky 

contact (6 species); and Semiconductor/Semiconductor (SS) contact with (iii) Type-I (19 

species); (iv) Type-II (15 species); (v) Type-III (2 species), and (vi) unconventional hybridized-

type (5 species) band alignments [see Figure 1(C) for schematic drawings of the band diagram 

of different contact types]. The band alignment diagrams of the 25 types of 2D monolayers 

considered in this work are shown in Figure 2(A) which provides a qualitative understanding 

on the contact type and band alignment formation via Anderson rule (AR).74 Due to the finite 

interaction between the two constituent monolayers,75 AR may no longer be valid in vdWHs 

with sizable interlayer coupling and interface dipole.76, 77 As shown in Figure 2(B), AR 

remains valid for most of the metallic TMDC, graphene, InSe, hBN and MA2Z4 family due to 

their weak coupling nature. In contrast, the disagreement between AR and direct DFT 

calculations is rather severe for semiconducting and Janus TMDC monolayers as well as the 

honeycomb semiconducting monolayers of GaN, BP and ZnO. This disagreement highlights 

the importance of direct DFT calculations for contact type and band alignment determination. 

3.2 Metal/Semiconductor (MS) Contacts

We first consider (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs of MS contact type. In this case, either Ohmic 

or Schottky contacts can be formed at the interface.78, 79 For an Ohmic contact, the absence of 

a Schottky barrier greatly facilitate charge injection across an MS contact and is much sought 

after for creating energy-efficient electrical contacts.80 MS vdWH contacts are particularly 

attractive due to the strong suppression of the Fermi level pinning effect, a detrimental effect 

that severely impedes the engineering of energy-efficient electrical contacts.81, 82 Here we

identify 4 species of p-type Ohmic contacts formed by MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 in contact with 

NbS2 and NbSe2 [see Figure 3(A-D)]. The formation of these p-type Ohmic vdWHs can be 


readily understood from the band alignment diagram in Figure 2(A), where the relatively larger

work functions of NbS2 (6.06 eV) and NbSe2 (5.35 eV) align with the valence band maximum 

(VBM) energies of MoSi2N4 (5.30 eV) and WSi2N4 (5.14 eV) to yield p-type Ohmic contact 

by virtue of AR. We note that the MoSi2N4/NbS2 contact is predicted to be an p-type Schottky 

contact with ultralow Schottky barrier height (SBH)38 where the strain arising from lattice 

mismatch upon forming the vdWH is entirely distributed on the NbS2 monolayer only. In 

contrary, strain is distributed evenly between the two monolayers in our calculations, which 

yields a p-type Ohmic contact instead. 

For a bilayer vdWH made up of monolayer A and monolayer B, the plane-averaged 

differential charge density (𝛥𝜌) is calculated as, 𝛥𝜌 = 𝜌𝐴𝐵 − 𝜌𝐴 − 𝜌𝐵, where 𝜌𝐴𝐵 is the charge 

density of the heterostructure AB, 𝜌𝐴 is the charge density of monolayer A, 𝜌𝐵 is the charge 

density of monolayer B. The charge redistribution of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 contacted by NbS2

and NbSe2 are examined from the 𝛥𝜌 plots in the upper panel of Figure 3(E-H). Significant 

electrons redistribution from the (Mo,W)Si2N4 monolayer towards the Nb(S2,Se2) monolayer

occurs due to the higher VBM energies of the semiconducting monolayers when compared to 

the Fermi levels of the metallic monolayers. Such electron migration causes the p-doped 

characteristics of the (Mo,W)Si2N4 sub-monolayers upon contact formation. We further note 

that the interfacial charge redistribution occurs universally for all vdWHs as evident from the 

differential charge density plots in Figures S20-S25. The interfacial charge redistribution

creates an interface dipole potential (ΔΦ) that manifests as an electrostatic potential energy 

difference between the two sides of the vdWHs. The ΔΦ are marked directly in the plane-

averaged electrostatic profile plots in Figures S14-S19 for all vdWHs studied in this work.

Although SBH is absent in Ohmic vdWH contact, a van der Waals gap is present 

between the two contacting monolayers that may impede charge ejection efficiency.83 The 

tunneling potential barrier Φ𝑇𝐵 and the barrier width 𝑑𝑇𝐵 can be extracted from the plane-


averaged electrostatic potential plots with reference to the Fermi level [see bottom panel of 

Figure 3(E-H)]. For MoSi2N4/NbS2, MoSi2N4/NbSe2, WSi2N4/NbS2 and WSi2N4/NbSe2, the 

tunneling potential barriers are 5.14, 4.70, 5.04, 4.60 eV respectively, and the barrier widths 

are 1.88, 1.86, 1.85, 1.84 Å respectively. Accordingly, the charge injection efficiency across 

the van der Waals gap can then be characterized by the tunneling-specific resistivity (𝜌𝑡) using

Simmons formula:84

𝜌𝑡 =
8𝜋2ℏ2𝑑𝑇𝐵

3𝑒2√2𝑚𝑒Φ𝑇𝐵

exp (2𝑑𝑇𝐵√2𝑚𝑒𝛷𝑇𝐵

ℏ
)

(1)

where ℏ, e, 𝑚𝑒 is the Planck’s constant, charge magnitude and mass of the free electron 

respectively. The calculated 𝜌𝑡 lies in the order of 10-9 which are comparable to those of

metal/MoSi2N4 and metal/WSi2N4 contacts (i.e. from 0.1 × 10−9 to 3.85 × 10−9 Ω𝑐𝑚2)37 and 

that in the semimetal contact of Bi/MoS2 contact (1.81 × 10−9 Ω𝑐𝑚2 ).85 Finally, when 

(Mo,W)Si2N4 monolayers are interfaced with (Mo,W)S2 in metallic 1T-phase and with 

graphene, the resulting (Mo,W)Si2N4/(1T-MoS2, 1T-WS2, graphene) vdWHs form p-type 

Schottky contacts [see Figure 4(B)]. For Schottky type vdWHs, the charge transfer follows the 

same trend of electron migration from (Mo,W)Si2N4 towards the metallic monolayers, but the 

overall plane-averaged magnitude of Δ𝜌 are far lesser than that of the Ohmic counterparts [see 

Figure S20 and S21]. The resulting p-type SBHs of these Schottky vdWHs are extracted from 

the electronic band structure as the energy difference between the Fermi level of the metallic 

monolayer and the VBM of the semiconducting monolayer.38 The SBHs of these MS vdWHs 

cover a broad energy range between 0.3 eV and 0.9 eV [see Figure 4(C)], which can be useful 

for Schottky diode and current rectification applications. 

3.3 Semiconductor/Semiconductor (SS) Contacts


We classify all SS vdWHs according to the relative location of the conduction band minimum 

(CBM) and VBM in the energy space, i.e. the three conventional band alignment types:86-88 (i) 

Type-I straddling gap band alignment where the CBM and VBM arises dominantly from only 

one of the constituent monolayers; (ii) Type-II staggered gap band alignment where the CBM 

and VBM resides dominantly in different sub-monolayers; and (iii) Type-III broken gap band 

alignment where the CBM of one sub-monolayer overlaps with the VBM of another sub-

monolayer. Unconventional band alignment types can also occur in vdWH in which the CBM 

and VBM energies cannot be straightforwardly classified according to these conventional 

band/or alignment types (denoted as Type-H in this work).89 In this Section, the 41 types of SS 

(Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs are classified according to their band alignment types [see Figure 

5(A)]. The electronic band structures of representative Type-I, II, III and H vdWHs are shown 

in Figure 5(B-E) respectively. 

3.3.1
Band Alignment Types

The band gap values, the direct or indirect nature of the band gap, and the band alignment types 

(i.e. Type-I, II and H) are summarized in Figure 5(A). We identify 19 species of Type-I vdWHs

– a band alignment type that is useful for photoluminescence applications, such as light-

emitting diodes and lasers, due to the localization of CBM and VBM states within the same 

sub-monolayer. Among these Type-I vdWHs, 15 species possess direct band gap that is highly 

beneficial for engineering efficient excited electron-hole pair recombination.90 The electronic 

band structure of a representative Type-I vdWH, MoSi2N4/hBN is shown in Figure 5(B). We 

note that the MoSi2N4/MoS2 calculated using PBE (HSE06) here shows a direct band gap of 

0.60 eV (1.06 eV) at the Γ point which is in stark contrast to the 1.26 eV (1.84 eV) reported in 

a previous work.66 We attribute this difference to the stacking orientation of the vdWH 

construction. The biaxial strain arising from lattice mismatch of the supercell considered in this 


work is only 2.7% (i.e. 30° rotation between the two monolayers), as compared to the 

substantially larger biaxial strain of 7.8% in the previous work.66

For Type-II band alignment, 15 species of vdWHs are identified. Figure 5(C) shows

the electronic band structure of MoSi2N4/WSi2N4, a Type-II vdWH compose entirely of MA2Z4

monolayers. The Type-II band alignment and the indirect nature of MoSi2N4/WSi2N4 is in good 

agreement with a recent DFT calculation of the same vdWH but under different stacking 

configuration.91 Type-II vdWHs are potential candidates for excitonic solar cell application. 

The maximum PCEs calculated for each Type-II vdWHs are presented in Section 5.2 below.

Finally, we note that (Mo,W)Si2N4/Na3Bi are the only Type-III vdWHs. Such band alignment

arises from the ultralow work function92 and the narrow band gap39 nature of Na3Bi monolayer

[see Figure 2(A)]. The VBM of Na3Bi overlap strongly with the CBM of (Mo,W)Si2N4, thus 

leading to the formation of Type-III SS contacts. Figure 5(D) shows the electronic band 

structure of WSi2N4/Na3Bi as an illustrative example. 

Beyond the conventional band alignment types discussed above, we further observed 5

vdWHs
with 
unconventional 
band 
alignments, 
namely 
the 
(Mo,W)Si2N4/MoS2, 

MoSi2N4/SMoSe, MoSi2N4/𝛼2-WGe2P4 and WSi2N4/SWSe [see Figure 5(E) for the electronic 

band structure of a representative vdWH, WSi2N4/MoS2]. As the VBM electronic states are 

delocalized and distributed rather evenly among the two sub-monolayers, the conventional 

Type-(I, II ,III) classification scheme is no longer applicable and we denote these vdWHs as 

the hybridized type (denoted as Type-H), which are intermediate between Type-I and Type-II 

vdWHs due to the spatial distribution of VBM states in both sub-monolayers. The Type-H 

contacts are also observed in vdWHs composed of TMDC monolayers30, 93 and binary 

semiconducting monolayers composed of group IV–V elements89 which arise due to the orbital 

hybridization of the out-of-plane pz-states. As the VBM states are distributed among the two 

sub-monolayers in Type-H contacts, some of the excited electron-hole pairs can recombine 


within the same sub-monolayers, thus rendering charge separation much less effective and may 

impede the potential of Type-H vdWHs for optoelectronics applications. We further note that 

to verify these unusual band structures, we employ the HSE06 exchange correlation functional 

in the electronic band structure calculations of these heterostructures. The Gamma-centered 

Brillouin zone k-point sampling grid of 6 x 6 x 1 is used due to computational resources 

constraint. Interestingly, the VBM hybridization is removed in MoSi2N4/2H-MoS2 and 

MoSi2N4/𝛼2-WGe2P4 under the HSE06 calculations [see Figure S13].

3.3.2
Excitonic Solar Cell Maximum Conversion Efficiency of Type-II vdWHs

Optically excited electron-hole pairs are spatially well-separated in Type-II vdWHs, which 

enables the efficient dissociation of these carriers to form conduction current. Such vdWHs are

thus practically useful for applications where long-live and/or delocalized electron-hole pairs 

are needed, such as photodetector, excitonic solar cell and photocatalytic water splitting.87 We

calculated the maximum solar cell PCE of these Type-II vdWHs, which represents the 

theoretical upper limit of solar-to-electricity conversion in a heterostructure device. The PCE 

is calculated as:86, 94

𝜂 =

0.65(𝐸𝑔

𝑑 − 𝛥𝐸𝑐 − 0.3) ∫
𝑃( ħ𝜔)

ħ𝜔
𝑑(ħ𝜔)

∞
𝐸𝑔𝑑

∫
𝑃( ħ𝜔) 𝑑(ħ𝜔)

∞
0

(2)

where 𝐸𝑔

𝑑 is the bandgap of the donor monolayer, 𝛥𝐸𝑐 is the conduction band offset (CBO) 

between the two monolayers, 𝑃( ℏ𝜔) is the solar spectral irradiance as a function of photon

frequency 𝜔, and the 0.3 eV term in Equation (2) is an empirical parameter to account for the 

energy loss during the conversion process.95 The AM1.5G standard solar spectrum is used for 

the solar spectral irradiance 𝑃(ℏ𝜔), which yields an integrated solar intensity of 𝑃𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑟 =

∫
𝑃( ħ𝜔) 𝑑(ħ𝜔)

∞
0
≈ 1000 W/m2. A representative value of 0.65 is assumed for the electrical 


fill factor of the solar cell95 which corresponds to the typical situation where ~60% of the 

excited electron-hole pair are dissociated to form the short-circuit current as observed 

experimentally.96 To achieve high PCE, the donor monolayer band gap should be within the 

desirable range of 1.0 to 1.7 eV, while the CBO should be as small as possible so to suppress 

the energy loss. 

The calculated PCEs are listed in Figure 6(A) and 6(B) for MoSi2N4-and WSi2N4-

based Type-II vdWHs, except for WSi2N4/MoGe2N4 in which the overly small band gap of

𝐸𝑔 − 𝛥𝐸𝑐 < 0.3 is unsuitable for solar cell application. In general, MoSi2N4-based Type-II SS 

contacts exhibit higher overall PCE when compared to the WSi2N4-based Type-II vdWHs. 

Recent high throughput screening of 581 Type-II vdWHs26 based on Anderson rule has 

uncovered 17 candidate vdWHs with exceptional PCE higher than 20%, and the highest being 

that of HfSe2/GeO2 (PCE = 22.6%). In our case, the PCE of MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2

vdWHs reaches 20.5% and 22.0% respectively, which is comparable to that of HfSe2/GeO2

and higher than many other vdWHs, such as phorphorus-based vdWHs (e.g. 

MoS2/Phosphorene with PCE of 17.5%).97 The exceedingly large PCE of MoSi2N4/InSe and 

MoSi2N4/WSe2 can be attributed to the small CBO of 0.03 eV and 0.05 eV respectively. 

Furthermore, MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 are indirect band gap Type-II heterostructures

in which the recombination of excitons is expected to be less effective due to the need of

phonon-assisted process to compensate the momentum-mismatch between CBM and the VBM 

states.98 MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 are thus expected to host long-live interlayer 

exciton that are highly beneficial for highly efficient light-to-electricity conversion.

For the four MoSi2N4-based Type-II vdWHs with PCE over 15%, we calculated the

real and imaginary parts of their dielectric function as well as the optical absorption spectra 

[see Figure 6(C-F)]. All four heterostructures exhibit substantial optical absorption of >10% 

in the visible light regime [denoted by dashed vertical lines in Figure 6(C-F)]. Particularly, the 


vdWH with the highest PCE, i.e. MoSi2N4/WSe2 exhibits a strong optical absorption shoulder 

(>20%) in the visible light regime of energies 2.5 eV and above, thus suggesting their potential 

usefulness for solar energy absorption and photodetection applications.99-101 Comparing to the

isolated MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers [see Figure 6(G) and 6(H)], the overall optical 

absorption in the visible light regime is significantly enhanced upon forming the vdWHs, thus 

establishing the importance of vdW engineering in boosting the solar energy conversion 

capability of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4. 

3.4 Optical Properties

The optical properties of the 51 vdWHs are calculated based on quantum mechanical interband 

transition process from the valence bands to the conduction bands. The macroscopic frequency-

dependent complex dielectric function ε() is calculated based on the random phase 

approximation formalism (RPA).36
The optical absorbance ( 𝛼 ) of a free-standing 2D 

monolayer under normal illumination can then be calculated as:102

𝛼 = 𝑅𝑒(̃())

|1 + ̃()

2 |

2

(3)

where 𝜎̃(𝜔) ≡ 𝜎2𝐷(𝜔)/𝜀0𝑐, 2𝐷() = 𝑖𝜀0𝐿(1 − 𝜀())
is
the
frequency-dependent 

complex 2D optical conductivity, 𝜀0 is the vacuum permittivity, L is the length of the in-plane 

lattice constant, c is the speed of light in vacuum. Equation (3) yields a maximum absorbance

of 𝛼𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 0.5 when 𝑅𝑒[̃()] = 2 and 𝐼𝑚[̃()] = 0 , which represents the theoretical 

absorption limit of a free-standing monolayer.102

The complex dielectric function and optical absorbance of the 51 types of vdWHs are

calculated and presented in Figures S26-S31. In general, the (Mo,W)Si2N4 vdWH family 

exhibits sizable optical absorption in the visible regime with optical absorbance up to 25%.


We compiled the peak absorbance for photon energies up to 5 eV for all vdWHs as shown in 

Figure 7. Intriguingly, almost all vdWHs exhibit peak absorbance in the UV regime, except 

for MoSi2N4/2H-WS2 vdWH which has a peak absorbance at the visible photon energy of 3.2 

eV. The peak absorbance of the isolated MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers [see Figure 6(G)

and 6(H) for the optical absorption spectra of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 monolayers] is 20% at 4.0 

eV and 17% at 4.4 eV respectively, which are comparable to some of the strongest mid-UV-

absorbing 2D materials (e.g. SnS2 and SnSe2).102 More importantly, the peak absorbance is

significantly enhanced upon forming the vdWHs, with many vdWHs reaching a peak 

absorbance of over 30% in the UV regime. In general, the WSi2N4 vdWHs exhibit peak 

absorbance at higher photon energies as compared to that of MoSi2N4 counterpart in the energy 

range being studied, owing to the slightly higher peak absorbance photon energies of 4.4 eV of 

the WSi2N4 monolayer, as compared to that of monolayer MoSi2N4 at 4.0 eV [see Figure 6(G)

and 6(H)]. We grouped the vdWHs into the sub-groups of near-UV (3.5 eV to 4.0 eV), mid-

UV (4.1 eV to 4.4 eV) and deep-UV (>4.5 eV) according to the peak absorbance photon 

energies. Intriguingly for the vdWHs composed of entirely MA2Z4, (i.e. (Mo,W)Si2N4/α2-

(Mo,W)Ge2P4) the vdWHs exhibit exceptionally strong UV absorption of over 40%, which 

approaches the optical absorption limit of a free-standing monolayer, and a broadband strong 

absorption shoulder between 3 eV and 5 eV [see Figure S29 and S31]. These findings suggest

the potential strength of MA2Z4-based vdWHs in photonics device applications. 

4. Conclusion

In summary, we investigated 51 types of MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 vdWHs and categorized 

these heterostructures based on their contact and band alignment types. For MS Ohmic contacts, 

the tunnelling-specific resistivities are comparable or lower than many of the previously 

reported 2D semiconductor electrical contacts. Multiple Type-II heterostructures are identified. 

Particularly, MoSi2N4/InSe and MoSi2N4/WSe2 exhibit excellent solar cell energy conversion 


efficiency greater than 20% and substantial optical absorption in the visible light regime, 

making them potential candidates for photovoltaic applications. In terms of optical absorption, 

the family of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based bilayer van der Waals heterostructures generally exhibit 

much enhanced ultraviolet optical absorption when compared to their isolated counterparts. 

The (Mo,W)Si2N4/(α2-MoGe2P4,α2-WGe2P4) heterostructures have an exceedingly high 

ultraviolet peak absorbance of over 40% that approaches the theoretical maximum absorption 

limit of a free-standing monolayer, thus revealing their strength in ultraviolet photonics 

applications. Our findings reveal the promising role of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based van der Waals 

heterostructures as a versatile platform for designing novel optoelectronics and photonics

applications, and call for a more comprehensive screening of the expansive MA2Z4 vdWH 

family to fully unlock their potential as building blocks of high-performance nanodevice 

technology. 

Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library.

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE) Academic Research 

Fund (AcRF) Tier 2 grant (Grant No. MOE-T2EP50221-0019) and SUTD-ZJU IDEA 

Collaboration (Grant No. SUTD-ZJU (VP) 202001). G.W. is supported by the Science and 

Technology Research Program of Chongqing Municipal Education Commission (Grant No. 

KJQN202001402). C.C.T. is supported by the Singapore University of Technology and Design

(SUTD) President’s Graduate Fellowship (PGF) scholarship. L.C. is supported by the National 

Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12104136). S.-J.L. is supported by the

National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61974176). We thank Li Ling Tan 

and Jin Quan Ng for their assistance in data generation and analysis.


Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.


References

‐











Figures

FIGURE 1 – Classification of the 51 types of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based van der Waals 
heterostructures (vdWHs). (A) Seven representative 2D material classes are considered, 
i.e. semiconducting, metallic and Janus TMDC, group III-IV monolayer (InSe), 
honeycomb lattices, ultrathin topological semimetal (Na3Bi) and MA2Z4 monolayers. (B) 
Classification 
table 
of 
various 
vdWHs 
according 
to 
their 
contact 
types. 

Metal/semiconductor (MS) contacts are composed of Ohmic and Schottky contacts, while 
semiconductor/semiconductor (SS) contacts can be further classified into Type-I, Type-II 
(direct or indirect band gap), Type-III and the hybridized type in which the VBM of the 
two constituent monolayers overlap. The open circle represents vdWHs with solar cell 
maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) higher than 15%. The open squares
represent vdWHs with peak absorbance higher than 40%. (C) The band diagrams of 
different band alignment types. 


FIGURE 2 – Band alignment of 2D monolayers and the assessment of Anderson rule.
(A) The CBM and VBM energies of the isolated 2D semiconducting monolayers, and the 
Fermi levels of 2D metallic and semimetallic monolayers. The energies are referenced to the 
vacuum level. (B) Side-by-side comparison of the band alignment and contact types between 
Anderson rule (AR) and direct DFT calculations (DFT). The band alignment types are 
indicated as ‘I’, ‘II’, ‘III’ and ‘H’ for Type-I, II, III and H vdWHs. The Schottky and Ohmic 
contacts are labelled as ‘SC’ and ‘O’ respectively. vdWHs with disagreement between AR 
and direct DFT calculation are highlighted by red bold frame. 


FIGURE 3 – Electronic band structures, differential charge densities and electrostatic 
potential profiles of (Mo,W)Si2N4 Ohmic vdWHs. (A) to (D) show the electronic band 
structures of MoSi2N4/NbS2, MoSi2N4/NbSe2,
WSi2N4/NbS2
and WSi2N4/NbSe2

respectively. (E) to (H) show the plane-averaged differential charge density (upper and 
middle panels) and the electrostatic potential profile (bottom panel) of the Ohmic contact
of (A) to (D) respectively. The yellow(cyan)-shaded region represents electron 
accumulation (depletion).


FIGURE 4 – Tunneling-specific resisitivity of Ohmic MS contacts and Schottky 
barrier heights of Schottky MS contacts. (A) The tunneling-specific resistivity for 4 
types of Ohmic MS contact; and (B) the Schottky barrier heights are calculated for the p-
type Schottky vdWHs respectively. The electronic band structures of the p-type Schottky 
vdWHs are shown in (C) to (H). 


FIGURE 5 – Band alignment types, band gap, and the direct or indirect nature of the 
band gap, and electronic band structures for Type-I, II and H vdWHs. (A) The band 
gap values are quoted in the unit of eV. The symbols ”D” and ”ID” denote direct and 
indirect type of the band gap, respectively. Electronic band structures of representative 
Type-I, II, III and H vdWHs of (B) MoSi2N4/hBN, (C) MoSi2N4/WSi2N4, (D) 
MoSi2N4/Na3Bi, and (E) WSi2N4/MoS2 respectively.


FIGURE 6 – Solar cell maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of Type-II SS 
vdWHs. (A) and (B) shows the calculated PCE for MoSi2N4 and WSi2N4 vdWHs 
respectively. The dielectric constants and the optical absorption spectra of Type-II SS 
vdWHs with PCE higher than 15%: (C) MoSi2N4/ZnO, (D) MoSi2N4/WGe2N4, (E) 
MoSi2N4/InSe, and (F) MoSi2N4/WSe2. The dielectric constant and optical absorption 
spectra of isolated (Mo,W)Si2N4 are shown in (G) and (H) respectively. 


FIGURE 7 – Peak absorbance of 51 species of (Mo,W)Si2N4-based vdWHs. The vdW 
with the largest maximum absorbance in the near-UV (3.5 eV to 4.0 eV), mid-UV (4.1 eV 
to 4.4 eV) and deep-UV (> 4.5 eV) regimes are shaded. The dashed box denote the peak 
absorbance of the isolated (Mo,W)Si2N4 monolayers. (Mo,W)Si2N4/Na3Bi exhibits in-plane 
optical dichroism as labelled by the (x) and (y) orthogonal directions. 


