Thermal boundary conductance of CVD-grown MoS2 monolayer-on-silica 
substrate determined by scanning thermal microscopy

C.M. Frausto-Avilaa,b , V. Arellano-Arreolab, J.M. Yañez-Limonb, A. De Luna-Bugallob,c,*, S. 
Gomèsa, P.-O. Chapuisa,*

a Univ Lyon, CNRS, INSA-Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CETHIL UMR5008, F-69621, Villeurbanne, France
b Cinvestav Unidad Querétaro, Querétaro, Qro. 76230, Mexico
c Departamento de Nanotecnología, Centro de Física Aplicada y Tecnología Avanzada, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México, CP 76000, Querétaro, Qro., Mexico.
*Corresponding authors: aluna@fata.unam.mx, olivier.chapuis@insa-lyon.fr

We characterize heat dissipation of supported MoS2 monolayers grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) by means of 
ambient-condition scanning thermal microscopy (SThM). We find that the thermal boundary conductance of the MoS2
monolayers in contact with 300 nm of SiO2 is around 4.6 ± 2 MW.m-2.K-1. This value is in the low range of the values 
determined for exfoliated flakes with other techniques such as Raman thermometry, which span an order of magnitude 
(0.44 - 50 MW.m-2.K-1) and underlines the dispersion of the measurements. The sensitivity to the in-plane thermal conductivity 
of supported MoS2 is very low, highlighting that the thermal boundary conductance is the key driver of heat dissipation for 
the MoS2 monolayer when it is not suspended. In addition, this work also demonstrates that SThM calibration using different 
thicknesses of SiO2, generally employed in bulk materials, can be extended to 2D materials.

Over the last two decades, there has been a growing 
interest in 2D materials due to their low dimensionality, 
making them attractive for various fields such as 
electronics, condensed matter, photonics, catalysis, among 
others. After the popularization of graphene, different
layered
materials have been discovered, including 

borophene1, hexagonal boron nitride hBN2, and transition 
metal dichalcogenides3 (TMDCs). Molybdenum disulfide 
(MoS2), a member of the family of TMDCs, is a 
semiconductor whose synthesis has been quite well
developed and established by different approaches4–9 . In 
the case of a single layer (thickness around 6 Å) MoS2
exhibits a direct bandgap10 (≈1.82 eV), reasonable 
electrical conductivity, large spin-orbit coupling, strong 
exciton binding, which makes it suitable for several
optoelectronic applications11,12.

Investigating the properties of 2D materials and 
implementing various characterization techniques are
challenging in many cases, particularly for thermal 
studies, due to the complexity associated with their
extremely-low thickness. With the advent of atomically
thin
materials, 
different
thermal 
characterization 

techniques have been extrapolated from bulk to 
nanostructured materials. Techniques such as the 3ω 
method13, photothermal characterization14,  as well as 
Raman thermometry15, have been efficiently translated for 
thermal conductivity measurements of such materials. 
Some of the techniques require depositing metallic 
contacts onto the samples16, which is unfeasible for certain
configurations of the systems,
or high-frequency 

equipment17 with assumptions on the (ideal) optical 
absorption. 

Thermal characterization aims mainly at obtaining 
parameters such as thermal conductivity and thermal 
boundary conductances (TBCs). Due to the quick 
preparation and crystal quality, most of the reports 

regarding the thermal properties of MoS2 are normally
performed using exfoliated samples (either supported by
an arbitrary substrate or suspended in a micrometer-sized 
hole), however MoS2 crystals can also be grown by 
chemical vapor deposition (CVD), which appears more 
appropriate for device integration and scaling18. For 
supported 
exfoliated 
monolayers 
(flakes), 
thermal 

conductivity values in the range 34.5-62.0 W.m-1.K-1 are 
reported, while TBCs span 0.44-50 MW.m-2.K-1 19–22. For 
the suspended configuration, thermal conductivity values 
between 23.2 and 84.0 W.m-1.K-1 are reported21,23,24. These 
values are more accurate when averaged over large areas 
and were obtained by techniques with inherent limitations 
such as optical diffraction25 in the best cases. Beyond such 
scales scanning thermal microscopy (SThM), developed 
since the 1990s25 on the atomic force microscopy (AFM) 
platform, is attractive since the spatial resolution can 
depend only on the radius of the thermal contact between 
the probe and the sample. Such radius can reach the sub-
100 nm scale under certain operation conditions, making 
it an option for nanoscale thermal measurements, in 
particular thermometry26. Although SThM was already 
used on structures involving MoS2 for thermometry in 
complex devices26 and for an analysis of heat dissipation
in samples where MoS2 was coupled to graphene27, it has 
not 
been 
used 
for 
quantitative 
thermal-property 

determination of the TMDC yet. In the present work, we 
propose a methodology based on ambient-condition
SThM to determine the TBC value for MoS2 monolayers
grown by CVD on SiO2/Si substrates. It is demonstrated 
that (in-plane) thermal conductivity is not useful in 
practice for samples with several microns of lateral
lengths, since heat dissipation takes place towards the 
substrate. 

The MoS2 crystals are grown by atmospheric CVD, further 
details can be found in previous reports28. The studied 
systems are composed of a MoS2 monolayer supported by 


a 300 nm-thick silica layer standing over a silicon wafer.
Figure 1 shows an optical image of a typical MoS2
monolayer, and the overall stack is reminded in the insert. 
The typical lateral size of the crystals is around 70-100 
µm.  As a large number of MoS2 monolayers crystals 
(typical shapes as that of Fig. 1) can be present on the 
substrate, careful attention is paid to avoid thermal or 
optical crosstalk. Moreover, we use Raman spectroscopy 
to monitor the frequency difference between the 𝐸2𝑔 and 
𝐴1𝑔 peaks7 to select only the single-layered MoS2 crystals
(see Suppl. Fig. 1).

Figure 1. (a) Optical microscopy image of a MoS2 monolayer 
with a triangular shape. The light dot corresponds to a laser 
spot irradiating the surface. (b) Cross-section schematic of the 

analyzed system.

Thermal scans are acquired by means of thermoresistive 
SThM, with two different thermal probes25. The data 
reported here are obtained using a Wollaston probe, whose 
sensor is a 5 µm-in-diameter Pt90/Rh10 filament with a 
length of ≈200 µm. It is bent in a V shape with the tip 
contacting the sample, and anchored between unetched
parts of the Wollaston wire, where the Pt90/Rh10 alloy is 
surrounded by a silver shell (≈75 µm of diameter in total). 
This makes the sides of the filament less electrically-
resistive. As a consequence, the filament is self-heated 
when fed by an electrical current I. The SThM operation 
mode typically used in this work consists in bringing the 
heated probe into contact with the sample in order to heat 
it locally and scanning its surface at constant force as in 
AFM. Noticeably, the electrical resistance of the sensor 𝑅
depends on the average temperature of the probe 𝑇̅, so in 
addition to being a heat source the probe is a thermometer:

𝑅 = 𝑅0. (1 + 𝛼𝜃),
(1)

where 𝛼 = (1/𝑅). 𝑑𝑅/𝑑𝑇̅ is the temperature coefficient of 
the  Pt90/Rh10 electrical resistance known to be 1.66×10-3

K-1, 𝑅0 = 𝑅(𝑇0) and 𝜃 = 𝑇̅ − 𝑇0 is the temperature rise 
above ambient temperature 𝑇0 (see Suppl. Sec. 2 for more 
details on SThM). The ratio between the heat input to the 
sensor 𝑃 = 𝑅𝐼2and the sensor average temperature rise 𝜃
provides a qualitative estimation of the sample ability to 
dissipate heat, it is known as the probe thermal 

conductance 𝐺probe (see Suppl. Secs. 2-4) and its value is
close to 95 µW.K-1 in ambient condition.

In our setup, the current supplied to the probe is constant,
and the voltage variation Δ𝑉 is monitored at the same time 
than the topography during the scan25 of the sample 
surface. The voltage reference (Δ𝑉 = 0) is taken at an 
arbitrary
point on the surface. Note that thermal 

stabilization is reached by waiting around 45 min before 
scanning to minimize the impact of thermal drifts on the 
images.
Figure 2 displays (a) the recorded AFM 

topography, and (b) the raw thermal image (Δ𝑉) of a MoS2
monolayer. It is possible to directly correlate the crystal 
topography (here slightly different from the crystal of Fig. 
1) with the thermal contrast. One can notice the strong 
difference between the thermal signal on the MoS2
monolayer and that in the region around (SiO2/Si 
substrate). Artifacts linked to scan direction are observed 
in the topography image, and are also present in the raw 
thermal image.

Fig 2. (a) Topography image obtained by atomic force 
microscopy with a Wollaston probe. A flat plane was 
subtracted from the raw image. (b) Raw thermal signal (Δ𝑉) 
obtained during the same scan.

The raw thermal image can be translated into a probe 
average temperature image with Eq. (1). One obtains the 

(a)
(b)


probe temperature variation Δ𝜃 as a function of location 
on the sample (with respect to some reference, here 
arbitrarily taken as the lowest value of the image). In order 
to smoothen the thermal signal fluctuations, we average 
the signal close to an edge as shown in Fig. 3 (the image 
is rotated with respect to that of Fig. 2). It is found that the 
probe temperature increases by approximately 0.1 K when 
it moves from SiO2 to MoS2, indicating that the MoS2 layer 
induces an additional thermal resistance for the flux being 
dissipated into the sample. At first sight, this effect could 
be ascribed either to a worse contact between the SThM 
probe with MoS2 than silica or to a weak thermal contact 
between MoS2 and the silica. This is in striking contrast to 
supported graphene, which increases heat dissipation 
properties29,30.
The temperature map is then translated into a map of the 
probe thermal conductance 𝐺probe (again with respect to 
an arbitrary reference, see Suppl. Sec. 2). It is found that 
𝐺probe varies by Δ𝐺probe = 55 × 10−9 W.K-1 close to the 
edge of the MoS2 crystal. It is instructive to compare this 
value with that obtained when simply increasing the 
thickness of the silica layer (silica is a standard solid-state 
thermal insulator). In Ref. [31], some of us reported, with 
a similar Wollaston SThM probe, how 𝐺probe varies with 
SiO2 thickness (see Suppl. Sec. 5). Assuming similar 
thermal conductivity for the oxide in the SiO2/Si substrate 
here and that of Ref. [31], we find that the decrease of 
probe thermal conductance when locating the probe on 
MoS2 is the same as that while bringing it over an oxide 
layer thicker by 95 nm. This thickness is more than 
hundred times than that of MoS2, underlining the potential 
of the TMDC as thin but efficient heat barrier.

Figure 3. (Top) Probe temperature rise with respect to an 
arbitrary reference between the supported MoS2 and the silica-
over-silicon wafer. (Down) Probe thermal conductance 
deduced from the temperature measurements (arbitrary 
reference). Left panels show rotated images with respect to 
Fig. 2, and right ones vertical averages in the square for each 
(horizontal) position.

In the following, we aim at obtaining quantitative thermal 
data for the MoS2 monolayer (see Suppl. Sec. 3 for a 
graphical summary of the procedure). To determine these,
one needs first to find an estimate of the thermal contact 
radius b, i.e. the size over which the SThM probe heats the 

sample. It is obtained by first comparing the probe thermal 
conductance with that obtained as a function of the silica 
thickness in Ref. [31]. The effective thermal conductivity
(that of a bulk leading to the same 𝐺probe) determined for 
a layer of 300 nm of SiO2
over Si is around 

𝜆𝑒𝑓𝑓 ≈ 2 W.m-2.K-1 (see Suppl. Sec. 6). The radius can
then be obtained from a finite element (FE) simulation 
solving the steady-state heat equation, in the sample only.
Indeed, the sample thermal conductance (conductance 
associated with heat dissipation in the sample from a hot 
isothermal disc on the sample surface) is 4𝜆𝑒𝑓𝑓b and equal 
to that of the exact geometry (300 nm SiO2/Si) for an
identical thermal contact radius. The radius determined 
from the FE simulation is around 4 µm (see Suppl. Sec. 7
for more details). This value underlines the well-known 
fact that heat spreads from the probe to the sample in the 
air, leading to a transfer over a much larger area than that 
of the mechanical contact25. Since heat is transferred 
mostly through air to the sample, the thermal boundary 
conductance at the mechanical contact is not a matter of 
concern. Note that the impact of the thermal contact 
conductance between the tip and the sample depends only 
on the effective (bulk) thermal conductivity felt by the 
probe for heat transfer through air32. This is in stark 
contrast to many works where heat transfer inside the
whole system made of the SThM sensor and at the probe-
sample contact is also required to be modelled. This 
simplification is possible because the current work builds 
on the previous calibration in Ref. [31]. 

Figure 4. Temperature profile in logarithmic scale as a function 
of depth below the heat source (FEM simulation). The upper 
region overlaid in green corresponds to the MoS2 monolayer, 
the lower blue region corresponds to SiO2, and, finally, the gray 
region corresponds to the contribution of the Si substrate.

The final step is also performed with a FE simulation. The 
actual geometry, i.e. the stack shown in the inset of Fig. 1,
is considered, with known thermal conductivity values for 
silicon and silica, and again with a disc of homogeneous 
temperature as heat input on the top (see Suppl. Sec. 8). 
The unknowns are the MoS2 thermal conductivity, 
supposed isotropic in the 0.7 nm thickness, and the TBC 
between MoS2 and silica. These two quantities are 
adjusted in the 2D cylindrical FE simulation to dissipate a 
power equivalent to that of a bulk with the effective 


thermal conductivity mentioned above (i.e. the bulk and 
MoS2/SiO2/Si sample thermal conductances are equal). It 
is found that the value of the thermal conductivity of MoS2
impacts very weakly the temperature distribution, which is 
driven only by the TBC. The temperature profile in the 
center of the structure is provided in Fig. 4 as a function of 
depth. Note that we verified that the MoS2 lateral size and 
shape do not matter provided that the size is larger than the 
thermal contact radius. The temperature profile is mostly 
flat in the thin TMDC layer (see Suppl. Fig. 8 for 3D 
temperature distribution), as a result of the insensitivity to 
thermal conductivity. Most importantly, there is a strong 
temperature discontinuity associated with the MoS2/SiO2
interface. 
Finally, 
one 
obtains
a 
value 
of 

4.6 ± 2 MW.m-2.K-1
for the thermal boundary 

conductance, which is close to
the values found 

experimentally for flakes by Raman thermometry12,20 and 
of similar order of magnitude to a molecular dynamic 
study33. The value is intrinsically low as Van Der Waals 
bonding provides a much weaker connection between the 
monolayer and its support. It seems therefore that the 
quality of the material, being it an exfoliated flake or a 
CVD-grown crystal, is not key for heat conduction when 
it is supported.

In summary, this works has showed that, with a proper 
calibration technique, SThM allows for quantitative 
determination of key parameters associated with heat 
dissipation 
in 
supported 
2D 
materials. 
Thermal 

conductivity may not be the relevant parameter, while Van 
Der Waals bonding leads to weak thermal coupling with 
substrates. In the near future, it will be useful to analyze 
TMDCs with a better spatial resolution, either by studying 
the jump at contact in probe approach curves or by 
implementing 
vacuum 
conditions.
Analyzing 
heat 

dissipation in TMDCs as a function of temperature may 
also enable to discriminate between the effect of thermal 
conductivity and thermal boundary conductance27.

See the Supplementary Information for details on material, 
the temperature-probe thermal conductance connection, 
for details on the varying-thickness oxide calibration 
samples and on the simulations.

We thank J.-M. Bluet for helping with the Raman 
characterization and A. Alkurdi for discussions. C.M.F.A. 
acknowledges a CONACYT scholarship funding. S.G.
and P.-O.C. acknowledge support of project TIPTOP
(ANR-16-CE09-0023) and A.D.L.B. the support of 
project UNAM-PAPIIT-A101822.

References

1 R. Peköz, M. Konuk, M.E. Kilic, and E. Durgun, ACS Omega 
3, 1815 (2018).
2 T. Knobloch, Y.Y. Illarionov, F. Ducry, C. Schleich, S. 
Wachter, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, T. Mueller, M. Waltl, and 
M. Lanza, Nat. Electron. 4, 98 (2021).
3 L.M. Xie, Nanoscale 7, 18392 (2015).

4 I.D. Marion, D. Čapeta, B. Pielić, F. Faraguna, A. Gallardo, P. 
Pou, B. Biel, N. Vujičić, and M. Kralj, Nanotechnology 29, 
305703 (2018).
5 Y. Lee, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, M. Chang, C. Lin, K. Chang, Y. 
Yu, J.T. Wang, C. Chang, and L. Li, Adv. Mater. 24, 2320 
(2012).
6 P. Yang, S. Zhang, S. Pan, B. Tang, Y. Liang, X. Zhao, Z. 
Zhang, J. Shi, Y. Huan, and Y. Shi, ACS Nano 14, 5036 (2020).
7 S. Ganorkar, J. Kim, Y.-H. Kim, and S.-I. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. 
Solids 87, 32 (2015).
8
K.M. McCreary, E.D. Cobas, A.T. Hanbicki, M.R. 

Rosenberger, H.-J. Chuang, S. V Sivaram, V.P. Oleshko, and 
B.T. Jonker, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 9580 (2020).
9 G. Deokar, D. Vignaud, R. Arenal, P. Louette, and J.-F. 
Colomer, Nanotechnology 27, 75604 (2016).
10 D.P. Rai, T. V Vu, A. Laref, M.P. Ghimire, P.K. Patra, and S. 
Srivastava, Nano-Structures & Nano-Objects 21, 100404 (2020).
11 P. Ni, A. De Luna Bugallo, V.M. Arellano Arreola, M.F. 
Salazar, E. Strupiechonski, V. Brandli, R. Sawant, B. Alloing, 
and P. Genevet, ACS Photonics 6, 1594 (2019).
12
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey, and A. 

Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics 8, 899 (2014).
13 D.G. Cahill, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 61, 802 (1990).
14 A. Abareshi, M. Arshadi Pirlar, and M. Houshiar, Mater. Res. 
Express (2019).
15 E. Yalon, Ö.B. Aslan, K.K.H. Smithe, C.J. McClellan, S. V 
Suryavanshi, F. Xiong, A. Sood, C.M. Neumann, X. Xu, K.E. 
Goodson, T.F. Heinz, and E. Pop, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
9, 43013 (2017).
16 T. Tong and A. Majumdar, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 77, 104902 
(2006).
17 P. Jiang, X. Qian, X. Gu, and R. Yang, Adv. Mater. 29, 
1701068 (2017).
18 S. Shree, A. George, T. Lehnert, C. Neumann, M. Benelajla, 
C. Robert, X. Marie, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, U. Kaiser, B. 
Urbaszek, and A. Turchanin, 2D Mater. 7, 15011 (2019).
19 S. Sahoo, A.P.S. Gaur, M. Ahmadi, M.J.-F. Guinel, and R.S. 
Katiyar, J. Phys. Chem. C 117, 9042 (2013).
20 A. Taube, J. Judek, A. Łapińska, and M. Zdrojek, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 7, 5061 (2015).
21 X. Zhang, D. Sun, Y. Li, G.-H. Lee, X. Cui, D. Chenet, Y. 
You, T.F. Heinz, and J.C. Hone, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7, 
25923 (2015).
22 J. Judek, A.P. Gertych, M. Świniarski, A. Łapińska, A. 
Dużyńska, and M. Zdrojek, Sci. Rep. 5, 1 (2015).
23 A.J. Gabourie, S. V. Suryavanshi, A.B. Farimani, and E. Pop, 
2D Mater. 8, 11001 (2021).
24 R. Yan, J.R. Simpson, S. Bertolazzi, J. Brivio, M. Watson, X. 
Wu, A. Kis, T. Luo, A.R. Hight Walker, and H.G. Xing, ACS 
Nano 8, 986 (2014).
25 S. Gomès, A. Assy, and P.O. Chapuis, Phys. Status Solidi 
Appl. Mater. Sci. 212, 477 (2015).
26 S. Vaziri, E. Yalon, M.M. Rojo, S. V. Suryavanshi, H. Zhang, 
C.J. McClellan, C.S. Bailey, K.K.H. Smithe, A.J. Gabourie, V. 
Chen, S. Deshmukh, L. Bendersky, A. V. Davydov, and E. Pop, 
Sci. Adv. 5, 1 (2019).
27 C. Evangeli, J. Spiece, S. Sangtarash, A.J. Molina-Mendoza, 
M. Mucientes, T. Mueller, C. Lambert, H. Sadeghi, and O. 
Kolosov, Adv. Electron. Mater. 5, 1 (2019).
28 V.M.A. Arreola, M.F. Salazar, T. Zhang, K. Wang, A.H.B. 
Aguilar, K.C.S. Reddy, E. Strupiechonski, M. Terrones, and 
A.D.L. Bugallo, 2D Mater. 8, 25033 (2021).
29 F. Menges, H. Riel, A. Stemmer, C. Dimitrakopoulos, and B. 
Gotsmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 205901 (2013).
30 M.E. Pumarol, M.C. Rosamond, P. Tovee, M.C. Petty, D.A. 


Zeze, V. Falko, and O. V Kolosov, Nano Lett. 12, 2906 (2012).
31 E. Guen, P.-O. Chapuis, R. Rajkumar, P.S. Dobson, J.M.R. 
Weaver, and S. Gomes, J. Appl. Phys. 128, 235301 (2020).
32 A.M. Massoud, J.-M. Bluet, V. Lacatena, M. Haras, J.-F. 
Robillard, and P.-O. Chapuis, Appl. Phys. Lett. 111, 63106 
(2017).
33 Z.-Y. Ong, Y. Cai, G. Zhang, and Y.-W. Zhang, 
Nanotechnology 32, 135402 (2021).


SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL TO

Thermal boundary conductance of CVD-grown MoS2 monolayer-on-silica 

substrate determined by scanning thermal microscopy

C.M. Frausto-Avilaa,b , V. Arellano-Arreolab, J.M. Yañez-Limonb, A. De Luna-Bugallob, S. 

Gomèsa, P.-O. Chapuisa

a Univ Lyon, CNRS, INSA-Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CETHIL UMR5008, F-69621, Villeurbanne, France.
b Cinvestav Unidad Querétaro, Querétaro, Qro. 76230, Mexico

Contents

1. Procedure to determine if the sample is a MoS2 monolayer
2. Procedure to determine the probe thermal conductance
3. Brief summary of the different steps for the data treatment
4. Thermal circuit associated to heat dissipation from the probe
5. ‘Equivalent oxide thickness’ procedure
6. Equivalent effective thermal conductivity
7. Determination of the thermal contact radius
8. Determination of the thermal boundary conductance

1. Procedure to determine if the sample is a MoS2 monolayer

According to the methodology followed by Ganorkar et al.1 for estimating the number of MoS2 layers synthesized 
by Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD), the difference between the Raman shifts of the E2g and A1g peaks is used to 
estimate the number of layers. The wavenumber difference is Δ = 21.5 cm-1 for a monolayer and 
Δ = 22.3 cm-1 for bilayers [1]. In this work we find a value of Δ = 21.6 cm-1, which can safely be considered as 
a MoS2 monolayer crystal (see Suppl. Fig. 1).

Suppl. Fig. 1. MoS2 Raman spectrum.


2. Procedure to determine the probe thermal conductance

The probe thermal conductance is defined as

𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 = 𝑃/𝜃, 
(1)

where 𝑃 = 𝑅 𝐼2 is the Joule self-heating power inside the sensitive part (sensor) of the probe, 𝑅 the electrical 
resistance of the sensitive part of the probe (sensor), I is the electrical current in the probe and 𝜃 its mean 
temperature rise with respect to ambient. The Wollaston probe resistance is inserted into a Wheatstone bridge 
(see Suppl. Fig. 2), and it is the bridge imbalance voltage Δ𝑉 that is provided in the thermal image. As a result, 
scans provide only temperature rises

Δ𝜃 =

Δ𝑉
𝐼 .

1

𝛼 𝑅
(2)

relative to an absolute reference temperature 𝜃𝑟𝑒𝑓 + 𝑇0, which is selected by balancing the bridge (Δ𝑉 = 0) , 
and not directly the probe voltage 𝑉𝑝. It is customary to balance the bridge either far from contact (𝜃𝑟𝑒𝑓 = 𝑇̅ −
𝑇0, where 𝑇̅ is the average temperature in the sensor), or in contact at a given location on the sample (𝜃𝑟𝑒𝑓 =
𝑇̅ − 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓). Here, the second option is chosen.
Knowing the value of the electrical resistance in the bridge 𝑅𝑣, one can deduce the probe temperature 𝑇0 + 𝜃 =
𝑇0 + 𝜃𝑟𝑒𝑓 + Δ𝜃. We use a symmetric bridge, so that 𝑅1 = 𝑅2 (taken as 50 ), and an input bridge current of 
𝐼𝑖𝑛 = 80 mA, i.e. 𝐼 = 40 mA is supplied in the probe. The electrical resistance of the sensitive part of the 
Wollaston probe (Pt90/Rh10 filament) 𝑅
is computed by determining the geometrical parameters, noticing that 

the variable resistance, when the bridge is balanced, is equal to:

𝑅𝑣 = 𝑅𝑤𝑖𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 + 𝑅𝐴𝑔 + 𝑅 ,
(3)

where the electrical resistance of the wiring is estimated to be 𝑅𝑤𝑖𝑟𝑒 ≈ 1 , 𝑅
= 𝑅0(1 + 𝛼 (𝜃)) and 𝑅𝐴𝑔 is 

obtained by subtraction from room-temperature measurements (𝜃 = 0). 𝑅𝐴𝑔 is the electrical resistance of the 
Wollaston wire (cantilever) assumed made of the silver shell.

Suppl. Fig. 2. Wheatstone bridge where R1 and R2, Rv and R are the fixed electrical resistances, the variable electrical 

resistance and the electrical resistance of the probe respectively. 

The local probe thermal conductance variation is obtained as in Ref. [2] by differentiating logarithmically Eq. (1), 
which gives after straightforward algebra:

Δ𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 = 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 − 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑓 = 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑓 . Δ𝜃. [𝛼(𝜃) −

1
𝜃]
(4)

if the current variation in the probe Δ𝐼 is neglected (which we verified). 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑓 is the probe thermal 
conductance at absolute temperature 𝑇0 + 𝜃𝑟𝑒𝑓. Of course Eq. (4) is valid only provided the thermal conductance 
variations stay small. A direct calculation without linearization can be performed if this is not the case.
From the parameters experimentally determined, 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 0 ≈ 95 μW. K−1 and 𝜃𝑓𝑓𝑐 ≈ 156 K far from contact. 
When the probe contacts the sample, the temperature rise 𝜃 decreases by about 10% for materials of moderate 
thermal conductivities, so 𝜃𝑟𝑒𝑓 ≈ 140 K. In principle 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑓 and 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 0 are different, but in the following 
Eq. (4) is used with the assumption 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 𝑟𝑒𝑓 ≈ 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 0 , which induces an uncertainty propagation in Δ𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒. 
Note that maps of Δ𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 or 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 with respect to an arbitrary reference provide similar information.


3. Brief summary of the different steps for the data treatment 

The raw SThM image allows only acquiring qualitative analysis of heat dissipation at the sample surface and a 
significant part of the work is therefore to deduce quantitative data from these images. We summarize the 
different steps (see Suppl. Fig. 3) mentioned in the main manuscript here, and more details are provided in the
Sections below. 


First (1), the local probe thermal conductance 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 is obtained from the electrical data (see above). 


Then (2), the calibration from Guen et al. [3] allows obtaining an oxide thickness that impacts the probe 
thermal conductance equivalently as MoS2. This step is interesting for qualitative reasoning but not 
decisive for the following. 


More importantly (3), the same paper [3] allows determining the two effective bulk thermal 
conductivities 𝑘𝑒𝑓𝑓 that provide the same probe thermal conductance as that of the MoS2/SiO2/Si and 
the SiO2/Si samples, respectively. Noticeably, all the previous steps do not require simulations. But they 
do not allow to determine the thermal contact radius b.


The simulation steps (4) involve Finite Element (FE) modelling. We proceed in two steps: (4a) we first 
determine the thermal contact radius b, and then (4b) we use it to determine the MoS2 thermal 
properties. The thermal radius is obtained by equating the thermal conductances of the effective bulk 
geometry (known to be 𝐺𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 = 4𝑘𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑏) and of the exact SiO2/Si geometry. Then for such radius a FE 
simulation of the MoS2/SiO2/Si stack is performed. The thermal conductivity of the monolayer 𝑘 and the 
thermal boundary conductance between the monolayer and the supporting material 𝐺𝑇𝐵𝐶 are varied in 
order to match the stack effective thermal conductivity determined in (3).

Suppl. Fig. 3. Schematic of the different steps of our approach for quantitative measurement. 


4. Thermal circuit associated to heat dissipation from the probe

We provide a schematic clarifying the different thermal conductances involved in our SThM experiments. 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒
is in principle indeed the sum of the three channels allowing heat to dissipate from the probe, where only one is 
useful for the experiment. However 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑣𝑖𝑟𝑜𝑛𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 ≈ 0 when the probe is in contact3. 𝐺𝑡𝑖𝑝 includes the thermal 
contact conductance associated with the transport of heat from the tip into the sample, and is usually difficult 
to determine precisely. The method described below (Suppl. Sec. 5) avoids addressing this issue fully.

Suppl. Fig. 4. Suppl. Fig. 3. Thermal circuit associated with heat dissipation in the probe.

5. ‘Equivalent oxide thickness’ procedure (Step (2) of Suppl. Fig. 3)

To find the equivalent thickness of SiO2 that induces a similar thermal resistance in the sample as that of the
monolayer of MoS2, we use a calibration sample3 made of a mosaic of silicon oxide layers with different 
thicknesses coating a silicon wafer. It happens that the substrate below MoS2 is similar, with a SiO2 layer on top 
of the silicon wafer. Since the two samples were not prepared at the same time and with the same goal, some 
uncertainty is introduced by comparing the data, which propagates until the determination of the thermal 
boundary conductance. The calibration sample is shown in Suppl. Fig. 5 and detailed in the previous publication3 

(beware that notations are not the same and that the probe thermal conductance defined here is based on the
probe average temperature, not the probe apex one).

Suppl. Fig. 5. (Left) SThM scan of the mosaic sample made of 9 different thicknesses of silica. The heights of the silicon 
oxide steps are indicated on the images. (Right) Probe thermal conductance for the different SiO2 thicknesses. The probe 

thermal conductance reference (𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 = 0) is the far-from-contact position.


More precisely, 𝐺probe varies of ∆𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 = 55 × 10−9 W.K-1 when the probe moves from the MoS2 crystal to 
the oxide surface (see Fig. 3 in the main paper). Note that ∆𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 = 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒(MoS2) − 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒(Si02 300 nm).
From Suppl. Fig. 5, we find that 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒(SiO2 300 nm) + ∆𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 = 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒(SiO2 395nm) in the calibration 
sample.

6. Equivalent effective thermal conductivity (Step (3) of Suppl. Fig. 3)

The effective thermal conductance for the {oxide on silicon} sample is obtained from the calibration curve in Ref. 
[3], as shown in Suppl. Fig. 6. The advantage of this method is that it provides a quantity that depends only on 
the sample and does not require the knowledge of the thermal conductance corresponding to the heat transfer 
between the probe and the sample included in 𝐺𝑡𝑖𝑝. For the value of 𝐺𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 found in Suppl. Fig. 5, we find 𝑘𝑒𝑓𝑓 ≈
2.1 W.m-1.K-1 in Suppl. Fig. 5.

Suppl. Fig. 6. Variation of the probe thermal conductance (reference far from contact) as a function of the effective thermal 

conductivity.

7. Determination of the thermal contact radius 

The thermal contact radius, i.e. the size of the hot zone on the sample surface (assumed to be a disc), is required 
for the final step. One can consider that there is a single thermal contact radius for each effective thermal 
conductivity, i.e. the radius does not depend on the exact configuration within the sample but only on the 
thermal conductance 𝐺𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒

4. This conductance is not known initially, and we are required to perform 

simulations in order determine the thermal contact radius for the {silica on silicon} sample. 
With finite-element (FE) simulations, we compute the thermal conductance of a medium consisting of a silica 
layer (300 nm) over a silicon wafer, for a given radius (see Suppl. Fig. 7). This can be done for an arbitrary 
temperature on the top 𝑇𝑡𝑜𝑝 of the simulated sample provided the thermal conductivities are considered 
temperature-independent. The lateral and bottom sides of the domain are considered at a fixed ambient 
temperature 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡. The sample thermal conductance within such geometry 𝐺𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 = 𝑄/(𝑇𝑡𝑜𝑝 − 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡)
is computed and compared to the conductance associated with the effective thermal conductivity, known 
analytically to be 𝐺𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 = 4𝑘𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑏 (defined as that of an equivalent-bulk thermal conductance for the same 
radius), determined from Suppl. Fig. 6. When the two thermal conductances are equal, this process provides the 
thermal contact radius b. We find 𝑏 ≈ 4 µm, which confirms that air heat transfer predominates.


This work can also be performed for a 395-nm silicon oxide layer, which provides the equivalent sample thermal 
conductance as that of the MoS2/SiO2/Si system. Note that we do not consider here possible partially-ballistic 
dissipation in contrast to Ref. [4].

Suppl. Fig. 7. Temperature distribution on the equivalent (395 nm SiO2 film on Si substrate) sample surface.

8. Determination of the thermal boundary conductance

In the final step, we perform simulations with the thermal radius previously determined by varying the thermal 
conductivity of MoS2 k and the thermal boundary conductances 𝐺𝑇𝐵𝐶 at its boundary with SiO2. While the values 
of thermal conductivity k do not impact much on the total sample thermal conductance (which is known to be 
4𝑘𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑏, where 𝑏 is the thermal radius), one value of the boundary conductance provides the correct sample 
thermal conductance. The cross section temperature field is shown in Suppl. Fig. 8, and as a function of depth z 
on the revolution axis in the core paper.

Suppl. Fig. 8. Temperature field in a cross section of the MoS2/SiO2/Si sample.


References

1.
Ganorkar, S., Kim, J., Kim, Y.-H. & Kim, S.-I., Effect of precursor on growth and morphology of MoS2 
monolayer and multilayer, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 87, 32–37 (2015).

2.
Lucchesi, C., Cakiroglu, D., Perez, J.-P., Talercio, T., Tournié, E., Chapuis, P.-O., Vaillon, R., Near-field 
thermophotovoltaic conversion with high electrical power density and cell efficiency above 14%, Nano 
Letters 21, 4524 (2021).

3.
Guen, E., Chapuis, P.-O., Rajkumar, R., Dobson, P.S., Weaver, J.M.R., Gomès, S., Scanning thermal 
microscopy probes using a sample of varying thermal conductivities with identical surfaces, Journal of 
Applied Physics 128, 235301 (2020)

4.
Massoud, A. M., Bluet, J.-M., Lacatena, V., Haras, M., Robillard, J.-F., Chapuis, P.-O., Native oxide limited 
thermal transport in suspended silicon membrane revealed by scanning thermal microscopy, Applied 
Physics Letters 111, 063106 (2017)


