Construction and analysis of surface phase diagrams to describe segregation and
dissolution behavior of Al and Ca in Mg alloys

Jing Yang, K. B. Sravan Kumar, Mira Todorova,∗ and J¨org Neugebauer
Department for Computational Materials Science, Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Eisenforschung GmbH,
Max-Planck-Str.
1, D-40237 D¨usseldorf, Germany
(Dated: July 11, 2023)

Segregation and dissolution behavior of Mg alloyed with Ca and Al are studied by performing
density functional theory calculations considering an extensive set of surface structures and compo-
sitions. Combining ab initio surface science approaches with cluster expansion for ordered surface
structures we construct surface phase diagrams for these alloys. We utilize these diagrams to study
segregation phenomena and chemical trends for surfaces in contact with a dry environment or with
an aqueous electrolyte.
We show that the presence of water dramatically impacts the stability
and chemical composition of the considered metallic surfaces. We furthermore find that the two
alloying elements behave qualitatively different: whereas Ca strongly segregates to the surface and
becomes dissolved upon exposure of the surface to water, Al shows an anti-segregation behavior,
i.e., it remains in Mg bulk. These findings provide an explanation for the experimentally observed
increase/decrease in corrosion rates when alloying Mg with Al/Ca.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Magnesium with its very low density of 1.74 g/cm3 [1]
and a price comparable to that of commonly used alu-
minum alloys shows great promise towards developing
lightweight materials in automotive and aerospace indus-
tries. Mg and its alloys have also great potential for im-
proving the energy density in batteries as either cathode
and anode materials [2], due to the ability of Mg to carry
twice as much charge as Li and its lower cost.
Other
promising applications relate to their use as biodegrad-
able implants, by exploiting the non-toxic nature of Mg,
its mechanical properties similar to bones and its ability
to corrode easily, which could circumvent the need for
implant removal [3].
Despite having applications in such diverse fields, Mg
based alloys suffer from two major limitations: poor duc-
tility [4] and poor corrosion resistance [5]. The ductil-
ity of Mg can be significantly improved upon alloying
with small amounts of the inexpensive and non-toxic Al
(1 wt.%) and Ca (0.1 wt.%) [4]. At higher concentrations
of a few weight percent, the same alloying elements (Al
and Ca) refine the grain size of Mg, thereby improving its
mechanical strength [6]. The reduction of the Mg grain
sizes is due to the inhibition of the grain boundary motion
during re-crystallization by finely dispersed Mg2Ca parti-
cles forming at calcium contents of 2-3 wt. %, as shown by
high-ratio differential speed rolling (HRDSR) [7]. Over-
all, alloying of Mg with Al and Ca improves its mechan-
ical properties.
Alloying with Al and Ca has also an impact on the cor-
rosion properties of Mg. Increasing the Ca content in Mg
alloys leads to an increased anodic corrosion potential [8].
This is consistent with the observation that Mg2Ca has
a larger anodic corrosion potential compared to pure Mg

∗ m.todorova@mpie.de

indicating that Ca is anodic in Mg alloys [9].
Anodic
corrosion potentials imply that metal atoms become oxi-
dized and dissolve in the electrolyte as positively charged
metal ions (Mg2+, Ca2+). The corrosion rate becomes
significantly higher for Ca concentrations above the sol-
ubility limit in Mg [10–12]. In contrast, Mg alloys with
2-10 wt. % Al, as well as Mg-Al intermetallics (Mg2Al3,
Mg17Al12), show an increased cathodic potential com-
pared to Mg, i.e. they are less prone to corrosion [9, 13].
Indeed, the corrosion rates of Mg alloys were found to
decrease upon increasing Al content [12, 14]. The anodic
nature of Ca in the corrosion experiments points towards
a preferential oxidation of Ca, which acts as a sacrificial
anode upon exposure to water. In contrast, Al with its
cathodic nature is expected to remain in a Mg alloy.
This picture is also confirmed by computations. Elec-
trochemical potentials calculated using a Born-Haber cy-
cle indicate that the Mg-Al intermetallic Mg17Al12 is
more cathodic than Mg, while the Mg-Ca intermetallic
Mg2Ca is more anodic than Mg [15]. Surface energies of
low index Mg surfaces with Al and Ca substituting Mg
atoms in the surface layer calculated using density func-
tional theory (DFT) indicate a higher dissolution rate
for Ca compared to Al [16]. Similar to the observations
in the corrosion experiments, dissolution potential differ-
ences, calculated using chemical potentials derived from
Mg vacancy formation energies in the presence of Al and
Ca substituted in Mg surfaces, show Al to be more ca-
thodic in nature than Ca [16]. While these computational
investigations provide a first qualitative understanding of
the impact Al and Ca have on Mg corrosion [15, 16] criti-
cal questions remain. For example, the surface structures
of the Mg alloys, dependencies on the alloy concentration
and the impact of water on the surface segregation be-
havior are less explored.
A step in this direction is provided by a DFT study
looking at the segregation behaviour of various alloying
elements substituting a Mg atom in the first layer for the
single coverage of 1

9 ML (monolayer; at 1 ML all atoms in

arXiv:2207.09809v3  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  10 Jul 2023


2

the topmost Mg layer would be substituted by an alloy-
ing element) [17]. This study showed that segregation of
Ca from the bulk to the Mg (0001) surface is thermody-
namically favored. However, the systematic exploration
of the dependence of Al and Ca surface segregation on
alloy concentration, as well as the transfer of this infor-
mation to construct surface phase diagrams, is lacking.
In this study, we therefore employ DFT calculations
and focus on the initial, i.e. non-oxidised state of Mg
alloys with dilute bulk concentrations of Al and Ca, con-
structing surface phase and surface Pourbaix diagrams.
To identify the stable surface structures, we consider two
scenarios: i) the surface of as cast Mg-Al and Mg-Ca al-
loys in the absence of an oxidizing medium (in vacuum)
and ii) the surface when the as cast alloy is exposed to
a corrosive environment. Accounting for the relevance
of water for wet corrosion we include it in the calcula-
tions for the later case, by modelling it as an implicit
solvent [18, 19].
The dependence of the surface segre-
gation behavior on surface coverage is accounted for by
considering different surface coverages ranging from as
low as θ =
1
36 ML up to a full monolayer.
We limit
this study to the Mg(0001) surface, which is the most
stable close-packed hcp surface termination [20] and has
been widely studied both computationally and experi-
mentally [21–25]. Though realistic surface structures are
more complex, low index surfaces such as the Mg(0001)
serve as a model system to study generic behavior and
chemical trends.

II.
METHODS

A.
Density functional theory calculations

All DFT calculations are performed in a plane wave
based DFT framework and the projector augmented wave
(PAW) approach as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio
Simulation Package (VASP) [26, 27]. Exchange and cor-
relation are described with the PBE implementation of
the Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) [28].
We employ Fermi smearing of 0.1 eV, converge energies
to 10−5 eV and optimize geometries using a force crite-
rion of 0.01 eV/˚A. Based on careful convergence checks
we chose an energy cutoff of 360 eV for further calcula-
tions, as it ensures that the lattice constants and the co-
hesive and formation energies of all considered materials
are accurate to at least 5 × 10−3 ˚A and 5 meV each. Sur-
faces are modelled using six layer thick symmetric slabs
and a vacuum region of 12 ˚A, removing the need to ap-
ply a dipole correction [29] to the electrostatic potential
in z-direction. For the Mg(0001) (1 × 1) surface cell we
use a (12 × 12 × 1) k-point mesh, which is equivalently
folded for larger cells. This set-up ensures that mixing
energies for Ca and Al incorporation in the Mg(0001)
surface are converged to better than 10 meV per Ca or
Al atom. To study the impact of water on the considered
surfaces, the vacuum region in the supercell is replaced

by a solvent using an implicit solvation model based on
Poisson-Boltzmann as implemented in VASPsol [18, 19].
For these calculations we used eight layer thick symmet-
ric slabs to obtain work functions and interface energies.

B.
Calculating surface energies

A key step in computing the segregation behavior of al-
loying elements on the Mg surface is to identify which sur-
face structure is the thermodynamically most stable one
for a given set of thermodynamic state variables. Since
surfaces are thermodynamically open systems - they can
exchange atoms with the bulk or with the environment to
which the surface is exposed - the relevant state variables
are temperature and chemical potentials of the chemical
species forming the alloy. For the binary system consid-
ered here these are Mg alloyed with Al or Ca, i.e., µMg,
µAl, and µCa. The impact of pressure is small [30, 31]
and will be neglected in this study. The relevant energy
is the surface formation energy Ef
σ(T, µMg, µX) with X
either Al or Ca. The subscript σ runs over all considered
surface configurations. The one which minimizes the sur-
face formation energy for a given set of state variables is
the thermodynamically stable phase

Esurf
σeq (T, {µi}) = min
σ Esurf
σ
(T, {µi}),
(1)

where the index i runs over Mg and the alloying element
X.
We
note
that
the
surface
formation
energy
Esurf
σ
(T, {µi}) is nothing else than the Grand Potential
Θσ(T, {µi}), which is routinely and very successfully
used to compute bulk phase diagrams, e.g. in the Monte
Carlo (MC) based ATAT code [32] or defect phase
diagrams, e.g. using MC/MD in LAMMPS [33, 34]. We
will use in this article the term surface formation energy,
since this is the commonly used name in the surface sci-
ence community where this formalism and terminology
are in use for almost three decades [30, 31, 35–43]. We
also prefer this notation since it conveys in the context
of surfaces a clear physical interpretation: The surface
formation energy is the excess energy required to create
the surface from ideal bulk.
Following the surface science approach [30, 37, 39], the
above introduced surface formation energy is defined as:

Esurf
σ
(T, {µi}) = 1

2A[EDFT
σ
− TSsurf

−
�

i=Mg,X
ni,σ(EDFT
i−bulk + µi)].
(2)

Here, EDFT
σ
is the DFT computed total energy of the
surface structure σ. ni,σ represents the number of atoms
of species i in the surface structure σ.
A is the area
of the surface unit cell described by the respective su-
percell and the factor two takes into account that the
symmetric slabs we consider here consist of two equiva-
lent surfaces. Ssurf is the excess surface entropy, which


3

is dominated by configurational entropy. Further contri-
butions include electronic or vibrational entropy, which
are substantially smaller and will therefore be neglected
in this work. For the ordered phases, the configurational
entropy is zero, i.e., Ssurf = 0. It should be noted that by
neglecting the entropy term, we are treating the ordered
surface phases in the same way as line compounds in bulk
surface diagrams. However, while a bulk line compound
exists, as indicated by its name, only for a single bulk
concentration, an ordered surface phase with zero con-
figurational entropy can exist over a finite range of bulk
alloying composition (see Fig. 7a).
The surface structures are characterized by the local
arrangement of the solute atoms in the first surface layers.
Since, as will be shown later, solute energies already in
the second layer are very close to the ones in Mg bulk
we consider only surface structures with solutes in the
first two layers.
The solute concentration of a surface
configuration σ is described by the coverage θσ, which
is defined by the number of solute atoms in this layer
divided by its total number of atoms.

C.
Chemical potentials

A critical input for calculating the surface energies ac-
cording to Eq. 2 are the chemical potentials. These po-
tentials provide a high-level link between thermodynamic
concepts and specific experimental condition or control
parameters such as bulk composition, temperature, ion
concentration in the case of wet corrosion etc. In this sec-
tion we discuss their definition, how to obtain them from
ab initio calculations, their physical and thermodynamic
boundaries as well as how to translate experimental con-
ditions into chemical potential and vice versa.

1.
Introduction and references

The chemical potentials µMg and µX describe the
chemical reservoirs with which the Mg and X atoms are
in equilibrium. Rather than using absolute chemical po-
tentials as obtained when using the DFT total energies
directly we follow common convention and reference our
potentials with respect to a physically well-defined con-
figuration.
A major advantage of using a physics based refer-
ence is that the chemical potentials do not contain spuri-
ous pseudopotential and code specific contributions but
just the code-agnostic energy difference between refer-
ence and actual value.
The potential consists then of
two parts (see Eq. 2): The DFT reference energy and
the chemical potential µi with respect to this reference.
For the Mg-X alloy system natural reference systems are
Mg hcp bulk (for Mg) and bulk fcc Al/Ca (for Al/Ca).
Thus, the chemical potential for Mg bulk is µMg-bulk = 0,
independent of the chosen DFT code or pseudopotential.
This choice also implies that the bulk contribution in

the slab region is completely eliminated (see Supplemen-
tal Material (SM), Sec. A [44]). As a consequence, the
surface energy defined by Eq. 2 is by construction the
excess energy necessary to create a surface from bulk.
Since we focus here on substitutional surface structures,
i.e. structures where a surface Mg atom is substituted
by an Al or Ca atom, formally a Mg/X atom has to be
brought/taken into/out of the thermodynamic reservoir
µMg/µX for Mg/X atoms, respectively. Thus, only the
difference between the chemical potentials of the host and
solute species enters in Eq. 2, i.e., Esurf
σ
(T, µMg − µX).
Fig. 1 shows the chemical potential difference between
host and solute chemical potential, as well as the individ-
ual host and solute chemical potentials. The latter are
given by µ = −kBT ln x with x the concentration of the
host/solute in the bulk. As can be seen, up to a solute
concentration of ≈ 10 % the difference in chemical poten-
tials can be safely replaced by the chemical potential of
the solute alone, i.e.,

(µX − µMg) ≈ µX
,
(3)

µMg ≈ 0.
(4)

The latter equation simply means that the Mg reservoir
is that of Mg bulk in the dilute solute limit. Since our
focus will be on solid solutions and precipitation of Al and
Ca occurring at bulk concentrations at about 1 at.% the
difference can be safely replaced by the chemical potential
of the alloying element alone.

2.
The chemical reservoirs

In a realistic scenario, the chemical reservoirs with
which a surface is in contact are the bulk on one side and
the environment on the other. Since the total number of

FIG. 1.
Difference between the chemical potentials of species
A and B in an AxAB1−xA compound.
Also shown are the
chemical potentials of the two species. Note that we plot −µB
rather than µB to show the matching asymptotic behavior
with µA − µB for xA approaching 1.


4

solute atoms on the surface is negligibly small compared
to the total number of solute atoms in the bulk or en-
vironment, the surface chemical potential (see SM, Sec.
B [44]) will equilibrate towards one of these embedding
chemical potentials through an exchange of solute atoms.
In the following, we will discuss two scenarios (see
Fig. 2): First, the case when the surface is equilibrated
with the bulk alloy composition, i.e., after casting the
alloy and before exposing it to an oxygen environment.
The second scenario addresses the case of wet corrosion,
in which the surface comes into contact with a water elec-
trolyte. In this case, solutes are constantly exchanged
between the surface and their solvated state as ions in
solution.
In the dilute limit, i.e. in the absence of solute-solute
interaction, the chemical potential of a solute atom X in
Mg bulk is

µX-in-Mg-bulk(xX, T) = ∆EX-in-Mg-bulk + kBT ln xX
(5)

with

∆EX-in-Mg-bulk = EN−1
Mg+1X − N − 1

N
EN
Mg − EX-bulk. (6)

Here EN
Mg represents the DFT total energy of Mg bulk
with N atoms, EN−1
Mg+1X is the energy of the same bulk sys-
tem with one Mg atom substituted by the alloying atom
X. EX-bulk is the bulk reference of X. With this defini-
tion and at T=0 K the chemical potential µX-in-Mg-bulk
becomes ∆EX-in-Mg-bulk=119 meV for Al and 95 meV for
Ca.
The positive sign here implies that bringing an
Al/Ca solute from its native bulk (i.e. Al or Ca bulk)
into Mg is an endothermic reaction at T = 0 K. The
solute concentration is then solely driven by the configu-
rational entropy (second term in Eq. 5).
If the surface is in thermodynamic equilibrium with
its bulk, the surface chemical potential entering Eq. 2 be-
comes µX = µX-in-Mg-bulk(xX, T), i.e., a given experimen-
tal scenario can be easily translated into a corresponding
solute chemical potential. An obvious advantage of us-
ing the chemical potential is that it combines two inde-
pendent variables (concentration and temperature) in a
single one. This allows for an intuitive xy-representation
of surface energies vs chemical potential in the absence
of an explicit temperature dependence. This is the case
for ordered surface structures where Ssurf = 0 in Eq. 2.
Since the chemical potential is a rather abstract quantity,
we select and discuss in the result section a few represen-
tative scenarios. For the Mg-X bulk alloys, we consider
bulk mole fractions of 2 × 10−2 and 10−3 at 800 K for
Al and Ca respectively, mirroring experimentally synthe-
sized solid solutions in these alloys.
When the surface is exposed to an aqueous electrolyte
containing ions, we consider the chemical potentials for
Al3+ and Ca2+ ions (Fig. 2b).
For Ca, these values
are calculated at the Mg dissolution potential at which
Mg dissolves as Mg2+. The dissolution potential U =
−2.51 V is calculated from the bulk Mg Pourbaix diagram

for a Mg2+ concentration of 10−5 mol/L, representative
of the Mg2+ concentrations observed in experiments [45].
Using the dissolution potential of Mg (U Mg = −2.51 V)
for Al, the fcc Al bulk becomes the stable phase rather
than the ionic species Al3+ in solution. As a consequence,
Al3+ solutes will precipitate on the surface, giving rise
to an Al-water interface. The Pourbaix diagram of Al
shows however a much lower voltage U Al = −1.676 V at
which dissolution starts [46]. We therefore choose this
voltage to determine the chemical potential of Al ions in
solution. For Ca, the dissolution potential is very high
(U Ca = −2.868 V [46]), making Ca2+ ion the preferred
species at the Mg dissolution potential. For this case we
therefore use the dissolution potential of Mg.
The dependence of chemical potentials of Al and Ca
on their ion concentrations [47] are given by:

µAl = ∆G0
Al3+ + kBT · lncAl3+

c0
+ 3e(USHE − U Al), (7)

µCa = ∆G0
Ca2+ + kBT · lncCa2+

c0
+ 2e(USHE − U Mg), (8)

where ∆G0
Al3+ and ∆G0
Ca2+ are the formation energies of
Al3+ and Ca2+ ions respectively. For the standard hydro-
gen electrode potential (USHE) we chose −4.73 V, similar
to previous studies [47], and consider concentrations of
cAl3+ = 3×10−7 and cCa2+ = 8×10−8 mol/L, representa-
tive of concentrations observed in experiments [45]. c0 is
the reference concentration, which is equal to 55.55 mol/l
(1 l of water contains 55.55 mol of H2O molecules). Ad-
ditional details of the derivation of Eq. 7 and Eq. 8 can
be found in SM, Sec. C [44].

3.
Thermodynamic boundaries of the chemical potentials

The chemical potential of element X in its thermody-
namically stable intermetallic phases is generally lower
than that of its bulk phase.
Therefore, they serve as
upper bounds for the chemical potential µX.
For Al,
the Mg containing intermetallic phase where Al has its
lowest chemical potential is Al12Mg17.
For Ca it is
Mg2Ca.
The respective chemical bulk potentials are
µCa(Mg2Ca) = −0.23 eV and µAl(Al12Mg17) = −0.09 eV
(see SM, Sec. D [44]). For chemical potentials µX larger
than these potentials the solid solution becomes thermo-
dynamically unstable against the formation of Al12Mg17
or Mg2Ca precipitates, respectively. This upper bound
of the solute chemical potential allows us to compute the
thermodynamic solubility limit of element X in Mg bulk
as a function of temperature following Eq. 5.
When kinetic barriers prevent the system from reach-
ing its thermodynamically preferred configurations, it is
possible to realize chemical potentials well above the crit-
ical solute potential µX at which the intermetallic precip-
itates would form in thermodynamic equilibrium. Exper-
imentally this can be achieved by methods such as rapid


5

FIG. 2.
Chemical potential of the alloying element along the
surface normal for the two scenarios considered in the paper:
(a) The surface is in contact with a dry environment (vac-
uum). For this case the surface is assumed to be in thermo-
dynamic equilibrium with the bulk. (b) The surface is in con-
tact with an aqueous electrolyte. Since adsorption/diffusion
kinetics between surface and electrolyte is much faster than
diffusion between surface and bulk the surface is assumed to
be in thermodynamic equilibrium with the electrolyte.

quenching (see SM, Sec. E [44]). In these cases, there still
exists an upper limit of µ. As evident from Eq. 5, the up-
per limit of the (equilibrium) solute chemical potential in
bulk Mg is µX-in-Mg-bulk(xX, T) < ∆EX-in-Mg-bulk. In the
following discussions, we will therefore discuss both the
equilibrium solubility limit and the ∆EX-in-Mg-bulk limit
for supersaturated solid solution.

D.
Cluster expansion

To systematically explore the large configuration space
of possible surface structures σ, we combine DFT calcu-
lations with the cluster expansion (CE) approach. The
CE parameters are obtained by fitting to DFT calcula-
tions going over all possible symmetry-inequivalent con-
figurations of the alloying atoms on the (2×2) and (3×3)
Mg(0001) surface. The CE includes pair and triple inter-
actions. In Fig. 3, we show the surface energies calculated
by DFT (red crosses) and the surface energies of random
structures on a (6×6) surface calculated with CE (green
dots). We observe that for coverages up to 0.6 ML, the
CE predictions agree well with DFT results. However,
for θ = 2

3 and θ = 7

9, the CE overestimates the energies
of the surfaces. A careful analysis of the surface struc-
tures reveals that the surfaces undergo symmetry break-
ing during DFT relaxation, which cannot be accounted
for in the CE (see SM, Sec. F [44]). Nevertheless, as we
will see later, such high coverages occur only at solute
concentration well above the solubility limit and thus are
thermodynamically unstable.
In Fig. 3, we can clearly observe an energy gap be-
tween the lowest-energy ordered phases (red crosses on
the energy-hull line) and disordered surface states cal-
culated by CE for a large set of random configurations.
This energy gap is most pronounced at θ = 1

3 and also
visible at θ = 2

9 (≈ 0.22). The significantly lower (i.e.
energetically more favorable) surface energy of the or-
dered structures originates from attractive solute-solute
interactions that are absent in the disordered structure.
Such an energy gap between the ordered structure and
the large number of disordered structures is a prerequisite

for the existence of an order-disorder transition. Above
a critical temperature the ordered surface state becomes
thermodynamically unstable against a disordered phase.
To describe this transition in the phase diagram, we
construct in the following an analytical expression for the
surface energy of the disordered phase. From CE, we can
obtain the energy of all possible surface configurations
ECE
σ , analogous to EDFT
σ
in Eq. 2. We then calculate the
surface energies at T = 0 K following:

Esurf
σ
(T = 0 K, {µi}) = 1

2A[ECE
σ

−
�

i=Mg,X
ni,σ(EDFT
i−bulk + µi)]. (9)

The obtained Esurf
σ
(T = 0 K, {µi}) values are plotted
in Fig. 3 (green dots). We exclude the ordered phases
and fit a parabolic curve that envelops the energies of
the disordered structures to represent Edisorder
θ
(T, {µi})
(Fig. 3, black dashed line). At given chemical potential,
the equilibrium surface coverage of the disordered phase
is the one that minimizes the surface formation energy.
Following Eq. 1, we obtain this minimized energy by

Edisorder(T, {µi}) = min
θ [Edisorder
θ
(T = 0 K, {µi})−TSsurf],

(10)
where

Ssurf = −kB [θ · lnθ + (1 − θ) · ln(1 − θ)] .
(11)

The coverage θ at which the energy Edisorder
θ
reaches its
minimum is the equilibrium concentration θeq(T, {µi}).
It should be noted that with CE, we can also obtain
θeq(T, {µi}) via grand canonical Monte Carlo simulation.
However, in this work our focus is to build, as for the or-
dered surface phases, an analytical model for disordered
surface phase Edisorder. For the following analysis and
discussions we will therefore use the equations outlined
above.

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A.
Segregation behavior of Al and Ca at as cast
Mg surfaces

We now study the surface segregation behavior of Al
and Ca in vacuum by applying the formalism outlined
in Sec. II. We thus systematically substitute the Mg
atoms in the top surface and the sub-surface layers of
a Mg(0001) slab with Al and Ca atoms thus realising dif-
ferent surface structures and coverages. An illustration
of some of the studied Ca substitutions in the surface and
sub-surface layers of Mg are shown in Fig. 4.


6

FIG. 3.
Cluster expansion (CE) prediction of the surface
energies (green) upon substitution of Ca in the Mg(0001) sur-
face. The CE calculations are done on a (6×6) surface cell
with 105 random Ca distributions. The orange line shows the
corresponding convex hull. The crosses show the energies of
ordered phases on (2×2) and (3×3) surfaces obtained with
DFT calculations. The structures which undergo symmetry
breaking (see text) are marked with blue. The CE predictions
corresponding to the DFT-calculated structures are marked
by large green dots.
From the CE predictions, we obtain
Edisorder by fitting a parabola that envelopes the energies of
the disordered phase (dashed black line).

FIG. 4.
Surface structures for several coverages of Ca sub-
stituting Mg atoms in the surface layer on the Mg(0001)
surface shown in top view.
The lowest energy structure
(θCa = 1/3 ML) is seen also in side view, showing the re-
laxation pattern. Mg atoms are shown as orange balls, Ca
atoms as silver.

1.
Surface phase diagrams of as cast surfaces

We construct surface phase diagrams for Al and Ca
substitution at the Mg(0001) surface. As a first step we
construct the convex hull from the DFT-computed sur-
face energies. These energies are obtained using Eq. 2
at T =0 K, µMg = µMg-bulk and µX = µX-in-Mg-bulk.
The latter choice allows us to directly determine whether
moving an X atom from the Mg bulk to the surface is en-
ergetically favorable (i.e., it reduces the surface energy
by segregating to the Mg surface) or not. Fig. 5 shows
the convex hull construction. The phases with the lowest
energy at a given θ are marked by filled dots and lie on
the convex hull. We note that changing the chemical po-
tential µX will change the energy minimum of the convex
hull, but not its shape (see SM, Sec. G [44]). Comparing
the energies for Ca substitution in the surface (red line)
and sub-surface (blue line) layer, we see that Ca prefers

FIG. 5.
Surface energies Esurf upon substitution of (left) Ca
and (right) Al in the Mg(0001) surface and sub-surface layers.
Surface energies are calculated in vacuum. The Al/Ca chem-
ical potentials are that of a single Al/Ca atom in Mg bulk
(∆EX-in-Mg-bulk). The solid lines show the convex hull con-
struction for the top (red) and subsurface (blue) layer struc-
tures at T = 0 K.

the top surface except for the highest coverage θ = 1. Al
solutes show the exact opposite trend. For both Ca and
Al we find that the surface energies remain unchanged
for low coverages, i.e., the energy of a solute remains vir-
tually unchanged when bringing it from Mg bulk into the
subsurface. Thus, in the low covereage regime the second
layer already behaves like bulk. In the top surface layer,
however, a qualitatively different behavior is observed.
Up to a coverage of 0.6 ML Ca segregation leads to a
substantial reduction of the surface energy, while Al in-
creases the surface energy over the entire coverage range,
even for small coverages. Thus, Ca shows strong segre-
gation tendencies whereas Al is a strong anti-segregant.

Next we construct the surface phase diagrams (Fig. 6).
In these diagrams we include also the disordered surface
phase (Eq. 10).
Each colored area shows the respec-
tive surface phase that has the lowest Gibbs energy for a
given range of chemical potentials. Since Al is a strong
anti-segregant, the Al surface phase diagram shows only
phases with sub-surface occupation. For the surfaces in
vacuum at 500 K, the disordered phase emerges as the
most stable one at low Al/Ca chemical potentials, which
correspond to Al/Ca poor conditions (e.g.
low Al/Ca
concentrations in the bulk). At low chemical potential
µX, it is energetically unfavorable for solutes to go from
bulk to the surface, resulting in low surface solute con-
centrations. As a consequence, the interaction between
substituted solute atoms at the surface is small and con-
figurational entropy wins over remaining (small) inter-
actions. It should be noted that though the energies of
the solute free (θ = 0) surfaces (blue line) appear to be
identical to that of the disordered phases (orange line)
at low chemical potentials in Fig. 6, the energy of the
latter is lower. The energy differences of the two phases
are small because the corresponding solute coverages θ
are very low (< 10−4). Nevertheless, the energy of the
disordered phase in the vicinity of θ = 0 is indeed below
that of the ordered one, as shown in Fig. 3. For Ca, going
to higher chemical potentials, a c(3 × 3) structure with
θ = 1/3 ML coverage (see Figure 4) and at even higher


7

FIG. 6.
Surface phase diagrams for Ca and Al substitution
at Mg(0001) surfaces (top) in vacuum and (bottom) in aque-
ous electrolyte. The surface coverages of Ca and Al are re-
ported in ML. Chemical potentials corresponding to selected
Ca/Al concentrations in Mg bulk and different Ca2+ concen-
trations in solution are plotted as vertical dashed lines. The
dashed black line corresponding to Mg2Ca/Al12Mg17 forma-
tion marks the solubility limit of Ca and Al in hcp Mg, re-
spectively. On the left side of this line, Ca incorporates as
solid solution and on the right side of the line (grey shaded
area) it is in a supersaturated state and thus thermodynam-
ically unstable against the formation of its respective precip-
itates. The free energy of the disordered phase is calculated
for T = 500 K in vacuum and T = 300 K in solution.

potentials a structure with a coverage of θ = 2/3 ML be-
come stable. We also see that already at a temperature
of 500 K, as considered here, the configurational entropy
makes the disordered phase the thermodynamically fa-
vorable one at low coverages (between 0 and 1/3) as well
as at higher coverages (between 1/3 and 2/3).
Constructing the phase diagram in µ space allows us to
include information from the bulk phase diagram, such
as bulk phase transitions, in the same diagram. Specifi-
cally, the black dashed vertical line marks the solubility
limit, i.e., the chemical potential at which the Ca/Al-Mg
solid solution becomes thermodynamically unstable and
starts to form Mg2Ca/Al12Mg17 precipitates.
For Ca,
as shown in Fig. 6, only the disordered surface structure
(a solid solution of Ca and Mg in the top surface layer)
can be realized in the solid solution region. All ordered
surface structures shown in this diagram become stable
only at a chemical potential well above the solubility limit
and are thus thermodynamically unstable. For supersat-
urated Ca solid solution in Mg, which occur e.g. when
rapidly quenching as-cast Mg, the Ca chemical potential
can be well above the solubility limit.
At these non-
equilibrium conditions the ordered c(3×3) surface struc-
ture can form. For Al, the surface phase diagram shows
a similar behavior: in the thermodynamically stable re-
gion only the disordered random solution can be formed.
Again, meta-stable phases may be formed when going to

non-equilibrium conditions where the excess solute con-
centration in the bulk is well above the equilibrium limit.

2.
Segregation isotherms for Ca at the Mg(0001) surface

To connect to specific experimental scenarios the chem-
ical potential can be expressed by physical quantities that
describe the environment with which the surface is in
thermodynamic contact (see Sec II C). In this section we
will consider the initial state of as-cast surfaces, where
the solute concentration at the surface and in bulk can be
assumed to be in thermodynamic equilibrium (see Fig. 7).
In a solid solution, where the Al and/or Ca concentra-
tion is low, the corresponding chemical potentials can be
directly obtained from the bulk solute concentration and
temperature via Eq. 5 (see Fig. 1).
In thermodynamic equilibrium the Al/Ca chemical po-
tential in bulk and at the surface are identical.
The
chemical potential entering Eq. 2 to compute the sur-
face energies can thus be substituted by Eq. 5, allow-
ing us to write it as function of temperature and bulk
composition.
The resulting segregation isotherms are
visualized in Fig. 7 in two representations. In the left
diagram (Fig. 7 a) the Ca surface coverage is shown as
function of the Ca bulk concentration for a set of tem-
peratures.
At low Ca bulk concentrations the surface
coverage increases monotonously until a phase transition
to the ordered θ = 1/3 ML surface structure occurs. For
low coverages, the McLean isotherm [48] accurately re-
produces the computed isotherms. The reason for their
perfect match is that the expression for the surface energy
(Eq. 10) becomes formally equivalent to McLean at low
surface coverages (see SM, Sec. H [44]). However, as also
shown in Fig. 7 a, at high bulk solute concentrations the
assumption of a single coverage independent solute de-
fect or surface energy breaks down. As a consequence the
McLean model qualitatively fails to describe this for the
composition region relevant for practical applications. A
remarkable difference to the continuous relation between
bulk concentration and surface coverage is that the pres-
ence of the ordered structure pins the coverage, as seen in
the appearance of a terrace of constant surface coverage
in the plot.
The right diagram (Fig. 7 b) shows the segregation
isotherms as a heat map depicting the Ca surface cov-
erage at different temperatures and Ca concentrations in
Mg bulk.
An increase of the bulk concentration leads
to an increase in surface coverage, while an increase in
the temperature leads to a decrease in the surface cov-
erage (as shown in Fig. 7 a and qualitatively explained
by the McLean model [48]).
As a consequence, the
bulk Ca concentration required to achieve the Ca sur-
face coverage of 1

3 ML keeps decreasing with decreasing
temperature. Even at bulk Ca concentrations as low as
10−5 at. %, when going to sufficiently low temperatures
(≈ 300 K) this high surface coverage remains. Of course,
at such low temperatures diffusion rates become exceed-


8

FIG. 7.
a) Surface segregation isotherms at different temper-
atures for Ca segregation to the Mg(0001) surface as a func-
tion of the Ca concentration XCa in bulk Mg at 300, 500 and
800 K. The dashed lines show the respective prediction of the
McLean model [48]. b) Heat map for coverages of Ca at the
Mg(0001) surface at different temperatures and XCa. Exper-
imentally determined solubility of Ca in Mg bulk taken from
Ref. [49]: white line [50], red line [51], blue line [52], black line
with crosses [53]. The dashed black line with squares shows
the DFT computed solubility limit calculated with Eq. 5.

ingly low, preventing the surface from reaching thermo-
dynamic equilibrium/ segregation isotherms in realistic
time intervals.

3.
Rationalizing the Al and Ca surface segregation behavior

To rationalize the strong tendency of Ca to segregate
to the Mg surface, as opposed to Al, we consider materi-
als properties like the surface energies or the atomic radii
of the involved elements. Looking first at the surface en-
ergies of Mg(0001) (γ = 34.7 meV/˚A2), Ca(111) (γ =
34.2 meV/˚A2 [54]) and Al(111) (γ = 41.8 meV/˚A2 [55])
we note, that the surface energies of Mg(0001) and
Ca(111) are very similar, while the one of Al is 16 %
higher. This suggests that Ca segregation to the surface
of Mg will be favorable and possibly even decrease the
systems surface energy, while the opposite is expected
for Al. Indeed, we find that for the relevant low Ca sur-
face coverage structures (including the 1/3 ML structure,
which is reminiscent of a plane in the Mg2Ca intermetal-
lic) the surface energy is decreased compared to the pris-
tine surface. For Al we observe, as expected, the opposite
trend.
The atomic radii of Mg, Ca and Al are 1.60 ˚A, 1.98 ˚A
and 1.43 ˚A [1] respectively, showing that Ca is bigger than
Mg, while Al is smaller. Consequently, we expect Ca in-
corporation into the lattice to induce a larger compres-
sive strain, which could be released by segregation to the
surface. The release of such unfavorable strain energy
would make Ca segregation to the surface energetically
highly attractive. To test this hypothesis, we analyse the
relaxation behavior of Ca and Al substituted in the Mg
surface at different surface coverages. As expected, we
find significant outward relaxations for Ca (0.5 - 0.8 ˚A).
For Al, much smaller (∼ 0.2 ˚A) and inward relaxations

are observed. Thus, Ca can release a large part of the
compressive strain it has in the bulk at the surface. In
contrast, Al, not experiencing large strain in bulk, does
not profit from this mechanism. This size-dependent sur-
face segregation phenomenon has also been observed pre-
viously. For example, alkali atoms heavier than Li are
immiscible in the bulk of Al metal due to the size mis-
match [29]. However, they intermix well at the surface
where the strain can be relaxed [56–58].

B.
Dissolution behavior of Al and Ca from the Mg
surface

To study the dissolution behavior of Al and Ca from
the Mg(0001) surface in a corrosive environment we use
again surface phase diagrams (Fig. 6) constructed from
DFT energies.
These energies are obtained for cover-
ages of Al and Ca in the top Mg(0001) surface layer. To
capture the impact of the electrolyte an implicit solvent
approach (VASPsol [18]) is used. This approach emulates
an aqueous environment and accounts for its impact on
surface structures and energies. We freeze in the surface
structures obtained in the vacuum calculations without
performing additional structural relaxation. This choice
is made based on a systematic study comparing surface
phase diagrams obtained for surfaces in vacuum, in im-
plicit solvent, and in explicit solvent.
We found that
using frozen structures of geometries relaxed in vacuum
produces phase diagrams closest to the explicit solvent
model. These results will be reported in a forthcoming
publication. We again employ the methodology outlined
in section II, which allows us to treat ordered and dis-
ordered structures in the same framework. The diagram
(Fig. 6) provides information not only about the surface,
but also of the bulk phases.

1.
Impact of solvation on stability and dissolution of the
substitutional elements on Mg(0001)

A comparison of the surface phase diagrams for Ca and
Al in the absence and presence of water (Fig. 6) reveals
distinct differences. In the following, we will first focus on
Ca and continue the discussion to Al. The surface phase
diagram constructed for Ca substituting Mg atoms in a
Mg(0001) surface in contact with water reveals a richer
set of ordered phases in the range of chemical poten-
tials compatible with concentrations of bulk solid solu-
tion. We see the appearance of a low coverage 1/9 and
2/9 ML Ca ordered phase, which is not found in the ab-
sence of water. Modelling an aqueous environment via an
implicit solvent provides mainly the electrostatic screen-
ing characteristic of the solvent. Thus, the stabilisation
of the 1/9 and 2/9 ML structure is related to the built-
up of a partial solvation shell around the Ca atom, which
due to its larger size sticks out of the surface layer (see
Fig. 4). This solvation-induced stabilisation of Ca surface


9

FIG. 8.
Surface energies (Gsurf) upon substitution of (left)
Ca and (right) Al in the Mg(0001) surface in the absence and
presence of implicit water.
The Al/Ca chemical potentials
are that of a single Al/Ca atom in Mg bulk (∆EX-in-Mg-bulk).
For Ca, we show only results for Ca in the top surface layer
because the structures with Ca in the subsurface layer have
been found to be higher in energy (i.e. less favorable) for all
coverages. For Al, results for Al residing on the subsurface
layer and on the top surface are shown.

atoms is absent in the vacuum case. The solvation en-
ergy gain is apparently sufficient to overcome the impact
of entropy, which dominates at low chemical potentials
and favors disordered surfaces in the vacuum case.
The screening of unfavorable electrostatic interactions
and the ensuing gain in solvation energy, is an important
stabilization mechanism for semiconductor/insulator sur-
faces in aqueous environment [59].
For metals, it was
considered to be of significantly lesser importance due
to their large dielectric screening. The appearance of a
solvation stabilized Ca structure is therefore significant,
since it reveals an efficient solution induced mechanism
to stabilize specific surface structures. Finally, the pres-
ence of the solvent substantially lowers the surface energy
(Fig. 8 a) of Ca substituted in the Mg surface, i.e., solva-
tion promotes solute segregation.
The same energy gain upon solvation is also observed
for Al-substituted Mg surfaces, though at a smaller mag-
nitude (Fig. 8 b). This energy gain promotes the segrega-
tion of Al to the top surface, whereas in vacuum it prefers
to reside at the subsurface layers. In this way, the θ = 1

3
ordered phase with Al in the top surface layer becomes
thermodynamically stable in the presence of water in a
small region of the phase diagram (Fig. 6d).
To discuss realistic experimental scenarios we consider
a few selected chemical potentials (see Sec. II C 2) that
represent bulk (blue dashed lines) or solution concentra-
tions in the electrolyte (dashed red and green lines in
Fig. 6). The low concentrations are consistent with ex-
perimental observations [45]. Using the chemical poten-
tials calculated for the ionic species in water at different
concentrations, we observe a significantly higher thermo-
dynamic stability of Ca2+ ions in solution, as compared
to Ca in Mg bulk. The higher energetic stability of Ca2+

ions in water compared to Ca atoms in Mg bulk favors
the dissolution of Ca from the Mg surfaces and prevents
the formation of surface structures with higher Ca cover-
age. A substantially lower propensity to dissolve is found
for Al (see red and green dashed lines in Fig. 6d). Note

FIG. 9.
Impact of Ca/Al substitution on the work function
of the Mg(0001) surface.
Values for the work functions of
the pristine Mg(0001) [60], Al(111) [55] and Ca(111) [54] are
marked by dashed lines.

that the x-scale is different for Ca and Al in Fig. 6c and
d.

2.
Impact of Al and Ca segregation on Mg(0001) in the
context of micro galvanic corrosion

The opposite dissolution tendencies of Ca and Al, to-
gether with the Al/Ca coverages obtained from the com-
puted surface phase diagrams and the computed elec-
trode potential (work function) of these structures, have
direct implications for the corrosion behavior of Mg upon
alloying with these elements. To discuss these relations
we compute the work functions for the various surface
structures and coverages (Fig. 9), since the work func-
tion indicates the ease for removing electrons from the
surface of a material. More details on the calculation are
provided in SM, Sec. I [44]. For the Mg(0001) surface
the work function increases with increasing coverage of
Al and shows the opposite trend (i.e. it decreases) for
Ca substitution up to ca. 0.6 ML. From the phase di-
agrams we know that Al favors high coverages on Mg,
while the favorable coverages for Ca lie right within the
range of work function decrease. The increase of the work
function in the presence of Al means that Al impairs the
withdrawal of electrons from Mg, which makes it harder
to oxidize the Mg surface. In contrast, the lower work
functions for Ca containing surfaces indicates that Ca
makes the withdrawal of electrons from the Mg surface
easier and therefore promotes its oxidation.
In the context of micro galvanic corrosion these trends
in the work functions indicate that Ca is likely to act
as anode promoting the electron withdrawal, while Al is
likely to act as cathode on the Mg surface, in good agree-
ment with observations of corrosion experiments men-
tioned in the introduction, i.e., Mg shows anodic poten-
tials in the presence of Ca and cathodic potentials in
the presence of Al [8, 9, 13]. Here, the anodic nature of
Ca implies that Ca prefers to oxidize to Ca2+ and dis-
solve from the Mg surface into the electrolyte, whereas


10

Al prefers to remain in the Mg surface.
This dissolu-
tion propensity and the anodic nature of Ca in Mg sur-
faces provides support to the experimental observations
of higher corrosion rates when the Ca content in Mg al-
loys is increased [10–12].

IV.
CONCLUSIONS

Based on an unified thermodynamic approach that
allows us to treat ordered and disordered surface struc-
tures in the same framework, and by using chemical
potentials as state variables, we construct phase dia-
grams for Mg surfaces alloyed with Al/Ca including
bulk information in the same diagram.
For Ca we
find a strong tendency to segregate to the surface, as
opposed to Al which shows an anti-segregation behavior,
preferring to remain in a more bulk like environment.
Generating surface segregation isotherms we predict the
surface coverage expected for a given bulk concentration
and temperature. Accounting for realistic environmental
conditions suggested by experiment we identify the
relevant surface coverage regimes.
Comparing surface
phase diagrams for initial state of pristine as cast alloys,

i.e.
surfaces in vacuum, with ones in contact with an
aqueous environment, we find that the built up of a
partial solvation shell around the protruding Ca atoms
at the surface leads to the stabilisation of a low coverage
ordered structure absent in vacuum.
Furthermore we
expect, based on the significantly higher thermodynamic
stability of Ca2+ ions in solution as opposed to Mg bulk,
but also to Al3+ ions in solution, and the resulting higher
dissolution tendency of Ca, that an Al enrichment at the
surface will occur under corrosive conditions. Invoking
finally materials properties (like the work function) of all
involved elements we rationalise the impact of Al and Ca
alloying in Mg in the context of micro-galvanic corrosion
and conclude that Ca/Al will be anodic/cathodic in Mg,
i.e.
the presence of Ca will promote corrosion and Al
suppress it.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge funding by the Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft
(DFG,
German
Research
Foundation)
through SFB1394, project no. 409476157.

[1] C. Kittell, Introduction to solid state physics, Vol. 8
(John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005).

[2] R. Van Noorden, The rechargeable revolution: A better
battery, Nature News 507, 26 (2014).

[3] F. Witte, N. Hort, C. Vogt, S. Cohen, K. U. Kainer,
R. Willumeit, and F. Feyerabend, Degradable biomate-
rials based on magnesium corrosion, Current Opinion in
Solid State and Materials Science 12, 63 (2008).

[4] S. Sandl¨obes, M. Fri´ak, S. Korte-Kerzel, Z. Pei, J. Neuge-
bauer, and D. Raabe, A rare-earth free magnesium alloy
with improved intrinsic ductility, Scientific Reports 7, 1
(2017).

[5] Y. Yang, F. Scenini, and M. Curioni, A study on magne-
sium corrosion by real-time imaging and electrochemical
methods: Relationship between local processes and hy-
drogen evolution, Electrochimica Acta 198, 174 (2016).

[6] Y. C. Lee, A. K. Dahle, and D. H. Stjohn, The role of
solute in grain refinement of magnesium, Metallurgical
and Materials Transactions A: Physical Metallurgy and
Materials Science 31, 2895 (2000).

[7] J. W. Seong and W. J. Kim, Development of biodegrad-
able Mg-Ca alloy sheets with enhanced strength and cor-
rosion properties through the refinement and uniform
dispersion of the Mg2Ca phase by high-ratio differential
speed rolling, Acta Biomaterialia 11, 531 (2015).

[8] N. T. Kirkland, M. P. Staiger, D. Nisbet, C. H. Davies,
and N. Birbilis, Performance-driven design of biocompat-
ible Mg alloys, JOM 63, 28 (2011).

[9] A. D. S¨udholz, N. T. Kirkland, R. G. Buchheit, and
N. Birbilis, Electrochemical properties of intermetallic
phases and common impurity elements in magnesium al-
loys, Electrochemical and Solid-State Letters 14, 2010
(2011).

[10] N. T. Kirkland, N. Birbilis, J. Walker, T. Woodfield,
G. J. Dias, and M. P. Staiger, In-vitro dissolution of
magnesium-calcium binary alloys: Clarifying the unique
role of calcium additions in bioresorbable magnesium im-
plant alloys, Journal of Biomedical Materials Research -
Part B Applied Biomaterials 95, 91 (2010).

[11] M. S. Syaza Nabilla, C. D. Zuraidawani, and D. M.
Nazree, Effect of Ca content percentage and sintering
temperature on corrosion rate in Mg-Ca composite fab-
ricated using powder metallurgy technique, AIP Confer-
ence Proceedings 1756, 030009 (2016).

[12] K. Gusieva, C. H. Davies, J. R. Scully, and N. Birbilis,
Corrosion of magnesium alloys: The role of alloying, In-
ternational Materials Reviews 60, 169 (2015).

[13] L. G. Bland, L. C. Scully, and J. R. Scully, Assessing the
corrosion of multi-phase Mg-Al alloys with high al con-
tent by electrochemical impedance, mass loss, hydrogen
collection, and inductively coupled plasma optical emis-
sion spectrometry solution analysis, Corrosion 73, 526
(2017).

[14] G. Song and A. Atrens, Understanding magnesium cor-
rosion. A framework for improved alloy performance, Ad-
vanced Engineering Materials 5, 837 (2003).

[15] K. Thekkepat, H.-S. Han, J.-W. Choi, S.-C. Lee, E. S.
Yoon, G. Li, H.-K. Seok, Y.-C. Kim, J.-H. Kim, and
P.-R. Cha, Computational design of Mg alloys with min-
imal galvanic corrosion, Journal of Magnesium and Alloys
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jma.2021.06.019 (2021).

[16] M. Nezafati, K. Cho, A. Giri, and C. S. Kim, DFT study
on the water molecule adsorption and the surface disso-
lution behavior of Mg alloys, Materials Chemistry and
Physics 182, 347 (2016).


11

[17] C. Wang, J. Wang, D. Ma, S. Zhu, L. Wang, and S. Guan,
First-principles studies on structure stability, segrega-
tion, and work function of Mg doped with metal el-
ements, International Journal of Quantum Chemistry
121, 1 (2021).

[18] K. Mathew, R. Sundararaman, K. Letchworth-Weaver,
T. A. Arias, and R. G. Hennig, Implicit solvation model
for density-functional study of nanocrystal surfaces and
reaction pathways, Journal of Chemical Physics 140,
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4865107 (2014).

[19] K. Mathew, V. S. Kolluru, S. Mula, S. N. Steinmann, and
R. G. Hennig, Implicit self-consistent electrolyte model in
plane-wave density-functional theory, Journal of Chem-
ical
Physics
151,
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5132354
(2019).

[20] L. Vitos, A. Ruban, H. Skriver, and J. Koll´ar, The surface
energy of metals, Surface Science 411, 186 (1998).

[21] H. Namba, J. Darville, and J. Gilles, A model for the
oxidation of mg(0001) based upon leed, aes, els and work
function measurements, Surface Science 108, 446 (1981).

[22] C. Bungaro, C. Noguera, P. Ballone, and W. Kress, Early
oxidation stages of mg(0001): A density functional study,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4433 (1997).

[23] E. Schr¨oder, R. Fasel, and A. Kiejna, Mg(0001) surface
oxidation: A two-dimensional oxide phase, Phys. Rev. B
69, 193405 (2004).

[24] T. K. Kim, T. S. Sørensen, E. Wolfring, H. Li, E. V.
Chulkov, and P. Hofmann, Electron-phonon coupling on
the mg(0001) surface, Phys. Rev. B 72, 075422 (2005).

[25] M. Pozzo and D. Alf`e, Hydrogen dissociation and diffu-
sion on transition metal (=ti, zr, v, fe, ru, co, rh, ni, pd,
cu, ag)-doped mg(0001) surfaces, International Journal
of Hydrogen Energy 34, 1922 (2009).

[26] G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular dynamics
for liquid metals, Physical Review B 47, 558 (1993).

[27] G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨uller, Efficient iterative schemes
for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave
basis set, Physical Review B 54, 11169 (1996).

[28] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized
gradient approximation made simple, Physical Review
Letters 77, 3865 (1996).

[29] J. Neugebauer and M. Scheffler, Adsorbate-substrate and
adsorbate-adsorbate interactions of Na and K adlayers on
Al(111), Physical Review B 46, 16067 (1992).

[30] C. G. Van de Walle and J. Neugebauer, First-principles
surface phase diagram for hydrogen on gan surfaces,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 066103 (2002).

[31] K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Composition, structure, and
stability of ruo2(110) as a function of oxygen pressure,
Phys. Rev. B 65, 035406 (2001).

[32] A. van de Walle, M. Asta, and G. Ceder, The alloy the-
oretic automated toolkit: A user guide, Calphad 26, 539
(2002).

[33] A. P. Thompson, H. M. Aktulga, R. Berger, D. S. Bolin-
tineanu, W. M. Brown, P. S. Crozier, P. J. in ’t Veld,
A. Kohlmeyer, S. G. Moore, T. D. Nguyen, R. Shan,
M. J. Stevens, J. Tranchida, C. Trott, and S. J. Plimpton,
Lammps - a flexible simulation tool for particle-based
materials modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum
scales, Computer Physics Communications 271, 108171
(2022).

[34] Z. Pan and T. J. Rupert, Formation of ordered and disor-
dered interfacial films in immiscible metal alloys, Scripta
Materialia 130, 91 (2017).

[35] G.-X. Qian, R. M. Martin, and D. J. Chadi, First-
principles study of the atomic reconstructions and en-
ergies of ga- and as-stabilized gaas(100) surfaces, Phys.
Rev. B 38, 7649 (1988).

[36] J. E. Northrup and S. Froyen, Energetics of gaas(100)-
(2×4) and -(4×2) reconstructions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71,
2276 (1993).

[37] R. Di Felice, J. E. Northrup, and J. Neugebauer, Ener-
getics of AlN thin films and the implications for epitaxial
growth on SiC, Physical Review B 54, R17351 (1996).

[38] R. D. Felice, J. E. Northrup, and J. Neugebauer, Ener-
getics of aln thin films and the implications for epitaxial
growth on sic, Phys. Rev. B 54, R17351 (1996).

[39] J. Neugebauer, T. Zywietz, M. Scheffler, J. E. Northrup,
and C. G. Van de Walle, Clean and As-Covered Zinc-
Blende GaN (001) Surfaces:
Novel Surface Structures
and Surfactant Behavior, Physical Review Letter 80,
3097 (1998).

[40] H. Chen, R. M. Feenstra, J. E. Northrup, T. Zywietz,
J. Neugebauer, and D. W. Greve, Surface structures and
growth kinetics of ingan(0001) grown by molecular beam
epitaxy, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B:
Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures Processing,
Measurement, and Phenomena 18, 2284 (2000).

[41] C. G. Van de Walle and J. Neugebauer, Role of hydro-
gen in surface reconstructions and growth of gan, Jour-
nal of Vacuum Science & Technology B: Microelectron-
ics and Nanometer Structures Processing, Measurement,
and Phenomena 20, 1640 (2002).

[42] J. Neugebauer,
T. K. Zywietz,
M. Scheffler,
J. E.
Northrup, H. Chen, and R. M. Feenstra, Adatom kinet-
ics on and below the surface: The existence of a new
diffusion channel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 056101 (2003).

[43] X.-G. Wang, A. Chaka, and M. Scheffler, Effect of the
environment on α−al2O3 (0001) surface structures, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 84, 3650 (2000).

[44] See Supplemental Material for calculation of chemical
potential in aqueous environment, chemical potential
threshold of forming precipitates, the discrepancy be-
tween cluster expansion and DFT results, the influence
of chemical potential on the convex hull, the McLean
model, and the calculation of work function.

[45] J. Nowak and D. Zander, private communication (2022).
[46] J. Rumble, ed., CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics
2022-2023:
A Ready-reference Book of Chemical and
Physical Data (CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2022).

[47] M. Todorova and J. Neugebauer, Extending the concept
of defect chemistry from semiconductor physics to elec-
trochemistry, Physical Review Applied 1, 1 (2014).

[48] D. McLean, Grain boundaries in metals (Oxford at the
Clarendon Press, 1957) p. 347.

[49] A. A. Nayeb-Hashemi and J. B. Clark, The Ca-Mg
(Calcium-Magnesium) System, Bulletin of Alloy Phase
Diagrams 8, 58 (1987).

[50] H.
Volsskuhler,
Der
aufbau
der
magneslumreichen
magnesium-kalzium-leglerungen (the phase diagram of
magnesium- rich mg-cal alloys), Z. Metallkunde 29, 236
(1937).

[51] H. Nowotny, E. Wormnes, and A. Mohrnheim, Investiga-
tion on the al–ca, mg–ca, and mg–zr systems, Z. Metal-
lkunde 32, 39 (1940).

[52] J. Haughton, Alloys of magnesium. part vi.-the consti-
tution of the magnesium-rich alloys of magnesium and
calcium, J. Inst. Metals 61, 241 (1937).


12

[53] W. Bulian and E. Fahrenhorst, The solid solubility of
calcium in magnesium, J. Inst. Metals 1, 70 (1946).

[54] J. Wang and S. Q. Wang, Surface energy and work func-
tion of fcc and bcc crystals: Density functional study,
Surface Science 630, 216 (2014).

[55] N. E. Singh-Miller and N. Marzari, Surface energies, work
functions, and surface relaxations of low-index metallic
surfaces from first principles, Physical Review B - Con-
densed Matter and Materials Physics 80, 1 (2009).

[56] C. Stampfl and M. Scheffler, Theoretical identification of
a (2 × 2) composite double layer ordered surface alloy of
na on al(111), Surface Science 319, L23 (1994).

[57] C. STAMPFL and M. SCHEFFLER, Theory of alkali-
metal adsorption on close-packed metal surfaces, Surface

Review and Letters 02, 317 (1995).

[58] M. Borg,
C. Stampfl,
A. Mikkelsen,
J. Gustafson,
E. Lundgren, M. Scheffler, and J. N. Andersen, Den-
sity of configurational states from first-principles cal-
culations:
The phase diagram of al–na surface alloys,
ChemPhysChem 6, 1923 (2005).

[59] S. H. Yoo, M. Todorova, and J. Neugebauer, Selective
Solvent-Induced Stabilization of Polar Oxide Surfaces in
an Electrochemical Environment, Physical Review Let-
ters 120, 66101 (2018).

[60] S.-T. Cheng, A density functional theory study on the
oxidation behavior of Mg and Mg-Zn alloys, Ph.D. thesis,
Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum (2015).


