Generation of adaptive cellular structures to surfaces with 

complex geometries using Homotopy functions and conformal 

transformation

A.E Gómez-Ovalle1

1Texas A&M University

Abstract

The optimal use of resources has motivated the engineering community to employ controlled 

distribution of material within their structural designs, often relying on cellular and lattice 

porous structures. In this research work, a computational method is implemented to generate 

porous lattice structures conforming to surfaces with complex geometry. This method allows 

solving the problem of integrating cellular structures in engineering applications with 

complex macro-geometries. Examples of surface transformation are shown in this report. In 

addition, an applied model is shown where the effects of the transformation on the 

mechanical properties are analyzed.

1.
Introduction

Cellular materials are based on unit cells that reproduce in space, similar to the concept of 

unit cells in crystallography [1]. Usually, unit cells are designed in a two- or three-

dimensional Euclidean space following a rectangular geometry. In this case, a unit cell is a 

parallelepiped, i.e., a space enclosed by three pairs of parallel surfaces. Within unit cells are 

the different motifs that are repeated throughout space, generating a cellular pattern. Typical 


motifs within unit cells correspond to beam or membrane assemblies, optimally designed to 

achieve unprecedented combinations of effective materials properties [2]. 

On a laboratory scale, the surface of freely cellular material is an arrangement of flat surface 

elements. These surface elements are characterized by their normals which are oriented 

perpendicular to the surface elements. Thus, the orientation of a particular surface element is 

given through the angles which its normal makes with the normals of the other surface 

elements. However, the surfaces that define the boundary of an engineering part are not flat, 

on the contrary, these are surfaces with variable curvatures [3]. Therefore, when unit cells 

approach the border defined by an engineering device, the normal vectors of the plane 

surfaces of the unit cell and the normal vectors of the surface of the engineering part do not 

coincide. More specifically, for every neighborhood of a point on the surface, the tangent 

planes are different. That is, tangent plane parametrizations do not produce parallel points. 

The situation mentioned above creates a challenge because, at the boundary of an engineering 

device, the unit cell boundaries and the engineering device do not match. So, in engineering 

applications, this key challenge is related to the design of cellular and architected materials 

while determining the best integration of a cellular pattern into the shape of the component 

of interest [4]. From this, , two situations occur i) there are empty spaces not filled by the 

unit cells or ii) the unit cells surpass the border of the engineering device. 

A solution is to start from the second situation and trim the areas of the remaining unit cells 

to meet the outer geometry[6]. However, this leads to another issue. The motifs within the 

unit cells are designed to fulfill specific effective properties, which depend on the topology 

of the chosen motif. If this motif is incomplete, the engineering performance of the unit cell 


will also be incomplete, leading to end-effects and unpredicted structural performances of 

the structures. 

Another solution is that the unit cell's geometry conforms to the engineering device boundary, 

ensuring that all unit cells are complete, giving a smoother end-effect condition. This type of 

solution creates a challenge in the modeling of cellular materials.

In order to achieve this, it is necessary to perform a transformation of the curve or surface 

that defines the unit cell to the curve or surface that defines the boundary of the engineering 

device. A mathematical concept that allows this transformation is that of homotopy. This 

concept refers to the mapping of one continuous function into another and it is achieved

through the continuous deformation of one function into another [5]. Therefore, two different 

topological spaces are homotopic if one space can be continuously deformed in the other. 

This concept has been used in graphic computing and other similar applications [6]. For 

example, Tai et al. applied the homotopy concept to determine the control of the shape of 

cross-sections between two defined contours [6,7]. In this case, the homotopy is parametrized 

by two scalar-valued functions that control, separately, the transition from one contour to the 

other and the scaling of the cross-sectional shape between the two defined contours [8]. 

Hence, the homotopy concept allows the transformation of the curves and surfaces that 

determine the unit cell to the surface of the edges of a final application piece.

This work aims to start a framework for modeling the mechanical properties of conforming 

cellular materials. To achieve this, continuous homotopic (algebraic topology) and conformal 

geometry will be implemented on unit cell design so that the initial mechanical properties are 

maintained. This methodology produces a functional geometric spatial gradation in the 


growth of the macro-structure topology. Due to the above, it is necessary to develop laws to 

homogenize and scale that applies to spatially heterogeneous structures. Finally, the failure 

mechanisms (plastic deformation and fracture) of these architecture structures will be 

analyzed using hybrid computational and analytical methods. In this case, the architectural 

structures will be elasto-plastically modeled using the Finite Element Software Abaqus®.

2. Homotopy functions as a solution to the curve transformation problem

2.1. Problem Definition

Definition of transformation: Figure 1 shows an example in which a geometric object (a 

pentagon) is adapted to another geometric object (a circle). The indicated segment's 

transformation represent that adapting one geometric object into another involves a 

transformation from one curve to another. The smooth modification specified in the 

definition exposes that this transformation must be step-by-step, in a continuous, non-abrupt 

manner. Figure 1 shows that the transformation modifies the curvature of the curve gradually. 

Figure. 1 Diagram of the adaptation of one structure to another. In this case, a straight line 

of a pentagon is transformed into an arc of a circle. 


This transformation function is defined according to the concept of homotopy, which allows 

the geometric transformation to be carried out gradually and continuously. Homotopy is 

defined below:

2.2. Definition of homotopic function:

Definition:  Let 𝑓, 𝑔 : 𝑋𝑌 be maps where 𝑋 and 𝑌 are topological spaces. If there exists a 

map 𝐹: 𝑋 × 𝐼𝑌 such that 𝐹(𝑥, 𝑜) = 𝑓(𝑥) and 𝐹(𝑥, 1) = 𝑔(𝑥) for all 𝑥 ∈ 𝑋, 𝐼 = [0,1], then 

the map 𝐹 is called a homotopy from 𝑓 to 𝑔.

In the case of applying the definition to the pentagon problem, the function 𝑓 corresponds to 

the contour parameterized by the straight line and the function 𝑔 corresponds to the contour 

parameterized by the arc of the circle. Therefore, the homotopic function defines continuous 

deformation of contour f into g as t varies from 0 to 1. The homotopic function for a contour 

(1D) can be expressed as follows (equation.1): 

𝐹(𝑥, 𝑡) = (1 − 𝑡)𝑓(𝑥) − 𝑡𝑔(𝑥)
eq.1

In the case of a 3D surface the homotopy function is expressed as follows:

𝐶(𝑢, 𝑣) = [(1 − 𝑅𝑛(𝑣))𝐶1(𝑢) + 𝑅𝑛(𝑣)𝐶2(𝑢)] (𝐼2 + 𝑆(𝑣)) eq.2

In this equation, 𝐶(𝑢, 𝑣) corresponds to the homotopy function in generalized coordinates 𝑢

and 𝑣. 𝑅𝑛(𝑣) corresponds to the generalization of the parameter 𝑡 which is in charge of

continuously transforming the initial contour 𝐶1(𝑢) to the objective contour 𝐶2(𝑢), this 

function has the name the flexing function. 𝐼2 corresponds to the 2 × 2 identity matrix. The 

function 𝑆(𝑣), called the scaling function, determines the number of internal contours that 

will exist between the initial contour and the target contour.


2.3. Algorithm applied (pseudocode) to generate the structure:

Algorithm 1: Conformal transformation from an initial curve to a target curve

1:   Begin

2:   read inputs;

3:   if (analytic geometry case) 

4:          Then

5:          Begin {Then}

6:                 determine distribution of cross-sectional planes;

7:             
determine radial distribution of points;

8:                  determine circumferential distribution of points;      

9:                    For each cross-section do

10:            Begin {each cross-section)

11:                            For each circumferential point do

12:                  Begin {each circumferential point}           

13:               generate end-shapes;

14:                   generate outer boundary;

15:                   determine shape variation parameter;

16:                  generate surface coordinates by blending end-shapes;

17:                   For each radial point do

18:                              Begin {each radial point}

19:                                   determine grid variation parameter;

20:                     
compute coefficients for orthogonal trajectories;


21:                                   determine grid-point coordinates;

22:                                   Write grid-point coordinates;

23:                      end; {each radial point}

24:             end; (each circumferential point}

25:      end; {each cross-section) 

26:   end' {Then] 

27: end.

3.
Application of the homotopy functions algorithm to 2D cellular structures

3.1. The first example of application of the homotopic function (2D): 

The objective in this example is to transform the contour given by the function (𝑦1, 𝑧1) to the 

contour given by the function (𝑦2, 𝑧2).

Figure.2 Contours to transform using homotopy functions. 

First step. The first step corresponds to the parameterization of the contours. Below are the 

settings for both contours: 


The initial shape, represented in parametric form with parameter 𝑡, can expressed as :

𝑦1 = 𝑦1(𝑡) 𝑧1 = 𝑧1(𝑡) }(𝑡𝑎 < 𝑡 < 𝑡𝑏) eq.3

The target cross-section in parametric form with the same 𝑡 domain (𝑡𝑎, 𝑡𝑏) is represented 

as:

𝑦2 = 𝑦2(𝑡) 𝑧2 = 𝑧2(𝑡) }(𝑡𝑎 < 𝑡 < 𝑡𝑏) eq.4

Therefore, the initial and terminal cross-section can be expressed as follows: 

Initial cross-section
𝐹inal cross-section

𝑦1(𝑡) = 𝑡

𝑧1(𝑡) = √1 − 𝑡2

3

𝑦2(𝑡) = 𝑡

𝑧2(𝑡) = √(0.317)2 − 𝑡2

Table.1 Parameterized cross sections.

Second Step. In this step the bending function is determined by means of a polynomial 

function:

The function 𝑐𝑛[𝑥𝑛(𝑥)]is usually specified to be smooth and monotonic. A typical expression 

for 𝑐𝑛 might be: 

𝑐𝑛(𝑥𝑛) = 𝑥𝑛

𝑚 eq.5

with m as an adjustable design parameter. 

After that, a transition surface representing a smooth blending of the two end shapes is 

defined by the functions: 

𝑦(𝑥, 𝑡) = [1 − 𝑐(𝑥)]𝑦1(𝑡) + 𝑐(𝑥)𝑦2(𝑡) eq.6

𝑧(𝑥, 𝑡) = [1 − 𝑐(𝑥)]𝑧1(𝑡) + 𝑐(𝑥)𝑧2(𝑡)
eq.7


Finally, the size variation of the surface is prescribed by introducing an independent scaling 

function 𝜆(𝑥), which is specified to be smooth and nonnegative but not necessarily 

monotonic:

𝑦(𝑥, 𝑡) = 𝜆(𝑥){[1 − 𝑐(𝑥)]𝑦1(𝑡) + 𝑐(𝑥)𝑦2(𝑡)} eq.8

𝑧(𝑥, 𝑡) = 𝜆(𝑥){[1 − 𝑐(𝑥)]𝑧1(𝑡) + 𝑐(𝑥)𝑧2(𝑡)} eq.9

The scaling function 𝜆(𝑥) is defined by: 

𝜆(𝑥𝑛) = 𝜆2(1.6𝑥𝑛 − 5.3𝑥𝑛2
eq.10

+9.1𝑥𝑛

3 − 4.4𝑥𝑛

4

After applying this algorithm, the determined cellular structure is generated by using the 

functions mentioned above: 

4. Comparison of the mechanical behavior between a 2D conformal structure and 

a 2D non-conformal structure

Figure 8 shows a preliminary qualitative comparison between a non-conforming and a 

conforming structure. In this case, there is high deformation in the outer and adjacent unit 

cells. On the other hand, in the structure, it is observed that the deformation of the outer cells 

is less.


Figure. 8 Models are showing the coupling of a conformal and a non-conforming cell 

structure with a circular geometry edge. a) The nonconforming model shows a large 

deformation at the edges of the unit cells close to the edge. b) The conformal model shows a 

significant reduction in unit cell deformation near the edge.

The figure. 9 shows an implementation of a non-conforming structure and a conforming one 

in another type of geometry. In this case, a tensile load is applied at one end of the structure 

of 100MPa. The structure is recessed at the other end. The structure material is Titanium with 

a modulus of elasticity of 116GPa and a Poisson's Ratio of 0.34. 


Figure.9 Finite element model of a conformal structure.

Figure.10 shows the results of the simulation. These models show three essential 

characteristics:

1. The non-conforming structure presents a more significant deformation along the x-

axis.

2. The conforming design gives higher stress concentrations.

3. The stress distribution in the conforming system is more uniform.

This last point is observed in the red circle in the non-conforming structure. In this red circle, 

an area is observed in which the stresses are low compared whole system. On the other hand, 

the conformal structure presents a similar stress distribution throughout the design; there are 

no areas with minor deformation. Comparison in the stress distribution between a conforming 

structure and a non-conforming structure


Figure.10 Comparison of the stress distribution between a conforming structure and a non-

conforming structure.

From these results, the following can be concluded:

a) The conformal structure generates a homogeneous distribution throughout the entire 

structure. This allows achieving one of the objectives of the methodology, which is 

that all unit cells throughout the structure deform uniformly. 

A conformal structure generates geometric alterations in the unit cell concerning the original 

unit cell. In this case, a pseudo-periodic structure is obtained that can decrease the mechanical 

rigidity of the structure. For this reason, the system changes the mechanical behavior initially 

expected for the original unit cells. Therefore, it is necessary to include a section in the 

transformation algorithm that allows controlling the mechanical behavior of the unit cell 

while it is transformed.


According to those mentioned above, it is necessary to generate a complement to the 

algorithm that allows controlling the transformation of the structure while maintaining a 

specific mechanical property. Therefore, the unit cell transformation modeling was divided 

into two categories to achieve the above objective. Figure. 11 illustrates the two ways in 

which unit cells are transformed. 

Figura.11 Two ways in which a unit cell is transformed. First, the unit cell is deformed at its 

angles, and second the size of the unit cell changes as it approaches the boundary. 

In the first instance, the figure shows that the unit cell changes shape, more specifically the 

angles and edges, which are coupled to the geometry of the outer edge. Second, once the unit 

cell takes on a particular geometry, the size increases as it gets closer to one of the edges.

The change in shape is represented by the Jacobian operator J, as shown in eq. 11. On the 

other hand, the changes in size are represented using the function w(x). the function y

represents any mechanical property. 

𝑦 = 𝐽𝑥 + 𝛿𝑤(𝑥)
Eq.11


𝐽 = (sin(𝜃1 + 𝜃2)
− cos(𝜃1 + 𝜃2)

−sin 𝜃1
cos 𝜃1
)
Eq.12

The next step is to generate a constitutive model of the conformal structure. For this, we use 

an asymptotic homogenization law. The goal is to decouple the originally multiscale problem 

with the use of two single-scale variables: 𝒙 capturing the macroscale trend and 𝑌̅ capturing 

the microscale. The two-scale spatial gradients get dissociated by 

𝜕

𝜕𝑥𝑗

𝜀 =

𝜕

𝜕𝑥𝑖 +

𝐽𝑖𝑘
𝜀

𝜕

𝜕𝑌̅𝑘

Eq.13

Eq. 13 shows the definition of mechanical property gradient in terms of a global variable and 

a microscale variable. In addition, it is essential to include the J term from the Jacobian. 

Finally, it is possible to arrive at an expression for the energy

𝐸𝐻~

1

2 ∫ [(𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝐻[0] − 𝛿𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝐻[1])

𝜕𝑢𝑖

𝐻[0]

𝜕𝑥𝑗

𝜕𝑢𝑖

𝐻[0]

𝜕𝑥𝑙 ] 𝑑𝑥
Eq.14

The perspective of this work is to implement these constitutive models in the homotopic 

transformation algorithm and be able to control the changes in the mechanical behavior of 

the transformed cell structures.

5. Conclusions

In this work, it was possible to determine a solution methodology for implementing cellular 

structures in engineering devices with complex geometry. This methodology is based on the 

concept of homotopy by transforming the geometry of a unit cell into the geometry of an 

exterior cellar. This methodology is computationally efficient because it allows unit cells to 

be modeled as functions and not as objects in CAD software. On the other hand, a deep 


analysis of the transformation dynamics of the cells was made, and their limitations were 

evaluated from a mechanical point of view. In this case, it was determined that the 

transformed structure allows obtaining a more homogeneous stress distribution than a non-

conforming structure.

On the other hand, it was shown that the deformation mechanisms of the conforming unit 

cell differ from the deformation mechanics of the structure based on the undeformed unit 

cells. This showed the need to optimize the algorithm because it does not consider the 

mechanical behavior of the system. It is necessary to build a constitutive model that models 

the conformal structures' mechanical behavior to perform this optimization. In this case, the 

transformation of the structure generates changes in the morphology of the unit cell, and to 

generates a size gradient as it approaches the edge of the target surface. To model these 

changes, we implement a property function that contains a Jacobian function and a function 

that describes the transformation in size. Finally, as a perspective of this work, this 

constitutive model must be implemented in the original algorithm to generate a homotopic 

transformation that allows controlling the mechanical behavior of the structure. The 

perspective of this work is to implement these constitutive models in the homotopic 

transformation algorithm and be able to control the changes in the mechanical behavior of 

the transformed cell structures.

6. References

1. 
Wahab MA. Unit Cell Symmetries and Their Representations. Numerical Problems in 
Crystallography. 2021. pp. 209–262. doi:10.1007/978-981-15-9754-1_6

2. 
Hanks B, Frecker M. Lattice Structure Design for Additive Manufacturing: Unit Cell 
Topology Optimization. Volume 2A: 45th Design Automation Conference. 2019. 
doi:10.1115/detc2019-97863


3. 
Hanks B, Frecker M. 3D Additive Lattice Topology Optimization: A Unit Cell Design 
Approach. Volume 11A: 46th Design Automation Conference (DAC). 2020. 
doi:10.1115/detc2020-22386

4. 
Modelling material uncertainty in multiscale optimization using lattice microstructures. 
2020. doi:10.2514/6.2021-1593.vid

5. 
James IM. General Topology and Homotopy Theory. Springer Science & Business Media; 
2012.

6. 
Agoston MK. Computer Graphics and Geometric Modelling: Mathematics. Springer 
Science & Business Media; 2005.

7. 
Tai C-L, Loe K-F, Kunii TL. Integrated Homotopy Sweep Technique for Computer-Aided 
Geometric Design. Visual Computing. 1992. pp. 583–595. doi:10.1007/978-4-431-68204-
2_36

8. 
A Special Issue of Computer Aided Geometric Design. Computer Aided Geometric Design. 
2007. p. 371. doi:10.1016/s0167-8396(07)00071-4


