Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting

Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
J. Seo,1, 2 C. Somarakis,1 S. Korneev,1 M. Behandish,1 and A.J. Lew1

1)Palo Alto Research Center, 3333 Coyote Hill Road, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Kyung Hee University, 1732 Deogyeong-daero, Giheung, Yongin, Gyeonggi 17104,
Republic of Korea

(*Electronic mail: jseo@khu.ac.kr)

(Dated: 15 July 2022)

We present physics-based nozzle design rules to achieve high-throughput and stable jetting in drop-on-demand liquid
metal 3D printing. The design rules are based on scaling laws that capture the change of meniscus oscillation relaxation
time with geometric characteristics of the nozzleвҖҷs inner profile. These characteristics include volume, cross-sectional
area, and inner surface area of the nozzle. Using boundary layer theory for a simple geometry, we show that the
meniscus settles faster when the ratio of inner surface area to volume is increased. High-fidelity multiphase flow
simulations verify this scaling. We use these laws to explore several design concepts with parameterized classes of
shapes that reduce the meniscus relaxation time while preserving desired droplet specs. Finally, we show that for
various nozzle profile concepts, the optimal performance can be achieved by increasing the ratio of the circumferential
surface area to the bulk volume to the extent that is allowable by manufacturing constraints.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Metal additive manufacturing (AM) is emerging as a viable
alternative to traditional methods such as casting to make sup-
ply chains more resilient and cost-effective for small-batch,
multi-variety, and spare parts1. Drop-on-demand (DoD) liq-
uid metal jetting stands out due to its high deposition through-
put, low porosity, use of off-the-shelf materials (aluminum
wire feed), predictable material properties, and operational
safety2. The process is characterized by ejecting a sequence
of droplets from a microfluidic nozzle attached to the end of
a pump where the metal is molten and pushed down at fre-
quencies of a few hundred Hz using mechanisms ranging from
magnetohydrodynamics1 to pneumatics3. As every droplet is
released, the meniscus (liquid-gas interface) at the tip of the
nozzle oscillates due to the dynamic interplay between sur-
face tension, the inertia of the fluid, and the imposed pressure
at the inlet of the nozzle (Fig. 1). Due to viscous dissipation
in the fluid, the oscillations are damped.
To enable fast and reliable/repeatable builds, it is important
to produce droplets with consistent volume, shape, and veloc-
ity distributions, which, in turn, strongly depend on the rate
at which the post-ejection energy in the liquid in the nozzle
dissipates. One way to quantify this rate is by observing the
decay of the oscillations of the meniscus membrane at the tip
of the nozzle. After a brief initial transient, the amplitude of
these oscillations decay exponentially with a characteristic re-
laxation time. Ideally, the meniscus should settle before the
next droplet starts forming.
The most common nozzle concepts are axisymmetric due
to their ease of manufacturing (e.g., via micro-drilling). The
resulting circular cross-sections lead to an inevitable tradeoff
between droplet parameters, target throughput, and relaxation
time. A nozzle with a smaller diameter has a smaller relax-
ation time, but it is harder to push the liquid through it due
to the need for larger fluid speeds to achieve a target through-
put and the increased viscous resistance. As a result, a higher
pressure is required to meet the target throughput. Reduc-
ing the diameter of the nozzle may also lead to either smaller

droplets or, through the use of an increased flow velocity, to an
elongated droplet that breaks apart after the ejection. The crit-
ical question is to design a nozzle that ejects a largely spheri-
cal droplet with a target velocity and mass while minimizing
the relaxation time of post-ejection oscillations.
Analysis of the meniscus damping rate has been known
as a challenging problem in multiphase fluid mechanics4,5

due to the non-linearity of the physics and of the partial dif-
ferential equations associated with multiphase flows. Accu-
rate analysis and prediction of the decay rate after a droplet
ejection requires the solution of the Navier-Stokes equa-
tions through computational fluid dynamics simulations for
extended periods of time.
In our study, we identified the
sources of viscous dissipation (both physical and numerical)
and considered flows driven by the oscillatory dynamics in-
duced by the meniscus in which inertial effects form a thin
boundary layer. Previous studies on meniscus damping con-
trol for 3D printing6 adopted the one-dimensional harmonic-
oscillator model, having a damper to model the viscous dissi-
pation. These studies assumed fully-developed viscous flows
(Poiseuille solution), but this assumption is invalid for the
types of flow induced in liquid metals, which often have very
low viscosity and for which the dynamics induced by the
meniscus does not allow the boundary layer to develop. To
the best of our knowledge, our work is the first study on the
damping of a nozzleвҖҷs meniscus considering transient inertial
effects, and on applying these results to establish design rules.
To demonstrate the application of the design rules, we
performed physics simulations of multiphase flows capturing
the oscillatory dynamics of the liquid-gas interface on sev-
eral nozzle geometries.
We used a multiphase flow solver
in OpenFOAMВ®, which employs the algebraic volume-of-
fluid approach for tracking gas-liquid interfaces. Our simu-
lation results validated our hypothesis on the formation of a
thin boundary layer near the nozzle wall, and demonstrated
a successful decrease of the relaxation time in nozzles with
increased surface-area-to-volume ratio.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we present
the problem definition including the geometry, quantities of

arXiv:2207.07023v1  [physics.flu-dyn]  14 Jul 2022


Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
2

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)

Liquid
metal

Gas

Injected
droplet

Meniscus
deflection

Nozzle 
outlet

Retraction
Damped
oscillation

Nozzle radius

FIG. 1. Time snapshots of the droplet ejection in the liquid metal
jetting printer. The red colored area is filled with liquid metal, and
the blue area corresponds to the area with gas. The nozzle is axisym-
metric, and is obtained by rotating the cross-section shown in the
figures around the left edge, or the axis. (a-b) Droplet ejection by a
high pressure pulse on the top surface; (c-d) meniscus retraction dur-
ing the pressure pulsing; (e-h) damped oscillations of the meniscus
without external pressure. Time intervals between snapshots vary.

interest, governing equations, and non-dimensional parame-
ters. In Section III, we present an analytical investigation of
physical mechanisms that determine the nozzle performance,
apply it to a simple cylindrical nozzle, and extend it to more
complex shapes. In Section IV, we describe the simulation
setup used in our study. In Section V, we validate the identi-
fied scaling laws applying numerical simulations to solve the
dynamics for a few nozzle concepts. Section VI summarizes
and concludes the current findings. Lastly, in Section VII, we
elaborate on the numerical method we adopted to solve the
governing equations and on the validation of the multiphase
flow solver.

II.
PROBLEM SETUP

A.
Nozzle Geometry

We consider a nozzle in a domain V = A Г— [0,L], where
A вҠӮ R2 is an open planar set that defines the cross-section of
the nozzle, and L is its length. For A, we adopt either Cartesian
coordinates (x,y) or cylindrical coordinates (r,Оё). The coor-
dinate along [0,L] will be denoted by z. The nozzle is filled
with a viscous fluid with density ПҒ, dynamic viscosity Вө, and
kinematic viscosity ОҪ = Вө/ПҒ. We assume that the dynamics
in the nozzle starts with the fluid at rest at time t = 0, and that
the next droplet is ejected at time t = T. The nozzle outlet ra-
dius and diameter are denoted by R and d, respectively. After
a droplet ejection, surface tension drives the meniscus fluctu-
ations and viscous dissipation dampens its deformation. The
vertical meniscus displacement in the z direction is denoted by
О·(x,y,t), and it is measured from the planar plane at the noz-
zle outlet (z = 0). The contact line, where the liquid-gas-solid
phases meet, is pinned at the sharp nozzle outlet, so О· = 0 at
r = R, as shown in Fig. 1 (d).

B.
Quantities of Interest

Our goal when designing a nozzle for high-speed jetting
is to reduce the relaxation time of the meniscus while retain-
ing the ability to eject droplets with a desired geometry and
speed. We will describe the long-time dynamic behavior of
the meniscus deformation, О·, with that of a damped harmonic
oscillator model

О·(x,y,t) = О·t=0(x,y)eвҲ’Оіt cos(Пүt +ПҶ),
(1)

where О·t=0 is the initial meniscus displacement, Оі > 0 is the
damping rate, Пү is the oscillation frequency of the meniscus
and ПҶ is a phase. The relaxation time is 1/Оі. Shortly after a
droplet is ejected, the dynamics of the meniscus is non-linear
and cannot be fully described by a single mode damped har-
monic oscillator model. After the initial transient, in which
high wavenumber modes decay fast, we find that the long-
time behavior of the meniscus can be well captured by the
damped harmonic oscillator model with a single wavenumber
mode. In the end, we aim to find a nozzle design geometry for
which Оі is large enough to damp the oscillations within the
ejection period (e.g., eвҲ’ОіT вҲј 10вҲ’2). In the long-time behav-
ior, the value of Оі appears to be a feature of the geometry and
the fluid only, and independent of the specific way in which a
droplet is generated.

C.
Governing Equations

The dynamics of liquid and gas in and around the nozzle
are governed by the Navier-Stokes (N-S) equation,

вҲӮПҒfвғ—u

вҲӮt
+вҲҮВ·(ПҒ fвғ—uвҠ—вғ—u) = вҲ’вҲҮp+вҲҮВ· Вө f (вҲҮвғ—u+вҲҮвғ—uT)

+ПҒ fвғ—g+ПғОәвғ—n ЛҶОҙ(вғ—xвҲ’вғ—xs),
(2)


Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
3

whereвғ—u is the velocity field, p is pressure,вғ—g is the acceleration
of gravity, and Пғ is the surface tension coefficient. ПҒf is den-
sity of fluid either being ПҒ for liquid metal and ПҒg for gases.
Вөf is viscosity of fluid, either being Вө for liquid metal and Вөg
for gases. The locus of the liquid-gas interface is described by
a surfaceвғ—xs, Оә is its mean curvature,вғ—n is the local surface nor-
mal vector, and ЛҶОҙ(вғ—xвҲ’вғ—xs) is the three-dimensional Dirac delta
function. The last term in the right hand side of the equation
represents the surface tension force, which is a concentrated
force and non-zero only at the interface.
We
consider
the
algebraic
Volume-of-Fluid
(VoF)
framework and introduce a three-dimensional scalar field
Оұ(x,y,z,t), defined as the volume fraction of liquid ranging
from 0 to 1, to track the interface location вғ—xs. The (diffuse)
interface between liquid and gas is algebraically described
by setting Оұ = 0 in the spatial domain filled with gas, and
Оұ = 1 in the spatial domain filled with liquid. In this way,
the interface curvature and the surface normal vector can be
calculated by relations such as Оә = вҲ’вҲҮВ·вғ—n andвғ—n = вҲҮОұ/|вҲҮОұ|.
The time evolution of the scalar field Оұ, and hence of the
gas-liquid interface, is governed by the phase transport
equation

вҲӮОұ
вҲӮt +вҲҮВ·(вғ—uОұ) = 0.
(3)

Finally, the system of equations is completed by stating the
equation for mass conservation

вҲҮВ·вғ—u = 0,
(4)

at all points of the domain. This states the incompressibility
of the liquid metal, and for simplicity, of the surrounding gas.
We assume that the contact line is effectively pinned at the
nozzle outlet rim. The nozzle outlet is macroscopically sharp,
but assumed to be rounded at the microscale, so that the slope
of the interface is not limited by the contact angle imposed
by the material properties7. With the fixed contact line, we
assume negligible contribution from the contact line to the
dissipation of energy in the system8. Our high-speed video
recording of the meniscus (not shown here) confirmed that the
meniscus can be considered to be pinned at the nozzle outlet.

D.
Dimensional Analysis

We proceed to derive dimensionless numbers to estimate
the relative importance of different physical phenomena based
on orders of magnitude approximations to typical material
properties for a liquid metal and a gas.
Typical values of mass density of liquid metals considered
in metal AM is ПҒ вҲј O(103)kg/m3, and the kinematic viscosity
is ОҪ вҲј O(10вҲ’7)m2/s (e.g. aluminum alloy)9. The density of
the surrounding gas (e.g. argon) is ПҒg вҲј O(1)kg/m3, and the
kinematic viscosity is ОҪg вҲј O(10вҲ’6)m2/s. Surface tension at
the interface between aluminum alloy10 and the argon gas is
Пғ вҲј O(1)N/m. We consider the range of nozzle diameter in
the order of hundred micrometers d вҲј O(10вҲ’4)m. The droplet
size is mainly determined by the nozzle outlet diameter, so
that the diameter of the droplet is dDroplet вҲј d.

The droplet ejection rate for the droplet-on-demand liq-
uid metal jetting is assumed fJet вҲј O(102)Hz. Based on the
capillary flow theory11, the meniscus oscillation frequency is
Пү вҲј
пҝҪ

Пғk3/ПҒ вҲј O(103)Hz, where k is the wavenumber as
k вҲј 1/d with d = 500Вөm. Therefore, we expect several peri-
ods of meniscus oscillations in between droplet ejections.
Based on these values, we find that the Reynolds num-
ber associated with the oscillatory dynamics of the meniscus
is Re = Пүd2/ОҪ вү« O(1). Therefore, we expect the flow in-
side nozzle to involve inertial effects forming a thin bound-
ary layer near the nozzle wall. A rough estimate of bound-
ary layer thickness resulting from oscillating flow is Оҙ вҲј
пҝҪ

ОҪ/Пү вҲј O(10)Вөm, which is thinner than the nozzle radius,
Оҙ/R вүӘ O(1). The flow inside the nozzle cannot be regarded
as fully developed.
The micro-scale nozzle size leads to capillary-force-
dominant meniscus dynamics, in which the capillary length
lc =
пҝҪ

Пғ/вҲҶПҒg = O(10вҲ’3)m is comparable or larger than the
nozzle diameter, where вҲҶПҒ is the difference in densities in
the two fluids. Likewise, the Bond number is small, Bo =
gd2вҲҶПҒ/Пғ вүӘ O(1), therefore the relative importance of the
gravitational force on the meniscus deformation is negligible.
The Weber number is We = ПҒU2d/Пғ вҲј O(1), for U вҲј Пүd
a characteristic speed, and the ejected droplet shape is deter-
mined by both inertial effect and the surface tension force.
In sum, the dynamics of meniscus oscillation will strongly
depend on the interplay between surface tension, inertia, and
viscous forces in the liquid metal. We use the boundary layer
theory for oscillatory flows11,12 to analyze the flow physics.

III.
PHYSICS-BASED DESIGN RULES FOR OPTIMAL
NOZZLE PERFORMANCE

In this section we present an analytical study of the phys-
ical mechanisms that determine the nozzle performance, and
their scaling relations to the geometric parameters of the noz-
zle design. After deriving an analytical expression for the
viscous dissipation from the Navier-Stokes equation, we de-
velop scaling laws for the relaxation time 1/Оі (alternatively,
damping rate Оі) for the cylindrical nozzle geometry, and intro-
duce modified geometries with faster relaxation times based
on these law.

A.
Source of Viscous Dissipation

From the dimensional analysis in Section II D, we assume
that a thin viscous boundary layer is formed near the nozzle
wall responding to the oscillatory fluid motion after the ejec-
tion of a droplet. A standard approach in potential flow anal-
yses of classical fluid mechanics on multiphase flows11,12 is
to decompose the total damping rate Оі into two components.
One source of dissipation is from the boundary layer, where
the velocity gradient is dominated by the no-slip effect of the
wall. Another source of viscous dissipation is from the bulk of
fluid away from the wall, where the velocity gradient mainly


Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
4

depends on the flow structure. This approach has been exten-
sively used to estimate the dissipation rate of sloshing liquid in
containers4,13,14. Accordingly, we decompose the total damp-
ing rate of the meniscus into two components,

Оі = Оіbulk +Оіbl,
(5)

where Оіbulk is the damping rate from the bulk of the fluid and
Оіbl is the damping rate from the boundary layer. These damp-
ing rates stem from the contribution in each region to the dis-
sipation of the kinetic energy of the fluid. To estimate them,
we adopt standard flow structures (velocity fields) for the bulk
of the fluid and the boundary layer.

B.
Scaling of Damping Rate

The damping rate can be estimated by the energy dissipa-
tion rate over the total energy of the system11,

Оі вҲј Оө

E ,
(6)

where Оө is the mean (in time) viscous dissipation rate and E is
the mean (in time) total energy in the system. Multiplying the
N-S equation (2) by 1

2вғ—u and integrating over the volume (i.e.
kinetic energy form), we can derive the energy dissipation rate
at a given time in a viscous fluid as

Оө = Вө

2

Лҡ
вҲҮsвғ—u: вҲҮsвғ—u dV,
(7)

where вҲҮSвғ—u is the symmetric gradient of the velocity field, and
A: B is the Frobenius inner product between tensors A and B.
The total energy of the system is

E = ПҒ
Лҡ
|вғ—u|2dV,
(8)

which is twice the kinetic energy12. The mean values of the
dissipation rate and the total energy can be computed via time
integration of the instantaneous values over a sufficiently long
period of time.
We first evaluate the scaling of the dissipation rate in the
bulk of the fluid, away from the wall. Following Eq. (7), the
scaling of the dissipation rate corresponding to a perturbed
flow structure at a length scale О» is11

Оө вҲј Вө U2

О» 2 V,
(9)

where U is the characteristic speed in the system, in our case,
a characteristic speed of the meniscus, and V the volume of
the fluid. Given that the mean energy scales as

E вҲј ПҒU2V,
(10)

the damping rate in the bulk of the fluid scales

Оіbulk вҲј ОҪ

О» 2 .
(11)

This indicates that perturbed flow structures with smaller size
will decay faster.
Our major focus will be on the largest
wavenumber mode, which stays in the system for the longest
time.
For the boundary layer dissipation near the wall, the surface
integral form of Eq. (7) is considered,

Оө вҲј Вө U2

Оҙ S,
(12)

where S is the surface area exposed to solid surface and Оҙ is
the boundary layer thickness formed near the solid surface.
Under the oscillatory flow with frequency Пү, a dimensional
analysis on the boundary layer thickness Оҙ estimates11

Оҙ вҲј
пҝҪ

ОҪ
Пү .
(13)

Finally, the damping rate at the boundary layer of the fluid
scales as

Оіbl вҲј вҲҡОҪПү S

V ,
(14)

where Eq. (8) is used to estimate the kinetic energy. The os-
cillation frequency of the meniscus can be roughly estimated
as Пү вҲј
пҝҪ

Пғ/ПҒR3. The scaling relation Eq. (14) indicates that
the interface deformation decays faster when the surface area
to the volume ratio is large. This provides an important insight
on the nozzle design and we will use this rule to control the
dissipation rate.
Potential flow analyses11,14 identified the exact relation in
Eq.
(11) for ideal waves as Оіbulk = 2ОҪk2, where k is the
wavenumber of the flow structure of interest.
For exam-
ple, in a closed brimful cylinder, the lowest wavenumber is
k = ОІ/R, where ОІ вүғ 3.83 is the first root of the derivative of
the first Bessel function of the first kind14. Furthermore, the
boundary layer dissipation rate identified by linear analyses14

is Оіbl вүғ
пҝҪ

ОҪПү
2
1
2R, for a cylinder with radius R and height L

(V = ПҖR2L and S = 2ПҖRL). We note that although this lin-
ear solution provided an accurate estimate of the decay rate
in small amplitude capillary waves (L вү« R)4,13,14, it does not
guarantee accurate predictions when the meniscus dynamics
is non-linear due to large interface fluctuations5. However,
we expect the damping rate to scale similarly with S and V
even during the initial, non-linear stages of the meniscus os-
cillations.
Using the insights from the scaling, we draw the following
nozzle design rules for high speed droplet jetting:

вҖў Given the inverse scaling of Оіbulk and Оіbl with the size of
the system (with both О» and V

S ), both damping rates can
be controlled by shaping (i.e. constricting) the cross-
section of the nozzle.

вҖў Given that Оіbl вҲј S/V, the damping rate can be con-
trolled by maximizing the surface area of the nozzle.

In the next subsections, we apply these ideas to estimate the
expected scaling of the damping rate upon a design change of
the nozzle.


Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
5

R!

R

r

z
R

Liquid metal

Gas

Dissipative
section

Shaping
section

FIG. 2. Geometric configurations of nozzles with constricted cylin-
ders. The nozzle is axisymmetric, and is obtained by rotating the
cross-section shown in the figures around the left edge, or the axis,
indicated by a dashed line. Here R is the radius of the nozzle and
Ri is the radius of the constricted part. (Left) Standard cylindrical
nozzle, showing a deformed liquid-gas interface; (right) constricted
nozzle with Ri=0.8R and a flat interface. The upper section with di-
ameter Ri is termed the dissipative section, while the lower section
with diameter R is referred to as the shaping section.

C.
Dissipation Control by Nozzle Constriction

As expected, the scaling of the damping rate identifies the
diameter of the nozzle as the parameter that most significantly
defines the damping rate for a cylindrical nozzle. This natu-
rally motivates the design of a nozzle with a smaller diameter,
for damping control. However, the diameter of the nozzle is
limited by the targeted droplet size. To account for this con-
straint, we consider nozzles with two distinct sections: a con-
stricted section destined to control the damping rate, separated
from another section that controls the droplet shape. An ex-
ample of a nozzle with these two sections is found in Fig. 2.
The part of the nozzle with a smaller diameter Ri < R is re-
ferred to as the dissipative section, whereas the section near
the nozzle outlet with radius R, whose role is to control the
the droplet size, is referred to as the shaping section (Fig. 2).

D.
Dissipation Control by Increasing Surface Area to Volume

Based on the scaling relation, Eq. (14), the second method
to reduce the relaxation time is to maximize the surface area
to volume ratio (S/V). The main advantage of this method is
that we can control the dissipation without changing the cross-
sectional area, and hence can circumvent large changes of the
mean speed of the fluid in the nozzle.
To show the proof-of-concept of this design rule, we con-
sidered an (idealized) cylindrical nozzle with n total concen-
tric cylinders identically spaced in the radial direction, as

R
2

R
2

R
3

R
3

R
3

R
4

R
4

R
4

R
4

d

R

R

R
2

R
2

R
3

R
3

R
3

R
4

r

z

r
Оё

Axial 
view

r-z 
slice 
view

R
4

R
4

R
4

t

FIG. 3. Geometric configurations of nozzles with concentric cylin-
ders. (Top) vertical slice of the nozzles with concentric cylinders.
The computational domain is designed for axisymmetric simulations.
The inner cylinders are located above the nozzle outlet by a distance
d. The thickness of the inner cylinders is denoted as t. All inner
cylinders have the same thickeness. Dashed lines indicate axes of ro-
tation. (Bottom) Horizontal slices of nozzles with concentric cylin-
ders. Dark gray regions are the inner walls of the cylinder. From left
to right, n=2,3,4.

shown in Fig. 3. This idealized geometry is a great exam-
ple of design that demonstrates larger surface area compared
to a typical cylinder nozzle, while keeping the cross-sectional
area essentially the same. We consider the thickness of the in-
ner cylinders in the radial direction, t, much smaller than the
radius of the outer cylinder, to keep the cross-sectional area
largely constant. In this way, we control the dissipation while
not changing the dynamics of the meniscus, which is mainly
controlled by the outlet diameter.
The total surface area of nozzle with n вүҘ 1 number of
cylinders15 is Sn = 2ПҖRLn, therefore, the resulting dissipation
rate scales

Оіbl,n вҲј вҲҡОҪПү n

R.
(15)

We expect that the bulk dissipation will not change signifi-
cantly if the axial component of the velocity is the dominant
flow feature associated with the damping.

IV.
SIMULATION SETUP

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our design rule, we em-
ployed the open-source CFD software OpenFOAMВ® and con-
ducted multiphase flow simulations of the meniscus dynamics
in the nozzle with several different designs. We studied the
relaxation time of the meniscus suspending at the outlet of the


Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
6

nozzle responding to a pressure pulse at the nozzle inlet. The
meniscus was initially flat and pinned at the nozzle outlet.
We chose material properties and nozzle dimensions in-
spired by 3D printing scenarios. We set the material prop-
erties to those of a liquid aluminum alloy9 ПҒ = 2435kg/m3,
ОҪ = 4.16Г—10вҲ’7m2/s, and of argon gas ПҒg = 1.6kg/m3, ОҪg =
2.6Г—10вҲ’5m2/s, and surface tension10 Пғ = 0.85N/m.
In this study, we considered R = 250Вөm as the nominal ra-
dius of the outlet of the nozzle. For the constricted nozzle
(Fig. 2), we set Ri = 200Вөm and Ri = 150Вөm. The connect-
ing area between the dissipative section and the shaping sec-
tion had smooth curves with a finite curvature to minimize the
formation of vortices at sharp corners, although flow separa-
tion can still be observed. For concentric cylinders, we placed
equally spaced inner cylinders along the radial direction (Fig.
3). The thickness of each inner cylinder is t = 4Вөm. The inner
cylinders were pushed inward by a distance d = 50Вөm so that
the meniscus did not directly touch the inner cylinders dur-
ing oscillations. This last part effectively acts as the shaping
section of this nozzle.
The OpenFOAM thin wedge geometry was employed to
represent planes in the swirl direction for 2-D rotation-
ally symmetric cases. The axi-symmetric wedge geometries
(shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3) were spatially discretized into
approximately 300K-400K hexaderal mesh elements (400 el-
ements in the radial direction, 900 elements in the vertical di-
rection inside the liquid domain). We used a non-uniform grid
and applied extra grid refinement in the region the liquid-gas
interface sweeps during oscillations. Our multi-step grid re-
finement study confirmed the convergence of the quantities of
interest.
The simulations were performed until 4.5 millisecond af-
ter the initial transident time period.
We conducted high-
performance parallel computing simulations with 48 proces-
sors on the Amazon AWS clusters.

V.
PROOF OF THE DESIGN RULE

A.
Standard Cylindrical Nozzle

Figure 4 shows instantaneous time snapshots of the ver-
tical velocity profiles every 0.1 milliseconds at z = 200Вөm
above the nozzle outlet. From the velocity profiles near the
nozzle wall, it is evident that our hypothesis that the menis-
cus dynamics forms a thin oscillatory boundary layer near
the wall is valid. The steep velocity gradient near the wall
is confined to the near wall region up to R вҲ’ Оҙ < r < R with
Оҙ вүҲ 20Вөm. The observed boundary layer thickness is consis-
tent with the estimate from the oscillatory viscous flow theory,
Оҙ вҲј
пҝҪ

ОҪ/Пү вүҲ 18Вөm.
While the velocity gradient inside the boundary layer is
governed by the no-slip condition on the wall, the bulk region
of the fluid has almost flat velocity profiles with negligible ve-
locity gradients. The plug-like oscillatory flow is driven by
the motion of the meniscus. This clear difference in velocity
gradient in the bulk and the boundary layer indicates that the
boundary layer dissipation is the major source of damping.

FIG. 4. Time snapshots of velocity profiles generated by the menis-
cus oscillation inside the cylindrical nozzle after a pressure pulse is
applied on top. The cylindrical nozzle radius is R = 250Вөm. From
brown to yellow (t1 вҲ’ t8), the vertical velocity uz is plotted in the
increasing order in time in every 0.1 ms. The velocity profiles are
measured at z = 200Вөm above the nozzle outlet.

Our main quantity of interest is the damping rate of the am-
plitude of the meniscus motion, Оі. We post-processed the time
history of the interface location at the center of the nozzle,
О·0(t) = О·(t,r = 0), in Fig. 5. At each time t, the interface
apex location was obtained via fitting [1 + tanh(z вҲ’ О·0(t))]/2
to the continuous volume fraction field along the axis, to find
the value of О·0(t). On the time history of the interface, we
calculated Оі and Пү by fitting a damped sinusoidal function
f(Оі,Пү,ПҶ,A) = Aexp(вҲ’Оіt)cos(Пүt +ПҶ) using the curve fit tool
provided in the Scipy.optimize. To disregard initial transient
effects, only data after 0.5 milliseconds were used in the fit.
As a result, the decay rate of the meniscus for the cylindrical
nozzle (shown in Fig. 2) with R = 250Вөm is obtained as

Оі = 167/sec,
(16)

and Пү=1269/sec. The variance associated with the fitted pa-
rameters are Вұ5/sec for Оі, and Вұ1/sec for Пү with 95% con-
fidence interval. All 95% confidence bounds for Оі and Пү in
this paper, although not specified, have less than 2.6 percent
of their reported values.

B.
Nozzle with a Constriction

The time evolution of the meniscus amplitude for standard
and constricted nozzles is plotted in Fig. 5. The nozzle with
a constricted section successfully leads to faster dissipation of
the meniscus oscillation. The decay rates of the meniscus dis-
placement with the constricted nozzle are significantly larger
than the standard nozzle as shown in Table I.
This result demonstrates that only a fraction reduction of
the nozzle radius (here 20%-40%) was effective to increase


Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
7

FIG. 5. Time history of the meniscus displacement at the center of
the channel, О·0(t) = О·(r = 0,t), for the standard cylindrical nozzle
with R = 250Вөm and the nozzle with a constricted section with radius
Ri = 200Вө and Ri = 150Вөm.

Nozzle type Radius at constriction Оі(secвҲ’1) Пү(secвҲ’1)

Standard
250Вөm
167
1269

Constricted
200Вөm
358
1318

Constricted
150Вөm
1176
1655

TABLE I. Damping rate Оі and oscillation frequency Пү of the menis-
cus motion for the standard nozzle and the nozzles with n concentric
cylinders.

the decay rate by approximately factor of 2-7. The higher
dissipation rate at more constricted nozzle can be explained
by the trends from both Оіbl and Оіbulk. The constricted cylin-
der has higher boundary dissipation rate due to larger surface
area to the volume ratio as well as higher bulk dissipation rate
due to smaller diameter against the standard cylindrical noz-
zle. The relationship between Оі and Ri is non-linear due to
combination of these two factors and the contribution from
the intermediate section between the shaping and the dissipa-
tive section. The direct proportionality between the surface
area to volume ratio and Оіbl is investigated via the concentric
cylinders in the following section.

C.
Nozzle with Concentric Cylinders

The time evolution of the meniscus amplitude for nozzles
with different number of concentric cylinders inside is plotted
in Fig. 6. The amplitude of the meniscus motion decays faster
in nozzles with larger surface area, therefore the concentric
cylinders are effective at reducing the relaxation time. We
summarized the damping rate and the oscillation frequency
for n = 1,2,3,4 in Table II. The results show that the damping
rate increases linearly (with a slope of вүҲ 200/sec) and con-
firms the proposed scaling of the damping rate dominated by
the boundary layer, Оіbl вҲј n in Eq. (15). Notice that the oscilla-
tion frequency remains largely fixed, since the outlet diameter

FIG. 6. Time history of the meniscus displacement at the center of
the channel, О·0(t) = О·(r = 0,t), for the standard cylindrical nozzle
with R = 250Вөm and a nozzle of the same radius with concentric
inner cylinders. Here n is the number of concentric cylinders in the
nozzle.

and total mass inside the nozzle are unchanged.

Nozzle type
Оі(secвҲ’1) Пү(secвҲ’1)

Standard nozzle, n=1
167
1269

Concentric cylinders, n=2
343
1256

Concentric cylinders, n=3
550
1237

Concentric cylinders, n=4
768
1205

TABLE II. Damping rate Оі and oscillation frequency Пү of the menis-
cus motion for the standard nozzle and the nozzles with n concentric
cylinders.

In Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 we plot the vertical velocity contours
and profiles inside the nozzle with concentric cylinders. They
show the formation of thin boundary layers near the surface of
the inner cylinder(s) and the standard cylinder wall. In Fig. 7,
we observe that, as the number of inner cylinders is increased,
more layers of boundary layers contribute to increasing the
energy dissipation in the liquid. The boundary layer thickness
at the inner cylinder (Fig. 8) is similar to that in the standard
nozzle wall, Оҙ вүҲ 20Вөm, since the oscillation frequency stays
nearly constant.

VI.
DISCUSSION

The nozzle geometry with equally spaced concentric cylin-
ders is a successful example of dissipation control without in-
troducing a cross-sectional area constriction. However, the
concentric cylinders are a concept geometry and not a favor-
able geometry for fabrication. Practical nozzle design should
be able to consider ease of manufacturing.
In Fig. 9, we have listed several examples of manufac-
turable nozzle designs inspired by the present analysis. The
constricted nozzle (Fig. 9 (a)) can be easily fabricated using
3D printing or machine tools. A drawback of this geome-
try, when the constriction ratio R/Ri is large enough, is the


Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
8

FIG. 7. Instantaneous snapshots of the contours of the axial velocity
component in the liquid domain, uz, at t = 1 msec for the nozzle with
concentric inner cylinders. The countour plots show boundary layers
near the solid wall surfaces.

FIG. 8. Time snapshots of velocity profiles generated by the menis-
cus oscillation inside a nozzle with a concentric cylinder (n = 1) after
a pressure pulse is applied on top. The cylindrical nozzle radius is
R = 250Вөm. From brown to yellow (t1 вҲ’t8), the axial velocity uz
is plotted in the increasing order in time every 0.1 ms. The velocity
profiles are measures at z = 200Вөm above the nozzle outlet.

flow separation and formation of vortices at the intersection
between dissipative and shaping section. This separation can
lead to a very inhomogeneous velocity field in the shaping
section that affects the formation of the droplet. For liquid
metals, these vortices can easily form for values of R/Ri that
are not too far from 1, albeit the droplet shape may not be
affected at such low ratios.
The other class of nozzle geometry has a cross-section ex-
truded along the flow direction (e.g., the star- or cross-shaped
geometry shown in Fig. 9 (b) and (c)). These geometries
are expected to promote viscous dissipation because both the
cross-sectional area and the volume-to-surface area ratio are
smaller than in the standard cylindrical nozzle. While flow
separation can also occur in these geometries in the transi-

tion between the dissipative and shaping section, they bet-
ter "distribute" the faster fluid leaving the dissipative section.
This helps forming a more homogeneous velocity field in the
ejected droplet, and hence to more regular jetting. This type
of nozzle geometries can be manufactured by drilling, or po-
tentially 3D printing.
Advancing the concept of the cross or the star cross-
sections further, cross-sections with n straight channels of
width w separated by the same angle stemming from the cen-
ter of the cross-section can be considered (Fig. 9 (c)). This
makes it possible to control the surface area S while while
keeping the volume V roughly constant, by increasing n and
decreasing w. The width w should be chosen based on the es-
timation of the thickness of the boundary layer. When w вүІ 2Оҙ,
the velocity profile inside the branch will be close to parabolic.
In this case, the scaling of viscous dissipation will be modi-
fied, since Оҙ вҲј w, so that Оіbl вҲј (ОҪ/w)(S/V) вҲј ОҪ/w2, assuming
w вҲј Оҙ вүӘ R. The value of n should be chosen as a compromise
between manufacturability, volume of the dissipative section,
and droplet shape.

VII.
CONCLUSION AND SUMMARY

Drop-on-demand liquid metal jetting is an emerging tech-
nology that enables the creation of quality products and pro-
vides a safe printing process. To enable reliable high-speed
printing, it is required to develop a nozzle that promotes fast
decay of the meniscus oscillation after a droplet ejection. De-
sign guidelines for high-speed jetting need a physical under-
standing of the energy dissipation mechanisms that controls
the relaxation time of the fluid in the nozzle. Dimensional
analysis reveals that the oscillatory flow inside the nozzle,
driven by the meniscus motion, is in the inertial flow regime,
and that it forms a thin boundary layer near the solid wall. In
this paper, we propose physics-based design rules to speed up
the decay of the meniscus fluctuations, based on scaling rela-
tions derived from the Navier-Stokes equation and the viscous
boundary layer theory. These scaling relations informs that
nozzles with smaller diameters and nozzles that maximize the
surface area to volume ratio have faster damping rates. These
dimensional considerations need to be balanced by the need
to obtain droplets of a given shape and size, so we focus on
the design of nozzles with an outlet of a given cross sectional
area. To demonstrate these ideas, we performed multiphase
flow simulations for several nozzle designs. We used a class of
idealized geometries that include multiple equally spaced con-
centric cylinders perpendicular to the nozzle meniscus move-
ment. The simulation results showed that the damping rate
increases as the surface area of the nozzle does, and displays
the linear growth with the number of concentric cylinders pre-
dicted by the scaling relations. Probing the vertical velocity
profiles inside the nozzle confirmed the formation of a thin
boundary layer near the wall.
Finally, we discussed a class of manufacturable nozzle de-
signs inspired by the discussion herein. To the best of our
knowledge, our study is the first investigation of the damp-
ing rate in a liquid metal jetting printer nozzle using oscil-


Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
9

Dissipative 
section

Shaping 
section

Dissipative 
section

Shaping 
section

Dissipative 
section

Shaping 
section

(a)

(b)

(c)

w

FIG. 9. Example of nozzle designs with a dissipative section poten-
tially simple to manufacture. The inset figures are cross-sectional
views of the nozzle outlet.
(a) A nozzle with a dissipative sec-
tion with a constriction; (b) A nozzle with a dissipative section
formed by an extruded star-shaped cross-section (sharp edges may
be smoothed); (c) A nozzle with a dissipative section formed by an
extruded cross-shaped cross-section. Here w is the width of a branch
of the cross.

latory viscous boundary layer theory. Also, our study is the
first demonstration of dissipation control by introducing de-
sign changes in the nozzle shape. We note that an accurate es-
timation of the meniscus damping in numerical simulations is
challenging due to the multiple sources of dissipation, includ-
ing the boundary layer, bulk, contact line, and numerical dis-
sipation. A systematic and rigorous analysis of the sources of
viscous dissipation, and a demanding numerical convergence
study, were crucial prerequisites for the results herein.
This study also suggests a number of questions for future
investigation. First, guidelines for the design of the shaping
section are needed, in which its shape should promote the ho-
mogenization of the velocity field prior to droplet formation.
This would minimize the likelihood of appearance of multiple
droplets as a result of a single pressure pulse. Second, ex-
perimental validation of the ideas herein is pending. Finally,
accurately computing the damping rate of non-axisymmetric

nozzles (fully three-dimensional geometries) is very compu-
tationally demanding, and hence was left for future studies.

VIII.
NUMERICAL METHODS AND VALIDATION

We describe the numerical tools we used to discretize the
governing equations and to perform the simulations of multi-
phase flows shown here. All of them were computed with the
interfoam solver in the OpenFOAM version 2106.

A.
Interface Capturing Scheme

In interfoam, the algebraic Volume-of-Fluid (VoF) inter-
face tracking method is applied to track the dynamics of the
gas-liquid interface. In a discretized domain with VOF, the
fraction of volume of liquid, Оұ, can take a value between 0
and 1 near the interface. As a result, in numerical simula-
tions the gas-liquid interface has a finite thickness, instead of
the sharp interface described as a Dirac delta function in Eq.
(2). Using the Continuum Surface Force model (CSF)16, the
surface tension force in the momentum Eq. (2) is calculated
as

ПғОәвғ—n ЛҶОҙ(вғ—xвҲ’вғ—xs) вүҲ ПғОәвҲҮОұ.
(17)

Given the volume fraction of fluid, Оұ(вғ—x,t), computed at each
time t and position вғ—x, the viscosity and the density fields are
updated as

Вөf (вғ—x,t) = Оұ(вғ—x,t)Вө +(1вҲ’Оұ(вғ—x,t))Вөg,
(18)

and

ПҒf (вғ—x,t) = Оұ(вғ—x,t)ПҒ +(1вҲ’Оұ(вғ—x,t))ПҒg,
(19)

and used to solve the N-S equation. We refer to Desphande
et al.17 for a description of detailed algorithms and finite vol-
ume formulations to solve the N-S equation and the volume
fraction field.

B.
Temporal and Spatial Discretization

OpenFOAM employs a cell-centered finite volume dis-
cretization. The spatial domain is discretized with hexahedral
meshes generated by the built-in meshing tool, blockMesh
and snappyHexMesh. We chose the linear scheme for cell
center-face interpolation, and the Gauss linear scheme for di-
vergence, gradient, and Laplacian operators.
The time discretization was performed via the explicit Eu-
ler time scheme. A variable time-step method was chosen
to ensure numerical stability, and controlled by the time step
restrictions based on a Courant-Freidich-Lewis(CFL) num-
ber derived from the momentum equation and the surface
tension17. We enforced CFL numbers below 0.2 for both mo-
mentum and interface driven time-step restrictions.


Physics-based nozzle design rules for high-frequency liquid metal jetting
10

The solution of the momentum equation was obtained by
constructing a predicted velocity field and correcting it us-
ing the Pressure Implicit with Splitting of Operators (PISO)
algorithm18. For the Poisson equation in this pressure correc-
tion, we used the preconditioned conjugate gradient scheme
with the diagonal-based incomplete Cholesky preconditioner.
We turned off the interface compression method in inter-
foam by setting cAlpha=0 in fvSolution. Instead, we created
extra refined meshes near the region of the interface to avoid
numerical diffusion of the interface thickness.

C.
Validation

The interfoam solver has been validated in previous
studies17, and it showed nice agreement in tracking interfaces
for highly inertial flows and surface-tension-driven capillary
flows. Standard tests showed that the CSF formulation in in-
terfoam led to a proper discrete balance between pressure and
surface tension17.
Although details are not presented here, we independently
performed validation studies to assess the quantitative predic-
tive ability of the interfoam solver on two-phase problems
with oscillating liquid-gas interfaces.
We evaluated exten-
sive simulation results from interfoam against reference so-
lutions in canonical multiphase flow test cases in the high
capillarity limit, obtained by analytical investigations12вҖ“14,19

with matched experimental investigations4,20, or numerical
solutions obtained by other numerical methods on highly re-
solved grids (level set21 or phase field22). These canonical
validation test cases involve damped oscillations of initially
perturbed two-dimensional circular (cylinder) and spherical
droplets21,22, of capillary waves in a periodic domain21, and
of the brimful cylindrical tank with water4,13,14. These sim-
ulations were performed with material properties of either
the water-air or the liquid metal-argon systems.
We con-
firmed that the oscillation frequency and the damping rate on
perturbed capillary flows calculated by the interfoam solver
showed nice agreement against the reference solutions within
вҲј 10% errors. We note that the numerical dissipation of inter-
foam, especially on some coarse grids, contributed to the over-
estimation of the damping rate, and we acknowledged that the
grid convergence study was a critical component of the valida-
tion. We tested three-step grid refinements and demonstrated
the grid convergence on both damping rate and oscillation fre-
quency.

1V. Sukhotskiy, P. Vishnoi, I. H. Karampelas, S. Vader, Z. Vader,
and
E. P. Furlani, вҖңMagnetohydrodynamic drop-on-demand liquid metal addi-
tive manufacturing: System overview and modelling,вҖқ Proceedings of the
5th International Conference of Fluid Flow, Heat and Mass Transfer , 1вҖ“6
(2018).

2M. Simonelli, N. Aboulkhair, M. Rasa, M. East, C. Tuck, R. Wildman,
O. Salomons, and R. Hague, вҖңTowards digital metal additive manufacturing
via high-temperature drop-on-demand jetting,вҖқ Additive Manufacturing 30,
1вҖ“9 (2019).

3J. Luo, L. hua Qi, J. ming Zhou, and H.-j. L. Xiang-hui Houc, вҖңModel-
ing and characterization of metal droplets generation by using a pneumatic
drop-on-demand generator,вҖқ Journal of Materials Processing Technology
212, 718вҖ“726 (2012).

4D. R. Howell, B. Burhow, T. Heath, C. McKenna, W. Hwang, and M. F.
Schatz, вҖңMeasurements of surface-wave damping in a container,вҖқ Physics
of Fluids 12, 322вҖ“326 (1999).

5C.-L. Ting and M. Perlin, вҖңBoundary conditions in the vicinity of the con-
tact line at a vertically oscillating upright plate : an experimental investiga-
tion,вҖқ Journal of Fluid Mechanics 295, 263вҖ“300 (1995).

6U. Stachewicz, J. F. Dijksman, D. Burdinski, C. U. Yurteri, and J. C. M.
Marijnissen, вҖңRelaxation times in single event electrospraying controlled
by nozzle front surface modification,вҖқ Langmuir 25, 2540вҖ“2549 (2009).

7J. Seo, R. Garcia-Mayoral, and A. Mani, вҖңPressure fluctuations and interfa-
cial robustness in turbulent flows over superhydrophobic surfaces,вҖқ Journal
of Fluid Mechanics 783, 448вҖ“473 (2015).

8J. H. Snoeijer and B. Andreotti, вҖңMoving contact lines: Scales, regimes,
and dynamical transitions,вҖқ Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech 45, 269вҖ“292 (2013).

9M. J. Assael, K. Kakosimos, R. M. Banish, J. Brillo, I. Egry, R. Brooks,
P. N. Quested, K. C. Mills, A. Nagashima, Y. Sato, and W. A. Wakeham,
вҖңReference data for the density and viscosity of liquid aluminum and liquid
iron,вҖқ J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 35, 285вҖ“2006 (2006).

10J. Molina, R. Voytovych, E. Louis, and N. Eustathopoulos, вҖңThe surface
tension of liquid aluminium in high vacuum: The role of surface condition,вҖқ
International Journal of Adhesion and Adhesives 27, 394вҖ“401 (2007).

11L. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Fluid Mechanics (Pergamon Press, 1958).
12H. Lamb, Hydrodynamics (Cambridge University Press., 1932).
13D. M. Henderson and J. W. Miles, вҖңSurface-wave damping in a circular
cylinder with a fixed contact line,вҖқ Journal of Fluid Mechanics 275, 285вҖ“
299 (1994).

14K. M. Case and W. C. Parkinson, вҖңDamping of surface waves in an incom-
pressible liquid,вҖқ Journal of Fluid Mechanics 2, 172вҖ“184 (1956).

15Here n = 1 is the standard nozzle, i.e. with zero internal concentric cylin-
ders.

16J. U. Brackbill, D. B. Kothe, and C. Zemach, вҖңA continuum method for
modeling surface tension,вҖқ J. Comput. Phys. 100, 335вҖ“354 (1992).

17S. S. Deshpande, L. Anumolu, and M. F. Trujillo, вҖңEvaluating the perfor-
mance of the two-phase flow solver interfoam,вҖқ Computational Science and
Discovery 5, 014016 (2012).

18R. I. Issa, вҖңSolution of the implicitly discretised fluid flow equations by
operator splitting,вҖқ J. Comput. Phys. 62, 40вҖ“65 (1986).

19J. W. Miles and D. M. Henderson, вҖңA note on interior vs. boundary-layer
damping of surface waves in a circular cylinder,вҖқ Journal of Fluid Mechan-
ics 364, 319вҖ“323 (1998).

20E. Becker, W. J. Hiller, and T. A. Kowaleswski, вҖңExperimental and theoret-
ical investigation of large amplitude oscillations of liquid droplets,вҖқ Journal
of Fluid Mechanics 231, 189вҖ“210 (1991).

21M. Herrmann, вҖңA balanced force refined level set grid method for two-
phase flows on unstructured flow solver grids,вҖқ Journal of Computational
Physics 227, 2674вҖ“2706 (2008).

22S. Mirjalili, C. B. Ivey, and A. Mani, вҖңComparison between the diffuse
interface and volume of fluid methods for simulating two-phase flows,вҖқ In-
ternational Journal of Multiphase Flow 116, 221вҖ“238 (2019).

23A. Prosperetti, вҖңMotion of two superposed viscous fluids,вҖқ Physics of Fluids
24, 1217вҖ“1223 (1981).


