1

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Terahertz PHASR Scanner with 2 kHz, 100 

picosecond Time-Domain Trace Acquisition Rate and 

an Extended Field-of-View Based on a Heliostat 

Design

Zachery B. Harris and M. Hassan Arbab, Member, IEEE

Abstract— Recently, we introduced a Portable HAndheld

Spectral Reflection (PHASR) Scanner to allow THz Time-Domain 
Spectroscopic (THz-TDS) imaging in clinical and industrial 
settings using a fiber-coupled and alignment-free telecentric beam 
steering design. The key limitations of the version 1.0 of the 
PHASR Scanner were its field-of-view and speed of time-domain 
trace acquisition. In this paper, we address these limitations by 
introducing a heliostat geometry for beam scanning to achieve an 
extended field-of-view, and by reconfiguring the ASynchronous 
OPtical Sampling (ASOPS) system to perform Electronically 
Controlled OPtical Sampling (ECOPS) measurements. The 
former change improved the deflection range of the beam, while 
also drastically reducing the coupling of the two scanning axes, the 
combination of which resulted in a larger than four-fold increase 
in the FOV area. The latter change significantly improves the 
acquisition 
speed 
and 
frequency 
domain 
performance 

simultaneously by improving measurement efficiency. To 
accomplish this, we characterized the non-linear time-axis 
sampling behavior of the electro-mechanical system in the ECOPS 
mode. We proposed methods to model and correct the non-linear 
time-axis distortions and tested the performance of the high-speed 
ECOPS trace acquisition. Therefore, here we introduce the 
PHASR Scanner version 2.0, which is capable of imaging a 
40×27 mm2 FOV with 2000 traces per second over a 100 
picosecond TDS range. This new scanner represents a significant 
leap towards translating the THz-TDS technology from the lab 
bench to the bedside for real-time clinical imaging applications.

Index Terms—Terahertz Imaging, Terahertz Time-Domain 

Spectroscopy,

I. INTRODUCTION

ERAHERTZ (THz) imaging has enjoyed many diverse 
potential applications such as art preservation [1], [2], 
security screening [3], [4], non-destructive testing [5]–

[7], and biomedical analysis [8]–[12]. However, many of the 
available imaging devices are not field-deployable or rely on 
raster scanning of the sample or instrument for image 
formation. Current THz camera systems do not provide 
spectroscopic information from the sample [13]–[18]. 
Therefore, images obtained from today’s THz cameras are not 

Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute 

of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under award 
number R01GM112693. (Corresponding author: Hassan Arbab).

The authors are with the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony 

Brook University, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA
(e-mail: 

zachery.harris@stonybrook.edu; hassan.arbab@stonybrook.edu). 

well suited for common techniques such as spectral 
“fingerprinting” [5], material parameter extraction (e.g. 
measuring refractive index) [8], [19], and analysis of scattering 
behavior [20]–[23]. In contrast, the time-domain spectroscopy 
(TDS) method can be used in these studies. Additionally, THz-
TDS can provide structural information and sub-surface 
imaging based on time-of-flight analysis [24], [25]. 
Compressive sensing techniques allow for THz-TDS image 
formation using a stationary system, but its field of view is 
limited to the collimated beam width [26]–[29]. 

Portable THz spectroscopy has been demonstrated for single-

point measurement using the battery-powered Micro-Z [30] and 
Mini-Z [31], [32] devices. Also, one-dimensional line scanning 
has been demonstrated using beam-steering along a single axis 
[33], [34]. However, in order to form an image, these devices 
would still need to be mechanically translated across the surface 
of a target. To address the need for portable full spectroscopic 
THz imaging devices, we developed the THz PHASR (Portable 
HAndheld Spectral Reflection) Scanner [35], [36]. This 
instrument acquired THz-TDS images over a 12×19 mm2 field 
of view (FOV) using an f-θ lens and a mirror mounted in 
telecentric alignment on a motorized gimbal. An ASynchronous 
Optical Sampling (ASOPS) system was used to provide fast 
acquisition rates of 100 waveforms/s. Recently, this device has 
been demonstrated in the assessment and longitudinal 
monitoring of burn injuries in an in vivo porcine model [37]. 
However, the use of the scanner in our preclinical studies have 
highlighted two key limitations in the first version of the 
scanner: (i) the FOV, limited by the distortions inherent to its 
scanning geometry and the mechanical limits of the gimbal, and 
(ii) scanning speed, limited by the acquisition rate of the 
ASOPS technique. Solutions to these two limitations are crucial 
in translation of our technology from bench to the bedside in 
the upcoming pilot human studies.

Here, we present the new THz PHASR Scanner 2.0, shown 

in Fig. 1(a). To increase the FOV, we redesigned the beam 
steering geometry based on a heliostat configuration, which

See supplementary material for the video of a 27×27 mm2 FOV scan.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available

online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org

T


2

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 1. (a) The PHASR 2.0 scanner. (b) Our telecentric imaging 
system with photoconductive antenna (PCA) emitter and 
detector, E and D, respectively, each paired with a 
collimating/focusing lens, CL. A silicon beam splitter, BS, 
directs the beam to the collocated section containing the 
gimbaled beam-steering mirror, GM, and f-θ imaging lens. An 
optional imaging window, W, is shown at the target plane.

additionally eliminated the distortions due to the intercoupling 
of the scanning axes in the gimballed motors of the PHASR 
Scanner 1.0. To increase the speed of the TDS trace 
acquisitions, we have adapted our existing ASOPS electronic 
hardware to perform Electronically Controlled OPtical 
Sampling (ECOPS) instead. These changes produce a new 
scanner with a large, 40×27 mm2 FOV and capable of recording 
2000 waveforms per second, representing a 20-fold increase in 
acquisition speed.

II. DESIGN OF THE PHASR 2.0 SCANNER

The schematic of a general telecentric THz-TDS imager is 

shown in Fig. 1(b). The terahertz light is generated by a 
commercial fiber-coupled photoconductive antenna (PCA), 
collimated, and then directed through a beam splitter. The beam 
is steered across a custom high-density polyethylene (HDPE) f-
θ lens by a gimballed mirror located at the lens’ rear focal point, 
thus creating a telecentric configuration. In this design, the lens 
maintains a normal incidence angle on the target, a flat focal 
surface plane, a constant focal spot size, and constant optical 
path length for all positions within the FOV [38]. The normal 
incidence and flat focal plane mean that the reflected beam is 
collocated with the incident beam, returning by the same path 
to the beam splitter where it is directed towards the detector 
PCA. Optionally, an imaging window can be used at the focal 
plane to flatten soft targets and allow for self-calibration 
reference measurements using the air-window interface 
reflections [19].

The simplified model of a generalized gimbal in Fig. 2(a) 

shows how rotations about the outer gimbal axis (blue, 𝛼) 
change the orientation of the other axis (red, 𝛽). In our previous 
design, we used a commercial gimbal unit with ±7° deflection 
in each axis. Due to the specific gimbal architecture, the unit 
was mounted at a 45° angle as shown in Fig. 2(b). In this 
arrangement, the angle between the elevation axis and the 
incident beam, 𝒃in, is dependent on the orientation of the 
azimuthal axis. Note that, at the default position of the 
azimuthal motor, 𝛼 = 0∘ shown in Fig. 2, the elevation axis, 𝛽, 
is perpendicular to the incident beam, whereas if the azimuthal 

axis rotates to its maximum range, 7°, the angle between the 
elevation axis and the beam would be about 5°. As a result of 
this varying angle, movement directly along the horizontal, 𝑥, 
or vertical, 𝑦, scanning directions requires contribution from 
both motors. In other words, the two gimbal axes are 
intercoupled. Fig. 2(c) shows the coordinate mapping from the 
motor angles to the position of the focused beam for this design, 
derived in detail in [35], which only provided a 12×19 mm2

FOV.

To improve this range, we have redesigned the mirror gimbal 

layout as shown in Fig. 3(a). Inspired by heliostats, instruments 
used in astronomy to reflect light from the sun as it moves 
through the sky to a fixed point, we have adapted the scanning 
mechanism’s orientation to reduce the axial coupling [39]. 
Instead of a single off-the-shelf gimbal, a pair of motors were 
stacked in a “daisy-chained” configuration. A rotation stage 
controlling the azimuthal axis is fastened directly to the scanner 
housing. The elevation angle is controlled by a motorized 
goniometer attached to the rotation stage. A 3D printed mirror
mount biased by 45° about the elevation axis is used to properly 
locate the mirror for scanning. The model gimbal shown in Fig. 
3(b) demonstrates this orientation. Note again the effect that 
rotating about the azimuthal axis has on the angle between the 
incident beam and the elevation axis. In this design, the outer 
azimuthal axis is collinear with the incident beam and as such, 
the elevation axis remains perpendicular to the incident beam at 
any azimuthal position. This provides the larger and 
significantly more rectilinear FOV shown in Fig. 3(c). For 
comparison, the outline of the PHASR Scanner 1.0 FOV is 
shown by the black dashed line. The vertical scan range, limited 
by the ±10° travel of the goniometer, is approximately 27 mm 
at the center, expanding slightly at larger horizontal positions. 
The color within the scanning area in Fig. 3(c) shows the 
simulated normalized power at the target calculated via ray-
tracing. The circular profile shows how the primary limiting 
factor of the horizontal scan range is the diameter of the f-θ lens 
which provides approximately a 40-mm range.

A. Heliostat Beam Scanning Algorithm

To demonstrate the decoupling of the imaging axes of 

rotation in the heliostat design, we derive the scanning 
coordinate system from the axial deflections. We define the 𝑧-
axis to be aligned antiparallel with the optic axis of the f-θ lens, 
and the 𝑥- and 𝑦-axes as shown in Fig. 3(a). A vector 
perpendicular to the face of the mirror then has the direction

𝒎̂ = (

cos(𝛽 − 45∘) sin(𝛼)

sin(𝛽 − 45∘)

− cos(𝛽 − 45∘) cos(𝛼)

) ,
(1)

where 𝛼 and 𝛽 are the angles rotated by the azimuthal and 
elevation motors, respectively, and defined in Fig. 3(b). That is, 
the mirror points in a direction corresponding to a simple 
spherical coordinate system with azimuthal angle about the 𝑦-
axis and elevation measured in either direction from the 𝑥𝑧-
plane. The collimated THz beam is then described by the 
incident and reflected vectors,


3

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 2. (a) Geometry of the beam steering in PHASR Scanner 1.0. (b) Simplified representation of the gimballed mirror in PHASR 
1.0. (c) Resultant scanning pattern from this geometry. Blue and red grids represent coordinates of angular deflection of the 
scanning mirror, α and β, about its azimuthal and elevation axes, respectively.

𝒃̂in = (

0
1
0

) ,
𝒃out = (

𝑥
𝑦
−𝑓

) ,
(2)

respectively, where (𝑥, 𝑦) is the location of the beam at the lens 
plane. Reflecting −𝒃in about 𝒎 to get the direction of 𝒃out and 
scaling such that the 𝑧 coordinate is equal to −𝑓, so that 𝑥- and 
𝑦-coordinates represent the location at the lens plane, it can be 
seen that

𝒃out = (

𝑓 tan(𝛼)

𝑓 sec(𝛼) tan(2𝛽)

−𝑓

) = 𝑓𝑠𝑒𝑐(𝛼) (

𝑓 sin(𝛼)
tan(2𝛽)
− cos(𝛼)

) . (3)

Equation (3) shows that at the lens plane, the 𝑥-coordinate is 
only dependent on 𝑓 and 𝛼, and the value ℎ = 𝑓 sec 𝛼 =
√𝑥2 + 𝑧2 is the distance to the lens plane at azimuthal angle 𝛼. 
Similarly, the 𝑦-coordinate is only dependent on ℎ and 𝛽. That 
is, the angle within the 𝑥𝑧-plane is determined only by 𝛼 and 
the angle away from the 𝑥𝑧-plane is determined only by 𝛽.

The basic scanning algorithm for this design is then as 

follows. The face of the mirror must point in the direction 
bisecting the incident and reflected beams:

𝒎 = ‖𝒃̂in‖𝒃out + ‖𝒃out‖(−𝒃̂in) = (

𝑚𝑥
𝑚𝑦
𝑚𝑧

) .
(4)

The axes of the gimbal must rotate to

𝛼 = arctan ( 𝑚𝑥

−𝑚𝑧

) ,
𝛽 = arctan (
𝑚𝑦

√𝑚𝑥2 + 𝑚𝑧2) + 45∘. (5)

Our previously demonstrated linear correction can be applied to 
account for slight deviations due to the f-θ lens [35]. This 
method is general for heliostat scanning over f-θ lenses. 
Variations on this design using different lenses might provide 
better performance for different applications, albeit with some 
tradeoffs. For instance, a lens with a larger focal length provides 
a greater field of view for the same angular range of travel at 
the gimbal, but at the cost of a larger spot size at the focus, 
reducing the spatial resolution of the device. The particular f-θ 
lens used here has been developed to suit the needs of a compact 
scanner. Thus, the vertical scan range of the PHASR Scanner 
2.0, limited by the ±10° travel of
the goniometer, is 

approximately 27 mm at the center, whereas the horizontal scan 
range is limited only by the lens area (e.g., here to 

approximately 40 mm).

III. ECOPS MEASUREMENTS USING ASOPS HARDWARE

The imaging rate of our previous scanner was limited by the 

measurement speed of the commercial ASOPS system used for 
generation and detection of THz pulses. Although faster than using 
a mechanical delay line, the THz-TDS acquisition rate was slower 
than speeds provided by the ECOPS technique. ECOPS trace 
acquisition rates of 2.5 kHz [40], 8 kHz [41] and even as high as 
60 kHz [42] have been demonstrated, though with THz time-axis 
ranges limited to less than about 20 ps at those speeds. Imaging 
systems using ECOPS technique have been reported with 
operating speeds of 1000 trace/s [43], [44]. Also, point 
measurements of sample layer thickness have been acquired at 
1600 Hz rates with 200 ps of range [45]. Both ASOPS and ECOPS 
use two femtosecond lasers to respectively generate and sample the 
temporal waveform of the THz electric fields. These two 
techniques are described in detail elsewhere [46], [47], however, 
an overview is provided here and illustrated conceptually in Fig. 4.

In both techniques, the difference in repetition rate of the two 

lasers causes the sampling laser to progressively record sequential 
THz pulses in time, building a representative time-domain 
acquisition. Here, we call the laser generating the THz pulses 
“Laser A,” which has a constant repetition frequency 𝑓rep and will 
thus produce THz pulses separated by a period of 𝑇rep = 1 𝑓rep
⁄
. 

The laser sampling the THz pulses is called “Laser B” and has its 
repetition frequency set to 𝑓rep − Δ𝑓, where Δ𝑓 is small compared 
to 𝑓rep. In general, the difference frequency Δ𝑓 can be set by the 
user and is dependent on time, t. As a result, the THz pulse samples 
occur at a period of 1 (𝑓rep − Δ𝑓)
⁄
. Assuming no variation in the 

beam path, each of these THz pulses is essentially identical at the 
detector so the different repetition periods of the two lasers mean 
that, in comparison to the previous sampling location of the THz 
pulse, each subsequent sample will be delayed by [46], [47],

Δ𝜏(𝑡) =
1

𝑓rep − Δ𝑓(𝑡) − 1

𝑓rep

≈ Δ𝑓(𝑡)

𝑓rep
2
,
(6)

where values of 𝜏 refer to the effective time axis intervals of the 
THz pulse and are usually in picoseconds. The actual sampling
interval in lab time, 𝑡, is 𝑇rep = 1 𝑓rep
⁄
and is equal to the period


4

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 3. (a) Geometry of the PHASR Scanner 2.0 beam steering. (b) Simplified representation of the gimballed mirror in PHASR 
2.0 showing the azimuthal axis, in blue, aligned with the incident beam and elevation axis, in red, perpendicular to it. (c) Resultant 
scanning pattern from this geometry. Blue and red grids represent coordinates of the angular deflection of the scanning mirror, α 
and β about its azimuthal and elevation axes, respectively. The dashed black line shows the FOV accessible with the previous 
version of the scanner and the solid black line shows the typical scanning area of 25.4×25.4 mm2 (1×1 in.2). The color scale shows 
the normalized incident power at the target as determined by ray-tracing simulation.

of the femtosecond laser pulses. Each successive pulse from 
Laser B will sample the corresponding THz pulse generated by 
Laser A at a time-point shifted by Δ𝜏. Starting at an arbitrary 
sampling time 𝜏(0) = Δ𝜏0 at time 𝑡 = 0, the effective sample
time at 𝑡 is given by:

𝜏(𝑡) = 𝜏0 +
∑
Δ𝑓(𝑛 𝑓rep
⁄
)

𝑓rep

× 1

𝑓rep

⌊𝑡×𝑓rep⌋

𝑛=0

(7)

where 𝑛 = ⌊𝑡 × 𝑓rep⌋ is the integer number of laser pulses that 
have occurred since 𝑡 = 0. The separated factor of 1 𝑓rep
⁄
in (7) 

emphasizes the fact that this is, in essence, a Riemann sum with 
its step size defined by the repetition interval of the laser. Thus, 
the transform between time and the sampling location can be 
approximated by the integral of the difference frequency over 
time.

In ASOPS measurements, illustrated in blue in Fig. 4, Δ𝑓 is 

kept constant and 𝜏 will increase by the same amount per pulse. 
The direction in which the sampling progresses depends on 
which laser has a higher repetition rate, i.e., it depends on the 
sign of Δ𝑓. If Laser B has a lower repetition frequency, as 
depicted in blue in Fig. 4(a), the sampling can be said to be in 
the “forward” direction as each subsequent sample is associated 
with a later time in the THz signal, as shown in Fig. 4(b). If the 
frequency of Laser B is higher, the sampling will occur in the 
opposite, “backwards,” direction. For ASOPS measurement in 
either direction, after one full period of the difference 

frequency, 1 |Δ𝑓|
⁄
, the accumulated sample time will equal 

that of a full period of
the laser repetition, that is, 

𝜏(1 |Δ𝑓|
⁄
) − 𝜏0 = 𝑇rep, and thus samples covering the full THz 

pulse will have been acquired. To improve the signal to noise 
ratio, SNR, multiple sequential acquisitions are then typically 
averaged to build a single THz-TDS trace, so the total time per 
trace is the number of averages multiplied by 1 |Δ𝑓|
⁄
.

However, ASOPS measurements are not time-efficient 

because in every acquisition event the entire 𝑇rep on the order 
of 10 ns, is recorded but only the relevant THz-TDS 
measurements range, typically on the order of 100s of ps, is 
retained. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 4(b) by the range 
between the dashed lines. Thus, the majority of the period of 
ASOPS is spent sampling timepoints outside of the range of 
interest. ECOPS improves the measurement speed by only 
sampling a small range of interest.

The ECOPS technique can be understood as ASOPS 

measurement with an alternating Δ𝑓, such as the illustrations 
shown in Fig. 4(a). As a result of the modulated Δ𝑓 value, 
instead of sampling the entire 1 |Δ𝑓|
⁄
period, Laser B 

repetitively samples in both forward and backward directions 
over only a small section of the available period as shown in red 
in Fig. 4(b). If the frequency of the modulation is 𝑓M, single-
shot THz-TDS traces can be acquired at 2𝑓M since data can be 
recorded in both directions. However, unlike ASOPS, which 
can sample any-sized section of the entire 𝑇rep period of the 


5

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 4. Conceptual depiction of the difference between the 
ASOPS (blue lines) and the ECOPS techniques using square 
(red lines) and sinusoidal (green lines) modulation. (a) the 
repetition rate of the two lasers, where Laser A is represented 
by the solid black line for both ASOPS and ECOPS. The 
repetition rate of Laser B is constant in ASOPS (blue), whereas 
it is modulated in ECOPS with a square (red) or sinusoidal 
(green) function. (b) The time domain sampling instances, as 
given by Eq. (7), are depicted for both techniques. Dashed black 
lines indicate the portion of interest in the time domain 
sampling window in a typical THz-TDS measurement. The 
time axis, shared between both (a) and (b), shows one 1 |Δ𝑓|
⁄

sampling period, i.e., the time required to record a single 
ASOPS trace, in laboratory time. In practice, the magnitude of 
Δ𝑓 is not the same between the two techniques, and a sinusoidal 
function of much higher frequency is used to drive ECOPS.

THz waveform, ECOPS’s measurement range, 𝑇THz, is linked 
to the speed through both Δ𝑓 and 𝑓M. Thus, while the THz 
acquisition window and its starting point, 𝜏0, can be adjusted in 
ASOPS by simply recording a different section of the 1 |Δ𝑓|
⁄

period, for ECOPS this requires more coordinated adjustment 
of the modulation parameters. 

Despite these differences, the two techniques can be 

implemented using the same equipment. The variation in 
Δ𝑓 can be created by taking advantage of the existing ASOPS 
hardware. The repetition rate of each of the lasers is controlled 
by the length of the laser cavity using stepper motors and 
piezoelectric actuators for coarse and fine adjustment of the 
laser cavity. A feedback system monitors the pulse rates and 
compares them to a reference oscillator and then adjusts the 
cavity length accordingly in real time. In our system, the 
reference for Laser B is generated by a Keysight 33500B Series 
waveform generator, allowing a user to select different values 
of Δ𝑓 for different speeds of ASOPS. ECOPS operation is 
achieved by modulating the frequency of this reference and 
relying on the same feedback system to correctly adapt the 

repetition rate. 

Practical hardware limitations mean that if the target Δ𝑓 is 

modulated too aggressively the system introduces errors in the 
repetition rate or will lose phase-locking between the two lasers 
entirely. For this reason, we found it preferable to use sinusoidal 
modulation, illustrated by the green traces in Fig. 4, which more 
smoothly varies the difference frequency than a square wave, 
shown in red. Likewise, to maintain phase-locking in our 
system we must use a peak ECOPS Δ𝑓 smaller than the typical 
Δ𝑓 used in ASOPS. However, the varying magnitude of the 
difference frequency produced by a sinusoidal modulation 
results in a time-dependent sampling rate of the THz time-
domain demonstrated by the curved green trace in Fig. 4(b). 
This is further complicated by the imperfect system response to 
the modulated reference frequency. The combined effects of 
these present transiently as timing drift and persistently as a 
distortion to the expected sampling rate of the THz signal, both 
of which must be accounted for. As a shorthand, we will specify 
the ECOPS modulation parameters by the modulation 
frequency and peak frequency differences. For example, 
“𝑓M = 1000 Hz, Δ𝑓 = ±32 Hz” should be understood as a 
nominal 
modulation 
of 
the 
form 

Δ𝑓 = (32 Hz) sin(2𝜋𝑡(1000 Hz)). 
In 
contrast, 
ASOPS 

measurements, which have a constant difference frequency, 
will be indicated just by that value, e.g., Δ𝑓 = 100 Hz.

A. Timing drift

Drift occurs if the system responds differently to the two 

forward and backward directions of time-domain scanning, e.g., 
through a hysteresis in the piezo. In that case, the two directions 
will cover different amounts of 𝜏, leading to an apparent drift of 
the THz signal due to the drift of the ECOPS sampling range. 
Left unchecked, this drift will quickly cause the region of 
interest to shift out of the scanning window. To counteract this 
effect, a small offset (typically on the order of tens of mHz) to 
the base repetition rate of laser B, 𝑓B, is required to bias the 
modulation by the same amount opposite to the drift. However, 
in our system, using a constant offset value is insufficient as the 
drift varies over time, as much as 5 ps/s within minutes. To 
address this issue, we have implemented a state control model 
for real-time drift compensation described by the flowchart in 
Fig. 5. In order to properly track the drift, we must find and lock 
on to a feature (such as the peak of a THz pulse) known to be 
stationary. For rough-surface or malleable targets such as liquid 
or skin, the flat imaging window, shown in Fig. 1 provides an 
ideal reflection reference from the air-window interface. Since 
the f-θ lens provides a constant phase at its focus over the entire 
planar field of view [38], there is no additional compensation 
for scanning location needed. The difference of the current 
apparent time location of this feature, 𝜏Curr, from the location 
measured some amount of time, Δ𝑡, previously, 𝜏Prev, provides 
the drift, d, of the ECOPS time window. A small adjustment to 
the frequency offset is made to compensate any time the 
window drift is above a certain threshold, 𝑑Max, in either 
direction. Once engaged, this compensation actively counters 
the majority of the drift in real-time. In this paper, we classify 


6

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 5. Flowchart of state model drift compensation algorithm. Drift, 𝑑, is calculated as the change in measured feature location 
(𝜏Curr − 𝜏Prev ) over some amount of time, Δ𝑡. If the magnitude of 𝑑 is greater than a threshold, 𝑑Max, then a small corresponding 
correction is made to the base repetition rate of Laser B, 𝑓B.

Fig. 6. (a) Illustration of the multi-layer reference target used for providing constant sampling points in the time-domain. (b) 
Representative time-domain signals when using the ECOPS time axis (𝑓M = 1000 Hz, Δ𝑓 = ±32 Hz, 50 avg.) in the forward 
(blue) and backward (red) directions compared to the reference ASOPS signal (black) of the same target (Δ𝑓 = 100 Hz, 100 avg.). 
(c) Distribution of the measured delay between the two pulses marked in (b) over 30 traces from each of the ECOPS directions 
with black dotted line showing the ASOPS value. (d) Comparison of the difference between the measured ASOPS and ECOPS 
locations (adjusted for different 𝜏0 values) of the time-domain reflection peaks in the forward (blue, lower axis) and backward 
(red, upper axis) for all 30 ECOPS datasets.

any remaining variation as jitter, which contributes to the 
measurement noise, and will be discussed in section IV(A).

B. Nonlinear time-domain sampling and its correction

In addition to the drift described in the previous section, other 

time-axis distortions are present as a result of the electronic and 

mechanical systems response to the frequency modulation. For 
example, any inaccuracy of the modulation electronics, 
mechanical responses of the piezos to the electronic waveform, 
or drift correction will modify the modulation from the nominal 
sinusoid and thus deviate the sampling from the expected 
points. The extent of this distortion is illustrated by 


7

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 7. (a) Correspondence of the location of the time domain peaks between the ECOPS forward (blue) and backward (red) 
directions and the ASOPS signals compared to the results calculated from Eq. (7) assuming that (𝜏𝐴𝑆𝑂𝑃𝑆 − 𝜏0) = 𝜏𝐸𝐶𝑂𝑃𝑆(𝑡) (black 
dashed line). The data presented here is the same as those shown in Fig. 6 (𝑓M = 1000 Hz, Δ𝑓 = ±32 Hz, 50 avg.) (b) The 
difference from the calculated model, more clearly showing the asymmetry of the trend between the ECOPS forward and backward 
directions. The peak locations in (a) and (b) were collected from 30 separate time-domain acquisitions.

measurements from a multi-layer reference target, shown in 
Fig. 6(a). TDS point measurements of a thin wafer of silicon,
sandwiched between the imaging window and metallic back 
layer, provides many distinct pulses due to the Fabry-Perot 
reflections. The relative timing of these “landmark” features 
allow for simple comparison between ECOPS signals and an 
ASOPS reference measurement of the same location on the 
multi-layer sample. Figure 6(b) illustrates the ECOPS time axes 
generated by Eq. (7), 𝜏ECOPS(𝑡), using the expected modulation 
function. This basic model does not result in the correct time 
axes and notably the timing error is not the same for both 
directions of the ECOPS sampling. For instance, note the 
interval labeled by Δ𝜏pks in Fig. 6(b). As measured by the 
ASOPS reference, the later peak arrives 42.62 ps after the first. 
As shown in Fig. 6(c), this difference is consistently 
underestimated by the ECOPS signals. Figure 6(d) shows the 
time-dependent difference in the ECOPS location of the 
landmark peaks from the same observed ASOPS locations, 
𝜏ASOPS, offset by the different 𝜏0 values for each trace. If the 
ECOPS measurement perfectly reproduced the ASOPS signal, 
these points would fall at 0 for all t. Instead, the non-zero slopes 
of the two sets indicate that the scaling provided by Eq. (7) 
didn’t capture the dynamic response of the electrical and 
mechanical hardware. The differences in the response to each 
direction of modulation is also made clear by plotting the 
forward and backwards ECOPS measurement using red and 
blue data points and corresponding time axes.

The full extent of the timing error can be seen in Fig. 7(a) and 

7(b), which compares the expected time axis function 
calculated from Eq. (7), black dashed line, to the actual 
corresponding ECOPS time-domain peaks in both forward 
(blue) and backwards (red) directions. The faded copies of the 
data points on either side of the 0 to 1 𝑓M
⁄
period provide 

context to the behavior of the model near the start and end of 
each measurement cycle. The trend shown in Fig. 7(b) results 
in time-domain error values of up to 5 ps.

This method of comparison provides an approach for a 

simple time-axis correction using empirical measurements of 
the Fabry-Perot reflections in the time-domain signals. A 

similar method was used for finding the time-axis scaling factor 
in [41]. Since the reflections are distinct and deterministic 
events in the time domain, they can be used for discrete 
sampling of a transformation from t to τ. In other words, a 
function describing the transformation between the ECOPS 
locations of the “landmark” features, such as the peaks, and the 
corresponding features in an ASOPS acquisition provides time-
axis calibration. We can approximate this transform for an 
individual acquisition using a polynomial equation of order N
given by,

𝜏(𝑡) − 𝜏0 = ∑ 𝐶𝑃𝑡𝑃

𝑁

𝑃=1

,
(8)

where 𝐶𝑃 are the coefficients of the 𝑃th polynomial term. If we 
label the landmark features 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐, … and associate their ECOPS 
locations in lab time: 𝑡𝑎, 𝑡𝑏, 𝑡𝑐, … with their ASOPS time-
locations: 𝜏𝑎, 𝜏𝑏, 𝜏𝑐, … then the set of 𝐶𝑃 values and 𝜏0 can be 
found using a least-squares fitting algorithm produced by 
numerically solving the matrix equation, given by

[

(𝑡𝑎)𝑁
(𝑡𝑎)𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑎
1

(𝑡𝑏)𝑁
(𝑡𝑏)𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑏
1

(𝑡𝑐)𝑁
(𝑡𝑐)𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑐
1

⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮

]

[
 
 
 
 𝐶𝑁
𝐶𝑁−1

⋮
𝐶1
𝜏0 ]

 
 
 
 

= [

𝜏𝑎
𝜏𝑏
𝜏𝑐
⋮

] .
(9)

The initial sampling point, 𝜏0, depends on the starting point of 
the window thus in general will be different for each 
acquisition. The polynomial coefficient terms, 𝐶𝑃, model the 
shape of the ECOPS time sampling and, excluding jitter, are 
expected to be the same for each acquisition.

The accuracy of this approximation will be limited by the 

number and distribution of sampling points used to generate the 
fit. We further increase the number of reference points by using 
multiple acquisitions with different 𝜏0 values, and thus different 
time window locations. In order to find the correct coefficients 
for all acquisitions, we fit a system of equations, in which the 
constant terms (0th order) are unique to acquisitions of the 
different time windows, but non-constant (1st and greater order) 


8

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

polynomial terms remain the same. That is, for 𝑀 different 
ECOPS acquisitions, we extract the time-locations, 𝑡𝑖,𝑚 and 
𝜏𝑖,𝑚, where 𝑖 = 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐, …
and 𝑚 = 1, 2, … , 𝑀, for all 

“landmarks” time sampling locations. The system of equations 
can be represented by the matrix equation given by,

[
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (𝑡𝑎,1)

𝑁
(𝑡𝑎,1)

𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑎,1
1
0
0
⋯
0

(𝑡𝑏,1)

𝑁
(𝑡𝑏,1)

𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑏,1
1
0
0
⋯
0

(𝑡𝑐,1)

𝑁
(𝑡𝑐,1)

𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑐,1
1
0
0
⋯
0

⋮
⋮
⋱
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋱
⋮

(𝑡𝑎,2)

𝑁
(𝑡𝑎,2)

𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑎,2
0
1
0
⋯
0

(𝑡𝑏,2)

𝑁
(𝑡𝑏,2)

𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑏,2
0
1
0
⋯
0

(𝑡𝑏,2)

𝑁
(𝑡𝑐,2)

𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑐,2
0
1
0
⋯
0

⋮
⋮
⋱
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋱
⋮

(𝑡𝑎,𝑀)

𝑁
(𝑡𝑎,𝑀)

𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑎,𝑀
0
0
0
⋯
1

(𝑡𝑏,𝑀)

𝑁
(𝑡𝑏,𝑀)

𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑏,𝑀
0
0
0
⋯
1

(𝑡𝑐,𝑀)

𝑁
(𝑡𝑐,𝑀)

𝑁−1
⋯
𝑡𝑐,𝑀
0
0
0
⋯
1

⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

×

[
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 𝐶𝑁
𝐶𝑁−1

⋮
𝐶1
𝜏01
𝜏02
𝜏03

⋮

𝜏0𝑀 ]

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

=

[
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
𝜏𝑎,1
𝜏𝑏,1
𝜏𝑐,1

⋮

𝜏𝑎,2
𝜏𝑏,2
𝜏𝑐,2

⋮

𝜏𝑎,𝑀
𝜏𝑏,𝑀
𝜏𝑐,𝑀

⋮
]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

.
(10)

Solving this equation gives the single set of coefficients for the 
mapping, 𝐶𝑁, 𝐶𝑁−1, … , 𝐶1 as well as the 𝜏0’s. Furthermore, 
simultaneous fitting to multiple 𝑀 acquisitions reduces the 
impact of jitter on the calculated value of the coefficients.

While this transformation could be applied independently for 

each direction of ECOPS scan, in practice we have found that 
this is best done using ECOPS measurements which have been 
“unwrapped”, as in Fig. 7 to contain both the forward and 
backwards sampled signals as they were recorded. That is, the 
fitting method is applied to both the blue and red points at once, 
starting with the forward signal and followed by the reverse 
signal. The small delay between the two directions is the “re-
arm” time of the recording instruments, in which no data is 
collected. This “Full-Cycle” approach more accurately fits the 
time in between the same landmark features’ location in the 
forward and backwards directions. In other words, the Full-
Cycle fitting would correct time-axis locations between 0 and 
1 ms in Fig. 7. The true function should then be expected to be 
periodic with a period equal to that of the frequency 
modulation. Figure 8 shows the mean-square-error (MSE) of 
the peak locations in the corrected time-axis results as a 
function of the fitting polynomial order. These results 
demonstrate that increasing the order of the fitting polynomial 
has diminishing returns beyond the 8th order. Therefore, in the

Fig. 8. The effect of polynomial order on goodness of fit for 
time-axis correction as measured by the MSE of ECOPS peak 
locations compared to ASOPS peak locations. An 8th order 
polynomial function is selected for subsequent time-axis 
modeling.

subsequent sections, we will use an 8th order polynomial 
function in Eq. (10).

Figure 9 shows the application of the 8th order polynomial 

time axis correction to Fabry-Perot reflections in Fig. 6. Figure 
9(a) shows that this polynomial function, shown by the green 
dashed line, agrees with the experimental measurements much 
better in comparison to the theoretical model shown by the 
black dashed line. In particular, Fig. 9(b) shows that the time-
axis error between the theoretical model and the ECOPS 
measurements can reach several picoseconds in a full-cycle 
measurement. In Fig. 9(c), however, this error, i.e., Δ𝜏ECOPS(𝑡), 
the difference between the measured locations and the 
polynomial model, is approximately uniform and smaller than 
1 picosecond. As a result, there is a better match between the 
ASOPS and ECOPS signals in both directions as shown in Fig. 
9(d). Specifically, in Fig. 9(e) the delay between the pulses 
labeled by Δ𝜏pks in Figs. 6(b) and 9(d) is reduced from 2 and 4 
picoseconds in the forward and backwards direction, 
respectively, to less than 0.3 picosecond in the forward 
direction (blue) and less than 0.6 picosecond in the backwards 
direction (red).

When using different ECOPS frequency modulation 

parameters, i.e., 𝑓M and Δ𝑓 values, following the method 
described in this section resulted in different 8th order 
polynomial time-axis corrections, however with similar 
accuracy in modeling the non-linear time-domain sampling 
(data not shown). Although results shown in Fig. 9 indicate that 
the error of time-axis sampling can be markedly reduced, the 
effect of the residual difference in spectroscopic measurements 
must be investigated. In the following section, we have used the 
8th order polynomial time-axis corrections to model and correct 
for the non-linear time-axis behavior in evaluating the 
performance of the new PHASR 2.0 Scanner.


9

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 9. (a) Comparison between the model calculated from Eq. (7) (black dashed line) and polynomial fit (green dashed line) to 
the actual peak locations (blue and red points). Difference from the calculated model (b) and difference from the polynomial fit (c) 
highlighting the improved correspondence to ASOPS peak locations. (d) The corrected time domain signal and (e) measurement 
of Δ𝜏pks demonstrating that after nonlinear time-axis correction the ECOPS traces much more closely match each other and the 
ASOPS reference. The histogram data are obtained from 30 ECOPS measurements of the sample in Fig. 6.

IV. INVESTIGATION OF PRACTICAL LIMITS

In order to validate the imaging capabilities of the PHASR 

Scanner 2.0 and the accuracy of our THz-TDS measurements 
in the ECOPS mode, we compare measurements against 
ASOPS data of the same type. In particular, four aspects of the 
THz-TDS measurements were examined: jitter, dynamic range, 
usable bandwidth, and spectroscopic accuracy. The first three 
values were calculated from measurements of a flat mirror 
while the spectroscopic accuracy was calculated based on the 
well-studied resonance of lactose at 0.53 THz [23], [48]–[50]. 
In each case, the performance metric was estimated from 100 
independent acquisitions obtained as single point spectroscopy 
measurements on the sample and without the optional imaging 
window. These measurements were repeated using different
setting values, which affect the acquisition rate: i.e., 𝑓M for 
ECOPS, as well as the number of time-domain traces averaged 
per acquisition and Δ𝑓 for both ASOPS and ECOPS. Per the 
manufacturer’s users’ manual, the Δ𝑓 values of the ASOPS 
system can be selected between 1 and 1000 Hz. Since our aim 
for employing ECOPS measurements is primarily to provide 
faster acquisition rate than the capabilities of the existing 

ASOPS system, the examined modulation frequencies were 
limited to 800 Hz and 1000 Hz. After time-axis correction, a 
gaussian high-pass filter (𝜇 = 0 THz, 𝜎 = 0.05 THz) was 
applied to all signals to remove low frequency noise typical of 
internal reflections within our PHASR Scanner. Table I shows 
single-shot acquisition time and the maximum THz-TDS 
sampling range for each of the setting values. Also, Table I 
includes the dynamic range values, further explored in Sec. 
IV(B), for 20 and 100 averages of the THz-TDS measurements. 
For ASOPS measurement, improving acquisition speed by 
increasing the difference frequency setting results in poorer 
dynamic range but has no effect on the sampling range. On the 
other hand, changing the ECOPS modulation settings of Δ𝑓 and 
𝑓M have comparatively little effect on the dynamic range of the 
measurements, but imposes limits on the length of TDS signal, 
which can be acquired.

A. Jitter

Consistent timing is vital to time-of-flight and phase-based 

measurements common to THz-TDS techniques such as 
material parameter extraction and thickness determination. A 


10

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

TABLE I

MEASUREMENT CAPABILITIES AT DIFFERENT ASOPS AND 

ECOPS SETTINGS

Method
𝑓M
[Hz]

Δ𝑓
[Hz]

Single
-Shot 
Time 
[ms]

Maximum 
THz-TDS 
Sampling 
Range [ps]

20-Avg. 
Dynamic 
Range 
[dB] 

100-Avg. 
Dynamic 
Range 
[dB]

ASOPS
0
50
20
10,000
35.4
43.2

0
100
10
10,000
30.5
36.0

0
200
5
10,000
21.9
28.7

0
400
2.5
10,000
14.3
21.5

0
500
2
10,000
8.7
18.7

0
1000
1
10,000
4.5
9.1

ECOPS
800
±32
0.625
140
34.2
42.6

800
±42
0.625
181
34.4
40.1

1000
±15
0.5
55
38.8
44.5

1000
±25
0.5
94
36.2
43.6

1000
±32
0.5
114
35.8
43.2

1000
±35
0.5
123
34.6
42.1

representative comparison between the ASOPS and ECOPS 
time-domain measurements obtained at the center of a flat 
mirror placed at the focal point is shown in Fig. 10(a). We 
define the jitter by the standard deviation of the time of arrival 
(ToA) of the reflected pulse as measured by the location of the 
maximum amplitude in the time-domain. Figure 10(b) shows 
the performance of both techniques at different settings. 
Notably, single-shot ASOPS measurements at 𝛥𝑓 ≥ 400 Hz
suffered from poor SNR such that a typical THz-TDS pulse 
could not be identified in the recorded trace. For example, 
single-shot ASOPS acquisitions of 𝛥𝑓 = 500 and 1000 Hz 
were nearly indistinguishable from noise, requiring special 
effort to manually locate the correct time window for 
measurement. Increasing the number of traces averaged per 
ASOPS acquisition typically decreases the noise, improving 
precision in calculations involving time of flight or phase 
measurements. However, this trend reverses for acquisitions 
which take more than about a second. In contrast, our 
implementation of ECOPS only improves up to around 20 
traces/acquisition. In both cases this indicates that arbitrarily 
large averaging is inadvisable due to the limits on the stability 
of the difference frequency, though for ECOPS this is also in 
part due to the limits of the simple drift compensation model in 
Sec. III(A). More advanced techniques or implementation of 
additional hardware such as presented in [43], [46] can improve 
the large-average performance to better match that of the 
existing ASOPS system.

B. Dynamic Range and Usable Bandwidth

In addition to time-resolved measurements, much of the 

strength of the THz-TDS imaging is due to the ability to 
measure broadband spectra. Representative frequency domain
reference measurements for both ASOPS and ECOPS are 
shown in Fig. 10(c) along with comparable measurements 
without the presence of the reference mirror to establish the 
noise floor. The peak dynamic range, calculated as the 
maximum ratio of the signal to the noise floor in the frequency 
domain, is shown in Fig. 10(d). Usable bandwidth is then 
calculated as the frequency at which the dynamic range first 
falls to below 3 dB and is plotted in Fig. 10(e). Some ASOPS 
measurements
with high difference frequency and low 

averaging did not exceed this threshold at any point, resulting 
in a bandwidth of 0 THz. Since the magnitude of the frequency 
spectra is not affected by the timing of the pulse, the drift does 
not affect broadband frequency performance, determined using 
the magnitude of the Fourier transformation of the TDS pulses, 
in the same way that it affected the ToA measurements. Thus 
as expected, increasing the averaging lowers the noise floor, 
improving both the dynamic range and usable bandwidth of the 
measurements. The effect of increasing averaging suppresses 
the noise floor for all settings, resulting in the parallel trends in
dynamic range plot. Most notably, ECOPS measurements offer 
approximately 10-20 dB higher dynamic range as compared to 
the ASOPS measurements. Furthermore, decreasing the 
ASOPS difference frequency improves the performance in both 
measures. ECOPS, which operates with even lower difference 
frequencies, shows similar capability to that of the best ASOPS 
setting (Δ𝑓 = 50 Hz) when comparing measurements with 
similar averaging despite the significantly shorter ECOPS 
measurement times. 

The effect of measurement speed on bandwidth is not as 

easily defined. Two series of water absorption lines beginning 
at approximately 1.1 and 1.7 THz [51], visible in Fig. 10(c), 
naturally limit dynamic range in their vicinity and create 
artificial striation in the measured bandwidth values. We have 
used a centered moving average filter, with 0.2 THz width 
applied to the signal spectra, as a simple method to remove the 
water absorption lines and other spectral fluctuations. 
Following this step, Figure 10(e) shows that, similar to the 
dynamic range, the bandwidth of the ASOPS measurements 
show a marked improvement with decreasing difference 
frequency. The bandwidth of the ECOPS measurements are 
higher than all ASOPS settings with similar numbers of 
averaging. However, the improvement in ECOPS bandwidth 
with increasing averaging is modest. This behavior is the result 
of the differing shapes of the spectral density of the noise floor 
in each technique, as illustrated for instance above 1.7 THz in 
Fig. 10(c). In general, higher difference frequencies result in a 
steeper negative slope in the noise floor, while lower difference 
frequency values produce a flat noise floor.

C. Spectroscopic Accuracy

To characterize the ability of our modified system to 

accurately measure frequency spectra, we calculated the 
measured location of the resonance of lactose, theoretically 
expected at 0.53 THz. The sample consisted of an 
approximately 4 mm thick pellet consisting of equal parts by 


11

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 10. (a) Normalized representative time domain signals reflected from a flat mirror obtained using ASOPS (blue, Δ𝑓 = 50 Hz, 
20 avg.) and ECOPS (red, 𝑓M = 1000 Hz, Δ𝑓 = ±25 Hz, 20 avg.) methods. (b) Standard deviation of time of arrival (ToA) for all 
sets of ASOPS and ECOPS acquisitions as a function of measurement time. (c) Fourier transform of the time domain signals in (a)
as well as noise measurements in ASOPS (light blue), and ECOPS (light red), acquired with the same parameters. Shaded areas 
show standard deviation over 100 acquisitions. (d) Maximum dynamic range and (e) maximum usable bandwidth of each set of 
acquisitions as a function of measurement time.

mass of α-lactose monohydrate and high-density polyethylene
(for binding). The two components were mixed as powders with 
mortar and pestle and then compressed for 3 hours. The sample 
was placed on a mirror and the reflection from the back surface 
(that is, the signal which has passed through twice the sample 
thickness) was captured. The location of the resonance was then 
determined by finding the location of the minimum spectral
amplitude in the area between 0.45 and 0.65 THz. This test 
provides additional insight into how well the nonlinear time-
axis sampling correction performs over large sections of the 
signal, as incorrect scaling will lead to frequency shifts. Figures 
11(a)-(b) show the distribution of the resonance locations using 
a selection of ASOPS and ECOPS settings after averaging 20 
independent traces. For ECOPS measurements, the distribution
of the resonances calculated for each direction using Eq. (7)
(i.e., without time-axis correction) are also shown in red and
blue. It can be seen that the precision of ASOPS measurements 
improves as the difference frequency is lowered, however the 

accuracy of ECOPS measurements remains higher than ASOPS 
and independent of ECOPS settings after our proposed time-
axis correction method. Figure 11(c), for example, compares 
the spectral location of lactose’s resonance for ASOPS 
measurements marked with the light blue box in Fig. 11(a) 
(Δ𝑓 = 100 Hz) with ECOPS measurements selected by the 
orange box in Fig. 11(b) (𝑓M = 1000 Hz, Δ𝑓 = ±32 Hz) before 
and after the nonlinear time-axis correction. Overall, the time-
axis corrected ECOPS results perform better than even the 
Δ𝑓 = 50 Hz ASOPS measurement, consistent with the trend 
according to difference frequency described previously. As 
shown in Fig. 11(d), the precision of this measurement 
improves as increasing averaging reduces the noise. This 
precision, as measured by standard deviation of the absorption 
peak location, is plotted for all measurement settings. While the 
variation decreases with increasing averaging as expected for 
both techniques, the standard deviation of the ASOPS results is 
nearly an order of magnitude higher than the corresponding 


12

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 11. Distribution of measured lactose resonance. (a) ASOPS measurements and (b) ECOPS measurements including values 
calculated from forward (blue) and backwards (red) directions using Eq. (7) as well as time-axis corrected (black). (c) Frequency 
domain plot of select ASOPS (Δ𝑓 = 100 Hz, 20 avg., light blue box in (a)) and ECOPS (𝑓M = 1000 Hz, Δ𝑓 = ±32 Hz, 20 avg, 
blue and red for ECOPS forward and backwards directions before time-axis correction, respectively, and orange for after 
correction). Area demonstrates mean ± standard deviation among 100 acquisitions (50 each of forward and backwards for ECOPS 
signals). Light blue- and orange-colored boxes in (a) and (b) indicate the corresponding boxplots. The resonance of lactose at 0.53 
THz in time-axis corrected ECOPS measurements (orange) overlap closely with ASOPS results (light blue). (d) Standard deviation 
of measured resonance location for each set of acquisitions. ECOPS measurements shown only after time-axis correction.

ECOPS measurements which have the same acquisition time.
Caution should be taken not to interpret these values as the 
frequency resolution of the signals—which is determined by the 
signal length upon which the Fourier transform is applied—but 
rather as a measure of the repeatability of measurements. For 
example, if the extracted values of the resonance location are 
split between a relatively few number of close frequency 
bins,the calculated standard deviation can be smaller than the 
frequency resolution for that measurement setting.

V. FAST ACQUISITION DEMONSTRATION

Finally, we show the overall improvement of our PHASR 

Scanner 2.0 by demonstrating its scanning capabilities in situ. 
A video demonstrating a scanning time of approximately 8 
seconds over a 27×27 mm2 FOV with 1 mm pixel sizes, (i.e., a 
729-pixel image) is presented in the supplemental materials.
The scan was acquired at 𝑓𝑀 = 1000 Hz, 𝛥𝑓 = ±32 Hz, for a
2000 THz-TDs trace/s acquisition rate. The acrylic target and 
peak-to-peak amplitude image of the scan is shown in Fig. 12(a) 
and (b), respectively. Each pixel represented the average of 10 
time-domain traces. To ensure that the pixels conform to a grid, 

each line of the scan consisted of an acceleration period, a 
constant speed section covering the FOV, and then a 
deceleration period and movement to the next line. Data was 
acquired during the constant speed section without pausing the 
beam-steering for each pixel. The acceleration, deceleration, 
and line step periods added an additional overhead time of 154 
ms/line or 4.0 seconds for an entire image, during which THz 
traces were not used.

A
1951 USAF Resolution Test Target
provides a

demonstration case for the full field of view of the scanner. The 
area containing elements 4-6 of group -2 (line widths ranging 
from 1.41 to 1.12 mm) and the resulting THz peak-to-peak 
image are shown in Fig. 12(c) and (d), respectively. The circular 
area of the ECOPS image clearly shows the boundaries of the 
lens area. 

V. CONCLUSION

Our first effort at a portable handheld scanner, the PHASR 
Scanner 1.0, addressed many of the problems present in current 
applications of THz-TDS imaging but it also had clear 
limitations in field of view and scanning speed. Implementing 


13

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Fig. 12. Demonstration images. (a) Photograph and (b) Peak-
to-peak image of the acrylic SBU target acquired during the 8-
second ECOPS THz-TDS scan presented in the supplemental
materials. (c) Visual image of group -2 of a 1951 USAF 
Resolution Test Target and (d) the corresponding THz peak-to-
peak image from an ECOPS scan. The full FOV (corresponding 
to the red box in (c)) of the scanner is shown. The vertical 
direction is limited by the range of the goniometer while the 
horizontal range is limited by the aperture of the lens (circular 
profile).

a heliostat gimbal geometry drastically reduced the inherent 
distortion from the scanning system and improved the scanning 
range from 12×19 mm2 to 40×27 mm2. This is combined with 
small modifications to the commercial ASOPS system, which 
allowed ECOPS operation of up to 2000 trace/s measurement 
rate. To implement this change, we used the existing ASOPS
hardware, though specific attention is required to reduce signal 
drift and non-linear time-axis sampling inherent to this upgrade. 
In particular, we used a state model to make real-time 
corrections to the time-window and a polynomial time-axis 
calibration to an ASOPS measurement based on Fabry-Perot 
reflections for accurate time-axis scaling. The resulting 
polynomial fit can then be used for further measurements within 
that session or until the ECOPS modulation parameters are 
changed. We demonstrated the performance metric of the new
ECOPS-based PHASR 2.0 Scanner. We show that we can use 

the ECOPS mode to take measurements with similar or better 
frequency-domain performance in significantly less time. These 
improvements make the PHASR Scanner 2.0 much more 
practical to use in scenarios such as biomedical imaging where 
scanning field of view and scanning speed significantly affect 
the patient experience. Our future work with the PHASR 2.0 
scanner is intended to demonstrate its ability “in the field” for 
clinical and industrial applications. Results of these studies 
have already been implemented to extend the FOV and speed 
of our PHASR 1.0 Scanner for imaging large burns with 1" 
diameter in several preclinical in vivo studies [52]–[54].
Furthermore, recent results have demonstrated the value of
polarization-sensitive THz measurement of biological samples
[55], including skin [56]. This motivates successive designs
which will develop our work on THz polarimetry [57] with the 
goal of providing fast, portable terahertz ellipsometry.

REFERENCES

[1]
J. B. Jackson et al., “Terahertz imaging for non-destructive evaluation of 
mural paintings,” Opt. Commun., vol. 281, no. 4, pp. 527–532, 2008.

[2]
M. Picollo, K. Fukunaga, and J. Labaune, “Obtaining noninvasive 
stratigraphic details of panel paintings using terahertz time domain 
spectroscopy imaging system,” J. Cult. Herit., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 73–80, 
2015.

[3]
Y. Cheng, Y. Wang, Y. Niu, and Z. Zhao, “Concealed object enhancement 
using multi-polarization information for passive millimeter and terahertz 
wave security screening,” Opt. Express, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 6350–6366, 
Mar. 2020, doi: 10.1364/OE.384029.

[4]
J. F. Federici et al., “THz imaging and sensing for security applications—
explosives, weapons and drugs,” Semicond. Sci. Technol., vol. 20, no. 7, 
p. S266, 2005.

[5]
K. Kawase, Y. Ogawa, Y. Watanabe, and H. Inoue, “Non-destructive 
terahertz imaging of illicit drugs using spectral fingerprints,” Opt.
Express, vol. 11, no. 20, pp. 2549–2554, Oct. 2003.

[6]
D. Zimdars et al., “Technology and applications of terahertz imaging non-
destructive examination: inspection of space shuttle sprayed on foam 
insulation,” in AIP Conference Proceedings, 2005, vol. 760, pp. 570–577.

[7]
Y. H. Tao, Anthony J. Fitzgerald, and Vincent P. Wallace. "Non-contact, 
non-destructive testing in various industrial sectors with terahertz 
technology." Sensors vol. 20, no.3, p.712, 2020.

[8]
R. M. Woodward et al., “Terahertz pulse imaging of ex vivo basal cell 
carcinoma,” J. Invest. Dermatol., vol. 120, no. 1, pp. 72–78, 2003.

[9]
M. H. Arbab, D. P. Winebrenner, T. C. Dickey, M. B. Klein, A. Chen, and 
P. D. Mourad, “A Noninvasive Terahertz Assessment of 2nd and 3rd 
Degree Burn Wounds,” in Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics
2012, 
San 
Jose,
CA,
USA, 
2012, 
p. 
CTu3B.3. 
doi: 

10.1364/CLEO_SI.2012.CTu3B.3.

[10] M. H. Arbab, D. P. Winebrenner, T. C. Dickey, A. Chen, M. B. Klein, and 

P. D. Mourad, “Terahertz spectroscopy for the assessment of burn injuries 
in vivo,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 18, no. 7, p. 077004, 2013.

[11] H. Liu, N. Vohra, K. Bailey, M. El-Shenawee, and A. H. Nelson, "Deep 

learning classification of breast cancer tissue from terahertz imaging 
through wavelet synchro-squeezed transformation and transfer learning." 
J. Infrared Millim. Terahertz Waves vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 48-70, 2022.

[12] X. 
Chen, 
et 
al. 
"Terahertz 
(THz) 
biophotonics
technology: 

instrumentation, techniques, and biomedical applications." Chem. Phys.
Rev. vol. 3 no. 1, p. 011311, 2022.

[13] M. I. Amanti, G. Scalari, M. Beck, and J. Faist, “Stand-alone system for 

high-resolution, real-time terahertz imaging,” Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 
3, pp. 2772–2778, 2012.

[14] N. Oda et al., “Palm-size and real-time terahertz imager, and its 

application to development of terahertz sources,” in Terahertz Physics, 
Devices, and Systems VII: Advanced Applications in Industry and 
Defense, Baltimore, MD, USA, 2013, vol. 8716, p. 871603.

[15] K. Fan, J. Y. Suen, X. Liu, and W. J. Padilla, “All-dielectric metasurface 

absorbers for uncooled terahertz imaging,” Optica, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 601–
604, 2017.

[16] F. Blanchard, J. E. Nkeck, D. Matte, R. Nechache, and D. G. Cooke, “A 

low-cost terahertz camera,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 12, p. 2531, 2019.


14

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

[17] M. Hassanalieragh, Z. Ignjatovic, J. D. Newman, and K. Fourspring, 

“Design and Characterization of a 10×10 Pixel Array THz Camera in 350 
nm CMOS Technology,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 20, no. 17, pp. 9834–9848, 
2020.

[18] D. Čibiraitė-Lukenskienė, K. Ikamas, T. Lisauskas, V. Krozer, H. G. 

Roskos, and A. Lisauskas, “Passive Detection and Imaging of Human 
Body Radiation Using an Uncooled Field-Effect Transistor-Based THz 
Detector,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 15, p. 4087, 2020.

[19] S. Huang et al., “Improved sample characterization in terahertz reflection 

imaging and spectroscopy,” Opt. Express, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 3848–3854, 
2009.

[20] L. M. Zurk, B. Orlowski, D. P. Winebrenner, E. I. Thorsos, M. R. Leahy-

Hoppa, and L. M. Hayden, “Terahertz scattering from granular material,” 
JOSA B, vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 2238–2243, Sep. 2007, doi: 
10.1364/JOSAB.24.002238.

[21] M. H. Arbab, D. P. Winebrenner, E. I. Thorsos, and A. Chen, “Application 

of wavelet transforms in terahertz spectroscopy of rough surface targets,” 
in Terahertz Technology and Applications III, San Francisco, CA, USA,
2010, vol. 7601, pp. 43–49. doi: 10.1117/12.845944.

[22] O. B. Osman and M. H. Arbab, “Mitigating the effects of granular 

scattering using cepstrum analysis in terahertz time-domain spectral 
imaging,” PLOS ONE, vol. 14, no. 5, p. e0216952, May 2019, doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0216952.

[23] M. E. Khani and M. H. Arbab, “Chemical Identification in the Specular 

and Off-Specular Rough-Surface Scattered Terahertz Spectra Using 
Wavelet Shrinkage,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 29746–29754, 2021, doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3059424.

[24] S. Katletz et al., “Efficient terahertz en-face imaging,” Opt. Express, vol. 

19, no. 23, pp. 23042–23053, 2011.

[25] E.-M. Stübling et al., “Application of a robotic THz imaging system for 

sub-surface analysis of ancient human remains,” Sci. Rep., vol. 9, no. 1, 
Art. no. 1, Mar. 2019, doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-40211-7.

[26] W. L. Chan, K. Charan, D. Takhar, K. F. Kelly, R. G. Baraniuk, and D. 

M. Mittleman, “A single-pixel terahertz imaging system based on 
compressed sensing,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 93, no. 12, p. 121105, 2008.

[27] C. M. Watts et al., “Terahertz compressive imaging with metamaterial 

spatial light modulators,” Nat. Photonics, vol. 8, no. 8, p. 605, 2014.

[28] Y. Lu et al., “Reflective single-pixel terahertz imaging based on 

compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Terahertz Sci. Technol., 2020.

[29] R. I. Stantchev, X. Yu, T. Blu, and E. Pickwell-MacPherson, “Real-time 

terahertz imaging with a single-pixel detector,” Nat. Commun., vol. 11, 
no. 1, p. 2535, May 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-16370-x.

[30] B. Schulkin, D. Brigada, J. S. James, T. Tongue, and X.-C. Zhang, 

“Progress toward handheld THz sensing,” in 2011 International 
Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves, Houston, TX, 
USA, 2011, pp. 1–2.

[31] C. Seco-Martorell, V. López-Domínguez, G. Arauz-Garofalo, A. Redo-

Sanchez, J. Palacios, and J. Tejada, “Goya’s artwork imaging with 
Terahertz waves,” Opt. Express, vol. 21, no. 15, pp. 17800–17805, 2013.

[32] G. J. Wilmink et al., “Development of a compact terahertz time-domain 

spectrometer for the measurement of the optical properties of biological 
tissues,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 16, no. 4, p. 047006, 2011.

[33] M. R. Grootendorst et al., “Use of a handheld terahertz pulsed imaging 

device to differentiate benign and malignant breast tissue,” Biomed. Opt. 
Express, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2932–2945, 2017.

[34] S. Mohammadzadeh and F. Friederich, “Design of a quasioptical scanning 

system for a fast mobile FMCW terahertz imaging system,” in Journal of 
Physics: Conference Series, Paris, France, 2020, vol. 1537, p. 012017.

[35] Z. B. Harris, A. Virk, M. E. Khani, and M. H. Arbab, “Terahertz time-

domain spectral imaging using telecentric beam steering and an f-θ 
scanning lens: distortion compensation and determination of resolution 
limits,” Opt. Express, vol. 28, no. 18, pp. 26612–26622, Aug. 2020, doi: 
10.1364/OE.398706.

[36] Z. B. Harris, M. E. Khani, and M. H. Arbab, “Terahertz Portable 

Handheld Spectral Reflection (PHASR) Scanner,” IEEE Access, 2020.

[37] O. Osman, Z. Harris, J. Zhou, M. Khani, A. Singer, and M. Arbab, “In 

Vivo Assessment of Burn Depth and Wound Healing Using a Handheld 
Terahertz Hyperspectral Scanner,” Adv. Photonics Res., Dec. 2021, doi: 
10.1002/adpr.202100095.

[38] Z. B. Harris, S. Katletz, M. E. Khani, A. Virk, and M. H. Arbab, “Design 

and characterization of telecentric f-θ scanning lenses for broadband 
terahertz frequency systems,” AIP Adv., vol. 10, no. 12, p. 125313, 2020, 
doi: 10.1063/5.0030110.

[39] J. M. Hilkert, G. Kanga, and K. Kinnear, “Line-of-sight kinematics and 

corrections for fast-steering mirrors used in precision pointing and 

tracking 
systems,” 
in 
Airborne 
Intelligence, 
Surveillance, 

Reconnaissance (ISR) Systems and Applications XI, Baltimore, MD, USA
2014, vol. 9076, p. 90760F.

[40] D. Stehr, C. M. Morris, C. Schmidt, and M. S. Sherwin, “High-

performance fiber-laser-based terahertz spectrometer,” Opt. Lett., vol. 35, 
no. 22, pp. 3799–3801, Nov. 2010, doi: 10.1364/OL.35.003799.

[41] R. J. B. Dietz et al., “All fiber-coupled THz-TDS system with kHz 

measurement rate based on electronically controlled optical sampling,” 
Opt. Lett., vol. 39, no. 22, pp. 6482–6485, Nov. 2014, doi: 
10.1364/OL.39.006482.

[42] M. Oeri, S. Wittmann, O. Peters, and R. Holzwarth, “30 kHz THz Pulse 

Detection based on Electro-Optical Sampling,” in 2020 45th International 
Conference on Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves (IRMMW-
THz), Buffalo, NY, USA, Nov. 2020, pp. 1–2. doi: 10.1109/IRMMW-
THz46771.2020.9370410.

[43] Y. Kim and D.-S. Yee, “High-speed terahertz time-domain spectroscopy 

based on electronically controlled optical sampling,” Opt. Lett., vol. 35, 
no. 22, pp. 3715–3717, Nov. 2010, doi: 10.1364/OL.35.003715.

[44] D.-S. Yee, K. H. Jin, J. S. Yahng, H.-S. Yang, C. Y. Kim, and J. C. Ye, 

“High-speed terahertz reflection three-dimensional imaging using beam 
steering,” Opt. Express, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 5027–5034, 2015.

[45] M. Yahyapour et al., “Fastest Thickness Measurements with a Terahertz 

Time-Domain System Based on Electronically Controlled Optical 
Sampling,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 7, Art. no. 7, Jan. 2019, doi: 
10.3390/app9071283.

[46] F. Tauser, C. Rausch, J. H. Posthumus, and F. Lison, “Electronically 

controlled optical sampling using 100 MHz repetition rate fiber lasers,” 
in Commercial and Biomedical Applications of Ultrafast Lasers VIII, San 
Jose, CA, USA 2008, vol. 6881, p. 68810O. doi: 10.1117/12.764506.

[47] Bartels et al., “Ultrafast time-domain spectroscopy based on high-speed 

asynchronous optical sampling,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 78, no. 3, p. 
035107, Mar. 2007, doi: 10.1063/1.2714048.

[48] E. R. Brown, J. E. Bjarnason, A. M. Fedor, and T. M. Korter, “On the 

strong and narrow absorption signature in lactose at 0.53THz,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., vol. 90, no. 6, p. 061908, Feb. 2007, doi: 10.1063/1.2437107.

[49] M. E. Khani, D. P. Winebrenner, and M. H. Arbab, “Phase Function 

Effects on Identification of Terahertz Spectral Signatures Using the 
Discrete Wavelet Transform,” IEEE Trans. Terahertz Sci. Technol., vol. 
10, no. 6, pp. 656–666, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TTHZ.2020.2997595.

[50] B. Fischer, M. Hoffmann, H. Helm, G. Modjesch, and P. U. Jepsen, 

“Chemical recognition in terahertz time-domain spectroscopy and 
imaging,” Semicond. Sci. Technol., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. S246–S253, Jun. 
2005, doi: 10.1088/0268-1242/20/7/015.

[51] M. Mikerov, J. Ornik, and M. Koch, “Removing Water Vapor Lines From 

THz-TDS Data Using Neural Networks,” IEEE Trans. Terahertz Sci. 
Technol., 
vol. 
10, 
no. 
4, 
pp. 
397–403, 
Jul. 
2020, 
doi: 

10.1109/TTHZ.2020.2990300.

[52] M. E. Khani et al., “Acute Burn Assessment Using Terahertz 

Spectroscopic Feature Extraction and Support Vector Machines,” in 
Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (2021), San Jose, CA, USA,
2021, p. JM4F.3. doi: 10.1364/CLEO_AT.2021.JM4F.3.

[53] M. E. Khani et al., “Supervised machine learning for automatic 

classification of in vivo scald and contact burn injuries using the terahertz 
Portable Handheld Spectral Reflection (PHASR) Scanner,” Sci. Rep., vol. 
12, no. 1, Art. no. 1, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-08940-4.

[54] O. B. Osman et al., “Deep neural network classification of in vivo burn 

injuries with different etiologies using terahertz time-domain spectral 
imaging,” Biomed. Opt. Express, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1855–1868, Apr. 
2022, doi: 10.1364/BOE.452257.

[55] Y. Deng, J. A. McKinney, D. K. George, K. A. Niessen, A. Sharma, and 

A. G. Markelz, "Near-field stationary sample terahertz spectroscopic 
polarimetry for biomolecular structural dynamics determination." ACS 
Photonics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 658-668, 2021.

[56] X. Chen, Q. Sun, J. Wang, H. Lindley-Hatcher, E. Pickwell-MacPherson

"Exploiting complementary terahertz ellipsometry configurations to 
probe the hydration and cellular structure of skin in vivo,” Adv. Photonics 
Res., vol. 2, no. 1, p. 2000024, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.1002/adpr.202000024.

[57] K. Xu, E. Bayati, K. Oguchi, S. Watanabe, D. P. Winebrenner, and M. H. 

Arbab, “Terahertz time-domain polarimetry (THz-TDP) based on the 
spinning E-O sampling technique: determination of precision and 
calibration,” Opt. Express, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 13482-13496, Apr. 2020, 
doi: 10.1364/OE.389651.


15

T-TST-REG-04-2022-00056

Zachery B. Harris received the B.S. 
degree in physics from the University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA in 2017. 
He is currently working as a Research 
Technician at Stony Brook University. 
His research interests include terahertz 
imaging and spectroscopy, terahertz 
signal 
processing, 
nondestructive 

evaluation, and medical imaging.

M. Hassan Arbab received the B.S. 
degree in electrical engineering from 
Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran, 
in 2004 and the M.S. and Dual Ph.D. 
degrees in electrical engineering and 
nanotechnology from the University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA in 2008 and 

2012, respectively.
From 2012 to 2016 he was a Postdoctoral Research Associate 
and a Senior Research Scientist with the Applied Physics 
Laboratory at the University of Washington. Since 2016, he has 
been an Assistant Professor with the Biomedical Engineering 
Department, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY. His 
research interests include terahertz science and technology, 
ultrafast and nonlinear optics, signal and image processing, 
machine learning and biomedical applications of terahertz 
spectroscopy.
Dr. Arbab is a member of the American Physical Society, the 
Optical Society of America, The International Society for 
Optical Engineering and the Biomedical Engineering Society.


