Controlling polarization of spintronic THz emitter by remanent magnetization texture

Weipeng Wu,1 Sergi Lendinez,1 Mojtaba Taghipour Kaffash,1 Richard
D. Schaller,2, 3 Haidan Wen,4 and M. Benjamin Jungfleisch1, ∗

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 19716, USA
2Center for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA
3Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA
4Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA
(Dated: July 19, 2022)

Terahertz (THz) sciences and technologies have contributed to a rapid development of a wide range of ap-
plications and expanded the frontiers in fundamental science. Spintronic terahertz emitters offer conceptual
advantages since the spin orientation in the magnetic layer can be easily controlled either by the externally
applied magnetic field or by the internal magnetic field distribution determined by the specific shape of the mag-
netic elements. Here, we report a switchable terahertz source based on micropatterned magnetic heterostructures
driven by femtosecond laser pulses. We show that the precise tunability of the polarization state is facilitated by
the underlying magnetization texture of the magnetic layer that is dictated by the shape of the microstructure.
These results also reveal the underlying physical mechanisms of a nonuniform magnetization state on the gen-
eration of ultrafast spin currents in the magnetic heterostructures. Our findings indicate that the emission of the
linearly polarized THz waves can be switched on and off by saturating the sample using a biasing magnetic field,
opening fascinating perspectives for integrated on-chip THz devices with wide-ranging potential applications.

Terahertz (THz) devices, which operate in the frequency
range from 0.1 THz to 30 THz in the electromagnetic spec-
trum, have significantly impacted various fields such as spec-
troscopy, sensing, and imaging [1].
Many applications
in modern life, such as medical diagnosis, security, non-
destructive industrial inspection, and non-ionizing imaging,
are based on THz radiation.
Functional THz components
could further advance these technologies. While there has
been significant progress in the past decades, THz compo-
nents that allow for an effective control of THz functionali-
ties such as the precise polarization state are still scarce [2, 3].
The manipulation of the polarization of THz radiation is a cru-
cial aspect in creating versatile integrated THz devices and
circuits. However, the development of such components is
hampered by the lack of the required functionalities tradi-
tional THz sources can provide: typically, high-intensity THz
sources capable of manipulating the polarization are narrow-
band, limiting possible applications [4].
These traditional
emitters exploit the electron’s charge degree of freedom and
rely either on semiconductor based photoconductive antennas
or nonlinear crystals [5].
However, the additional spin-degree of freedom of elec-
trons enables functionalities that could further advance THz
technologies, e.g., biomedicine, materials science, physics,
and chemistry.
These spintronic THz emitters are based
on magnetic heterostructures that comprise ferromagnetic
metal/heavy metal layers [5, 6]. Upon excitation with a fem-
tosecond laser pulse they emit THz radiation that is both
highly efficient and broadband [3, 7–17], which enables
the realization of functional THz components with emergent
properties based on the spin orientation in the ferromagnetic
layer. The THz generation process in spintronic emitters [5]
can be understood as a laser-driven ultrafast demagnetization

∗ mbj@udel.edu

of the ferromagnetic layer [18], leading to the formation of
a spin-polarized current that diffuses in the adjacent heavy
metal layer [19–21], where it is converted into a charge cur-
rent due to the inverse spin Hall effect [22–24]:

⃗Jc ∝ γ⃗Js ×⃗σ,
(1)

where ⃗σ is the spin-polarization vector, γ is the spin Hall an-
gle of the heavy metal layer, and ⃗Jc, ⃗Js are the charge and spin
currents, respectively. See supplemental material (SM) for a

FIG. 1. (a) Schematic of a time-domain THz spectroscopy (TDTS)
system using electro-optic sampling with a ZnTe crystal and a 800
nm Ti:Sapphire pulse laser with 35 fs pulse duration at a repetition
rate of 2 kHz. The time traces of the THz signal are recorded using
a delay stage. In our measurements, the laser pulses are polarized in
x-direction (out-of-plane), while the spintronic emitter is magnetized
in y-direction and the sample is rotated in the x/y-plane [the angle θ
describes the angle between the fixed magnetizing field direction and
the rotated sample, see Fig. 1(b)]. (b) Illustration of sample stack. (c)
Dimensions of micropatterned magnetic heterostructures.

arXiv:2207.07707v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  15 Jul 2022


2

schematic illustration of the inverse spin Hall effect. The time-
varying charge current burst then emits THz electromagnetic
waves, described by Maxwell’s equations. An additional ad-
vantage of spintronic THz sources is that micro- and nanofab-
rication of magnetic thin films are readily available, which
opens up the possibility to tailor THz properties by design.
Previously, microstructured stripes made of magnetic het-
erostructures were discussed as a means to modify the THz
emission characteristics [16] and it was shown that thin film
magnetic heterostructures exposed to an inhomogeneous mag-
netic field distribution can be utilized to create elliptical THz
waves [4]. Another approach to control the THz radiation in
spintronic emitters is to utilize the remanent magnetization
texture such as magnetic vortices and antivortices or magnetic
skyrmions [25, 26].
Here, we report a broadband magnetic-field controllable
THz source based on the magnetization texture facilitated by
micropatterned magnetic heterostructures with broken mirror
symmetry. For this purpose, we use lithographically-defined
arrays of a W/Fe/Pt trilayer grown on sapphire. We show that
the precise tunability of the polarization state is facilitated by
the underlying magnetization texture of the Fe layer that is de-
termined by the exact shape of the elements and the direction
of the applied field with respect to the microstructure. This
interpretation is further supported by micromagnetic simula-
tions. Our results further reveal how a nonuniform magne-
tization state affects the generation process of ultrafast spin
currents in the microstructure and hence the properties of the
emitted THz waves. Our findings indicate that a magnetic
switch of linearly polarized THz source can be realized in mi-
crostructured geometries opening fascinating perspectives for
integrated on-chip THz devices.
In the following, we describe the experimental methods in-
cluding time-domain THz spectroscopy, sample fabrication,
and micromagnetic modeling.
The experimental THz emission measurements are con-
ducted using a standard time-domain THz spectroscopy
(TDTS) system using electro-optical sampling with a 300 µm-
thick (110) ZnTe crystal, see Fig. 1(a). The laser system is a
800 nm Ti:Sapphire regenerative amplifier with a pulse width
of 35 fs at a 2 kHz repetition rate and incident laser fluence
below 3.5 mJ/cm2. The THz traces are measured with a time
resolution of 50 fs while the pumping laser beam is aligned
perpendicular to the sample plane and faces the substrate ma-
terial, see Fig. 1. An in-plane magnetic field (in y-direction) is
used to magnetize the sample to initially align the Fe magne-
tization M (perpendicular or parallel to the direction of sym-
metry as discussed below).
To increase the intensity of the emitted THz radiation we
sandwich the ferromagnetic layer (Fe) between two heavy
metals with opposite spin Hall angles (W and Pt), see
Fig. 1(b). Since the thickness of the used materials is small
(nanometers), the THz radiation originating from the two
heavy metal layers will have negligible phase difference. The
samples were fabricated in the following fashion: we use op-
tical lithography by a laser writer (Heidelberg MLA 100, min-
imum feature size: 1 µm) to pattern an array of chopped disks
(diameter: 5 µm, asymmetric cut of the disk from its center:

2 µm) with a separation of 9 µm between inner edges on top
of sapphire substrate. The sapphire substrate is 5 mm×5 mm
with 0.5 mm thickness in the C-plane (0001). The cut of the
disks is patterned parallel to one side of the substrate to eas-
ily align the external magnetic field with respect to the mi-
crostructured disk array. The detailed configuration is shown
in Fig. 1(c). The metal layers W (thickness: 3 nm), Fe (thick-
ness: 3 nm), and Pt (thickness: 3 nm) are grown using dc
magnetron sputtering in an Ar atmosphere at 3 mTorr and 20
sccm gas flow (base pressure < 10−7 Torr) on double-side-
polished sapphire substrates, followed by a lift-off process.
Microscope and atomic force microscopy images of the mea-
sured samples are shown in the SM. A control W/Fe/Pt trilayer
film was grown at the same time in the same deposition step.
We perform micromagnetic simulations using the graphic
processing unit (GPU) accelerated software mumax3 [27]
to determine the magnetization state of the microstructured
disks. We simulated a primitive cell of 2×2 lattice sites with
periodic boundary conditions in the plane, and considering 3
repeated cells along each direction for the initial calculation
of the dipolar field. Each disk with 5 µm diameter and 3 nm
thickness is cut 500 nm from one side to replicate the exper-
imental conditions. The lattice is discretized in square-based
elemental cells of 5×5×3 nm3 and the whole structure con-
sists of 2400×2400×1 cells. [28] The magnetic parameters
used for Fe are as follows: saturation magnetization MS =
1710 kA/m and exchange stiffness Aex = 21.2 × 10−12 J/m.
For each applied magnetic field direction (parallel or perpen-
dicular to the cut, respectively) we started with disks with ran-
dom magnetization in each cell that were exposed to an exter-
nal magnetic field with a magnitude of 8 mT, and then re-

FIG. 2. (a) Time trace of the THz emission from an extended W/Fe/Pt
trilayer control film.
(b) Corresponding intensity of the Fourier-
transformed THz signal shown in (a).


3

FIG. 3. Demonstration of switchable THz waves by initializing the sample along the direction of mirror symmetry (perpendicular to the cut)
and orthogonal to the direction of symmetry (parallel to the cut). For initialization, the angle between sample and magnetizing field (applied in
y-direction) was θ = 0◦. (a,d) Time-domain traces of THz emission for the different configurations. (b,e) Corresponding Fourier-transformed
spectra. (c,f) Schematic of the magnetization texture in remanent state when the initializing field is applied parallel or perpendicular to the
cut. Ideally, one would expect that all disks have the same chirality when initialized parallel to the cut (c), whereas a random distribution of
chirality would be expected when initialized perpendicular to the cut. For micromagnetic modeling results we refer to the SM.

moved the field to obtain the final magnetization equilibrium
state of the lattice. However, a field of 50 mT was used to ini-
tialize the samples in the experiments and all measurements
were done in the remanent state.

Figure 2(a) shows the time-domain trace of the THz signal
(in x-direction) generated by the W/Fe/Pt trilayer control film.
In-plane angular dependent measurements agree with a spin-
to-charge current conversion process by means of the inverse
spin Hall effect, see SM. Moreover, we observe that the THz
emission is independent from the helicity of the pump light,
shown in Fig. S3 in the SM implying that inverse spin or-
bit torque [29], inverse Faraday effect [30], or inverse Rashba
Edelstein effect [9, 11] can be ruled out as possible sources of
the observed THz emission [31]. The corresponding Fourier
spectrum of this reference signal [shown in Fig. 2(b)] demon-
strates that a broadband THz beam is generated.
In the following, we discuss the main observation of our
work – the manipulation of the ultrafast spin current gener-
ation driven by femtosecond laser pulses facilitated by the
underlying magnetization texture in the micropatterned mag-
netic heterostructure. As will be shown below, this control

is robust and is enabled solely by the effective magnetic field
distribution of the microstructure. Once the magnetic texture
is initialized by an external biasing field, no additional ex-
ternal magnetic field is required; this is particularly useful for
applications since the THz device itself does not require to be
powered.

Our results show that it is possible to switch on or off
linearly polarized THz waves by initializing the sample in
either of two orthogonal directions, in the following called
“parallel” and “perpendicular” to the cut.
The peak am-
plitude of the THz signal of the chopped disks samples is
about 1/20 of that of Fe/Pt bilayer film of the same thick-
ness. This ratio is of the same order as the ratio of the two-
dimensional hybrid metal halides with respect to the control
sample (ENiFe/Halides/ENiFe/Pt ≈1/15) [32]. Two-dimensional
hybrid metal halides are chiral magnetic materials for the gen-
eration of THz waves with asymmetric magnetic field depen-
dence. For the initialization process a constant magnetic field
is applied in the two directions, subsequently removed, and
the measurements are performed without a magnetic field be-
ing applied.
Since we expect a curled magnetization tex-
ture with magnetic moments lying in any direction in the
x/y-plane, we record the THz electric field amplitude in x-


4

FIG. 4. (a) In-plane angular dependence of the THz amplitude gener-
ated from micropatterned chopped disks initially magnetized paral-
lel to the symmetry-breaking cut. Ex becomes maximum/minimum
when Ey is minimum/maximum.
The solid lines show a sinu-
soidal fit to the experimental data (symbols).
The inset shows a
schematic of disks, the initially applied magnetic field direction, and
the used coordinate system. (b) Corresponding results for the case
when the chopped disks are initially magnetized perpendicular to the
symmetry-breaking cut. The THz amplitude was chosen at the same
delay time for different angles. A negligibly small THz signal was
detected; no significant angular dependence was observed for the two
orthogonal components Ex and Ey in this configuration.

direction, Ex and in y-direction, Ey. Figure 3 shows the THz
signals in the time domain and the corresponding fast-Fourier
transform (FFT) spectra in the frequency domain in x- and
y-direction when the sample is magnetized parallel and per-
pendicular to the cut, respectively. As is apparent from the
figure, a negligibly small THz signal is observed when the
sample is initially magnetized perpendicular to the cut. On
the other hand, a clear signal is observed in both x- and y-
direction when the sample is magnetized parallel to the cut.
The ability to switch between the two states is reproducible
and robust evidencing that this effect must originate from the
magnetization configuration in the microstructured disks with
broken mirror symmetry.
To further support our interpretation and to provide guid-
ance on the exact underlying magnetization texture of the
disks, we use micromagnetic modeling based on mumax3
(SM) [27]. A schematic illustration explaining our observa-
tions is shown in the lower panel of Fig. 3; actual simulation

results can be found in the SM. When the sample is firstly
magnetized parallel to the cut, due to the broken mirror sym-
metry, only one of two possible magnetization configurations
(either clockwise or counterclockwise depending on whether
the initial field is applied in positive or negative y-direction)
predominantly exists in the remanent state, see schematic in
Fig. 3(c). In other words, all magnetic microelements in the
array feature the same chirality with magnetic moments iden-
tically distributed in the x/y-plane (please note that the laser
spot size is sufficiently large to excite a multitude of disks).
This in turn leads to a THz emission with fixed linear polar-
ization, and we can observe both Ex and Ey components, see
Fig. 3(a). However, the situation drastically changes when
the sample is magnetized perpendicular to the cut – the direc-
tion of mirror symmetry of the disks: now two configurations
emerge in the remanent state with equal probabilities, result-
ing in a random distribution of chirality in each of the disks in
the array, see schematic shown in Fig. 3(f). If both chiralities
coexist in the sample, an overall cancellation of THz emission
due to the near-zero net magnetization occurs. This is the rea-
son why we observe a negligibly small signal when the sample
is initialized perpendicular to the cut, see Figs. 3(d,e). Please
note that we cannot rule out patterning imperfections in the
actual samples, which may lead to a deviation from the theo-
retically expected 100% or 50% of the circularity probability
distribution in the disks when initialized parallel or perpendic-
ular to the cut, respectively.
To further confirm our interpretation, we measure the de-
pendence of the THz emission on the in-plane sample rota-
tion angle θ [see Fig. 1(b)] around the z-axis for initial mag-
netizing directions parallel and perpendicular to the cut, see
Figs. 4(a,b). Figures 4(a,b) show the amplitude of the two
orthogonal components of THz radiation Ex and Ey taken at
identical delay times when the signal peaks in the time do-
main. As we would expect, the x-component is maximum
when the y-component is minimum, and vice versa. The ex-
perimental data in Fig. 4(a) (symbols) are fitted with sinu-
soidal functions (solid lines) that confirm the periodic behav-
ior: fits to the two components give a periodicity that is close
to 360◦– a characteristic of ferromagnetic spintronic emitters
relying on the inverse spin Hall effect [5]. As outlined in the
detailed analysis presented in the SM, there may be an ellip-
tical contribution to the THz signal. However, this effect is
small. In contrast to the angular dependence when the disks
are magnetized along the cut, negligible THz signal and an-
gular variation are detected when the disks are initialized per-
pendicular to the cut, Fig. 4(b).
Finally, we note that an additional tuning variable could be
a spatial variation of the thickness of the layers or their con-
ductivities that would enable the control of the exact phase dif-
ference as well as the relative strength of the two orthogonal
components. This approach may lead to a reliable generation
of elliptically polarized THz waves with tunable ellipticity and
polarization direction from spintronic emitters [4].
We demonstrated an effective way to control and switch
the linearly polarized THz radiation from femtosecond laser
pulse driven spintronic microstructure emitters. We showed
that the magnetic texture in the ferromagnetic layer controlled


5

with the shape of the microstructure dictates the emitted THz
waves. Our findings indicate that the emission of a polar-
ized THz radiation can be controlled without an external mag-
netic field applied during the THz generation process with
carefully designed microstructures. This goes beyond a re-
cent proposal to harness permanently applied inhomogeneous
magnetic fields [4], opening fascinating perspectives for inte-
grated on-chip THz devices with wide-ranging potential appli-
cations. Our results also reveal the underlying physical mech-
anisms of a nonuniform magnetization state on the generation
process of ultrafast spin currents and the subsequent conver-
sion in THz charge transients by the inverse spin Hall effect in
the magnetic heterostructures. The proposed approach could
potentially be used in spintronic emitters for the generation
of elliptically polarized THz waves with tunable polarization,
chirality, and ellipticity.
See the supplementary material for details on the in-
verse spin Hall effect, results of micromagnetic simulations,
helicity-dependent THz emission, angular dependence of the
control sample, microscope and atomic force microscopy im-

ages of the samples under investigation, and angular depen-
dence of the total THz electric field.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the National Science Founda-
tion under Grant No. 1833000 and the University of Delaware
Research Foundation (UDRF). Additional support received
from the National Science Foundation through the Univer-
sity of Delaware Materials Research Science and Engineer-
ing Center, DMR-2011824. Work performed at the Center for
Nanoscale Materials, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of
Science User Facility, was supported by the U.S. DOE, Of-
fice of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-AC02-
06CH11357. H. W. acknowledges support from the Depart-
ment of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy
Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division..
The authors have no conflicts to disclose.

[1] K.-E. Peiponen, A. Zeitler, and M. Kuwata-Gonokami, eds.,

Terahertz Spectroscopy and Imaging (Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg, 2013).

[2] D. Khusyainov, S. Ovcharenko, M. Gaponov, A. Buryakov,
A. Klimov, N. Tiercelin, P. Pernod, V. Nozdrin, E. Mishina,
A. Sigov, and V. Preobrazhensky, Scientific Reports 11, 697
(2021).

[3] D. Yang, J. Liang, C. Zhou, L. Sun, R. Zheng, S. Luo, Y. Wu,
and J. Qi, Advanced Optical Materials 4, 1944 (2016).

[4] D. Kong, X. Wu, B. Wang, T. Nie, M. Xiao, C. Pandey, Y. Gao,
L. Wen, W. Zhao, C. Ruan, J. Miao, Y. Li, and L. Wang, Ad-
vanced Optical Materials 7, 1900487 (2019).

[5] W. Wu,
C. Yaw Ameyaw,
M. F. Doty,
and M. B.
Jungfleisch, Journal of Applied Physics 130, 091101 (2021),
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0057536.

[6] T. S. Seifert, L. Chen, Z. Wei, T. Kampfrath, and J. Qi, “Spin-
tronic sources of ultrashort terahertz pulses,” (2021).

[7] T. Kampfrath, M. Battiato, P. Maldonado, G. Eilers, J. Nötzold,
S. Mährlein, V. Zbarsky, F. Freimuth, Y. Mokrousov, S. Blügel,
M. Wolf, I. Radu, P. M. Oppeneer, and M. Münzenberg, Nature
Nanotechnology 8, 256 (2013).

[8] T. Seifert, S. Jaiswal, U. Martens, J. Hannegan, L. Braun,
P. Maldonado, F. Freimuth, A. Kronenberg, J. Henrizi, I. Radu,
E. Beaurepaire, Y. Mokrousov, P. M. Oppeneer, M. Jour-
dan, G. Jakob, D. Turchinovich, L. M. Hayden, M. Wolf,
M. Münzenberg, M. Kläui, and T. Kampfrath, Nature Photon-
ics 10, 483 (2016).

[9] T. J. Huisman, R. V. Mikhaylovskiy, J. D. Costa, F. Freimuth,
E. Paz, J. Ventura, P. P. Freitas, S. Blügel, Y. Mokrousov, T. Ras-
ing, and A. V. Kimel, Nature Nanotechnology 11, 455 (2016).

[10] T. Seifert, S. Jaiswal, M. Sajadi, G. Jakob, S. Winnerl, M. Wolf,
M. Kläui,
and T. Kampfrath, Applied Physics Letters 110,
252402 (2017).

[11] M. B. Jungfleisch, Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, J. E. Pearson, R. D.
Schaller, H. Wen, and A. Hoffmann, Physical Review Letters
120, 207207 (2018).

[12] J. Walowski and M. Münzenberg, Journal of Applied Physics

120, 140901 (2016).

[13] C. Zhou, Y. P. Liu, Z. Wang, S. J. Ma, M. W. Jia, R. Q. Wu,
L. Zhou, W. Zhang, M. K. Liu, Y. Z. Wu, and J. Qi, Physical
Review Letters 121, 086801 (2018).

[14] G. Torosyan, S. Keller, L. Scheuer, R. Beigang, and E. T. Pa-
paioannou, Scientific Reports 8, 1311 (2018).

[15] D. M. Nenno, L. Scheuer, D. Sokoluk, S. Keller, G. Torosyan,
A. Brodyanski, J. Lösch, M. Battiato, M. Rahm, R. H. Binder,
H. C. Schneider, R. Beigang, and E. T. Papaioannou, Scientific
Reports 9, 13348 (2019).

[16] W. Wu, S. Lendinez, M. Taghipour Kaffash, R. D. Schaller,
H. Wen,
and M. B. Jungfleisch, Journal of Applied Physics
128, 103902 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0013676.

[17] V. Sharma, W. Wu, P. Bajracharya, D. Q. To, A. Johnson,
A. Janotti, G. W. Bryant, L. Gundlach, M. B. Jungfleisch, and
R. C. Budhani, Phys. Rev. Materials 5, 124410 (2021).

[18] E. Beaurepaire, J. C. Merle, A. Daunois, and J. Y. Bigot, Phys-
ical Review Letters 76, 4250 (1996).

[19] M. Battiato, K. Carva, and P. M. Oppeneer, Physical Review B
86, 024404 (2012).

[20] D. Rudolf, C. La-O-Vorakiat, M. Battiato, R. Adam, J. M.
Shaw, E. Turgut, P. Maldonado, S. Mathias, P. Grychtol, H. T.
Nembach, T. J. Silva, M. Aeschlimann, H. C. Kapteyn, M. M.
Murnane, C. M. Schneider, and P. M. Oppeneer, Nature Com-
munications 3, 4250 (2012).

[21] D. M. Nenno, B. Rethfeld, and H. C. Schneider, Physical Re-
view B 98, 387 (2018).

[22] M. I. Dyakonov and V. I. Perel, Sov. JETP Lett. 13, 467 (1971).
[23] J. E. Hirsch, Physical Review Letters 83, 1834 (1999).
[24] A. Hoffmann, IEEE Trans. Magn. 49, 5172 (2013).
[25] T.
Shinjo,
T.
Okuno,
R.
Hassdorf,
K.
Shigeto,
and
T.
Ono,
Science
289,
930
(2000),
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/289/5481/930.full.pdf.

[26] R. P. Cowburn, D. K. Koltsov, A. O. Adeyeye, M. E. Welland,
and D. M. Tricker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1042 (1999).

[27] A. Vansteenkiste, J. Leliaert, M. Dvornik, M. Helsen, F. Garcia-
Sanchez, and B. Van Waeyenberge, AIP Advances 4, 107133


6

(2014).

[28] The cell size is chosen larger than the exchange length of iron
(≈2.4 nm) to reduce the computation time because our structure
is fairly large.

[29] P.
Nemec,
E.
Rozkotová,
N.
Tesaˇrová,
F.
Trojanek,
E. De Ranieri, K. Olejník, J. Zemen, V. Novak, M. Cukr,
P. Maly, and T. Jungwirth, Nature Physics 8, 411 (2012).

[30] A. V. Kimel, A. Kirilyuk, P. A. Usachev, R. V. Pisarev, A. M.
Balbashov, and T. Rasing, Nature 435, 655 (2005).

[31] Please note that when the sample is firstly magnetized and
the field is then removed before the TDTS measurement, we
also observe a contribution of the THz signal in y-direction
which likely stems from a not perfectly magnetized sample in
y-direction and/or an applied magnetizing field that is not large
enough to saturate the Fe layer.

[32] K. Cong, E. Vetter, L. Yan, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Xiong, H. Qu,
R. D. Schaller, A. Hoffmann, A. F. Kemper, Y. Yao, J. Wang,
W. You, H. Wen, W. Zhang, and D. Sun, Nature Communica-
tions 12, 5744 (2021).


