Proposal for semiconductor-free negative differential resistance tunnel diode
with ultra-high peak-to-valley current ratio

Ersoy S¸a¸sıo˘glu1∗ and Ingrid Mertig1,2

1Institute of Physics, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
2Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics, Weinberg 2, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
(Dated: October 26, 2022)

The negative differential resistance (NDR) tunnel diodes are promising alternative devices for
beyond-CMOS computing as they offer several potential applications when integrated with transis-
tors. We propose a novel semiconductor-free NDR tunnel diode concept that exhibits ultra-high
peak-to-valley current ratio (PVCR) value. Our proposed NDR diode consists of two cold metal
electrodes separated by a thin insulating tunnel barrier. The NDR effect stems from the unique
electronic band structure of the cold metal electrodes, i.e., the width of the isolated metallic bands
around the Fermi level as well as the energy gaps separating higher- and lower-lying bands deter-
mine the current-voltage (I-V ) characteristics and the PVCR value of the tunnel diode. By proper
choice of the cold metal electrode materials, either a conventional N-type or Λ-type NDR effect can
be obtained. Two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials offer a unique platform for the realization of
proposed NDR tunnel diodes. To demonstrate the proof of concept we employ the nonequilibrium
Green function method combined with density functional theory to calculate the I-V characteristic
of the lateral (AlI2/MgI2/AlI2) and vertical (NbS2/h-BN/NbS2) heterojunction tunnel diodes based
on 2D cold metals. For the lateral tunnel diode, we obtain a Λ-type NDR effect with an ultra-high
PVCR value of 1016 at room temperature, while the vertical tunnel diode exhibits a conventional
N-type NDR effect with a smaller PVCR value of about 104. The proposed concept provides a
semiconductor-free solution for NDR devices to achieve desired I-V characteristics with ultra-high
PVCR values for memory and logic applications.

PACS numbers:

I.
INTRODUCTION

Current logic and memory devices are based on
the complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)
field-effect transistor technology and more than forty
years chip makers have succeeded in scaling of CMOS
transistors, which allowed Moore’s law to remain on
track[1].
However, the 2D scaling of the CMOS tech-
nology will reach fundamental limits soon according to
the International Roadmap for Devices and Systems[2].
In future technology nodes the performance benefits of
CMOS-based devices might no longer meet the circuit
performance targets and thus require a hybrid circuit
solution.
Within the last two decades several beyond-
CMOS device concepts ranging from electronic to spin-
tronic, from ferroelectric to resistive switching devices
have been proposed and demonstrated [3–7].
Despite
many valuable features of these new devices, exten-
sive benchmark calculations have shown that none of
them can beat CMOS transistors [8].
Thus, most of
the beyond-CMOS devices aim to complement CMOS
rather than replace it and they might enable computing
paradigms beyond the capabilities of conventional CMOS
technology.
The negative differential resistance (NDR) tunnel
diodes offer variety of unique functionalities and potential
applications when integrated with conventional CMOS

∗Electronic address: ersoy.sasioglu@physik.uni-halle.de

transistors[9].
Among them, NDR-based multi-valued
logic gates and static random-access-memory (SRAM)
are the most promising applications [10, 11]. The NDR
effect allows to design logic and memory architectures
with much reduced device count, very high speed, and
much lower power consumption. For instance, a tunnel
SRAM requires a single transistor and two NDR tunnel
diodes instead of six transistors in conventional SRAM
architecture, which substantially reduces the device foot-
print area and power consumption [11, 12]. By employ-
ing two NDR diodes connected in series the monostable-
bistable transition logic element gate has been demon-
strated to perform NAND and NOR operations [13–15].
All other logic gates have also been implemented by com-
bining NDR diodes with CMOS transistors [15].
The
binary NDR-based logic has also been extended to the
multi-valued logic, which increases the information den-
sity per given unit device and decreases the overall sys-
tem complexity [16–18]. By shifting from binary to the
ternary logic the system complexity can be drastically
reduced to 63% [19].

There are several devices (two-terminal tunnel diodes)
and circuits described in the literature that produce an
NDR effect. Of the two-terminal tunnel diodes, the Esaki
diode and the resonant tunneling diode received the most
attention [20–22]. The Esaki diode is a heavily doped
(degenerate) p-n junction diode, in which the electron
transport in the contact region is via quantum mechan-
ical tunneling under forward bias and it shows NDR ef-
fect, i.e, electrical current decreases with increasing bias
voltage.
Figure 1 schematically illustrates the current-

arXiv:2207.02593v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  25 Oct 2022


2

V

V

I
I

V
I

V
V

I

IP

V

V
P

IP

VP

N−type NDR

RTD (inter−band)
RTD (intra−band)
Esaki tunnel diode
(a)
(b)

−type NDR

V

FIG. 1: (Color online) (a) N-type and Λ-type negatives differ-
ential resistance (NDR). (b) Schematic representation of the
current-voltage (I-V ) characteristics of a Esaki tunnel diode
and intra- and inter-band resonant-tunneling diodes.

voltage (I-V ) characteristics of an Esaki diode and an
intra- and inter-band resonant tunneling diodes. How-
ever, those two-terminal NDR diodes have two primary
features hindering their applications:
i) the peak-to-
valley current ratio (PVCR) is rather low in tunnel diodes
that are compatible with CMOS technology [22–25]. In
these diodes the PVCR is usually less than ten, not high
enough for memory applications (tunnel SRAM). ii) the
III-V semiconductors that produce high PVCR (between
5 and 144) are not compatible with current CMOS tech-
nology [26, 27]. The low PVCR values in two-terminal
NDR tunnel diodes have been attributed to the band tails
tunneling, which originates from the strong doping and
doping fluctuations and it has been studied in detail by
many authors using different approaches [28–30]. Many
research contributions have been reported to improve the
PVCR value over 100 based on a CMOS compatible pro-
cess. Extremely high, by 2-3 orders of magnitude, PVCR
values have been obtained in NDR circuits based on com-
bination of a Si-based CMOS and a SiGe heterojunction-
bipolar-transistor [31–35]. Despite their high PVCR val-
ues, such devices posses complex circuit topology with at
least three (four) transistors for a Λ-type (N-type) NDR
effect (see Figure 1), which makes them unsuitable for
memory applications [36].
Recently, we proposed a new semiconductor-free NDR
tunnel diode concept with ultra-high PVCR. A patent
application has been filed for the proposed device [37] and
preliminary results have been presented in Ref.[38] Our
proposed NDR diode consists of two cold metal electrodes
separated by a thin insulating tunnel barrier. In Figure 2
we schematically show the density of states (DOS) of a
cold metal and compare with a normal metal and semi-
conductor. The NDR effect stems from the unique elec-
tronic band structure of the cold metal electrodes, i.e.,
the width of the isolated metallic bands around the Fermi
level as well as the energy gaps separating higher and
lower lying bands determine the current-voltage (I-V )
characteristics and the PVCR value of the tunnel diode.
By proper choice of the cold metal electrode materials ei-
ther conventional N-type or Λ-type NDR effect can be ob-
tained. In this paper we provide a detailed description of

E

E
E
F
F

E

EF

E

EF

E

EF

E

EF

E

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)
(e)
(f)
Cold Metal (FM−I)

Normal Metal
Semiconductor
Cold Metal

Cold Metal (FM−II)
Cold Metal (AFM)

DOS
DOS
DOS

DOS
DOS
DOS

FIG. 2: (Color online) Schematic representation of the den-
sity of states (DOS) for (a) a normal metal, (b) a semicon-
ductor, (c) a non-magnetic (or paramagnetic) cold-metal, (d)
a ferromagnetic (FM-I) cold-metal, (e) a half-metallic ferro-
magnetic (FM-II) cold-metal, and (f) an antiferromagnetic
(AFM) cold-metal.

the new NDR tunnel diode concept and demonstrate the
proof of principle by ab initio quantum transport calcu-
lations. Furthermore, we address different classes of suit-
able materials for realizing the new concept. To demon-
strate both Λ-type and N-type NDR effects we choose two
different kinds of cold metal materials: AlI2 and NbS2
(see Table I). The former posses a narrow metallic band
around the Fermi level and relatively large energy gaps
below and above the Fermi energy, while for the latter
material the width of the metallic band and energy gaps
are more or less comparable. By employing the nonequi-
librium Green function (NEGF) method combined with
density functional theory (DFT) we have calculated the
I-V curves of the lateral AlI2/MgI2/AlI2 and vertical
NbS2/h-BN/NbS2 heterojunction tunnel diodes. We ob-
tain a Λ-type NDR effect for the lateral tunnel diode with
an ultra-high PVCR value of 1016 at room temperature,
while the vertical tunnel diode exhibits conventional N-
type NDR effect with a smaller PVCR value of 104 within
the coherent tunneling transport model.

II.
DEVICE CONCEPT

The structure of the proposed cold metal tunnel diode
and its I-V characteristics are shown schematically in
Figure 3a. Analogous to the metal-insulator-metal diode,
the NDR diode consists of two cold metal electrodes sep-
arated by a thin insulating tunnel barrier.
Cold met-
als possess unique electronic band structure (see Figure 3
and Figure 4), i.e., isolated metallic bands around the
Fermi energy are separated from the higher-lying and
lower-lying states by sizeable energy gaps. The I-V char-


3

FIG. 3: (Color online) (a) Schematic representation of the cold metal NDR tunnel diode and the corresponding current-voltage
(I-V ) characteristics. (b) A schematic representation of the band diagram and thermal electron-hole excitations for the cold
metal NDR tunnel diode for different forward bias voltages.

acteristics of the cold metal tunnel diode can be quali-
tatively explained on the basis of the schematic energy-
band diagram shown in Figure 3b, where the energy-band
diagram of the insulating tunnel barrier is represented
by a rectangular potential without bias voltage and by
a trapezoid when a finite bias is applied.
The metal-
lic band width and energy gaps below and above the
Fermi level are denoted by Wm, EV
g , and EC
g , respec-
tively.
In energy-band diagram (Figure 3b) we assume
that Wm = EV
g = EC
g . If we choose the same cold metal
materials for the left and right electrodes of the tunnel
diode, then no charge transfer takes place between the
electrodes.
For a qualitative discussion of the NDR diode char-
acteristics we will use Bardeen’s approach for tunneling
[39, 40]. For a simple tunnel barrier the tunneling cur-
rent I(V ) for a bias voltage V is given by the expres-
sion I(V ) ∼
� +∞
−∞ ρCM(E + eV )ρCM(E)|T(V )|2f(E)[1 −
f(E + eV )]dE, where ρCM(E + eV ) denotes the density
of states of the cold metal electrode and f(E) being the
Fermi distribution function.
T(V ) is the transmission
probability being proportional to e−d√φ−V , where d is
the thickness of the tunnel barrier and φ being the bar-
rier height. As shown in Figure 3b when a positive bias
voltage is applied to the left cold metal electrode (second
panel in Figure 3b), electrons from the occupied valence
band of the right cold metal electrode tunnel through the
insulating barrier into the unoccupied states of the left
electrode. With increasing bias voltage V the current I
increases up to a peak value I1 then it starts to decrease
(panel 3) and finally for a specific value of bias voltage V2
the current becomes zero. This stems from the fact that
the conduction band of the left cold metal electrode has
an energy gap EC
g and thus within the applied potential
window there are no available states for the electrons to
tunnel into (see panel 4), resulting in a zero current. At
zero temperature this current is exactly zero, while at fi-
nite temperature very few thermally excited high energy
electrons that are at the tail of the Fermi-Dirac distri-
bution of the right cold metal electrode can tunnel into
the left electrode giving rise to an extremely small cur-
rent and thus the PVCR takes a finite value instead of a
infinite value at room temperature. The current remains
zero between the bias potential V2 and V3 and after V3 the
current starts to increase again. The region between the

bias potential V1 and V2 is called the NDR region. The
current in the first positive differential resistance (PDR)
region and in NDR region (see Figure 3a) stems from the
intra-band tunneling, while in the second PDR region it
is due to the inter-band tunneling (panel 5 in Figure 3b).
Note that the applied bias voltage drops across the insu-
lating tunnel barrier.
The I-V characteristics of a cold metal tunnel diode
having the same left and right electrodes is mainly de-
termined by three parameters Wm, EV
g , and EC
g .
For
N-type NDR effect one of the the following three con-
ditions should be satisfied:
i) Wm ∼ EV
g
∼ EC
g , ii)
Wm ∼ EC
g < EV
g , iii) Wm ∼ EV
g < EC
g . In this case
V2 ≃ V3 in I-V characteristics shown in Figure 3a. When
none of these three conditions are satisfied the NDR ef-
fect can still be observed but with a substantially reduced
PVCR value. For a Λ-type NDR effect the metallic band
width should be much smaller than the both energy gaps,
i.e., Wm ≪ EV
g ∼ EC
g and this leads to V2 ≪ V3 in I-V
characteristics. For both types of NDR effects the bias
voltages V1 and V2 corresponding to the peak and val-
ley currents are approximately determined by Wm/2 and
Wm, respectively.
Up to now we focus only on the forward bias and dis-
cuss the NDR effect. In the same way, for a reverse bias
one can observe the same NDR effect, i.e., the I-V char-
acteristics of the cold metal tunnel diode turns out to be
anti-symmetric if the left and right electrodes are made of
the same materials. This is similar to the intra-band res-
onant tunneling diode but different than the Esaki diode
and inter-band resonant tunneling diode shown in Fig-
ure 1b. As the I-V characteristics of the cold metal tun-
nel diode mainly depends on the three electronic struc-
ture parameters Wm, EV
g , and EC
g , by proper choice of
the left and right electrode materials one can achieve de-
sired I-V characteristics. For instance, the NDR region
(V1-V2 interval) can be tuned by tuning these parame-
ters. Moreover, multi-peak NDR effect can be achieved
in cold metal tunnel diodes connected in series.
Cold metallic behaviour is rather rare among the three-
dimensional (3D) bulk materials. Known examples are
alkali-doped fullerides [41], high temperature paramag-
netic phase of V2O3 [42], and recently several flat-band
materials such as CoAl2O4, Rb2NbCl6, Sr3PbNiO6, etc
have been predicted to show cold metallic behaviour [43].


4

On the other hand, two-dimensional (2D) transition-
metal dichalcogenides (NbX2, TaX2, X=S, Se, Te) and
transition-metal dihalides (ScI2, YI2, etc) as well as sev-
eral other 2D materials like AlI2, GaI2, InI2, Ag2F4,
DySBr, DySI, NdOBr, SmOBr, etc exhibit cold-metallic
behaviour [44–46] and offer a unique platform for the
realization of the proposed NDR tunnel diodes. More-
over, in contrast to 3D materials, 2D materials are much
better suited for tunneling devices as they form high-
quality heterointerfaces due to the absence of dangling
bonds.
Recently conventional N-type NDR effect has
been observed in a variety of devices based on 1D[47, 48]
and 2D materials, such as graphene/h-BN/graphene res-
onant tunnel diodes,[49] black phosphorus tunnel diodes
[50, 51], as well as transition-metal dichalcogenide tunnel
diodes [52–54]. However, in all these 2D material based
NDR tunnel devices the PVCR values were found to be
less than 10 and thus they do not exhibit their theoretical
advantages. As will be shown in the following section the
tunnel diodes based on 2D cold metals overcome the lim-
itations of conventional semiconductor tunnel devices by
providing ultra-high PVCR values as well as both types
of NDR effects, i.e., conventional N-type NDR and Λ-
type NDR effect.
The latter can be achieved only in
multi-terminal NDR circuits.

III.
COMPUTATIONAL METHODS

Ground state electronic structure calculations are car-
ried out using DFT implemented in the QuantumATK
S-2021.06 package[55]. As basis-set we use linear combi-
nations of atomic orbitals (LCAO) together with norm-
conserving PseudoDojo pseudopotentials[56] with the
Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) parametrization of the
exchange-correlation functional[57]. We use DFT-D2 van
der Waals corrections for the vertical tunnel diode. A
dense 24 × 24 × 1 k-point grid and density mesh cutoff
of 120 Hartree have been used. To prevent interactions
between the periodically repeated images, 20 ˚A of vac-
uum were added and Dirichlet and Neumann boundary
conditions are employed to the upper and lower surface,
respectively. The total energy and forces have been con-
verged at least to 10−4 eV and 0.01 eV/˚A, respectively.
The transport calculations were performed using
DFT combined with the NEGF method.
We use
a 24 × 1 × 172 (8 × 1 × 172) k-point grid in self-
consistent DFT-NEGF calculations of lateral (vertical)
tunnel diodes.
The I-V
characteristics were calcu-
lated within a Landauer approach [58], where I(V ) =
2e
h
�
T(E, V ) [fL(E, V ) − fR(E, V )] dE. Here V denotes
the bias voltage, T(E, V ) is the transmission coefficient
and fL(E, V ) and fR(E, V ) are the Fermi-Dirac distri-
butions of the left and right electrodes, respectively. The
transmission coefficient T(E, V ) for lateral (vertical) tun-
nel diode is calculated using a 300 × 1 (100 × 1) k-point
grid.

IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The cold metal tunnel diode concept introduced in the
preceding section can be realized either by using 3D ma-
terials or 2D van der Waals materials. In the following,
due to their structural simplicity and high-quality het-
erointerfaces because of the absence of dangling bonds
in vertical devices, we will focus on the 2D materials
by considering a lateral and a vertical tunnel diode as
shown in Table I and demonstrate the proof of principle
by ab-initio quantum transport calculations. As pointed
out above, depending on the electronic band structure
parameters (Wm, EV
g , and EC
g ) of the cold metal elec-
trode materials, a tunnel diode showing either conven-
tional N-type or Λ-type NDR effect can be realized. For
this purpose, as electrode materials we choose AlI2 (1T
phase) and NbS2 (1H phase) and DFT-PBE electronic
band structure of both materials are shown in Figure 4a.
As seen, both materials have a single metallic band of
similar width (Wm) crossing the Fermi level and an en-
ergy gap above the Fermi level (EC
g ) of similar size. While
the energy gap EV
g of AlI2 below the Fermi energy is
much larger than the corresponding energy gap of NbS2
(see Table I). Note that our ground-state calculations for
both materials are in good agreement with previously
published data[44]. As for the case of semiconductors and
insulators, the DFT-PBE method underestimates the en-
ergy gaps (EV
g , and EC
g ) of the cold metals under con-
sideration. The accurate EV
g and EC
g values are of par-
ticular importance in tunnel diodes made of transition-
metal dichalcogenides as they possess EV
g values, which
are smaller than the Wm in DFT-PBE method, which
might result in smaller PVCR values. Taking electronic
correlations into account either within the HSE06 hybrid
functional or GW method results in larger EV
g and EC
g
values [44, 59, 60]. For computational purposes, in trans-
port calculations we adopt the PBE-1/2 method, which
gives rather accurate band gaps in semiconductors and
insulator. For instance, PBE gives 4.69 eV for the band
gap of h-BN, an insulator used as a tunnel barrier in ver-
tical heterojunction diode, while the PBE-1/2 method
more or less reproduces the experimental band gap of
6.1 eV (see Table I). Figure 4b shows the Wm, EV
g , and
EC
g values calculated with the PBE and PBE-1/2 meth-
ods for one monolayer NbX2 and TaX2 (X=S, Se, Te)
compounds. As seen in all compounds the Wm values
do not change at all in PBE-1/2 method and also the
change of EC
g values are negligible. However, PBE-1/2
method gives considerably larger EV
g values, which are
comparable to the ones obtained by the HSE06 method
[44] but larger than the GW values reported in the lit-
erature [59, 60].
Note that the GW calculations for
the electronic band structure of NbS2 is in good agree-
ment with the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
measurements.[59, 61]

In Figure 5a and 5b, we show the atomic struc-
ture of the lateral AlI2/MgI2/AlI2 and vertical NbS2/h-


5

TABLE I: Material composition of the tunnel diode, type of NDR effect, crystal structure, lattice constants a, PBE (PBE-1/2)
band gap Eg of the insulating tunnel barrier, PBE (PBE-1/2) metallic band width Wm, and energy gaps EV
g and EC
g below
and above the Fermi level for the cold metallic electrode materials. Lattice parameters are taken from Ref.[44].

Tunnel Diode
NDR
Compound
a(˚A)
Eg(eV)
Wm(eV)
EV
g (eV)
EC
g (eV)

AlI2/MgI2/AlI2
Λ-type
1T-AlI2
4.14
1.20 (0.95)
1.65 (2.96)
1.55 (2.29)
1T-MgI2
4.21
3.66 (5.45)
NbS2/BN/NbS2
N-type
1H-NbS2
3.34
1.25 (1.20)
0.44 (1.21)
1.36 (1.38)
h-BN
2.51
4.69 (6.17)

(a)                                                                                   (b)

FIG. 4: (Color online) (a) Calculated PBE band structure of the monolayer 1T AlI2 and 1H NbS2 along the high symmetry
lines in 2D Brilloiun zone. The dashed black lines denote the Fermi level, which is set to zero. (b) PBE and PBE-1/2 method
comparison of the metallic band widths (Wm), and energy gaps below (EV
g ) and above (EC
g ) the Fermi level for NbX2 and
TaX2 (X=S, Se, Te) compounds.

BN/NbS2 heterojunction tunnel diodes, respectively.
The lateral tunnel diode is formed by joining one mono-
layer of AlI2 (left electrode), a one monolayer tunnel bar-
rier MgI2, and one monolayer of AlI2 (right electrode).
Due to the very similar lattice parameters of electrode
and tunnel barrier materials (see Table I) as well as their
similar compositions, they form a perfect interface. We
assume periodicity of the device in the x-direction. The
z-direction is chosen as the transport direction.
We
consider both armchair and zigzag orientations and the
thickness of tunnel barrier is 7.3 ˚A for the former case
and 8.4 ˚A for the latter case.
The total length of the
scattering region is about 64 ˚A for both orientations. On
the other hand, for the vertical tunnel diode the lattice
mismatch between NbS2 and tunnel barrier h-BN is rela-
tively large and thus in device modelling we construct an
orthorhombic commensurate supercell of 3 × 3 for NbS2
and 4 × 4 for h-BN and consider only armchair orienta-
tion as sown in Figure 5b with an overlap region of about
24 ˚A and the scattering region is about 70 ˚A.

Next, we discuss the transport properties of the cold
metal heterojunction tunnel diodes. In the preceding sec-
tion we qualitatively discussed the operation principle
and I-V characteristics of a cold metal tunnel diode on
the basis of a schematic energy-band diagram of the elec-
trodes and a simple tunnel barrier model. However, in
real materials quantum tunneling is a very sophisticated
process as it depends on the symmetry of Bloch states in
the electrodes, their matching at the interface, and their
decay rate, which is determined by thickness and barrier
height as well as the complex energy bands of the tunnel

barrier. Thus, fully ab-initio atomic scale transport cal-
culations are needed to reveal the I-V characteristics of
the proposed cold metal tunnel diodes. Calculated I-V
curves are presented in Figure 5c and 5d for the lateral
and the vertical tunnel diode, respectively. In both tun-
nel diodes left and right cold metal electrodes are the
same and thus we obtain anti-symmetric I-V curves. In
both cases with an applied bias voltage V the current
I exponentially increases and reaches the peak value Ip
at about 0.15 V and thus the first PDR region in both
tunnel diodes is limited to a small bias voltage window of
0.15 V in contrast to rough estimation of 0.48 V and 0.6 V
based on the energy-band diagram in preceding section.
However, in both tunnel diodes the valley current Iv is
determined by Wm of electrode materials, i.e., 0.95 eV for
AlI2 and 1.2 eV for NbS2 (see Table I), which gives rise to
an extended NDR region. At room temperature the val-
ley current in lateral tunnel diode is almost zero, which
leads to an ultra-high PVCR value of 1016, while for the
vertical tunnel diode the PVCR value is about 104, which
is still much larger than the conventional semiconductor
NDR tunnel diodes. The vertical tunnel diode exhibits
N-type NDR effect since the electrode material NbS2 pos-
sesses Wm ∼ EV
g ∼ EC
g within the PBE-1/2 method and
thus the second PDR region starts at about 1.2 V and
current increases exponentially as in the first PDR re-
gion. On the other hand, as will be discussed in detail
in the following for the lateral tunnel diode the Wm is
much smaller than the EV
g and EC
g (see Figure 6a) and
thus the second PDR region starts at bias voltages larger
than 2.3 V . Therefore, the NDR effect in the lateral tun-


6

FIG. 5: (Color online) (a) The atomic structure of the lateral AlI2/MgI2/AlI2 cold metal tunnel diode. The system is periodic
along the x-direction orthogonal to the z-axis, which is the transport direction. (b) The same as (a) for the vertical NbS2/h-
BN/NbS2 cold metal tunnel diode. (c) The current-voltage characteristics for the lateral AlI2/MgI2/AlI2 tunnel diode in both
armchair and zigzag orientations. (d) The same as (c) for the vertical NbS2/h-BN/NbS2 cold metal tunnel diode in armchair
orientation.

nel diode can be regarded as a Λ-type NDR.
As expected for both tunnel diodes the current de-
cays exponentially with increasing the tunnel barrier
thickness as seen in Figure 5.
For instance, the lat-
eral AlI2/MgI2/AlI2 tunnel diode having zigzag orienta-
tion posses slightly thicker tunnel barrier of about 8.4 ˚A,
which leads to 40% less peak current density compared
to the tunnel diode with armchair orientation. The situ-
ation is very similar in the case of vertical tunnel diode
NbS2/h-BN/NbS2, in which the current decreases by a
factor of 50 from 1 to 2 monolayers of h-BN tunnel bar-
rier. However, the current densities between the lateral
and vertical tunnel diodes are very different. For a simi-
lar tunnel barrier thicknesses and the same armchair ori-
entations the lateral tunnel diode has almost four times
larger peak current density of about 290 µA/µm.
The NDR effect can be explained on the basis of the
device density of states (DDOS) (or local DOS). For sim-
plicity we focus only on the lateral tunnel diode and con-
sider the armchair orientation.
The calculated DDOS
using the PBE-1/2 method for two different bias volt-
ages are presented in Figure 6a. Note that in DDOS the
energy resolved number of states are color coded and it
can be regarded as the energy-band diagram of the tunnel
diode (see Figure 3). As seen from the DDOS and also
from the Table I the band width Wm of the AlI2 electrode
does not change much but EV
g and EC
g values increases
by 1.3 eV and 0.8 eV, respectively within the PBE-1/2
method.
The tunnel barrier MgI2 has a band gap of

about 5.45 eV, which is clearly seen in DDOS. Moreover,
the voltage drop across the tunnel barrier is also seen,
especially around -3 eV, as a linear change of DDOS (the
valence band maximum of MgI2) from the right to the
left electrode. To get further insight into the drop of bias
voltage across the tunnel barrier in Figure 6b we present
the electrostatic difference potential ∆VE along the trans-
port direction of the tunnel diode for two different bias
voltages. As seen the ∆VE is flat towards the electrodes
and it drops linearly across the insulating tunnel barrier
revealing that the bias voltage drop takes place at the
tunnel barrier. The potential values are given in Volt and
the left-to-right potential drop is 0.4 V and 1.2 V , which
are exactly the applied bias voltages. Returning back to
the discussion of I-V characteristics, under an applied
bias voltage V the current stems from the intra-band
tunneling, i.e., electrons in the occupied states (see Fig-
ure 4a) in the right cold metal electrode can tunnel into
the unoccupied states of the left cold metal electrode (see
also panel 2 in Figure 3b). This tunneling is very efficient
at low bias voltages and thus the peak current turns out
to be around 0.15 V and bias voltages higher than the
Wm of AlI2 the intra-band tunneling completely ceases
since occupied and unoccupied energy levels are no longer
aligned (see panel 4 in Figure 3b). This can also be seen
from the transmission spectrum presented in Figure 6c,
in which transmission is finite for a bias voltage of 0.4 V ,
whereas it is exactly zero for 1.2 V , which is larger than
the Wm (0.95 eV) of AlI2. It is worth to note that in I-V


7

FIG. 6: (Color online) (a) Device density of states (DDOS) for the lateral AlI2/MgI2/AlI2 cold metal tunnel diode for an
applied bias voltage of V = 0.4 V (upper panel) and V = 1.2 V (lower panel) calculated with PBE-1/2 method. The dashed
lines display the Fermi level of the left and right electrodes (the corresponding atomic structure is presented in Figure 5a). (b)
and (c) calculated electrostatic difference potential and transmission spectrum, respectively.

characteristics of the cold metal tunnel diodes the first
PDR and NDR regions stem from the intra-band tunnel-
ing, while the second PDR region is due to inter band
tunneling. (see panels 2, 3, and 5 in Figure 3b) Note also
that finite PVCR values, especially in Λ-type NDR effect
originates from the thermal excitations, i.e, very few high
energy electrons at the tail of the Fermi-Dirac distribu-
tion function could contribute to the valley current.

The I-V
characteristics and the ultra-high PVCR
values of the tunnel diodes discussed above are based
on the coherent tunneling transport i.e., no dissipation
mechanism like inelastic electron-electron scattering or
electron-phonon scattering is taken into account in cal-
culations of the I-V curves. The latter is more efficient
in 2D semiconductors than 3D ones [62], giving rise to
lower room-temperature mobility and as a result low on
currents in field-effect transistors based on 2D semicon-
ducting nanomaterials [63]. The electron-phonon scat-
tering as a dissipation mechanism has been implemented
in the QuantumATK package, however due to enormous
computational cost of such calculations, it has been only
employed to very simple model systems like H2 molecule
placed between 1D Au chains.[55] Thus, for the present
tunnel diodes the inclusion of the electron-phonon scat-
tering in transport calculations is not feasible at all from
the computational point of view.
Therefore, the peak
current I1 (see Figure 3 and Figure 5) in the I-V charac-
teristics as well as the PVCR value of the tunnel diodes
can be regarded as the upper limit within the coherent
tunneling transport approach employed in the present
work. Inclusion of the inelastic scattering processes like

electron-phonon interaction is expected to renormalize
the I-V characteristics, i.e., it would decrease (increase)
the peak (valley) current and consequently it would re-
duce the PVCR value.
In addition to dissipative pro-
cesses, defects and interaction with the environment, i.e.,
the surrounding dielectric materials would also influence
the I-V characteristics of the devices. However, the over-
all I-V curves of the tunnel diodes are not expected to
change substantially, i.e., one can obtain either a conven-
tional N-type or Λ-type NDR effect by proper choice of
the cold metal electrode materials.

Finally we would like to comment on the transport
properties of the cold metal MX2 (M=Nb, Ta; X= Se,
Se) heterojunctions studied in Ref. [64] and dwell on the
other applications of the cold metals in nanoelectronics.
The authors of the Ref. [64] claim to get a promising
PVCR value of 51 and extremely high peak current den-
sity ( 5.1×104 µA/µm) for an edge contact NbSe2/NbS2
heterojunction device. However, we have shown in Sup-
porting Information [65] that the NDR effect obtained
in this paper does not stem from a physical mechanism
but from the numerical treatment of the current in the
QuantumATK package. Cold metals are not only promis-
ing materials for NDR tunnel diodes as discussed in this
work but also they have been proposed to achieve sub-60
mV/dec subthreshold swing (SS) in a CMOS transistor
when used as the source electrode. The unique electronic
band structure of the cold metal source electrode in a
CMOS transistor filters the transmission of high-energy
electrons in the subthreshold region leading to sub-60
mV/dec SS value and also reduces the leakage current in


8

the off state [66–70]. Besides applications of cold metals
in CMOS transistors, in metal-semiconductor Schottky
barrier diodes the use of a cold metal electrode instead
of normal metal one breaks the thermionic limit of an
ideality factor (η) of 1 at room temperature, which paves
the way for the development of low-power electronic cir-
cuits [71].

V.
CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we proposed a novel semiconductor-
free NDR tunnel diode concept that exhibits ultra-high
PVCR value. The proposed NDR diode consists of two
cold metal electrodes separated by a thin insulating tun-
nel barrier. The operation principle and the NDR effect
rely on the unique electronic band structure of the cold
metal electrodes, i.e., the width of the isolated metal-
lic bands around the Fermi level as well as the energy
gaps separating higher and lower lying bands determine
the I-V characteristics and the PVCR value of the tun-
nel diode. We showed that by proper choice of the cold
metal electrode materials either conventional N-type or
Λ-type NDR effect can be obtained.
In both types of
NDR effect the first PDR region and the NDR region are
determined by the intra-band quantum tunneling, while
inter-band quantum tunneling is responsible for the sec-
ond PDR region in the I-V curves of the N-type NDR ef-
fect. 2D transition-metal dichalcogenides (NbX2, TaX2;
X=S, Se, Te), transition-metal dihalides (ScI2, YI2, etc),

as well as several other 2D nanomaterials possess cold
metallic electronic band structure and offer a unique plat-
form for the realization of the proposed NDR tunnel
diodes. We demonstrated the proof of concept by em-
ploying the DFT+NEGF method and calculated the I-V
characteristic of the lateral AlI2/MgI2/AlI2 and vertical
NbS2/h-BN/NbS2 heterojunction tunnel diodes. For the
lateral tunnel diode we obtain a Λ-type NDR effect with
an ultra-high PVCR value of 1016 at room temperature,
while the vertical tunnel diode exhibits conventional N-
type NDR effect with a smaller PVCR value of about 104.
The obtained ultra-high PVCR values in tunnel diodes
should be regarded as the upper limit as we neglect the
dissipative processes like electron-phonon scattering as
well as interaction with environment i.e., the surrounding
dielectric materials and defects in DFT+NEGF calcula-
tions. We anticipate that a plethora of 2D nanomateri-
als can serve as cold metal electrodes in proposed tun-
nel diodes to achieve the desired I-V characteristics and
ultra-high PVCR values in a semiconductor-free solution
for NDR devices for high-speed, low-power memory and
logic applications.

Acknowledgments

E.S¸ and I.M. acknowledge support from Sonder-
forschungsbereich TRR 227 of Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (DFG) and funding provided by the European
Union (EFRE), Grant No: ZS/2016/06/79307.

[1] G. E. Moore, Electronics 38, 114 (1965).
[2] International Roadmap for Devices and Systems (IRDS)
(2021), available at https://irds.ieee.org, URL https://
irds.ieee.org/editions/2021.

[3] A. Chen, J. Hutchby, V. Zhirnov, and G. Bourianoff,
Emerging Nanoelectronic Devices (John Wiley & Sons,
2014).

[4] A. M. Ionescu and H. Riel, Nature 479, 329 (2011).
[5] D. E. Nikonov, G. I. Bourianoff, and T. Ghani, IEEE
Electron Device Lett. 32, 1128 (2011).

[6] I. Amlani, A. O. Orlov, G. Toth, G. H. Bernstein, C. S.
Lent, and G. L. Snider, Science 284, 289 (1999).

[7] D. A. Allwood, G. Xiong, C. C. Faulkner, D. Atkinson,
D. Petit, and R. P. Cowburn, Science 309, 1688 (2005).

[8] C. Pan and A. Naeemi, IEEE J. Explor. Solid-State Com-
put. Devices Circuits 3, 101 (2017).

[9] P. R. Berger and A. Ramesh, in Comprehensive Semi-
conductor Science and Technology (Elsevier Inc., 2011),
pp. 176–241.

[10] S. B. Jo, J. Kang, and J. H. Cho, Advanced Science 8,
2004216 (2021).

[11] J. Van Der Wagt, Proceedings of the IEEE 87, 571
(1999).

[12] K. Karda, J. Brockman, S. Sutar, A. Seabaugh, and
J. Nahas, in 2009 IEEE International Conference on IC
Design and Technology (IEEE, 2009), pp. 233–236.

[13] K. J. Chen, K. Maezawa, and M. Yamamoto, IEEE Elec-

tron Device Lett. 17, 127 (1996).

[14] K. Maezawa, H. Matsuzaki, M. Yamamoto, and T. Ot-
suji, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 19, 80 (1998).

[15] W. Williamson, S. B. Enquist, D. H. Chow, H. L. Dun-
lap, S. Subramaniam, P. Lei, G. H. Bernstein, and B. K.
Gilbert, IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 32, 222 (1997).

[16] L. J. Micheel and M. J. Paulus, in Proceedings of the
Twentieth International Symposium on Multiple-Valued
Logic (IEEE Computer Society, 1990), pp. 189–190.

[17] H. Lin, in Proceedings of 24th International Symposium
on Multiple-Valued Logic (ISMVL’94) (IEEE, 1994), pp.
188–195.

[18] N. Jin, S.-Y. Chung, R. M. Heyns, P. R. Berger, R. Yu,
P. E. Thompson, and S. L. Rommel, IEEE Electron De-
vice Lett. 25, 646 (2004).

[19] S. L. Hurst, IEEE Trans. Comput. 33, 1160 (1984).
[20] L. Esaki, Phys. Rev. 109, 603 (1958).
[21] L. Esaki and R. Tsu, IBM J. Res. Dev. 14, 61 (1970).
[22] A. Ramesh, P. R. Berger, and R. Loo, Appl. Phys. Lett.
100, 092104 (2012).

[23] W. Y. Fung, L. Chen, and W. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 99,
092108 (2011).

[24] R. Duschl, O. G. Schmidt, G. Reitemann, E. Kasper, and
K. Eberl, Electron. Lett. 35, 1111 (1999).

[25] H. Schmid, C. Bessire, M. T. Bj¨ork, A. Schenk, and
H. Riel, Nano Lett. 12, 699 (2012).


9

[26] D. H. Chow, J. N. Schulman, E. ¨Ozbay, and D. M. Bloom,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 61, 1685 (1992).

[27] H. Tsai, Y. Su, H. Lin, R. Wang, and T. Lee, IEEE
Electron Device Lett. 15, 357 (1994).

[28] S. Sant and A. Schenk, J. Appl. Phys. 122, 135702
(2017).

[29] J. Bizindavyi, A. S. Verhulst, Q. Smets, D. Verreck,
B. Sor´ee, and G. Groeseneken, IEEE J. Electron Devices
Soc. 6, 633 (2018).

[30] A. Schenk and S. Sant, J. Appl. Phys. 128, 014502
(2020).

[31] S.-Y. Chung, N. Jin, P. R. Berger, R. Yu, P. E. Thomp-
son, R. Lake, S. L. Rommel, and S. K. Kurinec, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 84, 2688 (2004).

[32] S.-L. Chen, P. B. Griffin, and J. D. Plummer, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices 56, 634 (2009).

[33] K.-J. Gan, C.-S. Tsai, and W.-L. Sun, Electron. Lett. 43,
517 (2007).

[34] R. Duane, A. Mathewson, and A. Concannon, IEEE
Electron Device Lett. 24, 661 (2003).

[35] L. Fang, C. Qiu, H. Zhang, Y. Hu, and L.-M. Peng, Adv.
Electron. Mater. p. 2101314 (2022).

[36] K.-J. Gan, J.-J. Lu, W.-K. Yeh, Y.-H. Chen, and Y.-W.
Chen, Eng. Sci. Technol. an Int. J. 19, 888 (2016).

[37] E. S¸a¸sıo˘glu and I. Mertig, Negative differential resistance
tunnel diode and manufacturing method (2021), German
Patent Application 102021206526.0.

[38] E. Sasioglu and I. Mertig, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. (2022).
[39] J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 6, 57 (1961).
[40] R. Meservey and P. Tedrow, Phys. Rep. 238, 173 (1994).
[41] O. Gunnarsson, Alkali-doped fullerides:
narrow-band
solids with unusual properties (World Scientific, 2004).

[42] P. Hansmann, A. Toschi, G. Sangiovanni, T. Saha-
Dasgupta, S. Lupi, M. Marsi, and K. Held, Mott–hubbard
transition in v2o3 revisited (2013).

[43] N. Regnault, Y. Xu, M.-R. Li, D.-S. Ma, M. Jovanovic,
A. Yazdani, S. S. P. Parkin, C. Felser, L. M. Schoop,
N. P. Ong, et al., Nature 603, 824 (2022).

[44] S. Haastrup, M. Strange, M. Pandey, T. Deilmann, P. S.
Schmidt, N. F. Hinsche, M. N. Gjerding, D. Torelli, P. M.
Larsen, A. C. Riis-Jensen, et al., 2d Mater. 5, 042002
(2018).

[45] M. N. Gjerding, A. Taghizadeh, A. Rasmussen, S. Ali,
F. Bertoldo, T. Deilmann, N. R. Knøsgaard, M. Kruse,
A. H. Larsen, S. Manti, et al., 2d Mater. 8, 044002 (2021).

[46] N. Mounet, M. Gibertini, P. Schwaller, D. Campi,
A. Merkys, A. Marrazzo, T. Sohier, I. E. Castelli, A. Ce-
pellotti, G. Pizzi, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 246
(2018).

[47] N. Janatipour,
Z. Mahdavifar,
S. Noorizadeh,
and
G. Schreckenbach, RSC Advances 12, 1758 (2022).

[48] A. Ostovan, Z. Mahdavifar, and M. Bamdad, J. Mol. Liq.
269, 639 (2018).

[49] A. Mishchenko, J. Tu, Y. Cao, R. V. Gorbachev, J. Wall-
bank,
M. T. Greenaway,
V. Morozov,
S. Morozov,
M. Zhu, S. Wong, et al., Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 808 (2014).

[50] J. Shim, S. Oh, D.-H. Kang, S.-H. Jo, M. H. Ali, W.-

Y. Choi, K. Heo, J. Jeon, S. Lee, M. Kim, et al., Nat.
Commun. 7, 1 (2016).

[51] K.-H. Kim, H.-Y. Park, J. Shim, G. Shin, M. Andreev,
J. Koo, G. Yoo, K. Jung, K. Heo, Y. Lee, et al., Nanoscale
Horiz. 5, 654 (2020).

[52] Y.-C. Lin, R. K. Ghosh, R. Addou, N. Lu, S. M. Eichfeld,
H. Zhu, M.-Y. Li, X. Peng, M. J. Kim, L.-J. Li, et al.,
Nat. Commun. 6, 1 (2015).

[53] T. Roy, M. Tosun, X. Cao, H. Fang, D.-H. Lien, P. Zhao,
Y.-Z. Chen, Y.-L. Chueh, J. Guo, and A. Javey, ACS
Nano 9, 2071 (2015).

[54] N. T. Duong, S. Bang, S. M. Lee, D. X. Dang, D. H.
Kuem, J. Lee, M. S. Jeong, and S. C. Lim, Nanoscale
10, 12322 (2018).

[55] S. Smidstrup, T. Markussen, P. Vancraeyveld, J. Wellen-
dorff, J. Schneider, T. Gunst, B. Verstichel, D. Stradi,
P. A. Khomyakov, U. G. Vej-Hansen, et al., J. Phys.
Condens. Matter 32, 015901 (2020).

[56] M. J. Van Setten, M. Giantomassi, E. Bousquet, M. J.
Verstraete, D. R. Hamann, X. Gonze, and G.-M. Rig-
nanese, Comput. Phys. Commun. 226, 39 (2018).

[57] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

[58] M. B¨uttiker, Y. Imry, R. Landauer, and S. Pinhas, Phys.
Rev. B 31, 6207 (1985).

[59] C. Heil, M. Schlipf, and F. Giustino, Phy. Rev. B 98,
075120 (2018).

[60] S. Kim and Y.-W. Son, Phy. Rev. B 96, 155439 (2017).
[61] D. Huang, H. Nakamura, K. K¨uster, U. Wedig, N. B. M.
Schr¨oter, V. N. Strocov, U. Starke, and H. Takagi, Phy.
Rev. B 105, 245145 (2022), URL https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.105.245145.

[62] L. Cheng, C. Zhang, and Y. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125,
177701 (2020).

[63] A. Afzalian, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl. 5, 1 (2021).
[64] Y. Yin, C. Shao, H. Guo, J. Robertson, Z. Zhang, and
Y. Guo, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 43, 498 (2022).

[65] See Supplemental Material at arxiv.org for NbSe2/NbS2
heterojunction and NbS2 only device the electron dif-
ference density, I-V curves, the device density of states
(DDOS) and electrostatic difference potential.

[66] C. Qiu, F. Liu, L. Xu, B. Deng, M. Xiao, J. Si, L. Lin,
Z. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Guo, et al., Science 361, 387
(2018).

[67] F. Liu, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 064037 (2020).
[68] E. G. Marin, D. Marian, M. Perucchini, G. Fiori, and
G. Iannaccone, ACS Nano 14, 1982 (2020).

[69] D. Logoteta, J. Cao, M. Pala, P. Dollfus, Y. Lee, and
G. Iannaccone, Phys. rev. res. 2, 043286 (2020).

[70] Z. Tang, C. Liu, X. Huang, S. Zeng, L. Liu, J. Li, Y.-G.
Jiang, D. W. Zhang, and P. Zhou, Nano Lett. 21, 1758
(2021).

[71] W. Shin, G. Myeong, K. Sung, S. Kim, H. Lim, B. Kim,
T. Jin, J. Park, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, et al., Appl.
Phys. Lett. 120, 243506 (2022).


Supplemental Material

Ersoy Şaşıoğlu1∗ and Ingrid Mertig1,2

1Institute of Physics, Martin Luther University

Halle-Wittenberg, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany

2Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics,

Weinberg 2, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany

1

arXiv:2207.02593v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  25 Oct 2022


In Ref. 1 transport properties of the cold metal MX2 (M=Nb, Ta; X= Se, Se) heterojunc-

tions have been studied by employing the DFT+NEGF method. The authors claim to get

a promising PVCR value of 51 and extremely high peak current density ( 5.1 × 104 µA/µm)

for an edge contact NbSe2/NbS2 heterojunction device. To verify the findings of this paper

we construct the same edge contact NbSe2/NbS2 heterojunction (armchair orientation, see

Figure S1a) and perform quantum transport calculations. Indeed we obtain a very similar

I-V curve (see Figure S2) with a peak current density of 5 × 104 µA/µm. However, the

NDR effect obtained in this paper does not stem from a physical mechanism but from the

numerical treatment of the current in the QuantumATK package, more specifically, from

the division of the device in leads and scattering region, which artificially introduces electro-

static boundary conditions. The boundary conditions fix the bias voltage drop in an artificial

manner, which can be seen in DDOS for the NbSe2/NbS2 heterojunction device presented in

Figure S3. As we discussed in main text for the case of lateral tunnel diode AlI2/MgI2/AlI2

the applied bias voltage V drops across the insulating tunnel barrier MgI2 (see Figure 6)

and the potential is flat in the electrode regions, however the NbSe2/NbS2 heterojunction

does not have such a tunnel barrier and thus a small fraction of the applied voltage drops

at the interface, where scattering takes place and the rest of the voltage artificially drops

in a region close to the right electrode due to the electrostatic boundary conditions (see

Figure S3). This artificial drop gives rise to an NDR effect, which is not physical but can be

regarded as a numerical artifact. For a finite bias voltage V the NEGF calculations do not

converge properly. Indeed, we get a proper convergence only for very small bias voltages

less than 0.1 V and with increasing the bias voltage V even no poor convergence is reached

above 0.7 V and thus cold metal-cold metal junctions do not provide any NDR effect with-

out a tunnel barrier. Since both NbSe2 and NbS2 are metals with different work functions

when they form a heterostructure an electrical double line (electrical double layer in 3D)

will be formed at the interface due to charge transfer (see Figure S1b). We would like to

point out that the same effect occurs if we calculate the I-V curve for a homogeneous system

consisting of NbS2 only (see Figures S4 and S5 ).

∗ Electronic address: ersoy.sasioglu@physik.uni-halle.de

1 Y. Yin, C. Shao, H. Guo, J. Robertson, Z. Zhang, and Y. Guo, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 43,

S2


(a)

(b)

FIG. 1: (Color online) (a) The atomic structure of the lateral NbSe2/NbS2 heterojunction (armchair

orientation). (b) Electron difference density for the NbSe2/NbS2 heterojunction.

498 (2022).

S3


FIG. 2: (Color online). Calculated current-voltage (I-V ) characteristics for the NbSe2/NbS2 het-

erojunction in armchair orientation.

S4


FIG. 3: (Color online) Left panels: Device density of states (DDOS) for the lateral NbSe2/NbS2

heterojunction for different applied bias voltages calculated with the PBE method. The dashed

lines display the Fermi level of the left and right electrodes. Right panels: Calculated electrostatic

difference potential for different applied bias voltages.

S5


FIG. 4: (Color online). Left panels: Device density of states (DDOS) for the lateral homogeneous

NbS2 device for different applied bias voltages calculated with the PBE method. The dashed lines

display the Fermi level of the left and right electrodes.
Right panels: Calculated electrostatic

difference potential for different applied bias voltages.

S6


FIG. 5: (Color online). Calculated current-voltage (I-V ) characteristics for the homogenous NbS2

in armchair orientation.

S7


