Notice: This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under Contract No. DE-
AC0500OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and 
the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States 
Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or 
reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for the United States 
Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of 
federally 
sponsored 
research 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
DOE 
Public 
Access 
Plan 

(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).


Probing temperature-induced phase transitions at individual ferroelectric domain walls

Kyle P. Kelley,1,a Sergei V. Kalinin,1 Eugene Eliseev,2 Shivaranjan Raghuraman,1 Stephen 

Jesse,1 Peter Maksymovych,1 and Anna N. Morozovska3,b

1 Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831

2 Institute for Problems of Materials Science, National Academy of Science of Ukraine, 

Krjijanovskogo 3, 03142 Kyiv, Ukraine.

3 Institute of Physics, National Academy of Science of Ukraine, pr. Nauki 46, 03028 Kyiv, 

Ukraine.

Abstract:

Ferroelectric domain walls have emerged as one of the most fascinating objects in condensed 

matter physics due to the broad variability of functional behaviors they exhibit. However, the vast 

majority of domain walls studies have been focused on bias-induced dynamics and transport 

behaviors. Here, we introduce the scanning probe microscopy approach based on piezoresponse 

force microscopy (PFM) with a dynamically heated probe, combining local heating and local 

biasing of the material. This approach is used to explore the thermal polarization dynamics in soft 

Sn2P2S6 ferroelectrics, and allows for the exploration of phase transitions at individual domain 

walls. The strong and weak modulation regimes for the thermal PFM are introduced. The future 

potential applications of heated probe approach for functional SPM measurements including 

piezoelectric, elastic, microwave, and transport measurements are discussed. 

a kelleykp@ornl.gov
b anna.n.morozovska@gmail.com


Ferroelectric domain walls separate regions of uniform polarization in ferroelectric 

materials and have recently been investigated for the broad range of functional behaviors they may 

exhibit.1 Following the discovery of the domain wall conductance by Seidel,2 the electronic 

properties of the ferroelectric domain walls have been explored by multiple groups.3-8 These 

studies targeted both the fundamental mechanisms of domain wall conduction,9 as well as 

applications in reconfigurable oxide electronics.5 The critical enabling element was local scanning 

probe microscopy techniques that allowed probing the properties of individual domain walls,10-12

as well controllable manipulation of ferroelectric polarization and the creation of specific 

ferroelectric13, 14 and ferroelastic15 domain structures. 

Similarly, advancements in (Scanning) Transmission Electron Microscopy have enabled 

direct observations of the atomic structures in the vicinity of domain walls and topological defects.

In this, direct visualization of atomic column positions and shapes allows the reconstruction of 

symmetry breaking distortions on a unit cell level.16-21 Here, the direct evidence towards the 

emergence of phases associated with novel order parameters,22 polarization rotation,23 and carrier 

accumulation24 have been observed. 

From the theoretical perspective, the emergent properties of the domain walls can be 

generally traced to the symmetry breaking phenomena emerging when the primary order parameter 

becomes zero.3, 25 Under these conditions, the phases and structural behaviors associated with 

secondary order parameters including magnetic,26 ferroelastic,27 or superconductive28 can emerge. 

In the systems close to the phase coexistence, the walls can precipitate transition to the spatially-

modulated phases induced by flexoelectric interactions.29, 30 For the walls associated with the 

discontinuity of polarization vector, the additional mechanisms of emergence of new 

functionalities is the coupling with the semiconductor system of the material.31 Finally, strain 

effects at the walls can lead to oxygen vacancy or other mobile charge accumulation and associated 

structural and electronic responses.32-34

However, until now, the vast majority of domain wall studies via scanning probe and 

electron microscopy have been limited to the constant temperature well below the ferroelectric 

transition. For the few cases when variable-temperature behaviors of surface potential or 

piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) signals were explored,35-40 these studies were performed 

under uniform heating conditions, by changing the temperature of the whole sample. Little is 

presently known about local temperature-induced phenomena at the domain walls, such as possible 


local temperature induced phase transition and material responses under the conditions of strong 

thermal gradients. 

Here we introduce a new approach, UV laser assisted thermal band excitation PFM (tPFM),

to probe thermal- and voltage dynamics in functional materials based on the synergy of local 

heating and local biasing. By aligning a UV laser normal to an atomic force microscope cantilever 

while employing band excitation piezoresponse spectroscopy (Figure 1a), the local ferroelectric 

and mechanical properties as a function of temperature can be measured simultaneously, providing 

insight into the local nature of the transition. Specifically, we apply a triangular voltage wave (here 

chosen as 0-4.75 V, 1 Hz) to the UV laser while measuring the PFM amplitude, phase, and resonant 

frequency in a point-by-point spectroscopy framework. In this manner, functional responses of the 

material are probed as a function of local heating where the relatively small tip-surface junction 

(radius less than 25 nm) mitigates long range heating. To complement local studies, uniform

heating is employed to evaluate thermal properties across the transition without the presence of a 

large local thermal field created in tPFM. 

As a model system, we have chosen uniaxial Sn2P2S6 (SPS) bulk single crystals which 

undergo a ferroelectric-paraelectric phase transition at approximately 338 K.41 The low Curie 

temperature makes this system ideal for temperature dependent piezoresponse force microscopy 

measurements. Here, we aim to explore the local nano- and micro-scale ferroelectric properties

and domain wall dynamics of single crystal SPS as a function of temperature via tPFM and uniform 

heating techniques. Combined imaging and spectroscopic studies have enabled us to determine the 

nature of the propagating phase boundary with increasing temperature, the heterogeneous nature 

of the transition, and how thermal gradients affect the functional properties near the phase 

transition.


As shown in Figure 1c, SPS possesses a smooth step and terrace-like surface morphology 

ideal for SPM-based techniques. Band excitation PFM amplitude and phase images at room 

temperature of 180˚ domains are shown in Figure 1d,e respectively. As such, a clear domain wall 

can be observed separating the two 180˚ domains, which is central to this study. We then apply 

thermal spectroscopy as shown in Figure 1b rastering from the top left and ending in the bottom 

right corner. At a laser voltage of 0V, i.e. room temperature, the spectroscopy amplitude and phase 

(left panels, top and bottom respectively) clearly resemble the PFM images (Figure 1d,e). 

However, at the largest laser voltage, i.e. 4.75V, a strong reduction in response and relatively 

uniform phase image is observed (Figure 1b, right panels), indicating probe temperatures above 

Figure 1: Experimental setup of thermally assisted band excitation piezoresponse force 
microscopy. a) Experimental illustration with ultra-violet laser aligned to AFM probe normal for 
thermal cycling. Triangle wave is applied to laser input for cantilever heating while ferroelectric 
and mechanical properties are measured via band excitation PFM (optical beam). b) Band 
excitation piezoresponse spectroscopy amplitude (top panels) and phase (bottom panels) spatial 
maps selected at a laser voltage of 0V (left, room temperature) and 4.75V (right) over a 20x20 
grid. Sn2P2S6 bulk single crystal c) surface topography, band excitation piezoresponse force 
microscopy d) amplitude and e) phase, where dark blue and light green phase regions correspond 
to down and up polarized domains, respectively.


the Curie temperature and a corresponding reduction of piezoelectric signal due to the local phase 

transition. 

To access the domain wall behavior near the phase transition temperature, we plot the 

normalized tPFM amplitude per laser voltage near the transition onset (Figure 2a-d), which occurs 

between 3.41V and 3.71V. Initially, the domain wall begins to broaden (Figure 2a) with increasing 

temperature, while further increasing the temperature results in a monotonic decrease in response 

only for the lower domain (Figure 2b-d) located at the bottom of the image corresponding to 

polarization pointing into the plane. Interestingly, we observe distinctly different phase transition 

behaviors between the domains. To examine this further, we plot spectra acquired across the 

domain wall as a function of laser voltage (Figure 2e,f), i.e. increasing temperature, acquired from 

the white line in Figure 2a-e. For clarification, the top and bottom curves in Figure 2e,f correspond 

to spectroscopic locations indicated by the beginning and end of the white arrows presented in 

Figure 2: UV laser assisted thermal band excitation spectroscopy. Spatial maps of normalized 
tPFM amplitude extracted at a laser voltage of a) 3.41 V, b) 3.56V, c) 3.60V, and d)3.71V. Note, 
panels (a-d) are slices of tPFM 3D dataset at specific laser heating voltages. A clear phase 
transition is observed propagating away from the domain wall versus laser voltage, i.e. 
temperature. e) Waterfall plot of tPFM amplitude and corresponding f) phase acquired across 
domain wall (white arrow panel a-d) illustrating the laser voltage at which the amplitude drops to 
zero increases further from the domain wall.


Figure 2a-d, respectively. As such, Figure 2e shows offset tPFM amplitude versus laser voltage 

across the domain wall. In the upper domain (up polarization), a continuous decrease in amplitude 

is observed between a laser voltage of 1.5V and 4.75V. In contrast, the lower domain experiences 

a continuous decrease in amplitude to zero, then begins to increase with increasing temperature

suggesting a ferroelectric to paraelectric transition. Similarly, the phase rotates by 180˚ (Figure 2f) 

in the lower domain congruent with the increased response. Importantly, with increasing distance 

from the domain wall within the lower domain, the onset of zero response appears at higher 

temperatures. These observations suggest the domain wall undergoes broadening, which is 

accompanied by domain dependent phase transition characteristics.

To gain further insight into spatial variability of the observed behaviors, we employ k-

means clustering and principal component analysis (PCA) on the tPFM spectra. Briefly, k-means 

is an unsupervised machine learning algorithm that automatically assigns each pixel to a group 

Figure 3: K-means clustering and principal component analysis of thermal spectroscopy. a) 
K-means clustering (k=4) of laser assisted thermal BE piezoresponse spectroscopy with 
corresponding b) amplitude and c) resonant frequency averages derived from clusters. Principal 
component analysis of laser assisted thermal BE piezoresponse spectroscopy with d-g) abundance 
maps and h-k) spectra for components 1-4, respectively.


(cluster) such that the within-cluster sum of squares is minimized. Comparatively, PCA is a linear 

decomposition technique used to decompose the dataset into the characteristic temperature 

dependent behaviors associated with position-dependent loadings. The application of these 

techniques on hyperspectral data is discussed in detail elsewhere.42-46

Here, using k-means clustering (k=4), four unique behaviors are observed where the spatial

cluster assignments are shown in Figure 3a. The four clusters are located near the domain wall 

(black), at the domain wall (red), and in the up polarized (purple) and down polarized (blue) 

domains. The tPFM amplitude and resonant frequency averages pertaining to each cluster are 

plotted in Figure 3b,c respectively. As shown in Figure 3b, tPFM spectra acquired near the domain 

wall (cluster 0) have an increase in amplitude with a maximum at approximately 2.7V; tPFM 

spectra acquired at the domain wall (cluster 3) have an amplitude minimum at lower laser voltages 

as compared to the down polarized domain (cluster 2); and tPFM spectra acquired in the up

polarized domain (cluster 1) have a continuously decreasing amplitude, similar to Figure 2e. Note, 

Figure 4: Uniform heating band excitation piezoresponse force microscopy. a-e) BE-PFM 
piezoresponse images of similar domain structure acquired at 30˚C, 70˚C, 85˚C, 90˚C, and 110˚C 
respectively. Note, piezoresponse drops by an order of magnitude at 110˚C. f) Histogram peaks 
and corresponding widths derived from green areas (up polarized domains, green line) and blue 
areas (down polarized domain, blue line) in panels (a-e) plotted versus temperature showing 
different transition temperatures in each domain. h) Average BE-PFM amplitude profiles across 
domain wall acquired from the red box in panels (a-e) versus temperature


the amplitude response for all four clusters at the maximum temperature qualitatively approach the 

same value indicating at 4.75V the entire system has undergone a complex phase transition.

Correspondingly, the decrease in resonance frequency (Figure 3c) observed near the domain wall

at higher temperatures suggests a local softening of the material, consistent with previous reports 

of domain wall mechanics.47

Subsequently, we perform PCA on the tPFM amplitude with the component abundance 

maps and spectra shown in Figure 3d-g and Figure 3h-k, respectively. Component 1 captures the 

temperature induced response decay for both domains, while component 2 corresponds to the 

higher transition temperature located in the upper domain (up polarized), i.e., combining 

component 1 and 2 qualitatively produces cluster 1 in Figure 3b. Component 3 corresponds to the 

domain wall broadening with increasing temperature, similar to Figure 2. Moreover, component 4 

clearly captures the enhanced response observed near the domain wall. As such, the PCA results 

provide additional confirmation of the unique phase transition behavior derived from k-means, and 

together qualitatively show the nature of the complex phase transition present in SPS. 

We further explore the phase transition behavior via uniform heating studies without the 

presence of the large local thermal field created in the UV laser assisted tPFM. Figure 4a-e shows 

band excitation PFM piezoresponse images from uniform heating studies at temperatures ranging 

from 30˚C to 110˚C. At lower temperatures, i.e. 30˚C and 70˚C (Figure 4a,b), the piezoresponse 

magnitude is relatively constant; however, at higher temperatures, i.e. 85˚C to 110˚C (Figure 4c-

e), the response begins to rapidly decay, as expected for a ferroelectric-paraelectric phase 

transition. To better understand the phase transition behavior under uniform heating, we plot 

histograms
(Supplementary
Information)
of the PFM piezoresponse images
with the 

corresponding distribution maximum and FWHM (error bars) versus temperature shown in Figure 

4f. Here, distinctly different transition behaviors between the up and down polarized domains are 

observed, similar to the tPFM, where the up polarized domains have a lower ferroelectric-

paraelectric phase transition temperature.  Lastly, we examine the domain wall behavior under 

uniform heating by extracting the domain wall width versus temperature in the region indicated by 

the red boxes in Figure 4a-e. As such, Figure 4g shows the average PFM amplitude across the 

domain wall. Note the continuous broadening of the wall with temperature, achieving ~150 nm at 

110˚C.


Overall, tPFM and uniform heating PFM demonstrates intriguing phase transition behavior 

in SPS. Specifically, tPFM provides a continuous spectrum of thermally induced polarization 

dynamics where we observe a clear broadening of the domain wall and the phase transition in the 

down polarized (lower) domain propagates away from the domain wall. Correspondingly, the 

down polarized domain has a lower transition temperature as compared to the up polarized (upper)

domain, which is further corroborated via uniform heating studies (Figure 4f). As such, these 

observations suggest domain dependent ferroelectric-paraelectric transition temperatures, i.e. the 

minimum piezoresponse as a function of temperature depends on the polarization orientation.

To gain further insight into the observed phenomena, we performed Finite Element 

Modeling reflecting the experimental conditions. Here, we aim to understand the temperature 

dependent polarization and effective piezoresponses in both a uniform and local heating (i.e. 

tPFM) geometry while considering the effects of rigid pinning on domain wall motion. For 

completeness, we also model the temperature dependent polarization, vertical displacement, and 

effective piezoresponse at the domain wall versus a uniformly polarized surface within a local 

heating PFM geometry. Accordingly, we establish a decoupled model for thermal PFM. We 

assume that the temperature distribution inside the material is established due contact with the 

heated AFM probe and is calculated self-consistently. The equilibrium temperature distribution 

𝑇(𝑟⃗) satisfies a Laplace equation inside the SPS region:

∆𝑇(𝑟⃗) = 0.   
(1)

Due to the very high heat conductivity of the metallic tip in comparison with a moderate 

conductivity of SPS and very low conductivity of the air, one can neglect the heat flux between 

the SPS and air and assume fixed temperature 𝑇𝑑 at the tip-surface contact area. Far from the heated 

tip the temperature tends to 𝑇0. Using a disk-plane model of the SPM tip,48, 49 we substitute the tip 

apex by a uniformly heated disk of radius 𝑅~(5 − 50) nm, which is in a perfect thermal contact 

with the SPS surface 𝑧 = 0.

The polarization and strain fields are calculated numerically as a non-local problem 

assuming the known temperature distribution as a solution of coupled Ginzburg-Landau and elastic 

equations. The relevant details including constitutive relations and materials parameters are 

provided in the Supplementary Information. Briefly, the equilibrium spatial distributions of the 

electric field 𝐸𝑖 and out-of-plane ferroelectric polarization component 𝑃3 obey the coupled 


problem consisting of Poisson equation for electric potential 𝜑 and Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire 

(LGD) equation for the 𝑃3:

∆𝜑 =

1

𝜀0𝜀𝑏

𝜕𝑃3
𝜕𝑧 ,        
(2a)

[𝛼(𝑇) − 𝑄𝑖𝑗𝜎𝑖𝑗]𝑃3 + 𝛽𝑃3

3 + 𝛾𝑃3

5 − 𝑔11

𝜕2𝑃3
𝜕𝑧2 − 𝑔44 (

𝜕2𝑃3
𝜕𝑥2 +

𝜕2𝑃3
𝜕𝑦2 ) = 𝜇

𝑑𝑇

𝑑𝑧 + 𝐸3.       (2b)

Here, SPS layer is located at 0 ≤ 𝑧 ≤ ℎ, 𝜀𝑏 is a background permittivity,50 [𝛼𝑇(𝑇(𝑟⃗) − 𝑇𝐶), where 

𝑇𝐶 ≈ 67˚C is the Curie temperature, 𝑄𝑖𝑗 are electrostriction tensor components, 𝜎𝑖𝑗 are elastic 

stresses, and 𝜇 is the coefficient of thermo-polarization effect.51 The coefficient 𝜇 is the diagonal 

component of the second rank tensor 𝜇𝑖𝑗, which values can be estimated as proportional to the 

product of the flexoelectric 𝐹𝑖𝑗 and linear thermal expansion 𝛽𝑖𝑗 coefficients, 𝜇𝑖𝑗 ≅ 𝐹𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙𝛽𝑘𝑙.i

Assuming the dominant role of the thermo-polarization effect over the flexoelectric effect, the 

latter is omitted in this work. The electric potential is 𝑉 at the tip-surface contact area and vanishes

at bottom electrode, The potential 𝜑 obeys the Laplace equation outside the ferroelectric. As such, 

the equations of state for elastic stresses 𝜎𝑖𝑗 and strains 𝑢𝑖𝑗 are:

𝑢𝑖𝑗 = 𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙𝜎𝑘𝑙 + 𝛽𝑖𝑗(𝑇 − 𝑇0) + 𝑄𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙𝑃𝑘𝑃𝑙,      
(3)

Analysis of the SPS polarization and effective piezoresponse for different tip voltages

revealed that starting from |𝑉| > 10 mV we are already in the “strong modulation” regime, i.e.,

such small voltages lead to domain wall motion and nanodomain nucleation under the tip (see 

i The estimate follows from relations 𝛿𝑢𝑖𝑗 ≅ δ𝑇𝛽𝑘𝑙 and 𝛿𝑃𝑖 ≅ 𝐹𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝜕𝛿𝑢𝑘𝑙

𝜕𝑥𝑗 ≅ 𝐹𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙𝛽𝑘𝑙

𝜕δ𝑇
𝜕𝑥𝑗.

Figure 5: The top view of polarization 𝑃3 across 180-degree domain wall (DW) at the SPS surface 
calculated for different tip temperatures 30, 70, 85, 90, and 110oC. Far from the DW boundary 
one can see “up” (red) and “down” (blue) domains. Ambient temperature 𝑇0 =200C, 𝑉 = 0. Note, 
tip-surface contact radius to the film thickness ratio  𝑅/ℎ = 0.09, and 𝜇 =-6.010-5 V/K were 
determined from the best comparison to experimental data.


Figure S1). This happens because the SPS Curie temperature 𝑇𝐶 is close enough to room 

temperature where local heating at e.g., 30˚C transforms the region under the tip very close to the 

paraelectric phase. Furthermore, small voltages cause strong polarization and piezoresponse 

modulation near the paraelectric phase boundary.

The top view of polarization 𝑃3 across a 180-degree domain wall (DW) at the SPS surface 

was calculated for different tip temperatures 30, 70, 85, 90, and 110˚C (Figure 5a-e, respectively)

Figure 6: Surface polarization 𝑃3 (a, c) and effective piezoresponse 𝑑33

𝑒𝑓𝑓 (b, d) under the tip apex 

calculated versus the tip temperature 𝑇𝑑 for uniform heating (a, b) and local heating (c, d). The tip 

is located very far from the domain walls. Different directions of the spontaneous polarization 𝑃𝑆

correspond to “up” (red curves) and “down” (blue curves) domains. For plots (c, d) the ambient 

temperature 𝑇0 =200C. The tip voltage 𝑉 is either zero or very small (see legends at the plots). 

Solid and dashed curves in the plots (b) and (d) are calculated in the LGD model without pinning 

and allowing for the “rigid” pinning, respectively. 


with ambient temperature 𝑇0 = 20˚C. Note, far from the DW boundary one can see “up” (red) and 

“down” (blue) domains (see Supplementary Information for further details). Here, the heated and 

biased tip is placed on the domain wall resulting in clear temperature-induced domain wall 

broadening (Figure 5, compare the DW width from the left to right) similar to the experimental 

observations in Figure 4h.

To provide numerical insight into the materials responses, surface polarizations 𝑃3 and 

effective piezoresponses 𝑑33

𝑒𝑓𝑓 under the tip apex were calculated versus the tip temperature 𝑇𝑑 for 

uniform (Figure 6a-b) and local heating (Figure 6c-d) using the LGD model. Moreover, the 

different directions of spontaneous polarization 𝑃𝑆 correspond to “up” (red curves) and “down” 

(blue curves) domains, where the tip voltage 𝑉 is either zero or very small (3mV). Here, the tip 

is located far from the domain wall. The effective piezoresponse under uniform heating is shown 

in Figure 6b with and without pinning (dashed and solid curves, respectively). Without pinning, 

the effective piezoresponses are non-monotonic functions of temperature and possess a sharp 

maximum at approximately 60˚C (slightly less than the bulk Curie temperature), which is

associated with the increase of dielectric susceptibility near the apparent paraelectric transition at 

𝑇𝐶. Importantly, without pinning, the domain walls move at infinitely small tip voltages with non-

monotonic growth near Tc originating from the maxima of dielectric permittivity. In contrast, the 

dashed curves in Figure 6b are calculated allowing for “rigid” pinning assuming the domain wall 

cannot move at voltages smaller than the threshold. In this approximation, the signal monotonically 

decreases with temperature resembling the polarization behavior shown in Figure 6a. Specifically, 

the PFM response in this case is proportional to the electrostriction terms in Eq.(3) linearized with 

respect to electric field, that gives the combination of piezoelectric tensor components, 𝑑𝑖𝑗𝑚 =

2𝑄𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙𝑃𝑘

𝑆𝜀𝑙𝑚. The latter are in turn proportional to the spontaneous polarization 𝑃𝑘

𝑆 and dielectric 

permittivity 𝜀𝑙𝑚. Since the rigid pinning prevents the local increase of the permittivity near the 

wall, PFM response curves are proportional to the spontaneous polarization shown in Figure 6a.

In comparison, under local heating, the spontaneous polarization disappears under the tip 

for the tip temperatures 𝑇𝑑 > 𝑇𝑐𝑟, due to the local transition to a paraelectric phase (see Figure 6c). 

Importantly, the temperature 𝑇𝑐𝑟 is approximately 110oC, however some thermo-induced 

polarization remains. Here, the difference between “up” and “down” domains originates from the 


thermo-polarization effect, mathematically expressed by the term 𝜇

𝑑𝑇

𝑑𝑧 in LGD equations for 

polarization (see Appendix A for details). 

The effective piezoresponse under local heating with and without pinning are shown in 

Figure 6d. In the unpinned case (solid lines), similar to uniform heating, the effective 

piezoresponses are non-monotonic functions of temperature and reveal a maximum at 90˚C 

associated with the increase in dielectric susceptibility near the apparent paraelectric transition. 

However, in the rigidly pinned case (dashed lines), the effective piezoresponses monotonically 

decrease with temperature resembling the polarization behavior shown in Figure 6c. Note, the local 

piezoresponse curves were calculated from the displacement profiles for very small voltages 𝑉~ ±

1 mV, using the expression of a symmetrized derivative 𝑑33

𝑒𝑓𝑓 ≈

𝑈3(𝑉)−𝑈3(−𝑉)

2𝑉
. The small voltages 

and symmetrization minimize the effect of possible domain nucleation in applied E-field. In 

essence, the modeled enhanced response in both heating geometries in the unpinned case 

qualitatively match the observed response near the domain walls (Figure 3), suggesting the 

observed enhanced response is due to a lower degree of pinning near the domain walls. 

Accordingly, next we investigate the thermally induced responses near the domain wall. 

As such, the surface polarization, displacement profiles and effective piezoresponse across the 

straight 180-degree domain wall (DW) in thick SPS are shown in Figure 7a-c, respectively. Here, 

local heating leads to temperature-induced domain wall broadening (compare blue, green and red 

curves in Figure 7a) and further shape changes (see teal and violet curves in Figure 7a), similar to 

Figure 5 and the observed response if Figure 4h. It is seen that the domain wall broadens 

monotonically for 𝑇𝑑 < 𝑇𝑐𝑟~90oC, and at 𝑇𝑑 > Δ𝑇𝑐𝑟 where the paraelectric region appears under 

the tip (compare the violet curve with the others). Corresponding profiles of the surface 

displacement are shown in Figure 7b, where the principal changes in the profile shape happens at 

lower temperatures, at 𝑇𝑑 >50oC (compare the teal and violet curves with the others). The local

effective piezoresponse curves were calculated from the displacement profiles for very small 

voltages 𝑉~ ± 1 mV, using the expression of a symmetrized derivative 𝑑33

𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝑥, 𝑉) ≈

𝑈3(𝑥,𝑉)−𝑈3(𝑥,−𝑉)

2𝑉
to minimize the effect of possible domain nucleation and/or DW motion in applied

E-field, similar to before. The DW motion starts in very small E-fields, since we use LGD-based 

FEM without pinning effects. The local piezoresponse curves are shown in Figure 7c. It is seen 

from the plot that local heating drastically changes the piezoresponse profiles, since pronounced 


maximum and minimum appear near the different sides of the DW. The entire profile is 

antisymmetric with respect to the DW plane, and the paraelectric “hole burning” (violet curves) 

exists for both straight and curved walls. 

Figure 7: Polarization 𝑃3 (a, d), vertical displacement 𝑈3 (b, e) and effective piezoresponse 𝑑33

𝑒𝑓𝑓

(c, f) profiles of the SPS surface across the straight 180-degree domain walls (a-c) and for the 

homogeneously polarized SPS surface (d-f) calculated for different tip temperatures 30 (blue 

curves), 70 (green curves), 85 (red curves), 90 (teal curves), and 110 oC (violet curves). Ambient 

temperature 𝑇0 =200C. The tip voltage 𝑉 is either zero or very small (see legends at the plots). 


Lastly for comparison, we identify the surface polarization, displacement profiles and 

effective piezoresponse of thick homogeneously polarized SPS as shown in Figure 7d-f,

respectively. Local heating leads to the temperature-induced decrease of the spontaneous 

polarization (compare different curves in Figure 7d), but its disappearance is expected at 

temperatures higher than 110oC (see violet curves in Figure 7d). Corresponding profiles of the 

surface displacement, shown in Figure 7e, reveal that the principal changes in the profile shape 

happens much earlier, at Δ𝑇 >70 K (compare the teal and violet curves with the others). The local 

piezoresponse curves, shown in Figure 7f, illustrate that the local heating drastically changes the 

piezo-response profiles where a pronounced maximum appears under the heated tip. Note, the 

entire profile is symmetric with respect to the tip axis.

To summarize, here we report the experimental realization of the temperature-assisted

piezoresponse force microscopy. In this method, the local electromechanical response is measured 

as a function of tip temperature, providing insight into the local temperature-induced polarization 

dynamics and phase transitions associated with changes in the polar behavior. For SPS, we 

discover temperature-induced broadening and effective transition temperature lowering at the 

domain wall. Moreover, we observe distinctively different phase transition behavior between up 

and down polarized domains, suggesting domain dependent Curie temperatures. Intriguingly, both 

tPFM and uniform heating studies suggest the presence of weak (less then 10% of RT value) 

constant polarization above the (nominal) bulk phase transition associated with the preexisting 

domains where the polarization is zero at the preexistent domain walls. While we tentatively 

identify this behavior with surface chemical pinning, it is clearly a subject for further 

investigations. 

Overall, the tPFM can be broadly used for the analysis of thermal phase transitions in 

materials exhibiting local electromechanical responses. This includes classical ferroelectric 

materials, but also ionic materials such as those used in energy and information technologies, in 

which electromechanical response is associated with electrochemical phenomena in the tip-surface 

junction.52-55 Similarly, this method can be extended to probing electrostatic responses associated 

with surface charging, directly related to the charge injection and surface electrochemistry of 

materials. As such, it provides a new and powerful venue for the exploration of phase transitions,

and bulk and surface electrochemistry on the nanoscale. 


METHODS

Laser Assisted Thermal Band Excitation Piezoresponse Force Microscopy

Laser assisted tPFM measurements were deployed via an Oxford Instruments Asylum Research 

Cypher atomic force microscope equipped with a “BlueTherm”, 40 mW laser diode. All PFM 

experiments used Budget Sensor Multi75E-G Cr/Pt coated AFM probes (~3 N/m). Band excitation 

PFM was collected using an AC voltage of 1V, while thermal spectroscopy was collected using 

laser voltages ranging from 0V-4.75V at 1Hz cycling frequency. All measurements were 

performed in ambient conditions in standard humid conditions (~20-50%). 

MODELING

Finite Element Modeling

Finite Element Modeling was done in COMSOL@MultiPhysics software, using electrostatics, 

solid mechanics, and general math (PDE toolbox) modules. A portion of results were analyzed and 

visualized in Mathematica 12.2 (https://www.wolfram.com/mathematica)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This effort (K.K., S.V.K.), including the data analysis and interpretation, was supported as part of 

the center for 3D Ferroelectric Microelectronics (3DFeM), an Energy Frontier Research Center 

funded by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences under 

Award Number DE-SC0021118. The PFM experiments were performed and partially supported 

(S.J., P.M.) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory’s Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences 

(CNMS), a U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science User Facility. Theory (A.N.M.) was 

supported by the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine (the Target Program of Basic Research 

of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine "Prospective basic research and innovative 

development of nanomaterials and nanotechnologies for 2020 - 2024", Project № 1/20-Н, state 

registration number: 0120U102306) and received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 

2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 

778070.

DATA AVAILABILITY

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 

reasonable request.


References

1.
Catalan, G.;  Seidel, J.;  Ramesh, R.; Scott, J. F., Domain wall nanoelectronics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 

2012, 84 (1), 119-156.
2.
Seidel, J.;  Martin, L. W.;  He, Q.;  Zhan, Q.;  Chu, Y. H.;  Rother, A.;  Hawkridge, M. E.;  

Maksymovych, P.;  Yu, P.;  Gajek, M.;  Balke, N.;  Kalinin, S. V.;  Gemming, S.;  Wang, F.;  Catalan, G.;  
Scott, J. F.;  Spaldin, N. A.;  Orenstein, J.; Ramesh, R., Conduction at domain walls in oxide multiferroics. 
Nat. Mater. 2009, 8 (3), 229-234.
3.
Eliseev, E. A.;  Morozovska, A. N.;  Svechnikov, G. S.;  Maksymovych, P.; Kalinin, S. V., Domain 

wall conduction in multiaxial ferroelectrics. Phys. Rev. B 2012, 85 (4), 045312.
4.
Vasudevan, R. K.;  Wu, W. D.;  Guest, J. R.;  Baddorf, A. P.;  Morozovska, A. N.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  

Balke, N.;  Nagarajan, V.;  Maksymovych, P.; Kalinin, S. V., Domain Wall Conduction and Polarization-
Mediated Transport in Ferroelectrics. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23 (20), 2592-2616.
5.
Evans, D. M.;  Garcia, V.;  Meier, D.; Bibes, M., Domains and domain walls in multiferroics. J. 

Taibah Univ. Med. Soc. 2020, 5 (9), 23.
6.
Guyonnet, J.;  Gaponenko, I.;  Gariglio, S.; Paruch, P., Conduction at Domain Walls in Insulating 

Pb(Zr0.2Ti0.8)O3 Thin Films. Adv. Mater. 2011, 23 (45), 5377-+.
7.
Farokhipoor, S.; Noheda, B., Conduction through 71 degrees DomainWalls in BiFeO(3) Thin 

Films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107 (12).
8.
Wu, W. D.;  Horibe, Y.;  Lee, N.;  Cheong, S. W.; Guest, J. R., Conduction of Topologically 

Protected Charged Ferroelectric Domain Walls. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108 (6), 077203.
9.
Maksymovych, P.;  Morozovska, A. N.;  Yu, P.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Chu, Y. H.;  Ramesh, R.;  Baddorf, A. 

P.; Kalinin, S. V., Tunable Metallic Conductance in Ferroelectric Nanodomains. Nano Lett. 2012, 12 (1), 
209-213.
10.
Gruverman, S. V. K. a. A., Scanning Probe Microscopy of Functional Materials: Nanoscale 

Imaging and Spectroscopy. Springer: New York, NY, 2011.
11.
Bonnell, D. A.;  Kalinin, S. V.;  Kholkin, A. L.; Gruverman, A., Piezoresponse Force Microscopy: A 

Window into Electromechanical Behavior at the Nanoscale. MRS Bull. 2009, 34 (9), 648-657.
12.
Aravind, V. R.;  Morozovska, A. N.;  Bhattacharyya, S.; Lee, D.;  Jesse, S.;  Grinberg, I.;  Li, Y. L.;  

Choudhury, S.;  Wu, P.;  Seal, K.;  Rappe, A. M.;  Svechnikov, S. V.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Phillpot, S. R.;  Chen, L. 
Q.;  Gopalan, V.; Kalinin, S. V., Correlated polarization switching in the proximity of a 180 degrees 
domain wall. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 82 (2).
13.
Gruverman, A.;  Auciello, O.;  Ramesh, R.; Tokumoto, H., Scanning force microscopy of domain 

structure in ferroelectric thin films: imaging and control. Nanotechnology 1997, 8, A38-A43.
14.
Pertsev, N. A.;  Petraru, A.;  Kohlstedt, H.;  Waser, R.;  Bdikin, I. K.;  Kiselev, D.; Kholkin, A. L., 

Dynamics of ferroelectric nanodomains in BaTiO(3) epitaxial thin films via piezoresponse force 
microscopy. Nanotechnology 2008, 19 (37).
15.
Balke, N.;  Winchester, B.;  Ren, W.;  Chu, Y. H.;  Morozovska, A. N.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Huijben, M.;  

Vasudevan, R. K.;  Maksymovych, P.;  Britson, J.;  Jesse, S.;  Kornev, I.;  Ramesh, R.;  Bellaiche, L.;  Chen, L. 
Q.; Kalinin, S. V., Enhanced electric conductivity at ferroelectric vortex cores in BiFeO(3). Nat. Phys. 
2012, 8 (1), 81-88.
16.
Jia, C. L.;  Nagarajan, V.;  He, J. Q.;  Houben, L.;  Zhao, T.;  Ramesh, R.;  Urban, K.; Waser, R., Unit-

cell scale mapping of ferroelectricity and tetragonality in epitaxial ultrathin ferroelectric films. Nat. 
Mater. 2007, 6 (1), 64-69.
17.
Jia, C. L.;  Mi, S. B.;  Faley, M.;  Poppe, U.;  Schubert, J.; Urban, K., Oxygen octahedron 

reconstruction in the SrTiO(3)/LaAlO(3) heterointerfaces investigated using aberration-corrected 
ultrahigh-resolution transmission electron microscopy. Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79 (8).


18.
Chisholm, M. F.;  Luo, W. D.;  Oxley, M. P.;  Pantelides, S. T.; Lee, H. N., Atomic-Scale 

Compensation Phenomena at Polar Interfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105 (19).
19.
Borisevich, A.;  Ovchinnikov, O. S.;  Chang, H. J.;  Oxley, M. P.; Yu, P.;  Seidel, J.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  

Morozovska, A. N.;  Ramesh, R.;  Pennycook, S. J.; Kalinin, S. V., Mapping Octahedral Tilts and 
Polarization Across a Domain Wall in BiFeO(3) from Z-Contrast Scanning Transmission Electron 
Microscopy Image Atomic Column Shape Analysis. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (10), 6071-6079.
20.
Borisevich, A. Y.;  Morozovska, A. N.;  Kim, Y. M.;  Leonard, D.;  Oxley, M. P.;  Biegalski, M. D.;  

Eliseev, E. A.; Kalinin, S. V., Exploring Mesoscopic Physics of Vacancy-Ordered Systems through Atomic 
Scale Observations of Topological Defects. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109 (6).
21.
Nelson, C. T.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Zhang, X. H.;  Ziatdinov, M.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Takeuchi, I.;  

Morozovska, A. N.; Kalinin, S. V., Exploring physics of ferroelectric domain walls via Bayesian analysis of 
atomically resolved STEM data. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 (1), 12.
22.
Goncalves-Ferreira, L.;  Redfern, S. A. T.;  Atacho, E.; Salje, E. K. H., The intrinsic elasticity of twin 

walls: Ferrielectric twin walls in ferroelastic CaTiO(3). Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94 (8).
23.
Salje, E. K. H., Multiferroic Domain Boundaries as Active Memory Devices: Trajectories Towards 

Domain Boundary Engineering. Chemphyschem 2010, 11 (5), 940-950.
24.
Kim, Y. M.;  Morozovska, A.;  Eliseev, E.;  Oxley, M. P.;  Mishra, R.;  Selbach, S. M.;  Grande, T.;  

Pantelides, S. T.;  Kalinin, S. V.; Borisevich, A. Y., Direct observation of ferroelectric field effect and 
vacancy-controlled screening at the BiFeO3/LaxSr1-xMnO3 interface. Nat. Mater. 2014, 13 (11), 1019-
1025.
25.
Morozovska, A. N.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Maksymovych, P.;  Kalinin, S. V.; Eliseev, E. A., Anisotropic 

conductivity of uncharged domain walls in BiFeO3. Phys. Rev. B 2012, 86 (8).
26.
Daraktchiev, M.;  Catalan, G.; Scott, J. F., Landau theory of domain wall magnetoelectricity. Phys. 

Rev. B 2010, 81 (22).
27.
Salje, E. K. H., Ferroelasticity. Contemporary Physics 2000, 41 (2), 79-91.

28.
Aird, A.; Salje, E. K. H., Enhanced reactivity of domain walls in WO3 with sodium. Eur. Phys. J. B 

2000, 15 (2), 205-210.
29.
Borisevich, A. Y.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Morozovska, A. N.;  Cheng, C. J.;  Lin, J. Y.;  Chu, Y. H.;  Kan, D.;  

Takeuchi, I.;  Nagarajan, V.; Kalinin, S. V., Atomic-scale evolution of modulated phases at the 
ferroelectric-antiferroelectric morphotropic phase boundary controlled by flexoelectric interaction. Nat. 
Commun. 2012, 3.
30.
Morozovska, A. N.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Glinchuk, M. D.;  Chen, L. Q.; Gopalan, V., Interfacial 

polarization and pyroelectricity in antiferrodistortive structures induced by a flexoelectric effect and 
rotostriction. Phys. Rev. B 2012, 85 (9), 094107.
31.
Morozovska, A. N.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Tagantsev, A. K.;  Bravina, S. L.;  Chen, L. Q.; Kalinin, S. V., 

Thermodynamics of electromechanically coupled mixed ionic-electronic conductors: Deformation 
potential, Vegard strains, and flexoelectric effect. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 83 (19).
32.
Goncalves-Ferreira, L.;  Redfern, S. A. T.;  Artacho, E.;  Salje, E.; Lee, W. T., Trapping of oxygen 

vacancies in the twin walls of perovskite. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 81 (2).
33.
Lee, W. T.;  Salje, E. K. H.; Bismayer, U., Ionic transport in twin domain walls. Ferroelectrics 2004,

303, 601-605.
34.
Seidel, J.;  Maksymovych, P.;  Batra, Y.;  Katan, A.;  Yang, S. Y.;  He, Q.;  Baddorf, A. P.;  Kalinin, S. 

V.;  Yang, C. H.;  Yang, J. C.;  Chu, Y. H.;  Salje, E. K. H.;  Wormeester, H.; Salmeron, M.; Ramesh, R., 
Domain Wall Conductivity in La-Doped BiFeO(3). Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105 (19).
35.
Kalinin, S. V.; Bonnell, D. A., Characterization of ferroelectric BaTiO3 (100) surfaces by variable 

temperature scanning surface potential microscopy and piezoresponse imaging. In Ferroelectric Thin 
Films Viii, Schwartz, R. W.;  McIntyre, P. C.;  Miyasaka, Y.;  Summerfelt, S. R.; Wouters, D., Eds. 2000; Vol. 
596, pp 327-332.


36.
Kalinin, S. V.; Bonnell, D. A., Effect of phase transition on the surface potential of the BaTiO3 

(100) surface by variable temperature scanning surface potential microscopy. J. Appl. Phys. 2000, 87 (8), 
3950-3957.
37.
Kalinin, S. V.;  Johnson, C. Y.; Bonnell, D. A., Domain polarity and temperature induced potential 

inversion on the BaTiO3(100) surface. J. Appl. Phys. 2002, 91 (6), 3816-3823.
38.
Likodimos, V.;  Labardi, M.;  Orlik, X. K.;  Pardi, L.;  Allegrini, M.;  Emonin, S.; Marti, O., Thermally 

activated ferroelectric domain growth due to random defects. Phys. Rev. B 2001, 63 (6).
39.
Likodimos, V.;  Labardi, M.; Allegrini, M., Domain pattern formation and kinetics on ferroelectric 

surfaces under thermal cycling using scanning force microscopy. Phys. Rev. B 2002, 66 (2).
40.
Ying, C. Y. J.;  Daniell, G. J.;  Steigerwald, H.;  Soergel, E.; Mailis, S., Pyroelectric field assisted ion 

migration induced by ultraviolet laser irradiation and its impact on ferroelectric domain inversion in 
lithium niobate crystals. J. Appl. Phys. 2013, 114 (8), 15.
41.
Haertle, D.;  Caimi, G.;  Haldi, A.;  Montemezzani, G.;  Gunter, P.;  Grabar, A. A.;  Stoika, I. M.; 

Vysochanskii, Y. M., Electro-optical properties of Sn2P2S6. Opt Commun 2003, 215 (4-6), 333-343.
42.
Jesse, S.; Kalinin, S. V., Principal component and spatial correlation analysis of spectroscopic-

imaging data in scanning probe microscopy. Nanotechnology 2009, 20 (8), 085714.
43.
Bonnet, N., Multivariate statistical methods for the analysis of microscope image series: 

applications in materials science. J. Microsc.-Oxf. 1998, 190, 2-18.
44.
Bosman, M.;  Watanabe, M.;  Alexander, D. T. L.; Keast, V. J., Mapping chemical and bonding 

information using multivariate analysis of electron energy-loss spectrum images. Ultramicroscopy 2006,
106 (11-12), 1024-1032.
45.
Kannan, R.;  Ievlev, A. V.;  Laanait, N.;  Ziatdinov, M. A.;  Vasudevan, R. K.;  Jesse, S.; Kalinin, S. V., 

Deep data analysis via physically constrained linear unmixing: universal framework, domain examples, 
and a community-wide platform. Adv. Struct. Chem. Imag. 2018, 4, 20.
46.
Yankovich, A. B.;  Zhang, C. Y.;  Oh, A.;  Slater, T. J. A.;  Azough, F.;  Freer, R.;  Haigh, S. J.;  Willett, 

R.; Voyles, P. M., Non-rigid registration and non-local principle component analysis to improve electron 
microscopy spectrum images. Nanotechnology 2016, 27 (36), 14.
47.
Stefani, C.;  Ponet, L.;  Shapovalov, K.;  Chen, P.;  Langenberg, E.;  Schlom, D. G.;  Artyukhin, S.;  

Stengel, M.;  Domingo, N.; Catalan, G., Mechanical Softness of Ferroelectric 180 degrees Domain Walls. 
Phys Rev X 2020, 10 (4).
48.
Morozovska, A. N.;  Eliseev, E. A.; Kalinin, S. V., The piezoresponse force microscopy of surface 

layers and thin films: Effective response and resolution function. Journal of Applied Physics 2007, 102
(7).
49.
Morozovska, A. N.;  Eliseev, E. A.;  Svechnikov, G. S.;  Gopalan, V.; Kalinin, S. V., Effect of the 

intrinsic width on the piezoelectric force microscopy of a single ferroelectric domain wall. Journal of 
Applied Physics 2008, 103 (12).
50.
Tagantsev, A. K.; Gerra, G., Interface-induced phenomena in polarization response of 

ferroelectric thin films. Journal of Applied Physics 2006, 100 (5).
51.
Gurevich, V. L.; Tagantsev, A. K., Theory for the Thermopolarization Effect in Dielectrics Having a 

Center of Inversion. Jetp Lett+ 1982, 35 (3), 128-130.
52.
Morozovska, A. N.;  Eliseev, E. A.; Kalinin, S. V., Electromechanical probing of ionic currents in 

energy storage materials. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 96 (22).
53.
Balke, N.;  Jesse, S.;  Kim, Y.;  Adamczyk, L.;  Ivanov, I. N.; Dudney, N. J.; Kalinin, S. V., Decoupling 

Electrochemical Reaction and Diffusion Processes in Ionically-Conductive Solids on the Nanometer Scale. 
ACS Nano 2010, 4 (12), 7349-7357.
54.
Kalinin, S.;  Kumar, A.;  Balke, N.;  McCorkle, M.;  Guo, S. L.;  Arruda, T.; Jesse, S., ESM of Ionic 

and Electrochemical Phenomena on the Nanoscale. Advanced Materials & Processes 2011, 169 (11), 30-
34.


55.
Proksch, R., Electrochemical strain microscopy of silica glasses. J. Appl. Phys. 2014, 116 (6).


