 
1

Superconductor relaxation - A must to be integrated into 

stability calculations 

 

Harald Reiss 

Department of Physics 

University of Wuerzburg, Am Hubland, D-97074 Wuerzburg, FRG 

harald.reiss@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de 

 

Abstract 
 
A superconductor is stable if it does not quench. Quench is a short-time 
physics problem. For its deeper understanding of, and how to avoid 
quench, the physics behind stability has to be analysed. A previously 
suggested dynamic relaxation model is re-considered and applied to 
YBaCuO 
123 
and 
BSCCO 
2223 
high-temperature, 
thin 
film 

superconductors. Parallel to this investigation, an unconventional 
approach using an electrical resistance network (a cell model) is applied 
to introduce a method how to estimate the extent by which, in resistance 
measurements, 
exact 
determination 
of 
critical 
temperature 
of 

superconductors is possible. This resistive cell model, when considering 
its numerical convergence behaviour, in a side result may provide an 
alternative explanation of (at least a contribution to) bending of resistivity 
vs. temperature curves, and perhaps also an alternative to standard 
explanations of the thermal fluctuations impact on these curves. 
 
The dynamic relaxation and the resistance models provide a parenthesis 
that correlates, in terms of the Ginzburg-Landau order parameter, (i) 
solution of superconductor stability problem (the main objective of this 
paper), with tentative explanation of (ii) bending of the resistivity curves 
near critical temperature and (iii) with predictions from thermal 
fluctuations.  
  
 
Keywords 
 
Superconductor phase transition; relaxation; critical temperature; 
resistive cell model; multi-component heat transfer, convergence 
 
 
 
 
 


 
2

 
1 
Superconductor stability 

 
A superconductor is stable if it does not quench. Quench can be avoided 

by application of stability models to design, manufacture, handling and 

operation of superconductors. 

 

Traditional stability models are described in [1 - 3]. With only few 

exceptions, stationary states are standard conditions in traditional, 

stationary stability calculations.  

 

Quench is a short-time physics problem. As extension of standard 

stability calculations, numerical methods have been suggested by the 

present author [4 - 6]. The results improve reliability of stability 

predictions by local results of temperature fields and critical and transport 

current density, especially in case of situations close to phase transition. 

But, and this is the main subject of this paper, superconductor stability 

against quench, with numerical simulations, still is not at its end. A new 

holistic, multi-physics approach is needed to treat the stability problem 

adequately. It requests integration of the relaxation problem into the 

stability analysis. 

  

A recently suggested "microscopic stability model" [7] has provided the 

core of the numerical stability calculations (this model essentially is a 

relaxation model, see later). Subsequent stability papers have refined 

this model, from filaments to thin film investigations [8]. 

 

Stability analysis needs taking into account relaxation of the 

superconductor after disturbances. The property "microscopic" means 

that calculation of relaxation time of the electron system, after a 


 
3

disturbance, is performed by step by step particle-particle selections 

(single electrons as candidates for pair re-organisation). In the present 

paper, the model is integrated into (is a correction to) the proper stability 

calculations that as previously are performed numerically to yield 

temperature vs. time excursion; these are provided by extensive Finite 

Element (FE) simulations. From the FE results, the relaxation model 

yields corresponding, final equilibrium temperatures (the temperature of 

the state when relaxation is completed). The question is after which 

experimental or simulation time relaxation will be accomplished. 

 

As a general rule, thermal equilibrium is obtained in a superconductor 

substance when it fulfils the Meissner effect (a state that is independent 

of the history, i. e. regardless whether it is obtained under field or zero 

field cooling conditions). This is accounted for in the numerical 

calculations in each of the very large number of single FE elements. 

 

Parallel to this investigation, an unconventional approach using an 

electrical resistance network (a cell model) is applied to introduce a 

method how to estimate the extent by which, in resistance 

measurements, 
exact 
determination 
of 
critical 
temperature 
of 

superconductors is possible. 

 

When the stability model is integrated into the cell model, it suggests, as 

a side result, postulation of a non-local, transition boundary layer, 

expressed 
as 
a 
temperature 
uncertainty, 
ϑTρ, 
around 
critical 

temperature. 
Within 
ϑTρ, 
the 
resistivity 
curve, 
under 
heat-up, 

continuously approaches the normal conduction value. Curved resistivity 

vs. temperature, instead of a sharp jump, is frequently observed in 

experiments. 


 
4

 

As another side result, this study may also, though weakly, contribute an 

alternative to predictions of the thermal fluctuations problem. More 

importantly, the transition boundary layer, ϑTρ, questions existence of a 

sharp, uniquely defined critical temperature but allows a sharp estimate 

of its uncertainty when it is obtained from resistance measurements. 

 

The dynamic relaxation model is a parenthesis that correlates, in terms 

of the Ginzburg-Landau order parameter, the solution of superconductor 

stability problem (the main objective of this paper) with side results of this 

study (a tentative explanation of bending of the resistivity curves near 

critical temperature and an alternative to standard assumptions of 

thermal fluctuations). 

  

 2 
Relaxation 

The literature reports magnetic relaxation measurements to determine 

pinning potentials, like in Nb3Sn, in the BSCCO family and in MgB2/Fe 

superconductors. In contrast to these studies, focus of the stability model 

[7] is on relaxation of the electron system from disturbances like transient 

local heat sources, usually the origin of a quench.  

 

We do not address statistical electron pair decay and recombination in 

dynamical equilibrium. These relaxations, at any temperature 0 ≤ T < 

TCrit, exist without disturbances. Instead, the paper is focused on electron 

pair decay and re-condensation, after temporal, local disturbances, of the 

decay products to electron pairs. 

  

A second question is whether relaxation rates after disturbances, 

possibly under thermal run-away, are large enough to re-organize 


 
5

superconductor stability to obtain a new thermodynamic equilibrium, as 

the sole state by which zero-loss current transport is possible. 

 

Superconductor stability against quench thus is an aspect of the 

relaxation problem.   

 

Analysis of relaxation requests calculation of relaxation time and 

relaxation rates. Critical current density after a disturbance neither is 

uniform in the conductor cross section nor is it constant in time, compare 

[4 - 6]. Accordingly, relaxation time and relaxation rate, too, would not be 

uniform and not be constant in time, if temperature distribution is not 

uniform but highly diversified and if it is transient, a situation that 

invariably happens after local disturbances. 

   

2.1 
 A recapitulation 

Excitations (thermal, magnetic, or simply from transport current 

exceeding critical current density, the flux flow state) disturb dynamic 

equilibrium between 

 

(i) decay of electron pairs and 

(ii) single electron (and quasi-particle) recombination rates. 

  

In the equilibrium state, both decay and recombination rates are equal. In 

a vivid description, the meaning of quasi-particles is explained by R. D. 

Mattuck (see Appendix, after Eq. 11). 

 

In the literature, relaxation of the superconductor electron system from 

an excited state to a new dynamic equilibrium, is expected to follow an 

exponential decay law, exp(-t/τ), of the density, c(x,t), of excited electron 


 
6

states, by recombination to electron pairs. The relaxation time, τ, usually 

is considered as constant. 

  

But relaxation cannot be completed instantaneously. It is more realistic to 

calculate relaxation time as a sensitively time-dependent quantity, τ = 

τ[T(t)], see later. This step has been realized in the relaxation model [7], 

by a multi-physics approach using analogies between relaxation in 

superconductors with re-organisation processes in nuclear and multi-

particle physics. 

 

The question is not whether the decay products might be correlated or 

uncorrelated (in the uncorrelated case they might not find partners in the 

strict BSC sense: no electron with momentum -k' and spin down, no 

electron with momentum -k'' and spin up might be available [27], p. 178 - 

180). Calculations of the relaxation time, as performed in [7], primarily 

need distances over which correlations between appropriate partners 

can be initiated, under observation of selection rules.  

 

In analogy to Sects. 2 to 5 of [7], we consider, after a disturbance, the 

decay of the concentration, c(x,t), of decay products as   

 

dc(x,t)/dt = (∂c(x,t)/∂x) (∂x/∂t) + ∂c/∂t 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 

 

with two contributions: “decay in space” = (∂c(x,t)/∂x) (∂x/∂t) and “decay 

in time” = ∂c(x,t)/∂t.  

 

Because of propagation of the thermal wave initiated by a disturbance, 

decay in space means that the increased concentration, c(x’,t1 > t0), 

resulting from a disturbance occurring at any arbitrary position, x’, of 


 
7

excited states, is distributed by a transport process to positions x ≠ x’. A 

transport mechanism that particularly simply can be described is 

diffusion, but it has to be shown that diffusion, while it is a simply 

described transport mechanism, is the realistic assumption, see later 

(Appendix).    

 

Decay in time means that the disturbed, total wave function, ψ(x,t > t0), 

that describes all electron states and decay products, returns to its 

equilibrium shape by recombination processes at al co-ordinates, x. 

 

The steps "decay in space" and" decay in time" in Eq. (1) have 

extensively been described previously [7] and will not be repeated here. 

The first term of this equation has been shown to be small against the 

second. 

 

Contributions to relaxation time from both items have to be summed up 

to lifetime, τ = tEq, of the total disturbed system until dynamic equilibrium 

of the total electron state is accomplished; time tEq(T) thus is the time 

interval that the system, at all co-ordinates, x, needs to arrive at the new 

equilibrium, at the same temperature, T', that the system attains under a 

disturbance above the smaller T of the preceding step. 

 

Calculation of total lifetime, τ, has to strictly follow selection rules, using 

“Coefficients of fractional parentage” (cfps), a concept applied in atomic 

and nuclear physics, the handling of which has to obey the Pauli 

exclusion principle. 

 

Because of the Pauli principle, calculation of, τ, has to proceed in a step-

wise manner, with calculation of the cfps in each step, at each 


 
8

temperature, T' (a "sequential model”). Calculation of τ, accordingly 

proceeds in a series of temperature steps the individual values of which 

are provided as results from the FE calculations of temperature 

excursions. Calculation of τ is the more complex the larger the 

temperature and, as a consequence, the larger the number of decayed 

electron pairs. Their number and, accordingly, the number of calculations 

steps, depends on the density of electrons at given temperature. The 

number of electron pairs that may result from recombination of single 

electrons to pairs is given by the Ginzburg-Landau order parameter. 

 

In their theory of phase transitions, Ginzburg and Landau postulated 

existence of an order parameter, Ψ, that in an expansion of the free 

energy density, 

 

gS = gN + a(T) │Ψ│2 + 1/2 b(T)│Ψ│4 + ... 
 
 
 
 
(2a) 

 

within the active part of the electrons, determines the number of electron 

pairs available for zero-loss current transport. (for explanation of the 

functions a(T) and b(T) in Eq. (2a), see standard volumes on  

superconductivity, e. g. [9], p 72). Eq. (2a) applies to zero magnetic field. 

In its original formulation, Ψ was assumed as an unspecified physical 

quantity (a complex number) that characterizes the thermodynamic state 

of the superconductor,  

 

Ψ = 0 for T > TCrit, while otherwise Ψ = Ψ(T)  
 
 
 
(2b) 

 

The square │Ψ│2 is identified as the density of electron pairs. In the 

present paper, we consider the ratio 

 


 
9

fS = nS(T)/nS(T=0)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2c) 

 

of the density of electron pairs, nS, to characterize the state of the 

superconductor, at temperature T < TCrit, in relation to its value at T = 0. 

Apart from the constant nS(T=0), fS in Eq. (2c) equals│Ψ│2. The fS fulfil, 

like in the original formulation of the order parameter, the conditions in 

Eq. (2b). 

 

In the following, the ratio fS = nS(T)/nS(T=0) therefore is assigned "the 

order parameter" (it is a direct approach to the state, Ψ, of the 

superconductor by the rather simple ratio fS, Eq. 2c). Complications thus 

do not arise when relaxation time, τ, has to be calculated. This is the 

proper subject of [7], i. e. calculation of relaxation time; in this reference, 

we do not determine wave functions attained by the system at 

intermediate reorganisation steps. 

   

Relaxation does not mean recombination of a strictly limited number of 

single electrons (the decay products from a disturbance) to electron pairs 

but re-organisation of the total electron body, i. e. of all electrons as far 

as they are "available". 

 

Available means: The percentage of electrons, the active ("busy") part, ξ, 

of the total electron body, that thermally can be excited to states located 

in small energy intervals above EF + ΔE and below EF - ΔE and that 

contribute by 

 

(i) electron pairs, in dynamic equilibrium with 

(ii) single electrons 

 


 
10

to thermal and electrical transport and also constitutes the electron 

contribution to total specific heat (and is responsible for the Meissner 

effect). 

 

In the literature, the fraction, ξ, is indicated, for low-TC and high-TC 

superconductors, as roughly 0.1 and 10 per cent of the total electron 

body, respectively. It is not clear the ξ = 10 per cent contribution in high 

temperature superconductors might be very precise, rather it is just a 

rough estimate. 

 

Using ΔE = 60 meV at T = 0, with the classical, BCS T-dependence of 

ΔE and with 2 ΔE(T = 0) = 3.52 kBTCrit and kB the Boltzmann constant, 

according to [10], p. 355, the numerical constant in this relation is 

between 5 and 7 for high temperature superconductors (HTSC) instead 

of 3.52.  With EF = 1 eV from [11] or from ARPES measurements, we 

have, at temperature not very close to TCrit, e. g. ξ(T = 80 K), a value ξ of 

below 1 per cent. With increasing temperature, ξ decreases, since the 

number of electron pairs is successively thinned out. 

 

In view of these uncertainties, we can only perform a sensitivity analysis 

showing the impact by which the ratio, ξ, indicating the active part in 

relation to the total electron body, is reflected by the equilibrium 

temperature excursions (see later, Figure 7c). 

 

2.2 
Modelling alternatives – A critique 

Contrary to the stepwise, cfp-organized procedure [7, 8], an analytic, 

continuum expression for the electron pair density can be found in Eq. 

(8) of [12], with nS(T)/n0 = 1 - (T/TCrit)4 and n0 the total number of (single?) 

electrons at T = 0. 


 
11

 

This expression neglects the dynamic aspects of the relaxation process. 

It does not explicitly integrate the step-wise sequence of a large number 

of 
statistical, 
single 
electron 
or 
quasi-particle 
generation 
and 

recombination processes. Instead, Eq. (8) in [12] implicitly assumes 

simultaneous re-organisation of the decay products to a new, 

recombined set of electron pairs and single particles; it does not consider 

this process as a sequence to restore the whole, active plus inactive 

parts of the total electron body to a new dynamic equilibrium. Note that 

this equation considers the ratio of electron pair density at a temperature, 

T, to the density, n0, of single electrons at T = 0. It is not clear how in [12] 

the density nS(T) was derived from n0. 

  

A correct calculation of  the re-organisation of decay products to electron 

pairs has to include, for each electron, n, that "looks" for (selects) its 

partner, n', to form a pair, the calculation of its own cfps from the 

previous N - 1 completed re-organisations. This means it requests 

expanding the wave function of a new, completed recombination state 

(N) (from the wave functions composed of single particle states) in terms 

of 

 

(j) each of the foregoing expansions of the (N - 1)-states and 

(jj) incorporating the wave function of the new pair (n, n') into the new 

state, N.  

 

Each of the steps (j), (jj), has to observe the Pauli selection rule. Since it 

implicitly assumes simultaneous re-organisation of the decay products, 

the concept suggested in [12] violates this principle.  

 


 
12

Fortunately, both the direct (stepwise, microscopic) method [7]) and, with 

some additional assumptions, the apparently heuristic Eq. (8) in [12], at 

least allows approximate calculation of relaxation rates and relaxation 

time. 

 

Relaxation rates in both concepts [7] and [12] converge to zero when the 

system 
during 
warm-up 
very 
closely 
approaches 
its 
super-

conduction/normal conduction phase transition (see later, Figure 3). 

Relaxation time, as a consequence of decreasing relaxation rate, as is 

shown in [7] and, later, in Figure 11 of [24], Part B, increases the more 

the closer the electron system during warm-up approaches this phase 

transition. 

 

This conclusion contradicts Buckel and Kleiner [13], Chap. 4, p. 262. The 

authors state that in conventional superconductors the probability that an 

unpaired electron finds a suitable partner for recombination to form a 

electron pair decreases under increasing temperature. But the present 

situation, relaxation from disturbances, is strongly different. This can be 

seen as follows (we have to look very carefully onto this situation): 

 

Starting from an original, dynamic equilibrium at a temperature, T, 

followed by a disturbance at this temperature (under continued warm-up 

leading to a temperature T' > T), increasingly more single particles, have 

to recombined to pairs in order to generate, by reorganisation of the total 

electron body, a new dynamic equilibrium at T'. Statistically, more 

"partners" to form a pair become available, simply because more pairs 

decay if temperature increases. This statistical, un-displaced dynamic 

equilibrium, as one step out of a great number of analogue ones, like all 


 
13

others can be obtained only if relaxation has been completed at each of 

the (intermediate) foregoing temperatures, T'. 

 

The increased number, n(T') > n(T), of single electrons within the active 

body that has to be reorganised to pairs, requests a larger number n(T') 

of single electrons (the decay products) to identify partners, n'(T'), under 

observation of the said selection rules (cfps and the Pauli principle), 

which means the whole recombination process takes more time the more 

the system approaches the phase transition. 

 

Another potentially alternative explanation is suggested in the papers by 

Gray et al. [14,15]. But they do not refer to a temperature increase from 

absorption of a radiation pulse or from other thermal disturbances. 

Contrary to the situation described in [7], Gray's papers describe 

injection experiments to create an additional number, Δn, of quasi-

particles, a strongly non-equilibrium state above the "core" (NTotal) of 

bound electrons in the undisturbed superconductor. This model 

apparently has not taken into account the cfp-rule that must be observed 

within 
the 
NTotal(T') 
active 
state. 
Injection 
experiments, 
as a 

consequence, cannot be described by the rigorous, sequential model [7].  

 

The model [7] therefore contradicts [13] (but is not contradicted by this 

reference), because the balance to yield N in [13] is not complete. The 

model [7] also contradicts [14, 15] (but is not contradicted by injection 

experiments) because in [7] additional electrons are not delivered to the 

previous state. 

  

The conclusion from [7] also specifies a note that Annett [9], added on p. 

52 to the left column (and again requests careful inspection). There we 


 
14

have: "The word superconductor is used only to mean a material with a 

definite phase transition and critical temperature." (correction by the 

present author: "definite", here written in Italics, probably means 

"completed"). But critical temperature is a dynamic, equilibrium electron 

state unto which a series of non-equilibrium states may converge when 

no more disturbances, besides statistical equilibrium fluctuations 

between decay of electron pairs and re-condensation of decay products 

to pairs, have to be compensated.   

 

Another item to be explained is determination the spatial structure of 

electron pairs in a superconductor volume. 

 

It is hardly correct to assume, as has been made in [16], that the electron 

pairs occupy a specific superconductor volume in that they fill these 

volumes uniformly (and that magnetic field lines would penetrate this 

volume in-between neighbouring, possibly overlapping electron wave 

functions). 

 

In the present paper, electron pairs are understood as correlations, in a 

correlated Fermi system a statistical concept, they are not solid particles 

that would densely occupy a superconductor volume. Complications (like 

penetration of magnetic field lines, mentioned in [16]) are avoided (there 

are no collisions between field lines and piles of overlapping electron 

pairs), and there are no impacts on centre of mass motion, spin of the 

electron pair or, in particular, variable distance of the two electrons that 

constitute the pair.    

  

A more attractive explanation of the spatial structure of electron pairs, 

directly from BCS-theory, is provided in [17]. 


 
15

 

As mentioned, electron pairs cannot be regarded as minute, materials 

entities (a solid, coherent particle of charge 2e). Instead, they are 

correlations between electrons j and k, with the j and k continuously 

exchanged (replaced by other electrons j' and k' that randomly, but under 

observation of quantum-mechanical selection rules, are identified from a 

very large number (a statistically filled repository within the active 

electron body), of single electrons or quasi-particles. The selection and 

recombination processes, replacements of j and k by j' and k', as 

simulated in [7] all are statistical processes. 

 

Yet the explanation [17] of the spatial structure of electron pairs will 

tentatively be applied in Sect. 3 to derive a "pseudo-porosity" from a cell 

model, a resistive network of the superconductor transport properties, as 

a function of the order parameter (like standard porosity a continuum 

property of a solid or liquid). 

  

In dynamic equilibrium, the porosity separates the number of electron 

pairs from the number of single electron or quasi-particle states (strictly 

speaking, their densities). 

 

Another 
problem 
arises 
with 
respect 
to 
current 
across 
a 

superconductor/normal conductor interface: Can it be described always 

as a "transport process"? Which conditions get electrical current or heat 

flow a "transport" process? This is not very trivial, but the discussion is 

postponed to the Appendix where some general aspects of transport 

processes (electrical and, as a parallel, multi-component, heat transfer 

processes) are discussed.   

 


 
16

3 
Curvature of resistivity vs. temperature 

The literature reports a great number of electrical resistivity, ρEl(T), or of 

conductivity, σEl(T), measurements that yield curves with remarkable 

deviations from the expected, sharp increase of ρEl(T) or of decrease of 

σEl(T) at TCrit. This is schematically illustrated in Figure 1. 

 

We make an attempt to explain, by a two-component, resistive cell 

model, the observed rounding of the transition curves by a correlation 

with variations of the superconductor order parameter (here in the 

approximation suggested in [7], compare Eq. 2a-c of the present paper).     

 

Glover III [18] claims evidence that the observed rounding of σEl(T), the 

"thermal fluctuations problem", in thin samples with short electron mean 

free paths relies on variations of an intrinsic materials property, a "sort of 

fluctuating superconductivity".   

 

The cell model described below does not rely on fluctuations of 

superconductivity (in [18], it is not very clear what is really meant by 

fluctuations against/between what, and to which extent). 

 

The cell model instead relies on calculation of an effective resistivity or 

conductivity of two phases co-existing in parallel, not separated in space, 

in a common superconductor material. The model considers a sole 

(electron) body that according to its temperature separates into two 

thermodynamic, different phases, not into different materials and 

accordingly is not identical to e. g. two-liquid models. 

 

Two-fluid models are well known in standard superfluidity and 

superconductivity literature, in classical fluid dynamics and in nuclear 


 
17

physics where a liquid-drop model (the nucleus imagined as an 

incompressible liquid) serves for calculation of nuclear binding energy. 

  

In contrast to [18], there is, in the present model, no fluctuation of one 

but variable contributions by two different, thermodynamic phases within 

the same material. Under dynamical equilibrium, their contribution to 

effective electrical resistivity relies solely on a function of the order 

parameter (the approximation given in Eq. 2c), that is a unique, strong 

function of temperature. Temperature of course may vary locally, under 

e. g. non-uniform materials properties or from locally different transport to 

critical current density or from locally different magnetic fields. 

 

The two-phase model in the following applies a resistance network. 

Description of the effective resistivity of this network is given in terms of a 

(pseudo-) porosity. This has to be defined clearly. The porosity is solely 

based on the order parameter of the superconductor electron system 

and its temperature dependency. It separates the density of single 

electrons and quasi-particles from the density of electron pairs. 

 

3.1 
Cell model and resistance network 

The Russell cell model [19] is a standard tool for application to two-

component systems to describe their effective materials and transport 

properties. It was originally derived for solely conductive, thermal energy 

transport but applies to also electrical, in general to any conductive 

transport process provided it 

 

(i) is really a "transport" process and, if so,  

(ii) is expressed by a differential formalism (as is done in Fourier's 

differential equation in case of solely conductive heat transfer).  


 
18

 

Network and cell model will be applied first to the region T < TCrit. A 

tentative, but well-explained extension to T > TCrit will be made in Sects. 

4 and 5). 

 

Let kCore denote, in a traditional application of this model, the thermal 

conductivity of spherical "inclusions" completely embedded in a 

continuum (a matrix or "shell"). In a thermal super-insulation, for 

example, this is the vacuum, or a gas of at least a very low residual 

pressure. 

 

In a continuous thermal super-insulation, the inclusions (the "core") in the 

evacuated space are minute, solid particles (powders or fibres; we do not 

consider 
evacuated, 
highly 
reflecting 
multi-foils). 
The 
thermal 

conductivity (if it exists, see again the Appendix, or compare [25, 26]) of 

the surrounding continuum (the "shell", here the vacuum) relies on 

residual gas pressure. If kShell denotes thermal conductivity of the shell, 

the ratio kCore/kShell in thermal super-insulations is very large. 

 

The procedure is applicable to any other continuum, not only to 

evacuated space filled with solid particles. 

 

If porosity, Π, is known, the effective, integral conductivity, k, according 

to the Russell cell model reads 

 

k = kCore [Π2/3 + (kCore/kShell) (1 - Π2/3)]/[Π2/3 - Π + (kCore/kShell) (1 - Π2/3 + Π)]  
(3) 

  

and applies to also resistivity when k is replaced by ρ = 1/k. 

  


 
19

In order to apply the Russell cell model, or any other traditional cell 

model, to also superconductors, the "inclusions" (the core) have to be 

interpreted as being composed of sets of electron pairs, and the "shell" is 

given by the overwhelming number of single electrons  or quasi-particles, 

all of them as decay products arising from disturbances. 

 

To get application of Eq. (3) working also in case of superconductors, we 

have to define the corresponding "pseudo-porosity", Π. 

 

With increasing temperature, the number of "inclusions" (sets of electron 

pairs) goes to zero at the phase transition; the porosity of the total, then 

normal conducting (NC) electron body accordingly approaches Π = 1. 

The electrical resistivity of this state, a finite value, ρEl,NC(T), is obtained 

from experiments.  

 

Electron pair, zero resistivity, ρEl,Core = ρEl,SC(T), cannot successfully be 

applied in Eq. (3). It has to be represented by a finite, non-zero 

resistivity, ρEl,Core > 0. This (pseudo-) resistivity of the superconducting, 

zero-resistive transport channel, if it is a transport process at all (if it 

"exists"), must be smaller, by many orders of magnitude (at least 20), 

than the resistivity of the normal conducting phase, the shell of single 

electrons or quasi-particles (the decay products). 

 

The ratio 20 is not the real problem; instead, it is the "existence" of 

resistivity or conductivity components. This situation shall be explained 

by an analogy of this problem known from multi-component heat transfer. 

There, it is the existence of total thermal conductivity or thermal 

resistivity that is in question. In case any of several heat transfer 

components, like radiation, cannot be described as a conductivity (which 


 
20

may happen in thin, partly transparent films), it is not clear that total heat 

flow could be explained in terms of a total resistivity or conductivity, 

which means they are not given ("might not exist") as quantifiable 

expressions). See again the Appendix for more explanation. 

   

Predictions of the cell model may diverge at very small and very large 

values of the porosity (this is apparently a weak point of all cell models). 

Application of this model to superconductors thus might become critical 

when, under warm-up, the number of electron pairs near TCrit goes to 

zero when, as mentioned, the porosity approaches Π = 1. 

 

In the present case, the resistivity must converge to the (as assumed, 

very small) finite value ρEl,Core if Π → 0. If this is the case, the cell model 

is confirmed to be applicable to the present problem, at least in view of 

this condition. Formally, satisfaction of this and other single conditions 

can easily be checked (here, just by assuming Π = 0 in Eq. 3).  

 

A more complete, general check whether the procedure works correctly 

requests a set 1 to 7 conditions to be fulfilled, see the contribution [20], p. 

Deb 1, and literature cited therein, how to calculate conductivity of 

particle beds. When conductivity is translated into resistivity, and (for 

example, condition 2) ρBed = ρEl,eff → ρEl,Shell(T), for Π = 1, all these 

conditions (with the exception of No. 7 that does not apply), are satisfied 

by the procedure described in the present paper (an Excel sheet). But it 

is necessary, and  has to be controlled, too, that also all elements of a 

numerically generated set of resistivity, ρEl(T), in dependence of 

temperature, not only a single value, converge to the limits given in 

conditions 1 to 6  of  [20], compare Figure 6b. 

 


 
21

For Figure 2b, a finite non-zero resistance originating from weak links 

would request incorporation of another rectangle, but is neglected in this 

presentation (its contribution shall be enclosed in the blue rectangles). In 

continuous thermal super-insulations, weak links result from e. g. contact 

resistances between neighbouring solid particles, in superconductivity, 

weak links may arise from a variety of local resistances, in high-

temperature 
superconductors 
between 
neighbouring 
grains 
(like 

Josephson 
barriers to 
electrical 
transport, contact 
angle 
mis-

orientations).   

 

3.2 
Calculation of the pseudo-porosity 

Porosity in the following has to be explained as a function of the ratios by 

which electrons, in their two conducting phases, contribute to total 

electrical conductivity. Contribution of the phases is solely related to 

temperature dependence of the ratio of particle (electron pair) density at 

temperatures T and T0 (T0 taken as a reference value). At different 

temperature, this ratio, fS(T) = nS(T)/nS(T0), as mentioned approximates 

the Ginzburg-Landau order parameter (strictly speaking, its square),  

 

Using nS for density of electron pairs, and since nS depends  strongly on 

temperature, the fraction 1 - fS needed for derivation of the (pseudo-) 

porosity cannot be constant, which means the pseudo-porosity, too, is a 

function of temperature, Π(T) = 1 - fS(T), and since temperature depends 

on time, T = T(t), under disturbances, also the porosity is a function of 

time during a disturbance.    

 

The number, NCP, of electron pairs in an arbitrarily, small volume, VSC, of 

the superconductor material then is given by 

 


 
22

NCP = fS(T) nS(T0) VSC  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 

 

The distance of two electrons forming an electron pair can be 

approximated roughly by the Pippard coherence length ξ (the range of 

the wave function for relative motion of the electron pair, Blatt [27], p. 

161-162) or (see below), when including its temperature dependency, by 

the length ζ(T) in Eq. (7). In both BSCCO 2223 and YBaCuO 123 

superconductors, ξ amounts to about 10 nm; in NbTi, ξ taken from [13] is 

5.8 nm. 

 

Spatial size of one pair (as mentioned, not a materials volume, not a 

solid particle of charge 2e but simply a correlation between two real 

particles, each of charge 1e), within which correlation of the two 

electrons exists, is dVCP. With the Pippard correlation length, we can 

estimate a corresponding (Pippard) correlation volume, which again 

means: not a materials volume. The total correlation volume, VCP, of all 

electron pairs NCP in the volume VSC, in the rough approximation, then 

results from VCP = NCP dVCP. 

 

In comparison to the average distance of single electrons (in the order of 

0.1 nm), the large (internal) size of a pair covers a very large number of 

electrons, which results in strong overlap of correlation integrals between 

corresponding wave functions of different pairs. 

   

A Cooper pair of size (correlation length) 102 to 103 nm, with atoms of 

size 10-1 nm covers (103)3 to (104)3 electrons which means the correlation 

of each Cooper pair overlaps with "billions and billions of others, very 

different from a Bose gas" [21]. Thus the effective correlation volume (in 


 
23

this probably oversimplified picture), and with M the number of overlaps, 

reads 

 

VCP,eff = (NCP dVCP)/M  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 

 

from which the porosity 

Π = 1 - VCP,eff/VSC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 

 

The number M of overlapping electron pairs cannot be constant but is a 

function of temperature, T. This follows from the temperature 

dependence of the coherence length in the dirty limit, 

 

ζ(T) = 0.85 (ζ0 ℓ)1/2 [TCrit/(TCrit - T)]  
 
 
 
 
 
(7) 

 

see [22], p. 210, with ζ0  the Pippard coherence length (at T near zero) 

and ℓ the mean free path of electrons, respectively. The length ζ(T) can 

be interpreted as the mean 1D dimension of an electron pair. 

 

With increasing T, the length ζ(T) increases, which means, with ς ≈ ℓ, the 

mean distance between two conduction-band electrons (about 0.1 nm), 

and ζ0 the Pippard coherence length, about 100 to 1000 nm, the ratio 

ζ(T)/ς, and accordingly, M, becomes very large. 

 

Eq. (6) of [17], with a square dependence M ~ (EF/ΔE)2 should provide an 

improved estimate of M, instead of simple ratios ζ0/ς applied in [21] and 

ζ0(T)/ς using Eq. (7). 

 

In any case, within one electron pair, there is a very large number of 

other electrons that in turn correlate to electron pairs and overlap within 


 
24

this distance, as schematically indicated in Figures 1 an 4 of [17]. The 

number M of overlaps in YBaCuO 123 within VSC to be used in Eq. (5) 

thus should amount to at least M = 106 to 109, increasing with 

temperature. 

 

Reversely, with increasing T, but decreasing M, VCP,eff would increase 

which means the porosity would become negative provided NCP is 

constant. But with increasing temperature, T → TCrit, NCP decreases, 

which finally (increasing M, decreasing NCP) limits VCP,eff strongly to very 

small values. The porosity thus increases,  Π(T)  → 1, with increasing T, 

and the resistivity ρEl(Π) converges, in a steady transition, to the normal 

conducting value, ρEl(T) → ρEl,NC(T), compare Figures 4, 5 and 6a,b. 

 

But at T very close to TCrit, handling of the procedure collides with 

limitations set to the applicability of Fortran routines or of Excel sheets. 

When declaring real and integer variables as "Real*16", the smallest 

possible deviation that can be simulated, T - TCrit, is 10-16 K. This sets a 

limit to the porosity obtainable from Eqs. (2) to (4). 

 

Accordingly, numerical sets of porosity, Π(T), and of resistivity, ρEl(T), are 

generated, the individuals of which, at T = TCrit - 10-16 K, converge to Π(T) 

= 1 and to the pure, normal conduction resistivity, ρEl(T) = ρEl,NC(T). 

 

Figure 4 shows resistivity, ρEl(T) = ρEl,SC(T), of YBaCuO 123 as function 

of porosity, and Figures  5 and 6a the resistivity of NbTi, YBacuO 123 

and BSCCO 2223 vs. temperature. 

 


 
25

The resistivity does not diverge to un-physically large values (a minor, 

yet favorable argument to support applicability of the cell resistance 

model). 

 

Detailed inspection of the diagrams in Figure 6a confirms the deviation 

from a sharp jump of ρEl(T) at T < TCrit. The deviations become more 

obvious in Figure 6b (enlarged sections of ρEl(T) of the NbTi, YBaCuO 

123 and BSCCO 2223 resistivity diagrams) and in Figure 6c for the 

electrical conductivity of the BSCCO superconductor. 

 

As is to be expected, the more temperature approaches TCrit, the larger, 

trivially, is the contribution within the Russell model to ρEl(T) by the 

normal conducting phase, ρEl,NC(T). This means the temperature 

dependence of ρEl,NC(T), the resistivity of the normal conducting phase, 

too, increasingly determines the excursion with temperature of the total 

resistivity, ρEl(T).  

  

 3.3 Symmetry operations to complete the model to T > TCrit 

Can we extend the results from Figures 5a and 6 a-c to T > TCrit, in an 

attempt to generate the curve, ρEl(T), over the total temperature range? 

The attempt in the following will be restricted to TCrit - 2 K ≤ T ≤ TCrit + 2 

K. This result shall be transferred to Sect. 4 to suggest a tentative (as will 

be shown, small) contribution for understanding of the thermal 

fluctuations problem (the full curves in Figure 6a have already been 

obtained from the point-symmetry operations described below). 

 

For this purpose, we divide the plane ρEl,SC vs. T in Figure 5a into 4 

quadrants and map the curve ρEl,SC(T) from quadrant 4 to quadrant 1 by 


 
26

three, successively performed, elementary symmetry operations (Figure 

5b). 

 

First, two operations, ρEl,SC(T) → ρEl,SC(-T), with the vertical axis TCrit = 

const as the mirror plane, and ρEl,SC(-T) → -ρEl,SC(-T), with the vertical 

position of the mirror plane defined by the solid red circle (the maximum 

obtainable in the calculations of the resistivity in quadrant IV or III). 

These steps are followed by -ρEl,SC(-T) → -ρEl,SC(-T) + |ΔρEl,SC(-T)|. In 

total, all these operations simulate a point-symmetry operation of ρEl,SC(T) 

against the solid, red circle.  

 

The linear transformation -ρEl,SC(-T) → -ρEl,SC(-T) + |ΔρEl,SC(-T)|, from 

quadrant II to quadrant I using the constant |ΔρEl,SC(-T)| serves to adjust 

the final ρEl,SC(T) in quadrant I to overlap with the normal resistivity of the 

superconductor, ρEl,SC(T), at T ≥ TCrit (the solid, light-blue circles in Figure 

5b). 

 

The limit which is set to the approximation of ρEl,SC(T< TCrit) to the normal 

conduction ρEl,NC(T ≥ TCrit) is given by the numerically obtainable 

maximum ρEl,SC(T < TCrit) =  ρEl,SC(T = T'). The maximum follows from 

limitations (as mentioned, by the maximum number of digits of integer 

and real type variables) experienced when temperature shall approach 

TCrit as close as possible. The final difference ρEl,SC(T= T') - ρEl,NC(T ≥ TCrit) 

is applied as a linear shift, |ΔρEl,SC(-T)|, of the curve ρEl,SC(T) when it is 

mapped from quadrant II to quadrant I. 

 

These symmetry operations are justified because they are applied to 

solely the superconductor electron system, ρEl,SC(T), not to the lattice with 

its zero electrical conductivity. The operations also are applicable 


 
27

because they are restricted to the small temperature interval within which 

the resistivity from zero steadily increases to large values.  

 

From Figure 6b, a (non-local) boundary layer, δTρ, then can be identified 

within which this increase, near critical temperature, is completed.  

 

The interval, δTρ, results from solely these symmetry operations, it is not 

determined in experiments performed in each quadrant.  Width of this 

interval depends on the sensitivity by which ρEl,SC(T) decays from 

ρEl,NC(T) when temperature is slightly reduced below TCrit. Values of the 

width are given in Sect. 5. 

 

An interesting question is whether the derivation of the interval δTρ could 

be applied to also the extent of the proximity effect, but this needs 

separate investigations. 

 

4 
Possible impacts on the Thermal Fluctuations problem 

While the behaviour of the calculated ρEl(T) in Figure 6a-c qualitatively 

confirms bending of resistivity vs. temperature curves frequently seen in 

standard experiments, deviations of the calculated curves in relation to 

results of their measurements are much larger, in particular in regions 

indicated by ellipse I in Figure 1. Strong deviations from the expected 

sharp jump were observed during early decades of high temperature 

superconductivity development. 

 

The reason for the deviations from sharp increase may be manifold: 

First, a straight, vertical line, at exactly T = TCrit, could be observed only 

in case composition of the material is absolutely stoichiometric and 

perfectly in the clean limit (mean free path of electrons exceeding 


 
28

coherence length), in zero magnetic field and without weak-links. Non-

stoichiometry and magnetic field influence presumably are most 

important sources of bending and its uncertainties. Trivially, derivation of 

the pseudo-porosity might be erroneous (or, frankly speaking, even the 

whole cell model might not be applicable at all to superconductors), but 

the observed convergence of the results speak in its favour. Also exact 

measurement of the curve ρEl(T) at temperature very close to TCrit is 

(potentially) extremely difficult, with possibly significant experimental 

errors. 

 

As another argument speaking in favour of deviations from the sharp 

increase of ρEl(T) much stronger than predicted in Figure 6a-c, might 

come from Ginzburg-Landau theory. Remember that this theory is a 

mean-field theory that does not integrate thermal fluctuations. If they 

shall be taken into account, variations (fluctuations) of the free energy of 

the superconductor against its equilibrium value should be reflected by 

variations of the order parameter, Ψ. The system, with certain probability, 

in such a state, is characterized by an order parameter, Ψ', that is not 

very different from Ψ. 

 

Annett [9], p. 89 - 93, assumes the usual Boltzmann probability 

distribution for such fluctuations to occur. The same reference shows 

that thermal fluctuations, resulting from this distribution, can provide 

"very large contributions to heat capacity essentially diverging at critical 

temperature." (see Figure 4.8 of [9]). The effect might clearly be seen in 

high temperature superconductors, in their heat capacity and also in their 

ρEl(T)-curves near TCrit. 

 


 
29

But in both cases [18, 9], the physical reasons for the fluctuations are not 

very clearly explained. Both references insist on probabilities ("statistical 

fluctuations of superconductivity", and "Boltzmann statistics") but do not 

provide a detailed explanation of the physical background why 

fluctuations within the microscopic structure of superconductors might 

come up at all (instead of just relating to statistics for the statistics' sake). 

 

This remark does not question Landau’s theory of second order phase 

transitions in superconductors. But it is striking that, as an alternative 

explanation, the curvature of the resisitivity vs. T diagrams, simply might 

result from the T-dependence of the order parameter. Should this 

observation not be mentioned? 

 

In [23], Figure 2 (see also footnote 1 in this reference) and in our 

previously published papers, we indeed have applied statistical 

fluctuations, but these were addressed to the values of TCrit, BCrit and JCrit 

as parameters in the FE calculations of transient disturbances, to 

account for irregularities of materials and transport properties arising 

during manufacture, handling and applications of the  materials, which 

means, accounting for really existing, materials property or transport 

variations (deteriorations) observed in experiments or from information 

available in the literature. 

 

This issue, strict correlation with really existing uncertainties, apparently 

is missing in the explanations of the thermal fluctuations problem 

provided in [18]. Application of the Boltzmann statistic needs justification 

preferentially based on physics, materials science and on experience. 

   


 
30

In any case, bending of ρEl,SC(T) from the sharp increase expected at TCrit 

and  deviations of the calculated ρEl,SC(T) from the experimental curves, 

can at least qualitatively be explained by the resistance model with 

temperature-dependent order parameter; it is thus not a "phenomenon" 

(this sounds as if a situation physically cannot be understood). The 

results instead are in-line, though weakly, with expectations from thermal 

fluctuations. It therefore appears the observations made with ρEl(T) are 

simply, at least partially, the physical consequence of the strong 

temperature dependency of the order parameter (and the weak 

temperature dependence of the normal conduction resistivity). 

 

5 
Consequence for unique identification of TCrit 

The boundary layer, δTρ, is not a materials layer but, in the ρEl(T)-

diagram, a small temperature interval within which resistivity changes 

drastically. This region can be interpreted as a temperature uncertainty 

δTρ that exist throughout the superconductor material; the layer does not 

separate superconducting from normal conducting, locally different 

materials regions but indicates the transition interval between two 

different thermodynamic phases within the same superconductor 

material. The curve within this layer steadily approaches the 

convergence limit.  

 

This is a counter-analogue to local temperature boundary layers, δT, for 

example in radiative transfer (mixtures of fine powders with strongly 

different extinction properties), or from boundary layers, δv, in fluid 

dynamics (insoluble mixtures of fluids with strongly different viscosity). 

 

The non-local resistivity layer δTρ is not associated with any solid 

boundary nor does it belong to a specific materials section. In the 


 
31

present picture, existence of δTρ in the end results from the phase 

change that is quantified by the temperature dependency of the order 

parameter (its approximation in Eq. 2c) in a homogenous material the 

temperature of which is not uniform. 

 

It is thus within the temperature interval, δTρ, in Figure 6b that TCrit 

cannot be defined sharply. 

 

Besides conclusions drawn from solely the relaxation model (from the 

results condensed in Figure 11 in [25], part B), on whether TCrit can be 

defined uniquely in view of strongly diverging relaxation time, this is the 

second argument to question not only its sharp definition but even the 

mere existence of a uniquely defined, critical temperature in 

superconductors. 

 

From Figure 6a,b, width of the boundary layer is estimated to between 

11 (NbTi) and 20 (YBaCuO and BSCCO) μK, for decay (within δTρ) of ρEl 

by 1.68 e-6,1.11e-5 and 1.22e-5 Ω m, respectively (these values of 

course depend on the estimated width). It is better to consider gradients: 

On the average, we have ΔρEl/δTρ = 0.153, 0.557 and 0.610 Ω m/K for 

NbTi, YBaCuO and BSCCO, respectively. The gradients (or their reverse 

values) allow estimates of the uncertainty by which critical temperature 

can be determined from resistivity (transport) measurements in these 

materials. 

 

Reduction of the width δTρ would be interesting to isolate (encircle) TCrit 

with reduced, finally perhaps vanishing uncertainty. A reduction of δTρ 

might be found on the basis of correlations between TCrit, JCrit and 

relaxation. Such correlations do exist, compare Figure 5a,b in [28]. But it 


 
32

is presently not clear whether a correlation between these critical 

parameters and the uncertainty δTρ could be demonstrated. 

   

6 
Integration of relaxation into stability calculations 

A general problem arises if the superconductor cannot relax to 

thermodynamic 
equilibrium 
within 
reasonable 
experimental 
or 

computation (simulation) time. 

 

In reality, this is a problem of all standard (and up to now, also of the 

reported [4 - 6] numerical), stability calculations. The basic question 

behind reads: Is superconductor stability against quench just a matter of 

conductor geometry (diameter of fibres, thickness of thin films, aspect 

ratios), resistance, thermal diffusivity, critical and transport current 

distribution etc? In short, is it reduced to solely engineering aspects like 

they are considered in standard stability calculations? How can we 

obtain deeper understanding of the physics behind? 

 

The "physics behind" is a problem of the dynamic behaviour of the total 

(emphasis is on "total") electron body and, after disturbances, its 

relaxation, in total, to a new dynamic equilibrium. The key to solve this 

problem is to calculate relaxation time as a function of the order 

parameter. 

 

This problem becomes obvious when temperature is calculated either 

analytically or by means of numerical solutions of Fourier's differential 

equation. Superconductor temperature has carefully to be calculated, 

because, as we have seen in Figures 13b, and 14 of [7], the order 

parameter (as approximated by Eq. (2c) depends very strongly on 

superconductor temperature. 


 
33

 

In one dimension, Fourier’s equation reads 

 

ρ cp([T(x,t)]) dT(x,t)/dt = div[λ∂T(x,t)/∂x)] + Q(x,t)  
 
 
 
(8) 

 

with local heat source, Q(x,t), resulting from a disturbance, at a simulated 

process time, t. In Eq. (8), the operator "div" means divergence of heat 

flux, and cp and λ are the specific heat and thermal conductivity of the 

material at positions (x,t), respectively. 

 

The problem is twofold, items (i) and (ii): 

Item (i): The commercially available, Finite Element code used in the 

transient temperature field calculations [4 - 6], like other FE-codes, does 

not differentiate between electron and lattice contributions to specific 

heat. Little information (except for some superconductor elements) is 

available for cp,NC, and cp,SC, the specific heat in the normal and 

superconducting state, respectively, at the same temperature. While 

unspecified values of cp are frequently reported in the literature when 

describing calculations of temperature excursions, electron and critical 

temperature, like the other superconductor critical parameters (JCrit, BCrit), 

refer to solely the electron system of the superconductor (though 

electrons and phonons are strongly coupled), which means, at T < TCrit, 

the value cp,SC is needed (like from the dashed curve in Figure 4.1 of 

[13]). 

 

It is not clear that cp in Eq. (8) could be taken just from cp,SC = cp(T < TCrit) 

(like from the open circles in Figure 4.1 of [13]). When else using the 

dashed-dotted curve in this Figure (the much smaller cp of the lattice) as 

input into any FE code or simply into analytical calculations, too large 


 
34

values of T(x,t) would be obtained. Standard procedure with FE codes is 

to apply the cp of the lattice or an effective specific heat; this means their 

standard application does not (and cannot) provide temperature 

excursion of the electron system. Fourier's differential equation, i. e. 

calculation of temperature excursion in electrically neutral, continuum or 

dispersed systems, with existing temperature gradients, does not apply. 

 

Item (ii) of the above: All calculated temperature excursions, T(x,t), and 

in particular TCrit are uniquely defined only if they are thermodynamic 

equilibrium values. Finite Element (FE) codes do not (and cannot) check 

whether thermodynamic equilibrium states are obtained during 

simulations. This is not to be confused with numerical convergence. 

 

Equilibrium temperature, T(x,tEq), of the electron system with tEq > t' 

(using the simulated process time, t'), with FE calculations presently can 

be obtained, in  first approximation, when using a correction, a shift Δt(t'), 

that depends on simulation time, t'; the obtained T(x,t') has to be used to 

calculate Δt(t') and the result, in this approximation, has to be added to t'. 

The Δt(t') should, however, be obtained at the temperature of the 

electron system, but this temperature is presently not available from the 

FE results. We therefore have provisionally applied 

 

T[x,tEq(t’)] = T[t’ + Δt(t')](x) = T(x,t')   
 
 
 
 
 
(9) 

 

with T(x,t’) the standard FE result. A solution of this problem might be 

found if Δt(t') is calculated iteratively; but this needs more investigations.   

 


 
35

In any case, T(x,tEq) by Eq. (8) at tEq is defined and is obtained only if 

relaxation from a disturbance is really completed and this state can 

successfully be integrated into the numerical procedure. 

 

Each single relaxation step, of a series initialized at a temperature, T(x,t), 

requests for its completion a very small time interval, ∂t(t'), and all the 

∂t(t') (a very large number) have to be summed up to the total Δt(t').   

 

Values of Δt(t') have up to now been reported only for filaments [7]. In the 

following, we turn to thin films. In the conductor geometry of windings 96 

to 100 shown in [8], Figure 1, thin superconductor films constitute a 

cable, a coated, multi-layer YBaCuO 123, thin film superconductor. 

  

It is not clear that the results for filaments obtained in [7] or for thin films 

should be identical, first because of the different T(x,t') in these systems 

that lead to very different Δt(t') and tEq, also to different critical current 

density, JCrit[T(x,t')], and finally to different stability functions. The stability 

function is defined in the Appendix, Eq. (10a,b), to predict under which 

conditions zero-loss current transport is possible. 

 

The Δt(t') within the temperature region T(x,t) << TCrit are tiny, mostly 

below 10-9 ms, but if a disturbance starts very close to TCrit, the shift 

becomes substantial, see later, Table 1. This is in accordance with the 

Δt(t') previously reported for filaments.  

 

For the present, thin film situation, to illustrate the extreme case resulting 

with the exponent n = 0.5 in the standard expression JCrit[T(x,t)] = [1 - 

T(x,t)/TCrit]n, the temperature, e. g. T(x,t') = 89.239 K (at x = centroid 

coordinate of turn 96) is reached, as predicted by the Finite Element 


 
36

calculations, at t' = 4.200 ms after start of the simulations (the readers 

are kindly asked for a moment to tolerate large numbers of decimal 

digits; this is simply to demonstrate the shift is tiny provided temperature 

is definitely below TCrit). 

 

The thermal disturbance (local temperature increase by conduction of 

heat from other positions) initiated at this temperature and at this position 

causes a large number of electron pairs to decay. Their relaxation to a 

new, local equilibrium with electron pairs, from application of [7], takes 

Δt(t') = 1.422 e-8 ms so that equilibrium temperature T(x,tEq) = 89.239 K 

at the same position in reality is obtained not at t' = 4.200 ms but only 

later, i. e. not before tEq = (4.200 + 1.422 e-8) ms, definitely a tiny 

correction. 

 

Also at most of the other simulation times, t', the correction of the t' to the 

corresponding equilibrium values, tEq, is tiny. But the situation may 

change strongly if temperature increases more closely to TCrit.  

 

Under the same disturbance, with the same exponent n, at the same 

position (increase of centroid temperature solely by conduction), we have 

at T(x,t') =  91.933 K obtained from the FE calculations a Δt(t')  = 1.191 

e-3 ms and tEq = 4.201 ms (the open red circles in Figure 7a,b). Further 

increase to T(x,t) = 91.9975 K yields even drastically increased Δt(t') and 

equilibrium tEq (not shown in Figure 7b, but compare Table 1). 

 

From technical and manufacturing aspects, and because of their 

improved current limiting properties, second generation (2G) thin film, 

coated YBaCuO 123 superconductors presently are considered more 

attractive than (1G) multi-filamentary BSCCO 2223/Ag tapes. Yet, when 


 
37

tentatively assuming the BSCCO 2223 superconductor material would be 

used for preparation of also the thin films of turns 1 to 100 in the same 

coil, with exactly the same conductor geometry, heat transfer to coolant 

and meshing, but simply with thermal diffusivity, critical current density 

and critical temperature of the BSCCO thin film material, Figure 8a,b 

shows that in  comparison to Figure 5c of [8] conductor temperature 

increases significantly, and the "hot" turn now is turn 97 instead of turn 

96 in case of the YBaCuO 123 thin film superconductor. 

 

If in Figure 8b critical current density, JCrit, decreases, and if, as is 

assumed in this Figure, voltage is constant, transport current density 

may become larger than (reduced) critical current density so that flux 

flow losses will increase. Increasing flux flow losses lead to increase of 

local conductor temperature, and this is confirmed in Figure 8b: The 

smaller JCrit, the larger the local temperature, in Figure 8b the element 

temperature of the centroid. 

 

Convergence of the numerical results in Figure 8a,b again is safely 

achieved and is almost perfect. 

 

Calculations of temperature distributions, fS, relaxation time, τ, from the 

shift, Δt(t'), at this temperature in both thin film superconductors takes 

enormous computational efforts. Even the numerical data input, before 

the proper calculations are started at all, takes about 15 min, which is 

explained by the large number of elements (in total about 65000) and the 

solid, thermal and electrical parameters assigned for each of the 

elements, with in total 10 different materials (like superconductor, 

stabilizer, solder, interfacial layers, metallic coating (Ag), buffer, 

substrate, casting compound, insulations). One simulation, in small time 


 
38

steps (between 10-14 and 10-6 s) extended over the period 0 ≤ t' ≤ 5 ms, 

requests more than 24 hrs computation time on a standard, 4-core PC 

under Windows 7. 

 

It is clear that numerical simulations delicately depend on input  

parameters, details of conductor geometry (very different thicknesses 

and aspect ratios of very different materials layers involved, an issue that 

Finite Element calculations do not like at all), and on convergence 

schemes. Yet the results provide exact and time-resolved energy 

balances, temperature, critical current and transport current distributions 

that cannot be obtained with traditional stability models. 

 

7 
Open problems 

Each of the simulation times, t', has to be understood as indicating 

individual (initial) start points (local disturbances, here at the centroid, x) 

caused by local events (absorption of a heat pulse, flux flow losses or 

simply a local temperature increase resulting from a disturbance at 

another, arbitrary positions, x', within the whole conductor cross section). 

 

But the series t' and tEq might be intermixed, which means the overall 

structure of T(x,t) would be lost, a value T(x,t'') might become smaller at 

a time t'' > t', which is impossible. This situation request more 

investigations. But with T(x,tEq(x)] the local equilibrium temperature, 

resulting from a disturbance 1 occurring at a position x' that is overlaid 

onto the impact received from a disturbance 2 occurring at another 

position, x'', which means, after a different time shift, the totally resulting 

equilibrium temperature, given at the common tEq that reflects the 

interfering tEq,1(x') and tEq,2(x''), with appropriate book-keeping in principle 

could be obtained provided a method can be found that does not rely on 


 
39

solutions of Fourier's differential equation in its original, basic form 

(calculation of temperature excursion in systems with existing 

temperature gradients).  

 

As a consequence, the sequence of T(x,t') in total, i. e. the whole set of 

curves, not only the centroid curves in Figures 7a-c and 8b, but all 

curves at other positions, are shifted to later times by the transformations 

of the t' to the tEq by Eq (7) while simulation temperature remains 

constant. The T(x,teq) thus are obtained as a set of equilibrium values, 

that are realized at the later times, tEq > t'. 

 

Since the Δt(t') are different for each T(x,t'), the whole set of equilibrium 

temperatures, T(x,tEq), for any position x, is distorted against T(x,t') which 

results in also distorted critical current density and distorted stability 

curves. This has been demonstrated in Figures 13a,b and 14 of [7] 

(these Figures are reprinted for comparison, Figure 9a,b). Note that 

contrary to Figures 7a-c and 8a,b of the present paper (thin films), they 

show the results for filaments. Because of some simplifying assumptions 

(arithmetic mean of Δt(t') taken instead of individual values, compare 

Figure Captions of Figure 9b), the distorted curves still resemble the 

original ones, but this similarity gets lost in Figures 7a-b and 8b when 

strictly the specific Δt(t') are taken to calculate tEq(t’) = t’ + Δt(t') for the 

plot of T(x,tEq). 

 

From the relaxation time given by the term Δt(t') in Eq. (9), which means 

by the extremely large number of summations of individual ∂t(t'), it is 

clear the equilibrium temperature and the distortion of T(x,tEq) against 

T(x,t') must depend on the ratio ξ, of the active part of the electrons 

within the total electron body. Relaxation time, Δt(t'), is the larger, the 


 
40

larger ξ and thus the larger the superconductor simulation temperature, 

T(x,t'), and as a consequence, the smaller the order parameter. 

 

The flat ellipse in Figure 7c collects all those T(x,tEq) that result from 

T(x,t') and that are increasingly close to TCrit. It shows that the tEq, as they 

may result from different t' (provided the corresponding T(x,t') might be 

approximately equal and close to TCrit) are intermixed, in the present 

case, chaotically; it is not uniquely clear that the T(x,tEq) can be ordered 

consistently. Without appropriate, complete book-keeping, the only 

conclusion that presently can be made is qualitative: The larger T(t,'), the 

larger are the shift Δt(t') and the larger are the tEq. But identical T(x,tEq) 

might result from different events taking place at different t'. 

 

The curves in Figure 9a,b, in contrast to Sect. 4 of [28], and to Figures 

4b, 5a, 7, 9a,b and 11c of the same reference, result from single, 

isolated heat pulses (Q = 3 10-8 Ws and  2.5 10-10 Ws, respectively, 

length 8 ns) applied to the conductor filament cross section, a less 

complicated, but strongly different situation in comparison to the events 

leading to the results in Figures 7a-c and 8a,b. "Less complicated" 

means: not by complex events like local flux flow losses or other 

individual events. In contrast, absorption of a single heat pulse, with its 

magnitude and position of its impact uniquely defined, is a comparatively 

simple event, at least in the sense of numerical simulations. 

 

As has been shown in [8, 27] and is again demonstrated in Figures 7a-c 

and 8b,  random, local, statistical variations of TCrit and JCrit (besides flux 

flow losses the "more complicated situation") are already sufficient to 

induce, without any fault current, just with transport current constant (!) 

and equal to nominal current, non-uniform temperature distributions. 


 
41

In turn, without variations of TCrit, JCrit and BCrit, and if  density of transport 

current is below critical current density (no flux flow losses), the 

temperature distributions would be flat and would not show any 

temperature run-away to catastrophic divergence. 

 

As before [7], the predicted distortion is more significant for the NbTi 

superconductor in comparison to the YBaCuO 123 and BSCCO 2223 

thin films. 

 

8 
Summary 

 For a clear understanding of how to avoid quench, the physics 

behind stability has to be analysed on a microscopic level. 

 

 Stability analysis and predictions of superconductor stability may 

be of limited value if they do not consider superconductor 

relaxation after disturbances. 

 

 Taking into account superconductor relaxation into stability 

calculations is mandatory if temperature of the electron system has 

already increased to values near critical temperature. This is 

shown for the thin film situation (the present paper) and confirms 

previous findings of the author reported for NbTi and for YBaCuO 

123 filaments.   

 

 If 
superconductor 
temperature, 
T(x,t') 
approaches 
critical 

temperature very closely, distribution of the calculated equilibrium 

temperatures on the time axis presently may become chaotic: the 

tEq cannot be ordered if there are several disturbances occurring in 


 
42

parallel, a situation that can be expected from e. g. local flux flow 

losses.  

 

 Superconductor order parameter is the parenthesis that holds 

together (i) solution of the stability problem (unique identification of 

the temperature excursion on time axis), and as side results, (ii) 

bending of the specific resistivity, (iii) presently to only some extent, 

the impact of the thermal fluctuations problem, both at temperature 

near TCrit. The order parameter thus is a very indicative quantity 

predicting the excursion with time of the superconductor under 

disturbances. 

 

 Curvature of the resistivity at temperature below and above TCrit 

suggests definition of a non-local, resistivity "transition boundary 

layer" that may exist without any solid interface but is distributed 

throughout the superconductor volume. it is expressed as a 

temperature uncertainty interval, δTρ, around critical temperature. 

From the curves ρEl(T), gradients in the order of 0.1 to 1 (Ω m/K) 

can be extracted that allow to roughly estimate the uncertainty, at 

any position x, by which critical temperature can be determined 

from resistivity measurements of these materials. 

 

 From the same resistances model, critical temperature, if it is 

understood as a sharply, with zero tolerance defined physical 

(thermodynamic) quantity, then would be a fiction. But exactly this 

follows from (a) the microscopic stability model (by the strong 

divergence of relaxation time) and (b) from the finite, non-zero 

temperature interval δTρ. 

 


 
43

 A still open question concerns how temperature of both electron 

system and, in parallel, the lattice, could be achieved from 

numerical simulations, in order to apply Eq. (9) for calculation of 

T(x,tEq) at equilibrium time from the simulated T(x,t') without 

iterations. 

 

 All conclusions presented in this paper result from properties of 

many-particle systems (as previously explained, an analogy to 

nuclear physics), thermodynamic considerations (temperature 

uniquely defined under solely thermal equilibrium) and from an 

analogue to standard, multi-component heat transfer principles 

(solid conduction plus radiation in thin films). 

   

Data Availability Statement 

No Data associated in the manuscript. 

 

Readers interested to reproduce the reported results should be familiar 

with, and have permission (valid licenses) to, apply standard, 

commercially available Finite Element (FE) codes and, if so, request 

dataset input files from the author. Instead of FE codes, Finite 

Differences (FD) codes, generated by their own development (like the 

FD code used in a first paper by the author to this subject), could be 

used as well by the readers, with increased computational efforts, 

however. Note that FE or FD codes are just tools, not the purpose, for 

investigation of the stability vs. relaxation problem. 

 

 

 

 


 
44

9 
References 

1 
Wilson M N, Superconducting Magnets, in: Scurlock, R. G. (Ed.) 

 
Monographs on cryogenics, Oxford University Press, New York, 

 
reprinted paperback (1989) 

 

2 
Dresner, L.: Stability of Superconductors, in: Wolf St. (Ed.) 

 
Selected topics in superconductivity, Plenum Press, New York 

 
(1995) 

 

3 
Seeger, B. (Ed.), Handbook of Applied Superconductivity, Vol. 1, 

 
Institute of Physics Publishing, Bristol and Philadelphia, IOP 

 
Publishing Ltd (1998) 

 

 4 
Reiss H, Finite element simulation of temperature and current 

 
distribution in a superconductor, and a cell model for flux flow 

 
resistivity – Interim results, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 29 (2016) 

 
1405 – 1422 

 

 5 
Reiss H, Stability of a (2G) Coated, Thin Film YBaCuO 123 

 
Superconductor - Intermediate Summary, J. Supercond. Nov.

 
Magn. 33 (2020) 3279 - 3311 

 6 
Reiss H, An Attempt to Improve Understanding of the Physics 

 
behind 
Superconductor 
Phase 
Transitions 
and 
Stability, 

 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.05944 (2021), accepted for publication in 

 
Cryogenics (2021), still in production (June 2022) 

7 
Reiss H, A microscopic model of superconductor stability, J. 

 
Supercond. Nov. Magn. 26 (2013) 593 - 617 

 


 
45

8 
Reiss H, Stability considerations using a microscopic stability 

 
model applied to a 2G thin film coated superconductor, J. 

 
Supercond. Nov. Magn. 31 (2018) 959 - 979 

 

9 
Annett J, Superconductivity, Superfluids and Condensates, Oxford 

 
Master Series in Condensed Matter Physics, Oxford University 

 
Press  (2004) 

 

10 
Enss Cr, Hunklinger S, Tieftemperaturphysik, Springer Verlag, 

 
Berlin (2000)   

 

11 
Dagan Y, Kohen A, Deutscher G, c-axis tunneling on YBCO films, 

 
Eur. Phys. J. B 19 (2001)= 353 - 356 

 

12 
Phelan P E, Flik M I, Tien C L, Radiative properties of 

 
superconducting Y-Ba-Cu-O thin films, Journal of Heat Transfer, 

 
Transacts. ASME 113 (1991) 487 – 493 

 

13 
Buckel W, Kleiner R, Superconductivity, Fundamentals and 

 
Applications, Wiley-VCH Verlag, 2nd Ed. Transl. of the 6th German 

 
Ed. by R. Huebener (2004) 

 

14 
Gray K E, Long K R, Adkins C J, Measurements of the lifetime of 

 
excitations  in superconducting aluminium, The Philosophical 

 
Magazine 20\50164\5 (1969) 273 - 278 

 

15 
Gray K E, Steady state measurements of the quasiparticle lifetime 

 
in superconducting aluminium, J. Phys. F: Metal Phys. (1971, Vol. 

 
1) 290 - 308 


 
46

 

16 
Köbler U, Bose-Einstein Condensation of Cooper-Pairs in the 

 
conventional superconductors, Int. J. Thermophys. (IJoT) 24 (3) 

 
(2021) 238 – 246 

 

17 
Kadin A M, Spatial structure of the electron pairs, J. Supercond. 

 
Nov. Magn. 20 (4) (May 2007) 285 - 298 

18 
Glover III R E, Superconductivity above the transition temperature, 

 
in: Gorter C J (Ed.), Progress in low temperature physics, Vol. VI, 

 
Chap. 7, North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, London 

 
(1970) 291 - 332 

    19 
Russell, H W, Principles of Heat Flow in Porous Insulators, J. Am. 

 
Ceram. Soc. 18 (1935) 1 - 5 

 

20 
Anlage St, Lecture 6 Summary, PHYS 798S Spring 2016, 

 
University of Maryland (February 16, 2016) 

 

   21 
Tsotsas E, Wärmeleitfähigkeit von Schüttschichten, in: Stephan P 

 
et al. (Eds), VDI Wärmeatlas (German VDI Heat Atlas), Springer 

 
Verlag, 12th Ed. (2021), in German. 

 

   22 
Tilley D R, Tilley J, Superfluidity and Superconductivity, Adam 

 
Hilger Ltd. 2nd Ed., Bristol (1986) 

 
 
 

23 
Reiss H, Relaxation and a non-local, resistivity boundary layer in 

 
superconductors, arXiv 2202.04408 (Febr 2022)    

  


 
47

24 
Poole, Jr. Ch P, Datta T, Farach H A, Copper oxide 

 
superconductors, J. Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1988 

 

   25 
Reiss H, The Additive Approximation for Heat Transfer and for 

 
Stability Calculations in a Multi-filamentary Superconductor - Part  

 
 
A, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 32 (2019)  3457 - 3472; Part B, J. 

 
Supercond. Nov. Magn 33 (2020) 629 – 660 

 
 
 
 

  26 
Reiss H, Wärmestrahlung - Superisolierungen, in: Stephan P et al. 

 
(Eds), VDI Wärmeatlas (German VDI Heat Atlas), Springer Verlag, 

 
12th Ed. (2021), in German. 

 

 27  
Blatt J M, Theory of Superconductivity, Academic Press Inc., New 

 
York (1964) 

 

28  
Reiss H, A correlation between energy gap, critical current        

 
density and relaxation of a superconductor, arXiv:2111.09825 

 
[cond-mat.supr-con]  

 

29   
Mattuck R D, A guide to Feynman diagrams in the many- body 

 
problem, McGraw-Hill Book Comp. New York (1967) 

 

    
 


 
48

Appendix Limitations of the cell model and of calculation of 

total transport properties 

 
 
Current flow as a transport process 

Transport processes in general are described by Boltzmann's transport 

equation.  

 

As a methodical tool, we in the following assume an electrical circuit that 

besides standard (Ohmic) resistances contains also non-Ohmic 

components like Josephson currents (Andreev reflections might be taken 

as another example but it is not very clear that this contribution arises in 

parallel to Ohmic components). This circuit shall serve as a model to 

check whether, or under which conditions, current flow can be described 

as a transport process. 

 

Transport processes are initialized under electrical potential gradients (in 

thermal physics, under temperature gradients). Pure Ohmic current thus 

may be modelled as a current transport process across single or several 

Ohmic resistances. Andreev reflections, too, contribute to total current, 

but like Josephson currents cannot be simulated as a proper transport 

process: They do not need electrical potential differences for their 

existence.   

 

For simulation of the Ohmic current contribution to total current, we apply 

the experimental, electrical resistivity, ρEl(T), from Figure VII - 11 in [24]. 

The values, ρEl(T), of YBaCuO 123 in Figure 1 of the present paper have 

schematically been extrapolated linearly from the region T > TCrit to TCrit - 

2 K ≤ T ≤ TCrit, see the green solid line in this Figure (an analogue would 

apply to also the other superconductor materials shown in the original 


 
49

Figure VII - 11 in [24]). Strong deviations from the linear relationship 

would be expected only at T << TCrit. 

 

The extrapolated ρEl(T) serve for definition of a residual resistivity in the 

superconducting state if there were no electron pairs (like under very 

large magnetic field). In the cell model described in Subsect. 3.1 of the 

present paper, the resistivity ρEl,SC(T) = 0 (or near zero) is obtained if 

pseudo-porosity Π(T) << 1 or if we have the ideal case (no down-

bending, but the expected standard, sharp decrease of ρEl,SC(T) to finally 

zero at T < TCrit). In both cases, the ideal value ρEl,SC(T) = 0 results solely 

from contribution of the electron pairs to conductivity in that all normal 

conducting components are short-switched.   

 

A critique initiated by a parallel to multi-component heat  transfer 

The following is a discussion of the question whether complex electrical 

or thermal transport processes can be described in terms of potential 

differences or temperature gradients, respectively. The readers if not 

very interested in details of, or parallels to, multi-component, conduction 

heat transfer, for clarification may go directly to [25, 26] (there with 

correspondingly calculated examples). 

 

Using the extrapolated  ρEl(T) in Figure 1, results obtained from the cell 

model for the total resistances of SC/NC/SC and SC/NC/NC contacts 

accordingly comprise only those electrons (of the active part) that 

contribute by Ohmic, not by exotic non-Ohmic processes like Josephson 

currents, to total current. This is because extrapolation of ρEl(T) is made 

from regions T >> TCrit (T > TCrit + δTρ, where only normal Ohmic 

conduction components of current exist), to the region T < TCrit -  δTρ. 

 


 
50

The delicate point is: Determination of TCrit is done, in countless 

experiments, by measurement of the course of total resistance or 

resistivity within small intervals around TCrit, but the mechanism of current 

transport in the two  neighbouring intervals T < TCrit - δTρ and T > TCrit + 

δTρ is different. The proper residual resistance within T << TCrit 

accordingly must be different from values extrapolated from T > TCrit to T 

<< TCrit. 

 

This situation is similar to multi-component heat transfer. If besides solid 

conduction e. g. radiation contributes to heat flow, the thermal 

conductivity or diffusivity (if it can be defined at all, see below) then 

apparently might depend on sample thickness (this is the heat transfer 

"thickness-effect" that was discussed in the 1980s literature, but has 

been solved meanwhile [25, 26]). 

 

Unique definition of temperature and of TCrit is important for stability 

calculations and predictions since temperature fields obtained from FE 

calculations and their excursion with time are mapped onto the field of 

critical current density that in turn specifies the stability functions needed 

for stability predictions (see previous papers of the author). Only unique 

definition of temperature results in unique values of critical current 

density, JCrit,, and since the stability function, Φ, contains only integrations 

over JCrit(x,y,t) dA (dA a cross section differential), calculation of Φ 

urgently needs clearly defined temperature fields with precisely known 

(as far as possible) individual values, T(x,t). The fields T(x,t) otherwise 

cannot suitably be mapped onto the fields JCrit(x,t) that are strongly 

temperature-dependent to yield the stability function, 

 

0 ≤ Φ(t) = 1 - ∫ JCrit(x,y,t) dA/ ∫JCrit(x,y,t0) dA  ≤ 1 
 
 
(10a) 

 


 
51

or its approximation 

0 ≤ Φ(t) = 1 - ΣJCrit(x,y,t) dA/ ΣJCrit(x,y,t0) dA  ≤ 1 
 
 
(10b) 

 

In multi-component heat transfer, in order to define conductivity as a true 

materials property, the sample must be non-transparent to radiation. A 

sample is non-transparent to (direct) propagation of radiation if its optical 

thickness is large. Radiative and, as a consequence, total thermal 

conductivity exist only in this case. 

 

"Existence" means: Conductivity can be specified as a true materials 

property, without any dependence on experimental parameters like 

sample thickness or thermal emissivity of enclosures that house 

materials samples. Only in this case can solid conductive and radiative 

components of multi-component heat transfer be calculated as 

independent of each other (as if the other component is not present at 

all), and only then can they be separated by temperature variations. 

 

The question thus is under which conditions an effective, total electrical 

resistivity, ρEl,SC(T), or its reverse, an effective, total electrical 

conductivity, as a genuine materials property, in analogy to the thermal 

analogue, would exist in exotic cases with non-Ohmic components in 

general, and whether each component can be calculated "as if the other 

is not present" and, by analogy, whether the components can be 

separated experimentally, by variations of voltage. 

    

The question therefore is: What is the analogue (if there is any) to 

radiative non-transparency that could facilitate calculation of total 

electrical current and separation into independent contributions in case a 

circuit contains also non-Ohmic components?   


 
52

In multi-component heat transfer, large optical thickness, τ → ∞, 

transforms the very complex integro-differential equation (the "Equation 

of Radiative Transfer") to a 2nd order differential equation, like Fourier's 

differential equation. The so called "Additive Approximation" [25], which 

means algebraic addition of conductivities, becomes applicable under 

solely this condition. 

 

What then is the analogue to large optical thickness that would  

 

(i) get electrical resistivity a genuine, solely materials property in that it 

does not depend on experimental parameters? 

(ii) allow conductivity components to be calculated independent of each 

other, experimentally be separated and algebraically be added to a total 

conductivity? 

  

In heat transfer calculations, summation of conductive and radiative 

components to total heat flux qTotal = qCond + qRad (Ws/m2), beyond doubt 

is correct, clearly from phenomenological viewpoints. But it is, in general, 

not correct to simply add corresponding conductivity components, λCond, 

λRad (W/(m K), to a total, solid plus radiative conductivity, λTotal = λRad + 

λCond. This is a thermally "exotic" example of energy transport (but is 

realistic, because it can come up in thin films). The components might be 

coupled by the temperature profile in a sample, which means they would 

not be independent of each other or even would not exist at all (in the 

meaning of "existence" explained above). 

 

In this then not clear that a temperature gradient and thus a radiative 

conductivity would exist at all positions within a sample including its 

boundaries. In multi-component heat transfer, also a total conductivity 


 
53

therefore exists only (and total heat flux can be calculated from a 

temperature gradient taken over the total sample thickness) if a 

temperature gradient exists, everywhere within the sample, which 

means: if temperature profile, T(x), is differentiable in x, at all positions. 

 

By analogy, the simple, algebraic addition of electrical current 

components, Ik, in Eq. (11) (Eq. 6-9 of [13]), of course is correct, like the 

summation qTotal = qCond + qRad in thermal physics is correct, again from 

the phenomenological viewpoint. The point is that the authors [13], p. 

320, say, below their Figure 6.8: "This means in the end that Iq (note by 

the present author: Iq the quasi-particle current) is treated in terms of an 

Ohmic resistance R." Their Eq. (6-9) in [13] yields 

 

I = Ij + Iq + Iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(11) 

 

using Iq = U/R.. 

 

The parallel to heat transfer is obvious. Total electrical current, I, could 

be calculated only if all components in Eq. (11) could be assigned 

electrical potential gradients. 

 

While quasi-particles resemble real particles quite closely, "the real 

particle plus as cloud of agitated particles (virtual energy states), 

constitutes the quasi-particle (the cloud screens the real particle, which 

means a quasi-particle interacts only weakly with other quasi-particles." 

(this citation, set in quotation marks, is from R. D. Mattuck, [29], p.14). 

Quasi-particles thus are not locally specified, materials bodies, they 

rather are correlations between real particles and excitations, like 

electron pairs are better described by correlations between single, real 


 
54

particles, each of elementary charge, e, not by materials bodies of 

charge 2e. The distance between electrons i and j of a pair is not 

uniquely defined, which means consideration an electron pair as a solid 

particle of charge 2e is doubtful. 

 

The question thus remains whether it is possible to explain a current   

without recourse to potential differences and "resistances"? If so, are all 

the components in Eq. (6-9) of [13] not switched exactly in parallel, but 

approximately in series, to each other? Is it not possible to 

experimentally to separate the components? 

  

In multi-component heat transfer, this is quite different since radiative 

conductivity is obtained as the result of a differential process: The optical 

thickness is extended to infinity, and the radiative conductivity converges 

to an expression based on just the wall temperature of a container that 

houses the non-transparent sample (interestingly not on internal sample 

temperatures). 

 

In Eq. (11), the component Iq is explained as current across a resistance. 

But if the other components cannot be explained by resistances, can 

they really be separated from Iq?   

 
In summary, items 1 and 2: 

(1) Total, multi-component heat transfer (heat flow or heat flux) cannot 

be calculated from temperature gradients and conductivity or diffusivity 

values if any component of the energy equation cannot be written in 

terms of a conduction process, i. e. by a differential expression. 

(2) Total, multi-component current cannot be calculated from electrical 

potential gradients if any component of total current is not of Ohmic type. 

 


 
55

The cell model explained in this paper thus is applicable only in case 

there are no non-Ohmic contributions to total resistance and total 

current.   

 


 
56

Figures  

  
  

 

 

 
 
 
Figure 1 Resistivity, ρEl(T), of superconductors near critical temperature (schematic). 
For examples see e. g. Figure VII - 11 in the book "Copper Oxide Superconductors" 
by Poole, Datta and Farach [24] that shows bending of the resistivity vs. temperature 
curves of YBaCuO 123 and of other superconductor compounds in which a Rare 
Earth element has been substituted for the element Y in the REBaCuO7-x family. At 
TCrit, the coloured, open ellipses I and II highlight well-known deviations from the 
sharp increase of ρEl(T) usually expected during a warm-up (in this schematic Figure, 
the deviations are exaggerated).   
 
 
 


 
57

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
Figure 2a,b Resistance networks: (a) thermal and (b) electrical resistances, all at T < 
TCrit of a superconductor. The diagrams are used to specify application of the Russell 
cell model [19] for thermal and electrical conduction transport in the material 
(schematic, strongly simplified). The percentage of electrons (of the total body) that 
are available ("active") for thermal and electrical transport applies to the composite of 
resistances 3 (light-blue) and 4 (black) in both diagrams (a) and (b). The dark-blue 
rectangles denote the single (not condensed to pairs) electron contribution to 
resistance of the residual body, and the brown rectangles denote the thermal 
resistance by the lattice (phonons). 
 


 
58

(a) Conduction heat transfer at different temperature. Dark brown and dark-blue 
thermal rectangles indicate non-zero phonon and single electron thermal resistances, 
(1) RPh, (2) and (3) REl, respectively. The black resistance (4) R∞, applies to electron 
pairs and illustrates their infinitely large thermal resistance (regardless of their 
number). Their zero contribution to conduction heat transfer results from vanishing 
collisions with the lattice. Vertical length of the black rectangles schematically 
indicates increasing number of electron pairs. At very low temperature, heat transfer 
in both (a) and (b) being subject to resistances RPh > REl, the thermal conductivity of 
the superconductor to the most part is by single (not condensed) electrons. Under 
given temperatures, T1 and T2, standard solution of Fourier's differential equation 
yields the phonon temperature within resistance 1 that, at any co-ordinate, is different 
from electron temperature in resistances 2 and 3. Temperature of channel 3 like 
channels 1 and 2 is below TCrit but otherwise undetermined.  
 
(b) Electrical current transport, like in (a) at different temperature (again schematic, 
strongly simplified). Against (a), dark-brown rectangles (1) are cancelled (totally 
insulating, electrical transport channel). Single (not condensed) electrons contribute, 
according to non-zero, electrical resistances, RPh and REl, respectively. The black 
rectangles (resistances Ro) illustrate zero resistance of electron pairs. Regardless of 
their number, total contribution to current transport is by electron pairs only. In order 
to make the Russell cell model (as a conduction or resistance model) applicable for 
the simulations, an at least 20 orders of magnitude smaller electrical resistance, in 
relation to normal electrical conduction, has to be assumed for the superconductor 
(this is schematically indicated by the small, non-zero vertical length of the black 
rectangles). 
 


 
59

1,0E-16

1,0E-14

1,0E-12

1,0E-10

1,0E-08

1,0E-06

1,0E-04

1,0E-02

1,0E+00

8
8,5
9
9,5
10
10,5
11
11,5
12

Temperature (K)

Order parameter

TCrit = 10.1 K

NbTi

X = 5.8 nm

 

1,0E-10

1,0E-08

1,0E-06

1,0E-04

1,0E-02

1,0E+00

90
90,5
91
91,5
92
92,5
93
93,5
94

Temperature (K)

Order parameter

X = 10 nm

TCrit = 92K

YBaCuO 123

 

1,0E-08

1,0E-07

1,0E-06

1,0E-05

1,0E-04

1,0E-03

1,0E-02

1,0E-01

1,0E+00

106
106,5
107
107,5
108
108,5
109
109,5
110

Temperature (K)

Order parameter

BSCCO 2223

X = 10 nm

TCrit = 108 K

 

 
 
Figure 3 Ratio fS = nS(T)/nS(T=4K) (an approximation to the proper, Ginzburg-Landau 
order parameter, compare Eq. 2a-c), of NbTi, YBaCuO 123 and BSCCO 2223 vs. 
temperature. Results are obtained using either the microstability (relaxation) model 


 
60

[7] or the approximation by Eq. (8) of [12] (light-green and dark-blue symbols, 
respectively). Electron pair density within the active electron part at T = 4 K in 
thermodynamic  equilibrium is 3e26/m3. 


 
61

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
Figure 4 Dependence of the resistivity, ρEl,SC, on pseudo-porosity of YBaCuO 123 
using different coherence lengths, X (light-green and blue symbols). The calculations, 
to obtain the ratio fS (Figure 3), porosity, Π, and resistivity, ρEl,SC, apply the 
microscopic (relaxation) stability model ([7], solid diamonds) or the approximation Eq. 
(8) of [12] (solid circles), respectively. Under increasing temperature, all curves, Π,) 
and ρEl(T), steadily converge to Π = 1 and to ρEl,NC (the normal conduction value), 
respectively. The sharp increase of the resistivity is due to the results found for the  
order parameter (in its approximation, Eq. 2a-c). 


 
62

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
Figure 5a Effective electrical resistivity, ρEl(T), of BSCCO 2223 near thermal phase 
transition. The results are obtained before point-symmetry operations (see text) have 
been performed. The curves are obtained using the Russell cell model [19], with the 
ratio, fS(T), that approximates the order parameter, and porosity, Π, either from 
application of the microscopic stability model [7] (light-green) or from application of an 
approximation (Eq. (8) in [12], blue, solid diamonds). The value of the superconductor 
pseudo-conductivity, ρel,SC ,amounts to 10-25 Ω m. Curvature of ρEl(T) below TCrit is 
confirmed, for any variations of ρEl,SC between this value and 10-50 Ω m. Meaning of 
the red solid circle is explained in Caption to Figure 5b. Note the logarithmic scale of 
the resistivity axis. 


 
63

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
Figure 5b Stepwise explanation of point symmetry (mapping) of the ρEl,SC = f(T), here 
indicated by solid, black circles (schematic). The symmetry operation starts in 
quadrant IV with the ρEl,SC shown in Figure 5a. The red, solid circle denotes the 
maximum numerical value obtained in the series ρEl,SC = f(T), in this quadrant. 
Mapping is continued (light-grey arrows) counter-clock wise to the final result seen in 
quadrant I (the real values are shown in Figure 6a). The light-brown, solid circles 
denote the normal conduction resistivity, ρEl,NC, of the superconductor. See text for 
more explanations. 
 


 
64

1,0E-22

1,0E-19

1,0E-16

1,0E-13

1,0E-10

1,0E-07

1,0E-04

1,0E-01

8
8,5
9
9,5
10
10,5
11
11,5
12

Temperature (K)

Resistivity (Ohm m)

TCrit = 10.1 K

NbTi

X = 5.8 nm

 

1,0E-22

1,0E-19

1,0E-16

1,0E-13

1,0E-10

1,0E-07

1,0E-04

90
90,5
91
91,5
92
92,5
93
93,5
94

Temperature (K)

Resistivity (Ohm m)

TCrit = 92 K

YBaCuO 123

X = 10 nm

 

  

 

 
Figure 6a Resistivity vs. temperature, the "full curves" obtained after completion of 
the point-symmetry operation (extended to quadrant I) onto the results calculated for 
the NbTi, YBaCuO 123 and BSCCO 2223 superconductors. While in the region T < 
TCrit, between 10-19 and 10-13 Ω m, bending of the curves near 108 K is clearly seen, it 
cannot be revolved to the same extent between 10-7 and 10-4 Ω m because of the 
logarithmic resistivity scale. Open symbols are applied to improve visibility of the 
curvatures under logarithmic resistivity scales; these are seen more clearly if the 
conductivity, instead of the resistivity, is considered in Figure 6c. 


 
65

 

 

 

 

 
 


 
66

Figure 6b Details of the resistivity vs. temperature curves of NbTi, YBaCuO 123 and 
BSCCO 2223 obtained after completion of the point-symmetry operations extended 
to quadrant I (see text for explanation). The horizontal temperature scale is strongly 
magnified. All diamonds converge to the normal conduction resistivity, ρEl,NC, at T > 
TCrit (the light-brown, solid circles in the bottom diagram) of the superconductor. The 
Figure shows, very close to TCrit, the non-local, resistivity boundary layer expressed 
as the temperature uncertainty, δTρ, in the three materials.   
 


 
67

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
Figure 6c Electrical conductivity, 1/ρEl,SC, of BSCCO 2223 calculated from the 
resistivity values shown in Figure 6a. The open, red circle highlights bending of the 
curve that here is more clearly seen than in Figure 6a,b. 


 
68

 

 

 
Figure 7a Equilibrium element temperature, T(x,t) of the centroid in turn 96 (for the 
cable geometry, compare Figure 1 in [8]). Results are given for different values n of 
the exponent in JCrit[T(x,t)] = [1 - T(x,t)/TCrit]n for the temperature dependency of 
critical current density (a standard relation for JCrit (T), with n = 1.5 the Ginzburg-
Landau exponent). Solid symbols show temperature in dependence of simulation 
time, t', open circles show the same temperature but vs. equilibrium time, tEq. 
Compare text, Sect. 6, for explanation of the difference between both time scales. 
The almost hidden, open red circle (compare the black arrow) indicates tEq that at T = 
91.9325 K differs from t' only very slightly (see Table 1, n = 0.5). The corresponding 
tEq at T = 91.9975 K that is substantially larger (in the order of 100 ms) than its t' is 
not shown. The Figure is copied from its original (Figure 5a in [28], here without the 
"convergence circles". 


 
69

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 7b Same plot as in Figure 7a but in detail showing the deviation of tEq from t' 
of a data point obtained from the FE calculations near phase transition. The open red 
circle indicating the corresponding equilibrium temperature is shifted from t' to the 
definitely larger tEq. The shift of simulation time in T(x,t'), namely t' → tEq) to time 
scale, tEq, yielding T(x,tEq). is indicated by the red arrow (temperature, T, remains 
unchanged).   


 
70

 

 

Figure 7c Same plot as in Figure 7a but in more detail showing the deviation of tEq 
from t' of data points obtained from the FE calculations near phase transition. The 
more closely temperature approaches the phase transition, the larger is the shift (the 
bulged-out calculated curve), as resulting from relaxation, from simulation times, t' 
(dark green diamonds) to the corresponding equilibrium times, tEq (data points in the 
flat ellipse). Results are given for the exponent n = 0.5 in JCrit[T(x,t)] = [1 - T(x,t)/TCrit]n 

and for different values of the ratio ξ, that indicates the "active" part of the electron 
body that contributes to thermal and current transport and specific heat. Red and 
dark-green diamonds and light-blue triangles correspond to  ξ = 5, 10 and 15 percent, 
respectively. The larger ξ, the larger is the shift Δt(t'), and the larger is the relaxation 
time. As explained in the text, this linear transformation is provisional only (an exact 
calculation of T(x,tEq) by FE simulations or by iterations is presently not possible.  


 
71

 

 

 

Figure 8a Equilibrium nodal temperature distribution within the cable cross section 
(turns 96 to 100). White dashed lines are part of the mesh (the inner block comprises 
turns 96 to 100 of the coil; the narrowly spaced double white lines indicate electrical 
insulation between turns, and the outer double lines reflect a reinforcement of the 
casting compound). This temperature distribution is obtained if instead of YBaCuO 
123 the superconductor material BSCCO 2223 tentatively would be used to prepare 
thin films. All results obtained for JCrit(77K) = 1.05 109 A/m2 within 0 ≤ t' ≤ 4.2 ms 
safely converge during the numerical simulations, in this Figure for simulation time t' 
= 4.1 ms (note that coolant temperature, 77 K, is confirmed and the position "MX" of 
the temperature maximum is located at almost exactly the conductor mid position). In 
comparison to Figure 5c of [8], the YBaCuO 123 case, the maximum temperature is 
found in turn 97 instead of 96, and the distribution of conductor temperature is 
smooth, with no fluctuations, and is smaller in the thin film material (does not exceed 
TCrit = 108 K), which means flux flow losses may occur if local current transport 
density, JTrans(x,y,t') is larger than critical current density.  


 
72

 

 

 
Figure 8b Equilibrium element temperature, T(x,t) of the centroid in turn 96 (same 
cable geometry as in Figure 7a-c). Numerical calculations are performed as in Figure 
7a but now for application of the BSCCO 2223 superconductor material, within 
exactly the same conductor cross section and meshing. Results are given for the 
value n = 1.5 of the exponent in JCrit[T(x,t)] = [1 - T(x,t)/TCrit]n for the temperature 
dependency of critical current density, but for small variations (dark-blue and dark-
green diamonds) of JCrit(77K) against the mean, 109 A/m2 (red diamonds, note the 
sequence of blue, red and green diamonds), for constant (maximum, minimum) 
voltage peaks. The inset (detail near simulation time t' = 1 ms) shows the shift Δt(t') = 
1.7701 10-5 ms resulting for JCrit(77K) = 109 A/m2. Compare again text, Sect. 6, for 
explanation.   

   


 
73

 

 
Fig. 9a Results reported in [7], reproduced here for comparison (and for convenience 
of the readers). Critical current density, JCrit(x,y,t), in the superconducting YBaCuO 
123 filament cross section. Data are calculated from the element temperatures using 
the exponent n = 2 and are given for the element positioned near the central node (x 
= 0, y = 0). The JCrit (x,y,t) are plotted vs. real (i. e. simulation) time, t' (solid symbols) 
and the “shifted” time scale, t → tEq = t' + Δt(t') (open symbols), with the shift Δt(t'). A 
pulse of Q = 3 10-8 Ws is absorbed at radial positions during a period of 8 ns. See the 
original Figure Caption in Figure 13b of [7]. Conductor geometry is shown in Figure 
1a of [5].    
 

 

  


 
74

 

 
Fig.9b Results reported in [7], reproduced here for comparison. Stability function, 
Φ(t), of the NbTi-filament, calculated using a heat pulse absorbed at radial positions 
0 ≤ x ≤ 6 µm, y = 0, of Q = 2.5 10-10 Ws during a period of 8 ns. The figure shows Φ(t) 
at planes 1 and 4 (axial distances from the target spot of y = 0 and 56.3 µm, 
respectively). Compare Figure 1a in [5] for conductor geometry. Data Φ(t), copied 
from Figure 14 of [7], are plotted vs. real (i. e. simulation) time scale, t' (solid 
symbols) and the “shifted” time scale t → tEq = t' + Δt(t') (open symbols), as a rough 
approximation with an arithmetic mean of the shift taken over the corresponding 
planes.   
  


 
75

 
 
  

T(x,t) of Centroid (K)
t' (ms)
Δt(t') (ms)
tEq (ms)

In Figure 

7a,b:

89,23869312
4,200011800E+00
1,422111958E-08
4,200011814E+00

91,93253103
4,200025400E+00
1,191142117E-03
4,201216542E+00
red open circle

91,9975
4,252099273E+00
9,862376318E+01
1,028758624E+02
not shown

87,74630188
4,200005000E+00
4,246666079E-09
4,20000500424667E+00

89,04192278
4,200011800E+00
1,165701175E-08
4,20001181165701E+00
not shown

91,5303986
4,200025400E+00
2,607124594E-06
4,20002800712459E+00

92,12951274
4,159348400E+00
0,000000000E+00
4,159348400E+00

91,36549101
4,161348400E+00
1,062653419E-06
4,161349463E+00
not shown

90,77014004
4,163348400E+00
1,508428464E-07
4,163348551E+00

 
 
 
 
Table 1 Transformation of simulation time, t', to equilibrium time, tEq, by the shift Δt(t') 
(time needed for relaxation). Red, blue and light-green numbers result for n = 0.5, 1.0 
and 1.5, respectively, in JCrit[T(x,t)] = [1 - T(x,t)/TCrit]n. Results are given for the ratio ξ 
= 0.1 for the active electron part of the total electron body. Results for other ratios are 
given in Figure 7c. With n = 1.5, the Ginzburg-Landau exponent, the ratio (tEq - 
t')/[TCrit - T(t')] becomes very small. The diverging number of digits shall just 
demonstrate the shift Δt(t') is tiny if temperature is clearly below TCrit.  
 
 


