Direction-Dependent Lateral Domain Walls in Ferroelectric Hafnium Zirconium Oxide 

and their Gradient Energy Coefficients: A First Principles Study

Tanmoy Kumar Paul*, Atanu Kumar Saha, Sumeet Kumar Gupta  

Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, 47907, USA
Email: paul115@purdue.edu / Phone: (765) 607-3147 

Keywords: domain walls, ferroelectrics, gradient energies, strains

To understand and harness the physical mechanisms of ferroelectric Hafnium Zirconium Oxide (HZO)-based 
devices, there is a need for clear understanding of domain interactions, their dynamics, negative capacitance effects, 
and other multi-domain characteristics. These crucial attributes depend on the coupling between neighboring 
domains quantified by the gradient energy coefficient (g). Furthermore, HZO has unique orientation-dependent 
lateral multidomain configurations. To develop an in-depth understanding of multi-domain effects, there is a need 
for thorough analysis of g. In this work, the energetics of multidomain configurations and domain growth 
mechanism corresponding to lateral domain walls of HZO are analyzed and gradient energy coefficients are 
quantified using first-principles Density Functional Theory calculations. These results indicate that one lateral 
direction exhibits the following characteristics: i) DW is ultra-sharp and domain growth occurs unit-cell-by-unit-
cell, ii) the value of g is negative and in the order of 𝟏𝟎−𝟏𝟐 𝐕𝐦𝟑𝐂−𝟏, and iii) g reduces (increases) with compressive 
(tensile) strain. In contrast, in the other lateral direction, the following attributes are observed: i) DW is gradual and 
domain growth occurs in quanta of half-unit-cell, ii) g is positive and in the order of 𝟏𝟎−𝟏𝟎 𝐕𝐦𝟑𝐂−𝟏, and iii) g
increases (reduces) with compressive (tensile) strain.

1. Introduction

Ferroelectric (FE)-based devices such as FE Tunnel 

Junction (FTJ), FE Field Effect Transistor (FEFET), and 
FE heterojunctions have shown immense promise for 
various applications, including non-volatile memory, 
logic, and neural networks, with new applications being 
continually explored. [1] [2] [3] With ongoing efforts of 
device miniaturization, HfO2-based materials (both 
doped and undoped) have significantly intrigued the FE 
research community. [4] Among HfO2 based FEs, 50% 
Zr-doped HfO2, widely known as Hafnium Zirconium 
Oxide (HZO) shows enhanced remnant polarization 
(experimental value of 23 μC cm−2) and stable 
ferroelectricity in ultra-thin samples. [5] [6] In addition, 
HZO exhibits strong multi-domain (MD) effects.[7] For 
understanding the physics of domain interaction in MD 
FEs, the phase-field modeling approach has been an 
instrumental tool. [8] It utilizes the Ginzburg-Landau-
Devonshire (LGD) equation to describe the FE state of 
the material via polarization. [9] According to this 
theory, the domain configuration in FE is the result of a 
complex interplay among several energy components, 
i.e., free energy, depolarization energy, gradient/elastic
energy, and others, as described by Equation (1).

𝑓total = 𝑓free + 𝑓grad + 𝑓dep

𝑓free = 𝑓0 + 𝛼

2 𝑃𝑧

2

+ 𝛽

4 𝑃𝑧

4

+ 𝛾

6 𝑃𝑧

6

𝑓dep = −𝐸𝑧 𝑃𝑧

𝑓grad =

𝑔𝑥
2 (

𝜕𝑃𝑧
𝜕𝑥 )

2

+

𝑔𝑦
2 (

𝜕𝑃𝑧
𝜕𝑦 )

2

+

𝑔𝑧
2 (

𝜕𝑃𝑧
𝜕𝑧 )

2

(1)

Here, 𝑃𝑧 is the polarization along the z -axis (assumed 

to coincide with the polar c-axis of the Pca21 unit cell 
without any loss of generality), 𝑓free is the local free 
energy density, 𝑓grad is the gradient energy density, and 
𝑓dep is the depolarization energy density which results 
from bound polarization charges near surface/interface, 
α, β and γ are Landau’s free energy coefficients, 𝐸𝑧 is 
the electric field in FE along 𝑧, and 𝑔𝑥, 𝑔𝑦 and 𝑔𝑧 are 
gradient energy coefficients along x, y, and z axes, 
respectively. Gradient energy is related to the formation 
of domain wall (DW) and is defined as the associated
energy cost owing to the polarization gradient near the 
DW region. Mathematically, 𝑔𝑥, 𝑔𝑦, and
𝑔𝑧 are 

proportionality constants that determine the magnitude 
of gradient energy contribution to the total energy. 

In the absence of bound charge compensation at the 

interface, depolarization fields emerge inside the FE 
leading to an increase in fdep (see Equation 1) and thus,
the overall energy. [10] To reduce fdep, the FE material 
may break into multiple domains with lateral DWs. In 
this case, interface bound charges are partially 
compensated via an in-plane stray field between two 
neighboring domains. With a higher density of 
alternating domains, increased localization of stray field 
and more suppression of depolarization field occurs. 
However, this comes at the cost of net increased
gradient energy
governed by the coefficient, g.

Ultimately, the two opposing factors are balanced by 
each other to minimize the overall energy. This leads to 
the stabilization of the most energetically favored 


domain 
configuration
according 
to 
the 
LGD 

formalism.[11]

Earlier works based on phase field models have 

demonstrated the importance of g for a wide number of 
device phenomena in Hafnium Zirconium Oxide (HZO)
and is summarized in Figure 1. [12] For example, gradient 
energy dictates the domain density (which increases 
with decrease in g). This, in turn, determines whether 
the polarization switching is dominated by domain 
nucleation (typically for low domain density) or DW 
displacement (associated with high domain density). 
Besides, g also impacts the softness/hardness of the DW 
(sharpness of polarization variation). Small g results in 
hard DW whereas large g results in soft DW, which are 
associated 
with 
hysteretic 
and 
non-hysteretic 

characteristics, respectively. Thus, g determines the
suitability of the FE device for memory or logic 
applications. [13] Furthermore, the negative capacitance 
effect 
in 
FEs, 
which 
has 
shown 
intriguing 

characteristics and promising applications, is also 
closely tied to multi-domain behavior and hence, to the 
value of g. [14] [15] It is, thus, clear that a better 
understanding of g is highly significant to advance the 
exploration and design of FE-based devices and circuits.

Being crucial for FE device phenomena, the efforts 

to quantify g in traditional perovskite-based FEs are 
many. For example, by combining first-principle 

calculations and hyperbolic function fitting, 𝑔𝑥, 𝑔𝑦, and 
𝑔𝑧 in PbTiO3 are reported as 0.12×10-10, 0.12×10-10, and
0.21×10-10 Vm3C-1 respectively.
[16] Using density 

functional perturbation theory and long wavelength 
expansion of crystal Hamiltonian, 𝑔𝑥 of six perovskite 
oxides (BaTiO3, CaTiO3, KNbO3, NaNbO3, PbTiO3,
and PbZrO3) have been calculated which fall in the 
range of 0.2×10-10 - 1×10-10 Vm3C-1. [17] On the other 
hand, for FE HfO2, negligible g has been predicted due 
to flat phonon bands of polar transverse optic phonons.
[18] However, proper quantification of g in different 
spatial directions is still lacking in HfO2-based FEs. 

Being hitherto less explored, it is crucial to quantify 

g associated with 180˚ lateral DWs in HZO. This is 
because FE MD configurations in HZO are primarily
180° lateral domains where the DW plane is parallel to 
the polarization axis of the unit cell. [19] Further, the unit 
cell of the FE phase in HZO has a unique type of atomic
configuration. In one of the lateral directions, unit cells 
can be divided into two layers: a non-polar dielectric
(DE) layer and a FE layer. [20] In the other lateral 
direction, continuous FE layers are formed. Due to this,
domain width, polarization, crystal phase at the DWs
and their width, etc. are highly dependent on the crystal
orientation of the domains. Correspondingly, the 
gradient energy associated with the former (alternate 

Figure 1 Mathematical representation of gradient energy coefficient and its significance. The chart shows how the 
gradient energy coefficient impacts several ferroelectric device properties and leads to device-level applications.


FE-DE) DW is expected to be quite different from the 
latter (continuous FE) DW.

In this work, we comprehensively quantify the g 

parameter in FE HZO considering its direction-
dependent material physics
using first-principles

Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations. Specific 
contributions are as follows:
➢ We find atomic-scale strain-free (lattice matched) 
bulk MD configurations in both the lateral directions
(i.e., x and y directions which are perpendicular to the 
polarization direction). 
➢ We calculate 𝑔𝑥 and 𝑔𝑦 for the most energetically 
stable lateral DWs assuming constant g along a 
particular direction. 
➢ We present a detailed quantitative comparison of the
direction dependence of g.
➢ We explore the microscopic switching mechanism 
in both lateral directions to understand their domain 
kinetics. 
➢ We analyze the strain dependence of g to predict its 
characteristics in the cases when HZO is integrated into
a device and is subjected to strain due to 
electrodes/substrates. 

2. Results and Discussion

To obtain the MD configurations of HZO, we 

perform extensive first-principles calculations based on 
DFT. The details of the computational procedure are 
described in the Computational Section. Here, let us 
first introduce the unit cell of HZO. Both experimental 
and 
theoretical 
works 
have 
proved 
that
the

orthorhombic 
Pca21
phase 
is 
the 
source
of 

ferroelectricity in HfO2-based FE materials. [21] [22] The 
unit cell of FE Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 is like the 𝑃𝑐𝑎21 phase of 
HfO2 where two Zr dopant atoms replace Hf at any two 
of the four lattice sites. We consider various cases of the 
lattice site occupation by Hf/Zr atoms. Different 
permutations of Hf and Zr can be narrowed down to 
three primitive configurations. We depict these three 
cases in Figure 2a-c where each plane parallel to (100), 
(010), or (001), respectively, contain, a single type of 
atom; either Hf, Zr, or O atoms. Alternately, we can say 
that planes perpendicular to one of the three orthogonal 
directions are mono-atomic. Among the three 
configurations, the formation of mono-atomic planes 
perpendicular to the [001] direction (i.e., along the 
polarization or z direction) in Figure 2c yields the 
minimum energy. Note that, the maximum deviation of 
the relaxed energy among the three cases (≈4 meV per 
unit cell) is very small. Nevertheless, unless mentioned 
otherwise, we subsequently consider this minimum 
energy configuration as the HZO unit cell.

The calculated relaxed lattice parameters of the HZO 

unit cell (5.05, 5.28, and 5.08 A° along the three 
orthogonal directions) match with previous theoretical 
calculations
and experiments.
[23]
[5] We obtain 

spontaneous polarization of 50
μC cm-2
with 

polarization quantum of 120.24 μC cm-2 along the z-
direction. The spontaneous polarization obtained here is 
higher 
than 
experimentally 
observed 
residual 

polarization. [5] This is attributed to the polycrystalline 
nature of FE HZO, which leads to lower average 
polarization in the experiments. But, the polarization 
from our simulations matches well with previous 
theoretical calculations. [20]

For gradient energy calculations, ionic relaxations of 

MD
supercells
are performed using the lattice 

parameters of the relaxed single-domain (SD) cell. We 
define these SD and MD supercells as unconstrained SD 
and constrained MD supercells, respectively. Later, 
during analyzing results, we also perform calculations 
on the fully relaxed MD supercells and define them as 
unconstrained MD supercells. MD
supercells of 

different sizes represent domains of different widths. 

Once the SD and MD configurations are optimized, 

we obtain the DW energy of MD configurations. DW 
energy is widely used to compare the favorability of MD 
configurations over SD, as well as among several MD 
configurations. It is defined as the energy difference 

Figure 2 Different lattice sites occupation by Hf/Zr 
atoms in Orthorhombic Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 unit cells. Planes 
parallel to a) (100), b) (010), and c) (001) are 
monoatomic, respectively. Among them, (c) gives the 
minimum energy configuration. Note that [001] is the 
polarization direction. Golden, Gray, and red atoms are 
Zr, Hf, and O atoms, respectively. For all other figures, 
both Zr and Hf atoms are colored in gray.   


between MD (𝐸MD) and SD (𝐸SD) supercell per unit 
cross-sectional area of each DW, as shown in Equation 
(2).

DW energy, 𝐸𝐷𝑊 =

𝐸MD−𝐸SD

2𝐴
(2)

Here, factor 2 in the denominator indicates that there 
are two DWs in each periodic supercell and A is the 
cross-sectional area of each DW.

For a particular type of lateral DW, we obtain the 

configuration with the lowest DW energy and calculate 
the gradient energy coefficient for that configuration. 
As described by Equation (1), gradient energy density 
depends on the polarization profile. Bulk structures are 
infinitely periodic, and no surface/interface or 
polarization-bound 
charges 
exist. 
Hence, 

depolarization energy does not take part in the total 
energy. Thus, in the SD supercell, total energy (𝐸𝑆𝐷) 
contains only the free energy component. On the 
contrary, for the MD supercell, both local free energy 
and gradient energy contribute to the total energy 
(𝐸𝑀𝐷). The energy barrier profile from the NEB method 
along with the modern theory of polarization provides 
the functional dependence of local free energy on 
polarization. Thus, the calculated polarization profile 
yields the local free energy of each dipole in MD 
(𝐸local,MD) and SD (𝐸local,SD) supercells. We use these 
values in Equation (3) to calculate the gradient energy 
density (fgrad). 
Total energy difference per unit volume, 

𝐸MD−𝐸SD

𝑉
=

1

𝑉 ∑(𝐸local,MD − 𝐸local,SD) + 𝑓grad
(3)

Then, the local polarization profile quantifies the

corresponding gradient energy coefficient (g)
as 

described in Equation (4). 

𝑓grad = ∑ 1

2 𝑔 (

∆𝑝

∆𝑙)

2

(4)

Here, ∆l is the distance between two consecutive 

dipoles and ∆p is the difference in polarization between 
the dipoles. The method followed here to calculate the 
gradient energy coefficient is like the method followed 
previously for perovskites, except the fact that we 
extract all values from first principles calculations. [16]

Based on the discussion in Section 1, we know that DWs 
in HZO have significant directional properties. Now, let 
us delve deeper into the emergence of different DWs in 
different directions and their energetics. 

2.1 Domain Wall Configurations

The orthorhombic unit cells of HZO shown in Figure 

3 are composed of two layers along [100] direction: a 
DE/spacer layer with all the O atoms
in the 

centrosymmetric position and FE/polar layer with all the 
O atoms in the non-centrosymmetric position. We will 
call this “Alternate Polar Spacer Layer” (APSL) 
configuration. The spacer and polar layers are indicated 
by the yellow and red/blue outlined regions,
respectively in Figure 3. This type of spacer layer in 
between the polar layers is unique to HZO, and 
fundamentally 
different 
from 
Perovskite-based 

conventional FEs. [18] Depending on the relative 
position of these spacer and polar layers, as well as their 
atomic co-ordination, different types of atomic 
arrangements are possible in an HZO unit cell. [24] For 
example, for a given upward polarized unit cell, four
types of downward polarized unit cells with different 
atomic arrangements are
derived
by performing 

Euclidean transformations i.e. rotation with respect to 
the x axis (R𝑥), reflection in xy plane (M𝑥𝑦) and 
translation along the x axis (T𝑥) (Figure 3a-d). We will 
denote the upward-polarized unit cell as U and the 4 
downward-polarized unit cells as 𝐷𝑎, 𝐷𝑏, 𝐷𝑐, and 𝐷𝑑
respectively. All the unit cells are energetically identical 

Figure 3 Orthorhombic Hf0.5Zr0.5O2 unit cells. For an 
upward polarized unit cell in the top, four energetically 
equivalent downward polarized unit cells in a-d) are 
derived from Euclidean transformations ( R𝑥 = rotation 
with respect to x-axis, M𝑥𝑦 = reflection in xy plane, and 
T𝑥 = Translation along x-axis). We will denote the 
upward polarized unit cell as U and the four downward 
polarized unit cells as 𝐷𝑎, 𝐷𝑏, 𝐷𝑐, and 𝐷𝑑, respectively. 
Polarization is along the z direction. Blue and red 
outlined regions are non-centrosymmetric polar layers 
with downward and upward polarizations, respectively. 
Yellow outlined regions are centrosymmetric spacer 
layers. The relaxed lattice parameters of all the unit 
cells are identical and denoted in the figure.


in the SD configuration and their atomic coordinates are 
explained in Supplementary Figure S1. There is an 
inherent energy barrier involved in flipping the 
polarization of a unit cell. The energy barrier pathways 
from upward-polarized unit cell to each of the 
downward-polarized unit cells are included in 
Supplementary Figure S2. 

Unlike [100], along [010] direction each layer is 

polarized as can be seen from Supplementary Figure 
S3(b). This is because each layer along [010] contains 
both non-centrosymmetric and centrosymmetric oxygen
atoms. We will call this “Continuous Polar Layer”
(CPL) configuration. Thus, domains with APSL or CPL 
configurations in HZO are different from each other in 
FE nature. Hence, depending on the direction of the MD 
formation, DWs in HZO have different characteristics 

as well. As a result, corresponding gradient energies are 
fundamentally distinct in magnitude. A simplistic 3D 
view of an HZO grain with the two types of lateral DW
is shown in Figure 4a to depict the directional 
dependence. 
Figure 
4b 
and 
4c 
illustrate 
the 

corresponding atomic configurations along each lateral 
direction before MD relaxation. Although in real FE
grains, 
there 
might 
be 
both 
types 
of 
DWs 

simultaneously, here, we consider them separately so 
that the energy state of each type of DW can be obtained 
individually. Thus, our analysis does not consider the 
energy contribution due to the interaction between the
APSL and CPL DWs. 

Now, to find the minimum energy MD configuration 

for each type of DWs, we calculate all the combinations 
of upward and downward-polarized unit cells shown in 

Figure 5 Representative 6-unit supercell for four possible APSL DWs along [100] direction, a) MD𝑥,𝑎, b) MD𝑥,𝑏, 
c) MD𝑥,𝑐, and d) MD𝑥,𝑑 deriving from combinations of the upward polarized unit cell, U with downward polarized 
unit cells, 𝐷𝑎, 𝐷𝑏, 𝐷𝑐, and 𝐷𝑑, respectively. The atomic configurations in DW resembles tetragonal, orthorhombic, 
distorted orthorhombic, and tetragonal, respectively. e) Domain Wall energy comparison of each type of APSL 
DW. For proper comparison purposes, all supercells comprise an equal number of unit cells. Yellow-shaded 
regions are DW regions for each case. All MD supercells are obtained from ionic relaxation at equivalent SD 
lattice parameters for representing SD to MD transition. 𝑀𝐷𝑥,𝑏 is the most energetically favorable APSL DW and 
is used for future calculations on APSL.

Figure 4 a) Simplistic 3D view of lateral domain walls in orthorhombic HZO. Alternate polar and spacer layers are 
along the x direction for both domains and along the y direction all layers are originally polar in nature. Atomic 
configurations of b) alternate polar-spacer layers (APSL) and c) continuous polar layers (CPL). Blue and red 
outlined regions are non-centrosymmetric polar layers with downward and upward polarization, respectively. 
Yellow outlined regions are centrosymmetric spacer layers. (DWs in the figure are before relaxation and for 
understanding purposes only.)


Figure 3. For APSL DW, U combines with 𝐷𝑎, 𝐷𝑏, 𝐷𝑐,
and 𝐷𝑑 to form MD configurations MD𝑥,𝑎, MD𝑥,𝑏, 
MD𝑥,𝑐, and MD𝑥,𝑑, respectively (x denotes APSL 
direction) as shown in Figures 5a-d. The corresponding 
DW energies are compared in Figure 5e. DW energy is 
very small (< 1 mJ m-2) in MD𝑥,𝑏 where the spacer layer 
acts as an in-built wall between the domains. This is 
because the crystal phase near the DW is nearly 
orthorhombic Pca21 and almost identical to the low-
energy bulk atomic configuration deep inside the 
domains. MD𝑥,𝑎 and MD𝑥,𝑑 show the tetragonal phase
in the spacer layers near the DW. As the orthorhombic 
atomic arrangement is lost near the DWs, the structural 
change causes DW energies to be higher than that of 
MD𝑥,𝑏. Among the two, MD𝑥,𝑑 has been denoted as 
topological DW for low barrier switching in earlier 
works. [24] MD𝑥,𝑐 shows atomic distortions near the DW 
suggesting the highest DW energy amongst the four
configurations. Thus, MD𝑥,𝑏 is the most energetically 
favorable DW and has been considered for subsequent 
analysis. The atomic configurations near all the DWs 
are included in Supplementary Figure S4.  

Similarly, for CPL DW, combinations of U with 𝐷𝑎, 

𝐷𝑏, and 𝐷𝑐 generate MD configurations MD𝑦,𝑎, MD𝑦,𝑏, 
and MD𝑦,𝑐 respectively (y denotes CPL direction) as 
shown in Figure 6a-c. A combination of U and 𝐷𝑑 gives 
unstable MD and so, we have discarded it for energy 
calculations.
MD𝑦,𝑎
and MD𝑦,𝑐
show distorted 

tetragonal-like phases at the center of the DW. In MD𝑦,𝑏,
the atomic configurations in the DW show pbcm-like 
phase. 

The atomic configurations near all the DWs are 

included in Supplementary Figure S5. DW energies 
denoted in Figure 6d show that 𝑀𝐷𝑦,𝑎 is the most 
energetically stable DW and will be considered for 
further calculations of CPL DW. It is noteworthy that 
the atomic configuration near CPL DW is significantly 
different from the low-energy bulk atomic configuration 
deep inside the domains. So, in the most energetically 
favorable configurations, CPL DW energy is much 
larger compared to the APSL DW. 

2.2 Gradient Energy Coefficient  

2.2.1
APSL Domain Wall

A representative relaxed MD supercell in the APSL 

configuration consisting of domains of equal widths (6 
upward and 6 downward polarized unit cells) is shown 
in Figure 7a. The APSL DW is atomically sharp as can 
be seen from the unit cell based local polarization 
profile in Figure 7b and can be treated as a hard DW. As
stated earlier, the in-built spacer layer in between the 
two domains makes it possible to orient the two 
neighboring polar layers in opposite directions, thus 
creating an abrupt DW. This is consistent with previous 
research work. [18] The polarization is uniform in each 
domain except for a mild increase near the DW (by ≈4 
μC cm-2 in magnitude compared to the polarization 
inside the domain). We have observed abruptness and 
mild enhancement of polarization near the DW 
irrespective of the domain width (i.e., supercell size). 
The mild polarization increase originates as follows. 
When polarization reversal of a domain occurs through

Figure 6 Representative 8-unit supercell for three possible CPL DWs along [010] direction, a) MD𝑦,𝑎, b) MD𝑦,𝑏, 
and c) MD𝑦,𝑐 deriving from combinations of the upward polarized unit cell, U with downward polarized unit cells 
𝐷𝑎, 𝐷𝑏, and 𝐷𝑐, respectively. (Combination with 𝐷𝑑 gives unstable configuration.) The atomic configurations at 
the center of the DW resemble distorted tetragonal, pbcm, and distorted tetragonal, respectively d) Domain Wall 
energy comparison of each type of CPL DW. For proper comparison purposes, all supercells comprise an equal 
number of unit cells. Yellow-shaded regions are DW regions for each case. All MD supercells are obtained from 
ionic relaxation at equivalent SD lattice parameters for representing SD to MD transition. 𝑀𝐷𝑦,𝑎 is the most 
energetically favorable CPL DW and is used for future calculations on CPL.


the pbcm phase, the non-centrosymmetric oxygen atoms 
move away from the centrosymmetric position toward 
the Hf/Zr plane (Supplementary Figure S2b). In section 
2.3.1 we will show that this is the polarization reversal 
path MD prefers energetically. We find that in the 
relaxed static APSL configuration, the atomic 
arrangement in the unit cells near the DW is slightly 
deviated from the Pca21 phase toward the pbcm phase. 
Thus, the polarization (calculated with respect to the 
centrosymmetric Fm3̅m phase) is slightly enhanced
compared to Pca21 phase (Supplementary Figure S6a). 

Now let us look at the dependence of DW energy on 

domain width shown in Figure 7c. In APSL, 
unconstrained MD shows slight reduction in supercell 
volume compared to SD as seen in other theoretical 
studies of HfO2. [18] So, during constrained transition 
from SD to MD with fixed lattice parameter, the MD 
supercell feels compressive strain. As domain width 
increases, the magnitude of compressive strain reduces 
as illustrated in Supplementary Figure S7(a). Hence, 
with wider domains, the constrained MD supercells are 
closer 
to 
the 
corresponding 
minimum 
energy 

unconstrained MD volume. As a result, DW energy 

decreases with increasing domain width and becomes 
negative for wider domains. However, the magnitude of 
DW energy is always very small (< 1 mJ m-2).

With this DW energy, the calculated gradient energy 

coefficient in APSL (𝑔𝑥) is shown in Figure 7d. Here, 
the polarization gradients between consecutive unit 
cells are considered for the calculation of 𝑔𝑥. This is 
because, in HZO, the existence of spacer and polar 
layers is intrinsically coupled. So, polarization variation
within unit cell does not affect the gradient energy in 
APSL. The local free energies of each of the unit cells 
in the supercell are extracted from the energy barrier 
profile in Supplementary Figure S6(a). The calculated 
result indicates three important attributes: i) 𝑔𝑥 is 
negative, ii) its absolute magnitude is very small (order 
of 10−12 V m3 C−1), and iii) absolute magnitude of 
𝑔𝑥 decreases with increasing domain width. 

These attributes can be explained as follows. The 

local free energy of the unit cells within the domains of 
MD are equal to those of SD because of their identical 
polarizations and atomic configurations. Moreover, 
since the DW energy is negligible, Equation (3) 
suggests that gradient energy is almost fully determined 

Figure. 7 a) Relaxed symmetric 12-unit supercell of APSL DW. b) Unit cell-based local polarization profile 
showing an atomically sharp DW. Polarization bump is observed near the DW. c) DW energy variation and d) 
Gradient energy coefficient with domain size. Figures (c) and (d) contain the equations used for calculations. Unit 
cell polarization is used because of the coupled existence of polar layers and spacer layers throughout the domains 
and DWs. Local free energies are extracted from the energy barrier profile for polarization reversal of unit cells. 
The DW energy is negligible which signifies the orthorhombic-like nature of the DW. The gradient energy 
coefficient is negative and is mainly determined by the local free energy density. 


by local free energy contribution of the unit cells 
surrounding the DWs. Near the DW, the unit cells of 
MD supercell are slightly deviated from the minimum 
energy point of energy barrier profile as described in the 
first paragraph of this section. So, Elocal,MD is always 
slightly > Elocal,SD. Thus, 𝑔𝑥 becomes negative according 
to the equation shown in Figure 7d. It turns out that the 
absolute magnitude of gradient energy coefficient (𝑔𝑥) 
is small and of the order of 10−12 V m3 C−1 (two orders 
less than that of conventional perovskite based FEs). [17]

To show the trend of 𝑔𝑥 with domain width, the local 

energy of unit cells near DW for different sized 
supercells are extracted from the barrier profile. As 
stated earlier, the polarization profile is similar 
irrespective of supercell size. Thus, we obtain similar 
local energy distribution for different supercell sizes. 
The net local energy difference being the same, an 
increase in the domain width reduces the difference in 
local energy density. Hence, |𝑔𝑥| reduces with domain 
width as shown in Figure 7d.

To use the extracted parameters in phase field models 

of HZO, one needs to account for the polarization bump 
at the two lattice points near the DW in addition to the 
negative value of 𝑔𝑥. Previous theoretical analysis has 
shown 
that 
higher 
order 
polarization 
gradient 

(𝑓grad,high =

1

2 𝑤𝑥 (

𝑑2𝑃

𝑑𝑥2)

2
) 
can 
have 
significant 

contribution to the total energy in addition to the 
contribution of g in ultra-sharp 180° DWs. [25] Here, 𝑤𝑥
is the higher order gradient energy coefficient along 
APSL direction. Mathematically, the higher order 
gradient energy for ultra-sharp DW has dominant effect 
to the energy component at the two lattice points near 
the DW. Thus, we equate 𝑓grad,high to the excess local 
free energy at those two lattice points and estimate the 
value of 𝑤𝑥. The calculation method and calculated 𝑤𝑥
parameter is discussed in Supplementary Figure S8. 

2.2.2
CPL Domain Wall

A representative relaxed MD supercell with equally 

wide domains for CPL is shown in Figure 8a. Here, DW 

Figure 8 a) Relaxed symmetric supercell of CPL DW. b) Half-unit-cell-wise local polarization profile showing a 
gradual DW. The distorted tetragonal layer at the center of the DW has zero polarization and converges to bulk 
polarization toward the domains. c) DW energy and Gradient energy coefficient with domain size. Figures (c) and 
(d) contain the equations used for calculations. Half-unit-cell-wise polarization is used because domains can consist 
of an odd number of half-unit cells and DW consists of the yellow outlined one-and-a-half-unit cell. Local free 
energies are extracted from the energy barrier versus the polarization profile of corresponding unit cells. High DW 
energy signifies different atomic configurations near the DW compared to low energy orthorhombic configurations 
deep inside the domains.


consists of one-and-a-half-unit cell (yellow shaded
region). Besides, domains can consist of odd number of 
half unit cells. Thus, contrary to APSL, we find it more 
useful to consider half-unit-cell wise polarization in 
CPL. The polarization profile in Figure 8b shows 
gradual change in polarization along the direction of 
CPL. The distorted tetragonal layer formed between the 
two domains has zero polarization and the polarization 
gradually reaches the bulk value as we move away from 
the DWs. This is different from the sharp polarization 
profile in the APSL configuration, but similar to that
observed in perovskite based FEs. [18]

DW energy variation with domain width is shown in 

Figure 8c. In CPL, unconstrained MD shows slight 
increase in supercell volume compared to SD. So, 
during constrained transition from SD to MD with fixed 
lattice parameter, the MD supercell feels tensile strain. 
This tensile strain reduces with increase in the supercell 
size as described in Supplementary Figure S7(b). So, 
with increased width, the constrained MD supercells 
tend to move more toward the minimum energy 
unconstrained volume. As a result, DW energy 
decreases with increasing domain width.

For gradient energy coefficient calculation along 

CPL (𝑔𝑦), half-unit-cell based polarization is used as 
shown in the equation in Figure 8d. The local free 
energy of each half-unit-cell in the supercell is extracted 
from the energy barrier profile in Supplementary Figure 
S6(b). Calculated 𝑔𝑦 is positive and in the order of 
10−10 V m3 C−1. This is in the same order of what is 
obtained in perovskites. [17] The resultant 𝑔𝑦 reduces 
with increasing domain width following the trend of 
DW energy. 

2.3 Nucleation and Domain Wall Motion

So far, we have analyzed the minimum energy static 

configurations of APSL and CPL DWs. Let us now look 
at the dynamics (nucleation of domains and DW 
motion) of both types of DW. 

2.3.1
APSL Domain Wall

For the APSL configuration, nucleation of oppositely 

polarized domains and the growth of new domains 
correspond to the reversal of the polar layer. As the 
spacer layer always exists with the polar layer, each 
reversal step corresponds to one unit cell reversal. 
Figure 9a shows the domain growth mechanism. As 
discussed earlier, the DWs are atomically sharp, and 
either DW1 or DW2 shifts by one unit cell at each step. 
Due to the unit cell-by-unit cell polarization reversal, 
the energy barrier does not depend on the relative 
location of Hf/Zr atoms in the corresponding lattice 
sites. 

Two paths of unit cell polarization reversal are 

possible from upward polarized unit cell, U to 
downward polarized unit cell 𝐷𝑏 as discussed in
Supplementary Figure S2. Therefore, for APSL MD 
configuration (consisting of U and 𝐷𝑏 as discussed in 
Section 2.1), we consider two separate polarization 
reversal paths as shown in the top and bottom panels of 
Figure 9c. The path in the top panel corresponds to cubic 
Fm3̅m phase as the intermediate phase for polarization 
reversal. In this case, the non-centrosymmetric O atoms 
shift toward the other non-centrosymmetric position 
without crossing the Hf/Zr plane. The energy barrier for 
both nucleation and DW motion is almost equal in 
magnitude because of the abruptness of the DW.  The 
barrier height is ≈1.34 eV which matches well with 
other theoretical calculations for HfO2. [24] On the other 
hand, the path in the bottom panel corresponds to pbcm
as the intermediate phase for the reversal process. In this 
case, the non-centrosymmetric O atoms cross the Hf/Zr 
plane while reversing the polarization. Note that this 
path has a lower energy barrier of 0.76 eV (almost equal 
for nucleation and DW motion) and thus is energetically 
more favorable than the top one.

2.3.2
CPL Domain Wall

Now let us look at the domain growth mechanism in 

the CPL configuration. Here, stable domains with odd 
number of half-unit cells can exist. So, half-unit-cell-
wise DW movement must be considered as shown in 
Figure 9b. The lengths of the arrow represent relative 
magnitude of the polarization. As discussed earlier for 
CPL, the DWs here represent gradually varying 
polarization. Here, the nucleation barrier is 640 meV, 
which is less than the APSL configuration, as well as 
the nucleation barrier of forming topological DW 
described for HfO2. [24] After nucleation happens, any 
one of the two DWs can shift to grow the new domain. 
Here, due to the half-unit-cell-wise polarization 
reversal, the energy barrier depends on the relative 
location of Hf/Zr atoms in the corresponding lattice sites 
(corresponding to the three types of unit cell 
configurations in Figure 2a-c). Shifting of one DW 
might lead to a different barrier height than the other 
DW surrounding the nucleated domain. Supplementary 
Figure S9-S11 illustrates this dependence on the three 
cases showing different domain growth paths and 
barrier profiles. Here, we calculate the average of these 
energy barrier profiles for the growth of the two DWs. 
On average, the DW motion corresponds to 94 and 175 
meV energy barriers for two consecutive layers. For the 
three lattice site occupation cases, average barrier 
heights are within 10 meV of the abovementioned 
values. Note that the DW growth barrier height in CPL 
is significantly less than that in APSL. According to 


Merz’s law, DW speed is proportional to exp (−

𝐸𝑎
𝐸 ), 

where 𝐸𝑎 is the activation field corresponding to barrier 
height and E is the applied electric field. As a result, 
domain growth is expected to be much faster in CPL 
compared to APSL.

2.4 Effect of Strain

The stability of the orthorhombic phase in HZO is 

largely dependent on the strain. It has been shown in 
experiments that strain provided by electrodes and 
substrate helps stabilize the orthorhombic phases. [26]

Therefore, it is important to understand its impact on 𝑔𝑥
and 𝑔𝑦. We will discuss this aspect in the current 
section.

Figure 9 Domain nucleation and DW motion mechanism for a) APSL and b) CPL configuration, respectively. 
Switching occurs by a unit cell and a half unit cell at each step, respectively. The length of the arrow defines the 
relative magnitude of polarization. c) Energy barrier profile for APSL domain growth mechanism. The barrier 
height is 1.34 eV when polarization reverses through the Fm3̅m phase and O atoms do not cross the Hf/Zr planes. 
On the contrary, a lower barrier height of 0.76 eV is obtained when O atoms cross the Hf/Zr plane during 
polarization reversal through the pbcm phase. Barrier heights are independent of the occupation site of Hf/Zr 
atoms, and the magnitude is similar for each reversal step. d) Average energy barrier profile of DW1 and DW2 
shift for CPL domain growth mechanism. The barrier height for nucleation is 640 meV. DW motion barrier height 
for DW1 and DW2 is dependent on the lattice site occupation by Hf/Zr atoms. However, an average of 94 and 175 
with 10 meV deviation is obtained in two consecutive steps for each of the three lattice site occupation cases. 


2.4.1
APSL Domain Wall

As tensile strain is applied (Figure 10a), 𝑔𝑥

increases, i.e., it becomes less negative and approaches 
to positive value. On the other hand, for compressive 
strain, 𝑔𝑥 decreases, i.e., it becomes more negative. 

To explain the trend in 𝑔𝑥 variation with strain, we 

calculate the DW energy for different strain conditions. 
Recall from section 2.2.1 that the APSL MD system 
feels slight compressive strain during the SD to MD 
transition. So, with applied compressive strain, the MD 
system energy initially reduces. However, after a certain 
critical compressive strain, it drifts away from the 
minimum energy. On the other hand, the SD system 
does not show such a non-monotonic behavior and 
exhibits an increase in energy with the increase in any 
compressive strain. So, DW energy decreases with 
compressive strain. 

For applied tensile strain, constrained MD moves 

further away from its minimum energy monotonically. 

Although SD also moves away from its minimum 
energy, the deviation of MD is always larger than the 
deviation of SD from their respective minimum energy 
configurations at a particular tensile strain. As a result, 
with increasing tensile strain, DW energy increases. 
This dependence of DW energy on strain is shown in 
Figure 10b for a 6-unit supercell. As the magnitude of 
polarization is merely affected by strains up to 1%, 
gradient energy almost fully depends on the energy 
difference between SD and MD according to the 
Equation in Figure 7d. Thus, 𝑔𝑥 follows the same trend 
as the DW energy with strain.

2.4.2
CPL Domain Wall

In the case of CPL DW, tensile strain reduces 𝑔𝑦

while compressive strain enhances its value. This is 
shown in Figure 10c. Up to 1% tensile and compressive 
strains, 𝑔𝑦 remains in the order of 10−10 V m3 C−1. 
Now let us discuss the cause behind this trend in detail. 

Figure 10 a) Gradient energy variation with strain for APSL DW comprising 6-unit supercells. 𝑔𝑥 increases for 
tensile strain, but decreases for compressive strain. b) DW energy variation in APSL with tensile and compressive 
strain for 6-unit supercell. DW energy reduces (increases) with compressive (tensile) strain. This happens due to 
the induced compressive strain in APSL during the SD to MD transition. c) Gradient energy variation with tensile 
and compressive strain for CPL DW comprising 7-unit supercells. 𝑔𝑦 remains in the order of  10−10 V m3 C−1 up 
to 1% strain. d) DW energy variation in CPL with tensile and compressive strain for 7-unit supercell. The trends 
of 𝑔𝑦 and DW energy variation in CPL are opposite to the strain effect in APSL DW. This is due to the induced 
tensile strain in CPL during the SD to MD transition.


As discussed in Section 2.2.2, for the CPL 

configuration, the MD system feels slight tensile strain 
during the SD to MD transition. So, the application of 
tensile strain lowers the MD system energy, and then 
raises it after a certain tensile strain. But, SD system 
energy exhibits a monotonic increase in energy with an 
increase in tensile strain. Thus, tensile strain reduces 
DW energy. On the contrary, compressive strain 
deviates MD from its minimum energy configuration 
more than it deviates SD. Thus, compressive strain 
increases DW energy. This variation of DW energy is 
depicted in Figure 10d. Consequently, 𝑔𝑦 follows the 
same trend as the DW energy in this strain limit. Note 
that the trend of 𝑔𝑥 and 𝑔𝑦 variation is mutually 
opposite with respect to compressive and tensile strain. 
The captured effect of strain on 𝑔𝑥 and 𝑔𝑦 in addition to 
other parameters in the phase field model will be useful 
to analyze the impact of strain on the multidomain state 
of a sample. 

3. Conclusion

In summary, in this work, we analyzed the 

orientation-dependence of lateral DWs in HZO and their 
gradient energy coefficients
using first-principles

calculations based on Density Functional Theory 
(DFT). Due to the unique alternate polar-spacer layer
(APSL) configuration in one lateral direction, the 
corresponding polarization profile is atomically sharp 
near the domain wall. In the other lateral direction, 
continuous polar layer (CPL) configuration is observed, 
and polarization shows gradual variation near the DW. 
Along this direction, half-unit-cell polarization should 
be considered instead of unit-cell polarization. This is 
because domains can form with an odd number of half-
unit cells and DW motion occurs in quanta of half-unit-
cells. The energy barrier profile indicates that domain 
growth occurs faster along this direction compared to 
the former. We emphasize that due to this orientation-
dependent DW characteristics, the gradient energy 
coefficient in HZO has a significant directional 
property. 𝑔𝑥 quantifies gradient energy between two 
consecutive oppositely polarized dipoles (unit cells) 
along the APSL direction. The magnitude of 𝑔𝑥 is small, 
negative, and in the order of 10−12 V m3 C−1. 𝑔𝑦
quantifies gradient energy between dipoles (half unit 
cells) along the CPL direction and is in the order of
10−10 V m3 C−1. 𝑔𝑥 and 𝑔𝑦 correspond to the most 
energetically stable systems of the two types of DWs 
and the order is valid over a wide range of domain 
widths. Compressive strain reduces 𝑔𝑥, but increases 
𝑔𝑦.  Similarly, tensile strain increases 𝑔𝑥, but reduces 
𝑔𝑦.  Both 𝑔𝑥 and 𝑔𝑦 affect the overall energetics of HZO 
samples. The results obtained in this work will give a 

comprehensive understanding of the gradient energy 
coefficient associated with lateral domain walls, which 
would be a crucial step for analyzing the multi-domain
nature of HZO-based devices
and their circuit 

applications. 

4. Computational Section

For DFT calculation, Projector-Augmented Wave 

(PAW) 
pseudopotentials 
with 
non-linear 
core 

correction and Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof generalized 
gradient approximation (GGA-PBE) as exchange-
correlation functional are applied in Quantum Espresso 
software package. [27] All atomic structures shown in 
this work are generated using the Xcrysden software 
package. [28] To obtain the fully relaxed unit cell of 
HZO, 10−6 Rydberg (Ry) errors in ionic minimization 
energy and 10−4 Ry Bohr−1 atomic force of all 
directional components are used, similar to previous 
works on HfO2. [23] Kinetic energy cut-off of 60 Ry for 
wavefunction and 360 Ry for charge density and 
potential are used. 6 × 6 × 6 Monkhorst-Pack grid of k-
points is applied for Brillouin Zone sampling. MD 
periodic supercells of lateral (100) and (010) plane DWs
are atomically relaxed at the SD lattice parameters using 
1 × 4 × 4 and 4 × 1 × 4 Monkhorst-Pack grid of k-
points, respectively. Gaussian smearing with spreading 
of 0.01 Ry is applied for better convergence. To 
accurately compare the energy of SD and MD 
supercells, SD supercells are calculated at the same k-
point grid as MD. 

FE polarization is calculated using the Berry phase 

approach of Kohn Sham states along with the modern 
theory of polarization to find both ionic and electronic 
contributions. [29] To find the energy barrier profiles of 
unit cell polarization reversal, as well as domain 
nucleation and DW motion, we use the Nudged Elastic 
Band (NEB) method. In strained configurations, to 
approximately mimic out-of-plane strain from the 
electrodes and in-plane stress from the substrate, we 
apply hydrostatic strain in our simulations. [23] Strains 
are calculated with respect to the volume of relaxed 
unstrained SD cells. All lattice parameters and atoms of 
SD cells are relaxed for each strain condition (both 
compressive and tensile). Then, the MD supercells are 
optimized at those lattice parameters, similar to what is 
done for configurations without strain. 

Acknowledgements

This work was supported in part by Andrews 

Fellowship in Purdue University.

References


[1] V. Garcia, M. Bibes, Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 

4289. 

[2] R. Yang, Nat. Electron. 2020, 3, 237. 
[3] I. Chakrabortya, A. Jaiswal, A. K. Saha, S. K. 

Gupta, and K. Roy, Appl. Phys. Rev. 2020, 7, 
021308. 

[4] S. S. Cheema, D. Kwon, N. Shanker, R. Dos Reis, 

S.-L. Hsu, J. Xiao, H. Zhang, R. Wagner, A. 
Datar, M. R. Mccarter, C. R. Serrao, A. K. Yadav, 
G. Karbasian, C.-H. Hsu, A. J. Tan, L.-C. Wang, 
V. Thakare, X. Zhang, A. Mehta, E. Karapetrova, 
R. V. Chopdekar, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, C. Hu, 
R. Proksch, R. Ramesh, J. Ciston, S. Salahuddin, 
Nature 2020, 580, 478. 

[5] J. Müller, T. S. Böscke, U. Schröder, S. Mueller, 

D. Bräuhaus, U. Böttger, L. Frey, T. Mikolajick, 
Nano Lett. 2012, 12 (8), 4318. 

[6] Y. Noh, M. Jung, J. Yoon, S. Hong, S. Park, B. S. 

Kang, S. E. Ahn, Curr. Appl. Phys. 2019, 19(4), 
486. 

[7] K. Jang, N. Ueyama; M. Kobayashi, T. Hiramoto, 

IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc. 2018, 6, 346. 

[8] Y. L. Li, S. Y. Hu, Z. K. Liu, and L. Q. Chen, 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 2001, 78, 3878. 

[9] V.L. Ginzburg, A.P. Levanyuk, J. Phys. Chem. 

Solids 1958, 6(1), 51. 

[10] D. Zhao, T. Lenz, G. H. Gelinck, P. Groen, D. 

Damjanovic, D. M. De Leeuw, I. Katsouras, Nat. 
Commun 2019, 10, 2547. 

[11] S. Matzen, S. Fusil, C. R. Phys. 2015, 16(2), 227. 
[12] A. K. Saha, S. K. Gupta, J. Appl. Phys. 2021, 129, 

080901. 

[13] A. K. Saha, M. Si, K. Ni, S. Datta, P. D. Ye and S. 

K. Gupta, In 2020 IEEE International Electron 
Devices Meeting (IEDM), San Francisco, CA 
2020, 4.3.1. 

[14] P. Zubko, J. C. Wojdeł, M. Hadjimichael, S. F.-

Pena, A. Sené, I. Luk'yanchuk, J.-M. Triscone, J. 
Íñiguez, Nature 2016, 534, 524. 

[15] M. Hoffmann, M. Gui, S. Slesazeck, R. Fontanini, 

M. Segatto, D. Esseni, T. Mikolajick, Adv. Func. 
Mat. 2022, 32(2), 2108494. 

[16] Y. -H. Shin, I. Grinberg, I.-W. Chen, A. M. Rappe, 

Nature 2007, 449, 881. 

[17] O. Diéguez, M. Stengel, Phys. Rev. X 2022, 12, 

031002. 

[18] H.-J. Lee, M. Lee, K. Lee, J. Jo, H. Yang, Y. Kim, 

Sci. 2020, 369, 1343. 

[19] T. Kiguchi, T. Shiraishi, T. Shimizu, H. 

Funakubo, T. J. Konno, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 2018, 
57, 11UF16. 

[20] W. Ding, Y. Zhang, L. Tao, Q. Yang, Y. Zhou, 

Acta Mater. 2020, 196, 556. 

[21] T. D. Huan, V. Sharma, G. A. Rossetti, Jr., and R. 

Ramprasad, Phys. Rev. B 2014, 90, 064111. 

[22] R. Materlik, C. Künneth, and A. Kersch, J. Appl. 

Phys., 2015, 117, 134109. 

[23] M. Dogan, N. Gong, T. P. Maae, S. I. Beigi, Phys. 

Chem. Chem. Phys. 2019, 21, 12150. 

[24] D. -H. Choe, S. Kim, T. Moon, S. Jo, H. Bae, 

Mater. Today 2021, 50, 8. 

[25] A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, J. J. Wang, G. 

S. Svechnikov, Y. M. Vysochanskii, V. Gopalan, 
and L.-Q. Chen, Phys. Rev. B 2010, 81, 195437. 

[26] T. S. Böscke, J. Müller, D. Bräuhaus, U. Schröder, 

U. Böttger, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 99, 102903. 

[27] P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, 

R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, 
M. Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de 
Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. 
Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. 
Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, 
R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. 
Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, 
A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, and R. 
M. Wentzcovitch, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2009, 
21, 395502. 

[28] A. Kokalj, Comp. Mater. Sci. 2003, 28, 155-168. 
[29] N. A. Spaldin, J. of Solid State Chem. 2012, 195, 

2. 


Supporting Information

Direction-Dependent Lateral Domain Walls in Ferroelectric Hafnium Zirconium Oxide 

and their Gradient Energy Coefficients: A First Principles Study

Tanmoy Kumar Paul*, Atanu Kumar Saha, Sumeet Kumar Gupta  

Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907, USA

Email: paul115@purdue.edu 

U
𝐷𝑎
𝐷𝑏

Zr
0.016
0.032
0.000
Zr
0.016
-0.032
0.000
Zr
0.016
0.032
0.000

Zr
0.484
0.532
0.000
Zr
0.484
0.468
0.000
Zr
0.484
0.532
0.000

O
0.821
0.372
0.147
O
0.689
0.357
0.358
O
0.811
0.143
0.358

O
0.679
0.872
0.147
O
0.811
0.857
0.358
O
0.689
0.643
0.358

O
0.287
0.228
0.253
O
0.216
0.227
0.253
O
0.284
0.273
0.253

O
0.213
0.728
0.253
O
0.284
0.727
0.253
O
0.216
0.773
0.253

Hf
0.484
-0.032
0.500
Hf
0.484
0.032
0.500
Hf
0.484
-0.032
0.500

Hf
0.016
0.468
0.500
Hf
0.016
0.532
0.500
Hf
0.016
0.468
0.500

O
0.689
0.643
0.642
O
0.821
0.627
0.853
O
0.679
0.873
0.853

O
0.811
0.143
0.642
O
0.679
0.127
0.853
O
0.821
0.372
0.853

O
0.284
0.273
0.747
O
0.213
0.271
0.747
O
0.287
0.229
0.747

O
0.216
0.773
0.747
O
0.287
0.771
0.747
O
0.213
0.729
0.747

Figure S1 Fractional atomic coordinates of U, 𝐷𝑎 and 𝐷𝑏 mentioned in Figure 3. 𝐷𝑐 and 𝐷𝑑 are derived by 
altering the sequence of polar and spacer layer in 𝐷𝑎 and 𝐷𝑏 respectively. This is obtained by shifting 𝐷𝑎 and 
𝐷𝑏 respectively by half unit cell and folding the atoms within the unit cell.


Figure S2 a)-d) Polarization reversal path for upward polarized unit cell, U to downward polarized unit cells 
𝐷𝑎, 𝐷𝑏, 𝐷𝑐 and 𝐷𝑑 respectively. The unit cells are taken from Figure 3 of main text. From U to 𝐷𝑏 transition, 
both Fm3̅m and pbcm can occur as intermediate state as shown in the two paths of b). While passing through 
Fm3̅m phase, the non-centrosymmetric O atoms shift without crossing the Hf/Zr plane. On the contrary, while 
passing through pbcm phase, the non-centrosymmetric O atoms cross the Hf/Zr plane.  For U to 𝐷𝑎, 𝐷𝑐 and 𝐷𝑑
transition, 𝑃42/𝑛𝑚𝑐 occurs as the intermediate phase.

Figure S3 a)-c) Atomic Configuration of HZO unit cell observed from three orthogonal planes. Along x 
direction, there are alternate polar and spacer layers. Along y direction, all layers are polarized.


Figure S4 a)-c) Atomic configurations of APSL DWs of supercells, 𝑀𝐷𝑥,𝑎, 𝑀𝐷𝑥,𝑐 and 𝑀𝐷𝑥,𝑑 respectively. The 
DWs resemble tetragonal, distorted orthorhombic and tetragonal phases respectively. DW of a) is half unit cell 
wide and so it shows half-cell wide configuration. DW of supercell, 𝑀𝐷𝑥,𝑏 is identical to the original orthorhombic 
phase and is not shown here.

Figure S5 a)-c) Atomic configurations of CPL DWs of supercells, 𝑀𝐷𝑦,𝑎, 𝑀𝐷𝑦,𝑏 and 𝑀𝐷𝑦,𝑐 respectively. The 
atomic configurations near DW resemble distorted tetragonal, pbcm and distorted tetragonal respectively. a) 
and c) show half-cell wide configuration at the center of the DWs.


Figure S6 a) Energy barrier profile for half unit cell shifting of oxygen atoms. The 𝑃𝑐𝑎21 phases here are unit 
cell U and 𝐷𝑏. The curve is obtained from merging the two polarization reversal paths of Figure S1b. Local free 
energy of dipoles near APSL DW is extracted from this curve. b) Energy barrier profile from unit cell U to unit 
cell 𝐷𝑎. As the two neighboring half-unit cells along [010] direction are symmetric, local free energy of dipoles 
(half-unit cell) in CPL configuration is extracted by dividing the barrier energies by 2. Polarization is calculated 
from modern theory of polarization where Fm3̅m and 𝑃42/𝑛𝑚𝑐 phases are the non-polar phases with zero 
polarization in a) and b) respectively. The green arrow shows the direction of the shift of O atoms.


a)

b)

Figure S7 a)-b) Hydrostatic strain induced during transition from SD to MD for APSL and CPL respectively. 
Hydrostatic strain is calculated from unconstrained MD volume and unconstrained SD volume as the following:

𝑆𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 = 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑀𝐷 − 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑆𝐷

𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑆𝐷

× 100%


Figure S8 Higher order gradient energy coefficient, 𝑤𝑥 along APSL direction for different domain width. This 
is obtained by equating 𝑓𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑,ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ to the excess local free energy at the two lattice points near the sharp DW as 
follows.

𝐸𝑒𝑥 = 𝐸 − 𝐸𝑚𝑖𝑛 = ∑ 𝑤𝑥(𝑃𝑖−1 − 2𝑃𝑖 + 𝑃𝑖+1

∆𝑥2
)2

Here, 𝐸𝑒𝑥= excess local free energy at only those two points near the DW, 𝐸𝑚𝑖𝑛= minima of double well 
potential barrier, E= local free energy at the two points


a)

b)

c)

Figure S9 DW shift just after nucleation and corresponding intermediate phases for CPL with (100) 
monoatomic plane. Left panels of a-b: The domain growth mechanism when DW1 shifts towards left keeping 
DW2 fixed. Right panels of a-b: The domain growth mechanism when DW2 shifts towards right keeping DW1 
fixed. The middle image of each path is the intermediate image with the highest energy. c) Energy Barrier profile 
for domain nucleation and growth. The planes of DW1 and DW2 that shift have mixture of Hf and Zr atoms 
and relative arrangement of Hf and Zr atoms in the two DWs are same. This causes identical heights of energy 
barrier for the two DW motions. Here, Hf (silver atoms) and Zr (yellow atoms) are distinguished by different 
colors to illustrate the difference properly. 


a)

b)

c)

Figure S10 DW shift just after nucleation and corresponding intermediate phases for CPL with (010) 
monoatomic plane. Left panels of a-b: The domain growth mechanism when DW1 shifts towards left keeping 
DW2 fixed. Right panels of a-b: The domain growth mechanism when DW2 shifts towards right keeping DW1 
fixed. The middle image of each path is the intermediate image with the highest energy. c) Energy Barrier profile 
for domain nucleation and growth. Different monoatomic planes (of Hf and Zr) shift for DW1 and DW2, which 
causes significantly different heights of energy barrier for the two DW motions. Here, Hf (silver atoms) and Zr 
(yellow atoms) are distinguished by different colors to illustrate the difference properly. 


a)

b)

c) 

Figure S11 DW shift just after nucleation and corresponding intermediate phases for CPL with (001) 
monoatomic plane. Left panels of a-b: The domain growth mechanism when DW1 shifts towards left keeping 
DW2 fixed. Right panels of a-b: The domain growth mechanism when DW2 shifts towards right keeping DW1 
fixed. The middle image of each path is the intermediate image with the highest energy. c) Energy Barrier profile 
for domain nucleation and growth. Although the planes of DW1 and DW2 that shift have mixture of Hf and Zr 
atoms, relative arrangement of Hf and Zr atoms in the two DWs are different. This causes slightly different 
heights of energy barrier for the two DW motions. Here, Hf (silver atoms) and Zr (yellow atoms) are 
distinguished by different colors to illustrate the difference properly. 


