Ontological Plant Representation for
Dynamical Simulations

Giuliano Vitali 1,∗

1DiSTAL, University of Bologna, Bologna , Italy

Correspondence*:
Giuliano Vitali
giuliano.vitali@unibo.it

ABSTRACT

The present study is aimed at analysing the bene?ts of an ontological approach in Functional
Structural Plant Modelling. The ontological approach has been used at two levels, to re?ne
the conceptual modelling approach, and to de?ne the nomenclature of the plant. To the scope
available domain-speci?c ontologies describing plant entities and their relations have been
analysed to verify how they support botanical and phenological descriptions at different scales.
The analysis put in evidence how ontologies have a large number of shared terms and also
host a large number of structural and dynamical relations among entities, however, they still
lack semantic annotation useful for a complete and consistent Conceptual Modelling, as put in
evidence by Foundation Ontologies. Nonetheless, the analysis also put in evidence the potential
of the approach and the basis for designing a bridged ontology to be used to produce tools for
learning botany, growing techniques, and supporting precision Agriculture.

Keywords: FSPM, ontology, virtual plants, modeling, eco-physiology

1
INTRODUCTION

Functional Structural Plant Modeling (FSPM) is a discipline studying how single plants as well as vegetal
tissues, populations and communities can be simulated together with their spatial representation (structure)
and full interaction with the environment. The objective is to quantitatively model how exogenous and
endogenous factors affect the local environment (e.g. temperature, shading) and regulate and activate
processes relevant to the plant growth and productive aspects (such as yield and quality of produce). Such a
detailed representation of plants and processes can be fruitfully used for teaching purposes of botany and
growing techniques, as well as in Precision Agriculture.

To simulate plant growth the most popular approach is based on L-System technique (17), a geometry-
oriented rule-based recursion algorithm.

1

arXiv:2208.07648v1  [physics.app-ph]  16 Aug 2022


Sample et al.
Running Title

An alternative approach is given by the topological approach (11) based on dedicated data structures to
store the plant state in its modules (metamers). It can be considered at the base of the Object Oriented (OO)
approach, which proved to support real plant coding (27).

Both approaches are suggested from an apparently simple plant architecture defined on the base of
naked-eye observation and on a formalism driven from the agronomic application contexts (5).

In fact, both approaches suffer strong limitations. L-Systems hardly allow encoding of existing plants
to let them to be regrown by simulation. On the other hand, the class hierarchy of OO technique hardly
allows to model the plasticity typical of living tissues (specialisation) or the appearance of new organs (e.g.
adventitious buds, see e.g. Gomez and Segura 6).

Moreover, though they have been used to represent plant development processes at a different scale (cell,
tissue, organ), the way these processes are connected to one another can hardly be embedded in a unique
computational scheme - there is still the need to have a model that incorporates processes operating at
different scales.

When developing a new model of a system to be used for simulations, system engineers start from
conceptual modelling characterised by three main tasks: (1) mapping to the ‘original’ system, which is
expressed through a modelling language (e.g.graphical); (2) a reduction aimed at identifying a subset of
the original system and (3) the pragmatics aimed at describing its purpose (25).

When conceptual models are developed in a cross-disciplinary context (e.g. engineering and botany) a
lack of a common agreement on terminology often occurs. This disagreement could happen both in the
graphic symbolism used in conceptual modelling, as much as in the terms used to describe the system
itself.

About the first point, a standard is in use for several years, Unified Modeling Language (24), supporting
several typologies of graphs to describe structural and dynamical aspects of a system.

However, UML doesn’t give the modeller the rules about the elements to be drawn in the graph, as it
lacks of semantics. That is the reason why in conceptual modelling, the role of Ontologies has grown
considerably in the last years. In particular, Ontology-driven Model Design (ODCM) proved to be a
robust and quick model development process (14) also useful for novice modellers (26). Reasoning over
ontologies may help in discovering inferences, and locating concepts in a class hierarchy, testing the
consistency of the conceptual model, and inspecting the conceptual knowledge embedded in the model
(29).

Two types of ontologies should be recognised though. A first typology may be recognised in Foundational
Ontologies, helping in classifying objects to support semantics in the modelling language (3). The second
typology is represented by Domain Ontologies developed to support knowledge in a number of areas,
particularly in descriptive sciences, including biology. Their terminology, however, may be so different to
make them hard to be merged, and the development of a controlled vocabulary specific for plant modelling
seems to be preferable (20).

The aim of this work is to analyse the possibility to integrate available Domain Ontologies with the
constraints of Foundation Ontology for the conceptual design of functional and structural plant modelling.

Frontiers
2


Sample et al.
Running Title

2
ONTOLOGIES

An ontology is a shared conceptualisation of a domain of interest (7) given by terms/symbols linked by
relationships with a semantic meaning. Ontologies sinks their roots in different disciplines, including:

• language theory - deriving from with logics and related to language computability, possibility to
obtain a prove about truth of a statement. Ontological approach is born to be used in semantic analysis
(e.g. in text mining, Sanchez and Moreno 21), and is currently used for bibliography research (Web
Ontologies).

• expert systems - ontologies can be considered descendants of Expert Systems (ES), developed in the
1970’s and popular in the 1990’s, mainly used for diagnosis purposes and to develop decision support
systems. ES host knowledge in terms of axioms, premises or facts, and inference rules, to be used to
obtain conclusions (with a certainty level). Ontologies generally host a general data models, made of
general types of things sharing certain properties, but they may also include information about specific
individuals. The first component can be considered the skeleton of a knowledge graph, helping to
validate and build new knowledge (10, 22).

2.1
Foundational Ontologies

Despite a number of suggestions produced to drive Conceptual Modeling (e.g.Occam razor), related
graphs are easily redundant and poorly consistent,and the need for a semantic represenation in UML entities
has already been evidenced (e.g., ˇCerans et al. 2) A way to reduce the fuzzyness around entities has been
proposed by Foundational Ontologies - here we will consider the most popular, the Unified Foundational
Ontology (UFO, (9), an approach that lead to an extension of UML (15) introducing a constraints on
entities (15).

The first point in UFO is to define stereotypes, that is an object categorization. A first distinction is made
between sortal and non-sortal types (classes of objects), the former being those endowable to some identity
(e.g.bud) contrasting with those that cannot (e.g.tissue).

UFO also consider the concept of rigidity, characterising those classes that derive from a class only (e.g.
vegetative-bud → bud) - entities in such a rigid hierarchy are called kind (top of hierarchy) and subkind.
Anti-rigid stereotypes are roles and phases (see table 1).

Rigid
Anti-rigid

Mixin
Phase Mixin

Category
Role Mixin

Sortal
Kind
Phase

SubKind
Role

Relator

Collective

Nonsortal
Quantity

Aspects
Mode
Quality

Table 1. UFO stereotypes

Stereotypes as phase and roles (referring to subjects that can be sorted) or PhaseMixin and RoleMixin (if
they cannot be sorted) may in fact be used to define entities that can derive from different classes: let’s
think to the ’enlighted tissue’ and ’shaded tissue’, given by tissues with different ’roles’ in photosynthesis

Frontiers
3


Sample et al.
Running Title

during daytime, while having the same at nightime. In this example the Mixin suffix refers to the fact that
the organs (sortal) or tissues (non-sortal) can derive from different organs, as a branch or a fruit in the first
case (sortal), fruit or branch skin in non-sortal case.

Another important class of sterotypes refers to relations, in which it is possible to identify some base
stereotypes that interprete the aspects featuring a given type:

• characterisation: a relation between a bearer entity and some features

• structuration: is the base constructor of any class, collecting and ascribing those features (of different
typologies) characterising each class

A set of relations as Part-whole,
Component Of,
Containment, Member Of,
SubCollection Of,
SubQuantity Of, identifies arrows commonly used in UM to connect entities. UFO includes relations with
a logical/computational equivalent as

• Formal: e.g. a vegetative bud ’is lighter than’ a flower bud

• Material: e.g. ’flow of sap’ from organ A to organ B

As OntoUML hardly supports dynamical features, other diagrams are suitable to the urpose. In particular
about Discrete Event Systems quite popular is BPMN, (19)), that also has an ontological extention -
Onto-PMN (8). In Onto-PMN, entities participates to events (like previously to roles). Events identified as
Atomic and Complex (compound) are ascribed to objects (with a given role). Most of semantic contents
stay in the concept of situation (state of affairs) that changes after the occurrence of an event and in that of
an entity disposition (meant as power, ability, capacity,etc) that determine a causal explainability of the
occurrence of a given event. From this viewpoint an event determines a triggering of a transition, driving a
transition rule suitable of a probabilistic approach (causal law). It follws a distinction between ’triggering
event’ and ’resulting event’.

UFO vs OO - UFO put in evidence structures embedded in OO (UML), trying to manage them explicitly,
as abstract classes, that cannot be instantiated, or some method/function that require to be written in the
subclass.

Some sortal stereotypes used to represent aspects, as quantity and amount, reflect classes that can be
found in OO-languages, namely Set and Magnitude (a mother classes of every numerical and measurable
quantity), both characterised by large number of specialised subclasses. A subclass like ordered-set can
be used to represent two UFO stereotypes as aspects including mode and quality. Relations (in UML
identified by arrows of several types) can also be ascribed to class ownership, often of magnitude-like or
set-like: they are often associated a multiplicity.

After (23) a major problem in OO representation of Ontologies is represented by the fact that in the
last case instances are not required to be referred to some class (e.g. ” the ’color white’ characterizes
more flowers than leaves ” ). Authors also put in evidence other main differences, tough proving
that coding an ontology within an OO scheme may be complex, but also feasible. The issue of
roles has already been solved by (4), and it is based on definition of a specific class defining roles:
StringCollection > roles > bud − role and successively subclass every object requiring roles in a
separate class branch: Object > ObjectWithRoles including attributes to describe possible roles and the
presently acting one. The complexity of translation is also related to the language the conceptual model
has to be coded. Smalltalk (supported by platforms as Squeak, Pharo, ..), as a pure OO language, is more
suitable to support those paradigms, with respect to other OO-style languages (e.g. Phyton, Java, ..) which

Frontiers
4


Sample et al.
Running Title

are basically based on imperative language (as C), that require a preliminary type declaration and memory
allocation).

example 1 - In figure 1 an (onto-extended) Class Diagram is used to draw a OO toy model of a plant. An
internode is here used as an object that can bear a number of leaves and buds, the latter being specialised
into vegetative-bud and a reproductive-bud. In a dynamical simulation framework the latter develop
generating respectively shoots and a flowers, entities inheriting features from the class VegetalOrgan, while
leaves and shoots also beared from the internode continue growing as any other VegetalPart. In the diagram
they are using the suggestions of UFO, labeling entities with ⟨⟨kind⟩⟩ and ⟨⟨subkind⟩⟩, while the arrows
are used to represent specialisation/generalisation (is a), and composition (1..N). Two processes ⟨⟨event⟩⟩
are also used to transform objects (buds into flower and shoot), which in a simulation perspective, could
mean destroy the first object using its parameters to create the new one (morphing).

2.2
Domain Ontologies

While a formal language (as UML) is represented by a reduced number of symbols (e.g.boxes and
arrows to connect them), the languages characterising knowledge domains are used to generate large
annotated dictionaries of terms and relations. Both, terms and relations, may be collected in a multi-
hierarchical framework, and a standard is represented by OWL (Ontology Web Language) and RDF
(Resource Description Framework), based on XML (Extensible Markup Language).

A growing number of tools, both on-line and desktop-based, allow to access OWL, browsing
over, as Ontobee (operating on 251 ontologies), operate queries, as Ontofox (https://ontofox.
hegroup.org/), or merging, as robot Jackson et al. 12), while for inspecting/editing Prot´eg´e
(https://protege.stanford.edu) a widely used platform.

Ontologies can also be translated in Graphic Data Base, as in Neo4j (https://neo4j.com/) with
the plugin neosemantics (https://neo4j.com/labs/neosemantics/).

The majority of ontologies can be found (and fully retreieved) at: http://purl.obolibrary.
org/obo/NAME.owl.

Ontologies for Plants - A number of ontologies are already available and many are under development
- largest ones are in the domain of medicine and biology. From some queries in Ontobee (https:
//www.ontobee.org) some of the largest ontologies dedicated to plant emerge, which are reported in
2 are together with some size indicator.

NAME
content
classes
object
annotation

properties
properties

BTO
BRENTA Tissue Ontology
6569
10
27

FLOPO
Flora Phenotype Ontology
35424
111
62

PO
Plant Ontology
2018
300
190

PPO
Plant Phenology Ontology
443
333
64

TO
Plant Trait Ontology
5216
159
76

Table 2. List of largest ontologies characterising domains of researches on vegetal plants

They cover a wide-range of aspects (e.g.development stages, Pujar et al. 18), but also host annotations
related to species (13) useful to extend the ontology to cover particular aspects (1), while queries can be
used to develop species-specific ontologies (28).

Frontiers
5


Sample et al.
Running Title

Ontology structure - Browsing Ontobee for the term bud we get, together with its definition on PO: an
undeveloped shoot system, and its tag: PO:0000055, other information including:

• hierarchy: Thing > continuant > independent continuant > material entity > plant anatomical entity
> plant structure > collective plant structure > collective plant organ structure > shoot system. In the
hierarchy the root entity thing is followed by a chain of entity types reflecting the standard adopted
from ontology editing board. The material entity is the starting point of many entities of major interest.

• subclasses: vegetative bud, axillary bud, terminal bud, reproductive bud, are all representing
specialisation of the parent entity (bud)

• siblings: root-borne shoot system, shoot-borne shoot system, primary shoot system, reproductive shoot
system, inflorescence branch crown, corm, bulb, vegetative shoot system, gametophore, represent
children of the same parent (shoot system - a collective plant organ structure that produces shoot-borne
portions of meristem tissue and the plant structures that arise from them - see figure 2).

• relations: properties tagged from a specific Ontology (Relation Ontology - RO). Almost every of such
relations are represented by directed edge on a graph, and have an inverse relation - e.g. the relation:
develops from RO:0002202 is the inverse of: delelops into RO:0002203. Relations have a domain,
represented by those entity types they can be applied.

Some relevant terms - In BTO WholePlant - BTO:0001461 - The main part of a plant) has a main child
shoot - BTO:0001243 - a sending out of new growth or the growth sent out: as a stem or branch with its
leaves and appendages especially when not yet mature), which has the following parts:

• stem - BTO:0001300 - The main trunk of a plant; specifically: a primary plant axis that develops buds
and shoots instead of roots (with 8 subclasses);

• internode - BTO:0000636 - Region on a stem between nodes (no descendants);

• leaf - BTO:0000713 - A lateral outgrowth from a plant stem that is typically a flattened expanded
variably shaped greenish organ, constitutes a unit of the foliage, and functions primarily in food
manufacture by photosynthesis, with subclasses: brct, leaflet, final leaf, true leaf ,etc;

• bud - BTO:000158 - A small lateral or terminal protuberance on the stem of a plant that may develop
into a flower, leaf, or shoot,including in its subclasses: apical bud, dormant eye, axillary bud, leaf bud,
flower bud (further specialised).

Such entities are all children of thing.

A more detailed plant description can be found in PO, where whole plant - PO:000000 is a child of plant
structure - PO:0009011 - A plant anatomical entity that is, or was, part of a plant, or was derived from a
part of a plant, where we may recognise two important children:

• collective plant structure - PO:0025007 - a plant structure that is a proper part of a whole plant and
includes two or more adjacent plant organs or adjacent cardinal organ parts, along with any associated
portions of plant tissue ). Its main descendant is shoot system - PO:0009006 - A collective plant organ
structure (PO:0025007) that produces shoot-borne portions of meristem tissue (PO:0009013) and the
plant structures (PO:0009011) that arise from them, whose children include:

• Bud - PO:0000055 - An undeveloped shoot system;

• multi-tissue plant structure - PO:0025496 - a plant structure that has as parts two or more portions of
plant tissue of at least two different types and which through specific morphogenetic processes forms
a single structural unit demarcated by primarily bona-fide boundaries from other structural units of

Frontiers
6


Sample et al.
Running Title

different types. Children include plant organ - PO:0009008 - A multi-tissue plant structure that is a
functional unit, is a proper part of a whole plant, and includes portions of plant tissue of at least two
different types that derive from a common developmental path, which in turn includes:

• shoot axis - PO:0025029 - a plant axis that is part of a shoot system, having as children: stem (
PO:0009047 - A shoot axis that is the primary axis of a plant) and branch (PO:0025073, a shoot
axis that develops from an axillary bud meristem or from equal divisions of a meristematic apical
cell).

• phyllome - PO:0006001 - a lateral plant organ produced by a shoot apical meristem ), having as a
childr Leaf (PO:0025034 - a phyllome that is not associated with a reproductive structure).

Every plant organs are part of a shoot system.

Most of these entities are used in other ontologies, where they are enriched with relations and annotations.
They are also indirectly referred to in TO (Trait Ontology), e.g. branch angle - TO:100000009 - A branch
morphology trait which is the angle of a branch ) where entities support almost every phenotypical
observation.

Dynamic aspects - In Plant Pheno Ontology (PPO) it is possible to find entities describing dynamical
aspects. There is an ancestor named occurrent having among children process which is defined in Basic
Formal Ontology as BFO:0000015, as an occurrent that has temporal proper parts and for some time t,
process s-depends on some material entity at t.

Process has a single child (in PO) plant structure development stage - PO:0009012 - a stage in the life
of a plant structure during which the plant structure undergoes developmental processes, with children:

• whole plant development stage

• collective plant organ structure development stage (including bud development stages);

• plant tissue development stage, including development stage of vascular tissues (xylem,phloem);

• multi-tissue plant structure development stage, including development stages for fruit, seed and other
plant organs.

Such a hierarchical representation is different from that found in PPO, where development stages descend
directly from occurent while:biological process include:

• biological process

• collective plant organ structure development stage (including development processes);

• multicellular organismal process;

• reproductive process;

• response to stimulus;

Though PO and PPO interpretation of process is rather different to that given in NCI thesaurus -
NCIT:C17828 - An activity occurring within an organism, between organisms or among organisms and the
mechanisms underlying such events (neither process nor biological process are used in PO, PPO or other
plant-related ontologies).

Analysing OWL Looking at PO and PPO OWLs, it is possible to see the practical use of OWL language.

Class is the main entry, used to describe and annotate terms.

AnnotationProperty is the local dictionary of decriptors e.g. definition, synonym, etc.

Frontiers
7


Sample et al.
Running Title

Axioms are assertions about a property relating a source to a target. They are used to enrich the set of
annotations, and also may include supplementary definitions and synonyms (exact or narrow) using the
tags defined in AnnotationProperty.

ObjectProperty report the relations between entities, most relevant being given by:

• part of & has part

• preceded by & precedes

• participates in & has participant

• located in & adjacent to

• develops from & develops to

• starts & starts with

• ends after & bearer of

• generated from & depends on

• developmentally preceded by & developmentally precedes

They are used (in classes) in a ’subclass-restriction’, ’equivalentClass-restriction’, or a ’disjointWith-
restriction’ context (16).

The ’restriction’ is used to define the class (as subclass,
same class,
or outside the
reference class hierarchy) on the base of a property,
which could be on the base of
a parameter value or on number of allowed items (’cardinality’);
here is a fragment of
ontology of PO 0001094: plant embryo coleoptilar stage:
<rdfs:subClassOf> <owl:Restriction>
<owl:onProperty rdf:resource=”http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/BFO 0000063”/> <owl:someValuesFrom
rdf:resource=”http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PO 0001081”/> </owl:Restriction> </rdfs:subClassOf> ,
telling that the: plant embryo coleoptilar stage precedes (BFO 0000063) the mature plant embryo stage
(PO 0001081).

Following figures have been produced importing the OWL in a GDB with Neo4J-semantics. Nodes are
shown as circles with a the property label as caption.

Figure 3 reports the set of Class nodes centered on shoot system from PO.

UFO interpretation - From an UFO viewpoint, it can be observed that entities appearing in figure 3 own
to Kind and Subkind prototypes.

In those ontologies, together with organs, also appear entities as root initial cell, and vascular System that
evidence Sortable entities at different scales, together with Nonsortable entities as portion of ’some tissue’,
easily related to prototypes as Quantity.

However OWL doesn’t seem to support any suggestions to identify Sortable from Nonsortable, not any
clues about class stereotyping.

Object Properties contain features referring to space and time relative allocation of entities, easily
recognised as UFO relations. While spatial features could be enriched for detail from other ontologies (as
Trait Ontology), dynamical aspects can be detailed by ontologies as PPO.

In Onto-PMN, events may include creator/destroyer of entities - in PPO family of processes includes
most of GO types descending from process (including organ develpment, reproduction, dormancy, aging,
response to stimulus, abscission, germination) and include both unicellular and multicellular organisms.

Frontiers
8


Sample et al.
Running Title

Such processes may easily include any metamorphoses process as well as development of new organs
(latent bud). Nonetheless, processes, as much as events, are (non material) entities to which material entities
partecipates in - one of the ObjectProperties listed above, e.g. dormant leaf bud - participates in (some) -
bud dormancy process.

Figure 4 reports the construction of a Conceptual Model for the dynamics of Bud in relation to the
organ bearing it Plant Shoot and to the tissue it is made for, collecting the classes from PO (on the left).
Bud dynamics are represented by stand alone entities - in particular Bud Swell Stage inherit feature from
System Devel Stage, has any vegetal part as a participant. This is the technique that allow in the OO
paradigm to have ’messages’ as standalone functions.

Dynamical aspects may be related to some change of phase, but they hardly refer to metamorphoses of
entities - entity may disappear (or die) and be substituted by an evolved self - as both are descendant of a
common class (e.g. plant part) the new entity inherit some properties, as mass and location.

Morphing, together with roles, though implicitly present in some complementary ontologies, could
require more specialised add-ons to include concepts already faced in popular branch of plant & crop
modeling (e.g.sink/source modeling), which may also include technical terms, e.g. tree growers refers to
vegetal parts not in use of botanists as ”Brindle”, ”Sucker”,” Dart”,”Spur”, etc.

3
CONCLUSION

The development of Domain Ontologies is becoming a common practice in scientific community, becoming
more and more rich of descriptions about living beings’ anatomy and behavior, while using terms shared
by a large community.

Ontology-based Conceptual Modeling may profit of such a large amount of coded description, together
with the constraints defined by Foundation Ontologies to suggest a new approach for plant structural and
functional modeling.

The analysis put in evidence that ontologies offer the possibility to include in modeling a large amount of
details and process occurring at several scales, and eventually to integrate them.

Domain Ontologies, however, may need a ’bridge ontology’ to be merged together and enriched by
semantical descriptors suggested by Foundational Ontologies.

Because of size and complexity of ontologies, the next step should consist in the development of a tool
helping in identifying missing definitions and relations, useful to improving current ontologies and make
robust design Conceptual Models in the same time.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

FUNDING

Not applicable.

Frontiers
9


Sample et al.
Running Title

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Not applicable.

SUPPLEMENTAL DATA

Not applicable.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The study is based on publicly available ontologies reported in the manuscript. Any detail on methodology
is available directly from author.

REFERENCES

1 .Akbar, Z., Mustika, H. F., Rini, D. S., Manik, L. P., Indrawati, A., Fefirenta, A. D., et al. (2021).
An ontology-driven personalized faceted search for exploring knowledge bases of capsicum. Future
Internet 13, 1–17. doi:10.3390/fi13070172

2 . ˇCerans, K., Ovˇcin¸n¸ikova, J., Liepin¸ˇs, R., and Spro ‘gis, A. (2013). Advanced OWL 2.0 ontology
visualization in OWLGrEd. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications 249, 41–54. doi:10.
3233/978-1-61499-161-8-41

3 .Fonseca, C. M., Porello, D., Guizzardi, G., Almeida, J. P. A., and Guarino, N. (2019). Relations
in ontology-driven conceptual modeling. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11788 LNCS, 28–42.
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-33223-5

4 .Fowler, M. (1997). Dealing with Roles. Proceedings of PLoP 97, 1–20
5 .Godin, C. and Caraglio, Y. (1998). A Multiscale Model of Plant Topological Structures. J.Theor.Biol. ,
1–46

6 .Gomez, M. and Segura, J. (1995). In vitro Control of Adventitious Bud Differentiation by Inorganic
Media Components in Leaves of Mature Juniperus oxycedrus. In Vitro Cellular & Developmental
Biology. Plant 31, 179–182

7 .Gruber, T. R. (1993). A translation approach to portable ontology specifications. Knowledge Acquisition
5, 199–220. doi:10.1006/knac.1993.1008

8 .Guizzardi, G. and Wagner, G. (2013). Dispositions and causal laws as the ontological foundation
of transition rules in simulation models. Proceedings of the 2013 Winter Simulation Conference -
Simulation: Making Decisions in a Complex World, WSC 2013 , 1335–1346doi:10.1109/WSC.2013.
6721520

9 .Guizzardi, G., Wagner, G., Almeida, J. P. A., and Guizzardi, R. S. (2015). Towards ontological
foundations for conceptual modeling: The unified foundational ontology (UFO) story.
Applied
Ontology 10, 259–271. doi:10.3233/AO-150157

10 .[Dataset] Hedden, H. (2019). knowledge graphs and ontologies
11 .Honda, H. (1971). Description of the form of trees by the parameters of the tree-like body: Effects of
the branching angle and the branch length on the shape of the tree-like body. Journal of Theoretical
Biology 31. doi:10.1016/0022-5193-90191-3

12 .Jackson, R. C., Balhoff, J. P., Douglass, E., Harris, N. L., Mungall, C. J., and Overton,
J. A. (2019).
ROBOT: A Tool for Automating Ontology Workflows.
BMC Bioinformatics 20.
doi:10.1186/s12859-019-3002-3

Frontiers
10


Sample et al.
Running Title

13 .Jaiswal, P., Avraham, S., Ilic, K., Kellogg, E. A., McCouch, S., Pujar, A., et al. (2005). Plant Ontology
(PO): A controlled vocabulary of plant structures and growth stages. Comparative and Functional
Genomics 6, 388–397. doi:10.1002/cfg.496

14 .Katasonov, A. (2012).
Ontology-driven software engineering: beyond model checking and
transformations.
International Journal of Semantic Computing 6, 205–242.
doi:10.1142/
S1793351X12500031

15 .[Dataset] OntoUML (2022). Ontouml - ontology-driven conceptual modelling language
16 .[Dataset] OWL (2004). Owl web ontology language reference
17 .Prusinkiewicz, P. and Lindenmayer, A. (1990). The Algorithmic Beauty of Plants. The Virtual
Laboratory (New York, NY: Springer New York). doi:10.1007/978-1-4613-8476-2

18 .Pujar, A., Jaiswal, P., Kellogg, E. A., Ilic, K., Vincent, L., Avraham, S., et al. (2006). Whole-Plant
Growth Stage Ontology for Angiosperms and Its Application in Plant Biology 1[OA]. Plant Physiology
142, 414–428. doi:10.1104/pp.106.085720

19 .Rosing van, M., White, S., Cummins, F., and Man de, H. (2015). Business Process Model and Notation.
doi:10.1007/978-3-658-26982-1 12

20 .Saint Cast, C., Lobet, G., Cabrera-Bosquet, L., Couvreur, V., Pradal, C., Muller, B., et al. (2020).
Improving interoperability between phenomics and modelling communities by designing a Plant
Modelling Ontology (PMO). In FSPM2020: Towards Computable Plants. 57–58. doi:10.1093/jxb/
ery309

21 .Sanchez, D. and Moreno, A. (2004). Creating ontologies from Web documents. Recent Advances in
Artificial Intelligence Research and Development , 11–18

22 .[Dataset] Schrader, B. (2020). whats the difference between an ontology and a knowledge graph
23 .Tomaiuolo, M., Turci, P., Bergenti, F., and Poggi, A. (2005). A two-level approach for ontology
management in multi-agent systems.
Proceedings of the Workshop on Enabling Technologies:
Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, WETICE 2005, 21–26. doi:10.1109/WETICE.2005.13

24 .[Dataset] UML (2017). Unified modeling language
25 .Verdonck, M., Gailly, F., De Cesare, S., and Poels, G. (2015). Ontology-driven conceptual modeling:
A’systematic literature mapping and review. Applied Ontology 10, 197–227. doi:10.3233/AO-150154

26 .Verdonck, M., Gailly, F., Pergl, R., Guizzardi, G., Martins, B., and Pastor, O. (2019). Comparing
traditional conceptual modeling with ontology-driven conceptual modeling: An empirical study.
Information Systems 81, 92–103. doi:10.1016/j.is.2018.11.009

27 .Vitali, G., Magnanini, E., Mennucci, N., and Denti, E. (2012). VPN - Client-server object-oriented
virtual plant modeling tool. In Proceedings - 2012 IEEE 4th International Symposium on Plant
Growth Modeling, Simulation, Visualization and Applications, PMA 2012. 1–4. doi:10.1109/PMA.
2012.6524865

28 .Walls, R. L., Cooper, L., Elser, J., Gandolfo, M. A., Mungall, C. J., Smith, B., et al. (2019). The plant
ontology facilitates comparisons of plant development stages across species. Frontiers in Plant Science
10, 1–17. doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.00631

29 .Zedlitz, J. and Luttenberger, N. (2014). Conceptual Modelling in UML and OWL-2. International
Journal on Advances in Software 7, 182–196

FIGURES

Frontiers
11


Sample et al.
Running Title

Figure 1. Example of Onto-UML class diagram for a plant grow model

Frontiers
12


Sample et al.
Running Title

Figure 2. Excerpt of PO hierarchy displayed in Prot´eg´e

Frontiers
13


Sample et al.
Running Title

Figure 3. Linkages among children bud (PO:0000055) displayed in Neo4J Browser

Figure 4. Conceptual Model representing swelling of an axillary bud
.

Frontiers
14


