Quantifying the Sensitivity and Unclonability of Optical Physical Unclonable
Functions
Giuseppe Emanuele Lio,1, a) Sara Nocentini,2 Lorenzo Pattelli,2 Eleonora Cara,3 Diederik Sybolt Wiersma,4 Ulrich
R¨uhrmair,5, b) and Francesco Riboli6, c)

1)Nation Institute of Optics National Research Council (CNR-INO), European Laboratory for Non-Linear
Spectroscopy (LENS) and Physics Dept., University of Florence, Via Nello Carrara 1, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino,
Florence, Italy
2)Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica (INRiM), Strada delle Cacce 91, Turin,
10135 Italy and European Laboratory for Non-Linear Spectroscopy (LENS), University of Florence,
Via Nello Carrara 1, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino, Florence, Italy
3)Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica (INRiM), Strada delle Cacce 91, Turin,
10135 Italy
4)Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica (INRiM), Strada delle Cacce 91, Turin,
10135 Italy. European Laboratory for Non-Linear Spectroscopy (LENS) and Physics Dept.,
University of Florence, Via Nello Carrara 1, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino, Florence,
Italy
5)Physics Dept.
LMU M¨unchen, Schellingstraße 4/III D-80799 M¨unchen, Germany.
Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) Dept., University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT,
USA
6)Nation Institute of Optics National Research Council (CNR-INO), and European Laboratory for Non-Linear
Spectroscopy (LENS), University of Florence, Via Nello Carrara 1, 50019, Sesto Fiorentino, Florence,
Italy

(Dated: August 8, 2022)

Due to their unmatched entropy, complexity, and security level, optical Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs)
currently receive a lot of interest in the literature. Despite the large body of existing works, however, one of
their core features has never been quantified in detail, namely their physical unclonability. This paper tackles
this fundamental and yet largely unaddressed issue. In simulations and/or experiments, the sensitivity of
diffraction-based optical responses is investigated with respect to various small alterations such as variation
in the position, size, and number of the scatterers, as well as perturbations in the spatial alignment between
the physical unclonable function (PUF) and the measurement apparatus. Our analysis focuses on 2D optical
PUFs because of their relevance in integrated applications and the need to reply to security concerns that
can be raised when the physical structure of the geometry is accessible. Among the results of this study, the
sensitivity analysis shows that a positional perturbation of scatterers on the order of 30 nm, i.e., far below
the wavelength of the probing laser light of 632 nm wavelength, is sufficient to invalidate the PUF response
and thus detect a forgery attempt. These results support and quantify the high adversarial efforts required
to clone optical PUFs, even for 2D layouts.

Keywords: Optical Physical Unclonable Functions, Rayleigh-Sommerfeld diffraction, Authentication, Speckle
sensitivity, Scattering

I.
INTRODUCTION

According to recent estimates1, the looming internet of
things and worldwide information exchange by the year
2018-2023 will produce a global data stream of around
tens zettabytes per annum. This requires secure and re-
liable authentication methods in order to protect private
information and to safeguard access to personal devices
and services.
The currently widespread techniques to
this end rely on the permanent storage of digital secret
keys in electronic devices, for example in smartphones,
car keys, bank cards, passports, or computers. Unfortu-
nately, the last decades have seen an explosion of attacks
that can extract such keys unnoticedly, including sophis-
ticated malware and physical methods2–4. This obviously
calls for new authentication approaches with improved
security features.
The use of non-digital primitives such as Physical Un-

clonable Functions (PUFs) constitutes a promising new
avenue in this context5–8. PUFs are randomly structured
physical systems which exhibit a complex input-output
or, in PUF parlance, “challenge-response” behavior that
is unique to each PUF. Their uncontrollable individual
disorder on small length scales makes them practically
unclonable, even for their original manufacturer.
Due
to their physical nature, randomness, and unclonability,
PUFs can disable various popular attack vectors com-
pared to classical, permanently stored keys: For exam-
ple, their physical nature obviously prevents that PUFs
are stolen remotely over a purely digital data connec-
tion by attackers2,9. As another example, PUFs allow
the short-term derivation of individual secret key ma-
terial in devices, avoiding the it long-term and attack-
prone presence of secrets in digital memory. This usually
complicates key extraction2 and side channel attacks9.
Finally, some special, advanced subclass of PUFs can re-

arXiv:2208.02906v1  [cs.CR]  29 Jul 2022


2

main practically unclonable and thus secure even if all
their internal disorder and structure is known, simply
due to the current limits of nanofabrication5,10.
This
makes these special PUFs innately immune against any
key-extracting and even any secret-extracting attacks,
an seminal property sometimes referred to as “secret-
freeness”10.

Within the ample research landscape of magnetic11,
silicon6,12–15 or radio-wave based16 PUFs, optical and
photonic versions have played a pivotal role since their
first proposal in 20025. A generic optical physical un-
clonable function consists typically of a scattering ma-
terial, which generates a complex light diffraction pat-
tern when illuminated with coherent light, providing a
particularly sensitive and convenient probing mechanism
for such systems5,17–19.
Laser light can resolve their
unique structures with sub-wavelength sensitivity, lead-
ing to strong security levels and high resilience against
cloning5,17–20.
By using passive or active materials of
different nature (integrated light sources in dielectric or
metallic systems), and by playing with the systems’ di-
mensionality (2D or 3D), a large variety of optical PUFs
can be conceived, as research in the last decades has
demonstrated.
This includes PUFs based on organic
nano-emitters21,22, chip-scale laser23, thin random scat-
tering layers of plasmonic nano-particles24–27, random sil-
ver nano-structures28,29, or even PUFs architecture com-
patible with microfabrication technologies for photonic
integrated circuits (PIC)30–32. In the end, any material
with random structure, defects or scattering elements,
including regular paper33, will generate complex speckle
patterns when illuminated by a coherent source, making
optical PUFs a highly efficient, inexpensive and robust
platform for secure authentication5,8,28,34,35.
In recent
years, 2D optical PUFs have attracted particular atten-
tion due to their high stability, industry-compatible fab-
rication processes, and straightforward integration with
existing telecommunication technologies30–32.
At the
same time, however, these 2D structures inevitably ex-
hibit a lower complexity and entropy than comparable 3D
systems. They also can be directly inspected by electron
microscopy or other diagnostic techniques, and are there-
fore easier – at least in principle – to replicate or “clone”,
both experimentally and numerically in simulations. For
these reasons, in view of their future widespread adop-
tion, an accurate estimate of their cryptographic security
is fundamental and in this work, we quantitatively eval-
uate their resilience to cloning attacks and sensitivity to
measurement perturbations. In more detail, the exper-
imental and numerical analysis carried out in this work
quantifies the sensitivity and the unclonability of a proto-
typical 2D optical PUF by comparing the keys generated
by different clones of the same primitive, or studying the
keys variation to small readout alterations.
Perturba-
tions considered include the imperfect cloning of the PUF
layout (e.g., due to slightly incorrect number, position or
alignment of the scattering elements), as well as errors
during the illumination or readout process. All results

are interpreted under a unified framework, which allows
us to cast a direct connection between the experimen-
tal device and its simulated counterpart. Moreover, the
results obtained from the analysis of 2D PUFs are also
relevant to more complex 3D architectures, as they can
be considered as a lower bound to evaluate unclonability,
stability, and other properties in 3D PUFs. Please recall
in this context that with current computational methods,
exact simulations of 3D optical PUFs are extremely de-
manding and time consuming compared to the 2D case.

II.
BACKGROUND AND
METHODOLOGY

A.
Use Case: Remote Identification

The typical use case for so-called optical Strong
PUFs36 consists of a remote identification protocol, in
which a PUF (or a user holding it) identifies remotely
via a digital communication channel to a central author-
ity. The protocol employs a large number of input-output
pairs or challenge-response pairs (CRPs) of the PUF as
a unique identifier or “fingerprint”, and is sketched in
Figure 1. As a preparatory initial step, we assume that
the central authority has measured a sufficiently large
database of CRPs for the PUF. We also assume the au-
thority has determined some error-tolerating threshold
value to ensure a successful identification of the PUF
in variable and error-prone everyday conditions.
The
threshold must be set is such a way to allow discrimi-
nating between the responses of original PUFs and per-
turbed responses generated by possible read-out errors
(Challenge Pixel Flip), non perfect clones of the original
PUF (scatterers relocation), or slight misalignment be-
tween the original PUF and the read out system (PUF
misalignment), see Figure 1.
Once these setup steps
have been accomplished, the PUF is handed over from
the authority to the user.
During the authentication
phase or identification protocol, the authority sends a
series of randomly chosen challenges from its database
to the PUF/user, and awaits the correct responses in re-
turn. Once they arrive, the incoming responses are com-
pared to the responses measured earlier in the prepara-
tory phase by the authority. If they match within the
predefined error threshold (see above), then the identity
of the PUF/user is confirmed. We stress that each CRP
can be used only once in the above protocol. This means
that the pre-established CRP list shrinks over time, and
must be planned large enough in the setup phase for the
entire application lifetime.

B.
Experimental Setup

To experimentally address these cases, we built an op-
tical setup able to generate the CRPs and authenticate
each entity, following the scheme sketched in Figure 2a.


3

Figure 1. a) Schematic representation of the authentication flowchart based on optical PUFs. Potential attack scenarios or
issues with this scheme include: i) the challenges Ci are affected by noise (single or multiple macro-pixel flip). ii) the optical-
PUF scatterers are misplaced (small structural perturbations or cloning imperfections). iii) the optical-PUF is misaligned with
respect to the illumination/readout system.

It comprises a He-Ne laser (λ = 633 nm), a digital micro-
mirror device (DMD) for the challenge manipulation, il-
lumination and collection optics, and a CCD camera to
record the responses. Additional details about the ex-
perimental apparatus are reported in the Experimental
Section and in Figure S1 of the Supporting Information
(SI). The 2D optical-PUF consists of a perforated metal-
lic membrane obtained starting from a disordered 2D ar-
rangement of polystyrene nano-spheres (see insets of Fig-
ures 2a and 2b), additional details are available in the
Experimental section and in Figure S3 of the SI. Because
of the fabrication method based on an uncontrolled self-
assembly process, even the manufacturer cannot replicate
the same PUF design twice.

C.
Numerical Simulations

In parallel, the experimental configuration is replicated
numerically using an implementation of the Rayleigh-
Sommerfeld (RS) method37–40, which we have integrated
in a routine to generate the sample masks, the challenges,
and a speckle registration algorithm. The numerical pro-
cess consists of four main steps, as depicted in Figure
2b. Numerically, the disordered arrangement of holes in
the diffraction mask (i.e., the PUF) is generated by pack-
ing non-overlapping circles using either a random sequen-
tial adsorption (RSA) or a Lubachevsky-Stillinger (LS)
approach41,42. These methods are used to pack discs up
to a target the packing fraction (fp) defined as the ra-
tio between the area occupied by the disks and the to-
tal sample area.
Then, a plane wave (U) is projected
over a pixelated-mask to generate the challenge pattern
(Ci) which is imaged onto the PUF. Following the exper-
imental configuration, the scattered intensity is finally
recorded in the far field at an off-axis position on a XY
plane at a distance z from the PUF.

Figure 2. a) Sketch of the experimental optical setup used
to characterize the proposed optical PUFs. The inset on the
left shows the challenges overlapped to the Thorlabs ruler
(R1L3S2P) to measure its size (scale bar 100 µm), the inset
on the right shows a sketch of the sample.
b) Scheme of
the numerical workflow used to generate and collect synthetic
CRPs.

D.
Entropy Estimation for Optical PUFs

To quantify the randomness (entropy or information
content), and the stability of the PUF responses against
environmental variations, we follow the typical approach
used for their application5,43. The first step is to gen-
erate the binary keys (K1, . . . , Ki from the responses
R1, . . . , Ri related to the challenges C1, . . . , Ci) by hash-
ing and reshaping each raw speckle image into a 1D array.


4

This can be performed using standard image transforma-
tion and binarization algorithms. Here, the wavelength
of a wavelet-based Gabor filter is tuned to extract the
features of the speckle images while ensuring the repeata-
bility of the responses under the same challenge interro-
gation. The pairwise distance between each binary keys
K1, . . . , Ki is then measured with the Hamming distance
metric43. Distances between keys generated by different
challenges are called “unlike” distances (and are related
to the entropy of the key), while those generated by same
challenges are called “like” distances (and are related to
the stability of the PUF). The entropy of the keys is then
evaluated by assuming that each Fractional Hamming
Distance (FHD) resulting from the bit-wise comparison
of two different keys can be represented as a Bernoulli
trial, albeit with correlations between successive PUF
responses.
For large N values, the expected binomial
distribution is well approximated by a Gaussian, which
makes it possible to estimate the number of independent
bit of the keys, i.e., N = ⟨p⟩ · (1 − ⟨p⟩)/σ2, that is associ-
ated with the PUF entropy/information content. There-
fore, as a first step, we have generated several synthetic
PUF configurations to study how N depends on the fp
for a fixed sub-wavelength hole radius r0 ≈ 200 nm. Nu-
merical simulations show that dense perforated masks
with a fp between 50 % and 70 % generates keys with
the highest entropic content, see Figure 3a. In addition,
we note that the entropy of the key is larger than that of
the challenge (composed by M × M macropixels), which
is NC = log2(2)M (see Figure 3a), demonstrating that
the interaction between light and the optical-PUF effec-
tively increases the information content encoded in the
Challenge. The choice of the size of the macropixels is
based on the analysis reported in the Challenges pixel size
section and in Figure S2 of the SI. The optical charac-
terization of the FHD for the experimental PUF sample
is reported in Figure 3b, returning a value of N = 448
bits, in excellent agreement with the numerical predic-
tion.
The “like” FHD distribution, which is collected
after a time lag of 30 minutes in order to test the stabil-
ity and define the acceptance threshold, returns a mean
value ⟨p⟩ of 0.122 and a standard deviation σ = 0.038
(yellow histogram/red curve in Figure 3b). Since the like
and unlike distributions are well separated, the authen-
tication acceptance threshold can be set at around 0.2 to
safely reject false positives44. Due to the deterministic
and noiseless nature of numerical calculations, the “like”
FHD distribution is not reported here as it would appear
as a delta-distribution centered around zero. Based on
the good agreement between the FHD histograms and
their Gaussian models, in the following we will plot FHD
distributions showing only their fitting curves for better
clarity.

Figure 3. a) Number of independent bits calculated as func-
tion of fp in synthetic optical-PUF samples.
b) The blue
histogram and solid line correspond to the experimental “un-
like” and its fit, the experimental “like” are displayed with
the yellow histogram and the red solid line for the fit, while
the numerical “unlike” are indicated by the green histogram
and its fit by the green dashed line. The inset in b) shows a
SEM image of the optical PUF, exhibiting a densely packed
arrangement of holes etched into a titanium membrane.

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A.
Sensitivity to Challenge Pixel Flips

This analysis has been carried out experimentally and
verified by numerical calculation. As a first test, we study
the sensitivity of the optical PUF response to perturba-
tions of the challenge (random macro-pixel flips).
We
generate a set of 2000 challenges, and then perturbed
versions of these challenges with one or more random
macro-pixels flipped to its opposite value. An ideal PUF
is expected to provide a completely independent response
as soon as the challenge is modified, meaning that this
test can be used to evaluate the optical PUF sensitivity.
Figure 4a shows some illustrative examples of 16 × 16
challenges and their perturbed version, with the flipped
pixels drawn in white in the large panels. Figure 4b re-
ports the fit retrieved by the FHD analysis for the exper-
imental and numerical studies. The fits are evaluated on
the FHD distributions obtained comparing the responses


5

Figure 4. a) Illustrative examples of original and perturbed
challenges for different numbers of flipped macro-pixels. The
large panel shows the macro-pixel that has been flipped. b)
Numerical (red) and experimental (blue) “inter-device” FHD
distributions for 1, 32, and 256 pixels. c) Trend for numerical
and experimental “unlike” (black ribbon line and green dots),
R′Rnpx comparison (red ribbon line and blue scatterers) and
the experimental “like” (light green ribbon). The error bars
are calculated as the standard deviation of each FHD distri-
bution.

from the system probed with the original challenges R′

and the responses obtained for the perturbed challenges
Rnpx. Figure 4c summarizes the comparison for differ-
ent degrees of perturbation.
Black and green ribbons
are shown for reference, representing the experimental
“unlike” and “like” FHD distributions, respectively. The
numerical and experimental comparison (“inter-device”)
FHD distributions of R′Rnpx present a similar trend (red
ribbon line and blue dots, respectively). Despite the bi-
dimensional nature of the sample, the optical PUF shows
a good sensitivity to a single pixel variation of the chal-
lenge as the FHD distribution of the responses related to
challenges with a single pixel flip are not overlapped with
their respective “like” distributions.

B.
Sensitivity to Scatterers Relocation

The second test that can be addressed numerically,
concerns the robustness of the PUF to cloning attempts.
In this scenario, an attacker trying to clone the physical

Figure 5. a) FHD distributions obtained by perturbing the
scatterer positions for σ equal to 2.5 %, 10 % and 17.5 %, the
inset shows a schematic view of misplaced scatterers. b) FHD
trend for the R′Rshake% comparison (red ribbon). The exper-
imental “unlike” (black ribbon line) and “like” distributions
(light green ribbon) are also shown for reference.. c) Repre-
sentative sketch about randomly removed and removed and
added scatterers in new positions. d) The comparison R′Rsc%
for different percentages of RR and RA scatterers modifica-
tions (red solid and blue dashed lines respectively. e) FHD
trend for numerical ”unlikes” (black (RR) and green (RA)
ribbons), compared FHD distributions R′Rsc% (red (RR) and
blue ribbons (RA)), and “like” distributions (light green rib-
bon) represents the reference.

device aims at replicating the shape, size and position
of all scattering elements. To simulate different degrees
of cloning imperfections, we perturb the PUF by adding
some Gaussian noise (σ ≈ nR/r0, where nR is the relo-
cation) on the position of each scatterer. The results are
summarized in Figure 5a, showing that cloning the holes
with a precision <5 nm (below the typical resolution of
e-beam lithography fabrications) is already sufficient to
relocate the R′RSR% FHD distribution at ⟨p⟩ = 0.25,
well above the experimental acceptance region. With a
precision of about 30 nm, the resulting PUF gives rise to
an effectively independent set of responses (⟨p⟩ = 0.5),
which is remarkable considering that the hole radius r0
is ≈ 200 nm and the probing wavelength is λ = 633 nm.
A graph that summarize the behavior for all applied po-
sitioning uncertainties is shown in Figure 5b.
Further
cloning imperfections are represented by two case stud-
ies mimicking an increasing modification of the involved
scatterers, for this purpose they are randomly removed
(RR) or randomly removed and then added again (RA)
in new positions, as sketched in Figure 5c. These numeri-
cal studies highlight how the “inter-device” (comparison)
FHD distributions become independent after a RR or a
RA of <20 % (⟨p⟩ ≈ 0.30) well above the experimental
acceptance region, as shown in the fits and the summary
FHD trend in Figure 5d,e respectively.


6

C.
Sensitivity to Misalignment within Measurement Setup

Figure 6. a) Illustration of the optical PUF shift with respect
to initial position and the probing/readout system. b) Nu-
merical (red dashed lines) and experimental (blue solid lines)
comparisons (R′Rsh%) reported for a rigid shift along the x
direction, equal to 0.1 %, 2.5 %, and 13 %. c) Trend for nu-
merical and experimental “unlike” distributions (black ribbon
and green dots respectively), the R′Rsh% comparison (red rib-
bon and blue hollow dots), and the experimental “like” (light
green ribbon), for reference.

In this section, we study how the responses are af-
fected by a misalignment of the illuminated region on
the optical-PUF. This analysis has been carried out ex-
perimentally and verified by numerical calculation. The
addressed case is of practical relevance assuming that the
physical token must be manually inserted by a user in a
slot for its optical readout. Numerically, we model the
displacement by performing a translation of the geom-
etry along the x axis, which is modeled with periodic
boundary conditions for convenience (Figure 6a). Based
on the so-called memory effect for speckle patterns45,46,
a rigid shift of the PUF should correspond to a propor-
tional shift of the response pattern if the displacement
is small. In the following, the shift (sh%) is evaluated
as the ratio between the translation and the lateral size
of the sample. We therefore expect that for small shifts,
the R′Rsh% FHD distributions should remain almost un-
affected as long as we re-align the optical responses us-

ing a registration algorithm (see Experimental Section).
Numerical and experimental measurements are in good
agreement and show that the compared distributions be-
come independent (i.e., the responses are different and/or
registration fails) after a shift of 0.1 %, corresponding to
≈1 µm, as reported in Figure 6b,c.

D.
Sensitivity to Varying Scatterer Sizes

Figure 7. The robustness/tolerance tunability based on the
scatterers radius:
a) increasing the scatterers radius the
optical-PUF becomes more sensitive to a single flip in the
Ci challenge; (b-c) while decreasing it enhances the PUF sen-
sitivity to scatterer misplacement or overall PUF misalign-
ment (trends shown in the cyan, red, and blue ribbon lines,
respectively). The black and the light green ribbons report
the “unlike” and the experimental authentication threshold
“like”, for reference.

As a final test, we numerically study how the PUF
sensitivity changes when the scatterer radius is either in-
creased or decreased. Compared to the original hole ra-
dius of r0 =∼ 200 nm, we test a reduced (subwavelength)
value of r− = 150 nm, and r+ = 400 nm (hole diameter
¿ λ). The effect of this change is evaluated over the pre-
vious scenarios, including the challenge sensitivity, po-
sitional perturbation and rigid displacement tests. The
results are summarized in Figure 7, showing that increas-
ing the hole size leads to a slightly larger PUF sensitivity
to small changes in the challenge (Figure 7a), but also
to a larger tolerance to fabrication imperfections (Figure
7b), highlighting a trade-off between the strength and the
unclonability for the considered 2D geometry. Similarly,
the last panel shows how the hole radius affects also the


7

overall misalignment tolerance of the PUF, which can be
made significantly stricter by pushing the aperture size
mode deeply into the sub-wavelength regime.

IV.
CONCLUSIONS

This paper quantified the sensitivity and unclonability
of scattering-based optical physical unclonable functions
in simulations and, for a few scenarios, also in experi-
ments. We focused our study on 2D structures as they
are very attractive for integrated devices in the visible
and telecommunication range also for cryptographic ap-
plications.
We analyzed several relevant scenarios, in-
cluding cloning attempts, challenge sensitivity, and the
tolerance to device misalignment during optical readout.
Fabrication imperfections of few nm, or even the mis-
match of one challenge pixel between the interrogation
and the enrolled ones are sufficient to deny the authen-
tication. Evaluating the sensitivity of a PUF to small
changes in the challenge pattern is also relevant to esti-
mate the maximum CRP space that can be reasonably
accessed using a PUF. Finally, the misalignment test, rel-
evant in a scenario where the PUF must be aligned into
an optical readout device, shows that the tolerable mis-
alignment is smaller than 10 µm, for a realistic detector
distance of 5 mm. These parameters, properly scaled for
the PUF and readout system specs, should be taken into
account when designing a readout device.

At the same time, our results provide guidance on how
to tune these values as needed towards either more robust
or tolerant authentication devices, e.g., by acting on the
radius of the holes in the structure. Notably, our pro-
posed numerical approach to test diffraction-based 2D
optical PUFs is computationally efficient and flexible,
allowing to investigate also other physical effects such
as thermal expansion, mechanical stress, tampering at-
tempts and readout noise or aberrations in future works.

As a final remark, our results outline a general strategy
to evaluate the sensitivity of optical physical unclonable
functions under different scenarios, and provide a more
quantitative ground to the general assumptions regard-
ing their resilience against adversarial attacks. Regard-
less of the specific 2D geometry considered here, these
results are relevant also for more complex architectures
with three-dimensional disorder, since the security level
of 2D devices can be reasonably taken as a lower bound
to the expected security of 3D PUFs.
Given the fast
progress of advanced rigorous numerical methods, we en-
vision that performing a similar analysis on a represen-
tative 3D arrangement of scatterers will soon be possible
to test directly this assumption and quantify the secu-
rity gain provided by multiple scattering also in other
disordered 3D structures.

V.
EXPERIMENTAL SECTION

Sample fabrication: The 2D optical-PUFs were ex-
perimentally fabricated by exploiting the irreproducible
self-assembly of dielectric nanospheres (polystyrene) on
glass substrates.
The nanospheres were deposited via
spin coating, in the regime of high spinning speeds (6000
rpm) where they form a monolayer with random ar-
rangement (see Figure S3a in SI). The initial diameter
of the spheres (617 nm) was then reduced by Ar plasma
to about 400 nm to create a reflective mask (Figure S3b)
by evaporation of 80 nm of Titanium (Figure S3c). The
spheres are then removed by sonication in isopropanol.
This four-step process results in a 2D reflective perforated
membrane with a random arrangement of nanoholes, see
Figure S3d.
Optical Setup:
A He-Ne laser beam (λ = 633 nm,
5 mW) propagates through lenses (L), polarizers (P), and
a iris (I). The beam spot (magnified by a beam expander
composed by a first lens L1 the iris I and the magnifi-
cation lens L2) impinges on a digital micro-mirror de-
vice (DMD) used to generate the challenge (Ci) used to
interrogate the scattering PUF-sample.
The challenge
Ci is focused using an infinity-corrected lens (L∞ with
focal length f = 200 mm) into the objective back-focal
plane (OBJ with 10× magnification), which allows to de-
magnify the challenges to a total area of 750 × 750 µm2

corresponding to the physical extent of our experimen-
tal PUF. The optical pattern transmitted through the
perforated membrane interferes in the far field to form
a speckle pattern response (Ri), which is collected by
lens in 2f configuration (L2f) far away from the PUF.
Finally, the speckle pattern is recorded by a 250 × 250
pixels camera (placed slightly off-axis to discard the bal-
listic signal) at 20 frames per second. A beam stabilizer
is also included in the beam path, adjusting the beam po-
sition by means of a position detector (PD) controlling
a piezoelectric mirror (PM), see Figure S1 in Supporting
Information.
Numerical simulations:
The Rayleigh-Sommerfeld
(RS) method exploits a fast Fourier transformation oper-
ation evaluating the far field starting from the near field
at a fixed distance along the light propagation direction
z. Each random Ci mask is created as a chessboard with
size of 16 × 16 pixels filled with an equal number of “on”
and “off” pixels placed randomly. The numerical sam-
ple contains a large number of scatterers (≈ 2 × 106 for
fp ≈ 0.71), and the generated responses are collected on a
250 × 250 pixel grid as in the experiments, at a distance
of z = 5 mm and at an off-axis angle to avoid ballistic
light.
Image registration: To properly evaluate the tolerance
of the illumination and readout process to small shifts of
the PUF, we apply an image registration algorithm to
both experimental and numerical responses before calcu-
lating the FHD. Due to the high sensitivity of the Ga-
bor hashing function to small changes in the responses,
we find that registering speckle patterns has a relatively


8

small impact when trying to recover a small misalign-
ment, showing instead a much larger reduction of the
FHD when applied to larger displacement values.
Be-
yond a certain misalignment, however, the registration
step itself will eventually fail, in which case we have left
the alignment of R′
i unmodified.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thanks H. Cao for fruitful discussion and
G. Roati and G. Del Pace for their help with the ex-
perimental equipment.
This work was supported in
part by the AFOSR/RTA2 (A.2.e. Information Assur-
ance and Cybersecurity) project “Highly Secure Nonlin-
ear Optical PUFs”. GEL and FR thank the FASPEC
(Fiber-Based Planar Antennas for Biosensing and Di-
agnostics) and the project ”Complex Photonic Systems
(DFM.AD005.
317).
GEL also thanks the research
project “FSE-REACT EU” financed by National Social
Fund - National Operative Research Program and Inno-
vation 2014-2020 (D.M. 1062/2021). Part of this work
has been carried out at Nanofacility Piemonte INRiM, a
laboratory supported by the “Compagnia di San Paolo”
Foundation, and at the QR Laboratories, INRiM.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The data and the codes that support the findings
of this study are available from the corresponding au-
thor upon reasonable request or at the following link
over Zenodo repository 10.5281/zenodo.5986425.
The
“puffractio” python code used to generate and process
the numerical data is available at the following link
https://github.com/lpattelli/puffractio.git on Github.

SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley
Online Library or from the authors.

REFERENCES

aCorrespondence email address: lio@lens.unifi.it
bCorrespondence email address: ruehrmair@ilo.de
cCorrespondence email address: riboli@lens.unifi.it
1Cisco, U. Cisco annual internet report (2018–2023) white paper.
Cisco: San Jose, CA, USA (2020).

2Anderson, R. Security engineering: a guide to building depend-
able distributed systems (John Wiley & Sons, 2020).

3Kocher, P. et al. Spectre attacks: Exploiting speculative execu-
tion. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
1–19 (IEEE, 2019).

4Lipp, M. et al.
Meltdown: Reading kernel memory from user
space. In 27th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
18), 973–990 (IEEE, 2018).

5Pappu, R., Recht, B., Taylor, J. & Gershenfeld, N.
Physical
one-way functions. Science 297, 2026–2030 (2002).

6Gassend, B., Clarke, D., van Dijk, M. & Devadas, S.
Silicon
physical random functions. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Con-
ference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’02,
148-160 (Association for Computing Machinery, 2002).

7R¨uhrmair, U. & Holcomb, D. E.
Pufs at a glance.
In 2014
Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition
(DATE), 1–6 (IEEE, 2014).

8Herder, C., Yu, M.-D., Koushanfar, F. & Devadas, S. Physical
unclonable functions and applications: A tutorial. Proceedings
of the IEEE 102, 1126–1141 (2014).

9R¨uhrmair, U. et al. Power and timing side channels for pufs and
their efficient exploitation. Cryptology ePrint Archive (2013).

10R¨uhrmair, U. Secret-free security: A survey and tutorial. Journal
of Cryptographic Engineering 1–26 (2022).

11Das, J., Scott, K., Rajaram, S., Burgett, D. & Bhanja, S. Mram
puf: A novel geometry based magnetic puf with integrated cmos.
IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology 14, 436–443 (2015).

12Suh, G. E. & Devadas, S.
Physical unclonable functions for
device authentication and secret key generation. In 2007 44th
ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference, 9–14 (IEEE, 2007).

13Nguyen, P. H. et al.
The interpose puf:
Secure puf design
against state-of-the-art machine learning attacks.
Cryptology
ePrint Archive (2018).

14Lugli, P. et al. Physical unclonable functions based on crossbar
arrays for cryptographic applications. International journal of
circuit theory and applications 41, 619–633 (2013).

15Csaba, G. et al. Application of mismatched cellular nonlinear
networks for physical cryptography. In 2010 12th International
Workshop on Cellular Nanoscale Networks and their Applica-
tions (CNNA 2010), 1–6 (IEEE, 2010).

16DeJean, G. & Kirovski, D. Rf-dna: Radio-frequency certificates
of authenticity.
In International Workshop on Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems, 346–363 (Springer, 2007).

17ˇSkori´c, B., Tuyls, P. & Ophey, W. Robust key extraction from
physical uncloneable functions. In International Conference on
Applied Cryptography and Network Security, 407–422 (Springer,
2005).

18Tuyls, P., ˇSkoric, B. & Kevenaar, T. Security with noisy data:
on private biometrics, secure key storage and anti-counterfeiting
(Springer Science & Business Media, 2007).

19Horstmeyer, R., Judkewitz, B., Vellekoop, I. M., Assawaworrarit,
S. & Yang, C. Physical key-protected one-time pad. Scientific
reports 3, 1–6 (2013).

20Horstmeyer, R., Assawaworrarit, S., Ruhrmair, U. & Yang, C.
Physically secure and fully reconfigurable data storage using op-
tical scattering.
In 2015 IEEE International Symposium on
Hardware Oriented Security and Trust (HOST), 157–162 (IEEE,
2015).

21Feng, J. et al. Random organic nanolaser arrays for cryptographic
primitives. Advanced Materials 31, 1807880 (2019).

22Kayaci, N. et al.
Organic light-emitting physically unclonable
functions. Advanced Functional Materials 2108675 (2021).

23Kim, K. et al. Massively parallel ultrafast random bit generation
with a chip-scale laser. Science 371, 948–952 (2021).

24Lio, G. E., De Luca, A., Umeton, C. P. & Caputo, R. Opto-
mechanically induced thermoplasmonic response of unclonable
flexible tags with hotspot fingerprint. Journal of Applied Physics
128, 093107 (2020).

25Berk, J. & Foreman, M. R. Theory of multiple scattering en-
hanced single particle plasmonic sensing. ACS Photonics (2021).

26Berk, J., Paterson, C. & Foreman, M. R. Tracking single parti-
cles using surface plasmon leakage radiation speckle. Journal of


9

Lightwave Technology 39, 3950–3960 (2021).

27Ferraro, A. et al. Low cost and easy validation anticounterfeit-
ing plasmonic tags based on thin films of metal and dielectric.
Nanomaterials 12, 1279 (2022).

28Anderson, B. R., Gunawidjaja, R. & Eilers, H. Initial tamper
tests of novel tamper-indicating optical physical unclonable func-
tions. Applied optics 56, 2863–2872 (2017).

29Caligiuri, V. et al. Hybrid plasmonic/photonic nanoscale strategy
for multilevel anticounterfeit labels.
ACS applied materials &
interfaces 13, 49172–49183 (2021).

30Tarik, F. B., Famili, A., Lao, Y. & Ryckman, J. D.
Robust
optical physical unclonable function using disordered photonic
integrated circuits. Nanophotonics 9, 2817–2828 (2020).

31Grubel, B. C. et al. Silicon photonic physical unclonable function.
Optics Express 25, 12710–12721 (2017).

32Knechtel, J. et al. Toward physically unclonable functions from
plasmonics-enhanced silicon disc resonators. Journal of Light-
wave Technology 37, 3805–3814 (2019).

33Buchanan, J. D. et al. fingerprinting documents and packaging.
Nature 436, 475–475 (2005).

34Li, Q. et al. Simulation of physically unclonable function based on
disordered photonic structure. Optical and Quantum Electronics
49, 122 (2017).

35Maes, R. & Verbauwhede, I. Physically unclonable functions: A
study on the state of the art and future research directions. In
Towards Hardware-Intrinsic Security, 3–37 (Springer, 2010).

36McGrath, T., Bagci, I. E., Wang, Z. M., Roedig, U. & Young,
R. J. A puf taxonomy. Applied Physics Reviews 6, 011303 (2019).

37Torcal-Milla, F. J. & Sanchez-Brea, L. M. Single-focus binary
fresnel zone plate.
Optics & Laser Technology 97, 316–320
(2017).

38Sanchez-Brea, L. M., Torcal-Milla, F. J. & Buencuerpo, J. Far-
field diffraction of linear chirped gratings. Optics & Laser Tech-
nology 107, 337–343 (2018).

39Sanchez-Brea, L. M., Torcal-Milla, F. J., del Hoyo, J., Cuadrado,
A. & Gomez-Pedrero, J. A.
Optimization of angular diffrac-
tive lenses with extended depth of focus. Journal of Optics 22,
065601 (2020).

40Lio, G. E. et al.
Leveraging on enz metamaterials to achieve
2d and 3d hyper-resolution in two-photon direct laser writing.
Advanced Materials 33, 2008644 (2021).

41Skoge, M., Donev, A., Stillinger, F. H. & Torquato, S.
Pack-
ing hyperspheres in high-dimensional euclidean spaces. Physical
Review E 74, 041127 (2006).

42Riboli, F. et al.
Tailoring correlations of the local density of
states in disordered photonic materials. Physical review letters
119, 043902 (2017).

43Daugman, J. The importance of being random: statistical prin-
ciples of iris recognition. Pattern recognition 36, 279–291 (2003).

44Kim, M. S. et al.
Revisiting silk: a lens-free optical physical
unclonable function. Nature Communications 13, 1–12 (2022).

45Feng, S., Kane, C., Lee, P. A. & Stone, A. D. Correlations and
fluctuations of coherent wave transmission through disordered
media. Physical review letters 61, 834 (1988).

46Yılmaz, H., K¨uhmayer, M., Hsu, C. W., Rotter, S. & Cao, H.
Customizing the angular memory effect for scattering media.
Physical Review X 11, 031010 (2021).

SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Quantifying the Sensitivity and Unclonability of Optical
Physical Unclonable Functions

Giuseppe Emanuele Lio1,a),†, Sara Nocentini2,†, Lorenzo
Pattelli2, Eleonora Cara3, Diederik Sybolt Wiersma4, Ulrich
R¨uhrmair5,b), Francesco Riboli6,c).

Figure S1. Representative sketch of the experimental setup
used to probe the PUF with the challenges C1, . . . , Ci and to
collect the responses R1, . . . , Ri.

Challenges pixel size

The number of macro pixels for the challenges has been
selected experimentally using 2000 challenges on the real
optical-PUF with a different macro-pixels arrangement.
To this end, challenges with 4 × 4, 8 × 8, and 16 × 16
macro-pixels have been used. As reported in Figure S2
using too few macro-pixels results in large and broad
“unlike” and “like” distributions. The intermediate case
shows a slightly better distribution of “unlike” and “like”
distributions, while using 16 × 16 challenge patterns the
produced keys shown narrowed “unlike” and “like” FHD
distributions with a high stability, well separated and a
“like” FHD distribution close to the possible threshold
(⟨p⟩ ≈ 0.1). Furthermore, the challenges with 16 × 16
macro-pixels represent a suitable configuration to have a
response sensitivity to a single bit flip modifying just an
area equal to 1/256 of the illumination pattern instead of
the other cases, namely 4×4 and 8×8, where a single flip
corresponds to modify 1/16 or 1/64 of the challenge area
respectively. On the other hand, as shown in the subsec-
tion 3.1, using challenge patterns composed of 32 × 32
or more macro-pixels does not to satisfy the condition
that a single bit flip in the challenge should correspond
to a shift of the FHD distribution R′R1px large enough
to avoid overlaps with the “like” standard deviation.


10

Figure S2.
FHD “like” and “unlike” distributions referred
to a set of 2000 challenges with 4 × 4, 8 × 8, and 16 × 16
macro-pixels.

Sample fabrication

Figure S3.
Optical-PUF fabrication process: a) Spin coat-
ing of polystyrene spheres (PS), D ≈ 600 nm on microscope
glass. b) Plasma etching of the PS and diameter reduction
(D ≈ 400 nm). c) Titanium thin layer sputtered to cover the
substrate (t ≈ 80 nm). d) PS removal by ethanol bath.


