 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

On the definition of chirality and enantioselective fields 

 
 
 

 

Jun-ichiro Kishine,[a] Hiroaki Kusunose,[b] and Hiroshi M. Yamamoto*[c] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[a] 
Jun-ichiro Kishine 
Department of Natural Sciences,  
The Open University of Japan,  
Wakaba 2-11, Chiba261-8586, Japan  
 

[b] 
Hiroaki Kusunose 
Department of Physics, Meiji University 
Higashi-Mita, Taka-Ku, Kawasaki 214-8571 Japan 
 

[c] 
Hiroshi M. Yamamoto 
Research Centre of Integrated Molecular Systems,  
Institute for Molecular Science 
Myodaiji, Okazaki 444-8585 Japan 
e-mail: yhiroshi@ims.ac.jp 

 
 


 

Abstract 

 In solid state physics, any symmetry breaking is known to be associated with emergence of an order parameter. 

However, the order parameter for molecular and crystal chirality, which is a consequence of parity and mirror symmetry 

breaking, has not been known since its discovery. In this article, the authors show that the order parameter for chirality 

can be defined by electric toroidal monopole рқҗәрқҗә0. By this definition, one becomes able to discuss external filed that can 

distinguish two different enantiomers only by physical fields. In addition, dynamics and fluctuations of the order 

parameter рқҗәрқҗә0  can be discussed, with which one can obtain fruitful insights on a spin filtering effect called CISS 

(Chirality Induced Spin Selectivity). Emergence of time-reversal-odd dipole рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§ by time propagation of рқҗәрқҗә0 quantities 

is discussed to explain the enantioselective effect (chiral resolution) at a ferromagnetic surface.  

 

 

1. Introduction: historical background 

CISS (Chirality Induced Spin Selectivity), an electronвҖҷs spin-filtering effect by a chiral molecule [1-5], is believed 

to be a quantum mechanical phenomenon which only takes place in chiral molecules and crystals. However, quantum 

mechanical treatment of chiral media is not so trivial as one might think for the first thought because it is not a 

structureless point-like concept. Therefore, in order to establish the starting point for unveiling microscopic mechanism 

of CISS, it is pivotal to explicitly give the definition of the chirality in terms of quantum mechanical language. 

Historically, in early 19th century, Arago and then Biot discovered the phenomena of natural optical activity (NOA). 

Later, in 1848, Pasteur ascertained that the NOA is a direct consequence of molecular or crystal asymmetry. In 1894, 

Lord Kelvin, in his Boyle Lecture [6], coined the term chirality with the definition, вҖңany geometrical figure, or group 

of points, is chiral, if its image in a plane mirror, ideally realized, cannot be brought to coincide with itself.вҖқ After the 

discovery of quantum mechanics, the existence of chiral molecules has puzzled many scientists because only one-

handed enantiomeric state cannot be an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian [7, 8]. An important point here is that two 

enantiomeric states, both of which are required to constitute the complete eigenstates, are separated by double-well 

potential and the molecule is allowed to stay at one of these two states in a finite period of time because of symmetry 

breaking. (The time scale depends on the height of potential barrier and system size.) Barron has proposed to extend 

the definition of chirality from such a structural chirality to dynamics of materials and fields in his discussions on 

true/false chirality [9-11]. The most important aim of his discussion was to describe the necessary conditions for 

absolute asymmetric synthesis, which might be a cause of homochirality in nature. However, such a discussion becomes 

heavily complicated when non-equilibrium states are considered, which precludes universal understanding of physical 

fields that can recognize structural chirality. 

In this short review, we try to describe the details of chiral symmetry breaking in terms of quantum mechanics with 

a knowledge of solid state physics, because the symmetry breaking is one of the central concepts for this field so that 

the methodology is well established. Through this method, we redefine the chirality in terms of the rank-zero  

multipole (monopole) basis. This new definition leads to unambiguous notion of structural chirality as well as enantio-

selective fields. Following this argument, we also discuss recent proposals on the microscopic mechanism of the CISS 

phenomena. 

 

 

 


2. Order parameter for chiral object 

As has been introduced in the previous section, chirality refers to an existence of two objects, called enantiomers, 

which are interconnected by mirror operation but cannot overlap one another. This definition of chirality is empirically 

natural, but it is ambiguous for chiral objects in discrete point groups at quantum mechanical level (here, we use the 

term вҖңchiral objectsвҖқ to refer to molecules and crystals possessing chirality). In order to establish a concrete description 

for such microscopic chiral objects, we then develop a proper representation scheme based on the concept of electronic 

multipoles. The concrete description of chirality in an appropriate basis will also lead to the discussion of physical 

fields in the next section that can recognize the handedness of chiral objects, which should be called вҖңenantioselective 

fieldsвҖқ. 

In the continuous SO(3) rotational group with inversion operation, parity (inversion) symmetry breaking is identical 

to mirror symmetry breaking. The situation becomes complicated when point groups, or subgroups of SO(3), are 

considered in order to express chirality of fixed molecules and crystals. In such a case, the inversion and mirror 

symmetries are independent, and even NOA can no more be as unique signature of chirality. It is important, however, 

to point out that none of the inversion or mirror symmetries exist for chiral point groups. Namely, the chiral point 

groups consist of purely rotational symmetry operations. At the same time, the difference between polar, weak and 

strong gyrotropic (WG and SG), and chiral point groups appear within non-centrosymmetric point groups having no 

inversion symmetry operation (Table 1). 

The difference between chiral and other point groups must reflect in the character of their wave function and associated 

electronic degrees of freedom. To extract the specific character of the wave function, it is useful to express any 

electronic degrees of freedom in terms of the complete symmetry-adapted (multipole) basis set. For instance, the 

presence of the electric dipole moment discriminates a polar wave function from non-polar ones. Such a description 

can be generalized to any point groups, in which a proper multipole moment can distinguish different symmetry of 

wave functions as shown in Fig. 1. The presence of electric dipole moment is a manifestation of the s-p hybrid orbital, 

рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘ рқ‘  + рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘қ (Fig 1a). Similarly, p-d hybrid orbital, рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘§рқ‘§ + рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘‘рқ‘‘рқ‘қрқ‘қ2вҲ’рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ2 is characterized by the electric toroidal quadrupole 

(Fig 1b). On the other hand, the time-reversal-symmetry (TRS) broken states, рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘ рқ‘  + рқ‘–рқ‘–рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘қ  and рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘§рқ‘§ + рқ‘–рқ‘–рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘‘рқ‘‘рқ‘қрқ‘қ2вҲ’рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ2 

carrying orbital angular momenta (dipole and quadrupole), are characterized by the finite magnetic toroidal dipole and 

magnetic quadrupole moments, respectively (Fig 1c and 1d). 

In this way, any wave functions under particular point group with or without TRS breaking are represented by the 

active moment of four type of electronic multipoles, i.e., electric (рқ‘„рқ‘„), magnetic (рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ), electric toroidal (рқҗәрқҗә), and magnetic 

toroidal (рқ‘Үрқ‘Ү) multipoles, whose properties are summarized in Table 2. The electric and magnetic multipoles are familiar 

in classical electromagnetism, which are polar (true) and axial (pseudo) tensors with time-reversal (рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ)-even and рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-

odd symmetries, respectively. On the other hand, less familiar electric toroidal and magnetic toroidal multipoles are 

axial (pseudo) and polar (true) tensors, which are counterparts of the ordinary electric and magnetic multipoles in the 

parity sector. Each multipole has its rank l, e.g., monopole is l=0, dipole is l=1, quadrupole is l=2, and so on, and the 

polar (true) tensor is characterized by the parity (-1)l, while the axial (pseudo) tensor by (-1)l+1 against the inversion 

operation. Therefore, the even-rank polar and odd-rank axial tensors are parity (рқ’«рқ’«) even, while others are рқ’«рқ’«-odd. It is 

important to note that these four multipoles constitute a complete basis set, and hence they can describe any of 

symmetry-adapted electronic states. For further detail, refer to the literatures, [12-14]. 

 

 

 


Table 1. Active multipoles belonging to the totally symmetry irreducible representation for non-centrosymmetric point 

groups except for C1. The abbreviations, P, C, SG, and WG denote Polar, Chiral, Strong Gyrotropic (NOA Active), and 

Weak Gyrotropic (NOA Inactive) point groups, respectively. The shaded rows represent chiral point groups. Full 

version of this table can be found in Table XVI in ref. [13]. 

 

Crystal System 
Point Group 
P 
C 
SG 
WG 

Active Multipole Moment 

Monopole 
Dipole 
Quadrupole 

Cubic 
O 
 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
 
 

 
Td 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
T 
 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
 
 

Tetragonal 
D4 
 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘ўрқ‘ў 

 
D2d 
 
 
вң” 
 
 
 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘Јрқ‘Ј 

 
C4v 
вң” 
 
 
вң” 
 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§ 
 

 
C4 
вң” 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§ 
Gu 

 
S4 
 
 
вң” 
 
 
 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘Јрқ‘Ј, рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ 

Orthorhombic 
D2 
 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘ўрқ‘ў, рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘Јрқ‘Ј 

 
C2v 
вң” 
 
вң” 
 
 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§ 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ 

Monoclinic 
C2 
вң” 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§ 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘ўрқ‘ў, рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘Јрқ‘Ј, рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ 

 
Cs 
вң” 
 
вң” 
 
 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘қрқ‘қ ,рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ  
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұрқ‘§рқ‘§, рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘қрқ‘қ 

Hexagonal 
D6 
 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘ўрқ‘ў 

 
D3h 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
C6v 
вң” 
 
 
вң” 
 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§ 
 

 
C6 
вң” 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§ 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘ўрқ‘ў 

 
C3h 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Trigonal 
D3 
 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘ўрқ‘ў 

 
C3v 
вң” 
 
 
вң” 
 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§ 
 

 
C3 
вң” 
вң” 
вң” 
 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§ 
рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘ўрқ‘ў 

 

 

 

Table 2. Four types of multipoles classified by parity and time-reversal properties. 

Type 
Symbol 
Parity рқ’«рқ’« 
Time-Reversal рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ 

Electric (E) Multipole 
рқ‘„рқ‘„0, рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§, рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ вҖҰ 
Polar (True) 
(-1)l 
Even 

Magnetic (M) Multipole 
рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ0, рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§,рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ вҖҰ 
Axial (Pseudo) 
(-1)l+1 
Odd 

Electric Toroidal (ET) Multipole 
рқҗәрқҗә0, рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘§рқ‘§, рқҗәрқҗәрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ вҖҰ 
Axial (Pseudo) 
(-1)l+1 
Even 

Magnetic Toroidal (MT) Multipole 
рқ‘Үрқ‘Ү0, рқ‘Үрқ‘Үрқ‘§рқ‘§, рқ‘Үрқ‘Үрқ‘қрқ‘қрқ‘Ұрқ‘Ұ вҖҰ 
Polar (True) 
(-1)l 
Odd 

 

 

 

 


 

Figure 1. Examples of atomic orbitals and associated symmetry-adapted multipoles. The shape and colormap 

represent the density of electric charge and z-component of the orbital angular momentum of wave functions, 

respectively. 

 

By using these four types of multipoles, all point groups are uniquely classified by the active multipole moments. In 

the language of group theory, any active moments belong to the totally symmetric (identity) irreducible representations, 

and they are so-called order parameters in Landau theory of phase transition. The classification of the non-

centrosymmetric point groups in terms of the active multipole moments is given by Table 1. By this classification, one 

can recognize that active electric toroidal monopole, рқҗәрқҗә0, is the manifestation of the chirality. As shown in Table 2, the 

electric toroidal monopole, рқҗәрқҗә0, is рқ’«рқ’«-odd and рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even pseudoscalar, that is the true meaning (concrete representation) 

of Kelvin's and Barron's definitions of chirality. Since the chirality itself is irrelevant to the time-reversal operation, its 

order parameter must be рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even. The sign of the monopole рқҗәрқҗә0 represents two possible handedness (right or left) of 

the chiral objects.  

Now the difference between chiral and other point groups is evident. For example, the NOA active objects are 

characterized either by the electric toroidal quadrupole or monopole as shown in the column SG (strong-gyrotropic) in 

Table 1. The chiral point groups always belong to strong gyrotropic point groups, but the opposite is not true. The 

nonchiral strong gyrotropic point groups, D2d, S4, C2v, Cs, also exhibit NOA. The presence of NOA is just necessary 

but not sufficient condition for a molecule or crystal to be chiral. In this sense, the NOA should more appropriately be 

called natural strong-gyrotropic effect. As a similar example, so called magneto "chiralвҖқ effect [15] is an interference 

effect between the NOA and Faraday effect. Therefore, this effect should be called magneto strong-gyrotropic effect. 

Although the explicit treatment of рқҗәрқҗә0  associated with specific wave functions of chiral objects depends on the 

molecules and crystals in question, a systematic prescription to compute the active multipole moments have been 

developed recently and is straightforwardly applied to any molecules and crystals. A typical example of the elemental 

Tellurium is found in ref. [16]. It is notable that рқҗәрқҗә0 term in chiral Tellurium is quite large with respect to other terms 

in the Hamiltonian. The energy scale estimated by first-principle method is about 1.7 eV, which well exceeds the spin-

orbit coupling of Tellurium atom. Such a large energy enhancement seems to be obtained as a consequence of chiral 

collective effect spanning over the whole wave functions. Another example for a fictitious chiral electron-phonon 

system will be shown later. 

It should be also pointed out that although the electric toroidal monopole, рқҗәрқҗә0, seems to be featureless, it has indeed 

an internal structure. This observation makes us extend the concept of chirality to various states of matters. For 

example, the helicity рқ’Ңрқ’Ң вҲҷ рққҲрққҲ has propagating momentum k and its spin angular momentum Пғ along k. Since k is рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-

odd polar vector, and Пғ is рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd axial vector, their scalar product is regarded as рқҗәрқҗә0. Another example is the 

monoaxial chiral helimagnetic order along z axis. The energy gain of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction 

due to this ordering is given by рқ‘«рқ‘« вҲҷ (рқ‘әрқ‘ә Г— вҲҮрқ‘§рқ‘§рқ‘әрқ‘ә). Since рқ‘«рқ‘« is рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even axial DM vector, and (рқ‘әрқ‘ә Г— вҲҮрқ’ӣрқ’ӣрқ‘әрқ‘ә) is рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even 

polar vector, their product is also regarded as рқҗәрқҗә0. In general, рқҗәрқҗә0 can be decomposed into рқ‘ёрқ‘ёрқ‘Һрқ‘Һ вҲҷ (рқ‘ёрқ‘ёрқ‘Ҹрқ‘Ҹ Г— рқ‘ёрқ‘ёрқ‘җрқ‘җ), рқ‘ёрқ‘ё вҲҷ


(рқ‘ҙрқ‘ҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Һ Г— рқ‘ҙрқ‘ҙрқ‘Ҹрқ‘Ҹ), and so on where рқ‘ёрқ‘ёрқ‘Һрқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹрқ‘Ҹ,рқ‘җрқ‘җ and рқ‘ҙрқ‘ҙрқ‘Һрқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹрқ‘Ҹ are the electric and magnetic dipoles, respectively. It is interesting to 

see, in a physical point of view, that such a structure indeed appears both in the Hamiltonian of Tellurium as a lattice-

spin coupling, рқ‘№рқ‘№ вҲҷ (рқ’Қрқ’Қ Г— рққҲрққҲ) [16], and in the parity-violation term due to weak interaction of elementary particles (see 

next section), which is a source of chiral response. 

 

3. Recognition of chirality in enantioselective fields 

 Once the order parameter of chiral objects is identified, one can discuss its response to the external fields through the 

invariant coupling of the electric toroidal monopoles between objects and fields. Namely, there is an invariant coupling 

in the Hamiltonian with the form of 

рқҗ»рқҗ»int = рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field) рқҗәрқҗә0(object) 

 

where рқҗәрқҗә0(object) and рқҗәрқҗә0(field) represent the chiral order parameter of the object and its conjugate external field 

with the coupling strength, рқ‘”рқ‘” , respectively. From the energetics point of view, the external field рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field)  with 

negative sign favors the positive sign of рқҗәрқҗә0(object), i.e., one handedness, while the opposite external field favors 

another handedness. Thus, the external field, рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field) is regarded as enantioselective field. It is important to note 

that the enantioselective fields can be made up from plural external sources as long as the symmetry of the combined 

fields coincides with that of the electric toroidal monopole, i.e., the рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even pseudoscalar in the relevant point group as 

was discussed in the last part of the previous section. We will discuss several examples below. Note that any external 

fields without рқҗәрқҗә0(field) are orthogonal to рқҗәрқҗә0(object), so that no interaction is expected. 

One example of рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field) is electromagnetic field called LipkinвҖҷs Zilch ПҒПҮ, which is a signature of circularly 

polarized light. It is defined as 

рқңҢрқңҢрқң’рқң’ = рқңҖрқңҖ0
2 рқ‘¬рқ‘¬ вҲҷ (рқӣҒрқӣҒ Г— рқ‘¬рқ‘¬) + 1
2рқңҮрқңҮ0

рқ‘©рқ‘© вҲҷ (рқӣҒрқӣҒ Г— рқ‘©рқ‘©) 

where E and B are electric and magnetic fields of electromagnetic wave. Tang and Cohen have clearly shown that Zilch 

is proportional to the circular dichroism [17]. We summarize typical external fields classified by multipoles in Table 3. 

Using this table, one can confirm that the combinations of рқ‘¬рқ‘¬ вҲҷ (рқӣҒрқӣҒ Г— рқ‘¬рқ‘¬) and рқ‘©рқ‘© вҲҷ (рқӣҒрқӣҒ Г— рқ‘©рқ‘©) have the same symmetry of 

рқҗәрқҗә0. Electrical magneto-chiral anisotropy (EMChA) is also understood as a conjugate рқҗәрқҗә0 field. In other words, the 

scalar product of the electric current J and magnetic field B represents рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field) [18]. 

 

 

Table 3. Representative external fields classified by the multipole basis. ui denotes the i-th component of the lattice 

displacement vector. 

 

 

External Field 
Symbol 
Multipole 
Rank 
Parity  рқ’«рқ’« 
Time-Reversal рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ 

Zilch 
ПҒПҮ 
рқҗәрқҗә0 
Monopole 
Odd 
Even 

Electric Field 
E 
рқ‘ёрқ‘ё 
Dipole 
Odd 
Even 

Magnetic Field 
B 
рқ‘ҙрқ‘ҙ 
Dipole 
Even 
Odd 

Rotational Field 
рққҺрққҺ = (рқӣҒрқӣҒ Г— рқ’–рқ’–)/2,рқӣҒрқӣҒ Г— рқ‘¬рқ‘¬ 
рқ‘®рқ‘® 
Dipole 
Even 
Even 

Electric Current 
J, рқӣҒрқӣҒ Г— рқ‘©рқ‘© 
рқ‘»рқ‘» 
Dipole 
Odd 
Odd 

Strain 
рқңҖрқңҖрқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘– = пҝҪвҲҮрқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘ўрқ‘ўрқ‘–рқ‘– + вҲҮрқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘ўрқ‘ўрқ‘–рқ‘–пҝҪ/2 
рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘– 
Quadrupole 
Even 
Even 


 We here mention another example of chiral coupling. Parity violation of the electroweak force leads to the parity 

violation energy difference (PVED). The coupling between subnuclear quarks and molecular electrons is generally 

written in the form [19] 

рқҗёрқҗёPV = 2Re пҝҪ вҹЁ0|рқҗ»рқҗ»PV|рқ‘—рқ‘—вҹ©
рқҗёрқҗё0 вҲ’ рқҗёрқҗёрқ‘–рқ‘–
рқ‘–рқ‘–

вҹЁрқ‘—рқ‘—|рқҗ»рқҗ»SO|0вҹ© 

where рқҗ»рқҗ»PV вҲқ {рққҲрққҲ вҲҷ рқ’‘рқ’‘, рқӣҝрқӣҝ(рқ’“рқ’“)}  is the parity-violated interaction Hamiltonian and рқҗ»рқҗ»SO вҲқ рққҲрққҲ вҲҷ рқ’Қрқ’Қ  is an electron spin-orbit 

coupling Hamiltonian. In this case, the quark-electron interaction plays a role of рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field) for the electron subsystem. 

It is important to notice that multipoles are mutually interchangeable, namely, the rotation operation (рқӣҒрқӣҒ Г—) converts 

their parity, while the time integral/derivative alters their time-reversal property. For example, the electric current J is 

рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd, while accumulated charge as a result of current generates electric field E (рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even). In this case, the time integral 

plays a role in converting magnetic toroidal dipole, рқ‘»рқ‘», into electric one, Q according to Table 3 and Fig. 2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2 An example of multipole conversion from рқ‘»рқ‘» to рқ‘ёрқ‘ё. 

 

Barron has discussed the connectivity between chirality and enantioselective field by proposing вҖңtrue chiralityвҖқ as рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-

even рқ’«рқ’«-odd pseudoscalar [9-11]. In his papers, he pointed out that, in addition to the structural chirality, another type 

of enantiomorphism which he calls вҖңfalse chiral influenceвҖқ exists. The important difference between вҖңtrueвҖқ and вҖңfalseвҖқ 

chirality is their response to time reversal operation where false chiral influence is рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd рқ’«рқ’«-odd. In a multipoleвҖҷs way 

of expression, the true chirality corresponds to рқҗәрқҗә0 and the false chirality is рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ0. One example of this falsely chiral 

field is a parallel combination of electric field E and magnetic field B. In the multipole classification, рқ‘¬рқ‘¬ вҲҷ рқ‘©рқ‘©  is a 

magnetic monopole рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ0 according to Table 3.  

 He stressed an importance of this discrimination because absolute asymmetric synthesis is impossible with вҖңfalsely 

chiralвҖқ field at equilibrium of liquids (which corresponds to SO(3) in which any proper rotation is allowed). This is 

because the falsely chiral field cannot recognize, or cannot lift the degeneracy of, any chiral enantiomers in it. This is 

consistent with our understanding because рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ0(field) cannot have any coupling with рқҗәрқҗә0(object) because of 

different symmetry in time domain. But at the same time, he discussed a possibility of absolute asymmetric synthesis 

from falsely chiral field with kinetic condition or inhomogeneous media. This possibility of absolute asymmetric 

synthesis by external field can be understood, in our point of view, by creating truly chiral field рқҗәрқҗә0(field) by 

applying time differential or time integration to a given falsely chiral field рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ0(field). In real systems, sometimes рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-

even and рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd components are mixed when the objects and/or fields are moving. Therefore, one needs to 

decompose the total response into рқҗәрқҗә0(object) and/or рқҗәрқҗә0(field) and other species to understand the essential role of 

chirality in a given phenomenon.  

 


Let us now discuss chirality recognition by CISS effect, which is an important extension of CISS to chemical 

application. Recently, Naaman and coworkers have reported separation of chiral molecules by magnetic substrate 

which is magnetized perpendicular to the surface [20, 21]. Interestingly, this effect is kinetic and disappears at long 

time experiment, which implies an influence of kinetic processes. At present, how to explain this enantio-separation 

at ferromagnet surface is under debate. The authors will clarify symmetry aspects of this phenomenon in accordance 

with the multipole method. 

In order to recognize chirality of the system at finite temperature, or in order to differentiate one enantiomer from the 

other, one needs to identify рқҗәрқҗә0(object) both in ground and excited states (including those materials such as self-

assembled monolayer and solid state in case of CISS). In addition, the time integral or time derivative should be applied 

to the quantity of interest, if one thinks about dynamics (excited state or non-equilibrium state) of a given chiral system. 

In this particular case, it seems that рқҗәрқҗә0 term in spin current (helicity of electron) can be transformed into metastable 

рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§ when spin reservoirs at molecular edges are assumed. Naaman has proposed antiparallel spin pair accumulated at 

two opposite ends of chiral molecule as shown in Fig 3, when the molecule is fluctuating around the substrate surface 

[20]. In such a case the metastable рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§ at lower end of the molecule should interact with рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§ at the ferromagnet surface 

via the exchange interaction, J, and therefore enantio-selection becomes possible. In other words, dEz/dt excites the 

molecule to induce displacement current which is spin polarized due to CISS. 

Here, the authors point out that this antiparallel spin pair is composed of two magnetic dipoles рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§ and вҲ’рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§ which 

constitutes рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd monopole, рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ0 as a whole. Therefore, the connection between molecular chirality рқҗәрқҗә0 and the рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-

odd monopole, рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ0 should be clarified. In this discussion, the authors recall attention to the relationship between рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-

odd and рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even quantities. For example, according to Table 3 and Fig 2, electric current is represented by рқ‘Үрқ‘Үрқ‘§рқ‘§ (рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd), 

while accumulated charge as a result of current generates electric field рқ‘„рқ‘„рқ‘§рқ‘§ (рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even). A time integral plays a role in 

converting рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-property of multipoles, in the present case, from рқҗәрқҗә0 to рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ0. As such, spin polarized current with finite 

helicity (рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even рқҗәрқҗә0) will end up with spin accumulation (рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§) or the рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd monopole, рқ‘Җрқ‘Җ0 as a whole, when 

edges of an object can act as spin reservoirs. 

Therefore, given that CISS effect exists in chiral molecules and that the molecule is moving around the surface of an 

ferromagnet, where E perpendicular to the surface exists because of contact potential (work function difference), the 

internal displacement current due to dielectric response will accumulate antiparallel spin polarization at two opposite 

ends of the molecule. Most importantly, inward/outward arrangement of this spin accumulation is governed by the 

handedness of the molecule because of the spin-momentum locking in chiral system. Therefore, either parallel 

(repulsive J) or anti-parallel (attractive вҖ“J) interaction is applied between chiral molecule and the substrate, depending 

on the handedness of the molecule as well as the magnetization direction of the substrate. In reality, all of E, B, dE/dt, 

and dB/dt exist in the present situation and any combination of those fields may come into play. But one is able to 

extract the interaction associated only to the chirality in the form of either рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field) вҲҷ рқҗәрқҗә0(object) or рқҗҪрқҗҪрқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§(field) вҲҷ

рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§(object) forms based on the discussion above. In the former case, the chiral moleculeвҖҷs рқҗәрқҗә0 interacts with a chiral 

field (рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-even рқҗәрқҗә0(field)) that is generated by the combination of ferromagnetic spins (рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd Вұрқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§) and dEz/dt (рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd). 

In the latter case of interaction, magnetic exchange between the magnetic moment рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§  of ferromagnetic substrate 

interacts with accumulated spin рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§ at the edge of the chiral molecule. As a result, in both types of interpretations, this 

chirality-specific interaction will result in a chirality recognition and thus the enantio-separations reported in recent 

papers become possible. 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 3 Helical molecules approaching to a ferromagnetic substrate (FM). Because of the displacement current associated 

with CISS effect, metastable spin accumulation, рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§ or вҲ’рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§, at both ends of the molecules is expected. 

 

 

4. Dynamics of chiral order parameter 

In this section, the authors discuss dynamics of рқҗәрқҗә0. The aim of this discussion is to identify the influence of chirality 

fluctuations. Another objective is to recall an attention to the stability of chiral and вҖңenantiopureвҖқ states in terms of 

symmetry breaking. Both topics are coming from the tendency of nature to restore the original higher symmetry even 

after the symmetry breaking. 

Because the discovery of chirality was made with stable chemical species such as quartz and tartrate, it tends to be 

considered as a firm entity once the structure of enantiomer is established. However, if the energy barrier that separates 

the two enantiomers is comparable to or smaller than the environmental thermal energy, the enantiomers start to 

interconvert one another, which is called racemization. In this regard, an emergence of chirality, or рқҗәрқҗә0, is similar to 

phase transition where lowering the temperature results in symmetry breaking, although it is not a collective 

phenomenon. It is important to point out that рқҗәрқҗә0 of chiral molecules and crystals is protected by double-well potential 

after symmetry breaking. In this sense, chirality can be redefined as рқҗәрқҗә0  protected by energy barrier. Despite this 

protection, the tendency to the enantiomeric interconversion remains still active even with higher energy barrier when 

quantum tunneling and/or thermal excitation are considered. In the physics of phase transition, such a tendency is 

known to work as a fluctuation that try to recover higher symmetry even after the symmetry breaking. Such 

thermal/quantum fluctuations are sometimes a source of enhanced interactions and may create emergent properties such 

as superconductivity [22-25]. From this point of view, the tendency to restore the original higher symmetry may also 

have an effect on physical and/or chemical properties of enantiomers, too, if the dynamics of the chemical structure is 

considered. Systematic elaboration of this effect is, however, not yet discussed to the best of our knowledge.  

Now the authors discuss flexible dynamics of chiral structure in more detail. Morino and Mizushima found that free 

rotation of 1,2-Dichloroethane stops at sufficiently low temperature to find rotational isomers called anti and gauche 

[26]. Although they didnвҖҷt point out it, there are two chiral enantiomers in the gauche form as shown in Figure 4. This 

means that two enantiomers can interconvert as a function of time when the temperature is high enough to overcome 

the energy barrier that separates two states. [5]Helicene is another example of enantiomeric interconversion where the 


energy barrier is comparable to kBT at room temperature. In this regard, even asymmetric sp3 carbon in fluoro-chloro-

bromo-methane should also racemize at sufficiently high temperatures. (Fig. 4c) 

In a quantum mechanical point of view, a tunneling effect can also take place in the racemization process. Let us 

consider chiral ammonia NH(D)(T) molecule that can flip between R (right) and L (left) forms. Even at zero temperature, 

the quantum levels for R and L enantiomers can have resonant tunneling because their energy levels are always identical 

due to the symmetry of SchrГ¶dinger equation. Neither R form nor L form can be an eigen state of the system alone 

because of symmetry consideration [9], and is therefore the complete wave function should be constructed from their 

linear combination. In that case, two enantiomeric states can oscillate one another as shown in Fig 5b (right panel). 

Such an oscillation can be described by 

рқң‘рқң‘(рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ў) = 1

вҲҡ2

пҝҪрқң‘рқң‘0(+) + рқң‘рқң‘0(вҲ’)рқ‘’рқ‘’вҲ’рқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘–пҝҪрқ‘’рқ‘’вҲ’рқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘–рқ‘–(+)рқ‘–рқ‘–/в„Ҹ 

where рқң‘рқң‘0(+)  and рқң‘рқң‘0(вҲ’) , are wave functions with even and odd parities, which are the eigen states of the 

Hamiltonian. в„ҸПү is the energy difference of these two states, while W(+) is the energy for even parity state [9]. In reality, 

the life time of an enantiomer due to the thermal/quantum interconversion is determined by the energy barrier height 

and system size. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4. Thermal racemization process for (a) 1,2-Dichloroethane (expressed by sawhorse projection and Newman 

projection), (b) [5]Helicene, and (c) fluoro-chloro-bromo-methane. The sign of рқҗәрқҗә0 is arbitrary. 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5. (a) Racemization process by quantum tunneling. (b) рқҗәрқҗә0 oscillation by thermal (left) and quantum (right) 

racemization. 

 

When the above life time of enantiomer is considered to be finite, one can also discuss a life time of enantio pure state. 

If a group of chiral molecules which are oscillating between two enantiomers is allowed to propagate in time, there are 

some limited periods of time when all the handedness of molecules is the same (Fig 6a). This is what we call enantio 

pure state, although this period can be as long as a life of universe in case the energy barrier is sufficiently high. This 

is quite analogical to the phase transition of ferromagnetism. In a ferromagnet, a phase transition at Curie temperature 

makes the spins within a domain aligned in the same direction. After poling process by external magnetic field (рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§), a 

single-domain magnet with parallel magnetization can be created. This is a time-reversal-symmetry (TRS)-broken state 

because one can flip the spin moment by time reversal operation рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ. On the other hand, a molecule can exhibit stable 

chiral structure, when the system temperature becomes well below the energy barrier separating two enantiomers, to 

yield a racemate. After an enantio-separation process for this racemate by external operation such as chiral 

chromatography ( рқҗәрқҗә0 ), an enantio-pure state can be obtained. Note that enantio-pure state is рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ -even while 

ferromagnetic single-domain state is рқ’Ҝрқ’Ҝ-odd. The difference between these two examples is originating in the nature of 

order parameters (рқ‘Җрқ‘Җрқ‘§рқ‘§ and рқҗәрқҗә0; Fig 6b) for magnetic and chiral symmetry breaking. In the vicinity of magnetic ordering, 

the fluctuation is known to induce superconductivity in some cases [22-25]. In a similar way, one may envisage an 

emergent effect from the chirality fluctuation which try to retrieve the structure of the opposite enantiopure state, when 

a dynamics of chiral molecule is considered. When the molecule is vibrating, for example, the symmetry of the opposite 

enantiomer should be mixing as a fluctuation to yield a certain type of correction [27].  

Let us now discuss the effect of the chirality dynamics. Here we define вҖҳdynamicвҖҷ as a time-dependent variance of 

materials and fields within the enantiopure time domain described above. In this definition, the chirality should be 

retained the same throughout the dynamics while its magnitude (order parameter) is changing. This chirality 

fluctuation may have other types of effect than the static chirality. Such a fluctuation should be visible when a chiral 

molecule is vibrating, for example.  

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 6. (a) Enantiopure state as a time domain. (b) Comparison between the chiral symmetry breaking and magnetic 

symmetry breaking. HPLC = High Pressure Liquid Chromatography 

 

Kato, JK and HMY have introduced a pseudo Jahn Teller Hamiltonian to calculate the dynamics of рқҗәрқҗә0 in a C3 chiral 

molecule that is being passed through by a tunneling electron [28]. The pseudo Jahn-Teller Hamiltonian Hen and spin-

orbit Hamiltonian HSOC are as follows.  

 

рқҗ»рқҗ»рқ‘’рқ‘’рқ‘’рқ‘’ = рқ‘үрқ‘ү+рқ‘„рқ‘„вҲ’|рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘§рқ‘§вҹ©вҹЁрқңҷрқңҷ+| + рқ‘үрқ‘үвҲ’рқ‘„рқ‘„+|рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘§рқ‘§вҹ©вҹЁрқңҷрқңҷвҲ’| + рқ‘үрқ‘үвҲ’вҲ—рқ‘„рқ‘„вҲ’|рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘§рқ‘§
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪвҹЁрқңҷрқңҷ+| + 

рқ‘үрқ‘ү+вҲ—рқ‘„рқ‘„+|рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘§рқ‘§
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪвҹЁрқңҷрқңҷвҲ’| + рқ‘үрқ‘ү0рқ‘„рқ‘„вҲ’|рқңҷрқңҷ+вҹ©вҹЁрқңҷрқңҷвҲ’| + рқҗ»рқҗ». рқ‘җрқ‘җ. 

 

рқҗ»рқҗ»рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ҷ = рқңҶрқңҶ(|рқңҷрқңҷ+вҹ©вҹЁрқңҷрқңҷ+| вҲ’ |рқңҷрқңҷвҲ’вҹ©вҹЁрқңҷрқңҷвҲ’|)вЁӮрқңҺрқңҺпҝҪрқ‘§рқ‘§ 

 

where рқ‘„рқ‘„+, рқ‘„рқ‘„вҲ’, |рқңҷрқңҷрқ‘§рқ‘§вҹ©, |рқңҷрқңҷ+вҹ©, |рқңҷрқңҷвҲ’вҹ©, and рқңҺрқңҺпҝҪрқ‘§рқ‘§ are bases for nuclear clockwise rotation, nuclear counterclockwise rotation, 

electronic z-translation, electronic clockwise rotation, electronic counterclockwise rotation, and electronic spin 

respectively (refer to Fig. 7(a)). V+, VвҖ“, V0, and О» are parameters for each energy strength. The chiral symmetry breaking 

manifests for рқ‘үрқ‘ү+ вү  рқ‘үрқ‘үвҲ’. Although the above Hamiltonian consists of two parts, the electron-nuclear coupling and the 

electron spin-orbit coupling terms, it is possible to obtain an effective Hamiltonian after integrating out the degrees of 

freedom associated with the nuclear vibration coordinates. A resultant effective Hamiltonian consists of рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field) 

containing nuclear vibrations, while рқҗәрқҗә0(object) contains only electron degrees of freedom. 

 Diagonalization of this рқҗәрқҗә0 term leads to four eigenstates labeled with an injected electron momentum direction (P) 

and total spin (J). The total spin J consists of electron spin and nuclear vibrational orbital angular momentum originating 

from discrete rotational symmetry. This result was actually demonstrated by fully diagonalizing the nuclear vibration. 

The splitting рқӣҝрқӣҝ вҲ’ рқңҶрқңҶ , where рқӣҝрқӣҝ is an energy difference between orbital angular momenta j = 0 and 1 states, directly 

corresponds to рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field), and gives spin dependent barrier potential. This energy split dominates the total energy 

scale and spin orbit-coupling рқңҶрқңҶ plays only a minor role in separating two KramerвҖҷs paired states in momentum space 

(both of which possess the same helicity). Thus, the spin barrier is proportional to рқ‘”рқ‘”рқҗәрқҗә0(field) (Fig. 7(b)). Consequently, 

there arises a spin-dependent barrier potential for an injecting electron and an electron with favored (disfavored) spin 

tends to go through (repelled from) a chiral molecule (Fig. 7(c)), which can explain the large spin polarization in CISS 

effect. 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 7. Pseudo JT model to explain CISS effect. For details of the parameters, refer to [28]. 

 

In the theoretical investigation of CISS effect, one needs to explain the fact that the magnitude of spin polarization is 

much larger than one can expect from simple spin-orbit Hamiltonian. In addition, Bardarson theorem prohibits any spin 

polarization as far as a scattering process by two-level two-terminal system is considered [29]. A source of third terminal 

is, therefore, being looked for by several theoretical researchers. In order to overcome these problems, recent 

experiments and calculations suggest an involvement of phonons as a source of effective spin polarization [30-33] 

whereas others will try to include exchange interactions [34, 35]. A model proposed here is another way to address this 

issue by explicitly including pseudo Jahn Teller effect into the system to include dynamics of chiral order parameter 

рқҗәрқҗә0(object). As an extension of this idea to crystalline materials, we are also interested in the effect generated by chiral 

phonons [36], which can be extended to CISS effects in solids [37, 38]. 

 

5. Summary 

 

In summary, we have demonstrated that electric toroidal monopole рқҗәрқҗә0 is the order parameter for chiral symmetry 

breaking. Because the chiral structure is strongly connected with chemical bonding, the interplay between physics 

(symmetry breaking) and chemistry (bonding) appears in an entangled manner in real systems. Even in such a case, 

factor decomposition by multipole concept should be a firm guideline to find out the essential role of chirality in a 

given situation. At present, methodology to analyze non-equilibrium and/or excited states is still quite limited, but 

development of thermodynamics to describe those states is needed to understand the recent experiments. For example, 

it has been experimentally shown that a combination of gravity and rotation can generate chiral aggregation from achiral 

molecules, in which the handedness can be reversed by rotation reversal [39, 40]. The way to explain the mechanism 

of these emergent chirality will be a big and fruitful future challenge. 


 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grants No. 19H00891, 21H01032, and No. 21H01034 and Cooperative 

Research by Institute for Molecular Science (IMS program 22IMS1220). 

 

References 

[1] B. GГ¶hler, V. Hamelbeck, T. Z. Markus, M. Kettner, G. F. Hanne, Z. Vager, R. Naaman, H. Zacharias, Science, 

2011, 331, 894. 

[2] K. Michaelia, D. N. Beratan, D. H. Waldeck, and Ron Naaman, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 2019, 116, 5931. 

[3] O. Ben Dor, S. Yochelis, A. Radko, K. Vankayala, E. Capua, A. Capua, S. -H. Yang, L. T. Baczewski, S. S. P. 

Parkin, R. Naaman, and Y. Paltiel, Nature Commun. 2017, 8, 14567. 

[4] R. Naaman, Y. Paltiel, and D. H. Waldeck, Acc. Chem. Res. 2020, 53, 2659 

[5] M. Suda, Y. Thathong, V. Promarak, H. Kojima, M. Nakamura, T. Shiraogawa, M. Ehara, and H. M. Yamamoto, 

Nature Commun. 2019, 10, 2455. 

[6] Lord Kelvin, The molecular tactics of a crystal, (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1894). 

[7] F. Hund, Z. Phys. 1927, 43, 805 

[8] L. Rosenfeld, Z. Phys. 1928, 52,161. 

[9] L. D. Barron, Chem. Soc. Rev. 1986, 15, 189 

[10] L.D. Barron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 18, 5539. 

[11] L.D. Barron, Molecular light scattering and optical activity, 2nd Ed, (Cambridge University Press, 2004) 

[12] S. Hayami and H. Kusunose, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 2018, 87, 033709. 

[13] S. Hayami, M. Yatsushiro, Y. Yanagi, and H. Kusunose, Phys. Rev. B 2018, 98, 165110. 

[14] H. Kusunose, R. Oiwa, and S. Hayami, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 2020, 89, 104704. 

[15] L. D. Barron and J.Vrbancich, Mol. Phys. 1984, 51, 715 

[16] R. Oiwa and H. Kusunose, arXiv:2203.15192. 

[17] Y. Tang and A. E. Cohen. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 104, 163901. 

[18] G. L. J. A. Rikken, J. FГ¶lling, and P. Wyder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2001, 87, 236602. 

[19] R.A. Harris and L. Stodolsky, J. Chem. Phys. 1980, 73, 3862. 

[20] K. Banerjee-Ghosh1, O. Ben Dor, F. Tassinari, E. Capua, S. Yochelis, A. Capua, S. -H. Yang, S. S. P. Parkin, S. 

Sarkar, L. Kronik, L. T. Baczewski, R. Naaman, Y. Paltiel, Science 2018, 360, 1331 

[21] D. Bhowmick, Y. Sang, K. Santra, M. Halbauer, E. Capua, Y. Paltiel, R. Naaman, and F. Tassinari, Cryst. Growth 

Des. 2021, 21, 2925. 

[22] N. F. Berk and J. R. Schrieffer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1966, 17, 433. 

[23] S. Nakajima, Prog. Theor. Phys., 1973, 50, 1101 

[24] K. Miyake, S. Schmitt-Rink, and C. M. Varma, Phys. Rev. B 1986, 34, 6554(R). 

[25] D. J. Scalapino, E. Loh, Jr., and J. E. Hirsch, Phys. Rev. B 1986, 34, 8190(R).  

[26] S. Mizushima and Y. Morino, Bull Chem. Soc. Jpn. 1941, 17, 94. 

[27] This may be an effect similar to the spin-orbit interaction which is a correction for charge symmetry рқ’һрқ’һ 

(electron/positron symmetry) breaking. 

[28] A. Kato, H. M. Yamamoto, and J. Kishine, Phys. Rev. B 2022, 105, 195117. 

[29] J. H. Bardarson, J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 2008, 41, 405203. 


[30] N. Sasao, H. Okada, Y. Utsumi, O. Entin-Wohlman, and A. Aharony, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 2019, 88, 064702. 

[31] G. -F. Du, H. -H. Fu, and R. Wu, Phys. Rev. B 2020, 102, 035431. 

[32] L. Zhang, Y. Hao, W. Qin, S. Xie, and F. Qu, Phys. Rev. B 2020, 102, 214303 

[33] J. Fransson, Phys. Rev. B 2020, 102, 235416. 

[34] J. Fransson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019, 10, 7126. 

[35] M. S. ZГ¶llner, A. Saghatchi, V. Mujica, and C. Herrmann, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2020, 16, 7357. 

[36] J. Kishine, A. S. Ovchinnikov, and A. A. Tereshchenko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 245302. 

[37] A. Inui, R. Aoki, Y. Nishiue, K. Shiota, Y. Kousaka, H. Shishido, D. Hirobe, M. Suda, J. Ohe, J. Kishine, H. M. 

Yamamoto, and Y. Togawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 124, 166602. 

[38] Y. Nabei, D. Hirobe, Y. Shimamoto, K. Shiota, A. Inui, Y. Kousaka, Y. Togawa, and H. M. Yamamoto, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 2020, 117, 052408. 

[39] M. Kuroha, S. Nambu, S. Hattori, Y. Kitagawa, K. Niimura, Y. Mizuno, F. Hamba, and K. Ishii, Angew. Chem. 

Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 18454.  

[40] N. Micali, H. Engelkamp, P. G. van Rhee, P. C. M. Christianen, L. Monsu Scolaro and J. C. Maan, Nature Chem. 

2012, 4, 201. 

 

 

 


