A Stress Induced Source of Phonon Bursts and Quasiparticle Poisoning

R. Anthony-Petersen,1 A. Biekert,1, 2 R. Bunker,3 C.L. Chang,4, 5, 6 Y.-Y. Chang,1 L. Chaplinsky,7

E. Fascione,8, 9 C.W. Fink,1 M. Garcia-Sciveres,2 R. Germond,8, 9 W. Guo,10, 11 S.A. Hertel,7

Z. Hong,12 N.A. Kurinsky,13 X. Li,2 J. Lin,1, 2 M. Lisovenko,4 R. Mahapatra,14 A.J. Mayer,9

D.N. McKinsey,1, 2 S. Mehrotra,1 N. Mirabolfathi,14 B. Neblosky,15 W.A. Page,1, ∗ P.K. Patel,7

B. Penning,16 H.D. Pinckney,7 M. Platt,14 M. Pyle,1 M. Reed,1 R.K. Romani,1, ∗ H. Santana Queiroz,1

B. Sadoulet,1 B. Serfass,1 R. Smith,1, 2 P. Sorensen,2 B. Suerfu,1, 2 A. Suzuki,2 R. Underwood,8

V. Velan,1, 2 G. Wang,4 Y. Wang,1, 2 S.L. Watkins,1 M.R. Williams,16 V. Yefremenko,4 and J. Zhang4

1Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
2Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
3Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA
4High Energy Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory,
9700 S. Cass Avenue, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA
5Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago,
5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA
6Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics, University of Chicago,
5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA
7Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, USA
8Department of Physics, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada
9TRIUMF, Vancouver, BC V6T 2A3, Canada
10Mechanical Engineering Department, FAMU-FSU College of Engineering,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida 32310, USA
11National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, 1800 East Paul Dirac Drive, Tallahassee, Florida 32310, USA
12Department of Physics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A7, Canada
13SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory/Kavli Institute for Particle
Astrophysics and Cosmology, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA
14Department of Physics and Astronomy, and the Mitchell Institute for Fundamental Physics and Astronomy,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA
15Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
16University of Michigan, Randall Laboratory of Physics, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

The performance of superconducting qubits is degraded by a poorly characterized set of energy
sources breaking the Cooper pairs responsible for superconductivity, creating a condition often called
“quasiparticle poisoning”. Both superconducting qubits and low threshold dark matter calorimeters
have observed excess bursts of quasiparticles or phonons that decrease in rate with time. Here, we
show that a silicon crystal glued to its holder exhibits a rate of low-energy phonon events that is
more than two orders of magnitude larger than in a functionally identical crystal suspended from
its holder in a low-stress state. The excess phonon event rate in the glued crystal decreases with
time since cooldown, consistent with a source of phonon bursts which contributes to quasiparticle
poisoning in quantum circuits and the low-energy events observed in cryogenic calorimeters. We
argue that relaxation of thermally induced stress between the glue and crystal is the source of these
events.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Coherence times are a key benchmark for the per-
formance of superconducting qubits, a technology from
which quantum computers may be constructed [1]. These
times have improved by many orders of magnitude over
the past two decades [2] but remain limited by mecha-
nisms capable of breaking Cooper pairs in the supercon-
ducting circuit, creating a condition often called quasi-
particle poisoning [3–5]. Stray infrared radiation (IR) [6–
8], environmental ionizing radiation [9–12], and resonant
absorption of microwave photons [8, 13] have all been

∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

shown to create excess quasiparticles in superconducting
quantum circuits. However, identification of the full set
of poisoning mechanisms is yet incomplete, as suggested
by other results in which efforts were made to shield and
isolate superconducting circuits [10, 14].

Notably, a superconductor was recently shown to have
one of the lowest residual quasiparticle densities ever
measured in a quantum circuit [14]. In this supercon-
ductor, two key behaviours were observed.
First, the
density of quasiparticles decreased as a function of time
after the superconductor was cooled down. Second, the
quasiparticles appeared in ms-long “bursts” which were
short compared to the time between bursts. Together,
these behaviors indicate that the cause of the quasiparti-
cle background is unlikely to be fully explained by pho-
tons and ionizing radiation.

arXiv:2208.02790v2  [physics.ins-det]  14 Aug 2024


2

Similarly,
multiple dark-matter experiments using
cryogenic crystals observe excess low-energy (10–100
eV scale) events of an unknown origin [15–17].
Mea-
surements suggest a background source that is non-
ionizing [18, 19] and which also decreases with time since
cooldown [17, 18, 20, 21]; it is not well-explained by any
known radiogenic or instrumental backgrounds.

The burst-like nature and variation in rate with time
since cooldown suggest a common mechanism for these
backgrounds and disfavor the sources of nonequilibrium
quasiparticles thus far identified by the superconducting-
qubit and dark-matter communities. For example, nei-
ther black-body IR that leaks from higher temperature
stages [6, 7] nor the slow annihilation of quasiparticles
near the superconducting gap [22] would create burst-like
events. Short-lived radiogenic backgrounds could display
a similar time dependence, but this dependence would
not reset with thermal cycling. The lack of any ioniza-
tion production in the germanium detectors used in Refs.
[18, 19] further limits the viable hypotheses because both
electronic and nuclear recoils produce observable ioniza-
tion signals in this energy range [23].

The most probable hypothesis is that multi-atom lat-
tice rearrangements, i.e.
microfractures, causes these
phonon bursts. The athermal phonons released in this
process can break Cooper pairs in a qubit’s superconduct-
ing films or be directly sensed in an athermal phonon sen-
sor. If these microfractures are driven by stress caused by
differential thermal contraction of a detector’s materials
or support structure—glue, clamps, metal films, etc.—
this hypothesis also naturally explains the time variation
since cooldown: the system is slowly releasing thermal
stress and coming into equilibrium.

The CRESST dark-matter experiment has shown that
stress-driven macroscopic fractures can cause phonon
bursts [24].
Although the properties of their events—
energy scale and time dependence—do not match the
phonon bursts reported here, they provide an existence
proof for stress-induced backgrounds in cryogenic de-
vices.
An earlier iteration of the experiment clamped
sapphire crystals with sapphire spheres, which tightened
into the crystals at cryogenic temperatures and produced
highly concentrated stress at the sphere/crystal contact
points. Their detectors exhibited an excess rate of keV-
to MeV-scale phonon bursts and macroscopic cracking
at the clamp contact points. Redesigning the structural
support to reduce the clamping force decreased this back-
ground by orders of magnitude [16, 24]. The observed
bursts were found to be non-Poissonian, to not have no-
ticeable time dependence in rate, and to occur at a much
higher energy scale. These properties are incompatible
with the low-energy background currently observed in
cryogenic calorimeters and superconducting circuits; a
different explanation is needed.

II.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We used two silicon crystals to study the effects of
stress on the athermal phonon background: one mounted
with a typical High Stress (HS) method and the other
held with a new Low Stress (LS) method. The LS crys-
tal was suspended by three sets of two 50 µm diame-
ter aluminium wires (see Fig.
1B and Supplementary
Note 3), bonded to aluminium pads on the surface of the
crystal and to a gold-plated copper mount which was at-
tached rigidly to the cryogenic system. This reasonably
represents a significantly lower-stress mounting scheme
compared to glue- or clamp-based schemes and that it is
naturally less susceptible to vibrations. The HS crystal
was glued directly to the gold-plated copper mount us-
ing a thin layer of GE/IM7031 varnish covering the back
side of the calorimeter, which contracts relative to the sil-
icon while cooling [25], inducing stress in the crystal. We
chose this configuration because it was straightforward
to implement, and it is representative of the adhesive-
based mounting schemes (e.g. vacuum grease [10, 14],
silver epoxy [10]) often used to hold crystals that host
quantum circuits. Additionally, the dark matter exper-
iment that observed the largest low-energy excess [18]
used epoxy, suggesting that glue may be a particularly
effective source of stress-induced events.
Athermal phonon sensors optimized for high collection
efficiency are a natural choice to study an anomalous
phonon population capable of breaking Cooper pairs. We
instrumented both the LS and HS crystals with function-
ally identical arrays of Quasiparticle-trap-assisted Elec-
trothermal Feedback Transitions Edge Sensors (QETs)
[26, 27], designed to be sensitive to athermal phonons
with energies larger than the aluminium superconduct-
ing bandgap. The phonons are collected with O(25%)
efficiency and are read out with eV-scale energy reso-
lution [28].
These sensors couple thin-film aluminium
“fins,” where athermal phonons are absorbed from the
silicon crystal and converted into quasiparticles, with
tungsten Transition Edge Sensors (TESs) that change
resistance as they are heated by quasiparticle absorp-
tion. This readout scheme is broadly used in cryogenic
calorimeters that search for low-energy signals from dark
matter and neutrinos [15–17] and is optimally sensitive
to any athermal phonons which may contribute to quasi-
particle poisoning in quantum circuits.
Aside from their mounting schemes, the HS and LS
calorimeters were intentionally constructed and operated
in as similar a manner as possible. The phonon-sensor de-
signs are identical, and the sensors were fabricated onto
(and the calorimeters later cut from) the same silicon
wafer at Texas A&M University. The superconducting
transition temperature (Tc) is an important indicator of
performance for TES-based sensors [29]. We measured
only a modest ∼20% difference between the TES transi-
tion temperatures for the two calorimeters (HS, 44.3 mK,
LS, 53.0 mK), which also showed qualitatively similar
sensor performance. These similarities suggest that we


3

FIG. 1.
Schematic showing the orgin of microfracture events (A) and photographs of the Low Stress (LS) silicon
calorimeter (B) and a functionally identical High Stress (HS) calorimeter (C). (A) The top schematic shows a
silicon crystal glued to a copper mount (representative of C). Stress generated by thermal contraction relaxes via microfracture
events (red), releasing energy as athermal phonons (pink) which break Cooper pairs (dark blue) in superconducting aluminium
films (light blue) and create quasiparticles (green) that are read out with tungsten TESs (purple). (B, C) The calorimeters
(grey) are 1 cm×1 cm by 1 mm thick. The LS calorimeter (left) is supported by three sets of two 50 µm diameter aluminium
wire bonds, located at the back and the front of the left and right sides of the crystal. The HS calorimeter (right) is glued to
a gold-plated copper mount using GE varnish. Both calorimeters are thermalized by several 25 µm diameter Au wire bonds
(left side) and read out through 25 µmaluminiumwire bonds (front). Athermal phonon readout sensors are visible as dots on
the calorimeter tops.

were largely successful in producing a matched calorime-
ter pair capable of isolating differences in background
rates due to variation in structural support. Additionally,
they were characterized together in a common optical
cavity with a direct line of sight between the calorimeters
and were read out using matching electronics, thereby
minimizing operational differences. The dilution refrig-
erator in which this experiment was performed is located
in a basement lab at the University of California, Berke-
ley, where no special efforts were taken to minimize ra-
dioactive backgrounds.

A.
Measured Background

We observed a background event rate approximately
two orders of magnitude larger in the HS device com-
pared to the LS device. With the well understood elec-
trothermal response of our phonon sensors, we identi-
fied the background as composed of individual events
occurring in lengths of time shorter than the O(10 µs)

calorimeter response time, rather than as a continuous
power source. The background spectra are shown in Fig.
2. We report the energy of a given event as the energy
absorbed in the TES (which is invariant to small changes
in film properties, as described in Sec. III D). Note that
at high energies the calorimeters saturate such that all
very energetic events appear in the energy range 85–170
eV. The exact energy scale and shape of the saturation
depends on tungsten film properties, which were observed
to vary between the two devices (see Sec. III A), leading
to the differences in saturation observed between the two
devices. See Supplementary Note 1 for a comparison to
other calorimetric detectors.
The background was divided into three energy bins for
further analysis.
The highest-energy events (85+ eV)
with a saturated calorimeter response were binned to-
gether. In the range 38–85 eV, the backgrounds observed
in HS and LS were similar; we therefore grouped them
together into one bin. In the lowest-energy bin (3–38 eV),
the backgrounds observed in the HS and LS calorimeters
appear to substantially differ.


4

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140

Energy absorbed in TES (eV)

10
5

10
4

10
3

10
2

10
1

100

101

102

Counts/(eV s)

Saturation

Glue Stress

High Stress

Calorimeter

Low Stress
Calorimeter

3-38 eV Bin
38-85 eV Bin
85+ eV Bin

FIG. 2.
Background spectra of energy absorbed in TESs in High Stress (red) and Low Stress (blue) calorime-
ters. The histogram is divided into three regions: high energies associated with saturation (85+ eV), and two lower-energy
bins (38–85 eV; 3–35 eV) where the backgrounds appear to be similar and different in the two calorimeters, respectively. These
spectra are from a 12 hour dataset, the last of 7 datasets acquired (see Supplementary Table 4). Error bars correspond to 1
sigma statistical uncertainties. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

B.
Time Dependence of Background Rates

To study the time dependence of these backgrounds,
∼80 hours of data were taken over a 5 d period, start-
ing approximately 3 d after starting the cooldown of the
calorimeters. During this period, the rate in each of the
three energy bins (see Fig. 2) was measured 70× for each
calorimeter in ∼1 hour time bins (see Supplementary Ta-
ble 4).
As shown in Fig. 3, the rates in both the 3–38 and
38–85 eV bins decreased with time, whereas the rates
in the highest-energy bin (85+ eV) were constant (con-
sistent with muons and other high-energy backgrounds).
An exponential was fit to each time-dependent rate to es-
timate the relevant timescale; the results are summarized
in Supplementary Table S1. We find that the 3–38 and
30–85 eV rates decreased with a time constant of 6–10 d,
broadly consistent with the quasiparticle measurements
in Ref. [14] and calorimetric results in Refs. [18, 20, 21].
We did not test whether the observed rates changed after
thermal cycling, and plan to study this in future work.
In the lowest-energy bin in the HS calorimeter, a sin-
gle exponential does not sufficiently describe the time-
dependent rate (χ2/(dof) = 4192/68).
This bin is es-
pecially well-measured because it contains 2–3 orders of
magnitude more events than any of the other bins. There
may be similar deviations from our exponential model in
the other time-series data that cannot be detected due to

insufficient statistics. A sum of exponentials or a power
law (as described in Ref. [14]) may be a more appropriate
fit to the data.
As the HS and LS calorimeters were functionally iden-
tical aside from their mounting method, we attribute the
difference in their 3–38 eV backgrounds as due to stress
created through thermal contraction in the rigidly joined
copper mount–GE varnish–HS crystal system. When this
stress relaxes (through e.g. a failure at the GE varnish -
silicon interface or deformation of the copper mount near
the varnish), many eV-scale bonds are broken effectively
instantaneously with respect to the calorimeter response,
releasing phonon energy which our sensors read out as a
single event.
If these events occur in the copper mount, they must
originate within ∼ 200 µm of the the glue-silicon inter-
face, as the athermal phonons to which the calorimeters
are sensitive quickly thermalize in copper [30]. The rate
of high energy background events (e.g. muons, gammas
from radioactive decays) in this thin copper volume can
be estimated to be approximately 0.04 Hz by scaling the
85+ eV rate in the HS calorimeter by the relative vol-
ume and electron density of the two materials. This esti-
mated rate is over 100 times lower than the observed low
energy excess rate, indicating that high energy particle
backgrounds in the copper mount do not account for the
majority of the observed differences in the LS and HS
calorimeter 3–38 eV backgrounds.


5

60
80
100
120
140
160

Time After Cooldown (Hours)

10
3

10
2

10
1

100

101

Rate in Bin (Hz)

High Stress, 3 eV to 38 eV rate

Low Stress, 3 eV to 38 eV rate

High Stress, 85 eV + rate
Low Stress, 85 eV + rate

High Stress, 38 eV to 85 eV rate
Low Stress, 38 eV to 85 eV rate

FIG. 3.
Time dependence of background rates in High Stress (light colors) and Low Stress (dark colors)
calorimeters. Rates are measured in three energy bins: 3–38 eV, 38–85 eV, and 85+ eV. Exponential fits are shown as solid
lines. 1 Sigma error bars are shown. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

Additionally, the relatively short decay time (6–10 d)
indicates that non-artificially activated radioactive back-
grounds cannot be responsible for the observed events.
The scintillation mechanism suggested in Ref. [31] can-
not compose a large fraction of the observed background
because it decreased with time and was not coincident
between our two detectors, which were closely co-located
in the same optical cavity. IR photon backgrounds would
not decrease with time given constant cryogenic perfor-
mance (as was observed), would not be concentrated into
events with tens of eV deposited within the ∼ 10 µs
calorimeter response time, and would be expected to be
coincident between the two detectors.

Within the 38–85 eV range,
the event rate in-
creased quasi-exponentially with decreasing energy and
decreased with time, similar to the stress-relaxation pro-
cess observed at lower energies in the HS calorimeter.
However, the magnitude, spectral shape, and time de-
pendence of the 38–85 eV rate were consistent in both
devices (see Supplementary Table 1), indicating that
mount-related stress may not be the cause of the back-
ground in this energy range. We hypothesize that stress
in the QET thin films may be responsible. As the crys-
tal, films, and photolithographically etched design are all

essentially identical between the two devices, this back-
ground (if present) should be very similar between the
two calorimeters. Both differential thermal contraction
between the crystal and films during cooldown and rel-
ative strain created during film deposition are natural
sources of such stress.

To demonstrate the plausibility of film stresses as a
source of background events, we briefly sketch the physics
of an aluminium film that becomes stressed when cool-
ing from room temperature to close to absolute zero.
Relative to a silicon substrate, aluminium will biaxially
contract by a factor of about 4 × 10−3 [32], yielding a
stress in the film of around 480 MPa. This is in excess
of the yield stresses measured in similar aluminuim thin
films [33], and will likely result in intermittent fast yield-
ing events even at low temperatures [34]. Other metal
films, including tungsten, which although stronger than
aluminium contract less at cryogenic temperatures, are
additional candidates for excess event sources.


6

C.
Inferred Residual Quasiparticle Density Scales

To contextualize our observation of stress-induced
athermal phonons for the superconducting qubit com-
munity, we estimate reduced quasiparticle densities xqp
based on simulations described in Sec. III F and Supple-
mentary Note 2. We simulate the quasiparticles produced
by our observed stress-induced phonon events as well as
high-energy backgrounds (muons, etc.) in two represen-
tative quasiparticle dynamics limits: the recombination-
dominated qubit in Ref. [11] and the trapping-dominated
superconductor in Ref. [14]. We emphasize that these es-
timates merely indicate that the properties and approx-
imate scale of the quasiparticle densities simulated with
our stress-induced events are in general agreement with
the densities observed in previous experiments.
Exact
quasiparticle densities may differ significantly from our
estimates because of the inherent variation among setups
(glue type, superconductor geometry, etc.),
In the case of the qubit, we find that our stress-induced
background would produce a reduced quasiparticle den-
sity of xqp ≈ 5.0 × 10−8, while high-energy backgrounds
should induce xqp ≈ 1.5 × 10−8. The latter is in general
agreement with the lower bound of xqp ≥ 7 × 10−9 esti-
mated in Ref. [11] for high-energy backgrounds. For the
system in Ref. [14], we find that our stress events induce
xqp ≈ 2.8×10−11, while high-energy backgrounds induce
xqp ≈ 3.3 × 10−10.
These
estimates
suggest
that
in
the
case
of
recombination-dominated systems similar to Ref.
[11],
stress backgrounds may already cause quasiparticle den-
sities comparable to or greater than those created
by high-energy backgrounds.
Running qubits in low-
background, underground environments [10] would pre-
sumably only increase the relative importance of stress-
induced backgrounds. The striking similarities (time de-
pendence of rate, etc.) between the residual quasipar-
ticle densities observed in Ref. [14] and our athermal
phonon population observations strongly suggest that
stress-induced phonons were the primary cause of their
quasiparticle bursts. The difference between our simu-
lated quasiparticle densities and their observations sug-
gests that stress events occurred at a higher rate or en-
ergy scale in their system.

D.
Conclusion

We observed that mounting a cryogenically cooled sil-
icon crystal with GE varnish leads to a large rate of
athermal phonon events with energies in the range of
10s–100s of eV per event. The mounting of crystals with
other glue-like substances—e.g., vacuum grease [14] or
epoxy [10]—likely also results in a population of ather-
mal phonons. Experimenters constructing quasiparticle-
sensitive quantum circuits or low-threshold calorimeters
on cryogenic crystals should therefore consider alterna-
tive mounting techniques (such as suspending crystals

from wire bonds) that avoid use of adhesives.
More broadly, experiments which are sensitive to
athermal phonon backgrounds may be sensitive to stress
in their crystals from a variety of mechanisms. In addi-
tion to adhesive-based mounting schemes, using clamps
to hold crystals can result in excess event rates [24].
Based on our results, we also hypothesize that stress be-
tween a device’s crystal substrate and thin films may be
a source of stress-induced events (see Sec. II B). A sys-
tematic program of stress reduction may substantially
decrease both the low-energy excesses currently observed
in cryogenic calorimeters used to search for dark matter
and the time-dependent component of the quasiparticle
poisoning problem in quantum circuits.

III.
METHODS

A.
Calorimeter Construction

In our calorimeters (see Fig. 1), phonons from the sil-
icon crystal are absorbed by aluminium fins patterned
onto the crystal’s surface. These phonons break Cooper
pairs and create quasiparticles, which diffuse to and are
absorbed by tungsten TESs coupled to the aluminium
fins. When heated by quasiparticle thermalization, the
current through a voltage-biased TES changes as the re-
sistance changes. This change in current can be read out
using SQUID electronics. A small gold pad on the silicon
surface was connected to the thermal bath via a gold wire
bond, thus removing thermal phonons from the crystal.
Our calorimeters were fabricated from a single 1 mm
thick, 100 mm diameter polished high-purity wafer (Float
Zone intrinsic silicon, >10 kOhm/square). Tungsten, alu-
minium, and gold films were deposited onto the crystal
surface, and then photolithographically etched into the
desired shapes.
The Tcs of the HS and LS devices were measured to
be 44.3 and 53.0 mK, respectively. The fraction of the
surface area of the calorimeters (including sidewalls and
bottoms) covered by “active” aluminium fins (which col-
lect athermal phonons into TESs) and tungsten TESs
(which collect sub-gap phonons) were 2.8% and 0.29%.
The “passive” areal fractions of aluminium, tungsten,
and gold were 3.3%, 0.29%, and 0.037%, respectively.
By design, these coverage fractions were similar to the
calorimeter used in Ref. [15]. We note that the fraction
of “passive” aluminium and tungsten includes approxi-
mately half of the total number of QETs, which were not
read out due to broken wire bonds. The broken readout
channel was the same for both calorimeters.

B.
Cryogenic Configuration

The HS and LS calorimeters were run inside a Cry-
oconcept HEXADRY UQT-B 200 dry (pulse tube based)
dilution refrigerator. The refrigerator was located in a


7

subbasement lab at the University of California, Berke-
ley, with minimal overburden and no radiation shielding
(lead, etc.). No special radiopurity precautions were un-
dertaken.
The configuration of the refrigerator and pulse tube
cooler were optimized to transmit minimal vibrations
from the pulse tube to the cold stages of the refrigerator.
Further, both the HS and LS mounting schemes are rela-
tively insusceptible to vibrations. We operated the refrig-
erator in a “pulse tube off” configuration for short periods
of time (up to 15 min) and did not measure any signifi-
cant difference in noise, performance, or background (vs.
pulse tube on) for either the HS or LS calorimeter. All
data presented in this paper were recorded with the pulse
tube on and with a stable refrigerator base temperature
< 10 mK. We have also studied a low-stress “resting” con-
figuration in which the calorimeter was sitting directly on
a copper surface without being glued down; these devices
were extremely susceptible to pulse-tube vibrations.
The HS and LS calorimeters were located inside the
same copper optical cavity, with a direct line of sight be-
tween them. The printed circuit boards used to read out
the calorimetry signals were also located in this optical
cavity, presumably leading to a subdominant scintillation
background as described in Ref. [31].
This cavity was
held at the temperature of the mixing chamber (∼10 mK)
and was sealed with copper tape to increase light tight-
ness. The mixing chamber and the optical cavity were lo-
cated inside the refrigerator’s still thermal shield (∼1 K),
which was in turn located inside 4 K and 50 K shields
sealed inside a 300 K vacuum can. An external mu-metal
shield was used to reduce internal magnetic fields.

C.
Readout Signal Chain

The HS and LS calorimeters were read out using stan-
dard TES readout techniques (see, e.g., Ref. [26]). The
current flowing through the TESs was read out using a
SQUID amplifier on the 100 mK cold-plate stage of the
dilution refrigerator. This SQUID was operated in a feed-
back mode and was controlled by room-temperature elec-
tronics. Data were collected continuously with a National
Instruments PCIe-6376 DAQ operating at 1.25 MHz.

D.
Data Collection and Energy Measurement

Approximately 80 hours of data were collected in 7
datasets, summarized in Supplementary Table 4.
For
both the HS and LS calorimeters, each dataset was
recorded as a continuous stream, and a threshold-based
event selection was carried out with offline software.
Pulses in the continuous data stream were found using an
optimal filtering approach, and 20 ms traces (symmetric
around the pulse) were recorded for each event. The re-
sulting set of triggered events were then processed using
an optimal filtering algorithm to measure pulse heights.

Thanks to the well understood electrothermal feedback
mechanism in TESs [26], we can directly infer the energy
absorbed in a TES from the size of a pulse. After de-
termining the pulse height in units of current using the
optimal filtering algorithm, we calculated the power ab-
sorbed in the TES in the infinite loop gain limit as

Pabs = δI ∂P

∂I (ω = 0) = δI(2ITESRLoad − Vbias).
(1)

We multiplied this peak power by the integral of the
pulse-fitting template (in units of time) to find the energy
associated with the pulse.
This method of calculating
the energy absorbed in the TES is in general insensitive
to the exact characteristics of the TES film (given films
with similar α which are significantly colder than Tc, as
was the case for our calorimeters). Note that the energy
measured with this approach corresponds to the energy
absorbed in the TES, rather than the energy deposited in
the phonon system. As described in Supplementary Note
1, the latter can be estimated by assuming a phonon col-
lection efficiency of 25%.
In the case of saturation, the temperature of the TES
rises significantly above Tc and the electrothermal feed-
back mechanism fails to completely capture the energy
absorbed in the TES. Therefore, the energy of saturated
pulses measured using this approach will be underesti-
mated. The energy at which this saturation takes place
depends on the Tc of the film, among other factors, lead-
ing to the variation in saturation energy seen in Fig. 2.
Because we did not directly calibrate the phonon col-
lection efficiency, we report energy as absorbed in the
TESs rather than energy deposited in the calorimeter
(aside from the estimates in Supplementary Note 1).
Given the phonon collection efficiencies observed in sim-
ilar calorimeters [28], we can safely conclude that the
events we observe are relevant to the observed low en-
ergy excess. Our analysis and conclusions are otherwise
insensitive to the exact energy that the observed events
deposit in the calorimeter.

E.
Data Quality Cuts

To ensure a consistent detector response, only the
events passing three sets of data-quality cuts were con-
sidered for analysis. Events were required to pass

• a “baseline cut” requiring the magnitude of the pre-
pulse baseline to be in a range associated with con-
sistent detector response,

• a “slope cut” requiring the slope of the baseline be-
fore and after a pulse to be consistent with steady-
state detector operation, and

• a “chi-squared cut” requiring the shape of the pulse
to be consistent with a representative pulse tem-
plate.


8

These cuts were designed to pass a large fraction of
events. Passage fractions are summarized in Supplemen-
tary Table 5.
Pulses larger than a threshold associated with satura-
tion failed to pass both the slope and chi-squared cuts,
even for pulses associated with the expected response of
the device. All such saturated pulses were therefore set
to pass and were thus included in our reported (85+ eV)
event rates. These pulses are outside of the main region
of interest for this analysis.
Cut passage fraction as a function of time was mon-
itored by finding the passage fraction of randomly ac-
quired traces as a function of time. Our reported event
rates have been corrected by this measured passage frac-
tion to account for cut efficiency.
Note that the pas-
sage fraction did not significantly vary over time and was
never less than 0.85, indicating that cut-efficiency time
dependence cannot be the source of the rate variation
described in Sec. II B.

F.
Quasiparticle Density Simulations

For our quasiparticle density estimates, we use a zero
dimensional model in which the quasiparticle dynamics
for the reduced quasiparticle density, xqp = nqp/ncp, are
governed by

dxqp(t)

dt
= −rxqp(t)2 − sxqp(t) + g(t),
(2)

where nqp and ncp are the number densities of quasi-
particles and Cooper pairs, respectively, r ≈ (20 ns)−1 is
the constant associated with recombination in aluminium
[30], s is the trapping rate in a given system, and g is
the quasiparticle generation rate. We approximate g by
g0δ(t − t0), where

g0 =
Ef

2∆Adncp
,
(3)

E is the phonon energy of the event in a device sub-
strate, f ≈ 0.5 [35] is the collection efficiency of phonon
event energy into quasiparticles, A and d are the area and
thickness of the superconductor (qubits and ground plane
combined), respectively, ∆ ≈ 180µeV is the supercon-
ducting bandgap of aluminium, and ncp ≈ 4 × 106µm−3

is the Cooper pair density in aluminium.
We estimate xqp for two systems.
One system is
recombination-limited (i.e., s ≈ 0, modeled after the de-
vice in Ref. [11]), with ∼ 100% superconductor surface
coverage and a superconductor thickness of 200 nm. In
the other system, dominated by trapping (modeled after
the device in Ref. [14]), we assume a 20 % coverage frac-
tion, a 35 nm thick superconductor, and s = 8.0 kHz.
The properties of the two systems are summarized in
Supplementary Table S3.
In both systems, we use the actual measured behav-
ior of our HS calorimeter to model g0 and t0 and thus

construct g(t) and xqp(t). For events under the satura-
tion threshold, we use event energies and timing without
modification. For saturated events, in simulations that
include high-energy backgrounds, we assign an energy
of 100 keV (similar to Ref. [30]); whereas, these events
are assigned 0 eV for simulations without high-energy
backgrounds. The datasets with zero energy from sat-
urated events are designed to simulate the performance
of a qubit operated in a well-shielded setup, such as an
underground laboratory with good radiopurity controls
where high-energy backgrounds would be greatly reduced
(as suggested in Ref. [10]).
We numerically simulate xqp(t) with the constructed
g(t) in 25 µs time steps. After discarding an initial pe-
riod, during which the simulation equilibrated, the sim-
ulated xqp(t) was plotted (see Supplementary Figure S2
) and time averages were taken (see Supplementary Ta-
ble 3).
Simulations were performed for each system—
recombination and trapping dominated—with only high-
energy backgrounds, with only stress backgrounds, and
with both backgrounds. The results are summarized in
Sec. II C and further discussed in Supplementary Note 2.

IV.
DATA AVAILABILITY

The
processed
datasets
used
for
this
study
are
available
through
figshare,
with
DOI
10.6084/m9.figshare.25337869. The data raw generated
during this study are available from the corresponding
author on request. Source data are provided with this
paper.

V.
CODE AVAILABILITY

The code used during this study is available from the
corresponding author on request.

VI.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank Aaron Chou for encouraging the
publication of these results and Bert G. Harrop for dis-
cussions of wire bonding techniques.
This work was supported by the U.S. Department
of
Energy
(DOE)
under
Contract
Nos.
DE-AC02-
05CH11231 (LBNL, R.A.P.,
A.B.,
C.W.F.,
M.G.S.,
X.L., J.L., D.M., S.M., W.A.P., M.P., M.R., R.K.R.,
H.S.Q., B.Sadoulet., B.Serfass, R.S., P.S., V.V., Y.W.,
S.L.W., M.R.W.,) and DE-AC05-76RL01830 (PNNL,
R.B.), through the Office of High Energy Physics Quan-
tum Information Science Enabled Discovery (Quan-
tISED) program, and through DOE Grant DE-SC020374
(TESSERACT, All Authors).
W.G. acknowledges support from the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory at Florida State University,
which is supported by the National Science Foundation


9

Cooperative Agreement No. DMR-1644779 and the state
of Florida.

VII.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS STATEMENT

This study was performed by the “SPICE/HeRALD”
or “TESSERACT” collaboration in M. Pyle’s UC Berke-
ley laboratory, with additional oversight and manage-
ment from B. Sadoulet. W.A.P. performed critical pre-
cursor work on resting calorimeters. E.F., R.G., Z.H.,
N.K., A.M., B.N., and R.U. did precursor work on the
LEE in the PD2/CPD detector, demonstrating that the
excess was unrelated to radioactive backgrounds and
suggesting stress relaxation as the likely source.
The
calorimeters used in this study were designed by C.F.
and were fabricated at Texas A&M University by M.
Platt in R.M. and N.M.’s laboratory.
S.M., W.A.P.,
M.R., and R.K.R. developed the low-stress hanging tech-
nique, and X.L., M.R. and R.K.R. assembled the LS and
HS calorimeters. The cryostat used for this study was
constructed by R.A.P., Y.Y.C., C.W.F., S.M., W.A.P.,
M. Pyle, M.R., R.K.R., H.S.Q., B. Serfass, and S.L.W.
DAQ and other software tools used in this analysis were
designed by C.F., X.L., W.A.P., B. Serfass, B. Suerfu,
and S.L.W. The main data analysis was undertaken by
R.K.R. Studies of stress in alternative TES materials
were carried out by M.L., G.W., V.Y. and J.Z. in C.L.C.’s
laboratory. Cryogenic studies were performed in W.G.’s
laboratory. Radioactive background modeling was per-
formed in B.P.’s laboratory. Studies of different detector
concepts and associated software development were un-
dertaken by A.B., L.C., J.L., P.K.P., H.D.P., R.S., V.V.,
Y.W., and M.R.W, with M.G.S., S.A.H., D.M., P.S., and
A.S. providing guidance and support as additional co-
principal investigators in the collaboration. All authors
read and approved the manuscript, which was written
primarily by R.B., M. Pyle and R.K.R. All authors con-
tributed to the collaboration which produced this work.

VIII.
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT

The authors declare no competing interests.

IX.
FIGURE LEGENDS/CAPTIONS

A.
Figure 1

Schematic showing the orgin of microfracture events
(A) and photographs of the Low Stress (LS) silicon
calorimeter (B) and a functionally identical High Stress
(HS) calorimeter (C). (A) The top schematic shows a sil-
icon crystal glued to a copper mount (representative of
C). Stress generated by thermal contraction relaxes via
microfracture events (red), releasing energy as athermal
phonons (pink) which break Cooper pairs (dark blue) in

superconducting aluminium films (light blue) and cre-
ate quasiparticles (green) that are read out with tung-
sten TESs (purple). (B, C) The calorimeters (grey) are
1 cm×1 cm by 1 mm thick. The LS calorimeter (left) is
supported by three sets of two 50 µm diameter aluminium
wire bonds, located at the back and the front of the left
and right sides of the crystal. The HS calorimeter (right)
is glued to a gold-plated copper mount using GE varnish.
Both calorimeters are thermalized by several 25 µm di-
ameter Au wire bonds (left side) and read out through 25
µmaluminiumwire bonds (front). Athermal phonon read-
out sensors are visible as dots on the calorimeter tops.
Figure file name: “Glued Hanging Paper Schematic
Final.jpg”

B.
Figure 2

Background spectra of energy absorbed in TESs in
High Stress (Red) and Low Stress (Blue) calorimeters.
The histogram is divided into three regions: high ener-
gies associated with saturation (85+ eV), and two lower-
energy bins (38–85 eV; 3–35 eV) where the backgrounds
appear to be similar and different in the two calorimeters,
respectively. These spectra are from a 12 hour dataset,
the last of 7 datasets acquired (see Supplementary Table
4). Error bars correspond to 1 sigma statistical uncer-
tainties. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.
Figure file name: “spectrum final.pdf”

C.
Figure 3

Time dependence of background rates in High Stress
(light colors) and Low Stress (dark colors) calorimeters.
Rates are measured in three energy bins: 3–38 eV, 38–85
eV, and 85+ eV. Exponential fits are shown as solid lines.
1 Sigma error bars are shown. Source data are provided
as a Source Data file.
Figure file name: “rates times final.pdf”

X.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Supplementary Information is available for this paper.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to Roger K. Romani (rkromani@gmail.com,
rkromani@berkeley.edu).

REFERENCES

[1] P. Krantz, M. Kjaergaard, F. Yan, T. P. Orlando, S. Gus-
tavsson, and W. D. Oliver, A quantum engineer’s guide
to superconducting qubits, Appl. Phys. Rev. 6, 021318
(2019), arXiv:1904.06560 [quant-ph].

[2] W. D. Oliver and P. B. Welander, Materials in supercon-
ducting quantum bits, MRS Bull. 38, 816 (2013).


10

[3] J. Aumentado, M. W. Keller, J. M. Martinis, and M. H.
Devoret, Nonequilibrium quasiparticles and 2e periodic-
ity in single-cooper-pair transistors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
066802 (2004), arXiv:cond-mat/0308253.

[4] J. M. Martinis, M. Ansmann, and J. Aumentado, En-
ergy decay in superconducting josephson-junction qubits
from nonequilibrium quasiparticle excitations, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 103, 097002 (2009), arXiv:0904.2171 [cond-
mat.mes-hall].

[5] K. Serniak,
M. Hays,
G. de Lange,
S. Diamond,
S. Shankar, L. D. Burkhart, L. Frunzio, M. Houzet,
and M. H. Devoret, Hot nonequilibrium quasiparticles in
transmon qubits, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 157701 (2018),
arXiv:1803.00476 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

[6] A. D. C´orcoles, J. M. Chow, J. M. Gambetta, C. Rigetti,
J. R. Rozen, G. A. Keefe, M. Beth Rothwell, M. B.
Ketchen, and M. Steffen, Protecting superconducting
qubits from radiation, Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 181906
(2011), arXiv:1108.1383 [quant-ph].

[7] R. Barends et al., Minimizing quasiparticle genera-
tion from stray infrared light in superconducting quan-
tum circuits, Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 113507 (2011),
arXiv:1105.4642 [cond-mat.mes-hall].

[8] C.-H. Liu et al., Quasiparticle Poisoning of Super-
conducting Qubits from Resonant Absorption of Pair-
Breaking Photons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 132, 017001 (2024),
arXiv:2203.06577 [quant-ph].

[9] M. McEwen et al., Resolving catastrophic error bursts
from cosmic rays in large arrays of superconducting
qubits, Nat. Phys. 18, 107 (2022), arXiv:2104.05219
[quant-ph].

[10] L. Cardani et al., Reducing the impact of radioactiv-
ity on quantum circuits in a deep-underground facility,
Nat. Commun. 12, 2733 (2021), arXiv:2005.02286 [cond-
mat.supr-con].

[11] A. Veps¨al¨ainen et al., Impact of ionizing radiation on su-
perconducting qubit coherence, Nature 584, 551 (2020),
arXiv:2001.09190 [quant-ph].

[12] C. D. Wilen et al., Correlated charge noise and relax-
ation errors in superconducting qubits, Nature 594, 369
(2021), arXiv:2012.06029 [quant-ph].

[13] S. Diamond et al., Distinguishing Parity-Switching Mech-
anisms in a Superconducting Qubit, PRX Quantum 3,
040304 (2022), arXiv:2204.07458 [quant-ph].

[14] E. T. Mannila, P. Samuelsson, S. Simbierowicz, J. T. Pel-
tonen, V. Vesterinen, L. Gr¨onberg, J. Hassel, V. F. Maisi,
and J. P. Pekola, A superconductor free of quasiparticles
for seconds, Nat. Phys. 18, 145 (2022), arXiv:2102.00484
[cond-mat.supr-con].

[15] I. Alkhatib et al. (SuperCDMS), Light Dark Matter
Search with a High-Resolution Athermal Phonon De-
tector Operated Above Ground, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127,
061801 (2021), arXiv:2007.14289 [hep-ex].

[16] A. H. Abdelhameed et al. (CRESST), First results from
the CRESST-III low-mass dark matter program, Phys.
Rev. D 100, 102002 (2019), arXiv:1904.00498 [astro-
ph.CO].

[17] P. Adari et al., EXCESS workshop: Descriptions of rising
low-energy spectra, SciPost Phys. Proc. 9, 001 (2022),
arXiv:2202.05097 [astro-ph.IM].

[18] L. Hehn et al. (EDELWEISS), Improved EDELWEISS-

III sensitivity for low-mass WIMPs using a profile
likelihood approach, Eur. Phys. J. C 76, 548 (2016),
arXiv:1607.03367 [astro-ph.CO].

[19] T. Salagnac et al. (Ricochet), Optimization and Perfor-
mance of the CryoCube Detector for the Future Ricochet
Low-Energy Neutrino Experiment, J. Low Temp. Phys.
211, 398 (2023), arXiv:2111.12438 [physics.ins-det].

[20] M. Pyle, Low energy event excess in calorimeters (2022),
EXCESS2022 Workshop.

[21] C. Strandhagen, Low energy excess in cresst (2021),
EXCESS2021 Workshop.

[22] A. Bespalov, M. Houzet, J. S. Meyer, and Y. V. Nazarov,
Theoretical model to explain excess of quasiparticles in
superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 117002 (2016).

[23] K. W. Jones and H. W. Kraner, Energy lost to ionization
by 254-ev 73Ge atoms stopping in Ge, Phys. Rev. A 11,
1347 (1975).

[24] J. ˚Astr¨om et al., Fracture Processes Observed with A
Cryogenic Detector, Phys. Lett. A 356, 262 (2006),
arXiv:physics/0504151.

[25] I. Perepechko, Low-Temperature Properties of Polymers,
edited by A. Beknazarov (Pergamon Press, Inc., Elms-
ford, New York, 1980).

[26] K. Irwin and G. Hilton, Transition-edge sensors, in Top-
ics in Applied Physics (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005)
pp. 63–150.

[27] K. D. Irwin, S. W. Nam, B. Cabrera, B. Chugg, and B. A.
Young, A quasiparticle-trap-assisted transition-edge sen-
sor for phonon-mediated particle detection, Rev. Sci. In-
strum. 66, 5322 (1995).

[28] C. W. Fink et al. (CPD), Performance of a large
area photon detector for rare event search applications,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 022601 (2021), arXiv:2009.14302
[physics.ins-det].

[29] C. W. Fink et al., Characterizing TES Power Noise for
Future Single Optical-Phonon and Infrared-Photon De-
tectors, AIP Adv. 10, 085221 (2020), arXiv:2004.10257
[physics.ins-det].

[30] J. M. Martinis, Saving superconducting quantum pro-
cessors from decay and correlated errors generated by
gamma and cosmic rays, npj Quantum Inf. 7, 90 (2021),
arXiv:2012.06137 [quant-ph].

[31] P. Du, D. Egana-Ugrinovic, R. Essig, and M. Shola-
purkar, Sources of Low-Energy Events in Low-Threshold
Dark-Matter and Neutrino Detectors, Phys. Rev. X 12,
011009 (2022), arXiv:2011.13939 [hep-ph].

[32] P. N. Nakashima, The crystallography of aluminum and
its alloys, in Encyclopedia of Aluminum and Its Alloys
(CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, 2018) pp. 488–586,
arXiv:2002.01562 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci].

[33] J.-H. Jou and C.-S. Chung, Mechanical characteristics
of aluminum thin films on silicon and gallium arsenide,
Thin Solid Films 235, 149–155 (1993).

[34] V. A. Koval and V. P. Soldatov, Jumplike deformation of
copper and aluminum during low-temperature creep, in
Advances in Cryogenic Engineering Materials (Springer
US, New York, New York, 1980) p. 86–90.

[35] T. Guruswamy, D. J. Goldie, and S. Withington, Quasi-
particle generation efficiency in superconducting thin
films, Supercond. Sci. Technology 27, 055012 (2014),
arXiv:1401.1937 [cond-mat.supr-con].


A Stress Induced Source of Phonon Bursts and Quasiparticle Poisoning:
Supplementary Information

R. Anthony-Petersen,1 A. Biekert,1, 2 R. Bunker,3 C.L. Chang,4, 5, 6 Y.-Y. Chang,1 L. Chaplinsky,7

E. Fascione,8, 9 C.W. Fink,1 M. Garcia-Sciveres,2 R. Germond,8, 9 W. Guo,10, 11 S.A. Hertel,7

Z. Hong,12 N.A. Kurinsky,13 X. Li,2 J. Lin,1, 2 M. Lisovenko,4 R. Mahapatra,14 A.J. Mayer,9

D.N. McKinsey,1, 2 S. Mehrotra,1 N. Mirabolfathi,14 B. Neblosky,15 W.A. Page,1, ∗ P.K. Patel,7

B. Penning,16 H.D. Pinckney,7 M. Platt,14 M. Pyle,1 M. Reed,1 R.K. Romani,1, ∗ H. Santana Queiroz,1

B. Sadoulet,1 B. Serfass,1 R. Smith,1, 2 P. Sorensen,2 B. Suerfu,1, 2 A. Suzuki,2 R. Underwood,8

V. Velan,1, 2 G. Wang,4 Y. Wang,1, 2 S.L. Watkins,1 M.R. Williams,16 V. Yefremenko,4 and J. Zhang4

1Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
2Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
3Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA 99352, USA
4High Energy Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory,
9700 S. Cass Avenue, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA
5Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Chicago,
5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA
6Kavli Institute for Cosmological Physics, University of Chicago,
5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA
7Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003, USA
8Department of Physics, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada
9TRIUMF, Vancouver, BC V6T 2A3, Canada
10Mechanical Engineering Department, FAMU-FSU College of Engineering,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida 32310, USA
11National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, 1800 East Paul Dirac Drive, Tallahassee, Florida 32310, USA
12Department of Physics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A7, Canada
13SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory/Kavli Institute for Particle
Astrophysics and Cosmology, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA
14Department of Physics and Astronomy, and the Mitchell Institute for Fundamental Physics and Astronomy,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA
15Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA
16University of Michigan, Randall Laboratory of Physics, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 1: COMPARISON
WITH OTHER CALORIMETRIC EXPERIMENTS

For comparison, we show the low-energy spectra mea-
sured with our HS and LS devices alongside the spectra
observed in the CPD [1] and CRESST-III [2] calorime-
ters in Supplementary Fig. 1. This comparison assumes
a phonon collection efficiency of 25% in the HS and LS
calorimeters, consistent with the observed collection ef-
ficiencies for devices of this type within O(2) [1]. When
normalizing by detector mass, the background rates in
our LS and HS detectors are significantly above previ-
ously above rates reported for the CPD and CRESST-III
detectors.
However, scaling by sensor volume (taken here as the
aluminium volume) may be more appropriate if back-
grounds originate in the sensor films (as hypothesized in
Section 2.1 of the main text) rather than the bulk of
the detector. The center subfigure of Fig. S1 attempts
to make this correction, assuming that the CRESST-III
phonon sensors are 1 um thick and with the dimensions
described in Ref. [3].

∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.

Given that the low energy background rate has been
observed to decrease with time both in CRESST detec-
tors [4, 5] and in the detectors in this work, corrections
for the time since the detector was initially cooled to
base temperature are necessary for any effort to compare
background rates on an equal footing. For the CPD de-
tector, we assume that the rate decreases similarly to the
rate in the LS detector in the 38-85 eV range (i.e. with a
time constant of 10 days), and that the detector had been
cold for 50 days total, resulting in a ∼ e4 fold rate reduc-
tion compared to the final LS detector dataset (shown
here). In CRESST detectors, both a slow (∼ year) and a
fast (∼ 15 days) decay constant have been observed [4, 5].
We assume that the CRESST-III data was taken approxi-
mately one year into their run, when 6 fast time constants
and 1 slow time constants had elapsed compared to the
LS detector’s final dataset, giving a ∼ e7 correction to
the rate. In the right subfigure of Fig. S1 we make this
correction, and see that rates in both the LS detector, the
CPD detector, and the CRESST-III detector are broadly
compatible. We hypothesize that all three detectors are
limited by a background associated with the relaxation of
mechanical stress in detector films, as described in Sec-
tion 2.2 from the main text.
Depending on the exact
mechanism underlying this background, additional cor-

arXiv:2208.02790v2  [physics.ins-det]  14 Aug 2024


2

rections (e.g. for aluminium film grain size) might ex-
plain any additional detector-to-detector rate variations.

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 2: ESTIMATING
QUASIPARTICLE DENSITIES FOR
REPRESENTATIVE QUANTUM SYSTEMS

Athermal phonons incident on a superconductor can
break Cooper pairs in the superconductor, creating quasi-
particles which can cause decoherence of superconduct-
ing qubits. The impact of “high energy” backgrounds on
quantum circuit performance has recently been the sub-
ject of significant study [7–9]. In this section, we com-
ment on the importance of such high-energy backgrounds
relative to stress-induced backgrounds.
To this end, we separate the background observed in
our calorimeters into two regions: the first between 3 and
85 eV (the two lowest-energy bins in Fig. 2 from the main
text), and the second above 85 eV where the response
of the detector saturates such that the energy deposited
in the detector cannot be accurately reconstructed. We
associate the first region with stress-related events (as
argued in Section 2.2 from the main text) and the sec-
ond region with cosmic-ray muons, high-energy gammas,
neutrons, alphas, etc. interacting with the calorimeter.
As we cannot accurately reconstruct the energy of these
saturated events, we assume that each deposits 100 keV
of energy in the phonon system, corresponding approx-
imately to the energy deposited by a minimum ionizing
muon [10] and similar to the average energy in Ref. [9].
In the simplest terms, we can compare the rela-
tive powers of the high-energy and stress-induced back-
grounds.
For example, in our first dataset, we see
a rate of approximately 672 eV/s of stress events in
the HS calorimeter, 10.9 eV/s in the LS calorimeter,
and 5.8 keV/s of high-energy backgrounds in either
calorimeter—summing the energies observed directly in
the case of stress backgrounds and assuming 100 keV
per saturated event in the case of high-energy back-
grounds.
In radiopure underground cryostats, as sug-
gested in Ref. [8], the high-energy background power
may be reduced by as much as a factor of 104, implying
that stress-induced backgrounds may completely domi-
nate the phonon-background power in such systems.
In many quantum circuits, the average quasiparticle
density depends not only on the power of phonons in-
cident on the superconducting elements but also on the
average energy of the phonon events. Inspecting Eq. (2)
in Sec 3.6 of the main text, we note that if the system is
dominated by recombination (i.e., s is small, as in many
quantum circuits [7]) and g is not constant with time, as
is the case for both high-energy and stress-related quasi-
particle creation, then the time-averaged quasiparticle
density will in general be smaller for infrequent high-
energy events than for frequent low-energy events, even if
both backgrounds have similar powers. Dense quasiparti-
cle populations created by infrequent high-energy events

will recombine more quickly than more diffuse quasipar-
ticle populations created by frequent low-energy events.
We simulated the time-dependent quasiparticle density
in two cases:
a recombination-limited superconductor
modeled after Ref. [7] and a trapping-dominated super-
conductor based on Ref. [11] (as discussed in Sections 2.3
and 3.6 in the main text). In both cases, we simulate the
quasiparticle densities based on measured phonon event
energies and timing in our HS calorimeter, assigning a
phonon energy of 100 keV for saturated events.
Sup-
plementary Figure 2 shows the simulated quasiparticle
densities.
In the recombination-dominated case (i.e., insignifi-
cant quasiparticle trapping), we simulate a time-averaged
value of xqp ≈ 4.1 × 10−8 due to stress events only and
5.0 × 10−8 if energy from high-energy backgrounds is in-
cluded. The simulated reduced quasiparticle density due
to high-energy backgrounds alone is 1.5 × 10−8, which
is comparable to the xqp ≥ 7 × 10−9 lower bound es-
timated in Ref. [7] for background radiation. While it
is notable that the stress-induced and high-energy con-
tributions to xqp are comparable in this recombination-
dominated case, this will not be generally true; stress-
induced events may occur in different systems with sig-
nificantly different rates or energy scales that depend on
details of the experimental setup.
Multiple works [9, 12] have suggested using quasipar-
ticle traps to suppress the time-averaged residual quasi-
particle density. We simulate such a system (based on
Ref. [11]) with the same event-rate assumptions as for
the recombination-dominated case and estimate xqp =
3.6 × 10−10 if high-energy backgrounds are included and
2.8 × 10−11 with only stress events included, approxi-
mately three orders of magnitude lower than measured
in Ref. [11]. However, if we increase the average energy
per stress event by a factor of 103, or equivalently in-
crease the rate density of events by a factor of 103 and
assume energy is much more locally absorbed, we recover
xqp ≈ 2.8 × 10−8 both with and without high-energy
backgrounds (as observed shortly after cooldown in Ref.
[11]). This increased energy scale (E ≈ 10 keV) is still
lower than the scale of events observed by CRESST [13],
suggesting that some combination of increases in rate and
energy scale plausibly explains the time-varying quasi-
particle density observed in Ref. [11].
Previously discussed mitigation techniques include op-
erating radiopure quantum circuits in low-background
environments [7, 8] (which would not reduce the stress-
induced phonon background) and using phonon sinks
to reduce the background athermal phonon populations
[9]. Phonon sinks would reduce the effects of the stress-
induced phonon background if the phonons are generated
by, e.g., glue-crystal microfractures.
However, phonon
sinks would not significantly mitigate the effects of film-
crystal microfractures, e.g., between the crystal and su-
perconducting qubit thin films. In the latter case, energy
would presumably be efficiently transferred to the quasi-
particle system of the qubit without involving significant


3

0
50
100
150
200

Estimated Phonon Energy (eV)

101

103

105

107

109

1011

Counts/(kev kg days)

0
50
100
150
200

Estimated Phonon Energy (eV)

10
8

10
6

10
4

10
2

100

Counts/(kev days (um3 Al)

0
50
100
150
200

Estimated Phonon Energy (eV)

10
8

10
6

10
4

10
2

100

Counts/(kev days (um3 Al), With Estimated Time Cold Correction

High Stress
Low Stress
CPD SLAC
CRESST-III

Supplementary Figure S1. Comparison to CPD and CRESST. Spectra of events in HS and LS calorimeters, compared to
those measured with the CRESST-III detector [2] and by SuperCDMS in the CPD detector at SLAC [1]. Data are from the
last of seven datasets taken. The energy in the HS and LS calorimeters are estimated assuming a phonon collection efficiency
of 25%, and therefore differ by a constant factor from the spectra in Fig. 2 from the main text. The left subfigure normalizes
by detector mass, the center subfigure normalizes by aluminium volume, and the right subfigure both normalizes by aluminium
volume and applies an estimated time cold correction (see text in Supplementary Note 1). Error bars correspond to 1 sigma
statistical errors for the LS and HS spectra; uncertainties could not be reconstructed for the CRESST or CPD detectors from
the datasets included alongside Ref. [6]. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

crystal-scale phonon propagation.
As we have shown,
trapping quasiparticles within the qubit [9, 12] would
somewhat mitigate the effects of stress-induced ather-
mal phonons, but a resolution of the underlying athermal
phonon problem is needed to achieve thermal densities of
quasiparticles.
In summary, our simulations indicate that in the case
of the recombination-dominated qubit, stress and high-
energy backgrounds plausibly contribute about equally to
quasiparticle poisoning, while experimental evidence [11]
indicates that the quasiparticle density is dominated by
stress-induced quasiparticles in the trapping-dominated
superconductor. In either case, the rate and energy scale
of stress-induced events will presumably vary from ex-
periment to experiment, either increasing or decreasing
the relative importance of this background.
The simulated residual quasiparticle densities are sum-
marized in Table S2, while the properties of the supercon-
ductors modeled in our simulations are listed in Table S3.

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE 3: LOW STRESS
TECHNIQUE DESCRIPTION

The low stress mounting technique described in this
paper was developed over the course of multiple design

iterations.
As a general principle, the two most chal-
lenging aspects of this process were achieving high bond
strengths and designing a setup such that the calorime-
ters could be bonded and transported without breaking
the delicate and rigid structural bonds.
The bulk wire from which the structural bonds is con-
structed is in general far stronger than needed to me-
chanically support the gram scale detectors. However,
both the bond itself and the interface between the bond
and bonding surface are relatively weak. Optimizing this
strength required a campaign of varying the e.g. bond
force, bond time, etc. and pull testing a number of sam-
ples using a mechanical pull tester. Obtaining a bond
which was both well bonded to the substrate and me-
chanically strong at the bond foot required settings in a
relatively narrow range. Heuristically, we found that the
strongest bonds we obtained failed at ∼0.3 the bulk bond
breaking strength and would fail with either the bond pad
being separated from the substrate, or from the bond foot
snapping off of the bonding wire where it was deformed
at the “ankle.” Structural bonds were made of 2 mil (50
µm) 1% Si aluminium wire from Tanaka, and were made
on a manual WestBond wire bonding machine.
To support the devices during bonding, we used a 3D
printed plastic jig, as shown in Fig. S3. This jig was de-
signed to be highly rigid, such that force transferred to


4

30
35
40
45
50

Simulation Time (s)

10
11

10
10

10
9

10
8

10
7

10
6

Reduced Quasiparticle Density x (Dimensionless)

Recombination Dominated

Stress + High Energy Events
Stress Events Only
High Energy Events Only
Stress + High Energy Average
Stress Only Average
High Energy Average

30
35
40
45
50

Simulation Time (s)

Trapping Dominated

Simulated Reduced Quasiparticle Density based on Observed Phonon Events

Supplementary Figure S2.
Simulated Reduced Quasiparticle Density xqp in Recombination- and Trapping-
Dominated Systems vs. Time. Simulations are based on observed events in the high stress calorimeter (see Supplementary
Note 2 for details). Note that in the trapping-dominated simulation (right), due to the fast trapping timescale both curves
are only on scale for a short length of time after each event; the average value of xqp is well below 10−9. The recombination-
dominated qubit was modeled after Ref. [7] and the trapping-dominating superconductor was modeled after Ref. [11]. Dotted
lines are time averages. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

the calorimeter when bonds were made would not move
the calorimeter enough to break bonds which were al-
ready made. The jig was constructed out of two pieces,
the first that supported and centered the calorimeter be-
ing bonded from the bottom, and the second clamping
the calorimeter to the bottom jig by pushing downwards.
This top jig was designed to only contact the edge of the
calorimeter to prevent damage to the films patterned on
the surface, and was made relatively small to allow for ac-
cess to the bonding pads around the device. The jig was
also designed such that when removed, the calorimeter
would not move relative to the copper support to which
it was bonded. This ensured that the device would hang
evenly without contacting support structures when the
jig was removed.
The bonded device was transported to the cryostat
while in the bonding jig to ensure that it would not be
damaged during transport.
The top and then bottom
jigs were slowly removed, and the hanging device was
mounted in the cryostat. In general, calorimeters could

only be structurally bonded once due to bonding pad size
constraints, so if the calorimeter was to be run again af-
ter completing a cryogenic run, it needed to be removed
and stored without breaking the structural wire bonds.
We found that it was easier to break these bonds when
attempting to reinstall the bonding jig than it was to
carefully transport and store the calorimeter in the hang-
ing state. These suspended calorimeters were in general
strong when accelerated side to side, but very weak when
accelerated up and down. For example, the calorimeters
would not be broken by moderate side to side manual
shaking, but would easily be broken by even small (∼mm)
scale drops onto rigid surfaces.
During the initial development of this technique, we
suffered from very poor (∼ 10%) yield, but through iter-
ative improvements to our design and techniques have
obtained significantly improved (∼ 80%) yields.
Pre-
sumably additional engineering and process development
could enable significantly higher (∼ 95%+) yields.


5

TABLE S1. High and Low Stress calorimeter rates and their time dependence.

Stress, Bin
Relative Ratea
Decay Const. (1/d) Fit τ (d)
χ2/(dof)

High, 3–38 eV
1.000 ± 0.026
0.1659 ± 0.0039
6.03 ± 0.14 4192/68
High, 38–85 eV (4.93 ± 0.58) × 10−4 0.093 ± 0.023
10.8 ± 2.7
93.5/68
High, 85+ eV
(4.83 ± 0.20) × 10−3 0.0017 ± 0.0070
90.7/68

Low, 3–38 eV
(7.10 ± 0.31) × 10−3 0.1678 ± 0.0082
5.96 ± 0.29 124.8/68
Low, 38–85 eV (5.92 ± 0.59) × 10−4 0.100 ± 0.020
9.97 ± 1.96 83.1/68
Low, 85+ eV
(4.96 ± 0.19) × 10−3 0.0076 ± 0.0062
70.2/68

Note: Uncertainties are 1σ. Fit τ is derived from the fit Decay Constant, and are not reported for the high energy bins for either
calorimeter, as the fit decay constants are consistent with being flat with respect to time
a Fit rate relative to the fit rate in the high stress 3–38 eV bin (60 hours after cooldown).

TABLE S2. Quasiparticle Background Simulation Results.

Average Power Recombination Dominated xqp

a Trapping Dominated xqp

b

High-energy Backgrounds
5.8 keV/s
1.5 × 10−8
3.3 × 10−10

Stress-induced Backgrounds 672 eV/s
4.1 × 10−8
2.7 × 10−11

Stress +
High Energy
6.5 keV/s
5.0 × 10−8
3.6 × 10−10

a Modeled after a recombination-dominated qubit in Ref. [7].
b Modeled after a trapping-dominated superconductor in Ref. [11].
Modeled xqp and measured powers derived from HS dataset 1.

TABLE S3. Superconductor Properties used in Residual Quasiparticle Density Simulations.

Recombination-Dominated Superconductor a Trapping-Dominated Superconductor b

Thickness
200 nm
35 nm

Superconductor Coverage Fraction 100 %
40%

Recombination Time Constant r
(20 ns)−1
(20 ns)−1

Trapping Rate s
0 Hz
8 kHz

Phonon Collection Efficiency
50%
50%

a Modeled after a recombination-dominated qubit in Ref. [7].
b Modeled after a trapping-dominated superconductor in Ref. [11].

TABLE S4. Table of datasets taken.

Dataset Number Start Date Start Time (UTC) Length (Hours)

1
2022-05-03 21:54:54
12.06
2
2022-05-04 18:15:33
12.06
3
2022-05-05 11:23:22
10.06
4
2022-05-05 22:25:41
10.06
5
2022-05-06 10:08:08
12.07
6
2022-05-06 22:58:07
12.07
7
2022-05-07 22:32:50
12.07


6

TABLE S5. Summary of the passage fraction of randomly selected events in each of the 7 data taking periods, showing passage
fraction for the baseline, slope, and χ2 cuts. These events do not necessarily contain a pulse. These randomly selected events
allow for us to study the passage fraction of infinitesimally small events.

Dataset No., Stress State Baseline Slope (Sequential) Slope (Total) χ2 (Sequential) χ2 (Total) Total Passage

1, Low Stress
0.964
1.00
0.964
0.973
0.973
0.939
2, Low Stress
0.966
1.00
0.966
0.984
0.984
0.951
3, Low Stress
0.962
1.00
0.965
0.995
0.995
0.960
4, Low Stress
0.969
1.00
0.969
0.981
0.981
0.951
5, Low Stress
0.965
1.00
0.965
0.979
0.978
0.944
6, Low Stress
0.970
1.00
0.970
0.985
0.985
0.956
7, Low Stress
0.968
1.00
0.969
0.983
0.983
0.951

1, High Stress
0.952
1.00
0.952
0.970
0.970
0.923
2, High Stress
0.952
1.00
0.946
0.977
0.977
0.930
3, High Stress
0.940
1.00
0.956
0.970
0.970
0.927
4, High Stress
0.959
1.00
0.959
0.937
0.937
0.898
5, High Stress
0.959
1.00
0.959
0.978
0.977
0.937
6, High Stress
0.960
1.00
0.960
0.979
0.979
0.939
7, High Stress
0.959
1.00
0.963
0.982
0.982
0.936

1, High + Low Stress
0.869
2, High + Low Stress
0.889
3, High + Low Stress
0.892
4, High + Low Stress
0.857
5, High + Low Stress
0.888
6, High + Low Stress
0.901
7, High + Low Stress
0.893

Cuts are applied sequentially. Sequential passage is the fraction of events that passed the previous cut which also pass this cut, total
passage is the fraction of all events that pass this cut.
High + Low Stress total passage fractions show the passage fraction for the combined total high and low stress cuts.


7

TABLE S6. Summary of the passage fraction of triggered events in each of the 7 data taking periods, showing passage fraction
for the baseline, slope, and χ2 cuts.

Dataset No., Stress State Baseline Slope (Sequential) Slope (Total) χ2 (Sequential) χ2 (Total) Total Passage

1, Low Stress
0.959
0.976
0.965
0.973
0.973
0.921
2, Low Stress
0.964
0.977
0.971
0.981
0.981
0.935
3, Low Stress
0.964
0.974
0.969
0.990
0.990
0.942
4, Low Stress
0.967
0.976
0.972
0.980
0.980
0.935
5, Low Stress
0.963
0.974
0.969
0.975
0.975
0.927
6, Low Stress
0.969
0.977
0.974
0.981
0.981
0.939
7, Low Stress
0.969
0.977
0.973
0.979
0.979
0.936

1, High Stress
0.931
0.960
0.940
0.961
0.961
0.868
2, High Stress
0.935
0.961
0.944
0.966
0.966
0.877
3, High Stress
0.951
0.964
0.946
0.964
0.964
0.881
4, High Stress
0.939
0.964
0.946
0.925
0.925
0.846
5, High Stress
0.939
0.964
0.948
0.963
0.963
0.881
6, High Stress
0.940
0.963
0.950
0.968
0.968
0.887
7, High Stress
0.946
0.966
0.954
0.978
0.978
0.894

1, High + Low Stress
0.803
2, High + Low Stress
0.826
3, High + Low Stress
0.834
4, High + Low Stress
0.796
5, High + Low Stress
0.821
6, High + Low Stress
0.838
7, High + Low Stress
0.843

Cuts are applied sequentially. Sequential passage is the fraction of events that passed the previous cut which also pass this cut, total
passage is the fraction of all events that pass this cut.
High + Low Stress total passage fractions show the passage fraction for the combined total high and low stress cuts.


8

Supplementary Figure S3.
CAD drawing of the LS
calorimeter bonding jig design. Calorimeter (red) is held
by 3D printed jigs (bottom, green; top, pink) while being
bonded to the copper support plate (gold). An additional el-
ement of the housing (bottom half of image) was made semi-
transparent to more easily show the jig configuration.


9

REFERENCES

[1] I. Alkhatib et al. (SuperCDMS), Light Dark Matter
Search with a High-Resolution Athermal Phonon De-
tector Operated Above Ground, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127,
061801 (2021), arXiv:2007.14289 [hep-ex].

[2] A. H. Abdelhameed et al. (CRESST), First results from
the CRESST-III low-mass dark matter program, Phys.
Rev. D 100, 102002 (2019), arXiv:1904.00498 [astro-
ph.CO].

[3] R. Strauss et al. (CRESST), A prototype detector for
the CRESST-III low-mass dark matter search, Nucl. In-
strum. Meth. A 845, 414 (2017), arXiv:1802.08639 [astro-
ph.IM].

[4] G. Angloher et al., Latest observations on the low en-
ergy excess in CRESST-III, SciPost Phys. Proc. 12, 013
(2023), arXiv:2207.09375 [astro-ph.CO].

[5] D. Fuchs, The low energy excess in cresst-iii (2023),
EXCESS2023 Workshop.

[6] P. Adari et al., EXCESS workshop: Descriptions of rising
low-energy spectra, SciPost Phys. Proc. 9, 001 (2022),
arXiv:2202.05097 [astro-ph.IM].

[7] A. Veps¨al¨ainen et al., Impact of ionizing radiation on su-
perconducting qubit coherence, Nature 584, 551 (2020),

arXiv:2001.09190 [quant-ph].

[8] L. Cardani et al., Reducing the impact of radioactiv-
ity on quantum circuits in a deep-underground facility,
Nat. Commun. 12, 2733 (2021), arXiv:2005.02286 [cond-
mat.supr-con].

[9] J. M. Martinis, Saving superconducting quantum pro-
cessors from decay and correlated errors generated by
gamma and cosmic rays, npj Quantum Inf. 7, 90 (2021),
arXiv:2012.06137 [quant-ph].

[10] R. L. Workman et al. (Particle Data Group), Review of
Particle Physics, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2022, 083C01
(2022).

[11] E. T. Mannila, P. Samuelsson, S. Simbierowicz, J. T. Pel-
tonen, V. Vesterinen, L. Gr¨onberg, J. Hassel, V. F. Maisi,
and J. P. Pekola, A superconductor free of quasiparticles
for seconds, Nat. Phys. 18, 145 (2022), arXiv:2102.00484
[cond-mat.supr-con].

[12] R.-P. Riwar, A. Hosseinkhani, L. D. Burkhart, Y. Y.
Gao, R. J. Schoelkopf, L. I. Glazman, and G. Cate-
lani, Normal-metal quasiparticle traps for supercon-
ducting
qubits,
Phys.
Rev.
B
94,
104516
(2016),

arXiv:1606.04591 [cond-mat.supr-con].

[13] J. ˚Astr¨om et al., Fracture Processes Observed with A
Cryogenic Detector, Phys. Lett. A 356, 262 (2006),
arXiv:physics/0504151.


