1

Growth-dependent Interlayer Chiral Exchange and Field-free Switching

Yu-Hao Huang1, Chao-Chung Huang1, Wei-Bang Liao1, Tian-Yue Chen1, and Chi-Feng Pai1,2

1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

2Center of Atomic Initiative for New Materials, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan

Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) has long been observed in normal 

metal/ferromagnetic multilayers, enabling the formation of chiral domain walls, skyrmions and other 

2D antisymmetric spin textures confined within a single ferromagnetic layer, while more recent works 

on interlayer DMI reveal new pathways in realizing novel chiral 3D spin textures between two 

separate layers. Here, we report on interlayer DMI between two orthogonally magnetized 

ferromagnetic layers (CoFeB/Co) mediated by a Pt layer, and confirm the chiral nature of the 

observed effective field of up to 37 Oe through asymmetric hysteresis loops under in-plane field. We 

highlight the importance of growth-induced in-plane symmetry breaking, resulting in a sizable 

interlayer DMI and a universal characteristic vector through wedge deposition of the samples. We 

further perform deterministic current-driven magnetization switching in the perpendicularly 

magnetized Co layer utilizing solely the effective field from the interlayer DMI. These results 

demonstrate interlayer DMI’s potential to facilitate deterministic field-free switching in spin memory 

applications.

 Email: cfpai@ntu.edu.tw


2

In the field of spintronics, much endeavor has been put into engineering the various couplings 

between separate magnetic bilayers, which are often the results of either symmetric or anti-symmetric 

exchange interactions. Symmetric exchange interactions are relatively well researched and 

documented, directly leading to the existence of ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AFM)

couplings, and important interlayer coupling effects such as the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida 

(RKKY) [1-4] interaction. Antisymmetric interaction, or the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) 

[5,6] on the other hand has gained significant attention lately due to its capability to mediate

noncollinear chiral spin configurations. The occurrence of the DMI requires two key factors, first

being the existence of inversion symmetry breaking in the material system, second is the requirement 

of the mediating electrons being subject to strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) [7,8]. Some prominent 

examples that take advantage of the DMI include skyrmions [9-11] and Néel domain wall logics 

[12,13].

Research on the DMI was originally focused on 2D configurations, that is, the two FM atoms 

described by the three-site Lévy-Fert model [14,15] belong to the same layer. Recently, theoretical 

calculations [15] have shown the possibility to extend this intralayer phenomenon to the 3D case in 

which the two FM atoms are from two separated layers, and was experimentally verified shortly after 

[16-18]. Compared to the 2D case, theoretical calculations and pioneering experimental works 

unambiguously stated the addition of an in-plane symmetry breaking element is of paramount 

importance [15,17]. This chiral interlayer coupling effect mediated by the DMI can potentially play 


3

a crucial role in future multilayered spintronic devices. Prior to our work, experimental reports 

utilized either two perpendicularly magnetized layers with FM/AFM coupling [16,17], or employed

a ferrimagnetic layer with bulk perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) alongside a FM layer with 

in-plane magnetic anisotropy (IMA) [18]. While very recent works demonstrated magnetization 

switching utilizing the interlayer DMI’s effective field, these efforts focused on AFM coupled systems

[19,20]. Therefore, by showing the interlayer DMI’s capability to mediate current-induced field-free 

switching in an orthogonally magnetized system, we aim to introduce a new pathway for interlayer 

DMI’s potential usage on more practical magnetic memory devices as well as its correlation to the 

materials growth approach.

In this work, we demonstrate experimentally the existence of a sizable interlayer DMI coupling 

between two widely used ferromagnetic layers, Co with PMA and CoFeB with IMA, mediated by a 

Pt spacer. Pioneering work by Avci et al. [18] already demonstrated Pt to be a suitable mediating 

spacer layer in comparison to other heavy metals (HM), for Pt possesses strong SOC, consistent with 

the reported HM/FM interfacial DMI scenarios [21-23]. We start by establishing a carefully designed 

magnetic field sweep procedure, allowing us to accurately quantify effective DMI fields and confirm 

the chiral nature of the DMI. The importance of in-plane symmetry breaking is then examined by 

comparing samples with and without symmetry breaking, and subsequently used devices with various 

orientations to check the universality of the DMI strength and direction on a single substrate. 

Moreover, we show that current-induced field-free magnetization switching of a PMA layer is 


4

achievable through the DMI effective field even with minimal spin torque acting upon the PMA layer, 

and the switching polarity can be well controlled by manipulating interlayer DMI’s characteristic 

direction.

The main samples used in this work are CoFeB(2)/Pt(2.5)/Co(0.6)/Pt(2.5) (numbers in 

parentheses are in nanometers) multilayers deposited by high-vacuum confocal magnetron sputtering 

(base pressure ∼10−8 Torr and Ar working pressure of 3×10−3 Torr) onto Si/SiO2 substrate. Nominal 

composition of the CoFeB was 40% Co, 40% Fe and 20% B (atomic percentage). Throughout 

deposition, rotary of the substrates was disabled, with the CoFeB atom flow direction striking 

substrate normal at α = 25° to produce a wedged multilayer and thus introduce in-plane symmetry 

breaking (Fig. 1(a)). However, Pt was grown in a normal-incidence configuration with α = 0°. Of the 

two FM layers, CoFeB has IMA since its thickness far exceeds the spin reorientation transition 

thickness [24,25] and Co possesses PMA due to strong interfacial anisotropy at the two Co/Pt 

interfaces [26,27]. For anomalous Hall resistance (RH) and unidirectional magnetoresistance (UMR)

measurements [28,29], Hall bar devices with 5-μm width and various rotary angles with respect to 

the substrate are prepared with standard photolithography processes.

We now investigate the interlayer DMI’s effect on a magnetic bilayer system with orthogonal 

magnetizations. The overall Hamiltonian Ĥ = JH M1 ∙ M2－𝑫 ∙ ( M1 × M2 ) consists of two parts, 

first being the conventional symmetric (Heisenberg) exchange term, and the second being the 

antisymmetric (DMI) term [7,30]. JH denotes the Heisenberg exchange integral, M1, 2 denotes the 


5

magnetizations of the two magnetic layers, and D is the characteristic DMI vector that governs the 

strength and direction of the interlayer DMI. Since the two magnetizations form an orthogonal 

configuration, Heisenberg exchange’s contribution to the Hamiltonian is conveniently excluded while 

the DMI maximized. Due to the degree and direction of symmetry breaking being determined by the

sputtering process, D is expected to be fixed and lie within the xy plane due to symmetry constraint

[15]. Overall, the system’s Hamiltonian is governed by a cross product term ĤDMI = －D ∙

( M1 × M2 ). From this Hamiltonian we can take direct analogy from the well-known Zeeman 

Hamiltonian ĤZeeman = −𝒎 ∙ H, where 𝒎 is the magnetic moment and H the external field. Thus, 

macroscopically speaking, interlayer DMI causes the IMA layer to exert an effective field on the PMA 

layer, and vice versa. If the aforementioned M1 and M2 are chosen to be MPMA and MIMA , 

respectively, then an DMI effective field HDMI = −D × MIMA is felt by the PMA (Co) layer while 

the IMA (CoFeB) layer experiences an effective field HDMI = 𝑫 × MPMA. For example, if the precise 

direction of D points toward φD=150° direction (φD denotes the angle between x axis and D), then

when MIMA is pinned at φH = 60° direction (φH being the angle of the applied in-plane field Hφ), 

HDMI exerted on MPMA is at maximum and points toward +z direction. Conversely, when MPMA

points toward +z, HDMI exerted on MIMA points toward φH = 60° direction (Fig. 1(a) left).

We devised a field sweep protocol to test the first CoFeB(2)/Pt(2.5)/Co(0.6)/Pt(2.5) wedged-

deposited structure patterned into a Hall bar device. An in-plane field Hφ is applied to fully 

align MIMA toward φH. Note that |Hφ| must be sizable to avoid the reciprocal HDMI and possible in-


6

plane anisotropy from causing unwanted tilting of MIMA. Subsequently, field sweep is performed in 

the ±z direction to capture hysteresis behavior of MPMA
by measuring its RH. Graphical 

representation of the procedures is demonstrated in Fig. 1(a) lower left panel. Fig. 1(b) shows two

hysteresis loops of the Co layer when subject to two different in-plane field angles, namely φH = 60° 

and 240° with |Hφ| = 300 Oe. Square RH hysteresis loops indicate strong PMA character of the Co 

layer with coercive field Hc = 25 Oe. The two hysteresis loops have significantly shifted switching 

boundaries and we subsequently define the horizonal shift of the loop centers, Hoffset, by the average 

of the two switching fields of magnetization’s down-to-up and up-to-down transitions. This sizable 

Hoffset is of striking difference with two control samples, namely wedged Pt(2.5)/Co(0.6)/Pt(2.5) and 

non-wedged CoFeB(2)/Pt(2.5)/Co(0.6)/Pt(2.5), in which PMA hysteresis loops are always 

symmetrical to the origin with negligible Hoffset (< 2 Oe) regardless of φH (Fig. 1(c)). The data of the 

two control samples also serve as demonstration of the precision of our elaborately calibrated vector 

magnet, excluding the possibility of artifact related asymmetries from the vector magnet.

Next, following the identical field sweep protocol with a constant |Hφ| = 300 Oe as φH rotated 

from 0 to 360°, we plot Hoffset as a function of φH as shown in Fig. 1(c). Hoffset has a clear sinusoidal 

dependence on φH which nicely agrees with the previous discourse in which MIMA aligns toward φH, 

leading to MPMA experiencing a constant effective field with the sinusoidal form −D × MIMA. The 

sine fit to the data Hoffset = HDMI sin(φH－φD) suggests an amplitude of HDMI = 37 Oe and φD of 150°

for this specific sample. The direction of φDis decently perpendicular to CoFeB’s atom flow direction 


7

(Fig. 1(a) upper right diagram), which agrees well with theoretical prediction [17]. The origin of the

symmetry breaking will be discussed in a latter section. HDMI’s amplitude of 37 Oe is comparable to

the results reported By Han et al. [17] but smaller than that in Ref. [18], possibly due to a much 

thicker Pt thickness weakening the long-range indirect exchange interaction. The observed 

phenomenon demonstrates beyond doubt that MPMA is subject to the effect of a sizable interlayer 

DMI coupling. Other frequently seen coupling effects, such as RKKY coupling, dipolar coupling [31]

or symmetric interlayer exchange coupling unanimously fall into the category of symmetric exchange

interaction, thus cannot explain the chiral nature of our findings. As for the antisymmetric intralayer

DMI coupling scenario, we note that the two Pt layers in the wedged sample were specifically chosen 

to have identical thicknesses of 2.5 nm, alongside a low current density less than 1.32 × 1010A/m2

to probe RH, renders symmetry breaking contribution from damping-like spin-orbit torque (SOT)

induced loop shift [21,32] minimal, as reported in single PMA layer structures [33]. This excludes 

the possibility of an intralayer DMI origin of the observed phenomenon. Lastly, we note that a

reciprocal effect where the MIMA experiences an effective field in the form of D × MPMA is verified 

with longitudinal magneto-optical Kerr effect during in-plane field sweep. This reciprocal effect 

manifests itself as a shift in the IMA hysteresis loop, similar to PMA layer’s behavior (See 

Supplemental Material S1). From the applied in-plane field |Hφ| dependence of Hoffset, we also rule 

out the possibility of a tilted easy axis effect scenario that could also give rise to a similar yet linear 

MIMA-independent Hoffset [34,35] (See Supplemental Material S2).


8

Following the established protocol, we separately fabricated the second batch of samples with 

identical layer structure but alternatively has Hall bar devices which sequentially rotates 30° in the xy

plane to test the universality of the wedge-induced in-plane symmetry breaking. Devices with varying 

orientations are grown simultaneously onto a 1 cm × 1 cm substrate with serial number A to F (Fig. 

2(a)). Hoffset is again measured, but here the six samples have independent xiyi and φH, i coordinates.

The six data sets are presented in Fig. 2(b), with solid lines being sine fits to the data. One can observe 

the six sinusoidal fits not only have a similar magnitude of HDMI = 30 ± 2 Oe, their φH, i dependence 

also shifts at a constant interval of approximately 30° from device A to F. We subsequently recalculate 

to convert φH, i back into the xy coordinate of the substrate (Fig. 2(a) lower left diagram) and plot the 

compilation of HDMI and φD in Fig. 2(c), from which both HDMI and φD are found to be universal among

the six rotary devices. These results show that both the strength and the direction of the interlayer 

DMI are indeed universal throughout the whole substrate, in sharp contrast to results from Avci et al. 

with device-to-device variations [18]. 

Here we try to shed light on how a wedge-deposited structure can give rise to in-plane symmetry 

breaking effects. Dong-Soo et al. [17] previously attributed their symmetry breaking to a thickness 

gradient/lattice mismatch of their polycrystal multilayer, while Pacheco et al. [16] demonstrated that 

an external field induced anisotropy in the in-plane layer can be effective as well. Consequently, we 

first examine CoFeB’s thickness gradient that could’ve occurred during the wedged deposition 

process. However, the thickness variation across a 20 µm-wide current channel is determined to be


9

merely 5×10-4 nm, much thinner than an atomic monolayer.  While the thickness variation is 

miniscule, we argue that although our sputter-deposited CoFeB layer should be predominantly

amorphous, different from Ref. [17], the oblique deposition approach can still generate nanocolumn 

structures with preferred orientation due to the shadow effect [17,36]. Such nanostructures can 

possibly further induce a structural in-plane symmetry breaking in the Pt mediating layer through a 

templating effect. We also note that both in-plane magnetic anisotropy and shadow effect induced by 

the wedge deposition may simultaneously exist in our samples (See Supplemental Material S3). This 

phenomenon is best demonstrated when comparing the two wedged CoFeB/Pt/Co/Pt samples used in 

our work. While both samples have their D directions decently perpendicular to the CoFeB atom flow 

direction (see Fig.1(a) and Fig.2(b) with φD ≈150° and 180°, respectively) the HDMI strength and D 

direction still show discrepancies, possibly due to competition between the two symmetry breaking 

effects. Still, we emphasize that D in this work is universal across a sizable substrate.

After observing a universal behavior of the interlayer DMI on the same substrate, we propose a 

scenario utilizing interlayer DMI as a viable approach in achieving field-free current-driven 

magnetization switching. The symmetry of a PMA magnetization is normally preserved under 

current-induced SOT if the spin polarization direction is constrained in-plane without the usage of 

unconventional spin polarizations [37], therefore field-free switching cannot be realized. Prior to our 

work, numerous methods were proposed to break the mirror symmetry and to achieve a purely-

current-driven magnetization switching, such as utilizing an intralayer DMI [38], tilted magnetic 


10

anisotropy [35,39], exchange bias [40-43] and epitaxial materials with broken mirror symmetry

[37,44]. It is postulated here that when the IMA layer experiences magnetization switching, the 

interlayer DMI effective field will reverse its polarity as well, potentially assist in breaking the 

symmetry between up/down magnetization states or switching the PMA magnetization outright.

Furthermore, the switching polarity of the PMA layer could be controlled by the relative orientation 

between MIMA and D, since the cross product of the two vectors dictates the orientation and strength

of the DMI effective field. Assuming the D vector points toward the －x direction, the landscape of

HDMI acting on MPMA is plotted in Fig. 3(a). When MIMA’s angle, φM, lies within the first and second 

Quadrant (solid area), HDMI points toward +z and maximizes at φM = 90°. On the contrary, HDMI points 

toward －z and minimizes at φM = 270° while φM lies within the third and fourth Quadrant (dashed 

area). Utilizing rotary devices, two geometries with their respective current channel striking an angle 

of 45° (135°) with the x axis are showcased in Fig. 3(b) left (right). For the 45° device, the applied 

pulse current (Ipulse) results in MIMA magnetization switching, its direction thus can take two values,

φM = 135° (－45°) when Ipulse is positive (negative) and exceeds the critical switching value. In the 

case of φM = 135° MPMA is pulled toward +z due to a positive HDMI whilst MPMA tends to point 

toward -z due to a negative HDMI when φM = －45°. A similar case is illustrated in the 135° device,

but the MPMA’s orientation dependence of the current polarity is the opposite to that of the 45° device.

The above model is confirmed by performing current-induced magnetization switching

measurements on a magnet-free probe station, with current pulses of various amplitudes and pulse 


11

width of 50 ms. For both 45° and 135° devices, their perpendicular magnetization’s deterministic

reversal processes are shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d), respectively (blue data set). We observed that the 

two devices’ switching polarities are not just opposite, but precisely follow the interlayer DMI 

effective field landscape that describes the HDMI response in relation to φM (For in-plane field induced 

PMA switching, see Supplemental Material S4). Our model also implicitly suggests that MPMA and 

MIMA should exhibit coherent switching where the two magnetizations have identical switching 

currents, since the DMI effective field (~ 37 Oe) surpasses the Hc (~ 25 Oe) of MPMA . We thus

perform consecutive current scans right after PMA switching in which MIMA’s switching is probed 

by the UMR [45], a detection method that utilizes alternating Ipulse to generate difference in 

magnetoresistance (ΔR) (Fig.3 (c) and (d), red data set). From the UMR data, IMA’s switching current 

in both 45° and 135° devices agrees relatively well with that of the PMA switching data, confirming

coherent switching. We highlight that the IMA CoFeB’s switching currents are slightly less than that 

of PMA Co’s switching. When performing PMA Co switching experiments, it is mostly the Hall-

cross (intersection) region that contributes to the Hall signal, while on the contrary the UMR detects 

signal that originated mainly from the Hall-bar (longitudinal) region. A previous work [46] pointed 

out the current density to be different in these two regions, with it being higher in the longitudinal 

region. This explains the lower switching current measured by UMR. Different from the PMA 

switching scheme, however, is that the switching polarity of the IMA layer remains unchanged

between the two devices. It is because the in-plane magnetization switching is realized by the current-


12

induced Oersted field and/or SOT originated from the adjacent Pt and thus the switching curve is

solely governed by Ipulse’s polarity regardless of the direction of D.

We hereby comment that our devices can achieve deterministic and full switching. We highlight 

the switching process to be independent of magnetic history since both magnetizations are 

reinitialized simultaneously under applied current and thus always retain the exact polarity, unlike 

other field-free approaches that rely on exchange bias, orange peel effect [47,48] or even exotic spin 

currents [37]. The vanishingly small SOT acting on MPMA also differentiates our work from the 

previously reported mechanism of the type-T scenario [49], in which simultaneous switching of the 

IMA and PMA layer was also demonstrated, though in that case the magnetic coupling is symmetric 

and the PMA switching requires sizable SOT, thus poses striking differences to our work. Finally, it 

is noted that the in-plane CoFeB layer can be replaced by a soft magnetic material, Permalloy (Py).

All the characteristics of interlayer DMI coupling, from sizable HDMI, universal D vector to field-free 

switching are retained (See Supplemental Material S5).

In conclusion, we demonstrated a sizable interlayer DMI within a magnetic multilayer system 

with orthogonal magnetic orientations. The existence of such an interlayer DMI is experimentally 

verified through an intricately calibrated field sweep procedure, revealing the chiral nature of the

DMI with out-of-plane effective field strength HDMI = 37 Oe. Comparisons with control samples

pinpoint interlayer DMI’s origin to the oblique deposition induced in-plane symmetry breaking and 

thus extends the influence of DMI from 2D to 3D magnetic textures. Characterizations of devices


13

with multiple orientations on the same substrate showcase the universal strength and direction of such

interaction, beneficial to wafer-scale integration. Furthermore, all-electric (current-driven) 3D 

magnetic texture harnessing is demonstrated in the deterministic field-free magnetization switching 

experiment. These results unequivocally prove the potential of strong interlayer DMI to be employed

when designing inter-connected 3D magnetic structures for field-free approaches within future 

spintronic devices.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan (MOST) under grant 

No. 111-2636-M-002-012 and by the Center of Atomic Initiative for New Materials (AI-Mat), 

National Taiwan University from the Featured Areas Research Center Program within the framework 

of the Higher Education Sprout Project by the Ministry of Education (MOE) in Taiwan under grant 

No. NTU-111L9008.


14

FIG. 1.  Sketch of the magnetic multilayers, external fields, coordinate system and interlayer DMI’s 

manifestation on RH hysteresis loops. (a) Illustration of the multilayer structure, with the CoFeB atom 

flow (target) tilted away from substrate normal at α=25°. Lower left diagram shows the coordinate 

system and the external field geometries. Upper left diagram demonstrates the cross-product 

relationship between MIMA, MPMA, D and HDMI (PMA and IMA). Upper right diagram indicates the 

relation between the CoFeB atom flow (symmetry breaking vector) and the D direction. (b) 

Representative Hall resistance loops. Field sweeps were performed by applying a constant field Hφ

in the xy plane while sweeping Hz field (see (a)). Blue and red data sets correspond to φH = 60° and 

240°, respectively with |Hφ| = 300 Oe. (c) Hoffset as a function of φH. The three samples used are the 

fully wedged CoFeB(2)/Pt(2.5)/Co(0.6)/Pt(2.5) sample and two control samples, namely fully 


15

wedged Pt(2.5)/Co(0.6)/Pt(2.5) and non-wedged CoFeB(2)/Pt(2.5)/Co(0.6)/Pt(2.5).

FIG. 2.
Demonstration of universal interlayer DMI within the same substrate, among different 

devices. (a) Schematic of six rotating hall cross devices, namely device A to F. These six devices have 

their current channel direction rotated with an interval of 30°. Individual device has their independent 

xiyi and φH, i coordinates to differentiate their respective field sweeping procedures. (b) Results from 

interlayer DMI coupling induced hysteresis loop shift measurements, note the different coordinate 

systems for each individual device. Solid lines are sine fits to the data. |Hφ| = 300 Oe throughout this 

set of experiments. (c) Compilation of φD and HDMI extracted from (b) with sine fitting. The 

characteristic D vector’s direction, φD,is recalculated to fit the universal xy coordinate of the substrate. 


16

FIG. 3.
Demonstration of current-driven field-free switching induced by the interlayer DMI. (a) 

Schematic of the relationships between MIMA, D vector and the resultant effective DMI field HDMI. 

(b) Illustration of two devices on the same substrate, with their respective current channel directions 

strike 45° and 135° with x axis, respectively. Following a conventional Oersted field and/or SOT

switching scheme, MIMA can be switched between two states, prompting HDMI response with opposite 

chirality. (c) and (d) show current-induced magnetization switching of both PMA and IMA layers in 

a field-free configuration. PMA switching is sensed by RH, while IMA switching is sensed by the 

UMR.


17

REFERENCES

[1]
P. Grunberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Pang, M. B. Brodsky, and H. Sowers, Layered magnetic structures: 

Evidence for antiferromagnetic coupling of Fe layers across Cr interlayers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2442 

(1986).

[2]
R. A. Duine, K. J. Lee, S. S. P. Parkin, and M. D. Stiles, Synthetic Antiferromagnetic 

Spintronics, Nat. Phys. 14, 217 (2018).

[3]
S. S. Parkin, R. Bhadra, and K. P. Roche, Oscillatory magnetic exchange coupling through thin 

copper layers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 2152 (1991).

[4]
S. S. Parkin, Systematic variation of the strength and oscillation period of indirect magnetic 

exchange coupling through the 3d, 4d, and 5d transition metals, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3598 (1991).

[5]
I. Dzyaloshinsky, A thermodynamic theory of ‘weak’ ferromagnetism of antiferromagnetics, J. 

Phys. Chem. Sol. 4, 241 (1957).

[6]
T. Moriya, Anisotropic Superexchange Interaction and Weak Ferromagnetism, Phys. Rev. 120, 

91 (1960).

[7]
M. Bode et al., Chiral magnetic order at surfaces driven by inversion asymmetry, Nature 447, 

190 (2007).

[8]
A. N. Bogdanov and U. K. Rossler, Chiral symmetry breaking in magnetic thin films and 

multilayers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 037203 (2001).

[9]
A. Soumyanarayanan et al., Tunable room-temperature magnetic skyrmions in Ir/Fe/Co/Pt 


18

multilayers, Nat. Mater. 16, 898 (2017).

[10]
C. Moreau-Luchaire et al., Additive interfacial chiral interaction in multilayers for stabilization 

of small individual skyrmions at room temperature, Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 444 (2016).

[11]
J. H. Franken, M. Herps, H. J. Swagten, and B. Koopmans, Tunable chiral spin texture in 

magnetic domain-walls, Sci. Rep. 4, 5248 (2014).

[12] T. P. Dao, M. Muller, Z. Luo, M. Baumgartner, A. Hrabec, L. J. Heyderman, and P. Gambardella, 

Chiral Domain Wall Injector Driven by Spin-Orbit Torques, Nano Lett. 19, 5930 (2019).

[13]
Z. Luo et al., Field- and Current-Driven Magnetic Domain-Wall Inverter and Diode, Phys. Rev. 

Appl. 15 (2021).

[14]
A. Fert and P. M. Levy, Role of Anisotropic Exchange Interactions in Determining the 

Properties of Spin-Glasses, Phys. Rev. Lett. 44, 1538 (1980).

[15]
E. Y. Vedmedenko, P. Riego, J. A. Arregi, and A. Berger, Interlayer Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya 

Interactions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 257202 (2019).

[16]
A. Fernandez-Pacheco, E. Vedmedenko, F. Ummelen, R. Mansell, D. Petit, and R. P. Cowburn, 

Symmetry-breaking interlayer Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions in synthetic antiferromagnets, Nat. 

Mater. 18, 679 (2019).

[17]
D. S. Han et al., Long-range chiral exchange interaction in synthetic antiferromagnets, Nat. 

Mater. 18, 703 (2019).

[18]
C. O. Avci, C. H. Lambert, G. Sala, and P. Gambardella, Chiral Coupling between Magnetic 


19

Layers with Orthogonal Magnetization, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 167202 (2021).

[19]
K. Wang, L. Qian, S.-C. Ying, and G. Xiao, Spin-orbit torque switching of chiral magnetization 

across a synthetic antiferromagnet, Commun. Phys. 4 (2021).

[20]
H. Masuda, T. Seki, Y. Yamane, R. Modak, K.-i. Uchida, J. i. Ieda, Y.-C. Lau, S. Fukami, and 

K. Takanashi, Large Antisymmetric Interlayer Exchange Coupling Enabling Perpendicular 

Magnetization Switching by an In-Plane Magnetic Field, Phys. Rev. Appl. 17 (2022).

[21]
C.-F. Pai, M. Mann, A. J. Tan, and G. S. D. Beach, Determination of spin torque efficiencies in 

heterostructures with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, Phys. Rev. B 93, 144409 (2016).

[22]
J. Torrejon, J. Kim, J. Sinha, S. Mitani, M. Hayashi, M. Yamanouchi, and H. Ohno, Interface 

control of the magnetic chirality in CoFeB/MgO heterostructures with heavy-metal underlayers, Nat. 

Comm. 5, 4655 (2014).

[23]
S. Emori, U. Bauer, S. M. Ahn, E. Martinez, and G. S. Beach, Current-driven dynamics of 

chiral ferromagnetic domain walls, Nat. Mater. 12, 611 (2013).

[24]
B. Cui, C. Song, G. Y. Wang, Y. Y. Wang, F. Zeng, and F. Pan, Perpendicular magnetic 

anisotropy in CoFeB/X (X=MgO, Ta, W, Ti, and Pt) multilayers, J. Alloys Compd. 559, 112 (2013).

[25]
M. Akyol, Origin of Interfacial Magnetic Anisotropy in Ta/CoFeB/MgO and Pt/CoFeB/MgO 

Multilayer Thin Film Stacks, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 32, 457 (2019).

[26]
P. F. Carcia, Perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in Pd/Co and Pt/Co thin‐film layered structures,

J. Appl. Phys. 63, 5066 (1988).


20

[27]
N. Nakajima et al., Perpendicular Magnetic Anisotropy Caused by Interfacial Hybridization 

via Enhanced Orbital Moment in Co/Pt Multilayers: Magnetic Circular X-Ray Dichroism Study, Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 81, 5229 (1998).

[28]
C. O. Avci, K. Garello, A. Ghosh, M. Gabureac, S. F. Alvarado, and P. Gambardella, 

Unidirectional spin Hall magnetoresistance in ferromagnet/normal metal bilayers, Nat. Phys. 11, 570 

(2015).

[29]
A. Cao, X. Zhang, B. Koopmans, S. Peng, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. Yan, H. Yang, and W. Zhao, 

Tuning the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in Pt/Co/MgO heterostructures through the MgO 

thickness, Nanoscale 10, 12062 (2018).

[30]
A. Fert, V. Cros, and J. Sampaio, Skyrmions on the track, Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 152 (2013).

[31]
R. Shindou, J.-i. Ohe, R. Matsumoto, S. Murakami, and E. Saitoh, Chiral spin-wave edge 

modes in dipolar magnetic thin films, Phys. Rev. B 87 (2013).

[32]
K. S. Ryu, L. Thomas, S. H. Yang, and S. Parkin, Chiral spin torque at magnetic domain walls,

Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 527 (2013).

[33]
T.-Y. Chen, W.-B. Liao, T.-Y. Chen, T.-Y. Tsai, C.-W. Peng, and C.-F. Pai, Current-induced 

spin–orbit torque efficiencies in W/Pt/Co/Pt heterostructures, Appl. Phys. Lett. 116 (2020).

[34]
V. M. P, K. R. Ganesh, and P. S. A. Kumar, Spin Hall effect mediated current-induced 

deterministic switching in all-metallic perpendicularly magnetized Pt/Co/Pt trilayers, Phys. Rev. B 

96 (2017).


21

[35]
H. J. Kim et al., Field‐Free Switching of Magnetization by Tilting the Perpendicular Magnetic 

Anisotropy of Gd/Co Multilayers, Adv. Funct. Mater.  (2022).

[36]
A. Barranco, A. Borras, A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe, and A. Palmero, Perspectives on oblique angle 

deposition of thin films: From fundamentals to devices, Prog. Mater. Sci. 76, 59 (2016).

[37]
J. Ryu et al., Efficient spin–orbit torque in magnetic trilayers using all three polarizations of a 

spin current, Nat. Electron.  (2022).

[38]
H. Wu et al., Chiral Symmetry Breaking for Deterministic Switching of Perpendicular 

Magnetization by Spin–Orbit Torque, Nano Lett. 21, 515 (2021).

[39]
F. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, and Y. Liu, Deterministic magnetization switching by spin–orbit 

torque in a ferromagnet with tilted magnetic anisotropy: A macrospin modeling, J. Magn. Magn. 

Mater. 527 (2021).

[40]
S. Fukami, C. Zhang, S. DuttaGupta, A. Kurenkov, and H. Ohno, Magnetization switching by 

spin-orbit torque in an antiferromagnet-ferromagnet bilayer system, Nat Mater 15, 535 (2016).

[41]
Y. C. Lau, D. Betto, K. Rode, J. M. Coey, and P. Stamenov, Spin-orbit torque switching without 

an external field using interlayer exchange coupling, Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 758 (2016).

[42]
Y. W. Oh et al., Field-free switching of perpendicular magnetization through spin-orbit torque 

in antiferromagnet/ferromagnet/oxide structures, Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 878 (2016).

[43]
A. van den Brink, G. Vermijs, A. Solignac, J. Koo, J. T. Kohlhepp, H. J. M. Swagten, and B. 

Koopmans, Field-free magnetization reversal by spin-Hall effect and exchange bias, Nat. Comm. 7, 


22

10854 (2016).

[44]
L. Liu et al., Symmetry-dependent field-free switching of perpendicular magnetization, Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 16, 277 (2021).

[45]
Y.-T. Liu, T.-Y. Chen, T.-H. Lo, T.-Y. Tsai, S.-Y. Yang, Y.-J. Chang, J.-H. Wei, and C.-F. Pai, 

Determination of Spin-Orbit-Torque Efficiencies in Heterostructures with In-Plane Magnetic 

Anisotropy, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 044032 (2020).

[46]
T.-Y. Tsai, T.-Y. Chen, C.-T. Wu, H.-I. Chan, and C.-F. Pai, Spin-orbit torque magnetometry by 

wide-field magneto-optical Kerr effect, Sci. Rep. 8, 5613 (2018).

[47]
N. Murray, W.-B. Liao, T.-C. Wang, L.-J. Chang, L.-Z. Tsai, T.-Y. Tsai, S.-F. Lee, and C.-F. Pai, 

Field-free spin-orbit torque switching through domain wall motion, Phys. Rev. B 100, 104441 (2019).

[48]
W. L. Yang et al., Role of an in-plane ferromagnet in a T-type structure for field-free 

magnetization switching, Appl. Phys. Lett. 120 (2022).

[49]
W. J. Kong et al., Spin-orbit torque switching in a T-type magnetic configuration with current 

orthogonal to easy axes, Nat. Comm. 10, 233 (2019).


