Spectral Shaping in a Multimode Fiber by All-fiber Modulation

Zohar Finkelstein1, Kfir Sulimany1, Shachar Resisi1, and Yaron Bromberg1,*

1Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel
*Corresponding author: yaron.bromberg@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract

In the past few years, there is a renewed interest in using multimode fibers for a wide range of technologies such
as communication, imaging and spectroscopy. Practical implementations of multimode fiber in such applications,
however, are held back, due to the challenges in dealing with modal dispersion, mode coupling and the fiber’s
sensitivity to mechanical perturbations. Here, we utilize these features of multimode fibers to generate all-fiber
reconfigurable spectral filters. By applying computer-controlled mechanical deformations to the fiber, along with
an optimization algorithm, we manipulate the light propagation in the fiber and control its output field. Using
this approach we demonstrate tunable bandpass filters and dual-band filters, with spectral resolutions as low as 5pm.

Introduction

In the past decade there is ongoing effort to utilize mul-
timode optical fibers (MMF) in a wide range of pho-
tonic applications such as optical fiber communication
[1–3], high energy fiber lasers [4–6], quantum optics[7–
11], nonlinear optics [12–18] and imaging [19–26]. The
challenge of MMF-based technologies is that transverse
modes of the fiber are interrupted by inter-modal inter-
ference, mode coupling, and modal dispersion. There-
fore, the information delivered by a MMF is scrambled,
forming at its output a spatiotemporal speckle pattern.
To fully utilize the potential of MMFs, it is desired to
have coherent control over the spectral and spatial de-
grees of freedom of the light that is transferred by the
fiber.

The traditional way to unscramble information trans-
ferred by MMFs is using spatial light modulators (SLM)
that shape the wavefront at the input and/or output of
the fiber [19]. However, due to the wavelength-dependent
transmission through multimode fibers, SLMs do not al-
low efficient control over a wide spectral bandwidth. Sur-
prisingly, however, modal interference and modal disper-
sion in multimode fibers can in fact be harnessed for a
wide range of applications [27], such as fiber spectrom-
eters [28, 29], cryptography [30, 31], and optical imple-
mentations of neural networks [32]. Another challenge
of multimode fibers is their extreme sensitivity to me-
chanical perturbations.
We have recently utilized this
sensitivity to make an all-fiber SLM, by applying con-
trolled deformations to the fiber [33].
Controlling the
medium that the light propagates through, rather than
the wavefront of the incident field, opens new opportuni-
ties for wavefront shaping, as was recently demonstrated
in the microwave regime [34, 35]. These works highlight

the great potential of controlling the medium instead of
the incident field for extending wavefront shaping to the
spectral domain, thanks to the strong coupling between
the spectral and spatial degrees of freedom in complex
media [36, 37].
In this work, we apply computer-controlled deforma-
tions to MMFs to realize all-fiber, reconfigurable spec-
tral filters. To this end, we apply local bends at multi-
ple positions along the fiber. The bends change the local
propagation constants of the fiber’s guided modes and in-
duce mode mixing, thus changing the fiber’s wavelength-
dependent transmission matrix. The curvatures of the
bends are determined by an optimization algorithm that
finds the optimal configuration that maximizes the over-
lap between the output spectrum and a target spectrum.
Using this configuration, which we call fiber piano, we
realize reconfigurable spectral filters with a 5pm resolu-
tion.

Experimental results

The experimental setup is depicted in Fig.1a. A broad-
band fiber-coupled LED source is coupled to a single
mode fiber (SMF), to obtain spatially coherent broad-
band light. The light is then coupled to a 1m-long step-
index MMF, with a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.22 and
a core diameter of 50µm. The output facet of the MMF is
spliced to another SMF that is coupled to a spectrometer.
The measured spectrum is determined by the complex
wavelength-dependent interference of the fiber modes at
the splicing point. We apply computer-controlled defor-
mations to the fiber by placing 28 piezoelectric actuators
along the fiber, with a 1.5cm separation between adja-
cent actuators (Fig.1b,c). We limit the minimal radius of
curvature the actuators apply to 1cm, to avoid significant

1

arXiv:2208.03778v2  [physics.optics]  16 Aug 2022


bending loss. As different deformations of the fiber yield
different spectra at the output of the SMF, we search for
the bend configuration that yields the required spectrum,
using a simulated annealing optimization algorithm [38].

Figure 1: Experimental setup for all-fiber spec-
tral shaping. (a) Light from a broadband LED source
(Thorlabs MWWHF2) that is coupled to a single mode
fiber (SMF), is injected into a 1m-long multimode fiber
(MMF, Thorlabs FG050LGA). The output light is pro-
jected onto a single transverse mode by splicing the dis-
tal end of the MMF to a SMF (Thorlabs P1-630A-FC-1)
that delivers the collected light to a spectrometer (Tele-
dyne IsoPlane-320 and ProEm-HS:1024). (b) To control
the transmission through the fiber we place an array of 28
computer-controlled piezoelectric actuators (both CTS
ceramic NAC2225-A01 and Thorlabs PB4NB2W) along
the fiber. Each actuator can travel ∼0.5mm in the verti-
cal direction, pressing the fiber from above (c). The actu-
ators create local deformations that change the propaga-
tion constants of the fiber’s guided modes. An optimiza-
tion algorithm (simulated annealing) searches for the op-
timal travel of each actuator, that maximizes the overlap
of the output spectrum with the target spectrum. (d)
To demonstrate spectral shaping with resolution beyond
the spectral resolution of the spectrometer, we replaced
the LED source with a fiber-coupled tunable laser at the
telecom band (Keysight 81490A). The output facet for
the MMF is imaged by an InGaAs camera (Xenics chee-
tah CL-7207) which records the wavelength-dependent
speckle patterns.

To demonstrate spectral shaping, we realize a tun-
able bandpass filter, by maximizing the output inten-
sity at different spectral bands (Fig.2a). The full-width-
half maximum (FWHM) bandwidth of each band is
245pm, determined by the spectral bandwidth of the
MMF [28]. Defining the enhancement factor as the peak-
to-background ratio in the obtained spectra, we achieve
enhancements in the range of 13 to 30. The efficiency
of the system, defined by the ratio of output and in-
put intensities at the chosen spectral band, is 0.06. To
demonstrate the versatility of the spectral shaping, we

also implement a dual bandpass filter, with two peaks
separated by 1.5 nm and a FWHM of 241pm for each
peak (see Fig.2b).

Figure 2: Experimental realization of a tunable
bandpass filter and a dual-band filter. (a) Measured
transmission spectra of the all-fiber tunable bandpass fil-
ter. Each curve represents an average of 6 spectra that
were optimized to maximize the enhancement at the de-
sired wavelength. We achieve a full-width-half-maximum
(FHWM) of 245pm and enhancements in the range of 13
to 30. (b) Optimized transmission for a dual filter, with
a FWHM of 241pm and separation of 1.5nm, obtained
by maximizing the sum of square roots of the intensities
at the chosen wavelengths. For the dual-band filters, we
obtain enhancements in the range of 7.5 to 10.5.

Since the spectral bandwidth of the fiber is inversely
proportional to the fiber’s length [28, 29], it is in prin-
ciple possible to realize bandpass filters with extremely
narrow linewidths by using long multimode fibers.
In
practice, however, the linewidths we could achieve were
limited by the 60 pm resolution of the spectrometer used
in the optimization process. We therefore replaced the
spectrometer and the LED source with a tunable laser
at telecom wavelengths, that can tune the wavelength in
the C-band with a spectral resolution of 1pm, and an In-
GaAs camera that images the output facet of the MMF
(Fig.1d). We fix the laser at a specific wavelength and
apply the same optimization process described above, to
enhance the intensity at a chosen square region of inter-

2


est (ROI) on the camera. We set the width of the ROI to
be equal to the FWHM of the intensity autocorrelation
of the speckle pattern recorded by the camera. After the
optimization, we scan the wavelength of the laser and
observe the transmitted spectrum. The FWHM of the
measured transmission peaks is inversely proportional to
the fiber’s length. Using a 150m long fiber, we realize
bandpass filters with a FWHM of 5 pm, and enhance-
ment factors in the range of 5 to 7 (inset of Fig.3)

Figure 3: Realization of narrow bandpass filters.
The measured FWHM of the optimized transmission
peaks versus the fiber’s length L exhibits inverse linear
scaling. The black curve is the predicted 1/L scaling [28].
Inset: the transmission spectrum for L = 15m (green),
L = 50m (yellow), and L = 150m (blue). All spectra are
normalized by the average background intensity. Error-
bars in both graphs correspond to the standard deviation
of different optimization runs.

Numerical simulations

To compare the performance of our system with its op-
timal limit, we numerically simulate the operation of
the fiber-piano by computing the transmission spectra
through a MMF with controlled local macro bends. We
model the fiber-piano by numerically propagating scalar
waves through curved segments of a MMF, separated
by straight segments.
Each curved segment simulates
a macro bend induced by an actuator, where the travel
of the actuator corresponds to a change in the radius of
curvature of the segment. We use 44 discrete values for
the radii of curvatures in the range of 1cm to 8cm, which
roughly corresponds to the range of curvatures induced
by the actuators in the experiment.
To find the field at the output of the fiber, we calcu-
late the transmission matrix (TM) of each segment and
propagate the input field by multiplying it by the TM’s
of all the segments. To calculate the TM of the curved

segments, we use ”BPM-matlab” [39], an open source
optical propagation simulation in MATLAB, which im-
plements a finite difference beam propagation method
for monochromatic light. We first compute the TM of
the 44 curved segments to be used in the simulation, by
propagating each guided mode of the fiber and projecting
the output field on the guided mode basis. Propagation
in the straight fiber segment is modeled by a diagonal
TM, whose elements, that represent the phase accumu-
lated by each guided mode, are computed by solving the
Helmholtz equation for the fiber’s index profile. The goal
of the simulation is to find the radius of curvature of each
bend, out of the 44 possible radii, that focuses the light
at the distal end of the MMF, at a chosen wavelength.
To this end, we use the same SA optimization algorithm
used in the experiment. Once the optimal radii of curva-
ture are found, we obtain the output spectrum by sim-
ulating propagation through the same configuration of
bends and the same input field, at different wavelengths.

We start by simulating propagation through a fiber-
piano with the same number of actuators as in our ex-
periments, 28 curved segments separated by straight seg-
ments.
The fiber we simulate is a 2m-long step-index
MMF, with a numerical aperture of 0.22 and a core di-
ameter of 50µm.
We excite the 50 first modes of the
fiber, corresponding to the roughly 50 modes we excite
in the experiment (see Fig.S4), with equal amplitudes
and random relative phases.
We achieve an enhance-
ment of 15 and a FWHM of 350pm (blue curve in Fig.4a).
Since we simulate the propagation over a bandwidth that
is only slightly wider than the bandwidth of the fiber,
here we define the enhancement as the spatial peak-to-
background, instead of the spectral peak-to-background
measured in the experiments. We attribute the differ-
ence from the experimental values obtained for the same
fiber and the same wavelength range (enhancement of 7
and FWHM of 650pm) to mode mixing that may increase
the fiber’s spectral bandwidth [40] and system instabili-
ties that may decrease the obtained peak-to-background
ratios [41].

It is instructive to compare the enhancement obtained
by the fiber piano to the optimal enhancement one ex-
pects to achieve, for example using a perfect spatial light
modulator at the proximal end of the fiber. We there-
fore look for the input field that maximizes the peak-to-
background ratio using the same bend configuration that
was found by the optimization algorithm for some arbi-
trary input. To this end, we first calculate the TM of the
bent fiber as described above. Next, by multiplying the
Hermitian conjugate of the TM by the target pattern
(a focused spot in the desired ROI), we get the input
field that maximizes the intensity in the ROI [41]. Then,
to find the output spectrum in the ROI, we numerically
propagate this input field at different wavelengths. The
optimal input field yields an enhancement of 45 and a
FWHM of 320pm (red curve in Fig.4a). We therefore

3


conclude that with 28 actuators we could achieve ≈ 30%
of the optimal enhancement.
To further explore the performance of the fiber-piano
under optimal conditions, we simulate the achievable en-
hancement in a loss-free system, for an increasing number
of fiber modes and actuators. Intuitively, the enhance-
ment should rise as these two parameters are increased
since they provide more degrees of freedom for the op-
timization process. The number of curved segments in
the simulation is set by the number of actuators we sim-
ulate. The number of guided modes in the fiber is set by
changing the core diameter while keeping the numerical
aperture of the fiber fixed. We fix the total fiber length
to 20m, and excite all the guided modes of the fiber with
equal amplitudes and random relative phases. To neglect
loss in the simulation, we force the transmission matrix
of each segment to be unitary.
In Fig.4b, we depict the enhancement versus the num-
ber of actuators, for fibers with different number of
modes.
As expected, the enhancement increases with
the number of actuators (Fig.4b).
The saturated en-
hanced values obtained by the SA optimization, are close
to the values expected by an optimal wavefront control,
as depicted in Fig.4c, confirming that with enough ac-
tuators the fiber-piano can approach the optimal values.
However, saturation is expected when the number of de-
grees of control, the actuators, approaches the number
of guided modes of the fiber. Here we see the satura-
tion is obtained at a much higher number of actuators,
which indicates that the degrees of control in the simu-
lation are not independent. Noticeably, as the number
of modes grows the simulation performance deteriorates
compared with the theoretical limit. This difference is
most probably due to the increased probability that the
SA algorithm finds a local minimum when the dimension
of the optimization problem increases.

Conclusions and Outlook

We experimentally realized all-fiber spectral shaping by
applying computer-controlled deformations to a multi-
mode fiber.
As a proof of concept of this approach,
we demonstrated a tunable bandpass filter with FWHM
of 245pm, and a dual-wavelength filter with the same
spectral width.
Next, we showed the possibility to
achieve narrower bandpass filters, using longer MMF,
and achieved FWHM bandwidths as low as 5pm.
Fi-
nally, we ran numerical simulations to test the perfor-
mance of the fiber under optimal conditions. We show
that with the fiber-piano it is possible to achieve peak-
to-background ratios that are above 70% of the ratios
obtained for optimal wavefront control.
In the high resolution configuration, where a camera
that images the distal end of the fiber is used to select one
spatial channel, one can simplify the detection method
by replacing the camera with a SMF that is spliced at

Figure 4: Numerical simulation results. (a) Simu-
lation of the system with a 2m long fiber. We first run
the SA optimization algorithm to search for the radii
of curvature of the curved segments that maximize the
intensity in the region of interest (ROI), at wavelength
λ = 1550 nm.
Then for the same bend configuration
and the same input modes, we propagate the field at dif-
ferent wavelengths and obtain the wavelength-dependent
intensity in the ROI. For each wavelength, we present the
enhancement, defined by the spatial peak-to-background
ratio. The blue curve corresponds to the enhancements
found by the optimization algorithm, while the red curve
depicts the predicted enhancement for a perfect wave-
front control (see text).
(b) Simulated enhancements
for different number of modes and actuators, showing
that the enhancement increases with each of these pa-
rameters until saturation is observed. (c) The enhance-
ment is achieved by the optimization algorithm (blue)
and the optimal enhancements for perfect wavefront con-
trol (red), as a function of the number of guided modes
in the fiber. The simulation data points are taken for
the highest number of actuators that we tested for each
fiber.

4


the distal end of the MMF along with a telecom pho-
todiode. Our method demonstrates a first step towards
realizing an all-fiber modulator for tailoring the spatial-
spectral waveform at the output of multimode fibers, a
key ingredient in a wide range of applications that are
based on multimode fibers.

Funding Information

This research was supported by the Zuckerman STEM
Leadership Program and the ISF-NRF Singapore joint
research program (grant No. 3538/20).

Disclosures

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References

[1]
D. J. Richardson, J. M. Fini, and L. E. Nelson.
“Space-division multiplexing in optical fibres”. In:
Nature Photonics 7.5 (2013), pp. 354–362.

[2]
Martin Pl¨oschner, Tom´aˇs Tyc, and Tom´aˇs ˇCiˇzm´ar.
“Seeing through chaos in multimode fibres”. In:
Nature Photonics 9.8 (2015), pp. 529–535.

[3]
Benjamin J Puttnam, Georg Rademacher, and
Ruben S Luı´es. “Space-division multiplexing for
optical fiber communications”. In: Optica
8.9
(2021), pp. 1186–1203.

[4]
Logan G Wright, Demetrios N Christodoulides,
and Frank W Wise. “Spatiotemporal mode-locking
in multimode fiber lasers”. In: Science 358.6359
(2017), pp. 94–97.

[5]
U˘gur Te˘gin et al. “Spatiotemporal self-similar fiber
laser”. In: Optica 6.11 (2019), pp. 1412–1415.

[6]
Henry Haig et al. “Multimode Mamyshev oscilla-
tor”. In: Optics Letters 47.1 (2022), pp. 46–49.

[7]
Hugo Defienne et al. “Two-photon quantum walk
in a multimode fiber”. In: Science advances 2.1
(2016), e1501054.

[8]
Natalia Herrera Valencia et al. “Unscrambling en-
tanglement through a complex medium”. In: Na-
ture Physics 16.11 (2020), pp. 1112–1116.

[9]
Saroch
Leedumrongwatthanakun
et
al.
“Pro-
grammable linear quantum networks with a mul-
timode fibre”. In: Nature Photonics 14.3 (2020),
pp. 139–142.

[10]
Huan Cao et al. “Distribution of high-dimensional
orbital angular momentum entanglement over a 1
km few-mode fiber”. In: Optica 7.3 (2020), pp. 232–
237.

[11]
Kfir Sulimany and Yaron Bromberg. “All-fiber
source and sorter for multimode correlated pho-
tons”. In: npj Quantum Information 8.1 (2022),
pp. 1–5.

[12]
Arash Mafi. “Pulse propagation in a short non-
linear graded-index multimode optical fiber”. In:
Journal of Lightwave Technology 30.17 (2012),
pp. 2803–2811.

[13]
Logan G Wright, Demetrios N Christodoulides,
and Frank W Wise. “Controllable spatiotemporal
nonlinear effects in multimode fibres”. In: Nature
photonics 9.5 (2015), pp. 306–310.

[14]
Katarzyna Krupa et al. “Spatial beam self-cleaning
in multimode fibres”. In: Nature Photonics 11.4
(2017), pp. 237–241.

[15]
Omer Tzang et al. “Adaptive wavefront shaping
for controlling nonlinear multimode interactions in
optical fibres”. In: Nature Photonics 12.6 (2018),
pp. 368–374.

[16]
Katarzyna Krupa et al. “Multimode nonlinear fiber
optics, a spatiotemporal avenue”. In: APL Photon-
ics 4.11 (2019), p. 110901.

[17]
U˘gur Te˘gin et al. “Controlling spatiotemporal non-
linearities in multimode fibers with deep neural
networks”. In: Apl Photonics 5.3 (2020), p. 030804.

[18]
Hamed Pourbeyram et al. “Direct observations of
thermalization to a Rayleigh–Jeans distribution
in multimode optical fibres”. In: Nature Physics
(2022), pp. 1–6.

[19]
Tom´aˇs ˇCiˇzm´ar and Kishan Dholakia. “Exploiting
multimode waveguides for pure fibre-based imag-
ing”. In: Nature communications 3.1 (2012), pp. 1–
9.

[20]
Youngwoon Choi et al. “Scanner-free and wide-
field endoscopic imaging by using a single mul-
timode optical fiber”. In: Physical review letters
109.20 (2012), p. 203901.

[21]
Ruo Yu Gu, Reza Nasiri Mahalati, and Joseph M
Kahn. “Design of flexible multi-mode fiber endo-
scope”. In: Optics express 23.21 (2015), pp. 26905–
26918.

[22]
Antonio M Caravaca-Aguirre and Rafael Piestun.
“Single multimode fiber endoscope”. In: Optics ex-
press 25.3 (2017), pp. 1656–1665.

[23]
Navid Borhani et al. “Learning to see through mul-
timode fibers”. In: Optica 5.8 (2018), pp. 960–966.

[24]
Ivo T Leite et al. “Observing distant objects with
a multimode fiber-based holographic endoscope”.
In: APL Photonics 6.3 (2021), p. 036112.

5


[25]
Shachar Resisi, Sebastien M Popoff, and Yaron
Bromberg. “Image Transmission Through a Dy-
namically Perturbed Multimode Fiber by Deep
Learning”. In: Laser & Photonics Reviews 15.10
(2021), p. 2000553.

[26]
Szu-Yu Lee et al. “Confocal 3D reflectance imaging
through multimode fiber without wavefront shap-
ing”. In: Optica 9.1 (2022), pp. 112–120.

[27]
Hui Cao and Yaniv Eliezer. “Harnessing disor-
der for photonic device applications”. In: Applied
Physics Reviews 9.1 (2022), p. 011309.

[28]
Brandon Redding and Hui Cao. “Using a multi-
mode fiber as a high-resolution, low-loss spectrom-
eter”. In: Optics letters 37.16 (2012), pp. 3384–
3386.

[29]
Brandon Redding et al. “High-resolution and
broadband all-fiber spectrometers”. In: Optica 1.3
(2014), pp. 175–180.

[30]
Yaron Bromberg et al. “Remote key establishment
by random mode mixing in multimode fibers and
optical reciprocity”. In: Optical Engineering 58.1
(2019), p. 016105.

[31]
Lyubov V Amitonova et al. “Quantum key estab-
lishment via a multimode fiber”. In: Optics express
28.5 (2020), pp. 5965–5981.

[32]
U˘gur Te˘gin et al. “Scalable optical learning opera-
tor”. In: Nature Computational Science 1.8 (2021),
pp. 542–549.

[33]
Shachar Resisi et al. “Wavefront shaping in multi-
mode fibers by transmission matrix engineering”.
In: APL Photonics 5.3 (2020), p. 036103.

[34]
Philipp Del Hougne, Mathias Fink, and Geof-
froy Lerosey. “Optimally diverse communication
channels in disordered environments with tuned
randomness”. In: Nature Electronics 2.1 (2019),
pp. 36–41.

[35]
Philipp Del Hougne et al. “Coherent wave control
in complex media with arbitrary wavefronts”. In:
Physical Review Letters 126.19 (2021), p. 193903.

[36]
David J McCabe et al. “Spatio-temporal focusing
of an ultrafast pulse through a multiply scattering
medium”. In: Nature communications 2.1 (2011),
pp. 1–5.

[37]
Ori Katz et al. “Focusing and compression of ultra-
short pulses through scattering media”. In: Nature
photonics 5.6 (2011), pp. 372–377.

[38]
Rob A Rutenbar. “Simulated annealing algorithms:
An overview”. In: IEEE Circuits and Devices mag-
azine 5.1 (1989), pp. 19–26.

[39]
Madhu Veettikazhy et al. “BPM-Matlab: an open-
source optical propagation simulation tool in MAT-
LAB”. In: Optics Express 29.8 (2021), pp. 11819–
11832.

[40]
Keang-Po Ho and Joseph M Kahn. “Statistics
of group delays in multimode fiber with strong
mode coupling”. In: Journal of lightwave technol-
ogy 29.21 (2011), pp. 3119–3128.

[41]
Ivo Micha Vellekoop and AP Mosk. “Phase con-
trol algorithms for focusing light through turbid
media”. In: Optics communications 281.11 (2008),
pp. 3071–3080.

6


Supplementary Material

Optimization Algorithm

The propagation of each wavelength in the fiber is deter-
mined by the curvature of the bends, set by the travel of
each actuator. Therefore, the spectrum at each spot on
the distal end of the MMF is determined by the travel
of each actuator. The optimization algorithm searches
for the travels that maximize the intensity in a desired
wavelength band (in the low resolution configuration) or
in a desired ROI on the camera (in the high resolution
configuration).
Since the propagation of the light in each curved seg-
ment depends on the deformations induced by all the
actuators prior to it, the ideal way to deal with such an
optimization problem is using a nonlinear optimization
algorithm.
Here we use the simulated annealing (SA)
algorithm [38], which we found to yield the best results
in terms of both the cost values and convergence times,
which is about 10 minutes.
The optimization parameters we used are initial tem-
perature T of 20, with a cooling function that scales as
Tαi, where i is the iteration number and α is 0.97 (0.99)
in the experiments (simulations). The cost function max-
imizes the intensity in the spectral (spatial) window in
the spectrum (image), normalized by the total intensity.
We run the algorithm until we observe a sequence of 30
iterations without any improvement in the cost function.
To decrease the probability of converging to local min-
ima, at each iteration we add with some probability p a
weak perturbation to the optimal configuration of actu-
ators and increase p as the temperature decreases.

System response time

To measure the response time of the fiber-piano, we use
the low resolution configuration and optimize the system
for a specific spectral window. Then we switch between
the optimal configuration of actuators and some other
configuration. The response time of the system is mea-
sured by the time it takes to reach from 10 to 90 percent
of the maximal intensity. We find that the rise time is
45ms, whereas the fall time is 10ms, as shown in Fig.S1.

System stability

To test the stability of the system, once we find the opti-
mal configuration, we keep the actuators in the same po-
sition and record the output spectrum over time. We find
that the spectrum maintains its shape and the overall
transmissions fall by approximately 30% after 10 hours
(see Fig.S2).

Figure S1: System response time. Normalized inten-
sity obtained when switching between the optimized con-
figuration of the actuators and a random configuration.
The rise time (10-90 percent from the optimal intensity)
is 45ms (top right inset), and the fall time is 10ms (bot-
tom right inset).

Figure S2: System stability.
The measured spectra
right after the optimization (blue curve), 5 hours after
optimization (red curve), and 10 hours after the opti-
mization (yellow curve). The peak intensity dropped by
≈30% after 10 hours.

Simulation

Transmission matrix computation

To simulate the operation on the fiber-piano, we chose
44 values for the radii of curvature, which model the
bends induced by the piezoelectric actuators.
The in-
verse of the radii of curvature are equally spaced be-
tween the maximal and minimal values.
We compute
the 44 transmission matrices (TM), C1, ...C44, that cor-

7


respond to the 44 values of the radii of curvature, by
propagating the fiber’s guided modes in the curved seg-
ment and projecting the output fields on the fiber mode
basis. We then compute the TM of the fiber, which is
deformed by M actuators, by alternatively multiplying
each one of the M transmission matrices of the M curved
segments, Ti ∈ C1, ..C44; i ∈ 1, .., M, with the diagonal
matrix D: Tfiber = DTMD...T2DT1D. D represents the
phase accumulated by each guided mode in a straight
fiber.
Fig.S3 depicts the fiber’s TM for an increasing
number of actuators M, showing that as M increases
the TM evolves from a band-diagonal matrix to a fully
randomized matrix.

Figure S3: Transmission matrix of the fiber for an
increasing number of actuators M. Each image rep-
resents the absolute square of the TM of the fiber, sup-
porting 129 modes

Evaluation of the number of excited modes

For the simulations that model the experimental configu-
ration with 28 actuators, we excite at the input only the
first 50 modes, and not all the modes supported by the
fiber, since by inspection of the speckle pattern obtained
experimentally, we conclude that in our experiments we
excite roughly 50 modes. The estimation of the num-
ber of excited modes is based on measuring the number
of speckle grains at the distal end of the fiber, defined
by the ratio of the core area and the speckle correlation
area. Indeed, the experimentally measured speckle pat-
tern has a similar grain size and number of grains to the
speckle pattern simulated assuming excitation of the first
50 guided modes Fig.S4.

Figure S4: Estimation of the number of excited
modes. (a) Experimental and (b) simulated output of
the MMF. In the simulation we found that we need to
excited 50 modes in order to obtain roughly the same
number of speckle grains and the same grain size as in
the experiment.

8


