1 

 

The importance of the interface for picosecond spin pumping 

in antiferromagnet-heavy metal heterostructures 

Farhan Nur Kholida, Dominik Hamaraa, Ahmad Faisal Bin Hamdana, Guillermo Nava Antonioa, 
Richard Bowena, Dorothée Petita, Russell Cowburna, Roman V. Pisarevc, Davide Bossinib, Joseph 

Barkerd*, Chiara Ciccarellia* 

aCavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, United Kingdom 

bDepartment of Physics, University of Konstanz, Universitätsstraße 10 78457 Konstanz, Germany 

cIoffe Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, 194021 St. Petersburg, Russia 

dSchool of Physics and Astronomy, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom 

 
*cc538@cam.ac.uk 
*j.barker@leeds.ac.uk 
Abstract 
Interfaces between heavy metals (HMs) and antiferromagnetic insulators (AFIs) have recently become 
highly investigated and debated systems in the effort to create spintronic devices able to function at 
terahertz frequencies. Such heterostructures have great technological potential because AFIs can 
generate sub-picosecond spin currents which the HMs can convert into charge signals. In this work we 
demonstrate an optically induced picosecond spin transfer at the interface between AFIs and Pt using 
time-resolved THz emission spectroscopy. We select two antiferromagnets in the same family of 
fluoride cubic perovskites, KCoF3 and KNiF3, whose magnon frequencies at the centre of the Brillouin 
zone differ by an order of magnitude. By studying their behaviour with temperature we correlate 
changes in the spin transfer efficiency across the interface to the opening of a gap in the magnon 
density of states below the Néel temperature. Our observations are reproduced in a model based on the 
spin exchange between the localized electrons in the antiferromagnet and the free electrons in Pt. These 
results constitute an important step in the rigorous investigation and understanding of the physics of 
AFIs/HMs interfaces on the ultrafast timescale.  
 
Introduction 

Antiferromagnetic spintronics aims to harness the advantages of THz-frequency magnetic 

dynamics and low magnetic field sensitivity to develop new types of memory and logic devices1–4. 

While the spin transport properties of antiferromagnets have been extensively investigated with 

electrical methods5–14 , the high eigenfrequencies of the antiferromagnetic resonances suggest that 

femtosecond laser pulses may be the most promising tool to fully explore the potential of 

antiferromagnetic spintronics. The all-optical generation, manipulation and detection of magnons in 

bulk antiferromagnets have been widely demonstrated3,15–18 up to the frequency regime of tens of 

THz19,20 and even in the absence of lattice heating21. As a next step towards establishing femtosecond 

antiferromagnetic devices, it is paramount to identify pathways to establish an efficient photo-induced 


2 

 

spin-charge conversion. Recently, a large number of studies on the conversion of high frequency spin 

excitations into charge signals in AFI/HM interfaces have been conducted12,13,22,23. Some of these 

works have sparked controversy, because contrasting results have been reported by different groups in 

very similar structures22–24. Hence questions concerning the spin-to-charge conversion mechanisms 

and the role of AFI/HM interfaces on the femtosecond timescale have arisen.  

Here we focus on a yet-unexplored route to transfer spin angular momentum from an AFI to a HM on 

the ultrashort timescale: the picosecond spin Seebeck effect (SSE). The quasi-static SSE has been 

measured in different AFIs25–27 revealing a rich  and not fully understood phenomenology.  Satisfactory 

modelling of the results obtained in the presence of a magnetic field below the spin flop value, i.e. for 

vanishing net magnetisation, has been obtained by extending the theory of bulk magnon transport 

developed for ferromagnets and taking into account the contribution from the two magnon branches 

carrying opposite spin momentum28. These branches are degenerate at zero magnetic field: an applied 

field thus lifts the degeneracy and enables net spin transport. In this scenario, the SSE amplitude is 

largely affected by the spin transport properties in the bulk of the AFI. Nevertheless, recent 

experiments as a function of temperature and magnetic field29,30 have pointed towards the key role of 

the interface31. It is clear that lacking an understanding of the spin transfer mechanisms between the 

AFI and the HM prevents to achieve a complete modelling and understanding of the experiments.     

Our study here addresses exclusively the role of the interface and characterises the spin transfer 

efficiency between an AFI and a HM as a function of temperature and applied magnetic field. We 

focus on the two interfaces in KNiF3/Pt and KCoF3/Pt. Both AFIs have a simple cubic perovskite-type 

structure and their spin structures have the same magnetic space group. However, KNiF3 has a lower 

magnetic anisotropy, resulting in a magnon gap that is about an order of magnitude lower with respect 

to KCoF3. 

In our study, we use an optical pump-THz emission layout illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Femtosecond 

laser pulses excite the free electrons in the HM thus raising their temperature. At the initial stage of 


3 

 

the process, the excited hot electrons are out of thermal equilibrium with the magnons and the crystal 

lattice. The subsequent thermalisation mechanisms lead to the transfer of a spin current from the AFI 

to the Pt, where it is converted into a charge current due to the inverse spin Hall effect (ISHE). The 

narrow bandwidth of our measurements (0.25 – 2.5 THz) filters any contribution to spin pumping from 

thermal magnons or phonons. Hence our measurements are sensitive only to the direct electron-

magnon interaction.  

Model for the optically induced incoherent spin pumping at an AFI-Pt interface 
 

The onset of long-range magnetic ordering affects the nature of spin transport across a magnetic 

insulator (MI)-HM interface. Phenomenologically, interfacial spin transport can be understood in 

terms of incoherent spin pumping. The photo-induced thermal fluctuations of itinerant electron spins 

in the HM generate torques on the adjacent localised spin moments of the MI and affect the magnon 

population in the vicinity of the interface. Vice versa, the scattering of magnons at the interface leads 

to spin accumulation in the HM. The coupling strength between the itinerant spins in the HM and the 

localised spins of d-electrons in the MI is often parameterized by an sd-exchange Hamiltonian with 

constant 𝐽!". In thermal equilibrium, scattering processes from both sides of the interface are equal in 

magnitude, resulting in a vanishing spin current. An imbalance between the magnon and the electron 

distributions is therefore required to break the equilibrium and to yield a net spin flow. 

In ferrimagnetic insulators, the magnon modes of opposite polarization are separated due to the 

inter-sublattice exchange field32. In uniaxial AFIs, the two magnon modes with opposite polarizations 

are degenerate at zero magnetic field. Hence even when thermal equilibrium is broken, the equal flow 

of spin current with opposite sign from the two magnon branches results in zero net spin flow.  

Breaking the degeneracy via Zeeman splitting is therefore necessary to cause an unequal population 

of the two magnon branches and lead to a net spin flow. As well as the mode degeneracy, AFIs can 

have a large zero-field magnon gap in the THz range due to the ‘exchange enhancement’ of the 


4 

 

anisotropy. This is significantly larger than the GHz gap of ferromagnets and can be expected to affect 

spin transfer across AFI-HM interfaces.  

 
To understand how the relevant material parameters modify the optically-induced, incoherent 

spin pumping at picosecond timescales, we combine a Heisenberg model for the AFI, a Hubbard model 

for the HM and an sd-Hamiltonian coupling them at the interface, ℋ = ℋ#$% + ℋ&' + ℋ(). This 

follows a similar approach used to study picosecond demagnetisation dynamics in bulk metallic 

ferromagnets33. The sd-coupling is treated as a weak term in the Hamiltonian allowing a solution in 

the mean field with Fermi’s Golden rule. A full derivation is given in the Supplementary Information. 

Here we outline the basic equations. In this model, the external magnetic field is assumed to be aligned 

with the Néel vector and below the spin flop critical value. Diagonalising the Hamiltonian and applying 

Fermi’s Golden rule we find the spin current per unit area across the AFI-HM interface to be 

𝐼sd = 𝜋𝑆𝐽!"

* (𝐷+!)* ,-
𝑑ε,

-𝑔-1ε,

-23𝑁, + 𝑈,63ε,

- + µ(6

.max
"

.#"
3𝑛/1ε,

- + µ(2 − 𝑛-1ε,

-26 

− ∫
𝑑ε,

0𝑔0;ε,

0<3𝑁, + 𝑈,6=ε,

0 − µ(> =𝑛/;ε1

0 − µ(< − 𝑛0;ε,

0<>

.max

'

.#

'
? ,                       (1) 

where 𝑆 is the absolute value of the AFI spins in units of ℏ.  𝛼 and 𝛽 denote the two AFI magnon 

modes (degenerate in zero field) with dispersion ε,

-,3.   𝜀4

5,3are the energies at the bottom of the magnon 

bands and 𝜀678

5,3  are the energy maxima at the Brillouin zone edges.   𝑔5,3;𝜀,

5,3< are the magnon density 

of states (DOS) of the involved modes and 𝐷+!is electron DOS at the Fermi level. The terms 𝑁1 + 𝑈1 

represent the normal and umklapp scattering, respectively. The thermal distribution 𝑛9(𝜀) =

(exp(𝜀/𝑘9𝑇:) − 1);<  is the Bose-Einstein distribution function for the electron-hole pairs at the 

effective electron temperature 𝑇:, whilst 𝑛5,0(𝜀) are the instantaneous (non-equilibrium) distribution 

of magnons.   

When the femtosecond laser pulse hits the sample, the electronic temperature in the HM 

increases rapidly, however the magnon population in the AFI is initially still at the ambient 


5 

 

temperature. This temperature bias, or more generally, the difference between the distributions 

𝑛9;ε,

-,0 ± µ(< and 𝑛-;ε,

-,0< gives rise to a spin current across the interface.  

The magnon thermal distribution 𝑛5,0(𝜀) evolves in time due to the spin current 

=>",'?.)

",'@

=A
=

B*+?.)

",'@

ℏ
                                                                           (2) 

We can assume that magnon-magnon scattering within and between magnon branches is negligible on 

the short timescales studied here. The contribution to the spin current from the 𝛼 and 𝛽 modes differs 

in sign since the both modes pump spins with the opposite signs due to their opposite magnon 

polarization. The spin current flow induces a spin accumulation µ! in the HM according to an equation 

=D,
=A = −

D,
E, +

F

ℏ 𝐼()  ,                                                                         (3) 

where τ! is the relaxation time of s-electron spins in the HM and ρ = −1/𝐷 with 𝐷 =

2𝐷↑

+!𝐷↓

+!/(𝐷↑

+! + 𝐷↓

+!) . This spin accumulation further influences the spin current (Eq. (1)) because 

the contribution from the α mode is increased whilst that of the β mode is decreased. This process is 

similar to the effect of an applied field on the AFI dispersion. Hence the lower energy magnon mode 

has an increasingly dominant effect with increasing of µ!.  

The net spin current is transient. As the magnon distribution in the AFI equilibrates towards 

the thermal distribution of the electron-hole pairs in the HM, the spin accumulation decays to zero and 

the net spin current once again vanishes.  

There are competing processes taking place at different timescales that define the temporal 

evolution of both the effective electronic temperature and the spin accumulation. This is mostly 

determined by the strength of the interface coupling through 𝐽(), 𝜏( and ρ parameters. When the sd 

coupling is stronger, the magnon distribution follows the electron-hole distribution more closely, but 

rapidly creates a significant spin accumulation which feeds back into enhancing the spin current. When 

the sd coupling is weak, the electron temperature reaches a maximum value and then decreases before 


6 

 

the magnon distribution has changed significantly. Hence less spin accumulation is created, resulting 

in the reduction of the spin current that can be generated.  

The magnon dispersion also affects the magnitude of the spin current generated by the laser-

pulse heating. The enhancement of the magnetic anisotropy in antiferromagnets results in significant 

increase of the magnon gap at low wavevectors in comparison to ferromagnets. The gap is 

approximately 𝜀4

5,3 ≈ 2𝑆Y(𝑧𝐽#$% + 𝐾)𝐾 ∓ 𝑔µ9µIH:8J, where 𝐽#$% and 𝐾 are the exchange and 

anisotropy constants respectively, and 𝑧 is the number of nearest neighbours. The second term is the 

Zeeman energy in the presence of an external magnetic field µIH:8J. The magnon gap defines the 

forbidden energy range within which there are no magnon states for electrons to scatter into, hence the 

magnitude of the spin current at low temperatures is limited by this gap. The additional heating of 

electrons by the laser-pulse has a diminishing effect when approaching the Néel temperature (TN) 

because of the absence of any magnon modes beyond the magnon Debye temperature. The spin current 

amplitude therefore saturates when approaching TN. 

 

Results 
 

Experimental Layout 

In this work we compare the optically induced incoherent spin pumping at the AFI-HM 

interface in KCoF3 and KNiF3 bulk single crystals (see Methods).  Below TN both materials are G-type 

antiferromagnets, with neighbouring spins aligned along opposite directions and pointing along one of 

the main cubic [100], [010] and [001] axes 21 (Fig.1 (b)). KNiF3 is often regarded as an almost perfect 

Heisenberg antiferromagnet because of its low magnetocrystalline anisotropy, which produces 

resonance frequency 𝜔KLM$- = 0.097 THz21 at zero field.  In KCoF3, the unquenched orbital angular 

momentum of the Co2+ ions results in a larger spin-orbit interaction, which is responsible for a larger 

anisotropy. Consequently the resonance frequency 𝜔KNI$- = 1.17 THz34,35 at zero field is higher by 

an order of magnitude than that of KNiF3. Fig. 1(c) and (d) show the temperature dependence of the 


7 

 

magnetic susceptibility for the two materials, from which we extract the values of the Néel temperature 

𝑇L = 117 K in KCoF3 and 𝑇L = 245 K in KNiF3.  

Fig.1(a) shows the experimental layout. We use 50 fs pump laser-pulses with a central wavelength of 

800 nm to generate a temperature difference between the free electrons in Pt and the magnons in the 

AFI.  In KCoF3, 800 nm corresponds to a transparency window and thus we assume that the pump 

energy is mainly absorbed by the Pt layer. In KNiF3, the pump wavelength (800 nm) coincides with a 

weakly-absorptive window with the absorption coefficient of 𝛼 = 70 cm-1 21. In order to maximise 

absorption of the laser pulses by the Pt layer, we use a reversed experimental geometry, in which the 

pump beam impinges on the sample from the Pt side.  

After optical pumping, the hot electrons in the Pt layer thermalize with its phonon bath in Pt 

with a time constant of 𝜏:;OP ≈ 260 fs36. Subsequently, a Fermi-Dirac distribution at the effective 

temperature 𝑇: can describe the electronic system. At the timescales probed in our experiment, the 

thermalisation of the hot electrons in the Pt layer with the spins in the AFI mainly occurs via direct 

electron-magnon scattering mediated by the sd-type exchange 𝐽(). The typical timescales of the 

phonon-magnon interaction in these AFIs, either directly measured with time-resolved techniques21 or 

extrapolated via static spectroscopic methods34, lie in the 10-100 ps region. We can thus assume that 

phonons do not significantly contribute to our measurements.  

Although the hot electrons in the Pt layer are initially not spin-polarized, the incoherent 

magnons excited via inelastic spin-flip scattering lead to a non-equilibrium net spin accumulation in 

the AFI provided the degeneracy between the two opposite chirality bands is lifted by an external 

magnetic field. This results in spin pumping through the interface to the Pt layer where spin-to-charge 

conversion occurs via the inverse spin-Hall effect and results in broadband THz electro-dipole 

emission37 

S(ω) = eZ(ω)𝜆(ΘQ&𝐼()(ω) ,                                                         (4) 


8 

 

where Z(ω) is the impedance of the AFI-Pt bilayer, 𝜆( and ΘQ& are respectively the spin diffusion 

length and the spin-Hall angle of the Pt layer, while – e is the electron charge. The amplitude of the 

THz emission is directly proportional to the spin current 𝐼sd through the AFI-Pt interface and therefore 

gives us a direct measurement of the optically-induced incoherent spin pumping. 

Analysis of terahertz emission 

 
The emitted THz radiation is consistent with the symmetry of the inverse spin-Hall effect in Pt 

for a spin current polarized along the direction of the external magnetic field, which in our set-up is 

applied within the plane of the AFI-HM structure, as shown in Fig. 1(a).  Fig. 2 (a)&(b) show the time-

trace evolution of the THz electric field pulse, S(𝑡), in KCoF3/Pt at 𝑇 = 20 K. The components 

polarized along the [100] and [010] directions are both shown for different linear polarizations of the 

pump beam (Fig.2 (a)). The THz electric field is polarized along the [010] direction, perpendicular to 

the direction of the external magnetic field. The pump polarization does not have any impact on the 

polarization or amplitude of the emission, in agreement with the thermal origin of the spin current. Fig. 

2(b) shows that the amplitude of the THz pulse is inverted when using two reversed pumping 

geometries, i.e. direct illumination from either the KCoF3 or the Pt side. This observation is consistent 

with the opposite direction of the spin current relative to the THz propagation direction, resulting in a 

reversal of the sign of the inverse spin Hall signal. In the Supplementary Information we show that 

THz emission is only measured when both the AFI, as spin source, and the Pt layer, as spin-to-charge 

transducer, are present in the structure while no emission was measured for the single AFI or a single 

Pt thin film deposited on glass. Similarly, in KNiF3 the THz emission is polarized along the [010] axis 

and does not depend on the polarization of the pump beam (Fig. 2(c)). The profile of the emitted THz 

pulse appears reversed in KNiF3 for the same magnetic field direction. This is because of the different 

geometry employed for the measurements of the KNiF3/Pt heterostructure with the optical pump 

hitting the sample from the Pt side. 


9 

 

In Fig. 2(d) we show that the amplitude of the emitted THz radiation linearly increases as a 

function of the external magnetic field in both the KCoF3/Pt and KNiF3/Pt structures. The opposite 

slope in the two cases is again to be attributed to the different pumping geometries. 

 

Temperature dependence  

      
Figures 3(a) and 3(c) show the normalised THz emission amplitude in the KCoF3/Pt and 

KNiF3/Pt samples as a function of temperature and for a constant value of the external magnetic field 

µIH:8J = 0.85 T. For 𝑇 < 𝑇L both AFIs manifest very different behaviour. In the KCoF3/Pt sample 

the optically induced spin pumping peaks at 𝑇L and decreases when approaching zero. The temperature 

dependence is strongly affected by the pump fluence below 𝑇L. This behaviour is reproduced by the 

theory described in the section Model for the optically induced incoherent spin pumping at a AFI-Pt 

interface by considering a gap in the magnon DOS of 1.17 THz. In the model we assume, that the 

laser-induced increase of the effective electronic temperature ∆𝑇R is independent from ambient 

temperature, as is found in transient reflectivity measurements36. The decrease of spin pumping below 

𝑇S is explained by the gap 𝜀4 in the magnon DOS. After optical pumping, only those electrons in Pt 

that have sufficiently high energy above 𝜀4 can contribute to the spin transfer by exciting high-energy 

magnons. At low ambient temperature the magnon gap 𝜀4

TUVW- in KCoF3 becomes commensurate with 

the energy of the optically heated electrons in Pt, 𝑘9𝑇: (~3 meV at an absorbed fluence of 

0.026 mJ/cm2)36,38, which leads to the quenching of electron-magnon scattering, as illustrated in Fig. 

4. As the fluence of the pump pulse is increased the electron temperature 𝑇: is proportionally increased 

and higher-energy magnons above the gap can be accessed, resulting in a larger value of the integral 

in Eq.(1).  

In KNiF3 the temperature dependence of the THz emission is different, increasing rather than 

decreasing towards lower temperatures (Fig.3 (c)). Moreover, no dependence on the fluence of the 


10 

 

pump beam is observed: all curves overlap and are fitted by ;1 −

X

X.<

Y
function. These are strong 

indications that the opening of the gap in the magnon DOS in this case does not play the main role in 

determining the temperature dependence of the THz emission. At low ambient temperature the magnon 

gap 𝜀4

TSZW- in KNiF3 is one order of magnitude smaller than the energy of the optically heated electrons 

in the Pt layer even at the lowest fluence that was used in our experiment. In Fig. 3(d) we compare the 

data in Fig. 3(a) and (c) with the same data measured by our group in YIG-Pt36,38 using the same 

experimental layout. The KNiF3 and YIG graphs overlap when plotted as a function of the 

renormalized temperatures 

[

[. and 

[

[/, where T\ is the Curie temperature in YIG. This suggests that the 

onset of the long-range magnetism and of the exchange coupling between the free electrons in Pt and 

the localised electrons in the magnetic insulator are responsible for the temperature behaviour. On the 

other hand, the role of quantities exclusively connected to Pt, such as the spin lifetime, do not seem to 

play a key role.  

Finally, we briefly comment on the spin pumping in the paramagnetic state at 𝑇 > 𝑇L. In this 

temperature region there is no long-range magnetic order, but short-range spin correlations still exist 

and have been shown to lead to a non-zero SSE in both paramagnets39 and antiferromagnets29. Within 

the model this is introduced phenomenologically by cutting off the spectrum starting from the centre 

of the Brillouin zone and for increasing wavenumbers with increasing temperature 40. Assuming a 

correlation length of 𝜉 = 𝑎 ;

X;X0

X0 <

;]

  with 𝑎 = 0.3 nm and 𝜈 = 0.64 we cutoff the spectrum for wave 

vectors below 𝑞^ = 1/𝜉. As shown in the Supplementary Information, the THz emission in the 

paramagnetic phase still reflects the symmetry of the inverse spin Hall effect in Pt and its amplitude 

scales linearly with the value of the external magnetic field.   

Conclusions 

By applying time-resolved THz emission spectroscopy for the study of an AFI-Pt interface in 

the cubic KCoF3 and KNiF3 antiferromagnets, we show that the optically induced spin transfer is 


11 

 

characterized by significantly different temperature dependences. In KCoF3 the experimental results 

are fully reproduced by a theoretical model that considers the spin exchange induced by electron-

magnon scattering between the free electrons in Pt and the localized electrons in the AFI in the 

presence of a temperature gradient.  We observe that the opening of a gap in the magnon DOS below 

𝑇L leads to the suppression of scattering events that involve lower energy particles and results in the 

quenching of the spin pumping. The key importance of the gap in the magnon DOS in determining the 

spin transfer efficiency between the AFI and the Pt is confirmed by the measurement on KNiF3, as its 

gap is one order of magnitude smaller than in KCoF3. Consistent with expectations, in KNiF3 we do 

not observe a quenching of the spin pumping at low temperatures. Instead, an increase is observed that 

we correlate with the exchange strength between Pt and the magnetic insulator. Through this 

comparative study of selected materials, we are able to shine light on the microscopy of spin transfer 

at picosecond timescales between antiferromagnets and heavy metals and identify a key figure of merit 

for its efficiency: the magnon gap. Our results set a landmark in the fundamental understanding of the 

highly discussed physics of the HM/AFI interfaces, which is the necessary cornerstone for the 

designing of femtosecond antiferromagnetic spintronics devices with optimized characteristics. 

 

Acknowledgements 
 

CC, DH, RB and JB acknowledge support from the Royal Society. This project has received 

funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie 
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 861300. FNK acknowledge Jardine Foundation and 
Cambridge Trust for financial support. DB and CC are thankful to A. Kimel for the fruitful discussion 
and for sharing data taken in his group, which helped with the interpretation of the results presented in 
this paper. JB thanks Kei Yamamoto for advice on the theory of sd coupling with antiferromagnets. 
D.B. acknowledges support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) program BO 5074/1-
1. RVP contribution to the paper was supported by Goszadanie.   

 

Methods 
Material Characterisation 

Single crystals KCoF3 and KNiF3 were grown by a floating zone technique. A 5 nm Pt layer 

was deposited on 0.8 mm thick plates of AFIs using magnetron sputtering after polishing the crystals 
plates to a surface roughness of ± 1 nm. The perovskite crystal structure (Fig.1 (a)) results in cubic 


12 

 

anisotropy, where the Néel vector can point along one of the three [100], [010] and [001]41,42 crystal 
axes. Below 𝑇S KCoF3 undergoes a tetragonal deformation (~0.2% with c/a<1), which results in a 
small uniaxial anisotropy with the easy axis along the [001] direction. 

Using the SQUID magnetometry, we measured the Néel temperature of 𝑇L= 117 K for KCoF3 

and of 𝑇L= 245 K for KNiF3. The low anisotropy results in large magnetic domain sizes in the range 
of hundreds of 𝜇m41.  

 

Experimental setup 

800 nm femtosecond laser pulses with pulse width of 50 fs are generated from an amplified 

Ti:sapphire laser system with a repetition rate of 5 kHz. The laser spot on the sample surface is 2.5 
mm in diameter. The nominal fluence of the incident pulse is varied from 0.04 to 3 mJ/cm2, 
corresponding to an absorbed fluence by the Pt layer of 0.026 to 1.7  mJ/cm2. Due to a low absorption 
of KCoF3 at 800 nm (𝛼 = 10 cm-1) only ≲ 5% of the total fluence is absorbed throughout entire 
thickness. On the other hand, a high absorbance in KNiF3 of 𝛼 = 70 cm-1 strongly reduces the laser 
fluence at the KNiF3/Pt when incident from KNiF3, and that is why we prefer to pump from the Pt 
side.  Constructive interferences in the thin Pt layer result in a high absorbance 𝐴 ≈

>1

>1_>2 ≈ 0.643 for 

KCoF3 (𝑛M ≈ 1.544 and 𝑛I = 1 are the refraction indices of KCoF3 and air, respectively) and 𝐴 ≈ 0.4 
for temperature control. An electromagnet is used to apply an external field up to 0.85 Tesla.  The 
resulting THz emission due to the inverse spin Hall effect is detected using an electro-optic sampling 
technique. The THz electric field radiation is steered by parabolic mirrors to a 1 mm thick ZnTe crystal 
such that it is spatially overlapped with a low power linearly polarized optical probe pulse (< 1 nJ). 
The THz field-induced birefringence creates an ellipticity in the probe pulse that is proportional to the 
THz electric field strength. Balanced detection is employed to measure the small ellipticity changes 
and construct the THz signal in time-domain as the delay of the probe pulse is modified with a 
motorised linear stage. For signal conversion to electric field in units of V/cm unit, we use an 
equation45 

∆𝐼
𝐼V

= 𝜔𝑛Y𝑟<`𝐿

2𝑐
2𝑆 

where 

∆B

B3 is the raw signal representing the change of the probe ellipticity, 𝜔 = 7.5𝜋 × 10<` s-1 is the 

central frequency of the probe pulse, 𝑛 = 2.85 is the refractive index of the ZnTe detector at 800 
nm, 𝑟<` = 3.9 pm/V is the electro-optic constant of ZnTe, 𝐿= 1 mm is the ZnTe thickness, 𝑐 = 3 × 10b 
m/s is the speed of light, 𝑆 is the THz electric field magnitude convoluted with the response function 
of our spectrometer46. 
 
 
Model Parameters 
 
To model KCoF3 we used the parameters 𝜇4H:8J = 0.85 T , 𝐽#$% = 0.9 meV, 𝐾 = 0.4 meV, 𝑧 = 6, 
𝑆 = 3/2,  𝜏!(𝑇) = 0.018 − 1.3 × 10;c𝑇 ps45, 𝜏R = 2.0 ps, 𝐷+! = 0.015 meV-1 nm-1, 𝐽!" = 5.0 meV. 
 
 

 


13 

 

 

 
 


14 

 

Figure 1 | Terahertz emission spectroscopy in AFI-Pt. (a) Schematic illustration of the measurement 
set-up. The external magnetic field is shown by a blue arrow and is directed along the [100] direction. 
(b) Crystal and magnetic structure of KCoF3 and KNiF3. (c-d) Magnetic susceptibility and its first 
derivative with respect to temperature in KCoF3 (c) and KNiF3 (d). From these datasets we extract the 
Néel temperature 𝑇L = 117 K in KCoF3 and 𝑇L = 245 K in KNiF3. 


15 

 

Figure 2 | Symmetry of the terahertz emission. (a) Components of the THz emission from KCoF3/Pt
polarized along the [100] and [010] axes for different optical pump polarizations. The absorbed pump 
fluence is 1.7 mJ.cm-2 the ambient temperature is 𝑇 = 20 K and 𝐻 = + 0.85 T along the [100] axis. 
(b) THz emission for two pumping geometries in KCoF3/Pt at 𝑇 = 20 K and 𝐻 = + 0.85 T. (c) Pump 
polarization dependence of the THz emission in KNiF3/Pt, measured at 𝑇 = 25 K. (d) THz electric 
field emission in KCoF3/Pt (red) and KNiF3/Pt (green) as a function of applied magnetic field. 

 
 
 


16 

 

Figure 3 | Temperature dependence of terahertz emission. (a) Temperature dependence of the peak 
THz emission in KCoF3 for varying pump fluences. (b) Temperature dependence of the peak THz 

emission in KNiF3 for varying pump fluences. The black line represents the function ;1 −

X

X.<

Y
  (c) 

Calculated integrated spin current in KCoF3 for different changes in the effective electron temperature 
in Pt with respect to the ambient temperature; ∆𝑇R = 𝑇R − 𝑇4.  (d) Temperature dependence of the THz 
emission amplitude in KNiF3, KCoF3 and YIG/Pt as presented in Ref. 33  as a function of the
normalised ambient temperature. 

 
 


17 

 

Figure 4 | Spin pumping across the AFI-Pt interface (a) At 𝑇 ≪ 𝑇L, the gap in the magnon DOS 
fully opens subtracting the contribution of low energy magnons to the spin pumping. Increasing the
laser fluence results in a higher effective electron temperature in Pt and higher energy magnons start 
to contribute to spin pumping. In the above graph we show the specific case of KCoF3. The Fermi-
Dirac distribution of the electrons on the Pt side is shown in orange at ambient temperature and in
yellow after optical pumping (an electron temperature increase of 30 K is assumed). The two field-
split magnon bands are shown in purple. (b) At 𝑇~𝑇L, the magnon gap is only partially open and low 
energy magnons are excited by spin-flip scattering by electrons close to the Fermi level in Pt. 
 
 
 
References 
 
1. Jungwirth, T., Marti, X., Wadley, P. & Wunderlich, J. Antiferromagnetic spintronics. Nature Nanotech 11, 

231–241 (2016). 

2. Baltz, V. et al. Antiferromagnetic spintronics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 015005 (2018). 

3. Němec, P., Fiebig, M., Kampfrath, T. & Kimel, A. V. Antiferromagnetic opto-spintronics. Nature Phys 14, 

229–241 (2018). 

4. Xiong, D. et al. Antiferromagnetic spintronics: An overview and outlook. Fundamental Research 2, 522–

534 (2022). 

5. Mendes, J. B. S. et al. Large inverse spin Hall effect in the antiferromagnetic metal Ir 20 Mn 80. Phys. 

Rev. B 89, 140406 (2014). 


18 

 

6. Ou, Y., Shi, S., Ralph, D. C. & Buhrman, R. A. Strong spin Hall effect in the antiferromagnet PtMn. Phys. 

Rev. B 93, 220405 (2016). 

7. Zhang, W. et al. Spin Hall Effects in Metallic Antiferromagnets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 196602 (2014). 

8. Lin, W., Chen, K., Zhang, S. & Chien, C. L. Enhancement of Thermally Injected Spin Current through an 

Antiferromagnetic Insulator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 186601 (2016). 

9. Qiu, Z. et al. Spin-current probe for phase transition in an insulator. Nat Commun 7, 12670 (2016). 

10. Lebrun, R. et al. Tunable long-distance spin transport in a crystalline antiferromagnetic iron oxide. 

Nature 561, 222–225 (2018). 

11. Wang, Y. et al. Magnetization switching by magnon-mediated spin torque through an antiferromagnetic 

insulator. Science 366, 1125–1128 (2019). 

12. Vaidya, P. et al. Subterahertz spin pumping from an insulating antiferromagnet. Science 368, 160–165 

(2020). 

13. Li, J. et al. Spin current from sub-terahertz-generated antiferromagnetic magnons. Nature 578, 70–74 

(2020). 

14. Hellman, F. et al. Interface-induced phenomena in magnetism. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 025006 (2017). 

15. Mashkovich, E. A. et al. Terahertz light–driven coupling of antiferromagnetic spins to lattice. Science 374, 

1608–1611 (2021). 

16. Satoh, T. et al. Spin Oscillations in Antiferromagnetic NiO Triggered by Circularly Polarized Light. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 105, 077402 (2010). 

17. Bossini, D. et al. Ultrafast Amplification and Nonlinear Magnetoelastic Coupling of Coherent Magnon 

Modes in an Antiferromagnet. Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 077202 (2021). 

18. Baierl, S. et al. Terahertz-Driven Nonlinear Spin Response of Antiferromagnetic Nickel Oxide. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 117, 197201 (2016). 

19. Bossini, D. et al. Macrospin dynamics in antiferromagnets triggered by sub-20 femtosecond injection of 

nanomagnons. Nat Commun 7, 10645 (2016). 


19 

 

20. Bossini, D. et al. Laser-driven quantum magnonics and terahertz dynamics of the order parameter in 

antiferromagnets. Phys. Rev. B 100, 024428 (2019). 

21. Bossini, D., Kalashnikova, A. M., Pisarev, R. V., Rasing, Th. & Kimel, A. V. Controlling coherent and 

incoherent spin dynamics by steering the photoinduced energy flow. Phys. Rev. B 89, 060405 (2014). 

22. Rongione, E. et al. Emission of coherent THz magnons in an antiferromagnetic insulator triggered by 

ultrafast spin-phonon interactions.  doi:https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.11965. 

23. Wust, S. et al. Indirect optical manipulation of the antiferromagnetic order of insulating NiO by ultrafast 

interfacial energy transfer. Preprint at http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.02686 (2022). 

24. Qiu, H. et al. Ultrafast spin current generated from an antiferromagnet. Nat. Phys. 17, 388–394 (2021). 

25. Seki, S. et al. Thermal Generation of Spin Current in an Antiferromagnet. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 266601 

(2015). 

26. Wu, S. M. et al. Antiferromagnetic Spin Seebeck Effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 097204 (2016). 

27. Li, J. et al. Spin Seebeck Effect from Antiferromagnetic Magnons and Critical Spin Fluctuations in 

Epitaxial FeF 2 Films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 217204 (2019). 

28. Rezende, S. M., Rodríguez-Suárez, R. L. & Azevedo, A. Theory of the spin Seebeck effect in 

antiferromagnets. Phys. Rev. B 93, 014425 (2016). 

29. Li, J. et al. Spin Seebeck Effect from Antiferromagnetic Magnons and Critical Spin Fluctuations in 

Epitaxial FeF 2 Films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 217204 (2019). 

30. Reitz, D., Li, J., Yuan, W., Shi, J. & Tserkovnyak, Y. Spin Seebeck effect near the antiferromagnetic spin-

flop transition. Phys. Rev. B 102, 020408 (2020). 

31. Yamamoto, Y., Ichioka, M. & Adachi, H. Antiferromagnetic spin Seebeck effect across the spin-flop 

transition: A stochastic Ginzburg-Landau simulation. Phys. Rev. B 105, 104417 (2022). 

32. Nambu, Y. et al. Observation of Magnon Polarization. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 027201 (2020). 

33. Tveten, E. G., Brataas, A. & Tserkovnyak, Y. Electron-magnon scattering in magnetic heterostructures far 

out of equilibrium. Phys. Rev. B 92, 180412 (2015). 


20 

 

34. Holden, T. M. et al. Excitations in KCoF 3 -I. Experimental. J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 4, 2127–2138 

(1971). 

35. Bossini, D. Femtosecond Optical Excitation of Spins in Antiferromagnetic Flourides. An opto-magnetic 

journey from the center to the edges of the Brillouin zone. (Radboud University, 2016). 

36. Kholid, F. N. et al. Temperature dependence of the picosecond spin Seebeck effect. Appl. Phys. Lett. 119, 

032401 (2021). 

37. Seifert, T. et al. Efficient metallic spintronic emitters of ultrabroadband terahertz radiation. Nature 

Photon 10, 483–488 (2016). 

38. Seifert, T. S. et al. Femtosecond formation dynamics of the spin Seebeck effect revealed by terahertz 

spectroscopy. Nat Commun 9, 2899 (2018). 

39. Wu, S. M., Pearson, J. E. & Bhattacharya, A. Paramagnetic Spin Seebeck Effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 

186602 (2015). 

40. Chen, K., Lin, W., Chien, C. L. & Zhang, S. Temperature dependence of angular momentum transport 

across interfaces. Phys. Rev. B 94, 054413 (2016). 

41. Safa, M. & Tanner, B. K. Antiferromagnetic domain wall motion in KNiF 3 and KCoF 3 observed by X-ray 

synchrotron topography. Philosophical Magazine B 37, 739–750 (1978). 

42. Tsuda, T., Yasuoka, H. & Miyauchi, T. Magnetic Susceptibility of an Antiferromagnetic KCoF3 Single 

Crystal 19F NMR and Static Measurements. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 45, 1551–1558 (1978). 

43. Krayer, L. J., Kim, J. & Munday, J. N. Near-perfect absorption throughout the visible using ultra-thin 

metal films on index-near-zero substrates [Invited]. Opt. Mater. Express 9, 330 (2019). 

44. Erum, N. & Azhar Iqbal, M. Mechanical and magneto-opto-electronic investigation of transition metal 

based fluoro-perovskites: An ab-initio DFT study. Solid State Communications 264, 39–48 (2017). 

45. Planken, P. C. M., Nienhuys, H.-K., Bakker, H. J. & Wenckebach, T. Measurement and calculation of the 

orientation dependence of terahertz pulse detection in ZnTe. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 18, 313 (2001). 

46. Gallot, G. & Grischkowsky, D. Electro-optic detection of terahertz radiation. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 16, 1204 

(1999). 


21 

 

47. Freeman, R., Zholud, A., Dun, Z., Zhou, H. & Urazhdin, S. Evidence for Dyakonov-Perel-like Spin 

Relaxation in Pt. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 067204 (2018). 

 
  


