1 
 

Fabrication and characterization of InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite 

heterostructure devices 

Li Zhang1, Yuanjie Chen1, Dong Pan2, Shaoyun Huang1, Jianhua Zhao2, and H. Q. Xu1,3,* 

1Beijing Key Laboratory of Quantum Devices, Key Laboratory for the Physics and Chemistry of 

Nanodevices, and School of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 

2State Key Laboratory of Superlattices and Microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 912, Beijing 100083, China 

3Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China 

*Corresponding author: hqxu@pku.edu.cn 

(Date: April 18, 2022) 

 

Abstract 

Semiconductor InSb nanosheet/hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)/graphite trilayers are fabricated, 

and single- and double-gate devices made from the trilayers are realized and characterized. The 

InSb nanosheets employed in the trilayer devices are epitaxially grown, free-standing, zincblende 

crystals and are in micrometer lateral sizes. The hBN and graphite flakes are obtained by 

exfoliation. Each trilayer is made by successively stacking an InSb nanosheet on an hBN flake 

and on a graphite flake using a home-made alignment stacking/transfer setup. The fabricated 

single- and double-gate devices are characterized by electrical and/or magnetotransport 

measurements. In all these devices, the graphite and hBN flakes are employed as the bottom gates 

and the gate dielectrics. The measurements of a fabricated single bottom-gate field-effect device 

show that the InSb nanosheet in the device has an electron field-effect mobility of ~ 7300 cm2 V-1 

s-1 and a low gate hysteresis of ~ 0.05 V at 1.9 K. The measurements of a double-gate Hall-bar 

device show that both the top and the bottom gate exhibit strong capacitive couplings to the InSb 

nanosheet channel and can thus tune the nanosheet channel conduction effectively. The electron 

Hall mobility in the InSb nanosheet of the Hall-bar device is extracted to be larger than 1.1 × 104 

cm2 V-1 s-1 at a sheet electron density of ~ 6.1 × 1011 cm-2 and 1.9 K and, thus, the device exhibits 

well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. 

 

Keywords: InSb nanosheet, hexagonal boron nitride, field-effect device, double-gate device, 

Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations 

 

 


2 
 

1. Introduction 

Because of their small electron effective mass, strong spin-orbit interaction (SOI), and large 

Landé g-factor, low-dimensional InSb nanostructures are attractive candidates for applications in 

high-speed electronics [1,2], spintronics [3,4], quantum electronics [5-7], and topological 

quantum computation [8,9]. To date, epitaxially grown InSb nanowires have been extensively 

investigated and have been employed as emerging platforms for realizing field-effect transistors 

(FETs) [1,2], quantum dot devices [5-7], and semiconductor-superconductor hybrid quantum 

devices [10-12]. Recently, high-quality two-dimensional (2D) InSb quantum structures, such as 

InSb quantum wells (QWs) [13-21] and free-standing nanosheets [22-25], have been achieved via 

epitaxial growth, opening up new possibilities for fabricating planar, integrated, complex 

quantum devices. Due to advances in material engineering, these heterostructured InSb QWs 

have been demonstrated to exhibit high electron mobilities and large mean free paths, and have 

been successfully employed to make good quantum point contacts (QPCs) in which well-defined 

conductance quantization has been observed [14,17,21]. In comparison, an advantage of using 

free-standing InSb nanosheets to prepare devices is that Ohmic or superconducting contacts can 

be made by directly depositing suitable metals on their surfaces. Currently, InSb nanosheets have 

been used for fabricating Hall-bar devices [22,24,25], QPCs [23], Josephson junctions (JJs) 

[26-28], quantum dot devices [29,30], and dual-gate field-effect devices [31]. However, most of 

these devices are fabricated on SiO2/Si substrates, and scattering by charge traps and defects in 

the SiO2 dielectrics and at the interfaces between the InSb nanosheets and the SiO2 dielectrics 

have limited the device performance and led to a difficulty in achieving high-quality quantum 

devices.  

    One possible solution to the above problem is to adopt a new layered, charge-trap free 

material with an atomically flat surface as a dielectric and a thin graphite as a gate electrode 

[32-35]. In the past few years, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has been proven to be such an 

excellent dielectric [36]. With their ultra-clean surfaces, fresh exfoliated hBN layers have been 

assembled, together with a variety of one-dimensional (1D) and 2D materials, such as graphene 

[36,37], transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) [33,38-40], black phosphorus [32,41,42], and 

InSb nanowires [43,44], into functional devices. In these devices, carrier mobilities have been 

significantly increased, when compared to their counterpart devices fabricated directly on SiO2/Si 

substrates, and quantum oscillations and ballistic transport at low magnetic fields [43] have been 

observed. Therefore, it is desirable to transfer InSb nanosheets onto hBN/graphite bilayers to 

construct devices with hBN as a dielectric and graphite as a gate electrode on SiO2/Si substrates 


3 
 

in order to suppress the influence of charge traps and defects at the surfaces of and inside the 

SiO2 dielectrics. 

In this article, a method of fabrication of free-standing micrometer-sized InSb 

nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayers is described, and realization of single- and double-gate devices 

from the trilayers on SiO2/Si substrates is demonstrated. As a key step of the method, the 

positions of almost optically invisible InSb nanosheets are determined with use of duplicated 

patterns on the transparent stacking/transfer stamps and thus tiny InSb nanosheets can be 

optically aligned to and stacked on exfoliated hBN flakes and then on exfoliated graphite flakes. 

In the fabricated single- and double-gate devices, the graphite and hBN flakes are used as the 

bottom gates and the gate dielectrics. The devices are characterized by electrical and/or 

magnetotransport measurements. In this work, typical results obtained only from the gate-transfer 

characteristic measurements of a single-gate field-effect device [as shown in Figs. 2(b) and 2(c)] 

and from the electrical and magnetotransport measurements of a double-gate Hall-bar device [as 

shown in Figs. 3(b) and 3(c)] will be presented. The gate transfer characteristic measurements of 

the single-gate field-effect device yield an electron field-effect mobility of ~7300 cm2 V-1 s-1 in 

the InSb nanosheet and a low hysteresis of ~0.05 V in gate voltage at low temperatures. The 

electrical and magnetotransport measurements of the double-gate Hall-bar device show that the 

two gates exhibit strong capacitive couplings to the InSb nanosheet channel and the electron Hall 

mobility of the InSb nanosheet becomes more than 1.1 × 104 cm2 V-1 s-1 at a sheet electron density 

of ~ 6.1 × 1011 cm-2 and 1.9 K, leading to observation of well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas 

oscillations. 

2. Experimental details 

The InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures used in the single-gate 

field-effect InSb nanosheet device and the double-gate InSb nanosheet Hall-bar devices studied in 

this work are obtained by mechanical alignment/transfer technique. The details about the trilayer 

heterostructure fabrication is given in Supplementary Information. Here, taken as an example, 

only a brief description about the fabrication of an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer 

heterostructure shown in Fig. 1(d) is presented. The InSb nanosheet used in the fabrication of the 

trilayer heterostructure was grown in a free-standing form on InAs nanowire stems via molecular 

beam epitaxy (MBE) on a p-type Si(111) substrate [22] and was transferred from the growth 

substrate to a SiO2/Si substrate with predefined Ti/Au metal markers (referred to as sample 

substrate A). Figure 1(a) displays an SEM image of the InSb nanosheet and Ti/Au markers on 

sample substrate A. Here, the InSb nanosheet is located at the upper side of marker ‘8’, as 


4 
 

indicated by a black dashed square. The nanosheet had a length of ~ 1 μm and a width of ~ 0.5 

μm. The inset of Fig. 1(a) shows a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) 

image of a typical MBE-grown InSb nanosheet taken from the same growth substrate and the 

corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern (graph in the lower-right corner of the inset). 

Here, it is shown that the nanosheet was a zinc-blende crystal, and free from stacking faults and 

twin defects. The hBN and graphite flakes were mechanically exfoliated from commercially 

available bulk hBN and graphite materials using Scotch tapes and were transferred onto two other 

marker-prepared SiO2/Si substrates (referred to as sample substrates B and C).  

 

 

Figure 1. SEM and optical images of a micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer 

sample at different fabrication stages. (a) SEM image of an InSb nanosheet and Ti/Au markers on 

a SiO2/Si substrate. The nanosheet is located in the region indicated by a black dashed square. 

Inset: HRTEM image of a typical MBE-grown InSb nanosheet and the corresponding FFT pattern 

(graph in the lower-right corner of the inset). (b) Optical image of the PPC surface of the stamp, 

on which the same InSb nanosheet as in (a) and the duplicated patterns of the substrate markers 

are seen. The InSb nanosheet is in the region indicated by a white dashed square. (c) Optical 

image of the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer after a hBN flake being picked up. The InSb nanosheet 

is located in the area indicated by a black dashed square. The light blue region marked by a red 

dotted line and the white region marked by a black dotted line are the pieces of thin and thick 

hBN. (d) Optical image of the finally fabricated InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer. The InSb 

nanosheet is located in the area indicated by a black dashed square. The thick hBN, thin hBN, and 

graphite regions are marked by purple, red, and green dotted lines, respectively.  


5 
 

To fabricate the InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure, the InSb nanosheet 

was first picked up from substrate A and was then stacked on the hBN flake on substrate B to 

form an InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer using a home-made alignment stacking/transfer setup 

mounted with a polypropylene carbonate (PPC) film coated polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp 

[34]. The InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer was then picked up by lifting the stamp from substrate B. 

Here, it is important to note that to align the almost optically invisible, micrometer-sized InSb 

nanosheet with the hBN flake, a pattern of the optically visible metal markers on substrate A was 

duplicated on the PPC film during the nanosheet capture and was used for the material alignment. 

It should also be noted that before the stamp was lifted, the stamp was pressed hard against 

substrate B, in order for the InSb nanosheet and the hBN flake to form a tightly attached bilayer 

on the PPC film of the stamp. Figure 1(b) shows an optical image of the same InSb nanosheet as 

in Fig. 1(a) after being captured on the PPC film, on which the duplicated pattern is also clearly 

seen. The InSb nanosheet lay at the upper side of duplicated pattern ‘8’, as indicated by a white 

dashed square. Figure 1(c) shows an optical image of the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer on the PPC 

surface after the bilayer was picked up. Here, it is seen that the entire hBN flake is not in the 

same thickness and the regions corresponding to the pieces of thick hBN and thin hBN are 

marked by black and red dotted lines, respectively. The InSb nanosheet as seen in Figs. 1(a) and 

1(b) is now found below the thinner portion of the hBN flake as indicated by a black dashed 

square. Next, the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer on the stamp was aligned and stacked on the 

graphite flake on substrate C. After pressing hard the stamp against substrate C, the stamp was 

released by heating up sample substrate C, leaving the PPC film coated InSb 

nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer on sample substrate C. Finally, the PPC film was removed from 

the trilayer by dipping sample C into acetone. Figure 1(d) shows an optical image of the finally 

achieved trilayer heterostructure on sample substrate C, where the InSb nanosheet is located on 

top of the hBN/graphite bilayer in a region marked by a black dashed square. For further details 

about the procedure of making such an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure, 

please refer to Supplementary Information.  

The single-gate field-effect device as shown in Fig. 2(b) and the double-gate Hall-bar device 

as shown in Fig. 3(b) are made, respectively, from an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer 

heterostructure as shown in Fig. 2(a) and an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure 

as shown in Fig. 3(a), obtained in the process described above. In both devices, the graphite flake 

and the hBN flake were employed as the bottom gate and the gate dielectric, respectively. In 

fabrication of the single-gate device, the InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite heterostructure was first 


6 
 

located relative to the predefined markers on the substrate (substrate C) by an optical microscope 

and some smaller markers were fabricated around the InSb nanosheet by electron-beam 

lithography (EBL), electron-beam evaporation (EBE) of Ti/Au (5/45 nm in thickness), and lift-off 

process. Subsequently, the InSb nanosheet was located relative to these small markers by SEM, 

and source and drain contact electrodes and gate electrodes were fabricated on the InSb nanosheet 

and on the graphite flake via EBL, EBE of Ti/Au (10/100 nm in thickness), and lift-off. It should 

be noted that before the metal evaporation, exposed areas on the InSb nanosheet were chemically 

etched in a de-ionized water-diluted (NH4)2Sx solution to remove the surface oxide. In fabrication 

of the double-gate Hall-bar device, a top gate was made on an otherwise completed single 

bottom-gate device. This was done first by depositing a dielectric layer of HfO2 (20 nm in 

thickness) on the sample by atomic layer deposition and then by fabricating a Ti/Au (5/120 nm in 

thickness) metal gate on top via the combined process of EBL, EBE, and lift-off.   

Figures 2(b) and 2(c) show an SEM image of the single-gate field-effect device and a 

schematic for the layer structure of the device and the electrical measurement circuit setup. The 

gate-transfer characteristics of the device were measured in a two-probe configuration by 

applying a fixed DC voltage (𝑉𝑉ds) of 0.4 mV to source and drain electrodes (i.e., contacts 2 and 3) 

and detecting the channel current (𝐼𝐼ds) as a function of bottom-gate voltage 𝑉𝑉BG. Figure 3(b) 

shows an SEM image of the double-gate Hall-bar device and the magnetotransport measurement 

circuit setup. Figure 3(c) shows a schematic view of the layer structure of the device and the 

circuit setup for application of the top and bottom gate voltages. The magnetotransport 

measurements of the device were carried out using a standard current-biased lock-in technique, in 

which a 17-Hz AC current (𝐼𝐼) of 50 nA was supplied between the source and drain electrodes (i.e., 

contact electrodes 1 and 6), and the voltage drop  𝑉𝑉x between probe electrodes 2 and 3 and the 

voltage drop  𝑉𝑉y between probe electrodes 5 and 3 were recorded. The longitudinal and Hall 

resistances were then obtained numerically from  𝑅𝑅xx =  𝑉𝑉x/𝐼𝐼𝑥𝑥  and  𝑅𝑅yx =  𝑉𝑉y/𝐼𝐼𝑥𝑥 . All the 

measurements were carried out in a physical property measurement system cryostat equipped 

with a uniaxial magnet and, in the magnetotransport measurements for the double-gate Hall-bar 

device, the magnetic field was applied perpendicular to the InSb nanosheet plane. 

3. Results and discussion 

3.1. Gate-transfer characteristic measurements of the single-gate field-effect device  

Figure 2 shows the gate-transfer characteristic study of the single-gate field-effect device. Figures 

2(a) and 2(b) show an optical image of an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure 

(before fabricating small markers) and an SEM image of the single bottom-gate field-effect 


7 
 

device made from the trilayer heterostructure [see Fig. 2(c) for a cross-sectional view of the layer 

structure of the device]. Note that in preparation of this trilayer heterostructure, hBN flakes were 

successively picked up twice. This is because, due to misalignment, the target InSb nanosheet 

was not stacked on the hBN flake picked up at the first time. Thus, in Fig. 2(a), two portions of 

thick hBN, a big piece of thin hBN (with a thickness of 𝑡𝑡~30 nm), and a piece of graphite are 

found and are marked by purple, green, and red dotted lines, respectively. The area where the 

InSb nanosheet is located is indicated by a white square. The InSb nanosheet in the single-gate 

field-effect device has a width of 𝑊𝑊~800 nm and a thickness of ~20 nm (estimated based on the 

calibrated contrast in the SEM image). Note that an InSb nanosheet with a relatively thin 

thickness was chosen here because it is expected that this thickness would be smaller than the 

Fermi wavelength of the electron and thus the electron transport in the nanosheet is of a 2D 

nature. The InSb nanosheet was contacted by four Ti/Au electrodes, as shown in Fig. 2(b), where 

the distance between the two inner contact electrodes is 𝐿𝐿~600 nm.  

Figure 2(d) shows the two-terminal conductance 𝐺𝐺 = 𝐼𝐼ds/𝑉𝑉ds of the device as a function of 

the gate voltage 𝑉𝑉BG measured at Vds=0.4 mV and 𝑇𝑇 = 1.9 K (black curve) by sweeping 𝑉𝑉BG 

upward [cf. the measurement circuit setup shown in Fig. 2(c)]. The measurements show that the 

device is an n-type transistor and the InSb conduction channel is in a pinch-off state at 𝑉𝑉BG = 0 

V and can be switched on by applying a positive 𝑉𝑉BG. The channel conductance 𝐺𝐺s is related to 

the charge carrier mobility 𝜇𝜇 via [1] 

𝐺𝐺s =
𝜇𝜇

𝐿𝐿2 𝐶𝐶g(𝑉𝑉BG − 𝑉𝑉th), 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 

where 𝑉𝑉th is the threshold voltage at which the channel current is cut off, and 𝐶𝐶g is the 

gate-to-channel capacitance which can be estimated from 𝐶𝐶g = 𝜀𝜀0𝜀𝜀r
𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿

𝑡𝑡  with 𝜀𝜀0 being the 

permittivity of vacuum, 𝜀𝜀r = 2.9 the relative dielectric constant of hBN, and 𝑡𝑡 = 30 nm the 

thickness of hBN. The measured resistance 𝐺𝐺−1 is composed of two terms, the channel 

resistance 𝐺𝐺S
−1 and the contact resistance 𝑅𝑅c [1, 45], and is given by, 

                               𝐺𝐺−1 = 𝐺𝐺S
−1 + 𝑅𝑅c. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (2) 

The field-effect carrier mobility 𝜇𝜇, contact resistance 𝑅𝑅c, and threshold voltage 𝑉𝑉th of the device 

at T = 1.9 K can be extracted by fit of the measured on-state transfer characteristic curve shown 

in Fig. 2(d) to Eqs. (1) and (2). The red curve in Fig. 2(d) shows the result of the fit. The fit yields  

the values of 𝜇𝜇~7300 cm2 V-1 s-1, 𝑅𝑅c~580 Ω, and 𝑉𝑉th~0.88 V. Note that the extracted mobility 

value in the nanosheet is much smaller than the values measured in InSb QWs (51000 cm2 V-1 s-1 

at 300 K, and 248000 cm2 V-1 s-1 at 4.5 K) [46]. This could be attributed to several factors. The 


8 
 

most important one is due to scattering by charge traps and defects at the surfaces and in the 

native oxidized layers of the nanosheet. Another one is that the extracted value of 𝜇𝜇 for the 

nanosheet is the field-effect mobility which represents an average value over a range of the gate 

voltages (or carrier densities) and could be much smaller than the Hall mobility values obtained 

at high carrier densities.  

 

Figure 2. Electrical characterization measurements of a single-gate field-effect device. (a) 

Optical image of the InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite heterostructure used for fabrication of the 

device. The InSb nanosheet is located in the area indicated by a white square. Purple, green and 

red dotted lines mark the thick hBN, thin hBN, and graphite regions in the sample, respectively. 

(b) False-colored SEM image of the device. The nanosheet has a width of ~800 nm and a 

thickness of ~20 nm. The separation between the two inner electrodes is ~600 nm. (c) Schematic 

for the layer structure of the device and the electrical measurement circuit setup. (d) Measured 

conductance 𝐺𝐺 = 𝐼𝐼𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑/𝑉𝑉𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑  (black curve) as a function of gate voltage 𝑉𝑉BG  (gate-transfer 

characteristics) for the device at Vds=0.4 mV and 𝑇𝑇 = 1.9 K by sweeping 𝑉𝑉BG upward. The red 

curve shows the fit of the on-state portion of the measured gate-transfer characteristic curve to 

Eqs. (1) and (2). The inset shows the measured gate-transfer characteristics of the device in a 

logarithmic scale. The black and red curves represent results of the measurements by sweeping 

𝑉𝑉BG upward and downward, respectively. (e) Gate-transfer characteristics measured at different 

temperatures T. (f) Extracted field-effect mobility 𝜇𝜇 as a function of 𝑇𝑇. The orange solid line is 

the fit of the mobility data at different T to Eq. (3). The black dashed line is the fit of the 

high-temperature mobility data by a power law 𝜇𝜇~𝑇𝑇−𝛾𝛾 with a value of 𝛾𝛾~2.11. 


9 
 

With use of the extracted value of  𝑉𝑉th, the electron density in the InSb nanosheet at a given 

value of VBG can be estimated from 𝑛𝑛 = 𝐶𝐶gs ×
𝑉𝑉BG−𝑉𝑉th
𝑒𝑒
, where 𝐶𝐶gs =
𝜀𝜀0𝜀𝜀r
𝑡𝑡  is the unit area 

capacitance of the graphite gate to the InSb nanosheet and 𝑒𝑒 is the elementary charge. For 

example, an electron density of 𝑛𝑛 =  1.6 × 1012 cm−2 in the InSb nanosheet can be obtained at 

𝑉𝑉BG = 4 V. By normalizing the thickness of InSb nanosheet, a three-dimensional (3D) electron 

density of 𝑛𝑛3𝐷𝐷 =  8 × 1017 cm−3  can be obtained, yielding a Fermi wavelength  𝜆𝜆𝐹𝐹 =

2(
𝜋𝜋

3𝑛𝑛3𝐷𝐷)

1
3 ≈ 22 nm at 𝑉𝑉BG = 4 V. This normalized bulk Fermi wavelength is larger than the 

nanosheet thickness (~20 nm) and thus the electron transport in the InSb nanosheet is of a 2D 

nature as it is assumed above. The electron mean free path in the nanosheet can be obtained from 

𝐿𝐿e =
ℏ𝜇𝜇

𝑒𝑒 √2𝜋𝜋𝑛𝑛, where ℏ is the reduced Planck constant. At 𝑉𝑉BG = 4 V, 𝐿𝐿e~ 152 nm is obtained, 

which is several times smaller than the channel length (L~600 nm) and thus the carrier transport 

in the InSb nanosheet is in the diffusive regime. The inset of Fig. 2(d) shows a logarithmic scale 

plot of the 𝐺𝐺 − 𝑉𝑉BG curves at 𝑇𝑇 = 1.9 K. The black and red curves in the inset represent the 

results measured by sweeping 𝑉𝑉BG  upward and downward, respectively, showing a clear 

ambipolar transport characteristic. The device exhibits a gate hysteresis of ~ 0.05 V at a sweeping 

rate of 0.08 V/s, which outperforms the previous devices made from free-standing InSb 

nanosheets directly on a SiO2/Si substrate [22]. The smaller hysteresis seen here indicates that the 

influence of the charge traps in the SiO2 dielectric has been effectively screened out by the 

graphite bottom-gate electrode and there are a significantly less amount of trapped charges in the 

hBN dielectric layer [32,44]. Again, it should be noted that a noticeably large gate hysteresis was 

observed at elevated temperatures (see Supplementary Information). For example, a gate 

hysteresis of ~0.56 V at 100 K and a gate hysteresis of ~1.16 V at 250 K were observed in the 

device at the same sweeping rate of 0.08 V/s. This increase in gate hysteresis at a high 

temperature is believed to originate dominantly from charge trapping and de-trapping in the 

bottom native oxidized layer of the InSb nanosheet [47-49].     

Figure 2(e) shows the gate-transfer characteristics of the device measured at different 

temperatures. Here, no conductance quantization is observed in these measurements, which is 

simply due to the fact that the InSb nanosheet in the device is in the diffusive regime as it was 

shown above. Nevertheless, it is seen that at high temperatures (above ~100 K), the threshold 

voltage moves toward negative values with increasing temperature. This is consistent with the 

fact that the carrier density in the InSb nanosheet channel becomes higher due to thermal 

excitation at a higher temperature. However, the on-state conductance (taken at a positive 𝑉𝑉BG of 


10 
 

above ~1 V) of the device is seen to decrease with increasing temperature at temperatures of 

above ~100 K. This is because of an increase in phonon scattering with increasing temperature. 

Figure 2(f) shows the field-effect mobilities extracted from the gate-transfer characteristic 

measurements of the device at different temperatures. It is seen that the mobility tends to saturate 

at low temperatures (below ~77 K), in good agreement with the results obtained from InSb QWs 

[15], but decreases exponentially with increasing temperature at high temperatures (above ~100 

K). In the considered temperature range, the temperature-dependent mobility µ(T) in the InSb 

nanosheet can be approximately expressed as, 

                               
1

𝜇𝜇(𝑇𝑇) =
1

𝜇𝜇imp + 
1

𝜇𝜇ph(𝑇𝑇).  
 
 
 
 
 
      (3) 

Here, term 1/𝜇𝜇imp describes contributions from all scattering events due to imperfections, such 

as impurities, defects, charge traps, surface/interface roughness etc., in the nanosheet, its surface 

native oxides and the dielectrics [15,50]. This term is, to the lowest order approximation, 

temperature independent. Term 1/ 𝜇𝜇ph  describes temperature-dependent contributions from 

acoustic and optical phonon scattering events. The mobility data extracted at different 

temperatures shown in Fig. 2(f) were fitted using Eq. (3) and the result of the fit is presented by 

the orange solid line in Fig. 2(f). The fit yields a value of 𝜇𝜇imp~7900 cm2 V-1 s-1 at the low 

temperature limit. At high temperatures (above ~100 K), the mobility is well fitted by a power 

law 𝜇𝜇~𝑇𝑇−𝛾𝛾 with 𝛾𝛾~2.11 as indicated by the black dashed line in Fig. 2(f). This power-law fit 

confirms that optical phonon scattering was the dominant factor for the limitation of the electron 

mobility in the nanosheet at the high temperatures [51,52]. Note that acoustic phonon scattering 

would yield a µ~𝑇𝑇−1 temperature dependence [53], which is not the case seen in Fig. 2(f).  

3.2. Electrical and magnetotransport measurements of the double-gate Hall-bar device  

Figure 3 shows transport measurements of the double-gate Hall-bar device at 𝑇𝑇 = 1.9 K. Figures 

3(a) and 3(b) show an optical image of an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure 

(before fabricating small markers) and an SEM image of the double-gate Hall-bar device made 

from the trilayer heterostructure, while Fig. 3(c) shows a schematic view of the layer structure of 

the device and the circuit setup for the application of top and bottom gate voltages VTG and VBG. 

In Fig. 3(a), two small, thick hBN pieces (marked by two black dotted lines), a large thin hBN 

piece (marked by a white dotted line), and a large graphite piece (marked by a purple dotted line) 

are seen. The thin hBN piece has a thickness of t~30 nm and has a large portion stacked on the 

graphite layer. The InSb nanosheet is seen to locate in the area marked by a black square on top 

of the stacked thin hBN/graphite bilayer. This InSb nanosheet has a width of 𝑊𝑊~ 900 nm and a 

thickness of ~30 nm (estimated based on the calibrated contrast in the SEM image) and is 


11 
 

contacted by six Ti/Au electrodes as shown in Fig. 3(b). The source and drain electrodes 1 and 6 

are ~1.7 μm apart, while the separations between probe electrodes 2 and 3 and between probe 

electrodes 3 and 5 are 𝐿𝐿23~850 nm and 𝑊𝑊35~500 nm, respectively. Note that the top gate and top 

gate dielectric cover almost the entire range of Fig. 3(b). 

 

Figure 3. Electrical and magnetotransport measurements of a double-gate Hall-bar device at 1.9 

K. (a) Optical image of the InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer used for fabrication of the 

device. The InSb nanosheet is located in the area indicated by a black square. White, black, and 

purple dotted lines mark the thin hBN, thick hBN, and graphite regions in the sample, 

respectively. (b) False-colored SEM image of the device and magnetotransport measurement 

circuit setup. The nanosheet has a width of ~900 nm and a thickness of ~30 nm. The distance 

between electrodes 1 and 6 is ~1.7 μm, while separation between probe electrodes 2 and 3 is 

~850 nm and that between probe electrodes 3 and 5 is ~500 nm. (c) Schematic view of the layer 

structure of the device and the circuit setup for the application of gate voltages VTG and VBG. (d) 

Gate-transfer characteristics of the device measured in a two-terminal configuration by applying a 

DC voltage of Vds=2 mV to electrodes 1 and 6 and recording the current through the InSb 

nanosheet channel Ids (with the conductance obtained through 𝐺𝐺 = 𝐼𝐼ds/𝑉𝑉ds) as a function of VTG 

and VBG. (e) Measured 𝐺𝐺 of the device as a function of 𝑉𝑉BG at 𝑉𝑉TG = 0 V (black curve). The 

red curve shows the fit of the on-state part of the measured data to Eqs. (1) and (2). (f) Measured 

𝑅𝑅xx (red) and  𝑅𝑅yx (black) of the device as a function of magnetic field B at 𝑉𝑉BG=0.5 V and 

 𝑉𝑉TG=0.5 V, i.e., a point marked by a black dot in (d). The measurements show well-defined 

Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. The arrows mark the magnetic field positions for a few even 

values of filling factor 𝜈𝜈. 


12 
 

Figure 3(d) shows the gate-transfer characteristics of the double-gate device measured in a 

two-terminal configuration by applying a DC voltage (𝑉𝑉ds) of 2 mV to the source and drain 

electrodes (electrodes 1 and 6), i.e., the source-drain current 𝐼𝐼ds as a function of the voltages 

applied to the bottom and top gates 𝑉𝑉BG and  𝑉𝑉TG [see the circuit setup for 𝑉𝑉BG and  𝑉𝑉TG in Fig. 

3(c)]. Owing to the short distances of the top and bottom gates to the InSb nanosheet, both gates 

show strong capacitive coupling to the nanosheet conduction channel. Figure 3(e) shows the 

measured two-terminal conductance 𝐺𝐺 = 𝐼𝐼ds/𝑉𝑉ds of the InSb nanosheet as a function of 𝑉𝑉BG 

at 𝑉𝑉TG = 0 V (black curve). The red curve in Fig. 3(e) shows the result of the fit of the measured 

on-state transfer characteristic data to Eqs. (1) and (2). With use of the channel length 𝐿𝐿 = 1.7 

μm, the channel width 𝑊𝑊 = 900 nm, and the hBN thickness 𝑡𝑡 = 30 nm, a field-effect mobility 

of 𝜇𝜇FE~7200 cm2 V-1 s-1 can be extracted for the InSb nanosheet from the fit. Note that the 

extracted bottom-gate threshold voltage from the fit is slightly negative, which is different from 

the extracted value for the single bottom gate device as shown in Fig. 2(d). This difference is 

most likely due to the fact that the nanosheet in the double-gate Hall-bar device is about 50% 

thicker than the nanosheet in the single bottom-gate device and thus the conduction band in the 

nanosheet of the double gate device is less pushed up in energy by quantum confinement and the 

fact that the top gate voltage has been set to zero giving a heterostructure band alignment 

favorable for conduction channel opening at zero bottom-gate voltage.    

Figure 3(f) shows the measured  𝑅𝑅xx (red) and  𝑅𝑅yx (black) as a function of magnetic field 

𝐵𝐵 with both top and bottom gate voltages set at 0.5 V [i.e., at a point indicated by a black dot in 

Fig. 3(d)]. From the measured  𝑅𝑅yx − 𝐵𝐵 curve at low magnetic fields, the Hall coefficient 

𝑅𝑅H~1030 Ω/T and the sheet electron density 𝑛𝑛sheet~ 6.1 × 1011 cm−2 in the InSb nanosheet 

can be obtained. The electron Hall mobility 𝜇𝜇Hall in the nanosheet can be estimated from the 

measured longitudinal resistance  𝑅𝑅xx at zero magnetic field and the sheet electron density 

𝑛𝑛sheet via, 

  𝜇𝜇Hall =
𝐿𝐿23
𝐿𝐿

1

𝑅𝑅xx𝑛𝑛sheet𝑒𝑒.  
 
 
 
 
 
      (4) 

Using 𝐿𝐿23~850 nm, 𝑊𝑊~ 900 nm, the zero-field value of  𝑅𝑅xx~850 Ω, and the sheet electron 

density 𝑛𝑛sheet~ 6.1 × 1011 cm−2, a Hall mobility value of 𝜇𝜇Hall~ 1.1×104 cm2 V-1 s-1 is obtained. 

Note that if 𝑊𝑊35~500 nm is used instead of 𝑊𝑊~ 900 nm in the calculation, a higher value of 

𝜇𝜇Hall~ 2.0×104 cm2 V-1 s-1 would be obtained. The actual sheet Hall mobility at 𝑉𝑉BG=0.5 V and 

 𝑉𝑉TG=0.5 V would be a value in between the two above values. The measured Hall resistance 

 𝑅𝑅yx at high fields displays step-like structures, indicating appearance of the quantum Hall effect 


13 
 

as a result of the formation of the Landau levels (LLs). In the same time, the longitudinal 

resistance  𝑅𝑅xx at high fields displays several pronounced peaks and valleys, i.e., well-defined 

Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. The Shubnikov-de Haas oscillation peaks appear at the magnetic 

fields where the LLs coincide with the Fermi energy. Because each spin-split LL is highly 

degenerate with a unit area degeneracy of 𝑒𝑒𝐵𝐵/ℎ (where ℎ is the Planck constant), the filling 

factor (FF), i.e., the number of spin-split LLs filled by electrons at each oscillation valley is given 

by 𝜈𝜈 = 𝑛𝑛𝑑𝑑ℎ𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑡𝑡ℎ/𝑒𝑒𝐵𝐵. The black arrows in Fig. 3(f) mark the magnetic field positions in the 

Shubnikov-de Haas oscillation valleys at which the filling factors 𝜈𝜈 at a few even values can be 

identified. 

 

4. Conclusions 

In conclusion, a method of fabrication of micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer 

heterostructures has been developed, and single- and double-gate devices have been made from 

the fabricated trilayer heterostructures on SiO2/Si substrates. The method employs duplicated 

patterns on the transparent stacking/transfer stamps for position determination of hardly visible 

InSb nanosheets under the optical microscope and, thus, enables stacking of micrometer or 

smaller InSb nanosheets on exfoliated hBN flakes and on exfoliated graphite flakes. Based on the 

fabricated InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures, a single-gate InSb nanosheet 

field-effect device and a double-gate InSb nanosheet Hall-bar device are fabricated on SiO2/Si 

substrates, where the hBN flakes are used as the bottom gate dielectrics and the graphite flakes as 

bottom gates. The fabricated devices are characterized by electrical and magnetotransport 

measurements. The measurements show that the InSb nanosheet in the single-gate field-effect 

device has an electron field-effect mobility of ~7300 cm2 V-1 s-1 and a low gate hysteresis of 

~0.05 V at 1.9 K, demonstrating an effective screening of charge traps in the SiO2 dielectrics by 

the graphite gate. The double-gate Hall-bar device exhibits strong capacitive couplings of the two 

gates to the InSb nanosheet channel, and a Hall mobility of larger than 1.1 × 104 cm2 V-1 s-1 as 

well as well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations at the sheet electron density of 6.1 × 1011 

cm-2 and 1.9 K. The fabrication method established in this work should have the potential to be 

widely used in assembling heterostructures from many tiny sized planar materials for applications 

in nanoelectronics, spintronics, and quantum electronics.  

 

Acknowledgments 

This work has been supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China through the 


14 
 

National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant Nos. 2017YFA0303304 and 

2017YFA0204901), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 92165208, 

92065106, 61974138, 11874071, 91221202, and 91421303), and the Beijing Academy of 

Quantum Information Sciences (Grant No. Y18G22). D. P. also acknowledges support from the 

Youth Innovation Promotion Association, Chinese Academy of Sciences (2017156). 

 

Data availability statement 

All data that support the findings of this study are included within the article and its 

Supplementary Information. 

 
 


15 
 

References 

[1]  Gul O, van Woerkom D J, Weperen I, Car D, Plissard S R, Bakkers E P and Kouwenhoven L P 
2015 Towards high mobility InSb nanowire devices Nanotechnology 26 215202 

[2]  Fan D, Kang N, Ghalamestani S G, Dick K A and Xu H Q 2016 Schottky barrier and contact 
resistance of InSb nanowire field-effect transistors Nanotechnology 27 275204 

[3]  Takase K, Tateno K and Sasaki S 2019 Efficient gate control of spin–orbit interaction in InSb 
nanowire FET with a nearby back gate Appl. Phys. Express 12 117002 

[4]  Kulesh I, Ke C T, Thomas C, Karwal S, Moehle C M, Metti S, Kallaher R, Gardner G C, Manfra 
M J and Goswami S 2020 Quantum dots in an InSb two-dimensional electron gas Phys. Rev. Appl. 
13 041003 

[5]  Nilsson H A, Caroff P, Thelander C, Larsson M, Wagner J B, Wernersson L E, Samuelson L and 
Xu H Q 2009 Giant, level-dependent g factors in InSb nanowire quantum dots Nano Lett. 9 
3151-6  

[6]  Fan D, Li S, Kang N, Caroff P, Wang L B, Huang Y Q, Deng M T, Yu C L and Xu H Q 2015 
Formation of long single quantum dots in high quality InSb nanowires grown by molecular beam 
epitaxy Nanoscale 7 14822-8 

[7]  Pribiag V S, Nadj-Perge S, Frolov S M, van den Berg J W, van Weperen I, Plissard S R, Bakkers E 
P and Kouwenhoven L P 2013 Electrical control of single hole spins in nanowire quantum dots 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 8 170-4 

[8]  Alicea J 2012 New directions in the pursuit of Majorana fermions in solid state systems Rep. Prog. 
Phys. 75 076501 

[9]  Nilsson H A, Samuelsson P, Caroff P and Xu H Q 2012 Supercurrent and multiple Andreev 
reflections in an InSb nanowire Josephson junction Nano Lett. 12 228-33  

[10]  Mourik V, Zuo K, Frolov S M, Plissard S R, Bakkers E P A M and Kouwenhoven L P 2012 
Signatures of Majorana fermions in hybrid superconductor-semiconductor nanowire devices 
Science 336 1003–7 

[11]  Deng M, Yu C, Huang G, Larsson M, Caroff P and Xu H 2012 Anomalous zero-bias conductance 
peak in a Nb–InSb nanowire–Nb hybrid device Nano Lett. 12 6414-9 

[12]  Gül O n, Zhang H, de Vries F K, van Veen J, Zuo K, Mourik V, Conesa-Boj S, Nowak M P, Van 
Woerkom D J and Quintero-Pérez M 2017 Hard superconducting gap in InSb nanowires Nano Lett. 
17 2690-6 

[13]  Gouider F, Vasilyev Y B, Bugár M, Könemann J, Buckle P D and Nachtwei G 2010 Terahertz 
photoresponse of AlInSb/InSb/AlInSb quantum well structures Phys. Rev. B 81 155304 

[14]  Qu F, van Veen J, de Vries F K, Beukman A J, Wimmer M, Yi W, Kiselev A A, Nguyen B M, 
Sokolich M, Manfra M J, Nichele F, Marcus C M and Kouwenhoven L P 2016 Quantized 
Conductance and Large g-Factor Anisotropy in InSb Quantum Point Contacts Nano Lett. 16 
7509-13 

[15]  McIndo C J, Hayes D G, Papageorgiou A, Hanks L A, Smith G V, Allford C P, Zhang S, Clarke E 
M and Buckle P D 2017 Determination of the transport lifetime limiting scattering rate in InSb/ 
AlxIn1−xSb quantum wells using optical surface microscopy Physica E: Low-dimensional Systems 
and Nanostructures 91 169-72 

[16]  Hayes D G, Allford C P, Smith G V, McIndo C, Hanks L A, Gilbertson A M, Cohen L F, Zhang S, 
Clarke E M and Buckle P D 2017 Electron transport lifetimes in InSb/Al1-xInxSb quantum well 
2DEGs Semiconductor Science and Technology 32 085002 


16 
 

[17]  Masuda T, Sekine K, Nagase K, Wickramasinghe K S, Mishima T D, Santos M B and Hirayama Y 
2018 Transport characteristics of InSb trench-type in-plane gate quantum point contact Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 112 192103 

[18]  Ke C T, Moehle C M, de Vries F K et al 2019 Ballistic superconductivity and tunable π–junctions 
in InSb quantum wells Nat. Commun. 10 3764 

[19]  Lei Z, Lehner C A, Cheah E, Karalic M, Mittag C, Alt L, Scharnetzky J, Wegscheider W, Ihn T 
and Ensslin K 2019 Quantum transport in high-quality shallow InSb quantum wells Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 115 012101 

[20]  Lei Z, Lehner C A, Rubi K, Cheah E, Karalic M, Mittag C, Alt L, Scharnetzky J, Märki P and 
Zeitler U 2020 Electronic g-factor and magneto-transport in InSb quantum wells Phys. Rev. 
Research 2 033213  

[21]  Lei Z, Lehner C A, Cheah E, Mittag C, Karalic M, Wegscheider W, Ensslin K and Ihn T 2021 
Gate-defined quantum point contact in an InSb two-dimensional electron gas Phys. Rev. Research 
3 023042  

[22]  Pan D, Fan D X, Kang N, Zhi J H, Yu X Z, Xu H Q and Zhao J H 2016 Free-standing 
two-dimensional single-crystalline InSb nanosheets Nano Lett. 16 834-41 

[23]  de la Mata M, Leturcq R, Plissard S R, Rolland C, Magen C, Arbiol J and Caroff P 2016 
Twin-induced InSb nanosails: A convenient high mobility quantum system Nano Lett. 16 825-33 

[24]  Gazibegovic S, Badawy G, Buckers T L J, Leubner P, Shen J, de Vries F K, Koelling S, 
Kouwenhoven L P, Verheijen M A and Bakkers E 2019 Bottom-up grown 2D InSb nanostructures 
Adv. Mater. 31 1808181 

[25]  Verma I, Salimian S, Zannier V, Heun S, Rossi F, Ercolani D, Beltram F and Sorba L 2021 
High-mobility free-standing InSb nanoflags grown on InP nanowire stems for quantum devices 
ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 4 5825-33 

[26]  Kang N, Fan D, Zhi J, Pan D, Li S, Wang C, Guo J, Zhao J and Xu H 2019 Two-dimensional 
quantum transport in free-standing InSb nanosheets Nano Lett. 19 561-9 

[27]  Zhi J, Kang N, Li S, Fan D, Su F, Pan D, Zhao S, Zhao J and Xu H 2019 Supercurrent and 
Multiple Andreev Reflections in InSb Nanosheet SNS Junctions Phys. Status Solidi (b) 256 
1800538 

[28]  de Vries F K, Sol M L, Gazibegovic S, Veld R L M o h, Balk S C, Car D, Bakkers E P A M, 
Kouwenhoven L P and Shen J 2019 Crossed Andreev reflection in InSb flake Josephson junctions 
Phys. Rev. Research 1 032031 

[29]  Xue J, Chen Y, Pan D, Wang J-Y, Zhao J, Huang S and Xu H Q 2019 Gate defined quantum dot 
realized in a single crystalline InSb nanosheet Appl. Phys. Lett. 114 023108 

[30]  Chen Y, Huang S, Mu J, Pan D, Zhao J and Xu H Q 2021 A double quantum dot defined by top 
gates in a single crystalline InSb nanosheet Chin. Phys. B 30 128501 

[31]  Chen Y, Huang S, Pan D, Xue J, Zhang L, Zhao J and Xu H Q 2021 Strong and tunable spin–orbit 
interaction in a single crystalline InSb nanosheet npj 2D Mater. Appl. 5 3 

[32]  Li L, Yang F, Ye G J, Zhang Z, Zhu Z, Lou W, Zhou X, Li L, Watanabe K, Taniguchi T, Chang K, 
Wang Y, Chen X H and Zhang Y 2016 Quantum Hall effect in black phosphorus two-dimensional 
electron system Nat Nanotechnol 11 593-7 

[33]  Larentis S, Movva H C P, Fallahazad B, Kim K, Behroozi A, Taniguchi T, Watanabe K, Banerjee S 
K and Tutuc E 2018 Large effective mass and interaction-enhanced Zeeman splitting of K-valley 
electrons in MoSe2 Phys. Rev. B 97 201407 


17 
 

[34]  Iwasaki T, Endo K, Watanabe E, Tsuya D, Morita Y, Nakaharai S, Noguchi Y, Wakayama Y, 
Watanabe K, Taniguchi T and Moriyama S 2020 Bubble-free transfer technique for high-quality 
graphene/hexagonal boron nitride van der Waals heterostructures ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12 
8533-8 

[35]  Wu L, Wang A, Shi J, Yan J, Zhou Z, Bian C, Ma J, Ma R, Liu H, Chen J, Huang Y, Zhou W, Bao 
L, Ouyang M, Pennycook S J, Pantelides S T and Gao H J 2021 Atomically sharp interface 
enabled ultrahigh-speed non-volatile memory devices Nat Nanotechnol 16 882-7 

[36]  Dean C R, Young A F, Meric I, Lee C, Wang L, Sorgenfrei S, Watanabe K, Taniguchi T, Kim P, 
Shepard K L and Hone J 2010 Boron nitride substrates for high-quality graphene electronics Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 5 722-6 

[37]  Wang L, Meric I, Huang P, Gao Q, Gao Y, Tran H, Taniguchi T, Watanabe K, Campos L and 
Muller D 2013 One-dimensional electrical contact to a two-dimensional material Science 342 
614-7 

[38]  Cui X, Lee G H, Kim Y D, Arefe G, Huang P Y, Lee C H, Chenet D A, Zhang X, Wang L, Ye F, 
Pizzocchero F, Jessen B S, Watanabe K, Taniguchi T, Muller D A, Low T, Kim P and Hone J 2015 
Multi-terminal transport measurements of MoS2 using a van der Waals heterostructure device 
platform Nat. Nanotechnol. 10 534-40 

[39]  Wu Z, Xu S, Lu H, Khamoshi A, Liu G B, Han T, Wu Y, Lin J, Long G, He Y, Cai Y, Yao Y, Zhang 
F and Wang N 2016 Even-odd layer-dependent magnetotransport of high-mobility Q-valley 
electrons in transition metal disulfides Nat. Commun. 7 12955 

[40]  Movva H C P, Fallahazad B, Kim K, Larentis S, Taniguchi T, Watanabe K, Banerjee S K and 
Tutuc E 2017 Density-dependent quantum Hall states and Zeeman splitting in monolayer and 
bilayer WSe2 Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 247701 

[41]  Li L, Ye G J, Tran V, Fei R, Chen G, Wang H, Wang J, Watanabe K, Taniguchi T and Yang L 2015 
Quantum oscillations in a two-dimensional electron gas in black phosphorus thin films Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 10 608-13 

[42]  Chen X, Wu Y, Wu Z, Han Y, Xu S, Wang L, Ye W, Han T, He Y, Cai Y and Wang N 2015 
High-quality sandwiched black phosphorus heterostructure and its quantum oscillations Nat. 
Commun. 6 7315 

[43]  Kammhuber J, Cassidy M C, Zhang H, Gül O n, Pei F, de Moor M W, Nijholt B, Watanabe K, 
Taniguchi T and Car D 2016 Conductance quantization at zero magnetic field in InSb nanowires 
Nano Lett. 16 3482-6 

[44]  Jekat F, Pestka B, Car D, Gazibegović S, Flöhr K, Heedt S, Schubert J, Liebmann M, Bakkers E P 
and Schäpers T 2020 Exfoliated hexagonal BN as gate dielectric for InSb nanowire quantum dots 
with improved gate hysteresis and charge noise Appl. Phys. Lett. 116 253101 

[45]  Pan D, Wang J Y, Zhang W, Zhu L, Su X, Fan F, Fu Y, Huang S, Wei D, Zhang L, Sui M, Yartsev 
A, Xu H and Zhao J 2019 Dimension engineering of high-quality InAs nanostructures on a wafer 
scale Nano Lett. 19 1632-42 

[46]  Orr J M S, Gilbertson A M, Fearn M, Croad O W, Storey C J, Buckle L, Emeny M T, Buckle P D 
and Ashley T 2008 Electronic transport in modulation-doped InSb quantum well heterostructures 
Phys. Rev. B 77 165334 

[47]  Guo Y, Wei X, Shu J, Liu B, Yin J, Guan C, Han Y, Gao S and Chen Q 2015 Charge trapping at the 
MoS2-SiO2 interface and its effects on the characteristics of MoS2 metal-oxide-semiconductor field 
effect transistors Appl. Phys. Lett. 106 103109 


18 
 

[48]  Hollinger G, Bergignat E, Joseph J and Robach Y 1983 Native oxide formation and electrical 
instabilities at the insulator/InP interface J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 1 778-81 

[49]  Sun J, Lind E, Maximov I and Xu H Q 2011 Memristive and memcapacitive characteristics of a 
Au/Ti–HfO2-InP/InGaAs diode IEEE Electron Device Letters 32 131-3 

[50]  Lehner C A, Tschirky T, Ihn T, Dietsche W, Keller J, Fält S and Wegscheider W 2018 
Limiting scattering processes in high-mobility InSb quantum wells grown on GaSb buffer 
systems Physical Review Materials 2 054601 

[51]  Hrostowski H J, Morin F J, Geballe T H and Wheatley G H 1955 Hall effect and conductivity of 
InSb Physical Review 100 1672 

[52]  Hiyamizu S, Fujii T, Mimura T, Nanbu K, Saito J and Hashimoto H 1981 The effect of growth 
temperature on the mobility of two-dimensional electron gas in selectively doped GaAs/N-AlGaAs 
heterostructures grown by MBE Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 20 455-8 

[53]  Arora V K and Naeem A 1985 Phonon-scattering-limited mobility in a quantum-well 
heterostructure Phys. Rev. B Condens Matter 31 3887-92 

 
 

 


1 
 

Supplementary Information for 

Fabrication and characterization of InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite 

heterostructure devices 

Li Zhang1, Yuanjie Chen1, Dong Pan2, Shaoyun Huang1, Jianhua Zhao2, and H. Q. Xu1,3,* 

1Beijing Key Laboratory of Quantum Devices, Key Laboratory for the Physics and Chemistry of 

Nanodevices, and School of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 

2State Key Laboratory of Superlattices and Microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 912, Beijing 100083, China 

3Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China 

*Corresponding author: hqxu@pku.edu.cn 

(Date: April 18, 2022) 

 

 

Outline 

S1. InSb nanosheet, hBN and graphite flake materials, and stamps 

S2. Process details for fabrication of InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures 

S3. Hysteresis in gate voltage in the single-gate field-effect device at different temperatures  

 

 

S1. InSb nanosheet, hBN and graphite flake materials, and stamps 

The planar InSb nanosheet/hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)/graphite trilayer devices studied in 

the main article were made from free-standing InSb nanosheet, thin hBN flakes and graphite 

flakes. The free-standing InSb nanosheets were grown on InAs nanowire stems on a Si(111) 

substrate by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The growth process was started by depositing a thin 

layer of Ag on the Si(111) substrate in a MBE chamber. The sample was then annealed in situ to 

generate Ag nanoparticles. Subsequently, InAs nanowires were grown on these Ag nanoparticles at 

a temperature of 505 ℃ for 20 min with the As/In beam equivalent pressure ratio being set at 30. 

After that, the group-Ⅴ source was switched abruptly from As to Sb and free-standing InSb 

nanosheets were formed on top of InAs nanowires by gradually increasing the Sb flux while 

maintaining the In flux unchanged. As-grown InSb nanosheets were examined by scanning 

electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy measurements. The measurements 

showed that the nanosheets were zincblende crystals, free from stacking faults and twin defects 

and were ~1 µm in lateral size and ~10-80 nm in thickness. The MBE grown InSb nanosheets 


2 
 

were mechanically picked up using a dry clean-room paper and were then randomly distributed on 

the surface of a SiO2/Si substrate with prefabricated, optically visible Ti/Au markers on top 

(sample substrate A). The hBN and graphite flakes were obtained by mechanical exfoliation from 

commercially available bulk hBN (from HQ Graphene) and graphite (from Graphene Supermarket) 

materials using Scotch tapes and were transferred on other two marker-prefabricated SiO2/Si 

substrates (sample substrates B and C). Here, we note that before attaching the hBN- or 

graphite-loaded tapes to substrates B and C, the surfaces of the substrates were cleaned by oxygen 

plasma. While after the tapes were attached, the samples B and C were heated at 100 ℃ on a hot 

plate for a few minutes before tape separation in order to obtain flakes with large lateral sizes [1]. 

After tape separation, the entire samples B and C were dipped in acetone to remove the residues of 

the adhesive substances and organic contamination on the material surfaces.     

In order to assemble prepared micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet on hBN flakes and then on 

graphite flakes to form InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures, transparent stamps 

were also needed. In the work presented in the main article, the transparent stamps were made first 

by spin coating of polypropylene carbonate (PPC) (from Sigma Aldrich, 20% concentration 

dissolved in tetrahydrofuran) onto a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) sheet [2]. The PPC/PDMS 

layer was then baked at 90 ℃ for 10 min and was cut into small stamps of about 3 mm × 3 mm in 

size.  

 

S2. Process details for fabrication of InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures 

The fabrication of InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures was carried out 

using a home-made alignment stacking/transfer system equipped with an optical microscope, a 

micro-positioner, a sample stage (from Instec) with a vacuum chuck and a temperature controller. 

Figure S1 shows the schematics for the process of fabrication of an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite 

trilayer heterostructure. First, as shown in the bottom graph of Fig. S1(a), a PPC/PDMS stamp was 

placed onto a glass microscope slide. The glass microscope slide was then flipped upside down 

and was mounted on the micro-positioner with the PPC film facing down, as shown in the top 

graph of Fig. S1(a). Next, sample substrate A was placed on the sample stage and was fixed firmly 

via the vacuum chuck, and the region containing markers was brought into focus in the field of 

view of the optical microscope as shown in Fig. S1(b). Here and after, for clarity, we only 

illustrate a magnified view of the region, where the target materials were seen and to be positioned, 

aligned, captured, and/or released, in Figs. S1(b)-S1(i). The middle graph of Fig. S1(b) shows 

schematically a region of the glass microscope slide with a part of the PDMS/PPC stamp that was 

used to pick up materials. By adjusting the micro-positioner, the stamp was coarsely positioned 


3 
 

over an area of sample substrate A, where an InSb nanosheet located beside marker ‘11’ was found, 

see Fig. S1(b). After aligning the stamp with the area on sample substrate A, the stamp was 

lowered until the PPC film touched the surface of sample substrate A, as shown in Fig. S1(c). 

Then, the substrate A was heated up through heating the sample stage to a temperature of 35-40 ℃, 

a temperature at which the PPC film had transformed from a rigid glassy state to a soft rubberlike 

state [3,4] and became ductile and easily deformable. The tight contact between the PPC film and 

sample substrate A was maintained by pressing the stamp against sample substrate A. After 3-5 

min, the stamp with adhesion of the InSb nanosheet on the PPC surface was lifted from sample 

substrate A [see Fig. S1(d)], and the sample stage, sample substrate A and the PDMS/PPC stamp 

were cooled down to room temperature. After being cooled down in temperature, the PPC film 

returned to the glassy state with clear patterns of the markers on substrate A being duplicated on 

the PPC surface [Fig. S1(d)]. 

To assemble the picked-up InSb nanosheet on an exfoliated hBN flake, sample substrate A 

was replaced with sample substrate B on the sample stage and the region containing the hBN flake 

was brought into focus in the field of view of the optical microscope. Here, the key step of 

assembling the InSb nanosheet on the hBN flake is an optical alignment of the InSb nanosheet to 

the hBN flake. However, since the size of the picked-up InSb nanosheet was at a micrometer or 

sub-micrometer scale and the image seen through the stamp was not sharp, the captured InSb 

nanosheet appeared to be a faint speck submerging in a vast blurred background, making the 

alignment process difficult. To make the alignment efficiently, the duplicated patterns on the PPC 

surface, which had a size of about 8 micrometers, were located in the following fabrication step. 

As the stamp was lowered closer and closer to sample substrate B, the duplicated patterns on the 

PPC surface became more and more focused [see Fig. S1(e)] and the region beside pattern ‘11’ 

was aligned with the hBN flake by fine adjusting the positions of the micro-positioner and the 

sample stage. Once aligned, the PPC film on the stamp was brought into contact with the surface 

of sample substrate B, as shown in Fig. S1(f). Then, substrate B was heated to a temperature of 

35-40 ℃ and the PPC film maintained tight contact to the surface of sample substrate B by 

keeping the stamp pressed against sample substrate B. The PPC film was converted to the 

rubberlike state again and deformed within a couple of seconds after the temperature rise, as 

demonstrated by evanescence of the duplicated patterns on the PPC film [Fig. S1(f)]. After 5 min, 

the stamp with adhesion of the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer on the PPC surface was lifted from 

sample substrate B [see the upper graph in Fig. S1(g)], and the sample stage, sample substrate B 

and the stamp were cooled down to room temperature again. 

 


4 
 

 

FIG. S1. Schematic process flow of an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure 

fabrication. (a) Bottom graph: a PPC/PDMS stamp was placed on the glass microscope slide. Top 

graph: the glass microscope slide was clamped on the micro-positioner. (b) Top graph: optical 

microscope. Middle graph: magnified view of the region of the glass microscope slide with the 

PDMS/PPC stamp. Bottom graph: sample substrate A, with a micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet 

and predefined markers, on the sample stage (not shown). (c) The PPC film in tight contact to 

sample substrate A. (d) The stamp with picked up InSb nanosheet was lifted from sample substrate 

A. Here a visible pattern of the substrate markers duplicated on the PPC film is also indicated. (e) 

Sample substrate A was replaced with sample substrate B. The stamp was lowered and the region 

beside the duplicated pattern ‘11’ was aligned with a target hBN flake on sample substrate B. (f) 

The PPC film was in contact to sample substrate B. (g) The target hBN flake had been picked up, 

leading to the formation of the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer on the PPC surface. Then sample 

substrate B was replaced by sample substrate C and a graphite flake on substrate C was aligned 

with the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer. (h) The PPC film was in contact to sample substrate C. (i) 

The PPC film was released from the PDMS and the PPC film/InSb nanosheet/hBN structure was 

stacked onto the graphite flake. Later the sample was dipped in acetone to remove the PPC film, 

leaving a micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure on substrate C. 


5 
 

Afterwards, sample substrate B was replaced with sample substrate C on the sample stage [see 

lower graph in Fig. S1(g)] and the region containing the target graphite flake on sample substrate 

C was brought into focus in the field of view of the optical microscope. Then, the stamp was 

lowered and the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer was aligned with the graphite flake, with the help of 

the large sized hBN flake, by adjusting the positions of the micro-positioner and the sample stage. 

After the PPC film on the stamp was brought into contact with the surface of sample substrate C 

[Fig. S1(h)], the substrate C was heated to a temperature of 120 ℃. After 10 min, the stamp was 

lifted from sample substrate C with the PPC film being released from the PDMS and the PPC 

film/InSb nanosheet/hBN structure being stacked onto the graphite flake. Finally, the sample was 

dipped in acetone to remove the PPC film, leaving an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer 

heterostructure on sample substrate C, as shown in Fig. S1(i). 

 

S3. Hysteresis in gate voltage in the single-gate field-effect device at different temperatures 

 

FIG. S2. The transfer characteristic curves of the InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite heterostructure 

single-gate field-effect device measured at different temperatures. The hysteresis increases with 

increasing temperature. The directions of gate voltage sweeping are indicated by the arrows.  

 

In this section, the observation of the gate hysteresis in the gate-transfer characteristic 

measurements of the single-gate field-effect device as studied in the main article at high 

temperatures is briefly presented. Figure S2 shows the gate-transfer characteristic curves of the 

single-gate field-effect device measured at temperatures of T = 1.9, 100 and 250 K with the gate 

voltage being swept in both upward and downward directions. Here the measurement data at 1.9 K 


6 
 

are the same as those shown in Fig. 2(d) of the main article. It is seen that the gate hysteresis in the 

measured gate-transfer characteristic curve at 1.9 K is ~0.05 V, while gate hysteresis becomes 

~0.56 V at 100 K, and ~1.16 V at 250 K (i.e., gate hysteresis becomes larger at a higher 

temperature. Similar gate hysteresis has been observed in the devices made with an oxidized layer 

as a gate dielectric and has been attributed dominantly to charge trapping and de-trapping 

processes in the oxide dielectric layer [5-7]. Here, the gate hysteresis observed in the InSb 

nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer single-gate field-effect device is primarily due to the charge 

trapping and de-trapping processes in the InSb native oxidized layer located between the InSb 

nanosheet and the hBN flake. Such charge trapping and de-trapping processes become more and 

more active with increasing temperature, leading a larger gate hysteresis at a higher temperature in 

consistence with the observation shown in Fig. S2. 

 

References 

[1] Huang Y, Sutter E, Shi N N, Zheng J, Yang T, Englund D, Gao H-J and Sutter P 2015 Reliable 
exfoliation of large-area high-quality flakes of graphene and other two-dimensional materials ACS 
Nano 9 10612-20  

[2] Kumar A and Whitesides G M 1993 Features of gold having micrometer to centimeter dimensions 
can be formed through a combination of stamping with an elastomeric stamp and an alkanethiol 
‘‘ink’’ followed by chemical etching Appl. Phys. Lett. 63 2002-4  

[3]  Luinstra G A and Borchardt E 2012 Material properties of Poly(Propylene Carbonates) Adv Polym 
Sci 245 29–48  

[4]  Cowie J. M. G. and Arrighi V. 2007 Polymers: Chemistry and Physics of Modern Materials, 3rd Edn. 
(Florida: CRC Press) 

[5]  Guo Y, Wei X, Shu J, Liu B, Yin J, Guan C, Han Y, Gao S and Chen Q 2015 Charge trapping at the 
MoS2-SiO2 interface and its effects on the characteristics of MoS2 metal-oxide-semiconductor field 
effect transistors Appl. Phys. Lett. 106 103109 

[6]  Hollinger G, Bergignat E, Joseph J and Robach Y 1983 Native oxide formation and electrical 
instabilities at the insulator/InP interface J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 1 778-81 

[7]  Sun J, Lind E, Maximov I and Xu H Q 2011 Memristive and memcapacitive characteristics of a 
Au/Ti–HfO2-InP/InGaAs diode IEEE Electron Device Letters 32 131-3 

 
 


