Preferred corrosion pathways for oxygen in Al2Ca – twin boundaries and 
dislocations

Nicolas J. Peter,1,2 Daniela Zander, 3 Xumeng Cao,4 Chunhua Tian,1 Siyuan 
Zhang,1 Kui Du,4 Christina Scheu1 and Gerhard Dehm1,a) 

1Max-Planck Institute for Iron Research, Max-Planck-Strasse 1, 40237 Düsseldorf, Germany

2Institute of Energy and Climate Research (IEK-2), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, 52425 Jülich, Germany

3Chair of Corrosion and Corrosion Protection, Division of Materials Science and Engineering, RWTH Aachen 

University, Intzestrasse 5, 52072 Aachen, Germany

4Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Chinese Academy of Science, 110016 Shenyang, China

With an ongoing discussion on the oxygen diffusion along crystal defects remaining, it is difficult to study this

phenomenon in Al containing intermetallic materials due to its rapid and passivating oxide formation. We report here the

observation of enhanced oxygen diffusion along crystal defects, i.e. dislocations and twin boundaries, in the C15 Al 2Ca

Laves phase and how the presence of oxygen induces structural changes at these defects. Three main phases were

identified  and  characterized  structurally  by aberration-corrected,  atomic  resolution  scanning  transmission  electron

microscopy, analytically by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and electron energy loss spectroscopy. Unlike the C15

bulk phase, the twin boundary and dislocation transformed into a few nanometer wide amorphous phase, which depletes

in Al and Ca but is highly enriched in oxygen. The dislocation even shows coexistence of the amorphous phase with a

simple Al-rich A1 fcc phase. This A1 phase only depletes in Ca, not in Al (Al remains at bulk concentration), and is also

enriched in oxygen. The Al-rich A1 phase is coherent with the C15 matrix. Electron energy loss spectroscopy revealed

the amorphous phase to be Al2O3. We thereby show as one of the first studies that oxygen diffusion along crystal defects,

especially  also  at  the  twin  boundary  can  induce  the  formation  of  an  amorphous  oxide  along  themselves.  The

identification of oxygen-induced transformation at strained defects has to be considered when the material is exposed to

air during plastic deformation at elevated temperatures.

  

a) Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail: dehm@mpie.de

1


MAIN TEXT

Magnesium alloys belong to the lightest structural  metals but exhibit low room temperature  ductility and creep

resistance. Al and Ca additions to such alloys were found to be beneficial in order to improve their creep resistance 1,

strength and particularly their ductility2, as well as their corrosion properties3. In this context, the formation of the

intermetallic C15 Al2Ca Laves phase and its positive influence on ductility is recently discussed e.g. for dilute Mg-Al-Ca

alloys3. However, there are only limited studies on the properties of the isolated Al 2Ca phase in terms of its mechanical

behavior4. Besides, there is still an ongoing discussion whether or not crystal defects, and in particular dislocations and

twin boundaries, provide a fast diffusion pathway for oxygen species in alloys and intermetallic materials5–9. These

defects could thereby critically influence oxidation rates of such materials, while being necessary for carrying plastic

deformation. Specific attention is paid to the understanding of the transport mechanisms influenced by space charge

regions, (interfacial) strain, segregation and electronic transfer along interfaces. 

So far, very limited studies on the diffusion of oxygen in the intermetallic C15 Al 2Ca phase is available. Even for fcc

aluminum and its alloys investigations on dislocation and twin boundary driven oxygen diffusion mechanisms are scarce

due to the rapid formation of the surface oxide. Only recently, the diffusion of interstitial oxygen in fcc aluminum has

been studied using first-principles10. In contrast to most fcc metals, oxygen sits on the tetrahedral interstitial and not on

the octahedral sites. However, the calculated oxygen diffusion coefficient is on the same order of magnitude of the

diffusion coefficient in other fcc metals and has been calculated to be about 1.6×10-23 m²/s at 273 K and 4.5×10-11 m²/s at

873 K10. Notably, the introduction of such an oxygen interstitial changed the cell volume (strain) by about 1.5 %. 

Alumina scales forming on crystalline interfaces and surfaces were already studied extensively in dry and humid oxygen

atmospheres since the 19th century11–15. It was reported that the formation of either amorphous or crystalline oxide can

occur based on thermodynamic (energetic) arguments16. For thin films, the sum of the surface energy of an amorphous

oxide and interface energy between metal and amorphous metal oxide is lower than the oxide’s bulk energy. At the point

where the summed up interfacial contributions equal the oxide’s bulk energy, a critical thickness is reached to form

crystalline metal oxide. This critical thickness of metal oxides forming on metal surfaces has been calculated to be one or

two atomic layers for (111) Al substrates up to about 4 nm for (110) Al at room temperature, which can increase to about

0.5 nm and 7 nm at 900 K16. In addition, it was assumed that the low diffusion coefficient of aluminum species at low

temperatures  < 573 K result in an amorphous oxide layer with a limited but uniform thickness whereas at higher

temperatures > 673 K the initial amorphous oxide layer transforms into γ-Al2O3 after prolonged oxidation14. Another

experimental study confirmed this transformation on an epitaxially grown thin film17. Only recently, ab initio simulations

2


on the formation and stability of amorphous, γ-Al2O3 and α-Al2O3 were published and related to the thermodynamic

driving forces behind the initial phase selection among amorphous and crystalline structures growing on a fcc (111)

aluminum substrate. It was found that γ-Al2O3 becomes more stable than the amorphous polymorph for layer thicknesses

down to  ∼1 nm at 600 K, whereas below 1 nm the amorphous layer becomes more stable18. However, there is no

information on the oxygen transport as well as the nucleation and growth mechanism of the metal oxides formed at

dislocations and twin boundaries and in particular of the Al2Ca Laves phase. As a consequence, the aim of the present

study is to discuss the influence of dislocations, and twin boundaries acting as 1) fast oxygen pathways and 2) preferred

nucleation sites for the oxygen-induced formation of amorphous Al2O3 for the Al2Ca Laves phase.

The used material was cast at a target Al:Ca ratio of 2:1 to obtain the Al2Ca alloy and was subsequently heat treated at

600 °C for 24 hours under Argon atmosphere. Cast alloys were not quenched but cooled in the furnace under argon

atmosphere. However, processing under these conditions and considering a heat of formation of -1657 kJ/mol for

(γ-)Al2O3

19 and of -635 kJ/mol for CaO20 at room temperature and a pressure of one atmosphere still makes oxygen

interaction with the Al2Ca surface as well as defects close to the surface even for low remaining oxygen partial pressures

very likely. Metallographically prepared samples from the cast alloy were investigated. Macroscopic/bulk chemistry and

structure were investigated by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) and scanning

electron microscopy (SEM) – back scattered electron (BSE) imaging, respectively. High magnification atomic structure

characterization was performed using aberration-corrected (scanning) transmission electron microscopes (S/TEM) at 300

kV.  Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) were used inside the

STEM to study local chemistry and for phase identification, respectively. Strain determination is based on experimentally

acquired STEM-HAADF micrographs, the exact method being described in detail by K. Du et al.21. STEM multislice

image simulations are based on the PRISM algorithm22. Detailed experimental information of all characterization

techniques is reported in the supplementary information.

BSE imaging of the cast and annealed material revealed the presence of a two-phase microstructure (Figure 1a), i.e. a

dominant matrix phase (Al2Ca) and a fine skeletal phase (Al4Ca) along the material’s grain boundaries. Within individual

grains of the matrix phase straight features (annealing twins) are observed, which are highlighted in Figure 1a by white

arrows. Closer observation under electron channeling contrast (ECCI) two-beam conditions (Figure 1b) revealed the

presence of two twins (dashed lines), which follow the <011> crystal orientation and appear decorated by line defects

fading into the bulk. This fading contrast is likely originating from disconnections at the twin boundary and their

associated line defects according to some further TEM investigations which are not discussed in this study. Additionally,

a second phase Al4Ca particle has been captured (black contrast in Figure 1b). The location of the S/TEM lamella lift-out,

3


perpendicular to the <011> orientation is indicated in Figure 1b as well by a solid white line. The lower twin boundary 2

in Figure 1b as well as the second phase particle can be seen in one part of the extracted S/TEM lamella (Figure 1c),

while two dislocations close to the surface are visible in another part of the same lamella (Figure 1d). With a close look,

these HAADF micrographs reveal that the lower twin boundary of the twin has some dark contrast ranging about 500 nm

from the surface into the bulk along the twin boundary (Figure 1c). This contrast is not seen at the upper twin boundary,

but is also seen at dislocation 2 close to the surface in Figure 1d. The overall chemical bulk composition of the heat

treated alloy was determined by ICP-OES to be 64.3 at. % aluminum and 35.7 at. % calcium, which is close to the

targeted composition. Local chemical analysis at higher magnification by STEM-EDS revealed good agreement of the

identified phases to the expected Al2Ca matrix and the Al4Ca skeletal phase nominal compositions. The results are

summarized in Figure 1e. Finally, the Al2Ca matrix phase revealed an atomic arrangement by HAADF-STEM imaging in

[011] zone axis orientation, which fits to the expected C15 Laves phase crystal structure (Figure 1f). Brighter dots

correspond to Ca atomic columns, while less bright dots are Al atomic columns. A multislice STEM image simulation of

the C15 structure is presented as inset for reference.

Detailed analysis of the twin inside the bulk reveals two perfectly intact twin boundaries (Figure 2a). The TEM image’s

fast Fourier transform is depicted in the inset, which shows the characteristic mirror symmetry and {111} as well as

{200} twin reflections. Atomic resolution HAADF-STEM of the lower twin boundary in Figure 2a has been performed

at different locations, i.e. in the bulk with a perfect twin boundary arrangement (Figure 2b) and close to the surface with a

distinct disruption of the atomic arrangement by an amorphous area at the former location of the twin boundary (Figure

2d), [{111} lattice planes are indicated for reference]. The latter location was accompanied by EDS analysis, which

revealed the amorphous region to contain less Al and Ca, but up to 30 at. % of oxygen (Figure 2e). This intergranular

region is widest at the surface and narrows down into the bulk until it fades into the perfect twin boundary atomic

arrangement described above. We estimated a simple diffusion coefficient (D) for oxygen along the twin boundary to be

D ≈ 1.4×10-18 m2/s knowing the diffusion length (x = 500 nm) and annealing time (t = 24 h) according to D = x²/t. For the

former location, and thus the perfect twin boundary arrangement, strain analysis was performed (Figure 2c) revealing that

the lattice planes next to the twin boundary plane gradually reach a compressive strain of up to 1.09 ± 0.18 % (a gaussian

distribution is plotted as purple dotted line to guide the eye). Compressive strains were characterized in literature e.g. for

γ-Fe channels between κ-carbide precipitates to be on the order of 5 %23. The detected maximum compressive strain of 1

% of the twin boundary appears reasonable, as the just slight distortion of the atomic arrangement at the twin boundary is

expected to lead to elastic strains only. It is speculated that the detected strain at the interface causes the preferred

pathway for enhanced oxygen transport along the twin boundary as we were able to exclude segregation effects by high

magnification, analytical STEM. The presence of oxygen at the twin boundary, potentially in combination with the

4


mechanical (stress) strain, allows for the heterogeneous nucleation of the amorphous interface phase from the boundary

by the chemomechanical stimulus.

Similar behavior is found for dislocation 2 in Figure 3a. The dark contrast along the dislocation line at low magnification

is again found to mainly be an amorphous region (dislocation 2 in Figure 3a). However, inside this region, crystalline

areas were identified consisting of a different crystal structure as compared to the C15 Al2Ca matrix phase. In fact, a

simple fcc (A1) crystal structure was formed coherently with the C15 adjacent matrix phase lattice and in coexistence to

the amorphous areas (Figure 3b). There are instances where this newly formed A1 phase even contains a twin in itself. In

another dislocation (dislocation 1 in Figure 3a) located further into the bulk and not connected to the surface, there is no

such dark contrast as is the case at dislocation 2, but a disordered structure of only few atomic unit cells (Figure 3d,

disruption of lattice planes indicated by arrow). The continuation of the atomic arrangement across the feature is

distorted, i.e. lattice planes are displaced by half a lattice plane distance, as indicated by white dashed lines and an arrow.

Local chemical analysis across the amorphous and A1 crystalline areas of dislocation 2 in Figure 3b was performed by

STEM-EDS spectral imaging (mapping) and quantitative analysis in terms of molar fraction of the individual elements

Al, Ca and O (Figure 3c). It was found that in the crystalline region the molar fractions of Al and Ca do not change much

from the bulk (Al2Ca), however, oxygen is slightly enriched. By contrast, in the amorphous regions the molar fractions of

Ca and especially Al are much reduced, while strong oxygen enrichment is found. From the molar fraction this

enrichment roughly fits to a M2O3 (M being metal), indicative for Al2O3. The extracted EDS concentration profiles are

provided in the supplementary material. EELS measurements from the amorphous region  fit well to the O-K edge of

amorphous Al2O3

 17  (Figure 3e), however, the energy resolution does not allow to resolve the subtle differences between

amorphous- and gamma Al2O3. In any case, the differences in chemical composition of the identified states allows for a

transformation sequence to be postulated. From the initial C15 Al2Ca phase Ca is the first element to deplete and form

the A1 phase, while in a subsequent step Al is additionally lost leading to the formation of the amorphous Al2O3 phase

during further oxygen incorporation.

It appears that strain containing defects in Al2Ca including dislocations and twin boundaries are the reason for fast

oxygen diffusion, and as a consequence, for oxygen-induced structural changes. This is supported by comparison of the

appearance of the amorphous regions along dislocation 2 and the twin boundary. While comparable in length, the

dislocation even being slightly longer, the twin boundary has a wide amorphous region at the surface, which narrows

down along its length, while the dislocation appears to have a constant width of the amorphous region along its entire

length. This suggests that the higher strain at the dislocation core (typically up to about 10 % for edge dislocations) leads

to even higher diffusion rates for oxygen than the twin boundary.  

5


In conclusion, we show the oxygen diffusion-induced formation of amorphous Al2O3 along crystal defects, i.e. a

dislocation and a twin boundary. At the dislocation a coexistence of an oxygen containing Al rich A1 phase and the

amorphous alumina phase has been observed. From the chemical composition of the two phases, we believe that a loss of

Ca precedes the reduction of Al within the structurally transformed region, suggesting a transformation sequence of C15

Al2Ca + O2 → A1 Al(O) phase → amorphous Al2O3. Understanding the role of oxygen diffusion pathways is crucial for

using the material reliably, as already small amounts of oxygen can lead to structural transformations along defects.

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors acknowledge financial support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) through the projects B01,

B05, and B06 of the SFB1394 Structural and Chemical Atomic Complexity – From Defect Phase Diagrams to Material

Properties, project ID 409476157. The authors cordially thank Hauke Springer and Leandro Tanure (RWTH Aachen) for

preparation of the annealed Al2Ca alloy. In addition, the authors like to acknowledge Uzair Rehman and Supriya Nandi

(Max-Planck Institut für Eisenforschung GmbH) for assistance with the Al2Ca sample and ECC imaging, respectively.

6


REFERENCES

1 D. Amberger, P. Eisenlohr, and M. Göken, Acta Materialia 60, 2277 (2012).

2 G. Zhu, L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Shen, P. Tu, H. Zhu, W. Liu, P. Jin, and X. Zeng, International Journal of 

Plasticity 120, 164 (2019).

3 P. Wu, F. Xu, K. Deng, F. Han, Z. Zhang, and R. Gao, Corrosion Science 127, 280 (2017).

4 W.-Y. Yu, N. Wang, X.-B. Xiao, B.-Y. Tang, L.-M. Peng, and W.-J. Ding, Solid State Sciences 11, 1400 (2009).

5 G. Williams Jr and L. Slifkin, Physical Review Letters 1, 243 (1958).

6 A. Le Claire and A. Rabinovitch, Diffusion in Crystalline Solids 257 (1984).

7 M. Lübbehusen and H. Mehrer, Acta Metallurgica et Materialia 38, 283 (1990).

8 Y. Shima, Y. Ishikawa, H. Nitta, Y. Yamazaki, K. Mimura, M. Isshiki, and Y. Iijima, Materials Transactions 43, 173 

(2002).

9 Q. Zhu, Z. Pan, Z. Zhao, G. Cao, L. Luo, C. Ni, H. Wei, Z. Zhang, F. Sansoz, and J. Wang, Nature Communications 12,

1 (2021).

10 A. Ross, H. Fang, S. Shang, G. Lindwall, and Z. Liu, Computational Materials Science 140, 47 (2017).

11 J.W. Richards, Aluminium: Its History, Occurrence, Properties, Metallurgy and Applications, Including Its Alloys (HC

Baird & Company, 1890).

12 R. Hart, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences 236, 68 (1956).

13 I. Popova, V. Zhukov, and J. Yates Jr, Journal of Applied Physics 87, 8143 (2000).

14 L. Jeurgens, W. Sloof, F. Tichelaar, and E. Mittemeijer, Thin Solid Films 418, 89 (2002).

15 L. Nguyen, T. Hashimoto, D.N. Zakharov, E.A. Stach, A.P. Rooney, B. Berkels, G.E. Thompson, S.J. Haigh, and T.L. 

Burnett, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 10, 2230 (2018).

16 L. Jeurgens, W. Sloof, F. Tichelaar, and E. Mittemeijer, Physical Review B 62, 4707 (2000).

17 S.W. Hieke, G. Dehm, and C. Scheu, Acta Materialia 140, 355 (2017).

18 M. Aykol and K.A. Persson, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 10, 3039 (2018).

19 Q. Chen, W. Zeng, X. Chen, S. Gu, G. Yang, H. Zhou, and Z. Yin, Thermochimica Acta 253, 33 (1995).

20 M.W. Chase Jr, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Monograph 9, (1998).

21 K. Du, Y. Rau, N. Jin-Phillipp, and F. Phillipp, J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 18, (2002).

22 C. Ophus, Advanced Structural and Chemical Imaging 3, 13 (2017).

23 C.H. Liebscher, M. Yao, P. Dey, M. Lipińska-Chwalek, B. Berkels, B. Gault, T. Hickel, M. Herbig, J. Mayer, J. 

Neugebauer, and others, Physical Review Materials 2, 023804 (2018).

7


FIGURES

Figure 1: Overview of the as-cast and heat treated Al2Ca alloy. BSE overview image of the annealed microstructure

with  twins  being  indicated  by  white  arrows  (a).  ECC  image  of  the  region  of  interest  showing  several

microstructural features including two twins 1 & 2 and a second phase Al4Ca (b). The [011] crystal direction and

the location of a S/TEM lift-out are indicated. STEM-HAADF micrographs of a twin and a two dislocations are

presented in Figures (c) and (d), respectively. Note the dark contrast of the lower twin boundary in (c) and at

dislocation 2 in (d). The chemical composition of the bulk and the two present phases, as determined by ICP-OES

and STEM-EDS, are displayed in (e), while the atomic arrangement is provided in the atomically-resolved STEM-

HAADF micrograph in (f). For reference, a multislice STEM image simulation result of the Al2Ca C15 Laves phase

in [011] zone axis orientation is shown as inset.

8


Figure 2: Characterization of oxygen enrichment induced changes at the twin boundary. In the bulk, the twin is 

composed of two perfectly arranged twin boundaries as seen in the high-resolution TEM image (a). The inset reveals 

the characteristic mirror symmetry and {200} as well as {111}-twin reflections in [011] zone axis orientation. The 

perfect atomic arrangement of the twin boundary is captured in the atomically-resolved HAADF -STEM micrograph 

(b), while the amorphized twin boundary region does not contain any atomic order anymore (c). Note that the 

amorphization only appears at twin boundary 2 in (a), but not in twin boundary 1. Strain of lattice planes (d) across 

the twin boundary is presented for the intact twin boundary in (b) and reveals about 1 % compressive strain in the 

close vicinity of the twin boundary. The EDS profile (e) across the amorphized twin boundary portion (d) shows the 

enrichment of the structurally transformed regions with oxygen and the depletion of Al and Ca.

9


Figure 3: Characterization of oxygen enrichment induced changes at the (sub)surface dislocations. Two dislocations 

were identified in the HAADF-STEM micrograph in (a), i.e. dislocation 2 running into the surface, while dislocation 

1 follows after a short separation distance. Dislocation 2 reveals a distinct structural arrangement in its oxygen 

enriched region by HAADF-STEM (b). There are amorphous regions coexisting with simple fcc (A1) crystalline 

regions, both highlighted by white squares. Chemical analysis of this exact area by quantitative STEM-EDS spectral 

imaging analysis (c) shows that amorphous region reveal a close to Al2O3 molar composition (color scale in molar 

fraction), while the crystalline part is close to the Al2Ca composition. Dislocation 1, in contrast to dislocation 2, is 

only disordered for few atomic unit cells, as seen in the HAADF-STEM micrograph in (d). The continuation of the 

lattice planes is indicated with a white dashed line. (e) EELS fine structure of the O-K edge.

10


