1 
 

Title: Stabilizing sample-wide Kekulé orders in graphene/transition metal 

dichalcogenide heterostructures  

Authors: Mo-Han Zhang§, Ya-Ning Ren§, Qi Zheng§, Xiao-Feng Zhou, Lin He† 

Affiliations: 
Center for Advanced Quantum Studies, Department of Physics, Beijing Normal University, 
Beijing, 100875, People’s Republic of China 
 

§These authors contributed equally to this work. 
†Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Lin He (e-mail: 
helin@bnu.edu.cn). 

Kekulé phases are Peierls-like lattice distortions in graphene that are predicted to host novel 

electronic states beyond graphene (1-8). Although the Kekulé phases are realized in graphene 

through introducing electron-electron interactions at high magnetic fields (9-11) or adatom 

superlattices (12-15), it is still an extremely challenge to obtain large-area graphene Kekulé 

phases in experiment. Here we demonstrate that sample-wide Kekulé distortions in graphene 

can be stabilized by using transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) as substrates and the 

induced Kekulé orders are quite robust in the whole graphene/TMDs heterostructures with 

different twist angles. The commensurate structures of the heterostructures provide periodic 

scattering centers that break the translational symmetry of graphene and couple electrons 

of the two valleys in graphene, which tips the graphene toward global Kekulé density wave 

phases. Unexpectedly, three distinct Kekulé bond textures stabilized at various energies are 

directly imaged in every graphene/TMDs heterostructure. Our results reveal an unexpected 

sensitivity of electronic properties in graphene to the supporting substrates and provide an 


2 
 

attractive route toward designing novel phases in graphene/TMDs heterostructures. 

Graphene is well-known for its rigidity of the honeycomb lattice that exhibits sixfold bond 

symmetry (16,17). However, it was predicted in theory that a bond density wave instability, i.e., 

the Kekulé distortion that breaks the bond symmetry and triples the unit cell, can be triggered in 

graphene through several different mechanisms (1-8). Recently, two types of the Kekulé phases 

are explicitly demonstrated through direct experimental observations. One is Kekulé-O order with 

“O”-shaped bond modulation that can be induced by electron-electron interactions at high 

magnetic fields (9-11) or by adatom superlattices (12-14). The other is Kekulé-Y order, where 

modulated bonds form a “Y”-shape pattern, that is realized in graphene grown epitaxially onto 

Cu(111), in which one of six carbon atoms in each superlattice unit cell is on top of a copper 

monovacancy (15). At an experimental level, it is highly challenging to stabilize the Kekulé orders 

in graphene over large areas in zero magnetic field because the requirement of precise control of 

the adatoms or monovacancies’ positions (12-15). Here, we show that superposing graphene on 

two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), WSe2 and WS2, creates 

superlattices that generate the Kekulé phases over the whole graphene/TMDs heterostructures. The 

commensurate structures of the heterostructures provide periodic scattering centers to couple 

electrons of the two valleys and generate global Kekulé density wave phases in graphene. In each 

graphene/TMDs heterostructure, three different Kekulé bond textures, which are stabilized at 

different energies, are directly imaged. 


3 
 

Figure 1a shows real-space schematics of four bond textures, i.e., Kekulé-Y-1, Kekulé-Y-2, 

Kekulé-O, and Kekulé-M, in graphene (1-15,18). In all the Kekulé phases, the unit cells are tripled 

in size. However, the bond textures of them are remarkably different, which enables us to distinct 

them by directly imaging the C-C bond density wave in real space (1-8). For the Kekulé-Y phase, 

there are two (four) bonds among the six bonds in each honeycomb exhibiting high density in the 

Kekulé-Y-1 (Kekulé-Y-2) bond texture. For the Kekulé-O phase, the “O”-shaped bond modulation 

is easy to identify in the real-space image. For the Kekulé-M phase, all bond strengths are equal, 

however, there are three different on-site energies. To date, only the Kekulé-Y-1 and the Kekulé-

O bond textures are directly imaged in experiment (9-15). Instead of using electron-electron 

interactions at high magnetic fields or precisely controlling positions of adatoms, here we propose 

to create global Kekulé phases in graphene through moiré superlattices from stacked and twisted 

structures of graphene on 2D TMDs, as shown in Fig. 1b. The atomic sites of the TMDs provide 

superlattice of scattering centers to generate wave vectors that satisfy the Kekulé nesting condition 

δq = K – K’ (the wave vector connects two Brillouin zone corners, i.e., the intervalley scattering). 

Once the Friedel oscillations generated by these scattering centers are in phase, the charge-density 

modulations are enhanced and, then, sample-wide distinct Kekulé bond density phases are 

stabilized in graphene.      

To explore possible Kekulé phases in the graphene/TMDs heterostructures, different samples 

with controlled twist angles are obtained by using transfer technology of graphene monolayer onto 

mechanical-exfoliated WSe2 and WS2 sheets (19-21) (See Fig. 2a and methods for details of the 


4 
 

sample preparation). The obtained graphene/TMDs heterostructures are systematically 

characterized by carrying out scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and scanning tunneling 

spectroscopy (STS) measurements (see Supplemental Fig. 1) and, unexpectedly, the Kekulé phases 

are quite robust for most of the studied heterostructures. Figure 2b shows a representative STM 

image and a STS map of a graphene/WSe2 heterostructure with a rotation angle 49.3° between 

graphene and the WSe2. The first characteristic of the Kekulé distortion is clearly shown by the 

presence of a commensurate √3 × √3 R 30° charge-density wave (CDW) in both the STM image 

and the STS map, which directly reflects the local density of states at the measured energy. The 

obtained √3 × √3 R 30° CDW order is long range over the whole sample when the stacked 

structure of the heterostructure is uniform. In our experiment, we obtain similar CDW order in 

different areas of the 49.3° graphene/WSe2 heterostructure. The atomic-resolved STM 

measurements and the sample-wide uniform CDW order also help us to completely exclude atomic 

defects or adatoms as the origin of the observed Kekulé distortion. The emergence of long-range 

Kekulé distortion in the graphene honeycomb lattice is further confirmed by Fourier transforms 

(FT) of large-area topographic image. In the FT image, beside the reciprocal lattice of graphene, 

the reciprocal lattice of WSe2, and the reciprocal lattice of moiré structure in the graphene/WSe2 

heterostructure, we can observe sharp peaks at QKek, arising from the √3 × √3 R 30° CDW (Figs. 

2c and 2d), as observed in the graphene Kekulé phase in previous study (15). 

In our experiment, direct evidence of the Kekulé bond order in graphene is obtained by 

performing high-resolution STS measurements. Figure 2e(right middle panel) shows a 


5 
 

representative STS map of the 49.3° graphene/WSe2 heterostructure, which clearly demonstrates 

strongly modified topography, with a periodic arrangement of highly distorted hexagons 

compatible with the Kekulé-Y-1 type pattern. Obviously, a third of the bonds in graphene are quite 

different due to the formation of the Kekulé density wave phase. It is interesting to note that the 

Kekulé-Y-1 type pattern is frequently observed in the graphene/WSe2 heterostructures with 

different rotation angles, as shown in Fig. 2e. In the presence of magnetic fields, Landau 

quantization of massless Dirac fermions is detected in the graphene/WSe2 heterostructures (see 

supplemental Fig. S2), indicating that there is still zero gap in the graphene Kekulé phase, which 

is the first experimental demonstration of such a theoretical prediction (1-8). To demonstrate the 

universality of the mechanism in introducing the Kekulé phases in graphene by using 2D TMDs 

as the supporting substrate, we carry out similar measurements in graphene/WS2 heterostructures. 

The same Kekulé-Y-1 type pattern is also frequently observed in graphene/WS2 heterostructures 

with different rotation angles, as shown in Fig. 2e (see supplemental Fig. S3 for more experimental 

evidences), which explicitly demonstrates the universality of the proposed mechanism. 

When a 2D crystal with a lattice constant 𝑎𝑎  is twisted θ relative to another with a lattice 

mismatch of δ, the moiré length is given by λ =
(1+𝛿𝛿)𝑎𝑎

�2(1+𝛿𝛿)(1−cos𝜃𝜃)+𝛿𝛿2 (22-24). With considering the 

lattice constants of graphene and WSe2 (WS2), the maximum moiré length generated between them 

is 0.984 nm (1.123 nm). Usually, it is believed that such a small moiré pattern generated between 

graphene and 2D insulating substrates will not affect the structure and electronic properties of 

graphene. Our result is contrary to such a belief and demonstrates that the 2D TMDs introduce 


6 
 

robust Kekulé phases in graphene. To introduce large-area Kekulé phases in graphene, the Friedel 

oscillations generated by the scattering centers in the supporting substrate must be in phase (12-

15), which requires that the scattering centers occupy one of the red-green-blue (RGB) sites of 

graphene, as schematically shown in Fig. 3a. In the RGB mosaic representation of the graphene 

lattice, the size of the unit cell is tripled and the Kekulé phases of graphene can be represented by 

making a three-colour tiling of the pristine graphene lattice (12-15). In the graphene/TMDs 

heterostructures, a stacked commensurate structure naturally provides atomic structures as the 

periodic scattering centers. When all the periodic scattering centers in the commensurate structure 

occupy the same RGB sites, the interference between scattering-induced oscillations of different 

centers is constructive (Fig. 3a, right panel), inducing the Kekulé distortion in graphene globally. 

Here we should point out that the length scale of the commensurate structure is not necessary the 

same as that of the unit cell of the Kekulé phase, actually, it could be much larger than that of the 

unit cell. Very recently, it has demonstrated explicitly that the Kekulé phase can be induced in 

graphene through 0.3% surface coverage lithium adatoms, corresponding to an average Li-Li 

distance of about 2 nm (16). Figure 3b shows the calculated length scale of the commensurate 

structure in the graphene/WSe2 heterostructures as a function of the twist angles. In the calculation, 

small lattice strain is assumed in graphene to create commensurate supercells (24-27) and a 

restriction on inducing the Kekulé distortion in graphene is imposed on the length scale of the 

commensurate structure (see Fig. S4 and supplemental materials for details of calculation). In 

graphene, the de Broglie wavelength of massless Dirac fermions is quite large around the Dirac 


7 
 

point (for example, it is easy to reach several hundreds nanometers around the Dirac point and it 

is still as large as 10 nm at 400 meV away from the Dirac point) (28). Therefore, each scattering 

center can nucleate a local patch of Kekulé order of a quite large radius, as reported around each 

adatom previously (14,28). The interactions between the scattering centers may prefer an 

arrangement that allows their Friedel oscillations to be in phase and, consequently, prefer the 

formation of commensurate structures in the graphene/TMDs heterostructures. Here, we assume a 

boundary of less than 10 nm on the length scale of the commensurate structure to stabilize the 

Kekulé phase. Obviously, the Kekulé phase is expected to be observed in a wide range of twist 

angles in the graphene/TMDs heterostructures, as shown in Fig. 3b. Therefore, we can frequently 

observe the Kekulé phase in the heterostructures in our experiment.  

Besides the Kekulé-Y-1 order, as shown in Fig. 2, the other two bond textures of the Kekulé 

phases, i.e., the Kekulé-Y-2 and Kekulé-M, are also observed in all the studied graphene/TMDs 

heterostructures. Figure 4 summarizes representative results obtained in the 20.6° graphene/WSe2 

heterostructure and in the 15.6° graphene/WS2 heterostructure, respectively (see supplemental Figs. 

S5 and S6 for more experimental results). In previous studies, usually, only one type of the Kekulé 

distortion can be observed in a studied system (9-15). Emergence of three bond textures of the 

Kekulé phases in each single graphene/TMDs heterostructure is an unexpected result in our 

experiment. According to our experiment, the three bond textures of the Kekulé phases emerge at 

different energies of the graphene. The three Kekulé bond textures seem appear randomly at 

different energies in different heterostructures and there is no obvious energy dependence of the 


8 
 

Kekulé bond textures (Fig. 4 and Fig. S5). Besides emerging at different energies, the vertexes of 

the unit cells for the three Kekulé bond textures could also be different, as shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 

S5. In the 20.6° graphene/WSe2 heterostructure, the vertexes of the unit cells for the Kekulé-Y-1 

and Kekulé-M are the same, however, there is a shift of C-C distance from that of the Kekulé-Y-2 

bond texture, as shown in Fig. 4e. In the 15.6° graphene/WS2 heterostructure, the vertexes of the 

unit cells for the Kekulé-Y-1 and Kekulé-Y-1 are the same, however, there is a shift of 0.246 nm 

from that of the Kekulé-M bond texture, as shown in Fig. 4f. These results indicate that the three 

Kekulé bond textures may be generated by different scattering centers in the commensurate 

structure. In the commensurate structure, every atomic sites of the 2D TMDs can act as the 

scattering centers for the Kekulé phases since that a translational symmetry is retained. Then, 

different scattering centers stabilize the graphene in different Kekulé bond textures at various 

energies. 

In summary, we demonstrate the ability to introduce sample-wide Kekulé phases in graphene 

by using TMDs as substrates. The commensurate structures of the graphene/TMDs 

heterostructures provide periodic scattering centers that tip the graphene toward global Kekulé 

density wave phases. Three Kekulé bond textures stabilized at various energies are directly imaged 

in every single graphene/TMDs heterostructure. Our results provide an attractive route toward 

designing novel phases in graphene by using 2D TMDs as supporting substrates.   

   


9 
 

 

References 

1. Tudorovskiy, T., Mikhailov, S. A., Intervalley plasmons in graphene. Phys. Rev. B 82, 073411 

(2010).  

2. Hou, C.-Y., Chamon, C., Mudry, C., Electron fractionalization in two-dimensional 

graphenelike structures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 186809 (2007). 

3. Nomura, K., Ryu, S., Lee, D.-H., Field-induced Kosterlitz-Thouless transition in the N = 0 

Landau level of graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 216801 (2009). 

4. Weeks, C., Franz, M., Interaction-driven instabilities of a Dirac semimetal. Phys. Rev. B 81, 

085105 (2010). 

5. Classen, L., Scherer, M. M., Honerkamp, C., Instabilities on graphene’s honeycomb lattice 

with electron-phonon interactions. Phys. Rev. B 90, 035122 (2014). 

6. Kharitonov, M., Phase diagram for the v=0 quantum Hall state in monolayer graphene. Phys. 

Rev. B 85, 155439 (2012).   

7. Ryu, S., Mudry, C., Hou, C.-Y. & Chamon, C. Masses in graphenelike two-dimensional 

electronic systems: Topological defects in order parameters and their fractional exchange 

statistics. Phys. Rev. B 80, 205319 (2009). 

8. Cheianov, V. V., Fal’ko, V. I., Syljuåsen, O. & Altshuler, B. L. Hidden Kekulé ordering of 

adatoms on graphene. Solid State Commun. 149, 1499-1501, (2009). 

9. Li, S.-Y., Zhang, Y., Yin, L.-J., He, L., Scanning tunneling microscope study of quantum Hall 


10 
 

isospin ferromagnetic states in the zero Landau level in a graphene monolayer. Phys. Rev. B 

100, 085437 (2019). 

10. Coissard, A., Wander, D., Vignaud, H., Grushin, A. G., Repellin, C., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, 

T., Gay, F., Winkelmann, C. B., Courtois, H., Sellier, H. & Sacepe, B. Imaging tunable 

quantum Hall broken-symmetry orders in graphene. Nature 605, 51-56, (2022). 

11. Liu, X., Farahi G., Chiu C.-L., Papic Z., Watanabe K., Taniguchi T., Zaletel M. P. & Yazdani 

A. Visualizing broken symmetry and topological defects in a quantum Hall ferromagnet. 

Science 375, 321-326, (2022). 

12. Ma, D., Fu, Z., Sui, X., Bai, K., Qiao, J., Yan, C., Zhang, Y., Hu, J., Xiao, Q., Mao, X., Duan, 

W., & He, L. Modulating the Electronic Properties of Graphene by Self-Organized Sulfur 

Identical Nanoclusters and Atomic Superlattices Confined at an Interface. ACS Nano 12, 

10984-10991 (2018). 

13. Bao, C., Zhang, H., Zhang, T., Wu, X., Luo, L., Zhou, S., Li, Q., Hou, Y., Yao, W., Liu, L., Yu, 

P., Li, J., Duan, W., Yao, H., Wang, Y. & Zhou, S. Experimental Evidence of Chiral Symmetry 

Breaking in Kekule-Ordered Graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 206804 (2021). 

14. Qu, A. C., Nigge, P., Link, S., Levy, G., Michiardi, M., Spandar, P. L., Matthe, T., Schneider, 

M., Zhdanovich, S., Starke, U., Gutierrez, C. & Damascelli, A. Ubiquitous defect-induced 

density wave instability in monolayer graphene. Sci. Adv. 8, eabm5180, (2022). 

15. Gutiérrez, C., Kim, C.-J., Brown, L., Schiros, T., Nordlund, D., Lochocki, Edward B., Shen, 

K. M., Park, J., & Pasupathy, A. N. Imaging chiral symmetry breaking from Kekulé bond 


11 
 

order in graphene. Nat. Phys. 12, 950-958 (2016). 

16. Castro Neto, A. H., Guinea, F., Peres, N. M. R., Novoselov, K. S. & Geim, A. K. The electronic 

properties of graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 109-162 (2009). 

17. Kotov, V. N., Uchoa, B., Pereira, V. M., Guinea, F. & Castro Neto, A. H. Electron-Electron 

Interactions in Graphene: Current Status and Perspectives. Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1067-1125, 

(2012). 

18. Herrera, S. A. & Naumis, G. G. Optoelectronic fingerprints of interference between different 

charge carriers and band flattening in graphene superlattices. Phys. Rev. B 104, 115424 (2021). 

19. Zhao, Y.-X., Zhou, X.-F., Zhang, Y., He, L. Oscillations of van Hove singularities spacing 

induced by sub-Angstrom fluctuations of interlayer spacing in graphene superlattices. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 127, 266801 (2021). 

20. Zheng, Q., Zhuang, Y., Sun, Q.-F., He, L. Coexistence of electron whispering-gallery modes 

and atomic collapse state in graphene/WSe2 heterostructure quantum dots. Nat. Commun. 13, 

1597 (2022).  

21. Zheng, Q., Hao, C.-Y., Zhou, X.-F., Zhao, Y.-X., He, J.-Q., He, L. Tunable sample-wide 

electronic kagome lattice in low-angle twisted bilayer graphene. arXiv: 2207.12670. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. in press (2022). 

22. Yankowitz, M., Xue, J., Cormode, D., Sanchez-Yamagishi, J. D., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T., 

Jarillo-Herrero, P., Jacquod, P., & LeRoy, B. J. Emergence of superlattice Dirac points in 

graphene on hexagonal boron nitride. Nat. Phys. 8, 382-386 (2012). 


12 
 

23. Moon, P. & Koshino, M. Energy spectrum and quantum Hall effect in twisted bilayer graphene. 

Phys. Rev. B 85, 195458 (2012). 

24. Carr, S., Fang, S., Kaxiras, E. Electronic-structure methods for twisted moiré layers. Nat. Rev. 

Mater. 5, 748-763 (2020). 

25. Koda, S. D., Bechstedt, F., Marques, M., Teles, L. K. Coincidence lattices of 2D crystals: 

heterostructure predictions and applications. J. Phys. Chem. C. 120, 10895-10908 (2016). 

26. Lazic, P. CellMatch: Combining two unit cells into a common supercell with minimal strain. 

Comp. Phys. Comm. 197, 324-334 (2015).   

27. Naimer, T., Zollner, K., Gmitra, M. & Fabian, J. Twist-angle dependent proximity induced 

spin-orbit coupling in graphene/transition metal dichalcogenide heterostructures. Phys. Rev. B 

104, 195156 (2021). 

28. Zhang, Y., Gao, F., Gao, S., Brandbyge, M., He, L. Characterization and manipulation of 

intervalley scattering induced by an individual monovacancy in graphene. arXiv: 2206.05938. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. in press (2022).  

Acknowledgments:  

This work was supported by the National Key R and D Program of China (Grant Nos. 

2021YFA1401900, 2021YFA1400100) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 

Nos.12141401, 11974050).  

Author contributions 

M.H.Z., Y.N.R., Q.Z. and X.F.Z. performed the sample synthesis, characterization and STM/STS 


13 
 

measurements. M.H.Z. and L.H. analyzed the data. L.H. conceived and provided advice on the 

experiment, analysis and the theoretical calculations. M.H.Z. and L.H. wrote the paper with the 

input from others. All authors participated in the data discussion. 

 

Data availability statement 

All data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 

request. 

Methods 

Sample preparation. The studied devices were fabricated using a wet-/dry-transfer technique. 

First of all, the TMDs crystal was separated into thick-layer WSe2 (or WS2) sheets by scotch tape. 

We stacked thick-layer WSe2 (or WS2) sheets to 285 nm thick SiO2/Si with polydimethylsiloxane 

(PDMS). The Si in the bottom is highly N-doped. Then, we grow large area graphene monolayer 

films on a 
2
20
×20 mm
 polycrystalline copper (Cu) foil (Alfa Aesar, 99.8% purity, 25 µm thick) 

via a low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) method. The Cu foil was heated from 

room temperature to 1035 ºC in 30 min and annealed at 1035 ºC for ten hours with Ar flow of 50 

sccm and H2 flow of 50 sccm. Then CH4 flow of 5 sccm and the other gases to be the same as 

before was introduced for 20 min to grow high-quality large area graphene monolayer. The furnace 

was cooled down naturally to room temperature. We used wet-transfer technique with polymethyl 

methacrylate (PMMA) to transfer graphene monolayer onto the substrate (TMD/SiO2/Si). Finally, 

we cleaned the upper PMMA with acetone.  

Measurements. STM/STS measurements were performed in low-temperature (4.2 K) and 


14 
 

ultrahigh-vacuum (~10-10 Torr) scanning probe microscopes [USM-1300 (4.2 K)] from UNISOKU. 

The tips were obtained by chemical etching from a W (95%) alloy wire. Before the experiment, 

we calibrate the STM with Highly Oriented Pyrolytic Graphite. The differential conductance 

(dI/dV) measurements were taken by a standard lock-in technique with an ac bias modulation of 5 

mV and 793 Hz signal added to the tunneling bias.  

 
 


15 
 

 

Fig. 1│The schematic of Kekulé orders and a graphene/TMDs heterostructure. a, A 

schematic for four Kekulé bond textures, showing different bond strengths or atomic on-site 

energies, in graphene. The unit cells of pristine graphene and Kekulé-ordered graphene are marked 

by black and colored parallelograms, respectively. b, A schematic drawing of graphene/TMDs 

heterostructure with a rotation angle θ. The inset shows the zoom-in atomic structure in blue frame. 

The purple diamond represents the unit cell of the commensurate structure in the heterostructure. 

That atomic sites at vertexes of the purple diamond can provide periodic scattering centers to 

induce long-range Kekulé order in graphene. 

 
 


16 
 

 

Fig. 2│Large-scale Kekulé order in graphene/TMDs heterostructures. a. Device structure. 

Monolayer graphene is placed on 2D TMDs, then the graphene/TMDs heterostructure is placed on 

SiO2/Si substrate. b. STM image and STS map (measured at 40 meV) in a graphene/WSe2 

heterostructure with twisted angle 49.3° between graphene and the WSe2. The unit cells of Kekulé 

order and graphene lattice are marked by red and yellow diamonds, respectively. c. The FT of the 

STS map in panel b. The yellow, white, green circles are the graphene, WSe2, graphene/WSe2 

moiré Bragg peak locations, respectively. The six red circles are at the wavelength of the Kekulé 

order. d. Line cuts through the graphene and Kekulé order peaks in the FT in c. The Kekulé order 

peak is as sharp as the graphene peak. e. Atomic resolved STS maps showing the Kekulé-Y-1 bond 

texture in six different graphene/TMDs heterostructures. The measured energies are 167 meV 

(G/WSe2, θ = 20.6°), 225 meV (G/WSe2, θ = 0.0°), 38 meV (G/WSe2, θ = 54.5°), 223 meV 

(G/WSe2, θ = 49.3°), 80 meV (G/WS2, θ = 18.7°), and -8 meV (G/WS2, θ = 15.7°). 


17 
 

 

Fig. 3│Kekulé ordered states in the commensurate structures of graphene/TMDs 

heterostructures. a. Illustrations of the disordered and ordered Kekulé states of the commensurate 

structures. The Kekulé phase of graphene is represented by making a red-blue-green (RBG) mosaic 

tiling of the pristine graphene lattice. Atomic structure of the TMD is overlaid onto the Kekulé 

phase of graphene. The unit cell of the commensurate structure is marked by chromatic 

parallelogram. Large-scale Kekulé ordered state is formed when the vertices of the commensurate 

structure occupy the same RGB sites. When they occupy different RGB sites, the induced 

oscillations by different scattering centers are not in phase and we cannot observe the Kekulé 

distortion globally. b. Calculated commensurate periods as a function of twist angle in the 

graphene/WSe2 heterostructures. In the calculation, a restriction on inducing the large-scale 

Kekulé distortion in graphene is imposed on the length scale of the commensurate structure. A 

boundary of about 10 nm on the length scale of the commensurate structure is assumed to stabilize 

the Kekulé phase in graphene. 
 


18 
 

 

Fig. 4│Different Kekulé bond textures in graphene/TMDs heterostructures. a,c,e. Kekulé-Y-

1, Kekulé-Y-2 and Kekulé-M orders observed in a 20.6° graphene/WSe2 heterostructure. b,d,f. 

Kekulé-Y-1, Kekulé-Y-2 and Kekulé-M orders observed in a 15.6° graphene/WS2 heterostructure. 

The unit cells of the Kekulé bond textures are marked by red (Kekulé-Y-1), yellow (Kekulé-Y-2), 

and blue (Kekulé-M) parallelograms in panels e and f. 

 


