1

Design and Analysis of a 170 GHz Antenna for Millimeter-wave 

Applications

Sheetal Punia, Suman Danani, Hitesh B. Pandya

ITER-India, Institute for Plasma Research Bhat, Gandhinagar-382428, India

ABSTRACT: 

Microstrip patch antennas are low-profile and robust when mounted on rigid surfaces of 

the devices making them suitable for communication and millimeter-wave applications. In 

this paper, an antenna is designed for the resonant frequency of 170 GHz using microstrip 

technology concerning its miniaturization and cost-effectiveness. The designed antenna is a 

part of a stray radiation detection system for ECE diagnostic to be installed on fusion 

research machine ITER. It offers low-directivity to receive radiation from all directions, high 

bandwidth, low side-lobe-level and return loss of -50 dB, leading to its remarkable utilization 

in the detection system being designed to protect millimeter wave components of ITER ECE 

Diagnostic. Power-handling and power-capturing capability of the designed antenna have 

also been discussed in the paper. Far-field simulations have been performed using CST 

Microwave Studio software to study the radiation characteristics of the designed antenna.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Microstrip antennas have various advantages over other conventional antenna techniques due

to their simple configuration. They are low-profile (i.e. small height and width), compatible with 

MMIC designs, quite simple and cheap to manufacture via printed-circuit technology and 

mechanically robust when placed on rigid surfaces [1]. Furthermore, they also offer some 

additional properties such as feedline flexibility, dual-polarization, frequency agility and 

omnidirectional patterning [2,3]. The importance and feasibility of microstrip antenna in our 

practical world can also be noted by wireless 5G communications and high-performance satellite, 

medical and missiles applications [4-6]. In this paper, our main goal is to design a compact antenna 


2

having wide angle reception. We opted the conventional microstrip technology for the designing 

purpose as the importance and feasibility of microstrip antenna in our practical world has been 

proved effectively. However, the designed antenna is based on the conventional Microstrip Patch 

Antenna design, but its operating frequency stands out the design from the previous work. As we 

know with an increment in the operating frequency, the dynamics of electrons inside the patch also 

changes drastically and that can change the whole characteristics of a system. This paper aims to 

design a reliable antenna array at 170 GHz for stray radiation sensor being designed for ITER ECE 

Diagnostic and possesses characteristics like low directivity, high bandwidth and better power

handling capability that has not been explored till now by any other research group.

The Electron Cyclotron Emission (ECE) diagnostic system on ITER will provide plasma 

electron temperature profile and electron temperature fluctuations with high spatial and temporal 

resolution [7-10]. Some challenges need to be addressed to ensure its proper functioning, such as

protection from RF stray radiation, obligatory to prevent damage to ECE components [11-13]. 

These stray radiations are generated due to Electron Cyclotron Resonance Heating (ECRH) wave 

frequency of 170 GHz utilized for plasma heating and current drive inside the vacuum vessel [14-

16]. After multiple–reflections inside the vacuum vessel, the unabsorbed ECRH power becomes

diffused and depolarized and may enter the ECE Diagnostic system through port openings. It is 

proposed to use a sniffer – a real-time power monitoring system- to be followed by a shutter 

safeguarding the ECE diagnostics. The crucial part of the proposed sniffer is the receiving system 

that will sense all the power expected to be entering through the port and incident on the ECE 

components. In this paper, an antenna system is designed to collect the stray electromagnetic 

energy from the vacuum vessel window and convert it into electrical energy to be monitored by 

the detector system.

Section II describes the analytical expressions and selection criteria for the characteristic 

design parameters of the microstrip antenna. These formulas will provide a good estimate of the 

antenna dimensions intended for millimeter wavelength. The final design of an antenna array is 

described in Section III. Comparative calculations for the power handling capacity of the 

individual and array antenna are presented in Section IV. In Section V, simulation results of the

antenna are discussed. Our conclusions are reported in Section VI, highlighting the importance

of the designed antenna and scope of future work.


3

II.
DESIGN PARAMETERS FOR ANTENNA

The microstrip patch antenna is a single-layer design consisting of four main parts: (i) Patch; 

(ii) Substrate; (iii) ground plane; (iv) feeding part. Interestingly, one can design microstrip 

antennas for specific resonant frequency, impedance and radiation patterns merely by modifying

their dimensions. This feature makes it the best fit for our required application. However, each of 

these components need to be designed carefully as discussed below:

Patch Dimensions

A patch can be of any shape, but the rectangular shape is usually preferred due to its easy

fabrication and simple analyses, avoiding complex numerical computations. Considering 𝜆0 =

1.76𝑚𝑚 as the free-space incident wavelength, the patch length (𝐿𝑝) and its thickness (𝑡) should 

be in the range 

𝜆0
3 < 𝐿𝑝 <

𝜆0
2 and 𝑡 ≪ 𝜆0, respectively, for better antenna performance.

Substrate Selection

In patch antenna design, the substrate is primarily required to offer mechanical support and

spacing between the ground plane and patch. The dielectric constant of the substrate material can 

alter the electrical performance of the antenna and impedance of transmission line. Therefore, it

should be chosen in the range 12 > 𝜀 > 2.2. For efficient radiation generation, low 𝜀 material is 

preferred as it enhances the fringe fields that account for the radiation. Furthermore, several

quantities must be parameterized for a specific design, such as loss tangent, temperature effects, 

surface wave excitation, dielectric dispersion, weight, elasticity and cost. Substrates with a higher 

thickness (ℎ) and a high dielectric constant result in smaller bandwidths and lower efficiencies 

due to the possibility of surface-wave excitation. Hence, it is convenient to keep the height of the 

substrate in the range of 0.01𝜆0 ≤ ℎ ≤ 0.05𝜆0 for the significant elimination of multiple surface 

waves. To overcome some of the problems of thin antenna elements (such as low power handling 

capability) without unduly sacrificing their principal advantages, they can be built on thick 

substrates. In this paper, Rogers RO3003 having dielectric constant 3.0, loss factor 𝑡𝑎𝑛𝛿 = 0.001

(on 10GHz) and ℎ = 0.254𝑚𝑚 is chosen as the substrate material to meet our requirements. The 

patch material used in CST MWS Studio is Copper. The considered Rogers RO3003 high 


4

frequency laminates are ceramic-filled PTFE composites for use in printed circuit boards in 

commercial microwave and RF applications. Its operating frequency range is 30-190GHz.

Boundary Condition

As we are interested in measuring the radiated power, all the results for antenna parameters 

are evaluated in the far-field region determined by the inner boundary distance 𝑠 ≥

2𝐷2

𝜆0 𝑤here, 𝐷 = 0.6239 𝑚𝑚 is the largest antenna dimension. It gives the far-field distance as 

~ 0.44 𝑚𝑚, which is exactly the distance used in  simulation.

Analytical Expressions

For the analysis of the microstrip antenna, the transmission line method is used for better 

physical understanding. In this method, the antenna structure is treated as two slots separated by a 

transmission line. For clarity, the rectangular patch parameters are represented in Fig. 1.

Figure 1: Dimensioning sketch for inset fed patch antenna.

Furthermore, the following parameters need to be fixed first while designing an antenna system:

I.
The dielectric constant of the substrate (𝜀 )

II.
Resonant frequency (𝑓)

III.
Height of the substrate (ℎ)


5

Once these parameters are fixed, the practical width and length of the patch 𝑊𝑝 and 𝐿𝑝 are 

determined by using the following expressions:

𝑊𝑝 = 𝑣0

2𝑓 √
2

𝜀 + 1
(1)

𝐿𝑝 =
1

2𝑓√𝜀𝑒𝑓𝑓√𝜇0𝜀0

− 2∆𝐿𝑝
(2)

where ∆𝐿𝑝 is the extended length, originated due to fringing effect (i.e., the field lines at the edges 

of patch undergo fringing) and having dependence on the resonant frequency, as

∆𝐿𝑝

ℎ
= 0.412

(𝜀𝑒𝑓𝑓 + 0.3) (𝑊𝑝

ℎ + 0.264)

(𝜀𝑒𝑓𝑓 − 0.258) (𝑊𝑝

ℎ + 0.8)

(3)

and, 𝜀𝑒𝑓𝑓 is the effective dielectric constant, which accounts for fringing and wave propagation in 

the feedline defined as

𝜀𝑒𝑓𝑓 = 𝜀 + 1

2
+ 𝜀 − 1

2
[1 + 12 ℎ

𝑊𝑝

]

−1/2

(4)

Most of the fringing field lines reside in the substrate such that 𝜀𝑒𝑓𝑓 ≈ 𝜀 . The length and width of 

the ground plane is determined by using the relation 𝐿𝑔 = 6ℎ + 𝐿𝑝 and 𝑊𝑔 = 6ℎ + 𝑊𝑝, 

respectively.

Microstrip Feedline Dimension

While designing an antenna, it is necessary to carefully configure the feeding lines in order 

to prevent impedance mismatching. In other words, antenna parameters need to be optimized by 

selecting the proper feeding technique and their feed location. The microstrip-line feed technique 

offers better reliability, ease of fabrication and good polarization purity over other techniques such 

as coaxial, aperture-coupled, proximity-coupled feed etc. It is etched on the same substrate as that 

of the patch, providing a planar structure. The width of this microstrip feedline (𝑊𝑓 ) is related to

its characteristic impedance such that


6

𝑍𝑇 =
60

√𝜀𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝑙𝑛 (8ℎ

𝑊𝑓

+ 𝑊𝑓

4ℎ)
(5)

Microstrip feedline acts as a dispersive transmission line above a critical frequency 𝑓𝑐 ≥

0.3√

𝑍𝑇
ℎ (

1

√𝜀 −1 ), where ℎ is in cm. The dispersion in the dielectric constant is given by 𝜀𝑒(𝑓) =

𝜀 −

𝜀 −𝜀𝑒𝑓𝑓

1+𝐺( 𝑓

𝑓𝑝)

2
where 𝑓𝑝 =

𝑍0
8𝜋ℎ
and 𝐺 = 0.6 + 0.009𝑍0. 𝑍0 is the static (i.e. low-frequency) 

characteristic impedance. The phase velocity of quasi TEM-mode propagating in microstrip gets

modified as 𝑣𝑝 =

𝑐

√𝜀𝑒(𝑓) and so does the wavelength 𝜆𝑝 =

𝑣𝑝
𝑓 .

For our antenna design, inset-fed microstrip feed is opted, which has advantages of overcoming 

narrow-bandwidth constraints and capturing more signals with improved accuracy. In the inset 

feeding technique, it is preferred to have the feeding location at a certain distance 𝑥0 from the edge

of the patch towards the center, in order to overcome resonant input resistance. The feeding point

can be calculated using the relation

𝑅𝑖𝑛(𝑥 = 𝑥0) = 1

2𝐺𝑟

cos2 (𝜋𝑥0

𝐿𝑝

)
(6)

where 𝐺𝑟 is the conductance given as 𝐺𝑟 =

1

90 (

𝑊𝑝
𝜆0 )

2
. 

Using above Eqs. (1) − (6), the dimensions of the inset fed patch antenna are evaluated and 

tabulated in Table 1.

Table 1

Design parameters evaluated for a single patch element.

S. No.
Parameter
Value

1.
Operating frequency (𝑓)
170 GHz

2.
Thickness (ℎ)
0.254 𝑚𝑚

3.
Length of Patch (𝐿𝑃)
0.3 𝑚𝑚

4.
Width of Patch (𝑊𝑝)
0.6239 𝑚𝑚

5.
Cut Width (𝑔)
0.1 𝑚𝑚

6.
Cut Depth (𝑥0)
0.101 𝑚𝑚


7

7.
Feed Length (𝐿𝑓)
0.355 𝑚𝑚

8.
Feed Width (𝑊𝑓)
0.063 𝑚𝑚

III.
ANTENNA ARRAY DESIGN

The main characteristics required for our system are wide-angle reception and better power 

handling capability. Conventional methods used for large apertures are bulky and complicate the 

design unnecessarily. Antenna array technology entails 𝑁 number of small-aperture identical 

antenna elements, exclusively positioned according to their functionality. Therefore, the array 

provides a large aperture, which makes it proficient to detect extremely weak signals from distant 

sources with improved gain and radiation pattern compared to a single antenna patch, as shown in 

Fig. 2. The antenna array also offers better power handling capabilities than a single antenna 

element that will be discussed in the next section. The feeding location of an antenna array is a 

crucial part that controls the distribution of voltages among the elements [17]. It is also responsible 

for proper power distribution among antenna elements due to its steering ability leading to beam 

phase change [18-20].

𝒕


8

(a)
(b)

Figure 2: CST model of (a) individual patch and (b) 2 × 2 patch antenna array for 170 GHz 

resonant frequency where 𝑡 depicts the thickness of the conducting patch.

Depending on the required specifications, one can define various array configurations, such as 

high bandwidth, high gain and improved efficiency. We designed a 2 × 2 patch antenna array for

the resonant frequency of 170 GHz, whose dimensions are optimized using Eqs. (1) − (6). Figure 

2(b) shows an antenna array displaying measurements of the patch and feeding network etched on 

the RO3003 substrate with dimensions 3.55 × 3.0 × 0.254 𝑚𝑚3 . The substrate thickness is kept 

small to get higher bandwidth. A symmetric corporate feeding network is used to feed different

patches of the antenna array with 50 𝑜ℎ𝑚 microstrip lines of width 0.063𝑚𝑚. T- junction 

technique is adapted for uniform power distribution and compact designing as it reduces the 

number of power dividers. The distance between two patches should always lie between 𝜆0/2 to 

𝜆0 enabling maximum scanning range and is optimized as 1.6 𝑚𝑚 in this case. The quarter-wave 

transformer is used to match impedance between the feeding line and the patch to reduce reflection 

losses, which shall be discussed later. Moreover, the excitation of the system is done by a 

waveguide port. 

IV.
POWER CALCULATION

Power Capturing

The maximum effective aperture of an antenna is defined as 𝐴𝑒𝑚 =

𝜆0

2

4𝜋 𝐺0𝑟 where, 𝐺0𝑟 is the 

receiving antenna gain. Using the Friis-Transmission equation, the power collected by the 

receiving antenna is calculated using the following expression

𝑃𝑟
𝑃𝑡

= 𝐴𝑒𝑚𝐺0𝑡

4𝜋𝑅2 = ( 𝜆0

4𝜋𝑅)

2

𝐺0𝑟𝐺0𝑡
(7)

where 𝑃𝑡 is the input power of the source and 𝑅 is the distance between source and antenna. For 

isotropic sources, 𝐺0𝑡 = 1. And (

𝜆0
4𝜋𝑅)

2

is a free-space loss factor that considers the losses due to 

the spherical spreading of the energy by the antenna. Equation (7) relates the power collection


9

capability of an antenna directly to its gain. As we have mentioned earlier, the wide aperture of an 

antenna array endorses higher gain and hence, higher power collection than a single antenna 

element.

Average Power Handling 

The rise in temperature, (i.e., the difference between the maximum operating temperature for 

substrate (𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥) and ambient temperature (𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏)) may determine the average power handling 

capability (APHC) of a system as 

𝑃𝑎𝑣 = (𝑇𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏)/∆𝑇
(8)

Here, temperature gradient (∆𝑇) is the total density of heat flow, having units 𝐶/𝑊
0
, associated 

with conductor (𝛼𝑐) and dielectric (𝛼𝑑) losses, which are defined as follows

𝛼𝑐 = 6.1 × 10−5 𝑍0𝜖𝑒√𝜋𝑓𝜇0/𝜎

ℎ
[𝑊′

ℎ +

0.0667 𝑊′

ℎ

𝑊′
ℎ + 1.444

] [0.5

+ ℎ

𝑊𝑝

(1 + 1.25

𝜋
ln (2ℎ

𝑡 ))]

(9)

𝛼𝑑 = 27.3
𝜖

𝜖 − 1

𝜖𝑒(𝑓) − 1

√𝜖𝑒(𝑓)

tan 𝛿

𝜆0
(10)

∆𝑇 = 0.2303ℎ

𝐾
( 𝛼𝑐
𝑊𝑒(0) +
𝛼𝑑

2𝑊𝑒(𝑓)) ( 𝐶/𝑊
0
)
(11)

The conductivity of the strip conductor is taken as 𝜎 = 5.8 × 104𝑆/𝑚𝑚 whereas the thermal 

conductivity (𝐾) of dielectric RO3003 is 0.5𝑊/𝐾/𝑚. 𝑊𝑒(0) and W′ are static and effective width

and can be evaluated using 𝑊𝑒(0) = 𝑊𝑝 +

𝑡

𝜋 (1 + 𝑙𝑛 (

2ℎ

𝑡 )) and W′ = 𝑊𝑝 + 1.25

𝑡

𝜋 (1 +

𝑙𝑛 (

2ℎ

𝑡 )) 𝑟espectively, where 𝑡 = 0.035𝑚𝑚 is the thickness of the conducting patch (as shown in 

Figure 2(a)). The frequency-dependent effective width can be calculated using the expression

𝑊𝑒(𝑓) = 𝑊𝑝 +

𝑊𝑒(0)−𝑊𝑝

1+( 𝑓

𝑓𝑝)

2 . Using above Eqs. (8) – (11), the APHC of individual antenna patch is 

calculated as 85.6𝑊 for the antenna dimensions derived in Section II. For calculations, the ambient 

temperature is kept as 250𝐶 whereas the operating temperature is 1500𝐶. Simulations performed 


10

for the individual antenna in CST Microwave studio give APHC value 79.5W, closer to the 

analytical one. In Section III later, it will be seen that the APHC value for the antenna array is

0.76𝑘𝑊 , which manifests the viability of the antenna array over the individual patch antenna.

V.
RESULTS

Impedance matching always ensures the maximum power transfer between the source and the 

load. Hence, a noble matching circuit is required for a specific design ensuring its better 

performance. The corporate feed network can use either a quarter-wave transformer or a stub to 

match patch element impedance to standard 50-ohm input impedance. The preferences mentioned 

above for our design are configured in Fig. 3. The important properties of the designed system

with both configurations are simulated using CST Microwave Studio software and examined 

below to check their reliability.

Figure 3: Matching configuration for 2 × 2 antenna array. 

A. S-Parameter and VSWR

The amount of power reflected from the antenna is parametrized by 𝑆11 parameter and Voltage 

Standing Wave Ratio (VSWR) related to each other by the following relation

𝑆11 = 𝑅𝑒𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑛 𝐿𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝑑𝐵) = −20 log10 (𝑉𝑆𝑊𝑅 − 1

𝑉𝑆𝑊𝑅 + 1)
(12)

𝑺𝒕𝒖𝒃
𝝀/𝟒 transformer


11

The antenna bandwidth can also be measured from the VSWR plot over a range of frequencies 

where its value is ≤ 2. The variation of 𝑆11 over the range of frequencies for quarter-wave 

transformer and stub configuration is plotted in Fig. 4. At the resonant frequency, i.e., 170 GHz , 

the minimum value of 𝑆11 is −50 𝑑𝐵 for quarter-wave and −35 𝑑𝐵 for stub configuration. It 

articulates the impedance matching along the propagation path of the signal and effective power 

delivery for quarter-wave transformer configuration.

Figure 4: Variation of S-parameter with the frequency of incident radiation for (a) Quarter-wave 

transformer and (b) stub configuration.

B. Side Lobe Level and Beamwidth

The performance of an antenna is usually measured in terms of gain and its relative 3D radiation 

pattern. The radiation pattern is represented by polar plots as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), measured 

in the far-field antenna range as mentioned earlier. It suggests that the main lobe direction is 

different for both the quarter-wave transformer and the stub configuration for the resonant 

frequency 170 GHz, which is 260 and 70, respectively. However, they possess approximately the 

same magnitude of gain depicted in Fig. 5(c) and (d). Gain IEEE measured in both configurations

does not include the losses associated with the polarization and impedance mismatching. 

(a)
(b)


12

Figure 5: Far field characteristics of antenna array for two configurations (i) quarter-wave 

transformer (a, c); and (ii) stub (b, d).

Far-field characteristics also enable us to investigate two important parameters associated with 

antenna performance. One is Half-Power beamwidth (also known as angular width), defined as the 

angular separation of 3dB in the radiation pattern. It deals with the resolution capabilities of the 

system. And another is the Side-lobe level (SLL), measured by the ratio of the amplitude of the 

main lobe to that of the side lobe. Low SLL minimizes the false target indication through the side 

lobes. There is a trade-off between both parameters and one needs to be compromised over the 

other [21]. We designed a system with a wider reception angle in lieu of high SLL to meet our 

requirements.

The major difference in both the configuration, i.e., stub and quarter-wave transformer, can be 

noted in Fig. 5. In the case of stub configuration, the value of angular width and SLL parameter 

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)


13

are 31.50 and −3.6𝑑𝐵, respectively. However, for quarter-wave transformer these are 70.50 and 

−15.5𝑑𝐵. It is evident from here that the parameters such as bandwidth, gain, S-parameter and 

side-lobe level attain desirable values for antenna array with quarter-wave transformer as a 

matching circuit. In other words, the quarter-wave transformer dominates over the stub in terms of 

better impedance matching, which makes it suitable for our desired application. 

C. Efficiency 

The power supplied to the system generally dispenses into surface-wave excitation, radiation 

emission and conductor and dielectric dissipation. Radiation efficiency is defined as the ratio of 

power radiated to the power inserted into the antenna system which is plotted in Fig. 6 for the 

2 × 2 antenna array. It also encompasses the total efficiency of the system that takes into account 

all 𝐼2𝑅 losses and the reflections arise due to mismatching between the antenna and the 

transmission line. 

Figure 6: Variation of efficiency of antenna array with the frequency.

For better understanding, we summarized the above-discussed properties of the individual 

patch antenna and the antenna array (with two different matching circuit configurations) in tabular 

form in Table 2. Here, we conclude the superiority of the 2×2 antenna array with a quarter-wave 


14

transformer over other systems in terms of return loss, bandwidth, efficiency, angular width and 

SLL. 

Table 2: Comparison between individual antenna patch and antenna array with two configurations.

VI.
CONCLUSION

A 2 × 2 microstrip antenna array has been designed and simulated successfully for the resonant 

frequency of 170 GHz using CST Microwave Studio software. The dominance of the antenna array 

over the individual patch has been proved while investigating their properties and power handling 

capabilities. However, continuous increment in the number of patches of an antenna array 

enhances its directivity further and decreases its angular width. Hence, the 2 × 2 antenna 

geometry reasonably satisfies our desired requirements. Significant properties of the designed 

system such as S-parameter, VSWR, gain, beamwidth, side-lobe level, efficiency have been 

estimated and discussed. A comparative study of the two matching circuits, i.e., stub and quarter-

wave transformer, have also been performed. The designed system's power-handling capability is 

also evaluated to check its reliability. At resonant frequency 170 GHz, the return loss is -50 dB, 

angular width is 70.50 and the gain is 8.6dBi for the designed antenna. The simulation results show 


15

that the designed system fulfills required characteristics and is recommended for high-frequency 

detector applications. 

The future work is to design a detector system for application in ECE diagnostic components

protection, utilizing this designed antenna. 

VII.
REFERENCES:

[1] R. Mishra, 2016. An Overview of Microstrip Antenna, HCTL Open International Journal 

of Technology Innovations and Research (IJTIR), vol.21, pp.2-4.

[2] Zhu, J., Fox, J. J., Yi, N., & Cheng, H. (2019). Structural design for stretchable microstrip 

antennas. ACS applied materials & interfaces, 11(9), 8867-8877.

[3] Awl, H. N., Abdulkarim, Y. I., Deng, L., Bakır, M., Muhammadsharif, F. F., Karaaslan, 

M., ... & Luo, H. (2020). Bandwidth improvement in bow-tie microstrip antennas: the 

effect of substrate type and design dimensions. Applied Sciences, 10(2), 504.

[4] Dakulagi, V., & Bakhar, M. (2020). Advances in smart antenna systems for wireless 

communication. Wireless Personal Communications, 110(2), 931-957.

[5] Sabban, A. (2018, January). Small wearable antennas for wireless communication and 

medical systems. In 2018 IEEE radio and wireless symposium (RWS) (pp. 161-164). IEEE.

[6] Song, L., & Tian, X. (2019). A wide-beam antenna based on missile telemetry system. The 

Applied Computational Electromagnetics Society Journal (ACES), 661-668.

[7] Udintsev, V. S., Danani, S., Taylor, G., Giacomin, T., Guirao, J., Pak, S., ... & Gimbert, N. 

(2019). Progress in ITER ECE Diagnostic Design and integration. In EPJ Web of 

Conferences (Vol. 203, p. 03003). EDP Sciences.

[8] Dwivedi, M., Dhawan, R., Punia, S., & Malik, H. K. (2019, August). Relativistic self-

focusing of Laguerre-Gaussian beam in an underdense plasma. In AIP Conference 

Proceedings (Vol. 2136, No. 1, p. 060006). AIP Publishing LLC.

[9] Pandya, H. K. B., Kumar, R., Danani, S., Shrishail, P., Thomas, S., Kumar, V., ... & Walsh, 

M. J. (2017, March). ITER ECE Diagnostic: Design Progress of IN-DA and the diagnostic 

role for Physics. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series (Vol. 823, No. 1, p. 012033). 

IOP Publishing.


16

[10]
Danani, S., Austin, M. E., Brookman, M. W., Pandya, H. K. B., & Kumar, V. 

(2017). Testing of the Prototype Receiver for ITER ECE Diagnostic. In EPJ Web of 

Conferences (Vol. 147, p. 02004). EDP Sciences.

[11]
Oosterbeek, J. W., Stern, M., Hirsch, M., Laqua, H., Marsen, S., Noke, F., et al. 

(2020). ITER ECRH protection: Microwave stray radiation exposure of in-vessel 

components. Talk presented at 62nd Annual Meeting of the APS Division of Plasma 

Physics. Virtual Edition. 2020-11-09 - 2020-11-13.

[12]
Moseev, D., Oosterbeek, J. W., Sirinelli, A., Corre, Y., Houry, M., Korsholm, S. 

B., ... & Udintsev, V. (2021). Stray radiation energy fluxes in ITER based on a 

multiresonator model. Fusion Engineering and Design, 172, 112754.

[13]
Hassanein, A., & Sizyuk, V. (2021). Potential design problems for ITER fusion 

device. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 1-11.

[14]
Bigot, B. (2017). ITER: a unique international collaboration to harness the power 

of the stars. Comptes Rendus Physique, 18(7-8), 367-371.

[15]
Punia, S., & Malik, H. K. (2021). Trifocal THz radiation and its tuning by dark 

hollow laser beams in collisional plasma. IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science, 49(2), 

934-941.

[16]
Punia, S., & Malik, H. K. (2020). Generation and regulation of electron vortices in 

an underdense plasma by Laguerre-Gaussian laser pulses. Results in Physics, 18, 103216.

[17]
H. Cheng-Chi, et al., 200. An aperture-coupled linear microstrip leaky-wave 

antenna array with two-dimensional dual-beam scanning capability," Antennas and 

Propagation, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 48, pp. 909-913.

[18]
A. Abbaspour-Tamijani and K. Sarabandi, 2003. An affordable millimeter-wave 

beam-steerable antenna using interleaved planar subarrays, Antennas and Propagation, 

IEEE Transactions on, vol. 51, pp. 2193-2202. 

[19]
A. Boufrioua and A. Benghalia, 2006. Effects of the resistive patch and the 

uniaxial anisotropic substrate on the resonant frequency and the scattering radar cross-

section of a rectangular microstrip antenna," Aerospace science and technology, vol. 10, 

pp. 217-221.


17

[20]
Kushwaha, R.S.; Srivastava, D.K.; Saini, J.P.;Dhupkariya, S., 2012. Bandwidth 

Enhancement for Microstrip Patch Antenna with Microstrip Line Feed, Computer and 

Communication Technology (ICCCT), vol., no., pp.183-185.

[21]
Pinchera, D. (2020). On the trade-off between the main parameters of planar 

antenna arrays. Electronics, 9(5), 739.

------------------------------------------------


