CVD Growth of Tin Selenide Thin Films for
Optoelectronic Applications

Shivam Tyagi
School of Physics
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Thiruvananthapuram, India

Shubham Yadav
School of Physics
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Thiruvananthapuram, India

Vaibhav Wani
School of Physics
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Thiruvananthapuram, India

Shivam Singh
School of Physics
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Thiruvananthapuram, India

Soumya Biswas
School of Physics
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Thiruvananthapuram, India

Krishna Nand Prajapati
School of Physics
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Thiruvananthapuram, India

Vinayak B Kamble*
School of Physics
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research
Thiruvananthapuram, India
kbvinayak@iisertvm.ac.in

Abstract—Tin Selenide (SnSe) thin films were grown onto glass
and alumina substrates by Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD)
method. The structural, micro-structural and morphological char-
acterizations of the as grown thin films were investigated using
XRD, SEM and Raman spectroscopy which reveals that the films
on glass are phase pure oriented SnSe while those on Alumina
are polycrystalline SnSe with SnSe2 impurity phase. The optical
properties of the films grown onto glass substrate were studied
by UV-vis spectroscopy. The optical band gap calculated is 1 to
1.3 eV for indirect and direct transition in film deposited on
glass substrates. The Arrhenius plots of the two films show very
different thermal activations i.e. 0.088 eV for tin vacancy acceptor
level close to valance band maxima in pure SnSe and 0.44 eV for
mid gap selenium vacancies of SnSe2. Photoresponse was observed
by illuminating the sample (Glass and alumina Substrate) using
white and UV light (400 nm) for a fixed time pulses. The deposited
onto Alumina substrate were found to show better photoresponse
due to SnSe/SnSe2 p-n heterojunctions.
Index Terms—Tin selenide, CVD, optoelectronics, sensors, thin
films

I. INTRODUCTION

Two-dimensional
(2D)
layered
chalcogenide
materials
(LCMs), especially the IVA-VIA group, have attracted tremen-
dous attention to the demands for next generation electronics
and optoelectronics. Bulk SnSe is a p-type semiconductor with

*email: kbvinayak@iisertvm.ac.in

Fig. 1.
Systematic illustration of SnSe thin film deposition by Chemical
deposition method.

an indirect band gap of ∼ 0.9 eV and a direct band gap of ∼ 1.3
eV [1], [2]. SnSe is a versatile material with a wide variety of
applications in optoelectronics, sensors, thermoelectrics etc [1].
Due to its small bandgap and layered structure it is exploited
for a broadband photodetector application as it absorbs most
of the NIR, visible and UV spectrum [3].
Recently, several research groups have reported that pure
phase 2D SnSe and SnSe2 can be synthesized by methods
such as micromechanical exfoliation, solution based meth-
ods, vapor deposition, plasma-assisted method etc [2], [4],
[5]. Nevertheless, the challenge lies in controlling the phase

arXiv:2208.13993v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  30 Aug 2022


Fig. 2.
The X-ray diffraction patterns of SnSe thin films deposited on (a)
glass substrate and (b) Alumina substrate. (The SnSe peak has been shown
with square in (b)

purity to get single-phase SnSe or SnSe2 because Sn2+ in
the precursor is readily oxidized into Sn4+, resulting in a
mixture of SnSe and SnSe2. As thin film technology can
be integrated into most emerging electronic and optoelectronic
devices, the development of thin film phase selection is of great
significance. Here, our aim is to go for the deposition of single
layer pure phase SnSe by CVD process. In this report, we are
preparing SnSe nanopowder as a precursor for SnSe thin film
deposition by using a simple hydrothermal route mentioned
below. The prepared SnSe precursor is used directly in CVD
growth SnSe.
He et al. [6] used Se and SnSe powder as precursors to
prepare SnSe and SnSe2 nanosheets by the method of vapor
deposition (VD). The phase transition of a similar system of tin
sulfides was realized by the addition of H2 [7] and regulating
the temperature [8] in a CVD process. Boscher et al. [9]
obtained SnSe and SnSe2 thin films on glass via atmospheric
pressure (AP) CVD. Huang et al. [6] also studied the effect
of growth temperature on the phase of the products. From the
above results [6], [9] it is evident that the temperature plays
a crucial role in the phase formation of tin selenide films.
However, the critical temperature of the tin selenide phase
transition varied from 650oC [9] to 510oC [6]. In a process
where VD preparation was carried out in the atmosphere, the
phase transition temperature raised to 650oC [9]. For the top-
down preparation via VD, SnSe2 films were beneficial to be
prepared at reaction temperature between 300oC and 470oC,
and SnSe films could be grown at 230oC to 280oC or 500oC
to 570oC [10].

Fig. 3. Raman Spectra of the films deposited on (a) glass substrate and (b)
Alumina substrate.

In this paper, we report the fabrication of phase pure SnSe
thin films through optimization of CVD process parameters.
The films deposited on amorphous (glass) and crystalline
(alumina) substrates show very different crystallinity and hence
markedly different transport properties. Although the films
deposited on glass are highly textured along (400) i.e. the crys-
talline axis of 2D layers of the structure, a better photoresponse
is observed for polycrystalline films on Alumina substrates.

II. EXPERIMENTAL

Tin (II) chloride dihydrate (SnCl2.2H2O, 98%, MERCK),
selenium powder (Se, 99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich), Potassium Hy-
droxide pellets (KOH, 84%, MERCK) and sodium hydroxide
(NaOH, 98%, Sigma Aldrich) were used for the synthesis with-
out any further purification. SnSe nanoplates were successfully
synthesized using simple hydrothermal method route [11]. First
a mixture of SnCl2.2H2O (1 mmol, 0.2253 gm) was dissolved
in deionized water (40 ml). The solution was then stirred at
room temperature for 5 min, followed by the addition of KOH
(10 mmol, 0.5611 gm) and stirred for another 15 min unless a
transparent solution was obtained. Se powder (1mmol, 0.0789
gm) was added to the above solution and stirred for 15 min
at room temperature and the solution turned grayish black.
Furthermore, NaBH4 (5 mmol, 0.1891 gm) was mixed in the
solution and stirred for another 30 min; this turned the solution
to pale yellow. The mixture was then transferred to a teflon-
lined stainless-steel autoclave of 50 ml capacity and sealed
tightly and heated to 170 oC for 12h. After cooling to room
temperature, the black precipitate was collected and thoroughly
washed with ethanol and deionized water for several times.
Finally, the product was vacuum dried for 10 h and collected
as powder.
As prepared SnSe (nanoplates) powder was used as a pre-
cursor for SnSe growth by Chemical vapour deposition method


Fig. 4. The SEM micrographs of SnSe thin films deposited on (a and b) on glass substrate and (c) on Alumina substrate. (d) The EDS spectrum of SnSe thin
film showing only Sn and Se along with composition of glass

as shown in FIG 1. The glass and silicon substrates were
cleaned in soap water, distilled water, acetone and IPA. The
Experiment was performed in a deposition chamber that has
two zone furnaces: zone I and zone II. To grow SnSe thin
film, precursor was kept in an alumina boat in the centre of
Zone II. The cleaned substrates were placed in Zone I at (21
cm - 28 cm) distance from the precursor in Zone I (FIG 1).
Further, the tube was pumped down to remove the extra oxygen
present in the deposition chamber. The temperature gradient
was maintained at 800oC for Zone II and 350oC for Zone I
[12]. To grow SnSe thin films Ar flow was maintained at 100
SCCM by mass flow controller and pressure was controlled
at 1 mbar in the deposition chamber. After 15-20 minute of
growth time, the furnace was left to cool down naturally to
room temperature. Here SnSe thin films was deposited on glass
and alumina substrates.

III. RESULTS

A. structural studies

X-Ray diffraction patterns were obtained and analyzed to
find the phase structure of SnSe thin films (FIG 2). These
corresponding peaks are consistent with peaks of orthorhombic
SnSe reported in the literature [13]. The XRD pattern shows
sharp peaks at (200), (400) and (800) reflections indicating
a (h00) preferred orientation in film deposited on glass. This

confirms pure phase SnSe thin films are at 24 cm distance from
the precursor. Whereas, the XRD patterns of films deposited
at closer and further distances show mixed impurity of SnSe2
[14]. On the other hand, the films deposited on alumina sub-
strate (FIG 2(b)) did not show any such preferred orientation.
It is possible that due to the small thickness of films compared
to the crystalline substrate most reflections are observed from
the alumina substrate. Nevertheless, it certainly rules out any
possibility of texture (preferred orientation) in the films. The
rhombohedral lattice of Alumina has no crystalline relationship
with that of orthorhombic SnSe and hence no strong orientation
observed on the polycrystalline substrate. The position of most
probable peaks of SnSe are marked with the box in FIG 2(b).
Whereas the only new peak observed in the film compared to
Alumina has been marked by an asterisk (*), which matches
(800) peak position.

Raman Spectroscopy measurement was performed to investi-
gate the quality of as-grown SnSe thin films. Five distinct peaks
were observed at 70.91, 104.39, 120.77, 153.01, 183.28 cm−1

(FIG 3). Here, Ag and B3g are two rigid shear modes of a layer
with respect to its neighbour and confirm the planar vibration
modes of orthorhombic phase SnSe.[ [13], [15] The highest
intensity peak was observed at 70.91cm−1 which corresponds
to A1g vibrational mode. [15]. The last peak (A1g) is attributed
to the vibrational mode of SnSe2. Thus it may be confirmed


Fig. 5.
(a) The UV-vis absorption spectra of SnSe thin films deposited on
glass substrate and (b) its Tauc plot showing band gap vaue of about 1.4 eV.

that both glass as well as Alumina substrate films have SnSe
formed while the alumina substrate film has SnSe2 impurity
phase.

B. Film morphology

The Scanning Electron Microscopy images of SnSe thin
films on glass as well as alumina substrates are shown in
FIG 4.It may be seen from the figure that films on the glass
have smoother flat platelets compared to the rough surface of
alumina substrate films. The roughness could be due to inherent
roughness of the alumina substrate and a conformal coating
deposited by the CVD method. These results are in good
agreement with results obtained in XRD [12]. The typical film
thicknesses measured for glass substrates using a profilometer
are 80-100 nm.
The Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) spectra of the
films on glass is shown in FIG 4(d). It may be seen that along
with the constituent of soda lime glass, only Sn and Se peaks
are observed. The typical relative percentages of Sn and Se
obtained are summarized in Table below.
From the EDS spectra quantification, it is apparent that film
deposited on glass has lower Sn content while that of alumina
substrate films has it in excess. It may be noted that these
numbers cannot be taken sacrosanct and are just indicative
of relative composition. A complete mapping of EDS or XPS
could provide more accurate quantifications.

C. Optical studies

The optical absorption was studied by UV-Visible ab-
sorbance spectrum ranging from 350 - 800 nm. The absorbance
spectrum is shown in FIG 5(a). The films show high absorbance
over the entire uv-visible spectrum. The value of the energy

TABLE I
THE SUMMARY OF ELEMENTAL QUANTIFICATION USING ENERGY
DISPERSIVE SPECTROSCOPY FOR SNSE FILMS ON GLASS AND ALUMINA

element
Glass substrate
Alumina substrate

Sn (L)
1.53
0.35

Se (K)
2.58
0.17

Sn:Se
0.6:1
2.05:1

bandgap of SnSe thin films deposited Glass Substrate was
calculated from the Tauc plot using the following relation:

αhν = A(hν − Eg)1/n
(1)

where, α is the absorption coefficient, A is the proportion-
ality constant, hν is incident photon energy and Eg is the
band gap of the material. For direct band gap, value of n is
taken to be
and for indirect n is 2. So, Eg was determined
via extrapolating the linear region of the curve of (αhν)1/n

versus hν cuts the abscissa. For the indirect transition, the
range of data measured was insufficient and hence extrapolated
as shown. In FIG 5(b) it may be noticed that the value of band
gaps for SnSe thin film deposited is found to be about ∼1
eV and 1.3 eV for indirect and direct transitions respectively.
These are good agreements as reported in the literature [1].

D. Transport measurements

CVD grown SnSe thin films conduction mechanism was
identified using temperature dependent current voltage char-
acteristics. I-V characteristics were taken for glass and alu-
mina substrate samples. SnSe is reported to show anomalous
semiconductor to metal like and again semiconducting trend
in resistivity due to bipolar effect and structural transition at
550 K and 800 K respectively [16]. However, within the range
of temperature studied in this work, both the samples showed
semiconducting nature as seen in FIG 6(a). Nevertheless, the
room temperature resistance of textured film was very low
compared to that of polycrystalline film. This could be due to
lattice mismatch at the grain boundary in polycrystalline film
[17], [18]. Whereas the textured film shows (400) orientation
which depicts the 2D nature of films (as SnSe has a layered
structure along the a-axis), the lattice mismatch is minimal.
On the other hand, when temperature is raised, the carriers

Fig. 6. (a) The variation of resistance with temperature for film on glass ((400)
textured) and Alumina (polycrystalline. (b) The Arrhenius plot of the two films
showing very different thermal activation energies of 0.46 eV and 0.088 eV
for glass and alumina substrates respectively.


Fig. 7.
The phtoresponse for polycrystalline films on alumina substrate (a)
320 nm and (b) 532 nm and phtoresponse for oriented films on glass substrate
(c) 320 nm and (d) 532 nm.

are excited thermally and the thermal excitation energy is
calculated using the Arrhenius relation,

R = R0 exp(E/kBT)
(2)

where, R0 is resistance at reference temperature (T=0) and kB
is Boltzmann constant. E is the energy of thermal activation.
SnSe shows p-type conductivity due to presence of tin
vacancies (V 2−
Sn ) which gives rise to an acceptor level just
above the valence band [19]. The activation energy calculated
for glass substrate is found to be 88 meV which could be due
to activation carriers to defect level state within the gap. Due
to excess defects (VSn) the film shows very high conductivity
and lower activation energy. Whereas the activation energy
obtained for polycrystalline films having SnSe2 impurity is 0.44
eV which is almost half the bandgap value and hence depicts
a thermal activation across the band edge. However, in that
case thermal activation should result in bipolar conductivity
which could be responsible for a steep fall of resistance
with temperature due to bipolar conduction. Such activation is
observed in As doped SnSe wherein substitution occurs at Sn
site and the dominant defect is Se vacancies (V 2+
Se ) which lies
approximately 0.4 eV above the valence band edge. [20] SnSe2
being an n-type conductor, the presence of impurity phases
results in heterojunction barriers.

E. Photoresponse

Here we observed the dark and photocurrent at a fixed
voltage under the illuminating UV light (320 nm) and green
(532 nm) for SnSe deposition alumina substrate [FIG 7(a) and
(b)] as well as on glass substrate [Fig 7]. There was a sharp
photocurrent increase with light intensity in both the cases,
however, the overall time taken to saturation (response) and
recovery was lower for that of glass substrate film. When
normalized with baseline current, the response i.e. ∆I/I for
glass substrate film turned out to be low compared to alumina
substrate film. (see table 8).
This difference in response could be due to the effect of p-
n junction hetero-interface which formed due to the impurity
phase of SnSe2 (n-type) in the matrix of SnSe (p-type) [21],
[22]. Nevertheless, the response time due to this showed two
time constant like one initial fast rise and then a slow rise going

to saturation. For UV light photo current response was larger
than white light.

IV. CONCLUSION

Tin selenide (SnSe) powder was prepared by using a hy-
drothermal method. This was used as a precursor for thin
film deposition by CVD method. Here, we deposited SnSe
on glass and Alumina substrates. It was found that different
type of substrates influence on SnSe thin films crystallinity and
phase purity. XRD, Raman and SEM confirm the orthorhombic
structure of preferred orientation with layered structure of the
SnSe thin films on glass. On the other hand Alumina substrate
films show no preferred orientation and impurity phase SnSe2
phase. The optical band gap varies nearly 1 eV to 1.17 eV. The
R-T measurements show that the glass substrate films have very
low thermal activation energy with high conductivity, while that
of alumina substrate films show almost half the bandgap energy
as activation energy and possible bipolar effect. Photoresponse
was observed in SnSe thin deposition onto alumina as well
as glass substrate using white light and UV light. Here SnSe
deposited onto Alumina substrate showed better photosensing
properties due to SnSe/SnSe2 heterojunction inhomogeneities.
Thus, a facile synthesis method is reported for fabrication of
SnSe thin films and potential photosensing studies have been
explored. Further studies quantifying the photoresponse are
ongoing.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The
authors
are
thankful
to
Science
and
Engineer-
ing
Research
Board,
Govt.
of
India
for
the
funding
(EEQ/2018/000769).

REFERENCES

[1] M. Kumar, S. Rani, Y. Singh, K. S. Gour, and V. N. Singh, “Tin-selenide
as a futuristic material: properties and applications,” RSC Advances,
vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 6477–6503, 2021.

[2] J. Zhang, H. Zhu, X. Wu, H. Cui, D. Li, J. Jiang, C. Gao, Q. Wang,
and Q. Cui, “Plasma-assisted synthesis and pressure-induced structural
transition of single-crystalline SnSe nanosheets,” Nanoscale, vol. 7,
no. 24, pp. 10 807–10 816, 2015.

Fig. 8.
The phtoresponse to (a) UV light 320 nm and (b) green light 532
nm for textured films deposited on Glass substrate and polycrystalline film on
alumina substrate.


[3] M. Kang, S. Rathi, I. Lee, L. Li, M. A. Khan, D. Lim, Y. Lee, J. Park,
A. T. Pham, A. T. Duong et al., “Photodetector based on multilayer SnSe2
field effect transistor,” Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,
vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 4243–4247, 2018.

[4] Y. Gong, C. Chang, W. Wei, J. Liu, W. Xiong, S. Chai, D. Li, J. Zhang,
and G. Tang, “Extremely low thermal conductivity and enhanced ther-
moelectric performance of polycrystalline SnSe by Cu doping,” Scripta
Materialia, vol. 147, pp. 74–78, 2018.

[5] F. Davitt, H. G. Manning, F. Robinson, S. L. Hawken, S. Biswas,
N. Petkov, M. van Druenen, J. J. Boland, G. Reid, and J. D. Holmes,
“Crystallographically controlled synthesis of SnSe nanowires: potential in
resistive memory devices,” Advanced Materials Interfaces, vol. 7, no. 16,
p. 2000474, 2020.

[6] Y. Huang, K. Xu, Z. Wang, T. A. Shifa, Q. Wang, F. Wang, C. Jiang,
and J. He, “Designing the shape evolution of SnSe2 nanosheets and their
optoelectronic properties,” Nanoscale, vol. 7, no. 41, pp. 17 375–17 380,
2015.

[7] J.-H. Ahn, M.-J. Lee, H. Heo, J. H. Sung, K. Kim, H. Hwang, and M.-H.
Jo, “Deterministic two-dimensional polymorphism growth of hexagonal
n-type SnS2 and orthorhombic p-type SnS crystals,” Nano letters, vol. 15,
no. 6, pp. 3703–3708, 2015.

[8] Z. Mutlu, R. J. Wu, D. Wickramaratne, S. Shahrezaei, C. Liu, S. Temiz,
A. Patalano, M. Ozkan, R. K. Lake, K. Mkhoyan et al., “Phase engineer-
ing of 2d tin sulfides,” Small, vol. 12, no. 22, pp. 2998–3004, 2016.

[9] N. D. Boscher, C. J. Carmalt, R. G. Palgrave, and I. P. Parkin, “At-
mospheric pressure chemical vapour deposition of SnSe and SnSe2 thin
films on glass,” Thin solid films, vol. 516, no. 15, pp. 4750–4757, 2008.

[10] P. Fernandes, M. Sousa, P. M. Salome, J. Leit˜ao, and A. d. Da Cunha,
“Thermodynamic pathway for the formation of SnSe and SnSe2 polycrys-
talline thin films by selenization of metal precursors,” CrystEngComm,
vol. 15, no. 47, pp. 10 278–10 286, 2013.

[11] M. Nerella, M. B. Suresh, and S. Bathulapalli, “Effect of na doping on
structural, optical, and dielectric properties of SnSe polycrystals,” Journal
of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 4347–
4362, 2021.

[12] D. Lu, C. Yue, S. Luo, Z. Li, W. Xue, X. Qi, and J. Zhong, “Phase con-
trollable synthesis of SnSe and SnSe2 films with tunable photoresponse
properties,” Applied Surface Science, vol. 541, p. 148615, 2021.

[13] S. Afrin, N. Kuperman, and R. Solanki, “Atomic layer deposition of
2-dimensional, semiconducting SnSe thin films,” in 2018 IEEE 13th
Nanotechnology Materials and Devices Conference (NMDC), 2018, pp.
1–4.

[14] P. Ramasamy, P. Manivasakan, and J. Kim, “Phase controlled synthesis
of SnSe and SnSe2 hierarchical nanostructures made of single crystalline
ultrathin nanosheets,” CrystEngComm, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 807–813, 2015.

[15] X. Xu, Q. Song, H. Wang, P. Li, K. Zhang, Y. Wang, K. Yuan, Z. Yang,
Y. Ye, and L. Dai, “In-plane anisotropies of polarized raman response and
electrical conductivity in layered tin selenide,” ACS Applied Materials &
Interfaces, vol. 9, no. 14, pp. 12 601–12 607, 2017.

[16] I. Loa, S. Popuri, A. Fortes, and J. Bos, “Critical mode and band-gap-
controlled bipolar thermoelectric properties of SnSe,” Physical Review
Materials, vol. 2, no. 8, p. 085405, 2018.

[17] L.-D. Zhao, S.-H. Lo, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, G. Tan, C. Uher, C. Wolverton,
V. P. Dravid, and M. G. Kanatzidis, “Ultralow thermal conductivity and
high thermoelectric figure of merit in SnSe crystals,” Nature, vol. 508,
no. 7496, pp. 373–377, 2014.

[18] M. R. Burton, T. Liu, J. McGettrick, S. Mehraban, J. Baker, A. Pockett,
T. Watson, O. Fenwick, and M. J. Carnie, “Thin film tin selenide (SnSe)
thermoelectric generators exhibiting ultralow thermal conductivity,” Ad-
vanced Materials, vol. 30, no. 31, p. 1801357, 2018.

[19] W. Wei, C. Chang, T. Yang, J. Liu, H. Tang, J. Zhang, Y. Li, F. Xu,
Z. Zhang, J.-F. Li et al., “Achieving high thermoelectric figure of merit
in polycrystalline SnSe via introducing sn vacancies,” Journal of the
American Chemical Society, vol. 140, no. 1, pp. 499–505, 2018.

[20] J. Navr´atil, K. ˇSraitrov´a, V. Kucek, T. Plech´aˇcek, J. Kaˇsparov´a, and
ˇC. Draˇsar, “Investigation of an amphoteric behaviour of arsenic dopant
in polycrystalline SnSe,” Scientific papers of the University of Pardubice.
Series A, Faculty of Chemical Technology. 24/2018, 2018.

[21] S. Gowthamaraju, U. Deshpande, and P. Bhobe, “Augmentation of the
thermoelectric properties of polycrystalline tin selenides via formation

of SnSe/SnSe2 composites,” Journal of Materials Science: Materials in
Electronics, vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 11 781–11 790, 2021.

[22] Y. Zhong, L. Zhang, W. Chen, and H. Zhu, “Macro van der waals pn
heterojunction based on SnSe and SnSe2,” Nanotechnology, vol. 31,
no. 38, p. 385203, 2020.


