Nanomechanical Resonators: Toward Atomic
Scale

Bo Xu,† Pengcheng Zhang,† Jiankai Zhu,† Zuheng Liu,† Alexander Eichler, Xu-Qian Zheng, Jaesung Lee,
Aneesh Dash, Swapnil More, Song Wu, Yanan Wang, Hao Jia, Akshay Naik,* Adrian Bachtold,
Rui Yang,* Philip X.-L. Feng,* and Zenghui Wang*

Cite This: ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585
Read Online

ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations

ABSTRACT: The quest for realizing and manipulating ever
smaller man-made movable structures and dynamical machines
has spurred tremendous endeavors, led to important discoveries,
and inspired researchers to venture to previously unexplored
grounds. Scientific feats and technological milestones of
miniaturization of mechanical structures have been widely
accomplished by advances in machining and sculpturing ever
shrinking features out of bulk materials such as silicon. With the
flourishing multidisciplinary field of low-dimensional nanoma-
terials, including one-dimensional (1D) nanowires/nanotubes
and two-dimensional (2D) atomic layers such as graphene/
phosphorene, growing interests and sustained effort have been
devoted to creating mechanical devices toward the ultimate limit
of miniaturization�genuinely down to the molecular or even atomic scale. These ultrasmall movable structures, particularly
nanomechanical resonators that exploit the vibratory motion in these 1D and 2D nano-to-atomic-scale structures, offer
exceptional device-level attributes, such as ultralow mass, ultrawide frequency tuning range, broad dynamic range, and
ultralow power consumption, thus holding strong promises for both fundamental studies and engineering applications. In this
Review, we offer a comprehensive overview and summary of this vibrant field, present the state-of-the-art devices and evaluate
their specifications and performance, outline important achievements, and postulate future directions for studying these
miniscule yet intriguing molecular-scale machines.
KEYWORDS: one-dimensional materials, two-dimensional materials, nanoelectromechanical systems, resonators, dynamic range,
frequency tuning, sensing, radio frequency, signal processing, quantum engineering

1. INTRODUCTION

Exploring mechanical degrees of freedom in genuinely nanoscale
structures, such as molecules and nanomaterials, can lead to
intriguing findings and devices at unconventional scales less
familiar with everyday life experiences but imagination-
capturing. For example, the exploration and demonstration of
molecular rotors, shuttles, valves, muscles, transporters, etc.,
have witnessed the rise of the exciting research field of molecular
machines, highlighted by the 2016 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.1−3

Thanks to their infinitesimal sizes, molecular machines can
engage in very fast linear/translational motion or rotary motion,
for example, in molecular motors the rotational frequency can
reach 12 megahertz (MHz), equivalent to millions of cycles per
second.1,4,5 Such exquisite and high-speed motions at the
molecular scale are fascinating and suggest far-reaching potential
for both fundamental research and future applications.

Among the different categories of nanoscale mechanical
structures, nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) stand out
as an important hallmark of devices, which leverage the
mechanical degrees of freedom in nanostructures through
deliberately designed device geometries. Further, by coupling
different (e.g., electrical, optical, thermal, and magnetic)
excitations (or information carriers) to the mechanical motion,
NEMS structures have enabled a plethora of device research and
applications.

Received:
March 11, 2022

Accepted:
August 12, 2022

Published: September 2, 2022

Review

www.acsnano.org

© 2022 The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society

15545

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

Downloaded via UNIV ELECTRONIC SCI & TECHLGY CHINA on November 20, 2022 at 11:25:45 (UTC).

See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.


Compared with quasi-static behaviors, dynamical operations
of NEMS are more important and relevant. The most-studied
type is NEMS resonators, which harness the vibrational modes
in nanostructures, and have been demonstrated using different
nanomaterials. One important category is derived from one-
dimensional (1D) nanomaterials, such as nanowires (NWs) and
nanotubes (NTs),6−9 in which the extreme aspect ratio (length
over diameter or width) and outstanding mechanical properties
are leveraged to form high-performance nanomechanical
resonators. For example, suspended silicon (Si) NWs grown
over microtrenches can form doubly clamped NEMS resonators,
with resonance frequency over 200 MHz.10 Carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) can also be used to build NEMS resonators.11 With
their low flexural stiffness and large stretchability, they can
realize highly tunable resonant responses: In one example, it was
possible to tune the resonance frequency of a device by more
than 2000%.12 Such broad tuning range is not readily attainable
in mechanical resonators machined from bulk materials (such as
microfabricated silicon resonators) or even resonators based on
thicker Si NWs.
Suspending two-dimensional (2D) materials enables fabrica-
tion of atomically thin mechanical resonators. The exploration
of 2D NEMS resonators started with graphene. Thanks to the
material’s high Young’s modulus (up to 1 terapascal, TPa),13

ultrasmall mass due to the atomic thickness (0.335 nm), and
high carrier mobility (over 106 cm2 V−1 s−1 at low temper-
ature),14,15 graphene resonators have been under intensive
research since 200716 and have led to many exciting findings.
Over the time, NEMS resonators based on 2D materials other
than graphene, such as transition-metal dichalcogenides
(TMDCs),17,18 black phosphorus (black P),19 hexagonal
boron nitride (h-BN),20 2D magnetic layers,21,22 and wide-
bandgap crystals23 have also emerged, giving rise to a plethora of
exciting research discoveries. Interestingly, 2D materials can be

stacked into heterostructures (HSs), enabling nearly endless
possibilities for creating and optimizing different types of 2D
NEMS resonators.
In this Review, we offer a comprehensive and detailed survey
about NEMS resonators based on 1D and 2D nanomaterials
(Figure 1.1). We start by introducing the material choice and
fabrication techniques (Section 2), followed by excitation and
detection techniques (Section 3). We then summarize the state-
of-the-art device specifications and performance in different
metrics for both 1D (Section 4) and 2D NEMS resonators
(Section 5). Section 6 discusses mode shapes (spatial profile of
different resonant modes) and techniques for visualizing them.
We then discuss the tuning of resonance frequency (Section 7)
as well as quality (Q) factor and damping in NEMS resonators
(Section 8). Dynamic response beyond simple harmonic
motion, such as nonlinearity (Section 9) and mode coupling
behavior (Section 10) are also presented. In terms of
applications, we survey the demonstration of NEMS resonators
in sensing (Section 11), signal processing, and fundamental
researches such as quantum experiments (Section 12). We
conclude by sharing our vision about the challenges and
opportunities in this highly vibrant field (Section 13).

2. MATERIAL CHOICE AND FABRICATION
TECHNIQUES
2.1. Low-Dimensional Materials Used for NEMS
Resonators. Many different types of 1D and 2D materials
have been explored for realizing NEMS resonators, which
demonstrate different mechanical, optical, magnetic, and
electrical properties. The list has grown significantly over the
years and is still expanding.
2.1.1. 1D Nanomaterials for NEMS Resonators. This
category mostly includes NWs and NTs based on different
materials. Among NWs,24−29 Si NW is the most commonly

Figure 1.1. Nanomechanical resonators enabled by diverse 1D and 2D nanomaterials. SEM images and optical images are reprinted in part with
permission from ref 10, copyright 2007 American Chemical Society; from ref 19, copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry; from ref 63,
copyright 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee AAAS. Distributed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 license http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/; from ref 125, copyright 2014 American Chemical Society; from ref 179, copyright 2021 American
Chemical Society; from ref 198, copyright 2006 American Chemical Society; and under a Creative Commons (CC BY) License from ref 20,
copyright 2017 Springer Nature, respectively.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15546


explored type for building NEMS resonators, while CNT is by
far the most extensively studied type of NTs in this regard. In
fact, the exploration of low-dimensional material-based NEMS
resonators largely started with CNT resonators,11 which have
been demonstrated by many research groups over the years,
leading to a number of important findings and a series of records
being refreshed.30

2.1.2. 2D Nanomaterials for NEMS Resonators. Although
started later than 1D NEMS, the research of 2D NEMS has been
growing fast, and many different types of 2D materials have been
explored for building NEMS resonators.31 This list now includes
graphene, 2D semiconductors, 2D magnets, wide-bandgap 2D
materials, and continues to expand. Furthermore, HSs based on
different combinations of 2D materials offer researchers almost
unlimited possibilities to explore different types of NEMS
resonators with desirable properties.
2.2. Fabrication Techniques Enabling NEMS Struc-
tures. Various fabrication techniques, including both top-down
and bottom-up approaches, have been developed and
implemented in creating NEMS resonators. To date, most 1D
and 2D devices are fabricated using a combination of top-down
defined device geometries and bottom-up grown or synthesized
nanomaterials.
2.2.1. Fabrication Techniques for 1D NEMS Resonators.
With the advances of micro- and nanofabrication technologies,
the microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) research com-
munity has been pushing the scaling of MEMS devices, and
some 1D NEMS resonators have been built entirely using
intricate top-down lithographic processes. For example, a silicon
nanobeam resonator with the size of 7.7 μm × 300 nm × 800 nm
has been fabricated using a dry etching process.32 Similar

examples include platinum (Pt) NW resonators33 and rhodium
(Rh) NW electromechanical arrays.34 Such approaches are good
for wafer-scale fabrication of NEMS devices; however, they are
limited in material choices, have limits on their feature size
(typically, the smallest device dimensions are still >100 nm), and
could create surface defects during the processes which are
detrimental to the device performance. Therefore, pure top-
down approaches face great challenges in harnessing the
material properties offered by low-dimensional material systems.
To address these challenges, also toward the goal of realizing
higher-quality, atomically terminated surfaces and further
miniaturized sizes, NEMS resonators based on bottom-up
synthesized Si NWs have been developed, in which Si NWs are
grown over predefined microtrenches using the vapor−liquid−
solid (VLS) epitaxial growth,35 forming Si NW NEMS
resonators with a hexagonal cross section and a diameter of
∼60 nm.10 NEMS resonators based on tin dioxide (SnO2) NWs
have also been demonstrated by dry transferring the NWs from
the growth substrate onto the target substrate with predefined
contact electrodes.36

CNTs, which are chemically synthesized or grown, represent a
molecular-level scaling limit (in diameter) for 1D NEMS
resonators, with diameters down to the one nanometer level for
single-walled nanotubes. Most CNTs used in NEMS resonators
are grown in a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process from
gas such as methane (CH4), ethane (C2H6), or acetylene
(C2H2).37 As carbon atoms dissociate from the gas, CNTs grow
from catalyst islands typically containing iron and nickel. The
initial nucleation determines the “chirality” of the CNTs, i.e., the
angle of the tube axis relative to the honeycomb atomic lattice.
Careful adjustment and monitoring of the growth parameters

Figure 2.1. Schematic illustrations of fabrication processes for 1D and 2D NEMS resonators. (a) Suspending a nanotube by etching the
sacrificial layer underneath using buffered hydrofluoric acid (HF) etching. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 198. Copyright 2013
American Chemical Society. (b) One-step direct transfer of CNTs for NEMS resonators and other functional devices. Reprinted in part with
permission from ref 49. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c) Etching of sacrificial layer underneath graphene, with SU-8 circularly
clamping the graphene to form a circular resonator with a local gate electrode. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 58. Copyright 2013
American Physical Society. (d) Dry transfer of molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) onto a substrate with predefined microtrenches and contact
electrodes. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 61. Copyright 2014 AVS American Institute of Physics.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15547


(temperature, gas composition, flow rate, etc.) enables
controlling the nanotube radius and its structural quality to
some extent.
Historically, the first method to create doubly clamped
nanotube resonators was to grow CNTs on a substrate, on which
microtrenches are subsequently patterned and etched (Figure
2.1a) after carefully locating and aligning with the selected
CNTs during lithographical definition of the microtrenches.11,38

Later, a method has been adopted to grow suspended nanotubes
in the final fabrication step,39 bridging two electrodes already
separated by a microtrench.40 This method has an advantage in
that the nanotube never comes into contact with photo/e-beam
resist, etchants, or cleaning solvents. The challenge is that all
components of the chip, such as electrical leads, must withstand
the rough CVD treatment at high temperatures. The CNTs
grown this way have very clean surfaces (free from additional
chemical processing), and such resonators have been used for
surface science studies.41−43 In this way, one can also create very
long (mm level) CNT resonators.44

However, to date no reliable method exists to grow CNT
resonators with the desired chirality and the controlled direction
and length. This outstanding issue presents a serious obstacle for
widespread applications of nanotubes as sensors (e.g. for
adsorption detection). In addition, nanotubes exposed to air
could accrue surface adsorbates, which could potentially affect
device responses. Such adsorbates can be removed in situ by
electrothermal annealing in ultrahigh vacuum.45 By applying a
bias voltage (a few volts) along the suspended nanotube, the
dissipated electrical power heats the CNT sufficiently to remove
adsorbates. Directly after the current annealing, the CNT can be
clean enough to enable the adsorption of solid and fluid
monolayers of noble gases.46,47 Furthermore, current annealing
also improves the mechanical quality factor of CNT
resonators.48 The removal of the surface species is more
efficient in devices with low contact resistances, which is
predominantly achieved by growing CNTs directly onto metal
electrodes.45

Besides direct growth, alternative techniques have been
developed by growing CNTs between the prongs of a nanoscale
fork or similar structures.49−52 Such structures can later be
stamped onto a second substrate to transfer the nanotubes onto
a chip52 with electrodes (Figure 2.1b). This method combines
the advantages of retaining clean nanotubes and creating
complex electronic circuits.53

It is worth mentioning that while most 1D resonators have a
doubly clamped geometry, some singly clamped ones have been
studied as well.34,54 Most of them simply involve NWs or CNTs
grown vertically from a substrate, though some have been
assembled into more deliberate structures and explored to
function as nanotube radio or mass sensors.55,56 For the rest of
this review, we will mainly focus on doubly clamped devices
when discussing 1D NEMS resonators, as these devices are more
relevant to device applications.
2.2.2. Fabrication Techniques for 2D NEMS Resonators. 2D
resonators can also be fabricated in a number of different ways.
One of the early approaches is similar to fabricating CNT
resonators, starting with a flake on a substrate and followed by
metal deposition and sacrificial layer etching, resulting in a
suspended 2D ribbon as a doubly clamped resonator.57 Some
variations to this approach include using polymer such as SU-8
to build a support structure around the 2D flake (Figure 2.1c),
thus forming a fully clamped resonator instead,58,59 and using
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) grown 2D materials instead

of exfoliated flakes, forming large-scale arrays of 2D NEMS
resonators by prepatterning the 2D layer.60

Alternatively, one can use prefabricated substrates with holes/
trenches and electrodes and then directly exfoliate the 2D
material onto the substrate, and there is a chance that 2D flakes
will be suspended over the holes/trenches. Both graphene and
MoS2 resonators were first achieved using this approach.16,17

However, such approaches have some degree of randomness,
and the fabrication outcome is often hit or miss.
A more deterministic alternative has been developed based on
a transfer technique, in which a 2D material is first exfoliated
onto a polymer stamp such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS),
with a target flake identified.61 Then the target flake is aligned to
features on a prepatterned substrate with microtrenches and
electrodes, and dry-transferred onto the targeted location on the
substrate (Figure 2.1d), resulting in suspended resonator
structures. Interestingly, such transfer techniuqe can also result
in large arrays of 2D resonators when combined with water-
assisted transfer.62

3. EXCITATION AND DETECTION OF VIBRATORY
MOTION IN NEMS RESONATORS

Beyond device fabrication, another major challenge in NEMS
resonator research comes from the precise measurement of the
mechanical motion in these minuscule structures. NEMS
resonators are typically of truly atomic scale in the direction of
motion, and the motional amplitude is often on the order of nm
or even smaller. It is often ineffective to simply attempt some
well-known motion detection schemes used for much larger,
mainstream MEMS devices. Therefore, tailored excitation and
measurement techniques are necessary to detect the motion of
these nanoscale mechanical devices and to study their
properties.
3.1. Excitation of Resonant Motion. In NEMS resonator
research, excitation of vibrational modes is typically achieved
optically, magnetically, acoustically, or electrically.
Optical (optothermal-mechanical) excitation often uses an
intensity-modulated laser to periodically heat up the material
through optical absorption, thus photothermally driving the
motion of the resonators through thermal expansion.63 This
technique poses minimal requirement on the device structure
(e.g., not requiring electrodes) and material properties (e.g., no
need to be conductive), and is suitable for fast prototyping of
NEMS resonators made from emerging nanomaterials (Figure
3.1a).
Magnetomotive excitation is based on the magnetic force
induced by the current flowing through the suspended portion
of the device perpendicular to a magnetic field, which has been
used to drive mechanical motion in Si NWs.10 Excitation can
also be achieved by integrating a piezoelectric material with the
substrate, which can acoustically shake the device with the
application of an AC voltage using the inverse piezoelectric
effect (Figure 3.1b).64 Some NEMS structures with one of the
dimensions extended into the macroscopic scale (such as
ultralong suspended CNT) can even be acoustically excited
using soundwaves.44

Electrical excitation is probably among the most widely used
techniques, which can usually be achieved in a capacitive scheme
(Figure 3.1c−e).65 By applying driving voltages between the
gate and the low-dimensional material that is suspended above
the gate and separated by a small gap (typically sub-μm scale),
the electrostatic force can drive the suspended nanomaterial into
periodic motion.57 This usually requires the low-dimensional

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15548


material to be metallic or semiconducting. For insulating
materials, such as h-BN, a modified electrical excitation
technique can be used: Given that the motional part of the
resonator is effectively a movable dielectric layer between two
electrodes, one can utilize the electrostatic force based on the
dielectric effect to excite the motion of the insulating material.66

3.2. Detection of Resonant Motion. Compared with
device fabrication and motion excitation, resonance detection is
arguably the most technically challenging aspect in the
experimental studies of NEMS resonators. Due to the much
smaller device size and smaller resonance signal amplitude,
existing resonance detection techniques used for MEMS
resonators, such as capacitive readout, high-speed camera
imaging, laser Doppler vibrometry, etc., may not be
straightforwardly applicable or effective, and different (or at
least carefully customized) techniques have to be developed. To
date, most NEMS resonators are measured either optically or
electrically.

Among optical detection schemes, laser interferometry is
arguably the most widely used technique, especially in the study
of 2D NEMS resonators (Figure 3.1a,c). It is based on the
interference resulting from multireflection of light within the
device structure: While a laser beam is incident on the resonator,
the spacing between the suspended material and the substrate
changes as the 2D material vibrates, and thus changes the
interferometry condition of the entire device structure. The
reflected light intensity is therefore modulated by the motion of
the resonators, and the depth of modulation reflects the
amplitude of the motion.67 The light signal is then converted to
an electrical signal using a photodetector, which contains the
mechanical vibration signal. At the resonance frequency, the
motion amplitude peaks, and so does the variation of the optical
signal. This technique is very sensitive to device motion, with
demonstrated fm/Hz1/2-level sensitivity at room temperature,68

and thus capable of measuring the undriven thermomechanical

Figure 3.1. Nanomechanical resonance excitation and measurement techniques. (a) Schematic for optothermal excitation (blue laser) and
optical interferometry readout (red laser) of 2D MoS2 resonators. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 63. Copyright 2018 The Authors,
some rights reserved; exclusive licensee AAAS. Distributed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
(b) Piezoelectric excitation and piezoresistive detection of Si NW resonators. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 72. Copyright 2008
American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic for capacitive excitation and optical interferometry readout of 2D tungsten disulfide (WSe2)
resonators. Reprinted in part with permission under a Creative Commons (CC BY) License from ref 65. Copyright 2016 American Chemical
Society. (d) Capacitive excitation and frequency down-mixing electrical readout of CNT resonators. Reprinted in part with permission from ref
110. Copyright 2009 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Direct RF electrical readout of graphene resonators. Note the
difference between the global gate design and the local gate design (as in d and e, respectively). Reprinted in part with permission from ref 87.
Copyright 2010 American Institute of Physics. Panels (a) and (c) belong to optical detection, while panels (b), (d), and (e) belong to electrical
detection.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15549


resonance induced by the Brownian motion of the nanodevice
(Figure 3.1a, switch position downward, blue laser off).16,63

Electrical resonance detection schemes, on the other hand, are
more compatible for integration with electronic circuits.
However, because of the minimal device size in resonant
NEMS resonators, the motional signal from the vibrational
structure can often be overwhelmed by the parasitic background
resulting from the much larger electrodes (often orders-of-
magnitude larger than the size of the motional structure, and
thus with a much larger capacitance). Therefore, some readout
techniques very widely used in MEMS studies, such as direct
capacitive signal transduction without mixing, hardly work for
NEMS resonators. To address this challenge, frequency mixing
is used to detect the resonance,69 where a frequency-modulated
(FM) or amplitude-modulated (AM) radio frequency (RF)
input is often used to create signals with slightly different
frequencies Δf from the resonance frequency (Figure 3.1b,d).
The resonator works as a mixer (multiplying signals of different
frequencies) with its conductance modulated by its vibration,
resulting in a signal at the intermediate frequency (IF, which
equals Δf in this case) that carries information on device
motion.11,70 This low-frequency signal is then amplified and
measured by a lock-in amplifier, which separates it from the
parasitic driving signal at high frequency. It is worth mentioning
that in order for the resonator to behave as a mixer, its
conductance needs to be modulated by the displacement, via
changes in carrier density, piezoresistive effect, etc. Therefore, it
is not uncommon for researchers to operate NEMS resonators at
the transconductance peaks, such as on the edges of the
Coulomb blockade peaks.71

In addition to optical and electrical readouts, a number of
detection techniques have also been demonstrated. For example,
the magnetomotive detection technique has been used for NW
resonators, which monitors the electromotive force voltage as
the device vibrates in a magnetic field.10 Employing the
piezoresistivity of Si, Si NW resonators have been measured
using piezoresistive readout techniques.72 Researchers have also
demonstrated mechanical detection of graphene/CNT reso-
nator motion using atomic force microscopy (AFM),73,74

scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM and
TEM)75,76 or by coupling NEMS resonators to superconducting
cavities.77−79 Some of these techniques are less common for
engineers as they require additional instrumentation (such as an
external magnetic field or AFM/TEM/SEM) and are challeng-
ing for integration toward device applications.
3.3. Implications from Device Structure and Dimen-
sionality. It is noted that most 1D resonators are measured with
electrical readout, while optical interferometry technique is far
more common in 2D resonator studies (see Table 1 in Section
5.6). The main reasons are as follows: Optical measurements for
1D resonator are very challenging, especially for CNT
resonators. Consider a laser spot focused by an objective lens,
which is typically on the order of the wavelength of the laser, i.e.,
a few hundred nanometers. The diameter of a CNT is orders of
magnitude smaller than the laser spot, and thus only a very small
fraction of reflected light carries information on the CNT
motion. This significantly affects the signal-to-background ratio
and the measurement efficiency, unless a scattering center is
functionalized on the nanotube to enhance light reflection44,80

or a nanotube bundle is positioned in an optical cavity.81 In
contrast, in 2D resonators, the entire laser spot can be positioned
within the vibrating structure (often 1 μm or more in lateral
size), and thus can utilize the strong coupling between motion

and optical field in transducing motional signal. It is worth
noting that for certain NW resonators, while featuring a 1D
geometry, the relatively larger diameter of the NWs (compared
with CNTs) facilitates optical detection of their resonant
motion.82,83

Another favorable factor for interferometric detection can be
found in the commonly used designs of 2D NEMS resonators,
which often have a small vacuum gap (usually a few hundred
nm) underneath the 2D flake. The size of the gap, together with
the partial transparency of 2D materials, allows sufficient light to
penetrate the 2D material and then reflect from the substrate,
which interferes with the light reflected from the top surface of
the 2D material. This obviates the use of another mirror (such as
in the reference arm in a Michelson interferometer),84 allowing
interferometry to be realized more readily in such device
structures.67 More interestingly, such a vacuum gap can even be
leveraged to tune the optical detection efficiency, from
optimized value all the way to zero responsivity.85 Alternatively,
for monolayers and multilayers with low reflection coefficients, a
standing wave is formed by the interfering incident and reflected
laser beams with the reflection from the metal gate. The
monolayer is a mobile absorber in this optical standing wave, and
its motion is measured by recording the reflected light
intensity.86

While most 2D resonators are convenient for measurements
using optical detection techniques, 1D resonators are highly
suitable for electrical readout schemes. This is because doubly
clamped device structures prevail among 1D resonators, in
which all the current has to pass through the motional channel.
As of 2D resonators, this is only true for doubly clamped devices
(which are indeed mostly measured with electrical readout); for
fully clamped devices, electrical current can flow between
electrodes through both the suspended and the nonsuspended
regions of the 2D film. Therefore, only a portion of the current
carries information on the device vibration, which limits the
weight of the motional signal in the measured current and thus
the detection efficiency.
As previously discussed, another important challenge in
electrical readout is the parasitic signal. While mixing is one way
to mitigate such effects, it could sometimes be undesirable for
signal processing as it essentially converts the resonant signal to
an entirely different frequency. One way to address this is by
minimizing the parasitic capacitance using a local gate structure,
with which direct electrical readout of the resonance has been
achieved by measuring the transmission parameter |S21| (Figure
3.1e).87 In such cases, the resonator acts as a resonant channel
transistor88 and allows the feedback and amplification of the
signal to be used to construct a self-sustained oscillator.59

4. DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS OF 1D RESONATORS

4.1. Carbon Nanotube Resonators. Among low-dimen-
sional nanomechanical resonators, doubly clamped CNTs
distinguish themselves by their ultralow mass and excellent
quantum transport properties. These attributes give rise to a
wealth of phenomena that are much harder to study using other
devices and offer the possibility for a number of applications.
While double-walled and multiwalled CNT resonators have also
been realized, the above statement is particularly true for single-
walled CNTs (SWCNTs). We therefore discuss singled-walled
CNT NEMS resonators with greater detail in this section.
4.1.1. Carbon Nanotubes from an Atomic Perspective.
CNTs represent the ultimate size limit of 1D mechanical
resonators. Single-walled CNTs are hollow cylinders whose

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15550


walls consist of a single layer of graphene, i.e., a honeycomb
lattice of carbon atoms,89 as illustrated in Figure 4.1a. As

previously discussed, a great majority of CNT resonators have a
doubly clamped geometry (Figure 4.1b,c). When a suspended
nanotube is clamped at the two ends, it vibrates like a guitar
string.11

Most of the special properties of nanotube resonators can be
understood from their special structure. (i) The mass of a
nanotube is very small because it consists of only a small number
of atoms. For a typical CNT with a radius of about 1.5 nm and a
length of 1 μm, the mass is roughly m = 7 × 10−21 kg,
corresponding to 3.5 × 105 carbon atoms. The fact that the cross
section of a CNT consists of only few (<10 for the thinnest
ones)90 atoms is also responsible for its extremely low spring
constant (for transverse deflection), down to ∼10 μN/m in the
doubly clamped configuration.91 This makes it possible to
significantly tune the resonance frequency and other mechanical
properties of the nanotube via external forces. (ii) The regular
2D crystal of carbon atoms rolled up into a nanotube can act as
an electrical conductor with a range of fascinating features. In
particular, at low temperatures the CNT can turn into a Fabry−
Pérot resonator45 or a quantum dot,92 depending on the
electron transmission between the nanotube and the electron
reservoirs.93 The coupling between such highly tunable
electrical states and the nanotube motion is the basis for some
of the most exciting ideas for future developments.
4.1.2. Mechanical Properties of CNT Resonators. From a
purely mechanical point of view, a CNT can be well
approximated as a hollow beam and modeled with the
corresponding Euler−Bernoulli equation.94 The validity of this
continuum model is surprising, considering that the radius of a
nanotube is only about 10 times larger than the separation
between atoms in the lattice. In principle, the Euler−Bernoulli
model can help to identify the eigenfrequencies of discrete
vibration modes. For a particular mode, the transverse vibration
amplitude z can be readily expressed in an equation of motion:

(4.1)

where dots denote time derivatives, ω0 is the angular resonance
frequency, γ = ω0/Q describes the energy dissipation with Q
being the quality factor, and F(t) is the external driving force.
When the nanotube displacement is large enough, nonlinear
spring and nonlinear damping forces become significant. In eq
4.1, α is the nonlinear spring constant for the cubic term of
displacement (quartic and symmetrical contribution to the
resonator potential energy), β is the nonlinear spring constant
for the quadratic term of displacement (cubic and antisym-
metrical contribution to the resonator potential energy),94−97

and η is the coefficient of a nonlinear damping process.98−101 We
will discuss about nonlinearities in NEMS resonators with
greater detail in Section 9.1.
4.1.3. Unique Features of CNT Resonators. While a
nanotube resonator can be described by the same equation of
motion as the majority of NEMS resonators, it possesses a
number of unique features. The resonance frequency f res of
flexural modes in CNT resonators can be pushed to impressive
high values above 10 GHz,102,103 which is yet to be achieved in
flexural-mode 2D resonators. CNT resonators can also feature
low intrinsic dissipation. This is a consequence of the high
crystallinity of nanotubes and their lack of dangling bonds at the
surface, which largely prevents chemisorption of molecules that
could act as two-level systems. When all potential sources of
electrical and mechanical noise are minimized, the quality factor
of ultraclean CNTs can reach 6.8 million at 70 mK.48,104

The demonstration of the large Q initially came as a surprise;
for many years, researchers have observed that quality factors
would decrease with the volume of the resonator, and did not
expect nanotubes to exhibit such giant quality factors, especially
as no special scheme or measure for “dissipation dilution” is at
work.105−108 Therefore, it is surprising and encouraging for
researchers to find that among the best-reported nanotube
devices, the corresponding dissipation coefficient is on the order
of mγ ≈ 3 × 10−19 kg·Hz.104 This dissipation coefficient is a
crucial number for force sensing applications because it directly
determines the thermal force noise power spectral density SF ∝
mγ.
Another important difference between a nanotube resonator
and a typical beam is related to static deformation. In MEMS
structures, the shape of a beam made from metal or dielectric is
usually defined in a top-down lithographic patterning process,
and its static profile cannot be easily modified in a continuous
and substantial way by electrostatic forces. In contrast, the
amount of slack and mechanical tension in a nanotube is difficult
to control in the fabrication process and can vary strongly
between nominally identical devices.97,109 Nevertheless, a gate
electrode in the microtrench under the nanotube offers a
convenient tool to control the resonator tension via the
electrostatic force.11,110,94,96−98,111 This force changes the
nanotube shape significantly and thus induces tensile strain in
nanotube, which enables frequency tuning11,94,96−98,109−112

(Section 7.1) and mode coupling (Section 10.1). In addition,
a static force applied on a straight nanotube breaks the symmetry
of a harmonic potential due to bending of the nanotube, which
leads to a striking behavior where the equilibrium position of the
mode can be controlled by its vibration amplitude,97 as
illustrated in Figure 4.2.
Furthermore, nanotubes exhibit excellent sensitivity to small
forces. Eq 4.1 reveals that the low mass increases the acceleration
of a resonator for a given force, z̈ ∼ F/m. On resonance, this
relationship simplifies to a steady-state response of
.

Figure 4.1. Structure of CNTs and typical device geometry of a
nanotube resonator. (a) Illustration of the atomic lattice forming a
nanotube. Individual carbon atoms are shown as spheres and
carbon−carbon bonds as lines. The distance between the arrows is
the tube diameter. (b) Colored scanning electron micrograph
showing a nanotube suspended over a trench. The gate electrode
underneath the nanotube is shown in red. The arrows indicate the
clamping points. Adapted with permission from ref 98. Copyright
2011 American Chemical Society. (c) Sketch of typical device
geometry, with a nanotube (green) suspended freely between source
and drain electrodes over a gate electrode and vibrating in z-
direction. Metal electrodes are shown in yellow.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15551


Because of its tiny mass and stiffness, the nanotube oscillation
amplitude in response to a small force is orders of magnitude
larger than that of most other resonators, turning it into an
excellent force sensor.91

4.2. Nanowire Resonators. Compared with nanotube
resonators, NW resonators exhibit greater diversity in terms of
choice of materials, fabrication methods, and thus device
dimensions. Consequently, device behavior and performance
also vary broadly. Figure 4.3 showcases a number of CNT and
NW resonators and summarizes their basic device specifications
and performance (such as frequency, quality factor, and surface-
to-volume ratio). It can be seen that compared with nanotubes,
NWs typically have smaller surface-to-volume ratios due to their
larger cross sections, and quality factors of NW resonators are
less scattered (mostly within the 103−105 range). Also, quality
factors tend to improve at cryogenic temperatures, which is true
for both CNT and NW resonators.
4.2.1. Device Dimensions. Unlike CNTs, which are always
chemically synthesized and grown, NWs of different materials
can be fabricated using a number of methods, from top-down
lithography processes to bottom-up chemical synthesis. There-
fore, the lateral dimensions of NW resonators can vary a lot. For
example, a top-down fabricated Si nanobeam resonator has a
cross section of 300 nm × 800 nm,32 and a Pt NW resonator
made by electrodeposition of Pt on a dissolvable nanoscaffold
has a diameter of 43 nm.33 Epitaxially grown Si NWs, on the
other hand, can have diameters between 60 and 100 nm.10,35

Arrays of NW mechanical devices have also been produced.
One noticeably clever technique is to translate the ultrasmall and
precise thickness control of superlattice growth into defining
patterns for creating high-density planar NW arrays,113 enabling
both metallic and semiconductor NW mechanical structures
after etching the substrate. Another approach is to combine top-
down lithography with assembly of bottom-up grown NWs. For
example, by using a bottom-up assembly method which involves
electric field force effect, capillary force effect, and a liftoff
process, large-area Si and Rh NW electromechanical resonator
arrays over centimeter-scale chip area have been fabricated.34

4.2.2. Parametric Excitation and Oscillator. In studies of
nanomechanical resonators, it is sometimes possible to achieve a
reduction in the apparent resonant peak width using certain
experimental schemes, with resulting phenomena termed
enhancement in the effective Q. Such techniques have been
explored for NW (and CNT) resonators. Parametric pumping:
Parametric amplification (exciting the resonator at twice of its
resonance frequency) can lead to a resonance line width
narrowing, which has been demonstrated in a CNT resonator98

and a silicon carbide (SiC) NW resonator.114Oscillator: The
effective quality factor can also be improved by converting an

open-loop resonator to a closed-loop self-sustained oscillator,
which can further concentrate the vibrational energy in the
frequency domain. This has been demonstrated in a doubly
clamped SiC NW NEMS oscillator, showing resonance line
width narrowing of 19 times and leading to a Qosc,eff of 47,580.115

Other techniques such as reduction of the phase (or frequency)
noise and strain engineering also belong to this category and can
lead to effective Q enhancement. We shall emphasize that such
phenomena do not mean reduction in the intrinsic energy
dissipation of the resonators (Section 8), and therefore may not
straightforwardly lead to improvement in sensing and quantum
experiments.

5. DEVICE CHARACTERISTICS OF 2D RESONATORS
Since the discovery of graphene, extensive research has been
conducted to study the various properties of 2D materials, and
2D NEMS resonators have been under intensive study. The
material choice for building 2D NEMS has soon grown beyond
just graphene, with 2D semiconductors, insulators, magnetic
materials, and 2D HSs joining the list one after another, offering
intriguing opportunities for studying electromechanical cou-
pling and enabling different types of NEMS-based sensors.
These atomically thin NEMS resonators show great promise for
realizing high-frequency, high-tunability, and ultralow-power
devices.
5.1. Graphene NEMS Resonators. NEMS resonators
based on graphene, the hallmark 2D material, have been
extensively studied in recent years (Figure 5.1). Nano-
mechanical analysis of the natural vibration of few-layer
graphene sheets120 dates back before the experimental
realization of the first graphene resonator. The initial
demonstration of a graphene nanomechanical resonator (Figure
5.1a), using optical interferometry detection, shows that the
fundamental mode resonance frequencies of these doubly
clamped resonators range from few MHz to ∼170 MHz with
Q up to ∼850, depending on the geometry of the devices.16

Later, the first electrical readout of doubly clamped graphene
NEMS resonators was demonstrated using AM mixing (Figure
5.1b), showing Q up to 104 at 5 K as well as frequency tuning
from ∼30 to 80 MHz.57 Due to the atomic-scale thickness, in
terms of elastic behavior, monolayer and few-layer graphene
resonators are typically in the membrane regime, and the
resonance frequency can be efficiently tuned by in-plane tension,
which can be induced by deflection and stretching caused by a
DC gate voltage. Meanwhile, the intrinsic strength of graphene is
up to 130 GPa, which means a very high fracture limit;13 this
corresponds to a very broad strain tuning range of the resonance
frequency.121 Arrays consisting of single-, bi- and trilayer
graphene circular drumhead resonators with diameters of 1 to
1.5 μm have been made with exfoliation and all-dry transfer
methods with stencil lithography electrodes, showing resonance
frequency up to 136 MHz and Qs of ∼100 to 400 at room
temperature.122

While the initial demonstrations on graphene NEMS
resonators are mainly based on mechanically exfoliated
graphene flakes, later CVD graphene has also been explored
for NEMS resonators. Fully clamped circular drumhead
resonators with diameters up to 30 μm (Figure 5.1e) have
been demonstrated using CVD graphene film123 and generally
show higher quality factors (Section 8.2) than doubly clamped
ones made of the same material under similar conditions. A
sizable array of single-layer graphene NEMS resonators has been
demonstrated (Figure 5.1c), including 38 CVD graphene

Figure 4.2. Sketch of an oscillation potential U(z) with a broken
symmetry. Small and large oscillations have different equilibrium
positions, see black and red lines. A change in the oscillation
amplitude results in a static shift Δz. Reprinted in part with
permission from ref 97. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15552


resonators with identical geometry and showing multimode
resonances.60 CVD graphene NEMS resonators in an array can
also show a narrow distribution of resonance parameters.124

Besides resonance characteristics, graphene NEMS resonators
have also been extensively used to study coupling effects and
other physical processes. In one example, a graphene resonator
has been capacitively coupled to superconducting microwave
cavities for efficient readout of motion (Figure 5.1d). The device
exhibits a Q of 105 at 30 mK and shows potential for studying the
quantum squeezing of mechanical states.125 Similarly, another

graphene resonator coupled to a superconducting microwave
cavity78 shows a Q of 220,000 at 14 mK and a displacement
sensitivity of 17 fm/Hz1/2. In another example, using Raman
spectroscopy as a local optical probe, motion-induced strain and
device resonance characteristics in a cantilever-shaped multi-
layer graphene NEMS resonator and a circular drumhead
monolayer graphene NEMS resonator have been revealed.126,127

A GHz graphene p−n junction resonator has also been
demonstrated,128 in which the resonant signals are found to
be strongly enhanced in the bipolar regime.

Figure 4.3. Examples of 1D NEMS resonators, with SEM images and representative resonance characteristics shown for (a) SWCNT, reprinted
in part with permission from ref 198. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (b) MWCNT, reprinted in part with permission from ref 116.
Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag. (c) Si NW, reprinted in part with permission from ref 72. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (d)
SiC NW, reprinted in part with permission from ref 117. Copyright 2009 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. (e) Gallium nitride
(GaN) NW, reprinted in part with permission from ref 118. Copyright 2012 American Institute of Physics. (f) Pt NW NEMS resonators,
reprinted in part with permission from ref 33. Copyright 2003 American Institute of Physics. (g) Measured Q vs resonance frequency for some
of the 1D NEMS resonators. Data taken from refs 10, 12, 33, 72, 74, 104, 117−119, 161, 198, 249, and 254. (h) Measured Q vs surface-to-volume
ratio for the same set of 1D NEMS resonators as in (g). In both (g) and (h), data measured at room temperature and cryogenic temperatures are
shown in red and blue, respectively.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15553


5.2. 2D Semiconductor NEMS Resonators. Beyond
graphene, 2D semiconductors such as TMDCs and black P
also provide attractive electrical, optical, and mechanical
properties, and are extensively explored for NEMS devi-
ces.17−20,65 For example, a theoretical calculation suggests that
MoS2 resonators could have lower energy dissipation and thus
higher Q factors than their graphene counterparts.129 MoS2 also
shows a larger piezoresistive gauge factor compared with
graphene, thus MoS2 NEMS resonators could exhibit stronger
electromechanical coupling, as its device motion not only
modulates the channel conductance through the gating effect
but also through the piezoresistive effect.130

The first MoS2 nanomechanical resonator17 (Figure 5.2a) has
been measured using laser interferometry, which shows
thermomechanical resonance frequencies up to 60 MHz in the
very high frequency (VHF) band, a Q up to 710 at room
temperature, and a frequency-Q product up to 2 × 1010 Hz.
Frequency scaling laws of MoS2 resonators are also elucidated
and developed with quantitative parameters, providing
important guidelines for scaling the frequency toward GHz
resonators.17 Besides thermomechanical motion, optothermally
or capacitively driven resonances of 2D MoS2 resonators up to
120 MHz have also been measured using optical interferometry,
and by gradually increasing the driving amplitude toward
mechanical nonlinearity (Section 9.1), a large linear dynamic
range (DR) up to 110 dB has been experimentally
demonstrated.63 This is in clear contrast to CNT resonators,
which have been expected to have very limited DR (Section
9.2).95 Electrical readout has also been demonstrated in 2D
MoS2 NEMS resonators, using FM mixing and piezoresistive
readout schemes.131−133 Raman spectroscopy has been coupled
with 2D MoS2 NEMS resonators, which show dynamical
phonon softening and Raman signal amplitude enhancement
during the nonlinear resonances.134

Besides TMDC, other 2D semiconductors also exhibit
interesting and unique properties. For example, black P

NEMS resonators have been demonstrated (Figure 5.2b) with
initial devices capable of vibrating at up to 100 MHz.19

Interestingly, due to its corrugated lattice structure, black P is
intrinsically and strongly anisotropic in-plane in its electronic,
elastic, optical, and thermal properties along the zigzag and
armchair directions, which gives rise to resonant responses
different from those made of elastically isotropic 2D
materials.135 Leveraging this unique feature of strong intrinsic
anisotropy in black P and other 2D materials sharing the similar
crystal structures, researchers have successfully determined its
anisotropic Young’s moduli by measuring the vibration
frequencies and mode shapes of higher order modes (see
Section 6 for more details).136

As in the case of 1D NEMS resonators, certain experimental
techniques can be used to enhance the effective Q of 2D NEMS
resonators, which does not necessarily suggest a reduction in the
energy dissipation rate. For example, using parametric pumping,
boosting of effective Q from 61 to 11 million by increasing the
pump voltage has been demonstrated in an MoS2 resonator.137

Turning the open-loop resonator to closed-loop feedback
oscillators also enhances the effective Q, which has been
demonstrated for both graphene and MoS2 oscillators.59,266

5.3. Wide-Bandgap 2D Material NEMS Resonators.
Atomic layers of h-BN crystal, the hallmark 2D dielectric, are
excellent candidates as structural materials for enabling NEMS
resonators, due to their outstanding mechanical properties
(Young’s modulus theoretically predicted to be as high as EY ≈
780 GPa and a very high breaking strain limit of ε ≈ 22%)138,139

and ultrawide bandgap (5.9 eV),140 which makes them suitable
for ultraviolet (UV) signal detections. Dry-transferred doubly
clamped h-BN membrane and circular drumhead resonators
(Figure 5.2 c) have both been demonstrated,20 vibrating at high
and very high frequencies (from ∼5 MHz to ∼70 MHz). From
the drumhead h-BN resonator with a diameter of ∼11.3 μm and
thickness of ∼10 nm, thermomechanical resonances with up to 4
modes have been measured. Combining measurements and

Figure 5.1. Graphene NEMS resonators with examples of device schematics, SEM images, and measured resonances, for (a) the first graphene
NEMS resonator with optical interferometry readout. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 16. Copyright 2007 American Association for
the Advancement of Science. (b) The first graphene NEMS resonator with electrical readout. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 57.
Copyright 2009 Springer Nature. (c) A large-scale array of NEMS resonators made from CVD graphene. Reprinted in part with permission from
ref 60. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (d) A graphene resonator coupled to a superconducting microwave cavity. Reprinted in
part with permission from ref 125. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (e) CVD graphene resonators with diameter up to 30 μm
showing size-dependent quality factor. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 123. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15554


modeling of the multimode resonances, the elastic behavior of h-
BN circular resonators is resolved, including the transition from
the membrane regime to the disk regime, with built-in tension
ranging from 0.02 N/m to 2 N/m. The Young’s modulus of h-
BN is determined to be EY ≈ 392 GPa from the measured
resonances.20,141 It is worth noting that measured elastic moduli
of 2D materials can sometimes be notably different from
theoretical values (such as in the case of black P135,136 as well),
suggesting that nanomechanical resonant measurements can
offer important insight into mechanical properties of 2D
materials, complementing first-principle calculations.
Just as semiconductors with 3D crystals (e.g. silicon) can be
grown in the form of 1D NWs, wide-bandgap materials can also
be grown into low-dimensional nanostructures. One such
example is beta gallium oxide (β-Ga2O3), an emerging
ultrawide-bandgap (∼4.8 eV) semiconductor with applications
in power and RF electronics, solar-blind UV optoelectronics,
and gas sensors.143 Its anisotropic crystal structure allows
controlled growth of low-dimensional nanostructures such as
NWs and nanoflakes.144 With its excellent mechanical proper-
ties (typical Young’s modulus EY,β‑Ga
d2O
d3 = 261 GPa and speed of
sound cβ‑Ga
d2O
d3 = 6623 m/s), β-Ga2O3 crystal has been
successfully demonstrated for NEMS resonators,144−146 with
frequency potentially beyond 4 GHz by tuning the device

geometry and dimensions.144 Electrical readout of β-Ga2O3
vibrating channel transistors has been demonstrated, showing
potential for integration with β-Ga2O3 power and RF
electronics.147 Resonant transducers for solar-blind UV
detection with high responsivity and fast response time have
also been explored for β-Ga2O3 NEMS.148,149

5.4. 2D Magnetic Material NEMS Resonators. 2D
magnetic materials, such as iron phosphorus trisulfide
(FePS3), manganese phosphorus trisulfide (MnPS3), and nickel
phosphorus trisulfide (NiPS3), etc., have been explored to
enable 2D magnetic NEMS resonators. Using their resonant
characteristics, magnetic phase transitions in these materials
have been studied. For example, in a study of NEMS resonator
based on 2D antiferromagnetic chromium triiodide (CrI3), the
frequency shift is found to be related to the magnetic state of the
material (Figure 5.2d). In addition, the magnetostriction effect
has been quantified, and strain tuning of the magnetic
interaction has been realized.21 In another example, using
temperature-dependent measurements, shifts in the resonance

frequency (f res), Q, and
(translating to heat capacity)

have been observed, revealing the transition between anti-
ferromagnetic and paramagnetic phases in 2D FePS3, MnPS3
and NiPS3.22 These findings demonstrate the possibility of

Figure 5.2. NEMS resonators based on 2D materials beyond graphene. (a) The first experimentally demonstrated MoS2 nanomechanical
resonator, showing undriven thermomechanical motion. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 17. Copyright 2013 American Chemical
Society. (b) The first black P NEMS resonator. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 19. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c)
False-colored SEM images of circularly clamped and doubly clamped h-BN resonators as well as the undriven thermomechanical resonance
spectra. Reprinted in part with permission under a Creative Commons (CC BY) License from ref 20. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (d)
Resonant response of a NEMS resonator based on 2D antiferromagnets chromium triiodide (CrI3) encapsulated by WSe2 and graphene.
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 21. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. (e) NEMS resonator based on 2D atomic layer van der Waals
HS and gate tuning of its resonance frequency. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 179. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (f)
Measured Q vs resonance frequency for some representative 2D NEMS resonators. Data taken from refs 16, 19, 20, 63, 65, 142, and 154. (g)
Measured Q vs surface-to-volume ratio for the same set of 2D NEMS resonators as in (f). In both (f) and (g), data measured at room
temperature and cryogenic temperatures are shown in red and blue, respectively. Some representative data from graphene NEMS are included
in (f) and (g) for reference.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15555


detecting and even controlling the magnetic states and phase
transitions in 2D magnets using NEMS resonators.
5.5. van der Waals Heterostructure NEMS Resonators.
Stacking different 2D layered materials into van der Waals
(vdW) HSs offers an additional degree of freedom to tailor the
properties of the devices, which is being actively explored and
exploited in 2D electronics and photonics.150−153 In the
mechanical domain, the introduction of vdW HSs can also
lead to interesting device properties. For example, for some air-
sensitive 2D materials, environmentally stable 2D materials
(such as graphene or h-BN) can be used to encapsulate and thus
protect the resulting 2D resonators, enhancing the mechanical
property and stability of the devices.154 In addition, 2D vdW HS
resonators offer the opportunity to study the interlayer friction
interactions and interfacial mechanics,155,156 which can offer
important insights into the dissipation in 2D NEMS devices.
The stacking of different 2D materials has led to NEMS
resonators with intriguing device performance. For example,
MoS2/graphene vdW HS resonators exhibit fundamental mode
resonance close to 100 MHz157 and a very wide fractional
frequency tuning range of Δf/f (Figure 5.2e).179 In another
example, an h-BN/graphene HS resonator shows a frequency

tuning range of about 100%.158 By coupling graphene/niobium
diselenide (NbSe2)/graphene resonators to a superconducting
cavity, very high Q up to 245,000 at 8.5mK in mechanical
resonance at >50 MHz has been reported.154 These findings
suggest that by designing different vdW HSs, it is possible to
create resonant devices with tailored and enhanced mechanical,
electrical, and optical properties.
5.6. Summary of Device Metrics in 1D and 2D NEMS
Resonators. The properties of 2D NEMS resonators based on
different materials are summarized in Figure 5.2f,g. Table 1 also
summarizes some of the key information on 1D and 2D NEMS
resonators studied to date, including the nanomaterial of choice,
resonance detection technique, and some of the notable device
performances reported. A few interesting trends can be
observed. One of the most obvious features is that low-
dimensional resonators are generally characterized by their large
frequency tuning range. This is related to the outstanding
stretchability of these materials and their low stiffness. For
example, both 1D and 2D resonators have shown frequency
tuning range over 1000%, which is unimaginable in most MEMS
resonators lithographically patterned and machined out of bulk
materials (such as Si) in the top-down paradigm. Another

Table 1. Summary of 1D and 2D NEMS Resonators

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15556


Figure 6.1. Visualizing motion and mode shapes in 1D NEMS resonators. (a) Schematic illustration of mode shape mapping for a CNT
resonator. (b) Measured and simulated mode shapes for the first three modes. (c) 3D illustration of the measured mode shapes. Reprinted in
part with permission from ref 74. Copyright 2007 American Physical Society.

Figure 6.2. Visualizing motion and mode shapes in 2D NEMS resonators. (a) Schematic illustration of mode shape mapping in 2D NEMS
resonators. (b) Spatial mapping of a MoS2 resonator with structural nonidealities. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 170. Copyright
2014 Springer Nature. (c) Comparison of the spatially resolved mode shapes with simulation for an anisotropic black P resonator. Reprinted in
part with permission from ref 136. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (d) An h-BN resonator device image, measured
thermomechanical resonance spectrum with 8 resonance modes, and spatial mapping of the 8 modes. Reprinted in part with permission under a
Creative Commons (CC BY) License from ref 20. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15557


noticeable revelation is that 1D and 2D resonators can achieve
large DR (e.g., up to 110 dB in MoS2 2D NEMS)63 and also
operate in the very deep nonlinear regime, which means that
they can vibrate over a relatively large range of amplitude before
reaching the breaking/fracturing limit. In terms of quality factor,
Q values as high as 6.8 million has been demonstrated in 1D
resonators, and Q up to 1 million is also demonstrated for 2D
resonators, both at mK-level cryogenic temperatures. Clear
differences in Q can be observed between room temperature and
low temperature, suggesting that phonon may play a role in the
dissipation process.

6. VISUALIZING MOTION AND VIBRATIONAL MODES

It has always been highly desirable to visualize the motion of
NEMS and their resonance mode shapes, and to deterministi-
cally assign and understand the multiple modes in the measured
frequency-domain spectra. Specifically, the mode shape provides
information about the spatial distribution of the vibrational
displacement within the device, i.e., which part vibrates more
and which part vibrates less, and the direction each part moves.
Typically, suspended 1D or 2D NEMS resonators exhibit
flexural or bending vibration, with the suspended region
vibrating around the equilibrium position. Depending on the
mode (except the fundamental modes), there exists one or more
nodal points/lines where the displacement is 0, across which the
structure moves in opposite directions at any given moment.
The vibration amplitude is the largest at the antinodes. While
mode shapes and mode sequence can be theoretically analyzed
and numerically calculated given the boundary conditions, e.g.,
visualized in modeling tools such as COMSOL, the results can
deviate (sometimes significantly) from the measured mode
shapes and mode sequence, as geometric nonidealities and
uncontrolled effects from strain affect the eigenfrequencies and
the shape of the eigenmodes.
For 1D CNT resonators, mode shapes can be experimentally
mapped by scanning a tapping-mode nanoprobe (i.e., in AFM)
across a doubly clamped CNT while monitoring the height
change (Figure 6.1). This technique has been demonstrated for
a MWCNT resonator with a length of 770 nm and a resonance
frequency up to 3.1 GHz.74 Alternatively, if the device size and
motion amplitude are sufficiently large, one can directly observe
the resonance in a microscope. This has been done for a doubly
clamped millimeter-long CNT resonator by depositing titanium
dioxide (TiO2) particles on the nanotube to make it visible in an
optical microscope.44 In this particular device, the resonance
frequency is only a few hundred Hz. For NWs resonators and
arrays with sufficiently large diameters so that the device motion
can be detected optically, resonant mode shapes can also be
mapped by scanning a laser spot across the entire device and
measuring the vibration amplitude at each position.169 For the
less common singly clamped geometry, such as CNT cantilevers,

the vibration mode shape can be resolved by measuring the
intensity of inelastically scattered electrons inside an SEM.75

Compared with 1D NEMS resonators, 2D resonators
typically have a large enough area for scanning the laser around
the device and thus providing spatial resolution in resonance
measurements. Therefore, spatial mapping of the mode shapes
of 2D NEMS resonators is usually performed by recording the
resonance signal at each location as the laser is scanned across
the suspended membrane (Figure 6.2a) at each identified
resonance mode frequency (i.e., “spectromicroscopy” measure-
ment).68 For example, spatial mapping has been performed on
circular graphene resonators with diameters up to 22.5 μm,
showing clearly the first few flexural modes of the circular
membrane.123 While in theory circular membranes have highly
symmetric mode shapes, uncontrolled strain within the
resonator, nonideal clamping at the edges, and geometrical
nonidealities during device fabrication often occur, which can be
effectively revealed using spatial mapping (Figure 6.2b).170

In addition to the device geometry, measurements of mode
shapes can offer important insights into other aspects of NEMS
resonators, such as resonant dynamics, material anisotropy, and
built-in tension. For example, degenerate modes in MoS2
resonators are distinguished to help analyze the mode coupling
behavior,171 and phase information can be derived from spatial
mapping to offer insights into the complicated dynamics of
graphene resonators.163 For anisotropic 2D materials such as
black P, experimental measurements of mode shapes and
frequencies of higher-order resonant modes can be combined to
resolve the material’s anisotropic Young’s moduli (Figure
6.2c).136 Even for nominally isotropic 2D materials, such as h-
BN, spatial mapping can reveal subtle structural and mechanical
properties of the suspended diaphragms, including built-in
anisotropic tension and bulge (Figure 6.2d),20 thus offering
guidelines on how these effects can be exploited for engineering
multimode resonant functions in 2D NEMS transducers.

7. FREQUENCY TUNING

The capability of tuning resonance frequencies is very important
for applications such as voltage-controlled oscillators, tunable
RF filters, frequency-shift-based signal processing and sensing,
and postfabrication reconfiguration and adjustment. The
resonance frequency f res for MEMS/NEMS resonators (in
fact, all harmonic resonators) can be generally described by the
simple lumped model of a spring-mass system (Figure 7.1). In
the simplest case when nonlinearities can be neglected (i.e., eq
4.1 reduces to that of a simple harmonic resonator), we obtain

(7.1)

Figure 7.1. Mechanical model of a 2D resonator. (a) Schematic illustration (side view) of a fully clamped 2D NEMS resonator in its fundamental
mode. (b) A simplified version of the resonator showing the vibration of the effective mass. (c) The lumped parameter model of the resonator in
a spring-mass system.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15558


where keff and meff are the effective spring constant and effective
mass of the device, respectively. Low-dimensional resonators
can have large frequency tuning ranges because the keff can be
efficiently modulated by applying gate voltages, strain, heat, etc.
7.1. Frequency Tuning in 1D NEMS Resonators. Gate-
induced frequency tuning has been extensively observed in 1D
NEMS resonators (Figure 7.2). As previously discussed, due to
their extreme aspect ratio, doubly clamped CNT resonators
often contain strain built in during fabrication and are thus
treated mechanically as strings (Figure 7.2a), while thicker NWs
behave like beams (Figure 7.2b). Generally, strings are more
susceptible to tension (in terms of resonance frequency) and
thus typically exhibit larger tuning ranges than beams (compare
the numbers in Figure 7.2a,b), meanwhile, slack in a string can
lead to a more complicated behavior than in a beam. Specifically,
doubly clamped CNTs are often not straight due to their
ultralow stiffness, so that the nanotube portions near the two

clamps are not parallel during fabrication. This complicates the
behavior of the frequency tuning.94

For simplicity, here we use a beam as an example to illustrate
the frequency tuning effect from the gate. In such cases, the
effect of a DC gate voltage VG on the resonance frequency can be
expressed as172

(7.2)

where EY is Young’s modulus, I is the moment of inertia about
the longitudinal axis of the beam, L is the length, S is the cross-
sectional area of the beam, ρ is the mass density of the suspended
material, T0 is the initial built-in tension of the as-fabricated
beam (when it is not deflected due to a gate voltage), VG is the

Figure 7.2. Frequency tuning in 1D NEMS resonators. (a) Observation of gate tuning of the resonance frequency in CNT resonators. Reprinted
in part with permission from ref 11. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Capacitive softening and spring hardening in an SnO2 NW,
by sweeping the voltage on the back gate (left) or the side gate (right). Reprinted in part with permission from ref 36. Copyright 2009 American
Institute of Physics Publishing. (c) Capacitive softening and spring hardening in a CNT resonator, by choosing the out-of-plane mode (top) or
the in-plane mode (bottom). Reprinted in part with permission from ref 173. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (d) Frequency
tuning of CNT resonators using a piezoelectric actuator. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 12. Copyright 2014 American Chemical
Society. (e) Axially tunable CNT resonators using cointegrated microactuators. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 111. Copyright 2014
American Chemical Society.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15559


DC gate voltage, zs is the static deflection at the center point of
the beam (which increases with |VG|), and C2 is the second
Taylor expansion coefficient of the capacitance per unit length
expanded in terms of the beam displacement.
When a DC gate voltage VG is applied, f res,1D may increase
with the magnitude of VG, showing a “U” shape, or decrease with
|VG| instead, showing an inverted “U” shape, or even first
decrease and then increase, showing a “W” shape (Figure 7.3).

This is because when VG is applied, there are two effects acting
on the resonance frequency. As represented by the zs
2 term of eq
7.2 (electrostatic tensioning, i.e., the “hardening” term), since
the voltage-induced static deflection zs will increase with |VG|, it
leads to a larger deflection-induced strain, which increases the
resonance frequency. At the same time, the application of VG will
also result in capacitive softening (the “softening” term). The
competition between these two effects determines the overall
shape of the frequency dependence on the applied VG. While the
details of the equation for a string are quantitatively different
from that for a beam, the same conclusions qualitatively hold for
CNT resonators, and the effects mentioned above have been
observed (Figure 7.2).
These two frequency tuning mechanisms can be effectively
controlled via properly designed device structures. For example,
the frequency of a doubly clamped NW resonator can be tuned
up or down by applying voltages to a side gate or a back gate
(Figure 7.2b),36 by leveraging the spring hardening or by
softening mechanisms: The side gate is in the direction of NW
vibration, and thus its effect in capacitive softening is much more
pronounced. Interestingly, such differentiation in frequency
tuning can also be achieved by selecting different resonant
modes (Figure 7.2c): those modes with device motion in the
direction of the electric field lines are generally more susceptible
to the softening effect.36,173

Besides a gate voltage, one can also control the device tension
mechanically by using a piezoelectric substrate12 (Figure 7.2d)
or MEMS actuator111 (Figure 7.2e), which can pull the
resonator in-plane, achieving frequency tuning ranges up to
2000%. An interesting implication from such frequency tuning
experiments is that high-frequency devices can be achieved by
engineering the strain in the resonator,11,12,111,174 in addition to
scaling down the device size and choosing materials with high
elastic modulus.33,175

7.2. Frequency Tuning in 2D NEMS Resonators. For
most 2D NEMS resonators made of one-to-few layer 2D
materials, the membrane model typically applies, and thus the
resonance frequencies are highly tunable by strain or stress.60,176

Different from 1D NEMS resonators which are usually doubly
clamped, 2D NEMS resonators can be doubly clamped or fully
clamped, and the different boundary conditions can affect the
frequency tuning through gating. Using a fully clamped circular
membrane resonator (f res,FC, eq 7.3) and a doubly clamped
nanoribbon resonator (f res,DC, eq 7.4) as examples, the
frequency tuning by gate-induced tensile strain and capacitive
softening can be written as177

(7.3)

(7.4)

where EY, t, and ρ are, respectively, the Youngs’ modulus,
thickness, and mass density of the 2D material, g is the gap size
(distance from the 2D layer to the gate), and ϵ0 is the vacuum
permittivity. For the fully clamped case, R is the radius of the
circular device, and εr is the radial strain in the membrane. For
the doubly clamped case, L is the length of the device, and ε is
the axial strain in the membrane.
In both cases, contributions from electrostatic tensioning and
capacitive softening are present. Specifically, electrostatic
tensioning is represented by the first term under each square
root, in which the effect of VG is implicit through modulating the
strain in the device; capacitive softening is represented by the
second term under each square root, in which the effect of VG is
explicit. It is interesting to note that NEMS resonators with a
higher initial tension (and thus frequency) generally exhibit
smaller tunability (in frequency ratio) by VG, because the VG-
induced strain is relatively small compared with the large initial
strain. Therefore, by releasing the initial strain (for example,
using thermal annealing), a much wider gate tuning range may
be achieved.57

Device strain in 2D resonators can be induced via electrostatic
tensioning (Figure 7.4a,b,c,d), thermal expansion (Figure
7.4b,e), external actuators (Figure 7.4f), pressure difference
(Figure 7.4g), substrate bending,178 and so on. In one example,
the frequency of a MoS2/graphene HS could be tuned up to
370% with gate voltage (Figure 7.4b).179 In other exam-
ples,180,181 the resonance frequencies of MoS2 and graphene
resonators have been tuned by temperature, and the direction of
frequency tuning depends on the device structure and thermal
expansion coefficient of the materials. A thermal hysteresis effect
has also been exploited to realize frequency-reconfigurable
resonators.182 Additionally, using comb-drive actuators, the
resonance frequencies of MoS2, graphene, and h-BN resonators
have been tuned (Figure 7.4f).183

8. QUALITY FACTOR AND DAMPING

Dissipation is important for MEMS/NEMS devices. In most
cases, the rate of the dissipation can be characterized by the
quality factor Q, which describes the ratio between the energy
stored in the resonator and the energy dissipated during each
vibration cycle:

Figure 7.3. Schematic illustrations of tuning curves of “U-shape” and
“W-shape” in 1D or 2D NEMS resonators. Reprinted in part with
permission from ref 63. Copyright 2018 The Authors, some rights
reserved; exclusive licensee AAAS. Distributed under a CC BY-NC
4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15560


(8.1)

where fres is the resonance frequency, γ = ω0/Q (the 2nd term in
eq 4.1, representing linear damping), BW = γ/2π is the so-called
“resonance bandwidth”, which refers to the full width of the peak
measured at half of the maximum power, and Est and Ediss are
respectively the energy stored in the resonator and the energy
dissipated per cycle of vibration.
A larger quality factor corresponds to slower energy
dissipation and a sharper resonance peak, and is generally
desirable for device applications: It can lead to better frequency
selectivity as well as a smaller power required to sustain the
oscillation. With high-Q MEMS/NEMS resonators, researchers
have demonstrated ultrasensitive transducers, narrow-passband
and low-insertion-loss RF filters, self-sustained oscillators,
etc.184−187

Both extrinsic and intrinsic dissipation mechanisms can exist
in NEMS resonators.188 Extrinsic dissipation sources can
include air/fluid damping,189 clamping loss, etc., while intrinsic
dissipation mechanisms can include phonons in the resonator
and the clamps,190 surface-induced loss,191−193 material-defect-
induced dissipation,194 thermoelastic damping,195−197 etc. All of
these need to be optimized to achieve high-Q resonators. A

microscopic description of different dissipation mechanism is
given in ref 190.
8.1. Quality Factors in 1D NEMS Resonators. The quality
factor in 1D NEMS resonators has been improving significantly
over the years. Early measurements of CNT resonators at room
temperature11,198 typically showed Q values below 2000. A
number of approaches have since been adopted to improve Q in
1D resonators. Cooling: By cooling doubly clamped CNT
resonators down to millikelvin temperature under high vacuum,
the effects from phonon and air damping can be minimized, and
Q values exceeding 5 million have been measured using
ultralow-noise measurement instruments (Figure 8.1a,b).48,104

In one work,104 several effects appearing in CNTs have been
carefully studied and controlled, which are important for the
observed high Q: (i) electromechanical damping suppressed in
the Fabry−Pérot regime and (ii) apparent enhancement of Q
through the reduction of the phase noise. Strain: Strain tuning of
Q has been demonstrated in NW resonators by bending the
substrate, and Q values up to 390,000 at room temperature have
been demonstrated (Figure 8.1c).199 It has also been reported
that an external DC voltage can increase the axial strain in
cantilever CNT resonators, which results in “soft clamping”, and
thus enhances the Q values.200Limiting amplitude: Large
vibration amplitudes can lead to nonlinear effects such as
nonlinear damping,101 and thus reduce Q values. Therefore,

Figure 7.4. Frequency tuning in 2D NEMS resonators. (a) Schematic illustration of a doubly clamped 2D resonator, with deformation and strain
induced by DC gate voltage. (b) Gate tuning of the resonance frequency for a 2D HS resonator. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 179.
Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. (c) Color plot of frequency tuning via DC gate voltage in a graphene NEMS oscillator. Reprinted in
part with permission from ref 59. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Multimode resonances frequency tuning in a black P resonator.
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 136. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic of Joule heating in a fully clamped
2D resonator, and frequency tuning of a graphene resonator (inset) using Joule heating. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 258,
copyright 2018 American Chemical Society, and ref 181, copyright 2018 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. (f) Illustration of a
comb-drive actuator controlling strain in a doubly clamped MoS2 resonator, and the measured frequency tuning data at different comb-drive
actuation voltages. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 183. Copyright 2021 Wiley-Blackwell. (g) Schematic illustration for tuning the
strain in a graphene resonator by deforming the membrane using pressure difference. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 245. Copyright
2021 Institute of Physics.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15561


limiting the vibration amplitude, such as by reducing the AC
electrical driving, can sometimes also improve Q values in CNT
resonators.201

8.2. Quality Factors in 2D NEMS Resonators. Graphene
resonators are arguably the most studied type of 2D NEMS
resonators, and their quality factors can be affected by a number
of factors and mechanisms. Size: A study of graphene
mechanical resonators with different diameters shows that Q
scales with device size (smaller devices have lower Qs).123

Stacking: Significant difference in Q is found among monolayer,
twisted bilayer, and Bernal-stacked bilayer graphene resona-
tors,202 suggesting the vdW interaction between layers, or more
specifically the interlayer friction, can affect the energy
dissipation in multilayer 2D NEMS resonators. Clamping
geometry: Unlike 1D CNT resonators, doubly clamped 2D
resonators have free edges which can also lead to dissipation, and
both theoretical203 and experimental60,204 studies show that
resonators with free edges generally exhibit lower Q compared
with those without free edges. Amplitude: Amplitude of motion
can also have strong effects on the nonlinear damping, and a
graphene with quality factor reaching 100,000 has been
demonstrated by exploiting the nonlinear nature of damping
through controlling the driving amplitude.101 Temperature: By
cooling the device to 15 mK and by reducing the vibration
amplitude, a graphene NEMS resonator with Q over 1 million
has been experimentally demonstrated (Figure 8.2a).142

Besides graphene, 2D NEMS resonators based on other 2D
materials have also been studied to understand and control
dissipation in these atomically thin mechanical structures
(Figure 8.2b−g). A theoretical study suggests that the Q of
MoS2 resonators could be intrinsically higher than that of
graphene resonators due to a larger phonon gap.129 Pressure-
dependent studies of MoS2 resonators suggest that free-
molecule-flow damping plays an important role in 2D
resonators,189 leading to a different pressure dependence of Q

in 2D resonators than in most 3D MEMS resonators. The
temperature dependence of the quality factor of MoS2
resonators has been compared to models from different
dissipation mechanisms (Figure 8.2c).205 The Q dependence
on device tension (Figure 8.2e)183,206 and DC gate voltage has
also been experimentally studied (Figure 8.2f).63,207 Further-
more, the trend of tuning Q using a DC gate voltage is
dependent on the device geometry (Figure 8.2g).208 Increasing
the AC drive voltage generally decreases the Q due to the
increased vibration amplitude (Figure 8.2d).208,101

Heterostructures can be used to enhance quality factors in 2D
resonators. For example, resistive loss through Joule heating can
be important for NEMS resonators using electrical readout,
especially at low temperatures. Through adding a low resistivity
NbSe2 layer between two graphene layers in a graphene/NbSe2/
graphene resonator,154 such electrical loss is reduced and the
mechanical Q in the device can reach up to 245,000.

9. NONLINEARITY AND DYNAMIC RANGE

9.1. Nonlinearity in NEMS Resonators. As shown in eq
4.1, when the vibration amplitude increases, the nonlinear terms
of the restoring and damping forces become non-negligible and
manifest in the device dynamics. Depending on which nonlinear
term is the dominant correction to the linear equation of motion,
the device can be described using the Duffing equation
(including a cubic term in the spring constant):63

(9.1)

or the van der Pol equation (including a cubic term in the
damping coefficient):101

(9.2)

leading to different nonlinear responses (Figure 9.1a,b,c).
Nonlinearities can be observed even at relatively small vibration
amplitudes. Therefore, nonlinear responses have important
implications for device dynamics. They can also be used to
extract device parameters such as Young’s modulus.209

There can be many different sources for spring nonlinearities,
and they can generally be categorized based on whether they
increase or decrease the resonance frequency upon increasing
the driven displacement (hardening or softening; Figure 9.1f
shows examples of both). It is often true that several types of
nonlinearities exist in a NEMS resonator. Since the electrostatic
gate force tunes the static tension in the membrane, and such
force tends to break the symmetry of the mode shape, it can be
employed to increase the contribution to the nonlinear Duffing
force associated with softening of the resonant mode. This can
sometimes lead to the ability to realize zero effective nonlinearity
for not too large displacement or to control the resonator in
either a hardening or softening regime.125,210,211 In addition,
while the conventional wisdom for resonant sensors is to avoid
nonlinear responses to preserve the linearity of the output,
researchers have found that the response of NEMS resonant
sensors can be enriched by exploiting the nonlinear effects.212,213

All this is possible because the suspended nanomaterials can
withstand a very high level of strain, allowing them to vibrate
with very large amplitudes (compared with device size) and thus
operate in deep nonlinear regimes; this feature is not readily
available in bulk materials (such as Si, which is commonly used
for MEMS resonators) that tend to fail at moderate strains.

Figure 8.1. Controlling and enhancing Q in 1D NEMS resonators.
(a) Resonance spectrum of a CNT resonator showing Q close to 5
million. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 104. Copyright
2014 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Temperature dependence of Q
in a CNT resonator. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 40.
Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. (c) Strain tuning of Q
and f in a silicon nitride NW resonator by substrate bending.
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 199. Copyright 2007
American Chemical Society.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15562


Here we take a closer look at CNT resonators: The extreme
aspect ratio of CNT and thus the large force response has
important consequences for the dynamics of nanotube
devices.95,214 For instance, a typical nanotube with a length of
1 μm attains a room-temperature thermal motion of zth = 2.5
nm, a large displacement that likely drives the device into the
nonlinear regime. The fluctuating amplitude of the thermal
motion translates into fluctuations of the resonance frequency
due to the Duffing nonlinearity, causing an apparent broadening
of the resonator line width and an apparent reduction of the Q
factor (when it is extracted from spectral measurements).97 The
spectrum can be further broadened by the thermal motion of the
other modes through the dispersive mode coupling (Section
10.1).174,215 Such spectral broadening is not related to energy
loss but to decoherence and frequency noise.104,216 Recent
measurements also indicate that the thermal energy could
concentrate in one mode, disperse into a second mode, and then
return, reminiscent of the Fermi−Pasta−Ulam−Tsingou
behavior.217 Therefore, the thermal noise combined with the
Duffing nonlinearity and the mode coupling leads to rich

dynamics in CNT resonators and deserves further studies in the
future.
9.2. Linear Dynamic Range. Another important device
characteristic that depends on both the thermal noise and the
nonlinearity is the linear DR. It describes the range of amplitude
in which the vibration response is linear, i.e., the motional
amplitude of the device (output) is proportional to the driving
amplitude (input). Such proportionality is important for sensing
and signal transduction, and a larger linear DR is generally
desirable for such devices. The linear DR is defined as the ratio of
the amplitude at the onset of nonlinearity (beyond which the
vibration is considered nonlinear) to the standard deviation of
the thermomechanical noise at resonance integrated over the
measurement bandwidth, i.e., the range in which linear
resonance response can be obtained (Figure 9.1a). In a
resonator with Duffing nonlinearity (which is by far the most
common type of nonlinearity observed), its linear DR can be
expressed as95

Figure 8.2. Controlling and enhancing Q in 2D NEMS resonators. (a) A graphene resonators measured at 15 mK, showing Q exceeding 1
million. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 142. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. (b) Thermomechanical resonance of a 2D MoS2
resonator measured at room temperature, showing Q exceeding 1000. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 63. Copyright 2018 The
Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee AAAS. Distributed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/. (c) Temperature dependence of Q for a 2D MoS2 resonator. Reprinted in part with permission under a Creative Commons (CC-BY-
NC-ND) License from ref 205. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. (d) Dependence of Q on DC and AC gate voltages, for 2D MoS2
NEMS resonators. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 208. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society. (e) Q vs comb-drive actuation
voltage for 2D MoS2 resonator mounted on a comb-drive. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 183. Copyright 2021 Wiley-Blackwell. (f)
Gate tuning of Q for MoS2 resonators. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 63. Copyright 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved;
exclusive licensee AAAS. Distributed under a CC BY-NC 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. (g) Different effect of
tuning Q for fully clamped and doubly clamped 2D MoS2 NEMS resonators using DC gate voltage. Reprinted in part with permission from ref
208. Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15563


(9.3)

where ac is the critical amplitude (the onset of bistability, and
0.745ac is 1 dB below the critical amplitude, often called the 1 dB

compression point), Sx,th
1/2 is the on-resonance thermomechan-
ical noise spectral density, and Δf is the measurement
bandwidth. As devices scale down, the DR exhibits different
trends for 1D and 2D NEMS resonators.
9.2.1. DR in 1D NEMS Resonators. The device aspect ratio
can have a large effect on the linear DR. Calculations95 show that
as the length of the NW or CNT increases, the DR decreases
(Figure 9.1d). When the device is sufficiently long or thin, the
resonator could be even intrinsically nonlinear (Figure 9.1b),
showing no linear region of operation. Experimentally, VLS
synthesized Si NW cantilevers with a wide range of dimensions
have been studied, showing DR ranging from 53 to 90 dB.83

Studies of doubly clamped SiC NW resonator show that the DR
can be tuned from 69 to 73 dB by applying a gate voltage,172 in
good agreement with the theoretical model.
9.2.2. DR in 2D NEMS Resonators. 2D NEMS resonators are
found to exhibit broader DR compared with 1D NEMS
resonators. Interestingly, a theoretical analysis of 2D drumhead
resonators218 shows that DR increases with device diameter
(Figure 9.1e), in striking contrast to 1D resonators (Figure
9.1d). It also shows that tensile strain in 2D NEMS resonators
can lead to a larger DR. Such broad DR has been observed in
mono-, bi-, and trilayer MoS2 drumhead resonators, with
measured linear DR up to 70 dB (Figure 9.1f),63 showing
excellent agreement with the theory. DR tuning has also been
experimentally demonstrated for 2D graphene resonators, in
which the DR can be enhanced by up to 25 dB using gate
voltage-induced strain.165

10. MECHANICAL MODE COUPLING IN
LOW-DIMENSIONAL RESONATORS

Mechanical coupling refers to the interaction between two (or
more) mechanical eigenmodes�they can be the modes in
either different structures219−226 or within the same vibrating
structure.171,227−231 An easy way to visualize such effects is to
think about two spring-mass resonators connected by a coupling
spring (Figure 10.1), whose equations of motion can be written
as

Figure 9.1. Nonlinearity and DR in 1D and 2D NEMS resonators.
(a) Definition of DR in a NEMS resonator, from thermomechanical
resonance to onset of nonlinearity as vibration amplitude increases.
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 218. Copyright 2014
American Institute of Physics. (b) Resonance spectra of the doubly
clamped SiC NW resonator with increasing drive, showing Duffing
nonlinearity. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 172.
Copyright 2006 American Institute of Physics. (c) Nonlinear
damping in a CNT resonator. Reprinted in part with permission
from ref 101. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (d)
Calculated DR for doubly clamped 1D NEMS resonators with
different lengths, including CNT and NW resonators. Reprinted in
part with permission from ref 95. Copyright 2005 American
Institute of Physics. (e) Calculated DR for fully clamped circular 2D
NEMS resonators at 300 K. Reprinted in part with permission from
ref 218. Copyright 2014 American Institute of Physics. (f) Softening
and hardening nonlinearities measured in monolayer and 3-layer 2D
MoS2 NEMS resonators as well as DRs. Reprinted in part with
permission from ref 63. Copyright 2018 The Authors, some rights
reserved; exclusive licensee AAAS. Distributed under a CC BY-NC
4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.

Figure 10.1. Coupled resonators. (a) Schematic illustration of two
coupled modes in a spring-mass model. (b) Illustration of two singly
clamped beam resonators coupled through a coupling beam. (c)
Illustration of two singly clamped beam resonators coupled through
a common clamping edge. In both (b) and (c), the origin of the
coupling spring term kc is indicated.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15564


(10.1)

where zi is the displacement of the ith resonator (i = 1 or 2). It can
be clearly seen that with the presence of the coupling spring kc,
the motion of the first resonator depends on the second one, and
vice versa. In two resonators situated in different places, the
coupling kc can occur via the transfer of elastic energy between
different resonators.219−221,226 Meanwhile, within a multimode
resonator, the coupling between different modes can arise
through the stress in the resonator or a force gradient.
Mechanical coupling in micro- and nanoscale resonant
devices can give rise to a plethora of interesting physical
phenomena such as mechanically induced transparency232−234

and can be leveraged to realize unique device functions like
transferring and storage of information in both the classical and
quantum domains.235−237 Due to their ultrasmall resonant mass
and superb frequency tunability as well as the unique physical
properties offered by various 1D and 2D nanomaterials,
mechanical coupling in low-dimensional NEMS resonators is
of particular interest to researchers for exploring exquisite
physical processes and demonstrating various device applica-
tions.
It is important to note that eq 10.1 describes the simplest case,
i.e., linear resonant coupling. Its result is simply converting the
original set of eigenmodes into another set, i.e., the "coupled
modes". When additional terms (such as higher-order terms and
periodic modulations to stiffness or damping) are included, one
can have more interesting resonant coupling, which can be
further categorized into nonlinear coupling and parametric
coupling. For more detailed and in-depth discussion, we refer
the readers to a more dedicated review.190 Here we use a
phenomenological and simplified approach to introduce mode
coupling in 1D and 2D NEMS resonators.
10.1. Coupling through Nonlinearity. The high mechan-
ical strength of 2D materials allows 2D resonators to be driven at
very high amplitudes, often more than the membrane thickness,
leading to strong nonlinear effects.212,213 In addition, the static
tension tunes the frequency of different resonant modes.
Tension-tunability of 2D membranes allows manipulating
individual mode frequencies, nonlinearities, and mode coupling,
which is not readily available in most MEMS devices.
Coupled modes affect each other through tension. The
amplitude of a particular mode can modify the resonant
frequencies of all the modes that are coupled through tension.238

This dispersive coupling does not require any condition on the
resonance frequency ratio of the two modes.
Another scenario arises when the modes have commensurate
resonance frequencies. Due to modal nonlinearities, the
response of a resonator is modified and includes higher tones
that are integer multiples of the excitation frequency; the high-
frequency mode is driven by a harmonic of the low-frequency
mode, and the low-frequency mode is driven by a subharmonic
of the high-frequency mode (Figure 10.2a).94,132 This
phenomenon is known as “internal resonance”, which enables
the efficient exchange of energy between the modes at different
eigenfrequencies. It can lead to peculiar resonant features such
as the frequency pinning of the driven mode (Figure
10.2b)132,239 and allows the study of nonlinear damping.240

Similar phenomena have also been observed in CNT
resonators. By applying a static force within the nanotube and
sweeping the resonant frequencies, one can tune the different

modes in and out of nonlinear resonant coupling, i.e., internal
resonance, as the ratio of the eigenfrequencies of the two modes
is close to an integer n or a rational number n/m, e.g., 1/3, 2, or
2/3 (Figure 10.3).94

Figure 10.2. Internal resonance and frequency pinning in an MoS2
NEMS resonator. (a) The frequency response of the device with
positive Duffing nonlinearity. (b) Pinning of the jump-down
frequency when the internal resonance occurs in the multistable
regime. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 132. Copyright
2015 American Institute of Physics.

Figure 10.3. Internal resonance in a CNT resonator. (a) Nonlinear
resonant coupling revealed by measuring the oscillation amplitude
of a single mode with the two-source current mixing method11 as a
function of gate voltage VG. The measured current ranges from 0
(black) to 1 nA (red). An avoided crossing is observed when the
frequency is half that of a higher-order mode. Reprinted in part with
permission from ref 94. Copyright 2012 American Physical society.
(b−e) Response of the vibration amplitude (which is roughly
proportional to the current) to an oscillating force at different gate
voltages indicated by the symbols in (a). Black and red lines are
sweeps with increasing and decreasing frequency, respectively. The
line shapes are highly irregular due to an interplay of nonlinear
resonant coupling and nonlinear Duffing response oscillations.
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 94. Copyright 2012
American Physical society.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15565


10.2. Coupling through Parametric Pumping. The
coupling between two modes can be turned on by applying a
periodic signal at neither their frequencies. Such signal is often
called the “pump”, with frequency ωp, which parametrically
drives the mode coupling. The coupled equations of motion
then take the form:231,241,242

(10.2)

The terms containing Γ and Λ are controlled by the parametric
pump signal and are responsible for sinusoidal modulation of the
stiffness of the mode by stretching of the nanomaterial, i.e., the
resonator body. This periodic stretching can be realized, for
example, using electrical gating227,231 or photothermal heat-
ing.171,228 The terms proportional to Γi are responsible for the
parametric amplification effect mentioned in Section
4.2.2,98,114,137,243,244 but for the case discussed here they are
usually far off-resonance, and produce no effect. The pump
signal Λ cos(ωpt) controls the coupling between the two modes
when ωp = |ω1 − ω2|. In such a process with ω1 < ω2, a quantum
with energy ℏωp and a quantum with energy ℏω1 are annihilated
while a quantum with energy ℏω2 is created, and vice versa
(Figure 10.4a).
Besides the requirement of ωp = |ω1 − ω2|, the coupling
strength is determined by the magnitude of Λ. When the rate of
transfer of phonons between the modes (∝ Λ) is larger than the
rate of decay of phonons in each mode (∝ γ1 + γ2), the system is
said to be in the strong coupling regime, where each of the two
resonances splits.241 Such splitting is observed in many 1D and
2D NEMS resonators (Figure 10.4b,c).171,219,227−231 The
amount of splitting (denoted as 2g) increases with Λ and can
be controlled by modulating the strength of the pump signal
(Figure 10.4d,e),227,229,231 tuning the tension using a DC gate
bias,227,231 heating the resonator using a laser beam,171 or even
bending the substrate.245

Transfer of energy between the modes can also occur241 when
ωp = |ω1 − ω2|/n, for integer values of n ≥ 2.171,227−231 An
example of this phenomenon in 2D NEMS resonators is shown
in Figure 10.4f. When pumped at the sum ωp = ω1 + ω2, the
modes experience mutual driving. This case is not energy
conserving and can result in strong amplification of both
amplitudes.

11. NEMS RESONATORS FOR SENSING
NEMS resonators based on low-dimensional nanomaterials
possess many advantages, such as ultrasmall size (down to just
one or few atoms in at least one dimension), ultrahigh aspect
ratio (exceeding 106 in some CNT resonators), ultralow mass
(down to attogram level; below 100,000 carbon atoms for the
shortest CNT), high resonance frequencies (as high as >10
GHz), ultralow power consumption (down to subpicowatt), and
large frequency tuning ranges (exceeding 2000%). Thanks to
these advantages, NEMS devices have demonstrated exciting
potentials toward a number of applications, with sensing
applications explored most extensively.
11.1. Mass Sensing. One of the most notable applications
for NEMS resonators is mass sensing. As can be seen from the
expression of resonance frequency for a simple spring-mass
resonator (eq 7.1,) any change in the resonator mass impacts the
resonance frequency. The smaller the initial resonator mass, the

larger the frequency shift is due to a certain added mass. Thanks
to their ultrasmall mass, NEMS resonators make exceptional
mass sensors.
Quantitatively, when an added mass of amount Δm lands on a
resonator of mass M, the resonance frequency f n (for the nth
resonance mode) will be shifted by Δfn according to246

(11.1)

where ϕn(x) denotes the relative amplitude (ratio to the
maximum displacement point on the resonator) for the nth mode
at position x, the position of adsorption for the added mass Δm.
The numerical factor αn, which is on the order of unity, depends

Figure 10.4. Parametric coupling in NEMS resonators. (a)
Illustration of a red-detuned pump alongside the two coupled
modes in the frequency domain. (b, c) The response of mode 1 as a
function of the red-pump detuning when Vp = 0 V (b) and Vp = 1.5 V
(c) in a graphene drumhead resonator. For nonzero pump
amplitudes, mode 1 is seen to split in the vicinity of ωp ≈ |ω1 −
ω2|. Inset, the response detected at ωd + ωp. Energy transfer to the
second mode is seen when ωd + ωp ≈ ω2. (d) Response of mode 1 at
fine intervals of the pump voltage. (e) Cooperativity, a figure of
merit that quantifies the magnitude of intermodal coupling vs pump
amplitudes. The solid line is a quadratic fit of the data (circles) to the
equation C = αVp
2. (f) Higher-order parametric coupling in NEMS
resonators: Mode 1 response as a function of the pump detuning
over a larger frequency range in a graphene drumhead resonator.
Apart from normal mode splitting at ωp ≈ Δω = |ω1 − ω2|, an extra
splitting at ωp ≈ (Δω)/2 can be seen, suggesting the onset of higher-
order intermodal coupling. (a−f) Reprinted in part with permission
from ref 227. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15566


on the specific mode. Again, it can be seen that the fractional
frequency shift, Δf n/fn is proportional to the fractional mass
change Δm/M. Therefore, a smaller resonator mass M means
that for the same amount of resonance frequency shift, a smaller
added mass Δm can be detected.
To achieve the ultimate mass sensitivity, researchers have
been striving to build ever smaller NEMS resonators. For
example, SiC NW resonators have been demonstrated to
function as highly sensitive mass sensors (Figure 11.1a)247 with
a mass resolution down to 7 zg (1 zg = 10−21 g), corresponding
to ∼30 xenon atoms.248 Later, using CNT resonators which
have smaller masses than NW ones, the detection of small
amount of atoms such as platinum (Pt, 0.324 zg),56 xenon (Xe,
0.218 zg),71 chromium (Cr, 0.1 zg),249 and argon (Ar, 0.066
zg)71 have been demonstrated (Figure 11.1b). Further, by using
an ∼100 nm short CNT resonator (even smaller mass) and
annealing it to reduce frequency fluctuations, a mass resolution
on the order of a single proton (1.7 yg, 1 yg = 0.001 zg) has been
achieved (Figure 11.1c).250

Besides 1D NEMS resonators, mass sensing has also been
demonstrated in 2D resonators. For example, graphene
resonators have been used for sensing pentacene molecules
(Figure 11.1f), and a mass sensitivity of ∼2 zg has been
achieved.57 While their mass sensitivity is not as competitive as
that of CNT resonators (given the larger resonator masses), the
large surface area makes 2D NEMS resonators particularly
promising for capturing low-density, low-concentration incom-
ing particle fluxes, which can be a practical advantage in many
applications.251

The superb mass resolution of low-dimensional resonators
allows researchers to study a number of exotic physical processes
related to surface adsorption, such as the kinetics and
fluctuations of adsorbed atoms over the device surface (Figure
11.1d),46,247,252 the formation of monolayers of adsorbed atoms
in low-dimensional solid, liquid, and vapor phases, and the
associated phase transitions (Figure 11.1e)41,42,46 as well as the
adsorption of helium superfluid monolayers and the so-called
layering transition.47

11.2. Force Sensing. Low-dimensional NEMS make
excellent force sensors. The ultimate force sensitivity is limited
by the thermal force noise, which is given by the fluctuation−
dissipation theorem:91

(11.2)

where kBT is the thermal energy, γ = ω0/Q is the damping
coefficient, Meff is the eigenmode mass, keff is the effective spring
constant, and Q is the quality factor. Therefore, the high
flexibility (thus low spring constant), small masses, and high
quality factors make low-dimensional resonators particularly
advantageous for force sensing.
Similar to the quest for the ultimate mass sensitivity,
researchers have been pushing the limit of force sensing with
continued scaling of NEMS resonators. For example, NW
resonators (including many with singly clamped geometry) have
been extensively explored for sensing small forces.253 Smaller in
size and mass, CNT resonators can achieve force sensitivities as
low as 4.3 zN/
(1 zN = 10−21 N) when operating the device
at low temperature (0.12 K).254 Central to this result is lowering
the contribution from the noise of the detection. This sensitivity
can enable the detection of tiny electrical forces (Figure
11.2a).91 Potentially, it could also allow coupling the nanotube
motion to the spin degree of freedom of individual electrons255

Figure 11.1. Mass sensing applications using NEMS resonators. (a)
Schematic illustration of Xe atom mass sensing using a SiC NW
resonator and the measured frequency response to mass loading,
showing zg-level mass sensing. Reprinted in part with permission
from ref 247. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) SEM
image and resonance curve during adsorption for a CNT resonator.
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 71. Copyright 2008
American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image and mass sensing data
for a CNT resonator, showing down to 1.7 yoctogram resolution.
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 250. Copyright 2012
Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustration of fluctuation
of Xe atoms (including adsorption, desorption, and surface
diffusion) on a SiC NW resonator. Reprinted in part with permission
from ref 247. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) Low-
dimensional phase transition of Kr atoms adsorbed on the surface of
a CNT resonator, detected by monitoring the resonance frequency.
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 42. Copyright 2010
American Association for the Advancement of Science. (f) Mass
sensing behavior of graphene resonator. Reprinted in part with
permission from ref 57. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15567


and protons (hydrogen atoms),256 toward single-atom nuclear
magnetic resonance and quantum spin-phonon physics.
2D resonators have also been explored for sensitive force
detection. For example, the first graphene resonator shows a
force sensitivity down to 0.9 fN/
(1 fN = 10−15 Newton).16

By coupling a graphene resonator to a superconducting cavity, a
force sensitivity of 390 zN/
has been achieved (Figure
11.2b), together with a displacement sensitivity of 1.3 fm/
.77

11.3. Other Sensing Applications. Besides mass and force
sensing, low-dimensional NEMS resonators have been explored
for other sensing applications.
11.3.1. Temperature Sensing. Varying temperature will
change not only the Young’s modulus of the material257 but also
the tension in the suspended structure due to the differential
thermal expansion of materials, both of which can lead to
frequency shifts in response to changing temperatures. Different
NEMS resonators exhibit different temperature-dependent
behaviors. For example, MoS2 resonators and h-BN resonators
show negative temperature coefficients of frequency (TCf),
defined as the relative frequency shift per temperature change. In
recent experiments, MoS2 resonators exhibit a TCf of −0.396%/
K from 293 to 315.5 K, and h-BN resonators show a TCf of
−0.285%/K from 266 to 414 K.20,180 In contrast, graphene
NEMS resonators exhibit a positive TCf of 1.2%/K from room
temperature to 1250 K,258 and can operate up to 2650 K.181

These devices could potentially be used as resonant temperature
sensors.

11.3.2. Light and Radiation Sensing. With a rich collection
of materials with different bandgaps, NEMS based on low-
dimensional materials can be used for sensing photons in a wide
range of wavelengths. Black P has a bandgap that varies from 0.3
to 2 eV depending on the thickness, thus black P resonators are
capable of covering a wide range of wavelengths from visible
light to infrared radiation. In one example, the device frequency
shifted upon exposure to 785 nm light due to the photothermal
effect, with a responsivity of
= −0.31 kHz/μW.259 MoS2

resonators have been demonstrated to show different
responsivities for lights of different wavelengths (405, 532, and
633 nm).131,180 In addition, photons with even higher energy,
such as γ-ray radiation, can also be detected using NEMS
resonators. For ∼5000 photons with energy at 662 keV
(collected over 24 h), MoS2 resonators exhibit resonance
frequency shifts of ∼0.5−2.1%, corresponding to a responsivity
of 30−82 Hz/photon (Figure 11.3a). The intrinsic sensitivity
(limit of detection) is estimated to approach 0.02−0.05
photons, which makes these 2D resonators excellent sensors
for low-dose radiation leakage that might be otherwise
undetectable.260

11.3.3. Inertial Sensing. While low-dimensional materials
usually have a small mass, they can form highly sensitive inertial
sensors when a proof mass is attached. For example, suspended
graphene membranes have been used to realize resonant
accelerometers. By exploiting the piezoresistive effect in
graphene, the acceleration can be measured from the resistance
change of the 2D material (Figure 11.3b).261,262 These graphene
accelerometers have a device footprint at least 2 orders of
magnitude smaller than conventional MEMS silicon acceler-
ometers, which can be advantageous in terms of integration and
power consumption.
11.3.4. Pressure Sensing. The resonance frequency of NEMS
resonators can also change with pressure, which suggests
potential for pressure sensing. For example, for MoS2
membranes covering microtrenches, the change in environment
pressure results in a pressure difference across the membrane,
and MoS2 membranes can exhibit different resonant responses
under different pressure ranges from ∼10 mTorr to 400 Torr
(Figure 11.3c), with pressure responsivities of the resonance
frequency from ∼0.05 to 0.8 MHz/Torr.263 In another example,
graphene-resonator-based squeeze-film pressure sensors have
been demonstrated, which can operate between 8 and 1000
mbar with a responsivity of 9000 Hz/mbar.264

11.3.5. Charge Sensing. NEMS resonators can detect very
tiny changes in force and strain induced by a charge
perturbation, and thus can function as highly sensitive
electrometers (charge sensors). In one example, the excellent
strain sensitivity of MoS2 NEMS resonators, in conjunction with
the bifurcation amplifier implementation, enabled real-time
detection of charges on the order of 10 electrons at room
temperature.212 Furthermore, the nonlinearity in the 2D NEMS
resonators is exploited to implement a set-reset (SR) mechanical
charge flip-flop which can record short-lived charge events.

12. RESEARCH FRONTIERS ENABLED BY NEMS
RESONATORS

In addition to the rich dynamics offered by the mechanical
coupling (Section 10) and the superb sensitivity to external
stimuli (Section 11), 1D and 2D resonators are made of
materials that can feature interesting quantum electron transport
properties. With these unique features, NEMS resonators offer a

Figure 11.2. Force sensing applications of low-dimensional NEMS
resonators. (a) AFM image of a 4 μm long CNT, schematic of the
device, and the corresponding force sensing experimental results
showing zN force sensing at 1.2 K and 3 K. Reprinted in part with
permission from ref 91. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.
(b) False-colored image of a multilayer graphene resonator and the
force sensitivity under different numbers of pump photons.
Reprinted in part with permission under a Creative Commons
(CC BY) License from ref 77. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing
Group.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15568


plethora of intriguing possibilities for pushing the frontiers of
both fundamental science and cutting-edge technology.
12.1. RF Signal Processing toward Wireless Commu-
nication. Resonators based on low-dimensional materials may
be used for RF signal processing and communication
applications and could potentially exhibit performance advan-
tages such as ultralow power consumption, high resonance
frequency, and broad frequency tuning range.
The first NEMS resonator with a fundamental mode
resonance frequency exceeding 1 GHz was a SiC nanobeam
resonator.265 When such an open-loop NEMS resonators is
connected into a closed loop with feedback, it can exhibit
sustained oscillations with only a DC supply once the circuit
satisfies the Barkhausen criteria: (1) the open-loop gain equals
unity, and (2) the feedback phase is an integer multiple of 2π.

Using such a construction, a SiC NW NEMS oscillator operating
at 428 MHz has been demonstrated (Figure 12.1a), showing
signal generation with low phase noise and excellent stability.115

A graphene NEMS oscillator59 (Figure 12.1b) with a 14%
frequency tuning range has been realized and used as the core of
a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), a type of device widely
used in RF communication. Audio signal transmission and FM
signal generation were demonstrated with this VCO. MoS2
resonators have also been made into self-sustained feedback
oscillators using an optoelectronics feedback circuitry.266

Besides oscillators, suspended graphene membranes have
been used as RF switches, which exhibit small pull-in voltage
(∼1 V) and excellent signal isolation (∼30 dB at 40 GHz).267

Furthermore, using a SWCNT resonator in a field-effect
transistor configuration, AM, FM, and digital demodulation
has been realized with the CNT resonator as a mixer (Figure
12.1c), showing potential toward wireless communication.70 A
nanotube radio has also been demonstrated using a singly
clamped resonator geometry, with the nanotube functioning
simultaneously as the antenna, tunable band-pass filter,
amplifier, and demodulator.55

12.2. NEMS Arrays and Other Coupled Systems.
Coupling different mechanical resonators enables large-scale
arrays of cascaded resonators. This can form a phononic crystal,
displaying phononic bandgaps caused by mutual coupling
among the resonant modes (Figure 12.2a).222,223 In one
example with graphene transferred onto an array of nanopillars,
measurements suggest the formation of a phononic crystal with a
quasi-continuous frequency spectrum.268 In another example,
phononic crystal waveguides in engineered h-BN nano-
mechanical structures have been demonstrated (Figure 12.2b),
and the as-fabricated h-BN devices exhibit strong phonon
dispersion relation with prominently higher first transmission
band frequency and wider bandgap opening, compared with
their counterparts made from conventional 3D crystalline
materials with similar geometric designs.223 Such h-BN
waveguides are capable of supporting 15−24 MHz RF acoustic
wave propagation over an effective length of 1.2 mm with a
group velocity as high as 250 m/s at the first transmission band,
while attenuating the transmission at the stop-band and bandgap
by over 30 dB. Combining the unique piezoelectric properties of
h-BN, such phononic structures may empower dynamically
tunable devices for RF signal processing, or even toward building
future integrated phononic and hybrid quantum circuitry.
In addition to phononic structures, low-dimensional NEMS
resonators can also be coupled to photonic and optomechanical
devices. In one example, a graphene resonator coupled to an on-
chip waveguide was used to locally detect the hybridization
between the propagating optical modes, by sensing changes in
the optical gradient force (a kind of radiation pressure)
produced by the light which affects the vibration amplitude.269

In another example,270 a hybrid system consisting of a SiC
microdisk cavity and an h-BN nanomechanical resonator
showed strong mechanical coupling, even with the thickness
of h-BN scaled down to a few atomic layers. Understanding the
nanomechanical properties facilitates the design and implemen-
tation of SiC/h-BN hybrid systems, toward exploring and
exploiting coherent transduction between optics and mechanics
on such platforms.
One interesting consequence of the coupling is that it allows
for the tiny motion of a stiff bulk resonator to be amplified to a
large motion in a second resonator made of a more compliant
2D material. This has been demonstrated in a graphene/silicon

Figure 11.3. Various sensing applications demonstrated using low-
dimensional NEMS resonators. (a) Schematic illustration of a 2D
MoS2 resonator used for γ-ray radiation sensing and the measured
sensing data. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 260.
Copyright 2016 American Institute of Physics. (b) Schematic
illustration of a graphene accelerometer and sensing data. Reprinted
in part with permission from ref 261. Copyright 2019 Nature
Publishing Group. (c) Schematics of the cross section of a MoS2
resonator at different pressures, and the measured dependence of
the resonance frequency on chamber pressure. Reprinted in part
with permission from ref 263. Copyright 2014 Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15569


nitride hybrid resonant structure (Figure 12.2c).224 In another
experiment, the nonlinearity has been engineered in a silicon
nitride membrane by coupling it to a graphene resonator;
mechanical frequency combs have also been observed in this
device, similar to the well-known optical frequency combs
(Figure 12.2d).225

12.3. Quantum Transport in NEMS Resonators:
Electromechanical Coupling. While the mechanical motion
in NEMS resonators can be coupled to different degrees of
freedom, such as photons and spins, the electromechanical
coupling, i.e., the interaction between mechanical vibration and
electron transport properties becomes particularly interesting
when the devices are measured at cryogenic temperatures.93

Here we use CNT resonators to discuss the exotic physical
processes resulting from strong electromechanical coupling.
12.3.1. Origin of Electromechanical Coupling. In terms of
electron transport properties, CNTs are 1D wires that can
become ballistic at low temperatures,93 meaning that they can
carry electrical current without noticeable dissipation along the
nanotube. The electron transport through the nanotube is then
dictated by the electrical transmission of the barriers formed at
the interface between the nanotube and the electrical leads,
giving rise to different quantum transport regimes. The carrier
density of the nanotube can be tuned capacitively with the gate
voltage as well as by the mechanical vibration (Figure 12.3a).
The electromechanical coupling emerges through this nano-
tube-gate capacitance, since it depends on the nanotube
displacement z. Mechanical vibrations of nanotubes have been
coupled to electrons in different transport regimes, including

single-electron tunneling,91,96,110,229,230,271−277 Kondo,48,278

and electronic Fabry−Pérot interference.104

Due to the small mass of nanotubes, the strength of the
electromechanical coupling is significant. This can be under-
stood in the following way: When adding one electron into the
nanotube, the associated capacitive force Fe creates a
comparatively large static displacement Δz = Fe/mω0
2. Since
m is tiny, the resulting electronic energy shift FeΔz is quite
sizable.
Large electromechanical coupling is important for the readout
of nanotube mechanical vibrations. It enables transduction of
small vibration amplitudes into measurable electrical current
modulations. Different methods were developed (see Section
3.2 for details) to optimize the sensitivity of the detec-
tion.11,40,70,254,274 The noise of the detection can reach the
level of the displacement noise of the zero-point fluctuations at
the resonance frequency.48 This is impressive considering that
nanotubes are physically the smallest operating mechanical
resonators and that the detection of mechanical vibrations
becomes increasingly difficult for resonators with reduced
dimensions and sizes.
12.3.2. Effects on Mechanical Motion. Conversely, the
electromechanical coupling can also generate a large back-action
of electrons on the nanotube mechanical vibrations. This back-
action has been used to tune the resonance frequency, the
energy decay time, and the effective temperature of the
resonator.48,276 Devices based on single-electron tunneling are
of main importance in this context, since the back-action of

Figure 12.1. Low-dimensional NEMS resonators for RF signal processing. (a) False-colored SEM images of self-sustained SiC NW NEMS
oscillators, the corresponding measurement circuit diagram showing a feedback loop, and the clean, stable, sinusoidal time-domain oscillation
waveform of the oscillators. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 115. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group. (b) False-colored SEM
image of a circular graphene oscillator with SU-8 clamp and local gate electrodes, the simplified circuit for a graphene radio station, and the
transmitted and received audio waveform of 1 s soundtrack from the graphene NEMS oscillator. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 59.
Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (c) SEM images of a CNT resonator, FM mixing and demodulation circuit, and the measurement
data showing the feasibility of digital demodulation using CNT resonator. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 70. Copyright 2010 Wiley-
VCH.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15570


electrons in this case is comparatively much larger than in other
electron transport regimes.
Single-electron tunneling in a nanotube quantum dot emerges
when the transmission of the tunnel barriers is sufficiently low
(Figure 12.3a).93 When an electron tunnels into the nanotube
dot, it creates a Coulomb gap that prevents a second electron
from tunneling into the nanotube dot, i.e., “Coulomb blockade”.
After some time, the extra electron on the nanotube dot tunnels
out of it. As a result, the system fluctuates back and forth
between the two states with N and N + 1 electrons. In an
experiment,271 the electrical transport of the nanotube quantum
dot features a series of conductance peaks when sweeping the
gate voltage, see Figure 12.3b, top. The peaks are associated with
situations where the energies of the electron states N and N + 1
are degenerate, which results in rapid fluctuations. In between
the peaks, these fluctuations can be suppressed almost to zero
(“Coulomb blockade” regions), such that the average charge
number on the quantum dot is a well-defined integer.

The charge fluctuations in the single-electron tunneling
regime result in a reduction of the resonance frequency (Figure
12.3b, bottom). The size of this frequency reduction is a direct
measure of the electromechanical coupling strength. It was
shown that the single-phonon single-electron electromechanical
coupling strength g0 = Fe/ℏzzp can become comparable to the
mechanical resonance frequency ω0,277 where zzp is the zero-
point motion amplitude of the vibrations. This so-called
ultrastrong coupling regime is analogous to those achieved in
electro- and optomechanical devices,279−281 and various
phenomena may emerge in this extreme regime.
In addition to the reduction of the resonance frequency, the
single-electron tunneling back-action can increase by a large
amount the mechanical losses,96,110 the Duffing nonlinearity
(Section 9.1),273 and the dispersive coupling between the
mechanical modes of the nanotube,238 (Section 10.1). Some of
these back-action effects have been observed in double quantum
dots where the Coulomb interaction between electrons also
plays a central role.271,274

Similar effects of electron transport on mechanical resonances
have also been observed in graphene resonators. By combining
magnetotransport and resonance measurements, researchers
have demonstrated periodic modulations of the resonance
frequency using gate voltage and magnetic field, which tune the
electron energy through the discrete Landau levels (Figure
12.4).282 Based on such electron-magneto modulation of
resonance frequencies, researchers are able to determine the
internal chemical potential oscillations in the 2D atomic layers.
12.4. Putting Mechanics into Quantum Mechanics.
Nowadays, one key theme of the “second quantum revolution” is
quantum engineering, which is to gain full understanding and
control of man-made quantum objects that generate, store,
transmit, and process quantum information. NEMS can be used
for probing quantum-limited phenomena, for realizing quantum
bits (qubits), or as NEMS or phononic transducers for qubits.283

Previous results, for example, include coupling acoustic
resonators to superconducting qubits,284,285 using super-
conducting qubits to perform quantum-limited measurements
of a bulk dilatational resonator,286 and observing quantum

Figure 12.2. Advanced coupled NEMS devices. (a) Schematic of a
graphene-based acoustic waveguide, where the graphene film is
suspended over a trench with a gate electrode array at its bottom.
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 222. Copyright 2019
American Physical Society. (b) Schematic of an h-BN phononic
crystal waveguide. Reprinted in part with permission from ref 223.
Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of a
graphene/silicon nitride hybrid resonant structure. Reprinted in
part with permission from ref 224. Copyright 2020 American
Chemical Society. (d) Giant tunable mechanical nonlinearity in a
graphene−silicon nitride hybrid resonator. Reprinted in part with
permission from ref 225. Copyright 2020 American Chemical
Society.

Figure 12.3. CNT resonator as a quantum dot. (a) Sketch of a CNT
coupled to source and drain leads with charge transport rates ΓS,D.
The total electrical charge of the nanotube can be tuned capacitively
by a gate voltage. The nanotube-gate capacitance CG(z) depends on
the nanotube displacement z. (b) Electrical conductance and
mechanical resonance frequency as a function of the gate voltage
measured at a temperature of 16 K. Reprinted in part with
permission from ref 272. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15571


entanglement287,288 in two mechanical drumhead resonators.234

These examples can provide important guidelines for using low-
dimensional NEMS as qubits or in qubit-coupled systems.
Extensive efforts have been devoted to reaching the quantum
ground state (QGS) and more complex nonclassical states with

low-dimensional NEMS devices. The QGS corresponds to the
case of negligible classical (thermal) fluctuations, where the
dynamics of the resonator is dominated by its zero-point
fluctuations, as required by the Heisenberg uncertainty
relation.289 This state is characterized by an average phonon
number n ≪ 1. At high temperature, the phonon number can be
estimated as n ≈ kBT/hf 0, with Boltzmann’s constant kB, the
temperature T, Planck’s constant h, and the resonance frequency
f 0 (note that hf 0 = ℏω0 is the energy of a single phonon of such
frequency). The QGS can be reached for high frequencies and
low temperatures, using for instance a resonator with f 0 = 10
GHz in a dilution refrigerator with T = 10 mK. However, many
NEMS have frequencies in the 1−100 MHz range and cannot be
cooled to the QGS passively.
Where passive cooling is insufficient, alternative cooling
schemes have been proposed or implemented in NEMS
resonators based on 1D and 2D nanomaterials, such as sideband
ground-state cooling of a graphene resonator77,79 or photo-
thermal back-action cooling of graphene resonators,86 MoS2
resonators,266 and CNT resonators,80 offering encouraging
prospects on this research front.
12.4.1. Sideband Cooling. Among the cooling schemes that
have been successfully demonstrated, parametric sideband
cooling, as extensively explored in cavity optomechanics,292

has proven to be particularly useful. Sideband cooling into the
QGS is routinely achieved with top-down microfabricated
resonators coupled to either optical cavities or superconducting
resonators.235,290,291 Graphene flakes have been coupled to
superconducting resonators,78,79,125 and sideband cooling has
been used to achieve a thermal population with nm = 7.2 ± 0.2.77

Sideband cooling can also be achieved by replacing the

Figure 12.4. Mechanical resonant frequency in a graphene resonator
as functions of the applied magnetic fields at different VG and
corresponding fits (red curves). Reprinted in part with permission
from ref 282. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.

Figure 12.5. Parametric sideband cooling in a graphene resonator. (a) Schematic of the experimental setup. (b) Schematic of sideband pumping
in frequency space. The curved arrows indicate the direction of energy flow when the system is pumped at ωp. (c) Amplification of a mode as
another mode is pumped at its Stokes sideband. (d) Parametric cooling in a mode on pumping the anti-Stokes sideband of another mode. (a−d)
Reprinted in part with permission from ref 228. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15572


superconducting resonator by a high-frequency mechanical
mode (Figure 12.5).228

As previously discussed (see Section 10.2), the presence of a
pump at the frequency difference of two modes (or resonators),
ωp = ω2 − ω1, can enable efficient energy exchange between
them. We previously discussed the strong coupling limit
(Section 10), where the energy exchange between the modes
is faster than their combined energy decay rate Γ1 + Γ2 and the
modes hybridize (eq 10.2). For sideband cooling, we are
interested in a different configuration.
Let us assume that mode 2 is at a sufficiently high frequency to
ensure n ≪ 1 and that its dissipation rate is higher than the
parametric energy exchange rate. When parametric coupling is
activated, a low-frequency mode 1 (with n ≫ 1 in thermal
equilibrium) exchanges energy with mode 2. Energy flows
predominantly from mode 1 to mode 2, where it is dissipated to
the environment before it can return to mode 1. Through this
interaction, the thermal population of mode 1 is reduced below
its thermal equilibrium value, i.e., mode 1 is cooled. The method
is known as “red sideband cooling”, referring to the pump
frequency ωp as a sideband detuned from ω2 by the amount ω1
on the negative (red) side. Such sideband cooling has been
rather modest so far, since the resonance frequency ω2 of mode 2
has not been sufficiently large compared to the resonance
frequency ω1 of mode 1, and since the lowest temperature that
mode 1 can reach is given by Teff = Tω1/ω2.190 For positive
(blue) detuning ωp = ω2 + ω1, the number of phonons is
increased in both modes, i.e., the two modes “heat up”. The
parametric pumping can be further enhanced when a mechanical
mode is present at the pumping frequency ωp.228

12.4.2. Cooling through Electromechanical Coupling.
Another effective approach is to actively “cool down” the
resonant motion via electromechanical coupling (Section 12.2),
which has been extensively explored in CNT resonators due to
their superb electron transport properties. In the most extreme
cases, the electromechanical coupling can dramatically modify
the charge stability diagram measurements of nanotube
quantum dots.96 These measurements indicate situations
where the electromechanical system experiences instability
and generates mechanical self-oscillations.48,276 More specifi-
cally, the DC power injected into the nanotube (by applying a
DC voltage bias between the source and drain electrodes) fuels
large mechanical vibrations at the resonance frequency. The self-
oscillations arise from the electron back-action, which results in
a mechanical dissipation rate that is effectively zero or negative.
The back-action origin can be single-electron tunneling276 as
well as an electrothermal effect.48 Conversely, the back-action
can also increase the total dissipation rate, such that the DC
power injected into the nanotube cools the mechanical
vibrations. Cooling to an average number of quanta nm = 4.6
± 2.0 has been achieved in this way.48

In some cases, it is interesting to suppress the back-action
associated with single-electron tunneling by operating the
system in the Kondo and the electronic Fabry−Pérot regimes.
This is especially relevant to boosting the Q-factor, since the
electronic contribution to mechanical losses is then mini-
mized.48,104 Furthermore, the electromechanical coupling is a
powerful tool to increase the coupling between the mechanical
vibrations and photons. Single-electron tunneling has recently
been used to amplify the coupling between the mechanical
vibrations of a nanotube and the photons of a superconducting
resonator.275 This is encouraging for future research and
applications, since superconducting resonators enable efficient

detection and cooling of mechanical vibrations of top-down
fabricated resonators.292

12.4.3. Proposals of NEMS Qubits. A recent theory proposal
showed that under particular conditions, the electromechani-
cally induced nonlinearity of a nanotube resonator can become
large enough to create a mechanical qubit.293 By coupling the
mechanical vibrations to a double quantum dot hosted along a
nanotube and using realistic device parameters, it should be
possible to reach the regime where the energy levels of the
resonator are no longer evenly spaced. The two lowest energy
levels can then be individually addressed with a resonant drive
and form a qubit. This regime can be reached in the ultrastrong
coupling limit when g0 > ω0. Similar schemes have also been
proposed with other NEMS layouts.294,295 Such a device may
offer opportunities for storing and processing quantum
information in these man-made atomic-scale devices.

13. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK: RESONANT WITH A
VIBRANT FUTURE

13.1. Summary. As we have presented in this review, the
study of low-dimensional resonators has come a long way and is
still progressing rapidly. Below we summarize some of the key
messages from several sections.
13.1.1. Material and Fabrication. Many types of 1D
nanomaterials, such as CNT and different NWs, have been
studied for NEMS resonators. 2D materials offer an even greater
choice: from graphene and 2D semiconductors to wide-bandgap
and magnetic 2D materials, and all these nanomaterials have
been explored in NEMS studies. Furthermore, given the rapidly
growing 2D material family and the nearly endless possibilities of
creating vdW HSs, there are many more yet to be explored. In
terms of fabrication techniques, both lithography/etching and
transfer approaches have been used in making NEMS
resonators. The former starts with an unsuspended (supported)
device structure before releasing the nanomaterial, which is
widely used in making doubly clamped structures. The latter is
often used for producing fully clamped resonators: it starts with
substrates with prepatterned structures and then places the
nanomaterial over such a patterned area, directly forming
suspended devices.
13.1.2. Measurement Schemes. Due to the much smaller
device size and motion amplitude compared with most MEMS
devices, different measurement techniques need to be devised
specifically for these NEMS resonators. A number of
experimental schemes have been developed and successfully
demonstrated for NEMS resonators. Among them, electrical
readout and optical readout are the most widely used ones. The
former is commonly used for 1D devices and doubly clamped
2D ones, given that all the current flowing through the device
carries the motional signal; the latter is widely used for fully
clamped 2D resonators, whose motional part is typically larger
than the laser spot.
13.1.3. Tuning Resonance Frequency and Quality Factor.
Given the high flexibility of low-dimensional nanomaterials, the
device resonance frequency can be effectively tuned through
strain, which can be induced through external electric fields or
other schemes. Frequency tuning of more than 1000% has been
achieved in both 1D and 2D NEMS resonators, greatly
exceeding that in most MEMS resonators. Quality factors in
NEMS resonators can strongly depend on a number of factors,
in particular temperature. At cryogenic temperatures, Q values
over 1 million have been achieved in both 1D and 2D resonators.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15573


13.1.4. Nonlinear Responses. In NEMS resonators, due to
the small device size and their low stiffness, the vibrational
amplitude can easily become much larger than the device
dimension in the direction of motion, which can lead to strong
nonlinear effects. Thermal fluctuation is also more pronounced
in these minuscule devices. Despite strong nonlinear effects and
significant thermal noise that both limit the linear DR, broad DR
(over 70 dB) has been achieved in both 1D and 2D NEMS
resonators.
13.1.5. Coupling in the Mechanical Domain. Coupling
between two resonators or between two resonant modes within
the same resonator has been demonstrated in both 1D and 2D
NEMS devices. Such coupling can occur through nonlinear
effects or parametric pumping, with the latter requiring an
external signal at a third frequency (which is often the sum or the
difference of the resonance frequency of the two modes). The
coupling effects can lead to rich physics in these nanodevices, in
particular the controlled transfer of energy between different
modes.
13.1.6. Device Applications. These miniscule devices are
highly sensitive to external stimuli, making them particularly
suitable for sensing applications. Both yg mass resolution and
zN/
force sensitivity have been achieved using CNT
resonators at cryogenic temperature. Other sensing functions
have also been demonstrated, including temperature, light and
radiation, acceleration, pressure, and electrical charge. Besides
sensing, they have also been used for RF signal processing as well
as fundamental studies related to quantum transport and
quantum information processing.
13.2. Challenges toward Scaling. While many encourag-
ing milestones have been achieved, there are still some
important challenges. Several of them are related to fabrication
and scaling, which we discuss below.
13.2.1. Larger-Scale Fabrication of Functional Devices.
One advantage of these devices is their smaller device footprint
compared with most MEMS devices, which could lead to denser
integration. However, it is still challenging to fabricate these
suspended NEMS devices at large scale. While some early
attempts had led to encouraging results,60,62 the yield is still not
ideal for practical applications. Nevertheless, with the fast
advancement of large-scale growth methods296−303 and clean
transfer techniques,304−309 which involve a lot of research
progress in industry and semiconductor foundries, we envision
that this challenge will be addressed as the entire field
progresses.
13.2.2. Better Predictability and Uniformity of Device
Performance. As the production of large-scale device arrays
becomes increasingly reproducible, it will be important to look
at the predictability of device performance, which is critical for
designing and realizing functional devices on a wafer scale.
However, the device performance can be affected by a number of
factors such as fabrication-induced tension,17,19,20,310 wrinkles in
the suspended region,311−313 contaminations on the surface,57

and slight variation in device dimension.170 While these are
difficult to completely avoid given the current state of
nanofabrication technology, the development of annealing
techniques,45,48,57,61 control of the environment during
fabrication,304,307 improved transfer techniques,314,315 and
even transfer-free approaches316,317 are promising when the
process is standardized in foundries. Another possible solution is
to design the device such that the device performance (such as
frequency) is insensitive to these factors. For example, by
designing devices operating in the appropriate mechanical

regime,310 one can minimize the effect of tension and thus
produce devices with highly predictable resonant frequencies.
13.2.3. More Scalable Readout Scheme. As the level of
device integration increases, compatible readout schemes are
required. While optical readout has proven to be highly versatile
and effective in fundamental research, for practical applications,
electrical schemes are much more compatible with highly
integrated NEMS devices. However, existing electrical readout
techniques typically require external circuity and additional
instruments, which poses challenges for using NEMS devices in
standalone wireless nodes, or as logical components in highly
integrated circuits. Toward such goals, one possible solution is
on-chip functional circuitry such as phase-locked loop.
However, such circuitry requires the performance of the
NEMS resonator to be highly predictable, as outlined in the
point above, so that the electrical components in the circuit can
be properly designed.
13.2.4. Further Miniaturization of Device Structures. While
current NEMS resonators can be atomically thin, they are
typically micrometer-sized in at least one of the lateral
dimensions. Toward higher frequency and integration, the
lateral device size needs to be further scaled down, which poses
challenges for fabrication. Furthermore, smaller devices lead to
smaller motional signal. Therefore, a number of technical
challenges need to be addressed toward this goal.
13.3. Future Opportunities. Moving forward, a number of
applications could emerge by leveraging the unique properties of
low-dimensional NEMS resonators. Here we discuss a few more
possible directions for future research in this field as well as the
technological challenges that need to be addressed in achieving
future goals.
13.3.1. Higher-End and Further Miniaturized Sensors. With
the superb sensitivity and responsivity as well as the miniscule
device footprint and ultralow power consumption, 1D and 2D
NEMS resonators have the potential to enable advanced sensor
technologies. For instance, the possibility of measuring the tiny
(zeptonewton) forces generated by individual nuclear spins can
lead toward nanoscale magnetic resonance imaging, i.e.
NanoMRI, and hence the direct investigation of complex
molecules and their functionality.256 Similarly, the ability to
measure the mass of a single atom could have transformative
consequences for the field of proteomics, as it would allow rapid
and precise characterization of large proteins without the need of
ionizing the protein.246,336,318

To date, however, the demonstration of sensitivities required
to detect individual atoms250 or zeptonewton forces91 have only
been demonstrated in cryogenic temperatures under high
vacuum. Translating these excellent device characteristics into
practical applications is a tremendous challenge for a variety of
reasons.
First, allowing a pristine nanomechanical resonator to interact
with a sample can significantly deteriorate its sensitivity. A
famous example of such an effect is the notorious noncontact
friction between closely spaced bodies, which limits the
sensitivity of some scanning force microscopy experi-
ments.319−327 In general, 1D and 2D resonators are even more
sensitive to such perturbations due to their low masses and
reduced spring constants.104 Overcoming this challenge will be
possible once we have a better understanding and control of
surfaces on the atomic scale. Interestingly, we can make use of
the sensitivity of nanomechanical resonators to investigate their
own surface properties and then employ this knowledge to
improve their performance. This line of future work is very much

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15574


aligned with ongoing efforts in the trapped-ion and super-
conducting qubit communities, whose devices are likewise
limited by surface effects.328−335 NEMS sensors could therefore
act as a catalyst for the progress in various fields of modern
physics.
A second challenge for practical sensing applications, as
described in Section 13.2.2, is the uniformity of resonator
properties. As features decrease toward the atomic scale, the
influence of individual material defects increases. This will make
it hard to produce sensors with reproducible and scalable
properties.170 As previously discussed, scalability is important,
for instance, for producing resonator grids for enhanced mass-
sensing throughput. This issue must be solved by making use of
the intrinsic precision of bottom-up processes; if materials are
grown from well-defined starting conditions with low enough
defects, the resulting devices are highly reproducible without the
need of atomic-scale manipulation.60

A third important step toward practical usage will be to enable
room-temperature operation of sensors with adequate perform-
ance. Avoiding the costs and work hours required for cryogenic
experiments will bring devices much closer to marketable
applications. Operating a mechanical sensor at higher temper-
atures usually degrades its performance due to the increased
thermomechanical force noise (eq 11.2). This drawback,
however, can be mitigated by using resonators with low effective
mass and high quality factors. For instance, a CNT cantilever at
300 K can have a force sensitivity below 1 aN per root Hz, as
shown in ref 80, better than what most larger state-of-the-art
sensors can achieve at cryogenic temperatures.253,255 It may be
rewarding to achieve adequate performance in these exquisite
machines in close to ambient conditions or at conditions
achievable with on-chip technology (such as using thermo-
electric cooling or MEMS vacuum pumps). However, to
translate such excellent device performance into practical
applications has remained an important question246,336 and
will likely require extensive engineering efforts.
13.3.2. Logical Processing Units. Resonator-based logic
gates337−340 have been extensively explored to realize computing
paradigms beyond the von Neumann architecture.341 NEMS
resonators based on low-dimensional nanomaterials are
particularly promising for realizing frequency-shift-based logic
functions, as the superb mechanical properties allow the device
frequency to be broadly and relatively easily changed. Together
with the ultrasmall device volume, 1D and 2D NEMS resonators
hold promise for ultralow power logic operations. Toward this
vision, one important hurdle to overcome is the large-scale
production of highly uniform resonator devices60,62 (ideally
compatible with CMOS back-end-of-line (BEOL) pro-
cesses,61,342 as illustrated in Figure 13.1), which is a prerequisite
for the scaling of such technologies.343

One particular form of computing that has spurred a lot of
interest in recent years is the neuromorphic solving of hard
optimization problems with Hopfield networks.344−346 Strong
parametric pumping can turn a nonlinear resonator into a
bistable system that fulfils the role of an artificial neuron.
Networks of such parametric oscillators, or “parametrons”, can
then be used to simulate the behavior of a problem and find an
optimal solution through, e.g., quantum annealing.347−351 1D
and 2D NEMS could become a valuable resource for such
networks due to their low power consumption, the possibility of
dense packaging, and their simple integration with electrical
components.98,114 As for other applications, the main exper-
imental challenges lie in the fabrication of nearly identical

resonators with highly uniform properties. Addressing these
issues is therefore crucial for a wide range of potential
applications and should be a priority for the community in the
coming years. In addition, it will be important to understand the
complexity of nonlinear oscillator networks, which can go
beyond that of an Ising Hamiltonian.350,352

13.3.3. RF Components toward 6G Technology and
Beyond. MEMS resonator technology has been extensively
used in wireless communications. The scaling law of NEMS
resonators17,353,354 suggests that these truly nanoscale devices
have the potential to operate in the GHz bands, and in CNT
resonators, the resonance frequency could be pushed above 10
GHz.103,102 By exploiting certain resonant modes,355 these
resonators might even be useful for communications in
millimeter-wave or THz bands. In addition, the excellent
frequency tunability63 and reconfigurability182 in NEMS
resonators make them particularly promising for multiband RF
operations, which are important for 5G and 6G communications
where many different electromagnetic frequency bands are used.
A major challenge is the impedance mismatch with silicon-based
circuits, which can affect the insertion loss of NEMS devices.
This is particularly important as frequency increases, as parasitic
effects become more pronounced. Therefore, it is important for
researchers to discover and develop effective measures to
address this issue before 1D and 2D NEMS resonators can be
used as RF circuit components.
We close by saluting Richard Feynman’s vision that “there is
plenty of room at the bottom”. With the encouraging
achievements over the last two decades and the promising
opportunities in front of us, there has never been a more exciting
time to be engaged in the scientific and technological
exploration of these truly nanoscale man-made machines,
which are undoubtedly resonant with a vibrant future.

AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors

Akshay Naik − Centre for Nano Science and Engineering, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012 Karnataka, India;

orcid.org/0000-0001-6325-7231; Email: anaik@
iisc.ac.in

Rui Yang − University of Michigan−Shanghai Jiao Tong
University Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China; School of Electronic Information
and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-6163-
2904; Email: rui.yang@sjtu.edu.cn

Philip X.-L. Feng − Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611, United

Figure 13.1. Artistic illustration of a 2D NEMS resonator integrated
with a CMOS circuit.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15575


States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-1083-2391;
Email: philip.feng@ufl.edu

Zenghui Wang − Institute of Fundamental and Frontier
Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, Chengdu 610054, China; State Key Laboratory of
Electronic Thin Films and Integrated Devices, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054,
China;
orcid.org/0000-0003-3743-7567;
Email: zenghui.wang@uestc.edu.cn

Authors

Bo Xu − Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 610054, China;
orcid.org/0000-0003-0262-
2017

Pengcheng Zhang − University of Michigan−Shanghai Jiao
Tong University Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China;
orcid.org/0000-0003-4106-
6762

Jiankai Zhu − Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 610054, China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-5495-
7612

Zuheng Liu − University of Michigan−Shanghai Jiao Tong
University Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-1866-
2649

Alexander Eichler − Department of Physics, ETH Zurich, 8093
Zurich, Switzerland;
orcid.org/0000-0001-6757-3442

Xu-Qian Zheng − Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611, United
States; College of Integrated Circuit Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing
210023, China;
orcid.org/0000-0003-4705-771X

Jaesung Lee − Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611, United
States; Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas 79968, United
States;
orcid.org/0000-0003-0492-2478

Aneesh Dash − Centre for Nano Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012 Karnataka,
India;
orcid.org/0000-0002-6465-6506

Swapnil More − Centre for Nano Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012 Karnataka,
India;
orcid.org/0000-0001-7906-8902

Song Wu − Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Chengdu 610054, China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-3104-
1855

Yanan Wang − Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Herbert Wertheim College of Engineering,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611, United
States; Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588,
United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-9663-4491

Hao Jia − Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050,
China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-1429-6995

Adrian Bachtold − ICFO-Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona
08860, Spain;
orcid.org/0000-0002-6145-2479

Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

Author Contributions
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge support from National Natural
Science Foundation of China (grants U21A20459, U21A20505,
62150052, 62104029, 12104086, 62004026, 62004032,
62104140, 62104241), Sichuan Science and Technology
Program (grants 2021YJ0517, 2021JDTD0028), Fundamental
Research Funds for the Central Universities (ZYGX2020ZB014
and ZYGX2020J029), Lingang Laboratory Open Research
Fund (grant LG-QS-202202-11), Science and Technology
Commission of Shanghai Municipality (STCSM) Natural
Science Project General Program (grant 21ZR1433800),
Shanghai Sailing Program (grant 19YF1424900), and Shanghai
Pujiang Program (grant 20PJ1415600). P.F. acknowledges
National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award (grant
no. ECCS-1454570, ECCS-2015708), CCSS Program (grant
no. ECCS-1509720), EPMD Program (grant no. ECCS-
1810154, ECCS-2015670), and EFRI Program (grant no.
EFMA-1641099). A.B. acknowledges ERC Advanced grant no.
692876, AGAUR (grant no. 2017SGR1664), MICINN grant
no. RTI2018-097953-B-I00, QUANTERA grant (PCI2022-
132951), the Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo, the Spanish
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness through Quantum
CCAA and CEX2019-000910-S [MCIN/AEI/10.13039/
501100011033], Fundacio Cellex, Fundacio Mir-Puig, and
Generalitat de Catalunya through CERCA. A.D., S.M., and A.N.
acknowledge funding support from MHRD, MeitY, and DST
Nano Mission through NNetRA. Y.W. gratefully acknowledges
the financial support from the National Science Foundation
(NSF) via Nebraska’s NSF EPSCoR RII Track-1 project and
Emergent Quantum Materials and Technologies (EQUATE,
OIA-2044049). We thank Dr. Changyao Chen, Dr. Yuehang Xu,
Dr. Fan Ye, Dr. Xuge Fan, Dr. Yong Xie, and Dr. Shengwei Jiang
for helpful discussions as well as high-resolution figures.

REFERENCES

(1) Richards, V. Molecular Machines. Nat. Chem. 2016, 8, 1090−
1090.
(2) Browne, W. R.; Feringa, B. L. Making Molecular Machines Work.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2006, 1, 25−35.
(3) Lancia, F.; Ryabchun, A.; Katsonis, N. Life-Like Motion Driven by
Artificial Molecular Machines. Nat. Rev.Chem. 2019, 3, 536−551.
(4) Berná, J.; Leigh, D. A.; Lubomska, M.; Mendoza, S. M.; Pérez, E.
M.; Rudolf, P.; Teobaldi, G.; Zerbetto, F. Macroscopic Transport by
Synthetic Molecular Machines. Nat. Mater. 2005, 4, 704−710.
(5) Abendroth, J. M.; Bushuyev, O. S.; Weiss, P. S.; Barrett, C. J.
Controlling Motion at the Nanoscale: Rise of the Molecular Machines.
ACS Nano 2015, 9, 7746−7768.
(6) Friedman, R. S.; McAlpine, M. C.; Ricketts, D. S.; Ham, D.; Lieber,
C. M. High-Speed Integrated Nanowire Circuits. Nature 2005, 434,
1085−1085.
(7) Tans, S. J.; Devoret, M. H.; Dai, H.; Thess, A.; Smalley, R. E.;
Geerligs, L. J.; Dekker, C. Individual Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes as
Quantum Wires. Nature 1997, 386, 474−477.
(8) Bockrath, M.; Cobden, D. H.; McEuen, P. L.; Chopra, N. G.; Zettl,
A.; Thess, A.; Smalley, R. E. Single-Electron Transport in Ropes of
Carbon Nanotubes. Science 1997, 275, 1922−1925.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15576


(9) Shulaker, M. M.; Hills, G.; Patil, N.; Wei, H.; Chen, H.-Y.; Wong,
H. S. P.; Mitra, S. Carbon Nanotube Computer. Nature 2013, 501,
526−530.
(10) Feng, X. L.; He, R.; Yang, P.; Roukes, M. L. Very High Frequency
Silicon Nanowire Electromechanical Resonators. Nano Lett. 2007, 7,
1953−1959.
(11) Sazonova, V.; Yaish, Y.; Üstünel, H.; Roundy, D.; Arias, T. A.;
McEuen, P. L. A Tunable Carbon Nanotube Electromechanical
Oscillator. Nature 2004, 431, 284−287.
(12) Ning, Z. Y.; Shi, T. W.; Fu, M. Q.; Guo, Y.; Wei, X. L.; Gao, S.;
Chen, Q. Transversally and Axially Tunable Carbon Nanotube
Resonators in Situ Fabricated and Studied inside a Scanning Electron
Microscope. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 1221−1227.
(13) Lee, C.; Wei, X.; Kysar, J. W.; Hone, J. Measurement of the
Elastic Properties and Intrinsic Strength of Monolayer Graphene.
Science 2008, 321, 385−388.
(14) Mayorov, A. S.; Elias, D. C.; Mukhin, I. S.; Morozov, S. V.;
Ponomarenko, L. A.; Novoselov, K. S.; Geim, A. K.; Gorbachev, R. V.
How close can one approach the Dirac point in graphene
experimentally? Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 4629−4634.
(15) Banszerus, L.; Schmitz, M.; Engels, S.; Goldsche, M.; Watanabe,
K.; Taniguchi, T.; Beschoten, B.; Stampfer, C. Ballistic Transport
Exceeding 28 μm in CVD Grown Graphene. Nano Lett. 2016, 16,
1387−1391.
(16) Bunch, J. S.; van der Zande, A. M.; Verbridge, S. S.; Frank, I. W.;
Tanenbaum, D. M.; Parpia, J. M.; Craighead, H. G.; McEuen, P. L.
Electromechanical Resonators from Graphene Sheets. Science 2007,
315, 490−493.
(17) Lee, J.; Wang, Z.; He, K.; Shan, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. High Frequency
MoS2 Nanomechanical Resonators. ACS Nano 2013, 7, 6086−6091.
(18) Castellanos-Gomez, A.; van Leeuwen, R.; Buscema, M.; van der
Zant, H. S.; Steele, G. A.; Venstra, W. J. Single-Layer MoS2 Mechanical
Resonators. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 6719−6723.
(19) Wang, Z.; Jia, H.; Zheng, X.; Yang, R.; Wang, Z.; Ye, G. J.; Chen,
X. H.; Shan, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Black Phosphorus Nanoelectromechan-
ical Resonators Vibrating at Very High Frequencies. Nanoscale 2015, 7,
877−884.
(20) Zheng, X.-Q.; Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Hexagonal Boron Nitride
Nanomechanical Resonators with Spatially Visualized Motion. Micro-
syst. Nanoeng. 2017, 3, 17038.
(21) Jiang, S.; Xie, H.; Shan, J.; Mak, K. F. Exchange Magnetostriction
in Two-Dimensional Antiferromagnets. Nat. Mater. 2020, 19, 1295−
1299.
(22) Šiškins, M.; Lee, M.; Mañas-Valero, S.; Coronado, E.; Blanter, Y.
M.; van der Zant, H. S. J.; Steeneken, P. G. Magnetic and Electronic
Phase Transitions Probed by Nanomechanical Resonators. Nat.
Commun. 2020, 11, 2698.
(23) Zheng, X.-Q.; Lee, J.; Rafique, S.; Karim, M. R.; Han, L.; Zhao,
H.; Zorman, C. A.; Feng, P. X.-L. β-Ga2O3 NEMS Oscillator for Real-
Time Middle Ultraviolet (MUV) Light Detection. IEEE Electron
Dev.Lett. 2018, 39, 1230−1233.
(24) Arcizet, O.; Jacques, V.; Siria, A.; Poncharal, P.; Vincent, P.;
Seidelin, S. A Single Nitrogen-Vacancy Defect Coupled to A
Nanomechanical Oscillator. Nat. Phys. 2011, 7, 879−883.
(25) Perisanu, S.; Vincent, P.; Ayari, A.; Choueib, M.; Purcell, S. T.;
Bechelany, M.; Cornu, D. High Q Factor for Mechanical Resonances of
Batch-Fabricated SiC Nanowires. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2007, 90, 043113.
(26) Sahafi, P.; Rose, W.; Jordan, A.; Yager, B.; Piscitelli, M.;
Budakian, R. Ultralow Dissipation Patterned Silicon Nanowire Arrays
for Scanning Probe Microscopy. Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 218−223.
(27) Gil-Santos, E.; Ramos, D.; Martínez, J.; Fernández-Regúlez, M.;
García, R.; San Paulo, Á.; Calleja, M.; Tamayo, J. Nanomechanical Mass
Sensing and Stiffness Spectrometry based on Two-Dimensional
Vibrations of Resonant Nanowires. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5, 641−
645.
(28) Mathew, J. P.; Patel, R.; Borah, A.; Maliakkal, C. B.; Abhilash, T.
S.; Deshmukh, M. M. Nanoscale Electromechanics to Measure
Thermal Conductivity, Expansion, and Interfacial Losses. Nano Lett.
2015, 15, 7621−7626.

(29) Montinaro, M.; Wüst, G.; Munsch, M.; Fontana, Y.; Russo-
Averchi, E.; Heiss, M.; i Morral, A. F.; Warburton, R. J.; Poggio, M.
Quantum Dot Opto-Mechanics in a Fully Self-Assembled Nanowire.
Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 4454−4460.
(30) Wang, Z. Nanoelectromechanical Systems Based on Low
Dimensional Nanomaterials: Beyond Carbon Nanotube and Graphene
Nanomechanical Resonators�A Brief Review. Proceedings from the
2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Nanotechnology (IEEE-
NANO), 2016; pp 875−878.
(31) Feng, P. X.-L. Resonant Nanoelectromechanical Systems
(NEMS): Progress and Emerging Frontiers. Proceedings from the
2020 IEEE 33rd International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems (MEMS), 2020; pp 212−217.
(32) Cleland, A. N.; Roukes, M. L. Fabrication of High Frequency
Nanometer Scale Mechanical Resonators from Bulk Si Crystals. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 1996, 69, 2653−2655.
(33) Husain, A.; Hone, J.; Postma, H. W. C.; Huang, X. M. H.; Drake,
T.; Barbic, M.; Scherer, A.; Roukes, M. L. Nanowire-Based Very-High-
Frequency Electromechanical Resonator. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2003, 83,
1240−1242.
(34) Li, M.; Bhiladvala, R. B.; Morrow, T. J.; Sioss, J. A.; Lew, K.-K.;
Redwing, J. M.; Keating, C. D.; Mayer, T. S. Bottom-Up Assembly of
Large-Area Nanowire Resonator Arrays. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2008, 3,
88−92.
(35) He, R.; Gao, D.; Fan, R.; Hochbaum, A. I.; Carraro, C.;
Maboudian, R.; Yang, P. Si Nanowire Bridges in Microtrenches:
Integration of Growth into Device Fabrication. Adv. Mater. 2005, 17,
2098−2102.
(36) Fung, W. Y.; Dattoli, E. N.; Lu, W. Radio Frequency Nanowire
Resonators and in situ Frequency Tuning. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94,
203104.
(37) Dai, H. Carbon Nanotubes: Synthesis, Integration, and
Properties. Acc. Chem. Res. 2002, 35, 1035−1044.
(38) Minot, E. D.; Yaish, Y.; Sazonova, V.; Park, J.-Y.; Brink, M.;
McEuen, P. L. Tuning Carbon Nanotube Band Gaps with Strain. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2003, 90, 156401.
(39) Kong, J.; Soh, H. T.; Cassell, A. M.; Quate, C. F.; Dai, H.
Synthesis of Individual Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes on Patterned
Silicon Wafers. Nature 1998, 395, 878−881.
(40) Hüttel, A. K.; Steele, G. A.; Witkamp, B.; Poot, M.;
Kouwenhoven, L. P.; van der Zant, H. S. J. Carbon Nanotubes as
Ultrahigh Quality Factor Mechanical Resonators. Nano Lett. 2009, 9,
2547−2552.
(41) Lee, H.-C.; Vilches, O. E.; Wang, Z.; Fredrickson, E.; Morse, P.;
Roy, R.; Dzyubenko, B.; Cobden, D. H. Kr and 4He Adsorption on
Individual Suspended Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. J. Low Temp.
Phys. 2012, 169, 338−349.
(42) Wang, Z.; Wei, J.; Morse, P.; Dash, J. G.; Vilches, O. E.; Cobden,
D. H. Phase Transitions of Adsorbed Atoms on the Surface of a Carbon
Nanotube. Science 2010, 327, 552−555.
(43) Dzyubenko, B.; Lee, H.-C.; Vilches, O. E.; Cobden, D. H. Surface
Electron Perturbations and the Collective Behaviour of Atoms
Adsorbed on a Cylinder. Nat. Phys. 2015, 11, 398−402.
(44) Bai, Y.; Yue, H.; Wang, J.; Shen, B.; Sun, S.; Wang, S.; Wang, H.;
Li, X.; Xu, Z.; Zhang, R.; Wei, F. Super-Durable Ultralong Carbon
Nanotubes. Science 2020, 369, 1104−1106.
(45) Yang, W.; Urgell, C.; De Bonis, S. L.; Margańska, M.; Grifoni, M.;
Bachtold, A. Fabry-Perot Oscillations in Correlated Carbon Nanotubes.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 187701.
(46) Tavernarakis, A.; Chaste, J.; Eichler, A.; Ceballos, G.; Gordillo,
M. C.; Boronat, J.; Bachtold, A. Atomic Monolayer Deposition on the
Surface of Nanotube Mechanical Resonators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 112,
196103.
(47) Noury, A.; Vergara-Cruz, J.; Morfin, P.; Plaçais, B.; Gordillo, M.
C.; Boronat, J.; Balibar, S.; Bachtold, A. Layering Transition in
Superfluid Helium Adsorbed on a Carbon Nanotube Mechanical
Resonator. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 122, 165301.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15577


(48) Urgell, C.; Yang, W.; De Bonis, S. L.; Samanta, C.; Esplandiu, M.
J.; Dong, Q.; Jin, Y.; Bachtold, A. Cooling and Self-Oscillation in a
Nanotube Electromechanical Resonator. Nat. Phys. 2020, 16, 32−37.
(49) Wu, C. C.; Liu, C. H.; Zhong, Z. One-Step Direct Transfer of
Pristine Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes for Functional Nano-
electronics. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 1032−1036.
(50) Waissman, J.; Honig, M.; Pecker, S.; Benyamini, A.; Hamo, A.;
Ilani, S. Realization of Pristine and Locally Tunable One-Dimensional
Electron Systems in Carbon Nanotubes. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2013, 8,
569−574.
(51) Viennot, J. J.; Palomo, J.; Kontos, T. Stamping Single Wall
Nanotubes for Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics. Appl. Phys. Lett.
2014, 104, 113108.
(52) Huang, X. M. H.; Caldwell, R.; Huang, L.; Jun, S. C.; Huang, M.;
Sfeir, M. Y.; O’Brien, S. P.; Hone, J. Controlled Placement of Individual
Carbon Nanotubes. Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 1515−1518.
(53) Ranjan, V.; Puebla-Hellmann, G.; Jung, M.; et al. Clean carbon
nanotubes coupled to superconducting impedance-matching circuits.
Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7165.
(54) Purcell, S. T.; Vincent, P.; Journet, C.; Binh, V. T. Tuning of
Nanotube Mechanical Resonances by Electric Field Pulling. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 2002, 89, 276103.
(55) Jensen, K.; Weldon, J.; Garcia, H.; Zettl, A. Nanotube Radio.
Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 3508−3511.
(56) Gruber, G.; Urgell, C.; Tavernarakis, A.; Stavrinadis, A.; Tepsic,
S.; Magén, C.; Sangiao, S.; de Teresa, J. M.; Verlot, P.; Bachtold, A.
Mass Sensing for the Advanced Fabrication of Nanomechanical
Resonators. Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 6987−6992.
(57) Chen, C.; Rosenblatt, S.; Bolotin, K. I.; Kalb, W.; Kim, P.;
Kymissis, I.; Stormer, H. L.; Heinz, T. F.; Hone, J. Performance of
Monolayer Graphene Nanomechanical Resonators with Electrical
Readout Nanomechanical Resonators with Electrical Readout. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 2009, 4, 861−867.
(58) Lee, S.; Chen, C.; Deshpande, V. V.; Lee, G.-H.; Lee, I.; Lekas,
M.; Gondarenko, A.; Yu, Y.-J.; Shepard, K.; Kim, P.; Hone, J.
Electrically Integrated SU-8 Clamped Graphene Drum Resonators for
Strain Engineering. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 102, 153101.
(59) Chen, C.; Lee, S.; Deshpande, V. V.; Lee, G.-H.; Lekas, M.;
Shepard, K.; Hone, J. Graphene Mechanical Oscillators with Tunable
Frequency. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2013, 8, 923−927.
(60) van der Zande, A. M.; Barton, R. A.; Alden, J. S.; Ruiz-Vargas, C.
S.; Whitney, W. S.; Pham, P. H. Q.; Park, J.; Parpia, J. M.; Craighead, H.
G.; McEuen, P. L. Large-Scale Arrays of Single-Layer Graphene
Resonators. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 4869−4873.
(61) Yang, R.; Zheng, X.; Wang, Z.; Miller, C. J.; Feng, P. X.-L.
Multilayer MoS2 Transistors Enabled by a Facile Dry-Transfer
Technique and Thermal Annealing. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 2014, 32,
061203.
(62) Jia, H.; Yang, R.; Nguyen, A. E.; Alvillar, S. N.; Empante, T.;
Bartels, L.; Feng, P. X.-L. Large-Scale Arrays of Single- and Few-Layer
MoS2 Nanomechanical Resonators. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 10677−10685.
(63) Lee, J.; Wang, Z.; He, K.; Yang, R.; Shan, J.; Feng, P. X.-L.
Electrically Tunable Single- and Few-Layer MoS2 Nanoelectromechan-
ical Systems with Broad Dynamic Range. Sci. Adv. 2018, 4, eaao6653.
(64) Jia, H.; Zheng, X.; Faizan, M.; Larsen, T.; Villanueva, L. G.; Feng,
P. X.-L. Molybdenum Disulfide (MoS2) Nanoelectromechanical
Resonators with On-Chip Aluminum Nitride (AlN) Piezoelectric
Excitation. Proceedings from the 2018 IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems (MEMS), 2018; pp 527−530.
(65) Morell, N.; Reserbat-Plantey, A.; Tsioutsios, I.; Schädler, K. G.;
Dubin, F.; Koppens, F. H. L.; Bachtold, A. High Quality Factor
Mechanical Resonators Based on WSe2 Monolayers. Nano Lett. 2016,
16, 5102−5108.
(66) Yoshikawa, D.; Takei, K.; Arie, T.; Akita, S. Dielectric Actuation
of Optically Transparent Electromechanical Resonator Consisting of a
Cantilevered Hexagonal Boron Nitride Sheet. Appl. Phys. Express 2019,
12, 105001.

(67) Wang, Z.; Feng, P. X.-L. Interferometric Motion Detection in
Atomic Layer 2D Nanostructures: Visualizing Signal Transduction
Efficiency and Optimization Pathways. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 28923.
(68) Wang, Z.; Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Spatial Mapping of Multimode
Brownian Motions in High-Frequency Silicon Carbide Microdisk
Resonators. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 5158.
(69) Knobel, R. G.; Cleland, A. N. Nanometre-Scale Displacement
Sensing Using a Single Electron Transistor. Nature 2003, 424, 291−
293.
(70) Gouttenoire, V.; Barois, T.; Perisanu, S.; Leclercq, J.-L.; Purcell,
S. T.; Vincent, P.; Ayari, A. Digital and FM Demodulation of a Doubly
Clamped Single-Walled Carbon-Nanotube Oscillator: Towards a
Nanotube Cell Phone. Small 2010, 6, 1060−1065.
(71) Chiu, H.-Y.; Hung, P.; Postma, H. W. C.; Bockrath, M. Atomic-
Scale Mass Sensing Using Carbon Nanotube Resonators. Nano Lett.
2008, 8, 4342−4346.
(72) He, R.; Feng, X. L.; Roukes, M. L.; Yang, P. Self-Transducing
Silicon Nanowire Electromechanical Systems at Room Temperature.
Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 1756−1761.
(73) Garcia-Sanchez, D.; van der Zande, A. M.; Paulo, A. S.; Lassagne,
B.; McEuen, P. L.; Bachtold, A. Imaging Mechanical Vibrations in
Suspended Graphene Sheets. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 1399−1403.
(74) Garcia-Sanchez, D.; San Paulo, A.; Esplandiu, M. J.; Perez-
Murano, F.; Forró, L.; Aguasca, A.; Bachtold, A. Mechanical Detection
of Carbon Nanotube Resonator Vibrations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 99,
085501.
(75) Niguès, A.; Siria, A.; Verlot, P. Dynamical Backaction Cooling
with Free Electrons. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 8104.
(76) Tsioutsios, I.; Tavernarakis, A.; Osmond, J.; Verlot, P.; Bachtold,
A. Real-Time Measurement of Nanotube Resonator Fluctuations in an
Electron Microscope. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 1748−1755.
(77) Weber, P.; Güttinger, J.; Noury, A.; Vergara-Cruz, J.; Bachtold, A.
Force Sensitivity of Multilayer Graphene Optomechanical Devices.
Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 12496.
(78) Singh, V.; Bosman, S. J.; Schneider, B. H.; Blanter, Y. M.;
Castellanos-Gomez, A.; Steele, G. A. Optomechanical Coupling
Between a Multilayer Graphene Mechanical Resonator and a
Superconducting Microwave Cavity. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 820−
824.
(79) Song, X.; Oksanen, M.; Li, J.; Hakonen, P. J.; Sillanpää, M. A.
Graphene Optomechanics Realized at Microwave Frequencies. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2014, 113, 027404.
(80) Tavernarakis, A.; Stavrinadis, A.; Nowak, A.; Tsioutsios, I.;
Bachtold, A.; Verlot, P. Optomechanics with a Hybrid Carbon
Nanotube Resonator. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 662.
(81) Stapfner, S.; Ost, L.; Hunger, D.; Reichel, J.; Favero, I.; Weig, E.
M. Cavity-Enhanced Optical Detection of Carbon Nanotube Brownian
Motion. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 102, 151910.
(82) Molina, J.; Ramos, D.; Gil-Santos, E.; Escobar, J. E.; Ruz, J. J.;
Tamayo, J.; San Paulo, Á.; Calleja, M. Optical Transduction for Vertical
Nanowire Resonators. Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 2359−2369.
(83) Molina, J.; Escobar, J. E.; Ramos, D.; Gil-Santos, E.; Ruz, J. J.;
Tamayo, J.; San Paulo, Á.; Calleja, M. High Dynamic Range Nanowire
Resonators. Nano Lett. 2021, 21, 6617−6624.
(84) Kouh, T.; Karabacak, D.; Kim, D. H.; Ekinci, K. L. Diffraction
Effects in Optical Interferometric Displacement Detection in Nano-
electromechanical Systems. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2005, 86, 013106.
(85) Zhu, J.; Zhang, P.; Yang, R.; Wang, Z. Analyzing Electrostatic
Modulation of Signal Transduction Efficiency in MoS2 Nano-
electromechanical Resonators with Interferometric Readout. Sci.
China Inf. Sci. 2022, 65, 122409.
(86) Barton, R. A.; Storch, I. R.; Adiga, V. P.; Sakakibara, R.; Cipriany,
B. R.; Ilic, B.; Wang, S. P.; Ong, P.; McEuen, P. L.; Parpia, J. M.;
Craighead, H. G. Photothermal Self-Oscillation and Laser Cooling of
Graphene Optomechanical Systems. Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 4681−4686.
(87) Xu, Y.; Chen, C.; Deshpande, V. V.; DiRenno, F. A.;
Gondarenko, A.; Heinz, D. B.; Liu, S.; Kim, P.; Hone, J. Radio
Frequency Electrical Transduction of Graphene Mechanical Reso-
nators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 97, 243111.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15578


(88) Xu, Y.; Li, O.; Xu, R. Graphene Resonant Channel Transistor.
Proceedings from the 2013 IEEE International Wireless Symposium
(IWS), 2013; pp 1−6.
(89) Iijima, S. Helical Microtubules of Graphitic Carbon. Nature
1991, 354, 56−58.
(90) Qin, L. C.; Zhao, X.; Hirahara, K.; Miyamoto, Y.; Ando, Y.;
Iijima, S. The Smallest Carbon Nanotube. Nature 2000, 408, 50−50.
(91) Moser, J.; Güttinger, J.; Eichler, A.; Esplandiu, M. J.; Liu, D. E.;
Dykman, M. I.; Bachtold, A. Ultrasensitive Force Detection with a
Nanotube Mechanical Resonator. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2013, 8, 493−496.
(92) Park, J.; McEuen, P. L. Formation of a P-Type Quantum Dot at
the End of an N-Type Carbon Nanotube. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2001, 79,
1363−1365.
(93) Laird, E. A.; Kuemmeth, F.; Steele, G. A.; Grove-Rasmussen, K.;
Nygård, J.; Flensberg, K.; Kouwenhoven, L. P. Quantum Transport in
Carbon Nanotubes. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2015, 87, 703−764.
(94) Eichler, A.; del Álamo Ruiz, M.; Plaza, J. A.; Bachtold, A. Strong
Coupling between Mechanical Modes in a Nanotube Resonator. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 025503.
(95) Postma, H. W. C.; Kozinsky, I.; Husain, A.; Roukes, M. L.
Dynamic Range of Nanotube- and Nanowire-Based Electromechanical
Systems. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2005, 86, 223105.
(96) Steele, G. A.; Hüttel, A. K.; Witkamp, B.; Poot, M.; Meerwaldt, H.
B.; Kouwenhoven, L. P.; van der Zant, H. S. J. Strong Coupling Between
Single-Electron Tunneling and Nanomechanical Motion. Science 2009,
325, 1103−1107.
(97) Eichler, A.; Moser, J.; Dykman, M. I.; Bachtold, A. Symmetry
Breaking in a Mechanical Resonator Made from a Carbon Nanotube.
Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2843.
(98) Eichler, A.; Chaste, J.; Moser, J.; Bachtold, A. Parametric
Amplification and Self-Oscillation in a Nanotube Mechanical
Resonator. Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 2699−2703.
(99) Dykman, M. I.; Krivoglaz, M. A. Spectral Distribution of
Nonlinear Oscillators with Nonlinear Friction Due to a Medium. Phys.
Status Solidi B 1975, 68, 111−123.
(100) Lifshitz, R.; Cross, M. C. Reviews of Nonlinear Dynamics and
Complexity; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA: Weinheim, 2008.
(101) Eichler, A.; Moser, J.; Chaste, J.; Zdrojek, M.; Wilson-Rae, I.;
Bachtold, A. Nonlinear Damping in Mechanical Resonators Made from
Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2011, 6, 339−
342.
(102) Laird, E. A.; Pei, F.; Tang, W.; Steele, G. A.; Kouwenhoven, L. P.
A High Quality Factor Carbon Nanotube Mechanical Resonator at 39
GHz. Nano Lett. 2012, 12 (1), 193−197.
(103) Chaste, J.; Sledzinska, M.; Zdrojek, M.; Moser, J.; Bachtold, A.
High-Frequency Nanotube Mechanical Resonators. Appl. Phys. Lett.
2011, 99, 213502.
(104) Moser, J.; Eichler, A.; Güttinger, J.; Dykman, M. I.; Bachtold, A.
Nanotube Mechanical Resonators with Quality Factors of up to 5
Million. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 1007−1011.
(105) Verbridge, S. S.; Craighead, H. G.; Parpia, J. M. A Megahertz
Nanomechanical Resonator with Room Temperature Quality Factor
over a Million. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2008, 92, 013112.
(106) Unterreithmeier, Q. P.; Faust, T.; Kotthaus, J. P. Damping of
Nanomechanical Resonators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105, 027205.
(107) Schmid, S.; Jensen, K. D.; Nielsen, K. H.; Boisen, A. Damping
Mechanisms in High-Q Micro and Nanomechanical String Resonators.
Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84, 165307.
(108) Yu, P. L.; Purdy, T. P.; Regal, C. A. Control of Material
Damping in High-Q Membrane Microresonators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012,
108, 083603.
(109) Rechnitz, S.; Tabachnik, T.; Shlafman, M.; Shlafman, S.; Yaish,
Y. E. Mode Coupling, Bi-Stability, and Spectral Broadening in Buckled
Nanotube Resonators. arXiv (Mesoscale and Nanoscale Physics),
2110.01572, ver. 1, 2021. https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.01572 (accessed
4 Oct 2021).
(110) Lassagne, B.; Tarakanov, Y.; Kinaret, J.; Garcia-Sanchez, D.;
Bachtold, A. Coupling Mechanics to Charge Transport in Carbon
Nanotube Mechanical Resonators. Science 2009, 325, 1107−1110.

(111) Truax, S.; Lee, S.-W.; Muoth, M.; Hierold, C. Axially Tunable
Carbon Nanotube Resonators Using Co-Integrated Microactuators.
Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 6092−6096.
(112) Ning, Z.; Fu, M.; Wu, G.; Qiu, C.; Shu, J.; Guo, Y.; Wei, X.; Gao,
S.; Chen, Q. Remarkable Influence of Slack on the Vibration of a Single-
Walled Carbon Nanotube Resonator. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 8658−8665.
(113) Melosh, N. A.; Boukai, A.; Diana, F.; Gerardot, B.; Badolato, A.;
Petroff, P. M.; Heath, J. R. Ultrahigh-Density Nanowire Lattices and
Circuits. Science 2003, 300, 112−115.
(114) Karabalin, R. B.; Feng, X. L.; Roukes, M. L. Parametric
Nanomechanical Amplification at Very High Frequency. Nano Lett.
2009, 9 (9), 3116−3123.
(115) Feng, X. L.; White, C. J.; Hajimiri, A.; Roukes, M. L. A Self-
Sustaining Ultrahigh-Frequency Nanoelectromechanical Oscillator.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (6), 342−346.
(116) Wei, X.; Chen, Q.; Xu, S.; Peng, L.; Zuo, J. Beam to String
Transition of Vibrating Carbon Nanotubes Under Axial Tension. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2009, 19, 1753−1758.
(117) Feng, X. L.; Matheny, M. H.; Karabalin, R. B.; Zorman, C. A.;
Mehregany, M.; Roukes, M. L. Silicon Carbide (SiC) Top-Down
Nanowire Electromechanical Resonators. Proceedings from the 2009
International Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems Conference
(Transducers), 2009; pp 2246−2249.
(118) Gray, J. M.; Bertness, K. A.; Sanford, N. A.; Rogers, C. T. Low-
Frequency Noise in Gallium Nitride Nanowire Mechanical Resonators.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 101, 233115.
(119) Huang, X. M. H.; Feng, X. L.; Zorman, C. A.; Mehregany, M.;
Roukes, M. L. VHF, UHF and Microwave Frequency Nanomechanical
Resonators. New J. Phys. 2005, 7, 247−247.
(120) He, X. Q.; Kitipornchai, S.; Liew, K. M. Resonance Analysis of
Multi-Layered Graphene Sheets Used as Nanoscale Resonators.
Nanotechnology 2005, 16, 2086−2091.
(121) Cao, K.; Feng, S.; Han, Y.; Gao, L.; Hue Ly, T.; Xu, Z.; Lu, Y.
Elastic Straining of Free-Standing Monolayer Graphene. Nat. Commun.
2020, 11, 284.
(122) Ye, F.; Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Very-Wide Electrothermal Tuning
of Graphene Nanoelectromechanical Resonators. Proceedings from the
2017 IEEE 30th International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems (MEMS), 2017; pp 68−71.
(123) Barton, R. A.; Ilic, B.; van der Zande, A. M.; Whitney, W. S.;
McEuen, P. L.; Parpia, J. M.; Craighead, H. G. High, Size-Dependent
Quality Factor in an Array of Graphene Mechanical Resonators. Nano
Lett. 2011, 11, 1232−1236.
(124) Arjmandi-Tash, H.; Allain, A.; Han, Z.; Bouchiat, V. Large Scale
Integration of CVD-Graphene Based NEMS with Narrow Distribution
of Resonance Parameters. 2D Mater. 2017, 4, 025023.
(125) Weber, P.; Güttinger, J.; Tsioutsios, I.; Chang, D. E.; Bachtold,
A. Coupling Graphene Mechanical Resonators to Superconducting
Microwave Cavities. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 2854−2860.
(126) Reserbat-Plantey, A.; Marty, L.; Arcizet, O.; Bendiab, N.;
Bouchiat, V. A Local Optical Probe for Measuring Motion and Stress in
a Nanoelectromechanical System. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 151−155.
(127) Zhang, X.; Makles, K.; Colombier, L.; Metten, D.; Majjad, H.;
Verlot, P.; Berciaud, S. Dynamically-Enhanced Strain in Atomically
Thin Resonators. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 5526.
(128) Jung, M.; Rickhaus, P.; Zihlmann, S.; Eichler, A.; Makk, P.;
Schönenberger, C. GHz Nanomechanical Resonator in an Ultraclean
Suspended Graphene P−N Junction. Nanoscale 2019, 11, 4355−4361.
(129) Jiang, J.-W.; Park, H. S.; Rabczuk, T. MoS2 Nanoresonators:
Intrinsically Better than Graphene? Nanoscale 2014, 6, 3618−3625.
(130) Yang, R.; Islam, A.; Feng, P. X.-L. Electromechanical Coupling
and Design Considerations in Single-Layer MoS2 Suspended-Channel
Transistors and Resonators. Nanoscale 2015, 7, 19921−19929.
(131) Yang, R.; Wang, Z.; Feng, P. X.-L. All-Electrical Readout of
Atomically-Thin MoS2 Nanoelectromechanical Resonators in the VHF
Band. Proceedings from the 2016 IEEE 29th International Conference on
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), 2016; pp 59−62.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15579


(132) Samanta, C.; Yasasvi Gangavarapu, P. R.; Naik, A. K. Nonlinear
Mode Coupling and Internal Resonances in MoS2 Nanoelectrome-
chanical System. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 107, 173110.
(133) Manzeli, S.; Dumcenco, D.; Migliato Marega, G.; Kis, A. Self-
Sensing, Tunable Monolayer MoS2 Nanoelectromechanical Resona-
tors. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 4831.
(134) Yang, R.; Yousuf, S M E. H.; Lee, J.; Zhang, P.; Liu, Z.; Feng, P.
X.-L. Raman Spectroscopic Probe for Nonlinear MoS2 Nano-
electromechanical Resonators. Nano Lett. 2022, 22, 5780−5787.
(135) Wang, Z.; Feng, P. X.-L. Design of Black Phosphorus 2D
Nanomechanical Resonators by Exploiting the Intrinsic Mechanical
Anisotropy. 2D Mater. 2015, 2, 021001.
(136) Wang, Z.; Jia, H.; Zheng, X.-Q.; Yang, R.; Ye, G. J.; Chen, X. H.;
Feng, P. X.-L. Resolving and Tuning Mechanical Anisotropy in Black
Phosphorus via Nanomechanical Multimode Resonance Spectromicro-
scopy. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 5394−5400.
(137) Lee, J.; Shaw, S. W.; Feng, P. X.-L. Giant Parametric
Amplification and Spectral Narrowing in Atomically Thin MoS2
Nanomechanical Resonators. Appl. Phys. Rev. 2022, 9, 011404.
(138) Wu, J.; Wang, B.; Wei, Y.; Yang, R.; Dresselhaus, M. Mechanics
and Mechanically Tunable Band Gap in Single-Layer Hexagonal
Boron-Nitride. Mater. Res. Lett. 2013, 1, 200−206.
(139) Song, L.; Ci, L.; Lu, H.; Sorokin, P. B.; Jin, C.; Ni, J.; Kvashnin,
A. G.; Kvashnin, D. G.; Lou, J.; Yakobson, B. I.; Ajayan, P. M. Large
Scale Growth and Characterization of Atomic Hexagonal Boron Nitride
Layers. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 3209−3215.
(140) Kubota, Y.; Watanabe, K.; Tsuda, O.; Taniguchi, T. Deep
Ultraviolet Light-Emitting Hexagonal Boron Nitride Synthesized at
Atmospheric Pressure. Science 2007, 317, 932−934.
(141) Zheng, X.-Q.; Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Hexagonal Boron Nitride
(h-BN) Nanomechanical Resonators with Temperature-Dependent
Multimode Operations. Proceedings from the 2015 18th International
Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems (Trans-
ducers), 2015; pp 1393−1396.
(142) Güttinger, J.; Noury, A.; Weber, P.; Eriksson, A. M.; Lagoin, C.;
Moser, J.; Eichler, C.; Wallraff, A.; Isacsson, A.; Bachtold, A. Energy-
Dependent Path of Dissipation in Nanomechanical Resonators. Nat.
Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 631−636.
(143) Pearton, S. J.; Yang, J.; Cary, P. H., IV; Ren, F.; Kim, J.; Tadjer,
M. J.; Mastro, M. A. Review of Ga2O3 Materials, Processing, and
Devices. Appl. Phys. Rev. 2018, 5, 011301.
(144) Zheng, X.-Q.; Zhao, H.; Feng, P. X.-L. A Perspective on β-
Ga2O3 Micro/Nanoelectromechanical Systems. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2022,
120, 040502.
(145) Zheng, X.-Q.; Zhao, H.; Jia, Z.; Tao, X.; Feng, P. X.-L. Young’s
Modulus and Corresponding Orientation in β-Ga2O3 Thin Films
Resolved by Nanomechanical Resonators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2021, 119,
013505.
(146) Zheng, X.-Q.; Lee, J.; Rafique, S.; Han, L.; Zorman, C. A.; Zhao,
H.; Feng, P. X.-L. Ultra-Wide-Bandgap β-Ga2O3 Nanomechanical
Resonators with Spatially Visualized Multimode Motion. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 43090−43097.
(147) Zheng, X.-Q.; Kaisar, T.; Feng, P. X.-L. Electromechanical
Coupling and Motion Transduction in β-Ga2O3 Vibrating Channel
Transistors. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2020, 117, 243504.
(148) Zheng, X.-Q.; Lee, J.; Rafique, S.; Karim, M. R.; Han, L.; Zhao,
H.; Zorman, C. A.; Feng, P. X.-L. β-Ga2O3 NEMS Oscillator for Real-
Time Middle Ultraviolet (MUV) Light Detection. IEEE Electron Device
Lett. 2018, 39, 1230−1233.
(149) Zheng, X.-Q.; Xie, Y.; Lee, J.; Jia, Z.; Tao, X.; Feng, P. X.-L. Beta
Gallium Oxide (β-Ga2O3) Nanoelectromechanical Transducer for
Dual-Modality Solar-Blind Ultraviolet Light Detection. APL Mater.
2019, 7, 022523.
(150) Novoselov, K. S.; Mishchenko, O. A.; Carvalho, O. A.; Castro
Neto, A. H. 2D Materials and van der Waals Heterostructures. Science
2016, 353, aac9439.
(151) Mak, K. F.; Shan, J. Photonics and Optoelectronics of 2D
Semiconductor Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. Nat. Photon. 2016,
10, 216−226.

(152) Wang, Z.; Xu, B.; Pei, S.; Zhu, J.; Wen, T.; Jiao, C.; Li, J.; Zhang,
M.; Xia, J. Recent Progress in 2D van der Waals Heterostructures:
Fabrication, Properties, and Applications. Sci. China Inf. Sci. 2022, 65,
211401.
(153) Pei, S.; Wang, Z.; Xia, J. Interlayer Coupling: An Additional
Degree of Freedom in Two-Dimensional Materials. ACS Nano 2022,
16, 11498−11503.
(154) Will, M.; Hamer, M.; Müller, M.; Noury, A.; Weber, P.;
Bachtold, A.; Gorbachev, R. V.; Stampfer, C.; Güttinger, J. High Quality
Factor Graphene-Based Two-Dimensional Heterostructure Mechan-
ical Resonator. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 5950−5955.
(155) Kim, S.; Annevelink, E.; Han, E.; Yu, J.; Huang, P. Y.; Ertekin,
E.; van der Zande, A. M. Stochastic Stress Jumps Due to Soliton
Dynamics in Two-Dimensional van der Waals Interfaces. Nano Lett.
2020, 20, 1201−1207.
(156) Kim, S.; Yu, J.; van der Zande, A. M. Nano-Electromechanical
Drumhead Resonators from Two-Dimensional Material Bimorphs.
Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 6686−6695.
(157) Ye, F.; Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Atomic Layer MoS2-Graphene van
der Waals Heterostructure Nanomechanical Resonators. Nanoscale
2017, 9, 18208−18215.
(158) Kumar, R.; Session, D. W.; Tsuchikawa, R.; Homer, M.; Paas,
H.; Watanabe, K.; Taniguchi, T.; Deshpande, V. V. Circular
Electromechanical Resonators Based on Hexagonal-Boron Nitride-
Graphene Heterostructures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2020, 117, 183103.
(159) Sawano, S.; Arie, T.; Akita, S. Carbon Nanotube Resonator in
Liquid. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 3395−3398.
(160) Bartsch, S. T.; Arp, M.; Ionescu, A. M. Junctionless Silicon
Nanowire Resonator. IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc. 2014, 2, 8−15.
(161) Presnov, D. E.; Kafanov, S. G.; Dorofeev, A. A.; Bozhev, I. V.;
Trifonov, A. S.; Pashkin, Y. A.; Krupenin, V. A. High Quality Factor
Mechanical Resonance in a Silicon Nanowire. JETP Lett. 2018, 108,
492−497.
(162) Feng, X. L.; He, R. R.; Yang, P. D.; Roukes, M. L. Phase Noise
and Frequency Stability of Very-High Frequency Silicon Nanowire
Nanomechanical Resonators. Proceedings from the 2007 International
Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems Conference (Transducers),
2007; pp 327−330.
(163) Davidovikj, D.; Slim, J. J.; Cartamil-Bueno, S. J.; van der Zant,
H. S. J.; Steeneken, P. G.; Venstra, W. J. Visualizing the Motion of
Graphene Nanodrums. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 2768−2773.
(164) Oshidari, Y.; Hatakeyama, T.; Kometani, R.; Warisawa, S. i.;
Ishihara, S. High Quality Factor Graphene Resonator Fabrication Using
Resist Shrinkage-Induced Strain. Appl. Phys. Express 2012, 5, 117201.
(165) Parmar, M. M.; Gangavarapu, P. R. Y.; Naik, A. K. Dynamic
Range Tuning of Graphene Nanoresonators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015,
107, 113108.
(166) Morell, N.; Tepsic, S.; Reserbat-Plantey, A.; Cepellotti, A.;
Manca, M.; Epstein, I.; Isacsson, A.; Marie, X.; Mauri, F.; Bachtold, A.
Optomechanical Measurement of Thermal Transport in Two-Dimen-
sional MoSe2 Lattices. Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 3143−3150.
(167) Islam, A.; Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. All-Electrical Transduction of
Black Phosphorus Tunable 2D Nanoelectromechanical Resonators.
Proceedings from the 2018 IEEE Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
(MEMS), 2018; pp 1052−1055.
(168) Jia, H.; Wang, Z.; Feng, P. X.-L. Multimode Black Phosphorus
Nanomechanical Resonators with Intrinsic Mechanical Anisotropy and
Electrical Tunability. Proceedings from the 2016Solid-State Sensors,
Actuators and Microsystems Workshop (Hiltonhead), 2016; pp 416−419.
(169) Yang, R.; Lee, J.; Wang, Z.; Feng, P. X.-L. Multimode
Characteristics in Mechanically-Coupled Silicon Carbide (SiC)
Nanowire Array Resonators. Proceedings from the 2013 Joint European
Frequency and Time Forum & International Frequency Control
Symposium (EFTF/IFCS), 2013; pp 145−148.
(170) Wang, Z.; Lee, J.; He, K.; Shan, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Embracing
Structural Nonidealities and Asymmetries in Two-Dimensional
Nanomechanical Resonators. Sci. Rep. 2015, 4, 3919.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15580


(171) Liu, C.-H.; Kim, I. S.; Lauhon, L. J. Optical Control of
Mechanical Mode-Coupling within a MoS2 Resonator in the Strong-
Coupling Regime. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 6727−6731.
(172) Kozinsky, I.; Postma, H. W. C.; Bargatin, I.; Roukes, M. L.
Tuning Nonlinearity, Dynamic Range, and Frequency of Nano-
mechanical Resonators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 88, 253101.
(173) Wu, C. C.; Zhong, Z. Capacitive Spring Softening in Single-
Walled Carbon Nanotube Nanoelectromechanical Resonators. Nano
Lett. 2011, 11, 1448−1451.
(174) Barnard, A. W.; Sazonova, V.; van der Zande, A. M.; McEuen, P.
L. Fluctuation Broadening in Carbon Nanotube Resonators. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2012, 109, 19093.
(175) Peng, H. B.; Chang, C. W.; Aloni, S.; Yuzvinsky, T. D.; Zettl, A.
Ultrahigh Frequency Nanotube Resonators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97,
087203.
(176) Song, X.; Oksanen, M.; Sillanpää, M. A.; Craighead, H. G.;
Parpia, J. M.; Hakonen, P. J. Stamp Transferred Suspended Graphene
Mechanical Resonators for Radio Frequency Electrical Readout. Nano
Lett. 2012, 12, 198−202.
(177) Mei, T.; Lee, J.; Xu, Y.; Feng, P. X.-L. Frequency Tuning of
Graphene Nanoelectromechanical Resonators via Electrostatic Gating.
Micromachines 2018, 9, 312.
(178) Yang, R.; Wang, Z.; Wang, P.; Lujan, R.; Ng, T. N.; Feng, P. X.-
L. Two-Dimensional MoS2 Nanomechanical Resonators Freely
Suspended on Microtrenches on Flexible Substrate. Proceedings from
the 2015 28th IEEE International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems (MEMS), 2015; pp 877−880.
(179) Ye, F.; Islam, A.; Zhang, T.; Feng, P. X.-L. Ultrawide Frequency
Tuning of Atomic Layer van der Waals Heterostructure Electro-
mechanical Resonators. Nano Lett. 2021, 21, 5508−5515.
(180) Yang, R.; Wang, Z.; Feng, P. X.-L. Calibrating Temperature
Coefficient of Frequency (TCf) and Thermal Expansion Coefficient
(α) of MoS2 Nanomechanical Resonators. Proceedings from the 2015
Joint Conference of the IEEE International Frequency Control Symposium
& the European Frequency and Time Forum (IFCS/EFTF), 2015; pp
198−201.
(181) Ye, F.; Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Glowing Graphene Nano-
electromechanical Resonators at Ultra-High Temperature up to 2650K.
Proceedings from the 2018 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting
(IEDM), 2018; pp 4.4.1−4.4.4.
(182) Wang, Z.; Yang, R.; Feng, P. X.-L. Thermal Hysteresis
Controlled Reconfigurable MoS2 Nanomechanical Resonators. Nano-
scale 2021, 13, 18089−18095.
(183) Xie, Y.; Lee, J.; Wang, Y.; Feng, P. X.-L. Straining and Tuning
Atomic Layer Nanoelectromechanical Resonators via Comb-Drive
MEMS Actuators. Adv. Mater. Technol. 2021, 6, 2000794.
(184) Cleland, A. N.; Roukes, M. L. A Nanometre-Scale Mechanical
Electrometer. Nature 1998, 392 (6672), 160−162.
(185) Hutchinson, A. B.; Truitt, P. A.; Schwab, K. C.; Sekaric, L.;
Parpia, J. M.; Craighead, H. G.; Butler, J. E. Dissipation in
Nanocrystalline-Diamond Nanomechanical Resonators. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2004, 84 (6), 972−974.
(186) Nguyen, C. T. MEMS Technology for Timing and Frequency
Control. IEEE Trans. Ultrason.Ferroelectr. Freq. Control 2007, 54 (2),
251−270.
(187) Nguyen, C. T.; Katehi, L. P. B.; Rebeiz, G. M. Micromachined
Devices for Wireless Communications. Proc. IEEE 1998, 86 (8), 1756−
1768.
(188) Imboden, M.; Mohanty, P. Dissipation in Nanoelectromechan-
ical Systems. Phys. Rep. 2014, 534 (3), 89−146.
(189) Lee, J.; Wang, Z.; He, K.; Shan, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Air Damping of
Atomically Thin MoS2 Nanomechanical Resonators. Appl. Phys. Lett.
2014, 105 (2), 023104.
(190) Bachtold, A.; Moser, J.; Dykman, M. I. Mesoscopic Physics of
Nanomechanical Systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2022, just accepted.
(191) Yasumura, K. Y.; Stowe, T. D.; Chow, E. M.; Pfafman, T.;
Kenny, T. W.; Stipe, B. C.; Rugar, D. Quality Factors in Micron- and
Submicron-Thick Cantilevers. J. Microelectromech. Syst. 2000, 9 (1),
117−125.

(192) Yang, J.; Ono, T.; Esashi, M. Investigating Surface Stress:
Surface Loss in Ultrathin Single-Crystal Silicon Cantilevers. J. Vac. Sci.
Technol. B 2001, 19 (2), 551−556.
(193) Henry, J. A.; Wang, Y.; Sengupta, D.; Hines, M. A.
Understanding the Effects of Surface Chemistry on Q: Mechanical
Energy Dissipation in Alkyl-Terminated (C1−C18) Micromechanical
Silicon Resonators. J. Phys. Chem. B 2007, 111 (1), 88−94.
(194) Czaplewski, D. A.; Sullivan, J. P.; Friedmann, T. A.; Carr, D. W.;
Keeler, B. E. N.; Wendt, J. R. Mechanical Dissipation in Tetrahedral
Amorphous Carbon. J. Appl. Phys. 2005, 97 (2), 023517.
(195) Fang, D.; Sun, Y.; Soh, A. K. Advances in Thermoelastic
Damping in Micro- and Nano- Mechanical Resonators: A Review. J.
Solid Mech. Mater. Eng. 2007, 1 (1), 18−34.
(196) Gysin, U.; Rast, S.; Ruff, P.; Meyer, E.; Lee, D. W.; Vettiger, P.;
Gerber, C. Temperature Dependence of the Force Sensitivity of Silicon
Cantilevers. Phys. Rev. B 2004, 69 (4), 045403.
(197) Lifshitz, R.; Roukes, M. L. Thermoelastic Damping in Micro-
and Nanomechanical Systems. Phys. Rev. B 2000, 61 (8), 5600−5609.
(198) Witkamp, B.; Poot, M.; van der Zant, H. S. J. Bending-Mode
Vibration of a Suspended Nanotube Resonator. Nano Lett. 2006, 6,
2904−2908.
(199) Verbridge, S. S.; Shapiro, D. F.; Craighead, H. G.; Parpia, J. M.
Macroscopic Tuning of Nanomechanics: Substrate Bending for
Reversible Control of Frequency and Quality Factor of Nanostring
Resonators. Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 1728−1735.
(200) Descombin, A.; Poncharal, P.; Pascale-Hamri, A.; Choueib, M.;
Diehl, R.; Vincent, P.; Purcell, S. T.; Ayari, A.; Perisanu, S. Giant,
Voltage Tuned, Quality Factors of Single Wall Carbon Nanotubes and
Graphene at Room Temperature. Nano Lett. 2019, 19 (3), 1534−1538.
(201) Zeevi, G.; Shlafman, M.; Tabachnik, T.; Rogachevsky, Z.;
Rechnitz, S.; Goldshtein, I.; Shlafman, S.; Gordon, N.; Alchanati, G.;
Itzhak, M.; Moshe, Y.; Hajaj, E. M.; Nir, H.; Milyutin, Y.; Izraeli, T. Y.;
Razin, A.; Shtempluck, O.; Kotchtakov, V.; Yaish, Y. E. Automated
Circuit Fabrication and Direct Characterization of Carbon Nanotube
Vibrations. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7 (1), 12153.
(202) Ferrari, P. F.; Kim, S.; van der Zande, A. M. Dissipation from
Interlayer Friction in Graphene Nanoelectromechanical Resonators.
Nano Lett. 2021, 21 (19), 8058−8065.
(203) Jiang, J.-W.; Wang, J.-S. Why Edge Effects are Important on the
Intrinsic Loss Mechanisms of Graphene Nanoresonators. J. Appl. Phys.
2012, 111 (5), 054314.
(204) Takamura, M.; Okamoto, H.; Furukawa, K.; Yamaguchi, H.;
Hibino, H. Energy Dissipation in Graphene Mechanical Resonators
with and without Free Edges. Micromachines 2016, 7 (9), 158.
(205) Matis, B. R.; Houston, B. H.; Baldwin, J. W. Energy Dissipation
Pathways in Few-Layer MoS2 Nanoelectromechanical Systems. Sci. Rep.
2017, 7 (1), 5656.
(206) Kramer, E.; van Dorp, J.; van Leeuwen, R.; Venstra, W. J. Strain-
Dependent Damping in Nanomechanical Resonators from Thin MoS2
Crystals. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 107, 091903.
(207) Zhang, P.; Jia, Y.; Shen, S.; Yang, R. Strain-Modulated
Equivalent Circuit Model and Dissipation Model for 2D MoS2
NEMS Resonators. Proceedings from the 2021 IEEE 34th International
Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), 2021; pp
658−661.
(208) Zhang, P.; Jia, Y.; Xie, M.; Liu, Z.; Shen, S.; Wei, J.; Yang, R.
Strain-Modulated Dissipation in Two-Dimensional Molybdenum
Disulfide Nanoelectromechanical Resonators. ACS Nano 2022, 16,
2261−2270.
(209) Davidovikj, D.; Alijani, F.; Cartamil-Bueno, S. J.; van der Zant,
H. S. J.; Amabili, M.; Steeneken, P. G. Nonlinear Dynamic
Characterization of Two-Dimensional Materials. Nat. Commun. 2017,
8 (1), 1253.
(210) Samanta, C.; Arora, N.; Naik, A. K. Tuning of Geometric
Nonlinearity in Ultrathin Nanoelectromechanical Systems. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2018, 113 (11), 113101.
(211) Samanta, C.; Arora, N.; V, K. K.; Raghavan, S.; Naik, A. K. The
Effect of Strain on Effective Duffing Nonlinearity in The CVD-MoS2
Resonator. Nanoscale 2019, 11 (17), 8394−8401.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15581


(212) Dash, A.; More, S. K.; Arora, N.; Naik, A. K. Ultra-Sensitive
Charge Detection and Latch Memory Using MoS2-Nanoresonator-
Based Bifurcation Amplifiers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2021, 118 (5), 053105.
(213) Yuksel, M.; Orhan, E.; Yanik, C.; Ari, A. B.; Demir, A.; Hanay,
M. S. Nonlinear Nanomechanical Mass Spectrometry at the Single-
Nanoparticle Level. Nano Lett. 2019, 19 (6), 3583−3589.
(214) Dykman, M. I.; Krivoglaz, M. A. Classical Theory of Nonlinear
Oscillators Interacting with a Medium. Phys. Status Solidi B 1971, 48
(2), 497−512.
(215) Zhang, Y.; Dykman, M. I. Spectral Effects of Dispersive Mode
Coupling in Driven Mesoscopic Systems. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92 (16),
165419.
(216) Schneider, B. H.; Singh, V.; Venstra, W. J.; Meerwaldt, H. B.;
Steele, G. A. Observation of Decoherence in a Carbon Nanotube
Mechanical Resonator. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5 (1), 5819.
(217) Barnard, A. W.; Zhang, M.; Wiederhecker, G. S.; Lipson, M.;
McEuen, P. L. Real-Time Vibrations of a Carbon Nanotube. Nature
2019, 566, 89−93.
(218) Wang, Z.; Feng, P. X.-L. Dynamic Range of Atomically Thin
Vibrating Nanomechanical Resonators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 104
(10), 103109.
(219) Deng, G.-W.; Zhu, D.; Wang, X.-H.; Zou, C.-L.; Wang, J.-T.; Li,
H.-O.; Cao, G.; Liu, D.; Li, Y.; Xiao, M.; Guo, G.-C.; Jiang, K.-L.; Dai,
X.-C.; Guo, G.-P. Strongly Coupled Nanotube Electromechanical
Resonators. Nano Lett. 2016, 16 (9), 5456−5462.
(220) Luo, G.; Zhang, Z.-Z.; Deng, G.-W.; Li, H.-O.; Cao, G.; Xiao,
M.; Guo, G.-C.; Tian, L.; Guo, G.-P. Strong Indirect Coupling Between
Graphene-Based Mechanical Resonators via a Phonon Cavity. Nat.
Commun. 2018, 9 (1), 383.
(221) Zhang, Z.-Z.; Song, X.-X.; Luo, G.; Su, Z.-J.; Wang, K.-L.; Cao,
G.; Li, H.-O.; Xiao, M.; Guo, G.-C.; Tian, L.; Deng, G.-W.; Guo, G.-P.
Coherent Phonon Dynamics in Spatially Separated Graphene
Mechanical Resonators. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2020, 117 (11),
5582.
(222) Hatanaka, D.; Bachtold, A.; Yamaguchi, H. Electrostatically
Induced Phononic Crystal. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2019, 11 (2), 024024.
(223) Wang, Y.; Lee, J.; Zheng, X.-Q.; Xie, Y.; Feng, P. X.-L.
Hexagonal Boron Nitride Phononic Crystal Waveguides. ACS Photon.
2019, 6 (12), 3225−3232.
(224) Singh, R.; Nicholl, R. J. T.; Bolotin, K. I.; Ghosh, S. Motion
Transduction with Thermo-Mechanically Squeezed Graphene Reso-
nator Modes. Nano Lett. 2018, 18 (11), 6719−6724.
(225) Singh, R.; Sarkar, A.; Guria, C.; Nicholl, R. J. T.; Chakraborty,
S.; Bolotin, K. I.; Ghosh, S. Giant Tunable Mechanical Nonlinearity in
Graphene−Silicon Nitride Hybrid Resonator. Nano Lett. 2020, 20 (6),
4659−4666.
(226) Šiškins, M.; Sokolovskaya, E.; Lee, M.; Mañas-Valero, S.;
Davidovikj, D.; van der Zant, H. S. J.; Steeneken, P. G. Tunable Strong
Coupling of Mechanical Resonance between Spatially Separated FePS3
Nanodrums. Nano Lett. 2022, 22 (1), 36−42.
(227) Mathew, J. P.; Patel, R. N.; Borah, A.; Vijay, R.; Deshmukh, M.
M. Dynamical Strong Coupling and Parametric Amplification of
Mechanical Modes of Graphene Drums. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2016, 11
(9), 747−751.
(228) De Alba, R.; Massel, F.; Storch, I. R.; Abhilash, T. S.; Hui, A.;
McEuen, P. L.; Craighead, H. G.; Parpia, J. M. Tunable Phonon-Cavity
Coupling in Graphene Membranes. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2016, 11 (9),
741−746.
(229) Li, S.-X.; Zhu, D.; Wang, X.-H.; Wang, J.-T.; Deng, G.-W.; Li,
H.-O.; Cao, G.; Xiao, M.; Guo, G.-C.; Jiang, K.-L.; Dai, X.-C.; Guo, G.-
P. Parametric Strong Mode-Coupling in Carbon Nanotube Mechanical
Resonators. Nanoscale 2016, 8 (31), 14809−14813.
(230) Zhu, D.; Wang, X.-H.; Kong, W.-C.; Deng, G.-W.; Wang, J.-T.;
Li, H.-O.; Cao, G.; Xiao, M.; Jiang, K.-L.; Dai, X.-C.; Guo, G.-C.; Nori,
F.; Guo, G.-P. Coherent Phonon Rabi Oscillations with a High-
Frequency Carbon Nanotube Phonon Cavity. Nano Lett. 2017, 17 (2),
915−921.
(231) Prasad, P.; Arora, N.; Naik, A. K. Gate Tunable Cooperativity
between Vibrational Modes. Nano Lett. 2019, 19 (9), 5862−5867.

(232) Weis, S.; Riviere, R.; Deleglise, S.; Gavartin, E.; Arcizet, O.;
Schliesser, A.; Kippenberg, T. J. Optomechanically Induced Trans-
parency. Science 2010, 330 (6010), 1520−1523.
(233) Safavi-Naeini, A. H.; Alegre, T. P. M.; Chan, J.; Eichenfield, M.;
Winger, M.; Lin, Q.; Hill, J. T.; Chang, D. E.; Painter, O.
Electromagnetically Induced Transparency and Slow Light with
Optomechanics. Nature 2011, 472 (7341), 69−73.
(234) Teufel, J. D.; Li, D.; Allman, M. S.; Cicak, K.; Sirois, A. J.;
Whittaker, J. D.; Simmonds, R. W. Circuit Cavity Electromechanics in
the Strong-Coupling Regime. Nature 2011, 471 (7337), 204−208.
(235) Teufel, J. D.; Donner, T.; Li, D.; Harlow, J. W.; Allman, M. S.;
Cicak, K.; Sirois, A. J.; Whittaker, J. D.; Lehnert, K. W.; Simmonds, R.
W. Sideband Cooling of Micromechanical Motion to the Quantum
Ground State. Nature 2011, 475 (7356), 359−363.
(236) Fan, L.; Fong, K. Y.; Poot, M.; Tang, H. X. Cascaded Optical
Transparency in Multimode-Cavity Optomechanical Systems. Nat.
Commun. 2015, 6 (1), 5850.
(237) Bagheri, M.; Poot, M.; Li, M.; Pernice, W. P. H.; Tang, H. X.
Dynamic Manipulation of Nanomechanical Resonators in the High-
Amplitude Regime and Non-Volatile Mechanical Memory Operation.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2011, 6 (11), 726−732.
(238) Castellanos-Gomez, A.; Meerwaldt, H. B.; Venstra, W. J.; van
der Zant, H. S. J.; Steele, G. A. Strong and Tunable Mode Coupling in
Carbon Nanotube Resonators. Phys. Rev. B 2012, 86 (4), 041402.
(239) Antonio, D.; Zanette, D. H.; López, D. Frequency Stabilization
in Nonlinear Micromechanical Oscillators. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3 (1),
806.
(240) Keşkekler, A.; Shoshani, O.; Lee, M.; van der Zant, H. S. J.;
Steeneken, P. G.; Alijani, F. Tuning Nonlinear Damping in Graphene
Nanoresonators by Parametric−Direct Internal Resonance. Nat.
Commun. 2021, 12 (1), 1099.
(241) Okamoto, H.; Gourgout, A.; Chang, C.-Y.; Onomitsu, K.;
Mahboob, I.; Chang, E. Y.; Yamaguchi, H. Coherent Phonon
Manipulation in Coupled Mechanical Resonators. Nat. Phys. 2013, 9
(8), 480−484.
(242) Frimmer, M.; Novotny, L. The Classical Bloch Equations. Am. J.
Phys. 2014, 82 (10), 947−954.
(243) Wu, C.-C.; Zhong, Z. Parametric Amplification in Single-
Walled Carbon Nanotube Nanoelectromechanical Resonators. Appl.
Phys. Lett. 2011, 99 (8), 083110.
(244) Aleman, B. J.; Sussman, A.; Zettl, A.; Mickelson, W. A Carbon
Nanotube-Based NEMS Parametric Amplifier for Enhanced Radio
Wave Detection and Electronic Signal Amplification. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser.
2011, 302 (1), 012001.
(245) More, S. K.; Naik, A. K. Strain Engineering of Graphene Nano-
Resonator. J. Micromech. Microeng. 2021, 31, 045015.
(246) Hanay, M. S.; Kelber, S.; Naik, A. K.; Chi, D.; Hentz, S.; Bullard,
E. C.; Colinet, E.; Duraffourg, L.; Roukes, M. L. Single-Protein
Nanomechanical Mass Spectrometry in Real Time. Nat. Nanotechnol.
2012, 7 (9), 602−608.
(247) Yang, Y. T.; Callegari, C.; Feng, X. L.; Roukes, M. L. Surface
Adsorbate Fluctuations and Noise in Nanoelectromechanical Systems.
Nano Lett. 2011, 11 (4), 1753−1759.
(248) Yang, Y. T.; Callegari, C.; Feng, X. L.; Ekinci, K. L.; Roukes, M.
L. Zeptogram-Scale Nanomechanical Mass Sensing. Nano Lett. 2006, 6
(4), 583−586.
(249) Lassagne, B.; Garcia-Sanchez, D.; Aguasca, A.; Bachtold, A.
Ultrasensitive Mass Sensing with a Nanotube Electromechanical
Resonator. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 3735−3738.
(250) Chaste, J.; Eichler, A.; Moser, J.; Ceballos, G.; Rurali, R.;
Bachtold, A. A Nanomechanical Mass Sensor with Yoctogram
Resolution. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7 (5), 301−304.
(251) Arash, B.; Wang, Q.; Duan, W. H. Detection of Gas Atoms via
Vibration of Graphenes. Phys. Lett. A 2011, 375 (24), 2411−2415.
(252) Schwender, J.; Tsioutsios, I.; Tavernarakis, A.; Dong, Q.; Jin, Y.;
Staufer, U.; Bachtold, A. Improving the Read-Out of the Resonance
Frequency of Nanotube Mechanical Resonators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2018,
113 (6), 063104.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15582


(253) Braakman, F. R.; Poggio, M. Force Sensing with Nanowire
Cantilevers. Nanotechnology 2019, 30, 332001.
(254) de Bonis, S. L.; Urgell, C.; Yang, W.; Samanta, C.; Noury, A.;
Vergara-Cruz, J.; Dong, Q.; Jin, Y.; Bachtold, A. Ultrasensitive
Displacement Noise Measurement of Carbon Nanotube Mechanical
Resonators. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 5324−5328.
(255) Rugar, D.; Budakian, R.; Mamin, H. J.; Chui, B. W. Single Spin
Detection by Magnetic Resonance Force Microscopy. Nature 2004,
430 (6997), 329−332.
(256) Sidles, J. A. Noninductive Detection of Single-Proton Magnetic
Resonance. Appl. Phys. Lett. 1991, 58 (24), 2854−2856.
(257) Tepsic, S.; Gruber, G.; Møller, C. B.; Magén, C.; Belardinelli, P.;
Hernández, E. R.; Alijani, F.; Verlot, P.; Bachtold, A. Interrelation of
Elasticity and Thermal Bath in Nanotube Cantilevers. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2021, 126, 175502.
(258) Ye, F.; Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Electrothermally Tunable
Graphene Resonators Operating at Very High Temperature up to 1200
K. Nano Lett. 2018, 18 (3), 1678−1685.
(259) Islam, A.; Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Black Phosphorus NEMS
Resonant Infrared (IR) Detector. Proceedings from the 2020 IEEE
33rd International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
(MEMS), 2020; pp 826−829.
(260) Lee, J.; Krupcale, M. J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Effects of γ-Ray Radiation
on Two-Dimensional Molybdenum Disulfide (MoS2) Nanomechanical
Resonators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016, 108 (2), 023106.
(261) Fan, X.; Forsberg, F.; Smith, A. D.; Schröder, S.; Wagner, S.;
Rödjegård, H.; Fischer, A. C.; Östling, M.; Lemme, M. C.; Niklaus, F.
Graphene Ribbons with Suspended Masses as Transducers in Ultra-
Small Nanoelectromechanical Accelerometers. Nat. Electron. 2019, 2
(9), 394−404.
(262) Hurst, A. M.; Lee, S.; Cha, W.; Hone, J. A Graphene
Accelerometer. Proceedings from the 2015 28th IEEE International
Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), 2015; pp
865−868.
(263) Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Atomically-Thin MoS2 Resonators for
Pressure Sensing. Proceedings from the 2014 IEEE International
Frequency Control Symposium (IFCS), 2014; pp 1−4.
(264) Dolleman, R. J.; Davidovikj, D.; Cartamil-Bueno, S. J.; van der
Zant, H. S.; Steeneken, P. G. Graphene squeeze-film pressure sensors.
Nano Lett. 2016, 16 (1), 568−571.
(265) Henry Huang, X. M.; Zorman, C. A.; Mehregany, M.; Roukes,
M. L. Nanodevice Motion at Microwave Frequencies. Nature 2003, 421
(6922), 496−496.
(266) Lee, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Self-Sustaining MoS2 Nanomechanical
Oscillators and Feedback Cooling. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2021, 119 (24),
243506.
(267) Li, P.; Cui, T. RF Nano Switch Based on Single Crystalline
Graphene. Proceedings from the 2015 Transducers - 2015 18th
International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Micro-
systems (Transducers), 2015; pp 307−310.
(268) Zhang, Q.-H.; Ying, Y.; Zhang, Z.-Z.; Su, Z.-J.; Ma, H.; Qin, G.-
Q.; Song, X.-X.; Guo, G.-P. Graphene-Based Nanoelectromechanical
Periodic Array with Tunable Frequency. Nano Lett. 2021, 21 (20),
8571−8578.
(269) Dash, A.; Selvaraja, S. K.; Naik, A. K. Probing Optical Mode
Hybridization in an Integrated Graphene Nano-Optomechanical
System. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2020, 37 (4), 1122−1126.
(270) Liu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zheng, X.-Q.; Lin, Q.; Feng, P. X.-L.
Nanomechanical and Optomechanical Coupling in Silicon Carbide/
Hexagonal Boron Nitride Hybrid Resonator. Proceedings from the
2021 21st International Conference on Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and
Microsystems (Transducers), 2021; pp 541−544.
(271) Ganzhorn, M.; Wernsdorfer, W. Dynamics and Dissipation
Induced by Single-Electron Tunneling in Carbon Nanotube Nano-
electromechanical Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108 (17), 175502.
(272) Benyamini, A.; Hamo, A.; Kusminskiy, S. V.; von Oppen, F.;
Ilani, S. Real-Space Tailoring of the Electron−Phonon Coupling in
Ultraclean Nanotube Mechanical Resonators. Nat. Phys. 2014, 10 (2),
151−156.

(273) Meerwaldt, H. B.; Labadze, G.; Schneider, B. H.; Taspinar, A.;
Blanter, Y. M.; van der Zant, H. S. J.; Steele, G. A. Probing the Charge of
a Quantum Dot with a Nanomechanical Resonator. Phys. Rev. B 2012,
86 (11), 115454.
(274) Khivrich, I.; Clerk, A. A.; Ilani, S. Nanomechanical Pump−
Probe Measurements of Insulating Electronic States in a Carbon
Nanotube. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2019, 14 (2), 161−167.
(275) Blien, S.; Steger, P.; Hüttner, N.; Graaf, R.; Hüttel, A. K.
Quantum Capacitance Mediated Carbon Nanotube Optomechanics.
Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 (1), 1636.
(276) Wen, Y.; Ares, N.; Schupp, F. J.; Pei, T.; Briggs, G. A. D.; Laird,
E. A. A Coherent Nanomechanical Oscillator Driven by Single-Electron
Tunnelling. Nat. Phys. 2020, 16 (1), 75−82.
(277) Vigneau, F.; Monsel, J.; Tabanera, J.; Bresque, L.; Fedele, F.;
Briggs, G. A. D.; Anders, J.; Parrondo, J. M. R.; Auffèves, A.; Ares, N.
Ultrastrong Coupling between Electron Tunneling and Mechanical
Motion. arXiv (Mesoscale and Nanoscale Physics), 2103.15219, ver. 2,
2021. https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.15219 (accessed 21 Jun 2021).
(278) Götz, K. J. G.; Schmid, D. R.; Schupp, F. J.; Stiller, P. L.; Strunk,
C.; Hüttel, A. K. Nanomechanical Characterization of the Kondo
Charge Dynamics in a Carbon Nanotube. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 120
(24), 246802.
(279) Yeo, I.; de Assis, P. L.; Gloppe, A.; Dupont-Ferrier, E.; Verlot,
P.; Malik, N. S.; Dupuy, E.; Claudon, J.; Gérard, J. M.; Auffèves, A.;
Nogues, G.; Seidelin, S.; Poizat, J. P.; Arcizet, O.; Richard, M. Strain-
Mediated Coupling in a Quantum Dot−Mechanical Oscillator Hybrid
System. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9 (2), 106−110.
(280) Kettler, J.; Vaish, N.; de Lépinay, L. M.; Besga, B.; de Assis, P.-
L.; Bourgeois, O.; Auffèves, A.; Richard, M.; Claudon, J.; Gérard, J.-M.;
Pigeau, B.; Arcizet, O.; Verlot, P.; Poizat, J.-P. Inducing Micro-
mechanical Motion by Optical Excitation of a Single Quantum Dot.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2021, 16 (3), 283−287.
(281) Fogliano, F.; Besga, B.; Reigue, A.; Heringlake, P.; Mercier de
Lépinay, L.; Vaneph, C.; Reichel, J.; Pigeau, B.; Arcizet, O. Mapping the
Cavity Optomechanical Interaction with Subwavelength-Sized Ultra-
sensitive Nanomechanical Force Sensors. Phys. Rev. X 2021, 11 (2),
021009.
(282) Chen, C.; Deshpande, V. V.; Koshino, M.; Lee, S.; Gondarenko,
A.; MacDonald, A. H.; Kim, P.; Hone, J. Modulation of Mechanical
Resonance by Chemical Potential Oscillation in Graphene. Nat. Phys.
2016, 12 (3), 240−244.
(283) Schwab, K. C.; Roukes, M. L. Putting Mechanics into Quantum
Mechanics. Phys. Today 2005, 58 (7), 36−42.
(284) Chu, Y.; Kharel, P.; Renninger, W. H.; Burkhart, L. D.; Frunzio,
L.; Rakich, P. T.; Schoelkopf, R. J. Quantum Acoustics with
Superconducting Qubits. Science 2017, 358 (6360), 199−202.
(285) Satzinger, K. J.; Zhong, Y. P.; Chang, H. S.; Peairs, G. A.;
Bienfait, A.; Chou, M. H.; Cleland, A. Y.; Conner, C. R.; Dumur, É.;
Grebel, J.; Gutierrez, I.; et al. Quantum Control of Surface Acoustic-
Wave Phonons. Nature 2018, 563, 661−665.
(286) O’Connell, A. D.; Hofheinz, M.; Ansmann, M.; Bialczak, R. C.;
Lenander, M.; Lucero, E.; Neeley, M.; Sank, D.; Wang, H.; Weides, M.;
Wenner, J.; Martinis, J. M.; Cleland, A. N. Quantum Ground State and
Single-Phonon Control of a Mechanical Resonator. Nature 2010, 464
(7289), 697−703.
(287) Kotler, S.; Peterson, G. A.; Shojaee, E.; Lecocq, F.; Cicak, K.;
Kwiatkowski, A.; Geller, S.; Glancy, S.; Knill, E.; Simmonds, R. W.;
Aumentado, J.; Teufel, J. D. Direct Observation of Deterministic
Macroscopic Entanglement. Science 2021, 372 (6542), 622−625.
(288) Mercier de Lepinay, L.; Ockeloen-Korppi, C. F.; Woolley, M. J.;
Sillanpaa, M. A. Quantum Mechanics−Free Subsystem with Mechan-
ical Oscillators. Science 2021, 372 (6542), 625−629.
(289) Cohen-Tannoudji, C.; Diu, B.; Laloë, F.Quantum Mechanics,
2nd ed.; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, 2020.
(290) Chan, J.; Alegre, T. P.; Safavi-Naeini, A. H.; Hill, J. T.; Krause,
A.; Gröblacher, S.; Aspelmeyer, M.; Painter, O. Laser Cooling of a
Nanomechanical Oscillator into Its Quantum Ground State. Nature
2011, 478, 89−92.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15583


(291) Verhagen, E.; Deléglise, S.; Weis, S.; Schliesser, A.; Kippenberg,
T. J. Quantum-Coherent Coupling of a Mechanical Oscillator to an
Optical Cavity Mode. Nature 2012, 482, 63−67.
(292) Aspelmeyer, M.; Kippenberg, T. J.; Marquardt, F. Cavity
Optomechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2014, 86 (4), 1391−1452.
(293) Pistolesi, F.; Cleland, A. N.; Bachtold, A. Proposal for a
Nanomechanical Qubit. Phys. Rev. X 2021, 11 (3), 031027.
(294) Rips, S.; Hartmann, M. J. Quantum Information Processing
with Nanomechanical Qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110 (12), 120503.
(295) Lee, J.; LaHaye, M. D.; Feng, P. X.-L. Design of Strongly
Nonlinear Graphene Nanoelectromechanical Systems in Quantum
Regime. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2022, 120 (1), 014001.
(296) Liu, L.; Li, T.; Ma, L.; Li, W.; Gao, S.; Sun, W.; Dong, R.; Zou,
X.; Fan, D.; Shao, L.; Gu, C.; Dai, N.; Yu, Z.; Chen, X.; Tu, X.; Nie, Y.;
Wang, P.; Wang, J.; Shi, Y.; Wang, X. Uniform Nucleation and Epitaxy
of Bilayer Molybdenum Disulfide on Sapphire. Nature 2022, 605, 69−
75.
(297) Liao, M.; Wei, Z.; Du, L.; Wang, Q.; Tang, J.; Yu, H.; Wu, F.;
Zhao, J.; Xu, X.; Han, B.; Liu, K.; Gao, P.; Polcar, T.; Sun, Z.; Shi, D.;
Yang, R.; Zhang, G. Precise Control of the Interlayer Twist Angle in
Large Scale MoS2 Homostructures. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 2153.
(298) Li, T.; Guo, W.; Ma, L.; Li, W.; Yu, Z.; Han, Z.; Gao, S.; Liu, L.;
Fan, D.; Wang, Z.; Yang, Y.; Lin, W.; Luo, Z.; Chen, X.; Dai, N.; Tu, X.;
Pan, D.; Yao, Y.; Wang, P.; Nie, Y.; Wang, J.; Shi, Y.; Wang, X. Epitaxial
Growth of Wafer-Scale Molybdenum Disulfide Semiconductor Single
Crystals on Sapphire. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2021, 16, 1201−1207.
(299) Chen, X.; Xie, Y.; Sheng, Y.; Tang, H.; Wang, Z.; Wang, Y.;
Wang, Y.; Liao, F.; Ma, J.; Guo, X.; Tong, L.; Liu, H.; Liu, H.; Wu, T.;
Cao, J.; Bu, S.; Shen, H.; Bai, F.; Huang, D.; Deng, J.; Riaud, A.; Xu, Z.;
Wu, C.; Xing, S.; Lu, Y.; Ma, S.; Sun, Z.; Xue, Z.; Di, Z.; Gong, X.;
Zhang, D. W.; Zhou, P.; Wan, J.; Bao, W. Wafer-Scale Functional
Circuits Based on Two Dimensional Semiconductors with Fabrication
Optimized by Machine Learning. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 5953.
(300) Yang, P.; Zhang, S.; Pan, S.; Tang, B.; Liang, Y.; Zhao, X.;
Zhang, Z.; Shi, J.; Huan, Y.; Shi, Y.; Pennycook, S. J.; Ren, Z.; Zhang, G.;
Chen, Q.; Zou, X.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, Y. Epitaxial Growth of Centimeter-
Scale Single-Crystal MoS2 Monolayer on Au (111). ACS Nano 2020, 14
(4), 5036−5045.
(301) Kang, K.; Xie, S.; Huang, L.; Han, Y.; Huang, P. Y.; Mak, K. F.;
Kim, C.-J.; Muller, D.; Park, J. High-Mobility Three-Atom-Thick
Semiconducting Films with Wafer-Scale Homogeneity. Nature 2015,
520, 656−660.
(302) Liu, C.; Wang, L.; Qi, J.; Liu, K. Designed Growth of Large-Size
2D Single Crystals. Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 2000046.
(303) Wang, L.; Xu, X.; Zhang, L.; Qiao, r.; Wu, M.; Wang, L.; Zhang,
S.; Liang, J.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Chen, W.; Xie, X.; Zong, J.; Shan, Y.;
Guo, Y.; Willinger, M.; Wu, H.; Li, Q.; Wang, W.; Gao, P.; Wu, S.;
Zhang, Y.; Jiang, J.; Yu, D.; Wang, E.; Bai, X.; Wang, Z.; Ding, F.; Liu, K.
Epitaxial Growth of a 100-Square-Centimetre Single-Crystal Hexagonal
Boron Nitride Monolayer on Copper. Nature 2019, 570, 91−95.
(304) Huang, Y.; Pan, Y.-H.; Yang, R.; Bao, L.-H.; Meng, L.; Luo, H.-
L.; Cai, Y.-Q.; Liu, G.-D.; Zhao, W.-J.; Zhou, Z.; Wu, L.-M.; Zhu, Z.-L.;
Huang, M.; Liu, L.-W.; Liu, L.; Cheng, P.; Wu, K.-H.; Tian, S.-B.; Gu,
C.-Z.; Shi, Y.-G.; Guo, Y.-F.; Cheng, Z. G.; Hu, J.-P.; Zhao, L.; Yang, G.-
H.; Sutter, E.; Sutter, P.; Wang, Y.-L.; Ji, W.; Zhou, X.-J.; Gao, H.-J.
Universal Mechanical Exfoliation of Large-Area 2D Crystals. Nat.
Commun. 2020, 11, 2453.
(305) Li, Z.; Ren, L.; Wang, S.; Huang, X.; Li, Q.; Lu, Z.; Ding, S.;
Deng, H.; Chen, P.; Lin, J.; Hu, Y.; Liao, L.; Liu, Y. Dry Exfoliation of
Large-Area 2D Monolayer and Heterostructure Arrays. ACS Nano
2021, 15, 13839−13846.
(306) Huang, Y.; Wang, Y.-K.; Huang, X.-Y.; Zhang, G.-H.; Han, X.;
Yang, Y.; Gao, Y.; Meng, L.; Wang, Y.; Geng, G.-Z.; Liu, L.-W.; Zhao, L.;
Cheng, Z.-H.; Liu, X.-F.; Ren, Z.-F.; Yang, H.-X.; Hao, Y.; Gao, H.-J.;
Zhou, X.-J.; Ji, W.; Wang, Y.-L. An Efficient Route to Prepare
Suspended Monolayer for Feasible Optical and Electronic Character-
izations of Two-Dimensional Materials. InfoMat 2021, 4, e12274.

(307) Kang, K.; Lee, K.-H.; Han, Y.; Gao, H.; Xie, S.; Muller, D. A.;
Park, J. Layer-by-Layer Assembly of Two-Dimensional Materials into
Wafer-Scale Heterostructures. Nature 2017, 550, 229−233.
(308) Mannix, A. J.; Ye, A.; Sung, S. H.; Ray, A.; Mujid, F.; Park, C.;
Lee, M.; Kang, J.-H.; Shreiner, R.; High, A. A.; Muller, D. A.; Hovden,
R.; Park, J. Robotic Four-Dimensional Pixel Assembly of van der Waals
Solids. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2022, 17, 361−366.
(309) Liu, L.; Kong, L.; Li, Q.; He, C.; Ren, L.; Tao, Q.; Yang, X.; Lin,
J.; Zhao, B.; Li, Z.; Chen, Y.; Li, W.; Song, W.; Lu, Z.; Li, G.; Li, S.;
Duan, X.; Pan, A.; Liao, L.; Liu, Y. Transferred van der Waals Metal
Electrodes for Sub-1-nm MoS2 Vertical Tansistors. Nat. Electron. 2021,
4, 342−347.
(310) Zhu, J.; Xu, B.; Xiao, F.; Liang, Y.; Jiao, C.; Li, J.; Deng, Q.; Wu,
S.; Wen, T.; Pei, S.; Xia, J.; Wang, Z. Frequency Scaling, Elastic
Transition, and Broad-Range Frequency Tuning in WSe2 Nano-
mechanical Resonators. Nano Lett. 2022, 22, 5107−5113.
(311) Deng, S.; Berry, V. Winkled, Rippled and Crumpled Graphene:
An Overview of Formation Mechanism, Electronic Properties, and
Applications. Mater. Today 2016, 19 (4), 197−212.
(312) Yllanes, D.; Bhabesh, S. S.; Nelson, D. R.; Bowick, M. J. Thermal
Crumpling of Perforated Two-Dimensional Sheets. Nat. Commun.
2017, 8, 1381.
(313) Bowick, M. J.; KošMrlj, A.; Nelson, D. R.; Sknepnek, R. Non-
Hookean Statistical Mechanics of Clamped Graphene Ribbons. Phys.
Rev. B 2016, 95, 104019.
(314) Zhao, X.-k.; Chen, R.-w.; Xu, K.; Zhang, S.-y.; Shi, H.; Shao, Z.-
y.; Wan, N. Nanoscale Water Film at a Super-Wetting Interface
Supports 2D Material Transfer. 2D Mater. 2021, 8, 015021.
(315) Shen, Y.-C.; Wu, Y.-T.; Lee, L.; Chen, J.-H.; Wani, S. S.; Yang,
T.-Y.; Luo, C. W.; Siao, M.-D.; Yu, Y.-J.; Chiu, P.-W.; Chueh, Y.-L.
Rational Design on Wrinkle-Less Transfer of Transition Metal
Dichalcogenide Monolayer by Adjustable Wettability-Assisted Transfer
Method. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31 (45), 2104978.
(316) Cullinan, M. A.; Gorman, J. J. Transfer-Free, Wafer-Scale
Fabrication of Graphene-Based Nanoelectromechanical Resonators.
Proceedings from the 2013 Microsystems for Measurement and
Instrumentation: Fulfilling the Promise (MAMNA), 2013, p 13653802.
(317) Cho, J. H.; Sun, G.; Cullinan, M. A Method to Manufacture
Repeatible Graphene-Based NEMS Devices at the Wafer-Scale.
Proceedings from the 2016 ASME International Manufacturing Science
& Engineering Conference, 2016; pp V001T02A77−VT02A77.
(318) Dominguez-Medina, S.; Fostner, S.; Defoort, M.; Sansa, M.;
Stark, A.-K.; Halim, M. A.; Vernhes, E.; Gely, M.; Jourdan, G.; Alava, T.;
Boulanger, P.; Masselon, C.; Hentz, S. Neutral Mass Spectrometry of
Virus Capsids above 100 Megadaltons with Nanomechanical
Resonators. Science 2018, 362 (6417), 918−922.
(319) Volokitin, A. I.; Persson, B. N. J. Noncontact Friction between
Nanostructures. Phys. Rev. B 2003, 68 (15), 155420.
(320) Stipe, B. C.; Mamin, H. J.; Stowe, T. D.; Kenny, T. W.; Rugar, D.
Noncontact Friction and Force Fluctuations between Closely Spaced
Bodies. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2001, 87 (9), 096801.
(321) Zurita-Sánchez, J. R.; Greffet, J. J.; Novotny, L. Friction Forces
Arising from Fluctuating Thermal Fields. Phys. Rev. A 2004, 69 (2),
022902.
(322) Kuehn, S.; Loring, R. F.; Marohn, J. A. Dielectric Fluctuations
and the Origins of Noncontact Friction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 96 (15),
156103.
(323) Yazdanian, S. M.; Marohn, J. A.; Loring, R. F. Dielectric
Fluctuations in Force Microscopy: Noncontact Friction and Frequency
Jitter. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128 (22), 224706.
(324) Kisiel, M.; Gnecco, E.; Gysin, U.; Marot, L.; Rast, S.; Meyer, E.
Suppression of Electronic Friction on Nb Films in the Superconducting
State. Nat. Mater. 2011, 10 (2), 119−122.
(325) She, J. H.; Balatsky, A. V. Noncontact Friction and Relaxational
Dynamics of Surface Defects. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108 (13), 136101.
(326) den Haan, A. M. J.; Wagenaar, J. J. T.; de Voogd, J. M.; Koning,
G.; Oosterkamp, T. H. Spin-Mediated Dissipation and Frequency
Shifts of a Cantilever at MilliKelvin Temperatures. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92
(23), 235441.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15584


(327) Héritier, M.; Pachlatko, R.; Tao, Y.; Abendroth, M.; Degen, C.
L.; Eichler, A. Spatial Correlation between Fluctuating and Static Fields
over Metal and Dielectric Substrates. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 127 (21),
216101.
(328) Turchette, Q. A.; Kielpinski, D.; King, B. E.; Leibfried, D.;
Meekhof, D. M.; Myatt, C. J.; Rowe, M. A.; Sackett, C. A.; Wood, C. S.;
Itano, W. M.; Monroe, C.; Wineland, D. J. Heating of Trapped Ions
from the Quantum Ground State. Phys. Rev. A 2000, 61 (6), 063418.
(329) Labaziewicz, J.; Ge, Y.; Leibrandt, D. R.; Wang, S. X.; Shewmon,
R.; Chuang, I. L. Temperature Dependence of Electric Field Noise
above Gold Surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 101 (18), 180602.
(330) Safavi-Naini, A.; Rabl, P.; Weck, P. F.; Sadeghpour, H. R.
Microscopic Model of Electric-Field-Noise Heating in Ion Traps. Phys.
Rev. A 2011, 84 (2), 023412.
(331) Brownnutt, M.; Kumph, M.; Rabl, P.; Blatt, R. Ion-Trap
Measurements of Electric-Field Noise Near Surfaces. Rev. Mod. Phys.
2015, 87 (4), 1419.
(332) Kumph, M.; Henkel, C.; Rabl, P.; Brownnutt, M.; Blatt, R.
Electric-Field Noise above a Thin Dielectric Layer on Metal Electrodes.
New J. Phys. 2016, 18 (2), 023020.
(333) Gao, J.; Daal, M.; Vayonakis, A.; Kumar, S.; Zmuidzinas, J.;
Sadoulet, B.; Mazin, B. A.; Day, P. K.; Leduc, H. G. Experimental
Evidence for a Surface Distribution of Two-Level Systems in
Superconducting Lithographed Microwave Resonators. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2008, 92 (15), 152505.
(334) Wang, H.; Hofheinz, M.; Wenner, J.; Ansmann, M.; Bialczak, R.
C.; Lenander, M.; Lucero, E.; Neeley, M.; O'Connell, A. D.; Sank, D.;
Weides, M.; Cleland, A. N.; Martinis, J. M. Improving the Coherence
Time of Superconducting Coplanar Resonators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009,
95 (23), 233508.
(335) Müller, C.; Cole, J. H.; Lisenfeld, J. Towards Understanding
Two-Level-Systems in Amorphous Solids: Insights from Quantum
Circuits. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2019, 82 (12), 124501.
(336) Naik, A. K.; Hanay, M. S.; Hiebert, W. K.; Feng, P. X.-L.;
Roukes, M. L. Towards Single-Molecule Nanomechanical Mass
Spectrometry. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2009, 4 (7), 445−450.
(337) Fang, J.; Zhang, P.; Yang, R.; Wang, Z. A Cantilever-Based
Resonator for Reconfigurable Nanomechanical Computing. J. Micro-
mech. Microeng. 2021, 31 (12), 124003.
(338) Lee, T.-H.; Bhunia, S.; Mehregany, M. Electromechanical
Computing at 500°C with Silicon Carbide. Science 2010, 329 (5997),
1316−1318.
(339) Wenzler, J.-S.; Dunn, T.; Toffoli, T.; Mohanty, P. A
Nanomechanical Fredkin Gate. Nano Lett. 2014, 14 (1), 89−93.
(340) Tella, S. A.; Alcheikh, N.; Younis, M. I. A Single MEMS
Resonator for Reconfigurable Multifunctional Logic Gates. J. Micro-
mech. Microeng. 2018, 28 (9), 095002.
(341) Wang, Z.; Fang, J.; Zhang, P.; Yang, R. Nanomechanics:
Emerging Opportunities for Future Computing. Sci. China Inf. Sci.
2021, 64 (10), 206401.
(342) Li, B.; He, Y.; Lei, S.; Najmaei, S.; Gong, Y.; Wang, X.; Zhang, J.;
Ma, L.; Yang, Y.; Hong, S.; Hao, J.; Shi, G.; George, A.; Keyshar, K.;
Zhang, X.; Dong, P.; Ge, L.; Vajtai, R.; Lou, J.; Jung, Y. J.; Ajayan, P. M.
Scalable Transfer of Suspended Two-Dimensional Single Crystals.
Nano Lett. 2015, 15 (8), 5089−5097.
(343) Li, M.-Y.; Su, S.-K.; Wong, H.-S. P.; Li, L.-J. How 2D
Semiconductors Could Extend Moore’S Law. Nature 2019, 567, 169.
(344) Nigg, S. E.; Lörch, N.; Tiwari, R. P. Robust Quantum Optimizer
with Full Connectivity. Sci. Adv. 2017, 3 (4), e1602273.
(345) Goto, H. Bifurcation-Based Adiabatic Quantum Computation
with a Nonlinear Oscillator Network. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 2186.
(346) Puri, S.; Andersen, C. K.; Grimsmo, A. L.; Blais, A. Quantum
Annealing with All-to-All Connected Nonlinear Oscillators. Nat.
Commun. 2017, 8, 15785.
(347) Mahboob, I.; Okamoto, H.; Yamaguchi, H. An Electro-
mechanical Ising Hamiltonian. Sci. Adv. 2016, 2 (6), e1600236.
(348) Inagaki, T.; Inaba, K.; Hamerly, R.; Inoue, K.; Yamamoto, Y.;
Takesue, H. Large-Scale Ising Spin Network Based on Degenerate
Optical Parametric Oscillators. Nat. Photon. 2016, 10 (6), 415−419.

(349) Inagaki, T.; Haribara, Y.; Igarashi, K.; Sonobe, T.; Tamate, S.;
Honjo, T.; Marandi, A.; McMahon, P. L.; Umeki, T.; Enbutsu, K.;
Tadanaga, O.; Takenouchi, H.; Aihara, K.; Kawarabayashi, K.-i.; Inoue,
K.; Utsunomiya, S.; Takesue, H. A Coherent Ising Machine for 2000-
Node Optimization Problems. Science 2016, 354 (6312), 603−606.
(350) Bello, L.; Strinati, M. C.; Dalla Torre, E. G.; Pe’er, A. Persistent
Coherent Beating in Coupled Parametric Oscillators. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2019, 123 (8), 083901.
(351) Goto, H.; Tatsumura, K.; Dixon, A. R. Combinatorial
Optimization by Simulating Adiabatic Bifurcations in Nonlinear
Hamiltonian Systems. Sci. Adv. 2019, 5 (4), eaav2372.
(352) Heugel, T. L.; Zilberberg, O.; Marty, C.; Chitra, R.; Eichler, A.
Ising Machines with Strong Bilinear Coupling. Phys. Rev. Res. 2022, 4
(1), 013149.
(353) Zheng, Q.; Jiang, Q. Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes as
Gigahertz Oscillators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 88, 045503.
(354) Feng, P. X.-L.; Wang, Z.; Lee, J.; Yang, R.; Zheng, X.; He, K.;
Shan, J. Two-dimensional nanoelectromechanical systems (2D NEMS)
via atomically-thin semiconducting crystals vibrating at radio
frequencies. 2014 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting
(IEDM), 2014, pp. 8.1.1−8.1.4.
(355) Zalalutdinov, M. K.; Robinson, J. T.; Fonseca, J. J.; LaGasse, S.
W.; Pandey, T.; Lindsay, L. R.; Reinecke, T. L.; Photiadis, D. M.;
Culbertson, J. C.; Cress, C. D.; Houston, B. H. Acoustic Cavities in 2D
Heterostructures. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 3267.

ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Review

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c01673

ACS Nano 2022, 16, 15545−15585

15585

 Recommended by ACS

Coupling Capacitively Distinct Mechanical Resonators for
Room-Temperature Phonon-Cavity Electromechanics

Alok Pokharel, Xin Zhou, et al.

SEPTEMBER 09, 2022
NANO LETTERS
READ 

Inverse Design of Photonic Devices with Strict Foundry
Fabrication Constraints

Martin F. Schubert, David H. Alexander, et al.

JUNE 13, 2022
ACS PHOTONICS
READ 

Moiré Modulation of Van Der Waals Potential in Twisted
Hexagonal Boron Nitride

Stefano Chiodini, Antonio Ambrosio, et al.

APRIL 29, 2022
ACS NANO
READ 

Deep Learning-Based High Throughput Inspection in 3D
Nanofabrication and Defect Reversal in Nanopillar Arrays:
Implications for Next Generation Transistors

Utkarsh Anand, Utkur Mirsaidov, et al.

MARCH 09, 2021
ACS APPLIED NANO MATERIALS
READ 

Get More Suggestions >


