Non-Hermitian chiral degeneracy of gated graphene 

metasurfaces

Soojeong Baek1†, Sang Hyun Park2,†, Donghak Oh1†, Kanghee Lee1, Sang-Ha Lee1, Hosub 

Lim3, Taewoo Ha4, Hyun-Sung Park5, Shuang Zhang6, Lan Yang7, Bumki Min1,8*, Teun-

Teun Kim9,*

1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 

Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea

2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 

55455, USA

3Harvard Institute of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Brigham and Women’s 

Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, United States

4Center for Integrated Nanostructure Physics, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Sungkyunkwan 

University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea

5Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Samsung Electronics, Suwon 16678, Republic of Korea

6Department of Physics, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 999077, China

7Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO 63130, 

USA

8Department of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, 

Republic of Korea

9Department of Physics, University of Ulsan, Ulsan 44610, Republic of Korea

* Correspondence to: bmin@kaist.ac.kr or ttkim@ulsan.ac.kr. 

†These authors contributed equally to this work.


Abstract

Non-Hermitian degeneracies, also known as exceptional points (EPs), have been the focus

of much attention due to their singular eigenvalue surface structure. Nevertheless, as 

pertaining to a non-Hermitian metasurface platform, the reduction of an eigenspace 

dimensionality at the EP has been investigated mostly in a passive repetitive manner. 

Here, we propose an electrical and spectral way of resolving chiral EPs and clarifying the 

consequences of chiral mode collapsing of a non-Hermitian gated graphene metasurface. 

More specifically, the measured non-Hermitian Jones matrix in parameter space enables 

the quantification of nonorthogonality of polarisation eigenstates and half-integer 

topological charges associated with a chiral EP. Interestingly, the output polarisation state 

can be made orthogonal to the coalesced polarisation eigenstate of the metasurface, 

revealing the missing dimension at the chiral EP. In addition, the maximal 

nonorthogonality at the chiral EP leads to a blocking of one of the cross-polarised 

transmission pathways and, consequently, the observation of enhanced asymmetric 

polarisation conversion. We anticipate that electrically controllable non-Hermitian 

metasurface platforms can serve as an interesting framework for the investigation of rich 

non-Hermitian polarisation dynamics around chiral EPs.


A physical system describable with a non-Hermitian Hamiltonian may host exceptional 

points1–4 (EPs), i.e., branching point singularities at which two or more eigenstates coalesce in 

parameter space. Unlike the degeneracies in Hermitian systems, for which an orthogonal set of 

eigenstates can be constructed, the eigenstates coalesce at the EP and become self-orthogonal, 

leading to a defective eigenspace of reduced dimensionality. These singular features have been 

observed and utilised in various quantum and classic systems, including electronic spins5, 

superconducting qubits6, condensed exciton-polaritons7, electronic circuits8, thermotic 

systems9 and active matter10. Particularly in photonic systems11–14, the ease of precise loss 

and/or gain control has facilitated the discovery of a plethora of EP-associated exotic 

behaviours, with some representative examples including chiral mode transfer with or without

encircling around EPs15,16, controlled electromagnetically induced transparency17, a ring (or a 

pair) of EPs in momentum space18,19, and coupling to the missing dimension at an EP20. In line 

with these advancements, we have also witnessed a series of promising EP-enabled 

functionalities, such as parity-time (PT) symmetry-broken lasing21, exceptional topological 

phase engineering22, electrical winding number switching23, exceptional sensing24,25 and 

coherent perfect absorption26.

For the exploration of non-Hermitian physics and the application of EP-enabled functionalities, 

metasurfaces22,23,27–29 are now being considered one of the most versatile platforms because 

their constituent meta-atoms are inherently constructed from lossy coupled subwavelength-

scale resonators. Generally, any change in the polarisation state of light transmitted through the 

non-Hermitian metasurface can be characterised by a non-Hermitian Jones matrix that plays 

the role of an effective Hamiltonian28–33. In contrast to the prevailing cases34, the non-Hermitian 

Jones matrix, of which the complex-valued elements can be engineered by geometrical and 


materials design of the meta-atoms, enables the utilisation of polarisation eigenstates for the 

examination of EP-related phenomena. Interestingly, at THz frequencies, the metasurface 

platform has been the only one that allows for the experimental observation of EPs, inheriting 

all the generic advantages of subwavelength-scale metaphotonics. However, until now, 

experimental probing of a branching point singularity in the parameter space has mostly been 

demonstrated in a passive way by repeatedly fabricating metasurfaces with varying meta-atom 

designs28,29. Furthermore, even with a series of repeated preparations, unavoidable errors from 

fabrications and/or measurements have made it difficult to observe relevant non-Hermitian 

dynamics around/at EPs. It is thus highly desirable to have precise real-time control of the 

parameters for access to an EP in a single metasurface platform23,35.

To circumvent the aforementioned problems, we hybridise gated graphene microribbons with 

non-Hermitian metasurfaces and demonstrate the electrically controlled probing of polarisation 

eigentransmission surfaces along with the corresponding eigenstates. Notably, this probing 

methodology utilises time domain spectroscopy that makes use of a broadband pulse, which in 

combination with a continuous gate tuning capability enables high-resolution access to chiral 

EPs in two-parameter space. Here, chiral EPs refer specifically to the non-Hermitian 

degeneracy at which a circularly polarised state becomes the only eigenstate as a result of 

coalescence. The measured non-Hermitian Jones matrix in the parameter space enables a 

systematic investigation of nonorthogonality between polarisation eigenstates and atypical 

linkage between input and output polarisation states at the chiral EP. Specifically, we show that, 

for a specific incident polarisation, augmenting dimensionality at the chiral EP can be solely 

revealed at the output. It is also found that the maximal nonorthogonality assured by the 

defective Jones matrix at the chiral EP leads to the observation of enhanced asymmetric 


polarisation conversion. Last but not least, the examination of polarisation eigenstates in 

parameter space reveals a vortex structure, from which half integer topological charges at the 

chiral EP are clarified.

Results

Design of non-Hermitian gated graphene metasurfaces. To map eigentransmission surfaces 

and investigate their structure near a chiral EP, we designed a non-Hermitian gated graphene 

metasurface consisting of an array of pairs of coupled split ring resonators (SRRs) with a 

graphene microribbon bridging the SRRs (Fig. 1a). The paired SRRs have their splits opened 

in orthogonal directions and are characterised by distinct external loss rates (Fig. 1b). Then, by 

employing temporal coupled-mode theory (TCMT)31,33,36, a parameter-dependent non-

Hermitian Jones matrix of the designed metasurface can be derived (see Methods). The two 

coupled SRRs are modelled as two orthogonally oriented resonators with a resonance 

frequency of 𝜔0, a coupling rate of 𝜅, and intrinsic and external loss rates of 𝛾𝑖𝜇 and 𝛾𝑒𝜇 (𝜇 =

𝑥, 𝑦), all of which can be adjusted to a certain degree by the geometry and materials constituting 

the unit cell (Fig. 1a, c). Under steady-state conditions, a 22 non-Hermitian Jones matrix 𝐓𝑙

can be written in a linear polarisation basis. The matrix can be expressed as a sum of uncoupled 

and coupled parts (𝐓𝑙 = 𝐓𝑙𝑢 + 𝐓𝑙𝑐), only the latter of which is relevant for investigating the 

coalescing behaviour near/at the chiral EP. Specifically, the coupled part is found to be 

proportional to the following matrix:

𝐓𝑙𝑐 ∝ [Ω𝑦 + 𝑗Γ
Κ

Κ
Ω𝑥 − 𝑗Γ]
(1)

where the dimensionless parameters are introduced for the simplicity of expression (see 

Methods for details): Ω𝑦 = (𝜔0 − 𝜔)/𝛾𝑒𝑦, Ω𝑥 = (𝜔0 − 𝜔)/𝛾𝑒𝑥, Γ = (𝛾𝑖𝑦/𝛾𝑒𝑦 − 𝛾𝑖𝑥/𝛾𝑒𝑥)/2, 


and Κ = −𝜅/√𝛾𝑒𝑥𝛾𝑒𝑦. An inspection of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the above matrix 

shows the presence of a pair of chiral EPs when the following conditions are satisfied:

Ω𝑥 = Ω𝑦,
Γ = ±Κ.
(2)

The first equality specifies a one-dimensional subspace satisfying PT symmetry, while the 

second equalities further identify the two chiral EPs as singularities distinguishing a PT exact 

phase from a broken one on the subspace. The chirality of a coalesced eigenstate at each EP is 

determined by the sign in the second equality (i.e., + for RCP and − for LCP). In this work, the 

system is parameterised by two variables: the angular frequency 𝜔 of an input wave and the 

gate voltage 𝑉𝑔 (or the Fermi level 𝐸𝐹 in simulations) that control the optical conductivity of 

graphene microribbons (Fig. 1c). The gating of graphene disproportionately adjusts the 

intrinsic loss rate of each SRR, resulting in a change in the Γ value and correspondingly the 

potential fulfilment of the second equality (here, in this experimental work, Γ = −Κ). From the 

simulations, it is found that the external loss rates are almost invariant within the gating range 

of interest. It is worthwhile to note that the pair of chiral EPs connected by a PT broken phase 

in the parameter space of our metasurface platform is analogous to the pair of EPs linked by a 

bulk Fermi arc in the momentum space of a two-dimensional non-Hermitian photonic 

crystal19,37,38.

Mapping of the eigentransmission surface and identification of chiral EP Non-Hermitian 

graphene metasurfaces were prepared by standard microfabrication techniques and a CVD-

grown graphene transfer method and characterised by terahertz time domain spectroscopy 

(THz-TDS, see Methods). Here, a charge-neutral point of the graphene is located at a gate 

voltage of ~ −1.1 V. From the measured co- and cross-polarised complex amplitude 

transmission through the fabricated metasurface, a set of non-Hermitian Jones matrices 𝐓𝑙 , 


each of which is specified on a rectangular grid in the two-parameter space, can be obtained.

The eigentransmission of 𝐓𝑙 clearly reveals self-intersecting Riemann surface structures (Fig. 

2a, b); the cusp at the end of the line of intersection is identified as the chiral EP and found to 

be located at (𝜔𝐸𝑃, 𝑉𝑔,𝐸𝑃 )   (0.55 THz, 0.1 V). To support the experimentally measured 

topological structure, we performed numerical simulations using a finite element method and 

extracted the eigentransmission (see Methods). As shown in Fig. 2c, d, the numerical 

simulations show qualitative agreement with the experimental results. Interestingly, sectioning 

of the reconstructed eigentransmission surfaces further captures the key features of coupling 

and phase transitions across the chiral EP. First, a transition from weak (Γ > −Κ, 𝑉𝑔 > 𝑉𝑔,𝐸𝑃) 

to strong (Γ < −Κ , 𝑉𝑔 < 𝑉𝑔,𝐸𝑃 ) coupling between polarisation eigenstates can be seen by 

sampling eigentransmission surfaces at consecutively decreasing values of 𝑉𝑔 across the chiral 

EP (corresponding to three cut lines on the Riemann surfaces shown in Fig. 2a). As more clearly 

seen in Fig. 2e, f, a crossing (anti-crossing) to anti-crossing (crossing) transition is clearly 

observable in the spectrally resolved eigentransmission amplitudes (phases). Second, an 

exceptional phase transition is observed in the gate-voltage-dependent eigentransmission 

amplitudes (phases) sampled along a one-dimensional subspace satisfying PT symmetry (Ω𝑥 =

Ω𝑦); in these plots, exact and broken PT phases appear on either side of the chiral EP (Γ = −Κ, 

Fig. 2a-d). Here, it is also worth noting that the coupling crossover is observed to be 

concomitant with the exceptional phase transition across the chiral EP, as in other non-

Hermitian systems23,39.

Nonorthogonality of eigenstates and half integer topological charge of chiral EP To 

visualise the eigenstate coalescing behaviour, numerically calculated and experimentally

extracted polarisation eigenstates are mapped on a Poincaré sphere (see Fig. 3a and Methods). 


For clarity, the polarisation eigenstates corresponding to different values of gate voltage (or 

Fermi levels) are colour-coded. As seen in Fig. 3a, except at the chiral EP, the polarisation 

eigenstates exist in pairs and appear symmetrically with respect to the south pole. It is 

noteworthy that the paired polarisation eigenstates are not represented on the Poincaré sphere 

by antipodal points, which is indicative of the characteristic nonorthogonality of general non-

Hermitian systems. As the chiral EP is approached in parameter space, the paired polarisation 

eigenstates move towards the south pole and eventually coalesce into the left circularly 

polarised state. To quantify the degree of nonorthogonality and coalescence, a Petermann factor 

(Fp) is calculated based on the left and right polarisation eigenstates extracted from the 

measurement (see Methods)40,41. Ideally, self-orthogonality and maximal nonorthogonality at 

the EP lead to the divergence of Fp, of which the experimental quantification can be done by 

plotting an inverse of Fp in parameter space (Fig. 3b). In the plot, smaller values of Fp-1 are 

seen along a one-dimensional subspace satisfying PT symmetry, and the value sharply drops 

down to ~310−4 near the chiral EP. This sharp decrease illustrates a singular sensitivity near 

the chiral EP to a variation in parameters. It is interesting to note that in addition to the 

investigation of nonorthogonality, the polarisation eigenstate mapping in parameter space 

enables the characterisation of topological charges associated with the chiral EPs. For this 

purpose, we monitored the cyclic variation of the ellipse orientation of polarisation eigenstates 

along an encircling path on the Riemann surface around the chiral EP42–44 (Fig. 3c). The cyclic 

variation of the ellipse orientation (Fig. 3d) reveals a polarisation vortex centre at the chiral EP 

along with a half integer topological charge ( 𝑞 = +1/2). While not observable in the 

measurements due to the maximum gate voltage limit, the existence of the other chiral EP in 

parameter space with a half integer topological charge of 𝑞 = −1/2 can be confirmed in the 

simulations37,38,45.


Revealing the missing dimension in a reduced polarisation eigenspace at chiral EP

Polarisation eigenstate coalescence and the corresponding reduction of an eigenspace 

dimensionality at the chiral EP also lead to singular behaviours in the transmission of waves 

through the non-Hermitian metasurface. More specifically, the left and right polarisation 

eigenstates become self-orthogonal at the chiral EP so that the output polarisation state |𝜓𝑜⟩ is 

described with the single eigenpolarisation state |𝐿⟩ and the associated Jordan vector, i.e., in 

our case, |𝐽⟩ = |𝑅⟩,

|𝜓𝑜⟩ = (𝑡𝐿𝐿,𝐸𝑃|𝐿⟩⟨𝐿| + 𝑡𝐿𝐿,𝐸𝑃|𝐽⟩⟨𝐽| + 𝑡𝐿𝑅,𝐸𝑃|𝐿⟩⟨𝐽|)|𝜓𝑖⟩
(3)

where 𝑡‘s are elements of the 22 non-Hermitian Jones matrix at the chiral EP written in a 

circular polarisation basis and |𝜓𝑜⟩ is the input polarisation state. Note that the matrix is in 

Jordan form at the chiral EP with its elements indicating cross- and co-polarised transmission 

(𝑡𝑅𝑅,𝐸𝑃 = 𝑡𝐿𝐿,𝐸𝑃 and 𝑡𝑅𝐿,𝐸𝑃 = 0 ). In Fig. 4, three illustrative cases are schematically shown 

along with their corresponding Poincaré sphere representations: (i) For RCP incidence (|𝜓𝑖⟩ =

|𝐽⟩, orthogonal to the polarisation eigenstate at the chiral EP, see Fig. 4a), the output polarisation

state becomes a superposition of the polarisation eigenstate and the Jordan vector (|𝜓𝑜⟩ =

𝑡𝐿𝐿,𝐸𝑃|𝐽⟩ + 𝑡𝐿𝑅,𝐸𝑃|𝐿⟩ ). (ii) For LCP incidence (|𝜓𝑖⟩ = |𝐿⟩ , the polarisation eigenstate at the

chiral EP, see Fig. 4b), the output polarisation state contains only the LCP component (|𝜓𝑜⟩ =

𝑡𝐿𝑅,𝐸𝑃|𝐿⟩). Note that the coalescence of polarisation eigenstates prohibits simultaneous nulling

of both cross-polarised transmissions, which eventually leads to asymmetric polarisation

conversion, as will be discussed below. (iii) Of particular interest is the case where the output 

polarisation state is completely devoid of the component parallel to the coalesced polarisation 

eigenstate (Fig. 4c); more specifically, preferential conversion to the Jordan vector (|𝜓𝑜⟩ =

𝑡𝐿𝐿,𝐸𝑃|𝐽⟩) can be achieved by setting the input polarisation states to |𝜓𝑖⟩ = −𝑡𝐿𝑅,𝐸𝑃/𝑡𝐿𝐿,𝐸𝑃|𝐽⟩ +


|𝐿⟩ . This counterintuitive outcome is the accidental revelation of the missing dimension

through the destructive interference of two LCP components: one from co-polarised 

transmission and the other from cross-polarised transmission of the prescribed input state. It is 

also worth mentioning that the solid angles subtended by output polarisation states are slightly 

smaller than those of input states (Fig. 4a-c) due to the nonunitary transformation performed 

by the metasurface46. More interestingly, the perfect nulling of cross-polarised transmission

𝑡𝑅𝐿 at the chiral EP leads us to observe the signature of a Pancharatnam–Berry phase during 

gate-controlled coupling crossover47 (Fig. 5a, b). The phase of 𝑡𝑅𝐿 at high frequencies sharply 

changes by 2π (see Fig. 5b), implying zero-to-one topological winding number switching23 by 

gating around the chiral EP (Fig. 5c). This winding number switching and the associated phase 

jump across the chiral EP can also be employed for enhanced sensing and monitoring of 

chemical and biological events48.

Maximal asymmetric polarisation conversion The asymmetric non-Hermitian Jones matrix 

of the fabricated graphene metasurface also leads to gate-controlled asymmetric polarisation 

conversion (Fig. 5d). When compared with a forward propagation case, a backward 

propagating wave is incident on the metasurface consisting of unit cells that are mirror-

reflected with a line of symmetry connecting the centres of two constituting SRRs. This 

guarantees that the off-diagonal elements of the Jones matrix are exchanged, i.e., 𝑡𝐿𝑅

𝑏 = 𝑡𝑅𝐿

𝑓 and 

𝑡𝑅𝐿

𝑏 = 𝑡𝐿𝑅

𝑓 , where superscripts specify the direction of propagation. Specifically, at the chiral 

EP of the fabricated metasurface, 𝑡𝐿𝑅

𝑏
becomes zero, while 𝑡𝑅𝐿

𝑏
remains nonzero, which

suggests that a large difference in off-diagonal elements can be observed. To quantitatively 

characterise the effect, a normalised difference in asymmetric polarisation conversion is 


defined here as 𝛿𝑡 ≡ (|𝑡𝑅𝐿

𝑏 |

2 − |𝑡𝑅𝐿

𝑓 |

2) / (|𝑡𝑅𝐿

𝑏 |

2 + |𝑡𝑅𝐿

𝑓 |

2), the value of which generally ranges 

from -1 to 1. Figure 5e shows the values of parameter-dependent 𝛿𝑡 extracted from the 

transmission measurement performed on the fabricated metasurface. It is clearly seen that the 

values are nonzero near the chiral EP and approach the maximum value of 1 at the chiral EP. 

Therefore, the gate-controlled access to the chiral degeneracy enables us to reach the maximal 

asymmetric polarisation conversion that is hard to achieve in passive non-Hermitian 

metasurfaces due to the sensitivity of exceptional points to fabrication errors.

Conclusions

In this work, we experimentally demonstrated the potential of a non-Hermitian gated graphene 

metasurface platform for the clarification and characterisation of chiral EPs in parameter space. 

The proposed platform stands among other recently implemented tunable non-Hermitian 

photonic systems23 while distinguishing itself from others by utilising a non-Hermitian Jones 

matrix for the manipulation of polarisation states. Specifically, in addition to the well-known 

general features such as nonorthogonality and mode coalescence, the non-Hermitian Jones 

matrix, especially written in Jordan form at the chiral EP, leads to an unusual nonunitary

relation between input and output polarisation states. One such manifestation is the preferential 

polarisation conversion into the state represented by a Jordan vector of the non-Hermitian Jones 

matrix. This implies that the output polarisation state can be made independent of the coalesced 

eigenstate of the metasurface being transmitted, which is contrary to our usual conception. We 

further experimentally clarified half-integer topological charges of a non-Hermitian chiral 

degeneracy and topological winding number switching by gating. We believe that the proposed 

tunable metasurface platform may become an essential tool in the investigation of dynamic 

phenomena related to non-Hermitian chiral degeneracies and serve as a testbed for realising 


artificial non-Hermitian effective matter.


References

1.
Berry, M. V. Physics of nonhermitian degeneracies. Czechoslov. J. Phys. 54, 1039–1047 

(2004).

2.
Heiss, W. D. The physics of exceptional points. J. Phys. A Math. Theor. 45, (2012).

3.
Bender, C. M. Making sense of non-Hermitian Hamiltonians. Reports Prog. Phys. 70, 

947–1018 (2007).

4.
Ashida, Y., Gong, Z. & Ueda, M. Non-Hermitian physics. Adv. Phys. 69, 249–435 

(2020).

5.
Ren, Z. et al. Chiral control of quantum states in non-Hermitian spin–orbit-coupled 

fermions. Nat. Phys. 18, 385–389 (2022).

6.
Abbasi, M., Chen, W., Naghiloo, M., Joglekar, Y. N. & Murch, K. W. Topological 

Quantum State Control through Exceptional-Point Proximity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 

160401 (2022).

7.
Gao, T. et al. Observation of non-Hermitian degeneracies in a chaotic exciton-polariton 

billiard. Nature 526, 554–558 (2015).

8.
Choi, Y., Hahn, C., Yoon, J. W. & Song, S. H. Observation of an anti-PT-symmetric 

exceptional point and energy-difference conserving dynamics in electrical circuit 

resonators. Nat. Commun. 9, (2018).

9.
Xu, G. et al. Observation of Weyl exceptional rings in thermal diffusion. Proc. Natl. 

Acad. Sci. 119, 1–7 (2022).

10.
Fruchart, M., Hanai, R., Littlewood, P. B. & Vitelli, V. Non-reciprocal phase transitions. 

Nature 592, 363–369 (2021).

11.
Feng, L., El-Ganainy, R. & Ge, L. Non-Hermitian photonics based on parity-time 

symmetry. Nat. Photonics 11, 752–762 (2017).

12.
Özdemir, K., Rotter, S., Nori, F. & Yang, L. Parity–time symmetry and exceptional 

points in photonics. Nat. Mater. 18, 783–798 (2019).

13.
Miri, M. A. & Alù, A. Exceptional points in optics and photonics. Science 363, (2019).


14.
Parto, M., Liu, Y. G. N., Bahari, B., Khajavikhan, M. & Christodoulides, D. N. Non-

Hermitian and topological photonics: Optics at an exceptional point. Nanophotonics 10, 

403–423 (2020).

15.
Yoon, J. W. et al. Time-asymmetric loop around an exceptional point over the full 

optical communications band. Nature 562, 86–90 (2018).

16.
Nasari, H. et al. Observation of chiral state transfer without encircling an exceptional 

point. Nature 605, 256–261 (2022).

17.
Wang, C. et al. Electromagnetically induced transparency at a chiral exceptional point. 

Nat. Phys. 16, 334–340 (2020).

18.
Zhen, B. et al. Spawning rings of exceptional points out of Dirac cones. Nature 525, 

354–358 (2015).

19.
Cerjan, A. et al. Experimental realization of a Weyl exceptional ring. Nat. Photonics 13, 

623–628 (2019).

20.
Chen, H. Z. et al. Revealing the missing dimension at an exceptional point. Nat. Phys.

16, 571–578 (2020).

21.
Feng, L., Wong, Z. J., Ma, R. M., Wang, Y. & Zhang, X. Single-mode laser by parity-

time symmetry breaking. Science 346, 972–975 (2014).

22.
Song, Q., Odeh, M., Zúñiga-Pérez, J., Kanté, B. & Genevet, P. Plasmonic topological 

metasurface by encircling an exceptional point. Science 373, 1133–1137 (2021).

23.
Ergoktas, M. S. et al. Topological engineering of terahertz light using electrically 

tunable exceptional point singularities. Science 376, 184–188 (2022).

24.
Chen, W., Özdemir, Ş. K., Zhao, G., Wiersig, J. & Yang, L. Exceptional points enhance 

sensing in an optical microcavity. Nature 548, 192–195 (2017).

25.
Park, J. H. et al. Symmetry-breaking-induced plasmonic exceptional points and 

nanoscale sensing. Nat. Phys. 16, 462–468 (2020).

26.
Wang, C., Sweeney, W. R., Stone, A. D. & Yang, L. Coherent perfect absorption at an 

exceptional point. Science 373, 1261–1265 (2021).

27.
Colom, R. et al. Crossing of the branch cut: the topological origin of a universal 2π-


phase 
retardation 
in 
non-Hermitian 
metasurfaces. 
Preprint 
at 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05632 (2022).

28.
Lawrence, M. et al. Manifestation of PT symmetry breaking in polarization space with 

terahertz metasurfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 1–5 (2014).

29.
Park, S. H. et al. Observation of an exceptional point in a non-Hermitian metasurface. 

Nanophotonics 9, 1031–1039 (2020).

30.
Cerjan, A. & Fan, S. Achieving Arbitrary Control over Pairs of Polarization States Using 

Complex Birefringent Metamaterials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 1–5 (2017).

31.
Kang, M., Chen, J. Chong, Y. D. Chiral exceptional points in metasurfaces. Phys. Rev. 

A 94, 1–5 (2016).

32.
Yu, S., Sung Park, H., Piao, X., Min, B. & Park, A. N. Low-dimensional optical chirality 

in complex potentials. Optica 3, 1025-1032 (2016).

33.
Li, S. et al. Exceptional point in a metal-graphene hybrid metasurface with tunable 

asymmetric loss. Opt. Express 28, 20083 (2020).

34.
Makris, K. G., El-Ganainy, R., Christodoulides, D. N. & Musslimani, Z. H. Beam 

dynamics in PT symmetric optical lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 1–4 (2008).

35.
Wang, D. et al. Superconductive PT-symmetry phase transition in metasurfaces. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 110, (2017).

36.
Suh, W., Wang, Z. & Fan, S. Temporal coupled-mode theory and the presence of non-

orthogonal modes in lossless multimode cavities. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 40, 1511–

1518 (2004).

37.
Król, M. et al. Annihilation of exceptional points from different Dirac valleys in a 2D 

photonic system. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.06621 (2021)

38.
Su, R. et al. Direct measurement of a non-Hermitian topological invariant in a hybrid 

light-matter system. Sci. Adv. 7, 1–10 (2021).

39.
Seyranian, A. P., Kirillov, O. N. & Mailybaev, A. A. Coupling of eigenvalues of 

complex matrices at diabolic and exceptional points. J. Phys. A. Math. Gen. 38, 1723–

1740 (2005).


40.
Berry, M. V. Mode degeneracies and the petermann excess-noise factor for unstable 

lasers. J. Mod. Opt. 50, 63–81 (2003).

41.
Lee, S. Y. et al. Divergent Petermann factor of interacting resonances in a stadium-

shaped microcavity. Phys. Rev. A 78, 2–5 (2008).

42.
Zhang, Y. et al. Observation of Polarization Vortices in Momentum Space. Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 120, 186103 (2018).

43.
Tang, W. et al. Exceptional nexus with a hybrid topological invariant. Science 370, 

1077–1080 (2020).

44.
Zhou, H. et al. Observation of bulk Fermi arc and polarization half charge from paired 

exceptional points. Science 359, 1009–1012 (2018).

45.
Yang, Z., Schnyder, A. P., Hu, J. & Chiu, C. K. Fermion Doubling Theorems in Two-

Dimensional Non-Hermitian Systems for Fermi Points and Exceptional Points. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 126, 86401 (2021).

46.
Ben-Aryeh, Y. Nonunitary squeezing and biorthogonal scalar products in polarization 

optics. J. Opt. B Quantum Semiclassical Opt. 7, (2005).

47.
Mailybaev, A. A., Kirillov, O. N. & Seyranian, A. P. Geometric phase around 

exceptional points. Phys. Rev. A. 72, 15–18 (2005).

48.
Kravets, V. G. et al. Singular phase nano-optics in plasmonic metamaterials for label-

free single-molecule detection. Nat. Mater. 12, 304–309 (2013).

49.
Ordal, M. A., Bell, R. J., Alexander, R. W., Long, L. L. & Querry, M. R. Optical 

properties of fourteen metals in the infrared and far infrared: Al, Co, Cu, Au, Fe, Pb, Mo, 

Ni, Pd, Pt, Ag, Ti, V, and W. Appl. Opt. 24, 4493 (1985). 

50.
Ziegler, K. Minimal conductivity of graphene: Nonuniversal values from the Kubo 

formula. Phys. Rev. B. 75, (2007).


Methods

Jones matrix of non-Hermitian metasurfaces A parameter-dependent non-Hermitian Jones 

matrix can be obtained by modelling gated graphene metasurfaces with temporal coupled mode 

theory (TCMT). The analysis results in the following 22 non-Hermitian Jones matrix in a 

linear polarisation basis.

𝐓 = 𝐈 − 𝐃𝐇−𝟏𝐃

where 𝐈 is the identity matrix, 𝐃 = [𝑗√𝛾𝑒𝑥
𝟎

𝟎
𝑗√𝛾𝑒𝑦

] , 𝐇 = 𝑗(𝛀 − 𝜔𝐈) − 𝚪𝒆 − 𝚪𝒊 , 𝚪𝒆 =

[𝛾𝑒𝑥
𝟎

𝟎
𝛾𝑒𝑦] , 𝚪𝒊 = [𝛾𝑖𝑥
𝟎

𝟎
𝛾𝑖𝑦] , and 𝛀 = [𝜔0
𝜅

𝜅
𝜔0] . Then, the non-Hermitian Jones matrix 

can be expressed as

𝐓 = 𝐓𝑢 + 𝐓𝑐 = 𝜉𝐈 + 𝜂 [Ω𝑦 + 𝑗Γ
Κ

Κ
Ω𝑥 − 𝑗Γ].

Here, for simplicity, we introduce two dimensionless parameters 𝜉 = 1 − 𝜒/ det(𝐇) and 𝜂 =

𝑗𝛾𝑒𝑥𝛾𝑒𝑦/det(𝐇), , where 𝜒 = 𝛾𝑒𝑥𝛾𝑒𝑦 + (𝛾𝑒𝑥𝛾𝑖𝑦 + 𝛾𝑒𝑦𝛾𝑖𝑥)/2 . In a circular polarisation basis, 

the matrix can be written as

𝐓𝑐𝑖𝑟 = 𝐓𝑐𝑖𝑟,𝑢 + 𝐓𝑐𝑖𝑟,𝑐 = 𝜉𝐈 + 1

2 𝜂 [
Ω𝑥 + Ω𝑦
Ω𝑥 − Ω𝑦 + 2𝑗(Γ − K)

Ω𝑥 − Ω𝑦 + 2𝑗(Γ + K)
Ω𝑥 + Ω𝑦

].

Numerical simulations To numerically calculate eigentransmission surfaces of the gated 

graphene metasurfaces, we use a commercial simulation tool that employs the commercial 

finite-element method solver CST Microwave Studio. In the frequency range of interest, the 


dielectric constant for gold is tabulated in ref.49 and can be fitted by using the Drude model 

with a plasma frequency 𝜔𝑝 = 1.37 × 1013 rad/s and a collision frequency 𝛾 = 4.07 ×

1013 rad/s. The complex index of the silicon substrate is extracted experimentally by measuring 

the transmission of the THz wave through the substrate. The optical conductivity of graphene 

is modelled by Kubo’s formula50 with an experimentally fitted scattering time of 20 fs.

Device fabrication The gated graphene non-Hermitian metasurfaces are prepared by 

employing standard microelectromechanical fabrication techniques. All the metallic structures 

are made of 200-nm-thick gold and attached to the substrate with a 20-nm-thick chrome 

adhesion layer. To bridge the gap between SRRs with a graphene microribbon, CVD-grown 

graphene is first transferred to the substrate with previously patterned SRRs. The transfer of 

graphene is accomplished by using PMMA (C2, Microchem) as a supporting layer. The 

transferred large-area graphene is then patterned by UV lithography with bilayered photoresists 

(PMGI and HKT 501). After UV exposure and development, the part of graphene uncovered 

by photoresists is etched by a plasma asher. As shown in Fig. 1c, the graphene microribbon can 

be electrically doped by utilising an ion gel gate dielectric with in-plane gate and ground 

electrodes patterned on an undoped silicon substrate.

THz-TDS measurement To retrieve non-Hermitian Jones matrices, a conventional THz time-

domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) system is employed. The main part of the system consists of 

a Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser (Mai-Tai, Spectra-physics) operating at a repetition rate of 80 

MHz with a centre wavelength of 800 nm, a GaAs photoconductive antenna (iPCA, BATOP) 

for the generation of a THz signal and a 1-mm-thick ZnTe crystal for detection. The generated 


THz signal covers a spectral range from ~0.1 to ~2.0 THz. The co- and cross-polarised complex 

amplitude transmissions are measured by employing two wire-grid terahertz polarisers and 

used to retrieve the non-Hermitian Jones matrix.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) through the 

government of Korea (NRF-2021R1C1C100631612 and 2017R1A2B3012364) and Institute 

of Information & communications Technology Planning and Evaluation (IITP) grant funded 

by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2022-0-00624). The work was also supported by the 

center for Advanced Meta-Materials (CAMM) funded by Korea Government (MSIP) as Global 

Frontier Project (NRF-2014M3A6B3063709). S.H.P acknowledge funding support from 

NSF/EFRI under Grant Agreement No. 1741660. The work is partially funded by NRF (NRF-

2021R1A6A3A14044805, 2020R1C1C1009098) and the Institute for basic science (IBS-

R011-D1). 

Author contributions

S.B., S.H.P., S.Z., B.M., and T.-T. K conceived the original idea. S.B. developed the gated 

graphene metasurfaces and performed the THz-TDS measurement. S.B., S.H.P., and D.O.

developed the analytical model. All authors analysed the data and discussed the results. S.B., 

S.H.P., D.O., S.Z., B.M., and T.-T.K. wrote the paper, and all authors provided feedback. B.M. 

and T.-T.K. supervised the project.


Competing financial interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Figure captions

Fig. 1 Design and fabrication of non-Hermitian gated graphene metasurfaces. a

Schematic illustration of the unit cell and its interaction with an incident wave. The unit 

cell is composed of two orthogonally oriented SRRs with an identical resonance 

frequency of 𝜔0, distinct intrinsic and external loss rates of 𝛾𝑖𝜇 and 𝛾𝑒𝜇 (𝜇 = 𝑥, 𝑦), and 

a coupling strength 𝜅 . The two SRRs are rridged ry a transferred single-layer 

graphene microrirron. b Simulated transmission amplitude through each SRR in the 

arsence of the other SRR. The SRRs are excited ry an incident wave polarised along

the gap opening. The fitted external loss rates are 𝛾𝑒𝑥 = 0.53 rad/s and 𝛾𝑒𝑦 = 0.03 

rad/s, respectively. c Schematic rendering and microscopic image of the non-

Hermitian gated graphene metasurface. The geometric dimensions of the unit cell are 

set 
to 
𝐿1 = 24 𝜇m, 𝐿2 = 44 𝜇m, 𝐿3 = 24 𝜇m, 𝐿4 = 64 𝜇m, 𝑔1 = 6 𝜇m, 𝑔2 = 50 𝜇m,

𝑆 = 2 𝜇m and 𝑃𝑥 = 𝑃𝑦 = 120 𝜇m. To apply gate voltage and change the conductivity of 

an array of graphene microrirrons, a square-ring-shaped gate electrode, a ground 

electrode and an ion gel layer are incorporated into the non-Hermitian graphene 

metasurface. Here, two ends of the graphene microrirron are attached to the square-

ring-shaped electrode, while the ion-gel layer covers roth the gate and ground 

electrodes as well as the array of graphene microrirrons.

Fig. 2 Eigentransmission amplitude and phase of the non-Hermitian gated 

graphene metasurface. a Experimentally measured eigentransmission amplitude 


and b phase plotted in parameter space spanned ry the input frequency and the gate 

voltage 𝑉𝑔 applied to the array of graphene microrirrons. The chiral EP is denoted ry 

a point (EP) on the surfaces. Chiral EP is orserved at a frequency of 0.55 THz and a

gate voltage of 𝑉𝑔,𝐸𝑃 = 0.1 V. c Numerically calculated eigentransmission amplitude 

and d phase plotted in parameter space spanned ry the input frequency and Fermi 

level EF of the graphene microrirrons. The chiral EP is located at 𝜔𝐸𝑃 = 0.54 THz and

EF = 0.13 eV. e Eigentransmission amplitude plot sectioned at three values of gate 

voltage. A strong-to-weak coupling transition is clearly seen across the chiral EP. f

Eigentransmission phase plot sectioned at three values of gate voltage.

Fig. 3 Electrical access to eigenpolarisation states at the EP. a Measured (square) 

and simulated (line) eigenpolarisation states plotted on the Poincaré sphere with LCP 

at the north pole with respect to 𝝎 and 𝑽𝒈. b Inverse of the Petermann factor (𝑭𝒑

−𝟏) 

calculated from eigenpolarisation states with respect to 𝝎 and 𝑽𝒈. c Cyclic parameter 

variation (rlack lines) around EP on Riemann surfaces of eigentransmission amplitude. 

Cynic-coloured and magenta-coloured dots indicate the starting points for the first and 

second round trip, respectively. d The variation of eigentrasnmission amplitude (top) 

and the corresponding eigenpolarisation ellipse angle (rottom) with respect to cyclic 

variation of 𝒇 and 𝑽𝒈 in parameter space.

Fig. 4 Peculiar linkage between input and output states at the chiral EP. a-c

Conceptual schemes (left), input states (middle), and output states (right) on the

Poincaré sphere for three polarisation input states at the chiral EP. a For the input state 

with RCP, the output polarisation states are superposed with RCP and LCP. b The 


LCP component is transmitted only for the input state with LCP. c For specific input 

states where the LCP components destructively interfere with each other, the RCP 

component is only transmitted, and then the missing dimension is revealed.

Fig. 5 Gate-controllable cross-polarised transmission tRL and asymmetric 

polarisation conversion. a-b Transmission amplitude (a) and phase (b) for 𝑡𝑅𝐿 in 

parameter space with incident frequency and gate voltage 𝑉𝑔. c Gate-tunarle winding 

numrer, which indicates the numrer of times winds around the EP in the complex 

plane of 𝑡𝑅𝐿 . d Schematic view for asymmetric polarisation conversion of circularly 

polarised light through non-Hermitian graphene metasurfaces. e
Normalised 

difference of intensity 𝛿𝑡 for the quantitative manifestation of asymmetric polarisation 

conversion with respect to 𝑓 and 𝑉𝑔.


Figures

Fig. 1 Baek et al.


Fig. 2 Baek et al.


Baek et al. Fig. 3


Baek et al. Fig. 4


Baek et al. Fig. 5


