Quantitative analysis of thin metal powder layers via transmission X-ray imaging and
discrete element simulation: Roller-based spreading approaches

Ryan W. Pennya,∗, Daniel Oropezaa, Reimar Weissbacha, Patrick M. Praeglab, Christoph Meierb, Wolfgang A. Wallb, A. John Harta,∗

aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, 02139, MA, USA
bInstitute for Computational Mechanics, Technical University of Munich, Boltzmannstraße 15, Garching b. M¨unchen, Germany

Abstract

A variety of tools can be used for spreading metal, ceramic, and polymer feedstocks in powder bed additive manufacturing methods.
Rollers are often employed when spreading powders with limited flowability, as arises in powders comprising fine particle sizes or
high surface energy materials. Here, we study roller-based powder spreading for powder bed AM using the unique combination
of a purpose-built powder spreading testbed with a proven method for X-ray mapping of powder layer depth. We focus on the
density and uniformity of nominally 100 µm thick layers of roller-spread Ti-6Al-4V and Al-10Si-Mg powders. Our results indicate
that when rotation is too rapid, roller-applied shear force impedes the creation of dense and uniform layers from powders of high
innate flowability, or where inertial forces driven by particle density dominate cohesive forces. Roller counter-rotation augments the
uniformity of cohesive powder layers, primarily though reducing the influence of particle clusters in the flowing powder, which are
otherwise shown to cause deep, trench-like streaks. Companion discrete element method (DEM) simulations further contextualize
the experiments through isolation of the effects of cohesion on layer attributes. Results suggest that roller motion parameters could
apply a strategic level of additional shear force to the flowing powder, thereby mitigating the clumping behavior characteristic of
highly cohesive feedstocks while maintaining high layer uniformity.

Keywords: additive manufacturing, powder, spreading, X-ray, quality, discrete element method

1. Introduction

Roller-based spreading mechanisms are commonly used in
powder bed additive manufacturing (AM) processes, particularly
when use of fine or highly cohesive powders conveys desirable
process attributes and/or component properties [1, 2]. Broadly,
powder bed AM functions by alternatively spreading thin lay-
ers of powder that are locally fused, e.g., by binder, sintering,
or melting, to ultimately fabricate monolithic components one
cross section at a time. In these processes, layer thickness de-
termines the vertical resolution of the printing process, which
is the primary consideration in selecting this parameter, in addi-
tion to secondary considerations that potentially include process
stability, build rate, post-process sintering conditions, and com-
ponent mechanical performance [1, 3–13]. However, powders
that are large as compared to the layer height cause sparse de-
position [4, 14, 15] and even jamming against the recoating
implement [16]. It follows that fine powders are desirable for
these manufacturing processes, especially when binder jetting
components destined for sintering, as to achieve accurate and
fully dense components [1, 3–10].
However, when fine particles are used in powder bed AM, the
low particle mass increases the relative effect of cohesive forces,
causing spontaneous clumping in the spreading flow. Therefore,

∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: rpenny@mit.edu (Ryan W. Penny), ajhart@mit.edu
(A. John Hart)

fine powders may also be prone to spreading into sparse and
highly variable layers [13, 17–19]. Additional attributes im-
pairing powder flowability and uniform layer formation include
alloy composition, density, shape, oxidation, and contamina-
tion [2, 5, 8, 10, 20–22]. In turn, this variability can manifest
as component defects, including porosity, rough surface finish,
and poor component accuracy [1, 4, 8, 11, 12]. Thus, enabling
the manufacturing of high quality powder bed AM components
lies at the intersection of discerning the powder attributes gov-
erning flowability in context, and imparting favorable spreading
boundary conditions through selection of spreading strategy,
or collectively the choice of the spreading tool(s) and motion
parameters applied thereto.
A number of legacy powder characterization techniques exist,
and have enjoyed a long history of quantifying the flowability
of metal powders in practical contexts. Among the simplest is
the static angle of repose, wherein powder is permitted to flow
through a standardized funnel and the slope of the resulting coni-
cal pile is measured. Higher angles are positively correlated with
decreasing powder flowability; a standardized funnel geometry
designed by Hall as applied in ASTM standard B213 [23] is com-
monly used to measure this parameter. Other approaches include
the Hausner Ratio [24] and Carr Index [25] that assess powder
flowability through comparing bulk density to tap density. While
these methods are common and easy to perform, they lack speci-
ficity either to a targeted powder attribute or, on the other extent
of the problem, to the fluctuating boundary conditions inherent
to spreading in powder bed AM [2, 5, 18, 26]. Therefore, these

arXiv:2209.04303v1  [physics.app-ph]  9 Sep 2022


simple methods, on their own, are poorly predictive of powder
spreadability and layer attributes.
Accordingly, much experimental work centers on quantifi-
cation of powder flow under conditions representative of AM.
For example, Budding and Vaneker [27] use a purpose-built
mechanized cup for extracting as-spread powder specimens of
known volume to study binder jetting using a plaster powder
(also see [8, 28, 29] for similar approaches). They find that
using a counter-rotating roller results in more dense layers than
a rigid (’doctor’) blade, and further that large diameter rollers
give higher density layers than smaller diameter rollers. This
work additionally shows that forward rotation can be an effec-
tive means of increasing layer density via compaction (also
see [30, 31]). Parallel work by Meyer and coworkers [32], con-
sidering PA6 and PA12 nylon powders used in selective laser
sintering (SLS), more closely examines the effect of surface
speed in roller spreading by holding translational speed constant
at 127 mm/s and varying roller rotational speed. Significant de-
creases in packing density are observed with increasing surface
speed, or sum of translational and roller tangential speed, from
153 to 233 mm/s, and further increasing surface speed 335 to
607 mm/s results in highly unpredictable spreading and more
sparse deposition as compared to blade-based layers used as
a control. The authors conclude that there are three spreading
regimes demarcated by roller surface speed: insufficient roller
rotational speed causing high forces, compaction, and powder
layer cracking; an optimal range with high density and high
uniformity; and excessive rpm which throws powder forward
and thus lowers packing density.
Dispensing of cohesive powders, i.e., metering the amount
needed to subsequently spread a layer, is also challenging. Hop-
per mechanisms are often used to pre-deposit highly cohesive
powders onto the build area prior to roller-based leveling [1, 33].
Jimenez et al. [34] demonstrate that the density of 20 − 40 µm
alumina powder layers deposited in this fashion depends strongly
on the amount of powder deposited by the hopper by using an
Archimedes approach to measuring specimen density. Finally,
our prior work led by Oropeza investigates roller-spreading of
nominally 20 µm and 40 µm alumina powders, where the com-
paratively lower inertial forces of the finer powder manifest
as lower flowability (angle of repose of 50.3◦ versus 42.5◦, re-
spectively) [35]. Divergent behavior is shown, whereby roller
counter rotation (300 RPM) improves deposition of fine alumina
powder (20 µm nominal diameter) by more than a factor of two,
yet impedes dense layer formation with powder having a larger
(40 µm nominal diameter) and more flowable size distribution.
Studies incorporating simulations have provided additional
insights to the influence of spreading parameters in isolation. For
instance, Wang and coworkers, performing simulations based
upon spreading of Ni-based alloy powders, conclude that knowl-
edge of the coefficient of sliding friction and Hamaker constant
(thus encoding the magnitude of van der Waals forces) are criti-
cal to capturing powder spreading kinematics [22]. Increasing
the Hamaker constant by two orders of magnitude is observed
to reduce deposition by approximately 10% in blade-spread lay-
ers, with increased layer surface roughness; however, use of a
counter-rotating roller increases velocity gradients in the powder

pile and thereby enhances particle flow into a dense and uniform
layer. Counterintuitively, a minor benefit of cohesion is noted;
specifically, it helps keep fine particles uniformly distributed in
the powder flow and thereby minimizes size segregation. Follow-
up work by the same group assesses simulated layers created
using six different spreading tool geometries, using 70 and 90 µm
thick layers of 25.9 to 52.7 µm (D10 to D90) nickel alloy powder
as test cases [36]. A blunt (1 mm radius) rounded blade is asso-
ciated with high deposition and, critically, generates exceptional
forces both along the downward and transverse (spreading) di-
rections. Mean forces with a counter-rotating roller are lower,
as well as average deposition, although high force transients are
still observed. Finally, in knife-edge geometries, an inclined
blade with a 45◦ bevel on the spreading edge is associated with
modestly increased deposition as compared to 90◦ blade.
Earlier work by Haeri [37, 38] considers the effect of spread-
ing tool as related to the aspect ratio of non-spherical powders.
Packing fraction is observed to monotonically decrease with
increasing particle aspect ratio for blade-based spreading, as
also seen experimentally by Brika and coworkers [8], in contrast
to roller-spread layers which achieve maximum density for par-
ticles with an aspect ratio of approximately 1.5. This change in
behavior arises from the roller preferentially aligning the major
axis of the particles with the spreading direction and thereby
achieving ordered and dense packing of the particles. Thus,
roller-based spreading may be favorable for high aspect ratio
(e.g., substantially oblate) powders, although a rigid blade with
an optimized super-elliptic profile may produce layers of nearly
equivalent quality. Research by Parteli considers the effect of
roller translation speed, spanning a range of 20 to 180 mm/s,
when spreading PA-12 nylon, and concludes that surface rough-
ness of the powder layer increases quadratically as a function
thereof. Joint experiments and simulations illustrating a similar
trend with a 316 SS powder are reported by Chen, and addition-
ally show packing density to fall in a similar manner [39].
Finally, we note that existing studies, including studies cen-
tered on blade-based spreading techniques, predominantly as-
sess layer non-uniformity at process-relevant resolution (e.g.,
approximately the laser spot size in laser powder bed AM) via
optical measurement of surface topology [9, 10, 21, 39–45].
However, this is a poor proxy for variation in the actual volume
of powder deposited because the sub-surface configuration or
packing density of powder layers is non-constant, in part due to
a spatially evolving size distribution [45, 46], particle-bridging
effects [47], and powder compaction at obstructions presented
by local changes in boundary conditions [15]. Notable excep-
tions, in addition to Oropeza et. al as mentioned above, include
Escano and coworkers [13] who use a side-on synchrotron X-ray
imaging technique to observe powder clustering dynamics in the
spreading of stainless steel powders, and Beitz et al. [48] who
use micro-CT to study packing of oblate powders in blade-spread
layers of PA12 nylon.
Therefore, in the case of highly cohesive powders used in AM,
there remains a critical need to quantify powder spreadability
and layer non-uniformity, and to be able to resolve material
deposition at process-relevant scales. To this end, we apply the
combination of a mechanized powder spreading testbed and X-

2


ray mapping of powder layer effective depth, shown in Fig. 1, to
the task of resolving deposition patterns of metal powders. Pow-
der layers are spread using a 20 mm diameter roller with a range
of motion parameters. The effective depth of the powder layer,
or thickness of material if the powder were to be fully consoli-
dated without spatial redistribution (see graphical definition in
Fig. 1d), is then mapped with the X-ray imaging system shown
in Fig. 1a at 15.5 µm spatial resolution, enabling particle-scale
layer non-uniformites to be resolved. For example, Figs. 3b
and 3c visually show marked decrease in layer uniformity when
the traverse speed of the roller is increased from 5 to 50 mm/s.
Roller spreading parameters are systematically evaluated using
15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V powder as a baseline case, including
statistical and power spectral density analysis of layer unifor-
mity. Additionally, the effects of increased particle cohesion are
experimentally studied with a 20 − 63 µm Al-10Si-Mg powder,
as well as parallel DEM simulations that enable isolated study
of feedstock cohesive forces and particle density.

2. Methods

2.1. Mechanized Powder Spreading

Powder layers are created using the mechanized spreading
testbed developed and qualified by Oropeza et al. in [49], con-
figured for these experiments as shown Figs. 1b and 1c. In com-
bination with the ballscrew-actuated traverse stage, the system
is capable of roller speeds spanning 0 to 300 RPM and traverse
speeds of up to 200 mm/s. The instrument further comprises a
build area designed to enable transmission X-ray measurements,
as is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1c, where the X-ray beam
path is shown in blue. To achieve a nominally 100 µm thick
powder layer, two micrometer heads (one is visible in the cross-
sectional view of Fig. 1c) are used to position the 2 mm thick,
6061 aluminum build platform 100 µm below the roller using
a gap gauge (Starrett No. 467M). The build platform height
is adjusted until a slight drag is felt as the gauge is slid along
the roller, and the final settings are validated by ensuring the
gauge slides freely at 90 µm and cannot be inserted into the gap
at 110 µm. For reasons that become apparent in the following
results, runout is a critical parameter in the implementation of
roller-based powder spreading. Qualification of this parameter
via laser line scanner in [49] gives 15 µm total indicated runout
over the central 10 mm of the roller.
To create a powder layer, a volume of powder is first expressed
from a supply piston (to the left of the representative build area
depicted in Fig. 1b), and then is collected as the roller sweeps
over it. This powder is then deposited both over the build area
and surrounding mechanical structure, including filling the gaps
therebetween. As the X-ray procedure described below requires
thorough cleaning after imaging a first layer prior to collecting
a baseline image for a second trial, all powder outside of the
supply piston is removed. Thus, to ensure that sufficient powder
is spread as to fill the gaps and prevent a short-feed, 4 times the
nominal amount of powder is expressed by the supply piston as
would theoretically be required to cover the 75 × 75 mm build
area of the instrument at the desired layer thickness. Extremely

cohesive powders (e.g. 0 − 25 µm Ti-6Al-4V) cannot be spread
by this method, as the powder is too cohesive to flow between
the roller and build area. However, such powders can be directly
deposited over the build area with a vibrating hopper, shown in
Fig. 1b, that is affixed to the traverse stage ahead of the roller. As
configured here, this apparatus deposits powder at approximately
0.3 g/s as it is moved across the build area.

2.2. X-ray Measurement of Effective Depth

Measurement of powder layer effective depth is performed
via X-ray transmission, using a custom-built apparatus described
by Penny et al. [15]. Figure 1a identifies the critical components
of the apparatus, comprising a Hamamatsu L12161-07 X-ray
source placed at the top of a lead cabinet (Hopewell Designs) that
generates a beam passing downwards, through the build platform
of the mechanized spreading testbed, and finally to a CMOS flat
panel detector equipped with a cesium iodide scintillator (Varex
Imaging 1207 NDT). These instruments are positioned on an
aluminum frame, enabling adjustable geometric magnification;
as disposed here, the detector resolves a 23.8 × 13.3 mm2 area
centered on the build platform with 15.5 µm/px spatial (lateral)
resolution. X-ray imaging is performed with the source set to
a potential of 50 keV and current of 200 µA, enabling use of
the small (5 µm) focus mode of the source (i.e., resolution is
limited by the combination of pixel pitch and geometric mag-
nification, and not by blurring from the finite emission volume
of the source). In turn, an integration time of 18000 ms pro-
vides signals of approximately 80% of the dynamic range of the
detector.
Transmission of the powder layer is assessed as the ratio of an
image with a powder layer present to a previously recorded base-
line image of the build platform without powder. As uncertainty
on transmission is dominated by shot noise, each image com-
prises a sum of individual frames to improve the signal-to-noise
ratio. Specifically, 52 frames are summed for measurements of
Ti-6Al-4V, and 520 frames are summed for Al-10Si-Mg due to
its lower X-ray stopping power, hence lower contrast. These
values achieve 1 µm uncertainty in the effective depth measured
by each detector pixel. To keep the duration of experiments
feasible, in view of the stark difference in experiment duration, 5
model layers are studied in experimental combinations including
Ti-6Al-4V and one layer is imaged when Al-10Si-Mg powder
is used. X-ray measurements are automated to synchronously
control the source and detector, average individual frames, and
periodically measure and correct for detector dark current.
Transmission measurements are interpreted as effective depth
using our forward radiation transport model [15], comprising:
evaluation of the source emission spectrum after Birch and Mar-
shall [50]; calculating the transmission through objects in the
beam path, including the powder layer and build platform, using
Lambert’s law [51] and spectral attenuation coefficients from
NIST [52]; and detector scintillator light yield (from [53]) and
gain deduced from observation of noise statistics. With this
model, transmission is computed as a function of powder layer
depth, including accurate representation of non-linearity induced
by beam hardening. As applied here, this function is densely

3


Figure 1: X-ray interrogation of roller-spread powder layers. (a) X-ray imaging apparatus with the powder spreading testbed installed. (b) Close-up image of the
testbed roller, powder supply, powder hopper, and build area. (c) Schematic view of the X-ray beam path and simulated build plate. (d) Graphical definition of powder
layer effective depth, illustrating three equivalent material configurations.

sampled, then numerically inverted to recover effective depth
from observed transmission.

2.3. Powders
The baseline powder for the experiments conducted herein is
a nominally 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V powder that, in view of our
prior study with a manual powder spreading approach, features
moderate flowability as compared to the range of powders com-
monly used in metal powder bed AM. We contrast this powder
with 20 − 63 µm Al-10Si-Mg; despite having a modestly coarser
size distribution, it is considerably more cohesive and less flow-
able as evidenced by its higher angle of repose (AoR) and Haus-
ner ratio. This arises from its lower mass density, and therefore
higher relative magnitude of cohesive forces as compared to
inertial forces when flowing. Finally, one experimental case is
studied using 0 − 20 µm Ti-6Al-4V, which is an extremely cohe-
sive powder. In fact, this powder is so cohesive as to preclude
angle of repose measurement with a Hall-specified ([23]) funnel,
though, due to different sensitivities to particle properties [26],
has a lower Hausner ratio than the 20 − 63 µm Al-10Si-Mg
powder. Table 1 compares the nominal powder sizes to their
actual measurements via laser diffraction (Horiba LA960), as
well as AoR measured via Hall flowmeter funnel [23]. Figure 2
shows substantially log-normal distributions of the powders via
cumulative size data.
Knowledge of the exact powder composition is critical to
ensuring the precision of the X-ray measurement technique. Ac-

cordingly, the composition reported for the specific powder lots
on the material certification certificates is used in modeling pow-
der layer attenuation in the aforementioned radiation transport
model, as opposed to the nominal proportion of alloy elements.

Figure 2: Cumulative size distributions for the three powders studied herein.

2.4. Power Spectral Density Analysis
In addition to the elementary statistical methods applied to
effective depth maps of powder layers presented below, we make
use of spatial frequency domain techniques to more fully un-
derstand the length scales of variance within powder layers.

4


Table 1: Tabulated powder properties. * the 0 − 25 µm Ti-6Al-4V powder is sufficiently cohesive to preclude standardized measurement of AoR, as it does not flow
through a funnel fabricated to Hall flowmeter specifications.

Material
Nominal Size [µm]
D10 [µm]
D50 [µm]
D90 [µm]
Angle of Repose [◦]
Hausner Ratio
Supplier

Ti-6Al-4V
15-45
23.4
31.5
43.4
35.6
1.12
AP&C (GE)
Ti-6Al-4V
0-20
9.3
14.0
19.1
*
1.27
AP&C (GE)
Al-10Si-Mg
20-63
32.7
44.7
64.9
38.2
1.44
IMR Metal Powders

Described in this context in [15], our analysis centers on first
projecting the X-ray measurements of effective depth into the
spatial frequency domain by performing a 2 dimensional Fourier
transform. The resulting complex amplitude data are squared,
giving the power spectral density (PSD) as a function of spatial
frequency, or, equivalently, variance as a function of inverse
dimension. As normalized here, integrating (summing) the en-
tire PSD gives a value equal to the statistical variance of the
powder layer. More deeply, however, fluctuations of a given
characteristic dimension are mapped to a radius about the origin
of the PSD plot. Direction is also preserved. As an example
germane to the data at hand, variation from a sinusoidal pattern
of effective depth exactly aligned with the spreading direction
maps to a point1 in the PSD. The specific location lies along the
axis passing through origin of the PSD that is aligned with the
direction of spreading, and, again, at a radius corresponding to
its spatial frequency.
Thus, to assist in interpreting these data, the PSD is fully
integrated as a function of direction to evaluate the total variance
associated with a size scale, regardless of orientation. In certain
cases, we alternatively restrict integration of the PSD to a specific
range of directions, namely those within ±15◦ of the spreading
direction and the direction normal thereto. Accordingly, layer
nonuniformity may be ascribed to these directions, to assist
in determining root cause. We do not apply this technique to
the simulated layers; their small spatial extent, while sufficient
to assess average and overall variance, provides an inadequate
number of measurements to support PSD analysis.

2.5. DEM Modeling

Experimental work is complemented by discrete element
method (DEM) powder spreading simulations implemented in
the parallel multi-physics research code BACI [54]. We refer the
reader to [15, 17, 55, 56] for additional descriptions of this DEM
model framework and calibration procedures. The powders are
modeled with spherical discrete elements, wherein the size dis-
tribution is fitted to experimental laser diffraction measurements
of the powders used in corresponding experiments. More specif-
ically, values for the 10th-percentile, median and 90th-percentile
are fitted to a lognormal distribution for this purpose. From a
physical perspective, the DEM model incorporates interactions
between particles as well as between particles and structural

1Two points are associated with this pattern mathematically, as the Fourier
transform, and therefore the PSD, of a real-valued function is symmetric about
the origin in frequency space. This distinction is omitted here for clarity; how-
ever, the integrations described herein necessarily respect the equivalency of
positive and negative spatial frequencies in this case.

elements (i.e., the substrate and spreading tool), that are con-
sidered in the equations of motion of each particle. Structural
elements, however, are fully displacement-controlled, i.e., they
are modeled as fully rigid and deflections are not considered
in this study. Normal forces consist of repulsive contact forces
modeled via a spring-dashpot penalty model as well as cohe-
sive van-der-Waals forces, characterized by their pull-off force.
Tangential (frictional) forces are modeled via a spring-dashpot
approach coupled to the normal force through Coulomb’s law.
Additionally, rolling resistance is considered in the equation of
angular momentum.

For discretization of the roller geometry, a tessellated model
of a 10 mm diameter roller (idealized, without runout) is rep-
resented by 125 linear segments around the theoretical roller
perimeter. This size is a trade-off between the size of 20 mm
diameter in the experimental setup and computational costs
for simulating a realistically sized powder ensemble relative to
the roller. A sensitivity study shows no significant impact of
this smaller diameter on the spreading results, along with the
moderate number of 42, 000 particles in total for the given size
distribution. In order to simulate comparable circumferential
velocities, the rotational velocity of the roller is scaled with the
diameter ratio, i.e., a 20 mm roller at 250 RPM in the experi-
ment is modeled with a 10 mm roller at 500 RPM . As applied
in our previous studies [15, 17, 55, 56], the dimension of the
simulation perpendicular to the spreading direction is 1 mm with
periodic boundary conditions, and the powder bed has a length
of 12 mm. However, only a 7 mm long segment located at the
center of the powder bed is used in the analysis to mitigate po-
tential edge effects at the beginning or the end of the powder bed.
Among other metrics that may be extracted, effective depth is
evaluated in analogy to the experimental X-ray technique with a
spatial resolution of 15.5 µm. Following the procedure described
in [15], the intersection length of particles with vertical rays is
determined on a fine grid and then down-sampled (averaged) to
match the spatial resolution of the experiment.

A pseudo-material modeling approach is proposed to study
the effects of particle surface energy and density. Surface en-
ergy, which determines cohesive forces, is systematically varied.
Thus, for each parameter set consisting of traverse velocity and
rotational velocity, surface energy values ranging from 0.02 to
2.56 mJ/m2 (non-cohesive to very cohesive) are simulated. We
justify this range in view of our prior study, which suggests
that a surface energy in the range of 0.04 − 0.08 mJ/m2 best
captures the behavior of the 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V powder
with good flowability. Conversely, powders with surface en-
ergies > 1 mJ/m2, at the other end of the chosen range, are
extremely cohesive. It is assumed that the same surface energy

5


used to describe particle-particle interactions is also applied to
particle-boundary interactions. Additionally, in order to better
understand the isolated impact of different material densities,
the same pseudo-material approach is applied to the Al-10Si-
Mg powder. Here, all parameters, including those defining the
surface energy sweep, are are chosen identically to Ti-6Al-4V
except for the particle density.

3. Results

3.1. Effect of Roller Motion Parameters on Effective Depth

We present results for the influence of roller counter-rotation
and traverse speed, beginning with the simple layer statistics in
Fig. 3a, in which the variance in effective depth is plotted versus
the average depth for the experimental powder layers. The left
panel presents the 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V results, and one may
immediately conclude that the combination of roller rotation and
high traverse speed (250 RPM and 50 mm/s, respectively) only
serves to create layers of undesirably high variance. Lowering
the traverse speed to 5 mm/s reduces layer variance by more
than a factor of three and increases average effective depth by
nearly 10 µm. Layers fabricated without roller rotation show
slightly increased deposition, achieving an average effective
depth of ≈ 60 µm, and again a slower traverse speed results
in lower layer variance. Compared to the cohesive (Al-10Si-
Mg) powder layers, quantified in the right panel, the opposite
trend is observed with respect to roller rotation. Namely, roller
rotation decreases layer variance from 183 to 154 µm2, while
simultaneously increasing average effective depth from 30.3 to
33.5 µm.
Leveraging Fig. S1, we compare these results to our prior
work with these powders in [15]. Therein, these powders are
manually spread at low (≈ 5 mm/s) into precision-etched silicon
templates to generate layers with a range nominal thicknesses,
using a 1/8 in. thick machinist’s flat as a blade. Results from
this study indicate that the packing fraction exponentially ap-
proaches an asymptotic value, somewhat analogous to a pour
packing fraction, with increasing layer thickness. The packing
fractions achieved with the cylindrical blade geometry in our
current results lie well above our manual spreading trend, sug-
gesting that this blade shape achieves a more dense packing of
powder particles. In Ti-6Al-4V, the 250 RPM, 5 mm/s case very
nearly achieves the asymptotic value of 0.5 from the manual
spreading experiments, indicating that little room remains for
further densification of the powder layer. The packing fraction
in the 0 RPM cases exceeds both this asymptotic value and the
tap packing fraction of 0.56 determined from manufacturer’s
data, suggesting that recoating forces are sufficient to cause an
extreme degree of compaction. The asymptotic packing fraction
of Al-10Si-Mg under manual spreading is 0.59 (c.f. 0.73 tap
packing fraction calculated from manufacturer’s data). Again,
the roller geometry achieves a more dense particle configuration.
The packing fractions still lie well below the asymptote, however,
showing that the particle configuration is not optimally dense
and may be considerably improved via spreading implement
design and motion parameters.

Figure 4a compares the experimental results for roller-based
spreading of 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V with DEM simulations,
performed with a deliberately altered range of surface energies
(see Fig. 4b for an alternate representation of these data). In the
left panel, describing the simulated case of 0 RPM and 50 mm/s,
we observe that average layer depth falls and variance increases
as powder surface energy is increased from 0.02 mJ/m2 (i.e.,
powder flowability decreases) and deposition becomes more
irregular. This parallels a qualitative reading of Fig. 5, in which
the corresponding motion parameters induce clumping and vi-
sually less smooth powder flow in the 0.16 mJ/m2 case than the
0.02 mJ/m2 case. At a value between 0.32 and 0.64 mJ/m2, the
powder becomes so extremely cohesive as to be largely pushed
forward as one large clump by the roller, and therefore little
powder is deposited in the layer. In other words, powder flow
closely resembles the 1.28 mJ/m2 panel of Fig. 5, wherein the
powder adheres so severely to itself, the build plate, and roller
as to cause a bridging effect. In this high surface energy regime,
variance decreases with increasing cohesiveness, as the build
area is largely devoid of powder particles. The indicated ex-
perimental result is at the low-cohesion end of this trend, with
slightly lower variance and higher deposition than expected by
the DEM simulation. Reducing the traverse speed to 5 mm/s typ-
ically results in higher layer depth, as seen in the center panels
of Figs. 4a and 4b, especially in the case of highly cohesive pow-
ders. Layer variance in the high surface energy regime is notably
higher than in the 50 mm/s case and is explained by the fact that
powder is deposited, i.e., variance is no longer artificially low
because a great number of regions are bare.
Results from simulations at the counter-rotating roller speed
of 500 RPM and traverse speed of 5 mm/s are shown in the
right panel of Fig. 4a, and the more complex trend is again best
understood with the corresponding plot in Fig. 4b. At surface
energy below 0.16 mJ/m2, the trend resembles the non-rotating
case at at the same spreading speed and average deposition falls
monotonically with increasing surface energy. However, beyond
this point counter-rotation causes the trend in effective depth to
reverse, coming to a sharp peak at approximately 0.64 mJ/m2

before rapidly falling off. Thus, the additional shear provided
by the roller can assist in depositing powders over a targeted
range of increased surface energies. Finally, we note that the
simulation is in agreement with the experimental results, where
counter-rotation modestly reduces deposition at surface ener-
gies comparable to the physical Ti-6Al-4V powder (0.04 to
0.08 mJ/m2).
Roller counter-rotation improves layer uniformity (i.e., lower
variance) for powders of surface energy below 0.64 mJ/m2. This
may be qualitatively understood via the simulation images in
Fig. 5. Specifically, powder flow in the 500 RPM, 5 mm/s,
0.16 mJ/m2 case more closely resembles the bulk powder flow
of the low cohesion (0.02 mJ/m2) case than the high cohesion
case, whereas the tortured shape of the avalanche slope in the
non-rotating case (0 RPM, 50 mm/s, 0.16 mJ/m2) reveals ir-
regular powder flow. At and above 0.64 mJ/m2 the variance
of effective depth is higher than in the non-rotating case; yet,
without rotation the layers are highly sparse and thus, while
having low variance, are not suitable for AM. This is again made

6


Figure 3: Summary of experimental layer characteristics. (a) Statistical data corresponding to layers of 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V, left, and more cohesive powders, right.
(b-c) Comparison of nominally 100 µm layers of Ti-6Al-4V spread with 250 RPM roller rotation at traverse speeds of 5 and 50 mm/s, respectively, via processed
X-ray (top) and optical (bottom) images. The orange arrows indicate the spreading direction.

plain in Fig. 5, where spreading an extremely cohesive powder
(surface energy of 1.28 mJ/m2) with roller rotation results in a
more dense and uniform layer, despite disturbance from large
clumps that are periodically propelled across the build platform
by the advancing rotating roller, as compared to the non-rotating
case.

Next, we compare the average and variance of effective depth
in simulations predictive of spreading 15 − 45 µm Al-10Si-Mg
powder, as to decouple the effects of surface energy and density,
as presented in Figs. 4c and 4d. The results are similar to the
equivalent Ti-6Al-4V case, namely decreasing deposition with
increasing surface energy, then reversing to a narrow peak, and
falling sharply as the powder becomes too cohesive to effectively
deposit. However, the Al-10Si-Mg curve is shifted slightly to
the left, indicating that flowability of the less-dense powder is
more sensitive to surface energy (e.g., the peak occurs at approx-
imately 0.16 mJ/m2). Again noting the size difference between
the simulated and experimental powders, the experimental result
closely matches the expected deposition and variance for inter-
mediately cohesive (0.04 to 0.16 mJ/m2) powder simulations.
At this range of surface energies the trend again matches the

experimental results, albeit opposite that expected for the Ti-
6Al-4V powder. Namely, the simulation and experiment agree
that adding counter-rotation increases deposition for this more
cohesive powder. Last, we note that the slightly higher variance
observed in the experiment is largely explained by the wash-
board pattern on the powder layers (e.g., as seen in Figs. 3b
and 3d) caused by the slight runout of the roller in the spreading
apparatus.

3.1.1. Cumulative Distribution Functions
We reinforce this understanding by constructing effective
depth cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) from the ef-
fective depth maps of experimentally spread powder layers in
Figs. 6 and 8a. Figure 6 comprises the average depth distribu-
tion of the 5 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V experimental layers spread
in each condition in bold, and the shaded region further de-
notes the ±3σ range observed over the 5 model layers. Again,
the 50 mm/s, 250 RPM trial is the clear standout in terms of
poor layer quality, showing a non-zero probability of completely
bare regions, poor consistency, and a non-gaussian distribution
shape. Both the layer-to-layer consistency and mean distribution

7


Figure 4: Statistics of simulated layers, nominally 100 µm thick, created with a selection of spreading implements. (a) Pseudo-material parameters selected to
replicate the particle size and density of 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V for a range of surface energies. (c) Pseudo-material particle density adjusted to replicate Al-10Si-Mg.
(b,d) Alternate representation of (a,c), respectively, wherein statistics are plotted against surface energy.

width (variance) improve when the traverse speed is reduced
to 5 mm/s. Layers spread without roller rotation are also very
consistent across the trial layers, and are similar in distribution
shape to the 5 mm/s, 250 RPM layers, albeit with higher aver-
age deposition. This distribution shape is also observed in the
experimental Al-10Si-Mg histograms in Fig. 8a. Again, how-

ever, the trend is reversed for the cohesive powder, where roller
rotation is seen to primarily enhance deposition by suppressing
the low-effective-depth tail of the distribution. We support this
observation statistically, noting that the distribution skew falls
from 0.284 to 0.193 with the benefit of roller counter-rotation.

Figures 7 and 8b present the corresponding simulated distribu-

8


Figure 5: Images extracted from simulations demonstrating differences in flow behavior for a selection of spreading parameters and powder surface energies. Inserts
show a 1 × 3.5 mm2 portion of the layer, top-down. Material size distribution and density corresponds to 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V.

tions for spreading of Ti-6Al-4V and Al-10Si-Mg, respectively.
These results clarify how, at low traverse speed, roller counter-
rotation enables improved results in spreading cohesive powders.
Specifically, we observe in Fig. 7 that percent coverage (i.e.,
the fraction of build platform area covered by powder at any
nonzero effective depth) improves for all of the most cohesive
powers (surface energies spanning 0.32 to 2.56 mJ/m2) simu-
lated. In comparison to the experiments, we again note particu-
larly tight agreement in the low-traverse-speed, counter-rotating
case, where the distribution shape and position closely matches
simulation results corresponding to highly flowable powders,
and under-prediction of powder deposition in the non-rotating
simulations. Similar findings are noted for the Al-10Si-Mg simu-
lation CDFs in Fig. 8b, where again extremely cohesive powders
(i.e. with surfaces energies of approximately 0.64 mJ/m2 and
greater for this material density) are shown to spread poorly with
high likelihood of bare regions. Layer density and quality, or low
variance and low probability of bare regions, peaks at surface
energies around 0.32 mJ/m2, and the shape and location of the
experimental curve best matches the 0.04 mJ/m2 simulation.

3.1.2. Power Spectral Density Analysis
Via PSD analysis of the experimental data, we consider layer
variance as a function of inverse dimension in Fig. 9. Beginning
with the 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V data in the left panel of Fig. 9a,
the curve for 250 RPM and 50 mm/s again stands out due to its
comparatively high variance. This, as previously described, is
primarily due to the fluctuations in powder deposition visible
at the millimeter scale or longer in Fig. 3c. Moreover, the
layers are strongly anisotropic at these length scales, with more
variance in the spreading direction due to the severe washboard
pattern, expected at an inverse defect dimension of 0.083 mm−1

(or ≈ 12 mm in conventional dimensions) by the combination

of roller and traverse speeds, and dictated by the runout of the
roller mechanism. Decreasing the traverse speed to 5 mm/s
reduces the low frequency variance substantially and improves
isotropy, aside from the peaks corresponding to the now ≈ 1 mm
long washboard pattern and its harmonics. Based upon a rough
approximation 2, the 15 µm roller runout is expected to manifest
as a 5 mm2 increase in variance that closely matches the height
of the spike in the 5 mm/s case. As the spike is much higher
(≈ 100 mm2) in the 50 mm/s case, we find that the high traverse
speed amplifies the effect of roller runout. Eliminating the roller
rotation improves layer uniformity by eliminating these spikes in
the spreading direction. Further, this condition, with no rotation
and slow traverse speed, features the lowest variance, especially
at intermediate inverse dimensions.
Finally, we note two points concerning these curves in the
high inverse dimension (> 20 mm−1) extreme, which may be
expressed as 50 µm or a few mean particle diameters in con-
ventional units. First, at approximately this point for the layers
spread without counter rotation, there lies a broad peak in vari-
ance in the transverse direction. This arises from the narrow axis
of streak-like defects, or regions of low deposition caused by
interactions of the roller with powder clumps. Naturally, these
streaks also correspond to comparatively elevated variance in
the spreading direction at lower inverse dimensions, thereby
capturing the elongated aspect ratio of these defects. This peak,
or streaking behavior, is most pronounced in the lowest-shear
(0 RPM, 5 mm/s) case. The curves from layers created with
roller rotation, and thus under conditions of elevated shear in the

2Here, we take the indicated runout of the roller as a 15 µm P-V, or 7.5 µm
amplitude sinusoidal error that is transferred to the surface of the powder. Further
assuming a packing fraction of 50%, the sinusoidal disturbance in effective depth
has an amplitude of A = 3.25 µm. The variance associated with such a pattern is
A2/2, or ≈ 5 mm2.

9


Figure 6: Cumulative distribution functions of experimental 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V layers, including the average and ±3σ range.

powder pile, show no such peak, and instead variance smoothly
rolls off at this point. Second, for both low and high traverse
speeds, total layer variance with rotation lies below the corre-
sponding curve without rotation above this inverse dimension
value. Thus, we conclude that increasing applied shear improves
layer uniformity at fine length scales by mitigating spontaneous
clumping of particles in the flow, but the additionally turbu-
lent powder flow reduces uniformity when considering larger,
millimeter-scale areas.
This view is further supported though analysis of Al-10Si-
Mg model layers, presented in Fig. 9b. Clearly, adding roller
rotation induces a spike in variance associated with the roller
runout, but also increases variance at all inverse dimensions
below ≈ 1 mm−1, as seen in the Ti-6Al-4V study. Above this
value, the hump associated with particle agglomeration is even
more obvious, arising from the more cohesive nature of this pow-
der. However, roller rotation clearly causes a decrease in layer
variance at high inverse dimension, with the difference peaking
in the 10 − 20 mm−1 range. In this case, the lower variance at
high inverse dimension clearly outweighs the increase at longer
length scales, resulting in more uniform layers in absolute terms
by mitigating clumping.

3.2. Roller Rotational Speed

Figure 10 presents an experimental parameter sweep to study
the impact of roller rotational speed on the spreadability of the
15−45 µm Ti-6Al-4V powder, where the aforementioned 0 RPM
and 250 RPM data are augmented with measurements of single

layers spread at 50, 100, 150, and 200 RPM. For this moderately
flowable material, we observe that the densest, most uniform
layer, and also with the best layer-to-layer variability, is created
absent counter-rotation. In cases with counter-rotation, layer
variance is approximately constant at ≈ 75 µm2, and average de-
position falls monotonically with increasing roller speed. Finally,
Fig. 10c shows no appreciable difference in the size scales asso-
ciated with layer variance as a function of roller speed, outside
of the conclusions related to roller runout described above. We
conclude that the effect of roller counter-rotation is negative for
flowable powders, as the variance associated with roller runout
outweighs the benefit of fracturing fine powder clumps that are
already unlikely to affect powder flow in low-cohesion materials,
and further reduces layer density. However, we do note that
increasing roller speed provides an effective means of increasing
shear forces on powder particles and clusters thereof, which may
be tailored to the flow characteristics of more cohesive powders.

3.3. Redistribution of Extremely Cohesive Powders

Finally, we consider layers fabricated from 0 − 20 µm Ti-
6Al-4V powder, which is so extremely cohesive as to preclude
flowability measurement via standard AoR methods. This poor
flowability precludes piston-feeding the powder for subsequent
spreading. Practically no deposition results for the range of
spreading parameters (traverse and roller speeds) considered
herein, and the powder is pushed across the build area in a sin-
gular large clump. However, we are able to study layers of this
powder by pre-depositing it via hopper mechanism, and locally

10


Figure 7: Cumulative distribution functions of DEM-simulated Ti-6Al-4V layers, varying presence of roller rotation, traverse speed, and surface energy. Note: To
facilitate comparison to Fig. 6, the average experimental curve is plotted in black.

redistributing the powder using the roller to form a the final layer.
Figure 3a illustrates that this method results in a dense layer of
high effective depth and the lowest variance of the experimental
layers, and Fig. 8a further shows that the layer-to-layer consis-
tency is similar to that of the coarser Ti-6Al-4V distribution.
PSD analysis in Fig. 9b shows that, as compared to piston-fed
15−45 µm Ti-6Al-4V, the hopper deposited 0−20 µm Ti-6Al-4V
creates layers of comparable variance at intermediate inverse
dimension, but notably lower variance at high inverse dimension
(approximately above 3 mm−1). The more uniform layers at
high spatial frequency likely arise from the combination of fine
particle size and increased fracturing of particle clusters from
exceptionally high spreading forces. We conclude, by separating
the functions of bulk powder delivery from localized redistribu-
tion, that roller-spreading provides an effective avenue towards
the use of finer powders in powder bed AM. This is consistent
with established commercial approaches using a hopper mecha-
nism, followed by one or more rollers, to spread thin layers of
fine, highly cohesive powders in binder jetting AM systems.

4. Conclusion

By X-ray transmission mapping of powder layers deposited
using a mechanized testbed, in combination with DEM simula-
tion, we demonstrates how the effects of roller counter rotation
and traverse speed interact with powder cohesion to strongly
influence powder layer quality. Roller counter rotation is shown

to benefit spreading of cohesive powders, as the increased shear
forces are sufficient to break apart powder clusters. This benefit
does not extend to all powders, however, as roller rotation is
shown to increase layer non-uniformity, including resulting in
periodic patterns in effective depth arising from roller runout.
Thus, an implement of static geometry (i.e., a blade) may be
indicated for powders of high innate flowability, which do not
require high applied forces to overcome inter-particle adhesion.
DEM simulations further suggest a threshold surface energy, rel-
ative to powder material density, beyond which powders become
too cohesive to reliably spread. However, this point may be
extended to more cohesive powders by adding counter rotation.
Finally, roller mechanism runout is demonstrated to be a major
determinant of layer uniformity, implying that roller spreading
of fine powders in low layer thicknesses demands very high
rotational precision of the spreading mechanism.

Upon this basis, future work should center on closely match-
ing spreading parameters to the characteristics of specific pow-
ders in two directions. First, our experiments and simulations
both suggest that spreading parameters may be specifically tai-
lored to achieve high density and low variance when spreading
cohesive powders. Thus, more densely sampling the range of
powders, traverse speeds, and roller parameters (e.g., speed, di-
ameter, material, and surface finish), is central to developing
spreading guidelines for future feedstocks used in powder AM.
This is currently being investigated via the DEM simulation
described herein, specifically considering forces arising from

11


Figure 8: Cumulative distribution functions of layers fabricated with cohesive
powders. (a) Experimental data comparing the effect of roller rotation in spread-
ing layers of Al-10Si-Mg, as well as provisional data on redistributing 0− 25 µm
Ti-6-Al-4V after hopper deposition. (b) DEM simulation results corresponding
to 15 − 45 µm Al-10Si-Mg powder spread with a roller speed of 500 RPM
and traverse speed of 5 mm/s for a selection of surface energies. Note: The
corresponding experimental curve is shown in black.

motion of the spreading and their effects on powder flow stability.
Second, we envision additional study of hopper-based powder
delivery strategies for highly cohesive powders, in view of the
high-quality layers provisionally achieved here. Reliable me-
tering of fine powders followed by spreading enables improved
resolution and future use of exotic materials of high surface
energy in AM.

5. Acknowledgements

Financial support at MIT was provided by: Honeywell Fed-
eral Manufacturing & Technologies (FM&T); a gift from Robert
Bosch, LLC; a MathWorks MIT Mechanical Engineering Fel-
lowship (to R.W.P.); a NASA Space Technology Research Fel-
lowship (to D.O.); and a research grant from Lockheed Martin
Corporation. We also thank Rachel Grodsky (Honeywell FM&T)
for performing laser diffraction particle sizing measurements.
P.P., C.M., and W.W. acknowledge funding of this work by

the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) within project 414180263.

References

[1] M. Ziaee, N. Crane, Binder jetting: A review of process, materials, and
methods, Additive Manufacturing 28 (2019). doi:10.1016/j.addma.
2019.05.031.

[2] P. Avrampos, G.-C. Vosniakos, A review of powder deposition in ad-
ditive manufacturing by powder bed fusion, Journal of Manufacturing
Processes 74 (2022) 332–352.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmapro.2021.12.021.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1526612521009002

[3] B. Nagarajan,
Z. Hu,
X. Song,
W. Zhai,
J. Wei,
Develop-
ment of micro selective laser melting:
The state of the art
and future perspectives,
Engineering 5 (4) (2019) 702 – 720.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2019.07.002.
URL
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2095809919307568

[4] H. W. Mindt, M. Megahed, N. P. Lavery, M. A. Holmes, S. G. R. Brown,
Powder bed layer characteristics: The overseen first-order process input,
Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A 47 (8) (2016) 3811–3822.
doi:10.1007/s11661-016-3470-2.

[5] S. Vock, B. Kl¨oden, A. Kirchner, T. Weißg¨arber, B. Kieback, Powders for
powder bed fusion: a review, Progress in Additive Manufacturing (2019).
doi:10.1007/s40964-019-00078-6.

[6] M. Brandt, The role of lasers in additive manufacturing, in: M. Brandt
(Ed.), Laser Additive Manufacturing, Woodhead Publishing Series in Elec-
tronic and Optical Materials, Woodhead Publishing, 2017, pp. 1 – 18. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100433-3.02001-7.

[7] A. T. Sutton, C. S. Kriewall, M. C. Leu, J. W. Newkirk, Powders for
additive manufacturing processes: Characterization techniques and effects
on part properties, Solid Freeform Fabrication 1 (2016) 1004–1030.

[8] S. E. Brika, M. Letenneur, C. A. Dion, V. Brailovski, Influence of parti-
cle morphology and size distribution on the powder flowability and laser
powder bed fusion manufacturability of ti-6al-4v alloy, Additive Manufac-
turing 31 (2020) 100929. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.
2019.100929.

[9] M. Heinl, S. Greiner, K. Wudy, C. Pobel, M. Rasch, F. Huber, T. Papke,
M. Merklein, M. Schmidt, C. K¨orner, D. Drummer, T. Hausotte, Measuring
procedures for surface evaluation of additively manufactured powder bed-
based polymer and metal parts, Measurement Science and Technology
31 (9) (2020) 095202. doi:10.1088/1361-6501/ab89e2.

[10] A. Mussatto, R. Groarke, A. O’Neill, M. A. Obeidi, Y. Delaure,
D. Brabazon, Influences of powder morphology and spreading param-
eters on the powder bed topography uniformity in powder bed fusion
metal additive manufacturing, Additive Manufacturing 38 (2021) 101807.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2020.101807.

[11] Y. Lee, W. Zhang, Mesoscopic simulation of heat transfer and fluid flow in
laser powder bed additive manufacturing, in: Solid Freeform Fabrication
Symposium, 2015, pp. 1154–1165.

[12] C. Qiu, C. Panwisawas, M. Ward, H. C. Basoalto, J. W. Brooks, M. M.
Attallah, On the role of melt flow into the surface structure and porosity
development during selective laser melting, Acta Materialia 96 (2015)
72–79. doi:10.1016/J.ACTAMAT.2015.06.004.

[13] L. Escano, N. Parab, L. Xiong, Q. Guo, C. Zhao, K. Fezzaa, W. Ev-
erhart, T. Sun, L. Chen, Revealing particle-scale powder spreading dy-
namics in powder-bed-based additive manufacturing process by high-
speed x-ray imaging, Scientific Reports 8 (12 2018). doi:10.1038/
s41598-018-33376-0.

[14] A. B. Spierings, N. Herres, G. Levy, Influence of the particle size distribu-
tion on surface quality and mechanical properties in am steel parts, Rapid
Prototyping Journal 17 (3) (2011) 195–202.

[15] R. W. Penny, P. M. Praegla, M. Ochsenius, D. Oropeza, R. Weissbach,
C. Meier, W. A. Wall, A. J. Hart, Spatial mapping of powder layer density
for metal additive manufacturing via transmission x-ray imaging, Additive
Manufacturing 46 (2021) 102197. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
addma.2021.102197.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2214860421003572

12


Figure 9: Power spectral density analysis of powder layer variance based on X-ray transmission data. (a) Comparison of spreading parameters in experimental layers
of 15 − 45 µm Ti-6Al-4V. (b) PSD curves illustrating the effect of increased particle cohesion, by comparison to results for Al-10Si-Mg and leveling of hopper
deposited 0 − 20 µm Ti-6Al-4V.

[16] W. Nan, M. Pasha, T. Bonakdar, A. Lopez, U. Zafar, S. Nadimi, M. Ghadiri,
Jamming during particle spreading in additive manufacturing, Powder
Technology 338 (2018) 253–262. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
powtec.2018.07.030.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0032591018305278

[17] C. Meier, R. Weissbach, J. Weinberg, W. A. Wall, A. J. Hart, Critical influ-
ences of particle size and adhesion on the powder layer uniformity in metal
additive manufacturing, Journal of Materials Processing Technology 266
(2019) 484 – 501. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.
2018.10.037.

[18] P. Kiani, U. Scipioni Bertoli, A. D. Dupuy, K. Ma, J. M. Schoenung, A
statistical analysis of powder flowability in metal additive manufacturing,
Advanced Engineering Materials 22 (10) (2020) 2000022. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1002/adem.202000022.

[19] J. A. Mu˜niz-Lerma, A. Nommeots-Nomm, K. E. Waters, M. Brochu, A
comprehensive approach to powder feedstock characterization for powder
bed fusion additive manufacturing: A case study on alsi7mg, Materials
11 (12) (2018).

[20] E. J. Parteli, T. P¨oschel, Particle-based simulation of powder application
in additive manufacturing, Powder Technology 288 (2016) 96–102. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2015.10.035.

[21] Z. Snow, R. Martukanitz, S. Joshi, On the development of powder
spreadability metrics and feedstock requirements for powder bed fu-
sion additive manufacturing, Additive Manufacturing 28 (2019) 78 – 86.

doi:10.1016/j.addma.2019.04.017.

[22] L. Wang, E. Li, H. Shen, R. Zou, A. Yu, Z. Zhou, Adhesion effects on
spreading of metal powders in selective laser melting, Powder Technology
363 (2020) 602–610.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.
2019.12.048.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0032591019311532

[23] ASTM, Standard test methods for flow rate of metal powders using the hall
flowmeter funnel, Tech. rep., ASTM International West Conshohocken,
PA (2013).

[24] H. H. Hausner, Friction conditions in a mass of metal powder., International
Journal of Powder Metallurgy (1 1967).

[25] R. L. Carr, Evaluating flow properties of solids, Chemical Engineering
(1965).

[26] A. B. Spierings, M. Voegtlin, T. u. Bauer, K. Wegener, Powder flowa-
bility characterisation methodology for powder-bed-based metal additive
manufacturing, Progress in Additive Manufacturing 1 (1) (2016) 9–20.

[27] A. Budding, T. Vaneker, New strategies for powder compaction in powder-
based rapid prototyping techniques, Procedia CIRP 6 (2013) 527 – 532,
proceedings of the Seventeenth CIRP Conference on Electro Physical
and Chemical Machining (ISEM). doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.procir.2013.03.100.

[28] G. Jacob, A. Donmez, J. Slotwinski, S. Moylan, Measurement of pow-
der bed density in powder bed fusion additive manufacturing processes,
Measurement Science and Technology 27 (11) (2016) 115601.
doi:

13


Figure 10: Effect of roller counter-rotation speed on the effective depth of experimental powder layers. (a-b) Comparison of layer statistics, illustrating decreasing
layer density with increasing roller speed. (c) Cumulative distribution function analysis showing similar distribution shape. (d) PSD analysis exhibiting consistent
layer variance outside of the peak associated with roller runout.

10.1088/0957-0233/27/11/115601.

[29] T. M. Wischeropp, C. Emmelmann, M. Brandt, A. Pateras, Measurement
of actual powder layer height and packing density in a single layer in
selective laser melting, Additive Manufacturing 28 (2019) 176 – 183.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2019.04.019.

[30] Y. Shanjani, E. Toyserkani, Material spreading and compaction in powder-
based solid freeform fabrication methods: mathematical modeling, in:
19th Annual International Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium, SFF,
Vol. 2008, 2008, pp. 399–410.

[31] I. Rishmawi, M. Salarian, M. Vlasea, Tailoring green and sintered density
of pure iron parts using binder jetting additive manufacturing, Additive
Manufacturing 24 (2018) 508 – 520. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.addma.2018.10.015.

[32] L. Meyer, A. Wegner, G. Witt, Influence of the ratio between the trans-
lation and contra-rotating coating mechanism on different laser sintering
materials and their packing density, in: Solid Freeform Fabrication 2017:
Proceedings of the 28th Annual International Solid Freeform Fabrication
Symposium An Additive Manufacturing Conference, 2017, pp. 1432–
1447.

[33] B. L. Pruitt, The design of an automated powder deposition system for a
three-dimensional printing machine, Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (1991).

[34] E. M. Jimenez, D. Ding, L. Su, A. R. Joshi, A. Singh, B. Reeja-Jayan,
J. Beuth, Parametric analysis to quantify process input influence on the
printed densities of binder jetted alumina ceramics, Additive Manufactur-
ing 30 (2019) 100864. doi:10.1016/j.addma.2019.100864.

[35] D. Oropeza, R. W. Penny, D. Gilbert, A. J. Hart, Mechanized spreading

of ceramic powder layers for additive manufacturing characterized by
transmission x-ray imaging: Influence of powder feedstock and spread-
ing parameters on powder layer density, Powder Technology 398 (2022)
117053. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2021.117053.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0032591021010718

[36] L. Wang, A. Yu, E. Li, H. Shen, Z. Zhou, Effects of spreader geometry on
powder spreading process in powder bed additive manufacturing, Powder
Technology 384 (2021) 211–222. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
powtec.2021.02.022.

[37] S. Haeri, Y. Wang, O. Ghita, J. Sun, Discrete element simulation and
experimental study of powder spreading process in additive manufacturing,
Powder Technology 306 (2017) 45 – 54. doi:10.1016/j.powtec.2016.
11.002.

[38] S. Haeri, Optimisation of blade type spreaders for powder bed preparation
in additive manufacturing using dem simulations, Powder Technology 321
(2017) 94 – 104. doi:10.1016/j.powtec.2017.08.011.

[39] H. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, Q. Wei, Y. Shi, W. Yan, Packing quality
of powder layer during counter-rolling-type powder spreading process
in additive manufacturing, International Journal of Machine Tools and
Manufacture 153 (2020) 103553. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijmachtools.2020.103553.

[40] T. Craeghs, S. Clijsters, E. Yasa, J.-P. Kruth, Online quality control of
selective laser melting, in: Proceedings of the Solid Freeform Fabrication
Symposium, Austin, TX, 2011, pp. 212–226.

[41] S. Kleszczynski, J. Zur Jacobsm¨uhlen, J. Sehrt, G. Witt, Error detection in
laser beam melting systems by high resolution imaging, in: Proceedings of

14


the Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium, Vol. 2012, 2012, pp. 975–987.

[42] A. Hendriks, R. Ramokolo, C. Ngobeni, M. Moroko, D. Naidoo, Layer-
wise powder deposition defect detection in additive manufacturing, in:
B. Gu, H. Helvajian, H. Chen (Eds.), Laser 3D Manufacturing VI, Vol.
10909, International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE, 2019, pp. 99
– 111. doi:10.1117/12.2509571.

[43] Y. Lee, A. K. Gurnon, D. Bodner, S. Simunovic, Effect of particle spread-
ing dynamics on powder bed quality in metal additive manufacturing,
Integrating Materials and Manufacturing Innovation (2020) 1–13.

[44] B. Zhang, J. Ziegert, F. Farahi, A. Davies, In situ surface topography of
laser powder bed fusion using fringe projection, Additive Manufactur-
ing 12 (2016) 100–107. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.
2016.08.001.

[45] L. Tan Phuc, M. Seita, A high-resolution and large field-of-view scanner
for in-line characterization of powder bed defects during additive man-
ufacturing, Materials & Design 164 (2019) 107562. doi:10.1016/J.
MATDES.2018.107562.

[46] U. Ali, Y. Mahmoodkhani, S. Imani Shahabad, R. Esmaeilizadeh, F. Liravi,
E. Sheydaeian, K. Y. Huang, E. Marzbanrad, M. Vlasea, E. Toyserkani, On
the measurement of relative powder-bed compaction density in powder-
bed additive manufacturing processes, Materials & Design 155 (2018)
495–501.

[47] H. Chen, Q. Wei, S. Wen, Z. Li, Y. Shi, Flow behavior of powder particles
in layering process of selective laser melting: Numerical modeling and
experimental verification based on discrete element method, International
Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture 123 (2017) 146 – 159. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2017.08.004.

[48] S. Beitz, R. Uerlich, T. Bokelmann, A. Diener, T. Vietor, A. Kwade,
Influence of powder deposition on powder bed and specimen properties,
Materials 12 (2) (2019) 297.

[49] D. Oropeza, R. Roberts, A. J. Hart, A modular testbed for mechanized
spreading of powder layers for additive manufacturing, Review of Scien-
tific Instruments 92 (1) (2021) 015114. doi:10.1063/5.0031191.

[50] R. Birch, M. Marshall, Computation of bremsstrahlung x-ray spectra
and comparison with spectra measured with a ge(li) detector, Physics
in Medicine and Biology 24 (3) (1979) 505–517.
doi:10.1088/
0031-9155/24/3/002.

[51] J.-H. Lambert, Photometria, sive de Mensura et gradibus luminis, colorum
et umbrae, sumptibus viduae E. Klett, 1760.

[52] E. Saloman, J. Hubbell, J. Scofield, X-ray attenuation cross sections for
energies 100 eV to 100 keV and elements Z = 1 to Z = 92, Atomic
Data and Nuclear Data Tables 38 (1) (1988) 1–196.
doi:10.1016/
0092-640X(88)90044-7.

[53] I. Holl, E. Lorenz, G. Mageras, A measurement of the light yield of
common inorganic scintillators, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science
35 (1) (1988) 105–109. doi:10.1109/23.12684.

[54] Baci: A comprehensive multi-physics simulation framework, https://
baci.pages.gitlab.lrz.de/website, accessed: 2021-06-06 (2021).

[55] C. Meier, R. Weissbach, J. Weinberg, W. A. Wall, A. J. Hart, Modeling and
characterization of cohesion in fine metal powders with a focus on additive
manufacturing process simulations, Powder Technology 343 (2019) 855 –
866. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2018.11.072.

[56] C. Meier, S. L. Fuchs, N. Much, J. Nitzler, R. W. Penny, P. M. Praegla,
S. D. Pr¨oll, Y. Sun, R. Weissbach, M. Schreter, N. E. Hodge, A. J.
Hart, W. A. Wall, Physics-Based Modeling and Predictive Simulation
of Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing Across Length Scales,
GAMM-Mitteilungen (2021). doi:https://doi.org/10.1002/gamm.
202100014.

S1. Comparison to Manual Spreading Experiments

15


Figure S1: Experimental packing fraction of roller-spread powder layers, compared to manually spread layers in a range of nominal thicknesses from [15].

S2. Computational Modeling Parameters

Table S1: DEM model parameters

Parameter
Value
Unit

Density
Ti-6Al-4V: 4430
kg/m3
Al-10Si-Mg: 2670
kg/m3
Penalty parameter
0.34
N/m
Poisson’s ratio
0.342
-
Coefficient of friction
0.4
-
Coefficient of rolling resistance
0.07
-
Coefficient of restitution
0.4
-
Surface energy
varied: 0.02-2.56
mJ/m2

Log-normal particle size distribution:
Median
13.4968
µm
Sigma
0.2253
-
Minimum cutoff radius
10.1117
µm
Maximum cutoff radius
44
µm

16


