 
 

Nature Communications                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 37 
 

 
 

Ring-originated anisotropy of local structural ordering in 
amorphous and crystalline silicon dioxide 
 
 
Motoki Shiga1,2,3,*, †, Akihiko Hirata4,5,6, Yohei Onodera6,7, Hirokazu Masai8 
 
*Corresponding author 
†motoki.shiga.b4@tohoku.ac.jp 

 

1 Unprecedented-scale Data Analytics Center, Tohoku University, 468-1 Aoba, Aramaki-
Aza, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan 

2 Graduate School of Information Science, Tohoku University, 6-3-09 Aoba, Aramaki-aza 
Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8579, Japan 

3 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, 1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 
103-0027, Japan 

4 Department of Materials Science, Waseda University, 3-4-1 Ohkubo, Shinjuku, Tokyo 
169-8555, Japan. 

5 Kagami Memorial Research Institute for Materials Science and Technology, Waseda 
University, 2-8-26 Nishiwaseda, Shinjuku, Tokyo 169-0051, Japan 

6 Center for Basic Research on Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-1, 
Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan 

7 Institute for Integrated Radiation and Nuclear Science, Kyoto University, 2-1010 
Asashiro-nishi, Kumatori-cho, Sennan-gun, Osaka 590-0494, Japan 

8 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 1-8-31 Midorigaoka, 
Ikeda, Osaka 563-8577, Japan 

 
 

Abstract 

Rings comprising chemically bonded atoms are essential topological motifs for the 

structural ordering of network-forming materials. Quantification of such larger motifs 

beyond short-range pair correlation is essential for understanding the linkages between the 

orderings and macroscopic behaviors. Here, we propose two quantitative analysis methods 

based on rings. The first method quantifies rings by two geometric indicators: roundness 

and roughness. These indicators reveal the linkages between highly symmetric rings and 

crystal symmetry in silica and that the structure of amorphous silica mainly consists of 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 2 of 37 
 

distorted rings. The second method quantifies a spatial correlation function that describes 

three-dimensional atomic densities around rings. A comparative analysis among the 

functions for different degrees of ring symmetries reveals that symmetric rings contribute 

to the local structural order in amorphous silica. Another analysis of amorphous models 

with different orderings reveals anisotropy of the local structural ordering around rings; this 

contributes to building the intermediate-range ordering.  

 

 

Introduction 

Amorphous materials exhibit a disordered structure owing to the lack of translational 

periodicity. Unlike crystals, which exhibit translational periodicity, amorphous materials 

do not have a long-range structural order. The formation of a short-range order, whose 

definition is based on the distances between two nearest neighbor atoms, can be observed 

in the pair distribution function (PDF) obtained via X-ray diffraction (XRD) and neutron 

diffraction (ND) measurements for both crystals and amorphous materials. For example, 

the short-range order of amorphous and crystalline silica (SiO2) under ambient conditions 

is based on a regular SiO4 tetrahedron. The interconnection of tetrahedra with corner-

sharing oxygen atoms forms a network structure. Meanwhile, for some amorphous 

materials, such as SiO2, these diffraction experiments also provide the evidence of a 

structural order on a length scale larger than the atomic bond length, i.e., the intermediate 

range. The formation of intermediate-range order of amorphous SiO2 is often discussed in 

terms of the first sharp diffraction peak (FSDP) observed in the diffraction data1,2,3,4. 

However, the origin of FSDP3,5,6,7,8 in amorphous SiO2 has long been debated. It is 

currently established that the length scale of FSDP is approximately 4 Å $=

!"

#!"#$&, 𝑞 =


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 3 of 37 
 

$

$"

% & sin 𝜃 with the scattering angle 2𝜃 and X-ray or neutron wavelength 𝜆 and that the 

periodicity with the coherence length is approximately 10 Å $=

!"

&#!"#$&, where 𝛥𝑞FSDP is 

the width of FSDP9. Structural order analysis based on PDF has limitations caused by a 

rapid decrease in the atomic pair correlation peak intensity on the intermediate-range 

scale. Moreover, structural units of intermediate-range orders are larger complexes than 

chemical bonds, and they cannot be identified using pairwise correlation analysis. Hence, 

revealing the structural orders hidden in many-body correlations in amorphous materials 

remains challenging.  

Structural models of glass, based on a network structure consisting of corner-

sharing tetrahedral motifs, as found in SiO2, help to investigate the intermediate-range 

structural orders in amorphous materials. The first structural model for glass was the 

crystallite model proposed by Frankenheim10 in 1835, which described glass as an 

aggregate of small crystallites. The crystallite model, also known as the discrete 

crystalline model, presumes that crystalline clusters are embedded in a glass matrix, owing 

to the relatively sharper feature of FSDP in the diffraction data. However, this model has 

been found inappropriate because the estimated lattice constants of the crystallites are 

larger than those of b-cristobalite, thereby leading to a discrepancy between the observed 

and calculated densities. Subsequently, continuous crystal11 and quasi-crystal models7 

have been proposed. Meanwhile, a continuous random network model was first proposed 

by Zachariasen12 in 1932, wherein short-range structural units in glass were connected 

randomly. Zachariasen also addressed the relationship between the structure and glass-

forming ability and proposed four rules for glass formation. Although Zachariasen’s 

models are only based on the short-range-order characteristics, such as chemical bonds 

and the coordination number, such models have been widely used. Several structural 

models such as the layer model13 and periodic boundaries of void (or cage) models8, 14, 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 4 of 37 
 

which assume larger structural units, have been developed further. To validate such model 

assumptions on the structural order for various materials, statistical analysis methods 

using geometric and/or chemical structure information are useful. A major approach for 

characterizing the structural order is ring (closed-path) analysis in a chemically bonded 

network generated from a structural model. In the conventional analysis, rings are 

exhaustively enumerated by the shortest-path algorithms, and ring size distributions are 

analyzed15,16,17,18,19. Recently, Onodera et al.20 reported structural orderings related to ring 

transformation in densified silica glass. However, since there is no analytical method for 

ring geometry, the discussion is limited to the number of atoms constituting the ring. For 

deeply understanding the intermediate-range order in amorphous materials, various 

analysis methods for the geometric information of rings and their linkages to structural 

order are necessary. This progress on understanding intermediate-range structural orders 

entails uncovering the relationship between the orders and material properties using 

quantitative analysis methods21,22, which leads to a new path for designing novel 

functional materials. Furthermore, such methods contribute to building data-driven 

material design using large-scale structural models of disordered materials23,24 generated 

by computational simulations using machine learning potentials24,25,26,27,28, which can 

realize much faster implementation without compromising the theoretical accuracy 

compared to exact computations based on the density functional theory. 

Here, we propose extensions from conventional ring analysis for structural order 

analysis: (1) quantitative characterization of ring shapes and (2) a spatial correlation 

function around rings to visualize local structural orders. The advantage of our approach is 

that it enables a direct combination of the size, shape, and spatial distribution of rings 

based on both atomic configuration and network topology. The direct approach is effective 

for deeply understanding intermediate-range structural orders because crucial topological 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 5 of 37 
 

structures formed by chemical bonds are embedded in the atomic configuration. Our 

methods are applied to analyze amorphous and crystalline silica for a deeper 

understanding of the structural orders around rings. 

 

Results  

To reveal the contribution of the network topological order to the intermediate-range 

structural order, we propose two analysis methods based on rings: (1) ring shape 

characterization (Fig. 1) and (2) spatial correlation analysis around rings (Fig. 2). 

Ring shape characterization 

The proposed procedure characterizes the shape of a ring through computation of the 

eigenvector and eigenvalue of the covariance matrix of atomic coordinates (so-called 

point cloud) in the ring, as shown in Fig. 1. This procedure first selects a ring enumerated 

from a network consisting of atoms and chemical bonds (Fig. 1a) and then obtains a point 

cloud composed of atoms in the ring (Fig. 1b). Subsequently, the eigenvectors and 

eigenvalues of the variance-covariance matrix of the coordinates are computed (Fig. 1c). 

The first eigenvector is computed as the direction with the largest variance of the point 

cloud. Under the restriction that the first and second eigenvectors are orthogonal with 

each other, the second eigenvector is computed by maximizing the variance of the point 

cloud in the vector. Furthermore, the third eigenvector is computed as the vector 

orthogonal to the first and second eigenvectors. As their eigenvalues are proportional to 

the variances of the point cloud along these vectors, they can be used to measure the ring 

shape. This approach uses eigenvectors, which provide second-order information. This is 

equivalent to approximating a ring by an ellipsoid, wherein the first and second 

eigenvectors correspond to the directions of the major and minor axes of the ellipse 

approximating the ring, respectively, whereas the third eigenvector is the normal vector 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 6 of 37 
 

of the plane of the ellipse. We proposed two shape indicators for a ring: roundness and 

roughness, as illustrated in Fig. 1d, both of which are computed from eigenvalues. 

Assuming a square root of the three eigenvalues, 𝑠+, 𝑠!, and 𝑠,, the first indicator 

“roundness” is defined as 

𝑟- = 𝑠!

𝑠+

.
(1)  

It evaluates how close the ring is to a perfect circle. The roundness value for a perfect 

circle is 1. The second indicator “roughness” is defined as 

𝑟. =
𝑠,

√𝑠+𝑠!

.
(2)  

It evaluates the flatness of the ring. These normalizations, i.e., 𝑠+ for roundness and the 

geometric mean of 𝑠+ and 𝑠! for the roughness, are included to remove the effect of the 

ring size. These indicators can be generalized by weighting atoms in computing ring 

centers and variance-covariance matrices. Variances of atomic positions weighted by 

atomic masses, called the radius of gyration, was proposed as a measure to evaluate ring 

compactions29.   

 
Examples in Fig. 1e demonstrate that roundness and roughness appropriately 

evaluate these ring shapes. In general, there is no direct relationship between roundness 

and roughness. For example, roundness and roughness are not correlated for rings with 

sizes 9 and 11, as shown in Fig. 1e. However, they are negatively correlated for rings with 

sizes 6 and 8. Notably, these numerical values of small rings are restricted due to the small 

degrees of freedom in their shapes. 

Spatial correlation function around rings 

The second proposed procedure (Fig. 2) is used to visualize how the symmetry and/or 

anisotropy of a ring significantly contribute to the local structural orderings in the 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 7 of 37 
 

intermediate-range scale. For the computational procedure of the spatial correlation 

function, we first enumerate all the rings (Fig. 2a). For each ring, we compute the ring 

center by averaging atomic coordinates and the eigenvectors of the variance-covariance 

matrix from the atomic coordinates of the ring (Fig. 2b). Then, we obtain the center 𝒄/ =

6𝑐/0, 𝑐/1, 𝑐/29, and eigenvectors 𝒆/+, 𝒆/!, 𝒆/, for the 𝑟-th ring, 𝑟 = 1, . . . , 𝑁3456. Here, 

𝑁3456 is the number of enumerated rings, while 𝑁789: is the number of an element in the 

structural model, i.e., the number of Si or O atoms in silica. Next, for each element, i.e. Si 

or O atom in silica, we compute the spatial three-dimensional (3D) histogram around 

each ring by three steps (Fig. 2c): (1) Atomic coordinates of the element in the structural 

models 𝒙; = (𝑥;, 𝑦;, 𝑧;)<, 𝑛 = 1, . . . , 𝑁789: are translated so that the ring center is the 

origin, which is computed by  

𝒙A/; = 6𝑥; − 𝑐/0, 𝑦; − 𝑐/1, 𝑧; − 𝑐/29

=, 𝑛 = 1, . . . , 𝑁789:
(3) 

where ∙= is a transpose operator of a vector or a matrix. (2) When the coordinate axes of 

the histogram around 𝑟-th ring are defined as 𝒆/+, 𝒆/!, 𝒆/,, the atomic coordinates in the 

new coordination system are computed by  

𝒗/; = (𝑣/;+, 𝑣/;!, 𝑣/;,)= = (𝒙A/;

= 𝒆/+, 𝒙A/;

= 𝒆/!, 𝒙A/;

= 𝒆/,)=, 𝑛 = 1, . . . , 𝑁789:.
(4)  

 (3) The 3D histogram of the element around the 𝑟-th ring in the new coordination 

system, ℎ789:,/(𝑣+, 𝑣!, 𝑣,) is computed using atomic coordinates 𝒗/;, 𝑛 = 1, . . . , 𝑁789:. 

After computing histograms for all rings, the spatial correlation function of each element, 

ℎ789:(𝑣+, 𝑣!, 𝑣,) is computed by averaging histograms (Fig. 2d): 

ℎ789:(𝑣+, 𝑣!, 𝑣,) =
1

𝐶789:

I ℎ789:,/(𝑣+, 𝑣!, 𝑣,)

?%&'(

/@+

.
(5) 

The normalization coefficient is 𝐶789: = 𝑑A, 𝑁3456𝑁789:𝑉B9C

D+ , where 𝑑A is the bin width 

of the histogram, and 𝑉B9C is the volume of the simulation box. Normalization is 

necessary to compare structural models with different atomic densities. In crystals, 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 8 of 37 
 

regions with large spatial correlation are point-like and are extremely small for 

visualization. To improve the visibility of the large correlation regions of crystalline 

materials, we used a Gaussian filter for their computed correlation functions to spatially 

expand them.  

Our proposed correlation function is a generalized formulation of the results from 

a recent study30. In the study, the spatial correlation function was computed based on a 

structural unit consisting of three atoms (i.e., a centered Si atom and two nearest O atoms 

in silica) to determine the coordination system of the correlation function. In contrast, our 

proposed approach determines the coordination system by using a ring as a larger unit 

consisting of over four atoms. This offers a more straightforward approach for visualizing 

and revealing intermediate-range structural orders in a network-forming amorphous 

material, which is demonstrated by identifying similarities in structural orders between 

amorphous and crystalline materials of silica. 

Analysis of amorphous and crystalline silica structural models 

In this study, we focused on amorphous and crystalline materials with corner-sharing 

tetrahedral motifs, which are represented by a structural model of amorphous silica (a-

SiO2), along with those of nine crystalline polymorphs of silica: a-tridymite31, b-

tridymite32, a-cristobalite33, b-cristobalite34, a-quartz35, b-quartz36, coesite I37, coesite II38, 

and stishovite39 (see Supplementary Tables 1–3 for data IDs, space groups, and lattice 

information, and Supplementary Discussion and Supplementary Figure 1 for structural 

statistics). Note that the coordination number of Si is six only in stishovite, while it is four 

in other crystals analyzed in this work. 

 
We generated a large-scale structural model of a-SiO2 by classical molecular 

dynamics (MD) simulation of a melt-quenching procedure, followed by refinement using 

the reverse Monte Carlo (RMC)40 technique to reproduce XRD and ND data. Here, the 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 9 of 37 
 

side length of the simulation box for the model was assumed approximately 100 Å to 

ensure accurate statistics and suppress artifacts caused by the periodic boundary condition 

(see Methods and Supplementary Table 4 for the detailed procedure and structural 

statistics). RMC was implemented with some constraints to preserve the physically 

meaningful structure generated by MD (Methods and Supplementary Discussion). 

Hereafter, the generated structure is referred to as the MD–RMC model. The X-ray and 

neutron total structure factors 𝑆(𝑞) of the model showed good agreement with the 

experimental data (Supplementary Figures 2 and 3). The coordination numbers around 

Si and O atoms, of over 99% in the first coordination distance of the generated model, are 

four and two, respectively. It was established that a well-known network structure, 

consisting of an SiO4 tetrahedron sharing O atoms at the corner for SiO2 (𝑁E4DF = 4, 

𝑁FDE4 = 2), is formed in the MD–RMC model (Supplementary Figures 4 and 5).  

Ring shape characterizations 

Guttman ring15, King ring17, and primitive ring18,19 are well-known ring definitions. We 

selected the primitive ring for our investigations. A primitive ring is defined as a ring that 

cannot be decomposed into two smaller rings18,19. This is equivalent to the condition that 

for any node pairs in the ring, there is no shortcut, which is a shorter path composed of 

edges outside the ring. Therefore, primitive rings are essential components in network-

forming amorphous materials. Although the primitive criterion enumerates larger rings 

compared to Guttman’s rings, it can avoid enumerating redundant larger rings unlike those 

in King’s criteria. Please see Yuan's paper19 for some illustrative examples of primitive 

rings. As a first step, our analysis exhaustively enumerated rings in each network of the 

structural models based on the shortest-path algorithms (See Methods for the detail.). Fig. 

3a shows the distributions of ring sizes, i.e., the numbers of Si atoms in a ring in 

amorphous and crystalline materials. Among the crystalline materials, cristobalite and 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 10 of 37 
 

tridymite phases have only six-fold rings, although the coordination number of each Si 

and O atom is the same in all crystalline materials. Therefore, these structures are 

topologically ordered even while considering the network connectivity patterns over the 

first coordination spheres. In contrast, other crystal phases have rings of different sizes. 

Notably, the ring sizes of coesite I and II are widely distributed, as in the amorphous 

material shown in the bottom panel, thus indicating that the structures of coesite I and II 

are topologically disordered, owing to its high density. The ring size of a-SiO2 is also 

widely distributed, with the peak of the ring size distribution located at approximately 

sizes 6 or 7, similar to the cases of phases of cristobalite and tridymite. 

For these structural models, we applied the proposed ring-shape characterizations, 

as summarized in Fig. 1. Fig. 3b–c show our proposed indicators of ring shape, i.e., 

roundness and roughness, in crystalline and amorphous silica materials. It was found that 

b-cristobalite has only six-fold rings with the largest roundness and smallest roughness 

compared to other crystals. Thus, compared to other crystalline materials, b-cristobalite 

has the highest ring symmetry, which contributes to the cubic nature of the crystal system, 

as discussed later. In contrast, the rings of a-cristobalite are less symmetric than those of 

b-cristobalite but with higher symmetry than those of coesite I and II. Among these 

structures, the order of the ring symmetries is identical to the order of the ring symmetries 

in crystal systems.  

We demonstrated that a set of three eigenvalues of a ring can be used as an 

indicator of the ring’s shape. Notably, the set is also useful for enumerating isomorphic 

rings in crystalline materials because these values are identical when the ring shapes are 

identical. The isomorphic rings identified in crystalline SiO2 and their shape 

characterizations are summarized in Fig. 4 and Supplementary Table 5. Both b- and a-

cristobalite have only one isomorphic ring, whereas b- and a-tridymite, b- and a-quartz, 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 11 of 37 
 

coesite I, coesite II, and stishovite have two, three, four, five, eleven, thirty-four, and four 

isomorphic rings, respectively. This indicates that the number of isomorphic rings in a 

crystalline material is a measure of its symmetry.  

Next, we analyzed linkages between ring symmetries and space groups of crystals. 

As a factor of the ring symmetry, the point group of each isomorphic ring is listed in 

Supplementary Table 5. The result concludes that only b-cristobalite and b-tridymite 

have a direct linkage between the point group of a ring and the space group of a crystal. 

For example, b-cristobalite includes only an isomorphic ring (A6-1) with the highest 

symmetry evaluated by both point group and our shape measures, as shown in 

Supplementary Table 5. We found that the three-fold rotational symmetry of the ring in 

b-cristobalite directly links to the three-fold symmetry of the cubic space group, as 

illustrated in Fig. 5a–b. Because b-cristobalite includes only one isomorphic ring, this 

situation leads to the formation of a cubic crystal system that has the highest symmetry 

among the crystalline materials of SiO2. We also found a direct linkage in b-tridymite, as 

illustrated in Fig. 5c–e. The ring with three-fold symmetry (C6-1), whose shape is 

identical to that of the ring (A6-1) in b-cristobalite, can yield six-fold screw symmetry 

combined with the partial translational operation along the screw axis. Lastly, rings in a-

cristobalite, a-tridymite, b-quartz, a-quartz, coesite I, and coesite II are unrelated to the 

space groups. Although a-cristobalite includes only an isomorphic ring similar to b-

cristobalite, the point group indicates no symmetry, small roundness, and large roughness, 

resulting in a less symmetric space group than that of b-cristobalite, as illustrated in 

Supplementary Figure 6. In this case, the configuration of rings with the lowest 

symmetry constructs four-fold screw symmetry. A similar situation is also found in a-

tridymite, b-quartz, and a-quartz, as illustrated in Supplementary Figures 7–9. The cases 

of coesite I and coesite II become extremely complicated, and it is hard to find any 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 12 of 37 
 

linkages between ring symmetries and space groups in such cases. Overall, this analysis 

concludes that there is a strong linkage between the ring symmetry and the crystal 

symmetry, i.e., highly symmetric rings build a highly symmetric crystal system.  

We further investigated the linkage between ring symmetries and crystal 

polymorphs based on the pressure–temperature phase diagram, as shown in Fig. 4 in a 

previous paper41. Two noteworthy findings regarding the phase diagrams are as follows: 

first, that high-temperature phases are more symmetric than the low-temperature ones. The 

symmetry is evaluated by the number of isomorphic rings and ring symmetries (such as 

roundness, roughness, and point group). For example, b-phases (such as b-cristobalite) are 

more symmetric than a-phases (such as a-cristobalite). In addition, cristobalites are more 

symmetric compared with tridymites. Second, except for stishovite, which has different 

atomic coordination numbers from other crystals, low-pressure phases are more symmetric 

than the high-pressure ones. For example, phases of cristobalite and tridymite are more 

symmetric than those of quartz and coesite. These two findings are consistent with the fact 

that b-cristobalite is the most symmetric among SiO2 crystal polymorphs since the phase 

is located at the lowest pressure and highest temperature in the phase diagram. 

The bottom panels in Fig. 3b–c show the computed results for a-SiO2. Similar to 

the ring size distribution, roundness and roughness are broadly distributed. This indicates 

that various rings are included in a-SiO2. The ring-shape evaluation with two-dimensional 

distributions of both measures is shown in Fig. 6. The probability density in a-SiO2 was 

computed by a kernel density estimation with Gaussian kernel, whose band width was 

determined using the Scott’s rule42. Characterization results for crystalline materials are 

represented by symbols due to the limited number of isomorphic rings. Fig. 6 shows that 

these values of a-cristobalite, b-cristobalite, a-tridymite, and b-tridymite are negatively 

correlated because of the small ring sizes. However, a correlation is not generally 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 13 of 37 
 

observed, instead, it is not adaptable for most cases. The figure shows that the peak 

position of the roundness–roughness distributions in a-SiO2 is close to those of the ring 

B6-1 in a-cristobalite and D6-3 in a-tridymite among the six-fold rings. This shows a 

resemblance between the major rings in a-SiO2 and those in a-cristobalite and α-tridymite. 

The broad distribution of the shape indicators in a-SiO2, covering those of all isomorphic 

rings in crystalline materials, suggests that the distribution in a-SiO2 is a mixture of 

isomorphic rings in crystalline materials and their variants. 

Spatial correlation functions around rings 

The influence of ring symmetries on the local structural ordering was evaluated using our 

proposed spatial correlation function. To visualize the functions of SiO2 materials, 

corresponding cross-sectional mappings at approximately 𝑣+ = 0, 𝑣! = 0, or 𝑣, = 0 were 

computed by integrating the correlation function over the cross-section thickness 𝑡, as 

shown in Fig. 7a–j. The cross-sectional thicknesses 𝑡 was set to 2 Å for all crystalline and 

amorphous models. In these figures, the blue and red regions exhibit high densities of Si 

and O atoms, respectively, as depicted by the color indicator (Fig. 7k). These mappings 

also show that b-, a-cristobalite, b-tridymite, and a-tridymite (Fig. 7a–d) have parallel 

planes along the 𝑣,-axis and concentric circles on the 𝑣+-𝑣! plane, whereas other 

crystalline materials (Fig. 7e–i) appear to be disordered. This is attributed to the fact that 

phases of cristobalite and tridymite have a smaller number of isomorphic rings with 

relatively larger roundness and smaller roughness than other crystalline materials. Among 

all crystalline materials, the function of b-cristobalite (Fig. 7a) is highly oriented and are 

surprisingly identical due to only one isomorphic ring (six-fold ring) with large roundness 

and small roughness. In contrast, the functions for a-cristobalite, b-tridymite, and a-

tridymite (Fig. 7b–d) appear noisy compared to that of b-cristobalite. This is because the 

three crystalline materials have a larger number of isomorphic rings or smaller roundness 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 14 of 37 
 

and larger roughness of rings than those of b-cristobalite. Coesite II (Fig. 7h) is the most 

disordered due to the variety of non-symmetric isomorphic rings. From another 

visualization of 3D surfaces of large spatial correlations shown in Supplementary Figure 

10, we could have similar findings and discussions. 

Fig. 7j shows the spatial correlation function for the a-SiO2 model. These 

diagrams exhibit a ring around the center, which is the average of all primitive rings. The 

𝑣+-𝑣! plane also shows that the averaged ring shape in a-SiO2 is not a perfect circle, but 

an ellipse, which is consistent with the results of the roundness analysis shown in Fig. 3b. 

As shown in Fig. 7j and Supplementary Figure 10j, the center ring is surrounded by 

multiple shells in the amorphous model. The shells of the O and Si atoms are alternately 

located from the center owing to the O–Si–O–Si linkage. In addition, these figures show 

planes parallel to the center ring in the upper and lower parts of the ring along the 𝑣,-axis. 

They also show partially parallel planes along the 𝑣!-axis, which is parallel to the 𝑣+-axis 

(the major axis of the rings), as shown in the middle panel of Fig. 7j. However, they do 

not exhibit such planes along the 𝑣+-axis. Owing to the anisotropic shapes of the rings, it 

can be concluded that a-SiO2 has anisotropic structural order around the rings. In 

particular, the planes consisting of rings are parallel to each other but orthogonal to the 

normal vector of a ring. Since this situation is similar to the arrangement of lattice planes 

in crystals such as b-cristobalite and b-tridymite, as shown in Fig. 5, the pseudo-Bragg 

condition for diffraction could also be considered locally even in amorphous materials. In 

fact, the normal vector of the ring becomes parallel to the scattering vector. Since the 

spacing between the planes (~ 4Å) corresponds to the position of FSDP in reciprocal 

space, the origin of FSDP is likely the formation of intermediate-range structural orders 

containing these parallel rings.  


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 15 of 37 
 

We further investigated the consistency between the spatial correlation functions 

of the amorphous and crystalline models. Supplementary Figure 11 shows the cross-

sectional mappings of the Si correlation functions in the amorphous model together with 

those in crystalline models: b-cristobalite (a), a-cristobalite (b), b-tridymite (c), a-

tridymite (d), b-quartz (e), a-quartz (f), coesite I (g), coesite II (h), and stishovite (i). In 

these diagrams, the function of the amorphous model is shown by the blue image, whereas 

that of the crystal model is shown by a green image. Supplementary Figure 12 shows 

correlation functions of the O atom, wherein spatial correlations of the amorphous model 

and those of crystalline models are colored red and green, respectively. The rightmost 

diagrams (𝑣+-𝑣! plane) show that the averaged ring of the amorphous model is similar to 

that of a-cristobalite (Supplementary Figures 11b and 12b), which is consistent with the 

roundness of rings in Fig. 3b. The averaged ring shape of a-tridymite (Supplementary 

Figures 11d and 12d) is similar to that of a-SiO2, whereas those of b-cristobalite 

(Supplementary Figures 11a and 12a) and b-tridymite (Supplementary Figures 11c 

and 12c) are different, but both are consistent with these roundness values. The upper and 

lower planes made by the large correlation regions for a-SiO2, which are pseudo-Bragg 

planes, are also consistent with those for the phases of cristobalite and tridymite. The 

correlation functions for the phases of quartz and coesite (Supplementary Figures 11e–h 

and 12e–h) also contain regions partly similar to those for a-SiO2, although they appear 

different globally. The anisotropic nature of the a-SiO2 amorphous model is consistent 

with the analysis results for crystalline SiO2, especially with phases of cristobalite and 

tridymite. 

For the amorphous SiO2, we performed an additional analysis to find a linkage 

between the roundness and roughness of rings and the symmetry of the intermediate-range 

atomic configuration around rings. To confirm the linkage, the b-cristobalite, which has 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 16 of 37 
 

the highest crystal symmetry and contains one type of symmetric ring with large 

roundness and small roughness, is used as a standard. In the analysis, we first selected four 

subsets of rings using their roundness and roughness values, as shown in Fig. 8a. The 

subsets (or regions in the figure) are determined by the quantiles of roundness 𝑟- =

0.73, 0.80, 0.87, and those of roughness 𝑟. = 0.24, 0.30, 0.36. For example, the range of 

region I is 0.87 < 𝑟- ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ 𝑟. ≤ 0.24. Rings in region I are more symmetric than 

those in other three regions because of larger roundness and smaller roughness of rings in 

the region. On the contrary, rings in region IV are less symmetric than others. For each 

region, we computed the spatial correlation function using rings included in the region. 

Fig. 8b shows the computed spatial correlation functions, along with the correlation 

function of b-cristobalite to discuss a symmetry of the intermediate-range atomic 

configurations around the rings. Direct comparisons of these functions of amorphous SiO2 

with that of b-cristobalite in same diagrams are shown in Supplementary Figure 13b. 

These figures demonstrate that b-cristobalite and the functions of symmetric rings similar 

to a perfect circle (the spatial correlation function for region I in Fig. 8b) and non-

symmetric rings that are dissimilar to a perfect circle (the function for region IV in Fig. 

8b) in a-SiO2. This demonstrates that atomic configurations are locally symmetric around 

symmetric rings, even in a-SiO2 and that the lesser the symmetric rings, the lesser 

symmetric the local atomic configurations, as shown in spatial correlation functions for 

regions II–IV in Fig. 8b and Supplementary Figure 13b. In a-SiO2, highly symmetric 

rings are scarce, while slightly less symmetric rings are predominant in region II, which 

includes the probability density mode. Therefore, the amorphous material is mainly 

composed of slightly less symmetric local structures in the present case. 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 17 of 37 
 

Comparing amorphous models with various structural orderings 

A series of analyses showed an anisotropic local structural order in the amorphous silica 

(a-SiO2) model, whereas isotropic halo rings were observed in the reciprocal space by 

macroscopic diffraction data. A transition from anisotropic to isotropic order prevails 

while transitioning from microscopic to macroscopic viewpoints. Notably, the anisotropic 

local structure originates from the rings, which is an essential topological motif in 

network-forming materials. Here, we discuss the influence of the anisotropic local 

structural order on the degree of structural order in amorphous structures through the 

comparison of some additional amorphous models. 

To validate our analyses further, we generated three additional amorphous 

structural models from a random configuration. The same number of atoms and the same 

size of the simulation box were used for these additional models. The first model (Rand-

Coord) was generated from a random configuration, followed by a hard-sphere Monte 

Carlo (HSMC) simulation under two restrictions: the closest atom–atom distance and 

coordination number. The closest-distance restriction avoids unreasonable spikes in the 

partial pair distribution functions. The coordination number restriction forces Si atoms to 

coordinate to four O atoms, whereas O atoms coordinate to two Si atoms within a Si–O 

cutoff distance of 1.90 Å. The second structural model (Rand-Tetra) used the Rand-Coord 

model as the initial atomic configuration and was then generated by implementing HSMC 

with restrictions on the coordination numbers and O–Si–O bond angle distribution to 

create a network structure, consisting of regular SiO4 tetrahedra sharing O atoms at the 

corner. The third model (Rand-RMC) used the Rand-Tetra model as the initial atomic 

configuration, subsequently generated by the RMC simulation to reproduce the X-ray and 

neutron 𝑆(𝑞) data. Structural statistics, such as structure factors, coordination numbers, 

bond angles, and ring characters are summarized in Supplementary Discussion and 

Supplementary Figures 14–17. This structured summary demonstrates that the randomly 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 18 of 37 
 

initialized models (i.e., Rand-Coord, Rand-Tetra, and Rand-RMC) are more disordered 

compared to the MD-RMC model. Among the structure factors, only Rand-RMC and 

MD-RMC exhibit FSDP because RMC fits the structure factors. Although all models form 

a network of chemical bonds, the structural orders of these amorphous models are highly 

different. Structures of three models without MD (Rand-Coord, Rand-Tetra and Rand-

RMC) are considerably more disordered than MD-RMC models, as demonstrated in 

Supplementary Figure 17, wherein all variances of ring size, roundness, and roughness 

of these three models are larger than those of the MD-RMC models. These statistics 

indicate that RMC does not construct structural order, instead, it generates disordered 

structures43. 

Fig. 9 shows the spatial correlation functions of Rand-Coord (a), Rand-Tetra (b), 

Rand-RMC (c), and MD-RMC (d), wherein all models exhibit anisotropic structural 

orders around the rings. This indicates that anisotropy is related only to the network 

formation of amorphous materials. A clearer shell structure was observed in the MD-RMC 

model compared to other models. This is due to the ring size distribution in the MD-RMC 

model, concentrated at size 6 (see Supplementary Figure 18), whereas other three 

models showed broad distributions. Hence, the correlation functions computed using only 

six-fold rings, as shown in Supplementary Figure 18, present clearer shell structures in 

all models. The correlation functions for Rand-RMC and MD-RMC in Figs. 9c–d and 

Supplementary Figures 18c–d exhibit parallel planes above and below rings along the 

𝑣,-axes indicated by green arrows. This relates to the intermediate-range structural orders 

exhibited by FSDP in the diffraction experiments. Conclusively, the anisotropy of 

structural orders around rings is essential for building intermediate-range structural orders. 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 19 of 37 
 

Discussion  

This study proposed two analysis methods for the structural orders of rings and those 

around rings based on the ring shapes in network-forming materials. The proposed 

analysis approach for crystalline and amorphous SiO2 first demonstrated that the 

distribution of ring shape characteristics is a strong tool for analyzing the amorphous 

models of SiO2. The roundness–roughness distribution showed that the major rings in 

amorphous SiO2 are similar to those in two crystals, a-cristobalite and a-tridymite, 

whose mass densities are similar to those of amorphous SiO2. In addition, it was found 

that the rings in quartz and coesite phases are included as minor rings in amorphous SiO2. 

This indicates that various rings found in crystalline polymorphs are necessary to form 

bulk amorphous materials44. Furthermore, the spatial correlation analysis showed that the 

anisotropic nature of structural orders was found in both crystalline SiO2, with different 

polymorphisms, and amorphous SiO2. The analysis further showed that pseudo-Bragg 

planes, parallel to the rings in amorphous SiO2, are consistent with those of four crystals: 

a-cristobalite, a-tridymite, b-cristobalite, and b-tridymite. In addition, this study found 

that rings with low roughness tend to construct planes parallel to the central rings, as 

shown by the ring shape characterization of isomorphic rings on crystalline materials. To 

validate the applicability of our approaches, three amorphous SiO2 structural models with 

different ordering degrees were prepared. The corresponding anisotropic local 

environments, as described above, were confirmed in all models. Although the actual 

degree of order for amorphous SiO2 is still arbitrary, observations in this study showed 

that even if amorphous SiO2 satisfies the experimental structure factors, it has anisotropic 

local structures. Furthermore, our analysis assumed that the observed pseudo-Bragg 

planes, presumably yielding the first sharp diffraction peak, are correlated with the 

intermediate-range structural orders in amorphous SiO2. 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 20 of 37 
 

To link structural orders and material properties and realize data-driven material 

design, quantitative evaluations for various structural models are necessary. In crystalline 

materials, the macroscopic properties are linked to the lattice structure and their symmetry 

because they include all structural information. Conversely, amorphous materials do not 

have such linkages because they do not have the lattice and symmetric structures. 

Therefore, we should explore the linkages through another approach using structural 

motifs such as rings. An example of this approach is using different fictive temperatures45, 

which revealed the linkage between the properties and ring size distributions in SiO2 glass. 

Various additional numerical descriptors such as geometric information of rings like 

roundness and roughness, and those of structural ordering from diverse perspectives are 

needed for finding new linkages between macroscopic properties and structural orders. 

For network-forming materials, we developed new descriptors and demonstrated useful 

applications for analyzing the structural orders of SiO2 materials, although the 

applicability of the approach is not limited to SiO2. Furthermore, the analysis of other 

network-forming materials using our proposed methods and a comprehensive comparison 

of the results should provide further information to help understand intermediate-range 

structural orders in network-forming materials.  

 

Methods 

Generation of a structural model of amorphous silica 

Structural models of amorphous silica were generated by a melt-quenching procedure in 

classical MD simulation, followed by RMC techniques to fit the diffraction measurements 

of the synthesized materials40. MD simulations and RMC were implemented using the 

LAMMPS code46 and the RMC++ code47, respectively. In the MD simulation of 

amorphous silica, the simulation box was a cube with a length of 100 Å. The density of 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 21 of 37 
 

this system was 2.2 g cmD,. The system had 66,156 atoms (22,052 Si atoms and 44,104 O 

atoms) within the NVT ensemble. A time step of 1 fs was used in the Verlet algorithm. 

Furthermore, the interactions were described by pair potentials with short-range Born-

Mayer repulsive and long-range Coulomb terms: 

𝜙GH = 𝐵GH exp \− 𝑟

𝜌GH

^ + 𝑒!

4𝜋𝜖I

𝑍G𝑍H

𝑟
,
(6) 

 

where 𝑟 is the interatomic distance between the atoms 𝑖 and 𝑗, 𝐵GH and 𝜌GH represent the 

magnitude (10D+J J) and softness (Å) of the Born-Mayer term, respectively, 𝑍G is the 

effective charge on atom 𝑖 (𝑍E4 = 2.4 and 𝑍F = −1.2), 𝑒 is the elementary charge, and 𝜖I 

is the permittivity of a vacuum. The coefficients used in the simulation were 𝐵GH =

21.39 × 10D+J J and 𝜌GH = 0.174 Å for an atomic pair of Si and O, and 𝐵GH =

0.6246 × 10D+J J and 𝜌GH = 0.362 Å for a pair of O atoms. In the potential function, the 

interactions between the Si atoms were ignored, similar to our previous work20. Although 

numerous studies have investigated the empirical potential functions for SiO2 materials, 

potentials that assume Si–Si interaction are limited. One example is the reference study48, 

wherein the potential function with Si–Si interactions was determined using ab Initio 

quantum-chemical methods. However, the effect of Si–Si interactions is smaller than those 

of other interaction terms. A comparison of these potentials reported in another study49 

showed that the potential function without Si–Si interactions is more accurate than that 

with Si–Si interaction. Because of the discussion in previous works, we considered an 

empirical potential function without Si–Si interaction. 

 
The atomic configuration was initialized at random, and the system was 

equilibrated at 4,000 K for 100,000 steps. Subsequently, it was cooled to 300 K for 

5,000,000 steps and annealed at 300 K for 100,000 steps. The generated model was 

refined via RMC modeling using XRD and ND measurements. RMC was implemented 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 22 of 37 
 

with the constraints of the coordination numbers, bond angles of O–Si–O, and the partial 

pair-distribution functions within the first coordination shell. The constraint of the bond 

angle was performed by preserving the distribution of the structures by the MD 

simulation. These constraints were added to preserve the physically meaningful structure 

generated by MD, which is discussed in detail along with some structural statistics. This 

model was named MD-RMC.  

 

Ring enumeration 

Under the assumption that the first coordination distance is less than 2.0 Å for Si–O, a 

network was generated for each structural model of SiO2. Primitive rings can be 

efficiently enumerated based on the shortest-path algorithms19. The enumeration algorithm 

first computes the distances of the node pairs in the network using the shortest path 

algorithm. Next, node pairs whose distances in the network are less than the threshold, 

which should be set to half of the maximum number of atoms counting both Si and O 

atoms in the primitive rings, are enumerated. Subsequently, all the shortest paths between 

the enumerated node pairs are enumerated. Ring candidates are generated by connecting 

two different shortest paths that do not share internal nodes. Upon inspecting the primitive 

criterion for the generated candidates and removing candidates that do not satisfy the 

criterion, the ring enumeration algorithm is terminated. The ring enumerations in this 

study were implemented using our in-house python package. 

 

 Data availability 

All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or 

Supplementary information. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from 

the authors. 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 23 of 37 
 

 

Code availability 

The codes developed during the current study are available from the corresponding author 

on reasonable request. 

 

 

References 

1. Wright, A. C. Neutron scattering from vitreous silica. V. The structure of vitreous silica: 

What have we learned from 60 years of diffraction studies? J. Non-Cryst. Solids 179, 84–

115 (1994). 

2. Salmon, P.S. & Zeidler, A. Ordering on different length scales in liquid and amorphous 

materials. J. Stat. Mech.: Theory Exp. 2019, 114006 (2019). 

3. Price, D.L., Moss, S.C., Reijers, R., Saboungi, M.L. & Susman, S. Intermediate-range 

order in glasses and liquids. J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 21, L1069 (1988). 

4. Salmon, P.S., Martin, R.A., Mason, P.E. & Cuello, G.J. Topological versus chemical 

ordering in network glasses at intermediate and extended length scales. Nature 435, 75–

78 (2005). 

5. Phillips, J. Topology of covalent non-crystalline solids ii: Medium-range order in 

chalcogenide alloys and a-Si(Ge). J. Non-Cryst. Solids 43, 37–77 (1981). 

6. Elliott, S.R. Medium-range structural order in covalent amorphous solids. Nature 354, 

445–452 (1991). 

7. Gaskell, P.H. & Wallis, D.J. Medium-range order in silica, the canonical network glass. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 66–69 (1996). 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 24 of 37 
 

8. Mei, Q., Benmore, C.J., Sen, S., Sharma, R. & Yarger, J.L. Intermediate range order in 

vitreous silica from a partial structure factor analysis. Phys. Rev. B 78, 144204 (2008). 

9. Onodera, Y. et al. Understanding diffraction patterns of glassy, liquid and amorphous 

materials via persistent homology analyses. J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn. 127, 853–863 (2019). 

10. Frankenheim, M. Die Lehre yon der Cohasion. Kessinger Publishing, (1835). 

11. Valenkov, N. & Poray-Koshitz, E. X-ray investigation of the glassy state. Z. Kristallogr. 

Cryst. Mater. 95, 195–229 (1936). 

12. Zachariasen, W. H. The atomic arrangement in glass, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 54, 3841–3851 

(1932). 

13. Červinka, L. Medium-range order in amorphous materials. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 106, 291–

300 (1988). 

14. Crupi, C., Carini, G., González, M. & D'Angelo, G. Origin of the first sharp diffraction 

peak in glasses. Phys. Rev. B 92, 134206 (2015). 

15. Guttman, L. Ring structure of the crystalline and amorphous forms of silicon dioxide. J. 

Non-Cryst. Solids 116, 145–147 (1990). 

16. Roux, S.L. & Jund, P. Ring statistics analysis of topological networks: new approach and 

application to amorphous GeS2 and SiO2 systems. Comput. Mater. Sci. 49, 70–83 (2010). 

17. King, S.V. Ring configurations in a random network model of vitreous silica. Nature 213, 

1112–1113 (1967). 

18. Goetzke, K. & Klein, H. J. Properties and efficient algorithmic determination of different 

classes of rings in finite and infinite polyhedral networks. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 127, 215–

220 (1991). 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 25 of 37 
 

19. Yuan, X. & Cormack, A.N. Efficient algorithm for primitive ring statistics in topological 

networks. Comput. Mater. Sci. 24, 343–360 (2002). 

20. Onodera, Y. et al. Structure and properties of densified silica glass: characterizing the 

order within disorder. NPG Asia Mater. 12, 85 (2020).  

21. Shi, Y. et al. Revealing the effect of medium-range structure on silicate glass hardness. 

Phys. Rev. Mater. 7, 013602 (2023). 

22. Minamitani, E., Shiga, T., Kashiwagi, M. & Obayashi, I. Topological descriptor of 

thermal conductivity in amorphous Si. J. Chem. Phys. 156, 244502 (2022). 

23. Deringer, V. et al., Origins of structural and electronic transitions in disordered silicon. 

Nature 589, 59–64 (2021). 

24. Erhard, L.C., Rohrer, J., Albe, K. & Deringer, V. L. A machine-learned interatomic 

potential for silica and its relation to empirical models. npj Comput. Mater. 8, 90 (2022). 

25. Behler, J. & Parrinello, M. Generalized neural-network representation of high-

dimensional potential-energy surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 146401 (2007). 

26. Bartók, A.P., Payne, M.C., Kondor, R. & Csányi, G. The accuracy of quantum 

mechanics, without the electrons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 136403 (2010). 

27. Behler, J. Four generations of high-dimensional neural network potentials. Chem. Rev. 

121, 16, 10037–10072 (2021). 

28. Deringer, V.L. et al. Gaussian process regression for materials and molecules. Chem. Rev. 

121, 16, 10073–10141 (2021). 

29. P. S. Salmon, et al., Ring compaction as a mechanism of densification in amorphous 

silica, Phys. Rev. B, 107, 144203 (2023). 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 26 of 37 
 

30. Zhang, Z. & Kob, W. Revealing the three-dimensional structure of liquids using four-

point correlation functions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 14032–14037 (2020).  

31. Kihara, K., Matsumoto, T. & Imamura, M. High-order thermal-motion tensor analyses of 

tridymite. Z. Kristallogr. Cryst. Mater. 177, 39–52 (1986).  

32. Wyckoff, R.W.G., Structure of Crystals 2nd Edition, The Chemical Catalog Company, 

New York, 239–248 (1931). 

33. Pluth, J.J. & Smith, J.V. Crystal structure of low cristobalite at 10, 293, and 473 k: 

Variation of framework geometry with temperature. J. Appl. Phys. 57, 1045–1049 (1985).  

34. Wyckoff, R.W.G. Ix. die kristallstruktur von 2-cristobalit SiO2 (bei hohen temperaturen 

stabile form). Z. Kristallogr. Cryst. Mater. 62, 189–200 (1925).  

35. Kihara, K. An X-ray study of the temperature dependence of the quartz structure. Eur. J. 

Mineral. 2, 63–78 (1990).  

36. Antao, S.M., Quartz: Structural and thermodynamic analyses across the a ↔ b transition 

with origin of negative thermal expansion (NTE) in b quartz and calcite, Acta 

Crystallogr. B Struct. Sci. Cryst. Eng. Mater., 72, 249–62 (2016). 

37. Levien, L. & Prewitt, C.T. High-pressure crystal structure and compressibility of coesite 

p = 1 atm anisotropic refinement. Am. Mineral. 66, 324–333 (1981).  

38. Cernok A., et al. High-pressure crystal chemistry of coesite-I and its transition to coesite-

II. Z. Kristallogr. Cryst. Mater. 229, 761–773 (2014). 

39. Yamanaka T., et al., Bonding character of SiO2 stishovite under high pressures up to 30 

GPa, Phys. Chem. Miner., 29, 633–641 (2002). 

40. McGreevy, R.L. & Pusztai, L. Reverse Monte Carlo simulation: A new technique for the 

determination of disordered structures. Mol. Simul. 1, 359–367 (1988).  


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 27 of 37 
 

41. Swamy, V., et al., A thermodynamic assessment of silica phase diagram J. Geophys. Res. 

Solid Earth, 99, 11787–11794 (1994). 

42. Scott, D.W., Multivariate Density Estimation: Theory, Practice, and Visualization, John 

Wiley & Sons, New York (1992). 

43. McGreevy, R. L., Reverse Monte Carlo modelling, J. Phys. Condens. Matter., 13, R877 

(2001). 

44. Mishima, O. & Stanley, H.E. The relationship between liquid, supercooled and glassy 

water. Nature 396, 329–335 (1998).  

45. Agarwal, A. & Tomozawa, M., Correlation of silica glass properties with the infrared 

spectra, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 209, 166 (1997). 

46. Thompson, A.P. et al. LAMMPS - a flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials 

modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum scales. Comput. Phys. Commun. 271, 

108171 (2022).  

47. Gereben, O., Jóvári, P., Temleitner, L. & Pusztai L., A new version of the RMC++ 

reverse Monte Carlo programme, aimed at investigating the structure of covalent glasses. 

J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater. 9, 3021–3027 (2007).  

48. Tsuneyuki, S., Tsukada, M., Aoki, H. & Matsui Y., First-principles interatomic potential 

of silica applied to molecular dynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 869 (1988). 

49. Kramer, G.J., Farragher, N.P., van Beest, B.W.H. & van Santen, R.A., Interatomic force 

fields for silicas, aluminophosphates, and zeolites: Derivation based on ab initio 

calculations, Phys. Rev. B 43, 5068 (1991). 

 

 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 28 of 37 
 

Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP20H05878 (to M.S.), 

JP20H05884 (to M.S.), JP23K17837 (to A.H.), JP20H05881 (to A.H. and Y.O.), 

JP20H05882 (to H.M.), JP20H04241 (to M.S., A.H., and Y.O.), and JP19K05648 (to 

Y.O.) and JST PRESTO Grant Number JPMJPR16N6 (to M.S.). We would also like to 

thank Dr. Shinji Kohara for the helpful discussions. 

  

Author contributions 

M.S., A.H., and Y.O. designed the study. M.S. developed the analysis methods and 

computational codes. M.S. and Y.O. built the structural models and analyzed the 

configurations. A.H. designed the analysis on the linkage between ring symmetries and 

structural symmetries, and A.H. and M.S. performed them. M.S. prepared a draft of the 

manuscript. M.S., A.H., Y.O., and H.M contributed to the writing and editing of this 

manuscript. 

 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

 

 
 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 29 of 37 
 

 
 

 

Fig. 1. Computational procedure of ring shape characterizations.  

a Rings observed from top and side views. b The point cloud of atoms in the ring. 
c The first, second, and third eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the variance-
covariance matrix of the point cloud. d Ring shape measurements: roundness and 
roughness, both of which are computed from the eigenvalues. Roundness and 
roughness are defined as Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively. e Examples of ring 
characterizations by ring size, roundness, and roughness for various rings along 
with observation from the top (the third eigenvector) and that from the side (the 
second eigenvector). 

 

 
 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 30 of 37 
 

 

 

 

Fig. 2. Computational procedure of spatial correlation function around rings.  

a Illustration of a network topology of amorphous SiO2. Blue and red spheres represent Si 
and O atoms, respectively. Only 500 enumerated rings chosen from 𝑁3456(= 45,423) 
rings at random are visualized by highlighting their edges in green. b Eigenvectors of the 
variance-covariance matrix from atomic coordinates in each ring are computed. c For each 
ring, the new coordination system (𝑣+, 𝑣!, 𝑣,) is defined by eigenvectors. The value of 𝑣K 
indicates the relative position from the ring center along the d-th eigenvector. Atomic 
coordinates in the system are computed by Eqs. (3) and (4). Next, for each ring 𝑟, spatial 
histograms for Si or O atom ℎE4,/(𝑣+, 𝑣!, 𝑣,), ℎF,/(𝑣+, 𝑣!, 𝑣,) are computed using atomic 
coordinates in the new system. d Spatial correlation functions of Si or O atoms around 
rings ℎE4(𝑣+, 𝑣!, 𝑣,), ℎF(𝑣+, 𝑣!, 𝑣,) are computed by averaging the spatial histograms, as 
expressed in Eq. (5). 

 
 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 31 of 37 
 

 

 

 

Fig. 3. Ring characterizations of SiO2 materials.  

     Proportion of the number of rings in crystalline and amorphous materials as a function 
of ring size (a), roundness (b), and roughness (c). Ring size is defined by the number of Si 
atoms in a ring. Roundness and roughness of a ring are defined as Eqs. (1) and (2), 
respectively. 
 

 
 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 32 of 37 
 

 

 
Fig. 4. Isomorphic primitive rings in crystalline SiO2.  

a The top view (the normal vector) of rings. b The side view (the second 
eigenvector). Numerical values of ring shape characteristics and the point group of 
each ring are listed in Supplementary Table 5.   

 
 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 33 of 37 
 

 

 
Fig. 5. Symmetry with rings in b-cristobalite and b-tridymite. a The view from the 

direction [111]. b The side view of that in (a). In these panels, all rings are 
identical to the ring A6-1 in Supplementary Table 5, some of which are colored 
magenta or green to visualize layers. This visualization shows the direct linkage 
between point group of the ring (3h m) to the space group of b-cristobalite (F d 3h 
m). c The view from the direction [001] of b-tridymite. The magenta ring is C6-1, 
whose point group is 3h m. d The view from the direction [010]. The orange ring is 
C6-2. All rings of C6-2 are orthogonal to ring C6-1. Si atoms are colored blue or 
cyan, which indicate site equivalence whether the z coordinate is lower or higher 
from the ring plane. e Screw symmetry 63 in b-tridymite, which is along the 
direction [001] with C6-1 rings. Numbers marked in prime and double prime 
indicate trajectories of the screw operation, which demonstrates the direct linkage 
between the point group of the ring and the space group of b-tridymite. 

 
 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 34 of 37 
 

 

 

 
Fig. 6. Probability distribution of ring characteristic indicators (roundness and 

roughness) of amorphous and crystalline SiO2. The probability density of a-
SiO2 was computed by a kernel density estimation with Gaussian kernel. The band 
width of the kernel was determined using the Scott’s rule42 (=n-1/(d+4)), where n is 
the number of rings, and d is dimension. In the data, n=45,423 and d=2. 

 
 
 

 
 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 35 of 37 
 

 

 

 

Fig. 7. Cross-sectional mappings of spatial correlation functions from 𝒗𝟏, 𝒗𝟐, and 𝒗𝟑-

axis directions for crystalline and amorphous SiO2.  
a–f Cross-sectional mappings of the spatial correlation functions of b-cristobalite 
(a), a-cristobalite (b), b-tridymite (c), a-tridymite (d), b-quartz (e), a-quartz (f), 
coesite I (g), coesite II (h), stishovite (i), and a-SiO2 (MD-RMC) (j). k Color 
indicator: a region with blue/red color indicates a large density of Si/O atoms. The 
cross-sectional thickness 𝑡 was set to 2 Å for all models. 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 36 of 37 
 

 

 

 

Fig. 8. Spatial correlations cross-sectional mappings of Si/O atoms using specific 

shapes of rings in a-SiO2. a Regions of roundness and roughness for computing 
spatial correlation functions around specific rings. The probability distribution of 
ring characteristic indicators of amorphous SiO2 is the same as that in Fig. 6. The 
regions are determined by the quantiles of roundness 𝑟- = 0.73, 0.80, 0.87, and 
those of roughness 𝑟. = 0.24, 0.30, 0.36. For example, the range of region I is in 
0.87 < 𝑟- ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ 𝑟. ≤ 0.24. Rings in region I, whose roundness is larger, 
and roughness is smaller than those in other regions, are more symmetric than 
those in other three regions. On the contrary, rings in region IV are less symmetric 
than others. Region II includes rings of major shapes because the region includes 
the mode, i.e., the point with the largest probability density. b The correlation 
functions computed using only rings whose shapes are in a specific region (I–IV), 
together with that of β-cristobalite, which is same as that in Fig. 7a. The color 
indicator at the bottom shows values of spatial correlations of Si/O atom. The 
direct comparisons of the function of Si/O atom in each region with that of b-
cristobalite are shown in Supplementary Figure 13. 

 


  Communications Materials                                                 Manuscript                                                                      Page 37 of 37 
 

 

 

 
Fig. 9. Cross-sectional mappings of spatial correlations of a-SiO2 models.  

a–d Cross-sectional mappings of spatial correlations of Rand-Coord (a), Rand-
Tetra (b), Rand-RMC (c), and MD-RMC (d) models. e Color indicator: a region 
with blue/red color indicates a large density of Si/O atoms. The cross-sectional 
thickness 𝑡 is 2 Å. Green arrows indicate parallel planes above and below the rings 
along the 𝑣+ and 𝑣! axes.  

 

 


 

 

1 

 

 

 

Supplementary Information for 

 

Ring-originated anisotropy of local structural ordering  

in amorphous and crystalline silicon dioxide  

 

Motoki Shiga1,2,3,*, †, Akihiko Hirata4,5,6, Yohei Onodera6,7, Hirokazu Masai8 
 

*Corresponding author 

†motoki.shiga.b4@tohoku.ac.jp 

 
 

1 Unprecedented-scale Data Analytics Center, Tohoku University, 468-1 Aoba, 
Aramaki-Aza, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan 

2 Graduate School of Information Science, Tohoku University, 6-3-09 Aoba, Aramaki-
aza Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8579, Japan 

3 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, 1-4-1 Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 
103-0027, Japan 

4 Department of Materials Science, Waseda University, 3-4-1 Ohkubo, Shinjuku, 
Tokyo 169-8555, Japan. 

5 Kagami Memorial Research Institute for Materials Science and Technology, Waseda 
University, 2-8-26 Nishiwaseda, Shinjuku, Tokyo 169-0051, Japan 

6 Center for Basic Research on Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-
1, Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan 

7 Institute for Integrated Radiation and Nuclear Science, Kyoto University, 2-1010 
Asashiro-nishi, Kumatori-cho, Sennan-gun, Osaka 590-0494, Japan 

8 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 1-8-31 
Midorigaoka, Ikeda, Osaka 563-8577, Japan 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 

 

2 

 

 
Supplementary Discussion 

Structure statistics of crystalline and amorphous model 

Densities and data IDs of the crystalline SiO2 and amorphous models are summarized in 

Supplementary Tables 1 and 4. In all crystalline models, the coordination number of all Si 

atoms is 4, whereas that of all O atoms is 2. In the amorphous MD-RMC model, the coordination 

number of 99.8% of Si atoms is 4, whereas that of 99.9% of O atoms is 2. Supplementary Fig. 1 

shows the bond angle distributions of (a) Si–O–Si, (b) O–Si–O, and (c) Si–Si–Si. These figures 

suggest that the angles of the O–Si–O bonds in all crystalline and amorphous models are 

concentrated at approximately 109.47° (= −

!

" ,, indicating that the SiO4 tetrahedra in all 

models are nearly equal to those of a regular tetrahedron. The Si–O–Si bond angles in the low-

density structures, such as b-cristobalite, b-tridymite, and a-tridymite, include a 180° angle, 

which is linear. Meanwhile, a-SiO2, in which the mass density is close to that of these three 

crystals, also has many such bonds, as indicated by the left-tailed distribution. This suggests that 

a-SiO2 has a structure similar to those of b-cristobalite, b-tridymite, and a-tridymite. The 

distributions of Si–O–Si shift to smaller values with increasing mass densities in the crystalline 

models. Note that coesite I and II, which have the highest densities among crystalline SiO2 

materials except for stishovite, have Si–O–Si bonds with an angle of 180°, whereas a-

cristobalite, b-quartz, and a-quartz do not contain such a bond. In contrast, the variance in the 

angles of the Si–Si–Si bond increases with the mass densities for crystalline models. This is 

inversely proportional to the structural order because it inversely reflects the symmetry of the 

SiSi4 tetrahedra. 


 

 

3 

 

The X-ray and neutron total structure factors 𝑆(𝑞) of a-SiO2 are shown in Supplementary 

Figures 2 and 3 together with the results of the MD–RMC model. The MD–RMC model agree 

well with the experimental data. The coordination numbers around Si and O atoms, of over 99% 

in the first coordination distance of the generated MD-RMC model, are four and two, 

respectively. It is confirmed that the MD-RMC model forms a network structure, sharing O 

atoms at the corners of the SiO4 tetrahedra. The bond angle distributions of the crystalline and 

amorphous models of MD-RMC are shown in the bottom panels of Supplementary Figure 1. 

The distribution of O–Si–O for a-SiO2 (MD-RMC) has a peak around 109.47° (= −

!

" ,, 

indicating that the SiO4 tetrahedra are nearly regular. Because the distribution of Si–Si–Si has a 

peak at approximately 109.47°, the SiSi4 tetrahedra are also close to being regular. 

Structural statistics of the MD model and MD-RMC model  

Because it is hard to construct a reasonable model with only RMC simulations or only MD 

simulations, RMC was implemented with the constraint of the coordination numbers, bond 

angles of O–Si–O, and the partial pair-distribution functions within the first coordination shell 

generated by the MD simulation. As shown in Supplementary Figures 15 and 16, coordination 

numbers and bond angles generated by Rand-RMC, which does not use a MD simulation, are 

more disordered than those by the MD-RMC model. Meanwhile, only MD simulations make it 

difficult to fully reproduce the experimental S(q). Therefore, our procedure, wherein MD 

simulation is followed by RMC, would be one of the best methods for generating a reasonable 

model. Here, we discuss the differences between the MD-RMC model and MD model. 

Supplementary Figures 2 and 3 show a comparison among the S(q) functions of an 

experimental measurement, the structure model generated by MD-RMC and that by only MD 

simulation (MD model), via X-ray diffraction and neutron diffraction. This figure shows that the 


 

 

4 

 

FSDP by the MD model is considerably sharper than that in the experimental observation. On the 

contrary, the S(q) of the MD-RMC model is consistent with the experimental one, which is 

significantly better than that of the MD model over observed q ranges. To clarify these 

differences, the difference S(q) data is also shown by dashed lines in Supplementary Figures 2 

and 3. It shows that not only in the FDSP region, but also in the smaller q region below FSDP, 

the difference by RMC is substantially smaller than that by MD. Supplementary Figures 4 and 

5 show the distributions of coordination numbers and bond angles of the MD model and MD-

RMC model. As shown in these figures, structures of SiO4 tetrahedra generated by the MD 

simulation are retained, whereas the distribution of Si–O–Si and Si–Si–Si angles in 

Supplementary Figures 5a and 5b, which shows the measurement of inter-tetrahedral 

structures, are changed to fit the experimental structure factor. Then, RMC refines the data to 

match the experimental S(q) while maintaining the basic structure, i.e., with structural 

constraints. As mentioned above, the RMC refinement did not violate structures in the first 

coordinates generated by the MD simulation.  

 

Structure statistics of amorphous models with different structural restrictions 

Supplementary Figure 14 shows structure factors by X-ray diffraction, (Supplementary 

Figure 14a) neutron diffraction (Supplementary Figure 14b), and partial structure factors 

(Supplementary Figures 14c–e) of four amorphous models: Rand-Coord, Rand-Tetra, Rand-

RMC, and MD-RMC. Supplementary Figures 14a–b demonstrate that Rand-RMC and MD-

RMC exhibit FSDP at around 𝑞 = 1.5 Å#!, which is not the case for Rand-Coord and Rand-

Tetra. In Supplementary Figures 14c–e, partial structure factors of only MD-RMD model have 

sharp principal peaks (PPs) at around 𝑞 = 2.8 Å#!.  


 

 

5 

 

In addition, Supplementary Figure 15 shows coordination number distributions of the four 

models. In random initialization models (i.e., Rand-Coord, Rand-Tetra, and Rand-RMC), the 

coordination numbers of only approximately 95% of Si atoms are four, while those of 

approximately 97% of O atoms are two. These percentages are smaller than those in the MD-

RMC model. Furthermore, Supplementary Figures 16 and 17 show bond angle distributions 

and ring characterizations, respectively. These figures show that the random initialization models 

are more broadly distributed than those in the MD-RMC model. In particular, the distributions of 

the ring sizes of the random initialization models are considerably different from those of the 

MD-RMC model. Overall, these structural statistics demonstrate that among all the models, the 

MD-RMC model is the most structurally ordered. 

 
 


 

 

6 

 

Supplementary Table 1. Atomic density of crystalline SiO2. AMCSD: American Mineralogist 
Crystal Structure Database, COD: Crystallography Open Database, ICSD: Inorganic Crystal 
Structure Database, and SM: Springer Materials.  
 

Name 
Mass density 

(g cm-3) 

Number density 

(#atoms Å-3) 
Database and ID 

b-cristobalite
2.21 
0.0665 
AMCSD #0017665

a-cristobalite
2.33 
0.0701 
COD #9009686 

b-tridymite 
2.22 
0.0666 
COD #5910147 

a-tridymite
2.21 
0.0665 
ICSD #40895 

b-quartz
2.54 
0.0763 
SM #sd_1144624 

a-quartz
2.65 
0.0796 
COD #9005017 

coesite I 
2.92 
0.0878 
COD #9000803 

coesite II
3.68
0.1108
SM #sd_1722202

stishovite 
4.28 
0.1287 
SM #sd_1938143 

 
 

Supplementary Table 2. Symmetry information of crystalline SiO2. Point group is 
described by Hermann–Mauguin notation.  
 

Name 
Space group
Point group
Crystal system

b-cristobalite
F d 36 m 
m 36 m 
Cubic 

a-cristobalite
P 41 21 2 
4 2 2 
Tetragonal 

b-tridymite 
P 63/m m c 
6/m m m 
Hexagonal 

a-tridymite
C 2 2 21 
2 2 2 
Orthorhombic

b-quartz
P 62 2 2 
6 2 2 
Hexagonal 

a-quartz
P 32 2 1 
3 2 
Trigonal 

coesite I 
C 2/c 
2/m 
Monoclinic 

coesite II
P 21/c
2/m
Monoclinic

stishovite 
P 42/m n m 
4/m m m 
Tetragonal 

 
 
 
 


 

 

7 

 

 

Supplementary Table 3. Bravais lattices of crystalline SiO2.  
 

Name 
 length (a, b, c) (Å)
 angle (α, β, γ) (deg.)
Cell volume (Å3)

b-cristobalite
7.120, 7.120, 7.120
90.0, 90.0, 90.0 
360.944 

a-cristobalite
4.971, 4.971, 6.928
90.0, 90.0, 90.0 
171.185 

b-tridymite
5.030, 5.030, 8.220 
90.0, 90.0, 120.0 
180.110 

a-tridymite
8.756, 5.024, 8.213  
90.0, 90.0, 90.0 
361.291 

b-quartz
4.996, 4.996, 5.457
90.0, 90.0, 120.0 
117.967 

a-quartz
4.914, 4.914, 5.405
90.0, 90.0, 120.0 
113.011 

coesite I 
7.136, 12.369, 7.174 
90.0, 120.34, 90.0 
546.439 

coesite II
6.545, 23.039, 6.503
90.0, 117.87, 90.0
866.746

stishovite 
4.181, 4.181, 2.666  
90.0, 90.0, 90.0 
46.612 

 
 
 
 
Supplementary Table 4. Statistics on the atoms in a-SiO2 models (MD-RMC, Rand-Coord, 
Rand-Tetra, and Rand-RMC). 
 

Name
Mass density

(g cm-3) 

Number density

(#atoms Å-3) 

Length of 

simulation box (Å)

Number of 
Si atoms 

Number of 
O atoms 

a-SiO2
2.20
0.0662
100.0
22,052
44,104

 
 
 
 


 

 

8 

 

Supplementary Table 5. Shape characters of isomorphic rings in crystalline SiO2. IDs are 
identical to those indicated in Fig. 4. Point group is described by Hermann–Mauguin notation.  
 

Name
ID
Ring size
Roundness
Roughness
Point group

b-cristobalite 
A6-1 
6 
1.00 
0.19 
36 m 

a-cristobalite
B6-1 
6 
0.82 
0.24 
1 

b-tridymite
C6-1 
6 
1.00 
0.19 
36 m 

C6-2 
6 
0.95 
0.29 
m m 2 

a-tridymite
D6-1 
6 
0.99 
0.20 
2 

D6-2
6
0.91
0.29
1

D6-3 
6 
0.85 
0.29 
2 

b-quartz
E6-1 
6 
0.95 
0.54 
2 2 2 

E8-1 
8 
0.77 
0.16 
2 

E8-2
8
0.65
0.43
2

E8-3 
8 
0.55 
0.58 
2 2 2 

a-quartz
F6-1 
6 
0.86 
0.55 
2 

F8-1
8
0.77
0.13
2

F8-2 
8 
0.76 
0.22 
2 

F8-3
8
0.65
0.44
1

F8-4 
8 
0.55 
0.59 
2 

coesite I
G4-1
4
0.92
0.19
2

G4-2 
4 
0.89 
0.16 
16

G6-1 
6 
0.75 
0.24 
16

G8-1 
8 
0.98 
0.15 
16

G9-1
9
0.50
0.28
1

G9-2 
9 
0.45 
0.44 
1 

G10-1 
10 
0.58 
0.10 
16

G11-1
11
0.95
0.42
1

G11-2 
11 
0.84 
0.43 
1 

G12-1 
12 
0.71 
0.22 
16

G12-2
12
0.71
0.29
1

coesite II 
H4-1 
4 
0.84 
0.22 
1 

H4-2 
4 
0.84 
0.25 
16

H4-3 
4 
0.81 
0.18 
1 

H4-4 
4 
0.76 
0.19 
16

H4-5 
4 
0.76 
0.20 
16

H6-1 
6 
0.88 
0.25 
16

H6-2 
6 
0.72 
0.32 
16

H6-3 
6 
0.79 
0.25 
16

H8-1 
8 
0.94 
0.19 
1 

H8-2
8
0.83
0.23
1

H9-1 
9 
0.44 
0.40 
1 

H9-2
9
0.48
0.44
1

H9-3 
9 
0.49 
0.28 
1 

H9-4
9
0.49
0.29
1


 

 

9 

 

H9-5 
9 
0.51 
0.26 
1 

H9-6
9
0.53
0.29
1

H9-7 
9 
0.41 
0.45 
1 

H9-8
9
0.42
0.45
1

H10-1 
10 
0.54 
0.14 
1 

H10-2
10
0.60
0.14
1

H11-1 
11 
0.92 
0.43 
1 

H11-2
11
0.92
0.43
1

H11-3 
11 
0.89 
0.43 
1 

H11-4
11
0.86
0.43
1

H11-5 
11 
0.86 
0.45 
1 

H11-6
11
0.83
0.44
1

H11-7 
11 
0.81 
0.41 
1 

H11-8
11
0.76
0.46
1

H12-1 
12 
0.69 
0.30 
1 

H12-2
12
0.70
0.24
1

H12-3 
12 
0.71 
0.31 
1 

H12-4
12
0.71
0.31
1

H12-5 
12 
0.72 
0.24 
1 

H12-6
12
0.69
0.31
1

stishovite 
I2-1 
2 
0.86 
0.00 
m m m 

I3-1
3
0.93
0.34
m

I4-1 
4 
1.00 
0.52 
46

I4-2 
4 
0.83 
0.28 
16

 

 
 
 


 

 

10 

 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 1. Triplet correlations evaluated by bond angle distribution in 
crystalline and amorphous SiO2. Bond angle distribution of O–Si–O (a), Si–O–Si (b), and Si–
Si–Si (c). 
 
 
 


 

 

11 

 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 2. Total structure factors 𝑺(𝒒) obtained via X-ray diffraction for a-
SiO2 models (MD and MD-RMC) and the experimental data. The difference between the X-
ray diffraction data computed from a structural model and that by the experiment is shown by a 
dashed line. 
 
 
 
 

 

Supplementary Figure 3. Total structure factors 𝑺(𝒒) obtained via Neutron diffraction 
data for a-SiO2 models (MD and MD-RMC) and the experimental data. The difference 
between the neutron diffraction data computed from a structural model and that by the 
experiment is shown by a dashed line. 
 


 

 

12 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 4. Distribution of coordination numbers in a-SiO2 models: MD and 
MD-RMC. Coordination numbers of Si atom (a) and O atom (b). 
 
 
 
 

 

Supplementary Figure 5. Triplet correlations evaluated by bond angle distributions in a-
SiO2 models: MD and MD-RMC. Bond angle distribution of O–Si–O (a), Si–O–Si (b), and Si–
Si–Si (c). 
 


 

 

13 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 6. Symmetry in a-cristobalite. a The view from the direction [001] of 
a-cristobalite. b The side view of that in (a). The operation of the screw symmetry along [001] is 
the combination of a rotation of 1 2
⁄ 𝜋 radian and a translation of 1 4
⁄  the lattice length, as 

shown in these panels. The cyan ring (B6-1) in the left most diagram moves to the green ring in 
the second diagram by the operation. After four operations, the ring moves to the next cell, 
which is the same as the parallel translation along the unit cell. In a-cristobalite, the ring shape is 
not directly linked to the symmetry operation because of the non-symmetric shape of the ring.  
 
 


 

 

14 

 

 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 7. Symmetry in a-tridymite. a The view from the direction [001] of a-
tridymite. The magenta ring indicates the ring D6-1. The point group of the ring is 2, whose 
rotation axis is identical to the second eigenvector of the ring. b The view from the direction 
[010]. Si atoms are colored blue or cyan, which indicate site equivalence whether the z 
coordinate is lower or higher from the ring plane. c The screw symmetry 21 along the direction 
[001]. Numbers marked in prime and double primes in the ring D6-1 indicate trajectories of the 
screw operation. The symmetry is not related to the rotation symmetry of the D6-1 ring because 
the rotation axis is not identical to the normal vector of the ring. 

 

 
 
 


 

 

15 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 8. Symmetry with rings in b-quartz. a The view from the direction 
[001] of a-quartz. b The view from the direction [010]. These panels show the trajectory of the 
ring E8-3 by the operation of screw symmetry along [001], which is the combination of a 
rotation of 1 3𝜋
⁄
 radian and a translation of 1 3
⁄  of the lattice length. The magenta ring in the left 

most diagram moves to the green ring in the second diagram by the operation. After three 
operations, the ring moves to the neighbor cell, which is the same as the parallel translation along 
the unit cell.  c The views of the six-fold ring (E6-1) from three directions. The ring is not linked 
to the screw symmetry. d The silhouette of the central hole seems to be a ring. However, as 
shown in the right diagram, the path is not a ring since it is not closed. Therefore, b-quartz does 
not include any rings linked to the crystal symmetry.  
 


 

 

16 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 9. Symmetry with rings in a-quartz. a The view from the direction 
[001] of b-quartz. b The view from the direction [010]. These panels show the trajectory of the 
ring F8-4 by the operation of screw symmetry along [001], which is the combination of a 
rotation of 2 3𝜋
⁄
 radian and a translation of 1 3
⁄  of the lattice length. The magenta ring in the left 

most diagram moves to the green ring in the second diagram by the operation. After three 
operations, the ring moves to the neighbor cell, which is same as the parallel translation along the 
unit cell.  c The views of the six-fold ring (F6-1) from three directions. The ring is not linked to 
the screw symmetry. d The path related to the silhouette of the central hole, which is less 
symmetric than that in b-quartz. As shown in the right diagram, the path is not a ring since it not 
closed. From these observations, a-quartz does not include any rings linked to the crystal 
symmetry. 
 
 


 

 

17 

 

 

 

 
Supplementary Figure 10.  Three-dimensional visualization of surfaces with large 
correlations along 𝑣!-, 𝑣$-, and 𝑣"-axes for crystalline and amorphous SiO2. Three-
dimensional visualization of spatial correlation functions of b-cristobalite (a), a-cristobalite (b), 
b-tridymite (c), a-tridymite (d), b-quartz (e), a-quartz (f), coesite I (g), coesite II (h), stishovite 
(i), and a-SiO2 (j). In these diagrams, regions whose correlation values are larger than the 
threshold are visualized in blue for Si atom and red for O atoms. The threshold of correlations for 
surface visualization for coesite II, other crystals, and amorphous materials are 7, 15, and 1.5, 
respectively. These threshold values were determined to visualize such regions clearly. Different 
values were used for amorphous and crystalline materials because of the difference of structural 
orders. 


 

 

18 

 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 11. Comparison of the spatial correlations cross-sectional mappings 
of Si atoms from the 𝑣!-, 𝑣$-, and 𝑣"-axis directions in a-SiO2 with those in a crystalline 
SiO2. a–e The blue region indicates a spatial correlation of Si atom in a-SiO2, whereas the green 
region indicates spatial positions where the correlation of Si atom is larger than the threshold in a 
crystalline material: b-cristobalite (a), a-cristobalite (b), b-tridymite (c), a-tridymite (d), b-
quartz (e), a-quartz (f), coesite I (g), coesite II (h), and stishovite (i). j Color bar indicating the 
spatial correlation of a-SiO2. These diagrams visualize only large correlation regions in functions 
of crystalline materials, which are colored green, larger than the threshold, which is set to 2.0. 
The setting of the threshold is not sensitive for visualization because regions with large 
correlation values and those with small values are clearly separated in the functions of crystalline 
materials. 
 


 

 

19 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 12. Comparison of the spatial correlations cross-sectional mappings 
of O atoms from the 𝑣!-, 𝑣$-, and 𝑣"-axis directions in a-SiO2 with those in a crystalline 
SiO2. a–e The red region indicates a spatial correlation of O atom in a-SiO2, whereas the green 
region indicates spatial positions where the correlation of O atom is larger than the threshold in a 
crystalline material: b-cristobalite (a), a-cristobalite (b), b-tridymite (c), a-tridymite (d), b-
quartz (e), a-quartz (f), coesite I (g), coesite II (h), and stishovite (i). j Color bar indicating the 
spatial correlation of a-SiO2. These diagrams visualize only large correlation regions in functions 
of crystalline materials, which are colored green, larger than the threshold, which is set to 2.0. 
The setting of the threshold is not sensitive for visualization because regions with large 
correlation values and those with small values are clearly separated in the functions of crystalline 
materials. 
 
 


 

 

20 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 13. Comparison of spatial correlations cross-sectional mappings of 
Si/O atoms using specific shapes of rings in a-SiO2 with those in b-cristobalite. a Regions of 
roundness and roughness for computing spatial correlation functions around the specific rings. 
The probability distribution of ring characteristic indicators of amorphous SiO2, the same as that 
in Fig. 5. The regions are determined by the quantiles of roundness 𝑟% = 0.73, 0.80, 0.87, and 
those of roughness 𝑟& = 0.24, 0.30, 0.36. For example, the range of the region I is 0.87 < 𝑟% ≤ 1 
and 0 ≤ 𝑟& ≤ 0.24. Rings in region I, whose roundness is larger, and roughness is smaller than 
those in other regions, are more symmetric than those in other three regions. On the contrary, the 
rings in region IV are less symmetric than others. Region II includes rings of major shapes 
because the region includes the mode, i.e., the point with the largest probability density. b The 
correlation functions computed using only rings whose shapes are in a specific region (I–IV). 
The blue density indicates a spatial correlation of Si atoms in a-SiO2 while the red density 
indicates that of O atoms. The green region indicates the spatial positions in b-cristobalite where 
the correlation of the Si atom is larger than the threshold, which is set to 2.0. Color bars at the 
bottom indicate the spatial correlation of Si/O atom in a-SiO2. 
 


 

 

21 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 14. Quantum beam diffraction data for a-SiO2 models. a–b Total 
structure factors 𝑆(𝑞) obtained via X-ray (a) and neutron diffractions (b). c–e Partial structure 
factors 𝑆'((𝑞) of Si–Si atom pair (c), Si–O atom pair (d), and O–O atom pair (e). 
 


 

 

22 

 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 15. Distribution of coordination numbers in the a-SiO2 models. 
Coordination numbers of Si atom (a) and O atom (b). 
 
 
 

 

Supplementary Figure 16. Triplet correlations evaluated by bond angle distribution in the 
a-SiO2 models. Bond angle distributions of O–Si–O (a), Si–O–Si (b), and Si–Si–Si (c). 
 
 
 


 

 

23 

 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 17. Ring characterizations of the a-SiO2 models. Proportion of the 
number of rings as a function of ring size (a), roundness (b), and roughness (c). 
 
 


 

 

24 

 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 18. Cross-sectional mappings of spatial correlations computed using 
only six-fold rings of a-SiO2 models. a–d Cross-sectional mappings of spatial correlations of 
Rand-Coord (a), Rand-Tetra (b), Rand-RMC (c), and MD-RMC (d). e Color indicator, a region 
with blue/red color, indicates a large density of Si/O atoms. The cross-sectional thickness 𝑡 is 2 
Å. Green arrows indicate parallel planes above and below the rings along the 𝑣!- and 𝑣$-axes.  
 


