GENESIS: Co-location of Geodetic Techniques in Space

Pacˆome Delva1, Zuheir Altamimi2, Alejandro Blazquez3,4, Mathis Blossfeld5, Johannes B¨ohm6, Pascal
Bonnefond1, Jean-Paul Boy7, Sean Bruinsma4,8, Grzegorz Bury9, Miltiadis Chatzinikos1, Alexandre
Couhert4,8, Cl´ement Courde10, Rolf Dach11, V´eronique Dehant12, Simone Dell’Agnello13, Gunnar
Elgered14, Werner Enderle15, Pierre Exertier8, Susanne Glaser16, R¨udiger Haas14, Wen Huang16, Urs
Hugentobler17, Adrian J¨aggi11, Ozgur Karatekin12, Frank G. Lemoine18, Christophe Le
Poncin-Lafitte1, Susanne Lunz16, Benjamin M¨annel16, Flavien Mercier4,8, Laurent M´etivier2, Benoˆıt
Meyssignac3,4, J¨urgen M¨uller19, Axel Nothnagel6, Felix Perosanz4,8, Roelof Rietbroek20, Markus
Rothacher21, Hakan Sert12, Krzysztof Sosnica9, Paride Testani22, Javier Ventura-Traveset23, Gilles
Wautelet24, and Radoslaw Zajdel9

1SYRTE, Observatoire de Paris-PSL, Sorbonne Universit´e, CNRS UMR8630, LNE, 61 avenue de
l’Observatoire, 75014 Paris, France
2Universit´e de Paris Cit´e, Institut de physique du globe de Paris, CNRS, IGN, F-75005 Paris, France
3LEGOS, Universit´e de Toulouse (CNES, CNRS, IRD, UPS), 14 avenue Edouard Belin, 31401
Toulouse, France
4Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales, 18 avenue Edouard Belin, 31401 Toulouse, France
5DGFI, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Arcisstraße 21 80333 M¨unchen, Germany
6Technische Universit¨at Wien, Wiedner Hauptstraße 8-10, 1040 Vienna, Austria
7Institut Terre & Environnement de Strasbourg, Universit´e de Strasbourg, CNRS UMR7063, 5 rue
Ren´e Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France
8GET, Universit´e de Toulouse (CNES, CNRS, IRD, UPS), 14 avenue Edouard Belin, 31401 Toulouse,
France
9Institute of Geodesy and Geoinformatics, Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life Sciences,
Norwida 25, 50-375 Wroclaw, Poland
10Universit´e Cˆote d’Azur, CNRS, Observatoire de la Cˆote d’Azur, IRD, G´eoazur, 2130 Route de
l’Observatoire 06460 Caussols, France
11Astronomical Institute of the University of Bern, Sidlerstrasse 5, 3012 Bern, Switzerland
12Royal Observatory of Belgium, Ringlaan 3, BE-1180, Brussels, Belgium
13National Institute for Nuclear Physics – Frascati National Labs (INFM-LNF), via E. Fermi 54,
Frascati (Rome), 00044, Italy
14Chalmers University of Technology, Onsala Space Observatory, SE 439 92 Onsala, Sweden
15European Space Operations Center, ESA/ESOC, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany
16German Research Centre for Geosciences (GFZ), Telegrafenberg, 14473 Potsdam, Germany
17Institut f¨ur Astronomische und Physikalische Geod¨asie, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, 80290
M¨unchen, Germany
18Geodesy & Geophysics Laboratory, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland
20771, U.S.A.
19Leibniz University Hannover, Institute of Geodesy, Schneiderberg 50, 30167 Hannover, Germany
20ITC Faculty of Geo–information Science and Earth Observation, Department of Water Resources
(WRS), Hengelosestraat 99 7514 AE, Enschede, Netherlands
21Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, ETH Zurich, Stefano–Franscini–Platz 5, 8093 Zurich,
Switzerland
22HE Space Operations B.V. for ESA - European Space Agency, 2200 AG Noordwijk, Netherlands
23ESA Toulouse, Centre Spatial de Toulouse, 18 Avenue Edouard Belin, 31401 Toulouse Cedex 9,
France
24Laboratory of Planetary and Atmospheric Physcis (LPAP), University of Li`ege, All´ee du Six Aoˆut,
19C 4000 Li`ege, Belgium

October 3, 2022

1

arXiv:2209.15298v1  [physics.ins-det]  30 Sep 2022


Abstract

Improving and homogenizing time and space reference sys-
tems on Earth and, more directly, realizing the Terrestrial
Reference Frame (TRF) with an accuracy of 1 mm and a
long-term stability of 0.1 mm/year are relevant for many sci-
entific and societal endeavors. The knowledge of the TRF
is fundamental for Earth and navigation sciences. For in-
stance, quantifying sea level change strongly depends on an
accurate determination of the geocenter motion but also of
the positions of continental and island reference stations,
such as those located at tide gauges, as well as the ground
stations of tracking networks. Also, numerous applications
in geophysics require absolute millimeter precision from the
reference frame, as for example monitoring tectonic motion
or crustal deformation for predicting natural hazards. The
TRF accuracy to be achieved represents the consensus of
various authorities, including the International Association
of Geodesy (IAG), which has enunciated geodesy require-
ments for Earth sciences.
Moreover, the United Nations
Resolution 69/266 states that the full societal benefits in de-
veloping satellite missions for positioning and remote sens-
ing of the Earth are realized only if they are referenced to
a common global geodetic reference frame at the national,
regional and global levels.
Today we are still far from these ambitious accuracy and
stability goals for the realization of the TRF. However, a
combination and co-location of all four space geodetic tech-
niques on one satellite platform can significantly contribute
to achieving these goals. This is the purpose of the GEN-
ESIS mission, proposed as a component of the FutureNAV
program of the European Space Agency.
The GENESIS
platform will be a dynamic space geodetic observatory car-
rying all the geodetic instruments referenced to one another
through carefully calibrated space ties. The co-location of
the techniques in space will solve the inconsistencies and bi-
ases between the different geodetic techniques in order to
reach the TRF accuracy and stability goals endorsed by the
various international authorities and the scientific commu-
nity.
The purpose of this white paper is to review the state-
of-the-art and explain the benefits of the GENESIS mission
in Earth sciences, navigation sciences and metrology. This
paper has been written and supported by a large community
of scientists from many countries and working in several dif-
ferent fields of science, ranging from geophysics and geodesy
to time and frequency metrology, navigation and position-
ing.
As it is explained throughout this paper, there is a
very high scientific consensus that the GENESIS mission
would deliver exemplary science and societal benefits across
a multidisciplinary range of Navigation and Earth sciences
applications, constituting a global infrastructure that is in-
ternationally agreed to be strongly desirable.

1
Introduction

The GENESIS proposal is dedicated to improving and ho-
mogenizing time and space references on Earth and, more

directly, to realizing the Terrestrial Reference System (TRS)
with an accuracy of 1 mm and a long-term stability of
0.1 mm/year. These numbers are relevant for many scientific
and societal endeavors for which a precise realization of the
TRS and the knowledge of the Earth’s kinematic parameters
are crucial.
Knowledge of Celestial Reference Frame (CRF) and of
Terrestrial Reference Frame (TRF) is fundamental for orbit
computation, in particular for metrological applications such
as altimetry (e.g., ocean radar altimetry, laser and radar al-
timetry over land surfaces and ice sheets, and interferometric
Synthetic-Aperture Radar mapping of land surface change),
as well as for more precise position determinations of Earth
orbiting satellites. For instance, quantifying sea level change
or the effects of ice melting using altimetry strongly depends
on an accurate determination of the position of continental
and island reference stations, such as those located at tide
gauges, as well as the ground stations of tracking networks.
Also, numerous applications in geophysics require absolute
millimeter precision from the reference frame, as for example
in the case of monitoring tectonic motion or crustal defor-
mation for predicting natural hazards and inferring climate
driven mass changes (non-tidal ocean, ice, atmospheric, and
hydrological) from observations of vertical and horizontal
displacements of the Earth’s surface.
A stable and accurate reference frame is needed for ro-
bust policy making in light of climate change. The quality
of many operational monitoring systems are tied to the accu-
racy of the underlying reference systems. Reliable evidence
based policies, which make use of such operational data, and
are expected to become more important in adaptation mea-
sures, are therefore directly dependent on the quality of in-
ternational reference frames. The TRF accuracy and stabil-
ity to be achieved, respectively 1 mm and 0.1 mm/year, rep-
resent the consensus of various authorities, including the In-
ternational Association of Geodesy (IAG), which has enun-
ciated geodesy requirements for Earth science through the
Global Geodetic Observing System (GGOS) initiative (see
Plag and Pearlman, 2009). Hereafter we will refer to these
numbers as the GGOS accuracy and stability goals.
The General Assembly of the United Nations (UN)
adopted a resolution on 26 February 2015: “A global geode-
tic reference frame for sustainable development” (United
Nations General Assembly, 2015). In this resolution the UN
recognize the importance of “the investments of Member
States in developing satellite missions for positioning and
remote sensing of the Earth, supporting a range of scien-
tific endeavors that improve our understanding of the Earth
system and underpin decision-making, and [...] that the full
societal benefits of these investments are realized only if they
are referenced to a common global geodetic reference frame
at the national, regional and global levels”. Moreover, in
this resolution, the UN “invites Member States to engage in
multilateral cooperation that addresses infrastructure gaps
and duplications towards the development of a more sustain-
able global geodetic reference frame”. In this article, we will
explain that the GENESIS mission is proposed precisely to
address the geodetic ground infrastructure gaps. The United
Nations Committee of Experts on Global Geospatial In-

2


formation Management (UN-GGIM) established a working
group to develop a global geodetic road map that addresses
key elements relating to the development and sustainability
of the Global Geodetic Reference Frame (GGRF).
Several space missions in order to reach the GGOS ac-
curacy and stability goals were proposed in the past, such
as GRASP (Bar-Sever et al., 2009), E-GRIP (Jetzer, 2016)
and E-GRASP (Biancale et al., 2017). Today, the GENESIS
mission is timely considering the large number of long-term
scientific undertakings, where many different space data
need to be analyzed together, as, for example, for the quan-
tification of the mass-loss in the polar regions, where altime-
try missions (ICESat-2, CryoSat-2, Sentinel-6) and gravity
field missions (GRACE and GRACE-FO) need to be jointly
exploited.
The strong statements by international bodies
underline that the GENESIS mission is highly needed and
timely, being the only proposed mission to cover this topic,
worldwide.
A very large and strong scientific community involved in
the worldwide networks and data and analysis centers of
the four geometrical IAG Services supports the GENESIS
proposal as part of the FutureNAV program of the Euro-
pean Space Agency (ESA). Clearly, GENESIS will deliver
exploratory results across many Earth’s science disciplines,
mainly where precise positioning, surface motions and mass
movement are critical. The mission is thus supported by an
active and broad community, and the downstream science
and policy-making users will continuously benefit from the
improvements in the TRF and of its link to the CRF.

2
Summary of GENESIS science
and mission objectives

The GGOS was initiated by the IAG with the goal of pro-
viding a consistent high-quality TRF, crucial for the present
day and future science application needs (Plag and Pearl-
man, 2009; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine, 2018, 2020). There exists a very wide spec-
trum of applications in Navigation and Earth sciences and
far beyond that require a more accurate TRF, as illustrated
in Figure 1.
The TRF is the indispensable fundamental
metrological basis to allow a long-term consistent monitor-
ing of the Earth’s system changes.
The GGOS accuracy and stability goals are required to
detect the smallest variations in the Earth system compo-
nents. These requirements are especially driven by the fact
that the stability in the present TRF of about 0.5 mm/year
is the most important contribution to the uncertainty in
global sea level rise (see Sect. 4.2) and in many other geo-
physical processes. The primary goal of the GENESIS mis-
sion is, therefore, the establishment of a TRF supporting the
GGOS accuracy and stability goals through the co-location
of space geodetic techniques on a single satellite.
Nowadays, the TRF is realized by station coordinates and
velocities for a globally distributed set of ground stations
using a combination of the four major space geodetic tech-
niques:

Figure 1:
GENESIS mission primary goal is a signifi-
cant improvement of the International Terrestrial Reference
Frame (ITRF). The ITRF is recognised to be the metrolog-
ical foundation for all space- and ground-based observations
in Earth Science and Navigation, and therefore this mis-
sion will potentially have a major impact in a large number
of GNSS and Earth Observation applications. This figure
shows some of them.

• Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS);

• Doppler Orbitography and Radiopositioning Integrated
by Satellite (DORIS), a radio satellite tracking system;

• the Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) technique;

• and the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI)
technique, which normal operation is to record the sig-
nals from quasars.

In order to develop a unique, consistent and accurate
TRF, these four techniques are combined and linked to-
gether thanks to co-location sites located on the ground,
where more than one space geodetic technique is located at
the same site. Thereby the local ties, i.e., the vectors con-
necting the reference points of the individual instruments
(GNSS and DORIS antennas, radio and optical telescopes),
must be realized at the 1 mm level or better.
Unfortunately, one of the major deficiencies in the real-
ization of a TRF originates from the difficulty to accurately
measure the local ties between the reference points (intersec-
tion of axes of large instruments, phase centres of antennas).
A second issue of the reference frame is that each technique
has its own systematic effects. Thus, a second deficiency
includes the (as yet unknown) systematic effects present in
the observations of the individual space geodetic techniques.
Finally, a third deficiency is the poor spatial distribution of
co-location sites on the globe.
In order to improve this situation fundamentally, the
GENESIS satellite mission will provide a highly accurate
co-location of the four space geodetic techniques in space,
on board the satellite with carefully and fully calibrated ref-
erence points, as illustrated in Figure 2. Thus, GENESIS
will be a calibrated co-location and reference point, fully

3


Figure 2:
The GENESIS mission will consist of the co-
location, for the first time ever, of the four space geodetic
techniques (GNSS, SLR, VLBI, and DORIS) aboard a sin-
gle well-calibrated satellite in Medium-Earth Orbit (MEO).
This will result in a unique dynamic space geodetic obser-
vatory, which combined with the measurements of geodetic
co-location sites on the ground, shall allow obtaining a sig-
nificant improvement of the International Terrestrial Refer-
ence Frame (ITRF).

complementary to the ground co-location, orbiting in space
and connecting all the ground stations to one another. In
this way, one can determine all the instrumental biases in-
herent to the different observing techniques simultaneously.
This bias determination is required: (1) to avoid systematic
errors, which can result in erroneous interpretations of the
differences in the techniques, as well as (2) to transmit the
TRF via GNSS at the precision of a millimeter to any point
on the Earth that can then be used for precise positioning
and navigation. The payload that will allow us to realize this
co-location consists of a VLBI transmitter, a GNSS and a
DORIS receiver, a Passive Laser Retro-Reflector (P-LRR)
and a Ultra-Stable Oscillator (USO) that will connect all
four techniques.
Secondary goals could be reached by with the addition an
Active Laser Retro-Reflector (A-LRR) and an accelerome-
ter. The A-LRR would allow for a high precision synchro-
nization of the onboard USO with ground clocks through
time transfer by laser link from ground stations. This would
provide metrology users with a common view, time transfer
technique, accurate at intercontinental scales. More specif-
ically, in addition to the benefits of the already present
P-LRR, the A-LRR would allow (1) to perform ground-to-
space and ground-to-ground time and frequency transfers
with an extended common view compared to the T2L2 and
ACES missions, by taking advantage of the higher altitude
of the GENESIS satellite, (2) to compare GNSS and laser
time transfer techniques with an uncertainty below 100 ps
and (3) to accurately monitor the behaviour of the onboard
clock for precise orbitography.
An accelerometer, in combination with a well tested

macro model of the satellite’s geometry and reflectance,
would provide insight in non-conservative forces and their
effect on the GENESIS orbit.
All the mechanical and
electronic properties of the platform must be character-
ized to within sub-millimeter tolerances.
An accelerome-
ter could be used to measure surface accelerations up to
10−11 m s−2 Hz−1/2 and would (1) guarantee high-precision
orbit determination and mitigating the errors mapping into
the modeling of non-conservative forces, (2) allow in-orbit
Center of Mass (CoM) determination.
These characteris-
tics are important in the determination of station positions
and geophysical products such as the geocenter and Earth’s
orientation parameters. Another role of this accelerometer
would be to serve as a position reference for the geodetic
instruments on the platform in order to determine the cor-
rection of angular motion between each instrument.

The availability of high-precision measurements from the
GENESIS mission will fundamentally improve the accuracy
and stability of the TRF by a factor of 5-10 and will allow
us to achieve the GGOS requirements. This paper reviews
the science applications of the GENESIS mission (see also
Figure 1): improvements in the TRF geocenter and scale
(Sect. 3.3); improvements in the celestial (inertial) frame
and the Earth orientation parameters, reflecting Earth sys-
tem processes (Sect. 3.4); improvements in the knowledge of
the low-degree spherical harmonics of the Earth gravity field,
complementary to GRACE and GRACE-FO (Sect. 4.1); im-
provements in global to local estimates of sea level change
(Sect. 4.2); improvement in estimates of present day ice
mass loss and Glacial Isostatic Adjustment (GIA) history
(Sect. 4.3); improved determination of the Earth’s rheol-
ogy and the melting history (Sect. 4.4); improved quantifi-
cation of surface loads due to the continental water cycle,
the atmosphere and the ocean (Sect. 4.4); improvements in
the Earth radiation budget (Sect. 4.5); improvements of the
ionospheric and plasmaspheric density (Sect. 4.6); distribu-
tion of a high-accuracy reference frame to all GNSS users
for global geo-referencing at the millimeter-level (Sect. 5.1);
very accurate and consistent antenna phase centre calibra-
tions for all GNSS satellites relevant for the terrestrial scale
and all positioning applications (Sect. 5.2); millimeter-level
precise orbit determination (POD) for altimetric, gravimet-
ric and GNSS satellites (Sect. 5.3); intercontinental time
transfer at the picosecond level and its use to unify height
systems by exploiting the gravitational redshift (Sect. 5.4).
Since reference frames are at the heart of metrology and all
monitoring processes, the benefits from GENESIS are truly
inter- and transdisciplinary and relevant for societal needs.

Moreover, an ESA Concurrent Design Facility (CDF)
study has confirmed that the GENESIS Mission is feasible
within the ESA FutureNAV defined program boundaries,
with a target launch date in 2027. The conclusion of this
study is given in Sect. 6.1.
This section is followed by a
high-level description of laser ranging (Sect. 6.2) and VLBI
transmitter (Sect. 6.3).

4


3
Reference frames

3.1
Importance of reference frames

Reference frames provide the necessary absolute basis for
the relative-only geodetic measurements.
They are indis-
pensable to study the dynamic Earth, and to be able to
meaningfully relate changes across space and time. They
are also essential for positioning and navigation in the civil
society and for proper georeferencing of geospatial informa-
tion. The provision of accurate and stable reference frames
is one of the major tasks of geodesy.
The TRF is the realization of the TRS and is currently
provided by precisely determined coordinates and velocities
of physical points on the Earth’s surface. The main phys-
ical and mathematical properties of a TRS (at the defini-
tion and conventions level) or of the TRF (at the realization
level) include each its origin, scale, orientation, and their
time evolution.
The Center of Mass (CM) of the Earth
System, or geocenter, as the realized origin of the TRF on
long-term scales, needs to be accurately determined includ-
ing its temporal motion (e.g., Petit and Luzum, 2010). The
temporal variations of the geocenter represent a component
of mass change (at spherical harmonic degree one) that is
not directly observable from a mass-change mission such as
GRACE-FO (Wu et al., 2012). While the degree one com-
ponent of mass change can be derived from a combination
of GRACE data with ocean model output (e.g., Swenson
et al., 2008; Sun et al., 2016, 2017) or space geodetic tech-
niques such as GNSS, SLR (e.g., Fritsche et al., 2009; Glaser
et al., 2015), a high-quality TRF solution furnished by space
geodesy that allows a matching with the temporal resolu-
tion of the GRACE-FO data would be highly desired (see
Sect. 4.1 for more details).
Any bias or drift in the TRF components propagates into
the estimated parameters based on the reference frame. It
concerns for instance the measurements of vertical land mo-
tion and crustal deformation. This encompasses geological
hazards but also human-induced effects (subsidence of land
and coastal areas due to different effects) or even measure-
ment of ongoing coastal erosion (National Academies of Sci-
ences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2020). Further examples
are GIA or mean sea level variability in space and time (King
et al., 2010; Collilieux and W¨oppelmann, 2011). The global
sea level rise of about 3.7 mm year−1 (IPCC Report, 2021)
is numerically small, but well ascertained within the range
of measurement accuracy. In addition, an acceleration in
the rate of sea level rise has also been observed (e. g. Nerem
et al., 2018; Veng and Andersen, 2021). In areas at risk of
flooding, the global mean sea level rise is a main topic of
public dispute and political decisions. For its accurate mon-
itoring and reliable prediction, the accuracy and long-term
stability of the TRF should be at least one order of magni-
tude better than the observed effects, leading to the GGOS
accuracy and stability goals.
As stated in the introduction, the importance of accu-
rate and stable reference frames was highlighted by the UN
(United Nations General Assembly, 2015). The implemen-
tation of the GGRF is intended to support the increasing

demand for positioning, navigation, timing, mapping, and
other geoscientific applications.
Indeed, the GGRF is es-
sential for a reliable determination of changes in the Earth
system, for natural disaster management, for monitoring sea
level rise and climate change, and to provide accurate infor-
mation for decision makers.
Furthermore, due to global-
ization and interoperability requirements, there is a grow-
ing demand for spatial data infrastructure. Precise spatial
information is needed in many areas beneficial to society,
including transportation, construction, infrastructure, pro-
cess control, surveying and mapping, and Earth sciences,
and is especially important for monitoring progress towards
the UN’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (UN SDGs’
Website, 2022) (see, e.g. UN-GGIM, 2021).

3.2
Present status of the terrestrial refer-
ence frame realization

The actual realization of the International Terrestrial Ref-
erence System (ITRS), accessible to the users, is the ITRF.
The computation of the ITRF is based on a rigorous com-
bination of different TRF solutions provided by the four
space geodetic techniques (DORIS, GNSS, SLR, VLBI), as
well as the terrestrial local tie measurements conducted at
co-location sites where two or more geodetic instruments
operate. Local ties are the relative coordinates between the
reference points of the individual instruments. They are cru-
cial to connect the exact points of the observations of the
different techniques in the ITRF construction. The ITRF is
provided to the users in the form of station positions at a ref-
erence epoch and corresponding linear station velocities, and
since the ITRF2014, parametric models for sites subject to
major earthquakes (Altamimi et al., 2016). The ITRF2020
was published in April, 2022 (ITRF Website, 2022). It now
provides seasonal signals caused mainly by loading effects,
expressed in both the Earth’s CM frame as sensed by SLR,
but also in the Center of Figure (CF) frame (Altamimi et al.,
2021, 2022).
The ITRF long-term origin is defined by SLR, the most
accurate satellite technique in sensing the Earth’s CM. The
ITRF long-term scale, however, is defined by an average of
the SLR and VLBI intrinsic scales. The consistency of these
scales still needs to be improved, since both techniques are
subject to systematic errors and other technical limitations,
such as time and range biases for SLR, antenna deformation
for VLBI, etc.
The GENESIS mission will help to solve
these inconsistencies.
The ITRF orientation and its time
evolution are defined to be the same for the successive ITRF
realizations.
Although the ITRF is the most accurate TRF available
today, it still needs at least an order of magnitude of im-
provement in order to meet the scientific challenges of ob-
serving Earth system variability. The ITRF is not only a
fundamental standard for Earth science applications, but
its elaboration, using extensive data analysis, also allows
to evaluate the level of consistency between space geodetic
techniques and to assess the systematic differences that are
a major limiting factor in the ITRF accuracy.
The analysis of the input data submitted to the latest

5


ITRF version, ITRF2020 (ITRF, 2022), was the occasion
to re-evaluate the current level of consistency among the
four main space geodetic techniques and their strengths and
weaknesses. There are still a number of factors that limit the
ITRF accuracy, as shown (or reconfirmed) by the ITRF2020
results.
Although the ITRF2020 long-term origin is defined solely
by SLR, weaknesses in its realization include the poor num-
ber and geometry of SLR stations in operation today: the
number of the most prolific SLR stations does not exceed
16, and not all of these stations have the same level of
performance.
The only internal evaluation that can be
made is the level of agreement between ITRF2020 and pre-
vious ITRF versions, namely ITRF2005, ITRF2008, and
ITRF2014 whose origins were also defined using SLR data
submitted in the form of time series. ITRF2020 results in-
dicate that the agreement in the origin components, with
respect to the past three ITRF versions, is at the level of
5 mm in offset and 0.5 mm/year in rate, values that are still
far away from the science requirements.
Counting the number of ITRF2020 co-locations between
VLBI, SLR and DORIS, 11 VLBI–SLR, 12 VLBI–DORIS
and 11 SLR–DORIS ties exist.
These numbers of co-
locations are too small to provide a reliable combination
of these three techniques alone. The GNSS network is fun-
damental in determining the ITRF by connecting the three
other techniques to GNSS, since almost all SLR and VLBI
stations, and about two thirds of the DORIS stations are co-
located with GNSS. Only 32 % to 50 % of these co-location
sites (with time spans > 3 years) have an agreement between
the terrestrial tie vectors and the space geodetic estimates of
better than 5 mm in the three components. It is likely that
most of the tie discrepancies (differences between terrestrial
ties and space geodetic estimates) are caused by systematic
errors in the techniques. The poor spatial distribution of co-
location sites is also a major limiting factor for the present
accuracy of the terrestrial reference frame realization, which
would be tackled by the GENESIS mission.
The ITRS Center of the International Earth Rotation
and Reference Systems Service (IERS), hosted by Insti-
tut national de l’information g´eographique et foresti`ere
(IGN) France, is responsible for the maintenance of the
ITRS/ITRF and the official ITRF solutions.
Two other
ITRS combination centers are also generating combined so-
lutions: Deutsches Geod¨atisches Forschungsinstitut at Tech-
nische Universit¨at M¨unchen (DGFI-TUM; Seitz et al., 2012,
2022) and Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL; Wu et al., 2015;
Abbondanza et al., 2017). These ITRS realizations provide
a valuable possibility to validate official ITRF solutions and
thus help to increase the reliability of the ITRF.
GENESIS, as a fully calibrated satellite-based platform,
will provide a complementary co-location of the four tech-
niques in space, a “Core co-location site in space”, as an
optimal supplement to the existing co-locations on ground.
This is essential to identify and potentially reduce the sys-
tematic errors and/or determine whether the errors come
from the terrestrial ties or from the space geodetic estimates.
The GENESIS mission will improve our ability to simulta-
neously identify the systematic errors and to consequently

Figure 3:
SLR derived geocenter motion, X component
(ILRSA combined solution, ASI/CGS).

improve the ITRF accuracy and stability, particularly the
origin and the scale that are the most critical parameters
for scientific applications. GENESIS will leverage the cru-
cial existing ground-based co-location network, allowing the
development of future-proof terrestrial reference frames.

3.3
Improvements in the ITRF geocenter
and scale

We define herein the geocenter motion as the motion of the
Center of Mass (CM) of the whole Earth (solid body and
fluid envelope) with respect to the geometrical Center of
Figure (CF) of its deformable terrestrial crust. This mo-
tion is strongest at the annual frequency (2 mm to 3 mm in
the equatorial plane and up to 5 mm in the direction of the
polar axis) where it mostly reflects non-tidal fluid mass re-
distribution on the Earth’s surface. The long-term secular
variation represented by a linear rate is believed to be less
than 1 mm/year (M´etivier et al., 2010, 2011). In addition,
atmospheric, hydrologic and oceanic masses cause deforma-
tions of the Earth’s surface due to loading effects (Wu et al.,
2012). The space geodetic stations tied to the crust, thus,
show variations of their position (mainly in the height com-
ponent) due to variations of the loading effects caused by
major water and atmosphere mass transport occurring over
large regions. These position variations lead to changes in
the CM with respect to the CF. Determining the variations
of the geocenter is therefore important for understanding the
long-wavelength changes in the distribution of mass within
the Earth’s system (see Sect. 4.1).
The geocenter motion is accessible by ground station ob-
servations (tied to the crust’s CF), used to observe the nat-
ural orbital motion of the satellites about the Earth’s CM.
Yet, space geodetic observation of the geocenter motion is
still in its infancy. Independent solutions derived using dif-
ferent techniques have systematic differences as large as the
signal level. Estimating geocenter coordinates is one of the
most demanding applications of high precision geodetic tech-
niques due to the current precision of the geodetic data, and
the nature and magnitude of different types of systematic
error.
Up to now the geocenter motion is traditionally measured
by SLR using the observations to geodetic satellites (see Fig-
ure 3). The geodetic satellites such as LAGEOS or LARES

6


are considered to be well suited for determining the geocen-
ter motion owing to their mission characteristics, such as
orbit altitude, low area-to-mass ratio, and thus minimized
non-gravitational orbit perturbing forces. Until now, deter-
mination of geocenter coordinates based on the SLR obser-
vations to active Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites was lim-
ited because of the issues in non-gravitational force model-
ing acting on LEOs. In principle, the geocenter coordinates
should be well determined from any satellite mission that is
continuously observed and has dynamical orbits of superior
quality. Therefore, GENESIS can introduce an alternative
for the geocenter recovery w.r.t. passive geodetic satellites.
However, the accuracy of SLR data is extremely sensitive
to the presence of observational biases therein, e.g., range
biases and network effects (Collilieux et al., 2009), affecting
also the geocenter determination. Determining these biases
would necessitate the use of an independent geodetic tech-
nique.
Range biases are calculated in SLR processing as
additive constants in the modeled range, which should be in
essence independent of the epoch of observation and mea-
surement conditions, such as station elevation/azimuth an-
gles, or measured range. However, the range biases not only
compensate for ranging machine errors but also absorb the
modeling errors such as satellite center of mass offsets, or-
bit force model deficiencies, or tropospheric delay (Appleby
et al., 2016; Luceri et al., 2019; Dro˙zd˙zewski and So´snica,
2021). The presence of ambiguous range biases corrupts the
estimation of fundamental geodetic products including site
coordinates, the terrestrial reference frame scale and origin
(geocenter motion), and geocentric gravitational constant
(GM) (Couhert et al., 2020a). GENESIS can expand our
knowledge on the range biases aiming to improve the con-
sistency of SLR geodetic products with the other space and
satellite geodetic techniques.
GNSS-based determinations of the geocenter motion suf-
fer from orbit modelling deficiencies due to an inherent cou-
pling of the GNSS orbit dynamic parameters: the GNSS geo-
center Z-component is strongly correlated with the param-
eterization of the Solar Radiation Pressure (SRP) (Meindl
et al., 2013). With only limited a priori knowledge about the
non-conservative forces acting on GNSS satellites, we must
incorporate additional empirical orbit parameters into the
solution, i.e., Empirical CODE Orbit Model or Jet Propul-
sion Laboratory GSPM. The errors in the orbit model,
as well as the correlations between the estimated param-
eters (Rebischung et al., 2014), introduce spurious orbit-
related signals in the GNSS-based geocenter motion esti-
mates (Meindl et al., 2013; Rodriguez-Solano et al., 2014).
The consistency between GNSS-based and SLR-based geo-
center motion estimates can be improved by using satellite
macromodels (Zajdel et al., 2021b).
Another way to im-
prove the GNSS-based geocenter motion is the combined
multi-GNSS processing (Scaramuzza et al., 2018) or the in-
clusion of Galileo satellites on an eccentric plane (Zajdel
et al., 2021b).
Other approaches (Haines et al., 2015; M¨annel and
Rothacher, 2017; Kuang et al., 2019; Couhert et al., 2020b)
demonstrated the possibility to observe the geocenter mo-
tion with GNSS tracking data in addition to LEO satel-

lites (e.g., GRACE, GOCE, or Jason-like satellites), which
helped to reduce the errors coming from the GNSS-only de-
termination. Such methods would be well suited to derive
GNSS-based geocenter time series with GENESIS. The syn-
chronization of the GENESIS onboard USO thanks to an
A-LRR would allow a modelling of the clock instead of es-
timating clock correction parameters for each epoch. This
is expected to improve the capability for accessing the geo-
center.
DORIS as the third satellite technique is in principle also
sensitive to the CM of the Earth. DORIS benefits from the
well-distributed network of stations but trails other geodetic
techniques in terms of the quality of station coordinates be-
cause of the limitation of non-gravitation perturbing forces
modeling and precise orbit determination of active satel-
lites equipped with DORIS receivers. Moreover, the prob-
lems mentioned for GNSS also apply to the DORIS system.
Yet, SRP modelling error on the Jason-type satellites can be
identified and mitigated without compromising the Z geo-
center estimate (Couhert et al., 2018).
VLBI in its current application is a purely geometric tech-
nique, thus, it has no connection to the Earth’s gravity field
(including the CM of the Earth). VLBI can currently be
connected to the satellite techniques only via the station net-
work and the local ties, and is not able to contribute to the
geocenter determination.
However, numerical simulations
demonstrated that geodetic VLBI is able to observe geocen-
ter motion using observations of Galileo satellites (Klopotek
et al., 2020), suggesting that the GENESIS mission will en-
able a VLBI-contribution to the estimation of geocenter mo-
tion.
For the current ITRS, the origin is assumed to be aligned
to the long-term Earth’s CM. In parallel, the geopotential
models assume that on average the Earth’s CM is at the
centre of the geodetic network (i.e., zero values for degree-1
geopotential coefficients). Thus, the importance of an accu-
rate geocenter motion cannot be overstated. Not account-
ing properly for the geocenter motion affects both satellite
altimetry, precise orbit determination and satellite-derived
estimates of the change in regional mean sea level. Because
of climate change, and the need to both measure the change
in the ice-sheets and understand their impact on sea level
and global fluid mass redistribution, we must explore strate-
gies to better observe and model these subtle variations in
the Earth’s geocenter.
GENESIS is a unique opportunity to properly calibrate
the space geodetic techniques against each other. By this,
GENESIS helps to improve our understanding of the afore-
mentioned systematic differences between geocenter solu-
tions derived using independent techniques, allowing the
best possible accuracy in the recovery of the geocenter time
series.
In addition, the VLBI tracking of GENESIS is a
unique opportunity to attach also the VLBI technique to
the CM of the Earth.
As a result, the TRF determined
from the GENESIS measurements will realize the origin lo-
cated in the CM of the Earth consistently for all four space
geodetic techniques for the first time.
The same reasoning holds true for another fundamental
property of the ITRF, i.e., the scale that is currently deter-

7


mined by means of SLR as well as by VLBI data analysis.
The scale is defined in such a way that there exists no scale
factor and no scale factor rate with respect to the mean of
VLBI and SLR long-term solutions as obtained by stacking
their respective time series.
But similar to the problems
mentioned related to geocenter, SLR and VLBI suffer from
systematics also affecting the scale, e.g., unknown range bi-
ases for SLR stations and unknown antenna deformations for
VLBI. Due to the very limited number of co-located SLR-
VLBI stations on the Earth’s surface and due to the lack of
a common satellite, the agreement of the SLR- and VLBI-
derived scales is difficult to assess, and the two techniques
cannot be well calibrated against each other. In ITRF2020
the scale discrepancy between SLR and VLBI could be sig-
nificantly reduced, however only selected VLBI sessions until
2013.75 and SLR observations from 1997 until 2021.0 were
used due to trends and jumps with unknown nature. GEN-
ESIS will probably help to reveal the reasons for them and
improve the scale realization significantly.
Undisclosed information about the ground calibrations of
the satellite antenna Phase Center Offsets (PCO) prevented
the use of GNSS for the scale determination. Thanks to the
release of the Galileo phase center calibrations for both the
ground (receivers) and space (satellite antennas) segment
(GSA, 2017), GNSS became a new potential contributor to
the realization of the terrestrial reference frame scale of the
future ITRF releases. Villiger et al. (2020) reported that
the Galileo scale difference w.r.t. ITRF2014 is 1.4 ppb at the
epoch of 1st January 2018. The information about the satel-
lite phase center calibrations, which have been published in
2019 by CSNO (China Satellite Navigation Office) for the
BeiDou satellites, opened up a space for the second GNSS
able to provide an independent realization of the terrestrial
reference frame scale (Zajdel et al., 2022). However, some
results indicate that the scales derived with BeiDou-released
and Galileo-released satellite phase center calibrations are
not consistent, and the bias between both reaches 1.8 ppb
(Qu et al., 2021).
Studies have already demonstrated that the SLR-based
scale can be well transferred to the GNSS network, if a
satellite is used as co-location platform (Thaller et al., 2011,
2014). In these studies, the GNSS satellites tracked by SLR
were employed as co-location platforms, however, being lim-
ited to GNSS and SLR only.
At the moment, DORIS is
unable to deliver reliable scale information due to uncali-
brated or not well-calibrated antenna phase centre locations
and variations (for ground stations as well as satellites).
GENESIS will enlarge the satellite co-location to all four
space geodetic techniques allowing cross-calibration of all
techniques to determine a homogeneous scale. Thanks to
the common platform on board GENESIS, the scale will be
transferrable to all techniques, resulting in the best possible
materialization of the ITRF.

3.4
Unification
of
reference
frames
and
Earth rotation

Geodetic VLBI uses the emission by extragalactic radio
sources with well-defined positions in the sky. If it is pos-

sible to transmit a quasar-like signal from an orbiting plat-
form with a precise orbit, then we would be able to better
understand biases between the CRF realized with positions
of extragalactic radio sources and dynamical realizations by
satellite orbits.
CRF, TRF, and the Earth Orientation Parameters (EOP)
that describe the transformation between these two frames
are fundamental for any kind of positioning on the Earth and
in space and provide most valuable information about the
Earth system. The International Celestial Reference Sys-
tem (ICRS) is a quasi-inertial reference system defined by
extragalactic radio sources, mostly quasars, billions of light
years away, and is realized as International Celestial Refer-
ence Frame (ICRF) with a set of quasar coordinates with a
noise floor of about 30 µas (Charlot et al., 2020). The po-
sitions of a set of globally distributed radio telescopes are
determined using the difference in the arrival times of the
signals at the different telescopes (Sovers et al., 1998).
The VLBI technique provides direct access to the ICRS
and is the best technique for observing the full set of EOP.
Specifically, VLBI is the only technique able to determine
the position of the celestial intermediate pole in the ICRF,
expressed as celestial pole offsets to a conventional preces-
sion/nutation model, and the Earth’s rotation angle, typ-
ically referred to as Universal Time or UT1-UTC. Table
1 summarizes the parameter types and the space geodetic
techniques contributing to their determination. The table
also shows the parameters that can be used for a co-location
of the techniques, both, on the surface of the Earth and in
space. Satellite techniques rely on measurements between
stations on the Earth’s surface and satellites, whose orbits
are subject to various gravitational and non-gravitational
forces (e.g., SRP).
As a consequence, SLR, GNSS and
DORIS depend on a reference frame that is dynamically
realized by satellite orbits and thus completely different in
nature from the kinematic realization of the ICRS by VLBI.
Presently, the only physical connection between the VLBI
frame and frames of SLR, GNSS and DORIS is via the lo-
cal ties on the ground; however, these ties reveal significant
discrepancies with respect to the terrestrial frames delivered
by the individual space geodetic techniques.
GENESIS will link all the technique frames in space (see
gray rows in Table 1). This concept and its realization will
represent a breakthrough in improving the accuracy and
consistency of the reference frame. In addition, GENESIS
will also directly link the dynamical satellite frame to the
quasars using differential VLBI observations (D-VLBI), i.e.
differencing the radio signal emitted by GENESIS with the
signals from the fixed radio sources, the quasars.
Another issue of the ICRF and ITRF is that the realiza-
tions of the frames are independent of one another.
The
ITRF is fixed when computing the ICRF and vice versa.
The approach leads to inconsistencies that map into the
EOP that connect the two frames. International Union of
Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG) Resolution No. 3 (2011)
recommends that the highest consistency between the ICRF,
the ITRF and the EOP should be a primary goal in all future
realizations of the ICRS. Although the IUGG recommenda-
tion has not yet been fulfilled, research in this direction has

8


Table 1: Classification of estimated parameters derived from space geodetic techniques. Co-location in space with GEN-
ESIS is marked in gray (adopted from M¨annel, 2016).

Classification
Type
Parameter
VLBI
GNSS
SLR
DORIS
LLR

Common,
Satellite orbits
GNSS orbits
(✓)
✓
(✓)

global
LEO orbit
✓
✓
✓

LEO clock corrections
✓
(✓)

GENESIS orbit
✓
✓
✓
✓

GENESIS clock corr.
✓
✓
✓
✓

EOP
Pole coordinates
✓
✓
✓
✓
(✓)

UT1
✓
(✓)

LoD
✓
✓
✓
✓
(✓)

Nutation
✓
(✓)

Nutation rates
✓
✓
✓
✓
(✓)

Gravity field
Earth center of mass
(✓)
✓
(✓)

Low degree coefficients
✓
✓
✓
(✓)

TRF
Scale
✓
(✓)
✓
(✓)
(✓)

Common,
Atmosphere
Ionosphere parameters
✓
✓
✓

local
Troposphere parameters
✓
✓
(✓)
✓

TRF
Station positions
✓
✓
✓
✓
(✓)

Station velocities
✓
✓
✓
✓
(✓)

Time-Frequency
Station clock corrections
✓
✓
(✓)
✓
(✓)

Technique-
CRF
Quasar positions
✓

specific
Moon orbit
✓

Instrumental
GNSS clock corrections
✓

Range biases
✓
✓

been initiated and simultaneous estimation of CRF, TRF,
and EOP have been achieved (Seitz et al., 2014; Kwak et al.,
2018).
At the international level, this topic is being ad-
dressed by the ICRF3 Working Group of the International
Astronomical Union and by Sub-Commission 1.4 on the In-
teraction of Celestial and Terrestrial Reference Frames of
the IAG. The common adjustment of the celestial and ter-
restrial reference frames and EOP will strongly benefit from
new observations provided by GENESIS.
In summary, to strengthen the link between VLBI and the
satellite techniques, it is imperative to use improved and bet-
ter ties than what is currently available, i.e., the local ties at
the relatively few VLBI/GNSS co-located sites. Initial work
with dedicated space tie satellites demonstrated the feasi-
bility of this approach, see simulations by Anderson et al.
(2018) or Klopotek et al. (2020) and real observations to
the APOD-A satellite by Hellerschmied et al. (2018). Ded-
icated VLBI beacons transmitting at VLBI frequencies on
a well-calibrated satellite such as GENESIS will enable the
observation of satellites with VLBI radio telescopes.
Moreover, GENESIS will not only combine GNSS and
VLBI, but also SLR and DORIS. Table 1 illustrates that a
rigorous combination of all the observation techniques and
of as many of the common parameters as possible should
be envisaged to overcome the weaknesses of the individual
space geodetic techniques. GENESIS is a crucial element
for improving the relationship between the reference frames
of VLBI and the satellite-based techniques.
The time variations of Earth rotation parameters contain
subtle information about the mass transport in the system
made up of the solid Earth, the external fluid layers, and

the outer and inner core.
An accurate determination of
EOP has long been at the origin of challenging studies re-
lated to the Earth’s interior: e.g., insights into the coupling
mechanisms at core-mantle and core-inner core boundaries
by inversion of nutation data (Dehant et al., 2017) and to
climate: e.g., mechanisms of angular momentum exchange
between the solid Earth and the atmosphere-ocean system,
link with climate change (Dickey et al., 2011). In addition,
the improvement of the VLBI CRF (Charlot et al., 2020)
contrasted with the optical data from the ESA’s Gaia as-
trometry mission (Gaia Collaboration et al., 2018) will al-
low to shed new lights on the physics of active galactic nuclei
and quasars that will benefit from an improved stability of
the radio frame currently limited to 0.03 mas.
Given that GENESIS will provide a direct link between
the kinematic (VLBI, quasar-based) and dynamic (satellite-
based) reference frames and is expected, thus, to improve
the consistency of the TRF, CRF, and EOP realizations,
all the above scientific domains will be positively impacted,
extending thus the challenges of GENESIS well beyond its
first scope.
The continuous tracking of the GENESIS satellite and
the connection to GNSS satellites will allow for mitiga-
tion of some technique-specific systematic effects currently
observed in the GNSS-derived Earth rotation parameters.
These errors come from constellation repeatability and or-
bital resonances between Earth rotation and satellite revo-
lution period, as well as draconitic errors due to the limi-
tations in the Precise Orbit Determination (POD) of GNSS
satellites (Zajdel et al., 2020). The integrated adjustment of
low-orbiting GENESIS and GNSS constellation could allow

9


for the mitigation of technique-specific systematic effects ob-
served in the polar motion and length-of-day variations, and
thus, improve the quality of EOPs.
The sub-daily Earth rotation can be monitored using
space geodetic techniques. However, the current empirical
sub-daily EOP models derived from GNSS or VLBI differ
from the geophysical models derived from ocean tides (Za-
jdel et al., 2021a). The sub-daily changes of the pole po-
sition are mainly caused by ocean tides, and to a smaller
extent, by the atmosphere. However, GNSS cannot provide
suitable values of some tidal constituents equal to half and
one sidereal day due to the similar revolution period of the
satellites.
GENESIS, with its completely different orbit characteris-
tics than the GNSS satellites, will introduce an ever bigger
step in this direction. Therefore, the sub-daily polar motion,
libration terms, or sub-daily length-of-day variations will be
better understood. Due to the continuous tracking of GEN-
ESIS, the derivation of sub-daily variations will be possible
based on integrated observational techniques.
Moreover,
GENESIS will help in deriving sub-daily variations of the
pole caused by the mass redistribution in the atmosphere,
which are currently affected by large determination errors.
Therefore, GENESIS will pave new opportunities for better
understanding the sub-daily Earth rotation and relate their
causes to the geophysical processes.

4
Benefits for Earth sciences

4.1
Long-wavelength gravity field

Changes in the Earth’s gravity field provide information
about the redistribution of mass within the Earth system.
These changes are measured with exquisite precision by ded-
icated gravity satellites such as GRACE-FO. Historically,
geodetic tracking data (primarily SLR data, but also DORIS
and GNSS) has also been used to provide information about
the long-wavelength (low-degree) time-variable gravity field
(e.g., Cheng and Ries, 2013; Cerri et al., 2013; Richter et al.,
2021; So´snica et al., 2015; Bloßfeld et al., 2018). Due to is-
sues with the accelerometers and possibly with tidal aliasing
the C20 and C30 solutions from GRACE and GRACE-FO
so far have been supplied by SLR (Loomis et al., 2019, 2020).
Because of these accelerometer issues, it remains impor-
tant to monitor and inter-compare GRACE and GRACE-
FO based solutions with independent solutions (e.g., Chen
et al., 2021), where that is possible at the longest wave-
lengths.
GENESIS can provide independent estimates of the low-
degree Stokes coefficients based on all geodetic techniques.
SLR studies and simulations showed that adding one satel-
lite to a solution based on five SLR satellites may signifi-
cantly improve the determination of the low-degree spherical
harmonics of the Earth gravity field (Bloßfeld et al., 2018;
Kehm et al., 2018). The main improvements were seen in
C10, C20, and C40, the standard deviations of which are
improved up to 30 %. Also, observations of GENESIS with
VLBI would strengthen the integration of the Earth geome-
try, rotation and gravitational field. The Stokes coefficients

are common parameters to all techniques such as a subgroup
of the EOP, namely the terrestrial pole coordinates and its
first derivatives (see Table 1).
Moreover, GENESIS will be of benefit in the refine-
ment of the Earth GM, which helps to define the scale of
the TRF. The current value of 3.986 004 415 × 1014 m3 s−2

was determined by Ries et al. (1992) and has an uncer-
tainty of the order 2 ppb, corresponding to ±2 cm in the
absolute radial position of high-orbiting GNSS satellites.
Some recent work has suggested possible solutions closer to
3.986 004 418 × 1014 m3 s−2 (Couhert et al., 2020a).
An exciting prospect is that the precise tracking on GEN-
ESIS by multiple geodetic techniques, together with SLR
tracking to the satellites LARES and LARES-2 could lead
to improve Earth GM determination with a much lower un-
certainty.

4.2
Altimetry and sea level rise

Measurements of sea level rise over the last century (and
more) have been derived from observations of sea level
change as recorded by a global distribution of tide gauges.
Tide gauge observations are relative observations, i.e., the
changes in sea level are provided relative to the land to which
they are attached. But processes such as glacial isostatic ad-
justment and tectonics cause the land to move in the vertical
direction. To measure sea level change in a global reference
frame, the tide gauges are geodetically tied to the TRF us-
ing co-located GNSS stations. Thus, the ability to observe
contemporary sea level rise at global or local scales is lim-
ited by the stability of the terrestrial reference frame, i.e.,
the metrological basis for the determination of the vertical
motions of stations on the Earth’s surface. The reference
frame stability is one of the major error sources in the de-
termination of global and regional sea level rise (Beckley
et al., 2007; Blewitt et al., 2010; Blazquez and Meyssignac,
2022), as illustrated in Figure 4.
As recognized by GGOS, sea level poses the most strin-
gent requirements on the accuracy and stability of the TRF.
In addition to the tide gauge problem outlined above, pre-
cise satellite orbits in a highly stable and accurate TRF are
crucial to observe sea level using satellite radar altimetry.
Since the launch of the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite in 1992,
followed later by the Jason and Sentinel series of altimetry
satellites, sea level variations have been routinely observed
from space while tide gauges are also required to detect drifts
in satellite radar altimetry data (International Altimetry
Team, 2021). Moreover, it is acknowledged that the contin-
uous improvement of satellite POD, through the precision
and quality of the tracking systems, reference frame, Earth
Rotation Parameters, and static and time-variable geopo-
tential models are crucial in order to reach the specifications
of altimetry missions (International Altimetry Team, 2021).
To be useful in long-term sea level studies, sea level and
the vertical land motion should be measured in a reference
frame at least one order of magnitude more accurate than
the contemporary climate change signals of 1 mm/year to
3 mm/year observed on average in sea level records, either
from tide gauges or satellite radar altimetry, leading to the

10


Figure 4:
Total uncertainty in the Global Mean Sea Level
(GMSL) trend and individual contributions (Blazquez and
Meyssignac, 2022).
The uncertainty coming from the In-
ternational Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF) is clearly
the major contribution, which implies a total uncertainty
currently well over the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) requirement. Updated from Ablain et al.
(2019)

GGOS accuracy and stability goals. The GGOS stability
goal of 0.1 mm/year of global and regional sea level varia-
tions over several decades can only be achieved by more ac-
curate and more stable reference frame realizations, which
is the primary goal of the GENESIS mission.

4.3
Determination of ice mass loss

Direct local observations and space geodetic techniques in-
cluding gravimetry, radar and laser altimetry, optical and
synthetic aperture radar imagery and GNSS, have provided
clear evidence for large changes in the world’s glaciers and
ice sheets, in response to present climate change (e.g., Shep-
herd et al., 2018, 2020; Millan et al., 2022; Fox-Kemper et al.,
2022, in press). However, despite the extensive literature
on the subject, the ice mass balances over the different ice
sheets and smaller glacier regions are associated with large
uncertainties (e.g., Cazenave et al., 2018; M´etivier et al.,
2010; Khan et al., 2015). In particular, the question of pos-
sible local accelerations of ice mass loss in Greenland is still
open (e.g., Velicogna and Wahr, 2013; Velicogna et al., 2014,
2020).
Direct observations of glaciers and ice sheets are local and
only partially resolved in time, while space observations pro-
vide insights into the cryosphere evolution at global scale
and at regular timescales. Space altimetry (e.g., ICESat,
ICESat-2, CryoSat-2 missions; e.g., Felikson et al., 2017;
Sørensen et al., 2018) gives high resolution observations of

the ice surface elevation, with a relatively poor time res-
olution.
These techniques, unfortunately, cannot provide
directly ice mass balances because the mean density of the
ice column is not known and may largely vary locally due
to compaction processes within the firn layers of ice sheets
(Medley et al., 2020). Additional information is therefore
mandatory, generally based on compaction assumptions and
climate models (Huss, 2013; Kuipers Munneke et al., 2015;
Medley et al., 2020). Space gravimetry from GRACE and
GRACE-FO missions provides direct information on mass
variations, on a monthly basis, but with a spatial resolu-
tion of a few hundred kilometers (Tapley et al., 2004; Lan-
derer et al., 2020). However, the various contributions from
the solid Earth and the surface layers cannot be separated
with space gravimetry data alone. These other signals have
to be removed before glacier and ice sheet signals can be
retrieved, specially in the regions where these signals are
of the same order of magnitude or even higher (Wouters
et al., 2019). Removing these signals implies adding new
information from models as for the GIA or observations and
adding new sources of uncertainty. In particular, the sepa-
ration between the recent ice melting signals and the GIA
induced by the last glacial period (e.g., Whitehouse et al.,
2021; Peltier et al., 2015; Lambeck et al., 2014), or by the
little ice age (Kjeldsen et al., 2015), is also a complex issue.
However, GIA modelling approaches today depend also on
space geodetic observations (e.g., Argus et al., 2021; Khan
et al., 2016) and therefore would benefit from a better es-
timation of ITRF parameters. Of particular interest is the
uncertainty associated with the GIA in Antarctica, responsi-
ble of 20 % of the uncertainty in the Antarctica mass change
for the period 2005-2015 (Blazquez et al., 2018).
Space geodetic techniques, in particular GNSS, provide
also useful information on ice sheets and glaciers evolution,
by showing the ground deformation at geodetic stations in-
duced by local ice mass changes (e.g. Khan et al., 2016;
Whitehouse et al., 2019). However, GNSS-based velocities
are sensitive to very local changes in the ice sheets, which
make it difficult to confront with more global approaches
such as space altimetry and gravimetry (e.g. Khan et al.,
2010). Other techniques are also promising for monitoring
ice caps evolutions, such as radar interferometry. A com-
bination of all techniques is today the best way for moni-
toring ice sheet changes, however discrepancies are clearly
evidenced (Shepherd et al., 2018, 2020).

Table 2: Uncertainty in the water mass change induced by
an uncertainty of 1 mm in each axis of the geocenter motion.

Ocean Mass
Greenland
Antarctica

mm SLE
Gt
Gt

X
0.5
<1
< 1
Y
0.3
<1
7
Z
0.6
11
68

Updated from Blazquez et al. (2018)

All space geodetic techniques rely on the availability of

11


a precise and stable terrestrial reference frame such as
ITRF2014 and ITRF2020 (see Sect. 3.2; Altamimi et al.,
2016).
The stability over time of such a frame may in-
evitably impact all kind of geophysical interpretations that
are deduced from geodetic observations. It was shown that it
is not possible to ensure consistency between the ITRF2008
origin and the mean CM at a level better than 0.5 mm/year
(Wu et al., 2011). These inconsistencies remain in ITRF2014
and cannot be properly explained by geophysical models
(Riddell et al., 2017).
Moreover, CM motions are today
more than ever difficult to estimate with precision and sta-
bility, because they are also impacted by climate change.
It has been shown that the global ice sheet melting may
induce today an accelerated CM motion, possibly up to
∼1 mm/year with respect to the CF, towards south pole
along the Earth’s rotational axis (e.g., M´etivier et al., 2010,
2011, 2020).
An error of a few tenths of mm/year in the frame origin
stability estimation is well known to have a large impact
on the orbit calculations of satellites and in the water mass
redistribution on the surface (See Table 2). Nowadays un-
certainty in the long term trends in the geocenter motion of
±0.3 mm/year leads to uncertainties in the Antarctica mass
change of 18 Gt/year (Wu et al., 2012; Blazquez et al., 2018).
As mentioned before, we expect that GENESIS will im-
prove the determination of the reference frame. Such a sta-
ble ITRF should drastically reduce the frame dependency of
ice mass balance estimations.

4.4
Geodynamics, geophysics, natural haz-
ards

Post-Glacial Rebound, also known as GIA, is the de-
layed viscoelastic response of the solid Earth to unloading
caused by the melting of ice after the last glacial maximum
(∼13 000 years ago). The induced vertical uplift can reach
more than 1 cm/year in North America and Fennoscandia,
where the ice thickness was the largest.
This long-term
deformation depends on the ice coverage (both extent and
thickness), the melt history, and the viscoelastic properties
of the Earth’s mantle. GIA models currently are built us-
ing various observations, from moraines to relative sea level
variations, Earth’s oblateness variations, length-of-day vari-
ations, etc. Vertical rebound velocities from GNSS perma-
nent stations provide an independent but also absolute ob-
servation of the GIA in high latitudes (where there is no ice
today), and improve our knowledge of the Earth’s rheology
at long timescales. Improving GIA models (Earth’s rheol-
ogy and ice history) requires better estimates of uplift rates
which can only be achieved with a more precise and stable
reference frame (see, e.g., M´etivier et al., 2020).
On shorter timescales, GNSS stations also record Earth’s
elastic response to surface mass redistribution within the
climatic system (mainly continental water storage, atmo-
sphere and ocean).
Dense networks of permanent GNSS
stations can now be used to derive soil and snow water
content at seasonal timescales, but has also provided ev-
idence for extreme droughts, especially in California (see,
e.g., Argus et al., 2014; Fu et al., 2015; Jiang et al., 2022).

GNSS time series from dense networks can be used to re-
fine the information provided by space gravimetry missions
(GRACE and GRACE-FO) at longer spatial wavelengths
(see Sect. 4.1). Amplitude and spatial extent of surface wa-
ter mass variations can be inferred from both vertical and
horizontal deformation measurements. In particular, hori-
zontal displacements help to refine the determination of the
location and the spatial extent of the load.
This elastic
Earth’s response to surface loads has to be separated from a
longer-term deformation, which can only be obtained with
a more accurate and stable reference frame as proposed by
the GENESIS project.
Observed ground movements at the Earth surface are
manifold and related to a whole set of processes. Common
and essential to all these movements are detection and mon-
itoring to execute and develop risk assessment strategies.
Natural hazards, such as earthquakes, volcanic hazards or
landslides may be preceded by small displacements of the
Earth’s surface. Dense networks of GNSS stations in Japan,
the western United States, and South America have been
installed to monitor these surface displacements, related to
the seismic cycle. In particular, pre-earthquake surface de-
formation can be related to the stress and the state of stress
in the lithosphere. Surface displacements from increasing
stress in the lithosphere may have small amplitudes. There-
fore, a very stable and precise reference frame is required to
be able to interpret these observations as reliable prediction
tools for the onset of hazards versus errors in the techniques
themselves.

4.5
Top of atmosphere radiation budget
and Earth energy imbalance

The radiative imbalance at the Top Of the Atmosphere
(TOA) is the most fundamental metric to estimate the sta-
tus of climate change. At equilibrium, the climate system
receives as much visible energy from the sun as it emits in-
frared radiation towards space. Over the last decades, green-
house gases and aerosol concentrations have been increasing
in the atmosphere, blocking longwave radiation and leading
to an imbalance at TOA between the incoming solar radi-
ation and the outgoing longwave radiation (Hansen et al.,
2011; Trenberth, 2014). This imbalance, known as the Earth
Energy Imbalance (EEI), is about 0.5 W m−2 to 1 W m−2

(e. g. Loeb et al., 2018). It characterizes the general heat
uptake of the climate system that is responsible for current
climate change. It is particularly challenging to estimate the
EEI from TOA radiation fluxes since it is 2 orders of magni-
tude smaller than the mean incoming solar radiation and the
mean outgoing longwave radiation (∼340 W m−2) (L’Ecuyer
et al., 2015). The Clouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy
System (CERES) project has been measuring the Earth ra-
diative budget at TOA for several decades now (Loeb et al.,
2018). The measurements are difficult, involving the incom-
ing solar radiation, the scanning of outgoing radiation both
visible and infrared, cloud cover, aerosols, and instrumental
problems. The precision of the measurement is evaluated
at the order of 0.17 W m−2 (90 % confidence level) at inter-
annual time scales but because of a potential bias of about

12


±2 W m−2 the accuracy is above ±2 W m−2. The precision
of CERES is sufficient to evaluate small changes in time of
the EEI that are induced by natural or anthropogenic forcing
(Loeb and Doelling, 2020; Raghuraman et al., 2021). But
the accuracy is not sufficient to estimate the mean EEI gen-
erated over the past decades by anthropogenic greenhouse
gases emissions.
Another approach to estimate the EEI consists in estimat-
ing the excess of energy that is stored in the climate system
in response to the TOA radiative imbalance. With its high
thermal inertia and its large volume, the ocean accumulates,
in the form of heat, more than 90 % of the excess of en-
ergy that is stored by the climate system (von Schuckmann
et al., 2020). The other climate reservoirs (i.e. atmosphere,
land, and cryosphere) play a minor role in the energy storage
at seasonal and longer timescales (von Schuckmann et al.,
2020). As a result, the Ocean Heat Uptake (OHU) is a pre-
cise proxy of the EEI and estimating the OHU is an efficient
approach to estimate the EEI.
The OHU can be estimated with an accuracy of a few
tenths of W m−2 and thus provides an approach to estimate
the mean EEI generated over the past decades by anthro-
pogenic greenhouse gases emissions. This is possible with
2 approaches: (1) from direct in-situ measurements of tem-
perature–salinity profiles mainly derived from the Argo float
network; (2) from the thermal expansion of the ocean de-
rived from a space geodetic approach (Meyssignac et al.,
2019). These methods are complementary, with their own
advantages and limitations.
The direct measurement ap-
proach relies on in situ measurements from Argo which are
unevenly spatially distributed with poor sampling of the
deep ocean (below 2000 m depth), marginal seas, and below
seasonal sea ice. The space geodetic approach measures the
sea level changes due to the thermal expansion and saline
contraction of the ocean (also called sterodynamic sea level
changes) derived from the differences between the total sea
level change derived from satellite altimetry measurements
and the barystatic sea level changes from satellite gravity
measurements. This approach offers consistent spatial and
temporal sampling of the ocean through time, with a nearly
global coverage of the oceans, except for the polar regions
(above 82°). It also provides OHU estimates from the entire
ocean water column. But it does not provide the vertical
structure of the OHU unlike the Argo approach. It is cru-
cial to develop both the geodetic approach and the in-situ
approach to derive EEI estimates that are cross validated
and thus reliable.
The
EEI
shows
time
variations
in
response
to
anthropogenic
emissions
and
natural
variability
like
ocean–atmosphere interactions or volcanic eruptions. The
coupled natural variability of the ocean and of the atmo-
sphere leads to monthly to interannual variations of the or-
der of a few W m−2 (Loeb et al., 2018). Decadal and longer-
term variations of the order of a few tenths of W m−2 are
associated with the anthropogenic and the natural forcing of
the climate system (Loeb and Doelling, 2020). On decadal
time scales the EEI shows trends of the order of a few cents of
W m−2 year−1 in response to changes in the external forcing
either natural or anthropogenic (Loeb and Doelling, 2020;

Raghuraman et al., 2021). To evaluate these variations and
particularly the small decadal and longer-term response of
EEI to anthropogenic or natural forcing, EEI should be es-
timated with an accuracy better than ±0.1 W m−2 and a
stability better than ±0.02 W m−2/year.
This is particu-
larly challenging, and it requires a fine characterisation of
the errors associated with the EEI estimates. In the case of
the EEI derived from the geodetic approach the limiting fac-
tors at decadal time scales come from the uncertainty in the
GIA correction and in the ITRF realization (see Blazquez
et al., 2018; Meyssignac et al., 2019; Gu´erou et al., Prep).
In particular, the uncertainty on the Z motion of the geo-
center of the ITRF which affects both the satellite altimetry
estimate of the sea level changes at mid to high latitudes
and the gravimetry estimate of the ocean mass changes is
a primary source of uncertainty on the EEI at decadal and
longer time scales (see Marti et al., 2022; Blazquez et al.,
2018; Gu´erou et al., Prep).
To reach an accuracy of ±0.1 W m−2 and a stability of
±0.02 W m−2/year in EEI on decadal time scales an accu-
racy of ±0.25 mm and a stability of ±0.05 mm/year is neces-
sary on sea level and ocean mass rates estimates at decadal
time scales. This is achievable only with more accurate and
more stable reference frame realizations, which is the pri-
mary goal of the GENESIS mission.

4.6
Ionospheric and plasmaspheric density

The Earth’s ionosphere is defined as the atmospheric layer,
typically between 80 km and 1000 km altitude, where the
electron density is sufficient to significantly influence the
propagation of electromagnetic waves that travel into it
(Davies, 1990).
Its main effect is the modification of the
wave propagation velocity, which is proportional to the in-
tegrated electron density along the wave propagation direc-
tion, called Total Electron Content (TEC). Secondary ef-
fects are a modification of the wave amplitude and a bend-
ing of the propagation vector, with respect to the generally
assumed straight line.
The
electron
density
profile
is
characterized
by
a
Chapman-profile shape, with a peak at an altitude typically
ranging from 200 km to 350 km. At mid and low latitudes,
above the ionosphere is the plasmasphere, constituting a
reservoir of cold particles (mainly electrons, protons and
helium ions) that fills during the day and drains at night
(Russel et al., 2016). Its location, as well as the particle
motion, is controlled by the geomagnetic field whose dipo-
lar nature confines the plasma. The main control of these
ionized mediums is the solar activity that drives extreme
ultraviolet radiation (hence the primary source for ioniza-
tion) and that modifies the solar wind which constantly in-
teracts with the geomagnetic field. Besides this variability
“from above” many irregularities arise “from below”, i.e. for
which the origin is located in the lower atmospheric layers
or at the ground level (Fuller-Rowell et al., 2017). One of
the most important ionospheric variability sources lies in
the equatorial region and is known as the “fountain effect”:
a rapid change in the neutral wind creates an important
⃗E × ⃗B (where ⃗E is the electric field and ⃗B the magnetic

13


filed) vertical drift that lifts the plasma up to 1000 km al-
titude (Kelley, 2009). The plasma plumes are then redis-
tributed on the either side of the magnetic equator to form
the so-called “ionization anomaly crests”, being two regions
of local maximum electron density. To that are associated
small-scale irregularities called equatorial plasma bubbles,
which appear during post-sunset hours at low-latitudes and
produce plasma depletions that disturb radio communica-
tions and GNSS services (Kintner et al., 2007). More pre-
cisely, they are responsible for signal scattering that fades
out the signal amplitude, leading to fluctuating signal-to-
noise ratio that prevents optimal GNSS satellite tracking,
or even worst, interrupts it.
During the last two decades, an important number of
GNSS receivers has been included on board LEO satellites
orbiting at various altitudes, besides an extensive network
of ground-based receivers.
They continuously receive the
signal broadcasted by GNSS satellites offering an excellent
time and space coverage and allowing to reliably monitor the
TEC above a given LEO satellite (Wautelet et al., 2017). In
the latter methodology, the retrieved TEC is the by-product
of the differential code biases computation performed us-
ing only LEO-based observation (i.e.
no ground station)
to minimize the impact of the ionospheric peak in the dif-
ferential code biases adjustment. Depending on the orbit
altitude and the geomagnetic latitude, the TEC above the
spacecraft would mostly express the ionization crests or the
plasmaspheric contribution.
In the framework of a circular orbit at an altitude
of 6000 km, as planned for the GENESIS mission (see
Sect. 6.1), the plasmaspheric TEC would be very small, and
even negligible. The LEO-DCB (Differential Code Biases)
computation software should be able to quantify this con-
tribution and provide, if plasmaspheric TEC contribution
is actually negligible, accurate and reliable DCB values for
GNSS satellites and onboard receiver.
In addition to the zenith GNSS antenna, a nadir-pointing
GNSS antenna would enable the observation of radio-
occultation profiles of GNSS satellites, as the same manner
as for dedicated missions COSMIC and COSMIC-2.
Us-
ing appropriate inversion methods on such observations will
provide additional electron density profiles that will bene-
fit the ionosphere/plasmasphere community. Moreover, the
high inclination of the GENESIS orbit will provide occul-
tations above polar and sub-polar regions, which are not
geographically covered by the dedicated missions COSMIC
and COSMIC-2. By providing electron density profiles at
polar regions, GENESIS will improve the observability and
the understanding of the dynamics in this region where the
ionosphere meets the solar environment.

5
Benefits for navigation sciences
and metrology

5.1
Improvement in global positioning

The positioning of stations in a GNSS network relies on
global solutions of complete satellite constellations and on

the simultaneous adjustment of station coordinates. These
solutions involve a large number of parameters that will de-
grade the observability of the station coordinates, and may
also introduce biases in the solutions: tropospheric propaga-
tion models, empirical solar radiation pressure parameters
of the satellites, antenna characteristics such as PCO, Phase
Variations (PV), which may or may not be adjusted.
In a global GNSS solution, the clock biases of the trans-
mitters and receivers must be managed. Regardless of the
strategy used (estimation or differentiation), the resulting
information for the geometry is the same. The result is a
significant reduction in the observability of the Earth’s cen-
ter of mass, i.e. the origin of the reference frame (Rebis-
chung et al., 2014; Meindl et al., 2013). This includes the
motion of the geocenter whose north-south motion is not
well observed by GNSS constellations and is corrupted by
draconitic signals from orbit solutions (see Sect. 3.3).
Some improvements could be achieved if the GENESIS
onboard oscillator can be modeled with sufficient accuracy
over long periods (typically one day), allowing a drastic re-
duction in the impact of receiver-related clock parameters.
A comparison of the onboard USO to ground atomic clocks
could be achieved thanks to an A-LRR (see Sec. 6.2). For
example, a model of the USO on board Jason-2 satellite was
developed thanks to the Time Transfer by Laser Link (T2L2)
instrument (Belli et al., 2016).
The frame scale factor is also directly connected to the
transmitters’ and receivers’ PCO/PV characteristics.
For
the ground receivers, independent calibration methods are
used by the International GNSS Service. For the transmit-
ters, only Galileo provides calibrations performed on ground
before launch. It has been shown that this has an impor-
tant impact on the observed scale factor. The GENESIS
satellite, carrying a GNSS receiver, can provide a lot of in-
formation about the scale and the motion of the geocenter
(see Sect. 3.3 for more details). Therefore, careful design of
the GENESIS platform is required to minimize the sensitiv-
ity of the dynamic modeling to external effects such as direct
and reflected solar radiation pressure. For the measurement
of long-term variations of these accelerations, the currently
used accelerometer technology, which requires a posteriori
calibration, is not suitable.
Contributions to the performance of GNSS by GENESIS
will include the following:

1 The well-calibrated satellite platform will provide lo-
cal tie vectors in space between physical antenna phase
centres allowing for a high-precision linking of GNSS
observations with the other space geodetic techniques,
referencing GNSS positioning results to a well-defined
reference frame (see Sect. 3.1 and Sect. 3.2)

2 The satellite antenna provides a clean absolute refer-
ence for accurate and consistent calibration of the trans-
mitting antennas of all GNSS satellites, without atmo-
spheric propagation errors. In the case of Galileo, the
antenna phase maps measured on the ground will allow
a better validation of these calibrations (see Sect. 5.2).
Pseudo-range biases will also be observed with much

14


better accuracy due to the reduction of ionospheric
pseudo-range errors (see Sect. 4.6)

3 The specific observability in the radial direction of the
satellite orbit allows GNSS to independently contribute
to the realization of the scale and origin of the Earth
reference frame (see Sect. 3.3)

As a proof of concept the capability of calibrating Global
Positioning System (GPS) transmit antennas using receivers
on board LEO satellites without relying on an external scale
was demonstrated by Haines et al. (2015) using GPS track-
ing data from GRACE-B and TOPEX/Poseidon.

5.2
GNSS antenna phase centre calibration

Conventionally a mechanical reference point is defined for
each GNSS antenna while the actual transmitting or receiv-
ing point might differ by up to few centimeters. For the re-
ceiving antenna these PCOs and direction-dependent phase
variations have been discussed since the early 1990’s leading
to sophisticated calibration methods (Rothacher et al., 1995;
Elosegui et al., 1995; Mader, 1999; W¨ubbena et al., 2000).
Compared deviations for the GNSS satellites became appar-
ent with the evolution of the GPS constellation in the early
2000’s (Zhu et al., 2003; Ge et al., 2005; Cardellach et al.,
2007). The problem was partially solved by estimating the
GNSS transmitter antenna patterns in the adjustment pro-
cess (Schmid and Rothacher, 2003; Bar-Sever, 1998; Schmid
et al., 2005; Dilßner, 2010; Steigenberger et al., 2016). This
approach suffers from considerable limitations. The major
restriction is the correlation between the terrestrial scale,
the satellite clock, and the satellite antenna offsets result-
ing from the observation geometry. As one consequence the
scale information is transferred from VLBI and SLR net-
works to the GNSS network (Schmid et al., 2007) which
prevents GNSS from providing an independent scale. The
second limit is given by the fact that the absolute antenna
phase patterns of ground tracking sites are contaminated by
local environmental effects such as time-variable multipath.
A third limitation is given by the required estimation of tro-
pospheric delays for each ground station. In 2016, Galileo
released as first GNSS ever precise calibrations for antenna
phase center and phase variations. Applying them in the
GNSS estimation, differences between GPS- and Galileo-
based coordinates become visible (Villiger et al., 2018). By
fixing the Galileo PCOs to the calibrated values, a Galileo-
based scale is realized and the GPS PCOs were estimated
simultaneously in an integrated processing (Villiger et al.,
2020).
A totally independent method to estimate scale-free
GNSS PCOs is given via the usage of space-based GNSS ob-
servations and the gravitational constraints from the orbital
dynamics of the corresponding low Earth orbiter (Huang
et al., 2022). The high consistency between the LEO-based
and the Galileo-based approaches has been shown by Huang
et al. (2021). Despite the larger constellation of Galileo than
that of LEOs (24 versus 10+ in 2022), the LEO-based ap-
proach has advantages in several important aspects. The

additional geometry due to the fast movement and the al-
titudes of the LEOs both benefit the de-correlation of the
GPS PCOs and the scale. The altitudes of the LEOs also
lead to negligible impact of troposphere delay on the space-
based observations. Moreover, the long-term available data
of historical and operating LEOs can be used for the estima-
tion of the GPS PCOs backwards in time. Recent studies
by Glaser et al. (2020) and Huang et al. (2022) confirmed
a one-millimeter accuracy requirement for the receiver PCO
position on board the LEOs.
As the antennas of GENESIS will be fully calibrated to-
gether with the entire satellite structure, this mission offers
a pure absolute reference for a precise and consistent cali-
bration of the transmit antennas of all GNSS satellites, in-
cluding Galileo and BeiDou. The orbiting geodetic observa-
tory thus offers the possibility to determine consistent GNSS
transmit phase patterns without relying on a scale from ex-
ternal sources, thus providing GNSS with the capability to
contribute independently to the realization of the scale of
the terrestrial reference frame (Bar-Sever et al., 2009; Haines
et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2022). Additionally, the geometry
between GENESIS and a GNSS satellite allows scanning the
transmitting antenna pattern within a short time and up to
nadir angles of 30°. Thus, it is possible to reduce additional
correlations between the phase centre offsets and the space-
craft orientation. The extension of nadir angles to 30° for
transmitting antenna calibrations leads to a significant im-
provement in the GNSS-based orbit determination for other
scientific Earth observation missions. Therefore, GENESIS
will allow improving products of such missions, especially,
orbit dependent altimeter data.

5.3
Positioning
of
satellites
and
space
probes

GENESIS will provide a breakthrough in space geodesy and
by this will contribute to improving the accuracy of many
satellite orbits, and consequently, the accuracy of the param-
eters that these satellites observe. POD is an integral part
of analyzing the data of numerous Earth science missions
and of inter-planetary space probes. Prominent examples of
past, present and future missions devoted to Earth observa-
tion are radar altimetry missions such as TOPEX/Poseidon,
Jason-1, -2, -3, Sentinel-3, and Sentinel-6A, laser altime-
try missions such as ICESat-1 and -2, gravity missions such
as CHAMP, GRACE, GOCE, and GRACE-FO, and many
other missions such as the SAR/InSAR missions TerraSAR-
X, TanDEM-X, and Sentinel-1, the magnetic field mission
Swarm or further satellites of the Copernicus Earth obser-
vation program of the European Union.
All above mentioned missions significantly rely on POD,
some of them even critically, as the quality of the science
products may directly depend on the accuracy of the or-
bit determination, e.g., requiring a radial orbit accuracy of
15 mm with a goal of 10 mm for the science products of
Sentinel-6A (Donlon et al., 2021) or a 3-D orbit accuracy
of 5 cm for the Sentinel-1 mission (GMES Sentinel-1 Team,
2004). This holds for all gravity missions and in particu-
lar for altimetry missions, where the radial component is

15


of primary interest (Cerri et al., 2010). Sea level measure-
ments from radar altimetry, e.g., are directly related to this
component (International Altimetry Team, 2021). For mis-
sions providing long-term climatological data records, it is
therefore essential to perform the most accurate POD in a
reference frame which is consistent across many years for the
data analysis of many different spacecraft. In addition to a
stable reference frame, which is crucial to not contaminate
sea level rise measurements with reference frame drifts (Al-
tamimi and Collilieux, 2013), the highly accurate modeling
of non-gravitational (e.g., Flohrer et al., 2011; Mao et al.,
2021) and gravitational forces, e.g., the proper modeling
of temporal gravity variations across many years (Couhert
et al., 2015; Peter et al., 2022), as well as a full exploitation
of multiple tracking techniques (Luthcke et al., 2003; Choi
et al., 2004) is mandatory for the most accurate POD.
Similar to the orbit determination of the GENESIS space-
craft, POD of any other Earth science spacecraft refers to
the positioning of the satellite CoM in a TRF. POD thereby
occurs across a range of time-scales: near-real-time, inter-
mediate latency, and longer latency for mission science prod-
ucts and climate data records. Missions with stringent accu-
racy requirements on POD usually employ multiple and in-
dependent POD payloads for this purpose. Onboard GNSS
receivers, DORIS receivers, and SLR reflectors are used to
improve the quality and robustness of the orbit determi-
nation and to enable cross calibrations (e.g., Montenbruck
et al., 2021).
Usually GNSS data provide one of the strongest POD
contributions due to the almost continuous tracking of all-
in-view GNSS satellites. As the quality of GNSS-based POD
critically depends on a proper modeling of systematic errors,
e.g., phase centre variations of the GNSS receiver and trans-
mitter antennas (see J¨aggi et al., 2009; Schmid et al., 2016,
Sect. 5.2), the improved calibrations of the GNSS transmit-
ter antennas, that will be provided by GENESIS, will fur-
ther improve the performance of GNSS-based POD. This
is of particular relevance for GNSS measurements collected
at low elevation angles (or large nadir angles as seen from
the GNSS), where altimetry missions collect a large amount
of data and where GNSS transmitter calibrations are still
poorly determined today (Schmid et al., 2016).
The fur-
ther reduction of systematic errors will pave the way to-
wards mm-accurate GNSS orbit determination of Earth sci-
ence spacecraft, when exploiting the integer nature of GNSS
carrier phase ambiguities (J¨aggi et al., 2007; Bertiger et al.,
2010; Montenbruck et al., 2018).
GENESIS will also benefit the DORIS, SLR and VLBI
techniques. For DORIS, the limiting error source at present
is the USO sensitivity to radiation-induced perturbations,
particularly while traversing the South Atlantic Anomaly
(ˇStˇep´anek et al., 2020). The possibility to synchronize the
USO to atomic clocks on the ground thanks to an A-LRR
on board the GENESIS satellite would remove this source of
error from the satellite segment. For SLR, the data from the
Jason-2/T2L2 experiment made it possible for the first time
to globally calibrate the time biases in the stations of the
SLR network (Exertier et al., 2017). The time-transfer ex-
periment incorporated onto the GENESIS mission would be

crucial to continue such a global calibration and will thus
benefit global geodesy, and indirectly POD by helping to
improve the SLR technique.
Finally, the VLBI transmit-
ter (VT, see Sect. 6.3) on board GENESIS will provide the
spacecraft position in the CRF.
The GENESIS spacecraft will provide an additional plat-
form to isolate residual biases in the ranging systems of
SLR stations (e.g., Luceri et al., 2019).
These residual
range errors are extremely challenging to isolate, because
they are dependent on ranging equipment and technique,
the retro-reflector target response, the data sampling and
editing when creating the SLR normal points. GENESIS
will provide a platform in a MEO where the other track-
ing data (GNSS, DORIS, VLBI) will help to isolate residual
bias effects (e.g., Arnold et al., 2019).
Provided that the locations of the spacecraft CoM and of
the individual POD sensors are all known in the respective
satellite body-fixed frame with sufficient accuracy from pre-
launch assessments, it will, therefore, be possible to translate
the high precision of the GNSS, DORIS, and SLR data col-
lected by Earth science spacecraft into mm-accurate satel-
lite positions expressed in the highly accurate and long-term
stable reference frame provided by GENESIS.

5.4
Relativistic geodesy and time and fre-
quency transfer

The International Astronomical Union recommended to in-
troduce the General Theory of Relativity as the theoretical
background for the definition of space-time reference sys-
tems (Soffel et al., 2003). Applying the General Theory of
Relativity is indispensable to meet the required geodetic ac-
curacy and stability of a TRF – i.e. 1 mm for positions and
0.1 mm/year for velocities – for detecting smallest variations
in the Earth system components. GENESIS will prove the
consistent use of the General theory of Relativity in space
geodesy and the involved reference systems at an unprece-
dented accuracy level.
The direct integration of gravimetric and geometric refer-
ence frames is an open issue, where time and frequency mea-
surements will play a central role. For the realization of a
dynamical reference such as a physical height system and the
related equipotential surface, called the geoid, gravity field
measurements are required. Today, such an equipotential
surface is only known at the centimeter to decimeter level if
comparing point values on larger scales. To overcome this
shortcoming, highly precise optical clocks connected by ded-
icated ground or space links can be used. This novel tech-
nique has reached an accuracy that allows the precise mea-
surement of differences of the gravity potential exploiting
the gravitational redshift (M¨uller et al., 2018; Delva et al.,
2019). Optical frequency standards at the leading national
metrology institutes today show relative frequency inaccu-
racies in the 10−18 range (corresponding to 1 cm in height)
and beyond (Brewer et al., 2019; Bothwell et al., 2019; Beloy
et al., 2021). Long-distance optical frequency transfer using
phase-stabilized optical fibers has been demonstrated with
a relative frequency inaccuracy at the 10−19 level (Lisdat
et al., 2016), and even 10−21 on shorter distances (Xu et al.,

16


2019). Free-space laser links already realized Common View
time transfer over thousands of kilometers at the picosecond
level (e.g., with T2L2, see Exertier et al., 2017), and reach
on shorter distances the femtosecond level for time transfer
(Sinclair et al., 2019) and 10−21 level for frequency trans-
fer (Gozzard et al., 2022). It is thus possible, with optical
standards and frequency transfer techniques, to consistently
unify height systems and to improve the accuracy of phys-
ical height reference frames and the geoid, to the cm level
or better that is of prime interest in the context of GGOS
and, especially, for monitoring sea level change.
GENE-
SIS could enable a proof of principle for comparing physical
heights (derived from time and frequency differences) over
large distances if an A-LRR will be present on board the
satellite.

6
Mission design and instruments

6.1
CDF study output

Using well-established ESA CDF assessment, the GENE-
SIS Mission feasibility has been assessed during March/April
2022, with the contribution of over 50 ESA experts covering
all necessary mission feasibility expertise profiles.
The GENESIS high level Mission Objectives have been
defined as follows:

• Obj-1: Improve ITRF accuracy and stability by pro-
viding in-orbit co-location and necessary combined pro-
cessing of the four space geodetic techniques that con-
tribute to its realization, namely GNSS, SLR, DORIS
and VLBI, on a highly calibrated and stable platform.
The goal is to contribute to the achievement of the
GGOS objectives for the ITRF realisation, aiming
for a parameter accuracy of 1 mm and a stability of
0.1 mm/year to the GGOS, in order to provide signifi-
cant scientific benefits in Earth modelling.

• Obj-2: To improve, compared to the current state of
the art, the operational time and frequency transfer and
synchronisation globally. Target performance 10 ps in
time transfer and 10−18 for relative frequency transfer.

Thanks to the onboard VLBI, which is the only geodetic
technique allowing access to the ICRF, GENESIS shall also
allow obtaining a direct link between the ITRF and the
ICRF (differencing the radio signal emitted by GENESIS
with the signals from the fixed quasar radio sources).
The CDF study identified initial high-level Mission Re-
quirements, given in Table 3. From these, the following key
technical drivers are identified:

1. The need of a Very Precise onboard Metrology
(calibrated ties):
the offset between each payload
and the satellite CoM shall be known with accuracies
< 1 mm. Offset stability shall remain within 1 mm-level
during the whole duration of the mission. (requiring
adequate thermoelastic materials; extremely accurate
on-ground calibration tests; etc).

2. A common time reference for all onboard instru-
ments shall be ensured (all geodetic instruments shall
be referenced and synchronized to each other)

3. Highly accurate Precise Orbit Determination:
GENESIS shall be able to determine the orbit with ac-
curacies at mm level (< 1 cm) (excellent GNSS POD,
requiring high success rate Integer ambiguity resolution
and a very accurate radiation pressure model of the
GENESIS satellite).

4. Simultaneous operation of Geodetic techniques,
guaranteeing the maximum contemporary use of the 4
onboard geodetic techniques (and at least 2 at all times)
with best possible performances.

As a result of the different optimisations performed at the
CDF, it has been concluded that a suitable compromise in
terms of POD and contribution of each technique results
to be a 6000 km circular orbit with quasi-polar inclination.
This is selected as baseline orbit for GENESIS (ref. SS-01
from Table 3).
The adoption of the circular orbit is compatible with re-
quirement SS-11 from Table 3 and enables also the contem-
porary use of the 4 geodetic techniques at the same time and
long baseline VLBI observations (with more than 6500 km)
over 75 % of the time.
To reach this orbit two concepts have been conceived,
within the program boundaries:

• Satellite launched with VEGA-C in a sun-synchronous
orbit in a piggyback configuration and the satellite be-
ing raised to the 6000 km using electrical propulsion;

• Direct injection into 6000 km orbit using a direct dedi-
cated launch with several potential options being con-
sidered (e.g., Rocket Factory launcher, ISAR Aerospace
launcher, a combined launch with Ariane 62/Galileo).

Depending on the launch option two different solutions have
been defined with resulting satellite masses (wet) around
375 kg (electrical propulsion option) and 218 kg (Direct in-
jection option).
The study has been instantiated for a generic platform,
based on the PROBA-V concept, although it is concluded
that several other platform options may be considered, re-
sulting in the satellite dimensions shown in Figure 5 and
6.
The current realisation of the ITRF is based on a multi-
technique approach that suitably combines different observ-
ing methods taking advantage of their peculiar strengths. In
particular, the frame origin is materialised by means of SLR
observations; the frame scale is based on the average con-
tribution of SLR and VLBI; DORIS disseminates the frame
information to radar altimetry missions; and finally GNSS
participates in a large number of ground ties, contributes
to establishing and maintaining the conventional frame ori-
entation and is essential to distribute the frame to a large
community of users (see Sect. 3 for more details). There-
fore, GENESIS will carry on board the payloads of all these
space geodetic techniques, exploiting their co-location on a

17


Table 3:
First estimation of high-Level Mission Requirements for GENESIS.

Req. ID
Statement

001
The GENESIS mission shall be designed to achieve the main mission objective Obj-1, through the co-
location in space of the following 4 geodetic techniques: GNSS, VLBI, SLR, DORIS.

002
The GENESIS mission should be designed to achieve the main mission objective Obj-2, for operational
time and frequency transfer and synchronisation
003
The mission shall comply with the space debris mitigation regulations

004
The casualty risk for the mission shall not exceed 1 in 10000 for any re-entry event (controlled or uncon-
trolled). If the predicted casualty risk for an uncontrolled re-entry exceeds this value, an uncontrolled
re-entry is not allowed and a targeted controlled re-entry shall be performed in order not to exceed a risk
level of 1 in 10000
005
The mission shall comply with the space debris mitigation requirements in the nominal and also in the
failure case

006
The mission operational lifetime shall be at least 3 years, as a minimum, excluding LEOP, commissioning
and disposal
007
The GENESIS mission should be designed for a development time of 3 to 4 years

008
The GENESIS mission should target a launch date in 2027
009
Use of high-Technical Readiness Level, demonstrated instruments and payloads shall be preferred, when-
ever possible.

010
Maximum re-use of existing facilities at ESA and ESA Member States
011
The satellite should be launched into an orbit capable to fulfil the mission and payload requirements.

012
A small satellite platform should be targeted
013
The satellite platform shall be able to accommodate all the GENESIS payloads associated to the geodetic
techniques. Additionally, the platform should host the other enabling subsystems, as needed (and optional
payloads as appropriate).

014
The platform nominal lifetime shall be at least 4 years.
015
The offset between each payload and the satellite CoM shall be known with accuracy of 1 mm. Offset
stability shall remain within 1 mm level during the whole duration of the mission

016
The CoM position should be known with 1 mm accuracy in the satellite reference frame.
017
The satellite shall have a Nadir-pointing face for the whole mission duration, with a pointing accuracy
less than 1 degree and a pointing stability of 0.1 degree along the whole orbit.

018
The satellite platform shall be able to operate at the least 2 geodetic techniques in parallel at all times.
019
Attitude determination shall be maintained at all times with accuracy below 0.1 degree.

020
The POD will have to be able to determine the orbit with an accuracy better than 1 cm. POD is also
affected by optical and thermal material properties (absorption, reflection and such) of the satellite outer
surfaces to make an accurate radiation pressure model of the satellite. This has to be taken into account
in CDF in particular with respect to impact on costs.
021
The S/C shall be able to download a volume of science data as follows:GNSS tracking data (1Hz) 0.2
GB/day; DORIS tracking data (0.1 Hz) 0.04 GB/day; Active SLR (SLR related, for synchronization
between a ground clock linked to a laser station and a clock on board the satellite) 0.05 GB/day; ac-
celerometer 0.002 GB/day

022
To provide the link with current ITRF realizations, the selected orbit shall be accessible by the established
global tracking networks of the different techniques
023
VLBI shall be visible for 20 % time from at the least 2 VLBI stations separated by 10 000 km

024
The GENESIS Payloads are: GNSS receiver, VLBI transmitter, a DORIS Receiver and a SLR retrore-
flector.
025
A common time reference for all onboard instruments

026
An accelerometer for measuring the non-gravitational accelerations, contributing to POD should be
included

highly calibrated platform to further improve the ITRF ac-
curacy and stability. The first ever co-location of VLBI with
all satellite geodetic techniques will also strengthen the in-
tegration of Earth geometry and rotation.

GENESIS will be equipped with an array of passive SLR
retroreflectors (P-LRR), a VLBI transmitter, one DORIS
and a GNSS receiver (baseline configuration accounts for 2

GNSS Rx in cold redundancy connected to 2 sets of anten-
nas on the nadir and zenith faces). The DORIS instrument
and GNSS Rx will require specific adaptations to fly on a
6000 km orbit. The additional installation of an Active Laser
Retro-Reflector (A-LRR) device is also examined to allow
accurate time transfer between SLR ground stations.
At
this stage, the A-LRR is considered as an optional payload,

18


Figure 5: Satellite dimensions.

Figure 6: Solar panel dimensions.

but it is considered highly desirable and easy to be inte-
grated as part of the baseline given its reduce mass/power
requirements (< 1 kg; < 1 W). All active payloads will rely
on a single time standard, realized by a USO connected to
a time distribution unit.
An additional optional payload
considered for GENESIS mission is the integration of an on-
board accelerometer, to further support high-precision or-
bit determination, the modelling of non-conservative forces
and allowing also in-orbit determination of the satellite CoM
(with several existing and under evolution instruments being
identified in Europe).
The design of the satellite and instruments integration is
shown in Figure 7 and 8.
In the framework of a potential international collabora-
tion with NASA, an assessment has also been made on the
possible integration of the NASA Geodetic Reference In-
strument Transponder for Small Satellites (GRITTS) in-
strument.
This instrument combines a GPS receiver and
VLBI transmitter.
The GRITSS concept is to upconvert

Figure 7: GENESIS instruments and requirements.

Figure 8: GENESIS instruments.

the received GNSS signal and transponding it to VLBI sta-
tions (1-way biased range). This approach does not require
the satellite to have a view of more than one VLBI station
at a time, allowing it to be in LEO but could be adapted
to MEO orbit as well. If agreed to be included, it would
increase the redundancy of geodetic payloads, and would
support the simultaneous testing of different approaches for
satellite VLBI.
The CDF GENESIS feasibility assessment has covered all
GENESIS mission technical and programmatic aspects, in-
cluding: system analysis; orbit options; mission analysis;
chemical propulsion; electrical propulsion; AOCS; commu-
nications; data handling; power; thermal; structures; radia-
tion; risks and programmatics; costs.
A detailed CDF GENESIS Report is currently under con-
clusion. A public version of this CDF Report will also be
available.
As a main result of the ESA CDF assessment, the GEN-
ESIS Mission has been confirmed to be feasible within the
ESA FutureNAV defined program Boundaries, with a target
launch date in 2027 (assuming the program is started in Q1
2023).

6.2
Passive
and
active
Laser
Retro-
Reflector

The SLR observable is the round-trip time of flight of a laser
pulse between a ground station and a target equipped with a
Laser Retro-Reflector. Timing and time transfer techniques
are at the heart of this activity. This technique makes a
fundamental contribution to the establishment of the ITRF,
thanks to a network of observatories spread over a large part
of the globe, the International Laser Ranging Satellite Net-
work (see Sect. 3 for more details). The majority of satellites
tracked by the International Laser Ranging Service (ILRS)
carry P-LRR. The size, the number and the arrangement
of Corner Cube laser Retro-reflector are a compromise be-
tween the link budget at the given satellite altitude, the
orbit eccentricity and the metrological performances.
Corner Cube laser Retro-reflector can be arranged spher-
ically, e.g., in LAGEOS, LAGEOS-2 and LARES-2 (which
are premiere geodetic satellites of the ILRS) or as a flat panel
as for the Galileo satellites (ILRS Website, 2018). Spheri-
cal arrays give the best accuracies. For example, LARES-2
(40 cm diameter, ∼ 300 kg mass) is a P-LRR delivered by the

19


Italian Space Agency designed to achieve a SLR accuracy of
1 mm (compared to the 5 mm of LAGEOS). It was launched
successfully by ESA on July 13, 2022, with the qualification
flight of the Vega C and it was successfully tracked by the
ILRS SLR network from July 14. Another spherical P-LRR
of significantly reduced size (∼ 10 cm) and mass (kg level)
compared to LARES-2 has been designed to achieve a SLR
accuracy of 2 mm for LEO satellites to be launched from
2024.
Alternatively, an A-LRR can synchronise ground-based
atomic clocks at intercontinental distances using standard
satellite laser ranging techniques.
An A-LRR allows the
precise determination of the onboard clock and the mon-
itoring of its behaviour in the space environment (gravity
field, radiation, temperature) as a supplement to the POD
provided by the conventional SLR. Such an idea has been
demonstrated by SLR ground stations with the T2L2 in-
strument on board the Jason-2 satellite (Belli et al., 2016).
This project highlighted the wide disparity between laser
stations in local time management. This demonstration of
time transfer by laser link is also expected for the Euro-
pean Laser Timing instrument of the Atomic Clock Ensem-
ble in Space (ACES) experiment on board the International
Space Station, which should be launched in 2024 (Caccia-
puoti et al., 2020).
An A-LRR on board GENESIS would allow:

• to benefit from a modern retro-reflector designed to
achieve millimeter accuracy and metrologically at-
tached to the other space geodetic instruments;

• be able to perform ground-to-space and ground-to-
ground frequency and time transfers with an extended
common view compared to T2L2 and ACES missions by
taking advantage of the higher altitude of the satellite;

• to compare GNSS and laser time transfer techniques
with an uncertainty below 100 ps;

• to be able to accurately monitor the behaviour of the
onboard clock for precise orbitography.

The P-LRR is typically less expensive than an A-LRR
counterpart. Being completely passive, is does not use any
resources on board GENESIS (except its mass and volume
envelope).
A combination of both a P-LRR and A-LRR
would provide all combined benefits, as well as the sum of
the resources and mass/volume envelopes needed on board
GENESIS.

6.3
VLBI Transmitter

Observations to distant radio sources, such as quasars, with
the VLBI technique enable the determination of a space-
fixed celestial reference frame like the ICRF with its cur-
rent realization ICRF3 (Charlot et al., 2020) and the Earth
Orientation Parameters (EOP).
VLBI is the only tech-
nique that provides the full set of EOP (polar motion, UT1,
celestial pole offsets), contributes to the ITRF scale, and
uniquely realizes ICRF, as opposed to the satellite-based
techniques (see Sect. 3.3). The connection of the ITRF to

the ICRF through VLBI enables the study of the dynam-
ics of the interior of the Earth through the wandering of
the motion of the poles with respect to the celestial frame,
as well as studying tidal dissipation and seasonal or inter-
annual effects in the geophysical fluids on the solid Earth
through measurements of the rotation rate of the Earth (see
Sect. 3.4).
The fundamental VLBI measurements are signal delay ob-
servations of the incoming radio signals between pairs of
tracking stations. Over time, and using multiple distant ra-
dio sources, these measurements enable the determination
of the baseline vectors between pairs of stations. The orien-
tation of these vectors in the CRF defines the Earth orien-
tation in that frame. The lengths of these vectors, known to
millimeter accuracy, critically contribute to the determina-
tion of the scale of the ITRF (Altamimi et al., 2016). The
VLBI observation campaigns and data processing are coor-
dinated by the International VLBI Service for Geodesy and
Astrometry (IVS Website, 2021).
One of the unique features of GENESIS is the VLBI
Transmitter (VT) that will accurately connect geodetic
VLBI stations through a space-tie to the other geodetic tech-
niques. The VT instrument will transmit signals in different
frequency bands in order to eliminate the ionospheric disper-
sive delay along the paths to each observing VLBI station,
and comply with the evolving observations procedures at all
VLBI stations. The signals can be observed by all geodetic
VLBI stations, including the new VLBI Global Observing
System (VGOS) fast slewing stations that are coming on-
line, in their standard geodetic receiver setups. The VT will
exploit the full extent of the frequency bands allocated on a
worldwide co-primary basis to the Earth exploration satel-
lite service through the International Telecommunications
Union Radio-communication Sector.
The ultra-low-power
density signals of the VT will be well below the applicable
coordination thresholds, ensuring easy compatibility with
ITU rules. Using the conventional VLBI technique of corre-
lating received signals across baselines it will be possible not
only to determine the baseline vectors, as in conventional
VLBI, but also the absolute geocentric position of the re-
ceiving sites. VLBI observations of GENESIS will therefore
enable these stations to be accurately located within the
GENESIS TRF consistently with the other geodetic tech-
niques, enable a frame tie between the celestial frame and
the dynamic reference frames of satellite orbits as well as
a frame tie between the GENESIS TRF and the extremely
accurate and stable inertial celestial frame.
A European VT, compatible with the accommodation
constraints on board the Galileo satellite, performance of
the receiving stations as well as with the ITU regulations in
all transmission frequency bands is currently under develop-
ment for consideration of Galileo second generation satellites
(H2020 HSNAV Website, 2020). The VT is currently de-
signed to transmit at different frequencies between 2 GHz to
14 GHz but also higher frequency bands can be considered.
The present setup for regular VGOS observations use four
1 GHz wide bands within the S, C, and X frequency bands.
Discussions of including higher frequencies in Ka band is
ongoing in order to maximise the covered signal bandwidth

20


since the VLBI estimates of group delay is approximated by
the reciprocal of the observed bandwidth. It may be possible
to investigate linking the ICRF across frequency bands using
the GENESIS satellite as a well-calibrated multi-frequency
target. The VT is designed to transmit both pseudo-noise
and random noise.
The random noise signal mimics the
broader-band noise emitted by quasar radio sources rou-
tinely observed by VLBI, hence can be processed by essen-
tially the usual station software. The required and projected
precision of phase measurement supported by the VT are
0.1 mm and 0.01 mm, respectively, for 1 second observable
(see Biancale et al., 2017).
The feasibility of a dedicated VLBI transmitter on board
future Galileo satellites and the assessment of the impact
of quality and quantity of satellite observations on the de-
rived geodetic parameters were studied recently by various
authors (see Jaradat et al., 2021, Klopotek et al., 2020, Sert
et al., 2022 and references therein). The concept of mea-
surement and equipment choices were discussed in Jaradat
et al. (2021) and the signals designed to mimic the quasars’
radiation as observed and recorded by ground-based tele-
scopes were simulated. The output signal of this chain us-
ing 2 GHz to 11 GHz for VGOS, was also tested using a
VLBI baseband data simulator, then correlated and fringe-
fitted for validation. It was shown that the combination of
quasar and satellite observations could allow theoretically
for simultaneous estimation of Earth Rotation Parameters
(polar motion and UT1-UTC) along with geocenter offsets,
VLBI station positions and satellite orbits (Klopotek et al.,
2020). In the case of carefully selected satellite observations
and optimized scheduling with the VGOS-type network, de-
tection of geocenter motion could be feasible. The use of
VT on GNSS satellites and observation assessment includ-
ing the UT1-UTC transfer quality for Galileo orbits was
demonstrated in Sert et al. (2022).
These recent studies
confirm the significance of dedicated onboard transmitters
and the potential of geodetic VLBI as another space geode-
tic technique.
Observations of quasars and GENESIS satellite within the
same sessions will provide the geodetic community with a
great opportunity for directly linking the dynamical refer-
ence frame of satellite orbits to the quasi-inertial reference
frame of extra-galactic radio sources and redefining the role
of VLBI in space geodesy.

7
Conclusion

The first objective of the GENESIS mission is to contribute
to the achievement of the GGOS accuracy and stability
goals concerning the ITRS realization, aiming for 1 mm and
0.1 mm/year, respectively. To this aim, GENESIS will pro-
vide in-orbit co-location of the four space geodetic tech-
niques: GNSS, SLR, DORIS, and VLBI, on a highly cal-
ibrated and stable platform.
We have shown in this article the primary and critical
importance of the International Terrestrial Reference Frame
(ITRF) and associated geodetic infrastructure and products
for many scientific applications in Earth and navigation sci-

Figure 9:
Illustration of how the geodetic infrastructure
is linked to enabled scientific applications.
(National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2020)

ences.
This is illustrated in Figure 9.
In particular, the
accuracy and stability of the ITRF is very important in the
context of climate change to measure sea-level rise, improve
estimates of ice mass balance, and determine Earth’s energy
imbalance – which are all observables that are critical in cli-
mate change studies.
Moreover, the ITRF improvements
can affect and improve many geodetic and geophysical ob-
servables as well as precise navigation and positioning.
In addition, the ITRF improvements strengthen the
geodetic infrastructure, including the Galileo constellation,
by reducing biases and errors between different techniques.
GENESIS will be complementary and enhance the products
of several other missions such as gravimetry and altimetry
satellites. The addition of optional payloads such as an Ac-
tive Laser Retro-Reflector (A-LRR) and an accelerometer
can pave the way for very interesting and complementary
objectives in navigation and time/frequency metrology.
The crucial necessity of an accurate and stable realiza-
tion of ITRS is endorsed by a large community of scientists
and industries as well as various authorities, including the
IAG and the UN. Finally, a study by the CDF of ESA has
demonstrated the feasibility of the GENESIS mission within
the ESA FutureNAV defined program boundaries, with a
targeted launch date in 2027.

Acronyms used

ACES
Atomic Clock Ensemble in Space

A-LRR
Active Laser Retro-Reflector

CDF
Concurrent Design Facility

CERES
Clouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy
System

CF
Center of Figure (of the Earth)

CM
Center of Mass (of the Earth)

CoM
Center of Mass (of the satellite)

CRF
Celestial Reference Frame

21


DGFI-TUM Deutsches Geod¨atisches Forschungsinstitut
at Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen

DORIS
Doppler Orbitography and
Radiopositioning Integrated by Satellite

EEI
Earth Energy Imbalance

EOP
Earth Orientation Parameters

ESA
European Space Agency

GGOS
Global Geodetic Observing System

GGRF
Global Geodetic Reference Frame

GIA
Glacial Isostatic Adjustment

GMSL
Global Mean Sea Level

GNSS
Global Navigation Satellite System

GPS
Global Positioning System

GRACE
Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment

GRACE-FO Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment
Follow On

IAG
International Association of Geodesy

ICESat
Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite

ICESat-2
Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite 2

ICRF
International Celestial Reference Frame

ICRS
International Celestial Reference System

IERS
International Earth Rotation and Reference
Systems Service

IGN
Institut national de l’information
g´eographique et foresti`ere

ILRS
International Laser Ranging Service

IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change

ITRF
International Terrestrial Reference Frame

ITRS
International Terrestrial Reference System

IUGG
International Union of Geodesy and
Geophysics

JPL
Jet Propulsion Laboratory

LAGEOS
LAser GEOdynamics Satellites

LARES
LAser RElativity Satellite

LEO
Low-Earth Orbit

LLR
Lunar Laser Ranging

MEO
Medium-Earth Orbit

OHU
Ocean Heat Uptake

PCO
Phase Center Offsets

PV
Phase Variations

P-LRR
Passive Laser Retro-Reflector

POD
Precise Orbit Determination

SLR
Satellite Laser Ranging

SRP
Solar Radiation Pressure

SDGs
Sustainable Development Goals

T2L2
Time Transfer by Laser Link

TEC
Total Electron Content

TOA
Top Of the Atmosphere

TRF
Terrestrial Reference Frame

TRS
Terrestrial Reference System

UN
United Nations

UN-GGIM
United Nations Committee of Experts on
Global Geospatial Information Management

VGOS
VLBI Global Observing System

VLBI
Very Long Baseline Interferometry

VT
VLBI Transmitter

USO
Ultra-Stable Oscillator

acknowledgments

JB and AN are grateful to the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF) for supporting this work with project P33925. Work
by SD has been supported by INFN and by ASI (Italian
Space Agency) under the ASI-INFN Joint Lab Agreement
n. 2019-15-HH.0. The contribution of JM was supported by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Re-
search Foundation) via Collaborative Research Center CRC
1464 “TerraQ”, project-ID 434617780, and Germany’s Ex-
cellence Strategy EXC 2123 “QuantumFrontiers”, project-
ID 390837967.
Work by SG has been supported by the
German Research Foundation (DFG) under Grant Num-
ber SCHU 1103/8-1 (GGOS-SIM, Simulation of the Global
Geodetic Observing System) and SCHU 1103/8-2 (GGOS-
SIM-2).
The GENESIS mission is supported by many scientists,
industrial partners, and space agencies, namely: Elisa Felic-
itas Arias (Paris Observatory-PSL, France), Fran¸cois Bar-
lier (Cˆote d’Azur Observatory, France), Bruno Bertrand
(Royal Observatory of Belgium, Belgium), Claude Boucher
(Bureau des Longitudes, France), Sara Bruni (PosiTim
UG at ESA/ESOC, Germany), Carine Bruyninx (Royal
Observatory of Belgium,
Belgium),
Hugues Capdeville
(CLS, France),
Corentin Caudron (Universit´e libre de
Bruxelles, Belgium), Julien Chab´e (Cˆote d’Azur Obser-
vatory,
France),
Sara Consorti (Thales Alenia Space,

22


Italy), Christophe Craeye (Universit´e catholique de Lou-
vain, Belgium), Pascale Defraigne (Royal Observatory of
Belgium, Belgium), Clovis De Matos (ESA/HQ, France),
Jan Dou˘sa (Geodetic Observatory Pecny, Czech Repub-
lic), Fabio Dovis (Politecnico di Torino, Italy), Frank
Flechtner (GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences,
Potsdam, Germany), Claudia Flohrer (BKG, Germany),
Aur´elien Hees (Paris Observatory-PSL/CNRS, France),
Ren´e Jr.
Landry (Qu´ebec University, Canada), Juliette
Legrand (Royal Observatory of Belgium, Belgium), Jean-
Michel Lemoine (GET/CNES/CNRS, France), David Luc-
chesi (IAPS/INAF, Italy), Marco Lucente (IAPS/INAF,
Italy), Nijat Mammadaliyev (Technische Universit¨at Berlin,
GFZ Potsdam, Germany), Gr´egoire Martinot-Lagarde (Cˆote
d’Azur Observatory, France), Stephen Merkowitz (NASA
GFSC, United States),
Gaetano Mileti (University of
Neuchˆatel, Switzerland) , Terry Moore (University of Not-
tingham, United Kingdom), Juraj Papco (Slovak Univer-
sity of Technology, Slovakia) , Roberto Peron (IAPS/INAF,
Italy),
Paul
Rebischung
(IGN/IPGP,
France),
Pascal
Rosenblatt, LPG/CNRS (France), S´everine Rosat, ITES-
EOST/CNRS (France), Matteo Luca Ruggiero, Universit`a
degli Studi di Torino (Italy), Alvaro Santamaria (Univer-
sit´e Paul Sabatier, France), Francesco Santoli ( IAPS/INAF,
Italy), Feliciana Sapio ( IAPS/INAF, Italy), Jaume Sanz
(Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya,
Spain),
Patrick
Schreiner (GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences,
Potsdam, Germany), Erik Schoenemann (ESA/ESOC, Ger-
many), Harald Schuh (GFZ German Research Centre for
Geosciences, Potsdam, Germany), Laurent Soudarin (CLS,
France), Cosimo Stallo (Thales Alenia Space, Italy), Dariusz
Strugarek (Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life
Sciences, Poland), Angelo Tartaglia (INAF, Italy), Daniela
Thaller (BKG, Germany), Maarten Vergauwen (KU Leu-
ven, Belgium), Francesco Vespe (Agenzia Spaziale Italiana,
Italy), Massimo Visco (IAPS/INAF, Italy), Jens Wickert
(GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences, Potsdam,
Germany) and Pawe�l Wielgosz (University of Warmia and
Mazury, Poland).

References

Abbondanza,
C.,
Chin,
T. M.,
Gross,
R. S.,
Heflin,
M.
B.,
Parker,
J.
W.,
Soja,
B.
S.,
van
Dam,
T.,
and
Wu,
X.
(2017).
JTRF2014,
the
JPL
Kalman filter and smoother realization of the Inter-
national
Terrestrial
Reference
System.
Journal of
Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth, 122(10):8474–8510.

eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/2017JB014360.

Ablain, M., Meyssignac, B., Zawadzki, L., Jugier, R., Ribes,
A., Spada, G., Benveniste, J., Cazenave, A., and Picot, N.
(2019). Uncertainty in satellite estimates of global mean
sea-level changes, trend and acceleration. Earth System
Science Data, 11(3):1189–1202.

Altamimi, Z. and Collilieux, X. (2013). Reference frames for
applications in geosciences: proceedings of the Symposium

in Marne-La-Vall´ee, 4-8 October, 2010. Springer, Berlin;
New York. OCLC: 834074316.

Altamimi, Z., Rebischung, P., Collilieux, X., Metivier, L.,
and Chanard, K. (2021). ITRF2020: From Data Analysis
to Results. 2021:G53A–08. Conference Name: AGU Fall
Meeting Abstracts.

Altamimi, Z., Rebischung, P., Collilieux, X., M´etivier, L.,
and Chanard, K. (2022). ITRF2020: An augmented ref-
erence frame refining the modeling of nonlinear station
motions. Submitted.

Altamimi, Z., Rebischung, P., M´etivier, L., and Collilieux,
X. (2016). ITRF2014: A new release of the International
Terrestrial Reference Frame modeling nonlinear station
motions. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth, 121(8):6109–6131.

Anderson, J., Beyerle, G., Glaser, S., Liu, L., M¨annel, B.,
Nilsson, T., Heinkelmann, R., and Schuh, H. (2018). Sim-
ulations of VLBI observations of a geodetic satellite pro-
viding co-location in space. Journal of Geodesy, 92.

Appleby, G., Rodr´ıguez, J., and Altamimi, Z. (2016). As-
sessment of the accuracy of global geodetic satellite laser
ranging observations and estimated impact on ITRF scale:
estimation of systematic errors in LAGEOS observations
1993–2014. Journal of Geodesy, 90(12):1371–1388.

Argus,
D. F.,
Fu,
Y.,
and Landerer,
F. W. (2014).
Seasonal variation in total water storage in California
inferred from GPS observations of vertical land mo-
tion.
Geophysical Research Letters, 41(6):1971–1980.

eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/2014GL059570.

Argus, D. F., Peltier, W. R., Blewitt, G., and Kreemer, C.
(2021). The viscosity of the top third of the lower mantle
estimated using GPS, GRACE, and relative sea level mea-
surements of glacial isostatic adjustment. Journal of Geo-
physical Research: Solid Earth, 126(5):e2020JB021537.

Arnold, D., Montenbruck, O., Hackel, S., and So´snica, K.
(2019). Satellite laser ranging to low Earth orbiters: orbit
and network validation. Journal of Geodesy, 93(11):2315–
2334.

Bar-Sever, Y. (1998). Estimation of the GPS transmit phase
center offset. Eos, Transactions, American Geophysical
Union, 79(45).

Bar-Sever, Y. E., Haines, B., Wu, S., Lemoine, F., and
Willis, P. (2009). Geodetic Reference Antenna in Space
(GRASP): A Mission to Enhance the Terrestrial Refer-
ence Frame. In COSPAR colloquium: scientific and fun-
damental aspects of the Galileo program. Padua, 2009.

Beckley, B. D., Lemoine, F. G., Luthcke, S. B., Ray,
R. D., and Zelensky, N. P. (2007).
A reassessment
of global and regional mean sea level trends from
TOPEX and Jason-1 altimetry based on revised reference
frame and orbits. Geophysical Research Letters, 34(14).
eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1029/2007GL030002.

23


Belli, A., Exertier, P., Samain, E., Courde, C., Vernotte, F.,
Jayles, C., and Auriol, A. (2016). Temperature, radiation
and aging analysis of the DORIS Ultra Stable Oscillator
by means of the Time Transfer by Laser Link experiment
on Jason-2.
Advances in Space Research, 58(12):2589–
2600.

Beloy, K., Bodine, M. I., Bothwell, T., Brewer, S. M.,
Bromley, S. L., Chen, J.-S., Deschˆenes, J.-D., Diddams,
S. A., Fasano, R. J., Fortier, T. M., Hassan, Y. S., Hume,
D. B., Kedar, D., Kennedy, C. J., Khader, I., Koepke,
A., Leibrandt, D. R., Leopardi, H., Ludlow, A. D., Mc-
Grew, W. F., Milner, W. R., Newbury, N. R., Nicolodi,
D., Oelker, E., Parker, T. E., Robinson, J. M., Romisch,
S., Sch¨affer, S. A., Sherman, J. A., Sinclair, L. C., Son-
derhouse, L., Swann, W. C., Yao, J., Ye, J., Zhang, X.,
and Boulder Atomic Clock Optical Network (BACON)
Collaboration (2021). Frequency ratio measurements at
18-digit accuracy using an optical clock network.
Na-
ture, 591(7851):564–569. Number: 7851 Publisher: Na-
ture Publishing Group.

Bertiger, W., Desai, S. D., Dorsey, A., Haines, B. J., Har-
vey, N., Kuang, D., Sibthorpe, A., and Weiss, J. P.
(2010). Sub-centimeter precision orbit determination with
GPS for ocean altimetry. Marine Geodesy, 33(sup1):363–
378.
eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/01490419.
2010.487800.

Biancale, R., Rothacher, M., and et al. (2017). E-GRASP /
Eratosthenes: Proposal for Earth Explorer Opportunity
Mission EE-9. Technical report.

Blazquez, A. and Meyssignac, B. (2022).
The impor-
tance of an accurate geocenter motion in the Earth’s
water and energy budgets estimated by gravimetry.
In
GENESIS-1
Online
Workshop:
Co-location
of
Geodetic Techniques in Space. 26 Apr. 2022.
https:
//genesis-1.sciencesconf.org/data/09_2204_
GENESIS_1_AB_BM_geocenter_in_water_energy.pdf.

Blazquez, A., Meyssignac, B., Lemoine, J. M., Berthier, E.,
Ribes, A., and Cazenave, A. (2018). Exploring the uncer-
tainty in GRACE estimates of the mass redistributions
at the Earth surface: implications for the global water
and sea level budgets. Geophysical Journal International,
215(1):415–430.

Blewitt, G., Altamimi, Z., Davis, J., Gross, R., Kuo, C.-
Y., Lemoine, F. G., Moore, A. W., Neilan, R. E., Plag,
H.-P., Rothacher, M., Shum, C. K., Sideris, M. G.,
Sch¨one, T., Tregoning, P., and Zerbini, S. (2010). Geode-
tic Observations and Global Reference Frame Contri-
butions to Understanding Sea-Level Rise and Variabil-
ity.
In Understanding Sea-Level Rise and Variability,
pages 256–284. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Section:
9

eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
10.1002/9781444323276.ch9.

Bloßfeld, M., Rudenko, S., Kehm, A., Panafidina, N.,
M¨uller, H., Angermann, D., Hugentobler, U., and Seitz,

M. (2018). Consistent estimation of geodetic parameters
from SLR satellite constellation measurements. Journal
of Geodesy, 92:1003–1021.

Bothwell, T., Kedar, D., Oelker, E., Robinson, J. M., Brom-
ley, S. L., Tew, W. L., Ye, J., and Kennedy, C. J.
(2019).
JILA SrI optical lattice clock with uncertainty
of 2.0 × 10−18. Metrologia, 56(6):065004.

Brewer, S. M., Chen, J.-S., Hankin, A. M., Clements,
E. R., Chou, C. W., Wineland, D. J., Hume, D. B., and
Leibrandt, D. R. (2019). 27al+ quantum-logic clock with
a systematic uncertainty below 10−18. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
123:033201.

Cacciapuoti, L., Armano, M., Much, R., Sy, O., Helm,
A., Hess, M. P., Kehrer, J., Koller, S., Niedermaier, T.,
Esnault, F. X., Massonnet, D., Goujon, D., Pittet, J.,
Rochat, P., Liu, S., Schaefer, W., Schwall, T., Prochazka,
I., Schlicht, A., Schreiber, U., Delva, P., Guerlin, C.,
Laurent, P., le Poncin-Lafitte, C., Lilley, M., Savalle, E.,
Wolf, P., Meynadier, F., and Salomon, C. (2020). Testing
gravity with cold-atom clocks in space. Eur. Phys. J. D,
74(8):164.

Cardellach, E., Elosegui, P., and Davis, J. L. (2007). Global
distortion of GPS networks associated with satellite an-
tenna model errors. J Geophys Res, 112(B7):B07405.

Cazenave, A., Meyssignac, B., Ablain, M., Balmaseda, M.,
Bamber, J., Barletta, V. R., Beckley, B., Benveniste, J.,
Berthier, E., Blazquez, A., Boyer, T., Caceres, D., Cham-
bers, D., Champollion, N., Chao, B., Chen, J. L., Cheng,
L., Church, J. A., Chuter, S., Cogley, G., Dangendorf, S.,
Desbruy`eres, D. G., Doll, P., Domingues, C. M., Falk, U.,
Famiglietti, J., Fenoglio-Marc, L., Galassi, G., Gardner,
A., Groh, A., Hamlington, B., Hogg, A., Horwath, M.,
Humphrey, V., Husson, L., Ishii, M., Jaeggi, Jevrejeva,
S., Johnson, G. C., Kolodziejczyk, Kusche, J., Lambeck,
K., Landerer, F. W., Leclercq, P., Legr´esy, B., Leuliette,
E., Llovel, W., Longuevergne, L., Loomis, B. D., Luthcke,
S., Marcos, M., Marzeion, B., Merchant, C. J., Merrifield,
M. A., Milne, G., Mitchum, G. T., Mohajeani, Monier,
Monselesan, D., Nerem, Palanisamy, H., Paul, F., Perez,
B., Piecuch, C. G., Ponte, R. M., Purkey, S. G., Rea-
ger, J. T., Rietbroek, R., Rignot, E., Riva, R., Roem-
mich, Sorensen, L. S., Sasgen, I., Schrama, Seneviratne,
S., Shum, C. K., Spada, G., Stammer, D., Van De Wal, R.,
Velicogna, I., von Schuckmann, K., Wada, Y., Wang, J.,
Watson, C., Wiese, D. N., Wijffels, S., Westaway, R. M.,
Woppelmann, G., and Wouters, B. (2018). Global sea-
level budget 1993–present. Earth System Science Data,
10(3):1551–1590.

Cerri, L., Berthias, J. P., Bertiger, W. I., Haines, B. J.,
Lemoine, F. G., Mercier, F., Ries, J. C., Willis, P., Ze-
lensky, N. P., and Ziebart, M. (2010).
Precision orbit
determination standards for the Jason series of altime-
ter missions. Marine Geodesy, 33(sup1):379–418. eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/01490419.2010.488966.

24


Cerri, L., Lemoine, J. M., Mercier, F., Zelensky, N. P., and
Lemoine, F. G. (2013). DORIS-based point mascons for
the long term stability of precise orbit solutions. Advances
in Space Research, 52(3):466–476.

Charlot, P., Jacobs, C. S., Gordon, D., Lambert, S., de Witt,
A., B¨ohm, J., Fey, A. L., Heinkelmann, R., Skurikhina, E.,
Titov, O., Arias, E. F., Bolotin, S., Bourda, G., Ma, C.,
Malkin, Z., Nothnagel, A., Mayer, D., MacMillan, D. S.,
Nilsson, T., and Gaume, R. (2020). The third realization
of the International Celestial Reference Frame by very
long baseline interferometry. Astronomy & Astrophysics,
644:A159.

Chen, J., Ries, J. C., and Tapley, B. D. (2021). Assessment
of degree-2 order-1 gravitational changes from GRACE
and GRACE Follow-on, Earth rotation, satellite laser
ranging, and models. J Geod, 95(4):38.

Cheng, M. K. and Ries, J. C. (2013). GRACE Technical
Note 07. Technical report.

Choi, K.-R., Ries, J. C., and Tapley, B. D. (2004). Jason-
1 precision orbit determination by combining SLR and
DORIS with GPS tracking data.
Marine Geodesy,
27(1-2):319–331.
eprint:
https://doi.org/10.1080/
01490410490465652.

Collilieux, X., Altamimi, Z., Ray, J., van Dam, T., and
Wu, X. (2009).
Effect of the satellite laser ranging
network distribution on geocenter motion estimation.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 114(B4).
eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1029/2008JB005727.

Collilieux, X. and W¨oppelmann, G. (2011). Global sea-level
rise and its relation to the terrestrial reference frame. J.
Geod., 85(1):9–22.

Couhert, A., Bizouard, C., Mercier, F., Chanard, K., Greff,
M., and Exertier, P. (2020a). Self-consistent determina-
tion of the Earth’s GM, geocenter motion and figure axis
orientation. Journal of Geodesy.

Couhert, A., Cerri, L., Legeais, J.-F., Ablain, M., Zelensky,
N. P., Haines, B. J., Lemoine, F. G., Bertiger, W. I., De-
sai, S. D., and Otten, M. (2015). Towards the 1mm/y
stability of the radial orbit error at regional scales. Ad-
vances in Space Research, 55(1):2–23.

Couhert, A., Delong, N., Ait-Lakbir, H., and Mercier,
F. (2020b).
GPS-based LEO orbits referenced to the
Earth’s center of mass. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth,
125(2):e2019JB018293.
e2019JB018293
10.1029/2019JB018293.

Couhert, A., Mercier, F., Moyard, J., and Biancale, R.
(2018). Systematic error mitigation in doris-derived geo-
center motion.
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid
Earth, 123(11):10,142–10,161.

Davies, K. (1990). Ionospheric radio. Peter Peregrinus Ltd.,
London.

Dehant, V., Laguerre, R., Rekier, J., Rivoldini, A., Triana,
S. A., Trinh, A., Van Hoolst, T., and Zhu, P. (2017). Un-
derstanding the effects of the core on the nutation of the
earth. Geodesy and Geodynamics, 8(6):389–395. Geodesy,
Astronomy and Geophysics in Earth Rotation.

Delva, P., Denker, H., and Lion, G. (2019). Chronometric
Geodesy: Methods and Applications. In Puetzfeld, D. and
L¨ammerzahl, C., editors, Relativistic Geodesy: Founda-
tions and Applications, Fundamental Theories of Physics,
pages 25–85. Springer International Publishing, Cham.

Dickey, J. O., Marcus, S. L., and de Viron, O. (2011). Air
temperature and anthropogenic forcing: Insights from the
solid earth. Journal of Climate, 24(2):569 – 574.

Dilßner, F. (2010). GPS IIF-1 satellite antenna phase center
and attitude modeling. Inside GNSS, 5(6):59–64.

Donlon, C. J., Cullen, R., Giulicchi, L., Vuilleumier, P.,
Francis, C. R., Kuschnerus, M., Simpson, W., Bouri-
dah, A., Caleno, M., Bertoni, R., Ranca˜no, J., Pourier,
E., Hyslop, A., Mulcahy, J., Knockaert, R., Hunter, C.,
Webb, A., Fornari, M., Vaze, P., Brown, S., Willis, J., De-
sai, S., Desjonqueres, J.-D., Scharroo, R., Martin-Puig,
C., Leuliette, E., Egido, A., Smith, W. H. F., Bonne-
fond, P., Le Gac, S., Picot, N., and Tavernier, G. (2021).
The Copernicus Sentinel-6 mission: Enhanced continuity
of satellite sea level measurements from space. Remote
Sensing of Environment, 258:112395.

Dro˙zd˙zewski, M. and So´snica, K. (2021).
Tropospheric
and range biases in Satellite Laser Ranging. Journal of
Geodesy, 95(9):100.

Elosegui, P., Davis, J. L., Jaldehag, R. K., Johansson, J. M.,
Niell, A. E., and Shapiro, I. I. (1995). Geodesy using the
Global Positioning System: The effects of signal scatter-
ing. Journal of Geophysical Research, 100:9921.

Exertier, P., Belli, A., and Lemoine, J. (2017). Time biases
in laser ranging observations: A concerning issue of space
geodesy. Advances in Space Research, 60(5):948–968.

Felikson, D., Urban, T. J., Gunter, B. C., Pie, N., Pritchard,
H. D., Harpold, R., and Schutz, B. E. (2017). Comparison
of elevation change detection methods from ICESat al-
timetry over the Greenland Ice Sheet. IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 55(10):5494–5505.

Flohrer, C., Otten, M., Springer, T., and Dow, J. (2011).
Generating precise and homogeneous orbits for Jason-1
and Jason-2. Advances in Space Research, 48(1):152–172.

Fox-Kemper, B., Hewitt, H. T., Xiao, C., Aoalgeirsd´ottir,
G., Drijfhout, S. S., Edwards, T. L., Golledge, N. R.,
Hemer, M., Kopp, R. E., Krinner, G., Mix, A., Notz, D.,
Nowicki, S., Nurhati, I. S., Ruiz, L., Sall´ee, J.-B., Slangen,
A. B. A., and Yu, Y. (2022). Ocean, cryosphere and sea
level change. In Masson-Delmotte, V., Zhai, P., Pirani, A.,
Connors, S. L., P´ean, C., Berger, S., Caud, N., Chen, Y.,
Goldfarb, L., Gomis, M. I., Huang, M., Leitzell, K., Lon-
noy, E., Matthews, J. B. R., Maycock, T. K., Waterfield,

25


T., Yelek¸ci, O., Yu, R., and Zhou, B., editors, Climate
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution
of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge
University Press. (in press).

Fritsche, M., Dietrich, R., R¨ulke, A., Rothacher, M., and
Steigenberger, P. (2009).
Low-degree Earth deforma-
tion from reprocessed GPS observations.
GPS Solut.,
14(2):165–175.

Fu, Y., Argus, D. F., and Landerer, F. W. (2015). GPS as
an independent measurement to estimate terrestrial wa-
ter storage variations in Washington and Oregon. Jour-
nal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 120(1):552–566.
eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/2014JB011415.

Fuller-Rowell, T., Yizengaw, E., Doherty, P., and Basu,
S. (2017). Ionospheric space weather. Longitude depen-
dence and lower atmosphere forcing. American Geophysi-
cal Union and John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey.

Gaia Collaboration, Mignard, F., and et al. (2018). Gaia
data release 2 - the celestial reference frame (gaia-crf2).
A&A, 616:A14.

Ge, M., Gendt, G., Dick, G., Zhang, F. P., and Reigber, C.
(2005). Impact of GPS satellite antenna offsets on scale
changes in global network solutions. Geophys Res Lett,
32(6):L06310.

Glaser, S., Fritsche, M., So´snica, K., Rodr´ıguez-Solano,
C. J., Wang, K., Dach, R., Hugentobler, U., Rothacher,
M., and Dietrich, R. (2015). A consistent combination of
GNSS and SLR with minimum constraints. Journal of
Geodesy, 89(12):1165–1180.

Glaser, S., Michalak, G., M¨annel, B., K¨onig, R., Neumayer,
K. H., and Schuh, H. (2020).
Reference system origin
and scale realization within the future GNSS constellation
“Kepler”. Journal of Geodesy, 94(12):1–13.

GMES Sentinel-1 Team (2004). GMES Sentinel-1 System
Requirements Document. Technical Report ES-RS-ESA-
SY-0001.

Gozzard, D., Howard, L., Dix-Matthews, B., Karpathakis,
S., Gravestock, C., and Schediwy, S. (2022). Ultrastable
free-space laser links for a global network of optical atomic
clocks. Phys. Rev. Lett., 128(2):020801.

GSA (2017). Galileo Satellite Metadata.

Gu´erou, A., Meyssignac, B., Prandi, P., Ablain, M., Ribes,
A., and Bignalet-Cazalet, F. (InPrep). Current observed
global mean sea level rise and acceleration estimated from
satellite altimetry and the associated uncertainty. Ocean
Science.

H2020
HSNAV
Website
(2020).
VLBI
Transmit-
ter for G2G.
https://h2020nav.esa.int/project/
h2020-038-01. Accessed 14 September 2022.

Haines, B. J., Bar-Sever, Y. E., Bertiger, W. I., De-
sai,
S. D.,
Harvey,
N.,
Sibois,
A. E.,
and Weiss,
J. P. (2015).
Realizing a terrestrial reference frame
using
the
Global
Positioning
System.
Journal
of
Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth, 120(8):5911–5939.

eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/2015JB012225.

Hansen, J., Sato, M., Kharecha, P., and von Schuckmann,
K. (2011).
Earth’s energy imbalance and implications.
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 11(24):13421–13449.

Hellerschmied, A., McCallum, L., McCallum, J., Sun, J.,
B¨ohm, J., and Cao, J. (2018). Observing APOD with the
AuScope VLBI Array. Sensors, 18(5).

Huang, W., M¨annel, B., Brack, A., Ge, M., and Schuh, H.
(2022). Estimation of GPS transmitter antenna phase cen-
ter offsets by integrating space-based GPS observations.
Advances in Space Research, 69(7):2682–2696.

Huang, W., M¨annel, B., Brack, A., and Schuh, H. (2021).
Two methods to determine scale-independent GPS PCOs
and GNSS-based terrestrial scale: Comparison and cross-
check. GPS Solutions, 25(1):4.

Huss, M. (2013).
Density assumptions for converting
geodetic glacier volume change to mass change.
The
Cryosphere, 7(3):877–887.

ILRS Website (2018).
Galileo:
Reflector information.

https://ilrs.gsfc.nasa.gov/missions/satellite_
missions/current_missions/ga02_reflector.html.
Accessed 14 September 2022.

International Altimetry Team (2021). Altimetry for the fu-
ture: Building on 25 years of progress. Advances in Space
Research, 68(2):319–363.

IPCC Report (2021).
Summary for policymakers.
In
Masson-Delmotte, V., Zhai, P., Pirani, A., Connors, S.,
P´ean, C., Berger, S., Caud, N., Chen, Y., Goldfarb,
L., Gomis, M., Huang, M., Leitzell, K., Lonnoy, E.,
Matthews, J., Maycock, T., Waterfield, T., Yelek¸ci, O.,
Yu, R., and Zhou, B., editors, Climate Change 2021: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press.

ITRF (2022). ITRF2020. Technical report.

ITRF Website (2022). ITRF 2020 solution. https://itrf.
ign.fr/en/solutions/ITRF2020/. Accessed 14 Septem-
ber 2022.

IVS Website (2021). International VLBI Service for Geodesy
& Astrometry.
https://ivscc.gsfc.nasa.gov/. Ac-
cessed 14 September 2022.

Jaradat, A., Jaron, F., Gruber, J., and Nothnagel, A.
(2021). Considerations of VLBI transmitters on Galileo
satellites. Advances in Space Research, 68(3):1281–1300.

26


Jetzer, P. e. a. (2016). E-GRIP: Einstein gravitational red-
shift probe. Technical report.

Jiang, Z., Hsu, Y.-J., Yuan, L., Tang, M., Yang, X., and
Yang, X. (2022). Hydrological drought characterization
based on GNSS imaging of vertical crustal deformation
across the contiguous United States. Science of The Total
Environment, 823:153663.

J¨aggi, A., Dach, R., Montenbruck, O., Hugentobler, U.,
Bock, H., and Beutler, G. (2009). Phase center modeling
for LEO GPS receiver antennas and its impact on precise
orbit determination. J Geod, 83(12):1145.

J¨aggi, A., Hugentobler, U., Bock, H., and Beutler, G. (2007).
Precise orbit determination for GRACE using undiffer-
enced or doubly differenced GPS data. Advances in Space
Research, 39(10):1612–1619.

Kehm, A., Bloßfeld, M., Pavlis, E., and Seitz, F. (2018). Fu-
ture global SLR network evolution and its impact on the
terrestrial reference frame. Journal of Geodesy, 92:625–
635.

Kelley, M. (2009). The Earth’s ionosphere. Plasma physics
& electrodynamics. Elsevier, London.

Khan, S. A., Aschwanden, A., Bjørk, A. A., Wahr, J., Kjeld-
sen, K. K., and Kjaer, K. H. (2015). Greenland Ice Sheet
mass balance: a review. Reports on progress in physics,
78(4):046801.

Khan, S. A., Sasgen, I., Bevis, M., van Dam, T., Bam-
ber, J. L., Wahr, J., Willis, M., Kjær, K. H., Wouters,
B., Helm, V., et al. (2016). Geodetic measurements re-
veal similarities between post–last glacial maximum and
present-day mass loss from the Greenland Ice Sheet. Sci-
ence advances, 2(9):e1600931.

Khan, S. A., Wahr, J., Bevis, M., Velicogna, I., and
Kendrick, E. (2010). Spread of ice mass loss into north-
west Greenland observed by GRACE and GPS. Geophys-
ical Research Letters, 37(6).

King, M. A., Altamimi, Z., Boehm, J., Bos, M., Dach, R.,
Elosegui, P., Fund, F., Hern´andez-Pajares, M., Lavallee,
D., Mendes Cerveira, P. J., Penna, N., Riva, R. E. M.,
Steigenberger, P., van Dam, T., Vittuari, L., Williams,
S., and Willis, P. (2010). Improved constraints on models
of glacial isostatic adjustment: a review of the contribu-
tion of ground-based geodetic observations.
Surveys in
Geophysics, 31:465–507.

Kintner, P., Ledvina, B., and de Paula, E. (2007). GPS and
ionospheric scintillations. Space Weather, 5(S09003).

Kjeldsen, K. K., Korsgaard, N. J., Bjørk, A. A., Khan, S. A.,
Box, J. E., Funder, S., Larsen, N. K., Bamber, J. L.,
Colgan, W., Van Den Broeke, M., et al. (2015). Spatial
and temporal distribution of mass loss from the Greenland
Ice Sheet since AD 1900. Nature, 528(7582):396–400.

Klopotek, G., Hobiger, T., Haas, R., and Otsubo, T.
(2020). Geodetic VLBI for precise orbit determination of
Earth satellites: a simulation study. Journal of Geodesy,
94(56):1–26.

Kuang, D., Bertiger, W., Desai, S. D., Haines, B. J., and
Yuan, D.-N. (2019). Observed geocenter motion from pre-
cise orbit determination of GRACE satellites using GPS
tracking and accelerometer data. J Geod, 93(10):1835–
1844.

Kuipers Munneke, P., Ligtenberg, S., No¨el, B., Howat, I.,
Box, J., Mosley-Thompson, E., McConnell, J., Steffen, K.,
Harper, J., Das, S., et al. (2015). Elevation change of the
Greenland Ice Sheet due to surface mass balance and firn
processes, 1960–2014. The Cryosphere, 9(6):2009–2025.

Kwak, Y., Bloßfeld, M., Schmid, R., Angermann, D., Gerstl,
M., and Seitz, M. (2018). Consistent realization of celes-
tial and terrestrial reference frames. Journal of Geodesy,
92:1047–1061.

Lambeck, K., Rouby, H., Purcell, A., Sun, Y., and Sam-
bridge, M. (2014). Sea level and global ice volumes from
the last glacial maximum to the holocene. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 111(43):15296–15303.

Landerer, F. W., Flechtner, F. M., Save, H., Webb,
F. H.,
Bandikova,
T.,
Bertiger,
W. I.,
Bettadpur,
S. V., Byun, S. H., Dahle, C., Dobslaw, H., Fahne-
stock, E., Harvey, N., Kang, Z., Kruizinga, G. L. H.,
Loomis, B. D., McCullough, C., Murb¨ock, M., Nagel,
P.,
Paik,
M.,
Pie,
N.,
Poole,
S.,
Strekalov,
D.,
Tamisiea, M. E., Wang, F., Watkins, M. M., Wen,
H.-Y., Wiese, D. N., and Yuan, D.-N. (2020).
Ex-
tending the global mass change data record:
GRACE
Follow-On instrument and science data performance.
Geophysical
Research
Letters,
47(12):e2020GL088306.

eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/
10.1029/2020GL088306.

Lisdat, C., Grosche, G., Quintin, N., Shi, C., Raupach, S.
M. F., Grebing, C., Nicolodi, D., Stefani, F., Al-Masoudi,
A., D¨orscher, S., H¨afner, S., Robyr, J.-L., Chiodo, N.,
Bilicki, S., Bookjans, E., Koczwara, A., Koke, S., Kuhl,
A., Wiotte, F., Meynadier, F., Camisard, E., Abgrall, M.,
Lours, M., Legero, T., Schnatz, H., Sterr, U., Denker, H.,
Chardonnet, C., Coq, Y. L., Santarelli, G., Amy-Klein,
A., Targat, R. L., Lodewyck, J., Lopez, O., and Pottie, P.-
E. (2016). A clock network for geodesy and fundamental
science. Nature Communications, 7:12443.

Loeb, N. G. and Doelling, D. R. (2020). CERES Energy
Balanced and Filled (EBAF) from afternoon-only satellite
orbits. Remote Sensing, 12(8):1280.

Loeb, N. G., Doelling, D. R., Wang, H., Su, W., Nguyen, C.,
Corbett, J. G., Liang, L., Mitrescu, C., Rose, F. G., and
Kato, S. (2018). Clouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy
System (CERES) Energy Balanced and Filled (EBAF)
Top-of-Atmosphere (TOA) Edition-4.0 Data Product.
Journal of Climate, 31(2):895–918.

27


Loomis,
B. D.,
Rachlin,
K. E.,
and Luthcke,
S. B.
(2019).
Improved Earth oblateness rate reveals in-
creased
ice
sheet
losses
and
mass-driven
sea
level
rise.
Geophysical Research Letters, 46(12):6910–6917.

eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1029/2019GL082929.

Loomis,
B. D.,
Rachlin,
K. E.,
Wiese,
D. N.,
Lan-
derer, F. W., and Luthcke, S. B. (2020).
Replac-
ing GRACE/GRACE-FO with Satellite Laser Rang-
ing:
Impacts on Antarctic ice sheet mass change.
Geophysical
Research
Letters,
47(3):e2019GL085488.

eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1029/2019GL085488.

Luceri, V., Pirri, M., Rodr´ıguez, J., Appleby, G., Pavlis,
E. C., and M¨uller, H. (2019). Systematic errors in SLR
data and their impact on the ILRS products. Journal of
Geodesy, 93(11):2357–2366.

Luthcke, S. B., Zelensky, N. P., Rowlands, D. D., Lemoine,
F. G., and Williams, T. A. (2003). The 1-centimeter or-
bit: Jason-1 Precision Orbit Determination using GPS,
SLR, DORIS, and altimeter data special issue: Jason-1
calibration/validation. Marine Geodesy, 26(3-4):399–421.
eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/714044529.

L’Ecuyer, T. S., Beaudoing, H. K., Rodell, M., Olson, W.,
Lin, B., Kato, S., Clayson, C. A., Wood, E., Sheffield, J.,
Adler, R., Huffman, G., Bosilovich, M., Gu, G., Robert-
son, F., Houser, P. R., Chambers, D., Famiglietti, J. S.,
Fetzer, E., Liu, W. T., Gao, X., Schlosser, C. A., Clark,
E., Lettenmaier, D. P., and Hilburn, K. (2015). The ob-
served state of the energy budget in the early twenty-first
century. Journal of Climate, 28(21):8319–8346.

Mader, G. L. (1999). GPS antenna calibration at the Na-
tional Geodetic Survey. GPS Solutions, 3(1):50–58.

M¨annel, B. (2016).
Co-Location of Geodetic Observation
Techniques in Space. PhD thesis, ETH Z¨urich.

Mao, X., Arnold, D., Girardin, V., Villiger, A., and J¨aggi,
A. (2021). Dynamic GPS-based LEO orbit determination
with 1cm precision using the Bernese GNSS Software. Ad-
vances in Space Research, 67(2):788–805.

Marti, F., Blazquez, A., Meyssignac, B., Ablain, M.,
Barnoud, A., Fraudeau, R., Jugier, R., Chenal, J., Larni-
col, G., Pfeffer, J., Restano, M., and Benveniste, J. (2022).
Monitoring the ocean heat content change and the Earth
energy imbalance from space altimetry and space gravime-
try. Earth System Science Data, 14(1):229–249.

Medley, B., Neumann, T. A., Zwally, H. J., and Smith, B. E.
(2020). Forty-year simulations of firn processes over the
Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets. The Cryosphere Dis-
cussions, pages 1–35.

Meindl, M., Beutler, G., Thaller, D., Dach, R., and J¨aggi,
A. (2013). Geocenter coordinates estimated from GNSS
data as viewed by perturbation theory. Advances in Space
Research, 51(7):1047–1064.

M´etivier, L., Greff-Lefftz, M., and Altamimi, Z. (2010). On
secular geocenter motion: the impact of climate changes.
Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 296(3):360–366.

M´etivier, L., Greff-Lefftz, M., and Altamimi, Z. (2011). Er-
ratum to “On secular geocenter motion: the impact of
climate changes” [Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 296 (2010) 360-
366]. pages 136–136.

M´etivier, L., Rouby, H., Rebischung, P., and Altamimi,
Z. (2020).
ITRF2014, Earth figure changes, and geo-
center velocity:
implications for GIA and recent ice
melting. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth,
125(2):e2019JB018333.

Meyssignac, B., Boyer, T., Zhao, Z., Hakuba, M. Z., Lan-
derer, F. W., Stammer, D., K¨ohl, A., Kato, S., L’Ecuyer,
T., Ablain, M., Abraham, J. P., Blazquez, A., Cazenave,
A., Church, J. A., Cowley, R., Cheng, L., Domingues,
C. M., Giglio, D., Gouretski, V., Ishii, M., Johnson, G. C.,
Killick, R. E., Legler, D., Llovel, W., Lyman, J., Palmer,
M. D., Piotrowicz, S., Purkey, S. G., Roemmich, D., Roca,
R., Savita, A., Schuckmann, K. v., Speich, S., Stephens,
G., Wang, G., Wijffels, S. E., and Zilberman, N. (2019).
Measuring Global Ocean Heat Content to estimate the
Earth Energy Imbalance. Frontiers in Marine Science, 6.

Millan, R., Mouginot, J., Rabatel, A., and Morlighem, M.
(2022). Ice velocity and thickness of the world’s glaciers.
Nature Geoscience, 15(2):124–129.

Montenbruck, O., Hackel, S., and J¨aggi, A. (2018). Precise
orbit determination of the Sentinel-3A altimetry satellite
using ambiguity-fixed GPS carrier phase observations. J
Geod, 92(7):711–726.

Montenbruck, O., Hackel, S., Wermuth, M., and Zangerl, F.
(2021). Sentinel-6A precise orbit determination using a
combined GPS/Galileo receiver. J Geod, 95(9):109.

M¨uller, J., Dirkx, D., Kopeikin, S. M., Lion, G., Panet, I.,
Petit, G., and Visser, P. (2018). High performance clocks
and gravity field determination. Space Science Reviews,
214(1):1–31.

M¨annel, B. and Rothacher, M. (2017). Geocenter variations
derived from a combined processing of LEO- and ground-
based GPS observations. Journal of Geodesy, 91(8):933–
944.

M´etivier, L., Altamimi, Z., and Rouby, H. (2020).
Past
and present ITRF solutions from geophysical perspec-
tives. Advances in Space Research, 65(12):2711–2722.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
(2018).
Thriving on Our Changing Planet: A Decadal
Strategy for Earth Observation from Space. The National
Academies Press, Washington, DC.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
(2020). Evolving the Geodetic Infrastructure to Meet New
Scientific Needs. The National Academies Press, Wash-
ington, DC.

28


Nerem, R. S., Beckley, B. D., Fasullo, J. T., Hamlington,
B. D., Masters, D., and Mitchum, G. T. (2018). Climate-
change-driven accelerated sea-level rise detected in the al-
timeter era. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ence, 115:2022–2025.

Peltier, W. R., Argus, D., and Drummond, R. (2015). Space
geodesy constrains ice age terminal deglaciation:
The
global ICE-6G C (VM5a) model.
Journal of Geophysi-
cal Research: Solid Earth, 120(1):450–487.

Peter, H., Meyer, U., Lasser, M., and J¨aggi, A. (2022).
COST-G gravity field models for precise orbit determina-
tion of Low Earth Orbiting satellites. Advances in Space
Research.

Petit, G. and Luzum, B. (2010). IERS conventions 2010.
Technical report.

Plag, H.-P. and Pearlman, M., editors (2009). Global Geode-
tic Observing System. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Qu, Z., Guo, J., and Zhao, Q. (2021). Phase center cor-
rections for BDS IGSO and MEO satellites in IGb14 and
IGSR3 frame. Remote Sensing, 13(4):745.

Raghuraman, S. P., Paynter, D., and Ramaswamy, V.
(2021).
Anthropogenic forcing and response yield ob-
served positive trend in Earth’s energy imbalance. Nature
Communications, 12(1):4577.

Rebischung, P., Altamimi, Z., and Springer, T. (2014). A
collinearity diagnosis of the GNSS geocenter determina-
tion. Journal of Geodesy, 88(1):65–85. ZSCC: 0000036.

Richter, H. M. P., L¨uck, C., Klos, A., Sideris, M. G.,
Rangelova, E., and Kusche, J. (2021).
Reconstructing
GRACE-type time-variable gravity from the Swarm satel-
lites. Sci Rep, 11(1):1117.

Riddell, A. R., King, M. A., Watson, C. S., Sun, Y., Riva,
R. E. M., and Rietbroek, R. (2017). Uncertainty in geo-
center estimates in the context of ITRF2014.
Journal
of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 122(5):4020–4032.
eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/2016JB013698.

Ries,
J.
C.,
Eanes,
R.
J.,
Shum,
C.
K.,
and
Watkins,
M.
M.
(1992).
Progress
in
the
de-
termination
of
the
gravitational
coefficient
of
the
Earth.
Geophysical Research Letters, 19(6):529–531.

eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1029/92GL00259.

Rodriguez-Solano, C. J., Hugentobler, U., Steigenberger,
P., Bloßfeld, M., and Fritsche, M. (2014). Reducing the
draconitic errors in GNSS geodetic products. Journal of
Geodesy, 88(6):559–574. ZSCC: 0000049.

Rothacher, M., Schaer, S., Mervart, L., and Beutler, G.
(1995).
Determination of antenna phase center varia-
tions using GPS data.
In IGS Workshop Proceedings:
Special Topics and New Directions, pages 205–220. Ge-
oForschungsZentrum Potsdam Germany.

Russel, C., Luhmann, J., and Strangeway, R. (2016). Space
Physics. An introduction.
Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Scaramuzza, S., Dach, R., Beutler, G., Arnold, D., Suˇsnik,
A., and J¨aggi, A. (2018). Dependency of geodynamic pa-
rameters on the GNSS constellation. Journal of Geodesy,
92(1):93–104.

Schmid, R., Dach, R., Collilieux, X., J¨aggi, A., Schmitz, M.,
and Dilssner, F. (2016). Absolute IGS antenna phase cen-
ter model igs08.atx: status and potential improvements.
J Geod, 90(4):343–364.

Schmid, R. and Rothacher, M. (2003).
Estimaion of
elevation-dependent satellite antenna phase center vari-
ations of GPS satellites. J Geod, 77(7-8):440–446.

Schmid, R., Rothacher, M., Thaller, D., and Steigenberger,
P. (2005). Absolute phase center corrections of satellite
and receiver antennas. Impact of global GPS solutions
and estimation of azimuthal phase center variations of the
satellite antenna. GPS Solut, 9(4):283–293.

Schmid, R., Steigenberger, P., Gendt, G., Ge, M., and
Rothacher, M. (2007). Generation of a consistent abso-
lute phase center correction model of GPS receiver and
satellite antennas. J Geod, 81(12):781–798.

Seitz, M., Angermann, D., Bloßfeld, M., Drewes, H., and
Gerstl, M. (2012).
The 2008 DGFI realization of the
ITRS: DTRF2008. J Geod, 86(12):1097–1123.

Seitz, M., Bloßfeld, M., Angermann, D., and Seitz, F.
(2022). DTRF2014: DGFI-TUM’s ITRS realization 2014.
Advances in Space Research, 69(6):2391–2420.

Seitz, M., Steigenberger, P., and Artz, T. (2014). Consistent
adjustment of combined terrestrial and celestial reference
frames. In Rizos, C., editor, Earth on the Edge: Science
for a Sustainable Planet, IAG Symposia Series 139, pages
215–221.

Sert, H., Hugentobler, U., Karatekin, O., and Dehant, V.
(2022). Potential of UT1 - UTC transfer to the Galileo
constellation using onboard VLBI transmitters. J. Geod.
submitted.

Shepherd, A., Ivins, E., Rignot, E., Smith, B., van den
Broeke, M., Velicogna, I., Whitehouse, P., Briggs, K.,
Joughin, I., Krinner, G., Nowicki, S., Payne, T., Scam-
bos, T., Schlegel, N., A, G., Agosta, C., Ahlstrøm, A.,
Babonis, G., Barletta, V. R., Bjørk, A. A., Blazquez, A.,
Bonin, J., Colgan, W., Csatho, B., Cullather, R., En-
gdahl, M. E., Felikson, D., Fettweis, X., Forsberg, R.,
Hogg, A. E., Gallee, H., Gardner, A., Gilbert, L., Gourme-
len, N., Groh, A., Gunter, B., Hanna, E., Harig, C., Helm,
V., Horvath, A., Horwath, M., Khan, S., Kjeldsen, K. K.,
Konrad, H., Langen, P. L., Lecavalier, B., Loomis, B.,
Luthcke, S., McMillan, M., Melini, D., Mernild, S., Mo-
hajerani, Y., Moore, P., Mottram, R., Mouginot, J., Moy-
ano, G., Muir, A., Nagler, T., Nield, G., Nilsson, J., No¨el,
B., Otosaka, I., Pattle, M. E., Peltier, W. R., Pie, N.,

29


Rietbroek, R., Rott, H., Sandberg Sørensen, L., Sasgen,
I., Save, H., Scheuchl, B., Schrama, E., Schr¨oder, L., Seo,
K.-W., Simonsen, S. B., Slater, T., Spada, G., Sutterley,
T., Talpe, M., Tarasov, L., van de Berg, W. J., van der
Wal, W., van Wessem, M., Vishwakarma, B. D., Wiese,
D., Wilton, D., Wagner, T., Wouters, B., Wuite, J., and
The IMBIE Team (2020). Mass balance of the Greenland
Ice Sheet from 1992 to 2018. Nature, 579(7798):233–239.

Shepherd, A., Ivins, E., Rignot, E., Smith, B., van der
Broeke, M., Velicogna, I., Whitehouse, P. L., Briggs, K.,
Joughin, I., Krinner, G., Nowicki, S., Payne, A., Scambos,
T., Schlegel, N., A, G., Agosta, C., Ahlstrom, A., Babo-
nis, G., Barletta, V. R., Blazquez, A., Boning, J., Csatho,
B., Cullather, R., Felikson, D., Fettweis, X., Forsberg, R.,
Gallee, H., Gardner, A., Gilbert, L., Groh, A., Gunther,
H., Hanna, E., Harig, C., Helm, V., Horwath, A., Hor-
wath, M., Khan, S. A., Kjeldsen, K., Konrad, H., Langen,
P., Lecavalier, Loomis, B. D., Luthcke, S., McMillan, M.,
Melini, D., Mernild, S. H., Mohajerani, Y., Moore, P.,
Mouginot, J., Moyano, G., Muir, A., Nagler, T., Nield,
G., Nilsson, J., Noel, B., Otosaka, Pattle, M., Peltier,
W. R., Pie, N., Rietbroek, R., Rott, H., Sandberg, L.,
Sasgen, I., Save, H., Scheuchl, B., Schrama, E., Schroder,
L., Seo, K., Simonsen, S., Slater, T., Spada, G., Sutterley,
T. C., Talpe, M., Tarasov, L., van de Berg, W. J., van der
Wal, W., van Wessem, M., vishwakarma, Wiese, D. N.,
and Wouters, B. (2018). Mass balance of the Antarctic
Ice Sheet from 1992 to 2017. Nature, 558(7709):219–222.

Sinclair, L. C., Bergeron, H., Swann, W. C., Khader, I.,
Cossel, K. C., Cermak, M., Newbury, N. R., and De-
schˆenes, J.-D. (2019). Femtosecond optical two-way time-
frequency transfer in the presence of motion. Phys. Rev.
A, 99(2):023844.

Soffel, M., Klioner, S. A., Petit, G., Wolf, P., Kopeikin,
S. M., Bretagnon, P., Brumberg, V. A., Capitaine, N.,
Damour, T., Fukushima, T., Guinot, B., Huang, T.-Y.,
Lindegren, L., Ma, C., Nordtvedt, K., Ries, J. C., Seidel-
mann, P. K., Vokrouhlick, D., Will, C. M., and Xu, C.
(2003). The IAU 2000 resolutions for astrometry, celes-
tial mechanics, and metrology in the relativistic frame-
work: Explanatory supplement. The Astronomical Jour-
nal, 126(6):2687–2706.

Sørensen, L. S., Simonsen, S. B., Forsberg, R., Khvoros-
tovsky, K., Meister, R., and Engdahl, M. E. (2018). 25
years of elevation changes of the Greenland Ice Sheet from
ERS, Envisat, and CryoSat-2 radar altimetry. Earth and
Planetary Science Letters, 495:234–241.

So´snica, K., J¨aggi, A., Meyer, U., Thaller, D., Beutler, G.,
Arnold, D., and Dach, R. (2015). Time variable Earth’s
gravity field from SLR satellites.
Journal of Geodesy,
89(10):945–960.

Sovers, O. J., Fanselow, J. L., and Jacobs, C. S. (1998). As-
trometry and geodesy with radio interferometry: experi-
ments, models, results. Rev. Mod. Phys., 70:1393–1454.

Steigenberger, P., Fritsche, M., Dach, R., Schmid, R., Mon-
tenbruck, O., Uhlemann, M., and Prange, L. (2016). Esti-
mation of satellite antenna phase center offsets for Galileo.
J Geod, 90(8):773–785.

Sun, Y., Ditmar, P., and Riva, R. (2017). Statistically op-
timal estimation of degree-1 and C20 coefficients based
on GRACE data and an ocean bottom pressure model.
Geophysical Journal International, 210(3):1305–1322.

Sun,
Y.,
Riva,
R.,
and
Ditmar,
P.
(2016).
Op-
timizing
estimates
of
annual
variations
and
trends
in geocenter motion and J2 from a combination of
GRACE data and geophysical models.
Journal of
Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth, 121(11):8352–8370.

eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/2016JB013073.

Swenson, S., Chambers, D., and Wahr, J. (2008). Estimating
geocenter variations from a combination of GRACE and
ocean model output.
Journal of Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth, 113(B8).

Tapley, B. D., Bettadpur, S., Ries, J. C., Thompson,
P. F., and Watkins, M. M. (2004).
GRACE measure-
ments of mass variability in the Earth system. Science,
305(5683):503–505.

Thaller, D., Dach, R., Seitz, M., Beutler, G., Mareyen,
M., and Richter, B. (2011). Combination of GNSS and
SLR observations using satellite co-locations.
J Geod,
85(5):257–272.

Thaller, D., So´snica, K., Dach, R., J¨aggi, A., Beutler, G.,
Mareyen, M., and Richter, B. (2014).
Geocenter coor-
dinates from GNSS and combined GNSS-SLR solutions
using satellite co-locations. In Rizos, C. and Willis, P.,
editors, Earth on the Edge:
Science for a Sustainable
Planet, International Association of Geodesy Symposia,
pages 129–134, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer.

Trenberth, K. E. (2014). Challenges for observing and mod-
eling the global water cycle. In Remote Sensing of the
Terrestrial Water Cycle, pages 511–519. American Geo-
physical Union (AGU).

UN-GGIM
(2021).
The
SDGs
geospatial
roadmap.
United Nations Comittee of Experts on Global Geospa-
tial Information Management.
https://ggim.un.org/
documents/SDGs-Geospatial-Roadmap.pdf.

UN SDGs’ Website (2022).
United nations: Department
of economic and social affairs, sustainable development.
https://sdgs.un.org/. Accessed 14 September 2022.

United
Nations
General
Assembly
(2015).
69/266.
A
global
geodetic
reference
frame
for
sustainable
development.
Resolution
adopted
by
the
General
Assembly
on
26
February
2015.
A/RES/69/266,

https://www.undocs.org/Home/Mobile?FinalSymbol=
A%2FRES%2F69%2F266&Language=E&DeviceType=
Desktop&LangRequested=False.

30


Velicogna, I., Mohajerani, Y., Landerer, F., Mouginot, J.,
Noel, B., Rignot, E., Sutterley, T., van den Broeke, M.,
van Wessem, M., and Wiese, D. (2020).
Continuity of
ice sheet mass loss in Greenland and Antarctica from the
GRACE and GRACE Follow-On missions. Geophysical
Research Letters, 47(8):e2020GL087291.

Velicogna, I., Sutterley, T. C., and Van Den Broeke, M. R.
(2014). Regional acceleration in ice mass loss from Green-
land and Antarctica using GRACE time-variable gravity
data. Geophysical Research Letters, 41(22):8130–8137.

Velicogna, I. and Wahr, J. (2013). Time-variable gravity ob-
servations of ice sheet mass balance: Precision and limita-
tions of the GRACE satellite data. Geophysical Research
Letters, 40(12):3055–3063.

Veng, T. and Andersen, O. B. (2021). Consolidating sea level
acceleration estimates from satellite altimetry. Advances
in Space Research, 68(2):496–503.

Villiger, A., Dach, R., Schaer, S., Prange, L., and J¨aggi, A.
(2018). Antenna calibrations for TRF scale determination
and their influence on coordinate estimation. In Report
on the Symposium of the IAG Subcommission for Europe
(EUREF) held in Amsterdam, The Netherland, 30 May -
01 June 2018.

Villiger, A., Dach, R., Schaer, S., Prange, L., Zimmermann,
F., Kuhlmann, H., W¨ubbena, G., Schmitz, M., Beutler,
G., and J¨aggi, A. (2020). GNSS scale determination using
calibrated receiver and Galileo satellite antenna patterns.
Journal of Geodesy, 94(9):93.

von Schuckmann, K., Cheng, L., Palmer, M. D., Hansen, J.,
Tassone, C., Aich, V., Adusumilli, S., Beltrami, H., Boyer,
T., Cuesta-Valero, F. J., Desbruy`eres, D., Domingues,
C., Garc´ıa-Garc´ıa, A., Gentine, P., Gilson, J., Gorfer,
M., Haimberger, L., Ishii, M., Johnson, G. C., Killick,
R., King, B. A., Kirchengast, G., Kolodziejczyk, N., Ly-
man, J., Marzeion, B., Mayer, M., Monier, M., Monse-
lesan, D. P., Purkey, S., Roemmich, D., Schweiger, A.,
Seneviratne, S. I., Shepherd, A., Slater, D. A., Steiner,
A. K., Straneo, F., Timmermans, M.-L., and Wijffels,
S. E. (2020). Heat stored in the Earth system: where does
the energy go? Earth System Science Data, 12(3):2013–
2041.

Wautelet, G., Loyer, S., Mercier, F., and Perosanz, F.
(2017). Computation of GPS P1–P2 differential code bi-
ases with JASON-2. GPS Solutions, 21.

Whitehouse, P., Milne, G., and Lambeck, K. (2021). Glacial
Isostatic Adjustment.
In Fowler, A. and Ng, F., edi-
tors, Glaciers and Ice Sheets in the Climate System: The
Karthaus Summer School Lecture Notes, Springer Text-
books in Earth Sciences, Geography and Environment,
pages 383–413. Springer International Publishing, Cham.

Whitehouse, P. L., Gomez, N., King, M. A., and Wiens,
D. A. (2019). Solid Earth change and the evolution of the
antarctic ice sheet. Nature communications, 10(1):1–14.

Wouters, B., Gardner, A. S., and Moholdt, G. (2019).
Global glacier mass loss during the GRACE satellite mis-
sion (2002-2016). Frontiers in Earth Science, 7:96.

Wu, X., Abbondanza, C., Altamimi, Z., Chin, T. M.,
Collilieux,
X.,
Gross,
R. S.,
Heflin,
M. B.,
Jiang,
Y., and Parker, J. W. (2015).
KALREF—A Kalman
filter and time series approach to the International
Terrestrial Reference Frame realization.
Journal of
Geophysical Research:
Solid Earth, 120(5):3775–3802.

eprint: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/pdf/10.1002/2014JB011622.

Wu, X., Collilieux, X., Altamimi, Z., Vermeersen, B., Gross,
R., and Fukumori, I. (2011). Accuracy of the International
Terrestrial Reference Frame origin and Earth expansion.
Geophysical Research Letters, 38(13):L13304.

Wu, X., Ray, J., and van Dam, T. (2012). Geocenter motion
and its geodetic and geophysical implications. Journal of
Geodynamics, 58:44–61.

W¨ubbena, G., Schmitz, M., Menge, F., B¨oder, V., and See-
ber, G. (2000). Automated absolute field calibration of
gps antennas in real-time. In Proceedings of the 13th In-
ternational Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of
The Institute of Navigation (ION GPS 2000), pages 2512–
2522.

Xu, D., Delva, P., Lopez, O., Amy-Klein, A., and Pottie, P.-
E. (2019). Reciprocity of propagation in optical fiber links
demonstrated to 10−21.
Optics Express, 27(25):36965–
36975. Publisher: Optical Society of America.

Zajdel, R., So´snica, K., Bury, G., Dach, R., and Prange,
L. (2020).
System-specific systematic errors in Earth
rotation parameters derived from GPS, GLONASS, and
Galileo. GPS Solutions, 24(3):1–15.

Zajdel, R., So´snica, K., Bury, G., Dach, R., Prange, L.,
and Kazmierski, K. (2021a).
Sub-daily polar motion
from GPS, GLONASS, and Galileo. Journal of Geodesy,
95(1):1–27.

Zajdel, R., So´snica, K., and Bury, G. (2021b). Geocenter co-
ordinates derived from multi-GNSS: a look into the role of
solar radiation pressure modeling. GPS Solutions, 25(1):1.

Zajdel, R., Steigenberger, P., and Montenbruck, O. (2022).
On the potential contribution of BeiDou-3 to the realiza-
tion of the terrestrial reference frame scale. GPS Solut,
26(4):109.

Zhu, Y. S., Massmann, F.-H., Yu, Y., and Reigber, C.
(2003). Satellite antenna phase center offsets and scale
errors in GPS solutions. J Geod, 76(11):668–672.

ˇStˇep´anek, P., Duan, B., Filler, V., and Hugentobler, U.
(2020).
Inclusion of GPS clock estimates for satellites
Sentinel-3A/3B in DORIS geodetic solutions.
J Geod,
94(12):116.

31


