Electrically driven exciton-polaritons 

in metal halide perovskite metatransistors

Yutao Wang,1,2† Jingyi Tian, 1,3† Maciej Klein, 1,3 Giorgio Adamo, 1,3 

Son Tung Ha,4* and Cesare Soci1,3*

1 Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies, TPI, Nanyang Technological University, 

21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371

2 Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Energy Research Institute @NTU (ERI@N), 

Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637553

3 Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical 

Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371

4 Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, Agency for Science Technology and 

Research (A*STAR), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Singapore 138634

†These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence: Ha_Son_Tung@imre.a-star.edu.sg; csoci@ntu.edu.sg

Achieving
electrical injection of exciton-polaritons, half-light, half-matter 

quasiparticles arising from the strong coupling between photonic and excitonic 
resonances, is a crucial milestone to scale up polaritonic devices such as optical 
computers, quantum simulators and inversionless lasers. Here we present a new 
approach to achieve strong coupling between electrically injected excitons and 
photonic bound states in the continuum of a dielectric metasurface monolithically 
patterned in the channel of a light-emitting transistor. Exciton-polaritons are 
generated by coupling electrically injected excitons in the gate-induced transport 
channel with a Bloch mode of the metasurface, and decay into photons emitted from 
the top surface of the transistor. Thanks to the high-finesse of the metasurface cavity, 
we achieve a large Rabi splitting of ~200 meV and more than 50-fold enhancement of 
the polaritonic emission over the intrinsic excitonic emission of the perovskite film.
Moreover, we show that the directionality of polaritonic electroluminescence can be 
dynamically tuned by varying the source-drain bias which controls the radiative 
recombination zone of the excitons. We argue that this approach provides a new 
platform to study strong light-matter interaction in dispersion engineered photonic 
cavities under electrical injection, and paves the way to solution-processed electrically 
pumped polariton lasers.

Keywords:
metal
halide perovskites, polaritonic electroluminescence, dielectric 

metasurfaces, bound states in the continuum, light emitting transistor, strong coupling.


1

Exciton-polaritons are bosonic quasiparticles arising from the strong coupling between 

excitons and confined photons. The hybrid nature equips exciton-polaritons with extremely 

small effective mass, strong nonlinearities and fast relaxation,1,2 properties that make them 

a unique platform for fundamental studies such as Bose-Einstein condensation and 

superfluidity, as well as for the realization of optoelectronic devices such as quantum 

simulators, neuromorphic computing and inversionless lasers.3-12 While electrically 

injected polaritons could enable the realization of electrically pumped polariton lasers, 

polariton circuits and high-speed communication systems, so far polaritonic devices have 

mostly been driven by optical excitation.

The typical platform for studying electrically driven exciton polaritons is that of light 

emitting diodes (LEDs) integrated with distributed Bragg reflector (DBR) microcavities,13-

15 which has inherent limitations to further manipulation of the polaritonic emission. 

Dielectric metasurfaces, on the other hand, enable complete mode and dispersion 

engineering of the polaritons, but achieving electrically driven exciton-polaritons in 

metasurfaces is challenging due to the need of smooth contacts between the active materials

and the charge injection layers to guarantee efficient charge carrier transport. By

comparison, the lateral configuration of light-emitting transistor (LET) devices enables the 

fabrication of pixelated metasurfaces directly in the emission zone, with minimal 

degradation of device performance.16 This provides the opportunity to design metasurfaces 

that support high Q-factor modes such as bound states in the continuum (BICs), which 

could ensure strong confinement of photonic modes in the active layer and lead to stronger 

light-matter interaction under electrical excitation.

In this work, we demonstrate electrically driven exciton-polaritons in a perovskite light-

emitting transistor with metasurfaces directly patterned into the open surface between top 

electrodes. Metal halide perovskites are chosen as both, active medium and dielectric 

matrix due to their unique combination of high optical gain and luminescence quantum

yield, good charge carrier transport, and high refractive index.17-20 Importantly, excitons in 

perovskite can possess large binding energy, strong nonlinearities and large oscillator 

strength, which highly benefit the study of exciton-polaritons.21-27 We observe the 

formation of high-quality factor polariton BICs (p-BICs) due to the strong coupling 

between the photonic BICs supported by the metasurface and the perovskite excitonic 


2

resonance, leading to a Rabi splitting energy of ~200 meV and more than 50-fold 

enhancement of the electroluminescence (EL) from the lower polariton band (LPB) over 

the intrinsic excitonic emission. Furthermore, we show that the directionality of the 

polaritonic emission can be dynamically tuned through group velocity selection under 

reversed electrical biases. Overall, these results build a foundation for a new class of light-

emitting devices enabled by functional designer metasurfaces that operate in the strong-

coupling regime, which could enable new fundamental discoveries and practical 

applications such as electrically driven polariton lasers and tunable perovskite polaritonic 

devices.

Monolithic integration of metasurfaces into perovskite LETs

The high refractive index of metal halide perovskites allows the monolithic integration of 

functional dielectric metasurfaces in light-emitting devices.16,20,28-31 Here light-emitting 

transistors with lateral electrode configuration are employed for the accessibility of their 

active region to metasurface nanofabrication (Fig. 1). Methylammonium lead iodide 

(MAPbI3) LETs were fabricated as detailed in the Methods section and elsewhere.32-34 The 

transistor has a top-contact bottom-gate configuration, with gold (Au) and p-doped Si as 

the source-drain electrodes and gate electrode, respectively (Fig. 1a). To create the 

monolithic light emitting metadevice, or metatransistor,32 the metasurface is directly 

patterned by focused ion beam (FIB) lithography (Fig. 1b). The metasurface, consisting of 

periodic nanobeams oriented parallel to the Au electrodes, serves as an optical cavity that 

supports photonic resonances. The highly confined cavity photons can strongly couple with 

excitons generated or injected in MAPbI3 to form exciton-polaritons. The inset shows a

microscope image of the operating metatransistor in which the bright square in the middle

of the electrodes corresponds to the EL emission from the metasurface area. Figure 1c 

shows the low-temperature absorption and photoluminescence (PL) properties of MAPbI3, 

where the absorption peak at 1.70 eV corresponds to the excitonic resonance of the 

perovskite, while the PL displays a dominant peak at ~1.66 eV and a minor peak at 1.60 

eV, which can be attributed to the orthorhombic and tetragonal phases of MAPbI3, 

respectively.35


3

Figure 1. Perovskite light-emitting metatransistors. a) Schematic of the metatransistor
device
concept
for polaritonic emission. A resonant dielectric metasurface is 

monolithically fabricated within the active region of the transistor between source (S) and 
drain (D) electrodes, leading to strong coupling of photonic modes and electrically injected 
excitons. The resulting polaritonic electroluminescence can be controlled by the gate (G) 
bias. b) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the perovskite nanobeam array 
fabricated by FIB lithography within the active region between the top S-D electrodes. The 
perovskite nanobeams had period (P) ranging from 380 and 400 nm, height of 125 nm, and 
spacing (w) of 100 nm. The optical microscope image of the device operating at Vg=±80
V and Vds=80 V in the inset shows the region of enhanced EL corresponding to the 
nanopatterned region of the square metasurface. c) PL and absorption spectra of the 
MAPbI3 perovskite compared to the EL spectrum of the unpatterned LET at 78 K. The 
crystal structure of the MAPBI3 perovskite is shown in the inset, where green, black and 
blue spheres represent MA+, Pb2+ and I- ions, respectively. d) Transfer characteristics of 
the MAPbI3 metatransistor obtained in the forward and backward sweeping direction of 
gate bias with Vds=40, 60 and 80 V. e) Peak EL intensity dependence on AC gate bias.


4

To increase brightness and uniformity of the electroluminescence, the device is operated

under an alternating current (AC) gate voltage (Vg) of ±80 V and constant source-drain 

voltage (Vds) of 80 V. Note that the relatively large bias voltages needed to operate the 

LETs are due to the large channel length and may be substantially reduced by decreasing 

the electrode gap or increasing the gate capacitance (e.g., adopting thinner SiO2 layers or 

high-k dielectric materials).36 The EL spectrum of the unstructured LETs peaks at 1.58 eV. 

The reduction of EL emission energy compared to the PL spectrum peaking at 1.66 eV 

may be due to energy transfer toward the smaller bandgap phase or emission from radiative 

trap states of the MAPbI3 film upon electrical injection (Fig. 1c).35,37 The gate bias 

dependence of the LET transport and EL characteristics are shown in Figures 1d and 1e. 

The perovskite metatransistor transfer characteristics show predominantly n-type charge 

transport behaviour with an on-off ratio larger than 103 and electron mobilities up to ~0.16

cm2V-1s-1 (Fig. 1d). The EL intensity is found to increase nearly exponentially when the 

gate voltage increases from 50 to 80 V (Fig. 1e). The strong dependence of the EL intensity 

on gate bias confirms that the device is operating in the enhancement regime.

Electrically driven polariton BICs in perovskite light-emitting metatransistors

To fulfil the criteria of strong coupling, the averaged decay rate of the excitonic (𝛾) and 

photonic resonances (𝜅) has to be smaller than the rate of the energy exchange (𝑔) between 

them, i.e., 2𝑔 ≥ (𝜅 + 𝛾)/2 21. Since 𝜅 is inversely proportional to the quality factor (Q) of 

the photonic cavity, a high Q cavity eases the strong coupling requirement. Here, we adopt 

a nanobeam metasurface that supports photonic BICs with extremely high radiative Q-

factor to facilitate the formation of exciton-polaritons (Fig. 2). To understand the formation 

of BICs in the nanobeam structures, we simulated the photonic bands of the passive cavity

(i.e., the perovskite replaced by a dielectric medium with a fixed refractive index n=2.4)

with P=400 nm for TM and TE polarization, as shown in Figures 2a and 2b, respectively.

Both TM and TE polarizations support symmetry-protected BICs at the Γ point located 

near 1.58 eV and 1.76 eV, respectively, indicated by the white arrow. The BICs are 

evidenced by the vanishing reflectance at the normal incidence, corresponding to the 

intrinsic near-zero linewidth and the ultrahigh radiative Q-factor of the passive metasurface


5

(Fig. S1). The field distribution of the symmetry-protected BICs is shown in the insets, 

providing a visual clue that the BICs can hardly couple to the vertical plane wave due to 

symmetry mismatch38.

Figure 2. Strong coupling of photonic BICs and perovskite excitonic resonances. a, b)
Calculated angle-resolved reflection spectra for TM (a) and TE (b) polarized illumination
of the passive perovskite metasurface (i.e., assuming zero absorption and a fixed refractive 
index n=2.4). The white dashed lines indicate the position of the excitonic resonance of 
MAPbI3 at ~1.70 eV. The insets show the field distribution in the x-z plane of the TM and 
TE polarized BICs. c, d) The simulated angle-resolved spectra of the active perovskite 
metasurface (P=400 nm) with TE and TM polarizations. e, f) Experimental angle-
dependent reflection spectra of the active perovskite metasurface under TM and TE 
illumination, respectively. The white dashed lines indicate the band structure of the passive 
metasurface (C) and the excitonic resonance (X) of MAPbI3. The blue dashed lines
represent the theoretically fitted lower polariton (LPBs) and the upper polariton bands 
(UPBs). The polariton BICs are indicated by white arrows. g, h) Hopfield coefficients of 
the corresponding polaritons, showing exciton and photon fractions in the LPBs for TM 
and TE polarizations, respectively.

Angle-resolved reflection measurements are used to validate the coupling between the 

perovskite exciton resonances and the photonic BICs in the perovskite metasurface. The 


6

experiments were conducted at cryogenic temperature (i.e., T=78 K) using a home-built 

micro-spectrometer setup with back-focal plane capability39 (details on the experimental

setup are provided in Figure S2). The measured reflection spectra under TM and TE 

polarization excitation shown in Figures 3e and 3f are in excellent agreement with the 

simulated reflection band structures of the active metasurface (Fig. 3c and 3d) calculated 

by taking into account the dispersion of the refractive index (Fig. S3). Anticrossing

behaviour between the photonic (C) and excitonic (X) bands can be observed for both TM 

and TE polarizations, a clear signature of strong coupling. A coupled oscillator model was 

used to calculate upper (UPB) and lower polariton branches (LPB)2, showing good 

agreement with the reflection measurement results. Under cavity detuning of Δ𝑇𝑀=-126 

meV ( Δ𝑇𝐸=53 meV), the Rabi splitting energy is estimated to be 202 meV (206 meV) for 

the TM mode (TE mode). This is much larger than the averaged damping rates of the 

excitonic and photonic resonances (39 meV, as derived from the averaged linewidth), 

confirming the system is able to reach the strong coupling regime. Note that the upper 

polariton bands can hardly be distinguished in the experiment due to strong absorption 

above the exciton energy.22,40 The Hopfield coefficients of the system, representing the 

fraction of the excitons (|𝑋|2) and the photons (|𝐶|2) in the LPBs for TM and TE 

polarizations, are calculated by the coupled oscillator model and shown in Figure 3g and 

3h, respectively. Photons and excitons are equally mixed in the polariton branches at the 

angle where the passive photonic bands cross the excitonic resonance. In our case, at the Γ

point the TM (TE) polarized polariton branch has an exciton fraction of 23% (62%), 

indicating the hybrid nature of the polariton BICs. The significant excitonic fractions of 

TE and TM polaritons in their LPBs are expected to facilitate polariton relaxation into 

lower energy states, which may eventually lead to condensation and inversionless 

lasing.1,12,41,42

Strong coupling of photonic BICs and excitonic resonances is also manifested by the 

polaritonic character of photoluminescence and electroluminescence properties of the 

perovskite metatransistor (Fig. 3). Angle-resolved photoluminescence spectra of the

perovskite nanobeam array excited by an off-resonance laser show clear enhancement of 

the emissions from the LPBs, in good agreement with the theoretical predictions for both 

TM and TE polarizations (Fig. 3a and 3b). To demonstrate electrically driven exciton-


7

polaritons in the perovskite metatransistor, the device was operated under AC gate voltage,

and the angle-resolved EL spectra were recorded for TM and TE polarizations (Fig. 3c and 

3d). Like PL, the EL spectra also show clear enhancement of polaritonic emission from the 

LPBs, confirming the generation of exciton-polaritons under electrical injection. It is worth 

noting that the outcoupling of the p-BICs at 1.53 eV for TM polarization (1.62 eV for TE 

polarization) to the radiative continuum is strictly forbidden due to the intrinsic symmetry 

mismatch inherited from the photonic BICs. The decrease of the intensity near the normal 

emission direction, therefore, is clear evidence of the p-BICs.

Figure 3. Polaritonic emission from perovskite metatransistor. a, b) Angle-resolved PL 
spectra of the perovskite metatransistor. c, d) Angle-resolved EL spectra of the perovskite 
metatransistor operating under Vds = 80V, Vg = ±80V. e, f) k-space far-field profiles of the 
p-BICs, obtained with a 10-nm band pass filter centered at 810 nm (1.53 eV) for TM and 
760 nm (1.63 eV) for TE polarization. The white dashed circles, from the inner to the outer, 
indicate the numerical aperture (NA) of 0.15, 0.3 and 0.45. g, h) EL intensity of the 
perovskite metasurface (blue line) and the perovskite film (black dashed line), along with 
the EL enhancement (blue shaded area) obtained as the ratio of the two.

The far field profile of the electrically driven p-BICs was analyzed in the xy-reciprocal 

space. Figures 3e and 3f show the back focal plane (BFP) image of the p-BICs around 1.53 

eV (1.63 eV) for TM (TE) polarization. The EL at normal direction (kx=0) is found to 


8

vanish even at large ky for both polarizations, matching well the simulated profile (Fig. S4). 

Interestingly, the polaritonic EL reaches a maximum 56-fold enhancement under TE 

polarization and 15-fold enhancement under TM polarization compared to the excitonic 

emission from the unstructured portions of the device channel, due to Purcell enhancement

and scattering from the exciton reservoir into the LPB (Fig. 3g, h)43. Overall, the 

monolithically structured metatransistors yield higher emission directionality and higher 

density of states in the LPBs, thanks to the strong coupling. As discussed in the following, 

we believe that these characteristics provide new opportunities to realize highly efficient

and tunable polaritonic devices and, potentially, electrically-driven polariton lasers.

Electrically tunable directionality of polariton emission

Unlike conventional LEDs where charge injection, and thus emission, is homogeneous 

across the active region of the device in the vertical multilayer stack, the recombination 

(emission) zone of LETs can be shifted towards the drain or the source electrode by 

adjusting the source-drain bias32,44. This characteristic feature of the LETs was exploited 

to prove reversible tunability of the polariton emission directionality in metatransistors (Fig. 

4). Figure 4a shows the angle-resolved EL spectra of the perovskite metatransistor with 

detuning energy Δ𝑇𝑀=-73.1 meV (P=380 nm) with Vds=80 V, which induces uniform EL 

emission throughout the metasurface area (inset of Fig. 4a). At these biasing conditions, 

two symmetric LPBs (LPB-1 and LPB-2) can be observed in the EL spectrum. Note that 

the enhanced polariton relaxation in LPB-1, characterized by the bottleneck where 

polaritons assemble, is located closer to the normal direction compared with the one 

presented in Figure 3c (i.e., Δ𝑇𝑀=-126.3 meV, P=400 nm) due to the larger exciton fraction

and longer polariton lifetime at smaller detuning energy.45 When reducing Vds to -40V, the 

emission zone shifts toward the source electrode, resulting in a gradient EL intensity 

distribution along the x-axis (inset of Fig. 4b). In this asymmetric electrical injection 

configuration, the majority of polaritons is driven to propagate along the positive x

direction (with positive group velocity), as evidenced by the asymmetric EL bands of TM 

polarization in the experiment (Fig. 4b) and the extracted group velocity from the 

dispersion of LPB-1 and LPB-2 (Fig. 4c). The simulated angle-resolved emission using a 

dipole source on one side of the metasurface to mimic the gradient EL distribution shows 


9

good correspondence with the experimental results (Fig. S5). Specifically, for the 

polaritonic emission at 1.57 eV, exciton-polaritons are emitted at both 4o and -4o under

symmetric injection (Vds=80 V) while they can be electrically switched to 4o off the normal 

(with positive group velocity) by changing the source-drain bias to Vds=-40 V (Fig. 4d). A 

similar phenomenon is also observed for TE-polarized polaritons (Fig. S6). This 

mechanism provides a simple way to electrically tune the directionality of the polaritonic

emission, which may find applications in actively reconfigurable polaritonic devices. 

Furthermore, switching of the emission zone between the source and drain electrodes,

which is possible in DC-driven LETs operating in the ambipolar regime,16,36,44 would allow 

modulation of the polariton emission from positive to negative angles (i.e., with positive 

or negative group velocities), or at both angles with adjustable ratio, enabling 

pluridirectional beam steering and ranging.

Figure 4. Electrically tunable directional polaritonic emission. TM polarized angle-
resolved EL spectra of the perovskite metatransistor with P=380 nm, Vg = ±80V and a) 
Vds=80 V or b) Vds =-40 V. Fitting of the LPB-1 and LPB-2 are indicated by the blue dashed 
lines. The insets show optical microscope images of the corresponding metasurface area 


10

(30 m x 30 m). c) Polariton group velocity of the LPB-1 and LPB-2 extracted from the 
dispersion in a). d) Directional EL of LPB-1 at the energy of 1.57 eV obtained by applying 
80 V (blue line) and -40V (orange line) source-drain voltage.

Conclusions and outlook

In conclusion, we demonstrated electrically driven exciton-polaritons in a MAPbI3 light-

emitting metatransistor with maximum Rabi splitting energy of 206 meV at 78 K. Low 

damping rates of the photonic BICs supported by the metasurface facilitate their strong 

coupling with the perovskite excitonic resonance to form polariton BICs under optical or 

electrical injection. This leads to more than 50-fold enhancement of EL from the LPB over 

the excitonic emission of the unpatterned MAPbI3 film. Moreover, the directionality of the 

polaritonic emission can be reversibly tuned by controlling the position of the 

recombination zone within the transistor channel with different source-drain biases. Our 

proof-of-concept demonstration shows that the light-emitting metatransistor platform,

which is compatible with various monolithic cavity designs and pixelated metasurface 

fabrication, enables complete polaritonic mode and dispersion engineering for the study of 

strong light-matter interactions under electrical excitation. To assess whether the threshold 

for polariton lasing is within reach, we estimated that the charge carrier density in the 

unoptimized MAPbI3 LET device (1.2×1017 cm-3) is only one order of magnitude lower 

than the threshold density obtained for photonic BIC lasing in MAPbI3 metasurfaces

(1.6×1018 cm-3),46 which may be even lower for polariton lasing (refer to “Charge carrier 

density estimation” section in Supplementary Information). Polariton condensation in 

perovskite light-emitting metatransistors could therefore be achieved by better cavity 

design, improved film and material quality, and higher injection currents (e.g. by optimized 

gate design and intense pulsed bias operation), opening new routes towards the highly 

sought, solution-processed electrically driven laser.47,48

Methods

LET fabrication

Perovskite LETs were fabricated in a bottom-gate and top-contact configuration on heavily 

p-doped Si substrates with a thermally grown SiO2 (500 nm) layer as the gate insulator. 


11

MAPbI3 thin films were fabricated from a 1.3 M precursor solution of CH3NH3I (Dyesol) 

and PbI2 (99.99%, TCI) (molar ratio 1:1) in anhydrous dimethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-

Aldrich). The as-prepared solution was magnetically stirred for 2 hrs at 373 K in N2 filled 

glovebox, then filtered by a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) syringe filter (0.45 μm) before 

spin-coating. Prior to perovskite deposition, substrates were cleaned with ultrasonication 

for 15 min in acetone, isopropanol and deionized water. Subsequently, substrates were 

dried with the flow of nitrogen, followed by an oxygen plasma cleaning treatment. The 

perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated onto the quartz substrates with a speed of 

4500 rpm for 30 s using the anti-solvent deposition method, with toluene drop-cast on the 

substrates 5 s after starting spinning. The resulting films were finally annealed at 373 K for 

15 min. Afterwards, 100 nm thick Au electrodes were thermally evaporated in high vacuum 

(~10-6 mbar). To avoid thermal decomposition of the perovskite films, samples were placed 

on a water-cooled substrate holder at 291 K during the electrode deposition. The resulting 

LET channel length (L) and width (W) were 80 μm and 1 mm, respectively. 

Metamaterial fabrication

To complete the metatransistor devices, nanobeam arrays were patterned on the perovskite 

film by focused ion beam (Helios 600 NanoLab, FEI) milling to form the subwavelength 

grating metasurface. The lateral dimension of each fabricated metasurface was 30 μm×30 

μm.

Electrical and optical characterization

Electrical and optical characterization was carried out using a temperature-controlled probe 

stage (HFS600E-PB4/PB2, Linkam) at the temperature of 78 K in the dark and under 

vacuum (~10-3 mbar). DC characteristics were acquired with a 2-channel precision 

source/measure unit (B2902A, Agilent). Charge-carrier mobilities were extracted from the 

forward sweeping of transfer characteristics obtained at Vds = 40 V, using the conventional 

equations for metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS) transistors in the saturation regime: 

𝜇𝑠𝑎𝑡 =

2𝐿

𝑊𝐶𝑖 (

𝜕√𝐼𝑑𝑠

𝜕𝑉𝑔 )

2
.


12

Photoluminescence spectra were measured using a home-built setup based on an optical 

microscope (Eclipse LV100, Nikon) with LU plan fluor × 10 and × 50 objectives. The 

excitation source was a 405 nm picosecond laser diode (P-C-405B, Picoquant) operated at

a 40 MHz repetition rate. The PL signal was detected by an AvaSpec ULS-RS-TEC, 

Avantes spectrometer.

Electroluminescence measurements of unpatterned devices were performed on the same 

optical setup as the PL measurement, under AC-driven mode by applying constant drain-

source bias (Vds=80 V) and square wave bias to the gate electrode (100 kHz modulation 

frequency), using an arbitrary waveform generator (3390, Keithley) coupled with a high-

voltage amplifier (WMA-300, Falco Systems). Optical images and videos were taken and 

acquired by a cooled sCMOS scientific camera (PCO.edge 3.1m) coupled to the optical 

microscope.

Angle-resolved measurements

Angle-resolved reflection, PL, and EL measurements were performed with a home-built 

micro-spectrometer. The system consists of an inverted optical microscope (Nikon Ti-U), 

a spectrograph (Andor SR-303i with 150 lines/mm grating), and an electron-multiplying 

charged-coupled detector (EMCCD, Andor Newton 971). A lens system along the light 

path between the microscope and the spectrograph is used to project the back focal plane 

of the collection objective (Nikon ×50, with numerical aperture NA=0.45) onto the slit of 

the spectrograph. This configuration allows spectral measurement with angular 

information corresponding to the NA of the objective. A linear polarizer placed on the 

optical path of the lens system was used to select the collection polarization. A halogen 

lamp was used as an excitation source in reflection measurements, while in PL 

measurements, samples were excited by a 488 nm continuous wave solid state laser.

Coupled oscillator model

The coupling between photon and exciton resembles the coupling of two harmonic 

oscillators, so the system can be described by the coupled oscillator model. Assuming the 

photonic oscillator in the optical cavity possesses the resonance energy of 𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑣 with the 

decay rate of 𝛾𝑐𝑎𝑣 while the excitonic resonance has the energy of 𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑐 with a nonradiative 


13

decay rate of 𝛾𝑒𝑥𝑐, the Hamiltonian of this system can be written with a coupling strength 

of 2𝑔0 (corresponding to the Rabi splitting energy ℏΩ) and the system can be described by 

the following eigenvalue equation:

(𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑣 + 𝑖𝛾𝑐𝑎𝑣
2𝑔0

2𝑔0
𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑐 + 𝑖𝛾𝑒𝑥𝑐) ∙ (𝐶

𝑋) = 𝐸 ∙ (𝐶

𝑋)
(1)

The C and X are the weighing factors of the photonic and excitonic oscillator, referring to 

the Hopfield coefficient. Let ∆𝐸 = 𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑐 − 𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑣, X and C are given by:

|𝑋|2 = 1

2 (1 +
∆𝐸

√∆𝐸2 + 4𝑔02)
(2)

|𝐶|2 = 1

2 (1 −
∆𝐸

√∆𝐸2 + 4𝑔02)
(3)

Solving the eigenvalue equation (1), gives the result of the eigenenergy:

𝐸𝑈𝑃,𝐿𝑃 = 1

2 (𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑣 + 𝑖𝛾𝑐𝑎𝑣 + 𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑐 + 𝑖𝛾𝑒𝑥𝑐)

± √4𝑔02 + [𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑐 + 𝑖𝛾𝑒𝑥𝑐 − 𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑣 + 𝑖𝛾𝑒𝑥𝑐 − 𝑖𝛾𝑐𝑎𝑣]2
(4)

where, the 𝐸𝑈𝑃 and 𝐸𝐿𝑃 are the energy of the lower polariton state and upper polariton state, 

respectively. The formation of these two new eigen modes indicates a clear anticrossing 

behavior. Assuming a non-dispersive 𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑐 with regard to the in-plane wave vector 𝑘∥, the 

dispersion of the polariton bands can be determined by the dispersion of the photonic bands 

𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑣(𝑘∥). The coupling strength between the two oscillators must be larger than the 

averaged decay rates in order to observe the splitting of the lower polariton state and the 

upper polariton state:

2𝑔0 > (𝛾𝑐𝑎𝑣 + 𝛾𝑒𝑥𝑐)

2
(5)

Numerical simulations

The angle-resolved reflection spectra were computed in Comsol Multiphysics 5.4. Floquet 

periodic boundary conditions were used in the transverse direction, and perfectly matched 

layers were used in the propagation direction. The system was excited by a periodic port 


14

above the array. The far-field distribution of the emission in the momentum space was

calculated by the reciprocity method, i.e., integrating the electric field intensity (~|E|2) 

inside the perovskite grating metasurface for different angles of incidence. The optical 

bands and Q-factors were calculated by an eigenfrequency solver using the same model.

Acknowledgements

We thank Dr. Ramón Paniagua-Domínguez and Dr. Arseniy I. Kuznetsov for valuable 

discussions and advice on this work. Research was supported by the Agency for Science, 

Technology and Research A*STAR-AME programmatic grant on Nanoantenna Spatial 

Light Modulators for Next-Gen Display Technologies (Grant no. A18A7b0058) and the 

Singapore Ministry of Education MOE Tier 3 (Grant no. MOE2016-T3-1-006). S.T.H 

acknowledges support from AME Young Individual Research Grant (YIRG Grant no. 

A2084c0177).

Author contributions

C.S., S.T.H. and Y.W. conceived the idea. Y.W. and M.K. fabricated the perovskite LETs. 

G.A. carried out FIB lithography for metasurface fabrication. Y.W. characterized PL, EL 

and absorption of the devices with M.K., conducted numerical simulations of the 

metasurface response and theoretical analysis with J.T.. S.T.H. carried out angle-resolved 

reflection, PL and EL measurements with assistance from Y.W. and M.K.. Y.W, J.T.,

S.T.H. and C.S. performed data analysis and wrote the paper with inputs from all authors.


15

Referencees

1.
Byrnes, T., Kim, N. Y. & Yamamoto, Y. Exciton–polariton condensates. Nature Physics
10, 803-813 (2014). 

2.
Deng, H., Haug, H. & Yamamoto, Y. Exciton-polariton Bose-Einstein condensation. 
Reviews of Modern Physics 82, 1489-1537 (2010). 

3.
Kasprzak, J. et al. Bose-Einstein condensation of exciton polaritons. Nature 443, 409-414 
(2006). 

4.
Amo, A. et al. Superfluidity of polaritons in semiconductor microcavities. Nature Physics
5, 805-810 (2009). 

5.
Ballarini, D. et al. All-optical polariton transistor. Nat Commun 4, 1778 (2013). 

6.
Ballarini, D. et al. Polaritonic Neuromorphic Computing Outperforms Linear Classifiers. 
Nano Lett 20, 3506-3512 (2020). 

7.
Christopoulos, S. et al. Room-temperature polariton lasing in semiconductor microcavities. 
Phys Rev Lett 98, 126405 (2007). 

8.
Christmann, G., Butte, R., Feltin, E., Carlin, J.-F. & Grandjean, N. Room temperature 
polariton lasing in a GaN∕AlGaN multiple quantum well microcavity. Applied Physics 
Letters 93, 051102 (2008). 

9.
Liu, X. et al. Strong light–matter coupling in two-dimensional atomic crystals. Nature 
Photonics 9, 30-34 (2014). 

10.
Zhao, L. et al. Strong exciton-photon interaction and lasing of two-dimensional transition 
metal dichalcogenide semiconductors. Nano Research 14, 1937-1954 (2020). 

11.
Kéna-Cohen, S. & Forrest, S. R. Room-temperature polariton lasing in an organic single-
crystal microcavity. Nature Photonics 4, 371-375 (2010). 

12.
Ardizzone, V. et al. Polariton Bose-Einstein condensate from a bound state in the 
continuum. Nature 605, 447-452 (2022). 

13.
Schneider, C. et al. An electrically pumped polariton laser. Nature 497, 348-352 (2013). 

14.
Christogiannis, N. et al. Characterizing the Electroluminescence Emission from a Strongly 
Coupled Organic Semiconductor Microcavity LED. Advanced Optical Materials 1, 503-
509 (2013). 

15.
Wang, T. et al. Electrically Pumped Polarized Exciton-Polaritons in a Halide Perovskite 
Microcavity. Nano Lett (2022). 

16.
Bisri, S. Z., Takenobu, T. & Iwasa, Y. The pursuit of electrically-driven organic 
semiconductor lasers. Journal of Materials Chemistry C 2, 2827-2836 (2014). 

17.
Dong, Q. et al. Electron-hole diffusion lengths> 175 μm in solution-grown CH3NH3PbI3
single crystals. Science 347, 967-970 (2015). 

18.
Protesescu, L. et al. Nanocrystals of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites (CsPbX(3), X = Cl, 
Br, and I): Novel Optoelectronic Materials Showing Bright Emission with Wide Color 
Gamut. Nano Lett 15, 3692-3696 (2015). 

19.
Jiang, Y. et al. Temperature dependent optical properties of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite by 
spectroscopic ellipsometry. Applied Physics Letters 108 (2016). 

20.
Makarov, S. et al. Halide-Perovskite Resonant Nanophotonics. Advanced Optical 
Materials 7 (2019). 


16

21.
Su, R. et al. Perovskite semiconductors for room-temperature exciton-polaritonics. Nat 
Mater 20, 1315-1324 (2021). 

22.
Su, R.
et al.
Room-Temperature Polariton Lasing in All-Inorganic Perovskite 

Nanoplatelets. Nano Lett 17, 3982-3988 (2017). 

23.
Dang, N. H. M. et al. Tailoring Dispersion of Room-Temperature Exciton-Polaritons with 
Perovskite-Based Subwavelength Metasurfaces. Nano Lett 20, 2113-2119 (2020). 

24.
Su, R. et al. Observation of exciton polariton condensation in a perovskite lattice at room 
temperature. Nature Physics 16, 301-306 (2020). 

25.
Polimeno, L. et al. Tuning of the Berry curvature in 2D perovskite polaritons. Nat 
Nanotechnol 16, 1349-1354 (2021). 

26.
Rui Su1, Sanjib Ghosh, Timothy C. H. Liew & Xiong, Q. Optical switching of topological 
phase in a perovskite polariton lattice. Science Advances (2021). 

27.
Nguyen Ha My Dang et al. Realization of Polaritonic Topological Charge at Room 
Temperature Using Polariton Bound state in the Contimuum. Advanced Optical Materials, 
2102386 (2022). 

28.
Cesare Soci et al. Roadmap on perovskite nanophotonics. in preparation for Optical 
Materials X (2022). 

29.
Huang Can & Chen, Z. Ultrafast control of vortex microlasers. Science 367 (2020). 

30.
Zhang, C. et al. Lead Halide Perovskite ‐ Based Dynamic Metasurfaces. Laser & 
Photonics Reviews 13 (2019). 

31.
Tiguntseva, E. Y. et al. Light-Emitting Halide Perovskite Nanoantennas. Nano Letters 18, 
1185-1190 (2018). 

32.
Klein, M. et al. Polarization-Tunable Perovskite Light-Emitting Metatransistor. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2206.12050 (2022). 

33.
Maddalena, F., Chin, X. Y., Cortecchia, D., Bruno, A. & Soci, C. Brightness Enhancement 
in Pulsed-Operated Perovskite Light-Emitting Transistors. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 10, 
37316-37325 (2018). 

34.
Chin, X. Y., Cortecchia, D., Yin, J., Bruno, A. & Soci, C. Lead iodide perovskite light-
emitting field-effect transistor. Nat Commun 6, 7383 (2015). 

35.
Panzer, F., Li, C., Meier, T., Köhler, A. & Huettner, S. Impact of Structural Dynamics on 
the Optical Properties of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskites. Advanced Energy 
Materials 7, 1700286 (2017). 

36.
Chaudhry, M. U. et al. Organic Light-Emitting Transistors: Advances and Perspectives. 
Advanced Functional Materials 30, 1905282 (2019). 

37.
Liu, X. et al. A Perovskite Light-Emitting Device Driven by Low-Frequency Alternating 
Current Voltage. Advanced Optical Materials 6 (2018). 

38.
Hsu, C. W., Zhen, B., Stone, A. D., Joannopoulos, J. D. & Soljačić, M. Bound states in the 
continuum. Nature Reviews Materials 1 (2016). 

39.
Ha, S. T. et al. Directional lasing in resonant semiconductor nanoantenna arrays. Nat 
Nanotechnol 13, 1042-1047 (2018). 

40.
Guillet, T. & Brimont, C. Polariton condensates at room temperature. Comptes Rendus 
Physique 17, 946-956 (2016). 

41.
Graf, A. et al. Electrical pumping and tuning of exciton-polaritons in carbon nanotube 
microcavities. Nat Mater 16, 911-917 (2017). 


17

42.
Wang, J. et al. Room Temperature Coherently Coupled Exciton-Polaritons in Two-
Dimensional Organic-Inorganic Perovskite. ACS Nano 12, 8382-8389 (2018). 

43.
Ballarini, D. et al. Polariton-Induced Enhanced Emission from an Organic Dye under the 
Strong Coupling Regime. Advanced Optical Materials 2, 1076-1081 (2014). 

44.
Klein, M., Li, J., Bruno, A. & Soci, C. Co-Evaporated Perovskite Light-Emitting Transistor 
Operating at Room Temperature. Advanced Electronic Materials 7, 2100403 (2021). 

45.
Gu, J., Chakraborty, B., Khatoniar, M. & Menon, V. M. A room-temperature polariton 
light-emitting diode based on monolayer WS2. Nat Nanotechnol 14, 1024-1028 (2019). 

46.
Jingyi, T. et al. Phase-change perovskite tunable microlaser. arXiv:2107.05239 (2021). 

47.
Veldhuis, S. A. et al. Perovskite Materials for Light-Emitting Diodes and Lasers. Adv 
Mater 28, 6804-6834 (2016). 

48.
Zhang, Q., Tao, W., Huang, J., Xia, R. & Cabanillas-Gonzalez, J. Toward Electrically 
Pumped Organic Lasers: A Review and Outlook on Material Developments and Resonator 
Architectures. Advanced Photonics Research 2 (2021). 


18

Supplementary Materials for

Electrically driven exciton-polaritons                                             

in metal halide perovskite metatransistors

Yutao Wang,1,2† Jingyi Tian, 1,3† Maciej Klein, 1,3 Giorgio Adamo, 1,3 

Son Tung Ha,4* and Cesare Soci1,3*

1 Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies, TPI, Nanyang Technological University, 

21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371

2 Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Energy Research Institute @NTU (ERI@N), 

Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637553

3 Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical 

Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371

4 Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, Agency for Science Technology and 

Research (A*STAR), 2 Fusionopolis Way, Singapore 138634

†These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence: Ha_Son_Tung@imre.a-star.edu.sg; csoci@ntu.edu.sg


19

Supplementary Text

Charge carrier density estimation

To evaluate the ability of electrically pumped lasing in perovskite meta-transistors, we first 

estimate the charge carrier densities required for optically pumped photonic lasing in the 

MAPbI3 perovskite metasurface in another work of our group with the same fabrication 

procedure1. Considering the carrier lifetime in perovskite ranges is roughly 100 ns,2 as the 

optical pump pulse duration (100 fs) used in the optical experiment is much smaller than

the photogenerated carrier lifetime ( 𝜏𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑠𝑒 ≪ 𝜏𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑒𝑟 ), carrier recombination can be 

reasonably neglected within a single pulse duration. Thus, assuming 100% carrier 

generation efficiency, the carrier density induced by the optical pump can be calculated by 

the following equation:2

𝑛 = (1 − 𝑅)(1 − 𝑒−𝛼𝐿)(𝐼𝑝/𝐿 ∙ ℎ𝑐

𝜆 )

where 𝑅 and 𝛼 are the reflectance and absorption coefficients, 𝐿 the optical penetration 

depth, and 𝐼𝑝 is the laser pulse fluence. The corresponding carrier density at the threshold 

fluence of 8 uJ/cm2 of the optically pumped BIC laser is 𝑛~1.6 × 1018 cm-3. 

For electrically driven LETs under continuous operation, the carrier density is given by:

𝑛 = 𝑛𝜏𝑐

𝑞𝑑

where 𝑗 is the current density, 𝜏𝑐 is the carrier lifetime, and 𝑑 is the transistor channel length. 

The current density achieved experimentally in our perovskite LETs has reached the level 

of ~1.5 kA/cm2 according to the electrical characteristics. Assuming the carrier lifetime to 

be 𝜏𝑐~100 ns, this corresponds to a carrier density of 𝑛~1.2 × 1017 cm-3. Since the threshold 

to achieve polariton condensation in the strong coupling regime is generally much smaller 

than the photonic lasing threshold,3,4 it is promising to achieve electrically driven lasers 

based on perovskite meta-transistors by better cavity designs, improved quality of the gain 

materials, optimized contact geometry and higher injection currents.

1.
Jingyi, T. et al. Phase-change perovskite tunable microlaser. arXiv:2107.05239 (2021). 

2.
Qin, J., Liu, X.-K., Yin, C. & Gao, F. Carrier Dynamics and Evaluation of Lasing Actions 
in Halide Perovskites. Trends in Chemistry 3, 34-46 (2021). 


20

3.
Byrnes, T., Kim, N. Y. & Yamamoto, Y. Exciton–polariton condensates. Nature Physics
10, 803-813 (2014). 

4.
Deng, H., Haug, H. & Yamamoto, Y. Exciton-polariton Bose-Einstein condensation. 
Reviews of Modern Physics 82, 1489-1537 (2010). 

Figure S1. Calculated band structures and the Q-factors of the passive perovskite 
metasurface of a) TE, and b) TM polarization using eigenmode simulation. The orange 
arrows indicate the symmetry protected photonic BICs located at the Γ point with ultrahigh 
Q-factors. The excitonic resonance is indicated by the blue dashed line.


21

Figure S2. Schematics of the back focal plane imaging systems for angle-resolved 
reflection, PL and EL measurement. The slit is removed and a band pass filter is added 
after the polarizer for far field profile measurement.


22

Figure S3. The a) real refractive index and b) extinction coefficient of the spin coated 
MAPbI3 film at 78K. The refractive index (n=2.4) for passive metasurface simulation is 
estimated at low photon energy where the exciton oscillator has minor effect on the 
refractive index.


23

Figure S4. The simulated far field profile of the polariton BIC for a) TM and b) TE mode. 
The white dashed circles represent the NA of 0.15, 0.3 and 0.45, from inner to outer side.


24

Figure S5. The simulated band structure of the a) TM and b) TE polarization with an 
asymmetric pumping situation. Similar to the experimental results, only mode with positive 
group velocity is emitting in the polariton bands. The asymmetric band structure is 
simulated by putting a x (TM) or y (TE) oriented electric dipole on one side of the 
nanogratings.


25

Figure S6.  The angle resolved EL spectra of the TE polarization under a) symmetric (Vds
= 80V) and b) asymmetric (Vds = -40V) pumping scheme. Blue dashed lines are the 
calculated polariton bands via coupled oscillator model. Two polariton bands (LBP-1 and 
LPB-2) can be observed. c) Group velocity of the LPB-1 and LPB-2. Similar to the case in 
Figure 4, only modes with positive group velocities are emitting in the asymmetric 
pumping scheme. d) Angle resolved EL spectra showing reversible switching between 
symmetric and asymmetric emission band structures.


