Phase-resolved measurement and control of ultrafast dynamics in terahertz 
electronic oscillators 

 

Takashi Arikawa1,2*, Jaeyong Kim3,6, Toshikazu Mukai3, Naoki Nishigami4, Masayuki Fujita4, 

Tadao Nagatsuma4 and Koichiro Tanaka1,5 

 

1 Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. 

2 PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Saitama, Japan 

3 ROHM Co., Ltd., Kyoto, Japan. 

4 Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Japan 

5 Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (iCeMS), Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan 

6 Present address: Qualitas semiconductor, co, ltd., Seongnam, Republic of Korea 

Corresponding author *arikawa@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

 

As a key component for next-generation wireless communications (6G and beyond1-3), terahertz 

(THz) electronic oscillators are being actively developed4. Precise and dynamic phase control of 

ultrafast THz waveforms is essential for high-speed beam steering and high-capacity data 

transmission. However, measurement of such ultrafast dynamic process is beyond the scope of 

electronics due to the limited bandwidth of the electrical measuring instruments. Here we surpass 

this limit by applying photonic technology. Using a femtosecond laser, we generate offset-free 

THz pulses to phase-lock the electronic oscillators based on a resonant tunneling diode5. This 

enables us to perform phase-resolved measurement of the emitted THz electric field waveform in 

time-domain with sub-cycle time resolution. Ultrafast dynamic response such as anti-phase 

locking behaviour is observed, which is distinct from in-phase stimulated emission observed in 

laser oscillators6-8. We also show that the dynamics follows the universal synchronization theory 

for limit cycle oscillators. This provides a basic guideline for dynamic phase control of THz 

electronic oscillators, enabling many key performance indicators1 to be achieved in the new era 

of 6G and beyond.  
 
 


Terahertz (THz) electronics is a rapidly evolving research field4. THz wave emitters based on 

compact electronic oscillators are suitable for real-world applications such as THz imaging9, 

Radar10, and wireless communications towards 6G and beyond1-3. Several types of THz oscillators 

are developed using diodes5,11-13 and transistors14-16. They use negative differential conductance 

(NDC) as an alternating-current gain to convert direct-current power to continuous wave (CW) 

THz radiation. The modern microfabrication technology was very successful in reducing the 

inductance (L) and capacitance (C) of the device, leading to the ultrahigh operating frequency 

(𝜔! = 1 √𝐿𝐶
⁄
) of THz. The highest fundamental oscillation approaching 2 THz is achieved17 by 

resonant tunneling diode (RTD) oscillator18-23. However, the characterization of such ultrafast 

oscillation is extremely challenging. For a clear example, THz frequency far exceeds the 

bandwidth of the state-of-the-art oscilloscopes, hindering the direct monitoring of the oscillation 

waveform24. 

At the same time, however, ultrafast time-domain measurement of the THz waveform is now 

routinely performed in the field of THz photonics. Instead of the electronic means, this technique 

is based on optical sampling such as electro-optic sampling25 using femtosecond lasers and known 

as THz time-domain spectroscopy26-29 (THz-TDS). In THz-TDS, a time resolution only limited 

by the pulse width of the femtosecond laser is achieved by utilizing phase-stable periodic nature 

of the signal waveform. Although THz-TDS is an ideal tool for characterizing THz electronic 

oscillators, no successful measurement has been reported so far due to their random phase 

fluctuation. 

In this paper, we show THz-TDS technique can be used to phase-lock electronic oscillators 

based on RTD by injection locking and perform optical sampling of the emitted THz waveform 

with a time resolution unachievable with electronic means. The phase-resolved measurement 

revealed the anti-phase locking nature, which is reproduced by the general synchronization theory 

for limit cycle (Van der Pol) oscillators. We also demonstrated oscillation phase control through 

the injection signal waveform. Our findings will provide the foundation for phase control 

technology of THz electronic oscillators. 

 

Results 

Principle of optical sampling. In order to perform optical sampling like THz-TDS, the signal 

waveform must be repetitive. In THz-TDS, this condition is satisfied because carrier-envelope 

phase stable THz pulses are generated by a mode-locked femtosecond laser31,31. In the frequency-

domain, this is equivalent to the offset-free comb spectrum at nfrep (n: integer, frep : laser repetition 

rate)32. In this case, THz wave with a period of TTHz = (nfrep)-1 and sampling pulses derived from 

the same mode-locked laser with a repetition interval of Trep = (frep)-1 are phase-locked, i.e., Trep = 

nTTHz. Therefore, all the sampling pulses measure the same electric field value at a fixed phase 


(black solid circles on red solid waveforms in Fig. 1a) and this allows us to accumulate huge 

number of tiny signals to sufficiently suppress the noise. By changing the relative timing between 

the THz and sampling pulse, we can reconstruct the whole waveform of the THz radiation. 

Similarly, time-domain sampling of the CW THz wave from electronic oscillators is possible 

if the oscillation frequency matches nfrep. However, this is generally unrealistic due to the phase 

fluctuation. In the case of RTD oscillators, typical phase coherence time is less than one 

microsecond33 (spectral linewidth on the order of a few MHz). In this situation, sampling pulses 

detect random electric field values every one microsecond (schematically shown by open circles 

on dashed red waveforms in Fig. 1a) and the required accumulation process produces zero signal. 

Therefore, phase locking is a key to realize optical sampling of electronic oscillators. 

Recent research revealed that THz RTD oscillators can be phase-locked by injecting external 

THz wave with the amplitude as small as 10-4 of the RTD oscillator itself33. For typical RTD 

oscillators with 10 µW output power, this corresponds to the electric field amplitude on the order 

of mV/cm, which is achievable by THz pulses used in THz-TDS. In this study, we used offset-

free THz pulses with a repetition rate of frep for injection locking (Fig. 1b). This allows us to lock 

the oscillation frequency and phase of the RTD oscillator to nfrep and satisfy the requirement for 

the optical sampling. 

 

Time-domain measurement. We used an RTD oscillator made of AlAs/GaInAs double barrier 

structure34 (see Methods and Supplementary Fig. S1 for detail). The size of the RTD chip is very 

tiny, comparable to a laser diode. The experimental setup is a standard THz-TDS system in 

reflection geometry (see Methods and Supplementary Fig. S2 for detail). We injected THz pulses 

to the biased RTD and measured reflected THz wave (Eon) using electro-optic sampling technique. 

If the RTD oscillation is phase-locked by the THz pulse, we should be able to observe the electric 

field emitted by the RTD in addition to the reflected injection THz pulse. By subtracting the 

waveform of the injection THz pulse which can be measured without the bias voltage (Eoff), we 

extracted the emission from the RTD (ERTD = Eon - Eoff). To avoid long-term fluctuation, we 

employed double modulation technique and obtained Eoff and ERTD simultaneously in a single 

delay stage scan rather than performing two scans for Eon and Eoff (see Methods).  

Figures 1c and 1d show the electric field waveforms of the injection THz pulse (Eoff) and the 

difference signal (ERTD), respectively. The bias voltage was set within the oscillation region (510 

mV). Before the injection THz pulse comes at 9 ps, ERTD only shows noisy signal although the 

RTD is emitting THz wave. This is the consequence of the phase fluctuation described above. 

After the THz pulse injection, the difference signal starts to show sinusoidal oscillation with a 

frequency of 0.340 THz. This agrees with the free-running frequency and suggests the successful 

phase-locking and phase-resolved detection of the RTD emission in time-domain. For the further 


confirmation, we calculated the Fourier transform (𝐸)on and 𝐸)off) and checked the amplitude ratio 

(*𝐸)on* *𝐸)off*
+
). As shown by the red curve in Fig. 1g, a sharp peak above one at 0.340 THz is seen, 

which means that the oscillation in Fig. 1c is due to the RTD emission, eliminating the possibility 

of absorption signal. 

Figure 1e shows the difference signal measured when the RTD was biased just outside of the 

oscillation region (551 mV). Even though the RTD was not oscillating, we still observed finite 

signal. This is because the reflectivity of the RTD slightly changes by the bias voltage most likely 

due to the rectification by the RTD as a THz detector35,36. The sudden increase of the signal around 

35 ps is explained by the internal reflection inside the device (26 ps round trip time. See 

Supplementary information for detail). Similar increase at 35 ps in Fig. 1d suggests that the signal 

due to the RTD reflectivity change is superimposed on the RTD emission. This point can be 

confirmed by comparing the amplitude ratio for both voltages (red and black traces in Fig. 1g); 

except for the RTD emission peak, they have small peaks and dips in common. These structures 

are almost equally spaced by 38.5 GHz (as indicated by the vertical grids), which is consistent 

with the existence of the multiple internal reflection of a round-trip time of 26 ps (= 38.5 GHz-1). 

 

Injection locking dynamics. By eliminating the signal due to the RTD reflectivity change, we 

can extract the RTD emission component from the difference signal. The narrow spectrum of the 

RTD emission allows us to use a simple frequency filtering to suppress the signal due to the 

reflectivity change. We numerically filtered out the frequency component outside of the blue 

shaded region in Fig. 1g and extracted the RTD emission component (blue trace in Fig. 1f). 

Although a small dip around 346.5 GHz is unavoidable, the large signal at 35 ps disappears and 

smooth buildup of the phase-locked component in about 50 ps is seen. For the decay dynamics, 

we don’t have to rely on the numerical data processing because the signal due to the RTD 

reflectivity change becomes negligible after 80 ps (Fig. 1e). After 80 ps, the RTD emission 

amplitude gradually decreases and becomes almost constant after around 250 ps (for full 

waveform up to 600 ps, see Fig. 2a). 

The electric field measurement in time-domain allows us to determine the phase of the RTD 

oscillation. We fitted the RTD emission after 80 ps by a decaying cosine function with its time 

origin at 9 ps and obtained the initial phase of 1.10p. The phase of the injection signal at 0.340 

THz is also obtained (0.11p) from the Fourier transform using cosine functions starting from 9 ps 

(inset of Fig. 1c). We found that the phase difference is 0.99p, which means that the RTD is anti-

phase locked to the injection signal. These dynamical features will be explained by a general 

synchronization theory for limit cycle oscillators. 


 

Figure 1 | Phase-resolved time-domain sampling of RTD THz oscillator. a. Principle of optical 

sampling. THz wave (solid red curve) and sampling pulses are phase-locked. Dashed red curve 

represents the THz wave from free-running electronic oscillators with phase noise. b. Phase-

locking of RTD by offset-free THz pulse injection. c. Waveform of the injection THz pulse (Eoff). 

The inset shows the amplitude (orange) and phase (blue) in the frequency-domain calculated from 

Eoff in the first 18 ps. The time origin was taken at 9 ps (positive peak of the main pulse) for the 

phase determination based on cosine function. Small-amplitude pulses at 22 ps and 94 ps are due 

to internal reflections inside the silicon substrate and detection crystal, respectively. d. Waveform 

of the difference signal (ERTD) at 510 mV. e. Waveform of the difference signal at 551 mV which 

is just outside of the oscillation region. f. Waveform of the RTD emission component (blue curve) 

at 510 mV obtained by frequency filtering. g. Fourier amplitude ratio between bias voltage on and 

off (red: 510 mV, black: 551 mV). The vertical grid lines are drawn at the integer multiples of 

38.5 GHz. The frequency resolution is 1.67 GHz. The amplitude ratio is almost unity in other 

frequency region. Only the spectral components in the blue shaded region are used to calculate the 

blue curve in d. 


Bias voltage dependence. We measured differential signals at different bias voltages to see how 

the RTD emission changes. Typical waveforms are shown in Fig. 2a (see Supplementary Fig. S3 

for the complete data set). Similar dynamics as discussed above is observed for all bias voltages, 

but with different oscillation frequencies and amplitudes. Figure 2b shows the power spectrum 

(*𝐸)RTD*

() calculated from the time-domain data after 80 ps. The oscillation frequency determined 

from the peak position changes with the bias voltage as shown by the red circles in Fig. 2c, and 

follows the free-running oscillation frequency (blue trace). The intensity of the RTD emission 

component was evaluated from the peak area of the power spectrum. As plotted in Fig. 2d by the 

red circles, the overall trend is similar to the output intensity in the free-running state (blue) 

especially above 480 mV. The fluctuation below 480 mV is probably due to the interference effect 

that increases or decreases the signal as the oscillation frequency changes with the bias voltage. 

The phase shift of the RTD oscillation with respect to the injection pulse is summarized in Fig. 

2e. Although it shows some deviation, again below 480 mV, the data points are concentrated 

around p irrespective of the bias voltage.  

 


 

 

Figure 2 | Bias voltage dependence. a. Typical waveforms and b. power spectra of the differential 

signals at three different bias voltages. To exclude the effect of the RTD reflectivity change, we 

used time-domain data after 80 ps to obtain the power spectra. c. Oscillation frequencies 

determined from the peak position of the power spectra (red circles). The frequency resolution is 

1.92 GHz. Blue curve represents the oscillation frequency in the free-running state determined by 

conventional heterodyne down-conversion method37. d. Output intensity determined from the peak 

area of the power spectrum (red circles). Blue curve is the output intensity in the free-running state 

measured with a square law detector (Fermi-level managed barrier diode38). The data point at 

485 mV is omitted due to the different situation of the phase-locking as shown in Fig. 3. e. Phase 

shift determined from the electric field oscillation. 

 


Effect of phase fluctuation. Although the electric field amplitude is stable up to 600 ps (Fig. 2a), 

it actually decays and becomes almost zero before 12.3 ns when the next injection THz pulse 

comes (at 81 MHz repetition rate). This is evident from the noise signal before the THz pulse 

injection shown in Fig. 1d. In this experiment, the differential signal decays due to the phase 

fluctuation. Therefore, the experimental results mean that the phase coherence time is shorter than 

12.3 ns, which corresponds to the linewidth broader than 81 MHz. This is much broader than the 

typical linewidth of a few MHz33, but can happen due to the noise from the power supply (in the 

current experiment, a function generator for double modulation measurement).  

In some cases, however, we observed differential signals with longer coherence times than 

12.3 ns. Figure 3 shows one example observed at 485 mV. We can see oscillation signal before 

the THz pulse injection, which is actually the RTD emission signal phase-locked by the previous 

injection THz pulses. This linewidth narrowing can be attributed to the effect of the cavity33 

formed by the RTD and optical components such as electro-optic crystal or photo-conductive 

antenna (see Supplementary Fig. S2a). This happens only when the RTD oscillation frequency 

coincides with one of the longitudinal modes of the cavity.  

 
 

 

Figure 3 | RTD emission with long coherence time. Oscillation signal is observed before the 

injection THz pulse arrived at 9 ps. The signal intensity is much stronger than those shown in Fig. 

1 due to the cumulative effect by multiple injection THz pulses. 

 


Analysis based on Van der Pol model. To understand the ultrafast dynamics of the injection 

locking, we performed numerical simulations and theoretical analysis based on a simple 

equivalent circuit39 (LC oscillator) shown in Fig. 4a. Here, v(t) is the oscillation voltage, i(v) is 

the alternating current flowing through the RTD. For the current-voltage characteristics of the 

RTD, we assumed a cubic function, i(v) = -av + gv3, where a and g are positive constants (Fig. 

4b). GL is the load conductance of the antenna that accounts for the radiation loss and is equal to 

a/2 for the maximum radiation power40. The injection signal (vinj) is modelled as a voltage source 

connected in series with the antenna conductance. The circuit equation becomes Van der Pol 

equation with external forcing term, which describes synchronization (injection locking) 

phenomena41. 

 

𝜉̈ + 𝜖(𝜉( − 1)𝜉̇ + 𝜉 = −𝜖𝜉̇inj        (1). 

 

Here, 𝜉 = 46𝛾 𝛼
⁄ 𝑣  is the dimensionless oscillation amplitude, 𝜉inj = 46𝛾 𝛼
⁄ 𝑣inj  is the 

dimensionless injection amplitude, 𝜏 = 𝜔!𝑡 (𝜔! = 1 √𝐿𝐶
⁄
) is the dimensionless time, and 𝜖 =

𝛼4𝐿 𝐶
⁄
2
⁄  is the nonlinearity parameter. The over-dot denotes the derivative with respect to 𝜏. 

As shown below, the time scale of the signal decay allows us to estimate the value of 𝜖 as around 

0.01. This enables us to simulate the RTD oscillator without assuming specific values for the 

circuit parameters (C, L, a and g). To simulate the typical situation with a short coherence time 

(Figs. 1 and 2), we only considered a single injection pulse. This is because the oscillation phase 

changes in a random fashion before the next injection pulse comes and cumulative effect does not 

exist. To mimic the phase fluctuation and data accumulation process in the experiment, we 

numerically solved eq. (1) with twenty different initial phases and took the average of them (〈𝜉〉). 

Figure 4d shows the simulated injection locking dynamics (〈𝜉〉, blue trace, left axis) induced 

by the injection pulse (orange trace, right axis). We assumed multi-cycle injection waveform to 

simulate the frequency filtering effect due to the antenna and circuit (see Methods for detail). The 

bottom axis is the dimensionless time 𝜏 and the top axis is the corresponding time when 

𝜔! 2𝜋
⁄
= 340 GHz. After the zero-signal due to the phase fluctuation, we see finite signal 

reflecting the phase-locking effect. The same waveform repeats at the rate of frep, which means 

that its frequency spectrum consists of comb modes at nfrep (i.e., injection locking to nfrep). The 

build-up time of the phase-locked signal is around 50 ps, which reproduces the experimental 

results (Fig. 1f). This result shows that the build-up time is determined by the duration of the 

injection signal. After the signal reaches its maximum, the amplitude gradually decreases and 

becomes stable after ~ 250 ps, as observed in the experiment (Fig. 2a). The decay time here 

strongly depends on the value of 𝜖, which allowed us to estimate its value. Finally, if we look at 

the oscillation phase (Fig. 4e), this model reproduces the anti-phase locking behaviour observed 


in the experiment (Fig. 2e).  

The anti-phase locking nature can be explained by the phase response function of the forced 

Van der Pol oscillator (see Methods for derivation), 

 

𝜑̇ =

+,inj,0

(,0 sin(𝜑)  
 
(2). 

 

Here 𝜉inj,0  > 0 and 𝜉0  > 0 are the amplitudes of the injection signal and the oscillator, 

respectively. 𝜑(𝜏) is the phase shift between the injection signal and the oscillator. In the steady 

state (𝜑̇ = 0), we have only one stable solution at 𝜑 = 𝜋 (Fig. 4c), which means the oscillator 

shows anti-phase locking behaviour. 

 
 


 

 

Figure 4 | Analysis based on Van der Pol model. a. Equivalent circuit. GL: load conductance, C: 

capacitance, L: inductance, i(v): RTD current, v(t): oscillation voltage. b. Current-voltage 

characteristic approximated by a cubic function. We considered the simplest case of the bias 

voltage at the center of the NDC region35 (inflection point), but similar results can be obtained 

at other bias voltages. c. Phase response function of the forced Van der Pol oscillator, showing 

the stable steady-state solution at p. d. Simulated waveform (blue, left axis) phase-locked by the 

injection signal (orange, right axis). e. Magnified view of d, showing the anti-phase locking 

behaviour. 


Oscillation phase control. The forced Van der Pol model predicts a constant phase shift between 

the injection signal and the electronic oscillator. This allows us to arbitrarily control the oscillation 

phase by changing the phase of the injection signal. For a simple demonstration, we performed a 

similar experiment as Fig. 1d, but with polarity-reversed (p phase shifted) injection THz pulse. 

The red trace in Fig. 5 shows the same data as plotted in Fig. 1d, while the black trace shows the 

data taken with polarity-reversed injection THz pulse. As expected, the oscillation phase of the 

RTD emission is also reversed. 

 

Discussion and outlook 

Phase control of THz electronic oscillators is an indispensable prerequisite for realizing many 

functionalities and applications such as beam forming/steering42, radar and high-capacity wireless 

communications. Injection-locked RTD THz oscillators are promising devices for such operation 

because they allow phase control by electronic signal (bias voltage)43. This gives hope that high-

speed phase modulation on the order of tens of GHz will be possible. However, the corresponding 

modulation period reaches as short as several tens of picoseconds, which is comparable to the 

time scale of the transient dynamics observed in this paper. This indicates that the maximum 

modulation bandwidth will be limited by the dynamical response time. This also shows the 

significance of understanding and controlling the ultrafast dynamics of the injection-locked THz 

oscillator. At the same time, ultrafast time-domain measurement of the THz electronic oscillators 

in the free-running state is also important to understand their phase fluctuation characteristics. For 

such purposes, single-shot THz TDS technique44,45 that can capture non-repetitive waveform is 

necessary instead of the method presented in this paper. 

It is worth comparing with similar optical sampling measurements performed in THz quantum 

 

Figure 5 | Oscillation phase control. The polarity of the injection THz pulse is reversed by 

flipping the sign of the voltage applied to the THz pulse emitter (photo-conductive antenna).


cascade lasers (QCLs)6,7. In QCLs, offset-free THz pulses are injected and used as seed light for 

lasing via stimulated emission. Consequently, the emitted THz wave has the same phase as the 

THz pulse8. The in-phase emission is a hallmark of the laser oscillator. In contrast, the anti-phase 

locking behaviour observed in RTD reflects the nature of the electronic oscillator. Although THz 

QCLs and RTDs have much in common46,47, our results show that the locking dynamics is clearly 

different. 

In conclusion, we showed that optical sampling technique is applicable to THz electronic 

oscillators by injection locking. This phase-resolved measurement allows us to directly monitor 

the ultrafast oscillation dynamics in response to external signal, which will be of significant 

importance for future applications such as ultrafast modulation in THz wireless communication. 

Based on the successful modeling using Van der Pol oscillator, we also demonstrated oscillation 

phase control through the phase of the injection waveform. This method will be universally 

applicable to other types of electronic limit cycle oscillators and provide a new tool for 

characterizing and controlling ultrafast response of THz electronic oscillators. 

 

 
 


References 

[1] Akyildiz, I. F., Kak, A., & Nie, S. 6G and Beyond: The Future of Wireless Communications 

Systems. IEEE Access, 8, 133995-134030 (2020). 

[2] Kürner, T., Mittleman, D. M. & Nagatsuma, T. THz Communications (Springer, 2022). 

[3] Ma, J., Shrestha, R., Adelberg, J. et al. Security and eavesdropping in terahertz wireless links. 

Nature 563, 89–93 (2018). 

[4] Sengupta, K., Nagatsuma, T. & Mittleman, D. M. Terahertz integrated electronic and hybrid 

electronic–photonic systems. Nat. Electron. 1, 622–635 (2018). 

[5] Asada, M. & Suzuki, S. Terahertz emitter using resonant-tunneling diode and applications. 

Sensors 21, 1–20 (2021). 

[6] Kröll, J. et al. Phase-resolved measurements of stimulated emission in a laser. Nature 449, 

698–701 (2007). 

[7] Oustinov, D. et al. Phase seeding of a terahertz quantum cascade laser. Nat. Commun. 1, 69 

(2010). 

[8] Maysonnave, J. et al. Mode-locking of a terahertz laser by direct phase synchronization. Opt. 

Express 20, 20855 (2012). 

[9] Valušis, G., Lisauskas, A., Yuan, H., Knap, W. & Roskos, H. G. Roadmap of terahertz imaging 

2021. Sensors 21, 1–51 (2021). 

[10] Cooper, K. B. et al. THz imaging radar for standoff personnel screening. IEEE Trans. 

Terahertz Sci. Technol. 1, 169–182 (2011). 

[11] Nishizawa, J., Płotka, P., Kurabayashi, T. & Makabe, H. 706-GHz GaAs CW fundamental-

mode TUNNETT diodes fabricated with molecular layer epitaxy. Phys. Stat. Sol. (C) 5, 2802–

2804 (2008). 

[12] Ino, M., Ishibashi, T. & Ohmori, M. C.W. oscillation with p+-p-n+ silicon impatt diodes in 

200 GHz and 300 GHz bands. Electron. Lett. 12, 148–149 (1976). 

[13] Eisele, H. & Kamoua, R. Submillimeter-wave InP Gunn devices. IEEE Trans. Microw. 

Theory Tech. 52, 2371–2378 (2004). 

[14] Urteaga, M., Griffith, Z., Seo, M., Hacker, J. & Rodwell, M. J. W. InP HBT Technologies for 

THz Integrated Circuits. Proc. IEEE 105, 1051–1067 (2017). 

[15] Tessmann, A. et al. Metamorphic HEMT MMICs and modules operating between 300 and 

500 GHz. IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits 46, 2193–2202 (2011). 

[16] Steyaert, W. & Reynaert, P. A 0.54 THz Signal Generator in 40 nm Bulk CMOS. IEEE J. 

Solid-State Circuits 49, 1617–1626 (2014). 

[17] Izumi, R., Suzuki, S. & Asada, M. 1.98 THz resonant-tunneling-diode oscillator with reduced 

conduction loss by thick antenna electrode. In Proc. 2017 42nd International Conference on 

Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves (IRMMW-THz) 1-2 (IEEE, 2017). 


[18] Miyamoto, T., Yamaguchi, A. & Mukai, T. Terahertz imaging system with resonant tunneling 

diodes. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 55, 1–6 (2016). 

[19] Tsuruda, K. et al. Development of practical terahertz packages for resonant tunneling diode 

oscillators and detectors. In Proc. 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Radio-Frequency 

Integration Technology (RFIT) 193-195 (IEEE, 2020). 

[20] Hiraoka, T., Inose, T., Arikawa, T., Ito, H. & Tanaka, K. Passive mode-locking and terahertz 

frequency comb generation in resonant-tunneling-diode oscillator. Nature Communications 13, 

3740 (2022). 

[21] Dobroiu, A., Wakasugi, R., Shirakawa, Y., Suzuki, S. & Asada, M. Absolute and Precise 

Terahertz-Wave Radar Based on an Amplitude-Modulated Resonant-Tunneling-Diode Oscillator. 

Photonics 5, 52 (2018). 

[22] Yi, L. et al. Towards Practical Terahertz Imaging System With Compact Continuous Wave 

Transceiver. Journal of Lightwave Technology 39, 7850-7861 (2021). 

[23] Webber, J., Iwamatsu, S., Nishida, Y., Fujita, M. & Nagatsuma, T. 48-Gbit/s 8K video-

transmission using resonant tunnelling diodes in 300-GHz band. Electron. Lett. 57, 668-669 

(2021). 

[24] Pupalaikis, P. J. et al. Technologies for very high bandwidth real-time oscilloscopes. 2014 

IEEE Bipolar/BiCMOS Circuits and Technology Meeting (BCTM) 128-135 (IEEE, 2014). 

[25] Wu, Q. & Zhang, X.-C. Free-space electro-optic sampling of terahertz beams. Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 67, 3523–3525 (1995). 

[26] Smith, P. R., Auston, D. H. & Nuss, M. C. Subpicosecond Photoconducting Dipole Antennas. 

IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 24, 255–260 (1988). 

[27] Fattinger, Ch. & Grischkowsky, D. Terahertz beams. Appl. Phys. Lett. 54, 490–492 (1989). 

[28] Neu, J. & Schmuttenmaer, C. A. Tutorial: An introduction to terahertz time domain 

spectroscopy (THz-TDS). J. Appl. Phys. 124, 231101 (2018). 

[29] Sakai, K. Terahertz Optoelectronics (Springer, 2005). 

[30] Yasui, T. et al. Terahertz Frequency Metrology Based on Frequency Comb. IEEE J. Sel. Top. 

Quantum Electron. 17, 191–201 (2011). 

[31] Füser, H. & Bieler, M. Terahertz frequency combs: Theoretical aspects and applications. J. 

Infrared, Millimeter, Terahertz Waves 35, 585–609 (2014). 

[32] Jones, D. J. et al. Carrier-envelope phase control of femtosecond mode-locked lasers and 

direct optical frequency synthesis. Science 288, 635–639 (2000). 

[33] Hiraoka, T. et al. Injection locking and noise reduction of resonant tunneling diode terahertz 

oscillator. APL Photonics 6, (2021). 

[34] Nishida, Y. et al. Terahertz coherent receiver using a single resonant tunnelling diode. Sci. 

Rep. 9, 18125 (2019). 


[35] Diebold, S. et al. High-speed error-free wireless data transmission using a terahertz resonant 

tunnelling diode transmitter and receiver. Electron. Lett. 52 1999-2001 (2016). 

[36] Takida, Y., Suzuki, S., Asada, M. & Minamide, H. Sensitive terahertz-wave detector 

responses originated by negative differential conductance of resonant-tunneling-diode oscillator. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 117, 021107 (2020). 

[37] Karashima, K. et al. Measurement of Oscillation Frequency and Spectral Linewidth of Sub-

Terahertz InP-Based Resonant Tunneling Diode Oscillators Using Ni-InP Schottky Barrier Diode. 

Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 49, 1–3 (2010). 

[38] Ito, H. & Ishibashi, T. Low‐noise heterodyne detection of terahertz waves at room 

temperature using zero‐biased Fermi‐level managed barrier diode. Electron. Lett. 54, 1080–1082 

(2018). 

[39] Orihashi, N., Suzuki, S. & Asada, M. One THz harmonic oscillation of resonant tunneling 

diodes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 1–3 (2005). 

[40] Asada, M., Suzuki, S. & Kishimoto, N. Resonant tunneling diodes for sub-terahertz and 

terahertz oscillators. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 47, 4375–4384 (2008). 

[41] Hayashi, C. Nonlinear Oscillations in Physical Systems (Princeton University Press, 2014). 

[42] Abdo, I. et al., A Bi-Directional 300-GHz-Band Phased-Array Transceiver in 65-nm CMOS 

With Outphasing Transmitting Mode and LO Emission Cancellation. IEEE Journal of Solid-State 

Circuits 57, 2292-2308 (2022). 

[43] Suzuki, Y., Mai, T. V., Yu, X., Suzuki, S. & Asada, M. Phase Control of Terahertz Waves 

Using Injection-Locked Resonant Tunneling Diode Oscillator. IEEE Transactions on Terahertz 

Science and Technology 12, 481-488 (2022). 

[44] Jiang, Z. & Zhang, X. C. Electro-optic measurement of THz field pulses with a chirped 

optical beam. Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 1945-1947 (1998). 

[45] Asai, G. et al. High-throughput terahertz spectral line imaging using an echelon mirror. Opt. 

Express 29, 3515 (2021).  

[46] Faist, J. & Scalari, G. Unified description of resonant tunnelling diodes and terahertz 

quantum cascade lasers. Electron. Lett. 46, 46–49 (2010). 

[47] Asada, M., Oguma, Y. & Sashinaka, M. Estimation of interwell terahertz gain by photon-

assisted tunneling measurement in triple-barrier resonant tunneling diodes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 77, 

618-620 (2000). 

 


Methods 

RTD device 

We used an RTD oscillator made of AlAs/GaInAs double barrier structure made on 0.2-mm-thick 

InP substrate18. The current-voltage characteristic is shown in Supplementary Fig. S1. The 

oscillation frequency ranges from 0.322 THz to 0.342 THz depending on the applied bias voltage. 

The typical output power was around 10 µW. For the output power extraction, a bowtie antenna 

was integrated34 and the RTD chip was mounted on a hyper hemispherical silicon lens with a 

diameter and thickness of 6 mm and 7.56 mm, respectively. To match the focal point of the silicon 

lens and the position of the RTD, we put silicon substrate with a thickness of 0.6 mm between the 

lens and RTD chip (Fig. 1b).  

 

Experimental setup 

We used a mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser (Spectra-Physics, Tsunami) that delivers 100 fs optical 

pulses (~ 800 nm center wavelength and ~ 850 mW average power) at 81 MHz repetition rate. 

Coherent THz pulses are generated by a large-area photo-conductive antenna48. For the electric 

field sampling, we employed electro-optic sampling method with a 2-mm-thick ZnTe crystal. A 

2-mm-thick MgO crystal was attached on the ZnTe crystal. The delay time is limited to 600 ps 

simply by the length of the delay stage. See Supplementary Fig. S2a for the schematics. 

 

Data acquisition by double modulation 

Taking two waveforms (with and without the bias voltage on RTD) of 600 ps takes a long time (~ 

30 minutes each) and the long-term fluctuation during the measurements makes it difficult to 

obtain tiny RTD emission signal. To avoid this long-term fluctuation, we employed double 

modulation technique. We used a two-channel function generator to modulate the bias voltage for 

the photo-conductive antenna at 100 kHz with a 50 % duty cycle and the bias voltage for the RTD 

oscillator at the half frequency (50 kHz) with a 25 % duty cycle. See Supplementary Fig. S2b for 

the timing chart. The electro-optic signal (𝑓(𝑡)) is periodic with the following unit signal, 

𝐸(𝑡) = G

/on (! 2 3 2 4)
!
(6 2 3 2 (4)

/off (26 2 3 2 84)
0      (36 2 3 2 :4)

 
 
 
(2), 
 
 

where T = 5 µs. The Fourier expansion of this signal becomes as follows, 

 

𝐸(𝑡) =

/off;/on

:
+ √2

/on</off

=
sin H2𝜋𝑓𝑡 +

=

:I +

/off;/on

=
sin(4𝜋𝑓𝑡) + ⋯ 
(3). 
 

 

Here f = 1/(4T). By using the f and 2f components (Ef and E2f, respectively) measured by a dual 


frequency lock-in amplifier, we obtained Eoff and ERTD = Eon - Eoff as follows, 

 

𝐸off =

=

: K2𝐸(> − √2𝐸>L 
 
(4), 
 
 

𝐸RTD =

=

√( 𝐸> 
 
 
(5). 
 
 

 

We have checked this modulation scheme works correctly by confirming that Eoff and ERTD 

obtained through eqs. (4) and (5) agree with the ones obtained from two different waveform 

measurements with and without the bias voltage on RTD. 

 

Injection waveform for numerical simulation  

Although we use almost single-cycle, broadband THz pulses (Fig. 1c), only a small part of the 

spectrum should be injected to the RTD oscillator due to the frequency filtering effect of the 

antenna and LC circuit. Taking into account for this effect, we assumed multi-cycle injection 

waveform represented by the following function with the Gaussian envelope and carrier 

frequency of n0 (free-running frequency of the oscillator),  

𝜉inj = 𝜉inj

! 𝑒<()*)+)-

-.-
cosK2𝜋𝜐!(𝜏 − 𝜏!)L      (6). 

As reasonable parameters that reproduce the experimental results, we used 𝜉inj

! = 0.2, t0 = 28p 

and s = 8p. The ratio of the full-width at half maximum to the center frequency of the power 

spectrum is ~10, which is close to the quality factor of 4 reported for a similar RTD device33. 

Deriving the injection amplitude 𝜉inj

!  is not straightforward due to several uncertainties such as 

coupling efficiency and possible electric field enhancement by the antenna electrodes. However, 

the injection power dependence allows us to determine the appropriate range for 𝜉inj

!  as follows. 

We found that the simulation results show almost the same dynamics as long as the injection 

amplitude 𝜉inj

!  is far below two (the free-running amplitude of the limit cycle oscillator). In this 

regime, only the phase-locked signal amplitude, 〈𝜉〉 changes in proportion to the injection 

amplitude 𝜉inj

! , which is actually the case in our experiment. Therefore, we performed simulations 

in this weak injection regime (𝜉inj

!  = 0.2 specifically). 

 

Phase response function of forced Van der Pol oscillator 

The anti-phase locking nature of the forced Van der Pol oscillator can be understood based on its 

phase response function49,50. We calculate the phase response function under the following 

injection signal, 

𝜉inj = 𝜉inj,0sinK𝛺inj𝜏L 
 
(7). 
 
 

Here 𝜉inj,0 > 0 is the amplitude and Ωinj is the frequency which is very close to the free-running 


one, i.e., 𝛺inj~1. As a first approximation, we assume that the oscillator is injection-locked to 

𝛺inj as follows, 

𝜉 = 𝜉0sin H𝛺inj𝜏 + 𝜑(𝜏)I 
 
(8). 
 
 

Here 𝜉0 > 0 is the amplitude and 𝜑(𝜏) is the phase shift. We consider a weak injection case 

where the amplitude 𝜉0 does not change and only the phase (or equivalently, frequency) changes 

by the injection. By substituting eqs. (7) and (8) into (1) and equating the coefficients of 

sin H𝛺inj𝜏 + 𝜑(𝜏)I and cos H𝛺inj𝜏 + 𝜑(𝜏)I terms separately to zero, we obtain the following 

equations, 

−𝜉0K𝛺inj + 𝜑̇ L

( + 𝜉0 = −𝜖𝛺inj𝜉inj,0sin(𝜑) 
 
(9), 
 
 

𝜉0𝜑̈ + 𝜖𝜉0K𝛺inj + 𝜑̇ L H

,+-

: − 1I = −𝜖𝛺inj𝜉inj,0cos(𝜑) 
(10). 
 
 

Here we ignored the third-harmonic term since the first approximation is concerned only with the 

fundamental frequency41. When the phase 𝜑(𝜏) varies slowly during one period of oscillation 

(2𝜋 𝛺inj
⁄
) due to the weak injection, we have 1 ≫ 𝜑̇ ≫ 𝜑̈ . In this condition, we have the 

following phase response function from eq. (9) 

𝜑̇ =

@<A/01

-

(Ainj +

+,inj,0

(,0 sin(𝜑)  
 
 
 

≈

+,inj,0

(,0 sin(𝜑)  
 
(11), 
 
 

where we neglected the first term in the right-hand side since 𝛺inj~1. In the steady state (𝜑̇ = 0), 

we have only one stable solution at 𝜑 = 𝜋, which means the oscillator shows anti-phase locking 

behaviour. In this condition, we have the following relation from eq. (10), 

𝜉0 H

,+-

: − 1I − 𝜉inj,0 = 0 
 
(12). 
 
 

Since we deal with the weak injection case (𝜉0 ≫ 𝜉inj,0), we have 𝜉0 ≈ 2. This means that the 

oscillation amplitude does not change from the free-running state, which is consistent with the 

initial assumption. 

 

Data availability 

The data that support the plots within this paper and other findings of this study are available from 

the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

 

References 


[48] Dreyhaupt, A., Winnerl, S., Dekorsy, T. & Helm, M. High-intensity terahertz radiation from 

a microstructured large-area photoconductor. Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 1–3 (2005). 

[49] Kuramoto, Y. Chemical Oscillations, Waves, and Turbulence (Springer, 1984). 

[50] Strogatz, S. H. Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos (CRC Press, 2001). 

 

Acknowledgements 

We thank M. Asada and S. Suzuki for valuable discussions. We also thank Y. Nishida for 

supporting device preparation. This work was supported in-part by ROHM joint research 

program, JST PRESTO (Grant No. JPMJPR21B1), JST CREST (Grant No. JPMJCR1534 and 

JPMJCR21C4), and JST ACCEL (Grant No. JPMJMI17F2). 

 

Author contributions 

T.A. conceived and conducted the experiment. J.K. and T.M. fabricated the RTD chip. N.N., 

M.F. and T.N. designed and prepared the RTD device. T.A. performed numerical simulation 

with inputs from K.T. T. A and M. F. discussed on the analysis of data with inputs from T. N and 

K. T. K.T. supervised the project. T.A. wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors. 

 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 


 

Supplementary information 

 

Phase-resolved measurement and control ofultrafast dynamics in terahertz 
electronic oscillators 

 

Takashi Arikawa1,2*, Jaeyong Kim3,6, Toshikazu Mukai3, Naoki Nishigami4, Masayuki Fujita4, 

Tadao Nagatsuma4 and Koichiro Tanaka1,5 

 

1 Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. 

2 PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Saitama, Japan 

3 ROHM Co., Ltd., Kyoto, Japan. 

4 Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Japan 

5 Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (iCeMS), Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan 

6 Present address: Qualitas semiconductor, co, ltd., Seongnam, Republic of Korea 

Corresponding author *arikawa@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

 

 

 

Internal reflection inside the RTD device 

There is an unintentional air gap or thin adhesive layer between the silicon lens and the substrate, 

which produces echo signals due to the internal reflection between the silicon lens/substrate 

interface and RTD/air interface. The round-trip time is estimated as 26 ps considering the oblique 

incidence of the THz beam on the RTD due to the tight focusing by the silicon lens. The first echo 

is seen at around 35 ps in Fig. 1c. In the difference signal (ERTD), this signal is stronger than the 

direct reflection signal starting from 9 ps. This is because the first echo undergoes the reflection 

at the RTD/air interface twice and the signal change due to the RTD reflectivity change is bigger. 

The second echo is small presumably because the THz beam is no longer confined in this cavity 

structure. 

 

 
 


 

 

 

Figure S1 | Current-voltage and output intensity-voltage characteristics of RTD THz oscillator. 

The RTD was driven by a source meter in voltage source mode. The output intensity is the same one 

shown in Fig. 2d as blue curve. 

 

 
 


 

 

Figure S2 | Experimental setup. a. THz-TDS setup in reflection geometry. b. Timing chart for the 

double modulation.  

 

 
 


 

 

Figure S3| Bias voltage dependence of the difference signal ERTD. The bias voltages of the typical 

waveforms used in the main text are underlined. 

 


