1

A data driven approach for cross-slip modelling in 
continuum dislocation dynamics

Vignesh Vivekanandan1, Ben Anglin2, Anter El-Azab1

1 School of Materials Engineering, Purdue University, Neil Armstrong Hall of Engineering, 701 W Stadium Avenue, 

West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA

2Naval Nuclear Laboratory, 814 Pittsburgh-McKeesport Blvd, West Mifflin, PA 15122, USA

Abstract

Cross-slip is a thermally activated process by which screw dislocation changes its glide plane to another 

slip plane sharing the same Burgers vector. The rate at which this process happens is determined by a 

Boltzmann type expression that is a function of the screw segment length and the stress acting on the 

dislocation. In continuum dislocation dynamics (CDD), the information regarding the length of the screw 

dislocation segment and local stress state on dislocations are lost due to the coarse-grained representation 

of the density. In this work, a data driven approach to characterize the lost information by analyzing the 

discrete dislocation configurations is proposed to enable cross-slip modeling in the CDD framework in 

terms of the coarse-grained dislocation density and stress fields. The analysis showed that the screw 

segment length follows an exponential distribution, and the stress fluctuations, defined as the difference 

between the stress on the dislocations and the mean field stress in CDD, follows a Lorentzian distribution. 

A novel approach for cross slip implementation in CDD employing the screw segment length and stress 

fluctuation statistics was proposed and rigorously tested by comparing the CDD cross-slip rates with 

discrete dislocation dynamics (DDD) rates. This approach has been applied in conjunction with three cross-

slip models used in DDD simulations differing mainly in the functional form of cross slip activation energy.

It was found that different cross-slip activation energy formulations yielded different cross-slip rates, yet 

the effect on mechanical stress-strain response and dislocation density evolution was minimal for the [001] 

type loading.


2

1. Introduction

Predicting the self-organized dislocation microstructure is considered a holy grail of the dislocation theory, 

which is currently belied to be potentially achievable through continuum dislocation dynamics (CDD) 

models (Hochrainer, 2015; Kalaei et al., 2022; Leung and Ngan, 2016; Lin et al., 2021; Lin and El-Azab, 

2020; Monavari and Zaiser, 2018; Sandfeld et al., 2015; Schulz et al., 2019; Starkey and El-Azab, 2022; 

Sudmanns et al., 2019; Vivekanandan et al., 2021; Xia and El-Azab, 2015) of mesoscale plasticity. 

Achieving this goal requires modelling the dislocation mechanisms within the CDD framework. One such 

important mechanism is cross-slip, which is a thermally activated process in which the screw dislocations 

change their glide plane. It is well established that cross slip contributes to pattern formation (Kubin et al., 

2009), dynamic recovery (Madec et al., 2002) and strain hardening (Devincre et al., 2007) in metals.

Therefore, it is essential for continuum dislocation dynamics models to accurately incorporate cross-slip 

mechanism to aid the prediction of dislocation microstructure evolution.

Broadly, there exists two types of models that explain the mechanism of cross-slip, Friedel-Escaig 

mechanism (FE) (Bonneville and Escaig, 1979) and Fleischer mechanism (FL) (Fleischer, 1959). The FE 

mechanism postulates that cross-slip happens in, say, FCC crystals when the two dislocation partials form 

a constriction on the glide plane and dissociate onto the cross-slip plane whereas the FL mechanism predicts 

the leading partial splits into a partial dislocation on the cross-slip plane and a stair-rod dislocation which 

eventually reacts with the trailing partial and completes the cross-slip process. Capturing the rate at which 

this process happens depends upon the activation energy barrier of the critical configuration and the length 

of the screw segment. Hence, it is essential for continuum dislocation dynamics models to incorporate these 

two parameters for accurately predicting the cross-slip behavior.  

Continuum dislocation dynamics models represent dislocations as coarse-grained density fields which have 

information about the average line orientation and magnitude of the dislocation density. The advantage of 

using this spatially smooth variable in studying the dynamics is the evolution of the system can be 


3

encapsulated in terms of the average quantity, e.g., dislocation density, rather than tracking the motion of 

all discrete states (Bertin et al., 2015; Cui et al., 2015; Devincre et al., 2011; Hussein et al., 2015; Po et al., 

2014; Sills et al., 2018; Stricker et al., 2018; Zhou and LeSar, 2012) that make the density. Conversely, 

coarse graining throws away the details corresponding to the discrete states like dislocation segment length 

distribution and dislocation-dislocation correlation which are important parameters required to model local 

processes like cross-slip. Hence, for the coarse-grained models to remain consistent with their lower-level 

counterparts, care must be taken to introduce the statistical information regarding the cross-slip process.

There exist different classes of continuum dislocation based models in the literature (Acharya and Roy, 

2006; Hochrainer, 2015; Kalaei et al., 2022; Li et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2021; Lin and El-Azab, 2020; 

Monavari and Zaiser, 2018; Sandfeld et al., 2015; Schulz et al., 2019; Starkey and El-Azab, 2022; 

Sudmanns et al., 2019; Vivekanandan et al., 2021; Xia and El-Azab, 2015). Here, we focus upon the vector-

based CDD models (Lin et al., 2021; Lin and El-Azab, 2020; Starkey and El-Azab, 2022; Vivekanandan et 

al., 2021; Xia and El-Azab, 2015) and higher order continuum models (Hochrainer, 2015; Sandfeld et al., 

2015; Sudmanns et al., 2019) that explicitly capture the cross-slip process. The first attempt to characterize 

the density-based rates of cross-slip process by systematically studying it using DDD (Devincre et al., 2011)

was done by (Deng and El-Azab, 2010), which was then improved by (Xia et al., 2016). In the latter work, 

attempts were made to characterize the cross-slip process for vector based CDD models by temporally 

coarse graining the time series data of cross-slip statistics obtained during every time step of the DDD

simulations. The cross-slip statistics used in the time series were obtained by monitoring the fraction of 

screw segments that cross-slipped throughout the DDD simulation domain in each time step. These coarse-

grained time series were then used to sample cross-slip rates in CDD based on the strain levels. Another 

approach to modeling cross-slip was proposed by (Sudmanns et al., 2019) in which they used the DDD 

cross-slip probability expression (Kubin et al., 1992) to calculate the cross-slip rate. In their work, the length 

of screw segment allowed to cross-slip, which is an input to the cross-slip probability expression, was 

estimated as the minimum of the average loop radius, defined as the fraction of dislocation density and 


4

curvature density, and the mean dislocation spacing. Although both the models make use of information 

from DDD, there is still a scope for improvement. For instance, the model proposed by (Deng and El-Azab, 

2010) and (Xia et al., 2016) does not consider the local stress effects to estimate the CDD cross-slip rate 

but rather uses the average cross-slip rate information obtained from DDD. Similarly, the model proposed 

by Sudmanns.et.al (Sudmanns et al., 2019) does not consider the distribution of screw segment length rather 

estimates the average length based on the coarse grained fields for cross-slip probability estimation. In 

addition to that, it was recently pointed out that the stress faced by a discrete dislocation is markedly 

different from the mean stress field (Vivekanandan et al., 2022), which is not accounted for in their cross-

slip probability evaluation. Hence, there is a need for a different approach which relates the coarse-grained 

dislocation density and stress fields in CDD to the discrete screw segment length distribution and stress 

field on dislocations to obtain the cross-slip rates accurately.

Since cross-slip is a thermally activated process, the estimation of the activation energy barrier required for 

the screw segment to transition from glide plane to cross-slip plane is the crucial step. Predominantly, two

different approaches have been considered in the literature to estimate the activation energy barrier; the line 

tension models (Kang et al., 2014; Malka-Markovitz and Mordehai, 2018) and atomistic simulation models

(Kuykendall et al., 2020; Rao et al., 2013). Based on these two approaches, different activation energy 

expressions were derived and used in DDD simulations. Most commonly used activation energy expression

was the one first proposed by (Kubin et al., 1992) and later modified by (Devincre et al., 2011) which states 

that activation energy of cross-slip barrier mainly depends on the Schmid stress along the primary plane 

(𝜏s

p) for an immobile dislocation and Schmid stress along cross-slip plane (𝜏scs) for a mobile dislocation. 

The parameters used in this model were calibrated based on the experimental observations at the initiation 

of stage III hardening resulting in activation energy of the form 𝐸act = −𝑉(|𝜏s

p| − 𝜏III) or 𝐸act =

−𝑉(|𝜏scs| − 𝜏III) depending on whether the dislocation is immobile or mobile, where 𝑉 is the activation 

volume and 𝜏III is the resolved shear stress at the beginning of stage III hardening. Contrary to the Kubin’s 

model, some studies (Kang et al., 2014) showed that the effect of Escaig stress on the activation barrier is 


5

much more significant than the Schmid stress. Based on atomistic studies conducted by Rao and co-workers

(Rao et al., 2013, 2011, 2010), Hussein and co-workers (Hussein et al., 2015) proposed a new cross-slip 

model in which the activation energy of cross-slip barrier was assumed to be linearly dependent on the 

difference in Escaig stress in the primary plane (𝜏e

p ) and cross-slip plane (𝜏ecs) as follows: 𝐸act = 𝐸cons −

𝑉(𝜏e

p − 𝜏ecs) where 𝐸cons is the constriction energy. Apart from these two models, Malka-Markovitz and 

Mordehai (Malka-Markovitz and Mordehai, 2019, 2018) derived a closed form expression for the stress 

dependent activation energy barrier based on the line tension model by employing harmonic approximation 

to obtain the interaction energy between partial dislocations. In this model, the contributions of both Schmid 

stress and Escaig stress in glide and cross-slip plane were considered in the activation energy expression. 

In this work, a new cross-slip model for vector-based CDD model is proposed. This model incorporates 

information about the screw segment statistics and internal stress fluctuations. Section 2 introduces the 

fundamental equations of the CDD model which is followed in section 3 by a discussion of the strategy for 

estimating the cross-slip rate using DDD statistics in terms of coarse-grained fields. In section 4, the validity 

of the proposed model is demonstrated by comparing the results with the cross-slip rates evaluated using 

the DDD. The effects of the different cross-slip activation energy formulations on the mechanical behavior 

and dislocation microstructure evolution in CDD is also discussed in this section. We conclude by 

discussing the results and summarizing the conclusions in Section 5 and 6.

2. Continuum dislocation dynamics model

Continuum dislocation dynamics models generally include two sets of equations describing the crystal 

mechanics and dislocation kinetics, which, together, capture the spatial-temporal evolution of dislocation 

system and the deformation and mechanical state of the crystal under mechanical boundary conditions. The 

crystal mechanics part is modelled as an eigen distortion problem and dislocation kinetics is captured in 

terms of a curl type dislocation transport reaction coupled with dislocation processes like cross-slip and 


6

junction reactions. The governing equations for the crystal mechanics include the stress equilibrium 

equation, Hooke’s law and boundary conditions:

𝛁 ∙ 𝝈 = 𝟎 in Ω,

𝝈 = 𝑪 ∶ (𝜷e)sym in Ω,

𝜷e = 𝛁𝒖 − 𝜷p,

𝒖 = 𝒖̅ on 𝜕Ωu,

𝒏 ∙ 𝝈 = 𝒕̅ on 𝜕Ωt.

(1)

In the above equation, 𝝈 is Cauchy stress tensor, 𝑪 is elastic tensor, 𝒖 is the displacement, 𝜷e and 𝜷p are 

elastic and plastic distortions, respectively, Ω is the domain of solution, 𝜕Ωu and 𝜕Ωt, are the parts of the 

boundary on which the displacement  𝒖 = 𝒖̅ and the traction 𝒕̅ are prescribed respectively. Solution of the 

above boundary value problem yields the stress which is then used to determine the dislocation velocity for 

each slip system, 𝑖, using a linearized mobility law commonly used in literature (Lin and El-Azab, 2020; 

Yefimov et al., 2004; Zaiser et al., 2001) as follows

𝑣𝑖 = sgn(𝜏𝑖)

𝑏
𝐵 〈|𝜏|𝑖 − (𝜏0 + 𝜏p𝑖 )〉,
(2)

where 𝑏 and 𝐵 are the magnitude of the Burgers vector and the drag coefficient, respectively. The 〈∙〉

corresponds to the Macauley bracket and sgn function corresponds to the sign of the argument. 𝜏𝑖 is the 

resolved shear stress along slip system 𝑖 and 𝜏0 is the lattice friction. 𝜏p𝑖 is the Taylor hardening stress that 

accounts for short range interactions due to sessile junctions on slip system 𝑖 which is defined as 

𝜏p𝑖 = 𝛼𝜇𝑏√∑ 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝜌𝑗

𝑗

𝐹(𝜌𝑖, 𝜌f).
(3)

In the above, 𝛼 is scaling factor, 𝜇 is the shear modulus, 𝑏 is the magnitude of Burgers vector, 𝑎𝑖𝑗 is the 

average strength of an interaction between slip system 𝑖 and 𝑗, 𝜌𝑗 is the scalar dislocation density of the slip 

system 𝑗 interacting with slip system 𝑖 and 𝜌f is the sum of the dislocation densities of the slip systems that 

react with slip system 𝑖 and form Lomer or Hirth lock. 𝐹(𝜌𝑖, 𝜌f) corresponds to a function that accounts for 


7

the dislocation pile up effect (Vivekanandan et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2016). In this work, 𝐹(𝜌𝑖, 𝜌f) is 

assumed to have the form 𝐹(𝜌𝑖, 𝜌f) = (1 + 𝑝e(𝑞𝜌𝑖/𝜌f − 1))

−1

based on the work of (Vivekanandan et al., 

2021), where 𝑝 and 𝑞 are parameters that determine the shape and the rate at which the function decays.

The dislocation velocity obtained from Eq. (2) for every slip system 𝑖 is used to solve the dislocation 

kinetics equations described below, following the approach used in (Vivekanandan et al., 2021),

𝝆̇ g𝑖 = 𝛁 × (𝒗𝑖 × 𝝆̇ g𝑖 ) + 𝝆̇ cs
𝑖 + 𝝆̇ jun

𝑖
,

𝝆̇ v𝑖 = 𝝆̇ vcs

𝑖
+ 𝝆̇ vjun

𝑖
,

𝛁 ∙ (𝝆g𝑖 + 𝝆v𝑖 ) = 0.

(4)

In the above system of equations, the first equation corresponds to the change in glide dislocation density 

due to dislocation transport and dislocation reactions. The curl type term captures the change in glide 

dislocation density due to dislocation transport. 𝝆̇ cs
𝑖 captures the change in glide dislocation density due to 

cross-slip which accounts for both new dislocations added to the slip system 𝑖 as well as dislocations that 

was removed from slip system 𝑖. 𝝆̇ jun

𝑖
corresponds to the change in glide dislocation density due to 

formation and destruction of dislocation junction reactions like glissile junction, Lomer locks and Hirth 

locks. The second equation corresponds to the rate of change of virtual dislocation density, which is defined 

as the dislocation density which are involved in dislocation reactions like cross-slip and junctions and are 

no longer available for dislocation glide. It is important to note that virtual density is a place holder used to 

keep track of dislocations involved in dislocation reactions and does not contribute to the distortion of the 

crystal. 𝝆̇ vcs

𝑖
captures the change in virtual dislocation density due to cross-slip and 𝝆̇ vjun

𝑖
corresponds to 

the change in virtual dislocation density due to formation and destruction of dislocation junction reactions 

like glissile junction. The third equation corresponds to the dislocation closure constraint that ensures 

dislocations do not end inside the crystal given that the initial dislocation configuration is divergence free.


8

Modelling the evolution of dislocations involved in dislocation processes like junctions and cross-slip 

requires information about the rate at which these processes occur. Since dislocations in CDD are 

represented as coarse grained fields, they inherently lack the local information about the individual 

dislocations involved in these processes. In this paper, a new approach based on our recent work

(Vivekanandan et al., 2022) is formulated to model cross-slip behavior in CDD.

3. Cross-slip rate estimation in CDD

Cross-slip is a thermally activated process by which a screw dislocation changes its original glide plane to 

another glide plane which shares the same Burgers vector. In CDD, the change in dislocation density due 

to this process for slip system 𝑖 is denoted by 𝝆̇ cs

𝑖 in Eq. (4) which can be defined as

𝝆̇ cs
𝑖 = 𝑟̇cs

𝑗→𝑖𝝆s

𝑗 − 𝑟̇cs

𝑖→𝑗𝝆s𝑖,
(5)

where 𝝆s𝑖 and 𝝆s

𝑗 denote screw dislocation densities in slip system 𝑖 and 𝑗, 𝑟̇cs

𝑖→𝑗 and 𝑟̇cs

𝑗→𝑖 correspond to the 

cross-slip rates of screw segments that cross-slipped from 𝑖 → 𝑗 and 𝑗 → 𝑖 respectively. It is evident from 

Eq. (5) that the cross-slip rates 𝑟̇cs should be determined accurately to characterize the cross-slip process in 

CDD. In DDD models, the probability for a discrete screw segment of length 𝐿 to cross-slip is estimated 

using an Arrhenius type equation (Hussein et al., 2015; Kubin et al., 1992; Malka-Markovitz et al., 2021)

as follows

𝑃(𝐿, 𝝈) = 𝑐𝐿e−𝐸act(𝝈)

𝑘𝑇
,
(6)

where 𝑐 is normalization constant,  𝐸act(𝝈) is the cross-slip activation energy barrier which depends on the 

local stress state of the dislocation segment, 𝑘 is the Boltzmann constant and 𝑇 is the temperature. Based 

on the cross-slip probability value, the cross-slip event is executed following the Metropolis algorithm.

Then, the average cross-slip rate for a given time step over the entire simulation domain for the discrete 

case can be written as


9

𝑟̇cs,DDD

𝑖→𝑗
=

∑ 𝑙cs,screw
𝑖

∑ 𝑙screw

𝑖
∙ 1
Δ𝑡 ,
(7)

where 𝑙cs,screw and 𝑙screw correspond to the length of screw segments belonging to slip system 𝑖 that cross-

slipped to slip system 𝑗 and length of screw segments belonging to slip system 𝑖 respectively and Δ𝑡 is the 

time step.

In CDD, the dislocation content is represented as density field which is a coarse-grained representation of 

the discrete dislocation. For the case of vector density based CDD model (Lin and El-Azab, 2020; 

Vivekanandan et al., 2021; Xia and El-Azab, 2015), the resolution over which the coarse graining is 

performed is small enough such that the underlying discrete dislocations can be assumed to have the same 

line orientation as the density field. Therefore, if the coarse-grained dislocation density field in CDD is of 

screw character, then all the underlying discrete dislocations is of screw character as well. It is important to 

note that this might not be true for other continuum models (Hochrainer, 2015; Sudmanns et al., 2019)

where at any given point, dislocations of different orientations can coexist. Since cross-slip is a local process 

that depends on the discrete length of the screw segment and the stress on the screw segment, a link must 

be established between the CDD dislocation density field and the underlying discrete dislocation states to 

estimate the cross-slip rate.

The first step in establishing such a mapping between the coarse-grained CDD dislocation state and the 

underlying discrete dislocation states is determining the length distribution of discrete dislocation segments

in DDD. The length distribution of the screw segments is analyzed by taking snapshots of the DDD 

simulation at different strain levels. Fig. 1(a) shows the screw segment length distribution of a DDD 

configuration throughout the simulation domain. It is evident from the figure that screw segment length in 

DDD follows an exponential distribution whose functional form is given by 𝑆(𝑥; 𝜙) =

1
𝜙 e

−𝑥

𝜙, where 𝜙 is 

the mean of the distribution. Similar type of distribution has been observed in (Sills et al., 2018), wherein 

they studied the link length distribution, which refers to length of dislocation between two pinning points 

in DDD. It is also important to note that the screw segments whose length is below 25nm are ignored in the 


10

distribution. The reason behind this exclusion is that in DDD cross-slip for small screw segments is not 

worth considering since they do not evolve on the cross-slip plane after cross-slipping; rather they cross-

slip back again into the original glide plane after some short time. Fig. 1(b) shows the exponential fits of 

screw segment length distribution across different strain levels. From the curve fits, we can observe that the 

average screw segment length decreases with increase in strain. This trend is expected because the number 

of dislocations in the simulation domain increases as the strain increases and consequently chances of 

collisions between dislocations resulting in junctions also increases. This results in long screw segments 

splitting into two smaller segments, thereby reducing the mean length of the screw segments in the 

simulation domain. Furthermore, it was found that Lambda defined as Λ =

1
𝑙̅ , where 𝑙̅ is the mean screw 

segment length, increases linearly with strain as shown in Fig. 1(c). Based on the statistics of screw segment 

length, the average screw segment length 𝑙̅ at every point in CDD can be estimated by sampling value from 

the exponential distribution for a given strain level. Therefore, for given screw dislocation density 𝜌s, the 

number of underlying screw segments per unit volume with an average length 𝑙̅ can then be defined as 𝑁 =

𝜌s
𝑙̅ .

Fig. 1. (a) Length distribution of screw segments for a dislocation configuration sampled from a 
monotonic DDD simulation at 0.5% strain. (b) Exponential fits of screw segment length distribution 
at different strain levels. (c) Mean of the exponential fits in (b) fitted to a line.


11

The second step in establishing a mapping between the coarse-grained CDD dislocation state and the 

underlying discrete dislocation states is characterizing the local stress state of the underlying screw 

dislocation in terms of the coarse-grained stress field. Since dislocations are represented as coarse grained 

density in CDD, the local information regarding the stress state of individual underlying dislocations is lost. 

Hence, there is a need to formulate a method to estimate the local stress state in terms of coarse-grained 

stress. The earlier work of a subgroup of authors (Vivekanandan et al., 2022) studied the relationship 

between the two quantities by analyzing DDD configurations for segments of all orientations. Since cross-

slip is relevant only for screw dislocations, the analysis must be performed again exclusively for screw 

segments. Therefore, a set of discrete dislocation configurations is analyzed to determine the relationship 

between the local stress and the coarse-grained stress for screw segments. The analysis involves performing 

coarse graining over voxels for a discrete dislocation configuration, which are regions of small volumes 

commensurate with the CDD mesh size, thereby converting the discrete states to continuum fields. The 

details regarding the coarse graining process and stress calculation can be found in our earlier work

(Vivekanandan et al., 2022).

Following the steps mentioned in (Vivekanandan et al., 2022), the relationship between the stress on the 

dislocation line and the coarse grained stress in the voxel is characterized in terms of the scaled stress 

fluctuation 𝝈̂d which is given by the following equation

𝝈̂d(𝒓𝑘

′ ) =

𝝈d(𝒓𝑘

′ ) − [𝝈c]⌊𝒓𝑘⌋
[𝝈c]⌊𝒓𝑘⌋

for 𝒓𝑘

′ ∈ Λ and 𝒓𝑘 ∈ S,

(8)

where  𝝈d(𝒓𝑘

′ ) represents the stress on a dislocation line located at the point with position vector 𝒓𝑘

′ within 

the voxel, [𝝈c]⌊𝒓𝑘⌋ represents the average stress within a voxel which is estimated by taking the average 

stress value of all crystal points ⌊𝒓𝑘⌋ located within the voxel. Λ and S corresponds to the set of points on 

the dislocation and set of points on the crystal respectively.  For the case of cross-slip, the stress fluctuation 

statistics of two components of stress tensor 𝝈, namely Schmid and Escaig are relevant. Schmid stress 𝜏s is 

the resolved shear stress that drives the dislocation motion while Escaig stress 𝜏e is the stress component 


12

that widens or shrinks the stacking fault between partial dislocations. If the Burgers vector of a given slip 

system 𝑖 is defined as 𝑏𝒃̂𝑖, with 𝑏 being its magnitude, the slip plane normal be 𝒏̂𝑖, and the direction of 

glide vector be  𝒅̂𝑖 = 𝒏̂𝑖 × 𝒃̂𝑖, then the Schmid and Escaig components along a slip system 𝑖 can then be 

defined as

𝜏s𝑖 = ((𝝈 ∙ 𝒃̂𝑖) × 𝒃̂𝑖) ∙ 𝒅̂𝑖,
(9)

𝜏e𝑖 = − ((𝝈 ∙ 𝒅̂𝑖) × 𝒃̂𝑖) ∙ 𝒅̂𝑖.
(10)

The scaled fluctuation statistics of Schmid and Escaig component of the stress tensor estimated based on 

Eq. (8) on the screw dislocations throughout the simulation domain is cast in the form of probability 

distribution function (PDF) as shown in Fig. 2. It is evident from the figure that the PDF follows Lorentzian

distribution whose functional form is 𝐻(𝑥: 𝑥0, 𝑤) =

1
𝜋 (

𝑤

(𝑥−𝑥0)2+𝑤2) where 𝑥0 is the center of the 

distribution and 𝑤 is the full width at the half maximum. Fig. 3 shows the variation of the scaled fluctuation 

statistics with respect to the strain level. It can be observed that the peak of the distribution decreases and 

width of the distribution increases as the strain level is increased. The results of fluctuation statistics for 

screw segments follows the similar trend with minor differences discussed in (Vivekanandan et al., 2022)

which studied dislocations of all orientations.


13

Fig. 2. PDF of (a) scaled Schmid stress fluctuation and (b) scaled Escaig stress fluctuation on 
dislocation points for screw dislocation segments at 0.5% strain. The statistics of both Schmid and 
Escaig stress fluctuations follows Cauchy distribution.

Fig. 3. PDF of (a) scaled Schmid stress fluctuation and (b) scaled Escaig stress fluctuation on 
dislocation points at different strain levels for screw dislocation segments.

Based on the statistics of the screw segment length distribution and scaled stress fluctuations, the cross-slip 

rate in CDD can then be defined following Eq. (7) as

𝑟̇cs

𝑖→𝑗 = ⟨

∑
𝐼cs,𝑚

𝑁
𝑚=1
𝑙𝑚

∑
𝑙𝑚
𝑁
𝑚=1

⟩ 1

Δ𝑡 ;
𝐼cs,𝑚 = {1 if 𝑃(𝑙𝑚) = 𝑐𝑙𝑚e−𝐸act

𝑘𝑇 > 𝑅

0

,
(11)

where 𝑙𝑚 corresponds to the length of the 𝑚th sampled screw segment, Δ𝑡 corresponds to the timestep, 𝑁

corresponds to the number of screw segments in the unit volume, 𝐼cs,𝑚 is the cross-slip indicator function 

for the 𝑚th screw segment, and 𝑅 is a random number. The cross-slip indicator function is 1 for the 

𝑚th segment if the cross-slip probability based on Eq. (6) is greater than the generated random number else 

it is zero. The functional expression for the normalization constant and activation energy varies based on 

the model chosen to characterize the cross-slip process. The activation energy expression (𝐸act) for the 

three different cross-slip models: Kubin (Devincre et al., 2011; Kubin et al., 1992), Hussein (Hussein et al., 

2015) and Malka (Malka-Markovitz et al., 2021) are given below.


14

𝐸act = −𝑉(|𝜏scs| − 𝜏III) (Kubin),
(12)

𝐸act = 𝐸cons − 𝑉(𝜏e

p − 𝜏ecs) (Hussein),
(13)

𝐸act = 𝐸cons [

𝐺(𝜏e

p)

2
+

𝐺(𝜏ecs)

2
[tanh(𝑙c) −

2𝜁Ls𝑙c𝐸∗

1.55
−

𝜆

1.55𝐺(𝜏ecs) (𝜁Ls𝑙c)3]] (Malka).
(14)

The definitions of the parameters in the above three model equations are given in Table 1 below.

Table 1. Definitions of symbols in Eq. (12)-(14).

Symbols
Definitions
Symbols
Definitions

𝐸cons
Constriction energy
𝑙c
Length of dislocation dissociated into CS plane

𝑉
Activation volume
𝜁Ls
Fitting parameter

𝐺(𝜏)

(1 + √3𝑏

6𝛾 𝜏)

−1
𝐸∗
Offset of interaction energies in glide and cross-slip 

plane.(ln (

𝐺(𝜏ecs)

𝐺(𝜏e

p)))

𝛾
Stacking fault energy
𝜆
1
6 (𝑏𝜏scs

𝛾 )

2

The Schmid stress and Escaig stress used in these activation energy formulations are the effective stress 

values on the screw segments after considering the fluctuation stress statistics. For example, in the model 

by Kubin, the activation energy depends on Schmid stress in the cross-slip plane (𝜏scs) , whereas in the 

model by Hussein the activation energy depends on the difference between the Escaig stress on the primary 

plane (𝜏e

p) and cross-slip plane (𝜏ecs). The effective stress for these two models after accounting for stress 

fluctuation can then be written in the form 

𝜏scs = 𝜏̅scs ∗ 𝜏̂scs + 𝜏̅scs,
(15)

𝜏ecs = 𝜏̅ecs ∗ 𝜏̂ecs + 𝜏̅ecs,
(16)


15

where 𝜏̅scs and 𝜏̅ecs correspond to the mean Schmid stress on the cross-slip plane and mean Escaig stress on 

the cross-slip plane in CDD respectively. 𝜏̂scs and 𝜏̂ecs correspond to the scaled Schmid and Escaig stress 

fluctuation variables which can be sampled from the estimated PDF based on Eq. (6). 

4. Results

In this section, the numerical experiment used to validate the newly proposed cross-slip framework, referred 

to as CDD cross-slip framework hereafter, is discussed first. This involves comparing the average cross-

slip rates obtained using the CDD cross-slip framework and DDD methodology for a given DDD 

configuration. Following that, the effect of different cross-slip models on the mechanical behavior and 

dislocation microstructure is studied by performing bulk CDD simulations using different cross-slip models 

of interest. 

4.1.
Cross-slip rate comparison

The main objective behind developing a new framework for cross-slip modelling in CDD is to capture the 

cross-slip rates accurately in CDD. Hence, to validate the CDD cross-slip framework a discrete 

configuration is sampled from DDD simulation, and the cross-slip rate is evaluated using the CDD 

framework and compared with DDD cross-slip rate. The DDD simulation tool used to conduct this 

experiment is the DDD simulation code microMegas (Devincre et al., 2011). Although, the DDD simulation 

code uses a cross-slip model that was derived from (Kubin et al., 1992), the DDD cross-slip rate was also 

evaluated for Hussein and Malka’s model for the chosen DDD configuration based on the data regarding 

screw segment length and stress on the dislocations, which are readily available.

The first step in the cross-slip rate comparison process is converting the chosen DDD configuration into a 

CDD configuration by performing a coarse graining process. The coarse graining process involves 

partitioning the domain into small volumes and smearing out the discrete dislocation within each volume 

to obtain a continuum representation of the discrete configuration. The details regarding the coarse graining 


16

procedure can be found in (Vivekanandan et al., 2022). Following the coarse graining procedure, the coarse-

grained state variables like dislocation density and coarse grained stress can be estimated for the given DDD 

configuration which can then be used in the CDD framework to estimate cross-slip rate. The details 

regarding the slip system nomenclature used in microMegas is mentioned in Table 2.

Table 2. Slip system enumeration for FCC crystals in microMegas

Slip system
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Plane
(111) (11̄1) (11̄1) (111̄) (111̄) (111) (1̄11) (11̄1) (111)
(1̄11)
(111̄) (1̄11)

Direction
[1̄01]
[1̄01]
[011]
[011]
[1̄10]
[1̄10]
[110]
[110]
[011̄]
[011̄]
[101]
[101]

The average DDD cross-slip rate is estimated based on the Eq. (7) whereas the average CDD cross-slip rate 

based on the new framework is estimated by Eq. (11). In the case of the former, the length of the discrete 

screw segment and stress on dislocations from DDD data are used while estimating the cross-slip 

probability whereas in the case of the latter, the screw segment length is sampled from the exponential 

distribution based on the coarse grained dislocation density and the effective stress on the dislocations is 

estimated based on Eq. (15) by sampling values from the Lorentzian distribution for scaled Schmid stress 

fluctuations and coarse grained stress. The material parameters used in these simulations are given in Table 

3.

Table 3. Material parameters used in the simulations.

Material parameters
Values
Material parameters
Values

Shear modulus (𝜇)
75 GPa
Stacking fault energy (𝛾)
0.03 J/m2

Poisson’s ratio (𝜈)
0.26
Fitting parameter (𝜁Ls)
0.6

Drag coefficient (𝐵)
25 × 10−5 Pa s
Constriction energy (𝐸cons)
1.55 eV

Burgers vector (𝑏)
0.254 nm
Activation volume (𝑉)
1800b3 m3

Stress at beginning of 

stage III hardening (𝜏III)

52 MPa
Temperature (𝑇)
300 K


17

Fig. 4 shows the average cross-slip rate computed for a DDD configuration at 0.5% strain using the CDD 

cross-slip framework and DDD method for the three cross-slip models. The cross-slip rates for the case of 

CDD framework are evaluated for 1000 different realizations which were sampled from the screw segment 

length distribution and the stress fluctuation distribution. The mean of those 1000 different instances is 

denoted by the black ‘◊’ marker along with a bar that indicates the maximum and minimum values in Fig. 

4. The cross-slip rate obtained using DDD method is represented by the red ‘○’ circle. It is evident from 

the figure that the cross-slip rates predicted by the CDD framework can take a range of values fixed by the 

sampled statistics. In addition to that, it can also be observed that the spectrum of cross-slip values spans a 

wider range for the case of inactive slip systems, denoted by the blue color in Fig 4, compared to the active 

ones. The reason for this is that the dependence of activation energy on sampled stress fluctuation statistics 

is more prominent due to the lack of resolved shear stress along the inactive slip systems. Consequently, 

any changes in the stress fluctuations affect the cross-slip rate more significantly in the case of inactive slip 

systems compared to active slip systems. Furthermore, comparing the CDD cross-slip rates with DDD 

cross-slip rates for all three models, it can be observed that in most of the cases the DDD values lie within 

the spectrum of CDD values. This indicates that the CDD model is indeed able to capture the cross-slip 

behavior in DDD based on the mean field variables and DDD statistics. A better agreement between the 

two methods can be expected when an ensemble of DDD configuration at the same strain level is sampled 

from multiple DDD simulations so that different possible local states are explored, which can then be 

averaged to compare the results from CDD.


18

Fig. 4. Average cross-slip rate computed using (a) Kubin, (b) Hussein and (c) Malka’s model based 
on DDD and CDD framework for a DDD configuration sampled at 0.5% strain.

Comparing the cross-slip rates given in Fig. 4 among the three different models shows that Malka’s model 

yields the highest cross-slip rate whereas the Kubin’s model has the lowest cross-slip rate. The difference 

in the cross-slip rates between the three models can be attributed to the stress components considered in the 

activation energy expression as well as the parameters used to calibrate the model. For instance, the Kubin’s

model considers only the Schmid stress along the cross-slip plane to determine the cross-slip activation 

energy barrier, which was shown to have the least effect on reducing the cross-slip activation energy 

compared to other stress components (Kang et al., 2014). Consequently, one can expect it to have the lowest 

cross-slip rates amongst other models. Additionally, since Kubin’s model was calibrated based on the cross-

slip activity at the beginning of stage III hardening, high stress levels are required to initiate cross-slip 

compared to other models which does not have such limitations. Similarly, Hussein’s model considers the 

cross-slip activation energy to be linearly dependent on the difference between the Escaig stresses on the 

primary and cross-slip plane. According to this model, cross-slip is never possible when Escaig stress on 

the cross-slip plane is higher compared to that of the primary plane. However, the line tension model by 

(Malka-Markovitz and Mordehai, 2019) showed that when the effect of Schmid stress on the cross-slip 

plane is considered, cross-slip is possible even though the Escaig stress on the cross-slip plane is higher 

compared to that of the primary plane. Since Malka’s model considers the effect of all stress components 

the chances for a dislocation to cross-slip is higher in their model compared to the other two models, which 

is evident from Fig. 4.

4.2.
Effect of different cross-slip models on bulk CDD simulations

The aim of this section is to study the effect of different cross-slip activation energy formulations on the 

mechanical response of the dislocation system and the dislocation microstructure evolution. Hence, CDD 

simulations using Kubin’s model (Kubin et al., 1992), Hussein’s model (Hussein et al., 2015) and Malka’s


19

model (Malka-Markovitz et al., 2021) were performed based on the new framework for the monotonic

loading case. All simulations were performed using the material properties listed in Table 3. 

The simulation domain size in these simulations is 5µm × 5µm × 5.303µm and the applied strain rate is 

20s−1 along [001] direction. The slip plane normal and Burgers vectors of all the slip systems for a FCC 

crystal in CDD is given in Table 4. The initial dislocation configuration was made up of 10 circular 

dislocation loops with radius ranging from 2µm and 5µm in each slip system. The initial total dislocation 

density used in these simulations is 1.5 × 1012 m−2.

Table 4. Slip system enumeration for FCC crystals in CDD

Slip system
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Plane
(111) (1̄11) (1̄11) (111̄) (111̄) (11̄1) (11̄1) (111) (111)
(111̄)
(1̄11) (11̄1)

Direction
[01̄1]
[01̄1]
[101]
[101]
[011]
[011]
[1̄01]
[1̄01]
[1̄10]
[1̄10]
[110]
[110]

Fig. 5(a) shows the average cross-slip rate, 𝑟̇cs1→2, defined in Eq. (11) for slip system 1 for the three models

obtained by averaging the cross-slip rate throughout the CDD simulation domain. The average cross-slip 

rate obtained from the Kubin’s model is significantly less compared to that of Hussein and Malka’s models.

This can be attributed to the origins of Kubin’s model, which was discussed in the previous section. Fig.

5(b) shows the average cross-slip rate 𝑟̇cs2→1 for slip system 2, which is the collinear slip system of 1, for all 

three models. Comparing Figs. 5(a) and 5(b), it can be observed that the average cross-slip rates of collinear 

slip systems are similar for both Kubin and Malka’s model, but the behavior is markedly different for the 

case of Hussein’s model. The difference in behavior for the case of Hussein’s model stems from the bias 

which the activation energy expression enforces on the cross-slip probability. Since the activation energy 

depends on the difference between Escaig stress in both the glide and cross-slip plane, as can be seen from 

Eq. (14), it is expected that if cross-slip is favorable from slip system 1 to slip system 2 at a point, then

cross-slip from slip system 2 to 1 would be less favorable. 


20

Fig. 5. Average cross-slip rates of (a) slip system 1 and (b) slip system 2 for three different models
in CDD simulation.

Figs. 6(a) and (b) show the stress-strain curves and dislocation density evolution curves of all the three 

models, respectively. The stress-strain response in Fig. 6(a) shows that there is a difference in the stress at

which yielding occurs and the rate of hardening between different models, although it is minimal.

Comparing Fig. 5 and 6 shows that the models with higher cross-slip rates have lower yield stress and 

higher rate of hardening. This can be explained by observing Fig. 6(b) which shows that for models with 

higher cross-slip rate dislocation density initially evolves slower and then starts to grow faster. 

Consequently, we observe for models with higher cross-slip rate, the yield stress is lower due to fewer 

dislocations and the rate of hardening is higher due to faster increase in dislocation density. 


21

Fig. 6. (a) Stress-strain curves and (b) total dislocation density curves obtained from CDD 
simulation for the three different models.

Fig. 7 shows the slip system dislocation density evolution for all three models. As expected, the dislocation 

density for an active slip system (SS 1-8) evolves faster compared to the inactive slip system (SS 9-12) in 

all cases. But in the case of Hussein’s model, a qualitative difference in the slip system density behavior is 

observed compared to other two models. The active slip systems evolve as two separate groups as can be 

seen in Fig. 7(b) as opposed to one in the other cases. This is due to the discrepancy in the cross-slip rates, 

which was shown in Fig. 5, because of which active slip systems with higher cross-slip rates evolved slower 

compared to their collinear counterparts since more dislocations were transferred to their collinear 

counterpart from them rather than to them. It is important to note that the same effect is not observed in the 

case of inactive slip systems since the dislocation density increase in these cases mainly comes from the 

glissile junction interaction between the active slip systems.


22

Fig. 7. Slip system dislocation density curves of simulations (a) based on Kubin’s model (b) based 
on Hussein’s model, (c) based on Malka’s model.  

4.3.
A dislocation relaxation experiment 

A relaxation experiment was performed wherein the dislocation configuration is loaded to a strain level of 

0.25% in a single time step, at a strain rate of the order 106 s−1 along [001] direction and then allowed to 

relax. Loading the simulation domain to 0.25% strain in a single time step results in high stress levels since 

the applied strain gets converted mostly to elastic strain as the dislocations do not have enough time to 

move. Once the high stress is induced in the domain, the system is then allowed to relax by maintaining the 

mean strain at 0.25% subjected to periodic boundary conditions. This approach was chosen to study the 

dislocation microstructure evolution at high stress levels because accessing such stress values through

typical monotonic loading simulations is near impossible due to the computational constraints and strain 

levels required to reach such stresses. 

The relaxation experiment described above was conducted for the three cross-slip models along [001] 

orientation. The simulation box size used in this simulation was 2.5𝜇m × 2.5𝜇m × 2.75𝜇m and the initial 

dislocation density was chosen to be 3 × 1014 𝜇m−2. The initial dislocation configuration was made up of 

10 circular dislocation loops with radii ranging from 2µm and 3µm in each slip system. The material 

parameters used in these simulations are listed in Table 3.


23

Fig. 8 shows the stress-time curve and dislocation density behavior over the course of the relaxation 

experiment. The initial steep increase in stress in Fig. 8(a) corresponds to the applied load stored as elastic 

strain in the simulation domain. With the progression of time, the stress in the simulation domain reduces

due to the relaxation and then reaches a stable state eventually for all three models. Fig. 8(b) shows the 

dislocation density evolution with time for the three models. The dislocation density decreases 

asymptotically due to the dislocation annihilation that happens during the relaxation tending towards a 

stable state for all three models.

Fig. 8. (a) Stress-strain curve and (b) total dislocation density evolution curve of the relaxation 
experiment.

Fig. 9 and 10 shows the dislocation microstructure obtained from the relaxation experiment for all the three 

models by visualizing the scalar dislocation density after applying the threshold filter over the whole 

simulation domain and along (010) plane respectively. The threshold filter assigns a color, in this case black 

or white, based on the dislocation density value at a given point. For the Figs. 9 and 10, if the dislocation 

density value at a point is greater than 175 𝜇m−2, then the color black was assigned else the color white

was assigned. After applying the threshold filter, the cell-type structures are observed along the planes (110) 

and (010), as observed in experiments (Ungar et al., 1984). 


24

Fig. 9. Dislocation microstructure obtained from the CDD relaxation experiment by visualizing the 
scalar dislocation density after applying the threshold filter using (a) Kubin’s model, (b) Hussein’s
model and (c) Malka’s model for modeling cross-slip process. The threshold filter has been applied 
to accentuate the features present in the image.

Fig. 10. Dislocation microstructure from the CDD relaxation experiment along (010) plane 
obtained by visualizing the scalar dislocation density after applying the threshold filter using (a) 
Kubin’s model, (b) Hussein’s model and (c) Malka’s model for modelling cross-slip process. The 
threshold filter has been applied to accentuate the features present in the image.

To quantify the similarities and differences between dislocation microstructures predicted by CDD for the 

three cross-slip models of interest, autocorrelations of the 2D dislocation microstructure images in Fig. 10 

were computed and compared. These autocorrelations were computed for single cross-sections of the 

simulation volume from the filtered data using FFT algorithm (Frigo, 1999). Fig. 11 (a), (b) and (c) shows 

the autocorrelation for the corresponding three images in Fig. 10. The autocorrelations of these images 

characterize the probability of finding dislocations at a prescribed distance and direction from a randomly 

placed point on the image. The X and Y axis in the images represent the distance in nm and the color bar 

captures the probability. All the three images show a bright red spot with the highest probability at the 


25

center and the probability decreases uniformly along all directions approximately which is evident from the 

gradual change in the color as one goes away from the center. Fig. 11(d) shows the radial pair correlation 

function for all three dislocation microstructure images in Fig. 10 obtained using MATLAB (Gavagnin et 

al., 2018), which decreases with increase in radial distance till it reaches a minimum and then rises again 

before becoming a constant for all three models. It is evident from the figures that the dislocation 

microstructure morphology of all three models is very similar as all the models follow the same trend. 


26

Fig. 11 Spatial autocorrelation of dislocation microstructure in Fig. 10 obtained using FFT 
algorithm (Frigo, 1999) for (a) Kubin’s model, (b) Hussein’s model and (c) Malka’s model. (d) 
Radial pair correlation function for all three models.

5. Discussion

The results presented in the previous section highlight the capability of the new CDD cross-slip framework 

which represents an improvement over the other existing approaches used to model cross-slip in CDD. The

cross slip modeling approach proposed here incorporates the information about local coarse grained stress,

dislocation density, the screw segment length statistics, and stress fluctuation statistics, thus allowing to 

overcome the shortcomings of other approaches used to capture the cross-slip process in CDD (Deng and 

El-Azab, 2010; Sudmanns et al., 2019; Xia et al., 2016). For instance, in the works of (Deng and El-Azab, 

2010; Xia et al., 2016), the cross-slip rate was estimated by sampling the averaged cross-slip rate time series 

data from DDD simulation after performing time coarse graining analysis. Although, this approach made

use of the cross-slip statistics from DDD, it was averaged over the simulation domain thereby ignoring the 

effects of the local stress and its fluctuations. This issue was addressed in the proposed model by making 

use of the local stress and dislocation density information, which was used to sample DDD statistics like 

screw segment length and stress fluctuation statistics to estimate the cross-slip rate. Likewise, the work of 

(Sudmanns et al., 2019) estimated the cross-slip rate by using the local coarse grained stress directly in the 

DDD cross-slip probability expression (Kubin et al., 1992), without  incorporating the effects of local 

dislocation arrangement which was shown to result in the markedly different local stress states 

(Vivekanandan et al., 2022). The new CDD cross-slip framework addressed this issue by making use of the 

screw segment length statistics and the stress fluctuation statistics which captures the different possible 

underlying local state for a given coarse grained description. 

The validity of the newly proposed cross-slip modeling approach was tested by comparing the cross-slip 

rate estimated using CDD and DDD methodology for a chosen DDD configuration. Cross-slip rate 

estimated using DDD methodology made use of the stress on the screw dislocations and screw segment 


27

length whereas the cross-slip rate obtained by using the CDD formalism used the coarse-grained stress and 

dislocation density in addition to the values sampled from DDD statistics like the screw segment length and 

stress fluctuation distribution. The sampled values correspond to one of the many possible configurations 

of the ensemble and hence it is indeed expected that the estimated cross-slip rate will vary along a spectrum 

and will not be an accurate match to the actual cross-slip rate. Nevertheless, Fig. 4 showed that CDD cross-

slip rate estimated using the new framework is within reasonable limits of DDD cross-slip rate for all three 

models. For an accurate comparison between the two methods, a set of DDD configurations should be 

sampled from multiple DDD simulations such that different local configurations for a given strain level can 

be accounted for during cross-slip rate estimation. The average cross-slip rate of the ensemble can then be 

used to compare with the average of CDD cross-slip rates that were obtained by sampling statistics from 

the screw segment length and stress fluctuation distribution.

The effect of different cross-slip activation energy formulations on the mechanical behavior and dislocation 

microstructure was investigated in this work. It was shown that the different cross-slip activation energy 

formulations indeed resulted in different average cross-slip rates, but the effect of the different cross-slip 

rates on the stress-strain response and dislocation density evolution was shown to be minimal in Fig. 6 and 

7. A plausible explanation for this behavior is the nature of the loading orientation, which is [001] loading 

orientation and type of loading used in the simulations, which is monotonic loading and cross-slip rates of 

collinear slip systems. The [001] loading orientation activates 8 slip systems comprising 4 pairs of collinear 

slip systems sharing the same Burgers vector for FCC crystal such that they all have the same Schmid 

factor. Similarly, the remaining 4 inactive slip systems comprising of 2 pairs of inactive slip systems also 

have the same Schmid factor. Hence, for the case where the loading is monotonic and collinear slip systems 

having similar cross-slip rates, one can expect dislocations evolving in a similar manner despite different 

cross-slip rates due to the dominance of the applied component of the Schmid stress. Consequently, the 

difference in the stress-strain response can also be expected to follow similar trend for models with different 

cross-slip rates. The relaxation experiment which was devised to study how dislocations reorganize 


28

themselves at higher stress levels and dislocation density also yielded similar stress-strain and dislocation 

density evolution behavior for all three models. With regard to the collective behavior of dislocations, the 

difference between the three models in this case was almost non-existent compared to the monotonic case 

indicating that at higher stresses, the differences between the models become insignificant. Finally, despite 

subjecting the dislocation system to a high strain rate loading before relaxation, the dislocation 

microstructure showed cell-like type structure typically observed in monotonic simulation for all three 

models. 

6. Conclusion

A data driven approach to model cross-slip behavior in CDD was proposed. The model made use of the 

screw segment length distribution and stress fluctuation statistics from DDD to inform CDD model about 

the essential information required for cross-slip modelling which was lost due to coarse graining. It was 

shown that the screw segment distribution in DDD follows the exponential distribution and the stress 

fluctuation statistics for screw segments follows the Lorentzian distribution. Using these statistics from 

DDD, it was shown that the average cross-slip rate over the whole domain obtained using the new 

framework was able to match the DDD cross-slip rate. In addition, the effect of different activation energy 

formulations on the stress-strain response, dislocation density evolution and dislocation microstructure 

were studied. It was found that, although the average cross-slip rates of the different cross-slip activation 

energies were different, the effect on stress-strain response and dislocation density evolution were minimal. 

Furthermore, it was shown that in the presence of high local stress and dislocation density, the new CDD 

framework was able to capture the dislocation self-organization in cell-like structure typically observed 

along the {100} and {110} type planes in experiments.

7. Acknowledgments


29

The authors are grateful for the support from the Naval Nuclear Laboratory, operated by Fluor Marine 

Propulsion, LLC for the US Naval Reactors Program. The computational methodology and writing of the 

work were partly supported by the National Science Foundation, Division of Civil, Mechanical, and 

Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI), through award number 1663311 and by the US Department of Energy, 

Office of Science, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, through award number DE-SC0017718 

at Purdue University.

8. References

Acharya, A., Roy, A., 2006. Size effects and idealized dislocation microstructure at small scales: 

Predictions of a Phenomenological model of Mesoscopic Field Dislocation Mechanics: Part I. 
Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 54, 1687–1710. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2006.01.009

Bertin, N., Upadhyay, M.V., Pradalier, C., Capolungo, L., 2015. A FFT-based formulation for efficient 

mechanical fields computation in isotropic and anisotropic periodic discrete dislocation 
dynamics. Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 23, 065009. https://doi.org/10.1088/0965-
0393/23/6/065009

Bonneville, J., Escaig, B., 1979. Cross-slipping process and the stress-orientation dependence in pure 

copper. Acta Metallurgica 27, 1477–1486. https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6160(79)90170-6

Cui, Y., Liu, Z., Zhuang, Z., 2015. Quantitative investigations on dislocation based discrete-continuous 

model of crystal plasticity at submicron scale. International Journal of Plasticity 69, 54–72. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2015.02.002

Deng, J., El-Azab, A., 2010. Temporal statistics and coarse graining of dislocation ensembles. 

Philosophical Magazine 90, 3651–3678. https://doi.org/10.1080/14786435.2010.497472

Devincre, B., Kubin, L., Hoc, T., 2007. Collinear superjogs and the low-stress response of fcc crystals. 

Scripta Materialia 57, 905–908. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scriptamat.2007.07.026

Devincre, B., Madec, R., Monnet, G., Queyreau, S., Gatti, R., Kubin, L., 2011. MODELING CRYSTAL 

PLASTICITY WITH DISLOCATION DYNAMICS SIMULATIONS: THE ’MICROMEGAS’ 
CODE. Mechanics of Nano-objects 81–100.

Fleischer, R.L., 1959. Cross slip of extended dislocations. Acta Metallurgica 7, 134–135. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6160(59)90122-1

Frigo, M., 1999. A fast Fourier transform compiler, in: Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 1999 

Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI ’99. Association for 
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 169–180. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/301618.301661

Gavagnin, E., Owen, J.P., Yates, C.A., 2018. Pair correlation functions for identifying spatial correlation 

in discrete domains. Phys. Rev. E 97, 062104. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.97.062104

Hochrainer, T., 2015. Multipole expansion of continuum dislocations dynamics in terms of alignment 

tensors. Philosophical Magazine 95, 1321–1367. https://doi.org/10.1080/14786435.2015.1026297

Hussein, A.M., Rao, S.I., Uchic, M.D., Dimiduk, D.M., El-Awady, J.A., 2015. Microstructurally based 

cross-slip mechanisms and their effects on dislocation microstructure evolution in fcc crystals. 
Acta Materialia 85, 180–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2014.10.067


30

Kalaei, A., Xiang, Y., Ngan, A.H.W., 2022. An efficient and minimalist scheme for continuum 

dislocation dynamics. International Journal of Plasticity 103433. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2022.103433

Kang, K., Yin, J., Cai, W., 2014. Stress dependence of cross slip energy barrier for face-centered cubic 

nickel. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, Sixtieth anniversary issue in honor of 
Professor Rodney Hill 62, 181–193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2013.09.023

Kubin, L., Hoc, T., Devincre, B., 2009. Dynamic recovery and its orientation dependence in face-centered 

cubic crystals. Acta Materialia 57, 2567–2575. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2009.02.013

Kubin, L.P., Canova, G., Condat, M., Devincre, B., Pontikis, V., Bréchet, Y., 1992. Dislocation 

Microstructures and Plastic Flow: A 3D Simulation. Solid State Phenomena 23–24, 455–472. 
https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/SSP.23-24.455

Kuykendall, W.P., Wang, Y., Cai, W., 2020. Stress effects on the energy barrier and mechanisms of 

cross-slip in FCC nickel. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 144, 104105. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2020.104105

Leung, H.S., Ngan, A.H.W., 2016. Dislocation-density function dynamics – An all-dislocation, full-

dynamics approach for modeling intensive dislocation structures. Journal of the Mechanics and 
Physics of Solids 91, 172–203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2016.03.008

Li, D., Zbib, H., Sun, X., Khaleel, M., 2014. Predicting plastic flow and irradiation hardening of iron 

single crystal with mechanism-based continuum dislocation dynamics. International Journal of 
Plasticity, In Honor of Hussein Zbib 52, 3–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2013.01.015

Lin, P., El-Azab, A., 2020. Implementation of annihilation and junction reactions in vector density-based 

continuum dislocation dynamics. Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 28, 045003. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-651X/ab7d90

Lin, P., Vivekanandan, V., Starkey, K., Anglin, B., Geller, C., El-Azab, A., 2021. On the computational 

solution of vector-density based continuum dislocation dynamics models: A comparison of two 
plastic distortion and stress update algorithms. International Journal of Plasticity 138, 102943. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2021.102943

Madec, R., Devincre, B., Kubin, L.P., 2002. Simulation of dislocation patterns in multislip. Scripta 

Materialia 47, 689–695. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-6462(02)00185-9

Malka-Markovitz, A., Devincre, B., Mordehai, D., 2021. A molecular dynamics-informed probabilistic 

cross-slip model in discrete dislocation dynamics. Scripta Materialia 190, 7–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scriptamat.2020.08.008

Malka-Markovitz, A., Mordehai, D., 2019. Cross-slip in face centred cubic metals: a general full stress-

field dependent activation energy line-tension model. Philosophical Magazine 99, 1460–1480. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14786435.2019.1584410

Malka-Markovitz, A., Mordehai, D., 2018. Cross-slip in face-centered cubic metals: a general Escaig 

stress-dependent activation energy line tension model. Philosophical Magazine 98, 347–370. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14786435.2017.1406194

Monavari, M., Zaiser, M., 2018. Annihilation and sources in continuum dislocation dynamics. Materials 

Theory 2. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41313-018-0010-z

Po, G., Mohamed, M.S., Crosby, T., Erel, C., El-Azab, A., Ghoniem, N., 2014. Recent Progress in 

Discrete Dislocation Dynamics and Its Applications to Micro Plasticity. JOM 66, 2108–2120. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11837-014-1153-2

Rao, S.I., Dimiduk, D.M., El-Awady, J.A., Parthasarathy, T.A., Uchic, M.D., Woodward, C., 2010. 

Activated states for cross-slip at screw dislocation intersections in face-centered cubic nickel and 
copper via atomistic simulation. Acta Materialia 58, 5547–5557. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2010.06.005

Rao, S.I., Dimiduk, D.M., Parthasarathy, T.A., El-Awady, J., Woodward, C., Uchic, M.D., 2011. 

Calculations of intersection cross-slip activation energies in fcc metals using nudged elastic band 
method. Acta Materialia 59, 7135–7144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2011.08.029


31

Rao, S.I., Dimiduk, D.M., Parthasarathy, T.A., Uchic, M.D., Woodward, C., 2013. Atomistic simulations 

of surface cross-slip nucleation in face-centered cubic nickel and copper. Acta Materialia 61, 
2500–2508. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2013.01.026

Sandfeld, S., Thawinan, E., Wieners, C., 2015. A link between microstructure evolution and macroscopic 

response in elasto-plasticity: Formulation and numerical approximation of the higher-dimensional 
continuum dislocation dynamics theory. International Journal of Plasticity 72, 1–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2015.05.001

Schulz, K., Wagner, L., Wieners, C., 2019. A mesoscale continuum approach of dislocation dynamics and 

the approximation by a Runge-Kutta discontinuous Galerkin method. International Journal of 
Plasticity 120, 248–261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2019.05.003

Sills, R.B., Bertin, N., Aghaei, A., Cai, W., 2018. Dislocation Networks and the Microstructural Origin of 

Strain Hardening. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 085501. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.085501

Starkey, K., El-Azab, A., 2022. Total Lagrange implementation of a finite-deformation continuum 

dislocation dynamics model of mesoscale plasticity. International Journal of Plasticity 155, 
103332. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2022.103332

Stricker, M., Sudmanns, M., Schulz, K., Hochrainer, T., Weygand, D., 2018. Dislocation multiplication in 

stage II deformation of fcc multi-slip single crystals. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of 
Solids 119, 319–333. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2018.07.003

Sudmanns, M., Stricker, M., Weygand, D., Hochrainer, T., Schulz, K., 2019. Dislocation multiplication 

by cross-slip and glissile reaction in a dislocation based continuum formulation of crystal 
plasticity. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 132, 103695. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2019.103695

Ungar, T., Mughrabi, H., Rönnpagel, D., Wilkens, M., 1984. X-ray line-broadening study of the 

dislocation cell structure in deformed [001]-orientated copper single crystals. Acta Metallurgica 
32, 333–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6160(84)90106-8

Vivekanandan, V., Anderson, J., Pachaury, Y., Mohamed, M., El-Azab, A., 2022. Statistics of internal 

stress fluctuations in dislocated crystals and relevance to density-based dislocation dynamics 
models. Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-651X/ac5dcf

Vivekanandan, V., Lin, P., Winther, G., El-Azab, A., 2021. On the implementation of dislocation 

reactions in continuum dislocation dynamics modeling of mesoscale plasticity. Journal of the 
Mechanics and Physics of Solids 149, 104327. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmps.2021.104327

Xia, S., Belak, J., El-Azab, A., 2016. The discrete-continuum connection in dislocation dynamics: I. Time 

coarse graining of cross slip. Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 24, 075007. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0965-0393/24/7/075007

Xia, S., El-Azab, A., 2015. Computational modelling of mesoscale dislocation patterning and plastic 

deformation of single crystals. Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 23, 055009. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/0965-0393/23/5/055009

Yefimov, S., Groma, I., van der Giessen, E., 2004. A comparison of a statistical-mechanics based 

plasticity model with discrete dislocation plasticity calculations. Journal of the Mechanics and 
Physics of Solids 52, 279–300. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5096(03)00094-2

Zaiser, M., Miguel, M.-C., Groma, I., 2001. Statistical dynamics of dislocation systems: The influence of 

dislocation-dislocation correlations. Physical Review B 64. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.64.224102

Zhou, C., LeSar, R., 2012. Dislocation dynamics simulations of plasticity in polycrystalline thin films. 

International Journal of Plasticity 30–31, 185–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijplas.2011.10.001

Zhu, Y., Xiang, Y., Schulz, K., 2016. The role of dislocation pile-up in flow stress determination and 

strain hardening. Scripta Materialia 116, 53–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scriptamat.2016.01.025


