1 

 

Structure, Dynamics and Hydrogen Transport in Amorphous Polymers: An Analysis of the 

Interplay Between Free Volume Element Distribution and Local Segmental Dynamics from 

Molecular Dynamics Simulations 

 

 

Mohammed Al Otmia, Frank Willmoreb, Janani Sampatha,* 

 

aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611 

bDepartment of Research Computing, Boise State University, Boise ID 83725 

*jsampath@ufl.edu 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


2 

 

Abstract 

Polymers are attractive membrane materials owing to their mechanical robustness and relatively 

inexpensive fabrication. An important indicator of membrane performance are free volume 

elements (FVEs) – microporous void spaces created by the inefficient packing of bulky groups 

along the polymer chain. FVEs tend to degrade over time as polymer chains reorganize 

irreversibly. While it is widely accepted that polymer flexibility has an impact on membrane 

transport properties, the molecular nature of this impact is still not well-understood. By 

establishing a correlation between local chain dynamics and the distribution of free volume 

elements (FVEs), penetrant transport can be regulated more efficiently in amorphous polymer 

membranes. In this work, we implement all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to explore 

the relationship between chain dynamics and free volume in three polymers with different levels 

of backbone flexibility— polymethylpentene (PMP), polystyrene (PS), and HAB-6FDA thermally 

rearranged polymer (TRP). We construct these polymers at different temperatures and examine 

how temperature impacts the FVE distribution and segmental mobility. Our analysis shows that 

chain segments near FVEs have higher mobility compared to the atoms in the bulk; the extent of 

this difference increases with chain flexibility. Increasing chain flexibility by increasing the 

temperature results in a broader FVE distribution. Rigid polymers such as TRP show the most 

robust FVE distribution and are not significantly affected by temperature change. To capture 

penetrant diffusion through the polymer matrix, hydrogen is inserted, and the diffusion is measured 

at different temperatures; hydrogen mobility is influenced by the FVE structure and overall 

mobility of polymer chains. At low temperatures, hydrogen mobility is influenced by void 

distribution, while at high temperatures, polymer dynamics dictates hydrogen transport. 

 


3 

 

Keywords: MD Simulations, Amorphous Polymers, Free Volume Elements, Plasticization, 

Physical Aging, Thermally Rearranged Polymers.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


4 

 

Introduction 

Traditional hydrocarbon purification is carried out through cryogenic distillation, which 

requires a large amount of energy.1 Integrating membrane-based separation with distillation is a 

promising alternative to reduce the energy consumption in the petrochemical industry. The 

performance of a membrane is characterized by the amount of penetrant flux or permeability, and 

the efficiency of separation or selectivity. For gas separation membranes, these factors are 

inversely correlated, as illustrated by the permeability-selectivity plot developed by Robeson.2 

Amongst the different membrane-based technologies that are available today, polymers are 

attractive materials due to their mechanical robustness, tunable properties, and inexpensive means 

of fabrication.3–5 Despite their many benefits, polymer membranes are limited in their application  

due to the inherent flexibility that arises from the molecular conformation of the chains in the 

matrix. This flexibility leads to structural rearrangement that causes membranes to lose their 

efficiency over time, due to phenomena such as plasticization and physical aging.5–8 A grand 

challenge is to develop polymers that are tailored to separate gases while maintaining a high level 

of selectivity with long lifetimes.1  

Amorphous polymers below their glass transition temperature (Tg) that have rigid chains 

and form microporous networks are superior membrane materials compared to their rubbery 

counterparts.4,9 An important feature of glassy polymers are free volume elements (FVEs) – the 

distribution of highly microporous void spaces created by the inefficient packing of bulky groups 

along the polymer backbone.10,11 While the voids themselves drive the thermodynamic solubility 

of penetrant, the shape and connectivity of these voids are the primary driver of transport in glassy 

polymers. Due to this network of voids, the primary driving force for separation in glassy polymers 


5 

 

is penetrant diffusivity, with solubility playing a smaller role in the transport of penetrants through 

the membrane.12,13 The upper bound of the Robeson plot is populated with highly glassy polymers 

mainly due to their superior diffusion selectivity.14–16 The free volume theory of penetrant transport 

posits that the diffusion of a penetrant through the polymer matrix occurs through a sequence of 

hops between voids that have sufficient space to accommodate it. Free volume theory attributes 

the rate and mechanism of gas diffusion in polymers to the size and distribution of FVE spaces in 

the polymer matrix.13,17,18 The correlation between FVE and diffusivity of gas molecules in glassy 

polymers makes FVEs an important parameter to consider when designing membrane materials.18–

20   

Having a robust FVE distribution is necessary to maintain polymer performance at long 

lifetimes. While the relative stability of FVEs in glassy polymers makes them superior separation 

media, they still experience structural relaxation and chain reorganization which compromises 

their performance. 21,22 This stems from the fact that although polymers have restricted dynamics 

below their glass transition temperature (Tg), they are not completely immobile.23,24 Under certain 

operating conditions (high pressures and temperatures, and high penetrant concentrations) and 

under ambient conditions as well, their chains become susceptible to rearrangements which alter 

the polymer morphology and FVE size and distribution. Local segmental motions, including 

translational, vibrational, and rotational motions of the chains, influence the FVE structure. FVEs 

can form, collapse, or coalesce due to thermally activated chain movement.25 Moreover, it is 

important to consider the coupling between chain segmental motion and FVEs in facilitating 

penetrant transport when designing novel membrane materials.  


6 

 

Physical aging and plasticization are two phenomena preventing the utilization of 

hydrocarbon separation membranes on a commercial scale, both of which are related to chain 

flexibility. Physical aging involves structural relaxation in glassy polymers under ambient 

conditions, driven by the difference in the current specific volume of the membrane and its 

equilibrium specific volume.6 This leads to the dissipation of nonequilibrium free volume and the 

densification of the membrane, causing the pores in the polymer structure to collapse, reducing the 

overall permeability.6,26 On the other hand, plasticization arises from irreversible chain 

reorganization of the polymer matrix and causes membrane selectivity to decline over time.27,28 It 

occurs when low-molecular-weight molecules adsorb onto the interstitial spaces of the polymer 

matrix at high pressures. The polymer chain becomes more flexible, and the interchain spacing 

increases, reducing the membrane’s sieving capability.5,6 Both these interrelated processes are 

directly correlated to the flexibility of the polymer chains, and their ability to undergo microscopic 

chain reorganization. Elucidating the molecular underpinnings of chain rearrangement and the 

relationship between chain dynamics and FVE structure will enable the rational design of durable, 

high-performance membranes.  

 

Common FVE characterization techniques such as positron annihilation lifetime 

spectroscopy (PALS), NMR spectroscopy, and photochromic probing have been used to obtain 

the average FVE distribution in a polymer membrane at a given point in time.29–31 Although these 

methods are powerful, they cannot directly capture the transient nature of FVEs that arises due to 

segmental motions of the chains. Recently, restricted orientation anisotropy method (ROAM) has 

been shown to provide a measure of the dynamics of FVE by correlating the orientational 

confinement experienced by the probe molecule to the local structural environment.10,11 While we 


7 

 

can gain insights about FVE distribution using these techniques, the underlying molecular 

structure-property relationships (change in FVE as a function of temperature or chain flexibility 

for instance) are hard to probe directly using experimental methods alone.32 

 

Over the years, molecular simulations have successfully captured penetrant adsorption and 

transport through different amorphous polymers. Specifically, the Colina group has studied the 

adsorption of penetrants through polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIMs) using a combination 

of grand canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) and MD simulations, revealing complex links between 

matrix swelling, free volume element rearrangement, and sorption-induced adsorption of 

penetrants at different pressures.32–35 Kumar et al. have used coarse-grained models to study the 

relationship between penetrant size and polymer matrix motion, as well as the mechanism of gas 

diffusion in polymer grafted nanoparticle membranes.36–38 Additionally, several other modeling 

studies have elucidated the molecular nature of gas and liquid transport in amorphous polymers. 

33,39–43 Overall, the relaxation of amorphous polymers like polystyrene and poly(1-trimethylsilyl-

1-propyne) has been studied using different molecular modeling techniques, including coarse-

grained and atomistic methods. 44–46 However, limited work has been done correlating the free 

volume elements and segmental dynamics in state-of-the-art rigid polymers like thermally 

rearranged polymers, that have shown promise as hydrocarbon separation membranes. 

 

In this work, we utilize all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to create three 

distinct amorphous polymers, namely polymethylpentene (PMP), polystyrene (PS), and HAB-

6FDA thermally rearranged polymer (TRP). These polymers exhibit diverse chemical structures, 

with TRPs belonging to a class of novel polymers with tunable pore distributions. Amorphous 


8 

 

polymers below their Tg are known to have a long relaxation time which makes it challenging to 

characterize their dynamics in classical MD timescales. To investigate the trends in flexibility, it 

is necessary to sample the systems at elevated temperatures, where the mobility of the polymer 

can be distinctly captured, hence we simulate these systems at three temperatures ranging from 

100 K to 500 K. We probe the structure of these systems using two different free volume element 

measurements. Next, we study segmental dynamics by calculating the bond autocorrelation 

function. To investigate the interplay between chain flexibility and void distribution on diffusion 

properties, we randomly introduce hydrogen molecules into the three polymer systems and analyze 

the diffusion behavior of hydrogen with respect to polymer chemistry and temperature.  

Quantifying the dynamics of different segments of the polymers with respect to FVEs can be used 

to elucidate the potential for a polymer to undergo rearrangement and deviate from its initial FVE 

distribution when used as a membrane material. 

 

Methods 

 

To model the polymer systems, we utilize the OPLS-AA forcefield to represent the 

interactions in the three polymer chemistries. OPLS-AA parameters are taken from LigParGen 

web server which uses 1.14 CM1A and 1.14 CM1A-LBCC charge models.47 After parameterizing 

and optimizing the monomer structure, we pack multiple monomers in a simulation box at a low 

density. We use the open-source package Polymatic, which has been used to generate a wide 

variety of polymers in the past, to build the polymer chain.48 Polymatic uses the simulated 

polymerization algorithm to construct the polymer chains; details can be found in the Supporting 

Information. Briefly, bonds are formed between monomer units to form a single polymer chain. 

Before the addition of each bond, energy minimization is performed to relax the newly formed 


9 

 

bond. Short MD simulations in the NVT and NPT ensembles are performed after every fifth bond 

in order to perturb the system and allow polymerized fragments to connect. After the formation of 

a single chain, twenty chains are packed into a large simulation box following which a 21-step 

equilibration protocol is performed to bring the systems to the appropriate density at the desired 

temperature and 1 atm.49  This protocol uses a number of NPT and NVT ensembles to heat and 

compress the system to a high temperature and pressure, then allows the system to cool and 

decompress to the final condition gradually to avoid any artifacts associated with the stress 

tensor.50 Simulated samples of PMP and PS consist of 200 monomers per chain while TRP consists 

of 100 monomers per chain. PS is atactic, with randomly distributed isotactic and syndiotactic 

segments. After the 21-step equilibration, we run the systems in the isothermal-isobaric ensemble 

at the specified temperature (100 K, 300 K, 500 K) and 1 atm for 3 ns to ensure that the systems 

fluctuate within their set densities.51,52 To validate the forcefield, we examine the density and glass 

transition temperature (Tg) of the three structures. We compute Tg of the three systems using a 

gradual quenching protocol.53,54 The details and results of the protocol are presented in the 

Supporting Information.55 The calculated Tg for PMP, PS, and TRP were 331K, 407K and, 579K, 

respectively, which agree with experimental Tg reported in the literature, of 300K, 373K, and 

578K.53,29,30  

 

The size of our simulation box ranges ~700 nm3 to ~1400 nm3, and they each consist of 

64000 – 106000 atoms.  While performing replicas in MD simulations is useful for increasing the 

overall sampling and accounting for uncertainty, our systems are large enough to obtain a 

representative sample of the system’s behavior, and sufficient sampling is generated from a single 

large system. However, to ensure that our systems are sufficiently large, we run three independent 


10 

 

replica simulations for the three chemistries at 300 K and examine the trends in segmental 

dynamics. This comparison is included in the Supplementary Information and shows that the 

trends observed are consistent across different replicas. 

 

Production runs are performed at different temperatures (100K, 300K, 500K) and 1 atm 

for 20 ns, over which data is collected. Nose-Hoover thermostat and barostat are employed, with 

a timestep of 1fs, and temperature and pressure damping parameters of 100 ps and 1000 ps, 

respectively. To study penetrant diffusion, hydrogen gas molecules are randomly inserted into the 

three equilibrated polymer structures at the different temperatures such that it corresponds to a gas 

concentration of 1.18 mol/L, equivalent to hydrogen molecular density at 29.6 atm and 300 K. 

After this, a short equilibration of 1 ns followed by a 20 ns production run was performed in NVT, 

similar to the method outlined in prior work.42,43 This insertion protocol bypasses the time needed 

to achieve a penetrant-saturated configuration. All simulations are carried out using the LAMMPS 

package.56 Long range interactions are calculated using particle-particle particle mesh algorithm 

(PPPM) with a 1.5 nm cutoff.  


11 

 

 

Figure 1.  Chemical structures and snapshots of the three polymer systems – (a) Polymethylpentene (PMP), (b) Polystyrene (PS), (c) 

HAB-6FDA TR (TRP). Chains are constructed using Polymatic. Each system has 20 chains; PMP and PS contain 200 monomers per 

chain, TRP contains 100 monomers per chain. Heavy atoms are shown in blue, and hydrogens are in pink. Snapshots depict 2.5 nm slices 

in the z direction for each system at 300 K. 

 

Results 

Free Volume Element Distribution 

 

To probe the structure of the three polymers, we assess their microporosity by calculating 

the free volume of the polymer matrix. Free volume in polymers can be defined in different ways; 

a summary of these definitions and their differences can be found in the detailed perspective by 


12 

 

White and Lipson.57 Specifically, we calculate the total free volume, which is the sum of the 

occupied volume, and excess free volume.  Computationally, free volume can be obtained by 

energetic or geometric methods.58–61 Each method of analysis sheds light on a certain aspect of 

void distribution; taken together, they provide a complete description of the microstructure of the 

polymer. The purpose of this study is to compare the change in free volume as a function of chain 

architecture and temperature, not to correlate free volume with Tg. In the two methods of 

measurement that we employ, we remain consistent in the parameters that we choose across the 

different chemistries and temperatures. 

 

 
To calculate the overall void volume, we utilize the alpha-shape method within the 

molecular visualization package Ovito.62 Alpha-shape is a geometric method of FVE estimation 

in which the particle coordinates are used to tessellate the simulation box into tetrahedral elements 

after which a probe sphere with pre-defined radius is employed to classify these elements into 

either empty or filled regions. The probe size is directly correlated to the void volume in the 

polymer – smaller probes yield large free volumes, whereas a large probe results in smaller total 

free volume. The alpha-shape method also allows for the classification of atoms as a function of 

their distance from FVEs.63 Particularly, regions within a surface manifold bound by the 

intersection between empty regions (voids) and filled regions (bulk polymer) can be identified. In 

this way, we classify polymer atoms as belonging to the surface (near voids) or bulk (away from 

the voids) depending on their atomic positions at t = 0. This allows us to capture the structural 

heterogeneities of the polymer and draw comparison between the dynamics in surface and bulk 

regions of different polymers, as a function of temperature.  


13 

 

A common criterion of choosing probe size is to use a value higher than the nearest 

neighbor atom separation distance. The probe radius employed (0.25 nm) was chosen to be higher 

than the atomic distance between two carbon atoms along a polystyrene backbone. As seen in 

Figure 2, the void volume (ratio of free to total volume) in the three systems increases as PMP > 

PS > TRP. This is expected, as TRP monomers have multiple cyclic groups along the backbone 

(Figure 1c), hindering chain packing, thereby increasing free volume. This is also in line with the 

simulated Tg measurements – polymers with high Tg are stiffer and have high free volumes; TRP 

has the highest Tg while PMP has the lowest. We also find that for each polymer, the void volume 

increases with increasing temperature, in line with free volume and glass transition theories that 

predict an increase in free volume as a function of temperature.57,64 Moreover, PMP shows the 

highest increase in free volume between the lowest and highest temperatures considered – this is 

because PMP has the highest flexibility and lowest Tg. TRP on the other hand shows a modest 

change in free volume with temperature. We note that the free volume (void ratio) of TRP is higher 

than free fractional volume (FFV) reported in prior simulations,65 this is due to the probe size used 

– we have chosen a probe radius that generates statistically significant number of surface atoms 

that allows us to calculate local dynamics across all three systems at the different temperatures 

considered. A larger probe (0.3 nm) significantly reduces the void ratio from 43% to 25%. We also 

report the densities of the three systems at different temperatures in the Supporting Information. 

De-densification of the polymer could contribute to some changes in the free volume as well. 


14 

 

 

Figure 2.  Void volume across the three polymer systems, at three different temperatures, as labelled. Voids are obtained by constructing 
a surface mesh on Ovito using the alpha-shape method, with a spherical probe of 0.25 nm radius. Snapshots of voids at 300 K are shown 
directly below each system along the x-axis. 

 

To understand the distribution of FVEs across the different systems, we employ the Void 

Analysis Codes and Unix Utilities for Molecular Modeling and Simulations (VACUUMMS).66 

This software package implements the Cavity Energetic Sizing Algorithm, a Monte Carlo based 

energetic method of determining voids in a polymer matrix.67,68 In CESA, a cavity is defined as a 

spherical volume with an energy center which is the local minimum in a repulsive particle energy 

field. This gives rise to a size distribution of voids. CESA has been shown to correlate well with 

permeability properties and PALS measurements.69 Figure 3 shows qualitative snapshots 

(rendered from scene definition language (SDL) generated by VACUUMMS using POV-Ray70 

tracing software) of the FVEs in PMP, PS, TRP, across three different temperatures. We find that 

temperature plays a critical role on the pore size distribution, and not only the overall free volume 


15 

 

distribution, as seen in Figure 3. We see that there is an increase in the size of the individual FVEs 

as the temperature increases; this is most pronounced in PMP, followed by PS, and to a lesser 

extent in TRP.  

 

 

Figure 3. Cavities as a function of temperature, for the three different polymer systems, as labeled. Images rendered using POV-Ray, 
from data generated via VACUUMMS. 

 

To quantify the voids, we plot the cavity size distribution, as seen in Figure 4. In agreement 

with the snapshots, we see that there is a shift towards larger cavity sizes with an increase in 

temperature, which is most pronounced in PMP. It is also seen that at the lowest temperature, the 

voids in PMP are the smallest, followed by PS and TRP, however, at the highest temperature, PMP 

has a higher distribution of large voids. Given the flexibility of polymers, thermal fluctuations 

cause pores to coalesce at higher temperatures; this is most distinct in systems that are flexible, 


16 

 

compared to systems with stiffer chains. This is why PMP exhibits the greatest sensitivity to 

temperature variations, as evidenced by the significant shift in the distribution of FVE observed 

between 100 K and 500 K. PS experiences a moderate alteration in its FVE distribution, marked 

by a shift in the distribution towards pores with larger diameters, and pores in TRP do not change 

very much in the temperature range considered (although there is a slight shift toward larger pores 

at 500 K). This also correlates with the Tg of these systems – the Tg of TRP is greater than 500K, 

thus, chain mobility is restricted at this temperature, unlike PMP and PS. Overall, we find that as 

temperature increases, the number of small-diameter voids decreases while that of larger-diameter 

voids increases. This observation suggests that, in addition to the established phenomenon of 

thermal expansion of free volume,57,71 the small individual pores within the polymer matrix 

coalesce to produce larger pores.  

 

 


17 

 

 

 

Polymer Dynamics 

Next, we evaluate the translational dynamics of the three polymers at the different 

temperatures by calculating the mean squared displacement (MSD). MSD measures the change in 

the position of the particles from their initial positions, defined as: 

𝑀𝑆𝐷 (𝑡) = < ∆𝑟!(𝑡) > = < (𝑟(𝑡" + 𝑡) − 𝑟(𝑡"))! > 

Figure 4: Cavity size distribution for (a) PMP (b) PS and (c) TRP as a function of temperature, as labelled


18 

 

where r (t0 + t) is the position of a particle at time t. We do not examine the center of mass motion 

of each chain, but instead compute the dynamics of all atoms (including hydrogen atoms along the 

polymer backbone and sidechain) across the three systems to improve statistics.  

 Universally, 
polymers 
exhibit 
three 
distinct 
regions 
in 
the 
mean-squared 

displacement.23,24,72 At short times (< 1 ps), all three systems follow ballistic dynamics (slope of 

2.0). After about 1 ps, the dynamics of the three systems move into the sub-diffusive regime (slope 

< 1.0). A distinct plateau regime develops after 1 ps which is more prominent in PS and TRP, 

presumably due to the time-scale separation between vibrational and relaxational degrees of 

freedom, restricting the dynamics of the atoms.23,24 This plateau regime persists beyond 1000 ps 

at 100 K and 300 K, and at 500 K, it only persists till 10 ps. At long times, polymer melts and 

rubbers attain diffusive behavior; however, none of the three systems at temperatures < 500 K 

reach diffusive regime due to the restricted dynamics and constrained nature of the chains. At 500 

K, PMP atoms are diffusive at long times. The trends shown for MSD have been observed in other 

amorphous systems.23,24 At any given temperature, PMP exhibits faster dynamics compared to PS 

and TRP, which is expected given that PMP has the lowest Tg of the three polymers considered, 

and a more flexible backbone. Additionally, increasing the system temperature accelerates the 

overall dynamics of each system, which can be seen in the larger MSD values at elevated 

temperatures. 


19 

 

  

  

 

To study the orientational dynamics and to probe relaxations on a more local scale, we 

calculate the bond vector autocorrelation function (bond ACF). It is defined by 

Bond ACF =
< 𝐵(𝑡)
00000000⃗ . 𝐵(0)
000000000⃗

𝐵(0)
000000000⃗ . 𝐵(0)
000000000⃗ > 

 

where B(t) is bond vector at time t. Averaging is done over all bonds in the system. Calculating 

the bond ACF enables us to capture small-scale orientational fluctuations in these amorphous 

Figure 5: Mean squared displacement of all polymer atoms in the system for PMP, PS, TRP at 100 K, 300 K, 500 K, as labelled.


20 

 

systems. As seen in Figure 6, the rate of decorrelation of the bond ACF reveals a consistent 

pattern, with PMP exhibiting the fastest relaxation at any given temperature, followed by PS, and 

TRP displaying the slower relaxation. The influence of temperature on the bond ACF is similar 

to the trends observed in the MSD; as temperature increases, the relaxation of the bond segments 

is more rapid. 

 

 

 Figure 6: Bond autocorrelation function averaged over all bonds in the three systems at three different temperatures, as labelled.


21 

 

 

Amorphous polymers are structurally heterogeneous, with voids interspersed between 

filled polymer regions. To probe polymer dynamics as a function of proximity to voids, we use the 

alpha-shape method to identify surface and bulk atoms (described above). Examining the dynamics 

of polymer segments that lie at the interface between void and filled regions offers a more robust 

correlation between the distribution of the FVE and the segmental dynamics. We compute the 

bond vector autocorrelation function of the surface and bulk atoms separately to evaluate the 

difference in dynamics between different regions in each of the three systems as shown in Figure 

7. 

We observe increased dynamics in the atoms that are at the surface, compared to atoms in 

the bulk, as evidenced by the faster relaxation of bond ACF of surface bonds compared to bulk 

bonds. The increased dynamics of the surface segments can be attributed to the greater number of 

degrees of freedom for these atoms, as a result of their proximity to a free interface. Our results 

also reveal that the contrast in dynamics between surface and bulk atoms is more distinct in PMP 

compared to PS and TRP. This can be attributed to the inherent rigidity of PS and TRP chains, 

regardless of their position in the bulk or near the surface. Conversely, the flexible chains in PMP 

exhibit a marked difference in dynamics between the bulk and surface regions. Atoms in the bulk 

region exhibit significantly slower dynamics due to the increased number of neighboring atoms 

that restrict their movement. The observed correlation between the dynamics of surface segments 

and the change in free volume element (FVE) distribution is ascribed to the fact that the surface 

segments constitute the walls of FVE, and thus their mobility directly influences the alteration in 

FVE. The dynamics of the surface segments offer an indication of the susceptibility of FVE 

distribution to change. The relatively slower dynamics in TRP compared to PMP suggests a more 


22 

 

robust FVE distribution in TRP. We find that for the timescales considered here, there is no 

difference in dynamics between surface and bulk groups at 100 K for PS and TRP, and the 

difference in dynamics for PMP segments is noticeable only at long times at 100 K. Interestingly, 

for PMP the bulk vs. surface groups at 300 K show a greater difference in segmental dynamics 

than that at 500 K. This could be because the total segmental mobility is very high for PMP at 500 

K, and the proximity to voids does not speed up the relaxation as much as it does at 300 K, where 

the overall mobility is restricted, thus the presence of voids causes a sharp increase in dynamics. 

A similar trend is observed for the PS and TRP systems at 500 K. While the PS segments show 

faster relaxation compared to TRP, we see that the difference in dynamics between surface and 

bulk bonds at 500 K is more pronounced in TRP than it is in PS. This is attributed to the fact that 

the overall high chain mobility reduces the impact of the void interface in PS, however, in TRP, 

the presence of voids greatly enhances the dynamics of chain segments that are close to it. 


23 

 

  

 

  

Penetrant Transport 

To investigate the impact of polymer structure on penetrant diffusion in the three systems, 

hydrogen molecules were introduced, and their trajectories were analyzed to gain insight into the 

nature of molecular transport under different temperature conditions. First, we investigate 

hydrogen transport qualitatively over 300 ps, as shown in Figure 8. For each system, we find that 

Figure 7. Comparison between segmental orientational dynamics of surface particles and bulk particles. Solid lines show the Bond 
ACF for atoms in the bulk while dashed lines show bond ACF for surface atoms (atoms near the FVE) atoms near the FVEs. 


24 

 

hydrogen diffusion increases as temperature increases, as expected. Prior work by Brownell et. al 

has found Arrhenius dependence between hydrogen diffusion and temperature in amorphous 

polymers.42 At a temperature of 100 K, hydrogen molecules are almost completely confined in 

PMP and PS, with only modest mobility observed in TRP. This is due to the high microporosity 

in TRP compared to the other systems at 100 K, which facilitates the transport of hydrogen. At 

300 K, the hydrogen trajectories in PMP and TRP are similar (evidenced by the area of the box 

covered by hydrogens over this time). Both systems show higher hydrogen mobility than that of 

PS. At 500K, significantly higher hydrogen diffusion is observed in PMP, in comparison to PS 

and TRP. Overall, we find that the trends in hydrogen diffusion across the three systems is different 

at different temperatures. 

 

Figure 8: Trajectories of 50 hydrogen molecules (chosen randomly) in PMP, PS and TRP at three different temperatures, as labelled. 
The evolution is shown from 0 ps to 300 ps.  Each bead has a simulation dt of 10 ps. 

 


25 

 

To investigate this further, we calculate the mean-squared displacement of all hydrogen 

atoms in the three systems at different temperatures (Figure 9). Across each system, there is an 

increase in hydrogen diffusion as the temperature increases, in line with prior work.42 However, 

comparing hydrogen MSD of the three systems at each temperature reveals interesting trends. At 

low temperatures (100 K), TRP exhibits substantially higher hydrogen diffusion than PS and PMP. 

This can be ascribed to the elevated microporosity of TRP, enabling hydrogen molecules to hop 

between the voids. However, as the temperature increases to 300 K, we see a reversal in this trend. 

At short times, H2 diffusion is highest in TRP, followed by PS and then PMP, however, at around 

100 ps, the MSD of H2 in PMP surpasses that of TRP. At 500 K, H2 diffusion is highest in PMP, 

followed by PS and TRP.   

  


26 

 

 

  

 
To provide additional insight about hydrogen dynamics, we compute the ensemble-

averaged displacement of hydrogen molecules using the self-part of Van Hove correlation 

function, given by:  

𝐺#(𝑟, 𝑡) = 1

𝑁 ⟨4 𝛿(𝑟 − |𝑟$(𝑡) − 𝑟$(𝑡")|)

%

$&'

⟩ 

 

where G(r,t) is the probability distribution, r is the position, t is the time, 𝛿 is the Dirac delta 

function, and N is the number of particles. Assuming that the particle is initially located at the 

Figure 9: Mean squared displacement of hydrogen molecules in PMP, PS and TRP at three different temperatures, as labeled. 


27 

 

origin at time t=0, the function G(r,t) denotes the probability of detecting the particle at position r 

within a time interval of dt. Figure 10 illustrates the dynamics of hydrogen in the three different 

systems and at different temperatures. Three distinct time intervals or dt = 1, 10 and 100 ps have 

been selected to demonstrate changes in hydrogen mobility at different times. We find that at a 

given temperature, the peak height decreases with increasing dt, signifying that hydrogen 

molecules have been displaced from their initial positions. We also see that for a given dt value, 

the peak height is lower at higher temperatures. At 100 K and 300 K, the displacement value of 

the first peak is constant for each system at a specific temperature, and a shoulder appears at long 

times (> 10 ps).  This implies that at these temperatures, there are two different types of hydrogen 

molecules that contribute to the distribution– localized and mobile. Specifically at 300 K, the first 

and second peaks in the distribution at dt = 100 ps signify local and mobile hydrogen molecules, 

respectively, across all three polymers. At 500 K, there is a single distribution at dt = 100 ps, with 

almost all hydrogen molecules exhibiting similar dynamics, and the peaks have different 

displacement values, unlike the distributions at lower temperatures.  

At 100 K, most hydrogens remain localized, resulting in small changes in peak height for 

PMP and PS. Additionally, the displacement remains nearly constant across different time 

intervals due to the limited mobility of hydrogen molecules. The peak height in TRP shows the 

most variation with dt, with a larger shift toward longer displacements, signifying that hydrogen 

dynamics is highest in TRP at 100 K. This is in line with the MSD results, as well as the fact that 

TRP has the largest void distribution at 100 K (Figure 3). At 300 K and dt = 100 ps, PS has the 

highest population of localized hydrogens and PMP has slightly more mobile hydrogens than TRP. 

This is consistent with the MSD results, with hydrogens in PS having lower MSD than that of PMP 

and TRP. At 500 K, the shoulder is not observed for PMP and PS, however, there is a faint shoulder 


28 

 

in the TRP distribution at dt = 100 ps, indicating that hydrogen mobility is restricted in TRP at 

high temperatures, compared to PMP and PS.   

The increase in hydrogen mobility in PMP at higher temperatures can be attributed to two 

factors. The first is that the PMP chains are inherently more mobile compared to TRP and PS, this 

mobility contributes to the penetrant motion. However, this is predominant only at high 

temperatures. At lower temperatures, when chain mobility is restricted, void volume and FVE 

distribution dominates, which is why H2 diffusion is higher in TRP, as it has larger voids at 100 K 

(Figure 3).  Secondly, since PMP chains have greater flexibility, it causes the FVEs to dilate, 

allowing the penetrant to hop more easily between the dilated voids. This is in line with the 

diffusion theories, which state that penetrant diffusion consists of series of jumps between FVEs 

in the polymer matrix.13,73,74 This coupling between penetrant motion and polymer local dynamics 

has also been observed in other systems, such as phenol diffusion in bisphenol-A-polycarbonate 

and helium diffusion in polypropylene.75,76 The mobility of hydrogen is strongly correlated with 

chain dynamics, and not just the distribution of FVEs. 

 


29 

 

 

 

Conclusion 

In summary, we implemented MD simulations to highlight the interplay between 

temperature, local chain dynamics, free volume element distribution, and penetrant transport in 

amorphous polymers. By using geometric and energetic methods to calculate the size and FVE 

distribution of different systems at different temperatures, we were able to probe the stability of 

FVE distribution against backbone flexibility and polymer segmental motions. We also calculated 

the dynamics of polymer segments as a function of distance from the voids in the matrix. As 

polymer segments near the surface have more degrees of orientational freedom, they exhibit faster 

bond decorrelation compared to bulk segments. With the increase in temperature within a given 

system, there is an increase in local segmental dynamics, leading to a redistribution of FVEs. The 

expansion and coalescence of FVEs are evidenced by a shift of FVE distribution towards higher 

Figure 10: Van Hove correlation function showing the distribution of hydrogen gas displacement in PMP, PS and TRP at 100 K, 300 K 
and 500 K, as labeled. Data shown for three time intervals (dt) of 1 ps, 10 ps, and 100 ps.


30 

 

diameter values, coupled with a reduction in the number of smaller FVEs. Upon the introduction 

of hydrogen penetrant, polymer mobility, in addition to FVE distribution, plays a critical role in 

the diffusion trends observed across different systems and temperatures. The diffusion of hydrogen 

in PMP exhibits a significant increase with increasing temperatures, even though its microporosity 

is lower than PS and TRP. This phenomenon is attributed to assisted transport of polymer chains, 

where the motion of polymers contributes to the enhancement of hydrogen diffusion. 

This work suggests that the relaxation of polymer segments, particularly surface segments, 

can serve as a useful method for assessing the stability of FVE distribution in different polymer 

membranes. The mobility of surface segments is directly correlated with the FVE redistribution in 

the polymer.  The impact of backbone flexibility on the stability of FVE distribution is significant, 

as it affects emergent phenomena such as plasticization and physical aging. Using segmental 

dynamics to establish a direct correlation between the polymer flexibility and FVE distribution can 

guide the design of superior membrane materials to address these challenges. Furthermore, while 

designing polymers for separation applications, it is imperative to decouple the contributions of 

polymer mobility and void distribution on penetrant transport. Future studies will be carried out to 

understand how tunable parameters such as polymer chemistry, polydispersity, and crosslinking 

influence physical aging.  

 

 

 

 

 

 


31 

 

Acknowledgements 

The authors acknowledge funding provided by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of 

Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences and Biosciences under award 

DE-FG02-17ER16362. Part of this research was financially supported by Prof. Sampath’s startup 

funds provided by the Department of Chemical Engineering and Herbert Wertheim College of 

Engineering at the University of Florida. https://www.che.ufl.edu The authors acknowledge 

University of Florida Research Computing for providing computational resources and support that 

have 
contributed 
to 
the 
research 
results 
reported 
in 
this 
publication. 

http://researchcomputing.ufl.edu. The authors also thank Dylan M. Anstine for many helpful 

discussions on the system setup. 

 

Supporting Information 

Details related to polymer parameterization and structure generation, glass transition temperature 

calculation, and hydrogen-polymer radial distribution function can be found in the Supporting 

Information. 

 

Data availability  

Analysis codes, input scripts, and data file containing force field parameters and structures can be 

found here - https://github.com/UFSRG/published-work/tree/main/2022-Otmi-Macromolecules 

 

 

 

 
 
  


32 

 

 Bibliography  

(1)    Sholl, D. S.; Lively, R. P. Seven Chemical Separations to Change the World. Nature 2016, 532 

(7600), 435–437. 

(2)    Robeson, L. M. The Upper Bound Revisited. J. Memb. Sci. 2008, 320 (1–2), 390–400. 

(3)    Galizia, M.; Chi, W. S.; Smith, Z. P.; Merkel, T. C.; Baker, R. W.; Freeman, B. D. 50th 

Anniversary Perspective : Polymers and Mixed Matrix Membranes for Gas and Vapor Separation: 
A Review and Prospective Opportunities. Macromolecules 2017, 50 (20), 7809–7843. 

(4)    Kim, S.; Lee, Y. M. Rigid and Microporous Polymers for Gas Separation Membranes. Prog. 

Polym. Sci. 2015, 43, 1–32. 

(5)    Kadirkhan, F.; Goh, P. S.; Ismail, A. F.; Wan Mustapa, W. N. F.; Halim, M. H. M.; Soh, W. K.; 

Yeo, S. Y. Recent Advances of Polymeric Membranes in Tackling Plasticization and Aging for 
Practical Industrial CO2/CH4 Applications-A Review. Membranes (Basel) 2022, 12 (1). 

(6)    Swaidan, R.; Ghanem, B.; Litwiller, E.; Pinnau, I. Physical Aging, Plasticization and Their 

Effects on Gas Permeation in “Rigid” Polymers of Intrinsic Microporosity. Macromolecules 2015, 
48 (18), 6553–6561. 

(7)    Ismail, A. F.; Lorna, W. Penetrant-Induced Plasticization Phenomenon in Glassy Polymers for 

Gas Separation Membrane. Separation and Purification Technology 2002, 27 (3), 173–194. 

(8)    Wang, X.-Y.; Willmore, F. T.; Raharjo, R. D.; Wang, X.; Freeman, B. D.; Hill, A. J.; Sanchez, I. 

C. Molecular Simulations of Physical Aging in Polymer Membrane Materials. J. Phys. Chem. B 
2006, 110 (33), 16685–16693. 

(9)    Guiver, M. D. Polymer Rigidity Improves Microporous Membranes. Science 2013. 

(10)   Hoffman, D. J.; Fica-Contreras, S. M.; Fayer, M. D. Amorphous Polymer Dynamics and Free 

Volume Element Size Distributions from Ultrafast IR Spectroscopy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2020, 117 (25), 13949–13958. 

(11)   Fica-Contreras, S. M.; Hoffman, D. J.; Pan, J.; Liang, C.; Fayer, M. D. Free Volume Element 

Sizes and Dynamics in Polystyrene and Poly(Methyl Methacrylate) Measured with Ultrafast 
Infrared Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143 (9), 3583–3594. 

(12)   Iyer/Liu/Zhang, G. M., Lu ,. hen. Hydrocarbon Separations by Glassy Polymer Membranes. 

JOURNAL OF POLYMER SCIENCE 2020. 

(13)   Cohen, M. H.; Turnbull, D. Molecular Transport in Liquids and Glasses. J. Chem. Phys. 1959, 31 

(5), 1164–1169. 

(14)   Robeson, L. M.; Liu, Q.; Freeman, B. D.; Paul, D. R. Comparison of Transport Properties of 

Rubbery and Glassy Polymers and the Relevance to the Upper Bound Relationship. J. Memb. Sci. 
2015, 476, 421–431. 

(15)   Matteucci, S.; Yampolskii, Y.; Freeman, B. D.; Pinnau, I. Transport of Gases and Vapors in 

Glassy and Rubbery Polymers. In Materials science of membranes for gas and vapor separation; 


33 

 

Yampolskii, Y., Pinnau, I., Freeman, B., Eds.; John Wiley & Sons, Ltd: Chichester, UK, 2006; pp 
1–47. 

(16)   Robeson, L. M.; Smith, Z. P.; Freeman, B. D.; Paul, D. R. Contributions of Diffusion and 

Solubility Selectivity to the Upper Bound Analysis for Glassy Gas Separation Membranes. J. 
Memb. Sci. 2014, 453, 71–83. 

(17)   Ramesh, N.; Davis, P. K.; Zielinski, J. M.; Danner, R. P.; Duda, J. L. Application of Free-Volume 

Theory to Self Diffusion of Solvents in Polymers below the Glass Transition Temperature: A 
Review. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 2011, 49 (23), 1629–1644. 

(18)   Thran, A.; Kroll, G.; Faupel, F. Correlation between Fractional Free Volume and Diffusivity of 

Gas Molecules in Glassy Polymers. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 1999, 37 (23), 3344–3358. 

(19)   Park, J. Y.; Paul, D. R. Correlation and Prediction of Gas Permeability in Glassy Polymer 

Membrane Materials via a Modified Free Volume Based Group Contribution Method. J. Memb. 
Sci. 1997, 125 (1), 23–39. 

(20)   Horn, N. R. A Critical Review of Free Volume and Occupied Volume Calculation Methods. J. 

Memb. Sci. 2016, 518, 289–294. 

(21)   Heuchel, M.; Fritsch, D.; Budd, P. M.; McKeown, N. B.; Hofmann, D. Atomistic Packing Model 

and Free Volume Distribution of a Polymer with Intrinsic Microporosity (PIM-1). J. Memb. Sci. 
2008, 318 (1–2), 84–99. 

(22)   Konnertz, N.; Ding, Y.; Harrison, W. J.; Budd, P. M.; Schönhals, A.; Böhning, M. Molecular 

Mobility of the High Performance Membrane Polymer PIM-1 as Investigated by Dielectric 
Spectroscopy. ACS Macro Lett. 2016, 5 (4), 528–532. 

(23)   Paul, W.; Bedrov, D.; Smith, G. D. Glass Transition in 1,4-Polybutadiene: Mode-Coupling 

Theory Analysis of Molecular Dynamics Simulations Using a Chemically Realistic Model. Phys. 
Rev. E Stat. Nonlin. Soft Matter Phys. 2006, 74 (2 Pt 1), 021501. 

(24)   Lyulin, A. V.; Balabaev, N. K.; Michels, M. A. J. Correlated Segmental Dynamics in Amorphous 

Atactic Polystyrene:  A Molecular Dynamics Simulation Study. Macromolecules 2002, 35 (25), 
9595–9604. 

(25)   Petropoulos, J. H. Mechanisms and Theories for Sorption and Diffusion of Gases in Polymers. In 

Polymeric gas separation membranes; Paul, D. R., Yampol’skii, Y. P., Eds.; CRC Press, 2018; pp 
17–81. 

(26)   Low, Z.-X.; Budd, P. M.; McKeown, N. B.; Patterson, D. A. Gas Permeation Properties, Physical 

Aging, and Its Mitigation in High Free Volume Glassy Polymers. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118 (12), 
5871–5911. 

(27)   Yu, H. J.; Chan, C.-H.; Nam, S. Y.; Kim, S.-J.; Yoo, J. S.; Lee, J. S. Thermally Cross-Linked 

Ultra-Robust Membranes for Plasticization Resistance and Permeation Enhancement – A 
Combined Theoretical and Experimental Study. J. Memb. Sci. 2022, 646, 120250. 

(28)   Zhang, L.; Xiao, Y.; Chung, T.-S.; Jiang, J. Mechanistic Understanding of CO2-Induced 

Plasticization of a Polyimide Membrane: A Combination of Experiment and Simulation Study. 
Polymer 2010, 51 (19), 4439–4447. 


34 

 

(29)   Gidley, D. W.; Peng, H.-G.; Vallery, R. S. POSITRON ANNIHILATION AS A METHOD TO 

CHARACTERIZE POROUS MATERIALS. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 2006, 36 (1), 49–79. 

(30)   Golemme, G.; Nagy, J. B.; Fonseca, A.; Algieri, C.; Yampolskii, Yu. 129Xe-NMR Study of Free 

Volume in Amorphous Perfluorinated Polymers: Comparsion with Other Methods. Polymer 2003, 
44 (17), 5039–5045. 

(31)   Victor, J. G.; Torkelson, J. M. On Measuring the Distribution of Local Free Volume in Glassy 

Polymers by Photochromic and Fluorescence Techniques. Macromolecules 1987, 20 (9), 2241–
2250. 

(32)   Kupgan, G.; Demidov, A. G.; Colina, C. M. Plasticization Behavior in Polymers of Intrinsic 

Microporosity (PIM-1): A Simulation Study from Combined Monte Carlo and Molecular 
Dynamics. J. Memb. Sci. 2018, 565, 95–103. 

(33)   Kupgan, G.; Abbott, L. J.; Hart, K. E.; Colina, C. M. Modeling Amorphous Microporous 

Polymers for CO2 Capture and Separations. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118 (11), 5488–5538. 

(34)   Anstine, D. M.; Tang, D.; Sholl, D. S.; Colina, C. M. Adsorption Space for Microporous 

Polymers with Diverse Adsorbate Species. npj Comput. Mater. 2021, 7 (1), 53. 

(35)   Hart, K. E.; Colina, C. M. Estimating Gas Permeability and Permselectivity of Microporous 

Polymers. J. Memb. Sci. 2014, 468, 259–268. 

(36)   Meng, D.; Zhang, K.; Kumar, S. K. Size-Dependent Penetrant Diffusion in Polymer Glasses. Soft 

Matter 2018, 14 (21), 4226–4230. 

(37)   Zhang, K.; Meng, D.; Müller-Plathe, F.; Kumar, S. K. Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics 

Simulation of Activated Penetrant Transport in Glassy Polymers. Soft Matter 2018, 14 (3), 440–
447. 

(38)   Barnett, J. W.; Kumar, S. K. Modeling Gas Transport in Polymer-Grafted Nanoparticle 

Membranes. Soft Matter 2019, 15 (3), 424–432. 

(39)   Shen, M.; Keten, S.; Lueptow, R. M. Dynamics of Water and Solute Transport in Polymeric 

Reverse Osmosis Membranes via Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Memb. Sci. 2016, 506, 95–
108. 

(40)   Xu, Q.; Jiang, J. Molecular Simulations of Liquid Separations in Polymer Membranes. Curr. 

Opin. Chem. Eng. 2020, 28, 66–74. 

(41)   Frentrup, H.; Hart, K. E.; Colina, C. M.; Müller, E. A. In Silico Determination of Gas 

Permeabilities by Non-Equilibrium Molecular Dynamics: CO2 and He through PIM-1. 
Membranes (Basel) 2015, 5 (1), 99–119. 

(42)   Brownell, M.; Frischknecht, A. L.; Wilson, M. A. Subdiffusive High-Pressure Hydrogen Gas 

Dynamics in Elastomers. Macromolecules 2022, 55 (10), 3788–3800. 

(43)   Wilson, M. A.; Frischknecht, A. L. High-Pressure Hydrogen Decompression in Sulfur 

Crosslinked Elastomers. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2022, 47 (33), 15094–15106. 


35 

 

(44)   Saha, S.; Bhowmick, A. K. An Insight into Molecular Structure and Properties of Flexible 

Amorphous Polymers: A Molecular Dynamics Simulation Approach. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2019, 
136 (18), 47457. 

(45)   Smith, G. D.; Smith, W. Structure and Dynamics of Amorphous Polymers: Computer Simulations 

Compared to Experiment and Theory . Rep Prog Phys 2004. 

(46)   Gartner, T. E.; Jayaraman, A. Modeling and Simulations of Polymers: A Roadmap. 

Macromolecules 2019, 52 (3), 755–786. 

(47)   Dodda, L. S.; Cabeza de Vaca, I.; Tirado-Rives, J.; Jorgensen, W. L. LigParGen Web Server: An 

Automatic OPLS-AA Parameter Generator for Organic Ligands. Nucleic Acids Res. 2017, 45 
(W1), W331–W336. 

(48)   Abbott, L. J.; Hart, K. E.; Colina, C. M. Polymatic: A Generalized Simulated Polymerization 

Algorithm for Amorphous Polymers. Theor. Chem. Acc. 2013, 132 (3), 1334. 

(49)   Larsen, G. S.; Lin, P.; Hart, K. E.; Colina, C. M. Molecular Simulations of PIM-1-like Polymers 

of Intrinsic Microporosity. Macromolecules 2011, 44 (17), 6944–6951. 

(50)   Karayiannis, N. Ch.; Mavrantzas, V. G.; Theodorou, D. N. Detailed Atomistic Simulation of the 

Segmental Dynamics and Barrier Properties of Amorphous Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) and 
Poly(Ethylene Isophthalate). Macromolecules 2004, 37 (8), 2978–2995. 

(51)   Polymer Properties Database. 

(52)   Liu, Q.; Borjigin, H.; Paul, D. R.; Riffle, J. S.; McGrath, J. E.; Freeman, B. D. Gas Permeation 

Properties of Thermally Rearranged (TR) Isomers and Their Aromatic Polyimide Precursors. J. 
Memb. Sci. 2016, 518, 88–99. 

(53)   Bejagam, K. K.; Iverson, C. N.; Marrone, B. L.; Pilania, G. Molecular Dynamics Simulations for 

Glass Transition Temperature Predictions of Polyhydroxyalkanoate Biopolymers. Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 2020, 22 (32), 17880–17889. 

(54)   Mohammadi, M.; fazli, H.; karevan, M.; Davoodi, J. The Glass Transition Temperature of 

PMMA: A Molecular Dynamics Study and Comparison of Various Determination Methods. Eur. 
Polym. J. 2017, 91, 121–133. 

(55)   Pilgrim, C. Piecewise-Regression (Aka Segmented Regression) in Python. JOSS 2021, 6 (68), 

3859. 

(56)   Thompson, A. P.; Aktulga, H. M.; Berger, R.; Bolintineanu, D. S.; Brown, W. M.; Crozier, P. S.; 

in ’t Veld, P. J.; Kohlmeyer, A.; Moore, S. G.; Nguyen, T. D.; et al. LAMMPS - a Flexible 
Simulation Tool for Particle-Based Materials Modeling at the Atomic, Meso, and Continuum 
Scales. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2022, 271, 108171. 

(57)   White, R. P.; Lipson, J. E. G. Polymer Free Volume and Its Connection to the Glass Transition. 

Macromolecules 2016, 49 (11), 3987–4007. 

(58)   Sarkisov, L.; Harrison, A. Computational Structure Characterisation Tools in Application to 

Ordered and Disordered Porous Materials. Mol. Simul. 2011, 37 (15), 1248–1257. 


36 

 

(59)   T.Willmore, F.; Wang, X.; Sanchez, I. Free Volume Properties of Model Fluids and Polymers: 

Shape and Connectivity. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Comput Mol Sci 2004, No. December 2005, 1385–
1393. 

(60)   Willems, T. F.; Rycroft, C. H.; Kazi, M.; Meza, J. C.; Haranczyk, M. Algorithms and Tools for 

High-Throughput Geometry-Based Analysis of Crystalline Porous Materials. Micropor. Mesopor. 
Mat. 2012, 149 (1), 134–141. 

(61)   Sarkisov, L.; Bueno-Perez, R.; Sutharson, M.; Fairen-Jimenez, D. Materials Informatics with 

PoreBlazer v4.0 and the CSD MOF Database. Chem. Mater. 2020, 32 (23), 9849–9867. 

(62)   Stukowski, A. Visualization and Analysis of Atomistic Simulation Data with OVITO–the Open 

Visualization Tool. Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2010, 18 (1), 015012. 

(63)   Stukowski, A. Computational Analysis Methods in Atomistic Modeling of Crystals. JOM 2014, 

66 (3), 399–407. 

(64)   Yampolskii, Y. P. Methods for Investigation of the Free Volume in Polymers. Russ. Chem. Rev. 

2007, 76 (1), 59–78. 

(65)   Jiang, Y.; Willmore, F. T.; Sanders, D.; Smith, Z. P.; Ribeiro, C. P.; Doherty, C. M.; Thornton, 

A.; Hill, A. J.; Freeman, B. D.; Sanchez, I. C. Cavity Size, Sorption and Transport Characteristics 
of Thermally Rearranged (TR) Polymers. Polymer 2011, 52 (10), 2244–2254. 

(66)   Willmore, F. T. A Toolkit for the Analysis and Visualization of Free Volume in Materials. In 

Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery 
Environment on Bridging from the eXtreme to the campus and beyond - XSEDE ’12; ACM Press: 
New York, New York, USA, 2012; p 1. 

(67)   Willmore, F. T.; Wang, X.; Sanchez, I. C. Free Volume Properties of Model Fluids and Polymers: 

Shape and Connectivity. J. Polym. Sci. B Polym. Phys. 2006, 44 (9), 1385–1393. 

(68)   in ‘t Veld, P. J.; Stone, M. T.; Truskett, T. M.; Sanchez, I. C. Liquid Structure via Cavity Size 

Distributions. J. Phys. Chem. B 2000, 104 (50), 12028–12034. 

(69)   Lock, S. S. M.; Lau, K. K.; Mei, I. L. S.; Shariff, A. M.; Yeong, Y. F. Cavity Energetic Sizing 

Algorithm Applied in Polymeric Membranes for Gas Separation. Procedia Engineering 2016, 148, 
855–861. 

(70)   Persistence of Vision Pty. Ltd http://www.povray.org/download/ (accessed Mar 27, 2023). 

(71)   Abdel-Hady, E. E.; Mohamed, H. F. M.; El-Sharkawy, M. R. M. Temperature Effect on Free 

Volume of Polymethylpentene Studied by Positron Annihilation Technique. phys. stat. sol. (c) 
2009, 6 (11), 2420–2422. 

(72)   Lyulin, A. V.; Michels, M. A. J. Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Bulk Atactic Polystyrene in 

the Vicinity of t g. Macromolecules 2002, 35 (4), 1463–1472. 

(73)   Pace, R. J.; Datyner, A. Statistical Mechanical Model for Diffusion of Simple Penetrants in 

Polymers. I. Theory. J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys. Ed. 1979, 17 (3), 437–451. 


37 

 

(74)   DiBenedetto, A. T.; Paul, D. R. An Interpretation of Gaseous Diffusion through Polymers Using 

Fluctuation Theory. J. Polym. Sci. A Gen. Pap. 1964, 2 (2), 1001–1015. 

(75)   Hahn, O.; Mooney, D. A.; Müller-Plathe, F.; Kremer, K. A New Mechanism for Penetrant 

Diffusion in Amorphous Polymers: Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Phenol Diffusion in 
Bisphenol-A-Polycarbonate. J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 111 (13), 6061–6068. 

(76)   Boshoff, J. H. D.; Lobo, R. F.; Wagner, N. J. Influence of Polymer Motion, Topology and 

Simulation Size on Penetrant Diffusion in Amorphous, Glassy Polymers:  Diffusion of Helium in 
Polypropylene. Macromolecules 2001, 34 (17), 6107–6116.  


