Electron-beam lithography of nanostructures at the tips of scanning probe cantilevers

L. Forrer1,2, A. Kamber1, A. Knoll3, M. Poggio1,2, and F. R. Braakman1,2,∗

1: Department of Physics, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland,
2: Swiss Nanoscience Institute, University of Basel, 4056 Basel, Switzerland and
3: IBM Research Europe - Z¨urich, 8803 Rueschlikon, Switzerland
(Dated: September 26, 2022)

We developed a process to fabricate nanoscale metallic gate electrodes on scanning probe cantilevers,
including on the irregular surface of protruding cantilever tips. The process includes a floating-layer
technique to coat the cantilevers in electron-beam resist. We demonstrate gate definition through
a lift-off process, as well as through an etching process.
The cantilevers maintain a high force
sensitivity after undergoing the patterning process. Our method allows the patterning of nanoscale
devices on fragile scanning probes, extending their functionality as sensors.

INTRODUCTION

Cantilevers are widely used in scanning probe mi-
croscopy, where they find application as force trans-
ducers in e.g. atomic force microscopy, magnetic force
microscopy, and kelvin probe microscopy [1].
These
cantilevers are usually optimized for mechanical prop-
erties [2], and include only simple tip design features.
Integration of more advanced sensors on cantilever tips
would allow the combination of extremely sensitive de-
tectors such as superconducting quantum interference de-
vices [3], single-electron transistors and quantum dot de-
vices [4, 5], and other quantum sensors with the nav-
igational toolbox that scanning probe microscopy can-
tilevers provide. Such advanced devices typically require
patterning of multiple metallic or superconducting gate
and contact electrodes of nanoscale dimensions.
Electron beam lithography (EBL) is a widespread tech-
nique to pattern nanoscale structures, such as gate elec-
trodes. EBL can achieve high patterning resolution, in
practice resulting in smallest feature sizes of ∼10 nm [6].
Moreover, EBL enables batch production and many stan-
dard recipes have been previously developed, facilitating
a fast fabrication development process and high device
yield. Typically, in EBL, a planar substrate is first spin-
coated with a resist, which is subsequently irradiated
with electrons, developed, and processed further. How-
ever, spin-coating of small samples and substrates with
non-flat surfaces does not provide a resist layer of accept-
able uniformity, due to effects such as edge-beading, lift-
off problems, and imperfect pattern transfer. Nonethe-
less, there are many applications where EBL on such ir-
regular substrates would be of interest.
Various other techniques of coating such substrates with
a resist layer exist, including spray coating [7], the use of
ice resists [8], evaporative methods [9], and resist transfer
techniques [10–12]. Furthermore, focused-ion or electron-
beam deposition [13] and milling methods can be used to
pattern irregular substrates. However, these techniques
are either slow, expensive, only demonstrated for pho-
toresist, or are not tailored towards patterning on frag-
ile substrates, such as scanning probe microscopy can-
tilevers, which are vulnerable suspended structures with

a length typically of the order of 100 µm and width and
thickness of only a few µm.
Based on an approach used for patterning on flakes of
2D materials [14], we developed a fabrication process
to pattern nanoscale structures on prefabricated can-
tilevers through EBL. The process involves coating the
cantilever with an electron-beam resist using a floating-
layer method.
We fabricate metallic gates on various
cantilever geometries, including on sloped and tipped
parts of the cantilevers. We demonstrate two methods of
gate definition: a lift-off process and an etching process.
By employing either a standard electron-beam irradia-
tion dose or a much higher dose, we use a poly(methyl
methacrylate) (PMMA) layer either as a (standard) pos-
itive resist for the lift-off process, or as a negative resist
for the etching process. The process allows us to pro-
duce gate arrays with gate width down to 70 nm and
pitch down to 90 nm. We have successfully applied the
method to pattern different types of cantilevers with good
reproducibility.

FLOATING PMMA METHOD

Fig. 1 schematically shows the key steps of our floating-
layer resist coating method.
First, a 15 % solution of
dextran in deionized (DI) water is deposited onto a clean
glass slide and spun at 2000 rpm for 40 s. Afterwards,
the slide is baked at 150 °C for 3 min. The desired resist
layer is then spin-coated on top of the dextran film. For
the work shown here, we employ as resist 4.5 % PMMA
with 950 K molecular weight dissolved in anisole (Allre-
sist AR-P 672.045). The PMMA is spun at 4000 rpm for
40 s and baked at 150 °C for 3 min, resulting in a resist
layer thickness of approximately 230 nm (Fig. 1a). Sub-
merging the prepared slide into DI water for about 15 min
causes the dextran film to dissolve (Fig. 1b). After this,
the slide is removed from the water, tilted by a small an-
gle, and slowly inserted back into the water. This causes
the PMMA to peel off the glass slide and float on the
water surface, as illustrated in Fig. 1c.
Next, the desired sample is fixed onto a metal holder. In
our case, we use a non-contact atomic force microscopy

arXiv:2209.11503v1  [physics.ins-det]  23 Sep 2022


2

PMMA
c
b

d
g
f
e

a

Dextran

Glass slide

Figure 1. Overview of resist-coating process. See main text for a step-by-step description of the process.

cantilever (NanoAndMore ATEC-NC) and fix it to an
aluminum square slide with Kapton tape (Fig. 1d). We
find that it is beneficial for the adhesion of the resist to
the sample to perform UV-ozone plasma treatment for
5 min. To coat the sample with the floating PMMA layer,
it is turned upside down (Fig. 1e) and slowly lowered into
the floating PMMA until the sample is fully submerged,
as shown in Fig. 1f. The sample is then removed from
the water at a small angle. To remove residual water, the
sample is first dried with tissues, followed by a baking
step at 150 °C for 3 min. This results in a sample which
is coated by a uniform layer of PMMA (Fig. 1g), with
minimal wrinkles or bubbles.
In the next sections, we use this method of resist trans-
fer to demonstrate EBL patterning of gate electrodes us-
ing a lift-off process, as well as using an etching process.
The lift-off process is an additive technique, where a thin
metallic layer is deposited on top of the patterned and de-
veloped positive resist. In a next step, the resist is washed
away in a solvent, leaving deposited material only in the
areas where the resist was exposed.
This technique is
useful when etching or metallization can damage parts of
the substrate material, for instance when producing elec-
trical contacts to semiconductor nanostructures or fragile
2D materials. The etching process is a subtractive tech-
nique, where a thin metallic layer is deposited onto the
sample prior to deposition of the resist.
The negative
resist is then patterned and developed, after which the
deposited layer is etched away only where the resist is not
exposed. Such an etching process avoids problems associ-
ated with lift-off, such as retention of residual resist and
deposited material in unwanted areas of the substrate,
and can produce finer structures than possible through
lift-off.

GATES ON CANTILEVERS - LIFT-OFF
PROCESS

In order to define gates using the lift-off process, we first
structure the non-contact AFM cantilever using focused
ion beam (FIB) milling. Originally, the slope of the AFM

tip with respect to the main cantilever surface is 54.7°, re-
sulting from the anisotropic KOH etching of silicon used
to fabricate the cantilevers.
We succesfully cover can-
tilevers with such large slope angles with PMMA and
perform EBL showing good pattern transfer after devel-
opment. However, with these large slope angles, we find
that the lift-off process does not fully remove the un-
exposed parts of the resist in the tip area. To improve
lift-off, we therefore prestructure the tip by milling away
part of it, adjusting its slope to ∼30° (see inset Fig. 3a).
We also mill away selective parts of the tip in this step,
resulting in a flat mesa at the top of the tip (see Fig. 2a),
which is used as a platform to host a set of parallel gate
electrodes. Note that structuring the cantilever tip area
can be done already during cantilever fabrication, allow-
ing to mass-produce cantilevers with the required tip ge-
ometry.
Before fabricating the gates, we use atomic layer depo-
sition (ALD) to cover the cantilever with a 60 nm thick
layer of Al2O3 (Fig. 2b), which later acts as an insulat-
ing layer between the metallic gates and the highly doped
silicon cantilever body. Using the floating-layer method
described before, we then coat cantilevers with PMMA
(Fig. 2c). Here, we coat the cantilevers with three lay-
ers of 950K PMMA resist, each spun at 4000 rpm for
40 s and baked at 150 °C for 3 min leading to a total re-
sist thickness of roughly 690 nm.
We align on charac-
teristic points of the cantilevers to define the markers

a
b
c

d
e
f

Si
Al2O3
PMMA
Ti/Pd

Figure 2. Protocol of gate patterning through lift-off process.
(a) Side view of the prepatterned flat mesa on a cantilever tip,
(b) mesa is covered with dielectric layer using ALD, (c) float-
ing PMMA transfer, (d) definition of gate pattern through
EBL, (e) electron beam evaporation of Ti/Pd, (f) lift-off yields
the desired nanostructures.


3

20 µm

 4 µm

40 µm

Side View
160°

 4 µm

 40 µm

 20 µm

Side View
150°

 a
 b

 4 µm

40 µm

 400 nm

Figure 3. Scanning electron micrographs of cantilevers with gates produced through lift-off process. (a) Tipped cantilever with
three Ti/Pd gates. Insets: zoom-in of tip area (top) and side view of cantilever tip part (bottom). (b) Flat cantilever with seven
large Au gates connected to five finer Ti/Pd gates in the front part of the cantilever. Insets: zoom-ins of front of cantilever,
showing finer gates. Note that the marker structures seen here are deposited together with the finer gates, and are used for
subsequent lithography not discussed here. Bottom inset is zoom-in of area delineated by white box in top inset. Note that
focussing of the electron beam on specific cantilever parts for alignment purposes results in selective additional metallization,
such as the rectangular piece on the right side of the cantilever in b).

(Ti/Au, 5 nm/50 nm) in a first standard EBL step. A
second EBL step is employed to define the gate patterns
(Fig. 2d), using the predefined markers. The resist is ex-
posed using an acceleration voltage of 30 kV and a dose of
375 µC cm−2, followed by development in isopropyl alco-
hol (IPA) : methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) (3:1) for 60 s
and IPA for 60 s. Afterwards, 5 nm Ti and 25 nm Pd are
deposited using an electron beam evaporator (Fig. 2e).
For lift-off, the sample is submerged in acetone for at
least 1 h at 50 °C (Fig. 2f).
Fig. 3 shows scanning electron micrographs of cantilevers
patterned with gates using our method. In Fig. 3a, the
tip is modified using FIB milling, as described. Three
gates with a width of 350 nm and pitch of 400 nm are
fabricated on the cantilever, including on the sloped tip
area. For Fig. 3b, we use one layer of resist (230 nm) and
pattern five nanoscale gates (width: 70 nm, pitch: 90 nm)
on a flat cantilever. The nanoscale gates are patterned
such that they connect to larger, prefabricated, contacts
which widen out to bondpads on the cantilever base.

GATES ON CANTILEVERS - ETCHING
PROCESS

In order to be able to fabricate gates on cantilever tips
with higher slopes, we developed an etching process

a
b
c

d
e
f

Si
Au
PMMA

Figure 4. Protocol of gate patterning through etching pro-
cess. (a) Side view of the prepatterned flat mesa on a can-
tilever tip, (b) electron beam evaporation of Au, (c) floating
PMMA transfer, (d) gates are patterned using overdosing of
PMMA, (e) argon ion beam etching transfers the pattern into
the Au layer, (f) the resist is removed using oxygen reactive
ion etching, yielding the desired nanostructures.

which does not require a lift-off step, thus avoiding prob-
lems due to incomplete material lift-off. By overdosing
the same type of PMMA as before, it can be used as a
negative resist [15] and act as a mask for pattern trans-
fer through subsequent etching. This process is there-
fore complementary to the one described before and more
suitable for removing large parts of a metallic film.
Fig. 4 schematically shows our top-down fabrication
strategy to fabricate on a steep slope, as for example
on the 54.7° slope of commercially available tipped can-
tilevers. As before, we start with such a cantilever where
a mesa is cut using FIB (Fig. 4a), to host the nanoscale


4

4 µm

1 µm

Figure 5. Scanning electron micrograph of tipped end of can-
tilever, patterned with gate array defined through etching pro-
cess.

gates at the end of the cantilever tip. Next, 20 nm of Au
is deposited using an electron-beam evaporator (Fig. 4b).
As shown in the work of Cai et al. [15], overdosing a con-
ventionally positive PMMA resist allows to use it as a
negative resist. To coat our lever, we use the technique
described in Fig. 1 (Fig. 4c).
Next, the PMMA layer
is exposed to electron beam radiation at a high dose of
80 000 µC cm−2 using an acceleration voltage of 30 kV.
Afterwards, the sample is developed in acetone for 10 min
and in IPA for 2 min (Fig. 4d). Then, argon ion beam
etching (60 s at 0° angle and 60 s at 40° angle, 500 V,
20 mA) is used to transfer the pattern of the negative
PMMA resist to the Au film (Fig. 4e). The last step of
the process is to remove the overexposed PMMA, which
is done by using oxygen reactive ion etching for 10 min
at 120 W (Fig. 4f). Fig. 5 shows a scanning electron mi-
crograph of a cantilever patterned using the described
etching process. Five gates of 100 nm width and 180 nm
pitch are fabricated on the tipped end of the cantilever
featuring the original 54.7° slope.

MECHANICAL PROPERTIES

For the cantilevers to maintain their function as sensi-
tive scanning probe force transducers, it is important
that their mechanical properties remain unaffected by
the lithography processes. To evaluate this, we measure
(in high vacuum, at room temperature) the resonance
frequency and quality factor of the first flexural mode of
a cantilever, before and after processing. We measure the

quality factor using a ringdown method. Before process-
ing, we measure a tipped cantilever with a quality factor
of 80 k and a resonance frequency of 306.8 kHz. Next,
we test the effect of our floating PMMA coating and lift-
off process, first without any metal deposition.
Here,
we find no significant change in resonance frequency or
quality factor. Finally, we measure after performing the
lift-off process, this time with deposition of 5 nm Ti and
25 nm Pd gates, as in Fig. 3a. Now, the resonance fre-
quency is decreased to 301.4 kHz and the quality factor to
70 k. The decrease of the resonance frequency is expected
due to the higher mass of the cantilever. The decrease
in quality factor results in a modest decrease of thermal
force sensitivity by <15 %.

OUTLOOK

In future work, the resolution of the gate patterns could
be improved by the use of thinner PMMA layers, or by
etching down the developed PMMA layer before pattern
transfer [15]. An interesting use of our method would
be to pattern superconducting devices, such as super-
conducting quantum interference devices [3] or charge
qubits [16] of small dimensions, on cantilever tips. This
would enable sensitive imaging of nanoscale magnetic
fields and charge dynamics with high resolution, for in-
stance in 2D materials [17] or qubit devices [18]. Finally,
although not tested here, our method could be used to
perform EBL on various other types of samples with ir-
regular surfaces, e.g. to pattern nanostructures on the
facets of cleaved optical fibers.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Ute Drechsler, Nadine Leisgang, and Marcus
Wyss for helpful discussions and technical support. We
acknowledge the support of the Swiss National Science
Foundation via the NCCR SPIN, the Canton Aargau,
and the European Commission under H2020 FET Open
grant ”FIBsuperProbes” (Grant No. 892427).


5

[1] E. Meyer, R. Bennewitz, H. Hug, Scanning probe mi-
croscopy, Second edition (Springer, 2021).

[2] F. Giessibl, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 949 (2003).
[3] M. Wyss, K. Bagani, D. Jetter, E. Marchiori, A. Verve-
laki, B. Gross, J. Ridderbos, S. Gliga, C. Sch¨onenberger,
and M. Poggio, Phys. Rev. Appl. 17, 034002 (2022).

[4] I. Khivrich and S. Ilani, Nat. Commun. 11, 2299 (2020).
[5] M. Yoo, T. Fulton, H. Hess, R. Willett, L. Dunkleberger,
R. Chichester, L. Pfeiffer, and K. West, Science 276, 579
(1997).

[6] C. Vieu, F. Carcenac, A. Pepin, Y. Chen, M. Mejias, A.
Lebib, L. Manin-Ferlazzo, L. Couraud, H. Launois, Appl.
Surf. Sci. 164, 111 (2000).

[7] J. Linden, C. Thanner, B. Schaaf, S. Wolff, B. L¨agel, and
E. Oesterschulze, Microelectron. Eng. 88, 2030 (2011).

[8] A. Han, A. Kuan, J. Golovchenko, D. Branton, Nano
Lett. 12, 1018 (2012).

[9] J. Zhang, C. Con, and B. Cui ACS Nano 8, 3483 (2014).

[10] M. Nilsen, F. Port, M. Roos, K. Gottschalk, and S.
Strehle, J. Micromech. Microeng. 29, 025014 (2019).

[11] J. Chang, Q. Zhou, and A. Zettl, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105,
173109 (2014).

[12] H. Zhou, B. K. Chong, P. Stopford, G. Mills, A. Midha,
L. Donaldson, and J. M. R. Weaver, J. Vac. Sci. Technol.
B 18, 3594 (2000).

[13] M. Jaafar, J. Pablo-Navarra, E. Berganza, P. Ares, C.
Mag´en, A. Masseboeuf, C. Gatel, E. Snoeck, J. G´omez-
Herrero, J. de Teresa, and A. Asenjo, Nanoscale 12,
10090 (2020).

[14] N. M. Leisgang, Doctoral dissertation (2021).
[15] H. Cai, K. Zhang, and X. Yu, AIP Adv. 5, 117216 (2015).
[16] B. J¨ack, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 043031 (2020).
[17] E. Marchiori, L. Ceccarelli. N. Rossi, L. Lorenzelli, C.
Degen, and M. Poggio, Nat. Rev. Phys. 4, 49 (2021).

[18] E. Marchiori, L. Ceccarelli. N. Rossi, G. Romagnoli, J.
Herrmann, J. Besse, S. Krinner, A. Wallraff, and M. Pog-
gio,, Appl. Phys. Lett. 121, 052601 (2022).


