Effect of Sn on generalized stacking fault energy surfaces in zirconium and its
hydrides

P. Chakraborty1, I. Mouton2, B. Gault1,3, A. Tehranchi1, J. Neugebauer1, T. Hickel1,4

1-Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Eisenforschung GmbH, D-40237 D¨usseldorf, Germany

2-Universit´e Paris-Saclay, CEA, Service de Recherches M´etallurgiques Appliqu´ees, 91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

3-Department of Materials, Imperial College, South Kensington, London SW7 2AZ, UK

4-BAM Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing, 12489 Berlin, Germany

Abstract

Hydrogen embrittlement in Zr alloy fuel cladding is a primary safety concern for water based nuclear

reactors. Here we investigated the stabilisation of planar defects within the forming hydrides by Sn,

the primary alloying element of Zircaloy-4 used in the cladding. In order to explain formation of

hydrides and planar defects observed in our experiments, we performed atomic-scale ab initio calcula-

tions focusing on the solute interactions with generalized stacking faults in hcp α-Zr and fcc zirconium

hydrides. Our calculations showed that an increase in Sn concentration leads to a stabilisation of

stacking faults in both α-Zr and hydride phases. However, the solution enthalpy of Sn is lower in

the α-Zr as compared to the other hydride phases indicative of two competing processes of Sn deple-

tion/enrichment at the Zr hydride/matrix interface. This is corroborated by experimental findings,

where Sn is repelled by hydrides and is mostly found trapped at interfaces and planar defects indicative

of stacking faults inside the hydride phases. Our systematic investigation enables us to understand

the presence and distribution of solutes in the hydride phases, which provides a deeper insight into

the microstructural evolution of such alloy’s properties during its service lifetime.

Keywords:
zirconium, hydrides, solute Sn, generalized stacking faults energies, ab initio, cladding

1. Introduction

Zirconium-based alloys are commonly used as fuel cladding material in the core of nuclear power

reactors because of their low thermal neutron capture cross section and good corrosion resistance [1].

While in operation, the fuel cladding is in contact with water, which promotes the oxidation of Zr [2].

This process releases free hydrogen, part of which enters the alloy and gives rise to the formation

of hydrides once the solid solubility limit has been exceeded [3]. This can have a detrimental effect

on the integrity and longevity of the material, as it can lead to the degradation of the mechanical

strength through various defect nucleation processes and defect evolution leading to embrittlement [4].

The wide use of zirconium alloys in nuclear power reactors has motivated numerous studies on pure

zirconium and zirconium hydrides over the past few decades [3, 5–7]. These large efforts to elucidate

Preprint submitted to Elsevier
September 20, 2022

arXiv:2209.09147v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  19 Sep 2022


hydride properties are related to the ingress of hydrogen during service in pressure and boiling water

reactors, during transport and storage. At low temperatures and pressures, zirconium is known to

have a hexagonal-close-packed (HCP) structure that is commonly referred to as the α-phase. The low

H solubility limit in zirconium and the thermodynamics of the Zr-H alloy system favors the formation

of brittle hydrides, which gives rise to severe safety issues [8–14]. Three main hydride phases have

been reported. The δ-phase is a non-stoichiometric phase with a face-centered-cubic (FCC) structure,

in which the regular lattice sites are occupied by the Zr atoms and the tetrahedral interstitial sites

are randomly occupied by hydrogen. Depending on the temperature, the hydrogen content of the

δ-ZrHx phase varies in the interval 1.4 < x < 1.7. Increasing the H content beyond this upper limit

leads to the formation of ε-ZrH2, which is a face-centred tetragonal (FCT) structure with a unit cell

having c < a. Another well-known phase is the γ-ZrH phase, which is a FCT structure with c > a,

usually considered as metastable. It is also frequently observed in non-equilibrium precipitation after

quenching from a solid solution. Recent works [15–17] have identified a new hydride phase ζ probably

with a composition close to Zr2H and metastable like γ.

Hydride nucleation and growth processes involve dislocation behaviors, including dissociation,

spreading motion, recombination and cross-slip, in the basal plane of the α-Zr lattice [3, 18–20]. Recent

observations by atom probe tomography (APT) on Zircaloy-4 following electrochemical hydrogen

charging motivated the extensive ab-initio calculations of the present work. We sought to explain the

distribution of the primary alloying element of Zircaloy-4, Sn, in a microstructure containing a hcp Zr

lattice and with zirconium hydrides by focusing in particular on the solute interactions with stacking

faults. Our results shed light onto the stabilisation of crystalline defects by alloying elements during

the growth of hydrides that can further contribute to the material’s embrittlement.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Experimental Details

Details of the experiments underlying this work can be found in Refs. [21, 22]. In short, plates of

Zircalloy 4 with a blocky-α microstructure [23] were electrochemically charged by using a solution of

1.5 wt. % H2SO4 in H2O at 65 ○C for 24 h (all details are in [21]). The thick hydride surface layer was

dissolved and the hydrogen homogenised throughout the alloy by annealing at 400 ○C for 5 h. The

sample was left to cool in the furnace cooling at approximately 0.5 ○C/min to promote the formation of

both intra- and intergranular hydrides. Specimens for atom probe tomography analysis were prepared

using a FEI Helios dual-beam xenon plasma focused ion beam (PFIB), using the protocol proposed

in Ref. [24], with the final stage of sharpening performed at cryogenic temperature to avoid hydride

formation during the preparation as reported previously [22, 25]. APT analyses were performed on

a CAMECA LEAP 5000 XR, operated in laser pulsing mode, with specimens maintained at a base

temperature of 50 K.

2


2.2. Computational Details

The theoretical investigations were designed to be compared directly to the experimental results.

The calculations were carried out using projector augmented wave (PAW) potentials as implemented

in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) [26, 27].
The PBE [28] exchange-correlation

functional was chosen. A plane-wave cutoff of 500 eV is considered for all calculations. The convergence

tolerance of atomic forces is 0.01 eV/ ˚A and of total energies it is 10−6 eV. The k-point sampling was

conducted by a Γ-centred Monkhorst-Pack scheme. The sampling density was set large enough that

the convergence of total energies was within 2 meV per atom. The Brillouin-zone integration was

made using the Methfessel–Paxton smearing.

In the present work, bulk properties of α-Zr such as the lattice constant and the solution enthalpy of

Sn were calculated as a function of its concentrations. The solution enthalpy ∆Es of m substitutional

Sn atoms was calculated as

∆Es = E(Zrn−mSnmHnx) − (n − m)E(ZrHx) − mxE(H) − mE(Sn)
(1)

where E(Zrn−mSnmHnx) is the total energy of a α-Zr or Zr-hydride system consisting of n−m Zr atoms

and m substitutional Sn atoms. The chemical potential of hydrogen, E(H), has been determined as the

concentration dependent energy difference in the δ-hydride. The same chemical potential of hydrogen

has been assumed for the other hydrides, because its determination is more complex in ordered phases.

Alternatively, the hydride reference could be replaced by −nE(ZrHx)+mE(Zr), shifting the reference

to the chemical potential of Zr. Eventhough, changing the two references changes the absolute values

for the solution enthalpy by up to 1 eV, we have ensured that our qualitative results do not depend on

the specific choice. The energy E(Sn) is determined for the I41/amd β-Sn system, but this choice is

not relevant when comparing the Sn solublity in different phases. Full volume relaxation was performed

in all calculations.

A slab supercell was constructed, separated by 10 ˚A of vacuum from its periodic image, to calculate

the generalized stacking fault (GSF) energies. The slab is divided into two blocks of equal atomic layers.

When the upper block is subject to a relative displacement by an arbitrary vector, f, parallel to the

slip plane as shown in Fig. 2(a), the shifted structure will have a fault energy E(f). When various slip

displacements, f, are applied in the plane of the cut, E(f) generates a surface which represents the

fault-energy map against the applied displacements. This fault-energy map is the GSF energy surface

EGSF (f) = E(f) − E(f = 0)

A
(2)

where A is the area of the glide plane of the supercell. The size and shape of the supercell were

never changed with slip displacements.
For further reference, the coverage ratio C is defined for

substitutional atoms adjacent to the slip plane. For example, when C is equal to 0.25 in Fig. 2a then

one out of four atoms in the glide plane is substituted.

3


Three hydrides are studied in this work, the metastable ζ phase, which later transforms into δ-

ZrHx, is also observed in experiments [29]. The δ-phase is known to have an FCC structure with

tetrahedral interstitial sites being randomly occupied by hydrogen. To model such compounds at

finite temperatures, one can employ configurational cluster expansion techniques [30, 31]. The special

quasi-random structure (SQS) method is sufficient when the focus is on the fully random alloy, i.e.,

if the impact of short-range order can be assumed negligible. The properties predicted by the SQS

approach will be closer to the properties of the true random alloy with increased SQS size. Therefore,

for simplicity and consistency with the other considered phases in this work, we approximate the

δ-phase to be a disordered alloy modelled based on ZrH2 hydride, where the H atoms occupy only

six tetrahedral sites keeping the remaining two tetrahedral sites vacant. In other words, the hydride

phases ZrHx are studied as a function of the H content x.

3. Results and Discussions

3.1. Experimental Results

Figure 1 shows an APT dataset from the same set of analyses as reported in Ref. [22]. This data

was obtained from the region ahead of the growth front of an intergranular hydride that has grown

perpendicularly to a GB. Sn is repelled from the growing hydrides and segregates in a few layers of the

blocky-α Zircaloy-4 matrix at the interface to the δ-hydrides. This agrees with existing experimental

studies [22, 32] that also reported the repulsion of Sn from hydrides and the presence of an intermediate

ζ Zr-hydride layer at the interface between the δ-hydride and the α−Zr matrix. We have observed a

series of planar features at the hydride/matrix interface, which appear segregated with Sn and were

interpreted as stacking faults in the α−Zr matrix [22], as readily visible in Fig 1a.

Hence, the composition profile in Fig. 1c shows that while Sn is repelled locally from the hydrides as

they grow, it eventually gets trapped in planar features present in the hydrides. Fig. 1e demonstrates

that the trapping of Sn to planar features is not limited to ζ hydride, but applies to δ hydride as well.

It is further documented from transmission electron microscopy (TEM) that the stacking faults start

growing ahead of the hydrides. The crucial question we ask here is the reason behind such an increase

in accumulation of Sn in planar features, while the solubility inside the hydrides is apparently small

(Fig. 1). Henceforth, the interaction of Sn with the α-Zr matrix and with the hydrides are evaluated

separately in presence of stacking faults and the comparison is used to explain the mechanisms behind

the observations.

3.2. Simulation Results

3.2.1. α-Zr and Sn solid solution

To understand and explain why our experiments show a lower solubility of Sn inside the hydrides as

compared to the Zr matrix, but at the same time a substantial increase in the Sn concentration along

4


Figure 1: a) APT reconstructed image of a sample that shows a hydride pocket in between the two grains denoted as

alpha 1 and alpha 2. b) the zoomed portion of the APT needle where the composition profile of Sn is evaluated. c)

Composition profile of Sn taken perpendicularly to the Sn-rich plates which shows the Sn rich regions in the ζ hydride.

d) another region of the APT needle is shown which contains the trapped Sn rich plates (shown in green) inside the

interconnected hydride regions(shown in yellow). e) the corresponding composition profile of Sn is shown which is trapped

inside the δ hydride.

5


Table 1: Lattice parameters (˚A) of α-Zr and β-Sn compared with other DFT works [33] and experimental values [34]

System
Present
Theory
Exp

α-Zr (a/c)
3.23/5.17
3.23/5.17
3.23/5.14

β-Sn (a/c)
5.95/3.21
5.94/3.21
5.83/3.18

planar features we have performed ab initio simulations. As a first step, the bulk phase of α-Zr and Sn

solid solution are considered. Table 1 shows the lattice constants of α-Zr and β-Sn obtained using the

present DFT calculations, which are in good agreement with reported values in the literature [33, 34].

All supercells have been constructed by using these lattice parameters as initial values. Subsequently,

the effect of changing the atomic concentration of Sn from 1.04 to 8.33 at.% has been studied. The

solution enthalpy of Sn in α-Zr is calculated to be -1.15 eV, the energy gained by the Sn atom with

reference to its bulk phase. Here, the supercell is chosen such that one Zr atom is substituted by Sn

in a (0001) plane containing eight Zr atoms.

In order to understand the interaction of Sn with planar defects, we follow the above mentioned

assumptions and analyze the generalized stacking fault (GSF) energies obtained by inducing a transla-

tional slip along the [01¯10] direction. Doing this, the system encounters a high-symmetry configuration

at translation b/3; b being the Burgers vector in the [01¯10] direction. The corresponding local mini-

mum is commonly known as the stable stacking fault (SSF). The energy barrier that precedes the SSF

is termed as unstable stacking fault (USF) energy. The SSF is of significant importance in determin-

ing the quantitative character of the plastic deformation. A reduction in the SSF indicates enhanced

dissociation of the dislocation core in the basal plane, while for the USF energy it indicates a reduction

of lattice resistance to dislocation motion.

The GSF properties in pure α-Zr are in very good agreement with existing literature values [35].

The impact of Sn atoms that are substituted in the glide plane only is shown in Fig 2. For 50%

coverage of Sn atoms at the glide plane, we have considered the results for three stable configurations

as shown in Fig. 3. For 37.5% coverage, a larger simulation cell is considered that is 3 out of 8 atoms on

the plane is a Sn atom. Accordingly, there can be several configurations, here we have compared five

configurations with different energies. For these two cases, the SFE plots in Fig 2 represents the mean

of the possible configurations for each displacement. The probability for a possible configuration is

determined by the statistics of Sn segregation and is therefore approximated by a Boltzmann average

at 400○C, annealing temperature [21, 22] at each displacement corresponding to a particular coverage

value C.

The dependence of the unstable and stable stacking fault energies on Sn coverage are depicted in

Fig. 4. With the substitution of Sn atoms in pure Zr we notice a monotonous decrease of the energy

for stacking fault configurations with C < 0.4. This indicates that the presence of Sn stabilizes the

6


Figure 2: (left) Schematic view of GSF calculations for the basal plane in α-Zr.
The figure represents the shifted

structure when the upper part of the initial configuration is glided along the [01¯10] direction in the {0001} basal plane.

The coverage ratio of the glide plane, C, is evaluated inside the marked plane. (right) Calculated GSF energies along

the [01¯10] γ line for pure α-Zr and α-Zr with Sn atoms in the glide plane for different coverage ratios C as marked in

the figure. The dashed lines for Sn coverage C = 0.375 and C =0.5 at the glide plane denotes the Boltzmann average at

each slip displacement at 400○C [21, 22]. The data points are connected using spline fitting.

Figure 3: SSF energy for various configurations of Sn atoms belonging to a coverage-ratio of (left) C = 0.375 and

(right) C = 0.5. A snapshot of the fault plane at the stacking fault is shown for each configuration. The green spheres

represent the host Zr atoms and red spheres are the Sn atoms, two different atomic planes are shown with lighter shade

corresponding to the fixed atomic plane with Sn atoms. The plot provides the stability of the SSFE of Zr–Sn binary

systems with respect to a clustering of Sn atoms in the glide plane. The horizontal dashed line is the Boltzmann average

of the datapoints at 400○C (annealing temperature [21, 22]).

7


stacking fault structure in α-Zr. At the same time, this means that Sn tends to segregate to these

planar defects. Indeed, the solution enthalpy of single Sn in the (0001) plane with 8 atoms (C = 0.125)

is lower at the SF (-1.45 eV) as compared to pure Zr without fault (-1.15 eV). Fig. 2 indicates that

this segregation effect is strongest for the translation b/3 and, for example, much smaller at the USF

(see Fig. 4). Therefore, Sn indeed stabilizes the SSF. At any of the other defect configurations along

the glide plane the stabilisation effect is small and can be neglected. This is further supported by the

segregation energy profile of Sn atoms with planar coverage C in the GP as seen in the inset of Fig. 4.

Furthermore, both USE and SFE increase again significantly towards C = 1, and there is an optimum

coverage of the glide plane for less than half of a monolayer of Sn atoms.

3.2.2. Zirconium hydrides and Sn

We will now focus on the effect of Sn on the GSF in the different hydride systems. Similar to the

previous analysis in α-Zr, Zr is substituted by Sn on the GP in the hydrides for various coverage ratios.

We first note that the calculated solution enthalpy of Sn in δ-hydride is 1.81 eV, which is positive,

clearly supporting our earlier statement of the larger solubility in α-Zr, where the value was -1.15 eV.

The GSF energy profiles are plotted along the ⟨¯211⟩ direction in the fcc {111} plane for the

hydrides. As shown in Fig 5b, the GSF energy is found to be the highest for the ε-hydride followed by

δ-ZrH1.5. This correlates almost linearly with the H concentration in these phases, while there is at

the same time a linear correlation with the c/a ratio in the different phases. Atoms are closely packed

in the fcc structure. However, H occupies all its tetrahedral positions in ZrH2, whereas δ-ZrH1.5 has

in our calculations two H vacancies in the supercell. This increases the chance of a distortion of the

Figure 4: Fault energies of the stable stacking fault (SSF, red circles) and unstable stacking-fault (USF, blue squares) of

an α-Zr lattice in the basal plane as a function of the coverage-ratio C with Sn. The inset shows the segregation energy

of Sn atoms with the corresponding coverage ratio C to the SSF, where negative values indicate attraction.

8


Figure 5: a)–d) GSF energy profiles along [¯211] direction in the fcc {111} plane : a)comparison of the USF energy and

the SSF energy is shown in this plot between the three hydrides without any solute atoms. b) - d) GSF energy profile

for ε-ZrH2, δ-Zr2H3 and γ-ZrH for pure hydride and with substituted Sn atoms with different coverage ratio in the GP

are plotted respectively.

Figure 6: a) Influence of H vacancy in pure ε-ZrH2 and hydride with Sn coverage of 0.166 at the glide plane is compared

here. b) The corresponding vacancy formation energy is shown.

9


lattice along the low energy {111} path by reducing the repulsive forces between the H atoms observed

in the δ-hydride phase, rendering a lower fault energy.

The GSF energy profiles of the three hydrides are plotted in Fig. 5 for glides along the fcc (111)

plane with and without Sn atoms. In the case of the ε-hydride it is seen from Fig. 5b that the GSF

has the highest energies among all the other hydrides without any Sn atom, but also shows for Sn

coverages in the range C = 0 - 0.33 the strongest decrease of the SFE with increasing Sn concentration.

For (unrealistically) high coverage ratios of more than 50% in the GP the lattice becomes even

unstable. For the case of γ-ZrH as shown in Fig. 5d the USF and SSF are less prominent as compared

to ε-ZrH2. The introduction of Sn in the lowest concentration further results in flattening the energy

curve. This may be attributed to the fact that H is only occupying 50% of the available interstitial

sites thereby resulting in reduced repulsion and enhanced mobility in the lattice structure. The GSF

energy profiles of γ-hydride show a less systematic dependence on the Sn content as compared to the

other hydrides, since Sn increases the GSFE for small displacements and the typical decrease is only

observed for the SSF as well as larger displacements. Again, an unrealistic coverage ratio of C = 0.5

yields a structural instability.

Since the effect of Sn is most substantial for the ε-ZrH2 hydride and its SSF, Sn has a strong

segregation effect to stacking faults in particular in regions with high H concentrations. Also in the

other hydrides with different H content, the addition of Sn yields a substantial softening of the energy

profiles particularly for the SSF, but the effect is less pronounced. To convince ourselves that the

amount of hydrogen is decisive for the differences between the hydrides and not, for example, the

c/a ratio, we have analyzed the Sn impact in ε-ZrH2 with and without a hydrogen vacancy. Fig. 6a

compares the GSF energy profiles with 1.66 atm% coverage of Sn with the pristine case of the hydride

without Sn and with/without a H vacancy at the GP. The fault energy for the pristine hydride is more

strongly lowered by Sn in the absence of a H vacancy as compared to the presence of a vacancy.

Another way of interpreting these results is the explicit evaluation of the H vacancy formation en-

ergy of ε-ZrH2 with and without Sn as shown in Fig 6b. It is seen that independent of the deformation,

the vacancy formation energy of H is much lower in the presence of Sn as compared to pristine ε-ZrH2.

This indicates that Sn is strongly attracted by these vacancies. The segregation to the stacking faults

is, therefore, mainly a consequence of avoiding H-rich environments as present in the bulk hydride

phases. Indeed the positive solution enthalpy of Sn in δ-hydride (1.81 eV) is substantially reduced to

-0.59 eV, when stacking faults are present inside the hydride.

4. Discussions

The results outlined in the previous section suggest a complex interplay of the composition-

dependent formation energies of planar defects and the segregation behaviour of Sn solutes in all

relevant phases. Together, these insights explain the experimentally observed phenomena reported

10


Figure 7: a)-d)Schematic illustration of a mechanism for the evolving microstructure showing a time evolution of hydrides

(yellow shading) and the role of stacking faults (black symbols). The distribution and interaction of Sn is depicted by

green dots and green arrows. The labels 1, 2, 3 correspond to the steps indicated in Fig. 8.

above, in particular the accumulation of Sn at planar features in the hydrides. As outlined in the last

section, the direct segregation of Sn atoms solved in the hydride to the forming stacking faults, is one

possible mechanism. The moderate annealing at 400 ○C for 5 h will, however, limit the kinetics of

segregation.

An alternative mechanism for the microstructural evolution next to a grain boundary (GB) is

schematically depicted in Fig. 7.
Since hydrogen accumulates at the GB, it leads to the growth

of a local hydride phase. Based on the variation in the H concentration, the experiments indicate

the presence of an intermediate, metastable ζ-phase in addition to the stable hydride phases. Our

simulations show, however, that the qualitative conclusions are largely independent of the hydrogen

concentration. We consistently observe for all hydride phases that the solution enthalpy of Sn is larger

than in the α-Zr phase (Fig. 8). The resulting local Sn depletion in the region of the forming hydride

can be accommodated by a Sn enrichment in the moving interface to the matrix as depicted by the

green arrows in Fig. 7c. This is also confirmed by the APT composition profile of Sn shown in Fig. 1c.

It is assumed that this process is kinetically more likely than the diffusion in the bulk hydride phase

itself.

Next to the hydrides the formation of planar defects has been observed. The presence of stacking

faults could be explained by a strain accumulation, originating from the lattice mismatch between the

forming hydride and α-Zr matrix. Wang et al. [36] previously showed that α-Zr grains within such

hydride pockets exhibit a difference in orientation compared to the parent grain. Therefore, further

growth of the hydride can be attributed to a large strain induced deformation, which causes stacking

faults to propagate from the interface into the matrix.

As the stacking faults grow into α-Zr, they get stabilised by the presence of Sn as suggested by

the above calculations. As a consequence, the Sn atoms that are accumulated locally at the growth

front of the hydride are attracted to the stacking faults as depicted schematically in Fig 7b (step 2).

The DFT results have shown (Fig. 4) that the trapping of Sn occurs up to an optimum coverage well

11


Figure 8: Solution enthalpy of Sn in pure Zr and the considered hydride phases with different H content ZrHx. The

solution enthalpy in the corresponding bulk phases (red symbols) and at the stacking faults (blue symbols) are compared.

Two possible mechanisms are indicated by a yellow arrow with label 0 and green arrows for the steps 1, 2, and 3 underlying

the schematic process in Fig. 7.

below 50 atm%. While the hydride continues growing, this enrichment of Sn in certain layers will be

transferred into this phase. Since an attractive interaction of Sn and SFs is observed for the hydride

phases, the planar distribution of Sn atoms will impose the formation of stacking faults (step 3).

The energetics of this mechanism is depicted in terms of the Sn solution enthalpy in Fig. 8. The

yellow arrow with label “0” indicates the direct segregation of Sn atoms solved in the hydrides to

stacking faults within the same phases. In the alternative multi-step mechanism, step 1 indicates the

thermodynamic driving force for Sn redistribution into α-Zr during the structural transformation from

Zr to the hydride phase. The segregation to stacking faults at the interface happens in step 2. Hence,

there is an expected accumulation of Sn atoms at the interface due to the atomic rearrangements.

Step 3 is the transfer of Sn from a stacking fault in α-Zr into a stacking fault in the δ-hydride. It is

denoted by a dashed arrow, because the increase in solution enthalpy indicates a missing driving force

for Sn diffusion in this direction. Instead the step is determined by the transformation of the matrix

phase into the hydride phase and the subsequent formation of stacking faults therein due to the Sn

enrichment. The driving force for Sn to find its way out of the hydride again (opposite direction of

arrow 3), is much reduced as compared to the one in step 1. Additionally, the corresponding kinetics

of the Sn atoms is assumed to be slower as well.

The overall change in the solution enthalpy is the same for both mechanisms.
However, the

comparison of the solution enthalpies of Sn in stacking faults of α−Zr and hydrides (Fig. 8) reveals

that the driving force for Sn to stacking faults is much stronger in the hydrides (step 0) than in the Zr

12


matrix (step 2). As a consequence, Sn atoms effectively push the SFs into the hydrides. This explains

the experimentally observed planar defects covered with Sn inside the hydrides, as schematically

depicted in Fig 7d. The orientation relationship between the matrix and the hydride as observed in

the experiments is {0001}α∥{111}δ, similar to the SF planes considered for DFT calculations. However,

since the stacking sequence of basal planes in the SSF of hcp Zr is fcc like and the stacking sequence of

(111) planes in the SSF of fct hydrides is hcp like, there is not a simple continuation of the SFs between

the two phases. It is more likely that the Sn enrichment stabilizes some of the hcp Zr structure in the

vicinity of the original stacking faults.

In general, the introduction of Sn in hydrides lowers the SFE depending on the structural symmetry

and therefore reduces the structural stability.
The reduction effect by Sn is increasing with the

hydrogen content in the hydride phases. At the same time, the stacking fault energy under Sn free

conditions is also increasing with the Sn content. Therefore, the overall impact of Sn containing SFs

on structural stability and deformation mechanisms is comparable in all hydrides.

5. Conclusion

In summary, using ab initio simulations of the effect of Sn on the stacking faults in hcp α-Zr

and in fcc zirconium hydrides allowed us to propose an interesting multi-step mechanisms for the

microstructure formation during hydride growth in Zircaloy-4. The DFT simulations of the hcp α-

Zr phase showed that an increase in Sn concentration leads to a stabilisation of the stacking fault

structure up to a optimal coverage of 40 atm % of the glide plane. A similar attraction to stacking

faults is also observed in the fcc hydride phases.

The dominant contribution to the thermodynamic driving force of Sn to segregate to stacking faults

is its interaction with H. Sn shows a much lower solubility in Zr-hydrides than in pure α-Zr, while

the presence of H vacancies improves the solubility ε-ZrH2. The trend continues with an increasing

number of H vacancies in the hydrides, yielding lower stacking fault energies in γ-ZrH as compared to

ε-ZrH2.

From the experiment it is seen that a series of hydrides is formed at each side of the GB. Small

pockets of pure Zr are found along side the hydride phases. With our analysis we understand not

only a Sn decoration of stacking faults, but also the reason for the formation of stacking faults inside

the hydride. The chemical stabilization of the defects by Sn, which would otherwise not be present,

belongs to the category of defect phases [37] that are currently reported for various materials systems

[38].

6. Acknowledgement

IM and BG are grateful for the Max-Planck Society and the BMBF for the funding of the Laplace

and the UGSLIT projects respectively, for both instrumentation and personnel.
BG and PC are

13


grateful for financial support from the ERC-CoG-SHINE-771602. Prof. Ben Britton and Dr. Siyang

Wang are gratefully acknowledged for the collaborative experimental work on Zr-hydrides and deu-

terides, which were prepared and analysed in depth as part of HexMat (EP/K034332/1) and MIDAS

(EPSRC EP/SO1720X) programme grants. AT, TH and JN acknowledge financial support by the

Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft within the CRC1394 “Structural and chemical atomic complexity

– from defect phase diagrams to material properties”.

References

[1] C. Lemaignan, A. T. Motta, Materials Science and Technology, Part II:Nuclear Materials (3rd

edn), Vol. 10B, VCH Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, 1994.

[2] C. Proff, S. Abolhassani, C. Lemaignan, Oxidation behaviour of binary zirconium alloys contain-

ing intermetallic precipitates, Journal of Nuclear Materials 416 (2011) 125–134.

[3] J. Bradbrook, G. Lorimer, N. Ridley, The precipitation of zirconium hydride in zirconium and

zircaloy-2, Journal of Nuclear Materials 42 (1972) 142–160.

[4] T. P. Chapman, D. Dye, D. Rugg, Hydrogen in Ti and Zr alloys: industrial perspective, failure

modes and mechanistic understanding, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 375

(2017) 20160418.

[5] K. G. Barraclough, C. J. Beevers, Some observations on the deformation characteristics of bulk

polycrystalline zirconium hydrides, Journal of Material Sciences 4 (1969) 518–525.

[6] J.-J. Won, S.-J. Min, K.-T. Kim, Cooldown-induced hydride reorientation of hydrogen-charged

zirconium alloy cladding tubes, Metals and Materials International 21 (2015) 31–42.

[7] D. O. Northwood, U. Kosasih, Hydrides and delayed hydrogen cracking in zirconium and its

alloys, International Metals Reviews 28 (1983) 92–121.

[8] M. P. Puls, The Effect of Hydrogen and Hydrides on the Integrity of Zirconium Alloy Compo-

nents(1st edn), Springer, London, 2012.

[9] S. Banerjee, P. Mukhopadhyay, Phase Transformations, Vol. 12, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2007.

[10] J. Bair, M. Asle Zaeem, M. Tonks, A review on hydride precipitation in zirconium alloys, Journal

of Nuclear Materials 466 (2015) 12–20.

[11] M. P. Puls, Elastic and plastic accommodation effects on metal-hydride solubility, Perspectives

in Hydrogen in Metals (1986) 173–183.

14


[12] V. Perovic, G. Weatherly, C. Simpson, The role of elastic strains in the formation of stacks of

hydride precipitates in zirconium alloys, Scripta Metallurgica 16 (1982) 409–412.

[13] J. Bai, C. Prioul, D. Francois, Hydride embrittlement in ZIRCALOY-4 plate: Part i. influence of

microstructure on the hydride embrittlement in ZIRCALOY-4 at 20○C and 350○C, Metallurgical

and materials transactions A 25 (1994) 1185–1197.

[14] R. Altobelli Antunes, M. C. Lopes de Oliveira, Hydrogen embrittlement of zirconium-based al-

loys for nuclear fuel cladding, Innovations in Corrosion and Materials Science (Formerly Recent

Patents on Corrosion Science) 4 (2014) 96–106.

[15] Z. Zhao, Identification d’une nouvelle phase d’hydrure de zirconium et mod´elisation `a l´echelle

m´esoscopique de sa pr´ecipitation, Ph.D. thesis, Lille 1 (2008).

[16] Z. Zhao, J.-P. Morniroli, A. Legris, A. Ambard, Y. Khin, L. Legras, M. Blat-Yrieix, Identification

and characterization of a new zirconium hydride, Journal of microscopy 232 (2008) 410–421.

[17] Z. Zhao, M. Blat-Yrieix, J. Morniroli, A. Legris, L. Thuinet, Y. Kihn, A. Ambard, L. Legras,

M. Limback, B. Kammenzind, et al., Characterization of zirconium hydrides and phase field

approach to a mesoscopic-scale modelling of their precipitation, ASTM International, 2008.

[18] Y. Zhang, X.-M. Bai, J. Yu, M. R. Tonks, M. J. Noordhoek, S. R. Phillpot, Homogeneous hydride

formation path in α-zr: Molecular dynamics simulations with the charge-optimized many-body

potential, Acta Materialia 111 (2016) 357–365.

[19] G. Carpenter, J. Watters, R. Gilbert, Dislocations generated by zirconium hydride precipitates

in zirconium and some of its alloys, Journal of Nuclear Materials 48 (1973) 267–276.

[20] Y. Li, S. Chatterjee, E. Martinez, N. Ghoniem, G. Po, On the cross-slip of screw dislocations in

zirconium, Acta Materialia 208 (2021) 116764.

[21] R. Birch, S. Wang, V. S. Tong, T. B. Britton, The effect of cooling rate and grain size on hydride

microstructure in zircaloy-4, Journal of Nuclear Materials 513 (2019) 221–225.

[22] I. Mouton, Y. Chang, P. Chakraborty, S. Wang, L. T. Stephenson, T. B. Britton, B. Gault,

Hydride growth mechanism in zircaloy-4: Investigation of the partitioning of alloying elements,

Materialia 15 (2021) 101006.

[23] V. S. Tong, T. B. Britton, Formation of very large ‘blocky alpha’grains in zircaloy-4, Acta Mate-

rialia 129 (2017) 510–520.

[24] K. Thompson, D. Lawrence, D. Larson, J. Olson, T. Kelly, B. Gorman, In situ site-specific

specimen preparation for atom probe tomography, Ultramicroscopy 107 (2007) 131–139.

15


[25] Y. Chang, W. Lu, J. Gu´enol´e, L. T. Stephenson, A. Szczpaniak, P. Kontis, A. K. Ackerman, F. F.

Dear, I. Mouton, X. Zhong, et al., Ti and its alloys as examples of cryogenic focused ion beam

milling of environmentally-sensitive materials, Nature communications 10 (2019) 1–10.

[26] G. Kresse, J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals, Physical review B 47 (1993)

558.

[27] G. Kresse, J. Furthm¨uller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using

a plane-wave basis set, Physical review B 54 (1996) 11169.

[28] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Physical

review letters 77 (1996) 3865.

[29] A. Aladjem, Zirconium-hydrogen, Vol. 49, Trans Tech Publ, 1996.

[30] A. Van de Walle, A complete representation of structure–property relationships in crystals, Nature

materials 7 (2008) 455–458.

[31] D. Lerch, O. Wieckhorst, G. L. Hart, R. W. Forcade, S. M¨uller, Uncle: a code for constructing

cluster expansions for arbitrary lattices with minimal user-input, Modelling and Simulation in

Materials Science and Engineering 17 (2009) 055003.

[32] A. J. Breen, I. Mouton, W. Lu, S. Wang, A. Szczepaniak, P. Kontis, L. Stephenson, Y. Chang,

A. K. da Silva, C. Liebscher, et al., Atomic scale analysis of grain boundary deuteride growth

front in zircaloy-4, Scripta Materialia 156 (2018) 42–46.

[33] Y. Udagawa, M. Yamaguchi, T. Tsuru, H. Abe, N. Sekimura, Effect of sn and nb on general-

ized stacking fault energy surfaces in zirconium and gamma hydride habit planes, Philosophical

Magazine 91 (2011) 1665–1678.

[34] R. Russell, On the Zr-Hf system, Journal of Applied Physics 24 (1953) 232–233.

[35] R. Besson, L. Thuinet, M.-A. Louchez, Atomic-scale study of stacking faults in Zr hydrides and

implications on hydride formation, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 30 (2018) 315003.

[36] S. Wang, F. Giuliani, T. B. Britton, Microstructure and formation mechanisms of δ-hydrides in

variable grain size Zircaloy-4 studied by electron backscatter diffraction, Microscopy and Micro-

analysis 25 (2019) 1588–1589.

[37] S. Korte-Kerzel, T. Hickel, L. Huber, D. Raabe, S. Sandl¨obes-Haut, M. Todorova, J. Neugebauer,

Defect phases–thermodynamics and impact on material properties, International Materials Re-

views 67 (2022) 89–117.

16


[38] M. ˇSlap´akov´a, A. Zendegani, C. Liebscher, T. Hickel, J. Neugebauer, T. Hammerschmidt,

A. Ormeci, J. Grin, G. Dehm, K. S. Kumar, F. Stein, Atomic scale configuration of planar

defects in the Nb-rich C14 laves phase NbFe2, Acta Materialia 183 (2020) 362–376.

17


