Temperature 
Dependent 
Zero-Field 
Splittings 
in 

Graphene  

C. Bray1╬, K. Maussang2╬, C. Consejo1, J. A. Delgado-Notario3,4, S. Krishtopenko1, I. Yahniuk4,5, 

S. Gebert1,2, S. Ruffenach1, K. Dinar1, E. Moench5, J. Eroms5, K. Indykiewicz6, B. Jouault1, J. 

Torres2, Y. M. Meziani3, W. Knap4, A. Yurgens7, S. D. Ganichev4,5, F. Teppe1* 

 

1 L2C (UMR 5221), Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France 

2 IES (UMR 5214), Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France 

3 Nanotechnology Group, USAL-Nanolab, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca 37008, Spain 

4 CENTERA Laboratories, Institute of High Pressure Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 29/37 

Sokołowska Str, Warsaw, Poland  

5 Terahertz Center, University of Regensburg, 93040, Regensburg, Germany 

6 Faculty of Electronics, Photonics and Microsystems, Wroclaw University of Science and 

Technology, 50-372 Wroclaw, Poland 

7 Department of Microtechnology and Nanoscience, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 

Göteborg, Sweden 

* frederic.teppe@umontpellier.fr 

╬ These authors have contributed equally to this work and share first authorship 
 

Abstract 

Graphene is a quantum spin Hall insulator with a 45 µeV wide non-trivial topological gap 

induced by the intrinsic spin-orbit coupling. Even though this zero-field spin splitting is weak, it 

makes graphene an attractive candidate for applications in quantum technologies, given the 

resulting long spin relaxation time. On the other side, the staggered sub-lattice potential, 

resulting from the coupling of graphene with its boron nitride substrate, compensates intrinsic 

spin-orbit coupling and decreases the non-trivial topological gap, which may lead to the phase 

transition into trivial band insulator state. In this work, we present extensive experimental 

studies of the zero-field splittings in monolayer and bilayer graphene in a temperature range 

2K-12K by means of sub-Terahertz photoconductivity-based electron spin resonance technique. 

Surprisingly, we observe a decrease of the spin splittings with increasing temperature. We 

discuss the origin of this phenomenon by considering possible physical mechanisms likely to 

induce a temperature dependence of the spin-orbit coupling. These include the difference in the 

expansion coefficients between the graphene and the boron nitride substrate or the metal 

contacts, the electron-phonon interactions, and the presence of a magnetic order at low 


temperature. Our experimental observation expands knowledge about the non-trivial 

topological gap in graphene. 

 

Introduction 

The intrinsic spin-orbit (ISO) coupling in graphene comes from carbon atom d orbitals [1;2] which 

hybridize with the pz ones. Indeed, the pz orbitals themselves have no net orbital momentum along z, 

so the spin-orbit interaction is expected to be weak [3]. The intrinsic spin splitting is therefore 

proportional to the spin-orbit coupling of the d states. The ISO opens a gap of opposite sign at each 

Dirac point of magnitude of about ∆I = 45 μeV [4;5;6]. Indeed, an electron state at K valley and a hole 

state at K’ valley are connected by sublattice symmetry. The emergence of this gap therefore moves 

graphene from the family of Dirac semimetals to the one of quantum spin Hall insulators [7;8]. This 

topological phase results in the emergence of the edge states connecting electron and hole bands at 

different Dirac points [5]. However, this sublattice symmetry in graphene can be broken, for instance, 

by the coupling of graphene to the boron nitride substrate [9;10;11], which in its turn induces staggered 

potentials (∆ at A-sites and −∆ at B-sites) and thus open a bandgap of 2∆. This makes it energetically 

favourable for the electrons to stay in one of the sub-lattices, resulting in pseudo-spin order [12]. This 

staggered sub-lattice potential competes with the ISO potential, as the former leads to a trivial band 

insulator state, while the latter induces a topological insulator phase. These phenomena of ISO 

coupling and spin splitting of sub-lattices were addressed both theoretically and experimentally on 

graphene on hBN [4, 5 and 6] by means of resistively detected electron spin resonance (ESR) at low 

temperatures. Indeed, when a magnetic field B is applied perpendicularly to the graphene sheet, the 

Kramers pairs split into spin-up and -down states by the Zeeman energy, gµBB. Measuring the spin-

flip transitions by ESR techniques allows one to determine accurately the different zero-field splittings 

(ZFS) in graphene. From there, it becomes possible to study this ISO coupling as a function of various 

physical parameters, such as temperature, hydrostatic pressure, or different orientations between 

graphene layers. For instance, the ISO coupling has been studied recently by ESR technique in twisted 

graphene bilayer [13]. As the ISO coupling is a relativistic atomic phenomenon, one could think at first 

glance that it should not be affected by the lattice temperature. However, graphene's perfect crystal 

symmetry can be broken when suspended or placed under massive contacts. As it cools down, the 

contraction of the metal can indeed deform the thin layer of carbon atoms [14]. The thermally induced 

strain can therefore affect, on the one hand, the symmetry of the sublattice, and on the other hand, the 

mixing of different atomic orbitals, and as a result the zero-field splittings become temperature 

dependent. Note that the electron-phonon interaction actually induces most of the temperature 

dependencies of the electronic structure of semiconductors [15]. For instance, the coupling of spins to 

lattice vibrations in graphene, with emphasis on flexural modes, may have a great impact on the spin-

orbit coupling [16]. Similarly, the Jahn-Teller effect can modify the orbital states in molecular systems 


through the Ham reduction factors [17], which can therefore change the energy of the resonant 

transitions of the system studied by ESR spectroscopy. Additionally, the possible presence of a 

magnetic order is also well known to modify the influence of the external magnetic field on the spin 

resonances. While some of these factors may be rather small, they are of paramount importance for 

understanding the details of the topological properties of in graphene.  

In this work, we adapt from [18] a sub-THz magneto-photoconductivity technique to detect ESRs in 

monolayer and bilayer graphene embedded or not in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). We measure 

several spin resonances and, by extrapolating their energy evolution to zero magnetic field, we observe 

two ZFS attributed to the sub-lattice and ISO potentials. The photoconductivity signal being greater 

there, we focused our study on the graphene samples encapsulated in hBN. Interestingly, the ZFS 

energies are very comparable in monolayer and bilayer graphene. By decreasing the temperature, an 

increase of the energies of the two ZFS is observed, which is discussed in the context of the thermal 

strain of the graphene layers, magnetic ordered phase, and the electron-phonon interaction. 

Results 

Graphene-based Terahertz (THz) detectors are fast and sensitive devices, operating on different 

photoconductivity mechanisms in a wide range of frequencies [19,20]. These physical phenomena 

include bolometric [21], thermoelectric [22] and ratchet effects [23], as well as ballistic [24] and plasma 

waves effects [25]. In all these cases, the electric field of the incident THz wave is rectified and 

transformed into a potential drop between two contacts of the graphene-based sensor. This THz 

photoconductivity technique is sensitive to all kinds of conductivity changes in the material. In the 

presence of a perpendicular magnetic field, it is also sensitive to magnetic-field driven resistance 

oscillations [26], to the carrier’s population imbalance between Landau levels, or to quantum 

fluctuations of conductance [27]. Therefore, a non-resonant (or broad band) signal in the photovoltage, 

∆U, is first expected when the resistance of the graphene sheet experiences Shubnikov-de Haas 

oscillations. But more interestingly, whatever the physical phenomena at the origin of the rectification, 

and the type of THz detector mentioned above, a resonant signal is also expected when the energy of 

the incident sub-THz radiation matches the Zeeman splitting of the electronic states. The 

photoconductive response is produced by a perturbation of the equilibrium electron spin polarization 

[28]. Our experimental method is indeed similar to the “Electrically Detected ESR” (EDESR) 

technique [29,30] which is very sensitive as it exploits the effects of spin-dependent interactions on the 

conductivity of the sample instead of directly measuring the sub-THz power absorbed by the spin 

system [31].The particularity of our photoconductivity technique is based on the optimization of the 

electromagnetic coupling between the incident THz wave and the two-dimensional electron gas. This 

technique therefore represents an effective EDESR method capable of operating with a high sensitivity 

over a wide range of frequencies ranging from tens of GHz to THz (See Methods for more details). 

The origin of the EDESR signal in graphene has not been deeply discussed in previous works. The 


authors only mentioned the resonant microwave absorption at the spin-flip transition energy as the 

phenomenon responsible for the observed signal [5]. However, although not the focus of this paper, it 

is recalled that spin-to-charge conversion mechanisms, namely spin-dependent scattering, tunnelling, 

and recombination [32], are at the origin of this population change of the two Zeeman states inducing a 

variation in conductivity.  

We carried out THz photoconductivity measurements in the presence of a perpendicular magnetic field 

with THz sensors based on two Ratchet devices on monolayer graphene (sample A) and bilayer 

graphene (sample B) both encapsulated in hBN, as well as on p-n junctions on CVD grown monolayer 

graphene (sample C). The manufacturing details of these devices and their mode of operation are 

explained in the "Methods" section. The experiments were carried using radiation frequencies between 

45 GHz and 220 GHz (sweeping the magnetic field up to 9 T), and temperature range from 2.6 to 12 

K. The amplitude of the detection signal and the signal-to-noise ratio were generally much greater in 

the two Ratchet devices than in the p-n junction. This is why we focus in the main text of this article 

on these ratchet sensors, although the first results on p-n junctions reported in the Supplementary 

Material section show the same trends and features in the results. 

In both Ratchet sensors at low magnetic field, the photoconductivity signal shows usual Shubnikov-de 

Haas like oscillations at all frequencies, as observed elsewhere in different systems [33, 34]. With 

incident frequency of 112 GHz, at magnetic field B in the range from 3.5 T to 4.3 T, the spectra 

clearly exhibit three resonances whose positions are independent of the back gate voltage (Fig. 1 a). It 

should however be noted that the sign of the measured signal depends finely on various parameters 

and, in particular, on the gate voltage. It is therefore possible to have a peak on one series of curves 

and a deep on another although it is still the same resonance. Similar behaviour has already been noted 

in Ref. [15]. This is the reason why the data processing in the form of colour maps helps in the 

detailed analysis of the results. A black and white chart of the raw results is given as an example in 

Figure 1 b), in which it is possible to clearly distinguish the evolution of the various lines and 

oscillations as a function of the magnetic field and the gate voltage. The signal of interest is affected in 

the measured signal by a baseline that depends on the magnetic field and on the working frequency. In 

the case of Fig. 1b), this baseline is rather stable with gate voltage and resonances are clearly visible in 

the normalized initial signal. However, the signal baseline depends a lot on the probe frequency as a 

results of frequency dependence of the free-space wave to sample coupling. Furthermore, one expects 

amplitude of resonances to decrease with increasing temperatures, has a consequence of thermal 

distribution of excited states probed by the optical transition of the electromagnetic wave. In order to 

visualize more clearly the different optical transitions of interest, the first and second derivatives of the 

signal in regard to the magnetic field are plotted in red-blue colour maps as shown in Figures 1 c) and 

d). Indeed, assuming a baseline dependence in magnetic field smoother than resonances width, such a 

procedure should strongly reduce the relative amplitude of baseline and increase precision for peak 

localization (see Supp. Mat.). In the following work, all data were processed similarly, with peak 


localization performed on the second derivative signal to insure consistency and proper comparison 

between different measurements. Maximum of the signal measured (resp. minimum) corresponds to a 

negative peak of second derivative (resp. positive), used to numerically perform peak detection 

afterwards. The green dashed lines are guides for the eye showing resonances found by data analysis 

with automatic peak detection routine on the smoothed second derivative of the normalized signal. At 

frequency of 112 GHz, magneto-photoconductivity shows five lines, two at negative magnetic fields 

(
 and 
) and three at positive magnetic fields 

(
, 
 and 
). Resonance 

fields are obtained from the mean value of the peak position detected for each back gate voltage curve, 

while the uncertainty is estimated from the standard deviation. Note that 
 and 
 lines are almost 

symmetric to 
 and 
 with less than 100 mT deviation, to be compared to resonance width 

roughly estimated at 200 mT. Note also that a small deep in signal is visible around 
, indicated 

in grey dashed line for clarity. 

 

 

Figure 1 – a) Measured photoconductivity signal in sample B at a given incident frequency and 
temperature (f = 112 GHz, T = 4 K) as a function of magnetic field, for different back gate voltages. 
The X-shaped feature at low field indicates the presence of Shubnikov-de Haas-like oscillations 
shifting towards stronger magnetic fields as the gate voltage increases. At higher magnetic field, 
several transitions are well seen as vertical lines, meaning that there are not affected by the back gate 
voltage. Green dashed lines correspond to the mean value of numerical peak detection routine, while 


grey dashed line at –4 T is just indicative added manually. b) Absolute value of normalized signal 
represented as the colour map plot. Signal is normalized to the integral over B. c) First derivative with 
respect to magnetic field. Each absorption line results in a dispersive shape curve with polarity change 
at the maximum. d) Second derivative with respect to magnetic field. Maximum of signal (resp. 
minimum) corresponds to a negative peak of second derivative (resp. positive), used to numerically 
perform peak detection. 

 

Figure 2 – a) Second derivative of the signal measured in sample B as a function of the magnetic field 
at 2.6 K in the frequency range 82-125 GHz. b) Frequency of the different resonances as a function of 
magnetic field in the range 82-220 GHz measured at 4 K. The dashed lines are linear fits obtain from 
measurement in the 82-125GHz range allowing for the extrapolation of the experimental results to 
B = 0. The highest dashed line (  resonance) follows the linear evolution with a slope of -29.3 GHz/T 
± 0.4 GHz/T and with an intercept at B = 0 of +11±1.0 GHz (45.7±8 µeV). The two other dashed lines 
corresponds to the  (resp. ’) resonance and have almost the same slope of -28.2 GHz/T ± 0.4 GHz/T 
(resp. -27.4 GHz/T ± 0.3 GHz/T) but their intercepts extrapolate to -1.1±1.0 GHz (-4.5±4.1 µeV) and 
–7.0±0.9 GHz (–28.8±3.7 µeV) at B = 0, respectively. These values are consistent with ISO and sub-


lattice ZFSs. c) Gapped dispersion relation of graphene at K and K' points of the Brillouin zone for the 
atoms of sites A and B (left side). The black horizontal lines correspond to the four levels whose 
degeneracy is lifted by the ISOs and sub-lattice potentials. When a magnetic field is applied (on the 
right side), the levels are splitted due to the Zeeman effect. The allowed spin-flip transitions are 
marked by coloured arrows. 

This decrease of conductivity is too small (in width and intensity) to be retrieved properly with a 

numerical peak detection routine, affected by long term drifts of the signal. It could be however 

interpreted as a sixth line, 
, in coherence with the line 
. 

We then studied the evolution of these different resonances as a function of the excitation frequency. 

The frequency of these spin resonances scales linearly with the magnetic field from 45 GHz up to 220 

GHz. Fig. 2 a) shows an example of the obtained results in the range 82-125 GHz on sample B 

(bilayer graphene). For each working frequency, the signal is processed as follow. First, the magnitude 

of the lock-in output measured is smoothed with a standard Savitzky-Golay filter, from scipy.signal 

Python library, with a window width typically of 50 mT. Then, this signal is numerically derived in 

regard to the magnetic field B using numpy.diff python method, followed once again by a smoothing 

from a Savitzky-Golay filter with a window width typically of 50 mT. This first derivative is then 

derived again in regard to the magnetic field B and smoothed with a Savitzky-Golay filter, and 

denoted afterwards the second derivative 
. A peak of photoconductivity has a second derivative 

form itself by a narrower peak but at the same position, with two side peak four times lower in 

amplitude. These peak positions are automatically extracted from those data using find_peak routine of 

scipy.signal library in Python, with typically prominence parameter of 0.5, and peak distance of 100 

mT. Local maxima appear then in red while local minima are plotted in blue. For magnetic fields 

lower than 1 T in magnitude, those peaks measured in the signal are independent of the working 

frequency and they are interpreted as Shubnikov-de Haas-like oscillations with no dependence with 

the incident wave frequency.  

For larger magnetic field, several lines with a linear dependence with the frequency and magnetic field 

are clearly visible (grey dashed lines in Figure 2 (a)). For each frequency, the position in magnetic 

field of each peak is automatically extracted by the peak detection routine. These three spin resonances 

can be extrapolated to zero magnetic field either by adjusting the results of data processed 

automatically by the peak detection routine (Fig. 2a), or by placing the position of the resonances 

observed by eye as a function of the frequency within the whole frequency range used in this study 

(Fig. 2b). In order to interpret quantitatively these measurements, we used the same theoretical 

description than reference [6]. where the Hamiltonian of the system at 
T is based on a minimal 

model in the bispinor basis spanned by spin and sublattice spin 
, 

 


where 
 is the ISO gap, 
 the sublattice splitting,  the valley index, 
 the small vector near 

the Dirac point, and  the identity operator. In that model, 
 and 
 are assumed to depends only on 

the temperature. 

 For sake of clarity, Fig. 2 c) shows a diagram of the splitted bands of graphene at K and K' points of 

the Brillouin zone at zero magnetic field for the atoms of sites A and B. The usual Dirac cones of 

opposite chirality (represented in red and blue) have opposite gaps in K and K'. In the case of 

symmetric sub-lattices, each of its bands is doubly degenerated (∆I). But when considering a sub-

lattice symmetry breaking driven by the interaction of graphene with the hBN substrate, a second rise 

of spin degeneracy takes place between the two sub-lattices A and B (see dashed lines) (∆γ). In the 

presence of magnetic field (right part of panel c), each of these four bands is Zeeman splitted. Several 

optical spin-flip transitions are therefore allowed. The α resonance, corresponding to the central 

feature in Fig. 2a) and b), is the ordinary Zeeman splitting EZ = gµBB. The upper resonance β, also 

reported in Fig.2a) and b), reveals a ZFS which is a direct measurement of the ISO coupling gap ∆I. 

The lowest resonance γ’ corresponds to the ZFS attributed to the sub-lattice splitting ∆γ due to the 

coupling of the graphene sheet with the hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) encapsulation [6].  

In Figure 2a), dashed grey lines correspond to a linear fit of the peak position for each line. From each 

linear fit, one extracts the Landé factor g from the slope, while the intercept at zero magnetic field 

provides the value of the zero-field splitting of the corresponding spin-flip transition. For the 

resonance, the slope is measured at -28.2 GHz/T ± 0.4 GHz/T and an intercept at B=0T of -1.1±1.0 

GHz (-4.5±4.1 µeV). For the 
resonance, the slope is measured at -29.3 GHz/T ± 0.4 GHz/T and an 

intercept at B=0T of  11.0±1.0 GHz (
45.7±4.1 µeV). For the ’ resonance, the slope is measured at 

-27.4 GHz/T ± 0.3 GHz/T and an intercept at B=0T of -7.0±0.9 GHz (
=-28.8±3.7 µeV). These 

results are summed up in Table 1 and in Supplementary Material.  

Resonance
Slope (GHz/T)
Frequency at B=0 (GHz)

’

Table 1 - slope and frequency at B=0T extracted from data of Fig. 2a). 

For single layer graphene (sample A), the Landé factor, calculated from the slope, was measured to be 

g = 2.09±0.02 (more information can be found in supplementary materials), and g = 2.02±0.02 for 

bilayer graphene sample. In Fig. 2b), due to low signal obtained at high frequencies, positions of the 

resonances have been manually noted (the red filled circle in Fig.2b)). However, the results are 

consistent with these linear fit in grey dashed lines (linear fit are realized only on blue filled circle, in 

the 82 – 125 GHz frequency range).  


The extrapolation of the central feature (
 or 
) intersects with the axis at its origin, when the 

other two lines extrapolate to finite positive and negative energy values (Fig. 2a). Similar results were 

also obtained with approximately the same resonant energies in sample A, on which we observed such 

resonances down to 45 GHz (see Supplementary Materials), and similarly in monolayer and trilayer 

graphene samples studied elsewhere [5,6,7]. In these works, the central feature represents the ordinary 

Zeeman splitting and the upper and lower lines were identified as spin-flip transitions between the 

splitted bands. Values of Landé g-factor, 
 and 
 splitting are summed up and compared to 

reference [6] in Table 2. 

Landé g-factor

(µeV)
(µeV)
(µeV)

’
Mean value

Sample A

Sample B

Ref. [6]
-
-
-

Table 2 – Landé g-factor, ∆γ and ∆I extracted from measurements on sample A (single layer graphene) 
and sample B (bilayer graphene). The value of the a resonance frequency 
 intercept at B=0T field, 

noted 
, is also indicated in energy unit (
). Values from Ref. [6] are indicated for comparison. 

From level scheme of Fig. 2c), one would expect five resonance frequencies for a given magnetic field 

α, β and β’, γ and γ’. For each of these resonances, the Zeeman splitting provides a linear dependence 

in magnetic field, so that the frequency at zero field (B=0T), noted 
, might be estimated from the 

intercept of the linear fit of experimental data. The zero field resonance frequency is expected to be 

null for the α resonance (
 GHz), while for the four other ones is directly related to ∆I  for β and 

β’resonances (
 and 
), and to ∆γ for γ and γ’ resonances (
 and 

). However, one observes only three resonances (α, β and γ’) over the five expected, 

attributed to different strength so that resonances β’ and γ are not visible within the signal-to-noise 

ratio of the experimental setup used. Such difference in resonance strength has been reported in 

reference [6] where only α, β and γ’ resonance have been clearly measured from several frequencies 

while γ resonance has been observed for few frequencies with very low signal-to-noise. Even though 

the value of ∆γ is not exactly the same as found in previous work (~ 30 µeV here, instead of 20 µeV in 

Ref. [6]), we believe that this gap is due to the same physical phenomenon. Indeed, as it is not an 

intrinsic value of graphene, there is no reason why these values should be exactly the same in samples 

with different geometries. However, the value of ∆γ is very comparable in our samples A and B, even 

if they were processed in different ways (See SM for details). Additionally, we also compare the spin 

relaxation times
 in our samples to those obtained in previous work [6]. For this, 


we use the β transition from figure 2, for which Δf/ΔB is the slope extracted from the linear fit in figure 

2 and δB the resonance peak width. We thus obtain a spin relaxation time in the range of ∼17 – 25 ps 

within the temperature range 2.6 –8 K, which is consistent with previous results [6].  

Finally, we address the question of the behaviour of these different electron spin resonances as a 

function of temperature. The experimental study was carried out between 2.6 K and 12 K. Figure 3a) 

shows the photoconductivity signal for sample A, measured at different temperatures as a function of 

magnetic field, with an incident frequency of 60 GHz. The probe frequency has been chosen such that 

resonances are observable up to at least 10K. For each temperature, several relevant peaks appear in 

the signal in the middle of other structures induced by different conductance oscillations and other 

measurement noises. Relevant peaks are clearly visible in typical frequency and magnetic field maps 

provided in Fig. 2, where their position dependence in frequency helps to clearly identify them, while 

the noise-related peaks are randomly distributed with frequency. Then, we used the linear fit 

parameters extracted from data, and their confidence interval, of Fig. 2 to predict the value of magnetic 

field, at which one expects to have a spin resonance for the working frequency used (60 GHz). Doing 

that, one may estimate the position of the three expected lines at 2.6 K and the corresponding 

uncertainty at –2.44 T±0.05 T, –2.16 T±0.05 T and –1.67 T±0.05 T. 

 

Figure 3 - Evolution of the resonance in sample A versus temperature for a source frequency of 60 
GHz. a) Photoresponse is plotted versus magnetic field at different temperatures. Red and green square 
represent the evolution with the temperature for local maximum of signal while blue diamond 


represents local minima of signal. From previous measurements of photoconductivity as a function of 
magnetic field and frequency (see Ошибка! Источник ссылки не найден.), one may estimates the 
position of the three expected lines and corresponding uncertainty : 
, 

 and 
. b) Energy of the intercept at zero origin versus the temperature for the 

three observed transitions. Same color as a) is used to represent the transition. Dash line represents the 
converge values of energy at high temperature, corresponding to 42.9 and -26.6 µeV respectively. 
Error bars are estimated on the second derivative signal, using the peak_widths routine from Python 
scipy.signal librairy, with a relative height parameter (rel_height) of 0.5. 
 

The uncertainty is sufficiently low to identify unambiguously each line of interest in Fig. 2. These 

peaks are marked with different symbols on the raw data in Fig.3a). The corresponding spin resonance 

energy is calculated from the line positions in magnetic field, with the mean value of the α line taken 

as the origin of the energy. The Zeeman shift is therefore renormalized so that the β and γ lines 

correspond directly to the ZFS. so that β and γ lines are compensated from Zeeman shift to the zero-

field splitting. We assume a linear Zeeman shift with a similar Landé factor for each line, as observed 

in previous results (see Fig.2 and SM). A clear effect of temperature is observed on the position of 

resonances, which shift away from each other as the temperature decreases. This temperature 

dependence of the position of the resonances was observed in our two samples at several frequencies 

(cf. Fig. SM 2, see, also, references [35,36]). In both samples, the α resonance was always represented 

the weakest line, which position was consistently independent of temperature. 

By extrapolating to zero magnetic field the positions of the resonances measured at 60 GHz, we find 

the values of the different ZFS. Their evolution in temperature is represented in Figure 3 b). It can be 

seen that the ISO ZFS increases from 45 µeV to 55 µeV between 12 K and 2.6 K, while the ZFS due 

to the sub-lattice potential increases from 30 µeV to 40 µeV in the same temperature range. 

Discussion 

To the best of our knowledge, this modification of the ZFS driven by temperature has never been 

reported in graphene. A similar effect was however observed at higher temperatures in copper II dimer 

[37], where it was supposedly induced by the dynamic Jahn–Teller effect, and in hBN nanopowders [38] 

in which it was attributed to the thermal expansion. Additionally, a similar a similar temperature 

dependence was also observed at lower temperatures in several magnetic materials such as CrCl3 [39] 

or BaAg2Cu[VO4]2, resulting from ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic states. Therefore, a first way 

of interpreting our experimental observation might be to consider the presence of a magnetic order at 

low temperature [40] likely to modify the influence of the external magnetic field on the spin 

resonances. However, this interpretation is unlikely for several reasons. Firstly, the β and γ' spin 

resonances evolve towards opposite magnetic fields, while the α resonance remains independent of 

temperature. Secondly, the temperature evolution of the ESR intensity signal,  χESR, which is directly 

proportional to the spin susceptibility [41], shows no trace of magnetic order. The signal seems indeed 

to obey Curie's law with a Curie-Weiss constant tending to zero (Fig. SM 3 in Supplementary 


Information). It is conceivable that the staggered sub-lattice potential can be modified by a 

temperature-driven strain of the graphene layer, as soon as the sub-lattice symmetry is broken by the 

interaction of the graphene layer with its hBN substrate. For instance, it was evidenced in [42] that the 

strain caused by thermal expansion coefficient mismatch between graphene and substrate cannot be 

neglected when compared with suspended graphene. In [43] authors found that when cooling graphene 

from 300 K to 10 K, the influence of strain on the monolayer and top and bottom layer of the bilayer 

graphene is large and shown a pronounced temperature-dependent variation. But the idea seems less 

natural with regard to the ISO which represents an intrinsic parameter of graphene sheets. One would 

indeed tend to say at first glance that the amplitude of the ISO should not depend on the temperature 

since it is a purely relativistic phenomenon due to the motion of electrons around carbon atoms. 

However, it was also shown in [44] that geometric curvature of the graphene sheet should affect the 

spin–orbit coupling. Later, B. Gong et al. [45] have shown using tight-binding approach that uniaxial 

strain can be used as a reversible and controllable way to tune the ISO coupling in graphene. In the 

case of applied uniaxial strain, not only the change in atomic distances has to be taken into account but 

also the lattice deformation, which affects the orbitals reorientation. The dependence of ISO splitting 

on the type of the strain is theoretically predicted by means of first-principles calculations in [46]. 

Additionally, by using a tight-binding model, it has been found that the strain should make it possible 

to control the strength of Rashba and intrinsic spin-orbit coupling [47]. And very recently the thermal 

expansion coefficient of bilayer and trilayer graphene was finally measured [48]. In this work, the 

authors claim that the metal deposit may cause local strain in 2D materials around metal elements such 

as contacts and top gates, even though edge contacts were found in there to have no significant impact 

on the resulting strain. However, A. De Sanctis et al. have shown experimentally in a twist-angle 

Graphene/hBN device [49] that top-contacts induce a complex strain pattern in the graphene layer. 

Indeed, as the thermal expansion coefficients of gold and graphene are opposite, this leads to complex 

contraction behavior upon cooling depending on the overall geometry and design of the graphene-

based device. In our case, the device are dual grating top-gate structures composed of long parallel 

metal fingers dedicated to the coupling of the incident THz radiation to the 2D electron system (See 

Fig. M1 in Methods). The thermal expansion difference between the graphene flake and the metallic 

grating should certainly be taken into account. Therefore, the observed variation of the ZFS with 

temperature may tentatively be attributed to the strain thermally induced from the metallic grating to 

the monolayer and bilayer graphene on hBN in both samples A and B. In such a case, the strain would 

modify on the one hand the distance between the carbon atoms, which would act on the staggered 

sublattice potential and the position of the γ line. On the other hand, this would distort the lattice, 

which would induce a reorientation of the orbitals, modifying the strength of the ISO and displacing 

the α line. However, it is essential to point out that the effects of thermal expansion or contraction, 

previously observed in graphene and reported in the literature [50, 51] are systematically observed at 

higher temperatures than those used in our experiments. At cryogenic temperatures, we can indeed 


assume that everything should already be strained when cooling from 300 K to 100 K, and that we 

should no longer expect an evolution below these temperatures. An alternative explanation could 

therefore be related with the effect of the electron-phonon interactions, often involved in temperature 

dependencies of the electronic structure in semiconductors and insulators. For instance, H. Ochoa and 

co-workers analysed the possible couplings between spins and flexural, out-of-plane, vibrations in 

graphene and found that the coupling with the phonons, should renormalize notably the Kane-Mele 

mass [16]. It was shown soon after, that supercollision scattering processes, facilitated by ripples, or 

flexural modes, are the dominant mechanism of electron-phonon energy transfer in suspended 

graphene [52]. Moreover, Kurzmann et al. recently studied graphene quantum dots and argued that the 

spin-orbit coupling of nominally flat graphene is enhanced by the out-of-plane zero-point vibrations of 

graphene [53]. On another side, Norambuena et al. modelled the effect of phonons and temperature on 

the ESR spectrum in molecular systems in the presence of a Jahn-Teller effect. They calculated the 

thermal dependence of Ham reduction factors [54] and showed its influence on the energy of a ZFS. 

Although their model is not specifically adapted to the case of graphene, it can be noted on the one 

hand that their theoretical results present qualitative similarities with the behaviour observed in our 

samples, and on the other hand the vacancy of a carbon atom in the crystal lattice of graphene can 

indeed be reconstructed by means of a Jahn-Teller distortion [55,56]. However, our results do not seem 

to indicate signs of quenching of the spin-orbit coupling predicted by their model, but rather a 

saturation of its value beyond 8 K. 

Additional experimental and theoretical studies are needed to elucidate the origin of the temperature 

evolution of ZFS. An experimental way to investigate these hypotheses in more detail would be for 

example to study the influence of the hydrostatic pressure on the ISO in a similar experimental 

configuration.  

 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, by means of a sub-Terahertz photoconductivity-based electron spin resonance 

technique, we have investigated the influence of temperature on different spin-splittings in monolayer 

and bilayer graphene. We have observed three main electron spin resonances systematically in our two 

Ratchet THz detectors over a frequency range from 45 GHz to 220 GHz. By extrapolating these 

resonance frequencies at zero field, we extracted two ZFSs, attributed to ISO and sublattice potential, 

whose values are comparable to those in the literature. By varying the temperature of these two 

samples, we found that these two ZFS increase by about 25 % when the temperature drops from 12 K 

to 2.6 K. We attempt to interpret these results by considering successively the possible presence of a 

magnetic order, the strain effect induced by the difference in thermal expansion between the graphene 

and the top gate contacts, and finally the electron-phonon interactions. None of these hypotheses is 

completely satisfactory, therefore the origin of our experimental observation requires further 


theoretical and experimental investigations. Beyond this particular behaviour, we also validate the fact 

that graphene-based photoconductive THz detectors allow efficient measurement of electronic spin 

resonances at high frequencies and magnetic fields. Indeed, even if the signal was higher in the ratchet 

detectors, the spin resonances were clearly observed in both types of THz sensors. 

 

Samples and methods 

Samples: Our three samples are made of monolayer (sample A and C) and bilayer (sample B) 

graphene. The graphene layers in samples A and B are encapsulated with relatively thin hBN flakes on 

a SiO2/Si substrate (300 nm SiO2) by micromechanical exfoliation of bulk materials using a standard 

scotch tape method. In addition, the devices also include a double metallic interdigitated asymmetric 

top gate (DGG) structures. These multiple gate periodic structures have been widely studied as 

broadband THz sensors in graphene based systems, where the photocurrent generated in the graphene 

channel is due to the well-known ratchet effect [57, 58]. The grating is formed by independent wide 

(TG2) and narrow (TG1) strips which allows to apply different top gate potentials. A schematic view of 

the fabricated device is shown in Figure M.1 (a). The optical image for the bilayer graphene structure 

is shown in Fig. M.1 (b). More detailed information on the sample fabrication can be found in Refs. 

[57] and [59]. Sample C (see schematics in Figure M.1 (c) is a THz detector based on a monolayer 

graphene p-n junction with log-periodic antenna used to couple the incident THz light. Note that the 

gate voltage corresponding to the CNP, UCNP, was varying slightly between different sample cool 

downs due to different charge trapping in the gate insulator [60,61]. 

The graphene detectors with thermoelectric readout (involving p-n junctions) were fabricated by using 

chemically-vapor-deposited (CVD) graphene on a 2” large copper foil either 25 or 60 μm thick in the 

commercial cold-wall system (AIXTRON Black Magic II). The charge-carrier mobility of such a 

graphene transferred to ordinary office lamination foil (EVA/PET) was surprisingly high, reaching 

9000 cm2/(Vs) at room temperature [62]. The p-n junctions were fabricated in the center of the 

graphene channel by chemical doping (see Fig. M.1c) and were assumed to be also exist near the metal 

electrodes through the proximity doping.  

 


Figure M.1 - Device description. a) The devices A and B are characterized by a periodic unit cell, L, 
of w1 = 0.5 µm, w2 = 1 µm, d1 = 0.5 µm, d2 = 2 µm for the Sample A and w1 = 0.75 µm, w2 = 1.5 µm, 
d1 = 0.5 µm, d2 = 1 µm for the Sample B. b) Picture of ratchet THz sample B where the encapsulated 
bilayer graphene has been highlighted by the dashed line c) The model geometry of graphene detector 
with a p-n junction in the center marked by the empty arrow. Graphene is outlined by the dashed line. 
The rectangle shows a layer of photoresist covering one half of the graphene channel. The solid arrows 
mark two latent p-n junctions in the vicinity of the electrodes (log-periodic antenna in this case). 

 

Measurements: The samples are placed inside a 6T horizontal cryogen free magnet system with 

optical access (See Figure M.2). The voltage generator (Keithley 2600B) allows to control the voltage 

applied on the back-gate with a voltage on the top-gate fixed at 0V for the ratchet samples A and B. 

Sub-THz source generated by Shottky diode of multiplied frequency are used to obtain frequencies in 

the ranges from 45 GHz to 75 GHz (optical power about 150 mW), and 82 GHz to 125 GHz (optical 

power about 10 mW). The sub-THz beam is focalized on the sample, through three Z-cut quartz 

windows, with golden parabolic mirrors. A magnetic field up to 5.5 T is oriented perpendicular to the 

surface of the sample and parallel to the wave-vector of the incident radiation. The signal is detected 

as a voltage drop at the edges of the detector, which is then amplified and measured via a standard 

lock-in technique (using an Amatek Signal recovery 6270). Similar setup on a 16T vertical magnet 

system is used to obtain results at higher frequencies with a sub-THz source from 150 GHz up to 220 

GHz (power source of 5 mW). 

 

Figure M.2: Description of photoconductivity measurement. The sample is placed inside a 6T 
horizontal cryofree magnet system. Sub-THz sources are used to illuminate the sample and excite 


resonantly the spin-flip transitions. The photoconductivity signal is measured via a standard lock-in 
technique. 

Detection principle: In the two encapsulated graphene samples with the DGG structure, the THz 

radiation results in the ratchet current, which is caused by the combined action of a spatially periodic 

asymmetric in-plane potential and the spatially modulated light due to the near-field effects of the 

radiation diffraction [57,58,63]. The amplitude and the sign of the photocurrent induced in graphene is 

defined by the lateral asymmetry parameter given by  

 

 

 
Here the overline stands for the average over the ratchet period, 
 is the derivative of the 

coordinate-dependent electrostatic potential 
, and 
 the distribution of the radiation electric 

field being coordinate dependent due to the near field of diffraction. In this study both top gates are 

kept at zero bias, however, the asymmetry is created by the built-in potential due to the metal stripes of 

different widths (TG1 and TG2) deposited on top of the encapsulated BLG. Note that in sample B the 

zero-magnetic field ratchet effect was studied in detail in Ref. [57]. 

With a single p-n junction formed in the graphene channel by a split gate or chemical doping, the 

response (dc) signal Vs appears because of a non-uniform Joule heating and thermoelectric effects, 

.  The Peltier effect will either help the Joule heating or reduce it, depending on the 

direction of current through the p-n junction. By averaging the instant signal voltage over one period 

of the THz radiation, one finds the mean value of the signal, which is measured in the experiment. In 

the case of no intentionally made p-n junction in the graphene channel, two latent p-n junctions can 

still exist because of extra doping through the proximity to metal electrodes. These p-n junctions 

normally do not contribute to the output signal because they are connected back-to-back and their 

individual contributions to the signal compensate each other. However, in the presence of a small dc 

current, one of the junctions will be heated more than another because of the Peltier effect. This will 

break the symmetry of the device and result in a non-compensated signal [64]. 

 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Terahertz Occitanie Platform, by CNRS through IRP “TeraMIR”, by 

the French Agence Nationale pour la Recherche (Colector-ANR-19-CE30-0032, Stem2D-ANR-19-

CE24-0015 and Equipex+ Hybat-ANR-21-ESRE-0026 projects), by the European Union through the 

Flag-Era JTC 2019 - (project DeMeGRaS, VR2019-00404, DFG No. GA 501/16-1, and ANR-19-

GRF1-0006) and the Marie-Curie grant agreement No 765426, from Horizon 2020 research and 

innovation programme. FT, SDG, WK, JADN and IY thank the support from the IRAP program of the 


Foundation for Polish Science (grant MAB/2018/9, project CENTERA). EM and SDG acknowledge 

the Volkswagen Stiftung Program 97738. YMM acknowledges the support by the Spanish Ministry of 

Science, Innovation, and Universities and FEDER under the Research Grants numbers RTI2018-

097180-B-100 and the FEDER/Junta de Castilla y León Research Grant number SA121P20. JADN 

thanks the support from the Universidad de Salamanca for the María Zambrano postdoctoral grant 

funded by the Next Generation EU Funding for the Requalification of the Spanish University System 

2021–23, Spanish Ministry of Universities. 

 

Author contributions 

The experiment was proposed by FT. The samples were fabricated by JADN, IY, EM, and KI. THz 

photoconductivity experiments were carried out by CB and CC. Characterization measurements were 

conducted and analysed by BJ, SG, KD, SDG and SR. KM and CB handled the data and prepared the 

figures. FT, and KM wrote the manuscript and CB, JADN, SSK, AY, YMM, WK, SSK and SDG 

corrected it. All co-authors discussed the experimental data and interpretation of the results.  

 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing financial interests.  

 

Data availability 

Data are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. Dataset will also be uploaded 

on the Recherche Data Gouv repository (https://recherche.data.gouv.fr) once the manuscript is 

accepted and published. 

 

References 

 

1 M. Gmitra, S. Konschuh, C. Ertler, C. Ambrosch-Draxl, and J. Fabian, Phys. Rev. B 80, 235431 (2009) 
2 S. Konschuh, M. Gmitra, and J. Fabian, Phys. Rev. B 82, 245412 (2010) 
3 Band-structure topologies of graphene: Spin-orbit coupling effects from first principles M. Gmitra, S. 
Konschuh, C. Ertler, C. Ambrosch-Draxl, and J. Fabian, Phys. Rev. B 80, 235431 (2009) 
4 Observation of resistively detected hole spin resonance and zero-field pseudo-spin splitting in epitaxial 
graphene Ramesh G. Mani, John Hankinson, Claire Berger & Walter A. de Heer, Nature Communications 
volume 3, 996 (2012) 
5 Resonance Microwave Measurements of an Intrinsic Spin-Orbit Coupling Gap in Graphene: A Possible 
Indication of a Topological State J. Sichau, M. Prada, T. Anlauf, T. J. Lyon, B. Bosnjak, L. Tiemann, and 
R. H. Blick, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 046403 (2019) 
6 Sublattice symmetry breaking and ultralow energy excitations in graphene-on-hBN heterostructures U. R. 
Singh, M. Prada, V. Strenzke, B. Bosnjak, T. Schmirander, L. Tiemann, and R. H. Blick, Phys. Rev. B 102, 
245134 (2020) 
7 C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 226801 (2005) 
8 Helical quantum Hall phase in graphene on SrTiO3, Louis Veyrat, Corentin Déprez, Alexis Coissard, Xiaoxi 
Li, Frédéric Gay, Kenji Watanabe, Takashi Taniguchi, Zheng Han, Benjamin A. Piot, Hermann Sellier, 
Benjamin Sacépé, Science 367, 6479,781-786 (2020) 


 

9 Interplay between sublattice and spin symmetry breaking in graphene, D. Soriano and J. Fernandez-Rossier 
Phys. Rev. B 85, 195433 (2012) 
10 C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. 
Shepard, and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 722 (2010) 
11 J. Xue, J. Sanchez-Yamagishi, D. Bulmash, P. Jacquod, A. Deshpande, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Jarillo-
Herrero, and B. J. LeRoy, Nat. Mater. 10, 282 (2011). 
12 A. H. MacDonald, J. Jung, and F. Fang, Phys. Scr. T 145, 014012 (2012) 
13 Electron spin resonance and collective excitations in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene,  
E. Morissette, J-X Lin, S Liu, D. Rhodes, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, M. S. Scheurer, M. Lilly, A. 
Mounce, and J.I.A. Li, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.08354, (2022) 
14 Strained bilayer graphene: Band structure topology and Landau level spectrum, Marcin Mucha-Kruczyński, 
Igor L. Aleiner, and Vladimir I. Fal’ko Phys. Rev. B 84, 041404(R) (2011) 
15 Predominance of non-adiabatic effects in zero-point renormalization of the electronic band gap, A. Miglio, V. 
Brousseau-Couture, E. Godbout, G. Antonius, Y.-H. Chan, S. G. Louie, M. Côté, M. Giantomassi and X. Gonze, 
npj Computational Materials 6, 167 (2020); https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-020-00434-z 
16 Spin-orbit coupling assisted by flexural phonons in graphene, H. Ochoa, A. H. Castro Neto, V. I. Fal’ko, and 
F. Guinea, Phys. Rev. B 86, 245411 (2012) 
17 Effect of linear Jahn-Teller coupling on paramagnetic resonance in a 2E state, F. S. Ham, Phys. Rev 166, 2, 
(1968) 
18 Terahertz Photovoltaic Response of Si-MOSFETs: Spin Related Effect, H. Videlier, N. Dyakonova, F. Teppe, 
C. Consejo, B. Chenaud, W. Knap, J. Lusakowski, D. Tomaszewski, J. Marczewski and P. Grabiec Acta Physica 
Polonica A 5, 120 (2011) 
19 Graphene field-effect transistors as room-temperature terahertz detectors, L. Vicarelli, M. S. Vitiello, D. 
Coquillat, A. Lombardo, A. C. Ferrari, W. Knap, M. Polini, V. Pellegrini, and A. Tredicucci, Nat. Mater. 11, 865 
(2012) 
20 Photodetectors based on graphene, other two-dimensional materials and hybrid systems, F. H. L. Koppens, T. 
Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello, and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 780 (2014) 
21 Epitaxial graphene quantum dots for high-performance terahertz bolometers, A. E. Fatimy, R. L. Myers-Ward, 
A. K. Boyd, K. M. Daniels, D. K. Gaskill, and P. Barbara, Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 335 (2016) 
22 Sensitive room-temperature terahertz detection via the photothermoelectric effect in graphene, X. Cai, A. B. 
Sushkov, R. J. Suess, M. M. Jadidi, G. S. Jenkins, L. O. Nyakiti, R. L. Myers-Ward, S. Li, J. Yan, D. K. Gaskill, 
T. E. Murphy, H. D. Drew, and M. S. Fuhrer, Nat. Nanotech. 9, 814 (2014) 
23 Terahertz Electric Field Driven Electric Currents and Ratchet Effects in Graphene, Annalen der Physik (2017), 
S. D. Ganichev, D. Weiss, J. Eroms, https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.201600406 
24 Terahertz detection and imaging using graphene ballistic rectifiers, G. Auton, D. B. But, J. Zhang, E. Hill, D. 
Coquillat, C. Consejo, P. Nouvel, W. Knap, L. Varani, F. Teppe, J. Torres, and A. Song, Nano Lett. 17, 7015 
(2017) 
25 Direct nanoscopic observation of plasma waves in the channel of a graphene field-effect transistor, Amin 
Soltani, Frederik Kuschewski, Marlene Bonmann, Andrey Generalov, Andrei Vorobiev, Florian Ludwig, 
Matthias M. Wiecha, Dovilė Čibiraitė, Frederik Walla, Stephan Winnerl, Susanne C. Kehr, Lukas M. Eng, Jan 
Stake & Hartmut G. Roskos, Light: Science & Applications 9, 97 (2020) 
26 Terahertz radiation detection by field effect transistor in magnetic field, Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 072106 (2009); 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3207886, S. Boubanga-Tombet, M. Sakowicz, D. Coquillat, F. Teppe, W. Knap, M. I. 
Dyakonov, K. Karpierz, J. Łusakowski, and M. Grynberg 
27 Terahertz radiation rectification as a probe of universal conductance fluctuations in graphene, International 
Symposium on Terahertz Nanoscience (TeraNano 2011) and Workshop of International Terahertz Research 
Network (GDR-I), Osaka University, Nakanoshima Center. Extended Abstract 1(1) 25I-N-10 (2011), D. 
Coquillat, N. Diakonova, J.-M. Poumirol, M.Goiran, W. Escoffier, B. Raquet, F. Teppe, M. Dyakonov, W. Knap 
28 Temperature dependence and mechanism of electrically detected ESR at the nÄ1 filling factor of a two-
dimensional electron system, E. Olshanetsky, J. D. Caldwell, M. Pilla, S.-C. Liu, and C. R. Bowers, Phys. Rev. 
B 67, 165325 (2003) 
29 Photoconductivity on GaAs-AlxGa1−xAs heterostructures D.Stein, G.Ebert, K.von Klitzing, G.Weimann, 
Surface Science, 142, 1–3, 406-411, (1984) 
30 Electron-spin resonance in the two-dimensional electron gas of GaAs-AlxGa1-xAs heterostructures, M. Dobers, 
K. V. Klitzing, and G. Weimann, Phys. Rev. B 38, 5453 (1988) 
31 Spin-spin scattering in a silicon two-dimensional electron gas, R. N. Ghosh, R. H. Silsbee, Phys Rev B 
Condens Matter, 46, 19, 12508-12525 (1992) 
32 Embracing the quantum limit in silicon computing, J. J. L. Morton, D. R. McCamey, M. A. Eriksson & S. A. 
Lyon, Nature 479, 345–353 (2011) 


 

33 Terahertz imaging of Landau levels in HgTe-based topological insulators, A. M. Kadykov, J. Torres, S. S. 
Krishtopenko, C. Consejo, S. Ruffenach, M. Marcinkiewicz, D. But, W. Knap, S. V. Morozov, V. I. Gavrilenko, 
N. N. Mikhailov, S. A. Dvoretsky, and F. Teppe, Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 262102 (2016); 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4955018 
34 Terahertz radiation detection by field effect transistor in magnetic field, S. Boubanga-Tombet, M. Sakowicz, 
D. Coquillat, F. Teppe, W. Knap, M. I. Dyakonov, K. Karpierz, J. Łusakowski, and M. Grynberg Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 95, 072106 (2009); https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3207886 
35 In situ Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroelectrochemical study of graphene-based supercapacitors: 
Comparison between chemically reduced graphene oxide and nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide, B. Wang, 
V. Likodimos, A. J. Fielding, R.A.W. Dryfe, Carbon, 160, 236-246 (2020) 
36 FMR Evidence of Stable Ferromagnetic Correlations at Zigzag Edge States in Graphene, M. A. Augustyniak-
Jablokowa, M. Maćkowiak, K. Tadyszak and R. Strzelczyk, Acta Phys. Polish. A 127, 537 (2015) 
37 Temperature-dependent zero-field splitting in a copper(II) dimer studied by EPR, M. V. Fedin, E. F. Zhilina, 
D. L. Chizhov, I. A. Apolonskaya, G. G. Aleksandrov, M. A. Kiskin, A. A. Sidorov, A. S. Bogomyakov, G. V. 
Romanenko, I. L. Eremenko, V. M. Novotortsev and V. N. Charushin, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 4513 (2013) 
38 Temperature-Dependent Energy-Level Shifts of Spin Defects in Hexagonal Boron Nitride, W. Liu, Z.-P. Li, 
Y.-Z. Yang, S. Yu, Y. Meng, Z.-A. Wang, Z.-C. Li, N.-J. Guo, F.-F. Yan, Q. Li, J.-F. Wang, K.-S. Xu, Y.-T. 
Wang, J.-S. Tang, C.-F. Li, and G.-C. Guo, ACS Photonics, 8, 1889−1895 (2021) 
39 Electron spin resonance and ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy in the high-field phase of the van der 
Waals magnet CrCl3, J. Zeisner, K. Mehlawat, A. Alfonsov, M. Roslova, T. Doert, A. Isaeva, B. Büchner, and 
V. Kataev, Phys. Rev. Materials 4, 064406 (2020) 
40 Electron paramagnetic resonance study of nanostructured graphite, J. Kausteklis, P. Cevc, D. Arcon, L. Nasi, 
D. Pontiroli, M. Mazzani, and M. Ricco, Phys. Rev. B 84, 125406 (2011) 
41 Electron Spin Resonance in a Multilayer Graphene Synthesized with Polystyrene, P. V. Semenikhin, A. N. 
Ionov, and M. N. Nikolaeva, Technical Physics Letters, 46, No. 2, 186–188 (2020) 
42 Temperature-dependent Raman investigation on suspended graphene: Contribution from thermal expansion 
coefficient mismatch between graphene and substrate, Shibing Tian, Yang Yang, Zhe Liu, Chao Wang, Ruhao 
Pan, Changzhi Gu, Junjie Li, Carbon Volume 104, 27-32, (2016) 
43 Temperature-induced strain and doping in monolayer and bilayer isotopically labeled graphene, T. G. A. 
Verhagen, K. Drogowska, M. Kalbac, and J. Vejpravova, Phys. Rev. B 92, 125437 (2015) 
44 Spin-orbit coupling in curved graphene, fullerenes, nanotubes, and nanotube caps, D. Huertas-Hernando, F. 
Guinea and A. Brataas, Phys. Rev. B 74, 155426 (2006) 
45 B. Gong, X.-H. Zhang, E.-H. Zhang, S.-L. Zhang, Mod. Phys. Lett. B 25, 823 (2011) 
46 Strain effects on the spin-orbit-induced band structure splittings in monolayer MoS2 and graphene Tawinan 
Cheiwchanchamnangij, Walter R. L. Lambrecht, Yang Song, Hanan Dery, Physical Review B 88, 155404 (2013) 
47 Modified spin–orbit couplings in uniaxially strained graphene, Hamed Rezaei and Arash Phirouznia, Eur. 
Phys. J. B 91, 295 (2018) 
48 The thermal expansion coefficient of monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer graphene derived from the strain induced 
by cooling to cryogenic temperatures, Applied Physics Letters 118(20) 203101 (2021) 
49 Strain-Engineering of Twist-Angle in Graphene/hBN Superlattice Devices, Adolfo De Sanctis, Jake D. 
Mehew, Saad Alkhalifa, Freddie Withers, Monica F. Craciun, and Saverio Russo, Nano Lett., 18, 7919−7926 
(2018) 
50 Negative Thermal Expansion Coefficient of Graphene Measured by Raman Spectroscopy, D. Yoon, Y.-W. 
Son, and H. Cheong, Nano Lett., 11, 8, 3227–3231 (2011) 
51 Performance of monolayer graphene nanomechanical resonators with electrical readout, C. Chen, S. 
Rosenblatt, K. I. Bolotin, W. Kalb, P. Kim, I. Kymissis, H. L. Stormer, T. F. Heinz & J. Hone, Nature 
Nanotechnology volume 4, 861–867 (2009) 
52 Electron−Phonon Coupling in Suspended Graphene: Supercollisions by Ripples, A. Laitinen, M. Oksanen, A. 
Fay, D. Cox, M. Tomi, P. Virtanen, and P. J. Hakonen, Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 6, 3009–3013, (2014) 
https://doi.org/10.1021/nl404258a 
53 Kondo effect and spin–orbit coupling in graphene quantum dots, A. Kurzmann, Y. Kleeorin, C. Tong, R. 
Garreis, A. Knothe, M. Eich, C. Mittag, C. Gold, F. Kornelis de Vries, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, V. Fal’ko, Y. 
Meir, T. Ihn & K. Ensslin, Nature Commu. 12, 6004, (2021) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-26149-3 
54 Effect of phonons on the electron spin resonance absorption spectrum, A. Norambuena, A. Jimenez, C. Becher 
and J. R Maze, New Journal of Physics, 22, 073068, (2020) 
55 Emerging chemical strategies for imprinting magnetism in graphene and related 2D materials for spintronic 
and biomedical applications J. Tucek, P. Błonski, J. Ugolotti, A. Kumar Swain, T. Enokib and R. Zboril, Chem. 
Soc. Rev., 2018,47, 3899-3990 (2018) 


 

56 Irradiation-Induced Magnetism in Graphite: A Density Functional Study, P. O. Lehtinen, A. S. Foster, Y. Ma, 
A. V. Krasheninnikov and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 93, 187202 (2004) 
57 Ratchet effect in spatially modulated bilayer graphene: Signature of hydrodynamic transport, E. Mönch, S. O. 
Potashin, K. Lindner, I. Yahniuk, L. E. Golub, V. Y. Kachorovskii, V. V. Bel’kov, R. Huber, K. Watanabe, T. 
Taniguchi, J. Eroms, D. Weiss, and S. D. Ganichev, Phys. Rev. B 105, 045404 (2022) 
58 Ratchet effects in quantum wells with a lateral superlattice, review, E. L. Ivchenko and S. D. Ganichev, JETP 
Lett. 93, 673-682 (2011) 
59 Enhanced terahertz detection of multigate graphene nanostructures, J. A. Delgado-Notario, W. Knap, V. 
Clericò, J. Salvador-Sánchez, J. Calvo-Gallego, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, T. Otsuji, V. V. Popov, D. V. 
Fateev, E. Diez, J. E. Velázquez-Pérez and Y. M. Meziani, Nanophotonics, 11, 3, 519-529, (2022) 
https://doi.org/10.1515/nanoph-2021-0573 
60 Photogalvanic probing of helical edge channels in two-dimensional HgTe topological insulators, K.-M. 
Dantscher, D. A. Kozlov, M. T. Scherr, S. Gebert, J. Bärenfänger, M. V. Durnev, S. A. Tarasenko, V. V. 
Bel’kov, N. N. Mikhailov, S. A. Dvoretsky, Z. D. Kvon, J. Ziegler, D. Weiss, and S. D. Ganichev, Phys. Rev. B 
95, 201103(R) (2017). 
61 Edge photocurrent in bilayer graphene due to inter-Landau-level transitions, S. Candussio, M. V. Durnev, S. 
Slizovskiy, T. Jötten, J. Keil, V. V. Bel’kov, J. Yin, Y. Yang, S.-K. Son, A. Mishchenko, V. Fal’ko, and S. D. 
Ganichev, Phys.  Rev. B 103, 125408 (2021) 
62 High mobility graphene on EVA/PET, M. Khan, K. Indykiewicz, P. L. Tam, and A. Yurgens, Nanomat. 12, 
331 (2022) 
63 Terahertz ratchet effects in graphene with a lateral superlattice, P. Olbrich, J. Kamann, M. König, J. Munzert, 
L. Tutsch, J. Eroms, D. Weiss, M.-H. Liu, L. E. Golub, E. L. Ivchenko, V. V. Popov, D. V. Fateev, K. V. 
Mashinsky, F. Fromm, Th. Seyller, and S. D. Ganichev, Phys. Rev. B 93, 075422 (2016) 
64 Current-induced enhancement of photo-response in graphene THz radiation detectors, K Indykiewicz, C Bray, 
C Consejo, F Teppe, S Danilov, SD Ganichev, A. Yurgens, AIP Advances 12 (11), 115009 (2022) 


Supplementary Information

Temperature Dependent Zero-Field Splittings in Graphene

C. Bray1╬, K. Maussang2╬, C. Consejo1, J. A. Delgado-Notario3,4, S. Krishtopenko1, I. Yahniuk4,5,

S. Gebert1,2, S. Ruffenach1, K. Dinar1, E. Moench5, J. Eroms5, K. Indykiewicz6, B. Jouault1, J.

Torres2, Y. M. Meziani3, W. Knap4, A. Yurgens 6, S. D. Ganichev4,5, F. Teppe1*

1 L2C (UMR 5221), Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France

2 IES, (UMR 5214), Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France

3Nanotechnology Group, USAL-Nanolab, Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca 37008, Spain

4 CENTERA Laboratories, Institute of High Pressure Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 29/37

Sokołowska Str, Warsaw, Poland

5 Terahertz Center, University of Regensburg, 93040, Regensburg, Germany

6 Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Göteborg, Sweden

* frederic.teppe@umontpellier.fr

╬These authors have contributed equally to this work and share first authorship

Data processing

In order to increase visibility of the absorption lines in the signal, the following data treatment has

been applied to raw photoconductivity data. The signal, denoted hereafter S is the magnitude R

measured by the lock-in. Firstly, this is signal is smoothed with a standard Savitzky-Golay filtre, from

scipy.signal Python library, with a window length of typically 50m T to 100m T and a 3rd order

polynomial interpolation. This smoothed signal is renormalized to unity with a norm 2 metric.

The derivative signal is then calculated from the finite difference of the normalized smoothed signal,

denoted D1, where the derivation is taken regarding the magnetic field B. This treatment allows

removal of parasitic DC offsets and long-term drifts of signal during the experimental mapping.

𝐷1 =
∂𝑆
∂𝐵 .

Assuming a Lorentzian absorption line, centered at
where
is the incident wave frequency and
𝐵0(𝑓)
𝑓

with a FWHM of
, the derivative signal will be a dispersive curve as follows
2Γ

𝑆 𝐵, 𝑓
(
) =
𝑎

1+

𝐵−𝐵0(𝑓)

Γ
(
)

2 ,  


𝐷1 =
∂𝑆
∂𝐵 =− 2𝑎

Γ

2

𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )
(
)

1+

𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )

Γ
(
)

2
⎡⎢⎢⎣

⎤⎥⎥⎦

2 ,

This derivative is then smoothed with a Savitzky-Golay filter with a window length of typically 50mT

to 100mT and a 3rd order polynomial interpolation. Then, the second derivative is numerically

computed so that a maximum of signal corresponds to a maximum of second derivative, denoted D2,

while quadratic drifts of signals are reduced

𝐷2 =
∂

2𝑆

∂𝐵

2 =− 2𝑎

Γ

2

1−3

𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )

Γ
(
)

2

1+

𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )

Γ
(
)

2
⎡⎢⎢⎣

⎤⎥⎥⎦

3 ,

This D2 signal is then extremal for
with a width based on first annulation of
.
𝐵 = 𝐵0 𝑓
( )
2Γ
3

Let’s assume a signal of the following expression

𝑆 𝐵, 𝑓
(
) =
𝑎

1+

𝐵−𝐵0(𝑓)

Γ
(
)

2 + ℎ 𝐵, 𝑓
(
),

where
is a function that models technical drifts and baseline of the experimental setup. Peak
ℎ 𝐵, 𝑓
(
)

localization on
is already affected by the B field dependence of
since the first
𝑆 𝐵, 𝑓
(
)
ℎ 𝐵, 𝑓
(
)

derivative is expressed as follow

𝐷1 =
∂𝑆
∂𝐵 =− 2𝑎

Γ

2

𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )
(
)

1+

𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )

Γ
(
)

2
⎡⎢⎢⎣

⎤⎥⎥⎦

2 +
∂ℎ
∂𝐵 .

Peak localization of the resonance on the initial signal is given by the cancellation of the first
derivative, providing
and then is affected by the first derivative of
. Assuming
𝐵𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑(𝑓)
ℎ
ℎ(𝐵, 𝑓)

has a smooth dependance in magnetic field,

1

ℎ(𝐵0 𝑓
( ),𝑓) ×
∂ℎ
( ∂𝐵
)

(𝐵0 𝑓
( ),𝑓)

≪ 1

Γ ,

the measured peak position might be estimated as follow, shifted from the real resonance field 𝐵0 𝑓
( )

𝐵𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑓
( ) ≈ 𝐵0 𝑓
( ) +
Γ

2

2𝑎 ×
∂ℎ
( ∂𝐵
)

𝐵0 𝑓
( ),𝑓
(
)
.

As expected, the lower is the amplitude of the peak, the larger is the effect of the baseline drift. Then,
if one considers the second derivative signal
,
𝐷2

𝐷2 =
∂

2𝑆

∂𝐵

2 =− 2𝑎

Γ

2

1−3

𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )

Γ
(
)

2

1+

𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )

Γ
(
)

2
⎡⎢⎢⎣

⎤⎥⎥⎦

3 +
∂

2ℎ

∂𝐵

2 ,

it is no longer affected by the quadratic dependance of the
since its second derivative will
ℎ(𝐵, 𝑓)

result in a constant shift of
that will note impact the peak localization. Assuming a smooth
𝐷2

dependance in magnetic field of the baseline signal, one expects that most of the baseline is mostly
locally quadratic so that most of it is removed in the derivation process. Furthermore, the width of the


𝐷2 mean peak is smaller by a factor 3. The error in peak position scales as the square of the peak width
and is proportional to the derivative of the baseline, as discussed previously. Then, one benefits both
from a factor 9 in precision from the peak width and reduction of the amplitude of the baseline by
removing its quadratic contribution.

Another quantity of interest is the crossed second derivative Dcross

𝐷𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑠𝑠 =
∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵 = 2𝑎Γ

2𝐵0

' 𝑓
( )

Γ

2−3 𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )
(
)

2

Γ

2+ 𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )
(
)

2
(
)

3 .

∂

3𝑆

∂𝐵∂𝑓∂𝐵 =

−24𝑎Γ

2𝐵0

' 𝑓
( ) 𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )
(
) Γ

2− 𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )
(
)

2
(
)

Γ

2+ 𝐵−𝐵0 𝑓
( )
(
)

2
(
)

4

in order to isolate only absorption lines that depends on the incident wave frequency. The quantity

Dcross
will be extremal also for
but of non-zero value only if there is a dependence in
𝐵 = 𝐵0 𝑓
( )

frequency of the resonance magnetic field
𝐵0 𝑓 . This permits to suppress any pattern that is not
( )

dependent in frequency. Such a derivative is proportional to the line position in magnetic field

derivative
, with three extrema values at
and
of opposite sign between the
𝐵0

' 𝑓
( )
𝐵0 𝑓
( ) 
𝐵0 𝑓
( ) ± Γ

central ones and side ones. More precisely

∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵 |

𝐵=𝐵0 𝑓
( )

= 2𝑎Γ

2𝐵0

' 𝑓
( ),

∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵 |

𝐵=𝐵0 𝑓
( )±Γ

=− 𝑎Γ

2

2 𝐵0

' 𝑓
( ),

so that sides peaks are four times lower in absolute amplitude. Then, lines will be localized on the

absolute value of the
signal (i.e.
) with a peak finding routine, so that only features with a
𝐷2
|𝐷2
|

frequency dependence are extracted. An appropriate threshold is defined so that side peaks of
|𝐷2 are
|

not detected, since they have a lower amplitude. Absolute value is required as a result of signal

distortion from long term drifts or noise increase from numerical derivation. In that aim, the find_peak

method of scipy.signal python library has been used on each D2 curve, as a function of B.

For a given frequency, Dcross and
are computed both for single layer and bilayer graphene sample.
𝐷2

Peak of photoconductivity are automatically extracted from those data using find_peak routine of

scipy.signal library in Python, with typically prominence parameter of 0.5, and peak distance of

100 mT. Then, these peaks are adjusted with a linear fit routine. On single layer graphene sample, one

obtained the mapping in frequency of Fig. 1. Then, for each line, a region of interest is defined by

hand from the ensemble of peaks detected, in order to provide linear regression fit procedure for each

transition observed. The optimal parameters and their 95% confidence interval are estimated with the

linregress method of the scipy.stats python library.


Figure 1 – a) Numerically calculated D2 signal of single layer graphene sample. Dashed line
corresponds to linear fit of automatically detected peaks. b) Numerically calculated Dcross signal of
single layer graphene sample. Dashed line corresponds to linear fit of automatically detected peaks. c)
Raw data of photoconductive signal in the 85-125 GHz range. d) Raw data of photoconductive signal
in the 45-75 GHz range.

From linear fits, one could extract the value of the slope and the frequency at zero-field (B=0T) for

each transition observed. These values are summed up in table 1 for bilayer graphene (sample B) and

in table 2 for single layer graphene (sample A). From these values, one may extract the value of the

Landé g-factor, summarized in table 3.

∂

2𝑆

∂𝐵

2

∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵

Line #
Slope (GHz/T)
Frequency at B=0

(GHz)
Slope (GHz/T)
Frequency at B=0

(GHz)


1 (γ’)
− 27. 4±0. 3
− 7. 0±0. 9
− 27. 3±0. 3
− 7. 4±1. 5

2 (α)
− 28. 2±0. 4
− 1. 1±1. 0
− 27. 6±0. 8
− 0. 7±2. 3

3 (β)
− 29. 3±0. 4
11. 0±1. 0
− 28. 1±0. 4
14. 6±1. 7

4 (β)
-
-
25. 2±1. 6
17. 1±2. 9

5 (α)
-
-
-
-

6 (γ’)
-
-
26. 5±0. 9
− 4. 4±2. 6

Table 1 – Value of slope and frequency at zero field for each transition observed in the case of a
bilayer graphene sample. Values are obtained from a linear fit of the detected peak of second
derivative signal.

∂

2𝑆

∂𝐵

2

∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵

Line #
Slope (GHz/T)
Frequency at B=0

(GHz)
Slope (GHz/T)
Frequency at B=0

(GHz)

1 (γ’)
− 27. 7±0. 4
− 6. 2±1. 5
− 27. 5±0. 4
− 5. 7±1. 9

2 (α)
− 28. 0±0. 4
− 0. 4±1. 4
− 28. 7±0. 4
− 3±1. 9

3 (β)
− 28. 35±0. 5
12. 5±1. 6
− 29. 3±0. 8
9. 2±3. 2

4 (β)
29. 9±1. 0
7. 8±3. 4
28. 8±0. 7
11. 0±2. 7

5 (α)
-
-
28. 3±0. 61
− 0. 9±2. 6

6 (γ’)
27. 2±0. 5
− 3. 6±2. 0
27. 9±0. 6
− 6. 1±2. 7

Table 2 – Value of slope and frequency at zero field for each transition observed in the case of a single
layer graphene sample. Values are obtained from a linear fit of the detected peak of second derivative
signal.


Single Layer Graphene
Bilayer Graphene

Line #
∂

2𝑆

∂𝐵

2

∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵

∂

2𝑆

∂𝐵

2

∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵

1 (γ’)
1. 96±0. 02
1. 95±0. 02
1. 98±0. 03
1. 96±0. 03

2 (α)
2. 01±0. 03
1. 97±0. 06
2±0. 03
2. 05±0. 03

3 (β)
2. 09±0. 03
2. 01±0. 03
2. 025±0. 04
2. 09±0. 06

4 (β)
-
1. 8±0. 11
2. 14±0. 07
2. 06±0. 05

5 (α)
-
-
-
2. 02±0. 04

6 (γ’)
-
1. 89±0. 06
1. 94±0. 04
1. 99±0. 04

Mean value
2. 02±0. 02
1. 92±0. 06
2. 02±0. 02
2. 03±0. 02

Table 3 – Estimation of Landé g-factor for single and bilayer graphene sample.


Bilayer graphene
Single layer graphene

∂

2𝑆

∂𝐵

2

∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵

∂

2𝑆

∂𝐵

2

∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵

Line #
Slope (GHz/T)
Frequency at
B=0 (GHz)
Slope (GHz/T)
Frequency at
B=0 (GHz)

Slope

(GHz/T)

Frequency at
B=0 (GHz)

Slope

(GHz/T)

Frequency at
B=0 (GHz)

1 (γ’)
− 27. 7±0. 4
− 6. 2±1. 5
− 27. 5±0. 4
− 5. 7±1. 9
− 27. 4±0. 3
− 7. 0±0. 9
− 27. 3±0. 3
− 7. 4±1. 5

2 (α)
− 28. 0±0. 4
− 0. 4±1. 4
− 28. 7±0. 4
− 3±1. 9
− 28. 2±0. 4
− 1. 1±1. 0
− 27. 6±0. 8
− 0. 7±2. 3

3 (β)
− 28. 35±0. 5
12. 5±1. 6
− 29. 3±0. 8
9. 2±3. 2
− 29. 3±0. 4
11. 0±1. 0
− 28. 1±0. 4
14. 6±1. 7

4 (β)
29. 9±1. 0
7. 8±3. 4
28. 8±0. 7
11. 0±2. 7
-
-
25. 2±1. 6
17. 1±2. 9

5 (α)
-
-
28. 3±0. 61
− 0. 9±2. 6
-
-
-
-

6 (γ’)
27. 2±0. 5
− 3. 6±2. 0
27. 9±0. 6
− 6. 1±2. 7
-
-
26. 5±0. 9
− 4. 4±2. 6

Table 4 – Estimated slopes and zero field frequencies by two different methods for single layer and bilayer graphene.


Temperature dependence of peak position

The temperature dependences of observed line have been also studied in the case of bilayer graphene,

summed up in Fig. 2. These results are consistent with observations made in single layer graphene.

Figure 2 - Evolution of the resonance in bilayer graphene versus the temperature for a source
frequency of 90 GHz. a) Photoresponse is plotted versus magnetic field at different temperatures. Red,
blue and green dots represent the evolution with the temperature for the α, β and γ’ transitions
respectively. No effect of temperature is observed for the zero-field valley transition as opposed as the
intrinsic spin-orbit coupling splitting ones. b) Energy of the intercept at zero origin versus the
temperature for the three observed transitions. Same color as a) is used to represent the transition.
Dash line represents the converge values of energy at high temperature, -47 and 26 µeV for β and γ’
transitions respectively.

Besides this temperature-induced strain effect, the spin resonance shift could indicate the presence of

low-temperature magnetic ordering [1]. The analysis of the amplitude of the resonances, proportional

to the paramagnetic susceptibility, makes it possible to separate a ferromagnetic signal from a

1 In situ Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroelectrochemical study of graphene-based supercapacitors:
Comparison between chemically reduced graphene oxide and nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide, B. Wang,
V. Likodimos, A. J. Fielding, R.A.W. Dryfe, Carbon, 160, 236-246 (2020)


paramagnetic contribution [2]. It is impossible to retrace the evolution of the intensity of the α line

because it is too weak in all of our results. However, we plot the amplitude of the second derivative of

the signal for the γ’ and β transitions over the entire temperature range in Fig. 3, measured in sample B

at a frequency of 60 GHz. The amplitude of the second derivative is proportional to the amplitude of

the resonance of the lock-in signal, as explained in previous section “Data processing”. Even though

this is a preliminary study, it is clear that the signal obeys a Curie law with a Curie-Weiss temperature

tending to 0, which indicates the absence of any magnetic order.

Figure 3 - Evolution of the amplitude of the optical transitions plotted versus temperature for sample A

at 60 GHz. Red and green dots represent γ’ and β transitions, respectively. Insert shows the reverse of

the amplitude of the optical transitions. Dashed lines correspond to linear fits.

Temperature dependence of peak amplitude

Since the probe frequency (60GHz) involves rather low energies of 240µeV (3 K equivalent

temperature), one expects thermal activation to play a significant role in the temperature dependence

2 FMR Evidence of Stable Ferromagnetic Correlations at Zigzag Edge States in Graphene, M. A.
Augustyniak-Jablokowa, M. Maćkowiak, K. Tadyszak and R. Strzelczyk, Acta Phys. Polish. A 127, 537 (2015)


of signal peak depth. Considering a two-level model, with a zero-field splitting of
, population of
∆

upper and lower level are given by Fermi-Dirac distribution
, with
and
𝑓 ε, µ
(
) =
1

1+𝑒

β(ε−µ)
β =
1

𝑘𝐵𝑇
µ

the chemical potential. For a given magnetic field
, levels energies might be written as follow
𝐵

𝐸1 =− ∆

2 − µ𝐵𝑔𝐵   𝑎𝑛𝑑   𝐸2 = ∆

2 + µ𝐵𝑔𝐵,

with
the Landé factor. For
the probe frequency (
GHz), the resonance condition of the
𝑔
ν
ν = 60

transition observed associated to a given peak provide the following relationship

ℎν = 𝐸2 − 𝐸1 = ∆ + 2µ𝐵𝑔𝐵.

The probability
for absorbing a probe photon is proportional to the probability of having
𝑃(Δ, β, µ, ν)

an electron in the lower level and no electron in the upper level is then given by

𝑃 Δ, β, µ
(
) = 𝑓 𝐸1, µ
(
) × 1 − 𝑓 𝐸2, µ
(
)
(
) =
1

1+2cosh𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ βµ
(
) 𝑒

−β
∆
( 2 +µ𝐵𝑔𝐵
)+𝑒

−β ∆+2µ𝐵𝑔𝐵
(
) .

Then, introducing the probe frequency , it might be rewritten as follow
ν

𝑃 β, µ, ν
(
) =
1

1+2cosh𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ βµ
(
) 𝑒

− βℎν

2 +𝑒

−βℎν .

The change in conductivity related to resonant absorption of the incident probe wave is proportional to

the probability
, with a coefficient denoted
that depends on the experimental setup.
𝑃 Δ, β, µ, ν
(
)
𝑎

Moreover, the detection scheme of this work is based on Ratchet devices that are non-linear process.

Consequently, as a nonlinear process, a threshold is expected in the signal generation. Additionally,

regarding level of noise in the experimental data, and the numerical method used for peak amplitude

measurements, an additional offset
in the model is added. Such simple aims at confirming that
𝑏

temperature dependence of peaks amplitude is dominated by thermal activation effects, using realistic

parameters, and modelling technical offsets from reasonable assumptions.


Figure 4 - Evolution of the amplitude of the optical transitions plotted versus temperature for sample A

at 60 GHz. Red and green dots represent γ’ and β transitions, respectively. Dashed line corresponds the

theoretical model fitted data, with resulting fit parameters in legend.

Then one may propose the following analytical expression of the detected signal 𝑆 Δ, β, µ, ν
(
)

amplitude at resonance

𝑆 β, µ, ν
(
) = 𝑎×
1

1+2cosh𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ βµ
(
) 𝑒

− βℎν

2 +𝑒

−βℎν − 𝑏
(
),

where
and
are unknown parameters related to the experimental setup, that might be taken as fit
𝑎
𝑏

parameters. from reasonable assumptions. This analytical model has been fitted with amplitude of γ'

and
lines measured at 60 GHz for sample A (same data as previous figure, Fig. 3). Data have been
β

fitted using curve_fit routine from Python 3.0 scipy.optimize library, providing good agreement

between data and model as illustrated in Fig. 4. Results of fits are providing the same offset coefficient

within confidence intervals obtained. Within confidence intervals of fitting parameters
,
line
𝑎 γ'

strength is twice the strength of
line.
β

Measurements on THz detector based on the graphene p-n junction

The graphene detector made from a p-n junction was measured in the same way as the ratchet

detectors. It was placed in a 6 T horizontal cryogen free magnet system with optical access. The


voltage generator (Keitley 2600B) allowed to control the current applied on the device. The

measurements were done at 1.7 K by applying a current of -140 µA on the device. Sub-THz source

generated by Shottky diode of multiplied frequency were used to obtain frequencies in the ranges from

82 GHz to 125 GHz (optical power about 10 mW). The signal was detected as a voltage drop at the

edges of the detector, which is then amplified and measured via a standard lock-in technique (using an

Amatek Signal recovery 6270).

Although the intensity of the photoconductivity signal and the signal-to-noise ratio obtained in the p-n

junction were lower than with the ratchet devices, we were able to detect spin resonances and followed

their evolution as a function of the incident frequency and the magnetic field. It turns out that the

positions of the resonances are comparable to those obtained in the ratchet detectors. The results

obtained with this p-n junction-based sensor as a function of the incident frequency are plotted in the

form of a color mapping in Figure 5. For each line, a region of interest is manually defined from the

set of detected peaks, in order to provide a linear fitting procedure for each observed transition. The

optimal parameters and their 95% confidence interval are estimated with the linregress method of the

python scipy.stats library. From the linear fits, it was possible to extract the value of the slope and the

zero field frequency (B = 0 T) for each observed transition. These values are summarized in Table 5.

Two spin resonances in the p-n junction of graphene are observed, whose zero-field extrapolation

allows their identification. The first gives a g-factor roughly equal to two, just like that measured in

ratchet detectors. The second allows us to extract a zero-field splitting of the order of 17.6 GHz (73

µeV), instead of the approximately 13 GHz observed in ratchet devices at low temperature. It should

be noted that the measurement uncertainty is high given the low signal-to-noise ratio. We also

underline that the geometry of the p-n junction detector requires a wide log-periodic metallic antenna

placed on the graphene sheet to effectively rectify the incident THz wave. The strain effects on the

graphene layer should therefore be significant at low temperature and could be responsible for this

higher ZFS value. Unfortunately, it was impossible to follow the evolution of this ZFS value as a

function of temperature because the intensity of the signal dropped below the detection threshold at

temperatures slightly higher than that used for these results.


Figure 5 – a) Numerically calculated Dcross signal of graphene detector with a p-n junction. Dashed line
corresponds to linear fit of automatically detected peaks. b) Frequency of the different resonances as a
function of magnetic field in the range 82-125 GHz measured at 1.7 K. The dashed lines are some
linear fits obtain from measurement in the 82-125GHz range allowing for the extrapolation of the
experimental results to B = 0. The lower dashed line follows the linear evolution with a slope of -25.4
GHz/T ± 1.5 GHz/T and with an intercept frequency at B =0 of -5.2 ± 6.6 GHz. The other dashed lines
have a slope of -27.7 GHz/T ± 1.6 GHz/T and with an intercept frequency at B = 0 of 17.6 ±4.8 GHz.
The inset is example of raw data of photoconductive signal in the 85-125GHz range.

∂

2𝑆

∂𝑓∂𝐵

Line #
Slope (GHz/T)
Landé g-factor
Frequency at
B=0 (GHz)
ZFS (µeV)

1
− 25. 4±1. 5
1. 8±0. 11
− 5. 2±6. 6
− 21. 6±27. 2

2
− 27. 7±1. 6
2. 0±0. 11
17. 6±4. 8
73. 0±19. 7

Table 5 – Estimated slopes and zero field frequencies for graphene detector with a p-n junction.


References

1 In situ Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroelectrochemical study of graphene-based supercapacitors:
Comparison between chemically reduced graphene oxide and nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide, B. Wang,
V. Likodimos, A. J. Fielding, R.A.W. Dryfe, Carbon, 160, 236-246 (2020)

2 FMR Evidence of Stable Ferromagnetic Correlations at Zigzag Edge States in Graphene, M. A.
Augustyniak-Jablokowa, M. Maćkowiak, K. Tadyszak and R. Strzelczyk, Acta Phys. Polish. A 127, 537 (2015)


