Flexo-photovoltaic effect and above-bandgap photovoltage in halide perovskites

Zhiguo Wang1, 6, Shengwen Shu2, 6, Xiaoyong Wei3, Renhong Liang1, Shanming Ke1, Longlong Shu1 ✉,

Gustau Catalan4, 5✉

1. School of Physics and Materials Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, People’s Republic 
of China.

2. College of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, People’s 
Republic of China.

3. Electronic Materials Research Laboratory, Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education and 
International Center for Dielectric Research, Xi’an Jiao Tong University, Xi’an 710049, People’s 
Republic of China

4. Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Catalonia. 

5. Institut Catala de Nanociencia i Nanotecnologia (ICN2), CSIC–BIST, Campus Universitat Autonoma 
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia.

6. These authors contributed equally: Zhiguo Wang, Shengwen Shu.

✉e-mail: llshu@ncu.edu.cn; gustau.catalan@icn2.cat

ABSTRACT

Halide perovskites have outstanding photovoltaic properties which have been optimized through 
interfacial engineering. However, as these materials approach the limits imposed by the physics of 
semiconductor junctions, it is urgent to explore alternatives, such as the bulk photovoltaic effect, 
whose physical origin is different and not bound by the same limits [1-3]. In this context, we focus on 
the flexo-photovoltaic effect, a type of bulk photovoltaic effect that was recently observed in oxides 
under strain gradients [4]. We have measured the flexo-photovoltaic effect of MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3
crystals under bending and found it to be orders of magnitude larger than for SrTiO3, the benchmark 
flexo-photovoltaic oxide. For sufficiently large strain gradients, photovoltages bigger than the 
bandgap can be produced. Bulk photovoltaic effects are additive and, for MAPbI3, the flexo-
photovoltage exists on top of a native bulk photovoltage that is hysteretic, consistent with the 
electrically switchable macroscopic polarization of this material. The results suggest that harnessing 
the flexo-photovoltaic effect through strain gradient engineering can provide a functional leap 
forward for halide perovskites.


Generating a photovoltaic effect requires breaking space-inversion symmetry; otherwise photo-
generated carriers do not have a preferential direction in which to flow (Neumann principle of 
symmetry). In conventional solar cells, spatial inversion symmetry is broken at interfaces, and
electron-hole pairs generated at or near the interfaces move in opposite directions towards their most 
charge-affine side of the junction [5,6], thereby establishing a photocurrent. However, spatial 
inversion symmetry can also be intrinsically broken, without the need for interfaces, inside the bulk 
of some materials -piezoelectrics – which are defined by having non-centrosymmetric crystal 
structures. Electron-hole pairs photo-excited inside piezoelectrics have different probabilities of 
drifting in opposite directions and thus generate a shift current in response to illumination. This is 
known as the “bulk photovoltaic effect” [1-3].

In addition, the symmetry of any crystal, piezoelectric or otherwise, can also be broken by bending. 
This is the basis of flexoelectricity, a linear coupling between strain gradients and polarization first 
described in insulating dielectrics [7] but known to exist also in semiconductors [8]. Because bending 
deformation is inherently asymmetric (it creates tension on the convex side of the crystal and 
compression on the concave one), the so-called flexophotovoltaic effect [4] is theoretically possible in
any material under bending. However, so far there has been no measurement of this effect in halide 
perovskites, a family of materials with large photovoltaic efficiency [6,9] which are known to be 
flexoelectric [10]. Here we report the flexophotovoltaic effect of halide perovskites MAPbBr3
(hereafter MAPB) and MAPbI3, and compare them to that of a reference oxide perovskite SrTiO3 (STO), 
used as flexoelectric benchmark [11]. We find that strain gradients can induce large flexo-photovoltaic 
effects in halide perovskites and can even achieve above-bandgap photovoltages in these materials.

The halide-perovskite samples in this study are single crystals made by us (see Methods) and the STO 
crystals were commercially acquired (TOPVENDOR, Beijing, China). Identical Au electrodes were 
deposited on opposite sides of the crystals to make symmetric sandwich-capacitor structures, which
were illuminated laterally so that the contributions from the two opposite electrode interfaces were 
of similar magnitude and opposite sign and hence mutually cancelled. Illumination was provided by 
LED light with 405 nm wavelength for MAPB and 365 nm for STO, which has a larger bandgap. The 
maximum light intensity was set to 1000 LUX, as calibrated at the sample location using a photometer. 
The same photometer, in combination with a polarizer placed between light source and sample, was 
used to verify that the light emitted by the LED was not polarized [see Supplementary video S1]. 
Rotating the polarizing filter also allowed characterizing the dependence of photovoltaic output on 
the polarization angle of incident light, which is important to determine the bulk nature of the 
photovoltaic effect [1,12]. The strain gradients required to induce a flexo-photoelectric response were 
generated by bending the crystals in single-clamp cantilever geometry. We used the standard 
continuum-mechanics equation to calculate the strain gradient from the vertical deflection [13]. The 
experimental scheme is depicted in Figure 1-A and the experimental details are provided in the 
Methods section. 

In the absence of bending, the close-circuit photocurrent and open-circuit photovoltage of STO and 
MAPB are found to be negligible, as expected for cubic centrosymmetric materials, and sizeable
photovoltage and photocurrents appear only when the crystals are bent (Figure 1). The use of single 
crystals with a well-defined bending geometry allows quantifying the flexophotovoltaic effect and 

compare it between different materials. We define the flexophotovoltage coefficient as 𝑉 

VOC

𝜕𝐺 , 

where VOC is the open-circuit photovoltage at 1000 LUX, measured in volts, and G is the strain gradient
measured in m-1.For STO, we find 𝑉 =-3×10-3 V/m-1 from linear regression of the photovoltage as a 
function of strain gradient in figure 1-D. In contrast, the flexo-photovoltaic coefficient of MAPB,
measured in identical conditions as the STO crystal, is much larger: V = -1.3 V/m-1 (Figure 1-H).


Figure 1. Schematic configuration of flexo-photovoltaic experiment and results for STO and MAPB. (A) Single 
crystals with identical top and bottom electrodes are clamped in the thickness direction [001] and bent vertically 
(see Supplementary materials figure S1). The lower left shows the relation between coordinate axis and crystal 
direction. The crystals were bent around the [010] axis and illuminated from the side parallel to the bending 
axis. A polarizing filter was introduced after the measurements in order to verify the bulk nature of the 
photoresponse. All measurements were performed under 1000 LUX of illuminance. (B and F) photocurrent 
density as a function of applied strain gradient. (C and G) current as a function of voltage under bending and 
illumination. (D and H) open-circuit photovoltage (voltage for which there is no current) and closed-circuit 
photocurrent (current at 0 V) as a function of strain gradient, extracted from (C and G). Linear fits to the data 
yield the flexophotovoltaic and flexophotocurrent coefficients, respectively. (E and I) photovoltage and 
photocurrent as a function of the polarization of the incident light with respect to the [001] direction, which is 
perpendicular to the elecrodes and parallel to the flexoelectric polarization. The observed pi-periodic response 
is consistent with a bulk photovoltaic effect. 

These results demonstrate that bending induces a photovoltaic effect in MAPB. Although photovoltaic 
contributions from crystal-electrode interfaces are self-cancelling when the crystal is flat (they are of 
equal magnitude and opposite sign), their equivalence is broken when the crystal is bent because one 
interface is under compression while the other is under tension, and this can yield a response that is
flexoelectric-like but of interfacial rather than bulk origin [10,14,15]. We therefore need to clarify
whether the observed bending-induced photovoltage is caused by a bulk flexo-photovoltaic effect or 
a by an interfacial change in the deformation potentials. Figures 1-E and 1-I show that the 
photovoltage and photocurrent change as a function of the polarization angle of incident linearly-
polarized light. These variations are not due to changes in the intensity of the incident light (see 
Methods and Supplementary video S1). The observed 90-degree dependence of photovoltage and 
photocurrent on light-polarization angle is a trademark signature of the bulk photovoltaic effect [1,12] 
and the flexo-photovoltaic effect [4].

To explore the generality of the results, we have extended this investigation to another halide 
perovskite, the archetype methil-ammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3, henceforth MAPI). Compared to 
MAPB, this material has a smaller bandgap and a crystal structure that might be ferroelectric at room 


temperature, although there is no unanimity about this aspect [16-18]. The MAPI single crystals were 
made and measured following the same procedure as for MAPB, and the results are shown in Figure 
2 A-B. Like in MAPB, we observe a clear flexo-photovoltaic effect, in the sense that bending the crystal 
modifies the photovoltaic output of the crystal. However, unlike MAPB, MAPI shows a non-zero 
photovoltaic output even in the initial flat state. This implies that the MAPI crystal is already polar to 
start with, with a native bulk photovoltaic effect that is then further modulated by bending. The bulk 
nature of both these photovoltages is supported by the 90-degree sinusoidal dependence of the 
photovoltage on the light polarization, shown in the supplementary materials Figure S2. 

To gain further insight into the native bulk photovoltage of MAPI, we measured the open-circuit 
photovoltage as a function of poling field. The results show a ferroelectric-like hysteretic response
(Figures 2 C-D). These photovoltages and photocurrents have been measured after, not during, the 
application of poling voltage, and the hysteresis loops are therefore robust against the so-called
“banana loop” artifact that affects conventional hysteresis measurements of polarization as a function 
of field in non-insulating materials [19]. The results indicate that MAPI crystals have two polar states 
separated by an energy barrier and switching the macroscopic polarization reverses the open-circuit 
photovoltage. From a functional point of view, therefore, MAPI is ferroelectric-like, and the
photovoltage dependence on its poling history means that, in addition to strain gradients, external
voltages can be used modify its photovoltaic output. On the other hand, these measurements can 
prove macroscopic polarization but cannot determine whether ferroelectricity exists at the 
crystallographic unit-cell level. The distinction is important because macroscopic polarization, induced 
by chemical or micro-structural gradients, can exist in cristallographically non-polar materials [20,21], 
and in the case of MAPI it is known that macroscopic polarization can be induced induce via ionic 
separation [22].

Figure 2. Photovoltaic output of MAPI as a function of strain gradient (A, B) and poling field (C, D). The results 
show a hysterestic bulk photovoltaic effect that can be modified both by electric fields and by strain gradients.


Contrary to the photovoltage of a semiconductor junction, the open-circuite voltage generated by the 
bulk photovoltaic effect can be bigger than the bandgap [1,23,24] and, since the flexophotovoltaic 
effect in of halide perovskites is a bulk photovoltaic effect, it is natural to wonder whether strain 
gradients can induce above-bandgap photovoltages. In our bulk crystals, the maximum curvature that 
could be generated without breaking was ≤ 0.25 m-1, and this was insufficient to induce an above-
bandgap photovoltage. On the other hand, strain gradients scale in inverse proportion to relaxation 
length and it is therefore possible to induce larger strain gradients by working at smaller size scales 
[25,26]. In particular, pressing a material with the sharp tip of an atomic force microscope is known to
induce very large local strain gradients and flexoelectricity [27, 4]. We have therefore made a smaller 
(micron-thick) crystal and used an atomic force microscope with a conductive tip to induce a large 
vertical strain gradient and collect the photovoltaic output as a function of the vertical force applied 
to the tip (Figure 3).

The open-circuit photovoltage was found to increase in direct proportion to the indentation force and 
therefore the strain gradient, exceeding the 2.3eV bandgap around 1 N and reaching ~4 eV for the 
applied forces of the order of 10 N (Figures 3-C and 3-D). Even larger photovoltages of up to ~6V, 
which is more than twice the bandgap, could be achieved at lower indentation forces by working with
a sharper tip (see supplementary materials S6). Since a larger-than-bandgap photovoltage cannot be 
generated in a semiconductor interface and our samples are single crystals free from internal grain 
boundaries that might act as tandem junctions [28], the results further support the bulk nature of the 
flexo-photovoltaic effect of MAPB, also verified by the 90-degree sinusoidal dependence of the 
photovoltage on light-polarization angle (inset of Figure 3-D).


Figure 3: Above-bandgap photovoltage induced by flexoelectricity. (A) scheme of the experiment, whereby a 
large local curvature is induced by pushing with the tip of an atomic force microscope, and the current vs voltage 
is measured under illumination for various indentation forces. (B) micro-crystal useed for the measurement. The 
thickness of the crystal is ~1 µm and the bottom electrode is ITO. We observed no mechanical damage to the 
sample even after applying a maximal indentation force of 20 N (see comparison in supplementary materials 
Figure S2. (C) current vs voltage measured under an indentation force of 10 N, showing a ~4V open-circuit 
photovoltage (D) open-circuit photovoltage as a function of indentation force, showing the correlation between 
the two and (inset) photovoltage as a function of linear light-polarization angle, showing the same sinusoidal 
dependence as in the bulk crystals.

Although strain gradient engineering is a less mature field than strain engineering [29], strategies are 
emerging. Flexible free-standing films [30] can be deposited onto pre-tensed polymer substrates to 
induce wrinkles [31], or self-roll into cylinders with radial strain gradients [32]. Even in conventional
flat-film architectures, vertical gradients can be induced through strain relaxation [33] or 
compositional gradients [34], while in polycrystalline films and ceramics strong internal strain 
gradients exist at grain boundaries [35], meaning that the flexo-photovoltaic effect may already be 
playing a role in the photovoltaic output of polycrystalline perovskites. At any rate, the strength of the 
flexophotovoltaic effect provides a clear motivation for exploring the limits of strain gradient 
engineering in halide perovskites.


Acknowledgments:

This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 12174174 and 

51962020) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (Nos. 20212ACB214011 and 
20202ZDB01006). GC acknowledges financial support from Project PID2019-108573GB-C21 funded by 
MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and a Severo Ochoa Grant CEX2021-001214-S. He also thanks 
Prof. Dennis Meier for hosting GC as visiting professor at NTNU (Trondheim) during part of the time 
invested in this research. L.S thanks the support from Nanchang University. We thank Prof. 
Massimiliano Stengel for stimulating discussions.

Methods

Sample information:

STO (100) single crystals were commercially acquired from TOPVENDOR (www. topvendor.com.cn), 
with dimensions of 5 mm × 15 mm × 0.1 mm (width × length × thickness). The dimensions of electrodes 
are 5 mm × 4 mm (width × length).

MAPB single crystals for bending were prepared using these raw materials: methylammonium 
bromide (CH3NH3Br, 99.5%, Advanced Election Technology) or iodide (CH3NH3I, 99.5%, Advanced 
Election Technology)
lead bromide (PbBr2, 99.9%, Advanced Election Technology), N,N-

dimethylformamide (DMF, 99%, Energy Chemical). MAPI single crystals for bending were prepared 
using these raw materials: methylammonium iodine (CH3NH3I, 99.5%, Advanced Election Technology), 
Lead iodine (PbI2, 99.5%, Advanced Election Technology), γ-butyrolactone (GBL, ≥ 99%, Energy 
Chemical). MAPB and MAPI single crystals were grown using the inverse temperature crystallization 
method [36]. MAPB and MAPI single crystals were grown from its saturated solution in DMF and GBL
(the concentration is 1 mol/L), respectively. We used 2000 mesh sandpaper to sand down the crystals 
to a lower thickness, followed by polishing the top and bottom surfaces with finer sandpaper (first 
5000 mesh, then 10000 mesh) to achieve a mirror-smooth surface. The final dimensions of the MAPB 
single crystals were 5 mm × 15 mm × 1 mm, and MAPI single crystals are 5 mm × 15 mm × 0.9 mm for 
flexo-photovoltaic. The dimensions of electrodes are 5 mm × 4 mm (width × length).

MAPB micro-crystals for AFM experiment: The MAPB solution (1 mol/L) was spin-coated at 2000 
rpm/min for 30s on the glass with indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode. Heating treatment at 70 C for 30 
min was carried out after the spin-coating process. The thickness of the micro MAPB single crystals is 
~1 µm (Figure S3).

Illumination

The photovoltaic response was induced using a non-polarized LED light source (Model: HY-UV0003). 
The illuminance on the sample was measured using a photometer (Model: DT1330A, LIHUAJIN). The 
non-polarized nature of the light was verified by measuring the intensity of the incident light as a 
function of polarizer angle; the intensity variations as a function of polarizer rotation were smaller 
than 0.6% (see supplementary video S1). 

Strain Gradients

The rectangular-beam-shaped crystals were clamped at one end and pushed at the opposite free end
to induce single-clamp cantilever bending. The free end was pushed either from above or from below 


to induce positive or negative strain gradients respectively. In single-clamp cantilever geometry, the 
strain gradient is calculated from the vertical deflection of the free end using this equation: [13]

𝜕𝜀11
𝜕𝑥3 =

3𝑤(𝐿)

𝐿2
(1 −

𝑥
𝐿)
(1)

where w(L) is the vertical deflection delivered by the piezoelectric actuator at the end of the 
cantilever, L is the length of the cantilever and x is the horizontal position from the center of the 
electrode to the fixed end, respectively. 

Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM)

The electrical-transport characterizations of MAPB single crystal under a tip force was measured using 
a Cypher ES (Asylum Research) atomic force microscope (AFM) with ORCA mode (conductive AFM). A 
diamond-coated conductive probe (Model: CDT-NCLR) with a diameter of ~150 nm and force 
constants of 72 N m-1 was used to apply pressure to the MAPbBr3 single crystal, and the current-
voltage (I-V) curve of the crystal was measured at the same time. An electrical bias was applied 
through the substrate, which was swiped at a ramping rate ~1 V s-1. The background noise is lower 
than  50 pA in the 20 nA measurement range. (1) The AFM tip was placed in contact with the surface 
of the crystal with a preset force. The applied force was increased by further deflecting the AFM tip 
cantilever. (2) After the applied force reached a preset value, the compressive force was maintained 
constant by the feedback amplifier circuit of the controller, and then the electrical measurements 
were initiated. In this stage, a sweeping bias was applied between the substrate and the tip. (3) After 
the I–V measurement had been performed, a new compressive force was applied by setting a new 
target set point value and the corresponding electrical measurement was performed. In addition, we 
performed measurements of current and voltage vs time for given set-points. The results, shown in 
the supplementary materials figure S6, show that the steady-state values do not differ significantly 
from those measured in the I-V cycles.

The AFM tips are calibrated by the thermal noise method. We can precisely obtain the inverse optical 
lever sensitivity (InvOLS) and the spring constant of the tips. The precise force is calculated by 
multiplying the spring constant, InvOLS and cantilever deflection (force = spring constant × InvOLS × 
(preset deflection − initial deflection)). All measurements were performed in air at room temperature. 


REFERENCES

1.
Fridkin, V. M. Bulk photovoltaic effect in noncentrosymmetric crystals. Crystallogr. Rep. 46, 654-
658 (2001).

2.
Fridkin, V. M. Review of recent work on the bulk photovoltaic effect in ferro and piezoelectrics. 
Ferroelectrics 53, 169-187 (1984).

3.
Grinberg, I. et al. Perovskite oxides for visible-light-absorbing ferroelectric and photovoltaic 
materials. Nature 503, 509-512 (2013).

4.
Yang, M. M., Kim, D. J. & Alexe, M. Flexo-photovoltaic effect. Science 360, 904–907 (2018).

5.
Shockley, W. & Queisser, H. J. Detailed balance limit of efficiency of p−n junction solar cells. J. 
Appl. Phys. 32, 510–519 (1961).

6.
Kim, J. Y. et al. High-efficiency perovskite solar cells. Chem. Rev. 120, 7867-7918 (2020).

7.
Zubko, P., Catalan, G. & Tagantsev, A. K. Flexoelectric effect in solids. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 43, 
387-421 (2013).

8.
Narvaez, J., Vasquez-Sancho, F. & Catalan, G. Enhanced flexoelectric-like response in oxide 
semiconductors. Nature 538, 219-221 (2016).

9.
Burschka, J. et al. Sequential deposition as a route to high-performance perovskite-sensitized 
solar cells. Nature 499, 316-319 (2013).

10. Shu, L. L. et al. Photoflexoelectric effect in halide perovskites. Nat. Mater. 19, 605-609 (2020).

11. Zubko, P., Catalan, G., Buckley, A., Welche, P. R. L. & Scott, J. F. Strain-gradient-induced 

polarization in SrTiO3 single crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 167601 (2007).

12. Vonbaltz, R. & Kraut, W. Theory of the bulk photo-voltaic effect in pure-crystals. Phys. Rev. B 23, 

5590-5596 (1981).

13. Zhang, L. B. et al., Origin of defects induced large flexoelectricity in ferroelectric ceramics, Phys. 

Rev. Mater. 6, 094416 (2022).

14. Stengel, M. Surface control of flexoelectricity. Phys. Rev. B 90, 201112 (2014).

15. Jin, Y. S. et al. Oxygen vacancy and photoelectron enhanced flexoelectricity in perovskite SrTiO3

crystal, Appl. Phys. Lett. 118, 164101 (2021).

16. Shahrokhi, S. et al, Emergence of ferroelectricity in halide perovskites. Small Methods 4, 

2000149 (2020).

17. Hoque, M. N. F. et al. Polarization and dielectric study of methylammonium lead Iodide thin film 

to reveal its nonferroelectric nature under solar cell operating conditions. ACS Energy Lett. 1, 
142-149 (2016).

18. Anusca, I. et al. Dielectric Response: Answer to Many Questions in the Methylammonium Lead 

Halide Solar Cell Absorbers. Adv. Energy Mater. 7, 1700600 (2017).

19. Scott, J. F. Ferroelectrics go bananas. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 20, 021001 (2008).


20. Biancoli, A., Fancher, C. M., Jones, J. L. & Damjanovic, D. Breaking of macroscopic centric 

symmetry in paraelectric phases of ferroelectric materials and implications for flexoelectricity. 
Nat. Mater. 14, 224-229 (2015).

21. Aktas, O. et al. Piezoelectricity in nominally centrosymmetric phases. Phys. Rev. Research 3, 

043221 (2021).

22. Xiao, Z. G. et al. Giant switchable photovoltaic effect in organometal trihalide perovskite devices. 

Nat. Mater. 14, 193-198 (2015).

23. Yang, S. Y. et al. Above-bandgap voltages from ferroelectric photovoltaic devices. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 5, 143–147 (2010).

24. Grinberg, I. et al. Perovskite oxides for visible-light-absorbing ferroelectric and photovoltaic 

materials. Nature 503, 509–512 (2013).

25. Nguyen, T. et al. Nanoscale flexoelectricity. Adv. Mater. 25, 946 (2013).

26. Deng, Q. et al. Nanoscale flexoelectric energy harvesting. Int. J. of Solids and Structures 51, 3218 

(2014).

27. Lu, H. et al. Mechanical writing of ferroelectric polarization. Science 336, 59-61 (2012).

28. Y. Yuan, et al. Anomalous photovoltaic effect in organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells. 

Sci. Adv. 3, e1602164 (2017).

29. C, Zhu. et al. Strain engineering in perovskite solar cells and its impacts on carrier dynamics. Nat. 

Commun. 10, 815 (2019).

30. Lu, D. et al. Synthesis of freestanding single-crystal perovskite films and heterostructures by 

etching of sacrificial water-soluble layers. Nat. Mater. 15, 1255-1260 (2016).

31. Dong, G. et al. Flexible ferroelectrics: periodic wrinkle-patterned single-crystalline ferroelectric 

oxide membranes with enhanced piezoelectricity. Adv. Mater. 32, 2004477 (2020).

32. Li, Y. Q. et al. Electrostatically driven polarization flop and strain-induced curvature in free-

standing ferroelectric superlattices. Adv. Mater. 34, 2106826 (2022).

33. Catalan, G. et al. Strain gradients in epitaxial ferroelectrics. Phys. Rev. B 72, 020102 (2005).

34. Damodaran, A. R. et al. Large polarization gradients and temperature-stable responses in 

compositionally-graded ferroelectrics. Nat. Commun. 8, 14961 (2017).

35. Simons, H. et al. Long-range symmetry breaking in embedded ferroelectrics. Nat. Mater. 17, 814-

819 (2018).

36. Makhsud, I. et al. High-quality bulk hybrid perovskite single crystals within minutes by inverse 

temperature crystallization. Nat. Commun. 6, 7586 (2015).


Supplementary Materials for

Flexo-photovoltaic effect and above-bandgap photovoltage in halide perovskites

Zhiguo Wang1, 6, Shengwen Shu2, 6, Xiaoyong Wei3, Renhong Liang1, Shanming Ke1, Longlong Shu1 ✉, 

Gustau Catalan4, 5✉

1. School of Physics and Materials Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang, People’s Republic of 
China.

2. College of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, People’s 
Republic of China.

3. Electronic Materials Research Laboratory, Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education and 
International Center for Dielectric Research, Xi’an Jiao Tong University, Xi’an 710049, People’s 
Republic of China

4. Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Catalonia. 

5. Institut Catala de Nanociencia i Nanotecnologia (ICN2), CSIC–BIST, Campus Universitat Autonoma 
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia.

6. These authors contributed equally: Zhiguo Wang, Shengwen Shu.

✉e-mail: llshu@ncu.edu.cn; gustau.catalan@icn2.cat

S1. Intensity of incident light vs polarizer angle 

Polarization.mp4

The illuminance on the sample is nearly independent of the polarizer angle (the maximum 
variation is <0.6%), confirming that the light emitted by the LED is not linearly polarized. 
Variations of photovoltage as a function of light-polarization are therefore a response of the 
material and not an illuminance artifact.


S2. Cantilever experimental setup

Figure S1. (A) The flexo-photovoltaic effect was characterized in single-clamp cantilever-
bending geometry with lateral illumination. (B) Positive strain gradients are induced by 
locating the displacement module above the sample and setting a downward displacement. 
(C) Negative strain gradients are induced by locating the displacement module below the 
sample and setting an upward displacement. By swapping between (B) and (C), the sign of the 
strain gradient is changed whilst ensuring that the position of the sample relative to the light 
source is not altered.


S3. Light-polarization dependence of photovoltaic output for MAPbI3 single crystal

Figure S2. 90-degree sinusoidal modulation of photovoltaic output for MAPbI3 single crystal 
as a function of light polarization for the crystal in flat (continuous line) and bent (dashed 
line) states. The results indicate that, already in the flat state, the photovoltaic output is 
polarization-dependent, consistent with the existence of a native macroscopic polarization.


S4. The effect of the AFM tip on the surface

Figure S3. AFM measurements of MAPbBr3 single crystal. (A) Height and (B) amplitude of the 
MAPbBr3 single crystal; (C) morphology and (D) amplitude of the pristine area at the point of 
force application; (E) morphology and (F) amplitude of the same area after applying a 20 N 
force on the tip (150 nm tip diameter).

In order to discard surface damage after applying force, the surface topography of the 

MAPbBr3 single crystal was measured by atomic force microscopy (AFM) in contact mode, 

using the same probe as for the ORCA (conductivity) measurement. First, we scanned a 11 

m2 area on the surface of MAPbBr3 single crystal, then we picked a point to apply 

increasing force (0.2 ~ 20 N) through the diamond tip. Surface topography was scanned

after each stress application. It can be seen that, even after applying a force of 20 N to the

AFM, there is no visible indent on the surface of the sample.


S5. I-V curves of MAPB crystal under AFM tip forces

Figure S4. The I-V curves of MAPB crystal under different AFM tip forces (150 nm tip 
diameter), in dark (background) and with illumination. 


S5. Current and voltage vs time for given set-points

Figure S5. (a) Current variations as a function of time at different voltages, for an applied 
force of 20 µN via an AFM probe of 150 nm tip diameter. (b) The same with a different (more 
zooomed-in) vertical axis. The results show that the steady-state values do not differ 
significantly from those measured in the I-V cycles and the above-bandgap photovoltage is 
not a transient state.


S6. Flexo-photovoltaic effect of MAPB single crystal by working with a sharper tip

Figure S6. The I-V curves of MAPB crystal under different AFM tip forces. The experiment is 
carried out under illumination. The background current from the AFM has been subtracted. 
A Ti/Ir coated conductive probe (Model: ASYELEC-01-R2) with a diameter of ~25 nm was used to 
apply pressure to the MAPB single crystal.


Figure S7. Open-circuit photovoltage as a function of indentation force with a sharper (25 
nm diameter) AFM probe.


S7. Finite Element Method (FEM) simulations of contacts between AFM tips and MAPB 
single crystals.

Figure S8. FEM analysis of longitudinal strain gradient in the thickness direction for MAPB 
crystal under the indentation force of two spheres of different diameter, representing AFM
tips of different sharpness. (A, B, C) 25 nm diameter tip, 0.01 µN, 0.1 µN and 1 µN forces, 
respectively. (D, E, F) 150 nm diameter tip, 0.1 µN, 1 µN and 10 µN forces, respectively. The 
colorbar quantifies, in m-1, the derivative of the vertical strain in the vertical direction, ∂εzz/∂z.

The deformation of the crystal under different AFM tips was calculated by finite element 
simulation. Schematic diagrams and FEM calculations are shown in Fig. S8, using spheres of 
25nm and 150nm diameter respectively to simulate the two kinds of probe tips we used.
Cuboids (width × length × thickness: 200 nm × 200 nm × 150 nm for 25 nm tip, and 400 nm × 
400 nm × 300 nm for 150 nm tip) are set up to represent MAPB single crystals. Si (elastic 
modulu: 200 GPa, poisson’s ratio: 0.28, density: 2330 kg/m3) and MAPB (elastic modulu: 
32.2 GPa, poisson’s ratio: 0.3, [S1] density: 3870 kg/m3) material parameters were used to 
set the spheres and cuboids respectively. Fig. S8 maps the strain gradient ∂εzz/∂z
distribution on the section of YZ under different tip forces, where εzz is strain in the direction 
of thickness. With a sharper tip, a significant increase in strain gradient is obtained even 
with a smaller force.


REFERENCE

[S1] Lomonosov, A. M. et al. Exceptional elastic anisotropy of hybrid organic–inorganic 
perovskite CH3NH3PbBr3 measured by laser ultrasonic technique. Phys. Status Solidi RRL 10, 
606–612 (2016).


