Efficient Extraction of Hot Carriers in Perovskite Quantum Dot 

through Building State Coupled Complex 

Yusheng Lia†, Junke Jiangb,f†, Dandan Wang*a, Dong Liua, Shota Yajimaa, Hua Lia, 

Akihito Fuchimotoa, Hongshi Lic, Guozheng Shia, Shuzi Hayasea,d, Shuxia Taob, 

Jiangjian Shie, Qingbo Meng*e, Chao Ding*a, Qing Shen*a,d 

a. 
Faculty of Informatics and Engineering, The University of Electro-Communications, 1-5-1 

Chofugaoka, Chofu, Tokyo 182-8585, Japan. 

b. 
Materials Simulation and Modelling, Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of 

Technology, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands. 

c. 
Institute of New Energy Materials Chemistry, School of Materials Science and Engineering, 

Nankai University, TongYan street 38, Jinnan District, Tianjin 300350, China 

d. 
CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 

332-0012, Japan 

e. 
Key Laboratory for Renewable Energy, Beijing Key Laboratory for New Energy Materials and 

Devices, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, P. R. China 

f. Present Address: Université Rennes, ENSCR, CNRS, ISCR-UMR 6226, F-35000 Rennes, France 

† 
These 
authors 
contributed 
equally 
*Corresponding 
authors: 
qbmeng@iphy.ac.cn, 

wdd2395360261@gmail.com, ding@jupiter.pc.uec.ac.jp, shen@pc.uec.ac.jp (Lead Contact)  

 
 


Abstract 

Utilizing hot carriers is the crucial approach for solar cell to exceed the thermodynamic 

detailed balance limit, yet effective extraction of hot carriers in absorber materials via 

most commonly used semiconductor acceptors has been a challenge in both materials 

and photophysics research for many years. Herein, we build series of CsPbI3 quantum 

dot and fullerene derivative systems to explore the decisive factors of this process and 

have for the first time realized efficient hot carrier extraction in these systems 

(maximum extraction efficiency ~ 84%). We find building the systems as state-coupled 

complexes creates new carrier transport channels at about 0.22 eV above CsPbI3 

quantum dot bandgap, which facilitates highly efficient HC extraction. Our research 

directly visualizes the inner connection of molecule interaction and ultrafast hot carrier 

extraction. The knowledge and strategy gained here are of universal meaning, taking an 

important step forward true hot carrier photovoltaics. 

 
 


Introduction 

In all photovoltaic devices, efficient extraction of carriers from photon absorber 

materials is directly linked to overall device efficiency since the photogenerated 

carriers ultimately produce electricity through charge transport, extraction, and 

collection processes1-3. Semiconductor photovoltaic devices that only utilize the 

band-edge carries in absorber to produce electrical power, is limited to Shockley-

Queisser limit efficiency (~33%)4. Much higher efficiencies, theoretically as high 

as 66%, are possible if the photogenerated hot carriers (HCs) can be efficiently 

extracted by suitable charge-selective materials before losing their excessive 

energy5.  

 

To realize extraction of HCs, slow HC cooling in absorber materials and effective 

HC transfer at interface are two indispensable parts for competing with the 

energy loss processes of HCs6-8. Extraction of HCs in conventional 

semiconductor absorber materials is extremely limited by the ultrafast HC 

cooling processes7, 9. Recently widely studied halide perovskites are revealed 

with remarkable long-lived HCs, about two to three orders of magnitude longer 

than conventional semiconductors10-15, due to the presence of hot-phonon 

bottlenecks11, 13, acoustic-optical phonon up-conversion14, band-filling12 and 

Auger heating13. In principle, the HC diffusion length in perovskites is sufficient 

to allow HCs transport to the absorber surface and transfer to generally used 

semiconductor charge-selective materials.  

 

Unfortunately, broadly used inorganic charge-selective materials, such as TiO2, 

SnO2 have been indicated to be difficult to extract HCs from perovskite materials 

due to their weak charge extraction ability and lacking coupling with perovskite16, 

17. Fullerene derivatives (FDs) were well known for their excellent performance 

as electron acceptor in organic solar cells18, 19. Nowadays, such materials have 

also been regarded as star materials in perovskite photovoltaic devices and gained 


great successes as the electron-selective materials, interface modification 

materials and even additives due to their excellent electrical properties and good 

chemical and physical coupling with perovskites20, 21. Moreover, they are 

suggested with the potential as hot exciton acceptor. Their blending with polymer 

aggregates facilitates hot exciton dislocation and excited electronic state coupling, 

producing an overall increase of organic device performance22-24. However, no 

similar experimental evidence has been presented in perovskite and FD systems. 

Achieving effective HC extraction in perovskite and FD systems is of great 

benefit to impel perovskite photovoltaics to a new plateau. 

 

In this work, we choose colloidal perovskite quantum dots (PQDs) as absorber 

material, as they provide larger surface area for coupling with FD molecules and 

the HCs in QDs are easier to transport to surface than bulk materials. We build 

series of the CsPbI3 QDs and FDs systems to probe their molecule interaction 

dynamics and ultrafast HC dynamics. We firstly explicate a general strategy to 

quantify HC relaxion for evaluating HC extraction efficiency and use it into our 

research of HC extraction. The completely distinct HC extraction in the systems 

with FDs owing different function groups are directly visualized by transient 

absorption (TA) spectroscopy. Using density of function theory (DFT) 

calculation and Stern-Volmer analysis, we elucidate the different molecule 

interaction mechanisms in these systems and their decisive role on the HC 

extraction in these systems. We find the key for realizing efficient HC extraction 

in CsPbI3 QDs and FDs systems lies on whether building state-coupled complex. 

The maximum extraction efficiency of 84% is finally achieved in these 

complexes by adjusting pump power. We show that efficient extraction of HCs 

from CsPbI3 QD to broadly used acceptors is feasible with building appropriate 

chemical combination. Our research updates the perspective of extracting HCs 

in perovskite materials and move a major step towards true HC photovoltaics.  


Results and discussions 

Building CsPbI3 QD and FD systems  

CsPbI3 QDs were synthesized by previous reported two sources hot injection 

method in oleic acid (OA), oleylamine (OAm), and octadecene25, 26. The as-

prepared CsPbI3 QDs crystallized in the cubic phase (Figure S1), with an average 

diameter of 14.6 nm (Figure S2) and exhibited a photoluminescence quantum 

yield (PLQY) of ∼95%, suggesting high crystalline quality. We synthesized 

CAFDs (PCBA and [Bias]PCBA) from the acid hydrolysis of PCBM and 

[Bias]PCBM respectively (synthetic details are given in supplementary methods) 

as semiconductor selective materials for CsPbI3 QDs. For comparation, same 

molar quantities of PCBM and [Bias]PCBM (called CMFDs, i.e., common 

fullerene derivatives) were used as reference materials. The molecular structures 

are shown in Scheme 1 and relevant nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 

(NMR), optical absorption, and energy level are shown in Figure S3-5. The FDs-

adsorbed CsPbI3 QDs dispersions (indicated hereafter as CsPbI3-FD QDs) were 

obtained by mixing CsPbI3 QDs with small quantity of FDs, and then purified by 

successive precipitation and centrifugation cycles (see experiments details in 

supplementary information). XRD (Figure S2) and UV-vis absorption spectra 

(ABS, Figure S6) indicate no explicit detrimental effects of FDs on the chemical 

structure of CsPbI3 QDs and the absorption contribution from FDs is completely 

negligible in our experiments.  

 


Scheme 1. Molecular structures of PCBM, PCBA, [Bias]PCBM, and [Bias]PCBA. We 

note both [Bias]PCBM and [Bias]PCBA are the mixture of isomers. Here, we only 

show one structure of the isomers.  

Hot carrier relaxion dynamics  

Pump power dependent HC cooling mechanisms complicate the evaluation of the HC 

relaxation time and determination of HC extraction efficiency13, 27. Building a 

convenient method with general applicability is still an imperative. In this part we will 

analyze the HC dynamics in CsPbI3 QDs, then evaluate a reliable method for our HC 

extraction research. Figure 1a,b shows the pseudo color TA maps of CsPbI3 QDs excited 

at 470 nm under a lower (16 μJ/cm2) and higher (200 μJ/cm2) pump fluence, 

corresponding to initial average generated exciton (e-h pair) numbers per QDs 

<N>~0.2 and <N>~2.3 respectively (see Figure S7). For both cases, immediately after 

photoexcitation, positive photo induced absorption (PIA) peak emerged below the 

bandgap with respect to bandgap remoralization (BGR) effect13, 28. Decay of PIA 

occurred once the HCs cooled down to occupy the states near band edge, 

simultaneously, band filling induced negative photobleaching (PB) signal with high 

energy tail gradually settled in near the bandgap and finally replaced the PIA signal. In 

lower intensity pump, global analysis of TA spectrum (Figure S8, evolution-associated 

spectra (EAS)) indicates PIA displays a consistent dynamic with the broadened PB. The 

relevant kinetical curve of this EAS component is shown in Figure 1c (dashed black 

line). In previous research, PIA decay has been used to evaluate HC lifetime28. The 

kinetic curve that represents PIA was chosen at 1.76 eV, where the contribution of PB 

signal is negligible. Along with the thermalization and relaxion of HCs, the ground state 

bleaching (GSB) gradually increases and reaches the maximum, which can be fitted 

with a convolution of single-exponential growth function and instrument response 

function (IRF) of TA measurement to yield a rise time. In some research, the HC 

lifetime was also estimated by monitoring this rise time29, 30. When the HCs totally cool 

down to be excited carriers at band edge, the broadened PB with high-energy tail will 


compress to the shape close to secant hyperbolic function or Gaussian function 

broadened GSB of exciton (Figure S8). Note that the weak positive absorption band 

(PIA2) existed at the higher energy side of the isosbestic point (IBP at 1.96 eV in Figure 

S8) on GSB shows small deviation accounted for excited carrier absorption at band 

edge27. In the presence of HCs, isosbestic point will shift to higher energy, at the 

meantime, the signal at the energy corresponding to the isosbestic point of GSB 

becomes negative PB, which means any new PB feature observed at this point can be 

attributed to the HC signal. In view of this, we propose to use the transient kinetic at 

this IBP to image the bleaching signal of HC. 

 

Figure 1. TA spectra and HC cooling dynamics of CsPbI3 QDs. a-b, Pseudo color TA 

maps under a 470 nm pump for (a) low (16 μJ/cm2, <N>~0.2) and (b) high (200 μJ/cm2, 

<N>~2.3) pump fluence. c-d, Evolution of HC lifetime with kinetics of ground state 

bleaching (GSB), isosbestic point (IBP), photo induced absorption (PIA) and evolution-

associated spectra (EAS) for (c) low and (d) high pump fluence. (e) Time-dependent 

HC temperature Tc. Solid red line and purple line represent the fitting curves with three 

temperature model (TTM). Dash red line and purple line are phonon temperatures. The 

solid black line is the HC temperature decay under higher pump fluence after removing 

the contributions of Auger reheating. (f) Energy loss rate as a function of HC 

temperature. Solid red and blue lines represent the numerical fits with LO–phonon 

model, while dashed black line represents the fit with Auger reheating model. 

 


As shown in Figure 1c, the GSB formation, PIA decay, IBP decay and EAS decay 

at lower pump, are kinetically correlated with a similar lifetime ~0.84 ps, which 

means these methods tend to acquire a same HC relaxion time. However, these 

kinetical curves are no longer completely synchronized at high-fluence pump 

(Figure 1b,d). Obviously, the decay at IBP exhibits slower dynamic than the 

formation of GSB and the PIA decay but still keeps in consistent with the 

existence of high energy tail that reveals the energy distribution of HCs. Note 

that EAS misses in Figure 1d since it cannot provide a clear picture to depict the 

dynamic relevant components under the influence of more obvious band filling 

effect as shown in Figure S8. We ascribe the non-synchronous dynamics in these 

curves to the appearance of multi-particle effects including Auger recombination 

and concomitant Auger heating, in which Auger recombination losses cold 

carriers and displays as the intensity-dependent rapid shortening of the GSB 

dynamics (Figure S7), while Auger heating contributes to further retardation of 

HC relaxation and plays an important role in practical HC solar cells13, 27 . 

 

Figure 2. Hot carrier extraction of FDs. (a) Time-dependent HC temperature Tc. (b) 

Energy extraction rates as a function of HC temperature. Inset is zoom of (b) at low 


carrier temperature. (c) IBP kinetics. (d) HC extraction efficiency with photon numbers 

per QD. 

 

Intrinsic energy losses of CsPbI3 QD in the processes of HC relaxion are further 

discussed via the analysis of time-dependent carrier temperature Tc (Figure 1e). To 

ensure that all population of HCs reach quasi-equilibrium and occupy the states at near 

band edge forming Fermi-Dirac distribution, we analyzed the HC cooling dynamics 

after a 0.3~1 ps delay (depend on pump intensity). Average carrier temperature Tc can 

be extracted by fitting the high-energy band tail of GSB13, 30 according to 1/(1+exp(E-

Ef)/kBTc), where Ef is quasi-Fermi energy, kB is Boltzmann constant (Figure S9). The 

initial excess energy (∆Eexcess) of carriers stimulated with 2.64 eV (470 nm) pump 

energy (Epump) relative to band edge is expected to be 0.36 eV corresponds to a highest 

effective temperature Tc ~2700 K (e.g., ∆Eexcess=(Epump-Eg)/2-Eg and Tc~2∆E/3kB, 

assuming electron and hole in perovskites have similar the effective mass and hold 

similar temperature with each other11, 29, 31). The drop of the effective temperature of 

carriers from initial pump to quasi-equilibrium are ascribed to carrier-carrier scattering. 

Subsequent temperature losses are numerically fitted with three temperature model 

(TTM)32, 33, which provides a clear picture of various stages of HC relaxation by 

coupling Auger reheating into the rate equations of HCs and longitudinal optical (LO) 

phonons (supplementary Note 1). Under low pump fluence, the HC relaxion displays 

single exponential decay and takes around 0.76 ps (Figure 1e), which is similar to the 

dynamics of GSB formation, PIA decay, IBP kinetic in Figure 1c. The scattering 

interaction between carrier and longitudinal optical (LO) phonons contributes to the 

fast drop of HC temperature. Whereafter, the LO-phonons rapidly release obtained 

excess energy to lattice without bottleneck, see LO-phonon temperature (Tp, dash 

purple line in Figure 1e). The energy power loss rate Jr (e.g.-1.5kBTc) in this regime can 

be fitted with LO-phonon interaction model (supplementary Note 2), the fitted LO–

phonon decay time τLO (~0.51 ps) is consistent with previous reports34.  

 


Under high pump fluence, HC relaxation changes significantly compared with that at 

low-fluence pump. Specifically, the HC cooling process is not terminated within 

picosecond but prolonged to tens of picoseconds. In this case, the time dependent 

temperature can be divided into three stages. time dependent temperature can be divided 

into three stages. Stage I is dominated by LO-phonon interaction as same as temperature 

decay under low pump fluence. It can be demonstrated from the similar value of τLO 

(0.47 ps) fitted from the energy power loss rate at this stage. The difference of stage I 

with the temperature decay under low pump fluence lies on HCs eventually heated the 

LO-phonon to a higher temperature, as the dash red line in Figure 1e. After the LO-

phonons attaching to peak temperature, the LO-phonons release energy to acoustic 

phonon or lattice with a slow rate probably due to hot phonon bottleneck effect. In 

addition, Auger reheating also contributes the slow HC relaxation in this stage, which 

can be found in the accelerated temperature decay after removing the Auger reheating 

effect (solid black line in Figure 1e). We think stage III is mainly on account of Auger 

reheating effect since the behavior of energy power loss rate follows quadratic 

dependence34 on (Tc-TL) remarkably well (TL is lattice temperature) and phonon 

bottleneck can be neglected due to Tp is close to TL at this stage. In brief, phonon 

bottleneck and Auger reheating effects greatly prolong the HC cooling in our PQDs. 

Specially, when Tc cooled down to room temperature (~70 ps) the dynamic curve at IBP 

just decayed into zero, hence, the transient kinetic at IBP is demonstrated with more 

general applicability to evaluate the HC relaxation for different conditions than GSB 

formation, PIA decay and EAS. 

Hot carrier extraction dynamics  

HC extraction from CsPbI3 QD to FDs is explored based on above discussion. 

Figure 2a displays the time-dependent carrier temperature Tc of CsPbI3 QD and 

CsPbI3-FDs QD under same pump intensity (<N>~2.3). The photon numbers per 

QD are thought to be identical due to the negligible absorption of FDs, hence, 

extra loss of HCs is ascribed to the function of FDs. The TA signals of FDs in 

same concentration with CsPbI3-FDs colloidal solution are shown in Figure S10, 


which are lower than the detection limit of our TA system. Surprisingly, CAFDs 

efficiently extract HCs from CsPbI3 QDs proved by the obvious acceleration of 

Tc decrease processes while CMFDs have insignificant impact on the HC (see 

more details about TA data in Figure S11-13). Since the temperature of HC has 

already shown apparent decrease around initial several picoseconds when cold 

carriers have not yet been extracted in quantity, it is reasonable to rule out the 

influence of cold carrier quenching on state filling and attribute the decrease of 

Tc to the HC extraction. The carrier extraction induced electronic energy power 

loss rate (Je) as a function of carrier temperature was further calculated to remove 

the influence of intrinsic HC cooling by the subtraction between the intrinsic Jr 

and the Jr for CsPbI3-FDs QDs, that is Je(FDs)=Jr(CsPbI3)-Jr(CsPbI3-FDs). For 

all CAFDs, Je exhibits an apparent increasement starting from carrier 

temperature higher than 850K and increase steadily with Tc (Figure 2b). Inset of 

Figure 2b indicates that HC transfer from CsPbI3 QD boundary to CAFDs exists 

a threshold energy (Tc > 850 K), which could be related to the location of energy 

level coupling (discuss latter). Figure 2c shows the transient kinetics at IBP for 

CsPbI3 QDs with and without CAFDs (<N>~2.3). In consistent with temperature 

results, it is apparent that introduction of CAFDs accelerates the IBP decay (more 

IBP kinetics see Figure S14). By fitting the transient kinetics at IBP, the 

extraction efficiency (η) of HCs (Figure 2d) can be estimated according to η=1-

τCAFDs/τQDs, where τCAFDs and τQDs are the lifetime of CsPbI3-CAFDs QD and 

CsPbI3 QD respectively. The results confirm that, improved HC lifetime due to 

bottleneck and Auger reheating under high pump fluence plays a crucial role in 

the HC harvesting. Long HC lifetime caused by these effects can keep HC above 

the threshold energy for longer time thus provides higher possibility to pass 

through the interface between PQD and selective materials. Finally, a maximum 

extraction efficiency (up to 84%) is acquired under <N>~2.3 by using 

[Bias]PCBA as selective materials. According to our knowledge, this result 

belongs to the premier echelon in HC extraction30, 35-38. We note that the small 


magnitude declines of η under <N>~5 is possibly ascribed to the saturation of 

carriers in CAFDs under high pump power or other uncertain reasons.  

 

Molecule Interactions and electronic coupling  

The most striking observation to emerge from the data comparison were the 

entirely different HC extraction ability of CAFDs and CMFDs from CsPbI3 QDs. 

Taking the molecule structures of PCBM and PCBA as comparison (Figure 3 a), 

the different function groups could be the driving force to their dramatically 

different HC extraction ability. In Figure 3b-c, analysis based on quencher’s (FDs) 

concentration dependent fluorescence (CsPbI3 QDs) quenching was adopted here 

to reveal the dynamic perspective of the molecular contact interaction hiding 

behind the following possible fluorescence quenching mechanisms39: (1) 

dynamic quenching, (2) static quenching (3) combined dynamic and static 

quenching (see detail illustration in supplementary note 3). Figure S15 shows the 

stable PL spectra of CsPbI3 QDs at a known concentration of 0.83 mg/ml titrated 

with varying quantities of FDs. In order to acquire a reliable corresponding-

relations between the PL quenching and the quantity of FDs, the purification 

process was canceled, instead, the mixture was straightly dissolved in 

chlorobenzene and stirred 5 mins. The quenching data are presented as a plot of 

F0/F versus Q (Stern−Volmer plot, S-V plot, see details in Supplementary Note 

4 about Stern−Volmer theory and the quenching models used in following) in 

Figure 3b-c, where F0 and F are the stable PL intensities in the absence and 

presence of FD quenchers, respectively, Q is the concentration of FD quenchers. 

Surprisingly, CAFDs performed a more striking ability in quenching 

fluorescence than CMFDs; there is a hundred to one thousand times’ difference 

at same quencher quantity. Besides, all the S-V plots appeared different types of 

derivation from the standard S-V equation that only exists one type of quenching 

(static or dynamic quenching) and presents a linearly dependence of fluorophores 

upon the concentration of quencher. A significant downward deviation from the 

linearity is displayed in the systems that use the CMFDs, i.e., PCBM and 


[Bias]PCBM as quencher (Figure 3b). It is generally understood as dynamic 

quenching in presence of two populations of fluorophores that owns different 

inaccessibility to the quencher40. Possible explanation for this might be on 

account of the discrepancy in chemical circumstances on the surface of different 

QDs, such as atom terminal and ligand content41. Assuming the total PL (F0) in 

the absence of quencher are contributed by inaccessible PQDs (Fi0) and 

accessible PQDs (Fa0), the S-V equation can be reframed as a linear form (inset 

of Figure 3b) according to F0/∆F=fa-1Ka-1[Q]-1+fa-1, where fa is the fraction of 

initial PL contributed by accessible PQDs (fa=Fa0/F0), Ka is quenching constant 

of accessible PQDs40. The fitting results are shown in Table 1. The higher 

quenching constant (Ka) and fraction (fa) of accessible PQDs for [Bias]PCBM as 

quencher means more effective dynamic quenching than PCBM, which is 

probable due to double numbers of ester groups. For clarity, the upper image of 

Figure 3a use PCBM as the example to illustrate the above-mentioned dynamic 

interaction processes between the accessible PQDs and PCBM molecules. At 

dark state, the PCBM molecules and PQDs in colloidal solution keep 

independent with each other. When pump laser stimulates the PQDs from ground 

state to excited state, the transition dipole impels the PQDs to collide with PCBM 

and simultaneously quench excited carriers. After the quenching process, 

accessible PQDs and PCBM molecules separate each other and restore to initial 

state. The whole processes belong to physical interaction. Due to the existence 

of collision process in the solution, the carriers transfer is inefficient. This result 

is also supported by the unchanged ABS (Figure S6) and solution color (digital 

images in inset of Figure 3b) of CsPbI3-CMFDs QDs compared with intrinsic 

CsPbI3 QDs.  

 

With regard to the quenching using CAFDs as quenchers, two stages are observed in 

both of the S-V plots : one is positive S-V plot, another is a linear S-V plot (see Figure 

3c). Previous studies interpreted the positive deviation of S-V plot as either a combined 


dynamic and static (forming complex) quenching mechanism42 or single static 

quenching but rather due to “sphere of action”43. Exactly distinguishing above two 

possibilities also needs to reconsider the ABS, which only reflects that ground state 

interactions. Essentially, the quenching within “sphere of action” is still achieved by 

the collision between quencher and excited state of fluorophores39. In contrast, the 

significant changes in the ABS take place only when CAFDs and CsPbI3 QDs form 

ground state complex and part of their electronic state stably couple together. Based on 

these considerations, we propose to use the formula combining the dynamic quenching 

model and modified static quenching model to depict our positive S-V plots, that is 

F0/F=(KD[Q+1])(KB[Q]n+1), where KD is dynamic quenching constant, KB is the 

binding constant of the static complex, n is the number of equivalent binding sites for 

CAFDs onto per CsPbI3 QD. From the fitting results in Table 1, KB is almost six orders 

of magnitude larger than KD indicating that the quenching by forming static complex 

holds the dominant position in the first quenching stage. The value n~2 obtained in all 

cases means about two CAFD molecules on average are bonding with per CsPbI3 QD. 

The formation of static complex provides very high bonding stability and close contact 

distance from QDs to CAFDs, which facilitate the efficient coupling of electronic state 

for fast carrier transfer. The downer image of Figure 3a illustrates these interaction 

processes: firstly, the most PCBA molecules and PQDs have formed ground state 

complexes by chemical bonding in solution under dark state. Once the pump laser 

stimulates the complexes, fast carrier transfer occurs from CsPbI3 QD to the bounding 

PCBA molecules. During this process, the collision induced slow carrier transfer also 

happens. Finally, after quenching, ground state complexes will contain their stable state 

while separate with the PCBA molecules that dynamically interact with QD. For 

CsPbI3-CAFDs QDs, the core point lies on the formation of stable complexes that can 

be further demonstrated by the black dispersions under room light (digital images in 

inset of Figure 3c). X-ray photoelectron spectrum (XPS) and attenuated total reflection 

mode of Fourier transform infrared spectra (ATR-FTIR) illustrate that CAFDs would 

prefer chemically anchoring onto the uncapped atoms rather than extensively replacing 


the long chain ligand by traditional ligand exchange (See supplementary Figure S16-

17 and Note 5), in agreement with the small number of equivalent binding sites. The 

linear S-V plot in the second stage indicates only one standard type of quenching occurs. 

Due to the binding sites have already been occupied, the specific interaction by forming 

static complex for excessive CAFD quenchers is nearly saturated within this stage. As 

result, it is easily attributing the quenching to standard dynamic quenching rather than 

standard static quenching although both display linear S-V plots. The equation 

describes this situation is F0/F=KD2Q+b, where KD2 is dynamic quenching constant, b 

is constant39. The consistent orders of magnitude of KD2 and Ka (see table 1, PCBM vs 

PCBA,[Bias]PCBM vs [Bias] PCBA) also support the fact of dynamic quenching in 

this stage. Along with quenching stages, PL peak position also display related shift; 

detail discussions are shown in supplementary Note 6. 

 

Figure 3. Physical and chemical interactions between CsPbI3 QDs and FDs. (a) 

Schematic diagram of the interaction between PCBM/PCBA molecules and 

CsPbI3 QDs. (b) CMFDs (i.e., PCBM and [Bias]PCBM), (c) CAFDs (i.e., PCBA 


and [Bias]PCBA) quenching of CsPbI3 QDs described in Stern−Volmer (S-V) 

plot. Inset of (b) is modified S-V plot to demonstrate the presence of two 

populations of fluorophores. (d) The second derivative absorption spectrum of 

CsPbI3 QDs and CsPbI3-FDs dispersions. 

Table 1. Parameters fitted from S-V plots 

 
Ka (M-1) 
fa 
KD (M-1) 
n  
Kb (M-n) 
KD2 (M-1) 

PCBM 
5.71×107 
48.9% 
 
 
 
 

[Bias]PCBM
1.46×108 
92.0% 
 
 
 
 

PCBA 
 
 
2.47×106 
2.06 
2.09×1012 
8.52×107 

[Bias]PCBA
 
 
1.21×107 
2.12 
1.84×1013 
2.22×108 

 

Figure 3d shows the second derivative absorption spectra that eliminate the linear 

background function and further resolve the fine structure of electronic states. In 

quantum confinement systems, the minimal value points at second derivative ABS are 

thought to be related with the electronic state energy levels36, 44. Here, the weak 

absorption of FDs in the CsPbI3-FDs dispersions has been removed before calculating 

derivative ABS. Thus, the changes are only associated with the effective coupling 

between FDs and CsPbI3 QDs. From the area where significant differences locate at, it 

can be easily conjectured that the CAFDs have significant influences on the electronic 

states of CsPbI3 QDs at both band edge and high energy level while CMFD cannot. For 

CsPbI3-CAFD QDs, the energy difference between the minimal value points at high 

energy level (2.12 eV) and band edge (1.90 eV) is ~0.22 eV i.e., 825 K, in consistent 

with the HC transfer threshold, which implies the coupling electronic state provide 

channel for HC transferring from CsPbI3 QDs to CDFA molecules. Besides, excitation 

power dependent PL spectrum (supplementary Figure S18) indicated the changes at 

band edge are attributed to electric-field induced exciton delocalization. This is also 

supported by the decrease of exciton binding energy (from 25 meV to 7 meV, clarified 

in supplementary Figure S19-20, Note 7 and Table S1) and highly efficient (~100%) 

cold electron transfer (Figure S21). The electric field induced exciton delocalization 


driven by FDs has also been reported in bulk perovskite film45 and the theoretical 

calculations relying on the conception of the overall ligand/core adduct as an 

indecomposable species also demonstrated the mixing orbitals would lead to 

delocalized states throughout the whole band structure while QD and ligand experience 

each other’s electric field46, 47. Thus, we infer that the electric-field tuned HC transfer 

may also occurred in our experiments. 

 

Figure 4. Density of function theory (DFT) calculations for QD-OA, QD-PCBA, and 

QD-PCBM, respectively. (a) The atomistic view of binding mode with CsI-termination 

(left figure) and PbI2-termination (right figure), respectively. (b) The binding energies 

of ligands to the CsPbI3 QDs. Partial density of state (pDOS) of the bonding atoms at 

the interface between PCBA molecule and (c) CsI termination, (d) PbI2 termination. 

 

DFT calculation  

Density of function theory (DFT) was applied to further understand the nature of 

the HC extraction. Figure 4a shows the binding mode of OA, PCBA and PCBM 

with the optimized surface structures with CsI-termination and PbI2-termination, 

respectively. More details of structural models and computational settings can be 

found in Supplementary Information and in Figure S22-23. Similar with OA, 

PCBA binds to both CsI- and PbI2-terminated slabs via covalent bonds. On PbI2-

terminated QD, both Pb-O bond lengths (LPb-O(1) ≈ 2.51 Å and LPb-O(2) ≈ 2.43 Å) 

are smaller than the sum of Pb2+ (1.2 Å) and O2− (1.4 Å) ion radii, illustrating 


that the effective bonding is realized by bidentate chelating between the two O 

atoms of PCBA and Pb atoms. Unlike PbI2-termination, the bonding in CsI-

termination is realized with the bidentate bridging mode, which have two O 

atoms bond with Pb atom and Cs atom separately. Whether the bonding mode is 

bidentate bridging or chelating, such bonding through multiple atoms has been 

shown to give extra stability to the complex than monodentate48. The binding 

energy (in Figure 4b) between PCBA and CsPbI3 QD is large in negative values 

(about -4 eV) regardless of surface termination, illustrating PCBA can 

spontaneously anchor onto QD surface. In addition, slightly lower binding 

energy compared to OA (about -4.4 eV) suggests the slight preference of OA 

compared to PCBA, in agreement with experiments from S-V analysis, XPS and 

FTIR. In contract, the small binding energy (almost zero) between PCBM and 

CsPbI3 QDs demonstrates the weak interaction. As shown in the charge density 

difference (CDD)(Figure S24), PCBM has no notable charge redistribution at the 

interface, indicating the PCBM molecular is physically adsorbed on the 

perovskite surface, which is different from the chemical bonding between PCBA 

and CsPbI3 surface. From the partial density of state (pDOS) of the above-

mentioned bonding atoms (Figure 4c-d), we see that large area of the synergic 

electronic state peak of bonding Pb atom with the electronic state of O atoms 

indicating their strong coupling. The high energy states coupling can be treated 

as the bridge for PQDs and selective materials, which extremely matters HC 

transfer at the interface. Besides, the overlap of the DOS between the whole 

PCBA with CsPbI3 is another necessary condition for HC extraction (Figure S25). 

Taking OA as an example, despite the coupling at interface bonding (Figure S26), 

the carriers cannot continue transfer into OA molecule due to lacking further 

DOS overlap between the whole OA molecule with CsPbI3 (Figure S25). In view 

of all the experimental and theorical results, we highlight the importance of the 

coupling of interface atoms, overlap of density state and interface electric field 

on HC extraction, in which the former helps interface carrier transfer between 


the coupling atoms, the middle decides on further extraction, the latter may 

accelerate whole processes.  

Conclusions 

In this work, we explicate a general strategy to quantify HC extraction and 

achieve efficient extraction of HCs from CsPbI3 QD to widely used organic FD 

acceptors with appropriately building QDs and FDs into state coupled complexes. 

For realizing extraction of HCs in FD and perovskite systems, the key is building 

their effective state couplings. We uncover that the stable chemical bonding in 

these complexes can acts as a bridge coupling FDs and CsPbI3 QDs and provides 

effective channels for HC extraction. By adjust pump power, we finally achieve 

about 84% HC extraction efficiency. Our research provides an alluring strategy 

for utilizing HCs and pave the way to realize more efficient hot carrier 

photovoltaic technology.  

Author Contributions 

Y.S. Li, Q. Shen conceived the idea. Y.S. Li conducted experiments, data analysis and 

paper writing. J.K. Jiang contributed to DFT calculations and the writing of the relevant 

results, S.X. Tao contributed to the supervision of DFT calculations, relevant data 

analysis and revision. D. Liu, Y. Shota, H. Li, F. Akihito, H.S. Li, G.Z. Shi, J.J. Shi and 

S. Hayase contributed to discussion. Q.B. Meng, C. Ding, D.D. Wang and Q. Shen 

contributed to discussion, data analysis and paper writing.  

Conflicts of interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

Acknowledgements 


The authors are very grateful to Prof. James Lloyd-Hughes (Department of 

Physics, University of Warwick, United Kingdom), Dr. Maurizio Monti 

(Institute for Physics and Astronomy, Denmark) for their kind providing of the 

TTM fitting code and patient explanations about their code. We also appreciate 

the meaningful help on FTIR analysis from Prof. Ishida Takayuki (The 

University of Electro-Communications, Japan). This work was supported by 

NEDO, the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) Mirai program 

(JPMJMI17EA), MEXT KAKENHI Grant (26286013, 17H02736), JST 

SPRING (Grant Number JPMJSP2131), the China Scholarship Council (No. 

202008050282). S.T. and J.J. acknowledge funding by the Computational 

Sciences for Energy Research (CSER) tenure track program of Shell and NWO 

(Project number15CST04-2) and NWO START-UP, the Netherlands. 

 

Notes and references 

 

1. 
C. M. Whitaker, T. U. Townsend, A. Razon, R. M. Hudson and X. Vallvé, 

in Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, 2010. 

2. 
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. 

Zhang and J. You, Nature Energy, 2016, 2, 16177. 

3. 
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737-740. 

4. 
W. Q. Shockley, H. J. , J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519. 

5. 
A. J. N. Robert T. Ross, J. Appl. Phys. , 1982, 53, 3813–3818. 

6. 
K. K. Paul, J.-H. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Nature Reviews Physics, 2021, 3, 178-

192. 

7. 
M. J. Li, J. H. Fu, Q. Xu and T. C. Sum, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31. 

8. 
C. A. Nelson, N. R. Monahan and X. Y. Zhu, Energ Environ Sci, 2013, 6, 

3508-3519. 


9. 
W. A. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X.-

Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543-1547. 

10. 
Z. Guo, Y. Wan, M. J. Yang, J. Snaider, K. Zhu and L. B. Huang, Science, 

2017, 356, 59-+. 

11. 
Y. Yang, D. P. Ostrowski, R. M. France, K. Zhu, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. 

Luther and M. C. Beard, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 53-59. 

12. 
H. H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, S. Y. Shao, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Nat. Commun., 

2018, 9. 

13. 
J. H. Fu, Q. Xu, G. F. Han, B. Wu, C. H. A. Huan, M. L. Leek and T. C. 

Sum, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9. 

14. 
J. F. Yang, X. M. Wen, H. Z. Xia, R. Sheng, Q. S. Ma, J. Kim, P. Tapping, 

T. Harada, T. W. Kee, F. Z. Huang, Y. B. Cheng, M. Green, A. Ho-Baillie, 

S. J. Huang, S. Shrestha, R. Patterson and G. Conibeer, Nat. Commun., 2017, 

8. 

15. 
Q. Shen, T. S. Ripolles, J. Even, Y. Ogomi, K. Nishinaka, T. Izuishi, N. 

Nakazawa, Y. H. Zhang, C. Ding, F. Liu, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, T. 

Minemoto, K. Katayama and S. Hayase, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111. 

16. 
I. Dursun, P. Maity, J. Yin, B. Turedi, A. A. Zhumekenov, K. J. Lee, O. F. 

Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Advanced Energy Materials, 2019, 9. 

17. 
C. Ding, F. Liu, Y. H. Zhang, D. Hirotani, X. Rin, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, 

T. Masuda, R. X. Wang and Q. Shen, Nano Energy, 2020, 67. 

18. 
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153-161. 

19. 
Z. He, B. Xiao, F. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Yang, S. Xiao, C. Wang, T. P. Russell 

and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 174-179. 

20. 
C.-H. Chiang and C.-G. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 196-200. 

21. 
K. Liu, S. Chen, J. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Qin, X. Lu, Y. Tu, Q. Meng and X. 

Zhan, Energ Environ Sci, 2018, 11, 3463-3471. 

22. 
G. Grancini, M. Maiuri, D. Fazzi, A. Petrozza, H. J. Egelhaaf, D. Brida, G. 

Cerullo and G. Lanzani, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 29-33. 


23. 
K. Chen, A. J. Barker, M. E. Reish, K. C. Gordon and J. M. Hodgkiss, J. 

Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18502-18512. 

24. 
H. Tamura and I. Burghardt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16364-16367. 

25. 
J. M. Luther, Science, 2016. 

26. 
M. Hao, Y. Bai, S. Zeiske, L. Ren, J. Liu, Y. Yuan, N. Zarrabi, N. Cheng, 

M. Ghasemi, P. Chen, M. Lyu, D. He, J.-H. Yun, Y. Du, Y. Wang, S. Ding, 

A. Armin, P. Meredith, G. Liu, H.-M. Cheng and L. Wang, Nature Energy, 

2020, 5, 79-88. 

27. 
S. S. Lim, D. Giovanni, Q. Zhang, A. Solanki, N. F. Jamaludin, J. W. M. 

Lim, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar, M. S. Pshenichnikov and T. C. Sum, 

Science Advances, 2019, 5, eaax3620. 

28. 
Z. Guo, Y. Wan, M. Yang, J. Snaider, K. Zhu and L. Huang, Science, 2017, 

356, 59-62. 

29. 
J. Chen, M. E. Messing, K. Zheng and T. Pullerits, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 

141, 3532-3540. 

30. 
M. J. Li, S. Bhaumik, T. W. Goh, M. S. Kumar, N. Yantara, M. Gratzel, S. 

Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8. 

31. 
M. B. Price, J. Butkus, T. C. Jellicoe, A. Sadhanala, A. Briane, J. E. Halpert, 

K. Broch, J. M. Hodgkiss, R. H. Friend and F. Deschler, Nat. Commun., 

2015, 6, 8420. 

32. 
J. C. Johannsen, S. Ulstrup, F. Cilento, A. Crepaldi, M. Zacchigna, C. Cacho, 

I. C. E. Turcu, E. Springate, F. Fromm, C. Raidel, T. Seyller, F. Parmigiani, 

M. Grioni and P. Hofmann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 027403. 

33. 
M. Monti, K. D. G. I. Jayawardena, E. Butler-Caddle, R. M. I. Bandara, J. 

M. Woolley, M. Staniforth, S. R. P. Silva and J. Lloyd-Hughes, Physical 

Review B, 2020, 102, 245204. 

34. 
M. Achermann, A. P. Bartko, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, Nat. 

Phys., 2006, 2, 557-561. 


35. 
H. Hong, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, R. Qiao, F. Yao, Y. Cheng, C. Wu, L. Lin, K. 

Jia, Y. Zhao, Q. Zhao, P. Gao, J. Xiong, K. Shi, D. Yu, Z. Liu, S. Meng, H. 

Peng and K. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14952-14957. 

36. 
A. De, S. Das and A. Samanta, ACS Energy Letters, 2020, 5, 2246-2252. 

37. 
Y. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Zhou and H. Zhu, Science Advances, 2019, 5, 

eaax9958. 

38. 
L. Wang, Z. Wang, H. Y. Wang, G. Grinblat, Y. L. Huang, D. Wang, X. H. 

Ye, X. B. Li, Q. Bao, A. S. Wee, S. A. Maier, Q. D. Chen, M. L. Zhong, C. 

W. Qiu and H. B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13906. 

39. 
in Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, ed. J. R. Lakowicz, Springer 

US, Boston, MA, 2006, DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-46312-4_8, pp. 277-330. 

40. 
S. Lehrer, Biochemistry, 1971, 10, 3254-3263. 

41. 
B. Pradhan, S. Das, J. Li, F. Chowdhury, J. Cherusseri, D. Pandey, D. Dev, 

A. Krishnaprasad, E. Barrios, A. Towers, A. Gesquiere, L. Tetard, T. Roy 

and J. Thomas, Science Advances, 2020, 6, eaay5225. 

42. 
Y. Kubota, Y. Motosa, Y. Shigemune and Y. Fujisaki, Photochem. 

Photobiol., 1979, 29, 1099-1106. 

43. 
H. Boaz and G. K. Rollefson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72, 3435-3443. 

44. 
I. Moreels and Z. Hens, Small, 2008, 4, 1866-1868; author reply 1869-1870. 

45. 
J. Shi, Y. Li, J. Wu, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li, J. J. Jasieniak and Q. Meng, 

Advanced Optical Materials, 2020, 8. 

46. 
C. Giansante, I. Infante, E. Fabiano, R. Grisorio, G. P. Suranna and G. Gigli, 

J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1875-1886. 

47. 
D. Debellis, G. Gigli, S. ten Brinck, I. Infante and C. Giansante, Nano Lett., 

2017, 17, 1248-1254. 

48. 
A. E. Martell and R. D. Hancock, in Metal Complexes in Aqueous Solutions, 

Springer US, Boston, MA, 1996, DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4899-1486-6_3, pp. 

63-95. 

 


