Investigating the Electronic Structure of 

Prospective Water-splitting Oxide 

BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ Before and After Thermal 

Reduction  

 
Subhayan Roychoudhury§, Sarah Shulda¶, Anuj Goyal¶, Robert Bell¶, Sami Sainio‡,  
Nicholas Strange‡, James Eujin Park#, Eric N. Coker#, Stephan Lany¶, David 
Ginley¶, and David Prendergast§ 
 
 
§ The Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 
94720, USA 
¶National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA 
‡SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025 
 #Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, USA 
 
 
Abstract 
 
BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ (BCM), a non-stoichiometric oxide closely resembling a 
perovskite crystal structure, has recently emerged as a prospective contender for 
application in renewable energy harvesting by solar thermochemical hydrogen 
generation. Using solar energy, oxygen-vacancies can be created in BCM and the 
reduced crystal so obtained can, in turn, produce H2 by stripping oxygen from H2O. 
Therefore, a first step toward understanding the working mechanism and 
optimizing the performance of BCM, is a thorough and comparative analysis of the 
electronic structure of the pristine and the reduced material. In this paper, we 
probe the electronic structure of BCM using the combined effort of first-principles 
calculations and experimental O K-edge x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). The 
computed projected density-of-states (PDOS) and orbital-plots are used to propose 
a simplified model for orbital-mixing between the oxygen and the ligand atoms. 
With the help of state-of-the-art simulations, we are able to find the origins of the 
XAS peaks and to categorize them on the basis of contribution from Ce and Mn. For 


the reduced crystal, the calculations show that, as a consequence of dielectric 
screening, the change in electron-density resulting from the reduction is strongly 
localized around the oxygen vacancy. Our experimental studies reveal a marked 
lowering of the first O K-edge peak in the reduced crystal which is shown to result 
from a diminished O-2p contribution to the frontier unoccupied orbitals, in 
accordance with the tight-binding scheme. Our study paves the way for 
investigation of the working-mechanism of BCM and for computational and 
experimental efforts aimed at design and discovery of efficient water-splitting 
oxides. 
 
 
 
Introduction: 
The quest for developing advanced mechanisms capable of harvesting energy in a 
renewable, sustainable and environment-friendly manner is one of the grand 
challenges of modern technological research. One such example is the production 
of solar fuel by splitting H2O or CO2 through a reversible two-step cycle involving 
reduction and re-oxidation of metal oxides. In particular, in one of its most 
promising approaches, the process of Solar Thermochemical Hydrogen generation 
(STCH)1–3 entails, as a first step, the removal of oxygen atoms from a metal oxide at 
a high temperature generated using solar irradiation under inert atmosphere. This 
is then followed by a re-oxidation of the oxide by exposing it to H2O, resulting in 
the production of hydrogen. For efficient water-splitting, the oxide must be 
structurally stable to withstand a large number of redox cycles. Additionally, it must 
be reducible at relatively low temperature and undergo re-oxidation in spite of the 
presence of H2 in the steam feed. The efficacy of an oxide in the STCH operation is 
governed by its chemical properties, which, in turn are primarily dictated by its 
electronic structure. Being able to decipher and manipulate the electronic structure 
of prospective water-splitting oxides with dedicated theoretical and experimental 
investigation is, therefore, of paramount importance in gaining a deeper 
understanding of their working-mechanism as well as in the discovery, design and 
performance-optimization of such materials.  
 
Owing to their stability against decomposition and phase-change under the 
extreme environment of a thermochemical reactor, non-stoichiometric oxides 
have recently received substantial attention in this regard4. In particular, non-


stoichiometric ceria (CeO2) is generally recognized as the frontrunner among the 
prospective candidates5,6 since, besides possessing other beneficial attributes, it is 
capable of stripping oxygen from H2O even under an extremely unfavorable H2O:H2 
ratio4 . However, contrary to the ease of the re-oxidation step, the reduction step 
for ceria poses a major disadvantage since it requires a temperature above 
1500˚C7,8, which necessitates non-standard materials and becomes prohibitively 
expensive under standard industrial conditions. 
 
As a consequence, the last few years have witnessed the search for alternative 
oxides that can undergo reduction at a lower temperature, with significant 
attention being devoted toward perovskite-based structures9–15. Recently, the non-
stoichiometric perovskite compound BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ (BCM) has been proposed 
as a contender for the STCH application16. In addition to high chemical stability and 
tunability of the point-defect thermodynamics, BCM is shown to offer nearly a 
three-fold improvement over ceria in hydrogen production at a reduction 
temperature below 1400˚C. Additionally, like ceria, BCM is also capable of 
operating under unfavorable H2O:H2 ratio. Therefore, as a first step toward gaining 
a detailed understanding of the factors responsible for its performance, a thorough 
exploration of the electronic structure of BCM is necessary. In particular, it is 
imperative that such a study addresses the change in the electronic structure 
induced by the reversible removal of oxygen atom from the compound. 
 
On the experimental front, investigation of the electronic structure of materials is 
performed most commonly using core-level spectroscopy. For example, x-ray 
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) produces an element-specific spectrum of the 
absorption intensity plotted as a function of photon-energy. However, in order to 
decipher the details of electronic structure from such a plot, the experimental 
efforts must often be complemented with theoretical studies. The aim of such 
theoretical calculations is then to be able to gain insight into the origin of the 
spectral features by assigning electronic processes and orbitals to them. For several 
decades, ab initio computation of electronic properties has been performed most 
commonly with the help of density-functional theory (DFT), thanks to its 
convenient balance between accuracy and expense. However, in addition to such 
first-principles simulations, simplified quantum-mechanical models can be 
extremely helpful in elucidating the electronic properties of most materials.  
 


With these considerations, in this paper we present a detailed combined 
theoretical and experimental investigation of the electronic structure of BCM. The 
information obtained with first-principles DFT calculations are presented mostly in 
the form of partial density-of-states (PDOS) and real-space representation of 
single-electron energy eigenstates, referred to as electronic orbitals hereafter. The 
computational studies are then complemented with crystal-field theory (CFT)-
based models of orbital mixing which corroborate the first-principles results 
qualitatively. Experimental O K-edge XAS is performed to probe the electronic 
excitations before and after oxygen-removal from the compound. The absorption 
spectra so obtained are compared with their simulated counterparts obtained 
using an accurate many-body method. In particular, prominent changes in the 
experimental spectrum upon oxygen removal are replicated by the computational 
results which, in turn, are shown to follow from simplified models. 
 
 
Computational Formalism: 
Experimental and computational details, along with the crystal structure, are 
included in the Supplementary Materials. However, since a major portion of the 
paper deals with the analysis of x-ray absorption spectra, in order to facilitate the 
discussion, here we provide a brief outline of the computational framework 
employed in the spectroscopic simulations. The O K-edge spectra have been 
simulated using the Many-Body X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (MBXAS)17,18 
formalism which, for an electronic excitation from the initial ground state (GS) 
|Ψ#$⟩ to some final core-excited state |Ψ&', evaluates the transition amplitude 
𝐴#$ → & as 

𝐴#$ → & = ,Ψ&-𝑂/-Ψ#$', 

where 𝑂/ is the many-body transition operator, which, in these calculations, is 
approximated by the dipole term.  |Ψ#$⟩ is approximated by a Slater determinant 
(SD) composed of the occupied Kohn-Sham (KS) orbitals of the DFT GS. The SD for 
|Ψ&', on the other hand, is constructed by populating KS orbitals of a different self-
consistent field – that of a core-ionized state with an empty core orbital on a 
specific atom, which we refer to as the full core-hole1 (FCH) KS system. A specific 
final state, |Ψ&', refers to a SD comprising the valence occupied orbitals of the FCH 
system together with the specific (previously unoccupied) orbital indexed by 𝑓 
(within the so-called f(1) approximation). 

 

1 Lowest energy state of the system corresponding to core-ionization of the relevant atom. 


 
Results and Discussions: 
 
 
 

(1) 
Structure and Configuration 

 

Fig. 1 The structure of a pristine 12R-BCM crystal. The atoms labeled A, B, C (also 
C’), D and E are representatives of a MnM, OM, MnS, OS and Ce atom, respectively. 
Atoms C’, A and C collectively constitute a representative triple of Mn atoms, as 
mentioned in the text. Each triple of Mn atom contains two MnS atoms of identical 
magnetic moment (C and C’, for this particular triple) and an MnM atom which has 
a magnetic moment in the opposite direction (A, for this particular triple).  

 

O

Ce

Ba

Mn(↑)

Mn(↓)

A MnM

C    ,   
MnS

B OM

D OS

E
Ce

A

B
C

D

E

C’

C’


 
 
 
As shown in Fig. 1, 12R-BCM has a rhombohedral crystal structure2 (R-3m, #166), 
with each of Ba, Mn, and O occupying the two unique Wyckoff sites and Ce a single 
Wyckoff site. Within the standard perovskite notation (not to be confused with the 
notation used in Fig. 1), the Ba atoms occupy the ‘A’ sites while Mn and Ce share 
the ‘B’ sites. Both Mn and Ce atoms exhibit six-fold coordination to neighboring O 
atoms. O atoms are present in two inequivalent coordinations each with two-fold 
coordination: OM refers to a ``Middle’’ O atom, which is coordinated by two Mn 
atoms while OS refers to a  ``Side’’ O atom which is coordinated by a single Mn and 
a single Ce atom. Similarly, the Mn atoms exhibit two inequivalent coordinations in 
the lattice: those with a Ce atom as a second nearest-neighbor are hereafter 
labeled MnS, while those with two other Mn atoms as second nearest neighbors 
are labeled MnM. The Mn-O coordination environment is not perfectly octahedral 
because of the unequal Mn-O angles and bond lengths: 1.89 Å for MnS-OS and 1.99 
Å (1.93 Å) for MnS-OM (MnM-OM). Ce-O bonds are arranged in a perfect octahedral 
symmetry with a Ce-O bond length (2.23 Å) larger than the Mn-O bond length. 
Notably, the difference in the Mn-OS and the Ce-OS bond lengths (2.23 Å -1.89 Å , 
i.e., 0.34 Å) is exactly equal to the difference in the ionic radius of Ce4+ (1.01 Å)3 and 
Mn4+ (0.67 Å)4. 
 
The Mn atoms, which are in the Mn4+ oxidation state, have strong net magnetic 
moments due to the 3d3 valence occupancy and are arranged in triples (groups of 
three neighbors). In our DFT calculations, we simulate the lowest energy anti-
ferromagnetic spin configuration of Mn atoms in the rhombohedral structure such 
that, in terms of the magnetic moment, the Mn atoms follow an alternating 
arrangement. Within every triple of Mn atoms, if the MnM site has a net up (down) 
magnetic moment, then both of the MnS sites will have the opposite down (up) 
magnetic moment, resulting, for each triple, in a net magnetic moment with the 
direction dictated by the 2:1 majority of MnS constituents. In the particular anti-
ferromagnetic arrangement in our chosen supercells, all triples within a given layer 
are spin-polarized along the same direction while triples belonging to neighboring 
layers have opposite spin-polarizations. The calculated ground-state total energy 

 

2 The crystal structure is provided in the supplementary materials. 

3 https://www.webelements.com/cerium/atom_sizes.html 

4 https://www.webelements.com/manganese/atom_sizes.html 


of such a polarization-arrangement is seen to be lower than that of others: e.g., the 
ferromagnetic arrangement where all Mn atoms are polarized along the same 
direction or the anti-ferromagnetic one in which neighboring triples differ in their 
net spin-polarization but within a given triple, all Mn atoms are polarized along the 
same direction. 
 

(2) 
Electronic structure of the pristine crystal 

 

Fig. 2 The total and partial DOS of the pristine BCM crystal. The energy of the VBM 
is set at zero. 

 
 
 
Fig. 2 shows the density of states (DOS) of the pristine BCM crystal, along with the 
projected DOS (PDOS) contributions from the different species. The small 
contribution of Ce-4f in the occupied PDOS indicates that these orbitals do not 
partake significantly in mixing with O-2p orbitals. The Ce-4f states are mostly 

Energy (eV)

PDOS

Total
Ce
Ba
Mn
O


unoccupied, with significant peaks appearing above the Fermi level, and highly 
localized in energy; confined within 1.5 eV on the energy axis with peak value 
around 0.75 eV above the CBM. In fact, the PDOS at the LUMO energy shows 
comparable contributions from O-p, Mn-3d and Ce-4f orbitals. The energy of the 
Ce-4f band is relatively similar across the two spin channels because Ce in the Ce4+ 
charge state has an empty valence 4f orbital. 
 
 
 
 

 

 
Fig. 3 PDOS plot of an MnM and an MnS atom belonging to the same triple. In this 
representative triple, the MnM and MnS atoms have a net up and down spin-
polarization, respectively [see, for example, the triple consisting of the atoms C’, A 
and C in Fig. 1]. On the energy axis, 0 corresponds to the VBM. 

 
The magnitude of Lowdin polarization is seen to be lower (±3.13) for MnM than it is 
for MnS (±3.19), as reported in Tab. 1. This can be associated with the exchange 
interaction of MnM with electrons from the second nearest-neighbors, both of 
which are MnS atoms with magnetic moments in the direction opposite to that of 
the MnM atom. Note from Fig. 3, which shows the 3-d PDOS of a MnM and a MnS 
atom (which are constituents of the same triple and therefore, are spin-polarized 

MnM-3d
MnS-3d

Energy (eV)

PDOS

Spin

Spin


along opposite directions) that, in their respective majority spin channels, the CBM 
in the PDOS of MnM is at a higher energy compared to that of MnS. This trend, 
however, is reversed for the lowest unoccupied peaks of their respective minority 
channels. Noting that a larger polarization typically corresponds to a larger 
exchange-splitting, which, in turn, would result, in accordance with the tight-
binding formalism, in a larger energy-difference between the unoccupied levels of 
the two spin-channels, we can attribute the aforementioned property of the PDOS 
to the relatively higher (lower) local magnetic moment of MnM (MnS). 
 
 
We can begin to understand the electronic structure by making some initial 
simplifications. If we assumed a local octahedral coordination, the Mn 3d-orbitals 
for each spin channel would split into eg and t2g orbitals. The former would occupy 
a higher energy subspace as a consequence of increased electronic repulsion 
resulting from the alignment along the octahedral Mn-O bonding-axes, while the 
latter would be oriented between the bonding-axes and consequently, would have 
lower energy.  

(i) 
In our attempt at deciphering the electronic structure, as a first 
approximation, we can neglect all orbital-mixing between the Mn and the 
O atoms.  Since the Mn atoms have a 3d3 configuration, under such a 
hypothetical, fully-ionic Mn4+ scenario, then, in the majority spin channel, 
we would expect each t2g orbital to be occupied with parallel spins 
(according to Hund’s rule) with the eg orbitals remaining unoccupied. In 
the minority spin channel, the Mn 3d orbitals would have higher energy 
due to exchange splitting and therefore all the minority d-orbitals would 
be completely empty, giving rise to a net absolute atomic magnetic 
moment of 3 𝜇3 for each Mn atom. 
 

(ii) 
Introducing a further layer of complexity, in accordance with the concepts 
of ligand-field theory within the solid state19, we can take into account 
the mixing between the Mn-eg and the O-2p orbitals, while retaining the 
non-bonding nature of the Mn t2g orbitals since the latter are not oriented 
along the bonding axes. The mixed (Mn-eg + O-2p) orbitals would then 
split into occupied bonding and unoccupied anti-bonding orbitals. Thus, 
in the majority spin-channel, the occupied orbitals would exhibit either a 
bonding (Mn-eg + O-2p) nature or a non-bonding Mn-t2g nature, with the 
VBM consisting predominantly of the former. The unoccupied orbitals can 


be expected to show (Mn-eg + O-2p) nature. In the minority spin channel, 
all occupied orbitals would show exclusively (Mn-eg + O-2p) bonding 
character while in the unoccupied subspace, there would be anti-bonding 
(Mn-eg + O-2p) and non-bonding Mn-t2g orbitals. 

 

Fig. 4 The PDOS of an MnS and a neighboring OS atom, showing their 3d and 2p 
contributions, respectively. As in Fig. 3, the MnS atom has a majority of down spin 
electrons. Certain peaks in the up (U) and down (D) spin channels of the PDOS are 
labeled for further analysi of the corresponding orbitalss, as shown with isovalue 
plots in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. In the labels, the superscript t and e, refers to an orbital 
showing appreciable mixing of O-2p with Mn- t2g and Mn- eg , respectively, while 
the superscript p refers to an orbital having  predominantly O-2p character. 

 
 
 
In order to test the validity of two orbital mixing approximation, we analyze the 2p 
orbital PDOS of an OS atom and the 3d orbital PDOS of the adjacent MnS atom in 

Energy (eV)

Mns-3d
Os-2p
Spin

Spin

tD1

tD2

eD3

eD4

tD5

tD7

tD8

eD9

eD10

tU2

eU3

eU4

pU5
pU6

tU7

tU8

eU11

eU9

eU10

eD11

tD6

tU1

PDOS


Fig. 4. Note that, in contrast with OM, OS is coordinated with atoms of two separate 
species: an MnS and a Ce, the latter of which shows much weaker mixing with O p-
orbitals in comparison with the Mns (as evident from the low contribution of Ce 4f 
in the occupied PDOS shown in Fig. 2), making the PDOS analysis of OS-2p 
comparatively simpler. A low numerical broadening (2.86 meV) has been used to 
facilitate the assignment of electronic orbitals to the PDOS features in Fig. 4. Fig. 5 
and Fig. 6, present the isovalue plots of the KS orbitals contributing to various 
salient peaks of the PDOS for the up (U) and the down (D) spin channels, 
respectively. Notice, for example, that, in contrast with the aforementioned 
prediction of ligand-field theory, in the majority, i.e., down spin-channel, the PDOS 
around the VBM is dominated by orbitals exhibiting mixed (MnS-t2g + OS-2p) 
character [e.g. tD7, tD8] while orbitals at much lower energy (-4 eV) show distinct 
(MnS -eg + OS-2p) mixing [e.g. eD3, eD4]. Additionally, in the minority, i.e., up spin-
channel, the occupied orbitals tU1, tU2 show noticeable (MnS-t2g +  OS-2p) character. 
In order to explain such anomalies, 
 

(iii) 
we propose in Fig. 7, an alternative mixing scheme consistent with the 
orbital-characteristics observed in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 which accounts for the 
possibility of mixing between the MnS -t2g and the Os-2p orbitals, which is 
possible, especially due to the fact that the Mn-O coordination 
environment is not perfectly octahedral. This additional mixing leads to 
splitting of the MnS -t2g  manifold into: a lower energy band of what would 
be called non-bonding orbitals under the mixing scheme (ii) outlined 
above, but which here exhibit some mixing with Os-2p; and a higher 
energy band, the anti-bonding counterpart, which, depending on the spin 
channel, may be occupied (down spin, majority) or not (up spin, minority).  

 
Fig. 5 also shows significant OS-2p (non-bonding) character near the up-spin 
VBM [pU5 and  pU6]. Additionally, from Fig. 6, we can notice substantial presence 
of Ce-4f in the KS orbitals eD10 and eD11, which is consistent with the PDOS plot 
shown in Fig. 2. Overall, the schematic picture in Fig. 7 provides a consistent 
view of the ultimate electronic structure observed in our simulations. 
 
In summary, we have seen that the Ba orbitals have very little presence in the 
frontier PDOS. The Ce-4f orbitals, which show weak mixing with O-2p, are 
predominantly localized near the conduction band edge. The Mn-3d orbitals, on 


the other hand, mix substantially with O-2p, generating bonding and anti-
bonding levels across a wide energy range, as shown schematically in Fig. 7. 

 
 
 

 

Fig. 5 Isovalue plots of up spin KS orbitals having significant contributions to the 
peaks labeled in Fig. 4. The relevant OS atom is marked with a “+” symbol. 

 
 
 
 
 

tU2
eU3
eU4

tU7
tU8

eU9

eU10
eU11

pU5
pU6

tU1


 

Fig. 6 Isovalue plots of down spin KS orbitals having significant contributions to the 
peaks labeled in Fig. 4. The relevant OS atom is marked with a “+” symbol. 

 
 
 

tD1
tD2
eD3
eD4

tD5
tD6
tD7
tD8

eD9
eD10

eD11


 

Fig. 7 PDOS of MnS-3d and OS-2p, along with a schematic detailing the bonding 
scheme in accordance with the LCAO formalism. Note that the down (up) spin 
channel corresponds to majority (minority) spins. 

 

(3) 
O K-edge XAS of the Pristine Crystal 

Spin
Spin

Spin

Spin
eg

t2g

Mns-3d
Os-2p

eg

t2g

Os-2p

Energy (eV)


 

 

 

 
Fig. 8 Top left panel shows the O K-edge XAS of the pristine BCM crystal. Panel (a) 
shows the experimental spectrum while the panel (b) shows the resultant simulated 
spectrum, along with the individual contributions from OS and OM. In order to 
facilitate comparison, the spectra have been divided into four regions along the 
energy axis and the salient crests and troughs have been labeled. Panel (c) shows, 
for both of the oxygen atoms, the contribution of the up and the down spin channels 
to the net spectrum. The rest of the panels show isovalue plots of orbitals of the 
promoted electron in the excited-states resulting from core-excitation of an OM 
(panels (d)-(g)) or an OS atom (panels (h)-(m)). The core-excited atom is marked by 
a “+” symbol. The XAS peak marked by circle of a given color in panel (c) has 

Resultant

OM
OS

Spin

Spin

Energy (eV)

Intensity (a.u.)

Experiment

A
A’

B

B

F

C

D
I
II
III
IV

A

A’

E

F

G

C

D

E

G

(d)
(e)

(f)
(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

(m)

OM+OS

OM
OS

Spin

Spin

Energy (eV)

Intensity (a.u.)

Experiment

A
A’

B

B

F

C

D
I
II
III
IV

A

A’

E

F

G

C

D

E

G

(a)

(b)

(c)


substantial contributions from a final (core-excited) state in which the excited 
electron resides in the orbital labeled by the same color in the isovalue-plots. 

 
 
 
 
 
One of the most efficacious avenues for experimental investigation of electronic 
structure is the element-specific X-ray spectroscopy. In the following, we present a 
detailed experimental and theoretical account of the O K-edge X-ray absorption 
spectra (XAS) associated with exciting a 1s core electron of an O atom. Since the 
BCM unit cell contains an equal number of OM and OS atoms, the final spectrum will 
be the resultant of contributions from both of these atoms. Notably, the final state 
created by the process of X-ray absorption differs from the GS in that it has a 
missing 1s electron (a hole) localized on a specific oxygen atom. In addition, the 
core-hole creation results in a significant modification of electron-density in the 
vicinity of the excited atom O(x), resulting, in accordance with the tight-binding 
framework, in an enhanced contribution to the occupied PDOS and a downward 
shift in the energy of those orbitals, due to strong, attractive Coulomb interactions 
with the core hole. Concomitantly, the contributions of the excited atom to the 
unoccupied PDOS, due to orbitals of mixed character with neighboring atomic sites 
may be reduced. A comparison of the PDOS of individual atoms corresponding to 
the ground and the FCH state is presented in Fig.S1. The FCH state is defined above 
and is the foundational self-consistent field from which the core-excited Kohn-
Sham orbitals are obtained.  
 
The experimental O K-edge spectrum of BCM is presented in Fig. 8(a). As mentioned 
in the introduction, the goal then, is to extract meaningful electronic-structure 
information from the spectrum by associating electronic excitations to the salient 
spectral features. As a first step to this end, in Fig. 8(b) we show the simulated 
resultant O K-edge spectrum, as well as the individual contributions from OM and 
OS. As expected, OM, which is coordinated by two Mn atoms with opposite magnetic 
moments of comparable magnitude, produces relatively symmetric contributions 
to the absorption spectrum for the two spin channels (Fig. 8(c)). On the other hand, 
the spectral contributions of OS, which is coordinated by a Mn and a Ce atom having 
significant and negligible magnetic moments respectively, differ considerably 
between the spin channels. This asymmetry leads to a lower intensity of the first 


XAS peak in the resultant spectrum of OS. From Table 2, OS can be seen to have a 
slightly higher Lowdin magnetic moment, indicating a stronger spin-polarization, 
than OM. The exchange interaction arising from this higher spin-polarization lowers 
the conduction orbitals of the majority spin channel associated with OS, as evident 
from the slightly lower energy of the first XAS peak of OS (compared to OM) in the 
down spin channel. It is important to note that the appearance of the simulated 
spectrum is heavily dependent on the broadening used for generating it. A spectral 
peak which is well-separated in energy from the rest of the features will typically 
experience a substantial lowering of intensity with increment in broadening. In Fig. 
8 (b)-(c), a uniform broadening of 0.2 eV is used, while the spectra simulated with 
higher broadening energies are shown in Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Materials. In 
particular, Fig. S2 reveals that the relative intensities of the net simulated spectrum 
depend on the broadening. For higher broadening values, the relative intensity of 
the intense peak A diminishes in comparison with the others. Additionally, the 
features at 528.9 eV and 529.7 eV, which are present between A and B in in the 
simulated spectrum (black line in Fig. 8(b)), but not visible in the experimental 
counterpart (Fig. 8(a)), vanish for higher values of broadening.   
 
 
Peak 
O atom 
Ligand atom 
Note 

A’ 
OS 
MnS 
(OS-2p+MnS-3d) 
orbital 
in 

majority spin-channel 

A 
OM 
Mn 
(OM-2p+Mn-3d) 
orbital 
in 

majority spin-channel. Both 
up 
and 
down 
orbitals 

contribute, since OM has two 
neighboring Mn atoms with 
opposite spin-polarization. 

B 
O 
Mn 
(OS-2p+MnS-3d) orbital in the 
minority 
channel. 
(OM-

2p+Mn-3d) orbital in both 
spin channels. 

D 
OS 
Ce, Mn 
OS-2p orbital mixed with Ce-4f 
and Mn-3d 

E 
O 
Ce 
Highly 
delocalized 
orbital 

showing mostly (O-2p+Ce-4f) 
character. 


Table 1 The characteristics of the excited-electron giving rise to the salient peaks in 
the experimental O K-edge spectrum. Mn/O atom without a subscript indicates 
substantial contribution from both “middle” (M) and “side” (S) atoms. 
 
The utility of computation in the analysis of x-ray spectroscopy can be appreciated 
from Table 1 which maps the low-energy spectral peaks to the orbitals of the 
excited electron. The peaks in region I of the spectrum (see Fig. 8(a)) arise mostly 
from mixing of O-2p with Mn-3d orbitals while the contribution of Ce-4f  is noticed 
in region II.  
 
A more detailed visual description of the associated orbitals is provided by the 
relevant isovalue plots of Fig. 8(d)-(m). The orbital plot in panel (d) of Fig. 8 reveals 
that, in accordance with our theoretical model, the first peak of the OM K-edge 
(contributing to peak A) in the up spin channel originates from a final state where 
the excited electron resides in an orbital with substantial contribution from the 3d 
orbital of MnM, which has a net positive spin-polarization. Panel (e) shows that the 
down spin counterpart essentially involves the 3d orbital of the neighboring MnS 
atom, which has a net negative spin-polarization. Similar to the intense first peak, 
for OM, the feature at ~530.5 eV (contributing to peak B) can be associated with an 
orbital with mixed O-2p and Mn-3d character (panel (f)) which, for brevity, has been 
plotted for the up-spin channel only. However, unlike the orbital associated with 
the first peak (i.e., panel (d)), this orbital corresponds to the minority spin channel 
of the relevant Mn atom and consequently has a higher energy, more delocalization 
and lower intensity. Note that, while both panel(d) and (f) correspond to peaks in 
the up-spin spectrum, the contributing Mn atom for panel (d) is the MnM, which 
has a positive spin-polarization while that for panel (f) is the MnS, which has a 
negative spin-polarization. The orbital associated with the higher energy peak at 
~532.2 eV (panel (g), peak E), which shows even more delocalization, can be seen 
to contain appreciable contribution from the Ce-4f orbitals. 
 
Similar to the OM spectrum, the first peak of the OS spectrum (contributing to peak 
A’) in the down spin channel originates from mixing of O-2p with the 3d orbital of 
the neighboring MnS atom, which has a negative spin-polarization (panel (h) in Fig. 
8). By contrast, for the up spin contributions in the OS spectrum, as already shown 
in Fig. 3 and Fig. 7, the lack of exchange interaction pushes the minority (up) spin 
MnS-3d orbitals to higher energy, and the first OS K-edge peak in this spin-channel 
(at ~529 eV, between A and B), in fact, arises primarily from an unoccupied orbital 
with heavy contributions from Ce-4f, as evident from panel (i) in Fig. 8. This explains 


the relatively higher energy and lower intensity of this peak, in comparison with 
the down-spin counterpart. The up-spin peak at ~530.4 eV originates from an 
orbital similar in characteristics to the one responsible for the peak at ~530.5 eV 
for the OM spectrum, as can be seen by noting the similarity between panels (f) and 
(j).  
 
The higher-energy resultant peak at ~531.8 eV (peak D) contains appreciable 
contribution from both spin channels of the OS XAS spectrum. The comparability of 
the energy and the intensity of these two peaks corresponding to different spin 
channels can be attributed to the fact that they are associated with unoccupied 
orbitals containing contributions mostly of 4f orbitals of the neighboring Ce atom, 
which has negligible magnetic moment (panels (k) and (l)). 
 
Panels (d), (e) and (h) reveal that all of the intense low-energy XAS peaks contain 
substantial contribution from a 3d orbital of a Mn atom coordinated with the core-
excited oxygen O(x) [note that in panels (d) and (e), this is an OM atom while in panel 
(h), this is an OS atom]. However, the 2p contribution of O(x) is noticeably lower than 
that of other (i.e., not core-excited) O atoms coordinated with the aforementioned 
Mn. This result is somewhat counterintuitive, since we might expect the core-hole 
to attract the promoted electron mostly to the O(x) atom. However, as a purely 
quantum-mechanical effect, the presence of a core-hole would lower the onsite 
energy of O(x), resulting in a reduction of its relative contribution to the anti-
bonding orbitals responsible for these spectral peaks. By contrast, we see the 
largest 2p contribution for the O atom on the opposite side of the Mn atom from 
the core-excited O(x), due to its farther distance from the core hole [evident in 
panels (d), (e) and (h)]. Notably, the MBXAS method captures the contributions of 
both the excited and occupied valence orbitals to these spectral features and leads 
to strong XAS intensities which would be underestimated with single-particle core-
hole approaches. 
  
In short, the O K-edge spectrum of the pristine BCM crystal is generated from a 
non-trivial combination of contribution from the two different spin-channels of the 
two inequivalent O sites: OM and OS. As summarized in Table 1, the low-energy 
features result mostly from promoting the O 1s electron to orbitals of mixed O-2p 
and Mn-3d character, while the presence of Ce-4f is noticed at relatively higher 
energies. 
 


 

(4) 
The Reduced BCM Crystal 

 

As mentioned in the introduction, for the STCH operation, BCM is exposed to 
high-temperature in an inert atmosphere, resulting in removal of oxygen atoms 
and it is this reduced phase that takes part in H2 generation by splitting the H2O 
molecule. This prompts us to investigate the electronic structure of the thermally-
reduced BCM crystal. In particular, owing to the high electronegativity of the O 
atom, bonding between O and metallic ligands typically involves concentration of 
electronic population around the former. It is then instructive to probe how the 
excess electronic population available in the system as a result of the oxygen-
removal, arranges itself.  On the experimental front, as shown in Fig. 13, O K-edge 
XAS reveals a marked reduction in the first-peak intensity in the reduced crystal in 
comparison with the pristine counterpart. A detailed theoretical analysis is 
required to shed light on the origin of such reduction.  
 
For a vacancy at the OM site, the formation energy (2.7 eV) is seen to be lower than 
that for a vacancy at the OS site (3.3 eV), which indicates a higher probability for 
oxygen-removal from the OM site. This conclusion is also supported by experimental 
XAS studies presented in ref.20, which reports substantial change in the Mn L-near-
edge spectrum as a function of temperature, implying a progressive reduction of 
the Mn atom. On the contrary, no major energy-shift is noted in the Ce M-edge 
spectrum. Therefore, in the rest of the paper, the theoretical treatment of 
electronic structure and XAS will be limited to a reduced structure with a vacancy 
at the OM site. 


 

Fig. 9 Top left panel shows a diagrammatic representation of the reduced crystal 
structure with the oxygen-vacancy at an OM site indicated by a dashed circle. The 
Mn atoms affected most drastically by the removal of OM are marked by ‘e-’, 
indicating the presence of excess electronic population (i.e., they are nominally 
reduced to Mn3+). The bottom left panel shows, for clarity, the relative positions of 
atoms close to the vacancy.  Various atoms, which are subjected to further analysis, 
have been marked by colored arrows with labels in the right-hand-side panel. In the 
labels, the superscript red., which is short for “reduced” (dist., which is short for 
“distant”) denotes an atom located near (far from) the OM vacancy. 

 
The structure of the reduced crystal (provided in the Supplementary Materials) is 
obtained by relaxing the ionic coordinates in presence of the oxygen vacancy.  From 
Table 2 and Figure 9, it can be seen that the electronic population and the spin-
polarization of the atoms nearest the oxygen vacancy (both Mn and O) are 
noticeably larger than their counterparts in the pristine crystal. We label the 

e-
e-

MnS

(red.)

MnM

(red.)

[1]OM

(red.)

[2]OM

(red.)

MnM(dist.)

MnS(dist.)

OM

(dist.)

OS

(dist.)

OS

(red.)


corresponding Mn atoms as MnS(red.) and MnM(red.). Due to the vacancy, they  are 
coordinated with 5 (as opposed to 6) oxygen atoms. We would expect that the 
removal of an O atom would leave behind two electrons on Mn sites. In fact, it is 
these neighboring Mn atoms, as well as the O atoms coordinated with them which 
gain electron density (Table 2), and so, we label them as reduced (red.). On the 
other hand, the more distant (dist.) atoms in the supercell show much smaller 
deviations in their electron populations. Thus, the excess electronic population 
available in the system as a result of oxygen-removal, remains local to the site of 
reduction. A combination of localized orbitals and dielectric screening leads to the 
effect of the oxygen-vacancy diminishing with increasing distance.  
 
 
 
 

Atom
Total 

Population 

Spin Up
Spin Down
Polarization

Pristine  

MnS [C] 
13.4731
5.1401
8.3330
-3.1929

MnM [A] 
13.5225
8.3287
5.1938
3.1350

OS [D] 
6.5212
3.2817
3.2394
0.0423

OM [B] 
6.5680
3.2969
3.2711
0.0258

Reduced 

MnS(dist.) 
13.4734
5.1408  
8.3325
-3.1917

MnM(dist.) 
13.5217
8.3308
5.1909
3.1398

OS(dist.) 
6.5165
3.2822
3.2343
0.0479

OM(dist.) 
6.5658
3.2948
3.2710
0.0237

MnS(red.) 
13.5232
4.8637
8.6595
-3.7958

MnM(red.) 
13.5875
8.6647
4.9228
3.7419

OS(red.) 
6.5559
3.2970
3.2589
0.0381

[1]OM(red.) 
6.6015
3.3209
3.2806
0.0403

[2]OM(red.) 
6.6192
3.3203
3.2988
0.0215

Table 2 For various atoms of the pristine and the reduced crystal (column 1), the 
total electron population (column 2), spin-up population (column 3), spin-down 
population (column 3) and polarization (column 4) of valence electrons, calculated 
using Lowdin’s scheme of population analysis. For the pristine crystal, the atoms 


are labeled (A-D) in accordance with Fig. 1 while for the reduced structure, the 
color-convention used in Fig. 11 is maintained. 

 
 
 

 

Fig. 10 Mn-3d PDOS plots contrasting contributions of atoms from the reduced 
crystal to those of atoms from the pristine one. The top (bottom) panel corresponds 
to the middle, i.e. M (side, i.e. S) site. The VBM is set to zero. 

 

 
Fig. 10 showcases a comparison of the 3d PDOS of different Mn atoms: MnM(red.) 
and MnS(red.)  (MnM(dist.) and MnS(dist.)) present at the site of reduction (distant from 
the site of reduction). As expected, the PDOS of the distant atoms, MnM(dist.) and 
MnS(dist.), bear noticeable resemblance with their counterparts from the pristine 
structure, while those of the reduced atoms, MnM(red.) and MnS(red.), differ 
appreciably. From Table 2, it can be noted that, owing to their coordination with 

MnM(red.) -3d
MnM(dist.) -3d
Mn(pristine)mid-3d

MnS(red.) -3d
MnS(dist.) -3d
Mn(pristine)side-3d

Energy (eV)

PDOS


fewer O atoms, the reduced Mn atoms have higher valence electronic population. 
This enhanced occupation elevates the unoccupied orbitals to higher energy and 
shifts their weight off the reduced Mn sites, as evident from the higher energy and 
lower intensity of the relevant Mn PDOS-peaks, respectively. For the pristine 
crystal, Fig. 3 reveals that for both of the Mn sites (i.e., MnM and MnS), the 
unoccupied edge of the PDOS corresponds to the respective majority spin channels. 
Therefore, after the thermal reduction, the excess electron available to MnM(red.) 
and MnS(red.) can be expected to go to the majority spin channel. This is consistent 
with Table 2, which shows that the absolute values of the polarization of the 
reduced Mn atoms are higher than those of the pristine counterparts. In Fig. 10, 
this can be associated with the isolated PDOS contribution in the majority spin 
channel at the Fermi level (0 eV). 
 

(5) 
O K-edge XAS of the reduced structure 

 

 

 

Fig. 11 O K-edge XAS of different oxygen sites of the reduced crystal. The left (right) 
panels correspond to OM (OS) sites. In each panel, the shaded plots show the up and 
down spin contributions of the relevant O atom, the solid black line shows the spin-
summed spectrum, while the broken blue line represents the spectrum of an OM / OS 
atom from the pristine crystal.  

 
 

[2]OM(red.) up/down      [2]OM(red.) TOT.

O(pristine)mid TOT.

[1]OM(red.) up/down
[1]OM(red.) TOT.
O(pristine)mid TOT.

OS(red.) up/down
OS(red.)TOT.

O(pristine)side TOT.

OM(dist.) up/down
OM(dist.) TOT. 
O(pristine)mid TOT.

OS(dist.) up/down     OS(dist.) TOT.                 

O(pristine)side TOT.

Energy (eV)

Intensity (a.u.)

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)


O K-edge X-ray absorption spectra corresponding to core-excitation of different 
inequivalent oxygen sites is displayed in Fig. 11, along with counterparts from the 
pristine crystal, to facilitate comparison. Once again, the spectra of the distant 
atoms are very similar to those from the pristine crystal while those of O atoms 
close to the vacancy-site differ substantially. For [2]OM(red.), the up and down-spin 
spectra do not display any drastic asymmetry since both of its neighboring Mn 
atoms are 5-fold coordinated due to the neighboring vacancy (i.e., they are MnS(red.) 
and MnM(red.)). However, the increased electron population on these reduced Mn 
atoms raises the energy of their 3d orbitals, leading to a higher energy-difference 
between the corresponding Mn-3d and the O-2p levels, effectively making the 
bonding more ionic (due to decreased orbital mixing). In accordance with the tight-
binding formalism, this results in a reduced O-2p contribution to the anti-bonding 
orbitals (see schematic in Fig. 12). Therefore, the intensity of the resultant [2]OM(red.)  
spectrum is lower than the OM counterpart from the pristine crystal. On the other 
hand, the [1]OM(red.) atom is coordinated with two Mn atoms among which, only 
MnM(red.), which has a positive spin-polarization, experiences a major enhancement 
in electron population. Mixing between [1]OM(red.)-2p and MnM(red.)-3d orbitals is 
primarily responsible for the up-spin spectrum of [1]OM(red.). Therefore, for [1]OM(red.), 
the first peak of the up-spin spectrum exhibits a noticeably higher energy and lower 
intensity compared to the down-spin counterpart. The energy-shift between the 
first peaks corresponding to these two spin-channels leads to a substantial 
reduction in the intensity of the resultant peak for [1]OM(red.), as can be seen by 
comparing the panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 11. The peak intensity for OS(red.) is also 
lowered in comparison with that of pristine OS, although this lowering is less 
pronounced since, in the pristine as well as in the reduced crystal, only the first 
peak originates from mixing with Mn orbitals. The second peak, which corresponds 
to a different spin channel and is much lower in intensity, results mostly from 
mixing with Ce orbitals and therefore, does not experience any major change upon 
reduction. The up-spin peak of [1]OM(red.), the down-spin peak of OS(red.), and both 
peaks of [2]OM(red.) are associated with orbitals resulting from the mixing of O-2p 
with the 3d orbital of the reduced (i.e., 5 fold coordinated) Mn atom(s). The 
blueshift of these peaks, with respect to their counterparts in the pristine spectrum 
is consistent with previous reports21 and expected from the tight-binding 
consideration. 
 
As discussed above, for all three O atoms near the site of reduction, i.e., for atoms 
[1]OM(red.) , [2]OM(red.) and OS(red.) , the first peak of the spectrum shows a reduction in 


intensity. Therefore, the resultant O K-edge spectrum of the reduced crystal should 
exhibit lowering of the first peak intensity, although the exact ratio can be expected 
to depend on the percentage of oxygen-vacancies formed in the crystal. However, 
as shown in Fig. 13, at least in qualitative terms, the experimental O K-edge 
spectrum of reduced BCM corroborates the aforementioned conclusion of 
intensity-lowering. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Fig 12 Schematic diagram showing a reduction in the O-p contribution to the anti-
bonding orbital resulting from a higher population of Mn. To facilitate comparison, 
the O-p level is kept at the same energy. This effect is further exaggerated by the 
core-excited state, which draws down the O 2p orbital energies and enhances the 
ionicity, further reducing O character in the antibonding orbital. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

O-p

Mn-d

Mn-d

Mn-d

Bonding

Bonding

Anti-bonding

Anti-bonding

O-p

Increment in electronic

population of Mn


 

 

Fig 13 Experimental O K-edge absorption spectra of pristine and reduced BCM.  

 

 

 

As a consequence of the reduction, in general the electronic population increases 
in the vicinity of the site of reduction. From the consideration of classical Coulombic 
interaction, this can be expected to result in a diminished contribution from the 
local DOS of these atoms to the low-energy conduction orbitals of the system. 
However, as we have seen in the case of the pristine crystal, quantum mechanical 
effects associated with orbital-mixing (within the tight-binding framework) can play 
a crucial role in deciding the character of the final orbital.  In order to investigate 
further how the interplay of the O-2p and Mn-3d orbitals results in a reduction in 
the peak intensities for the O(red.) atoms, we compare, for the reduced crystal, 

 

Energy (eV)

Intensity (a.u.)

Pristine
Reduced


A. the PDOS of MnS(dist.)-3d and OS(dist.)-2p as a consequence of core-

exciting the OS(dist.) atom (note that Fig. 11 indicates that this should be 
relatively similar to the pristine counterpart). 

B. the PDOS of MnS(red.)-3d and OS(red.)-2p as a consequence of core-

excitation of the OS(red.) atom, against 

 
For the final core-excited state corresponding to case [A], (case[B]), let us denote 
the KS orbital responsible for generating the peak at 9.94 eV (10.34 eV) as 𝜙5 (𝜙3). 
Further, let [A]C[Mn] and [A]C[O] ([B]C[Mn] and [B]C[O]) denote, respectively, the 
contribution from the Lowdin-orthogonalized MnS(red.)-3d and OS(red.)-2p (MnS(dist.)-
3d and OS(dist.)-2p) atomic-orbitals to 𝜙5 (𝜙3). Note that the OS(red.)-2p and the 
OS(dist.)-2p orbitals are responsible for the corresponding first-peaks in the 
absorption spectra shown in Fig. 11. The computed values of the aforementioned 
contributions reveal that 

8[:;]
[=]

[>]8[:;]
= 0.86 while 

8[C]
[=]

[>]8[C]
= 2.3. 

In other words, creation of the oxygen-vacancy results in a lowering of the 
contribution of the 2p orbital of the core-excited OS atom at the conduction band-
edge. Conversely, the contribution of the MnS 3d orbital is enhanced. We note here 
that the difference in the Lowdin population of the MnS(red.) atom in case [B] (i.e., 
after core-excitation of OS(dist.)) and the MnS(dist.) atom in case [A] (i.e., after core-
excitation of OS(red.)) is 0.06 while that between the corresponding core-excited 
oxygens is 0.01. The higher contribution of the 2p orbital of the excited oxygen far 
from the site of oxygen-vacancy essentially points to the fact that, owing to the 
higher electronic population of Mn(red.) [see Tab. 2], the difference in the onsite 
energy between MnS(red.)-3d and core-excited OS(red.)-2p in case [A] is higher than 
that between MnS(dist.)-3d and core-excited OS (dist.)-2p in case [B]. Therefore, in 
accordance with the tight-binding prescription, in an anti-bonding orbital with 
mixed MnS-3d and OS-2p character, the OS-2p contribution would be relatively 
lower in case [A]. This effect is demonstrated schematically in Fig. 12. The lower OS-
2p contribution in case [A] would, in turn, result in a reduction in the intensity of 
the corresponding XAS peak. 
 
To summarize, a qualitative theoretical analysis combining first-principles 
calculations and a tight-binding model reveals that the lowering of the first-peak 
intensity in the reduced crystal originates from a combination of two effects: 


1. Lifting of degeneracy between the up and the down spin peaks for [1]OM(red.), 

as shown in Fig. 11, and 

2. Reduction in the O-2p contribution to the unoccupied orbitals, as illustrated 

schematically in Fig. 12. 

 
 

                                 
 

Fig. 14 Top panel shows the experimental O K-edge spectra of the pristine and the 
reduced crystal (same as Fig. 13). Bottom panel shows the simulated spectrum of 
the pristine crystal in black solid line (same as that shown in black line in Fig. 8(b). 
The broken blue line in the bottom panel shows a model spectrum calculated 
approximately for the reduced triple. Further details are provided in the text 

Fig. 14 shows, along with the experimental counterparts, the simulated O K-edge 
spectrum for pristine BCM and a model spectrum for the reduced crystal. In the 

A

B

C

D

Energy (eV)

Intensity (a.u.)

Experiment

Theory


latter, we have accounted, in an approximate manner, only for the O atoms 
coordinating the reduced triple (see Fig. 9 in the main manuscript). More 

specifically, this is calculated as (1/11) x [3 x I( OS(dist.) ) + 3 x I( OS(red.) ) + 3 x I( [1]OM(red.) 

)+ 2 x I( [2]OM(red.))], where I(Om) denotes the spectrum of the Om atom. Note that 
the actual spectrum of the reduced crystal will contain contributions from all O 
atoms present in the crystal, not just the O atoms coordinating the reduced triple. 
The contributions coming from all O atoms occupying inequivalent sites in the 
reduced crystal will, in principle, be different. Therefore, the final spectrum will 
depend, in a complicated manner, not only on the density but also on the 
distribution of the defects. If the thermal reduction results in removal of two 
oxygens coordinating the same triple, the spectra would likely be significantly 
different. Note, for example, that the first-peak of the experimental absorption 
spectra for the pristine and the reduced crystal are coincident on the energy-axis. 
On the other hand, in the O K-edge EELS spectra reported in Ref.20, a noticeable 
blueshift is reported with increasing thermal reduction, especially at 700° C. As 
discussed in section (5), such a blueshift is expected in the spectral contribution of 
the O(red.) atoms. Similarly, owing to the change in the anti-bonding orbital as well 
as spin-splitting, the O(red.) K-edge spectra will experience a reduction in the 
intensity of the first peak. The degree of prominence of such features in the net 
experimental spectrum will, however, be dictated by the density and distribution 
of the oxygen vacancies and by the probe-depth and resolution of the experiment. 
Notably, the measured overall red-shift in the spectral features at and above 536 
eV is reproduced in our simulations. 
 
Conclusion 
 
In conclusion, with a combination of theoretical and experimental studies, in this 
paper we present a detailed description of the electronic structure of the 
BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ crystal in its pristine and reduced form. The electronic structure 
is probed experimentally with the help of O K-edge XAS, which shows a substantial 
reduction in the first-peak intensity as a result of oxygen-removal. On the theory 
front, DFT based first-principles calculations are performed to obtain the PDOS and 
to plot, in real-space, the occupied and the unoccupied orbitals. On the basis of 
these ab initio results, we propose a simple scheme of orbital-mixing between the 
O and the ligand orbitals consistent with the tight-binding model and the crystal 
field theory. Furthermore, using state-of-the-art spectroscopic simulations using 


the MBXAS method, we provide an in-depth analysis of the O K-edge spectrum by 
associating the spectral peaks with the relevant unoccupied electronic orbitals. We 
show that the low-energy peaks can mostly be attributed to O-2p and Mn-3d 
mixing, while the presence of Ce-4f orbitals are observed only at relatively higher 
energy. For the reduced crystal, our calculations reveal that, owing to dielectric 
screening, the change in electron-density is heavily localized around the site of 
reduction. At atomic sites distant from the oxygen-vacancy, the density is 
practically identical to that of the pristine counterpart. Finally, the simulated 
spectra replicate the qualitative lowering of the K-edge intensity for O atoms close 
to the vacancy-site. Within the tight-binding formalism, this can be explained in 
terms of the reduction in the relative contribution of these O atoms to the frontier 
unoccupied orbitals. 
 
 
(1) Rao, C. N. R.; Dey, S. Solar Thermochemical Splitting of Water to Generate Hydrogen. Proc. 

Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2017, 114 (51), 13385–13393. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1700104114. 

(2) Nakamura, T. Hydrogen Production from Water Utilizing Solar Heat at High Temperatures. 

Solar Energy 1977, 19 (5), 467–475. https://doi.org/10.1016/0038-092X(77)90102-5. 

(3) Steinfeld, A. Solar Thermochemical Production of Hydrogen––a Review. Solar Energy 2005, 

78 (5), 603–615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2003.12.012. 

(4) McDaniel, A. H. Renewable Energy Carriers Derived from Concentrating Solar Power and 

Nonstoichiometric Oxides. Current Opinion in Green and Sustainable Chemistry 2017, 4, 
37–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsc.2017.02.004. 

(5) Chueh, W. C.; Falter, C.; Abbott, M.; Scipio, D.; Furler, P.; Haile, S. M.; Steinfeld, A. High-

Flux Solar-Driven Thermochemical Dissociation of CO 2 and H 2 O Using Nonstoichiometric 
Ceria. Science 2010, 330 (6012), 1797–1801. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1197834. 

(6) Chueh, W. C.; Haile, S. M. A Thermochemical Study of Ceria: Exploiting an Old Material for 

New Modes of Energy Conversion and CO 2 Mitigation. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A. 2010, 368 
(1923), 3269–3294. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2010.0114. 

(7) Siegel, N. P.; Miller, J. E.; Ermanoski, I.; Diver, R. B.; Stechel, E. B. Factors Affecting the 

Efficiency of Solar Driven Metal Oxide Thermochemical Cycles. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2013, 
52 (9), 3276–3286. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie400193q. 

(8) Cheng, W.-H.; de la Calle, A.; Atwater, H. A.; Stechel, E. B.; Xiang, C. Hydrogen from 

Sunlight and Water: A Side-by-Side Comparison between Photoelectrochemical and Solar 
Thermochemical Water-Splitting. ACS Energy Lett. 2021, 6 (9), 3096–3113. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.1c00758. 

(9) McDaniel, A. H.; Miller, E. C.; Arifin, D.; Ambrosini, A.; Coker, E. N.; O’Hayre, R.; Chueh, W. 

C.; Tong, J. Sr- and Mn-Doped LaAlO3−δ for Solar Thermochemical H2 and CO Production. 
Energy Environ. Sci. 2013, 6 (8), 2424. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ee41372a. 

(10) Yang, C.-K.; Yamazaki, Y.; Aydin, A.; Haile, S. M. Thermodynamic and Kinetic Assessments 

of Strontium-Doped Lanthanum Manganite Perovskites for Two-Step Thermochemical 


Water Splitting. J. Mater. Chem. A 2014, 2 (33), 13612–13623. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C4TA02694B. 

(11) Sai Gautam, G.; Stechel, E. B.; Carter, E. A. Exploring Ca–Ce–M–O (M = 3d Transition Metal) 

Oxide Perovskites for Solar Thermochemical Applications. Chem. Mater. 2020, 32 (23), 
9964–9982. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c02912. 

(12) Emery, A. A.; Saal, J. E.; Kirklin, S.; Hegde, V. I.; Wolverton, C. High-Throughput 

Computational Screening of Perovskites for Thermochemical Water Splitting Applications. 
Chem. Mater. 2016, 28 (16), 5621–5634. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b01182. 

(13) McDaniel, A. H.; Ambrosini, A.; Coker, E. N.; Miller, J. E.; Chueh, W. C.; O’Hayre, R.; Tong, J. 

Nonstoichiometric Perovskite Oxides for Solar Thermochemical H2 and CO Production. 
Energy Procedia 2014, 49, 2009–2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.213. 

(14) Vieten, J.; Bulfin, B.; Huck, P.; Horton, M.; Guban, D.; Zhu, L.; Lu, Y.; Persson, K. A.; Roeb, 

M.; Sattler, C. Materials Design of Perovskite Solid Solutions for Thermochemical 
Applications. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12 (4), 1369–1384. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C9EE00085B. 

(15) Barcellos, D. R.; Coury, F. G.; Emery, A.; Sanders, M.; Tong, J.; McDaniel, A.; Wolverton, C.; 

Kaufman, M.; O’Hayre, R. Phase Identification of the Layered Perovskite Ce  x  Sr  2– x  MnO 4 
and Application for Solar Thermochemical Water Splitting. Inorg. Chem. 2019, 58 (12), 
7705–7714. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b03487. 

(16) R. Barcellos, D.; Sanders, M. D.; Tong, J.; McDaniel, A. H.; O’Hayre, R. P. BaCe 0.25 Mn 0.75 O 

3−δ —a Promising Perovskite-Type Oxide for Solar Thermochemical Hydrogen Production. 
Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11 (11), 3256–3265. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8EE01989D. 

(17) Liang, Y.; Prendergast, D. Quantum Many-Body Effects in x-Ray Spectra Efficiently 

Computed Using a Basic Graph Algorithm. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97 (20), 205127. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.97.205127. 

(18) Liang, Y.; Vinson, J.; Pemmaraju, S.; Drisdell, W. S.; Shirley, E. L.; Prendergast, D. Accurate 

X-Ray Spectral Predictions: An Advanced Self-Consistent-Field Approach Inspired by Many-
Body Perturbation Theory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118 (9), 096402. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.096402. 

(19) Hoffmann, R. How Chemistry and Physics Meet in the Solid State. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 

Engl. 1987, 26 (9), 846–878. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.198708461. 

(20) Trindell, J. A.; McDaniel, A. H.; Ogitsu, T.; Ambrosini, A.; Sugar, J. D. Probing Electronic and 

Structural Transformations during Thermal Reduction of the Promising Water Splitting 
Perovskite BaCe 0.25 Mn 0.75 O 3. Chem. Mater. 2022, acs.chemmater.2c00731. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c00731. 

(21) Roychoudhury, S.; Qiao, R.; Zhuo, Z.; Li, Q.; Lyu, Y.; Kim, J.-H.; Liu, J.; Lee, E.; Polzin, B. J.; 

Guo, J.; Yan, S.; Hu, Y.; Li, H.; Prendergast, D.; Yang, W. Deciphering the Oxygen Absorption 
Pre-Edge: A Caveat on Its Application for Probing Oxygen Redox Reactions in Batteries. 
ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL MATERIALS 2021, 4 (2), 246–254. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/eem2.12119. 

 
 
 


 

Supplementary Materials for “Investigating the 

Electronic Structure of Prospective Water-splitting 
Oxide BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ Before and After Thermal 

Reduction” 

 

Subhayan Roychoudhury§, Sarah Shulda¶, Anuj Goyal¶, Robert Bell¶, Sami Sainio‡,  
Nicholas Strange‡, James Eujin Park#, Eric N. Coker#, Stephan Lany¶, David 
Ginley¶, and David Prendergast§ 
 
 
§ The Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 
94720, USA 
¶National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA 
‡SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025 
#Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, USA 

 

 
Details of XAS Experiment: 
X-Ray absorption spectroscopy data was acquired at the Stanford Synchrotron 
Radiation Lightsource (SSRL). For analysis of the oxygen K-edge, collected on beam 
line 10-1, a thin layer of BCM powder was spread on carbon tape. Total 
fluorescence yield spectra were obtained with a silicon diode AXUV100. An oxygen 
reference spectrum was collected simultaneously with data collection at the 
oxygen edge for both (reduced and oxidized) samples. The sample data was put on 
an absolute energy grid for direct comparison by aligning the refence spectra and 
shifting the sample data correspondingly. Specific to this beamline, an agglomerate 
of chemical species resides permanently within the beam path for reference 
collection. Two spectra at three different spots were collected and averaged for 
each sample. Alignment and averaging were carried out in Athena1. Normalization 
was carried out with Igor Pro (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, OR, USA). O1s spectra 
were base line corrected by subtracting the minimum pre-edge value to bring pre-
edge to 0 and then were divided by the average of the region after the main 


features (after 547eV). In-situ heating experiments at the Mn K-edge and Ce L-
edges were carried out on beamline 4-1 using an in-situ chamber fabricated at 
Sandia National Laboratory. All data was collected in fluorescence using a Ge array 
fluorescence detector. Three spectra were collected, normalized, aligned, and then 
averaged for each sample. For normalization, the pre-edge was fit to a line and the 
extended region fit to a 3-term quadratic polynomial. Reference foils were 
collected simultaneously with sample data acquisition to enable accurate 
alignment of all spectra (to place all spectra on an absolute energy grid).  Data 
normalization, alignment, and averaging was carried out in Athena1. 
 
Computational Details: 
DFT based first-principles calculations of electronic structure are performed with 
the Quantum Espresso software package. Plane-wave energy cutoff of 35 eV and 
280 eV are used for wavefunction and energy, respectively. PBE exchange-
correlation functional and Ultrasoft pseudopotentials have been used throughout. 
In calculations of the x-ray excited states, the core-excited oxygen atom is 
represented by a modified pseudopotential which encodes the effects of the core-
hole. Hubbard U values of 3.9 eV and 5.4 eV are used for the Mn-3d orbitals and 
the Ce-4f orbitals, respectively. In order to mitigate the effects of the interaction 
between the periodic images of the core-excited atom, we use a large supercell in 
our XAS calculations (parameters provided below). Therefore, the self-consistent 
field calculations are performed at the k=0 point only. A uniform (i.e., independent 
of the incident frequency) broadening of 0.2 eV is used to generate the spectra. 
Results obtained using other energies for broadening are shown in Fig. S2. The 
relative alignment of the spectra of different O atoms is determined with the help 
of the total energies of the FCH states and the energies of the lowest unoccupied 
orbitals. If, for the FCH state corresponding to core-excitation of the i-th (j-th) O 
atom, Ei (Ej) is the sum of the total energy and the KS energy of the lowest 
unoccupied orbital, then the onset-energy for the spectrum of the i-th O atom will 
be higher than that of the j-th O atom by (Ei - Ej). 
 
 


 

Fig. S1 Figure showing the PDOS of Mn and O atoms before and after the X-ray 
absorption process. Panel (a) and panel (b) show, respectively, the GS 2p PDOS of 
an OM and an OS atom along with the 3d PDOS of the neighboring atoms. Panel (c) 
(panel(d)) shows, for the FCH state obtained by core-exciting an OM (OS) atom, the 
2p PDOS of the core-excited atom OM(x) (OS(x)), along with the 3d PDOS of the 
neighboring Mn atoms. 

 

Energy (eV)

Intensity (a.u.)

GS
GS

FCH [OM(x)]
FCH [OS(x)]

OM(2p)
MnM(3d)
MnS(3d)

OS(2p)
MnS(3d)

OM(x)(2p)
MnM(3d)
MnS(3d)

OS(x)(2p)
MnS(3d)

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)


 

Fig. S2 O K-edge spectrum of the pristine BCM crystal using different energies for 
broadening. 

 
 
 

Energy (eV)

Intensity (a.u.)


 

Fig. S3 The green and orange lines show, at the conduction band edge, the PDOS, 
respectively, of MnS(red.)-3d and OS(red.)-2p corresponding to the SCF resulting from 
core-excitation of the OS(red.) atom.  The brown and the red lines show the conduction 
band-edge PDOS of MnS(dist.)-3d and OS(dist.)-2p for the SCF resulting from core-
excitation of the OS(dist.) atom. The OS(red.)-2p orbital generates the first-peak in the 
OS(red.) K-edge spectrum shown in Fig. 11 (bottom right panel) while the OS(dist.)-2p 
orbital is responsible for the OS(dist.) K-edge first-peak in Fig. 11 (top tight panel). 

 
                   
 
 
 
 
Structure of the Crystal 
 
Superell Parameters 
 
Lattice Parameter, a0 : 38.5438  a.u. 
 
Crystal axes in units of a0 
               a(1) = (   0.500000  -0.866025  -0.000065 ) 

 9.7
 9.8
 9.9
 10
 10.1
 10.2
 10.3
 10.4
 10.5

PDOS

Energy (eV)

MnS(dist.)

OS(dist.)

MnS(red.)

OS(red.)


               a(2) = (   0.500041   0.288699   0.000000 ) 
               a(3) = (  -0.166698   0.288729   0.953047 ) 
 
Ionic coordinates of the pristine crystal in Angstrom (Mn1 and Mn2 atoms are spin-
polarized along opposite directions) :  
 
Ba  3.3992982800040  -5.8877571473726   5.9030879974125 
Ba  1.6992753014839  -2.9432306153339  15.6224917664166 
Ba  8.4988409553240  -2.9435347977983   5.9030879992436 
Ba  6.7988179768038   0.0009917342405  15.6224917682477 
Ba  8.4984193486792  -14.7196939519691   5.9024215079341 
Ba  6.7983963701591  -11.7751674199303  15.6218252769381 
Ba 13.5979620239991  -11.7754716023947   5.9024215097652 
Ba 11.8979390454790  -8.8309450703559  15.6218252787692 
Ba  3.3995090833264   0.0003224297127   5.9034212430673 
Ba  1.6994861048063   2.9448489617515  15.6228250120713 
Ba  8.4990517586464   2.9445447792871   5.9034212448984 
Ba  6.7990287801262   5.8890713113259  15.6228250139024 
Ba  8.4986301520016  -8.8316143748837   5.9027547535889 
Ba  6.7986071734815  -5.8870878428449  15.6221585225929 
Ba 13.5981728273215  -5.8873920253093   5.9027547554200 
Ba 11.8981498488014  -2.9428654932706  15.6221585244240 
Ba  5.0991316821485  -2.9435103526960   3.8153160382894 
Ba  3.3991087036284   0.0010161793427  13.5347198072935 
Ba 10.1986743574684   0.0007119968783   3.8153160401205 
Ba  8.4986513789483   2.9452385289171  13.5347198091246 
Ba 10.1982527508237  -11.7754471572924   3.8146495488110 
Ba  8.4982297723035  -8.8309206252537  13.5340533178150 
Ba 15.2977954261436  -8.8312248077181   3.8146495506421 
Ba 13.5977724476235  -5.8866982756793  13.5340533196461 
Ba  5.0993424854709   2.9445692243894   3.8156492839442 
Ba  3.3993195069508   5.8890957564281  13.5350530529482 
Ba 10.1988851607908   5.8887915739637   3.8156492857753 
Ba  8.4988621822707   8.8333181060025  13.5350530547793 
Ba 10.1984635541461  -5.8873675802071   3.8149827944658 
Ba  8.4984405756259  -2.9428410481683  13.5343865634698 
Ba 15.2980062294660  -2.9431452306327   3.8149827962969 
Ba 13.5979832509459   0.0013813014061  13.5343865653009 
Ba  5.0990564182092  -2.9433798354133   8.2066141932703 
Ba  3.3990334396890   0.0011466966254  17.9260179622743 
Ba 10.1985990935291   0.0008425141610   8.2066141951014 
Ba  8.4985761150090   2.9453690461998  17.9260179641054 
Ba 10.1981774868843  -11.7753166400098   8.2059477037918 
Ba  8.4981545083642  -8.8307901079710  17.9253514727959 
Ba 15.2977201622043  -8.8310942904354   8.2059477056229 
Ba 13.5976971836841  -5.8865677583966  17.9253514746270 
Ba  5.0992672215316   2.9446997416720   8.2069474389250 
Ba  3.3992442430114   5.8892262737108  17.9263512079291 


Ba 10.1988098968515   5.8889220912464   8.2069474407561 
Ba  8.4987869183314   8.8334486232852  17.9263512097602 
Ba 10.1983882902067  -5.8872370629244   8.2062809494466 
Ba  8.4983653116866  -2.9427105308856  17.9256847184506 
Ba 15.2979309655267  -2.9430147133500   8.2062809512777 
Ba 13.5979079870065   0.0015118186888  17.9256847202818 
Ba  3.3995843472658   0.0001919124300   1.5121230880864 
Ba  1.6995613687456   2.9447184444688  11.2315268570905 
Ba  8.4991270225857   2.9444142620044   1.5121230899175 
Ba  6.7991040440656   5.8889407940432  11.2315268589216 
Ba  8.4987054159409  -8.8317448921664   1.5114565986080 
Ba  6.7986824374208  -5.8872183601276  11.2308603676121 
Ba 13.5982480912609  -5.8875225425920   1.5114566004391 
Ba 11.8982251127407  -2.9429960105533  11.2308603694432 
Ba  3.3993735439434  -5.8878876646553   1.5117898424317 
Ba  1.6993505654232  -2.9433611326166  11.2311936114357 
Ba  8.4989162192633  -2.9436653150810   1.5117898442628 
Ba  6.7988932407432   0.0008612169578  11.2311936132668 
Ba  8.4984946126185  -14.7198244692518   1.5111233529532 
Ba  6.7984716340984  -11.7752979372130  11.2305271219573 
Ba 13.5980372879385  -11.7756021196774   1.5111233547844 
Ba 11.8980143094183  -8.8310755876386  11.2305271237884 
Ce  0.0000000000000   0.0000000000000   0.0000000000000 
Ce -1.7000229785201   2.9445265320388   9.7194037690040 
Ce  5.0995426753199   2.9442223495743   0.0000000018311 
Ce  3.3995196967998   5.8887488816131   9.7194037708351 
Ce  5.0991210686751  -8.8319368045964  -0.0006664894784 
Ce  3.3990980901550  -5.8874102725576   9.7187372795256 
Ce 10.1986637439951  -5.8877144550221  -0.0006664876473 
Ce  8.4986407654750  -2.9431879229833   9.7187372813567 
Ce  5.0993318719975  -2.9438572275110  -0.0003332438237 
Ce  3.3993088934774   0.0006693045277   9.7190705251804 
Ce 10.1988745473175   0.0003651220633  -0.0003332419926 
Ce  8.4988515687973   2.9448916541021   9.7190705270115 
Ce 10.1984529406727  -11.7757940321075  -0.0009997333021 
Ce  8.4984299621526  -8.8312675000687   9.7184040357019 
Ce 15.2979956159926  -8.8315716825331  -0.0009997314710 
Ce 13.5979726374725  -5.8870451504943   9.7184040375331 
Mn1  1.6997598483999   2.9443744408066   4.8597018854176 
Mn1 -0.0002631301202   5.8889009728453  14.5791056544216 
Mn1  6.7993025237198   5.8885967903809   4.8597018872487 
Mn1  5.0992795451997   8.8331233224197  14.5791056562527 
Mn1  6.7988809170751  -5.8875623637899   4.8590353959391 
Mn1  5.0988579385549  -2.9430358317511  14.5784391649432 
Mn1 11.8984235923950  -2.9433400142155   4.8590353977702 
Mn1 10.1984006138749   0.0011865178233  14.5784391667743 
Mn1  6.7990941696678   0.0005130610966   7.3894409247774 
Mn1  5.0990711911476   2.9450395931354  17.1088446937815 
Mn1 11.8986368449877   2.9447354106709   7.3894409266085 
Mn1 10.1986138664676   5.8892619427097  17.1088446956126 


Mn1 11.8982152383429  -8.8314237434998   7.3887744352990 
Mn1 10.1981922598228  -5.8868972114611  17.1081782043030 
Mn1 16.9977579136629  -5.8872013939255   7.3887744371301 
Mn1 15.2977349351427  -2.9426748618867  17.1081782061342 
Mn1  1.6995465958072  -2.9437009840799   2.3292963565793 
Mn1 -0.0004763827130   0.0008255479589  12.0487001255833 
Mn1  6.7990892711271   0.0005213654945   2.3292963584104 
Mn1  5.0990662926070   2.9450478975332  12.0487001274144 
Mn1  6.7986676644823  -11.7756377886763   2.3286298671008 
Mn1  5.0986446859622  -8.8311112566375  12.0480336361049 
Mn1 11.8982103398023  -8.8314154391020   2.3286298689320 
Mn1 10.1981873612821  -5.8868889070632  12.0480336379360 
Mn2  1.6995490450775  -2.9437051362788   4.8593686397628 
Mn2 -0.0004739334426   0.0008213957600  14.5787724087668 
Mn2  6.7990917203974   0.0005172132955   4.8593686415939 
Mn2  5.0990687418773   2.9450437453343  14.5787724105979 
Mn2  6.7986701137527  -11.7756419408752   4.8587021502844 
Mn2  5.0986471352325  -8.8311154088365  14.5781059192884 
Mn2 11.8982127890726  -8.8314195913009   4.8587021521155 
Mn2 10.1981898105525  -5.8868930592621  14.5781059211195 
Mn2  1.6997622976702   2.9443702886076   7.3897741686011 
Mn2 -0.0002606808499   5.8888968206464  17.1091779376051 
Mn2  6.7993049729902   5.8885926381820   7.3897741704322 
Mn2  5.0992819944700   8.8331191702207  17.1091779394362 
Mn2  6.7988833663454  -5.8875665159888   7.3891076791227 
Mn2  5.0988603878252  -2.9430399839500  17.1085114481267 
Mn2 11.8984260416653  -2.9433441664144   7.3891076809538 
Mn2 10.1984030631452   0.0011823656243  17.1085114499578 
Mn2  6.7988784678047  -5.8875582115909   2.3289631127556 
Mn2  5.0988554892846  -2.9430316795521  12.0483668817597 
Mn2 11.8984211431247  -2.9433358620166   2.3289631145867 
Mn2 10.1983981646045   0.0011906700222  12.0483668835908 
Mn2 11.8979995364799  -14.7194950161873   2.3282966232772 
Mn2 10.1979765579597  -11.7749684841486  12.0477003922812 
Mn2 16.9975422117998  -11.7752726666130   2.3282966251083 
Mn2 15.2975192332797  -8.8307461345742  12.0477003941123 
O  6.0518685395084  -4.5936989226439   6.0810425107902 
O  4.3518455609883  -1.6491723906051  15.8004462797943 
O 11.1514112148284  -1.6494765730695   6.0810425126213 
O  9.4513882363082   1.2950499589693  15.8004462816254 
O 11.1509896081836  -13.4256357272403   6.0803760213118 
O  9.4509666296634  -10.4811091952015  15.7997797903158 
O 16.2505322835035  -10.4814133776659   6.0803760231429 
O 14.5505093049834  -7.5368868456272  15.7997797921469 
O  6.0520695928534  -1.2931696830465   6.0816616470464 
O  4.3520466143333   1.6513568489923  15.8010654160505 
O 11.1516122681734   1.6510526665279   6.0816616488775 
O  9.4515892896532   4.5955791985667  15.8010654178816 
O 11.1511906615286  -10.1251064876429   6.0809951575680 
O  9.4511676830084  -7.1805799556041  15.8003989265720 


O 16.2507333368485  -7.1808841380685   6.0809951593991 
O 14.5507103583284  -4.2363576060298  15.8003989284031 
O  3.1936366615992   2.9444711569437   6.0819948916698 
O  1.4936136830791   5.8889976889825  15.8013986606739 
O  8.2931793369192   5.8886935065181   6.0819948935009 
O  6.5931563583990   8.8332200385568  15.8013986625050 
O  8.2927577302744  -5.8874656476527   6.0813284021914 
O  6.5927347517543  -2.9429391156139  15.8007321711954 
O 13.3923004055943  -2.9432432980784   6.0813284040225 
O 11.6922774270742   0.0012832339604  15.8007321730265 
O  0.9527377208559   1.6506875444646   6.0819948908701 
O -0.7472852576643   4.5952140765033  15.8013986598741 
O  6.0522803961758   4.5949098940389   6.0819948927012 
O  4.3522574176557   7.5394364260777  15.8013986617052 
O  6.0518587895310  -7.1812492601318   6.0813284013917 
O  4.3518358110109  -4.2367227280931  15.8007321703957 
O 11.1514014648510  -4.2370269105575   6.0813284032228 
O  9.4513784863308  -1.2925003785187  15.8007321722268 
O  3.1934258582768  -2.9436084201417   6.0816616460151 
O  1.4934028797567   0.0009181118971  15.8010654150191 
O  8.2929685335968   0.0006139294327   6.0816616478462 
O  6.5929455550766   2.9451404614714  15.8010654168502 
O  8.2925469269520  -11.7755452247381   6.0809951565366 
O  6.5925239484319  -8.8310186926993  15.8003989255407 
O 13.3920896022719  -8.8313228751637   6.0809951583677 
O 11.6920666237518  -5.8867963431250  15.8003989273718 
O  0.9525366675109  -1.6498416951328   6.0813757546139 
O -0.7474863110093   1.2946848369059  15.8007795236179 
O  6.0520793428308   1.2943806544415   6.0813757564450 
O  4.3520563643107   4.2389071864803  15.8007795254490 
O  6.0516577361860  -10.4817784997292   6.0807092651355 
O  4.3516347576659  -7.5372519676905  15.8001130341395 
O 11.1512004115060  -7.5375561501549   6.0807092669666 
O  9.4511774329858  -4.5930296181161  15.8001130359706 
O  2.4467722259665   1.6505109996606   3.6376947705665 
O  0.7467492474464   4.5950375316993  13.3570985395705 
O  7.5463149012865   4.5947333492349   3.6376947723976 
O  5.8462919227663   7.5392598812737  13.3570985414016 
O  7.5458932946417  -7.1814258049358   3.6370282810881 
O  5.8458703161215  -4.2368992728971  13.3564320500921 
O 12.6454359699616  -4.2372034553615   3.6370282829192 
O 10.9454129914415  -1.2926769233227  13.3564320519232 
O  5.3052149071981   0.0004204971584   3.6370756353416 
O  3.6051919286780   2.9449470291971  13.3564794043457 
O 10.4047575825180   2.9446428467327   3.6370756371727 
O  8.7047346039979   5.8891693787715  13.3564794061768 
O 10.4043359758733  -8.8315163074380   3.6364091458632 
O  8.7043129973531  -5.8869897753993  13.3558129148673 
O 15.5038786511932  -5.8872939578637   3.6364091476943 
O 13.8038556726731  -2.9427674258249  13.3558129166984 


O  7.5459030446191  -4.5938754674479   3.6367423904866 
O  5.8458800660989  -1.6493489354091  13.3561461594907 
O 12.6454457199390  -1.6496531178735   3.6367423923177 
O 10.9454227414189   1.2948734141652  13.3561461613218 
O 12.6450241132942  -13.4258122720443   3.6360759010082 
O 10.9450011347741  -10.4812857400055  13.3554796700122 
O 17.7445667886142  -10.4815899224699   3.6360759028393 
O 16.0445438100940  -7.5370633904312  13.3554796718433 
O  5.3050041038757  -5.8876590799270   3.6367423896869 
O  3.6049811253556  -2.9431325478882  13.3561461586909 
O 10.4045467791956  -2.9434367303527   3.6367423915180 
O  8.7045238006755   0.0010898016861  13.3561461605220 
O 10.4041251725509  -14.7195958845234   3.6360759002084 
O  8.7041021940307  -11.7750693524847  13.3554796692125 
O 15.5036678478708  -11.7753735349491   3.6360759020396 
O 13.8036448693507  -8.8308470029103  13.3554796710436 
O  2.4465711726215  -1.6500182399368   3.6370756343103 
O  0.7465481941014   1.2945082921019  13.3564794033143 
O  7.5461138479415   1.2942041096375   3.6370756361414 
O  5.8460908694213   4.2387306416763  13.3564794051454 
O  7.5456922412967  -10.4819550445333   3.6364091448319 
O  5.8456692627765  -7.5374285124945  13.3558129138359 
O 12.6452349166166  -7.5377326949589   3.6364091466630 
O 10.9452119380965  -4.5932061629201  13.3558129156670 
O  7.5461040979641  -1.2933462278505   3.6373615267428 
O  5.8460811194439   1.6511803041883  13.3567652957469 
O 12.6456467732840   1.6508761217239   3.6373615285739 
O 10.9456237947639   4.5954026537627  13.3567652975780 
O 12.6452251666392  -10.1252830324469   3.6366950372644 
O 10.9452021881191  -7.1807565004081  13.3560988062684 
O 17.7447678419592  -7.1810606828725   3.6366950390955 
O 16.0447448634390  -4.2365341508338  13.3560988080995 
O  2.4964507145836   4.3239924294312   8.4109867367717 
O  0.7964277360635   7.2685189614700  18.1303905057757 
O  7.5959933899036   7.2682147790055   8.4109867386028 
O  5.8959704113834  10.2127413110443  18.1303905076068 
O  7.5955717832588  -4.5079443751652   8.4103202472933 
O  5.8955488047386  -1.5634178431265  18.1297240162973 
O 12.6951144585787  -1.5637220255909   8.4103202491244 
O 10.9950914800586   1.3808045064479  18.1297240181284 
O  7.5952984046644  -1.3785530969637   8.4106921260847 
O  5.8952754261442   1.5659734350750  18.1300958950887 
O 12.6948410799843   1.5656692526106   8.4106921279158 
O 10.9948181014642   4.5101957846494  18.1300958969199 
O 12.6944194733395  -10.2104899015602   8.4100256366063 
O 10.9943964948194  -7.2659633695214  18.1294294056103 
O 17.7939621486595  -7.2662675519858   8.4100256384374 
O 16.0939391701393  -4.3217410199470  18.1294294074414 
O  0.1066303044843   2.9442289661446   8.4109867359188 
O -1.5933926740358   5.8887554981834  18.1303905049229 


O  5.2061729798043   5.8884513157190   8.4109867377499 
O  3.5061500012841   8.8329778477577  18.1303905067540 
O  5.2057513731595  -5.8877078384518   8.4103202464404 
O  3.5057283946394  -2.9431813064130  18.1297240154444 
O 10.3052940484794  -2.9434854888774   8.4103202482715 
O  8.6052710699593   0.0010410431613  18.1297240172755 
O  5.2059621764819   0.0003717386336   8.4106534920952 
O  3.5059391979618   2.9448982706724  18.1300572610992 
O 10.3055048518018   2.9445940882079   8.4106534939263 
O  8.6054818732817   5.8891206202467  18.1300572629303 
O 10.3050832451570  -8.8315650659628   8.4099870026167 
O  8.6050602666369  -5.8870385339241  18.1293907716208 
O 15.4046259204770  -5.8873427163885   8.4099870044478 
O 13.7046029419568  -2.9428161843497  18.1293907734519 
O  2.4959665326668   1.5653041305473   8.4110253699084 
O  0.7959435541467   4.5098306625861  18.1304291389124 
O  7.5955092079868   4.5095264801216   8.4110253717395 
O  5.8954862294666   7.4540530121604  18.1304291407435 
O  7.5950876013420  -7.2666326740491   8.4103588804299 
O  5.8950646228218  -4.3221061420103  18.1297626494340 
O 12.6946302766619  -4.3224103244748   8.4103588822610 
O 10.9946072981418  -1.3778837924360  18.1297626512651 
O  2.4962399112612  -1.5640871476541   8.4106534911169 
O  0.7962169327411   1.3804393843846  18.1300572601210 
O  7.5957825865811   1.3801352019202   8.4106534929480 
O  5.8957596080610   4.3246617339590  18.1300572619521 
O  7.5953609799363  -10.3960239522505   8.4099870016385 
O  5.8953380014162  -7.4514974202118  18.1293907706425 
O 12.6949036552563  -7.4518016026762   8.4099870034696 
O 10.9948806767361  -4.5072750706374  18.1293907724736 
O  8.3920104609906  -5.8874168891279   1.3077505454379 
O  6.6919874824705  -2.9428903570891  11.0271543144419 
O 13.4915531363105  -2.9431945395536   1.3077505472690 
O 11.7915301577904   0.0013319924852  11.0271543162730 
O 13.4911315296658  -14.7193536937243   1.3070840559595 
O 11.7911085511456  -11.7748271616856  11.0264878249635 
O 18.5906742049857  -11.7751313441500   1.3070840577906 
O 16.8906512264656  -8.8306048121112  11.0264878267946 
O  0.9033423608106  -1.5646348260196   1.3080451552720 
O -0.7966806177096   1.3798917060192  11.0274489242760 
O  6.0028850361305   1.3795875235548   1.3080451571031 
O  4.3028620576104   4.3241140555936  11.0274489261071 
O  6.0024634294857  -10.3965716306160   1.3073786657936 
O  4.3024404509656  -7.4520450985772  11.0267824347976 
O 11.1020061048057  -7.4523492810416   1.3073786676247 
O  9.4019831262855  -4.5078227490029  11.0267824366287 
O  6.0021900508914  -7.2671803524146   1.3077505445850 
O  4.3021670723712  -4.3226538203758  11.0271543135891 
O 11.1017327262113  -4.3229580028402   1.3077505464161 
O  9.4017097476912  -1.3784314708014  11.0271543154202 


O 11.1013111195665  -16.0991171570110   1.3070840551066 
O  9.4012881410464  -13.1545906249722  11.0264878241106 
O 16.2008537948865  -13.1548948074366   1.3070840569377 
O 14.5008308163663  -10.2103682753978  11.0264878259417 
O  6.0026742328081  -4.5084920535306   1.3077119114483 
O  4.3026512542880  -1.5639655214918  11.0271156804524 
O 11.1022169081281  -1.5642697039563   1.3077119132794 
O  9.4021939296079   1.3802568280825  11.0271156822835 
O 11.1017953014833  -13.3404288581270   1.3070454219699 
O  9.4017723229631  -10.3959023260882  11.0264491909740 
O 16.2013379768032  -10.3962065085527   1.3070454238010 
O 14.5013149982831  -7.4516799765139  11.0264491928051 
O  6.0024008542137  -1.3791007753291   1.3080837902398 
O  4.3023778756936   1.5654257567097  11.0274875592438 
O 11.1019435295337   1.5651215742452   1.3080837920709 
O  9.4019205510135   4.5096481062840  11.0274875610749 
O 11.1015219228889  -10.2110375799255   1.3074173007614 
O  9.4014989443687  -7.2665110478867  11.0268210697654 
O 16.2010645982088  -7.2668152303512   1.3074173025925 
O 14.5010416196887  -4.3222886983124  11.0268210715965 
O  3.2926785889931  -2.9435596616169   1.3080837892615 
O  1.5926556104729   0.0009668704219  11.0274875582656 
O  8.3922212643130   0.0006626879575   1.3080837910927 
O  6.6921982857929   2.9451892199962  11.0274875600967 
O  8.3917996576682  -11.7754964662133   1.3074172997831 
O  6.6917766791481  -8.8309699341745  11.0268210687872 
O 13.4913423329882  -8.8312741166390   1.3074173016142 
O 11.7913193544680  -5.8867475846002  11.0268210706183 
 
 
Ionic coordinates of the reduced crystal in Angstrom (Mn1 and Mn2 atoms are spin-
polarized along opposite directions) : 
 
Ba  3.4040895190061  -5.8645513210539   5.9088414399699 
Ba  1.7040665404859  -2.9200247890151  15.6282452089740 
Ba  8.5032105876812  -14.6964881256503   5.9081749504915 
Ba  6.8031876091611  -11.7519615936115  15.6275787194956 
Ba  3.3178615110375   0.0685691035000   5.8822084861659 
Ba  1.6178385325173   3.0130956355388  15.6016122551699 
Ba  8.4169825797126  -8.7633677010964   5.8815419966875 
Ba  6.7169596011925  -5.8188411690576  15.6009457656915 
Ba  5.0784088649930  -2.9663778313410   3.6793491705317 
Ba  3.3783858864729  -0.0218512993022  13.3987529395358 
Ba 10.1775299336682  -11.7983146359374   3.6786826810533 
Ba  8.4775069551480  -8.8537881038986  13.3980864500573 
Ba  5.1319315780046   2.9256405405172   3.7896500451257 
Ba  3.4319085994845   5.8701670725559  13.5090538141298 
Ba 10.2310526466798  -5.9062962640793   3.7889835556473 


Ba  8.5310296681596  -2.9617697320405  13.5083873246514 
Ba  5.0556400633749  -3.0145395684981   8.3745257190662 
Ba  3.3556170848548  -0.0700130364594  18.0939294880703 
Ba 10.1547611320501  -11.8464763730946   8.3738592295878 
Ba  8.4547381535299  -8.9019498410558  18.0932629985918 
Ba  5.1206036048368   2.9262833236750   8.2262294990924 
Ba  3.4205806263167   5.8708098557138  17.9456332680965 
Ba 10.2197246735120  -5.9056534809214   8.2255630096140 
Ba  8.5197016949918  -2.9611269488827  17.9449667786181 
Ba  3.4231482612154   0.0129761209801   1.5232703971657 
Ba  1.7231252826953   2.9575026530189  11.2426741661697 
Ba  8.5222693298906  -8.8189606836163   1.5226039076873 
Ba  6.8222463513704  -5.8744341515775  11.2420076766913 
Ba 13.5928633772548   0.0074040315938   1.5019560279765 
Ba 11.8928403987347   2.9519305636326  11.2213597969805 
Ba 18.6919844459300  -8.8245327730026   1.5012895384981 
Ba 16.9919614674098  -5.8800062409638  11.2206933075021 
Ba  8.5950761146876  -2.9919241216079   5.8941707699720 
Ba  6.8950531361674  -0.0473975895691  15.6135745389761 
Ba 13.6941971833627  -11.8238609262043   5.8935042804936 
Ba 11.9941742048426  -8.8793343941655  15.6129080494977 
Ba  8.5183723611846   2.9614089366863   5.8964536811389 
Ba  6.8183493826645   5.9059354687250  15.6158574501429 
Ba 13.6174934298598  -5.8705278679102   5.8957871916605 
Ba 11.9174704513396  -2.9260013358714  15.6151909606645 
Ba 10.2004668910093   0.0262023754860   3.8158049179340 
Ba  8.5004439124892   2.9707289075248  13.5352086869380 
Ba 15.2995879596845  -8.8057344291104   3.8151384284556 
Ba 13.5995649811643  -5.8612078970716  13.5345421974596 
Ba -0.0090112759983   0.0161983434607   3.8021901139515 
Ba -1.7090342545185   2.9607248754995  13.5215938829555 
Ba  5.0901097926768  -8.8157384611357   3.8015236244731 
Ba  3.3900868141567  -5.8712119290969  13.5209273934771 
Ba 10.1829124240489   0.0043994050102   8.1959829834398 
Ba  8.4828894455287   2.9489259370490  17.9153867524439 
Ba 15.2820334927240  -8.8275373995862   8.1953164939614 
Ba 13.5820105142039  -5.8830108675474  17.9147202629654 
Ba 10.1835002637261   5.8806382723380   8.2041582660053 
Ba  8.4834772852059   8.8251648043767  17.9235620350094 
Ba 15.2826213324012  -2.9512985322585   8.2034917765269 
Ba 13.5825983538811  -0.0067720002197  17.9228955455309 
Ba  8.4991362103609   2.9463798242817   1.5170712772442 
Ba  6.7991132318408   5.8909063563205  11.2364750462483 
Ba 13.5982572790361  -5.8855569803147   1.5164047877658 
Ba 11.8982343005159  -2.9410304482759  11.2358085567698 
Ba  8.5204778274776  -2.8938461208796   1.5623727125110 
Ba  6.8204548489575   0.0506804111592  11.2817764815150 
Ba 13.6195988961528  -11.7257829254760   1.5617062230325 
Ba 11.9195759176327  -8.7812563934372  11.2811099920366 
Ce 10.1904409535025   5.8675456206648   0.0053540376008 


Ce  8.4904179749824   8.8120721527035   9.7247578066049 
Ce 15.2895620221777  -2.9643911839316   0.0046875481224 
Ce 13.5895390436576  -0.0198646518929   9.7240913171264 
Ce  3.3974960511682  -0.0016035229482   9.6887710684674 
Ce  1.6974730726481   2.9429230090906  19.4081748374714 
Ce  8.4966171198434  -8.8335403275446   9.6881045789890 
Ce  6.7965941413232  -5.8890137955058  19.4075083479930 
Ce  8.4925329900939  -2.9474050072702   9.6989500904609 
Ce  6.7925100115738  -0.0028784752314  19.4183538594649 
Ce 13.5916540587691  -11.7793418118666   9.6982836009824 
Ce 11.8916310802489  -8.8348152798279  19.4176873699865 
Ce 10.2083396342900   0.0179591231985   0.0241394416810 
Ce  8.5083166557698   2.9624856552373   9.7435432106850 
Ce 15.3074607029651  -8.8139776813979   0.0234729522026 
Ce 13.6074377244450  -5.8694511493591   9.7428767212066 
Mn1  6.7942213973146  -5.8474760341253   4.8549203875392 
Mn1  5.0941984187944  -2.9029495020865  14.5743241565433 
Mn1 11.8933424659897  -14.6794128387217   4.8542538980608 
Mn1 10.1933194874696  -11.7348863066829  14.5736576670649 
Mn1  6.7912894739824  -0.0172173067702   7.4192110384332 
Mn1  5.0912664954623   2.9273092252686  17.1386148074373 
Mn1 11.8904105426576  -8.8491541113666   7.4185445489548 
Mn1 10.1903875641374  -5.9046275793278  17.1379483179589 
Mn1  1.7206859283224  -2.9138975756940   2.3480077961458 
Mn1  0.0206629498023   0.0306289563448  12.0674115651498 
Mn1  6.8198069969975  -11.7458343802904   2.3473413066673 
Mn1  5.1197840184774  -8.8013078482516  12.0667450756714 
Mn1  6.8164613655725   5.8877280669186   4.8572869252217 
Mn1  5.1164383870524   8.8322545989574  14.5766906942258 
Mn1 11.9155824342477  -2.9442087376778   4.8566204357433 
Mn1 10.2155594557275   0.0003177943610  14.5760242047473 
Mn1 11.8885284531816   2.9332923492647   7.4065109086546 
Mn1 10.1885054746614   5.8778188813035  17.1259146776586 
Mn1 16.9876495218567  -5.8986444553317   7.4058444191761 
Mn1 15.2876265433366  -2.9541179232929  17.1252481881802 
Mn1  6.8130600074064   0.0292125819041   2.3370442435857 
Mn1  5.1130370288862   2.9737391139429  12.0564480125897 
Mn1 11.9121810760815  -8.8027242226923   2.3363777541072 
Mn1 10.2121580975614  -5.8581976906536  12.0557815231113 
Mn2  1.7287594246200  -2.9173257043775   4.8784321553607 
Mn2  0.0287364460999   0.0272008276613  14.5978359243647 
Mn2  6.8278804932952  -11.7492625089739   4.8777656658822 
Mn2  5.1278575147750  -8.8047359769352  14.5971694348863 
Mn2  1.6912628440275   2.9414190300235   7.3885104220945 
Mn2 -0.0087601344926   5.8859455620623  17.1079141910985 
Mn2  6.7903839127027  -5.8905177745729   7.3878439326161 
Mn2  5.0903609341825  -2.9459912425341  17.1072477016201 
Mn2  6.8070200511077  -5.8658842224715   2.3246855720501 
Mn2  5.1069970725875  -2.9213576904327  12.0440893410542 
Mn2 11.9061411197828  -14.6978210270679   2.3240190825717 


Mn2 10.2061181412627  -11.7532944950291  12.0434228515757 
Mn2  6.8280681010776   0.0480381338381   4.8472432749950 
Mn2  5.1280451225574   2.9925646658769  14.5666470439990 
Mn2 11.9271891697527  -8.7838986707583   4.8465767855166 
Mn2 10.2271661912326  -5.8393721387195  14.5659805545206 
Mn2  6.8007733673805   5.8748307777536   7.3867700727171 
Mn2  5.1007503888604   8.8193573097923  17.1061738417211 
Mn2 11.8998944360557  -2.9571060268428   7.3861035832386 
Mn2 10.1998714575355  -0.0125794948041  17.1055073522427 
Mn2 11.9071226993696  -2.9259170924913   2.3293666533667 
Mn2 10.2070997208495   0.0186094395475  12.0487704223707 
Mn2 17.0062437680448  -11.7578538970877   2.3287001638882 
Mn2 15.3062207895247  -8.8133273650489  12.0481039328923 
O  6.0714020068665  -4.5404458428838   6.0928019870478 
O  4.3713790283463  -1.5959193108450  15.8122057560519 
O 11.1705230755416  -13.3723826474802   6.0921354975694 
O  9.4705000970215  -10.4278561154414  15.8115392665735 
O  3.1866245012928   2.9596263902512   6.0825499502425 
O  1.4866015227727   5.9041529222900  15.8019537192466 
O  8.2857455699680  -5.8723104143452   6.0818834607641 
O  6.5857225914479  -2.9277838823064  15.8012872297682 
O  0.9332430518142   1.6822662778721   6.0533422829054 
O -0.7667799267059   4.6267928099109  15.7727460519094 
O  6.0323641204893  -7.1496705267243   6.0526757934269 
O  4.3323411419692  -4.2051439946856  15.7720795624310 
O  3.2237178578407  -2.8930326157643   6.1167021775932 
O  1.5236948793206   0.0514939162745  15.8361059465972 
O  8.3228389265159  -11.7249694203607   6.1160356881147 
O  6.6228159479957  -8.7804428883219  15.8354394571188 
O  0.9560828183334  -1.6400785528025   6.1059139787483 
O -0.7439401601868   1.3044479792362  15.8253177477523 
O  6.0552038870085  -10.4720153573990   6.1052474892699 
O  4.3551809084884  -7.5274888253602  15.8246512582739 
O  2.4358377591511   1.6753737124261   3.6336974046790 
O  0.7358147806310   4.6199002444649  13.3531011736831 
O  7.5349588278263  -7.1565630921703   3.6330309152006 
O  5.8349358493061  -4.2120365601315  13.3524346842046 
O  5.2896851567785  -0.0275961155209   3.6537188209249 
O  3.5896621782584   2.9169304165179  13.3731225899289 
O 10.3888062254537  -8.8595329201173   3.6530523314465 
O  8.6887832469335  -5.9150063880786  13.3724561004505 
O  7.5526726325684  -4.5747704050830   3.6332762636462 
O  5.8526496540482  -1.6302438730442  13.3526800326502 
O 12.6517937012435  -13.4067072096794   3.6326097741678 
O 10.9517707227234  -10.4621806776406  13.3520135431718 
O  5.3055434074124  -5.8544180518367   3.6230239562230 
O  3.6055204288923  -2.9098915197980  13.3424277252270 
O 10.4046644760876  -14.6863548564332   3.6223574667445 
O  8.7046414975674  -11.7418283243944  13.3417612357486 
O  2.4608386110021  -1.6176108952995   3.6660149171243 


O  0.7608156324819   1.3269156367393  13.3854186861283 
O  7.5599596796772  -10.4495476998959   3.6653484276458 
O  5.8599367011571  -7.5050211678571  13.3847521966499 
O  7.5403325819054  -1.3091258510045   3.6531329497328 
O  5.8403096033852   1.6354006810343  13.3725367187368 
O 12.6394536505805  -10.1410626556009   3.6524664602544 
O 10.9394306720604  -7.1965361235621  13.3718702292584 
O  2.4978512573595   4.2372562189895   8.4854761415347 
O  0.7978282788394   7.1817827510283  18.2048799105387 
O  7.5969723260347  -4.5946805856069   8.4848096520563 
O  5.8969493475145  -1.6501540535681  18.2042134210603 
O  7.4883025535042  -1.5915339611152   8.2429693139533 
O  5.7882795749841   1.3529925709236  17.9623730829573 
O 12.5874236221794  -10.4234707657116   8.2423028244749 
O 10.8874006436592  -7.4789442336728  17.9617065934789 
O  0.0845810415709   2.9190086307584   8.3923959311201 
O -1.6154419369492   5.8635351627972  18.1117997001242 
O  5.1837021102461  -5.9129281738380   8.3917294416417 
O  3.4836791317259  -2.9684016417992  18.1111332106458 
O  5.0770705965302  -0.2041833909277   8.2392533372218 
O  3.3770476180100   2.7403431411111  17.9586571062258 
O 10.1761916652053  -9.0361201955241   8.2385868477434 
O  8.4761686866852  -6.0915936634853  17.9579906167474 
O  2.4645954271232   1.5099660881686   8.3497027701300 
O  0.7645724486031   4.4544926202074  18.0691065391341 
O  7.5637164957984  -7.3219707164278   8.3490362806516 
O  5.8636935172782  -4.3774441843890  18.0684400496556 
O  2.4100055855722  -1.6208004829549   8.5239843893594 
O  0.7099826070520   1.3237260490839  18.2433881583634 
O  7.5091266542473  -10.4527372875513   8.5233178998810 
O  5.8091036757272  -7.5082107555125  18.2427216688850 
O  8.3974054821384  -5.8626317129236   1.3065747919767 
O  6.6973825036183  -2.9181051808848  11.0259785609807 
O 13.4965265508135  -14.6945685175200   1.3059083024983 
O 11.7965035722934  -11.7500419854812  11.0253120715023 
O  0.9231650564783  -1.5300643833802   1.3377417400967 
O -0.7768579220418   1.4144621486586  11.0571455091007 
O  6.0222861251535  -10.3620011879766   1.3370752506183 
O  4.3222631466334  -7.4174746559378  11.0564790196223 
O  6.0136079972739  -7.2274847751323   1.2604905723121 
O  4.3135850187537  -4.2829582430936  10.9798943413161 
O 11.1127290659490  -16.0594215797287   1.2598240828336 
O  9.4127060874289  -13.1148950476900  10.9792278518377 
O  6.0201102027811  -4.4749332614079   1.3147290838105 
O  4.3200872242609  -1.5304067293691  11.0341328528145 
O 11.1192312714562  -13.3068700660043   1.3140625943321 
O  9.4192082929361  -10.3623435339655  11.0334663633361 
O  6.0413900534684  -1.3656500975223   1.2447879350410 
O  4.3413670749483   1.5788764345165  10.9641917040451 
O 11.1405111221435  -10.1975869021187   1.2441214455626 


O  9.4404881436234  -7.2530603700799  10.9635252145666 
O  3.3364854712871  -2.8941070340477   1.3562565167706 
O  1.6364624927670   0.0504194979910  11.0756602857746 
O  8.4356065399622  -11.7260438386442   1.3555900272922 
O  6.7355835614421  -8.7815173066054  11.0749937962962 
O 11.1653017569011  -1.6535923323214   6.0799170042454 
O  9.4652787783809   1.2909341997174  15.7993207732494 
O 16.2644228255762  -10.4855291369178   6.0792505147670 
O 14.5643998470561  -7.5410026048790  15.7986542837710 
O 11.1785918950263   1.6535706070225   6.0681128082813 
O  9.4785689165062   4.5980971390613  15.7875165772854 
O 16.2777129637015  -7.1783661975739   6.0674463188029 
O 14.5776899851813  -4.2338396655351  15.7868500878069 
O  8.3039769348279   5.8761691915909   6.0842019664315 
O  6.6039539563077   8.8206957236296  15.8036057354355 
O 13.4030980035030  -2.9557676130056   6.0835354769531 
O 11.7030750249829  -0.0112410809668  15.8029392459571 
O  6.0578791396479   4.5824549486078   6.0681855059117 
O  4.3578561611277   7.5269814806466  15.7875892749157 
O 11.1570002083230  -4.2494818559886   6.0675190164332 
O  9.4569772298029  -1.3049553239498  15.7869227854373 
O  8.2675466587014  -0.0802857895686   6.1066749377331 
O  6.5675236801813   2.8642407424702  15.8260787067371 
O 13.3666677273766  -8.9122225941650   6.1060084482547 
O 11.6666447488564  -5.9676960621262  15.8254122172587 
O  5.9929750239030   1.2244454405915   6.1079580871536 
O  4.2929520453828   4.1689719726302  15.8273618561576 
O 11.0920960925781  -7.6074913640049   6.1072915976752 
O  9.3920731140580  -4.6629648319662  15.8266953666792 
O  7.5519530277913   4.5953937898702   3.6294260353689 
O  5.8519300492712   7.5399203219089  13.3488298043730 
O 12.6510740964664  -4.2365430147262   3.6287595458905 
O 10.9510511179463  -1.2920164826875  13.3481633148946 
O 10.4323459970390   2.9656467410863   3.6561766557800 
O  8.7323230185188   5.9101732731251  13.3755804247840 
O 15.5314670657141  -5.8662900635101   3.6555101663016 
O 13.8314440871940  -2.9217635314714  13.3749139353056 
O 12.6682816868520  -1.6515564408778   3.6543492449422 
O 10.9682587083318   1.2929700911609  13.3737530139462 
O 17.7674027555271  -10.4834932454743   3.6536827554637 
O 16.0673797770070  -7.5389667134355  13.3730865244678 
O 10.4176613544500  -2.9436822698560   3.6379080415031 
O  8.7176383759299   0.0008442621828  13.3573118105072 
O 15.5167824231252  -11.7756190744524   3.6372415520247 
O 13.8167594446051  -8.8310925424137  13.3566453210287 
O  7.5843740049639   1.3950857022530   3.5190610125200 
O  5.8843510264438   4.3396122342917  13.2384647815240 
O 12.6834950736390  -7.4368511023435   3.5183945230415 
O 10.9834720951189  -4.4923245703047  13.2377982920456 
O  2.4752704758464  -4.2090762618233   3.6503451759262 


O  0.7752474973263  -1.2645497297846  13.3697489449302 
O  7.5743915445215  -13.0410130664198   3.6496786864477 
O  5.8743685660014  -10.0964865343810  13.3690824554518 
O  7.5837947352616   7.2445876717383   8.4288535332319 
O  5.8837717567415  10.1891142037771  18.1482573022360 
O 12.6829158039368  -1.5873491328581   8.4281870437535 
O 10.9828928254166   1.3571773991807  18.1475908127576 
O 12.6724353115694   1.5258854197144   8.4020284402986 
O 10.9724123330493   4.4704119517532  18.1214322093027 
O 17.7715563802446  -7.3060513848820   8.4013619508202 
O 16.0715334017244  -4.3615248528432  18.1207657198242 
O  5.1927542444039   5.8571950236458   8.3826450037341 
O  3.4927312658838   8.8017215556845  18.1020487727382 
O 10.2918753130791  -2.9747417809507   8.3819785142557 
O  8.5918523345589  -0.0302152489119  18.1013822832597 
O 10.2737378581223   2.8904264174695   8.3681021542043 
O  8.5737148796022   5.8349529495083  18.0875059232084 
O 15.3728589267975  -5.9415103871269   8.3674356647259 
O 13.6728359482773  -2.9969838550881  18.0868394337299 
O  7.5873961338659   4.4948959140044   8.3911311131904 
O  5.8873731553458   7.4394224460432  18.1105348821944 
O 12.6865172025411  -4.3370408905920   8.3904646237119 
O 10.9864942240210  -1.3925143585532  18.1098683927160 
O  7.5966502825796   1.3753995945015   8.6040212436857 
O  5.8966273040595   4.3199261265403  18.3234250126897 
O 12.6957713512548  -7.4565372100949   8.6033547542072 
O 10.9957483727346  -4.5120106780561  18.3227585232113 
O 13.5073001458697  -2.9198026454300   1.3248938236300 
O 11.8072771673495   0.0247238866087  11.0442975926341 
O 18.6064212145448  -11.7517394500264   1.3242273341516 
O 16.9063982360247  -8.8072129179877  11.0436311031556 
O  5.9825289795379   1.3927590028501   1.3123559589807 
O  4.2825060010178   4.3372855348888  11.0317597279847 
O 11.0816500482130  -7.4391778017463   1.3116894695022 
O  9.3816270696929  -4.4946512697076  11.0310932385063 
O 11.0951191579772  -4.2649354215963   1.2444216343746 
O  9.3950961794570  -1.3204088895575  10.9638254033787 
O 16.1942402266523  -13.0968722261927   1.2437551448962 
O 14.4942172481322  -10.1523456941540  10.9631589139002 
O 11.1386254764681  -1.5066935667847   1.3747381930345 
O  9.4386024979479   1.4378329652540  11.0941419620386 
O 16.2377465451432  -10.3386303713812   1.3740717035561 
O 14.5377235666231  -7.3941038393424  11.0934754725602 
O 11.1433439404342   1.6118042065468   1.3003128103053 
O  9.4433209619140   4.5563307385856  11.0197165793094 
O 16.2424650091093  -7.2201325980496   1.2996463208269 
O 14.5424420305892  -4.2756060660109  11.0190500898310 
O  8.4039367961331   0.0263615376035   1.3343557489030 
O  6.7039138176129   2.9708880696422  11.0537595179070 
O 13.5030578648082  -8.8055752669929   1.3336892594246 


O 11.8030348862881  -5.8610487349542  11.0530930284286 
 
 
 
(1) Ravel, B.; Newville, M. ATHENA , ARTEMIS , HEPHAESTUS : Data Analysis for X-Ray 

Absorption Spectroscopy Using IFEFFIT. J Synchrotron Rad 2005, 12 (4), 537–541. 
https://doi.org/10.1107/S0909049505012719. 

 


