Advanced interfacial phase change material: 

structurally confined and interfacially extended superlattice 

 

Hyeon wook Lim1, Young sam Kim2, Kyu-jin Jo3, Seok-Choi4, Chang Woo Lee1, Dasol Kim1, Ki 

hyeon Kwon1, Hoe don Kwon1, Soo bin Hwang1, Byung-Joon Choi4, Cheol-Woong Yang3, Eun Ji 

Sim2, and Mann-Ho Cho1*  

 

Keywords: interfacial phase change material, doping, vdW layer, superlattice, neuromorphic 

 

Interfacial Phase Change Memory (iPCM) retrench unnecessary power consumption due 

to wasted heat generated during phase change by reducing unnecessary entropic loss. In 

this study, an advanced iPCM (GeTe/Ti-Sb2Te3 Superlattice) is synthesized by doping Ti 

into Sb2Te3. Structural analysis and density functional theory (DFT) calculations confirm 

that bonding distortion and structurally well-confined layers contribute to improve phase 

change properties in iPCM. Ti-Sb2Te3 acts as an effective thermal barrier to localize the 

generated heat inside active region, which leads to reduction of switching energy. Since 

Ge-Te bonds adjacent to short and strong Ti-Te bonds are more elongated than the bonds 

near Sb-Te, it is easier for Ge atoms to break the bond with Te due to strengthened Peierls 

distortions (Rlong/Rshort) during phase change process. Properties of advanced iPCM 

(cycling endurance, write speed/energy) exceed previous records. Moreover, well-

confined multi-level states are obtained with advanced iPCM, showing potential as a 

neuromorphic memory. Our work paves the way for designing superlattice based PCM 

by controlling confinement layers. 

 

 

Phase change memory (PCM) is one of the promising candidates for next-generation non-

volatile memory (NVM). There have been many attempts to design superior PCMs based on 

single phase materials mainly composed of Ge, Sb, Te alloys1. However, there remains a fatal 

problem: the unnecessary diffusion of heat through the liquid phase generated during the 

RESET process due to the melt-quenching process2. To solve these problems, many research 

has been conducted on various methods such as pulse design optimization, device structure 

improvement, and material design to present new paradigms for designing advanced PCMs3,4,5. 

Meanwhile, outstanding device characteristics for interfacial phase change memory (iPCM) 


composed of alternately stacked GeTe (GT) and Sb2Te3 (ST) within nm ranges has been 

reported6,7,8. The main characteristic of iPCM is that two reversible phases are correspond to 

crystal and metastable crystal phases, not the crystalline and amorphous phases. Therefore, 

iPCM saves energy because it does not undergo a melting process which consumes a lot of the 

energy generated from heat diffusion in the liquid state during the RESET process. However, 

due to difficult manufacturing process and complex structure, understanding the phase change 

mechanism of iPCM has not sufficiently progressed. Although the phase change mechanism 

of iPCM has not been fully comprehended, many reports suggest that difference between the 

two phases is determined by local movement of atoms adjacent to interface near the vdW 

layer9,10. Some models for iPCM were suggested based on four representative structures: Petrov, 

inverted Petrov, Kooi, and Ferro11. Structures corresponding to low/high resistance states 

(LRS/HRS) are considered as Ferro and inverted Petrov, according to Junji Tominaga et al12. 

Despite the deficient evidence on the properties of each phase in iPCM for the switching 

process, advanced results which include ultralow-switching current and multi-level 

characteristics with the GT/ST superlattice on flexible substrates were reported13. However, 

this remarkable performance is limited to specific device structures such as pore-type structures 

and thermally insulating flexible substrates. Sufficient attempts have not been made to develop 

advanced iPCM using modified structures by doping with transition metals, such as Sc and Ti, 

which are already used in alloy-based PCM14,15,16,17. To implement PCM device using 

superlattice structure, further research is needed to maximize the advantages of the superlattice 

structure and reduce difficulties in the fabrication process. 

In this study, advanced iPCM composed of alternately stacked GT and Ti-doped Sb2Te3 

(Ti-ST) were synthesized with MBE and evaluated by various measurements. Furthermore, 

outstanding figure of merits were obtained with the advanced iPCM, including ultra-low power 

consumption (~2 pJ), high cycling endurance (~3 × 109), fast speed (~8 ns) and multi-level 

characteristics (~6 level). Considering structural analysis and various experimental 

measurements, appropriate unit cells are constructed, and density functional theory (DFT) 

calculations are used to investigate atomic switching characteristics within the microstructure. 

The structural confinement and interfacial extension of iPCM with Ti atoms enable the above 

advancement. Phase change process is facilitated by strengthened thermal confinement of Ti-

ST blocks and the improved structural coherence near the interface. Peierls distortions of the 

Ge-Te bonds vicinity to Ti atoms are strengthened due to robust Ti-Te bonding and expansion 

of the interfacial distance by intra-structural localization of Ti-ST blocks, which also enables 


triggered Ge atoms to change bonding motifs through smooth atomic movement. Due to the 

well-controlled interfacial thermal confinement and intra-structural localization of Ti-ST layers, 

multi-levels with electrical pulsing are obtained. Above properties will pave the way for 

designing iPCM as a neuromorphic memory, in addition to their application in PCM18,19. 

Furthermore, in the case of alloy-based PCM such as GST, phase change proceeds from 

random positions during the phase change process. Therefore, as a method of improving phase 

change characteristics of these thin films, material design is used to directly modify the entire 

region with several dopants14,15,16. In this study, material design of superlattice system is 

optimized by modifying confinement layer (ST) to improve phase change properties in GT 

layer, which is the activated region surrounded by the confinement layer. Therefore, a new 

methodology for improving phase change characteristics of PCMs is established by controlling 

the confinement layer, not the activated layer. Strong features of iPCM are further improved 

by reducing unnecessary entropic loss during phase change process, while confinement layers 

of the system maintain their crystallinity. It is a new paradigm that it leads to an advancement 

of phase change characteristics of the entire system by improving the properties of the 

confinement layer surrounding changeable materials, rather than directly modifying activated 

region which has been conducted in alloy based PCM. 

 

Electrical characteristics of GT/Ti-ST superlattice device  

The structures of GST-based superlattice device and characteristic changes caused by Ti 

incorporation are expressed as a schematic using atomic modeling. (Fig. 1a). The feature of 

interfacial expansion along the vertical direction due to Ti doped in ST blocks and locally 

stretched Ge-Te bonds with distortion are presented. Adopting increasing step pulse 

programing (ISPP) method (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 2b), phase change characteristics 

are evaluated through device operation on the same device platform. For GT/Ti-ST SL, all 

figure of merits obtained by electrical evaluations are improved compared to GT/ST SL and 

even other PCMs (Fig. 1c-g). 

Advanced iPCM’s characteristics showed much better performance in cycling endurance 

test with a significantly higher value (~3 × 109) than the other representative phase change 

materials including iPCM (Supplementary Fig. 2a, c-d). Compared with GT/ST SL, it is 

confirmed that reversible resistance states obtained with different electrical pulses are much 

more confined in GT/Ti-ST SL, which is an important property that prevents each state from 

overlapping when various resistance states are implemented for multi-level systems. These 


advancements are detailed in Table 1. As Ti concentration increases above certain level, Ti-ST 

blocks decompose to Ti-ST and TiTe2 phases occurs, which degrade the phase change 

characteristics (Supplementary Fig. 2e-f, Supplementary Fig3. f-g).20 Multi-level states are also 

obtained by repeatedly applying different electrical pulses. It is advantageous for resistance-

based memories to implement a multi-level cell (MLC) that can be used as a neuromorphic 

memory.21,22 Although MLC characteristics have been implemented and reported by previous 

studies in the use of PCM as a resistance-based memory,23 a gradual change in resistance 

caused by phase change is very difficult. Herein, well-confined multi-level resistance states in 

GT/Ti-ST SL are successfully implemented through cycling endurance test. Although a similar 

attempt was conducted with Y doped ST, only three different resistance states with unstable 

operating process were reported.24 

 

Enhanced properties owing to bonding characteristics with Ti 

It is observed structural modification at the atomic level after device operation through 

transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurement (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 3).  

Fig. 2a shows the device structure with HR-TEM after applying electrical signals alternatively 

about 500,000 times. Fig. 2b-e shows locally amorphized region incorporated in the layered 

structure. It is confirmed that the parts maintaining the layered structure are strongly aligned 

along the c-axis direction. Septuple and nonuple Te-terminated atomic layers are observed 

using intensity profiling in high-angle annular dark-field scanning TEM (HAADF-STEM), 

which are presented in Fig. 2f-g. The hexagonal closed packed (HCP) quintuple layer (QL) 

structure is maintained in Ti-ST up to certain amounts of Ti incorporation. Te-terminated layers 

with cation intermixing can correspond to Ferro-like or Kooi-like structures9,25. Among the 

four representative models suggested by several studies on iPCM (inverted Petrov, Petrov, 

Ferro, and Kooi models), switching characteristics can be explained by Ferro and inverted 

Petrov models9. The internal structures of the superlattice devices after about 500,000 cycling 

operations show the structural change of the superlattice device. The thick Te-terminated layers 

inside iPCM correspond either to Kooi or Ferro structure.26 However, Kooi structure is so 

stable that phase change is not possible in it.27 Considering intensity profiled images of the 

asymmetric cation sites, the layers are correspond to Ferro and Ferro-like structure.  

To investigate the change in the local structure of Ge atoms at the vdW interface using 

DFT calculations, unit cells of GT/(Ti)-ST SL were constructed using Ferro structure taking 

Ge/Sb intermixing17 into account to reflect the experimental environment. Fig. 3a present unit 


cell structures with charge density differences in GT/(Ti-)ST, where Ti atoms substitute Sb 

atoms maintaining the same octahedral motif in ST14. Since Ge-Te bond sharing Te with strong 

Ti-Te bond is relatively weaker than Ge-Te bond near the Sb-Te bond, it is easier for Ge to 

break the Ge-Te bond near the Ti-Te and convert into the other bonding motif, which is resulted 

with the electrical switching properties29. Phase change was implemented through the change 

in the bonding structure of Ge atoms near cation-intermixed zone. Specifically, three relatively 

long bonds among the six Ge-Te metavalent bonds30 combining in an octahedral motif are 

broken and then four short and strong covalent bonds are formed with tetrahedral bonds. These 

changes successfully explain the reversible phase change process between the metallic and 

insulating phases as shown in the band structures (Supplementary Fig. 4d-e). Using the amount 

of the occupied electron charge in the bond between Ge atoms and adjacent Te atoms, the 

change in structural motifs (octahedral/tetrahedral) and bond types (metavalent/covalent) 

before and after the phase change process can be successfully explained31,32. It is interesting 

that all elements are combined with metavalent30,33 bonds in LRS of GT/ST SL and valence 

electrons are occupied with  p orbital, maintaining the octahedral bonding motif. It is 

confirmed that p orbital alignment is well established with LRS in the GT/ST SL (Fig. 2f-g) 

and left side of Fig. 3c. This alignment was due to all constituent elements maintaining an 

octahedral motif and forming metavalent bonds with valence electrons occupied in p orbital32. 

Structural change occurs from octahedral to tetrahedral motif for Ge atoms when phase change 

proceeds, three relatively weak bonds among the six metavalent Ge-Te bonds in LRS are 

broken and new identical covalent bonds are formed through sp3 hybridization.34 On the other 

hand, unlike Ge atoms, Sb atoms maintain the bonding states with octahedral motif35; therefore, 

a structural change does not occur in ST. When ST is doped with Ti, Ti maintains octahedral 

motif through robust Ti-Te bond substituting Sb and HCP QL structure is also well maintained. 

However, the original p orbital alignment is quite distorted due to spatial expansion vicinity to 

the interfaces as well as enhanced structural localization due to robust Ti-Te bond (Fig. 3b). 

Ti atoms substituting Sb atoms pull nearest Te atoms strongly (Fig. 3), which produce 

relatively elongated Ge-Te bonds in the intermixed zone. Bond properties were investigated 

using density derived electrostatic and chemical (DDEC) 6 method (Fig. 4)31. Changes in 

bonding characteristics due to Ti doping are presented in Fig. 4a. Ti substituting Sb in the 

octahedral motif forms six strong and short bonds with Te, which extends the near chemical 

bond length or vdW gap distance (Fig. 3c-d). The localization in Ti-ST block by Ti-Te bond is 

strengthened (Fig. 4b, c). Thus, the more Ti atoms are involved in the cation site in the HCP 


ST block, the stronger the localization within the block, resulting in increased adjacent vdW 

gap distance. Volume of unit cell is reduced due to the short and strong Ti-Te bond, while 

length along the c-axis is rather extended. For V2VI3 or Pn2Ch3 (Pn = Pnictogen, Ch = 

Chalcogen) materials, such as Sb2Te3 and Bi2Te3, constituting HCP QL structure, the vdW gap 

is significantly reduced compared with theoretically expected value due to metavalent bonding 

of the electrons at the interface.36 However, shrinkage of interfacial space is relieved as 

interfacial metavalent bonding is decreased to some extent due to incorporated Ti in GT/Ti-ST 

SL. Since the phase change in iPCM occurs with limited atomic movement of Ge atoms vicinity 

of the interface37, expanded interfacial space facilitate the vertical movement of Ge atom, 

which occurs with phase change process. These characteristics of phase change process agree 

well with changes in the specific bonding properties (Fig. 4). The length of chemical bonds 

between Ge atom located in Ge/Sb intermixed zone and Te which is pulled toward Ti is 

increased and the amount of electrical charges involved in the bond is decreased. (Fig. 4d, e). 

Ge-Te bonds near Ti atoms are easier to break by the strengthened Peierls distortion 

(Rlong/Rshort)38 due to elongated Ge-Te bonds close to Ti atoms. Therefore, Ge atoms located in 

Ge/Sb intermixed zone are much easier for switching to the other structural motif compared 

with environment without Ti. Since Ge atoms bonded with adjacent Te atoms have relatively 

increased vacant space along the c-axis, they can be easily flipped to tetrahedral motifs. It is 

well understood that Ge in the center forms covalent bonds with four Te atoms with almost 

same bond length. The closer the bond order value is to 1, the greater the amount of the 

occupied electrons in the bond, which denotes the strong covalent bonding motif.39 This 

tendency is more evident in GT/Ti-ST compared with GT/ST (Fig. 4f-h). Analyzing angle 

distribution function (ADF), it is confirmed that bond angle of Ge atoms was much more 

distributed around 100 degrees in GT/Ti-ST SL than in GT/ST SL, corresponding to phase 

change with the local structural changes of Ge atoms. Ti and Sb always maintain octahedral 

motifs, bond angle near 90 degrees15,40, regardless of the structural change, while Ge atoms 

partially change to tetrahedral motif (covalent bonding with Te atoms) in HRS (Supplementary 

Fig.5). Sb always maintains an octahedral motif in GT/(Ti-)ST SL, which forms partially 

defective octahedral motifs regardless of phase change process, including elongated Sb-Te 

bonds due to Ti.15 Ti are maintain strong octahedral motif. 

 

The effects on structural coherency in GT/Ti-ST superlattice  

Significant improvements in GT/Ti-ST superlattice films with Ti incorporation are also 


elucidated through several structural analyses. Using time-domain thermo-reflectance (TDTR) 

measurement, the decrease in thermal conductivity of iPCM was confirmed. It is very 

interesting that the reduction in thermal conductivity of 5%-doped GT/Ti-ST is larger than the 

10% doped Ti-ST SL (Fig. 5a-b). This is caused by generation of TiTe2 from Ti-ST block with 

excess amount of Ti (Supplementary Fig.3f-g). Tri-layered TiTe2 blocks have large lattice 

mismatch about 11% with GT and ST, which deteriorate the formation of uniform interfaces 

in superlattice structure.41 For GST based PCM, thermal conductivity along the cross-plane is 

lowered in superlattice structure than in alloy due to increased anisotropy and presence of the 

vdW interface.42 Ti-ST has lower thermal conductivity than ST system. Therefore, it has more 

efficient intrinsic thermal barriers inside the superlattice structure when Ti is incorporated with 

certain amounts in ST blocks. Since PCM operates with Joule-heating process, lowered thermal 

conductivity of GT/Ti-ST SL helps confine the generated heat with applied electrical pulses 

inside the active region, which enable ultra-low energy switching for GT/Ti-ST SL.43,44 The 

scheme and TEM image of superlattice device presented in Fig. 2 and the red box (Fig. 1a) 

illustrate the strengthened thermal confinement effect of ST blocks due to Ti incorporation with 

lowered thermal conductivity. 

Another important role of Ti is in synthesizing an ideal iPCM by inducing the coherent 

growth of HCP QL ST and GT blocks by changing the process of forming HCP QL ST blocks 

from growth-dominant to nucleation-dominant method, which prevent deterioration of the 

roughness due to abrupt change of grain size during the synthesizing process20.20 By 

incorporating Ti atoms in iPCM, it is possible to synthesize an iPCM with uniform vdW layers 

over large areas.20 From X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray reflectance (XRR), and atomic force 

microscope (AFM) results, it is confirmed that morphology of iPCM is significantly improved 

by an appropriate amount of Ti and that good crystallinity is maintained (Fig. 5c-e). 

In addition, the chemical states of composed elements are studied using x-ray 

photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), with an in-situ transfer system to prevent oxidation, to 

obtain accurate bonding state of the constituent elements, measured chemical states showed 

that there were no phase segregations despite Ti is incorporated and it is observed that all 

elements except for Te atom itself are combined with Te (Fig. 5f-i). The binding energy shift 

for constituents almost did not occur before and after doping. That is, the chemical 

circumstance of Ti bonded with Te is hardly modulated, resulting in the maintenance of the 

octahedral motif.15 From above, GT/Ti-ST SL can avoid device failure due to formation of 

segregated phases with additional element. The atom that plays a key role in the phase change 


process is Ge atom (Supplementary Fig.4a-b). Therefore, the phase change mechanism in 

GT/Ti-ST SL is up to the behavior of Ge atoms as the same manner in GT/ST SL. Moreover, 

analyzing composition ratio using XPS measurement showed that the GT/(Ti-)ST SL structure 

has Ge-deficient GT layers (Supplementary table 1). In detail, the result indicates that intrinsic 

vacancies from the cation site in GT layer help Ge to move efficiently during phase change 

process, which is consistent with already reported research that Ge-deficient GT layers 

contribute to superior phase change properties in iPCM6,45.  

 

Conclusions 

In summary, an ultra-efficient and structurally coherent advanced iPCM was developed in this 

study, which led to the following figure of merit: high cycling endurance (~3 × 109), ultra-low 

RESET energy (~2 pJ), and high speed (~8 ns). After sufficient electrical pulsing, it is observed 

that internal structure of superlattice device was well maintained, i.e., Te terminated layers 

were preserved. The layers corresponding to Ferro structure (-Te-Ge-Te-Ge-Te-Sb-Te-Sb-Te-) 

contain some extent of Ge/Sb intermixing in cation sites. Interestingly, it is also confirmed that 

strong p orbital alignment in GT/ST SL is slightly distorted with Ti due to the strong 

localization. Based on Ferro structure considering Ge/Sb intermixing, bonding properties of 

two reversible phases in GT/(Ti)-ST SL are suggested with DFT calculation and XPS. Ge-Te 

bonds vicinity to Ti-Te bonds are weakened, which facilitate Ge atoms to break the bond with 

Te by strengthened Peierls distortion (Rlong/Rshort). Although volume size of unit cell is reduced 

as intra-structural localization of ST block is strengthened by incorporating Ti atoms in ST 

blocks, interfacial space is expanded. The phase change process is strengthened with the stable 

structure formed by strong intra-structural localization of Ti-Sb2Te3 blocks and switching 

energy consumption is reduced with enhanced thermal barrier of the blocks by lowered thermal 

conductivity with Ti. Consequently, Ti incorporation facilitates efficient atomic movement of 

Ge atoms which leads to GT/Ti-ST SL being a superior PCM. 

By modifying properties of confinement layer through doping with other transition metals 

which enable to strengthen structural coherence and confinement effect of Sb2Te3 block of 

iPCM, other advanced iPCMs can be developed. Due to GT/Ti-ST SL’s strong figure of merits 

for cycling endurance and low-energy transition by effectively reducing entropic loss during 

phase change process, elaborated resistance changes with repetitive electrical pulsing become 

possible in addition to the improvement of above phase change characteristics in single device. 

Advanced iPCM is expected to pave the way for developing advanced memory devices by 


suppressing wasted heat generated during the phase change process and effectively forming 

structurally coherent interfaces. Advanced iPCM has an enormous potential to be one of the 

strongest candidates for non-volatile memories in highly integrated memory systems such as 

3D X Point structure, which is suitable to perform deep learning operations with matrix-vector-

multiplication in neuromorphic computing23,46,47. 

 

Table 1. Device characteristics with different PCMs 

Atomic ratio (%) 
GST 

alloy 

Ti-ST 

alloy 

GT/ST 

Superlattice 

TiTe2/Sb2Te3 

(PCH) 

GT/Ti-ST 

Superlattice 

RESET Energy 

(pJ) 

900 
750 
10 
200 
2 

SET Speed (ns) 
30 
8 
30 
8 
8 

Cycling 

Endurance 

105~8 
105~6 
107~9 
2×109 
3×109 

Multi-Level 

States (MLC) 

3 
2 
2~4 
8 
6 

 

 

 
 


 

 

Fig. 1. Scheme and device operation (Scheme of the superlattice structure, device and electrical data obtained from square pulses) a, 

Schematics of the GT/ST SL and GT/Ti-ST SL and applied electrical pulses for the device operation are presented. The light green block 

represents the GeTe layer, the sky blue represents the Sb2Te3 layer, and the blue represents the Ti-Sb2Te3 layer. The following features are 

expressed in the central part of the scheme: The interfacial space is quite extended along the vertical direction due to Ti-ST block and the heat 

confinement effect of ST blocks is further strengthened with Ti incorporation, which facilitates efficient phase change process by localizing 

heat generated by applied electrical pulses into the GT blocks. Moreover, the diagram presents the distortion of Ge-Te bonds is strengthened 

as the Ge-Te bonds vicinity to Ti atoms are elongated due to short and strong Ti-Te bonds. b, Electrical data obtained by increasing the step 

pulse programming (ISPP) measurements and c, cycling endurance test of GT/Ti-ST SL (Ti 5%). d, Schematic which presents the properties 

obtained with cycling endurance test based on different PCMs fabricated and evaluated with same electronics. e, RESET energy as a function 

of bottom electrode contact (BEC) diameter. The above values are obtained using product of the power (P = V2/R, where the cell’s resistance 

varies) and the pulse length (t ~ ns) applied during the operation. f, SET speed as a function of the applied voltage bias for GST alloy and 

superlattice device. In obtaining above measured values of e and f. The standard deviations due to the repeated measurements and leading/trail 

edges of the electrical pulses are indicated by the hourglass-shaped icons. g, Multi-level states are obtained through the cyclability test with 

proper pulse design, and the population for each resistance was calculated and expressed as a cumulative probability. 
 


 

 

Fig. 2. Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) results of the superlattice device after the cyclability test. a, TEM image of the 

superlattice device after cycling operations (~5 × 105 times) and b, magnified image of a. C-IBID denotes carbon – ion beam induced 

deposition and W-EBID denotes tungsten – electron beam induced deposition. c-e, Magnified images of the area marked with square boxes 

in b. The degree of crystallization and alignment of each region is presented with fast fourier transformed (FFT) image. d, corresponds to the 

amorphized region. c and e correspond to the regions where the layered structures still exist. f-g, is observed through HAADF-STEM by 

magnifying e with intensity profiling where intensity is proportional to Z2. Valence electrons occupied with p orbital of constituent elements 

lead to atomic alignment through metavalent bonds. Te is distributed on the anion site and the other elements and vacancy are intermixed at 

the cation sites. 
 
 


 

 

Fig. 3. Unit cell of GT/(Ti-)ST SL and structural changes due to Ti incorporation. a, DFT modeling of GT/(Ti-)ST SL based on Ferro 

structure with Ge/Sb intermixing. Strong localization due to Ti incorporation is confirmed with isosurface value being set as 0.008 e/bohr3. b, 

The change in volume and length of the unit cell of GT/(Ti-)ST SL corresponded to LRS/HRS. In both reversible phases, Ti leads to reduction 

of unit cell volume and extension along the c-axis. c, HAADF-STEM images of GT/(Ti-)ST SL in LRS. Original atomic alignment is distorted 

with Ti incorporation. d, The distance (vdW gap) between (Ti-)ST block and adjacent blocks through HAADF-STEM measurement in 

GT/(Ti)-ST SL, purple for distances with ST and red for Ti-ST. 

 
 


 

 

Fig. 4. Bond properties in GT/(Ti)-ST SL. a, Characterization of the chemical bond with the nearest Te atoms, atoms in the center remain 

Sb, Ti, Ge. Electron density of each atom is 0.005 e/bohr3. The bond order in these systems corresponds to the value which is dividing the 

number of valence electrons occupied in the chemical bond between atoms by the number of atoms participating in the bond. b, Bond length 

and c, Bond order values for the chemical bonds where Sb and Ti at the center are bounded to Te maintaing octahedral motifs in GT/(Ti)-ST 

SL. d, Bond length and e, Bond order values for chemical bonds where Ge at the center is bounded to Te maintaining octahedral motifs in 

GT/(Ti)-ST SL. f, Bond order of Ge at the center are bound to Te with covalent bonding maintain tetrahedral motifs in GT/(Ti)-ST SL. g-h, 

Angle distribution function (ADF) of Ge atoms in GT/(Ti-)ST SL for two reversible phases. 

 
 


 

 

Fig. 5. Structural analysis in GT/(Ti-)ST SL. a, Raw data of the time-domain thermo-reflectance (TDTR) data and b, thermal conductivity 

of GT/(Ti)-ST SL. Above standard deviation occurs during the fitting operation, which is to minimize the root-mean-square error through the 

iterative optimization process. c, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and d, X-ray reflection (XRR) measurement of GT/(Ti)-ST SL on Si (111) substrate 

through θ-2θ method. e, Atomic force microscope (AFM) data of GT/(Ti)-ST SL on Si (111) substrate. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 

(XPS) data of each element, which corresponds to f, Ge, g, Sb, h, Te, i, Ti of GT/(Ti)-ST SL and Ti-ST alloy. Sb 3d peak is broadened 

asymmetrically because Sb 3d5/2 peak maintaining octahedral motif is deconvoluted to two peaks corresponded to elongated and original bond 

due to short and strong Ti-Te bonds, which is consistent with the results of the micro-structural change (Fig. 4d-e). 
 
 


Methods 

Sample Preparation. The thin film preparation process for structural analysis is as follows: 

iPCM is synthesized with MBE. In the case of molecular beam epitaxy, the substrate is fixed 

at the center of the upper range under high vacuum (base pressure ~ high 10-9 Torr) and the 

constituent elements of the material to be deposited are evaporated in gaseous form onto the 

substrate through thermal evaporation. When synthesizing the film on the silicon substrate, 

which is oriented in the (111) direction, the substrate (silicon wafer) is soaked in acetone and 

isopropanol successively for a few minutes to desorb organic matter, ultrasonicated, and soaked 

in a buffered oxide etchant to remove the native oxide (SiO2) of the substrate, and finally, rinsed 

with deionized (DI) water. Then, the Si wafer is transferred to the MBE chamber and annealed 

at a high temperature (about 600 °C) to remove the remaining impurities, cooled to room 

temperature, and then Ti-ST is deposited at room temperature with a thickness of 3 nm. Heat 

treatment at 190 °C (for the 5% doping; the higher the doping percentage, the higher the 

required heat treatment temperature) for 30 minutes follows, and then 4~5 nm of Ti-ST is 

stacked while maintaining the above temperature. A robust seed layer is formed through the 

above two-step process. After lowering the temperature slowly to about 20 °C, the temperature 

of the effusion cell containing each element is adjusted to evaporate each source with the 

intended ratio (1.0 Å/min for Ge, 1.5 Å/min for Sb, 3 Å/min for Te, and about 0.4 Å/min for 

Ti). Each source (Ge, Sb, Te) is heated in an isolated Knudsen cell containing a cylindrical 

crucible, and then a beam of each component directed toward the substrate is ejected from the 

cell and adsorbed on the surface. Ti is evaporated with an e-beam evaporator where a hot 

electron beam is generated from the filament and accelerated by an electric/magnetic field; it 

hits the source rod to vaporize Ti from the source and then transfer it to the substrate. Each 

material has a different desorption rate depending on the selectivity of the substrate and the 

pre-deposited material. Considering this, the deposition rate on the substrate surface is 

precisely controlled through the Proportional-Integral-Differential (PID) controller to enable 

the precise control that responds to every moment for the growth of a very high-quality thin 

film. After synthesizing the seed layer and lowering the temperature to about 20 °C, 

approximately 1 nm of the GT layer and approximately 2~3 nm of Ti-ST is deposited 

alternately. The above process is repeated until the top layer (Ti-ST) is deposited. 

 

X-Ray Diffraction/Reflection (XRD/XRR). The XRD measurement is performed using a 


high-resolution X-ray diffractometer with a 9 kW Cu Kα (wavelength ~ 1.5406 Å) radiation 

source. The measurement was conducted with the Po-hang accelerator 5D beam line. 

 

Raman Spectroscopy. Raman spectra were obtained through micro-Raman spectroscopy 

(Horiba Lab Ram ARAMIS) using a 532 nm wavelength Nd: YAG laser with a 100x objective 

and 2400 grooves/mm grating. The spectra were calibrated at a silicon peak of 520 cm-1. 

 

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). In-situ XPS spectra of the core levels were 

measured using the PHI 5000 Versa Probe made by ULVAC-PHI, where the base pressure was 

about 4 x 1-10 Torr. The XPS spectra were obtained using monochromatic Kα radiation with an 

analyzer pass energy of 23.5 eV, providing an overall experimental resolution of 200 meV. The 

background of each spectrum was subtracted by the Shirley method. For the depth profile, a 

500 kV Ne+ ion beam was used, a modest condition to prevent transformation of the samples. 

 

Keithley (I-V test). To probe the operation of the test cells, an Agilent 33600A pulse generator 

and a Keithley 2636B source-meter were used for applying electrical pulses and measuring the 

resistance during the switching process, respectively. To switch the cells between several 

reversible phases, electrical pulses which were 8~200 ns in width and 0.1~3 V in height were 

applied, and each state’s resistance was measured at 0.1 V. 

 

Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM). TEM specimens for cross-sectional observation 

of the super-lattice devices were prepared using a focused ion beam (FIB, NX2000; Hitachi 

Inc., Japan) instrument. To maintain the initial state of the specimen, tungsten and carbon were 

used as protective layers. During the FIB process, the TEM specimen was etched with Ga+ ions 

at 30 kV, 10 kV, and 5 kV, successively. The TEM images were taken at an accelerating voltage 

of 200 kV using a JEM-ARM200F (JEOL Ltd.) and One View camera (Gatan Inc.). The STEM 

images were acquired at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV using an aberration-corrected STEM 

(JEM-ARM200F, JEOL Ltd.). STEM images were collected using a convergence semi-angle 

of 21 mrad and a high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector with a collection semi-angle 

of 68-280 mrad. 

 


Density Functional Theory (DFT) Calculation. The electronic structures of the GT/(Ti-)ST 

SL were calculated using DFT with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP).48 All 

calculations were implemented at the generalized gradient approximation level, using the 

Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE)49 functional. The Grimme’s D350 dispersion correction term 

was added to capture long-range interactions during structure optimization. The Brillouin zone 

was sampled with 11 × 11 × 11 (21 × 21 × 5) k-points, the kinetic energy cutoff for the plane 

wave was set to 500 eV (400 eV), and the convergence criterion for the self-consistent loop 

was 1E-6 eV (1E-4 eV) for optimization (single-point calculation) until the difference in force 

between the steps was less than 0.01 eV/Å. The superlattices were relaxed with 2 × 2 × 2 

Brillouin zone sampling and gamma point sampling, respectively. By fabricating several 3 × 

3× 1 supercells of ST, representative structures were created in which Sb and vacancies were 

mixed in a ratio of 2:1 in all layers except for the Te layers. The exact location of the vacancy 

was determined by the CD and monitored during the process of site switching and optimization. 

Subsequently, the CD near the vacancy site was numerically integrated. The superlattices were 

constructed in the same manner. The vacancies, Sb, and Ge were mixed at the interface between 

GeTe and ST. The bond order was calculated using the density derived electrostatic and 

chemical (DDEC6) approach.31 The band structure calculations were carried out in the 

reciprocal space along the symmetry points (K, Γ, Μ). 

 

Time-Domain Thermo-Reflectance (TDTR). To measure the thermal metrology based on 

thermo-reflectance, the N8- 200 made by TMX Scientific TransometerTM was used. A pulsed 

heating laser of 4.7–5.8 μJ was illuminated to change the temperature of the surface and heat 

reflection energy of the sample with the film stack. At the same time, a probing laser (18.5–

23.3 mW) was used to record the change in light reflectivity (i.e., thermal decay) as a function 

of time. Two unknown independent parameters can be extracted after fitting by combining the 

experimental data with known material parameters. These unknown parameters can be 

calculated using the coefficient of thermal reflectance, representing the relationship between 

temperature and reflectivity changes. During the fitting process, optimal calculations were 

performed through an iterative optimization process that minimized the root-mean-square error 

between the experimental and numerical decay curves. Eventually, the inverse numerical 

solution can acquire the film stack’s thermal conductivity and boundary resistance. 


References 

1. 
Kolobov, A. V. et al. Understanding the phase-change mechanism of rewritable optical media. 

Nat. Mater. 3, 703–708 (2004). 

2. 
Burr, G. W. et al. Overview of candidate device technologies for storage-class memory. IBM 

J. Res. Dev. 52, 449–464 (2008). 

3. 
Salinga, M. et al. Monatomic phase change memory. Nat. Mater. 17, 681–685 (2018). 

4. 
Xie, Y. et al. Self‐Healing of a Confined Phase Change Memory Device with a Metallic 

Surfactant Layer. Adv. Mater. 30, 1705587 (2018). 

5. 
Ghazi Sarwat, S. et al. Projected Mushroom Type Phase‐Change Memory. Adv. Funct. Mater. 

31, 2106547 (2021). 

6. 
Tominaga, J. The Design and Application on Interfacial Phase‐Change Memory. Phys. status 

solidi – Rapid Res. Lett. 13, 1800539 (2019). 

7. 
Simpson, R. E. et al. Interfacial phase-change memory. Nat. Nanotechnol. 6, 501–505 (2011). 

8. 
Mitrofanov, K. V. et al. High-Speed Bipolar Switching of Sputtered Ge–Te/Sb–Te 

Superlattice iPCM with Enhanced Cyclability. Phys. Status Solidi - Rapid Res. Lett. 13, 1–6 

(2019). 

9. 
Kooi, B. J. & Momand, J. High Resolution Imaging of Chalcogenide Superlattices for Data 

Storage Applications: Progress and Prospects. Phys. status solidi – Rapid Res. Lett. 13, 

1800562 (2019). 

10. 
Ohyanagi, T. et al. GeTe sequences in superlattice phase change memories and their electrical 

characteristics. Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 252106 (2014). 

11. 
Tominaga, J., Kolobov, A. V., Fons, P., Nakano, T. & Murakami, S. Ferroelectric Order 

Control of the Dirac‐Semimetal Phase in GeTe‐Sb 2 Te 3 Superlattices. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 

1, 1300027 (2014). 

12. 
Mitrofanov, K. V. et al. High‐Speed Bipolar Switching of Sputtered Ge–Te/Sb–Te 

Superlattice iPCM with Enhanced Cyclability. Phys. status solidi – Rapid Res. Lett. 13, 

1900105 (2019). 

13. 
Khan, A. I. et al. Ultralow–switching current density multilevel phase-change memory on a 

flexible substrate. Science 373, 1243–1247 (2021). 

14. 
Zhu, M. et al. One order of magnitude faster phase change at reduced power in Ti-Sb-Te. Nat. 

Commun. 5, 4086 (2014). 

15. 
Rao, F. et al. Direct observation of titanium-centered octahedra in titanium–antimony–

tellurium phase-change material. Nat. Commun. 6, 10040 (2015). 

16. 
Rao, F. et al. Reducing the stochasticity of crystal nucleation to enable subnanosecond 

memory writing. Science 358, 1423–1427 (2017). 

17. 
Tominaga, J., Sumi, S. & Awano, H. Intermixing suppression through the interface in GeTe/Sb 


2 Te 3 superlattice. Appl. Phys. Express 13, 075503 (2020). 

18. 
Kaspar, C., Ravoo, B. J., van der Wiel, W. G., Wegner, S. V. & Pernice, W. H. P. The rise of 

intelligent matter. Nature 594, 345–355 (2021). 

19. 
Zhang, W., Mazzarello, R., Wuttig, M. & Ma, E. Designing crystallization in phase-change 

materials for universal memory and neuro-inspired computing. Nat. Rev. Mater. 4, 150–168 

(2019). 

20. 
Xia, M. et al. Ti–Sb–Te Alloy: A Candidate for Fast and Long-Life Phase-Change Memory. 

ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 7, 7627–7634 (2015). 

21. 
Sebastian, A., Le Gallo, M., Khaddam-Aljameh, R. & Eleftheriou, E. Memory devices and 

applications for in-memory computing. Nat. Nanotechnol. 15, 529–544 (2020). 

22. 
Xia, Q. & Yang, J. J. Memristive crossbar arrays for brain-inspired computing. Nat. Mater. 18, 

309–323 (2019). 

23. 
Xu, M. et al. Recent Advances on Neuromorphic Devices Based on Chalcogenide Phase‐

Change Materials. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 2003419 (2020). 

24. 
Liu, B. et al. Multi-level phase-change memory with ultralow power consumption and 

resistance drift. Sci. Bull. 66, 2217–2224 (2021). 

25. 
Momand, J. et al. Atomic stacking and van-der-Waals bonding in GeTe–Sb 2 Te 3 

superlattices. J. Mater. Res. 31, 3115–3124 (2016). 

26. 
Momand, J. et al. Interface formation of two- and three-dimensionally bonded materials in the 

case of GeTe-Sb2Te3 superlattices. Nanoscale 7, 19136–19143 (2015). 

27. 
Yu, X. & Robertson, J. Atomic Layering, Intermixing and Switching Mechanism in Ge-Sb-Te 

based Chalcogenide Superlattices. Sci. Rep. 6, 37325 (2016). 

28. 
Woo Lee, C. et al. Phase change in GeTe/Sb2Te3 superlattices: Formation of the vacancy-

ordered metastable cubic structure via Ge migration. Appl. Surf. Sci. 602, 154274 (2022). 

29. 
Ribaldone, C., Dragoni, D. & Bernasconi, M. A first-principles study of the switching 

mechanism in GeTe/InSbTe superlattices. Nanoscale Adv. 2, 5209–5218 (2020). 

30. 
Wuttig, M., Deringer, V. L., Gonze, X., Bichara, C. & Raty, J.-Y. Incipient Metals: Functional 

Materials with a Unique Bonding Mechanism. Adv. Mater. 30, 1803777 (2018). 

31. 
Manz, T. A. Introducing DDEC6 atomic population analysis: part 3. Comprehensive method to 

compute bond orders. RSC Adv. 7, 45552–45581 (2017). 

32. 
Kim, D. et al. Conversion between metavalent and covalent bond in metastable superlattices 

composed of 2D and 3D sublayers. (2022). 

33. 
Zhu, M. et al. Unique Bond Breaking in Crystalline Phase Change Materials and the Quest for 

Metavalent Bonding. Adv. Mater. 30, (2018). 

34. 
Kolobov, A. V., Fons, P. & Tominaga, J. Local instability of <math display="inline"> 

<mi>p</mi> </math> -type bonding makes amorphous GeTe a lone-pair semiconductor. Phys. 


Rev. B 87, 155204 (2013). 

35. 
Song, Z., Wang, R., Xue, Y. & Song, S. The “gene” of reversible phase transformation of 

phase change materials: Octahedral motif. Nano Res. 15, 765–772 (2022). 

36. 
Cheng, Y. et al. Understanding the Structure and Properties of Sesqui‐Chalcogenides (i.e., V 2 

VI 3 or Pn 2 Ch 3 (Pn = Pnictogen, Ch = Chalcogen) Compounds) from a Bonding 

Perspective. Adv. Mater. 31, 1904316 (2019). 

37. 
Nakamura, H. et al. Resistive switching mechanism of GeTe–Sb 2 Te 3 interfacial phase 

change memory and topological properties of embedded two-dimensional states. Nanoscale 9, 

9386–9395 (2017). 

38. 
Raty, J. et al. A Quantum‐Mechanical Map for Bonding and Properties in Solids. Adv. Mater. 

31, 1806280 (2019). 

39. 
Kooi, B. J. & Wuttig, M. Chalcogenides by Design: Functionality through Metavalent 

Bonding and Confinement. Adv. Mater. 32, (2020). 

40. 
Song, Z. et al. From octahedral structure motif to sub-nanosecond phase transitions in phase 

change materials for data storage. Sci. China Inf. Sci. 61, 081302 (2018). 

41. 
Shen, J. et al. Thermal Barrier Phase Change Memory. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 5336–

5343 (2019). 

42. 
Khan, A. I. et al. Electro-Thermal Confinement Enables Improved Superlattice Phase Change 

Memory. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 43, 204–207 (2022). 

43. 
Okabe, K. L. et al. Understanding the switching mechanism of interfacial phase change 

memory. J. Appl. Phys. 125, 184501 (2019). 

44. 
Fu, B., Tang, G. & Li, Y. Electron–phonon scattering effect on the lattice thermal conductivity 

of silicon nanostructures. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 19, 28517–28526 (2017). 

45. 
Takaura, N. et al. 55-μA GexTe1-x/Sb2Te3 superlattice topological-switching random access 

memory (TRAM) and study of atomic arrangement in Ge-Te and Sb-Te structures. in 2014 

IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting vol. 24 29.2.1-29.2.4 (IEEE, 2014). 

46. 
Yang, W., Hur, N., Lim, D.-H., Jeong, H. & Suh, J. Heterogeneously structured phase-change 

materials and memory. J. Appl. Phys. 129, 050903 (2021). 

47. 
Zhang, W. & Ma, E. Unveiling the structural origin to control resistance drift in phase-change 

memory materials. Mater. Today 41, 156–176 (2020). 

48. 
Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations 

using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169–11186 (1996). 

49. 
Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865–3868 (1996). 

50. 
Grimme, S., Antony, J., Ehrlich, S. & Krieg, H. A consistent and accurate ab initio 

parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 elements H-Pu. 


J. Chem. Phys. 132, 154104 (2010). 

 

Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by grants from the Government of Korea (MSIP) (No. 

2021M3H4A1A03052566) and the Korea Semiconductor Research Consortium (KSRC) 

through a project developing source technologies for future semiconductor devices and NRF-

2020R1A2C2007468 for DFT Calculations and the Korean government (Grant No. 

2017R1A5A1014862, SRC program: 22 vdWMRC (center) and supported by the National 

Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Government of Korea (MSIP) (No. 

2021M3H4A1A03052566). 

 

 

Author Information 

Authors and Affiliations 

 

H. Lim, C. Lee, D. Kim, K. Kwon, H. Kwon, S. Hwang, M. Cho 

Department of Physics, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea 

E-mail: mh.cho@yonsei.ac.kr 

 

Y. Kim, E. Sim 

Department of Chemistry, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seoul, Republic of Korea 

 

K. Cho, C. Yang 

School of Advanced Materials of Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066 

Seobu-ro, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do 16419, Republic of Korea 

 

S. Choi, B. Choi 

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University of Science and 

Technology 232, Seoul, Republic of Korea 

 

 
 


Supporting Information 

 

Advanced interfacial phase change material: 

structurally confined and interfacially extended superlattice 

 

Hyeon wook Lim1, Young Sam Kim2, Kyu-jin Cho3, Seok -Choi4, Chang woo Lee1, Da sol Kim1, Ki hyeon 

Kwon1, Hoe don Kwon1, Byung -Joon Choi4, Cheol-Woong Yang3, Eun Ji Sim2, and Mann-Ho Cho1,2,*  

 

The supplementary information provides additional information about the manuscript. 

Supplementary explanations for the preparation process, device characterization, evaluation, 

and optimization process, and the structural analysis presented in the manuscript are presented 

here with additional data. The supplementary information is presented below to strengthen the 

thesis of the manuscript and help understand the system of advanced iPCM. 

Firstly, the fabricating process of a single device after the thin film synthesis involves very 

meticulous detail. In the case of superlattice based PCM, unlike alloy based PCM, it is 

necessary to synthesize thin film maintaining crystallinity to keep the layered structure. 

Therefore, the fabricating process is not filling PCM material in a hole made with photoresist 

material but synthesizing thin film with sufficiently high temperature annealing in large area 

and then isolating it through an etching process to manufacture the device. In this process, 

organic material including photoresist material became hardening and some decrease in the 

on/off ratio in electrical operating is caused by this residual organic matter due to hardening. 

During the dry etching process with the plasma system, there was a thermal hardening issue 

with photo-resist materials. For bottom electrode contact (BEC), it affects the thin film’s initial 

growth due to its direct contact with it, and it is a place where electrical pulses are converted 

into the Joule heating process due to high current density. Therefore, it is hard to change the 

type of BEC. For synthesizing the iPCM on the device platform, a thin seed layer of 

approximately 3 nm is deposited at room temperature and treated with a post annealing process 

as a buffer layer to minimize the difference in thermal properties and selectivity between SiO2 

and BEC (TiN), and then a solid seed layer is deposited with an additionally deposited seed 

layer through the co-dep process. In the case of the top metal, because it acts as a thermal 

reservoir, which is a passage where the heat generated from the BEC passes upward after the 

phase change of the thin film, there are relatively few restrictions, including the difference in 


work function with the thin film compared to the selection of BEC. Considering the above 

characteristics, iPCM and top metal are sequentially synthesized over the BEC structure, and 

the isolation process is then performed with a uniform pattern successively, which is presented 

in Supplementary Fig.1. 

From the result of the endurance test, it was confirmed that by increasing Ti composition 

in iPCM, the on/off ratio and cycle limit decreased. In particular, it is confirmed that device 

degradation occurs rapidly with highly doped systems (>10%). This degradation is due to 

segregation of the TiTe2 block caused by excessively incorporating Ti. The TiTe2 block has a 

quite large lattice mismatch with GT and ST blocks of about 11%, far exceeding the low lattice 

mismatch between GT and ST (~2.2%). In large areas above the Si substrate, it is confirmed 

that the vdW material ST and the non-vdW material GT are alternately and uniformly stacked 

on the ST seed layers. Even though Ti element is incorporated, it is confirmed that the original 

crystal structure of iPCM is well maintained. However, the segregation phase of the HCP TiTe2 

tri-layers appears with excessive doping (>10%). 

The changes in the binding energy of the core electron in Ge atoms due to the change of 

the bonding motif in Ge atoms during the phase change process are confirmed, which is not 

found in the other elements during the phase change process. When the band structure for the 

phases before and after the phase change is calculated through the local bonding motif changes 

of Ge atoms near the interface, the Fermi level crosses through the edge side of the valence 

band in the LRS, but it does not cross any band in the HRS, specifically, lying between the 

band gaps. Therefore, it is confirmed that the metal to insulator transition occurred. The Raman 

spectroscopy results show that some contributions of GT and GST occurred in the phonon 

mode from the phase change process, in addition to the phonon mode corresponding to the 

Sb2Te3, which continues to exist before and after the phase change process. In Raman 

spectroscopy, the phonon modes of ST were dominant in LRS but the corresponding phonon 

mode decreased and the phonon mode corresponded to GST increased in HRS compared to 

LRS. However, when phase separation occurs by irradiating much stronger laser than intensity 

suitable for RESET, stable TiTe2 structures are formed and it deviates from reversible phases. 

Moreover, changes in the bond angle for the constituent elements in iPCM according to 

the local structural change of Ge atoms are also presented in Supplementary Fig.5. Each 

angular region is divided into tetrahedral and (defective) octahedral sections. It is confirmed 

whether the bonds correspond to each bonding motif with indicators such as charge density, 

bond length, and bond order. In the case of Sb, the defective octahedral structure is observed 


in the doped system much more than in the undoped one due to Ti substituting some of the Sb 

atoms. In the process of changing from LRS to HRS, the degree of change in the bonding motif 

is larger in doped system than in the undoped one compared to the existing octahedral motif of 

Ge element. 

 

Table S1. Atomic concentration (in-situ XPS) 

Atomic ratio (%) 
Ge 
Sb 
Te 
Ti 

GT/ST SL 
9.5 
30.5 
60 
- 

GT/Ti-ST SL 
8.5 
27 
59.5 
5 

 

Supplementary Figure 1: Schematic fabrication process of the superlattice device. a, A scheme of the whole process up to the fabricating 

the superlattice PCM device. Since continuous annealing is conducted to maintain high crystallinity for synthesizing superlattice based PCM, 

the fabrication process is performed by firstly synthesizing in large area and then vertically etching the unnecessary parts, rather drilling a 

photoresist hole and then filling the thin film in it and progressing the lift-off. b, A scheme of the GT/(Ti-)ST SL on Si (111). Due to the high 

structural coherence of Ti-ST, robust superlattice deposition was possible in GT/Ti-ST SL even above the synthesis of thinner seed layers. c, 

A scheme of the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), which is a deposition chamber. Each source is transported in vapor form through thermal 

evaporation wih the effusion cell for GST and this process was delicately controlled through the PID loop, which enable the detailed deposition 

with Angstrom scale. In the case of Ti, since the evaporation temperature is high, it was deposited with thermal evaporation method by hitting 

the rod source with hot electrons generated from the filament through high voltage/current. 
 


 

Supplementary Figure 2: Electrical evaluation of several PCM including iPCM. Cycling endurance of a, alloy-based phase change 

materials and b, electrical data of GT/ST SL obtained with the ISPP method. c, GT/ST SL and d-f, GT/Ti-ST SL varying the degree of Ti 

concentration in the superlattice device. The cycle limit decreased and the tendency to maintain the confined resistance levels collapsed 

dramatically by increasing Ti concentration ratio higher than 5% in GT/Ti-ST SL. 
 

 

Supplementary Figure 3: TEM image of the superlattice over a large area and HAADF-STEM image as a function of Ti (%). a-c, 

High resolution TEM images of the iPCM. Following images are HAADF-STEM image of d, GT/ST SL and e GT/Ti-ST SL (Ti 5%) and f, 

GT/Ti-ST SL (Ti > 10%) where intensity profiling is conducted. g, is magnified image of f. 
 

 


 

Supplementary Figure 4: Structural analysis and band structure before and after phase change process. Binding energy of cation atoms: 

a, Ge, b, Sb and c, Ti are obtained with XPS measurement. When the optical coefficient and electrical resistance of GT/Ti-ST SL were changed 

through the irradiating pulsed optical laser to films, only binding energy of Ge atom was changed. High binding shift occurred due to increase 

in covalent bonding from octahedral to tetrahedral transition in Ge-Te bond. From the thin film synthesis process to optical laser irradiation 

and XPS measurement, all processes were carried out through in-situ process.28 A high binding shift occurred d, e Band structures of the 

reversible phases are presented. It was confirmed that band crossing of the fermi level did not occur in HRS and it occurred when more than 

a certain ratio of tetrahedral Ge atoms which have covalent bonding with Te were generated. f, Phonon mode of the GT/Ti-ST SL before and 

after phase change and segregated phases, measured with raman spectroscopy. 

 
 


 

Supplementary Figure 5: Angle distribution function (ADF) in GT/(Ti)-ST SL before and after the phase change process. a, ADF of 

cation atoms in GT/Ti-SL, the colored areas indicate the chemical bonds that combined with the octahedral, defective octahedral, and 

tetrahedral motifs from the left side, respectively. b-e, ADF of the Ge, Sb, and Ti atoms in the GT/(Ti)-ST SL. 

 

 


